ml 


= 

a4 
io 
Dd 
5S 
ee 
= 

= 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/scofieldreferencO000reve 


The Scofield Reference Bible 


THE 


HOLY BIBLE 


- CONTAINING THE 


OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS 


AUTHORIZED VERSION 
WITH A NEW SYSTEM OF CONNECTED TOPICAL REFER- 
ENCES TO ALL THE GREATER THEMES OF SCRIPTURE, 
WITH ANNOTATIONS, REVISED MARGINAL RENDERINGS, 
SUMMARIES, DEFINITIONS, CHRONOLOGY, AND INDEX 
TO WHICH ARE ADDED 


HELPS AT HARD PLACES, EXPLANATIONS OF SEEMING DISCREPANCIES, 
AND A NEW SYSTEM OF PARAGRAPHS 


EDITED BY 


REV. C. Il. SCOFIELD, D.D. 


CONSULTING EDITORS: 


REV. HENRY G. WESTON, D.D., LL.D., REV. PROF. W. G. MOOREHEAD, D.D., 
President Crozer Theological Seminary. Prof. in Xenia (U. P.) Theological Seminary. 
REV. JAMES M. GRAY, D.D., REV. ELMORE HARRIS, D.D., 
Dean of Moody Bible Institute. President Toronto Bible Institute. 
REV. WILLIAM J. ERDMAN, D.D., ARNO C. GAEBELEIN, 
Author “The Gospel of John,” etc., etc. Author “Harmony of Prophetic Word,” etc., etc. 
REV. ARTHUR T, PIERSON, D.D., REV. WILLIAM L. PETTINGILL, D.D., 
Author, Editor, Teacher. ‘Author, Editor, Teacher. 


NEW AND IMPROVED EDITION 


NEW YORK 


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON, TORONTO, MELBOURNE AND BOMBAY 


Minion 16mo, Black-face type Scofield Facsimile Series No. 1 


This edition of the Scofield Reference Bible 
is facsimile (page for page) with the larger size, 


having been reproduced by the photographic 
process. 


Copyright, ror, 
by 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
AMERICAN BRANCH 


Printed in the U.S. A. 


} 
¢ 


¢ 


J 


ie 


4 


y 


INTRODUCTION. 
(TO BE READ.) 


THIs edition of the Bible had its origin in the increasing conviction of the Editor 
through thirty years’ study and use of the Scriptures as pastor, teacher, writer, and 
lecturer upon biblical themes, that all of the many excellent and useful editions of 
the Word of God left much to be desired. Gradually the elements which must 
combine to facilitate the study and intelligent use of the Bible became clear to his 
mind. These he has, with the invaluable collaboration of a wide circle of spiritual 
and experienced Bible students and teachers, in England and the United States. 
endeavoured, with what measure of success others must now judge, to embody in 
the present work. The distinctive features are as follows: 

I. It was felt that the old system of references, based solely upon the accident of 
the English words, was unscientific and often misleading. In the present edition. 
by a new system of connected topical references, all the greater truths of the divine 
revelation are so traced through the entire Bible, from the place of first mention to 
the last, that the reader may for himself follow the gradual unfolding of these, by 


- many inspired writers through many ages, to their culmination in Jesus Christ and 


the New Testament Scriptures. This method imparts to Bible study an interest 
and vital reality which are wholly lacking in fragmentary and disconnected study. 

II. The last fifty years have witnessed an intensity and breadth of interest in 
Bible study unprecedented in the history of the Christian Church. Never before 
have so many reverent, learned, and spiritual men brought to the study of the 
Scriptures minds so free from merely controversial motive. Anew and vast exegetical 
and expository literature has been created, inaccessible for bulk, cost, and time to the 
average reader. The winnowed and attested results of this half-century of Bible 
study are embodied in the notes, summaries, and definitions of this edition. Exposi- 
tory novelties, and merely personal views and interpretations, have been rejected. 

III. Helps have been provided, available for instant reference, on the very page 
where help is needed. For example, at every mention of a Hebrew month, weight, 
coin, or measure, the English equivalent is given in the margin. Obscure and diffi- 
cult passages, alleged discrepancies or contradictions, and every important type or 
symbol are elucidated by new references, or made the subject of an explanatory foot- 
note on the same page. 

IV. All of the connected topical lines of reference end in analytic summaries of 
the whole teaching of Scripture on that subject, thus guarding the reader against 
hasty generalizations from a few passages or proof texts. The saying that ‘‘any- 
thing may be proved by the Bible’’ is both true and false—true if isolated passages 
are used; utterly false if the whole divine revelation is in view. 

. The great words of Scripture, as adoption, advocacy, assurance, atonement, 
church, conversion, death, election, eternal life, eternal punishment, faith, flesh, for- 
giveness, grace, hell (whether sheol, hades, or Sehenna), imputation, justification, 
kingdom, propitiation, reconciliation, redemption, repentance, righteousness, salva- 
tion, sanctification, sin, world (in its four meanings), etc., etc., are defined in simple, 
non-technical terms. These definitions have been submitted to, and approved by, a 
very large number of eminent students and teachers of all the evangelical bodies. 

Each of the sixty-six books of the Bible is provided with an introduction 
and analysis, the latter so carried out in the text by appropriate sub-heads as greatly 
to facilitate the study and comprehension of the book. 

VII. The entire Bible has been divided into paragraphs by italicized sub-heads 
while preserving the chapter and verse division which gives the Authorized Version, 
among many other superiorities, its unrivalled pre-eminence. 

VIII. The remarkable results of the modern study of the Prophets, in recovering 
to the church not only a clear and coherent harmony of the predictive portions, but 
also great treasures of ethical truth, are indicated in expository notes. This por- 
tion of the Bible, nearly one-fourth of the whole, has been closed to the average 
reader by fanciful and allegorical schemes of interpretation. The method followed 
gives ready access also to the amazing literary riches of the Prophetical Books. 

IX. The greater covenants of God which absolutely condition human life and 
the divine redemption, and about which the whole Bible gathers, are analyzed, and 
their relation to each other and to Christ made clear. 

X. The Dispensations are distinguished, exhibiting the majestic, progressive order 
of the divine dealings of God with humanity, ‘“‘the increasing purpose’? which runs 
through and links together the ages, from the beginning of the life of man to the end 
_ in eternity. Augustine said: “Distinguish the ages, and the Scriptures harmonize.” 

XI. After mature reflection it was determined to use the Authorized Version. 
None of the many Revisions have commended themselves to the people at large, 


The Revised Version, which has now been before the public for twenty-seven years, 
gives no indication of becoming in any general sense the people’s Bible of the Eng- 
lish-speaking world. The discovery of the Sinaitic MS. and the labours in the 
field of textual criticism of such scholars as Griesbach, Lachmann, Tischendorf, 
Tregelles, Winer, Alford, and Westcott and Hort, have cleared the Greek textus 
receptus of minor inaccuracies, while confirming in a remarkable degree the general 
accuracy of the Authorized Version of that text. Such emendations of the text as 
scholarship demands have been placed in the margins of this edition, which there- 
fore combines the dignity, the high religious value, the tender associations of the 
past, the literary beauty and remarkable general accuracy of the Authorized Ver- 
sion, with the results of the best textual scholarship. 

The Editor disclaims originality. Other men have laboured, he has but entered 
into theif labours. The results of the study of God’s Word by learned and spiritual 
men, in every division of the church and in every land, during the last fifty years, 
under the advantage of a perfected text, already form a vast literature, inaccessible 
to most Christian workers. The Editor has proposed to himself the modest if 
laborious task of summarizing, arranging, and condensing this mass of material. 

That he has been able to accomplish this task at all is due in very large measure 
to the valuable suggestions and co-operation of the Consulting Editors, who have 
freely given of their time and the treasures of their scholarship to this work. It is 
due to them to say that the Editor alone is responsible for the final form of notes 
and definitions. The Editor’s acknowledgments are also due to a very wide circle 
of learned and spiritual brethren in Europe and America to whose labours he is 
indebted for suggestions of inestimable value. It may not be invidious to mention 
among these Professor James Barrellet, of the Theological Faculty of Lausanne, 
Professors Sayce and Margoliouth, of Oxford, Mr. Walter Scott, the eminent 
Bible teacher, and Professor C. R. Erdman, of Princeton. 

Finally, grateful thanks are due to those whose generous material assistance 
has made possible the preparation of a work involving years of time, and repeated 
journeys to the centres of biblical learning abroad. 

The completed work is now dedicated to the service amongst men of that Loving 
and Holy God, whose marvellous grace in Christ Jesus it seeks to exalt. 


jai. 1909. C. I. SCOFIELD. 


PREFACE TO THE PRESENT EDITION. 


The very large demand for the Scofield Reference Bible in every part of the 
world, and the consequent large and repeated printings, have made it necessary 
to reset the entire Bible in new type that the high standard of the Oxford University 
Press may be maintained, and the public furnished with this Bible in the highest 
form of the printer’s art. To the attainment of this high purpose no labour of 
Editor or publishers has been counted too great. 

The Scofield Reference Bible has now been nearly eight years in the hands 
of the Christian public. The editor would be more, or less, than human if he were 
not profoundly grateful, not only, nor chiefly, for the large sale accorded to it, but 
rather for the assurances which have reached him from every part of the earth of 
blessing through its: use. ; 

That this testimony has come in part from great biblical scholars has been most 
gratifying, but it has been an especial cause of gratitude to know that the plain 
people of God in their homes, and far away missionaries in heathen lands have been 
helped to a clearer and more spiritual apprehension of the Word of God. 

But the very warmth of this welcome given to his labours has made the Editor 
solicitous that in any new typing of it he might find his opportunity to add, here 
and there, such further help as experience has shown to be desirable. This he has 
endeavoured, here to do. The Panoramic View of the whole Bible will, it is believed, 
show the unity of the Book—a fact in danger of failing to be perceived in face of 
the other and more evident fact that it is made up of many books. 

_ Chronological data have also been supplied; and, on the mechanical side, more 
distinct type; large type in the reference columns; and the substitution of Arabic 
for Roman numerals will be noted as distinct improvements. 

The Editor is especially grateful to the many eminent and spiritually minded 
brethren who have aided him by suggestions and counsel, and to those whose most 
Christian liberality has ‘made such a work possible. He is sure that they, not 
less emphatically than himself, in again putting forth this testimony to Him whom 
having not seen we love, will say: “Yet not I, but the grace of God which was with 


me. 
“Greyshingles,” Douglaston, L. 1, Jan. 1,'1917, C. I. SCOFIELD. 


A PANORAMIC VIEW OF THE BIBLE. 


The Bible, incomparably the most widely circulated of books, at once pro 
and baffles study. Even the non-believer in its authority rightly feels ie = 
unintelligent to remain in almost total ignorance of the most famous and ancient 

_ of books. No barrier of language now exists, for the Bible has been translated into 
practically all languages and dialects. And yet most, even of sincere believers 
soon retire from any serious effort to master the content of the sacred writings. 
The reason is not far to seek. It is found in the fact that no particular portion of 
Scripture is to be intelligently comprehended apart from some conception of its 
place in the whole. For the Bible story and message is like a picture wrought out 
in mosaics: each book, chapter, verse, and even word forms a necessary part, and 
has its own appointed place. It is, therefore, indispensable to any interesting and 
fruitful study of the Bible that a general knowledge of it be gained. 

; First. The Bible is one book. Seven great marks attest this unity. (1) 

' From Genesis the Bible bears witness to one God. Wherever he speaks or acts he 
is consistent with himself, and with the total revelation concerning him. (2) The 
Bible forms one continuous story-—the story of humanity in relation to God. (3) 
The Bible hazards the most unlikely predictions concerning the future, and, when 
the centuries have brought round the appointed time, records their fulfilment. 
(4) The Bible is a progressive unfolding of truth. Nothing is told all at once, 
and once for all. The law is, “first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn.” 
Without the possibility of collusion, often with centuries between, one writer of 
Scripture takes up an earlier revelation, adds to it, lays down the pen, and in due 
time another man moved by the Holy Spirit, and another, and another, add new 
details till the whole is complete. (5) From beginning to end the Bible testifies to 
one redemption. (6) From beginning to end the Bibie has one great theme— 

* the person and work of the Christ. (7) And, finally, these writers, some forty-four 
in number, writing through twenty centuries, have produced a perfect harmony of 
doctrine in progressive unfolding. «This is, to every candid mind, the unanswer- 
able proof of the Divine inspiration of the Bible. 

Second, The Bible is a book of books. Sixty-six books make up the one 
Book. Considered with reference to the unity of the one book the separate books 
may be regarded as chapters. But that is but one side of the truth, for each of 
the sixty-six books is complete in itself, and has its own theme and analysis. In 
the present edition of the Bible these are fully shown in the introductions and di- 
visions. It is therefore of the utmost moment that the books be studied in the 

light of their distinctive themes. Genesis, for instance, is the book of beginnings 
—the seed-plot of the whole Bible. Matthew is the book of the King, &c 
Third. The books of the Bible fall into groups. Speaking broadly there are 
ve great divisions in the Scriptures, and these may be conveniently fixed in the 
memory by five key-words, Christ being the one theme (Luke 24. 25-27): 


PREPARATION. MANIFESTATION. PROPAGATION. 


The O. T. The Gospels. The Acts. 
ay EXPLANATION. ,CONSUMMATION. 
’ The Epistles. The Apocalypse. 


In other words, the Old Testament is the preparation for Christ; in the Gospels 
he is manifested to the world; in the Acts he is preached and his Gospel is propa- 
gated in the world; in the Epistles his Gospel is exp/ained; and in the Revelation 
all the purposes of God in and through Christ are consummated. And these 
groups of buoks in turn fall into groups. This is especially true of the Old Testa- 
ment, which is in four well defined groups. Over these may be written, as memory 
aids: 


REDEMPTION. ORGANIZATION. POETRY. SERMONS. 
Genesis _ Joshua Job Isaiah Jonah 
Exodus Judges Psalms Jeremiah Micah 
Leviticus Ruth Proverbs Ezekiel Nahum 
Numbers I, If Sar. Ecclesiastes Daniel Habakkuk 
Deuteronomy I, II Kings Song of Solomon Hosea Zephaniah 

I, II Chronicles Lamentations Joel Haggai 
Ezra Amos Zechariah 
Nehemiah Obadiah Malachi 


Esther 


Again care should be taken not to overlook, in these general groupings, the dis- 
tinctive messages of the several books composing them. Thus, while redemption 
is the Seneral theme of the Pentateuch, telling as it does the story of the redemption 
of Israel out of bondage and into “a good land and large,” each of the five books 
has its own distinctive part in the whole. Genesis is the book of beginnings, and 
explains the origin of Israel. Exodus tells the story of the deliverance of Israel; 
Leviticus of the worship of Israel as a delivered people; Numbers the wanderings 
and failures of the delivered people, and Deuteronomy warns and instructs that 
people in view of their approaching entrance upon their inheritance. Da 

The Poetical books record the spiritual experiences of the redeemed people in 
the varied scenes and events through which the providence of God led them. The 
prophets were inspired preachers, and the prophetical books consist of sermons with 
brief connecting and explanatory passages. Two prophetical books, Ezekiel and 
Daniel, have a different character and are apocalyptic, largely. ! j 

Fourth. The Bible tells the Human Story. Beginning, logically, with the 
creation of the earth and of man, the story of the race sprung from the first human 
pair continues through the first eleven chapters of Genesis. With the twelfth chap- 
ter begins the history of Abraham and of the nation of which Abraham was the 
ancestor. It is that nation, Israel, with which the Bible narrative is thereafter 
chiefly concerned from the eleventh chapter of Genesis to the second chapter of 
the Acts of the Apostles. The Gentiles are mentioned, but only in connection with 
{srael. But it is made increasingly clear that Israel so fills the scene only because 
entrusted with the accomplishment of great world-wide purposes (Deut. 7. 7). 

The appointed mission of Israel was, (1) to be a witness to the unity of God 
in the midst of universal idolatry (Deut. 6. 4; Isa. 43. 10); (2) to illustrate to the 
nations the greater _blessedness of serving the one true God (Deut. 33. 26-29; 
1 Chron. 17. 20, 21; Psa. 102. 15); (3) to receive and preserve the Divine revelation 
(Rom. 3.1.2): and (4) to produce the Messiah, earth’s Saviour and Lord (Rom. 9. 4) 
The prophets foretell a glorious future for Israel under the reign of Christ. 

The biblical story of Israel, past, present, and future, falls into seven distinct 
periods: (1) From the call of Abram (Gen. 12) to the Exodus (Ex. 1-20); (2) From 
the Exodus to the death of Joshua (Ex. 21 to Josh. 24); (3) from the death of Joshua 
to the establishment of the Hebrew monarchy under Saul; (4) the period of the kings 
from Saul to the Captivities; (5) the period of the Captivities; (6) the restored 
commonwealth from the end of the Babylonian captivity of Judah, to the destruction 
of Jerusalem, A.D. 70; (7) the present dispersion. 

The Gospels record the appearance in human history and within the Hebrew 
nation of the promised Messiah, Jesus Christ, and tell the wonderful story of his 
manifestation to Israel, his rejection by that people, his crucifixion, resurrection, 
and _ ascension. 

The Acts of the Apostles record the descent of the Holy Spirit, and the beginning 
of a new thing in human history, the Church. The division of the race now becomes 
threefold—the Jew, the Gentile, and the Church of God. Just as Israel is in the 
foreground from the call of Abram to the resurrection of Christ, so now the Church 
fills the scene from the second chapter of the Acts to the fourth chapter of the Reve- 
lation. The remaining chapters of that book complete the story of humanity and 
the final triumph of Christ. 

Fifth. The Central Theme of the Bible is Christ. It is this manifestation 
of Jesus Christ, his Person as ‘‘God manifest in the flesh” (1 Tim. 3. 16), his sacrificial 
death, and his resurrection, which constitute the Gospel. Unto this all preceding 
Scripture leads, from this all following Scripture proceeds. The Gospel is preached 
in the Acts and explained in the Epistles. Christ, Son of God, Son of man, Son 
of Abraham, Son of David, thus binds the many books into one Book. Seed of 
the woman (Gen. 3. 15) he is the ultimate destroyer of Satan and his works; Seed 
of Abraham he is the world blesser; Seed of David he is Israel’s King, ‘‘Desire of 
all Nations.” Exalted to the right hand of God he is ‘“‘head over all to the Church, 
which is his body,” while to Israel and the nations the promise of his return forms 
the one and only rational expectation that humanity will yet fulfil itself. Mean- 
while the Church looks momentarily for the fulfilment of his special promise: ‘‘I 
will come again and receive you unto myself” (John 14.1-3). To him the Holy Spirit 
throughout this Gospel age bears testimony. The last book of all, the Consumma- 
tion book, is “The Revelation of Jesus Christ” (Rev. 1. 1). 


THE NAMES AND ORDER 


OF ALL THE 
BOOKS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT 


WITH THE NUMBER OF THEIR CHAPTERS. 


THE BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 


PAGE CHAPS, PAGE 
CSIC NCS ESO iste: se as sb D> aisiuhss ,O Oveess Eucclesiastes| akheuteine,c¢ 696 
Exodus. ...... 71 -.. 40 SongofSolomon. . . 705 
Leviticus SOU Pn T26 eee 27 Isaiah 1211.. eee 713 
Numbers Gas Pes A serk* co. © 165 ase 36 Jeremiah A REA an 772 
es Bee ir tina oe a abba fA Lamentations . ... 834 
Bagot i. ger) Bake 840 
te ee et EGA i ea paar rere oF 
We SAMUel: oe haces, 319 Faetrerks, (OL Hosea 2 vss 2 se 921 
II.Samud ..... 9558). 24 is IIe Ne ee ae 930 
iD Kings? ey. BRS 4, Up a) 2 ATOR | (ole) Fre 934 
iiiKings sa. 421... 25 Obadiah ...... 941 
I. Chronicles! .... 456 ...29 Jonah ....... 943 
TE) Chronicles. 490. 1. 36 © Micah. we. ye te 946 
ZraM toys 5 lan ete Pen ey KN) ee elation AS on 952 
Mehemiahnt iis 2541io.-s. 13), Blabakkuk voy 955 
BBESSEHEL Uh, hued! sisiele vit ies 55 Share otal? Zephaniah a./9) +5 atc aie 9509 
ODA Rife biceps bes 5607 Sat a 42g athageaiye 6 oth © he 962 
Besalensi ad eer Wsiits 0s 599 150 9aj Zechariahywts | ..yo) 965 
IBTOVELDS mriizeite lis Ls) vo 672 i 3k Malachi. Yo. ..ianae 980 


THE BOOKS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


PAGE CHAPS. PAGE 

NPAT REDE Ma tcenut903.2 ear, 004 98101. Timothy, 3 .ioau!aly. 1274 

IVE ATIG sete y's 45) Vip he tap 1045:, Se. o) 16 Te. Timothy. oecevae ee 1279 

ag Mewes ty cael a Tituginh anole hee 1283 
coh aN puke ee MRPs Salachs : 

Philemon. 22 28 1286 

BUG VACtS fie 21 Seis fo) 0) a VIAT ncn sa 28 pe lehie Hobrewla) moaetpaes 


the R URE TON a e168 : 
pee ore ; Pretest at . 16 Epistle of James . . . 1306 


IE Corinthians . ...:1230....13 1:Peterr.. +--+... 1311 
Gralatians: 9)... 30/6 « 10at ar se LV GEL, Peter: 5. a bia conte 1317 
Ephesians. ..... 1249 6 John... .... 1321 
Philippians... . . 1257... 4—UsJohn’.. 4... 1326 
EColossianS «a +s 1260 perme eek Le JOM yrs: poyte Mee a 1327 
I. Thessalonians . . . 1267 5 Tucows we atl, eames 1328 
II. Thessalonians . . 1271 3) Revelation —¢)4..4) 911330 


_— 
PANO WBAOWNIYDEH HOW 


CHAPS. 


. 
_ 


Nor KRM KS OW = w 


° 
i) 


HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 
to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 
so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference 
and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 


ILLUSTRATION 
(at Mark 1.1.) 
t Gospel vs.1, 
14.15; Mk 
835 (Gen. 
12.1-3, Rev. 
| 14.6) 
Here Gospel! is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place; 
Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the references in parenthesis are 
the first and the last. 


THE PENTATEUCH. 


THE five books ascribed to Moses have a peculiar place in the structure of the 
Bible, and an order which is undeniably the order of the experience of the people 
of God in all ages. Genesis is the book of origins—of the beginning of life, and 
of ruin through sin. Its first word, ‘In the beginning God,” is in striking contrast 
with the end, “In a coffin in Egypt.” Exodus is the book of redemption, the first 
need of a ruined race. Leviticus is the book of worship and communion, the proper 
exercise of the redeemed. Numbers speaks of the experiences of a pilgrim people, 
the redeemed passing through a hostile scene to a promised inheritance. Deuter- 
onomy, retrospective and prospective, is a book of instruction for the redeemed 
about to enter that inheritanée. 

That Babylonian and Assyrian monuments contain records bearing a grotesque 
resemblance to the majestic account of the creation and of the Flood is true, as 
. also that these antedate Moses. But this confirms rather than invalidates the 
inspiration of the Mosaic account. Some tradition of creation and the Flood would 
inevitably be handed down in the ancient cradle of the race. Such a tradition, 
following the order of all tradition, would take on grotesque and mythological 
features, and these abound in the Babylonian records. Of necessity, therefore, the 
first task of inspiration would be to supplant the often absurd and childish tradi- 
tion with a revelation of the true history, and such a history we find in words of 
matchless grandeur, and in an order which, rightly understood, is absolutely 
scientific. : 

In the Pentateuch,? therefore, we have a true and logical introduction to the 
entire Bible; and, in type, an epitome of the divine revelation. 


a Cf. Mt. 8. 4; 19.8; Mik. 12. 26; Lk. 5. 14; 16. 29-31; 
John 3. 14;.5. 45, 46; 7. 19. 


The abbreviation cf. used throughout the Bible signifies compare, 


THE FIRST 


CALLED 


BOOK OF MOSES 


11] GENESIS. [14 


GENESIS is the book of beginnings. 


It records not only the beginning of the 


heavens and the earth, and of plant, animal, and human life, but also of all human 
institutions and relationships. Typically, it speaks of the new birth, the new crea- 


tion, where all was chaos and ruin. 


With Genesis begins also that progressive self-revelation of God which culminates 


. in Christ. The three primary names of Deity, Elohim, Jehovah, and Adonai, and 


the five most important of the compound names, occur in Genesis; and that in an 
ordered progression which could not be changed without confusion. 

The problem of sin as affecting man’s condition in the earth, and his relation to 
God, and the divine solution of that problem are here in essence. Of the eight great 
covenants which condition human life and the divine redemption, four, the Edenic, 
Adamic, Noahic, and Abrahamic Covenants, are in this book; and these are the fun- 
damental covenants to which the other four, the Mosaic, Palestinian, Davidic, and 
New Covenants, are related chiefly as adding detail or development. 

Genesis enters into the very structure of the New Testament, in which it is quoted 


above sixty times in seventeen books. 


In a profound sense, therefore, the roots of 


all subsequent revelation are planted deep in Genesis, and whoever would truly 
comprehend that revelation must begin here. 
The inspiration of Genesis and its character as a divine revelation are authenti- 
cated by the testimony of history, and by the testimony of Christ (Mt. 19. 4-6; 
24.-37-39; Mk. 10. 4-9; Lk. 11. 49-51; 17. 26-29, 32; John 1. 5; 7. 21-23; 8. 44, 56). 
Genesis is in five chief divisions: I. Creation (1. 1-2. 25). II. The Fall and Re- 
demption (3.1-4.7). III. The Diverse Seeds, Cain and Seth, to the Flood (4. s—7. 24). 


IV. The Flood to Babel (8. 1-11. 9). 


Joseph (11. 10-50. 26). 


V. From the cail of Abram to the death of 


The events recorded in Genesis cover a period of 2,315 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER i. 
The original creation. 


the “beginning 14God 2created 
the heaven and the earth. 


Earth made waste and empty by z 


judgment (Jer. 4. 23-26). 
2 And the earth was 3without 


c Holy Spirit. 

en.6.3. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 

d Job 26.13. 


form, and void; and darkness was| Psa.104.30. 


upon the face of the deep. And 
‘the ¢Spirit of God moved upon the 
face of the waters. 


The new beginning—the first 
day: light diffused. 


3 And God said, Let there be 
4light: and there was light. 
4 And God saw the light, that it 


1 Elohim (sometimes E/ or Elah, English form ‘‘God,” the first of the three pri- 
mary names of Deity, is a uni-plural noun formed from £/= strength, or the strong 
one, and Alah, to swear, to bind oneself by an oath, so implying faithfulness. This 
uni-plurality implied in the name is directly asserted in Gen. 1. 26 (plurality), 27 
(unity); see also Gen. 3. 22. Thus the Trinity is latent in Elohim. As meaning 
primarily the Strong One it is fitly used in the first chapter of Genesis. Used in the 
O. T, about 2500 times. See also Gen. 2. 4, note; 2. 7; 14. 18, note; 15, 2, note; 


17. 1, note; 21. 33, note; 1 Sam. 1. 


3, note. 


, 2 But three creative acts of God are recorded in this chapter: (1) the heavens and 
the earth, v. 1; (2) animal life, v. 21; and (3) human life, vs. 26, 27. The first crea- 
tive act refers to the dateless past, and gives scope for all the geologic ages. 
3 Jer. 4. 23-26, Isa‘ 24. 1 and 45. 18, clearly indicate that the earth had undergone 
acataclysmic change as the result of a divine judgment. The face of the earth bears 
everywhere the marks of such a catastrophe. 


There are not wanting intimations 


which connect it with a previous testing and fall of angels. See Ezk. 28. 12-15 and 


Isa. 14. 9-14, which certainly go beyond the kings of Tyre and Babylon, F 
4 Neither here nor in verses 14-18 is an original creative act implied. A different 
word is used. The sense is, made to appear; made visible. The sun and moon were 


created “in the beginning.” The “light” of course came from the sun, but the 


vapour diffused the light. Later the sun appeared in an unclouded sky. 


3 


15] GENESIS. [1 20 
was good: and God divided the! B.c. 4004. | 12 Andtheearth brought forth grass, 


light from the darkness. and herb yielding seed after his 

5 And God called the light 1Day, kind, and the tree yielding fruit, 
and the darkness he called Night. whose seed was in itself, after his 
And the “evening and the morning kind: anid God saw that /t was good. 
were the first day- _13 And the evening and the morn- 
The second nen aieeat above,|, rit expanse pa pene: ie fos Perk an» 

t . i.e.of €1o : Sy 

G0 hnd oy Bek ree hererpele ap id NS and stars become visible. ” 
“firmament in the midst. of the| pour above. |. 14 And God saiti, Let there belights 
es cet gavide sheiates b jeeb Seah aa divide the day from the nists and 

7 And God made the firmament, *llet them be for signs, and for sea- 
‘and divided thaletars which were “feaven” sons, and for days, and years: _ 
under the firmament from the} fhe | 15 And let them be for lights in 
waters which were above the fir-| 7.11; 8.2. the firmament of the heaven to give 
,Mament:. and it was so. light upon the earth: and it was so. 


8 And God called the *firmament|‘ Ps#-1365-9. | 16 And God ¢made two great 
Heaven. And the evening and thelg The wora _ lights; the 4greater light to rule the 


morning were the second day. coe ime eh a the lee to Be the 
° 5 4 i night: he made the stars . 
7m tl gee | el alc 

9 And God said, Let the waters) function haan the caete coy a 
ete the ams Th ee ee ries 18 And to rule-over the day and 
gether unto one p ace, and let the iO . aivide th 
dry Jand appear: and it was so. . “Foaven’® of Heht perce Ps) | aad God 

10 And God called the dry land} the stars; hat it dod 
Earth; and the gathering together $e Genk mt od ec gC gatid teehee 
ra ve Werste ee he ee and) 1.23.43. ing were the Foe day: 

11 eel God. uae Let thevearth The fifth day: thesecondcreative 
3bring forth grass, the herb yielding act—animal lif e. (See Gen. 2. 19.) 
seed, and the fruit tree yielding 20 And God said, Let the waters 
fruit after his kind, whose seed isin bring forth abundantly the moving 
itself, upon the earth: and it was so. creature that hath life, and fowl 


1 The word “‘day” is used in Scripture in three ways: (1) that part of the solar 
day of twenty-four hours which is light (Gen. 1. s, 14; John 9. 4; 11. 9); (2) sucha 
day, set apart for some distinctive purpose, as, “day of atonement” (Lev. 23. 27); 
“day of judgment” (Mt. 10. 15); (3) a period of time, long or short, during which 
certain revealed purposes of God are to be accomplished, as “day of the Lorb.” 

2 The use of “evening” and ‘‘morning’’ may be held to limit ‘‘day” to the solar day; 
but the frequent parabolic use of natural phenomena may warrant the conclusion 
Si each creative ‘day’ was a period of time marked off by a beginning and 
ending. 

3 It is by no means necessary to suppose that the life-germ of seeds perished in the 
catastrophic judgment which overthrew the primitive order. With the restoration 
of dry land and light the earth would “bring forth” as described. It was animal 
life which perished, the traces of which remain as fossils, Relegate fossils to 
the primitive creation, and no conflict of science with the Genesis cosmogony 
remains. 

4 The “greater light” is a type of Christ, the “Sun of righteousness” (Mal. 4. 2). 
He will take this character at His second advent. Morally the world is now in the 
state between Gen. 1. 3 and 1. 16 (Eph. 6. 12; Acts 26. 18; 1 Pet, 2.9), The sun is 
not seen, but there is light. Christ is that light (John 1. 4, 5, 9), but “shineth in 
darkness,”’ comprehended only by faith. As ‘Sun of righteousness” He will dispel 
all darkness. Dispensationally the Church is in place as the “lesser light,” the moon, 
reflecting tHe light of the unseen sun. The stars (Gen, 1. 16) are individual believers 
who are “lights” (Phil. 2. 15, 16). See John 1. s. 

(A type is a divinely purposed illustration of some truth, It may be: (1) a person 
ae 5. 14); (2) an event (1 Cor. 10. 11); (3) a thing (Heb. 10. 20); (4) an institution 

Heb. 9. 11); (S) a ceremonial (1 Cor. 5.7). Types occur most frequently in the Pen- 
tateuch, but are found, more sparingly, elsewhere. The antitype, or fulfilment of 
the type, is found, usually, in the New Testament.) 


4 


1 21] 


GENESIS. 


[1 28 


a ll ee lee EL 


that may fly above the earth in the 
open firmament of heaven. 

21 And God created great whales, 
and every living creature that mov- 
eth, which the waters brought forth 
abundantly, -after their kind, and 
every winged fowl after his kind: 
and God saw that it was good. 

22 And God blessed them, saying, 
Be fruitful, and multiply; and fill 
the waters in the seas, and let fowl 
multiply in the-earth. 

_23 And the evening and the morn- 
ing were the fifth day. 


The sixth day: (1) the fecundity 
of the earth after the creative 
work of the fifth day. 


24 And God said, Let the earth 
bring forth the living 2creature after 
his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, 
and beast of ‘the earth after his 
kind: and it was so. 

25 And God made the beast of the 


B.C 4004. 


a Gen.11.7. 


b Kingdom 
(O.T.). 


cCfhMt.19." 
4; Mk.10.6, 


d The Eight 


Covenants 
(1, Edenic). 


Gen.2.15-17. 


(Gen.1.28; 
Heb.8.10.) 


earth after his kind, and cattle after 
— 


their kind,andevery thing that creep- 
eth upon the earth after his kind: 
and God saw that it was good. 


The sixth day: (2) the creation of 
man (described Gen. 2. 7, 21-23). 


26 And God said, Let *us make 

an in our image, after our like- 
ness: and let them have ’dominion 
over the fish of the sea, and over the 
fowl of the air, and over the cattle, 
and over all the earth, and over 
every creeping thing that creepeth 
upon the earth. 

27 So God created man in his own 
image, in the image of God created 
he him; ‘male and female created he 
them. 

The First 4Dispensation: Inno- 
cency (Gen. 1. 28-3, 13). The 
First, or Edenic Covenant: con- 
ditioned the life of unfallen 
man. (Add Gen. 2. 8-17.) 

28 5And God blessed them, and 
God 4said unto them, ®Be fruitful, 


_ 1 The second clause, “every living creature,” as distinguished from fishes merely, 
is taken up again in verse 24, showing that in the second creative act all animal 


life is included. 


2“Creature,” Heb. nephesh, trans. soul in 2.7 and usually. Initself nephesh, or 
soul, implies self-conscious life, as distinguished from plants, which haveunconsciouslife. 


In the sense of self-conscious life animals also have ‘‘soul.”’ 
Gen. 1. 26, 27, gives the general, Gen. 2. 7, 21-23, the particular, 
The revealed facts are: 

Man was created, not evolved. This is (a) expressly declared, and the 


3 Man, 
me of the creation of man. 
1) 


See verses 26, 27, note, 


declaration is confirmed by Christ (Mt. 19. 4; Mk. 10. 6); (b) ‘‘an enormous gulf, a 
divergence practically infinite’? (Huxley) between the lowest man and the highest 
beast, confirms it; (c) the highest beast has no trace of God-consciousness—the 
religious nature; (d) science and discovery have done nothing to bridge that “‘gulf.’’, 


(2) T 


found chiefly in man’s tri-unity, and in his moral nature. 3 
“Spirit”? is that part of man which “‘knows’”’ (1 Cor. 


and body” (1 Thes. 5. 23). 


hat man was made in the “‘image and likeness” of God. This ‘image’ is 


Man is “spirit and soul 


_2.11), and which allies him to the spiritual creation and gives him God-consciousness. 
“Soul” in itself implies self-conscious life, as distinguished from plants, which have 


unconscious life. 


In that sensé animals also have “soul” (Gen. 1. 24). 
“soul” of man has a vaster content than {‘soul’’ as applied to beast life. 
seat of his emotions, desires, affections (Psa. 42. 1-6). 


ture usage, nearly synonymous with sfsoulsc z é 
teristically, the soulual or psychical man, “‘soul’’ is often used as synonymous with 


the individual, e. g. Gen. 12. 5. 


But the 
It is the 
The “heart” is, in Scrip- 
Because the natural man is, charac- 


The body, separable from spirit and soul, and sus- 


ceptible to death, is nevertheless an integral part of man, as the resurrection shows 


(John 5. 28, 29; 1 Cor. 15. 47-50; Rev. 20. 11-13). 


It is the seat of the senses (the 


‘means by which the spirit and soul have world-consciousness) and of the fallen 


Adamic nature (Rom. 7. 23, 24). 


4 A dispensation is a period of time during which man is tested in respect of obe- 
dience to some specific revelation of the will of God, Seven such dispensations are, 


distinguished in Scripture. 


“sequence of disobedience. 
(1 Tim. 2. 14). 


ended in the judgment _of the Expulsion (Gen. 3. 24). 


See note 5. Phtel ! 
5 The First Dispensation: Innocency. Man was created in innocency, placed in a 
“perfect environment, subjected to an absolutely simple test, and warned of the con- 
The woman fell through pride; the man, deliberately 
God restored His sinning creatures, but the dispensation of innocency 


See, for the other dispen- 


sations: Conscience (Gen. 3. 23); Human Government (Gen. 8. 20); Promise 
(Gen. 12. 1); Law (Ex. 19.8); Grace (John 1. 17); Kingdom (Eph. 1. 10). ' 
6 The Edenic Covenant, the first of the eight great covenants of Scripture which 


5 


1 29] GENESIS. [24 


CHAPTER 2. ae 
The sabbath rest of God: type of 
the believer’s rest in the fin-- 


and multiply, and replenish the 

earth, and subdue it: and have do- 

minion over the fish of the sea, and i 

over the fowl of the air, and over ished work of redemptiori 

every ee pane that moveth (Heb. 3.-4). 

Py te a a Cf.Heb.4.4. th h 
29 And God said, Behold, I have CTs ee ak Pah ie eA 


i 7 i b Sabbath. 
given you every herb bearing seed, Be eras, lof therit. 


which is upon the face of all the! Gu.23, ; 
earth, and every “tree, an the| clei) 2 Andon the seventh dav God 
wich a. ag ica’ Bee cSanctify, - |jand he, “rested on the.seventh day — 
meat) 10 YOU Mt shall be for" holy O-1). |from all his work which hehadmade. 
30 And to .every beast of ‘the! (Gen.2.3; 3 And God pes the ee 
earth, and to every fowl of the air,| 7°h®-3-) Bey, ae oae pea fied “All his 
and Boe Cly, aoe. that creeped d poy te 5 orks. which Ged created and made. 
Anmames of). 5 

life, 7 Fee ec oh cey eee en we Summary of the creation work 
for meat: and it was so. “1; Mal.3.18 of Chapter 1 

31 And God saw every thing that! 4 These are the generations of the 
heavens and of the earth when they 
were created, in the day that the 
2dLorD God made the earth and 
day. : the heavens, 


condition life and salvation, and about which all Scripture crystallizes, has seven 
elements. The man and woman in Eden were responsible: 

(1) To replenish the earth with a new order—man; (2) to subdue the earth to 
human uses; (3) to have dominion over the animal creation; (4) to eat herbs and 
fruits;_(5) to till and keep the garden; (6) to abstain from eating of the tree of 
knowledge of good and evil; (7) the penalty—death. See, for the other seven 
covenants: Adamic (Gen. 3. 15); Noahic (Gen. 9. 1); Abrahamic (Gen. 15. 18); 
a's ite 19. 25); Palestinian (Deut. 30. 3); Davidic (2 Sam. 7. 16); New 

eb. 8. 8). 

1In the O. T. the same Hebrew word (qodesh) is trans. sanctify, consecrate, dedi- 
cate, and holy. It means, set apatt for the service of God. See refs. following 
“Sanctify,” Gen. 2. 3. me 

2Lorp (Heb. Jehovah). 

(1) The primary -meaning of the name LorD (Jehovah) is ‘the self-existent 
One.” Literally (as in Ex. 3. 14), “He that is who He is, therefore the eternal I 
AM.” But Havah, from which Jehovah, or Yahwe, is formed, signifies also ‘‘to 
become,” that is, to become known, thus pointing to a continuous and increasing 
self-revelation. Combining these meanings of Havah, we arrive at the meaning 
of the name Jehovah, He is “the self-existent One who reveals Himself.” The 
name is, in itself, an advance upon the name “God” (EJ, Elah, Elohim), which sug- 
gests certain attributes of Deity, as strength, etc., rather than His essential being. 

(2) It is significant that the first appearance of the name Jehovah in Scripture 
follows the creation of man. It was God (Elohim) who ‘said, “Let us make man 
in our image” (Gen..1. 26); but when man, as in the second chapter of Genesis, is to 
fill the scene and become dominant over creation, it is the LorD God (Jehovah 
Elohim) who acts. This clearly indicates a special relation of Deity. in His Jehovah 
character, to man, and all Scripture emphasizes this. 

(3) Jehovah is distinctly the redemption name of Deity. When sin ener 
and redemption became necessary, it was Jehovah Elohim who sought the sinnin 
ones (Gen, 3. 9-13) and clothed them with “‘coats of skins” (Gen. 3. 21), a beautifi 
type of a Tighteousness provided by the Lorp God through ’sacrifice (Rom. 3. 21, 22) 
The first distinct revelation of Himself by His name Jehovah was in connectior 
with the redemption of the covenant people out of Egypt (Ex. 3. 13-17). 

As Redeemer, emphasis is laid upon those attributes of Jehovah which the si 
and salvation of man bring into exercise. These are: (a) His holiness (Lev: 11. 44, 
45; 19. 1, 2; 20. 26; Hab. 1. 12, 13): (6) His hatred and judgment of sin (Deut, 32- 
35-42; Gen. 6. 5-7; Psa. 11. 4-6; 66. 18; Ex. 34. 6, ); (c) His love for and redemp- 
tion of sinners, but always righteously (Gen. 3. 21; 8. 20, 21; Ex. 12. 12, 13: Lev. 


16. 2, 3; Isa. 53. 5, 6, 10). Salvation by Jehovah apart from sacrifice is unknown to 
Scripture. 
6. 


25] GENESIS. [2 17 


5 And every plant of the field be-' B.c. 4004. | 10 And a river went out of Eden 


fore it was inthe earth, and every) to water the garden; and from 
herb of the field before it grew: for thence it was parted, and became 
the Lorp God had not caused it to into four heads. 
rain upon the earth, and there was 11 The name of the first fs Pison: 
not a man to till the ground. ° la1 Cor.15.45; [that 18 it which compasseth the 
6 But there went up a mist from} Mt.19.4; whole land of Havilah, where there 
the earth, and watered the whole) M&10.6. is gold; 
face of the ground. bThe Eight | 12 And the gold of that land is 
The creative act of Gen. 1. 27 Ceae. ne St is bdellium and the 
described. Gen3-14-. | 13° And the name of the second 


7 And the Lorp God ¢formed| febaio} [river is Gihon: the same is it that 
as oo the er of ae aie Bad Or, Adam. |cOmMpasseth the whole land of Ethi- 
-breat into his nostrils the brea 2 *  fopia. 
of life; and man became a 4living/d Cf.Rom.5. 14 And the name of the third river 
soul. pk re is i ates that “y # which goeth 
hetats 1 ies towar e east of Assyria. And 
The habitation of unfallen ¢ Death (spir- |the fourth river is Euphrates. 
man, and the Edenic Cove-|* ii2n Mts. 15bAnd the Lore God tock the 
nant... (Add Gen. 1./28-30.) rr Benes) ‘man, and put him into the garden 
8 And the Lorp God planted al ~*~ ~~” ‘Jof Eden to dress it and to keep it. 
garden eastward inBdens'and there|f Hiddekel= | 16 And the Lorp God Goat 
he put theman whom hehad formed.) Spesotcem’ |manded the man, saying, Of every 
9 And out of the ground made the! tree of the garden thou mayest 


Lorp God to grow every tree that! freely eat: 

is pleasant to the sight, and good 17 But of the tree of the knowledge 
for food; the tree of life also in the of good and evil, thou shalt not eat 
‘midst of the garden, and the tree of, of it: ¢for in the «day that thou eat- 
knowledge of good and evil. est thereof thou shalt surely die. 


(4) In His redemptive relation to man, Jehovah has seven compound names 
which reveal Him as meeting every need of man from his lost state to the end. 
These compound names are: (a) Jehovah-jireh, “the Lorp will provide’’ (Gen. 

22. 13, 14), 1. e. will provide a sacrifice; (b) Jehovah-rapha, “the Lorp that heal- 
eth”? (Ex. 15. 26). That this refers to physical healing the context shows, but the 
deeper healing of soul malady is implied. (c) fehovah-nissi, “the LORD our ban- 
ner’ (Ex. 17. 8-15). The name is interpreted by the context. The enemy was 

_Amalek, a type of the flesh, and the conflict that day stands for the conflict of Gal. 
5. 17—the war of the Spirit against the flesh. Victory was’wholly due to divine 
help. (d) Jehovah-Shalom, “the Lorp our peace,’’ or “the LORD send_peace”’ 
(Jud. 6. 24). Almost the whole ministry of Jehovah finds expression and illustra- 

tion in that chapter. Jehovah hates and judges sin (vs. Diy Jehovah loves and 
saves sinners (vs. 7-18), but only through sacrifice (vs. 19-21) (see also Rom. 5. 1; 

Eph. 2. 14; Col. 1. 20). (e) Jehovah-ra-ah, “the LoRD my shepherd” (Psa. 23.). 
In Psa. 22. Jehovah makes peace by the blood of the cross; in Psa. 23. Jehovah 
is shepherding His own who are in the world (John. 10. 7, note). (f) Jehovah- 

‘tsidkenu, “the Lorp our righteousness” (Jer. 23. 6). This name of Jehovah 
occurs in 4 prophecy concerning the future restoration and conversion of Israel. 
Then Israel will hail Him as Jehovah-tsidkenu—“the Lorp our righteousness.” 
(g) Jehovah-shammah, “the Lorp is present” (Ezk. 48.35). This name signifies 
Jehovah’s abiding presence with His people (see Ex. 33. 14, 15; 1 Chr. 16. 27, 33; 

sa. 16. 11; 97. 5; Mt. 28. 20; Heb. 13.5). , p : 

(5) Lorp (Jehovah) is also the distinctive name of Deity as in covenant with 
Israel (Ex. 19. 3; 20. 1, 2; Jer. 31. 31-34). 

(6) Lorp God (Heb. Jehovah pote) is the first of the compound names 
f Deity. Lorp God is used distinctively: (1) of the relation of Deity to man & as 
Creator (Gen.' 2. 7-15); (b) as morally in authorit over man (Gen. 2. 16, 17); (c) as 

eating and governing the earthly relationships of man (Gen. 2. 18-24; 3. 16-19, 
22-24); and (d) as redeeming man (Gen. 3. 8-15, 21); (2) of the relation of Deity to 
Israel (Gen. 24. 7; 28. 13; Ex. 3. 15, 18; 4. 5;°S. 1; 7. 6, etc.; Deut. 1. 11, 21; 4. 1; 6. 3; 
12. 1, etc.; Josh. 7. 13, 19, 20; 10. 40, 42; Jud. 2. 12; 1 Sam. 2. 30; 1 Ki. 1, 48; 2 Ki. 9. 6; 
10. 31; 1 Chr. 22. 19; 2 Chr. 1.9; Ezra 1. 3; Isa. 21.17). See other names of Deity, 
Gen. 1. 1, note; 2. 4, note; 14. 18, note; 15. 2, note; 17. 1, note; 21. 33, note; 


1 Sam. 1. 3, note. F 


2 18] GENESIS. [3 10 


18 And the LorpD God said, Jt is} B.c. 4004. 
not good that the man should be 
alone; I will make him an help 
meet for him. 

19 And out of the ground the 
Lorp God formed every beast of 
the field, and every fowl of the air; 
and brought them unto Adam to 


The temptation of Eve: (2) add- 
ing to the Word of God. 


2 And the woman said unto the 

serpent, We may eat of the fruit of 
the trees of the garden: i 

3 But of the fruit of the tree which 

1s a i se: ce pe poaghe oe 

3 hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, 

eeeapet ne woud) pte a neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. 


ing creature, that was the name The temptation of Eve: (3) the 


thereof. first lie (John 8. 44). 

20 And Adam gave names to all < ¢ 
cattle, and to the fowl of the air, 4 And the serpent said unto the 
and to every beast of the — i but woman, Ye shall not surely die: __ 
for Adam there was not found an 3 

ili The temptation of Eve: (4) the 
Rete nest for him. appeal to pride (Isa. 14. 12- 
The method of the creation Of |, Isha, “pen 14). 
woman (Gen. 1. 27). cause she 


21 And the Lorp God caused al out ie a an shin bebarineaet arin 2 
deep pal to fall upon Adam, and eh) (Hos. shall be opened, and A shall be as 
he slept: and he took one of his| -***””" gods, knowing good and evil. 
ibs, d closed the flesh in-)5 cfMt.19. P 
ioe prelate Beet eS 531 oris. The temptation of Eve: (5) the 

22 And the rib, which the Lorp 16 Eph-o: fall (1 Tim. 2. 14). 


God had taken from man, made he th 
a woman, and brought her unto the|¢ Satan, vs. - 6 And when the woman saw that 


: 1,2,4,13,14; |the tree was good for food, and that 
man. | 1Chr.21.1. it was pleasant to the eyes, and a* 
Eve, type of the church as bride| {Ge73-1; tree to be desired to make one wise, 


of Christ (Eph. 5. 28-32). Rev.20.10.) | she took of the fruit thereof, and did 

93 And Adam seid, 1 Tis us mow! sorte. (ecth hes cd bo oa 
, n. vs.  |with her; and he did eat. 

flesh: she shall be called «Woman sti, |_2_And the eyes of them both were 

because she was taken out of Jas.1.2.)° en naked; and they sewed fig 


leaves together, and made them- 


an. 
24 >Therefore shall a man leave 


his father and his mother, and shall Selves) aprons, 
cleave unto his wife: and they shall The seeking God. His sabbath 
be one flesh. rest broken; His new work be- 
25 And they were both naked, the gun (John 5. 17; 9. 4; 14. 10). 
man and his wife, and were not ; : 
ashamed. 8 And they heard the voice of the 
LorD God walking in the garden 
CHAPTER 3. in the cool of the day: and Adam + 
The temptation of Eve: (1) the uae ps ue ne ones front 
implied doubt of the benev- Saree ere © Pthe camiones 
tenédiok God. gs e trees of the garden. 
o 9 And the LorpD God called unto 
OW the 2‘serpent was more sub- Adam, and said unto him, Where 
til than any beast of the field art thou? 
which the Lorp God had made. 10 And he said, I heard thy voice 
And he said unto the woman, Yea, in the garden, and I was afraid, be- 
hath God 4said, Ye shall not eat of cause I was naked; and I hid my- 
every tree of the garden? self. 


1 Eve, type of the Church as bride of Christ (John 3. 28, 29; 2 Cor. 11. 2; Eph. 5. 
25-32; Rev. 19. 7, 8). 

2 The serpent, in his Edenic form, is not to be thought of as a writhing reptile. 
That is the effect of the curse (Gen. 3.14). The creature which lent itself to Satan 
may well have been the most beautiful as it was the most “subtle” of creatures less 
than man, Traces of that beauty remain despite the curse. Every movement of 
a serpent is graceful, and many species are beautifully coloured. In the serpent, 
Satan first appeared ‘“‘as an angel of light”? (2 Cor. 11. 14). 

on 8 


3 11) GENESIS. [3 20 


11 And he said, Who told thee that|_B.c. 4004. | 16 Unto the woman he said, I will 
thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten! The Eight [ereatly multiply thy ¢sorrow and 
a vaca ark eee pean asin Covenants. ne concep aoe: i _ sorrow eee 

ee that thou shouldest not ea en.8.21. ring forth c en; an e- 

12 And the man said, The woman] {293i} sire shall be to thy husband, and 
whom thou gavest to be with me,|s Sacrifice he shall ¢rule over thee. 
she gave me of the tree, and I did AprePR ot) 17 And unto Adam he said, Be- 
“Ss And the Lorp God said unto (Ge n3-15; cous z bp ger apy na the 
the woman, What is this that thou|¢ Christ (hist the eee of Menich I Conca 
hast done? And the woman said,] Gen 123,  |thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of 
The serpent beguiled me, and I did} (Gen.3.15; |it: cursed is the ground for thy 


eat. Othe oe sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it 
The Second, or Adamic row with thy|all the days of thy life; 

BASE conception. | 18 Thorns also and /thistles. shall 

eCf.1 Cor.11. lit bring forth to thee; and thou shalt 


14 1And the Lorp God “said unto) 3:44-2¢)EPb-/eat the herb of the field; 
the serpent, Because thou hast done) 18;1Tim.2. | 19 In the sweat of thy face shalt 
this, thou art cursed above all cat-| 11; Tit.2.5; |thou eat bread, till thou return unto 
ve and above every beast of the); c¢Romg22. |the ground; for out of it wast thou 

os Sh abgang ee oe £0,|¢ Pestirs rapes ie oe thou art, and unto 
and dust s ou €a € days ysical). |dust s. ou return. 
of thy life: Gen.5.5. 

: : (Gen.3.19; 

15. And I will put enmity between] Heb.9.27.) The faith of Adam: 
thee and the woman, and between h Faith, Gena. aR Ne wis , 
thy seed and her seed; it shall) #2499537 20 And Adam ‘called his wife’s 
bruise thy head, and thou shalt} ;i-e. jiving,or |name ‘Eve; because she was the 
‘bruise chis heel. life-giver. {mother of all living. 


1The Adamic Covenant conditions the life of fallen man—conditions which 
must remain till, in the kingdom age, ‘‘the creation also shall be delivered from the 
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God” (Rom. 8. 21). 
The elements of the Adamic Covenant are: : \ 

(1) The serpent, Satan’s tool, is cursed (v. 14), and becomes God’s illustration 
~ in nature of the effects of sin—from the most beautiful and subtle of creatures to a 
loathsome reptile! The deepest mystery of the atonement is intimated here. 
Christ, ‘‘made sin for us,’”’ in bearing our judgment, is typified by the brazen ser- 
pent (Num. 21. 5-9; John 3. 14, 15; 2 Cor. 5. 21). Brass speaks of judgment—in 
the brazen: altar, of God’s judgment, and in the laver, of self-judgment. 

(2) The first promise of a Redeemer (v. 15), Here begins the “highway of the 
Seed,” Abel, Seth, Noah (Gen. 6. 8-10), Shem (Gen. 9. 26, 27), Abraham (Gen. 12. 
1-4), Isaac (Gen. 17. eee Jacob (Gen. 28. 10-14), Judah (Gen. 49. 10), David 
(2 oy 7. 5-17), Immanuel-Christ (Isa. 7. 9-14; Mt. 1. 1, 20-23; 1 John 3. 8; John 
12. 31). 

(3) The changed state of the woman (v.16). In three particulars: (a) Multi- 
plied conception; (b) motherhood linked with sorrow; (c) the headship of the 
man (cf. Gen. 1. 26, 27). The entrance of sin, which is disorder, makes necessary 
Pend and it is vested in man (1 Tim. 2. 11-14; Eph. 5. 22-25; 1 Cor. 
11. 7-9). 

&) The earth cursed (v. 17) for man’s sake. It is better for fallen man to 
battle with a reluctant earth than to live without toil. 
5) The inevitable sorrow of life (v. 17). 
( 6 SUE light occupation of Eden (Gen. 2. 15) changed to burdensome labour 
vs. 18, 19). of 

: (7) pees death (v.19; Rom. 5. 12-21). See ‘Death (spiritual)” (Gen. 2. 17; 
Eph. 2.5, note). - : p 
__ See for the other covenants: Edenic (Gen. 1. 28); Noahic (Gen. 9. 1); Abrahamic 
(Gen, 15. 18); Mosaic (Ex. 19. 25); Palestinian (Deut. 30. 3); Davidic (2 Sam. 7. 16); 
New (Heb. 8. 8). js ; i 

2The chain of references which begins here includes the promises.and proph- 
ecies concerning Christ which were fulfilled in His birth and works at His 
first advent. See, for line of unfulfilled promises and prophecies: “Christ (second 
advent)” (Deut. 30. 3; Acts 1. 9, note); “Kingdom” (Gen. 1. 26-28; Zech. 12. 8); 
coats (N. T.)” (Lk. 1. 31; 1 Cor. 15. 28); ‘Day of the Lord” (Isa. 2. 10; Rev. 
19, 11). 

9 


3 21] GENESIS. {4 6 


The response of fehovah Elohim|_B.c. 4003. CHAPTER 4, 
Salida eh Sie The first sons of Adam and 
21 Unto Adam also and to his wife Eve. 


did the Lorp God make !coats_ of ND Adan Eee Boe Wate 
skins, and ¢clothed them. A! and she conceived, and bare 
The judgment of the Expul-|? Righteous oa aid Seid, 2 nave gOecoae 


‘ 5 ness (ar-_ |man “from the LORD. 
sion ends the First Dispensa-| ment) Job 2 And she again bare his. brother 


tion. al; Rew (4Abel. And Abel was a keeper of 

PHAN “he Lore God asia! Re | 19.8.) jprere-j Due Cain was a tiller of the 
the L ; Be- ground. 

acted agen deri sanps core P ore wt 3 And in process of time it came 


: ; to pass, that Cain brought of the 
lest he put forth his hand, and cs “Tehoven, _ |fruit of the ground an offering unto 
also of the tree of life, and eat, an the Lorp. 


live for ever: ; d Faith, Gen. | 4 And Abel, he also “brought of 
330, Fes |the firstlings of his 5Alock and of the 


The Second Dispensation: Con- 1138) \fat thereof. And the Lorp had re- , 


science (Gen. 3. 22-7. 23). 


e Sacrifice 


‘cal 
23 2Therefore the Lorp God sent] G2?s 40. ing he had not respect. And Cain 
him forth from the garden of Eden, Ye ecu was very wroth, and his counte- 
to till the ground from whence he nance fell. 
was taken. a 
24 So he drove out the man; and 


Cain exhorted even yet to bri 
he placed at the east of the gar- ; ven yet to bring 


in-off : 
den of Eden 4Cherubims, and a SS ees 
flaming sword which turned every |. 6 And the Lorb said unto Cain, 
way, to keep the way of the tree of why art thou wroth? and why is 


life. |thy countenance fallen? 


1 Coats of skins: Type of “Christ, made unto us righteousness” —a divinely pro- 
vided garment that the first sinners might be made fit for God’s presence. See 
Righteousness, Sarment (Gen. 3. 21; Rev. 19, 8). 

#The Second Dispensation: Conscience. By disobedience man came to a per- 
sonal and experimental knowledge of good and evil—of good as obedience, of evil 
as disobedience to the known will of God. Through that knowledge conscience 
awoke. Expelled from Eden and placed under the second, or Adamic Covenant, 
man was responsible to do all known good, to abstain from all known evil, and to 
approach God through sacrifice. The result of this second testing of man is stated 
in Gen. 6. 5, and the dispensation ended in the judgment of the Flood. Appar- 
ently “the east of the garden” (v. 24), where were the cherubims and the flame, 
remained the place of worship through ‘this second dispensation. See for the other 
six dispensations: Innocence (Gen. 1. 28); Human Government (Gen. 8. 20); 
Tiamise (Gen. 12. 1); Law (Ex. 19. 8); Grace (John 1, 17); Kingdom (Eph. 
1. 10). 

3 Cain (“acquisition”) is a type of the mere man of the earth. His religion was 
destitute of any adequate sense of sin, or need of atonement. This religious type 
is described in 2 Pet. 2. Seven things are said of him: (1) he worships in self-will; 
2) is angry with God; (3) refuses to bring a sin-offering; (4) murders his brother; 
5) lies to God; (6) becomes a vagabond; (7) is, nevertheless, the object of the divine 
solicitude. 

4 Abel (“‘exhalation,” or, “that which ascends”) is a type of the spiritual man. 
His sacrifice, in which atoning blood was shed (Heb. 9. 22), was therefore at once 
his confession of sin and the expression of his faith in the interposition of a sub- 
stitute (Heb. 11. 4), 

°Type of Christ, the Lamb of God, the most constant type of the suffering 
Messiah—“the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world” (John 1. 29). 
A lamb fitly symbolizes the unresisting innocency and harmlessness of the Lord 
Jesus (Isa. 53. 7; Lk. 23. 9; Mt. 26. 53, 54). This type is brought into prominence 
by contrast with Cain’s bloodless offering of the fruit of his own works, and pro- 
claims, in the very infancy of the race, the primal truth that “without shedding of 
blood is no remission” (Heb. 9. 22; 11. 4). 


10 


spect unto Abel and to his ‘offering: | 
5 But unto Cain and to his offer- - 


are oe. 


vad GENESIS. ass 


7 If thou doest well, shalt thou! s.c. 3375. |¢mark nm Cain, lest findi 
not be accepted? and if thou doest|—|him should kill him. 
not well, !sin lieth at the door. And iets Bs 
unto thee shali be his desire, and The first civilization. 


thou shalt rule over him. 16 And Cain went out from the 

* presence of the LorD, and dwelt in 

The first murder: history of the land of “Nod, on the east of 
Cain (cf. Gen. 4. 23). Eden. 


Hu : ® 17 And Cain knew his wife; and 
__8 And Cain talked with Abel his/aMt. 23.35; /|she conceived, and bare Enoch: and 
brother: and it came to pass, when| L*.11-51;  /he 2builded a city, and called the 


) they were in the field, that Cain Pare ie name of the city, after the name of 
rosé up against Abel his brother, _ his son, Enoch. 
and 4slew him. bie. for 18 And unto Enoch. was born 


__9 And the Lorp said unto Cain, ae ro- |Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and 
Where is Abel thy brother? And) Thelawof |Mehujael begat Methusael: and 

he said, I know not: Am I my/| Gen. 96 et |Methusael begat Lamech. 
oe sees Santen . SS iene 19 And esa ge took A him 
t e said, at hast thou two wives: the name o e one 
done? the voice of thy brother’s|¢ i< wander-|wag Adah, and the name of the 
Blood “crieth unto me from the “* wa hes eeirenseagiee 

_ ground. d Or, who 20 An ah bare Jabal: he was 
11 And now art thou cursed from ne the father of such as dwell in tents, 

_the earth, which hath opened her! Gaia had and of such as have cattle. 

mouth to receive thy brother’s| slainanun- | 21 And his brother’s name was 


blood from thy hand; se} vet (Jubal: he was the father of all such 
ie shal nce henceforth sield unto] Tatelby  |°22 "And Zillah; she also bare Tu 
thee her strength; a fugitive and aj Jehovah; bal-cain, an instructer of every ar- 


vagabond shalt thou be in the| PO~7U" |tificer in brass and iron: and the 
mech, who sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah. 


earth. 
13 And Cain said unto the Lorp,| ad slsin in | 23 And Lamech_said* unto his 
My punishment is greater than I erence. iwives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my 


can bear. voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken 
~ 14 Behold, thou hast driven me unto my speech: for I have slain a 
out this day from the face of the man to my wounding, and a young 
earth; and from thy face shall I be man to my hurt. 


24 If Cain shall be avenged seven- 


hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a 
fold, truly Lamech seventy and 


vagabond in the earth; and it shall 


_come to pass, that every one that sevenfold. 

ag Seta Se Shih The birth of Seth: the spiritual 

-Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, seed renewed. 
vengeance shall be taken on him 25 And Adam knew his wife 
sevenfold. And the Lorpb ‘set a again; and she bare a son, and 


10r, sin-offering. In Hebrew the same word is used for “sin,” and “‘sin-offer- 
ing,” thus emphasizing in a remarkable way the complete identification of the 
believer’s sin with his sin-offering (cf. John 3. 14 with 2 Cor. 5. 21), Here both 
meanings are brought together. “‘Sin lieth at the door,”’ but.so also “a sin-offering 
croucheth at the [tent] door.” It is “where sin abounded” that “grace did much 
‘more abound”. (Rom. 5. 20). Abel’s offering implies a previous instruction (cf. Gen. 
3. 21), for it was “‘by faith” (Heb. 11. 4), and faith is taking God at His word; so 
that Cain’s unbloody offering was a refusal of the divine way. But Jehovah made 
a last appeal to Cain (Gen. 4. 7) even yet to bring the required offering. 
2The first civilization, that which perished in the judgment of the Flood, was 
Cainitic in origin; character, and destiny. Every element of material civilization is 
‘mentioned in verses 16-22, city and pastoral life, and the development of arts and 
‘manufactures. Enoch, after whom the first city was named, means “teacher.” 
The el termination of the names of Enoch’s son and grandson shows that for a time 
the knowledge of Elohim was preserved, but this soon disappears (Rom. 1. 21-23). 
Adah means “pleasure,” or ‘“adornment’’; Zillah, to “‘hide’’; Lamech, ‘‘conqueror,” 
‘or “wild man.” (Cf. Rom. 1. 21-25. See Gen. 6.4.) The Cainitic civilization 
may have been as splendid as that of Greece or Rome, but the divine judgment is 
according to the moral state, not the material (Gen, 6. 5-7). _ 
: il 


eo 


4 26] 


GENESIS. 


[5 30 


forty years, and begat sons and 


called his name “Seth: For God, 
said she, hath appointed me 
another seed instead of Abel, whom 
Cain slew. 

26 And to Seth, to him also there 
was born a son; and he called his 
name %Enos: then began men to 
‘call upon the name of the LorD. 


CHAPTER 5. 


4 ah is the book of the genera- 
tions of !Adam. In the day 
that God created man, 4in the like- 
ness of God made he him; 

2 eMale and female created he 
them; and blessed them, and called 
their name Adam, in the day when 
they were created. 

3 And Adam lived an hundred 
and thirty years, and begat a son in 
his..own.,likeness,,.after his image; 
and called his name Seth: 

4 And the days of Adam after he 
had begotten Seth were eight hun- 
dred years: and he begat sons and 
daughters: 

5 And all the days that Adam 
lived were nine hundred and thirty 
years: and he /died. 


The family of Seth. 


6 And Seth lived an hundred and 
five years, and begat Enos: 

7 And Seth lived after he begat 
Enos eight hundred and seven 
years, and begat sons and daugh- 


ters: 

8 And all the days of Seth were 
nine hundred and twelve years: and 
he died. 

9 And Enos lived ninety years, 
and begat Cainan: 

10 And Enos lived after he begat 
Cainan eight hundred and fifteen 
years, and begat sons and daugh- 
ters: 

11 And all the days of Enos were 
nine hundred and five years: and 
he died. 

12 And Cainan lived seventy 
years, and begat Mahalaleel: 

13 And Cainan lived after he be- 
gat Mahalaleel eight hundred and 


B.C. 4004. 


aie. Sheth = 
appointed 


6i.e mortal 


¢ Or, call 
themselves 
by the 
name of 
Jehovah, 
Contra, 
Gen.12.8; 
26.25 


d Gen.1.27. 
e ME.10.6. 


f Death 
(physical). 
Gen.6.17. 
(Gen.3.19; 
Heb.9.27.) 


g Faith. vs. 
22-24; Gen. 
6.22. (Gen.3. 
20; Heb.11. 
39.) 


h Miracles 


daughters: . 4 

14 And ali the days of Cainan 
were nine hundred and ten years: 
and he died. : 

15 And Mahalaleel* lived sixty 
and five years, and begat Jared: 

16 And Mahalaleel lived after he 
begat ‘Jared eight hundred and 
thirty years, and begat sons and 
daughters: 

17 And all the days of Mahalaleel 
were eight hundred ninety and five 
years: and he died. 

18 And Jared lived an hundred 
sixty and two years, and he begat 
Enoch: 

19 And Jared lived after he begat 
Enoch eight hundred years, and be- 
gat sons and daughters: 

20 And all the days of Jared were 
nine hundred sixty and two years: 
and he died. 

21 And Enoch lived sixty and five 
years, and begat Methuselah: 

22 And 2Enoch éwalked with God 
after he begat Methuselah three 
hundred years, and begat sons and 
daughters: 

23 And all the days of Enoch were 
three hundred sixty and five years: 

24 And Enoch walked.with God: 
and he was not;.for God /took 


im. 

25 And Methuselah lived an hun- 
dred eighty and seven years, and 
begat Lamech: 

26 And Methuselah lived after he 


* begat Lamech seven hundred eighty 


and two years, and begat sons and 
daughters: 

27 And all the days of Methuselah 
were nine hundred sixty and nine 
years: and he died. 

28 And Lamech lived an hundred 
eighty and two years, and begat a 
son: 

29 And he called his name Noah, 
saying, This same shall comfort us 
concerning our work and toil of our 
hands, because of the ground which 
the Lorp hath cursed. 

30 And Lamech lived after he be- 
gat Noah five hundred ninety and 
five years, and begat sons: and 
daughters: 


1 Adam, as the natural head of the race (Lk. 3. 38), is a contrasting type of 


Christ, the Head of the new 


creation. 


See Rom. 5. 14; 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22, 45-47. 


Enoch, ‘“‘translated that he should not see death” (Heb. 11. 5) before the judg- 
ment of the Flood, is a type of those saints who are to be translated before the apoca- 
lyptic judgments (1 Thes. 4. 14-17). Noah, left on the earth, but preserved through 
the judgment of the Flood, is a type of the Jewish people, who will be kept through 
the apocalyptic judgments (Jer. 30. 5-9; Rev. 12. 13-16) and brought as an earthly 


people to the new heaven and new e 


12 


arth (Isa. 65. 17-19; 66. 20-22; Rev. 21. 1). 


5 31] GENESIS. 


31 And all the days of Lamech| B.c. 2853. 
were seven hundred seventy and 
seven years: and he died. 

32 And Noah was five hundred 
years old: and Noah begat Shem, 
Ham. and Japheth. 


CHAPTER 6. 


The Flood (Gen. 6. 1-8. 19): 
(1) The marriage of Cainites 
with Sethites. 


a Holy Spirit. 


Ex.28.3. © 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


AND it came to pass, when men 
began to multiply on the face 
of the earth, and daughters were|é Or, the 


born unto them, eres 
2 That the sons of God saw the! The Hebrew 
daughters of men that they were| word signifies 
fair; and they took them wives of Meath 
all which they chose. it clesithe 
(2) The warning of Jehovah. | EnPsesires. 
3 And the Lorp said, My ¢spirit Fee” A 
shall not always strive with man,|" Tore.” 


for that he also is flesh: yet his days 


shall be an hundred and twenty|¢ Righteous- 


ness. Gen.7. 


years. 1. (Gen.6.9; 
(3) The antediluvian civilization| **??>? 
(Lk. 17. 37). eile. upright. 


4 There were giants in the earth} °% %7°°'® 


in those days; and also after that, 
when the !sons of God came in unto 
the daughters of men, and they bare 
children to them, the same be- 
Came mighty men which were of 
old, men of renown. 


(4) The purpose of Jehovah in 
judgment, 
5 And Gop saw that the wicked- 


~ ness of man was great in the earth, 


[6 14 


and that every ‘imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart was only evil 
continually. 

6 And it ‘repented the Lorp that 
he had made man on the earth, 
and it grieved him at his heart. 

7 And the Lorp said, I will de- 
stroy man whom I have created 
from the face of the earth; both 
man, and beast, and the creeping 
thing, and the fowls of the air; for 
7a ‘repenteth me that I have made 

em. 


(5) The purpose of Jehovah in 
grace. 


8 But Noah found grace in the 
eyes of the LorD. - 

9 These are the generations of 
Noah: Noah was a 4just man and 
eperfect in his generations, and 
Noah “walked with God. 

10 And Noah begat three sons, 
Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 

11 The earth also-was corrupt be- 
fore God, and the earth_was filled 
with violence. 

12 And God looked upon the 
earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; 
for all flesh had corrupted his way 
upon the earth. 

13. And God said unto Noah, The 
end of all flesh is come before me; 
for the earth is filled with violence 
through them; and, behold, I will 
destroy them with the earth. 

14 Make thee an ark of gopher 
wood; rooms shalt thou make in the 
ark, and shalt pitch it within and 
without with pitch. = 


1Some hold that these “sons of God” were the “angels which kept not their 


- first estate’’ (Jude 6). 
angels. But this is an error (Isa. 43. 6). 


It is asserted that the title is in the O. T. exclusively used of 
Angels are spoken of in a sexless way. 


No female angels are mentioned in Scripture, and we are expressly told that mar- 
riage is unknown among angels (Mt. 22.30). The uniform Hebrew and Christian 
interpretation has been that verse 2 marks the breaking down of the separation 
between the godly line of Seth and the godless line of Cain, and so the failure of the 
testimony to Jehovah committed to the line of Seth (Gen. 4. 26). For apostasy 
there is noremedy but judgment (Isa. 1. 2-7, 24, 25; Heb. 6. 4-8; 10. 26-31). Noah, 
“a preacher of righteousness,” is given 120 years, but he won no convert, and the 
judgment predicted by his great-grandfather fell (Jude 14, 15; Gen. 7. 11). 

2Noah and Enoch are the two antediluvians of whom it is said that they “‘walked 
with God” (Gen. 5. 24; 6. 9). Enoch, “translated that he should not see death” 
(Heb. 11. 5), becomes a type of the saints who will be “caught up” before the great 
tribulation (1 Thes.<4. 14-17; Rev. 3. 10; Dan. 12. 1; Mt. 24. 21); Noah, preserved 
through the Flood, is a type of the Israelitish people who will be preserved through 
the tribulation (Jer. 30. 5-9). See “Tribulation” (Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 7. 14). 

3 “Ark”: type of Christ as the refuge of His people from judgment (Heb. 11. 7). 
In strictness of application this speaks of the preservation through the “great tribu- 
lation” (Mt. 24. 21, 22) of the remnant of Israel who will turn to the Lord after the 
Church (typified by Enoch, who was translated to heaven before the judgment of 
the Flood) has been caught up to meet the Lord (Gen. 5, 22-24; 1 Thes. 4. 15-17; 
Heb. 11. 5; Isa. 2. 10, 11; 26. 20, 21)... But the type has also a present reference to 


13 


6 15] GENESIS. [715 


15 And this is the fashion which\_ B.c. 2448. |not clean by two, the male and his 


thou shalt make it of: The length female. : 
of the ark shall be three hundred 3 Of fowls also of the air by 
‘cubits, the breadth of it fifty cu- sevens, the male and the female; to 
bits, and the height of it thirty wees a alive upon the face of all 
cubits. ; e earth. : 
16 A window shalt thou make to 4 For yet seven days, and I will 
the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou pause it a sot po eathee me om 
finish it above; and the door of the lays and forty nights; and ev 
ark shalt thou set in the side there- living substance that I have made 
of; with lower, second, and third ‘she I destroy from off the face of 
stories shalt thou make it. : e earth. e ; 
“7 And, behold, I, even I, doj*Qpecubit= |S” And Noah did according unto 
bring a flood of waters upon the) v.1o. all that the LoRD commanded him. 


earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein 6 And Noah was six hundred 
is the breath of life, from under|? Coie a years old when the flood of waters 
heaven; and every thing that is in be 16.2205. was upon fee aptity te i = 
i 3.19; Ss 
a ahs Sth thee! will I establish Heb 27.) Lara ana ee Ae, ar his rR 
my covenant; and thou shalt come|c Faith. Gen. wives with him, into the ark, be- 
into the ark, thou, and thy sons, soo. eee [Cause of the waters of the flood. 
and thy wife, and thy sons’ wives ee Sy 8 Of clean a amt ee — 
ith thee. that are not clean, and of fowls, 
“19 And of every living thing of|¢ Righteous- land of every thing that creepeth 
all flesh, !two of every sort shalt| 728%: S<®- lupon the earth, 


5.6. (Gen. 4 
thou bring into the ark, to keep 63: Lit 35.) 9 There went in two and two unto 
them alive with thee; they shall be creek Noah into the ark, the male and the 
730 OF 4 ater their kind, and “BB, note, Noah” pit So 
owls 5 : é 
of cattle after their kind, of every|/Sce Gen.6.9, 10, And it came to pass after seven 
creeping thing of the earth after his) 7°fe 2- days, that the waters of the flood 
kind, two of every sort shall come gice. May. were upon the earth. 
unto thee, to keep them alive. 11 In the six hundredth year of 


21 And take thou unto thee of all)" Mt24.27 7; |Noah’s life, in the 8second month, 
food that is eaten, and thou shalt] 1Thes.s'3.' \the seventeenth day of the month, 
gather it to thee; and it shall be| 2 Pet.2.5; the “same day were all the foun- 
for food for thee, and for them. 2 Pet-3.6. tains of the great deep ‘broken up, 

22 Thus ‘did Noah; according to]; miracles {land the windows of heaven were 
all that God commanded him, so| (.T.). Gen. opened. 


did he. 34; Jone” | 12 And the rain was upon the 
TO ee earth forty days and forty nights. 
CHAPTER 7. RE a ine ppcfeame oay entered 

£ ah, an 2 . 

(6) The judgment of the Flood: Japhetee the -sadene, Noalr? ane 
end oi testing under the Sec- Noah’s wife, and the three ‘wives 
ona Dispensation. of his sons with them, into the 

nee the LorD said unto Noah, ark; 
~ Come thou and all thy house 14 They, and every beast after his 

into the ark; for thee have I seen kind, and all the cattle after their 

‘righteous before me in this gene- kind, and every creeping thing that 

ration. creepeth upon the earth after his 

2 Of every ‘clean beast thou shalt kind, and every fowl after his kind, 

take to thee by sevens, the male and every bird of every sort. 

his female: and of beasts that are 15 And they went in unto Noah 


the position of the believer “in Christ” (Eph. 1.), etc. It should be noted that the 
word translated ‘“‘pitch”’ in Gen. 6. 14 is the same word translated “atonement” in 
Lev. 17.11, etc. It is atonement that keeps out the waters of judgment and makes 
the believer’s position “in Christ” safe and blessed. 

1Cf. Gen. 7. 2. In addition to two animals, etc., commanded (Gen. 6. 19) to 
be preserved for future increase (“they shall be male and female’), the further 
command was given more than 100 years later to take of clean beasts, i. e. beasts 
acceptable for sacrifice, seven each. Exodus gives ten such beasts, or but seventy 


in all. Modern ships carry hundreds of live beasts, with their food, besides scores 
of human beings. 
14 


7 16) 


into the ark, two and two of all] Be. 2349. 


fete wherein is the breath of 
‘ife 

16 And they that went in, went in 
male and female of all flesh, as God 
had commanded him: and the 
Lorp shut him in. 

17 And the flood was forty days 
upon the earth; and the waters in- 
creased, and bare up the ark, and it 
was lift up above the earth. 

18 And‘ the waters prevailed, and 
were increased greatly upon the 
earth; and the ark went upon the 
face of the waters. 

19 And the waters prevailed ex- 
ceedingly upon the earth; and all 
the high hills, that were under the 
whole heaven, were covered. 

20 Fifteen ¢cubits upward did the 
waters prevail; and the mountains 
were covered. 

21 And all flesh died that moved 
upon the earth, both of fowl, and of 
cattle, and of beast, and of every 
creeping thing that creepeth upon 
the éarth, and every man: 

22 All in whose nostrils was the 
breath of life, of all that was in the 
dry land, died. 

23 And every living substance 
was destroyed which was upon the 
face of the ground, both man, and 
cattle, and the creeping things, and 
the fowl of the heaven; and they 
were destroyed from the ’ earth: 
and Woah only remained alive, 
and they that were with him in the 


ark. 
24 And the waters prevailed upon 
the earth an hundred and fifty 


days. 


CHAPTER 8. 


ND God remembered Noah, 

and every living thing, and all 

the cattle that was with him in the 

ark: and God made a wind to pass 

over the earth, and the waters as- 
swaged; 

2 The fountains also of the deep 

and the windows of heaven were 
‘stopped, and the rain from heaven 
was restrained; 

3 And the waters returned from 
off the earth continually: and after 
the end of the hundred and fifty 
days the waters were abated. 

4 And the ark rested in the “sev- 
enth month, on the seventeenth day 
of the month, upon the mountains 
of 4Ararat. 

5 And the waters decreased con- 
tinually until the ‘tenth month: in 


GENESIS. 


[8 19 


a One cukit— 
18 in. 


6 EES 


ground, 


“heavenly” 
of Eph.2. 
4-6 for the 
Church, and 
to the “new 
heavens and 


( Fs 
17-19; 66.22; 
Reyv.21.1). 


ei.e. January. 


Jf The raven 


the tenth month, on the first day 
of the month, were the tops of the 
mountains seen. 

6 And it came to pass at the end 
of forty days, that Noah opened the 
window of the ark which he had 
made: 

7 And he sent forth a /raven, 
which went forth to and fro, until 
the waters were dried up from off 
the earth. 

8 Also he sent forth a /dove from 
him, to see if the waters were abated 
from off the face of the ground; 

9 But the dove found no rest for 
the sole of her foot, and she returned 


. {unto him into the ark, for the 


waters were on the face of the 
whole earth: then he put forth his 
hand, and took her, and pulled her 


- jin unto him into the ark. 


10 And he stayed yet other seven 
days; and again he sent forth the 
dove out of the ark, 

11 And the dove came in to him in 
the evening; and, lo, in her mouth 
was an olive leaf pluckt off: so 
Noah knew that the waters were 
abated from off the earth. 

12 And he stayed yet other seven 
days; and sent forth the dove; 
which returned not again unto him 
any more. 

13 And it came to pass in the six 
hundredth and first year, in the 
first month, the first day of the 


eae the dove |month, the waters were dried up 
thought to |from off the earth: and Noah re- 
ugh’ : 
stand for {moved the covering of the ark, and 
eae believer’s |iooked, and, behold, the face of the 
oO natures: 
the “old ground was dry. 
man” satis- 14 And in the “second month, on 
fore i, |the seven and twentieth day of the 
judgment; |tmonth, was the earth dried. 
the “new 15 And God spake unto Noah, 
many tang |saying 
satistactiee | 16 Go forth of the ark, thou, and 
thingsof | |thy wife, and thy sons, and thy 
pe aig sons’ wives with thee. 
_17 Bring forth with thee every liv- 
gi.e. April. ing thing that is with thee, of all 
ite. May flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, 


15 


and of every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth; that they 
may breed abundantly in the earth, 
and be fruitful, and multiply upon 
the earth. 

18 And Noah went forth, and his. 
sons, and his wife, and his sons’ 
wives with him: 

19 Every beast, every creeping 
thing, and every fowl, and whatso- 
ever creepeth upon the earth, after 
their kinds, went forth out of the 


lark, 


8 20] GENESIS. [97 
The Third Dispensation: Hu- 


fruitful, and multiply, and replenish 


G ent (Gen. 8. 20- the earth. 
iio) stg ge aan Noahic 2 And the fear of you and the 
Covenant (to Gen. 9. 27). dread of you shall be upon every 
20 And Noah builded an altar] beast of the earth, and upon every 


i 1 t 
unto the Lorp; and took of every pei as poctipirigt vse ot 


clean beast, and of every clean fowl, : Gshies afidhe sea tintin vaurenee 
and offered *burnt-offerings on the)¢ Rectan th oy deliv edhe y 


( 
altar. Gen.12.7,8. 3 Every moving thing that liveth 
21 And the LORD smelled a sweet (Gen4.45 ; shall be meat-for yous even aacthe 


savour; and the Lorp !%said in his have] weer ane 
heart, I will not again curse thel, rye Eignt ie See 


ground any more for man’s sake;) Covenants, 4 But flesh with the life thereof, 


for the imagination of man’s heart] Gen.15.18. seh f 
is evil from his youth; neither will) {S333 Rove ne the blood thereof, shall ye 


I again smite any more every thing 5 And surely your blood of your 


living, as I have done. ¢ Kingdom | * “figbe 
Thi : (.T). Ex. [lives will I require; at the hand of 
22 While the earth remaineth,| 37.49. every beast walla cequive sche aaaee 


seedtime and harvest, and cold and| (Gen.1.26; i 
heat, and summer and winter, and Zech.13.8.) mak en aS ee 
day and night shall not cease. PneaifsGcunane 


6 ‘Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, 


by man shall his blood be shed: for 
CHAPLER. 9. in the image of God made he 

ARD God blessed Noah and his man. : 
sons, and 2said unto them, Be} 7 And you, be ye fruitful, and 


1The Third Dispensation: Human Government. Under Conscience, as in Inno- 
cency, man utterly failed, and the judgment of the Flood marks the end_of the 
second dispensation and the beginning of the third. The declaration of the Noahic 
Covenant subjects humanity to a new test. Its distinctive feature is the institu- 
tion, for the first time, of human government—the government of man by man. 
The highest function of government is the judicial taking of life. All other govern- 
mental powers are implied in that. It follows that the third dispensation is dis- 
tinctively that of human government. Man is responsible to govern the world 
for God. That responsibility rested upon the whole race, Jew and Gentile, until 
the failure of Israel under the Palestinian Covenant (Deut. 28.-30. 1-10) brought 
the judgment of the Captivities, when ‘‘the times of the Gentiles” (See Lk. 21. 24; 
Rev. 16. 14) began, and the government of the world passed exclusively into Gen- 
tile hands (Dan. 2. 36-45; Lk. 21. 24; Acts 15. 14-17). That both Israel and the 
Gentiles have governed for self, not God, is sadly apparent. The judgment of the 
confusion of tongues ended the racial testing; that of the captivities the Jewish; 
while the Gentile testing will end in the smiting of the Image (Dan. 2.) and the 
judgment of the nations (Mt. 25. 31-46). See, for the other six dispensations: 
Innocence (Gen. 1. 28); Conscience (Gen. 3. 23); Promise (Gen. 12. 1); Law (Ex. 
19. 8); Grace (John 1. 17); Kingdom (Eph. 1. 10). 

2The Noahic Covenant. The elements are: 
G (2) ane relation of man to the earth under-the Adamic Covenant is confirmed 

en. 8. 21). 
(2) The order of nature is confirmed (Gen. 8. 22). 
(3) Human government is established (Gen. 9. 1-6). 
“ ie Earth is secured against another universal judgment by water (Gen, 8. 21; 
etd): 

(5S) A prophetic declaration is made that from Ham will descend an inferior 
and servile posterity (Gen. 9. 24, 25). 

(6) A prophetic declaration is made that Shem will have a peculiar relation 
to Jehovah (Gen. 9. 26, 27). All divine revelation is through Semitic men, and 
Christ, after the flesh, descends from Shem. 

(7) A prophetic declaration is made that from Japheth will descend the “‘en- 
larged”’ races (Gen. 9, 27). Government, science, and art, speaking broadly, are 
and have been Japhetic, so that history is the indisputable record of the exact ful- 
filment of these declarations. See, for the other seven covenants: Edenic (Gen. 
1. 28); Adamic (Gen. 3. 15); Abrahamic (Gen. 15, 18); Mosaic (Ex, 19, 25); Pales- 
tinian (Deut. 30.3); Davidic (2 Sam. 7. 16); New (Heb, 8. 8). 

16 


% 


Noah: and of them was the whole 
earth overspread. 


> - 
” 
98] GENESIS. [10 2 
_ multiply; bring forth abundantly in! B.C. 2348 Jes thetical: r 
_ the earth, and multiply therein. Noah pacar ah of ena 
8 And God spake unto Noah, and 20 And Noah b tod é 
_ to his sons with him, ¢saying, andriad Bad Oho nue: Bust 
| (2, And I, behold, 1 establish my hwo amma a Fis tan es 
_ covenant with you, and with your j : 
Boa after you: ove eae BS ie oh the wine, and 
10 And with every living creature SER Eee eo ee 
And ered within his tent. 
that is with you, of the fowl, of the 22 And H h 
cattle, and of every beast of the Bite AE SOREN OF Ge 
Wath with ; naan, saw the nakedness of his 
: you; from all that go out!a SeeGen.8.__ father d told hi 
of ey ark, to every beast of the By note; eitneutine old Auaiewe. Dreltes 
earth. -1, note, ti 
i] Y ; 23 And Shem and Japheth took 
11 And I will establish my cove-)s The bow i ii eta pirat 
nant with you; neither shall all flesh not said to See ace: snd lai Ou bon DoLuEne 
Re cut off anymore by thé waters! nave come shoulders, and went backward, and 
ele into exist- {covered the nakedness of. their 
of a flood; neither shall there any} ence at this |father: and their f: b 
more be a flood to destroy the earth. eee Bee eects "and they ae per ee 
‘ : AS Pho , 
eek crank which ieiaee terrae [fathere Bakeddess 
between me and you and every liv- with the ees usion re. Aol Covenant: 
ing creature that zs with you, for) character e prophetic declaration. 
eta eee atons: A SY Cree sits. isc spc wee Si _ from his 
: my bow in the cloud,| Typically, ’ new what his younger 
a Bec it: Bball be fora thee ofa ee Eras ee “ee et mae me i 
nant between me and the earth. the storm nd he said, ‘Cursed be Ca- 
14 And it shall come to pass, when) clouds of naan; a servant of servants shall h 
I bring a cloud over the earth, that judgment. _|be unto his brethren. Brora 
oe err seen = the cloud:| hasbeen see fry Ee me ne be the 
nd I will remember my cove-! thought t od of Shem; and C 
nant, which 1s between me ana Foul speale a the |shall be his servant. Bode 
and every living creature of all jose 27 God shall enlarge Japheth, and 
flesh; and the waters shall no move] never to he shall dwell in the tents of Shem: 
PPecome a flood to destroy all flesh. Be srpeucy: and Canaan shall be his servant. 
nd the bow shall be in the} visited The famil; Ne 
ps and I si look upon se that pon the (Gen. 9. at Baie 
may remember the everlasting) 3°°°(Gu) 28 And Noah lived af 
eee ha site end, ieee, $10.14 Heb. three hundred SA Rte peas pa 
, creature of all fles at 1s] ° 10.14-18). 29 And all the days of Noah 
upon the earth. i ayes 
Bes God titanate Noah, This) $0 OG 2, Ibe died ee Ste 
ts the token of the covenant, which} suddiv. 5-7. ‘ 
ee ep tlshed between me and CHAPTER 10. 
es at is upon the earth. OW these are the erati 
18 And the sons of Noah, that N of the sons of Noah, Sheen, 
went forth of the ark, were Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them 
and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham were sons born after the flood. 
is the father of Canaan. 2 The sons of Japheth; 1Gomer, 
19 ‘Yhese are the three sons of and 2Magog, and ?Madai, and 4Ja- 
van, and ©Tubal, and ®Meshech, and 


7Tiras. 


1 Progenitor of the ancient Cimerians and Cimbri, from whom are descended the 


Celtic family. 


’ 


3Progenitor of the ancient Medes. ; 
4 Progenitor of those who peopled Greece, Syria, etc 


5 Tubal’s descendants peopled the region south 
It is probable that Tobolsk perpetuates the tribal 


A branch of this race peopled Spain. _ fh 
6Progenitor of a race mentioned in connection with Tubal, Magog, and other 


Broadly speaking, Russia, excluding the conquests of Peter the 


they spread north and south. 
name. 


northern nations. 


2From Magog are descended the ancient Scythians, or Tartars, whose descend- 


ants predominate in the modern Russia. See Ezk. 38. 2; 39. 6; Rev. 20. 8. 


LCs 
of the Black Sea, from whence 


Great and his successors, is the modern land of Magog, Tubal, and Meshech, 


7Progenitor of the Thracians. 


17 


10 3] 


GENESIS. 


[113 


3 And the sons of Gomer; Ashke- 
naz, and Riphath, and Togarmah. 

4 And the sons of Javan; Elishah, 
and Tarshish, Kittim, and Do- 
danim. 

5 By these were the “isles of the 
Gentiles divided in their lands; 
every one after his tongue, after 
their families, in their nations. 

6 And the sons of Ham; Cush, 
and Mizraim, and Phut, and Ca- 
naan. 

7 And the sons of Cush; Seba, 
and Havilah, and Sabtah, and 
Raamah, and Sabtechah: and the 
sons of Raamah; Sheba, and 
Dedan. 

8 And Cush begat Nimrod: he 
began to be a mighty one in the 
earth. 

9 He was a mighty hunter before’ 
the Lorp: wherefore it is said, 
Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter 
before the LorD. . 

10 And the beginning of his king- 
dom was Babel, and Erech, and 


Accad, and Caineh, in the land of|5 Or, he went 


Shinar. 

11 Out of that land ‘went forth 
Asshur, and builded “Nineveh, and 
the city Rehoboth, and Calah, 

12 And Resen between ¢Nineveh 
and Calah: the same is a great 
city, 

13 And Mizraim begat Ludim, 
and Anamim, and Lehabim, and 
Naphtuhim, 

14 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, 
(out of whom came Philistim,) and 
Caphtorim. 

15 And Canaan begat Sidon his 
firstborn, and Heth, 

16. And the Jebusite, and the 
Amorite, and the Girgasite, 

17 And the Hivite, and the Ar- 
kite, and the Sinite, 

18 And the Arvadite, and the 
Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and 
atterward were the families of the 
Canaanites spread abroad. 

19 And the border of the Canaan- 
ites was from Sidon, as thou com- 
est to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou 
goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, 


and Admah, and Zebcim, even unto 
Lasha. | 


From these seven sons of Japheth are descended the 
trans. “heathen”? 148 times in the A. V 


B.C. 2347. 


a Lit. coasts. 
Settlement 
would 
naturally 
follow the 
coasts first. 


out into 
_ Assyria. 


c Nah.1.1, 
note, 


2 Tsa.13.1, 
note, 


e Arphaxad. 
v.24; Gen. 
11.10. 


| 


| 


20 These are the sons of Ham, 
after their families, after their 
tongues, in their countries, and in 
their nations. 

21 Unto Shem also, the father of 
all the children of Eber, the brother 
of Japheth the elder, even to him ~ 
were children born. 

22 The children of Shem; Elam, 
anc Asshur, and ‘Arphaxad, and 
Lud, and Aram. 

23 And the children of Aram; Uz, 
and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. 

24 And Arphaxad begat Salah; 
and Salah begat Eber. 

25 And unto Eber were born two 
sons: the name of one was Peleg; 
for in his days was the earth di- 
vided; and his brother’s name was 
Joktan. - 5 

26 And Joktan begat Almodad, 
and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, 
and Jerah, 

27 And Hadoram, and Uzal, and 
Dikiah, 

28 And Obal, and Abimael, and 
Sheba, : 

29 And Ophir, and Havilah, and. 
Jobab: all these were the sons of 


\Joktan. 


30 And their dwelling was from 
Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar 
a mount of the east. 

31 These are the sons of Shem, 
after their families, after their 
tongues, in their lands, after their 
nations. 
| 32 These are the families of the 
sons of Noah, after their genera- 
tions, in their nations: and by 
these were the nations divided in 
the earth after the flood. 


CHAPTER 11. 


The failure of man under the 
Noahic Covenant. 


ANP the whole earth was of Jone 
language, and of one speech. 

2 And it came to pass, as they 
journeyed from the east, that they 
found a plain in the land of Shinar; 
and they dwelt there. 

3 And they said one to another, 


oyim, or Gentile, nations, 


The name implies nothing concerning 


religion, meaning simply, non-Israelite, or “foreigner.” 
1The history of Babel (“confusion”) strikingly parallels that of the professing 


Church. 


(1), Unity (Gen. 11. 1)—the Apostolic Church (Acts 4. 32, 33); (2) Am- 


bition (Gen. 11. 4), using worldly, not spiritual, means (Gen. 11. 3), ending in a man- 
made unity—the papacy; (3) the confusion of tongues (Gen. 11.'7)—Protestantism, 


with its innumerable sects. 


18 


See Isa. 13. 1, note. 


_ Go to, let us make brick, and burn 

them throughly. And they had 
brick for stone, and slime had they’ 
for morter. 

4 And they said, Go to, let us 
build us a city and a tower, whose 
top may reach unto heaven; and 
let us make us a name, lest we be 
scattered abroad upon the face of 
the whole earth. 


The judgment of the confusion 
| of tongues. Life continues 
- under the Adamic and Noahic 

Covenants. 


5 And the Lorp came down to 
_ see the city and the tower, which 

the children of men builded. 

6 And the Lorp said, Behold, 
_ the people fs one, and they have all 
_ one language; and this they begin 
- to do: and now nothing will be re- 

strained from them, which they 
have imagined to do. 

7 Go to, let us go down, and there 
“confound their language, that they 
may not understand one ancther’s| 
speech. 

8 So the LorpD scattered them 
abroad from thence upon the face 
of all the earth: and they left off to 
build the city. 

9 Therefore is the name of it 
_ealled “Babel; because the LorD 
did there confound the language of 

all the earth: and from thence did 
the Lorp scatter them abroad upon 
the face of all the earth. 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 2247. 


a Miracles 
(O.T.). vs. 


bie. con- 
fusion. See 
Gen.11.1, 
note; Isa. 
13.1, note. 


c Arphaxad. 
vs.10-13; | 
1 Chr.1.17. 
(Gen.10,22; 
Lk.3.36.) 


[11 22 


The ancestry of Abram. 


10 These are the !generations of 
Shem: Shem was an hundred years 
old, and begat ‘Arphaxad two years 
after the flood: 

11 And Shem lived after he begat 
Arphaxad five hundred years, and 
begat sons and daughters. 

12 And Arphaxad lived five and 
thirty years, and begat Salah: 

13 And Arphaxad lived after he’ 
begat Salah four hundred and three) 
years, and begat sons and daugh- 
ters. 

14 And Salah lived thirty years, 


‘land begat Eber: 


15 And Salah lived after he begat 
Eber four hundred and three years, 
and begat sons and daughters. 

16 And Eber lived four and thirty 
years, and begat Peleg: 

17 And Eber lived after he begat 
Peleg four hundred and thirty 
years, and begat sons and daugh- 
ters. 

18 And Peleg lived thirty years, 
and begat Reu: : 

19 And Peleg lived after he begat 
Reu two hundred and nine years, 
and begat sons and daughters. 

20 And Reu lived two and thirty 
years, and begat Serug: 

21 And Reu lived after he begat 
Serug two hundred and seven years, 
and begat sons and daughters. 

22 And Serug lived thirty years, 
and begat Nahor: 


1Genesis 11. and 12. mark an important turning point in the divine dealing. 


Heretofore the history has been that of the whole Adamic race. 


There has been 


neither Jew nor Gentile; all have been one in ‘‘the first man Adam.”’ Henceforth, 
“in the Scripture record, humanity must be thought of as a vast stream from which 
God, in the call of Abram and the creation of the nation of Israel, has but drawn 


- off a slender rill, through which He may at last purify the great river itself. 


Israel 


was called to be a witness to the unity of God in the midst of universal idolatry 


Deut. 6. 4; Isa. 43. 10-12); to illustrat 
Deut. 33. 26-29); to receive and preserv' 


e the blessedness of serving the true God 
e the divine revelations (Rom. 3. 1, 2; Deut. 


4, 5-8); and to produce the Messiah (Gen. 3. 15; 21. 3; 28. 10, 14; 49. 10; 2 Sam. 7. 16, 


17; Isa. 4. 3, 4; Mt. 1. 1.) 


The reader of scripture should hold firmly in mind: (1) that from Gen. 12. to 
Mt. 12. 45 the Scriptures have primarily in view Israel, the little rill, not the great 
Gentile river; though again and again the universality of the ultimate divine intent 
breaks into view (e. g. Gen. 12. 3; Isa. 2. 2, 4; 5. 26; 9. 1, 2; 11. 10-12; 42. 1-6; 49. 6, 12; 
52.15: 54.3; 55.5; 60.3, 5, 11-16; 61.6,9; 62.2; 66.12, 18,19; Jer. 16.19; Joel 3. 9, 
10; Mal. 1. 11; Rom. %., 10., 11.; Gal. 3. 8-14); (2) that the human race, henceforth 
called Gentile in distinction from Israel, goes on under the Adamic and Noahic 
covenants; and that for the race (outside Israel) the dispensations of Con- 


‘science and of Human 


Government continue. 


The moral history of the great 


Gentile world is told in Rom. 1. 21-32, and its moral accountability in Rom. 2. 1-16. 


Conscience never acquits: it either 


to the Gentiles it is to them, as to Israe 


3. 19, 20; 7. 9, 10; 2 Cor. 3. 7; Gal. 3 


“accuses” or “excuses.” 
1, ‘‘a ministration of death,’’ a “curse” (Rom. 
A wholly new responsibility arises when 


#10)" 


Where the law is known 


either Jew or Gentile knows the Gospel (John 3. 18, 19, 36; 15, 22-24; 16.9; 1. John 


5. 9-12). 


19 


11 23] GENESIS. [127 


23 And Serug lived after he begat] B.C. 2126. CHAPTER 12. : 
Wahor two hundred years, and ’be- The Fourth Dispensation: 
gat sons and daughters. _ Promise: from the call of 

24 And Nahor lived nine and Abram to the giving of the 
twenty years, and begat Terah: Jaw (Gen. 12. 1-Ex. 19. 8). 

25 And Nahor lived after he begat The Fourth, or Abrahamic 
Terah an-hundred and nineteen Covenant. (Add Gen. 13. 14- 
years, and begat sons and daugh-|2 The t dolay.| 183 15. 1-21; 17. 4-8; 22. 15-24; 26. 
ters. Seer : "| 1-5; 28. 10-15.) : 

= eparation. é 
ca gh nes i Naber wand dewtes Gen. OW '!the Lorp had said unt 


Haran paar Abram, Get thee one of th 
f ti Cor.6.14- country, and from thy kindred, an: 
af Pecan hee Hee AbPRIn, in) * Vfrom ay oe dees unto a lan 
1 . ‘ that I will shew thee: 
Beet Gee Se aia Se ieee vs.| 2 2And I will make of thee a great 
28 And Haran died before his| 2.3: Gen.13. |‘nation, and I will bless thee, and 


father Terah in the land of his| {325, {ce |make thy name great; and thou 


ivity, i ( shalt be a blessing: 
pede brant ‘and Nahor! took as 3 And I will bless them that bless 
them wives: the name of Abram’s|? Chrst (frst thee, and curse him that curseth 


dvent). : Se 
wife was Sarai; and the name of| Gen.i7.19. |thee: and in ¢thee shall all families 


Nahor’s wife, Milcah, the daughter oh aon of the earth be “blessed. 
of Haran, the father of Milcah, and oe Abram in the land: worship, 


the father of Iscah. e Gospel. communion, and promise. 
30 But Sarai was barren; she had ws 7G 
no child. 1213: " |. 4 So Abram departed, as the 


Rev.14.6.) LORD had spoken unto him; and 
Lot went with him: and Abram 


Incomplete obedience: the |! F2ith. vs. |was seventy and five years old 
Wasted years at Haran. iets, when he departed out of Haran. 

; (Gen.3.20; 5 And Abram took Sarai his wife, 

31 And *Terah took Abram his| Heb-11-39.) land Lot his brother’s son, and all 

son and Lot the son of Haran his}, rpe their substance that they had gath- 

son’s son, and Sarai his daughter; theopha- ered, and the souls that they had 

in law, his son Abram’s wife; and) 2/es. gotten in Haran; and they fwent 


they went forth with them from Ur oem: forth to go into the land of Canaan; 
of the Chaldees, to go into the land} Rev.i.10.) and into the land of Canaan they 


of Canaan; and they came unto! came. 

Haran, and dwelt there. 6 And Abram passed through the 
32 And the days of Terah were land unto the place of Sichem, unto 

two hundred and five years: and the plaix of Moreh. And the Ca- 

Terah died in Haran. naanite was then in the land. 


7 And the Lorp éappeared unto 
Abram, and said, Unto thy seed 


1The Fourth Dispensation: Promise. For Abraham and his descendants it is 
evident that the Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 15. 18, note) made a great change. 
They became distinctively the heirs of promise. That covenant is wholly gracious 
and unconditional. The descendants of Abraham had but to abide in their own 
land to inherit every blessing. In Egypt they lost their blessings, but not their 
covenant. The Dispensation of Promise ended when Israel rashly accepted the 
law (Ex. 19. 8). Grace had prepared a deliverer (Moses), provided a sacrifice for 
the guilty, and by divine power brought them out of bondage (Ex. 19. 4); but at Sinai 
they exchanged grace for law. The Dispensation of Promise extends from Gen. 12. 
i to Ex, 19. 8, and was exclusively Israelitish. The dispensation must be distin- 
guished from the covenant. The former is a mode of testing; the latter is everlast- 
ing because unconditional. The law did not abrogate the Abrahamic Covenant 
(Gal. 3. 15-18), but was an intermediate disciplinary dealing ‘‘till the Seed should 
come to whom the promise was made” (Gal. 3. 19-29; 4. 1-7). Only the dis- 
pensation, as a testing of Israel, ended at the giving of the law. See, for the other 
six dispensations: Innocence (Gen. 1. 28); Conscience (Gen. 3. 23); Human 
pencrniment (Gen. 8. 20); Law (Ex. 19. 8); Grace (John 11. 17); Kingdom (Eph. 

a0) 
*For analysis and summary of the Abrahamic Covenant, see Gen. 15. 18, 
20 


12 8] GENESIS. [13 9 


_ will I give this land: and there] B.c. 1920. |and said, What is this that thou 
_ builded he an ¢altar unto the Lorp, hast done unto me? why didst thou 
who appeared unto him. not tell me that she was thy wife? 
8 And he removed from thence 19 Why saidst thou, She is my 


unto a mountain on the east of sister? so I might have taken her 
1Beth-el, and pitched his tent, hav- to me to wife: now therefore behold 
ing Beth-el on the west, and Hai on thy wife, take her, and go thy way. 
the east; and there he builded an 20 And Pharaoh commanded Ais: 
altar unto the LorbD, and called men concerning him: and they sent 
upon the name of the Lorp. him away, and his wife, and all 
9 And Abram journeyed, going on that he had. f 
_ still toward the south. 
_ Under trial Abram forsakes the CHAPTER 13. 
place of blessing. Abram returns to the land and 
10 And there was a *famine in the altar. 
the land: 2and Abram went down ND Abram went up out of 
into Egypt to sojourn there; for -Egypt, he, and his wife, and 
the famine was grievous in the), SacriAce all that he had, and Lot with him, 
land. (typical). |into the south. 
11 And it came to pass, when he} vs.7,8; 2 And Abram was very rich in 


" was come near to enter into Egypt, cattle, in silver, and in gold. 


that he ‘said unto Sarai his wife, Pies) 3 And he went on his journeys 

Behold now, I know that thou art from the south even to Beth-el, 
ei atl ccectopasa| 25°1;.. loeens at cane browning, terres 

, uth 1.1; ’ 

when the Egyptians shall see thee, contra. Psa. Beth-el and Hai; 

that they shall say, This is his| 33-18-19 4 Unto the place of the altar, 
wife: and they will kill me, but!<cr Gen. which he had made there at the 

they will save thee alive. 20.1-18; first: and there Abram called on 

13 Say, I pray thee, thou art my| 2°11: the name of the Lorn. 


sister: that it may be well with me'd Miracles 


for thy sake; and my soul shall live} (O.T.). Gen. Abram’s separation from Lot. 


_ because of thee. Bey te orn 5 And Lot also, which went-with 
14 And it came to pass, that,| 21-70.) |Abram, had flocks, and herds, and 
when Abram was come into Egypt, tents. 
the Egyptians beheld the woman 6 And the land was not able to 
that she was very fair. bear them, that they might dwell 
15 The princes also of Pharaoh together: for their substance was 
saw her, and commended her before great, so that they could not dwell) 
Pharaoh: and the woman was taken together. 
into Pharaoh’s house. 7 And there was a strife between 
~ 16 And he entreated Abram well the herdmen of Abram’s cattle and 
for her sake: and he had sheep, the herdmen of Lot’s cattle: and 
and oxen, and he asses, and men- the Canaanite and the Perizzite 
servants, and maidservants, and dwelled then in the land. 
she asses, and camels. 8 And Abram said unto Lot, Let 
17 And the Lorp ¢plagued Pha- there be no strife, I pray thee, be- 
-raoh and his house with great tween me and thee, and between 
plagues because of Sarai Abaya my herdmen and thy herdmen; for 
wife. we be brethren. 
18 And Pharaoh called Abram, 9 Is not the whole land before 


1One of the sacred places of Canaan, meaning, house of God (Gen, 28. 1- 

22: 35. 1-7, note. It is characteristic of all apostasy that Jeroboam chose this 
sacred place in which to erect an idol (1 Ki. 12. 28, 32. Cf. 1 Ki, 13; 1-5); and of 
divine judgment upon apostasy that God should decree the destruction of Bethel, 
despite its sacred memories (1 Ki, 13. 1-5; 2 Ki. 23. 15-17; Amos 3. 14, 15). God 
never hesitates to cast aside that which no longer serves His purpose (Rev. 2. 5; 


3. 15). ai"? . 
2 i na disciplinary testing of God’s people in the land. (Cf. Gen. 
26. ee a 52 Sem} 24, 13; Psa. 105. 16.) The resort to Egypt (the 
world) is typical of the tendency to substitute for lost spiritual power the fleshly 
resources of the world, instead of seeking, through confession aid amendment, the 
restoration of God’s presence and favour. 
PA 


13 10] 


thee? “separate thyself, I pray thee, 
from me: if thou wilt take the left 
hand, then I will go to the right; 
or if thou depart to the right hand, 
then I will go to the left. 

Lot’s first step in backsliding. 

(See Gen. 13. 12; 19. 1, 33.) 

10 And Lot lifted up his eyes, and 
beheld all the plain of Jordan, that 
it was well watered every where, 
before the Lorp destroyed Sodom 
and Gomorrah, even as the garden 
of the LorD, like the land of Egypt, 
as thou comest unto Zoar. 

11 Then Lot chose him all the 
plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed 
east: and they separated themselves 
the one from the other. 

Lot’s second step in backsliding. 
(See Gen. 13. 10; 19. 1, 33.) 

12 Abram dwelled in the land of 
Canaan,’ and Lot dwelled in the 
cities of the plain, and pitched Ais 
tent toward Sodom. 

13 But the men of Sodom were|s Israel (cove- 
wicked and sinners before the Lorp! nant), vs.15- 


a Separation, 
vs.7, 


erin 17; Gen.15. 
es gly. 48. (Gean2. 
The Abrahamic Covenant: the ne Rom.11. 


land given; natural posterity 

promised (v,. 16). i 

14 And the Lorp said unto 
Abram, after that Lot was sep- 
arated from him, Lift up now thine 
eyes, and look from the place where 
thou art northward, and southward, 
and eastward, and westward: 

15 For all the land which thou 
seest, to thee will I give it, and to 
thy ‘seed for ever. 

16 AndI will make thy seed as the 
dust of the earth: so that if a man 
can number the dust of the earth, 
then shall thy seed alsobenumbered. 

17 Arise, walk through the land 
in the length of it and in the breadth 
of it; for I will give it unto thee. 

18 ‘Then Abram removed Ais 
tent, and came and dwelt in ahs) 
plain of Mamre, which is in He- 
bron, and built there an altar untol 
the Lorp. 


c Farth, vs.14- 
18; Gen.14 


22,23. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb.11. 
39.) 


d vores 
‘pical). 
Gen n7 813. 


(Gen.4.4; 

Heb.10.18.) 
eIt is Abram 

the sepa- 


rated man 
who has 


CHAPTER 14. 
Abram delivers Lot. 


ANP it came to pass in thé days 
of Amraphel king of Shinar, 
Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlao. 
mer king of Elam, and Tidal king 
of nations; 
2 That these made war with 
Bera king of Sodom, and with 
Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1918. 


[14 16 


‘king of Admah, and Shemeber king 
of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, 
which is Zoar. } 
3 All these were joined together in 
the vale of Siddim, which is the salt 


sea. 

4 Twelve years they served Ched- 
orlaomer, and in the thirteenth year 
they rebelled. 


7 And they returned, and came to 
En-mishpat, which is Kadesh, and 
smote all the country of the Ama- 
lekites, and also the Amorites, that 
dwelt in Hazezon-tamar. 

8 And there went out the king of 
Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, 
and the king of Admah, and the 
king of Zeboiim, and the king of 
Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they 
joined battle with them in the vale 
of Siddim: 

9 With Chedorlaomer the king of 
Elam, and with Tidal king of na- 
tions, and Amraphel king of Shinar, 
and Arioch king of Ellasar; four 
kings with five. 

10 And the vale of Siddim was 
full of slimepits; and the kings of 
Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell 
there; and they that remained fled 
to the mountain. 

11 And they took all the goods of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their 
victuals, and went their way. 

12 And they took Lot, Abram’s 
brother’s son, who dwelt in Sodom, 
and his goods, and departed, 

13 And there came one that had 
escaped, and told Abram the He- 
brew; for he dwelt in the plain of 
Mamre the Amorite, brother of 
Eshcol, and brother of Aner: 
and these were confederate with 
Abram. 


D1@> ‘Ane ewhenAbrdin thease 


his brother was taken captive, he 

armed his trained servants, born in 

his own house, three hundred and 

encca! and pursued them unto 
an. 


| 15 And he divided himself against 


them, he and his servants, by night, 
and smote them, and pursued them 
unto Hobah, which is on the left 
hand of Damascus. 

16 And he brought back all the 


14 17] GENESIS. [151 


goods, and also brought again his} s.c. 1913. /unto Abram, Give me the persons, 


brother Lon and his goods. and the and take the gocds to thyself. _ 
women also, and the people. 22 And Abram: 4said to the king 
oe f of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand 
1e revelation of God as El unto the Lorp, the most high God, 
Elyon, “the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth, 
possessor of heaven and 23 That I will not take from a 
earth. 2 Meaning pared Even to shoslatchet: and 
. ing of at I will not take any thing that 
pL? ere Pe june os popes vent Rightecus- | thine, lest thou shouldest say, I 
from the Eon cheer ae Chitose: se May “Sa age pviewse as hich th 
; - ; 5 ave only at whic e€ 
Bee val ceaneeeh| erect. ene ee ateashe and oe ree 
3 : s| Heb.7.2. on 0 e men which went wit! 
hich is ing’ 3; 
een Ly Rego of 5Sa-| ° ae. f) Hwodria Me ee ee 5 
lem proveht forth bread and wine:| Genis.2. 
A 1 (Gen.1.1; 
Been ese oF the fmosty eras) CHAPTER 15. 
19 And he blessed him, and said,|¢ Faith, vs. . 
Blessed jbo Abram of the mont {226m |The Absahamic Covenant con: 
ig , possessor of heaven and 3.70: Heb. | ised (v. 5) ; 
earth: | -WAesONWiae! | p> 
20 And blessed be the most high! | AF ER these things the word of 
God, which hath delivered thine ere the LorD came unto Abram in 
enemies into thy hand. And he ‘a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: 
gave him tithes of ail. . I am thy shield, and thy exceeding 
21 And the king of Sodom said : __ great reward. © 


IMelchizedek, type of Christ the King-Priest. The type strictly applies to 
the priestly work of Christ in resurrection, since Melchizedek presents onlv 
the memorials of sacrifice, bread and wine. “After the order of Melchizedek” 
(Heb. 6. 20) refers to the royal authority and unending duration of Christ’s high 
priesthood (Heb. 7. 23, 24). The Aaronic priesthood was often interrupted by 

~death. Christ is a priest after the order of Melchizedek, as King of righteousness, 
King of peace (Isa. 11. 4-9; Heb. 7. 2), and in the endlessness of His priesthood; 
but the Aaronic priesthood typifies His priestly work. 

Bea once high,” or “most high God” (Heb. El Elyon). “Elyon’” means simply 
est. : 

: (1) The first revelation of this name (v. 18) indicates its distinctive meanings. 
Abram, returning from his victory over the confederated kings (Gen. 14. 1-17), is 
met by Melichizedek, King of Salem... the “priest of the most high God” (El 

~Elyon), who blesses Abram in the name of El Elyon, “possessor of heaven and 
earth.” This revelation produced a remarkable impression upon the patriarch. 
Not only did he at once give Melchizedek “‘tithes of all” the spoil of the battle, 
but when the King of Sodom offered other of that spoil to Abram, his answer was: 
“T have lift up mine hand unto the Lorp [Jehovah], the most high God [E/ Elyon], 
the possessor of heaven and earth, that I will not take from a thread even to a 
shoelatchet,” etc. (Gen. 14. 18-23). : 

(a) The Lorp (Jehovah) is known to a Gentile king (Melchizedek) by the 
name “most high God” (EI Elyon); (b) a Gentile is the priest of Ei Elyon and 
(c) His distinctive character as most high God is “possessor of heaven and earth.” 

Appropriately to this Gentile knowledge of God by His name “Most High,” we 
read that.‘“‘the Most High divided to the nations [i.e. Gentiles] their inheritance, 
when he separated the sons of Adam,” etc. (Deut. 32. 3). As “possessor of 
heaven and earth,” it was the prerogative of the Most High to distribute the earth 
among the nations according to whatever principle He chose.. That principle is 
declared in Deut. 32. 8. To the same purport is the use of the name in Daniel, 
the book of Gentile prophecy (Dan. 3. 26; 4. 17, 24, 25, 32, 34, 35; 5. 18, 21). : 

(2) As “possessor of heaven and earth,” the most high God has and exercises 

authority in both spheres: (a) the heavenly authority of Ei Elyon (e.g. Dan. 4. 
35, 37; Isa. 14. 13, 14; Mt. 28. 18); (6) the earthly authority of E/ Elyon (e.g. Deut. 
32. 8; Psa. 9. 2-5; 21. 7; 47. 2-4; 56. 2,3; 82. 6,8; 83. 16-18; 91. 9-12; 2 Sam. 22. 

14, 15; Dan. 5. 18). See, for other names of Deity: Gen. 1. 1, note; 2. 4, note; 2.7; 
15. 2, note; 17.1, note; 21. 33, note; 1 Sam. 1. 3, note. 

- 23 


7 


15 2] 


GENESIS. 


— 


[15 18 


2 4And Abram said, !*Lord 2Gop, 
what wilt thou give me, seeing I go 
childless, and the steward of my 
house is this Eliezer of Damascus? 

3 And Abram said, Behold, to me 
thou hast given no seed: and, lo, 
one born in my house is mine heir. 

4 And, behold, the word of the 
LORD came unto him, saying, This 
shall not be thine heir; but he that 
shall come forth out of thine own 
bowels shall be thine heir. 

§ And he brought him forth 
abroad, and said, Look now toward 
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be 
able to number them: and he said 
unto him, ‘So shall thy ¢seed be. 

6 And he “believed in the Lorn; 
and he /counted it to him for éright- 
eousness. 

7 And he said unto him, I am the 
Lorp that brought thee out of Ur 
of the Chaldees, to give thee this 


B.C. 1913. 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 
b Deity 
(names of). 
Gen.17.1, 
(Gen.1.1; 
Mal.3.18.) 


c Rom.4.18, 
d Israel (cove- 


nant). vs.4, 
5; Gen.17.15- 


e Faith. Gen. 
21.1-6. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 

f Rom.4.3; Gal. 
3.6; Jas.2.23. 

g Righteous- 
ness. Prov. 


land to inherit it. 21.15,21. 

8 And he said, Lord Gop, where- einen 
by shall I know that I shall inherit b M irae tes 

Bg tA) IS en. 

9 And he said unto him, Take me} _19.24,25,26. 
an heifer of three years old, and a Sana he 
she goat of three years old, and a i The Eight 
ram of three years old, and a turtle-|’ Covenants. 
dove, and a young pigeon. : Ex.19.25. 

10 And he took unto him all furnaces 


‘these, and divided them in the 


midst, and laid each piece one 
against another: but the birds di- 
vided he not. 

11 And when the fowls came down 


*{upon the carcases, Abram drove 


them away. 4 
12 And when the sun was going 
down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; 
and, lo, an horror of great darkness 
fell upon him. 
13 And he said unto Abram, 


Know of a surety that thy seed 


shall be a stranger in a land that is 
not their’s, and shall serve them; 


. |and they shall afflict them four hun- 
- |\dred years; 


14 And also that nation, whom 
they shall serve, will I judge: and 
afterward shall they come out with 
great substance. 

15 And thou shalt go to thy 
fathers in peace; thou shalt be 
buried in a good old age. 

16 But in the fourth generation 
they shall come hither again: for 
the iniquity of the Amorites zs not 
yet full. 

17 And it came to pass, that, 
when the sun went down, and it 
was dark, behold a smoking fur- 
nace, and a burning lamp that 
’passed between those pieces. 

18 In the same day the Lorp 
made a ‘covenant with Abram, 3say- 


1“Tord” (Heb. Adon, Adonai). 


(1) The primary meaning of Adon, Adonai, 
the Old Testament Scriptures both to Deity and to 


is Master, and it is applied in 
man. The latter instances are 


distinguished in the English version by the omission of the capital. As applied to 


man, the word is used of two relationships: master and husban 
10, 12, “master,” may illustrate the former; Gen. 18. 12, 
these relationships exist between Christ and the believe 


2 Cor. 11. 2, 3, “husband”’). 


(2) Two principles inhere in the relation of m 
ter’s right to implicit obedience (John 13. 13; M 
servant’s right to direction in service (Isa. 6. 8-11). 


the divine names is illustrated in Ex. 4. 10-12. 


competency, and “Moses said unto the Lorp [Jehovah], O my Lord 


not eloquent,” etc. 


thy mouth.” The same distinction 


of Deity: Gen. 1. 1, note; 2. 4, note; 


21, 33, note; 1 Sam. 1. 3, note. 


2“Lord Gop” (Heb. Adonai Jehovah). 
pound name, while gathering into one the speci 


15. 2, note) will be found to empha 
acter of Deity. 
2, 8; Deut. 3. 24; 9. 26: Josh. 7. 
1 Ki. 2. 26; Psa. 69. 6; 71. 5; Isa. 7. 


note; 2.4, note; 2. 7; 14. 18, note; 


Lge 


3The Abrahamic Covenant as form 
14-17; 15. 1-7; 17. 1-8) is in seven distin 


(The following passages m 


Since service is in question, 
Jehovah as Lord. But now power is in question, 
but Jehovah (LorD) who answers (referring to cre 
unto him, Who hath made man’s mouth? . 


appears 


size the A 
ay 
7; Jud. 6. 
7). See, 
15a; 


ct parts: 
24 


d (Gen, 24. 9, 
“lord,” the latter). Both 
¢ (John 13: 13, “master”; 


aster and servant: (3) the Mas- 
t. 23. 10; Lk. 6. 46); (6) the 
Clear distinction in the use of 
Moses feels his weakness and in- 
i [Adonai], I am 
Moses (appropriately) addresses 
and it is not the Lord (Adonai) 
ation power)—‘‘and Jehovah said 


. . Now therefore go, and I will be with 
in Josh. 7. 8-11. 
2. 73 14. 18, note; 15 2, note; 17 1, note, 


See, for other names 


When used distinctively, this com- 
al meanings of each (Gen. 1.1, note; 
donai rather than the Jehovah char- 


suffice to illustrate this: Gen. 15. 
22; 16. 28; 2 Sam. 7. 18-20, 28, 29; 


for other names of Deity: Gen. 1. 1, 
note; 17.1, note; 21, 33, note; 1 Sam. 


ed (Gen. 12. 1-4) and confirmed (Gen. 13. 


" 


* 


: 


15 19] 


GENESIS. 


[16 11 


ing, Unto thy seed have I given 
this land, from the river of Egypt 
unto the great river, the river Eu- 
phrates: 

19 The Kenites, and the Keniz- 
zites, and the Kadmonites, i 

20 And the Hittites, and the 
Perizzites, and the Rephaims, 

21 And the Amorites, and the Ca- 
naanites, and the Girgashites, and 
the Jebusites. 

CHAPTER 16. 
The birth of Ishmael. 
OW Sarai Abram’s wife bare 
him no children: and she had 
an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose 


name was Hagar. ? 
2 And Sarai said unto Abram, Be- 


- hold now, the LorD hath restrained 


me from bearing: I pray thee, go in 
unto my maid; it may be that I may 
obtain children by her. And Abram 
hearkefhed to the voice of Sarai. 

3 And Sarai Abram’s wife took! 
THagar her maid the Egyptian, after, 
Abram had dwelt ten years in the 
land of Canaan, and gave her to her 
husband Abram to be his wife. 

4 And he went in unto Hagar, and 
she conceived: and when she saw 
that she had conceived, her mis- 
tress was despised in her eyes. 


B.c. 1913. | 5 And Sarai said unto Abram, My 
wrong be upon thee: I have given 
my maid into thy bosom; and 
when she saw that she had con- 
ceived, I was despised in her eyes: 
bee LorpD judge between me and 
thee. 

6 But Abram said unto Sarai, Be- 
hold, thy maid zs in thy hand; do to 
her as it pleaseth thee. And when 
Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fied 
from her face. 

7 And the @angel of the Lorp 
found her by a fountain of water in 
the wilderness, by the fountain in 
the way to Shur. 

8 And he said, Hagar, Sarai’s 
maid, whence camest thou? and 
whither wilt thou go? And she 
said, I flee from the face of my mis- 
tress Sarai. 

9 And the 4angel of the Lorp 
said unto her, Return to thy mis- 
ee and submit thyself under her 

ands. 


a Heb.1.4, 
note. 


bi.e. God shall 
hear. 


10 And the @angel of the Lorp & 


\ 


said unto her, I will multiply thy ~ 


seed exceedingly, that it shall not 
be numbered for multitude. 


11 And the ¢angel of the Lorp » 


said unto her, Behold, thou art with 


child, and shalt bear a son, and ” 


shalt call his name %Ishmael; be- 


(1) “I will make of thee a great nation.” Fulfilled in a threefold way: (a) In 
a natural posterity—‘‘as the dust of the earth”? (Gen. 13. 16; John 8. 37), viz. the 


Hebrew people. 


(b) In a spiritual posterity—“look now toward heaven . 


- » SO 


shall thy seed be’” (John.8. 39; Rom, 4. 16, 17; 9. 7, 8; Gal. 3. 6, 7, 29), viz. all men 


of faith, whether Jew or Gentile. 
18-20) 


15, 17; 


(c) Fulfilled also through Ishmael (Gen. 17, 


(2) “I will bless thee.”? Fulfilled in two ways: (a) temporally (Gen. 13. 14, 
15. 18; 24. 34, 35); (6) spiritually (Gen. 15.6; John 8.56). 
3) ‘And make thy name great.’”? Abraham’s is one of the universal names. 


“And thou shalt be a blessing” (Gal. 3. 13, 14). 
5) “I will bless them that bless thee.” In fulfillment closely related to the 


next clause. 


(6) “And curse him that curseth thee.” Wonderfully fulfilled in the history 


of the dispersion. It has invariably fared ill with the people who have persecuted 
the Jew—well with those who have protected him. The future will still more re- 
markably prove this Pagcrle eit nas 7; Isa. 14. 1, 2; Joel 3. 1-8; Mic. 5. 7-9; 
ag. 2. 22; Zech. 14. 1-3; Mt. 25. 40, 45). mat 
a (7) “In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.” This is the great 
evangelic promise fulfilled in Abraham’s Seed, Christ (Gal. 3. 16; John 8: 56-58). 
It brings into greater definiteness the promise of the Adamic Covenant concerning 
the Seed of the woman (Gen. 3. 15). : , I f 
Note.—The gift of the land is modified by prophecies of three dispossessions 
and restorations (Gen. 15. 13, 14, 16; Jer. 25. 11, 12; Deut. 28. 62-65; 30. 1-3). Two 
dispossessions and restorations have been accomplished. Israel is now in the third 
dispersion, from which she will be restored at the return of the Lord as King under 
the Davidic Covenant (Deut. 30. 3; Jer. 23. 5-8; Ezk. 37. 21-25; Lk. 1. 30-33; Acts 
15. 14-17). : ; 
7 ome for the other seven covenants: Edenic (Gen. 1. 28); Adamic (Gen. 3. 
15); Noahic (Gen. 9. 1); Mosaic (Ex. 19. 25); Palestinian (Deut. 30. 3); Davidic 


‘(2 Sam. 7. 16); New (Heb. 8. 8) 


1 Hagar is a type of the law “which gendereth to bondage” (Gal. 4. 24, 25). 
25 


cy 


16 12] 


GENESIS. 


[17 10 


cause the LorD hath heard thy af- 
fiction. 

12 And he will be a wild man; his 
hand will. be against every man, 
and every man’s hand against him; 
and he shall dwell in the presence 
of all his brethren. 

13 And she called the name of the 
Lorp that spake unto her, Thou 
God seest me: for she said, Have I 
also-here looked after him that seeth 
me? 

14 Wherefore the well was called 
*Beer-lahai-roi; behold, it-is be- 
tween Kadesh and Bered. 

15 And Hagar bare Abram a son: 
and Abram called his son’s name, 
which Hagar bare, Ishmael. 

16 And Abram was fourscore and 
six years old, when Hagar bare Ish- 
mael to Abram, 


CHAPTER 17. 


The revelation of God as El 
Shaddai, Almighty God. 


ANP when Abram was ninety 
years old and nine, the Lorp 
bappeared to Abram, and said unto 
him, I am the !Almighty God; 
walk before me, and be thou ¢per- 
fect. 

2 And I will make my covenant 
between me and thee, and will mul- 
tiply thee exceedingly. 

3 And Abram fell on his face: and 
God talked with him, saying, 


ai.e. The weil 
of him that 
liveth and 
seeth me. 
Gen.24.62; 
25.11. 


b The the- 
ophanies. 
Gen.18.1. 
(Gen.12.7; 
Rev.1.9.) 


c Deity 
(names of). 
Gen.21.33. 
Gen. 1.1; 
Mal.3.18.) 


d Or, upright, 
or sincere. 


eOr, high 
father. 


f Or, father of 
many na- 
tions. 


g Rom.4.17. 


Abram becomes Abraham... 

4 As for me, behold, my covenant 
is with thee, and thou shalt be a 
father of many nations. 

5 Neither shall thy name any 
more be called «Abram, but thy 
name shall be ‘Abraham; for a 


&father of many nations have I. 


made thee. 


The Abrahamic Covenant con-— 


firmed and made everlasting. 
6 And I will make thee exceeding 


fruitful, and I will make nations of © 
thee, and kings shall come out of | 


thee. 


7 And I will establish my cove: 
nant between me and thee and thy | 
seed after thee in their generations | 


for an everlasting covenant, to be a 


God unto thee, and to thy seed after : 


thee. 


8 And I will give unto thee, and to - 


thy seed after thee, the land where- | 


in thou art a stranger, all the land | 
of Canaan, for an everlasting pas- 


session; and I will be their God. 
Circumcision established as the 


sign of the Abrahamic Cove- | 


nant. 


9 And God said unto Abraham, © 
Thou shalt keep my covenant there- 


fore, thou, and thy seed after thee 
in their generations, 


10 This 7s my covenant, which ye — 


shall keep, between me and you and 


i“ Almighty God” (Heb. El Shaddai.) 
(1) The etymological signification of Almi 


teresting and touching. God (£/) signifies the 


thy seed after thee; Every man 


ghty God (EI Shaddai) is both in- 
“Strong One” 


(Gen. 1.1, note). The 


qualifying word Shaddai is formed from the Hebrew word “shad,” the breast, 
invariably used in Scripture for a woman’s breast; e.g. Gen. 49. 253° Job 3. 128 


Psa. 22. 9! Song VEE Ge bis: 1 By We 
therefore means primarily 


giver and Satisfier of His people. 
dai” was translated “Almighty.” 
signifies almightiness. 


8; 8. 1, 8, 10; Isa. 28. 9; Ezk. 16, 7. 
“the breasted.” 
Nourisher, the Strength-giver, and so, 
pours Himself into believing lives. 

strengthened and nourished from the 
satisfied, so E] Shaddazt is that name 


y.”’ The primary name 
l “All-sufficient” 
meaning and the characteristic use of th 


: (2) Almighty God (El Shaddai) not only 
is nowhere better illustrated than in the -first occurrence of the name (Gen, 17. 


1-8). To aman ninety-nine years of age, and “‘as good as dead” 
[EI Shaddai] . 
is the use of the hame in Gen. 28. 3, 4. 

Almighty God (EI Shaddai) chastens His people. 
For the moral connection of chastening with fruit-bearing, see John 15. 2; Heb. 
Almighty is the characteristic name of God in Job, 
that book. The hand of El Shaddai falls upon Job, 
in judgment, but in purifying unto greater fruitful- 
See, for other names of Deity: Gen. 1. i 
2, note; 21. 33, note; 1 Sam. 1. 3, note. 


said: “I am the Almighty God 
ceedingly.” To the same purport 
3) As Giver of fruitfulness, 


12. 10; Ruth 1. 20. Hence, 
occurring thirty-one times in 
the best man of his time, not 
ness (Job 5. 17-25). 

2.73; 14. 18, note; 15, 


26 


Shaddai 


” God is ‘‘Shaddai,’” because He is the 
in a_ secondary sense, the Satisfier, who 
As a fretful, unsatisfied babe is not only 
mother’s breast, but also is quieted, rested, 
of God which sets Him forth as the Strength- 
It is on every account to be regretted that “Shad- 
i El or Elohim sufficiently — 
would far better express both the Hebrew 
€ name in Scripture. 


enriches, but makes fruitful. This 


(Heb. 11. 12), He 


I will... multiply thee ex- 


+ note; 2. 4, note; 


17 11). 


GENESIS. 


[18 9 


child among you shall be circum-| B.C. 1898. | 


cised. 

11 And ye shall circumcise the 
flesh of your foreskin; and it shall 
be a “token of the covenant betwixt 
me and you. 

12 And he that is eight days old 
shall be 4circumcised among you, 
every man child in your genera- 
tions, he that is born inthe house, 
or bought with money of any 
stranger, which 7s not of thy seed. 

13 He that is born in thy house, 
and he that is bought with thy 
money, must needs be circumcised: 
and my covenant shall be in your 
flesh for an everlasting covenant. 

14 And the uncircumcised man 
child whose flesh of his foreskin is 
not circumcised, that soul shall be 
cut off from his people; he hath 
broken my covenant. 


The promise of Isaac, in whom 
the line of Christ runs. 


i5 And God said unto Abraham, 
As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt 
not call her name Sarai, but “Sarah 
shall her name be. 

16 And I will bless her, and give 

ee a son also of her: yea, I will 
bless her, and she shall be a mother 
of tae ; kings of people shall be 

ef. 

17 Then Abraham fell upon his 
face, and laughed, and said in his 
heart, Shall a child be born unto 
him that is an hundred years old? 
and shall Sarah, that is ninety years 
old, bear? 

18 And Abraham 4said unto God, 
O that Ishmael might live before 
‘thee! 

19 And God said, Sarah thy wife 
shall bear thee a son indeed; and 
thou shalt call his name Isaac: and 
I will establish my ‘covenant with 
him for an everlasting covenant, 
and with his fseed after him. 


Ishmael to be a nation. 


°20 And as for Ishmael, 
heard thee: Behold, I have blessed 


him, and will make him fruitful,) 


and will multiply him exceedingly; 
8twelve princes shall He beget, and 
I will make him a great nation. 

21 But my covenant will I estab- 
lish with Isaac, which Sarah shall 


bear unto! thee at this set time in) 


the: next year. 


22 And he left off talking with) 


him, and God went up from Abra- 
ham. 


|b Lk.2.21; 


| 3; Col.2.11. 


I have 


a Rom.4,9-12, 
Rom.2. 25- 29; 
19; Gal.5.2, 


ci.e. princess. 


d Bible pray- 
ers (O.T.). 
Ger..18.23. 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 
e Israel (cove- 
nant). vs.15- 

21; Gen.22, 
16-18. (Gen. 
12.2,3; Rom. 
11.26.) 


f Christ (first 
advent). 
Gen.24.60. 
(Gen.3.15; 
Acts 1.9.) 


g Gen.16.10; 
25.12-16. 


h The theoph- 
anies. Gen. 
26.2,24. 
(Gen.12.7 
Rev.1.9.) 


i Cf.Gen.19. 
1. For sig- 


nificance of 
Abraham's 
tent, Heb.11. 
9,1 


23 And Abraham took Ishmael 
his son, and all that were born in 
his house, and all that were bought 
with his money, every male among 
the men of Abraham’s house; and 
circumcised the flesh of their fore- 
skin in the selfsame day, as God 
had said unto him. 

24 And Abraham was ninety 
years old and nine, when he was 
circumcised in the flesh of his fore- 
skin. 

25 And Ishmael his son was thir- 
teen years old, when he was circum: 
cised in the flesh of his foreskin. 

26 In the selfsame day was Abra- 
ham circumcised, and Ishmael his 


son. 

27 And all the men of his house, 
born in the house, and bought with 
money of the stranger, were circum- 
cised with him. 


CHAPTER 18. 


Abraham, “‘the friend of God.’” 
(Cf. John 3. 29; 15. 13-15.) 


ND the Lorp “appeared unto 

him in the plains of Mamre: 

and he sat in the ‘tent door in the 
heat of the day; 

2 And he hft up his eyes and 
looked, and, lo, three men stood by 
him: and when he saw them, he 
ran to meet them from the tent 
door, and bowed himself toward the 
ground, 

3 And said, My Lord, if now I 
have found favour in thy sight, pass 
not away, I pray thee, from thy 
servant: 

4 Let alittle water, I pray you, be 
fetched, and wash your feet, and 
rest yourselves under the tree: ~ 

5 And I will fetch a morsel of 
bread, and comfort ye your hearts; 
after that ye shall pass on: for 
therefore are ye come to your ser- 
vant. And they said, So do, as 
thou hast said. 

6 And Abraham hastened into the 
tent unto Sarah, and said, Make 
ready quickly three measures of fine 
meal, knead it, and make cakes 
upon the hearth. 

7 And Abraham ran unto the 
herd, and fetcht:a calf tender and 
good, and gave i# unto a young 
man; and he hasted to dress. it. 

8 And he took butter, and milk, 
and the calf which he had dressed, 
and set it before them; and he. 
stood by them under the tree, and 
they did eat. __ 

9 And they said unto him, Where 


18 10) GENESIS. [1919 


as Sarah thy wife? And he said,| B.C. 1898, | 24 Peradventure there be fifty 
Behold, in the tent. righteous within the city: wilt thou 

10 And he said, I will certainly 
return unto thee according to the 
time of life, and, lo, ¢Sarah thy 
‘wife shall have a,son. And Sarah 
theard it in the tent door, which was 
‘behind him. 

11 Now Abraham and Sarah were 
old and well stricken in age; and 
it ceased to be with Sarah after the 
‘manner of women. 

12 Therefore Sarah laughed with- 
in herself, saying, After I am waxed 
old shall I have pleasure, my lord 
‘being old also? 

13 And the LorD said unto Abra- 
tham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, 
‘saying, Shall I of a surety bear a 
child, which am old? 

14 Is any thing too hard for the 
Lorp? At the time appointed I 


therein? 


after this manner, to slay the right- 
eous with the wicked: and that the 
righteous should be as the wicked, 
that be far from thee: Shall not the 
Judge of all the earth do right? 

26 And the Lorp said, If I find 
in Sodom fifty righteous within the 
city, then I will spare all the place 
for their sakes. 

27 And Abraham answered and 
said, Behold now, I have taken 


which am but dust and ashes: 


will return unto thee, according to And he said, If I find there forty 
the time of life, and Sarah shall)? CfRom.9.9.. land five, I will not destroy it. 
‘have a son. b Communion | 29 And he spake unto him yet 


15 Then Sarah denied, saying, I} (vs.1-8) and |again, and said, Peradventure there 
laughed not; for she was afraid.| intercession (shall be forty found there. And he 
rpiialey said, Nay; but thou didst| 8°‘? pi I will not do it for forty’s 
‘laugh. c Bible pray- |sake, 

16 And the men rose up from eee 30 And he said unto him, Oh let 
‘thence, and looked toward Sodom:| (Gen15.2; |not the Lord be angry, and I will 
sand Abraham went with them to] Hab.3.1-16.) |speak: Peradventure there shall 
bring them on the way. ete thirty be found there. And he said, 

nd the Lorp said, Shall I|" 99: I will not do st, if I find thirty 


‘hide from Abraham that thing there. 
which I do; pea er 31 And he said, Behold now, I 
18 Seeing that Abraham shall] "°° have taken upon me to speak unto 


surely become a great and mighty] Lot was a the Lord: Peradventure there shall 

‘nation, and all the nations of the terres be twenty found there. And he 

Sinatra ‘ik ie a i. ane ‘7 20) in a place pas t a not destroy it for twen- 
ow him, that he will] devoted to y’s sake, 

command his children and_ his} judgment. 32 And he said, Oh let not the 


also destroy and not spare the place © 
for the fifty righteous that are — 


25 ‘That be far from thee to do — 


upon me to speak unto the Lord, — 


: 


‘household after him, and they shall| $f 4°t27- |Lord be angry, and I will speak yet 
keep the way of the Lorp, to do but this once: Peradventure ten 
Justice and judgment; that the shall be found there. And he said, 
LorD may bring upon Abraham I will not destroy st for ten’s 
‘that which he hath spoken of him. sake. 

20 And the Lorp said, Because 33 And the Lorp went his way, 
the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is as soon as he had left communing 
great, and because their sin is very with Abraham: and Abraham re- 
“grievous; turned unto his place. 

21 I will go down now, and see 
whether they have done altogether CHAPTER 19. 
-according to the cry of it, which is The d. 5 
come unto me; and if not, I will 6 destruction of Sodom. The 
Neslour’ third step in Lot’s backslid- 

22 And the men turned their faces ing: a great man in Sodom 
‘from thence, and went toward (v. 1). (See Gen, 13. 10, 12; 
‘Sodom: but Abraham stood yet be- 19. 33.) 
fore the Lorp. ND there 4came two ¢angels to 

Abraham the intercessor. . Sodom at even; and Lot /sat j 
in the gate of Sodom: and Lot see- 

23 And Abraham drew ®near, and ing them rose up to meet them; 
vsaid, ‘Wilt thou also destroy the and he bowed himself with his face 
righteous with'the wicked? toward the ground; 


28 


GENESIS. [19 27 


2 And he said, Behold now, my 
lords, turn in, I pray you, into your 
servant's house, and tarry all night, 
and wash your feet, and ye shall 
tise up early, and go on your ways. 
And they said, Nay; but we will 
abide in the street all night. 

3 And he pressed upon them 
greatly; and they turned in unto 
him, and entered into his house; 
and he made them a feast, and did 
bake ¢unleavened bread, and they 
did eat. 

4 But before they lay down, the 
men of the city, even the men of, 
Sodom, compassed the house round, 
both old and young, all the people 
from every quarter: 

5 And they called unto Lot, and 
said unto him, Where are the men 
which came in to thee this night? 
bring them out unto us, that we 
may know them. 

6 And Lot went outat the door 
unto them, and shut the door after 


im, 
7 And said, I pray you, brethren, 

do not so wickedly. 

8 Behold now, I have two daugh- 
ters which have not known man; 
let me, I pray you, bring them out 
unto you, and do ye to them as is 
good in your eyes: only unto these 
men do nothing; for therefore came 
- they under the shadow of my 

roof. 

9 And they said, Stand back. 
‘And they said again, This one 
fellow came in to sojourn, and he 
will needs be a judge: now will we 
deal worse with thee, than with 
them. And they pressed sore upon 

_ the man, even Lot, and came near 
to break the door. 

10 But the men put forth their 
hand, and pulled Lot into the house 
to them, and shut to the door. 

11 And they smote the men that 
were at the door of the house with 
blindness, both small and great: so 
that they wearied themselves to 
find the door. 

12 And the men said unto Lot, 
Hast thou here any besides? son in 
law, and thy sons, and thy daugh- 
ters, and whatsoever thou hast in 
the city, bring them out of this 
place: 

13 For we will destroy this place, 
- because the cry of them is waxen 
great before the face of the LoRD; 
and the LorpD hath sent us to de- 

stroy it. 

14 And «Lot went out, and spake 
unto his sons in law, which married! 


B.C. 1898. 


a Leaven. Ex, 
12.8,15-20, 
34,39. (Gen. 
19.3; Mt.13, 
33.) 


6 The world’s 
contempt for 
a worldly be- 
liever. 


¢ Lot had ut- 
terly lost his 
testimony. 
In gaining 
influence 
(Gen.19.1) 
he had. lost 
power, even 
in his own 
family. 


d Heb.1.4, 
note. 


¢ Miracles 
(O.T ), vs.24- 
26; Gen.20. 
17,18. (Gen. 
5.24; Jon.2, 
1-10.) 


f Lk.17.32, 


29 


his daughters, and said, Up, get 
you out of this place: for the Lorp 
will destroy this city. But he 
seemed as one that mocked unto 
his sons in law. 

15 And when the morning arose, 
then the angels hastened Lot, say- 
ing, Arise, take thy wife, and thy 
two daughters, which are here; lest 
thou be consumed in the iniquity of 
the city. 

16 And while he lingered, the men 
laid hold upon his hand, and upon 
the hand of his wife, and upon the 
hand of his two daughters; the 
LorD being merciful unto him: and 
they brought him forth, and set him 
without the city. 

17 And it came to pass, when 
they had brought them forth 
abroad, that he said, Escape for thy 
life; look not behind thee, neither 
stay thou in all the plain; escape 
to the mountain, lest thou be con: 
sumed. 

18 And Lot said unto them, Oh, 
not so, my Lord: 

19 Behold now, thy servant hath 
found grace in thy sight, and thou 
hast magnified thy mercy, which 
thou hast shewed unto me in saving 
my life; and I cannot escape to the 
mountain, lest some evil take me, 
and I die: 

20. Behold now, this city is near 
to flee unto, and it zs a little one: 
Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not 
a little one?) and my soul. shall 

ive. 

21 And he said unto him, See, I 
have accepted thee concerning this 
thing also, that I will not over- 
throw this city, for the which thou 
hast spoken. 

22 Haste thee, escape thither; for 
I cannot do any thing till thou be 
come thither. Therefore the name 


of the city was called Zoar. 

23 The sun was risen upon the 
earth when Lot entered into 
Zoar 

24 Then the LorD ¢rained upon 
Sodom and upon Gomorrah brim- 
stone and fire from the LORD out of 
heaven; 

25 And he overthrew those cities, 
and all the plain, and all the inhab- 
itants of the cities, and that which 
grew upon the ground. 

26 But his ‘wife looked back from 
behind him, and she became a pillar 
of salt. 

27 And Abraham gat up early in 
the morning to the place where he 
stood before the Lorp: 


19 28] GENESIS. [20 9 


28 And he looked toward Sodom)! B.c. 1898. |same is the father of the Moabites 


and Gomorrah, and toward all the unto this day. 

land of the plain, and beheld, and, 38 And the younger, she also bare 

lo, the smoke of the country went a son, and called his name Ben- 

up as the smoke of a furnace. ammi: the same 1s the‘father of the 
29 And it came to pass, ¢when children of Ammon unto this day. 

God destroyed the cities of the 

plain, that God remembered Abra- CHAPTER 20. 


ham, and sent Lot out of the midst 


, 
of the overthrow, when he over- Abrahams lapse at Gerar 


threw the cities in the which Lot Gece 2a: eg 
dwelt. je Abraham journeyed from 
30 And Lot went up out of Zoar, thence toward the south coun- 
and dwelt in the mountain, and his try, and dwelled between Kadesh 
two daughters with him; for he and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar. 
feared to dwell in Zoar: and he 2 And Abraham said of Sarah his 
dwelt in a cave, he and his two wife, She is my sister: and Abime- 
daughters. lech king of Gerar sent, and took 
31 And the firstborn said unto the} - \Sarah, 
younger, Our father is old, and | 3. But God came to Abimelech in 
there is not a man in the earth to a dream by night, and said to him, 
come in unto us’ after the manner) See v.36, Behold, thou art but a dead man, 
of all the earth: note, for the woman which thou hast 
32 Come, let us make our father); yo¢ “pitched |taken; for she is a man’s wife. 
drink wine, and we will lie with] teward 4 But Abimelech had not come 
him, that we may preserve seed of Aaa 12) [near her: and he said, Lord, wilt 
our father, fanmvorlaly? thou slay also a righteous nation? 
advantage; 5 Said he not unto me, She fs my 


The last step in Lot’s backslid-| then became |sister? and she, even she herself 
ing. (See Gen. 13. 10, 12; 19.1.) 2°S45™*" |said, He is my brother: in the integ- 
Cf. Lk. 22. 31-62.) (Gen.19.1), _|rity of my heart and innocency of 

= ye aus of |my hands have I done this. 

33 And they made their father) tery accept. | 6 And God said unto him in a 


drink wine that night: and the} ing the dream, Yea, I know that thou didst 
firstborn went in, and lay with aera of this in the integrity of thy heart; 
her father; and he perceived not| ome for I also withheld thee from sin- 
when she lay down, nor when she: ning against me: therefore suffered 
arose. I thee not to touch her. 

34 And it came to pass on the 7 Wow therefore restore the man 
morrow, that the firstborn said un- his wife; for he 1s a prophet, and he 
to the younger, Behold, I lay yes- shall pray for thee, and thou shalt 
ternight with my father: let us| live: and if thou restore her not, 
make him drink wine this night! know thou that thou shalt surely 
also; and go thou in, and lie with! die, thou, and all that are thine. 
him, that we may preserve seed of| 8 Therefore Abimelech rose early 
our father. ; in the morning, and called all his 

35 And they made their father servants, and told all these things 
drink wine that night also: and in their ears: and the men were sore 
the younger arose, and lay with afraid. ‘ 
him; and he perceived not when 9° Then Abimelech called Abra- 
she lay down, nor when she arose. ham, and said unto him, What hast 

36 1Thus were both the daugh- thou done unto us? and what have 
ters of Lot with child by their |I offended thee, that thou hast 
father {brought on me and on my kingdom 

37 And the firstborn bare a son, a great sin? thou hast done deeds 
and called his name Moab: the unto me that ought not to be done. 


1 Abraham and Lot are contrasted characters. Of the same stock (Gen. 11. 31), 
subjected to the same environment, and both justified men (Gen. 15. 6; 2 Pet. 2. 
7,8), the contrast in character and career is shown to be the result of their Tespective 
choices at the crisis of their lives. Lot ‘chose him all the plain of Jordan” for pres- 
ent advantage; Abraham “looked for a city which hath foundations” (Heb. 11. 10), 
and (Gen. -13. 18) “came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre (fatness), which is in 


Hebron” (communion), The men remain types of the worldly and ‘the spiritual 
believer. 
30 


_ P 
{ 20 10) GENESIS. [21 16 
10 And Abimelech said unto, sc. 1898. | 5 And Abraham was an hundred 


_ Abraham, What sawest thou, that 
’ thou hast done this. thing? 
11 And Abraham said, Because I 
thought, Surely the ¢fear of God zs 
not in this place; and they will, slay 
me for my wife’s sake. 

12 And yet indeed she is my sis- 
ter; she #s the daughter of my 
father, but not the daughter of 
my mother; and she became my wife. 

13 And it came to pass, when 
God caused me to wander from my 
father’s house. that I said unto her, 

_ This is thy kindness which thou 
shalt shew unto me; at every place 
whither we shall come, say of me, 


years old, when his son Isaac was 
born unto him. 

6 And Sarah said, God hath made 
me to laugh, so that all that hear 
will laugh with me. 

7 And she said, Who would have 
said unto Abraham, that Sarah 
should have given children suck? for 
I have born Aim a son in his old 


age. 

8 And the child grew, and was 
weaned: and Abraham made a great 
feast the same day that Isaac was 
weaned. 


The bondwoman and her son 


He is my brother. cast out (Gai, 4. 21-31). 
14 And Abimelech took sheep, Sashes ) 
and oxen, and menservants, and 9 And Sarah saw the son of Ha- 
womenservants, and gave them deter as gar the Egyptian, which she had 
unto Abraham, and restored him ‘ born unto Abraham, mocking. 
Sarah his wife. b Miracles 10 Wherefore she said unto Abra- 
_ 15 And Abimelech said, Behold, eee ham, ¢Cast out this bondwoman 
my land is before thee: dwell-where| 3°°(Gen.5.24;,and her son: for the son of this 
it pleaseth thee. ” Jon.2.1-10.) |bondwoman shall not be heir with 
“nla hate nt ae eh ear wot Rie Wind wa very air 
ousand pieces of silver: behold,) 1/14. (Gen. |ous in Abraham’s sight be 
- hers a thee a ee. of ow ae $20; Heb. his seal : Sen one 
unto all that are with thee, and with pA 12 And God said unto Abraham, 
all other: thus she was reproved. |d Miracles Let i€'not be grievous in thy sight 
17 So Abraham prayed unto God:| (0.T.). Ex. |because of the lad, and because of 
and God healed Abimelech, and his) (@20%'7,. _|thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah 
# aie eau a! and} Jon.2.1-10.) aoa said unto pete ee unto 
they bare children. é er voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed 
18 For the Lorp had fast closed/*$'3:18: 4; |be called. 
up all the wombs of the house of| 7-10. 13 And also of the son of the 
Abimelech, because of Sarah Abra- bondwoman will I make a nation, 
_ ham’s wife. because he is thy seed. 


CHAPTER 21. 
The birth of Isaac. 


ND the Lorp visited Sarah as 
he had <said, and the Lorp did 
unto Sarah as he had spoken. 
2 For Sarah ¢conceived, and bare} 
_ Abraham a son in his old age, at 
the set time of which God had 
spoken to him. 
- 3 And Abraham called the name) 
of his son that was born unto him, | 
_whom Sarah bare to him, ?Isaac. 
4 And Abraham circumcised his 
son Isaac being eight days old, as 
God had commanded him. 


—* 


14 And Abraham rose up early in 
the morning, and took bread, and 
a bottle of water, and gave rf unto 
Hagar, putting 1¢ on her shoulder, 
and the child, and sent her away: 
and she departed, and wandered in 
the wilderness of Beer-sheba. 

15 And the water was spent in the 
bottle, and she cast the child under 
lone of the shrubs, 

16 And she went, and sat her 
down over against him a good way 
off, as it were a bowshot: for she 
said, Let me not see the death of 
the child. And she sat over against 
him, and lift up her voice, and 
wept. 


| 


1 Sarah, type of grace, “the freewoman,” and of the ‘“‘Jerusalem which is above.” 


See Gen. 17. 15-19; Gal. 4. 22-31. 


2 Isaac is typical in a fourfold way: (1) of the Church as composed of the spiritual 


children of Abraham (Gal 
(Gen. 22. 1-10; Phil. 2. 5-8; 


. 4. 93); (2) of Christ as the Son “obedient unto death” 
(3) of Christ as the Bridegroom of a called-out bride 


see Gen. 24; also “‘Church,” Mt. 16. 18 and refs.); (4) of the new nature of the 
‘believer as “born after the Spirit” (Gal. 4.-29). 
31 


~ the lad; and the ¢angel of God 


21 17) 
17 And God heard the voice of 


called to Hagar out of heaven, and 
said unto her, What aileth thee, Ha- 
gar? fear not; for God hath heard 
the voice of the lad where he is. 

18 Arise, lift up the lad, and hold 
him in thine hand; for I will make 
him a great nation. 

19 And God opened her eyes, and 
she saw a well of water; and she 
went, and filled the bottle with 
water, and gave the lad drink. 

20 And God was with the lad; 
and he grew, and dwelt in the wil- 
derness, and became an archer. 

21 And he dwelt in the wilderness) 
of Paran: and his mother took him 
a wife out of the land of Egypt. 


Abraham at Beer-sheba. 


22 And it came to pass at that 
time, that Abimelech and Phichol 


the chief captain of his host spake} * 


unto Abraham, saying, God is with 
thee in all that thou doest: 

23 Now therefore swear unto me 
here by God that thou wilt not deal 
falsely with me,,nor with my son, 
nor with my son’s son: but accord- 
ing to the kindness that I have done 
unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, 
and to the land wherein thou hast 
sojourned. 

24 And Abraham said, I wiil 
swear. 

25 And Abraham reproved Abim- 
elech because of a well of water, 
which Abimelech’s servants had 
violently taken away. 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1892. 


a Heb.1.4, 


note, 


b Deity 
(names of). 
Gen.35.11. 


(Gen.1.1; 
Mail.3.18.) 


1“Everlasting God” (Heb. El Olam). 


(1) The Hebrew Olam is used in Scripture: 
(e.g. Lev. 5. 2, “hidden”; 2 Ki. 4. 27, “hid”: 
time or age (Lev. 25. 32, “at any time’; Josh. 24. 2, “in old ¢ime’’). 


Psarhowis 


26 And Abimelech said, I wot not 
who hath done this thing: neither 
didst thou tell me, neither yet 
heard I of it, but to day. : 

27 And Abraham took sheep and 
oxen, and gave them unto Abime- 
lech; and both of them made a 
covenant. : 
28 And Abraham set seven ewe 
lambs of the flock by themselves. 

29 And Abimelech said unto 
Abraham, What mean these seven 
ewe lambs which thou hast set by 
themselves? 

30 And he said, For these seven 
ewe lambs shalt thou take of my 
hand, that they may be a witness 
unto me, that I havedigged this well. 

31 Wherefore he called that place 
Beer-sheba; because there they 
sware both of them. 

32 Thus they made a covenant at 
Beer-sheba: then Abimelech rose 


. {up, and Phichol the chief captain 


of his host, and they returned inte 
the land of the Philistines. 

33 And Abraham planted a 
grove in Beer-sheba, and called 
there on the name of the Lorp, the 
beverlasting 1God. 

34 And Abraham sojourned in the 
Philistines’ land many days. 


CHAPTER 22, 


The offering of Isaac. 


2 AN it came to pass after these 

things, that God did ‘tempt 
Abraham, and said unto him, Abra- 
ham:and he said, Behold, herelam. 


(a) of secret or hidden things 
“hidest”); (b) an indefinite 
Hence the 


word is used to express the eternal duration of the being of God (Psa. 90. 2, “From 
everlasting to everlasting’’), and is the Hebrew synonym of the Greek aion, age or 


dispensation. See Gen. 1. 


They are among the 
“everlasting” 
He is the God 
successive ages or dispensations. 
He is God over everlasting things. 


2.4, note; 2.7; 14.18, note; 15. 2, note; 17, 1. note; 
experience of Abraham was 

surrender of something 
(1) Country and kindred (Gen. 12. 


2 The spiritual 
which involved a 


27, 28, note 4, 
(2) The ideas therefore of things kept secret 
‘bine in this word. Both ideas inhere in the doctrine of the dispensations or ages. 

“mysteries” of God (Eph. 1. 9, 10; 
God (EI Olam) is, therefore, that name of Deity in virtue of which 
whose wisdom has divided all time and eternity into the mystery of 
It is not merely that 


See, for other names of Deity: Gen. 1. 1, note; 


1. 


These were: 
10. 34-39; 2 Cor. 6. 14-18). (2) His 


nephew, Lot; especially dear to Abraham by nature, as a possible heir and asa 


fellow believer (2 Pet. 2. 7, 8; 


byiGen: 15,123, Cf. 2.1 


im.,'2. 20, 
Ishmael (Gen. 17. 17, 18. 


L Gen, 13,1418)! 
separation from one who, though a believer, 


21; 


22. 1-19, 
32 


Cf. Heb. 11. 17, 18). 


The completeness of Abraham’s 


was a “‘vessel unto dishonour,”’ is shown 
Acts 15. 36-40. 
Cf. 1 Chr. 13. 1-14; 15.1, 2). 
son Isaac, whom thou lovest” (Gen. 


(3) His own plan about 
(4) Isaac, “thy son, thine only 


a 

_ 2 And he said, Take now thy son, 

thine only son Isaac, whom thou 

lovest, and get thee into the land of 

Moriah; and offer him there for a 

burnt-offering upon one of the 

mountains which I will tell thee of. 
3 4And Abraham rose up early in 
the morning, and saddled his ass, 
and tock two of his young men with 
him, and Isaac his son, and clave 
the wood for the burnt-offering, and 

' rose up, and went unto the place of 

' which God had told him. 

.4 Then on the third day Abraham 
lifted up his eyes, and saw the place 
afar off, 

5 And Abraham said unto his 
young men, Abide ye here with the 
ass; and I and the lad will go yon- 
der and worship, and %come again 
to you. 

6 And Abraham took the wood of 
the burnt-offering, and laid rt upon 
Isaac his son; and he\ took the fire 
in his hand, and a knife; and they 
went both of them together. 

7 And Isaac spake unto Abraham 
his father, and said, My father: and 
he said, Here am I, my son. And 
he said, Behold the fire and the 
wood: but where zs the lamb for a 
burnt-offering? 

8 And Abraham said, My son, 
God will provide himself a lamb for 
a “burnt-offering: so they went both 
of them together. 

9 And they came to the place 


‘5 


which God had told him of; and} 


Abraham built an altar there, and 
_ laid the wood in order, and bound 

Isaac his son, and laid him on the 

altar upon the wood. 

_ 10 And Abraham stretched forth 
his hand, and took the knife to.slay 
his son. 

11 And the ¢angel of the LorpD 
called unto him out of heaven, and 
‘said, Abraham, Abraham: and he 
said, Here am I. 

12 And he said, Lay not thine 
hand upon the lad, neither do thou 
any thing unto him: for now I 
know that thou ¢fearest God, see- 
ing thou hast not withheld thy son, 
thine only son from. me. é 

13 And Abraham lifted up his 
eyes, and looked, and behold be- 
hind Aim a ram caught in a thicket 
by his horns: and Abraham went 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1872. 


a Faith, vs.1- 
14; Gen.50. 
24,25. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 


b Resurrec- 


aie s 
4.32 35. 
(Job 19.25; 
1 Cor.15.52.) 


c Sacrifice 
(typical), vs- 
8,13; Ex.12. 
S212 7- 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 


d Heb.1.4, 


note. 


e Psa.19,9, 
note, 


f Israel (cove- 
nant), vs.16- 
18; Gen.26. 


1The typical lessons here are: 


[232 


and took the ram, and offered him 
up for a burnt-offering in the stead. 
of his son. 

14 And Abraham called the name 
of that place Jehovah-jireh: as it is 
said to this day, In the mount of 
the Lorp it shall be seen, 


The Abrahamic Covenant con- 
firmed. 


15 And the dangel of the LorpD) 


called unto Abraham out of heaven” 
the second time, 

16 And fsaid, By myself have I 
sworn, saith the LorD, for because 
thou hast done this thing, and hast 
not withheld thy son, thine only 


son: 

17 That in blessing*I will bless 
thee, and in multiplying I will mul- 
tiply thy seed as the stars of the 
heaven, and as the sand which is 
upon the sea shore; and thy seed 
shall possess the gate of his enemies; 

18 And in thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed; be- 
cause thou hast obeyed my voice. 

19 So Abraham returned unto his 
young men, and they rose up and 
went together to Beer-sheba; and 


|Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba. 


20 And it came to pass after these 
things, that it was told Abraham, 
saying, Behold, Milcah, she’ hath 
also born children unto thy brother 
Nahor; 

21 Huz his firstborn, and Buz his 
brother, and Kemuel the father of 
Aram, 

22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and 


m. |Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel. 


23 And Bethuel begat Rebekah: 
these eight Milcah did bear to Na- 
hor,.Abraham’s brother. 

24 And his concubine, whose 


name was Reumah, she bare also 
Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, 
and Maachah. 


CHAPTER 23. 
The death and burial of Sarah. 


SAND Sarah was an hundred and 
seven and twenty years old. 
these were the years of the life of 
Sarah. 

2 And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba; 
the same is Hebron in the land of 
Canaan: and Abraham came to 


(1) Isaac, type of Christ “obedient unto death” 


(Phil. 2. 5-8); (2) Abraham, type of the Father, who “‘spared not His own son, but 


delivered Him up for us all” 


(John 3. 16; Rom. 8. 32); (3) the ram, 


type of substi- 


tution—Christ offered as a burnt-offering in our stead (Heb. 10. 5-10); (4) cf 
resurrection (Heb. 11, 17-19). See also Jas. 2. 21-23, 
Boh ah 


23 3] GENESIS. [241 


mourn for Sarah, and to weep for} B.C. 1860. 13 And he spake unto Ephron in 


er, ti Hone st apie Hoh ry Heap 
3 And Abraham stood up from land, saying, But if thou wilt give © 
before his dead, and spake unto the it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give 
sons of Heth, saying, thee prey ce the field i‘ beh ks ~ 
4 I amastranger and a sojourner me, an will bury my ; 
with you: give me a possession of 14 And Ephron answered Abra- 
a Jpuryingplace with you, that I ham, saying unto him, 
may bury my dead out of my sight. 15 My lord, hearken unto me: the 
5 And the children of Heth an- ee oe Sips pray 4shekels 
, Saying unto him, of silver, what is that betwixt me _ 
Neer dale — load: thea art a and yee ele meee ees 
mighty prince among us: in the raham hearkened unto 
choice OF our sepulchres bury thy Ephron; and Abraham weighed to 
dead; none of us shall withhold Ephron the silver, which he had 
his sepulchre, but that named in the audience of the sons of 
from thee his sep ; y 
thou mayest bury thy dead. 4 Heth, ots Ben dsee sere pees 
7 And Abraham stood up, an current money wi emer it. 
bowed himself to the people of the 17 And the field of Ephron, which 
land, even to the children of Heth. was in Machpelah, which was be- 
8 And he communed with them,|) 4.. sexe: |fore eae ee oe fen bape 
saying, If it be your mind that 1)° =959q., or |whic was therein, ani e trees 
should ‘bury my dead out of my) 65 cents; also|that were in the field, that were in 
sight; hear me, and intreat for me| vY-16- all a borders round about, were 
to Ephron the son of Zohar, ieee made sure . 
9 That tiie may give me the cave Tike as _18 Unto Abraham for g possession 
of Machpelah, which he hath, which is oa af ce ee Mee 
is in the end of his field; for as eth, before all that went in at the 
itch money as it is worth he shall gate of his city. : eG 
give it me for a possession of a a» aes “pang pumesetraerok = 
buryingplace amongst you. ara € in the cave o: e 
10 And Ephron dwelt among the field of Machpelah before Mamre: 
children of Heth: and Ephron the the same is Hebron in the land of 
Hittite answered Abraham in the Canaan, 
audience of the children of Heth, 20 And the field, and the cave 
even of all that went in at the gate that is therein, were made sure unto 
of his city, saying, fe. penchant fos peneseeat one bury- 
11 Nay, my lord, hear me: the ingplace by the sons of Heth. 
field give I thee, and the cave that 
is ag it ey in ang CHAPTER 24. 
presence of the sons of my people : 
give I it thee: bury thy dead. A bride for Isaac. 
12 And Abraham bowed down 2 J 2 Nee tirene Hi. was old, and well 
himself bef6ére the people of the stricken in age: and the Lorp 


land. had blessed Abraham in all things. 


1Cf, Gen. 33. 19; 50. 133 Josh, 24. 32; Acts 7. 15, 16. A discrepancy in these 
statements has been fancied. It disappears entirely before the natural supposition 
that in the interval of about eighty years between the purchase by Abraham vf 
the family sepulchre (Gen. 23. 4-20) and Jacob’s purchase (Gen. 33. 19), the de- 
scendants of Hamor (or ‘“Emmor,” Acts 7. 15, 16) had resumed possession of the 
field in which thé burial-cave was situated. Instead of asserting an ancient title 
by inheritance, Jacob-repurchased the field. Heth was the commion ancestor. 

* The entire chapter is highly typical: (1) Abraham, type of a certain king who 
would make a marriage for his son (Mt. 22. 2; John 6. 44); (2) the unnamed ser- 
vant, type of the Holy Spirit, who does not “speak of himself,” but takes of the 
things of the Bridegroom with which to win the bride (John 16. 13, 14); (3) the 
servant, type of the Spirit as enriching the bride with the Bridegroom’s gifts (Gal. 5. 
22; 1 Cor. 12. 7-11); (4) the servant, type of the Spirit as bringing the bride to the 
meeting with the Bridegroom (Acts 13. 4: 16. 6, 7; Rom, 8.11; 1 Thes. 4. 14-16); 
(S) Rebekah, type of the Church, the ecclesia, the “‘called out” virgin bride of 
Christ (Gen. 24. 16; 2 Cor, 11. 2; Eph. 5. 25-32); (6) Isaac, type of the Bride- 
groom, “‘whom not having seen,” the bride loves through the testimony of the 
unnamed Servant (1 Pet. 1.8); (7) Isaac, type of the Bridegroom who goes out to 
meet and receive His bride (Gen. 24. 63; 1 Thes. 4. 14-16), 


242], 


GENESIS. 


[24 29 


2 And Abraham said unto his eld- 
est servant of his house, that ruled 


over all that he had, Put, I pray 


thee, thy hand under my thigh: 

3 And I will make thee swear by 
the Lorp, the God of heaven, and 
the God of the earth, that thou shalt 
not take a wife unto my son of the 
daughters of the Canaanites, among 
whom I dwell: 

4 But thou shalt go unto my 
country, and to my kindred, and 


- take a wife unto my son Isaac. 


5 And the servant said unto him,| 
Peradventure the woman will not} 


be willing to follow me unto this 


and from the land of my kindred, 
and which spake unto me, and tha 


land: must I needs bring thy son 
again unto the land from whence 
thou camest? 

6 And Abraham said unto him, 
Beware thou that thou bring not 
my son thither again. 

7 TheLorp God of heaven, which 
took me from my father’s house, 


sware unto me, saying, Unto thy 


B.C. 1857. 


t|@ Heb.1.4 


note, 


seed will I give this land; he shall) Bible pray- 


send his ¢angel before thee, and 
thou shalt take a wife unto my son 
from thence. 

8 And if the woman will not be 
willing to follow thee, then thou 
shalt be clear from this my oath: 


only bring not my son thither 


again. 

9 And the servant put his hand 
under the thigh of Abraham his 
master, and sware to him concern- 


ing that matter. 


10 And the servant took ten 


camels of the camels of his master, 


_and departed; for all the goods of 


his master were in his hand: and 
he arose, and went to Mesopota- 
mia, unto the city of Nahor. 

11 And he made his camels to 
kneel down without the city by a 


’ well of water at the time of the 


evening, even the time that women 
go out to draw water. 

12 And he bsaid, O LorD God of 
my master Abraham, I pray thee, 
send me good speed this day, and 
shew kindness unto my master 
Abraham. 

13 Behold, I stand here by the 
well of water; and the daughters 
of the men of the city come out to 
draw water: 

14 And let it come to pass, that 
the damsel to whom I shall say, 
Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, 
that I may drink; and she shall 
say, Drink, and I will give thy 


ers (O.T.). 
Gen.32.9. 
(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 


¢ Jud.6.17,37; 
2 Ki.20.9; 
Prov.16.33; 
Acts 1.26. 


Cf.Mt.12.39. 


Signs are 
given to 
faith, not to 
doubt. 


d One shekel 


=14 oz. 
troy: 


35 


camels drink also: Jet the same be 
she that thou hast appointed for 
thy servant Isaac; and ‘thereby 
shall I know that thou hast shewed 
kindness unto my master. 

15 And it came to pass, before he 
had done speaking, that, behold, 
Rebekah came out, who was born 
to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife 
of Nahor, Abraham’s brother, with 
her pitcher upon her shoulder. 

16 And the damsel was very fair 
to look upon, a virgin, neither had 
any man known her: and she went 
down to the well, and filled her 
pitcher, and came up. 

17 And the servant ran to meet 
her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, 
drink a little water of thy pitcher. 

18 And she said, Drink, my lord: 
and she hasted, and let down her 
pitcher upon her hand, and gave 
him drink. 

19 And when she had done giving’ 
him drink, she said, I will draw 
water for thy camels also, until 
they have done drinking. 

20 And she hasted, and emptied 
her pitcher into the trough, and 


Iran again unto the well to draw 


water, and drew for all his camels. 

21 And the man wondering at her 
held his peace, to wit whether the 
LorpD had made his journey pros- 
perous or not. 

22 And it came to pass, as the 
camels had done drinking, that the 
man took a golden earring of half 
a 4shekel weight, and two bracelets 
for her hands of ten shekels weight 
of gold; 

23 And said, Whose daughter art 


\thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there 


room in thy father’s house for us to 
lodge in? 

24 And she said unto him, I am 
the daughter of Bethuel the son 
of Milcah, which she bare unto 
Nahor. 

25 She said moreover unto him, 
We have both straw and provender 
enough, and room to lodge in. 

26 And the man bowed down his 
head, and worshipped the LORD. 

27 And he said, Blessed be the 
Lorp God of my master Abraham, 
who hath not left destitute my 
master of his mercy and his truth: 
I being in the way, the Lorp led 
me to the house of my master’s 
brethren. 

28 And the damsel ran, and told. 
them of her mother’s house these 
things. 

29 And Rebekah had a brother. 


ow eV} 


[24 55 


24. 30] GENESIS. 


and his name was Laban: andj _ B.C. 1857. . 
Laban ran out unto the man, unto 
the well. 

30 And it came to pass, when he 
saw the earring and bracelets upon 
his sister’s hands, and when he 
heard the words of Rebekah his 
sister, saying, Thus spake the man 
unto me; that he came unto the 
man; and, behold, he stood by the 
camels at the well. ‘ 

31 And he said, Come in, thou 
blessed of the LORD; wherefore 
standest thou without? for I have 
prepared the house, and room for 
the camels. 

32 And the man came into the 
house: and he ungirded his camels, 
and gave straw and provender for 
the camels, and water to wash his 
feet, and the men’s feet that were 
with him. 

33 And there was set meat before 

im to eat: but he said, I will not 
eat, until I have tolc mine errand. 
And he said, Speak on. 

34 And he said, I am Abraham’s 
servant. 

35 And the Lorp hath blessed my 
master greatly; and he is become 
great: and he hath given him 
flocks, and herds, and silver, and 
gold, and menservants, and maid- 
servants, and camels, and asses. 

36 And Sarah my master’s wife 
bare a son to my master when 
she was old: and unto him hath he 
given all that he hath. 

37 And my master “made me 
swear, saying, Thou shalt not take 
a wife to my son of the daughters 
of the Canaanites, in whose land I 
dwell: 

38 But thou shalt go unto my fa- 
ther’s house, and to my kindred, 
and take a wife unto my son. 

39 And I said unto my master, 
Peradventure the woman will not 
follow me. 

40 And he said unto me, The 
Lorp, before whom I walk, will 
send his ‘angel with thee, and pros- 
per thy way; and thou shalt take 
a wife for my son of my kindred, 
and of my father’s house: 

41 Then shalt thou be clear from 
this my oath, when thou comest to 
my kindred; and if they give not 
thee one, thou shalt be clear from 
my oath. 

42 And I came this day unto the 
well, and said, O (Lorp God of my 
master Abraham, if now thou da 


|\@vV.3. 
61 Ki.8.23, 


c Heb.1.4, 
note. 


ld v.12. 
¢ 1 Sam.1.13, 


prosper my way which I go: 
43 Behold, I stand by the well of 


36 


water; and it shall come to pass, 


that when the virgin cometh forth - 


to draw water, and I say to her, 
Give me, I pray thee, a little water 
of thy pitcher to drink; : 

44 And she say to me, Both drink 
thou, and I will also draw for thy 
camels: Jet the same be thie woman 
whom the Lorp hath appointed 
out for my master’s son. 

45 And before I had done speak- 
ing in mine ‘heart, behold, Rebekah 
came forth with her pitcher on her 
shoulder; and she went down unto 
the well, and drew water: and I 
said unto her, Let me drink, I pray 
thee. 

46 And she made haste, and let 
down her pitcher from her shoul- 
der, and said, Drink, and I will give 
thy camels drink also: so I drank, 
and she made the camels drink also. 

47 And I asked her, and said, 
Whose daughter art thou? And 
she said, The daughter of Bethuel, 
Nahor’s son, whom Milcah bare 
unto him: and I put the earring 
upon her face, and the bracelets 
upon her hands. 

48 And I bowed down my head, 
and worshipped the Lorp, and 
blessed the LoRD God of my master 
Abraham, which had led me in the 
right way to take my master’s 
brother’s daughter unto his son. 

49 And now if ye will deal kindly 


jand truly with my master, tell me: 


and if not, tell me; that I may turn 
to the right hand, or to the left. 

50 Then Laban and Bethuel an- 
swered and said, The thing pro- 
ceedeth from the LorD: we cannot 
speak unto thee bad or good. 

51 Behold, Rebekah js before 
thee, take her, and go, and let her 
be thy master’s son’s wife, as the 
LorD hath spoken. 

52 And it came to pass, that, when 
Abraham’s servant heard their 
words, he worshipped the LORD, 
bowing himself to the earth. 

_93 And the servant brought forth 
Jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, 
and. raiment, and gave them to Re- 
bekah: he gave also to her brother 
and to her mother precious things, 

54 And they did eat and drink, he 
and the men that were with him, 
and tarried all night; and they rose 
up in the morning, and he said, 
Send me away unto my master, 

55 And her brother and her 
mother said, Let the damsel abide 
with us a few days, at the least 
ten; after that she shall go. 


24 56] GENESIS. 4513 


. 56 And he said: unto them, Hinder] _ B.c. 1857. | 2 And she bare him Zimran, and 
es Uy Sea iad ae hath bane Ji ence ee Be Aen Midian, 
¥ : me away tha | f 
$ I may go to my master. 3 And Jolenat beet Sheba, and 

; ia fad aed said, pee call Sey Dedan. And the sons of Dedan 
damsel, and enquire at her mouth. were Asshurim, Letushi 
58 And they called Rebekah, and eugai iastaNe ie Cee 
_ said unto her, Wilt thou_go with 4 And the sons of Midian; Ephah, 
y3 this man? And she said, I will go.; and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abi- 
Cand her’ mires, gad che chideemorieennch tan ee | 
) 5 a e children of Keturah. 

_ Abraham’s servant, and his men. . - 

- “60 And they blessed Rebekah, and Isaac heir of all things(Heb. 1.2). 
— said unto her, Thou art our sister,| 5 And Abraham gave all that he 
_ bethou the mother of thousands of; had unto Isaac. 

- millions, and let thy ¢seed possess| 6 But unto the sons of the concu- 
m the GOR oy which hate them. het which epee ae Ape: 

— 61 An ebekah arose, and he am gave gilts, and sen cy 
- damsels, and they rode upon eet away from Isaac his son, while he 
! eS and followed the man: and jyet abet eastward, unto the east 
_ the servant took Rebekah, and COTE ae 
’ went his way. : } The death of Abraham 
: CAri 

62 And Isaac came from the way oars 7 And these are the days of the 
‘i of the well bLahai-roi; for he Bends Ms years of Abraham’s life which he 
“ ee coun aye! ae, ioe peas an hundred threescore and 
i =} een years. 
_ tate in the field at the eventide: and di-e. “the — 8 Then Abraham gave up the 
- he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and,| ye get 'ghost, and died in a good old age, 
_ behold, the camels were coming. and seeth |an old man, and full of years; and 
64 And Rebekah lifted up her| ee ee was gathered to his people. 
eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she 14; 49-2" | 9 And his sons Isaac and Ishmael 

: lighted off the camel. buried him in the cave of Machpe- 
_ 65 For she had said unto the ser- lah, in the field of Ephron the son 
. erent, Lhe Eat is ispeauat eet ; ‘ ri the Hittite, which is be- 

m e fie o meet us? n ore Mamre; 
fi the servant had said, It is my 10 The field which Abraham pur- 
master: therefore she took a vail, chased of the sons of Heth: there 

___ and covered herself. was Abraham buried, and Sarah 
a Aad sgore —e ail ty told Isaac all his wife. 

j ings that he had done. 11 And it came to pass after the 
_ .67 And Isaac brought her into death of Abraham, that God blessed 
" his mother Sarah’s tent, and took his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by 
z hele < ee poems his wife; the well Lahai-roi. 

an e loved her: and Isaac was 


The generations of Ishmael. 
Ae ne pees ae the generations 
CHAPTER 25. ‘of Ishmael, raham’s son, whom 
Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s hand- 
maid, bare unto Abraham: 


comforted after his mother’s death. 


Abraham weds Keturah, 


ByREN again Abraham took a 13 And these are the names of the 
wife, and her name was *Ke- sons of Ishmael, by their names, 
turah. according to their generations: the 


_ 1 This is the model servant: (1) he does not run unsent, vs. 2-9; (2) goes where 


he is sent, vs. 4, 10; (3) does nothing else; (4) is prayerful and thankful, vs. 12-14, 


26, 27; (5) is wise to win, vs. 17, 18, 21. Cf, John 4. 7; (6) speaks not of himself, 
but of his master’s riches and Isaac’s heirship, vs. 22, 34-36; Acts 1. 8; (7) presents 


the true issue, and requires clear decision, v. 49. 


2 As Sarah stands for “the mother of us all,” i.e. of those who, by grace, are 
one with the true Son of promise, of whom Isaac was the type (John 3. 6-8; Gal. 
4. 26, 28, 29: Heb. 2. 11-13), and joint heirs of His wealth (Heb. 1. 2; Rom. 8. 16, 17), 
so Keturah (wedded after the full blessing of Isaac) and her children by Abraham 
may well stand for the fertility of Israel the natural seed, Jehovah’s wife (Hos. 2. 
1-23) after the future national restoration under the Palestinian covenant (Deut. 30. 


1-9, note). oy 


25 14] GENESIS. [26 2 


25 And the first came out red, all 
ever like an hairy garment; and 
they called his name /Esau. 

26 And after that came his brother 
out, and his hand took hold on 
Esau’s heel; and his name was 
called Jacob: and Isaac was three- 
score years old when she bare them. 


The sale of the birthright. 


27 And the boys grew: and Esau 
was a cunning hunter, a man of the 
field; and Jacob was a plain man, 
dwelling in tents. 

28 And Isaac loved Esau, because 
he did eat of Ais venison: but Re- 
bekah loved Jacob. 

29 And Jacob sod pottage: and 
Esau came from the field, and he 
was faint: 

30 And Esau said to Jacob, Feed 
me, I pray thee, with that same red 
pottage; for I am faint: therefore 
was his name called “Edom. 

31 And Jacob said, Sell me this 
day thy *birthright. 

32 And Esau said, Behold, I am 
at the point to die: and what profit 
shall this birthright do to me? 

33 And Jacob said, Swear to me 
this day; and he sware unto him: and 
he sold his birthright unto Jacob. 

34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread 
and pottage of lentiles: and he did 
eat and drink, and rose up, and 
went his way: thus Esau despised 
his birthright, 


CHAPTER 26. 


The Abrahamic Covenant con- 
firmed to Isaac. 


ANe there was a ‘famine in the 
land, beside the first famine 
that was in the days of Abraham 
And Isaac went unto Abimelech 
king of the Philistines unto Gerar. 

2 And the Lorp ¢appeared unto 
him, and said, ¢Go not down into 
Egypt; dwell in the land which I 
shall tell thee of: 


firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and 
Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 

14 And Mishma, and Dumah, and 
Massa, 

15 Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Na- 
phish, and Kedemah: 

16 These are the sons of Ishmael, 
and these are their names, by their 
towns, and by their castles; twelve 
princes according to their nations. 

17 And these are the years of the 
life of Ishmael, an hundred and 
thirty and seven years: and he 
gave up the ghost and died; and 
was gathered unto his people. | 

18 And they dwelt from Havilah 
unto Shur, that rs before Egypt, 
as thou goest toward Assyria: and 
he died in the presence of all his 


brethren, Pee 
The generations of Isaac. 12. 


19 And these are the generations) bie. red. 
of Isaac, Abraham’s soy: Abraham] . c.. Gen12. 
begat Isaac: 10, note. 

20 And Isaac was forty years old 
when he took Rebekah to wife, the|? The theoph- 
daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of| 94: Gen35.6 
Padan-aram, the sister to Laban} (Gen.12.7; 
the Syrian. Rev. 1.10.) 

21 And Isaac intreated the LORD) . cr.Gen.46.3, 
for his wife, because she was bar-| note. 

‘ren; and the LorpD was intreated 
of him, and Rebekah his wife con- 
ceived. 

22 And the children struggled to- 
gether within her; and she said, If 
it be so, why am I thus? And she 
went to enquire of the Lorp. 

23 And the LorD said unto her, 
Two nations are in thy womb, and 
two manner of people shall be sepa- 
rated from thy bowels; and the one 
people shall be stronger than the 
other people; and the ¢elder shall 
serve the younger. 


The birth of Esau and Jacob. 


24 And when her days to be deliv- 
ered were fulfilled, behold, there 
were twins in her womb. 


1 Esau stands for the mere man of the earth (Heb. 12. 16,17). In many respects 
a nobler man, naturally, than Jacob, he was destitute of faith, and despised the 
SEE A eek it was a spiritual thing, of value only- as there was faith to ap- 
prehend it. 

_* The “birthright” had three elements, (1) Until the establishment of the Aaronic 
priesthood the head of the family exercised priestly rights, (2) The Abrahamic 
family held the Edenic promise of the Satan- Bruiser (Gen. 3. 15)—Abel, Seth, Shem, 
Abraham, Isaac, Esau. (3) Esau, as the firstborn, was in the direct line of the 
Abrahamic promise of the Earth-Blesser (Gen. 12.3). For all that was revealed, in 
Esau might have been fulfilled those two great Messianic promises: This birth- 
right Esau sold for a momentary fleshly gratification. Jacob’s conception of the 


birthright at that time was, doubtless, carnal and inadequate, but his desire for, it 
evidenced true faith, 
38 


26 3] F GENESIS. [26 26 


3 4Sojourn in this land, and I will 
be with thee, and will bless thee; 
for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I 
will give all these countries, and I 
will perform the oath which I sware 


15 For all the wells which his 
father’s servants had digged in the 
days of Abraham his father, the 
Philistines had stopped them, and 
filled them with earth, 

16 And Abimelech said unto 
Isaac, Go from us; for thou art 
\ > much mightier than we, 
will give unto thy seed all these L A, heh 
countries; and in thy seed shall ali Sent grel 2 ieners 


the nations of the earth be blessed; : 17 And Isaac departed thence, 
5 Because that Abraham obeyed and pitched his tent in the valley of 
my voice,.and kept my charge, my Gerar, and dwelt there. 
commandments, my statutes, an 18 And Isaac digged again the 
my laws. Feb rea waters yan eae had 
igged in the days of Abraham his 
The lapse of Isaac. (Cf. Gen. 20. father: for the Philistines. had 
1-18. stopped them after the death of 
6 And Isaac dwelt in Gerar: Abraham: and he called their 
7 And the men of the place asked: names after the names by which 
him of his wife; and he said, She zs his father had called them. 
my sister: for he feared to: say, She 19 And Isaac’s servants digged in 
ismy wife; lest, said he, the men of} the valley, and found there a well 
the placeshould killme for Rebekah;} of springing water. 


because she was fair to look upon. 20 And the herdmen of Gerar did 

8 And it came to pass, when he strive with Isaac’s herdmen, saying, 
had been there a long time, that}e Israel (cove- |The water 1s our’s: and he called 
Abimelech king of the Philistines} 222%)- vs-2- |the Iname of the well Esek; because 


looked out at a window, and saw, gs oe? they strove with him. 
and, behold, Isaac was sporting} 12.2,3; 21 And they digged another well, 
with Rebekah his wife. Rom.11.26.) |and strove for that also: and he 
9 And Abimelech called Isaac,|, called the name of it Sitnah, 
and. said, Behold, of a surety she is} 22 And he removed from thence, 
thy: wife: and how saidst thou, She}, and. digged another well; and for. 
-is my sister? And Isaac said unto}, that they strove not: and he called 
him, Because I said, Lest I die for} the name of it Rehoboth; and he 
er, said, For now the Lorp hath made 
10 And Abimelech said, What. is} room for us, and we shall be fruitful 
this. thou hast done unto us? one}, in the land. 
of the people might lightly have 23 And he went up from thence to 
- lien with thy wife, and thou should-| Beer-sheba. 
est have brought guiltiness upon us.} 24 And the Lorp appeared unto 
11 And Abimelech charged a him the same night, and said, I am 
- his people, saying, He that touch- the God of Abraham thy father: 
eth this man or his wife shall surely fear not, for I am with thee, and 
be put to death. will bless thee, and multiply thy 
12 Then Isaac sowed in that land,| seed for my servant Abraham’s 
and received in the same year an} sake, 7 
hundredfold: and the Lorp blessed 25 And he builded an altar there, 
him. and called upon the name of the 
13 And the man waxed great, and Lorp, and pitched his tent there: 
went forward, and grew until he and there Isaac’s servants digged a 
became very great: well. 2 ; 
14 For he had possession of 26 Then Abimelech went to him 
flocks, and possession of herds, and from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of 
great store of servants: and the his friends, and Phichol the chief 
Philistines envied him. captain of his army. 


1 The wells of Genesis have significant names, and are associated with significant 
events: (1) Beer-lahai-roi, the well of him that liveth and seeth me (Gen. 16. 
14; 24. 62; 25.11). (2) Beer-sheba, the well of the oath or covenant (Gen. 21. 
25-33; 22. 19; 26. 23-25; 46. 1-5). (3) Esek, contention (Gen. 26. 20). (4) Sitnah, 
hatred (Gen. 26. 21). Esek and Sitnah were Isaac’s own attempts at well-digging. 
Afterward, he dwelt by the old wells of his father. (5) Rehoboth, enlargement 
(Gen. 26. 22). a 

3 


26 27 


27 And Isaac said unto them, 
Wherefore come ye to me, seging 
ye hate me, and have sent me away 
from you? 

28 And they said, We saw Cer- 
tainly that the LORD was with thee: 
and we said, Let there be now an 
oath betwixt us, even betwixt us 
and thee, and let us make a cove- 
nant with thee; : 

29 That thou wilt do us no hurt, 
as we have not touched thee, and 
as we have done unto thee nothing 
but good, and have sent thee away 
in peace: thou art now the blessed 
of the Lorb. 

30 And he made them a feast, and 
they did eat and drink. 

31 And they rose up betimes in 
the morning, and sware one to 
another: and Isaac sent them away, 
and they departed from him in 
peace. 

32 And it came to pass the same 
day, that Isaac’s servants came, 
and told him concerning the well 
which they had digged, and said 
unto him, We have found water. 

33 And he called it Shebah: 
therefore the name of the city is 
Beer-sheba unto this day. 

34 And Esau was forty years old 
when he took to wife Judith the 
daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and 
Bashemath the daughter of Elon 
the Hittite: 

35 Which were a grief of mind 
unto Isaac and to Rebekah. 


CHAPTER 27 
The stolen blessing. 


7g it came to pass,that when 
Isaac was old, and his eyes 
were dim, so that he could not see, 
he called Esau his eldest son, and 
said unto him, My son: and he said 
unto him, Behold, here am I. 

2 And he said, Behold now, I am 
old, I know not the day of my 
death: 

3 Now therefore take, I pray thee, 
thy weapons, thy quiver and thy 
bow, and go out to the field, and 
take me some venison; 

4 And make me savoury meat, 
such as I love, and bring it to me, 
that I may eat; that my soul may 
bless thee before I die. 

5 And Rebekah heard when Isaac 
spake to Esau his son. And Esau 
went to the field to hunt for veni- 
son, and to bring it. 

6 And Rebekah spake unto Jacob 
her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy 


B.C. 1804. 


40 


GENESIS. 


[27 22 


‘father speak unto Esau thy brother, 
saying, 

‘7 +Bring me venison, and make me 
savoury meat, that I may eat, and 
bless thee before the LorpD before 
my death. 

8 Now therefore, my son, obey 
my voice according to that which I 
command thee. 

9 Go now to the flock, and fetch 
me from thence two good kids of 
the goats; and I will make them 
savoury meat for thy father, such 
as he loveth: 

10 And thou shalt bring i¢ to thy 
father, that he may eat, and that he 
may bless thee before his death. 

11 And Jacob said to Rebekah his 
mother, Behold, Esau my brother 7s 
ahairy man, andIamasmooth man: 

12 My father peradventure will 
feel me, and I shall seem to him as 
a deceiver; and I shall bring a 
curse upon me, and not a blessing. 

13 And his mother said unto him, ~ 
Upon me be thy curse, my son: © 
only obey my voice, and go fetch 
me them. 

14 And he went, ana fetched, and 
brought them to his mother: and 
his mother made savoury meat, 
such as his father loved. 

15 And Rebekah took goodly rai- 
ment of her eldest son Esau, which 
were with her in the house, and put 
them upon Jacob her younger son: 

16 And she put the skins of the 
kids of the goats upon his hands, 
and upon the smooth of his neck: 

17 And she gave the savoury 
meat and the bread, which she had 
prepared, into the hand of her son 
Jacob. 

18 And he came unto his father, 
and said, My father: and he said, 
Here am I; who art thou, my 
son? 

19 And Jacob said unto his father, 
I am Esau thy firstborn; I have 
done according as thou badest me: 
arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of 
my venison, that thy soul may 
bless me. 

20 And Isaac said unto his son, 
How is it that thou hast found it so 
quickly, my son? And he said, 
Because the LorD thy God brought 
it to me. 

21 And Isaac said unto Jacob, 
Come near, I pray thee, that I may 
feel thee, my son, whether thou be 
my very son Esau or not. 

22 And Jacob went near unto 
Isaac his father; and he felt him, 
and said, The voice is Jacob’s 


Er ieee ll 


of Esau. 

23 And he discerned him not, be- 
cause his hands were hairy, as his 
brother Esau’s hands: so he blessed 


im. 

24 And he said, Art thou my very 
son Esau? And he said, I am. 

25 And he said, Bring it near to 
me, and I will eat of my son’s 
venison, that my soul may bless 
thee. And he brought it near to 
him, and he did eat: and he 
brought him wine, and he drank. 


The blessing of Jacob. 


26 And his father Isaac said unto 
him, Come near now, and kiss me, 
my Son. 

27 And he came near, and kissed 
him: and he smelled the smell of 
his raiment, and blessed him, and 
said, See, the smell of my son is as 
the smell of a field which the LorD 
hath blessed: 

28 Therefore God give thee of the 


dew of heaven, and the fatness of the 


earth, and plenty of corn and wine: 
29 Let people serve thee, and na- 
tions bow down to thee: be lord 
over thy brethren, 
mother’s sons bow down to thee: 


@cursed be every one that curseth) 


thee, and blessed be he that bless- 
eth thee. 

30 And it came to pass, as soon as 
Isaac had made an end of blessing 


Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce 


gone out from the presence of Isaac 


his father, that Esau: his brother 


came in from his hunting. 

31 And he also had made savoury 
meat, and brought it unto his 
father, and said unto his father, 
Let my father arise, and eat of his 
son’s venison, that thy soul may 
bless me. 

32 And Isaac his father said unto 


him, Who art thou? And he said, 


Iam thy son, thy firstborn Esau. 
33 And Isaac trembled very ex- 


ceedingly, and said, Who? where, 


is he that hath taken venison, and 


brought it me, and I have eaten of | 


all before thou camest, and have 
blessed him? yea, and he shall be 
blessed. 


_ Esau’s unavailing remorse. (See 


Heb. 12. 16, 17.) 
34 And when Esau heard the 


_ words of his father, he cried with a 


great and exceeding bitter cry, and 


said unto his father, Bless me, even 


me also, O my father 


and let thy} 


GENESIS. 


voice, but the hands are the hands 


a Gen.12.3; 
15.18, note 
3,(5).. 


|b trembled 
with a great 
trembling, 
greatly. 


| c i.e. sup- 
planter. 


! 

|d Esau wept 
because of a 
| lost advan- 
tage, but 
“found no 
way to 

| change his 
mind, though 
he sought it 
carefully 
with tears’’ 
(Heb.12.17) 
—so far may 
regret or re- 
morse be 
from true 
repentance, 


e Gen.26.34, 
35. Heth 
was ances- 
tor of the 
Hittites. 


41 


127 46 


35 And he said, Thy brother came 
with subtilty, and hath taken away 
thy blessing. 

36 And he said, Is not he rightly 
named ‘Jacob? for he hath sup- 
planted me these two times: he 
took away my birthright; and, be- 
hold, now he hath taken away my 
blessing. And he said, Hast thou 
not reserved a blessing for me? 

37 And Isaac answered ana said 
unto Esau, Behold, I have made 
him thy lord, and all his brethren 
have I given to him for servants; 
and with corn and wine have I sus- 
tained him: and what shall I do 
now unto thee, my son? 

38 And Esau said unto his father, 
Hast thou but one blessing, my 
father? bless me, even me also, O 
my father. ¢And Esau lifted up 
his voice, and wept, 

39 And Isaac his father answered 
and said unto him, Behold, thy 
dwelling shall be the fatness of the 
earth, and of the dew of heaven 
from above; 

40 And by thy sword shalt thou 
live, and shalt serve thy brother; 
and it shall come to pass when thou 
shalt have the dominion, that thou 
shalt break his yoke from off thy 
neck. 

41 And Esau hated Jacob because 
of the blessing wherewith his father 
blessed him: and Esau said in his 
heart, The days of mourning for 
my father are at hand; then will I 
slay my brother Jacob. 

42 And these words of Esau her 
elder son were told to Rebekah: 
and she sent and called Jacob her 
younger son, and said unto him, 
Behold, thy brother Esau, as touch- 
ing thee, doth comfort himself, pur- 
posing to kill thee. 

43 Now therefore, my son, obey 
my voice; and arise, flee thou to 
Laban my brother to Haran; 

44 And tarry with him a few 
days, until thy brother’s fury turn 


away; 

45 Until thy brother’s anger turn 
away from thee, and he forget that 
which thou hast done to him: then 
I will send, and fetch thee from 
thence: why should I be deprived 
also of you both in one day? 

46 And Rebekah said to Isaac, I 
am weary of my ‘life because of the 
daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a 
wife of the daughters of Heth, such 
as these which are of the daughters 
of the land, what good shall my life 


do me? 


28 1] GENESIS. [28 22 


B.C. 1760. ant lay down in that place to 

sleep. 

12 And he dreamed, and behold a 
ladder set up ©n the earth, and the 
top of it reached to heaven: and 
behold the “angels of God ascending 
and descending on it. 

13 And, behold, the LorD stood 
above it, and-said, I am the Lorp 
God of Abraham thy father, and 
ithe God of Isaac: the dand whereon 
thou liest, to thee will I give it, and 
to thy seed; 

14 And thy seed shall be as the 
dust of the earth, and thou shalt 
spread abroad to the west, and to 


CHAPTER 28. 


Jacob at Bethel: the Abrahamic 
Covenant confirmed to him. 


jake Isaac called Jacob, and 
blessed him, and charged him, 
and said unto him, Thou shalt not 
take a wife of the daughters of 
Canaan. 

2 Arise, go to Padan-aram, to the 
house of Bethuel thy mother’s fa- 
ther; and take thee a wife from 
thence of the daughters of Laban 
thy mother’s brother. 

3 And God Almighty bless thee, 


and make thee fruitful, and multi- the east, and to the north, and to 
ply thee, that thou mayest be a), ¢.,36.3;, |the south: and in thee and in thy 
multitude of people; called Bashe-|@seed shall all the families of the 
4 And give thee the blessing of| math. earth be blessed. 

Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed), p44 15 And, behold, I am with ‘thee, 
with thee; that thou mayest inherit| note. ”* and will keep thee in all places 
the land wherein thou art a stran- whither thou goest, and will bring 


ger, which God gave unto Abra-|<Jsrael (cove Ithee again into this land; for I will 

ham. ;Gen.35. jnot leave thee, until I have done 
5 And Isaac sent away Jacob:]} 9-12. (Gen. |that which I have spoken to thee 

and he went to Padan-aram unto| 37:33; R™- lof. 

Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian,| ~~ ~ 16 And Jacob awaked out of his 

the brother of Rebekah, Jacob’s|¢ ChArisr (frst sleep, and he said, Surely the Lorp 


and Esau’s mother. advent) jis in this place; and I knew it 
6 When Esau saw that Isaac had} (Gen3.15; |not. 
blessed Jacob, and sent him away] Acts 1.9.) 17 And he was afraid, and said, 


to Padan-aram, to take him a wife} , p.4.13.5 How dreadful is this place! this is 
from thence; and that as he blessed Sent none other but the house of God, 


him he gave him a charge, saying,| fie. the and this is the gate of heaven. 

Thou shalt not take a wife of the mouse of 18 And Jacob rose up early in the 

daughters of Canaan; Cf.Gen.35.7. |Morning, and took the stone that 
7 And that Jacob obeyed his fa- he had put for his pillows, and set 


ther and his mother, and was gone Gendt it up for a pillar, and poured oil 
to Padan-aram; “~~ hapon the top of it. 


8 And Esau seeing that the 19 And he called the name of that 
daughters of Canaan pleased not place /Beth-el: but the name of that 
Isaac his father; city was called Luz at the first. 

9 Then went Esau unto Ishmael, 20 And Jacob vowed a vow, say- 
and took unto the wives which he ing, If God will be with me, and 
had ¢Mahalath the daughter of Ish- will keep me in this way that I go, 
mael Abraham’s son, the sister of and will give me bread to eat, and 
Nebajoth, to be his wife. raiment to put on, 

10 1And Jacob went out from 21 So that I come again to my 
Beer-sheba, and went toward Ha- father’s house in peace; then shail 
ren, f HH the LORD be my God: 

11 And he lighted upon a certain 22 And this stone, which I have 
place, and tarried there all night, set for a pillar, shall be God’s 
because the sun was set; and he house: and of all that thou shalt 


took of the stones of that place, give me I will surel. i 
and put them for his pillows, &tenth unto thee. ys 
1 Bethel becomes, because of Jacob’s vision there, one of the significant places of 
Scripture. To the Christian it stands for a realization, however imperfect, of the 
heavenly and spiritual contents of faith, answering to Paul’s prayer in Eph. 1. 17-23. 
Dispensationally, the scene speaks of Israel the nation, cast out of the Land 
of Promise because of evil-doing there, but holding the promise of restoration 
and blessing (Gen. 28. 15; Deut. 30. 1-10, refs.). To “an Israelite indeed’? Christ 


speaks of Jacob’s vision as to be fulfilled in the Son of man (cf. Gen, 28. 12; 
John 1. 47-51). 
42 


$29 3] 


‘CHAPTER 29. 


Jacob’s years at Haran 
(to Gen. 31. 10), } 


es Jacob went on his jour: 
ney, and !came into the land:of 
‘the people of the east. | 

2 And he looked, and behold ia 
well in the field, and,Jo, there were 
three flocks of sheep lying by it} 
for out of that well they watered the 
flocks: and a great stone was upon 
he well’s mouth. i ! 
-3 And thither were ali the flocks 
gathered and they rolled the stone 
from the well’s mouth, and watered 
the sheep, and put the stone again 
sapon the well’s:mouth in his place: 

4 And Jacob said unto them, My’ 
‘brethren, whence be ye? And they 
‘said, Of Haran are we. 

-5 And he said unto them, Know 

ye Laban the son of Nahor? And 
they said, We know him. 
-6 And he said unto them, Js he 
swell? And they said, He is well: 
‘and, behold, Rachel this daughter 
cometh with the sheep. 

7 And he said, Lo, it is yet high 
«day, neither zs it time that the cat- 
tle should be gathered together: 
water ye the sheep, and go and 
feed them. 

8 And they said, We cannot, until 
-all the flocks be gathered together, 
and ?trlI they roll the stone from the 
well’s mouth; then we water the 
sheep. . 

9 And while he yet spake with 
“them, Rachel came with her father’s 
sheep: for she kept them. 

10 And it came to pass, when 
Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of 
‘Laban his mother’s brother, and 

the sheep of Laban his mother’s 
brother, that Jacob went near, and 
tolled the stone from the well’s 
mouth, and watered the flock of 
Laban his mother’s brother. | 
41 And Jacob kissed Rachel, and 
difted up his voice, and wept. } 

12 And Jacob told Rachel that he 

was her father’s brother, and that 
the was Rebekah’s son: and ‘she ran 
and told her father 

13 And it came to pass, when La- 


GENESIS. {29 27 


{ban heard the tidings of Jacob his 
sister’s son, that he ran to meet him, 
and embraced him, and kissed him, 
and:brought him to his house. And 
he told Laban all these things. 

14 And Laban said to him, ‘Surely 
thou .art my bone and my flesh. 
And he abode with him the space 
of amonth. 

15 And Laban said unto Jacob, 
Because thou art my brother, 
shouldest thou therefore serve me 
for nought? tell me, what shal/'thy 
\jwages be? 

16 And Laban had:-two:daughters: 
the name of the elder was Leah, and 
the name of the younger was 
‘Rachel. 
| 17 Leah was tender eyed; but 
‘Rachel was beautiful and \well -fa- 
‘|voured. 

18 And Jacob-loved Rachel, and 
said, I will serve thee seven years 
for Rachel thy younger daughter 

19 And Laban said, Jt is better 
that I give her to thee, than that I 
should give her to another man: 
abide with me. 

20 And Jacob served seven years 
for Rachel; and they seemed unto 
him but a few days, for the love he 
had to hei. 

21 And Jacob said unto Laban, 
Give me my wife, for my days are 
fulfilled, that I may go in unto her. 

22 And Laban gathered together 
all the men of the place, and made 
a feast. 

23 And it came to pass in the 
evening, that he took Leah his 
daughter, and brought her to him; 
and he went in unto her. 

24 And Laban gave unto his 
daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for 
an handmaid. 

25 And it came to pass, that in the 
morning, behold, it was Leah: and 
jhe said to Laban, What is this thou 
hast done unto me? did not I serve 
with thee for Rachel? wherefore 
then hast thou beguiled me? . 

26 And Laban said, It must not 
be so done in our country, to give 
the younger before the firstborn. 

97 Fulfil her week, and we will 
‘give thee this also for the service 


1 Jacob at Haran becomes a striking illustration, if not type, of the nation de- 


scended from him in its present Jong dispersion. 


Like Israel, he was: (1) Out of the 


place of blessing (Gen. 26. 3); (2) without an altar (Hos. 3. 4, 5); (3) gained an 
‘evil name (Gen. 31. 1; Rom. 2. 17-24); (4) but was under the covenant care of 
Jehovah (Gen. 28. 13, 14; Rom. 11. 1, 25-30); (5) and was-ultimately brought back 
(Gen. 31. 3; 35. 1-4; Ezk. 37. 21-23). i ; : 
The personal lesson is obvious: while Jacob is not forsaken, he is permitted 
to reap the shame and sorrow of his self-chosen way. 
43 


29 28] 


which thou shalt serve with me yet 
seven other years. 

28 And Jacob did so, and fulfilled 
her week: and he gave him Rachel 
his daughter to wife also. A 

29 And Laban gave to Rachel his 
daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be 
her maid. 

30 And he went in also unto Ra- 
-chel, and he ¢loved also Rachel 
more than Leah, and served with 
him yet seven other years. 

31 And when the LorD saw that 
Leah was hated, he opened her 
womb: but Rachel was barren. 

32 And Leah conceived, and bare 
ason, and she called his name ’Reu- 
ben: for she said, Surely the LorD 
hath looked upon my affliction; 
now therefore my husband will love 
me. 

33 And she conceived again, and 
bare a son; and said, Because the 
Lorp hath heard that I was hated, 
he hath therefore given me this son 
also: and she called his name ‘Sim- 
eon. 

34 And she conceived again, and 
bare a son; and said, Now this time 
will my husband be joined unto me, 
because I have born him three sons: 
therefore was his name called ¢Levi. 

35 And she conceived again, and 
bare a son: and she said, Now will 
I praise the LorpD: therefore she 
called his name ‘Judah; and left 
bearing. 


CHAPTER 30. 
AND when Rachel saw that she 
bare Jacob no children, Rachel 
envied her sister; and said unto 
oie: Give me children, or else I 
ie. ' 

2 And Jacob’s anger was kindled 
against Rachel: and he said, Am I 
in God’s stead, who hath withheld 
from thee the fruit of the womb? 

3 And she said, Behold my maid 
Bilhah, go in unto her; and she 
shall bear upon my knees, that I 
may also have children by her. 

4 And she gave him Bilhah her 
handmaid to wife: and Jacob went 
in unto her. 

5S And Bilhah conceived, and bare 
Jacob a son. 

6 And Rachel said, God hath 
judged me, and hath also heard my 


voice, and hath given me a son: 
therefore called she his name /Dan. 
7 And Bilhah Rachel’s.maid con- 
ceived again, and bare Jacob a sec- 
ond son. 
8 And Rachel said, With great 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1753. 


a v.20; cf. 
Deut.21.15. 


bi.e. see, a 
son. 


ci.e. hearing. 


di.e. joined. 
Num.18.2,4. 


ei.e. praise. 
fie. judging. 


gi.c, wrest- 


hag. 
hi.e. a troop. 
ti.e. happy. 
jie. Aire. 
Rie. dwelling. 


lice. judg- 
ment. 


m i.e. adding. 


[30 25 


wrestlings have I wrestled with my 
sister, and I have prevailed: and 
she called his name sNaphtali. 

9 When Leah saw that she had 
left bearing, she took Zilpah her 
maid, and gave her Jacob to wife. 

10 And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare 
Jacob a son. 

11 And Leah said, A troop com- 
eth: and she called his name /Gad. 

12 And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare 
Jacob a second son. 

13 And Leah said, Happy am I, 
for the daughters will call me 
blessed: and she called his name 
* Asher. 

14 And Reuben went in the days 
of wheat harvest, and found man- 
drakes in the field, and brought 
them unto his mother Leah. Then 
Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I 
pray thee, of thy son’s mandrakes. 

15 And she said unto her, Is it a 
small matter that thou hast taken 
my husband? and wouldest thou 
take away my son’s mandrakes 
also? And Rachel said, Therefore 
he shall lie with thee to night for 
thy son’s mandrakes. 

16 And Jacob came out of the 
field in the evening, and Leah went 
out to meet him, and said, Thou 
must come in unto me; for surely I 
have hired thee with my son’s man- 
drakes. And he lay with her that 
night. 

17 And God hearkened unto 
Leah, and she conceived, and bare 
Jacob the fifth son. 

18 And Leah said, God hath given 
me my hire, because I have given 
my maiden to my husband: and she 
called his name /Issachar. 

19 And Leah conceived again, and 
bare Jacob the sixth son. 

20 And Leah said, God hath en- 
dued me with a good dowry; now 
will my husband dwell with me, 
because I have born him six sons: 
and she called his name *Zebulun. 

21 And afterwards she bare a 
daughter, and called her name 
‘Dinah. 

22 And God remembered Rachel, 
and God hearkened to her, and 
opened her womb. 

23 And she conceived, and bare a 
son; and said, God hath taken away 
my reproach: 

24 And she called his name ”Jo- 
seph; and said, The Lor shall add 
to me another son. 

25 And it came to pass, when 
Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob 
said unto Laban, Send me away, 


a 


' GENESIS. 


_ that I may go unto mine own place, 

and to my country. 

26 Give me my wives and my 
children, for whom I have served 
thee, and let me go: for thou know- 
est my service which I have done 
thee. 

27 And Laban said unto him, I 
pray thee, if I have found favour in 
thine eyes, tarry: for I have learned 
By. experience that the LorpD hath 
blessed me for thy sake. 

28 And he said, Appoint me thy 
wages, and I will give it. 

29 And he said unto him, Thou 
~knowest how I have served thee, 
and how thy cattle was with me. 
30 For it was little which thou 
hadst before I came, and it is now 
increased unto a multitude; and the 
LorpD hath blessed thee since my 
coming: and now when shall I pro- 

vide for mine own house also? 

31 And he said, What shall I give 

‘thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt 
not give me any thing: if thou wilt 
do this thing for me, I will again 
feed and keep thy flock. 

32 I will pass through all thy flock 
to Gay, removing from thence all 
the speckled and spotted cattle, and 
all the brown cattle among the 
sheep, and the spotted and speckled 
among the goats: and of such shall 
“be my “hire. 

33 So shall my righteousness an- 
swer for me in time to come, when 
it shall come for my hire before thy 
face: every one that /s not speckled 
and spotted among the goats, ard 

brown among the sheep, that shall 
be counted stolen with me. 

_ 34 And Laban said, Behold, I 
would it might be according to thy 
word. 

35 And he removed that day the 
he goats that were ringstraked -and 
spotted, and all the she goats that 
were speckled and spotted, and 
every one that had some white in 
it, and all the brown among the 
sheep, and gave them into the 
hand of his sons. 

36 And he set three days’ journey 
betwixt himself and Jacob: and 
Jacob fed the rest of Laban’s flocks. 

37 And Jacob took’ him rods of 
green poplar, and of the hazel and 
Chesnut tree; and pilled white 
strakes in them, and made the 
white appear which was in the rods. 

38 And he set the rods which he 
had pilled before the flocks in the 
gutters in the watering troughs 
when the flocks came to drink, that 


— 


B.C. 1746. 


a Gen.31.8. 


6 Gen.31.9,12. 


¢ v.30. 

d Gen.28.15. 
é vs.2,3. 
fv.4l. 


45 


[31 10 


they should conceive when they 
came to drink. 

39 And the flocks conceived before 
the rods, and brought forth cattle 
bringstraked, speckled, and spotted. 

40 And Jacob did separate the 
lambs, and set the faces of the flocks 
toward the ringstraked, and all the 
brown in the flock of Laban; and 
he put his own flocks by themselves, 
and put them not unto Laban’s 
cattle. 

41 And it came to pass, whenso- 
ever the stronger cattle did con- 
ceive, that Jacob laid the rods 
before the eyes of the cattle in the 
gutters, that they might conceive 
among the rods. 

42 But when the cattle were fee- 
ble, he put them not in: so the 
feebler were Laban’s, and the 
stronger Jacob’s. 

43 And the “man increased ex- 
ceedingly, and had much cattle, and 
maidservants, and menservants, 
and camels, and asses. 


CHAPTER 31. 


ND he heard the words of La- 
ban’s sons, saying, Jacob hath 
taken away all that was our fa- 
ther’s; and of that which was our 
father’s hath he gotten all this 
glory. 

2 And Jacob beheld the counte- 
nance of Laban, and, behold, it was 
not toward him as before. 

3 And the LorD said unto Jacob, 
Return unto the land of thy fathers, 
and to thy kindred; and I will ¢be 
with thee. 

4 And Jacob sent and called Ra- 
chel and Leah to the field unto his 
flock, 

5 And said unto them, I see your 
father’s countenance, that it ss not 
toward me as before; but the God 
of my father ‘hath been with me. 

6. And ye know that with all my 
power I have ‘served your father. 

7 And your father hath deceived 
me, and changed my wages ten 
times; but God suffered him not to 
hurt me. 

8 If he said thus, The speckled 
shall be thy wages; then all the 
cattle bare speckled: and if he said 
thus, The ringstraked shall be thy 
hire; then bare all the cattle ring- 
straked. 

9 Thus God hath taken away the 
cattle of your father, and given 
them to me. 

10 And it came to pass at the time 


31 11] 


lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a 
dream, and, behold, the rams which 


leaped upon the cattle were ring- 


straked, speckled, and grisled 


Parenthesis: the call back to 
Bethel (vs. 11-13). 


11 And the “angel of God spake} 


unto mein a dream, saying, Jacob: 
And I said, Here am I. 

12 And he said, Lift up now thine 
eyes, and see, all the rams which. 


unto thee. 

13, 1 am the 5God of Beth-el, 
where thou anointedst the pillar, 
and where thou vowedst a vow 
unto me: now arise, get thee out 
from this land, and ‘return unto the 
land of thy kindred. 


The flight of Jacob. | 


14 And Rachel and Leah an-! 
swered and said unto him, Js there 
yet any portion or inheritance for 
us in our father’s house? 

15 Are we not counted of him 
strangers? for he hath sold us, and 
hath quite devoured also our 
money. 

16 For all the riches which God 
hath taken from our father, that is 
our’s, and our children’s: now then, 
whatsoever God hath said unto 
thee, do. 

17 Then Jacob rose up, and set 
his sons and his wives upon camels; 

18 And he carried away all his. 
cattle, and all his goods which he 
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, 
which he had gotten in Padan- 
aram, for to go to Isaac his father 
in the land of Canaan. 

19 And Laban went to shear his 
sheep: and Rachel had stolen the 
images that were her father’s. 

20 And Jacob stole away un- 
awares to Laban the Syrian, in 
that he told him not that he fled. 

21 So he fled with all that he had; 
and he rose up, and passed over the 
river, and set his face toward the 
mount Gilead. 

22 And it was told Laban on the 
third day that Jacob was fled. 

23 And he took his brethren with 
him, and pursued after him seven! 
days’ journey; and they overtook 
him in the mount Gilead. 

24 And God came to Laban the 
Syrian in a ¢dream by night, and 


GENESIS. 


that the cattle conceived, that I} B.c. 1739. 


@ Heb.1.4, 
note, 


6 Gen.28.18 
¢ v.3. 
d Gen.20.3: 


év.19; 


[31 36 


said unto him, Take heed that thou 
‘speak not to Jacob either good or 


ad. 

25 Then Laban overtook Jacob. 
Now Jacob had pitched his tent in 
the mount: and Laban with his 
brethren pitched in the mount of 
Gilead. 

26 And Laban said to Jacob, 
What hast thou done, that thou 
hast stolen away unawares to me, 
and carried away my daughters, asi 
captives taken with the sword? 

27 Wherefore didst thou flee away’ 
secretly, and steal away from me; 
and didst not tell me, that I might 
have sent thee away with mirth, 
and with songs, with tabret, and 
with harp? 

28 And hast not suffered me to 
kiss my sons and my daughters? 
thou hast now done foolishly in so: 
doing. 

29 It is in the power of my hand 
to do you hurt: but the God of your 
father spake. unto me yesternight, 
saying, Take thou heed that thou 
speak not to Jacob either good or 


ad, 

30 And now, though thou would- 
est needs be gone, because thou sore 
longedst after thy father’s house, 
yet wherefore hast thou ¢stolen my’ 
gods? 

31 And Jacob answered and said 
to Laban, Because I was afraid: for 
I said, Peradventure thou wouldest: 
take by force thy daughters from 


me. 

32 With whomsoever thou findest 
thy gods, let him not live: before 
our brethren discern thou what is 
thine with me, and take it to thee. 
For Jacob knew not that Rachel 
had stolen them. 

33 And Laban went into Jacob’s 
tent, and into Leah’s tent, and into 
the two maidservants’ tents; but he 
found them not. Then went he 
out of Leah’s tent, and entered into 
Rachel’s tent. 

_34 Now Rachel had taken the 
images, and put them in the camel’s 
furniture, and sat upon them. And 
Laban searched all the tent, but 
found them not. 

_35 And she said to her father, Let 
it not displease my lord that I can- 
not rise up before thee; for tHe cus- 
tom of women is upon me. And he 
searched, but found not the images. 

36 And Jacob was wroth, and 
chode with Laban: and Jacob an- 
swered and said to Laban, What is 
my trespass? what is my sin, that 


thou hast so hotly pursued after 
sme? 

37 Whereas thou hast searched all 

my stuff, what hast thou found of 
all thy household stuff? set it here 
before my brethren and thy breth- 
ten, that they may judge betwixt 
us both. 
38 This twenty years have I been 
with thee; thy ewes and thy she 
goats have not cast their young, 
vand the rams of thy flock have I 
not eaten. 

39 That which was torn of beasts 
d brought not unto thee; I bare the 
“loss of it; of my hand didst thou 
Tequire it, whether stolen by day, 
or stolen by night. 

40 Thus I was; in the day the 
drought consumed me, and the 
frost by night; and my sleep de- 
parted from mine eyes. 

41 Thus have I been twenty years 
in thy house; I served thee fourteen 
years for thy two daughters, and 
Six years for thy cattle: and thou 
hast changed my wages ten times. 

42 Except the God of my father, 

the God of Abraham, and the fear 
of Isaac, had been with mé, surely 
thou hadst sent me away now 
empty. God hath seen mine afflic- 
tion .and the labour of my hands, 
and rebuked thee yesternight. 
43 And Laban answered and said 
nto Jacob, These daughters are 
‘my daughters, and these children 
‘are my children, and these cattle 
are my cattle, and all that thou 
seest is mine: and what can I dc 
this day unto these my daughters, 
or unto their children which they 
thave born? 

44 Now therefore come thou, let 
us make a covenant, I and thou; 
and let it be for a witness between 
me and thee. 

45 And Jacob took a stone, and 
set it up for.a pillar. 

46 And Jacob said unto his breth- 
ten, Gather:stones; and they took 
stones, and made an heap: and they 
did eat there upon the heap. 

47 And Laban called it ’Jegar- 
sahadutha: but Jacob called it 
Galeed. 

48 And Laban said, This heap rs 
a witness between me and thee this 
day. Therefore was the name of it 
called Galeed; 

49 And dMizpah: for he said, The 
Lorp watch between me and thee, 
when we are absent one from 
another. 

50 If thou shalt afflict my daugh- 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1739. 


a Ex,22.10. 


b Chald. the 
heap of wit- 
ness, 


c Heb. the 
heap of wit- 
ness, 


di.e. beacon, 
in the sense 
of watch- 
tower. 


e Heb.1.4, 
note, 


fie. two 

hosts, or 
bands—the 
visible band, 
Jacob’and 
his servants; 
the invisible 
band, God’s 
angels. Cf. 
2 Ki 6.13-17. 


g i.e. Esau’s 
country. 
Gen.25.30. 
See Gen.36, 
1, note. 


A? 


| Jacob, 


[32 8 


ters, or if thou shalt take other 
wives beside my daughters, no man 
is with us; see, God is witness be- 
twixt me and thee. 

51 And Laban said to Jacob, Be- 
hold this heap, and behold this pil- 
lar, which I have cast betwixt me 
and thee; 

52 This heap be witness, and this 


|pillar be witness, that I will not 


pass over this heap to thee, and 
that thou shalt not pass over this 
heap and this pillar unto me,. for 
harm. 


| 53 The God of Abraham, and the 
\God of Nahor, the God of their fa- 


ther, judge betwixt us. And Jacob 
sware by the fear of his father 
Isaac. 

54 Then Jacob offered sacrifice 
upon the mount, and called his 
brethren to eat bread: and they did 
eat bread, and tarried all night in 
the mount. 

55 And early in the morning 
Laban rose up, and kissed his sons 
and his daughters, and blessed 
them: and Laban departed, and re- 
turned unto his place. 


CHAPTER 32. 


Jacob (‘ ‘supplanter’ *) becomes 
Israel (“a prince with God”). 


gAiND Jacob went on his way, and 
the “angels of God met him. 

2 And when Jacob saw them, he 
said, This zs God’s host: and he 
called the name of that place /Ma- 
hanaim. 

3 And Jacob sent messengers be- 
fore him.to Esau his brother unto 
the land of Seir, the country of 
&Edom. 

4 And he commanded them, say- 
ing, Thus shall ye speak unto my 
lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith 
thus, I have sojourned with Laban, 
and stayed there until now: 

5 And I have oxen, and asses, 
flocks, and menservants, and wo- 
menservants: and I have sent to 
tell my lord, that I may find grace 
in thy sight. 

6 And the messengers returned to 
saying, We came to thy 
brother Esau, and also he cometh 
to meet thee, and four hundred 
men with him. 

7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid 
and distressed: and he divided the 
people that was with him, and the 
flocks, and herds, and the camels, 
into two bands; 

8 And said, If Esau come to the 


ee 


32 9] 


one company, and smite it, then the 
other company which is left shall 
escape. 

9 ee @Jacob said, O God of my 
father Abraham, and God of my fa- 
ther Isaac, the LorpD which saidst 
unto me, Return unto thy country, 
and to thy kindred, and I will deal 
well with thee: 

10 I am not worthy of the least of 
all the mercies, and of all the truth, 
which thou hast shewed unto thy 
servant; for with my staff I passed 
over this Jordan; and now I am 
become two bands. 

11 Deliver me, I pray thee, from 
the hand of my brother, from the 
hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest 
he will come and smite me, and the 
mother with the children. 

12 And thou saidst, I will surely 
do thee good, and make thy seed as 
the sand of the sea, which cannot 
be numbered for multitude. * 

13. And he lodged there that same 
night; and took of that which came 
to his hand a present for Esau his 
brother; 

14 Two hundred she goats, and 
twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, 
and twenty rams, ‘ 

15 Thirty milch camels with their 
colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, 
twenty she asses, and ten foals. 

16 And he delivered them into 
the hand of his servants, every. 
drove by themselves; and said unto 
his servants, Pass over before me, 
and put a space betwixt drove and 
drove. 

17 And he commanded the fore- 
most, saying, When Esau my 
brother meeteth thee, and asketh 
thee, saying, Whose art thou? and 
whither goest thou? and whose are 
these before thee? 

18 Then thou shalt say, They be 
thy servant Jacob’s; it 7s a present 
sent unto my lord Esau: and, be- 
hold, also he is behind us. 

19 And so commanded he the 
second, and the third, and all that 
followed the droves, saying, On this 
manner shall ye speak unto Esau, 
when ye find him. 

20 And say ye moreover, Behold, 
thy servant Jacob is behind us. 
For he said, I will appease him 


GENESIS. 


SSS ee 
withthe present that goeth beforeme, 


B.C. 1739. 


a Bible pray- 
ers (O.T.). 
vs.9-11; Ex. 
32.11. 
15.2; Hab.3. 
1-16.) 


b Jacob’s cri- 
sis. Cf.Josh. 
5.13-15; Job 
42.5,6; Isa. 
6.1-8; Jer.1. 
4-9; Ezek.1, 
28; 2.1-7; 
Dan.10.1-12; 
Acts 9.1-6; 
Rev.1.13-18. 


ci.e. a prince 
of (or with) 
God. 

di.e. the face 
of God. 

e Ex.24.11; 
33.20; Deut. 


Isa.6.5; 
John 1.18. 


(Gen, 


(33.1 


and afterward I will see his face; 
peradventure he will accept of me. 

21 So went the present over be- 
fore him: and himself lodged that 
night in the company. F 

22 And he rose up that night, and 
took his two wives, and his two 
womenservants, and his eleven 
sons, and passed over the ford Jab- 

ok. 

23 And he took them, and sent 
them over the brook, and sent over 
that he had. 

24 And Jacob was left alone; 2and 
there wrestled a man with him until 
the breaking of the day. 

25 And when he saw that he pre- 
vailed not against him, he touched 
the hollow of his thigh; and the hol- 
low of Jacob’s thigh was out of 
joint, as he wrestled with him. 

26 And he said, Let me go, for the 
day breaketh. And he said, I will 
not let thee go, except thou bless 


me. 

27 And he said unto him, What 
is thy name? And he said, Jacob. 

28 And he said, Thy name shall 
be called no more 1Jacob, but <Is- 
rael: for as a prince hast thou 
power with God and with men, and 
hast prevailed. 

29 And Jacob asked Aim, and 
said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy 
name. And he said, Wherefore is 
it that thou dost ask after my 
name? And he blessed him there. 

30 And Jacob called the name of 
the place ¢Peniel: for I have ¢seen 
God face to face, and my life is 
preserved. 

31 And as he passed over Penuel 
the sun rose upon him, and he 
halted upon his thigh. 

32 Therefore the children of Is- 
rael eat not of the sinew which 
shrank, which is upon the hollow of 
the thigh, unto this day: because he 
touched the hollow of Jacob’s thigh 
in the sinew that shrank. 


CHAPTER 33. 


Jacob meets Esau, 


AND Jacob lifted up his eyes, and 
looked, and, behold, Esau 
came, and with him four hundred 


1 Both names are applied to the nation descended from Jacob. When used char- 


acteristically “Jacob” is the name for the n 
Jacob; “Israel” for the spiritual part of the 


was sent to all the people, ‘Jacob,’ 


hended by the spiritual part of the people. 


summary). 


> but it 


48 


atural posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and 
nation. See, e.g. Isa. 9.8. The “word” | 
“lighted upon Israel,” i.e. was compre: | 
See “Israel” (Gen. 12. 2,3; Rom, 11. 26, 


men. 
unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and 
unto the two handmaids. 

2 And he put the handmaids and 
‘their children foremost, and Leah 
and her children after, and Rachel 
and Joseph hindermost. 

3 And he passed over before them, 
and bowed himself to the ground 
seven times, until he came near to 
his brother. 

4 And Esau ran to meet him, and 
embraced him, and fell on his neck, 
and kissed him: and they wept. 

5 And he lifted up his eyes, and 
saw the women and the children;; 
and said, Who are those with thee? 
Andhesaid, The children which God 
hath graciously given thy servant. 

6 Then the handmaidens came 
near, they and their children, and 
they bowed themselves. 

7 And Leah also with her children 
came near, and bowed themselves: 
and after came Joseph near and Ra- 
chel, and they bowed themselves. 

8 And he said, What meanest 
thou by all this drove which I met? 
And he said, These are to find 
grace in the sight of my lord. 

9 And Esau said, I have enough, 
my brother; keep that thou hast 
unto thyself. 

10 And Jacob said, Nay, I pray 
thee, if now I have found grace in 
thy sight, then receive my present 
at my hand: for therefore I have 
seen thy face, as though I had seen 
the face of God, and thou wast 
pleased with me. 

11 Take, I pray thee, my blessing 
that is brought to thee; because God 
hath dealt graciously with me, and 
because I have enough. And he 
urged Kim, and he took it. 

12 And he said, Let us take our 
journey, and let us go, and I will 
go before thee. 

13 And he said unto him, ¢My 
lord knoweth that the children are 
tender, and the flocks and herds 
with young are with me: and if 
men should overdrive them one 
day, all the flock will die. 

‘14 Let my lord, I pray thee, pass 
over before his servant: and I will 
lead on softly, according as the cat- 
tle that goeth before me and the 
children be able to endure, until I 
come unto my lord unto Seir. 

15 And Esau said, Let me now 
leave with thee some of the folk 
that are with me. And he said, 
What needeth it? let me find grace 
in the sight of my lord. 


| 


And he divided the children} _ 


GENESIS. 


a Not all at 
once does 
“Jacob” 
cease to 
dominate the 
walk of “Is- 
rael.” Cf. 
Gen.35 1-10, 
where the 
walk be- 
comes ac- 
cording to 
the new 
name, 


bie. booths 
te} 
branches). 


c Called “Sy- 
chem,” Acts 
7.16. 


di.e. God, the 
God of Is- 
rael. Jacob's 
act of faith, 
appropriat- 
ing his new 
name, but 
also claim- 
ing Elohim 
in this new 
sense as the 
God through 
whom alone 
he could 
walk accord- 
ing to his 
new name. 
See Gen.14, 
18-23, note, 
for a similar 
appropria- 
tion by Abra- 
ham. 


49 


[34 10 


16 So Esau returned that day on 
his way unto Seir. 

17 And Jacob journeyed to Suc- 
coth, and built him an house, and 
imade booths for his cattle: there- 
fore the name of the place is called 
’Succoth. 


Jacob’s worship in self-will. 


18 And Jacob came to Shalem, a 
city of Shechem, which is in the 
land of Canaan, when he came from 
Padan-aram; and pitched his tent 
before the city. 

19 And he bought a parcel of a 
field, where he had spread his tent, 
at the hand of the children of 
Hamor, ‘Shechem’s father, for an 
jhundred pieces of money. 

20 And he erected there an altar, 
and called it ¢El-elohe-Israel. 


CHAPTER 34. 


Jacob reaps the harvest of his 
’ evil years (Gal. 6. 7, 8). 


nee Dinah the daughter of 
Leah, which she bare unto 
Jacob, went out to see the daugh- 
ters of the land. 

2 And when Shechem the son of 
‘'Hamor the Hivite, prince of the 
country, saw her, he took her, and 
lay with her, and defiled her. 

3 And his soul clave unto Dinah 
the daughter of Jacob, and he loved 
the damsel, and spake kindly unto 
\the damsel. 

4 And Shechem spake unto his 
father Hamor, saying, Get me this 
damsel to wife. 

5 And Jacob heard that he had 
defiled Dinah his daughter: now 
his sons were with his cattle in the 
field: and Jacob held his peace un- 
til they were come. 

6 And Hamor the father of She- 
chem went out unto Jacob to com- 
mune with him. 

7 And the sons of Jacob came out 
of the field when they heard st: and 
the men were grieved, and they 
were very wroth, because he had 
wrought folly in Israel in lying 
with Jacob’s daughter; which thing 
ought not to be done. 

8 And Hamor communed with 
them, saying, The soul of my son 
Shechem longeth for your daugh- 
ter: I pray you give her him to wife. 

9 And make ye marriages with us. 
and give your daughters unto us, 
and take our daughters unto you. 

10 And ye shall dwell with us: 
and the land shall be before you; 


34 11] 


GENESIS 


[35 6 


So ee 


dwell. and trade ye therein, and get 
you possessions therein. 

11 And Shechem said unto. her 
father and unto her brethren, Let me 
find grace in your eyes, and what 
ye shall say unto me’I: will give. 

12 Ask me never so much dowry 
and. gift, and I will give according 
as ye shall say unto me: but give 
me the damsel to wife. 

13: And the sons of Jacob an- 
swered Shechem and Hamor his 
father deceitfully, and: said, because 
he had defiled Dinah their sister: 

14 And they said unto them, We 
cannot do this thing, to give our 
sister to one that is uncircumcised; 
for that were a reproach unto-us: 

15 But in this will we consent un- 
to you: If ye will be as we be, that 
every male of you be circumcised; 

16 Then will we give our daugh- 
ters unto you, and we will take your 
daughters to us, and we will dwell 
with you, and we will become one 
people. 


17 But if ye will not hearken unto 
us, to be circumcised; then will we 
take our daughter, and we will be 
gone. 

18 And their words: pleased Ha- 
mor, and Shechem Hamor’s son. 

19 And the young man deferred 
not to do the thing, because’ he had 
delight in Jacob’s daughter: and he 
was more honourable than all the 
house of his father. 

20 And Hamor and Shechem his 
son came unto the gate of their city, 
and communed with the men of 
their city, saying, 

21 These men are peaceable with 
us; therefore let them dwell in the 
land, and trade therein; for the 
land, behold, rt is large enough for 
them; let us take their daughters 
to us for wives, and let us give 
them our daughters. 

22 Only herein will the men con- 
sent unto us for to dwell with us, 
to be one people, if every male! 
among us be circumcised, as they 
are circumcised. 

23 Shall not their cattle and 
their substance and every beast of 
their’s be our’s? only let us con- 
sent unto them, and they will dwell 
with us. 

24 And unto Hamor and unto 
Shechem his son hearkened all that 
went out of the gate of his city; 
and every male was circumcised, 
all that went out of the gate of his 
city. 

25 And it came to pass on the 


50 


third: day, when they were sore,. 
that. two of the sons of Jacob, Sim-: 


_— 


eon and Levi, Dinah’s brethren, 


took each man his sword, and: came 
upon the city boldly, and’ slew, all 
the males. 

26 And they slew-Hamor and’She. 
chem his son with the edge’ of the 
sword, and took Dinah out of She- 
chem’s house, and went out 

27 The sons of Jacob came upon 
the slain, and spoiled the city, be. 
cause they had defiled their sister 

28 They took their sheep, and 
their oxen, and their asses, and 


that which. was in the city, and 


that which was in the field, 

29 And all their wealth, and all 
their little ones, and their wives 
took they captive, and spoiled even 
all that was in the house, 

30 And Jacob said to Simeon and 
Levi, Ye have troubled me to make 
me to stink among. the inhabitants- 
of the land, among the Canaanites 
and the Perizzites: and I being few 
in number, they shall gather them- 
selves together against me, and slay 
me; and I shall be destroyed, I and 
my house. 

34 And they said, Should he deal 
with our sister as with an harlot? 


CHAPTER 35: 


Jacob’s return to Bethel: com- 
munzion and promise restored. 


Am God said unto Jacob, Arise, 
go up to Beth-el, and dwell 
there: and make there an altar unto» 
God, that appeared unto thee when 
thou fleddest from the face of Esau 
thy brother. 


2 Then Jacob said unto his house: : 


hold, and to all that were with him, 
Put away the strange gods that are 
among you, and be clean. and 
change your garments: 

3 And let us arise, and go up to 
Beth-el; and I will make there an: 
altar unto God, who answered me 
in the day of my distress, and was 
with me in the way which I went. 

4 And they gave unto Jacob alk 
the strange gods which were in 


|their hand, and all their earrings. 


which were in their ears; and Jacob 
hid them under the oak which was 
by Shechem. 


5 And they journeyed: and the 
iterror of God was upon the cities 
that were round about them, and 
they did not pursue after the sons 
of Jacob. 

6 So Jacob came to Luz, which is 


357] GENESIS. 135 29 


in the land of Canaan, that jis,| B.C. 1732. 17 And it came to pass, when she 

Beth-el, he and all the people that was in hard labour, that the mid- 

were with him. wife said unto her, Fear not: thou 
7. And he built there an altar, and shalt have this son also. 

_ called the place 1El-beth-el: because 18 And it came to pass, as her 

there God appeared unto him, when soul was in departing, (for she died) 


he fled from the face of his brother. jthat she called his name ¢Ben-oni; 

8 But Deborah Rebekah’s nurse {but his father called him?Benjamin. 
died, and she was buried beneath 19 And Rachel died, and was bur- 
Beth-el under an oak: and the name ied in the way to Ephrath, which is 
of it was called ¢Allon-bachuth. Beth-lehem. 

9 And God appeared unto Jacob 20 And Jacob set a pillar upon her 
again, when he came out of Padan- grave: that is the pillar of Rachel’s 
‘aram, and blessed him. f grave unto this day. 

10 And God said unto him, Thy| _ 21 And Israel journeyed, and 
mame is Jacob: thy name shall not spread his tent beyond the tower 
be called any more Jacob, but Israel of Edar. 


shall be thy name: and he called his|¢ feehe ey 22 And it came to pass, when 
name Israel. : , PM8- |Tsrael dwelt in that land, that Reu- 
11 And God said unto him, I am|? The theoph-|ben went and lay with Bilhah his ~ 
‘God Almighty: be fruitful and mul-/ anes. roe father’s concubine: and Israel heard 
poly; 2 ete ac eo ome = 127; Rev.1. ne risus the sons of Jacob were 
e of thee, i twelve: 
shall come out of thy loins; ee ! 93 The sons of Leah; Reuben, 
12 And the land which I gave)‘ (fares of). |Jacob’s firstborn, and Simeon, and 
Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will] Ex.3.13-15. |Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and 
give it, and to thy seed after thee} (Gen.1.1, Zebulun: 


will I give the land. Eee 24 The sons of Rachel; Joseph, 
13. And God went up from him in|die.son of {and Benjamin; 

the place where he talked with him.} sorrow. 25 And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s 
14 And Jacob set up a pillar in handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali: 

the place where he talked with him, 26 And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s 

even a pillar of stone: and he handmaid; Gad, and Asher: these 

poured a 2drink-offering thereon, are the sons of Jacob, which were 


born to him in Padan-aram. 
Death of Isaac 


and he poured oil thereon. 
15 And Jacob called the name of 
_the place where God spake with 


him, Beth-el. pee And J nie came uae Iban e 

° ather unto Mamre, unto the city o: 

Death of oe and birth of |Arbah, which is Hebron, where 

el kevea stat ‘Abraham and Isaac sojourned. 

16 And they journeyed from | 28 And the days of Isaac were an 
Beth-el; and there was but a little hundred and fourscore years. 

way to come to Ephrath: and 29 And Isaac gave up the ghost, 

Rachel travailed. and she had hard and died, and was gathered unto 

“labour. his people, being old and full of 


lie. the God of Bethel. Cf. Gen. 28. 19, There it was the place as the 
scene of the ladder-vision which impressed Jacob. He called the place “Bethel,” 
i.e. the house of God. Now it is the God of the place, rather than the place, and 
he calls it El-Bethel, i.e. “the God of the house of God.” Cf. Gen. 33. 20, ref. 

2 The first mention of the drink-offering. It is not mentioned among the Levit- 
ical offerings of Lev. 1.-7., though included in the instructions for sacrifice in the 
land (Num. 15. 5-7). It was always ‘“‘poured out,’’ never drank, and may be con- 
sidered a type of Christ in the sense of Psa. 22. 14; Isa. 53. 12 ; , 

3i.e. son of my right hand. Benjamin, ‘“‘son of sorrow” to his mother, but 
“son of my right hand’? to his father, becomes thus a double type of Christ. As 
Ben-oni He was the suffering One because of whom a sword pierced His mother’s 
heart (Lk. 2. 35), as Benjamin, head of the warrior tribe (Gen. 49. 27), firmly 
joined to Judah the kingly tribe (Gen. 49. 8-12, 1 Ki. 12. 21), he becomes a type 
of the victorious One. It is noteworthy that Benjamin was especially honoured 
among the Gentiles (Gen. 45. 22). j 

So manifold are the distinctions of Chnst that many personal types of Him 
are needed. Joseph is most complete, Benjamin standing only for Christ the sor- 
towful One (Isa. 53. 3, 4) yet to have power on earth. Cf. Gen. 43. 34, note. 

$1 


Any 


tia a 

36 1] GENESIS. (36 27 
q i Esau and Jacob|_B.c. 1796._|Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah 

i eae ae : the daughter of Zibeon, Esau’s wife: 
. and she Bere ee Jeush, and 
HAP’ 3 Jaalam, and Korah. 

bs ee 15 These were dukes of the sons of 

The generations of Esau Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the first- 
Edom). born son of Esau; duke Temans duke 

the generations Omar, duke Zepho, e Kenaz, 
N “ete is ‘doen 16 Duke Korah, duke Gatam, 
2 Esau took his wives of the and duke Amalek: these are the 
daughters of Canaan; Adah the dukes that came of Eliphaz in the 
daughter of Elon the Hittite, and land of Edom; these were the sons 
Aholibamah the daughter of Anah of Adah. 
the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite; 17 And these are the sons of 
3 And Bashemath Ishmael’s Reuel Esaun’s son; duke Nahath, 
daughter, sister of Nebajoth. duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke 
4 And Adah bare to Esau Eli- Mizzah: these are the dukes that 
phaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel; came of Reuel in the land of Edom; 
5 And Aholibamah bare Jeush, these are the sons of Bashemath 
“and Jaalam, and Korah: these are Esau’s wife. 

the sons of Esau, which were born! 18 And these are the sons of 
unto him in the land of Canaan. | Aholibamah Esau’s wife; duke 
6 And Esau took his wives, and| Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah: 
his sons, and his daughters, and all these were the dukes that came 
the persons of his house, and his of Aholibamah the daughter of 


cattle, and all his beasts, and all his/¢4 Bee SEES, Anah, Esau’s wife. 

substance, which he had got in the) "°° 19 These are the sons of Esau, 
land of Canaan; and went into the|® Lit. chiefs of|who 1s Edom, and these are their 
country from the face of his brother) thousands. |dukes. 


Jacob. |e Lit. Rock 20 These are the sons of Seir the 
7 For their riches were more than| dweller. ‘Horite, who inhabited the land; 

that they might dwell together: Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and 

and the land wherein they were Anah, 

strangers could not bear them be- 21 And Dishon, and Ezer, and Di- 

cause of their cattle. shan: these are the dukes of the 

8 Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Horites, the children of Seir in the 
Esau is Edom. land of Edom. 

9 And these are the generations 22 And the children of Lotan were 
of Esau the father of the Edomites Hori and Hemam; and Lotan’s sis- 
in mount Seir: ter was Timna. 

10 These are the names of Esau’s 23 And the children of Shobal 
sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the were these; Alvan, and Manahath, 
wife of Esau, Reuel the son of and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam. 
Bashemath the wife of Esau. 24 And these are the children of 

11 And the sons of Eliphaz were Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this 
Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, was that Anah that found the 
and Kenaz. | mules in the wilderness, as he fed 

12 And Timna was concubine to the asses of Zibeon his father.. 
Eliphaz Esau’s son; and she bare 25 And the children of Anah were 
to Eliphaz “Amalek: these were the these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the 
sons of Adah Esau’s wife. daughter of Anah. 

13 And these are the sons of! | 26 And these are the children of 
Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Sham- Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and 
mah, and Mizzah: these were the Ithran, and Cheran. 
sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife. 27 The children of Ezer are these; 

14 And these were the sons of Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan. 


1Edom (called also “Seir,” Gen. 32. 3; 36. 8) is the name of the coun 
lying south of the ancient kingdom of Judah, and extending from the Dead Beat 
the Gulf of Akaba. It includes the ruins of Petra, and is bounded on thé north by 
Moab. Peopled by descendants of Esau (Gen. 36. 1-19), Edota has a remark- 
able prominence in the prophetic word as (together with Moab) the scene of the 
final destruction of Gentile world-power in the day of the Lord. See ‘‘Armaged- 
don” (Rev. 16. 14; Rev. 19. 21) and ‘Times of the Gentiles” (Lk. 21. 24; Rev. 
16. 14). Cf. Psa. 137, 7: Oba. 8-16: Isa. 34. 1-8; 63. 1-6; Jer. 49. 14-22; Ezk. 25. 19-14, 
52 | 


36 28) GENESIS. — Pn) Paz 


41 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, 
duke Pinon, | 

42 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, 
duke Mibzar, ; 

43 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: 
these be the dukes of Edom, accord- 
ing to their habitations in the land 
of their possession: he is Esau the 
father of the Edomites. 


CHAPTER 37. 
The history of Jacob resumed. 


Nhe Jacob dwelt in the land 
wherein his father was a stran- 
ger, in the land of Canaan. 


Joseph, the beloved of his father. 


2 These are the generations of Ja- 
Pcieaste cob. *Joseph, being seventeen years 
and Gen.40. |Old, was feeding the flock with his 
5-23. brethren; and the lad was with the 
CE. Gena? sons of Bilhah, and with the sons 
41; John 15. |Of Zilpah, his father’s wives: and 
18-20. ay cepa brought unto his father their 
evil report. 
c$ee Gen-#4- | 3 Now Israel loved Joseph more 
5; Phil.2.10. |than all his children, because he 
was the son of his old age: and he 
made him a coat of many colours. 
4 And when his brethren saw that 
their father loved him more than all 
his brethren, they hated him, and 
could not speak peaceably unto 


B.C. 1780. 


came of the Horites; duke Lotan, 
duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke 


nah, 

30 Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke 
Dishan: these are the dukes that 
came of Hori, among their dukes in 
the land of Seir. 

31 1And these are the kings that 
teigned in the land of Edom, be- 
fore there reigned any king over 
the children of Israel. 

32 And Bela the son of Beor 
reigned in Edom: and the name of 
his city was Dinhabah. 

33 And Bela.died, and Jobab the 
son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in 
his stead. 

34 And Jobab died, and Husham 
of the land of Temani reigned in his 
stead. 

35 And Husham died, and Hadad 
the son of Bedad, who smote Midian 
in the field of Moab, reigned in his 
stead: and the name of his city was 
Avith. 

36 And Hadad died, and Samlah 
of Masrekah reigned in his stead. 

37 And Samlah died, and Saul of 
‘Rehoboth Ay the river reigned in 
his stead. 

38 And Saul died, and Baal-hanan 
the son of Achbor reigned in his 
stead. 

89 And Baal-hanan the son of 
Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in 
his stead: and the name of his city 
was Pau; and his wife’s name was 
Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, 
the daughter of Mezahab. 

40 And these are the names of the 
dukes that came of Esau, accord- 

‘ing to their families, after their 
places, by their names; duke Tim- 
nah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth, 


im. 

5 And 2Joseph dreamed a dream, 
and he told it his brethren: and 
they hated him yet the more. 

6 And he said unto them, Hear, I 
pray you, this dream which I have 
dreamed: 

7 For, behold, we were binding 
sheaves in the field, and, lo, my 
sheaf arose, and also stood upright; 
and, behold, your sheaves stood 
round about, and made “obeisance 
to my sheaf. 


1Jt is characteristic of Scripture that the kings of Edom should be enumerated 
before the kings of Israel. The principle is stated in 1 Cor. 15. 46. First things 
are ‘natural,’ man’s best, and always fail; second things are “‘spiritual,’’ God’s 
things, and succeed. Adam—Christ; Cain—Abel; Cain’s posterity—Seth’s posterity; 
‘Saul—David; Israel—the true Church, etc. ‘ ; 

2While it is nowhere asserted that Joseph was a type of Christ, the analogies 
are too numerous to be accidental. They are: (1) both were especial objects of a 
father’s love (Gen. 37. 3; Mt. 3. 17; John 3. 35; 5. 20); (2) both were hated by 
their brethren (Gen. 37. 4; John 15. 25); (3) the superior claims of both were 
rejected by their brethren (Gen. 37. 8; Mt. 21. 37-39; John 15. 24, 25); (4) the 
brethren of both conspired against them to slay them (Gen..37. 18; Mt. 26. 3, 4); 
(5) Joseph was, in intent and figure, slain by his brethren, as was Christ (Gen. 37. 
24; Mt. 27. 35-37); (6) each became a blessing among the Gentiles, and gained a 
Gentile bride (Gen. 41. 1-45; Acts 15. 14; Eph. 5. 25-32); (7) as Joseph reconciled 
his brethren to himself, and afterward exalted them, so will it be with Christ and 
His Jewish brethren (Gen. 45. 1-15; Deut. 30. 1-10; Hos. 2. 14-18; Rom. 11. 1, 15, 


25, 26). Pe 


37 8] GENESIS. ; [87 x 


21 And Reuben udeed it, and he © 
‘delivered him out of their hands; 
and said, Let us not kill him. 

22 And Reuben said unto them, — 
Shed no blood, but cast him into 
this pit that zs in the wilderness, 
and lay no hand upon him; that — 
he might rid him out of their hands, 
to deliver him to his father 
again. 

23. And it came to pass, when Jo- 
seph ph po se rs etre 

that they /stript Joseph out of his. 
eee gen eng the slevenineass coat, his coat of many colours that 

10 And he told it to his father, lots inca ae took him! ‘andieuee 
and to his brethren: and his father MA Ke 
rebuked him, and said unto him, pin ee Le ovis aoe ito 
What ig ie Cream be ete ie at zat d they ahenue Otte) ke 
dreamed? a and thy mother : a 
and thy brethren indeed come to bread: and they lifted up their 


bow down ourselves to thee to the eyes and looked, and, behold, a 


Joseph hated wind rejected by| B.C. 1729. 
his brethren. 


8 And his brethren said to him, 
Shalt thou indeed reign over us?) 


yet the more for his dreams, and} 
for his words. ! 
9 And he dreamed yet another 
dream, and told it his brethren, 
and said, Behold, I have dreamed 
a dream more; and, behold, the sun 


garth? Seer = eo oe from 
’ F unites ee ilead wit eir camels bearing 
rt And his brethren envied him; spicery and balm and myrrh, going 
ut his father observed the saying. tos en i dowu to Exyot 
1Z And his brethren went to feed a John 19.15. 26 etn Judah said faa his breth- : 
their father’s flock in Shechem. b Mt.27.17,18; ren, What profit is if if we slay 
13 ‘And Israel said unto Joseph,| Acts 7.9. hie EA sg? ae conceal his blogaal 
Do not thy brethren feed the flock 7 S : 


Z : is- | 27 Come, and let us sell him to 
in Shechem? come, and I will send|¢ Jsrae! (Ais oa: ; 
thee unto them. And he said tol 1338:¢en. |the Ishmeelites, and let not our 


} : .,,/hand be upon him; for he is our 

46.1-6. (Gen. ; . 
Ri alee aie Rin Gacy cee 12.2;3; Rom. brother and our flesh. And his ~ 
thee, see whether it be well with) 777°? brethren were content. 


d@ 1 Sam.17.17, ; 
flocks; and. bring me w oceans 18; Li.20. Joseph, drawn up from the pit, 
So he 4sent him out of the vale of oie: ea goes to the Gentiles. 


Hebron, and he came to Shechem. 


eMt.21.38; 28 Then there passed by Midian- 

pan And a certain Peeps 26.3,4. ites merchantmen; and they drew 

the field: and the man asked him,|fMt.27.28. and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, 

saying, What seekest thou? and &sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites. 

16 And he said, I seek my breth-|?™*?”° for twenty pieces of silver: and 
ren: tell me, I pray thee, where they brought Joseph into Egypt. 


29 And Reuben returned unto the 
pit; and, behold, Joseph was not 
in the pit; and he rent his clothes 


they feed their flocks. 
17 And the man said, They are 
departed hence: for I heard them 


say, Let to D 30 And he returned unto his 
ent after are eer oe brethren, and said, The child is not; 
found them in Dothan. and I, whither shall I Zo? 

18 And when they saw him afart 31 And they took Joseph’s coat, 
off, even before he came near unto! mre ere a ue of A eee and 
them, they ¢c ippe: e coat in the bloo 
to slay h te onspired against him) 32 And they sent the coat of 

19 And they said one to another,! many colours, and they brought it 
Behold, this dreamer cometh. to their father; and said, This have 


we found: know now whether it be 


Joseph cast into the place of } thy son’s coat or no. 


death. 33. And he knew it, and said, It fs 
my son’s coat; an evil beast hath 

20 Come now therefore, and let us! devoured him; Joseph is without 

slay him, and cast him into some, doubt rent in pieces. 

pit, and we will say, Some evil) 34 And Jacob rent his clothes, 

beast hath devoured him: and we! and put sackcloth upon his loins, 

shall see what will become of his} and mourned for his son many’ 


dreams, days. 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1729. 


35 And all his sons and all his 
daughters rose up to comfort him; 
but he refused to be comforted; and 
he said, For I will go down into 
the ¢grave unto my son mourning. 
Thus his father wept for him. 

36 And the Midianites sold him 
into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer 
ef Pharaoh’s, and captain of the 
guard. 


CHAPTER 38 


_ Parenthesis: the shame of 
Judah. 


A ND it came to pass at that time, 

: that Judah went down from 
his brethren, and turned in to a 
certain Adullamite, whosé name 
was Hirah, 

2 And Judah saw there a daugh- 
ter of a certain Canaanite, whose 
name was Shuah; and he took her, 
and went in unto her. 

3 And she conceived, and bare a 

- son; and he called his name Er. 

4 And she conceived again, and 
bare a son; and she called his name 
Onan. 

5 And she yet again conceived, 
and bare a son; and called his 
name Shelah: and he was at Che- 
zib, when she bare him. 

6 And Judah took a wife for Er 
his firstborn, whose name was Ta- 


amar. 
7 And Er, Judah’s firstborn, was 
wicked in the sight of the “Lorp; 
and the LorpD slew him. 
8 And Judah said unto Onan, Go; 
in unto thy brother’s wife, and 
marry her, and raise up seed to thy 


a Heb. sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note, 


b1 Chr.2.3 
¢ Lit. was evil 


in the eyes 
of the Lord. 


d Lit. become 
acontempt. 


should not be his; and it came to| 
pass, when he went in unto his) 
brother’s wife, that he spilled.7t.on 
the ground, lest that he should give 
seed to his brother ‘ 
10 And the thing which he did 
displeased the LoRD: wherefore 
the slew him also. f 
11 Then said Judah to Tamar his 
daughter in law, Remain a widow 
at thy father’s house, till Shelah 
my son be grown: for he said, Lest 
peradventure he die also, as his 
brethren did. And Tamar went 
and-dwelt in her father’s house. 
12 And in process of time the 
daughter of Shuah Judah’s wife 
died; and Judah was comforted, 
and went up unto his sheepshearers 
to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah 
the Adullamite, = 


(38 25 


13 And it was told Tamar, saying, 


Behold thy father in law goeth up 
to Timnath to shear his sheep. 

14 And she put her widow’s gar- 
iments off from her, and covered her 
with a vail, and wrapped herself, 
and sat in an open place, which is 
by the way to Timnath; for she 
saw that Shelah was grown, and 
she was not given unto him to wife. 

15 When Judah saw her, he 
thought her to be an harlot; be- 
cause she had covered her face. 

16 And he turned unto her by the 
way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, 
let me come in unto thee; (for he 
knew not that she was his daughter 
in law.) And she said, What wilt 
thou give me, that thou mayest 
come in unto me? 

17 And he said, I will send thee a 
kid from the flock. And she said, 
Wilt thou give me a pledge, till 
thou send it? 

18 And he said, What pledge shall 
I give thee? And she said, Thy 
signet, and thy bracelets, and thy 
staff that zs in thine hand. And 
he gave it her, and came in unto 
her, and she conceived by him. 

19 And she arose, and went away, 
and laid by her vail from her, and 
put on the garments of her widow- 
hood. 

20 And Judah sent the kid by the 
hand of his friend the Adullamite, 
to receive his pledge from the wo- 
man’s hand: but he found her not. 

21 Then he asked the men of that 
place, saying, Where is the harlot, 
that was openly by the way side? 
And they said, There was no harlot 
in this place. 

22 And he returned to Judah, and 
said, I cannot find her; and also 
the men of the place said, that 
there was no harlot in this place. 

23 And Judah said, Let her take 
it to her, lest we ¢be shamed: be- 
hold, I sent this kid, and thou hast 
not found her. 

24 And it came to pass about 
three months after, that it was told 
Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter 
in law hath played the harlot; and 
also, behold, she is with child by 
whoredom. And Judah said, Bring 
her forth, and let her be burnt. 

25 When she was brought forth, 
she sent to her father in law, say 
ing, By the man, whose these are, 
am I with child: and she said, 
Discern, I pray thee, whose are 
these, the signet, and bracelets, and 
staff, 


38 26] 


26 And Judah acknowledged 
them, and said, She hath been more 
righteous than I; because that I 
gave her not to Shelah my son. 
And he knew her again no more. 

27 And it came to pass in the 
time of her travail, that, behold, 
twins were in her womb. 

28 And it came to pass, when she 
travailed, that the one put out Ais 
hand: and the midwife took and 
bound upon his hand a scarlet 
thread, saying, This came out first. 

29 And it came to pass, as he drew 
back his hand, that, behold, his 
brother came out: and she said, 
How hast thou broken forth? this 
breach be upon thee: therefore his 
name was called Pharez. 

30 And afterward came out his 
brother, that had the scarlet thread 
upon his hand: and his name was 
called Zarah. 


CHAPTER 39. 


Joseph tested by adversity. 


(AND Joseph was brought down 
to Egypt; and Potiphar, an 
officer of Pharaoh, captain of the 
guard, an Egyptian, “bought him 
of the hands of the Ishmeelites, 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1727. 


a Psa. 105.17. 


b Gen.18.26; 
30.27; 2 Sam. 
6.1i. 


which had brought him down! ¢ Lev.20.10. 


thither. 

2 And the Lorp was with Joseph, 
and he was a prosperous man; and 
he was in the house of his master 
the Egyptian. 

3 And his master saw that the 
LORD was with him, and that the 
LORD made all that he did to pros- 
per in his hand. 

4 And Joseph found grace in his 
sight, and he served him: and he 
made him overseer over his house, 
and all that he had he put into his 
hand. 

5 And it came to pass from the 
time that he had made him over- 
seer in his house, and over all that 
he had, that the Lorp ‘blessed the 
Egyptian’s house for Joseph’s sake; 
and the blessing of the LorD was 


- upon all that he had in the house, 


and in the field, 

6 And he left all that he had in 
Joseph’s hand; and he knew not 
ought he had, save the bread which 
he did eat. And Joseph was a 
goodly person, and well favoured. 

7. And it came to pass after these 
things, that his master’s wife cast 
her eyes upon Joseph; and she 
said, Lie with me, 


d Psa.51.4. 


e Dan.1.9; 
Acts 7.9,10. 


56 


8 But he refused, and said unto 


his master’s wife, Behold, my mas- 
ter wotteth not what zs with me in 
the house, and he hath committed 
all that he hath to my hand; ; 

9 There is none greater in this 
house than I; neither hath he kept 
back any thing from me but thee, 
because thou art his wife: how 
then can I do this great ‘wicked- 
ness, and sin ¢against God? 

10 And it came to pass, as she 
spake to Joseph day by day, that 
he hearkened not unto her, to lie 
by her, or to be with her. : 

11 And it came to pass about this 
time, that Joseph went into the 
house to do his business; and there 
was none of the men of the house 
there within. ; 

12 And she caught him by his gar- 
ment, saying, Lie with me: and he 
left his garment in her hand, and 
fled, and got him out. 

13 And it came to pass, when she 
saw that he had left his garment in 
her hand, and was fled forth, 

14 That she called unto the men 
of her house, and spake unto them, 
saying, See, he hath brought in an 
Hebrew unto us to mock us; he 
came in unto me to lie with me, 
and I cried with a loud voice: 

15 And it came to pass, when he 
heard that I lifted up my voice and 
cried, that he left his garment with 
me, and fled, and got him out. 

16 And she laid up his garment 
by her, until his lord came home. 

17 And she spake unto him ac- 
cording to these words, saying, The 
Hebrew servant, which thou hast 
brought unto us, came in unto me 
to mock me: 

18 And it came to pass, as I lifted 
up my voice and cried, that he left 
his garment with me, and fled 
out. 

19 And it came to pass, when his 
master heard the words of his wife, 
which she spake unto him, saying, 
After this manner did thy. servant 
to me; that his wrath was kindled. 

20 And Joseph’s master took him, 
and put him into the prison, a place 
where the king’s prisoners were 
bound: and he was there in the 
prison. 

21 But the Lorp was with 
Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and 
gave him ¢favour in the sight of the 
keeper of the prison. 

22 And the keeper of the prison 
committed to Joseph’s hand all the 
prisoners that were in the prison; 


Oi ae a aaa eof 
39 23] f 


and whatsoever they did there, he 
was the doer of it. 

23 The keeper of the prison looked 
not to any thing that was under his 
hand; because the LoRD was with 
him, and that which he did, the 
LoRD made it to prosper. 


GENESIS. 


CHAPTER 40. 


ND it came to pass after these 

things, that the butler of the 
king of Egypt and Ais baker had 
offended their lord the king of 
Egypt. 

2 And Pharaoh was wroth against 
two of his officers, against the chief 
of the butlers, and against the chief 
of the bakers. 

3 And he put them in ward in the 
house of the captain of the guard, 
into the prison, the place where 
Joseph was bound. 

4 And the captain of the guard 
charged Joseph with them, and he 
served them: and they continued a 
season in ward. 

5 And they dreamed a dream both 
of them, each man his dream, in 
one night, each man according to 
the interpretation of his dream, the 
butler and the baker of the king of 
Egypt, which were bound in the 
prison. 

6 And Joseph came in unto them 
in the morning, and looked upon 
them, and, behold, they were sad. 

7 And he asked Pharaoh’s officers 
that were with him in the ward of 
his lord’s house, saying, Wherefore 
look ye so sadly to day?- 

8 And they said unto him, We 
have dreamed a dream, and there 
is no interpreter of it. And Joseph 

_said unto them, Do not Yinterpreta- 
tions belong to God? tell me them, 
I pray you. 2 

9 And the chief butler told his 
dream to Joseph, and said to him, 
In my dream, behold, a vine was 
before me; 

10 And in the vine were three 
branches: and it was as though it 
budded, and her blossoms shot 
forth; and the clusters thereof 
brought forth ripe grapes: _ 

11 And Pharaoh’s cup was in my 
hand: and I took the grapes, and 
pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, 
and I gave the cup into Pharaoh’s 
hand. f 

12 And Joseph said unto him, 
This is the ‘interpretation of it: 
The three branches are three days: 

13 Yet within three days. shall 


a Gen.39.20, 
23. 


b Dan.2.20-22. 
¢ Dan.2 36. 


d 2 Ki.25.27; 
Jer.52.31. 


e Neh.2.1. 


57 


B.C. 1729. 


[41 3 


Pharaoh lift up thine “head, and 
restore thee unto thy place: and 
thou shalt deliver Pharaoh’s cup 
into his hand, after the former 
manner when thou wast his butler. 

14 But think on me when it shall 
be well with thee, and shew kind- 
ness, I pray thee, unto me, and 
make mention of me unto Pharaoh, 
and bring me out of this house: 

15 For indeed I was stolen away 
out of the land of the Hebrews: 
and here also have I done nothing 
that they should put me into the 
dungeon. 

16 When the chief baker saw that 
the interpretation was good, he 
said unto Joseph, I also was in my 
dream, and, behold, J had three 
white baskets on my head: 

17 And in the uppermost basket 
there was of all manner of bake- 
meats for Pharaoh; and the birds 
did eat them out of the basket upon 
my head. 

18 And Joseph answered and 
said, This zs the interpretation 
thereof: The three baskets are 
three days: 

19 Yet within three days shall 
Pharaoh lift up thy head from off 
thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; 
and the birds shall eat thy flesh 
from off thee. 

20 And it came to pass the third 
day, which was Pharaoh’s birth- 
day, that he made a feast unto all 
his servants: and he lifted up the 
head of the chief butler and of the 
chief baker among his servants. 

21 And he restored the chief but- 
ler unto his butlership again; and 
he gave the “cup into Pharaoh’s 
hand: 

22 But he hanged the chief baker: 
as Joseph had interpreted to them. 

23 Yet did not the chief butler re- 
member Joseph, but forgat him, 


CHAPTER 41. 
The dream of Pharaoh. 


AN? it came to pass at the end 
of two full years, that Pharaoh 
dreamed: and, behold, he stood by 
the river. 

2 And, behold, there came up out 
of the river seven well favoured 
kine and fatfleshed; and they fed 
in a meadow. 

3 Ard, behold, seven other kine 
came up after them out of the river, 
ill favoured and leanfleshed; and 
stood by the other kine upon the 
brink of the river. 


41 4] 


GENESIS. 


: 
(41 33 


~ 


4 And the ill favoured and lean- 


fleshed kine‘ did eat up the seven! 


So} 


| 


well favoured and fat kine. 
Pharaoh awoke. 

5 And he slept and dreamed the 
second time: and, behold, seven 
ears of corn came up upon one 
stalk, rank and good. , 

6 And, behold, seven thin ears! 
and blasted with the east wind) 
sprung up after them. | 

7 And the seven thin ears de-! 
voured the seven rank and full ears. 
And Pharaoh. awoke, and), behold, 
it was a dream. 

8 And it came to pass in the morn-| 
‘ing that his ¢spirit was troubled; 
and he sent and called for all the! 
magicians of Egypt, and all the 
wise men thereof: and Pharaoh’ 
told them his dream; but there was} 
none that could interpret them unto| 
Pharaoh. 

9 Then spake the chief butler 
unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remem- 
ber my faults this day: 


10 Pharaoh was wroth with his| _ 


servants, and put me in ward in 
the captain of the guard’s house, 
both me and the chief baker: 

11 And we dreamed a dream in 
one night, I and he: we dreamed 
each man according to the interpre-| 
tation of his dream. 

12 And there was there with us a 
young man, an Hebrew, servant to 
the captain of the guard; and we 
told him, and he interpreted to us 
our dreams; to each man according 
to his dream he did interpret. 

13. And it came to pass, as he in- 
terpreted to us, so it was; me he 
restored unto mine office, and him’ 
he hanged. 


Joseph’s exaltation in Egypt. 


14 Then Pharaoh sent and called 
Joseph, and they brought him 
hastily Sout of the dungeon: and he 
shaved himself, and changed his 
faiment, and came in unto Pha- 
rach. 

15 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 
I have dreamed a dream, and there 
is none that can interpret it: and I 
have heard say of thee, that thou! 
canst understand a dream to inter-| 
pret it. | 

16 And J oseph answered Pharaoh, 
saying, If is not in me: God shall 
give Pharaoh an answer of peace. 

17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 
In my dream, behold, I stood upon 
the bank of the river: ‘ 


BC 1715. __ 


a Dan.4.5,19; 
7.28; 8.27. 


|b 1 Sam.2.8. 
¢ Dan.2.29,45. 


$8 


18. And, behold, there came up 
lout. of the river seven kine, fat- 
fleshed and welll favoured; and they 
‘fed in a meadow: : 

| 19 And, behold, sevem other kine 
icame up after them, poor and very 
ill favoured and leanfleshed, such 
las I never saw in all the land of 
Egypt for badness: i 

| 20 And the lean and the ill fa- 
voured kine did eat up the first 
iseven fat kine: 

| 2% And when they had eaten them: 


up, it could not be known that they 
had eaten them; but they were sall 


22 And I saw in my dream, and, 
behold, seven ears came upi in one 
istalk, full and good: : 
| 23 And, behold, seven ears, with- 
ered, thin, and blasted with the 
east wind, sprung up after them: 

24 And the thin ears devoured the 
‘seven good ears: and I told this 
unto the magicians; but there was 
mone that could declare it to me. 
| 25 And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, 
The dream of Pharaoh is one: God 
hath shewed Pharaoh what he is 
about to do. 
| 26 The seven good kine are seven 
years; and the seven good ears are 
seven years: the dream is one. 

27 And the seven thin and ill 
favoured kine that came up after 
them are seven years; and the 
seven empty ears blasted with the 
least wind shall be seven years of 
famine. 
| 28 This 7s the thing which I have 
spoken unto Pharaoh: What God 
is about to do he sheweth unto 
Pharaoh. 

29 Behold, there come seven 


years of great plenty throughout all 
ithe land of Egypt: 

30 And there shall arise after 
ithem seven years of famine; and 
all the plenty shall be forgotten in 
the land of Egypt; and the famine 
shall consume the land; 

31 And the plenty shall not be 
known in the land by reason of 
that famine following: for it shalt 
be very grievous. 

32 And for that the dream was 
doubled unto Pharaoh twice; i# is 
because the thing is established by 
God, and God will shortly bring it 
ito pass. 

33 Now therefore Yet Pharaoh 
look out a man discreet and wise, 
and set him over the land of 
Egypt. i 


41 34] GENESIS. 


[421 


34 Let Pharaoh do this, and let] Bec. 1715. 
him appoint officers over the Iand,|~———C—s~CS~S 
and take up the fifth part of the 
land of Egypt in the seven pien- 
teous years. 

35 And let them gather ail the 
food of those good years that come, 
and lay up corn under the hand of 
Pharaoh, and Jet them keep food in 
the cities. 

36 And that food shall be for store 
to the land against the seven years 
of famine, which shall be in the 
land of Egypt; that the land perish 
not through the famine. 

37 And' the thing was good in the 
eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes 
of all his servants. 

38 And Pharaoh said unto his 
servants, Can we find such a one 
as this js, a man in whom the 
Spirit of God is? 

39. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 
Forasmuch as God hath shewed 
thee all this, there is none so dis- 
creet and wise as thou. art: 

40° Thou shalt be ¢over my house, 
and according unto thy word shall 
all my people be ruled: only im the 
throne wili I be greater than thou. 

41 And’ Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 
See, I have set thee over all the 
land of Egypt. 

42 . And Pharaoh took off his ring 
from his hand, and put it upon Jo- 
seph’s hand, and arrayed him in 
vestures of fine linen, and put a 
gold chain about his neck; s 

43 And he made him to ride in 
the second. chariot which he. had; 
and they cried before him, Bow 
the knee: and he made him ruler 
over all the land of Egypt. 

44 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 
I am Pharaoh, and without thee 
shall no man lift up his hand or 
foot in all the land of Egypt. 


Joseph, rejected by his brethren, 
receives a Gentile bride. 


45 And Pharaoh called Joseph’s 
name Zaphnath-paaneah; and he 
gave him to wife 4Asenath the 
daughter of Poti-pherah priest of 
On. And Joseph went out over all 
the land’ of Egypt. . 

46 And Joseph was thirty years 
old when he stood before Pharaoh 
king of Egypt. And Joseph went 
out from the presence of Pharaoh, 


a Isa.11.10; 
Rev.11.15; 
15.24. 


b Coptic, re- 
vealer of 
secret 
things: 

ci.e. forget- 
ting: 

d i.e. fruitful. 


1 Asenath, the Gentile bride 
type of the Church, called out 
the time of His rejection by His brethren, 
Gen. 37. 2, note. ™ 


and went throughout all the land 
of Egypt. 

47 And in the seven plenteous 
years the earth brought forth by 
handfuls. 

48 And he gathered up all the 
food of the seven years, which were 
in the land of Egypt, and laid up 
the food in the cities: the food of 
the field, which was round about 
every city, laid he up in the same. 

49 And Joseph gathered corn as 
the sand of the sea, very much, 
until he left numbering; for 1t was 
without number 

50 And unto Joseph were born 
two sons before the years of famine 
came, which Asenath the daughter 
of Poti-pherah priest of On bare 
unto him. 

51 And Joseph called the name of 
the firstborn ‘<Manasseh: For God, 
said he, hath made me forget all 
my toil, and all my father’s house. 

52 And the name of the second 
called he ¢Ephraim: For God hath 
caused me to be fruitful in the land 
of my affliction. 

53 And the seven years of plente- 
ousness, that was in the land) of 
Egypt, were ended. 

54 And the seven years of dearth 
began to come, according as Joseph 
had said: and the dearth was in 
all lands; but in all the land of 
Egypt there was bread. 

55 And when all the land of Egypt 
was famished, the people cried to 
Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh 
said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto 
Joseph; what he saith to you, do. 

56 And the famine was over all 
the face of the earth: And Joseph 
opened all the storehouses, and sold 
unto the Egyptians; and the fam- 
ine waxed sore in the land of 


Egypt. 
57 And all countries came into 


\Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; 


because that the famine was so 


jsore in all lands. 


CHAPTER 42. 


Joseph, rejected by his brethren, 
preserves them (cf. Ezk, 11. 16). 
RNC when Jacob saw that there 

was corn in Egypt, Jacob said 
unto his sons, Why do ye look one 
upon another? 


espoused by Joseph the rejected one (John 19. 15), 
from the Gentiles to be the bride of Christ during 
Israel (Acts 15. 14; Eph. 5. 31,32). See 


'9 And Joseph remembered the 


_ life of Pharaoh 


2 And he said, Behold, I have|_ 
heard that there is corn in Egypt: 
get you down thither, and buy for 
us from thence; that we may live, 
and not die. 

3 And Joseph’s ten brethren went 
down to buy corn in Egypt. _ 

4 But Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, 
Jacob sent not with his brethren; 
for he said, Lest peradventure mis- 
chief befall him. 

5 And the sons of Israel came to 
buy corn among those that came: 
for the “famine was in the land of 
Canaan. 

6 And Joseph was the governor 
over the land, and he it was that 
sold to all the people of the land: 
and Joseph’s brethren came, and 
bbowed down themselves before him 
with their faces to the earth. 

7 And Joseph saw his brethren, 
and he knew them, but made him- 
self “strange unto them, and spake 
Toughly unto them; and he said 
unto them, Whence come ye? And 
they said, From the land of Canaan 
to buy food. 

& And Joseph knew his brethren, 


but they knew not him. a Gen.12.10, 


note. 


dreams which he dreamed of them, |® Cf-Gen.37.8. 
and said unto them, Ye are spies;). crGena4s. 
to see the nakedness of the land ye] 1-2; Mt.23. 
are come. 37-39. 
10 And they said unto him, Nay, d Psa.19.9, 
my lord, but to buy food are thy] note. 
servants come. 
11 We are all one man’s sons; we 
are true men, thy servants are no 
spies. 
12 And he said unto them, Nay, 
but to see the nakedness of the i 
land ye are come. 
13 And they said, Thy servants 
are twelve brethren, the sons of one 
man in the land of Canaan; and, 
behold, the youngest is this day 
with our father, and one fs not. 
14 And Joseph said unto them, 
That is it that I spake unto you, 
saying, Ye are spies: 
15 Hereby ye shall be proved: By 
the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go 
forth hence, except your youngest 
brother come hither. 
16 Send one of you, and Jet him 
fetch your brother, and ye shall be 
kept in prison, that your words 
may be proved, whether there be 
any truth in you: or else by the 
: surely ye are 
spies. 
17 And he put them all together 
into ward three days. 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1707. 


[42 33 

18 And Joseph said unto them the 
third day, This do, and live; for I 
¢fear God: 

19 If ye be true men, let one of 
your brethren be bound in the house 
of your prison: go ye, carry corn 
for the famine of your houses: 

20 But bring your youngest 
brother unto me; so shail your 
words be verified, and ye shall not 
die. And they did so. 

21 And they said one to another, 
We are verily guilty concerning 
our brother, in that we saw the 
anguish of his soul, when he be- 
sought us, and we would not hear; 
therefore is this distress come 
upon us. 

22 And Reuben answered them, 
saying, Spake I not unto you, say- 
ing, Do not sin against the child; 
and ye would not hear? therefore, 
behold, also his blood is required. 

23 And they knew not that Joseph 
understood them, for he spake 
unto them by an interpreter. 

24 And he turned himself about 
from them, and wept; and returned 
to them again, and communed with 
them, and took from them Simeon, 
and bound hirn before their eyes. 

25 Then Joseph commanded to 
fill their sacks with corn, and to 
restore every man’s money into his 
sack, and to give them provision 
for the way: and thus did he unto 
them. 

26 And they laded their asses 


with the corn, and departed thence. 


27 And as one of them opened his 
sack to give his ass provender in 
the inn, he espied his money; for, 
behold, it was in his sack’s mouth. 

28 And he said unto his brethren, 
My: money is restored; and, lo, it is 
even in my sack: and their heart 
failed them, and they were afraid, 
saying one to another, What is 
this that God hath done unto us? 

29 And they came unto Jacob 
their father unto the land of Ca- 
naan, and told him all that befell 
unto them; saying, 

30 The man, who is the lord of 
the land, spake roughly to us, and 
took us for spies of the country. 

31 And we said unto him, We are 
true men; we are no spies: 

32 We be twelve brethren, sons 
of our father; one is not, and the 
youngest rs this day with our father 
in the land of Canaan. 

33 And the man, the lord of the 


country, said unto us, Hereby shall 
i know that ye are true men; leave 


“ih ¥ rs | bodied - ° a v Se aaa lit Pee Y 


GENESIS. [43 20 


tainly know that he would say, 
Bring your brother down? 

8 And Judah said unto Israel his 
father, Send the lad with me, and 
we will arise and go; that we may 
live, and not die, both we, and 
thou, and also our little ones. 

9 I will be ¢surety for him; of my 
hand shalt thou require him: if I 
bring him not unto thee, and set 
him before thee, then let me bear 
the blame for ever: 

10 For except we had lingered, 
surely now we had returned this 
second time. 

11 And their father Israel said 
unto them, If 7t must be so now, do 
this; take of the best fruits in the 
land in your vessels, and carry 
down the man a present, a little 
ebalm, and a little honey, spices, 
and myrrh, nuts, and almonds: 


‘one of your brethren here with me, 
and take food for the famine of 
your households, and be gone: 

34 And bring your youngest 
brother unto me: then shall I know 
that ye are no spies, but that ye 
are true men: so will I deliver you 
your brother, and ye shall traffick 
in the land. 

35 And it came to pass as they 
emptied their sacks, that, behold, 
every man’s bundle of money was! 
in his sack: and when both they 
and their father saw the bundles of 
money, they were afraid. 

36 And Jacob their father said 
unto them, Me have ye bereaved of 
my children: Joseph is not, and 
Simeon is not, and ye will take 
Benjamin away: all these things 
are against me. } 

37 And Reuben spake unto his) 
father, saying, Slay my two sons, 12 And take double money in 
if I bring him not to thee: deliver your hand; and the money that 
him into my hand, and I will bring was brought fagain in the mouth 
him to thee again. of your sacks, carry sf again in 

38 And he said, My son shall not], prep. sheor, [your hand; peradventure it was an 
go down with you; for his brother] See Hab.2.5, |oversight: 


B.C. 1707. 


is dead, and he is left alone: if mis-| note. 13 Take also your brother, and 
chief befall him by the way in the], .. Gena. ‘[atise, go again unto the man: 
which ye go, then shall ye bring] 10, note. 14 And God Almighty give you 
down my gray hairs with sorrow mercy before the man, that he may 
to the ¢grave. ¢ Gen.44.23.  |cend away your other brother, and 
dGen.44.32. |Benjamin. IfI be bereaved of my 
CHAPTER 43. Rcotz een children, I am bereaved. 


15 And the men took that present, 


t, N D the “famine was sore in the] ¢ Gen.42.25. eae be meee sl ee money i 
and. their hand, an enjamin; an 
ee ore tre |... [pd sibel beleeelgasend Gee. ae 
had brought out of Egypt, their 16 And when Joseph saw Ben- 
father said unto them, Go again, jamin with them, he said to the 
buy us a little food. ruler of ne pee ae ane font 
3 And Judah spake unto him, say- home, and slay, and make ready; 
ng, The man did solemnly protest for these men shall dine with me 
unto us, saying, Ye shall not ‘see at noon. 2 
my face, except your brother be} 17 And the man did as Joseph 
with you. ‘ bade; oe ae oo brought the 
4 If thou wilt send our brother men into Joseph’s house. 
with us, we will go down and buy 18 And the men were 4£afraid, 
thee food: because they were brought into 
5 But if thou a can eke him, ded a cone and Eade said, 
we will not go down: for the man ecause O e money that was 
said unto us, Ye shall not see my returned in our sacks at the first 
face, except your brother be with time a we brought in; that ne 
you. may seek occasion against us, an 
6 And Israel said, Wherefore dealt fall upon us, and take us for bond- 
ye so ill with me, as to tell the man men, and our asses. 
whether ye had yet a brother? 19 And they came near to the 
7 And they said, The man asked steward of Joseph’s house, and 
us straitly of our state, and of our they communed with him at the 
kindred, saying, Is your father yet door of the house, b 
alive? have ye another brother? 20 And said, O sir, we came in- 
and we told him according to the deed down at the first time to buy 
tenor of these words: could we cer- food: 
; 61 


u, 


i) 
43 21] GENESIS. [448 


B.c. 1707. |and for the Egyptians, which did 
eat with him, by themselves: be- 
cause the Egyptians might not eat 
bread with the Hebrews; for that 
is an abomination unto the Egyp- 
tians. : 
| 33 And they sat before him, the 
firstborn according to his birth- 
jtight, and the youngest according 
to his youth: and the men mar- 
ivelled one at another. ‘ 
34 And he took and sent messes 
unto them from before him: ‘but 
Benjamin’s mess was five times so 
much as any of their’s, And they 
drank, and were merry with him. 


21 And it came to pass, when we 
came to the inn, that we opened 
our sacks, and, behold, every man’s 
money was in the mouth of his 
sack, our money in full weight: and 
we have brought it again in our 
hand. 


food: we cannot tell who put our 
money in our sacks. 

23 And he said, Peace be to you, 
fear not: your God, and the God 
of your father, hath given you 
treasure in your sacks: I had your 
money. And he brought Simeon 
out unto them. 

24 And the man brought the men 
into Joseph’s house, and gave them 
water, and they washed their feet; 
and he gave their asses provender. 

25 And they made ready the pres- 
ent against Joseph came at noon: 
for they heard that they should eat 
bread there. 

26 And when Joseph came home, 
they brought him the present which 
was in their hand into the house, 
and bowed themselves to him to 
the earth. 


CHAPTER 44. 


AND he commanded the steward 
of his house, saying, Fill the 
men’s sacks with food, as much as 
they can carry, and put every man’s 
Money in his sack’s mouth. 

| 2 And put my cup, the silver cup, 
|in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, 
and his corn money. And he did 
according to the word that Joseph 
had spoken. 

3 As soon as the morning was 
light, the men were sent away, they 
and their asses. 

4 And when they were gone out 
of the city, and not yet far off, 
Joseph said unto his steward, Up, 
follow after the men; and when 
thou dost overtake them, say unto 
them, Wherefore have ye rewarded. 
evil for good? 

5, Zs not this 7¢ in which my lord 
drinketh, and whereby indeed he 
divineth? ye have done evil in so 
doing. 


28 And they answered, Thy ser- 
vant our father ys in good health, 
he is yet alive. And they bowed 
down their heads, and made 
obeisance. 

29 And he lifted up his eyes, and 
saw his brother Benjamin, his 


his bowels did yearn upon his 
brother; and he sought where to 
weep; and he entered into Ais 
chamber, and wept there. 

31 And he washed his face, and 
went out, and refrained himself, 
and said, Set on bread. 

32 And they set on for him by 
himself, and for them by themselves, 


fore saith my lord these words? 


1Cf. Gen. 35. 18, note. It is important to observe that Benjamin now becomes 
prominent. Joseph is peculiarly the type of Christ in His first advent, rejection, 
death, resurrection, and present exaltation among the Gentiles, but unrecognized 
of Israel. As the greater Benjamin, “Son of sorrow,” but also “Son of my right 
hand,” He is to be revealed in power in the Kingdom (see Gen. 1. 26-28: Zech, 12. 8, 
note. It is then, and not till then, that Israel is to be restored and converted (see 
Deut, 30. 1-9, note). Typically Gen. 45. 1, 2 anticipates the revelation pro- 
Phetically described, Ezk. 20. 33-36; Hos. 2. 14-23, at which time the Benjamin 
type of Christ will be fulfilled. 

&2 


44.9] GENESIS. [45 3 


9 With whomsoever of thy ser-| B.C. 1707. 24 And it came to pass when we 
vants it be found, both let him die, came up unto thy servant my 
and we also will be my lord’s father, we told him the words of my 
bondmen. lord. 

10 And he said, Now also let it be 25 And our father said, Go again, 
according unto your words: he with and buy us a little food. 
whom it is found shall be my ser- 26 And we said, We cannot go 
vant; and ye shall be blameless. down: if our youngest brother be 

11 Then they speedily took down with us, then will we go down: for 

. every man his sack to the ground, we may not see the man’s face, ex- 
and opened every man his sack. cept our youngest brother be with 

?2 And hesearched, and began at 
the eldest, and left at the youngest: 
and the cup was found’ in Benja- 
min’s sack. » 

13. Then they rent their clothes, 
and laded every man his ass, and 
returned to the city. 


us. 

27 And thy servant my father 
said unto us, Ye know that my wife 
bare me “two sons: 

28 And the one went out from me, 
.land I said, «Surely he is torn in 
pieces; and I saw him not since: 


14 And Judah and his brethren 29. And if ye take this also from 

* came to Joseph’s house; for he was me, and mischief befall him, ye 

yet there: and they fell ¢before him shall bring down my gray hairs 
on the ground. with sorrow to the Jgrave: 

15 And Joseph said unto them, 30 Now therefore when I come to 


What deed is this that ye havel, q.4377 thy servant my father, and the lad 
done? wot ye not that such a man <r be not with us; seeing that his life 


as I can certainly divine? bGen.46.19. jis bound up in the lad’s life; 

16 And Judah said, What shall) . Q...373. 31 It shall come to pass, when he 
we say unto my lord?’ what shall} 424. 7" seeth that the lad is not with us, 
we speak? or how shall we clear that he will die: and thy servants 


ourselves? God hath found out the|? $°93%23;,_ |shall bring down the gray hairs of 
iniquity of sea pan aan end aeaeat lisa hey our father with sorrow 
we are my lord’s servants, both] ¢ Gem.37.33. to the Jgrave. 
Bees es ese ity whos Ml sect shoot. lioertae lad watovrmy faeher, SayANw, 
Ul . ab.2.5, 1e 1 » Ag, 
17 And he said, God forbid that I) note. If I bring him not unto thee, then 
should do so: but the man in.whose|, 1 sana; |p shall bear the blame to my father 
my servant; and’ as for you, get ny 33 Now therefore, I pray thee, let 
you up in peace unto your father. |" #%2-14-23. |thy servant abide instead of the lad 
a a path er Sit a itedtorrifed. Lede Oe se cay pore let the 
m, and‘ said, my lord, let thy] . ad go up wi s brethren. 
servant, I pray thee, speak a word]? ners 34 For how shall I go up to my 
in my lord’s ears, and let not thine father, and the lad be not with me? 


anger burn against thy servant: lest peradventure I see the evil that 
for thou art even as Pharaoh. shall come on my father. 

19 My lord asked his servants, 
saying, Have ye a father, or ai CHAPTER 45. 

oo nad we said unto my lord, We’ Joseph r eveaispasen fo his 
have a father, an old man, and a brethren. F 
child of his old age, a little one; pee Joseph could not refrain 
and his brother is dead, and he himself before all them_that 
balone is left of his mother, and his stood by him; and he cried, Cause 
¢father loveth him. every man to go out from me. And 

21 And thow saidst unto thy ser- there stood no man with him, 
vants, Bring him. down unto me, hwhile Joseph made himself known 
that I may set mine eyes upon him. unto his brethren. 

22 And we said unto my. lord, 2 And he wept aloud: and’ the 
The lad cannot Jeave his father: Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh 
for if he should leave his father,| heard. : ; 
his father would die. 3 And Joseph said unto his breth- 

23 And thou saidst unto thy ser- ren, I am Joseph; doth my father 
vants, Except your youngest bro- yet live? And his brethren could 
ther come down with you, ye shall not answer him; for they were 
see my face no more. © “troubled at his presence. 


45 4} 


4 And Joseph said unto his breth- 
ten, Come near to me, I pray you. 
And they came near. And he said, 
T am Joseph your brother, whom 
*ye sold into Egypt. ; 

5 Now therefore be not grieved, 
‘nor angry with yourselves, that ye 
sold me hither: for God did send 
me before you to preserve life. 

6 For these two years hath the 
famine been in the land: and yet 
there are five years, in the which 
there shall neither be earing nor 
harvest. 

7 And God °sent me before you to 
‘preserve you a posterity in the 
earth, and to save your lives by a 
great deliverance. 

8 So now it was not you that 
sent me hither, but God: and he 
hath made me a father to Pha- 
raoh, and lord of all his house, 
and a ruler throughout all the land 
of Egypt. 

9 Haste ye, and go up to miy fa- 
ther, and say unto him, Thus saith 
thy son Joseph, God hath made me 
lord of all Egypt: come down unto 
me, tarry not: 

10 And thou shalt dwell in the 
land of ¢Goshen, and thou shalt be 
near unto me, thou, and thy chil- 
dren, and thy children’s children, 
and thy flocks, and thy herds, and 
_ all that thou hast: 

11 And there will I nourish thee; 
for yet there are five years of fam- 
ine; lest thou, and thy household, 
and ali that thou hast, come to 
poverty. 

12 And, behold, your eyes see, 
and the eyes of my brother Benja- 
min, that it is my mouth that 
speaketh unto you. 

13 And ye shall tell my father of 
all my glory in Egypt, and of all 
that ye have seen; and ye shall 
haste and “bring down my father 
hither. 

14 And he fell upon his brother 
Benjarnin’s neck, and wept: and 
Benjamin wept upon his neck. 

15 Moreover he kissed all his 
brethren, and wept upon them: 
and after that his brethren talked 
with him, 


Joseph’s brethren blessed and 
sent to Jacob. 


16 And the fame thereof was 
heard in Pharaoh’s house, saying, 
Joseph’s brethren are come: and it 
pleased Pharaoh, well, and his ser- 
vants, 


GENESIS. 


B.C. 1707. 


a Gen.37.28. 


b Gen.50.20; 
Acts 2.23. 


¢ Heb. to 
make you 
a remnant, 
See Isa.1.9; 
Rom.11.5, 
note. 


d Gen.47.6; 
Ex.9.26. 


e Acts 7.14 


f Gen.47.6; 
Deut.32.14. 


g Israel (his- 
tory), vs. 
1-6; Ex.3. 
15-17. (Gen. 
12.2,3; Rom. 
11.26.) 


h Gen.21.33; 
26.32,33, 


[46 aq 


17 And Pharaoh said unto _Jo- 
seph, Say unto thy brethren, This 
do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get 
you unto the land of Canaan; 

18 And take your father and your 
households, and come unto me: and 
I will give you the good of the land 
of Egypt, and ye shall feat the fat 
of the land. ; 

19 Now thou art commanded, this . 
do ye; take you wagons out of the 
land of Egypt for your little ones, 
and for your wives, and bring your 
father, and come. 

20 Also regard not your stuff; for 
the good of all the land of Egypt js 
your’s. : 

21 And the children of Israel did 
so: and Joseph gave them wagons, 
according to the commandment of 
Pharaoh, and gave them provision 
for the way. 

22 To all of them he gave each 
man changes of raiment; but to 
Benjamin he gave three hundred 
Pieces of silver, and five changes 
of raiment. 

23 And to his father he sent after 
this manner; ten asses laden with 
the good things of Egypt, and ten 
she asses laden with corn and bread 
and meat for his father by the way. 

24 So he sent his brethren away, 
and they departed: and he said 
unto them, See that ye fall not cut 
by the way. 

25 And they went up out of 
Egypt, and came into the land of 
Canaan unto Jacob their father, 

26 And told him, saying, Joseph 
1s yet alive, and he is governor over 
all the land of Egypt. And Jacob’s 
heart fainted, for he believed them 
not. 

27 And they told him all the 
words of Joseph, which he had said 
unto them: and when he saw the 
wagons which Joseph had sent to 
carry him, the spirit of Jacob their 
father revived: ’ 

28 And Israel said, Jt is enough: 
Joseph my son is yet alive: I wil} 
go and see him before I die, 


CHAPTER 46. 
Jacob journeys to Egypt. 


AND sIsrael tock his journey with 
all that he had, and came to 
WBeer-sheba, and offered sacrifices 
unto the God of his father Isaac. 

2 And God spake unto Israel in 
the visions of the night, and said, 
saceb, Jacob. And he said, Hers: 
am I, 


46 3] GENESIS. [46 28 


_3 And he said, 11 am God, the} B.c. 1705. [all the souls of his sons ‘and his 


God of thy father: fear not to go|” ————<CS~*sé‘ antghtterrs were thirty and three. 
down into Egypt; for I will ¢there 16 And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, 
make of thee a great nation: and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, 

4 I will go down with thee into and Arodi, and Areli. 
Egypt; and I will also surely >bring 17 And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, 
thee up again: and Joseph shall and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, - 
put his hand upon thine eyes. and Serah their sister: and the sons 
5 And Jacob rose up from Beer- of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel. 
sheba: and the sons of Israel car- 18 These are the sons of Zilpah, 
tied Jacob their father, and their whom Laban gave to Leah his 
little ones, and their wives, in the daughter, and these she bare unto 
wagons which Pharaoh had sent to Jacob, even sixteen souls. 
carry him. : 19 The sons of Rachel Jacob’s 
6 And they took their cattle, and wife; Joseph, and Benjamin. 
their goods, which they had gotten 20 And unto Joseph in the land 
in the land of Canaan, and came of Egypt were born Manasseh and 
into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed Ephraim, which Asenath the daugh- 
with him: ter of Poti-pherah priest of On bare 
7 Hissons, and his sons’ sons with unto him. 
him, his daughters, and his sons’ 41 And the sons of Benjamin were 
daughters, and all his seed brought}, gx 12.37; Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, 
he with him into Egypt. Deut.26.5. {Gera, and Naaman, - Ehi, and 
8 And these are the names of the), 20 15 46, Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and 
children of Israel, which came into] ’ 59 13,25; tx, |Ard. 
Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben,} 3.8. 22 These are the sons of Rachel, 


Jacob’s firstborn. which were born to Jacob: all the 
9 And the sons of Reuben; Ha- souls were fourteen. 

noch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and 23 And the sons of Dan; Hushim, 

Carmi, 24 And the sons of Naphtali; 


10 And the sons of Simeon; Je- Jahzeel, arid Guni, and Jezer, and 


muel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Shillem. 
Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the) 25 These are the sons of Bilhah, 
son of a Canzanitish woman. which Laban gave unto Rachel his 

11 And the sons of Levi; Gershon, daughter, and she bare these unto 
Kohath, and Merari. Jacob: all the souls were seven. 

12 And the sons of Judah; Er, and 26 All the 2souls that came with 
Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, Jacob into Egypt, which came out 
and Zarah: but Er and Onan died of his loins, besides Jacob’s sons’ 
in the land of Canaan. And the wives, all the souls were threescore 
sons of Pharez were Hezron and and six; 

Hamul. 27 And the sons of Joseph, which 

13. And the sons of Issachar; Tola, were born him in Egypt, were two 
and Phuvah, and Job, and Shim- souls: all the souls of the house of 

ron. ; Jacob, which came into Egypt, 

14 And the sons of Zebulun; Se- were threescore and ten. 
red, and Elon, and Jahleel. 28 And he sent Judah before him 

15 These be the sons of Leah, unto Joseph, to direct his face unto 
which she bare unto Jacob in Pa- Goshen; and they came into the 
dan-aram, with his daughter Dinah: land of Goshen. 


1[t is important to distinguish between the directive and the permissive will of 
God. In the first sense the place for the covenant family was Canaan (Gen. 26. 
1-5). Gen. 46. 3 is a touching instance of the permissive will of God. Jacob’s 
family, broken, and in part already in Egypt, the tenderness of Jehovah would not 
forbid the aged patriarch to follow. God will take up His people and, so far as 
possible, bless them, even when they are out of His best. In Israel’s choice of a king 
(1 Sam. 8. 7-9); in the turning back from Kadesh (Deut. 1. 19-22); in the sending 
of the spies; in the case of Balaam— illustrations of this principle are seen. It is 
needless to say that God’s permissive wili never extends to things morally wrong. 
The highest blessing is ever found in obedience to His directive will. b 

2Cf. vy. 27. A discrepancy has been irnagined. The “‘souls that came with Jacob” 
were 66. The “souls of the house of Jacob” (v. 27, i.e. the entire Jacobean family) 
were 70, viz. the 66 which came with Jacob, Joseph and his two sons, already in 
Egypt=69; Jacob himself = 70.‘ See Acts 7. 14, note. 

65 


46 29] 


GENESIS. 


29 And Joseph made ready his 
chariot, and went up to meet Israel 
his father, to Goshen, and presented 
himself unto him; and he fell on 
his neck, and wept on his neck a 
good while. : 

30 And Israel said unto Joseph, 
Now 4let me die, since I have seen 
thy face, because thou art yet alive. 

31 And Joseph said unto his 
brethren, and unto his father’s 
house, I will go up, and shew Pha- 
raoh, and say unto him, My breth- 
ren, and my father’s house, which 
were in the land of Canaan, are 
come unto me; 

32 And the men are shepherds, 
for their trade hath been to feed 
cattle; and they have brought their 
flocks, and their herds, and all that 
they have. \ 

33 And it shall come to pass, when 
Pharaoh shail call you, and shall 
say, What is your occupation? 

34 That ye shall say, Thy ser- 
vants’ trade hath been about cattle 
from our youth even until now, 
both we, and also our fathers: that 
ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; 
for every shepherd is an abomina. 
tion unto the Egyptians. 


CHAPTER 47, 


Jacob and his descendants 
exalted. . 


{THEN Joseph came and told 
Pharaoh, and said, My father 
and my brethren, and their flocks, 
and their herds, and all that they. 


have, are come out of the land of| 
Canaan; and, behold, they are in 
the land of Goshen. 

2 And he took some of his breth- 
ren, even five men, and presented 
them unto Pharaoh, 

3 And Pharaoh said unto his 
brethren, What is your occupation? 
And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy 
Servants are shepherds, both we, 


and also our fathers. 

4 They said moreover unto Pha- 
taoh, For to sojourn in the land are 
we come; for thy servants have no 
pasture for their flocks ; for the 
famine is sore in the land of Ca- 
naan: now therefore, we pray thee, 
let thy servants dwell in the land 
of Goshen. 

5 And Pharaoh spake unto Jo- 
seph, saying, Thy father and thy 
brethren are come unto thee: 

6 The land of Egypt is before 
thee; in the best of the land make 
thy father and brethren to dwell; 


B.C. 1706. 


a Lk.2.29,30. 
6 LK.12.42-44. 
¢ Heb.7.7. 


dG 


CNS 
11.10; 25.7,8. 


66 


in the land of Goshen let them 
dwell: and if thou knowest any 
men of activity among them, then 
make them rulers over my cattle. 

7 And Joseph brought in Jacob 
his father, and set him ‘before Pha- 
raoh: and Jacob ‘blessed Pharaoh. 

8 And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, 
How old art thou? 

9 And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, 
The days of the years of my pil- 
grimage are an hundred and thirty 
years: few and evil have the days 
of the years of my life been, and 
hhavemnot attained unto ‘the days of 
the years of the life of my fathers 
in the days of their pilgrimage. 

10 And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, 
and went out from before Pharaoh. 

11 And Joseph placed his father 
and his brethren, and gave them_a 
possession in the land of Egypt, im 
the best of the land, in the land of 
Rameses, as Pharaoh had -com- 
manded. 

12 And Joseph nourished his fa- 
ther, and his brethren, and all his 
father’s household, with bread, ac- 
cording to their families. 

13 And there was no bread in all 
the land; for the famine was very 
sore, so that the land of Egypt and 
all the land of Canaan fainted by 
reason of the famine. 

14 And Joseph gathered up all the 
money that was found in the land of 
Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, 
for the corn which they bought: 
and Joseph brought the money into 
Pharaoh’s house. 

15. And when money failed in the 
land of Egypt, and in the land of 
Canaan, all the Egyptians came 
unto joseph, and said, Give us 
bread: for why should we die in thy 
ptesence? for the money faileth. 

16 And Joseph said, Give your 
cattle; and I will give you for your 
‘cattle, if money fail. 

17 And they brought their cattle 
lunto Joseph: and Joseph gave them 
bread in exchange for horses, and 
for the flocks, and for the cattle of 
the herds, and for the asses: and 
he fed them with bread for all their 
cattle for that year. 

18 When that year was ended, 
ithey came unto him the second 
year, and said unto him, We will 
mot hide it from my lord, how that 
jour money is spent; my lord also 
hath our herds of cattle: there is 
not ought left in the sight of my 
lord, but our bodies, and our 
lands: 


that we may live, and not die, that 
the land be not desolate. 

20 And Joseph “bought all the 
land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the 
Egyptians sold every man his field, 
because the famine: prevailed over 
them: so the land became Pha- 
taoh’s. 

21 And as for the people, he re-} 
moved them to cities from one end| 
of the borders of Egypt even to the} 
other end thereof. 

22 Only the land of the priests 
bought he not; for the priests had a 
portion assigned them of Pha-| 
raoh, and did eat their portion 
which Pharaoh gave them: where-| 
fore they sold not their lands. 

23 Then Joseph said unto the 
people, Behold, I have bought you 
this day and your land for Pharaoh:|a Rev.5.5-10; 
lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall} 11-15- 
sow the land. : 

24 And: it shall come to pass in 
the increase, that ye shall give the 
fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four 
parts shall be your own, for seed of} c Or, days of 
the field, and for your food, and for 
them of your households, and for 
food for your little ones. 

25 And they said, Thou hast 
saved our lives: let us find grace in 
the sight of my lord, and we will be 
Pharaoh’s servants. 

26 And Joseph made it a law over 
the land of Egypt unto this day, 
that Pharaoh should have the fifth 
part; except the land of the priests 
‘only, which became not Pharaoh’s. 


The last days of Jacob. 


97 And Israel dwelt in the land of 
Egypt, in the country of Goshen; 
and they had possessions therein, 
and grew, and émultiplied exceed- 


ingly, 

28 And Jatob lived in the land 
of Egypt seventeen years: so the 
twhole age of Jacob was an hun- 
dred forty and seven years. 

29. And the ¢time drew nigh that 
Israel must die: and he called his 
son, Joseph, and said unto him, If; 
now I have found grace im. thy 
sight, ‘put, I pray thee, thy hand 
under my thigh, and deal kindly 
and truly with me; bury me not, I 
pray thee, in Egypt: 

30 But I will ‘lie with my fathers, 
and thou shalt carry me out of 


7-123 12.37; 
Heb.11.12. 


his Life. 

d Job 14.14; 
John 7:8; 
19.11 

e Gen.24.3.4. 


f Gen.50.5-13; 
Heb.11.21. 


67 


GENESIS. 
B.C. 1702. 
‘And. he: sware unto him. 


irael bowed himself upon the bed’s 
head. 


CHAPTER 48. 


the years of 


[48 12 


Egypt, and bury me in their bury- 
ingplace. And he said, I will do as 
thow hast said. 

31 And he said, Swear unto mez 
And Is- 


nasseh and Ephraim. 

2: And one told Jacob, and said), 
Behold, thy son Joseph cometh 
unto thee: and Israel strengthened: 
himself, and sat upon the bed. 

3 And Jacob said unto Joseph, 
God Almighty appeared unto me 
at Luz in the land of Canaan, and 
blessed me, 

4 And said unto me, Behold, I 
will make thee fruitful, and multi- 
ply thee, and I will make of thee a 
multitude of people; and will give 
this land to thy seed after thee for 
an everlasting possession. 

5 And now thy two sons,, Eph-~ 
raim and Manasseh, which were: 
born unto thee in the land of Egypt 
before I came unto thee into Egypt, 
are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, 
they shall be mine. 

6 And thy issue, which thou be- 
gettest after them, shall be thine, 
and shall be called after the name of 
their brethren in their inheritance. 

7 And as for me, when I came: 
from Padan, Rachel died by me in 
the land of Canaan in the way, 
when yet there was but a little way 
to come unto Ephrath: and I buried 
her there in the way of Ephrath; 
the same is Beth-lehem. 

8 And Israel beheld Joseph’s sons, 
and said, Who are these? 

9 And Joseph said unto his father, 
They are my sons, whom God hath 
given me in this place. And he 
said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto 
me, and I will bless them. 

10 Now the eyes of Israel were 
dim for age, so that he could, not 
see. And he brought them near 
unto him; and he kissed them, and 
embraced them. e 

11 And Israel said unto Joseph, I 
had not thought to see thy face: 
and, lo, God hath shewed me also 
thy seed. 

12 And Joseph brought them out 
from between his knees, and he 
bowed. himself with his face to the 
earth, 


yt 


48 13] 


13 And Joseph took them both, 
Ephraim in his right hand toward 
[Israel’s left hand, and Manasseh in 
his left hand toward Israel’s right 
hand, and brought them near unto 
‘him. 

14 And Israel stretched out his 
right hand, and laid it upon Ephra- 
im’s head, who was the younger, 
and his left hand upon Manasseh’s 
head, guiding his hands wittingly; 
for Manasseh was the firstborn. 

15 And he blessed Joseph, and 
said, God, before whom my fathers 
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the 
God which fed me all my life long 
unto this day, | 

16 The ¢Angel which redeemed 
me from all evil, bless the lads; 
and let my name be named on 
them, and the name of my fathers 
Abraham and Isaac; and let them 
grow into a multitude in the midst 
of the earth. - ; 
| 17 And when Joseph saw that his 
father laid his right hand upon the 
head of Ephraim, it displeased him: 
and he held up his father’s hand, 
to remove it from Ephraim’s head p water. 
unto Manasseh’s head. (Kineman 

18 And Joseph said unto his fa-|, type). Isa. 
ther, Not so, my father: for this is} 59-20, note. 
the firstborn; put thy right hand ¢ Vs.8,10; Rev. 
upon his head. 5.5. 

19 And his father refused, and 
said, I know it, my son, I know it:|° S784 
he also shall become a people, and| 2 Sam.7.16. 
he also shall be great: but truly Se 
his younger brother shall be greater ay 
than he, and his seed shall become) v.15. 

a multitude of nations. 

20 And he blessed them that day, 
saying, In thee shall Israel bless, 
saying, God make thee as Ephraim 
and as Manasseh: and he set 
Ephraim before Manasseh. 

21 And Israel said unto Joseph, 

Behold, I die: but God shall be with 
you, and bring you again unto the 
land of your fathers. 

22 Moreover I have given to thee 
one portion above thy brethren, 
which I took out of the hand of the 
Amorite with my sword and with 
my bow. 


CHAPTER 49. 


Jacob’s dying blessing: pro- 
phetic of the tribes of Israel. 


AX? Jacob called unto his sons, 

and said, Gather yourselves 

together, that I may tell you that 

piich shall befall you in the last 
ays. . 


a Heb.1.4, 
note. 


@ Christ (first 


GENESIS. 


| (a0:s8 


2 Gather yourselves together, and 
hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken 
unto Israel your father. 

3 Reuben, thou art my firstborn, 
my might, and the beginning of my 
strength, the excellency of dignity, 
and the excellency of power: 

4 Unstable as water, thou shalt 
not excel; because thou wentest 
up to thy father’s bed; then de- 
filedst thou it: he went up to my 
couch, 

5 Simeon and Levi are brethren; 
instruments of cruelty are in their 
habitations. K 

6 O my soul, come not thou into 
their secret; unto their assembly, 
mine honour, be not thou united: 
for in their anger they slew a man, 
and in their selfwill they dizged 
down a wall. 

7 Cursed be their anger, for it 
was fierce; and their wrath, for it 
was cruel: I will divide them in 
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. 

8 ‘Judah, thou art he whom thy 
brethren shall praise: thy hand 
shall be in the neck of thine ene- 
mies; thy father’s children shall 
bow down before thee. - 

9 Judah is a lion’s whelp: from 
the prey, my son, thou art gone 
up: he stooped down, he couched 
as a lion, and as an old lion; who 
shall rouse him up? 

10 The sceptre shall not depart 
from Judah, nor a lawgiver from 
between his feet, until ¢Shiloh 
come; and unto him shall the gath- 
ering of the people be. 

11 Binding his foal unto the vine, 
and his ass’s colt unto the choice 
vine; he washed his garments in 
wine, and his clothes in the blood ' 
of grapes: 

12 His eyes shall be red with 
wine, and his teeth white with 
milk. 

13 Zebulun shall dwell at the 
haven of the sea; and he shall be 
for an haven of ships; and his bor- 
der shall be unto Zidon. 

14 ¢Issachar is a strong ass couch- 
ing down between two burdens: 

15 And he saw that rest was 
good, and the land that it was 
pleasant; and bowed his shoulder 
to bear, and became a servant unto 
tribute. 

16 Dan shall judge his people, as 
one of the tribes of Israel. 

17 Dan shall be a serpent by the 
way, an adder in the path, that 
biteth the horse heels, so that his 
rider shall fall backward. 


GENESIS. 


18 I_have waited for thy salva-)_ B.C. 1689. 
tion, O Lorp. 5 a 6 ee 
19 ¢Gad, a troop shall overcome 

him: but he shall overcome at the 


for a possession of a burying- 
place. 

31 There they buried Abraham 
and Sarah his wife; there they 


last. 3 buried ¢Isaac and Rebekah his wife; 
20 Out of ’Asher his bread shall! . and there I buried Leah. 

be fat, and he shall yield royal 32 The purchase of the field and 

dainties. of the cave that is therein was from 


the children of Heth. 

33 And when Jacob had made an 
end of commanding his sons, he 
gathered up his feet into the bed, 
and yielded up the ghost, and was 
| gathered unto his people. ° 


21 Naphtali is a hind let loose: 
he giveth goodly words. 

22 Joseph is a fruitful bough, 
even a fruitful bough by a well; 
whose branches run over the 
wall: . 

23 The archers have __ sorely 
grieved him, and.shot at him, and 
hated him: ; 

24 But his bow abode in strength, 
and the arms of his hands were 
made strong by the hands of the 
mighty God of Jacob; (from thence 
is the shepherd, the stone of Is- and kissed him. 
rael:) 2 And Joseph commanded his ser- 

25 Even by the God of thy father.) , g.4.39.11 vants the physicians to ‘embalm 
who shall help thee; and by the “his father: and the physicians em- 
Almighty, who shall bless thee with| > Josh.19.24,26.|balmed Israel. 


CHAPTER 50. 


The burial of Jacob. 


WD <Joseph fell upon his fa- 
ther’s face, and wept upon him, 


blessings of heaven above, blessings) - g...03.4 3 And forty days were fulfilled for 

of the deep that lieth under, bless-| note. ” him; for so are fulfilled the days of 

ings of the breasts, and of the) those which are embalmed: and the 

seas Pree lich eiaits @ Gen.35.29) fore: imo for him three- 
(2 essings of thy father| ¢ Gen.46.4. score and ten days. 

have prevailed above the blessings 4 And when the days of his 

of my progenitors unto the utmost} ¥-?6 mourning were past, Joseph spake 


bound of the everlasting hills: they] g Num.20.29; |unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, 
shall be on the head of Joseph, and! Deut.34.8. If now I have found grace in your 


on the crown of the head of him eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears 
that was separate from his breth- of Pharaoh, saying, 
Ten. 5 My father made me swear, say- 

27 Benjamin shall ravin as a ing, Lo, I die: in my grave which I 
wolf: in the morning he shall de- have digged for me in the land of 
vour the prey, and at night he shall Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. 
divide the spoil. Now therefore let me go up, I pray 
- 98 All these are the twelve tribes thee, and bury my father, and I 
of Israel: and this is it that their will come again. 
father spake unto them, and 'blessed 6 And Pharaoh said, Go up, and 
them; every one according to his bury thy father, according as he 
blessing he blessed them. made thee swear. 

29 And he charged them, and 7° And Joseph went up to bury 
said unto them, I am to be gathered his father: and with him went up 
unto my people: bury me with my all the servants of Pharaoh, the 
fathers in the cave that is, in the elders of his house, and all the 
field of Ephron the Hittite, elders of the land of Egypt, 

30 In the cave that is in the field 8 And all the house of Joseph, 
of ‘Machpelah, which is_ before and his brethren, and his father’s 
Mamre, in the land of Canaan, house: only their little ones, and 
‘which Abraham bought with their flocks, and their herds, they 
the field of Ephron the Hittite left in the land of Goshen. 


lJacob’s life, ending in serenity and blessing, testifies to the power of God 
to transform character. His spiritual progress has six notable phases: (1) the 
first exercise of faith, as shown in the purchase of the birthright (Gen. 25. 28- 
34; 27. 10-22); (2) the vision at Bethel (Gen. 28. 10-19); (3) walking in the flesh 
(Gen. 29. 1-31. 55); (4) the transforming experience (Gen. 32. 24-31); (5) the 
es) to Bethel: idols put away (Gen. 35. 1-7); (6) the walk of faith (Gen. 37. 1- 
9. 33), 

69 


50 9} 


9 And there went up with him! _B.c. 1689. 
both chariots and horsemen: and it 
was a very great company, 

10, And they came to the thresh- 
ing-floor of Atad, which is beyond 
Jordan, and there they mourned 
with a great and very sore lamen- 
tation: and he made a mourning 
for his father seven days: 

11 And when the inhabitants of 
the land, the Canaanites, saw the 
mourning in the floor of Atad, they 
said, This is a grievous mourning 
to the: Egyptians: wherefore the 
name of it was called Abel-mizraim, 
which is beyond Jordan. 

12 And his sons did unto him 
according as he commanded them: 

13 For his sons carried him into 
the land of Canaan, and “buried 
him in the cave of the field of 
Machpelah, which Abraham bought 


a Gen.23.4, 
note. 


bi.e. to their 
hearts. 


¢ Faith. vs.24, 


25; Ex.1.17. 
with the field for a possession of a eis 
buryingplace of Ephron the Hittite, 
before Mamre. a 

14 And Joseph returned into| J0sh-2437:, 
Egypt, he, and his brethren, and| Heb.11.22. 
all that went up with him to bury|- =a 
his father, after he had buried his] $°3.17,8,. 
father. 35.18; Deut. 

The fear of Joseph’s brethren. paroe ne 


15 And when Joseph’s brethren 
saw that their father was dead, they 
said, Joseph will peradventure 
hate us, and will certainly requite 
bn all the evil’ which we did unto 

im, 

16 And they sent a messenger 
unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did 
command before he died, saying, 

17 So shall ye say unto Joseph, 
Forgive, I pray thee now, the tres- 
pass of thy brethren, and their sin; 
for they did unto. thee evil: and 


70 


GENESIS. 


(50.26 


now, we pray thee, forgive the tres- 
pass of the servants of the God of 
thy father. And Joseph wept when 
they spake unto him. 

18 And his brethren also went and 
fell down before his face; and they 
said, Behold, we be thy servants. 

19 And Joseph said unto them, 
Fear not: for am I in the place of 
God? 

20 But as for you, ye thought evil 
against me; but God meant it 
unto good, to bring to pass, as it 
is this day, to save much people 
alive. 

21 Now therefore fear ye not: I 
will nourish you, and your little 
ones. And he comforted them, and 
spake kindly unto them. 


The last days and death of 
Joseph. 


22 And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, 
he, and his father’s house: and Jo- 
seph lived an hundred and ten 


i6; | years. 


23 And Joseph saw Ephraim’s 
children of the third generation: 
the children also of Machir the son 
of Manasseh were brought up upon 
Joseph’s knees. 

24 And Joseph ‘said unto his 
brethren, I die: and God will surely 
visit you, and bring you out of 
this land unto the land which he 
sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to 
Jacob. 

25 And Joseph took an doath of 
the children of Israel, saying, God 
will surely visit you, and ye shall 
carry up my bones from hence. 

26 So Joseph died, being an hun- 
dred and ten years old: and they 
embalmed him, and he was put in 


!a coffin in Egypt. 


THE SECOND BOOK OF MOSES 
CALLED 


EXODUS. 


Exobus, “going out,” records the redemption out of Egyptian bondage of the de- 
scendants of Abraham, and sets forth, in type, all redemption. It is therefore 
peculiarly the book of redemption. But as all redemption is unto a relationship 
with God of which worship, fellowship, and service are expressions, so Exodus, in 
the giving of the law and the provisions of sacrifice and priesthood, becomes not 
only the book of redemption, but also, in type, of:the conditions upon which all re- 
lationships with God exist. 

Broadly, the book. teaches. that redemption is essential to any relationship with 
a holy God; and that even a redeemed people cannot have fellowship with Him 
unless constantly cleansed. from defilement. 

In Exodus, God, hitherto connected with the Israelitish people only through His 
covenant with Abraham, brings them to Himself nationally through redemption, 
puts them under the Mosaic Covenant, and dwells, among them in the cloud of 
glory. Galatians explains the relation of the law to the Abrahamic Covenant. In 
the Commandments God taught Israel His just demands. Experience under the 
Commandments convicted: Israel of sin; and the provision of priesthood and sacri- 
fice (filled with precious types of Christ) gave a guilty peoplea way of forgiveness, 
cleansing, restoration to fellowship, and worship. 


ry [118 


Exodus falls into three chief divisions: I. Israel in Egypt (1.-15.). 
III. Israel at Sinai (19.-40.). 


Red Sea to Sinai (16.-18.). 


II, From the 


The events recorded in Exodus cover a period of 216 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. 


Israel in Egypt. 
TOW these are the names of the 
children of Israel, which came) 
into Egypt; every man and’ his 
household came with Jacob. 
2 Reuben,Simeon,Levi,andJudah, 
3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benja- 
min, 
4 Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and 
Asher. 
5 And all the souls that came out 
of the loins of Jacob were seventy. 
souls: for Joseph. was in Egypt| 
already, ’ 
6 And Joseph died, and all his ae fea 
brethren, and ail that generation. j 


The Egyptian bondage 


7 And the children of Israel were 
fruitful, and increased abundantly, 
and multiplied, and waxed exceed- 
ing mighty; and the land was filled 
with them. ; 

8 Now there arose up a new king 
over Egypt, which knew not Joseph. 

9 And he said unto his people, 
Behold, the people of the children 
of Israel are more and mightier 
than we: 

10 Come on, let us deal wiscly 
with them; lest they multiply, and 
it come to. pass, that, when there 
falleth out any war, they join also 
unto our enemies, and fight against! . 


6 Faith. Ex. 
2.1-3. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb 
11.39.) 


71 


B.C. 1706. 


Af and so get them up out of the 
land. 

11 Therefore they did set over 
them taskmasters to afflict them 
with their burdens. And they built 
for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom 
and Raamses. 

12 But the more they afflicted 
them, the more they multiplied and’ 
grew. And they were grieved be- 
cause of the children of Israel. 

13 And the Egyptians made the 
children of Israel to serve with 
rigour: 

14 And they made their lives bit- 
ter with hard bondage, in morter. 
and in brick, and in all manner of 
service in the field: all their ser- 
vice, wherein they made them 
serve, was with rigour. 

15 And the king of Egypt spake 
to the Hebrew midwives, of which 


the name of the one was Shiphrah, 
and the name of the other Puah: 

16 And he said, When ye do the 
office of a midwife to the Hebrew 
women, and see them upon the 
stools; if it be.a son, then ye shall 
kill him: but if it be a daughter, 
then she shall live. 

17 But the midwives *feared God, 
and did not as the king of Egypt 
commanded them, but saved’ the 
men children alive. 

18 And the king of Egypt called 
for the midwives, and said unto 


119] 


. them, Why have ye done this thing, 


and have saved the men children 


alive? 


19 And the midwives said unto 


Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew wo- 
men are not as the Egyptian 
women; for they are lively, and 


are delivered ere the midwives 


come in unto them. 

20 Therefore God dealt well 
with the midwives: and the peo- 
ple multiplied, and waxed very 
mighty. 

21 And it came to pass, because 
the midwives feared God, that he 
made them houses. 

22 And Pharaoh -charged all his 
people, saying, Every son that is 
born ye shall cast into the river, 
AN every daughter ye shall save 
alive. 


CHAPTER 2. 


The preparation of the deliverer 
(Ex. 2. 1-4. 28). The birth of 


‘ Moses. 


EXODUS. [2 a 


7 Then said his sister to Pha- 
raoh’s daughter, Shail I go and call 
to thee a nurse of the Hebrew 
women, that she may nurse the 
child for thee? 

8 And Pharaoh’s daughter said to 
her, Go. And the maid went and 
called the child’s mother. 

Q And Pharaoh’s daughter said 
unto her, Take this_child away, and 
nurse it for me, and I will give thee 
thy wages. And the woman took © 
the child, and nursed it. 

10 And the child grew, and she 
brought him unto Pharaoh’s daugh- 
ter, and he became her son. And 
she called his name ‘Moses: and 
she said, “Because I drew him out 
of the water. 


Moses identifies himself with 
Israel. 


1i And it came to pass in those 
days, when Moses was grown, that 
he went out unto his brethren, and 
looked on their burdens: and he 
spied an Egyptian smiting an He- 


28; Heb.11. 
23. 


ND there went a man of the brew, one of his brethren. 
house of Levi, and took to 12 And he looked this way and 
wife a daughter of Levi. cHeb.Mo- {that way, and when he saw that 
2 And the woman conceived, and| °°: there was no man, he slew the 
bare a 'son: and when she saw him|¢dHeb. ma- |Egyptian, and hid him in the sand. 
that he was a goodly child, ¢she| shah, to 13: And when he went out the 
thid him three months. draw out. —_ {second day, behold, two men of the 


3 And when she could not longer 
hide him, she took for him an ark 
of bulrushes, and daubed it with 
slime and with pitch, and put the 
child therein; and she laid i¢ in the 
flags by the river’s brink. 

4 And his sister stood afar off, to 
wit what would be done to him. 

5 And the daughter of Pharaoh 
came down to wash herself at the 
Tiver; and her maidens walked along 
by the river’s side; and when she 
saw the ark among the flags, she 
sent her maid to fetch it. 

6 And when she had opened it, 
she saw the child: and, behold, the 
babe wept. And she had compas- 
sion on him, and said, This is one 
of the Hebrews’ children. 


Hebrews strove together: and he 
said to him that did the wrong, 
Wherefore smitest thou thy fei- 
low? ; 

14 And he said, Who made thee 
a prince and a judge over us? in- 
tendest thou to kill me, as thou 
killedst the Egyptian? And Moses 
feared, and said, Surely this thing 
is known. 

15 Now when Pharaoh heard this 
thing, he sought to slay Moses. 
But Moses fled from the face of 
Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of 
Midian: and he sat down by a 
well, 

16 Now the priest of Midian had 
seven daughters: and they came 
and drew water, and filled the 


1 Moses, type of Christ the Deliverer (Isa. 61. 1; Lk. 4. 18; 2 Cor. 1. 10; 1 Thes. 
1,10): (1) A divinely chosen deliverer (Ex. 3. 7-10; Acts 7. 25; John 3. 16), (2) Re- 
jected by Israel he turns to the Gentiles (Ex. 2. 11-15; Acts 7. 25; 18. 5, 6; 28. 
17-28). (3) During his rejéction he gains a Gentile bride (Ex, 2. 16-243 Mt. 12) 


14-21; 2 Cor. 11. 2; Eph. 5. 30-32). 


(4) Afterward he again appears as Israel’s 


deliverer, and is accepted (Ex. 4. 29-31; Rom. 11. 24-26; Acts 15. 14-17). (5) Officially, 
Moses typifies Christ as Prophet (Acts 3. 22, 23), Advocate (Ex. 32. 31-35; 1 John 
2. 1, 2), Intercessor (Ex. 17. 1-6; Heb. 7. 25), and Leader, or King (Deut. 33. 4, 5; 


Tsa. 55. 4; Heb. 2. 10); 
with Christ. Moses was fait 
over His own house (Heb, 3. 5, 6). 


while, in relation to the house of God, he is in contrast 
hful as a servant over another’s house; Christ as a Son 


troughs to water their father’s 


ock. 

17 And the shepherds came and 
drove them away: but Moses stood 
up and helped them, and watered 
their flock. 

18 And when they came to ¢Reuel 
their father, he said, How is 1t that 
ye are come so soon to day? 

19 And they said, An Egyptian 
delivered us out of the hand of the 
shepherds, and also drew water 
enough for us, and watered the 
flock. 

20 And he said unto his daugh- 
ters, And where is he? why is it 
that ye have left the man? call 
him, that he may eat bread. 


Moses, rejected by his brethren, 
takes a Gentile bride. (Cf. 
Acts 18. 5, 6; Eph. 5. 30-32.) 


21 And Moses was content toja Called Ra- 
dwell with the man: and he gave eel: Num. 
Moses Zipporah his daughter. ba 

22 And she bare Aim a son, and|b Kingdom 
he called his name Gershom: for he 
said, I have been a stranger in a 
strange land. 

23 And it came to pass in process 
of time, that the king of Egypt died: 
and the children of Israel sighed by 
reason of the bondage, and they|? ee 
cried, and their cry came up unto} Acts 7.32: 
God by reason of the bondage. 

24 And God heard their groaning, 
and God remembeied his covenant 
with Abrahain, with Isaac, and with| (Gen.1.1; 
Jacob. Mal.3.18.) 

25 And God locked upon the chil-) ¢ rsraef (his- 


10; Ex.19.9. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.i2.8.) 


c Heb.14, 
note, 


e Deity 
Ex.34.6,7. 


dren of Israel, aud God had respect tory). veds- 
unto them. 13) (Gen.12. 
‘ 2,3; Rom.11, 

CHAPTER 3. 26.) 


“The call of Moses: the burning 
bush. 


Now Moses kept the flock of 

Jethro his father in law, the 
priest of Midian: and he ied the 
flock to the backside of the desert, 
and came to thé mountain of God, 
even to Horeb. 

. 2 And the ‘angel of the LORD ap- 

* peared unto him in a flame of fire 
out of the midst of a bush: and he 
looked, and, behold, the bush 
burned with fire, and the bush was 
not consumed. 

3 And Moses said, I will now turn}. 
aside, and see this great sight, why 
the bush is not burnt, 

4 And when the Lorp saw that 
he turned aside to see, God called 
unto him out of the midst of the 

73 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1531. 


(O.T.), vs.1- 


(names of). 


[3 15 
| 


bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And 
he said, Here am I. | 

5 And he said, Draw not nigh 
hither: put off thy shoes from off 
thy feet, for the place whereon thou 
standest rs holy ground. 

6 Moreover he said, I am the God 

of thy father, ¢the God of Abraham, 
the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob. And Moses hid his face: for 
he was afraid to look upon God. 
“97 And the Lorp said, I have’ 
surely seen the affliction of my peo- 
ple which are in Egypt, and have 
heard their cry by reason of their 
taskmasters; for I know their sor-, 
rows; 

8 And I am come down to deliver 
them out of the hand of the Egyp- 
tians, and to bring them up out of, 
that land unte a good land and a 
large, unto a land flowing with milk 
and honey; unto the place of the 
Canaanites, and the Hittites, anc 
the Amorites, and the Perizzites,' 
and the Hivites, and the Jebusites. 

9 Now therefore, behold, the cry 
of the children of Israel is come, 
unto me: and I have also seen the 


tians oppress them. 

10 Come now therefore, and f 
will send thee unto Pharaoh, that 
thou meyest bring forth my people 


ee wherewith .the Egyp- 


\the children of Israel out of Egypt. 


11 And Moses said unto God, Who 
am J, that = should go unto Phae 
raoh, and that T should bring forth 
the children of {srae) out of Egypt? 


be with thee; and this 

pe with th thee, that fF nave sent 
thee: When thou hast brought 
forth the people out of wgypt, ye 
shall serve God upon this mountain. 


The revelation of fhe name 
Jehovah. 


13 And Moses said unto God, Be- 
hold, when I come unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, and shall say unto 
them, The God of your fathers hath 
sent me unto you; and they shall 


ne 


Ba fe el Seat oa P 


say to me, What is his name? what, ) 


shall I say unto them? 


14 And God said unto Moses, | > 


M THAT 
us $ha 


dren of Israei, 1 AM hath sent me \— 
NLS 


unto you. 
The commission of Moses. 


15 And God said moreover unto 
Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the 
children of ‘Israel, The Lorp God, 


AM: and he said,” A\ al 
ou say unto the chil-| 7) 


3 16] EXODUS. [ore 


of your fathers, the God of Abra-|_B.c. 1491. | 2 And the Lorp said unto him, 

ham, the God of Isaac, and the God What is that in thine "hand? And 

of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: the said, A “rod. ‘ 

this 1s my name for ever, and this is 3 And he said, Cast it on the 

my memorial unto all generations. ground. And he cast it on the 
16 Go, and gather the elders of ground, and it ¢became a serpent; 


Israel together, and say unto them, and Moses fled from before it. 

The Lorp God of your fathers, the 4 And the LorD said unto Moses, 
God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Put forth thine hand, and take it 
Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I ‘by the tail. And he put forth his 
have surely visited you, and seen hand, and caught it, and it became 
that which is done to you in Egypt: a rod in his hand: 

17 And I have said, I will bring 5 That they may believe that the 
you up out of the affliction of Egypt LorpD God of their fathers, the God 
unto the land of the Canaanites, of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and 
and the Hittites, and the Amorites, the God of Jacob, hath appeared 
and the Perizzites, and the Hivites,|,1 ask. unto thee. 
and the Jebusites, unto a land flow- 6 And the Lorp said furthermore 
ing with milk and honey. 5 The useof junto him, !Put now thine hand into 

18 And they shall hearken to thy bec op thy bosom, And he put his hand 
voice: and thou shalt come, thou] 1ki.17.~ ’ |into his bosom: and when he took 


and the elders of Israel, unto the 516 doh jit out, behold, his hand was leprous 
king of ot dines d ve. het a 12531 —«(|aS Snow. 
unto him, € RD God o eo ; 7 And he said, Put thine hand 
Hebrews hath met with us: and|¢Sien ofthe into thy bosom again. And he put 
now let us go, we beseech thee, eon his hand into his bosom again; and 
three aed journey into the wilder- 2.9; Rev.2: plucked it out of his bosom, and, 
pee Nake : : ‘ 
eae et rete sacrifice to the Mos ce Shep: apes turned again as his 
19 And I am sure that the king of the tool of '| 8 And it shall come to pass, if 
Egypt will not let you go, no, not| his calling. jthey will not believe thee, neither 
by a mighty hand. Fest down, itihearken to the voice of the first 
20 And I will stretch out my| serpent; _ |sign, that they will believe the 
hand, and smite Egypt with all my} taken upin lyoice of the latter sign. 


wonders which I will do in the midst] fh, it be” | 9 And it shall come to pass, if 


thereof: and after that he will let] Soa or Goa” they will not believe also these two 
you go. [ f ; een Cf. signs, neither hearken unto thy 
21 And I will give this people| a voice, that thou shalt take of the 


favour in the sight of the Egyp- water of the river, and pour it upon 
tians: and it shall come to pass,)¢ Miracies _ |the dry Jand: and the water which 
that, when ye go, ye shall | not go Snes nae thou takest out of the river shall 


empty: 10-12 (Gen. |/become blood upon the dry Jand. 
22 But every woman shall ¢bor-} ‘5.24; Jon.2. ’ is . 
tow of her neighbour, and of her| 12-10) Moses’ two objections: (2) his 


that sojourneth in her house, jewels lack of eloquence. 
of silver, and jewels of gold, and rai- 
ment; and ye shall put them upon 
your sons, and upon your daughters; 


and ye shall spoil the Egyptians. 


CHAPTER 4. 


Moses’ two objections: (1) the 
unbelief of the people. 


AND Moses answered and said, 
«4 But, behold, they will not be- 
lieve me, nor hearken unto my 
voice: for they will say, The LoRpD 
hath not appeared unto thee. 


our capacity taken up for God; (2) the hand that holds the rod of God’ 
must be a cleansed hand swayed by a new heart (Isa. 52. 11). of God’s power 


74 


p Ui EXODUS. [5 1- 


13 And he said, O my Lord, send,|_B.c. 1491._|raoh, Thus saith the Lorp, Israel 


I pray thee, by the hand of him aS My son, even my firstborn: 
whom thou wilt send. 23 And I say unto thee, Let my 
ae : son go, that he may serve me: and 
Aaron jomed with Moses. if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I 
i4<And the anger of the LORD iwill slay thy son, even thy firstborn. 


was kindled against Moses, and he 24 And it came to pass by the 
said, Js not ¢Aaron !the Levite thy way in the inn, that the LorD met 
brother? I know that he can speak him, and sought to Skill him. 

well. And-also, behold, he cometh 25 Then Zipporah took a sharp 
forth to meet thee: and when he stone, and cut off the foreskin of 


seeth ; : : her son, and cast rt at his feet, and 

heart. gee ieee: berwlad. as Bis oat poene gk a bloody husband art 
15 And thou shalt s ou to me. 

him, and put words in aes ake 26 Sohe let him go: then she said, 

and I will be with thy mouth, and A bloody husband thou art, be- 

with his mouth, and will teach you! cause of the circumcision. 

what ye shall do. 27 And the LorD said to Aaron, 
16 And he shall be thy spokesman Go into the wilderness to meet 


unto the people: and he shall be, Moses. And he went, and met him 
even he ASRS Seahee tictead of 0 CfEx.32-21- Jin the mount of God, and kissed him. 


a mouth, and thou shalt be to him|? /nsetation 28 And Moses told Aaron all the 


instead of God. se words of the Lorp who had ‘sent 


47 And thou shalt take this tod in| (x41, him, and all'the ‘signs ‘which ‘he had 
thine hand, wherewith thou shalt| Rev-2?4%) commanded him. 
desis. ee tee, ben aso! ¢ C£Ex.5.1. Deieranee anngunieed to the 
to Jethro his father in law, and said|¢ CfE*4 ke I es 


unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, i reese And Moses and Aaron went 


and return unto my brethren which| and Aaron and gathered together all the elders 
are in Egypt, and see whether they shrank from of the children of Israel: 
be yet alive. And Jethro said to Selucnae 30 And Aaron spake all the words 
Moses, Go in peace. ieee which the LorD had spoken unto 
the firstborn. |Moses, and did the signs in the 
The return of Moses to Egypt. sight of the people. 
; 31 And the people believed: and 
_19 And the LorD said unto Moses when they heard that the LORD 
in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: had visited the children of Israel, 
for all the men are dead which and that he had looked upon their 
sought thy life. ely? affliction, then they bowed their 
20 And Moses took his wife and heads and worshipped. 
his sons, and set them upon an ass, 
and he returned to the land of CHAPTER 5. 
4 athe “gh vitae took the rod of The contest with Pharaoh: the 
91 And the Lord ssc saito Wio- first demand; the increased 
ses, When thou goest to return into burdens. 
Egypt, see that thou do all those ND afterward Moses and Aaron 
wonders before Pharaoh, which I went in, and told Pharaoh, 
have put in thine hand: but I will Thus saith the LorD God of Israel, 
2harden his heart, that he shall not éLet my people go, that they may 
let the people go. hold a feast unto me in the wilder- 
22 And thou shalt ‘say unto Pha- ness. 


1 Cf, Ex. 28. 1, note. j 
2Cf. Ex. 8. 15, 32; 9.34. In the face of the righteous demand of Jehovah and 


of the tremendous attestations by miracle that He was indeed God, and that Moses 
and Aaron were His representatives, Pharaoh “hardened his heart.” Instrumen- 
tally God hardened Pharaoh’s heart_by forcing him to an issue against which he 
hardened his own heart in refusal. Light rejected, rightful obedience refused, in- 
evitably hardens conscience and heart. See Rom. 9, 17-24. 

3iCf. Gen. 17. 14. The context ue 25) interprets v. 24. Moses was forgetful 
of the very foundation sign of Israel’s covenant relation to Jehovah. On the eve 
of delivering Israel he was thus reminded that without circumcision an Israelite 
was cut off from the covenant. See Josh. 5. 3-9. 

75 


5 2] 


2 And Pharaoh said, Who is the 
Lorp, that I should obey his voice 
to let Israel go? I know not the 


fall upon us with pestilence, or 
with the sword. i 

4 And the king of Egypt said un- 
to them, Wherefore do ye, Moses 
and Aaron, let the people from their 
works? get you unto your burdens. 

5 And Pharaoh said, Behold, the 
people of the land now are many, 
and ye make them rest from their 
burdens. 

6 And Pharaoh commanded the 
same day the taskmasters of the 
people, and their officers, saying, 

Ye shall no more give the peo- 
ple straw to make brick, as hereto- 
fore: let them go and gather straw 
for themselves. 

8 And the tale of the bricks, 
which they did make heretofore, vel , cr nge.a9 
shall lay upon them; ye shall not] 3840. By 
diminish ought thereof: for they| death and 
be idle; therefore they cry, saying,} Tramacction 
Let us go and sacrifice to our God.} have his peo- 

9 Let there more work be laid| ple sepa- 
upon the men, that they may labour evoerba 
therein; and let them not regard] wood (Rom. 
vain-words. §.1-11; Gal. 

10 And the taskmasters of the] °;14,19; Heb. 
people went out, and their officers, kak 
and they spake to the people, say- 
ing, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not 
give you straw. 

11 Go ye, get you straw where ye 
can find it: yet not ought of your 
work shall be diminished. 

12 So the people were scattered 
abroad throughout all the land of, 

Egypt to gather stubble instead of| 
straw. 

13 And the taskmasters hasted 
them, saying, Fulfil your works, 
your daily tasks, as when there 
was straw. : ; 1 

14_ And the officers of the children 
of Israel, which Pharaoh’s task- 
masters had set over -them, were 
beaten, and demanded, Wherefore 
have ye not fulfilled your task in 
making brick both yesterday and 
to day, as heretofore? 

15 Then the officers of the chil- 
dren of Israel came and cried unto 
Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest 
thou thus with thy servants? 

16 There is no straw given unto 
thy servants, and they say to us, 


76- 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


Make brick: and, behold, fhy ser- 
vants are beaten; but the fault is 
in thine own people. t 

17 But he said, Ye are idle, ye 
lare idle: therefore ye say, Let us go 
and do sacrifice to the LORD. 

18 Go therefore now, and work: 
for there shall no straw be given 
you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of 
bricks. F 

19 And the officers of the children 
of Israel did see that they were in 
evil case, after it was said, Ye shall 
not minish ought from your bricks 
of your daily task. 

20 And they met Moses and Aa- 
ron, who stood in the way, as they 
came forth from Pharaoh: 

21 And they said unto them, The 
Lorp look upon you, and judge; 
because ye have made our savour to 
be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, 
and in the eyes of his servants, to 
put a sword in their hand to slay 


us. 

22 And Moses returned unto the 
Lorp, and said, Lord, wherefore 
hast thou so evil entreated this 
people? why is it that thou hast 
sent me? 

23 For since I carne to Pharaoh to 
speak in thy name, he hath done 
evil to this people; neither hast 
thou delivered thy people at all. 


iy 


CHAPTER 6. 


The answer of Jehovah to 
Moses’ first prayer. 


‘THEN the LorD said unto Mo- 
ses, Now shalt thou see what I 
will do to Pharaoh: for with a 
strong hand shall he let them go, 
and with a strong hand shall he 
drive them out of his land. 

2 And God spake unto Moses, and 
[said unto him, I am the Lorp: 

3 And I appeared unto Abraham, 
{unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the 
\name of God Almighty, but by my 
name JEHOVAH was I not known 
to them. 

4 And I have also established my 
covenant with them, to givethem 
the land of Canaan, the land of @ 
their pilesjmage, wherein they were 
iStranger f 
| 5° And .I have also heard the 
iSroaning of the children of Israel, 
whom the Egyptians keep in bond- 
age; and I have remembered my 
covenant, 

6 Wherefore say unto the children 
of Israel, I am the Lorp, and I will 


bring you out from under the bur- 
dens of the Egyptians. and I will 
rid you out of their bondage, and I 
will ‘redeem you with a stretched 
out arm, and with great judg- 
ments: ’ 

7 And I will take you to me fora 
people, and I will be to you a God: 
and ye shall know that I am the 
LorpD your God, which bringeth 
you out from under the burdens of 
the Egyptians. 

8 And I will bring you in unto the 
land, concerning the which I did 
¢swear to give it to Abraham, to 
Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give 
it you for an heritage: I am the 
LorbD. 

9 And Moses spake so unto the 
children of Israel: but they heark- 
ened not unto Moses for anguish of 
spirit, and for cruel bondage. 

10 And the Lorp spake unto 
Moses, saying, 

11 Go in, speak unto Pharaoh 
king of Egypt, that he let the chil- 
dren of Israel go out of his land. 

12 And Moses spake before the 
LorD, saying, Behold, the children 
of Israel have not hearkened unto 
me: how then shall Pharaoh hear 
me, who am of uncircumcised lips? 

13 And the Lorp spake unto 
Moses and unto Aaron, and gave 
them a ¢charge unto the children of 
Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of 
Egypt, to bring the children of 
Israel out of the land of Egypt. 


The families of Israel. 


14 These be the heads of their 
fathers’ houses: The sons of Reu- 
ben the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, 
and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: 
these be the families of Reuben. 

15 And the sons of Simeon; Je- 
muel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and 
Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the 
son of a Canaanitish woman: these 
are the families of Simeon. 

16 And these are the names of the 
sons of Levi according to their gen- 
erations; Gershon, and Kohath, and 
Merari: and the years of the life of 
Levi were an hundred thirty and 
seven years, 

17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, 
ae Shimi, according to their fam- 

ies 

18 And the sons of Kohath; Am- 
ram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and 
Uzziel: and the years of the life of 
Kohath were an hundred thirty 
and three years. J 

19 And the sons of Merari; Ma- 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


a Separation. 


(Gen.12.1; 2 
Cor.6.14-17.) 


b Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


¢ v.4; Gen. 
15.18; 26.3; 
35.12. 

d Num.27.19, 
23; Deut.31. 
14. 


¢ Ex.5.1; 7.4. 


77 


iis 


hali and Mushi: these are the 
families of Levi according to their 
generations. 

20 And Amram took him Joche- 
bed his father’s sister to wife; and 
she bare him Aaron and Moses: and 
the years of the life of Amram were 
an hundred and thirty and seven 
years. 

21 And the sons of Izhar; Korah, 
and Nepheg, and Zichri. 

22 And the sons of Uzziel; Mi- 
shael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri. 

23 And Aaron took him Elisheba, 
daughter of Amminadab, sister of 
Naashon, to wife; and she bare 
him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, 
and Ithamar. 

24 And the sons of Korah; Assir, 
and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these 
are the families of the Korhites. 

25 And Eleazar Aaron’s son took 
him one of the daughters of Putiel 
to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: 
these are the heads of the fathers 
of the Levites according to their 
families. 

26 These are that Aaron and 
Moses, to whom the Lorp said, 
eBring out the children of Israel 
from the land of Egypt according to 
their armies. 

27 These are they which spake to 
Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring 
out the children of Israel from 
Egypt: these are that Moses and 
Aaron. 


The renewed commission. 


28 And it came to pass on the day 
when the LorD spake unto Moses 
in the land of Egypt, 

29 That the Lorp spake unto 
Moses, saying, I am the LORD: 
speak thou unto Pharaoh king of 
Egypt all that I say unto thee. 

30 And Moses said before the 
Lorp, Behold, I am of uncircum- 


cised lips, and how shall Pharaoh 
hearken unto me? 


CHAPTER 7. 


Ne the LorD said unto Moses, 
See, I have made thee a god 
to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother 
shall be thy prophet. 

2 Thou shalt speak all that I com- 
mand thee: and Aaron thy brother 
shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he 
send the children of Israel out of 
his land. 

3 And I will harden Pharaoh’s 
heart, and multiply my signs anu 
my’ wonders in the land of Egypt. 


ol 


unto you, that I may lay my hand 
upon Egypt, and bring forth mine 
armies, and my people the children 
of Israel, out of the land of Egypt 
by great judgments. 

3 And the Egyptians shall know 
that I am the Lorp, 4¢when I 
stretch forth mine hand upon 
Egypt, and bring out the children 
of Israel fromeamong them. 

6 And Moses and Aaron did as the 
LorDcommanded them, so did they. 

7 And Moses was fourscore years 
old, and Aaron fourscore and three 
years old, when they spake unto 
Pharaoh. 
~ 8 And the Lorp spake unto 
Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 

9 When Pharaoh shall speak unto 
you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: 
then thou shalt say unto Aaron, 
Take thy rod, and cast it before 
Pharaoh, and it shall become a 
serpent. 


|The contest with Pharaoh: the 
fecond demand; the first mir- 
- acle. 


10 And Moses and Aaron went in 
unto Pharaoh, and they did so as 
the Lorpd had commanded: and 
Aaron cast down his rod before 
Pharach, and before his servants, 
and it ‘became a serpent. 

1f Then Pharaoh also called the 
wise men and the sorcerers: now 
the magicians of Egypt, they also 
did in ‘like manner with their en- 
chantments. 

12 For they cast down every man 
his rod, and they became serpents: 
but Aaron’s 'rod swallowed up their 
rods, 

13 And he hardened Pharaoh’s 
heart, that he hearkened not unto 
them; as the Lorp had said. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
third demand. 
/ 


14 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, Pharaoh’s heart is hardened, he 
refuseth to let the people go. 

15 Get thee unto Pharaoh in the 
morning; lo, he goeth out unto the 
water; and thou shalt stand by the 
river’s brink against he come: and 
the rod which was turned to a 


EXODUS. 


4 But Pharaoh shall not hearken| sic. 1491. 


a A prophetic 
sign also. 
The nations 
shall know 
Jehovah 
when He re- 
stores and 
blesses Is- 
rael in the 
kingdom 
(Isa.2.1-3; 
11,10-12; 14. 
T; 60.4,5; 
Ezk.37.28). 


6 Miracles 
(O.T.). vss 
10-12,20-25; 
Ex.8.5-14. 
(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


¢ Cf. 2 Tim.3. 
8. See Ex. 
8.18. Nei- 
ther Satan 
nor his tools 
can create 
hfe. Rev.13 
15 will be a 
“lying won- 


der”’ (2 Thes. 
2.9). 


d vs. 11,24. 
e Ex,3.19. 


1 Cf. Ex. 4. 2, note. As Moses’ rod was the rod of 
(Deut. 33. 4, 5), so Aaron’s was the rod 
' the serpents, symbols of Satan, who had the power 


of life, 


[7% 
serpent shalt thou take in thine 
hand 


16 And thou shalt say unto him, 
The Lorp God of the Hebrews hath 
sent me unto thee, saying, Let my 
people go, that they may serve me 
in the wilderness: and, behold, hith- 
erto thou wouldest not hear. 

17 Thus saith the Lorn, In this 
thou shalt know that I am the 
Lorn: behold, I will smite with the 
rod that is in mine hand upon 
the waters which are in the river, 
and they shall be turned to blood. 

18 And the fish that is in the river 
shall die, and the river shall stink; 
and the Egyptians shall lothe to 
drink of the water of the river. 

19 And the Lorp spake unto 
Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy 
tod, and stretch out thine hand 
upon the waters of Egypt, upon 
their streams, upon their rivers, and 
upon their ponds, and upon all their 
pools of water, that they may be- 
come blood; and that there may be 
blood throughout all the land of 
Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and 
in vessels of stone. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
second miracle; the first judg- 
ment. 


20 And Moses and Aaron did so, 
as the LorD commanded; and he 
lifted up the rod, and smote the 
waters that were in the river, in 
the sight of Pharaoh, and in the 
sight of his servants: and all the 
waters that were in the river were 
turned to blood. 

21 And the fish that was in the 
river died; and the river stank, and 
the Egyptians could not drink of 
the water of the river; and there 
was blood throughout all the land 
of Egypt. 

22 And the magicians of Egypt 
did ¢so with their enchantments: 
and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, 
neither did he hearken unto them; 
fas the LorD had said. 

23 And Pharaoh turned and went 
into his house, neither did he set 
his heart to this also. 

24 And all the Egyptians digged 
round about the river for water to 
drink; for they could not drink of 
the water of the river. 


power, the rod of the King 
the rod of the Priest. As here 
of death (Rev. 12. 9; Heb. 2. 14), 


are swallowed up, so in resurrection death will be “swallowed up in victory” (1 Cor, 


15.54). See Num. 17. 8. 


78 


25 And seven days were fulfilled, 
after that the Lorp had smitten 
the river. 


CHAPTER 8. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
fourth demand. 


ND the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say 
unto him, Thus saith the Lorp, Let 
my people go, that they may serve 


me. 

2 And if thou refuse to let ee 
go, behold, I will smite all thy bor- 
ders with frogs: 

3 And the river shall bring forth 
frogs abundantly, which shall go up 
and come into thine house, and into 
thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, 
and into the house of thy servants, 
and upon thy people, and into thine 
ovens, and into thy kneading- 
troughs: 

4 And the frogs shall come up 
both on thee, and upon thy people,| 
and upon all thy servants. 

5 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth|¢ Miracles 
thine hand with thy rod over the} (O.T.)._vs.5- 
streams, over the rivers, and over| }4:15-18.20- 
the ponds, and cause frogs to come| (Gen.5.24; 
up upon the land of Egypt. 


Jon.2.1-10.) 
The contest with Pharaoh: the|?Ex.7.11. 
third muracle; the second)ckx.7.13. 


judgment. ¢ Cf.Ex.7.11, 


@ And Aaron stretched: out his), p.05, 
hand over the waters of Egypt; 
@and the frogs came up, and cov- 
ered the land of Egypt. ; 

7 And the magicians did ¥so with 
their-enchantments, and brought up 

frogs upon the land of Egypt. 
~ 8 Then Pharaoh called for Moses 
and Aaron, and said, Intreat the 
Lorp, that he may take away the 
frogs from me, and from my peo- 
ple; and I will let the people go, that 
they may do sacrifice unto the 
Lorp. 

9 And Moses said unto Pharaoh, 
‘Glory over me: when shall I intreat 
for thee, and for thy servants, and 
for thy people, to destroy the frogs 
from thee and thy thouses, that 
they may remain in the river only? 

10 And he said, To morrow. And 
he said, Be it according to thy 
word: that thou mayest know that 
there is none like unto the LORD 
‘our God. 

11 And the frogs shall depart from 
‘thee; and from thy houses, and from 
thy servants, and from thy people;' 


79 


EXODUS. 


Ula 


they shall remain in the river 
only. 
The fourth miracle. 


12 And Moses and Aaron went out 
from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto 
the Lorp because of the frogs which 
he had brought against Pharaoh. 

13 And the Lorn did according to 
the word of Moses; and the frogs 
died out of the houses, out of the 
villages, and out of the fields. 

14 And they gathered them to- 
gether upon heaps: and the Jand 
stank. 
| 15 But when Pharaoh saw that 
there was respite, he ‘hardened his 
heart, and hearkened not unto 
them; as the Lorp had said. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
fifth ania: the third judg- 
ment. 


| 16 And the Lorn said unto Mo- 
ses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out 
thy rod, and smite the dust of the 
land, that it may ‘become lice 
throughout all the land of Egypt. 

17 And they did so; for Aaron 
stretched out his hand with his rod, 
and smote the dust of the earth, and 
it became lice in man, and in beast; 
all the dust of the land became lice 
throughout all the land of Egypt. 

18 And the magicians did so with 
their enchantments to bring forth 
lice, but they ¢could not: so there 
were lice upon man, and upon beast. 

19 Then the magicians said unto 
‘Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: 
and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, 
and he hearkened not unto. them; 
las the LorD had said. 


\The contest with Pharaoh: the 
fifth demand. 


20 And the LorD said unto Ma- 
ses, Rise up early in the morning 
and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he 
«cometh forth to the water; and say 
unto him, Thus saith the Lorp, 
Let my people go, that they may 
serve me. i 

21 Else, if thou wilt not let my 
ipeople go, behold, I will send 
iswarms of flies upon thee, and upon 
thy servants, and upon thy people; 
and into thy houses: and the houses 
of the Egyptians shall be full of 
swarms.of flies, and also the ground 
whereon they are. 

22 And I will sever in that day 
the ‘land of Goshen, in which my 
people dwell, that no swarms of 
flies shall be there; to the end thou 


823] 


mayest know that I am the Lorp 
in the midst of the earth. 

23 And I will put a ¢division be- 
tween my people and thy people: 
to morrow shall this sign be. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
sixth miracle; the fourth 
judgment. 

24 And the LorpD did so; and 
there came a grievous swarm of 
flies into the house of Pharaoh, and 
into his servants’ houses, and into 
all the land of Egypt: the land was 
corrupted by reason of the swarm 
of flies. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
first compromise refused. 


25 And Pharaoh called for Moses 
and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, 
sacrifice to your God 1in the land. 

26 And Moses Ysaid, It is not 
meet so to do; for we shail sacrifice 
the abomination of the Egyptians 
to the LorpD our God: lo, shall we 
sacrifice the abomination of the 
Egyptians before their eyes, and 
will they not stone us? 

27 Wewill go three days’ journey 
into the wilderness, and sacrifice to 
the Lorp our God, as he shall com- 
mand us. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
second compromise refused. 


28 And Pharaoh said, I will let 
you go, that ye may sacrifice to the 
Lorp your God in the wilderness; 
only ye shall not go ‘very far away: 
intreat for me, 

‘29 And Moses said, Behold, I go 
out from thee, and I will intreat the 
LorD that the swarms of fies may 
depart from Pharaoh, from his ser- 
vants, and from his people, to mor- 
row: but let not Pharaoh deal de- 
ceitfully any more in not letting the 
people go to sacrifice to the Lorp. 


The seventh miracle. 


30 And Moses went out from Pha- 
taoh, and intreated the Lorp. 

31 And the Lorn did according 
to the word of Moses; and he re- 
moved the swarms of flies from Pha- 
taoh, from his servants, and from 
his people; there remained not one. 

32 And Pharaoh hardened his 
heart at this time also, neither 
would he let the people go. 


1 The compromises 
day. 
stay in Egypt.”’ 
the world’ 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


CHAPTER 9. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
sixth demand; the eighth 
muracle; the fifth judgment. 


HEN the Lorp said unto Mo- 

ses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and 

tell him, Thus saith the Lorp God 

of the Hebrews, Let my people go, 
that they may serve me. 

2 For if thou refuse to let them 
go, and wilt hold them still, 

3 Behold, the hand of the LorD 
is upon thy cattle which zs in the 
field, upon the horses, upon the 
asses, upon the camels, upon the 


a Heb. pe- oxen, and upon the sheep: there 


Cee shall be a very grievous ¢murrain. 
tion,” Psa. 4 And the Lorp shall sever be- 
ares: 130.7. [tween the cattle of Israel and the 
Gab is” |cattle of Egypt: and there shall 


nothing die of all that is the chil- 


b Separation. |dren’s of Israel. 


Roi: 5 And the LorD appointed a set 
24-26. (Gen, |time, saying, To morrow the LORD 
pore a shall do this thing in the land. 


-6 And the Lorn did that thing on 
the morrow, and all the cattle of 
Egypt died: but of the cattle of the 
children of Israel died not one. 


¢ The second 
compromise 
is a modifi- 
cation 


merely of 7 And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, 

ae eels es there was not one of the cattle of 

peaien the Israelites dead. And the heart 

worldly s of Pharaoh was hardened, and he 
am. 


did not let the people go. 
The contest with Pharaoh: the 


dintisacios ninth miracle; the sixth judg- 
on vs. ment. 
22-26; Ex.10.| 8 And the Lorp said unto Moses 
12-19. (Gen. |and unto Aaron, Take to you hand- 


fuls of ashes of the furnace, and let 
Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven 


5.24; Jon.2. 
1-10.) 


e Deut, 28.27; in the sight of Pharaoh, 
ried. 9 And it shall become small dust 


in all the land of Egypt, and shall 
be a boil breaking forth with blains 
upon mah, and upon beast, through- 
out all the land of Egypt. 

10 And they took ashes of the fur- 
nace, and stood before Pharaoh; 
and Moses sprinkled it up toward 
heaven; and it became a boil break- 
ing forth with blains upon man, 
and upon beast. 

11 And the magicians could not 
stand before Moses because of the 
‘boils; for the boil was upon the 
magicians, and upon all the Egyp- 
\tians. 


proposed by Pharaoh are those urged upon Christians to- 
The first says in effect: ‘“Be a Christian if you will, but not a ‘narrow’ one— 
Invariably it ends in world-conformity, world-pleasing, 
Ss money for God (Psa. 50. 9-17). Cf. 2 Cor. 6 


and seeking 
- 14-18; Gal. 1. 4, 
80 


9:12] EXODUS. [10 1 


12 And the Lorp hardened the] B.c. 1491. |the Lorp rained hail upon the land 
heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened of Egypt. 
not unto them; as the Lorp had 24 So there was hail, and fire 
spoken unto Moses. mingled with the hail, very griev- 


. js ous, such as there was none like it 
The OO ULNA heed ga the in all the land of Egypt since it 


became a nation. 
13 And the LorD said unto Mo- 25 And the hail smote throughout 
ses, Rise up early in the morning, all the land of Egypt all that was 
and stand before Pharaoh, and say 


in the field, both man and beast; 
unto him, Thus saith the Lorp and the hail smote every herb of 
God of the Hebrews, Let my people the field, and brake every tree of 
go, that they may serve me. the field. 

14 For I will at this time send all 26 Only in the land of Goshen, 
my plagues upon thine heart, and bwhere the children of Israel were, 
upon thy servants, and upon thy was there no hail. 
people; that thou mayest know that 27 And Pharaoh sent, and called 
there is none like me in all the for Moses and Aaron, and said unto 
earth. them, I have sinned this time: the 

15 For now I will stretch out my LORD is righteous, and I and my 
hand, that I may smite thee and people are wicked. 
thy people with pestilence; and 28 Intreat the Lorp (for it is 
thou shalt be cut off from the earth. enough) that there be no more 

16 And in very deed for “this mighty thunderings and hail; and I 
cause have I raised thee up, for to 


will let you go, and ye shall stay 
shew in thee my power; and that 


no longer. 
my name may be declared through- 29 And Moses said unto him, As 
out all the earth. 


soon as I am gone out of the city, I 
17 As yet exaltest thou thyself 


will spread abroad my hands unto 
against my people, that thou wilt the LoRD; and the thunder shall 
not let them go? 


cease, neither shall there be any 

18 Behold, to morrow about this/, pom.9.16,17; |More hail; that thou mayest know 
time I will cause it to rain a very| 2 Cor.2.16; “|how that the earth zs the Lorp’s, 
grievous hail, such as hath not been) ¢f-1Pet.2.8. | 30 But as for thee and thy ser- 
in Egypt since the foundation there-}, crgxg.23, |vants, I know that ye will not yet 


of even until now. fear the LORD God. 

19 Send therefore now, and 31 And the flax and the barley 
gather thy cattle, and all that thou was smitten: for the barley was in 
hast in the field; for upon every the-ear, and the flax was bolled. 
man and beast which shall be found 32 But the wheat and the rie were 
in the field, and shall not be brought not smitten: for they were not 
home, the hail shall come down grown up. 
upon them, and they shall die. 33 And Moses went out of the city 

20 He that feared the word of the from Pharaoh, and spread abroad 
LorD among the servants of Pha- his hands unto the Lorp: and the 
raoh made his servants and his cat- thunders and hail ceased, and the 
tle flee into the houses: rain was not poured upon the 

21 And he that regarded not the earth. 
word of the LorD left his servants 34 And when Pharaoh saw that 
and his cattle in the field. ae rain and the Phy Re the Rie 

‘ i ers were cease e sinned ye 
The contest with Pharaoh: the more, and hardened his heart, he 
tenth miracle; the seventh 
4 and his servants. 

yadesnent, 35 And the heart of Pharaoh was 

22 And the Lorn said unto Mo- hardened, neither would he let the 
ses, Stretch forth thine hand toward children of Israel go; as the LorpD 
heaven, that ee may be hail in had spoken by Moses. 
all the land of Egypt, upon man, é 
and upon beast, and upon every CHAPTER 10. 
eet ene: throughout the The contest with Pharaoh: the 

23 And Moses stretched forth his eighth demand. 
tod toward heaven: and the LorD ND the Lorp said unto Moses, 
sent thunder and hail, and the fire Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have 
tan along upon the ground; and hardened his heart, and the heart 


81 


10. 2] 


of his servants, that I might shew| Bic: 1497. 


these my signs before him: _ 

2 And that thou mayest tellin the 
ears of thy son, and of thy son’s' 
son, what things I have wrought in 
Egypt, and my signs which I have’ 
done among them; that ye may 
know how that I am the Lorpb. 

3 And Moses and Aaron came in 
unto Pharaoh, and said_unto him, 
Thus saith the Lorp God of the, 
Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse: 
to humble thyself before me? let my’ 
people go, that they may serve me. 

4 Else, if thou refuse to let my 
people go, behold, to morrow will I 
bring the “locusts into thy coast: 

5. And they shall cover the face of 


EXODUS. 


land of Egypt for the locusts, that 
they may aome up upon the land of 
Egypt, and eat every herb of the 
land, even all that the hail hath left. 

13. And Moses stretched forth his 
rod over the land of Egypt, and the 


\LorD brought an east wind upon 


a Prov.30.27; 
Rev.9.2,3. 


the earth, that one cannot be able|) Separation. 


to see the earth: and they shall eat 
the residue of that which is escaped, 
which remaineth unto you from the 
hail, and shall eat every tree which 
groweth for you out of the field: 

6 And they shall fill thy houses, 
and the houses of all thy servants. 
and. the houses of all the Egyptians; 
which neither thy fathers, nor thy 
fathers’ fathers have seen, since the 
day that they were upon the earth 
unto this. day. And he turned him- 
self, and went out from Pharaoh. 

7 And Pharaoh’s servants said 
unto him, How jong shall this man 
be a snare unto us? let the men go, 
that they may serve the Lorn their 
God: knowest thou not yet that 
Egypt is destroyed? 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
third compromise refused. 


8 And Moses and Aaron were 
brought again unto Pharaoh: and 
he said unto them, °Go, serve the 
LORD your God: but who are they 
that shall go? 

9 And Moses said, We will go 
with our young and with our old, 
with our sons and with our daugh- 
ters, with our flocks and with our 
herds will we go; for we must hold 
a feast unto the Lorp. 

10 And he said unto them, Let 
the LorD be so with you, as I will 
let you go, and your little ones: 
look to it; for evil is before you. 

11 Not so: go now ‘ye that are 
men, and serve the Lorn; for that 
ye did desire. And they were 
driven out from Pharaoh’s presence. 
The contest with Pharaoh: the 

eleventh miracle; the eighth 
judgment, 

12 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, Stretch out thine hand over the 


vs.8-11,24- 
26; Ex.11.7. 
(Gen.12.1; 
2 Cor.6.14- 
17.) 


¢ The third 
compromise 
proposed by 
Pharaoh is, 
perhaps, as 
applied to 
believers, 
the subtlest 
and most 


the land all that day, and all that 
night; and when it was morning, 
the east. wind brought the 4locusts.. 

14 And the locusts went up over 
all the land of Egypt, and rested in 
all the coasts of Egypt: very griev- 
ous were they; before them there 
were no such locusts as they, neither 
after them shall be such. 

15 For they covered the face of 
the whole earth, so that the land 
was darkened; and they did eat 
every herb of the land, and all the 
fruit of the trees which the hail had’ 
left: and there remained not any 
green thing in the trees, or in the 
herbs of the field, through all the 
land of Egypt. 

16 Then Pharaoh called for Mo- 
ses and Aaron in haste; and he said, 
I have sinned against the LorpD 
your God, and against you. 

17 Now therefore forgive, I pray 


successful of |thee, my sin only this once, and 


them all. 
The most: 
godly: par- 
ents desire: 
worldly pros- 
perity and 
position for 
their children 
(Mt.20.20, 
21). 


d Miracles 

} (O.T.). vs. 
12-19,21-23; 
Ex.12.29,30. 


(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


e Cf.Ex.8.23. 


f i.e. “Leave 
your prop- 
erty in the 

world.” Cf. 


intreat the LorD your God, that he 
may take away from me this death 
only. 

18 And he went out from Pha- 
raoh, and intreated the Lorpb. 

19° And the Lorp turned a mighty 
strong west wind, which took away: 
the locusts, and cast them into the 
Red sea; there remained not one 
locust in all the coasts of Egypt: 

20 But the Lorp hardened Pha- 
raoh’s heart, so that he would not 
let the children of Israel go. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
twelfth miracle; the ninth 
judgment. 


21 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 


Mt.16.25-27; |Ses, Stretch out thine hand toward 


Lk.18.18-25. 


82 


heaven, that there may be darkness 
over the land of Egypt, even dark: 
ness which may be felt. 

22 And Moses stretched forth his 
hand toward heaven; and there was 
a thick darkness in all the land of 
Egypt three days: 

23 They saw notone another, riei= 
ther rose any from his place for 
three days: “but all the children of 
Israel had light in their dwellings. 
Fhe contest with Pharaoh: the 

fourth compromise refused, 


24 And Pharaoh called unto Mo- 
ses, and Jsaid, Go ye, serve the 


10 25] 


Lorp; only let your flocks and your 
herds be stayed: let your little ones 
also go with you. 

25 And Moses said, Thou must 
give us also sacrifices and burnt- 
offerings, that we may sacrifice unto 
the LorD our God. 

26 Our cattle also shall go with 
us; there shall not an hoof be left 
behind; for thereof must we take to 
serve the LORD our God; and we 
know not with what we must serve 
the Lorb, until we come thither. 

27 But the LorD hardened Pha- 
rtaoh’s heart, and he would not let 
them go. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
king abandoned to judgment. 


28 And Pharaoh said unto him, 
Get thee from. me. take heed to 
thyself, see my face no more; for 
in that day thou seest my face thou 
shalt die. 

29 And Moses said, Thou hast 
spoken well, I will see thy face 
again no more. 


CHAPTER 11. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
judgment upon the firstborn 
foretold. 


ND the LorbD said unto Moses, 
Yet will I bring one plague 
more upon Pharaoh, and upon 
Egypt; afterwards he will let you 
go hence; when he shall let you go, 
he shall surely thrust you out hence 
altogether. 

2 Speak now in the ears of the 
people, and let every man “borrow 
of his neighbour, and every woman 
of her neighbour, jewels of silver, 
and jewels of gold. 

3 And the LorD gave the people 
favour in the sight of the Egyp- 
tians. Moreover the man Moses 
was very great in the land of Egypt, 
in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, 
and in the sight of the people. 

4 And Moses said, Thus saith the 
Lorp, About midnight will I go 
out into the midst of Egypt: 

5 And all the firstborn in the land 
df Egypt shall die, from the first- 
born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon 
his throne, even unto the firstborn 
of the maidservant that 7s behind 
the mill; and all the firstborn of 
beasts. 

6 And there shall be a great cry 
throughout all the land of Egypt, 
such as there was none like it, nor 
shall be like it any more. 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


[12 8 


7 But against any of the ichildren 
of Israel ‘shall not a dog move his 
tongue, against man or beast: that 
ye may know how that the Lorp 
doth put a $difference between the 
Egyptians and Israel. 

8 And all these thy servants shall 

come down unto me, and bow down 
themselves unto me, saying, Get 
thee out, and all the people that fol- 
low thee: and after that I will go 
out. And he went out from Pha- 
raoh in a great anger. 
9 And the Lorp said unto Moses, 
(Pharaoh shall not hearken unto 
you; that my wonders may be 
multiplied in the land of Egypt. 

10 And Moses and .Aaron did all 
'these wonders before Pharaoh: and 
the Lorp hardened Pharaoh’s 
heart, so that he would not let the 


1a Lit. ask. 


b Separation. 
Ex.19.4. 
(Gen.12.1; 

2 Cor.6.14- 
17.) 


¢ Israel (his- 
tory). vs.1- 
13; Ex.13. 
17-22. (Gen. 
12.2.3, Rom. 
11.26.) 


di.e. April. 


e Sacrifice 
(typical). 
vs.3-11,27; 
Ex.17.15. 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 


jf Leaven. vs. 


83 


children of Israel go out of his land. 


CHAPTER 12. 


The contest with Pharaoh: Par- 
enthesis—the Passover 


yaegee the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses and Aaron in the land of 
Egypt, ‘saying, 

2 This month shall be unto you 
the beginning of months: it shal/ 
be the “first month of the year to 
you. 

3 Speak ye unto all the congrega- 
tion of Israel, saying, In the tenth 
day of this month they shall take 
to them every man a ‘lamb, accord- 
ing to the house of their fathers, a 
lamb for an house: 

4 And if the household be too 
little for the lamb, let him and his 
neighbour next unto his house take 
it according to the number of the 
souls; every man according to his 
eating shall make your count for 
the lamb. 

5 Your lamb shall be without 
blemish, a male of the first year: 
ye shall take zt out from the sheep, 
or from the goats: 

6 And ye shall keep it up until 
the fourteenth day of the ‘same 
month: and the whole assembly of 
the congregation of Israel shall kill 
it in the evening. 

7 And they shall take of the blood, 
and strike 1t on the two side posts 
and on the upper door post of the 
houses, wherein they shall eat it, 

8 And they shall eat the fiesh in 
that night, roast with fire, and Jun- 
leavened bread; and with bitter 
herbs they shall eat it. 


129] | EXODUS. [12 26 


17 And yeshall observe the feast 
of unleavened bread; for in: this 
|selfsame day have I brought your 
armies out of the land of Egypt: 
therefore shall ye observe this day 
in your generations by an ordinance 


9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at 
all with water, but roast with fire; 
his head with his legs, and with the 
purtenance thereof. y a: 
10 And ye shall let nothing of it 
remain until the morning; and that 


__ BC. 1491. 


which remaineth of it until the for ever. 

morning ye shall burn with fire. 18 In the first month, on the 
11 And thus shall ye eat it; with fourteenth day of the month at 
your loins girded, your shoes on even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, 
your feet, and your staff in your until the one and twentieth day of 

hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: the month at even. 
it is the LorpD’s !passover. 19 Seven days shall there be no 
2 3 GOS leaven found in your houses: for 
Redemption (typical): (1) by whosoever eateth that which is 
blood. leavened, even that soul shail be 
12 For I will pass through the cut off from the congregation of 


Israel, whether he be a stranger, or 
born in the land. 

20 Ye shall eat nothing leavened; 
in all your habitations shail ye eat 
unleavened bread. F 

21 Then Moses called for all the 
elders of Israel, and said unto them, 


land of Egypt this night, and will 
smite all the firstborn in the land 
of Egypt, both man and beast; and 
against all the gods of Egypt I will 
execute judgment: I am the Lorp. 

13 And the blood shall be to you|, gx13.6, 
for a token upon the houses where 


cording to your families, and kill 


i te'are: and when I e the blood, I|*Heb-11.28. Draw out and take you a lamb ac- 


a Nooeed Oe you, “and ee cHeb.12.24._ |the passover 
Shall not be upon you to destroy 

i d2Sam.24. 22 And ye shall take a bunch of 
you, when I smite the land of Egypt.|¢ 7} Sop, hyssop, and dip ft in the blood that 


, ; : 24 is inthe bason, and strike the lin- 
Sy Bee eee ae tel and the two side posts with the 
blood that fs in the bason; and none 
14 And this day shall be unto you of you shall go out at the door of 
for a memorial; and ye shall keep} his house until the morning. 
it a feast to the Lorp throughout 23 For the LorD will pass through 
your generations; ye shall keep it a to smite the Egyptians; and when 
feast by an ordinance for ever. . he seeth the ‘blood upon the lintel, 
15 Seven days shall ye eat un- and on the two side posts, the 
leavened bread; even the first day Lorp will pass over the door, 
ye shall put away leaven out of and will not 4suffer the destroyer 
your houses: for whosoever eateth to come in unto your houses to 
leavened bread from the first day smite you. 
until the seventh day, that soul 24 And ye shall observe this thing 
shall be cut off from Israel. for an ordinance to thee and to thy 
16 And in the first day there sons for ever. 
Shall be an holy convocation, and] . 25 And it shall come to pass, when 
in.the-seventh day there shall be an ye be come to the land which the 
holy convocation to you; no manner LORD will give you, according as he 
of work shall be done in them, save hath promised, that ye shall keep 
that which every man must eat, this service. 
that only may be done of ‘you. 26 And it shall come to pass, when 


1 The Passover, type of Christ our Redeemer (Ex. 12. 1-28: John 1, 2931 Corns. 
6, 7; 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19): (1) The lamb must be without blemish, and to test this it was 
kept up four days (Ex. 12.5, 6). So our Lord’s public life, under hostile scrutiny, 
was the testing which proved His holiness (Lk. 11. 53, 54; John 8. 46; 18. 38). 
(2)-The Lamb thus tested must be slain (Ex. 12. 6; John 12. 24; Heb. 9, 22). (3) The 
blood must be applied (Ex. 12.7). This answers to appropriation by personal faith, 
and refutes universalism (John 3.36). (4) The blood thus applied of itself, without 
anything in addition, constituted a perfect protection from judgment (Ex. 12. 13; 
i John 1.7; Heb. 10,10, 14). (5) The feast typified Christ the bread of life, answer- 
ing to the memorial supper (Mt. 26. 26-28; 1 Cor. 11. 23-26). To observe the 
feast was a duty and privilege, but not a condition of safety. As a matter of fact, 
the bread was not eaten by the Israelites on the night in which, nevertheless, they 
were preserved from the judgment upon the firstborn (Ex. 12. 34-39). 


84 


og 
mal 2 127} 


your children shall say unto you, 
What mean ye by this service? 

27 That ye shall say, It is the sac- 
rifice of the LoRD’s passover, who 
passed over the houses of the chil- 
dren of Israel in Egypt, when he 
smote the Egyptians, and delivered 
our houses. And the people bowed 
the head and worshipped. 

28 And tHe children of Israel went 
away, and ¢did as the LorD had 
commanded Moses and Aaron, so 
did they. 


The contest with Pharaoh: the 
tenth judgment; death of the 
firstborn. 


29 And it came to pass, that at| 


midnight the LorpD smote all the 
firstborn in the land of Egypt, from 
the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat 
on his throne unto the firstborn of 
the captive that was in the dun- 


geon; and all the firstborn of cat- 


tle. 

30 And Pharaoh rose up in the 
night, he, and all his servants, and 
all the Egyptians; and there was a 
great cry in Egypt; for there was 
not a house where there was not 
one dead. 

31 And he called for Moses and 
Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, 
and get you forth from among my 
people, both ye and the children of 
Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as 
ye have said. 

32 Also take your flocks and your 
herds, as ye have said, and be gone; 
and bless me also. 

33 And the Egyptians were ur- 
gent upon the people, that they 
might send them out of the land in 
haste; for they said, We be all dead 
men. 

34 And the people took their 
dough before it was leavened, their 
kneadingtroughs being bound up 
in their clothes upon their shoul- 
ders, 

35 And the children of Israel did 
according to the word of Moses; 
and they “borrowed of the Egyp- 
tians jewels of silver, and jewels of 
gold, and raiment: 

36 And the LorD gave the people 
favour in the sight of the Egyp- 
tians, so that they ¢lent unto them 
such things as they required. 
And they spoiled the Egyptians. 


Redemption: (2) by power; the 
first stage of the journey. 


37 And the children of Israel jour- 
neyed from Rameses to Succoth, 


EXODUS. 


BO. 1491, 


(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 


b Miracles 


(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


c Lit. asked. 
d Lit. gave. 


e Lhis -mixed 
multitude, 
standing for 
unconverted 
church- 
members, 
was a source 
of weakness 
and division, 
then as now 


11.4-6). 
There had 
been a mani- 
festation of 
divine power, 
and men 
were drawn 
to it without 
change of 
heart. Cf. 
Lk.14.25-27. 


pee John 19, 


85 


(12 51 


about six hundred thousand on foot 
that were men, beside children. 

38 And a émixed multitude went 
up also with them; and flocks, and 
herds, even very much cattle. 

39 And they baked unleavened 
cakes of the dough which they 
brought forth out of Egypt, for it 
was not leavened: because they 
were thrust out of Egypt, and 
could not tarry, neither had they 


ptepared for themselves any vict- 
ual. 

40 Now the sojourning of the 
children of Israel, who dwelt in 
Egypt, was four hundred and thirty 
years. 

41 And it came to pass at the end 
of the four hundred and thirty 
years, even the selfsame day it 
came to pass, that all the hosts of 
the LorD went out from the land 
of Egypt. 

42 It is a night to be much ob- 
served unto the Lorp for bringing 
them out from the land of Egypt: 
this zs that night of the LorRD to 
be observed of all the children of 
Israel in their generations, : 

43 And the LorD said unto Mo- 
ses and Aaron, This 1s the ordinance 
of the passover: There shall no 
stranger eat thereof: 

44 But every man’s servant that 
is bought for money, when thou 
hast circumcised him, then shall he 
eat thereof. 

45 A foreigner and an hired ser- 
vant shall not eat thereof. 

46 In one house shall it be eaten; 
thou shalt not carry forth ought of 
the flesh abroad out of the house; 
neither shall ye break a /bone 
thereof. 

47 All the congregation of Israel 
shall keep it. 

48 And when a stranger shall so- 
journ with thee, and will keep the 
passover to the Lorp, let all his 
males be circumcised, and then let 
him come near and keep it; and he 
shall be as one that is born in the 
land: for no uncircumcised person 
shall eat thereof. 

49 Oné law shall be to him that 
is homeborn, and unto the stranger 
that sojourneth among you. 

50 Thus did all the children of 
Israel; as the LoRD commanded 
Moses and Aaron, so did they. 

51 And it came to pass the 
selfsame day, that the Lorp 
did bring the children of Israel 
out of the land of Egypt by their 
armies. 


13 1] EXODUS. 


[142 


CHAPTER 13. B.C. 1491. 


Parenthetical: The firstborn set 
apart for Jehovah. 


Pe the Lorp spake unto Mo- 

ses, saying, 

2 Sanctify unto me all the first- 
born, whatsoever openeth the womb 
among the children of Israel, both 
of man and of beast: it rs mine. 

3 And Moses said unto the peo- 
ple, Remember this day, in which 
ye came out from Egypt, out of the 
house of bondage; for by strength: 
of hand the Lorp brought you out 
from this place: “there shall no’ 
leavened bread be eaten. 

4 This day came ye out in the! 
month SAbib. 

5 And it shall be when the Lorp 
shall bring thee into the land of 
the Canaanites, and the Hittites, 
and the Amorites, and the Hivites,| reaven. vs. 
and the Jebusites, which he sware| 3,6,7; Ex.23. 
unto thy fathers to give thee, a land Pic 
flowing with milk and honey, that] 33)’ 
thou shalt keep this service in this} _ ; 
month. bie. April, 

6 Seven days thou shalt eat un-}-criK2.23. 
leavened bread, and in the seventh 
day shall be a feast to the Lor. |¢ Thesedeme- 

7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten lings made a 
seven days; and there shall no} memorial 
leavened bread bé seen with thee, oem ea Teseel 
neither shall there be leaven seen Sin 
with thee in all thy quarters. 

8 And thou shalt shew thy son in| ¢ Sem at Mis 
that day, saying, This rs done be-| 7% 
cause of that which the Lorp did| f Israel (his- 
unto me when I came forth out of porns a vs-L7- 
Egypt. 1o.a1 (Gee. 

9 And it shall be for a sign unto| 12.2,3; Rom. 
thee upon thine hand, and for a] 14.26.) 
memorial between thine eyes, that 
the LorpD’s law may be in thy 
mouth: for with a strong hand hath 
the LorpD brought thee out of Egypt. 

10 Thou shalt therefore keep this 
ordinance in his season from year 

| to year. 

{ 11 And it shall be when the Lorp 
shall bring thee into the land of the 
Canaanites;asheswareuntotheeand 
to thy fathers, and shall give it thee, 

12_ That thou shalt set apart unto 
the LORD all that openeth the ma- 
trix, and every firstling that cometh 
of a beast which thou hast; the} 
males shall be the Lorp's. 

13 And every ¢firstling of an ass 
thou shalt redeem with a lamb; 
and if thou wilt not redeem it, then 
thou shalt break his neck: and all 
the firstborn of man among thy 
children shalt thou redeem. 


14 And it shall be when thy son 
asketh thee in time to come, saying, 
What is this? that thou shalt say 
unto him, By strength of hand the 
LorD brought us out from Egypt, 
from the house of bondage. 

15 And it came to pass, when 
Pharaoh would hardly let us go, 
that the LorD slew all the firstborn 
in the land of Egypt, both the first- 
born of man, and the firstborn of 
beast: therefore I sacrifice to the 
Lorp all that openeth the matrix, 
being males; but all the firstborn of 
my. children I redeem. 

16 And it shall be for a token 
upon thine hand, and for frontlets 
between thine eyes: for by strength 
of hand the Lorp brought us forth 
out of Egypt. 

17 And it came to pass, when 
Pharaoh had let the people go, that 
God led them not through the way 
of the land of the Philistines, al- 
though that was near; for God said, 
Lest peradventure the people ¢re- 
pent when they see war, and they 
return to Egypt: 

18 But God led the people about, 
through the way of the wilderness 
of the Red sea: and the children of 
Israel went up harnessed out of the 
land of Egypt. 

19 And Moses took the bones of 
Joseph with him: for he had straitly 
sworn the children of Israel, saying, 
God will surely visit you; and ye: 
shall carry up my bones away hence 
with you. 


Redemption: (2) by power; the 
second stage of the journey.° 


20 And they took their journey 
from Succoth, and encamped in 
Etham, in the edge of the wilderness. 


Redemption: (2) by power; the 
divine presence and guidance. 


21 And the Lorp went before 
them by day in a pillar of a cloud, 
to lead them the way; and by night 
in a pillar of fire, to give them light; _ 
to go by day and night: 

22 He took not away the pillar of 
the cloud by day, nor the pillar of 
fire by night, from before the 
tpeople, 


CHAPTER 14, 


Redemption: (2) by power; the 
third stage of the Journey, 
AND the LorpD spake unto Mo- 

- ses, saying, 
2 Speak unto the children of Israel, 


that they turn and encamp before 
¢Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and 
the sea, over against Baal-zephon: 
before it shall ye encamp by the sea. 

3 For Pharaoh will say of the 
children of Israel, They are en- 
tangled in the land, the wilderness 
hath shut them in. 

4 And I will harden Pharaoh’s 
heart, that he shall follow after 
them; and I will be honoured upon 
Pharaoh, and upon all his host; 
that the Egyptians may know that 
Iam the Lorp. And they did so. 

5 And it was told the king of 
Egypt that the people fled: and the 
heart of Pharaoh and of his servants 
was turned against the people, and 
they said, Why have we done this, 
that we have let Israel go from 
serving us? 

6 And he made ready his chariot, 
and took his people with him: 

7 And he took six hundred chosen 
chariots, and all the chariots of 
Egypt, and captains over every one 
of them. 

8 And the Lorp hardened the 
heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, 
and he pursued after the children of 
Israel: and the children of Israel 
went out with an high hand. 

9 But the Egyptians pursued af- 
ter them, all the horses and char- 
iots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, 
and his army, and overtook them 
encamping by ‘the sea, beside Pi- 
hahiroth, before Baal-zephon. 

10 And when Pharaoh drew nigh, 
the children of Israel lifted up their 
eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians 
marched after them; and they were 
sore afraid: and the children of 
Israel cried out unto the LorD. 
_4d1 And they said unto Moses, Be- 
cause there were no graves in 
Egypt, hast thou taken us away to 
die in the wilderness? wherefore 
hast thou dealt thus with us, to 
carry us forth.out of Egypt? 

12 Is not this the word that we 
did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let 
us alone, that we may serve the! 
Egyptians? For it had been better) 
for us to serve the Egyptians, than) 
that we should die in the wilderness. 


Redemption: (2) by power; Je- 
hovah’s victory over pursuing 
Egypt. 

413 And Moses said unto the peo- 
ple, Fear ye not, stand still, and 
see the salvation of the Lorp, 
which he will shew to you to day: 
for the Egyptians whom ye have 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


@ Num.33.7. 


6 2 Chr.20.17; 
Psa.46.10,11; 
Tsa.30.15; 
Rom.4.5; 

1 Pet.2.24. 


c Heb.1.4, 
note, 


d Israel (his- 


é Isa.52.12; 
58.8. 


f Miracles 
(O.T.). vs. 


(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


g Faith. vs.21, 


87 


— they go forward: 


seen to day, ye shall see them again 
no more for ever, 

14 The Lorn shall fight for you, 
and ye shall hold your peace. 


| 15 “And the Lorb said unto Mo- 


ses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? 
speak unto the children of Israel, 


16 But lift thou up thy rod, and 

tretch out thine hand over the 
sea, and divide it: and the children 
of Israel shali go on dry ground 
through the midst of the sea. 

17 And I, behold, I will harden 
ithe hearts of the Egyptians, and 
they shall follow them: and I will 
get me honour upon Pharaoh, and 
upon all his host, upon his chariots, 
and upon his horsemen. 

18 And the Egyptians shall know 
that I am the Lorp, when I have 
‘gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, 
upon his chariots, and upon his 
horsemen. 

19 And the ‘angel of God, which 
went before the camp of Israel, re- 
moved and went “behind them; and 
the pillar of the cloud went from be- 
fore their face, and stood behind 
them: 

20 And it came between the camp 


“jof the Egyptians and the camp 
of Israel; and it was a cloud and 


darkness to them, but it gave 
light by night to these: so that 
the one came not near the other all 
the night. 

21 And Moses stretched out his 
hand over the sea; and the Lorp 
fcaused the sea to go back by a 
strong east wind all that night, and 
made the sea dry Jand, and the 
waters were divided. 

22 And the children of Israel 
éwent into the midst of the sea 
upon the dry ground: and the 
waters were a wall unto them on 
their right hand, and on their left 

23 And the Egyptians pursued, 
and went in after them to the midst 
of the sea, even all Pharaoh’s 
horses, his chariots, and his horse- 
men. 

24 And it came to pass, that in 
the morning watch the Lorp 
looked unto the host of the Egyp- 
tians through the pillar of fire and 
of the cloud, and troubled the host 
of the Egyptians, 

25 And took off their chariot 
wheels, that they drave them heav- 
ily: so that the Egyptians said, 
Let us flee from the face of Israel; 
for the Lorp fighteth for them 


against the Egyptians. 


i hs Oe bl ae ae 


14 26] 


26 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, Stretch out thine hand over the 
sea, that the waters may come 
again upon the Egyptians, upon 
their chariots, and upon their horse- 
men. 

27 And Moses stretched forth his 
hand over the sea, and the sea re- 
turned to his strength when the 
morning appeared; and the Egyp- 
tians fled against it; and the Lorp 
overthrew the Egyptians in the 
midst of the sea. 

28 And the waters returned, and 
covered the chariots, and the horse- 
men, and all the host of Pharaoh 
that came into the séa after them; 
there remained not so much as one 
of them. 


Redemption: (2) by power; the 
fourth stage of the journey. 


29 But the children of Israel 
walked upon dry Jand in the midst 
of the sea; and the waters were a 
wall unto them on their right hand, 
and on their left.. 

30 !Thus the Lorp saved Israel 
that day out of the hand of the}? Heb: éaa!, 


Redemp. 


a Psa.19.9, 
note, 


Egyptians; and {israel saw the] (Kinsman 
Egyptians dead upon the sea shore. eee vee 
-4U, note, 


31 And Israel saw that great work 
which the Lorp did upon the Egyp- 
tians: and the people “feared the 
Lorn, and believed the Lorp, and 
his servant Moses. 


CHAPTER 15, 


Redemption: complete (1) by 
blood; (2) by power. The 


song of the redeemed. 


HEN sang Moses and the chil- 
dren of Israel this song unto 
the Lorp, and spake, saying, I will 
sing unto -the Lorp, for he. hath 
triumphed gloriously: the horse and 
his rider hath he thrown into the 


ea. 

2 The Lorp is my strength and 
song, and he is become my. salva- 
tion: he is my God, and I will pre- 
pare him an habitation; my father’s 
God, and I will exalt him. 

3 -The Lorp is a man of war: the 
LorD is his name. 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


[15 7 


4 Pharaoh’s chariots and his host 
hath he cast into the sea: his chosen _ 
captains also are drowned in the 
Red sea. 

5 The depths have covered them: 
they sank into the bottom as a 
stone. , 

6 Thy right hand, O LorD, is be- 
come glorious in power: thy right 
hand, O Lorp, hath dashed in 
pieces the enemy. 

7 And in the greatness of thine 
excellency thou +hhast overthrown 
them that rose up against thee: 
thou sentest forth thy wratk, 
which consumed them as stubble. 

8 And with the blast of thy nos- 
trils the waters were gathered to- 
gether, the floods stood upright as 
an heap, and the depths were con- 
gealed in the heart of the sea. 

9 The enemy said, I will pursue, 
I will overtake, I will divide the 
spoil; my lust shall be satisfied 
upon them; I will draw my sword, 
my hand shall destroy them. 

10 Thou didst blow with thy 
wind, the sea covered them: they 
sank as lead in the mighty waters. 

11 Who jis like unto thee, O 
LORD, among the gods? who 1s like 
thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in 
praises, doing wonders? 

12 Thou stretchedst out thy right 
hand, the earth swallowed them. 

13. Thou in thy mercy hast led 
forth the people which thou hast 
oredeemed: thou hast guided them 
in thy strength unto thy holy habi- 
tation. 

14 The people shall hear, and be 
afraid: sorrow shall take hold on 
the inhabitants of Palestina. 

15 Then’ the dukes of Edom shall 
be amazed; the mighty men of 
Moab, trembling shall take hold 


{upon them; all the inhabitants of 


Canaan shall melt away. 

16 Fear and dread shall fall upon 
them; by the greatness of thine 
arm they shall be as still as a stone; 
till thy people pass over, O Lorp, 
till the people pass over, which 
thou hast purchased. 

17 Thou shalt bring them in, and 
plant them in the mountain of thine 


1 Redemption: (Exodus type) Summary, Exodus is the book of redemption, and 
teaches: (1) redemption is wholly of God (Ex. 3. 7, 8; John 3. 16); (2) redemption 


is through 
(Ex. 12. 13, 
Rom. 8. 2. 


a person (Ex. 2. 2, note; John 3. 16, 17); (3) redemption is by blood 
23, 27; 1 Pet. 1. 18); (4) rédemption is by power (Ex. 6. 6; 13. 14; 
See Isa. 59, 20, note; Rom. 3. 24, note). 


The blood of Christ redeems the believer from the guilt and penalty of sin 


(1 Pet. 1. 18) 
Op 25h. 2.2) 


: 88 


as the power of the Spirit delivers from the dominion of sin (Rom. 


_ 15 18] EXODUS. [16 8 


inheritance, in the place, O Lorp, 
which thou hast made for thee to 
dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, 
which thy hands have established. 

18 The LorpD shall reign for ever 
and ever. ! 

19 For the horse of Pharaoh went 
in with his chariots and with his 
horsemen into the sea, and the 
Lorp brought again the waters of 
the sea upon them; but the children 
of Israel went on dry Jand in the 
midst of the sea. 

20 ¢And Miriam the prophetess, 
the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel 
in her hand; and all the women 
went out after her with timbrels 
and with dances. 


B.C. 1491. Redemption: (3) experience; 
; rest after trial. 


27 And they came to/Elim, where 
were twelve wells of water, and 
threescore and ten palm trees: and 
they encamped there by the waters. 


CHAPTER 16. 


Redemption: (3) experience; 
seventh stage of the journey; 
hunger. : 


ND they took their journey 
from Elim, and all the congre- 
gation of the children of Israel came 
unto the wilderness of Sin, which is 
between Elim and Sinai, on the fif- 
21 And Miriam answered them, teenth day of the second month 
*Sing ye to the Lorp, for he hath after their departing out of the land 
triumphed gloriously; the horse and|,2sam65, |of Egypt. 


his rider hath he thrown into the sea. Pog 1n2: erga uae ponercent ion of 
=: . , [ovel the children of Israel murmured 
Redemption: (3) experience; ‘against Moses and Aaron in the 


; ; Gen.16.7. 
fitth stage of the journey. ¢ Gen cr pets aig 


22 So Mases brought Israel from|¢i-¢- bitter. 3 And the children of Israel said 

Dee tesidciacse tot iStariend| MeeNT: ‘lated by the tend ofthe Lown inehe 
5 1 .T.). V8. 

they went three days in the wilder-| 23-25;Ez. land of Egypt, when we sat by the 


ness, and found no water. reaeg ye see acCpet point: we si eat 
Date p .| Jon.2.1-10.) ead to the full; for ye have 
Redemption: (3) experience; ) brought *us forth into this wilder- 
sixth stage of the journey—| fic. trees. ness, to kill this whole assembly 
how bitter becomes sweet. poetry with hunger 
23 And when they came to Ma-| After trial 4 Then said the Lorp unto Mo- 
ithe Gas oe oe te See [es ee a et et 
, wul, jess- , 
pie ageeretare the name of it was = ft go ae and = a (aaa eee 
calle arah. 2 every day, that I may prove them, 
24 nie the people murmured! ¢ i.e. May. whether they will walk in my law, 
against Moses, saying, What shall or no, 
we drink? : 5 And it shall come to pass, that 
pe gar he ened ante mee pow on “as ch -— re shall pconsig 
and the LorpD shewed him a tree, at which they bring in; and i 
pebick when he nad cast into ee et - jibe as much as they 
waters, e waters were made |gather daily. 
ésweet: there he made for them a | 6 And Moses and Aaron said unto 


all the children of Israel, At even, 
then ye shall know that the Lorp 
hath brought you out from the land 
of Egypt: _ 

7 And in the morning, then ye 
shali see the glory of the Lorp; for 
{that he heareth your murmurings 
against the LorD: and what are 
we, that ye murmur against us? 

8 And Moses said, This shall be, 
when the LorD shail give you in 
the evening flesh to eat, and in the 


statute and an ordinance, and there 
he proved them, Pe 

26 And said, If thou wilt dili- 
gently hearken to the voice of the 
Lorp thy God, and wilt do that 
which is right in his sight, and wilt 
give ear to his commandments, and 
keep all his statutes, I will put none 
of these diseases upon thee, which I 
have brought upon the Egyptians: 
ios I am the LorD that healeth 
thee. 


1 These bitter waters were in the very path of the Lord’s leading, and stand for 
the trials of God’s people, which are educatory and not punitive. The ‘“‘tree” is 
the cross (Gal. 3. 13), which became sweet to Christ as the expression of the Father’s 
will (John 18. 11)._When our Marahs are so taken we cast the “‘tree” into the 


waters (Rom. 5. 3, 4). 
89 


EXODUS 


B.C. 1491. 


HEIR 
MkE.6.3. 


6 Ex.16.25, 
note, 


'| ¢ Miracles 


d Cf.John 6. 
33 with John 
6.41,42,52. 
Christ gives 
himself un- 
reservedly, 
but we have 
no more of 
Him than 
faith ap- 
propriates,; 
v.18. Cf.v.2, 
Josh, with 
v.3.. V.2 
is our title; 
v.3, the law 
of posses- 
sion. 


e One omer = 
6.70 pints; 
also vs.18, 
22,32,33,36. 


f As we are 
not nour- 
ished by the 
memory of 
food, so nei- 
ther can 
spirituality 
be sustained 
on past ap< 
propriations 
of Christ 


16 9] 
morning bread to the full; for that 
the LorD heareth your murmurings 
which ye murmur against him: and’ 
what are we? your murmurings are’ 
not against us, but against the 
Lorp. 
§ And Moses spake unto Aaron) 
Say unto all the congregation of] 
the children of Israel, Come near; 
before the Lorb: for he hath heard 
your murmurings. 

10 And it came to pass, as Aaron 
spake unto the whole congregation| ; 
of the children of Israel, that they]? +S? 
looked toward the wilderness, and, 
behold, the glory of the Lorp ap- 
peared in the cloud. 

11 And the Lorpb spake unto Mo- 
ses, Saying, a 

12. I have heard the murmurings, 
of the children of Israel: speak unto 
them, saying, At even ye shall eat 
flesh, and in the morning ye shall 
be filled with bread; and ye shall 
know that I am the Lorp your 
God. ~ 

13 And it came to pass, that at 
even the quails came up, and 
covered the camp: and in the 
morning the dew lay round about 
the host. 

The manna: typeof Christ the 
giver and sustainer of life 
(John 6. 30-63), 

14 And when the dew that lay 
was. gone up, behold, upon the face 
of the wilderness there lay a ¢small 
round thing, as small as the hoar 
frost on the ground. 

15 And when the children of 
Israel saw it, they said one to an- 
other, It is *manna: for they 
wist not what it was. And Mo- 
ses said unto them, This ss the 
bread which the Lorp hath <given 
you to eat. 

16 This zs the thing which the 
Lorp hath commanded, Gather of 
it every man according to his eat- 
ing, an ‘omer for every man, ac-|® Pata * 
cording to the number of your| 208-11. 
persons; take ye every man for! (Gen.2.3; 
them which are in his tents. Mela) 

17 And the children of Israel did 
“ and gathered, some more, some 
ess. 

18 And when they did mete it 
with an omer, he that gathered 
much had nothing over, and he 
that gathered little had no lack; 
they gathered every man according 
to his eating. 

19 And Moses: said, Let no. man 
leave of it till the morning, 


[16 32, 


20 Notwithstanding they heark- 
ened not unto Moses; but some of 
them /left of it until the morning, 
and it bred worms, and stank: and 
Moses was wroth with them. 

21 And they gathered it every 
morning, every man according to 
his eating: and when the sun waxed 
hot, it melted. 

22 And it came to pass, that on 
the sixth day they gathered twice 
as much bread, two omers for one 
man: and all the rulers of the con- 
gregation came and told Moses.. 


The Sabbath given to Israel; type 
of frase kingdom (Heb. 4. 
8, 9). 


23 And he said unto them, This 
is that which the Lorp hath said, 
‘/To morrow is the rest of the holy 
sabbath unto the Lorb: bake that 
which ye will bake to day, and 
seethe that ye will seethe: and that 
which remaineth over lay up for 
you to be kept: until the morning. . 
24 And they laid it up till the 
morning, as Moses bade: and it did 
not stink, neither was there any 
worm therein, 

25 And Moses said, Eat that to 
day; for to day is a &sabbath unto 
the LorD> to day ye shall not find 
it in the field. 

2h Six days ye shall gather it; but 
on the seventh day, which is the 
sabbath, in it there shall be none. 

27 And it came to pass, that 
there went out some of the people 
on the seventh day for to. gather, 
and they found none. 

28 And the Lorp said unto. Mo- 
ses, How long refuse ye to keep my 
commandments and my laws? 

29 See, for that the Lorp hath 
given you the sabbath, therefore he 
giveth you on the sixth day the 
bread of twe days; abide ye every 
man in his place, let no man go out 

of his place on the seventh day; 

‘| 30 So the people rested on the 
seventh day. 

31 And the house of Israel called 
the name thereof Manna: and it 
was like coriander seed, white: and 
the taste of it was like wafers made 
lwith honey. 

32 And Moses said, This is the 
thing which the Lorp command: 
eth, Fill an omer of it to be kept 
for your generations; that they may 
see the bread wherewith I have fed 
you in the wilderness, when I 
brought you forth from the land of 
Egypt. 


'* 


cee 


¥ 16 33] 


EXODUS. 


33 And Moses said unto Aaron, 


1179 


Bc. 491. |Wh i is tha thou Jhast 
Take a pot, and put an omer full of br: are a He Seu hie 
manna therein, and lay it up before se ae in Oe st ees ete tere 
4 2 ; , us and our children and our cattle 
the Lorp, to be kept for your gen- with thirst? 
erations. Mos ; Foure 
34 As the Lorp commanded Mo- oetheavniantany Stontec em 
“Se a ao = i up before the this people? they be almost ready 
35 ;And the children of Israel did)? 1 bv- 3 pts. Beye rit s ; 
eat Imanna forty years, until they] 5 rT. : ep tions experience, 
came to a land inhabited; they| tion’ vs27;| Water from the rock; type of 
did eat manna, until they came) Nem1422. Christ, the are of the Spirit 
ae nae borders: of the land of| jas.1.2.)” sO ta Re 2 2 ' 
. : ; e LorD said unto Moses, 
36 Now an omer ss the tenth part Pe Go on before the people, and take 
of an ¢ephah. ee: itr eeuibe ea ee as died Israel; 
17-6; an y rod, wherewi ou smot- 
CHAPTER 17. | te eg est the river, take in thine hand, 
E hiss i id Cf. Num.20. | i 
Beith cies 8) t Patias peaalse 8; Psat05. i Behold, I will stand before thee 
thirst iio | caeicy (emapen the pede Hae ate 
. ‘or.10.4,6. {thou s smite the rock, an 
ND all the congregation of the pee there shall come ¢water out of it, 
children of Israel journeyed T.). vs. |that the people may drink. And 
from the wilderness of Sin, after| 5-7;Lev.10. |Moses did so in the sight of the 
their journeys, according to the precea lelders of Israel. 
ae ee apie (ety ie Toe hak: 7 oy he esled the dea of the 
pitched in Rephidim: an ere ace assah, d Meri y - 
was no water for the people to|/Deut.6.16. Las of the chiding of the dian 
drink, ., ... leGen36.12; Of Israel, and because they tempted 
2 st aathangte oe ei did chide Num_24:205 the Lorp, saving. Is the Lorp 
with Mcses, and said, Give us water eut.25.17; /among us, or not 
that we may drink. And Moses] ?S8m™-15-2. om TN : 
said unto them, Why chide ye with Redemp ae (3) pis pa ti the 
me? wherefore do ye “tempt the alate oot ith maiek, 
Lorp? : 8 &@Then came 3Amalek, and 
3 And the people thirsted there fought with Israel in Rephidim. 
for water; _and the people mur- ' 9 And Moses said unto Joshua, 
mured against Moses, and said, Choose us out men, and go out, 


1 Manna, type of Christ as “the bread of life,’”’ come down from heaven to die 


“for the life of the world”. (John 6. 35, 48-51). A ‘“‘small” thing (Ex. 16. 14), 
having but the taste of “fresh oil’? (Num. 11. 8), or “wafers with honey” (Ex. 16. 
31), it typifies Christ in humiliation as presented in Matthew, Mark, and Luke; 
“having no form nor comeliness; . . . no beauty that we should desire him” (Isa. 
53. a But as such He must be received by faith if we would be saved (John 6. 
53-58). To meditate upon Christ as He went about among men, doing not His 
own will but the will of the Father (John 6. 38-40), is to feed on the manna. This 
is, of necessity, the spiritual food of young believers, and answers to “milk” (1 Cor. 
3. 1, 2). But Christ in glory, and the believer’s present and eternal association 
with Him there, answers to ‘‘the old corn of the land” (Josh. 5.11), the “‘meat”’ of 
Heb. 5. 13, 14, or Christ as presented in the Epistles of Paul. Cf. 2 Cor. 5. 16. 

2 The rock, type of life through the Spirit by grace: (1) Christ the Rock (1 Cor. 
10.4). (2) The people utterly unworthy (Ex. 17. 2; Eph. 2. 1-6). (3) Characteris- 
tics of life through grace: (a) free (John 4. 10; Rom. 6, 23; Eph. 2.8); (6b) abundant 
(Rom. 5.20; Psa. 105. 41; John 3. 16); (c) near (Rom. 10. s);"(d) the people had only 
to take (Isa. 55.1). The smitten-rock aspect of the death of Christ looks toward 
the outpouring of the Holy Spirit as a result of accomplished redemption, rather 
than toward our sui/t. It is the affirmative side of John 3. 16. “Not perish’ 
speaks of atoning blood; ‘‘but have” speaks of life bestowed. 

3Amalek, grandson of Esau (Gen. 36. 12), who was “born after the flesh” 
(Gal. 4.’ 22-29) and progenitor of the Amalekites, Isracl’s persistent enemy, is a 
type of the flesh in the believer (Gal. 4. 29). But the conflict with Amalek in 
chapter 17 sets forth the resources of the man under law, rather than those of the 
believer under grace. The man under law could fight and pray (vs. 9-12). Under 


94 


17 10) EXODUS. Beige c\: a 


i : he encamped at the 

fight with Amalek: to morrow J|_B.c. 1491. _|ness, where ; 
will stand on the top of the hill mount of God: ee te 
with the rod of God in mine hand. 6 And he said unto ses, y 

10 So Jochua did as Moses had father in law Jethro am come unto 
said to him, and fought with Ama- thee, and thy wife, and her two 
lek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur sons with her. a ; 
went up to the top of the hill. 7 And Moses went out to mee 

11 And it came to pass, “when his father in law, and did obeisance, 
Moses held up his hand, that Israel and kissed him; and they asked 
prevailed: and when he let down each other of their welfare; and — 
his hand, Amalek prevailed. they came into the tent. 4 , 

12 But Moses’ hands were heavy; 8 And Mosestold hisfather in 
and they took a stone, and put it law all that the LorD had done 
under him, and he sat thereon; unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians 
and Aaron and Hur &stayed up his for Israel’s sake, and ali the travail 


hands, th e on the one side, and that had come upon them by the 
the i hesonithe other side; and his Hee and how the LoRD delivered 
La til the going em. ta 
pee ae ey pre nah 9 And Jethro rejoiced for all the 
13. And Joshua discomfited Ama- goodness which the LorD had done 
lek and his people with the edge of to Israel, whom he had delivered 
the sword. out of the hand of the Egyptians. 


14 And the LorD said unto Mo-|¢ Heb.7.25. 10 And Jethro said, Blessed be- 
ses, aie this for a mpemeial in ? b Deut.33.27: ee see Spaegetty b dctvece a 
‘book, and rehearse 1f in the ears Of| Isa.40.28-31. |out o e hand o e Egyp i 
Joshua: for I will utterly put out ¥ ._.,  jand out of the hand of Pharaoh, 
the remembrance of Amalek from Sere cae tie) aw pene toe pours from 
under heaven. (Bx.4.15; under the hand of the Egyptians. 

15 And Moses built an @altar, and| Rev.22.19.) 11 Now I know that the LorD is 
called the name of it Jehovah-nissi: aiGabe ee greater than all gods: for in the 
oe For he said, Bepause the LORD (typical), pie whee p's dealt proudly 

ath sworn that the LORD wi v-1.3-17. e was above them. 
have war with Amalek from gen- ies 12 And Jethro, Moses’ father in 
eration to generation. “""" jlaw, took a burnt-offering and sac- 
ei.e. a stran- lrifices for God: and Aaron came, 
CHAPTER 18. Ser and all the elders of Israel, to eat 


i 5 i 3 : 3 
Redemption: (3) experience; fie, God is |bread with Moses’ father in law be 


r fore God. 
Jeaning on the arm of flesh. 13 And it came to pass on the 
WVBEN Jethro, the priest of morrow, that Moses sat to judge the 
Midian, Moses’ father in law, people: and the people stood by 
heard of all that God had done for .|Moses from the morning unto the 
Moses, and for Israel his people, evening. 
and that the Lorp had brought! 14 And when Moses’ father in law 
Israel out of Egypt; saw all that he did to the people, he 
2 Then Jethro, Moses’ father in said, What is this thing that thou 
law, took Zipporah, Moses’ wife, doest to the people? why sittest 
after he had sent her back, thou thyself alone, and all the 
3 And her two sons; of which the people stand by thee from morning 
name of the one was ‘Gershom; unto even? 


for he said, I have been an alien in 
a strange land: 

4 And the name of the other was 
fEliezer; for the God of my father, 
said he, was mine help, and deliv- 
ered me from the sword of Pharaoh: 

5 And Jethro, Moses’ father in 
law, came with his sons and _ his 
wife unto Moses into the wilder- 


15. And Moses said unto his father 
in law, Because the people come 
unto me to enquire of God: 

16 When they have a matter, they 
come unto me; and I judge between 
one and another, and I do make 
them know the statutes of God, 
and his laws. 

17 And Moses’ father in law said 


grace the Holy Spirit gains the victory over the flesh in the believer’s behalf (Rom. 
8. 2-4; Gal. 5. 16, 17); but this victory is only as the believer walks in the Spirit. 
Acting in independency or disobedience, Amalek gains an easy victory (Num. 14. 
42-45). Like Saul we are prone to spare the flesh (1 Sam. 15. 8, 9), forgetting Rom. 
7.18. See “Flesh,” John 1. 13; Jude 23. : 


92 


unto him, The thing that thou doest 
is not good. 

18 Thou wilt surely wear away, 
both thou, and this people that js 
with thee: for this thing is too 
heavy for thee, thou art not able 
to perform it thyself alone 

19 Hearken now unto my-voice, !I 
will give thee counsel, and God shall 
be with thee Be thou for the peo- 
ple to God-ward, that thou mayest 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


a Psa.19.9, 


[19 5 


rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, 
and rulers of tens. 

26 And they judged the people at 
all seasons: the hard causes they 
brought unto Moses, but every 
small matter they judged them 
selves. 

27 And Moses let his father in 
law depart; and he went his way 
into his own land. 


bring the causes unto God: are CHAPTER 19, 

20 And thou shalt teach them or- Red tions) ; 
dinances and laws, and shalt shew Ye oe ar ey fé gee 2) 
them the way wherein they must] ~" jee RES He aed SOUTER 
walk,and the work that theymust do. | ci-e. June. Brac lacth gas 

21 Moreover thou shalt provide éIetaol eae: N the ‘third ‘month, when the 
out of all the people able men, such|" tory). ys.1-g;|4 children of ¢Israel_were gone 
as *fear God, men of truth, hating} Ex-201-17. '|forth out of the land of Egypt, the 
covetousness; and place such over bara oe a65 same day came they into the wii- 
them, to be rulers of thousands, ~~" |derness of «Sinai. 
and rulers of maraieleiss rulers of gS Ses - 2 For they were departed from 
fifties, and rulers of tens: oses). Ex. |Rephidim, and were come to the 

22 And let them judge the people] [$17'Gai°3" |desert of Sinai, and had pitched in 
at all seasons: and it shall be, that} 1-29.) the wilderness; and there Israel 
eee ee patichs sop siapuns fCLEx312. fcamped before the mount. 
hey shall judge: > shall it be|¢ Separation. | Reemipt ae 12) nee iat as 
easier for thyself, and they shall] E3316. é given up for law. 
bear the burden with thee. 2 Cor.6.14- | 3 And Moses went up unto God, 

23 If thou shalt do this thing, and) 17.) and the Lorp called unto him out 
God command thee so, then thou of the mountain, saying, Thus 


shalt be able to endure, and all this 
people shall also go to their place in 
peace. 

24 So Moses hearkened to the 
woice of his father in law, and did 
all that he had said. 

25 And Moses chose able men out 
of all Israel, and made them heads 
over the people, rulers of thousands, 


1Cf. Num. 11. 14-17. 
substituting His own order. 


shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, 
and tell the children of Israel; 

4 Ye have seen what I did unto 
the Egyptians, and how I bare you 
on eagles’ wings, and brought you 
unto myself. 

5 Now therefore, 4if ye will obey 
my voice indeed, and keep my cove- 
nant, then ye shall be a peculiar 


Jehovah entirely ignored this worldly-wise organization, 


2 At Sinai Israel learned the lessons: (1) of the holiness of Jehovah through the 


“Commandments; (2) of their own sinfulness and weakness through failure; (3) and 
of the goodness of Jehovah through the provision of priesthood and sacrifice. The 
Christian learns through the experience of Rom. 7. 7-24 what Israel learned at 
Sinai. This division of Exodus should be read in the light of Rom. 3. 19-26; 7. 
7-24; Gal. 4. 1-3. Gal. 3 6-25 explains the relation of the law to the Abrahamic 
Covenant: (1) the law cannot disannul that covenant; (2) it was “‘added” to con- 
vict of sin; (3) it was a child-leader unto Christ; (4) it was but a preparatory dis- 
cipline “‘till the Seed should come.” r 

3 It is exceedingly important to observe: (1) that Jehovah reminded the people 
that hitherto they had been the objects of His free grace; (2) that the law is not 
proposed as a means of life, but as a means by which Israel might become “‘a pecul- 
iar treasure” and a “kingdom of priests’; (3) that the law was not imposed until 
it had been proposed and voluntarily accepted. The principle is stated in Gal. 
9; 1-4. 

4Cf. 1 Pet. 2.9; Rev. 1. 6; 5. 10. What, under law, was condition, is under 
grace, freely given to every believer. The “if” of v. 5 is the essence of law as a 
method of divine dealing, and the fundamental reason why ‘‘the law made nothing 
perfect” (Rom. 8. 3; Heb. 7. 18, 19). The Abrahamic (Gen. 15. 18, note) and New 
(Heb. 8. 8-12, note) covenants minister salvation and assurance because they 


impose but one condition, faith, 
93 


A ] ™ . i‘ eS ee 


19 6] "\ Exopus: <> [19 24 


treasure unto me above all people:| 3B.c. i491. | 14 And Moses went down from — 


for all the earth is mine: the mount unto the people, and ~ 
6 And ye shall be unto me a king- sanctified the people; and they | 
dom of priests, and an holy nation. washed their clothes. 
These are the “words which thou 15 And he said unto the people, 
shalt speak unto the children of Be ready against the third day: 
Israel. come not at your wives. ; 
7 And Moses came and called for 16 And it came to pass on the 
the elders of the people, and laid third day in the morning, that there 
before their faces all these words were thunders and lightnings, and 
which the LorD commanded him. a thick cloud upon the mount, and 
- D I the voice of the trumpet exceeding 
The Fifth Dispensation, Law loud: so that all the people that 
(extends to the Cross). (From was in the camp trembled. 
Ex. 19. s to Mt. 27. 35.) 17 oo aroee brought forth cree 
8 And all the people answered to- a ees owt of the cansp taneet ie 
gether, and said, All that the LorD Rionis mend ACen res ae 
hath spoken we will !do, And Mo- wer ree ¥: ad “nas alt 
ses returned the words of the peo- ' Tmount Sinai was O- 


gether on a smoke, because the 
_., |Lorp descended upon it in fire: 
Redemption: (3) experience. To|*weiize,” |2nd the smoke thereof ascended as 
a people under law, God is “in| 20.1. ‘Ex4, |the smoke of a furnace, and the 
a thick cloud,” and unap-| }3)Rev-22- whole mount quaked greatly. 
proachable (vs. 9-23). ) 19 And when the voice of the 
: b Kingdom |trumpet sounded long, and waxed 
9 And the Lorp said unto Moses,| (0-T.). Ex. |louder and louder, Moses spake, 
Lo, I come unto thee in a thick] 2412,‘Ge™ |and God answered him by a voice. 
cloud, that the people may hear| 128)  ° | 20 And the Lorp came down 
when I speak with thee, and be- , upon mount Sinai, on the top of the 
lieve thee for ever. And Moses Coal) mount: and the LorpD called Moses 
told_the words of the people unto} Ex.28.i3.. |wp to the top of the mount; and 


ple unto the Lorpb. 


the Lorpb. (Gen.2.3; Moses went. up. 

10 And the Lorp said unto Mo-| 2¢ch-8-3.) 21 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, Go unto the people, and sanc- ses, Go down, charge the people, 
tify them to day and to morrow, lest they break through unto the 
and let them wash their clothes, LorpD to gaze, and many of them 

11 And be ready against the third perish. 
day: for the third day the Lorp 22 And let the priests also, which 
will come down in the sight of all eome near to the LORD, sanctify 
the people upon mount Sinai. themselves, lest the LorD break 

12 And thou shalt set bounds un- forth upon them. 
to the people round about, saying, 23 And Moses said unto the 
Take heed to yourselves, that ye LorpD, The people cannot come up 
go not up into the mount, or touch to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst 
the border of it: whosoever touch: us, saying, Set bounds about the 
eth the mount shall be surely put to} - mount, and ‘sanctify it. 
death: 24 And the LorD said unto him, 
13 There shall not an hand touch Away, get thee down, and thou 
it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shalt come up, thou, and Aaron 
shot through; whether it be beast with thee: but let not the priests. 
or man, it shall not live: when the} and the people break through to 
trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up unto the Lorpb, lest he 


come up to the mount. break forth upon them. | 


1 The Fifth Dispensation: Law. This dispensation extends from Sinai to Cal- 
vary—from the Exodus to the Cross. The history of Israel in the wilderness and 
Hy the land is one long record of the violation of the law. The testing of the nation 

Vy ni ended in the judgment of the Captivities, but the dispensation itself ended 
ake e ies (1) Man’s state at the beginning (Ex. 19. 1-4). (2) His responsi- 
ility (Ex. 19. 5, 6; Rom. 10.5). (3) His failure (2 Ki. 17. 7-17, 19: Acts 2. 22, 23). 

(4) The judgment (2 Ki, 17. 1-6, 20; 25. 1-11; Lk. 21. 20-24). 
See, for the other six dispensAtions: Innocence (Gen. 1. 28); Conscience ‘Gen. 


3. 23); Human G . . ! 
a7) sKingdom (Soha no (Gen. 8. 20); Promise (Gen. 12. 1); Grace (John 
94 


19 25] EXODUS.  f8008 


25 So Moses went down unto the 
people, and 4spake unto them. 


6 And shewing mercy unto thou- 

eee sana of them that love me, and 
u eep my commandments. 

CHAPTER 20. Govenants. | 7 ‘Thou shalt not take the name of 


Redemption: (3) experience; selt| Gewis [the Lon, thy God in vain; for the 


known through the revelation|, 7 aw ‘ : 
of God’s haly law (Rom. 7. 7- eco vs. pr ee nes taistesabbuah dey A) 


24). : 
The Law: (1) the Command-| }%&,&=19- keep it holy. 


ments; the Fifth, or Mosaic,| 129.) ie ctieweet bs thou labour, and 


B.C. 1491. 


Covenant. c Inspiration 
Fx243.4, | 10 But the seventh day is the 
ND God ?spake all these ‘words, 7812) (ex. sabbath of the LorD thy God: in it 
dsaying, ; eae thou shalt not do any work, thou, 
2 Iam the Lorp thy God, which ase ) __Inor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy 
have brought thee out of the land of ae (ais- |manservant, nor thy maidseryant, 


Egypt, out of the house of bondage.| 1-17; #z.40. |nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that 

3 Thou shalt have no other gods Aci as is within thy gates: f F 
Sal me; Romii2z6) |, 11 For in six days the Lorp made 

4 Thou 2shalt not make unto thee], sappath. vs.,neaven and earth, the sea, and all 
any graven image, or any likeness| 8-11; x.31. |that in them is, and rested the 
of any thing that is in heaven cane ee seventh day: wherefore the LorD 
above, or that is in the earth be-| 4°" blessed the sabbath day, and hal- 
neath, or that is in the water under} ¢yq¢45.4; 19, [lowed it. 

e earth. 19; Mi.7.10. | 12 fHonour thy father and thy 

5 Thou shalt not bow down thy-|¢mt.s.21; 19. |mother: that thy days may be long 
self to them, nor serve them: for I| 18; L«-18.20; |upon the land which the Lorp thy 
the Lorp thy God am a jealous|, M@*1919 {God giveth thee. 


God, visiting the iniquity of the|*Mt52%._ | 13 ¢Thou shalt not kill. 

fathers upon the children unto the) Lic.is.20;' 14 “Thou shalt not commit adul- 
third and fourth generation of| Rom13.9;_ |tery. 

them that hate me; (heat. 15 Thou shalt not steal. 


1 The Mosaic Covenant, (1) given to Israel (2) in three divisions, each essential 
to the others, and together forming the Mosaic. Covenant, viz.: the Commandments, 
expressing the righteous will of God (Ex. 20. 1-26);the *Sjudgments,” governing the 

“social life of Israel ae ‘21, 1-24. 11); and the “ordinances,” governing the reli- 
gious life of Israel (Ex. 24. 12-31. 18). These three elements form “the law,” 
as that phrase is generically used in the New Testament (e.g. Mt. 5.17, 18). The 
Commandments and the ordinances formed one religious system, The Command- 
ments were a “ministry of condemnation” and of “death” (2 Cor. 3. 7-9); the 
ordinances gave, in the high priest, a representative of the people with Jehovah; 
and in the sacrifices a “cover” (see ‘‘Atonement,” Lev. 16. 6, note) for their sins 
in anticipation of the Cross (Heb. 5. 1-3; 9. 6-9; Rom. 3. 25, 26). The Christian 
4 not under the conditional Mosaic Covenant of works, the law, but under the 


unconditional New Covenant of grace (Rom. 3. 21-27; 6._14, 15; Gal. 2. 16; 3.- 


tape 16-18, 24-26; 4. 21-31; Heb, 10. 11-17). See New Covenant (Heb. 8. 8, 
note). 
See, for the other seven covenants: Edenic (Gen. 1. 28); Adamic (Gen. 3. 15); 
Noahic (Gen. 9. 1); Abrahamic (Gen. 15. 18); Palestinian (Deut. 30. 3); Davidic 
(2 Sam. 7. 16); New (Heb. 8. 8). ; 

2 There is a threefold giving of the law. First, orally, in Ex. 20. 1-17. This was 
pure law, with no provision of priesthood and sacrifice for failure, and was_accom- 
panied by the “judgments” (Ex. 21. 1-23. 13) relating to the relations of Hebrew 
with Hebrew; to which were added (Ex. 23. 14-19) directions for keeping three 
annual feasts, and (Ex. 23. 20-33) instructions for the conquest of Canaan. These 
words Moses communicated to the people (Ex. 24. 3-8). Immediately, in the 
persons of their elders, they were admitted to the fellowship of God (Ex. 24. 9-11). 
Second, Moses was then called up to receive the tables of stone (Ex. 24, 12-18). 
The story then divides. Moses, in the mount, receives the gracious instructions 
concerning the tabernacle, priesthood, and sacrifice (Ex. 25.-31.). Meantime 
(Ex. 32.), the people, led by Aaron, break the first commandment. Moses, re- 
turning, breaks the tables “written with the finger of God” (Ex. 31. 18; 32. 16-19). 
Third, the second tables were made by Moses, and the law again written by the 
hand of Jehovah (Ex. 34. 1, 28, 29; Deut. 10. 4). 

95 


. 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


20 16] 


16 Thou shalt not bear false wit- 
ness against thy neighbour. 

17 Thou shalt not 4covet thy 
neighbour’s house, thou shalt not 
covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor his 
manservant, rior his maidservant, 
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing 
that is thy neighbour’s. 

18 And all the people saw the 
thunderings, and the lightnings, 
and the noise of the trumpet, and 
the mountain smoking: and when 
the people saw it, they removed, 
and stood 4afar off. 

19 And they said unto Moses, 
Speak thou with us, and we will 
hear: but let not God speak with 
us, lest we die. 

20 And Moses said unto the peo- 
ple, Fear not: for God is come to 
prove you, and that his ‘fear may 
be before your faces, that ye sin 
not. 

21 And the people stood afar off, 


a Cf.Rom.7.7, 


6 For contrast 
between law 
and grace 


-and Moses drew near unto the thick] cf-Eph.2.13; 
darkness where God was. Heal. with 

22 And the LorD said unto Moses,| “*°'10:19-22- 
Thus thou shalt say unto the chil-|c Psa.19.9, 
dren of Israel, Ye have seen that I| note. 


have talked with you from heaven. 

23 Ye shall not make with me 
gods of silver, neither shall ye make 
unto you gods of gold. 

24 An altar of earth thou shalt 
make unto me, and shalt sacrifice 
thereon thy burnt-offerings, and 
thy peace-offerings, thy sheep, and 
thine oxen: in all places where I 
record my name I will come unto 
thee, and I will bless thee. hk Num.35.11. 

25 And if thou wilt make me an|.. _. 
altar of stone, thou shalt not build]? 2 ¥1-2:29- 
it of hewn stone: for if ¢thou lift Jj Deut.24.7. 
up thy tool upon it, thou hast pol- 


d Josh.8.30,31; 
Rom.4.4-8; 
Eph.2.8-10. 


e Deut.15.12- 
18; Jer.34.8- 
11, 

f Psa.40.6; 
Heb.10.5. 

g Gen.9.6. 


luted it. k PARLE 
26 Neither shalt thou go up by] mik.7.10. 


steps unto mine altar, that thy na- 
kedness be not discovered thereon. 


CHAPTER 21. 


The Law: (2) the “judgments” ; 
master and servant. 


NOW. these are the judgments 
which thou shalt set before 
them. 

2 If thou buy an «Hebrew servant, 
six years he shall serve: and in the 
seventh he shall go out free for 
nothing. ‘ 

3 If he came in by himself, he 
shall go out by himself: if he were 
married, then his wife shall go out 
‘with him. 


4 If his master have given him a 
wife, and she have born him sons 
or daughters; the wife and her chil- 
dren shall be her master’s, and he 
shall go out by himself. 

5 And if the servant shall plainly 
say, I love my master, my wife, and 
my children; I will not go out free: 

6 Then his master shall bring him 
unto the judges; he shall also bring 
him to the door, or unto the door 
post; and his master shall bore his 
Jear through with an aul; and he 
shall serve him for ever. 

7 And if a man sell his daughter 
to be a maidservant, she shall not 
go out as the menservants do. 

8 If she please not her master, 


‘who hath betrothed her to himself, 


then shall he let her be redeemed: 
to sell her unto a strange nation he 
shall have no power, seeing he hath 
dealt deceitfully with her. 

9 And if he have betrothed het 
unto his son, he shall deal with her 
after the manner of daughters. 

10 If he take him another wife; 
her food, her raiment, and her duty 
of marriage, shall he not diminish. 

11 And if he do not these three 
unto her, then shall she go out free 
without money. 


The Law: (2) the “judgments”; 
injuries to the person. 


12 He that smiteth a man, so that 
he die, shall be surely put to ¢death. 

13 And if a man lie not in wait, 
but God deliver him into his hand; 
then I will appoint thee “a place 
whither he shall flee. 

14 But if aman come presumptu- 
ously upon his neighbour, to slay 
him with guile; thou shalt ‘take 
him from mine altar, that he may 


ie. 

15 And he that smiteth his father, 
or his mother, shall be surely put 
to death. 

16 And he that Jstealeth a man, 
and selleth him, or if he be found 
in his hand, he shall surely be put 
to death. 

17 And he that “curseth his fa- 
ther, or his mother, shall surely be 
put to death. 

18 And if men strive together, 
and one smite another with a stone, 
or with Ais fist, and he die not, but 
keepeth his bed: 

19 If he rise again, and walk 
abroad upon his staff, then shall he 
that smote. him be quit: only he 
shall pay for the loss of his time, 


and shall cause Aim to be thor- 
oughly healed. 

20 And if a man smite his servant, 
or his maid, with a rod, and he die 
under his hand; he shall be surely 
punished. 

21 Notwithstanding, if he con- 
tinue a day or two, he shall not be 
punished: for he is his money. 

22 If men strive, and hurt a wo- 
man with child, so that her fruit 
depart from her, and yet no mis- 
chief follow: he shall be surely pun- 
ished, according as the woman’s 
husband will lay upon him; and he 
shall pay as the judges determine. 

23 And if any mischief follow, 
then thou shalt give life for life, 

24 Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, 
hand for hand, foot for foot, 

25 Burning for burning. wound 
for wound, stripe for stripe. 

26 And if a man smite the eye of 
his servant, or the eye of his maid, 
that it perish; he shall let him go 
free for his eye’s sake. 

27 And if he smite out his man- 
servant’s tooth, or his maidser- 
vant’s tooth; he shall let him go 
free for his tooth’s sake. 

28 If an ox gore a man or a 
woman, that they die: then the ox 
shall be surely stoned, and his flesh 
shall not be eaten; but the owner of 
the ox shall be quit. 

29 But if the ox were wont to 
push with his horn in time past, 
and it hath been testified to his 
owner, and he hath not kept him 
in, but that he hath killed a man 
or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, 
and his owner also shali be put to 
death. 

30 If there be laid on him a sum 
of money, then he shall give for the 
tansom of his life whatsoever is laid 
upon him. 

31 Whether he have gored a son, 
or have gored a daughter, accord- 
ing to this judgment shall it be done 
unto him. 

32 If the ox shall push a manser- 
vant or a maidservant; he shall 
give unto their master thirty 'shek- 
els of silver, and the ox shall be 
stoned. : 

33 And if a man shall open a pit, 
or if a man shall dig a pit, and not 
cover it, and an ox or an ass fall 
therein; 

34 The owner of the pit shall 
make it good, and give money unto 
the owner of them; and the dead 
beast shall be his. 

35 And if one man’s ox hurt an- 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


a Lev.24.20; 
Deut.19.21; 
cf. Mt.5.38- 
44; 1 Pet.2. 
19-21. The 
provision in 
Exodus is 
Jaw, and 
righteous; 
the N.T. 
passages, 
&race, and 
merciful. 


6 One shekel 
= 2s. 9d., or 
65 cents. 


c 2 Sam.12.6. 


[22 10 


other’s, that he die; then they shall 

sell the live ox, and divide the 
aanen of it; and the dead ox also 
they shall divide: 

36 Or if it be known that the ox 
hath used to push in time past, and 
his owner hath not kept him in; he 
shall surely pay ox for ox; anda the 
dead shall be his own. 


CHAPTER 22. 


The Law: (2) the “judgments”; 
rights of property. 


F a man shall steal an ox, or a 

sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he 
shall restore five oxen for an ox, 
and four ‘sheep for a sheep. 

2 If a thief be found breaking up, 
and be smitten that he die, there 
shall no blood be shed for him. 

3 If the sun be risen upon him, 
there shall be blood shed for him; 
for he should make full restitution; 
if he have nothing, then he shall be 
sold for his theft. 

4 Ifthe theft be certainly found in 
his hand alive, whether it be ox, or 
ass, or sheep; he shall restore 
double. 

5 If a man shall cause a field or 
vineyard to be eaten, and shall put 
in his beast, and shall feed in 
another man’s field; of the best of 
his own field, and of the best of his 
own vineyard, shall he make resti- 
tution. 

6 If fire break out, and catch in 
thorns, so that the stacks of corn, 
or the standing corn, or the field, be 
consumed therewith; he that kin- 
dled the fire shall surely make res- 
titution. 

7 If a man shall deliver unto his 
neighbour money or stuff to keep, 
and it be stolen out of the man’s 
house; if the thief be found, let him 
pay double. 

8 If the thief be not found, then 
the master of the house shall be 
brought unto the judges, to see 
whether he have put his hand unto 
his neighbour’s goods. 

9 For all manner of trespass, 
whether it be for ox, for ass, for 
sheep, for raiment, or for any man- 
ner of lost thing, which another 
challengeth to be his, the cause of 
both parties shall come before the 
judges; and whom the judges shall 
condemn, he shall pay double unto 
his neighbour. 

10 Ifaman deliver unto his neigh- 
bour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, 
or any beast, to keep; and it die, or 


22 11] 


be hurt, or driven away, no man 
seeing it: 

11 Then shall an oath of the 
LorD be between them both, that 
he hath not put his hand unto his 
neighbour’s goods; and the owner 
of it shall accept thereof, and he 
shall not make it good. 3 

12 And ifit be stolen from him, he 
shall make restitution unto the 
owner thereof. 

13. If it be torn in pieces, then let 
him bring it for witness, and he 
shall not make good that which was 
torn. 

14 And if a man borrow ought of 
his neighbour, and it be hurt, or 
die, the owner thereof being not 
with it, he shall surely make it 
good. 

15 But if the owner thereof be 
with it, he shall not make it good: 
if it be an hired thing, it came for 
his hire. 


The Law: (2) the “judgments”; 
crimes against humanity. 


16 And if a man entice a maid 
that is not betrothed, and lie with 
her, he shall surely endow her to 
be his wife. 

17 If her father utterly refuse to 
give her unte him, he shall pay 
money according to the dowry of 
virgins. 

18 Thou shalt not suffer a ¢witch 
to live. 

19 Whosoever lieth with a beast 
shall surely be put to death. 

20 He that sacrificeth unto any 
bgod, save unto the LorD only, he 
shall be utterly destroyed, 

21 Thou shalt neither ‘vex a 
stranger, nor oppress him: for ye 
were strangers in the land of 
Egypt. 

22 Ye shall not ¢afflict any wid- 
ow, or fatherless child. 

23 If thou afflict them in any 
wise, and they cry at all unto me, 
I will surely hear their cry; 

24 And my wrath shall wax hot, 

nd I will kill you with the sword; 
and your wives shall be widows, and 
your children fatherless. 

25 If thou lend money to any of 
my people that is poor by thee, 
thou shalt not be to him as an 
usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon 

usury. 
26 If thou at all take thy neigh- 
Dour’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt 
deliver it unto him by that the sun 
goeth down: 


EXODUS. 


a Deut.18.10, 
LICE 
1 Sam.28. 
3-10. 

b Deut.13. 
6-16. 

c Ex.23.9; ~ 
Mal.3.5. 

d Deut.24. 


e Ex.34.6,7. 

f Acts 23.5. 

g Ex.13.12,15. 

h v.6; Lev.19. 
15. 


98 


B.C. 1491. 


ee ore 


[23 11 


27 For that.zs his covering only, 
it zs his raiment for his skin: where-_ 
in shall he sleep? and it shall come 
to pass, when he crieth unto me, 
that I will hear; for I am @gracious. 

28 Thou shalt not revile the gods, 
nor curse the Jruler of thy people. — 

29: Thou shalt not delay to offer 
the first of thy ripe fruits, and of 
thy liquors: &the firstborn of thy 
sons shalt thou give unto me. 

30 Likewise shalt thou do with 
thine oxen, and with thy sheep: 
seven days it shall be with his 
dam; on the eighth day thou shalt 
give it me. 

31 And ye shall be holy.men unto 
fme: neither shall ye eat any flesh 
that is torn of beasts in the field; 
ye shall cast it to the dogs. 


CHAPTER 23. 


4 eee shalt not raise a false 
report: put ‘not thine hand 
with the wicked to be an un- 
righteous witness. 

2 Thou shalt not follow a multi- 
tude to do evil; neither shalt thou 
speak in a cause to decline after 
many to wrest judgment: 

3 Neither shalt thou countenance 
a ‘poor man in his cause. 

4 If thou meet thine enemy’s ox 
or his ass going astray, thou shalt 
surely bring it back to him again. 

5 If thou see the ass of him that 
hateth thee lying under his burden, 
and wouldest forbear to help him, 
thou shalt surely help with him. 

6 Thou shalt not wrest the judg- 
ment of thy poor in his cause. 

7 Keep thee far from a false mat- 
ter; and the innocent and righteous 
slay thou not: for I will not justify 
the wicked. 

8 And thou shalt take no gift: for 
the gift blindeth the wise, and per-. 
verteth the words of the righteous. 

9 Also thou shalt not oppress a 
stranger: for ye know the heart of 
a stranger, seeing ye were strangers 
in the land of Egypt. 


The Law: (2) the “judgments”; 
the land and the Sabbath. | 


10 And six years thou shalt sow. 
\thy land, and shalt gather in the 
‘fruits thereof: | 

11 But the seventh year thou 
shalt let it rest and lie still; that the 
poor of thy people may eat: and 
what they leave the beasts of the. 
‘field shall eat. In like manner thou © 


23 12] 
shalt deal with thy vineyard, and 
with thy oliveyard. 

12 Six days thou shalt do thy 
work, and on the seventh day thou 
shalt rest: that thine ox and thine) 
ass may rest, and the son of thy 
handmaid, and the stranger, may 
be refreshed. 

13 And in all things that I have} 
said unto you be circumspect: and| 
make no mention of the name of 
other gods, neither let it be heard 
out of thy mouth. 


The three national feasts: un- 
leavened bread; firstfruits; in- 
gathering. 


14 ¢Three times thou shalt keep 
a feast unto me in the year. 

15 Thou shalt keep the feast of 
bunleavened bread: (thou shalt eat 
unleavened bread seven days, as I 
commanded thee, in the time ap- 
pointed of the month ‘Abib; for in 
it thou camest out from Egypt: and 
none shall appear before me empty:) 

16 And the feast of harvest, the 
firstfruits of thy labours, which 
thou hast'sowm in the field: and the 
feast of ingathering, which isin the 
end of the year, when thou hast 
ee in thy labours out of the 

eld. 

17 Three times in the year all thy 

males shall appear before the Lord 
Gop. 
18 Thou shalt not offer the blood 
of my sacrifice with leavened bread; 
neither shall the fat of my sacrifice 
remain until the morning. 

19 The first of the firstfruits of 
thy land thou shalt bring into the 
house of the Lorp thy God. Thou 
shalt not seethe a kid in his 
inother’s milk. 


Instructions and promises con- 
cerning the conquest of the land. 


20 Behold, I send an ¢Angel be- 
fore thee, to keep thee in the way, 
and to bring thee into the place 
which I have prepared. 

21 Beware of him, and obey his 
voice, provoke him not; for he will 
not pardon your transgressions: for 
my name is in him. 

22 But if thou shalt indeed obey 
his voice, and do all that I speak; 
then I will be an enemy unto thine 
enemies, and an adversary unto 
thine adversaries. 

23 For mine Angel shall go before 
thee, and bring thee in unto the 
Amorites, and the Hittites, and the} 
Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the 


° 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


[24.3 


Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I 
will cut them off, 

24 Thou shalt not bow down to 
their gods, nor serve them, nor do 
after their works: but thou shalt 


lutterly overthrow them, and quite 
break down their images. 


a Cf. Lev.23. 
4-44. Exodus 
forthe wil- 


derness; Le- 
viticus for 
the land. 


b Leaven. vs. 
15,18; Ex. 
29.2,23. 
(Gen.19.3; 
Mt.13.33.) 

ci.e. April. 


d Heb.1.4, 
note. 


e Inspiration. 
vs.3,4,7,8, 
12; Ex.32.16. 
(Bx.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


99 


25 And ye shall serve the Lorp 
your God, and he shall bless thy 
bread, and thy water; and I will 
take sickness away from the midst 
of thee. 

26 There shall nothing cast their 
young, nor be barren, in thy land: 
the number of thy days I will fulfil. 

27 I will send my fear before thee, 
and will destroy all the people to 
whom thou shalt come, and I will 
make all thine enemies turn their 
backs unto thee. 

28 And I will send hornets before 
thee, which shall drive out the Hi- 
vite, the Canaanite, and the Hit- 
tite, from before thee. 

29 I will not drive them out from 
before thee in one year; lest the 
land become desolate, and the beast 
of the field multiply against thee. 

30 By little and little I will drive 
them out from before thee, until 
thou be increased, and inherit the 
land. 

31 And I will set thy bounds from 
the Red sea even unto the sea of 
the Philistines, and from the desert 
unto the river; for I will deliver the 
inhabitants of the land into your 
hand; and thou shalt drive them 
out before thee. 

32 Thou shalt make no covenant 
with them, nor with their gods. 

33 They shall not dwell in thy 
land, lest they make thee sin against 
me: for if thou serve their gods, it 
will surely be a snare unto thee. 


CHAPTER 24. 


The order of worship pending 
the building of the tabernacle. 


ND he said unto Moses, Come 

up unto the Lorp, thou, and 

Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and 

seventy of the elders of Israel: and 
worship ye afar off. 

2 And Moses alone shall come 
near the LorpD: but they shall not 
come nigh; neither shall the people 
go up with him, 


The people accept the covenant: 
the worship of the people. 


3 And Moses came and told the 


people all the «words of the Lorp, 
and all the judgments: and all the 


»¥ 


EXODUS. 


24 4] 


eople answered with one voice, 
Sad acid, All the words which the 
Lorp hath said will we do. 

4 And Moses wrote all the words 
of the Lorp, and rose up early in 
the morning, and ¢builded an altar 
under the hill, and twelve pillars, 
according to the twelve tribes of 
Israel. . 

*5 And he sent young men of the 


a Cf.Ex.33. 


children of Israel, which offered nee 
burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace-| for worship 
offerings of oxen unto the LORD. was tempo- 


tarily called 


6 And Moses took half of the 


blood, and put it in basons; and es 
half of the blood he sprinkled on 
the altar. ‘ b Heb.9.20. 

7 And he took the book of the} ¢symbot of 
covenant, and read in the audience} communion. 
of the people: and they said, All| ¢fLe-22- 
that the Lorp hath said will we do,| blood. 
and be obedient. _sprinkled 

8 And Moses took the blood, and] ‘people (see 
sprinkled it on the people, and said,| Who had not 
Behold the “blood of the covenant,| yet broken 
which the Lorp hath made with| the law could 
you concerning all these words. mune with 

od. Never 
The worship of Moses, the aps 
priests, and the elders. peated. Cf, 
Ex.24.9-11 

9 Then went up Moses, and Aa- pag OG 
ron, Nadab, and Abihu, and sev-| 68. But cf, 
enty of the elders of Israel: -under grace, 

10 And they saw the God of Is- Eph? 165 
tael: and there was under his feet] 99°’ 
as it were a paved work of a sap-| 
phire stone, and as it were the body|@ fingdom : 
of heaven in his clearness. weeeatiecn 

11 And upon the nobles of the! 1.26; Zech 
children of Israel he laid not his} 12-8-) 
hand: also they saw God, and did] ¢see 2 Cor. 
feat and drink ' 8.1, note. 


12 And the LorpD said unto Mo- 
ses, Come up to me into the mount, 
and be there: and I will give thee 
tables of stone, and a law, and com- 
mandments which I have written; 
that ¢thou mayest teach them. 

13 And Moses rose up, and his 
Minister Joshua: and Moses went 
up into the mount of God. 


f i.e. acacia. 


14 And he said unto the elders, — 
Tarry ye here for us, until we come — 
again unto you: and,:behold, Aaron 
and Hur are with you: if any man 
have any matters to do, let him 
come unto them. 

15 And Moses went up into the > 
mount, and a cloud covered the 
mount. 

16 And the glory of the Lorp 
abode upon mount Sinai, and the 
cloud covered it six days: and the 
seventh day he called unto Moses 
out of the midst of the cloud. . 

17 And the sight of the glory of 


the LorpD was like devouring fire 
on the top of the mount in the eyes 
of the children of Israel. 5 

18 And Moses went into the midst 
of the cloud, and gat him up into 
the mount: and Moses was in the 
mount forty days and forty nights. 


CHAPTER 25. 


Moses in the mount. The tab- 
ernacle: (1) the materials. 


ND !the Lorpb spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 
2 Speak unto the children of Is- 


rael, that they bring me an offer- 
ing: of every man that giveth it 
ewillingly with his heart ye shall 
take my offering. 

3 And this is the offering which 
ye shall take of them; gold, and 


silver, and brass, 


4 And blue, and purple, and scar- 
let, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, 
5 And rams’ skins dyed red, and 
badgers’ skins, and fshittim wood, 

6 Oil for the light, spices for 
anointing oil, and for sweet in- 
cense, 

7 Onyx stones, and stones to be 
set in the eéphod, and in the breast- 
plate. 

8 And let them make me a sanc- 
tuary; that I may dwell among 
them. 

9 According to all that I shew 


1 The general authority for the types of Exodus is found: (1) as to the persons 


and events, in 1 Cor. 10. 1-11; (2) 


as to the tabernacle, in Heb. 9. 1-24. 


Having 


the assurance that in the tabernacle everything is typical, the details must of neces- 
sity be received as such. Two warnings are necessary: (1) Nothing may be dog- 


matically asserted to 
(2) all types not so 


of analogy, or spiritual congruity, 


be a type without explicit New Testament authority; and 
authenticated must be recognized as having the authority 
merely. The typical meanings of the ma- 


terials and colours of the tabernacle are believed to be as follows: Gold, Deity 


in manifestation—divine glory: silver, 
note); brass, symbol of judgment, as in 
of brass (Num. 21. 6-9); blue, 
Sacrifice. 


100 


redemption (Ex. 
i the brazen altar and in the serpent 
heavenly in nature or origin; purple, royalty; scarlet, 


30. 12-16; 38. 27, 


Sothys atealIhs Bele SO i acne ard A NOG PRL TED ie ys ah ARG 
e510} EXODUS. [25 28 


_ thee, after the pattern of the Itab-| B.c. 1491. |seat shall ye make the cherubims 


ernacle, and the pattern of all the on the two ends thereof. 
instruments thereof, even so. shall 20 And thecherubims shall stretch 
ye make it. forth their wings on high, covering 
The tabernacle. (2) the ark. agate an apie siti sabrts and 
eir faces shall look one to an- 
10, And they shall ¢make an ark)" xhe most _Jother; toward the mercy seat shall 
of shittim wood: two ‘cubits and) type of the faces of the cherubims be. 
pot ee Be ae Sem peter beep 21 abe thou shalt put the mercy 
‘ eity; woo » ‘3 
Phereof.canel a eubinand a: half the e iva mood ren fee half! ane oe ae 
“eng isha ar ; Bee it that I shall give thee. j 
11 And thou shalt overlay it with} 19 33> josh, | 22 And there I will meet with 
pure gold, within and without shalt oer ett thee, and I will commune with thee 
thou overlay it, and shalt make up- Jud.20.27;  |from above the mercy seat, from 
on it a crown of gold round about.} 4 774475 between the two cherubims which 
12 And thou shalt cast four rings 1 ;6.1-21, |are upon the ark of the testimony, 
of gold for it, and put them in the] 7}) aa \of all things which I will give thee 
four corners thereof; and two rings} 35 24.59:’ |in commandment unto the children 
shall be in the one side of it, and} 1 Kis.1-21; |of Israel 


: : ‘ 2 pees 
fu ringsin the other sie oft. | (RSG! The tabernacle: (3) the fable of 
dshittim wood, and overlay them} 2 Chr.35.3: shewbread (Lev. 24. 5-9). 
with gold. a ae 23 Thou shalt also make a table 
14 And thou shalt put the staves! pos or of shittim wood: two cubits shall 


into the rings by the sides of the] Neh. Where |be the length thereof, and a cubit 
ark, that the ark may be borne with a it? Rev the breadth thereof, and a cubit 
them. é OE and a half the height thereof. 

15 The staves shall be in the rings} ie. acacia. 24 And thou shalt overlay it with 
of the ark: they shall not be taken pure gold, and make thereto a 


from it. MD ¢ One cubit = _jcrown of gold round about. 
16 And thou shalt put into the ark) see also vs. 25 And thou shalt make unto it a 
the testimony which I shall give) 17.23: border of an hand breadth round 


ee. dSee“Pro. |about, and thou shalt make a 
17 And thou shalt make a ¢mercy| pitiation.” | golden crown to the border thereof 
seat of pure gold two cubits and a; Rom.3.2s, /round about. 


half shall be the length thereof, and) 7°°* | 26 And thou shalt make for it four 
acubit anda half the breadth thereof. | ¢ Ezk.1.5, rings of gold, and put the rings in 
18 And thou shalt make two] ote: 1 Ki /the four corners that are on the 
echerubims of gold, of beaten work) 57: B83 {four feet thereof, 
shalt thou make them, in the two} 4.5.’ 27 Over against the border shall 
ends of the mercy seat. the rings be for places of the staves 
19 And make one cherub on the to bear the table. 
one end, and the other cherub on! 28 And thou shalt make the 
the other end: even of the mercy! |staves of 5shittim wood, and over- 


i The tabernacle, speaking comprehensively, is explained in the N. T. as typical 
in three ways: (1) of the Church as a habitation of God through the Spirit (Ex. 
25.8; Eph 2. 19-22); (2) of the believer (2 Cor 6. 16); (3) asa figure of things in 
the heavens (Heb. 9 23, 24) In detail, all speaks of Christ: (1) The ark, in its 
materials, acacia-wood (see Ex. 26. 15, note) and gold, is a type of the humanity 
and deity of Christ. (2) In its contents, a type of Christ, as: (a) having God’s law 
in His heart (Ex. 25. 16); (b) the wilderness food (or portion) of His people (Ex. 
16. 38} ; (c) Himself the resurrection, of which Aaron’s rod is the symbol (Num, 
17. 10). (3) In its use the ark, especially the mercy-seat, was a type of God’s 
throne. That it was, to the sinning Israelite, a throne of grace and not of judgment 
was due to the mercy-seat formed of gold and sprinkled with the blood of atonement, 
which vindicated the law, and the divine holiness guarded by the cherubim (Gen, 
3. 24; Ezk. 1.5, note) See Propitiation, Rom. 3, 25, note. 

2’All begins with the ark, which, in the completed tabernacle, was placed in the 
holy of holies, because, in revelation, God begins from Himself, working outward 
toward man; as, in approach, the worshipper begins from himself, moving toward 
God in the holy of holies. The same order is followed in the Levitical offerings 
(Lev. 1.-5.). In approach man begins at the brazen altar, type of the Cross, where, 
in the fire of judgment, atonement is made. 

i101 


25 297 EXODUS. 
lay them with gold, that the table 
may be borne with them. 

_ 29 And thou shalt make the 
dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, 
and covers thereof, and bowls 
thereof, to cover withal: of pure 


he make it, with all these ves- 
els. ; 
“40 And look that thou make — 
them after their ‘pattern, which 
was shewed thee in the mount. 


gold shalt thou make them. CHAPTER 26. 
30 And thou shalt set upon the], e6iso, or |The tabernacle: (5) the curtains 
table Ishewbread before me alway. | $29,085. af tines. 
The tabernacle: (4) the golden |; crHeb.8.5. OREOVER thou shalt make 
candlestick. 4d Fine linen the tabernacle with: ten -cur- 


31 And thou shalt make a ¢can-| typifies per- |tains of fine twined linen, and 
dlestick of pure gold: of beaten| sonalright- |ebine, and purple, and scarlet: with 
' work shall the candlestick be made:| (eyog), |/cherubims of cunning work shalt 


his shaft, and his branches, his| The fine thou make them. ; 
bowls, his knops, and his flowers, ita tee 2 The length of one curtain shall 
ou. aches shall come sgleas lie of a: paso toma ee be 
out of the sides of it; three branches Ps cubits: and every one of the cur: 
of the candlestick out of the one|° G72, tains shall have one measure. 
side, and three branches of the can-! heavenly 3 The five curtains shall be 
dlestick out of the other side: origin; pur- |coupled together one to another; 
33 Three bowls made like unto} 2/6: #istoy- |and other five curtains shall be 


c al 
almonds, with a knop and a flower David's son; '|coupled one to another. 


in one branch; and three bowls| scariet,His | 4 And thou shalt make loops of 


made like almonds in the other] S@"fce- blue upon the edge of the one cur- 
branch, with a knop and a flower:| f See Ezk.1.5, |tain from the selvedge in the coup- 
so in the six branches that come| ete. ling; and likewise shalt thou make 


out of the candlestick. gOne cubit= |i the uttermost edge of another 
34 And in the candlestick shall|"1 ft. 5.48 in; |curtain, in the coupling of the 
be four bowls made like unto al-| also vs.8,13,’ |second. 

monds, with their knops and their| 1° 5 Fifty loops.shalt thou make in 
flowers. hCfLev.i6. |the one curtain, and fifty loops 
35 And there shall be a knop BA The |shalt thou make in the edge of the 
under two branches of the same, scene tebe (Curtain that is in the coupling of the _ 
and a knop under two branches of) to the result |second; that the loops may take 
the same, and a knop under two| ofthe ordi- |hold one of another. 

branches of the same, according to) fans ot*he | 6 And thou shalt make fifty 
the six branches that proceed out} “covering? |taches of gold, and couple the cur- 


of the candlestick. (Lev.16.5,  |tains' together with the taches: 
we knops and their branches} 70*¢), thus /and it shall be one tabernacle. 

ae Ree toe oe be Christ in |The tabernacle: (6) the curtains 
37 And thou shait make the seven} (cfGen.3- of goats’ hair. 


, 21, ; at 
lamps thereof: and they shall light] 7Hif'eOvene | 7 And thou shalt make curtains 
the lamps thereof, that they may] is intensified |of ‘goats’ hair to be a covering 


"38. And the tongs thereof, andithe| Site sim (TRO ine, tabernacle: eleven eure 
’ skins, v.14. : % 

snuffdishes thereof, shall be of 8 The length of one curtain shall 

pure golds be thirty cubits, and the breadth 

39 Of a “talent of pure gold shall of one curtain four cubits: and the 


5 Showbread, type of Christ, the Bread of God, nourisher of the Christian’s life 
as a believer-priest (1 Pet. 2. 9; Rev. l. 6). In John 6. 33-ss our Lord has more 
in mind the manna, that food which “came down” ; but all typical meanings of 

bread” are there gathered into His words. The manna is the life-giving Christ: 
the showbread, the life-sustaining Christ. The showbread typifies Christ as the 

corn of wheat”? (John 12. 24) ground in the mill of suffering (John 12. 27) and 
brought into the fire of judgment (John 12. 31-33). We, as priests, by faith feed 
upon Hirn as having undergone that in our stead and for our sakes. It is medita- 
tion upon Christ, as in Heb. 12. 2, 3. 

2 Candlestick, type of Christ our Light, shining in the fullness of the power of the 
sevenfold Spirit (Isa. 11. 2; Heb. 1. 9: Rev. 1. 4). Natural light was excluded from 
the tabernacle. Cf. 1 Cor. 2. 14,15. See Gen. 1. 16, note, and John 1. 4, 


102 


eleven curtains shall be all of one 
measure. 

9 And thou shalt couple five cur- 
tains by themselves, and six cur- 
tains by ‘themselves, and shalt 
double the sixth curtain in the 
forefront of the tabernacle. 

10 And thou shalt make fifty 
loops on the edge of the one curtain 
that fs outmost in the coupling, 
and fifty loops in the edge of the 
curtain which coupleth the second. 

11 And thou shalt make fifty 
taches of brass, and put the taches 
into the loops, and couple the tent 
together, that it may be one. 

12 And the remnant that remain- 


hang over the backside of the 
tabernacle. 

13 And a cubit on the one side, 
anda cubit on the other side of that 
which remaineth in the length of 
the curtains of the tent, it shall 
hang over the sides of the taber- 
nacle on this side and on that side, 
to cover it. 


The tabernacle: (7) the covering 
of rams’ skins. 


14 And thou shalt make a cover- 
ing for the tent of rams’ skins dyed 
red, and a covering above of bad- 
gers’ skins. 

The tabernacle: (8) the boards 
and sockets. 


15 And thou shalt make !boards 
for the tabernacle of 'shittim wood 
standing up. 

16 Ten cubits shall be the length 
of a board, and a cubit and a half 
shall be the breadth of one board.| 

“17 Two tenons shall there be in| 
one board, set in order one against 
another: thus shalt thou make for 
all the boards of the tabernacle. 

18 And thou shalt make the 


a See v.7, ref. 
bi.e. acacia. 


c Rom.8.9; 
1 Cor.6.19. 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


boards for the tabernacle, twenty 
boards on the south side southward. 

19 And thou shalt make forty 
2sockets of silver under the twenty 
boards; two sockets under one 
board for his two tenons, and two 
sockets under another board for his 
two tenons. 

20 And for the second side of the 
tabernacle on the north side there 
shall be twenty boards: 

21 And their forty sockets of sil- 
ver; two sockets under one board, 
and two sockets under another 
board. 

22 And for the sides of the taber- 
nacle westward thou shalt make six 
boards. 

23 And two boards shalt thou 
make for the corners of the taber- 
nacle in the two sides. 

24 And they shall be coupled to- 
gether beneath, and they shall be 
coupled together above the head of 
it unto one ring: thus shall it be for 
them both; they shall be for the 
two corners. 

25 And they shall be eight boards, 
and their sockets of silver, sixteen 
sockets; two sockets under one 
board, and two sockets under an: 
other board. 


The tabernacle: (9) the outside 
bars. 


26 And thou shalt make bars of 
bshittim wood; five for the boards 
of the one side of the tabernacle, 

97 And five’bars for the ‘boards of 
the other side of the tabernacle, and 
five bars for the boards of the side 
of the tabernacle, for the two sides 
westward. 


The tabernacle: (10) the bar in 
the midst. 
28 And the ‘middle bar in the 
midst of the boards shall reach 
from end to end. 


1 The typical meaning of the boards is clear as to Christ. Acacia wood, a desert 
growth, is a fitting symbol of Christ in His humanity as “a root out of dry ground” 


(Isa. 53. 2). 
divine glory. 
less clear. The connection may be 
4, 13. 
liever. So viewed the type is beautiful. 
the silver of redemption (Gal. 1. 4; 


The covering, gold, typifies Deity in manifestation, speaks of His 
As applied to the individual believer the meaning of the boards is 
found in John 17. 21, 22, 23; Eph. 1. 4,6; 1 John 
Only as seen “in Him” could the boards be taken as representing the be- 
In the world, and yet separated from it by 
Ex. 30. 11-16; 38. 25-27), as the boards of the 


tabernacle were separated from the earth by the sockets of silver, and united by the 


“middle bar” (v. 28), representing 


both the one life (Gal. 2. 20) and one Spirit 


(Eph. 4. 3), “all che building, fitly framed together, groweth unto an holy temple 


in the Lord”? (Eph. 2. 21). 


2 Silver symbolizes redemption (Ex. 25. 1, note; 


38. 27, note). All the taber- 


nacle rests upon silver except the hangings of the gate, the way of access (Ex. 27. 


17, note); 
103 


26 29} 


of gold, 


29 And thou shalt overlay the 
boards with gold, and make their 
rings of gold for places for the 
bars: and thou shalt overlay the 
bars with gold. 

30 And thou shalt rear up the! 
tabernacle according to the thee ia 


thereof which was shewed thee in 


“EXODUS. 


The tabernacle: (11) the overlay) __B.c. 1491. 


and their hooks shall be of gold: 
and thou shalt cast five sockets of 
‘brass for them. 


CHAPTER 27. 


The tabernacle: (14) the brazen 


altar. 
| A ND thou shalt make an 2altar 
of ¢shittim ‘wood, five ¢cubits 
long, and five cubits broad; the al- 


_ The tabernacle: (13) the outer 


the mount. 


|aie. acacia. {tar shall be foursquare: and the 


The tabernacle: (12) the inner |p See ae een thereof shall be three 
vail. bY note. > 5 

: ; 2 And thou shalt make the horns 

31 And thou shalt make a !vail of : : 

blue, and purple, and scarlet, and Gee aa of it upon the four corners thereof 


; : : i f me: and 
fine twined linen’ df cunning work:} manity), ce sake Pe ei ee 
: : : des completely |thou shalt overlay , : 
with cherubims shall it be made: c 
5 inclosed in 3 And thou shalt make his pans to 
rae crake DADS AE UPON! | pease, must receive his ashes, and his shovels 
four pillars of ¢shittim wood overlaid] have become RS » 2 ’ 
ith gold: their hooks sha/l be of| completely |and his basons, and his fleshhooks, 
eold nua the roar sockets of silver.| hatred by and his firepans: all the vessels 


sacrificial —_| thereof thou shalt make of brass. 
33 And thou shalt hang up the} fires. Cf. { 4 dmdothott ‘shaltanake dortte 


vailunder the taches, that thou may-| Heb.10.5-7, 3 

est bring in thither within the vail]; one cupie= State of network of brass; and upon 

the ark of the testimony: and the] 1 f-5.48 in.; |the net shalt thou make four Brasee 

vail shall divide unto you between| also vs.9,12-’ |fings in the four corners thereof. 

the holy place and the most holy. | 1618 5 And thou shalt put it under the 
F : compass of the altar beneath, that 

34 And thou shalt put the merey]e cf.Num.21. 
seat upon the ark of the testimony] 9: Jchn 3.14 |the net may be even to the midst of 
in the most holy place. with’ John 12./the altar. 


31-33; thus | 6 And thou shalt make staves for 
35 And thou shalt set the table] fxing'the the tltar/ staves Gk, hive: Lebel 


without the vail, and the candle-| symbolic 3 
3 pple meaning of jand overlay them with brass. 
gUck Qver against the table on the 7 And the staves shall be put into 


ide of the tabernacle toward the| DMs °,¢% 
2 ties rae gecone Be 2 festation in |the rings, and the staves shall be 


vine mani- 
‘le prices te ae put the'tavle judgment. jupon the two sides of the altar, to 
E bear it. 


8 Hollow with boards shalt thou 
make it: as it was shewed thee in 


vail 


36 And thou shalt make an hanging 
for the door of the tent, of blue, and 
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined 
linen, wrought with needlework. 

37 And thou shalt make for the 
hanging five pillars of 4snittim 
wood, and overlay them with gold, 


ithe mount, so shall they make it. 
ee tabernacle: (15) the court 


9 And thou shalt make the court 
of the tabernacle: for the south side 
southward there shall be hangings 
for the court of 4fine twined linen 


1The inner veil, type of Christ’s human body (Mt. 26. 26; 27. 50; Heb. 10 20) 
This veil, barring entrance into the holiest, was the most expressive symbol of the 
truth that “‘by the deeds of the Jaw shall no flesh be justified” (Rom 3 20; Heb. 
9.8) Rent by an unseen hand when Christ died (Mt. 27 51), thus giving in- 
stant access to God to all who come by faith in Him, it was the end of all legality, 


the way to God was open 


It is deeply significant that the priests must have patched 


together again the veil that God had rent, for the temple services went on yet for 


nearly forty years. 
or sinner back under law. 


‘ (Cf Gal. 1. 6 
is ‘‘another gospel,”’ and under anathema. 


That patched veil is Galatianism—the attempt to put saint 
-9.) Anything but “the grace of Christ” 


2 Brazen altar, type of the Cross upon which Christ, our whole burnt-offering, 
offered Himself without spot to God (Heb. 9. 14). 


3 Cf. Ex. 25. 10. 


The altar of burnt-offerin 

seat. The atonement more than saves us—it ¢ 
4 The fine linen commonly typifies 

and in the hangings of the court stand 


g is double the height of the mercy- 
glorifies God (John 17, 4). 

personal righteousness (Ex. 26 1, ref d), 
s for that measure of righteousness which 


God demands of any who would, in his own righteousness, approach, Christ, fig- 


104 


EXODUS. : ‘eye 


a an hundred cubits long for one 
side: 

10 And the twenty pillars thereof 
and their twenty sockets shali be 
of brass; the hooks of the pillars 
and their fillets shall be of silver. 

11 And likewise for the north side 
in length there shall be hangings 
of an hundred cubits long, and his 
twenty pillars and their twenty 
sockets of brass; the hooks of the 
pillars and their fillets of silver. 

12 And for the breadth of the 
court on the west side shall be 
hangings of fifty cubits: their pil- 
lars ten, and their sockets ten. 

13 And the breadth of the court! ¢ Num.21.9, 
on the east side eastward shall be| note. 
fifty cubits. 

14 The hangings of one side of the 
gate shall be fifteen cubits: their 
pillars three, and their sockets three. 

15 Andon the other side shall be! 
hangings fifteen cubits: their pils| 
lars three, and their sockets three. 


The tabernacle: (16) the hang- 
ing for the gate of the court. 


with needlework: and their pillars 
shall be four, and their sockets 
four. 

17 All the 2pillars round about the 
court shall be filleted with silver; 
their hooks shall be of silver, and 
their sockets of brass. 

18 The length of the court shall 
be an hundred cubits, and the 
breadth fifty every where, and the 
height five cubits of fine twined 
linen, and their sockets of brass. 

19 All the vessels of the taber- 
nacle in all the service thereof, and 
all the pins thereof, and all the pins 
of the court, shall be of “brass. 


The tabernacle: (17) the oil for 
the light. 


20 And thou shalt command the 
children of Israel, that they bring 
thee pure 3oil olive beaten for the 
light, to cause the lamp to burn 
always. 

21 In the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation without the vail, which is 
before the testimony, Aaron and 
his sons shall order it from evening 


B.C. 1491. 


16 And for the 1gate of the court to morning before the Lorb: it 
shall be an hanging of twenty cu- shall be a statute for ever unto 
bits, of blue, and purple, and scar- their generations on the behalf of 
let, and fine twined linen, wrought the children of Israel. 


uratively speaking, put up the hangings of the court in Lk. 10. 25-28. The only 
way of approach was the “gate” (v. 16, John 10.9). The hangings of the court bar 
out equally the self-righteous man and the open sinner, for the height was above 
eight feet (Ex. 27. 18). 

1 In the hangings of the court (v. 9, ref.), representing that practical righteous- 
ness which God demands in the law, and which, therefore, bars out all men (Rom. 
3. 19, 20; 10. 3-5), no colours are inwrought. But the “gate” is Christ (John 10. 9), 
and so the colours reappear as in the veil (Ex. 26. 31). " 

2 The fillets and hooks upholding the linen hangings are of silver (Ex. 38. 27, 
note), for it is in virtue of His redemptive work that Christ is our way of access, 
and not by virtue of His righteous Jife (symbolized by the fine linen); but the pil- 
Jars of the court rest upon brass sockets, not silver as in the case of the boards 
(Ex. 26. 19, note), and brass symbolizes divine righteousness in judgment (Num. 
21. 9, note). Redemption not only displays God’s mercy, but vindicates His right- 
eousness in showing that mercy (Rom. 3. 21-26). 

3 Oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit (Cf. John 3. 34, with Heb. 1.9). In Christ 
the oil-fed Light ever burns, the Light of the world (John 8. 12). But here we 
have not the world, but the sanctuary. It is a question, not of testimony in and to 
the world, but of our communion and worship as believer-priests in the holiest 
(Heb. 10. 19, 20). In the Tabernacle there were two compartments, two lights: the 
holy place with the candlestick (Ex. 25. 31, note); the holy of holies with the 
shekinah, or manifested glory of God. These two places are now one (Mt. 27. 
50, 51; Heb. 9. 6-8; 10. 19-21), but it is important to see that there are still two 
lights: Christ, the Light of life (John 8. 12), through the Spirit giving light upon 
the holy things of God, the showbread and altar of incense; and also the shekinah, 
now on the face of Jesus Christ (2 Cor. 4.6). Into this twofold light we, as believer- 
priests, are brought (1 Pet. 2.9). We ‘“‘walk in the light,’ not merely which He 
gives, but in which He lives (1 John 1. 7). But what of the command to “bring 
pure oil’? (Ex. 27. 20)? Because our access, apprehension, communion, and _trans- 
formation are by the Spirit (Eph. 2. 18; 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15; 2 Cor. 13. 14; Phil. 2. 1; 
2 Cor. 3.18). Our title to His presence is the blood (Eph. 2. 13), but only as filled 
‘with the Spirit (Eph. 5. 18) do we really walk in the light. 

105 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


28 1) 


CHAPTER 28. 


The priesthood: (1) the high 
priest and the priests; types 
“of Christ and “believers of the 
Church age. 


A. ND take thou unto thee 1Aaron 
thy brother, and his sons with 
him, from ’among the children of 
Israel, that he may minister unto 
me in the priest’s office, even Aa- 
ron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and 
Ithamar, Aaron’s sons. 

2 And thou shalt make “holy gar- 
ments for Aaron thy brother for|a See 1 Pet.2. 
glory and for beauty. 9; Rev.1.6. 

3 And thou shalt speak unto all), sanctity, 


that are wise hearted, whom Ihave} holy (0.T.). 
filled with the ‘spirit of wisdom, ete aes 
that they may make Aaron’s gat-| (Gen23: 
ments to “consecrate him, that he Zech.8.3.) 
Scot unto me in the priest’s ¢ Holy Spirit. 
. Ex.31.3. 
n (Gen.1.2; 
The priesthood: (2) the gar- Mal.2.15.) 
ments of the high priest. Ae 
x.29.5, 
4 and these aes the ¢garments| note. 
which they shall make; a breast- . 
plate, and an ephod, and a robe,|* G0/@, Deity 
and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a| tion; blue, 
girdle: and they shall make holy Deaventys 
garments for Aaron thy brother,| Rye: 
and his sons, that he may minister] scarlet, 
unto me in the priest’s office, sacrifice; 
fine linen, 
The materials. | Lgaheac, 
» And they shall ¢take gold, and ness ere 
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and| 77° 
fine linen. f The place of 
It ; 
The ephod. 1sa.9.6; Lk. 
15.4,5. 
6 And they shall make the «ephod 
of gold, of blue, and of purple, of|¢ One span = 


scarlet, and fine twined linen, with, 8737 ches. 
cunning work, 

7 It shall have the two shoulder 
pieces thereof joined at the two 
edges thereof; and so it shall be 
joined together. 

& And the curious girdle of the 
ephod, which is upon it, shall be of 
the same, according to the work 
thereof; even of gold, of blue, and 
nurele, and scarlet, and fine twined 

nen. 


9 And thou shalt take two onyx} 


1 Type of Christ, ous High Priest. 


[28 al 


stones, and grave on them the 
names of the children of Israel: 

10 Six of their names on one 
stone, and the other six names of 
the rest on the other stone, accord- 
ing to their birth. 

11 With the work of an engraver 
in stone, like the engravings of ‘a 
signet, shalt thou engrave the two 
stones with the names of the chil- 
dren of Israel: thou shalt make 
them to be set in ouches of gold. 

12 And thou shalt put the two 
stones upon the Shoulders of the 
ephod for stones of memorial unto 
the children of Israel: and Aaron 
shall bear their names before the 
Lorp upon his two/shoulders for a 
memorial. 

13. And thow shalt make ouches o. 
gold; $ 

14 And two chains of pure gold at 
the ends; of wreathen work shalt 
thou make them, and fasten the 
wreathen chains to the ouches. 


The breastplate. 


15 And thou shalt make the 
breastplate of judgment with cun- 
ning work; after the work of the 
ephod thou shalt make it; of ¢gold, 
of blue, and of purple, and of scar- 
let, and of fine twined linen, shalt 
thou make it. 

16 Foursquare it shall be being 
doubled; a “span shall be the 
length thereof, and a span shall be 
the breadth thereof, 

17 And thou shalt set in it settings 
of stones, even four rows of stones: 
the first row shall be a sardius, a 
topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall 
be the first row. 

18 And the second row shall be an 
emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond. 

19 And the third row a ligure, an 
agate, and an amethyst. 

20 And the fourth row a beryl, 
and an onyx,and a jasper: they shall 
be set in gold in their inclosings. 

21 And the stones shall be with 
the names of the children of Israel, 
twelve, according to their names, 
like the engravings of a signet: 
every one with his name shall they 
be according to the twelve tribes. 


Christ is a priest after the order of Melchize- 


dek, but He executes his priestly office after the pattern of Aaron. Heb. 7. gives 


the order; 
2 Heb, 
Often trans. “sanctify.” 
fundamental idea of a holy 
something set apart for Go 


Heb. 9., the pattern. See Gen. 14. 18-20, note. 
godesh =“‘set apart’? for God. Trans. “Holy? iy) 
See summary, Zech. 8. 3, note. 


“consecrate,’”’ v. 3. 


if godesh had been uniformly trans. “set apart.” 


106 


75 


. This is always the 
, consecrated, separated, or sanctified person or thing— 
. Infinite confusion would have been spared the reader 


a 
28 22] 


22 And thou shalt make upon the 
breastplate chains at the ends of 
wreathen work of pure goid. 

23. And thou shalt make upon the 
breastplate two rings of gold, and 
shalt put the two rings on the two 
ends of the breastplate: 

24 And thou shalt put the two 
wreathen chains of gold in the two 
rings which are-on the ends of the 
breastplate. 

25 And the other two ends of the 
two wreathen chains thou shalt 
fasten in the two: ouches, and put 
them on the shoulder pieces of the 
ephod. before it. 

26 And thou shalt make two.rings 
of gold, and thou shalt put them! 
upon the two ends of the breast- 
plate in the border thereof, which 
is in the side of the ephod inward. 

27 And two other rings of gold 
thou. shalt make, and shalt put 
them on the two sides of the ephod 
underneath, toward the forepart 
thereof, over against the other 


coupling thereof, above the curious 


girdle of the ephod. 

28 And they shall bind the breast- 
plate by the rings thereof unto the 
rings of the ephod with a lace of 
blue, that it may be above the 
curious girdie of the ephod, and 
that the breastplate be not loosed 
from the ephod. 

29 And Aaron shall bear the 
fMames of the children of Israel in 
the breastplate of judgment upon 
his “heart, when he goeth in unto 
the holy place, for a memorial 
before the Lorp continually. 


The 
Urim and Thummuim. 


30 And thou sha't put in_the 
breastplate of judgment the }Urim 
and the Thummim; and they shall 
be upon Aaron’s heart, when he 
goeth in before the Lorp: and 
Aaron shall bear the judgment of 
the children of Israel upon his 
heart before the LorpD continually. 


The robe of the Ephod. 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


a The-place: 
of affection. 
Cf.v.12,ret. 


b See Ex.29.5, 
note. 


ci.e. be re- 
sponsible for 
every neg- 
lect or 
offence re- 
specting 
“the holy 
things,” etc. 


31 And thou shalt make the brobe 
of the ephod all of blue. 


1Urim and Thummim, 
be simply a collective name for 
of the twelve: stones is to manifest 


antitype of the Aaronic high priest. c 
“the Urim and Thummim 
were connecte 


to: be conclusive that 
breastplate. In use the U and T 


with the ascertainment of the divine 


33. 8; 1 Sam. 28. 6; Ezra 2. 63). 


meaning “lights and perfections.” 
for the stones of the breastplate, 1 ‘ 
“tights and perfections” of Him who is the 
Per contra, Lev. 8. 8. 


the 


107 


[28 40 


32 And there shall be an hole in 

the top of it, in the midst thereof: 
it shall have a binding of woven 
work round about the hole of it, as 
it were the hole of an habergeon, 
that it be not rent. 
_33_ And beneath upon the hem of 
it thou shalt make pomegranates 
of blue, and of purple, and of scar- 
let, round about the hem thereof; > 
and bells of gold between them 
round about: 

34 A golden bell and a pomegran- 
ate, a golden bell’ and a pome- 
granate, upon the hem of the robe’ 
round about. 

35 And it shall be upon Aaron to 
minister: and his sound shall be 
heard when he goeth in unto the 
holy place before the Lorp, and 
when he cometh out, that he die 
not. 


The “holy crown” 
(Ex. 29. 6). 


36 And thou shalt make a plate 
of pure gold, and grave upon it, 
like the engravings of a_ signet, 
HOLINESS TO THE LORD. 

37 And thou shalt put it on a blue 
lace, that it may be upon the mitre; 
upon the forefront of the mitre it 
shall be. 

38 And it shall be upon Aaron’s 
forehead, that Aaron may ‘bear the 
iniquity of the holy things, which 
the children of Israei shall hallow 
in all their holy gifts; and it shall 
be always upon his forehead, that 
they may be accepted before the 
LORD. 


The ordinary garments of high 
priest and priests, over which 
the garments for glory and 
beauty were put on. 


39 And thou shalt embroider the 
coat of fine linen, and thou shalt 
make the mitre of fine linen, and 
thou shalt make the girdle of 
needlework. | 

40 And for Aaron’s sons thou 
shalt make coats, and thou shalt 
make for them girdles, and bonnets 
shalt thou make for them, for glory 
and for beauty. 


Some make these to 
so that the total effect 


This would seem 
” are additional to the stones of the 


d, in some way not clearly expressed, 
will in particular cases (Num, 27. 21; Deut. 


Frhy 
7 


‘the altar to minister in the holy 


4 j P “4 ag tid ‘i f 4 : { og 
28 41] EXODUS. [29 6 
thou shalt put them upon] _B.c. 1491._|priest’s office: ¢Take one young 
a Aen broth d_ hi ’bullock, and two ‘rams without 
aron t rother, an 1s sons ock, : 
with fms, and shalt anoint them,|, crryep.7, | blemish, 
and consecrate them, and sanctify} 26-28. _2 And ‘unleavened bread, and 
them, that they may minister unto feet as deakes unleavened tempered with 
me in the priest’s office. note.” |oil, and wafers unleavened anointed 
42 And thou shalt make them with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou 


linen breeches to cover their naked-|¢ Leaven. vs. |make them. Q 
ness; from the loins even unto the ee 3 And thou shalt put them into 


thighs they shall reach: 19.3; Mt.13. |one basket, and bring them in the 
43. And they shall be upon Aaron,} 33-) basket, with the bullock and the 

and upon his sons, when they come} gee Ex.25, {two rams. J 

in unto the tabernacle of the congre-} 30, Sota: 4 And ?Aaron and his sons thou 

gation, or when they come near unto eee shalt bring unto the door of the 


tabernacle of the congregation, and 
place; that they bear not iniquity,| Distinguish |shalt ‘wash them with water. 
and die: it shall be a statute for| the washing 


ever unto him and his seed after him.| fom the use The order for the high priest. 


Ex.30.18-21. | 5 And thou shalt take the 3gar- 


CHAPTER 29. Lay ere ments, end put jupon oeeeat 
A r i coat, and the robe of the ephod, 
The priesthood: (3) the conse- (Tit.3.5); the land the ephod, and the breastplate, 


cration of the priests; the} javer, daily and gird him with the curious girdle 


oterings. GJohni.o) |of the ephod: 
AD this 7s the thing that thou] See both, 6 And thou shalt put the mitre 
shalt !do unto them to hallow| John 13.10. |upon his head, and put the holy 
them, to minister unto me in the crown upon the mitre. 


1 The priest type of consecration. (Cf. the temple type, 1 Ki. 8. 1-11; 2 Chr. 5. 
4-14). The order in Leviticus (8. 1-9. 24) differs from the order here. In Leviticus 
the filling the hands precedes the sprinkling. P 

2 Aaron shares in the washing (i.e. symbol of Tegeneration, Tit. 3.5; John 3. 
5-6): (1) as needing it, being in this in contrast with Christ (Heb. 7.. 26-28); (2) 
to typify Christ’s action, who received the baptism of John, not as needing it, but 
as thus identifying Himself with sinners, and as fulfilling the Aaronic type. As in 


- Aaron’s case, His anointing followed the washing (Ex, 29. 4, 7; Mt. 3. 14-16). 


The high priest’s garments were put on in reverse order of the instructions for 
making them: 

(1) The “coat”? (Ex. 28. 39), the oriental long garment worn next the person, 
made of fine linen (Ex. 27. 9, ref.). 

(2) The “robe of the ephod” (Ex. 28. 31-35), a long seamless garment of 
blue linen with an opening for the head, worn over the “coat.” Pomegranates, 
symbol of fruitfulness, were embroidered on the skirt of the robe in blue, purple, 
and scarlet, alternated with golden bells, symbol of testimony, which gave a sound 
as the high priest went in and out of the sanctuary. The robe was secured by an 
embroidered girdle. 

i (3) The ephod (Ex. 28. 5-12) was next put on. A short garment made of 
linen, embroidered with gold, blue, purple, and scarlet, it consisted of two pieces, front 
and back, united by two shoulder-pieces and by a band about the bottom. Two 
Onyx stones, set in gold and fastened upon the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, were 
engraved with the names of the twelve tribes: “and Aaron shall bear their names 
before Jehovah upon his two shoulders (the place of strength) for a memorial.” Cf. 
TSAO 6s. Lic 1514 a 

_.: (4) The breastplate was a square pouch (Ex. 28. 16) of linen to contain the 
Urim and Thummim (Ex. 28. 30, note). To the linen pouch was attached the 


the names of the twelve tribes engraved thereon, on each stone a tribal name. The 
breastplate with the jewel work, was attached at the upper corners to the shoulder- 
pieces of the ephod by golden chains. Golden rings were sewn on ephod and breast- 
plate, and the latter was further secured to the ephod by laces of blue through 


by the high:priést when judging the causes of the people (Ex. 28. 30, note, tefs.). 


(5) A mitre (or “turban”’) of fine linen was made (Ex. 28.37) to cover the 
Bee bearing upon the front a gold plate engraved, “Holiness to’the LORD” (v. 


108 


“the breastplate of judgment” because worn - 


Yoga As d6 UT iia a “ 
a 7) EXODUS. [29 28: 


7 Then shalt thou take the 
anointing oil, and pour it upon his 
head, and anoint him. 


The order for the priests. 


8 And thou shalt bring his sons, 
and put coats upon them. 

9 And thou shalt “gird them with 
girdles, Aaron and his sons, and 
put the bonnets on them: and the 21 And thou shalt take of the 
priest’s office shall be their’s for a blood that zs upon the altar, and of 
perpetual statute: and thou shalt the anointing oil, and sprinkle it 
consecrate Aaron and his sons. upon Aaron, and upon his gar- 
ments, and upon his sons, and upon 
the garments of his sons with him: 


20 Then shalt thou kill the ram, 
and take of his blood,and put it 
upon the tip of the right ear of 
Aaron, and upon the tip of the right 
ear of his sons, and upon the thumb 
of their right hand, and upon the 
great toe of their right foot, and 
sprinkle the blood upon the altar 
round about. 


B.C. 1491. 


The order for the sacrifices. 


10 And thou shalt cause a bullock and he shall be hallowed, and his 
to be brought before the tabernacle garments, and his sons, and his 
of the congregation: and Aaron and sons’ garments with him. 
his sons shall ‘put their hands upon 22 Also thou shalt take of the 
the head of the bullock. ram the fat and the rump, and the 

11 And thou shalt kill the bullock fat that covereth the inwards, and 
before the Lorp, by the door of the the caul above the liver, and the two 
tabernacle of the congregation. kidneys, and the fat that zs upon 

12 And thou shalt take of the them, and the right shoulder; for it 


blood of the bullock, and put it)/¢Symbolof zs a ram of consecration: 
upon the horns of the altar with thy| sqyice; Le | 23 And one loaf of bread, and one 


finger, and pour all the blood be- john gar cake of oiled bread, and one wafer 
side the bottom of the altar. Rev.1.13.. lout of the basket of the unleavened 
13 And thou shalt take all the fat), ;.,.14 bread that is before the LORD: | 
that covereth the inwards, and the] note.’ 24 And thou shalt put all in the 
caul that is above the liver, and the ehands of Aaron, and in the hands 


two kidneys, and the fat that is up-|°l¢”-1-8 ‘e/ |of his sons; and shalt wave them 
on them, and burn them upon the|dtev.4.11,12, |for a wave-offering before the 


altar. ref. LorbD. 

14 But the flesh of the bullock,! 5 41 the 25 And thou shalt receive them of 
and his skin, and his dung, shalt| hands. their hands, and burn them upon 
thou burn with fire ¢without the the altar for a burnt-offering, for a 
camp: it is a sin-offering. Isweet savour before the LORD: it is 

15 Thou shalt also take one ram; lan offering made by fire unto the 
and Aaron and his sons shall put LORD. 
ocr hands upon the head of the The priesthood: (4) the food of 

16 And thou shalt slay the ram, the priests. (See also vs. 29 

b 33; Lev. 2. 6; 6. 14-18, 24-295 
and thou shalt take his blood, and re 
: 4 7. 6-11, 34.) 
sprinkle it round about upon the 
altar. 26 And thou shalt take the breast 

17. And thou shalt cut the ram in of the ram of Aaron’s consecration, 
pieces, and wash the inwards of and wave it for a wave-offering 
him, and his legs, and put them before the Lorp: and it shall be 
unto his pieces, and unto his head. thy part. ; 

18 And thou shalt burn the whole , 27 And thou shalt sanctify the 
ram upon the altar: it 7s a burnt- breast of the wave-offering, and the 
offering unto the LoRD: it is a shoulder of the heave-offering, 
sweet savour, an offering made by which is waved, and which is 
fire unto the LorD. heaved up, of the ram of the conse- 

19 And thou shalt take the other cration, even of that which is for 
ram; and Aaron and his sons shall Aaron, and of that which is for his 

their hands upon the head of sons: 
‘eg ne < 28 And it shall be Aaron’s and 
(6) To these were added linen breeches, ‘from the loins even to the thighs” 
(Ex. 28. 42). 


The “coat” and linen. breeches were made for the priests, also, and were the 
ordinary garments of high priest and priests as distinguished from the other gar- 
ments, which were “for glory and beauty.” 

109 


29 29) EXODUS. _ , [301 


his sons’ by a statute for ever from|_B.c. 1491. | The continual burnt-offering. — 


Se Ay oho mereek in S onl 38 Pee ies phad which baou shal 
eave-o 5 ? ei 
heanegiecing from the children of oe eee estes ae Guorteiualivd 
Israel of the sacrifice of their peace- 1 305Hihe anedamio.thaushalal ocd 
“Sopa edadh their heave-offering in the morning; and the other lamb 
unto the 4 see 
29 And the holy garments | of vireo eee a tenth 
Aaron shall be his sons’ after him, dralot Housamingledaniththelsoneale 
_ to be anointed oe and to be Dees ofjasis han tek beaten oil; and 
ee, eee at the fourth part of an hin of wine 
30 And that son that is priest in for tongiinledeiecings 
iis ystead shall put ery ey relies | 41 And the other lamb thou shalt 
Gays, when ‘he cometh Gnto ‘the offer at even, and shalt do thereto. 


Sa 2 ordinary ico a eG according to the ¢meat-offering of 


the morning, and according to the 
31 And thou shalt take the ram of Say 2 
the consecration, and seethe his drink-offering thereof, for a sweet 


flesh in the holy place. savour, an offering made by fire 


32 And Aaron and his sons shall Re Red behdl mmatindal 
eat the flesh of the ram, and the|¢ v.33, note. burnt-offering throughout your gen- 
bread that is in the basket by the}, Sas erations at the door of the taber- 
Sorte copra ate Se ges ety brat nacle of the congregation before the 

33 And they shall eat those things] =%-30-30.37. Lorp: where I will meet you, to 

4 (Gen.2.3; speak there unto thee. 
wherewith the latonement Was] Zech.8.3.) 43 And there I will meet with the 
made, to consecrate and to sanctify 


One hin= hildren of Israel, and the taberna- 
them: but a stranger shall not eat|¢Onehin= |C oh : 
thereof, because they are holy. are co Sepa will ee ie seta 

34 And if ought of the flesh of the 


consecrations, or of the bread, re-|? Lit. meal. wre = bet pe Neda ae 
main unto the morning, then thoul e ie, acacia tar: I will sanctify also bo 


shalt burn the remainder with fire: : sy pepe een porgrgei 
it Shall not be eaten, because it is 45 And I will dwell ‘among the 
fe) y. . . re . 
ye And Br analy thou do uae Poets a Teracl; and will ‘be their 
aron, and to his sons, according i : 
to all things which I have com- Be uc “pth te te pad ee Vir. 
manded thee: seven days shalt thou brought them forth out of the land 
borkartiesnachaié offer every day of Egypt, that I may dwell preee 
a bullock for te he Bee e for them: I am the Lorp their God. 
atonement: and thou shalt cleanse 
the altar, when thou hee: an CHAPTER 30. 
atonement for it, and thou shalt The tabernacle: (18) the altar 
anoint it, to sanctify it. “ yer he, 
37 Seven days thou shalt make an pee se; the great worship 
"atonement for the altar, and bsanc- So 
tify it; and it shall be an altar most ND thou shalt make an altar ta 
holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar burn “incense upon: of ¢shittim 
shall be holy. wood shalt thou make it, 


1 Heb. kaphar, “to cover.” The English word “atonement” (at-one-ment) is not 
a translation of the Heb. Kaphar, but a translator’s interpretation. According 
to Scripture the legal sacrifice “covered” the offerer’s sin and secured the divine for- 
&iveness; according to the translators it made God and the sinner at-one. But the 
O.T. sacrifices did not at-one the sinner and God. “It is not possible that the blood 
of bulls and goats should take away sins” (Heb. 10. 4). The Israclite’s offering 
implied confession of sin and of its due desert, death; and God “‘covered”’ (“passed 
over,” Rom. 3. 25) his sin, in anticipation of Christ’s sacrifice, which did, finally, 
“put away” the sins “done aforetime in the forbearance of God” (Rom, 3. 25; 
Heb. 9.15). See Rom. 3. 25, note. The word “atonement” does not occur in the 
N.T.; Rom. 5. 11, meaning reconciliation, and so rendered in the R.V. See “Sac- 

Tifice,” Gen. 4. 4, and refs. See note on atonement, Lev. 16. 
Altar of incense, type of Christ our intercessor (John 17. 1-26; Heb. 7. 25), 

110 


i 


302] EXODUS. [30 21 


2 A “cubit shall be the length) B.c. 1491. 12 When thou takest the sum of 
thereof, and a cubit the breadth the children of Israel after their 
thereof; foursquare shall it be: and number, then shall they give every 
two cubits shail be the height man a ransom for his soul unto the 
thereof: the horns thereof shall be LORD, when thou numberest them, 
of the same. ; that there be no plague among 

3 And thou shalt overlay it with them, when thou numberest them. 
pure gold, the top thereof, and the 13 ¢This they shall give, every one 
sides thereof round about, and the that passeth among them that are 
horns thereof; and thou shalt make numbered, half a /shekel after the 
unto it a crown of gold round about. shekel. of the sanctuary: (a shekel 

4 And two golden rings shalt thou is twenty #gerahs:) an half shekel 
make to it under the crown of it, by shall be the offering of the LoRD. © 
the two corners thereof, upon the 14 Every one that passeth among 
two sides of it shalt thou make it; them that are numbered, from 
and they shall be for places for the twenty years old and above, shall 


staves to bear it withal. AGYAGe = give an offering unto the Lorpb. 
5 And thou shalt make the staves|" 7 &. 5.48 in. | 15. The rich shall not give more, 


of Sshittim wood, and overlay them| _ : and the poor shall not give less 
with gold. bie. acacia. |than half a/shekel, when they give 

6 And thou shalt put it before the] -rit. meaz |an offering unto the LORD, to make 
vail that is by the ark of the testi- an ¢atonement for your souls. 


mony, before the mercy seat that|? See E*.29.33,/ 16 And thou shalt take the 


is over the testimony, where I will| "°* .  |¢atonement money of the children 
meet with thee. e ChEx.38. of Israel, and shalt appoint it for 

7 And Aaron shall burn thereon le se ad the service of the tabernacle of the 
sweet incense every morning: when| comes a congregation; that it may be a me- 
he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn| type ofre- /morial unto the children of Israel 
incense upon it. demption before the LorpD, to make an 


8 And sg pet eh a the ant ¢datonement for your souls. 
* h i . 
lamps ateven, esha rm Reel ome _|Who may. avorship? (2) the 
the Lorp throughout your genera-| é 2227" * em Bt L ee apes be hsee 


tions. 
9 Ye shall offer no !strange in- 2 Oe gerah= | 17 And the LorpD spake unto 
cense thereon, nor burnt-sacrifice, “4 grains: |Moses, saying, 
nor ‘meat-offering; neither shall ye|A Jobn 13.8. 18 Thou shalt also make a 2laver 
‘pour drink-offering thereon. of brass, and his foot also of brass, 
10 And Aaron shall make an to wash withal: and thou shalt 
déatonement upon the horns of it put it between the tabernacle of 
once in a year with. the blood of the congregation and the altar, and 
the sin-offering of atonements: once thou shalt put water therein. 
in the year shall he make 2atone- 19 For Aaron and his sons shall 
ment upon it throughout your gen- hwash their hands and their feet 
erations: it is most holy unto the thereat: é 
“Lorb. 20 When they go into the taber- 
+ 9 nacle of the congregation, they shall 
Who may worship? (1) the re- wash with water, that they die not; 
deemed. (Psa. 107. 1, 2; Ex. 15. or when they come near to. the 
1-21). altar to minister, to burn offering 
11 And’the LorD spake unto Mo- made by fire unto the LoRD: 


ses, saying, 21 So they shall wash their hands 


through whom our own prayers and praises ascend to God (Heb. 13. 15; Rev. 8. 
3, 4), and of the believer-priest’s sacrifice of praise and worship (Heb. 13. 15). 

1 Cf. Lev. 10. 1-3. Two prohibitions are given concerning worship: (1) No 
“strange” incense is to be offered. This speaks of. simulated or purely formal 
worship. (2) No “strange” fire was permitted. This refers to the excitation of 
“‘celigious” feelings by merely sensuous means, and to the substitution for devo- 
4jon to Christ of any other devotion, as to religious causes, or sects. Gf..1 Corsi: 
41-13: Col. 2. 8, 16-19. See Ex. 30. 38, note. s 

2 Laver, type of Christ cleansing us from defilement, and from “every spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing’ (John 13. 2-10; Eph. 5. 25-27). It is significant that 
the priests could not enter the holy place after serving at the brazen altar till hands 
and feet were cleansed. ‘ii 


. 


rae) 


I 


‘ , Fe 4 , 
30 22} EXODUS. (31 6 
and their feet, that they die not:| B.c. 1491. /of it upon a stranger, shall even be 
and it shall be a statute for ever to cut off from his people. ; 


them, even to him and to his seed 


throughout their generations. Worship; the incense, type of 


prayer and praise. It is for 


Who may worship? (3) the-an- the Lord, v. 37; spiritual, not 
ointed (John 4. 23; Eph. 2. 18; sensuous, v. 38. 
5. 18, 19). 3 34 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 

22. Moreover the LoRD spake un- ses, Take unto thee sweet spices, 
to Moses, saying, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; 

23 Take thou also unto thee prin- these sweet spices with pure 
cipal spices, of pure myrrh five 2frankincense: of each shall there 
hundred ¢shekels, and of sweet be a like weight: 
cinnamon half so much, even two 35 And thou shalt make it a per- 
hundred and fifty shekels, and of fume, a confection after the art of 
sweet calamus two hundred and the apothecary, tempered together, 
fifty shekels, ; pure and holy: 

24 And of cassia five hundred 36 And thou shalt beat some of it 
shekels, after the shekel of the very small, and put of it before the 
sanctuary, and of oil olive an testimony in the tabernacle of the 

- ohin: congregation, where I will meet 


25 And thou shalt make it an oil}a One shekel {with thee: it shall be unto you 
of holy ointment, an ointment com- a As ar most holy. 
pound after the art of the apothe-| , * | 37 And as for the perfume which 
cary: it shall be an holy anointing|® One hin = thou shalt make, ye shall not make 
oil. ° ANE © to yourselves according to the com- 
26 And thou shalt anoint the! 7 x position thereof: it shall be unto 
tabernacle of the congregation] ¢ Sanctify, thee holy for the Lorp. 
therewith, and the ark of the tes-| 2°” ©.T). | 38 Whosoever shall make like 


timony, ‘ ee unto that, to 3smell thereto, shall 
27 And the table and all his} (Gen.2.3; even be cut off from his people. 
vessels, and the candlestick and his} 7¢ch-8-3.) ‘ 
vessels, and the altar of incense, d Holy Spirit. CHAPTER 31. 
28 And the altar of burnt-offering| Ex.35.31. 
with all his vessels, and the laver (Gen. 1.35 The tabernacle: (19) the 
and his foot. BLBs1S2) workmen. 
29 And thou shalt sanctify them, ND the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
that they may be most holy: what: A ses, saying, e 
peevee toucheth them shall be 2 See, I have called by name 
oly. Bezaleel th f Uri 
30 And thou shalt anoint Aaron Au of Hera ee of pn aiee aks 
and his-sons, and ‘consecrate them, 3 And I have filled him with the 
et ey, ers minister unto me in dspirit of God, in wisdom, and in 
e priest’s office. i : i 
31 And thou shalt speak unto the a ra e ae cee 
children of Israel, saying, This shall 4 To devise cunning works, to 
be an holy anointing loil unto me work in gold, and in silver, and in 
Bus hout your generations. brass, 
pon man’s flesh shall it not 5 And in cutti f 
‘be poured, neither shall ye make them, ase ie Hee Ss albert 
any other like it, after the compo- work in all manner of workman- 
ania it: it 7s holy, and it shall ship. 
e holy unto you. 6 And I, behold,I have given with 
Ae Pppoeyes compoundeth any him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, 
ike 1t, Or whosoever putteth any of the tribe of Dan: and in the 


; equionng oil, type of the Holy Spirit for service (Acts 1. 8). 
cas Farsincense is not to be confounded with incense (to which it was to be added), 
as it 1s oiten used apart from incense. We are told what composed the incense— 


never in Scripture what the frankincense was. All speaks of Christ—the sweet 


spices of those perfections which we ma a h i i 
TONER Sanaa, y apprehend, the frankincense of that which 


3 What is condemned here i i i 
! is making worship a mere pleasure to the natural man 
whether sensuous, as in beautiful music to 
I s ; please the ear, or eloquence, me 
give delight to the natural mind. Cf. John 4, 23,. 24. SHEERS SHEP 


112 


317) | EXODUS. [32 16 


hearts of all that are wise hearted I 
have put wisdom, that they may 
make all that I have commanded 
thee; 

7 The tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion, and the ark of the testimony, 
and the mercy seat that is there- 
upon, and all the furniture of the 
tabernacle, 

8 And the table and his furniture, 
and the pure candlestick with all his 
furniture, and the altar of incense, 

9 And the altar of burnt-offering 
with all his furniture, and the laver 
and ‘his foot, 

10 And the cloths of service, and 
the holy garments for Aaron the 
priest, and the garments of his sons, 
8 minister in the priest’s RaEe 4 

1 And the anointing oil, an : 
sweet incense for the holy place: and bring them unto me. 


d 3 And all the people brake off the 
according to all that I have com-/o eae YS-| golden earrings which were in their 


manded thee shall they do. f 35.035 ears, and brought them unto Aaron. 
The Sabbath a sign between Gore 4 And he received them at their 
Jehovah and Israel. res hand, and fashioned it with a grav- 

: b See Ex.20.4, jing tool, after he had made it a 


tables of testimony, btables of stone, 
cwritten with the finger of God. 


CHAPTER 32. 
Parenthetical: the broken law. 


Ae when the people saw that 
Moses delayed to come down 
out of the mount, the people gath- 
ered themselves together unto Aa- 
ron, and said unto him, Up, ¢make 
us gods, which shall go before us; 
for as for this Moses, the man that 
brought us up out of the land of 
Egypt, we wot not what is become 
of him. 

2 And Aaron said unto them, 
Break off the golden earrings, which 
are in the ears of your wives, of 
your sons, and of your daughters, 


B.C. 1491. 


ee eee Lorn spake unto Mo-| note. gules ss one ee — These 
2 ? ‘ thy gods, srael,which brought 
13 Speak thou also unto the chil-|¢ 22” _©f Ss 

ee ere ae foe Pera ery 
*sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a €*19%,) |built an altar before it; and Aaron 


sign between me and you through- made proclamation, and said, To 
out your generations; that ye may/d Acts 7.40. | morrow is a feast to the LorD. 


ee use Ee ik the LORD that) a scot. 6 And they rose up early on the 
4 ‘ Vechall keep the sabbath there!| 2°7- morrow, and offered burnt-offerings, 
i : agg 
PPE eeepc ata Ee asian, [oor brought peace oferings: and 
one that defileth it shall surely be ¢Ctv.il. to drink, and rose up to play. 


put to death: for whosoever doeth 


any work therein, that soul shall The condemnation of Jehovah. 


be cut off from among his people. 7 fAnd the LorD said unto Moses, 
15 Six days may work be done; Go, get thee down; for &thy people, 
but in the seventh is the sabbath which thou broughtest out of the 
of rest, holy to the LoRD: whoso- land of Egypt, have corrupted 
ever doeth any work in the sabbath themselves: / ; 
“day, he shall surely be put to death. 8 They have turned aside quickly 
16 Wherefore the children of Israel out of the way which I commanded 
shall keep the sabbath, to observe them: they have made them a mol- 
the sabbath throughout their gene- ten calf, and have worshipped it, 
rations, for a perpetual covenant. and have sacrificed thereunto, and 
17 It zs a sign between me and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, 
the children of Israel for ever: for which have brought. thee up out of 
in six days the LorD made heaven the land of Egypt. | 
and earth, and on the seventh day 9 And the LorD said unto Moses, 
he rested, and was refreshed. I have seen this people, and, be-_ 
18 And he gave unto Moses, when hold, it is a stiffnecked people: 
he had made an end of communing 10 Now therefore !et me alone, 
with him upon mount Sinai, two that my wrath may wax hot against 


1 This whole scene affords a striking contrast between law and grace. Cf. Moses’ 
intercession with Christ’s (John 17.). Israel_was a nation, under probation (Ex. 
19. 5, 6); believers under grace are a family, awaiting glory (John 20. 17; Rom. 
5.1,2). For them there is “an advocate with the Father,” whose propitiatory sac- 
rifice never loses efficacy (1 John 2.1,2). Moses pleads a covenant (Ex. 32. 13); 
Christ points to a sacrifice (John 17. 4). Aa 


32 11] 


them, and that I may consume 
them: and I will make of thee a 
great nation. 


The advocacy of Moses 
(1 John 2.1). 


11 And Moses besought the LorD 
his God, and “said, LORD, why doth 
thy wrath wax hot against thy 
people, which thou hast brought 
forth out of the land of Egypt with 
great power, and with a mighty 
hand? 

12 ‘Wherefore should the Egyp- 
tians speak, and say, For mischief 
did he bring them out, to slay them 
in the mountains, and to consume} 
them from the face of the earth?! 
Turn from thy fierce wrath, and 4bre- 
pent of this evil against thy people. 

13 RememberAbraham,Isaac,and 
Israel, thy servants, to whom thou 
swarest by thine own self, and 
saidst unto them, I will multiply 
your seed as the stars of heaven, 
and all this land that I have spoken 
of will I give unto your seed, and 
they shall inherit it for ever. 

14 And the Lorp ’repented of the 
evil which he thought to do unto 
his people. 


Disciplinary judgment. 


15 And Moses turned, and went 
down from the mount, and the two 
tables of the testimony were in his 
hand: the tables were written on 
both their sides; on the one side 
and on the other were they written. 

16. And the ‘tables were the work 
of God, and the ¢writing was the 
writing of God, graven upon the 
tables. 

17 And when Joshua heard the 
noise of the people as they shouted, 
he said unto Moses, There is a 
noise of war in the camp. 

18 And he said, I¢ is not the voice 
of them that shout for mastery, 
neither is it the voice of them that 
cry for being overcome: but the 
noise of thern that sing do I hear. 

19 And it came to pass, as soon as 
he came nigh unto the camp, that 
he saw the calf, and the dancing: 
and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and 
he cast the tables out of his hands, 
and brake them beneath the mount. 

20 And he took the calf which 
they had made, and burnt i¢ in the 
fire, and ground it to powder, and 
strawed it upon the water, and 
mene the children of Israel drink 
of it. 


21 And Moses said unto Aaron, 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


@ Bible pray- 
ers (O.T.). 
Ex.33.12. 
(Gen.15.2; 
Hab,3.1-16.) 


6 Zech.8.14, 
note. 

c See Ex.20.4, 
note. 


d Inspiration. 


e See Ex.29.33, 
note, 


114 


(32 8 


What did this people unto thee, 
that thou hast brought so great a 
sin upon them? 

22 And Aaron said, Let not the 
anger of my lord wax hot: thou 
knowest the people, that they are 
set on mischief. : 

23 For they said unto me, Make 
us gods, which shall go before us: 
for as for this Moses, the man that 
brought us up out of the land of 
Egypt, we wot not what is become 
of him. 
24 And I said unto them, Whoso- 
ever hath any gold, let them break 
it off. So they gave st me: then I 
cast it into the fire, and there came 
out this calf. 

25 And when Moses saw that the 
people were naked; (for Aaron had 
made them naked unto their shame 
among their enemies:) 

26 Then Moses stood in the gate 
of the camp, and said, Who js on 
the Lorp’s side? Jet him come unto 
me. And all the sons of Levi gath- 
ered themselves together unto him. 

27 And he said unto them, Thus 
saith the LorpD God of Israel, Put 
every man his sword by his side, 
and go in.and out from gate to gate 
throughout the camp, and slay 
every man his brother, and every 
man his companion, and every man 
his neighbour. 

28 And the children of Levi did 
according to the word of Moses: 
and there fell of the people that day 


about three thousand men. 


The missed blessing. 


29 For Moses had said,Consecrate 
yourselves to day to the Lorp, even 
every man upon his son, and upon 
his brother; that he may bestow 
upon you a blessing this day. 


The confession and intercession 
of Moses. 


30 And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that Moses said unto the 
people, Ye have sinned a great sin: 
and now I will go up unto the 
LorpD;*peradventure I shall make 
an ‘atonement for your sin. 

31 And Moses returned unto the 
Lorp, and said, Oh, this people 
have sinned a great sin, and have 
made them gods of gold. 

32 Yet now, if thou wilt forgive 
their sin—; and if not, blot me, I 
pray thee, out of thy book which 
thou hast written. 

33 And the Lorp said unto Moses, 


32.34] 


Whosoever hath sinned against me, 
him will I blot out of my book. 

34 Therefore now go, lead the 
people unto the place of which I 
have spoken unto thee: behold, 
mine ¢Angel shall go before thee: 
nevertheless in the day when I visit 
I will visit their sin upon them. 

35 And the Lorp plagued the 
people, because they made the calf, 
which Aaron made. 


CHAPTER 33. 


The journey to be resumed. 


ND the LorD said unto Moses, 
Depart, and go up hence, thou 
and the people which thou hast 
brought up out of the land of Egypt, 
unto the land which I sware unto 
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, 
saying, Unto thy seed will I give it: 
2 And I will'send an ¢angel before 
thee;. and I will drive out the Ca- 
naanite, the Amorite, and the 
Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hi- 
vite, and the Jebusite: 

3 Unto a land flowing with milk 
and honey: for I will not go up in 
the midst of thee; for thou art a 
stiffnecked people: lest I consume 
thee in the way. - 

4 And when the people heard 
these evil tidings, they mourned: 
and no man did put on him his 
ornaments. 

5 For the Lorp had said unto 
‘Moses, Say unto the children of 
Israel, Ye are a stiffnecked people: 
T will come up into the midst of 
thee in a moment, and consume 
thee: therefore now put off thy 
ornaments from thee, that I may 
know what to do unto thee. 

6 And the children of Israel 
stripped themselves of their orna- 
ments by the mount Horeb. 


The “‘tent of meeting” outside 
the camp. 


7 And Moses took the “tabernacle, 
and pitched it without the camp, 
afar off from thecamp,and called 
it the Tabernacle of the congre- 
gation. And it came to pass, that 
every one which sought the LorD 
went out unto the tabernacle of the 
congregation, which was without 
the camp. 

8 And it came to pass, when Mo- 
ses went out unto the tabernacle, 
that all the people rose up, and 
stood every man at his tent door, 
and looked after Moses, until he 
was gone into the tabernacle. 


EXODUS. 


[33 20 


9 And it came te pass, as Moses 
entered into the tabernacle, the 
cloudy pillar descended, and stood 
at the door of the tabernacle, and 
the Lorp talked with Moses... 

10 And all the people saw the 
cloudy’ pillar stand at the taber- 
nacle door: and all the people rose 
up and worshipped, every man in 
his tent door. 

11 And the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses face to face, as a man speaketh 
unto his friend. And he turned 
again into the camp: but his servant 
Joshua, the son of Nun, a young 
ad departed not out of the taber- 
nacle. 


Moses’ prayer; Jehovah’s answer. 
12 And Moses ‘said unto the 


B.C. 1491. 


ra LorpD, See, thou sayest unto me, 

5 eee Bring up this people: and thou hast 
The eter [not let me know whom thou wilt 
nacle” isnot |send with me. Yet thow hast said, 
pe Se RCE I know thee by name, and thou hast 
thataftes  |also found grace in my sight. 
ward made 13 Now therefore, I pray thee, if 
by com- Tt have found grace in thy sight, 
mandment _|shew me now thy way, that I may 
not yet know thee, that I may find grace in 
made. thy sight: and consider that this 


nation is thy people. 


¢ Bible pray- | 14 And he said, My presence shall 


ers (O.T.). z : é 

Num.6. go with thee, and I will give thee 
22-201 Agen rest. 

31-16.) 15 And he said unto him, If thy 


presence go not with me, carry us 


d Separation. not up hence. 


Gani 16 For wherein shall it be known 
2 Cor.6. here that I and thy people have 
14-17.) found grace in thy sight? fs it not 
eie.Ex.34.  |in that thou goest with us? so shali 
6,7. we be eee ae thy people, 
from all the people that are upon 

F Ree aS the face of the earth. 
g Cf.John 1. 17 And the LorD said unto Moses, 
18, note.. |] will do this thing also that thou 


jhast spoken: for thou hast found 
grace in my sight, and I know thee 
by name. 


Moses seeks a new vision for the 
new task. 


18 And he said, I beseech thee, 
shew me thy glory. 

19 And he said, I will make all my 
egoodness pass before thee, and I 
will proclaim the name of the LORD 
before thee; and ‘will be gracious 
to whom I will be gracious, and 
will shew mercy on whom I will 
shew mercy. 

20 And he said, Thou canst not 
see my face: for there shall no man 
see me, and live. 


115 


21 And the LorD said, Behold, 
there is a place by me, and thou 
shalt stand upon a rock: 

22 And it shall come to pass, 
while my glory passeth by, that I 
will put thee in a 4clift of the rock, 
and will cover thee with miy Shand 
while I pass by: ! 

23 And I will take away mine 
hand, and thou shalt see my back 
parts: but my face shall not be 
seen. 


CHAPTER 34. 


The second tables of the law. 


fay the LorD said unto Moses,| 
“Hew thee two tables of stone 
like unto the first: and I will write! 
upon these tables the ¢words that} 
were in the first tables, which thou 
brakest. 

2 And be ready in the morning, 
and come up in the morning unto 
mount Sinai, and present thyself 
there to me in the top of the mount. 

3 And no man shall come up with 
thee, neither let any man be seen 
throughout all the mount; neither 
let the flocks nor herds feed before 
that mount. 

4 And he hewed two tables of 
stone like unto the first; and Moses 
rose up early in the morning, and 
went up unto mount Sinai, as the 
LorD had commanded him, and 
took in his hand the two tables of | 
stone. 


The new vision.(Cf.Ex. 33. 18-23.) 


5 And the Lorn descended in the 
cloud, and stood with him there, 
and proclaimed the name of the 
Lorp. 

6 And the Lorn passed by before 
him, and proclaimed, «The Lorp, 
The Lorp God, merciful and gra- 
cious, longsuffering, and abundant 
in goodness and truth, 

7 Keeping mercy for thousands, 
forgiving iniquity and transgression 
and sin, and that will by no means 
clear the guilty; visiting the 
iniquity of the fathers upon the 
children, and upon the children’s 
children, unto the third and to the 
fourth generation. 

8 And _Moses made haste, and 
bowed his head toward the earth, 
and worshipped. 

9 And he said, If now I have 
found grace in thy sight, O Lord, 
let my Lord, I pray thee, go among 
us; for it is a stiffnecked people; 
and pardon our iniquity and our 


EXODUS. 


a Song 2.14. 
’Cf.John 10. 
28,29. 


c See Ex.20.4, 
note. 


d Inspira- 
tion. vs.1, 


e Deity 
(names of). 
1 Sam.i.3. 
(Gen.1.1; 
Mal.3.18.) 


f Josh.23.12; 
Psa.106.34- 
38; 2 Cor.6. 
14; 2 Tim.2. 
20,21; Jas. 
4.4. 


g See Deut. 
16.21, 


h Leaven. vs. 
18,25; Lev. 
2.4,5,11. 
(Gen.19.3; 
Mt.13.33.) 


tice. April. 
j Law (of 


Moses). vs. 
18-28; Lev.1. 


116 


B.C. 1491, 


sin, and take us for thine inheri- — 
tance. 


The renewed commission. 


10 And he said, Behold, I make 
a covenant: before all thy people I 
will do marvels, such as have not © 
been done in all the earth, nor in 
any nation: and all the people 
among which thou art shall see the 
work of the Lorp: for it 1s a ter 
rible thing that I will do with 
thee. 

11 Observe thou that which I 
command thee this day: behold, I 
drive out before thee the Amorite, 
and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, 
and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, 
and the Jebusite. 

12 Take heed to thyself, lest thou 
make a fcovenant with the inhabi- 
tants of the land whither thou 
goest, lest it be for a snare in the 
midst of thee: 

13 But ye shall destroy their al- 
tars, break their images, and cut 
down their Sgroves: 

14 For thou shalt worship no 
other god: for the LorpD, whose 
name is Jealous, is a jealous God: 

15 Lest thou make a covenant 
with the inhabitants of the land, 
and they go a whoring after their 
gods, and do sacrifice unto their 
gods, and one call thee, and thou 
eat of his sacrifice; 

16 And thou take of their daugh- 
ters unto thy sons, and their 
daughters go a whoring after their 
gods, and make thy sons go a 
whoring after their gods. 

17 Thou shalt make thee no 
molten gods. 


Thefeastsandthesabbaths again 
enjoined, (Cf. Lev: 23. 4~44.) 


18 The feast of ‘unleavened bread 
shalt thou keep. Seven days thou 


{shalt eat unleavened bread, as I 


commanded thee, in the time of the 
month ‘Abib: for in the month Abib 
thou camest out from /Egypt. ‘ 

19 All that opéneth the matrix ig 
mine; and every firstling among thy 
cattle, whether ox or sheep, that 
is male. 

20 But the firstling of an ass thou 
shalt redeem with a lamb: and if 
thou redeem Aim not, then shalt 
thou break his neck. All the first- 
born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. 
And none shall.appear before me 
empty. 

21 Six days thou shalt work, but 
on the seventh day thou shalt rest: 


34 22) EXODUS. [35 15 


35 And the children of Israel saw 
the face of Moses, that the skin of 
Moses’ face shone: and Moses put 
the vail upon his face again, until 
he went in to speak with him. 


CHAPTER 35. 
The Sabbath in Israel. 


At D Moses gatheréd all the con- 
gregation of the children of 


in earing time and in harvest thou] _B.c. 1491. 
shalt rest. 

22 And thou shalt observe the 
feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of 
wheat harvest, and the feast of in- 
gathering at the year’s end. 

23 Thrice in the year shall all 
your menchildren appear before 
the Lord Gop, the God of Israel. 

24 For I will cast out the nations 
before thee, and enlarge thy bor- 


ders: neither shall any man desire Israel together, and said unto them, 
thy land, when thou shalt go up to These are the ‘words which the 
appear before the Lorp thy God LorpD hath commanded, that ye 
thrice in the year. should do them. 

25 Thou shalt not offer the blood 2 Six days shall work be done, but 
of my sacrifice with leaven; neither on the seventh day there shall be 
shall the sacrifice of the feast of the to you an holy day, a ¢sabbath of 
passover be left unto the morning. rest to. the LorD: whosoever doeth 

26 The first of the firstfruits of work therein shall be put to death. 
thy land thou shalt bring unto the 3 Ye shall kindle no fire through- 


house of the Lorp thy God. | Thou), ... Jud.16 out your habitations upon the sab- 
“Sa not ars a kid in his} 99° °° |bath day. 
mother’s milk. af : 

27 And the Lorp said unto Mo-|? Cf? Cor.s. The See emer ss instructs 
ses, Write thou these words: for x peop e. 
after the tenor of these words I have|c Inspiration.| 4 And Moses spake unto all the 
made a covenant with thee and wees. congregation of the children of Is- 
with Israel. Rev.22.19.) |rael, saying, This is the thing 


28 And he was there with the which the Lorp commanded, say- 
d Sabbath. vs. ing 


Lorp forty days and forty nights;|* 94772 749 
he did neither eat bread, nor drink] 3'39. (Gen. | 5 "Take ye from among you an 
water. And he wrote upon the] 2.3; Mt.12. joffering unto the LoRD: whosoever 


tables the words of the covenant,| 1:) is of a ¢willing heart, let him bring 

the ten commandments. evs.21,22,26, jit, an offering of the LorD; gold, 
29 And it came to pass, when 233 Hn26 and silver, and brass, 

Moses came down from mount} 36:1 Chr. ° ; 

Sinai with the two tables of testi-| penne Phe ee se: he oe: 


mony in Moses’ hand, when he] 2 Cor.8.10- 
came down from the mount, that rl 2Cor.9. | 6 And blue, and purple, and scar 
Moses wist not that the skin of his} ~~ let, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, 
face shone while he talked with/f i.e. acacia. 7 And rams’ skins dyed red, and 

i badgers’ skins, and fshittim wood, 


im. 
30 And when Aaron and all the|*=%>°% | 8 And oil for the light, and spices 

children of Israel saw ort Ee for anointing oil, and for the sweet 

“hold, the skin of his face shone; an incense, 

they were afraid cone nigh Nay Fe pane oe pce and batty ee 
31 And Moses called unto them; e set for the ephod, and for the 

and Aaron and all the rulers of the breastplate. ‘ 

congregation returned mn, him: 10 and every Lh ee sey ates 

and Moses talked with them. you shall come, and make all that 
32 And afterward all the children the Lorp hath commanded; ‘ 

of Israel came nigh: and he gave 11 The tabernacle, his tent, and his 

them in commandment all that the covering, his taches, and his boards, 

Lorp had spoken with him in his bars, his pillars, and his sockets, 

mount Sinai. 12 The ark, and the staves there- 
33 And till Moses had done of, with the mercy seat, and the 

speaking with them, he put a °vail vail of the covering, — 

on his face. 12 The table, and his staves, and 
34 But when Moses went in be- all _ a cant pe Be rice 

fore the Lorp to speak with him, he 14 e candlestic so for the 

took the vail off, until he cone, out. Beats pile th pu in his 

And he came out, and spake unto amps, Wl e oil for thi: lig 

the children of Israel that which he 15 And the incense altar, and his 


was commanded. staves, and the anointing oil, and 


117 


the sweet incense, and the hanging 
for the door at the entering in of 
the tabernacle, : . 

16 The altar of burnt-offering,with 
his brasen grate, his staves, and 
all his vessels, the laver and his 
foot, ; 

17 The hangings of the court, his 
pillars, and their sockets, and the 
hanging for the door of the court, 

18 The pins of the tabernacle, and 
the pins of the court, and their 
cords, : 

19 The cloths of service, to do 
service in the holy place, the holy 
garments for Aaron the priest, and 
the garments of his sons, to minister 
in the priest’s office. 

20 And all the congregation of the 
children of Israel departed from the 
presence of Moses. 

21 Andtheycame, every one whose 
heart stirred him up, and every one 
whom his spirit made willing, and 
they brought the Lorp’s offering 
to the work of the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and for all his service, 
and for the holy garments. 

22 And they came, both men and 
women, as many as were willing 
hearted, and brought bracelets, and 
earrings, and rings, and tablets, ali 
jewels of gold: and every man that c Ex.28.3; 
offered offered an offering of gold| 31.6: 35.10, 
unto the Lorp: 33) 

23 And every man, with whom 
was found blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’| 917+ 
hair, and red skins of rams, and 
badgers’ skins, brought them, 

24 Every one that did offer an 
offering of silver and brass brought 
the Lorp’s offering: and every 
man, with whom was found ¢shittim 
wood for any work of the service, 
brought /¢. 

25 And all the women that were 
wise hearted did spin with their 
hands, and brought that which they 
had spun, both of blue, and of pur- 
ple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen. 

26 And all the women whose heart 
stirred them up in wisdom spun 
gnats’ hair. 

27. And the rulers brought onyx 
stones, and stones to be set, for the 
ephod, and for the breastplate; 

28 And spice, and oil for the light, 
and for the anointing oil, and for 
the sweet incense. 

29 The children of Israel brought 
a willing offering unto the Lorp, 
every man and woman, whose heart 
made them willing to bring for all 
manner of work, which the Lorp 


ai.e. acacia. 
b Holy Spirit. 


(Gen,1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


ei.e. free will. 
2 Cor.8.1, , 
note. 


118 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


had commanded ‘to be made by the 
hand of Moses. . 


Bezaleel and Aholiab to devise 
and teach. (Cf. Ex. 31. 1-11.) 


30 And Moses said unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, See, the LorD hath 
called by name Bezaleel the son of 
Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of 
Judah; P 

31 And he hath filled him with the 
bspirit of God, in wisdom, in under- 
standing, and in knowledge, and in 
‘all manner of workmanship; : 

32 And to devise curious works, to 
‘work in gold, and in silver, and in 
‘brass, 

33 And in the cutting of stones, to 
set them, and in carving of wood, 
to make any manner of cunning 
work. 

34 And he hath put in his heart 
that he may teach, both he, and 
Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of 
the tribe of Dan. 

35 Them hath he filled with wis- 
dom of heart, to work all manner of 
work, of the engraver, and of the 
cunning workman, and of the em- 
broiderer, in blue, andin purple, in 
scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the 
weaver, even of them that do any 
work, and of those that devise cun- 
ning work. : 


CHAPTER 36. 


More than enough: the work 
begun. 


"THEN wrought Bezaleel and 
Aholiab, and every ‘wise 
hearted man, in whom the Lorp 
put wisdom and understanding to 
know how to work all manner of 
work for the service of the sanctu- 
ary, according to all that the Lorp 
Ihad commanded. 

2 And Moses called Bezaleel and 
Aholiab, and every wise hearted 
man, in whose heart the LorpD had 
put wisdom, even, every one whose 
¢heart stirred him up to come unto 
the work to doit: ~ 


3 And they received of Moses all 
the offering, which the children of 
Israel had brought for the work of 
the service of the sanctuary, to 
makeit withal. And they brought 
yet unto him ¢free offerings every 
morming.  -_ 

4 And all the wise men, that 
wrought all the work of the sanc- 
tuary, came every man from his 
work which they made; 


3S And they spake unto Moses, 
saying, The people bring much more 
than enough for the service of the 
work, which the LoRD commanded 
to make. 

6 And Moses gave commandment, 
and they caused it to be proclaimed 
throughout the camp, saying, Let 
neither man nor woman make any 
more work for the offering of the 
sanctuary. So the people were re- 
strained from bringing. 

7 For the stuff they had was suffi- 
cient for all the work to make it, 
and too much. 


The linen curtains (Ex. 26. 1-6). 


8 And every wise hearted : 
among them that wrought the work 
of the tabernacle made ten curtains 
of fine twined linen, and blue, and 
purple, and scarlet: with cherubims 
Of cunning work made he them. 

9 The length of one curtain was 
twenty and eight cubits, and the 
Breadth of one curtain four cubits: 
fhe curtains were all of one size. 

10 And he coupled the five cur- 
tains one unto another: and the 
other five curtains he coupled one 
unto another. 

11 And he made loops of blue on 
the edge of one curtain from the 
selvedge in the coupling: likewise 
he made in the uttermost side of 
another curtain, in the coupling of 
the second. 

12 %¥Fifty loops made he in one 
curtain, and fifty loops made he in 
the edge of the curtain which was 
in the coupling of the second: the 
loops held one curtain to another. 

13 And he made fifty taches of 
gold, and coupled the curtains one 
unto another with the taches: so 
it became one tabernacle. 


The curtains of goats’ hair. 
(Cf. Ex. 26. 7.) 


14 And he made curtains of goats’ 
hair for the tent over the taberna- 
cle: eleven curtains he made them. 

15 The length of one curtain was 
thirty cubits, and four cubits was 
the breadth of one curtain: the 
eleven curtains were of one size. 

16 And he coupled five curtains 
Dy themselves, and six curtains by 
themselves. 

17 And he made fifty loops upon 
the uttermost edge of the curtain 
jn the coupling, and fifty loops made 
he upon the edge of the curtain 
which coupleth the second. 

18 And he made fifty taches of 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


a One cubit = 
1 ft. 5.48 in.; 
also vs.15,21. 

6 Ex.26.5. 

c Ex.26.14. 

di.e. acacia. 


e Ex.26.26. 


119 


[36 33 


brass to couple the tent together, 
that it might be one. 


The covering of rams’ skins. 
Cf. Ex. 26. 14.) 


19 And he made a “covering for 
the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, 
land a covering of badgers’ skins 
above that. 


The boards and sockets. 
(Cf. Ex. 26. 15.) 


20 And he made boards for the 
tabernacle of ¢shittim wood, stand- 
ing up. 

21 The length of a board was ten 
cubits, and the breadth of a board 
one cubit and a half. 

22 One board had two tenons, 
equally distant one from another: 
thus did he make for all the boards 
of the tabernacle. 

23 And he made boards for the 
tabernacle; twenty boards for the 
south side southward: 


The sockets of silver. 
Cf. Ex. 26. 19.) 


24 And forty sockets of silver he 
made under the twenty boards; 
two sockets under one board for his 
two tenons, and two sockets under 
another board for his two tenons. 

25 And for the other side of the 
tabernacle, which is toward the 
north corner, he made twenty 
boards, : 

26 And their forty sockets of sil- 
ver; two sockets under one board, 
and two sockets under another 
board. 

27 And for the sides of the taber- 
nacle westward he made six boards. 

28 And two boards made he for 
the corners of the tabernacle in the 
two sides. 

29 And they were coupled be- 
neath, and coupled together at the 
head thereof, to one ring: thus he did 
to both of them in both the corners. 

30 And there were eight boards; 
and their sockets were sixteen 
sockets of silver, under every board 
two sockets. 


The bars. (Cf. Ex. 26. 26.) 


31 And he made bars of ¢shittim 
wood; five for the boards of the one 
side of the tabernagle, 

32 And five ‘bars for the boards 
of the other side of the tabernacle, 
and five bars for the boards of the 
tabernacle for the sides westward. 

33 And he made the middle bar to 
shoot through the boards from the 
one end to the other. 


The gold overlay. (Cf. Ex. 26. 29.) 


34 And he overlaid the boards 
with gold, and made their rings of 
gold to be places for the bars, and 
overlaid the bars with gold. 

The inner vail. (Cf. Ex. 26. 31.) 


35 And he made a 4vail of blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and fine 


' twined linen: with cherubims made 


he it of cunning work. 

36 And he made thereunto four 
pillars of Sshittim wood, and over- 
laid them with gold: their hooks 
were of gold; and he cast for them 
four sockets of silver. 


(Cf. Ex. 26. 36.) 


37 And he made an changing for 
the tabernacle door of blue, and 
purple, and-scarlet, and fine twined 
linen, of needlework; 

38 And the five ‘pillars of it with 
their hooks: and he overlaid their 
chapiters and their fillets with gold: 
a their five sockets were of 

Tass, 


The outer vail. 


CHAPTER 37. 
The ark. (Cf. Ex. 25. 10.) 


AND ¢Bezaleel made the ark of 
bshittim wood: two cubits and 
a half was the length of it, and a 
cubit and a half the breadth of it, 
and a cubit and a half the-height 
of it: 

2 And he overlaid it with pure 
gold within and without, and made 
a crown of gold to it round about. 

3 And he cast for it four rings of 
gold, to be set by the four corners 
of it; even two rings upon the one 
side of it, and two rings upon the 
other side of it. 

4 And he made staves of ®shittim 
wood, and overlaid them with gold. 

5 And he put the staves into the 
tings by the sides of the ark, to 
bear the ark. 


The mercy seat. (Cf. Ex. 25. 17.) 


6 And he made the mercy seat of 
pure gold: two cubits and a half 
was the length thereof, and one 
cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 

7. And he made two fcherubims of 
gold, beaten out of one piece made 
he them, on the two ends of the 
mercy seat; 

8 One cherub on the end on this 
side, and another cherub on the 
other end on that side: out of the 
mercy seat made he the cherubims 
on the two ends thereof, 


EXODUS. 


"B.C. 1491. 


a Ex.26.31; 
30.6; Heb. 
10.20. 


b i.e. acacia. 
c Ex.26.36. 


d Ex 25.10; 
40.3,21; 


e One cubit = 
1 ft. 5.48 in.; 
also vs.6,10, 
25. 


f1 Ki.6,23; 
Ezk.1.5, 
note. 


g Ex:25.20. 

h Ex.25.23; 
35.13; 40.4, 
22. 


t Ex.25.31; 
40.24,25; 
Heb.9.2. 


120 


with their wings over the gmercy 


9 And the cherubims spread out 
|therr wings on high, and covered 


seat, with their faces one to an- 


other; even to the mercy seatward 
were the faces of the cherubims. 


The table of shewhread. 
fo CE X02 5093.9) 


10 And he made the “table of 
bshittim wood: two cubits was the 
length thereof, and a cubit the 
breadth thereof, and a cubit and a 
half the height thereof: 

11 And he overlaid it with pure 
gold, and made thereunto a crown 
of gold round about. 

12 Also he made théreunto a bor- 
der of an handbreadth round about; 
and made a crown of gold for the 
border thereof round about. 

13. And he cast for it four rings of 
gold, and put the rings upon the 
four corners that were in the four 
feet thereof. 

14 Over against the border were 
the rings, the places for the staves 
to bear the table. 

15 And he made the staves of 
bshittim wood, and overlaid them 
with gold, to bear the table. 

16 And he made the vessels which 
were upon the table, his dishes, and 
his spoons, and his bowls, and his 
covers to cover withal, of pure gold. 


The golden candlestick. 
(Cf. Ex. 25. 31.) 


17 And he made the candlestick 
of pure gold: of beaten work made 
he the ‘candlestick; his shaft, and 
his branch, his bowls, his knops, 
and his flowers, were of the same: 

18 And six branches going out of 
the sides thereof; three branches of 
the candlestick out of the one side 
thereof, and three branches of the 
candlestick out of the other side 
thereof: 

19 Three bowls made after the 
fashion of almonds in one branch, a 
knop and a flower; and three bowls 
made like almonds in another 
branch, a knop and a flower: so 
throughout the six branches going 
out of the candlestick. 

20 And in the candlestick were 
four bowls made like almonds, his 
knops, and his flowers: 

21 And a knop under two branches 
of the same, and a knop under two 
branches of the same, and a knop 
under two branches of the same, 
according to the six branches going 
out of it. 


37 22] - - EXODUS. ie [38 18 


22 Their knops and their branches| B.C. 1491. 6 And he made the staves of 
were of the same: all of it was one bshittim wood, and overlaid them 
beaten work of pure gold. with brass. 

23 And he made his seven lamps, 7 And he put the staves into the 
and his snuffers, and his snuff- rings on the sides of the altar, to 
dishes, of pure gold. bear it withal; he made the altar 

24 Ofa 4talent of pure gold made hollow with boards. 


he nee ta all the vessels thereof. The laver of brass. (Cf. Ex. 30. 18.) 
The incense altar. (Cf. Ex. 30.1.) 8 And he made the laver of brass, 


25 A > : and the foot of it of brass, of the 
RE oe eer fookingelasses of the women ae 
was a cubit, and the breadth of it a sembling, which assembled at the 
abit: it oie ucendiae and two door of the tabernacle of the con- 
cubits was the height of it; the stegation: 
ors eine yrs oe the sane, The court. (Cf. Ex. 27. 9.) 

nd he overlaid it with pure x 
gold, both the top of it, and the 9.) Andebe Wad sabes De 
sides thereof round about, and the eae eRe: Sas fomnea 
Eee 3 in 
horns of it: also he made unto it a linen, an hundred cubits: 


crown of gold round about. Scene 
A 10 Their pillars were twenty, and 
27 And he made two rings of gold their brasen sockets twenty; the 


es ee ORE SOUR Ee ta hooks SF he pillars and their fillets 

: ? were of silver. 
Bee er at Dee a cauy fant 11 And for the north side the 
98 And he made the staves of hangings: were’ an hundred cu. 
Becta etal. catid "overlaid them bits, their pillars were twenty, and 
Aue al d ? their sockets of brass twenty; the 
ecid. ba oy ans bool of the pillars and their fillets 

er . ee of silver. 

Tne 30 asa) oil. bie. acacia. | 12 And for the west side were 
Pee: hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars 
29 And he made the ‘holy an-| ~~ ~~" ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks 
ointing oil, and the pure incense of|¢One cubit= jof the pillars and their fillets of 


sweet spices, according to the work| 1,% 5.48 in; |silver. ; 
of the apothecary. 15,18. 13 And for the east side eastward 


fifty cubits. 

14 The hangings of the one side 
of the gate were fifteen cubits; 
their pillars three, and their sockets 
three. 

15 And for the other side of the 
court gate, on this hand and that 
hand, were hangings of fifteen cu- 
bits; their pillars three, and their 
sockets three. r 

16 All the hangings of the court 
round about were of fine twined 
linen. 

17 And the sockets for the pillars 
were of brass; the hooks ef the 
pillars and their fillets of silver; 
and the overlaying of their chapi- 
ters of silver; and all the pillars of 
the court were filleted with silver. 


The gate of the court. 
(Cf. Ex. 27. 16.) 


1g And the hanging for the gate 
of the court was needlework, of 
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and 
fine twined linen: and twenty cu- 
bits was the length, and the height 
in the breadth was five cubits, 


CHAPTER 38. 


The altar of burnt-offering. 
(Cf. Ex. 27. 1.) 


ND ‘he made the altar of burnt- 
; offering of 4shittim wood: 
five ¢cubits was the length thereof, 
and five cubits the breadth thereof; 
it was foursquare; and three cubits 
the height thereof. 

2 And he made the horns thereof 
on the four corners of it; the horns 
thereof were of the same: and he 
overlaid it with brass. 

3 And he made all the vessels of 
the altar, the pots, and the shovels, 
cand the basons, and the fleshhooks, 
and the firepans: all the vessels 
thereof made he of brass. 

4 And he made for the altar a 
brasen grate of network under the 
compass thereof beneath unto the 
midst of it. 

5 And he cast four rings for the 
four ends of the grate of brass, to 
be places for the staves. 


121 


38 19] 


EXODUS. 


[39 11 


answerable to the hangings of the 

court. é 

19 And their pillars were four, 
and their sockets of brass four; 
their hooks of silver, and the over- 
laying of. their chapiters and their 
fillets of silver. 

20 And all the pins of the taber-| 
nacle, and of the court round about, 
were of brass. 

21 This is the sum of the beac] 
nacle, even of the tabernacle of tes-! 
fimony, as it was counted, accord-! 

\ ing to the commandment of Moses, 
for the service of the Levites, by the 
hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron the 
priest. : 

22 And Bezaleel, the son of Uri,) 
the son of Hur, of ‘the tribe of| 
Judah, made all that the Lorp 
commanded Moses. 

23 And with him was Aholiab, 
son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of 
Dan, an engraver, and a cunning! 
workman, and an embroiderer in 
blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, 
and fine linen. 

24 All'the gold that-was occupied) 
for the work in all the work of the} 
holy -place, even the -gold of ‘the 
offering, was twenty and nine “tal. 
ents, and seven hundred and thirty 
¢shekels, after the shekel of the| 
sanctuary. 

25 And the silver of them that 
were numbered of the congregation 
was an hundred “talents, and a 
thousand seven hundred and three- 
score and fifteen shekels, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary: 

26 A 4bekah for every man, that 
is, half a shekel, after the shekel of 
the sanctuary, for every one that 
went to be numbered, from twenty 
years old and upward, for six hun- 
dred thousand and three thousand 
aay five hundred and fifty men. 

27 And of the hundred talents of 
'silver were cast. the esockets of the 
sanctuary, and the sockets of 
the vail; an hundred sockets of 
the hundred talents, a talent for a 
socket. 

28 And of the thousand seven 
hundred seventy and five shekels 
he made hooks for the pillars, and 
overlaid their chapiters, and filleted 
them. 

29 And the brass of the offering 
was seventy talents, and two thou- 
sand and four hundred shekels. 


B.C. 1491. 


a One talent = 
£6150, or 
$29,085. 


6 One shekel = 


2s. 9d., or 
65 cents; also 
v.29. 


¢ One silver 


v.27. 

d One bekah = 
1s.4.4d., or 
35 cents. 


e Ex.26.19, 
note, 


fEx.25.4; 
35.23. 


g Ex.31.10; 
35.19. 


h Ex.28.6; 
Lev.8.7. 


# Ex.28.9,12. 


j Ex.28.29; 
Josh.4.7. 


k One span = 
8.737 inches. 


30 And therewith he made the 
‘sockets toithe door of the tabernacle — 
of the congregation,.and the brasen 
altar, and the brasen -grate for it, 
‘and all the vessels of the altar, 

31 And the sockets of ithe court 
round about, and the sockets of 
the court gate, and all the pins of 
the tabernacle, and all the pins of 
the court round about. 


CHAPTER 39, 


The holy garments for Aaron. 
(Cf. Ex. 31.10.) 


ND of the fblue, and purple, 
and scarlet, they made écloths 
of service, to do service in the holy 
place, and made the holy garments — 
for Aaron; as the LoRD commanded 
Moses. 

2 And he made the 4ephod of 
gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, 
and fine twined linen. 

3 And they did beat the gold into 
thin plates, and cut it into wires, 
‘to work it in the blue, and in the 
purple, and in the scarlet, and in 
the fine linen, with cunning work. 

4 They made shoulderpieces for 
it, to.couple it together: by the two 
edges was it coupled together. 

5 And the curious girdle of his 
ephod, that was upon it, was-of the 
same, according to the work there- 
of; of gold, blue, and purple, and 
scarlet, and fine twined linen; as 
the LorD commanded Moses. 

6 And they wrought-onyx stones 
inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, 
as signets are ‘graven, with ‘the 
names of the children of Israel. 

7 And he put them on the shoul- 
ders of the ephod, that they 
should be stones for a jmemorial 
to the children of Israel; as the 
LorD commanded Moses. 

8 And he made the breastplate of 
cunning work, like the work of the 
ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, 


and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 

9 It was foursquare; they made 
the breastplate double: a *span was 
the length thereof, and a span the 
breadth thereof, being doubled. 

10 And they set in it four rows of 
stones: the first row was a sardius, 
a topaz, and a carbuncle: this wes 
the first row. 

11 And the second row, an eme- 
tald, a sapphire, and a diamond. 


1Silver thus receives its symbolic meaning—redemption. ‘The sockets were 


made of the redemption money of the children of Israel. 


Num. 3. 44-51. 


122 


Cf. Ex. 26. 19; 30. 13-15; 


39 12] i EXODUS. [39 42 


12 And the third row, a ligure, an| B.c. 1401. |about the hem of the robe to minis- 
agate, and an amethyst. ter in; as the LorD commanded 

13 And the fourth row, a beryl,.an Moses. 
onyx, and a jasper: they were in- 27 And they made “coats of fine 
closed in ouches of gold in their linen of woven work for Aaron, 
inclosings. and for his sons, 

14 And the stones were according 28 And a 4mitre of fine linen, and 
to the names of the children of goodly bonnets of fine linen, and 
Israel, “twelve, according to their linen breeches of fine twined linen, 


names, Jike the engravings of a 29 And a fgirdle of fine twined 
signet, every one with his name, linen, and blue, and purple, and 
according to the twelve tribes. scarlet, of needlework; as the LORD 

15 And they made upon the commanded Moses. 
breastplate chains at the ends, of 30 And they made the plate of 
wreathen work of pure gold. the holy crown of pure gold, and 

16 And they made two ouches.of| wrote upon it.a writing, like to the 
gold, and two gold rings; and put engravings of a signet, *HOLI- 
the two rings in the two ends of NESS TO THE LORD. 
the breastplate. 31 And they tied unto it a lace of 

17 And they put the two wreath- blue, to fasten it on high upon the 
en chains of gold in the two rings mitre; as the LORD commanded 
on the ends of the breastplate. Moses. 

18 And the two ends of the two 32 Thus was all the work of the 
wreathen chains they fastened in tabernacle of the tent of the congre- 
the two ouches, and put them on gation finished: and the children of 
the shoulderpieces of the ephod, be- Israel did according to all that the 
fore it. Lorp commanded Moses, so did 

19 And they made two rings of|¢ Rev.21,12. ey. 
gold, and put them on the two ends 33 And they brought the taber- 


of the breastplate, upon the border 6 Ex.28.33. nacle unto Moses, the tent, and alt 
of it, which was on the side of the|,#x.28:30,40. |his furniture, his taches, his boards, 


ephod inward. his bars, and his pillars, and his 
20 And they made two other)? =*-28-439. |sockets, : 
See Kage ee ae on ee ¢ Ex.28.42. dy reise a eae of te 
two sides of the ep underneath, skins dyed red, an e covering 
toward the forepart of ee ore f Ex.28.39. badgers’ skins, and the vail of the 
against the other coupling thereof,| » Zech.14.20. |COVETINg, ; 
above the curious girdle of the i 35 The ark of the testimony, and 
ephod. h Ex.25.23-30. lthe staves thereof, and the mercy 
21 And they did bind the breast- seat, 
eget aie mites ne ee of mies copy ekg mo s be vessels 
the e with a lace of blue, that ereof, an e ‘shewbread, 
it might be above the curious girdle 37 The pure candlestick, with the 
of the ephod, and that the breast- lamps thereof, even with the lamps 
plate might not ‘be loosed from the to be set in order, and all the ves- 
ephod; as the LorD commanded sels thereof, and the oil for light, 
Moses. | 38 And the golden altar, and the 
22 And he made the robe of the anointing oil, and the sweet intense, 
ephod of woven work, all of blue. pad the hanging for the tabernacle 
93 And there was an hole in the oor, : 
midst of the robe, as the hole of an 39 The brasen altar, and his grate 
habergeon, with a band round lof brass, his staves, and ail his ves- 
about the hole, that it should not ‘sels, the laver and his foot, 


tend. 40 The hangings of the court, ‘his 
94 And they made upon the hems pillars, and his sockets, and the 
of the robe pomegranates of ‘blue, ‘hanging for the court gate, his 


‘and purp let, and twined ‘cords, and his pins, and all the-ves- 
laa (tacts sels of the service of the tabernacle, 
95 And they made bells of pure \for the tent of the congregation, 
gold, and put the bells between the | 41 The cloths of.service to do ser- 
pomegranates upon the hem.of the |vice in the holy, piace, and the holy 
Tobe, round about ‘between the garments for Aaron the priest, and 
pomegranates; his sons garments, ‘to minister in 
26 A bell and a pomegranate, a ‘the priest’s office. 


bell and a pomegranate, round 42 According to all that the LORD 


123 


39 43] 


commanded Moses, so the children 
of Israel made all the work. : 

43 And Moses did look upon all 
the work, and, behold, they had 
done it as the Lorp had com- 
manded, even so had they done it: 
and Moses blessed them. 


CHAPTER 40. 
The tabernacle set up. 


ND the Lorp 4spake unto Mo- 

7 & ses, Ssaying, 

2 On the first day of the first 
month shalt thou set up the taber- 
nacle of the tent of the congregation. 

3 And thou shalt put therein the 
ark of the testimony, and cover the 
ark with the vail. 

4 And thou shalt bring in the 
table, and set in order the things 
that are to be set in order upon it; 
and thou shalt bring in the candle- 
stick, and light the lamps thereof. 

5 And thou shalt set the altar of 
gold for the incense before the ark 
of — eee eae put arhe Dene 
ing of the door to the tabernacle. " 

6 And thou shalt set the altar of 8 CLES 22. 
the burnt-offering before the door! ® Israel (his- 
of the tabernacle of the tent of the| £0*¥)- vs-1- 
congregation. 


1-34. (Gen 
7 And thou shalt set the laver be-| 12.2,3; Rom 
tween the tent of the congregation| 11-26.) 


and the altar, and shalt put water] cic. April. 
therein. a 

8 And thou shalt set up the court|¢ Lit. meal. 

round about, and hang up the hang- 
ing at the court gate. 
_9 And thou shalt take the anoint- 
ing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, 
and all that is therein, and shalt 
hallow it, and all the vessels there- 
of: and it shall be holy. 

10 And thou shalt anoint the altar 
of the burnt-offering, and all his 
vessels, and sanctify the altar: and 
it shall be an altar most holy. 

11 And thou shalt anoint the 
laver and his foot, and sanctify it. 

12 And thou shalt bring Aaron 
and his sons unto the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and 
wash them with water. : 

13 And thou shalt put upon Aa- 
ron the holy garments, and anoint 

m, and sanctify him; that he may 
minister unto me in the priest’s 
office. i 

14 And thou shalt bring his sons, 
and clothe them with coats: 

15 And thou shalt anoint them, as 
thou didst anoint their father, that 
they may minister unto me in the 


124 


EXODUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


priest’s office: for their anointing 
shall surely be an_ everlasting 
priesthood throughout their genera- 
tions. 

16 Thus did Moses: according to 
all that the LORD commanded him, 
so did he. . 

17 And it came to pass in the 
bfrst month in the second year, on 
the first day of the month, that the 
tabernacle was reared up. 

18 And Moses reared up the tab- 
ernacle, and fastened his sockets, 
and set up the boards thereof, and 
put in the bars thereof, and reared 
up his pillars. 

19 And he spread abroad the tent 
over the tabernacle, and put the 
covering of the tent above upon it; 
as the LoRD commanded Moses. 

20 And he took and put the testi- 
mony into the ark, and set the 
staves on the ark, and put the 
mercy seat above upon the ark: 

21 And he brought the ark into 
the tabernacle, and set up the vail 
of the covering, and covered the ark 
of the testimony; as the LorD com- 
manded Moses. 

22 And he put the table in the 
tent of the congregation, upon the 
side of the tabernacle northward, 
without the vail. 

23 And he set the bread in order 
upon it before the LorpD; as the 
LorpD had commanded Moses. 

24 And he put the candlestick in 
the tent of the congregation, over 
against the table, on the side of the 
tabernacle southward. 

25 And he lighted the lamps be- 
fore the LorD; as the LorD com- 
manded Moses. 

26 And he put the golden altar in 
the tent of the congregation before 
the vail: 

27 And he burnt sweet incense 
thereon; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

28 And he set up the hanging at 
the door of the tabernacle. 

29 And he put the altar of burnt- 
offering by the door of the taberna- 
cle of the tent of the congregation, 
and offered upon it the burnt- 
offering and the ¢meat-offering; as 
the LoRD commanded Moses. 

30 And he set the laver between 
the tent of the congregation and 
the altar, and put water there, to 
wash withal. 

31 And Moses and Aaron and his 
sons washed their hands and their 
feet thereat: 

32 When they went into the tent 


- | 


40 33] 


EXODUS. 


P88 ie ee | 
‘) 


[40 38 


of the congregation, and when they! B.c.1490. |gation, because the cloud abode 
came near unto the altar, they thereon, and the glory of the LorD 


washed; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

33 And he reared up the court 
round about the tabernacle and the 
altar, and set up the hanging of 
the court gate. So Moses @finished 


a Heb.3.2,3. 
6 C£. 1 Ki.8. 
10,11. 


, 


c Lev.16.2; 


the work. Aer ae 
34 5Then a “cloud covered the} 2 Chr.5.13 
tent of the congregation, and the Sian oer 
Iglory of the Lorn filled the taber-|* p78 14. 
nacle. Isa.4.5. 


35 And Moses was not able to 
enter into the tent of the congre- 


1 Cf. Eph. 2. 22. 


Med the tabernacle. 

36 And when the cloud was taken 
up from over the tabernacle, the 
children of Israel went onward in 
all their journeys: 

37 But if the cloud were not taken 
up, then they journeyed not till the 
day that it was taken up. 

38 For the 4cloud of the Lorp 
was upon the tabernacle by day, 
and fire was on it by night, in the 
sight of all the house of Israel, 
throughout all their journeys. 


What the shekinah glory was to tabernacle and temple, that 


the Spirit is to the “holy temple,’ the Church, and to the temple which is the be- 


liever’s body (1 Cor. 6. 19). 


THE THIRD BOOK OF MOSES ae 
CALLED 


bel LEVITICUS. is 


Leviticus stands in the same relation to Exodus, that the Epistles do to the Gospels, 
Exodus is the record of redemption, and lays the foundation of the cleansing, wor- 
ship, and service of a redeemed people. Leviticus gives the detail of the walk, 
worship, and service of that people. In Exodus God speaks out of the mount to 
which approach was forbidden; in Leviticus He speaks out of the tabernacle in 
which He dwells in the midst of His people, to tell them that which befits His holi- 
ness in their approach to, and communion with, Himself. 

The key-word of Leviticus is holiness; occurring 87 times. Key-verse, 19. 2. 

Leviticus is in nine chief divisions: I. The Offerings, 1.-6. 7. Il. The Law of 
the Offerings, 6, 8-7. 38. III. Consecration, 8. 1-9. 24. IV. A Warning Example, 
10. 1-20. V. A Holy God must have a Cleansed People, 11-15. VI. Atonement, 
16., 17. VII. The Relationships of God’s People, 18-22. VIII. The Feasts of 
Jehovah, 23. IX. Instructions and Warnings, 24-27. 


— 


CHAPTER 1. B.C. 1490. ot me cette: even of the herd, and 
sans of the flock. _ 
The bunnt-oferinde Chane atte etan (ot | 3. If his offering be a !burnt-sac- 


ing Himself without spot to Moses). Pe rifice of the herd, let him offer a 


A s male without blemish: he shall offer 
paar canes. erm sirwisie > Cs tis. aE it of his own voluntary will at the 


door of the tabernacle of the con- 
ND the Lorn called unto ¢Mo-|® an e. ececn poe the s2OEP 4 
ses, and spake unto him out of| 347;Lev.2.| 4 Andhes put his 2hand upon 
the tabernacle of the congregation,| 1-16, (Gen. |the head of the burnt-offering; and 
Eayine, a ake 38 aS Heb.10. |i¢ shall be accepted for him to make 
peak unto the children of Is- ; “atonement for him. 
rael, and say unto them, If any man] See Ex.29.33,/ 5 And he shall kill the bullock 
of you bring an offering unto the| 70¢e- \before the Lorp: and the priests, 
LorD, ye shall bring your offering Aaron’s sons, shall bring the blood, 


1 The burnt-offering (1) typifies Christ offering Himself without spot to God in 
delight to do His Father’s will even in death. (2) Itis atoning because the believer 
has not had this delight in the will of God; and (3) substitutionary (v. 4) because 
Christ did it in the sinner’s stead. But the thought of penalty is not prominent 
(Heb. 9. 11-14; 10. 5-7; Psa. 40. 6-8; Phil. 2. 8). The emphatic words (Lev. 1. 3-5) 
are “‘burnt-sacrifice,”’ “voluntary,” “it shall be accepted for him,’ and “atone- 
ment.”’ 

The creatures acceptable for sacrifice are five: 

(1) The bullock, or ox, typifies Christ as the patient and enduring Servant 
(1 Cor. 9. 9, 10; Heb. 12. 2, 3), “obedient unto death” (Isa. 52. 13-15; Phil. 2. 5-8). 
His offering in this character is substitutionary, for this we have not been. 

(2) The sheep, or lamb, typifies Christ in unresisting self-surrender to the 
death of.the cross (Isa. 53. 7; Acts 8. 32-35). 

(3) The goat typifies the sinner (Mt. 25. 33) and, when used sacrificially, 
Christ, as “numbered with the transgressors” (Isa.-53. 12; Lk. 23. 33), and ‘‘made 
sin,” and “‘a curse” (Gal. 3. 13; 2 Cor. 5. 21), as the sinner’s substitute. 

(4, 5) The turtle-dove or pigeon. Naturally a symbol of mourning innocency 
(Isa. 38. 14; 59. 11; Mt. 23. 37; Heb. 7. 26), is associated with poverty in Lev. 5. n 
and speaks of Him who for our sakes became poor (Lk. 9. 58), and whose pathway 
of poverty which began with laying aside “the form of God,” ended in the sacrifice 
through which we became rich (2 Cor. 8:9; Phil. 2. 6-8). The sacrifice of the poor 
Man becomes the poor man’s sacrifice (Lk, 2. 24). ; 

_ These grades of typical sacrifice test the measure of our apprehension of the 
varied aspects of Christ’s one sacrifice on the cross. The mature believer should 
see Christ crucified in all these aspects. 

2 The laying on of the offerer’s hand signified acceptance and identification 

126) ; 


4 


‘Sy 


1 6) LEVITICUS. » (20° 


and sprinkle the blood round about} 3B.c.1490. [upon the altar: it is a burnt-sacri- 


per the altar that is by the door} fice, an offering made by fire, of.a 

4 * e tabernacle of the congrega- supchesve uate: the ee ‘ 
; if the burnt-sacrifice for 
. And vai Se flay se burnt- his offering to the LorD be of fowls, 
= ee a cu ea ie pieces. then he shall bring his offering of 

es oe “ee ne e priest turtledoves, or of young pigeons. 
- ae ire upon the a ew and lay 15 And the priest shall bring it 
Pe he eee ann mons ponds and beces eee e 

i . 4 ead, and burn it.on the altar; an 
shail lay the parts, the head, and the blood thereof shall be wrung 

the fat, in order upon ithe wood out at the side-of the altar: 

that is on the lfire which is upon 16 And he shall pluck away his 
oe ree i 4 Dac tree Propo his feathers, and cast it 
shall ‘he ees 2 aoa the p teae whi ie eae Bane ae eee shes 
priest shall burn all on the altar, ito} quickly— 17 And he shall cleave it with the 
be a saad pats ab) offering a wanes bactemie dae shall noe divide 
made by fire, of a “sweet “savour : it asunder: and the priest shall burn 
unto the Lor. ‘ bSavour of it upon the altar, upon the wood 
10 And if his offering be of the vetasies that is upon the fire: it is a burnt- 
flocks,namely,ofthesheep,orofthe; °°” sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of 


goats, for a burnt-sacrifice; he shall) - Lit. meal. |a sweet savour unto the LORD. 
bring it a male without blemish. 


11 And he shall kill it on the side 
- the ne por ward priors the CHAPTER 2. 

ORD: and the priests, Aaron’s isis 
sons, shall sprinkle his blood round RerBabeand plo ate Q) 
about upon the altar. |, ; His human perfections tested 

12 And he shall cut it into his by suffering. See Law of this 
pieces, with his head and his fat: offering, Lev. 6. 14-23 
and the priest shall lay them in 2 ‘ 
order on the wood that is on the Ae when any will offer a “meat- 
fire which is upon the altar: offering unto: the LorRD, this 

13. But he shall wash ‘the inwards offering shall be of 8fine flour; and 
and the legs with water: and the he shall pour oil upon it, and put 
priest shall bring it all, and burn zt jfrankincense thereon: 


of himself with his offering. In type it answered to the believer’s faith accepting 
and identifying himself with Christ (Rom. 4. 5; 6. 3-11). The believer is justified by 
faith, and his faith is reckoned for righteousness, because his faith identifies him 
with Christ, who died as his sin-offering (2 Cor. 5. 21; 1 Pet. 2. 24). 

1 Fire. Essentially a symbol of God’s holiness. As such it expresses God in 
three ways: (1) In judgment upon that which His holiness utterly condemns (e.g. 
Gen. 19. 24; Mk. 9. 43-48; Rev. 20. 15); (2) in the manifestation of Himself, and 
of that which He approves (e.g. Ex. 3. 2; 1 Pet. 1. 7; Ex. 13. 21); and (3) in purifica- 
tion (e.g. 1 Cor. 3. 12-14; Mal. 3. 2, 3). So, in Leviticus, the fire which only mani- 
fests the sweet savour of the burnt-, meal-, and peace-offerings, wholly consumes 
the sin-offering. ; 

2‘The sweet savour offerings are so called because they typify Christ in His own 
perfections, and in His affectionate devotion to the Father’s will. The non-sweet 
savour offerings typify Christ as bearing the whole demerit of the sinner. Both 
are substitutional. In our place Christ, in the burnt-offering, makes good our lack 
of devotedness, and, in the sin-°and trespass-offerings, suffers because of our dis- 
obedience. 

3 The meal-offering. ‘The fine four speaks of the evenness and balance of the 
character of Christ; of that perfection in which no quality was in excess, none lack- 
ing; the fire, of His testing by suffering, €ven unto death; frankincense, the 
fragrance of His life Godward (see Ex. 30. 34); absence of Jeaven, His character 
as “the Truth” (see Ex. 12, 8, refs.); absence of honey ;—His was not that mere 
natural sweetness which may exist quite apart from grace; oil mingled, Christ 
as born of the Spirit (Mt. 1. 18-23); oil upon, Christ as baptized with the Spirit 

John 1. 32; 6. 27); the oven, the unseen sufferings of Christ-—His inner agonies 

(Heb. 2. 18; Mt. 27. 45,46); the pan, His more evident sufferings (e.g. Mt. 27. 27-31); 

salt, the pungency of the truth of God—that which arrests the action of leaven. 
127 


2 2] _ LEVITICUS. i | 


2 And he shall bring it to Aaron’s| B.C. 1490. |fruits, ye shall offer them unto the 


riests: and he shall take Lorpb: but they shall not be burnt 

erect This handful of the flour on the altar for a sweet savour. 
thereof, and of the oil thereof, with 13 And every oblation of thy 
all the frankincense thereof; and bmeat-offering shalt thou season 
the priest shall burn the memorial with 3salt; neither shalt thou suffer 
of it upon the altar, to be an 4offer- the salt of the covenant of thy God 
ing made by fire, of a sweet savour to be lacking from thy ’meat-offer- 
unto the LoRD: ing: with all thine offerings thou 

3 And the remnant of the ’meat- shalt offer salt. : 
offering shall be Aaron’s and his 14 And if thou offer a Smeat- 
sons’: it 1s a thing most holy of the offering of thy firstfruits unto the 
offerings of the LoRD made by fire. LorD, thou shalt offer for the 

4 And if thou bring an oblation ’meat-offering of thy firstfruits 
of a ’meat-offering baken in the green ears of corn dried by the fire, 
oven, it shall be ‘unleavened cakes even corn beaten out of full ears. 


of fine flour mingled with oil, or un- “fi 15 And thou shalt put oil upon it, 
leavened wafers sooeted with oil. * eppiead. vs. and poor thereon: it is 
5. And if thy oblation be a "meat-| 1-16;Lev.3. |a °meat-offering. 
offering baken in a pan, it shall be| }-¥7.'Gs"-4-| 16 And the priest shall burn the 
of fine flour unleavened, mingled! 12, ee. oe per ae ee peates 
with oil. ; corn thereof, and part of the 
6 Thou shalt part it in pieces, and)>Lit: meal thereof, with all the frankincense 
pour oil thereon: it is a meat-|,; reaven. vs. |thereof: zt is an offering made by 


offering. 4,5,11; Lev. |fire unto the Lorb. 
7 And if thy oblation be a ’meat- Ph Ree, 
offering baken in the fryingpan, it) 33))’ CHAPTER 3. 


shall be made of fine flour with oil. A 
8 And thou shalt bring the ’meat-|? S2crifice The sweet savour offerings: (3) 


offering that is made of these things rieierae the peace-offering: Christ our 
unto the Lorb: and when it is pre-| 3-35. (Gen. peace (Eph. 2. 14-18). See Law 
sented unto the priest. he shall) {44° | OF this offering, Lev. 7. 11-21. 


bring it unto the altar. eas i : 
9 And the priest shall take from] Lev.1.4; 16. AN? if his oblation be a ¢sacri- 
the  meat-offering a memorial] 21; Isa.53.6. fice of 4peace-offering, if he of- 


thereof, and shall burn st upon the fer it of the herd; whether it be a 
altar: it is an offering made by fire, male or female, he shall offer it 
of a sweet savour unto the Lorp. without blemish before the LorD. 
10 And that which is left of the 2. And he shall ¢lay his hand upon 
bmeat-offering shall be Aaron’s and the head of his offering, and kill it 
his sons’: zt is a thing most holy of at the door of the tabernacle of the 
the offerings of the Lorp made by congregation: and Aaron’s sons the 
fire. priests shall sprinkle the blood upon 
11 No ‘meat-offering, which ye the altar round about. 
shall bring unto the Lorp, shall be 3 And he shall offer of the sacrifice 
made with Neaven: for ye shall of the peace-offering an offering 
burn no leaven, nor any 2honey, in made by fire unto the LorD; the fat 
any offering of the LoRD made by that covereth the inwards, and all 
fire. the fat that 7s upon the inwards, 
12 As for the oblation of the first- 4 And the two kidneys, and the 


1 For meanings of leaven see Mt. 13. 33. Also Lev. 7. 13, note. 

* Honey is mere natural sweetness and could not symbolize the divine gracious: 
ness of the Lord Jesus. ; 

3 Cf. Num. 18. 19; Mk. 9. 49, 50; Col. 4. 6. 

4 The peace-offering. The whole work of Christ in Telation to the believer’s 
peace is here in type. He made peace, Col. 1. 20: proclaimed peace, Eph. 2. 17; 
and is our peace, Eph. 2. 14. In Christ God and the sinner meet in peace; God is 
propitiated, the sinner reconciled—both alike satisfied with what Christ has done. 
But all this at the cost of blood and fire. The details speak of fellowship. This 
brings in prominently the thought of fellowship with God through Christ. Hence 
the peace-offering is set forth as affording food for the priests (Lev. 7. 31-34). Ob- 
serve that it is the breast (affections) and shoulders (strength) upon which we as 
priests (1 Pet. 2. 9) feed in fellowship with the Father. This it is which makes the 
peace-offering especially a thank-offering (Lev. 7. 11, 12), 


128 


a ™ as “we ee ix 


3.5] LEVITICUS. : [4 8 


fat that 7s on them, which is by the] B.c. 1490. |liver, with the kidneys, it shall he 
flanks, and the Scaulabovetheliver,|~ ——__—=s«{take: away. ie 
with the kidneys, it shall he take 16 And the priest shall burn them 
away. : . upon the altar: it is the food of the 
5 And Aaron’s sons shall burn it offering made by fire for a sweet 
on the altar upon the burnt-sacri- savour: all the fat is the LorD’s. 
fice, which is upon the wood that is 17 It shall be a perpetual statute 
on the fire: zt zs an offering made for your generations throughout all 
by fire, of a sweet savour unto the your dwellings, that yeeat neither 
Lorp. > fat nor blood. 
6 And if his offering for a sacrifice 
of peace-offering unto the LorpD be CHAPTER 4. 
of the flock; male or female, he shall T . 
Bete 4 without blemish, he non-sweet savour offerings: 
7 If he offer a lamb for his offer- (1) the sin-offering; Christ 
ing, then shall he ‘offer it before atoning for the guilt of sin 
See (Heb. 13. 11, 12). See Law of 
8 And he shall lay his hand upon this offering, Lev. 6. 25-30. 
the head of his offering, and kill it ‘ANP the LorD spake unto Mo- 
before the tabernacle of the congre- ses, saying, 
2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, saying, If a soul shall sin 


gation: and Aaron’s sons shall 
through ignorance against any of 


sprinkle the blood thereof round 
about upon the altar. 


9 And he shall offer of the sacri- sy Hs "n° \the commandments of the Lorp 


fice of the peace-offering an offering concerning things which ought 
made by fire unto the Lorp; thej’? Chr-35-14. Inot to be done, and shall do against 
fat thereof, and the whole rump, it|¢ 1 Ki.s.62. any of them: 


shall he take off hard by the back- 3 If the priest that is anointed do 
bone: and the fat that covereth the ?¥-+ sin according to the sin of the peo- 
inwards, and all the fat'that is upon] - Num.28.2.__|ple; then let him /bring for his sin, 
the inwards, f which he hath sinned, a young bul- 

10 And the two kidneys, and thel/ eS ys,{lock without blemish unto the 


fat that is upon them, which is by| 335: revs. |LORD for a !sin-offering. 
the flanks, and the ¢caul above the} 1-19. (Gen.4. | 4 And he shall bring the bullock 
liver, with the kidneys, it shall he} 4; #¢>-10- [unto the door of the tabernacle of 


take away. od the congregation before the LORD; 
11 And the priest shall burn it and shall lay his hand upon the 
upon the altar: it is the ‘food of bullock’s head, and kill the bullock 
the offering made by fire unto the before the LorD. 
Lorp. 5 And the priest that is anointed 
12 And if his offering be a goat, shall take of the bullock’s blood, 
then he shall offer it before the and bring it to the tabernacle of 
Lorp. the congregation: 7 
13 And he shall lay his hand upon 6 And the priest shall dip his fin- 
the head of it, and kill it before the ger in the blood, and sprinkle of the 
tabernacle of the congregation: and blood seven times before the Lorb, 
the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the before the vail of the sanctuary. 
blood thereof upon the altar round 4 7 And the priest shall put some 
about. of the blood upon the horns of the 
14 And he shall offer thereof his altar of sweet incense before the 
offering, even an offering made by LORD, which is in the tabernacle of 
fire unto the LorpD; the fat that the congregation; and shall pour all 
covereth the inwards, and all the the blood of the bullock at the bot- 
fat that 7s upon the inwards, tom of the altar of the burnt-offer- 
15 And the two kidneys, and the ing, which is at the door of the 
fat that 7s upon them, which is by tabernacle of the congregation, 
the flanks, and the caul above the 8 And he shall take off from it all 


1 The sin-offering, though still Christ, is Christ seen laden with the believer’s 
sin, absolutely in the sinner’s place and stead, and not, as in the sweet savour offer- 
ings, in His own perfections. It is Christ’s death as viewed in Isa, 53.; Psa. 22.3 
Mt. 26. 28; 1 Pet. 2. 24; 3. 18. But note (Lev. 6. 24-30) how the essential holiness 
of Him who was “made sin for us” (2 Cor. 5. 21) is guarded. The sin-offerings are 
expiatory, substitutional, efficacious (Lev. 4. 12, 29, 35); and have in view the 
‘vindication of the law through substitutional sacrifice, 

129 


4 9] LEVITICUS. [4 25 
the fat of the bullock for the sin-| B.C. 1490. 17 And the priest shall dip his 


offering; the fat that covereth the ; finger in some of the blood, and 
inwards, and all the fat that 7s upon ‘sprinkle it seven. times before the 
the inwards, \LORD, even before the vail. 

9 And the two kidneys, and the | 18 And he shail put some of the 
fat that 1s upon them, which is by biood. upon the horns of the altar 
the flanks, and the caul: above the which is before the Lorpb, that is in 
liver, with the kidneys, it shall he the tabernacle of the congregation, 
take away, and shall pour out. all the blood at 

10 As it was taken off from the the bottom of the altar of the burnt- 
bullock of the sacrifice of peace- offering, which ts at the door of 
offerings: and the priest shall burn the tabernacle of the congrega- 
them upon the altar of the burnt- tion. 
offering. | 19 And he shall take all his fat 

11 And the skin of the bullock, from him, and burn i# upon the 
and all his flesh, with his head, and as 
with his legs, and his inwards, and 20 And he shall do with the bul- 
his dung, \lock as he did with the bullock for 

12 Even the whole bullock shall a sin-offering, so shall he do with 
he carry forth !without the camp this: and the priest shall make an 
urito a clean place, where the ashes} és fatonement for them, and it shall 
are poured out, and burn. him on)? $s E*29 | be forgiven. them. 
the wood with fire: where the; ” 21 And he shall carry forth the 
ashes are poured out shall’ he be)? Forgive- bullock without the camp, and’ burn 
burnt. 20,2631,35; |Him as he burned the first bullock: 


13. And if the whole congregation! Lev.s.10,13, |it is a sin-offering for the congre- 
of Israel sin through ignorance, and| 16,18. (Lev. | gation. 


the thing be hid from the eyes of| 3293)" 22 When a ruler hath sinned, and 
the assembly, and they have done done somewhat through ignorance 
edie wee es of the ages any ast! Seyi 
commandments of the LORD: con- of the LorD his God concerning 
mae ee ee should not snes besa should not be done, 

e done, and are guilty; and is' guilty; 

14 When the sin, which they have 23 Or if his sin, wherein he hath 
sinned against it, is known, then the sinned, come to his knowledge; he 
congregation shall offer a young shall bring his offering, a kid of the 
bullock for the sin, and bring him goats, a male without blemish: 
before the tabernacle of the con- 24 And he shall lay his hand upon 
Ore and ‘the elders of th re oS auce the yell the b Sar 

ni e elders of the congre- e place where they e burnt- 
gation shall lay their hands upon offering before the Lorp: it is a 
the head of the bullock before the sin-offering. 
nore. gad, fhe aa shall be an aoe ue priest ee take - the 
illed before the Lorn. 0) e sin-offering wit! is 

16 And the priest that is anointed finger, and’ put it upon the horns of 
shall bring of the bullock’s blood the altar of burnt-offering, and shall 
fo the tabernacle of the congrega-| pour out his bloed at the bottom of 

ion: | 


the altar of burnt-offering. 


1Cf. Ex. 29. 14; Lev. 16, 27; Num. 19. 3: Heb. 13. 10-13. The last passage is the 
interpretative one. The “camp” was Judaism—a religion: of forms and ceremonies, 
“Jesus, also, that He might sanctify [separate, or set apart for God] the people 
with for ‘through’] His own blood, suffered without the gate” [temple gate, city 
gate, i.e. Judaism civil and religious]; Heb. 13. 12. But how does this sanctify, 
or set apart, a people? “Let us go forth therefore unto: Him without the camp 
[Judaism then, Judaized Christianity now—anything religious which denies Him 
as our sin-offering] bearing His reproach”? (Heb. 13. 13). The sin-offering, “burned 
without the camp,” typifies this aspect. of the death of Christ. The cross becomes | 
a new altar, in a new place, where, without the smallest’ merit in themselves, the 
redeemed gather to offer, as believer-priests,, spiritual sacrifices (Heb. 13: 15; T Pet. 
2.5). The bodies of the sin-offering beasts were not burned without’ the camp, as. 
some have fancied, because “saturated with sin,” and unfit for a holy camp: Rather, | 
an unholy camp. was an unfit place for a holy sin-offering. The dead body of our 
Lord was not “saturated with sin,” though in it our sins had been borne (1 Pet. 


2. 24). | 
130 | 
| 


26 And he shall burn all his fat 
upon the altar, as the fat of the 
sacrifice of peace-offerings: and the 
priest shall make an “atonement for 
him as concerning his sih, and it 
shall be forgiven him. . 

27 And if any one of the common 
people-sin through ignorance, while 
he doeth somewhat against any 
of the commandments of the LORD 
concerning things which ought 
mot to be done, and be guilty; 

28 Or if his sin, which he hath 
sinned, come to his knowledge: 
then he shall bring his offering, a 
kid of the goats, a female without 
blemish, for his sin which he hath 


sinned, : 

29 And he shall lay his hand upon 
the head of the sin-offering, and 
slay the sin-offering in the place of 
the burnt-offering. 

30 And the priest shail take of 
the blood thereof with his finger, 
and put if upon the horns of the! 
altar of burnt-offering, and shall 
pour out all the blood thereof at 
the bottom of the altar. 

31. And he shall take away all the 
fat thereof, .as the fat is taken away 
from off the sacrifice of peace-offer- 
ings; and the priest shall burn it 
upon the altar for a sweet savour 
unto the LorpD; and the priest shall 
make an ¢atonement for him, and 
it shall be forgiven him. 

’ 32 And-if he bring a lamb fora 
sin-offering, he shall bring it a fe- 
male without blemish. 

33 And he shall lay his hand 
upon the head of the sin-offering, 
and slay it for a sin-offering in the 
place where they kill the burnt- 
offering. 

~ 34 And the priest shall take of the 
blood of the sin-offering with his/ 
finger, and put it upon the horns of 
the altar of burnt-offering, and) 
shall pour out all the blood thereof 
at the bottom of the altar: 

35 And he shall take away all the 
fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb 
is taken away from the sacrifice of 
the peace-offerings; and the priest 
shall burn them upon the -altar,) 
according to the offerings made 
by fire unto the orp: and the 
priest shall make an ¢atonement 
for his sin that ‘the hath .com- 
ae and ‘it shall be forgiven 

m. 


-1The trespass-offerings have in 


guilt—which is the sin-offering aspect. 


being is here meant. Psa, 


LEVITICUS. 


B.C. 1490. 


aSee Ex.29. 
33, note. 


b Sacrifice 
(typical). 
vs.1-19; 
Lev-.6,.1-7. 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

¢ Num.5.7; 
Josh.7.19. 


d Lev:12.8; 
14.21. 


[oe 


CHAPTER 5. 


The non-sweet savour offerings: 
(2) the trespass - offerings; 
Christ atoning for the injury 
of sin. See Law of this offer- 
ing, Ley. 7. 1-7. 


AD if a soul sin, and hear the 
voice of swearing, and is a 
witness, whether he hath seen or 
known of it; if he do not utter it, 
then he shall bear his iniquity. 

2 Or if a soul touch any unclean 
thing, whether it be a carcase of 
an unclean beast, or a carcase of 
unclean cattle, or the carcase of un- 
clean creeping things, and if it be 
hidden from him; he also shall be 
unclean, and guilty. 

3 Or if he touch the uncleanness 
of man, whatsoever uncleanness it 
be that a man shall be defiled 
withal, and it be hid from him; 
when he knoweth of it, then he 
shall be guilty. 

4 .Or if a soul swear, pronouncing 
with Ais lips ‘to do evil, or to do 
‘good, whatsoever it be that a man 
shall pronounce ‘with an oath, and 
it ‘be ‘hid from ‘him; when he know- 
eth of it, then he shall be guilty in 
one of these. 

5 And it shall be, when ‘he shall 
be guilty in one of these things, 
that he shall “confess that he hath 
sinned in that thing: 

6 And he shall bring his Itres- 
pass-offering unto the LorD for his 
sin which he hath sinned, a female 
from the flock, a lamb or.a kid of 
the goats, for a sin-offering; and 
the priest shall make an 4atone- 
ment for him concerning his sin. 

7 And ifthe be 2not able to bring a 
lamb, then he shall bring for his 
trespass, which he hath committed, 
two turtledoves, or two young pi- 
geons, unto the LorpD; one for a 
sin-offering, and the other for a 
Lburnt-offering, 

8 And he shall bring them unto 
the priest, who shall offer that 
which is for the sin-offering first, 
and wring off his head from ‘his neck, 
but shall not divide rt asunder: 

9 And the shall sprinkle of the 
blood of the sin-offering upon the 
side of ‘the altar; and the rest of 
the blood shall be wrung out at the 
bottom of ‘the altar: it 4s a sin- 
loffering. 


view rather the ingury which sin does than its 


131 


_ at 


What is due to God’s rights in-every human 
51. 418 a perfect expression of this. 


LEVITICUS. 


10 And he shall offer the second] _B.c. 1490. 
for a burnt-offering, according to ce 
the manner: and the priest shall 
make an ¢atonement for him for his 
sin which he hath sinned, and it 
shall be &forgiven him. nat 

11 But if he be not able to bring 


two turtledoves, or two young 
pigeons, then he that sinned shall 
bring for his offering the tenth part 
of an ‘ephah of fine flour for a sin- 
offering; he shall put no oil upon 
it, neither shall he put any frankin- 
cense thereon: for it rs a sin- 
offering. 

12 Then shall he bring it to the 
priest, and the priest shall take his 
handful of it, even a memorial 
thereof, and burn it on the altar, 
according to the offerings made by 
fire unto the LORD: it ss a sin- 
offering. 

13 And the priest shall makelcSee Ex.29. 
an “atonement for him as touch-| 33, note. 
ing his sin that he hath sinned b Farsive- 
in one of these, and it shall be] ness. vs.10, 
forgiven him: and the remnant| 13,16,18; 
shall be the priest’s, as a ¢meat- Peer 
offering. : Mt.26.28.) 

14 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, c¢ One ephah 

15 If a soul commit a trespass, 
and sin through ignorance, in the 
holy things of the Lorp; then he 
shall bring for his trespass unto the 
LorD a ram without blemish out of 
the flocks, with thy estimation by 
‘shekels of silver, after the shekel 
of the sanctuary, for a trespass- 
offering. 

16 And he shall make amends for 
the harm that he hath done in the 
holy thing, and shall add the fifth 
part thereto, and give it unto the 
priest: and the priest shall make an 
“atonement for him with the ram 
of the trespass-offering, and it shall 
be forgiven him, 

17 And if a soul sin, and commit 
any of these things which are for- 
bidden to be done by the command- 
ments of the Lorp; though he wist 
it not, yet is he guilty, and shall 
bear his iniquity. 

18 And he shall bring a ram with- 
out blemish out of the flock with 
thy estimation, for a trespass-offer- 
ing, unto the priest: and the priest 
shall make an ¢atonement for him 
concerning his ignorance wherein 
he erred and wist it not, and it shall 
be forgiven him, 

19 It is .a_ trespass-offering: he 
hath certainly trespassed against 
the Lorp. 


d Lit. meal. 


e One shekel 
= 2s. 9d. or 
6S cents. 


f Sacrifice 
1-7; Lev.i6. 


g Forgive- 
ness. Lev. 
19.22. (Lev. 
4.20; Mt. 
26.28.) 


132 


= 1 bu. 3 pts. 


(typical). vs. 


CHAPTER 6. 


The trespass-offering and resti- 
tution. See Law of this offer- 
ing, Lev. 7. 1-7. 


Ae the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

2 If a soul sin, and commit a 
trespass against the Lorpb, and lie 
unto his neighbour in that which 
was delivered him to keep, or in 
fellowship, or in a thing taken away 
by violence, or hath deceived his 
neighbour; 

3 Or have found that which was 
lost, and lieth concerning it, and 
sweareth falsely; in any of all these 
that a man doeth, sinning therein: 

4 Then it shall be, because he 
hath sinned, and is guilty, that he 
shall restore that which he took vio- 
lently away, or the thing which he 
hath deceitfully gotten, or that 
which was delivered him to keep, 
or the lost thing which he found, 

5 Or all that about which he hath 
sworn falsely; he shall even restore 
it in the principal, and shall add the 
fifth part more thereto, and give it 
unto him to whom it appertaineth, 
in the day of his trespass-offering. 
6 And he shall bring his trespass- 
offering unto the LorD, a ram with- 
out blemish out of the flock, with 
thy estimation, for a trespass-offer- 
ing, unto the priest: 

7 And the priest shall make an 
fatonement for him before the 
LorpD: and it shall be &forgiven 


“him for any thing of all that he 


hath done in trespassing therein. 
The law of the offerings: (1) the 


burnt-offering (Lev. 1. 1-17). 


8 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

9 Command Aaron and his sons, 
saying, This is the law of the burnt- 
offering: It zs the burnt-offering, 
because of the burning upon the 
altar all night unto the morning, 
and the fire of the altar shall be 
burning in it. 

10 And the priest shall put on 
his linen garment, and his linen 
breeches shall he put upon his flesh, 
and take up the ashes which the 
fire hath consumed with the burnt- 
offering on the altar, and he shall 
put them beside the altar. 

11 And he shall put off his gar- 
ments, and put on other garments, 
and carry forth the ashes without 
the camp unto a clean place. 


LEVITICUS. 


75 


12 And the fire upon the altar 
shall be burning in it; it shall not 
be put out: and the priest shall 
burn wood on it every morning, 
and lay the burnt-offering in order 
upon it; and he shall burn thereon 
the fat of the peace-offerings. 

13 The !fire shall ever be burning 
upon the altar; it shall never go out. 


The law of the offerings: (2) the 
meat-offering (Lev. 2. 1-16). 


14 And this is the law of the 
émeat-offering: the sons of Aaron 
shall offer it before the LORD, be- 
fore the altar. 

15 And he shall take of it his 
handful, of the flour of the ¢meat- 
offering, and of the oil thereof, and 
all the frankincense which is upon 
the “meat-offering, and shall burn 
it upon the altar for a sweet sa- 
vour, even the memorial of it, unto 
the Lorb. 

16 And the remainder thereof 
shall Aaron and his sons eat: with 
bunleavened bread shall it be eaten 
in the holy place; in the court of 
the tabernacle of the congregation 
they shall eat it. 

17 It shall not be baken with 
leaven. I have givenit unto them 
for their portion of my offerings 
made by fire; it zs most holy, as is 
the sin-offering, and as the trespass- 
offering. 

18 All the males among the chil- 
dren of Aaron shall eat of it. It 
shall be a statute for ever in your 
generations concerning the offerings 
of the LoRD made by fire: every one 
that toucheth them shall be holy. 


(The priests’ meat-offering.) 


19 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

20 This is the offering of: Aaron 
and of his sons, which they shall 
offer unto the Lorp in the day 
when he is anointed; the tenth part 
of an ‘ephah of fine flour for a @meat- 
offering perpetual, half of it in the 
morning, and half thereof at night. 

21 Ina pan it shall be made with 
oil; and when it is baken, thou 
shalt bring it in: and the baken 
pieces of the 4meat-offering shalt 
thou offer for a sweet savour unto 
the Lorp. 

22 And the priest of his sons that 
is anointed in his stead shall offer 


B.C. 1490. 


a Lit. meal. 


b Leaven. vs. 


c One ephah 
=1bu.3 
pts. 


d Heb. kaphar, 
to cover. 
See Dan.9, 
24, note; 
Ex.29.33; 
note, 


it: rt 1s a statute for ever unto the 
Lorp; it shall be wholly burnt. 

23 For every ¢meat-offering for 
the priest shall be wholly burnt: it 
shall not be eaten. 


The law of the offerings: (3) the 
sin-offering (Lev. 4. 1-35). 


24 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

25 Speak unto Aaron and to his 
sons, saying, This is the law of 
the sin-offering: In the place where 
the burnt-offering is killed shall the 
sin-offering be killed before the 
LorD: it is most holy. 

26 The priest that offereth it for 
sin shall eat it: in the holy place 
shall it be eaten, in the court of the 
tabernacle of the congregation. 

27 Whatsoever shall touch the 
flesh thereof shall be holy: and 
when there is sprinkled of the blood 
thereof upon any garment, thou 
shalt wash that whereon it was 
sprinkled in the holy place. 

28 But the earthen vessel wherein 


‘a, |it is sodden shall be broken: and if 


it be sodden in a brasen pot, it 
shall be both scoured, and rinsed in 


water. 

29 Allthe males among the priests 
shall eat thereof: it 7s most holy. 

30 And no sin-offering, whereof 
any of the blood is brought into the 
tabernacle of the congregation to 
¢reconcile withal in the holy place, 
shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in 
the fire. 


CHAPTER 7. 


The law of the offerings: (4) the 
oun meer (Lev. 5. 1 to 
Osa) : 


Ske this is the law of the 
trespass-offering: itis mostholy. 

2 Inthe place where they kill the 
burnt-offering shall they kill the 
trespass-offering: and the blood 
thereof shall he sprinkle round 
about upon the altar. 

3 And he shall offer of it. all the 
fat thereof; the rump, and the fat 
that covereth the inwards, 

4 And the two kidneys, and the 
fat that 7s on them, which is by the 
flanks, and the caul that 1s above 
the liver, with the kidneys, it shall 
he take away: 

5 And the priest shall burn them 
upon the altar for an offering made 


1See Lev. 1. 8, note. Here the fire expresses also the undying devotedness of 


Christ. 


133 


LEVITICUS. 


15 And the flesh of the sacrifice o 
his peace-offerings for thanksgiving 
shall be eaten the same day that it 
is offered; he shall not leave any of 
it until the morning. y 

16 But if the sacrifice of his offer- 
ing be a vow, or a voluntary offer= 
ing, it shall be eaten the same day 
that he offereth his. sacrifice: and 
on the morrow also the remainder 
of it shall be eaten: 

17 But the remainder of the flesh 
of the sacrifice on the third day 
Pig had ane Ghee ee f th 
18 if any of the flesh of the 
is baken in the oven, and all that is acrifice of his peace-offerings be 
dressed in the fryingpan, and in the|,seezx.29, jeaten at all on the third day, it 
pan, shall be the priest’s that offer-| 33, note. shall not be acneeheds neither shaw 
Ce “had every meat-offering, min-|° bits mea! ee ere — per 
gled with oil, and dry, shall all the|cLeaven. vs. and the soul that eateth of it shall 
sons of Aaron have, one as much! 12,13; Lev.8. |bear his iniquity. 


7 6] 


by fire unto the Lord: it is a tres-|_ B.C. 1490. 
pass-offering. i 

6 Every male among the priests 
shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten 
in the holy place: it rs most holy. 

7 As the sin-offering zs, so 1s the 
trespass-offering: there is one law 
for them: the priest that maketh 
*atonement therewith shall have zt. 

8 And the priest that offereth any 
man’s burnt-offering, even the 
priest shall have to himself the 
skin of the burnt-offering which he 
hath offered. 3 

9 And all the ‘meat-offering that 


as another. “Re See 19 And the flesh that toucheth 
The law of the offerings: (5) the 33.) any unclean thing shall not be 


; eaten; it shall be burnt with fire: 
peace-offering (Lev. 3. 1-17). an ee and as for the flesh, all that be 


11 And this zs the law of the clean shall eat thereof. 
sacrifice of lpeace-offerings, which] ¢Lev-15.3. 20 But the soul that eateth of the 
he shall offer unto the Lorb. fLev.11.24,28. |flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offer- 
12 Ifhe offer it for a thanksgiving, ings, that pertain unto the ‘LORD, 
then he shall offer with the sacrifice having his uncleanness upon him, 
of thanksgiving cunleavened cakes even that soul shall be cut off from 
mingled with oil, and unleavened his people. 
wafers anointed with oil, and cakes 21 Moreover the /soul that. shail 
mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried. touch any unclean thing, as the 
13 Besides the cakes, he shall offer uncleanness of man, or any unclean 
for his offering 2eavened bread beast; or any abominable unclean 
with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of thing, and eat of the flesh of the 
his peace-offerings. sacrifice of peace-offerings, which 
14 And of it he shall offer one out}, pertain unto the Lorp, even that 
of the whole oblation for an heave- soul shall be cut off from his people: 
offering unto the LorD, and it} 22 And the Lorb spake unto Mo- 
shall be the priest’s that sprinkleth| ses, saying, 
the blood of the peace-offerings. 23 Speak unto the children of Is- 


1Tn the “law of the offerings,” the peace-offering is taken out of its place as third 
of the sweet savour offerings, and placed alone, and after all the non-sweet savour 
offerings. The explanation is as simple as the fact is beautiful. In revealing the 
offerings Jehovah works from Himself out to the sinner (see Ex. 25. 10, note). 
he whole burnt-offering comes first as meeting what is due to the divine affections, 
and the trespass-offering last as meeting the simplest aspect of sin—its injurious- 
ness. .But the sinner begins of necessity with that which lies nearest to a newly 
awakened conscience—a sense, namely, that because of sin he is at enmity with 
God. His first need, therefore, is peace with God. And that is precisely the Gospel 
order. Christ’s first message is, “Peace”? (John 20.19), afterward He shows them 
His hands and His side. It is the order of 2 Cor. 5. 18-21: first “the word of recon- 
ciliation,” verse 19, then the trespass- and sin-offering, verse 21. Experience thus 
reverses the order of revelation. 
he use of leaven here is significant. Peace with God is something which the 
believer shares with God. Christ is our peace-offering (Eph. 2.13). Any thanks- 
giving for peace must, first of all, present Him. In verse 12 we have this, in type, 
and so leaven is excluded. In verse 13 it is the offerer who gives thanks for Ais 
Participation in the peace, and so leaven fitly signifies, that though having peace 
with God through the work of another, there is still evilin him. This is illustrated 
in Amos 4. 5, where the evil in Israel is before God. 


134 


* 
¥ 24] 


LEVITICUS. [8 9 
F 
tael, saying, Ye shall eatno manner! B.c. 1490. |Israel, in the day that “he anointed 


of fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat. 

24 And the fat of the beast that 
dieth of itself, and the fat of that 
which is torn with beasts, may be 
used in any other use: but ye shall 
in no wise eat of it. 

25 For whosoever eateth the fat 
of the beast, of which men offer an 
offering made by fire unto the 
Lorp, even the soul that eateth it 
shall be cut off from his people. | 

26 Moreover ye shall eat no man- 


ner. of blood, whether it be of fowl 
or of beast, in any of your dwellings. 

27 Whatsoever soul it be that 
eateth any manner of blood, even 
that soul shall be ¢cut off from his 
people. { 

28 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

29 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, saying, He that offereth the 
sacrifice of his peace-offerings unto 
the LorpD shall bring his oblation 


unto the LorD of the sacrifice of} 


his peace-offerings. 

30 His own hands shall bring the 
offerings of the LORD made by fire, 
the fat with the breast, it shall he 
bring, that the breast may be 
waved for a owave-offering before 
the LORD. 

31 And the priest shall burn the 
fat upon the altar: but the breast 
shall be Aaron’s and his sons’. 

32 And the right shoulder shall 
ye give unto the “priest for an 
heave-offering of the sacrifices of 
your peace-offerings. 

33 He among the sons of Aaron, 
that offereth the blood of the peace- 
offerings, and the fat, shall have 
the right shoulder for his part. 

34 For the wave-breast and the 
heave-shoulder have I taken of the 
children of Israel from off the sac- 
rifices of their peace-offerings, and 
jhave given them unto Aaron the 
priest and unto his sons by a 
statute for ever from among the 
children of Israel. 

35 This fs the portion of the an- 
ointing of Aaron, and of the anoint- 
ing of his sons, out of the offerings 
of the LorD made by fire, in the 
day when he presented them to 
minister unto the LorD in the 
priest’s office; 

36 Which the LorpD commanded 
to be given them of the children of 


1 The priests did not consecrate themselves, 


stance Moses, acting for Jehovah. 
sense of Rom. 12. 1. 


a v.20. 


b Lev.8.27; 
9.21; Ex.29. 
24,27. 


c Num.6.20. 


d Lev.8.12,30; 
Ex.40.13,15. 


e Lev.6.9,14, 
25. 


f Lit. meal. 


g Leaven. vs. 
2,26; Lev. 
10.12. 
19.3; Mt.13. 
33.) 


h See Ex.28, 
30, note, 


‘perfection.’ 


(Gen, 


them, by a statute for ever through- 
out their generations. 

37 This is the ‘law of the burnt- 
offering, of the ‘meat-offering, and 
of the sin-offering, and of the tres- 
pass-offering, and of the consecra- 
tions, and of the sacrifice of the 
peace-offerings; 

38 Which the LoRD commanded 
Moses in mount Sinai, in the day 


(that he commanded the children of 


‘Israel to offer their oblations unto 
the Lorp, in the wilderness of 
Sinai. 

CHAPTER 8. 


Consecration of the priests. 


A®D the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

2 Take 1Aaron and his sons with 
him, and the garments, and the 
anointing oil; and a bullock for the 
sin-offering, and two rams, and a 
basket of ¢unleavened bread; 

3 And gather thou all the congre- 
gation together unto the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation. 

4 And Moses did as the LorpD 
commanded him; and the assembly 
was gathered together unto the 
door of the tabernacle of the con- 
geregation. 

5 And Moses said unto the con- 
lgregation, This is ‘the thing which 
the LoRD commanded to'be done. 


Consecration: (1) cleansing 
(Eph. 5. 25-27; John 13. 3-10). 


6 And Moses brought Aaron and 
his sons, and washed them with 
water. 


Consecration: (2) the high 
priest ciothed, 


7 And he put upon him the coat, 
and girded him with the girdle, and 
clothed him with the robe, and put 
the ephod upon him, and he girded 
him with the curious girdle of the 
ephod, and bound it unto him 
therewith. 

8 And he put the breastplate upon 
him: also he put in the breastplate 
the *Urim and the Thummim. 

9 And he put the mitre upon his 
head: also upon the mitre, even 
upon his forefront, did he put the 
golden plate, the holy crown; as the 
LorD commanded Moses. 


all was done by another, in this in- 


The priests simply presented their bodies in the 


135 


8 10} 


LEVITICUS. 


Consecration: (3) the high 
priest’s anointing. 


10 And Moses took the anointing 
oil, and anointed the tabernacle 
and all that was therein, and sanc- 
tified them. 

11 And he sprinkled thereof upon 
the altar seven times, and anointed 
the altar and all his vessels, both 
the laver and his foot, to sanc- 
tify them. > 

12 And he !poured of the anoint- 
ing oil upon Aaron’s head, and 
anointed him, to sanctify him. 


Consecration: (4) the priests 
clothed, 


13 And Moses brought Aaron’s 
sons, and put coats upon them, and 
girded them with girdles, and put 
bonnets upon them; as the Lorp 
commanded Moses. 


Consecration: (5) the offerings. 


14 And he brought the bullock for 
the sin-offering: and Aaron and his 
sons laid their hands upon the head 
of the bullock for the sin-offering. 

15 And he slew it; and Moses 
took the blood, and put i# upon the 
horns of the altar round about with 
his finger, and purified the altar, 
and poured the blood at the bottom 
of the altar, and ¢sanctified it, to 
make ?reconciliation upon it.’ 

16 And he took all the fat that 


B.C. 1490. 


was upon the inwards, and the caul 
above the liver, and the two kid- 
neys, and their fat, and Moses 
burned sf upon the altar. 

17 But the bullock, and his hide, 
his flesh, and his dung, he burnt 
with fire without the camp; as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

18 And he brought the ram for 
the burnt-offering: and Aaron and 
his sons laid their hands upon the 
head of the ram. 

19 And he killed i#; and Moses 
sprinkled the blood upon the altar 
round about. 

20 And he cut the ram into pieces; 
and Moses burnt the head, and the 
pieces, and the fat, 

21 And he washed the inwards 
and the legs in water; and Moses 


is Two important distinctions are made in the case 
firming his typical relation to Christ the anti- 


a Sanctify, 
holy (O.T.). 
Lev.27.14- 
22. (Gen.2. 
3; Zech.8.3.) 


b Heb. kaphar, 
to cover. 
See Dan.9, 
24, note, 
¢ Ex.29.19,31. 
d Lev.14.14, 
e Heb.9.22,23. 
f Ex.29.22. 


g Ex.29.26. 


the sacrifices are slain, while in the case of the 


cedes the anointing. 


6c 


anointing oil poured. 


God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him” 


Hy: 


[8 3 


burnt the whole ram upon the altar: 
it was a burnt-sacrifice for a sweet 
savour, and an offering made by 
fire unto the LorpD; as the LorD 
commanded Moses. 

22 And he brought the ‘other 
ram, the ram of consecration: and 
Aaron and his sons laid their hands 
upon the head of the ram. 

Consecration: (6) the blood 
applied. 

23 And he slew it; and Moses 
took of the ¢blood of it, and put it 
upon the tip of Aaron’s right ear, 
and upon the thumb of his right 
hand, and upon the great toe of his 
right foot. 

24 And he brought Aaron’s sons, 
and Moses put of the “blood upon 
the tip of their right ear, and upon 
the thumbs of their right hands, 
and upon the great toes of their 
right feet: and Moses sprinkled the 
blood upon the altar round about. 

25 And he ftook the fat, and the 

rump, and all the fat that was upon 
the inwards, and the caul above the 
liver, and the two kidneys, and their 
fat, and the right shoulder: 
26 And out of the basket of un- 
leavened bread, that was before the 
LorD, he took one unleavened 
cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and 
one wafer, and put them on the fat, 
and upon the right shoulder: 


Consecration:(7)the hands filled. 

27 And he put all upon Aaron’s 
hands, and upon his sons’ hands, 
and waved them for a wave-offer- 
ing before the Lorp. 

28 And Moses took them from off 
their hands, and burnt them on the 
altar upon the burnt-offering: they 
were consecrations for a sweet sa- 
vour: it is an offering made by fire 
unto the Lorpb. 

29 And Moses took the £breast, 
and waved it for a wave-offering 
before the Lorb: for of the ram of 
consecration it was Moses’ part: as 
the LorRD commanded Moses, 


Consecration: (8) the anointing 
of the priests. 


30 And Moses took of the anoint- 


of the high priest, thus con- 


type: (1) Aaron is anointed before 
i : priests 
le L Christ the sinless One required 
the anointing oil, symbol of the Holy Spirit; (2) upon 


the application of blood pre- 
no preparation for receiving 
the high priest only was the 
(John 3. 34). 


“Thy God hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows” (Heb. 


1. 9). 


136 


Pi i 


ing oil, and of the blood which was 
upon the altar, and sprinkled it 
upon Aaron, and upon his gar- 
ments, and upon his sons, and upon 
his sons’ garments with him; and 
sanctified Aaron, and his garments, 
and his sons, and his sons’ gar- 
ments with him. 


Consecration: (9) the food of the 

priests. (Ex. 29. 26, and refs.) 

31 And Moses said unto Aaron 
and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the 
door of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation: and there eat it with the 
bread that zs in the basket of con- 
secrations, as I commanded, saying, 
Aaron and his sons shall eat it. 

32 And that which remaineth of 
the flesh and of the bread shall ye 
burn with fire. 


Consecration: (10) the priests 

separated unto God. 

33 And ye shall not go out of the 
door of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation in seven days, until the 
days of your consecration be at an 
end: for seven days shall he conse- 
crate you. 

34 As he hath done this day, so 
the Lorp hath commanded to do, 
to make an “atonement for you. 

35 Therefore shall ye abide at the 
door of the tabernacle of. the con- 
gregation day and night seven 
days, and keep the charge of the 
Lorp, that ye die not: for so I am 
commanded. 

36 So Aaron and his sons did all 
things which the LoRD commanded 
by the hand of Moses. 


CHAPTER 9. 
_The priests begin their ministry. 


ND it came to pass on the eighth 

day, that Moses called Aaron 

and his sons, and the elders of Is- 
rael; 

2 And he said unto Aaron, Take 
thee a young calf for a sin-offering, 
and a ram for a burnt-offering, 
without blemish, and offer them 
before the LORD. 

3 And unto the children of Israel 
thou shalt speak, saying, Take ye 
a kid of the goats for a sin-offering; 
and a calf and a lamb, both of the 
first year, without blemish, for a 
burnt-offering; 

4 Also a bullock and a ram for 
peace-offerings, to sacrifice before 
the Lorp; and a meat-offering 
mingled with oil: for to day the 
Lorp will appear unto you. 


LEVITICUS. 


a See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


b Lit. meal. 

¢ Heb.9.22,23. 

d Isa.53.10; 
Heb.2.17; 
SES 

e Lit. meal. 


f Ex.29,38. 


137 


[9 19 


gaia Kile a leg ied WN Gy 
B.C. 1490. 5 And they brought that which 


Moses commanded before the tab- 
ernacle of the congregation: and all 
the congregation drew near and 
stood before the LORD. 

6 And Moses said, This zs the 
thing which the LoRD commanded 
that ye should do: and the glory of. 
the LorpD shall appear unto you. 

7 And Moses said unto Aaron, Go 
unto the altar, and offer thy sin- 
offering, and thy burnt-offering, 
and make an Zatonement for thy- 
self, and for the people: and offer 
the offering of the people, and make 
an 4atonement for them; as the 
LorD commanded. 

8 Aaron therefore went unto the 
altar, and slew the calf of the sin- 
offering, which was for himself. 

9 And the sons of Aaron brought 
the “blood unto him:-and he dipped 
his finger in the blood, and put it 
upon the horns of the altar, and 
poured out the blood at the bottom 
of the altar: 

10 But the fat, and the kidneys, 
and the caul above the liver of the 
sin-offering, he burnt upon the 
altar; as the LorD commanded 
Moses. 

11 And the flesh and the hide he 
burnt with fire without the camp. 

12 And he slew the burnt-offer- 
ing; and Aaron’s sons presented un- 
to him the blood, which he sprinkled 
round about upon the altar. 

13 And they presented the burnt- 
offering unto him, with the pieces 
thereof, and the head: and he burnt 
them upon the altar. 

14 And he did wash the inwards 
and the legs, and burnt them upon 
the burnt-offering on the altar. 

15 And he brought the people’s 
offering, and took the goat, which 
was the sin-offering for the people, 
and slew it, and offered it for sin 
as the first. 

16 And he brought the burnt- 
offering, and offered it according to 
the manner. 

17 And he brought the ¢meat- 
offering, and took an handful there- 
of,and burnt it uponthe altar, beside 
the /burnt-sacrifice of the morning. 

18 He slew also the bullock and 
the ram for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, which was for the people: 
and Aaron’s sons presented unto 
him the blood, which he sprinkled 
upon the altar round about, 

19 And the fat of the bullock and 
of the ram, the rump, and. that 
which covereth the inwards, and 


9 20]: 


a 
the kidneys, and the caul above the} 
liver: 

20 And they put the fat upon the 
breasts, and he burnt the fat upon 
the altar: ; 

21 And the breasts and the right 
shoulder Aaron waved for a wave- 
offering before the LORD; as Moses 
commanded: 

22 And Aeron lifted up his hand 
toward the people, and blessed 


B.C. 1490. 


@ Miracles 


O.T.). vs. 
them, and came down from offering ta: Num. 
of the sin-offering, and the burnt- Hen eae 
offering, and peace-offerings. 0 e | 

23. And Moses and Aaron went 
into the tabernacle of the congrega-|° Se 
tion, and came out, and blessed the| 3218, 26: 
people: and the glory of the Lorp| 2 Sam.24.1, 
appeared ‘unto ali the people. 15. 


24 And there came a fire out from 
before the LorpD, and consumed 
upon the altar the burnt-offering 


c Lit. meal. 


and the fat: which when all the| Guiost” 
people saw, they shouted, and fell] Mt.13.33.) 
on their faces: eNum.18.10. 
CHAPTER 10. 
The strange fire of Nadab and 
Abthu. 

ae Nadab and Abihu, the sons] wa-dab, 

of Aaron, took either of them| ‘liberal’ 
his censer, and put fire therein, and Baier 
put incense thereon, and offered| ‘God is 
strange fire before the Lorp,| father.’ 
which he commanded them not. 

2 And there went out fire from 
the LogD, and devoured them, and 
they ¢died before the Lorp. | 

3 Then Moses. said unto Aaron,|) 

This is if that the Lorp spake,|) 

saying, I will be sanctified in them 

that come nigh me, and before all Mish-a-el, 
the people I will be glorified. And] one with 
Aaron. held his peace. God. 

4 And Moses called) Mishael and El-za-phan, 
Elzaphan, the sons. of Uzziel the| ‘God pro- 
uncle of Aaron, and said unto them,]| ‘ects. 
Come near, carry your brethren], Uz-zi-el, 
from. before the sanctuary out of! ‘power of 
the camp. | God.’ 

5. So they: went near, and. carried’ El-e-a-zar, 
them intheir coats out.of the camp;} ‘God has 
as Moses-had said. | helped.’ 

6 And Moses. said unto. Aaron,| 7:4-.-mar 
and unto Eleazar and unto Itha-| ‘isieoft ” 
mar, his sons, Uncover not your| Palms.’ 


1 Strange fire. Fire “from before the Lord” 
offering the fire which the care of the priests 


138 


LEVITICUS. 


heads, neither rend your clothes; 


upon all the people: but let your 
brethren, the whole house of Israel, 


hath kindled: 
7 And ye: shall: not go out from 
the door of the tabernacle of the 


you. And they did according. to 
the word of Moses. 
8 And. the LorpD spake unto. Aa- 
ron,, saying, 
9 Do not drink. wine nor strong 
ink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, 
when. ye go into the tabernacle of 
the. congregation, lest ye die: it 


out your generations: : 
10 And that ye may put difference 


tween unclean and clean; 


children of Israel all the statutes 
which the Lorp hath spoken unto 
them by the hand of Moses. 

12 And Moses spake unto Aaron, 
and unto Eleazar and unto Itha- 
mar, his: sons that were left, Take 


of the offerings of the Lorp made 


beside the altar: for it 7s most holy: 

13. And ye shall eat it in:the eholy 
place, because it is thy’ due, and 
thy sons’ due, of the sacrifices of 


[10 16 


| 


lest’ ye die, and lest “wrath come | 


bewail the burning which the Lorp | 


) 


congregation, lest ye die: for the 
anointing oil of the LorD ss upon 


shall be a statute for ever through- — 


between holy and unholy, and’ be-__ 
11 And that ye may teach the > 


the ‘meat-offering that remaineth 


by fire, and eat it without 4leaven | 


the LorpD made by fire: forsoI am — 


commanded. 

14 And: the wave-breast and 
heave-shoulder shall ye eat in a 
clean place; thou, and thy sons, 
and thy daughters with thee: for 
they be thy due, and thy sons’ due, 
wAich are given out of the sacrifices 
of peace-offerings of the children of 
Israel. 

IS The heave-shoulder and. the 
wave-breast, shall. they bring with 
the offerings made by fire of the 
fat, to wave it for a wave-offering 
before the LorpD; and it shall be 
thine, and thy sons’ with thee, by 
|a statute for ever; as the Lorp 
hath. commanded. 

16: And. Moses: diligently sought 
the goat of the sin-offering,, and, 


10 17) 
behold, it was burnt: and he was 
angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, 
the sons of Aaron which were left 
alive, saying, 

17 Wherefore have ye not eaten 
the sin-offering in the holy place, 
seeing it is most holy, and God 
hath given it you to bear the ini- 


quity of the congregation, to make 
atonement for them before the 
LORD? 

18 Behold, the blood of it was not 
brought in within the “holy place: 
ye should indeed have eaten it in 
the holy place, as I comimanded. 

19 And Aaron said unto Moses, 
Behold, this day have they offered 
their sin-offering and their burnt- 
offering’ before the LorD; and such 
things have befallen me: and if I 
had eaten the’ sin-offering to: day, 
should it have been ‘accepted in the 
sight of the LorD?’ 

20 And’ when Moses heard that, 
he was content. 


CHAPTER 11. 


A holy God—a holy people: 
(1) their food. 


ND the Lord spake unto Mo- 
ses and to Aaron, saying unto 
them, 
2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, saying, 1These are the beasts 
which ye shall eat among all the 
beasts that are-on the earth. 


3° Whatsoever parteth the hoof,| 


and is‘ clovenfooted, and’ cheweth 
the cud, among the beasts, that 
shall ye eat. 

4 Nevertheless these shall ye: not 
eat of them that chew the’ cud, or 

“of them that divide the hoof: as 
the camel, because he cheweth the 
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he 
is unclean unto you. 

5 And the coney, because he 
cheweth the cud, but divideth not 
the hoof; he zs unclean unto you. 

6 And'the2hare; because he chew- 
eth the cud, but divideth not the 
hoof; he is unclean. unto you. 


1 The dietary regulations of the covenant people 


LEVITICUS. 


B.C..1490, 


a See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


6 Lev.6.26. 


¢ ¥sa.1.11,15; 
Jer.6.20; 


[t1 22 


7 And the swine, though he divide 
the hoof, and be clovenfooted, yet 
he cheweth not the cud; he is un- 
clean to you. 

8 Of their flesh: shall ye not eat, 
and their carcase shall! ye not 
touch; they are unclean to you. 

9 These shall ye eat of all. that 
are in the waters: whatsoever hath 
fins and! scales in the waters, in the 
seas, and: in the rivers, them shall 
ye eat. 

10 And ail that have not fins and 
scales in the seas, and in the rivers, 
of all that move in the waters, and 
of any living thing which zs in the 
waters, they shail be an abomina- 
tion unto you: 

11 They shall be even an abomi- 
nation unto you; ye shall not eat of 
their flesh, but ye shall have their 
carcases in abomination. 

12) Whatsoever hath no fins nor 
scales in the waters, that shall be 
an abomination unto you. 

13\ And these are they which ye’ 
shall have in abomination among 
the fowls; they shall’ not be eaten, 
they are an abomination: the eagle, 
and the ossifrage, and the ospray, 

14 And the vulture, and the kite 
after his kind; 

15 Every raven after his kind; 

16 And the owl, and the night 
hawk, and the cuckow, and the 
hawk after his kind, 

17 And the little owl, and the cor- 
morant, and the great owl, 

18 And the swan, and the pelican, 
and the gier eagle, 

19 And the stork, the hefon after 
her kind, and the lapwing, and the 
bat. 

20 All fowls that creep, going 
upon a// four, shall be an abomina- 
tion unto you. 

21 Yet these may ye eat of every 
flying creeping thing that goeth 
upon ail four, which have legs 
above their feet, to leap withal 
upon the earth; 

22 Even these of them ye may 
eat; the locust after his kind, and 
the bald locust after his. kind, and 


must be regarded primarily as 


sanitary. Israel, it must be remembered, was a nation living on the earth under 


a theocratic: government. 


thé social as well as with the religious life of that people. 


Of necessity the divine legislation. concerned itself with 


To force upon every word 


of that legislation a typical meaning is’to strain. 1 Cor. 10. 1-11 and Heb.. S. 23, 24 
beyond all reasonable interpretation. 


2 Heb. arnebeth, an unidentified 
is said: to, characteristics not possessed by the’ hare. 


animal, but certainly not a.hare, possessing as if 


The supposed error in the text 


is due entirely to the translators’ assumption that the English hare and the ancient 


“arnebeth” were identical. 


13¢ 


11 23) 


LEVITICUS. 


the beetle after his kind, and the 
grasshopper after his kind. i 

23 But all other flying creeping 
things, which have four feet, shall 
be an abomination unto you. 

24 And for these ye shall be un- 
clean: whosoever @toucheth the car- 
case of them shall be unclean until 
the even. 

25 And whosoever beareth ought 
of the carcase of them shall wash 
his clothes, and be unclean until 
the even. 

26 The carcases of every beast 


' which divideth the hoof, and is not 


clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, 
are unclean unto you: every one 
that toucheth them shall be un-; 
clean. 

27 And whatsoever goeth upon 
his paws, among all manner of 
beasts that go on all four, those 
are unclean unto you: whoso touch- 
eth their carcase shall be unclean 
until the even. 

28 And he that beareth the car- 
case of them shall ‘wash his clothes, 
and be unclean until the even: they 
are unclean unto you. 

29 These also shall be unclean 
unto you among the creeping things 
that creep upon the earth; the wea- 
sel, and the mouse, and the tortoise 
after his kind, 

30 And the ferret, and the chame- 
leon, and the lizard, and the snail, 
and the mole. 

31 These are unclean to you 
among alt that creep: whosoever 
doth ¢touch them, when they be 
dead, shall be unclean until the 
even. 

32 And upon whatsoever any of 
them, when they are dead, doth fall, 
it shall be unclean; whether 7# be 
any vessel of wood, or raiment, or 
skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel st 
be, wherein any work is done, it] 
must be put into water, and it shall] 
be unclean until the even; so it} 
shall be cleansed. 

33 And every earthen vessel, 
whereinto any of them falleth, 
whatsoever is in it shall be un. 
clean; and ye shall ¢break it. 

34 Of all meat which may be 
eaten, that on which such water 
cometh shall be unclean: and all 
drink that may be drunk in every 
such vessel shall be unclean. 

35 And every thing whereupon 
any part of their carcase falleth 
shall be unclean; whether it be 
oven, or ranges for pots, they shall 
be broken down: for they are un- 


B.C. 1490. 


av.8; Lev. 
17.15,16; 


1 Cor.15.33. 
6 Num.19.10, 


22; 31.24; 


Zech.13.1; 


Heb.9.10; 
10.22. 


€ vs.24,25. 
d v.8; Hag. 
else 


e Psa.2.9; 
Jer.48.38. 


f1 Pet.1.16, 


140 


clean, and shall be unclean unto 
you. 

36 Nevertheless a fountain or pit, 
wherein there is plenty of water, 
shall be clean: but that which touch- 
eth their carcase shall be unclean. 

37 And if any part of their car- 
case fall upon any sowing seed which 
is to be sown, it shali be clean. 

38 But if any water be put upon 
the seed, and any part of their car- 
case fall thereon, it shall be un- 
clean unto you. 

39 And if any beast, of which ye 
may eat, die; he that toucheth the 
carcase thereof shall be unclean un- 
til the even. 

40 And he that eateth of the car- 
case of it shall wash his clothes, 
and be unclean until the even: he 
also that beareth the carcase of it 
shall wash his clothes, and be un- 
clean until the even. 

41 And every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth shall be an 
abomination; it shall not be eaten. 

42 Whatsoever goeth upon the 
belly, and whatsoever goethupon all 
four, or whatsoever hath more feet 
among all creeping things that creep 
upon the earth, them ye shall not 
eat; for they are an abomination. 

43 Ye shall not make yourselves 
abominable with any creeping thing 
that creepeth, neither shall ye make 
yourselves unclean with them, that 
ye should be defiled thereby. 

44 For I am the Lorp your God: 
ye shall therefore sanctify your- 
selves, and ye shall be holy; for I 
am fholy: neither shall ye defile 
yourselves with any manner of 
creeping thing that creepeth upon 
the earth. 

4S For I am the Lorn that bring- 
eth you up out of the land of Egypt, 
to be your God: ye shall therefore 
be holy, for I am holy. 

46 This is the law of the beasts, 
and of the fowl, and of every living 
creature that moveth in the waters, 
and of every creature that creepeth 
upon the earth: 

47 To make a difference between 
the unclean and the clean, and be- 
tween the beast that may be eaten 
and the beast that may not be eaten. 


CHAPTER 12. 


A holy God—a _ holy people: 
(2) the law of motherhood 
(Psa. 51. 5; John 3.6), 

AND the Lorp spake unto Mo- 

ses, saying, 


an DIY 
2a 


- 2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, saying, If a woman have con- 


_ ceived seed, and born a man child: 


then she shall be unclean seven 
days; according to the days of the 
separation for her infirmity shall she 
be unclean. 

3 And in the eighth day the flesh 
of his foreskin shall be circumcised. 

4 And she shall then continue in 
the blood of her purifying three and 
thirty days; she shall touch no hal- 
lowed thing, nor come into the 
sanctuary, until the days of her 
purifying be fulfilled. 

5 But if she bear a maid child, 
then she shall be unclean two weeks, 
as in her separation: and she shall 
continue in the blood of her puri- 
fying threescore and six days. 

6 And when the days of her puri- 
fying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a 
daughter, she shall bring a ¢lamb 
of the first year for a burnt-offering, 
and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, 
for a sin-offering, unto the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation. 
unto the priest: 

7 Who shall offer it before the 
Lorp, and make an 2atonement for 
her; and she shall be cleansed from 
the issue of her blood. This is the 
law for her that hath born a male 
or a female. 

8 And if she be not ‘able to bring 
a lamb, then she shall ¢bring two 
turtles, or two young pigeons; the 
one for the burnt-offering, and the 
other for a sin-offering: and the 
priest shall make an 2atonement for 
her, and she shall be clean. 


CHAPTER 13. 


‘A holy God—a holy people: 
(3) leprosy—Type of sin as in 
Rom. 6. 12-14; 1 John 1. 8. 


PANDY the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses and Aaron, saying, 

2 When a man shall have in the 
skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or 
bright spot, and it be in the skin of 
his flesh like the plague of Jleprosy; 
then he shall be brought unto Aa- 
ron the priest, or unto one of his 
sons the priests: 


LEVITICUS. 


a John 1.29; 
1 Pet.1.18, 
19. 


b See Ex.29, 
33, note. 


c Lev.5.7. 

|d Lk.2.22-24. 

e Deut.17.8,9; 
24.8; Mal. 
2.7; Lk.17. 
14. 

f Psa.19.12; 
John 13.8,10. 

g Num.12.10, 


D2.2 Ks,55, 
27; 2 Chr.26. 
9 


B.C. 1490. 


[13 12 


3 And the 2priest shall look on the 
plague in the skin of the flesh: and 
when the hair in the plague is 
turned white, and the plague in 
sight be deeper than the skin of his 
flesh, it 7s a plague of leprosy: and 
the priest shall look on him, and 
pronounce him unclean. 

4 If the bright spot be white in © 
the skin of his flesh, and in sight 
be not deeper than the skin, and 
the hair thereof be not turned 
white; then the priest shall shut 
up him that hath the plague 
seven days: 

5 And the priest shall look on him: 
the seventh day: and, behold, if the 
plague in his sight be at a stay, and 
the plague spread not in the skin; 
then the priest shall shut him up 
seven days more: 

6 And the priest shall look on 
him again the seventh day: and, 
behold, if the plague be somewhat 
dark, and the plague spread not 
in the skin, the priest shall pro- 
nounce him clean: it fs but a scab: 
and he shall fwash his clothes, and 
be clean. 

7 But if the scab spread much 
abroad in the skin, after that he 
hath been seen of the priest for his 
cleansing, he shall be seen of the 
priest again: 

8 And if the priest,see that, be- 
hold, the scab spreadeth in the skin, 
then the priest shall pronounce him 
unclean: it 1s a leprosy. 

9 When the plague of leprosy is 
in a man, then he shall be brought 
unto the priest; 

10 And the priest shall see him: 
and, behold, if the rising be white 
in the skin, and it have turned the 
hair white, and there be quick raw 
flesh in the rising; 

11 It is an old leprosy in the skin 
of his flesh, and the priest shall pro- 
nounce him unclean, and shall not 
shut him up: for he is unclean. 

12 And if a leprosy break out 
abroad in the skin, and the leprosy 
cover all the skin of him that hath 
the plague from his head even to 
his foot, wheresoever the priest 


looketh; 


1 Leprosy speaks of sin as (1) in the blood; (2) becoming overt in loathsome ways; 


(3) incurable by human means. 
“sin,” demanding self-judgment (1 
and cleansing (1 John 1. 9). 


Corliss 


The anti-type as applied to the people of God is 
); and ‘‘sins,” demanding confession 


2 Some have found in the regulations of this chapter concerning an inquest by the 
te provisions for the exercise of discipline in the 


usness and cruelty have come in thereby. The 
explicit instructions of the N.T. are the alone and sufficient rule of discipline. 


priests of a case of leprosy, elabora 
local church. No little self-righteo 


141 


. oh ae 2 east 


13 13] 


LEVITICUS. 


3 2 


13 Then the priest -shall consider: 
and, behold, if the Jeprosy have 
covered all his flesh, he shall pro- 
mounce him clean that hath the 
plague: it is all turned white: he 
as clean. 

14 But when raw flesh appeareth 
in him, he shall be unclean. 

45 And the priest shall see the 
raw flesh, and pronounce him to be 
vanclean: for the raw flesh is un- 
clean: it as a leprosy. c 

16 Or if the raw fiesh turn again, 
and be changed unto white, he shall 
come unto the priest; 

17 And the priest shall see him: 
and, ‘behold, if the plague be turned 
into white; then the priest shall 
pronounce him clean that hath 
the plague: he is clean. : 

18 The flesh also, in which, even 
in the skin thereof, was a boil, and 
is healed, : 

19 And in the place of the boil) 
there be a white rising, or a bright) 
spot, white, and somewhat reddish, 
and it be shewed to the priest; 

20 And if, when the -priest seeth 
it, behold, it be in sight lower 
than the skin, and the hair there- 
of be turned white; the priest 
shall pronounce him unclean: it is 
a plague of leprosy broken out of 
the boil. 

21 But if the priest look on it, 
and, behold, there be no white 
hairs therein, and if it be:not lower 
than the skin, but be somewhat 
dark; then the priest shall shut him 
up seven days: 

22 And if it spread much abroad 
in the skin, then the priest shall 
pronounce him unclean: it js a| 
plague. ; 

23 But if the bright spot stay in 
his place, and spread not, it is a 
burning boil; and the priest shall 
pronounce him clean. 

24 Or if there be any flesh, in the] 

skin whereof there fs a hot ¢burn- 
ing, and the quick fesh that burn- 
eth have a white bright spot, 
somewhat reddish, or white: 
_25 Then the priest shall look upon 
it: and, behold, if the ‘hair in the 
bright spot be turned white, and it 
be in sight deeper than the skin Sab 
1s a leprosy broken out of the burn- 
ing: wherefore the priest shall pro- 
nounce him unclean: it is the plague 
of leprosy. 

26 But if the priest look on it, 
and, behold, there be no white hair 
in the bright spot, and it be no 
lower than the other skin, but be 


a Tsa.3.24, 


6 1 Ki,8.38; 
2 Chr.6.29; 
Usa.1.5. 

c ¥s.4,6. 


a.N377,27. 


142 


him ‘the seventh day: 


somewhat dark; then the priest 
shall shut him up-seven days: 

27 And the priest-shall look upon 
and if it be 


unclean: it is the plague of leprosy. 

28 And if the bright spot stay in 
his place, and spread not in the 
skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is 
a rising of the burning, and the 
priest shall pronounce him clean: 
for it is an inflammation of the 
burning. 

29 If a man or woman ‘have a 
bplague upon the head or the beard; 

30 Then the priest shall see the 
plague: and, behold, if it be in sight 
deeper than the skin; and there be 
in it a yellow thin hair; then the 
priest shall pronounce him unclean: 
it is a dry scall, even a leprosy upon 
the head or beard. 

31 And if the priest look on the 
plague of the scall, and, ‘behold, it 
be not in sight deeper than the 
skin, and that there Zs no black 
hair in it; then the priest shall shut 
up him that hath the plague of 
the scall “seven-days: 

32 And in the seventh day ‘the 
priest shall look on the plague: and, 
behold, if the scall-spread not, and 
there be in it no yellow. hair, and 
the scall be not in-sight deeper than 
the skin; 

33 He shall be shaven, but the 
scall shall he not shave; and the 
priest shall shut up Aim that hath 
the scall seven days more: 

34 And in the seventh day the 
priest shall look on the scall: and, 
behold, if the scall be not spread in 
the skin, nor e in sight deeper 
than the skin; then the priest shall 
|pronounce him clean: and he shall 
wash his clothes, and be clean. 
|, 35. But if the scail ¢spread much 
in the skin after his cleansing; 

36 Then the priest shall look on 
him: and, behold, if the scall be 
spread in the skin, the priest shall 
not seek for yellow hair; ‘he is un- 
clean. 

37 But if the scall be in his sight 
at a stay, and that there is black 
hair grown up therein; the scall is 


‘|healed, he is clean: and the priest 


shall pronounce him clean. 
_38 Ifa man also ora woman have 
in the skin of their flesh bright 
spots, even white bright spots; 

39 Then the priest shall look: 
and, behold, if*the bright spots in 
the skin of their flesh be darkish 


oh. . 
13 40) 


white; it is a freckled spot that 
groweth in the skin; he is clean. 

40 And the man whose hair is 
fallen off his head, he is bald; yet 
is he clean. 

41 And he that hath his hair failen 
off from the part of his head to- 
ward his face, he is forehead bald: 
yet is he clean. 

42 And if there be in the bald 
head, or bald forehead, a white 
reddish sore; it is a leprosy sprung 
up: in his bald head, or his bald 
forehead. 

_43° Then the priest shall look upon|| 
it: and, behold, 1# the rising of th 
sore be white reddish in his bald 
head, or in his bald forehead, as the 
leprosy appeareth in the skin of the! 
flesh; 

44 He is a leprous man, he is un- 
clean: the priest shall pronounce 
him utterly unclean; his plague’ is 
in his “head. 

45 And the leper in whom the 
plague 7s, his clothes shall be ‘rent, 
and his head “bare, and he shail put 
a covering. upon his upper lip, and 
shall cry, 7Unclean, unclean. 

46 All the days wherein the 
plague shail be in him he shail be 
defiled; he fs unclean: he shail dwell|¢ 
éalone; without the camp shaii his 
habitation be. 

47 The. garment also that the/¢ 
plague of leprosy is in, whether it 
be a woollen garment, or a linen.gar- 
ment; 

48 Whether it be in the warp, or 
woof; of linen, or of woolien; whether 
i skin, or in any thing made of] 


ina 
skin; ey 

49 And’ if the plague be greenish]! 
or reddish in the garment, or in the 
skin, either in the warp, or in the 
woof, or in any thing of skin; it is]| 
a plague of leprosy, and shall be 
shewed unto the priest: 

50 And the priest shall look upon 
the plague, and shut up if that)| 
hath the plague seven days: 

51, And heshail look on the plague 
on the seventh day: if the plague 
be spread in the garment, either in 
the warp, or in: the woof, or in a 
skin, or in any work that is made 
of skin; the plague is a fretting 
leprosy;.it is unclean. _ 

52 He shail. therefore burn that 
garment, whether warp or woof, in. 


a 


|5 


c 


l As a type of Gospel salvation th 
4..4, 5); (2):the priest seeks the leper, 
out shedding of blood is no remission 
your faith is vain” (1 Cor, 15. 17). 


LEVITICUS. 


B.C. 1490. 


, 


[14 4 


woollen or in linen, or any thing of 
skin, wherein the plague is: for it 
fs a fretting leprosy; it shall be 
burnt in the fire. 

53 And if the priest shall look, 
and, behold, the plague be not 
spread in the garment, either in the 
warp, or in the woot, or in any thing 
of skin; 

54 Then the priest shall command 
that they wash the thing wherein 
the plague is, and he shall shut it 
up seven days more: 

55 And the priest shall look on 
the plague, after that it is washed: 
and, behold, if the plague have not 
ichanged his colour, and the plague 
be not spread; it ts unclean; thou 
shalt burn it in the fire; it ss fret 
inward, whether it be bare within 
or without. 

56 And if the priest look, and, be- 
hold, the plague be somewhat dark 


ise after the washing of it; then he 
2 Sam.13.19; |shall rend it out of the garment, or 
Tes toe, out of the skin, or out of the warp, 
Jer.36.24; or out of the woof: 

Joel 2.13. 57 And if it appear still in the gar- 
iinet 6s ment, either in the warp, or in the 
g1io.  |woof, or in any thing of skin; it is 


a spreading plague: thou shalt 
burn that wherein the plague is 
with: fire. 

58 And the garment, either warp, 
or woof, or whatsoever thing. of 
skin: it be, which thou shalt wash, 
if the plague be departed from 
them, then it shall be washed the 
second time, and’ shall be clean. 
| 59 This is. the law of. the plague 
of leprosy in a garment of woollen 
or linen, cither in the warp, or woof, 
or any thing of skins, to pronounce 
it clean, or to pronounce it unclean. 


CHAPTER 14. 


lA holy God—a holy people: (4) 
the law of the leper’s cleansing. 


ANP the Lorn spake unto Mo- 
ses, Saying, 

2° This shall be the law of the leper 
‘in the day of his cleansing: He 
shall be brought unto the priest: 

3 And the priest shall go !forth 
out of the camp; and the priest shali 
look, and, behold, 1f the plague of 
leprosy be healed in the leper; 

4 Then shall the priest command 


Job 42.6;° 
Psa.51.3,53 
3sa.6.5;°64.6; 


2 Chr.26.21; 
Psa:38.11. 


e-points are: (1): The leper does nothing (Rom. 
not the leper the priest (Lk. 19. 10); (3) “‘with- 
’ (Heb, 9:.22); (4) “and if Christ be not raised, 


143 


LEVITICUS. 


of the blood of the trespass-offering, — 
and the priest shall put rt upon the 
tip of the right ear of him that is to 
be cleansed, and upon the thumb of 


to take for him that is to be 
cleansed two !birds alive and clean, 
@and cedar wood, and scarlet, and 
hyssop: 


B.C. 1490. 


And the priest shall command his right hand, and upon the great 
eet one of the birds be killed in toe of his right foot: 
an earthen “vessel over running 15 And the priest shall take some 
water: of the log of oil, and pour it into 

6 As for the living bird, he shall the palm of his own left hand: _ 
take it, and the cedar wood, and the 16 And the priest shall dip his 
scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall right finger in the oil that is in his 
dip them and the living bird in the left hand, and shall sprinkle of the 
blood of the bird that was killed oil with his finger seven times be- 
over the running water: fore the LorpD: ; 

7 And he shall sprinkle upon him 17 And of the rest of the oil that 
that is to be cleansed from the is in his hand shall the priest put 
leprosy seven times, and shall pro- upon the tip of the right ear of him 
mnounce him clean, and shall let the that is to be cleansed, and upon 

_ living bird loose into the open field. the thumb of his right hand, and 

8 And he that is to be cleansed upon the great toe of his right foot, 
shall wash his clothes, and shave upon the blood of the trespass- 
off all his hair, and wash himself in offering: : 
water, that he may be clean: and Rap eataa 6s 18 And the remnant of the oil that 
after that he shall come into the Heb.9.19.’ |48 in the priest’s hand he shall pour 
camp, and shall tarry abroad out| __ upon the head of him that is to be 
of his tent seven days. bLit. meal. | cleansed: and the priest shall make 

9 But it shall be on the seventh] one log= an Satonement for him.before the 


day, that he shall shave all his hair| .96 pts: also |LORD. 

off his head and his beard and his Riga Sa 19 And the priest shall offer the 
eyebrows, even all his hair he shall] ?4- 8sin-offering, and make an /Satone- 
shave off: and he shall wash his d Lev.5.18; ment for him that is to be cleansed 
clothes, also he shall wash his flesh| 6.6. from his uncleanness; and afterward 
in water, and he shall be clean. e Isa.53.10. he shall kill the burnt-offering: 


10 And on the eighth day he shall 20 And the priest shall offer the 
take two he lambs without blemish, | f See Ex.29. burnt-offering and the Smeat-offer- 
and one ewe lamb of the first year} 33 note. ing upon the altar: and the priest 
without blemish, and three tenth g2Cor.5.21. (shall make an fatonement for him, 
deals of fine flour for a >meat- and he shall be clean. 
offering, mingled with oil, and one 21 And if he be poor, and cannot 
log of oil. ‘ get so much; then he shall take one 

11 And the priest that maketh lamb for a trespass-offering to be 
him clean shall present the man waved, to make an fatonement for 
that is to be made clean, and those him, and one tenth deal of fine flour 
things, before the Lorp, at the mingled with oil for a ’meat-offer- 
door of the tabernacle of the con- ing, and a log of oil; 
gregation: ‘ 22 And two turtledoves, or two 

12 And the ¢priest shall take one young pigeons, such as he is able to 
he lamb, and offer him for a ¢tres- get; and the one shall be a sin- 
pass-offering, and the log of oil, and offering, and the other a burnt- 
wave them for a wave-offering be- offering. 
fore the Lorb: . 23 And he shall bring them on the 

13 And he shall slay the lamb in eighth day for his cleansing unto 
the place where he shall kill the the priest, unto the door of the 
sin-offering, and the burnt-offering, tabernacle of the congregation, be- 
in the holy place: for as the sin- fore the Lorp. 
offering is the priest’s, so is the 24 And the priest shall take the 
trespass-offering: it is most holy: lamb of the trespass-offering, and 

14 And the priest shall take some the log of oil, and the priest shall 


1 The bird slain, and the live bird, dipped in blood and released, present the two 
aspects of salvation in Rom, 4, 25 ; “delivered for our offences, and raised again for 
our ae 

€ earthen vessel typifies the humanity of Christ, as the running water typifies 
the Holy Spirit as the ‘Spirit of life” (Rom. 8. 2): “put to death ie theaene 
quickened by the Spirit” (1 Pet. 3, bier seg page ht 


144 


fea 


25 And he shall kill the lamb of 
the trespass-offering, and the priest 
shall take some of the blood of the 
trespass-offering, and put it upon 
the tip of the right ear of him that 
is to be cleansed, and upon the 
thumb of his right hand, and upon 
the great toe of his right foot: 

26 And the priest shall pour of the 
oil into the palm of his own left 
hand: 

27 And the priest shall sprinkle 
with his right finger some of the oil 
that is in his left hand seven times 
before the LoRD: 

28 And the priest shall put of the 
oil that is in his hand upon the tip 
of the right ear of him that is to be 
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his 
tight hand, and upon the great toe 
of his right foot, upon the place of 
the blood of the trespass-offering: 

29 And the rest of the oil that zs 
in the priest’s hand he shall put 
upon the head of him that is to be 
cleansed, to make an “atonement 
for him before the LorpD. 

30 And he shall offer the one of 
the turtledoves, or of the young 
pigeons, such as he can get; 

31 Even such as he is able to get, 
the one for a sin-offering, and the 
other for a burnt-offering, with the 
bmeat-offering: and the priest shall 
make an “atonement for him that is 
to be cleansed before the LorpD. 

32 This is the law of Aim in 
whom is the plague of leprosy, 
whose hand is not “able to get that 
which pertaineth to his cleansing. 

33 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses and unto Aaron, saying, 

_. 34 When ye be come into the land 
of Canaan, which I give to ¢you for 
a possession, and I put the plague 
of leprosy in a house of the land of! 
your possession; 

35 And he that owneth the house 
shall come and tell the priest, say- 
ing, It seemeth to me there is as it 
were a plague in the house: 

36 Then the priest shall command 
that they “empty the house, before 
the priest go into it to see the 
plague, and all that zs in the house 
be not made unclean: and after- 
ward the priest shall go in to see 
the house: 

37 And he shall look on the plague, 
and, behold, if the plague be in the 
walls of the house with hollow 
strakes, greenish or reddish, which 
in sight are lower than the wall; 


LEVITICUS. 


wave them for a wave-offering be-| B.C. 1490. | 38 Then the priest shall go out of 
fore the LorD: the house to the door of the house, 


a See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


b Lit. meal, 


c Psa.72.12,14. 


d Gen,12.7; 
13.17; 17.8; 
Deut.32.49. 


e Or, prepare. 


f Lev.13.51; 
Zech.5.4. 


g1 Ki.9.6,9; 
2 Ki.10.27; 
18.4; Jer. 
52.13. 


145 


[14 52 


and shut up the house seven days: 

39 And the priest shall come again 
the seventh day, and shall look: 
jand, behold, rf the plague be spread 
in the walls of the house; 

40 Then the priest shall command 
that they take away the stones in 
which the plague is, and they shall 
cast them into an unclean place 
without the city: 

41 And he shall cause the house to 
be scraped within round about, and 
they shall pour out the dust that 
they scrape off without the city into 
an unclean place: 

42 And they shall take other 
stones, and put them in the place 
of those stones; and he shall take 
other morter, and shall plaister the 
house. 

43 And if the plague come again, 
and break out in the house, after 
that he hath taken away the stones, 
and after he hath scraped the house, 
and after it is plaistered; 

44 Then the priest shall come and 
look, and, behold, if the plague be 
spread in the house, Jit is a fretting 
leprosy in the house: it 7s unclean. 

45 And he shall &break down the 
house, the stones of it, and the tim- 
ber thereof, and all the morter of 
the house; and he shall carry them 
forth out of the city into an unclean 
place. 

46 Moreover he that goeth into 
the house all the while that it is 
shut up shall be unclean until the 
even. 

47 And he that lieth in the house 
shall wash his clothes; and he that 
eateth in the house shall wash his 
clothes. 

48 And if the priest shall come in, 
and look upon it, and, behold, the 
plague hath not spread in the house, 
after the house was plaistered: then 
the priest shall pronounce the house 
clean, because the plague is healed. 

49 And he shall take to cleanse 
the house two birds, and cedar 
wood, and scarlet, and hyssop: 

50 And he shall kill the one of the 
birds in an earthen vessel over 
running water: 

51 And he shall take the cedar 
wood, and the hyssop, and the scar- 
let, and the living bird, and dip 
them in the blood of the slain bird, 
and in the running water, and 
sprinkle the house seven times: 

52 And he shall cleanse the house 
with the blood of the bird, and with 


14 53] . 


LEVITICUS. 


[15 | 


the running water, and with the 
diving bird, and with the cedar 
‘wood, and with the hhyssop, and 
with the scarlet: 

53 But he shall let go the living 
bird out of the city into ‘the open 
fields, and make an 4atonement for 
the house: and it shall be clean. 

54 This is the law for all manner 
of “plague of leprosy, and scall, 

55 And for the leprosy of a gar- 
ment, and of a house, 

56 And for a rising, and for a 
scab, and for a bright spot: 

57 To teach when 7t is unclean, 
and when it is clean: this is the law 
of leprosy. 


CHAPTER 15. 


A holy God—a holy people: (5) 
the imperative of cleansing 
(John 13. 3-10; Eph. 5. 25-27; 
1 John 1.9). 


ae the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses and to Aaron, saying, 

2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
tael, and say unto them, When any 
man. hath a running ‘issue out of 
his flesh, because of his issue he 
is unclean. 

3 And this shall be his unclean- 
ness in his issue: whether his flesh 
run with his issue, or his flesh be 
stopped from his issue, it fs his 
uncleanness. 

4 Every bed, whereon he lieth 
that hath the issue, is unclean: and 
every thing, whereon he sitteth, 
shall be unclean. 

5 And whosoever toucheth his bed 
shall wash his 4clothes, and bathe 
himself in water, and be unclean 
until the even. 

6 And he that sitteth on any 
thing whereon he sat that hath the 
issue shall wash his clothes, and 
bathe himself in water, and be 
unclean until the even. 

7 And he that toucheth the flesh 
of him that hath the issue shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe ‘him- 
self in water, and be unclean until 
the even. 

B And if he that hath the issue 
Spit upon him that is clean; then ‘he 
shall wash his clothes, and ‘bathe 
himself in water, and be unclean 
until the even. 

9 And what saddle soever he 
rideth upon that hath the ‘issue 
shall be unclean. 

10 And whosoever toucheth any 
thing that was under him shall be! 
unclean until the even: and he that 


B.C. 1490. 


a See. Ex.29. 
33, note. 


6 Lev.13.30. 
c Lev.22.4; 
Num:5.2; 


d Lev.22.4; 


g Lev.14.22,31, 


146 


1 
beareth any of those things shall — 
wash his clothes, and bathe ‘Aim- 
self in water, and be unclean until 
the even. 

11 And whomsoever ‘he toucheth 
‘that hath the issue, and hath not 
rinsed his hands in water, he ‘shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe him- 
self in water, and be unclean until 
the even. 

12 And the évessel of earth, that 
he toucheth which hath ‘the issue, 
shall be broken: and every vessel 
of wood shall be rinsed in water. 

13 And when he that hath an 


issue is cleansed of his issue; then he 
shall number to ‘himself seven days 
for his cleansing, and wash his 
clothes, and bathe his flesh in run- 
ning water, and shall be clean. 

14 And on the eighth day he shall 
take to him étwo turtledoves, or two 
young pigeons, and come before the 
LorD unto the door of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, and give 
them unto the priest: 

15 And the-priest’shall offer them, 
the one for a sin-offering, and the 
other for a burnt-offering; and the 
priest shall make an “atonement 
for him before ‘the Lorp for ‘his 
issue. 

16 And if any:man’s seed of copu- 
lation go out from ‘him, then ‘he 
shall wash all his flesh in water, and 
be unclean until the even. 

17 And every garment, and every 
skin, whereon is the seed of copula- 
tion, shall be washed with -water, 
and be unclean until-the even. 

18 The woman also with -whom 
man shall lie with seed of copuila- 
tion, they shall both bathe them- 
selves in water, and be unclean 
until the even. 

19 And if a woman have an issue, 
and her issue in her flesh ‘be blood, 
she shall be put apart seven days: 
and whosoever toucheth her shall 


be unclean until the even. 

20 And every thing that she lieth 
upon in her separation shall ‘be un- 
clean: every thing also that she 
sitteth upon shall be unclean. 

21 And whosoever toucheth ‘her 
bed shall wash ‘his clothes, and 
bathe Aimself in water, and be 
unclean until the even. 

22 And whosoever toucheth any 
thing that she sat upon shall wash 
his clothes, and bathe Aimself in 
water, and be unclean until the 
even. 

23 And if it be on ‘her bed, or on 
any thing whereon she sitteth, when 


as 24] 


LEVITICUS. 


[16 5 


he toucheth it, he shall be unclean} B.c.1490. |uncleanness, when they defile my 


until the even. 

24 And if any man lie with her at 
all, and her flowers be upon him, he 
shall be unclean seven days; and all 
the bed whereon he lieth shall be 
unclean. 

25 And if a woman have an issue 
of her blood many days out of the 
time of her separation, or if it run 
beyond the time of her separation; 
all the days of the issue of her un- 
cleanness shall be as the days of 
her separation: she shali be un- 
clean. 

26 Every bed whereon she lieth 
all the days of her issue shall be 
unto her as the bed of her separa- 
tion: and whatsoever she sitteth 
upon shall be unclean, as the un- 
cleanness of her separation. 

27 And whosoever toucheth those 
things shall be unclean, and shall 
wash his clothes, and bathe him- 
self in water, and be unclean until 
the even. 

28 But if she be cleansed of her 
issue, then she shall number to her- 
self seven days, and after that she 
shall be clean. 

29 And on the eighth day she 
shall take unto her two turtles, or 
two young pigeons, and bring them 
unto the priest, to the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation. 

30 And the priest shall offer the 
one for a sin-offering, and the other 
for a burnt-offering; and the priest 
shall make an ¢atonement for her 
before the LorD for the issue of her 
uncleanness. 

31 Thus shall ye separate the chil- 
dren of Israel from their unclean- 
ness; that they die not in their 


a See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


Num.3.1-10. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


cLev.10.1,2. 

d Ex.30.10; 
Heb.4.16; 
9.7,8; 10.19. 


e Sacrifice 
(typical). vs. 


tabernacle that 1s among them. 

32 This is the law of him that 
hath an issue, and of him whose 
seed goeth from him, and is defiled 
therewith; 

33 And of her that is sick of her 
flowers, and of him that hath an 
issue, of the man, and of the 
woman, and of him that lieth with 
her that is unclean. 


CHAPTER 16. 


The day of atonement: Christ 
as High Priest and sacrifice 
(Heb. 9. 1-14). 


Ax the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses after the death of the ‘two 
sons of Aaron, when they offered 
before the LorpD, and died; 

2 And the LorD said unto Moses, 
Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that 
he come not at all “times into the 
holy place within the vail before the 
mercy seat, which zs upon the ark; 
that he die not:for I will appear 
in the cloud upon the mercy seat. 

3 Thus shall Aaron come into the 
holy place: with a young bullock 
for a sin-offering, and a ram for a 
burnt-offering. 

4 He shall put on the holy linen 
coat, and he shall have the linen 
breeches upon his flesh, and shall 
be girded with a linen girdle, and 
with the linen mitre shall he be 
attired: these are holy garments; 
therefore shall he wash his flesh in 
water, and so put them on. 

5 And he shall take of the congre- 
gation of the children of Israel two 
kids of the !goats for a ¢sin-offering, 
and one ram for a burnt-offering. 


1 The two goats. 


Christ (Heb. 7. 26,27). The typical 
is done 


high priest. ‘Typically (1) ail 


The offering of the high priest for himself has no anti-type in 
interest centres upon the two goats and the 
by the high priest (Heb. 1. 3, “by Himself’), 


the people only bring the sacrifice (Mt. 26. 47; 27. 24, 2s). (2) The goat slain (Jeho- 
vah’s lot) is that aspect of Christ’s death which vindicates the holiness and righteous- 


ness of God as'expressed in the law 


goat typifies that aspect of Christ’s work which 
(Heb. 9: 26; Rom. 8. 33, 34). (4) The high priest 
“is own. blood” for us (Heb. 
and ‘mercy seat,’ which else must have 
the priests of the New Covenant, there is 
(Mt. 27. 51; Heb, 10. 19, F 
tue of His blood, where He is, 


entering “heaven itself” with 


makes that to be a “throne. of grace,” 
(5) For us, 


been a throne of judgment. : 
what Israel never had, a rent veil 
ship, and blessing, we enter, in. vir 
(Heb. 4. 14-16; 10. 19-22). 


The atonement of Christ, as interprete 
necessary. elements: (1) It is substitutionary— 


in death. (2) The law is not 


execution of the sentence of the law. (3 
is expressed in every animal sacrifice—it mu 
of the atoning work of Christ is typified (a 


147 


) The s: 


st b 
) in the promises, ‘St shall be forgiven 


(Rom, 3. 24-26), and is expratory. (3) The living , 
puts away our sins from before God 


entering the holiest, typifies Christ 
9. 11, 12). His blood 


So that, for wor- 


20). 
into the holiest 


di by the O.T. sacrificial types, has these 
the offering tales the offerer’s place 
evaded but honored—every sacrificial death was an 
inlessness of Him who bore our sins 


e without blemish. (4) The effect 


6 And Aaron shall offer his but- 
lock of the sin-offering, which is for 
himself, and make an !¢atonement 
for himself, and for his house. 

7 And he shall take the two goats, 
and present them before the Lorp 
at the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation. 

8 And Aaron shall cast lots upon 
the two goats; one lot for the Lorp, 
and the other lot for the scapegoat. 

9 And Aaron shall bring the goat 
‘upon which the Lorp’s lot fell, and 
offer him for a sin-offering. 

10 But the goat, on which the lot 


fell to be the scapegoat, shall be 

presented alive before the LORD, to 

make an ’atonement with him, and|a See Ex.29. 

to let him go for a scapégoat into] 35 note. 

the wilderness. b Isa.53.5,6; 
11 And Aaron shall bring the bul-|  Heb.7.27; 

lock of the sin-offering, which is for! 9-23.24. 

himself, and shall make an ¢atone- c Heb. kaphar 

ment for himself, and for his house,} = covering. 

and shall kill the bullock of the sin- oes 


offering which is for himself: 

12 And he shall take a censer full 
of burning coals of fire from off the 
altar before the Lorp, and his 
hands full of sweet incense beaten 
small, and bring ft within the vail: 

13 And he shall put the incense 
upon the fire before the Lorp, that 
the cloud of the incense may cover 
the mercy seat that is upon the 
testimony, that he die not: 

14 And he shall take of the blood 
of the bullock, and sprinkle 7 with 
his finger upon the mercy seat east- 
ward; and before the mercy seat 
shall he sprinkle of the blood with 
his finger seven times. 


LEVITICUS. 


B.C. 1490. 


; a 
15 Then shall he kill the goat of 
the sin-offering, that is for the peo- 
ple, and bring his blood within the 
vail, and do with that blood as he 
did with the blood of the bullock, 
and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, 
and before the mercy seat: 

16 And he shall make an ¢atone- 
ment for the holy place, because of - 
the uncleanness of the children of 
Israel, and because of their trans- 
gressions in all their sins: and so 
shall he do for the tabernacle of 
the congregation, that remaineth 
among them in the midst of their 
uncleanness. 

17 And there shall be no man in 
the tabernacle of the congregation 
when he goeth in to make an 
Jatonement in the holy place, until 
he come out, and have made an 
atonement for himself, and for his 
household, and for all the congre- 
gation of Israel. 

18 And he shall go 2out unto the 
altar that is before the Lorp, and 
make an atonement for it; and 
shall take of the blood of the bul- 
lock, and of the blood of the goat, 
and put it upon the horns of the 
altar round about. 

19 And he shall sprinkle of the 
blood upon it with his finger seven 
times, and cleanse it, and hallow it 
from the uncleanness of the chil- 
dren of Israel. 

20 And when he hath made an 
end of ‘reconciling the holy place, 
and the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion, and the altar, he shall bring 
the live goat: 

21 And Aaron shall lay both his 


him”; and (5) in the peace-offering, the expression of fellowship—the highest priv- 


ilege of the saint. 


See Ex. 29. 33, note. 
Atonement. 


The biblical use and meaning of the word must be sharply dis- 


tinguished from its use in theology. In theology it is a term which covers the whole 


sacrificial and redemptive work of Christ. 


In the O.T. atonement is the English 


word used to translate the Hebrew words which mean “‘cover,”’ “coverings,” or ‘‘to 


cover.” Atonement (at-one-ment) is, 


therefore, not a translation of the Hebrew, 


but a purely theologic concept. The Levitical offerings “covered” the sins of Israel 


until, and in anticipation of the Cross, 
sins. 
sacrifices), which God “passed over” (Rom. 3. 
righteousness was never vindicated until, in th 
a propitiation,”’ See ‘Propitiation,” 


were the confession of his desert 
they were the “shadows”? 


but did not “take away” 
These were the “sins done aforetime” (“‘covered”’ meantime by the Levitical 
25)—for which “‘passing over”? God’s 
e Cross, Jesus Christ was ‘‘set forth 
rO} F Rom. 3. 25, note. 
Levitical sacrifices which made “at-one-ment.” 
to go on with a guilty people because they typified the Cross, 
of death, and the expression 


(Heb. 10. 4) those 


It was the Cross, not the 
The O.T. sacrifices enabled God 
To the offerer they 
of his faith; to God 


(Heb. 10. 1) of which Christ was the reality. 


2 Dispensationally, for Israel, this is yet future; the High: Priest is still in the holi- 


est. When H 
(Rom, 11. 23-27; Zech. 12, 
dispensation as priests (1 
19-22). 


148 


€ comes out to His ancient people they will be converted and restored 
10, 12; 13. 1; Rev. 1. 7), 


Pet. 2, 9) enter into the holiest where He is (Heb, 10. 


Meantime, believers of this 


erat." 
16 22] 


hands upon the head of the live 
goat, and confess over him all the 
iniquities of the children of Israel. 
and all their transgressions in all 
their sins, putting them upon the 
head. of the goat, and shall send 
him away by the hand of a fit man 
into the wilderness: 

22 And the goat shall bear upon 
him all their iniquities unto a land 
not inhabited: and he shall let go 
the goat in the wilderness. 

23 And Aaron shall come into the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and 
shall put off the linen garments, 
which he put on when he went into 
the holy place, and shall leave them 
there: 

24 And he shall wash his flesh 
with water in the holy place, an 
put on his garments, and come 
forth, and offer his burnt-offering, 
and the burnt-offering of the peo- 
ple, and make an “atonement for 
himself, and for the people. 

25 And the fat of the sin-offering 
shall he burn upon the altar. 

26 And he that let go the goat 
for the scapegoat shall wash his 
clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, 
and afterward come into the camp. 

27 And the bullock for the sin- 
offering, and the goat for the sin- 
offering, whose blood was brought 
in to make “atonement in the holy 
place, shall one carry forth with- 
out the camp; and they shall burn 
in the fire their skins, aud their 
flesh, and their dung. 

28 And he that burneth them 
shall wash his clothes, and bathe 
his flesh in water, and afterward he 
shall come into the camp. 

29 And this shall be a statute for 
ever unto you: that in the ‘seventh 
month, on the tenth day of the 
month, ye shall afflict your souls, 
and do no work at all, whether it 
be one of your own country, or a 
stranger that sojourneth among 
you: 

30 For on that day shall the 
priest make an ¢atonement for you, 
to cleanse you, that ye may beclean 
from all your sins before the LORD. 

31 It shall be a sabbath of rest 
unto you, and ye shall afflict your 
souls, by a statute for ever. 

32 And the priest, whom he shall 
anoint, and whom he shall conse- 
crate to minister in the priest’s 
office in his father’s stead, shall 
make the 2atonement, and shall put 
on the linen clothes, even the holy 
garments: 


B.C. 1490. 


Mal 


hvé. 


LEVITICUS. 


a See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


b Lev.1.8, ref. 
ci.e. October. 


|d Law (of 
Moses). Lev. 


e Psa.87.2; 
BS be 
Heb.13.10. 


f Ex.29.13. 
g Hairy one. 


Deut.32.17; 
2 Chr.11.15. 


149 


[17 9 


33 And he shall make an atone- 
ment for the holy sanctuary, and - 
he shall make an 4atonement for 
the tabernacle of the congregation, 
and for the altar, and he shall make 
an 2atonement for the priests, and 
for all the people of the congrega- 
tion. 

34 And this shall be an everlast- 
ing statute unto you, to make an 
“atonement for the children of Is- 
rael for all their sins once a year. 
And he did as the LorD com- 
manded ¢Moses. , 


CHAPTER 17, 
But one place of sacrifice. 


Axe the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

2 Speak unto Aaron, and unto his 
sons, and unto all the children of 
Israel, and say unto them; This 1s 
the thing which the Lorp hath 
commanded, saying, 

3 What man soever there be of 
the house of Israel, that killeth an 
ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, 
or that killeth it out of the camp, 

4 And bringeth it not unto the 
door of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, to offer an offering unto 
the LorpD before the tabernacle of 
the Lorpb; blood shall be imputed 
unto that man; he hath shed blood; 
and that man shall be cut off from 
among his people: 

5 To the “end that the children of 
Israel may bring their sacrifices, 
which they offer in the open field, 
even that they may bring them 
unto the LORD, unto the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, 
unto the priest, and offer them for 
peace-offerings unto the Lorp. 

6 And the priest shall sprinkle the 
blood upon the altar of the LorD 
at the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and /burn the fat. for 
a sweet savour unto the LORD. 

7 And they shall no more offer 
their sacrifices unto Sdevils, after 
whom they have gone a whoring. 
This shall be a statute for ever unto 
them throughout their generations. 

8 And thou shalt say unto them, 
Whatsoever man there be of the 
house of Israel, or of the strangers 
which sojourn among you, that of- 
fereth a burnt-offering or sacrifice, 

9 And “bringeth it not unto the 
door of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, to offer it unto. the LORD; 
even that man shall be cut off from 
among his people. 


17 10] LEVITICUS. [18 o 


ior ity of 2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
“tl Benen cniood a bag hide rael, and an hes them, I am the 
: LORD your k 
DBRS Be Pe ee [3 Aster te doings of the land of 
strangers that sojourn among you, aay - Z pip ar ced en Tienes oe 
that eateth any manner of blood; ne 1 a of Consanihatather brite 
1 will even set my face against that bes “shall e not do; neither shall 
soul that eateth blood, and will cut Nene aike i dee ‘tte 
itor coca ae & "Ye shall do Judements, and 
blood: and I have given it to you reaps ae ees ery Go d 
upon the laltar to make an Zatone- therein: hall, GhierGicee® Reco Aaa 
rt fi ur souls: for it is the 5 Ye shal UE Sint SAS Dae 
Oeod ae 4 t keth an @atonement statutes, and my judgments: which 
forthe ae Sap ifa ma a6 he shall live in ‘them: 
s c 342 I am the Lorn. 
aio Toor ld nto theo oh aie wales 
eat blood, neither shall any ag peeehet Whose nuke Fae? athe 
that sojourneth among you ea hers ; 
blood. 7 The nakedness of thy father, or — 
Re awe ois ere Be aSeeEx.29, |the nakedness of thy mother, shalt 
strangers that sojourn among you,| 33, note. thou not uncover: she jis set 
which hunteth and catcheth any b Sacrifice eran shalt not uncover her 
+) e . 
tae Paes Peels ee eget oe. 
frcteot and cover it with dust. Bropkete |wife shalt jthou not uncover: it is 

14 For it is the life of all flesh;| (Gena4; [thy father’s Pope sci a ee 
the blood of it is for the life thereof:| eb-10-18.) | 9 The ape eee h thy pee aga x 
therefore I said unto the children of|¢Romao.s; [daughter of thy fat nes a ek © 
Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no} Gal.3.12. of thy mother, whether she be one 
manner of flesh: for ‘the life of all at home, or’born abroad, even their 
flesh is the blood thereof: who- nakedness thou shalt not uncover. 
soever eateth it shall be cut off. | pe ae he nak ae of by. fran 

15 Andevery soul that eateth that | pater co eeene} *h v oie hae 
which died of itse/f,.or that which jGaughter, even their vat ame ie 
was torn with }beasts, whether it |thou shalt not eet gath iit tale 
be one-of your own country, or a | ones ke He aieteh fathers 
stranger, jhe shall both wash his like? ep OG, Peay ° ie MA AP at 
clothes; and bathe himself in water, wite's daughter, ‘bego oe fo) ce 
and be unclean until the even: then |father, she 7s thy sister, thou shalt 
shall he be clean not uncover her nakedness. 

16 But if he wash them not, nor 12 Thou shalt not uncover the 
bathe his flesh; then he shall bear nakedness of thy father’s Puna 
his iniquity. she is thy father’s near kins- 

“13 “Thou shal h 

. 13 Thou shalt not uncover the 

: 1 CHAPTER ae tatttenh nakedness of thy mother’s sister; 

The fence re op re oe for she is thy mother’s near ‘kins- 
: woman. 

ANP the LorpD spake unto Mo- 14 Thou shalt not uncover the 

ses, Saying, nakedness of thy father’s brother, 


1 (1) The value of the “life” is the measure of the value of the “‘blood.”’ ‘This 
gives the blood of Christ its inconceivable value. When it was shed the sinless 
God-man gave His life. “It is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats could 
take away sins” (Heb. 10. 4). (2) It is not the blood in the veins of the sacrifice, but 
the blood upon the altar which is efficacious. The Scripture knows nothing .of 


salvation by the imitation or influence of Christ’s life, but only by that life yielded 
up on the cross. 


150 


1815 


thou shalt not approach to his wife: 
she is thine aunt. 

15 Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy daughter in law: 
she is thy son’s wife; thou’ shalt 
not uncover her nakedness. 

16 Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy brother’s wife: it 
is thy brother’s nakedness. 

17 Thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of a woman and her 
daughter, neither shalt thou take 
her son’s daughter, or her daugh- 
ter’s daughter, to. uncover her 
nakedness; for they are her near 
Iimswomen: it is wickedness. 

18 Neither shalt thou take a wife 
to her sister, to vex her, to uncover 
her nakedness, beside the other in 
her life time. 

19 Also thou shalt not approach 
unto a woman to uncover her 
nakedness, as “long as she is put 
apart for her uncleanness. 

20 *Moreover thou shalt not lie 
carnally with thy neighbour’s wife, 
to defile thyself with her. 

21 And thou shalt not let any of 
thy seed pass through the fire to 
4Molech, neither shalt thou profane 
the name of thy God: I am the 
Lorp. 

22 Thou shalt not lie with ‘man- 
kind, as with womankind: it is 
abomination. 

93 Neither shalt thou lie with any 
“beast to defile thyself therewith: 
neither shail any woman stand 


LEVITICUS. 


[19 14 


B.C. 1490. | 30 Therefore shall ye keep mine 


a Ezk.18.6. 
b Prov.6.25, 
33. 


c 2 Ki.16.3. 
d Called 
Moloch, 
Acts 7.43. 
e Kom,1.27. 
f Ex.20.12. 


g Ex.16.233 
20.8. 


h Sabbath. 


vs.3,30; Lev. 
23.3. (Gen, 
2.3; Mt.12, 


1.) 


before a beast to lie down thereto?) ; py 99.4, 


it is confusion. 


24 Defile not ye yourselves in any) J Mt.5.33: 
of these things: for in all these the], p,. 19.9 
nations are defiled which I cast out| note.’ 


before you: 
~ 95 And the land is defiled: there- 
fore I do visit the iniquity thereof 


upon it, and the land itself vomiteth]) 


out her inhabitants. 


26 Ye shall therefore keep my}, 


statutes and my judgments, and 
shali not commit any of these 
abominations; neither any of your 
own nation, nor any stranger that 
sojourneth among you: ‘ 

27 (For all these abominations 
have the men of the land done, 
which were before you, and the 
land is defiled;) 

28 That the land spue not you out 
also; when ye defile it, as it spued out 
the nations that were before you. 

29 For whosoever shall commit 
any of these:abominations, even the 
souls that commit them shall be 
cut off from among their people. 


151 


ordinance, that ye commit not any 
one of these abominable customs, 
\which were committed before you, 
jand that ye defile not yourselves 
itherein: I am the LorpD your God, 


CHAPTER 19. 


The relationships and walk of 
God’s earthly people, continued. 


ND the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
|4% ses, saying, 

2 Speak unto all the congregation 
of the children of Israel, and say 
unto them, Ye shail be holy: for I 
the LorD your God am holy. 

3 Ye shall fear every man his 
fmother, and his father, and &keep 
ca mies I am the LorbD your 

od. 


4 Turn ye not unto ‘idols, nor 
make to yourselves molten gods: I 
am the LorD your God. 

5 And _ if ye offer a sacrifice of 
peace-offerings unto the Lorpb, ye 
shall offer it at your own will. 

6 It shall be eaten the same day 
ye offer it, and on the morrow: and 
if ought remain until the third day, 
it shall be burnt in the fire. 

7 And if it be eaten at all on the 
third day, it is abominable; it shall 
not be accepted. 

8 Therefore every one that eateth 
it shall bear his iniquity, because he 
hath profaned the hallowed thing of 
the LoRD: and that soul shall be 
icut off from among his people. 

9 And when ye reap the harvest 
of your land, thou shalt not wholly 
reap the corners of thy field, neither 
shalt thou gather the gleanings of 
thy harvest. 

10 And thou shalt not glean thy 
vineyard, neither shalt thou gather 
every grape of thy vineyard; thou 
shalt leave them for the poor and 
stranger: I am the LORD your God. 

11 Ye shall not steal, neither deal 
falsely, neither lie one to another. 

12 And ye shall not swear by my 
name falsely, neither shalt thou 
profane the name of thy God: I am 
the Lorpb. 

13 Thou shalt not defraud thy 
neighbour, neither rob Aim: the 
wages of him that is hired shall 
not abide with thee all night until 
the morning. 

14 Thou shait not curse the deaf, 
nor put a stumblingblock before 
the blind, but shalt “fear thy God: 
I am the Lorpb, 


asa talebearer among thy people: 


’ Lorp for his sin which he hath 


. the Lorp. 


19 15] 


LEVITICUS. 


ny maa y 
a leet - 1 


{20 5 


15 Yeshall do no unrighteousness} B.C. 1490. |in your flesh for the dead, nor print — 


in judgment: thou shalt not respect 
the person of the poor, nor honour 
the person of the mighty: but in 
righteousness shalt thou judge thy 
neighbour. 

16 Thou shalt not go up and down 


neither shalt thou stand against 
the blood of thy neighbour: I am 


17 Thoushalt not hate thy brother 
in thine heart: thou shalt in any 
wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not 
suffer sin upon him. 

18 Thou shalt not avenge, nor 
bear any grudge against the chil- 
dren of thy people, but thou shalt 
2love thy neighbour as thyself: I 
am the Lorp. 

19 Ye shall keep my statutes. 
Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender 
with a diverse kind: thou shalt not 
sow thy field with mingled seed: 
neither shall a garment mingled of 
linen and woollen come upon thee. 

20 And whosoever lieth carnally 
with a woman, that is a bondmaid, 
betrothed to an husband, and not 
at all redeemed, nor freedom given 
her; she shall be scourged; they 
shall not be put to death, because 
she was not free. 

21 And he shall bring his trespass- 
offering unto the Lorp, unto the 
door of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, even aram for a trespass- 
offering. 

22 And the priest shall make an| 
batonement for him with the ram 
of the trespass-offering before the 


done: and the sin which he hath 
done shall be ‘forgiven him. 

23 And when ye shall come into 
the land, and shall have planted 
all manner of trees for food, then 
ye shall count the fruit thereof as 
uncircumcised: three years shall it 
be as uncircumcised unto you; it 
shall not be eaten of, 

24 But in the fourth year all the 
fruit thereof shall be holy to praise 
the LorD withal. 

25 And in the fifth year shall ye 
eat of the fruit thereof, that it may 
yield unto you the increase thereof: 
I am the Lorp your God. 

26 Ye shall not eat any thing 
with the blood: neither shali ye use 
enchantment, nor observe times. 

27 Ye shall not round the corners 
of your heads, neither shalt thou 
mar the corners of thy beard. 


28 Ye shall not make any cuttings 


a 


b See Ex.29. 
33, note, 


c Forgiveness, 


Num.15.25, 
26,28. (Lev. 
4.20; Mt.26. 
28.) 


d Psa.19.9, 


note. 


e One ephah = 
1 bu. 3 pts. 


f One hin = 
about 6 qts. 


g Deut.17 
2-5. 


152 


any marks upon you: I am the 
LORD. 

29 Do not prostitute thy daugh- 
ter, to cause her to be a whore; lest 
the land fall to whoredom, and the 
land become full of wickedness. 

30 Ye shall keep my sabbaths, 
and reverence my sanctuary: I am 
the Lorpb. 

31 Regard not them that have 
familiar spirits, neither seek after 
wizards, to be defiled by them: I 
am the LorpbD your God. 

32 Thou shalt rise up before the 


hoary head, and honour the face of | 


the old man, and 4fear thy God: I 
am the LoRD. 

33 And if a stranger sojourn with 
thee in your land, ye shall not vex 


im. 

34 But the stranger that dwelleth 
with you shall be unto you as one 
born among you, and thou shalt 
love him as thyself; for ye were 
strangers in the land of Egypt: I 
am the LorpD your God. 

35 Ye shall do no unrighteousness 
in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, 
or in measure. 

36 Just balances, just weights, a 
just “ephah, and a just Shin, shall 
ye have: I am the LorD your God, 
which brought you out of the land 
of Egypt. 

37 Therefore shall ye observe all 
my statutes, and all my judgments, 
and do them: I am the Lorpb. 


CHAPTER 20. 


The relationships and walk of 
God’s earthly people, continued. 


iAP the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

2 Again, thou shalt say to the 
children of Israel, Whosoever he be 
of the children of Israel, or of the 
strangers that sojourn in Israel, 
that giveth any of his seed unto 
Molech; he shall surely be put to 
death: the people of the land shall 
stone him with stones. 

3 And I will set my face against 
that man, and will cut him off from 
among his people; because he hath 
given of his seed unto Molech, to 
defile my sanctuary, and to profane 
my holy name. 

4 And if the people of the land do 
any ways hide their, eyes from the 
man, when he giveth of his seed 


unto Molech, and ¢kill him not: 
5 Then I will set my face against 


{ 


that man, and against his ¢family, 
and will cut him off, and all that go 
a whoring after him, to commit 
whoredom with Mbolech, from 
among their people. 

6 °And the soul that turneth after 
such as have familiar spirits, and 
after wizards, to go a whoring after 
them, I will even set my face 
against that soul, and will cut him 
off from among his people. 

7 ‘Sanctify yourselves therefore, 
and be ye holy: for I am the LorD 
your God. 

8 And ye shall keep my statutes, 
and do them: 4I am the LorD 
which sanctify you. 

9 For ‘every one that curseth his 
father or his mother shall be surely 
put to death: he hath cursed his 
father or his mother; his ‘blood 
shall be upon him. 

10 And the man that committeth 
adultery with another man’s wife, 
even he that committeth adultery 
with his neighbour’s wife, the 
adulterer and the adulteress shall 
surely be put to death. 

11 And the man that lieth with 
his father’s wife hath uncovered 
his father’s nakedness: both of 
them shall surely be put to death; 
their blood shal/J be upon them. 

12 And if a man lhe with his 
daughter in law, both of them shall 
surely be put to death: they have 
wrought confusion; their blood 
shall be upon them. 

13 Ifa man also lie with mankind, 
as he lieth with a woman, both of 
them have committed an abomina- 
tion: they shall surely be put to 
death; their blood shall be upon 
them. 

“14 And if a man take a wife and 

her mother, it is wickedness: they 
shall be burnt with fire, both he and 
they; that there be no wickedness 
among you. 

15 And if a man lie with a beast, 
he shall surely be put to death: and 
ye shall slay the beast. 

16 And if a woman approach unto 
any beast, and lie down thereto, 
thou shalt kill the woman, and the 
beast: they shall surely be put to 
death; their blood shall be upon 
them. 

17 And if a man shall take his 
sister, his father’s daughter, or his 
mother’s daughter, and see her 
nakedness, and she see his naked- 
ness; it is a wicked thing; and they 
shall be cut off in the sight of their 

‘people: he hath uncovered his 


LEVITICUS. 


a Ex.20.5, 

6 Lev.19.31. 

c Heb.12.14. 

d Ex.31.13; 
Deut.14.2; 
Ezk.37.28. 


e Ex. 21.17; 
Prov.20.20. 


f vs.11,13. 


g Separation. 
vs.24-26; 
Num.6.1-8. 
(Gen.12.1; 

2 Cor.6. 
14-17.) 


h 1 Sam.28.9. 


153 


B.C. 1490. 


aed 


sister’s nakedness; he shall bear his 
iniquity. 

18 And if a man shall lie with a 
woman having her sickness, and 
shall uncover her nakedness; he 
hath discovered her fountain, and 
she hath uncovered the fountain of 
her blood: and both of them shall 
be cut off from among their people. 

19 And thou shalt not uncover the 
nakedness of thy mother’s sister, 


Jnor of thy father’s sister: for he un- 


covereth his near kin: they shall 
bear their iniquity. 

20 And if a man shall lie with his 
uncle’s wife, he hath uncovered his 
uncle’s nakedness: they shall bear 
their sin; they shall die childless. 

21 And if a man shall take his 
brother’s wife, it zs an unclean 
thing: he hath uncovered his 
brother’s nakedness; they shall be 
childless. 

22 Ye shall therefore keep all my 
statutes, and all my judgments, and 
do them: that the land, whither I 
bring you to dwell therein, spue you 
not out. 

23 And ye shall not walk in the 
manners of the nation, which I cast 
out before you: for they committed 
all these things, and therefore I 
abhorred them. 

24 But I have said unto you, Ye 
shall inherit their land, and I will 
give it unto you to possess it, a land 
that floweth with milk and honey: 
I am the LorpD your God, which 
have éseparated you from other 


people. 

25 Ye shall therefore put differ- 
ence between clean beasts and un- 
clean, and between unclean fowls 
and clean: and ye shall not make 
your souls abominable by beast, or 
by fowl, or by any manner of living 
thing that creepeth on the ground, 
which I have separated from you 
as unclean. 

26 And ye shall be holy unto me: 
for I the LoRD am holy, and have 
severed you from other people, that 
ye should be mine. 

27 A man also or woman that 
hath a familiar “spirit, or that is a 
wizard, shall surely be put to death: 
they shall stone them with stones: 
their blood shall be upon them. 


CHAPTER 21 


The relationships and walk of 
the priests. 


Ae the LorpD said unto Moses, 
Speak unto the priests the 


21 2] 


LEVITICUS. 


[22 é 


+ 


sons of Aaron, and say unto them, 
There shall none be defiled for the 
dead among his people: 

2 But for his kin, thatis:‘near unto 
him, that is, for his mother, and for 
his father, and for his son, and for 
his daughter, and for his brother. 

3 And for his sister a virgin, that 
is nigh unto him, which hath had 
no husband; for her may he be de- 
filed. ; 

4 Bat he shall not defile himself, 
being a chief man among his peo- 
ple, to profane himself. 

5 They shall not make baldness 
upon their head, neither shall they 
shave off the corner of their beard, 
nor make any cuttings in their 
flesh. ‘ 

6 They shali be 5holy unto their 


B.C. 1490. 


a Ezk.44.25, 


God, and not profane the name of 
their God: for the offerings of the 
LorD made by fire, and the bread 
of their God, they do offer: “there- 
fore they shall be holy. ' 

7 They shall not take a wife that 
is a whore, or profane; neither shall 
they take a woman put away from 
her husband: for he is holy unto 
his God. 

8 1Thou shalt ¢sanctify him there- 
fore; for he offereth the bread of 
thy God: he shall be ¢holy unto 
thee: for I the Lorb, which ¢sanc- 
tify you, am “holy. 

9 And the daughter of any priest, 
if she profane herself by playing the 
whore, she profaneth her father: 
she shall be burnt with fire. 

10 And he that is the high priest 
among his brethren, upon whose 
head the anointing oil was poured, 
and that is consecrated to put on 
the garments, shall not uncover 
his head, nor rend his clothes; 

11 Neither shall he go fin to any 
dead body, nor defile himself for his 
father, or for his mother; 

12 Neither shall he go out of the 
Sanctuary, nor profane the sanctu- 
ary of his God; for the scrown of 
the anointing oil of his God is upon 
him: I am the Lorp. 

13 And he shall take a *wife in her 
virginity. 

14 Awidow, ora divorced woman, 
or profane, or an harlot, these shal! 
he not take: but he shall take a 
virgin of his own people to wife. 

15 Neither shall he ‘profane his 


seed among his people: for I ‘the 
LorD do sanctify him. 


61 Pet.2.9. 
¢ Isa.52.11. 
d Heb. qo- 


desh, Gen.2. 


3, note. 
e Lev:10:6,7. 
f Num:19.14. 


g Lev89512; 
Ex.29.6,7. 


hv.7. 

i Gen.18.19. 
j Lev.22.23, 
k Num.6.3. 
1 Lev.18.21. 


m Lev.16.19; 
25.10. 


n Lev.7.20. 


o Lev.15.2, 


The physical disqualifications 
of a priest. 

16 And the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, : 

17 Speak unto Aaron, saying, 
Whosoever he be of thy seed in 
their generations that ‘hath any 
blemish, let him not approach to 
offer the bread of his God. 

18 For whatsoever man he be 
that hath a blemish, he shall not ap- 
proach: a blind man, or a lame, or . 
he that hath a flat nose, or any 
thing Jsuperfluous, 

19 Ora man that is brokenfooted, 
or brokenhanded, 

20 -Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or 
that hath a blemish in his eye, or 
be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his 
stones broken; 

21 No man that hath a blemish of 
the seed of Aaron the priest shall 
come nigh to offer the offerings of 
the LORD made by fire: he hath a 
blemish; he shall not come nigh to’ 
offer the bread of his God. 

22 He shall eat the bread of his 
God, both of the most holy, and of 
the holy. 

23 Only he shall not go in unto 
the vail, nor come nigh unto the 
altar, because he hath a blemish; 
that he profane not my sanctuaries: 
for I the Lorp do sanctify them. 

24 And Moses'told it unto Aaron, 
and to his sons, and unto all the 
children of Israel. 


CHAPTER 22. 


The separation of the priests 
Heb. 7. 26). 


Abe the LorD spake unto Moses, 
saying, 

2 Speak unto Aaron and to his 
sons, that they ‘separate them- 
selves from the holy things of the 
children of Israel, and ‘that they 
profane not my holy name in those 
things which they hallow unto 
me: I am the Lorp. 

3 Say unto them, Whosoever he 
be of all your seed among your 
generations, that goeth unto the 
holy things, which the children of 
Israel hallow unto the LorD, “hav- 
ing his uncleanness upon him, that 
soul shall be cut off from my 
presence: I am the Lorn. 

4 What man soever of the seed of 
Aaron is a leper, or “hath a Tunning. 


issue; he shall not eat of the holy 


1 Verse 8 illustrates 
service of God, 


154 


the O.T. holiness or sanctification—a person set apart for the. 


We 
22 5] 


LEVITICUS. 


[22°32 


bwhoso toucheth any thing that is 
unclean by the dead, or a man 
whose seed goeth from him; 

5 Or whosoever toucheth any 
creeping thing, whereby he may be 
made unclean, or a man of whom 
he may take uncleanness, whatso- 
ever uncleanness he hath; 

6 The soul which hath touched 
any such ‘shall be unclean until 
even, and shall not eat of the holy 
thimgs, unless he ‘wash his flesh 
with water. 

7 And when the sun is down, he 
shall be clean, and shall afterward 
eat of the holy things; “because it 
is his food. 

8 That which dieth of itself, or is 
torn with beasts, he shall not eat) 
to defile himself therewith: I am 
the LorpD. 

9 They shall therefore keep mine 
ordinance, ‘lest they bear sin for it, 
and die therefore, if they profane it: 
I the Lorp do sanctify them. 

10 There shall no stranger-eat of 
the holy thing: a sojourner of the 
priest, or an hired servant, shall 
not eat of the holy thing: 

11 Butif the priest buy any soul 
with his money, he shall eat of it, 
and he that is born in his ‘house: 
they shall eat of his meat. 

12 If the priest’s daughter also be 
married unto a stranger, she may 
not eat of an offering of the holy 


things, until he be clean: re B.C. 1490. 


things. 

13 But if the priest’s daughter be 
a widow, or divorced, have no 
child, and is freturned unto her 
father’s house, as in her youth, 
she shall eat of her father’s. meat: 


but there shall no stranger eat 

thereof. 

14 And if a man eat of the holy 
thing unwittingly, then he shall put 
the fifth part thereof unto it, and 
shall give it unto the priest with 
the holy thing. 

15 And they shall not profane the 
8holy things of the children of 
Israel, which they offer unto the 
LorRD;. 

16 Or suffer them to bear the 
iniquity of trespass, when they eat 
their holy things: for I the LORD 
do sanctify them. 

Sacrifices must be physically 
perfect—ty pe of the moral per- 
fections of Christ (Heb. 9. 14). 

17 And theLorp spake unto Mo- 


ses, saying, ; 
‘18 Speak unto Aaron, and to his 


a Lev.15.13. 

6 Num.19.11. 

¢ Heb,.10.22. 

d Lev.21.22; 
Num.18.11, 
13. 

¢ Ex.28.43. 

f Gen.38.11. 

g Num.18.32. 

h Num. 16. 
40.. 

t Lev.19.37; 


Num.15.40; 
Deut.4,40. 


155 


sons, and unto all the children of 
Israel, and say unto them, Whatso- 
ever he be of the house of Israel, or 
of the strangers im Israel, that will 
offer his oblation for all his vows, 
and for all his freewill-offerings, 
which they will offer unto the 
Lorp for a burnt-offering; 

19 Yeshall offer at your own will 
a male without blemish, of the 
beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats 

20 But whatsoever hath a blem- 
ish, that shall ye not offer: for it 
shall not be acceptable for you. 

21 And whosoever offereth a sacri- 
fice of peace-offerings unto the LORD 
to.accomplish his vow, or a freewill- 
offering in beeves or sheep, it shall 
be perfect to be accepted; there 
shall be no. blemish therein. 

22 Blind, or broken, or maimed, or 
having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, 
ye shall not offer these unto the 
LorpD, nor make an offering by fire 
of them upon the altar unto the 
Lorp. 

23 Either a bullock or a lamb that 
hath any thing superfluous or lack- 
ing in hig parts, that mayest thou 
offer for a freewill-offering; but for 
a vow it shall not be accepted. 

74 Ye shall not offer unto the 
LorD ‘that which is bruised, or 
crushed, or broken, or cut; neither 
shall ye make any offering thereof 
in your land. 

25 Neither from a “stranger’s 
hand shall ye offer the bread of your 
God of any of these; because their 
corruption is in them, and blem- 
ishes be in them: they shall not be 
accepted for you. 

26 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

27. When a bullock, or a sheep, or 
a goat, is brought forth, then it 
shall be seven days under the dam; 
and from the eighth day and thence- 
forth it shall be accepted for an 
offering made by fire unto the 
LorD. 

28 And whether it be cow or 
ewe, ye shall not kill it and her 
young both. in one day. 

29 And when ye will offer a sac- 
rifice of thanksgiving unto the 
Lorp, offer rt at your own will. 

30 On the same day it shall be 
eaten up; ye shall leave none of it 
until the morrow: I arm the LorpD. 

31 ‘Therefore shalt ye keep my 
commandments, and do them: I am 
the LorD. 

32 Neither shall ye profane my 
holy name; but I will be hallowed 


22) 33] LEVITICUS. ne f28 ” 


among the children of Israel: I am] _3.c.1490._|The feasts of Jehovah: (3) First: 


the LorD which byes ee rye fruits; ee risen (1 pomtees 

33. That brought you out of the 9 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
land of Egypt, to be your God: I ses, saying, ; 
am the Lorb. 10 Speak unto the children of Is- 

CHAPTER 23 rael, and say unto them, When ye 
he: th b be come into the land which I give 

The feasts of Jehovah: the sab- unto you, and shall reap the har- 

bath and the feasts. vest thereof, then ye shall bring a 
ee the LORD spake unto Moses, sheaf of ee of your har- 
saying, vest unto the priest: 

2 Speak unto the children of Is- 11 And he shall wave the sheaf 
rael, aa te ae Wace before patent to peice: fom 
ing the !feasts o € LORD, which) ‘ou: on the morrow after the sab- 
Shall proclaim to be holy convo- ete the priest shall wave it. 
cations, even these are my feasts. 12 And ye shall offer that day 

3 Six days shall work be done: when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb 
but ene Maier 1s the ee ; Re Bea of the Preah for 
or rest, an holy convocation; ye a burnt-offering unto the LorpD. 
shall do no work therein: it is the)a Sabbath. 13 And the ¢meat-offering thereof 
sabbath of the Lorp in all your, Mum453?- |shall be two tenth deals of fine 
dwellings. 3; Mt.12.1.) |flour mingled with oil, an offering 


The feasts of Jehovah: (1) the 
Passover; Christ our Redeemer 


made by fire unto the Lorp for a 


bie. April. sweet savour: and the drink-offer- 


(1 Cor, 5.75 1 Pet. I: 19). c Leaven. vs. me anes ee Be of wine, the 
4 These are the feasts of the! $727,%um- [fourth part of an chin. | 
Lorp, even holy convocations, Gone 14 And ye shall eat neither bread, 


i hail jai i ir| Mt.13.33.) jnor parched corn, not green ears, 
pe ve shallsproclaiaa ga Sb) until the selfsame day that ye have 
5 In the fourteenth day of the brought an offering unto your God: 
bfirst month at even is the LORD’s|¢ One hin = it shall be a statute for ever 


d Lit. méal. 


2passover about 6 ats. throughout your generations in all 
pence ur dwellings. 
The feasts 6f Jehovah: (2) un- Pe 
leavened bread. Memorial The feasts of Jehovah: (4) the 
feast (1 Cor. 11. 23-26; 5. 6-8; wave-loaves; the church at 
2 Cor. 7. 1; Gal. 5. 7-9), Pentecost, fifty days after the 

6 Andon the fifteenth day of the resurrection of Christ (1 Cor. 
same month is the feast of “unleav- 10. 16, 17; 12. 12, 13, 20). 
ened ®bread unto the Lorpb: seven 15 And ye shall count unto you 
days ye must eat unleavened bread. from the morrow after the sabbath, 

7. In the first day ye shall have an from the day that ye brought the 
holy convocation: ye shall do no sheaf of the wave-offering: seven 
servile work therein. sabbaths shall be complete: 

8 But ye shall offer an offering 16 Even unto the morrow after 
made by fire unto the LoRD seven the seventh sabbath shall ye num- 
days: in the seventh day is an holy ber “fifty days; and ye shall offer a 
convocation: ye shall do no servile new ¢meat-offering unto the LorD. 
work therein. 17 Ye shall bring out of your hab- 


_1 The feasts of Jehovah. As given to Israel, these were simply seven great re- 
ligious festivals which were to be observed every year. The first three verses of 
Lev. 23. do not relate to the feasts, but separate the sabbath from the feasts. 

_ ? The Passover, vs. 4,5. This feast is memorial and brings into view redemp- 
tion, upon which all blessing rests. Typically, it stands for “Christ our passover, 
sacrificed for us’? (1 Cor. 5. 7). 

3 The feast of Unleavened Bread, vs. 6-8. This feast speaks of communion with 
Christ, the unleavened wave-loaf, in the full blessing of His redemption, and of a 
holy walk. The divine order here is beautiful; first, redemption, then a holy walk. 
See 1 Cor. 5. 6-8; 2 Cor. 7. 1; Gal. 5. 7-9. 

# The feast of Firstfruits, vs. 10-14. This feast is typical of resurrection—first, 
fd cae then of “them that are Christ’s at His coming” (1 Cor, 15. 23; i Thes, 

. 13-18), 


5 The feast of Pentecost, vs. 15-22. The anti-type is the descent of the Holy 


Spirit to form the church. For this reason leaven is present, because there is evil 


156 


ah ile: iP + ..F | .. » in 5 bs ay a 
_ LEVITICUS. | eS 128 30, 


itations two lwave-loaves of two| B.c.1490. |The feasts of Jehovah: (5) Trum- 


tenth deals: they shall be of fine pets; prophetic of the future 
flour; they shali be baken with regathering of Israel (Isa. 18. 
leaven; they are the firstfruits unto 33.7527. 123133 58. "14143Joel 24 
the er 15-32). 
2 nd ye shall offer with the : 
ec “ar lambs ii blemish tie aA. ibe QF ia SORE Pate 
° € frst year, and one young 24 Speak unto the children of Is- 
peliock, end eg eric they shall rael, saying, In the ‘seventh PicHthe 
ae tig a. sane Rye: the in the first day of the month, shall 
Reg then dri Laff imeat-orering, ye have a sabbath, a memorial of 
their arink-olterings, even an blowing of 2trumpets, an holy con- 
offering made by fire, of sweet vocation. 
savour unto the Lorp. 25 Ye shall do no servile work 


19 Then ye shall sacrifice one kid|a Lit. meal. | therein: but ye shall offer an offer- 


of th bsin-offerin ; k 
Be ee ei eee df cscs. fine made by fee tt the Lo 


sacrifice of peace-offerings. cie. October; |Z he feasts of Jehovah: (6) the 
20 And the priest shall wave them| #lso vs.27, day of Atonement (Heb. 9. 1-16). 
with the bread of the firstfruits for| *4°%41- 26 And the LorD spake unto 


a wave-offering before the LORD,|dSee Ex.29. |Moses, saying, 
with the two lambs: they shall be| 35, note. 27 Also on the tenth day of this 
holy to the Lorp for the priest. | 4.4. 92.12; _ |Seventh month there shall be a day 


21 And ye shall proclaim on the} Jer31.9; of 3datonement: it shall be an holy 
selfsame day, that it may be an holy| Ezk.7.16. convocation unto you; and ye shall 
convocation unto you: ye shall dono afflict your souls, and offer an offer- 
servile work therein: it shall be ing made by fire unto the Lorp. 

a statute for ever in all your dwell- 28 And ye shall do no work in 
ings throughout your generations. that same day: for it is a day of 

22 And when ye reap the harvest datonement, to make an ¢atonement 
of your land, thou shalt not make for you before the LORD your God. 
clean riddance of the corners of thy 29 For whatsoever soul 1t be that 
field when thou reapest, neither shall not be ‘afflicted in that same 
shalt thou gather any gleaning of day, he shall be cut off from among 
thy harvest: thou shalt leave them his people. 
unto the poor, and to the stranger: 30 And whatsoever soul it be that 
I am the LorbD your God. doeth any work in that same day, 


in the church (Mt. 13. 33; Acts 5. 1, 10; 15. 1). Observe, it is now loaves; not a 
sheaf of separate growths loosely bound together, but a real union of particles mak- 
ing one homogeneous body. The descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost united 
the separate disciples into one organism (1 Cor. 10. 16, 17; 12. 12, 13, 20). 

1 The wave-loaves were offered fifty days after the wave-sheaf. This is precisely 
the period between the resurrection of Christ and the formation of the church at 
Pentecost by the baptism of the Holy Spirit (Acts 2. 1-4; 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13). See 
“Church” (Mt. 16. 18; Heb. 12. 22, 23). With the wave-sheaf no leaven was offered, 
for there was no evil in Christ; but the wave-loaves, typifying the church, are ‘‘baken 
with leaven,” for in the church there is still evil. 

2 The feast of Trumpets, vs. 23-25. This feastis a prophetical type and refers to 
the future regathering of long-dispersed Israel. A long interval elapses between 
Pentecost and Trumpets, answering to the long period occupied in the pentecostal 
work of the Holy Spirit in the present dispensation. Study carefully Isa. 18. 3; 
27. 13 (with contexts); 58. (entire chapter), and Joel 2. 1 to 3. 21 in connection with 
the “trumpets,” and it will be seen that these trumpets, always symbols of testimony, 
are connected with the regathering and repentance of Israel after the church, or 
pentecostal, period is ended. This feast 1s immediately followed by the day 
of atonement. 

3 The day of Atonement, vs. 26-32. The day is the same described in Lev. 16., 
but here the stress is laid upon the sorrow and repentance of Israel. In other 
words, the prophetical feature is made prominent, and that looks forward to the 
repentance of Israel after her regathering under the Palestinian Covenant, Deut. 
30. 1-10, preparatory to the second advent of Messiah and the establishment of 
the kingdom. See the connection between the “trumpet” in Joel 2, 1 and the 
mourning which follows in verses 11-15, Also Zech, 12. 10-13 in connection with 
the atonement of Zech. 13. 1. Historically the “fountain”? of Zech. 13. 1 was 


157 
Mes 
Me 


23 31] 


the: same soul will I “destroy from) B.C. 1490. 


among his people. 

31 Yeshall do no manner of work: 
it shall be a. statute for ever 
throughout your generations in ail 
your dwellings. 

32 It shall be unto you a sabbath 
of rest, and ye shall afflict your 
souls: in the ninth day of the month 
at even, from even unto even, shall 
ye celebrate your sabbath. 


The feasts of Jehovah: (7) Taber- 
nacles (Ezra 3. 4; Zech. 14. 16- 
19; Rev. 21.3). 


33 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, Saying, ‘ 

34 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, saying, The fifteenth day of 
this seventh month shall be the 
>feast of tabernacles for seven days 


a Lev.20.3,6. 
6 Ex.23.16; 


unto the LorD. eon 
35 On the first day shall be an| 16-19. 
holy convocation: ye shall do no} Heb.11.9. 


servile work therein. : 

36 Seven days ye shall offer an foxes = 
offering made by fire unto the 
LorpD: on the eighth day shall be an 
holy convocation unto you; and ye 
shall offer an offering made by fire 
unto the LorD:; it rs a solemn as- 
sembly; and ye ‘shall do no servile 
work therein. 

37 These are the feasts of the 
LORD, which ye shall proclaim to 
be holy convocations, to offer an 
offering made by fire unto the 
Lorp, a burnt-offering, and a¢meat- 
offering, .a sacrifice, and drink-offer- 
ings, every thing upon his day: 

38 Beside the sabbaths of the 
Lorp, and beside your gifts, and 
beside all your vows, and beside all 
your freewill-offerings, which ye 
give unto the Lorp. 

39 Also in the fifteenth day of the 
seventh month, when ye have gath- 
ered in the fruit of the land, ye 
shall keep a feast unto the Lorp 
seven days: on the first day shal] 
be a sabbath, and on the eighth 
day shali be a sabbath. 

40 And ye shall take you on the 
first day the boughs of goodly trees, 
branches of palm trees, and the 
boughs of thick trees, and willows 


@ Lit. meal. 

e Heb.11.13, 
16. 

f Neh.8. 
14-18. 

g Ex.13.14. 

hk Ex.27.20. 


# Ex.31.8; 
Zech.4.2,11. 


j Ex.25.30. 


LEVITICUS. 


[24 9 
* 
of the brook; and ye shall rejoice be- 
fore the LORD your God seven days. — 
41 And ye shall keep it a feast 
unto the LorD seven days in the - 


2 2 
| 


year. It shall be a statute for ever 


in your generations: ye shall cele- 
brate it in the seventh month. | 

42 Ye shall ¢«dwell in ‘booths 
seven days; fall that are Israelites 
born shall dwell in booths: 

43 That your égenerations may 
know that I made the children of 
Israel to dwell in booths, when I 
brought them out of the land of 
Egypt: I am the LorpD your God. 

44 And Moses declared unto the 
children of Israel the feasts of the 


Lorb. 
CHAPTER 24. 


The oil for the light in the holy 
place (Ex. 25. 6.) 


At the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

2 *Command the children of Is- 
raei, that they bring unto thee pure 
oil olive beaten for the light, to 
cause the lamps to burn continually, 

3 Without the vail of the testi- 
mony, in the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, shall Aaron order it from 
the evening unto the morning be- 
fore the LorD continually: it shail 
be a statute for ever in your gen- 
erations. 

4 He shall order the lamps upon 
the pure ‘candlestick before the 
Lorp continually. 


The shewbread (Ex. 25. 23-30). 
5S And thou shalt take fine flour, 


and bake Jtwelve cakes thereof: two 
tenth deals shall be in one cake. 

6 And thou shalt set them in two 
TOWS, SIX On a row upon the pure 
table before the Lorp. 

7 And thou shalt put pure frank- 
incense upon each row, that it may 
be on the bread for a memorial, 
even an. offering made by fire unto 
the Lorp. 

8 Every sabbath he shall set it in 
order before the Lorp continually, 
being taken from the children of 
Israel by an everlasting covenant. 

9 And it shall be Aaron’s and his 


opened at the crucifixion, but rejected by the 
turies. 
to Israel. 


1 The feast of Tabernacles, vs. 34-44, is 


158 


1 Jews of that and the succeeding cen- 
After the regathering of Israel the fountain will be efficaciously “opened” 


Py 


24 10) LEVITICUS. [25 13 
LL AEEEEP Ip SERED SE PSRESEEVEPSEPPEN i 
sons’; and they shall eat it,in the) 3:c. 1490. HAP 
hoiy place: for it 7s most ay unto. = : a= 
him of the offerings of the LorpD The law of the land: (1) the 
made by fire by a perpetual statute. sabbatic year. 

The penalty of blasph ND the Lorp spake unto Mo- 

Crohn = a 10. 31). ga A ses in mount Sinai, saying, 

Deetanti ah : : ; hes 2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
aes cha nee an = itis: rael, and say unto them, When ye 
be an se father on oe SYp- come into the land which I give you. 
recs pnd tiie son. of the Ee lec aa 

: - unto ‘ 
raelitish woman and a man of Is- | 3) Six eee shalt sow thy 
Bee races ieeciitich saemsais Ree een cy eh che ML Fis: 
4 5 
son blasphemed the name of the fnuitishencot; pianagantnets 09S 
alee i qe cursed. And they 4 But in the seventh year shall be 
pout im unto Moses: (and his a sabbath of ‘rest unto the land, a 
mother’s name was Shelomith, the sabbath for the LORD: thou shalt 
oe of Dibri, of the tribe of neither oo thy field, nor prune thy 
= vineyard. 
= And: they put him in ward, 5 8That which groweth of its own 
that the mind of the LorpD might accord of thy harvest thou shalt 
be shewed them. not reap, neither gather the grapes 
a ee be LorRD spake unto Mo- of ynins mers pr it is a 
5 , year of rest unto t ' 

14 Bring forth him that hath 6 And the sabbath “of the land 
cursed without the camp; and let}¢ Ex.18.26. shall be meat for you; for thee, and 
all that heard him lay their chands SS were: for thy servant, and for thy maid, 
upon his head, and let all the con- 27.5. Jand for thy hired servant, and for 
pee ony in as, ¢ Deut.13.9. ae stranger that sojourneth with 

: ou shalt speak unto the ee, : 
children of Israel, saying, Whosoever d Ex.20.7. 7 And for thy cattle, and for the 
ee a cae int ie een ben eNum.35.31. woe that aie in ee shall all 

e tha E 

ee Se tee cats, (ee ee 
be put to death, and all the con-|¢ 2 Ki.19.29. Sap t ‘ubsle (2) the 
gregation shall certainly stone him:} . Bfee ds Chacl IF: 
as well the stranger, as he that is hie. October.| § And thou shalt number seven 
born in the land, when he blas-|;SeeEx.29. |sabbaths of years unto thee, seven 
phemeth the name of the LORD,| 33, note. times seven years; and the space 
shail be put to death. of the seven sabbaths of years shall 

17 And he that ¢killeth any man be unto thee forty and nine years. 
pelt een opus soidenta: Nee 9 ‘bho shetty ou cause the aa 

. An e a e a beas pet of the jubile to sound on the 
shall make it good; beast for beast. tenth day of the ‘seventh month, in 
p19 _And if a man cause a blemish the day of ‘atonement shall ye make 
in permanente es Be hath done, the pre pce sound throughout all 
so shall it be done to him; your land. 

20 Breach for breach, eye for-eye, 10 And ye shall hallow the fiftieth 
tooth for tooth: as he hath caused year, and proclaim liberty through- 
a blemish in a man, so shall it be out al/ the Jand unto all the inhabi- 
done to him again. tants thereof: it shall be a jubile 

21 And he that killeth a beast, he unto you; and ye shall return every 
shall restore it: and he that killeth) man unto his possession, and ye 
age pe Sbalive put to death. m spall return every man unto his 

es ave one manner amily. 
law, as well for the stranger, as for 11 A jubile shall that fiftieth year 
one of your own country: for I am be unto you: ye shall not sow, nei- 
the Lorp your God. ther reap that which groweth of it- 
oi ene quer sete fo estar | Tagg: ae nor ba pe rapes in 
en of Israel, that they sho it of thy vine undressed, 
bring forth him that had cursed out 12 For it zs the jubile; it shall be 


of the camp, and stone him with 
stones. And the children of Israel 
did as the LorD commanded Moses. 


159 


holy unto you: ye shall eat the in- 
crease thereof out of the field. 
13 In the year of this jubile ye 


25 14] 


shall return every man unto his] B.C. 1491. 


possession. 

14 Andif thou sell ought unto thy 

neighbour, or buyest ought of thy 
neighbour’s hand, ye shall not op- 
press one another: 
‘15 According to the number of 
years after the jubile thou shalt 
buy of thy neighbour, and acco-d- 
ing unto the number of years of the 
fruits he shall sell unto thee: 

16 According to the multitude of 
years thou shalt increase the price 
thereof, and according to the few- 
ness of years thou shalt diminish 
the price of it: for according to the 
number of the years of the fruits 
doth he sell unto thee. 

17 Ye shall not therefore oppress 
one another; but thou shalt ¢fear 
thy God: for I am the Lorp your 
God. 

18 Wherefore ye shall do my stat- 
utes, and keep my judgments, and 
do them; and ye shall dwell in the 
land in safety. 

19 And the land shall yield her 
fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and 
dwell therein in safety. . 

20 And if ye shall say, What shall 
we eat the seventh year? behold, 
we shall not sow, nor gather in our 
increase: 

21 Then I will Scommand my 
blessing upon you in the sixth year, 
and it shall bring forth fruit for 
three years. 

22 And ye shall sow the eighth 
year, and eat yet of old fruit until 
the ninth year; until her fruits 
come in ye shall eat of the old 
store. 

23 The land shall not be sold for 
ever: for the land is ‘mine; for ve 
are 4strangers and sojourners with 
me. 

24 And in all the land of your 


possession ye shall grant a redemp- 
tion for the land. 


The law of the land: (3) the re- 
demption of the inheritance. 


25 If thy brother be waxen poor, 
and hath sold away some of his 
possession, “and if any of his kin 
come to ‘redeem it, then shall he 
redeem that which his brother sold. 

26 And if the man have none to 
redeem it, and himself be able to 
redeem it; 

27 Then let him count the years 
of the sale thereof, and restore the 
overplus unto the man to whom he 
sold it; that he may return unto his 
Possession, 


LEVITICUS. 


ey | 


a Psa.19.9, 
note, 


b Deut.28.8. 
¢ 2 Chr.7.20. 


d Psa.39.12; 
Heb,11.13, 
16, 


e Num.5.8; 
Job 19.255 
Jer.32.7,8. 


f Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 


59.20, note. 


g Psa.19.9, 
note, 


160 


28 But if he be not able to restore 
it to him, then that which is sold’ 
shall remain in the hand of him 
that hath bought it until the year 
of jubile: and in the jubile it shall 
go out, and he shall return unto 
his possession. ; 

29 And if a man sell a dwelling 
house in a walled city, then he may 
redeem it within a whole year after 
it is sold; within a full year may he 
redeem it. 
| 30 And if it be not ‘redeemed 
within the space of a full year, then 
the house that js in the walled city 
shall be established for ever to him 
that bought it throughout his gen- 
erations: it shall not go out in the 
jubile. 

31 But the houses of the villages. 
which have no wall round about 
them shall be counted as the fields 
of the country: they may be re- 
deemed, and they shall go out in 
the jubile. 

32 Notwithstanding the cities of 
the Levites, and the houses of the 
cities of their possession, may the 
Levites redeem at any time. ; 

33 And if a man purchase of the 
Levites, then the house that was 
sold, and the city of his possession, 
shall go out in the year of jubile: 
for the houses of the cities of the 
Levites are their possession among 
the children of Israel. 

34 But the field of the suburbs of 
their cities may not be sold; for it 
is their perpetual possession. 


The law of the land: (4) the poor 
brother. 


35 And if thy brother be waxen 
poor, and fallen in decay with thee; 
then thou shalt relieve him: yea, 
though he be a stranger, or a so- 
journer; that he may live with thee, 

36 Take thou no usury of him, or 
increase: but &fear thy God: that 
thy brother may live with thee. 

37 Thou shalt not give him thy 
money upon usury, nor lend him 
thy victuals for increase. 

38 I am the Lord your God, 
which brought you forth out of the 
land of Egypt, to give you the land 
of Canaan, and to be your God. 

39 And if thy brother that dwell- 
eth by thee be waxen poor, and be 
sold unto thee; thou shalt not com- 
pel him to serve as a bondservant: 

40 But as an hired servant, and 
as a sojourner, he shall be with 
thee, and shall serve thee unto the . 
year of jubile: 


 , 

41 And then shall he depart from 
thee, both he and his children with 
him, and shall return unto his own 
family, and unto the possession of 
his fathers shall he return. 

42 For they are my servants, 
which I brought forth out of the 
land of Egypt: they shall not be 
sold as bondmen. 

43 Thou shalt not rule over him 

with rigour; but shalt ¢fear thy God. 

44 Both thy bondmen, and thy 
bondmaids, which thou shalt have, 
shall be of the “heathen that are 
round about you; of them shall ye 
buy bondmen and bondmaids. 

45 Moreover of the children of the 
strangers that do sojourn among 
you, of them shall ye buy, and of 
their families that are with you, 
which they begat in your land: and 
they shall be your possession. 

46 And ye shall take them as an 
inheritance for your children after 
you, to inherit them for a posses- 
sion; they shall be your bondmen 
for ever: but over your brethren 
the children of Israel, ye shall not 
rule one over another with rigour. 


The law of the land: (5) the re- 
demption of the poor brother 
—Christ our Kinsman - Re- 
deemer. 


47 And if a sojourner or stranger 
wax rich by thee, and thy brother 
that dwelleth by him wax poor, 
and sell himself unto the stranger or 
sojourner by thee, or to the stock of 
the stranger’s family: 

48 After that he is sold he may 
be ‘redeemed again; one of his 
brethren may ¢redeem him; 

49 Either his uncle, or his uncle’s 
son, may ‘redeem him, or any that 
is nigh of }kin unto him of his fam- 
ily may redeem him; or if he be 
able, he may redeem himself. 

50 And he shall ¢réckon with him 
that bought him from the year that 
he was sold to him unto the year of 
jubile: and the price of his sale shall 
be according unto the number of 
years, according to the time of an 
hired servant shall it be with him. 

51 If there be yet many years be- 
hind, according unto them he shall 
give again the price of his redemp- 


LEVITICUS. 


B.C. 1491. 


a Psa.19.9, 
note. 


b Lit. nations. 


c Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


d Gal.4.4,5. 


e Imputation. 
Lev.27.18. 
(Lev.25.50; 
Jas.2.23.) 


f Law (of Mo- 
ses). Lev. 
27.1-34.(Ex. 
19.1; Gal.3. 
1-29.) 


g Psa.4.8. 
h 2 Ki.17,25. 
t Deut.32.30; 


Jud.7.7,12; 
1 Sam.14.14, 


(26 8 


tion out of the money that he was 
bought for. 

52 And if there remain but few 
years unto the year of jubile, then 
he shall count with him, and accord- 
ing unto his years shall he give him 
again the price of his redemption. 

53 And as a yearly hired servant 
shall he be with him: and the 
other shall not rule with rigour 
over him in thy sight. 

54 And if he be not ‘redeemed in 
these years, then he shall go out in 
the year of jubile, both he, and his 
children with him. 

55 For unto me the children of 
Israel are servants; they are my 
servants whom I brought forth out 
of the land of Egypt: I am the 
LorpD your God. 


2CHAPTER 26. 


The law of the land: (6) condi- 
tions of blessing; warnings of 
chastisement, 

Dye shall make you no idols nor 

graven image, neither rear you 

up a standing image, neither shall 

ye set up any image of stone in 

your land, to bow down unto it: 
for I am the LorD your God. 

2 Yeshall ‘keep my sabbaths, and 

reverence my sanctuary: I am the 

LORD. 


Conditions of blessing. 


3 If ye walk in my statutes, and 
keep my commandments, and do 
them; 

4 Then I will give you rain in due 
season, and the land shall yield her 
increase, and the trees of the field 
shall yield their fruit. 

5 And your threshing shall reach 
unto the vintage, and the vintage 
shall reach unto the sowing time: 
and ye shall eat your bread to the 
full, and dwell in your land safely. 

6 And Iwill give peace in the land, 
and ye shall lie down, and none 
shall make you afraid: and I will rid 
evil "beasts out of the land, neither 
shall the sword go through your 
land. 

7 And ye shall chase your ene- 
mies, and they shall fall before you 
by the sword. 

8 And ‘five of you shall chase an 


1 The Kinsman-Rédeemer. 


tion—“‘to free by paying,” and the Redeemer—“‘the one who pays.” : 
perfectly illustrates this beautiful type 


Ruth and Boaz (Ruth 2. 1; 3. 10-18 
of Christ. See ‘‘Redemption,” Isa. 


3 4. 1-10) 


59. 20, note. 


The word goel is used to indicate both the redemp- 


The case of 


2 Chapter 26. should be read in connection with Deut. 28., 29., 30., the Pales: 


tinian Covenant. 


161 


20 9Y 


LEVITICUS. 


[26 2 | 


7 


hundred, and an hundred of you 
shall put ten thousand to flight: 
and your enemies shall fall before 
you by the sword. 

9 For I will have respect unto 
you, and make you fruitful, and 
multiply you, and establish my 
covenant with you. 

10 And ye shall eat old store, and 
bring forth the old because of the 
new. 

11 And I will set my tabernacle 
among you: and my soul shall not 
abhor you. 

12 And I will walk among you, 
and will be your ®God, and ye shall 
‘be my people. 

13 I am the LorD your God, 
which brought you forth out of the 
Jand of Egypt, that ye should not 
be their bondmen; and I have 
broken the bands of your yoke, and 
made you go upright. 


Warnin§gs of chastisement. 


14 But if ye will not hearken unto 
me, and will not do all these com- 
mmandments; 

15 And if ye shall despise. my 
statutes, or if your soul abhor my 
judgments, so that ye will not do 
all my commandments, but that ye 
‘break my covenant: 


The first chastisement. 


16 I also will do this unto you; I 
will even appoint over you terror, 
consumption, and the burning ague, 
that shall consume the eyes, and 
cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall 
sow your seed in vain, for your 
enemies shall eat it. 

17 And I will set my face against 
you, and ye shall be ‘slain before 
your enemies: they that hate you 
shall reign over you; and ye shall 
flee when none pursueth you. 


The second chastisement 


18 And if ye will not yet for all 
, this hearken unto me, then I will 
| punish you seven times more for 
' your sins. 

19 And I will break the pride of 
your power; and I will make your 
dheaven as iron, and your earth as 
brass: 

20 And your strength shall ‘be 
spent in vain: for your land shall 
not yield her increase, neither shall 
the trees of the land yield their 
fruits. 


The third chastisement. 


21 And if ye walk contrary unto 
me, and will not hearken unto me; I 


B.C. 1491. 


a 2 Ki.13.23. 

6 2 Cor.6.16. 

¢1Sam.4.10; 
31.4. 


d@1 Ki17.1. 


e 2 Ki.17.25; 
Ezk.14.21. 


#Num.16.49; 
2 Sam. 24.15. 


g Hag.1.6. 
h 2 Ki.6.28 
29. 


i2 Ki.23.8, 
20. 

j 2 Ki.25.4, 
10. 


k 2 Chr.36.19. 
7 Psa.44.11. 


m Lit. nations. 


162 


will bring seven times more plagues 
upon you according to your sins. 

22 I will also send ¢wild beasts 
among you, which shall rob you of, 
your children, and destroy your cat- 
tle, and make you few in number; 
om your Aigh ways shall be deso- 
ate. 


The fourth chastisement. 


23 And if ye will not be-reformed 
by me by these things, but will 
walk contrary unto me; 

24 Then will I also walk contrary 
unto you, and will punish you yet 
seven times for your sins. 

25 And I will bring a sword upon 
you, that shall avenge the quarrel 
of my covenant: and when ye are 
gathered together within your cit- 
ies, I will send the ‘pestilence among 
you; and ye shall be delivered into 
the hand of the enemy. 

26 And when I have broken the 
staff of your bread, ten women shall 
bake your bread in one oven, and 
they shall deliver you your bread 
again by weight: and ye shall eat, 
and not be &satisfied. 


The fifth chastisement. 


27 And if ye will not for all this 
hearken unto me, but walk contrary 
unto me; 

28 Then I will walk contrary unto 
you also in fury; and I, even I, will 
chastise you seven times. for your 
sins. 

29 And ye shall “eat the flesh of 
your sons, and the flesh of your 
daughters shall ye eat. 

30 And I will ‘destroy your ‘high 
places, and cut down your images, 
and cast your carcases upon the 
carcases of your idols, and my soul 
shall abhor you. 

31 And I will make your Jcities 
waste, and bring your %sanctuaries 
unto desolation, and I will not smell 
the savour of your sweet odours. 


The dispersion predicted. 
(Cf. Deut. 28. 58-67.) 


32 And I will bring the land into 
desolation:.and your enemies which 
dwell therein shall be astonished at 
at. 

33 And I will ‘scatter you.among 
the “heathen, and will draw out a 
sword after you: and your land 
shall be desolate, and your cities 
waste. ; 

34 Then shall the land enjoy her 


jsabbaths, as long as it lieth deso- 


Jate, and ye be in your enemies’ 


“eh 
26 35] 


LEVITICUS. 


[27 1 


land; even then shall the land rest,| Bc. 1491. 45 But I will for their sakes re- 


and enjoy her sabbaths. 

35: As long as it lieth desolate it 
shall rest; because it did not rest 
in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt 
upon it. 

36 And upon them that are left 
alive of you I will send a faintness 
into their hearts in the lands of 
their enemies; and the sound of a 
shaken leaf shall chase them; and 
they shall flee, as fleeing from a 
sword; and they shall fall when 
none pursueth. 

37 And they shall fall: ome upon 
another, as it were before'a sword, 
when none pursueth: and ye shall 
have no power to stand before your 
enemies. 

38 And ye shall perish among the 
“heathen, and the land of your 
enemies shall eat you up. 

39 And they. that are left of you 
shall pine away in their iniquity in 
your enemies’ lands; and also in 
the iniquities of their fathers: shall 
they: pine away: with them. 


The Abrahamic Covenant re- 
mains, despite the disobedi- 
ence and dispersion. 


40 If they shall °confess. their in- 
iquity, and the iniquity of their 
fathers, with their trespass: which 
they trespassed against me, and 
that also they have walked con- 
trary unto me; 

41 And that I also have walked 

contrary unto them, and have 
brought them into the land of their 
enemies; if then their uncircumcised 
hearts be chumbled, and they then 
daccept of the punishment of their 
iniquity: 
42 Then will I remember my cov- 
enant with Jacob, and also my cove- 
nant with Isaac, and also my 
covenant with Abraham will I re- 
member; and I will remember the 
land. 

43 The land also shall be left of 
them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths, 
while she lieth desolate without 
them: and they shall accept of the 
punishment of their iniquity: be- 
cause, even because they despised 
my judgments, and because their 
soul abhorred my statutes. 

44 And yet for all that, when they 
be in the land of their enemies, I 
will not cast them away, neither 
will I abhor them, to destroy them 
utterly, and to break my covenant 
with them: for I am the LorD 
their God. \ 


a Lit. nations. 


61 Ki.8.33; 
Neh.9.2; 
1 John 1.9. 


¢ 2:Chr.12.6, 
7,12; I Pet. 
5.5,6. 


d Psa.39.95 
51.3,4; Dan: 
9.7. 

e Psa.106:45. 


f Law (of Mo- 
ses). vs.1- 


g One shekel = 
23. 9d., or 
65 cents; also 
vs.4,5,6,7,16, 
25. 


163, 


member the covenant of their an- 
cestors, whom I brought forth out 
of the land of Egypt in the: sight 
of the “heathen, that I might be 
their God: I am the Lorp: 

46 These are the statutes and) 
judgments and laws, which, the 
LorpD made between him and’ the: 
children of Israel in mount Sinai by 
the hand of Moses. 


CHAPTER 27. 


Concerning vowed (dedicated) 
persons and things: 


AN the LorD spake unto IMo- 
ses, saying, 

2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, and say unto them, When a 
man shall make a singular vow, the 
persons shail be for the Lorp by 
thy estimation. 

3 And thy estimation shall be of’ 
the male from twenty years eld 
even unto sixty years. old, even thy 
estimation shall be fifty sshekels or 
silver, after the shekel of the sanc- 
tuary. 

4 And if it be a female, then thy 
estimation shall be thirty shekels. | 

5 And if it be from five years old 
even unto twenty years old, then 
thy estimation shall be of the male 
twenty shekels, and for the female 
ten shekels. 

6 And if it be from a month old 
even unto five years old, then thy 
estimation shall be of the male five 
shekels of silver, and for the female 
thy estimation shall be three shck- 
els of silver. 

7 And if it be from sixty years old 
and above; if it be a male, then thy 
estimation shall be fifteen shekels, 
and for the female ten shekels. 

8 But if he be poorer than thy 
estimation, then he shall present 
himself before the priest, and the 
priest shall value him; according to 
his ability that vowed shall the 
priest value him. 

9 And if it be a beast, whereof 
men bring an offering unto the 
Lorn, all that any man giveth of 
such unto the LorD shall be holy. 

10 Heshall not alter it, nor change 
it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a 
good: and if he shall at all change 
beast for beast, then it and the ex- 
change thereof shall be holy. 

11 And if it be any unclean beast, 
of which they do not offer a sacri- 
fice unto the Lorp, then he shall 
present the beast before the priest: 


12 And the priest shall value it, 
whether it be good or bad: as thou 
valuest it, who art the priest, so 
shall it be. . 

13 But if he will at all ¢redeem it, 
then he shall add a fifth part 
thereof unto thy estimation. 

14 And when a man shall sanc- 
tify his house to be holy unto the 
Lorp, then the priest shall estimate 
it, whether it be good or bad: as 
the priest shall estimate it, so shall 
it stand. ¥ 

15 And if he that sanctified it will 
Stedeem his house, then he shall 
add the fifth part of the money of 
thy estimation unto it, and it shall 
be his. 

16 And if a man shall sanctify un- 
to the LoRD some part of a field of 
his possession, then thy estimation 
shall be according to the seed there- 
of: an ‘homer of barley seed shall 
be valued at fifty shekels of silver. 

17 If he sanctify his field from the 
year of jubile, according to thy 
estimation it shall stand. 

18 But if he sanctify his field after 
the jubile, then the priest shall 
freckon unto him the money ac- 
cording to the years that remain, 
even unto the year of the jubile, 
and it shall be abated from thy 
estimation. 

19 And if he that sanctified the 


field will in any wise ¢redeem it,| 


then he shall add the fifth part of 
the money of thy estimation unto 
it, and it shall be assured to him. 

20 And if he will not ¢redeem the 
field, or if he have sold the field to 
another man, it shall not be re- 
deemed any more. 

21 But the field, when it goeth out 
in the jubile, shall be holy unto 
the LorD, as a field devoted; the 
possession thereof shall be the 
priest’s. 

22 And if a man sanctify unto 
the Lorp a field which he hath 
bought, which is not of the fields of 
his possession; 

23 Then the priest shall reckon 
unto him the worth of thy estima- 
tion, even unto the year of the 
jubile: and he shall give thine es- 
timation in that day, as a holy 
thing unto the Lorp. 

24 In the year of the jubile the 


LEVITICUS, 


B.C. 1491. 


a Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note 


b Sanctify, 
holy (O.T.) 
vs.14-22; 
Josh.5.15. 
(Gen.2.3; 
Zech.8.3.) 


c About 86 
gals. 


d Imputation, 


vs.18.23; 

1 Sam.22.15, 
(Lev.25.50; 
Jas.2.23.) 


e One gerah = 
11.2 grains, 
or 3 1-4 cts. 


f Gen.28.22; 
Num.18.21, 
24. 

g 2 Cor.8.1, 
note. 

h Jer.33.13; 
Ezk.20.37; 
Mic.7.14, 

1 v.10. 

7 Mail.4.4. 

k Ex.19.2,3, 


25; Heb.12. 
8,25 


164 


[27 Py 


field-shall return unto him of whom 
it was bought, even to him to whom 
the possession of the land did 
belong. : 

25 And all thy estimations shall 
be according to the shekel of the 
sanctuary: twenty ¢gerahs shall be 
the shekel. 


The three things which are the 
Lord’s absolutely: (1) the first- 
ling of the beasts. 


26 Only the firstling of the beasts, 
which should be the Lorp’s first= 
ling, no man shall sanctify it; 
whether it be ox, or sheep: it is 
the LoRD’s. 

27 And if it be of an unclean 
beast, then he shall “redeem it ac- 
cording to thine estimaticn, and 
shall add a fifth part of it thereto: 
or if it be not redeemed, then it shail 
be sold according to thy estimation. 


(2) Any dedicated thing. 


28 Notwithstanding no devoted 
thing, that a man shall devote 
unto the LorD of all that he hath, 
both of man and beast, and of the 
field of his possession, shall be sold 
or “redeemed: every devoted thing 
is most holy unto the LorD. 

29 None devoted, which shall be 
devoted of men, shall be redeemed; 


but shall surely be put to death. 


(3) All the tithe of land, tree, 
and beast. 


30 And fall the stithe of the land, 
whether of the seed of the land, or 
of the fruit of the tree, zs the 
Lorp’s: it is holy unto the Lorp. 

31 And if a man will at all 2re- 
deem ought of his tithes, he shall 
add thereto the fifth part thereof. 

32 And concerning the tithe of the 
herd, or of the flock, even of what- 
soever 'passeth under the rod, the 
tenth sHall be holy unto the Lorp. 

33 He shall not search whether it 
be good or bad, neither shall he 
change it: and if he change it at 
all, then both it and the tchange 
thereof shall be holy: it shall not 
be “redeemed. 

34 JThese are the command- 
ments, which the LorD commanded 
Moses for the children of Israel in 
mount *Sinai, 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MOSES 


a NUMBERS. she 


THE book derives its name from the fact that it records the enumeration of Israel. 
Historically, Numbers takes up the story where Exodus left it, and is the book of 
the wilderness wanderings of the redeemed people consequent upon their failure to 
enter the land at Kadesh-barnea. 

Typically, it is the book of service and walk, and thus completes, with the pre- 
ceding books, a beautiful moral order: Genesis, the book of the creation and fall; 
Exodus, of redemption; Leviticus, of worship and fellowship; and Numbers, of that 
which should follow—service and walk. 

It is important to see that nothing was left to self-will. Every servant was num- 
bered, knew his place in the family, and had his own definitely assigned service. 
The N.T. parallel is 1 Cor. 12. is 

The second typical lesson is that, tested by wilderness circumstances, Israel 
utterly failed. 

Numbers is in five chief divisions: I. The Order of the Host, 1.1-10.10. IZ. From 
Sinai to Kadesh-barnea, 10. 11-12. 16. III. Israel at Kadesh-barnea, 13. 1-19. 22. 
IV. The Wilderness Wanderings, 20. 1-33. 49. V. Closing Instructions, 33. 50-36. 13. 

The events recorded in Numbers cover a period of 39 years (Ussher). 


; CHAPTER 1 B.C. 1490. Poteau i Gi id son es rt 
The order of the host: (1) Moses] Se a Dealer. sseh; Gamaliel the 
he ee : 
Seen to number t ct Benjamin; Abidan the son 
. ; of Gideoni. 
ND the Lorpb spake unto Mo- 12 Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of 
A ses in the wilderness of ¢Sinai, Ammishaddai. 
in the tabernacle of the congrega- 13 Of Asher; Pagiel the son of 
tion, on the first day of the °second Ocran. 
month, in the second year after they 14 Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of 
were come out of the land of Egypt, Peas Os " : 
saying, a Num.10.12; 15 aphtali; Ahira the son o 
2 ‘Take ve the ee ie all ae oe reser anne ” p 
gregation of the children of Israel, ce ae 16 ese were the renowned o: 
after their families, by the house of |b i.e. May; the congregation, princes of the 
their fathers, with the Pal git Cle EONGRE a oe nes eo eheads of 
their names, every male by their! . yum.26. thousands in Israel. 
polls; 2,63; Ex.30, | 17 And Moses and Aaron took 
23 age twenty yee old “ee ea 12; 2am. |these men which are expressed by 
ward, all that are able to go forth) 91'9’ ‘ |their names: 
to war in Israel: thou and Aaron ’ 18 And they assembled all the 
shall number them by their arm-|/?Num.7-%, . icongregation together on the first 
ies. fl 29; jer.9.23. |day of the second month, and they 
4 ety with you there shall hi 3 24. [pear rea! er ale “ie se 
man of every tribe; every one hea amilies, by the house of their 
oi og cans of ee. oT “23; Jers: reed: pote oat Mare pulbes e 
n ese are the names of the! Mic.3.1,9; e names, from y years oO 
men. that shall stand with you: of| 5-2- and upward, by their polls. 
the tribe of Reuben; Elizur the son| + yo, 19 #As the LorD commanded Mo- 
of Shedeur. : es pee so he nurpbsica them in the 
6 Of Simeon; Shelumie e son! wilderness of Sinai. 
of Zurishaddai. 20 And the children of Reuben, 
7 Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Israel’s eldest son, by their genera- 
Amminadab. tions, after their families, by the 
8 Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son house of their fathers, according to 
of Zuar. the number of the narnes, by their 
9 Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of polls, every male from twenty years 
Helon. old and upward, all that were able 
10 Of the children of Joseph: of to go forth to war; 
” 163 


a 


1 21] 


NUMBERS. 


a “ 


21 Those that were numbered of | B.C. 1490. 


them, even of the tribe of Reuben, 
were forty and six thousand and 
five hundred. ; 

22 Of the children of Simeon, by 
their generations, after their fam- 
ilies, by the house of their fathers, 
those that were numbered of them, 
according to the number of the 
names, by their polls, every male 
from twenty years old and wpward, 
all that were able to go forth to 


war; 

23 Those that were numbered of 
ithem, even of the tribe of Simeon, 
were fifty and nine thousand and 
three hundred. 

24 Of the children of Gad, by their 
generations, after their families, by 
the house of their fathers, according 
to the number of the names, from 
‘twenty years old and upward, all 
that were able to go forth to war; 

25 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of ‘the tribe of Gad, 
were forty and five thousand ‘six 
hundred and fifty. ! 

26 Of the children of Judah, by 
their generations, after their fam- 
ilies, by the house of their fathers, 
according to the number of ‘the 
mames, from twenty years old and 
upward, all that were able to ‘go 
forth to war; 


27 Those that were numbered of 
‘them, even of the ‘tribe of Judah, 
were threescore and fourteen ‘thou- 
‘sand and six hundred. 

28 Of the children of Issachar, by 
their generations, after their fam- 
ilies, by ‘the house of their fathers, 
according to the number of the 
names, from twenty years old and 
upward, all that were able to go 
forth to war; 

29 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of the tribe of Issachar, 
were fifty and four thousand and 
four hundred. 

30 Of the children of Zebulun, 
by their generations, after their 
families, by the house of their 
fathers, according to the number of 
the names, from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able ‘to 
go forth to war: 

.31 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of the tribe of Zebulun, 
were fifty and seven thousand and 
four hundred. 

32 Of the children of Joseph, 
namely, of the children of Eph- 
Taim, by their generations, after 
their families, by the house of their 


fathers, according to the number. of 


166 


lthe names, from twenty years old 


and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 

33 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, 
were forty thousand and five hun- 
dred. 

34 Of the children of Manasseh, 
by their generations, after their 
families, by the house of their 
fathers, according to the number 
of the names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were ‘able 
to go forth to war; 

35 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of the tribe of Manas- 
seh, were thirty and two thousand 
and two hundred. ‘ 

36 ‘Of the children of Benjamin, 
by their generations, after ‘their 
families, by the house of their 
fathers, according to the mumber 
of the names, from twenty years 
old and upward, all that were able 
to go forth to war; 

37 Those that were numbered -of 
them, even of the tribe of Benja- 
min, were thirty and five thousand 
and four hundred. 

38 Of the children of Dan, by 
their generations, after their fam- 
ilies, by ‘the house of their fathers, 
according ‘to tthe number of the 
names, from twenty years old and 
upward, all that were able to -go 
forth ‘to war; 

39 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of the tribe of Dan, 
were threescore and two thousand 
and seven hundred. 

40 Of the children of Asher, by 
their generations, after their fam- 
ilies, by the house of their fathers, 
according to the number of the 
names, from twenty years old and 
upward, all that were able to go 
forth to war; 

41 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of the tribe of Asher, 
were forty and one thousand and 
five hundred. 

42 Of the children of Naphtali, 
throughout their generations, after 
their families, by the house of their 
fathers, according to the number of 
the names, from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able to 
go forth to war; 

43 Those that were numbered of 
them, even of the tribe of Naphtali, 
were fifty and three thousand and 
four hundred. 

44 These are those that were 
numbered, which Moses and Aaron 
numbered, and the princes of Israel, 


ke 
ee ‘ 


1 45] 


NUMBERS. 


(2 17 


being twelve men: each one was 
for the house of his fathers. 

45 So were all those that were 
numbered of the children of Israel, 
by the house of their fathers, from 
twenty years old and upward, all 
that were able to go forth to war in 
Israel; 

46 Even all ¢they that were num- 
bered were six hundred. thousand 
and three thousand and five hun- 
dred and fifty. 

47 >But the Levites after the tribe 
of their fathers were not numbered 
among them. 

48 For the Lorpb had spoken unto 
Moses, saying, 

49 Only thou shalt not number 
the tribe of Levi, neither take the 
sum of them among the children of 
Israel: 

50 But thou shalt appoint the 
Levites over the tabernacle of testi- 
mony, and over all the vessels there- 
of, and over all things that belong 
to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, 


B.C. 1490. 


a Num.2.32; 
14.22-38; 26. 
63-65; Ex. 
12.37; 38.26; 
Deut.10:22; 
Heb.11.12. 
Cf£.Rev.7. 
4-9. 


and all the vessels thereof; and they 
shall minister unto it, and shall en- 
camp round about the tabernacle. 

51 And when the tabernacle set- 
teth forward, the “Levites shall take 
it down: and when the tabernacle is 
to be pitched, the Levites. shall set 
it up: and the stranger that cometh 
nigh shall be put to death. 

52 And the children of Israel shall 
pitch their tents, “every man. by his 
own camp, and every man by his 
own standard, throughout their 
hosts. 

53 But the Levites shall pitch 
round about the tabernacle of testi- 
mony, that there be no wrath upon 
the congregation of the children of 
Israel: and the Levites shall keep 
the charge of the tabernacle of tes- 
timony. 

54 And the children of Israel did 
according to all that the LORD.com- 
manded. Moses, so did they. 


CHAPTER 2. 


The order of the host: (2) ar- 
rangement of the camp. 


ma ND the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses and unto Aaron, saying, 

2 eEvery man of the children of 
Israel shall pitch by his own stand- 
ard, with the ensign of their father’s 
house: /far off about the tabernacle 
of the congregation shall they pitch. 


b Num.2.33; 
3.15; Ex.38. 
21; 1 Chr.6. 
1-448; 21.6. 


c Num.10.17- 
2h. 

\@ Num.2.2; 
24.2. 

e Num.1.52; 
Psa.16.6. 

f Josh.3.4. 
Num.1.7; 
10.14; 1 Chr. 
2:10. 

h Num.10.14. 

4 Num.10.18. 

j Num.10.17, 
21. 


3 And on the east side toward the; 
rising of the sun shall they of the 
standard of the camp of J udah pitch’ 


“ak 


167 


throughout their armies: and 8Nah- 

shon the son of Amminadab shall 

be Nog thee of the children of Ju- 
ah. 

4 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were 
threescore and fourteen thousand 
and six hundred. 

5. And those that do pitch next 
unto him shall be the tribe of Issa- 
char: and Nethaneel the son of 
Zuar shall be captain of the chil- 
dren of Issachar. 

6 And his host, and. those that 
were numbered thereof, were fifty 
and four thousand and four hun- 
dred. 

7. Then the tribe of Zebulun: and 
Eliab the son of Helon shall be cap- 
tain of the children of Zebulun. 

8 And his host, and those that 
were numbered thereof, were fifty 
and seven thousand and four hun- 
dred. 

9 All that were numbered in the 
camp of Judah were an hundred 
thousand and fourscore thousand 
and six thousand and four hundred, 
throughout their armies. These 
shall “first set forth. 

10 On the south side shall be the 
standard of the camp of Reuben 
according to their armies: and the 
captain of the children of Reuben 
shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur. 

11 And his host, and those that 
were numbered thereof, were forty 
and six thousand and five hun- 
dred. 

12 And those which pitch by him 
shall be the tribe of Simeon: and 
the captain of the children of Sim- 
eon shall be Shelumiel the son of 
Zurishaddai. 

13 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were fifty 
and nine thousand and three hun- 
dred. 

14 Then the tribe of Gad: and the 
captain of the sons of Gad shall be 
Eliasaph the son of Reuel. 

15 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were forty 
and five thousand and six hundred 
and fifty. 

16 All that were numbered in the 
camp of Reuben were an hundred 
thousand and fifty and one thou- 
sand and four hundred and fifty, 
throughout their armies. And they 
shall set forth in the ‘second rank, 

17 jThen the tabernacle of the 
congregation shall set forward with 
the camp of the Levites in the midst 
of the camp: as they encamp, so 


in his place by their standards. 


18 On the west side shall be the 
standard of the camp of Ephraim 
according to their armies: and the) 


captain of the sons of Ephraim 
shall be Elishama the son of Am- 
mihud. 

‘19 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were forty 
thousand and five hundred. p 

20 And by him shall be the tribe 
of Manasseh: and the captain of the 
children of Manasseh shall be Ga- 
maliel the son of Pedahzur. 

21 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were thirty 
and two thousand and two hundred. 

22 Then the tribe of Benjamin: 
and the captain of the sons of Ben- 
jamin shall be Abidan the son of 
Gideoni. 

23 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were 
thirty and five thousand and four 
hundred. 

24 All that were numbered of the 
camp of Ephraim were an hundréd 
thousand and eight thousand and 
an hundred, throughout their ar- 
mies. And they shall go forward 
in the ¢third rank. 

25 The standard of the camp of 
Dan shali be on the north side by 
their armies: and the captain of the 
children of Dan shall be Ahiezer 
the son of Ammishaddai. 

26 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were 
threescore and two thousand and 
seven hundred. 

27 And those that encamp by him 
shall be the tribe of Asher: and the 
captain of the children of Asher 
shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran. 

28 And his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were forty 
and one thousand and five hundred. 

29 Then the tribe of Naphtali: 


and the captain of the children of 
Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of 


Enan. 

30 And’ his host, and those that 
were numbered of them, were fifty 
Boe, three thousand and four hun- 

red. 


31 All they that were numbered| 


in the camp of Dan were an hun- 

dred thousand and fifty and seven 

thousand and six hundred. They 

von go hindmost with their stan- 
ards. 


32 These are those which were 
numbered of the children of Israel 
by the house of their fathers: ball 


shall they set forward, every man 


NOMBERS. 


oa Num.10.22, 


6 Num.1.46, 
47, 11.21; 
Ex.38.26. 


c Num,24,2, 
5,6. 


d Israel (his- 
tory). vs.1- 
10; Deut.1. 
6-8,19-40. 
(Gen.12.2, 
3; Rom.11. 
26.) 


e Num.26.61; 
Lev.10.1,2; 
1 Chr.24.2. 


fNum.8.6; 
18.2; Ex.32. 
27,28; Deut. 


8, 


g Num.8,19; 


168 


B.C. 1490. 


those that were numbered of the 
camps throughout their hosts were 
six hundred thousand and three 
thousand and five hundred and fifty. 

33 But the Levites were not num- 
bered among the children of Israel; 
as the Lorp commanded Moses. — 

34 And the children of Israel did 
according to all that the LORD com- 
manded Moses: ‘so they pitched by 
their standards, and so they set 
forward, every one after their fam- 
ilies, according to the house of their 
fathers. 4 


CHAPTER 3. 


The order of the host: (3) the 
priests. ; 


4 eas also are. the generations 
of Aaron and Moses in the day 
that the LorD spake with Moses in 
mount 4Sinai. ’ 

2 And these are the namés of the 
sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn, 
and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. © 

3 These are the names of the sons 
of Aaron, the priests which were 
anointed, whom he consecrated ta 
minister in the priest’s office. 

4 And Nadab and ¢Abihu died 
before the LorpD, when they offered 
strange fire before the LORD, in the 
wilderness of Sinai, and they had 
no children: and Eleazar and Itha- 
mar ministered in the priest’s office 
in the sight of Aaron their father. 


The order of the host: (4) the 
tribe of Levi. : 


5 And the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, : 
6 JBring the tribe of Levi near, 
and present them before Aaron the 
past, that they may minister unto 

im. 

7 And they shall keep his charge, 
and the charge of the whole congre- 
gation before the tabernacle of the 
congregation, to do.the service of 
the tabernacle, 

8 And they shall keep all the in- 
struments of the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and the charge of the 
children of Israel, to do the service 
of the tabernacle. 

9 And thou shalt égive the Levites 
unto Aaron and to his sons: they 
are wholly given unto him out of 
the children of Israel. 

10 And thou shalt appoint Aaron 
and his sons, and they shali wait 
on their priest’s office: and the 
stranger that cometh nigh shall be 
put to death, § 


a, 
311] 


11 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

12 And J, behold, I have taken 
the Levites from among the chil- 
‘dren of Israel instead of all the 
firstborn that openeth the matrix 
among the children of Israel: there- 
fore the Levites shall be mine; 

13 Because all the firstborn are 
mine; for on the day that I smote 
all the firstborn in the land of Egypt 
T hallowed unto me all the firstborn 
in Israel, both man and beast: mine 
shall they be: I am the Lorpb. 


The order of the host: (5) the 
families of Levi. 


_ 14 And-the Lor spake unto Mo- 
ses in the wilderness of Sinai, say-, 


ing, | 
15 Number the children of Levi 
after the house of their fathers, by) 
their families: every male from a 
month old and upward shalt thou 
number them. 
16 And Moses numbered them ac- 
cording to the word of the Lorp, as|¢ Num4.24, 
he was commanded. 2: 
17 And these were the sons of|) =x.25.9. 
Levi by their names; Gershon, and 
Kohath, and Merari. LRRD EE 
18 And these are the names of the|d 1 Chr.26.23. 
sons of Gershon by their families; 
Libni, and Shimei. «Meera: 
19 And the sons of Kohath by|fNum.1.53. 
g Num.4.31, 
32, 


their families; Amram, and Izehar, 
Hebron, and Uzziel. 

20 And the sons of Merari by 
their families; Mahli, and Mushi. 
These are the families of the Levites 
according to the house of their 
fathers. 

21 Of Gershon was the family of 
the Libnités, and the family of the 
Shimites: these are the families of 
the Gershonites. 

22 Those that were numbered of 
them, according to the number of 
all the males, from a month old and 
upward, even those that were num- 
‘ered of them were seven thousand 
and five hundred. 

23 The families of the Gershonites 
shall. pitch behind the tabernacle 
westward. : 

94° And the chief of the house of 
the father of the Gershonites shall 
be Eliasaph the son of Lael. 


The order of the host: (6) the 
charges of the sons of Levi. 


25 And the charge of the sons of 
tGershon in the tabernacle of the 
congregation shall be the taber- 
nacle, and the tent, the covermg 


169 


NUMBERS. 


[3 38° | 


thereof, and the hanging for the 
door of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, { 

26 And the hangings of the court, 

and the curtain for the door of the 
court, which is by the tabernacle, 
and by the altar round about, and 
the ‘cords of it for all the service 
thereof. 
27 And of ¢Kohath was the fam- 
ily of the Amramites, and the fam- 
ily of the Izeharites, and the family 
of the Hebronites, and the family of 
the Uzzielites: these are the fam- 
ilies of the Kohathites. 

28 Inthe number of ali the males, 
from a month old and upward, were 
eight thousand and six hundred, 
keeping the charge of the sanctuary. 

29 The families of the “sons of 
Kohath shall pitch on the side of 
the tabernacle southward. 

30 And the chief of the house of 
the father of the families of the 
Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the 
son of Uzziel. 

31 And their charge shall be the 
ark, and the table, and the candle- 
stick, and the altars, and the ves- 
sels of the sanctuary wherewith 
they minister, and the hanging, and 
all the service thereof. 

32 And Eleazar the son of Aaron 
the priest shall be chief over the 
chief of the Levites, and have the 
oversight of them that keep the 
charge of the sanctuary. 

33 Of Merari was the family of 
the Mahlites, and the family of the 
Mushites: these are the families of 
Merari. 

34 And those that were numbered 
of them, according to the number of 
all the males, from a month old and 
upward, were six thousand and two 
hundred. 

35 And the chief of the house of 
the father of the families of Merari 
was Zuriel the son of Abihail: 
tthese shall pitch on the side of the 
tabernacle northward. 

36 And under the écustody and 
charge of the sons of Merari shali 
be the boards of the tabernacle, 
and the bars thereof, and the pillars 
thereof, and the sockets thereof, 
and all the vessels thereof, and all 
that serveth thereto, 

37 And the pillars of the court 
round about, and their sockets, and 
their pins, and their cords. i 

38 But those that encamp before 


the tabernacle toward the east, even 
before the tabernacle of the con- 
\gregation eastward, shall be Moses, 


3 39] 


and Aaron and his sons, *keeping| B.C. 1490. 


the charge of the sanctuary for the 
charge of the children of Israel; and 
the stranger that cometh nigh shall 
be put to death. 

39 All that were numbered of the 
Levites, which Moses and Aaron 
numbered at the commandment of 
the Lorp, throughout their fam- 
dlies, all the males from a month 
old and upward, were twenty and 
two thousand. 


The order of the host:(7)the first- 
born redeemed (Ex.38. 27, note). 


Israel, and the cattle of the Levites 
instead of their cattle; and the Le-|* 
vites shall be mine: I am the 
Lorp. 

46 And for those that are to be 
tedeemed of the two hundred and 
threescore and thirteen of the first- 
born of the children of Israel, which|* 
are more than the Levites; 

47 Thou shalt even take five 
‘shekels apiece by the poll, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary shalt 
thou take them: (the shekel is 
twenty /fgerahs:) 

48 And thou shalt give the money, 
wherewith the odd number of them 
is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and 
to his sons. 

49 And Moses took the redemp- 
tion money of them that were over 
and above them that were redeemed 
by the Levites: 

50 Of the firstborn of the children 
of Israel took he the money; a thou- 
sand three hundred and threescore 


NUMBERS. 


40 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, “Number all the firstborn of the 
males of the children of Israel from 
a month old and upward, and take], ys'7,8. 
the number of their names. 
41 ¢And thou shalt take the Le-| Num.26.62. 
vites for me (I am the LorD) in-|-y45. 
stead of all the firstborn among the 
children of Israel; and the cattle of|¢ ¥8-12,45- 
the Levites instead of all the first-| ¢ One shekel = 
lings among the cattle of the chil-| 2s. 9d... or 
dren of Israel. Seenehe 
42 And Moses numbered, as the] “””’ 
-LORD commanded him, all the first-| f One gerah = 
born among the children of Israel. aus et 
43 And all the firstborn males by r 
the number of names, from a month| ¢ Ex.38.27, 
old and upward, of those that were} 7°¢e- 
’ numbered of them, were twenty and], Ex.26.31; 
two thousand two hundred and] 1sa.25.7; 
threescore and thirteen. pee 
44 And the Lorb spake unto Mo- ‘ 

ses, saying, i Ex.25.10, 
45 Take the Levites instead of all] 16- 

. the firstborn among the children of j1 Ki8.7,8. 


Ex.25.30, 
note. 


TEx.25. 


31-38. 


m Ex.30.1-5. 


Ex.25.9; 
1 Chr.9.29. 


170 


[4 g 


and five shekels, after the shekel of 
the sanctuary: 

51 And Moses gave the money of 
them that were redeemed unto Aa- 
ron and to his sons, according to the 
word of the Lorp, as the Lorp 
commanded Moses. 


CHAPTER 4. 


The order of the host: (8) service 
of the Kohathites. 


AD the LorD spake unto Moses 
and unto Aaron, saying, , 

2 Take the sum of the sons of 
Kohath from among the sons of 
Levi, after their families, by the 
house of their fathers, 

3 From thirty years old and up- 
ward even until fifty years old, all 
that enter into the host, to do the 
work in the tabernacle of the 
congregation. 

4 This shall be the service of the 
sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of 
the congregation, about the most 
holy things: 

5 And when the camp setteth for- 
ward, Aaron shall come, and his 
sons, and they shall take down the 
covering ‘vail, and cover the iark 
of testimony with it: 

6 And shall put thereon the cover- 
ing of badgers’ skins, and shall 
spread over it a cloth wholly of blue, 
and shall put in the Jstaves thereof. 

7 And upon the table of *shew- 
bread they shall spread a cloth of 
blue, and put thereon the dishes, 
and the spoons, and the bowls, and 
covers to cover withal: and ‘the 
continual bread shall be thereon: 

8 And they shall spread upon 
them a cloth of scarlet, and cover 
the same with a covering of badgers’ 
skins, and shall put in the staves 


\thereof. 


9 And they shall take a cloth of 
blue, and cover the /candlestick of 
the light, and his lamps, and his 
tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all 
the oil vessels thereof, wherewith 
they minister unto it: 

10 And they shall put it and all 
the vessels thereof within a cover- 
ing of badgers’ skins, and shall put 
it upon a bar. 

11 And upon the golden altar 
they shall spread a cloth of blue, 
and cover it with a covering of bad- 
gers’ skins, and shall put to the 
staves thereof: 

12 And they shall take all the “in- 
struments of ministry, wherewith 
they minister in the sanctuary, and 


we 


4 13] 


NUMBERS. 


[4 34 


put them in a cloth of blue, and 
cover them with a covering of 
badgers’ skins, and shall put them 
on a bar: 

13 And they shall take away the 
ashes from the altar, and spread a 
purple cloth thereon: 

14 And they shall put upon it all 
the vessels thereof, wherewith they 
minister about it, even the censers, 
the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and 
the basons, all the vessels of the 
altar; and they shall spread upon 
it a covering of badgers’ skins, and 
put to the staves of it. 

15 And when Aaron and his sons 
thave made an end of covering the 
sanctuary, and all the vessels of the 
sanctuary, as the camp is to set 
forward: after that, the sons of 
4Kohath shall come to bear it: but 
they shall not touch any holy thing, 
lest they die. These things are the 
burden of the sons of Kohath in the 
tabernacle of the congregation. 


The order of the host: (9) the 
office of Eleazar. 


16 And to the office of Eleazar 
the son of Aaron the priest per- 
taineth the oil for the light, and 
the “sweet incense, and the daily 
dmeat-offering, and the ‘anointing 
oil, and the oversight of all the tab- 
ernacle, and of all that therein fs, in 
the sanctuary, and in the vessels 
thereof. 

17 And the Lorp spake unto 
Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 

18 Cut ye not off the tribe of the 
families of the Kohathites from 
among the Levites: 

19 But thus do unto them, that 
they may live, and not die, when 
they approach unto the most Sholy 
things: Aaron and hissons shall go 
in, and appoint them every one to 
his service and to his burden: 


a Num.7.9; 
31.9; Josh. 


15.2,15. 


6 Ex.25.6; 
Lev.24.2. 


¢ Ex.30.34. 


d Lit. meal. 


e Ex.30.23- 
25. 


fv. 
g Num,3.25, 
26. 


hk Ex.26.14. 


t v.33. 


jv3. 


k Num.3.36, 
37. 


1Ex.26.15. 
m Ex.25.9. 
n v.28, 


20 But they shall not go in to see 
when the holy things are covered, 
lest they die. 


The order of the host: (10) the 
service of the Gershonites. 


21 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

92 Take also the sum of the sons 
of Gershon, throughout the houses 
of their fathers, by their families; 

23 From thirty years old and up- 
ward until fifty years old shalt 
thou number them; all that enter in 
to perform the service, to do the 
work in the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation. 


171 


B.C. 1490. 


10.21; Deut. 


4.10; 2 Sam. 
6.13; 1 Chr. 


24 This is the service of the fami- 
lies of the Gershonites, to serve, 
jand for burdens: 
| 25 sAnd they shall bear the cur- 
tains of the tabernacle, and the 
tabernacle of the congregation, his 
covering, and the covering of the 
*badgers’ skins that is above upon 
it, and the hanging for the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, 

26 And the hangings of the court, 
and the hanging for the door of the 
gate of the court, which is by the 
tabernacle and by the altar round 
about, and their cords, and all the 
instruments of their service, and 
all that is made for them: so shall 
they serve. 

27 At the appointment of Aaron 
and his sons shall be all the service 
of the sons of the Gershonites, in all 
their burdens, and in all their ser- 
vice: and ye shall appoint unto 
them in charge all their burdens. 

28 This is the service of the fami- 
lies of the sons of Gershon in the 
tabernacle of the congregation: and 
their charge shal] be under the 
hand of ‘Ithamar the son of Aaron 
the priest. 


The order of the host: (11) the 
service of the Merarites. 


29 As for the sons of Merari, thou 
shalt number them after their fami- 
lies, by the house of their fathers; 

30 From ‘thirty years old and up- 
ward even unto fifty years old shalt 
thou number them, every one that 
entereth into the service, to do the 
work of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation. 

31 And “this 7s the charge of their 
burden, according to all their ser- 
vice in the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation; the boards of the taber- 
nacle, and the bars thereof, and 
the pillars thereof, and sockets 
thereof, 

32 And the pillars of the court 
round about, and their sockets, and 
ltheir pins, and their cords, with all 
‘their “instruments, and with all 
their service: and by name ye shall 
reckon the instruments of the 
charge of their burden. 

33 This is the service of the fami- 
lies of the sons of Merari, according 
to all their service, in the tabernacle 
of the “congregation, under the 
hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron 
the priest. 

34 And Moses and Aaron and the 
chief of the congregation numbered 
Ithe sons of the Kohathites after 


iar 
Ay 


4 35] 


: 
their families, and after the house of| B.C. 1490. 


their fathers, 

35 From “thirty years old and up- 
ward even unto fifty years old, 
every one that entereth into the 
service, for the work in the taber- 
nacle of the congregation: 

36 And those that were numbered 
of them by their families were two 
thousand seven hundred and fifty. 
‘37 These were they that, were 
numbered of the families of the 
Kohathites, all that might do ser- 
vice in the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, which Moses and Aaron 
did number according to the com- 
mandment of the LorD by the hand 
of Moses. ie 

38 And those that were numbered 
of the sons of Gershon, throughout 
their families, and by. the house of 
their fathers, 

39 From thirty years old and up- 
ward even unto fifty years old, 
every one that entereth into the 
service, for the work in the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, 

40 Eventhose thatwere numbered 
of them, throughout their families, 
by the house of their fathers, were| 
two thousand and six hundred and 
thirty. 

41 These are they that were 
numbered of the families of the sons 
of Gershon, of all that might do 
service in the tabernacle of: the 
congregation, whom Moses and 
Aaron did number according to the 
commandment of the Lorpb. 

42 And those that were numbered 
of the families of the sons of Merari, 
throughout their families, by the 
house of their fathers. ; 

43 From thirty years old and up- 
ward even unto fifty years old, 
every one that entereth into the 
service, for the work in the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, 

44 Even those that were numbered 
of them after their families, were 
three thousand and two hundred. 

45 These be those that were num- 
bered of the families of the sons of 
Merari, whom Moses and Aaron 
numbered according to the word of 
the “Lorp by the hand of Moses. 

46 All those that were numbered 
of the Levites, whom Moses and 
Aaron and the chief of Israel num- 
bered, after their families, and after 
the house’ of their fathers, 

47 4rom thirty years old and up- 
ward even unto fifty years old, 
every one that came to do the ser- 
vice of the ministry, and the service: 


NUMBERS. 


a v.47. 

b v.22. 

¢ v.29. 

d vs.3,23,30; 
Sethi 

é vs.15,24,31. 

f Lev.15.2. 

g 2 Ki.7.3; 


2 Chr.26.21, 


h Lev.6.2. 


¢ Psa.32.5; 
1 John 1.9, 


j Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 


59.20, note. 


k See Ex.29, 
33, note, 


172 


of the burden in the tabernacle of 
the congregation, \ 

48 Even those that were num- 
bered of them, were eight thousand 
and five hundred and fourscore. 

49 According to the command- 
ment of the LorD they were num- 
bered by the hand of Moses, every 
one according to his “service, and 
according to his burden: thus were 
they numbered of him, as the Lorp 
commanded Moses. 


CHAPTER 5. 


The order of the host: (12) defile- 
ment of the camp. 


vs Greg the LorD spake unto Moses, 
sayin: 


2 Command the children of Israel, 
that they put out of the camp every 
leper, and every one that hath an 
fissue, and whosoever is defiled by 
the dead: 

3 Both male and female shall ye 
put out, without the camp shall ye 
put them; that they defile not their 
camps, in the midst whereof I dwell. 

4 And the children of Israel did 
so, and put them out without the 
camp: as the Lorp spake unto 
Moses, so did the children of Israel. 

5 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

6 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, ‘When a man or woman shall 
commit any sin that men commit,, 
to do a trespass against the LorbD, 
and that person be guilty; 

7 Then they shall ‘confess their 
sin which they have done: and he 
shall recompense his trespass with 
the principal thereof, and add unto 
it the fifth part thereof, and give it 
unto Aim against whom he hath 
trespassed. 

8 Butifthe man have noJkinsman 
to recompense the trespass unto, let 
the trespass be recompensed unto 
the Lorp, evento the priest: beside 
the ram of the ‘atonement, whereby 
an atonement shall be made for 

imi. 

9 And every offering of all the 
holy things of the children of Israel, 
which they bring unto the priest, 
shall be his. 

10 And every man’s hallowed 
things shall be his: whatsoever 
any man giveth the priest, it shall 
be his. 

11 And the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

12 Speak unto the children of Is- 
frael, and say unto them, If any 


7 
_ 


$3) 


man’s wife go aside, and commit a 
trespass against him, 

13 And a man lie with her car- 
nally, and it be hid from the eyes 
of her husband, and be kept close, 
and she be defiled, and there be no 
witness against her, neither she be 
taken with the manner; 

14 And the spirit of jealousy come 
upon him, and he be jealous of his 
wife, and she be defiled: or if the 
spirit of jealousy come upon him, 
and he be jealous of his wife, and 
she be not defiled: 

15 Then shall the man bring his 
wife unto the priest, and he shall 
bring her “offering for her, the tenth 
part of an Sephah of barley meal; 
he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put 
frankincense thereon; for it is an! 
offering of jealousy, an offering of 
memorial, ‘bringing iniquity to re- 
membrance. 

16 And the priest shall bring her 
near, and set her before the LORD: 

17 And the priest shall take holy 
water in an earthen vessel; and of 
the dust that is in the floor of the 
tabernacle the priest shall take, and 
put zt into the water: 

18 And the priest shall set the 
woman before the 4LorpD, and un- 
cover the woman’s head, and put the 
offering of memorial in her hands, 
which is the jealousy offering: and 
the priest shall have in his hand the} 
ebitter water that causeth the curse: 

19 And the priest shal! charge her 
by an oath, and say unto the 
woman, If no man have lain with; 
thee, and if thou hast not gone} 
aside to uncleanness with another 
instead of thy husband, be thou free 
from this bitter water that causeth 
the curse: 

90 But if thou hast gone aside to 
another instead of thy husband, 
and if thou be defiled, and some 
man have lain with thee beside 
thine husband: 

21 Then the priest shali /charge 
the woman with an oath of cursing, 
and the priest shall say unto the 
woman, The LorD make thee a 
curse and an oath among thy peo- 
ple, when the Lorpb doth make thy 
thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell; 
22 And this water that causeth 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1490. 


a Lev.5.11. 

b One ephah 
=1bu 
3 pts. 

¢1 Ki.17.18; 
Ezk.29.16; 
Heb.10.3. 

d Heb.13.4. 

€ vs.17,22,24, 


Ff Josh.6.26; 


g Lev.8.27. 
h Lev.2.2,9. 
i Deut.28.37; 


Isa.65.15; 
Jer.24.95 


29.18,22; 42. 
18. 


j Separation. 


k Jud.13.5; 
Heb.7.26,. 


the curse shall go into thy bowels, 


[6 2 


to make thy belly to swell, and thy 
thigh to rot: And.the woman shall 
say, Amen, amen. 

23 And the priest shall write these 
curses in a book, and he shall blot 
them out with the bitter water: 

24 And he shall cause the woman 
to drink the bitter water that 
causeth the curse: and the water 
that causeth the curse shall enter 
into her, and become bitter. 

25 Then the priest shall take the, 
jealousy offering out of the woman’s 
hand, and shall wave the offering 
before the Lorpb, and offer it upon 
the altar: 

26 And the priest shall take an 
handful of the offering, “even the 
memorial thereof, and burn 7t upon 
the altar, and afterward shall cause 
the woman to drink the water. . 

27 And when he hath made her 
to drink the water, then it shall 
come to pass, that, if she be defiled, 
and have done trespass against her 
husband, that the water that 
causeth the curse shall enter into 
jher, and become bitter, and her. 
lbelly shali swell, and her thigh 
shail rot: and the woman shall be’a 
licurse among her people. 

28 And if the woman be not 
defiled, but be clean; then she shall 
be free, and shall conceive seed. 

29 This is the law of jealousies, 
when a wife goeth aside to 
another instead of her husband, 
and is defiled; 

30 Or when the spirit of jealousy 
cometh upon him, and he be jealous 
over his wife, and shall set the wo- 
|man before the LorD, and the priest 
shall execute upon her all this law. 

31 Then shall the man be guiltless 
‘from iniquity, and this woman shall 
bear her iniquity. 


CHAPTER 6. 


The order of the hos: (13) the 
Nazarites. 


Ark the LorD spake unto Moe 
ses, Isaying, . 

2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, and say unto them, When 
either man or woman shall Jsepa- 
rate themselves to vow a vow of 
a 2kNazarite, to separate them- 
selves unto the LORD; 


1 There is a beautiful moral order in chapters 6.-7.; separation, 6. 1-12; wor- 


ship, 6. 13-21; blessing, 6. 22-27; service, 
2 The Nazarite (more accurately Nazirite, 


7. 1-89. 
one separated) was a person of either 


See Heb. 13. 12-16. 


sex separated wholiy unto the Lorp. Abstention from wine, the symbol of mere 


natural joy (Psa. 104, 15), was the expression of 


173 


a devotedness which found all its 


6 3] NUMBERS. [6 P| 
3. He:shall separate himself from) — B:c. 1490: 14 And he shall offer his offering 
wine: and: strong. drink, and shall) . unto the LorD, one-he lamb of the? 
drink no vinegar of wine, or vine- first year without. blemish for a 
gar of strong drink, neither shall burnt-offering, and one ewe lamb of, 
he drink ‘any liquor of grapes, nor the first year without blemish for a: 
eat moist grapes, or dried. sin-offéring, and one ram without 

4 All the days of his separation blemish for peace-offerings, 
shall he eat nothing that is made 15 And a basket of cunleavened: 
of the vine tree, from the kernels bread, cakes of fine flour mingled 
even to the husk. with oil, and wafers of unleavened. 

5 All the days of the vow of his bread anointed with: oil, and their 
separation there shall no razor come ¢dmeat-offering, and ther drink: 
upon his head: until the days be offerings. 

16 And the priest shall bring 


fulfilled, in the which he separateth 
Aimself unto the LorD, he shall be them before the LorD; and shall 
“offer his sin-offering, and his burnt- 


holy, and shall let the locks of the 
hair of his head grow. offering: 

6 All the days that he separateth!, rey 5.7. 17 And he shall offer the ram for 
iimself unto the Lorp he shali a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto: 
bSee Ex.29. |the LorRD, with the basket of un-. 


come: at no dead body. 
leavened bread: the priest shall offer 


7 He shalk not make himself un- 
clean for his father, or for his|cLeaven.vs. lalso his émeat-offering, and his 


mother, for his brother, or for his} 15,17,19; drink-offering. 
sister, when they die: because the eae 18 And the Nazarite shall shave 
fe sation of his God is upon his} Mt.13.33). |the head of his’ separation at the 
3 All the days of his separation|? Lit- meal. es — ae a 
Be as seat unto the rms $ : e Lev.4.30. i of ses i oe is ae 
nd if any man die very sud- on, and put st in the fire which 
denly by him, and) he hath defiled|/!S™-2.15. |. under the sacrifice of the peace-- 
Reichel shove ee er en am ae e295, ita And onde 
€ shall shave his head in the day} 28. the priest shall take 4 
of his cleansing, on the seventh day bp ERGOT. Fsodden: shoulder of the ram, and: 
shall he shave it. one unleavened cake out of the 
10 And on the eighth day he shall! i Bibie-pray- basket, and one unleavened wafer, 
Ae peg Sisdes) oy ve vouris et rg beaters put them upon the hands. 
eons, to the priest, e door of| Num.i0'35, |o e Nazarite, after the hair of 
the tabernacle of the congrega-| 36 (Gen. | |his separation is shaven: 
Sent, Saige weld Renter 30 pe rami pe And the ot act Wore them: 
s er the or a wave- 7 
one for a sin-offering, and the other pets rea Sy be ee 
for a burnt-offering, and make: an with the wave-breast and heave-- 
’atonement for him, for that he shoulder: and Aafter that the Naz- 
sinned by the dead, and shall hal:| arite may drink wine. 
low his head that same day. 21 This 7s the law of the Nazarite: 
12 And he shall consecrate unto who hath vowed, and of his offer- 
via Beeb: ee aie of es cceene ing unto the Lorp for his separa-. 
F , ail bring a lamb of the tion, beside that that his hand. 
et ga pore trespass-offering: shall get: according to the vow. 
ae ie Sh t ee before shall which he vowed, so he must do; 
a » because his separation was after ee, lew of his separation. 
; — the LorD spake unto Mo-- 
13 And this zs the law of the ses, saying, é - 


Nazarite, when the days of his 23 S 
ie, peak unto Aaron and ; 
separation are fulfilled: he shall be| his. sons, saying, #On. this re 
brought unto the door of the taber-| shali biess the children of Israel 

nacle of the congregation: saying unto them, ‘ 


joy in the Lorp (cf. Psa. 87. 7; 97. 12; Hab. 3. 18; Phil. 3. 1, 3; 4. 4, 10), Th : 
hair, naturally a reproach to man (1 Cor. 11. 14), was at once the RAN sign a. 
Nazarite’s separation, and of his willingness. to bear reproach for Jehovah’s sake. 


174 


6 24] 


NUMBERS. 


[7 25 


24 The Lorp bless thee, and keep| B.C. 1490. 


thee: 
25 The Lorp make his ¢face shine 
upon thee, and be gracious unto 


ee: 
26 The Lorp “lift up his counte- 
Mance upon thee, and give thee 
“peace. ; 
27 And they shall put my name 
upon the children of Israel; and I 
will bless them. 


CHAPTER 7. 


The order of the host: (14) the 
gifts of the princes. 


AND it came to pass on the day 
that Moses had fully set up the 
tabernacle, and had ¢anointed it, 
and sanctified it, and all the instru- 
ments thereof, both the altar and 
all the vessels thereof, and had an- 
ointed them, and sanctified them; 

2 That the “princes of Israel, 
heads of the house of their fathers, 
who were the princes of the tribes, 
and were over them that were 
numbered, offered: 

3 And !they brought their offer- 
ing before the LorpD, six covered 
wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon 
for two of the princes, and for each 
sone an ox:.and they brought them 
‘before the tabernacle. 

4 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

5 Take it-of them, that they may 
be to do ‘the service of the taber- 
macle of the congregation; and thou 
shalt give them unto the Levites, 


a Psa.31.16; 
80.3,7,19; 
Dan.9.17. 

6 Fsa.89.15. 

c Isa.26.3,12. 

d Lev.8.10,11. 

e Num.14. 


f Num.4.24, 
28. 

g Num.4.4, 
15. 


h One shekel= 
2s. 9d., or 
65 cts.; also 
vs.19,25,31, 
37,43,49,55, 
61,67,73,79, 


85,86. 


# Lit. meal. 
j Ex.30.34. 
k Lev.1.2;3. 
LLev.4.23. 


‘to every man according to his 
“service. 

6 And Moses took the wagons and 
the oxen, and gave them unto the 
Levites. 

7 Two wagons and four oxen he 
gave unto the sons of /Gershon, 
according to their service: 

8 And four wagons and eight oxen 
he gave unto the sons of Merari, 
according unto their service, under 
the hand of Ithamar the son of 
Aaron the priest. 

9 But unto the sons.of Kohath he 
gave none: because the &service of 
the sanctuary belonging unto them 
was that they should bear upon 
their shoulders. 

10 And the princes offered for 
dedicating of the altar in the day 
that it was anointed, even the 


m Lev.3.1. 


nv.13. 


princes offered their offering before 
the altar. 

11 And the LorD said unto Mo- 
ses, They shall offer their offering, 
each prince on his day, for the dedi- 
cating of the altar. 

12 And he that offered his offering 
the first day was Nahshon the son 


‘lof Amminadab, of the tribe of 


Judah: 

13 And his offering was one silver 
charger, the weight thereof was an 
hundred and thirty “shekels, one 
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary; both 
jof them were full of fine flour 
mingled with oil for a ‘meat-offer- 
ing: 

14 One spoon of ten shekels of 
gold, full of Jincense: 

i5 One young ‘bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: 

16 One kid of the goats for a /sin- 
offering: 

17 And for a sacrifice of ™peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
ihe goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of Nah- 
shon the son of Amminadab. 

18 On the second day Nethaneel 
the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, 
did offer: 

19 He “offered for his offering one 
silver charger, the weight whereof 
was an hundred and thirty shekels, 
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, 
after the shekel of the sanctuary; 
both of them full of fine flour min- 
|gled with oil for a ‘meat-offering: 

20 One spoon of gold of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

21 One young bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: 

22 One kid of the goats fora sin- 
offering: 

23 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of Neth- 
aneel the son of Zuar. 

24 On the third day Eliab the 
son of Helon, prince of the children 
of Zebulun, did offer: 

25 His offering was one silver 
charger, the weight whereof was an 
hundred and thirty shekels, one 
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary; both of 
them full of fine fiour mingled with 
oil for a ‘meat-offering: 


_ 1Jt is beautiful to observe that, though the offerings of the princes were identical, 
‘each is separately recorded by the pen of inspiration. Cf. Mk. 12. 41~4. 


175 


eas 


NUMBERS. 


i 7 26] 


26 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

27 One young bullock, one. ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: . 

28 One kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering: . : 

29 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
‘he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of Eliab 
the son of Helon. : 

30 On the fourth day ¢Elizur the 
son of Shedeur, prince of the chil- 
dren of Reuben, did offer: 

31 His offering was one silver 
charger of the weight of an hundred 
and thirty shekels, one silver bowl 
of seventy shekels, after the shekel 
of the sanctuary; both of them full 
of fine flour mingled with oil for a 
bmeat-offering: 

32 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

33 One young bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: 

34 One kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering: 

35 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of Elizur 
the son of Shedeur. 

36 On the fifth day Shelumiel the 
son of Zurishaddai, prince of the 
children of Simeon, did offer: 

37 His ‘offering was one silver 
charger, the weight whereof was 
an hundred and thirty shekels, 
one silver bowl of seventy shek- 
els, after the shekel of the sanc- 
tuary; both of them full of fine 
flour mingled with oil for a meat- 
‘offering: 

38 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

39 One young bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: 

40 One kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering: 

41 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of 
Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai. 

42 On the sixth day ¢Bliasaph the 
son of *Deuel, prince of the children 
of Gad, offered: 

43 His foffering was one silver 
charger of the weight of an hundred 
and thirty shekels, a silver bowl of 
seventy shekels, after the shekel of 
the sanctuary; both of them full of 


B.C. 1490. 


a Num.i.5; 
2.10. 


b Lit. meal. 

¢ v.13. 

d Num.1.14; 
2.14. 

e Called 
Reuel; Num. 
2.14. 

lf v.13. 

gv.13. 


h Num.1.10; 
2.20. 


t v.13. 


176 


7a 


fine flour mingled with oil for a 
bmeat-offering: 

44 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

45 One young bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: 

46 One kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering: 

47 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
he goats, five lambs of the first year: 
this was the offering of Eliasaph 
the son of Deuel. 

48 On the seventh day Elishama_ 
the son of Ammihud, prince of the 
children of Ephraim, offered: 

49 His offering was one silver 
charger, the weight whereof was an 
hundred and thirty shekels, one sil- 
ver bowl of seventy shekels, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary; both 
of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a ’meat-offering: 

50 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

51 One young bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: , 

52 One kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering: 

53 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams,’ five 
he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of 
Elishama the son of Ammihud. 

54 On the eighth day “offered 
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, 
prince of the children of Manasseh: 

55 His ‘offering was one silver 
charger of the weight of an hun- 
dred and thirty shekels, one silver 
bowl of seventy shekels, after the 
shekel of the sanctuary; both of 
them full of fine flour mingled with 
oil for a °meat-offering: 

56 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

57 One young bullock, one ram, 
cone lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: 


; 


| 58 One kid of the goats for a sins 


offering: 

99 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five | 
he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of | 
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 

60 On the ninth day Abidan the | 
son of Gideoni, prince of the chil- | 
dren of Benjamin, offered: > | 

61 His offering was one silver| 
charger, the weight whereof was 
an hundred and thirty shekels, one 
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after 


i 


wos. whi ie ! * 


7 2) NUMBERS. [8 2 


the shekel of the sanctuary; both! B.c. 1490. 
of them full of fine flour mingled|~ —S—_ 
with oil for a ¢meat-offering: 

62 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

-63 One young bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-offering: 

64 One kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering: 

65 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
Offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of Abi- 
dan the son of Gideoni. 

66 On the tenth day Ahiezer the 
son of Ammishaddai, prince of the 
children of Dan, offered: 

67 His offering was one silver 
charger, the weight whereof was an 
hundred and thirty shekels, one sil- 
ver bowl of seventy shekels, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary; both 
of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a ¢meat-offering: 


silver bowl of seventy shekels, after 
the shekel of the sanctuary; both 
of them full of fine flour mingled 
with oil for a ¢meat-offering: 

80 One golden spoon of ten shek- 
els, full of incense: 

81 One young bullock, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a 
burnt-ofiering: : 

82 One kid of the goats for a sin 
offering: 3 

83 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five 
he goats, five lambs of the first 
year: this was the offering of Ahira 
the son of Enan. 

84 This was the dedication of the 
altar, in the day when it’ was 
anointed, by the princes of Israel: 
Jtwelve chargers of silver, twelve sil- 
ver bowls, twelve spoons of gold: 

85 Each charger of silver we1gh- 
ing an hundred and thirty shekels, 
each bowl seventy: all the silver 
vessels weighed two thousand and 

68 One golden spoon of ten shek- four hundred shekels, after the 
els, full of incense: , shekel of the sanctuary: 

69 One young bullock, one ram,|? Lit: meal. 86 The golden spoons were 
one lamb of the first year, for al) Num.i.a3;  |twelve, full of incense, weighing 
burnt-offering: 207. ten shekels apiece, after the shekel 


a One kid of the goats for a sin-| | 13 of the pence ae and of the 
offering: Eats, spoons was an hundred and twenty 
71 And for a sacrifice of peace-|dv.1. shekels. 
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five Vien 128? 87 All the oxen for the burnt- 
he pee five bey ob Ee fee Ex.33.9,11. piering i hakpiekics ck remy Nr: 
year: this was e offering o rams twelve, the lambs o rs 
Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, |/=*25-22- | year twelve, with their ¢meat-offer- 
Ge On a vents day ape eBx25.37; ing: — es ine of the goats for 
e son of Ocran, prince o e 25. sin-offering twelve. 
children of sates offered: ' Se see the se ed the sacri- 
73 His ‘offering was one silver ce of the peace-offerings were 
charger, the Ore psber was twenty ae four bullocks, fe ven 
an hundred and thirty shekels, one sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs 
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after of the first year sixty. ’ This was 
the shekel of vss ee neat ne dedication of be altar, after 
of them full of fine flour mingle that it was ¢anointed. 
with oil for a ¢meat-offering: 89 And when Moses was gone in- 
74 One golden spoon of ten shek- to the tabernacle of the congrega- 
els, full of incense: , tion to ‘speak with him, then he 
75 One young bullock, one ram, heard the voice of one speaking 
one lamb of the first year, for a unto him from off the Jmercy seat 
burnt-offering: that was upon the ark of testimony, 
76 One kid of the goats for a sin- poe the ay cherubims: 
offering: and he spake unto him. 
77 And for a sacrifice of peace- 
offerings, two ee ee ie CHAPTER 8. 
mesoets, “hvertambe vor the. its? The order of the host: (15) the 
Pasiel ee ae ake ata of Jamps and the candlestick. 
78 On the twelfth day Ahira the AND the LorD spake unto Mo- 
son of Enan, prince of the children ses, saying, 
f Naphtali, offered: ; 2 Speak unto Aaron, and say unto 
id i eri ilver him, When thou lightest the lamps 
one silve A 1 nps, 
Fite shave aia Hereol was} the seven lamps shall give light 


an hundred and thirty shekels, one over against the candlestick, 


177 


8 3] 


NUMBERS. 


‘oe 


[93 


3 And Aaron did so; he: lighted 
the lamps thereof over against the 
candlestick, as the LorD» com- 
manded Moses. 

4 And this work of the 4eandle- 
stick was of beaten gold, unto the 
shaft thereof, unto the flowers 
thereof, was beaten work: accord- 
ing unto the “pattern which the 
Lorp had shewed Moses, so he 
made the candlestick. 


The order of the host: 
(16) cleansing the Levites. 


5 And the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

6 Take the Levites from among) 
the children of Israel, and ‘cleanse 
them. 

7 And thus shalt thow do unto 
them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle: 
dwater of purifying upom them, and 
let them shave all their flesh, and 


Yet them wash their clothes, and so: 
make themselves clean. 

8 Then let them take a: young 
bullock with his ¢meat-offering, 
even fine: flour mingled with oil, 
and another young bullock shalt 
thou take: for a sin-offering. 

9 And thou shalt bring: the Le- 
vites before the tabernacle of: the 
congregation: and thou shalt gather’ 
the whole assembly of the children 
of Israel together: 

10 And thou shalt bring the Le- 
vites before the Lorp: and the 
children of Israel shall put their 
hands upon the Levites: 

11 And Aaron shall foffer the Le- 
vites before the Lorp for an offer- 


ing of the children of Israel, that 
they may execute the service of the 
Lorp. 

12 And the Levites shall lay their 
hands upon the heads of the bul- 
locks: and thou shalt offer the one 
for a sin-offering, and the other for 
a burnt-offering, unto the Lorp, to 
make an £atonement for the Levites. 

13. And thou shalt set the Levites 
before Aaron, and before his sons, 
and offer them for an offering unto 
the Lorp. 

14 Thus shalt thou separate the 
Levites from among the children of 
Israel:. and the Levites shall be 
mine. 

15 And after that shall the Le- 
vites go in to do the service of the 
tabernacle of the congregation: and 
thou shalt cleanse them, and offer 
them for an offering. 

16 For they are wholly given unto 
me from among the children of Is- 


a Ex.25.31. 

b Ex.25.40. 

c 2 Cor.7.1. 

d Num.19.9, 
17; Psa.51. 
2,7; Heb.9, 
13,14. 

¢ Lit. meal. 

f vs.11-22; 
cf.Rom.15. 
16. 


g See Ex,29. 
33, note. 


178 


rael; instead: of such as: open. every 
womb, even instead of the first- 
born of all the childrem of Israel, 
have I taken them unto me: 

17 For all the firstborn of the:chil- 
dren of Israel. are mine, both man 
and beast: on the day that I smote 
every firstborn in the:land of Egypt 
I sanctified them for myself. 

18 And I have taken the: Levites 
for all the firstborn of the children 
of Israel. 

19 And I have given the Levites 
as a gift to Aaron and to his sons” 
from among. the children of Israel, 
to do the service of the children of 
Israel in the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, and to make an éatone= 
ment for the children of Israel: that 
there be no plague among the chil- 
dren of Israel, when the childrem of 
Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary. 

20 And Moses, and Aaron, and all 
the congregation of the children off 
Israel, did to the Levites according 
unto all that the LorD commanded 
Moses concerning the Levites, so 
did the children of Israel unto them. 

21 And the Levites were purified; 
and they washed their clothes; and 
Aaron offered them as an: offering 
before the LoRD; and Aaron made 
an Satonement for them to: cleanse 
them. : 

22 And after that went the Le- 
vites in to do their service in the 
tabernacle of the congregation be- 
fore Aaron, and before his sons: as 
the Lorp had commanded Moses: 
concerning the Levites, so-did they 
unto them. 

23. And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

24 This is it that belongeth unto 
the Levites: from twenty and five 
years old and upward they shall go. 
in to wait upon the service of the 
tabernacle of the congregation: 

25 And from the age of fifty years. 
they shall cease waiting upon the 
service thereof, and shall serve no 
more: 

26 But shall minister with their 
brethren in the tabernacle of the 
congregation, to keep the charge, 
and shall.do no service. Thus shalt 
thou do unto the Levites touching 
their charge. 


CHAPTER 9, 


The order of the host: (17) the 
Passover. 


D Ng the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses in the wilderness of Sinai, 


4 


9 2) 


in the “first month of the second 
year after they were come out of the 
dJand of Egypt, saying, 

2 Let the children of Israel also 
keep the passover at his appointed 
season. 

3 In the fourteenth day of this 
month, at even, ye shall keep it in 
this appointed season: according to 
all the rites of it, and according to 
all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye 
keep it. 

4 And Moses spake unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, that they should 
-keep the passover. 

5 And they kept the passover on 
the fourteenth day of the first 
month at even in the wilderness of 
Sinai: according to all that the 
LLorpD commanded Moses, so did 
‘the children of Israel. 

6 And there were certain men, 
who were defiled by the dead body 
-of a man, that they could not keep 
the passover on that day: and they 
«came before Moses and before Aa- 
‘ron on that day: 

7 And those men said unto him, 
We are defiled by the dead body 
of a man: wherefore are we kept 
back, that we may not offer an 
offering of the LorpD in his ap- 
pointed season among the children 
of Israel? 

8 And Moses said unto them, 
Stand still, and I will hear what 
the Lorp will command concerning! 


syou. 

9 And the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

10 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael; saying, If any man of you or 
of your posterity shall be unclean 
by reason of a dead body, or be in 
a journey afar off, yet he shall keep 
the passover unto the LORD. 

11 The fourteenth day of the “sec- 
-ond month at even they shall keep 
it, and eat it with “unleavened 
‘bread and bitter herbs. 

12 They shall leave none of it 
unto the morning, nor break any 
-ebone of it: according to all the ordi- 
mances of the passover they shall 
keep it. 

13 But the man that js clean, and 
is not in a journey, and forbeareth 
to keep the passover, even the same 
fsoul shall be cut off from among 
his people: because he brought not 
the offering of the LorD in his ap- 
pointed season, that man shall bear 
his sin. 

14 And if a stranger shall sojourn 
among you, and will keep the pass- 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1490. 


ai.e. April; 
also v.5. 


6 Ex.12.3; 
Deut.16.1; 
2 Chr.30.3- 
15; Lk.22.7; 
1 Cor.5.7,8. 


cie. May. 

d Leaven. 
Num.28.17. 
(Gen,19.3; 
Mt.13.33.) 


e Fulfilled, 
John 19.36. 


f Heb.10.29; 
12.25 


g Isa.56.6,7. 
h1sa.4.5. 
1 Num.10.11, 


33,34; Ex.33. 


14,15; Ex. 
40.36,38. 


j Num.1.53; 
3.8; Zech. 
SJ 


k Ex.40.36,37. 


179 


[9 23 


over unto the LORD; according to 
the ordinance of the passover, and 
according to the manner thereof, so 
shall he do: ye shall have one ordi- 
nance, both for the stranger, and 
aioe that was born in the 
and. 


The order of the host: (18) the 
guiding cloud. 


15 And on the day that the taber- 
nacle was reared up the cloud 
heovered the tabernacle, namely, 
the tent of the testimony: and at 
even there was upon the tabernacle 
as it were the appearance of fire, 
until the morning. 

16 So it was alway: the cloud 
covered it by day, and the appear- 
ance of fire by night. 

17 And when the ‘cloud was taken 
up from the tabernacle, then after 
that the children of Israel jour- 
neyed: and in the place where the 
cloud abode, there the children of 
Israel pitched their tents. 

18 At the commandment of the 
LorpD the children of Israel jour- 


jneyed, and at the commandment of 


the Lorpb they pitched: as long as 
the cloud abode upon the tabernacle 
they rested in their tents. 

19 And when the cloud tarried 


long upon the tabernacle many 


days, then the children of Israel 
kept the Jcharge of the LORD, and 
journeyed not. 

20 And so it was, when the cloud 


jwas a few days upon the taber- 


nacle; according to the command- 
ment of the LORD they abode 
in their tents, and according to the 
commandment of the LorD they 


|journeyed. 


21 And so it was, when the cloud 
abode from even unto the morning, 
and that the cloud was taken up in 
the morning, then they journeyed: 
whether it was by day or by night 
that the cloud was taken up, they 
journeyed. 

22 Or whether it were two days, 
or a month, or a year, that the cloud 
tarried upon the tabernacle, remain- 
ing thereon, the children of Israel 
kabode in their tents, and journeyed 
not: but when it was taken up, they 
journeyed. 

23 At the commandment of the 
Lorp they rested in the tents, and 
at the commandment of the LORD 
they journeyed: they kept the 
charge of the Lorp, at the com- 


mandment of the LorD by the hand 
of Moses. 


10 1] 


silver assembly-trumpets. 


aD the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, ; 

2 Make thee two trumpets of sil- 
ver; of a whole piece shalt thou 
make them: that thou mayest use 
them for the calling of the assembly, 
and for the journeying of the camps. 

3 And when they shall blow with} 
them, all the assembly shall assem- 
ble themselves to thee at the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation. 

4 And if they blow but with one! 
trumpet, then the princes, which 
are *heads of the thousands of Is- 
oe shali gather themselves unto 
thee. 

5 When ye blow an alarm, then! Num.1.16; 
the camps that lie on the east parts} =x-.18.21. 
shall go forward. b Joel 2.1. 

6 When ye blow an alarm the 
second time, then the camps that] ¢ Num.2.10. 
lie on the “south side shall take d Num.31.6: 
their journey: they shall blow an - 


1 Chr.15.24; 
alarm for their journeys. 2 Chr.13.12, 
7 But when the congregation is to}, num.29.1: 
be gathered together, ye shall blow,| Lev.23.24: 
but ye shall not sound an alarm. 2 Chr.5.12; 
8 And the sons of Aaron, the! P4813: 


i c 89.15; 
@priests, shall blow with the trum- rE a 


pets; and they shall be to you for 
an ordinance for ever throughout /=*-28-29- 
aN eo 

nd if ye go to warin your 
land against the enemy that op-|/ Called 
presseth you, then ye shall blow an 
alarm with the trumpets; and yel. 
shall be remembered before the aE 
LORD your God, and ye shall be) *’*”* 
saved from your enemies. 

10 ‘Also in the day of your glad- 
ness, and in your solemn days, and 
in the beginnings of your months, 
ye shall blow with the trumpets) 
over your burnt-offerings, and over! 
the sacrifices of your peace-offer-, 
ings; that they may be to you for| 
a/memorial before your God: I am 
the Lorp your God. | 


From Sinai to Kadesh-barnea: 
(1) the first march; the hait, 
in Paran. | 


11 And it came to pass 6n the! 
twentieth day of the &second| 
month, in the second year, that the 
cloud was taken up from off the. 
tabernacle of the testimony. \ 

12 And the children of Israel took 
their journeys out of the wilderness} 
of Sinai; and the cloud rested in! 
the wilderness of Paran, t 


gi.e. May, 


180 


NUMBERS. (10 2 


CHAPTER 10. | B.C. 1490. 13 And aug ca took oe joum 
3 ney according to the commandment 
The order of the host: (19) the of the Lorp by the hand of Moses, 


Reuel, Ex.2. 
18. 


14 In the first place went the 
standard of the camp of the chil- 
jdren of Judah according to their 
larmies: and over his host was 
Nahshon the son of Amminadab, 

15 And over the host of the tribe 
of the children of Issachar was 
Nethaneel the son of Zuar. 

16 And over the host of the tribe 
of the children of Zebulun was 
Eliab the son of Helon. 

17 And the tabernacle was taken 
down; and the sons of Gershon and 
the sons of Merari set forward, 
bearing the tabernacle. 

18 And the standard of the camp 
of Reuben set forward according to 
their armies: and over his host was 
Elizur the son of Shedeur. 

19 And over the host of the tribe 
of the children of Simeon was She- 
lumiel the son of Zurishaddai. 

20 And over the host of the tribe 
of the children of Gad was Eliasaph 
the son of Deuel. 

21 And the Kohathites set for- 
ward, bearing the sanctuary: and 
the other did set up the tabernacle 
against they came. 

22 And the standard of the camp 
of the children of Ephraim set for- 
ward according to their armies: and 
over his host was Elishama the son 
of Ammihud. 

23 And over the host of the tribe 
of the children of Manasseh was, 
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 

24 And over the host of the tribe 
of the children of Benjamin was 
Abidan the son of Gideoni. 

25 And the standard of the camp 
of the children of Dan set forward, 
which was the rereward of all the 
camps throughout their hosts: and 
over his host was Ahiezer the son 
of Ammishaddai. 

26 And over the hast of the tribe 
of the children of Asher was Pagiel 
the son of Ocran, 

27 And over the host of the tribe 
of the children of Naphtali wag 
Ahira the son of Enan, 

28 Thus were the journeyings of 
the children of Israel according to 
their armies, when they set for- 


ward. 

29 And Moses said unto Hobab, 
the son of *Raguel the ‘Midianite, 
Moses’ father in law, We are jour- 
neying unto the place of which the 
Lorp said, I will give it you: come. 
thoa with us, and we will do thee 

q 


i | 


good concerning Israel. 

30 And he said unto him, I will 
not go; but I will depart to mine 
own land, and to my kindred. 

31 And he said, Leave us not, I 
pray thee; forasmuch as thou know- 
est how we are to encamp in the 
wilderness, and ¢thou mayest be to 
us instead of eyes. 

32 And it shall be, if thou go with 
us, yea, it shall be, that what good- 
ness the LORD shall do unto us, the 
same will we do unto thee. 


33 And they departed from the 
mount of the Lorp three days’ 
journey: and the ark of the cove- 
nant of the LORD went before them 
in the three days’ journey, to 
search out a resting place for them. 

34 And the cloud of the Lorp 
was upon them by day, when they 
went out of the camp. 

35 And it came to pass, when the 
ark set forward, that Moses said, 
Rise up, LORD, and let thine ene- 
mies be scattered; and let them that 
hate thee flee before thee. | 

36 And when it rested, he °said, 
Return, O LorD, unto the many 
thousands of Israel. 


CHAPTER 11. 


From Sinai to Kadesh-barnea:) 
(2) the fire of the Lord at, 
_ Faberah. 


BND when the people com- 
plained, it displeased the 
orp: and the Lorp heard it; 
and his anger was kindled; and the} 
fire of the LorD burnt among them, 
and ‘consumed them that were in 
the uttermost parts of the camp. 

.2 And the people cried unto Mo- 
ses; and when Moses prayed unto 
the LorD, the fire was quenched. 

3 And he called the name of the 
place ¢Taberah: because the fire of 
the LoRD burnt among them. 
Frorn Sinai to Kadesh-barnea: 

(3) the flesh-pots of Egypt. 

4 And «the mixt multitude that 
was among them fell a lusting: and| 
the children of Israel also wept 
again, and said, Who shall give us 
flesh to eat? 3 

5 We remember the fish, which 
we did eat in Egypt freely; the cu- 
cumbers, and the melons, and the 
leeks, and the onions, and the gar- 


lick: 
6 But now our soul is dried away: 


there is nothing at all, beside this 
fmanna, before our eyes. 


a But see Ex. 
13.21,22. 
What need 
had Moses of 
Hobab’s 
eyes? Cf. 
Jer.17.5. 


b Bible pray- 
ers (O.T.). 
Num.11.11- 
15. (Gen.15, 
2; Hab.3.1- 
16.) 


c Miracles 
(O.T.). vs.1- 
3; Num.16. 
31-35. (Gen. 
5.24; Jon.2. 
1-10.) 


d A burning. 


e Cf.Ex.12. 
38, note. Un- 
converted 
church mem- 
bers, unable 
to desire or 
understand 
Christ as the 
Bread of God 
(Ex.16.35, 
note), will 
clamour for 
things pleas- 
ing to the 
flesh in the 
work and 
way of the 
church: 
sumptuous 
buildings, 
ornate ritual, 
an easy doc- 
trine. Alas! 
they lead 
away the 
unspiritual 
believers 
also, 


f Ex.16.35, 
note. 


g Bible pray- 
ers (O.T.).va. 
11-15; Num. 
12.13. (Gen. 
15.2; Hab.3. 
1-16.) 


h Holy Spirit. 
vs.17,25,26, 
29; Num.24. 
2. (Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


181 


NUMBERS. 


SE eee ee 
good: for the LorD hath spoken] B.C. 1490. 7 And the manna was as corian- 


[11 18 


der seed, and the colour thereof as 
the colour of bdellium. 

8 And the people went about, 
and gathered it, and ground if in 
mills, or beat yt in a mortar, and 
baked it in pans, and made cakes 
of it: and the taste of it was as the 
taste of fresh oil. 

9 And when the dew fell upon the 
camp in the night, the manna fell 
upon it. 

From Sinai to Kadesh-barnea: 
(4) the complaint of Moses. 


10 Then Moses heard the people 
weep throughout their families, 
every man in the door of his tent: 
and the anger of the LORD was 
kindled greatly; Moses also was 
displeased. 

11 And Moses said unto the 
Lorp, Wherefore hast thou afflicted 
thy servant? and wherefore have I 
not found favour in thy sight, that 
thou layest the burden of all this 
people upon me? 

12 Have I conceived all this peo- 
ple? have I begotten them, that . 
thou shouldest say unto me, Carry 


ithem in thy bosom, as a nursing 


father beareth the sucking child, 
unto the land which thou swarest 
unto their fathers? 

13 Whence should I have flesh to 
give unto all this people? for they 
weep unto me, saying, Give us 
flesh, that we may eat. 

14 I am not able to bear all this 
people alone, because it is too 
theavy for me. 

15 And if thou deal thus with me, 
kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if 
I have found favour in thy sight; 
and let me not see my wretchedness. 


From Sinai to ey ia 
the seventy elders. (Cf. Ex. 18.19, 

16 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, Gather unto me seventy men of 
the elders of Israel, whom thou 
knowest to be the elders of the peo- 
ple, and officers over them; and 
bring them unto the tabernacle of 
the congregation, that they may 
stand there with thee. 

17 And I will come down and talk 
with thee there: and I will take of 
the “spirit which zs upon thee, and 
will put zt upon them; and they 
shall bear the burden of the people 
with thee, that thou bear if not 
thyself alone. z 
i 18 And say thou unto the people, 
\Sanctify yourselves against to mor- 
row, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye 


11 19] NUMBERS. [12 


have wept in the ears of aapanee E B.C. 1490. Kap peachts varie: SECs soniaal Pe 
ing, Who: shail give us flesh to; e ; ‘ 
Bate for it was well with us Hy hare men, See and said, My 
Egypt: fore the Lord wi or oses, forbid them. __ ; 
give ect gin ye shall eat. 29 And Moses said: unto him, En- 
19 Ye shall not eat one day, nor : viest thou for my sake? would God 
two days, nor five days, neither ten that el Hes Taint peorle wee 
days, nor twenty days; prophets, and that the LORD wo 
20 i But even a whole month; until put his 4spirit upon them! ; 
it come out at your nostrils, and it 30 And Moses gat him into the. 
be loathsome unto you: because! camp, he and the elders of Israel. 
that ye have despised the Lorp, From Sinai to Kadesh-barnea? 
} which isiamong you, and have wept (7) the quails and the plague. 
before i Paes Why came we! nat ae Frat iudl 
forth out of Egypt: n ere went forth a win 
21 And Moses said, The people, from the Lorb, and brought quails. 
among whom I am, are six hundred ._,,. |from thesea, and let them fall by’ 
‘thousand footmen; and thou hast/2 peer eg the camp, as it were a day’s journey 
‘said, I will give them flesh, that} G@x4is: _ jon this side, and as.it were a day’s) 
they may eat a whole month. Rey.22.19.), |journey on the other side, round. 
22 Shall the flocks and the Rests b Holy Spirit. pecnt wa ag and 8 i wen twa 
be San oe tiem, £ eee Og v3.17.25, pico Sh. “upon the face o: e. 
or shal the fish o e sea be} 26,29; Num. jearth. ‘ 
gathered together for them, to suf- eRe 32. And the people stood up all 
fice them? ; 153 that day, and all that night, and all. 
23. And the LorD said unto Moses, the. next day, and they gathered the; 


Is the Lorp’s hand waxed short?|¢ ex ne quails: he that gathered least gath- 
thou shalt see now whether my) > ™- lered ten ¢homers: and they spread. 
word shall come to pass unto thee|d One homer= |them all abroad for themselves 


or not. about 86 gals./round about the camp. 
24 And Moses went.out, and told), num.3317. |.33 And while the flesh was yet 
the people the ¢words of the Lorp, between their teeth, ere it was 


and gathered the seventy men of|f Ee. homens of |chewed, the wrath of the LorD was 


the elders of the people, and set! 3353. kindled against the people, and the 

them round about the tabernacle. LorD smote the people with a very 
25 And the LorpD came down in ajg Fay stags > |Sreat plague. 

cloud, and spake unto him, and! 5;35°°** | 34 And he called the name of that 

took of the 4spirit that was upon ; place Kibroth-hattaavah: because 


thim, and gave it unto the seventy|' CfSong 1.5. |there they buried the people that 
elders: and it came to pass, that.) ; ceik.933- lusted. 
when the spirit rested upon them,? 36. 35 And the people ‘journeyed 


they prophesied, and did not cease. from /Kibroth-hattaavah unto Haz- 

From Sinai to Kadesh-barnea: eroth; and abode at Hazeroth. 

(6) Eldad and ede prophesy., CHAPTER 12. 

a! ee Ze oe ee oi From Sinai to Kadesh-barnea: 

one was Eldad, and the name of the oie slam ice Si of Miriam 

other Medad: and the °spirit rested ron, 

upon them; and they were of them Ae &Miriam and Aaron spake 

'that were written, but went not out against Moses because of the 

unto the tabernacle: and they 4AEthiopian woman whom he had 

prophesied in the camp. married: for he had married an 
27 And there ran a young man, Ethiopian woman. 

and told Moses, and said, Eldad and 2 And they said, Hath the LorpD 

Medad do prophesy in the camp. indeed spoken ‘only by Moses? hath 


! There was no more power than before—only more machinery. Moses had 
murmured (v. 11) because of the burden that God had laid upon him. God, in dis- 
tributing the burden, shows that Moses’ power had, all along, been in proportion 
to his burden, | 

_ 2 The correct rendering is, “about two cubits above the face of the earth,” that is, 
within reach of the people that they might slay them for food. The statement is 
not that the quails were piled up from the face of the earth two cubits deep. The 
level of their fight was two cubits above the earth. | 

% 182 | 
q 


ad 
aU 
i 


2 3} 


NUMBERS. [13 20 


‘he not spoken also by us? And the! Bc. 1490. CHAPTER 13. 
‘Lorp heard it. 


3 (Now the man Moses was very 
“meek, above all the men which 
were upon the face of the earth.) 

4 And the Lorp spake suddenly 
‘unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and 
sunto Miriam, Come out ye three 
unto the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation. And they three came out. 

5 And the LorpD came down in 
the pillar of the cloud, and stood 
in the door of the tabernacle, and 
‘called Aaron and Miriam: and they 
both came forth. 

© And he said, Hear now my 
words: If there be a "prophet among! 
you, I the Lorp will make myself 
iknown unto him in a vision,| 
‘and will speak unto’ him in a 


At Kadesh-barnea: (1) the spies 
sent in. 


Fo Need the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

2 ‘Send thou men, that they may 
search the land of Canaan, which I 
gave unto the children of Israel: of 
levery tribe of thelr fathers shall ye 
send a man, every one a ruler 
among them. 

3 And Moses by the command- 
ment of the LorD sent them from 
the wilderness of Paran: all those 
men were heads of the children of 
Israel. 

4 And these were their names: of 
the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the 
son of Zaccur. 


dream. 5 Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat 
7 My servant Moses is not so, be rey Pere gbe son of Hori. 
‘who is faithful in all mine Rouse: 2.23;2Cor. | 6 s oe me of Judah, Caleb the 
8 With him will I speak mouth to| 10.1. json of Jephunneh. 
mouth, even ein igh iaed. net = »CfNum.11 7 ie ae gabe of Issachar, Igal the 
-dark speeches; and the similitude of| 9s. “\son of Joseph. ) 
the LorD shall he behold: where- | 8 Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea 
fore then were ye not 4afraid|/¢#e>316. the son of Nun. Og i 
‘to Sepak against my servant Mo-|g Psa.105.15. 2% Of its ote of Benjamin, Palti 
“ses ; e son of Raphu. 
9 And the anger of the LORD was eee os 10 Of.the tribe of Zebulun, Gad- 
kindled against them; and he de-| 19, “* |diel the son of Sodi. 


parted. pes 11 Of the tribe of Joseph, name- 
lt Ad the cloud departed from|/BAN. [Wy ofthe tbe of Manasse, Gada 
Miriam became ‘eprous, white as| 14.13-i9.. | 12 Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel 
snow: and Aaron looked upon Mir- gaan the son of Gemaiiy: Ait hg 
jam, and, behold, she was lep- He Of ee Pane x“ sher, Sethur 
a g Lev.13.4. the son 0 ichael. i: 4 
“TL And Aaron said unto Moses,| 46 Heb-12.9. ty Of fhe maine of Naphtali, Nahbi 
Alas, lord, I beseech thee, lay]; aag, |the son of Vophsi. 
Be iaaon us, wherein we 4 Miotsend | 15 Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the 
ee Se ate at 
42 Let her not be as one dead, of| jie. Saviour, men which Moses sent to spy out 


whom the flesh is half consumed} °% Petverer. ithe land. And Moses called Oshea 


when he cometh out of his mother’s 
womb. 

13 And Moses cried unto the 
Lorp, saying, Heal her now, O 
God, I ‘beseech thee. 

14 And the LorpD said unto Mo- 
ses, If her father had but spit in her 
face, should she not be ashamed 
seven days? let her be @shut out 
from the camp seven days, and 
after that let her be received in 
again. 

15 And Miriam was -shut out 
from the camp seven days: and the 
people journeyed not till Miriam 
was brought in again. 

16 And afterward the people re- 
moved from Hazeroth, and “pitched 
in the wilderness of Paran. 


the son of Nun J/Jehoshua. 

17 And Moses sent them to spy 
out the land of Canaan, and said 
junto them, Get you up this way 
southward, and go up into the 
mountain: 

18 And see the land, what it zs, 
and the people that dwelleth there- 
in, whether they be strong or weak, 
few or many; 

19 And what the land is that they 
dwell in, whether it be good or bad; 
and what cities they be that they 
dwell in, whether in tents, or in 
strong holds; 

20 And what the land is, whether 
it be fat or lean, whether there be 
wood therein, or not. And be ye of 
good courage, and bring of the fruit 


4 


13 21] 


of theland. Now the time was the 
time of the firstripe grapes. 

21 So they went up, and searched 
the land from the wilderness of 
Zin unto Rehob, as men come to 
Hamath. 

22 And they ascended by the 
south, and came unto Hebron; 
where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Tal- 
mai, the children of ¢Anak, were. 
(Now Hebron was built seven years 
before Zoan in Egypt.) 

23 And they came unto the brook 
of 4Eshcol, and cut down from 
thence a branch with one cluster of 
grapes, and they bare it between 
two upon a staff; and they brought 
of the pomegranates, and of the} | 
figs. bi.e. cluster. 

24 The place was called the brook], , 3. 
Eshcol, because of the cluster of 
grapes which the children of Israel|/¢ Num.20.1, 
cut down from thence. eae 


B.C. 1490. _ 


a Josh.11.21; 
15.13,14. 


36; Deut.1. 
_25 And they returned from search-| 19; Josh.14.6. 
ing of the land after forty days. snes 
At Kadesh-barnea: (2) the Pee 


report of the spies. ‘1,2. 


26 And they went and came to],,33. 
Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the 
congregation of the children of Is-|/ Josh.11.21, 
rael, unto the ‘wilderness of Paran, 
to 4Kadesh; and brought back word] ; Ex.16.2; 
unto them, and unto all the congre-| 17.3; Num. 
gation, and shewed them the fruit] 3641: Psa 
of the land. ri 

27 And they told him, and said,|jDeut.9.7; 
We came unto the land whither] 7233 1Sam- 
thou sentest us, and surely it pec 
floweth with milk and honey; and] Gen.48.21; 
this is the fruit of it. Ex.33.16; 


20.1, 
28 Nevertheless the fpeople be eerie 
strong that dwell in the land, andj Josh.1.5; . 
the cities are walled, and very| J¥9¢3225 
great: and moreover we saw the] Bsa.46.7-11; 
children of sAnak there, Zech.8.23. 
29 The Amalekites dwell in the 1 v.23: Deut. 


land of the south; and the Hittites, 
and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, 
dweil in the mountains: and the 
Canaanites dwell by the sea, and 
by the coast of Jordan. 

30 And Caleb stilled the people 
before Moses, and said, Let us go 
up at once, and possess it; for we 
are well able to overcome it. 

31 But the men that went up with 
him said, We be not able to go up 
against the people; for they are 
stronger than we. 

32 And they brought up an evil 
Teport of the land which they had 
searched unto the children of Israel, 
saying, The land, through which we 
have gone to scarch it, is a land 


-7,8,22; 
Heb.3.8,16. 


184 


NUMBERS. 


that eateth up the inhabitan 
thereof; and all the people that we 
saw in it are men of a great 
stature. i 

33 And there we saw the giants, 
the sons of “Anak, which come of 
the giants: and we were in our own 
sight as grasshoppers, and so we 


were in their sight. 


CHAPTER 14. 


At Kadesh-harnea: (3) the un- 
belief of Israel (1 Cor. 10. 1-53 
Heb. 3. 7-19). 


sos _all the congregation lifted 
up their voice,.and cried; and 
the people wept that night. 

2 And all the children of Israel 
‘murmured against Moses and 
against Aaron: and the whole con- 
gregation said unto them, Would 
God that we had died in the land 
of Egypt! or would God we had 
died in this wilderness! 

3 And wherefore hath the LorD 
brought us unto this land, to fall by 
the sword, that our wives and our 
children should be a prey? were it 
not better for us to return into 
Egypt? 

4 And they said one to another, 
Let us make a captain, and let us 
return into Egypt. 

5 Then Moses and Aaron fell on 
their faces before all the assembly 
of the congregation of the childten 
of Israel. 

6 And Joshua the son of Nun, 
and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, 
which were of them that searched 
the land, rent their clothes: 

7 And they spake unto all the 
company of the children of Israel, 
saying, The land, which we passed 
through to search it, zs an exceed- 
ing good land. ’ 

8 If the Lorp delight in us, then 
he will bring us into this land, and 
give it us;.a land which floweth 
with milk and honey. 

9 Only Jrebel not ye against the 
LorpD, neither fear ye the people of 
the land; for they are bread for us: 
their defence is departed from them, 
kand the LorD is with us: fear them 
not. 

10 But all the congregation bade 


stone them with stones. And the 
glory of the LorD appeared in the 
tabernacle of the congregation be- 
fore all the children of Israel. | 

11 And the Lorn said unto Moses, 
How long will this people ‘provoke 
me? and how long will it be ere 


| 


14 12] 


which I have shewed: among them? 

12 I will smite them with the 
pestilence, and disinherit them, and 
will ¢make of thee a greater nation 
and mightier than they. 

13 4And MosessaiduntotheLorD, 
“Then the Egyptians shall hear it, 
(for thou broughtest up this people 
in thy might from among them;) 

14 And they will tell 1¢ to the in- 
habitants of this land: for they 
have heard that thou LorD art 
among this people, that thou LoRD 
art seen face to face, and that thy 
cloud standeth over them, and that 
thou goest before them, by daytime 
in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pil- 
lar of fire by night. 

15 Now if thou shalt kill a// this 
people as one man, then the nations 
which have heard the fame of thee 
will speak, saying, 

16 Because the LORD was not 
ble to bring this people into the 
and which he sware unto them, 
erefore he hath slain them in the 
ilderness. 
17 And now, I beseech thee, let 
the power of my Lord be‘great, ac- 
cording as thou hast spoken, saying, 
18 The Lorp 7s longsuffering, and 
f great mercy, forgiving iniquity 
nd transgression, and by no means 
learing the guilty, visiting the 
iniquity of the fathers upon the 
hildren unto the third and fourth 
generation. 
19 Pardon, I beseech thee, the 
iniquity of this people according 
unto the greatness of thy mercy, 
and as thou hast forgiven this peo- 
ple, from Egypt even until now. 
20 And the Lorp said, I have 
pardoned according to thy word: 


21 But as truly as I live, all the 
earth shall be @filled with the glory 
of the LORD. 

22 Because all those men which 
have seen my glory, and my mira- 
cles, which I did in Egypt and in 
the wilderness, and have ‘tempted 
me now these ten times, and have 
not hearkened to my voice; 

93 Surely they shall not see the 
land which I sware unto their 
fathers, neither shall any of them 
that provoked me see it: 


NUMBERS. 


they believe me, for all the signs| B.C. 1490. 


a Cf.Ex.32.10. 


6 Bible 
Prayers 


(O.T.), Num. 


27.15. (Gen, 
15.2; Hab. 
3.1-16.)- 


c Ex.32.12; 
Deut.9.26, 
275,32.27. 


d Psa.72.19; 
Isa.66.18,19; 
Hab.2.14; 
Mt.6.10. 


e Tempta- 
tion, Deut. 
6.16. (Gen. 
3.1; Jas.1.2.) 


f v.38; Num. 
26.65; 32.12; 
Deut.1.36- 
38; Josh.14. 
6-15. 


[14 36 


24 But my servant Caleb, because 
he had another spirit with him, and 
hath followed me fully, him will I 
bring into the land whereinto he 
went; and his seed shall possess it. 

25 (Now the Amalekites and the 
Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) 
To morrow turn you, and get you 
into the wilderness by the way of 
the Red sea. 

26 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses and unto Aaron, saying, : 

27 How long shall I bear with 
this evil congregation, which mur-- 
mur against me? I have heard the[ 
murmurings of the children of 
Israel, which they murmur against 


me. 

28 Say unto them, As truly as I 
live, saith the Lorpb, as ye have 
spoken in mine ears, so will I do to 
you: 

29 Your carcases shall fall in this 
wilderness; and all that were num- 
bered of you, according to your 
whole number, from twenty years 
old and upward, which have mur- 
mured against me, 

30 Doubtless ye shall not come 
into the land, concerning which I 
sware to make you dwell therein, 
fsave Caleb the son of Jephunneh, 
and Joshua the son of Nun. 

31 But your little ones, which ye 
said should be a prey, them will I 
bring in, and they shall know the 
land which ye have despised. 

32 But as for’you, your carcases, 
they shall fall in this wilderness. 

33 And your children shall wan- 


der in the wilderness forty years, 
and bear your whoredoms, until 
your carcases be wasted in the 
wilderness. 

34 After the number of the days 
in which ye searched the land, even 
forty days, each day for a year, 
shall ye bear your iniquities, even 
forty years, and ye shall know my 
breach of promise. 

35 I the Lorp have said, I will 
surely do it unto all this evil con- 
gregation, that are gathered to- 
gether against me: in this wilder- 
ness they shall be consumed, and 
there they shall die. i 

36 And the men, which Moses 
sent to search the land,-who re- 


SEG Se Se EE I eS ee Ne a eee 

1 Kadesh-barnea is, by the unbelief of Israel there, and the divine comment on 
that unbelief (Num. 14. 22-38; Deut. 1. 19-40; 1 Cor. 10. 1-5; Heb. 3. 12-19), invested 
The people had faith to sprinkle the blood of 
atonement (Ex. 12.28) and to come out of Egypt (the world), but had ‘not faith to 


with immense spiritual significance. 


enter their Canaan rest. 


Therefore, though redeemed, they were. a forty years’ 


grief to Jehovah. The spiritual application is made in Heb. 6. 3-11, note, 


185 


14 37] 


turned, and made all the congrega- 
tion to murmur against him, by 
bringing up a slander upon the 
land, : n 

37 Even those men that did bring, 
up the evil report upon the land, 
died by the plague before the 
Lorp. 

38 But Joshua the son of Nun, 
and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, 
which were of the men that went 
to search the land, lived str//. 

39 And Moses told these sayings 
-unto all the children of Israel: and} 

‘the people mourned greatly. 

40 And they rose up early in the} 
Morning, and gat them up into the 
top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we} 
be here, and will go up unto the 
place which the LorD hath prom- 
ised: for we have sinned. 

41 And Moses said, Wherefore 
now do ye transgress the command- 
ment of the LoRD? but it shall not 
prosper. 

42 Gonot up, for the Lorp rs not 
among you; that ye be not smitten 


a Cf. Josh.7. 
1-8. 


b Lit. meal. 


¢ One hin = 


before your enemies. oo = 
43. For the Amalekites and the 79,10, 9, 


Canaanites. are there before you, 
and ye shall fall by the sword: be- 
cause ye are turned away from the 
Lorp, therefore the LorpD will not} 
be with you. 

44 But they ¢presumed to go up} 
unto the hill top: nevertheless the 
ark of the covenant of the Lorp, 
and Moses, departed not out of the 
camp. 

45 Then the Amalekites came 
down, and the Canaanites which 
dwelt in that hill, and smote them, 
and discomfited them, even. unto 
Hormah. 


CHAPTER 15. 
The years of !wandering: (1) the} 
end anticipated. 


ND the Lorp spake untoMoses, 
saying, ; 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1490.. 


[15 13 


2 Speak unto the children of Is-. 
rael, and say unto them, When ye 
be come into the land of your habi- 
tations; which I give unto you, 

3. .And: will make an offering by 
fire unto the LorD, a burnt-offering,. 
or a sacrifice in performing a vow, 
or in a freewill-offering, or in. your 
solemn feasts, to make a sweet sa- 
vour unto the Lorp, of the herd or 
of the flock: 1 

4 Then shall he that offereth his 
offering unto the LorpD bring a 
bmeat-offering of a tenth deal of 
flour mingled with the fourth part 
of an chin of oil. 

5 And the fourth part of an hin of 
wine for a drink-offering shalt thou 
prepare with the burnt-offering or 
sacrifice, for one lamb. 

6 Or for aram, thou shalt prepare: 
for a ’meat-offering two tenth deals 
of flour mingled with the third part 
of an hin of oil. 

7 And for a drink-offering thou 
shalt offer the third part of an hin 
of wine, for a sweet savour unto: 
the Lorpb. 

8 And when thou preparest a bul- 
lock for a burnt-offering, or for a 
sacrifice in performing a vow, or 
peace-offerings unto the Lorp: 

9 Then shall he bring with a 
bullock a ’meat-offering of three 
tenth deals of flour mingled with 
half an hin of oil. 

10 And thou shalt bring for a 
drink-offering half an hin of wine, 
for an offering made by fire, of a 
sweet savour unto the Lorp. 

11 Thus shall it be done for one 
bullock, or for one ram, or for a 
lamb, or a kid. 

12. According to the number that 
ye shall prepare, so shall. ye do to 
every one according to their num- 


er. 
13 All that are born of the country, 
shall do these things after this 
manner, in offering an offering 


1 The wilderness was part of the necessary discipline of the redeemed people, 
but not the years of wandering. The latter were due wholly to the unbelief of the 


people at Kadesh-barnea. 


experience. 


freshment by the way; 
perience of Rom. 7. 7-24. 


The Red Sea, Marah, Elim, Sinai, were God’s ways, in 
development and discipline, and have, of necessity, 


their counterpart in Christian 


: The Red Sea speaks of the cross as that which—death to Christ but 
life for us—separates us from Egypt, the world (Gal. 6. 14); Marah of God’ 
to turn untoward things into blessing; Elim of God’s power to give rest 
Sinai of God’s holiness 
So far the path: was: 


S power 
and re- 


and our deep inherent evil, the ex- 


and. is.of God. But from Kadesh- 


barnea to Jordan all save the grace of God toward an unbelieving people, is for 


warning, not imitation 


therefore should, enter by. faith (Heb. 3.-4.). 


2Tt is remarkable that just when the people are turning in unbelief from the 


186 


) (1 Cor. 10. 1-11; Heb: 3. 17-19). 
God, of which the Sabbath and Canaan were types, 


>). There is a present rest of 
into which believers may, and. 


land,, 


15 14) NUMBERS. ; [15 37 


made by fire, of a sweet savour! 
‘unto the Lorp. 

14 And if a stranger sojourn with 
you, or whosoever be among you in) 
your generations, and will offer an) 
offering made by fire, of a sweet 
savour unto the LORD; as ye do,| 
so he shail do. 

15 One ordinance shall be both 
for you of the congregation, and 
also for the stranger that sojourn-; 
eth with you, an ordinance for ever 
im your generations: as ye are, so 
shall the stranger be before the 
Lorp. 

16 One law and one manner shall 
be for you, and for the stranger that 
sojourneth with you. 

17 And the LorD spake unto 

Moses, saying, 
‘18 Speak unto the children of Is- 
tael, and say unto them, When ye 
come into the land whither I bring 
you 


ing before the LorD, for their igno- 
rance: 

26 And it shall be forgiven all the 

congregation of the children of 
Israel, and the stranger that so- 
journeth among them; seeing all 
the people were in ignorance. 
_27 And if any soul sin through 
ignorance, then he shall bring a 
she goat of the first year for a sin- 
offering. 

28 And the priest shall make an 
éatonement for the soul that sin- 
neth ignorantly, when he sinneth 
by ignorance before the LoRD, to 
make an ’atonement for him; and 
it shall be forgiven him. 

29 Ye shall have one law for him 
that sinneth through ignorance, 
both for him that is born among 
the children, of Israel, and for the 
stranger that sojourneth among 
them. 

30 But the soul that doeth ought 


presumptuously, whether he be 
born in the land, or a stranger, 
the same reproacheth the Lorp; 
and that soul shall be cut off from 
among his people. 

31 Because he hath despised the 
word of the Lorp, and hath broken 
his commandment, that soul shall 
utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall 
be upon him, 

What the law really is (Rom. 3. 19; 
7. 7-11; 2 Cor. 3. 7, 9; Gal. 3. 10). 


32 And while the children of Is- 


19 Then it shall be, that, when yel, rit. meal 
eat of the bread of the land, ye shall ; : 
offer up an heave-offering unto the| & See Ex.29. 
Lorp. 33, note. 

20 Ye shall offer up a cake of the} c Forgive- 
first of your dough for an heave-| 7ess. vs.25, 
offering: as ye do the heave-offering] 352%" ree 
of the threshingfloor, so shall ye] 4.20: mt. ~ 
heave it. 26.28.) 

21 Of the first of your dough yel y sappath 
shall give unto the LorpD an heave-} vs.32-36; 
offering in your generations. Neh.9.13,14. 


22 And if ye have erred, and not errr 


observed all these commandments, 
which the LorpD hath spoken unto 
Moses, 

23 Even all that the LorpD hath 
commanded you by the hand of 
Moses, from the day that the LorRD 
commanded Moses, and hencefor-! 
ward among your generations; 

24 Then it shall be, if ought be 
committed by ignorance without 
the knowledge of the congregation, 
that all the congregation shall offer 
one young bullock for a burnt- 
offering, for a sweet_savour unto} 
the LORD, with his ¢meat-offering, | 
and his drink-offering, according to} 
the manner, and one kid of the! 
goats for a sin-offering. 

25 And the priest shall make an 
‘atonement for all the congregation 
of the children of Israel, and it shall 
be ‘forgiven them; for it zs igno- 
rance: and they shall bring their 
Offering, a sacrifice made by fire} 
unto the Lorp, and their sin-offer-| 


rael were in the wilderness, they 
found a man that gathered sticks 
upon the ¢sabbath day. 

33 And they that found him gath- 
ering sticks brought him unto Mo- 
ses and Aaron, and unto all the con- 
gregation. 

34 And they put him in ward, 

cause it was not declared what 
should be done to him. 

35 And the LorpD said unto Mo- 
ses, The man shall be surely put to 
death: all the congregation shall 
stone him with stones without the 
camp. 

36 And all the congregation 
brought him without the camp, and 
stoned him with stones, and he died; 
as the LoRD commanded Moses. 
The ribband of blue, the heaven- 

ly color—reminder .of a sep- 
arated walk. 

37 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 


God gives directions for conduct when they shall have entered it. See Rom, 11, 29; 


Phil. 1,6, 


ow 


iit 2 Rae tl 
15 38] NUMBERS. [16 17 


38 Speak unto the children of Ts-| B.C. 1490. leven Aira whom he hath chosen 


fael, and bid them that they make 
them fringes in the borders of their 
garments throughout their genera- 
tions, and that they put upon the 
fringe of the borders a ribband of 


ue: 

39 And it shall be unto you for a 
fringe, that ye may look upon it, 
and remember all the command- 
ments of the LorpD, and do them; 
and that ye seek not after your own 
heart and your own eyes, after 
which ye use to go a whoring: 

40 That ye may remember, and 
do all my commandments, and be 
holy unto your God. 

41 I am the LorpD your God, 
which brought you out of the land 
of Egypt, to be your God: I am the 
Lorp your God. 


CHAPTER i6. 


The years of vances Bee ian men 
‘gainsaying o orah” {vs.|4Ex.6.21; 
8-10; Jude 11). Jude 11, 


Now *Korah, the son of Izhar, 
the son of Kohath, the son of|¢ ae ae 

Levi, and Dathan and Abiram, the] B38 i's, 

sons of Eliab, and On, the son of 

Peleth, sons of Reuben, took 

men: 

2 And they rose up before Moses, 
with certain of the children of Is- 
rael, two hundred and fifty princes 
of the assembly, famous in the con- 
gregation, men of renown: 

3 And they gathered themseives 
together against Moses and against 
Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take 
too much upon you, seeing all the 
congregation are holy, every one of 
them, and the Lorp jis among! 
them: wherefore then lift ye up| 
yourselves above the congregation 
of the Lorp? 

4 And when Moses heard it, he 
fell upon his face: 

5 And he spake unto Korah and 
unto all his company, gaying, Even 
to morrow the Lorp will shew who 
are his, ’and who is holy; and will 
cause Him to come near unte him;| 


Priests’ 


62 Tim.2.19, 


will he cause to come near unto him. 

6 This do; Take you censers, 
Korah, and all his company; 

7 And put fire therein, and put 
incense in them before the LorpD to 
morrow: and it shall be that the 
man whom the LorD doth choose, 
he shali be holy: ye take too much 
upon you, ye sons of Levi. 

8 And Moses said unto Kerah, 
Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levit 

9 Seemeth it but a small thing 
unto you, that the God of Israel 
hath separated you from the con- 
gregation cf Israel, to bring you 
near to himself to “do the service of 
the tabernacle of the Lor», and to 
stand before the congregation to 
minister unto them? 

10 And he hath brought thee near 
to him, and all thy brethren the 
sons of Levi with thee: and 2seek ye 
the priesthood also? 

11 For which cause both thou 
and all thy company are gathered 
together against the Lorp: and 
what is Aaron, that ye murmur 
against him? 

12 And Moses sent to call Dathan 
jand Abiram, the sons of Eliab: 
which said, We will not come up: 

13 Is it a small thing that thou 
hast brought us up out of a land 
that floweth with milk and honey, 
to kill us in the wilderness, except 
thou make thyself altogether a 
prince over us? 

14 Moreover thou hast not 
brought us into a jand that foweth 
with milk and honey, or given us 
inheritance of fields and vineyards: 
wilt thou put out the eyes of these 
men? we will not come up. 

1S And Moses was very wroth, 
and said unto the Lorp, Respect 
not thou their offering: I have not 
taken one ass from them, neither 
have I hurt one of them. 

16 And Moses said unto Korah, 
the thou and all thy company before 


the Lorp, thou, and they, and 
\Aaron, to morrow: 

| 17 And take every man his censer, 
and put incense in them, and bring 


1 The ribband of blue. Blue, the heavenly colour, used upon the borders of the 
garments signified that the servants of God were to be heavenly in obedi- 


ence and character and separate from earthly ambitions and desires, 
2 The “gainsaying of Korah” was intrusion into the priest’s office (“no man 


taketh this honour unto himself,” Heb, 5. 4). 


order without the divine authority (5. 10). Th 
(Rev. 2. 6, 15), the division of an equal brothe 
“laity”; a vastly different thing from the due 
12. 4-31; Eph, 4. 8, 11, 12), or of elders and deac 


188 


It was an attempt to create a priestly 
e modern analogue is Nicolaitanism 
thood (Mt. 23, 8) into “clergy” and 
recognition of ministry-gifts '(1 Cor. 
ons (1 Tim. 3. 1-13; Tit, 1. 5-9), 


ye before the LorRD every man his 
censer, two hundred and fifty cen- 
sers; thou also, and Aaron, each of 
you his censer. 

18 And they took every man his 
censer, and put fire in them, and! 
laid incense thereon, and stood in 
the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation with Moses and 


aron. 

19 And Korah gathered all the 
congregation against them unto the 
door of the tabernacle of the con-) 
gregation: and the glory of the 
Lorp appeared unto all the con- 
gregation. 

20 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses and unto Aaron, saying, 

21 °Separate yourselves from 


NUMBERS.. 


among this congregation, that I 
may consume theminamoment. | 

22 And they fell upon their faces, 
and said, O God, the God of the 
spirits of all flesh, shali one man 


sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all 
the congregation? 

23 And the LoRD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

24 Speak unto the congregation, 
saying, Get you up from about the 
tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and 
Abiram. 

25 And Moses rose up and went 
unto Dathan and Abiram; and the 
elders of Israel followed him. 

26 And he spake unto the congre- 
gation, saying, Depart, I pray you, 
from the tents of these wicked men, 
and touch nothing of their’s, lest 
ye be consumed in all their sins. 

27 Sothey gat up from the taber- 
nacle of Korah, Dathan, and 
Abiram, on every side: and Dathan 
and Abiram came out, and stood in 
the door of their tents, and their 
wives, and their sons, and their 
little children. 

28 And Moses said, Hereby ye 
shall know that the LorD hath sent 

‘me to do all these works; for J have 
not done them of mine own 
mind. 

29 If these men die the common 
death of all men, or if they be 
visited after the visitation of all 
men; then the LorD hath not sent 


me. 

30 But if the LorD make a new! 
thing, and the earth open her 
mouth, and swallow them up, with’ 
all that appertain unto them, and 
they go down quick into the °pit; 
then ye shall understand that 


a Separation. 
vs.20-26; 
Deut.22.10. 
(Gen.12.1; 

2 Cor.6.14- 
17.) 


b Heb. sheol. 


c Miracles 


d Lev.27.28. 


eCf.1 Sam. 
13.9; Heb. 
5.4; Jude 11. 


these men have provoked the 
LorD. 


189 


B.C. 1471. 


31 And it came to pass, as he had 
made an end of speaking all these 
words, that the ground “clave asun- 
\der that was under them: 

| 32 And the earth opened her 
mouth, and swallowed them up, and 
their houses, and all the men that 
appertained unto Korah, and aii 
their goods. 

33 They, and all that apper- 
tained to them, went down alive 
into the pit, and the earth closed 
upon them: and they perished from 
among the congregation. 

34 And all Israel that were round 
about them fled at the cry of them: 
for they said, Lest the earth swallow 
us up also. 

35 And there came out a fire from 
the Lorp, and consumed the two 
hundred and fifty men that offered 
incense. 

36 And the Lorp spake unto 
Moses, sayirig, 

37 Speak unto Eleazar the son of 
Aaron the priest, that he take up 
the censers out of the burning, and 
scatter thou the fire yonder; for 
they are ¢hallowed. 

38 The censers of these sinners 
against their own souls, let them 
make them broad plates for a 
covering of the altar: for they 


* loffered them before the Lorp, 


therefore they are hallowed: and 
they shall be a sign unto the 
children of Israel.” 

39 And Eleazar the priest took 
the brasen censers, wherewith they 
that were burnt had offered; and 
they were made broad plates fora 
covering of the altar: 

40 To be a memorial unto the 
children of Israel, ‘that no stranger, 
which is not of the seed of Aaron, 
come near to offer incense before 
the Lorp; that he be not as Korah, 
and as his company: as the LorD 
said to him by the hand of 
Moses. a 

41 But on the morrow all the con- 
gregation of the children of Israel 
murmured against Moses and 
against Aaron, saying, Ye have 
killed the people of the LorpD. 

42 And it came to pass, when the 
congregation was gathered against 
Moses and against Aaron, that they 
looked toward the tabernacle of the 
congregation: and, behold, the 
cloud covered it, and the glory of 
the LORD appeared. 

43 And Moses and Aaron came 
before the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation. 


NUMBERS. 


08 


44 And the LorpD spake unto] B.C. 1471. 


Moses, saying, f 

45 Get you up froin among this 
congregation, that I may consume 
them as in a moment. And they 
fell upon their faces. 

46 And Moses said unto Aaron, 
Take a censer, and put fire therein 
from off the altar, and put on in- 
cense, and go quickly unto the con- 
gregation, and make an 4atone- 
ment for them: for there is wrath 
gone out from the Lorp; the 
plague is begun. 

47 And Aaron took as Moses com- 
manded, and ran into the midst of 
the congregation; and, behold, the 
plague was begun among the peo- 
ple: and he put on incense, and 
made an “atonement for the people. 

48 And he stood between the/é v.35. 
dead and the living; and the plague 


a Yee Ex.29, 
33, note. 


c Ex.25:22; 
was stayed. ; 29.42,43; 
49 Now they that died in the] 30.36. 


plague were fourteen thousand and|4 jum46s. 
seven hundred, %beside them that 


died about the matter of Korah. et ea 
50 And Aaron returned unto Mo- Cae 
Ses unto the door of the tabernacle| 7-11. (Gen. 


of the congregation: and the plague a5 Jon.2. 
was stayed. i 
E Seas 
9.4. 
CHAPTER 17. 


The years of wandering: (3) 
Aaron’s rod that budded. 


AND the LORD spake unto Moses, | 
saying, 

2 Speak unto the children of Is- 
tael, and take of every one of them 
a rod according to the house of 
their fathers, of all their princes ac- 
cording to the house of their 
fathers twelve rods: write thou 
every man’s name upon his rod. 

3 And thou shalt write Aaron’s 
name upon the rod of Levi: for one! 
tod shall be for the head of the 
house of their fathers. 

4 And thou shalt lay them up in 
the tabernacle of the congregation 
before the testimony, ‘where I will 
meet with you. 

5 And it shall come to pass, that 
the man’s rod, whom I shall dchoose, 
shall blossom: and I will make to 
cease from me the murmurings of 


g i.e. be re- 
sponsible for 
every neglect 
or offence 
relating to. 
Cf£Ex.28.38. 


h Num.1.47, 
ref, 


Priest. 
Himself will confirm it (v. 5). 


the children of Israel, whereby 
they murmur against you. ; 

6 And Moses spake unto the chil- 
dren of Israel,- and every one of 
their princes gave him a rod apiece, 
for each prince one, according to 
jtheir fathers’ houses, even twelve 
rods: and the rod of Aaron was 
among their rods. 
| 7 And Moses laid up the rods be- 
fore the LoRD in the tabernacle of 
witness. 

8 And it came to pass, that on the 
morrow Moses went into the taber- 
nacle of witness; and, behold, the 
\'rod of Aaron for the house of Levi 
was ‘budded, and brought forth 
buds, and bloomed blossoms, and 
yielded almonds. 

9 And Moses brought out all the 
rods from before the LorD unto ali 
the children of Israel: and they 
looked, and took every man his rod. 

10 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, Bring Aaron’s rod again before 
|the testimony, to be ‘kept for a 
token against the rebels; and thou 
shait quite take away their mur- 
|murings from me, that they die not. 
11 And Moses did so: as the 
LORD commanded him, so did he. 
| 12 And the children of Israel 
(spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, 
|we die, we perish, we all perish. 

13 Whosoever cometh any thing 
near unto the tabernacle of the 
Lorp shall die: shall we be con- 
sumed with dying? F 


CHAPTER 18, 


|The years of wandering: (4) 

| Aaron and the Levites con- 
firmed in their privileges and 
responsibilities. 


AND the Lorp said unto Aaron, 
Thou and thy sons and thy 
father’s house with thee shall &bear 
the iniquity of the sanctuary: and 
thou and thy sons with thee shall 
bear the iniquity of your priesthood, 
2 And thy brethren also of the 
tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy 
father, bring thou with thee, that 
they may be joined unto thee, and 
minister unto thee: but thou and 
thy sons with thee shall minister 
before the tabernacle of witness. 


1 Aaron’s rod that budded: Type of Christ in resurrection, owned of God as High 
Aaron’s priesthood had been questioned in the rebellion of Korah, so God 
Each of the tribe-heads brought a perfectly dead rod; 


God put iife into Aaron’s only. So all the authors of religions have died, Christ 


among them, but only Christ was raised from 
priest (Heb. 4. 14; 5. 4-10). 


190 


the dead, and exalted to be a high 


a 


3 And they shall keep thy charge. 
and the charge of all the tabernacle:) 
only they shall not come nigh the! 
vessels of the sanctuary and the| 
altar, that neither they, nor ye also, 


e. i 

4 And they shall be joined unto} 
thee, and keep the charge of the} 
tabernacle of the congregation, for| 
all the service of the tabernacle:| 
and a stranger shall not come nigh 
unto you. 

5 And ye shall keep the charge of 


the sanctuary, and the charge of 
the altar: that there be no wrath) 
any more upon the children of| 
Israel. j 
6 And I, behold, I have taken| _. 
your brethren the Levites from)? it: mea 
among the children of Israel: to you) 5 Ex.13.2-13; 
they are given as a gift for the} 34-20; Lk.2. 
Lorp, to do the service of the) 272+ 
tabernacle of the congregation. c One shekel 
7 Therefore thou and thy sons] = 2s. 9d., 
with thee shall keep your priest’s| ° 
office for every thing of the altar,|d One gerah 
and within the vail; and ye shall) = 11.2 
serve: I have given your priest’s) Sy"*.¢° 
office unto you as a service of 
gift: and the stranger that cometh] ¢ Ex.29.26-28; 
nigh shall be put to death. Lev-731-34- 
8 And the Lorp spake unto) /tLev.2.13; 
Aaron, Behold, I also have given| 2 Chr.i3.5; 
thee the charge of mine heave-offer-| M¥-9-49,505 
ings of all the hallowed things of the nie 
Children of Israel; unto thee have I} g Deut.10.8,9; 
given them by reason of the anoint-) 32-22: 1... 
ing, and to thy sons, by an ordi-| Josh.i3.14: ” 
nance for ever. 14.3; 18.7 


9 This shall be thine of the most], ... 16.5. 
holy things, reserved from the fire:|" Eek 44.5. 
every oblation of their’s, every 


@meat-offering of their’s, and every | * ¥°-24,26; 


3 2 Lev.27.30,32; 
-sin-offering of their’s, and every tres-| Neh.10.37; 
pass-offering of.their’s, which they 12.44; a 
al.3.6-10; 


shall render unto me, shall be most) A553 9, 
holy for thee and for thy sons. | eet 
10 In the most holy place shalt 
thou eat it; every male shall eat it: 
it shall be holy unto thee. 
i1 And this is thine; the heave-! 
offering of their gift, with all the; 
wave-offerings of the children of| 
Israel: I have given them unto thee,| 
and to thy sons and to thy daugh-| 
ters with thee, by a statute for ever:) 
every one that is clean in thy house) 
shall eat of it. é | 
12 All the best of the oil, and all 
the best of the wine, and of the; 
wheat, the firstfruits of them which’! 
they shall offer unto the were: 
them have I given thee. eiotee 
13 And whatsoever is first ripe 1n) 
the land, which they shall bring! 


191 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1471. 


[18 24 


unto the Lorp, shall be thine; 
every one that is clean in thine 
house shall eat of it. 

14 Every thing devoted in Israel 
shall be thine. 

15 Every thing that openeth the 
matrix in all flesh, which they bring 
unto the Lorp, whether it be of 
men or beasts, shall be thine: never- 
theless the “firstborn of man shalt 
thou surely redeem, and the firstling 
of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem. 

16 And those that are to be re- 
deemed from a month old shalt thou 
redeem, according to thine estima- 
tion, for the money of five ‘shekels, 
after the shekel of the sanctuary, 
which is twenty ¢@gerahs. 

17 But the firstling of a cow, or 
the firstling of a sheep, or the first- 
ling of a goat, thou shalt not re- 
deem; they are holy: thou shalt 
sprinkle their blood upon the altar, 
and shalt burn their fat for an of- 
fering made by fire, for a sweet 
savour unto the LoRD. 

18 And the flesh of them shall be 
thine, ‘as the wave-breast and as 
the right shoulder are thine, 

19 All the heave-offerings of the 
holy things, which the children of 
Israel. offer unto the LorD, have I 
given thee, and thy sons and thy 
daughters with thee, by a statute 
for ever: it is a covenant of Jsalt 
for ever before the LORD unto thee 
and to thy seed with thee. 

20 And the Lorp spake unto 
Aaron, Thou shalt have 4no inheri- 
tance in théir land, neither shalt 
thou have any part among them: /I 
am thy part and thine inheritance 
among the children of Israel. 

21 And, behold, I have given the 


ichildren of Levi all the ‘tenth in 


Israel for an inheritance, for their 
service which they serve, even the 


service of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation. 

22 Neither must the children of 
Israel henceforth come nigh the 
tabernacle of the congregation, lest 
they bear sin, and die. 

23 But the Levites shall do the 
service of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, and they shall bear their 
iniquity: it shall be a statute for 
ever throughout your generations, 
that among the children of Israel 
they have no inheritance. 

24 But the tithes of the children 
of Israel, which they offer as an 
heave-offering unto the Lorp, I 
have given to the Levites to inherit: 
therefore I have said unto them, 


Jit ile ae 4 . od 8 Sp Ly) ae we A PAE fia tae! ee 


18 25] NUMBERS. [19 1 


Among the children of Israel they} _ B.C. 1471. 2 This is the ordinance of the law 
shall have no inheritance. which the Lorp hath commanded, 
25 And the LorD spake unto Mo- saying, Speak unto the children cf 
ses, saying, Israel, that they bring thee a fred 
26 Thus speak unto the Levites, heifer without spot, wherein is no 
and say unto them, When ye take blemish, and ‘upon which never 
of the children of Israel the tithes came yoke: : 
which I have given you from them 3 And ye shall give her unto Ele- 
for your inheritance, then ye shall azar the priest, that he may bring 
offer up an heave-offering of it forthe her forth ‘without the camp, and 
LORD, even atenth part of thetithe. one shall slay her before his face: 
27 And this your heave-offering 4 And Eleazar the priest shall 
shall be reckoned unto you, as take of her blood with his finger, 
though it were the corn of the and 4sprinkle of her blood directly 
threshingfloor, and as the fulness before the tabernacle of the con- 
of the winepress. gregation seven times: 


28 Thus ye also shall offer an 5 And one shall burn the heifer in 
heave-offering unto the LorD of all|?? Cor-12- [his sight; her skin, and her flesh, 
your tithes, which ye receive of the] Deut.213; |and her blood, with her dung, shall 
children of Israel; and ye shall give| 1Sam.6.7. {he burn: f 
thereof the Lorp’s heave-offering| -y.y.4.12,.21; | © And the priest shall take ‘cedar 


to Aaron the priest. 16.27: Heb. |wood, and fhyssop, and scarlet, and 
29 Out of all your gifts ye shall} 13.11. cast 1t into the midst of the burning 

offer every heave-offering of the Ayes of the heifer. 

LorD, of all the best thereof, even| 16.14-19. 7 Then the priest shall wash his 

the hallowed part thereof out of it. clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh 


30 Therefore thou shalt say unto|¢%<v¥-144,549-\in water, and afterward he shall 
them, When ye have heaved the} sxEx.12.22. come into the camp, and the priest 


best thereof from it, then it shall be shall be unclean until the even. 
counted unto the Levites as the in-|% He-9-13- 8 And he that burneth her shall 
crease of the threshingfloor, and as}, vs.13,20,21; |wash his clothes in water, and 
the increase of the winepress. Num.31.23. |bathe his flesh in water, and shall 
31 And ye shall eat it in every be unclean until the even. - 
place, ye and your households: for 9 And a man that is clean shail 
it 7s your reward for your service in gather up the ashes of the heifer, 
the tabernacle of the congregation. and lay them up without the camp 
32 And ye shali bear no sin by in a clean place, and it shall be kept 
reason of it, when ye have heaved for the congregation of the children 
from it the best of it: neither shall of Israel for a “water of separation: 
ye pollute the holy things of the it is a purification for sin. 
children of Israel, lest ye die. 10 And he that gathereth the 
ashes of the heifer shall wash his 
CHAPTER 19. clothes, and be unclean until the 


at even: and it shall be unto the chil- 
The years of wandering: (5) the dren of Israel, and unto the stranger 


ordinance of the red heifer. that sojourneth among them, for a 
AND the LORD spake unto Moses statute for ever. 
and unto Aaron, saying, 11 He that toucheth the dead 


1 The red heifer: Type of thesacrifice of Christ as the ground of the cleansing of 
the believer from the defilement contracted in his pilgrim walk through this world, 
and illustration of the method of his cleansing. The order is: (1) The slaying 
of the sacrifice; (2) the sevenfold sprinkling of the blood, typical public testimony 
before the eyes of all of the complete and never-to-be-repeated putting away of all 
the believer’s sins as before God (Heb. 9. 12-14; 10. 10-12); (3) the reduction of 
the sacrifice to ashes which are preserved and become a memorial of the sacrifice; 
(4) the cleansing from defilement (sin has two aspects—gui/¢ and uncleanness) 
by sprinkling with the ashes mingled with water. Water is a type of both the Spirit 
and the Word (John 7. 37-39; Eph. 5. 26). The operation typified is this: the Holy 
Spirit uses the Word to convict the believer of some evil allowed in his life to the 
hindering of his joy, growth, and service. Thus convicted, he remembers that 
the guzlt of his sin has been met by the sacrifice of Christ (1 John 1. 7). Instead, 

_ therefore, of despairing, the convicted believer judges and confesses the defiling 
wae as unworthy a saint, and is forgiven and cleansed (John 13. 3-10; 1 John 1, 


192 


‘ vy? ' A) eee 
‘ hi ae aie V4 


19 12] — ‘i NUMBERS. 


[208 


body of any man shall be unclean| B.c. 1471. |sprinkleth the water of separation 
seven days. i 4 . ~~ |shall wash his clothes; and he that 
oe a ier eee =e ewer) with ee te water - separation 
it on the third day, and on the sev- shail be unclean until even. 
enth day he shall be clean: but if 22 And whatsoever the unclean 
he purify not himself the third day, person toucheth shall be unclean; 
as soy seventh day he shall not and oe soul ie toucheth ¢. shall 
e clean. be unclean until even. 
13. Whosoever toucheth the dead 
body of any man that is dead, and CHAPTER 20. 
purifieth not himself, defileth the 2 mea 
tabernacle of the Lorp; and that Be mengeoR: 
soul shall be cut off from Israel: : 
because the water of separation HEN came the children of Is- 
was not sprinkled upon him, he shall 4 raci, even the whole congrega- 
be unclean; his uncleanness is yet cone into an oe of ey ie 
upon him. ‘first month: and the people abode 
14 This rs the law, when a man in Kadesh; and ¢Miriam died there, 
dieth in a tent: all that come into and was buried there. 
the tent, and all that is in the tent, 2 wht hy 
shall be penclean sixel days aLit. purges |The years of wandering: 
ee himself (7) thirst in the old place of 
15 And every open vessel, which) ¢orm sin. thirst (Ex. 17, 1, 2) 
hath no covering bound upon it, is Paes j A Age pad tats 
unclean. v.2, nd there was no water for the 
16 And whosoever toucheth one Cee RB congregation: and they gathered 
that is slain with a sword in the! note. erp lac eee fagainst Moses 
open fields, or a dead body, or a| . ’ and against Aaron. 
bone of a man, or a grave, shall be|°** April. 3 And the people ‘chode with Mo- 
unclean seven days. dBx.15.20; |ses, and spake, saying, Would God 
17 And ®for an unclean person| Num.26.59. |that we had died when our breth- 
rie haere cia Namsor9: "dad why. have: pelbraeghenap 
urnt heifer of p a) 425 é ; 
and running water shall be put é the congregation of the Lorp into 
thereto in a vessel: fExi72:,  |this wilderness, that we and our 
18 And a clean person shall take cattle should die there? ; 
hyssop, and dip it in the water, and|¢ v-8, note. 5 And wherefore have ye made us 
sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon], yi4m17.10; |to come up out of Egypt, to bring 
all the vessels, and upon the pef-| see v.9. us in unto this evil place? it is no 
sons that were there, and upon him place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, 
that touched a bone, or one slain, or or of oe pa ee res neither is there 
one dead, or a grave: any &water to 4 
19 And the clean person shall 6 And Moses and Aaron went 
sprinkle upon the unclean on the from the presence of the assembly 
third day, ‘and on the seventh day: unto the door of the tabernacle of 
and on the seventh day he shall the congregation, and they fell upon 
purify himself, and wash his pean oo faces: a ee ee of the 
and bathe himself in water, an ORD appeared unto them. 
shall be clean at even. Water from the rock, and 
20 But the man that shall be un- gens U 
clean, and shall not purify himself, Moses, sin. 
that soul shail be cut off a 7 And the LorD spake unto Mo: 
among the congregation, because he ses, Saying, 
hath defiled the sanctuary of the 8 Take the “rod, and gather thou 
Lorp: the water of separation hath the assembly together, thou, and 
not been sprinkled upon him; he is Aaron thy brother, and Ispeak ye 
unclean. unto the rock before their eyes; 
21 And it shall be a perpetual and it shall give forth his water, 
statute unto them, that he that and thou shait bring forth to them 


1 See Ex. 17. 5, and refs. The rock (Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4) once smitten, needs 
not to be smitten (crucified) again. Moses’ act exalted himself (v. 10),.and implied 
(in type) that the one sacrifice was ineffectual, thus denying the eternal efficacy 
of the blood (Heb. 9. 25, 26; 10. 3, 11, 12). The abundant water (grace reaching the 
need of the people, despite the error of their leader) tells of refreshing and power 
through the Spirit. — 

a0 


i 2) 2 a y ; es ee iid” 


20 9] NUMBERS. (21 : 


B.C. 1453. jof thy water, then I-will pay for it: 
I will only, without doing any 
thing else, go through on my feet. 

20 And he said, Thou shalt not 
go through. And Edom came out 
against him with much people, and 
with a strong hand. 

21 Thus fEdom refused to give 
Israel passage through his border: 
wherefore Israel turned away from 


water out of the “rock: so thou shalt 
give the congregation and their 
beasts drink. 

9 And Moses took the rod from 
before the LORD, as he commanded 
him. 

10 And Moses and Aaron gath- 
ered the congregation together be- 
fore the rock, and he said unto 
them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we 


fetch you water out of this rock? him. 

11 And Moses lifted up his hand, 22 And the children of Israel, 
and with his rod he smote the rock even the whole congregation, jour- 
twice: and the 4water came out neyed from Kadesh, and came unto 
peoney, pad athe con eneeales mount Hor. 

ank, and their beasts also. The death of Aaron. 

12 And the LorD spake unto Mo- | 
ses and Aaron, Because ye believed | 23 Ang as LorD spake Ee ae 
me not, to sanctify me in the eyes|¢Neh.9.15; _ |SES ani aron. im moumt, EO. BM 


of the children of Israel, therefore ora ra ey Of at, ne On aree 

aie Lat ee ee ASAE 24 sAaron shall be gathered unto 

hewn ee es his rae toh BS Pet not entez 

hic t Py soca -T.)- vs. linto the land whic ave given 

13 This is the water of “Meribah; a1. Wen, (Unto the children of Israel, "because 
because the children of Israel strove! 21.8.9. ( : 

with the Lorp, and he was sancti-| 5:24:Jon- ye rebelled against my word at the 


Beds 5 2.1-10.) water of Meribah. t 
oh nes ; cieletzi¥e. 25 Take Aaron and Eleazar his 
(8) fae ‘2 ve oa derin 55 (Ex,17.7.) son, a bring them up unto 
-forgiven sin o. , jmount Hor: 
Edom (Gen, 25. 30), j¢ Jud-11.16,17. | 96 And strip Aaron of his gar- 
Aw And. e Heb.1.4, ments, and put them upon Eleazar 
from oe He tipi rec acpi note. his son: and Aaron shall be gathered 


Edom, Thus saith thy brother Is-|fPsa-137.7; unto his people, and shall die 


rael, T +1; Ezk.25.12, there. 
that Araki a the travail 13; Oba. 27 And Moses did as the Lorp 
15 How our fathers went down commanded: and they went up into 
into Egypt, and we have dwelt in|£Devt3?.50. emcees in the sight of all the 
Egypt a long time; and the a on. ; 
tians vexed us, and our ates pi gesa. | 28 And Moses stripped Aaron of 
16 And when we cried unto the! . his garments, and put them upon 
Lorn, he heard our voice, and sent Poo jadaa Eleazar his son; and Aaron died 
an ‘angel, and hath brought us| 30. there in the top of the mount: and 


forth out of Egypt: and, behold, we [hosts and Eleazar came down from 
ate Ke se 4 city in the utter- 39 wee op oe all the congrega 
mo : : . 
17, on a aa i thee te: thee! tion saw that Aaron was dead, they 
through thy country: we will not See has Aaron. thirty days, 
pass through the fel ds or thteugh even e house of Israel. 
€ vineyards, neither will we drink 
of the water of the wells: we will/ ‘ peg ak 
go by the king’s high way, we will The march of Israes: 
not turn to the right hand nor to (1) victory. 
the left, until we have passed thy AND when king Arad the Ca- 
borders. ; ! naanite, which dwelt in the 
18 And Edom said unto him, south, heard tell that Israel came by 
Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I the way of the spies; then he fought 
a: out against thee with the against Israel, and took some of 


them prisoners 

19 And the children of Israel said 2 And Israel vowed 

unto him, We will go by the high the Lorp, and said, if ‘thos will 
way: and if I and my cattle drink jindeed deliver this people into my 


1The death of Aaron marks the end of the wanderz. 
Marches or halts, but does not wander (see Num. is) eee Ee pee we | 


194 


hand, then I will utterly destroy 
their cities. 

3 And the Lorn hearkened to the 
voice of Israel, and delivered up the 
Canaanites; and they utterly de- 
stroyed them and their cities: and). 
he called the name of the place 
¢Hormah. 

4 And they journeyed from mount 
Hor by the way of the Red sea, to 
compass the land of Edom: and the 
soul of the people was much dis- 
couraged because of the way. 


The march of Israel: (2) the ser- 
pent of brass (Gen. 3. 1, note; 
John 3. 14, 15; 2 Cor. 5. 20). 


5 And the people ’spake against 
God, and against Moses, “Where- 
fore have ye brought us up out of 
Egypt to die in the wilderness? for 
there is no bread, neither is there|¢ Cf.Num.11. 
‘any water; ¢and our soul loatheth} * 
this light bread. ; 

6 And the Lorn /sent fiery ser- 
pents among the people, and they 
bit the people; and much people of 
Israel died. 

7 Therefore the people came to 
Moses, and said, We have sinned, 
for we have spoken against the 
Lorb, and against thee; pray unto 

the Lorp, that he take away the 
’ serpents from us. And Moses) 14-17. 
prayed for the people. E 

8 And the LorD said unto Moses, 
&Make thee a fiery serpent, and set 
jt upon a pole: and it shall come to 
pass, that every one that is bitten, 
when-he looketh upon it, shall live. 

9 And Moses made a !serpent of 
hbrass, and put it upon a pole, and 
it came to pass, that if a serpent 
_ had bitten any man, when he be-) 
held the serpent of brass, he ‘lived. 

10 And the children of Israel set 
forward, and pitched in Oboth. 

11 And they journeyed from 
Oboth, and pitched at /Ije-abarim, 
in the wilderness which 1s before 
Moab, toward. the sunrising. 

12 From thence they removed, 
and pitched in the valley of Zared. 

13 From thence they removed, 
and pitched on the other side of 


ai.e. utter 
destruc- 
tion. 


6 Psa.78.19. 


¢ CLEx.16.3; 
17.3. 


e Cf.John 6. 
48-52,60-64. 


f 1 Cor.10.9; 
Deut.8.15. 


h 2 Ki.18.4. 


i Miracles 


jie. ruins of 
Abarim. 


ki.e. the hill. 


li.e. wilder- 
ness. 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1452. 


g John 3.14,15. 


[21 24 


Arnon, which is in the wilderness 
that cometh out of the coasts of the 
Amorites: for Arnon is the border 
of Moab, between Moab and the 
Amorites. 

14 Wherefore it is said in the book 
of the wars of the Lorp, What he 
did in the Red sea, and in the 
brooks of Arnon, 

15 And at the stream of the 
brooks that goeth down to the 
dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the 
border of Moab. 

16 And from thence they went to 
Beer: that zs the well whereof the 
LorD spake unto Moses, Gather 
the people together, and I will give 
them water. 

17 ?Then Israel sang this song, 
Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it: 

18 The princes digged the well, 
the nobles of the people digged it, 
by the direction of the lawgiver, 
with their staves. And from the wil- 
derness they went to Mattanah: 

19 And from Mattanah to Nahal- 
iel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth: 

20 And from Bamoth in the val- 
ley, that is in the country of Moab, 
to the top of *Pisgah, which looketh 
toward /Jeshimon. 


The march of Israel: (3) two 
victories. 


21 And Israel sent messengers 
unto Sihon king of the Amorites, 
saying, 

22 Let me pass through thy land: 
we will not turn into the fields, or 
into the vineyards; we will not 
drink of the waters of the well: but 
we will go along by the king’s high 
way, until we be past thy borders. 

23 And Sihon would not suffer I3- 
rael to pass through his border: but 
Sihon gathered all his people to- 
gether, and went out against Israel 
into the wilderness: and he came to 
Jahaz, and fought against Israel. 

24 And Israel smote him with the 
edge of the sword, and possessed 
his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, 
even unto the children of Ammon: 
for the border of the children of 
Ammon was strong. 


1 See Gen. 3. 14, note. The serpent is a symbol of sin judged; brass speaks of 
the divine judgment, as in the brazen altar (Ex. 27. 2, refs. and note), and self- 


judgment, as in the laver of brass. 
sin for us” (John 3. 14, 15; 2 Cor. 5. 
moment is indicated in the cry: 
Me?” (Mt. 27. 46.) : 

2 The spiritual order here is 
(2) water, symbol of the Spirit 
Rom. 14. 17); (4) power (vs. 21-24). 1 


The brazen serpent is a type of Christ “made 
21) in bearing our judgment. Historically, the 
“My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken 


beautiful: (1) atonement (vs. 8, 9; John 3. 14, 15); 
bestowed (v. 16; John 7. 37-39); (3) joy (vs. 17, 18; 


te , y ; . : a om 
ee 20 25) NUMBERS. [22 on 


25 And Israel took all these| B.C. 1452. CHAPTER 22. 


cities: and Israel dwelt in all The march of Israel: (4) Balaam 


th ities of the Amorites, in : : E 
Heshbon, and in all the villages (2 Pet. 2. 15; Jude 11; Rev. 2.14) 


thereof. ND the children of israel set 

26 For Heshbon was the city of ike forward, and pitched in the 
Sihon the king of the Amorites, plains of Moab on this side Jordan 
who had fought against the former by Jericho. } 
king of Moab, and taken all his 2 And ‘Balak the son of Zippor 
land out of his hand, even unto saw all that Israel had done to the 
Arnon. 'Amorites. ‘ 

27 Wherefore they that speak in} 3 And Moab was sore afraid of 
proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, | the people, because they were 
let the city of Sihon be built and many: and Moab was distressed be- 
prepared: cause of the children of Israel. 

28 For there is a fire gone out of 4 And Moab said unto the elders 
Heshbon, a flame from the city of! of Midian, Now shall this company 
Sihon: it hath consumed Ar of| jlick up all that are round about us, 
Moab, and the lords of the high! jas the ox licketh up the grass of the 
places of Arnon. field. And Balak the son of Zippor 

29 Woe to thee, Moab! thou art was king of the Moabites at that 
undone, O people of Chemosh: he time. 
hath given his sons that escaped,|c Deut.3.1, 5 He sent messengers therefore 
and his daughters, into captiv-| 29-7. unto 1¢Balaam the son of Beor to 
ity unto Sihon king of the Amo- De. 'Pethor, which is by the river of the 


rites. land of the children of his people, to 


30 We have shot at them; Hesh-!¢ Josh.24.9; [call him, saying, Behold, there is a 


bon is perished even unto Dibon,| {7212.25 |people come out from Egypt: be- 
and we have laid them waste even’ Rev.214 hold, they cover the face of the 
unto Nophah, which reacheth un-| as learth, and they abide over against 
to Medeba. oon estas ime: 


31 Thus Israel dwelt in the land! 22: Nehi3, | 6 Come now therefore, I pray 
of the Amorites. ago Fet.2. 3 thee, curse me this people; for they 
32 And Moses sent to spy out abe * |are too mighty for me: peradven- 
Jaazer, and they took the villages| ture I shall prevail, that we may 


| 
| 
| 
\ 


thereof, and drove out the Amo-| smite them, and that I may drive 
rites that were there. | them out of the land: for I wot that 

33 ¢And they turned and went up he whom thou blessest is blessed, 
by the way of Bashan: and Og the jand he whom thou cursest is cursed. 
king of Bashan went out against 7 And the elders of Moab and the 
them, he, and all his people, to the elders of Midian departed with the 
battle at Edrei. rewards of divination in their hand: 

34 And the Lorp °said unto Mo- and they came unto Balaam, and 
ses, Fear him not: for I have jspake unto him the words of 
delivered him into thy hand, and Balak. 
all his people, and his land; and ' 8 And he said unto them, Lodge 
thou shalt do to him as thou here this night, and I will bring you 
didst unto Sihon king of the word again, as the Lorp shall 
Amorites, which dweit at Hesh- speak unto me: and the princes of 
bon. Moab abode with Balaam. 

35 So they smote him, and his 9 And God came unto Balaam, 
sons, and all his people, until there and said, What men are these with 
was none left him alive: and they |thee? 
possessed his land. 10 And Balaam said unto God, 


: 1 Balaam is the typical hireling prophet, seeking only to make a market of his 
gift. This is “the way of Balaam”’ (2 Pet. 2. 15), and characterizes false teachers, 
The “error of Balaam” (Jude 11) was that he could see only the natural morality 
—a holy God, he reasoned, must curse such a people as Israel. Like all false teach- 
ers he was ignorant of the higher morality of vicarious atonement, by which God 
could be just and yet the justifier of believing sinners (Rom. 3. 26). The “doctrine 
of Balaam” (Rey. 2. 14) refers to his teaching Balak to corrupt the people whom 
he could not curse (Num. 31. 16, with Num. 25. 1-3 and Jas. 4. 4). Spiritually, 
Balaamism in ‘teaching never rises above natural reasonings; in practice, it is easy 
world-conformity. See Rev. 2. 14, note. 


196 


: 


en Wats sai 5 te jh ad Ga kk Vy " ; ey eee 
o ee 


é 


22 11) NUMBERS. __ tere 22, 138 


5 i eI RRS ET FR ge bw 
SPE av I eke ch ay 


' - . 
Balak the son of Zippor, king of} B.c. 1452. |was riding upon his ass, and his 
Moab, hath sent unto me, saying, two servants were with him. 

11 Behold, there is a people come 23 And the ass saw the ‘angel of * 


out of Egypt, which covereth the a 
face of the earth: come now, curse 
me them; peradventure I shall be 
able to overcome them, and drive 
them out. 


the LorD standing in the way, and ~ 
his sword drawn in his hand: and 
the ass turned aside out of the way, 
and went into the field: and Balaam 
smote the ass, to turn her into the 


12 And God said unto Balaam, way. . 
Thou shalt ¢not go with them; thou} 24 But the ‘angel of the LorD  ~ 
shalt not curse the people: for they stood in a path of the vineyards, a= —~ 
ere pierass 29 ind ghi wales on this side, and a wall 

n aam rose up in the on that side. 
morning, and said unto the princes 25 And when the ass saw the )— 
of Balak, Get you into your land: cangel of the LORD, she thrust her-\)—~ 
ae ee LorD telah to give me pelt ue the wall, mae peat, en 

eave to go with you. aam’s foot against e wall: an 

14 And the princes of Moab rose he smote her again. 5 
up, and they went unto Balak, and 26 And the angel of the LorD\_. 
said, Balaam refuseth to come with went further, and stood in a nar- ~~ 
us. d row place, where was no way to 

15 And Balak dna Ae again pee es to the right hand or ta 
princes, more, and more honour- the left. 
able than they. a Cf.v.20. 27 And when the ass saw the,‘ : 

16 And they came to Balaam, and) $¢¢Ss"45 langel of the LorD, she fell downi/ 


said to him, Thus saith Balak the! ae under Balaam: and Balaam’s anger 
son of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray) See v.12, was kindled, and he smote the ass 
thee, hinder thee from coming unto ref. with a staff. 


me: ¢ Heb.1.4, 28 And the LORD opened the 
17 For I will promote thee unto} 70*¢e. mouth of the ass, and she said unto 
very great honour, and I will dojjo.. Gen Balaam, What have I done unto 
whatsoever thou sayest unto me:} 21.19;2Ki |thee, that thou hast smitten me 
come therefore, I pray thee, curse] 6-17; Lk.24. |these three times? 
me this people. 16,31. 29 And Balaam said unto the ass, 
18 And Balaam answered and|,seezPet.2. |Because thou hast mucked me: I 
said unto the servants of Balak, If} 14,15. would there were a sword in mine 
Balak would give me his house full hand, for now would I kill thee. 
of silver and gold, I cannot go be- 30 And the ass said unto Balaam, 
yond the word of the LorD my Am not I thine ass, upon which 
God, to do less or more. thou hast ridden ever since J was 
19 Now therefore, I pray you, thine unto this day? was I ever 
tarry ye also here this night, that I wont to do so unto thee? And he 


may know what the LorD will say isaid, Nay. 
_unto me more. 31 Then the Lorp 4opened the 


20 And God came unto Balaam 
at night, and said unto him, ®If the| 
men come to call thee, rise up, and 
go with them; but yet the word 
which I shall say unto thee, that 
shalt thou do. | 

21 And Balaam rose up in the 
morning, and saddled his ass, and 
went with the princes of Moab. 

. 22 And God’s Janger was kindled 
because he went: and the ‘angel of 
the Lorp stood in the way for an} 


adversary against him. Now hej 


eyes of Balaam, and he saw the 
angel of the LorpD standing in the 
way, and his sword drawn in his 
hand: and he bowed down his head, 
and fell flat on his face. 
| 32 And the angel of the LorD 
said unto him, Wherefore hast thou” 
smitten thine ass these three times? 
behold, I went out to withstand 
thee, because thy way is “perverse 
before me: 

33 And the ass saw me, and 
turned from me these three times: 


1Cf. Gen. 46. 3, note. In v. 12 the directive will of Jehovah is made known to 


Balaam, in v. 20 Jehovah’s permissive will. 
knows the true mind of the Lord about it. 


The prophet is now free to go, but 
The matter is wholly one between Je- 


hovah and His servant. The permission of vy. 20 really constitutes a testing of 
Balaam. He chose the path of self-will and self-advantage, and Jehovah could not 


but gravely disapprove. 
was to follow. 


The whole scene, vs. 22-35, prepared Balaam for what 


i 


22 34] NUMBERS. (23 1 


unless she had turmsed from me,| B.C.1452. |and prepare me here seven oxen 


ely now also J had slain thee, and seven rams. 
Ba sawed her alive. 2 And Balak did as Balaam had 
34 And Balaam said unto the ‘spoken; and Balak and Balaam of- 
“angel of the LorD, I have sinned; ‘fered on every altar a bullock and 
for I knew not that thou stoodest a tam. ; 
in the way against me: now there- 3 And Balaam said unto Balak, 
fore, if it °displease thee, I will get Stand by thy burnt-offering, and I 
me back again. will go: peradventure the LorpD will 
35 And the “angel of the Lorp come to meet me: and whatsoever 
said unto Balaam, Go with the men: he sheweth me I will tell thee. And 
“but only the word that I shall he went to an high place. 
speak unto thee, that thou shalt|, p414 4 And God met Balaam: and he 
speak. So Balaam went with the! note. ’ said unto him, I have prepared 
princes of Balak. seven altars, and I have offered up- 


36 And when Balak heard that|?i-¢-.2¢ evil in| gn every altar a bullock and a ram. 


Balaam was come, he went out to eee 5 And the LorpD put a “word in 
meet him unto a city of Moab,|<See v.20. Balaam’s mouth, and said, Return 
¢which is in the border of Arnon,|j yyum.9113, |uato Balak, and thus thou shalt 
which is in the utmost coast. “~~ Ispeals: 


37 And Balak said unto Balaam,|¢ Inspiration.| 6 And he returned unto him, and, 
Did I not earnestly send unto thee tages lo, he stood by his burnt-sacrifice, 
to call thee? wherefore camest thou] 4.15; Rev. |he, and all the princes of Moab. 
not unto me? am I not able indeed! 22.19.) 7 And he took up his parable, and 
oe coucte thee to honour? fNum.23.26; said, Balak the king of Moab hath 

nd Balaam said unto Balak,|’ 9413-1 Ki, brought me from Aram, out of the 
Lo, I am come unto thee: have I} 22-14;2Chr.|mountains of the east, saying, 


now any power at all to say any| 18-13. Come, curse me Jacob, and come, 
thing? the ‘word that God putteth| ¢ or, a city of |defy Israel. 
in my mouth, that shall I fspeak. streets. 8 How shall I curse, whom God 


39 And Balaam went with Balak, nantes trond hath not cursed? or how shall I 
ee Poel presses vs SI2165, : Gay eecom the Lorp hath not 
An alak offered oxen an eut.4.2,13. |defie 
sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to Rova230.) 9 For from the top of the rocks I 
se ope bork with ave Fi out [See bie soe from sa pee — 
nd it came to pass on the im: lo, e people 1 
morrow, that Balak ‘took Balaam, one, and shall i be Docking ; 
and brought him up into the high ong the nations. 
places of Baal, that thence he might 10 Who can count the dust of 
see the !utmost part of the people. Jacob, and the number of the 
Ciereries fourth part of Israel? Let me die 


the death of the righteous, ‘and let 
Balaam: the prophecy from the 


my last end be like his! 
high places of Baal, The we 11 And Balak said unto Balaam, 
ration of Israel. 


heer pee thou done unto me? I 
took thee to curse mine enemies, 
AND Balaam said unto Balak, 

Build me here seven altars, 


and, behold, thou hast blessed 
them altogether. 


1“Utmost part,” etc., means the end of the encampment, the “fourth 
Israel” (Num. 23. 10). Balak’s thought, as Grant (following Keil) points ane a 
not at all to permit Balaam to see the whole of the Hebrew host. In bringing Ba- 
laam to Pisgah (vs. 13, 14), Balak corrects what, evidently, he thought a blunder 
(Num. 23. 13, 14). But when the hireling sees the whole camp he must utter a 
grander word than before, “He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob,” and that with 
the nation in full view! What an illustration of the truth of Rom. 4. 5-8! 

-2 In the prophecies of Balaam God testifies on behalf of His people rather than 
(as usual) to them. It is the divine testimony to their standing as a tedeémed peo- 
ple in view of the serpent “lifted up,’’ and of the water from the smitten rock (Num. 
21, 5-9; 20, 11). Their state was morally bad, but this was a matter concerning 
the discipline of God, not His judgment. The interpretation of the prophecies 
is literal as to Israel, typical as to Christians. Through Christ “lifted up” (John 
3. 14) our standing is eternally secure and perfect, though our state may require 
the Father’s discipline (1 Cor. 11. 30-32; 2 Cor. 1. 4-9; cf. vs. 10-13); meantime 
against all enemies, God is “for us” (Rom. 8 31). i 


198 


23 12] 


12 And he answered and said, 
Must I not take heed to speak that 
which the Lorp hath put in my 
mouth? ~ 


Balaam: the prophecy from Pis- 
Sah: the _ justification and 
power of Israel. 


13 And Balak said unto him, 
Come, I pray thee, with me unto 
another place, from whence thou 
mayest see them: “thou shalt see 
but the utmost part of them, and 
shalt not see them all: and curse 
me them from thence. 

14 And he brought him into the 


field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah,! 


and built seven altars, and offered 
a bullock and a ram on every altar. 

15 And he said unto Balak, Stand 
here by thy burnt-offering, while I 
meet the LORD yonder. 

16 And theLorpD met Balaam, and 
put a word in his mouth, and said, 
Go again unto Balak, and say thus. 

17 And when he came to him, be- 
hold, he stood by his burnt-offering, 
and the princes of Moab with him. 


And Balak said unto him, What| ; 


hath the’LorpD spoken? 

18 And he took up his parable, 
and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear; 
hearken unto me, thou son of 
Zippor: 

19 God is not a man, that he 
should lie; neither the son of man, 
that he should “repent: hath he 


said, and shall he not do it? or! 


hath he spoken, and shall he not 
make it good? 

20 Behold, I have received com- 
mandment to bless: and he hath 
blessed; and I cannot reverse it. _ 
21 He hath not beheld iniquity in 
Jacob, neither hath he seen per- 
verseness in Israel: the LorD his 
God is with him, and the shout of 
a king is among them. 

22 God brought them out of 
Egypt; he hath as it were the 
strength of an “unicorn. 

23 Surely there is no enchant- 
ment against Jacob, neither is 
there any divination ¢against Is- 
rael: according to this time it shall 
be said of Jacob and of Israel, 
eWhat hath God wrought! _ 

24 Behold, the people shall rise up 
as a great lion, and _ lift up himself 
as a young lion: he shall not lie 
down until he eat of the prey, and 
drink the blood of the slain. 

25 And Balak said unto Balaam, 
Neither curse them at all, nor bless 
them at all. 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1452. 


a Better, thou 
seest but 
the extrem- 
ity of them, 
and dost 
not see 


them all, 


6 Zech.8.14, 
note 


ci.e. the 
aurochs, or 
wild ox. 


\d Or, in. 
je Psa.31.19; 
| 44.1. 


fNum.21.20. 
gOr, the 


waste. 


hOr, to the 
meeting of 
enchant- 
ments. 


j Num.11.25; 
1 Sam.19, 
20,23; 10.10; 
2 Chr.15.1. 


k Holy Spirit. 
Num.27.18. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


? Num.23.7,18. 


m i.e. pros- 
trated by 


8.18; 10. 
15,16; 2 Cor. 
12.2-4; Rev. 
1.10,17. 


n See Jer.51. 
13; Rev.17. 
bs 

o1 Sam,15.9. 


I» 2 Sam.5.12; 
1 Chr.14.2. 


q Num.14,9; 
23.24. 


199 


[24.9 


26 But Balaam answered and 
said unto Balak, Told not I thee, 
saying, All that the LorD speaketh, 
that I must do? 


the prophecy from 
(1) the beauty and 
order of Israel. 


27 And Balak said unto Balaam, 
Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee 
unto another place; peradventure 
it will please God that thou mayest 
curse me them from thence. 

28 And Balak brought Balaam 
unto the top of Peor, that looketh 
ftoward £Jeshimon. 

29 And Balaam said unto Balak, 
Build me here seven altars, and pre- 
pare me here seven bullocks and 
seven rams. 

30 And Balak did as Balaam had 
said, and offered a bullock and a 
ram on every altar. 


CHAPTER 24. 


ysis when Balaam saw that it 
pleased the LorD to bless Is- 
rael, he went not, as at other times, 
to seek for “enchantments, but he 
set his face toward the wilderness. 

2 And Balaarn lifted up his eyes, 
and he saw Israel ‘abiding in his 
tents according to their tribes; and 
ithe “spirit of God came upon him. 

3 'And he took up his parable, 
and said, Balaam the son of Beor 
hath said, and the man whose eyes 
are open hath said: 

4 He hath said, which heard the 
words of God, which saw the vision 
of the Almighty, “falling tnto a 
trance, but having his eyes open: 

5 How goodly are thy tents, O 
Jacob, and thy tabernacies, O Is- 
rael! 

6 As the valleys are they spread 
forth, as gardens by the river’s 
side, as the trees of lign aloes which 
the Lorp hath planted, and as 
cedar trees beside the waters. 

7 He shall pour the water out of 
his buckets, and his seed shall be 
|tin many waters, and his king shall 
be higher than °Agag, and his 
Pkingdom shall be exalted. 

8 God brought him forth out of 
Egypt; he hath as it were the 
strength of an unicorn: he shall 
geat up the nations his enemies, 
and shall break their bones, and 
pierce them through with his 
arrows. 

9 He couched, he lay down as a 
lion, and as a great lion: who shall 


‘Wi 
/ ie 


‘bad of mine own mind; but what) 


24 10] 


NUMBERS. 


stir him up? Blessed is he that 
blesseth thee, and cursed is he that 
curseth thee. . 

10 And Balak’s anger was kindled 
against Balaam, and he smote his 
hands together: and Balak said 
unto Balaam, I called thee to curse 
Mine enemies, and, behold, thou 
hast altogether blessed therm these 
three times. 

11 Therefore now flee thou to thy 
place: I thought to promote thee 
unto great honour; but, lo, the 
LorpD hath kept thee back from 
honour. 

12 And Balaam said unto Balak, 
Spake I not also to thy messengers 
which thou sentest unto me, saying, 

13 If Balak would give me his 
house full of silver and gold, I can-| 
not go beyond the commandment) 
of the LorD, to do either good or! 


the LorD saith, that will I speak? 
14 And now, behold, I go unto) 

my people: come therefore, and I) 

will advertise thee what this people! 

lees do to thy people in the latter 
ays. 


Balaam: the prophecy from 
OEE (2) the Messianic king- 
liom. 


15 And he took up his parable, 
and said, Balaam the son of Beor 
hath said, and the man whose eyes 
are open hath said: 

16 He hath said, which heard the! 
words of God, and knew the know- 
ledge of the most High, which saw 
the vision of the Almighty, falling 
into a trance, but having his eyes 
open: 

17 I shall see him, but not now: I! 
shall behold him, but not nigh: there 
shall come a Star out of Jacob, and| 
a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, 
and shall smite the corners of Moab, 
and destroy all the children of 
Sheth. 

18 And Edom shall be a posses- 
sion, Seir also shall be a possession 
for his enemies; and Israel shall do 
valiantly. 

19 Out of Jacob shall come he 
that shall have dominion, and shall 
prey him that remaineth of the 
city. 

20 And when he looked on Ama- 
lek, he took up his parable, and 
said, Amalek was the first of the 
‘nations; but his latter end shall 
be that he perish for ever, 

21 And he looked on the Kenites, 
and took up his parable, and said, 


B.C. 1452. 


a Gen.12.3; 
27.29 


d Or, the first 
of the 
nations that} 
warred 
against 
Israel. Ex. 
17.8. 


e Pronounced 
Kittim. 
Gen.10.4; 
Dan.11.30. 

f Num.31.8. 


g Num.31.16; 
1 Cor.10.8. 


h Ex,34.15,16; 
1 Cor.10.20. 


i Ex.20.5. 

j Or, Baal of 
Peor. See 
Num.23.28. 

k Psa.106.30, 


1Cf.1 Cor. 
10.8, note. 


200 


Strong is thy dwellingplace, and 
thou puttest thy nest in a rock. 

22 Nevertheless the Kenite shall 
be wasted, until Asshur-shall carry 
thee away captive. ; 

23 And he took up his parable, 
and said, Alas, who shall live when 
God doeth this! 

24 And ships shall come from 
the coast of ¢«Chittim, and shall ; 
afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, 
and he also shall perish for ever. 

25 And Balaam rose up, and went 
and /freturned to his place: and 
Balak also went his way. 


CHAPTER 25. 


“The doctrine of Balaam”’ (Num. 
31. 16; Rev. 2. 14; Jas. 4. 4). 


AND Israel abode in Shittim, and 
&the people began to commit 
whoredom with the daughters of 
Moab. 

2 And they called the people unto 
the sacrifices of their gods: and the 
people did eat, and bowed down to 
their gods. 

3 And Israel joined himself unto 
JBaal-peor: and the anger of the 
LorpD was kindled against Israel. 

4 And the LorD said unto Moses, 
Take all the heads of the people, 
and hang them up before the Lorp 
against the sun, that the fierce 
anger of the LORD may be turned 
away from Israel. 

5S _And Moses said unto the judges 
of Israel, Slay ye every one his men 
that were joined unto Baal-peor. 

6 And, behold, one of the children 
of Israel came and brought unto his 
brethren a Midianitish woman in 
the sight of Moses, and in the sight 
of all the congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel, who were weeping 
before the door of the tabernacle of 
the congregation. r 

7 And when Phinehas, the son of 
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, 
saw it, he rose up from among the 
congregation, and took a javelin in 
his hand; 

8 And he went after the man of 
Israel into the tent, and thrust both 
of them through, the man of Israel, 
and the woman through her belly. 
®So the plague was stayed from the 
children of Israel. 

9 And those that /died in the 
plague were twenty and four thou- 


sand, 

10 And the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 
| 11 Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, 


the son of Aaron the priest, hath 
turned my wrath away from the 
children ‘of Israel, while he was 
zealous for my sake among them, 
that I consumed not the children of 
Israel in my 2jealousy. 

12 Wherefore say, “Behold, I give 
unto him my covenant of peace: 

13 And he shall have it, and his 
seed after him, even the covenant 
of an everlasting priesthood; be- 
cause he was zealous for his God, 
and made an ‘atonement for the 
children of Israel. 

14 Now the name of the Israelite 
that was slain, even that was slain| 
with the Midianitish woman, was 
Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a 
chief house among the Simeonites. 

15 And the name of the Midian- 
itish woman that was slain was 
Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was 
head over a people, and of a chief 
house in Midian. 

16 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, é 

17 Vex the Midianites, and smite} 
them: 

18 For they vex you with their 
wiles, wherewith they have be- 
guiled you in the matter of Peor, 
and in the matter of Cozbi,: the 
daughter of a prince of Midian, 
their sister, which was slain in the 
day of the plague for Peor’s sake. 


CHAPTER 26. 


The new generation of Israel 
numbered (vs. 64, 65). 


1th it came to pass after the; 
plague, that the LorD spake) 
santo Moses and unto Eleazar the| 
son of Aaron the priest, saying, 

2 Take the sum of all the congre- 
gation of the children of Israel, 
from twenty years old and upward, 
throughout their fathers’ house, all 
that are able to go to war in Israel. 

3 And Moses and Eleazar the 
priest spake with them in the plains 
of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, 
saying, 

4 Take the sum of the people, 
from twenty years old and up- 
ward: as the Lorp 4commanded 
Moses and the children of Israel, 
which went forth out of the land of 
Egypt. 

5 eReuben, the eldest son of Is- 
rael: the children of Reuben; Ha- 
noch, of whom cometh the family 
of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the| 
family of the Palluites: R 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1452. 


a Cf£.Ex.20.5; 
Deut.32. 
16,21; 1 Ki. 
14.22. 


b Mal.2.4,5; 
3.1. 


c See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


d See Num.1. 


j2= 


e Gen.46.8; 
Ex.6.14; 
1 Che.5.1. 


f Num.16. 
32-35. 


g 1 Cor.10.6; 
2 Pet.2.6. 


|h Bx.6.24; 


1 Chr.6.22, 


i Gen.38.2, 
etc.; 46.12. 


201 


6 Of Hezron, the family of the 
Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of 
the Carmites. 

7 These are the families of the 
Reubenites: and they that were 
numbered of them were forty and 
three thousand and seven hundred 
and thirty. 

8 And the sons of Pallu; Eliab. 

9 And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, 
and Dathan, and Abiram. This 1s 
that Dathan and Abiram, which 
were famous in the congregation, 
who strove against Moses and 
against Aaron in the company of 
Korah, when they strove against 
the LorpD: 

10 fAnd the earth opened her 
mouth, and swallowed them up to- 
gether with Korah, when that 
company died, what time the fire 
devoured two hundred and fifty 
men: sand they became a sign. 

11 Notwithstanding the children 
of *Korah died not. 

12 The sons of Simeon after their 
families: of Nemuel, the family of 
the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the fam- 
ily of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the 
family of the Jachinites: 

13 Of Zerah, the family of the 
Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of 
the Shaulites. 

14 These are the families of the 
Simeonites, twenty and two thou- 
sand and two hundred. 

15 The children of Gad after their 
families: of Zephon, the family of 
the Zephonites: of Haggi, the fam- 
ily of the Haggites: of Shuni, the 
family of the Shunites: 

16 Of Ozni, the family of the Oz- 
nites: of Eri, the family of the 
Erites: 

17 Of Arod, the family of the Ar- 
odites: of Areli, the family of the 
Arelites. : 

18 These are the families of the 
children of Gad according to those 
that were numbered of them, forty 
thousand and five hundred. 

19 The sons of ‘Judah were Er 
and Onan: and Er and Onan died 
in the land of Canaan. 

20 And the sons of Judah after 
their families were; of Shelah, the 
family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, 
the family of the Pharzites: of Ze- 
rah, the family of the Zarhites. 

21 And the sons of Pharez were; 
of Hezron, the family of the Hez- 
ronites: of Hamul, the family of the 
Hamulites. 

22 These are the families of Ju- 
dah according to those that were 


iy 


26 23] 


numbered of them, threescore and 
sixteen thousand and five hun- 


red. 

23 Of the sons of “Issachar after 
their families: of Tola, the family 
of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family 
of the Punites: : 

24 Of Jashub, the family of the) 
Jashubites: of Shimron, the family} 
of the Shimronites. ; | 

25 These are the families of Issa-| 
char according to those that were 
numbered of them, threescore and 
four thousand and three hundred. 

26 Of the sons of 6Zebulun after 
their families: of Sered, the family 
of the Sardites: of Elon, the family 
of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the fam- 
ily of the Jahleelites. 

27 These are the families of the 
Zebulunites according to those that 
were numbered of them, threescore 
thousand and five hundred. 

28 The sons of ‘Joseph after their 
families were Manasseh and Eph- 
raim. 

29 Of the sons of Manasseh: of 
Machir, the family of the Machir- 
- ites: and Machir begat Gilead: of 
Gilead come the family of the Gil- 
eadites. 

30 These are the sons of Gilead: 
of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezer- 
ites: of Helek, the family of the 
Helekites: 

31 And of Asriel, the family of 
the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the 
family of the Shechemites: 

32 And of Shemida, the family of 
the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, 
the family of the Hepherites. 

33 And Zelophehad the son of 
Hepher had no sons, but daughters: 
and the names of the daughters of 
Zelophehad were Mahlah, and 
Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 

34 These are the families of 
Manasseh, and those that were 
numbered of them, fifty and two 
thousand and seven hundred. 

35 These are the sons of Ephraim 
after their families: of Shuthelah, 
the family of the Shuthalhites: of 
Becher, the family of the Bachrites: 
of Tahan, the family of the Ta- 
hanites. 

36 And these are the sons of Shu- 
thelah: of Eran, the family of the 
Eranites. 

37 These are the families of the 
sons of Ephraim according to those 
that were numbered of them, thirty 
and two thousand and five hundred. 
These are the sons of Joseph after 
their families. 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1452. 


a Gen46.13; 
1 Chr.7.1. 


b Gen.46.14. 
c Gen.46.20. 


d Gen.46.21; 
1 Chr.7.6. 


e Gen.46.23. 


Ff Gen.46.17; 
1 Chr.7.30. 


¢ Gen.46.24; 
1 Chr.7.13. 


h See Num.1. 


46. 
¢ Josh.11.23; 
14.1. 


202 


6 58 


38 The sons of “Benjamin after 
their families: of Bela, the fam- 
ily of the Belaites: of Ashbel, 
the family of the Ashbelites: of 
Ahiram, the family of the Ahira- 
mites: 

-39 Of Shupham, the family of the 
Shuphamites: of Hupham, the fam- 
ily of the Huphamites. 

40 And the sons of Bela were Ard 
and Naaman: of Ard, the family of 
the Ardites: and of Naaman, the 
family of the Naamites. 

41 These are the sons of Benja- 
min after their families: and they 
that were numbered of them were 
forty and five thousand and six 
hundred. 

42 These are the sons of ‘Dan af- 
ter their families: of Shuham, the 
family of the Shuhamites. These 
are the families of Dan after their 
families. : 
| 43 All the families of the Shuham- 
lites, according to those that were 
numbered of them, were threescore 
and four thousand and four hun- 
dred. 

44 Of the children of fAsher after 
their families: of Jimna, the family 
of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family 
of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the fam. 
ily of the Beriites. 

45 Of the sons of Beriah: of He- 
ber, the family of the Heberites: of 
Malchiel, the family of the Mal- 
chielites. 

46 And the name of the daughter 
of Asher was Sarah. 

47 These are the families of the 
sons of Asher according to those 
that were numbered of them; who 
were fifty and three thousand. and 
four hundred. 

48 Of the sons of ¢Naphtali after 
their families: of Jahzeel, the fam- 
ily of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the 
family of the Gunites: 

49 Of Jezer, the family of the Je-. 
zerites: of Shillem, the family of 
the Shillemites. 

50 These are the families of 
Naphtali according to their fam- 
ilies: and they that were numbered 
of them were forty and five thou- 
sand and four hundred. 

51 These were the numbered of 
the children of “Israel, six hundred 
thousand and a thousand seven 
hundred and thirty. 

52 And the Lorp spake unto 
Moses, saying, 

53 ‘Unto these the land shall be 


|\divided for an inheritance accord- 


ing to the number of names, 


¢ 


a 
26 <4] 


54 To “many thou shalt give 
the more inheritance, and to 
‘few thou shalt give the less in- 
heritance: to. every one. shall 
his inheritance be given accord- 
ing to those that were numbered 
of him. 

55 Notwithstanding the land shall 
be divided by lot: according to the 
names of the tribes of their fathers 
they shall inherit. 

56 According to the lot shall the 
possession thereof be divided be- 
tween many and few. 

57 And these are they that were 
numbered of the Levites after 
their families: of Gershon, the 
family of the Gershonites: of Ko- 
hath, the family of the Kohath- 
ites: of Merari the family of the 
Merarites. 

58 These are the families of the 


Levites: the family of the Libnites, 
the family of the Hebronites, the 
family of the Mahlites, the family 
of the Mushites, the family of the 
Korathites. And Kohath begat 
Amram, 

59 And the name of Amram’s wife 
was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, 
whom her mother bare to Levi in 
Egypt: and she bare unto Amram 
Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their 
sister. 

60 And unto Aaron was born Na- 
dab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Itha- 


mar. 

61 And ‘Nadab and Abihu died, 
when they offered strange fire be- 
fore the LorD. 

62 And those that were numbered 
of them were twenty and three 
thousand, all males from a month 

_old and upward: for they were not 


' numbered among the children of 


Israel, because there was no inheri- 
tance given them among the chil- 
dren of Israel. 

63 These are they that were num- 
bered by Moses and Eleazar the 
priest, who numbered the children 
of Israel in the plains of Moab by 
Jordan near Jericho. 

64 But among these there was 
not a man of them whom Moses 
and Aaron the priest numbered, 
when they numbered the children 
of Israel in the wilderness of! 
Sinai. 

65 For the Lorp had _ said of, 
them, @They shall surely die in the 
wilderness. And there was not left 
a man of them, ‘save Caleb the son 
of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son 
of Nun, ! 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1452. 


ai.e. the 
&reater. 


bie. the 
smaller. 


1 Chr, 24. 2. 
d Num.14. 


28,29; 1 Cor. 


5,6. 
e Num.14.30. 
f Or, Chiefs, 
g Josh.17.4. 
h Ex.18.15,19. 
4 Or, right, 


[27 13 


CHAPTER 27. 
The law of inheritance. 


ik ae came the daughters of Ze- 
lophehad, the son of Hepher, 
the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, 
jthe son of Manasseh, of the fami- 
lHies of Manasseh the son of Joseph: 
jand these are the names of his 
\daughters; Mahlah, Noah, and 

\Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah. 

2 And they stood before Moses, 
and before Eleazar the priest, and 
ibefore the ‘princes and all the con- 
\gregation, by the door of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, saying, 

3 Our father died in the wilder- 
ness, and he was not in the company 
of them that gathered themselves 
together against the Lorp in the 
‘oun sin, of Korah; but died in his 
own sin, and had no sons. 
| £ Why should the name of our 
|father be done away from among 
las family, because he hath no son? 
sGive unto us therefore a posses- 
sion among the brethren of our 
father. 

5 And Moses “brought their cause 
before the Lorp. 

6 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 

'ses, saying, 
7 The daughters of Zelophehad 
|speak right: thou shalt surely give 
ithem a possession of an inheritance 
among their father’s brethren; and 
thou shalt cause the inheritance of 
their father to pass unto them. 

8 And thou shalt speak unto the 
jchildren of Israel, saying, If a man 
\die, and have no son, then ye shall 
|cause his inheritance to pass unto 
\his daughter. 
| 9 And if he have no daughter, 
[then ye shall give his inheritance 
junto his brethren, 
| 10 And if he have no brethren, 
|jthen ye shall give his inheritance 
iunto his father’s brethren. 

11 And if his father have no 
jbrethren, then ye shall give his in- 
heritance unto his kinsman that is 
next to him of his family, and he 
jshall possess it: and it shall be unto 
the children of Israel a statute of 
jjudgment, as the Lorp_ com- 
manded Moses. 


{ Moses to prepare for death. 


12 And the Lorn said unto Mo- 
ses, Get thee up into this mount 
|Abarim, and see the land which I 
jhave given unto the children of 
Israel. 

' 73 And when thou hast seen it 


27% 14] 


¥ 
7 


‘oe a. ee ee 
P ny 
NUMBERS. 


thou also ¢shalt be gathered unto! B.c. 1452. 


thy people, as Aaron thy brother 
was gathered. { 

14 For ye ‘rebelled against my 
commandment in the desert of Zin, 
in the strife of the congregation, to 
sanctify me at the water before their 
eyes: that is the water of Meribah 
in Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin, 


i Joshua appointed in Moses’ |# Num.20.24, 
aH place. Deut.10.6. 


15 And Moses spake unto the 


6 Num.20.12, 


Lorp, ‘saying, 24; Deut.1. 
16 Let the Lorn, the Ged of the oF ean 
spirits of all flesh, set a man over set Ncag 
‘the congregation, ¢ Bible 
: 17 Which may go out before them, Or). Dee 
pS and which may go in before them,| $57°%Gen 
« and which may lead them out, and} 15.2: Hab.3 
which may bring them in: that the| 1-16.) 
| congregation of the LorpD be not as! 7, Ki22.17: 
@4sheep which have no shepherd. Zech.10.2; 
18 And the LorD said unto Mo- Hee 
ses, Take thee Joshua the son of| M*-6-3¢- 
iy Nun, a man in whom is the ¢spirit,| ¢ Holy Spirit. 
) and lay thine hand upon him; Deut.34.9. 
19 And set hirn before Eleazar the; Meraigh 
priest, and before all the congre- 
gation; and give him a charge in| fEx.28.30, 
their sight. nore. 
; 20 And thou shalt put some of|¢ Josh9.14; 
) thine honour upon him, that all the} 1Sam.22/10, 
: congregation of the children of Is-} 3:15 
rael may be obedient. h Deut.3.28; 
21 And he shall stand before Elea-| 31.7,8. 


zar the priest, who shall ask coun- 
sel for him fafter the judgment of 


i 


Or, savour 
of satisfac- 


Urim before the Lorp: gat his word| tion. Lev 
shall they go out, and at his word| 1-% note. 
they shall come in, both he, and all j One ephah 
the children of Israel with him,| = 1 bu.3 
even all the congregation. Piss 

22 And Moses did as the Lorp k Lit. meal. 
commanded him: and he _ took; d 
Joshua, and set him before Eleazar f Ons bin as 
the priest, and before all the con- 
gregation: jm Ex.29.42; 

23 And he laid his hands upon| s¢Am» 


him, ‘and gave him a charge, as the! 


LorD commanded by the hand of i.e. April. 


Moses. 
o Ex.12.6-18; 
‘i CHAPTER 28. Lev.23.5; 
¥ 5 um.9.3; 
The order of offerings. Deut.16.1; 
Ezk.45.21. 


WAND the Lorp spake unto Mo- 
ses, sdying, 

2 Command the children of Israel, 
and say unto them, My offering, 
and my bread for my sacrifices 
made by fire, for a ‘sweet savour 
unto me, shall ye observe to offer 
unto me in their due season. 

3 And thou shalt say unto them, 
This is the offering made by fire’ 


204 


_ [ts 


which ye shall offer unto the Lorp, 
two lambs of the first year without 
spot day by day, for a continual 
burnt-offering. 

4 The one lamb shalt thou offer 
in the morning, and the other lamb 
shalt thou offer at even; , 

5 And a tenth part of an Jephah 
of flour for a kmeat-offering, min- 
gled with the fourth part of an 
‘hin of beaten oil. 

6 ft is a "continual burnt-offer- 
ing, which was ordained in mount 
Sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice 
made by fire unto the Lorpb. 

7 And the drink-offering thereof 
shall be the fourth part of an ‘hin 
for the one lamb: in the holy place 


‘|shalt thou cause the strong wine to 


be poured unto the Lorp for a 
drink-offering. 

, 8 And the other lamb shalt thou 
‘Offer at even: as the #meat-offering 
of the morning, and as the drink- 
offering thereof, thou shalt-offer it, 
a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet 
savour unto the LorpD. 

9 And on the sabbath day two 
lambs of the first year without spot, 
and two tenth deals of flour for a 
kmeat-offering, mingled with oil, 
and the drink-offering thereof: 

10 This is the burnt-offering of 
'every sabbath, beside the continual 
burnt-offering, and his drink-offer- 
ing. 

11 And in the beginnings of your 
months ye shall offer a burnt-offer- 
ing unto the LoRD; two young bul- 
locks, and one ram, seven lambs of 
the first year without spot; 

12 And three tenth deals of flour 
for a meat offering, mingled with 
oil, for one bullock; and two tenth 
deals of flour for a kmeat-offering, 
ming!ed with oil, for one ram; 

13 And a several tenth deal of 
flour mingled with oil for a kmeat- 
offering unto one lamb; for a burnt- 
offering of a sweet savour, a sacri- 
fice made by fire unto the LORD. 

14 And their drink-offerings shall 
be half an ‘hin of wine unto a bul- 
lock, and the third part of an hin 
unto a ram, and a fourth part of 
an hin unto a lamb: this js 
the burnt-offering of every month 
throughout the months of the year. 

15 And one kid of the goats for 4 
sin-offering unto the Lorb shall be 
offered, beside the continual burnt- 
offering, and his drink-offering, 

16 And in the fourteenth day of 
the “first month is the °passover of 
the Lorp , 


a 


NUMBERS. 


17 And in the fifteenth day of this 
month is the feast: seven days shall 
“unleavened bread be eaten. 

18 In the first day shall be an 
holy convocation; ye shall do no 
manner of servile work therein: 

19 But ye shall offer a sacrifice 
made by fire for a burnt-offering 
unto the LORD; two young bul- 
jocks, and one ram, and seven lambs 
of the first year: they shall be unto 
you without blemish: 

20 And their ’meat-offering shall 
be of flour mingled with oil: three 
tenth deals shall ye offer for a bul- 
lock, and two tenth deals for a ram; 

21 A several tenth deal shalt thou 
offer for every lamb, throughout the 
seven lambs: 

22 And one goat for a sin-cffer- 
ing, to make an ‘atonement for you. 

23 Ye shall offer these beside the 
burnt-offering in the morning, which 
is for a continual burnt-offering. 

24 After this manner ye shall 
offer daily, throughout the seven 
days, the meat of the sacrifice made 
by fire, of a sweet savour unto the 
Lorp: it shall be offered beside the 
continual burnt-offering, and his 
drink-offering. 

25 And 4on the seventh day ye 
shall have an holy convocation; ye 
shall do no servile work. 

26 Also «in the day of the first- 
fruits, when ye bring a new °meat- 
offering unto the LorD, after your 
weeks be out, ye shall have an holy 
convocation; ye shall do no servile 
work: 

27 But ye shall offer the burnt- 
offering for a sweet savour unto 
the Lorpb; two young bullocks, one 


ram, seven lambs of the first BOR ! 


28 And their °meat-offering 0: 
flour mingled with oil, three tenth 
deals unto one bullock, two tenth 
deals unto one ram, 

29 A several tenth deal unto one 
lamb, throughout the seven lambs; 

30 And one kid of the goats, to 
make an ‘atonement for you. 

21 Ye shall offer them beside the 
continual burnt-offering, and his 
bmeat-offering, (they shall be unto 
you without blemish) and their 
drink-offerings. 


CHAPTER 29 


AND. in the fseventh month, on 
the first day of the month, ye 
shall have an holy convocation; ye 
shall do no seryile work: éit is a day 
of blowing the trumpets unto you. 


B.C. 1452. 


a Leaven. 
Deut.16.3, 
4,8,16. (Gen. 
19.3; Mt. 
13.33.) 


b Lit. meal. 


c See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


|d Ex.12.16; 
13.6; Lev. 
23.8. 


e Ex.23.16; 


fi.e. October; 
also vs.7,12. 


g Lev.23.24. 


h Psa.35.13; 
Isa.58.5. 


i Lev.16.3,5. 

j Lev.23.34; 
Deut.16.13; 
Ezk.45.25. 


k Ezra 3.4. 


295 


2 And ye shall offer a burnt-offer- 
ing for a sweet savour unto the 
LorRpD; one young bullock, one ram, 
and seven lambs of the first year 
without blemish: 

3 And their ’meat-offering shall 
be of flour mingled with oil, three 
tenth deals for a bullock, and two 
tenth deals for a ram, 

4 And one tenth deal for one 
lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 

5 And one kid of the goats for a 
sin-offering, to make an “atonement 
for you: 

6 Beside the burnt-offering of the 
month, and his ’meat-offering, and 
the daily burnt-offering, and his 
bmeat-offering, and their drink- 
offerings, according unto their man- 
ner, for a sweet savour, a sacrifice 
made by fire unto the LORD. 

7 And ye shall have on the tenth 
day of this fseventh month an holy 
convocation; and ye shall “afflict 
your souls: ye shall not do any 
work therein: 

8 But ye shall offer a burnt-offer- 
ing unto the Lorp for a sweet 
savour; one young bullock, one ram, 
and seven lambs of the first year; 
they shall be unto you without 
blemish: 

9 And their 5meat-offering shall 
be of flour mingled with oil, three 
tenth deals to a bullock, and two 
tenth deals to one ram, 

10 A several tenth deal for one 
lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 

11 One kid of the goats for a sin- 
offering; beside the ‘sin-offering of 
catonement, and the continual 
burnt-offering, and the ’meat-offer- 
ing of it, and their drink-offerings. 

12 And Jon the fifteenth day of 
the seventh month ye shall have an 
holy convocation; ye shall do no 
servile work, and ye shall keep a 
feast unto the LORD seven days: 

13 And *ye shall offer a burnt- 
offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of 
a sweet savour unto the Lorp; 
thirteen young bullocks, two rams, 
and fourteen lambs of the first year; 
they shall be without blemish: 

14 And their ’meat-offerings shall 
be of flour mingled with oil, three 
tenth deals unto every bullock of 
the thirteen bullocks, two tenth 
Ideals to each ram of the two rams, 

15 And a several tenth deal to 
each lamb of the fourteen lambs: 

16 And one kid of the goats for a 
sin-offering; beside the continual 
burnt-offering, his meat-offering. 
and his drink-offering. 


29 17] 


17 And on the second day ye! BC. 1452. 


shall offer twelve young bullocks, 
two rams, fourteen lambs of the) 
first year without spot: : 

18 And their ¢meat-offering and 
their drink-offerings for the bul- 
locks, for the rams, and for the} 
lambs, shall be according to their) 
number, Yafter the manner: 

19 And one kid of the goats for a 
sin-offering; beside the continual) 
burnt-offering, and the ¢meat-offer- 
ing thereof, and their drink-offer- 
ings. 

20 And on the third day eleven 
bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs 
of the first year without blemish; 

21 And their *meat-offering and 
their drink-offerings for the bul- 
locks, for the rams, and for the 
lambs, shall be according to their 
umber, after the manner: 

22 And one goat for a sin-offer- 
ing; beside the continual burnt- 
offering, and his ¢meat-offering, and 
his drink-offering. 

23 And on the fourth day ten bul- 
locks, two rams, and fourteen lambs 
of the first year without blemish: 

24 Their “meat-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for 
the rams, and for the lambs, shal/ 
be according to their number, after 
the manner: 

25 And one kid of the goats for a 


NUMBERS, 


a Lit. meal. 


6 vs.3,4,9,10; 
Num.15.12; 
28.7,14. 


c Lev.23.36. 


d Lev.23.2; 
1 Chr.23.31; 
2 Chr.31.3; 
Ezra 3.5; 
Neh.10.33; 
Isa.1.14, 


e Lev.7.11,16; 
21.22,23. 


sin-offering; beside the continual] /Num.1.4,16; 


burnt-offering, his ¢meat-offering, 
and his drink-offering. 

26 And on the fifth day nine bul- 
locks, two rams, and fourteen 
lambs of the first year without spot: 


g Lev.27.2; 
Deut:23.21; 


Jud.11.30,35; 
Eccl.5. 


5.4. 


27 And their ¢meat-offering and|h Lev.5.4; 


their drink-offerings for the bul- 
locks, for the rams, and for the 
lambs, shal/ be according to their 
number, after the manner: 

28 And one goat for a sin-offer- 
ing; beside the continual burnt- 
offering, and his ¢meat-offering, 
and his drink-offering. 

29 And on the sixth day eight| 
bullocks, two rams, and fourteen 
lambs of the first year without 
blemish: 

30 And their *meat-offering and 
their drink-offerings for the bul- 
locks, for the rams, and for the 
lambs, shall be according to their 
number, after the manner: 

_31 And one goat for a sin-offer- 
ing; beside the continual burnt- 
offering, his ‘meat-offering, and his 
drink-offering. 

32 And on the seventh day seven! 

bullocks, two rams, and fourteen 


Mt.14.9; 


206 


[30 4 


lambs of the first year without 
blemish: 3 

33 And their ¢meat-offering and 
their drink-offerings for the bul- 
locks, for the rams, and for the 
lambs, shall be according to their 
number, after the manner: 

34 And one goat for a sin-offer- 
ing; beside the continual burnt- 
offering, his “meat-offering, and his 
drink-offering. 

35 On the eighth day ye shall 
have ‘a solemn assembly: ye shall 
do no servile work therein: 

36 But ye shall offer a burnt-offer- 
ing, a sacrifice made by fire, of a 
sweet savour unto the LORD: one 
bullock, one ram, seven lambs of 
lthe first year without blemish: ’ 

37 Their ¢meat-offering and their 
drink-offerings for the bullock, for 


the ram, and for the lambs, shall. 


be according to their number, after 
the manner: 

38 Anda one goat for a sin-offer- 
ing; beside the continual burnt- 
offering, and his ¢meat-offering, and 
his drink-offering. 

39 These things ye shall do unto 
the LorD in your 4set feasts, beside 
your ‘vows, and your freewill-offer- 
ings, for your burnt-offerings, and 
for your “meat-offerings, and for 
your drink-offerings, and for your 
peace-offerings. 

40 And Moses told the children of 
Israel according to all that the 
LoRD commanded Moses. 


CHAPTER 30. 


The law of vows. (Cf. Mt. 5. 
33-37.) 


AN? Moses spake funto the 

heads of the tribes concerning 
the children of Israel, saying, This 
1s the thing which the Lorp hath 
commanded. 

2 8If a man vow a vow unto the 
LorD, or ‘swear an oath to bind 
his soul with a bond; he shall not 
break his word, he shall do accord- 
ing to all that proceedeth out of his 
mouth, 

3 If a woman also. vow a vow 
unto the Lorn, and bind herself 
by a bond, being in her father’s 

Ouse in her youth; 

4 And her father hear her vow, 
and her bond wherewith she hath 
bound her soul, and her father shall 
{hold his peace at her: then all her 
Mee shall nee every bond 
wherewith she ha und her 
shall stand. inthe: 


1 


7 


. stand; and the Lorp shall forgive 


_ stand. 


5 But if her father disallow her in 
the day that he heareth; not any of 
her vows, or of her bonds where- 
with she hath bound her soul, shall 


el because her father disallowed 
er, 

6 And if she had at all an hus- 
band, when she vowed, or uttered 
ought out of her lips, wherewith she 
bound her soul; 

7 And her husband heard 7¢t, and 
held his peace at her in the day that 
he heard it: then her vows shall 
stand, and her bonds wherewith she 
bound her soul shall stand. 

8 But if her husband 4disallowed 
her on the day that he heard it; 
then he shall make her vow which 
she vowed, and that which she 
uttered with her lips, wherewith 
she bound her soul, of none effect: 
and the LorpD shail forgive her. 

9 But every vow of a widow, and 
of her that is divorced, wherewith 
they have bound their souls, shall 
stand against her. 

10 And if she vowed in her hus- 
band’s house, or bound her soul by 
a bond with an oath; 

11 And her husband heard i¢, and 
held his peace at her, and disal- 
lowed her not: then all her vows! 
shall stand, and every bond where-| 
with she bound her soul shall 


12 But if her husband hath ut- 
terly made them void on the day 
he heard them; then whatsoever 
proceeded out of her lips concerning 
her vows, or concerning the bond of 
her soul, shall not stand: her hus-/ 
band hath made them void; ae 


_-the LorD shall forgive her. 


‘a 


13 Every vow, and every binding; 
oath to afflict the soul, her husband 
may establish it, or her husband 
may make it void. 

14 But if her husband altogether 
hold his peace at her from day to} 
day; then he establisheth all her! 
vows, or all her bonds, which are 

»upon her: he confirmeth them, be- 
cause he held his peace at her in 
the day that he heard them. 

15 But if he shall any ways make 
them void after that he hath heard 
them; then he shall bear her iniq- 
uity. ‘ 

16 These are the statutes, which 
the LorD commanded Moses, be- 
tween a man and his wife, between 
the father and his daughter, being 
yet in her youth in her father’s 
house, 


ey 


NUMBERS. 


BC. 1452. 


a Gen.3.16. 

6 Num.25.17. 
c Num.27.13. 
d Num,10.9. 


ei.e. alarm 
clarzons. 


f See Jud.6. 
1,2,33. 


g Josh.13.22. 


| hice. encamp- 


ments. 


¢ Deut.20,14. 


207 


[31 14 


CHAPTER 31. 


The judgment on Midian 
(Num, 25. 6-18). 


ND the LorpD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

2 *Avenge the children of Israel 
lof the Midianites: afterward shalt 
Le “be gathered unto thy peo- 
ple. 

' 3 And Moses spake unto the peo- 
ple, saying, Arm some of yourselves 
unto the war, and let them go 
against the Midianites, and avenge 
|the LorD of Midian, 

4 Of every tribe a thousand, 
throughout all the tribes of Israel, 
‘shall ye send to the war. 

5 So there were delivered out of 
the thousands of Israel, a thousand 
lof every tribe, twelve thousand 
jarmed for war. 

6 And Moses sent them to the 
jwar, a thousand of every tribe, 
ithem and Phinehas the son of 
Eleazar the priest, to the war, with 
\the holy instruments, and ¢the 
‘trumpets to blow in his hand. 

7 And they warred against the 
Midianites, as the LoRD com- 
manded Moses; and they slew all 
the /males. 

8 And they slew the kings of 
Midian, beside the rest of them 
that were slain; namely, Evi, and 
\Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and 
Reba, five kings of Midian: ¢Ba- 
jaam also the son of Beor they slew 
with the sword. 

9 And the children of Israel 
took all the women of Midian 
jcaptives, and their little ones, 
and took the spoil of all their cat- 
tle, and all their flocks, and all their 
goods. 

10 And they burnt all their cities 


“\wherein they dwelt, and all their 


goodly ‘castles, with fire. 

11 And ‘they took all the spoil, 
and all the prey, both of men and 
lof beasts. 
| 12 And they brought the captives, 
and the prey, and the spoil, unto 
Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and 
unto the congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel, unto the camp at the 
plains of Moab, which are by Jor- 
'dan near Jericho. 
| 13 And Moses, and Eleazar the 
priest, and all the princes of the 
congregation, went forth to meet 
them without the camp. 
| 14 And Moses was wroth with the 
officers of the host, with the cap- 
tains over thousands, and captains 


yourselves and your captives on 
on third day, and on the seventh 
ay. 

20 And purify all your raiment, 
and all that is made of skins, and 
all work of goats’ hair, and all 
things made of wood. 

21 And Eleazar the priest said un- 
to the men of war which went to 
the battle, This is the ordinance of 
the law which the LorD com- 
manded Moses; 

22 Only the gold, and the silver, 
socks the iron, the tin, and the 
ead, 

23 Every thing that may abide 
the fire, ye shall make /t go through 
the fire, and it shall be clean: never- 
theless it shall be purified with the 
water of separation: and all that 
abideth not the fire ye shall make 
go through the water. 

24 And ye shall wash your clothes 
on the seventh day, and ye shall be 
clean, and afterward ye shall come 
into the camp. 

25 And the Lor spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, 

26 Take the sum of the prey that 
was taken, both of man and of 
beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, 
and the chief fathers of the congre- 
gation: 

27 And @divide the prey into two 
parts; between them that took the 
war upon them, who went out to 


_ battle, and between all the congre- 


gation: 

28 And levy a tribute unto the 
LORD of the men of war which 
went out to battle: “one soul of five 
hundred, both of the persons, and 


20.14; 1 Sam. 
15:3. 


6 Num.25.2. 


c 2 Pet.2.15; 
Rev.2.14. 


d Josh.22.8; 
1 Sam.30.26. 


e See vs.30,47; 
and Num 
18.26. 

J See vs.42-47. 

g Num.,3.7, 
8,25,31,36; 
18.3,4. 


kh See Num, 
18.8,19, 


i v.30. 


208 


es ie * MO a naeth Eee ete AL ; 
¥ hog “4 ( 
mi) 31 15] NUMBERS. 
over hundreds, which came from} B.C. 1452. _|of the beeves, and of the asses, and 
_ the battle. of the sheep: ‘ 4 
15 And Moses said unto them, 29 Take it of their half, and give 
Have ye saved all the women it unto Eleazar the priest, for an 
alive? heave-offering of the LoRD. j 
16 Behold, “these caused the chil- 30 And of the children of Israel’s 
dren of Israel, through the ‘counsel half, thou shalt take fone portion of 
of Balaam, to commit trespass fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, 
against the LorD in the matter of of the asses, and of the flocks, of all 
Peor, and there was a plague among manner of beasts, and give them 
the congregation of the LorD. unto the Levites, ¢which keep the 
17 Now therefore kill every male charge of the tabernacle of the 
among the little ones, and kill every LorD. 
woman that hath known man by 31 And Moses and Eleazar the 
lying with him. ‘priest did as the LORD commanded 
18 But all the women children, Moses. : 2 
that have not known a man by ly- 32 And the booty, being the rest 
ing with him, keep alive for your- jof the prey which the men of war 
selves. had caught, was six hundred thou- 
19 And do ye abide without the sand and seventy thousand and 
camp seven days: whosoever hath five thousand sheep, 
killed any person, and whosoever 33 And threescore and twelve 
hath touched any slain, purify both|a See Deut. thousand beeves, 


34 And threescore and one thou- 
sand asses, 

35 And thirty and two thousand 
persons in all, of women that had 
not known man by lying with him. 
36 And the half, which was the 
portion of them that went out to 
war, was in number three hundred 
thousand and seven and thirty 
thousand and five hundred sheep: 
37 And the Lorp’s tribute of the - 
sheep was six hundred and three- 
score and fifteen. 

38 And the beeves were thirty and 
six thousand; of which the Lorp’s 
tribute was threescore and twelve. 

39 And the asses were thirty 
thousand and five hundred: of 
which the Lorp’s tribute was 
threescore and one. 

40 And the persons were sixteen 
thousand; of which the Lorp’s 
tribute was thirty and two persons. 

41 And Moses gave the tribute, 
which was the LorRpD’s heave-offer- 
ing, unto Eleazar the priest, ’as the 
LORD commanded Moses. 

42 And of the children of Israel’s 
half, which Moses divided from the 
men that warred, 

43 (Now the half that pertained 
unto the congregation was three 
hundred thousand and thirty thou- 
sand and seven thousand and five 
hundred sheep, 

44 And thirty and six thousand 
beeves, 

45 And thirty thousand asses and 
five hundred, 

46 And sixteen thousand per- 
[Sons:) ; 

47 Even ‘of the children of Israel’s 


é 


ae ee ¢ , 1 
31 48] NUMBERS. 
half, Moses took one portion of] B.c. 1452. 
fifty, both of man and of beast, and]/~ 
gave them unto the Levites, which 
kept the charge of the tabernacle of 
the LORD; as the LORD commanded 
Moses. 

48 And the officers which were 
over thousands of the host, the cap- 
tains of thousands, and captains of 
hundreds, came near unto Moses: 

49 And they said unto Moses, 

Thy servants have taken the sum 
of the men of war which are under 
our charge, and there lacketh not 
one man of us. 

50 We have therefore brought an|? ae pigeoa 
oblation for the LoRD, what every : 
man hath gotten, of jewels of gold,|} See Ex.29. 
chains, and bracelets, rings, ear-| 33) 7°fe- 
rings, and “tablets, to make an|; £x.30.12-16. 
batonement for our ‘souls before the Pandas 
Lorp. = Qs. od, or 

51 And Moses and Eleazar the} 65 cts. 
priest took the gold of them, even 
all wrought jewels. e Deut.20.14. 

52 And all the gold of the offering fEx.30.16. 
that they offered up to the LoRD, 
of the captains of thousands, and of | & sete 
the captains of hundreds, was six-| 2sam.24.8 
teen thousand seven hundred and 
fifty ¢shekels. h Dt ee 

53 (For ‘the men of war had ; 
taken spoil, every man for himself.) | i Deut.1.22. 

54 And Moses and Eleazar the Nene Te 
priest took the gold of the captains|? Beenie 
of thousands and of hundreds, and| 24,28 
brought it into the tabernacle of the gee a4 
congregation, for a memorial for|” Deut1.36;’ 
the children of Israel before the} Josh.14.8,9. 
Lorp. 7 Meut.1.34. 

CHAPTER 32. m Deut.30.17; 
Josh.22.16, 
The choice of the world-border-| 18; 2 Chr.7 
ers (Gen. 11. 31; Jad.5. 16; Josh.| 19+ 15-2. 
7. 7; 2 Tim. 4. 10) n Josh.4.12,13. 


OW the children of !Reuben 
and the children of Gad had a 
very great multitude of cattle: and 
when they saw the land of éJazer, 
and the land of Gilead, that, behold, 
the place was a place for cattle; 

2 The children of Gad and the 
children of Reuben came and spake 
unto Moses, and to Eleazar the 
priest, and unto the princes of the 
congregation, saying, 

3 Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, 
and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and 
Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, 
and Beon, 


inheritance just outside the land, 


What their descendants were when Messiah came is 


CRY ara ek 


} 
{32 17 

4 Even the country which the 
LORD smote before the congrega- 
tion of Israel, 7s a land for cattle, 
and thy servants have cattle: 

5 Whereforé, said they, if we have 
found grace in thy sight, let this 
land be given unto thy servants for 
a possession, and bring us not over 
Jordan. 

6 And Moses said unto the chil- 
dren of Gad and to the children of 
Reuben, Shall your brethren go to 
war, and shall ye sit here? 

7 And wherefore discourage ye 
the heart of the children of Israel 
from going over intc the land which 
the LorD hath given them? 

8 Thus did your fathers, ‘when I 
sent them from ‘Kadesh-barnea to 
see the land. 

9 For jwhen they went up unto 
the valley of Eshcol, and saw the 
land, they discouraged the heart of 
the children of Israel, that they 
should not go into the land which 
the LorD had given them. 

10 And the LorpD’s anger was 
kindled the same time, and he 
sware, saying, 

11 Surely none of the men that 
came up out of Egypt, from twenty 
years old and upward, shall see the 
land which I sware unto Abraham, 
unto Isaac, and untoJacob; because 
they have not wholly followed me: 

12 Save Caleb the son of Jephun- 
neh the Kenezite, and Joshua the 
son of Nun: “for they have wholly 
followed the LORD. 

13 And the LorRpD’s anger was 
kindled against Israel, and he made 
them wander in the wilderness forty 
years, until all the generation, that 
had done evil in the sight of the 
LorD, was consumed. 

14 And, behold, ye are risen up in 
your fathers’ stead, an increase of 
sinful men, to augment yet the 
‘fierce anger of the LoRD toward 
Israel. 

15 For if ye “turn away from 
after him, he will yet again leave 
them in the wilderness; and ye shall 
destroy all this people. 

16 And they came near unto him, 
and said, We will bu'ld sheepfolds 
here for our cattle, and cities for 
our little ones: 

17 But “we ourselves will go ready 
armed before the children of Israel, 


209 


[until we have brought them unto 


1 The Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh, who chose their 
are types of world-borderers—carnal Christians 


seen in Mk, 5. 1-17 


32 18] 


their place: and our little ones shall 


dwell in the fenced cities because of 


the inhabitants of the land. 
18 *We wili not return unto our 


houses, until the children of irae 


have inherited every man his in- 


NUMBERS. 


heritance. 


19 For we will not inherit with 
them on yonder side Jordan, or for- 
ward; “because our inheritance is 
fallen to us on this side Jordan 
eastward, 

20 And “Moses said unto them, If 
ye will do this thing, if ye will go 
armed before the LorD to war, 

21 And will go all of you armed 
over Jordan before the LorD, until 
he hath driven out his enemies from 
before him, , 

22 And the land be subdued be- 


fore the Lorp: then afterward ye! 


shall return, and be guiltless before 
the LorD, and before Israel; and 
this land shall be your possession 
before the LorpD. 

23. But if ye will not do so, behold, 
ye have sinned against the LORD: 
and besure ¢yoursin will find youout. 

24 Build you cities for your little 
ones, and folds for your sheep; and 
do that which hath proceeded out 
of your mouth. 

25 And the children of Gad and 
the children of Reuben spake unto 
Moses, saying, Thy servants will 
do as my lord commandeth. 

26 Our little ones, our wives, our 


12.1; 13.8. 


¢ Deut.3.18; 
Josh,1.14; 
4.12,13. 


d Gen4.7; 
44.16; Isa. 
$9.12. 


eOr, tent- 
villages. 


Jair. 


flocks, and all our cattle, shall ‘be 
there in the cities of Gilead: 


g Ex.12.37. 


27 But thy servants will pass); ic. April. 


over, every man armed for war, be-| 
fore the LORD to battle, as my lord) 


saith. 


¢ Ex.14.8, 


28 So concerning them Moses| 


commanded Eleazar the priest, and 
Joshua the son of Nun, and the 
chief fathers of the tribes of the 
children of Israel: 

29 And Moses said unto them, If| 
the children of Gad and the children 
of Reuben will pass with you over 
Jordan, every man armed to battle, 
before the Lorp, and the land shall 


be subdued before you; then ye! 


shall give them the land of Gilead 
for a possession: | | 

30 But if they will not pass over 
with you armed, they shall have 
possessions among you in the land! 


of Canaan. 1 


31 And the children of Gad and! 
the children of Reuben answered, 


saying, As the Lorp hath said ha 


thy servants, so will we do. 


32 We will pass over armed before! 


210 


B.C. 1452. 


a Josh.22.3,4. 
b v.33. Josh, 


fOr, the tent- 
villages of 


the LorD into the land of Canaan, 
that the possession of our inheri- 
tance on this side Jordan may be 
our’s. 

33 And Moses gave unto them, 
even to the children of Gad, and to 
the children of Reuben, and unto 
half the tribe of Manasseh the son 
of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon 
king of the Amorites, and the king- 
dom of Og king of Bashan, the 
land, with the cities thereof in the 
coasts, even the cities of the coun- 
try round about. : 

34 And the children of Gad built 
Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer, 

{ 35 And Atroth, Shophan, 
Jaazer, and Jogbehah, 

36 And Beth-nimrah, and Beth- 
haran, fenced cities: and folds for 
sheep. 

37 And the children of Reuben 
built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and 
Kirjathaim, 

38 And Nebo, and Baal-meon, 
(their names being changed,) and 
Shibmah: and gave other names 
unto the cities which they builded. 

39 And the children of Machir the 
son of Manasseh went to Gilead, 
and. took it, and dispossessed the 
Amorite which was in it. 

40 And Moses gave Gilead unto 
Machir the son of Manasseh; and 
he dwelt therein. 

41 And Jair the son of Manasseh 
went and took the small ‘towns 
thereof, and called them fHavoth- 


air. 

42 And Nobah went and took Ke- 
nath, and the villages thereof, and 
called it Nobah, after his own name. 


CHAPTER 33. 


Summary of the journeys from 
Egypt to Jordan. 


ol Rose ees are the journeys of the 
children of Israel, which went 
forth out of the land 6f Egypt with 
their armies under the hand of 
IMoses and Aaron. 

2 And Moses wrote their goings 
out according to their journeys by 
the commandment of the LorRpD; 
and these are their journeys accord- 
ing to their goings out. 

3 And they departed from Rame- 
ses in the /first month, on the fif- 
teenth day of the first month; on 
the morrow after the passover the 
children of Israel went out ‘with an 
high hand in the sight of all the 
Egyptians. 

4 For the Egyptians buried all 


and 


, 


= 


© 33-5) 


NUMBERS. 


their firstborn, which the LORD! B.C. 1452. 


their gods also the LoRD executed 
judgments. 

5 And the children of Israel re- 
moved from Rameses, and pitched 
in Succoth. 

6 And they departed from Suc- 
coth, and pitched in Etham, which 
is in the edge of the wilderness. 

7 Andthey ¢removed from Etham, 
and turned again unto Pi-hahiroth, 
which is before Baal-zephon: and 
they pitched before Migdol. 

8 And they departed from before 
Pi-hahiroth, and ‘passed through 
the midst of the sea into the wilder- 
ness, and went three days’ journey 
in the wilderness of Etham, and 
pitched in Marah. 

9 And they removed from Marah, 
and fcame unto Elim: and in Elim 
were twelve fountains of water, and 
threescore and ten palm trees; and 
they pitched there. 

10 And they removed from Elim, 
and encamped by the Red sea. 

11 And they removed from the 
Red sea, and encamped in the 
éwilderness of Sin. 

12 And they took their journe: 


a Ex.12.12; 
18.11; Isa. 
19.1. 

b Ex.12.37. 

¢ Ex,13.20. 

d Ex.14.2,9. 


e Ex.14.22; 
15.22,23. 


f Ex.15.27. 
gEx.16.1. 


y 
out of the wilderness of Sin, ands B2.172: 
9.2. 


encamped in Dophkah. 
13 And they departed from Doph- 
kah, and encamped in Alush. 


# Num.11.34. 


14 And they removed from Alhush,|Ji-e. the 


and encamped at /Rephidim, where 
was no water for the people to drink. 


&raves of 
dust. 


15 And they departed from Reph-|* Deut.10.6. 
idim, and pitched in the wilderness} ; pnent.10.7. 


of Sinai. 


16 And they removed from the|7Num.20.1; 


desert of Sinai, and pitched ‘at 


_dKibroth-hattaavah. 


17 And they departed from Ki- 
broth-hattaavah, and encamped at 
Hazeroth. 

18 And they departed from Haze- 
roth, and pitched in Rithmah. 

19 And they departed from Rith- 
mah, and pitched at Rimmon-parez. 

20 And they departed from Rim- 
mon-parez, and pitched in Libnah. 

21 And they removed from Lib- 
nah, and pitched at Rissah. 

22 And they journeyed from Ris- 
sah, and pitched in Kehelathah. 

23 And they went from Kehela- 
thah, and pitched in mount Sha- 
pher. 

24 And they removed from mount 
Shapher, ‘and encamped in Hara- 
dah. 

25 And they removed from Hara- 


dah, and pitched in Makheloth. 


27.14. 


nie. August. 


oie. the 
ruins of 
Abarim. 


211i 


[33 49 


3 orn, which the LorD) Bc. 1452. | 26 And they removed from Mak- 
had smitten among them: “upon ‘heloth, and encamped at Tahath. 


| 27 And they departed from Ta- 
hath, and pitched at Tarah. 
| 28 And they removed from Ta- 
irah, and pitched in Mithcah. 

29 And they went from Mithcah, 
jand pitched in Hashmonah. 
| 30 And they departed from Hash- 
lmonah, and ‘encamped at Mose- 
jroth. 

31 And they departed from Mose- 
roth, and pitched in Bene-jaakan. 

32 And they removed from Bene- 
|jaakan, and fencamped at Hor-ha- 
igidgad. 

33 And they went from Hor-ha- 
igidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah. 
34 And they removed from Jotba- 
ithah, and encamped at Ebronah. 
| 35 And they departed from Ebro- 
nah, and encamped at Ezion-gaber. 

36 And they removed from Ezion- 
jgaber, and pitched in the ”wilder- 
ness of Zin, which 1s Kadesh. 

37 And they removed from Ka- 
'desh, and pitched in mount Hor, in 
the edge of the land of Edom. 

| 38 And Aaron the priest went up 
into mount Hor at the command- 
ment of the LORD, and died there, 
jin the fortieth year after the chil- 
dren of Israel were come out of the 
land of Egypt, in the first day of 
the “fifth month. 

39 And Aaron was an hundred 
land twenty and three years old 
lwhen he died in mount Hor. 

40 And king Arad the Canaanite, 
lwhich dwelt in the south in the 
land of Canaan, heard of the com- 
ling of the children of Israel. 

41 And they departed from mount 
‘Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah. 

42 And they departed from Zal- 
monah, and pitched in Punon. 

43 And they departed from Pu- 
non, and pitched in Oboth. 

44 And they departed from 
Oboth, and pitched in °Ije-abarim, 
in the border of Moab. ' 

45 And they departed from Iim, 
and pitched in Dibon-gad. 

46 And they removed from Di- 
‘bon-gad, and encamped in Almon- 
diblathaim. 

47 And they removed from Al- 
imon-diblathaim, and pitched in the 
!mountains of Abarim, before Nebo. 
| 48 And they departed from the 
imountains of Abarim, and pitched 
in the plains of Moab by Jordan 
near Jericho. ' 

49 And they pitched by Jordan, 
from Beth-jesimoth even unto 


54 And ye shall divide the land 
by lot for an inheritance among 
your families: and to the ¢more ye 
shall give the more inheritance, and 
to the ‘fewer ye shall give the less 
inheritance: every man’s inhert- 
tance shall be in the place where 
his lot falleth; according to the 
tribes of your fathers ye shall 
inherit. 

55 But if ye will not drive out the 
inhabitants of the land from before 
you; then it shall come to pass, 
that those- which ye let remain of! 
them shall be fpricks in your eyes, 
and thorns in your sides, and shall 
vex you in the land wherein ye dwell. 


die. greater. 
éi.e. smaller. 


Ff Josh.23.13; 
Jud.2.3; 
Psa.106.34- 
36; see Ex. 
23.33; Ezk. 
28.24, 


g Gen.17.8; 
Deut.1.7,8; 
Psa.78.55; 
105.11; Ezk. | 
47.14. 

h Josh.15.1; 
see Ezk.47. 
13;,etc. 


i Gen.14.3; 


56 Moreover it shall come to pass, 
that [I shall do unto you, as I 
thought to do unto them. 


CHAPTER 34. 
Preparations to enter the land. 


PEND the LorD spake unto Moses, 
Saying, 

2 Command the children of Israel, | 
and say unto them, When ye come 
into the land of sCanaan; (this is 
the land that shall fall unto you for 
an inheritance, even the land of 
Canaan with the coasts thereof:) 

3 Then “your south quarter shall| 


Josh.15.2. 


j Gen.15.18; 
Josh.15.4,47; 
1 Ki. 8.65, 
Isa.27.12. 


k Ezk.47.15. 
( Ezk.47.17. 


m 2 Ki.23.33; 
Jer.39.5,6. 


n Deut.3.17; 
Josh.11.2; 
19.35; Mt. 
14.34; Lk. 
Sil; 


a Ge eS ae eee a ee ey its he baal dy begs, 
33:50} NUMBERS. 134 20 
-shittim in the plains of|B.c.1452. | 5 And the border shall fetch a 
a a it L compass from Azmon Junto the 
50 And the LorpD spake unto Mo- river of Egypt, and the goings out 
ses in the plains of Moab by Jordan of it shall be at the sea. 
near Jericho, saying, 6 Pil as for se Sama Sarge: 
i, i ye shall even have the great sea 
pate” aes et are cs for a border: this shall be your 
51 Speak unto the children of Is- Nar a aieatis ti cusa cae 
rael, and say unto ee eee oF pc border: from the great sea _ye shall 
Bea Nate Jordan into the; point out for you mount Hor: | 
52 ‘Then ye shall drive out alljcie. the 8 From ae bos am shall Do 
Ppahinhabitants of -thesland(inem| Sainsef jek, YOGRSporserspn i 
before you, and destroy all their) S#*4- poe tes Fes qa ae pres 
pictures, and destroy all their mol- seg ee Es he of the border s e e 
ee hor ceca: pluck down) 3:1;7-°%™ 9 And the border shall go am to 
53 And ye shali dispossess the in-| ¢ Ex.23.24,33; petipeee pees ie ane cna 
habitants of the land, and dwell] 3413: Deut. |Pat7 oe Don border. s 
ale pope given you the fosh11.125 10 And ye shall point out your 


east border from Hazar-enan to 
Shepham: 

11 And the coast shall go down 
from *Shepham to Riblah, on the 
east side of Ain; and the border 
shall descend, and shall reach unto 
the side of the sea *of Chinnereth 
eastward: 

12 And the border shall go down 
to Jordan, and the goings out of it 
shall be at the salt sea: this shall 
be your land with the coasts thereof 
round about. 

13 And Moses commanded the 
children of Israel, saying, This is 
the land which ye shall inherit by 
lot, which the LORD commanded to 
give unto the nine tribes, and to the 
half tribe: 

14 For the tribe of the children of 
Reuben according to the house of 
their fathers, and the tribe of the 
children of Gad according to the 
house of their fathers, have received 
their inheritance; and half the 
tribe of Manasseh have received 
their inheritance: 

15 The two tribes and the half 
tribe have received their inheritance 
on this side Jordan near Jericho 
eastward, toward the sunrising. 

16 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 


be from the wilderness of Zin along 
by the coast of Edom, and your 
south border shall be the outmost 
coast of ‘the salt sea eastward: 

4 And your border shall turn from 
the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, 
and pass on to Zin: and the going 
forth thereof shall be from the 
south to Kadesh-barnea, and shall 
go on to Hazar-addar, and pass on 
to Azmon: 


ses, saying, 

17 These are the names of the 
men which shall divide the land 
unto you: Eleazar the priest, and 
Joshua the son of Nun. 

18 And ye shall take one prince 
of every tribe, to divide the land 
by inheritance. 

19 And the names of the men are 
these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb 
the son of Jephunneh. 


{20 And of the tribe of the children 


212 


f. 


rran: 
as 


ae 


~ 2 Se 7 ASS. 


NUMBERS. 


[35 18 


a 


-of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Am-| Bc. 1452. 


mihud. 5 

21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Eti- 
dad the son of Chislon, 

22 And the prince of the tribe of 
the children of Dan, Bukki the son 
of Jogli. 

23 The prince of the children of 
Joseph, for the tribe of the children 
of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of 
Ephod. 

24 .And the prince of the tribe of 
the children of Ephraim, Kemuel 
the son of Shiphtan. 

25 And the prince of the tribe of 
the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan 
the son of Parnach. 

26 And the prince of the tribe of 
the children of Issachar, Paltiel the 
son of Azzan. 

27 And the prince of the tribe of 
the children of Asher, Ahihud the 
son_ of Shelomi. 

28 And the prince of the tribe of 
the children of Naphtali, Pedahel 
the son of ihud. 

29 These are they whom the 
Lorp commanded to divide the in- 
heritance unto the children of 
Israel in the land of Canaan. 


CHAPTER 35. 
The cities of refuge. 


AND the LorD spake unto Moses 
in the plains of Moab by Jor- 
dan near Jericho, saying, 

2 «Command the children of Is- 
rael, that they give unto the Levites 
of the inheritance of their possession 
cities to dwell in; and ye shall give 
also unto the Levites suburbs for 

_the cities round about them. 

3 And the cities shall they have 
to dwell in; and the %suburbs of 
them shail be for their cattle, and 
for their goods, and for all their 
beasts. a 

4 And the suburbs of the cities, 
which ye shall give unto the Le- 
vites, shall reach from the wall of 
the city and outward a thousand 
¢cubits round about. . 

5 And ye shall measure from with- 
out the city on the east side two 
thousand cubits, and on the south 
side two thousand cubits, and on 
the west side two thousand cubits, 
and on the north side two thou- 
sand cubits; and the city shal/ bein 


1 The cities of refuge are types of C 


Heb. 6. 18 19). 


a Josh.14.3,4; 
21.2. See 


Ezk.45.1; 
48.8, etc. 


bi.e. pasture 
grounds. 


c¢ One cubit = 
1 ft. 5.48 in.; 
also v.5. 


di.e. by error; 
unwittingly. 


e Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


f Deut.19.6; 
Josh.20.3, 


5,6. 


g Deut.4.41; 
Josh.20.8. 


h Ex.21.12,14; 
Lev.24.17; 
Deut.19.11, 
12. 


the midst: this shall be to them the 
suburbs of the cities. 

6 And among the cities which ye 
shall: give unto the Levites there 
shall be six cities for 1refuge, which 
ye shall appoint for the manslayer, 
that he may flee thither: and to 
them ye shall add forty and two 
cities. 

7 So all the cities which ye shail. 
give to the Levites shall be forty 
and eight cities: them shali ye give 
with their suburbs, 

8 And the cities which ye shall 
give shall be of the possession of 
the children of Israeli: from them 
that have many ye shall give 
many; but from them that have 
few ye shall give few: every one 
shall give of his cities unto the 
Levites according to his inheritance 
which he inheriteth. 

9 And the LorD spake unto Mo- 
ses, saying, : 
10 Speak unto the children of Is- 
rael, and say unto them, When ye 
be come over Jordan into the land 

of Canaan; 

11 Then yeshall appoint you cities 
to be cities of refuge for you; that 
the slayer may flee thither, which 
killeth any person at ¢unawares. 

12 And they shall be unto you 
cities for refuge from the “avenger: 
fthat the manslayer die not, until 
he stand before the congregaticn in . 
judgment. 

13 And of these cities which ye 
shall give six cities shall ye have 
for refuge. 

14 Ye shall give three cities on 
this side Jordan, and three cities 
shall ye give in the land of Canaan, 
which shall be cities of refuge. 

15 These six cities shall be a 
refuge, both for the children of Is- 
rael, and for the stranger, and for 
the sojourner among them: that 
every one that killeth any person 
unawares may flee thither. 

16 “And if he smite him with an 
instrument of iron, so that he die, 
he is a murderer: the murderer 
shall surely be put to death. 

17 And if he smite him with 
throwing a stone, wherewith he may 
die, and he die, he zs a murderer: 
the murderer shall surely be put to 
death. . 

18 Or if he smite him with an 


hand weapon of wood, wherewith he 


213 


hrist sheltering the sinner from judgment 


(Psa. 46. 1; 142. 5; Isa. 4. 6; Ex. 21. 13; Deut. 19. 2-9; Rem. 8. 1, 33, 34; Phil. 3. 


inch 


35 19] 


may die, and he die, he 7s a mur- 
derer: the murderer shall surely be 
put to death. . 
19. The “revenger of blood him- 
self shall slay the murderer: when 
he meeteth him, he shall slay him. 
20 But if he thrust him of hatred, 
or hurl at him Sby laying of wait, 
that he die; : 
21 Or in enmity smite him with 
his hand, that he die: he that smote 
him shall surely be put to death; 
for he 1s a murderer: the ¢revenger 
of blood shall slay the murderer, 
when he meeteth him. 
22 But if he thrust him suddenly 
¢without enmity, or have cast upon 
him any thing without laying of Ape. eat 


wait, Redemp. 
23 Or with any stone, wherewith| (Kinsman 
a man may die, seeing him not, and| {P9)- Tsa- 
cast it upon him, that he die, and : 
was not his enemy, neither sought] 6 Ex.21.14; 
his harm: Deut.19.11, 
24 Then the congregation shall] ¢-#x.21.13. 
judge between the slayer and the a 
revenger of blood accérding to these]? paged 
judgments: 21.10. 
25 And the congregation shall de- c 
liver the slayer out of the hand of| ¢ ieee 
the “revenger of blood, and the con- 13.16: 2 Cor 
gregation shall restore him to the] 13.1; Heb. 
city of his refuge, whither he was| 10-28: 
fled: and he shall abide in it unto fo Beaey 


the death of the high priest, ¢which 
was anointed with the holy oil. 8 omen 

26 But if the slayer shall at any rks 
time come without the border of{h Or, have 
the city of his refuge, whither he| 2‘onement 
SEs fled: made for. 

27 And the 4revenger of blood 
find him ‘without the borders of the 
city of his refuge and the “revenger 
of blood kill the slayer; he shall 
not be guilty of blood: 

28 Because he should have re- 
mained in the city of his refuge 
until the death of the high priest: 
but after the death of the high 
priest the slayer shall return into 
the land of his possession. 

29 So these things shall be for a 
statute of judgment unto you 
throughout your generations in all 
your dwellings. 

30 Whoso killeth any person, the 
murderer shall be put to death by 
the ‘mouth of witnesses: but one 
witness shall not testify against any 
pefson to cause him to die. 

31 Moreover ye shall take no 
fsatisfaction for the life of a mur- 
derer, which is guilty of death: but 
he shall be surely put to death. 

32 And ye shall take no satisfac- 


1 Gen.9.6. 

j Ex.29.45,46. 
k Lev.25.10. 
!Num.27.7 
m1 Ki.21.3. 


NUMBERS. 


B.C. 1451. 


st 


tion for him that is fled to the city” 
of his refuge, that he should come 
again to dwell in the land, until the 
death of the priest. 

33 Soye shall not pollute the land 

wherein ye are: for blood 4it de- 
fileth the land: and the land cannot 
be “cleansed of the blood that is 
shed therein, but by the *blood of 
him that shed it. 
34 Defile not therefore the land 
which ye shall inhabit, wherein I 
dwell: for JI the LorD dwell among 
the children of Israel. 


CHAPTER 36. 
As to inheritances. 


ND the chief fathers of the fam- 

ilies of the children of Gilead, 
the son of Machir, the son of Ma- 
nasseh, of the families of the sons 
of Joseph, came near, and spake 
before Moses, and before the 
princes, the chief fathers of the 
children of Israel: 

2 And they said, The LoRD com- 
manded my lord to give the land 
for an inheritance by lot to the 
children of Israel: and my lord was 
commanded by the LoRD‘to give 
the inheritance of Zelophehad our 
brother unto his daughters. 

3 And if they be married to any 
of the sons of the other tribes of the 
children of Israel, then shall their 
inheritance be taken from the inher- 
itance of our fathers, and shall be 
put to the inheritance of the tribe 
whereunto they are received: so 
shall it be taken from the lot of our 
inheritance. 

4 And when the “jubile of the 
children of Israel shall be, then 
shall their inheritance be put unto 
the inheritance of the tribe where- 
unto they are received: so shall 
their inheritance be taken away 
from the inheritance of the tribe of 
our fathers. 


ae 


self to the inheritance of the tribe 
_ of his fathers. 

8 And every daughter, that 
possesseth an inheritance in any 
tribe of the children of Israel, shall 
be wife unto one of the family of 
the tribe of her father, that the 
children of Israel may enjoy every 
man the inheritance of his fathers, 

9 Neither shall the inheritance re- 
move from one tribe to another 
tribe; but every one of the tribes of 
the children of Israel shall keep 
himself to his own inheritance. 

10 Even as the LORD commanded 
Moses, so did the daughters of Ze- 
lophehad: 


NUMBERS. 


ja i Chr.23.22, 


6 Num.26.3; 
| 33.48. 


215 


_ BC, 1451. 


(36 13 


11 For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hog- 

lah, and Milcah, and Noah, the 
ldaughters of Zelophehad, were 
|married unto their father’s brothers’ 
'sons: 
| 12 And they were married into 
the families of the sons of Manasseh 
\the son of Joseph, and their inheri- 
\tance remained in the tribe of the 
family of their father. 
13 These are the commandments 
land the judgments, which the LorD 
icommanded by the hand of Moses 
junto the children of Israel in the 
iplains of Moab by Jordan near 
Jericho. 


i 


TORE ORE coe ALL aE ee a ea Ce 
. ; © ey " 


THE FIFTH BOOK OF MOSES 
CALLED 


el DEUTERONOMY. Con 


DEUTERONOMY consists of the parting counsels of Moses delivered to Israel in view 
of their impending entrance upon their covenanted possession. It contains a sum- 
mary of the wilderness wanderings of Israel, which is important as unfolding the 
moral judgment of God upon those events; repeats the Decalogue to a generation 
which had grown up in the wilderness; gives needed instruction as to the conduct 
of Israel in the land, and contains the Palestinian Covenant (30. 1-9). The book 
breathes the sternness of the Law. Key-words, ‘“Thou shalt”; key-verses, 11. 26-28. 
It is important to note that, while the land of promise was unconditionally given 
to Abraham and to his seed in the Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 13. 15;+15. 7), it was 
under the conditional Palestinian Covenant (Deut. 28.-30. 9) that Israel entered 
the land under Joshua. Utterly violating the conditions of that covenant, the 
nation was first disrupted (1 Ki. 12.) and then cast out of the land (2 Ki, 17. 1-18; 
24. 1-25. 11). But the same covenant unconditionally promises a national restora- 
tion of Israel which is yet to be fulfilled (Gen. 15. 18, note). 
Deuteronomy is in seven divisions: I. Summary of the history of Israel in the 
wilderness, 1. 1-3. 29. II. A restatement of the Law, with warnings and exhor- 
tations, 4. 1-11. 32. III. Instructions, warnings, and predictions, 12. 1-27. 26. 
The great closing prophecies summarizing the history of Israel to the second 
coming of Christ, and containing the Palestinian Covenant, 28. 1-30. 20. V. Last 
counsels to Priests, Levites, and to Joshua, 31. VI. The Song of Moses and his 


parting blessings, 32., 33. VII. The death of Moses, 34. 


The time covered by this retrospect is approximately forty years. 


CHAPTER 1. B.C. 1451. Pes thereunto, in the plain, in the 


: x, hills, and in the vale, and in the 
The failure at Kadesh-barnea. south, and by the sea'side, to the 


THESE be the words which Mo-/ Israel (his- Hand of the Canaanites, and unto 


ses spake unto all Israel on] €%%$4o% |Lebanon, unto the great river, the 


this side Jordan jn the wilderness,| Deut.7.68. {river Euphrates. 

in the plain over against the Red| (Gen.12.23; | 8 Behold, I have set the land be- 

sea, between Paran, and Tophel,| R°™11-26) |fore you: go in and possess the 

and Laban, and Hazeroth, and/? Josh.9.1-10; [land which the LorD sware unto 

Dizahab. seb li your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and 
2 (There are “eleven days’ jour-|¢Prolonged | Jacob, to give unto them and to 

ney from Horeb by the way of| by ope act of their seed after them. 

mount Seir unto Kadesh-barnea.) | forty years. | 9 And I ‘spake unto you at that 
3 And it came to pass in the} Num.14.23, |time, saying, I am not able to bear 


fortieth year, in the 4deleventh| 7°¢e you myself alone: 
month, on the first day of the|di-e. Febru- 10 The LorD your God hath mul- 
month, that Moses spake unto the| 2: tiplied you, and, behold, ye are 


children of Israel, according unto|e¢Num.21.24, |this day Jas the stars of heaven for 

all that the Lorp had given himin} 33- multitude. 

commandment unto them; fEx.3.1. 11 (The LorD God of your 
4 After he had slain «Sihon the eCf.Gen.31.3; |fathers make you a thousand times 

nee. ee pac, wich aval Num.10.11. |/so ree fs ye babe pa 

in Heshbon, an g the king of]; Gen.12.7; you, as he hath promised you! 

Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth Eo LUD Bs 12 How can I myself alone bear 

in ee : ; Cf tsa 1130, YOUF cumibrance; and your burden, 

n this side Jordan, in the land ; Jer 23.’ |and your strife? 

a ‘ Biceb, began Moses to declare Fa Easy. 13 BR ae aes men, and under- 
is law, saying, ~26. standing, an Own among your 
6 The Lorp our God /spake unto] iEx.18.13; —_|tribes, and I will make them rulers 

us in Horeb, saying, Ye have) Nemlll4. lover you, 

&dwelt long enough in this mount: |jCfGen.15.5; | 14 And ye answered me, and said, 
if can rot a take your ce Deut.28.62, The te which ee hast spoken 

ney, and go to the mount o e 1s good for us to do. 

Amorites, and unto all the places| {15 So I took the chief of your 


216 


‘oe y 


-must go up, and into what cities we 


it 16] 
tribes, wise men, and known, and 
made them heads over you, cap- 
tains over thousands, and captains 
over hundreds, and captains over 
fifties, and captains over tens, and 
officers among your tribes. 

16 And I charged your judges at 
that time, saying, Hear the causes 
between your brethren, and judge 
tighteously between every man and 
his brother, and the stranger that 
is with him. 

17 *Ye shall not respect persons 
in judgment; but ye shall hear the 
small as well as the great; ye shall 
not be afraid of the face of man; for 
the judgment zs God’s: and the 
cause that is too hard for you, bring 
it unto me, and I will hear it. 

18 And I commanded you at that 
pac all the things which ye should 

oO. 

19 And when we departed from 
Horeb, we went through all that 
great and terrible wilderness, which 
ye saw by the way of the mountain 
of the Amorites, as the LORD our 
God commanded us; and we *came 
to Kadesh-barnea. 

20 And I said unto you, Ye are 
come unto the mountain of the 
Amorites, which the LorD our God 
doth give unto us. 

21 Behold, the Lorp thy God 
hath set the land before thee: go up 
and possess it, as the LorD God of 
thy fathers hath said unto thee; 
fear not, neither be discouraged. 

22 And ye came near unto me 
every one of you, and said, We will 
send men before us, and they shail 
search us out the land, and bring 
us word again by what way we 


shall come. 

23 And the saying pleased me 
well: and I ‘took twelve men of 
you, one of a tribe: 

24 4And they turned and went up 
into the mountain, and came unto 
the valley of Eshcol, and searched 
it out. 

25 And they took of the fruit of 
the land in their hands, and 
brought it down unto us, | and 
brought us word again, and said, Jt 
is €a good land which the LORD 
our God doth give us. 

26 fNotwithstanding ye would not 
go up, but rebelled against the com- 
mandment of the LORD your God: 

27 And ye murmured in your 
tents, and said, Because the LORD 
hated us, he hath brought us forth 
out of the land of Egypt, to deliver’ 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Deut.16.19; 
Lev.19.15; 
1 Sam.16.7; 
Prov.24.23; 
Jas.2.1. 


6 Num.13.26. 

¢ Num.13.2. 

d Num.13.22- 
24. 


e Num.13.2. 


f Num.14.1-4; 
Psa.106.24, 
25. 


g Num.13.28, 
31-33; Deut. 
9.1,2. 


h Psa.106.24; 
Heb.3.7-19; 
4.1,2. 


+t Num,14.22, 
23; Psa.95.11. 


j Num.14.24, 
30; Josh.14. 
9,10. 


k Num.20.12; 
27.14; Deut. 
3.26; 4.21; 
34.4; Psa. 
106.32. 


1 Num.14.30. 


217 


Viel dined) 
‘ 


[1 42 


us into the hand of the Amorites, to 
destroy us. 

28 Whither shall we go up? our 
brethren have discouraged our 
heart, saying, 8The people is 
greater and taller than we; the 
cities are great and walled up to 
heaven; and moreover we have seen 
the sons of the Anakims there. 

29 Then I said unto you, Dread 
not, neither be afraid of them. 

30 The LorD your God which go- 
eth before you, he shall fight for 
you, according to all that he did for 
you in Egypt before your eyes; 

31 And in the wilderness, where 
thou hast seen how that the LorD 
thy God bare thee, as a man doth 
bear his son, in all the way that ye 
went, until ye came into this place. 

32 Yet in this thing “ye did not 
believe the LoRD your God, 

33 Who went in the way before 
you, to search you out a place to 
pitch your tents fn, in fire by night, 
to shew you by what way ye should 
go, and in a cloud by day. 

34 And the Lorp heard the voice 
of your words, and was wroth, and 
sware, saying, 

35 ‘Surely there shall not one of 
these men of this evil generation 
see that good land, which I sware 
to give unto your fathers, 

36 Save Caleb the son of Jephun- 
neh; he shall see it, and to him will 
I give the land that he hath trodden 
upon, and to his children, because 
he hath wholly followed the Lorp. 

37 FAlso the LORD was angry 
with me for your sakes, saying, 
Thou also shalt not go in thither. “ 

38 But ‘Joshua the son of Nun, 
which standeth before thee, he shall 
go in thither: encourage him: for he 
shall cause Israel to inherit it. 

39 Moreover your little ones, 
which ye said should be a prey, and 
your children, which in that day 
had no knowledge between good 
and evil, they shall go in thither, 
and unto them willl give it, and they 
shall possess it. 

40 But as for you, turn you, and 
take your journey into the wilder- 
ness by the way of the Red sea. 

41 Then ye answered and said 
unto me, We have sinned against 
the LORD, we will go up and fight, 
according to all that the Lorp our 
God commanded us. And when ye 
had girded on every man_ his 
weapons of war, ye were ready to 
go up into the hill. 

42 And the Lorp said unto me, 


1 43] 


Say unto them, Go not up, neither 
fight; for I am not among you; lest 
ye be smitten before your enemies. | 

43 So I spake unto you; and ye 
would not hear, but rebelled against} 
the commandment of the Lorp,| 
and went presumptuously up into} 
the hill. Q 

44 And the Amorites, which dwelt 
in that mountain, came out against 
you, and chased you, as bees do, 
and destroyed you in Seir, even| 
unto Hormah. 

45 And ye returned and wept be- 
fore the Lorp; “but the Lorp 
would not hearken to your voice, 
nor give ear unto you. 

46 So ye abode in Kadesh many} > Deut.1.40; 
days, according unto the days that) Num-14.25. 
ye abode there. ¢ C£Deut.1. 


CHAPTER 2. hel Aaa. 


. The wanderings and conflicts of| Josh-24.4. 
the wilderness. e Psa.1.6; 


37.18, 44.21; 
HEN we turned, and took our! §9'5, 94 11; 
journey into the wilderness by 


a Cf.Zech.7, 
11-13. 


103 14, Mt. 
the way of the Red sea, as the} $852) 2 Pet. 
Lorpb spake unto me: and we com- 


passed mount Seir many days. f1 Ki.9.26, 
2 And the Lorp spake unto me,| , beatin 
saying, Fs east of the 
3 Ye have compassed this moun-| Dead Sea. 
tain ‘long enough: turn you north- h Geno! 
ward. 36-38. 
4 And command thou the people,| . 
saying, Ye are to pass through the| * Gen-14.5. 


coast of your brethren the children! ; peut.9.2 ; 
of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and| Num13. 
they shall be afraid of you: take ye| 22,33. 
good heed unto yourselves there- k v.22; Gen. 
er xe —_ 14.6, 36.20. 
éddle not with them; for I 
will not give you of their land, no, Eueathl. 
not “aed a foot pore ; be-|m Num.13.26. 
cause i Nave “given mount Seir unto 
Esau for a possession. mae aae 
6 Ye peal buy meat of thet for 
money, that ye may eat; and ye 
shall also buy water of them for aes 
money, that ye may drink. ee 
7 For the Lorp thy God hath}? Gen.14.5. 
blessed thee in all the works of thy 
hand: he ¢knoweth thy walking 
through this great wilderness: these 
forty years the Lorp thy God hath 
een with thee; thou hast lacked 
nothing. 
8 And when we passed by from 
our brethren the children of Esau, 
which dwelt in Seir, through the 
way of the plain from fElath, and 
from Ezion-gaber, we turned and 
passed by the way of the éwilder- 
ness of Moab. 


o Num.14.35; 


218 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1491. 


9 And the LorpD said unto me, 
Distress not the Moabites, neither 
contend with them in battle: for I 
will not give thee of their land for a 
possession; because I have “given 
Ar unto the children of Lot for a 
possession. 

10 The ‘Emims dwelt therein in 
times past, a’ people great, and 
many, and tall, as the 7Anakims; ~ 

11 Which also were accounted 
giants, as the Anakims; but the 
Moabites call them Emims. 

12 The *Horims also dwelt in Seir 
beforetime; but the children of Esau 
succeeded them, when they had de- 
stroyed them from before them, 
and dwelt in their stead; as Israel 
did unto the land of his possession, 
which the LorRD gave unto them. 

13 Now rise up, said J, ‘and get 
you over the brook Zered. And we 
went over the brook Zered. 

14 And the space in which we 
came from ”Kadesh-barnea, until 
we were come over the brook Zered, 
was thirty and eight years; “until 
all the generation of the men of 
war were wasted out from among 
the host, °as the LORD swure unto 
them. 

15 For indeed the hand of the 
LORD was against them, to destroy 
them from among the host, until 


they were consumed. 


16 So it came to pass, when all 
the men of war were consumed and 
dead from among the people, 

17, That the LorD spake unto me, 
Saying, 

18 Thou art to pass over through 
Ar, the coast of Moab, this day: 

19 And when thou comest nigh 
over against the children of Ammon, 
distress them not, nor meddle with 
them: for I will not give thee of 
the land of the children of Ammon 
any possession; because I have 
given it unto the children of Lot for 
a possession. 

20 (That also was accounted a 
land of giants: giants dwelt therein 
in old, time; and the Ammonites 
call them #Zamzummims; 

21 A people great, and many, and 
tall, as the Anakims; but the Lorp 
destroyed them before them: and 
they succeeded them, and dwelt in 
their stead: 

22 As he did to the children of 
Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he 
destroyed the Horirns from before 
them; and they succeeded them, 
and dwelt in their stead even unto 
this day: 


_dwelt in their stead.) 


2 23] 


23 And the Avims which dwelt in 
Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the 
Caphtorims, which came forth out 
of Caphtor, destroyed them, and 


24 Rise ye up, take your journey, 
and pass over the river Arnon: be- 
hold, I have given into thine hand. 
Sihon the Amorite, king of Hesh- 
bon, and his land: begin to possess 
it, and contend with him in battle. 

25 This day will I begin to put the 
dread of thee and the fear of thee 
fipon the nations that are under 
the whole heaven, who shall hear 
report of thee, and shall tremble, 
and be in anguish because of thee. 

26 And I sent messengers out of 
the wilderness of Kedemoth unto 
Sihon king of Heshbon with words 
of peace, saying, 

27 Let me pass through thy land: 
I will go along by the high way, I 
will neither turn unto the mght 
hand nor to the left. a 

28 Thou .shalt sell me meat for 
money, that I may eat; and give 
me water for money, that I may 
drink: only I will pass through on 
my feet; 

29 -(As the children of Esau which 
dwell in Seir, and the Moabites 
which dwell in Ar, did unto me;) 
until I shall pass over Jordan into 
the land which the LorpD our God 
giveth us. 

30 But Sihon king of Heshbon 
would not let us pass by him: for 
the Lorp thy God hardened his 
spirit, and made his heart obstinate, 
that he might deliver him into thy 
hand, as appeareth this day. 

31 And the Lorp said unto me, 
Behold, I have begun to give Sihon 
and his land before thee: begin to 
@possess, that thou mayest inherit 
his land. 

32 Then Sihon came out against 
us, he and all his people, to fight at 
Jahaz. 

33: And the Lorp our God de- 
livered him before us; and we smote 
him, and his sons, and all his 
people. 

34 And we took all his cities at 
that time, and utterly destroyed the 
men, and the women, and the little 
ones, of every city, we left none to 
remain: 

35 Only the cattle we took for a 
prey unto ourselves, and the spoil 
of the cities which we took. 

36 From ®Aroer, which is by the 
brink of the river of Arnon, and 
from the city that is by the river, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Josh.1.3. 

b Deut.3.12; 
4.48; Josh. 
13.9. 

c¢ Num.21.33, 
etc.; Deut. 
29.7. 

d Deut.1.4. 

e Num.21.34. 

f Deut.4.48; 
1, Cbr:5.23; 
Psa.29.6. 


g One cubit = 


1 ft. 5.48 in. 


h Num.32.33; 
Josh.12.6; 
13.8-12. 


219 


[3 12 


even unto Gilead, there was not 
one city too strong for us: the LORD 
our God delivered all unto us: 

37 Only unto the land of the chil- 
dren of Ammon thou camest not, 
nor unto any place of the river Jab- 
bok, nor unto the cities in the moun- 
tains, nor unto whatsoever the 
Lorp our God forbad us. 


CHAPTER 3. 


oe we turned, and went up 
the way to Bashan: and ‘Oz 
the king of Bashan came out against 
us, he and all his people, to battle 
at ¢Edrei. 

2 And the Lorp said unto me, 
Fear him not: for I will deliver him, 
and all his people, and his land, 
into thy hand; and thou shalt do 
unto him as thou didst unto ‘Sihon 
king of the Amorites, which dwelt 
at Heshbon., 

3 So the Lorp our God delivered 
into our hands Og also, the king of 
Bashan, and all his people: and we 
smote him until none was left to 
him remaining. 

4 And we took all his cities at 
that time, there was not a city 
which we took not frorn them, three- 
score cities, all the region of Argob, 
the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 

5 All these cities were fenced with 
high walls, gates, and bars; beside 
unwalled towns a great many. 

6 And we utterly destroyed them, 
as we did unto Sihon king of Hesh- 
bon, utterly destroying the men, 
women, and children, of every city. 

7 But all the cattle, and the spoil 
of the cities, we took for a prey to 
ourselves. 

8 And we took at that time out of 
the hand of the two kings of the 
Amorites the land that was on this 
side Jordan, from the river of Arnon 
unto mount /Hermon; 

9 (Which Hermon the Sidonians 
call Sirion; and the Amorites call 
it Shenir;) 

10 All the cities of the plain, and 
all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto 
Salchah and Edrei, cities of the 
kingdom of Og in Bashan. 

11 For only Og king of Bashan 
remained of the remnant of giants; 
behold his bedstead was a bedstead 
of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the 
children of Ammon? nine Scubits 
was the length thereof, and four 
cubits the breadth of it, after the 
cubit of a man. 

12 And this “land, which we pos- 


3 13] 


DEUTERONOMY. 


sessed at that time, from Aroer, 
which zs by the river Annon, and 
half mount Gilead, and \the ctties 
thereof, gave I unto the /Reubenites 
and to ‘the 'Gadites. 

13 “And the rest of Gilead,-and all 
Bashan, being the kingdom of ‘Og, 
gave I unto the half tribeof Manas- 
seh; all the region of Argob, with 
all Bashan, which was called the 
land of giants. 

14 Jair the son of Manasseh took 
all the country of Argob unto ‘the 
coast of Geshuri and Maachathi; 
and-called them after his ownmame,) 
Bashan-havoth-jair, unto ‘this day. 

15 AndI gave’Gilead unto Machir. 

16 And unto the Reubenites and 
unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead 
even unto the river Arnon half ‘the 
valley, and the border even ‘unto the 
river Jabbok, which is the border 
of the children of Ammon; 

17 The plain also, and Jordan, 
and the coast thereof, ‘from ‘Chin- 
nereth even unto the sea of the 
plain, even ‘the salt sea, under 
“Ashdoth-pisgah ‘eastward. 

18 And I commanded you at that 
time, saying, The Lorp your ‘God 
hath given you this land ‘to possess 
it: ¢ye shall pass over armed before 
your brethren the children of Israel, 
all that are meet for the war. 

19 But your wives, and your little 
ones, and your cattle, (for I know 
that ye have much cattle,) shali 
abide in your cities which I have 
given you; 

20 Until the LorpD have-given rest 
unto your brethren, as well.as unto 
you, and until! they also possess the 
fand which the Lorp your God 
hath given them beyond Jordan: 
and then shall ye ‘return every 
man unto his possession, which I 
have given you. 

21 And #1 commanded Joshua at 
that time, saying, Thine-eyes have 
seen all that the Lorp your ‘God 
hath done unto ‘these two Kings: so 
shall the Lorp do unto all the king- 
doms whither thou passest. 

22 Ye shall not fear them: for 
&the LorD your God he shall fight 
for you. 

23 And I *besought the LorpD at 
that time, saying, 

24 O Lord Gop, thou ‘hast begun 
to shew thy servant thy greatness, 
and thy mighty hand: for what 
God is there in heaven or in earth, 
that can do-according to thy works, 
and according to thy might? 

25 I pray thee, let me go over, and 


B.c. 1451. 


a Josh.13.29,30. 
b Num.32.39. | 


ci.e. the 
springs of 
Pisgah, or 
the hill. 


d Num.32.20, 
ete: 


é Josh.22.4. 
f Num.27.18. 


g Ex.14.14; 
Deut.1.30; 
20.4. 


h Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). Deut. 
9:26. (Gen. 
15.2; Hab.3. 
1-16.) 


¢ Num.:20.12; 
27.14; Deut. 
1:37; 31.2; 
32.51,52; 
34.4; Psa. 
106.32,33. 


j Or, ravine. 


k Lev.19.37; 
20.8; 22.31; 
Deut {S.1; 
8.1; Ezk.20. 
ae Rom.10. 


1 Deut.12.32; 
Josh.1.7; 
Prov.30.6; 
Rev.22.18, 
19, 


mInspiration. 


(Ex.4.15;_ 
Rev.22.19.) 


n Num.25.4, 
etc.; Josh. 
22.17; Psa. 
106.28,29. 


o Lit. gods. 
> Psa.46.1; 


145.18; 148. 
14; Isa.55.6. 


220 


ee the good land that is beyond 
Jordan, that goodly mountain, and 
‘Lebanon. : ; 

26 But the Lorp “was wroth with 
me for your (sakes, and would not 
hear me: and the LorpD said unto 
‘me, Let it suffice thee; speak -no 
jmore unto me ofthis matter. 

27 Get thee upinto the top of Pis- 
gah, and lift up thine eyes west- 
ward, and morthward, and )south- 
ward, and eastward, and behold it 


\hwith ithine ‘eyes: for thou shalt not 
go over thts Jordan. 


28 Butcharge Joshua, andencour- 
age ‘him, and strengthen him: for 
he shall go over before this people, 
and she shall cause them to inherit 
the Jand which tthou shalt see. 

'29 ‘So we .abode in the Jyalley 
over against Beth-<peor. 


(CHAPTER 4. 


The new generation taught the 
Jessons of Sinai. 


i pastas therefore hearken, O Israel, 
% unto the “statutes and ainto 
the judgments, which I teach you, 
for to do them, that ye may live, 
and go in and possess the land 
which the Lorp God of your 
fathers giveth you. 

2 ‘Ye shall not add «unto ‘the 
mwyord which I command you, 
neither shall ye diminish ought 
from it, that ye may keep the com- 
mandments of the Lorp your God 
which I command you. 

3 Your eyes ‘have seen what ‘the 
LorD did ‘because of “Baal-peor: for 
all the: men that followed Baal-peor, 
the Lorp thy God hath destroyed 
them from-among you. 

4 But ye that did cleave unto the 
Lorp your God are alive every one 
of you this day. 

5 Behold, I ‘have taught you stat- 
utes and judgments, even as the. 
LorD my God commanded me, that 
ye should do so in the land whither 
ye go to possess it. 

6 Keep therefore and do them; 
for this 1s your wisdom and your un- 
derstanding in the sight of the na- 
tions, which shall ‘hear all ‘these 
statutes, and say, Surely this great 
nation 1s a wise and understanding 
people. 

7 For what nation is there so 
great, who hath °God so ?nigh unto 
them, as the Lorp our God isin all 
things that we call upon ‘him for? 

8 And what nation is there so 
great, that hath statutes and judg- 


a 
aan 


_-16 Lest ye corrupt yourselves, 
and make you a graven image, the 


4 9] 
ments so righteous as all this law, 
which I set before you this day? 

9 Only take heed to thyself, and 
keep. thy soul diligently, lest thou 
forget the things which thine eyes 
have seen, and lest they depart 
from thy heart all the days of thy 
life: but teach them thy sons, and 
thy sons’ sons; 

10 Specially the day that thou 
stoodest before the LoRD thy God 
in Horeb, when the LorD said unto 
me, Gather me the people together, 
and I will make them hear my} 
words, that they may learn to fear} 
me all the days that they shall live} 
upon the earth, and that they may 
teach their children. 

11 And ye came near and stood 
under the mountain; and the moun- 
tain burned with fire unto the 
midst of heaven, with darkness, 
clouds, and thick darkness. 

12 And the Lorpspake unto you 
out of the midst of the fire: ye 
heard the voice of the words, but 
saw no similitude; 2only ye heard a 
voice. 

13 And he declared unto you his 
covenant, which he commanded 
you to perform, even ten com- 
mandments; and he wrote them 
upon two tables of stone. 

14 And the Lorp commanded me 
at that time to teach you statutes 
and judgments, that ye might do 
them in the land whither ye go over 
to’ possess it. 

15 Take ye therefore good heed 
unto yourselves; for ye ‘saw no 
manner of similitude on the day 
that the LorpD spake unto you in 
Horeb out of the midst of the fire: 


similitude of any figure, the ¢like- 
ness of male or female, 

17. The likeness of any beast that 
i3 on the earth, the likeness of any 
winged fowl that flieth in the air, 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C, 1451. 


18 The likeness of any thing that 


_ creepeth on the ground, the likeness 


of any fish that 7s in the waters be- 
neath the earth: 

19 And lest thou lift up thine eyes 
unto heaven, and when thou seest 
the sun, and the moon, and the 
stars, even all the host of heaven, 
shouldest be ‘driven to worship 
them, and serve them, which the 
Lorp thy God hath divided unto} 
all nations under the whole heaven. 

20: But the Lorp hath taken you, 
and fbrought you forth out of the 
iron furnace, ever: out of Egypt, to’ 


a Psa.19.9, 
note, 


b Ex.20.22; 
1 Ki.19.12. 


¢ Cf.John 1. 
18, note. 


d Rom.1.23. 


€Or, drawn 
away. 


f1 Ki.8.51; 
Jer.11.4. 


g Deut.30.18, 
19; Isa.1.2; 
Mic.6.2. 


h Lev.26.33; 
Deut.28:62, 
64; Neh.1.8. 


tie. Gentiles. 
jie. nations. 
k Psa.115.4,5; 


135.15-47; 
Isa.44.9; 
46.7. 


1 Gen.49.1; 
Deut.31.29; 
Jer.23.20; 
Hos.3.5. 


221 


[4 32 


be unto him a people of inheritance, 
as ye are this day. 

21 Furthermore the LORD) was 
angry with me for your sakes, and 
sware that I should not go over 
Jordan, and that I should not goin. 
unto that good land, which the 
Lorp thy God giveth thee for an 
inheritance: 

22 But.I must die in this land, I 
must not go over Jordan: but ye 
shall. go over, and possess. that good’ 
land. 

23 Take heed unto yourselves, lest 
ye forget the covenant of the LoRD: 
your God, which he made with you, 
and make you a graven image, or 
the likeness of any thing, which the 
Lorp thy God hath forbidden thee. 

24. For the LORD thy God is a 
consuming fire, even a jealous God. 

25 When thou shalt beget chil- 
dren, and children’s: children, and: 
ye shall have remained long in the: 
land, and shall corrupt yourselves, 
and make a graven image, or the 
likeness of any thing, and shall do 
evil in the sight of the LorpD thy 
God, to provoke him to anger: 

26 #I call heaven and earth to wit- 
ness against you this day, that ye 
shall soon utterly perish from off 
the land whereunto ye go over Jor- 
dan to: possess it; ye shall not pro- 
long your days upon it, but shalt 
utterly be destroyed. 

27 And the Lorp shall /scatter 
you among the ‘nations, and ye 
shall be left few in number among 
the jheathen, whither the LorD 
shall lead you. 

28 And there ye shall serve gods, 
the work of men’s hands, wood and 
stone, which neither’ see, nor hear, 
nor eat, nor smell. 

29 But if from thence thou shalt 
seek the LORD thy God, thou shalt 
find him, if thou seek him with all 
thy heart. and with. all thy soul. 

30 When thou art in tribulation, 


and all these things are come upon 
thee, ‘even in the latter days, if 
thou turn tothe LoRD thy God, and 
shalt be obedient unto his voice; 

31 (For the.Lorp thy God is a 
merciful God;) he will not forsake 
thee, neither destroy thee, nor for- 
get the covenant of thy fathers 
which he sware unto them. 

32 For ask now of the days that 
are past. which were before thee, 
since the day that God created man 
upon the earth, and ask from the 
one side of heaven unto: the other, 
whether there hath been any such 


thing as this great thing rs, or hath 
been heard like it? - x 

33. Did ever people hear the voice 
of God speaking out of the midst of 
the fire, as thou hast heard, and 
live? 

34 Or hath God assayed to go and 
take him a nation from the midst 
of another nation, by temptations, 
by signs, and by wonders, and by 
war, and by a mighty hand, and by 
a stretched out arm, and by great 
terrors, according to all that the 
LorD your God did for you in 
Egypt before your eyes? 

35 Unto thee it was shewed, that 
thou mightest know that the Lorp 
he is God; there is none else beside 
him. 

36 “Out of heaven he made thee 
to hear his voice, that he might in- 
struct thee: and upon earth he 
shewed thee his great fire; and thou 
-heardest his words out of the midst 
of the fire. 

37 And because he loved thy 
fathers, therefore he chose their 
seed after them, and brought thee 
out in his sight with his mighty 
power out of Egypt; ; 

38 To drive out nations from be- 
fore thee greater and mightier than 
thou art, to bring thee in, to give 
thee their land for an inheritance, 
as it is this day. 

39 Know therefore this day, and 
consider it in thine heart, that the 
LorD he ss God in heaven above, 
and upon the earth beneath: there 
is none else. 

40 Thou shalt keep therefore his 
statutes, and his commandments, 
which I command thee this day, 
that it may go well with thee, and 
with thy children after thee, and 
that thou mayest prolong thy days 
upon the earth, which the Lorp 
thy God giveth thee, for ever. 


Three of the cities of refuge 
designated, 


41 Then Moses 'severed three 
cities on this side Jordan toward 
the sun rising; 

42 ‘That the slayer might flee 
thither, which should kill his neigh- 
bour unawares, and hated him 
not in times past; and that fleeing 
Pe one of these cities he might 
ive: 

43 Namely, 4Bezer in the wilder- 
ness, in the plain country, of the 
Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, 
of the Gadites; and Golan in Ba- 
shan, of the Manassites. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


a Ex.19.9,19; 
20.18-22; 
24.16; Heb. 
12.19. 

6 Num.35.6,14. 

c Deut.19.4, 

d Josh.20.8. 


e Num.21.24; 
Deut.1.4. 


g Ex.19.5; 
Deut.4.23, 


h Heb.8.9, 


i Ex.20.21; 
Gal.3.19. 


222 


B.C. 1451. 


44 And this is the law which 
Moses set before the children of 
Israel: 

45 These are the testimonies, and 
the statutes, and the judgments, 
which Moses spake unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, after they came forth 
out of Egypt, 

46 On this side Jordan, in the 
valley over against Beth-peor, in 
the land of Sihon king of the 
Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, 
whom Moses and the children of 
Israel ‘smote, after they were come 
forth out of Egypt: 

47 And they possessed his land, 
and the land of Og king of Bashan, 
two kings of the Amorites, which 
were on this side Jordan toward the 
sun rising; 

48 From Aroer, which is by the 
bank of the river Arnon, even unto 
mount Sion, which is Hermon, ~ 

49 And all the plain on this side 
Jordan eastward, even unto the sea 
of the plain, under the springs of 
Pisgah. 


CHAPTER 5. 


The new generation taught the 
Mosaic covenant. (Cf, Ex. 20. 
4, note.) : 


ANP Moses called all Israel, and 
said unto them, Hear, O Israel, 
the statutes and judgments which I 
speak in your ears this day, that ye 
may learn them, and keep, and /do 
them. 

2 The Lorp our God made a 
8covenant with us in Horeb. 

3 The Lorp /made not this cove- 
nant with our fathers, but with us, 
even us, who are all of us here alive 
this day. 

4 The Lorp talked with you face 
to face in the. mount out of the 
midst of the fire, 

5 (‘I stood between the Lorp and 
you at that time, to shew you the 
word of the Lorp: for ye were 
afraid by reason of the fire, and went 
not up into the mount;) saying, 

6 I am the Lorp thy God, which 
brought thee out of the land of 
Egypt, from the house of bondage. 

7 Thou shalt have none other 
gods before me. 

8 Thou shalt not make thee any 


}graven image, or any likeness of 


any thing that is in heaven above, 
or that is in the earth beneath, or 
that is in the waters beneath the 
earth: 


9 Thou shalt not bow down thy- 


self unto them, nor serve them: for 
I the Lorp thy God am a jealous 
God, visiting the iniquity of the 
fathers upon the children unto the 
third and fourth generation of 
them that hate me, 

10 And shewing 4¢mercy unto 
thousands of them that love me 
and keep my commandments. 

11 Thou shalt not take the name 
of the Lorp thy God in vain: for 
the LorD will not hold Aim guilt- 
less that taketh his name in vain. 

12 Keep the sabbath day to sanc- 
tify it, as the Lorp thy God hath 
commanded thee. 

13 5Six days thou shalt labour, 
and do all thy work: 

14 But the seventh day is the sab- 
bath of the Lorp thy God: in it 
thou shalt not do any work, thou, 
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor 
thy manservant, nor thy maid- 
servant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, 
nor any of thy cattle, nor thy 
stranger that is within thy gates; 
that thy manservant and thy maid- 
servant may rest as well as thou. 

15 And remember that thou wast 
a servant in the land of Egypt, and 
that the Lorp thy God brought 
thee out thence through a mighty 
hand and by a stretched out arm: 
therefore the LorD thy God com- 
manded thee to keep the sabbath 
day. 

16 Honour thy father and thy 
‘mother, as the LORD thy God hath 
commanded thee; that thy days 
may be prolonged, and that it may 
go well with thee, in the land which 
the LorD thy God giveth thee. 

17 Thou shalt not kill. 

18 Neither shalt thou commit 
adultery. 

19 Neither shalt thou steal. 


20 Neither shalt thou bear false}. 


witness against thy neighbour. 

21 Neither shalt thou desire thy 
neighbour’s wife, neither shalt thou 
covet thy neighbour’s house, his 
field, or his manservant, or his 
maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or 
any thing that is thy neighbour’s. 

22 These ¢words the LorD spake 
unto all your assembly in the mount 
out of the midst of the fire, of the 
cloud, and of the thick darkness, 
with a great voice: and he added 
no more. And he wrote them in 
two tables of stone, and delivered 
them unto me. 

23 And it came to pass, when ye 
heard the voice out of the midst of 
the darkness, (for the mountain did 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Jer.32.18; 
Dan.9.4. 


6 Ex.23.12; 
35.2; Ezk. 
20.12. 


c Eph.6.2,3; 
Col.3.20. 


d Inspiration. 


Deut.10.14. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


e Deut.4.33; 
Jud.13.22. 


f Ex.20.19; 
Heb.12.19. 


g Deut.32.29; 
Psa.81.13; 
Isa.48.18; 
Mt.23.37; 
Lk.19.42. 


h Psa.19.9, 
note. 


zt Deut.10.12; 
Psa.119.3; 
Jer:7::235 
Lk.1.6. 


223 


burn with fire,) that ye came near 
unto me, even all the heads of your 
tribes, and your elders; 

24 And ye said, Behold, the Lorp 
our God hath shewed us his glory 
and his greatness, and we have 
heard his voice out of the midst of 
the fire: we have seen this day 
that God doth talk with man, and 
he ¢liveth. 

25 Now therefore why should we 
die? for this great fire will consume 
us: if we hear the voice of the LoRD 
on God any more, then we shall 

e 

26 For who is there of all flesh, 
that hath heard the voice of the 
living God speaking out of the 
midst of the fire, as we have, and 
lived? 

27 Go thou near, and hear all that 
the LorD our God shall say: and 
‘speak thou unto us all that the 
LorpD our God shall speak unto 
thee; and we will hear it, and do it. 

28 And the LorD heard the voice 
of your words, when ye spake unto 
me; and the Lorb said unto me, I 
have heard the voice of the words 
of this people, which they have 
spoken unto thee: they have well 
said all that they have spoken. 

29 8O that there were such an 
heart in them, that they would 
hfear me, and keep all my com- 
mandments always, that it might 
be well with them, and with their 
children for ever! 

30 Go say to them, Get you into 
your tents again. 

31 But as for thee, stand thou 
here by me, and I will speak unto 
thee all the commandments, and 
the statutes, and the judgments, 
which thou shalt teach them, that 
they may do them in the land 
which I give thein to possess it. 

32 Ye shall observe to do there- 
fore as the LORD your God hath 
commanded you: ye shall not turn 
side to the right hand or to the 

eft. 

33 Ye shall walk in ‘all the ways 
which the LORD your God hath 
commanded you, that ye may live, 
and that it may be well with you, 
and that ye may prolong your days 
in the land which ye shall possess. 


CHAPTER 6. 


Nye these are the command- 
ments, the statutes, and the 
judgments, which the Lorp your 
God commanded to teach you, that 


6 2) 


ye might do them in the land 
whither ye ‘go to possess it: 

2 That thou mightest “fear the 
Lorp thy God, to keep all his stat- 
utes and his commandments, which 
I command thee, thou, and thy son, 
and thy son’s son, all the days of 
thy life; and that thy days may be 
prolonged. 

3 Hear therefore, O Israel, and 
observe to do it; that it may ‘be 
well with thee, and that ye may in- 
‘crease mightily, as the Lorp God 
‘of thy fathers hath promised thee, 
in the land that floweth with milk 
and'‘honey. , | 


The “great commandment.” |¢ Law (of 
|| Mfoses). vs. 
1-5;.Psa.1.2. 
(Ex19.1; 
Gal.3-1-29.) 


6 Psa.19.9, 
note. 


¢ Mk.12.29. 

d Mt.22.37; 
|| Mk.12.29,30; 
Lk:10:27. 


e Mt.4.10; 
Lk.4:8. 


4 Hear, O Israel: The LoRD our 
God is.one “LORD: 

5 And thou shalt 4love the LorD 
thy God with all thine heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy 
might. 


Instruction and warning. 


6 And these words, which I-com- 
mand thee this day, shall be in 
thine heart: 

7 And thou shalt teach them dili- 
gently unto thy children, and shalt 
‘talk of them when thou sittest in 
‘thine house, and when thou -walk- 
est by the way, and when thou liest 
-down, and when thou risest up. 

8 And ‘thou shalt bind them for a 
sign upon thine hand, and they 
‘shall 'be as frontlets between thine 
eyes. 

9 And thou shalt write them’ upon 
‘the posts of thy house, and on thy 
‘gates. 

10 And it shall be, when the 
LORD thy God shall have brought 
thee into the land which he sware 
unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to 
Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee 
‘great and goodly cities, which thou 
‘buildedst not, | 

11 And houses full of all good 
things, which thou filledst not, and, 
wells digged, which thou diggedst 
not, vineyards and olive trees, 
which thou plantedst not; when 
ed shalt have eaten and be 

12 Then beware lest thou forget 
the Lorp, which brought thee 
forth out of the land of Egypt, 
from the house of bondage. | 

13 Thou shalt “fear the Lorp thy, 
God, and serve chim, and shalt 
swear by his name. . H 

14 Ye shall not go after other 


f Tempta- 
tion. Psa. 
78.18,41,56. 
(Gen-3.1; 
Jas.1:2:) 


g Mt.4.7; Lk. 
4:12. 
hk Num.33.52, 
Sao 
i Ex.3.19; 
13.3, 
Job 35.7,8; 
Jer.32.39, 
k Lev.18.5; 
-Deut.24.13; 
Rom.10.3,5. 


1 Gen.15.19, 
etc.; Ex.33.2. 


224 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


j Deut.10.13; | 


gods, of the gods of the people 
which are round ‘about you; 

15 (For the Lorp thy God is a 
jealous ‘God among you) lest the 
anger of the Lorp thy God be 
kindled against thee, and destroy 
thee from off ‘the face of the earth. 

16 Ye shall not 4tempt the LorD 
your God, as ye tempted Azm in 
Massah. 

17 Ye shall diligently keep the 
commandments of ithe LORD your 
God, and his testimonies, and his 
statutes, which he hath com- 
manded thee. 

18 And thou shalt do that which 
zs right and good in the sight of the 


|LoRD: that it may be well with 
|thee, and that thou mayest_go in 


and possess the good jland which 
ithe LORD sware unto thy fathers, 
19 *To cast out ali thine enemies 


from before thee, as the LorD hath 
spoken, 


20 And when thy son asketh thee 
in time to come, saying. What mean 
thetestimonies, andthestatutes, and 
the judgments, which the LoRD our 


|God hath commanded you? 


21 Then thou shalt say unto thy 
son, We were Pharaoh’s bondmen 
in Egypt; and the Lorp brought 
us out of ‘Egypt with a mighty 
hand: 

22 And the LorpD shewed signs 


jand wonders, great and sore, upon 


Egypt, upen Pharaoh, and upon ail 


|his household, ‘before our eyes: 


23 And he brought us out from 
thence, that he might ‘bring wus in, 
0 give us the land which he sware 
unto our fathers. 

24 And the LorD commanded us 
to do all these statutes, to fear the 
Lorp our God, /for our good al- 
ways, that he might preserve us 
alive, as it 1s at this day. 

25 And Ait shall be-our righteous- 
ness, if we observe to do all these 


commandments before the Lorp 
our God, as he hath commanded us. 


CHAPTER 7. 
The command to be separate. 


| WHEN the Lorp thy Ged shall 


bring thee into the land 


|whither thou goest ‘to possess it, 


and hath cast out many nations 
before thee, ‘the Hittites, and the 


|Girgashites, and ‘the Amorites, and 
jthe Canaanites, and the Perizzites, 


and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, 
seven Hepat greater and mightier 
us 


ae 


2. And when the Lorp thy God 
shall deliver’ them: before thee; thou 


shalt. smite: them,. and utterly de-|) 


stroy them; thou shalt make nec 
covenant with them, nor shew 
mercy unto them: 

3 ¢Neither shalt thou make mar- 
riages with them; thy daughter 
thou shalt not give unto his son, 
nor his. daughter shalt thou take 
unto thy son. 

4 For they will turn away thy 
son from following me, that they 
may serve other gods: so will the 
anger of the LorD be kindled 
against you, and destroy thee sud- 
denly. 

5 But thus: shall ye deal with 
them; ye shall destroy their altars, 
and break down their images, and) 
cut dowm their groves, and burn 
their graven images with fire. 


6 For thou art an holy cpeople|, 
unto the Lorp thy God: the LorD} 
thy God hath ¢chosen thee-to be a 


special. people unto himself, above 


ail people that are upon the face of| 


the earth. 
7 The Lorp did not set his love 


wpon' you, nor choose you, because}, 


ye were more in number than any 
people; for ye were the fewest of all 
people: 

8 But because the Lorp loved 
you, and because he would keep the 
oath which he had sworn unto your 
fathers, hath the LoRD brought you 
out with a mighty hand, and ‘re- 
deemed you out of the house of 
bondmen, from the hand of Phar- 
aoh king of Egypt. 

9 Know therefore that the LORD 
thy God, he is God, the faithful 
God, fwhich keepeth covenant and 


“mercy with them that love hira, and. 


keep his commandments to a thou- 
sand. generations; 

10 And repayeth them that. hate 
him to their face, to destroy them: 
he will not be slack to) him that 
hateth him, he will repay him to his 
face. 

11 Thow shalt therefore keep the 
commandments, and: the statutes, 
and the judgments, which I com- 
mand thee this: day, to do them. 


The promise of victory. 


12 Wherefore it shall come to 
pass, if ye hearkem to: these judg- 
ments, and keep, and do them, that 
the Lorp thy God shall keep unto 
thee the covenant and the mercy 
which #e sware unto thy fathers: 

13 And he will ¢love thee, and 


DEUTERONOMY. 


a Josh.23.12; 
1 Ki.r7.2; 
Ezra 9.2, 


'b See: Deut. 
10.27. 
\c Israel (his- 


28:58-68. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 
| 
d Election 
(corporate). 
vs:6,7; Psa. 
33.12. (Deut 
TOI Pet. 
507) 


|e Ex.14.30, 
| note. 


f Ex.20.6; 
Deut.5.10; 
Neh.1.5; 
Dan.9:4. 


g John 14.21. 


hEx 9.14; 
15.26;, Deut. 
28.27,60. 


t Ex.23.33: 
Deut.7.4,5; 
12.30; Jud. 
8.27; Psa. 
106.36. 


j Josh.10:24, 
25,42; 12.1, 
etc. 


225 


B.C,.1451. 


[7 25 


bless thee,. and, multiply thee: he 
will also bless the fruit of thy womb, 
and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, 
and thy wine, and thine oili, the in- 
crease of thy kine, and the flocks of 
thy sheep, im the land which he 
sware unto thy fathers: to give thee. 
' 14 Thowshalt be blessed! above:all) 
people: there shall not be male or 
female barren among you, or among. 
your cattle. 

15 And the LorpD will take away 
from thee all sickness, and will put 
none of the “evil diseases of Egypt, 
which thou knowest, upon thee; but 
will lay them upom all them that 
hate thee. 

16 And:thow shalt consume all the 
people which the Lorp thy God 
shall deliver thee; thine eye shall 
have no pity upon them: neither 
shalt thou serve their gods; for that 
will be a ‘snare unto thee. 
| 17 If thou. shalt say in thine heart,, 
These nations are more than I; how; 
can I dispossess them? 

18 Thou shalt not be afraid of 


them; but shalt. well remember 
iwhat the LorD. thy God did unto 


Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt; 

| 19. The great temptations which. 
thine eyes saw, and the signs, and. 
the wonders, and. the mighty hand,, 
and the stretched out arm, whereby 
the Lorp thy God brought thee. 
out: so shall the LorpD thy God do. 
unto'all the people of whom thou 
art afraid. 

20 Moreover the Lorp thy God. 
will send the hornet among them, 
until they that are left, and hide 
themselves from thee, be destroyed.. 

21 Thou shalt not be affrighted at 
them: for the Lorp thy God is 
among you, a mighty God and 
terrible. 

22 And the Lorb thy God will 
put out those nations before thee by 
little and. little: thou mayest not 
consume them at once, lest. the 
beasts of the field increase upon 
thee. . 

23 But the Lorp thy God shall 
deliver them unto thee, and shall 
destroy them with a mighty de- 
struction, until they be destroyed. 

24 And he Jshall deliver their 
kings, into. thine hand, and thou 
shalt destroy their name from under 
heaven: there shall no man be able 
to stand before thee, until thou 
have destroyed them. 

25 The graven images of their 
gods shall ye burn with fire: thou 
shalt not desire the silver or gold 


ez 


7 
n 
‘ 


i 


DEUTERONOMY. 


that is on them, nor take st unto 
thee, lest thou be ¢snared therein: 
for it is an abomination to the 
Lorp thy God. 

26 Neither shalt thou bring an 
abomination into thine house, lest 
thou be a cursed thing like it: but 
thou shalt utterly detest it, and 
thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it 
is a cursed thing. 


CHAPTER 8. 
Warnings and exhortations. 


joes the commandments which I 
command thee this day shall 
ye observe to do, that ye may live, 
and multiply, and go in and possess 
the land which the Lorp sware 
unto your fathers. 

2 And thou shalt remember all the 
way which the LorpD thy God %led 
thee these forty years in the wilder- 
ness, to humble thee, and to prove 
thee, to know what was in thine 
heart, whether thou wouldest keep 


his commandments, or no. 

3 And he humbled thee, and suf- 
fered thee to hunger, and fed thee 
with manna, which thou knewest 
not, neither did thy fathers know; 
that he might make thee know that 
man doth not live by bread <only, 
but by every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of the Lorp doth 
man live. : 

4 Thy raiment waxed not old 
upon thee, neither did thy foot 
swell, these forty years. 

5 ‘Thou shalt also consider in 
thine heart, that, as a man chas- 
teneth his son, so the Lorp thy 
God chasteneth thee. 

6 Therefore thou shalt keep the 
commandments of the Lorp thy 
God, to walk in his ways, and to 
Sfear him. 

7 For the Lorp thy God bringeth 
thee into a good land a land of 
brooks of water, of fountains and 
depths that spring out of valleys 
and hitls; iM 

8 A land of wheat, and barley, 
and vines, and fig trees, and pome- 
granates; a land of oil olive, and 
honey; 

9 A land wherein thou shalt eat 
bread without scarceness,thou shalt 
not lack any thing in it; a land 
whose stones are iron, and: out of 
whose hills thou mayest dig brass. 

10 When thou hast eaten and art 
full, then thou shalt bless the LoRD 
thy God for the good land which he 
hath given thee. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Jud.8.27; 
Zeph.1.3. 


b Deut.2.7; 
29.5; Psa. 
136.16; 
Amos 2.10. 


¢ Psa.104.29; 
Mt.4.4; Lk. 
4.4. 


d Deut.29.5; 
Neh.9.21. 


é 2 Sam.7.14; 
Psa.89.32; 
Prov.3.12; 
Heb.12.5,6; 
Rev.3.19. 


f Psa.19.9, 
note, 


g Deut.28.47; 
32.15; Prov. 
30.9; Hos. 
13.6. 


h Ezk.28.17; 
1 Cor.4.7. 


i Psa.106.21. 


j Jer.24.5,6; 
Heb.12.11. 


k Dan,9.11-14. 


1? Num.13.22, 
28,32,33. 


m Deut.31.3; 
Josh.3.11; 
John 10.4. 


11 Beware that thou forget not 
the Lorp thy God, in not keeping 
his commandments, and his judg- 
ments, and his statutes, which I 
command thee this day: 

12 sLest when thou hast eaten 
and art full, and hast built goodly 
houses, and dwelt therein; 

13 And when thy herds and thy 
flocks multiply, and thy silver and 
thy gold is multiplied, and-all that 
thou hast is multiplied; 

14 “Then thine heart be lifted up, 
and thou ‘forget the LorD thy God, 
which brought thee forth out of the 
land of Egypt, from the house of 
bondage; 

15 Wholed thee through that great 
and terrible wilderness, wherein 
were fiery serpents, and scorpions, 
and drought, where there was no 
water; who brought thee forth 
water out of the rock of flint; 

16 Who fed thee in the wilderness 
with manna, which thy fathers 
knew not, that he might humble 
thee, and that he might prove thee, 
Jto do thee good at thy latter end; 

17 And thou say in thine heart, 
My power and the might .of mine 
hand hath gotten me this wealth. 

18 But thou shalt remember the 
Lorp thy God: for it is he that 
giveth thee power to get wealth, 
that he may establish his covenant 
which he sware unto thy fathers, 
as it is this day. 

19 And it shall be, if thou do at 
all forget the Lorp thy God, and 
walk after other gods, and serve 
them, and worship them, I testify 
against you this day that ye shall 
surely perish. 

20 As the nations which the Lorp 
destroyeth before your face, 4#so 
shall ye perish; because ye would 
not be obedient unto the voice of 


ithe LorD your God. 


CHAPTER 9. 
Warnings and exhortations. 


EAR, O Israel: Thou art to 

pass over Jordan this day, to 

go in to possess nations greater and 

mightier than thyself, cities great 
and fenced up to heaven, 

2 A people great and tall, ‘the 


‘\children of the Anakims, whom 


thou knowest, and of whom thou 
hast heard say, Who can stand be- 
fore the children of Anak! 

3 Understand therefore this day, 
that the Lorp thy God is he which 
™goeth over before thee; as a con- 


Se 


i’ 
Bo 4 


DEUTERONOMY. 


suming fire he shall destroy them, 
and he shall bring them down be- 
fore thy face: so shalt thou drive 
them out, and destroy them quickly, 
as the LorD hath said unto thee. 

4 4Speak not thou in thine heart, 
after that the Lorp thy God hath 
cast them out from before thee, say- 
ing, For my righteousness the LORD 
hath brought me in to possess this 
land: but for the wickedness of 
these nations the Lorp doth drive 
them out from before thee. 

5 Not for thy righteousness, or for 
the uprightness of thine heart, dost 
thou go to possess their land: but 
for the wickedness of these nations 
the LorpD thy God doth drive them 
out from before thee, and that he 
may perform the word which the 
LORD sware unto thy fathers, Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Jacob. 

6 Understand therefore, that the 
Lorp thy God giveth thee not this 
good land to possess it for thy right- 
eousness; for thou art a stiffnecked 
people. 

7 Remember, and forget not, how 
thou provokedst the Lorp thy God 
to wrath in the wilderness: from 
the day that thou didst depart out 
of the land of Egypt, until ye came 
unto this place, ye have been rebel- 
lious against the LORD. 

8 Also in “Horeb ye provoked the 
Lorp to wrath, so that the LoRD 
was angry with you to have de- 
stroyed you. 

9 When I was gone up into the 
mount to receive the tables of stone, 
even the tables of the covenant 
which the LoRD made with you, 
then I abode in the mount forty 
days and forty nights, I neither did 
eat bread nor drink water: . 

10 ‘And the Lorp delivered unto 
me two tables of stone written with 
the finger of God; and on them was 
written according to all the words, 
which the LoRD spake with you in 
the mount out of the midst of the 
fire in the day of the assembly. 

11 And it came to pass at the end 
of forty days and forty nights, that 
the LorD gave me the two tables of 
stone, even the tables of the cove- 
nant. 

12 And the Lorp said unto me, 
Arise, get thee down quickly from 
hence; for thy people which thou 
hast brought forth out of Egypt 
have corrupted themselves; they 
are quickly turned aside out of the 
way which I commanded them; they 
have made them a molten image. 


[9 28 


B.C. 1451. 13 Furthermore the LORD spake 
unto me, saying, I have seen this 


a Deut.8.17; 


Rom.11.6,20; 


1 Cor.4.4,7- 


b Ex.32.4; 
Psa.106.19. 


c Ex.20.4, 
note. 


d Num.14.12. 


e Ex.34.28; 
Psa.106.23. 


227 


people, and, behold, it is a stiff- 
necked people: 

14 Letmealone,thatI may destroy 
them, and blot out their name from 
under heaven: ¢and I will make of 
thee a nation mightier and greater 
than they. 

15 So I turned and came down 
from the mount, and the mount 
burned with fire: and the two tables 
of the covenant were in my two 
hands. 

16 And I looked, and, behold, ye 
had sinned against the LORD your 
God, and had made you a molten 
calf: ye had turned aside quickly 
out of the way which the Lorb had 
commanded you. 

17 And I took the two tables, and 
cast them out of my two hands, and 
brake them before your eyes. 

18 And I ¢fell down before the 
LORD, as at the first, forty days and 
forty nights: I did neither eat bread 
nor drink water, because of all 
your sins which ye sinned, in doing 
wickedly in the sight of the Lorp, 
to provoke him to anger. 

19 For I was afraid of the anger 
and hot displeasure, wherewith the 
LORD was wroth against you to 
destroy you. But the LorpD heark- 
ened unto me at that time also. 

20 And the LORD was very angry 
with Aaron to have destroyed him: 
and I prayed for Aaron also the 
same time. 

21 And I took your sin, the calf 
which ye had made, and burnt it 
with fire, and stamped it, and 
ground it very small, even until it 
was as small as dust: and I cast the 
dust thereof into the brook that 
descended out of the mount. 

22 And at Taberah, and at 
Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah, 
ye provoked the LORD to wrath. 

23 Likewise when the LorD sent 
you from Kadesh-barnea, saying, 
Go up and possess the land which I 
have given you; then ye rebelled 
against the commandment of the 
Lorp your God, and ye believed 
him not, nor hearkened to his 
voice. ’ 

24 Ye have been _ rebellious 
against the LORD from the day that 
I knew you. 

25 Thus I fell down before the 
Lorp forty days and forty nights, 
as I fell down at the first; because 
the Lorp had said he would destroy 
you. 


9 26] 


DEUTERONOMY. 


aA 


[10 a 


26 I “prayed therefore unto the 
Lorp, and said, O Lord Gop, de- 
stroy not thy people and thine 
inheritance, which thou ‘hast *re- 
deemed through thy -greatness, 
‘which thou ‘hast brought forth out 
of Egypt with a mighty ‘hand. 

27 Remember thy servants, Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not 
unto the stubbornness of this peo-| 
ple, nor to their wickedness, nor ‘ta 
‘their sin: } 

28 Lest the land whence thou 
broughtest us out say, Because the 
‘LorD ‘was not able to bring the: 
into the land which he promise 
‘them, and because he hated them, 
‘he hath brought them out ‘to slay; 
‘them in the wilderness. | 

29 Yet they are thy people and) 
thine inheritance, which thou 
‘broughtest out by thy mighty 
power and by thy stretched out arm. 


CHAPTER 19. | 
Warnings and exhortations. 


AT that time the Lorp ‘said unto 
‘ me, Hew thee two tables of 
stone like unto the first, and come 
up unto me into the mount, and 
make thee an ark of wood. | 

2 And I will write on the tables 
the words that were in the first 
tables which thou brakest, and thou 
shalt put ‘them in ‘the ark. | 

3 And I made an-ark of 4shittim! 
wood, and thewed two tables of 
stone like unto the first, and went 
‘up into the mount, having ‘the two 
tables in mine hand. 

4 And he wrote on ,the tables, ‘ac+ 
‘cording to ‘the first writing, the ‘ten 
commandments, which the Lorp 
spake unto you in the mount out of 
the midst of the fire in the day of 
the assembly: and the Lorp gave 
them unto me. 

5 And I turned myself and came 
down from the mount, and put ‘the 
tables in the ‘ark which I had made; 
and there they ‘be, as the Lorp 
‘commanded me. } 

6 And the children of Israel took 
their journey from Beeroth of the 
children ‘of Jaakan to Mosera: there 
Aaron died, and there he was 
buried; and Eleazar his son minis- 
tered in the priest’s -office in his 
stead. | 

7 Fromthencethey journeyed unto 
Gudgodah; and from 'Gudgodah to 
Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters, 

8 At that time the Lorp sepa- 
tated the tribe of Levi, to bear ‘the 


B.C. 1451. 


a Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). Deut 
21.6-8. (Gen 
15.2; Hab. 
3.1-16.) 


6 Ex.14.30, 
note. 


¢ Inspiration. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

@ i.e. acacia. 

é Mic.6.8. 


F Psa.19.9, 
note. 


g Josh:22.22; 
Psa.136.2; 
Dan.2.47; 
11.36. 


h Psa.19.9, 
note. 


¢ Gen.46.27; 
Ex.1.5; Acts 
7.14 


228 


ark of the covenant of the LORD, to 
Istand before the LORD to minister 
unto him, and to bless in his name, 
junto this day. $ 
| 9 Wherefore Levi hath no partinor 
inheritance with his brethren; the 
|LorpD gs ‘his inheritance, according 
las the LorD thy God promised him. 
| 10 And I stayed in the mount, ac- 
‘cording to ithe first time, forty days 
and forty nights; and the LorD 
hearkened ‘unto me at that time 
jalso, and the LorD would not 
destroy thee. 

11 And the Lorp said unto me, 
Arise, take thy journey before the 
‘people, that they may go in.and pos- 
\sess the land, which I sware unto 
itheir fathers to ‘give unto them. 

12 And now, Israel, ¢what doth 
the Lorp thy God require of thee, 
but to ‘fear the LorD thy God, to 
walk ‘in all ‘his ‘ways, and to love 
‘him, and to serve the Lorp thy God 
Nes all thy ‘heart and ‘with all thy 
soul, 

13 To keep the commandments-of 
the LorpD, and his statutes, which 
I command thee this day for thy 
good? 

14 Behold, the heaven and the 
heaven of heavens zs the Lorp’s 
thy God, the earth also, with all 
that therein 7s. 

15 Only the Lorp had .a delight 
in thy fathers to love them, and ‘he 
Chose their seed after them, even 
you above all people, as ut zs this 

ay. 

16 Circumcise therefore the fore- 
skin of your heart, and ‘be no more 
istiffnecked. 

17 For the LorRD your God is 
&€God ‘of gods, and Lord of Jords, a 
| great God, a mighty, and a terrible, 
‘which regardeth not persons, nor 
taketh reward: 


18 He doth-execute the judgment 
of the fatherless and widow, and 
oveth the stranger, in giving him 
food and raiment. 
19 Love ye therefore the stranger: 
for ye were strangers in the land of 


gypt. 

20 Thou shalt “fear the Lorp thy 
God; him shalt thou serve, and to 
him shalt thou cleave, and swear 
\by his name. 

21 He is thy praise, and he zs thy 
\God, that hath done for thee these 
great and terrible things, which 
thine eyes have seen. 
|_22 Thy fathers went down into 
|*Egypt with threescore and ten per- 
sons; and now the Lorp thy God 


Prt] 


DEUTERONOMY. 


[11 25 


hath made thee as the stars of} B.c.1451% |Lorp thy God. are always upon it, 


heaven for multitude. 


CHAPTER 11. 
Warnings and exhortations. 


HEREFORE thou shalt love 

i the Lorp thy God, and keep 
his charge, and his statutes, and his 
judgments, and his commandments, 
alway. 

2 And know ye this day: for I 
speak not with your children which 
have not known, and which have 
not seen the chastisement of the 
Lorp your God, his greatness. his 
mighty hand, and his stretched out 


arm, 
3 ¢And his miracles, and his acts, 
which he did in the midst of Egypt 
unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, 
and unto all his: land; 
4 And what he did unto the army 


of Egypt, unto: their horses, and to} 
their chariots; how he made the} 


water of the Red sea to overflow 


them as they pursued after you,} 


and how the LorpD hath destroyed 
them unto this day; 

5 And what he did unto you in 
the wilderness, until ye came into 
this place; 

6 And °what he did unto Dathan 
and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the 
son of Reuben: how the earth 
Opened her mouth, and swallowed 
them up, and their households, and 


their tents, and all the substance! 


that was in their possession, in the 
midst of all Israel: 
7 But your eyes have seen all the 


great acts of the Lorp which: he} 


did. 
8 Therefore shall ye keep all the 
commandments which I command’ 


you this day, that ye may be strong,| 


and go in and possess the land, 
whither ye go to possess it; 


9 And that ye may prolong your!) 


days in the land, which the LorD 
sware unto your fathers to give unto) 


them and to their seed, a land that) 


floweth with milk and honey. 

10 For the land, whither thou 
goest in to possess it, 7s not as the 
land of Egypt, from whence ye came 
out, where thou sowedst thy seed, | 
and wateredst if with thy foot, as 

_a garden of herbs: 

11 But the land, whither ye go to 
possess it, zs a land of hills and 
valleys, and drinketh water of the 
rain of heaven: 


a Psa.78.12; 
| 135.9. 


b Num.16.1, 
31; 27.35 
Psa.106.17. 

¢ Psa.119.2,34. 


d Psa.72.53 
| 89.29. 


|é Josh.1.3;: 
14.9. 


12 A land which the Lorp thy 
God careth for: the eyes of the’ 


229 


from the beginning of the year even 
punto the end of the year. 

' 13 And it shall. come to pass, if ye 
shall hearken diligently unto my 
commandments which I. command 
you this day, to.love the LorD your 
God, and to serve him with all your 
heart and! with all your soul, 

14 That I willgive you therain of 
your land in his: due: season, the first 
rain and. the latter rain, that thou 
mayest. gather in thy corn, and thy 
wine, and thine. oil. 
| 1S: And f will send grass in thy 
Ids for thy cattle, that thou may- 
est eat and be full. 
| 16 Take heed to yourselves, that 
your heart: be not deceived, and ye 
turn aside, and serve other gods, 
land worship them; 
| 17 And then the Lorp’s wrath 
Ibe kindled: against you,.and he shut 
up the heaven, that there be no 


rain, and that the land yield not her 


het 


fruit; and fest ye perish quickly 
from off the good land which the 
LorpD giveth you. 

18 Therefore shail ye lay up these 
my wordsin your heart and in your 
soul, and bind them for a sign upom 
your hand, that they may be as 
frontlets between. your eyes. 
| 19 And ye shall teach them: your 
children, speaking of them when 
thou sittest im thine house, and 
when thou walkest by the way, 
when thou liest. down, and when 
thou risest up. 
| 20 And thou shalt write them 
upon the: door posts of thine house, 
‘and upom thy gates: 
| 22 That your days may be multi- 
plied, and' the days.of your children, 
in the land which the LorD sware 
unto your fathers: to: give them, 2as 
the days of heaven upon the earth. 
| 22 For if ye shall diligently keep 
‘all these commandments: which I 
command you, to do them, to love 
the LorRD your God, to walk in: all 
his ways, and to cleave unto: him; 
| 93 Then will the Lorp drive ou% 
all these nations from before you, 
and ye shall possess greater nations 
and mightier than yourselves. 
| 24 ‘Every place whereon tho 
soles of your feet shall tread shall b= 
your’s: from the wilderness ancl 
Lebanon, from the river, the river 
Euphrates, even unto-the uttermost 
sea shall your coast be. 

25 There shall no man be able to 
stand before you: for the Lord 


your God shall lay the fear of you 


and the dread of you upon all the 
land that ye shall tread upon, as he 
hath said unto you. ; 

26 Behold, I set before you this 
day a blessing and a curse; 

27 A blessing, if ye obey the com- 
mandments of the LORD your God, 
which I command you this day: 

28 And acurse, if ye will not obey 
the commandments of the Lorp 
your God, but turn aside out of the 
way which I command you this 
day, to go after other gods, which 
ye have not known. 

29 And it shall come to pass, 
when the Lorp thy God hath 
brought thee in unto the land 
whither thou goest to possess it, 
tnat thou shalt put “the blessing 
upon mount Gerizim, and the curse 
upon mount Ebal. 

30 Are they not on the other side 
Jordan, by the way where the sun 
goeth down, in the land of the 
Canaanites, which dwell in the 
champaign over against Gilgal, 
beside the plains of Moreh? 

31 For ye shall pass over Jordan 
to go in to possess the land which the 
LorpD your God giveth you, and ye 
shall possess it, and dwell therein. 

32 And ye shall observe to do all 
the statutes and judgments which I 
set before you this day. 


CHAPTER 12. 


Conditions of blessing in the 
Jand. 


SRMESE are the statutes and 
judgments, which ye shall 
observe to do in the land, which the 


DEUTERONOMY. 


LorD God of thy fathers giveth 
thee to possess it, all the days that 
ye live upon the earth. 

2 Ye shall utterly destroy all the 
places, wherein the nations which 
ye shall possess served their gods, 
upon the high mountains, and upon 
the hills, and under every green 
tree: 

3 And ye shall overthrow their 
altars, and break their pillars, and 
burn their ‘groves with fire; and ye 
shall hew down the graven images 
of their gods, and destroy the 
names of them out of that place. 

4 Ye shall not do so unto the 
LorpD your God. 

5 But unto the place which the 
Lorp your God shall choose out of 
all your tribes to put his name 
there, even unto his habitation shall 
ye seek, and thither thou shalt 
come; 


6 And 4thither ye shall bring your 
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, 
and your tithes, and heave-offerings 
of your hand, and your vows, and 
your freewill-offerings, and the 
firstlings of your herds and of your 
flocks: 

7 And there ye shall eat before the 
LorpD your God, and ye shall rejoice 
in all that ye put your hand unto, 
yé and your households, wherein 
the LorpD thy God hath blessed 
thee. 

8 Ye shall not do after all the 
things that we do here this day, 
“every man whatsoever is right in 
his own eyes. 

9 For ye are not as yet come to 
the rest and to the inheritance, which 
the LorRD your God giveth you. 

10 But when ye go over Jordan, 
and dwell in the land which the 
LorD your. God giveth you to in- 
herit, and when he giveth you rest 


from all your enemies round about, 

vie so that ye dwell in safety; 
11 Then there shall be a place 
tae which the Lorp your God shall 
33. “" |choose to cause his name to dwell 
there; thither shall ye bring all that 
ak cy a I command you; your burnt-offer- 
cab ings, and your sacrifices, your 
dLev.17.3,4. |tithes, and the heave-offering of 
eJud.i7.6; your hand, and all your choice 
21.25.” vows which ye vow unto the Lorpb: 
12 And Sye shall rejoice before the 
fv.7. LorD your God, ye, and your sons, 
g Gen.9.4; and your daughters, and your men- 
Lev.7.26; servants, and your maidservants, 
tet Dents and the Levite that is within your 
23,24. gates; forasmuch as he hath no 


part nor inheritance with you. 

13 Take heed to thyself that thou 
offer not thy burnt-offerings in 
every place that thou seest: 

14 But in the place which the 
LorD shall choose in one of thy 
tribes, there thou shalt offer thy 
burnt-offerings, and there thou 
shalt do all that I command thee. 

15 Notwithstanding thou mayest 
kill and eat flesh in all thy gates, 
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, 
according to the blessing of the 
Lorp thy God which he hath given 
thee: the unclean and the clean 
may eat thereof, as of the roebuck, 
and as of the hart. 

16 Only ye shall not eat the 
blood; ye shall pour it upon the 
earth as water. 

17 Thou mayest not eat within 
thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or 
of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the 
firstlings of thy kerds or of thy 


yy 
Av 12 18] 


flock, nor any of thy vows which 
thou vowest, nor thy freewill-offer- 
ings, or heave-offering of thine 
hand: 

18 But thou must eat them before 
the Lorp thy God in the place 
which the LorpD thy God shall 
choose, thou, and thy son, and thy 
daughter, and thy manservant, and 
thy maidservant, and the Levite 
that 7s within thy gates: and thou 
shalt rejoice before the LorpD thy 
God in all that thou puttest thine 
hands unto. 

19 Take heed to thyself that thou 
forsake not the Levite as long as 
thou livest upon the earth. 

20 When the LorD thy God shall 
enlarge thy border, as he hath prom- 
ised thee, and thou shalt say, I 
will eat flesh, because thy soul 
longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest 
eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul 
lusteth after. 

21 If the place which the LorpD 


thy God hath chosen to put his! 


name there be too far from thee, 
then thou shalt kill of thy herd and 
of thy flock, which the LorpD hath 
given thee, as I have commanded 
thee, and thou shalt eat in thy 
gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth 
after. 

22 Even as the roebuck and the 
hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat 
them: the unclean and the clean 
shall eat of them alike. 

23 Only be sure that thou eat not 
the “blood: for the blood is the life; 
and thou mayest not eat the life 
with the flesh. 

24 Thou shalt not eat it; thou 
shalt pour it upon the earth as 
water. 

25 Thou shalt not eat it; that 
it may go well with thee, and with 
thy children after thee, when thou 
shalt do that which is right in the 
sight of the LorD. 

26 Only thy holy things which 
thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt 
take, and go unto the place which 
the LorD shall choose: 

_ 27 And thou shalt offer thy 
burnt-offerings, the flesh and the 
blood, upon the altar of the LorD 
thy God: andithe blood of thy 
sacrifices shall be poured out upon 
the altar of the Lorp thy God, and 
thou shalt eat the flesh. 

28- Observe and hear all these 
words which I command thee, that 
it may go well with thee, and with 
thy children after thee for ever, 
when thou doest that which 1s 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451.. 


a Gen.9.4; 
Lev.17.11,14. 

b Lev.1.5,9, 
13,17; 17.11. 


¢ Ex.23.23; 
Deut.19.1; 
Josh.23.4. 


d Deut.4.2; 
13.18; Josh, 
1.7; Prov. 
30.6; Rev. 
22.18. 


e Zech.10.2. 


f Mt.24.24; 
2 Thes.2.9. 


g Psa.19.9, 
note, 


h Ex.14.30, 
note, 


231 


[13°6 


good and right in the sight of the 
Lorp thy God. 

29 When the ‘Lorp thy God 
shall cut off the nations from before 
thee, whither thou goest to possess 
them, and thou succeedest them, 
and dwellest in their land; 

30 Take heed to thyself that thou 
be not snared by following them, 
after that they be destroyed from 
before thee; and that thou enquire 
not after their gods, saying, How 
did these nations serve their gods? 
even so will I do likewise. 

31 Thou shalt not,do so unto the 
Lorp thy God: for every abomina- 
tion to the LorD, which he hateth, 
have they done unto their gods; for 
even their sons and their daughters 
they have burnt in the fire to their 
gods: 

32 What thing soever I command 
you, observe to do it: ¢thou shalt not 
add thereto, nor diminish from it. 


CHAPTER 13. 
The test of false prophets. 


IF there arise among you a 
prophet, or a ‘¢dreamer of 
dreams, Jand giveth thee a sign or 
a wonder, 

2 And the sign or the wonder 
come to pass, whereof he spake unto 
thee, saying, Let us go after other 
gods, which thou hast not known, 
and let us serve them; 

3 Thou shalt not hearken unto 
the words of that prophet, or that 
dreamer of dreams: for the LorpD 
your God proveth you, to know 
whether ye love the Lorp your 
God with all your heart and with 
all your soul. 

4 Ye shall walk after the Lorp 
your God, and £fear him, and keep 
his commandnients, and obey his 
voice, and ye shall serve him, and 
cleave unto him, 

5 And that prophet, or that 
dreamer of dreams, shall be put to 
death; because he hath spoken to 
turn you away from the LorpD your 
God, which brought you out of the 
fland of Egypt, and “redeemed you 
out of the house of bondage, to 
thrust’ thee out of the way which 
the LorD thy God commanded thee 
to walk in. So shalt thou put the 
evil away from the midst of thee. 

6 If thy brother, the son of thy 
mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, 
or the wife of thy bosom, or thy 
friend, which is as thine own soul, 
entice thee secretly, saying, Let us 


13 7] 


DEUTERONOMY. 


[14 18 


go and serve other gods, which thou] B.c. 1451. |which is right in the eyes of the 


hast not known, thou, nor thy 
fathers; i 

7 Namely, of the gods of the peo-| 
ple which are round about you,| 
nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, | 
from the one end of the earth even 
unto the other end of the earth; 

8 Thou shalt not consent unto 
him, nor hearken unto him; neither 
shall thine eye pity him, neither 
shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou 
conceal him: i 

9 But thou shalt surely kill him; 
thine hand shall be first upon him 
to put him to death, and afterwards 
the hand of all the people. 

10 And thou shalt stone him with 
stones, that he die; ‘because he hath 
sought to thrust thee away from ‘the 
LorpD thy God, which brought thee 
out of the land of Egypt, from the 
house of bondage. 

11 And all Israel shall ‘hear, and 
fear, and shall do no more any such 
wickedness as ‘this is among you. 

12 If thou shalt hear say in one 
of thy cities, which the Lorp thy 
God hath given thee to dwell there, 
saying, 

13 Certain men, the children of 
Belial, are gone out from among 
you, and have withdrawn the in- 
habitants of their city, saying, Let 
us go and serve other gods, which 
ye have not known; 

14 Then shalt thou enquire, and 
make search, and ask diligently; 
and, behold, if it be truth, and the 
thing certain, that such abomina- 
tion is wrought among you; 

15 Thou shalt surely smite the in- 
habitants of that city with the edge 
of the sword, destroying it utterly, 
and all that zs therein, and the 
cattle thereof, with the edge of the 
sword, 

16 And thou shalt gather all the! 
spoil of it into the midst of the street! 
thereof, and shalt “burn with fire 
the city, and all the spoil thereof) 
every whit, for the Lorp thy God: 
and it shall be an heap for ever; it 
shall not be ‘built again. 

17 And there shall deave nought) 
of the cursed thing to thine hand:/ 
that the LorD may turn from the 
fierceness of his anger, and shew 
thee mercy, and have compassion 
upon thee, and multiply thee, as he 
hath sworn unto thy fathers; 

18 When thou shalt hearken to 
the voice of the Lorp thy God, to 
keep all his commandments which I 
command thee this day, to do that! 


a Josh:6.24. 
b Gal.3.26. 
¢1 Pet.2.9. 


d Ezk.4.14; 
Acts 10.13, 
14. 


e See Lev.11.6, 


note. 


f Lev.11.13. 


232 


Lorp thy God. 


CHAPTER 14. 


VE are the &chiidren of the Lorp 
your God: ye ‘shall mot cut 
yourselves, nor make any baldness 
between your eyes for the dead. 
2 “For thou art an holy people 
mnto the Lorp thy ‘God, and the 
Lorp hath chosen thee to be a 
‘peculiar people unto himself, above 
all the nations that are wpon the 
jearth. 


The dietary laws. 


| 3 ?@Thou shalt not eat.any abomi- 
nable thing. , 

4 These are the beasts which ye 
shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and 
‘the goat, 

5 The hart, and the roebuck, and 
the fallow deer, and the wild goat, 
and the pygarg, and the wild -ox, 
and the chamois. 
| 6 And every ‘beast that parteth 
the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft into 
two claws, and cheweth the cud 
among the beasts, that ye shall eat. 

7 Nevertheless these ye shall not 
eat of them that chew the cud, or of 
them that divide the cloven hoof; 
as ‘the camel, and the “hare, and the 
‘coney: for they chew the cud, but 
divide not the hoof; therefore they 
are unclean unto you. 

8 And the swine, because it di- 
videth the hoof, yet cheweth not 
the cud, it 7s unclean unto you: ‘ye 
shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch 
their dead carcase. 

Q These ye shall eat of all that are 
in the waters: all that have fins 
and scales shall ye eat: 
| 10 And whatsoever hath not fins 
and scales ye may not eat; it is 
unclean unto you. 

11 Of all clean ‘birds ye shall eat. 

12 But these are they of which 
ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the 
jossifrage, and the ospray, 
| 13 And the glede, and the kite, 
and the vulture after his kind, 

14 And every raven after his kind, 

15 And the owl, and the night 
|hawk, and the cuckow, and the 
\hawk after his kind, 
| 16 The little owl, and the great 
owl, and the swan, 

17 And the pelican, and the gier 
jeagle, and the cormorant, : 
| 18 And the stork, and the ‘heron 


19 And every creeping thing that 
flieth is unclean unto you: they 
shalf not be eaten. 

on But of all clean fowls ye: may 
eat. 

21 2Yeshalf not eat of any thing 
that dieth of itself: thou shalt give 
it unto the stranger that is in thy 
gates, that he may eat it; or thou 
mayest sell it unto an alien: for 
thou art an holy people unto the 
Lorp: thy God. Thou shalt not 
seethe a kid in his mother’s milk. 
22 Thou shalt truly tithe all the 
increase of thy seed, that the field 
bringeth forth year by year. 

23 And thou shalt eat before the 
Lorp thy God, in the place which 
he shall choose to place his name 
there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy 
wine, and of thine oil, and the first- 
lings of thy herds and of thy flocks; 
that thou mayest learn to ‘fear the 
Lorp thy God always. 

24 And if the way be too long for 
thee, sothatthou artnot abletocarry 
it;.or if the place be too far from thee, 
which the Lorp thy God shall choose 
to set his name there, when the 
Lorp thy God hath blessed thee: 

25 Then shalt thou turn 7t into 
money, ‘and bind up the money in 
thine hand, and shalt go unto the 
place which the Lorp thy God 
shall choose: . 

26 And thou shalt bestow that 
money for whatsoever thy soul lust- 
eth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or 
for wine,, or for strong drink, or for 
whatsoever thy soul desireth: and 
thou. shalt eat there before the 
Lorp thy God, and thow shalt re- 
joice, thou, and thine household, | 
_»27 And the Levite that is within 

thy gates; thou shalt not forsake 
him; for he hath no part nor inher- 
itance with thee. 

28 ¢At the end of three years thou 
shalt bring forth all the tithe of 
thine increase the same year, and 
shalt lay it up within thy gates: 

29 And the Levite, (because he 
hath no part nor inheritance with 
thee,) and the stranger, and the fa- 
therless, and the widow, which are 
within thy gates, shall come, and shall 
eat and be satisfied; that ‘the LORD 
thy God may bless thee in all the 
work of thine hand which thou doest. 


CHAPTER 15. 
The sabbatic-year. 


Al the end of fevery seven years) 
thou shalt make a release. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Lev.17.15; 
22.8; Ezk.4. 
14. 


b Lev.27.30; 
Deut.12.6, 
17; Neh.10. 
She 


¢ Psa.19.9, 
notey 

d Amos 4.4. 

e See Mal.3. 
10. 

f Ex.21.2; 
23.10,11; 
Jer.34,14. 

g1 John 3.17. 

h Mt.26.11; 
Mk.14.7; 
John 12.8. 

¢Ex.21.2; 


Lev.25.39; 
Jer.34.14. 


| 2" And this: is the manner of the 
release: Every creditor that lendeth 


neighbour, or of his. brother; 
ecause it is called the Lorpb’s 
release: 

| 3 Of a foreigner thou. mayest ex- 
act it again: but that which is 
thine with thy brother thine hand 
shall release; 

| 4 Save when there shall be no 
poor among you; for the LorD shall 
greatly bless thee in: the land which 
the Lorp thy God giveth thee for 
an inheritance to possess: it: 

| 5 Only if thou carefully hearken 
unto the voice of the Lorp thy 
God, to observe to do all these com- 
mandments which I command thee 
this day. 

6. For the Lorp thy God blesseth 
thee, as he promised thee: and thou 
shalt lend unto many nations, but 
thou shalt not borrow; and thou 
shalt reign over many nations, but 
they shall not reign over thee. 

7 If there be among’ you a poor 
man of one of thy brethren within 
any of thy gates in thy land which 
the Lorpb thy God giveth thee, thou 
shalt not harden thine heart, nor 
shut thine hand from thy poor 
brother: 

8 But éthou shalt open thine hand 
wide unto him, and shalt surely 
lend him sufficient for his need, in 
that which he wanteth. 

9 Beware that there be not a 
thought in thy wicked heart, say- 
ing, The seventh year, the year of 
release, is at hand; and’ thine eye 
be evil against thy poor brother, and 
thou. givest him nought; and he cry 
unto the LorD against thee, and it 
be sin unto. thee. 

10 Thou shalt surely give him, 
and thine heart shall not be grieved 
when. thou givest unto him: because 
that for this thing the Lorp thy 
God shall bless thee in all thy 
works, and in all that thou puttest 
thine hand unto, 

11 For the “poor shall never cease 
out. of the land: therefore I com- 
mand thee, saying, Thou shalt open 
thine hand wide unto thy brother, 
to thy poor, and’ to thy needy, in 
thy land. 

12. And ‘if thy brother, an Hebrew 
man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold 
unto. thee, and serve thee six years; 
then in the seventh year thou shalt 
let him: go free from thee. 4 

13 And'when thou sendest him out 


*, Jd ie bo Os ie 


DEUTERONOMY. [16 10 
free from thee, thou shalt not let} B.c. 1451. | of tgp Le. Sik pmo pS aa 
1 ty: see 
ese Thou sauale fumes him liber- 2 Thou shalt thereiose pactinnes 
ally out of thy flock, and out of thy the passover unto the ‘ one 1y 
floor, and out of thy winepress: of God, of the flock and the her I in 

that wherewith the LorD thy, God the place which the JOR? s 
hath blessed thee thou shalt give ones to nage hissarne Spee de 
i ou sha 
eet tee shalt remember that bread with it; seven days shalt thou 
thou wast a bondman in the land eat waleavened, bread Sheree 
d the Lorp thy God even € bread o} iction; 
Ee ches: shaceaare I com- thou camest forth out of the land 
mand thee this thing to day. of Egypt in haste: that thou may- 
i est remember the day when thou 
The Beta en ae ‘ camest ton fore . ee of 
16 And it shall be, if he say unto Egypt all the days of thy life. 
thee, I will not go enay ron ease rs aoe there aan ay no eemened 
b e he loveth thee an ne rea seen wil ee in y 
Hotse because he is well with thee; coast seven days; neither shall 
17 Then thou shalt take an aul, there any thing of the flesh, which 
and thrust 7t through his ear unto thou sacrificedst the first day at 
the door, and he shalt be thy reir even, remain all night until the 
vant for ever. And also unto thy morning. . 
maidservant thou shalt do likewise. 5 Thou mayest not sacrifice the 
thee, when thou sonlest Hier awagl@Ex14so. [Passover w Lass ty Gada ae 
5 te. 
free from thee; for he hath been ae : 2 thee: ; 
worth a double hired servant to|i-e- April. 6 But at the place which the 
thee, in serving thee six years: and]; peaven. vs. Lorp thy God shall choose to place 
the Lorp thy God shall bless thee! 3,4,8,16: his name in, there thou shalt sacri- 
in all that thou doest. Gerber fice the passover at even, at the 
19 ab the varyes pals ane Mt.13.33.) acing dona of the pun oe gir Seg 
thu hal satis ints the Loeb Faget cor. fan that thou camestYorth out 
thy God: thou shalt do no work| 1°: 7 And thou shalt roast and eat it 
with the firstling of thy bullock, nor in the place which the Lorp thy 
Pees ere: of thy pe: re God gaall choose: and Hee shalt 
2 ou shalt eat it before the turn in the morning, and go unto 
Lorp thy God year by year in the thy tents. 
place wench the pony ene choose, 8 Six days thou shalt cat unleays 
thou and thy household. ened bread: and on the sevent 
21 And if there be any blemish day shall be a solemn assembly to 
therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or the LorD thy God: thou shalt do 
pe eny ill Blemish oon ae ne no work therein. 
sacrifice 1t unto the Lorpb thy God. : 
22 Thou shalt eat it within thy The feast of Weeks. 


gates: the unclean and the clean 
person shall eat it alike, as the 
roebuck, and as the hart. 
23 Only thou shalt not eat the 
blood thereof; thou shalt pour jt 
upon the ground as water, 


CHAPTER 16. 
The Passover. 
OB®SERVE the month of ¥Abib, 


and !keep the passover unto 
the Lorp thy God: for in the month 


9 Seven weeks shalt thou number 
unto thee: begin to number the 
seven weeks from such time as 
thou beginnest to put the sickle to 
the corn. 


cording as the LORD thy God hath 
blessed thee: 


1 Cf. the order of the feasts in Lev. 23. Here the Passover and Tabernacles are 
given especial emphasis as marking the beginning and the consummation of God’s 
ways with Israel; the former speaking of redemption, the foundation of all: the 
latter, of re-gathered Israel blessed in the kingdom. Between, in Deut. 16. 9-12, 
comes the Feast of Weeks—the joy of a redeemed people, anticipating greater 
blessing yet to come. It is, morally, Rom. 5. 1, 2. 


234 


~~ 
4 


16:11] 


DEUTERONOMY. 


[17 9 


11 And thou shalt rejoice before 

the LORD thy God, thou, and thy 
son, and thy daughter, and thy 
manservant, and thy maidservant, 
and the Levite that is within thy 
gates, and the stranger, and the 
fatherless, and the widow, that are 
among you, in the place which the 
Lorp thy God hath chosen to place 
his name there. 

12 And thou shalt remember that 
thou wast a bondman in Egypt: 
and thou shalt observe and do these 
statutes. 


The feast of Tabernacles. 


13 °Thou shalt observe the feast 
of tabernacles seven days, after that 
thou hast gathered in thy corn and 
thy wine: 

14 And thou shalt rejoice in thy 
feast, thou, and thy son, and thy 
daughter, and thy manservant, and 
thy maidservant, and the Levite, 
the stranger,-and the fatherless, and 
the widow, that are within thy 
gates. 

15 Seven days shalt thou keep a 
solemn feast unto the Lorp thy 
God in the place which the LorD 
shall choose: because the LORD thy 
God shall bless thee in all thine 
increase, and in all the works of 
thine hands, therefore thou shalt 

surely rejoice. 


The gifts of the males. 


16 Three times in a year shall all 
thy males appear before the LORD 
thy God in the place which he shall 
choose; in the feast of unleavened 
bread, and in the feast of weeks, 
and in the feast of tabernacles: and 
they shall not appear before the 
LorpD empty: : 

17 Every man shall give as he is 
able, according to the blessing of 
the Lorp thy God which he hath 
given thee. 


Judges in the gates. 

18 Judges and officers shalt thou 
make thee in all thy gates, which 
the Lorp thy God giveth thee, 
throughout thy tribes: and they 
shall judge the people with just 
judgment. ¢ 

19 Thou shalt not wrest judg- 
ment; thou shalt not respect per- 
sons, neither take a gift: for a gift 
doth blind the eyes of the wise, and 
pervert the words of the righteous. 

20 That which is altogether just 
shalt thou follow, that thou mayest 
live, and inherit the land which the 
Lorp thy God giveth thee. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Ex.23.16; 
Lev.23.34; 
Num.29.12. 


b Lev.23.39,40. 


c The groves 
(Heb. Ashe- 
rim) so 
often men- 
tioned in the 
O.T. were 
devoted to 
the worship 
of Ashtereth, 
the Baby- 
lonian god- 
dess Ishtar, 
the Aphro- 
dite of the 
Greeks, the 
Roman 
Venus. Cf. 
Jud.2.13, 
note. 


d Lev.24.14, 
16; Josh.7. 
25. 


e See Jer.18.18. 


235 


21 Thou shalt not plant thee a 
‘grove of any trees near unto the 
altar of the Lorp thy God, which 
thou shalt make thee. 

22 Neither shalt thou set thee up 
any image; which the LorpD thy 
God hateth. 


CHAPTER 17. 
Offerings must be unblemished. 


HOU shalt not sacrifice unto the 
Lorpb thy God any bullock, or 
sheep, wherein is blemish, or any 
evilfavouredness: for that is an 
abomination unto the LoRD thy 
God. 
Idolaters to be stoned. 

2 If there be found among you, 
within any of thy gates which the 
LorpD thy God giveth thee, man or 
woman, that hath wrought wicked- 
ness in the sight of the Lorp thy 
God, in transgressing his covenant, 

3 And hath gone and served other 
gods, and worshipped them, either 
the sun, or moon, or any of the host 
of heaven, which I have not com- 
manded; 

4 And it be told thee, and thou 
hast heard of it, and enquired dili- 
gently, and, behold, it be true, and 
the thing certain, that such abom- 
ination is wrought in Israel: 

5 Then shalt thou bring forth that 
man or that woman, which have 
committed that wicked thing, unto 
thy gates, even that man or that 
woman, and shalt 4stone them with 
stones, till they die. 

6 At the mouth of two witnesses, 
or three witnesses, shall he that is 
worthy of death be put to death; 
but at the mouth of one witness he 
shall not be put to death. 

7 The hands of the witnesses shall 
be first upon him to put him to 
death, and afterward the hands of 
all the. people. So thov shalt put 
the evil away from among you. 


Obedience to authority. 


8 If there arise a matter too hard 
for thee in judgment, between blood 
and blood, between plea and plea, 
and between stroke and stroke, 
being matters of controversy with- 
in thy gates: then shalt thou arise, 
and get thee up into the place which 
the Lorp thy God shall choose; 

9 And ‘thou shalt come unto the 
priests the Levites, and unto the 
judge that shall be in those days, 
and enquire; and they shall shew 
thee the sentence of judgment: 


17 10] 


DEUTERONOMY. 


10 And thou shalt:do according to 
the sentence; which they of that 


B.C. 1451. 


place which the LorD: shall choose} 
shall shew thee; and. thou: shalt 
observe: to do according to all that 


they inform thee: 


1I According to the sentence of} 
the law which they shall teach thee,| 


and according to the judgment 


which they shall tell thee, thou! 
shalt do: thou shalt not decline}! 
from: the sentence which they shall} 
shew thee, to the right hand, nor]! 


to the left. 

12. And ¢the man that will do pre- 
sumptuously, and will not hearken 
unto the priest that standeth to 
Minister there before the LorD thy 
God, or unto the judge; even that 
man shall die: and thou shalt put 
away the evil from Israel. 

13 And all the people shall hear, 
and fear, and do no more presump- 
tuously. 


Concerning a king. 


14. When thou: art come: unto: the 
land which the Lorp thy God 
giveth thee, and shalt possess: it, 
and shalt dwell therein, and. shalt 
say, I will set a king over me, like 
as' all the nations that are about 
me; 

15 Thou shalt in any wise set 
Aim king over thee, “whom the 
Lorp thy God shall choose: one 
from among thy brethren shalt thou 


set king over thee: thou mayest not 
set a stranger over thee, which is 
not thy brother. 

16 But he shall not multiply 
horses to himself, nor cause the 
people to return to Egypt; to the 
end that he should multiply horses: 
forasmuch as the Lorp hath said 
unto you, Ye shall henceforth re- 
turn no more that way. 

17 Neither shall he multiply wives 
to himself, that ¢his heart turn not 
away: neither shall he greatly mul- 
tiply to himself silver and gold, 


@ Num.15.30; 
Ezra 10.8; 
Hos.4.4. 


6 1‘Sam.8.5. 


9,20 


c See 1 Sam. 
9.15; 10.24; 
16.12; 1 Chr. 
22.10. 

d See 1 Ki.11. 
3,4. 


? 


e 2 Ki.11.12. 


f Psa.19.9, 
note. 


18 And it shall be, when he sit-| 


teth upon the throne of his kingdom,| 


that he shall write him a copy’ of 
this law in a book out of that which 
1s before the priests the Levites: 

19 And it shall be with him, and 
he shall read therein all the days of 
his life: that he may learn to /fear 
the Lorp his God, to keep all the 
words of this law and these statutes, 
to do them: 

20 That his heart be not lifted up 
above. his brethren, and that he 
turn not aside from the command- 


236 


[18 iol 


4 


ment,. to the: right: hand) or to the © 


left: to the end that he:may prolong 
his days in. his. kingdom, he, and 
his.children, in: the: midst of Israel. 
CHAPTER’ 18. 
The tribe of Levi. 


/[HE. priests. the Levites, and all 
H the tribe of Levi, shall have no: 


part nor inheritance with Israel: - 


they shall eat the offerings. of the 

LORD made by fire, and his inheri-. 

tance. ’ 

| 2 Therefore shall they have no in- 
eritance among their brethren: 

the LorpD is their inheritance, as he 

hath said unto them. 


The priest’s due. 


'3 And this shall be the priest’s 
due. from the people, from them 
that. offer a sacrifice, whether it be. 
ox. or sheep; and’ they shall give 
unto the priest the shoulder, and 
the two cheeks, and the maw. 

4 The firstfruit also of thy corn, 


| 6 And if a Levite come from any 
of thy gates out of all Israel, where 
he sojourned, and come with all the 
desire of his mind unto the place 
which the LorD shall choose: 

| 7 Then he shall minister in the 
name of the LorD his God, as alk 
his brethren the Levites do, which 
‘stand there before the Lorp. 

| 8 They shall have like portions to 
eat, beside that which cometh of the 
sale: of his: patrimony, 


Idola trous practices forbidden. 


among you any one that maketh 
his son or his daughter to pass 
through the fire, or that useth divi- 
nation, or an observer of times, or 
an enchanter, or a witch, 

il Or a charmer; or a consulter 
with familiar spirits, or a wizard, 
or a necromancer. 

12 Forall that do these things are 
an abomination unto the Lorp- 


18 13} 


sand because of these abominations 
the Lorp thy God:doth drive them 
‘out from ‘before fhee. 

13 Thou ‘shalt be “perfect with 
tthe Lorp thy God. 

14 For these nations, which thou 
shalt possess, hearkened unto ob- 
‘servers of times, and unto diviners: 
but as for thee, the LoRD thy God 
thath not suffered thee so to do. | 


The great prophecy of Messiah 
the Prophet (Acts.3. 22,23). | 


15 The Lorp thy God will raise 
‘up unto thee a Prophet from the 
‘midst of thee, -of thy brethren, like 


unto me; unto him ye shall 
“‘hearken; 
16 According to all that thou de- 


‘Siredst of the Lorp thy God in 
Horeb in the day of the assembly, 
‘saying, Let me not hear again the 
‘voice of the LORD my God, neither 
let me see this great fire any more, 
‘that I die not. 

17 And the LorpD said unto me, 
‘They have well spoken that which 
they have spoken. 

18 I will raise them up a Prophet 
from among their brethren, like 
unto thee, and will put my words 
in his mouth; and he shall speak 
— them. all that I shall command 
‘him. 

19 And it shall.cometo:pass, that 
swhosoever ‘will not ‘hearken unto 
my words which he shall speak in 
my name, I will require zt of him. | 


The test of the prophets. 


20 But ¢the prophet, which shall 
presume to speak a word in my 
name, which I have not commanded 


shim to speak, or ‘that shall speak 
in the name of other gods, even 
that prophet shall die. | 

21 And if thou say in thine heart, 
How shall we know the word which 
the LorpD hath not spoken? 

22 When .a /prophet speaketh in 
the name of the LORD, if the thing 
follow not, nor come to pass, that 
is the thing which the Lorp hath 
not spoken, but the prophet hath 
spoken it presumptuously: thou 
shalt not be afraid of him. 


CHAPTER 19. 


Cities of refuge (Num. 35. 1-34; 
Deut. 4. 41-49). 
HEN the Lorp thy God hath 
cut off the nations, whose 
land the Lorp ‘thy God giveth thee,, 


Bc. 1451. | 


aie, upright, 
or sincere. 


b vs.15,18,19: 
John 1,21-45; 
7.16; 8.28; 
12.49,50; 
14.10,24; 
17.8; Acts 
3:22.23; 
7.37. 


|| c. Acts 3:23. 


d Deut13.5; 
Jer.14.14,15; 
Zech.13.3. 


e Deut.13.1, 
2; Jer.2.8. 


f Jer.28.9. 
g Ex.21.13; 


Num.35.10, 
14; Josh. 
20.2. 


| Num.35.15; 


Deut.4.42. 


i Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


237 


DEUTERONOMY. 


[19 13 


and thou succeedest them, and 
dwellest in their cities, and in their 
houses; 

2 £Thou shalt separate three cities 
for thee in the midst of thy land, 
which the Lorp thy God giveth 
thee to possess it. 


| 3 Thou shalt prepare thee a way, 


and divide the coasts of thy land, 


|which the Lorp thy God giveth 


thee to inherit, into three parts, 
that every slayer may flee thither. 

4 And “this is the case of the 
slayer, which shall flee thither, that 
he may live: Whoso killeth his 
neighbour ignorantly, whom he 
hated not in time past; 

5 As when a man goeth into the 
wood with his neighbour to hew 
wood, and his hand fetcheth a 
stroke with the axe to cut down the 
tree, and the head slippeth from the 
helve, and lighteth upon his neigh- 
bour, that he die; he shall flee unto 
one of those cities, and live: 

6 Lest the ‘avenger of the blood 
pursue the slayer, while his |heart is 
hot, and overtake him, because the 
way is long, and slay him; whereas 
he was not worthy of death, inas- 
much as he hated him not in time 


past. 

7 Wherefore I command thee, 
saying, Thou shalt separate three 
cities for thee. 

8 And if the LorD thy God en- 
large thy coast, as he hath sworn 
unto ‘thy fathers, and give thee all 
the land which he promised to give 
unto thy fathers; ; 

9 If thou.shalt keep all these com- 
mandments to do them, which I 
command thee this day, to love the 
Lorp thy God, and to walk ever in 
his ways; then shalt thou add three 
cities more for thee, beside these 
three: 

10 That innocent blood be not 
shed in thy land, which the 
Lorp thy God giveth thee for an 
inheritance, and so blood be upon 
thee. 

11 Butif any man hate his neigh- 
bour, and lie in wait for him, and 
rise up against him, and smite him 
mortally that he die, and fleeth into 
one of these cities: 

12 Then the elders of his city shall 
send and fetch him thence, and 
deliver him into the hand of the 
avenger of blood, that he may die. 

13 Thine eye shall not pity him, 
but thou shalt put :away the guilt of 
innocent blood from Israel, that it 
may go well with thee. 


19 14) 


The sacred landmark. 


14 Thou shalt not remove thy 
neighbour’s landmark, which they 
of old time have set in thine inheri- 
tance, which thou shalt inherit in 
the land that the Lorp thy God 
giveth thee to possess it. | 


The terror of the law. 


15. One witness shall not rise up 
against a man for any iniquity, or 
for any sin, in any sin that he sin- 
neth: at the mouth of two witnesses, 
or at the mouth of three ¢witnesses, 
shall the matter be established. 

16 If a false witness rise up 
against any man to testify against 
him that which is wrong; 

17 Then both the men, between 
whom the controversy fs, shall 
stand before the Lorp, before the 
priests and the judges, which shall 
be in those days; 

18 And the judges shall make dili- 

gent inquisition: and, behold, if the 
witness be a false witness, and hath 
testified falsely against his brother; 

19 Then shall ye do unto him, as 
he had thought to have done unto 
his brother: so shalt thou put the 
evil away from among you. 

20 And those which remain shall 
hear, and fear, and shall hence- 
forth commit no more any such evil 
among you. 

21 And thine eye shall not pity; 
but life shall go for life, eye for 
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, 
foot for foot. 


CHAPTER 20. 
The law of warfare. 


NAJHEN thou goest out to battle 
against thine enemies, and 
seest horses, and chariots, and a 
people more than thou, be not 
afraid of them: for the Lorp thy 
God is with thee, which brought 
thee up out of the land of Egypt. 

2 And it shall be, when ye are 
come nigh unto the battle, that the 
priest shall approach and speak 
unto the people, 

3_ And shall say unto them, Hear, 
O Israel, ye approach this day unto 
battle against your enemies: let not 
your hearts faint, fear not, and do 
not tremble, neither be ye terrified 
because of them; 

4 For the LorpD your God is he 
that goeth with you, ‘to fight for 
you against your enemies, to save 


you. 
5 And the officers shall speak unto 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


@ 2 Cor.13.1. 
b Ex.21.23-25; 
Lev.24.20; 
Mt.5.38,39. 

c Deut.1.30; 
3.22; Josh. 
23.10. 

d Jud.7.3. 


é 2 Sam.20.18, 
> 20. 


fNum.31.7, 
g Josh.8.2. 


238 


ae. 

[20 17 
the people, saying, What man is 
there that hath built a new house, 
and hath not dedicated it? let him 
go and return to his house, lest he 
die in the battle, and another man 
dedicate it. 
| 6 And what man is He that hath 
planted a vineyard, and hath not 
yet eaten of it? let him also go and 
return unto his house, lest he die 
oe the battle, and another man eat 
of it. 

7 And what man is there that 
hath betrothed a wife, and hath not 
taken her? let him go and return 
unto his house, lest he die in the 
battle, and another man take her. 

8 And the officers shall speak fur- 
ther unto the people, and they shall 
say, ?What man is there that 1s 
fearful and fainthearted? let him 
go and return unto his house, lest 
his brethren’s heart faint as well as 
his heart. 

9 And it shall be, when the offi- 
cers have made an end of speaking 
unto the people, that they shall 
make captains of the armies to lead 
the people. 

10 When thou comest nigh unto 
a city to fight against it, ‘then pro- 
claim peace unto it. 

11 And it shall be, if it make thee 
answer of peace, and open unto 
thee, then it shall be, that all the 
people that is found therein shall 
be tributaries unto thee, and they 
shall serve thee. 

12 And if it will make no peace 
with thee, but will make war 
against thee, then thou shalt be- 
siege it: 

13. And when the Lorp thy God 
hath delivered it into thine hands, 
Sthou shalt smite every male thereof 
with the edge of the sword: 

14 But the women, and the little 
ones, and &the cattle, and all that is 
in the city, even all the spoil thereof, 
shalt thou take unto thyself; and 
thou shalt eat the spoil of thine 
enemies, which the Lorp thy God 
hath given thee. 

15 Thus shalt thou do unto all the 
cities which are very far off from 
thee, which are not of the cities of 
these nations. 

16 But of the cities of these peo- 
ple, which the LorD thy God doth 
give thee for an inheritance, thou 
shalt save alive nothing that 
breatheth: 

17 But thou shalt utterly destroy 
them; namely, the Hittites, and the 
Amorites, the Canaanites, and the 


20 18] 
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jeb- 
usites; as the LoRD thy God hath 
commanded thee: 

18 That they teach you not to do 
after all their abominations, which 
they have done unto their gods; so 
should ye “sin against the LORD 
your God. 

19 When thou shalt besiege a city 
a long time, in making war against 
it to take it, thou shalt not destroy 
the trees thereof by forcing an axe 
against them: for thou mayest eat 
of them, and thou shalt not cut 
them down (for the tree of the field 
is man’s life) to employ them in 
the siege: 

20 Only the trees which thou 
knowest that they be not trees for 
meat, thou shalt destroy and cut 
them down; and thou shalt build 
bulwarks against the city that 
maketh war with thee, until it be 
subdued. 


CHAPTER 21. 
Inquest for the slain. 


one be found slain in the land 
which the Lorp thy God giveth 
thee to possess it, lying in the field, 
and it be not known who hath 
slain him: 

2 Then thy elders and thy judges 
shall come forth, and they shall] 3 Gen.29.33, 
measure unto the cities which are 
round about him that is slain: e See 1 Chr. 

3 And it shall be, that the city] > 

which is next unto the slain man, 
even the elders of that city shall 
take an heifer, which hath not been 
wrought with, and which hath not 
drawn in the yoke; 
_4 And the elders of that city shall 
bring down the heifer unto a rough 
valley, which is neither eared nor 
sown, and shall strike off the 
heifer’s neck there in the valley: 

5 And the priests the sons of Levi 
shall come near; for them the LORD 
thy God hath chosen to minister 
unto him, and to bless in the name 

of the Lorp; and by their word 
shall every controversy and every 
stroke be tried: ; 

6 And all the elders of that city, 
that are next unto the slain man, 
shall wash their hands over the 
heifer that is beheaded in the valley: 

7 And they shall answer and say, 
Our hands have not shed this blood, 
neither have our eyes seen it. 

8 Be ’merciful, O LORD, unto thy 
people “Israel, whom thou hast re- 
deemed, and lay not innocent blood 


a Ex.23.33. 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 


c Ex.14.30, 
note. 


f Gen.25.31, 
33. 


239 


DEUTERONOMY. 


BC. 1451. 


[21 19 


unto thy peopie of Israel’s charge, 
And the blood shall be forgiven 
them. 

9 So shalt thou put away the 
guilt of innocent blood from among 
you,when thou shalt do that which 
ts right in the sight of the LORD. 


Domestic regulations. 


10 When thou goest forth to war 
against thine enemies, and the 
Lorp thy God hath delivered them 
into thine hands, and thou hast 
taken them captive, 

ji1 And seest among the captives 
a beautiful woman, and hast a 
desire unto her, that thou wouldest 
have her to thy wife; 

12 Then thou shalt bring her 
home to thine house; and she shall 
shave her head, and pare her nails; 

13 And she shall put the raiment 
of her captivity from off her, and 
shall remain in thine house, and 
bewail her father and her mother a 
full month: and after that thou 
shalt go in unto her, and be her 
husband, and she shall be thy wife. 

14 And it shall be, if thou have no 


‘\delight in her, then thou shait let 


her go whither she will; but thou 
shalt not sell her at all for money, 
thou shalt not make merchandise of 
her, because thou hast humbled her. 

15 If a man have two wives, one 
beloved, ¢and another hated, and 
they have born him children, both 
the beloved and the hated; and if 
the firstborn son be her’s that was 
hated: 

16 Then it shall be, when he mak- 
eth his sons to inherit that which 
he hath, that he may not make the 
son of the beloved firstborn before 
the son of the hated, which 1s in- 
deed the firstborn: 

17 But he shall acknowledge the 
son of the hated for the firstborn, 
éby giving him a double portion of 
all that he hath: for he is the be- 
ginning of his strength; /the right 
of the firstborn is his. 


A prodigal son under law. 
(Cf. Lk. 15, 11-23.) 


18 If a man have a stubborn and 
rebellious son, which will not obey 
the voice of his father, or the voice 
of his mother, and that, when they 
have chastened him, will not 
hearken unto them: 


| 19 Then shall his father and his 


mother lay hold on him, and bring 
him out unto the elders of his city, 
and unto the gate of his place; 


21 20] 


DEUTERONOMY. 


+7 


[22 21 


20 And they shall say unto the! Bic. 1451. 


elders of his city, This our son is 
stubborn and rebellious, he will not 
obey our voice; he is a glutton, and 
a drunkard. OTs 
21 And all the men of his city 
shall stone him with stones, that he 


die: so shalt thou put evil away) 
from among you; and all Israel] 


shall hear, and fear. 4 
22) And if a man have committed 


a sin worthy of death, and he be to) 


be put to death, and thou hang him 
on a tree: 


23 His body shali not remain all 


night upon the tree, but thou shalt 
in any wise bury him that day; (for 
he that is hanged is accursed of 
56God;) that thy land be not defiled, 
which the LorD thy God giveth 
thee for an inheritance. 


CHAPTER 22. 
The law of brotherhood. 


"HOU shalt not see thy broth- 

+ er’s ox or his sheep go astray, 
and hide thyself from them: thou 
shalt in any case bring them again 
unto thy brother. 

2 And if thy brother be not nigh 
unto thee, or if thou know him not, 
then thou shalt bring it unto thine 
own: house, and it shall be with 
thee until thy brother seek after it, 
and thou shalt restore it to him 
again. 

3 In like manner shalt thou do 
with his ass; and so shalt thou do’ 
with his raiment; and with all lost 
things of thy brother’s, which he 
hath lost, and thou hast found, 
shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest 
not hide thyself, 

4 Thou ¢shalt not see thy broth- 
er’s ass or his ox fall down by the 
way, and hide thyself from them: 
thou shalt surely help him to lift 
them up again. 

5S The woman shall not wear that 
which pertaineth unto a man, 
neither shall a- man put on a 


@ Josh.8.29; 
John 19.31. 


6 Gal.3.13. 

c Ex.23.4. 

¢@ Ex.23:5. 

e Lev.22.28. 

f Lev.19.19, 

g See 2 Cor. 
6.14-16. 


1 Ki.8.53 


i Lev.19.19. 


j Num.15.38; 
Mt.23.5. 


woman’s garment: for all that do 
so are abomination unto the Lorp 
thy God. 

6 If a bird’s nest chance to be be- 
fore thee'in the way in any tree, or 
on the ground, whether they be 
young ones, or eggs, and the dam 
sitting upon the young, or upon the 
eggs,. ‘thou shalt not take the dam 
with the young: 

7 But thou shalt in any wise let 
the dam go, and take the young to 
thee; that it may be well with thee, 


240 


h Separation. 


i 


land that thou mayest prolong thy 


ays. 

8 When thou buildest a new 
house, then thou shalt make a bat- 
tlement for thy roof, that thou 
bring not blood upon thine house, 
if any man fall from thence. 


} The law of separation. 
| 9 fThou shalt not sow thy vine- 
yard with divers seeds: lest the 
fruit of thy seed which thou hast 
sown, and the fruit of thy vine- 
yard, be defiled. : 

10 &Thou shalt not plow with an 
ox and an ass ‘together. 

/11 ‘Thou shalt not wear a gar- 
ment of divers sorts, as of woollen 
and linen together. 2 

12 Thou shalt make thee /fringes 
upon the four quarters. of thy ves- 
ture, wherewith thou coverest thy- 
self, 

The innocent wife protected. 

13 If any man take a wife, and go 
in unto her, and hate her, 

14 And give occasions of speech 

against her, and bring up an evil 
name upon her, and say, I took this 
woman, and when I came to her, I 
found her not a maid: 
15 Then shall the father of the 
damsel, and her mother, take and 
bring forth the tokens of the dam- 
sel’s virginity unto the elders of 
the city in the gate: “ 

16 And the damsel’s father: shall 
say unto. the elders, I gave my 
daughter unto this man to wife, 
and he hateth her; 

17 And, lo, he hath given occa- 
sions of speech against her, saying, 
f found not thy daughter a maid; 
and yet these are the tokens of 
my daughter’s virginity. And they 
shall spread the cloth before the 
elders, of the city. 

18 And the elders of that city shall 
take that. man and chastise him; 

19 And they shall amerce him in 
an hundred shekels of silver, and 
give them unto the father of the 
damsel, because he hath brought. 
up an evil name upon a virgin of 


Israel: and she shall be his wife; 
he may not put her away all his 
days. 

The guilty wife to be stoned. 

20 But if this thing be true, and 
the tokens of virginity be not 
found for the damsel: 

21 Then they shall bring out the 
damsel to the door of her father’s 
house, and the men of her city shall 


stone her with stones that she die: 
because she hath ®wrought folly in 
Israel, to play the whore in her fa- 
ther’s house: so shalt thou put evil 
away from among you. 

22 Ifaman be found lying witha 
woman married to an husband, then 
they shall both of them die, both 
the man that lay with the woman, 
and the woman: so shalt thou put 
away evil from Israel. 

23 If adamsel that zs a virgin be 
betrothed unto an husband, and a 
man find her in the city, and lie 
with her; 

24 Then ye shall bring them both 
out unto the gate of that city, and 
ye shall stone them with stones 
that they die; the damsel, because 
she cried not, being in the city; and 
the man because he hath humbled 
this neighbour’s wife: so thou shalt 
put away evil from among you. | 

25 But if a man find a betrothed] ¢ Gen.34.7; 
damsel in the field, and the man 
force her, and lie with her: then 
si peeks only that lay with her Niece ats 

26 But unto the damsel thou shalt] ¢ See Deut.2, 
do nothing; there is in the damsel] 29. 


no sin worthy of death: for as when] g niim.22.5,6. 


aman riseth against his neighbour, 
d slayeth him, even so is this 
matter: 

27 For he found her in the field, 
and the betrothed damsel cried, 
and there was none to save her. 

28 If a man find a damsel that is 
a virgin, which is not betrothed, and 
lay ‘hold on her, and lie with her, 
and they be found; 

29 Then the man that lay with 
her shall give unto the damsel’s 
father fifty shekels of silver, and 
-she shall be his wife; because he 
hath humbled her, he may not put 
her away all his days. 

30 A man shall not take his fa- 
ther’s wife, nor discover his father’s 
skirt 


e Ezra 9.12. 


f Gen.25.24, 
25,26; Oba. 
10,12 


g Ex.22.21; 
23.9; Lev. 
19.34. 


h Lev.26.12. 


CHAPTER 23. 
Divers regulations. 


He that is wounded in the stones, 
or hath his privy member cut 
off, shall not enter into the congre- 
gation of the LORD. 

2 A bastard shall not enter into 
the congregation of the LorD; even 
to his tenth generation shall he not 
enter into the congregation of the 


3 An ’Ammonite or Moabite shall 
not enter into the congregation of . 
41 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. | 


Jud.20.6,10; 
2 Sam.13.12, 
13. 


#1 Sam.30.15. 


{23 16 


the Lorp; even to their tenth gen- 
eration shall they not enter into 
the congregation of the Lorp for 
ever: 

4 ‘Because they met you not with 
bread and with water in the way, 
when ye came forth out of Egypt: 
and 4because they hired against 


|\thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pe- 


‘thor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee. 

5 Nevertheless the LORD thy God 
would not hearken unto Balaam; 
|but the Lorp thy God turned the 
|curse into a blessing unto thee, be- 


cause the Lorp thy God loved thee. 


6 ¢Thou shalt not seek their peace 


inor their prosperity all thy days 


for ever. 

7 Thou shalt not abhor an Edom- 
ite; ffor he is thy. brother: thou 
‘shalt not abhor an Egyptian; be- 
cause &thou wast a stranger in his 
land. 

8 The children that are begotten 
of them shail enter into the congre- 
gation of the LORD in their third 
generation. 

9 When the host goeth forth 
against thine enemies, then keep 
thee from every wicked thing. 

10 If there be among you any 
man, that is not clean by reason of 
uncleanness that chanceth him by 
night, then shall he go abroad out 
of the camp, he shall not come 
within the camp: 

11 But-it shall be, when evening 
cometh on, he shall wash himself 
with water: and when the sun is 
down, he shall come into the camp 
again. 

12 Thou shalt have a place also 
without the camp, whither thou 
shalt go forth abroad: 

13 And thou shalt have a paddle 
upon thy weapon; and it shall be, 
when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, 


thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt 
turn back and .cover that which 
cometh from thee: 

14 For the Lorp thy God /walk- 
eth in the midst of thy camp, to de- 
liver thee, and to give up thine 
enemies before thee; therefore shall 
thy camp be holy: ‘that he see no 
unclean thing in thee, and turn 
away from thee. 

15 Thou shalt not ‘deliver unto 
his master the servant which is 

scaped from his master unto thee: 

16 He shail dwell with thee, even 
among you, in that place which he 
shall choose in one of thy gates, 
where’it liketh him best: thou shalt 
not oppress him, 


i 
23 17] 


17 There shall be no whore of the 
daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite 
of the sons of Israel. f 

18 Thou shalt not bring the hire 
of a whore, or the price of a dog, 
into the house of the Lorp thy 
God for any vow: for even both 
these are abomination unto the 
Lorp thy God. 

19 Thou shalt not lend upon 
usury to thy brother; usury of 
money, usury of victuals, usury of 
any thing that is lent upon usury: 

20 Unto a stranger thou mayest 
lend upon usury; but unto thy 
brother thou shalt not lend upon 
usury: that the LorRD thy God may 
bless thee in all that thou settest 
thine hand to in the land whither 
thou goest to possess it. 

21 When thou shalt vow a vow 
unto the LorpD thy God, thou shalt 
not slack to pay it: for the Lorp 
thy God will surely require it of 
thee; and it would be sin in thee. 

22 But if thou shalt forbear to|¢ Num.30.2; 
vow, it shall be no sin in thee. 

23 °*That which is gone out of thy bMt12.1: 
lips thou shalt keep and perform;] yic2.3; 
even a freewill-offering, according} Lk.6.1. . 
as thou hast vowed unto the LorpD ¢Mt5.31 
thy God, which thou hast promised ed 
with thy mouth, d Ex.21.16. 

24 When thou comest into thy POE 
neighbour’s vineyard, then thou|°14.2.° °° 
mayest eat grapes thy fill at thine 
own pleasure; but thou shalt not|/Ss¢ L:17. 
put any in thy vessel. 10.6500%: 

25 When thou comest into the 
standing corn of thy neighbour,|¢ J#-5.4- 
then thou mayest pluck the ears 
with thine hand; but thou shalt not 
move a sickle unto thy neighbour’s 
standing corn. 


CHAPTER 24. 


The Mosaic law of divorce (Mt. 
19. 8; cf. 1 Cor, 7, 12-15). 


WVHEN aman hath taken a wife, 
and married her, and it come 
to pass that she find no favour in 
his eyes, because he hath found 
some uncleanness in her: then let 
him write her a bill of divorcement, 
and give it in her hand, and send 
her out of his chouse. 

2 And when she is departed out of 
his house, she may go and be an- 
other man’s wife. 

3 And if the latter husband hate 
her, and write her a bill of divorce- 
ment, and giveth it in her hand, 
and sendeth her out of his house; 


242 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


Psa.66.13,14. 


rats 


or if the latter husband die, which 
took her to be his wife; 

4 Her former husband, which sent 
her away, may not take her again 
to be his wife, after that she is de- 
filed; for that is abomination before 
the LorD: and thou shalt not cause 
the land to sin, which the Lorp thy 
God giveth thee for an inheritance. 


Divers regulations. 


5 When a man hath taken a new 
wife, he shall not go out to war, 
neither shall he be charged with 
any business: but he shall be free 
at home one year, and shall cheer 
up his wife which he hath taken. 

6 No man shall take the nether or 
the upper millstone to pledge: for 
he taketh a man’s life to pledge. 

7 4If aman be found stealing any 
of his brethren of the children of 
Israel, and maketh merchandise of 
him, or selleth him; then that thief 
shall die; and thou shalt put evil 
away from among you. 

8 Take heed in ‘the plague of 
leprosy, that thou observe dili- 
gently, and do according to all that 
the priests the Levites shall teach 
you: as I commanded them, so ye 
shall observe to do. 

9 fRemember what the LorpD thy 
God did unto Miriam by the way, 
after that ye were come forth out 
of Egypt. 

10 And when thou dost lend thy 
brother any thing, thou shalt not go 
into his house to fetch his pledge. 

11 Thou shalt stand abroad, and 
the man to whom thou dost lend 
shall bring out the pledge abroad 
unto thee. 

12 And if the man be poor, thou 
shalt not sleep with his pledge: 

13 In any case thou shalt deliver 
him the pledge again when the sun 
goeth down, that he may sleep in 
his own raiment, and bless thee: 
and it shall be righteousness unto 
thee before the Lorp thy God. 

14 Thou shalt not oppress an 
hired servant that is poor and 
needy,whether he be of thy breth- 
ren, or of thy strangers that are in 
thy land within thy gates: 

15 At his day thou shalt give him 
his hire, neither shall the sun ga 
down upon it; for he is poor, and 
setteth his heart upon it: lest he 
cry against thee unto the Lorp, 
and it be sin unto thee. 

16 The fathers shall not be put to 
death for the children, neither shall 
the children be put to death for the 


i 
24:17] 


fathers: every man shall be put to 
death for his own sin. 

17 Thou shalt not pervert the 
judgment of the stranger, nor of 
the fatherless; nor take a widow’s 
raiment to pledge: 

18 But thou shalt remember that 
thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and 
the Lorp thy God 4redeemed thee 
thence: therefore I command thee 
to do this thing. 

19 When thou cuttest down thine 
harvest in thy field, and hast forgot 
a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not 
go again to fetch it: it shall be for 
the stranger, for the fatherless, and 
for the widow: that the Lorp thy 
God may ®bless thee in all the work 
of thine hands. 

20 When thou beatest thine olive 
tree, thou shalt not go over the 
boughs again: it shall be for the 
stranger, for the fatherless, and for 
the widow. 

21 When thou gatherest the 
grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt 
not glean it afterward: it shall be 
for the stranger, for the fatherless, 
and for the widow. 

22 And thou shalt remember that 
thou wast a bondman in the land of 
Egypt: therefore I command thee 
to do this thing. 


CHAPTER 25. 
Divers regulations. 


there be a controversy between 
men, and they come unto judg- 
ment, that the yudges may judge 
them; then they shall justify the 
righteous, and condemn the wicked. 

2 And it shall be, if the wicked 
man be worthy to be beaten, that 
the judge shall cause him to lie 
down, and to be beaten before his 
face, according to his fault, by a 
certain number. 

3 Forty stripes he may give him, 
and not exceed: lest, if he should 
exceed, and beat him above these 
with many stripes, then thy brother 
should seem vile unto thee. 

4 Thou shalt not muzzle the ox 
when he treadeth out the ‘corn. 

5 If brethren dwell together, and 
one of them die, and have no ¢child, 
the wife of the dead shall not marry 
without unto a stranger: her hus- 
band’s brother shall go in unto her, 
and take her to him to wife, and 
perform the duty of an husband’s 
brother unto her. 

6 And it shall be, that the first- 
born which she beareth ‘shall suc- 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Ex.14.30, 
note. 


b Deut.15.10; 


Psa.41.1; 


Prov.19.17. 


¢1 Cor.9,9; 


1 Tim.5.18. 


d Mt.22.24; 
Mk.12.19; 
Lk.20.28. 


e Gen.38.9. 


f Ruth 4.1,2. 


g Ruth 4.6, 
h Ruth 4.7. 
i Ruth 4.11, 
j Ex.20.12. 


k Prov.11.1; 
1 Thes.4.6. 


1 Ex.17.8. 


243 


[25 19 


ceed in the name of his brother 
which is dead, that his name be 
not put out of Israel. 

7 And if the man like not to take 
his brother’s wife, then let his broth- 
er’s wife go up to the ‘gate unto 
the elders, and say, My husband’s 
brother refuseth to raise up unto 
his brother a name in Israel, he 
will not perform the duty of my 
husband’s brother. 

8 Then the elders of his city shall 
call him, and speak unto him: and 
if he stand to it, and say, SI like 
not to take her; 

9 Then shall his brother’s wife 
come unto him in the presence of 
the elders, and “loose his shoe from 
off his foot, and spit in his face, 
and shall answer and say, So shall 
it be done unto that man that will 
not ‘build up his brother’s house. 

10 And his name shall be called in 
Israel, The house of him that hath 
his shoe loosed. 

11 When men strive together one 
with another, and the wife of the 
cone draweth near for to deliver her 
husband out of the hand of him 
that smiteth him, and putteth forth 
her hand, and taketh him by the 
secrets: 

12 Then thou shalt cut off her 
hand, thine eye shall not pity her. 

13 Thou shalt not have in thy bag 
divers weights, a great and a small. 

14 Thou shalt not have in thine 
house divers measures, a great and 
a small. 

15 But thou shalt have a perfect 
and just weight, a perfect and just 
measure shalt thou have: /that thy 
days may be lengthened in the land 
which the LorDthy God giveth thee. 

16 For all that do such things, 
and all that do unrighteously, are 
an abomination unto the Lorpb thy 


God. 

17 ‘Remember what Amalek did 
unto thee by the way, when ye 
were come forth out of Egypt; 

18 How he met thee by the way, 
and smote the hindmost of thee, 
even all that were feeble behind 
thee, when thou wast faint and 
weary; and he feared not God. 

19 Therefore it shall be, when the 
Lorp thy God hath given thee rest 
from all thine enemies round about, 
in the land which the Lorp thy 
God giveth thee for an inheritance 
to possess it, that thou shalt blot 
out the remembrance of Amalek 
from under heaven; thou shalt not 
forget it, 


26 1] 


CHAPTER: 26. _B.C.1451. | 

The law of the offering of first- 

fruits.. (Cf. Ex. 23. 16-19.) 
[ade it shall be, when thou art 

come! in unto the land’ which} 
the Lorp thy God giveth thee: for 
an inheritance, and posseéssest it,}) 
and dwellest therein; 

2 That thou shalt take of the 
first of all the fruit of the earth, 
which thou shalt bring of thy/| 
land that the Lorp thy God) 
giveth thee, and shalt put it 
in a basket, and shalt go unto 
the place which the Lorb thy God 
shall choose to place his namelc Bible 
there. pieyers 

3: And thou shalt go unto the} {0;5);,Peut 
priest that shall be in those days,} (Gen.15.2; 
and’ say unto him, I profess this} Hab.3-1-16.) 
day unto the Lorp thy God, that I), x0s.12.12. 
am’ come unto the country which 
the Lorp sware unto our fathers pore 
for to give us. by Se 

4 And the priest shall take the|d Gen.46.27; 
basket out of thine hand) and set it] Deut-10.22. 
down before the altar of the Lorp e Ex.1.11,14. 
thy God. : 

5 And thou shalt-speak and ¢say| f Ex.2.23-25; 
before the Lorp thy God, A oSyr-| 3-9 431. 
ian ‘ready to perish was my father, |g Ex.12.42,51; 
and he went down.into Egypt, and| 13-3,14,16; 
sojourned there with a @few,. and|, reso 
became there a nation, great,|; Deut.4.34. 
mighty, and’ populous: lars 

6 And the ‘Egyptians evil en-|?2*3% 
treated us, and afflicted us, and laid] j Deut.12.7, 
upon us hard bondage: | 12,18; 16.11. 

7 And fwhen we cried unto thel, 3:41 
Lorb God of our fathers, the LoRD| prayers 
heard our voice, and looked on our} (0-T.). Josh. 
affliction, and our labour, and our ie Si 
oppression: 3.1-16.) 

8 And the sLorp brought us forth] Ape 
out of Egypt with a mighty hand, ra 
and with an: outstretched arm, and/) 
with great “terribleness, and with]? Isa.63.15; 
signs, and with wonders: | Zech.2,13. 

9 And he hath brought us into] 
this place, and hath given us this 
land, even a ‘land that floweth with|! 
milk and honey. } 

10 And now, behold, I have 
brought the firstfruits of the land, 
which thou, O Lorn, hast given me. 

And thou shalt set it before the 
Lorp thy God, and worship before 
the Lorp thy God: 

11 And thou shalt. rejoice in 
every good thing which the Lorp 
thy God hath given unto thee, and 
unto thine house, thou, and the 


DEUTERONOMY. 


Levite, and the stranger that is| 


among you. 


244 


12 When thou hast made an end 
of tithing all the tithes of thine in- 
crease’ the third year, which 1s the 
year of tithing, and: hast’ given it 
unto: the Levite, the stranger, the 
fatherless, and the widow, that 
they may eat within thy gates, and 
be filled; > 

13. Then thou shalt “say before 
the Lorp: thy God, I have brought 
away the hallowed things out of 
mune house, and also have given 
them unto the Levite, and unto the 
stranger, to the fatherless, and to 
the widow, according to all thy 
commandments which thou hast 
commanded me: I have not trans- 
gressed thy commandments, neither 
have I forgotten them: 

14 /I have not eaten thereof in my 
mourning, neither have I taken 
away ought thereof for any un- 
clean use, nor given ought thereof 
for the dead: but I have hearkened 
to the voice of the LoRD my God, 
and have done according to all that 
thou hast commanded me. 

15 ™Look down from thy holy 
habitation, from heaven, and bless 
thy people Israel, and the land 
which thou hast given us, as thou 
swarest unto our fathers, a land 
that floweth with milk and honey. 
16 This day the Lorp. thy God 
hath commanded thee to do these 
statutes and judgments: thou shalt 
therefore keep and do them with. all 
thine heart, and with all thy soul. 
17 Thou hast avouched the LorD 
this day to. be thy God, and to walk 
in his ways, and to keep his stat- 


utes, and his commandments, and 


his judgments, and to hearken unto 
his voice: 

18 And the Lorpb hath avouched 
thee this day to be. his peculiar peo- 
ple, as he hath promised thee, and 
that thou shouldest keep all his 
commandments; 

19 And to make thee high above 
all nations which he hath made, in 
praise, and in name, and in honour}; 
and that thou mayest be an holy 
people unto the Lorp thy God, as 
jhe hath spoken. 


| 
| CHAPTER 27. 


| 
‘The stones of ae tet in Mount’ 
al, 


Axe Moses with the elders of! 
4X Israel commanded the people, 
saying, Keep. all the command-| 
ments which I command you this| 
day. 


27 24 


DEUTERONOMY. 


[28 3 


2 And it shall be on the 4day 
when ye shall pass over Jordan 
unto the land which the LorpD thy 
God giveth thee, that thou shalt 
bset thee up ¢reat stones, and plais- 
ter them with plaister: 

3 And thou shalt write upon them 
all the words of this law, when thou 
art passed over, that thou mayest 
go in unto the land which the 
Lorp thy God giveth thee, a land 
that floweth with milk and honey; 


as the Lorp God of thy fathers! 


hath promised thee. 

4 Therefore it shall be when ye be 
gone over Jordan, that ye shall set 
up these stones, which I command 
you this day, in mount <Ebal, and 
thou shalt plaister them with 
plaister. 

5 And there shalt thou build an 
altar unto the LorpD thy God, an 
altar of stones: ¢thou shalt not lift 
up any iron tool upon them. 

6 Thou shalt build the altar of the 
Lorp thy God of whole stones: and 
thou shalt offer burnt-offerings 
thereon unto the Lorp thy God: 

7 And thou shalt offer peace-offer- 
ings, and shalt eat there, and re- 
joice before the LorD thy God. 

8 And thou shalt write upon the 
stones all the words of this law 
very plainly. 


Blessings and curses from Ebal 
and Gerizim. 


9 And Moses and ‘the priests the 
Levites spake unto all Israel, say- 
ing, Take heed, and hearken, 1e) 
{srael; this day ‘thou art ‘become 
the people of the LorD thy God. 

10 Thou shalt therefore obey the 
voice of the LORD thy God, and do 
his commandments and his statutes, 
which I command thee this day. 

11 And Moses charged the people 
the same day, saying, 

12 These shall stand fupon mount 
Gerizim to bless the people, when 
ye are come over Jordan; Simeon, 
and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, 
and Joseph, and Benjamin: 

13 And these shall stand supon 
mount Ebal to curse; Reuben, Gad, 
and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and 
Naphtali. 

14 And ‘the Levites shall speak, 
and say unto all the men of Israel 
with a loud voice, 

15 iCursed be the man that mak- 


eth any graven or molten image, an 


B.C. 1451. 


¢e Josh.4.1. 
6 Josh.8.32. 


c Deut.11.29; 
Josh.8.30. 


dé Ex:20:25; 
Josh.8.31. 


e Deut.26.18. 


f Deut.11.29; 
Josh.8.33; 
Jud.9.7. 


g Deut.11.29; 
Josh.8.33. 


 Deut.33.10; 
osh.8.33; 
Dan.9.11. 


4Ex:204,23; 
Ex.34.17; 
Lev.19.4; 
26.1. 


j Gal.3.10. 

k Ex.15.26; 
Lev.26.3; 
Isa.55.2. 


1 v.15; Zech, 
1.6. 


abomination unto the Lorp, the 
work of the hands of the craftsman, 


jand putteth it in a secret place. 


And all the people shall answer:and 
say, Amen. 

16 Cursed be he that setteth light 
by his father or his mother. And 
all the people shall say, Amen. 

17 Cursed be he that removeth 
his neighbour’s landmark. And all 
the people shall say, Amen. 

18 Cursed be he that maketh the 
blind to wander out of the way. 
And all the people shall say, Amen. 

19 Cursed be he that perverteth 
the judgment of the stranger, 
fatherless, and widow. And all the 
people shall say, Amen. 

20 Cursed be he that lieth with 


|his father’s wife; because he uncov- 
|ereth his father’s skirt. And all the 
people shall say, Amen. 


21 Cursed be he that lieth with 


any manner of beast. And all the 
|people shall say, Amen. 


22 Cursed be he that lieth with 
his sister, the daughter of his father, 
or the daughter of his mother. And 
all the people shall say, Amen, 

23 Cursed be he that lieth with 
his mother in law. And all the 
people shali say, Amen. 

24 Cursed be he that smiteth his 
neighbour secretly. And all the 
people shall say, Amen. ‘ 

25 Cursed be he ‘that taketh -re- 
ward to slay an innocent person. 
And all the peopte:shall:say, Amen. 

26 Cursed be he that confirmeth 
not all the words of this law to do 
jthem. And all the people shall 


say, Amen. 


CHAPTER 28. 


Conditions of blessing in the 
land, 


AND it shall come ‘to pass, lif 
thou shalt hearken diligently 
unto the voice of the Lorp thy 
God, to observe and to do all his 
commandments which I command 
thee this day, that the Lorp thy 
God will set thee on high above all 
nations of the earth: 

2 And all these blessings shail 
come on thee, and ‘overtake ‘thee, 
if thou shalt hearken unto the 
voice of the Lorp thy God. 

3 Blessed shalt thou be in the 
city, and blessed shalt thou be in 
the field. 


1 Chapters 28.-29. are, properly, an integral part of the Palestinian Covenant 


(Deut. 30. 1-9, note). 


245 


25 44 


DEUTERONOMY. 


[23 


4 Blessed shall be the fruit of thy 
body, and the fruit of thy ground, 
and the fruit of thy cattle, the in- 
crease of thy kine, and the flocks of 
thy sheep. 

5 Blessed shall be thy basket and 
thy store. 

6 Blessed shalt thou be when 
thou comest in, and blessed shalt 
thou be when thou goest out. 

7 The Lorp shall cause thine ene- 
mies that rise up against thee to be 
smitten before thy face: they shall 
come out against thee one way, and 
flee before thee seven ways: 

8 The LorD shall *command the 
blessing upon thee in thy store- 
houses, and in all that thou settest 
thine hand unto; and he shall bless 
thee in the land which the Lorp 
thy God giveth thee. 

9 The LorD shall establish thee 
an holy people unto himself, as he 
hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt 
keep the commandments of the 
Lorp thy God, and walk in his 


ways. 

10 And all people of the earth 
shall see that thou art called by 
the name of the Lorp; and they 
shall be afraid of thee. 

11 And the Lorn shall make thee 
plenteous in goods, in the fruit of 
thy body, and in the fruit of thy 
cattle, and in the fruit of thy 
ground, in the land which the Lorp 
sware unto thy fathers to give thee. 

12 The LorD shall open unto thee 
his good treasure, the heaven to 
give the rain unto thy land in his 
season, and to bless all the work of 
thine hand: and thou shalt lend! 
unto many nations, and thou shalt 
not borrow. 

13. And the LorpD shall make thee 
the chead, and not the tail; and 
thou shalt be above only, and thou 
shalt not be beneath; if that thou 
hearken unto the commandments 
of the LorpD thy God, which I com- 
mand thee this day, to observe and 
to do them: 

14 And thou shalt not go aside 
from any of the words which I com- 
mand thee this day, to the right 
hand, or to the left, to go after 
other gods to serve them, 


Conditions which will bring 
chastisement in the land. 


15 But it shall come to pass, 4if 
thou wilt not hearken unto the 
voice of the LorD thy God, to ob- 
serve to do all his commandments 
and his statutes which I command 


B.C. 1451. 


a Lev.25.21. 


6 Num.6.27; 
2 Chr.7.14; 
Isa.63.19; 
Dan.9.18,19. 


c Isa.9.14,15. 


d Lev.26.14; 
Dan.9.11,13; 
Mal.2.2. 


e Mal.2.2. 


f1Sam.14.20; 
Zech.14.13. 


g Isa.30.17; 
51.20; 66.15. 


h Amos 4.9, 


i Times of 
the Gen- 
tiles. vs. 
28,49-52, 
63-68; 2 Ki, 
18.9-12. 
(Lk.21.24; 
Rev.16,19.) 


246 


thee this day; that all these curses 
shall come upon thee, and overtake 
thee: 

16 Cursed shalt thou be in the 
city, and cursed shalt thou be in 
the field. 

17 Cursed shall be thy basket 
and thy store. 

18 Cursed shall be the fruit of 
thy body, and the fruit of thy land, 
the increase of thy kine, and the 
flocks of thy sheep. 

19 Cursed shalt thou be when 
thou comest in, and cursed shalt 
thou be when thou goest out. 

20 The LorD shall send tpon thee 
cursing, fvexation, and &rebuke, in 
all that thou settest thine hand unto 
for to do, until thou be destroyed, 
and until thou perish quickly; be- 
cause of the wickedness of thy 
doings, whereby thou hast for- 


|saken me. 


21 The Lorp shall make the pes- 
tilence cleave unto thee, until he 
have consumed thee from off the 
land, whither thou goest to possess 


rhe 

22 The Lorp shall smite thee 
with a consumption, and with a 
fever, and with an inflammation, 
and with an extreme burning, and 
with the sword, and with “blasting, 
and with mildew; and they shall 
pursue thee until thou perish. 

23 And thy heaven that fs over 
thy head shall be brass, and the 
earth that is under thee shall be 
iron. 

24 The LorD shall make the rain 
of thy land powder and dust: from 
heaven shall it come down upon 
thee, until thou be destroyed. 

25 The LorpD shall cause thee to 
be smitten before thine enemies: 
thou shalt go out one way against 
them, and flee seven ways before 
them: and shalt be removed into 
all the kingdoms of the earth. 

26 And thy carcase shall be meat 
unto all fowls of the air, and unto 
the beasts of the earth, and no man 
shall fray them away. 

27 The LorD will smite thee with 
the botch of Egypt, and with the 
emerods, and with the scab, and 
with the itch, whereof thou canst 


not be healed. 

28 The LorpD shall ‘smite thee 
with madness, and blindness, and 
astonishment of heart: 

29 And thou shalt grope at noon- 
day, as the blind gropeth in dark- 
ness, and thou shalt not prosper in 


thy ways: and thou shalt be only 


al 


* 


28 30) 


oppressed and spoiled evermore, 
and no man shail save thee. 

30 Thou shalt betroth a wife, and 
another man shall lie with her: 
thou shalt build an house, and thou 
shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt 
plant a vineyard, and shalt not 
gather the grapes thereof. 

31 Thine ox shall be slain before 
thine €yes, and thou shalt not eat 
thereof: thine ass shall be violently 
taken away from before thy face, 
and shall not be restored to thee: 
thy sheep shall be given unto thine 
enemies, and thou shalt have none 
to rescue them. 

32 Thy sons and thy daughters 
shall be given unto another people, 
and thine eyes shall look, and fail 
with longing for them all the day 
long: and there shall be no might 
in thine hand. 

33 The fruit of thy land, and all 
thy labours, shall a nation which 
thou knowest not eat up; and thou 
shalt be only oppressed and crushed 
alway: 

34 So that thou shalt be mad for 
the sight of thine eyes which thou 
shalt see. 

35 The LorpD shall smite thee in 
the knees, and in the legs, with a 
sore botch that cannot be healed, 
from the sole of thy foot unto the 
top of thy head. 

36 The LorD shall “bring thee, 
and thy king which thou shalt set 
over thee, unto a nation which 
neither thou nor thy fathers have 
known; and there shalt thou serve 
other gods, wood and stone. 

37 And thou shalt become 2an as- 
tonishment, a proverb, and a by- 
word, among all nations whither 
the LorD shall lead thee. 

38 Thou shalt carry much seed 
out into the field, and shalt gather 
but little in; for the locust shall 
consume it. 

39 Thou shalt plant vineyards, 
and dress them, but shalt neither 
drink of the wine, nor gather the 
rapes; for the worms shall eat 
them. ‘ 

‘40 Thou shalt have olive trees 
throughout all thy coasts, but thou 
shalt not anoint thyself with the 
oil; for thine olive shall cast his 
fruit. 

41 Thou shalt beget sons and 
daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy 
them; for they shall go into cap- 


tivity. : 
42 All thy trees and fruit of thy 
land shall the locust consume. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


a 2 Ki.17.4,6; 
24.12,14; 
25-7125 
2 Chr.33.11; 
36.6,20. 


b 1 Ki.9.7,8; 
Jer.24.9; 
25.9; Zech. 
8.13. 

¢ v.13; Lam. 
1.5. 

d Isa.8.18; 
Ezk.14.8. 

e Jer.28.14. 


f Times of 
the Gen- 


g Jer.48.40; 
49.22; Lam- 
4.19; Ezk. 
173,125 
Hos.8.1. 


h Psa.2.12, 
‘note. 


i 2 Ki.6.28,29. 


247 


[28 54 


43 The stranger that is within 
thee shall get up above thee very 
high; and thou shalt come down 
very low. 

44 He shall lend to thee, and thou 
shalt not lend to him: he shall be 
vee chead, and thou shalt be the 
tail. 

45 Moreover all these curses shall 
come upon thee, and shall pursue 
thee, and overtake thee, till thou be 
destroyed; because thou hearken- 
edst not unto the voice of the LorpD 
thy God, to keep his command- 
ments and his statutes which he 
commanded thee: 

46 And they shall be upon “thee 
for a sign and for a wonder, and 
upon thy seed for ever. 

47 Because thou servedst not the 
Lorp thy God with joyfuiness, and 
with gladness of heart, for the abun- 
dance of all things; 

48 Therefore shalt thou serve 
thine enemies which the LorD shall 
send against thee, in hunger, and 
in thirst, and in nakedness, and in 
want of all things: and he ¢shall 
put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, 
until he have destroyed thee. 

49 The LorD shall bring fa nation 
against thee from far, from the end 
of the earth, as swift as the eagle 
Hieth; a nation whose tongue thou 
shalt not understand; 

50 A nation of fierce countenance, 
which shall not regard the person 
of the old, nor shew favour to the 


+|}young: 


51 And he shall eat the fruit of 
thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, 
until thou be destroyed: which also 
shall not leave thee either corn, 
wine, or oil, or the increase of thy 
kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he 
‘have destroyed thee. 

52 And he shall besiege thee in all 
thy gates, until thy high and fenced 
lwalls come down, wherein thou 
“trustedst, throughout all thy land: 
land he shall besiege thee in all thy 
gates throughout all thy land, 
which the LorD thy God hath 
given thee. : 

53 And'thou shalt eat ‘the fruit of 
thine own body, the flesh of thy 
sons and of thy daughters, which 
the Lorp thy God hath given thee, 
in the siege, and in the straitness, 
wherewith thine enemies shall dis- 
tress thee: 

54 So that the man that is ten- 
der among you, and very delicate, 
his eye shail be evil toward his 
brother, and toward the wife of his 


=: 
28 55] DEUTERONOMY. a 


bosom, and: toward the remnant of B.C. 1451. lother gods, which neither thou nor 


his children which he shall leave: thy fathers have known, even wood 

55. So that he will not give to any 
of them of the flesh of his children 
whom he shall eat: because he hath 
nothing left him in the siege, and 
in the straitness, wherewith thine 
enemies shall distress thee in all 
thy gates. 

56 The tender and. delicate wo- 


and stone. 

65 And fgamong these nations 
shalt thou find no ease, neither 
shall the sole of thy foot have rest: 
but the Lorp shall give thee there 
a trembling heart, and failing of 
eyes, and sorrow of mind: 

66 And thy life shall hang in 


man among you, which would not doubt before thee; and thou shalt 
adventure to set the sole of her foot fear day and_-night, and shalt have 
upon the ground for delicateness none assurance of thy life: 
and tenderness, her eye shall be evil 67 In the: morning thou shalt say, 
toward the husband of her bosom, Would God it were even! and at 
end eoeerd her son, and toward her even thou A oe wees ee it 

aughter, were morning! for the fear of thine 

57 And toward her young one heart wherewith thou shalt fear, 
that cometh out from between her and for the sight of thine eyes 
feet, and toward her children which which thou shalt see. 
she shall bear: for she shall eat them 68 And the Lorp shall bring:thee 
for want of all things secretly in into Egypt again with ships, by the 
the siege and straitness, wherewith), way whereof I spake unto thee, 
thine enemy shall distress thee in|¢ Jsraef (Ais- |Thou shalt see it no more again: 
od gates. . | poet Deut, |2nd there ye shall be sold unto your 

8 If thou wilt not observe to do} 30.1-7. (Gen.|enemies for bondmen and: bond- 
all the ag of Ase’ hd that ‘ona 1395 Rom. |women, and no man shall buy you. 
wr tt y = 3 a - ie 
Nagast fear this miebe aoe feties b Psa.19.9 CHAPTER 29: 
ful name, THE LORD THY GOD;), note. The Pali atict Cc ‘i 

59 Then the Lorp will make thy] cEx63 t eS sree ovenant: 
plagues wonderful, and the plagues|© ~°~” (1) introductory words. 
of thy seed, even great plagues, and|¢ Deut.10.22; i] gees are the words of the 
of long continuance, and sore sick-| Neh9\23- covenant, which the Lorp 
nesses, and of long continuance. eIsa:1.24, commanded Moses. to make with 

60 Moreover he will bring upon the children of Israel im the land of 
thee all the diseases of Egypt,|/Jer1613. | Moab, beside the covenant whiclt 
Grey shall cleave unt thes ogi POE etek ener eae 

ee. n es: calli is= 
61 Also every sickness, and every)" Ex-19.4. rael, and saith Sits thier om head 
"i eo which is not written in’ the} ; 2 Cor.3.14-  |seen all that the Lorp did. before 
oad & this law, them will the] 16; Eph.4.18 | your eyes'in.the land of Egypt unto 
‘ Btewean ot thee, until thou fate rin aot ae his servants, 

; f and unto all his land; 

62 And ye shall be left few in 3 Th eat nptati i 
number, whereas ye were @as the thine ejent Hae secilitins ote i 
stars of heaven for multitude; be- those great miracles: ; 
cause thou wouldest not obey the 4 Yet ‘the Lorp hath not. given 
voice of the Lorp thy God. you an heart to perceive, and eyes 
Continued disobedience to be to see. and ears to hear, unto this 

Bes evi udig mene ides GaN raat Dave waoa ties 

ispersion. : ee you torty years 

63 And it shall come to pass, that Be ro ees on 
as the LorD rejoiced over you to shoe is not waxen old upon thy 
do ie oe ao to multiply you; foot. 
so the LORD ¢will rejoice over you 6 Ye have not eat i: 
to destroy you, and to bring you to ‘ther have ye acme siete Poe 7 
nought; and ye shall be plucked drink: that ye might know that E 
aoe off a whither thou goest am: the LORD your God 
to possess it. ; : 2 

64 And the Lorp shall fscatter echo dee Temata Hoditow | 
thee among all people, from the and Og the king of Bash i 
one end of the earth even unto the out against us unto battle, snd Wie 
other; and. there thou shalt serve smote them: f | 

248 


ua 


8 And we took their land, and! 
‘gave it for an inheritance unto the 
Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and 
tto the half tribe of Manasseh. 

9 Keep therefore the words of this 
covenant, and do them, that ye may 
prosper in all that ye do. 

10 Ye stand this day all of you 
before the LorpD your ’>God; youn 
captains of your tribes, your elders, 
and your officers, with all the men 
of Israel, 

11 Your little ones, your wives, 
and thy stranger that zs in thy 
camp, from the hewer of thy wood 
unto the drawer of thy water: 

12 That thou shouldest enter into 
covenant with the Lorpb thy God, 
and into his oath, which the LorD 
thy God maketh ‘with thee this 
es That h blish th 

3 That he may establish thee to “33. 
day for a people unto himself, and ieee 
that he may be unto thee a God, as : 
he hath said unto thee, and as he|? Acts 8:28; 
hath sworn unto ‘thy fathers, ‘to see RE 
Abraham, to Isaac, and ‘to Jacob. 


14 Neither with you “only do I| Peut3.?4- 
make this covenant and ‘this oath; | ‘Rev.22.19.) 

15 But with Aim that standeth ’ 
here with us this day ‘before the Cie 
Lorp our God, and also with hAim| 2 Sam.7.8, 
that 7s not here with us this day: Cais 


16 (For ye know how we ‘have 
dwelt in the land of Egypt; and 
how we came through the nations 
which ye ‘passed by; 

17 And ye have-seen their abomi- 
nations, and ‘their ‘idols, wood and 
stone, silver’and gold, which were 
among them:) 

18 Lest there should be among 
you man, or woman, or family, or 
tribe, whose heart turneth away 
this.day from the LorD our God, to 
go and serve the gods of these na- 
tions; lest there should be among 
you a root that beareth gall and 
wormwood; 

19 And it come to pass, when he 
heareth the words of this curse, 
that he bless himself in ‘his heart, 
saying, I shall have peace, though I 
walk in the tmagination of mine 
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: 

20 The Lorp will not spare him, 
but then the anger of the Lorp and 
his jealousy ‘shall smoke against 
that man, and all the curses that 
are written in this ‘book shall lie 
upon him, and the LorD shall blot 
out his name from under heaven. 

21 And the Lorp shall separate 
him unto evil out of-all the tribes of 
Israel, according to all the curses of! 


e Israel (his- 


31.16-23. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


f Kingdom. 


(Gen.1.26; 
Zech, 12.8.) 


249 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


¢ Inspiration. 


[30 2 


the covenant that are written in 
this book of the law: 

22 So that the generation to.come 
of your children ‘that ‘shall rise up 
after you, and the stranger that 
shall come from a far land, ‘shall 
say, when they ‘see the plagues of 
that land, and the sicknesses which 


|the LorD hath laid -wpon it; 


23 And that the whole land 
thereof is brimstone, and salt, and 
burning, that it is not sown, nor 
beareth, nor any grass groweth 
therein, like the ‘overthrow of 
Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, 
and Zeboim, which the LorD over- 


| threw in his anger, and in his wrath: 


24 Even all nations shall say, 
Wherefore hath the Lorp done 
thus ‘unto this land? what mean- 
eth the ‘heat of this great anger? 

25 Then men shall say, ‘Because 
they have forsaken the covenant:of 
the Lorp ‘God of ‘their fathers, 
which he:made with them when he 
brought them forth out of the land 
of Egypt: 

26 For they went and served 
other gods, and worshipped them, 
gods whom they knew not, and 
whom he had not given unto them: 

27 And the anger of the LORD was 
kindled against this land, to bring 
upon it all the curses that are writ- 
ten in this book: 

28 And the Lorpd rooted them out 
of their Jand in anger, and in wrath, 
and in great indignation, and cast 
them into another Jand, as it is 
othe things bel LS 

29 e secret things belong un- ei 
to the, LorD our God: but those ; 
things which are ‘revealed be- 

Jong unto us and to our children 
for ever, that we may do all the 
words of this law. 


CHAPTER .30. 


The Sixth, or Palestinian Cove- 
nant: (2) the covenant declared. 


d oe it shall come'to pass, when 
all these things are come upon 
ethee, the blessing and the curse, 
which I have set before thee, and 
thou shalt call them to mind 
famong all the nations, whither the 
fLORD thy God ‘hath driven thee, 
2 And shalt return unto the LorD 
thy God, and shalt obey ‘his voice 
according to all that I command 
‘thee this day, thou and thy chil- 


‘dren, with all thine heart, and with 


all thy. soul; 


DEUTERONOMY. 


I command thee this day, it is not 
ae from thee, neither rs it far 
off. 
12 It zs not in heaven, that thou 


3 That then the Lorp thy God 
will 1turn thy captivity, and have 
compassion upon thee, and will 
“Sreturn and gather thee from all 


B.C. 1451. 


the nations, whither the LorD thy shouldest say, Who shall go up for 
God hath scattered thee. us to heaven, and bring it unto us, 
4 If any of thine be driven out that we may hear it, and do it? 
unto the outmost parts of heaven, 13 Neither zs it beyond the sea, 
from thence will the Lorp thy God that thou shouldest say, Who shall 
gather thee, and from thence will go over the sea for us, and bring it 
he fetch thee: unto us, that we may hear it, and 
5 And the Lorp thy God will do it? 
bring thee into the land which thy 14 But.the word is very nigh un- 


fathers possessed, and thou shalt|¢ Ciao to thee, in thy £mouth, and in thy 
possess it; and he will do thee| £°720v°n")-|heart, that thou mayest do it. 


good, and multiply thee above thy] (Deut.30.3; 15 See, I have set before thee this 


fathers. Acts 1.9-11.) [day life and good, and death and 
6 And the Lorp thy God will cir-|, y..32.39:  jevils 

cumcise thine heart, and the heart} &zt.11.19; 16 In that I command thee this 

of thy seed, to love the LoRD thy] 36.26. day to love the Lorp thy God, to 


God with all thine heart, and with) .7..4.339, |walk in his ways, and to keep his 
all thy soul, that thou mayest live.| See Abra- commandments and his statutes 
7 And the LorD thy God will put por SL Fo and his judgments, that thou may- 
all these ‘curses upon thine ene- 15.18, note, |est live and multiply: and the LorD 
pet: and on beret that hate thee, oie. hy. God shal bless thee in the land 
which persecute ee, eph.3.20. whither thou goest to possess it. 

8 And thou shalt ¢return and] $ePales- | 17 But if thine heart turn away, 
obey the voice of the Lorp, and] nant. Deut. |so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt 
do all hu commandments which I} 30.1-9, note. |be drawn away, and worship other 
Sa And feo God will edenge‘l. mee re ie, oe this day, 
make thee plenteous in every work fRom.10.6,7. |that ye shall surely perish, and 
Fes geine hand, in the fruit of thy g Roo 10'8: that ye shall not prolong your days 

ody, and in the fruit of thy cattle, | upon the land, whither thou passest 
and in the fruit of thy land, for// John 11.25. lover Jordan to go to possess it, 


good: for the Lorp will again ¢re- 19 I call heaven and earth to 
jJoice over thee for good, as he record this day against you, that 
rejoiced over thy fathers: I have set before you life and 
10 If thou shalt hearken unto the death, blessing and cursing: there- 
voice of the Lorp thy God, to keep fore choose life, that both thou and 
his commandments and his statutes thy seed may live: 
which are written in this book of 20 -That thou mayest love the 
the law, and if thou turn unto the Lorp thy God, and that thou may- 
Lorp thy God with all thine heart, est obey his voice, and that thou 
and with all thy soul. Fe eee unto pen for he is 
5 : thy ‘life, and the length of th: 
Bde final warning. days: that thou mayest dwell in 
11 For this commandment which |the land which the Lorp sware 


eee re ee: th ES ee eas 


1 The Palestinian Covenant gives the conditions under which Israel entered the 
land of promise. It is important to see that the nation has never as yet taken the 
land under the unconditional Abrahamic Covenant, nor has it ever possessed the 
whole land (cf. Gen. 15. 18, with Num, 34, 1-12). The Palestinian Covenant is in 
seven parts: 

1) Dispersion for disobedience, v. 1 (Deut. 28. 63-68. See Gen. 15. 18, note). 
2) The future repentance of Israel while in the dispersion, v. 2. 

3) The return of the Lord, v. 3 (Amos 9. 9-14; Acts 15. 14-17), 

4) Restoration to the land, v. 5 (Isa. 11. 11, 12; Jer. 23. 3-8; Ezk. 37. 21-25), 

5 National conversion, v. 6 (Rom. 11. 26, 27; Hos. 2. 14-16), 

35 A The judgment of Israel’s oppressors, v. 7 (Isa. 14. 1, 2; Joel 3. 1-8; Mt 

(7) National prosperity, v. 9 (Amos 9. 11-14). 
See, for the other seven covenants: Edenic, Gen. 1, 28; Adamic, Gen. 3. 15; 


aes ae 4 Abrahamic, Gen. 15. 18; Mosaic, Ex. 19,.25; Davidic, 2 Sam. 
250 


mei DEUTERONOMY. [31 20 


unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to|__B.C.1451._|men, and women, and children, and 
Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them. thy stranger that is within thy 
gates, that they may hear, and that 
they may learn, and “fear the LorD 
your God, and observe to do all the 
words of this law: 

13. And that their children, which 
have not known any thing, may 
hear, and learn to 4fear the LorpD 
your God, as long as ye live in the 
land whither ye go over Jordan to 
possess 1t. 


Jehovah warns Moses of the 
apostasy of Israel. (Cf. 1 Tim. 
4. 1-3; 2 Tim. 3. 1-8; Jude 1-19.) 


14 And the Lorp said unto Mo- 
ses, Behold, thy days approach that 
thou must die: call Joshua, and pre- 
sent yourselves in the tabernacle of 
the congregation, that I may give 
him a charge. And Moses and 


CHAPTER 31. 


Moses’ last counsels to. the 
priests, Levites, and Joshua. 


aN Moses went and spake 
these words unto all Israel. 

2 And he said unto them, I am 
an hundred and twenty years old 
this day; I can no more go out and 
come in: also the LorD hath said 
unto me, Thou shalt not go over 
this Jordan. 

3 The Lorpv thy God, he will go 
over before thee, and he will de- 
stroy these nations from before 
thee, and thou shalt possess them: 
and Joshua, he shall go over before 
thee, as the LorD hath said. 


4 And the Lorp shall do unto Joshua went, and presented them- 
them as he did to Sihon and to Og, selves in the tabernacle of the con- 
kings of the Amorites, and unto the gregation. 
land of them, whom he destroyed. 15 And the LorD appeared in the 


5 And the LorD shall give them ble tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud: 
up before your face, that ye may do “" ‘and the pillar of the cloud stood 
unto them according unto all the] Heb.13:5. over the door of the tabernacle. . 
commandments which I have com-| . Josh.1.5,9: 16 And the LorD said unto Mo- 


manded you. : 1 Chr.28.0, {Ses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with 

6 °Be strong and of a good cour- tay. fathers; and this people will rise 
age, fear not, nor be afraid of them:]¢ Psa.19.9, up, and go a whoring after the gods 
for the Lorp thy God, he it is that; "°° lof the strangers of the land, whither 
doth go with thee; “he will not fail] e Israel they go to be among them, and will 
thee, nor forsake thee. (history). forsake me, and break my covenant 


7 And Moses called unto Joshua, curs289: which I have made with them. 


and said unto him in the sight of} (Gen.12.23; | 17 Then my anger shall be kin- 
all Israel, Be strong and of a good) ,Rom.11.26.) |dled against them in that day, and I 
courage: for thou must go with this will forsake them, and I will hide 
people unto the land which the my face from them, and they shall 
Lorp hath sworn unto their fathers be devoured, and many evils and 


to give them; and thou shalt cause troubles shall befall them; so that 
them to inherit it. they will say in that day, Are not 
“8 And the LorpD, he it is that these evils come upon us, because 
doth go before thee; che will be with our God is not among us? 
thee, he will not fail thee, neither 18 And I will surely hide my face 
forsake thee: fear not, neither be in that day for all the evils which 
dismayed. they shall have wrought, in that 
9 And Moses wrote this law, and \they are turned unto other gods. _ 
delivered it unto the priests the | 19 Now therefore write ye this 
sons of Levi, which bare the ark of song for you, and teach it the chil- 
the covenant of the LorpD, and unto dren of Israel: put it in their 
all the elders of Israel. mouths, that this song may be a 
10 And Moses commanded them, pares ie me against the children 
saying, At the end of every seven of Israel. 
years, in the solemnity of the year 20 For when I shall have brought 
of release, in the feast of taber-| them into the land which I sware 
nacles, unto their fathers, that floweth with 


11 When all Israel is come to ap- milk and honey; and they shall have 
pear before the LorD thy God in; eaten and filled themselves, and 
the place which he shall choose,) waxen fat; then will they turn 
thou shalt read this law before ail unto other gods, and serve them, 
Israel in their hearing. and provoke me, and break my 


12 Gather the people together, covenant. 


251 


31 21] 


af 


DEUTERONOMY. 


21 And it shall come to pass, when 
many evils and troubles are befallen 
them, that this song shall testify 
against them as a witness; for it 
shall not be forgotten out of the 
mouths of their seed: for I know 
their imagination ¢which they go 
about, even now, before I have 
brought them into the land which 
I sware. ‘ 

22 Moses therefore wrote this 
song the same day, and taught it 
the children of Israel. 

23 And he gave Joshua the son of 
Nun a charge, and said, Be strong 
and of a good courage: for thou 
shalt bring the children of Israel 
into the land which I sware unto 
them: and I will be with thee. 


Moses instructs the Levites. 


24 And it came to pass, when 
Moses had made an end of writing 
the ‘words of this law in a book, 
until they were finished, 

25 That Moses commanded the 
Levites, which bare the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, saying, 

26 Take this book of the law, ‘and 
put it in the side of the ark of the 
covenant of the Lorp your God, 
that it may be there for a witness 
against thee. 

27 For I know thy rebellion, and 
thy stiff neck: behold, while I am 
yet alive with you this day, ye 
have: been rebellious against the 
Lorp; and how much more after 
my death? 

28 Gather unto me all the elders 
of your tribes, and your officers, 
that I may speak these words in 
their ears, and call heaven and 
earth to record against them. 

29 For I know that after my 
death ye will utterly corrupt your- 
selves, and turn aside from the way 
which I have commanded you; and 
evil will befall you in the latter 
days; because ye will do evil in the 
sight of the Lorn, to provoke him| 
to anger through the work of your 
hands. 

30 And Moses spake in the ears 
of all the congregation of Israel the 
words of this song, until they were 


ended. 
CHAPTER 32. 
The song of Moses. 


GE ear, O ye heavens, and I 
will speak; and hear, O earth, 
the words of my mouth. 

2 4My doctrine shall drop as the 
fain, my speech shall distil as the’ 


B.C. 1451. 


ea Amos 5. 
25,26. 


6 Inspiration. 
2 Sam.23.2. 

(Ex.4.15; 

Rev.22.19.) 


c See 2 Ki. 
22.8. 

d Tsa.55.10,11; 
1 Cor.3.6-8. 


e Dan.4.37; 
Rev.15.3. 


tf Israel 
(history). vs. 
8,9; Deut. 
34.1-5. (Gen. 
12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


g Jer.2.6; 
Hos.13.5. 


252 


dew, as the small rain upon the 
tender herb, and as the showers 
upon the grass: 

3 Because I will publish the name 
of the LorpD: ascribe ye greatness 
unto our God. ; 

4 He 1s the Rock, his work is per- 
fect: for all his ways are judgment: 
a God of truth and without iniquity, 
just and right zs he. 

5 They have corrupted them- 
selves, their spot is not the spot 
of his children: they are a perverse 
and crooked generation. 

6 Do ye thus requite the LorD, O 
foolish people and unwise? is not 
he thy father that hath bought 
thee? hath he not made thee, and 
established thee? 

7 Remember the days of old, con- 
sider the years of many generations: 
ask thy father, and he will shew 
yey thy elders, and they will tell 
thee. 

8 When the Most High divided to 
the nations their finheritance, when 
he separated the sons of Adam, he 
set the bounds of the people accord- 
ing to the number of the children 
of Israel. 

9 For the Lorp’s portion is his 
people; Jacob, is the lot of his in- 
heritance. 

10 He found him 4in a desert 
land, and in the waste howling 
wilderness; he led him about, he 
instructec him, he kept him as the 
apple of his eye. 

11 As an eagle stirreth up her 
nest, fluttereth over her young, 
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh 
them, beareth them on her wings: 

12 So the LorpD alone did lead 
him, and there was no strange 
god with him, 

13 He made him ride on the high 
places of the earth, that he might 
eat the increase of the fields; and he 
made him to suck honey out of the 
rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; 

14 Butter of kine, and milk of 
sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams 
of the breed of Bashan, and goats, 
with the fat of kidneys of wheat; 
and thou didst drink the pure blood 
of the grape. 

15 But Jeshurun waxed fat, and 
kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou _ 
art grown thick, thou art covered 
with fatness; then he forsook God 
which made him, and lightly es- 
teemed the Rock of his salvation. 

16 They provoked him to jealousy | 
with strange gods, with abomina- 
tions provoked they him to anger. — 


| 


17 They sacrificed unto ¢devils, 
not to God; to gods whom they 
knew not, to new gods that came 
newly up, whom your fathers feared 


not. 

18 °Of the Rock that begat thee 
thou art unmindful, and hast for- 
gotten God that formed thee. 

19 cAnd when the LorD saw it, 
he abhorred them, because of the 
provoking of his sons, and of his 
daughters. 

20 And he said, 
,» I will see what 
their end shall be: for they are a 
very froward generation, children in 
whom js no faith. 

21 They have moved me to 4jeal- 
ousy with that which is not God; 
they have provoked me to anger 
with their vanities: and I will move 
them to 4Zjealousy with those 
which are not a people; I will pro- 
vcke them to anger with a foolish 
nation. 

22 For a fire is kindied in mine 
anger, and shall burn unto the low- 
est hell, and shall consume the earth 
with her increase, and set on fire the 
foundations of the mountains. 

23 I will heap mischiefs upon 
them; I will spend mine arrows 
upon them. 

24 They shall be burnt with 
hunger, and devoured with burning 
heat, and with bitter destruction: I 
will also send the teeth of beasts 
upon them, with the poison of ser- 
pents of the dust. 

25 The sword without, and terror 
within, shall destroy both the 
young man and the virgin, the 
suckling also with the man of gray 
hairs. 

26 ¢I said, I would scatter them 
into corners, I would make the re- 
membrance of them to cease from 
among men: 

27 Were it not that I feared the 
wrath of the enemy, lest their ad- 
versaries should behave themselves 
strangely, and lest they should say, 
Our hand is high, and the LoRD 
hath not done all this. _ ; 

28 For they are a nation void of 


counsel, neither is there any un-; 


derstanding in them. : 

29 fO that they were wise, that 
they understood this, that they 
would consider their latter end! 

30 How should one chase a thou- 
sand, and two put ten thousand to 
flight, except their Rock had sold 
them, and the LorD had shut them 
up? 


DEUTERONOMY. 


_ B.C. 1451. 


a Spoiler, 
destroyer. 


6 Isa.17.10. 
c Jud.2.14. 


d Rom.10.19; 


11.11. 


e Ezk.20.13, 
14,23. 


f Lk.19.42. 


g 1 Sam.4.8; 
Jer.40.3. 


h Hos.13.12; 
Rom.2.5. 


# Rom.12.19; 
Heb.10.30. 


j Zech.8.14, 
note. 


k Psa.2.12, 
note. 


7 Rom.15.10. 


253 


[32 45 


| 31 For their rock is not as our 
Rock, even our enemies themselves 
being judges. 

32 For their vine is of the vine of 
Sodom, and of the fields of Gomor- 
rah: their grapes are grapes of gall, 
their clusters are bitter: 

33 Their wine is the poison of 
dragons, and the cruel venom of 
asps. 

| 34 Is not this laid up in store 
with me, and sealed up among my 
treasures? 

35 To me belongeth vengeance, 
and ‘recompence; their foat shall 
slide in due time: for the day of 
their calamity is at hand, and the 
things‘that shall come upon them 
make haste. 

36 For the Lorp shall judge his 
people, and Jrepent himself for his 
servants, when he seeth that their 
power is gone, and there is none 
shut up, or left. 

37 And he shall say, Where are 
their gods, their rock in whom they 
ktrusted, 

38 Which did eat the fat of their 
sacrifices, and drank the wine of 
their drink-offerings? let them rise 
up and help you, and be your pro- 
tection. 

39 See now that I, even I, am he, 
and there is no god with me: I kill, 
ahd I make alive; I wound, and I 
heal: neither 7s there any that can 
deliver out of my hand. 

40 For I lift up my hand to hea- 
ven, and say, I live for ever. 

41 If I whet my glittering sword, 
and mine hand take hold on judg- 
ment; I will render- vengeance to 
mine enemies, and will reward 
them that hate me. 

42 I will make mine arrows drunk 
with blood, and my sword shall de- 
vour flesh; and that with the blood 
of the slain and of the captives, 
from the beginning of revenges 
upon the enemy. 

43 Rejoice, O ye nations, with his 
ltpeople: for he will avenge the 
blood of his servants, and will 
render vengeance to his adversaries, 
and will be merciful unto his land, 
and to his people. 

44 And Moses came and spake all 
the words of this song in the ears 
of the people, he, and Hoshea the 
son of Nun. 


The exhortation. 


45 And Moses made an end of 
speaking all these words to all 
Israel: 


YH 


"32 40] 


46 And he said unto them, ¢Set 
your hearts unto all the words 
which I testify among you this day, 
which ye shall command your chil- 
dren to observe to do, all the words 
of this law. ‘ i 

47 For it is not a vain thing for 
you; because it rs your life: and 
through this thing ye shall prolong 
your days in the land, whither ye 
go over Jordan to possess it. 

48 And the LorpD spake unto 
Moses that selfsame day, saying, 

49 Get thee up into this mountain 
Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which 
ts in the land of Moab, that zs over 
against Jericho; and behold the 
land of Canaan, which I give unto 
the children of Israel for a posses- 
sion: 

50 And die in the mount whither 
thou goest up, and be gathered unto 
thy people; as Aaron thy brother 
died in mount Hor, and was gath- 
ered unto his people: 

51 Because ye trespassed against|a Ezk.40.4. 
me among the children of Israel at Gen Agus 
the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in ices 
the wilderness of Zin; because ye} c Lk.10.39; 
sanctified me not in the midst of the} Acts 22.3. 
children of Israel. d John 1.17; 

52 Yet thou shalt see the land] 7.19. 
before thee; but thou shalt not go! 


thither unto the land which I givel® icant eee 


the children of Israel. 4,5; Josh.1, 
155. (Gen.1 
CHAPTER 33. ioe aes 

The blessing of the tribes. f See Ex.28. 

30, note. 


ND this 7s the blessing, where- 
with Moses the man of God|¢ Isa.2.3. 
blessed the children of Israel before 
his death. 

2 And he said, The Lorp came 
from Sinai, and rose up from Seir 
unto them; he shined forth from 
mount Paran, and he came with ten 
thousands of saints: from his right 
hand went a fiery law for them. 

3 Yea, he loved the people; all 
his sairits are in thy hand: and 
they ‘sat down at thy feet; every 
one shall receive of thy words. 

4 ¢Moses commanded us a law, 
even the inheritance of the congre- 
gation of Jacob. 

And he was ‘king in Jeshurun, 
when the heads of the people and 
the tribes of Israel were gathered 
together, 

6 Let Reuben live, and not die; 
and let not his men be few. 

7 And this is the blessing of Ju- 
dah: and he said, Hear, Lorp, the 
voice of Judah, and bring him unto 


254 


DEUTERONOMY. 


B.C. 1451. 


\ 


his people: let his hands be suffi 
cient for him; and be thou an help 
to him from his enemies. 

8 And of Levi he said, Let thy 
fThummim and thy Urim be with 
thy holy one, whom thou didst 
prove at Massah, and with whom 
thou didst strive at the waters of 
Meribah; 

9 Who said unto his father and to 
his mother, I have not seen him; 
neither did he acknowledge his 
brethren, nor knew his own chil. 
dren: for they have observed thy 
word, and kept thy covenant. 

10 They shall teach Jacob thy 
judgments, and Israel thy law: 
they shall put incense before thee, 
and whole burnt-sacrifice upon 
thine altar. 

11 Bless, Lorp, his substance, 
and accept the work of his hands: 
smite through the loins of them that 
rise against him, and of them that 
hate him, that they rise not again. 

12 And of Benjamin he said, The 
beloved of the LorpD shall dwell in 
safety by him; and the LorD shall 
cover him all the day long, and he 
shall dwell between his shoulders. 

13. And of Joseph he said, Blessed 
of the LorpD be his land, for the 
precious things of heaven, for the 
dew, and for the deep that coucheth 
beneath, 

14 And for the precious fruits 
brought forth by the sun, and for 
the precious things put forth by the 
moon, 

15 And for the chief things of the 
ancient mountains, and for the 
precious things of the lasting hills, 

16 And for the precious things of 
the earth and fulness thereof, and 
ifor the good will of him that dwelt 
in the bush: let the blessing come 
upon the head of Joseph, and upon 
the top of the head of him that wag 
separated from his brethren. 

17 His glory is like the firstling of 
his bullock, and his horns are like 
the horns of unicorns: with them he 
shall push the people together to the 
ends of the earth: and they are the 
ten thousands of Ephraim, and they 
are the thousands of Manasseh. 

18 And of Zebulun he said, Re- 
joice, Zebulun, in thy going out; 
and, Issachar, in thy tents, 

19 They shall écall the people 
unto the mountain; there they shall 
offer sacrifices of righteausness: for 
they shall suck of the abundance 
of the seas, and of treasures hid in 
the sand. | 


| 
q 


20 And of Gad he said, Blessed 
be he that enlargeth Gad: he dwell- 
eth as a lion, and teareth the arm 
with the crown of the head. 

21 And he provided the first part 
for himself, because there, in a por- 
tion of the lawgiver, was he seated; 
and he came with the heads of the 
people, he executed the justice of 
the LorD, and his judgments with 
Israel. 

22 And of Dan he said, Dan isa 
lion’s whelp: he shall leap from 
Bashan. 

23 And of Naphtali he said, O 
Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and 
full with the blessing of the LORD: 
possess thou the west and the 
south. 

24 And of Asher, he said, Let 
Asher be blessed with children; let 
him be acceptable to his brethren, 
and let him dip his foot in oil. 

25 Thy shoes shall be iron and 
brass; and as thy days, so shall 
thy strength be. 

26 There is none like unto the 
God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon 
the heaven in thy help, and in his 
excellency on the sky. 

27 The eternal God is thy4refuge, 

ind undérneath are the € everlasting 
‘arms: and he~shall thrust out the 
é€nemy from before thee; and shall 
say, Destroy them. 

28 Israel then shall dwell in 
safety alone: the fountain of Jacob 
shall be upon a land of corn and 
wine; also his heavens shall drop 
down dew. 

29 Happy art thou, O Israel: who 
is like unto thee, O people saved 
by the Lorpb, the shield of thy 
help, and who is the sword of thy 

“excellency! and thine enemies shall 
be found liars unto thee; and thou 
shalt tread upon their high places.| 


CHAPTER 34. 


The vision and death of Moses. 


ND Moses went up from the| 
plains of Moab unto the moun-! 
tain of Nebo. ta the top of Pisgah. 


a Psa.90.1. 
b Jer.23.6; 
33.16. 


¢ Israel (his- 
tory). vs. 
1-5; Josh. 
11.26.) 

d Jude 9. 

e Gen.50.3,10. 


(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


g Acts 8.17; 
1 Tim.4.14. 


h Ex.33.11; 
Num.12.6,8, 


255 


DEUTERONOMY. 


| B.C. 1451. 


3.9-17. (Gen. 
12.2,3; Rom. 


f Holy Spirit. 
Jud.3.10. 


[34 12 


that 7s over against Jericho. And 
the LorD ‘shewed him all the land 
of Gilead, unto Dan, 

2 And all Naphtali, and the land 
of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all 
the land of Judah, unto the utmost 


sea, 

3 And the south, and the plain of 
the valley of Jericho, the city of 
palm trees, unto Zoar. 

4 And the Lorp said unto him, 
This is the land which I sware unto 
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto 
Jacob, saying, I will give it unto 
thy seed: I have caused thee to see 
it with thine eyes, but thou shalt 
not go over thither. 

5 So Moses the servant of the 
LorpD died there in the land of 
Moab, according to the word of the 
LorRD. 

6 And he buried him in a valley 
in the land of Moab, over against 
Beth-peor: but ¢no man knoweth 
of his sepulchre unto this day. 

7 And Moses was an hundred 
and twenty years old when he died: 
his eye was not dim, nor his natural 
force abated. 

8 And the children of Israel wept 
for Moses in the plains of Moab 
ethirty days: so the days of weep- 
ing and mourning for Moses were 
ended. 


After Moses, Joshua. 


9 And Joshua the son of Nun was 
full of the /fspirit of wisdom; for 
Moses had ‘laid his hands. upon 
him: and the children of Israel 
hearkened unto him, and did as the 
LorpD commanded Moses, 

10 And there arose not a prophet 
since in Israel like unto Moses, 
hwhom the LorD knew face to face, 

11 In all the signs and the won- 
ders, which the LORD sent him to 
do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, 
and to all his servants, and to all 
his land, 

12 And in all that mighty hand, 
and in all the great terror which 
Moses shewed in the sight of all 


Israel. 


ss HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


% ‘THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 
to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time 
_ so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first referenc 

and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 

ye 

De et i ILLUSTRATION 

ae (at Mark 1.1.) 

6b Gospel. vs. - 
1,14,15; Mk. 
8.35. (Gen. 

12.1-3; Rev. 

14.6.) 


_ Here Gospel is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place 
_ Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the. chain, and the references in parenthesis are 
the first and last. 


THE HISTORICAL BOOKS. 


‘THE Historical Books of the Old Testament, usually so called, are twelve in number, 
from Joshua to Esther inclusive. It should, however, be remembered that the entire 
Old Testament is filled with historical material. The accuracy of these writings, 
often questioned, has been in recent years completely confirmed by the testimony 
of the monuments of contemporaneous antiquity. 

The story of the Historical Books is the story of the rise and fall of the Common- 
wealth of Israel, while the prophets foretell the future restoration and glory of that 
people under King Messiah. 

The history of Israel falls into seven distinct periods: 

I. From the call of Abraham to the Exodus, Gen. 12. 1-Ex, 1. 22 (with Acts 7.). 
The book of Job belongs to this period and shows the maturity and depth of philo- 
sophic and religious thought, and the extent of revelation of the age of the Patri. 
archs, 

Ii. From the Exodus to the death of Joshua. The history of this period is gath- 
ered from the books of Exodus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, and such parts 
of Leviticus as relate to the story of Israel. The great figures of Moses, Aaron, and 
Joshua dominate this period. 

III. The period of the Judges, from the death of Joshua to the call of Saul, Jud. 
1. 1-1 Sam. 10. 24. 

IV. The period of the Kings, from Saul to the Captivities, 1 Sam. 11. 1-2 Ki. 
17.6; 25. 30-2 Chr. 36. 23. ’ 

V. The period of the Captivities, Esther, and the historical parts of Daniel. 
With the captivity of Judah began “the times of the Gentiles,” the mark of which 
is the political subjection of Israel to the Gentile world-powers (Lk. 21. 24). 

VI. The restored Commonwealth, always under Gentile over-lordship, from the 
end of the seventy years’ captivity and the return of the Jewish remnant to the 
destruction of Jerusalem, A.D. 70. The inspired history of this period is found in 
Ezra, Nehemiah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi in the Old Testament, and in 
the historical and biographical material found in the New Testament. During 
this period Christ, the promised King of the Davidic Covenant, and the Seed of the 
Adamic and Abrahamic Covenants, appeared, was rejected as king, was crucified, 
rose again from the dead, and ascended to heaven. Toward the end of this period, 
also, the church came into being, and the New Testament Scriptures, save the 
Gospel of John, John’s Epistles, and the Revelation, were written. 

VII. The present dispersion (Lk. 21. 20-24), which according to all the Old Tes- 
tament prophets is to be ended by the final national regathering promised in the. 
Palestinian Covenant (Deut. 30. 1-9). The partial restoration at the end of the 
70 years was foretold only by Daniel and Jeremiah, and was to the end that Mes- 
siah might come and fulfil the prophecies of His sufferings. In the year A.D. 70 
Jerusalem was again destroyed, and the descendants of the remnant of Judah sent 
to share the national dispersion which still continues. 


257 


HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


‘THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 

to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 

i so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference 
and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 


Pi 


x 


ILLUSTRATION 


i, (at Mark 1. 1.) : : 


b Gospel. vs. } 
1,14,15; Mk. 


Here Gospel is the subject: vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place; 


_ Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the references in parenthesis are 
_ the first and last. j 4 


i 
‘ 


J 


; 
| 


258, 


11 


THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 


phere 


JosHuA records the consummation of the redemption of Israel out of Egypt; for 


redemption has two parts: “out,’”’ and “into” (Deut. 6. 23). 
Law, of which Moses is the representa- 


“Moses My servant is dead’? (Josh. 1. 2). 


The key-phrase is 


tive, could never give a sinful people victory (Heb. 7. 19; Rom. 6. 14; 8. 2-4). 

In a spiritual sense the book of Joshua is the Ephesians of the Old Testament. 
“The heavenly” of Ephesians is to the Christian what Canaan was to the Israelite 
—a place of conflict, and therefore not a type of heaven, but also a place of victory 
and blessing through divine power (Josh. 21. 43-45; Eph. 1. 3). 

The government, as before, was theocratic; Joshua succeeding Moses as the 


ruler under God. 

Joshua falls into four parts: 
inheritance, 13.-21. 
death, 23., 24. 


. 


I. The conquest, 1.-12. 
III. Incipient discord, 22, 


II. The partition of the 
IV. Joshua’s last counsels and 


The events recorded in Joshua cover a period of 26 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. 


OW after the *death of Moses 
the servant of the LoRD it came 
to pass, that the LorD spake unto 
1bJoshua the ‘son of Nun, Moses’|* 
minister, saying, 


Deut.34.5; 
Cf.Rev.1.18. 


hogs 6 Kingdorn. 
Joshua commissioned. 


2 Moses my servant is dead; now 
therefore arise, go over this Jordan, 
thou, and all this people, unto the 
land which I do give to them, even 
to the children of Israel. 37,38; Acts 

3 ¢Every place that the sole of| 7-45. 
your foot shall tread pea ee d The law of 

sai ae 


12.8.) 


c¢ Num.13.16; 
14.6,29,30, 


have I given unto you, as appropria- 

unto Moses. tion. God 
4 From the wilderness and this} &y% i but 

Lebanon even unto the great river,| take. 

the river Euphrates, all the land of Seen 


the Hittites, and unto the great sea 
toward the going down of the sun,! + pnit.4.13. 
shall be your coast. 

5 There shall not any man be able? sea 
to stand before thee all the days of g 


thy life: as I was with Moses, so]# Cf.Col.3. 
eI will be with thee: I will not fail] 1°17- 
thee, nor forsake thee. + Psa.1.2,3; 

6 Be /strong and of a good cour-| 143.5; Jer. 
age: for unto this people shalt thou) pats ve 
divide for an inheritance the land,| contra, Hos. 
which I sware unto their fathers to} 10.13. 


give them. 
7 Only be thou strong and very 


courageous, that thou mayest ob-|' 
ition tenes eer, CS 


1 Joshua (Je-hoshua, meaning Jehovah-Saviour) ¢ 
The more important points are: 


after Moses (John 1. 17; Rom. 8. 3, 4; 10.4, 5; Heb. 7. 18, 19; Gal. 3. 23-25). 


4). 


of our salvation” (Heb. 2. 10, 11). 


leads to victory (Rom. 8. 37; 2 Cor. 1. 10; 2.1 
have suffered defeat (Josh. 7. 5-9; 1 John 2. 1). 


11, 14; 4, 8-11). 
259 


B.C. 1451. 


serve to do. according to all the 
law, which Moses my servant com- 
manded thee: turn not from it to 
the right hand or to the left, that 
thou mayest prosper whithersoever 
thou goest. 

8 This book of the law shall not 
depart out of thy mouth; but thou 
shalt ‘meditate therein day and 


- night, that thou mayest observe to 


do according to all that is written 
therein: for then thou shalt make 
thy way prosperous, and then thou 
shalt have good success. 

9 Have not I commanded thee? 
Be strong and of a good courage; be 
not afraid, neither be thou dis- 
mayed: for the LorpD thy God is 
with thee whithersoever thou goest. 


Joshua assumes command. 


10 Then Joshua commanded the 
officers of the people, saying, 

11 Pass through the host, and 
command the people, saying, Pre- 
pare you victuals; for within threé 
days ye shall pass over this Jordan, 
to go in to possess the land, which 
the Lorp your God giveth you to 
possess it. 

12 And to the Reubenites, and to 
the Gadites, and to half the tribe of 
Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying, 

13 Remember the word which 
Moses the servant of the Lorp 
commanded you, saying, The LoRD 


is a type of Christ, the ‘‘Captain 
(1) He comes 
(2) He - 
(3) He is our Advocate when we 


(4) He allots our portions (Eph. 1. 


( i 
4 


¥ 
4 
te 
‘ 
a 


eT 
your God hath given you rest, and 
hath given you this land. 

14 Your wives, your little ones, 
and your cattle, shall remain in the 
land which Moses gave you on this 
side Jordan; but ye shall pass be- 
fore your brethren armed, all the 
mighty men of valour, and help 
them; : 

15 Until the Lorp have given 
your brethren rest, as he hath given 
you, and they also have possessed 
the land which the LorpD your God 
giveth them: then ye shall return 
unto the land of your possession, 
and enjoy it, which Moses the 
Lorp’s servant gave you on this 
side Jordan toward the sunrising. 

16 And they answered Joshua, 
saying, All that thou commandest 
us wewill do, and whithersoever thou 
sendest us, we will go. 

17 According as we hearkened 
unto Moses in all things, so will we 
hearken unto thee: only the Lorp 
thy God be with thee, as he was 
with Moses. 

18 Whosoever he be that doth re- 
bel against thy commandment, and 
will not hearken unto thy words in 
all that thou commandest him, he 
shall be put to death: only be strong 
and of a good courage. 


CHAPTER 2. 
Rahab and the spies. 


AN Joshua the son of Nun sent 
out of Shittim two men to spy 
secretly, saying, Go view the land, 
even Jericho. And they went, and 
came into an harlot’s house, named 
*Rahab, and lodged there. 

2 And it was told the king of Jeri- 
cho, saying, Behold, there came 
men in hither to night of the chil- 
dren of Israel to search out the 
country, 

3 And the king of Jericho sent 
unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the 
men that are come to thee, which 
are entered into thine house: for 
they be come to search out all the 
country. 

4 And the woman took the two 
men, and hid them, and said thus, 
There came men unto me, but I wist 
not whence they were: 

9 And it came to pass about the 
time of shutting of the gate, when 
it was dark, that the men went out: 
whither the men went I wot not: 
pursue after them quickly: for ye 
shall overtake them. 

6 But she had brought them up 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Heb.11.31; 
Jas.2.25. 


b Jas.2.24,25; 
Heb.i1.31. 


c Deut.1.8. 

d Deut.2.25. 

¢ Ex.14.21, 

f Num,21.21. 
& v.18. 

h Josh.6.23-25, 
iv.12. 


260 


to the roof of the house, and hid 
them with the stalks of flax, which 
she had laid in order upon the roof. 

7 And the men pursued after them 
the way to Jordan unto the fords: 
and as soon as they which pursued 
after them were gone out, they shut 
the gate. 

8 And before they were laid down, 
she came up unto them upon the 
roof; 

9 And she said unto the men, I 
know that the Lorp hath given 
you the land, and that your ¢terror 
is fallen upon us, and that all the 
inhabitants of the land faint be- 
cause of you. 

10 For we have heard how the 
Lorp <dried up the water of the 
Red sea for you, when ye came out 
of Egypt; and what ye /did unto the 
two kings of the Amorites, that 
were on the other side Jordan, Si- 
hon and Og, whom ye utterly de- 
stroyed. 

11 And as soon as we had heard , 
these things, our hearts did melt, 
neither did there remain any more 
courage in any man, because of you: 
for the LORD your God, he /s God in 
heaven above, and in earth beneath. 

12 Now therefore, I pray you, 
swear unto me by the LorRD, since 
I have shewed you kindness, that 
ye will also shew kindness unto my © 
father’s house, and give me a true 
8token: 

13 And that ye will save “alive 
my father, and my mother, and my 
brethren, and my sisters, and all 
that they have, and deliver our 
lives from death. 

14 And the men answered her, 
Our life for your’s, if ye utter not 
this our business. And it shall be, 
when the Lorp hath given us the 
land, that we will deal kindly and 
truly with thee. 

15_ Then she let them down by a 
cord through the window: for her 
house was upon the town wall, and 
she dwelt upon the wall. 

16 And she said unto them, Get 
you to the mountain, lest the pur- 
suers meet you; and hide your- 
selves there three days, until the 
pursuers be returned: and afterward 
may ye go your way. 

17 And the men said unto her, We 
will be blameless of this thine oath 
which thou hast made us swear. 

18 Behold, when we come into 
the land, thou shalt bind this ‘line of 
scarlet thread in the window which 
thou didst let us down by: and thou 


‘ata hel ae 


i 
2 19] 


shalt bring thy father, and thy 
mother, and thy brethren, and all 
thy father’s household, home unto 


thee. 

19 And it shall be, that whoso- 
ever shall go out of the doors of thy 
house into the street, his blood!) 
shall be upon his head, and we wil/} 
be guiltless: and whosoever shall 
be with thee in the house, his blood 
shall be on our head, if any hand 
be upon him. 

20 And if thou utter this our busi- 
ness, then we will be quit of thine 
oath which thou hast made us to 
swear. 

21 And she said, According unto 
your words, so be it. And she sent 
them away,-and they departed: and 
she bound the scarlet Jline in the 
window. 

22 And they went, and came unto 
the mountain, and abode there 
three days, until the pursuers were 
returned: and the pursuers sought 
them throughout all the way, but 
found them not. 

23 So the two men returned, and 
descended from the mountain, and 
passed over, and came to Joshua 
the son of Nun, and told him all 
things that befell them: 

24 And they said unto Joshua, 
Truly the LorpD hath delivered into 
our hands all the land; for even all 
the inhabitants of the country do 
faint because of us. 


CHAPTER 3. 
The Passage of Jordan. 


PND Joshua rose early in the 
morning; and they removed 
from Shittim, and came to ?Jordan, 
he and all the children of Israel, 
and lodged there before they passed 
over. 

2 And it came to pass after three 
days, that the officers went through 
the host; 

3 And they commanded the peo- 
ple, saying, When ye see the ark of 
the covenant of the LorD your God, 
and the priests the Levites bearing 
it, then ye shall remove from your 
place, and go after it. 

4 Yet there shall be a ¢space be- 
tween you and it, about two thou- 
sand cubits by measure: come not 
near unto it, that ye may know the 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Heb.10.19- 
22. 


b One cubit = 
about 18 in. 


c Ex.19.10-15; 
Job 1.5; 


Joel 2.16. 


d Israel (his- 
tory). vs. 
9-17; Josh. 
24.29-33. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


e Ex.13.21,22; 
John 10.4; 
Heb.2.14-18; 
12.2-4. 


jes 


15 


| i 
way by which ye must go: for ye 


pare not passed this way hereto- 
ore. 

5 And Joshua said unto the peo- 
ple, ‘Sanctify yourselves: for to 
morrow the LorD will do wonders 
among you. 

6 And Joshua spake unto the 
Priests, saying, Take up the ark of 
the covenant, and pass over before 
the people. And they took up the 
ark of the covenant, and went be- 
fore the people. 

And the LorD said unto Joshua, 
This day will I begin to magnify 
thee in the sight of all Israel, that 
they may know that, as I was 
with Moses, so I will be with thee. 

8 And thou shalt command the 
priests that bear the ark of the 
covenant, saying, When ye are 
come to the brink of the water of 
Phas ye shall stand still in Jor- 


an. 

§ And Joshua said unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, Come hither, and 
ae the words of the LorD your 

od. 

10 And Joshua said, Hereby ye 
shall know that the living God js 
among you, and that he will with- 
out fail drive out from before you 
the Canaanites, and the Hittites, 
and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, 
and the Girgashites, and the Amo: 
rites, and the Jebusites. 

11 Behold, the ark of the covenant 
of the Lord of all the earth passeth 
over “before you into Jordan. 

12 Now therefore take you twelve 
men out ‘of the tribes of Israel, out 
of every tribe a man. 

13 And it shall come to pass, as 
soon as the soles of the feet of the 
priests that bear the ark of the 
Lorp, the Lord of all the earth, 
shall rest in the waters of Jordan, 
that the waters of Jordan shall be 
cut off from the waters that come 
down from above; and they shall 
stand upon an heap. 

14 And it came to pass, when the 
people removed from their tents, to 
pass over Jordan, and the priests 
bearing the ark of the covenant be- 
fore the people; 

15 And as they that bare the ark 
were come unto Jordan, and the 
feet of the priests that bare the ark 
were dipped in the brim of the 


1 The scarlet line of Rahab speaks, by its color, of safety through sacrifice 


(Heb. 9. 19, 22). 
2 The passage of Jordan, 
5,6; Col. 3. 1-3). 


261 


type of our death with Christ (Rom. 6. 6-11; Eph. 2. 


3 16] 


JOSHUA. ° 


water, (for Jordan overfloweth all) B.c. 1451. 


his banks all the time of harvest,) 

16 That the ¢waters which came 
down from above stcod and rose up 
upon an heap very far from the city 
Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and 
those that came down toward the 
sea of the plain, even the salt sea, 
failed, and were cut off: and the 
people passed over right against 


ark of the covenant of the Lorp 
stood firm on dry ground in the 
midst of Jordan, and all the Israel- 
ites passed over on dry ground, 
until all the people were passed 
clean over Jordan. 


CHAPTER 4. 
The two memorials. 


AD it came to pass, when all 

the people were clean Best Miracles 
over Jordan, that the Lorp spake! {9-F),ve: 
unto Joshua, saying, 4.1-18.” (Ge 

2 Take you twelve men out of the! 5.24; Jon.2. 
people, out of every tribe a man, RD, 

d command ye them, saying,|!s Deut.27.2; 
Take you hence out of the midst of| Psa-103.2. 
Jordan, out of the place where the 
priests’ feet stood firm, twelve 
‘stones, and ye shall carry them! 1-18; Josh.6. 
over with you, and leave them in} $25. eons 
the lodging place, where ye shall) jii9) 
lodge this night. 

4 Then Joshua called the twelve 
men, whom he had prepared of the 
children of Israel, out of every tribe) 
a man: 

5 And Joshua said unto them, | 
Pass over before the ark of the! 
LorD your God into the midst of. 
Jordan, and take you up every man! 
of you a stone upon his shoulder, | 
according unto the number of the} 
tribes of the children of Israel: 

6 That this may be a ‘sign among| 
you, that when your children ask! 
their fathers in time to come, say-! 
ing, What mean ye by these} 
stones? 

7 Then ye shall answer them,, 
That the waters of Jordan were cut 
off before the ark of the covenant of 
the Lorp; when it passed over 
Jordan, the waters of Jordan were 
cut off: and these stones shall be} 


¢ Miracles 
(O.T.). vs. 


1 The two memorials. 


for a memorial unto the children of 
Israel for ever. : ; 

8 And the children of Israel did so 
as Joshua commanded, and took up 
twelve stones out of the midst of 
Jordan, as the Lorp spake unto 
Joshua, according to the number of 
the tribes of the children of Israel, 
and carried them over with them 
unto the place where they lodged, 
and laid them down there. 

9 And Joshua set up twelve stones 
in the midst of Jordan, in the place 
where the feet of the priests which 
bare the ark of the covenant stood: 
and they are there unto this day. 

10 For the priests which bare the 
ark stood in the midst of Jordan, 
until every thing was finished that 
the LoRD commanded Joshua to 


(Gen, 


speak unto the people, according to 
all that Moses commanded Joshua: 
and the people hasted and passed 
over. 

11 And it came to pass, when all 
the people were clean passed over, 
that the ark of the Lorp passed 
over, and the priests, in the pres- 
ence of the people. 

12 And the children of Reuben, 
and the children of Gad, and half 
the tribe of Manasseh, passed over 
armed before the children of Israel, 
as Moses spake unto them: 

13 About forty thousand prepared 


for war passed over before the LoRD 
unto battle, to the plains of Jericho. 

14 On that day the LorpD magni- 
fied Joshua in the sight of all Israel; 
and they feared him, as they feared 
Moses, all the days of his life. 

15 And the LorD spake unto 
Joshua, saying, 

16 Command the priests that 
|bear the ark of the testimony, that 
|they come up out of Jordan. 

17 Joshua therefore commanded 
ithe priests, saying, Come ye up out 
\of Jordan. 

| 18 And it came to pass, when the 
priests that bare the ark of the 
icovenant of the LORD were come up 
‘out of the midst of ‘Jordan, and the 
isoles of the priests’ feet were lifted 
‘up unto the dry land, that the wa- 
ters of Jordan returned unto their 
|Place, and flowed over all his banks, 
as they did before. 


The twelve stones taken out of Jordan and erected by 


Joshua in Gilgal, and the twelve stones left in Jordan to.be overwhelmed by its 
waters, are memorials marking the distinction between Christ’s death under judg- 


ment in the believer’s place (Psa. 42. 


peribet deliverance from judgment. 
. 1-18, 


7; 88. 7; John 12. 31-33), and the believer’s 
The stones in Jordan stand, typically, for Psa. 


262% 


4 19] JOSHUA. (5 1 


knives, and ‘circumcised the chil- 
dren of Israel at the hill of the fore- 
skins. 

4 And this fs the cause why 
Joshua did circumcise: All the peo- 
ple that came out of Egypt, that 
were males, even all the men of war, 
died in the wilderness by the way, 
after they came out of Egypt. 

5 Now all the people that came 
out were circumcised: but all the 
people that were born in the wil- 
derness by the way as they came 
forth out of Egypt, then? they had 
not circumcised. 

6 Forthe children of Israel walked 
i.e. April. forty years in the wilderness, till all 


up the waters of Jordan from before} Ex.12.26,27; ae people pies f Ee ey te 
you, until ye were passed over, as| 13.8-145 keer nines rm en Ae 
Rhea BORD eirGod did to the Red| Deut.20.5; sumed, because they obeyed not the 

Eolas: voice of the LoRD: unto whom the 


Bo en pe coe ae before Lorp sware that he would not shew 
24 That all the ieaple of ie earth c Gen.17.10- them the land, which the LorD 
mieht know the hand of the LorD re pee ae sware unto their fathers that he 
= : >| 63 Jer.9.25, | vould give us, a land that floweth 


it 7 i : i 26; Rom.2. C g 
that it is mighty: that ye might 28,29; 1 Cor. with milk and honey. 


The encampment at Gilgal. 


19 And the people came up out of 
Jordan on the tenth day of the ¢first 
month, and encamped in Gilgal, in 
the east border of Jericho. 

20 And those twelve stones, which 
they took out of Jordan, did Joshua 
pitch in Gilgal. q 

21 And he spake unto the children 
of Israel, saying, When your chil- 
dren shall ask their fathers in time 
to come, saying, What mean these 
stones? 

22 Then ®ye shall let your chil- 
dren know, saying, Israel came over 
this Jordan on dry land. 

23 For the Lorp your God dried 


B.C. 1g51. 


fear the LORD your God for ever. 7.19; Gal.5. Pe ind. them chidrent whom Be 
ail 33: raised up in their stead, them 
CHAPTER 5. Colzil. Joshua circumcised: for they were 
FAND it came to pass, when all the F ; uncircumcised, because they had 
kings of the Amorites, which EEE S| Ot circumcised them by the way. 
were on the side of Jordan west-|¢ See Josh.4. 8 And it came to pass, when they 
ward, and all the kings of the Ca-| 19- had done circumcising all the peo- 
naanites, which were by the sea, ple, that they abode in their places 
heard that the Lorp had dried up in the camp, till they were whole. 
the waters of Jordan from before 9 And the LorD said unto Joshua, 
the children.of Israel, untii we were This day have I rolled away the 
passed over, that their heart melted, reproach of Egypt from off you. 
neither was there spirit in them Wherefore the name of the place is 
any more, because of the children called ¢Gilgal unto this day. 
of Israel. 10 And the children of Israel en- 


‘camped in Gilgal, and kept the 
The reproach of Egypt rolled passover on the fourteenth day of 


away. . 
' . he ¢ th at even in the plains of 
2 At that time the LorDp said edcko. a Pee} 


unto Joshua, Make thee sharp ‘ 
knives, and !circumcise again the The new food for the new place. 
children of Israel the second time. 11 And they did eat of the old 
3 And Joshua made him sharp 2corn of the land on the morrow after 


1 Circumcision is the “sign” of the Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 17. 7-14; Rom, 
4,11). “The reproach of Egypt’’ was that, during the later years of the Egyptian 
bondage, this separating sign had been neglected (cf. Ex. 4. 24-26), and this neg- 
lect had continued during the wilderness wanderings. The N.T. analogue is world 
conformity; the failure openly to take a believer’s place with Christ in death and 
resurrection (Rom. 6.:2-11; Gal. 6. 14-16). Spiritually it is mortifying the deeds of 
the body through the Spirit (Rom. 8. 13; Gal. 5. 16, 17; Col. 2. 11, 12; 3. 5-10). 

2The manna is a type of Christ in humiliation, known “after the flesh,” giving 
his flesh that the believer might have life (John 6. 49-51); while the “old corn of 
the land” is Christ apprehended as risen, glorified, and seated in the heavenlies. 
Occupation with Christ on earth, “crucified through weakness, * tends to a wilder- 
ness experience. An experience befitting the believer’s place in the heavenlies 
demands an apprehension of the power of His resurrection (2 Cor. 5. 16; 13. 43 Phil. 
3. 10;.Eph. 1. 15-23). It is the contrast between “milk” and ‘“‘meat” in Paul’s writ- 


ings (1 Cor. 3. 1, 2; Heb, 5. 12-14; 6. 1-3). 


263 


a 


5 12] JOSHUA. [6 


the passover, unleavened cakes, and} B.C_1451. |them, Take up the ark of the cove- 


parched corn in the selfsame day. nant, and let seven priests bear 
12 And the manna ceased on the seven trumpets of rams’ horns be- 
morrow after they had eaten of the fore the ark of the Lorp. 
old corn of the land; neither had 7 And he said unto the people, 
the children. of Israel manna any Pass on, and compass the city, and 
more; but they did eat of the fruit let him that is armed pass on before 
of the land of Canaan that year. he menue ne ert 
, : it came to pass, when 
een cece oe eae Joshua had spoken unto the people, 


13 And it came to pass, when A E 
Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted that the seven priests bearing the 


up his eyes and looked, and, behold, peiieg Sea hrseae nt A horns 
there stood a “man over against Soma Sag the trumpets: al ‘he 
him with his sword drawn in his eck (of ther cavenant of the Lorp 
hand: and Joshua went unto him, 

followed them. 


and said unto him, Ar¢ thou for us, 9: And the armed cen went befoes 
or for our adversaries? 


: i i h 
14 And he said, Nay; but as cap- a S Beers cee i LS aa AEE il 
tain of the host of the Lorp am I after the ark, the priests going on, 
now come. And Joshua fell on his and blowing with the t ote 
rece co ane car eng Fac worship, 10 And Joshua had commanded 
and said unto him, What saith my a 
lord unto his servant? a CfJob 42. the people, saying, Ye shall not 


15 And the captain of the Lorp’s SHOU Gee gor Haas ios wie 
host said unto Joshua, Loose thy| Jer-1. 165 weed ree oF es gl any wre 
shoe from off thy foot; for the place| -E2K-1.285 E 


; Dan.10.5-8; d i : 
whereon thou standest %s choly.| Acts 9.3-6; the éday I bid you shout; then shall 


: } ye shout. 
And Joshua did so. Row): 11 Sone of oe Lore com- 
CHAPTER 6. 6 penal. passe € city, going about it once: 
Phacongussiier Teche! roly (OT). land they came into the camp, and 


(Gen.2.3; lodged in the camp. 
Now Jericho was straitly shut] Zech.8.3.) 12 And Joshua rose early in the 
up because of the children of 


¢ Trans. “con. |mMorning, and the priests took up 
Israel: none went out, and none secrated,” |the ark of the Lorp. 
came in. Josh.6.19; 13 And seven priests bearing 

2 And the LorD said unto Joshua,| ™®-V- Aly. |seyen trumpets of rams’ horns be- 
See, I have given into thine hand|gcrjer.14. {fore the ark of the LorD went on 
Jericho, and the king thereof, and] 14.15; 27:14, continually, and blew with the 
the mighty men of valour. 15; Jon.3.2. |trumpets: and the armed men went 

3 And ye shall compass the city, before them; but the rereward came 
all ye men of war, and go round after the ark of the Lorpb, the 
about the city once. Thus shalt priests going on, and blowing with 
thou do six days. the trumpets. 

4 And seven priests shall bear be- 14 And the second day they com- 
fore the ark seven trumpets of rams’ passed the city once, and returned 
horns: and the seventh day ye into the camp: so they did six days. 
shall compass the city seven times, 15 And it came to pass on the 
and the priests shall blow with the seventh day, that they rose early 

_ trumpets. about the dawning of the day, and 

5 !And it shall come to pass, that compassed the city after the same 
when they make a long blast with manner seven times: only on that 
the ram’s horn, and when ye hear day they compassed the city seven 
the sound of the trumpet, all the times. 
people shall shout with a great 16 And it came to pass at the 
shout; and the wall of the city shall seventh time, when the priests blew 
fall down flat, and the people shall with the trumpets, Joshua said unto 
ascend up every man straight be- the people, Shout; for the Lorp 
fore him. hath given you the city. 

6 And Joshua the son of Nun 17 And the city shall be accursed, 
called the priests, and said unto even it, and ail that are therein, to 


: 1 The central truth here is that spiritual victories are won by means and upon 
principles utterly foolish and inadequate in the view of human wisdom (1 Cor. 1. 
17-29; 2 Cor. 10. 3-5). 

264 


\ 


6 18) 


the Lorpb: only Rahab the hariot 
shall live, she and all that are with 
her in the house, because she hid 
the messengers that we sent. 

18 And ye, in any wise keep your- 
selves from the accursed thing, lest 
ye make yourselves accursed, when 
ye take of the accursed thing, and 
make the camp of Israel a curse, 
and trouble it. 

19 But all the silver, and gold, 
and vessels of brass and iron, are 
econsecrated unto the LorD: they 
shall come into the treasury of the 
Lorpb. 

20 So the Speople shouted when 
the priests blew with the trumpets: 
and it came to pass, when the peo- 
ple heard the sound of the trumpet, 
and the people shouted with a great 
shout, that the wall ‘fell down flat, 
so that the people went up into the 
city, every man straight before him, 
and they took the city. 

21 And they utterly destroyed all 
that was in the city, both man and 
woman, young and old, and ox, and 
sheep, and ass, with the edge of the 
sword. 

22 But Joshua had said unto the 
two men that had spied out the 
country, Go into the harlot’s house, 
and bring out thence the woman, 
and all that she hath, as ye sware 
unto her. 

23 And the young men that were 
spies went in, and brought out Ra- 
hab, and her father, and her mother, 
and her brethren, and all that she 
had; and they brought out all her 
kindred, and left them without the 
camp of Israel. ; i 

24 And they burnt the city with 
fire, and all that was therein: only 
the silver, and the gold, and the 
vessels of brass and of iron, they 
put into the treasury of the house 
of the LORD. 

25 And Joshua saved Rahab the 
harlot alive, and her father’s house- 
hold, and all that she had; and she 
dwelleth in Israel even unto this 
day; because she hid the messen- 
gers, which Joshua sent to spy out 
Jericho. ' 

26 And Joshua adjured them at 
that time, saying, ¢Cursed_ be the 
man before the LORD, that riseth up 
and buildeth this city Jericho: he 
shall lay the foundation thereof in 
his firstborn, and in his youngest 
son shall he set up the gates of it. 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1451. 


@ Sanctify, 
holy (O.T.). 


b Faith. vs. 
20,25; Psa. 
2.12. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 


¢ Miracles 
(O.T.). vs.6- 
25; Josh.10 
12-14. (Gen. 
5-24; Jon.2, 
1-10.) 


d See 1 Ki.16. 
34. 


€ vs.20,21. 


f Called 
Achar, 
1 Chr.2.7. 


g Cf. Josh.2. 
11. 


h Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). Jud. 
13.8,9. (Gen. 
15.2; Hab. 
3.1-16.) 


t Cf.Ex.5.22; 
14.11; 16.3; 
17.3; Num. 
21.5. 


j Ex.32.12; 
Num.14.13. 


(711 


27 So the LorpD was with Joshua; 
and his fame was noised through- 
out all the country. 


CHAPTER 7. 
The sin of Achan. 


Bu the children-of Israel com- 
mitted a trespass in the ac- 
cursed thing: for fAchan, the son of 
Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of 
Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took 
of the accursed thing: and the anger 
of the LorD was kindled against 
the children of Israel. - 

2 And Joshua sent men from Jeri- 
cho to Ai, which is beside Beth- 
aven, on the east sideof Beth-el, 
and spake unto them, saying, Go 
up and view the country. And the 
men went up and viewed Ai. 

3 And they returned to Joshua, 
and said unto him, Let not all the 
people go up; but let about two or 
three thousand men go up and smite 
Ai; and make not all the people to 
labour thither; for they are but few. 

4 So there went up thither of the 
people about three thousand men: 
and they fled before the men of Ai. 

5 And the’ men of Ai ‘smote of 
them about thirty and six men: for 
they chased them from before the 
igate even unto Shebarim, and 
smote them in the going down: 
wherefore the hearts of the people 
8melted, and became as water. 
| 6 And Joshua rent his clothes, and 
fell to the earth upon his face before 
the ark of the LoRD until the even- 
tide, he and the elders of Israel, and 
put dust upon their heads. 

7 And Joshua “said, Alas, O Lord 
Gop, ‘wherefore hast thou at all 
brought this people over Jordan, to 
deliver us into the hand of the Amo- 
rites, to destroy us? would to God 
we had been content, and_dwelt on 
the other side Jordan! 

8 O Lord, what shall I say, when 
Israel turneth their backs before 
their enemies! 

9 For ‘the Canaanites and all the 
inhabitants of the land shall hear 
of it, and shall environ us round, 
and cut off our name from the 
earth: and what wilt thou do unto 
thy great name? 

10 And the LORD said unto 
Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore 
liest thou thus upon thy face? 3 

11 lIsrael hath sinned, and they 


1 The sin of Achan and its results teach 
“Israel hath sinned.” 


ple of God, 7. 11. 


265 


the great truth of the oneness of the peo- 
See in illustration 1 Cor. 5, 1-7; 12. 12- 


aia 
ae 


7 12] 


have also transgressed my covenant 
which I ¢commanded them: for they 
have even Staken of the accursed 
thing, and have also stolen, and 
¢dissembled also, and they have put 
it even among their own stuff. 

12 Therefore the children of Israel 
could not stand before their ene- 
mies, but turned their backs be- 
fore their enemies, because they 
were accursed: neither will I be with 
you any more, except ye destroy the 
accursed from among you. ; 

13 Up, sanctify the people, and| 
say, 4Sanctify yourselves against to! 
morrow: for thus saith the LorpD 
God of Israel, There is an accursed 
thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: 
thou canst not stand before thine| 
enemies, until ye take away the 
accursed thing from among you. 

14 In the morning therefore ye| 
shall be brought according to your| 
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe 
which the LorpD taketh shall come 
according to the families thereof; 
and the family which the Lorp 
shall take shall come by households; 
and the household which the Lorp 
shall take shall come man by man. 

15 And it shall be, that he that is 
taken with the accursed thing shall 
be burnt with fire, he and all that! 
he hath: because he hath trans- 
gressed the covenant of the Lorpb, 
and because he hath wrought folly 
in Israel. 

16 So Joshua rose up early in the 
morning, and brought Israel by 
their tribes; and the tribe of Judah 
was taken: 

17 And he brought the family of| 
Judah; and he took the family of 
the Zarhites: and he brought the| 
family of the Zarhites man by man; 
and Zabdi was taken: 

18 And he brought his household 
man by man; and Achan, the son of 
Carmi, the son ot Zabdi, the son 
of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was’ 
taken. 

19 And Joshua said unto Achan, 
My son, give, I pray thee, glory to 
the LorD God of Israel, and make 
‘confession unto him; and tell me! 
now what thou hast done; hide it| 
not from me. 

20 And Achan answered Joshua, 
and said, Indeed I have sinned! 
against the LorpD God of Israel, 
and thus and thus have I done: 

21 When I saw among the spoils 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1451. 


@ Josh.6.17,18. 
6 v.21. 


¢ Acts 5.1,2; 
Heb.4.13. 


d Sanctify, 


holy (O.T.). 
1 Ki.7.51. 


Jer.3.12,13. 

f One 
shekel = 2s. 
9d., or 65 cts. 


g Isa.65.10; 
Hos,2.15. 


h Josh.1.9; 
10.8.. 


? Josh.6.2. 
j Cf.Deut.20. 
4c 


[8 4 


a goodly Babylonish garment, and — 
two hundred /shekels of silver, and 
a wedge of gold of fifty shekels 
weight, then I coveted them, and 
took them; and, behold, they are 
hid in the earth in the midst of my 
tent, and the silver under it. 

22 So Joshua sent messengers, 
and they ran unto the tent; and, 
behold, it was hid in his tent, and 
the silver under it. 

23 And they took them out of the 
midst of the tent, and brought them 
unto Joshua, and unto all the chil- 
dren of Israel, and laid them out 


|before the LorpD. 


24 And Joshua, and all Israel with 
him, took Achan the son of Zerah, 
and the silver,,and the garment, 
and the wedge of gold, and his sons, 
and his daughters, and his oxen, and 
his asses, and his sheep, and his 
tent, and all that he had: and they 
brought them unto the valley of 
Achor. 

25 And Joshua said, Why hast 


\thou troubled us? the LorpD shall 


trouble thee this day. And all Is- 
rael stoned him with stones, and 
burned them with fire, after they 
had stoned them with stones. 


26 And they raised over him a 
|\great heap of stones unto this day. 


So the LorpD turned from the fierce- 
ness of his unger. Wherefore the 
name of that place was called, The 
8valley of Achor, unto this day. 


CHAPTER 8. 
The conquest of Ai. 


Ane the LORD said unto Joshua, 
hFear not, neither be thou dis- 
mayed: take all the people of war 
with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: 
see, I have ‘given into thy hand the 


j|king of Ai, and his people, and his 


city, and his land: 

2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her 
king as thou didst unto Jericho and 
her king: only the Jspoil thereof, and 
the cattle thereof, shall ye take for 
a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an 
ambush for the city behind it. 

3 So Joshua arose, and all the 
people of war, to go up against Ai: 
and Joshua chose out thirty thou- 
sand mighty men of valour, and 
sent them away by night. 

4 And he commanded them, say- 
ing, Behold, ye shalt lie in wait 


against the city, even behind the 


14, 26. The whole cause of Christ is injured by 


one believer. 


266 


the sin, neglect, or unspirituality of 


85] 


city: go not very far from the city, 
but be ye all ready: 

5 And I, and all the people that 
are with me, will approach unto 
the city: and it shall come to pass, 
when they come out against us, as 
at the first, that we will flee before 
them, 3 

6 (For they will come out after 
us) till we have drawn them from 
the city; for they will say, They flee 
before us, as at the first: therefore 
we will flee before them. ‘ 

7 Then ye shall rise up from the 
ambush, and seize upon the city: 
for the Lorp your God will deliver 
it into your hand. 

8 And it shall be, when ye have 
taken the city, that ye shall set the 
city on fire: according to the com- 
mandment of the LORD shall ye do. 
See, I have commanded you. 

9 Joshua therefore sent them 
forth: and they went to lie in am- 
bush, and abode between Beth-el 
and Ai, on the west side/of Ai: but 
Joshua lodged that night among 
the people. 

10 And Joshua rose up early in 
the morning, and numbered the 
people, and went up, he and the 
elders of Israel, before the people 


to Ai. 

11 And all the people, even the 
people of war that were with him, 
went up, and drew nigh, and came 
before the city, and pitched on the 
north side of Ai: now there was a 
valley between them and Ai. 

12 And he took about five thou- 

sand men, and set them to lie in 
ambush between Beth-el and Ai, on 
the west side of the city. 
“13 And when they had set the 
people, even all the host that was 
on the north of the city, and their 
liers in wait on the west of the city, 
Joshua went that night into the 
midst of the valley. 

14 And it came to pass, when the 
king of Ai saw it, that they hasted 
and rose up early, and the men of 
the city went out against Israel to 
battle, he and all his people, at a 
time appointed, before the plain; 
but he wist not that there were 
liers in ambush against him behind 
the city. e 

15° And Joshua and all Israel 
made as if they were beaten before 
them, and fled by the way of the 
wilderness. 

16 And all the people that were 
in Ai were called together to. pursue 
after them: and they pursued after 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Cf. Josh.15. 
ree 1 Chr.12. 


b Ex.14.16; 
Psa.44.3. 
c¢ Deut.7.2. 


267 


[8 28 


Joshua, and were drawn away from 
the city. 

17 And there was not a man left 
in Ai or Beth-el, that went not out 
after Israel: and they left the city 
open, and pursued after Israel. . 

18 And the Lorp said unto 
Joshua, &Stretch out the spear that 
is in thy hand toward Ai; for I wilt 
give it into thine hand. And Joshua 
stretched out the spear that he had 
in his hand toward the city. 

19 And the ambush arose quickly 
out of their place, and they ran as 
soon as he had stretched out his 
hand: and they entered into the 
city, and took it, and hasted and 
set the city on fire. Sa! 

20 And when the men of Ai 
looked behind them, they saw, and, 
behold, the smoke of the city as- 
cended up to heaven, and they had 
no power to flee this way or that 
way: and the people that fled to 
the wilderness turned back upon 
the pursuers. 

21 And when Joshua and all Is- 
rael saw that the ambush had taken 
the city, and that the smoke of the 
city ascended, then they turned 
again, and slew the men of-Ai. 

22 And the other issued out of the 
city against them; so they were in 
the midst of Israel, some on this 
side, and some on that side: and 
they smote them, so that they let 
none ‘of them remain or escape. 

93 And the king of Ai they took 
alive, and brought him to Joshua, 

24 And it came to pass, when Is- 
rael had made an end of slaying 
all the inhabitants of Ai in the 
field, ‘in the wilderness wherein 
they chased them, and when they 
were all fallen on the edge of the 
sword, until they were consumed, 
that all the Israelites returned unto 
Ai, and smote it with the edge of 
the sword. 

25 And soit was, that all that fell 
that day, both of men and women, 
were twelve thousand, even all the 
men of Ai. 

26 For Joshua drew not his hand 
back, wherewith he stretched out 
the spear, until he had utterly de- 
stroyed all the inhabitants of Ai. 

27 Only the cattle and the spoil of 
that city Israel took for a prey unto 
themselves, according unto the 
word of the LORD which he com- 
manded Joshua. 

28 And Joshua burnt Ai, and 
made it an heap for ever, even a 
desolation unto this day. 


8 29} JOSHUA. 
29 And the king of Ai he hanged! B.C. 1451. 3 And when the inhabitants of 


on a tree until eventide: and as soon 
as the sun was down, Joshua com- 
manded that they should take his 
carcase down from the tree, and 
cast it at the entering of the gate 
of the city, and raise thereon a 
great heap of stones, that remain- 
eth.unto this day. 


The blessings and cursings. 


30 Then Joshua built an 2altar 
unto the Lorp God of Israel in 
mount Ebal, 

31 As Moses the servant of the 
LorRD commanded the children of 
Israel, as it is written in the book 
of the law of Moses, an “altar of! 
whole stones, over which no man 
hath lift up any iron: and they 
offered thereon burnt-offerings unto 
the Lorp, and sacrificed peace- 
offerings. 

32 And he ‘wrote there upon the 
stones a copy of the law of Moses,|a Deut.27.4-6. 
which he wrote in the presence of bEx.20.25 
the children of Israel. ha 

33 And all Israel, and their elders, | ¢ Deut.27.2, 
and officers, and their judges, stood| 38- 
on this side the ark and on that d Deut.11.29; 
side before the priests the Levites,|  27.12,13. 
which bare the ark of the covenant) . yout 31.11: 
of the LorD, as well the stranger,|° 2¢3°30.20. 
as he that was born among them; 
dhalf of them over against mount!‘ aA 
Gerizim, and half of them over i 
against mount Ebal; as Moses the’ g Josh.s.10. 
servant of the Lorp had com- 


manded before, that they should|” joe) 3:1!5 


bless the people of Israel. 2.1; 5.19, 
34 And afterward he ¢read all the 
words of the law, the blessings and 
cursings, according to all that is 
written in the book of the law. 

35 There was not a word of all 
that Moses commanded, which 
Joshua tead not before all the con- 
gregation of Israel, with the women; 
and the little ones, and the strangers 
that were conversant among them. 


CHAPTER 9, 
The league with the Gibeonites. 


AND it came to pass, when all 
F& the kings which were on this 
side Jordan, in the hills, and in the 
valleys, and in all the coasts of the 
great sea over against Lebanon, the 
Hittite, and the Amorite, the Ca- 
naanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, 
and the Jebusite, heard thereof S 

2 That they gathered themselves 
together, to fight with Joshua and 
with Israel, with one accord, 


268 


fGibeon heard what Joshua had 
done unto Jericho and to Ai, 

4 They did work wilily, and went 
and made as if they had been am- 
bassadors, and took old sacks upon 
their asses, and wine bottles, old, 
and rent, and bound up; 

5 And old shoes and clouted upon 
their feet, and old garments upon 
them; and all the bread of their 
provision was dry and mouldy. 

And they went to Joshua unto 
the Scamp at Gilgal, and said unto 
him, and te the men of Israel, We 
be come from a far country: now 
therefore make ye a league with us. 

7 And the men of Israel said unto 
the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell 
among us; and how shall we make 
a league with you? 

8 And they said unto Joshua, We 
are thy servants. And Joshua said 
unto them, Who are ye? and from 
whence come ye? 

9 And they said unto him, From 
a very far country thy servants are 
come because of the name of the 
LorpD thy God: for-we have heard 
the fame of him, and all that he did 


in Egypt, 

10 And all that he did to the two 
kings of the Amorites, that were 
beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of 
Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, 
which was at Ashtaroth. 

11 Wherefore our elders and all 
the inhabitants of our country 
spake to us, saying, Take victuals 
with you for the journey, and go to 
meet them, and say unto them, We 
are your servants: therefore now 
make ye a league with us. 

12 This our bread we took hot for 
our provision out of our houses on 
the day we came forth to go unto 
you; but now, beheld, it is dry, and 
it is mouldy: 

13 And these bottles of wine, which 
we filled, were new; and, behold, 
they be rent: and these our gar- 
ments and our shoes are become old 
by reason of the very long journey, 

14 And the men took of their 
victuals, and asked not counsel at 
‘the mouth of the Lorp. 

15 And Joshua made peace with 
them, and made @league with them, 
to let them live: and the princes of 
the congregation sware unto them. 

16 And it came to pass at the end 
of three days after they had made 
a league with them, that they heard 
that they were their neighbours 
and that they dwelt among them. 


f 
| 


i ho Aa 
aa : 
9 17] 


17 And the children of Israel jour- 
neyed, and came unto their cities on 
the third day. Now their_ cities 
were Gibeon, and. Chephirah, and 
Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim. 

18 And the children of Israel 
smote them not, because the princes 
of the congregation had sworn ¢un- 
to them by the LorpD God of Israel. 
And all the congregation murmured 
against the princes. 

19 But all the princes said unto all 
the congregation, We have sworn 
unto them by the Lorp God of Is- 
rael: now therefore we may not 
touch them. 

20 This we will do to them; we 
will even let them live, lest wrath 
be upon us, because of the oath 
which we sware unto them. 

21 And the princes said unto 
them, Let them live; but let them 
be hewers of wood and drawers of 
water unto all the congregation; as 
the princes had promised them. 

22 And Joshua called for them, 
and he spake unto them, saying, 
Wherefore have ye beguiled us, say- 
ing, We are very far from you; 
when ye dwell among us? 

23 Now therefore ye are cursed, 
and there shall none of you be freed 
from being bondmen, and hewers of 
wood and drawers of water for the 
house of my God. 

24 And they answered Joshua, 
and said, Because it was certainly 
told thy servants, how that the 
LorpD thy God commanded his ser- 
vant Moses to give you all the land, 
and to destroy all the inhabitants 
of the land from before you, there- 
fore we were sore afraid of our lives 
because of you, and have done this 
thing. 

25 And now, behold, we are in 
thine hand: as it seemeth good and 
right unto thee to do unto us, do. 

26 And so did he unto them, and 
‘delivered them out of the hand of 
the children of Israel, that they 
slew them not. 

27 And Joshua made them that 
day hewers of wood and drawers of 
water for the congregation, and for 
the altar of the LORD, even unto 
this day, in the place which he 
should choose. 


CHAPTER 10. 
The victory at Gibeon. 


NOW it came to pass, when Ado- 
ni-zedec king of Jerusalem had 
heard how Joshua had taken Ai, 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Psa.15.4; 
Eccl.5.6. 


b Ex.15.14; 


Deut.11.25; 
Heb.10.27, 


269 


[10 1 


and had utterly destroyed it; as he 
had done to Jericho and her king, 
so he had done to Ai and her king; 
and how the inhabitants of Gibeon 
had made peace with Israel, and 
were among them; 

2 That they feared greatly, be- 
cause Gibeon was a great city, as 
one of the royal cities, and because 
it was greater than Ai, and all the 
men thereof were mighty. 

3 Wherefore Adoni-zedec king of 
Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king 
of Hebron, and unto Piram king of 
Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of 
Lachish, and unto Debir king of 
Eglon, saying, 

4 Come up unto me, and help me, 
that we may smite Gibeon: for it 
hath made peace with Joshua and 
with the children of Israel. 

5 Therefore the five kings of the 
Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the 
king of Hebron, the king of Jar- 
muth, the king of Lachish, the king 
of Eglon, gathered themselves to- 
gether, and went up, they and all 
their hosts, and encamped before 
Gibeon, and made war against it. 

6 And the men of Gibeon sent 
unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, 
saying, Slack not thy hand from 
thy servants; come up to us quickly, 
and save us, and help us: for all the 
kings of the Amorites that dwell in 
the mountains are gathered to- 
gether against us. : 

7 So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, 
the, and all the people of war with 
him, and all the mighty men of 
valour. 

8 And the Lorpb said unto 
Joshua, Fear them not: for I have 
delivered them into thine hand; 
there shall not a man of them 
stand before thee. 

9 Joshua therefore came unto 
them suddenly, and went up from 
Gilgal all night. 

10 And the Lorp discomfited 
them before Israel, and slew them 
with a great slaughter at Gibeon, 
and chased them along the way 
that goeth up to Beth-horon, and 
smote them to Azekah, and unto 
Makkedah. 

11 And it came to pass, as they 
fled from béfore Israel, and were in 
the going down to Beth-horon, that 
the LorRD cast down great stones 
from heaven upon them unto Aze- 
\kah, and they died: they were 
‘more which died with hailstones 
than they whom the children of 
Jsrael slew with the sword. 


10 12] 


12 Then spake Joshua to the 
LorpD in the day when the Lorp 
delivered up the Amorites before 
the children of Israel, and he said 
in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand 
thou still upan Gibeon; and thou, 
Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. 

13 And the sun ¢stood still, and 
the moon stayed, until the people 
had avenged themselves upon their 
enemies. Js not this written in the 
book of Jasher? So the sun stood 
still in the midst of heaven, and 
hasted not to go down about a 
whole day. 


14 And there was no day like that 

before it or after it, that the LorD 

~hearkened unto the voice of a man: 
for the Lorp fought for Israel. 

15 And Joshua returned, and all 
Israel with him, unto the camp to 
Gilgal. 

16 But these five kings fled, and 
hid themselves in a cave at Mak- 
kedah. h 

17 And it was told Joshua, saying, 
The five kings are found hid in a 
cave at Makkedah. 

18 And Joshua said, Roll great 
stones upon the mouth of the cave, 
and set men by it for to keep them: 

19 And stay ye not, but pursue 
after your enemies, and smite the 
hindmost of them; suffer them not 
to enter into their cities: for the 
LorD your God hath delivered 

+ them into your hand. 

20 And it came to pass, when 
Joshua and the children of Israel 
had made an end of slaying them 
with a very great slaughter, till 
they were consumed, that the rest 
which remained of them entered 
into fenced cities. . 

21 And all the people returned to 
the camp to Joshua at Makkedah 
in peace: none moved his tongue 
against any of the children of Israel. 

22 Then said Joshua, Open the 
mouth of the cave, and bring out 
those five kings unto’ me out of the 
cave. 

23 And they did so, and brought 
forth those five kings unto him out 
of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, 
the king of Hebron, the king of 
Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and 
the king of Eglon. 

24 And it came to pass, when they 
brought out those kings unto 
Joshua, that Joshua called for all 
the men of Israel, and said unto the 
captains of the men of war which 
went with him, Come near, put 
your ‘feet upon the necks of these 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1451. 


a Miracles 


(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


6 Ex.11.7. 


c Psa.110.1; 
Isa.26.5,6; 
Mal.4.3; 
Heb.2.8. 


d Josh.1.9; 


Deut.31.6,8; 
2 Tim.4.17, 
18. 

e Deut.7.2,16; 
1 Cor.15.25. 

Ff Josh.15.42; 
21.13; 2 Ki, 
8.22; 19.8. 


gv.3. 


270 


[10 35 


kings. And they came near, and 
put their feet upon the necks of 
them. 

25 And Joshua said unto them, 
7Fear not, nor be dismayed, be 
strong and of good courage: for 
thus shall the Lorp do to all your 
enemies against whom ye fight. 

26 And afterward Joshua smote 
them, and slew them, and hanged 
them on five trees: and they were 
hanging upon the trees until the 
evening. : 

27 And it came to pass at the time 
of the going down of the sun, that 
Joshua commanded, and they took 
them down off the trees, and cast 
them into the cave wherein they 
had been hid, and laid great’ stones 
in the cave’s mouth, which re- 
martin until this very day. 


Victories at Makkedah, etc. 


28 And that day Joshua took 
Makkedah, and smote it with the 
edge of the sword, and the king 
thereof he utterly «destroyed, them, 
and all the souls that were therein; 
he let none remain: and he did to 
the king of Makkedah as he did 
unto the king of Jericho. 

29 Then Joshua passed from 
Makkedah, and all Israel with him, 
unto Libnah, and fought against 
fLibnah: 

30 And the Lorp delivered it 

also, and the king thereof, into the 
hand of Israel; and he smote it with 
the edge of the sword, and all the 
souls that were therein; he let none 
remain in it; but did unto the kin: 
thereof as he did unto the king of 
Jericho. 
"37 And Joshua passed from Lib- 
nah, and all Israel with him, unto 
Lachish, and ehcamped againet it, 
and fought against it: 

32 And the Lorpb delivered La- 
chish into the hand of Israel, which 
took it on the second day, and 
smote it with the edge of the sword, 
and all the souls that were therein, 
according to all that he had done to 
Libnah. 

33 Then Horam king of Gezer 
came up to help Lachish; and Josh- 
ua smote him and his people, until 
he had left him none remaining. 

34 And from Lachish Joshua 
passed unto £Eglon, and all Israel 
with him; and they encamped 
against it, and fought against it: 

35 And they took it on that day, 
and smote it with the edge of the 
sword, and all the souls that were 


.. eit wfeor 


10 36 


[1115 


SS a a ee | EIR ier uN ome, 
therein he utterly destroyed that mountains, and to the Hivite under 


day, according to all that he had 
done to Lachish. 

36 And Joshua went up from Eg- 
lon, and all Israel with him, unto 
Hebron; and they fought against it: 

37 And they took it, and smote it 
with the edge of the sword, and the 
king thereof, and all the cities 
thereof, and all the souls that were 
therein; he left none remaining, ac- 
‘cording to all that he had done to 
Egilon; but destroyed it utterly, and 
all the souls that were therein. 

38 And Joshua returned, and all 
Israel with him, to ¢Debir; and 
fought against it: 

39 And he took it, and the king 
thereof, and all the cities thereof; 
and they smote them with the edge 
of the sword, and utterly destroyed 
all the souls that were therein; he 
jeft nome remaining: as he had done 
to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and 
to the king thereof; as he had done 
also to Libnah, and to her king. 

40 So Joshua smote all the coun- 
try of the hills, and of the south, 


Hermon in the land of Mizpeh. 

4 And they went out, they and all - 
their hosts with them, much people, 
even as the ‘sand that is upon the 
sea shore in multitude, with horses 
and chariots very many. 

5 And when all these kings were 
met together, they came and 
pitched together at the waters of 
Merom, to fight against Israel. 

6 And the LorD said unto Joshua, 
Be not afraid because of them: for 
to morrow about this time will I de- 
liver them up all slain before Israel: 
thou shalt hough their horses, and 
burn their chariots with fire. 

7 So Joshua came, and all the peo- 
ple of war with him, against them 
by the waters of Merom suddenly; 
and they fell upon them. 

8 And the Lorp delivered them 
into the hand of Israel, who smote 
them, and chased them unto great 
Zidon, and unto Misrephoth-maim, 
and unto the valley of Miz>eh east- 
ward; and they smote them, until 
they left them none remaining. 


and of the vale, and of the springs,|« Josh.15.15; | 9 And ‘Joshua did unto them as 
and all their kings: he left none re-| Jud-1.11. the LorpD bade him: he houghed 


maining, but utterly destroyed alll, peuto.23, [their horses, and burnt their char- 


that breathed, as the LorpD God of 
Israel commanded. 

41 And Joshua smote them from 
bKadesh-barnea even unto Gaza, 
and all the country of Goshen, even 

“unto Gibeon. 

42 And all these kings and their 
Jand did Joshua take at one !time, 
because the Lorp God of Israel 
fought for Israel. 

43 And Joshua returned, and all 
Israel with him, unto the camp to 
Gilgal. 


CHAPTER i1. 
Final conquest of Canaan. 


ND it came to pass, when Jabin 
king of Hazor had heard those} 
things, that he sent to Jobab king 
of Madon, and to the king of Shim- 
ron, and to the king of Achshaph, 

2 And to the kings that were on 
the north of the mountains, and of 
the plains south of Chinneroth, and 
jn the valley, and in the borders of 
Dor on the west, 

3 And to the Canaanite on the 
east and. on the west, and to the 
Amorite, and the Hittite, and the 
Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the 


jots with fire. 

16 And Joshua at that time 
turned back, and took Hazor, and 
smote the king thereof with the 
sword: for Hazor beforetime was 
the head of all those kingdoms. 

ji And they smote all the souls 
that were therein with the edge of 
the sword, utterly destroying them: 
\there was not any left to breathe: 
and he burnt Hazor with fire. 
| 12 And all the cities of those 
lkings, and all the kings of them, did 
Joshua take, and smote them with 
the edge of the sword, and he ut- 
terly destroyed them, as Moses the 
servant of the LORD commanded. 

13 But as for the cities that stood 
still in their strength, Israel burned 
none of them, save Hazor only; 
that did Joshua burn. 

14 And all the spoil of these cit- 
ies, and the cattle, the children of 
Israel took for a prey unto them- 
iselves; but every man they smote 
with the edge of the sword, until 
|they had destroyed them, neither 
left they any to breathe. 

15 As the LoRD commanded Mo- 
ses his servant, so did Moses com- 
jmand Joshua, and so did Joshua; 


1Cf. Josh. 11. 18. As the context shows, the verses refer to different parts of 


Palestine and different kings. © 


= 


11 16] 


€ 


JOSHUA. 


[12 2 


he left nothing undone of all that| B.C. 1450. 


the LorD commanded Moses. 

16 So Joshua took all that land, 
the hills, and all the south country, 
and all the land of Goshen, and the 
valley, and the plain, and the moun- 
tain of Israel, and the valley of the 
same; 

17 Even from the mount Halak, 
that goeth up to Seir, even unto 
Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon 
under mount Hermon: and all their 
kings he took, and smote them, and 
slew them. , 

18 Joshua made war a “long time 
with all those kings. 

19 There was not acity that made 
peacewiththechildrenof Israel, save 
the Hivites the inhabitants of Gib- 
eon: all other they took in battle. 

20 For it was of the LorpD to 
harden their hearts, that the 
should come against Israel in battle, 
that he might destroy them utterly, 
and that they might haveno favour, 
but that he might destroy them, as 
the LORD commanded Moses. 

21 And at that time came Joshua, 
and cut off the »Anakims from the 
mountains, from Hebron, from De- 
bir, from Anab, and from all the 
mountains of Judah, and from all 
the mountains of Israel: Joshua de- 
stroyed them utterly with their 
cities. 

22 There was none of the Ana- 
kims left in the land of the children 
of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and 
in Ashdod, there remained. 

23 So Joshua took the whole land, 
according to all that the LorD ‘said 
unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for 
an inheritance unto Israel accord- 


ing to their divisions by their tribes. | 


And the land rested from war. 


CHAPTER 12. 


The roster of the kings of 
Canaan. 


New these are the kings of the 
land, which the children of Is- 
rael smote, and possessed their land 
on the other side Jordan toward the 
Tising of the sun, from the river 
Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all 
the plain on the east: 

2 4Sihon king of the Amorites, 
who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled 
from Aroer, which is upon the bank 
of the river Arnon, and from the 
middle of the river, and from half 
Gilead, €ven unto the river Jabbok, 
which is the border of the children 
of Ammon; 


a4 a Cf. Josh.10. 


42, note. 


6 Num.13.22; 
Deut.9.2. 


d Deut.2.33, 
36; 3.6,16,17. 


é Deut.3.8,14. 
f Num.32.29, 
33. 


g Ex.23.23. 
h Josh.6.2. 

? Josh.10.23. 
Jj Jud.1.22, 
k 1 Ki.4.10, 


272 


3 And from the plain to the sea of 
Chinneroth on the east, and unto 
the sea of the plain, even the salt 
sea on the east, the way to Beth- 
jeshimoth; and from the south, 
under Ashdoth-pisgah: : 

4 And the coast of Og king of 
Bashan, whicA was of the remnant 
of the giants, that dwelt at Ashta- 
roth and at Edrei, 

5 And reigned in mount ‘Hermon, 
and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, 
unto the border of the Geshurites 
and the Maachathites, and half Gil- 
ead, the border of Sihon king of 
Heshbon. 

6 Them did Moses the servant of 
the LorD and the children of Israel 
smite: and Moses the servant of the 
Lorp gave Jit for a possession unto 
the Reubenites, and the Gadites, 
and the half tribe of Manasseh. 

7 And these are the kings of the 
country which Joshua and the chil- 
dren of Israel smote on this side 


Jordan on the west, from Baal-gad 
in the valley of Lebanon even unto 
the mount Halak, that goeth up to 
Seir; which Joshua gave unto the 
tribes of Israel for a possession ac- 
cording to their divisions; 

8 In the mountains, and in the 
valleys, and in the plains, and in the 
springs, and in the wilderness, and 
in the south country; the “Hittites, 
the Amorites, and the Canaanites, 
the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the 
Jebusites: 

9 The king of /Jericho, one; the 
king of Ai, which is beside Beth-el, 
one; 

10 The king of ‘Jerusalem, one; 
the king of Hebron, one; 

11 The king of Jarmuth, one; the 
king of Lachish, one; 

12 The king of Eglon, one; the 


king of Gezer, one; 

13 The king of Debir, one; the 
king of Geder, one; 

14 The king of Hormah, one; the 
king of Arad, one; 

15 The king of Libnah, one; the 
king of Adullam, one; 

16 The king of Makkedah, one; 
the king of /Beth-el, one; 

17 The king of Tappuah, one; the 
king of *Hepher, one; 

18 The king of Aphek, one; the 
king of Lasharon, one; 

19 The king of Madon, one; the 
king of Hazor, one; 

20 The king of Shimron-meron, 
one; the king of Achshaph, one; 

21. The king of Taanach, one: the 
king of Megiddo, one; 


42 22 J | 


22 The king of Kedesh, one; the 
king of Jokneam of Carmel, one; 

23 The king of Dor in the coast of 
Dor, one; the king of the nations of 
Gilgal, one; 

24 The king of Tirzah, one: all 
the kings thirty and one. 


CHAPTER 13. 


The Lord instructs Joshua con- 
cerning the division of the 
Jand. 


New Joshua was old and stricken 
: in years; and the LorD said 
unto him, Thou art old and stricken 
in years, and there remaineth yet 
very much land to be possessed. 

2 This is the land that yet re- 
maineth: all the borders of the 
Philistines, and all Geshuri, 

3 From Sihor, which is before 
Egypt, even unto the borders of 


si 


JOSHUA. 


B.C, 1451. 


[13 26 


11 And Gilead, and the border of 
the Geshurites and Maachathites, 
and all mount Hermon, and all Ba- 
shan unto Salcah; 

12 All the kingdom of Og in Ba- 
shan, which reigned in Ashtaroth 
and in Edrei, who remained of the 
remnant of the giants: for ‘these 
did Moses smite, and cast them out. 

13 Nevertheless the children of 
Israel expelled ¢not the Geshurites, 
nor the Maachathites: but the Ge- 
shurites and the Maachathites dwell 
among the Israelites until this day. 

14 Only unto the tribe of Levi he 
gave ‘none inheritance; the sacri- 
fices of the Lorp God of Israel 
made by fire are their inheritance, 
as he said unto them. 

15 And Moses gave unto the tribe 
of the children of Reuben inhert- 
tance according to their families. 

16 And their coast was from 


JAroer, that is on the bank of the 
river Arnon, and the city that is in 


Ekron northward, which is counted 


to the Canaanite: five lords of the|? N°™3?-33- 


Philistines; the Gazathites, and the} Josh.12.5. the midst of the river, and all the 
Pp coiiteas fre: cq caate ia ee Sah Py ees 48 ou 
ittites, an e ronites; also cae SS &Heshbon, an er cities 
ites: d -23.12, that in the plain; Di d 
a Poe south, all the land of 13: Nura.33. Benoeebent sat Foy aar ore 
the Canaanites, and Mearah that is) °° J84-?'23-) 18 And hJahaza, and Kedemoth, 
beside the ening! ene Aphek, | e Josh.14.3,4. ae Mepbant uit me: 
to the borders of the Amorites: n irjathaim, and Sibmah, 
Seite land of 5 Sates lessee ane ae ay in the mount of 
and all Lebanon, toward the sun-|g Num.21.28, |the valley, 
rising, from Baal-gad under mount} 3°- 20 And Beth-peor, and Ashdoth- 
Hermon unto the entering into Ha-|;, num.21.23, |Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth, 
th. 21 And all the cities of the plain, 
a5 All the inhabitants of the hill}#Num.31.8. [and all the kingdom of Sihon king 
country from Lebanon unto Misre-| ;num.22.5; |Of the Amorites, which reigned in 
photh-maim, and all the Sidonians,| 31.8. ’ |Heshbon, whom Moses smote with 


them will I drive out from before 
the children of Israel: only divide 
thou it by lot unto the Israelites for 
an inheritance, as I have com- 
manded thee. 

7 Now therefore divide this land 
for an inheritance unto the nine 
tribes, and the half tribe of Ma- 
nasseh, 

8 With whom the Reubenites and 
the Gadites have received their in- 
heritance, which “Moses gave them, 
beyond Jordan eastward, even as 
Moses the servant of the LORD gave 
them; 

9 From Aroer, that 7s upon the 
bank of the river Arnon, and the 
city that is in the midst of the 
river, and all the plain of Medeba 
unto Dibon; i 

10 And all the cities of Sihon king 
of the Amorites, which reigned in 
Heshbon, unto the border of the 
children of Ammon; 


273 


the princes of ‘Midian, Evi, and Re- 
kem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, 
which were dukes of Sihon, dwell- 
ing in the country. 

22 jBalaam also the son of Beor, 
the soothsayer, did the children of 
Israel slay with the sword among 
them that were slain by them. 

23 And the border of the children 
of Reuben was Jordan, and the 
border thereof. This was the in- 
heritance of the children of Reuben 
after their families, the cities and 
the villages thereof. 

24 And Moses gave inheritance 
unto the tribe of Gad, even unto 
the children of Gad according to 
their families. 

25 And their coast was Jazer, and 
all the cities of Gilead, and half the 
land of the children of Ammon, 
unto Aroer that 1s before Rabbah; 

26 And from Heshbon unto Ra- 
math-mizpeh, and Betonim; and 


13 27} 


Debir; . ; 

27 And in the valley, Beth-aram, 
and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and 
Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of 
Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and 
his border, even unto the edge of 
the sea of Chinnereth on the other 
side Jordan eastward. 

28 This is the inheritance of the 
children of Gad after their families, 
the cities, and their villages. 

29 And Moses gave inheritance 
unto the half tribe of Manasseh: 
and this was the possession of the 
half tribe of the children of Manas- 
seh by their families. 

30 And their coast was from Ma- 
hanaim, all Bashan, all the king- 
dom of Og king of Bashan, and all 
the towns of Jair, which are in 
Bashan, threescore cities: 

31 And half Gilead, and Ashtar- 
oth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom 
of Og in Bashan, were pertaining 
unto the children of Machir the son 
of Manasseh, even to the one half 
of the children of Machir by their 
familtes. : 

32 These are the countries which 
Moses did distribute for inheri- 
tance in the plains of Moab, on 
the other side Jordan, by Jericho, 
eastward. 

33 But unto the tribe of Levi 
Moses gave not any inheritance: 
the LorD God of Israel was their 
inheritance, as he said unto them. 


CHAPTER 14. 


The land divided: the portion 
of Caleb. 


{ARs these are the countries 
which the children of Israel 
inherited in the land of Canaan, 
which Eleazar +he priest, and 
Joshua the son of Nun, and the 
heads of the fathers of the hae 

| 


of the children of Israel, distributed 
for inheritance to them. 

2 By “lot was their inheritance, 
as the LORD commanded by the 
hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, 
and for the half tribe. 

3 For Moses had given the inheri- 
tance of two tribes and an half tribe 
on the other side Jordan: but unto 
the Levites he gave none inheri- 
tance among them, 

4 For the children of Joseph 4were 
two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: 
therefore they gave no part unto 
the Levites in the land, save cities 
to dwell in, with their suburbs for 


JOSHUA. 


from Mahanaim unto the border of} B.c.1445. -|their cattle an 


a Num.26.55; 
32.54; 34.13; 
Psa.16.5,6; 
47.4. 


b Gen.48.5; 
1 Chr.5.1,2. 


¢ Num.32.12. 

d Num.13.6, 
26. 

¢ Num.14.24. 

f Num.14.30. 

g Num.13.28, 
33. 


214 


te |. 
[14 15 

ad for their sub- 
stance. ‘ 


5 As the LorD commanded Mo- 
ses, so the children of Israel did, 
and they divided the land. 

6 Then the children of Judah 
came unto: Joshua in Gilgal: and 
cCaleb the son of Jephunneh the 
Kenezite said unto him, Thou 
knowest the thing that the Lorp 
said unto Moses the man of God 
concerning me and thee in Kadesh- 
barnea. 

7 Forty years old was I when 
Moses the servant of the Lorp 
j¢sent me from Kadesh-barnea to 
espy out the land; and I brought 
him word again as it was in mine 
heart. i 
8 Nevertheless my brethren that 
went up with me made the heart 
of the people melt: but I éwholly 
followed the LorD my God. 

9 And Moses’ sware on that 
day, saying, Surely the land 
whereon thy feet have .trodden 
shall be thine inheritance, and thy 
children’s for ever, because thou 
ea wholly followed the LoRD my 
God. 

10 And now, behold, the Lorp 
hath kept me alive, as he Jsaid, 
these forty and five years, even 
since. the LORD spake this word 
unto Moses; while the children of 
Israel wandered in the wilderness: 
and now, lo, I am this day four- 
score and five years old. 

11 As yet I am as strong this day 
as I was in the day that Moses sent 
me: as my strength was then, even 
so igs my strength now, for. war, 
both to go out, and to come in. 

12 Now therefore give. me this 
mountain, whereof the LORD spake 
in that day; for thou heardest in 
that day show the Anakims were 
there, and that the cities were 
great and fenced: if so be the Lorp 
‘will be with me, then I shall be 
fable to drive them out, as the 
LORD said. 

13 And Joshua blessed him, and 
gave unto Caleb the son of Jephun- 
neh Hebron for an inheritance. 

14 Hebron therefore became the 
inheritance of Caleb the son of Je- 
phunneh the Kenezite unto this 
day, because that he wholly fol- 
lowed the Lorp God of Israel. 

15 And the name of Hebron be- 
fore was Kirjath-arba; which Arba 
was a great-man among the Ana- 
kims. And the land had rest from 
war. 


CHAPTER 15. 
The land divided: the. portion 
of Judah. 


‘AIS then was the lot of the 
tribe of the children of Judah 
by their families; even to the bor- 
der of Edom the wilderness of Zin 
southward was the uttermost part 
of the south coast. 
2 And their south border was 
from the shore of the salt sea, from 
the bay that looketh southward: 
3 And it went out to the south 
side to Maaleh-acrabbim, and 
passed along to Zin, and ascended 
up on the south side unto Kadesh- 
barnea, and passed along to Hez- 
ron, and went up to Adar, and 
fetched a compass to Karkaa: 

4 From thence it passed toward 
Azmon, and went out unto the 
river of Egypt; and the goings out 
of that coast were at the sea: this 
shall be your south coast. 

5 And the east border was the 
salt sea, even unto the end of Jor- 
dan. And their border in the north 
quarter was from the bay of the sea 
at the uttermost part of Jordan: 

6 And the border went up to 
Beth-hogla, and passed along by the 
north of Beth-arabah; and the bor- 
der went up to the stone of Bohan 
the son of Reuben: 

7 And the border went up toward 
Debir from the valley of Achor, and 
so northward, looking toward Gil- 
gal, that is before the going up to 
Adummim, which is on the south 
side of the river: and the border 
passed toward the waters of En- 
shemesh, and the goings out there- 
of were at En-rogel: 

8 And the border went up by the 
valley of the son of.Hinnom unto 
the south side of the Jebusite; the 
same is Jerusalem: and the border 
went up to the top of the mountain 
that lieth before the valley of Hin- 
nom westward, which is at the end 
of the valley of the giants north- 
ward: 

9 And the border was drawn from 
the top of the hill unto the ¢foun- 
tain of the water of Nephtoah, and 
went out to the cities of mount 
Ephron; and the border was drawn 
to ’Baalah, which is Kirjath-jea- 


rim; 

10 And the border compassed 
from Baalah westward unto mount 
Seir, and passed along unto the side 
of mount Jearim, which is Chesa- 
lon, on the north side, and went 


JOSHUA. 


a Josh.18.15. 


b 2 Sam.6.2; 
1 Chr.13.6. 


c Gen.38.13; 
Jud.14.1. 


d Kirjath- 
arba. 


e Num.13.22; 
Jud.1.10,20. 


f Josh.10.38. 
g Num.32.12. 


275 


[1s 27 


down to Beth-shemesh, and passed 
on to “Timnah: , 

11 And the border went out unto 
the side of Ekron northward: and 
the border was drawn to Shicron, 
and passed along to mount Baalah, 
and went out unto Jabneel; and 
the goings out of the border were 
at the sea. 

12 And the west border was to 
the great sea, and the coast there- 
of. This is the coast of the children 
of Judah round about according to 
their families. 

13 And unto Caleb the son of Je- 
phunneh he gave a part among the 
children of Judah, according to the 
commandment of the LORD to 
Joshua, even the city of ¢Arba the 
father of Anak, which city is He- 


|bron. 


14 And Caleb drove thence the 
three “sons of Anak, Sheshai, and 
Ahiman, and Talmai, the children 
of Anak, 

15 And he went up thence to the 
inhabitants of fDebir: and the name 
of Debir before was Kirjath-sepher. 

16 And Caleb said, He that smit- 
eth Kirjath-sepher, and taketh it, 
to him will I give Achsah my 
daughter to wife. 

17 And Othniel the 2son of Kenaz, 
the brother of Caleb, took it: and 
he gave him Achsah his daughter 
to wife. 

18 And it came to pass, as she 
came unto him, that she moved 
him to ask of her father a field: 
and she lighted off her ass; and 
Caleb said unto her, What wouldest 
thou? 

19 Who answered, Give me a 
blessing; for thou hast given me a 
south land; give me also springs of 
water. And he gave her the upper 
springs, and the nether springs. 

20 This is the inheritance of the 
tribe of the children of Judah ac- 
cording to their families. 

21 And the uttermost cities of the 
tribe of the children of Judah to- 
ward the coast of Edom southward 
were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur, 

22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and 
Adadah, ; 

23 And Kedesh, and Hazor, and 
Ithnan, 

24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth, 

25 And Hazor, Hadattah, and Ke- 
rioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor, 

26 Amam, and Shema, and Mola- 
dah, 

27 And Hazar-gaddah, and Hesh- 
mon, and Beth-palet, 


15 28] 


28 And Hazar-shual, and Beer- 
sheba, and Bizjothjah, 

29 “@Baalah, and Iim, and Azem, 

30 And Eltolad, and Chesil, and 
Hormah, 

31 And >Ziklag, and Madmannah, 
and Sansannah, 7 

32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, 
and Ain, and Rimmon: all the 
cities are twenty and nine, with 
their villages: 

33 And in the valley, Eshtaol, 
and Zoreah, and Ashnah, “ 

34 And Zanoah, and En-gannim, 
Tappuah, and Enam, 

35 Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, 
and Azekah, 

36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, 
and Gederah, and Gederothaim; 
fourteen cities with their villages: 

37 Zenan, and Hadashah, and 
Migdal-gad, 

38 And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and 
Joktheel, 
ae, Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eg- 
on, 

40 And Cabbon, and Lahmam, 
and Kithlish, 

41 And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, 
and Naamah, and Makkedah; six- 
teen ‘cities with their villages: 


42 Libnah, and Ether, and; 


Ashan, 

43 And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and 
Nezib, 

44 And Keilah, and Achzib, and 
Mareshah; nine cities with their 
villages: 

45 Ekron, with her towns and her 
villages: 

46 From Ekron even unto the sea, 
all that Jay near Ashdod, with their 
villages: 

47 Ashdod with her towns and her 


JOSHUA. 


| 


B.C. 1444. 


av.9. 
b 1 Sam.27.6, 
¢ Josh.18.14. 
d 1 Sam.23.29, 
¢ Jud.1.8,21; 
2 Sam.5.6, 
f 2 Chr.8.5, 
g Josh.17.7. 
h Josh.17.9. 


villages, Gaza with her towns and 
her villages, unto the river of Egypt,| 
and the great sea, and the border 
thereof: 

48 And in the mountains, Shamir, 
and Jattir, and Socoh, 

49 And Dannah, and Kirjath-san- 
nah, which ss Debir, 

50 And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and 
Anim, 

51 And Goshen, and Holon, and 
Giloh; eleven cities with their vil- 
lages: 

52 Arab,and Dumah, and Eshean, 

93 And Janum, and Beth-tap- 
puah, and Aphekah, 

54 And Humtah, and Kirjath- 
arba, which is Hebron, and Zior; 
nine cities with their villages: 


55 Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and 
Tuttah, 


276 


56 And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and 
Zanoah, 

57 Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; 
ten cities with their villages: 

58 Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor, 

59 And Maarath, and _ Beth- 
anoth, and Eltekon; six cities with 
their villages: 

60 ‘Kirjath-baal, which is Kir- 
jath-jearim, and Rabbah; two cities 
with their villages: 

61 In the wilderness, Beth- 
arabah, Middin, and Secacah, 

62 And Nibshan, and the city of 
Salt, and ¢En-gedi; six cities with 
their villages. 

63 As for the ¢Jebusites the inhab- 
itants of Jerusalem, the children of 
Judah could not drive thern out: 
but the Jebusites dwell with the 
children of Judah at Jerusalem unto 
this day. 


CHAPTER 16. 


The land divided: the portion 
of Manasseh and Ephraim. 


ANP the lot of the children of 
Joseph fell from Jordan by Jer- 
icho, unto the water of Jericho on 
the east, to the wilderness that 
goeth up from Jericho throughout 
mount Beth-el, 

2 And goeth out from Beth-el to 
Luz, and passeth along unto the 
borders of Archi to Ataroth, 

3 And goeth down westward to 
the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast 
of /Beth-horon the nether, and to 
Gezer: and the goings out thereof 
are at the sea. y 

4 So the children of Joseph, Ma- 
nasseh and Ephraim, took their 
inheritance. 

5 And the border of the children 
of Ephraim according to their fam- 
ilies was thus: even the border of 
their inheritance on the east side 
was Ataroth-addar, unto Beth- 
horon the upper; 
| 6 And the border went out toward 
the sea to &Michmethah on the 
north side; and the border went 
about eastward unto Taanath- 
shiloh, and passed by it on the east 
to Janohah; 

7 And it went down from Janohah 
to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and 
came to Jericho, and went out at 
Jordan. 

8 The border went out from Tap- 
puah westward unto the river “Ka- 
nah; and the goings out thereof 
were at the sea. This is the inher- 


, 
~~ 


16 9] JOSHUA. [17 18 
itance of the tribe of the children of| | B.c. 1444. |hand unto the inhabitants of En- 


Ephraim by their families. 

9 And the separate cities for the 
children of Ephraim were among 
the inheritance of the children of 
Manasseh, all the cities with their 
villages. 

10 And they drave not out the 
Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: 
but the Canaanites dwell among 
the Ephraimites unto this day, and 
serve under tribute. 


CHAPTER 17. 


The land divided: the separate 
portion for Manasseh. 


HERE was also a lot for the 

tribe of Manasseh: for he was 

the firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for 

Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, 

the father or Gilead: because he was 

a man of war, therefore he had 
Gilead and Bashan. 

2 There was also a Jot for the rest 
of the children of Manasseh by their 
families; for the children of Abie- 
zer, and for the children of Helek, 
and for the children of Asriel, and 
for the children of Shechem, and 
for the children of Hepher, and for 
the children of Shemida: these were 
the male children of Manasseh 
the son of Joseph by their fam- 
ilies. 

3 But Zelophehad, the son of He- 
pher, the son of Gilead, the son of 
Machir, the son of Manasseh, had 
no sons, but daughters: and these! 
are the names of his daughters, 
Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Mil- 
cah, and Tirzah. 

4 And they came near before 
Eleazar the priest, and before 
Joshua the son of Nun, and be- 
fore the princes, saying, The LorD 
commanded Moses to give us an 
inheritance among our brethren. 
Therefore according to the com- 
mandment of the LorD he gave 
them an inheritance among the 
brethren of their father. : 

5 And there fell ten portions to 
Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead 
and Bashan, which were on the 
other side Jordan; 

6 Because the daughters of Ma- 
nasseh had an inheritance among 
his sons: and the rest of Manas- 
seh’s sons had the land of Gilead. 

7 And the coast of Manasseh was 
from Asher to Michmethah, that 
lieth before Shechem; and the - 
border went along on the right 


a Josh.16.9. 


6 1 Sam.31.10; 


1 Ki.4.12, 


c Or, Re- 
phaims. 


277 


tappuah. 

8 Now Manasseh had the land of 
Tappuah: but Tappuah on the bor- 
der of Manasseh belonged to the 
jchildren of Ephraim; 

9 And the coast descended unto 
the river Kanah, southward of the 
river: “these cities of Ephraim are 
among the cities of Manasseh: the 
coast of Manasseh also was on 
the north side of the river, and 
the outgoings of it were at the sea: 

10 Southward it was Ephraim’s, 
and northward it was Manasseh’s, 
and the sea is his border; and they 
met together in Asher on the north, 
and in Issachar on the east. 

11 And Manasseh had in Issachar 
and in Asher SBeth-shean and her 
towns, and Ibleam and her towns, 
and the inhabitants of Dor and her 
towns, and the inhabitants of En- 
dor and her towns, and the inhab- 
itants of Taanach and her towns, 
and the inhabitants of Megiddo and 
her towns, even three countries. 

12 Yet the children of Manasseh 
could not drive out the inhab- 
itants of those cities; but the Ca- 
naanites would dwell in that land. 

13 Yet it came to pass, when the 
children of Israel were waxen 
strong, that they put the Canaan- 
ites to tribute; but did not utterly 
drive them out. 

14 And the children of Joseph 
spake unto Joshua, saying, “Why 
hast thou given me but one lot and 
one portion to inherit, seeing I am 
a great people, forasmuch as the 
Lorp hath blessed me hitherto? 

15 And Joshua answered them, If 
thou be a great people, then get 
thee up to the wood country, and 
cut down for thyself there in the 
land of the Perizzites and of the 
¢giants, if mount Ephraim be too 
inarrow for thee. 

16 And the children of Joseph 
said, The hill is not enough for us: 
and all the Canaanites that dwell in 
the land of the valley have chariots 
of iron, both they who are of Beth- 
shean and her towns, and they who 
are of the valley of Jezreel. 

17 And Joshua spake unto the 
house of Joseph, even to Ephraim 
and to Manasseh, saying, Thou art 
a great people, and hast great power: 
thou shalt not have one lot only: 

18 But the miountain shall be 
thine; for it 7s a wood, and thou 
shalt cutit down: and the outgoings 
‘of it shall be thine: for thou shalt 


18 1] 


JOSHUA. 


[18 21 


drive out the Canaanites, though} 8.c. 1444. 


they have iron chariots, and though 
they be strong. 


CHAPTER 18. 
The tabernacle set up at Shiloh. 


esepe the whole congregation of 
the children of Israel assem- 
bled together at Shiloh, and set up 
the tabernacle of the congregation 
there. And the land was subdued 
before them. 


The land divided: the portion 
of the seven tribes. 


2 And there remained among the 
children of Israel seven tribes, 
which had not yet received their 
inheritance. 

3 And Joshua said unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, How long are ye 
bslack to go to possess the land, 
which the LorD God of your 
fathers hath given you? 

4 Give ont from among you three 
men for each tribe: and I will send 
them, and they shall rise, and “go 
through the land, and describe it 
according to the inheritance of 
them; and they shall come again 
to.me. 

5 And they shall divide it into 
seven parts: ¢Judah shall abide in 
their coast on the south, and the 
house of Joseph shall abide in their 
coasts on the north. 

6 Ye shall therefore describe the 
land into seven parts, and bring 
the description hither to me, that 
I may cast lots for you here before 
the LorpD our God. 

7 But the Levites have no part 
among you; for the priesthood of 
the Lorp is their inheritance: and 
Gad, and Reuben, and half the 
tribe of Manasseh, have received 
their inheritance beyond Jordan on 
the east, which Moses the servant 
of the LorD gave them. 

8 And the men arose, and went 
away: and Joshua charged them 
that went to describe the land, say- 
ing, Go and walk ¢through the land, 
and describe it, and come again to 
me, that I may here cast lots for 
you before the LorpD in Shiloh. 

9 And the men went and passed 
through the land, and described it 
by cities into seven parts in a book, 
and came again to Joshua to the 
host at Shiloh. 

_10_ And Joshua cast Slots for them 
in Shiloh before the Lorp: and 
there Joshua divided the land unto! 


a Josh.19.51; 
Jer7-12- 


b Jud.18.9; 
Eccl.9.10. 


cv.8. 

d Josh.15.1. 
e Gen.13.17, 
f Acts 13.19. 


g Gen.28.19; 
Jud.1.23. 


h Josh.16.3. 
#1 Chr.13. 
5,6. 


Jj Josh.15.9, 


278 


the children of Israel according to 
their divisions. . ‘ 

11 And the lot of the tribe of the 
children of Benjamin came up ac- 
cording to their families: and the 
coast ‘of their lot came forth be- 
tween the children of Judah and 
the children of Joseph. 

12 And their border on the north 
side was from Jordan; and the bor- 
der went up to the side of Jericho 
on the north side, and went up 
through the mountains westward; 
and the goings out thereof were at 
the wilderness of Beth-aven. 

13. And the border went over from 
thence toward Luz, to the side of 
8Luz, which is Beth-el, southward; 
and the border descended to Ata- 
roth-adar, near the hill that lieth 
on the south side of the nether 
+Beth-horon. 

14 And the border was drawn 
thence, and compassed the corner 
of the sea southward, from the hill 
that lieth before Beth-horon south- 
ward; and the goings out thereof 
were at Kirjath-baal, which zs Kir- 
jath-jearim, a city of the children of 
Judah: this was the west quarter. 

15 And the south quarter was 
from the end of ‘Kirjath-jearim, 
and the border went out on the 
west, and went out to the well of 
Jwaters of Nephtoah: 

16 And the border came down to 
the end of the mountain that Ireth 
before the valley of the son of Hin- 
nom, and which is in the valley of 
the giants on the north, and de- 
scended to the valley of Hinnom, 
to the side of Jebusi on the south, 
and descended to En-rogel, 

17 And was drawn from the 
north, and went forth to En- 
shemesh, and went forth toward 
Geliloth, which is over against the 
going up of Adummim, and de- 
scended to the stone of Bohan the 
son of Reuben, 

18 And passed along toward the 
side over against Arabah north- 
ward, and went down unto Arabah: 

19 And the border passed along to 
the side of Beth-hoglah northward: 
and the outgoings of the border 
were at the north bay of the salt 
sea at the south end of Jordan: 
this was the south coast. 

20 And Jordan was the border of 
it on the east side. This was the 
inheritance of the children of Ben- 
jamin, by the coasts thereof round 
about, according to their families. 

21 Now the cities of the-tribe of 


ry 


“18 22] 


, 


JOSHUA. 


[19 29 


the children of Benjamin according 
to their families were Jericho, and 
Beth-hoglah, and the valley of 
Keziz, 

22 And Beth-arabah, and Zema- 
raim, and Beth-el, 

23 And Avim, and Parah, and 


Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with 
their villages: 
25 “Gibeons and %Ramah, and 


26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, 
and Mozah, 

27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and 
Taralah, 

28 And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, 
which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and 
Kirjath; fourteen cities with their 
villages. This is the inheritance 
of the children of Benjamin accord- 
ing to their families. 


Beeroth, | 


CHAPTER 19. 


AND the second lot came forth to 

Simeon, even for the tribe of 
the children of Simeon according to 
their families: and their inheritance 
was within the inheritance of the 
¢children of Judah. 

2 And they had in their inheri- 
tance ¢Beer-sheba, and Sheba, and 
Moladah, 

3 And Hazar-shual, and Balah, 
and Azem, 

4 And Eltolad, and Bethul, and 
Hormah, 

5 And Ziklag, and Beth-marca- 
both, and “Hazar-susah, 

6 And Beth-lebaoth, and Sharu- 
hen; thirteen cities and their vil- 

_dages: 

7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and 

Ashan; four cities and their vil- 


lages: 

8 And all the villages that were 
round about these cities to Baalath- 
beer, fRamath of the south. This is 
the inheritance of the tribe of the 
children of Simeon according to 
their families. . 

9 Out of the portion of the children 
of Judah was the inheritance of the 
children of Simeon: for the part of 
the children of Judah was too much 
for &them: therefore the children of 
Simeon had their inheritance within 
the inheritance of them. 

10 And the third lot came up 
for the children of Zebulun ac- 
cording to their families: and the 
border of their inheritance was un- 
to Sarid: 


B.C. 1444. 


a1 Ki.3.4,5. 
6 Jer.31.15. 
cv9. 


d Gen.21.31; 
1 Chr.4.28. 


e Josh.15.28. 
f 1 Sam.30.27. 
gv. 

kh Gen.49.13. 


i Jud.4.6,12; 
Psa.89.12. 

j 2 Ki.14.25. 

k1 Ki.21.1. 

11 Sam.15.12; 
1 Ki.18.20; 
Isa.33.9; 


Soeariete 
46.18, 


279 


11 And their border went up to- 
ward the “sea, and Maralah, and 
reached to Dabbasheth, and reached 
to the river that is before Jokneam; 

12 And turned from Sarid east- 
ward toward the sunrising unto the 
border of ‘Chisloth-tabor, and then 
goeth out to Daberath, and goeth 
up to Japhia, 

13 And from thence passeth on 
along on the east to /Gittah-hepher, 
to Ittah-kazin, and goeth out to 
Remmon-methoar to Neah; 

14 And the border compasseth it 
on the north side to Hannathon: 
and the outgoings thereof are in the 
valley of Jiphthah-el: 

15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, 
and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth- 
lehem: twelve cities with their vil- 
lages. 

16 This zs the inheritance of the 
children of Zebulun according to 
their families, these cities with their 
villages. i 

17 And the fourth lot came out to 
Issachar, for the children of Issa- 
char according to their families. 

18 And their border was toward 
kJezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shu- 


nem, 

19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, 
and Anaharath, 

20 And Rabbith, and Kishion, 
and Abez, ! 

21 And Remeth, and En-gannim, 
and En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez; 

22 And the coast reacheth to Ta- 
bor, and Shahazimah, and Beth- 
shemesh; and the outgoings of their 
border were at Jordan: sixteen cities 
with their villages. 

23 This is the inheritance of the 
tribe of the children of Issachar 
according to their families, the cit- 
ies and their villages. 

24 And the fifth lot came out for 
the tribe of the children of Asher 
according to their families. 

25 And their border was Helkath, 
and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph, 

26 And Alammelech, and Amad,; 
and Misheal; and reacheth to 'Car- 
{mel westward, and to Shihor- 
jlibnath; 

27 And turneth toward the sun- 
rising to Beth-dagon, and reacheth 
to Zebulun, and to the valley of 
Jiphthah-el toward the north side 
of Beth-emek, and Neiel, and goeth 
out to Cabul on the left hand, 

28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and 
Hammon, and Kanah, even unto 
great Zidon; 

29 And then the coast turneth to 


at 
tals 


19 30] 


Tyre; and the coast turneth to Ho- 
sah; and the outgoings thereof are 
at the sea from the coast to Achzib: 

30 Ummah also, and Aphek, and 
Rehob: twenty and two cities with 
their villages. 

31 This is the inheritance of the 
tribe of the children of Asher ac- 
cording to their families, these cit-} 
ies with their villages. 

32 The sixth lot came out to the 
children of Naphtali, even for the 
children of Naphtali according to 
their families. 

33 And their coast was from He- 
leph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and 
Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto 
Lakum; and the outgoings thereof 
were at Jordan: 

34 And then the coast turneth 
westward to Aznoth-tabor, and go- 
eth out from thence to Hukkok, and 
reacheth to Zebulun on the south 
side, and reacheth to Asher on the! 
west side, and to Judah upon Jor-! 
dan toward the sunrising. a Num.35.6, 

35 And the fenced cities are Zid-| refs 
dim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath,| 5 rep. gaal, 
and Chinnereth, Redemp. 
a6. pnd Adamah, and Ramah, and ae 

37 And Kedesh, and Edrei, and 
En-hazor, ¢ Ruth 4.1,2, 

38 And Iron, and Migdal-el, Ho-)g peb.6.18. 
rem, and Beth-anath, and Beth-! 
shemesh; nineteen cities with their) 
villages. | 

39 This is the inheritance of the! f Josh.21.32; 
tribe of the children of Naphtali| ! Chr.6.76. 
according to their families, the cit-! 
ies and their villages. 

40 And the seventh lot came out 
for the tribe of the children of Dan 
according to their families, 

41 And the coast of their inheri- 
tance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and 
Ir-shemesh, 

42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, 
and Jethlah, 

_43 And Elon, and Thimnathah, 
and Ekron, 

44 And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, 
and Baalath, 

45 And Jehud, and Béne-berak, 
and Gath-rimmon, 

46 And Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, 
with the border before Japho. 

47 And the coast of the children 
of Dan went out too Jittle for them: 
therefore the children of Dan went 
up to fight against Leshem, and 
took it, and smote it with the edge 
of the sword, and possessed it, and 
dwelt therein, and called Leshem, 


e Num.35.12, 
ase 


| 
\ 


280 


JOSHUA. 


Ramah, and to the strong city| B.C. 1444. 


59.20, note. 


Dan, after the name of Dan their 
father. 

48 This zs the inheritance of the 
tribe of the children of Dan accord- 
ing to their families, these cities 
with their villages. 

49 When they had made an end 
of dividing the land for inheritance 
by their coasts, the children of Is- 
rael gave an inheritance to Joshua 
the son of Nun among them: 

50 According to the word of the 
LorD they gave him the city which 
he asked, even Timnath-serah in 
mount Ephraim: and he built the 
city, and dwelt therein. \ 

51 These are the inheritances, 
which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua 
the son of Nun, and the heads of 
the fathers of the tribes of the chil- 
dren of Israel, divided for an in- 
heritance by lot in Shiloh before the 
LorD, at the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation. So they made 
an end of dividing the country 


CHAPTER 20. 
The cities of refuge. 


A Be te LorpD also spake unto 
Joshua, saying, 

2 Speak to the children of Israel, 
saying, Appoint out for you cities of 
refuge, whereof I ¢spake unto you 
by the hand of Moses: 

3 That the slayer that killeth any 
person unawares ‘and unwittingly 
jmay flee thither: and they shall be 
your refuge from the Yavenger of 
blood. 

4 And when he that doth flee unto 
one of those cities shall stand at the 
‘entering of the gate of the city, and 
shall declare his cause in the ears 
of the elders of that city, they shall 
take him into the city unto them, 
ahd give him a place, that he may 
¢dwell among them. 

5 And if the ‘avenger of blood 
pursue after him, then they shall 
not deliver the slayer up into his 
hand; because he smote his neigh- 
bour unwittingly, and hated him 
not beforetime. 

6 And he shall dwell in that city, 
until he stand before the congrega- 
tion for judgment, and until the 
death of the high priest that shall 
be. in those days: then shall the 
slayer return, and come unto his 
own city, and unto his own house, 
unto the city from whence he fled. 

7 And they appointed fKedesh in 
Galilee in mount Naphtali, and 
Shechem in mount Ephraim, and 


ees 


JOSHUA. 


poe, te. Vl AE gay 


[21 2¢ 


Kirjath-arba, which 1s Hebron, in 
the mountain of Judah. : 

8 And on the other side Jordan by 
Jericho eastward, they assigned *Be- 
zer in the wilderness upon the plain 
out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ra- 
moth in Gilead out of the tribe of 
Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of 
the tribe of Manasseh. 

9 These were the cities appointed 
for all the children of Israel, and for 
the stranger that sojourneth among 
them, that whosoever killeth any 
person at unawares might flee 
thither, and not die by the hand 
of the avenger of blood, until he 
stood before the congregation. 


CHAPTER 21. 


Division of the iand: the portion 
of the Levites. 


HEN came near the heads of 


the fathers of the Levites unto) 


bBleazar the priest, and unto Joshua 
the son of Nun, and unto the heads 
of the fathers of the tribes of the 
children of Israel; 

2 And they spake unto them at 
Shiloh in the land of Canaan, say- 
ing, The (LoRD commanded by the 
hand of Moses to give us cities to 
dwell in, with the suburbs thereof 
for our cattle. 

3 And the children of Israel gave 
unto the Levites out of their in- 
heritance, at the commandment of 
the Lorpb, these cities and their 
suburbs. 

4 And the lot came out for the 
families of the Kohathites: and the 
children of ¢Aaron the priest, which 
were of the Levites, had by lot out 
of the tribe of Judah, and out of the 
tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe 
of Benjamin, thirteen cities. 

5 And the rest of the children of 
eKohath had by lot out of the fam- 
ilies of the tribe of Ephraim, and 
out of the tribe of Dan, and out 
of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten 
cities. : 

6 And the children of Gershon had 
by lot out of the families of the tribe 
of Issachar, and out of the tribe of 
Asher, and out of the tribe of Naph- 
tali, and out of the half tribe of 
Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities. 

7 The children of Merari by their 
families had out of the tribe of Reu- 
ben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and 
out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve 


cities. 
8 And the children of Israel gave 
by lot unto the Levites these cities 


B.C, 1444. 


a Josh.21.36; 
Deut.4.43; 
1 Chr.6.78. 

b Josh.14.1; 
17.4. 

¢ Num.35.2; 
1 Cor.9.14, 


d vs.8,19; 
Josh.24.33, 


e v.20. 

{1 Chr.6.55. 

g Josh.14.14. 

h Josh.15.51; 
1 Chr.6.58, 
Hilen. 

t Josh.15.42; 


1 Chr.6.59, 
Ashan, 


28) 


with their suburbs, as the Lorp 
commanded by the hand of Moses. 

9 And they gave out of the tribe 
of the children of Judah, and out of 
the tribe of the children of Simeon, 
these cities which are here men- 
tioned by name, 

10 Which the children of Aaron, 
being of the families of the Kohath- 
ites, who were of the children of 
Levi, had: for their’s was the first 


lot. 

11 And ‘they gave them the city 
of Arba the father of Anak, which 
city is Hebron, in the hill country © 
of Judah, with the suburbs thereof 
round about it. 

12 But the fields of the city, and 
the villages thereof, gave they to 
&Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his 
possession, 

13 Thus they gave to the children 
of Aaron the priest Hebron with 
her suburbs, to de a city of refuge 
for the slayer; and Libnah with her 
suburbs, 

14 And Jattir with her suburbs, 
and Eshtemoa with her suburbs, 

15 And “Holon with her suburbs, 
and Debir with her suburbs, 

16 And ‘Ain with her suburbs, 
and Juttah with her suburbs, and 
Beth-shemesh with her suburbs; 
nine cities out of those two tribes. 

17 And out of the tribe of Benja- 
min, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba 
with her suburbs; 

18 Anathoth with her suburbs, and 
Almon with her suburbs; four cities. 

19 All the cities of the children 
of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen 
cities with their suburbs. 

20 And the families of the chil- 
dren of Kohath, the Levites which 
remained of the children of Kohath, 
even they had the cities of their lot 
out of the tribe of Ephraim. 

21 For they gave them Shechem 
with her suburbs in mount Ephraiin, 
to be a city of refuge for the slayer; 
and Gezer with her suburbs, 

22 And Kibzaim with her sub- 
urbs, and Beth-horon with her sub- 
urbs; four cities. 

23 And out of the tribe of Dan, 
Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbe- 
thon with her suburbs, 

24 Aijalon with her suburbs, 
Gath-rimmon with her suburbs; 
four cities. " 

25 And out of the half tribe of 
Manasseh, Tenach with her sub- 
urbs, and Gath-rimmon with her 
suburbs; two cities. 

26 All the cities were ten with 


21 27) 


their suburbs for the families of the 
children of Kohath that remained. 

27 And unto the children of Ger- 
shon, of the families of the Levites, 
out of the other half tribe of Ma- 
nasseh they gave Golan in Bashan 
with her suburbs, to be a city of 
tefuge for the slayer; and Beesh- 
terah with her suburbs; two cities. 

28 And out of the tribe of 
Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, 
Dabareh with her suburbs, 

29 Jarmuth with her suburbs, 
En-gannim with her suburbs; four 


cities. 

30 And out of the tribe of Asher, 
Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon 
with her suburbs, 

31 Helkath with her suburbs, and 
Rehob with her suburbs; four cities. 

32 And out of the tribe of Naph- 
tali, *Kedesh in Galilee with her 
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for 
the slayer; and Hammoth-dor with 
her suburbs, and Kartan with her 
suburbs; three cities. 

33 All the cities of the Gershon- 
ites according to their families were 
thirteen cities with their suburbs. 

34 And unto the families of the 


children of ’Merari, the rest of the} 


Levites, out of the tribe of Zebu- 
lun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and 
Kartah with her suburbs, 

35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Na- 
halal with her suburbs; four cities. 

36 And out of the tribe of -Reu- 
ben, Bezer with her suburbs, and 
Jahazah with her suburbs, 

37 Kedemoth with her suburbs, 
and Mephaath with her suburbs; 
four cities. 

38 And out of the tribe of Gad, 
Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, 
to be a city of refuge for the slayer; 
and Mahanaim with her suburbs, 

39 Heshbon with her suburbs, 
Jazer with her suburbs; four cities 
in all. . ; 

40 So all the cities for the children 
of Merari by their families, which 
were remaining of the families of 
the Levites, were by their lot twelve 
cities. 

41 All the cities of the Levites 
within the possession of the chil- 
dren of Israel were ¢forty and eight 
cities with their suburbs. 

42 These cities were every one 
with their suburbs round abnut 
them: thus were all these cities. 

43 And the Lorp gave unto 
Israel:all the land which he’ «sware 
to give unto their fathers; and they 
possessed it. and dwelt therein. 


JOSHUA. 


B.c. 1444. | 44 fAnd the LoRD gave them rest 


a Josh.20.7. 
6 v.7; 1 Chr. 


¢ Josh.20.8. 
d Num.35.7. 


e Gen.12.7; 
26.3,4; 28.4, 


»14. 


f Deut.7.23, 
24. 


g Josh.23.14; 
Num.23.19; 
1 Ki.8.56} 

1 Cor.1.9; 
1 Thes.5.24; 
Tit.1.2. 


282 


€ 
[22 § 


round about, according to all that 
he sware unto their fathers: and 
there stood not a man of all their 
enemies before them; the LORD 
delivered all their enemies into their 
hand. 

45 &There failed not ought of any 
good thing which the LorpD had 
spoken unto the house of Israel; all 
came to pass. 


CHAPTER 22. 


The schismatic altar of Reuben 
and Gad. 


HEN Joshua called the Reu- 
benites, and the Gadites, and 
the half tribe of Manasseh, 
-2 And said unto them, Ye have 
kept all that Moses the servant of 
the LoRD commanded you, and 
have obeyed my voice in all that I 
commanded you: 

3 Ye have not left your brethren 
these many days unto this day, but 
have kept the charge of the com- 
mandment of the LorD your God. 

4 And now the Lord your God 
hath given rest unto your brethren, 
as he promised them: therefore now 
return ye, and get you unto your 
tents, and unto the land of your 
possession, which Moses the ser- 
vant of the LORD gave you on the 
other side Jordan. 

5 But take diligent heed to do the 
commandment and the law, which 
Moses the servant of the Lorp 
charged you, to love the LorD your 
God, and to walk in all his ways, 
and to keep his commandments, 
and to cleave unto him, and to serve 
him with all your heart and with all 
your soul. 

6 So Joshua blessed them, and 
sent them away: and they went 
unto their tents. 3 

7 Now to the one half of the tribe 
of Manasseh Moses had given pos- 
session in Bashan: but unto the 
other half thereof gave Joshua 
among their brethren on this side 
Jordan westward. And when 
Joshua sent them. away also unto 
their tents, then he blessed them, 

8 And he spake unto them, say- 
ing, Return with much riches unto 
your tents, and with very much 
cattle, with silver, and with gold, 
and with brass, and with iron, and 
with very much raiment: divide the 
spoil of your enemies with your 
brethren. 

9 And the children of Reuben and 


22 10] JOSHUA. [22 28 


the children of Gad and the half! B.c. 1444. 

tribe of Manasseh returned, and de- 
parted from the children of Israel 
out of Shiloh, which is in the land 
of Canaan, to go unto the country 
of Gilead, to the land of their pos- 
session, whereof they were pos- 
sessed, according to the word of the 


19 Notwithstanding, if the land of 
your possession be unclean, then 
pass ye over unto the land of the 
possession of the Lorp, wherein 
the Lorp’s tabernacle dwelleth, 
and take possession among us: but 
rebel not against the LORD, nor re- 
bel against us, in building you an 


LorD by the hand of Moses. altar beside the altar of the LorpD 
10 And when they came unto the our God. 
borders of Jordan, that are in the 20 Did not Achan the son of 
land of Canaan, the children of Zerah commit a trespass in the 
Reuben and the children of Gad accursed thing, and wrath fell on 
and the half tribe of Manasseh built all the congregation of Israel? and 
a an altar by Jordan, a great that man perished not alone in his. 
altar to see to. iniquity. 
11 And the children of Israel 21 Then the children of Reuben 
rd oe pote ee. ee eee es ees of mie and ihe 
euben and the children o a tribe o anasseh answered, 
and the half tribe of Manasseh and said unto the heads of the 
have built an altar over against the thousands of Israel, 
land of Canaan, in the borders of 22 The Lorp God of gods, the 
ne oy ee passage of the chil- Sane Pe gs yee he ae and 
dren of Israel. stael he s now; if it be in 
12 And when the children of Israel rebellion, or if in transgression 
heard of it, the whole congregation against the LORD, (save us not this 
of the children of Israel gathered|¢ Deut-13.12; j|day, 
themselves together at Shiloh, to go| J¥4-20-122- | 23 That we have built us an altar 
up to war against them. b Ex.6.25; to turn from following the LorD, or 
13 And the children of Israel sent} Num.25.7. [if to offer thereon burnt-offering or 
unto the children of Reuben, and to} - neut.12. émeat-offering, or if me offer peace- 
the “pean of Gad and to a inal 5-14. create besa et the LorD him- 
trib , into t and o} : self require it; 
bGilead, Phinchas the son of Elea-|@Eit meal | 24 And if we have not rather 
zar the priest, e Psa.19.9, done it for fear of this thing, saying, 
14 And with him ten princes, of}; 7oete. In time to come your children. 
each chief house a prince through-| ;, 34, might speak unto our children, 


out all the tribes.of Israel; and each saying, What have ye to do with the: 
one was an head of the ‘house of|gDeut.12.5,6. |LORD God of Israel? 


their fathers among the thousands 25 For the Lorp hath made Jor- 
dan a border between us and you, 


fF ael. 1 
Bes And they came unto the chil- ye children of Reuben and children 
dren of Reuben, and to the children of Gad; ye have no part in the 
of Gad, and to the half tribe of Ma- LORD: so shall your children make 
nasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and our children cease from ‘fearing the 
they spake with them, saying, LorD. ; 

16 Thus saith the whole congrega- 26 Therefore we said, Let us now 
tion of the Lorp, What trespass prepare to build us an altar, not for 
is this that ye have committed burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice: 
against the God of Israel, to turn 27 But that it may be a fwitness 
away. this day from following the between us, and you, and our gene- 
Lorp, in that ye have builded you rations after us, that we might do 
‘an altar, that ye might rebel this the service of the ‘LorD before him 
day against the LorpD? with our burnt-offerings, and with 

17 Is the iniquity of Peor too our sacrifices, and with our peace- 
little -for us, from which we are not offerings; that your children may 
cleansed until this day, although not say to our children in time to 


A jague in the congrega- come, Ye have no part in the Lor. 
Beer ross, i 28 Therefore said we, that it shall 
18 But that ye must turn away be, when they should so say to us 
this day from following the LoRD? or to our generations in time to 


and it will be, seeing ye rebel to come, that we may say again, Be- 
day against the ed that to mor- hold the pattern of the altar of the 
row he will be wroth with the whole LORD, which our fathers made, not 


congregation of Israel. for burnt-offerings, nor for sacri- 


, 


22 29 


JOSHUA. 


fices; but it 7s a °witness between|_ B.C. 1444. 


us and you. 

29 God forbid that we should re- 
bel against the Lorb, and turn this 
day from following the Lorpb, to 
build an altar for burnt-offerings, 
for 'meat-offerings, or for sacrifices, 
beside the altar of the LoRD our 
God that is before his tabernacle. 

30 And when Phinehas the priest, 
and the princes of the congregation 
and heads of the thousands of Israel 
which were with him, heard the 
words that the children of Reuben 
and the children of Gad and the 
children of Manasseh spake, it 
pleased them. ! 

31 And Phinehas the son of Elea- 
zar the priest said unto the children 
of Reuben, and to the children of 
Gad, and to the children of Ma- 
nasseh, This day we perceive that 
the ‘LORD is among us, because ye 
have not committed this trespass 


4 Behold, I have divided unto you 
by lot these nations that remain, to 
be an inheritance for your tribes, 
from Jordan, with all the nations 
that I have cut off, even unto the 
great sea westward. 

5 And the LorpD your God, he 
shall expel them from before you, 
and drive them from out of your 
sight; and ye shall possess their 
land, as the LORD your God hath 
“promised unto you. 

6 Be ye therefore very courageous 
to keep and to do all that is written 
in the book of the law of Moses, 
that ye turn not aside therefrom to 
the right hand or fo the left; 

7 That ye come not among these 
nations, these that remain among 
you; neither make ‘mention of the 
name of their gods, nor cause to 
sweat by them, neither serve them, 
nor bow yourselves unto them: 

8 But cleave unto the LorD your 


against the LorD: now ye have de- oe God, as ye have done unto this 
livered the children of Israel out of ; ay. ‘ 
the hand of the Lorp. b Lit. meal, 9 For the LorpD hath driven out 


32 And Phinehas the son of 
Eleazar the priest, and the princes, 
returned from the children of Reu- 
ben, and from the children of Gad, 


¢ Lev.26.11,12; 
Zech.8.23. 


di.e. a wit- 


from before you great nations and 
strong: but as for you, no man 
hath been able to stand before you 
unto this day. 


jand of Conan, to thechirenel oo Tee eee 
5 ousand: for the Lorp your God, 
peels and brought them word|§¢ Josh.22.4. be ze is that Bebteth for you, as he 
n. ‘ . |fDeut.31.28; {hath promised you. 
poe pad the chi plese chil- tt Chr.26.1, 11 Take good heed therefore unto 
Sorel Beet Ga So Gaueten |g paans...(vOUDelves, that.ve love the Lon 
tend to go up against them in bat-|s Num.33.53. 12 Else if: ye do in any wise go 
tle, to destroy the land wherein the IPiRI6A: back, and cleave unto the remnant 
ee wee and Gad dwelt.| * pos.2-i7, of these nations, even these that 
Be luhetchiidnn alice nite marines oie en ana 
e 
altar “Ed: for it shall be a witness of coed theene sma ee 
between us that the LorD is God. 13 Know for a certainty that the 
Lorp yous, Ged will no more drive 
CHAP 23. out any of these nations from be- 
TER 23 '|fore you; but they shall be snares 
The last counsels of Joshua. and traps unto you, and scourges 
nS t in your sides, and thorns in your 
Nate Gee tee sod land ahitk ihe roe 
‘rest unto Israel from all their ene- God hath given you. eae 
mies round about, that Joshua 14 And, behold, this day I am 
waxed old and stricken in age. going the way of all the earth: and 
2 And Joshua /called for all Israel, ye know in all your hearts and in 
and for their elders, and for their all your souls, that not one thing 
pepe lenceria hid the Lose Sea 
» aL d your spake 
on niges piticken da bees ies concerning you; all are come to 
sLoRD your God hath done toll bath failed theneee ats Oe ae 
€se nations because of you; for 15 Therefore it shall come to pass, — 
PRED your God is he that hath that as all good things are come 
you. upon you, which the Lorp your — 


| 
> 
q 


God promised you; so shall the 
Lorp bring upon you all evil 
things, until he have destroyed 
you from off this good land which 
the LorpD your God hath given 
you. 

16 When ye have transgressed 
the covenant of the LorD your 
God, which he commanded you, 
and have gone and served other 
gods, and bowed yourselves to 
them; then shall the “anger of the 


LorpD be kindled against you, and 
ye shall perish quickly from off the 


good land which he hath given unto| 


you. 
CHAPTER 24. 
Joshua’s last charge to Israel: 
his death. 


ND Joshua gathered all the 


bcalled for the elders of Israel, and 
for their heads, and for their judges, 
and for their officers; and they pre- 
‘sented themselves before God. 

2 And Joshua said unto all the 
people, Thus saith the LorD God of 
Israel, “Your fathers dwelt on the 
other side of the flood in old time, 
even Terah, the father of Abraham, 
and the father of Nachor: and they 
served other gods. 

3 And I ¢took your father Abra- 
ham from the other side of the flood,’ 
and led him throughout all the land 
of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, 
and gave him Isaac. 

4 And I gave unto Isaac Jacob 
and Esau: and I gave unto Esau 
mount Seir, to possess it; but Jacob 
and his children went down into 
Egypt. a 
5 I sent Moses also and Aaron, 


and I plagued Egypt, according to 
that which I did among them: and 
afterward I brought you out. 

6 And I brought your fathers out 
of Egypt: and ye came unto the 
sea; and the Egyptians pursued 
after your fathers with chariots and 
‘horsemen unto the Red sea. . 

7 And when they cried unto the 
‘Lorp, he put darkness between 
you and the Egyptians, and brought 
‘the sea upon them, and covered 
‘them; and your eyes have seen 
what I have done in Egypt: and ye 
dwelt in the wilderness a long 
“season. 

8 AndTI brought you into the land 
‘of the Amorites, which dwelt on the 
other side Jordan; and they fought 
with you; and I gave them into 
your hand, that ye might possess 


JOSHUA. 


B.C. 1427. 


tribes of Israel to Shechem, and|¢ 2 Ki.24.20. 


b Josh.23.2. 
c Gen.11.26, 
d Gen.12.1. 


e Israel (his- 


g Ezk.20.39. 
h Gen.18.19; 
Psa.101.2; 
1 Tim.3.4,5. 


# Psa.116.16. 


[24 19 


their land; and I destroyed them 
rom before you. 

9 Then’Balak the son of Zippor, 
king of Moab, arose and warred 
against ‘Israel, and sent and called 
Balaam the son of Beor to curse you: 

10 But I would not hearken unto 
Balaam; therefore he blessed you 
still: so I delivered you out of his 
hand. 

11 And ye went over Jordan, and 
came unto Jericho: and the men of 
Jericho fought against you, the 
Amorites, and the Perizzites, and 
the Canaanites, and the Hittites, 
jand the Girgashites, the Hivites, 
and the Jebusites; and I delivered 
them into your hand. 

12 And I sent the hornet before 
you, which drave them out from be- 
fore you, even the two kings of the 
Amorites; but not with thy sword, 
nor with thy bow. 

13 And I have given you a land 
for which ye did not labour, and 
cities which ye built not, and ye 
dwell in them; of the vineyards 
and oliveyards which ye planted 
not do ye eat. 

14 Now therefore ‘fear the LorD, 
and serve him in sincerity and in 
truth: and put away the gods which 
your fathers served on the other 
side of the flood, and in Egypt; and 
serve ye the LORD. 

15 And if it seem evil unto you to 
serve the LORD, choose you this day 
whom ye will serve; whether the 
gods which your fathers served that 
were on the other side of the flood, 
or the gods of the Amorites, in 
whose land ye dwell: “but as for 
me and my house, we will serve the 
LorD. 

16 And the people answered and 
said, God forbid that we should for- 
sake the LORD, to serve other gods; 

17 For the LorD our God, he it is 
that brought us up and our fathers 
out of the land of Egypt, from the 
house of bondage, and which did 
those great signs in our sight, and 
preserved us in all the way wherein 
we went, and among all the people 
through whom we passed: 

18 And the LorD drave out from 
before us all the people, even the 
Amorites which dwelt in the land: 
itherefore will we also serve the 
Lorp; for he is our God. 

19 And Joshua said unto the peo- 
‘ple, Ye cannot serve the Lorn: for 
he zs an holy God; he is a jealous 
God; he will not forgive your trans- 
gressions nor your sins. 


JOSHUA. [24 3 


a witness unto you, lest ye dent 
your God. : 

28 So Joshua let the people depart, 
every man unto his inheritance. — 


The death of Joshua. 


29 And it Scame to pass after these 
things, that Joshua the son of Nun, 
the servant of the LorbD, died, be- 
ing an hundred and ten years old. 

30 And they buried him in the 
border of his “inheritance in Tim- 
nath-serah, which iss in mount 
Ephraim, on the north side of the 
hill of Gaash. 

31 And Israel served the Lorp all 
the days of Joshua, and all the days 
of the elders that ‘overlived Joshua, 
g Israel (his. |@24 which had known all the works 

tory). vs. |Of the LorpD, that he had done for 

29-33; Jud. Israel. 


20 If ye forsake the Lorp, and 
serve strange gods, then he will 
turn and do you hurt, and consume 
you, "after that he hath done you 


B.C. 1427. 


good. 

21 And the people said unto 
Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the 
LORD. 

22 And Joshua said unto the peo- 
ple, Ye are witnesses against your- 
selves that ye have “chosen you the 
LorpD, to serve him. And they 
said, We are witnesses. 

23 Now therefore ¢put away, 
said he, the strange gods which are 
among you, and incline your heart 
unto the LorD God of Israel. 

24 And the people ‘said unto 
Joshua, The Lorp our God will 
we serve, and his voice will we 
obey. 


a1 Chr.28.9; 
Ezra 8.22; 

Isa.65.11,12. 

6 Ezk.18.24. 

c Psa.119.173. 

d Jud.10.15,16; 
1 Sam.7.3; 

2 Cor.6,16-18. 


€ Deut.5.28, 
2 


f Jud.9.6. 


25 So Joshua made a covenant Gens 23, | 32 And the Jbones of Joseph, 
with the people that day, and set} Rom.11.26.) |Which the children of Israel brought 
them a statute and an ordinance in up out of Egypt, buried they in She- 
Shechem. , h Josh.19.50. |chem, in a parcel of ground which 


_26 And Joshua wrote these words} ; profongea |Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor 
in the book of the law of God, and! their days ithe father of Shechem for an hun- 
took a great stone, and set it up| ter dred pieces of silver: and it became 
there under an oak, that was by|;Genso.2s; |the inheritance of the children of 


the sanctuary of the Lorp. Heb.11.22. | Joseph. 

27 And Joshua said unto all the 33 And Eleazar the son of Aaron 
people, Behold, this stone shall be died; and they buried him in a hill 
a witness unto us; for it hath heard ithat pertained to Phinehas his 
all the words of the LorD which he son, which was given him in mount 
spake unto us: it shall be therefore Ephraim. 


11] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. "* 


Tus book takes its name from the thirteen men raised up to deliver Israel in the 
declension and disunion which followed the death of Joshua. Through these men 
Jehovah continued His personal government of Israel. The key-verse to the condi- 
tion of Israel is (17. 6), “Every man did that which was right in his own eyes.” 
Two facts stand out—the utter failure of Israel; the persistent grace of Jehovah. 
In the choice of the Judges is illustrated Zechariah’s great word (4. 6), “‘not by 
might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord’’; and Paul’s word (1 Cor. 
ites , “not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are 
called.” : 

The book records seven apostasies, seven servitudes to seven heathen nations, 
seven deliverances. The spiritual parallel is found in the history of the professing 
church since the Apostles, in the rise of sects and the lost sense of the unity of the 
one body (1 Cor. 12. 12, 13). 

Judges is in two parts: I. 1-16. inclusive; key-verse, 2. 18. II. 17.-21.; key- 


verse, 21. 25. 
The events recorded in Judges cover a period of 305 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. B.c. 1425. {taken it, and smitten it with the 


edge of the sword, and set the city 


The incomplete victory of Judah. cnshiresa 

iN eas after the *death of Joshua 9 And ‘afterward the children of 
it came to pass, that the chil- Judah went down to fight against 

dren of Israel asked the LorD, the Canaanites, that dwelt in the 

saying, Who shall go up for us mountain, and in the south, and in 

against the Canaanites first, to the valley. 


fight against them? 10 And Judah went against the 
2 And the Lorp said, ®Judah Canaanites that dwelt in ¢Hebron: 
shall go up: behold, I have delivered (now the name of Hebron before 


the land into his hand. was Kirjath-arba:) and they slew 

3 And Judah said unto Simeon Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai. 
his brother, Come up with me into 11 And from thence he went 
my lot, that we may fight against against the inhabitants of Debir: 


the Canaanites; and I likewise will 3 and the name of Debir before was 
go with thee into thy lot. So @ Josh.24.29. | Kirjath-sepher: 

Simeon went with him. b Gen.49.8,9; 12 And ‘Caleb said, He that 
4 And Judah went up; and the| Rev-5.5. smiteth Kirjath-sepher, and taketh 
Lorp delivered the Canaanites and] , josh.tt.21, fit, to him will I give Achsah my 


the Perizzites into their hand: and| - daughter to wife. 
they slew of them in Bezek ten|¢ Josh.15.13. 13 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, 


thousand men. eJosh.1s.i7, |Caleb’s younger brother, took it: 
5 And they‘found Adoni-bezek in and he gave him Achsah his daugh- 
Bezek: and they fought against) fDeut343. {ter to wife. 


him, and they slew the Canaanites 14 And it came to pass, when she 
and the Perizzites. came to him, that she moved him 

6 But Adoni-bezek fled; and they to ask of her father a field: and she 
pursued after him, and caught him, lighted from off her ass; and Caleb 
and cut off his thumbs and his great said unto her, What wilt thou? 
toes. 15 And she said unto him, Give 

7 And Adoni-bezek said, Three- me a blessing: for thou hast given 
score and ten kings, having their me a south land; give me also 
thumbs and their great toes cut off, springs of water. And Caleb gave 
gathered their meat under my her the upper springs and the 
table: as I have done, so God hath nether springs. 


sequited me. And they brought him 16 And the children of the Kenite, 

to Jerusalem, and there he died. Moses’ father in law, went up out 

8 Now the children of Judah had of the city of fpalm trees with the 

fought against Jerusalem, and had children of Judah into the wilder- 
287 


1 17] 


ness of Judah, which Jieth in the 
south of Arad; and they went and 
dwelt among the people. : 

17 And Judah went with Simeon 
his brother, and they slew the Ca- 
naanites that inhabited Zephath, 
and utterly destroyed it. And the 
name of the city was called Hormah. 

18 Also Judah took Gaza with 
the coast thereof, and Askelon 
with the coast thereof, and Ekron 
with the coast thereof. 

19 And the LorpD was with Judah; 
and he drave out the inhabitants 
of the mountain; but could not drive 
out the inhabitants of the valley, 
because they had chariots of iron. 

20 And they gave *Heébron unto 
Caleb, as Moses said: and he ex- 
pelled thence: the three sons of 
Anak 


The incomplete victory of 
Benjamin. 


21 And the children of Benjamin 


did not drive out the Jebusites that 
inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebu- 


JUDGES. 


sites dwell with the children of Ben-|@ J°sh-14-9,14. 


jamin in Jerusalem unto this day. 
22 And the house of Joseph, they 


also went up against Beth-el: and 


the LoRD was with them. 


b Josh.2.12; 
1 Sam.30.15. 


¢2 Ki.7.6. 


_23 And the house of Joseph sent! d Heb.1.4, 


to descry Beth-el. 
of the city before was Luz.) 

24 And the spies saw a man come 
forth out of the city, and they said 
unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, 
the entrance into the city, and Swe 
will shew thee mercy. 

25 And when he shewed them the 
entrance into the city, they smote 
the city with the edge of the sword; 
but they let go the man and all his 
family. 

26 Andthe man went into the land 
of the “Hittites, and built a city, and 
called the name thereof Luz: which 
is the name thereof unto this day. 


The incomplete victory of 
Manasseh, 


27 Neither did Manasseh drive 
out the inhabitants of Beth-shean 
and her towns, nor Taanach and her 
towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor 
and her towns, nor the inhabitants 
of Ibleam and her towns, nor the 
inhabitants of Megiddo and: her 
towns: but the Canaanites would 
dwell in that land. 

28 And it came to pass, when Is- 
tael was strong, that they put the 
Canaanites to tribute, and did not 
utterly drive them out. 


(Now the name| 7°f¢ 


e Gen.17.7; 
Ex.23.20;, 
Psa.89.34. 


f Psa.106.34. 


_ B.C. 1425. 


29 Neither did Ephraim drive out 
the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; 
but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer 
among them. 

30 Neither did Zebulun drive out 
the inkabitants of Kitron, nor the 
inhabitants of Nahalol; but the 
Canaanites dwelt among them, and 
became tributaries. 

31 Neither did Asher drive out 
the inhabitants of Accho, nor the 
inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, 
nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor 
of Aphik, nor of Rehob: 

32 But the Asherites dwelt among 
the Canaanites, the inhabitants of 
the land: for they did not drive 
them out. 

33 Neither did Naphtali drive out 
the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, 
nor the inhabitants of Beth-anath; 
but he dwelt among the Canaan- 
ites, the inhabitants of the land: 
nevertheless the inhabitants of 
Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath 
became tributaries unto them. 

34 And the Amorites forcea the 
children of Dan into the mountain: 
for they would not suffer them to 
come down to the valley: 

35 But the Amorites would dwell 
in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in 
Shaalbim: yet the hand of the 
house of Joseph prevailed, so that 
they became tributaries. 

36. And the coast of the Amorites 
was from the going up to Akrab- 
bim, from the rock, and upward. 


CHAPTER 2Z. 
Review of the Israelitish invasion 


of Canaan to the deathof Joshua. 


ND an ¢angel of the LorpD came 

+ up from Gilgal to Bochim, and 
said, I made you to go up out of 
Egypt, and have brought you unto 
the land which I sware unto your 
fathers; and I ‘said, I will never 
break my covénant with you. 

2 And ye shall make no league 
with the inhabitants of this land; 
ye shall throw down their altars: 
Jbut ye have not obeyed my voice: 
why have ye done this? 

3. Wherefore I also said, I will not 
drive them out from kefore you; but 
they shall be as thorns in your 
sides, and their gods shall be a 
snare unto you. 

And it came to pass, when the 
angel of the Lorp spake these 
words unto all the children of Is- 
rael, that the peopie lifted up their 
voice, and wept. 


Sh JUDGES. (222 


5 And they called the name of] BC.1425. jand as the LorpD had sworn unto 
that place *Bochim: and they sac- them: and they were greatly dis- 
geces oe wea ae eae : tressed. 

nd when Joshua had let the . . 
people go, the children of Israel Institution of the Judges. 
went every man unto his inheri- 16 Nevertheless the LorpD raised 
tance to possess the land. up 4judges, which delivered them 

7 And the people served the LORD out of the hand of those that 
all the days of Joshua, and all the spoiled them. 
days of the elders that outlived 17 And yet they would not 
Joshua, who had seen all the great hearken unto their judges, but they 
works of the LorRD, that he did for went a whoring after other gods, 
Israel. and bowed themselves unto them: 

8 And 4Joshua, the son of Nun, they turned quickly out of the way 
the servant of the Lorb, died, which their fathers walked in, obey- 
being an hundred and ten years old. ing the commandments of the 


9 And they buried him in the bor-| . Lorp; but they did not so. 
der of his inheritance in “Timnath-|* ** “°°°°** | 18 And when the Lorp raised 
heres, in the mount of Ephraim, on|» Israel (his- |them up 2judges, then the LORD was 
the north side of the hill Gaash. ae Ne with the judge, and delivered them 
10 And also all that generation] 3)°§ (Gen, |Out of the hand of their enemies all 
were gathered unto their fathers:) 12.2,3; Rom. |the days of the judge: for it ‘re- 
and there arose another generation} 11.26.) pented the LorD because of their 
after them, which knew not the], yosn19.50, |groanings by reason of them that 
LORD, nor yet the works which he| Timnath: oppressed them and vexed them. 
had done for Israel. Ba sezahe _19 And it came to pass, when the 

11 And the children of Israel did|z xingdom |Judgee was dead, that they re- 
evil in the sight of the Lorp, and| (.T.). vs. |turned, and corrupted themselves 


served Baalim: 16-18; 1 Sam.) more than their fathers, in following 
12 And they forsook the Lorp| &3-7-,‘S°" other gods to serve them, and to 
God of their fathers, which brought] 12.8:) bow down unto them; they ceased 
them out of the land of Egypt, and not from their own doings, nor from 
followed other gods, of the gods of |/°7*028"% their stubborn way. 
the people that were round about Result of Israel’s incomplete 
them, and bowed themselves unto ebedistice 
them, and provoked the LORD to 
anger. 20 And the anger of the LorpD 
13 And they forsook the Lorp, was hot against Israel; and he said, 
and served Baal and 1Ashtaroth. Because that this people hath trans- 
14 And the anger of the LoRD was gressed my covenant which I com- 
hot against Israel, and he delivered manded their fathers, and have not 
them into the hands of spoilers that hearkened unto my voice; } 
spoiledthem, and he sold them into . 21 Ialso will not henceforth drive 
the hands of their enemies round out any from before them of the na- 
about, so that they could not any tions which Joshua left when hedied: 
longer stand before their enemies. 22 That through them I may 
15 Whithersoever they went out, prove Israel, whether they will keep 
the hand of the LORD was against the way of the LorD to walk there- 
them for evil, as the LorpD had said, in, as their fathers did keep 7t, or not. 


1 Ashtaroth, plural of Ashtoreth (1 Ki. 11. 5), were figures of Ashtoreth the Phceni- 
cian goddess (the Astarte of the Greeks), which were worshipped as idols during 
times of spiritual declension in Israel (Jud. 10. 6; 1 Sam. 7.3.4; 12.103 31. 10; 1 Ki, 11. 
5, 33; 2 Ki. 23. 13). Jeremiah refers (44. 18, 19) to Ashtoreth as the “queen of 
heaven.” ‘ 

2 The judges were tribesmen in Israel upon whom the Lord laid the burden of 
Israel’s apostate and oppressed state. They were the spiritual ancestors of the 
prophets; that is to say, men raised up of God, the theocratic King, to represent 
Him in the nation. They were patriots and religious reformers. because national 
security and prosperity were inseparably connected with loyalty and obedience to 
Jehovah. Not one of the chosen deliverers had anything whereof to glory in the 
flesh. Othniel was. but the son of the younger brother of Caleb; Ehud was a left- 
handed man and an assassin; Shamgar, a rustic with an ox-goad; Deborah, a woman; 

Gideon, of am obscure family in the smallest tribe, etc. Each of the classes men- 
tioned in 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28 is illustrated among the judges. 
289 


2 23] 


23 Therefore the LorD left those 
nations, without driving them out 
hastily; neither delivered he them 
‘into the hand of Joshua. 


CHAPTER 3. 


OW these are the nations which 

the LorD left, to prove Israel 

‘by them, even as many of Israel as 
had notknownall thewarsof Canaan; 

2 Only that the generations of the 
children of Israel might know, toa 
teach them war, at the least such 
as before knew nothing thereof: : 

3 Namely, five lords of the Philis- 
tines, and all the Canaanites, and 
the Sidonians, and the Hivites that 
dwelt in mount Lebanon, from 
mount Baal-hermon unto the enter- 
‘ing in of Hamath. 


‘by them, 


“ments of the LORD, which he com- 
manded their fathers by the hand 
-of Moses. 


The first apostasy and servitude. 

5 And the children of Israel dwelt 
-among the Canaanites, Hittites, 
and Amorites, and Perizzites, and 
Hivites, and Jebusites: 

6 And they took their daughters 
to be their wives, and gave their 
-daughters to their sons, and served 
their gods. 

7 And the children of Israel did 
evil in the sight of the Lorb, and 
forgat the LorD their God, and 
served Baalim and the 1¢groves. 

8 Therefore the anger of the LorD 
was hot against Israel, and he sold 
them into the hand of Chushan- 
rishathaim king of Mesopotamia: 
and the children of Israel served 
Chushan-rishathaim eight years. 


Othniel, the first Judge. 

9 And when the children of Israel 
cried unto the Lorp, the Lorp 
raised up a $deliverer to the chil- 
dren of Israel, who delivered them, 
even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Ca- 
leb’s younger brother. 

10 And the ‘Spirit of the Lorp 
came upon him, and he judged Is- 
rael, and went out to war: and the 
Lorp delivered Chushan-risha- 


JUDGES. 


B.C. 1406. 


thaim king of Mesopotamia into 
his hand; and his hand prevailed 
against Chushan-rishathaim. F 

11 And the land had rest forty 
years. And Othniel the son of Ke- 
naz died. 


j The second apostasy and 
servitude. 


12 And the children of Israel did 
evil again in the sight of the LorD: 
and,the ¢<LorD strengthened Eglon 
the king of Moab against Israel, 
because they had done evil in the 
sight of the LorD. 

13 And he gathered unto him the 
children of Ammon and Amalek, 
and went and smote Israel, and 
possessed the city of palm trees. 

14 So the children of Israel served 
Eglon the king of Moab eighteen 
years. 


Ehud, the second Judge. 


15 But when the children of Israel 
jcried unto the Lorp, the Lorp 
raised themi up a deliverer, Ehud 
the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man 
lefthanded: and by him the chil- 
dren of Israel sent a present unto 
Eglon the king of Moab. 

16 But Ehud made him a dagger 
which had two edges, of a ‘cubit 
length; and he did gird it under his 
raiment upon his right thigh. 

17 And he brought the present 
unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eg- 
lon was a very fat man. 

18 And when he had made an end 
to offer the present, he sent away 
the people that bare the present. 

19 But he himself turned again 
from the quarries that were by 
Gilgal, and said, I have ‘a secret 
errand unto thee, O king: who said, 
Keep silence. And all that stood 
by him went out from him. 


aSee Deut. 
16.21 


6 saviour. 


¢ Holy Spirit. 
Jud.6.34. 


e About 18 in. 


21 And Ehud put forth his left 
hand, and took the dagger from his 
right thigh, and thrust it into his 
belly: 

22 And the haft also went in after 


1 Groves, like high places, have been associated with idolatrous worship from 


time immemorial. 
there (Deut. 16. 21). 


The Heb. asherah, trans. 
This idol seems often to have 
of which is constantly found on Assyrian monuments. 
‘such groves were associated with every form of idolatry (Cee) BRA ia, 
See, also, “high places” (1 Ki. 3. 2, note), and 


“grove,”’ means also the idol enshrined 

been a sacred tree, the figure 
In apostate Israel, Se 

17). 

“Ashtaroth,”’ Jud. 2. 13, note. 

290 


+ 


3 23] JUDGES. [4 15 


the blade: and the fat closed upon} _B.-C- 1336. 
the blade, so that he could not . 
draw the dagger out of his belly; 
and the dirt came out. 

23 Then Ehud went forth through 
the porch, and shut the doors of the 
parlour upon him, and locked them. 

24 When he was: gone out, his| 
servants came; and when they saw 
that, behold, the doors of the par- 
lour were locked, they said, Surely 
he 4covereth his feet in his summer 
chamber. 

95 And they tarried till they were | 
ashamed: and, behold, he opened 
not the doors of the parlour; there- 
fore they took a key, and opened 
them: and, behold, their lord was| 
fallen down dead on the earth. 


twenty years he mightily oppressed 
the children of Israel. 


Deborah and Barak, the fourth 
and fitth Judges. 


4 And Deborah, a prophetess, the 
wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel 
at that time. 

5S And she dwelt under the palm 
tree of /Deborah between Ramah 
and Beth-el in mount Ephraim: and 
the children of Israel came up to 
her for judgment. 

6 And she sent and called Barak 
the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh- 
naphtali, and said unto him, Hath 
not the Lorp God of Israel com- 
jmanded, saying, Go and draw to- 
ward mount Tabor, and take with 


, 

26 And Ehud escaped while they thee ten thousand men of the chil- 
tarried, and passed beyond the dren of Naphtali and of the children 
quarries, and escaped unto Seirath. of Zebulun? 

27 And it came to pass, when he 7 And éI will draw unto thee to 
was come, that he blew a trumpet|a 1 Sam.24.3. the river Kishon Sisera, the captain 
in the mountain of Ephraim, and), 5.45. of Jabin’s army, with his chariots 
the children of Israel went down|’-"“°” and his multitude; and I will de- 
with him from the mount, and he}c Jud.2.19. liver him into thine hand. 
before them. is giead tone 8 And Barak said unto her, If 


28 And he said unto them, Follow|” p.a.3'9. It thou wilt go with me, then I will go: 
iter met for tne te the Moabites| comers only See ON aoe 
ee ee re a baie thee ee 
Ree en ee ees nt) |/ OSS... befor Sener ee 

29 And they slew of Moab at that| ¢ Ex.14.4. shall sell Sisera into the hand of a 

time about ten thousand men, all woman. And Deborah arose, and 


justy, and all men of valour; and hvs18,21. | went with Barak to Kedesh. 
there escaped not a man. i Deut.20.1. 10 And Barak called Zebulun and 
= 7 7t 
520 So, Moab, was subdued that; garnered by |N*Myith ton thousand men at is 
the land had rest fourscore years. lamation. \feet:and Deborah went up with him. 
Sh tie end Tud 11 Now Heber the Kenite, which 
Beas dereees he Bint duces. was of the children of Hobab the 
~ 31 And after him was 'Shamgar meee ras of Me had severed 
the son of Anath, which slew of the imself from the Kenites, an 
Philistines six hundred men with pitched his tent. unto the plain of 
an ox goad: and he also delivered Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh. 
Israel. 12 And they shewed Sisera that 
Barak the son of Abinoam was gone 
CHAPTER 4. lup to mount Tabor. 
Th “ed d 13 And Sisera /gathered together 
e third apostasy an all his chariots, even nine hundred 
servitude. 4 chariots of iron, and all the people 
AND the children of Israel “again that were with him, from Harosheth 
did evil in the sight of the of oe Gentiles unto the river of 
Lorpb, when Ehud was dead. ishon. ' 

2 And the LorD moe mn into bo page oun ae 
the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, p; for this 7s the day in which the 
that reigned in Hazor; the eapeain Loe delivers’ Sisera into 
of whose host was Sisera, whic thine hand: 1s no e LorpD gone 
dwelt in ‘Harosheth of the Gentiles. out before thee? So Barak went 

3 And the children of Israel cried ae ae et eae and ten 

to the Lorp: for he had nine thousand men after him. *' 
Dot cts “ 15 And the Lord discomfited Sis- 


hundred chariots of iron; and 
291 


, « ‘ Ua i - * n <5 = NES) ae 
7 (cj | JUDGES. [516 


avenging of Israel, when the peonian 
willingly offered themselves. 

3 Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O 
ye princes; I, even I, will sing unto 
the LorbD; I will sing praise to the 
LorpD God of Israel. 

4 Lorb, when thou wentest out 
of Seir, when thou marchedst out of 
the field of Edom, the earth trem- 
bled, and the heavens dropped, the 
clouds also dropped water. 

5 The mountains ’melted from 
before the LorD, even that Sinai 
from before the LorD God of Israel. 

6 Inthe days of “Shamgar the son 
of Anath, in the days of Jael, the 
highways were unoccupied; and the 
travellers walked through byways. 

7 The inhabitants of the vil- 
lages ceased, they ceased in Israel, 
until that I Deborah arose, that I 
arose a mother in Israel. 

8 They chose new gods; then was 
war in the gates: was there a shield 
or spear seen among forty thousand 


era, and all his chariots, and all| B.C. 1296. __ 
his host, with the edge of the sword} ~ 
before Barak; so that Sisera lighted 
down off his chariot, and fled away 
on his feet. 

16 But Barak pursued after the 
chariots, and after the host, unto 
Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all 
the host of Sisera fell upon the edge 
of the sword; and there was not a 
man left. 

17 Howbeit Sisera fled away on 
his feet to the tent of Jael the wife 
of Heber the Kenite: for there was 
peace between Jabin the king of 
Hazor and the house of Heber the 
Kenite. 

18 And Jael went out to meet Sis- 
era, and said unto him, Turn in, 
my lord, turn in to me; fear not. 
And when he had turned in unto 
her into the tent, she covered him 
with a mantle. 

19 And he said unto her, Give me, 
I pray thee, a little water to drink; 


for I am thirsty. And she opened in Israel? 
a bottle of milk, and gave him 9 My heart is toward the gov- 
De a ae pect Ex.15.1; aS of he that payors ae 
gain he said unto her, Stan a.18, selves willingly amon e people. 
in the door of the tent, and it shall aoe 3,4, |Bless ye the Lose “ ste! 
be, when any man doth come and Fre bs 10 Speak, ye that ride on white 
enquire of thee, and say, Is there|} fowed. asses, ye that sit in judgment, and 
any man here? that thou shalt say, ¢ Jud3.31 walk by the way. 7 
No. ancl watt li They that are delivered from 
21 Then Jael Heber’s wife took ald righteous- |the noise of archers in the places of 
nail of the tent, and took an ham-| esses. drawing water, there shall they re- 
mer in her hand, and went softly) ¢ psa.103, hearse the ¢righteous acts of the 
unto him, and smote the nail into} 1,2. LoRD, even the righteous acts 
his temples, and fastened it into the toward the inhabitants of his vil- 
ground: for he was fast asleep and lages in Israel: then shall the people 
Ron dudcbebotd teotsteckpinstned P iz seApakeraiaiece MaDe 
y } , aS Barak pursue wake, awake, eborah;: 
boa ya ena ees to meet him, awake, awake, utter a song: arise, 
Eilehew! thes lhe eran wiel tne cha son OR ATO 
ive, thou son o Fi 
thou seekest. And when he came 13 Then hemade him that reid 
oy her en t, behold, Sisera lay eth have dominion over the nobles 
ore , and the nail was in his tem- ts the re the LorD made 
; me have omin 
23 So God subdued on that day mighty. ae 
Jabin the king of Canaan before the 14 Out of Ephraim was there a 


children of Israel. root of them against Amalek: 

24 And the hand of the children thee, Henjanine among agent 
of Israel prospered, and prevailed out of Machir came down governors, 
against Jabin the king of Canaan, and out of Zebulun they that handle 
until they had destroyed Jabin king the pen of the writer, 
of Canaan. 15 And the princes of Issachar 
were with Deborah; even Issachar, 


CHAPTER 5. and also Barak: he was sent on foot 

The song of Deborah and Barak. cee = be gh A For the divisions 
euben 

ee sang Deborah and Barak thoughts of Hearted nie aoa 

no one Bese of Abinoam on that 16 Why abodest thou among the 


sheepfolds, to hear the bleati f 
2 Praise ye the Lorp for the the flocks? For the divisionsto®: Reus 
292 


ben there were great searchings of 
heart. 

17 Gilead abode beyond Jordan: 
and why did Dan remain in ships? 
Asher continued on the sea shore, 
and abode in his breaches. 

18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a 
people that jeoparded their lives 
unto the death in the high places 
of the field. ; 

19 The kings came and fought, 
then fought the kings of Canaan in 
Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; 


them away, that ancient river. the 
river Kishon. Omy soul, thou hast 
trodden down strength. 

22 Then were the horsehoofs 
broken by the means of the prans- 
i the pransings of their mighty 


ings, 
ones. 

23 Curse ye Meroz, said the 
4angel of the LORD, curse ye bit- 
terly the inhabitants thereof; be- 
cause they came not to the help of 
the LorD, to the help of the LoRD 
against the mighty. 

24 Blessed above women_ shall 
Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite 
be, blessed shall she be above 
women in the tent. 

25 He asked water, and she gave 
him milk; she brought forth butter 
in a lordly dish. . 

26 She put her hand to the nail, 
and her right hand to the work- 
men’s hammer; and with the ham- 
mer she smote Sisera, she smote 
off his head, when she had pierced 
and stricken through his temples. 

27 At her feet he bowed, he fell, 
he lay down: at her feet he bowed, 
he fell: where he bowed, there he 
fell down dead. f ; 

28 The mother of Sisera looked 
out at a window, and cried through 
the lattice, Why is his chariot so 
long in coming? why tarry the 
wheels of his chariots? 


JUDGES. © 


B.C. 1296. 


a Heb.1.4, 


note. 
b her words. 
¢.Psa.92.9. 
d Psa.37.6. 


e Psa.50.15; 
Hos.5.15. 


“99 Her wise ladies answered her,} 


yea, she returned “answer to her- 
self, 

30 Have they not sped? have they 
not divided the prey; to every man 
a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey 
of divers colours, a prey of divers 
colours of needlework, of divers 
colours of needlework on. both sides, 
meet for the necks of them that 
take the spoil? ; ‘ 

31 Solet all thine enemies ‘perish, 


293 


O Lorp: but Jet them that love 
him be as the ¢sun when he goeth 
forth in his might. And the land 
had rest forty years. 


CHAPTER 6. 


‘|The fourth apostasy and servi- 


tude. 


AND the children of Israel. did 
evil in the sight of the LORD: 
and the Lorp delivered them into 
the hand of Midian seven years. 

2 And the hand of Midian pre- 
vailed against Israel: and because 
of the Midianites the children of 
Israel made them the dens which 
are in the mountains, and caves, 
and strong holds. 

3 And so it was, when Israel had 
sown, that the Midianites came up, 
and the Amalekites, and the chil- 
dren of the east, even they came 
up against them; 

4 And they encamped against 
them, and destroyed the increase 
of the earth, till thou come unto 
Gaza, and left no sustenance for 
Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, mor 
ass. 

5 For they came up with their cat- 
tle and their tents, and they came 
as grasshoppers for multitude; for 
both they and their camels were 
without number: and they entered 
into the land to destroy it. 

6 And Israel was greatly impov- 


Jerished because of the Midianites; 


and the children of Israel ‘cried 
unto the LORD. 

7 And it came to pass, when the 
children of Israel cried unto the 
Lorp because of the Midianites,- 

8 That the LorD sent a prophet 
unto the children of Israel, which 
said unto them, Thus saith the 
Lorp God of Israel, I brought you 
up from Egypt, and brought you 
forth out of the house of bondage; 

9 And i delivered you out of the 
hand of the Egyptians, and out of 
the hand of all that oppressed you, 
and drave them out from _ before 
you, and gave you their land; 

10 And I said unto you, I am the 
Lorp your God; fear not the gods 
of the Amorites, in whose land ye 
dwell: but ye have not obeyed my 
voice. 

Gideon, the sixth Judge. 


11 And there came an “angel of 
the LorD, and sat under an oak 
which was in Ophrah, that per- 
tained unto Joash the Abi-ezrite: 


6 12] * JUDGES. 


[6 34 


and his son Gideon threshed wheat] B.c. 1249. 


by the winepress, to hide it from 
the Midianites. 
.12 And the angel of the Lorp 


<7!appeared unto him, and said unto 


him, The LORD is with thee, thou 
mighty man of valour. 

13 And Gideon said unto him, Oh 
my Lord, “if the LorD be with us, 
why. then is all this befallen us? and 
where be all his miracles which 
our fathers told us of, saying, Did 
not the LorD bring us up from 
Egypt? but now the Lorp hath 
forsaken us, and delivered us into! 
the hands of the Midianites. 

14 And the LorD looked upon' 


him, and said, Go in this thy might, | 
and thou shalt save Israel from ey 


hand of the Midianites: have not I 


sent thee? 


15 And he said unto him, Oh my 
Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? 
behold, my family is poor in Ma- 
nasseh, and I am the least in my 


father’s house. | 


16 And the LorD said unto him, 
Surely I will be with thee, and thou 
shalt smite the Midianites as one 
man. 

17 And he said unto him, If now I 
have found grace in thy sight, then 


shew me a sign that thou talkest| 


with me. 

until I come unto thee, and bring 
forth my present, and set if before 
thee. And he said, I will tarry 
until thou come again. 


18 Depart not hence, I pray thee, | 


19 And Gideon went in, and made 
ready a kid, and unleavened cakes 
of an ’ephah of flour: the flesh he 
put in a basket, and he put the 
broth in a pot, and brought it out 
unto him under the oak, and pre- 
sented if. 

20 And the ‘angel of God said 
unto him, Take the flesh and the 
unleavened cakes, and lay them 
upon this rock, and ‘pour out the 
broth. And he did so. 

21 Then the ‘angel of the Lorp 
put forth the end of the staff that 
was in his hand, and touched the 
flesh and the unleavened cakes; and 
there rose up fire out of the rock, 
and consumed the flesh and the un- 
leavened cakes. Then the ‘angel of 
the Lorp departed out of his sight. 

22 And when Gideon perceived 
that he was an “angel of the Lorp, 
Gideon said, Alas, O Lord Gop! 
for because I have seen an “angel 
of the LorD face to face. 

23 And the Lorp said unto him, 


Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou 
shalt not die. 

24 Then Gideon built an altar 
there unto the LorD, and called it 
Jehovah-shalom: unto this day it is 
yet in Ophrah of the Abi-ezrites. ._ 

25 And it came to pass the same 
night, that the LorD said unto him, 
Take thy father’s young bullock, 
even the second bullock of seven 
years old, and throw down the altar 
of Baal that thy father hath, and 
cut down the 2grove that is by it: 

26 And build an altar unto ‘the 
Lorp thy God upon the top of this 
rock, in the ordered place, and take 
the second bullock, and offer a 
burnt-sacrifice with the wood of the 
4grove which thou shalt cut down. 

27 Then Gideon took ten men of 
his servants, and did as the Lorp 
had said unto him: and so it was, 
because he feared his father’s house- 
hold, and the men of the city, that 
he could not do it by day, that he 
did it by night. 

28 And when the men of the city 
arose early in the morning, behold, 
the altar of Baal was cast down, 
and the ¢grove was cut down that 
was by it, and the second bullock 
was offered upon the altar that was 
built. 
| 29 And they said one to another, 
Who hath done this thing? And 
when they enquired and asked, 
they said, Gideon the son of Joash 
hath done this thing. c 

30 Then the men of the city said 
unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that 
he may die: because he hath cast 
down the altar of Baal, and because 
he hath cut down the ¢grove that 
was by it. 

31 And Joash said unto all that 
stood against him, Will ye plead for 
Baal? will ye save him? he that 
will plead for him, let him be put to 
jdeath whilst it is yet morning: if 
he be a god, let him plead for him- 
self, because one hath cast down 
his altar. 

32 Therefore on that day he called 
him ¢Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal 
plead against him, because he hath 
thrown down his altar. 

33 Then all the Midianites and 
the Amalekites and the children of 
the east were gathered together, 
and went over, and pitched in the 
valley of Jezreel. 

34 But the Spirit of the Lorp 
came upon Gideon, and he blew a 
trumpet; and Abi-ezer was gath- 
lered after him, : 


JUDGES. 


35 And he sent messengers 
throughout all Manasseh; who also] 
was gathered after him: and he 
sent messengers unto Asher, and!_ 
unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali;| 
and they came up to meet them. 

36 And Gideon said unto God, If 
thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, 
as thou hast said, 

37 Behold, I will put a fleece of 
wool in the floor; and if the dew be 
on the fleece only, and it be dry 
upon all the earth beside, then shall 
I know that thou wilt save Israel 
by mine hand, as thou hast said. 

38 And it was-so: for he rose up 
early on the morrow, and thrust the 
fleece together, and wringed the 
dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of 
water. 

39 And Gideon said unto God, 
Let not thine anger be hot against 
me, and I will speak but this once: 
let me prove, I pray thee, but this 
once with the fleece; let it now be 
dry only upon the fleece, and upon 
all the ground let there be dew. 

40 And God did so that night: for 
it was dry upon the fleece only, and) , peut.g.17; 


there was dew_on all the ground. 1 Sam.14.6; 
cae 
m.11.18; 
CHAPTER 7. 1 Cor.1.29: 
The preparation for battle. pe Pe 


HEN Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, 

T and all the people that were > PSE 
with him, rose up early, and pitched| ¢ 1 Sam.14.6. 
beside the well of Harod: so that 
the host of the Midianites were on 
the north side of them, by the hill 
of Moreh, in the valley. 

2 And the LorD said unto Gideon, 
The people that are with thee are 
too many for me to give the Midian- 
ites into their hands, lest Israel 
eéyaunt themselves against me, say- 
ing, Mine own hand hath saved 
me. 

3 Now therefore go to, proclaim in 
the ears of the people, saying,’Who- 
soever is fearful and afraid, let him 3 
return and depart early from mount 
Gilead. And there returned of the 
people twenty and two thousand; 
and there remained ten thousand. 

4 And the LorD said unto Gid- 
eon, The people are yet too many; 
bring them down unto the water, 
and I will try them for thee there: 
and it shall be, that of whom I say 
unto thee, This shall go with thee, 
the same shall go with thee; and of 
whomsoever I say unto thee, This 
shail not go with thee, the same 
shall not go. ; 


[7 14 


5 So he brought down the people 
unto the water: and the LorD said 
unto Gideon, Every one that lap- 
peth of the water with his tongue, 
as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set 
by himself; likewise every one that 
boweth down upon his knees to 
drink. 

6 And the number of them that 
lapped, putting their hand to their 
mouth, were three hundred men: 
but all the rest of the people bowed 
down upon their knees to dri 
water. 


Gideon’s three hundred. 


7 And the LorD said unto ‘Gid- 
eon, By the three hundred men that 
lapped will I save you, and deliver 
the Midianites into thine hand: and 
let all the other people go every 
man unto his place. 

8 So the people took victuals in 
their hand, and their trumpets: 
and he sent all the rest of Israel 
every man unto his tent, and re- 
tained those three hundred men: 
and the host of Midian was beneath 
him in the valley. 

9 And it came to pass the same 
night, that the LorD said unto him, 
Arise, get thee down unto the host; 
for I have delivered it into thine 
hand. 

10 But if thou fear to go down, go 
thou with Phurah thy servant down 
to the host: 

11 And thou shalt hear what they 
say; and afterward shall thine 
hands be strengthened to go down 
unto the host. Then went he down 
with Phurah his servant unto the 
outside of the armed men that were 
in the host. 

12 And the Midianites and the 
Amalekites and all the children of 
the east lay along in the valley 
like grasshoppers for multitude; 
and their camels were without 
nurnber, as the sand by the sea side 
for multitude. 

13 And when Gideon was come, 
behold, there was a man that told 
a dream unto his fellow, and said, 
Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, 
a cake of barley bread tumbled into 
the host of Midian, and came unto a 
tent, and smote it that it fell, and 
overturned it,that the tent lay along. 

14 And his fellow answered and 
said, This is nothing else save the 
sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a 
man of Israel: for into his hand 
hath God delivered Midian, and all 
the host. 


15 And it was so, when Gideon 
heard the telling of the dream, and 
the interpretation thereof, that he 
worshipped, and returned into the 
host of Israel, and said, Arise; for 
the Lorp hath delivered into your 
hand the host of Midian. 


The victory over Midian. 


16 And he divided the three hun- 
dred men into three companies, and 
he put a trumpet in every man’s 
hand, with empty pitchers, and 
“lamps within the pitchers. 

17 And he said unto them, Look 
on me, and do likewise: and, be- 
hold, when I come to the outside of 
the camp, it shall be that, as I do, 
so shall ye do. 

18 When I blow with a trumpet, I 
and all that are with me, then blow 
ye the trumpets also on every side 
of all the camp, and say, The sword 
of the Lorpb, and of Gideon. 

19 So Gideon, and the hundred 
men that were with him, came unto 
the outside of the camp in the be- 
ginning of the middle watch; and 
they had but newly set the watch: 
and they blew the trumpet;, and 


brake the pitchers that were in 
their hands. 

20 And the three companies blew 
the trumpets, and brake the pitch- 
ers, and held the lamps in their left 
hands, and the trumpets in their 
right hands to blow withal: and 
they cried, The sword of the Lorp, 
and of Gideon. 

21 And they ‘stood every man in 
his place round about the camp: 
fea all the host ran, and cried, and 

ed. 

22 And the three hundred blew 


the trumpets, and the Lorp set 
every man’s sword against his fel- 
low, even throughout all the host: 
and the host fled to Beth-shittah 
in Zererath, and to the border of 
Abel-meholah, unto Tabbath. 

23 And the men of Israel gathered 
themselves together out of Naph- 
tali, and out of Asher, and out of 
all Manasseh, and pursued after the 
Midianites. 

24 And Gideon sent messengers 
throughout all mount Ephraim, 
saying, Come down against the 
Midianites, and take before them 
the waters unto Beth-barah and 
Jordan. Then all the men of 
Ephraim gathered themselves to- 
gether, and took the waters unto 
*Beth-barah and Jordan. 

25 And they took two princes of 


a Or, fire- 
brands, or, 
torches, 


6 Ex.14.13, 
14; 2 Chr. 
20.17. 


¢ John 1.28, 
d Psa.83.11, 
12, 


e Cf.Jud.12. 
1; 2 Sam.2. 
8; 1 Ki.12. 
16. Here 
begins that 
deep-rooted 
division in 
Israel which 
culminated 
in the divi- 
sion of Solo- 
mon’s king- 
dom under 
Jeroboam 
and Reho- 
boam. 


f 1 Sam.25. 
11; 1 Ki.20, 
11. 


JUDGES 


B.C. 1249. 


the ¢Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; 
and they slew Oreb upon the rock > 
Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the 
winepress of Zeeb, and pursued 
Midian, and brought the heads of 
Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the 
other side Jordan. 


CHAPTER 8. 


The jealousy of Ephraim. Events 
| to the death of Gideon. 


ND the men of ‘Ephraim said 
unto him, Why hast thou 
served us thus, that thou calledst 
us not, when thou wentest to fight 
with the Midianites? And they did 
chide with him sharply. 

2 And he said unto them, What 
have I done now in comparison of 
you? TJs not the gleaning of the 
grapes of Ephraim better than the 
vintage of Abi-ezer? 

3 God hath delivered into your 
hands the princes of Midian, Oreb 
and Zeeb: and what was I able to 
do in comparison of you? Then 
|their anger was abated toward 
him, when he had said that. 

4 And Gideon came to Jordan, 
and passed over, he, and the three 
hundred men that were with him, 
faint, yet pursuing them. 

5 And he said unto the men of 
Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of 
bread unto the people that follow 
me; for they be faint, and I am pur- 
suing after Zebah and Zalmunna, 
kings of Midian. 

6 And the princes of fSuccoth said, 
Are the hands of Zebah and Zal- 
munna now in thine hand, that we 
should give bread unto thine army? 

7 And Gideon said, Therefore 
when the LorD hath delivered Ze- 
bah and Zalmunna into mine hand, 
then I will tear your flesh with the 
thorns of the wilderness and with 
briers. ; 

8 And he went up thence to Pen- 
uel, and spake unto them likewise: 
and the men of Penuel answered 
him as the men of Succoth had 
answered Aim. 

9 And he spake also unto the men 
of Penuel, saying, When I come 
again in peace, I will break down 
this tower. 

10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna 
were in Karkor, and their hosts 
with them, about fifteen thousand 
men, all that were left of all the 
hosts of the children of the east: 
for there fell an hundred and twenty 
thousand men that drew sword. 


11] JUDGES. . [8 35 


‘11 And Gideon went up by the 
way of them that dwelt in tents on 
the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, 
and smote the host: for the host 
was secure, 

12 And when Zebah and Zal- 
‘munna fled, he pursued after them, 
and took the two kings of Midian, 
Zebah and Zalmunna, and -dis- 
comfited ail the host. 

13 And Gideon the son of Joash 
returned from battle before the sun 
was up, 

14 And caught a young man of 
the men of Succoth, and enquired 


my son rule over you: the “LORD 
shall rule over you. 

‘24 And Gideon said unto them, 
I would desire a request of- you, 
that ye would give me every man 
the earrings of his prey. (For they 
had golden earrings, because they 
were -¢Ishmaelites. ) 

25 And they answered, We will 
willingly give them. And they 
spread a garment, and did cast 
therein every man the earrings of 
his prey. : 

26 And the weight of the golden 
earrings that he requested was a 


-B.C. 1249. , 


of him: and he described unto him thousand and seven hundred shek- 
the princes of Succoth, and the els of gold; beside ornaments. and 
elders thereof, even threescore and collars, and purple raiment that 
seventeen men. was on the kings of Midian, and 

15 And he came unto the men of beside the chains that were about 
Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah their camels’ necks. 
and Zalmunna, with whom ye did 27 And Gideon made an ephod 
upbraid me, saying, Are the hands thereof, and put it in his city, even 
of Zebah and Zalmunna now in in ‘Ophrah: and all Israel went 
thine hand, that we should give thither a whoring after it: which 
bread unto thy men that are thing became a snare unto Gideon, 
weary? © and to his house. 

16 And he took the elders of the), 19, 28 Thus was Midian subdued be- 


city, and thorns of the wilderness fore the children of Israel, so that 
and briers, and with thern he taught] > Psa.89.12, |they lifted up their heads no more. 


the men of Semen: - pa aenlets And rea country, Sere i ee 
17 And he beat down the “tower| 0.19;Isa. |mess forty years in e days o 
of Penuel, and slew the men of the} 33.22. rs Gideon. 
8 “Then said he unto Zebah and p Gon to2- feeraatera sian gee 
Zalmunna, What manner of men} Jud.6.24. house. ; 
were they whom ye slew at ’Tabor? 30 And Gideon had threescore 
And they answered, As thou art, so and ten sons of his body begotten: 
were they; each one resembled the for he had many wives. : 
children of a king. 31 And his concubine that was in 
19: And he said, They were my Shechem, she also bare him a son, 
brethren, even the sons ch prod pag seine ac Sperm Ae ae 2 
mother: as the LorD liveth, if ye 32 An eon the_son of Joas 
had saved them alive, I would not died in a good old age, and was 
slay you. buried in the sepulchre of Joash his 
20 And he said unto Jether_his father, in Ophrah of the Abi-ez- 
firstborn, Up, and slay them, But rites. 
the youth drew not his sword: for The fifth apostasy: the time of 
he feared, because he was yet a So ntittion: 
youth. R 
21 Then Zebah and Zalmunna 33 And it came to pass, as soon as 
said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: Gideon was dead, that the children 
for as the man is, so 1s his strength. of Israel turned again, and went 
And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah . ee ae ee and made 
Zalmunna, and took away the aal-beri eir god. 
Pecerrs that were on their cam- 34 And the children of Israel re- 
els’ necks. membered not the Lorp their God, 
who had delivered them out of the 


h f Israel said i r 
ae Teron Rule ihe over us, hands of all their enemies on every 


d th side: : 
hs een eke thon hast 35 Neither shewed they kindness 


j ; Mi- to the house of Jerubbaal, namely, 
mglivered Fe nd ok os Gideon, according to all the good- 


Bana Gideon said unto them, I ness which he had shewed unto 


will not rule over you, neither shail #3 Israel. 


93] 


CHAPTER 9. 
The conspiracy of Abimelech. 


ND Abimelech the son of Jerub- 

baal went to “Shechem unto 

his mother’s brethren, and com- 

muned with them, and with all the 

family of the house of his mother’s 
father, saying, 

2 Speak, I pray you, in the ears of 
all the men of Shechem, Whether 
is better for you, either that all the 
sons of Jerubbaal, which %are 
threescore and ten persons, reign 
over you, or that one reign over 
you? remember also that I am 
your bone and your flesh. 

3 And his mother’s brethren spake 
of him in the ears of all the men of 
Shechem all these words: and their 
hearts inclined to follow Abimelech; 
for they said, He is our brother. 

4 And they gave him threescore 
and ten pieces of silver out of the 
house of ‘Baal-berith, wherewith 
Abimelech hired vain and light per- 
sons, which followed him. 

5 And he went unto his father’s 
house at Ophrah, and 4slew his 
brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, be- 
ing threescore and ten persons, up- 
on one stone: notwithstanding yet 
Jotham the youngest son of Jerub- 
baal was left; for he hid himself. 

6 And all the men of Shechem 
gathered together, and all the house 
of Millo, and went, and made Abim- 
elech king, by the plain of the pil- 
lar that was in Shechem. 

7 And when they told it to Jo- 
tham, he went and stood in the top 
of mount ¢Gerizim, and lifted up 
his voice, and cried, and said unto 
them, Hearken unto me, ye men of 
Shechem, that God may hearken 
unto you. 

8 The /trees went forth on a time 
to anoint a king over them; and 
they said unto the olive tree, Reign 
thou over us. 

9 But the olive tree said unto 
them, Should I leave my fatness, 
wherewith by me they honour God 
and man, and go to be promoted 
over the trees? 

10 And the trees said to the fig 
tree, Come thou, and reign over 
us. 

11 But the fig tree said unto them, 
Should I forsake my sweetness, and 
my good fruit, and go to be pro- 
moted over the trees? 

12 Then said the trees unto the 
vine, Come thou, and reign over us. 

13 And the vine said unto them, 


[9 25 


JUDGES. 


B.C. 1209. 


Should I leave my wine, which 
cheereth God and man, and go to 
be promoted over the trees? 

14 Then said all the trees unto 
the bramble, Come thou, and reign 
over us. 

15 And the bramble said unto the‘ 
trees, If in truth ye anoint me king 
over you, then come and put your 
8trust in my shadow: and if not, 
let fire come out of the bramble, 
and devour the cedars of Lebanon. 

16 Now therefore, if ye have done 
truly and sincerely, in that ye have 
made Abimelech king, and if ye 
have dealt well with Jerubbaal and 
his house, and have done unto him 
according to the deserving of his 
hands; 

17 (For my “father fought for 
you, and adventured his life far, 
and delivered you out of the hand 
of Midian: 

18 And ‘ye are risen up against 
my father’s house this day, and 
have slain his sons, threescore and 
ten persons, upon one stoné, and 
have made Abimelech, the son of 


a Jud.8.31. 
b Jud.8.30. 


¢ Jud.8.33. 
d 2 Ki.11.1,2, 


¢ Josh.8.33.  |his maidservant, king over the men 
f Parables ' \Of Shechem, because he is your 

(0.T.). vs. | brother;) 

coack ed 19 If ye then have dealt truly and 

9.7-15: Zech. |Sincerely with Jerubbaal and with 

11.7-14.) his house this day, then rejoice ye 

= in Abimelech, and let him also re- 
g Psa.2.12, ee & 

nore" joice in you: . 

20 But if not, let fire come out 

h Jud.7. from Abimelech, and devour the 
i Jud.8.35. men of Shechem, and the house of 
is Millo; and let fire come out from the 
rns men of Shechem, and from the 


reuse of Millo, and devour Abime- 
ech, 

21 And Jotham ran away, and 
fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt 
there, for fear of Abimelech his 
brother. 

22 When Abimelech had reigned 

\jthree years over Israel, 
23 Then God Jsent an evil spirit 
\between Abimelech and the men of 
Shechem; and the men of Shechem 
feels treacherously with Abime- 
ech: 

24 That the cruelty done to the 
threescore and ten sons of Jerub- 
baal might come, and their blood 
be laid upon Abimelech their 
brother, which slew them; and 
upon the men of Shechem, which 
aided him in the killing of his 
brethren. 

25 And the men of Shechem set 
liers in wait for him in the top of 
the mountains, and they robbed all. 


298 


f 


9 26] 


that came along that way by them: 
and it was told Abimelech. 

26 And Gaal theson of Ebed came 
with his brethren, and went over to 
Shechem: and the men of Shechem 
put their confidence in him. 

27 And they went out into the 
fields, and gathered their vineyards, 
and trode the grapes, and made 
merry, and went into the house of 
their god, and did eat and drink, 
and cursed Abimelech. 

28 And Gaal the son of Ebed said, 
Who 4is Abimelech, and who is 
Shechem, that we should serve 
him? js not he the son of Jerub- 
baal? and Zebul his officer? serve 
the men of Hamor the father of 
Shechem: for why should we serve 
him? 

29 And 4would to God this people 
were under my hand! then would 
I remove Abimelech. And he said 
to Abimelech, Increase thine army, 
and come out. 

30 And when Zebul the ruler of 
the city heard the words of Gaal 
the son of Ebed, his anger was 
_ kindled, 

31 And he sent messengers unto 
Abimelech “privily, saying, Behold, 
Gaal the son of Ebed and his breth- 
ren be come,to Shechem; and, be- 
pene they fortify the city against 
thee. 

32 Now therefore up by night, 


thou and the people that is with 
thee, and lie in wait in the field: 

33 And it shall be, that in the 
morning, as soon as the sun is up, 
thou shalt rise early, and set upon 
the city: and, behold, when he and 
the people that is with him come 
out against thee, then mayest thou 

~ do to them as thou shalt find occa- 
sion. 

34 And Abimelech rose up, and 
all the people that were with him, 
by night, and they laid wait against 
Shechem in four companies. 

35 And Gaal the son of Ebed went 
out, and stood in the entering of 
the gate of the city: and Abimelech 
rose up, and the people that were 
with him, from lying in wait. 

36 And when Gaal saw the peo- 
ple, he said to Zebul, Behold, there 
come people down from the top 
of the mountains. And Zebul said 
unto him, Thou seest the shadow of 
the mountains as if they were 


men. 

37 And Gaal spake again and 
said, See there come people down 
by the middle of the land and 


JUDGES. 


B.C, 1206. 


a1 Sam.25. 
10; 1 Ki.12. 
16. 


b 2 Sam.15.4; 
Psa.10.3. 

ccrattily. 

d ys.28,29. 

e v.20. 

if 2 Ki.3.25. 


299 


[9 49 


another company come along by 
the plain of Meonenim. 

38 Then said Zebul unto him, 
Where is now thy mouth, where- 
with thou 4saidst, Who is Abime- 
lech, that we should serve him? is 
not this the people that thou hast 
despised? go out, I pray now, and 
fight with them. 

39 And Gaal went out before the 
men of Shechem, and fought with 
Abimelech. 

40 And Abimelech chased him, 
and he fled before him, and many 
were overthrown and wounded, 
even unto the entering of the gate. 

41 And Abimelech dwelt at Aru- 
mah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal 
and his brethren, that they should 
not dwell in Shechem. 

42 And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that the people went out 
yee the field; and they told Abime- 

ech. 

} 43 And he took the people and 
divided them into three companies, 
and laid wait in the field, and 
looked, and, behold, the people 
were come forth out of the city; 
and he rose up against them, and 
smote them. 

44 And Abimelech, and the com- 
pany that was with him, rushed 
forward, and stood in the entering 
of the gate of the city: and the two 
other companies ran upon all the, 
people that were in the fields, and 
slew them. 

45 And Abimelech fought against 
the city all that day; “and he took 
the city, and slew the people that 
was therein, and beat f/down the 
city, and sowed it with salt. 

46 And when all the men of the 
tower of Shechem heard that, they 
entered into an hold of the house 
lof the god Berith. 

47 And it was told Abimelech, 
that all the men of the tower of 
Shechem were gathered together. 

48 And Abimelech gat him up to 
mount Zalmon, he and all the peo- 
ple that were with him; and Abime- 
lech took an axe in his hand, and 
cut down a bough from the trees, 
and took it, and laid it on his shoul- 
der, and said unto the people that 
were with him, What ye have seen 
|me do, make haste, and do as I 
have done. 

49 And all the people likewise cut 
down every man his bough, and 
followed Abimelech, and put them 
to the hold, and set the hold on fire 
upon them; so that all the men of 


9 50] 


the tower of Shechem died also,! B.C. 1206. and the gods of Syria, and the gods 
about a thousand men and women. of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and 


50 Then went Abimelech to The- 
bez, and encamped against Thebez, 
and took it. 

51 But there was a strong tower 
within the city, and thither fled all 
the men and women, and all they 
of the city, and shut zt to them, and 
gat them up to the top of the tower. 

52 And Abimelech came unto the 
tower, and fought against it, and 
went hard unto the door of the 
tower to burn it with fire. 

53 ¢And a certain woman cast a 
piece of a millstone upon Abime- 
lech’s head, and all to brake his 
skull. 

54 Then he called hastily unto 
the young man his armourbearer, 
and said unto him, Draw thy sword, 
and slay me, that men say not of 
me, A woman slew him. And his 
young man thrust him through, and 
he died. 

55 And when the men of Israel 
saw that Abimelech was dead, they 
departed every man unto his place. 

56 Thus God ‘rendered the wick- 
edness of Abimelech, which he did 
unto his father, in slaying his sev- 
enty brethren: 

57 And all the evil of the men of 
Shechem did God render upon their 
heads: and upon them came the 
¢eurse of Jotham the son of Jerub- 


baal. 
CHAPTER 10. 
Tola, the seventh Judge. 


AN D after Abimelech there arose 
to «defend Israel Tola the son 
of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of 
Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir 
in mount Ephraim. 

2 And he judged Israel twenty 
and three years, and died, and was 
buried in Shamir. 


Jair, the eighth Judge. 

3 And after him arose Jair, a 
Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty 
and two years. 

4 And he had thirty sons that 
rode on thirty ass colts, and they 
had thirty cities, which are called 
fHavoth-jair unto this day, which 
are in the land of Gilead. 

_9 And Jair died, and was buried 
in Camon. 


The sixth apostasy and 
servitude, 
6 And the children of Israel did 
evil again in the sight of the LorpD, 
and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, 


JUDGES. 


a2 Sam.11. 
21. 

61 Sam.31.4. 

cv.24. 

d vs.20,45. 


e Save, or, de- 
liver. 


fOr, The yil- 


lages of Jair. 
Num.32.41. 


300 


110. 18 


the gods of the children of Ammon, 
and the gods of the Philistines, and 
forsook the LoRD, and served not 
him, 

7 And the anger of the LorD was 
hot against Israel, and he sold them 
into the hands of the Philistines, 
and into the hands of the children 
of Ammon. 

8 And that year they vexed and 
oppressed the children of Israel: 
eighteen years, all the children of 
Israel that were on the other side 
Jordan in the land of the Amorites, 
which is in Gilead. 

9 Moreover the children of Am- 
mon passed over Jordan to fight 
also against Judah, and against 
Benjamin, and against the house of 
Ephraim; so that Israel was sore 
Gistressed. 

10 And the children of Israel cried 
unto the Lorb, saying, We have 
sinned against thee, both because 
we have forsaken our God, and 
also served Baalim. 

11 And the Lorp said unto the 
children of Israel, Did not I deliver 
you from the Egyptians, and from 
the Amorites, from the children of 
Ammon, and from the,Philistines? 

12 The Zidonians also, and the 
Amalekites, and the Maonites, did 
oppress you; and ye cried to me, 
pean delivered you out of their 

and. 

13 Yet ye have forsaken me, and 
served other gods: wherefore I will 
deliver you no more, 

14 Go and cry unto the gods 
which ye have chosen; let them de- 
liver you in the time of your tribula- 


on. 

15 And the children of Israel said 
unto the LorRD, We have sinned: 
do thou unto us whatsoever seem- 
eth good unto thee; deliver us only, 
we pray thee, this day. 

16 And they put away the strange 
gods from among them, and served 
the Lorb: and his soul was grieved 
for the misery of Israel. 

17 Then the children of Ammon 
were gathered together, and en- 
camped in Gilead. And the chil- 
dren of Israel assembled themselves 
together, and encamped in Mizpeh. 

18 And the people and princes of 
Gilead said one to another, What 
man is he that will begin to fight 
against the children of Ammon? he 
shall be head over all the inhabi- 
tants of Gilead. 


~ 
114 


JUDGES. 


[11 25 


CHAPTER 11. B.C. 1161. |rael took away my land, when they 
Jephthah, the ninth Judge. came up out of Egypt, from Arnon 


OW 4Jephthah the Gileadite 
was a mighty man of valour, 
and he was the son of an harlot: and 
' Gilead begat Jephthah. 

2 And Gilead’s wife bare him 
sons; and his wife’s sons grew up, 
and they thrust out Jephthah, and 
said unto him, Thou shalt not in- 
herit in our father’s house; for thou 
art the son of a strange woman. 

3 Then Jephthah fled from his 
brethren, and dwelt in the land of 
Tob: and there were gathered vain 
men to Jephthah, and went out 
with him. 

4 And it came to “pass in process 
of time, that the children of Ammon 
made war against Israel. 

5 And it was so, that when the 
children of Ammon made war 
against Israel, the elders of Gilead 
went to fetch Jephthah out of the 
land of Tob: 

6 And they said unto Jephthah, 
Come, and be our captain, that we 
may fight with the children of Am- 
mon. 

7 And Jephthah said unto the 
elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate 
me, and expel me out of my father’s 
house? and why are ye come unto 
me now when ye are in distress? 

g And the elders of Gilead said 
unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn 
again to thee now, that thou may- 
est go with us, and fight against 
the children of Ammon, and be our 
head over all the inhabitants of 
Gilead. 

9 And Jephthah said unto the 
elders of Gilead, If ye bring me 
home again to fight against the 
children of Ammon, and the LORD 
deliver them before me, shall I be 
your head? ; 

10 And the elders of Gilead said 
unto Jephthah, The Lorp be wit- 
ness between us, if we do not so ac- 
cording to thy words. ‘ 

11 Then Jephthah went with the 
elders of Gilead, and the. people 
made him head and captain over 
them: and Jephthah uttered all his 
words before the LorD in Mizpeh. 

12 And Jephthah sent messengers 
unto the king of the children of 
Ammon, saying, ¢?What hast thou 
to do with me, that thou art come 
against me to fight in my land? 

13 And the king of the children of 
Ammon answered unto the mes- 
sengers of Jephthah, Because “Is- 


a Heb.11.32, 
thae. 


b Gen.21.10; 
Deut.23.2 


c after days. 
d Deut.20.10, 
12. 


e Num.21.24. 
f Deut.2.9,19 


g Num.21.4. 


hk Num.21.213 
Deut.2.26. 


301 


called Jeph: 


even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: 
now therefore restore those Jands 
again peaceably. 

14 And Jephthah sent messengers 
again unto the king of the children 
of Ammon: 

15 And said unto him, Thus saith 
Jephthah, Israel ftook not away the 
land of Moab, nor the land of the 
children of Ammon: 

16 But when Israel came up from 
Egypt, and walked through the 
wilderness unto the Red sea, and 
came to Kadesh; 

17 Then Israel sent messengers 
unto the king of Edom, saying, Let 
me, I pray thee, pass through thy 
land: but the king of Edom would 
not hearken thereto. And in like 
manner they sent unto the king of 
Moab: but he would not consent: 
and Israel abode in Kadesh. 

18 Then they went along through 
the wilderness, and &compassed 
the land of Edom, and the land of 
Moab, and came by the east side of 
the land of Moab, and pitched on 
the other side of Arnon, but came 
not within the border of Moab: for 
Arnon was the border of Moab. 

19 And Israel “sent messengers 
unto Sihon king of the Amorites, 
the king of Heshbon; and Israel 
said unto him, Let us pass, we pray 
thee, through thy land into my 
place. 

20 But Sihon trusted not Israel to 
pass through his coast: but Sihon 
gathered all his people together, 
and pitched in Jahaz, and fought 
against Israel. 

21 And the Lorp God of Israel 
delivered Sihon and all his people 
into the hand of Israel, and they 
smote them: so Israel possessed 


all the land of the Amorites, thegin- 
habitants of that country. 

22 And they possessed all the 
coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon 
even unto Jabbok, and from the 
wilderness even unto Jordan. 

23 So now the LorD God of Israel 
hath dispossessed the Amorites 
from before his people Israel, and 
shouldest thou possess it? 

24 Wilt not thou possess that 
which Chemosh thy god giveth 
thee to possess? So whomsoever 
the Lorp our God shall drive out 
from before us, them will we possess. 

25 And now art thou any thing 
better than Balak the son of Zippor, 


lking of Moab? did he ever strive 


~ 


11 26] JUDGES. 
against Israel, or did he ever fight 
against them, 

26 While Israel dwelt in Heshbon 
and her towns, and in Aroer and 
her towns, and in all the cities that 
be along by the coasts of Arnon, 
three hundred years? why there- 
fore did ye not recover them within 
that time? 

27 Wherefore I have not sinned 
against thee, but thou doest me 
wrong to war against me: the LorD 
the Judge be judge this day between 
the children of Israel and the chil- 
dren of Ammon. 

28 Howbeit the king of the chil- 
dren of Ammon hearkened not unto 
the words of Jephthah which he 
sent him. . 

29 Then the ¢Spirit of the Lorp 
came upon °Jephthah, and he passed 
over Gilead, and Manasseh, and 


passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and|? #0/¥ Spirit. 


: : 13.25. 
from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed aS 
over unto the children of Ammon,; Mal.2.15.) 

Jephthah’s awful vow. es 
30 And Jephthah ‘vowed _a vow Be bate 
unto the Lorp, and said, If thou) 2¢¢8 oy 
shalt without fail deliver the chil-| Israel. 
dren of Ammon into mine hands, ave tagts 
31 Then it shall be, that whatso- means 
ever cometh forth of the doors of| 1Sam.11i. 


my house to meet me, when I return 
in peace from the children of Am- 
mon, ¢shall surely be the Lorp’s, 
and I will offer it up for a burnt- 
offering. 

32 So Jephthah passed over unto 
the children of Ammon to fight 
against them; and the Lorp de- 
livered them into his hands. 

33 And he smote them from 
Aroer, even till thou come to Min- 
nith, even twenty cities, and unto 
the plain of the vineyards, with a 
very great slaughter. Thus the} 
children of Ammon were subdued! 
before the children of Israel. 

34 And Jephthah came to ¢Miz- 
peh unto his house, and, behold, his 
daughter came out to meet him with 
timbrels and with dances: and she 
was his only child; beside her he 
had neither son nor daughter. 

35 And it came to pass, when he! 
saw her, that he rent his clothes, 
and said, Alas, my daughter! thou 
hast btought me very low, and thou! 
art one of them that trouble me:| 
for I have opened my mouth unto| 
the Lorp, and I fcannot go back. | 

36 And she said unto him, My| 
father, if thou hast opened thy! 
mouth unto the Lorp, do to me ac-! 


d Lev.27.2,3, 
28. 


ev.ll. 


f Num.30.2. 


g Or,celebrate. 


kh Jud.8.1, 
note. 


B.C. 1143. 


fl2is 
cording to that which hath pro- 
ceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch 
as the LorpD hath taken vengeance 
for thee of thine enemies, even of 
the children of Ammon. 

37 And she said unto her father, 
Let this thing be done for me: let 
me alone two months, that I may go 
up and down upon the mountains, 
and bewail my virginity, I andmy 
fellows. 

38 And he said, Go. And he sent 
her away for two months: and she 
went with her companions, and be- © 
wailed her virginity upon the moun- 
tains. 

39 And it came to pass at the end 
of two months, that she returned 
unto her father, who did with her 
according to his vow which he had 
vowed: and’ she knew no man. 
And it was a custom in Israel, 

40 That the daughters of Israel 
went yearly to £lament the daughter 
ot Jephthah the Gileadite four days 
in a year. 


CHAPTER 12 
The second jealousy of Ephraim. 


AN D the men of ‘Ephraim 
gathered themselves together, 
and went northward, and said unto 
Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou 
over to fight against the children of 
Ammon, and didst not call us to go 
with thee? we will burn thine house 
upon thee with fire. 

2 And Jephthah said unto them, I 
and my people were at great strife 
with the children of Ammon; and 
when I called you, ye delivered me 
not out of their hands. 

3 And when I saw that ye deliy- 
ered me not, I put my life in my 
hands, and passed over against the 
children of Ammon, and the Lorp 
delivered them into my hand: 
wherefore then are ye come up unto 
me this day, to fight against me? 

4 Then Jephthah gathered to- 
gether all the men of Gilead, and 
fought with Ephraim: and the men 
of Gilead smote Ephraim, because 
they said, Ye Gileadites are fugi- 
tives of Ephraim among the Ephra- 
imites, and among the Manass- 
ites, 


, 9 And the Gileadites took the pas- 


sages of Jordan before the Ephraim- 
ites: and it was so, that when those 
Ephraimites which were escaped 
said, Let me go over; that the men 
lof Gilead said unto him, Ar# thou 
lan Ephraimite? If he said, Nav: 


JUDGES. 


6 Then said they unto him, Say 
now Shibboleth: and he said Sib- 
boleth: for he could not frame to 
pronounce if right. Then they took 
him, and slew him at the passages 
of Jordan: and there fell at that 
time of the Ephraimites forty and 
two thousand. 

7 And Jephthah judged Israel six 
years. Then died Jephthah the 
Gileadite, and was buried in one of 
the cities of Gilead. 


Ibzan, the tenth Judge. 

8 And after him °Ibzan of Beth- 
lehem judged Israel. 

9 And he had thirty sons, and 
thirty daughters, whom he sent 
abroad, and took in thirty daugh- 
ters from abroad for his sons. And 
he judged Israel seven years. 

10 Then died Ibzan, and was 
puried at Beth-lehem. 


Elon, the eleventh Judége. 

11 And after him Elon, a Zebu- 
lonite, judged Israel; and he judged 
Israel ten years. 

12 And Elon the Zebulonite died, 
and was buried in Aijalon in the 
country of Zebulun. 


Abdon, the twelfth Judée. 

13 And after him Abdon the son 
of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged 
Israel. 

14 And he had forty sons and 
thirty nephews, that rode on three- 
score and ten ass colts: and he 
judged Israel eight years. 

15 And Abdon the son of Hillel 


a Signifying a 
stream or 
flood. 


b He seems to 
have been 
only a civil 
judge in 
northeast 
Israel. 


c Heb.1.4, 
note. 


d1 Sam.1.19, 
20. 


e Num.6.2. 


f Bible 
prayers 


the Pirathonite died, and was buried DE 
in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim,| 45°? Hab.3. 


in the mount of the Amalekites. 1-16.) 


CHAPTER 13. 


The seventh apostasy and 
servitude. 


PACND the children of Israel did 
evil again in the sight of the 
Lorp; and the Lorp delivered 
them into the hands of the Philis- 
tines forty years. F 


The parents of Samson. 

2 And there was a certain man of 
Zorah, of the family of the Danites, 
whose name was Manoah; and his 
wife was barren, and bare not. 

3 And the ‘angel of the LORD 
‘appeared unto the woman, and 
dsaid unto her, Behold now, thou 
art barren, and bearest not: but} 
thou shalt conceive, and bear a 


son. 
. 303 


B.C. 1143. 


[13 16 


4 Now therefore beware, I pray 
thee, and drink not wine nor strong 
drink, and eat not any unclean 
thing: 

5 For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and 
bear a son; and no razor shall come 
on his head: for the child shall be 
a ‘Nazarite unto God from the 
womb: and he shall begin to de- 
liver Israel out of the hand of the 
Philistines. 

6 Then the woman came and told 
her husband, saying, A man of God 
came unto me, and his countenance 
was like the countenance of an*.__ 
‘angel of God, very terrible: but IW 
asked him not whence he was, 
neither told he me his name: 

7 But he said unto me, Behold, 
thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; 
and now drink no wine nor strong 
drink, neither eat any unclean 
thing: for the child shall be a Naz- 
arite to God from the womb to the 
day of his death. 

8 Then Manoah fintreated the 
Lorp, and said, O my Lord, let the 
man of God which thou didst send 
come again unto us, and teach us 
what we shall do unto the child 
that shall be born. 

9 And God hearkened to the voice 
of Manoah; and the ‘angel of God 
came again unto the woman as she 
sat in the field: but Manoah her 
husband was not with her. 

10 And the woman made haste, 
and ran, and shewed her husband, 
and said unto him, Behold, the-man 
hath appeared unto me, that came 
unto me the other day. 

11 And Manoah arose, and went 
after his wife, and came to the man, 
and said unto him, Art thou the 
man that spakest unto the woman? 
And he said, I am. 

12 And Manoah said, Now let thy 
words come to pass. Wow shall we 
order the child, and How shall we 
do unto him? 

13 And the ‘angel of the LorpD 
said unto Manoah, Of all that I said 
unto the woman let her beware. 

14 She may not eat of any thing 
that cometh of the vine, neither let 
her drink wine or strong drink, nor 
eat any unclean thing: all that I 
commanded her let her observe. 

15 And, Manoah said unto the 
cangel of the LorD, I pray thee, let 
us detain thee, until we shall have 
made ready a kid for thee. 

16 And the ‘angel of the Lorp 
said unto Manoah, Though thou 
detain me, I will not eat of thy 


13 17] 


JUDGES. 


Pera 


[14 


bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt- 
offering, thou must offer it unto the 
Lorp. For Manoah knew not that 
he was an angel of the Lorp. 

17 And Manoah said unto the 
angel of the LorD, What is thy 
name, that when thy sayings come 
to pass we may do thee honour? 

18 And the 4angel of the Lorp 
said unto him,Why askest thou thus 
after my name, seeing it is secret? 

19 So Manoah took a kid with 
émeat-offering, and offered it upon| 
a rock unto the Lorp: and the 
angel did wonderously; and Ma- 
noah and his wife looked on. 

20 For it came to pass, when the 
flame went up toward heaven from 
off the altar, that the ¢angel of the 
LorpD ascended in the flame of the 
altar. And Manoah and his wife 
looked on if, and fell on their faces 
to the ground. 

21 But the ¢angel of the Lorpb did 
no more appear to Manoah and to 
his wife. Then Manoah knew that 
he was an “angel of the Lorp. 

22 And Manoah said unto his 
wife, We shall surely die, because 
we have seen ‘God. 

23 But his wife said unto him, If 
the Lorp were pleased to kill us, 
he would not have received a burnt- 
offering and a meat-offering at our 
hands, neither would he have 
shewed us all these things, nor 
would as at this time have told us 
such things as these. 


The birth of Samson. 

24 And the woman bare a son, 
and called his name Samson: and 
the child grew, and the Lorp 
blessed him. 

25 And the 4Spirit of the Lorp 


began to move him at times in the 
camp of Dan between Zorah and 
Eshtaol. 


CHAPTER 14. 
Samson, the thirteenth Judge. 


Pe Samson went down to Tim- 
nath, and saw a woman in 
Timnath of the daughters of the 
Philistines. 

2 And he came up, and told his 
father and his mother, and said, I 
have seen a woman in Timnath of 
the daughters of the Philistines: 
now therefore get her for me to 
wife. 

3 Then his father and his mother 
said unto him, Js there never a 
woman among the daughters of thy 
brethren, or among all my people, 


B.C. 1161. 


a Heb.1.4, 


note, 
b Lit. meal. 


¢ See John 1, 
18, note. 


d Holy Spirit. 
Jud.14 


e Holy Spirit. 
vs.6,19; Jud. 
15.14. (Gen. 
1.2; Mal.2. 
15.) 


f Miracles 
(O.T.), vs. 5, 
6,19; Jud. 
15.14-17. 
(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 

g1Sam.14. 
25,26. 

h Lev.11.27, 

i Or, shirts. 


304 


1 
that thou goest to take a wife of the — 
uncircumcised Philistines? And 
Samson said unto his father, Get 
her for me; for she pleaseth me 


well. 

4 But his father and his mother 
knew not that it was of the LORD, 
that he sought an occasion against 
the Philistines: for at that time 
the Philistines had dominion over 
Israel. 


Samson and the Iion. 


5 Then went Samson down, and 
his father and his mother, to Tim- 
nath, and came to the vineyards of 
Timnath: and, behold, a young 
lion roared against him. 

6 And the Spirit of the Lorp 
came mightily upon him, and he 
Jrent him as he would have rent a 
kid, and he had nothing in his 
hand: but he told not his father or 
his mother what he had done. 

7 And he went down, and talked 
with the woman; and she pleased 
Samson, well. 


Samson’s riddle. 


8 And after a time he returned to 
take her, and he turned aside to see 
the carcase of the lion: and, behold, 
there was a swarm of bees and 
honey in the carcase of the lion. 

9 sAnd he took thereof in his 
hands, and went on eating, and 
came to his father and mother, and 
he gave them, and they did eat: 
but he told not them that he had 
taken the honey out of the /car- 
case of the lion. 4 

10 So his father went down unto 
the woman: and Samson made 
there a feast; for so used the young 
men to do. 

11 And it came to pass, when they 
saw him, that they brought thirty. 
companions to be with him. 

12 And Samson said unto them, 
Iwill now put forth a riddle unto 
you: if ye can certainly declare it 
me within the seven days of the 
feast, and find it out, then I will 
give you thirty ‘sheets and thirty 
change of garments: 

13 But if ye cannot declare it me, 
then shall ye give me thirty ‘sheets 
and thirty change of garments. 
And they said unto him, Put forth 
thy riddle, that we may hear it. 

14 And he said unto them, Out of 
the eater came forth meat, and out 
of the strong came forth sweetness. 
And they could not in three days 
expound the riddle. 


“om 


4s And it came to pass on the 
seventh day, that they said unto 
Samson’s wife, ¢Entice thy hus- 
band, that he may declare unto us 
the riddle, “lest we burn thee and 
thy father’s house with fire: have 
ve called us to take that we have? 
is it not so? 

16 And Samson’s wife wept before 
him, and said, “Thou dost but hate 
me, and lovest me not: thou hast 
put forth a riddle unto the children 
of my people, and hast not told st 
me. And he said unto her, Behold, 
T have not told zt my father nor my 
mother, and shall I tell it thee? 

17 And she wept before him the 
seven days, while their feast lasted: 
and it came to pass on the seventh 
day, that he told her, because she 
lay sore upon him: and she told 


the riddle to the children of her, 


people. 

18 And the men of the city said 
unto him on the séventh day before 
the sun went down, What is sweeter 
than honey? and what is stronger 
than a lion? And he said unto 
them, If ye had not plowed with 
my heifer, ye had not found out my 
riddle. 


Samson at Ashkelon. 


19 And the 4Spirit of the Lorp 
came upon him, and he went down 
to Ashkelon, and slew thirty men 
of them, and took their spoil, and 
gave change of garments unto them 
which expounded the riddle. And 
his anger was kindled, and he went 
up to his father’s house. 

20 But Samson’s wife was ‘given 
to his companion, whom he had 
used as his friend. 


CHAPTER 15. 


Bat it came to pass within a 
while after, in the time of 
wheat harvest, that Samson visited 
his wife with a kid; and he said, I 
will go in to my wife into the 
chamber. But her father would 
not suffer him to go in. ; 

2 And her father said, I verily 
thought that thou hadst utterly 
hated her; therefore I gave her to 
thy companion: 7s not her reece 
sister fairer than she? take her, I 
pray thee, instead of her. 


The foxes and firebrands. 

3 And Samson said concerning 
them, Now shall I be more blame- 
less than the Philistines, though I 
do them a displeasure. 


ate 


JUDGES. 


B.C. 1141. 


a Jud.16.5. 
6 Jud.15.6. 
¢ Jud.16.15. 
dv.6. 

e Jud.15.2. 
f Jud.14.20. 


g 2 Sam.14. 
30. 


h Jud.14.15. 


i Holy Spirit. 


1 Sam.10.6, 
10. (Gen.1. 
2; Mal.2.15.) 


305 


4 And Samson went and caught 
three hundred foxes, and took fire- 
brands, and turned tail to tail, and 
put a firebrand in the midst between 
two tails. 

5 And when he had set the brands 
on fire, he let them go into the 
standing corn of the Philistines, 
and burnt up both the shocks, and 
also the standing scorn, with the 
vineyards and olives. 

6 Then the Philistines said, Who 
hath done this? And they an- 
swered, Samson, the son in law 
of the Timnite, because he had 
taken his wife, and given her to his 
companion. And the Philistines 
came up, and /burnt her and her 
father with fire. 

7 And Samson said unto them, 
Though ye have done this, yet will 
I be avenged-of you, and after that 
I will cease. 

8 And he smote them hip and 
thigh with a great slaughter: and he 
went down and dwelt in the top of 
the rock Etam. 

9 Then the Philistines went up, 
and pitched in Judah, and spread 
themselves in Lehi. 

10 And the men of Judah said, 
Why are ye come up against us? 
And they answered, To bind Sam- 
son are we come up, to do to him 
as he hath done to us. 

11 Then three thousand men of 
Judah went to the top of the rock 
Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest 
thou not that the Philistines are 
rulers over us? what is this that 
thou hast done unto us? And he . 
said unto them, As they did unto 
me, so have I done unto them. 

12 And they said unto him,We are 
come down to bind thee, that we 
may deliver thee into the hand of 
the Philistines. And Samson said 
unto them, Swear unto me, that ye 
will not fall upon me yourselves. 

13 And they spake unto him, say- 
ing, No; but we wiil bind thee fast, 
and deliver thee into their hand: 
but surely we will not kill thee. 
And they bound him with two new 
cords, and brought him up from the 
rock. 


Samson slays a thousand Phi- 
Jistines. 


14 And when he came unto Lehi, 
the Philistines shouted against him: 
and the ‘Spirit of the LorpD came 
mightily upon him, and the cords 
that were upon his arms became as 
flax that was burnt with fire, and 


15 15] 


JUDGES. 


his bands loosed from off his 
hands. ; 

15 And he found a new %jawbone 
of an ass, and put forth his hand, 
and took it, and slew a thousand 
men therewith. 

16 And Samson said, With the 
jawbone of an ass, heaps upon 
heaps, with the jaw of an ass have 
I slain a thousand men. 

17 And it came to pass, when he 
had made an end of speaking, that 
he cast away the jawbone out of 
his hand, and called that place 
CRamath-lehi. 

18 And he was sore athirst, and 
called on the LorD, and said, Thou 
hast given this great deliverance 
into the hand of thy servant: and 
now shall I die for thirst, and fall 
into the hand of the uncircumcised? 

19 But God clave an hollow place 
that was in the jaw, and there came 
water thereout, and when he had 
drunk, his spirit came again, and|a 
he revived: wherefore he called the 
name thereof ¢En-hakkore, which 
is in Lehi unto this day. 

20 And he judged Israel in the 
days of the Philistines twenty], 


years. 
CHAPTER 16. 


Samson at Gaza. 


HEN went Samson to Gaza,/|¢ 
and saw there an harlot, and 
went in unto her. 


c 


B.C. 1140. 


Miracles 
(O.T.). vs. 
14-17,18,19; 
Jud.i6.28-30. 
(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


1 Cor.1.27, 
28. 


The hill of 


the jawbone. 


The well of 
him that 
cried. 


2 And it was told the Gazites,|¢1Ki-11.1. 
saying, Samson is come hither.| ¢yug14.16. 


And they compassed Aim in, and 


' laid wait for him all night in the|s Gen.39.10. 


gate of the city, and were quiet all 
the night, saying, In the morning, 
when it is day, we shall kill him. 

3 And Samson lay till midnight, 
and arose at midnight, and took the 
doors of the gate of the city, and 
the two posts, and went away with 
them, bar and all, and put them 
upon his shoulders, and carried 
them up to the top of an hill that is 
before Hebron. 


Samson and Delilah. 


4 And it came to pass afterward, 
that he loved a “woman in the 
valley of Sorek, whose name was 
Delilah. 

5S And the lords of the Philistines 
came up unto her, and said unto 
her, Entice him, and see wherein 
his great strength Izeth, and by 
what means we may prevail 
against him, that we may bind him 
to afflict him: and we will give thee 


every one of us eleven hundred 
pieces of silver 

6 And Delilah said to Samson, 
Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy — 
great strength Jreth, and wherewith 
thou mightest be bound to afflict 
thee. . 

7 And Samson said unto her, If 
they bind me with seven green withs 
that were never dried, then shall I 
be weak, and be as another man. 

8 Then the lords of the Philistines 
brought up to her seven green withs 
which had not been dried, and she 
bound him with them. 

9 Now there were men lying in 
wait, abiding with her in the cham- 
ber. And she said unto him, The 
Philistines be upon thee, Samson. 
And he brake the withs, as a thread 
of tow is broken when it toucheth 
the fire. So his strength was not 
known. 

10 And Delilah said unto Sam- 
son, Behold, thou hast mocked me, 
and told me lies: now tell me, I pray 
thee, wherewith thou mightést be 
bound. 

11 And he said unto her, If they 
bind me fast with new ropes that 
never were occupied, then shall I 
be weak, and be as another man. 

12 Delilah therefore took new 
ropes and bound him therewith, and 
said unto him, The Philistines be 
upon thee, Samson. And there 
were liers in wait abiding in the 
chamber. And he brake them 
from off his arms like a thread. 

13 And Delilah said unto Samson, 
Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and 
told me lies: tell me wherewith thou. 
mightest be bound. And he said 
unto her, If thou weavest the 
seven locks of my head with the 
web. 

14 And she fastened it with the 
pin, and said unto him, The Philis- 
tines be upon thee, Samson. And 
he awaked out of his sleep, and 
went away with the pin of the 
beam, and with the web. : 

15 And she said unto him, /How 
canst thou say, I love thee, when 
thine heart 7s not with me? thou 
hast mocked me these three times, 
and hast not told me wherein thy 
great strength lieth. 

16 sAnd it came to pass, when she 
pressed him daily with her words, 
and urged him, so that his soul was 


vexed unto death; 


306 


17 That he told her all his heart, 
and said unto her, There hath not 
come a razor upon mine head; for I 


P| 


’ 


have been a Nazarite unto God 
from my mother’s womb: if I be 
shaven, then my strength will go 
from me, and I shall become weak, 
and be like any other man. 

18 And when Delilah saw that he 
had told her all his heart, she sent 
and called for the lords of the Philis 
tines, saying, Come up this once, for 
he hath shewed me all his heart. 
Then the lords of the Philistines 
came up unto her, and brought 
money in their hand. 

19 And she made him sleep upon 
her knees; and she called for a man, 
and she caused him to shave off the 
seven locks of his head; and she 
began to afflict him, and his strength 
went from him. 

20 And she said, ThePhilistines be 
upon thee, Samson. And he awoke 
out of his sleep, and said, I will go 
out as at other times before, and 
shake myself. And he ¢wist not that 
the Lorp was departed from him. 

21 But the Philistines took him, 


JUDGES. 


a Contra, Ex. 
34.29. 


b Bored out. 
c Bible 


B.C. 1120. 


[17 3 


upon the house standeth, that I 


may lean upon them. 

27 Now the house was full of men 
and women; and all the lords of the 
Philistines were there; and there 
were upon the roof about three 
thousand men and women, that 
beheld while Samson made sport. 

28 And Samson ‘called unto the 
Lorp, and said, O Lord Gop, 
remember me, I pray thee, and 
strengthen me, I pray thee, only 
this once, O God, that I may be at 
once avenged of the Philistines for 
my two eyes. 

29 And Samson took hold of the 
two middle pillars upon which the 
house stood, and on which it was 
borne up, of the one with his right 
hand, and of the other with his left. 

30 And Samson said, Let me die 
with the Philistines. And he bowed 
himself with al/ his might; and the 
house 4fell upon the lords, and upon 
all the people that were therein. 
So the dead which he slew at his 


and put out his eyes, and brought]: prayers death were more than they which 

him down to Gaza, and bound him Oreo, uu, {he slew in his life. 

with fetters of brass; and he did) Gen.15.2; 31 Then his brethren and all the 

grind in the prison house. Hab.3.1-16.) |house of his father came down, and 
22 Howbeit the hair of his head]; ny; sctes took him, and brought Aim up, and 

began to grow again after he was| (0.T).vs. |buried him between Zorah and 

shaven. bei ; ef Lear 2 mine busvinepicce ef 

Fe Pia it anoah his father. e judg 
The death of Samson. Sy ie Israel twenty years. 


23 Then the lords of the Philis- 
tines gathered them together for to 
offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon 
their god, and to rejoice: for they 
said, Our god hath delivered Sam- 
son our enemy into our hand. 

24 And when the people saw him, 
they praised their god: for they 
said, Our god hath delivered into 
‘our hands our enemy, and the de- 
stroyer of our country, which slew 
many of us. 

25 And it came to pass, when 
their hearts were merry, that they 
said, Call for Samson, that he may 
make us sport. And they called 
for Samson out of the prison house; 
and he made them sport: and they 
set him between the pillars. 

96 And Samson said unto the lad 
that held him by the hand, Suffer 
me that I may feel the pillars where- 


CHAPTER 17. 

Confusion, civil and religious. 

ND there was a man of mount 
Ephraim, whose name was 
Micah. a 
(1) Micah’s worship in self-will. 

2 And he said unto his mother, 
The eleven hundred shekels of 
silver that were taken from thee, 
about which thou cursedst, and 
spakest of also in mine ears, behold, 
the silver is with me; I took it. 
And his mother said, Blessed be 
thou of the LORD, my son. 

3 And when he had restored the 
eleven hundred shekels of silver to 
his mother, his mother said, I had 
wholly dedicated the silver unto the 
Lorp from my hand for my son, to 
make a graven image and a molten 


ee 


_ 1The character and work of Samson are alike enigmatical. 
angel (13. 1-21) he was a Nazarite (Num. 6.; Jud. 
his Nazarite separation through fleshly appetites. 


Announced by an 
13. 5) who constantly defiled 
Called of God to judge Israel, 


and endued wonderfully with the Spirit, he wrought no abiding work for Israel, 
and perished in captivity to his enemies the Philistines. What was real in the man 
was his mighty faith in Jehovah in a time of doubt and apostasy, and this faith 


God honoured (Heb. 11. 32). 
307 


17 4] 


image: now therefore I will restore 
it unto thee. 

4 Yet he restored the money unto 
his mother; and his mother took 
two hundred shekels of silver, and 
gave them to the founder, who 
made thereof a graven image and 
a molten image: and they were in 
the house of Micah. 

5 And the man Micah had. an 
house of gods, and made an ephod, 
and teraphim, and consecrated one 
of his sons, who became his priest. 

6 Inthose days there was no king 
in Israel, but every man did that 
which was right in his own eyes. 

7 And there was a young man out 
of Beth-lehem-judah of the family 
of Judah, who was a Levite, and he 
sojourned there. 

8 And the man departed out of 
the city from Beth-lehem-judah to 
sojourn where he could find a place: 
and he came to mount Ephraim to 
the house of Micah, as he journeyed. 

9 And Micah said unto him, 
Whence comest thou? And he said 
unto him, I am a Levite of Beth- 
lehem-judah, and I go to sojourn 
where I may find a place. 

10 And Micah said unto him, 
Dwell with me, and be unto me a 
father and a priest, and I will give 
thee ten shekels of silver by the 
year, and a suit of apparel, and thy 
victuals. So the Levite went in. 

11 And the Levite was content to 
-dwell with the man; and the young 
man was unto him as one of his 
sons. 

12 And Micah consecrated the 
Levite; and the young man became 
his priest, and was in the house of 
Micah. 

' 13 Then said Micah, Now !know 
I that the LorD will do me good, 
seeing I have a Levite to my priest. 


CHAPTER 18. 


Confusion, civil and religious: 
(2) the Danite invasion. 


jp those days there was no king 
in Israel: and in those days the 
tribe of the Danites sought them 
an inheritance to dwell in; for unto 
that day all their inheritance had 
not fallen unto them among the 
tribes of Israel. 


JUDGES.. 


B.C. 1406. 


a Hos.4.12. 
61 Ki.22.6. 
¢ Josh.19.47, 
called Le- 
shem. 
dv,2. 


e Josh.2.23, 
24, 


2 And the children of Dan sent of 
their family five men from their 
coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, 
and from Eshtaol, to spy out the 
land, and to search it; and they said 
unto them, Go, search the land: 
who when they came to mount 
Ephraim, to the house of Micah, 
they lodged there. 

| 3 When they were by the house 
of Micah, they knew the voice of 
the young man the Levite: and they 
turned in thither, and _ said unto 
him, Who brought thee hither? and 
what makest thou in this place? 
and what hast thou here? 

4 And he said unto them, Thus 
and thus dealeth Micah with me, 
and hath hired me, and I am his 
priest. 

5 And they said unto him, ¢Ask 
counsel, we pray thee, of God, that 
we may know whether our way 
which we go shall be prosperous. 

6 And the priest said unto “them, 
Go in peace: before the LorpD is 
your way wherein ye go. 

7 Then the five men departed, 
and came to ‘Laish, and saw the 
people that were therein, how they 
dwelt careless, after the manner of 
the Zidonians, quiet and secure; 
and there was no magistrate in 
the land, that might put them to 
shame in any thing; and they were 
far from the Zidonians, and had no 
business with any man. ° 

8 And they came unto their breth- 
ren to ¢Zorah and Eshtaol: and 
their brethren said unto them, 
What say ye? 

9 And they said, Arise, that we 
may go up against them: for we 
have seen the land, and, behold, it 
1s very good: and are ye still? be 
not slothful to go, and to enter to 
possess the land. 

10 When ye go, ye shall come un- 
to a people secure, and to a large 
land: for ‘God hath given it into 
your hands; a place where there is 
no want of any thing that ss in the 
earth. 

11 And there went from thence of 
the family of the Danites, out of 
Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hun- 
dred men appointed with weapons 
of war. : ‘ 

12 And they went up, and pitched 


1A striking illustration of all apostasy. With his entire. departure from the 
revealed will of God concerning worship and priesthood, there is yet an exaltation 
of false priesthood. Saying, ‘Blessed be thou of Jehovah,” Micah’s mother makes 


an idol; and Micah expects the blessing of Jehovah because he 


idolatry to the ancient levitical order. 


308 


has linked his 


— ee Risin Ju aisha 
es a JUDGES. [19 3 
in Kirjath-jearim, in Judah: where-| B.C. 1406. |the priest, and ye are gone away: 
fore they called that place *Maha- and what have I more? and what 
neh-dan unto this day: behold, it is is this that ye say unto me, What 
behind Kirjath-jearim. aileth thee? 

13 And they passed thence unto 25 And the children of Dan said 
mount Ephraim, and came unto the unto him, Let not thy voice be 
house of Micah. heard among us, lest angry fellows 

14 Then answered the five men run upon thee, and thou lose thy 
that went to spy out the country of life, with the lives of thy household. 
Laish, and said unto their brethren, 26 And the children of Dan went 
Do ye know that there is in these their way: and when Micah saw 
houses an 4ephod, and teraphim, that they were too strong for him, 
and a graven image, and a molten he turned and went back unto his 
image? now therefore consider what house. 
ye have to do. 27 And they took the things 

15 And they turned thitherward, which Micah had made, and the 
and came to the house of the young priest which he had, and came unto 
man the Levite, even unto the Laish, unto a people that were at 
house of Micah, and saluted him. quiet and secure: and they smote 

16 *And the six hundred men ap- them with the edge of thesword, 
pointed with their weapons of war, and burnt the city with fire. 
which were of the children of Dan, 28 And there was no deliverer, 
stood by the entering of the gate. because it was far from Zidon, and 

17 And the five men that went to they had no business with any man; 
spy out the land went up, and and it was in the valley that lieth 
came in thither, and took the by Beth-rehob. And they built a 
graven image, and the ephod, and city, and dwelt therein. 
the teraphim, and the molten 29 4¢And they called the name of 
image: and the priest stood in the|,9cpr14, _|the.city Dan, after the name of Dan 
entering of the gate with the six their father, who was born unto Is- 


hundred men that were appointed |? Jud-17.5. rael: howbeit the name of the city 
with weapons of war. | 3 se ¢2Ki6.2g, |Was Laish at the first. 
18 And these went into Micah’s Contuss vil i eR 
14.14; onfusion, civil and religious: 
house, and fetched the carved oor AAT: (3) the Danite idolatry. 


image, the ephod, and the teraphim,| 4 °xj12'29’ 2 
and the molten image. Then said| 30; 15.20. 30 And the children of Dan set up 
the priest unto them, What do ye? the graven image: and Jonathan, 
19 And they said unto him, Hold the son of Gershom, the son of Ma- 
thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy nasseh, he and his sons were priests 
mouth ave go with us, and be to to the tribe of Dan until the day of 
us a father and a priest: is it better the captivity of the land. ; 
for thee to be a priest unto the 31 And they settee up Micae i 
house of one man, or that thou be a graven image, wilich le) maces 
the time that the house of God was 


ethene a tribe and a family in i Shiloh. 
20 And the priest’s heart was CHAPTER 19. 
glad, and he took the ephod, and the Confusion. civil and nelinouss 
teraphim, and the graven image, (4)the Levite and his concubine. 
and went in the midst of the people. : ; : 
21 So they turned and departed, bien) it came to pass in those 
and put the little ones and the cattle days, when there was no king 
and the carriage before them. in Israel, that there was a certain 
22 And when they were a good Levite sojourning on the side of 
way from the house of Micah, the mount Ephraim, who took to him a 
men that were in the houses near concubine out of Beth-lehem-judah. 
to Micah’s house were gathered to- 2 And his concubine played the 
gether, and overtook the children whore against him, and went away 
of Dan. J from him unto her father’s house to 
23 And they cried unto the chil- Beth-lehem-judah, and was there 
dren of Dan. And they turned four whole months. 
their faces, and said unto Micah, 3 And her husband arose, and 
¢What aileth thee, that thou comest went after her, to speak friendly 
with such a company? unto her, and to bring her again, 
24 And he said, Ye have taken having his servant with him, and a 
away my gods which I made, and couple of asses: and she brought 


309 


19 4] 


JUDGES. 


fo 


thim into her father’s house: and] B.C. 1406. 


‘when the father of the damsel saw 
him, he rejoiced to meet him. 

4 And his father in law, the dam- 
sel’s father, retained him; and he 
abode with him three days: so 
they did eat and drink, and lodged 
there. 

5 And it came to pass on the 
fourth day, when they arose early 
in the morning, that he rose up to 
depart: and the damsel’s father said 
unto his son in law, Comfort thine 
eheart with a morsel of bread, and 
afterward go your way. 

6 And they sat down, and did eat 
and drink both of them together: 
for the damsel’s father had said un- 
to the man, Be content, I pray thee, 
and tarry all night, and let thine! 
heart be merry. 

7 And when the man rose up to 
depart, his father in law urged him: 
therefore he lodged there again. | 

| 


8 And he arose early in the morn- 
ing on the fifth day to depart: and 
the damsel’s father said, Comfort 
thine heart, I pray thee. And they], psa.104.15. 
tarried until afternoon, and they 
did eat both of them. 

9 And when the man rose up to 
depart, he, and his concubine, and 
his servant, his father in law, the 
damsel’s father, said unto him, Be- 
hold, now the day draweth toward 
evening, I pray you tarry all night: 
behold, the day groweth to an end, 
lodge here, that thine heart may 
be merry; and to morrow get you 
early on your way, that thou may- 
est go home. 

10 But the man would not tarry 
that night, but he rose up and 
departed, and came over against 
Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and 
there were with him two asses 
saddled, his concubine also was 
with him, 

11 And when they were by Je- 
bus, the day was far spent; and the 
servant said unto his master, Come, 
I pray thee, and iet us turn in into 
this city of the Jebusites, and lodge 
in it. 

12 And his master said unto him, 
We will not turn aside hither into 
the city of a stranger, that is not 
of the children of Israel; we will 
pass over to Gibeah. 

13 And he said unto his servant, 
Come, and let us draw near to one 
of these places to lodge all night, 
in Gibeah, or in Ramah. 

14 And they passed on and went!. 
their way; and the sun went down 


6 Josh.18.1; 
: Sam.1.3, 


c Jud.6.23. 


vs.6,9; 
Jud.16.25. 


¢ the matter 
of this folly. 


310 


upon them when they were by 
Gibeah, which belongeth to Ben- 
jamin. i 

15 And they turned aside thither, 
to go in and to lodge in Gibeah: 
and when he went in, he sat him 
down in a street of the city: for 
there was no man that took them 
into his house to lodging. 

16 And, behold, there came an old 
man from his work out of the field 
at even, which was also of mount 
Ephraim; and he sojourned in Gib- 
eah: but the men of the piace were 
;Benjamites. 

17 And when he had lifted up his 
eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in 
the street of the city: and the old 
man said, Whither goest thou? and 
iwhence comest thou? > 
) 18 And he said unto him, We are 
heen from Beth-lehem-judah to- 
\ward the side of mount Ephraim; 
from thence am I: and I went to 
Beth-lehem-judah, but I am now 
jgoing to the Shouse of the LorpD; 
jand there is no man that receiveth 
me to house. 

19 Yet there is both straw and 
provender for our asses; and there 
is bread and wine also for me, and 
for thy handmaid, and for the 
young man which is with thy ser- 
vants: there is no want of anything, 

20 And the old man said, “Peace 

be with thee; howsoever Je¢ all thy 
wants ize upon me; oniy lodge not 
\in the street. 
| 21 So he brought him into his 
house, and gave provender unto the 
asses: and they washed their feet, 
jand did eat and drink. 
22 Now as they were making their 
l¢hearts merry, behold, the men of 
the city, certain sons of Belial, beset 
the house round about, and beat at 
the door, and spake to the master of 
the house, the old man, saying, Bring 
forth the man that came into thine 
jhouse, that we may know him. 

23 And the man, the master of the 
house, went out unto them, and 
said unto them, Nay, my brethren, 
nay, I pray you, do not so wick- 
edly; seeing that this man is come 
into mine house, do not this folly. 

24 Behold, here is my daughter a 
maiden, and his concubine; them I 
will bring out now, and humble ye 
them, and do with them what seem- 
eth good unto you: but unto this 
man do not so ¢vile a thing. 

25 But the men would not hearken 
to him: so the man took his concu- 
bine, and brought her forth unto 


them; and they knew her, and 
abused her all the night until the 
morning: and when the day began 
to spring, they let her go. 

26 Then came the woman in the 
dawning of the day, and fell down 
at the door of the man’s house 
where her lord was, till it was light. 

27 And her lord rose up in the 
morning, and opened the doors of 
the house, and went out to go his 
way: and, behold, the woman his 
concubine was fallen down at the 
door of the house, and her hands 
were upon the threshold. 

28 And he said unto her, Up, and 
let us be going. But none answered. 
Then the man took her up upon an 
ass, and the man rose up, and gat 
him unto his place. 

29 And when he was come into 
his house, he took a knife, and laid 
hold on his concubine, and divided 
her, together with her bones, into 
twelve pieces, and sent her into all 
the coasts of Israel. 

30 And it was so, that all that|cCf.2 Sam. 
‘saw it said, There was no such deed} 2-12. 
done nor seen from the day that the}, 1 sam.3.20; 
children of Israel came up out of] 2Sam.3.10; 
the land of Egypt unto this day:| 24-2. 
consider of it, take advice, and 
speak your minds. 


CHAPTER 20. 


Confusion, civil and religious: 
(5) the civil *war. 


“Peo all the children of Israel 
went out, and the congregation 
was gathered together as one man, 
from /Dan even to Beer-sheba, with 
the land of Gilead, unto the LORD 
in Mizpeh. 

2 And the chief of all the people, 
even of all the tribes of Israel, pre- 
sented themselves in the assembly 
of the people of God, four hundred 
thousand footmen that drew sword. 

3 (Now the children of Benjamin 
heard that the children of Israel 
were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then 
said the children of Israel, Tell us, 
how was this wickedness? 

4 And the Levite, the husband of 
the woman that was slain, answered 
and said, I ‘came into Gibeah that 
belongeth to Benjamin, I and my 
concubine to lodge. 

5 And the men of Gibeah rose 
against me, and beset the house 
round about upon me by night, and 
thought to have slain me: and my 
concubine have they forced, that 
she is dead. 


cJud.19.15. 
d Josh.7.15. 


Ff Jud.3.15; 
1 Chr.12.2. 


311 


JUDGES. 


e Jud.19.22. 


[20 18 


6 And I took my concubine, and 
cut her in pieces, and sent her 
throughout all the country of the 
inheritance of Israel: for they have 
committed lewdness and ¢folly in 
Israel. 

7 Behold, ye are all children of 
Israel; give here your advice and 
counsel. 

8 And all the people arose as one 
man, saying, We will not any of us 
go to his tent, neither will we any 
of us turn into his house. 

9 But now this shall be the thing 
which we will do to Gibeah; we 
will go up by lot against it; 

10 And we will take ten men of an 


whundred throughout all the tribes 


of Israel, and an hundred of a thou- 
sand, and a thousand out of ten 
thousand, to fetch victual for the 
people, that they may do, when 
they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, 
according to all the folly that they 
have wrought in Israel. - 

11 So all the men of Israel were 
gathered against the city, knit to- 
gether as one man. 

12 And the tribes of Israel sent 
men through all the tribe of Benja- 
min, saying, What wickedness is 
this that is done among you? 

13 Now therefore deliver us the 
emen, the children of Belial, which 
are in Gibeah, that we may put 
them to death, and put away evil 
from Israel. But the children of 
Benjamin would not hearken to the 
voice of their brethren the children 
of Israel: 

14 But the children of Benjamin 
gathered themselves together out of 
the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to 
battle against the children of Israel. 

15 And the children of Benjamin 
were numbered at that time out of 
the cities twenty and six thousand 
men that drew sword, beside the 
inhabitants of Gibeah, which were 
numbered seven hundred chosen 
men. 

16 Among all this people there 
were seven hundred chosen men 
flefthanded; every one could sling 
stones at an hair breadth, and not 


miss. 

17 And the men of Israel, beside 
Benjamin, were numbered four 
hundred thousand men that drew 
sword: all these were men of war. 

18 And the children of Israel 
arose, and went up to the house of 
God, and asked counsel of God, and 
said, Which of us shall go up first 
to the battle against the children 


20 19] 


of Benjamin? And the Lorp said, 
Judah shall go up first. 

19 And the children of Israel rose 
up in the morning, and encamped 
against Gibeah. 

20 And the men of Israel went out 
to battle against Benjamin; and the 
men of Israel put themselves in 
array to fight against them at 
Gibeah. 

21 And the children of Benjamin 
came forth out of Gibeah, and de- 
stroyed down to the ground of the 
Israelites that day twenty and two 
thousand men. 

22 And the people.the men of Is- 
rael encouraged themselves, and set 
their battle again in array in the 
place where they put themselves in 
array the first day. 


23 (And the children of Israel! 


went up and wept before the Lorp 
until even, and asked counsel of the 
LORD, saying, Shall I go up again 
to battle against the children of 
Benjamin my brother? And the 
LorD said, Go up against him.) 

24 And the children of Israel came 
near against the children of Benja- 
min the second day. 

25 And Benjamin went forth 
against them out of Gibeah the 
second day, and destroyed down to 
the ground of the children of Israel 
again eighteen thousand men; all 
these drew the sword. 

26 Then all the children of Is- 
tael, and all the people, went up, 
and came unto the house of God, 
and wept, and sat there before the 
Lorp, and fasted that day until 
even, and offered burnt-offerings 
and peace-offerings before the 
LORD. 

27 And the children of Israel en- 
quired of the Lorp, (for the ark of 
the covenant of God was there in 
those days, 

28 And Phinehas, the son of 
Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood 
before it in those days,) saying, 
Shall I yet again go out to battle 
against .the children of Benjamin 
my brother, or shall I cease? And 
the Lorp said, Go up; for to mor- 
ped will deliver them into thine 

and. 

29 And Israel set liers in wait 
round about Gibeah. 

30 And the children of Israel went 
up against the children of Benja- 
min on the third day, and put them- 
selves in array against Gibeah, as 
at other times. 

31 And the children of Benjamin 


JUDGES. 


a vs.18,23. 


6 Num.25.7, 
13; Josh.24 
33. 


¢ Josh.8.14. 
d Josh.8.15. 


312 


went out against the people, and 
were drawn away from the city; 
and they began to smite of the peo- 
ple, and kill, as at other times, in 
the highways, of which one goeth 
up to the house of God, and the 
other to Gibeah in the field, about. 
thirty men of Israel. 

32 And the children of Benjamin 
said, They are smitten down before 
us, as at the first. But the chil- 
dren of Israel said, Let us flee, and 
draw them from the city unto the 
highways. 

33 And all the men of Israel rose 
up out of their place, and put them- 
selves in array at Baal-tamar: and 
the liers in wait of Israel came forth 
out of their places, even out of the 
meadows of Gibeah. 

34 And there came against Gib- 
eah ten thousand chosen men out 
of all Israel, and the battle was sore: 
‘but they knew not that evil was 
near them. 

35 And the LorpD smote Benja- 
min before Israel: and the children 
of Israel destroyed of the Benja- 
mites that day twenty and five 
thousand and an hundred men: all 
these drew the sword. 

36 So the children of Benjamin 
saw that they were smitten: for the 
men of 4Israel gave place to the 
Benjamites, because they: trusted 
unto the liers in wait which they 
had set beside Gibeah. 

37 And the liers in wait hasted, 
and rushed upon Gibeah; and the 
liers in wait drew themselves 
along, and smote all the city with 
the edge of the sword. 

38 Now there was an appointed 
sign between the men of Israel and 
the liers in wait, that they should 
make a great flame with smoke rise 
up out of the city. 

39 And when the men of Israel 
retired in the battle, Benjamin 
began to smite and kill of the men 
of Israel about thirty persons: for 
they said, Surely they are smitten 
down before us, as in the first 
battle. 

40 But when the flame began to 
arise up out of the city with a pil- 
lar of smoke, the Benjamites looked 
behind them, and, behold, the flame 
of the city ascended up to heaven. 

41 And when the men of Israel 
turned again, the men of Benjamin 
were amazed: for they saw that 
evil was come upon them, 

42 Therefore they turned their 
backs before the men of Israel unto 


a er at 


20 43} JUDGES. Sie 


6 And the children of Israel ¢re- 
pented them for Benjamin their 
brother, and said, There is one tribe 
cut off from Israel this day. 

7 How shall we do for wives for 
them that remain, seeing we have 


the way of the wilderness; but the 
battle overtook them; and them 
which came out of the cities they 
destroyed in the midst of them, 

43 -Thus they inclosed the Benja- 
mites round about, and chased 


them, and trode them down with isworn by the LorpD that we will 
ooh over against Gibeah toward not give them of our daughters to 
e sunrising. wives: 

44 And there fell of Benjamin 8 And they said, What one is 
eighteen thousand men; all these there of the tribes of Israel that 
are cH Sree ae cae not uP Asa ee to the 

ni ey turned and fled to- ORD: nd, behold, there came 

mere t the pels enticas usta hp feck popes to ene comp lien Jabesh- 
of “Rimmon: and they gleaned ,o gilead to the assembly. 

them in the highways five thou- 9 For the people were numbered, 

sand men; and pursued hard after and, behold, there were none of 

a unto Gidom, and slew two ine inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead 
ousand men of them. ere. . 

46 So that all which fell that day 10 And the congregation sent 
of Benjamin were twenty and five|¢ Josh.15.32; |thither twelve thousand men of the 
thousand men that drew the sword; Sgt valiantest, and commanded them, 
all these were men of valour. ; saying, “Go and smite the inhabi- 


47 But six hundred men turned]? Jud. 21.13. tants of Jabesh-gilead with the edge 
and fled to the wilderness unto the] - phere is of the sword, with the women and 
rock Rimmon, and abode in the} here no the children. _ : 
rock Rimmon four months. mourning 11 And this zs the thing that ye 

48 And the men of Israel turned ereiar shall do, fYe shall utterly destroy 
again upon the children of Benja-| because of |every male, and every woman that 


min, and smote them with the edge} national hath lain by man. ; 
of the sword, as well the men of pee See 12 And they found among the in- 
every city, as the beast, and all that! tum to habitants of Jabesh-gilead four hun- 
came to hand: also they set on fire! Jehovah. dred young virgins, that had known 
all the cities that they came to. Accordingly, Ino man by lying with any male: 
Jehovah and they Ree eee unto ba 
comes to camp to iloh, which is in the 

CHAPTER 21. gered land of Canaan. } 
Confusion, civil and religious:) in self-will 13 And the whole congregation 


(6) mourning for a Jost tribe. Rees sent some to speak to the children 


of Benjamin that were in the rock 
INOW the men of Israel had sworn] ¢ Zech.8.14, Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto 


in Mizpeh, saying, There shall| note. them. fey : 
not any of us give his daughter unto}, | <. Jud.s. 14 And Benjamin came again at 
Benjamin to wife. 23;1Sam. |that time; and they gave them 
~2 And the people came to the} 11.7. wives which they had saved alive 


house of God, and abode there till of the women of Jabesh-gilead: and 
even before God, and lifted up eal yet so they sufficed them not. 


their voices, and wept sore; 15 And the people repented them 
3 And said, O LorpD God of Is- for Benjamin, because that’ the 
rael, why is this come to pass in Lorp had made a breach in the 
Israel, that there should be to day tribes of Israel. 
one ‘tribe lacking in Israel? 16 Then the elders of the congre- 
4 And it came to pass on the mor- gation said, How shall we do for 
row, that the people rose early, and: wives for them that remain, seeing 
built there an altar, and altered se Sromen jae destroyed out of 
- i -offer- enjamin?: 
pent offerings and  peace-offe tT And. they id Tee 
5 And the children of Israel said, be an inheritance for them that be 
Who is there among all the tribes escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe 
of Israel that came not up with the be not destroyed out of Israel. 
congregation unto the LORD? For 18 Howbeit we may not give them 
they had made a great oath oo wives of our daughters: for the chil- 
cerning him that came not up to the dren of Israel have sworn, saying, 
Lorp to Mizpeh, saying, He shall Cursed be he that giveth a wife to 


surely be put to death.” Benjamin. 


313 


21 19] 


19 Then they said, Behold, there 
is a feast of the Lorp in Shiloh 
yearly in a place which is on the 
north side of Beth-el, on the east 
side of the highway that goethup 
from Beth-el to Shechem, and on 
the south of Lebonah. 

20 Therefore they commanded 
the children of Benjamin, saying, 
Go and lie in wait in the vineyards; 

21 And see, and, behold, if the 
daughters of Shiloh come out to 
2dance in dances, then come ye out 
of the vineyards, and catch you 
every man his wife of the daugh- 
ters of Shiloh, and go to the land of 
Benjamin. 

_22 And it shall be, when their 
fathers or their brethren come unto 
us to complain, that we will say un- 


JUDGES. 


B.C. 1406. 


a Jud.11.34. 
6 Jud.20.48. 


314 


[21 2 
to them, Be favourable unto the 
for our sakes: because we reserved 
not to each man his wife in the war: 
for .ye did not give unto them at 
this time, that ye should be guilty. 

23 And the children of Benjamin 
did so, and took therm wives, ac- 
cording to their number, of them 
that danced, whom they caught: 
and they went and returned unto 
their inheritance, and repaired the 
bcities, and dwelt in them. 

24 And the children of Israel de- 
parted thence at that time, every 


‘man to his tribe and to his family, 


and they went out from thence 
every man to his inheritance. 

25 In those days there was no 
king in Israel: every man did that 
which was right in his own eyes. 


11] 


THE BOOK OF RUTH. 


[1 19 


Tus lovely story should be read in connection with the first half of Judges, as it 


presents a picture of life in Israel at that time. 
the book may be taken as a foreview of the church (Ruth), as the Gen- 
tile bride of Christ, the Bethlehemite who is able to redeem. 
normal Christian experience: I. Ruth deciding, 1. 


Typically, 


resting, 3. IV. Ruth rewarded, 4. 


Ruth also gives a 
II. Ruth serving, 2. III. Ruth 


The events recorded in Ruth cover a period of 10 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. 
Ruth deciding. 
ind Sa it came to “pass in the days 


when the judges rul that 
there was a “famine in the land. 
And a certain man of ‘“Beth-lehem- 
judah went to sojourn in the coun- 
try of ¢Moab, he, and his wife, and 
his two sons. 

2 And the name of the man was 
‘Elimelech, and the name of his 
wife /Naomi, and the name of his 
two sons ’Mahlon and “Chilion, 
tEphrathites of Beth-lehem-judah. 
And they came into the country of 
Moab, and continued there. 

3 And Elimelech Naomi’s hus- 
band died; and she was left, and 
her two sons. 

4 And they took them wives of 
the woman of Moab: the name of 
the one was /Orpah, and the name 
of the other *Ruth: and they dwelled 
there about ten years. ia 

5 And Mahlon and Chilion died 
also both of them; and the woman 
was left of her two sons and her 
husband. 

6 Then she arose with her daugh- 
ters in law, that she might return 
from the country of Moab: for she 
had heard in the country of Moab 
how that the Lorp had visited his 
people in giving them bread. 

7 Wherefore she went forth out of 
the place where she was, and her 
two daughters in law with her; and 
they went on the way to return 
unto the land of Judah. 

8 And Naomi said unto her two 
daughters in law, Go, return 
each to her ‘mother’s house: the 
‘orp deal kindly with you, as 
ye have dealt with the dead, and 
with me. ; 

9 The Lorp grant you'that ye 
may find rest, each of you in the 
house of her husband, Then she 


B.C. 1322. 


a Jud.2.16. 


b Gen.12.10, 
note 


¢c House of 
Bread and 
Praise. 

d Gen.19.37 


eie. My God 
is King. 


f Pleasant, 
g Sick 

h Pining 

t Gen.35.19. 


j Hind or 
Fawn. 


k Friendship 
or Beauty 


1 Psa.38,2. 
m Jud.11.24 


n Ruth 2.11, 
12. 


o 1 Sam.3.17 


BL5 


kissed them; and they lifted up 
their voice, and wept. 

10 And they said unto her, Surely 
we will return with thee unto thy 


t th 
in my womb, that they may be 
your husbands? 

12 Turn again, my daughters, go 
your way; for I am too old to have 
an husband. If I should say, I have 
hope, if I should have an husband 
‘also to night, and should also. bear 
sons; 

13 Would ye tarry for them till 
they were grown? would ye stay 
for them from having husbands? 
nay, my daughters; for it grieveth 
me much for your sakes that the 
lhand of the LORD is gone out 
against me. f 

14 And they lifted up their voice, 
and wept again: and Orpah kissed 
her mother in law; but Ruth cl&ve 
unto her. 

15 And she said, Behold, thy sis- 
ter in law is gone back unto her 
people, and unto her gods: return 


‘\thou after thy sister in law. 


16 And Ruth said, Intreat me not 
to leave thee, or to return from fol- 
lowing after thee: for whither thou 
goest, I will go; and where thou 
lodgest, I will lodge: “thy people 
shall be my people, and thy God 
my God: 

17 Where thou diest, will I die, 
and there will I be buried: °the 
Lorp do so to me, and more also, if 
ought but death part thee and me. 

18 When she saw that she was 
stedfastly minded to go with her, 
then she left speaking unto her. 

19 So they two went until they 
came to Beth-lehem. And it came 
to pass, when they were come to 
Beth-lehem, that all the city was 


1 20] RUTH. [2 19 


moved about them, and they said,| B.c. 1312. |men that they shall not touch thee? 
Is this *Naomi? ; and when thou art athirst, go unto 
20 And she said unto them, Call the vessels, and drink of that which 
me not Naomi, call me ’Mara: for the young men have drawn. 
the Almighty hath dealt very bit- 10 Then she fell on her face, and 
terly with me. bowed herself to the ground, and 
21 I went out full, and the Lorp said unto him, Why have I found 
hath brought me home again grace in thine eyes, that thou 
empty: why then call ye me shouldest take knowledge of me, 
Naomi, seeing the LorD hath tes- seeing I am a stranger? 
tifiéd against me, and the Almighty 11 And 4Boaz answered and ‘said 
hath afflicted me? unto her, It hath fully been shewed 
22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth me, all that thou hast done unto 
the Moabitess, her daughter in law, thy mother in law since the death 
with her, which returned out of the of thine husband: and how thou 
country of Moab: and they came to hast left thy father and thy mother, 
Beth-lehem in the beginning of bar- and the land of thy nativity, and 
ley harvest. art come unto a people which thou 
knewest not heretofore. 
CHAPTER 2. eee shacvdid Wht thy 
: work, and a full reward be given 
Ruth serving. thee of the LorD God of Israel, un- 
ND Naomi had a ‘kinsman of der whose wings thou art come to 
her husband’s, a mighty man 
of wealth, of the family of Elime- 


‘trust. 

13 Then she said, Let me find fa- 

lech; and his name was Boaz. vour in thy sight, my lord; for that 
2 And Ruth the Moabitess said thou hast comforted me, and for 
unto Naomi, Let me now go to the|ci.e. Pleasant.|that thou hast spoken friendly unto 
field, and glean ears of corn after| | f thine handmaid, though I be not 
him in whose sight I shall find|’+*: 4tfer- Hike unto one of thine handmaidens. 
grace. And she said unto her, Go,|c Ruth 3.2,12. | 14 And Boaz said unto her, At 


my daughter. Fears mealtime come thou hither, and eat 
Pidcind lene Hum attemtne tae] Stktno lead Ge ee 
- she sat beside 
ers: and her hap was to light on ale Psa.2.12, the reapers: and he reached her 
part of the field belonging unto AOA parched corn, and she did eat, and 
erly was of the kindred of fOne ‘ was sufficed, and left. 
ire behold, Boaz came from bu pts. rea Rie ee tle eh eae a 
Beth-lehem, and said unto the reap- men, saying, Let her glean even 
ory The ee ae eas nee eet the sheaves, and reproach 
ey answere im, e Lorp er not: 
bless thee. 16 And let fall also some of the 
5 Then said Boaz unto his servant handfuls of purpose for her, and 
AWhbde COMETS Chis? bao orton thes eaeecci ee ee 
2 tts em, and rebuke her F 
6 And the servant that was set 17 So she gleaned in the field un- 
over the reapers answered and said, til even, and beat out that she had 
M aie mene a ae rove Pa Seen and it was about an fephah 
mi out o e of barley. 
country of Moab: 18 And she took it up, and went 
7 And she said, I pray you, let me into the city: and her mother in law 
glean oe gather after the reapers saw what she had gleaned: and she 
Bad late coueaconte ie on eee nesta eae 
she had res 
inorning until now, that she tarried sufficed. Sot is bah, 
ae in the house. 19 And her mother in law said 
Mearest thou Wisc omtvamatenen ta devil Aadod ee ee 
; : o day? and where wroughtest 
Go Bes to | See in another field, thou? blessed be he that did take 
ney " = rom hence, but abide knowledge of thee. And she shewed 
BELatiitine eyenbbiGll theltiehd Suwon cn he 
‘ a 
that they do reap, and go thou after a aes shee i terse to.dae 
‘them: have I not charged the young is Boaz. 


316 


ie ey ee 
2 20] 


RUTH. 


BO re Wi tag 8 3 


[43 


‘20 And Naomi said unto her] B.C. 1312. 10 And he said, Blessed hi! thou 


daughter in law, Blessed be he of 
the Lorpb, who*hath not left off his 
kindness to the living and to the 
dead. And Naomi said unto her, 
The man is near of kin unto us, one 
of our next ¢kinsmen. 

21 And Ruth the Moabitess said, 
He said unto me also, Thou shalt 
keep fast by my young men, until 
they have ended all my harvest. 

22 And Naomi said unto Ruth 
her daughter in law, Jt 1s good, my 
daughter, that thou go out with 
his maidens, that they meet thee 
not in any other field. 

23 So she kept fast by the maid- 
‘ens of Boaz to glean unto the end 
of barley harvest and of wheat har- 
vest; and dwelt with her mother 
in law. 


CHAPTER 3. 
Ruth resting. 


SEN Naomi her mother in law 
said unto her, My daughter, 
shall I not seek rest for thee, that 
it may be well with thee? 

2 And now is not Boaz of our 
kindred, with whose maidens thou 
wast? Behold, he winnoweth bar- 
ley to night in the threshingfloor. 

3 Wash thyself therefore, and 
banoint thee, and put thy raiment 
upon thee, and get thee down to the 
floor: but make not thyself known 
unto the man, until he shall have 
done eating and drinking. 

4 And it shall be, when he lieth 
down, that thou shalt mark the 
place where he shall lie, and thou 
shalt go in, and uncover his feet, 
_and lay thee down; and he will tell 
thee what thou shalt do. 

5 And she said unto her, All that 
thou sayest unto me I will do. 

6 And she went down unto the 
floor, and did according to all that 
her mother in law bade her. 

7 And when Boaz had eaten and 
drunk, and his heart was merry, he 
went to lie down at the end of the 
heap of corn: and she came softly, 
and uncovered his feet, and laid her 
-down. : 

8 And it came to pass at mid- 
night, that the man was afraid, and 
turned himself: and, behold, a wo- 
man lay at his feet. 

9 And he said, Who art thou? 
And she answered, I am Ruth thine 


a Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 

6 Eccl.9.8. 

c Gate. 

d Ruth 4.1. 


e Or, sheet, or, 
apron. 


f Ruth 3.12. 
g1 Ki.21.8, 


handmaid: spread therefore thy 


skirt over thine handmaid; for thou) 


art a near ¢kinsman. 


317 


of the Lorb, my daughter: for thou 
hast shewed more kindness in the 
latter end ‘than at the beginning, 
inasmuch as thou followedst not 
young men, whether poor or rich. 

11 And now, my daughter, fear 
not; I will do to thee all that thou 
requirest: for all the “city of my 
people doth know that thou art a 
virtuous woman. 

12 And now it is true that I am 
thy near ?kinsman: ¢howbeit there 
is a kinsman nearer than I. 

13 Tarry this night, and it shall 
be in the morning, that if he will 
perform unto thee the part of a 
ekinsman, well; let him do the kins- 
man’s part: but if he will not do the 
part of a kinsman to thee, then will 
I do the part of a kinsman to thee, 
as the Lorp liveth: lie down until 
the morning. 

14 And she lay at his feet until the 
morning: and she rose up before 
one could know another. And he 
said, Let it not be known that a 
woman came into the floor. 

15 Also he said, Bring the ¢vail 
that thou hast upon thee, and hold 
it. And when she held it, he meas- 
ured six measures of barley, and 
laid it on her: and she went into 
the city. 

16 And when she came to her 
mother ‘in law, she said, Who art 
thou, my daughter? And she told 
Hes all that the man had done to 

er. 


17 And she said, These six meas- 
ures of barley gave he me; for he 
said to me, Go not empty unto thy 
mother in law. 

18 Then said she, Sit still, my 
daughter, until thou know how the 
matter will fall: for the man will 
not be in rest, until he have finished 
the thing this day. 


CHAPTER 4. 
Ruth rewarded. 


f heal went Boaz up to the gate, 
and: sat. him down there: and, 
behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz 
fgpake came by; unto whom he 
said, Ho, such a one! turn aside, sit 
down here. And he turned aside, 
and sat down. 

2 And he took ten men of the 
gelders of the city, and said, Sit ye 
down here. And they sat down. 

3 And he said unto the kinsman, 
Naomi, that is come again out of 
the country of Moab, selleth a par- 


4 4] RUTH. [4 | 
cel of land, which was our brother] 5.c. 1312. 11 And all the people that were 


Elimelech’s: in the gate, and the elders, said, We 
4 And I thought to advertise thee, jare witnesses. ‘THe LorpD make 
saying, Buy it before the inhabi- (the woman that is come into thine 
tants, and before the elders of my Pee like SG oe oa 
eople. If thou wilt ¢redeem it, which ‘two ui € house o} 
oo aie it: but if thou wilt not re- Israel: and de thou worthily in 
deem it, then tell me, that I may eens and be famous in ‘Beth- 
know: for there is none to redeem ehem: ‘ 
it beside thee; and I am after thee. rs res poy Wes be eae the 
And he said, I will redeem /t. ouse 0} arez, whom amar 
5 Then said Boaz, What day thou bare unto Judah, of the seed which 
buyest the field of the hand of the Lorp shall give thee of this 
Naomi, thou must buy it also of young woman. 
Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the 13 So Boaz took Ruth, and she 
dead, to raise up the name of the was his wife: and when he went in 
dead upon his inheritance. a a unto her, ae RES gave her con- 
6 And the “kinsman said, I can- : ception, and she bare a son. ; 
not “redeem :t for myself, lest I mar es aes 14 And the women said unto 


mine own inheritance: redeem thou| 59-20 note. (Naomi, Blessed be the Lorp, which 
my right to thyself; for I cannot|s pDeut.25 7-9 |hath not left thee this day without. 


tedeem it. ja ¢kinsman, that his name may be 
7 Now ?this was the manner in| ©S-2930. famous in Israel. 
former time in Israel concerning d Gen.38.29. 15 And he shal Bese nes a 
5 ‘ 7 : shea 
Pol eocolig sen ee eed et cana eae Suiet bees or ah! ace 
plucked off his shoe, and gave it to] ¢Lk.1.58. in law, which loveth thee, which is 
his neighbour: and this was a testi- sieewee ‘better to thee than seven sons, 
mony in Israel. io park hath born him. : 
8 Therefore the kinsman said] ~ 97°" 16 And Naomi took the child, and 


unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he|/i-e. Beloved. \Jaid it in her bosom, and became 
drew off his shoe. 1 Or, Salmah. |NUTSe unto it. 


9 And Boaz said unto the elders, 17 And the fwomen her neigh- 
and unto all the people, Ye are bours gave it a name, saying, There 
witnesses this day, that I have is a son born to Naomi; and they 
bought all that was Elimelech’s, called his name 9Obed: he is the 
and all that was Chilion’s and father of Jesse, the father of "David. 
Mahlon’s, of the hand of Naomi. 18 Now these are the generations 

10 Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron, 
the wife of Mahlon, have I pu - 19 And Hezron begat Ram, and 
chased to be my wife, to raise up Ram begat Amminadab, . 


the name of the dead upon his in- 
heritance, that the name of the 
dead be not cut off from among 


20 And Amminadab begat Nah- 
shon, and Nahshon begat Salmon, 
21 And ‘Salmon begat Boaz, and 


his brethren, and from the gate of Boaz begat Obed, 
his place ye are witnesses this 22 And Obed begat Jesse, and 
day i Jesse begat David, 


318 


THE FIRST BOOK OF SAMUEL. 


OTHERWISE CALLED 
1 1] THE FIRST BOOK OF THE KINGS. wie 


Tuts book presents the personal history of Samuel, last of the Judges. It records 
the moral failure of the priesthood under Eli, and of the Judges in Samuel’s attempt 
to make the office hereditary (1 Sam. 8.1). In his prophetic office Samuel was 
faithful, and in him begins the line of writing prophets. Henceforth the prophet, 
not the priest, is conspicuous in Israel. In this book the theocracy, as exercised 
through judges, ends (8. 7), and the line of kings begins with Saul. 

The book is in four parts: I. The story of Samuel to the death of Eli, 1. 1-4. 22. 
II. From the taking of the ark to the demand for a king, 5. 1-8. 22. III. The 
reign of Saul to the call of David, 9. 1-15. 35. IV. From the call of David to the 
death of Saul, 16. 1-31. 13. 

The events recorded in First Samuel cover a period of 115 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. B.C. 1171. pet pies and to all her sons 
an er daughters, portions: 

The mother of Socal, 5 But unto Hannah he gave a 
TOW there was a certain man of worthy portion; for he loved Han- 
2 Teg leper e of punt neh: bubsene LorpD had shut up 

phraim, and his name was a- er womb. 
nah, the son of Jeroham, the son of 6 And her adversary also provoked 
Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of her sore, for to make her fret, because 
Taye a Lege eee wives; the oe i note a pF aon 
Bs roe of the one was Hannah, and|> Deity : when she went up to the house of 
the name of the other Peninnah: (names of)- the LORD, so she provoked her; 
and Peninnah had children, but} (Gen.i1; [therefore she wept, and did not eat. 
Hannah had no children. Mal.3.18.) 8 Then said Elkanah her hus- 

3 And this man went up out band to her, Hannah, why weepest 
of his city yearly to %worship thou? and why eatest thou not? 
and to sacrifice unto the “LorD and why is thy heart grieved? am 
of ‘hosts in Shiloh. And _ the not I better to thee than ten sons? 
two sons of Eli, Hophni and_Phin- 9 So Hannah rose up after they 
ehas, the priests of the LORD, had eaten in Shiloh, and after they 
were there. had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat 

4 And when the time was that upon a seat by a post of the temple 
Elkanah offered, he gave to Penin- of the LorD. 


1 Jehovah (LORD) of Hosts, Heb. Jehovah Sabaoth. For the distinctive mean- 
ings of Jehovah, see Gen. 2.4, note. _ Sabaoth means simply host or hosts, but with 
especial reference to warfare or service. In use the two ideas are united; Jehovah 
is LorD of (warrior) hosts. It is the name, therefore, of Jehovah in manifestation 
EP roves. “The LORD of Hosts, He is the King of glory (Psa. 24. 10), and ac- 
cordingly in Old Testament Scripture this name 1s. revealed in the time of Israel’s 
need. It is never found in the Pentateuch, nor directly in Joshua or Judges, and 
occurs but rarely in the Psalms; but Jeremiah, the prophet of approaching national 
judgment, uses the name about eighty times. Haggai in two chapters uses the 
name fourteen times: Zechariah in fourteen chapters calls upon the LorD of hosts 
about fifty times. In Malachi the name occurs about twenty-five times. In the 
utmost extremity, the Psalmist twice comforts his heart with the assurance “the 
Lorp of hosts is with us” (Psa. 46. 7, 11). The meanings and uses of this name 
may be thus summarized: (1) The “‘hosts” are heavenly. Primarily the angels are 
meant, but the name gathers into itself the idea of all divine or heavenly power 
as available for the need of God’s people (Gen. 32. 1, 2; Isa. 6. 1-5; 1 Ki, 22. 19; Lk. 
2. 13-15). (2) In use this is the distinctive name of Deity for Israel’s help and 
comfort in the time of her division and failure (1 Ki. 18. 15.3; 19. 14; Isa. 1. 9; 8. 11-14; 
9, 13-19; 10. 24-27; 31. 4, 5; Hag. 2. 4; Mal. 3. 16, 17; Jas. 5. 4). See other names of 
Deity, Gen. 1.1, note; 2. 4, note; 2. 7; 14. 18, note; 15. 2, note; 17. 1, note; 21. 


33, note. 319 


1 10] 


I SAMUEL. 


The vow of Hannah. 


10 And she was in bitterness of 
soul, and prayed unto the Lorp, 
and wept sore. 

11 And she vowed a vow, and 
“said, O LorD of hosts, if thou wilt 
indeed look on the affliction of thine 
handmaid, and remember me, and 
not forget thine handmaid, but wilt 
give unto thine handmaid a man 
child, then I will give him unto 
the LorpD all the days of his life, 
and there shall no ‘razor come upon 
his head. 

12 And it came to pass, as she 
continued praying before the LORD, 
that Eli marked her mouth. 

13 Now Hannah, she spake in her 
heart; only her lips moved, but her 
voice was not heard: therefore Eli 
thought she had been drunken. 

14 And Eli said unto her, How 
long wilt thou be drunken? put 
away thy wine from thee. 

15 And Hannah answered and 
said, No, my lord, I am a woman 
of a sorrowful spirit: I have drunk 
neither wine nor strong drink, but 
have ‘poured out my soul before 
the Lorp. 

16 Count not thine handmaid for 
a daughter of Belial: for out of the 
abundance of my complaint and 
grief have I spoken hitherto. 

17 Then Eli answered and said, 
Go in peace: and the God of Israel 
grant thee thy petition that thou 
hast asked of him. 

18 And she said, Let thine hand- 
maid find grace in thy sight. So 
the woman went her way, and did 
eat, and her countenance was no 
more sad. 

19 And they rose up in the morn- 
ing early, and worshipped before 
the Lorpb, and returned, and came 
to their house to Ramah: and El- 
kanah knew Hannah his wife; and 
the Lorp remembered her. 


The birth of Samuel, 


20 Wherefore it came to pass, 
when the time was come about 
after Hannah had conceived, that 
she bare a son, and called his name 
4Samuel, saying, Because I have 
asked him of the Lorp. 

21 And the man Elkanah, and all 
his house, “went up to offer unto 


the LorD the yearly sacrifice, and 
his vow. 


B.C. 1171. 


a Bible 
prayers 
O:7.); 
1 Sam.2.1. 
(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 
6 Num.6.5. 


c Psa.62.8. 


that he may appear before the 
LorpD, and there abide for ever. 
23 And Elkanah her husband said 
unto her, Do what seemeth thee 
good; tarry until thou have weaned 
him; only the LorpD establish his 
word. So the woman abode, and 
gave her son suck until she weaned 


Hannah brings Samuel to Eli. 
24 And when she had weaned 


thim, she took him up with her, with 


three bullocks, and one fephah of 
ficur, and a bottle of wine, and 
brought him unto the house of the 
LORD in Shiloh: and the child was 
young. 

25 And they slew a bullock, and 
brought the child to Eli. 

26 And she said, Oh my lord, as 
thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the 
woman that stood by thee here, 
praying unto the Lorpb. 

27 For this child I prayed; and 


die. asked of |the LORD hath given me my peti-« 


God. 
e Gen.18.19; 


Josh.24.15; 
Psa.101.2. 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 


hk Psa.97.11, 
12. 


i Rev.15.4. 

j Psa.18.2. 

k Psa.116.3. 

1 Heb. Sheol. 


See Hab.2. 
5, note. 


22 But Hannah went not up; for] 


she said unto her husband, J will 
not go up until the child be 


weaned, and then I wili bring him,: 


320 


tion which I asked of him: 

28 Therefore also I have lent him 
to the LorD; as long as he liveth 
he shall be lent to the Lorp. And 
he worshipped the Lorp there. 


CHAPTER 2. 
Hannah’s prophetic prayer. 


(AND Hannah £prayed, and said, 
My heart *rejoiceth in the 
LORD, mine horn is exalted in the 
Lor: my mouth is enlarged over 
mine enemies; because I rejoice in 
thy salvation. 

2 *There is none holy as the 
Lorp: for there is none beside 
thee: neither is there any Jrock 
like our God. 

3 Talk no more so_ exceeding 
pre: let Ore SPEEA, com 
out of your mou for the RD 1S 
a God of knowledge, ‘an: Sy 
actions are » weighéd: 

The bows’ of the 2h pe wean 
are broken, and they that stumbled 
are girded with strength. 

5 They that were full have hired 
out themselves for bread; and they 
that were hungry ceased: so that 
the barren hath born seven; and she 
that hath many children is waxed 
feeble. 

6 The Lorp “killeth, and maketh 
alive: he bringeth down to the 
‘grave, and bringeth up. 

7 The Lorp maketh poor, and 
maketh rich: he bringeth low, an 
lifteth up. 


8 He raiseth up the poor out of} B.C. 116s. 


the dust, and lifteth. up the beggar 
from the dunghill, to set them 
among princes, and to make them 
inherit the throne of glory: for the 
pillars of the earth are the Lorp’s, 
and he hath set the world upon 
them. 

9 He will.¢keep the feet of his 
saints, and the “wicked shall be 
silent in darkness; for by strength 
shall no man prevail. 

10 The adversaries of the LorD 
shall be broken to pieces; out of 
heaven shall he thunder upon them: 
the Lorp shall judge the ends of 
the earth; and ‘he shall give 
strength unto his king, and exalt 
the horn of his Zanointed. 

11 And Elkanah went to Ramah 
to his house. And the child. did 
minister unto the LorD before Eli 
the priest. 


The evil sons of Eli. 


12 Now the sons of Eli were sons 
of Belial; they knew not the LORD.|} Rom.3.19. 

13 And the priests’ custom with AME 18 
the people was, that, when any ak tri 
man offered sacrifice, the priest’s|d A prophecy 
servant came, while the flesh was BE bated 
in seething, with a fleshhook of| psa 019. 
three teeth in his hand; 

14 And he struck it into the pan, Si Mencea eT 
or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all) “°°” 
that the fleshhook brought up the} f Deut.33.1. 
priest took for himself. So they did 

in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that|* Peep vis 
came thither. h Ex.29.9. 
£1 Ki.2.27, 
35. 


a Psa.37.23, 
24; 94.18; 
121.3. 


15 Also before they burnt the fat, 
the priest’s servant came, and said 
to the man that sacrificed, Give 
flesh to roast for the priest; for he 
will not have sodden flesh of thee, 
‘but raw. 

16 And if any man said unto him, 
Let them not fail to burn the fat 
presently, and then take as much 
as thy soul desireth; then he would 
answer him, Nay; but thou shalt 
give it me now: and if not, I will 
take it by force. | 

17 Wherefore the sin of the young 
men was very great before the 
Lorp: for men abhorred the offer- 
ing of the LORD. 


The child Samuel in the | 
tabernacle. | 


18 But Samuel ministered before 
‘the Lorp, being a child, girded 
with a linen ephod. 

19 Moreover his mother made 
him a little coat, and brought it to 
him from year to year, when she 


32) 


I SAMUEL. 


came up with her husband to offer 
the yearly sacrifice. 


which ‘is lent to the LorD. And 
they went unto their own home. 

21 And the LorD visited Hannah, 
so that she conceived, and bare 
three sons and two daughters. And 
the child Samuel grew before the 
Lorb. x 

22 Now Eiji was very old, and 
heard all that his sons did unto all 
Israel; and how they lay with the 
women that assembied at the door 
of the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion. 

23 And he said unto them, Why 
do ye such things? for I hear of your 
evil dealings by all this people. 

24 Nay, my sons; for it is no good 
report that I hear: ye make the 
Lorb’s people to transgress. 

25 If one man sin against another, 
the judge shall judge him: but if a 
man sin against the “LoRD, who 
shall intreat for him? Notwith- 
standing they hearkened not unto 
the voice of their father, because 
the LORD would slay them. 

26 And the child Samuel grew on, 


land was in favour both with the 


LORD, and also with men. 
The warning to Eli. 


27 And there came a /fman of God 
unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus 
saith the Lorp, Did I plainly ap- 
pear unto the house of thy father, 
when they were in Egypt in Pha- 
raoh’s house? 

28 And did I &choose him out of 
all the tribes of Israel to be my 
priest, to offer upon mine altar, to 
burn incense, to wear an ephod be- 
fore me? and did I give unto the 
house of thy father all the offerings 
made by fire of the childrenofIsrael? 

29 Wherefore kick ye at my sac- 
rifice and at mine offering, which I 
have commanded in my habita- 
tion; and honourest thy sons above 
me, to make yourselves fat with the 
chiefest of all the offerings of Israel 
my people? 

30 Wherefore the Lorp God of 
Israel saith, I “said indeed that thy 
house, and the house of thy father, 
should walk before me for ever: 
but now the LORD saith, Be it far 
from me; for them that honour me 
I will honour, and they that despise 
me shall be lightly), esteemed. 

31 Behold, the ‘days come, that J 


2 32] 


I SAMUEL. 


{3 a 


will cut off thine arm, and the arm 
of thy father’s house, that there 
shall not be an old man in thine 
house. 

32 And thou shalt see an enemy 
in my habitation, in all the wealth 
which God shall give Israel: and 
there shall not be an old man in 
thine house for ever. : 

33 And the man of thine, whom I 
shall not cut off from mine altar, 
shall be to consume thine eyes, and 
to grieve thine heart: and all the 
increase of thine house shall die in 
the flower of their age. 

34 And this shail be a sign unto 
thee, that shall come upon thy two 
sons, on Hophni and Phinehas: in 
one day they shall ¢die both of 
them. 

35 And I will Sraise me up a faith- 
ful priest, that shall do according 
to that which 7s in mine heart and 
in my mind: and I will build him a 
sure house; and he shall walk be- 
fore mine anointed for ever. 

36 And it shall come to pass, that 
every one that is left in thine house 
shall come and crouch to him for a 
piece of silver and a morsel of bread, 
and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, 
into one of the priests’ offices, that 
I may eat a piece of bread. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Samuel becomes Jehovah's 
prophet-priest. 


naw the child Samuel ministered 

unto the LorD before Eli. And 
*the word of the LorD was precious 
in those days; there was no open 
vision. 

2 And it came to pass at that 
time, when Eli was laid down in 
his place, and his eyes began to 
wax dim, that he could not see; 

3 And ere the ¢lamp of God went 
out in the temple of the Lorp, 
where the ark of God was, and 
Samuel was laid down to sleep : 

4 That the Lorp called Samuel: 
and he answered, Here am I. 

5 And he ran unto Eli, and said, 
Here am I; for thou calledst me. 
And he said, I called not: lie down 
again. And he went and lay down. 

6 And the Lorp called yet again, 
Samuel. And Samuel arose and 
went to Eli, and said, Here am I; 
for thou didst call me. And he an- 
swered, I called not, my son; lie 
down again. 

7 Now Samuel did not yet know 
the Lorn, neither was the word 


B.C. 1165. 


@ 1 Sam.4.11. 


6 Heb.2.17; 
7.26-28. 


c Or, a word 
from the 
LORD was 
unusual in 
those days; 
there was 
no public 
vision. 


d@ Ex.27.20,21. 

e Psa.85.8. 

f 1Sam.2.29- 
36. 


g1Sam.2.12, 
23. 


hk Num.15.30; 
Isa.22.14; 
Heb.10.4, 
26,31. 


322 


of the LorD yet revealed unto. 


him. 

8 And the Lorp called Samuel 
again the third time. And he arose 
and went to Eli, and said, Here am 
I; for thou didst call me. And Eli 
perceived that the Lorp had called 
the child. 

9 Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, 
Go, lie down: and it shall be, if he 
call thee, that thou shalt say, 
‘Speak, Lorp; for thy servant 
heareth. So Samuel went and lay 
down in his place. 

10 And the LorpD came, and 
stood, and called as at other times, 
(Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel an- 
'swered, Speak; for thy servant 
heareth. 

11 And the Lorp said to Samuel, 
Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, 
at which both the ears of every one 
that heareth it shall tingle. 

12 In that day I will perform 
against Eli all things which I have 
fspoken concerning his house: 
nine I begin, I will also make an 
end. 

13 For I have told him that I will 
judge his house for ever for the in- 
iquity which he knoweth; because 
his sons made themselves vile, and 
he restrained them not. 

14 And therefore I have sworn 
unto the house of Eli, that the in- 
iquity of Eli’s house shall not be 
Apurged with sacrifice nor offering 
for ever. : 

15 And Samuel lay until the 
morning, and opened the doors of 
the house of the Lorp. And Sam- 
uel feared to shew Eli the vision. 

16 Then Eli called Samuel, and 
said, Samuel, my son. And he an- 
swered, Here am I. 

17 And he said, What is the thing 
that the Lorp hath said unto thee? 
I pray thee hide it not from me: 

do so to thee, and more also, 
if thou hide any thing from me 
‘ei all the things that he said unto 
thee. 

18 And Samuel told him every 
whit, and hid nothing from him. 
And he said, It zs the Lorp: let 
him do what seemeth him good. 

19 And Samuel grew, and the 
LORD was with him, and did let 
none of his words fall to the 
ground. 

20 And all Israel from Dan even 
to Beer-sheba knew that Samuel 
was established to be a prophet of 
the Lorp. 

21 And the Lorp appeared again 


41] I SAMUEL. [4 22 


in Shiloh: for the Lorp revealed) B.c.1141._|was a very great slaughter; for 
there fell of Israei thirty thousand 
footmen. 

11 And the ark of God was taken; 


word of the Lorp. 


CHAPTER 4. ae a two sons mc Eli, Hophni 
The ark taken by the an inehas, were slain. 
Pie lstines |.12 And there ran a man of Ben- 


ND the word of Samuel came to 
- allIsrael. Now Israel went out 
against the Philistines to battle, and 
pitched beside Eben-ezer: and the 
Philistines pitched in Aphek. 

2 And the Philistines put them- 
selves in array against Israel: and 
when they joined battle, Israel was} 
smitten before the Philistines: and} 
they slew of the army in the field 
about four thousand men. 

3 And when the people were come 
into the camp, the elders of Israel} 
said, *Wherefore hath the LorD 
smitten us to day before the Philis- 
tines? Let us fetch the ark of the 
covenant of the LorD out of Shiloh 
unto us, that, when it cometh/ 
among us, it may save us out of the 
hand of our enemies. 

4 So the people sent to Shiloh. 
that they might bring from thence} Prov.19.3. 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD 
of hosts, which ‘dwelleth between 
the cherubims: and the two sons Of} ¢ Ex.25.18,22. 
Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were 
there with the ark of the covenant 


13 And when he came, lo, Eli sat 
upon a seat by the wayside watch- 
ing: for his heart trembled for the 
ark of God. And when the man 
came into the city, and told z¢, all 
the city cried out. 

14 And when Eli heard the noise 
of the crying, he said, What mean- 
eth the noise of this tumult? And 
the man came in’ hastily, and told 

is 

15 Now Eli was ninety and eight 
years old; and his eyes were dim, 
that he could not see. 

16 And the man said unto Eli, I 
am he that came out of the army, 
and I fled to day out of the army. 
And he said, What is there done, 
my son? 

17 And the messenger answered 
6 Deut-1211. and said, Israel is fled before the 
Philistines, and there hath been 
also a great slaughter among the 
people, and thy two sons also, 
Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, 
and the ark of God is taken. 

18 And it came to pass, when he 
made mention of the ark of God, 
that he fell from off the seat back- 
ward by the side of the gate, and 
his neck brake, and he died: for he 
was an old man, and heavy. And 
lhe had. judged Israel forty years. 

19 And his daughter in law, Phi- 
nehas’ wife, was with child, near to 
be delivered: and when she heard 
the tidings that the ark of God was 
taken, and that her father in law 
and her husband were dead, she 
bowed herself and travailed; for her 
pains came upon her. 

20 And about the time of her 


camp, all Israel shouted with a great 
shout, so that the earth rang again.| 

6 And when the Philistines heard] 
the noise of the shout, they said, 
What meaneth the noise of this 
great shout in the camp of the He- 
brews? And they understood that 
the ark of the LORD was come into 
the camp. ! 

7 And the Philistines were afraid,| 
for they said, God is come into the} 
camp. And they said, Woe unto] 
us! for there hath not been such al 
thing heretofore. 

8 Woe unto us! who shall deliver] 
us out of the hand of these mighty 
Gods? these are the Gods that 
smote the Egyptians with all the] 
plagues in the wilderness, 

9 Be strong, and quit yourselves 
like men, O ye Philistines, that ye) 
be not servants unto the Hebrews, 
as they have been to you: quit 
yourselves like men, and fight. 

10 And the Philistines fought, and 
Israel was smitten, and they fled 
every man into his tent: and there! 


21 And she named the child I-cha- 
bod, saying, The glory is departed 
from Israel: because the ark of God 
was taken, and because of her 
father in law and her husband. 

22 And she said, The glory is de- 
parted from Israel: for the ark of 
Goda is taken. 


323 


'g 4 
CHAPTER 5. 
The ark of God a curse to the 
Philistines. 


ND the Philistines took the ark 
of God, and brought it from 
¢Eben-ezer unto “Ashdod. 

2 When the Philistines took the 
ark of God, they brought it into the 
house of Dagon, and set it by 
“Dagon. 

3 And when they of Ashdod arose 
early on the morrow, behold, Dagon 
was fallen upon his face to the 
earth before the ark of the Lorn. 
And they took Dagon, and set him 
in his place again. 

4 And when they arose early on 
the morrow morning, behold, Da- 
gon was fallen upon his face to the 
ground befcre the ark of the Lorp; 
and the head of Dagon and both the 
palms of his hands were cut off 
upon the threshold; only the 
stump of Dagon was left to him. 

5 Therefore neither the priests of 
Dagon, nor any that come into Da- 
gon’s house, tread on the threshold 
of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day. 

6 But the ¢hand of the LorD was 
heavy upon them of Ashdod, and 
he destroyed them, and ‘smote 
them with emerods, even Ashdod 
and the coasts thereof. 

7 And when the men of Ashdod 
saw that it was so, they said, The 
ark of the God of Israel’ shall not 
abide with us: for his hand is sore 
upon _us, and upon Dagon our god. 

8 They sent therefore and gath- 
ered all the lords of the Philistines 
unto them, and said, What shall 
we do with the ark of the God of 
Israel? And they answered, Let 
the ark of the God of Israel be car- 
ried about unto Gath. And they 
earried the ark of the God of Israel 
about thither. 

9 And it was so, that, after they 
had carried it about, the fhand of 
the LorD was against the city with 
a very great destruction: and he 
smote the men of the city, both 
small and great, and they had 
emerods in their secret parts. 

10 Therefore they sent the ark of 
God to Ekron. And it came to 
pass, as the ark of God came to 
Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, 
saying, They have brought about 
the ark: of the God of Israel to us, 
to slay us and our people. 

11 So they sent and gathered to- 
gether all the lords of the Philis- 
tines, and said, Send away the ark 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1141. 


a 1 Sam.7.12. 
6 Acts 8.40. 
¢ 1 Chr.10.10. 


f 1 Sam.7.13; 
12.15; Deut. 
2.15, 

g vs.6,9. 


hk 1 Sam.9.16; 
Jer.14.2. 


4 Gen.41.8; 
Ex.7.11; 
Isa.47.13. 

j Deut.16.16. 


k Contra, Lev. 
5.15,16. 


1 Contra, Heb. 
9.22. 


m1 Sam.5.6, 
11. 

nCf.2 Sam. 
6.3. 


324 


of the God of Israel, and let it go 
again to his own place, that it slay 
us not, and our people: for there 
was a deadly destruction through- 
out al: the city; the hand of God 
was very heavy there. 

12 And the men that died not 
were smitten with the emerods: and 
the “cry of the city went up to 
heaven. 


CHAPTER 6. 


The ark brought to Joshua the 
Beth-shemite. 


ND the ark of the Lorp was in 

the country of the Philistines 
seven months. 

2 And the Philistines called for 


ithe priests and the ‘diviners, say- 


ing, What shall we do to the ark of _ 
the LorpD? tell us wherewith we 
shall send it to his place. 

3 And they said, If ye send away 
the ark of the God of Israel, send it 
not Jempty; but in any wise return 
him a ‘trespass-offering: ‘then ye 
shall be healed, and it shall. be 
known to you why his hand is not 
removed from you. 

4 Then said they, What shall be 
the trespass-offering which we shall 
return to him? They answered, 
Five golden emerods, and five golden 
mice, according to the number of 
the lords of the Philistines: for one 
plague was on you all, and on your 
lords. 

5 Wherefore ye shall make images 
of your emerods, and images of your 
mice that mar the land; and ye shall 
give glory unto the God of Israel: 
peradventure he will lighten his 
hand from off you, and from off 
your gods, and from off your land. 

6 Wherefore then do ye harden 
your hearts, as the Egyptians and 
Pharaoh hardened their hearts? 
when he had wrought wonderfully 
among them, did they not let the 
people go, and they departed? 

7 Now therefore make a new 
"cart, and take two milch kine, on - 
which there hath come no yoke, 
and tie the kine to the cart, and 
bring their calves home from them: 

8 And take the ark of the LorRpD, 
and lay it upon the cart; and put 
the jewels of gold, which ye return 
him for a trespass-offering, in a 
coffer by the side thereof; and send 
it away, that it may go. 

9 And see, if it goeth up by the 
way of his own coast to Beth-she- 
mesh, then he hath done us this 


cs 


6 10), 


I SAMUEL. 


(79 


great evil: but HW not, then we shall 
know that zt is not his hand that 
smote us; it was a chance that 
happened to us. 

10 And the men did so; and took 
two milch kine, and tied them to the 
cart, and shut up their calves at 
home: 

11 And they laid the ark of the 
LorpD upon the cart, and the coffer 
with the mice of gold and the 
images of their emerods. 

12 And the kine took the straight 
way to the way of Beth-shemesh, 
and went along the highway, low- 
ing as they went, and turned not 
aside to the right hand or to the 
left; and the lords of the Philistines 
went after them unto the border of 
Beth-shemesh. ” 

13 And they of Beth-shemesh 
were reaping their wheat harvest in 
the valley: and they lifted up their 
eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced 
to see it. 

14 And the cart came into the field 
of Joshua, a Beth-shemite, and stood 
there, where there ‘was a great 
stone: and they clave the wood of 
the cart, and offered the kine a 
burnt-offering unto the LorD. 

15 And the Levites took down the 
ark of the LORD, and the coffer that 
was with it, wherein the jewels of 
gold were, and put them on the 
great stone: and the men of Beth- 
shemesh offered burnt-offerings and 
sacrificed sacrifices the same day 
unto the LORD. 

16 And when the five lords of the 
Philistines had seen it, they re- 
turned to Ekron the same day. 

17 And these are the golden eme- 

_rods which the Philistines returned 
for a trespass-offering unto the 
Lorp; for Ashdod one, for Gaza 
one, for Askelon one, for Gath one, 
for Ekron one; 

18 And the golden mice, accord- 
ing to the number of all the cities of 
the Philistines belonging to the 
five lords, both of fenced cities, and 
of country villages, even unto the 
great stone of Abel, whereon they 
setdowntheark ofthe LorD: which 
stone remaineth unto this day in 
thefield of Joshua, the Beth-shemite. 

19 And he smote the men of Beth- 
shemesh, “because they had looked 
into the ark of the LorD, even he 
smote of the people fifty thousand 
and threescore and ten men: and 
the people lamented, because the 
Lorp had smitten many of the 
people with a great slaughter. 


B.C. 1140. 


a Num.4.15, 
16; 1 Chr.13. 
9,10. 

b Zech.12.10, 
1° 

c Deut.30.2, 
10; Joel 2.13. 


d See Jud.2. 
13, note. 


325 


20 And the men of Beth-shemesh 
said, Who is able to stand before 
this holy Lorp God? and to whom 
shall he go up from us? 

21 And they sent messengers to 
the inhabitants of Kirjath-jearim, 
saying, The Philistines have brought 
again the ark of the LORD; come ye 
down, and fetch it up to you. 


CHAPTER 7. 


The ark brought to the house 
of Abinadab. The revival at 
Mizpeh. * 


yo) the men of Kirjath-jearim 
came, and fetched up the ark 
of the LorpD, and brought it into 
the house of Abinadab in the hill, 
and sanctified Eleazar his son to 
keep the ark of the LorD. 

2 And it came to pass, while the 
ark abode in Kirjath-jearim, that 
the time was long; for it was twenty 
years: and all the house of Israel 
‘lamented after the LORD. 

3 And Samuel spake unto all the 
house of Israel, saying, If ye do “re- 
turn unto the LorpD with all your 
hearts, then put away the strange 
gods and ¢Ashtaroth from among 
you, and prepare your hearts unto 
the Lorpb, and serve him only: and 
he will deliver you out of the hand 
of the Philistines. 

4 Then the children of Israel did 
put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, 
and served the LorD only. 

5 And Samuel said, Gather all Is- 
rael to Mizpeh, and I will pray for 
you unto the LORD. 

6 And they gathered together to 
Mizpeh, and drew water, and 
poured it out before the LorD, and 
fasted on that day, and said there, 
We have sinned against the LORD. 
And Samuel judged the children of 
Israel in Mizpeh. 

7 And when the Philistines heard 
that the children of Israel were 
gathered together to Mizpeh, the 
lords of the Philistines went up 
against Israel. And when the chil- 
dren of Israel heard it, they were 
afraid of the Philistines. 

8 And the children of Israel said 
to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto 
the Lorp our God for us, that he 
will save us out of the hand of the 
Philistines. 

The Israelites victorious at 
Eben-ezer. 


9 And Samuel took a sucking 
lamb, and offered it for a burnt- 


\ 


7 10} 


I SAMUEL. 


offering wholly unto the Lorb: and 
Samuel cried unto the Lorp for 
Israel; and the LorpD heard him: 

10 And as Samuel was offering up 
the burnt-offering, the Philistines 
drew near to battle against Israel: 
but the Lorp thundered with a 
great thunder on that day upon the 
Philistines, and ¢discomfited them; 
and they were smitten before Israel. 

11 And the men of Israel went out 
of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philis- 
tines, and smote them, until they 
came under Beth-car. 

12 Then Samuel took a’stone, and 
set it between Mizpeh and Shen, 
and called the name of it Eben- 
ezer, saying, Hitherto hath the 
Lorp helped us. 

13 So the Philistines were sub- 
dued, and they came no more into 
the coast of Israel: and the hand 
of the LorD was against the Philis- 
tines all the.days of Samuel. 

14 And the cities which the Philis- 
tines had taken from Israel were 
restored to Israel, from Ekron even 
unto Gath; and the coasts thereof 
did Israel deliver out of the hands 
of the Philistines. And there was 
peace between Israel and the Amo- 
rites. 


Samuel, prophet, priest, and 
Judége. 


15 And Samuel judged Israel all 
the days of his life. 

16 And he went from year to year! aE 
in circuit to Beth-el, and Gilgal, 1011. ‘ 
and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in 
all those places. g Ex.16.8. 

17 And his return was to Ramah 3/h1 Ki.217. 
for there was his house; and there ; 
he judged Israel; and there he built| # ree 
an altar unto the Lorn, Neti 


CHAPTER 8. 
Israel demands a king. 


ND it “came to pass, when Sam- 
uel was old, that he made his 
sons “judges over Israel. 

2 Now the name of his firstborn 
was Joel; and the name of his sec- 
ond, Abiah: they were judges in 
Beer-sheba. 

3 And his sons walked not in his 
ways, but turned aside after lucre, 
and took ‘bribes, and perverted 
judgment. 

4 Then all the elders of Israel 
gathered themselves together, and 
came to Samuel unto Ramah, 

5 And said unto him, Behold, 
thou art old, and thy sons walk not 


a Psa.18.14, 


bi.e.The stone 
of help. 


c aoe Sem 
tory). vs.1-8; 
2 Sam. 


d Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs. 
1-7; 1 Sam. 
9.15-17. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


e 1 Sam.12.3; 
Prov.29.4. 


326 


B.C. 1120. 


[8 # 


in thy ways: now ‘make us a king 


to judge us like all the nations. 

6 But the thing displeased Sam- 
uel, when they said, Give us a king 
to judge us. And Samuel prayed 
unto the Lorp. 


The theocracy rejected. 


7 And the Lorp said unto Sam- 
uel, Hearken unto the voice of the 
people in all that they say unto 
thee: for they have not rejected 
thee, but they have rejected me, 
that I should not reign over them, 

8 According to all the works which 
they have done since the day that 
I brought them up out of Egypt 
even unto this day, wherewith they 
have forsaken me, and served other 
gods, so do they also unto thee. 

9 Now therefore hearken unto 
their voice: howbeit yet protest 
solemnly unto them, and shew 
them the manner of the king that 
shall reign over them. 

10 And Samuel told all the words 
of the Lorp unto the people that 

g. 


l. lasked of him a king. 


11 And he said, This will be the 
manner of the king that shall reign 
over you: He will take your sons, 
and appoint them for himself, for 
his chariots, an¢ to be his horse- 
men; and some shall run before his 
chariots. 

12 And he will appoint him cap- 
tains over thousands, and captains 
over fifties; and will set them to 
ear his ground, and to reap his 
harvest, and to make his instru- 
Ments of war, and instruments of 
his chariots. 

13 And he will take your daugh- 
ters to be confectionaries, and to 
be cooks, and to be bakers. 

14 And he will take your “fields, 
and your vineyards, and your olive. 
yards, even the best of them, and 
give them to his servants. 

15 And he will take the tenth of 
your seed, and of your vineyards, 
and give to his officers, and to his 
servants. 

16 And he will take your men- 
servants, and your maidservants, 
and your goodliest young men, and 
your asses, and put them to his 
work. 

17 He will take the tenth of your 
sheep: and ye shall be his servants. 

18 And ye shall cry out in that 
day because of your king which ye 
shall have chosen you; and the 
Lorp will not ‘hear you in that 


8 19] 


19 Nevertheless the people re- 
fused to obey the voice of Samuel; 
and they said, Nay; but we will 
have a king over us; 

20 That we also may be like all 
the nations; and that our king may 
judge us, and go out before us, and 
fight our battles. 

21 And Samuel heard all the words 
of the people, and he rehearsed 
them in the ears of the LORD. 

22 And the.LorD said to Samuel, 
Hearken unto their voice, and make 
them a king. And Samuel said 
unto the men of Israel, Go ye every 
man unto his city. 


CHAPTER 9. 
Saul chosen to be king. 


\ VOW there was a man of Benja- 
min, whose name was Kish, the 
son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the 
son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, 
a Benjamiteé, a mighty man of 
power. 
2 And he had a son, whose name 
was Saul, a choice young man, and 
a goodly: and there was not among 
the children of Israel a goodlier per- 
son than he: from his shoulders and 
upward he ¢was higher than any of 
the people. 

3 And the asses of Kish Saul’s 
father were lost. And Kish said to 
Saul his son, Take now one of the 
servants with thee, and arise, go 
seek the asses. 

4 And he passed through mount 
Ephraim, and passed through the 
land of °Shalisha, but they found 
them not: then they passed through 
the land of Shalim, and there they 

“were not: and he passed through 
the land of the Benjamites, but they 
found them not. 

5 And when they were come to 
the land of Zuph, Saul said to his 
servant that was with him, Come, 
and let us return; lest my father 
leave caring for the asses, and take 
thought for us. 

6 And he said unto him, Behold 
now, there is in this city a man of 
God, and he is an honourable man; 
all that he saith cometh surely to 
pass: now let us go thither; perad- 


venture he can shew us our way 
that we should go. 

‘7 Then said Saul to his servant, 
But, behold, if we go, what shall we 
bring the man? for the bread is 
spent in our vessels, and there 1s 
not a present to bring to the man 
of God: what have we? 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1095. 


a 1 Sam.10.23. 

6 2 Ki.4.42. 

¢ One shekel 
=2s. 9d., or 
65 cts. 

d Gen.24.11. 

e1 Ki.3.2. 

f1Sam.10.1, 

g Ex.2.23-25. 

hk Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs.15- 
17; 1 Sam. 
10.17-25. 


(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


327 


[9 20 


8 And the servant answered Saul 
again, and said, Behold, I have here 
at hand the fourth part of a ‘shekel 
of silver: that will I give to the 
man of God, to tell us our way. 

9 (Beforetime in Israel, when a 
man went to enquire of God, thus 
he spake, Come, and let us go to the 
seer: for he that is now called a 
Prophet was beforetime called a 
Seer.) 

10 Then said Saul to his servant, 
Well said; come, let us go. So they 
went unto the city where the man 
of God was. 

11 Ard as they went up the hill to 
the city, they found young ¢maidens 
going out to draw water, and said 
unto them, Is the seer here? 

12 And they answered them, and 
said, He is; behold, he zs before you: 
make haste now, for he came to day 
to the city; for there is a sacrifice of 
the people to day in the ¢high 
place: 

13 As soon as ye be come into 
the city, ye shall straightway find 
him, before he go up to the high 
place to eat: for the people will not 
eat until he come, because he doth 
bless the sacrifice; and afterwards 
they eat that be bidden. Now 
therefore get you up; for about this 
time ye shall find him. 

14 And they went up into the 
city: and when they were come into 
the city, behold, Samuel came out 
against them, for to go up to the 
high place. 

15 Now the Lorpb had told Sam- 
uel in his ear a day before Saul 
came, saying, 

16 To morrow about this time I 
will send thee a man out of the land 
of Benjamin, and thou shalt fanoint 
him to be captain over my people 
Israel, that he may save my people 
out of the hand of the Philistines: 
for I have #looked upon my people, 
because their cry is come unto me. 

17 And when Samuel saw Saul, 
the LorD said unto him, Behold the 
man whom I spake to thee of! this 
same shall ‘reign over my people. 

18 Then Saul drew near to Samuel 
in the gate, and said, Tell me, I 
pray thee, where the seer’s house 1s; 

19 And Samuel answered Saul, 
and said, I am the seer: go upbefore 
me unto the high place; for ye shall 
eat with me to day, and to morrow I 
will let thee go, and will tell thee all 
that is in thine heart. 

20 And as for thine asses that 
were lost three days ago, set not 


9 21] 


thy mind on them; for they are 
found. And on whom is all the 
desire of Israel? Js it not on thee, 
and on all thy father’s house? 

21 And Saul answered and said, 
Am not I a Benjamite, of the small- 
est of the tribes of Israel? and my 
' family the least of all the families 
of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore 
then speakest thou so to me? 

22 And Samuel took Saul and his 
servant, and brought them into the 
parlour, and made them sit in the 
chiefest place among them that 
were bidden, which were about 
thirty persons. . 

23 And Samuel said unto the 
cook, Bring the portion which I 
gave thee, of which I said unto thee, 
Set it by thee. 

24 And the cook took up the 
shoulder, and that which was upon 
it, and set it before Saul. And 
Samuel said, Behold that which is 
left! set it before thee, and eat: for 
unto this time hath it been kept for 
thee since I said, I have invited the 
people. So Saul did eat with Sam- 
uel that day. 

25 And when they were come 
down from the high place into the 
city, Samuel communed with Saul 
upon the top of the house. 

26 And they arose early: and it 
came to pass about the spring of the 
day, that Samuel called Saul to the 
top of the house, saying, Up, that 
I may send thee away. And Saul 
arose, and they went out both of 
them, he and Samuel, abroad. 

27 And as they were going down 
to the end of the city, Samuel said 
to Saul, Bid the servant pass on be- 
fore us, (and he passed on,) but 
stand thou still a while, that I may 
shew thee the word of God. 


CHAPTER 10. 
Saul anointed king. 


ie Samuel took a vial of oil, 
and poured it upon his head, 
and kissed him,-and said, Js it not 
because the Lorp hath anointed 
thee to be “captain over his inheri- 
tance? 

2 When thou art departed from 
me to day, then thou shalt find two 
men by: Rachel’s “‘sepulchre in the 
border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and 
they will say unto thee, The asses 
which thou wentest to seek are 
found: and, lo, thy father hath left 
the care of the asses, and sorroweth 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1095. 


|a 1 Sam.9.16; 
16.13; 2 Ki. 
9.3,6. 


b 2 Sam.5.2. 


c Gen.35.19, 
20. 


(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


e 1 Sam.11.6. 


328 


(10 14 


for you, saying, What shall I do for — 
my son? : 

3 Then shalt thou go on forward © 
from thence, and thou shalt come to 
the plain of Tabor, and there shall 
meet thee three men going up to 
God to Beth-el, one carrying three 
kids, and another carrying three 
loaves of bread, and another carry- 
ing a bottle of wine: 

4 And they will salute thee, and 
give thee two Joaves of bread; 
which thou shalt receive of their 
hands. ; 

5 After that thou shalt come to 
the hill of God, where is the garri- 
son of the Philistines: and it shall 
come to pass, when thou art come 
thither to the city, that thou shalt 
meet a company of prophets coming 
down from the high place with a 
psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, 
and a harp, before them; and they 
shall prophesy: 

6 And the 4Spirit of the Lorp 
will come upon thee, and thou shalt 
prophesy with them, and shalt be 
turned into another man. 

7 And let it be, when these signs 
are come unto thee, that thou do as 
occasion serve thee; for God is with 
thee. 

8 And thou shalt go down before 
me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will 
come down unto thee, to offer burnt- 


offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices 


of peace-offerings: seven days shalt 
thou tarry, till I come to thee, and 
shew thee what thou shalt do. 

9 And it was so, that when he had 
turned his back to go from Samuel, 
God gave him another heart: and 
ail those signs came to pass that 
day. 

10 And when they came thither 
to the hill, behold, a company of 
prophets met him; and the «Spirit 
of God came upon him, and he 
prophesied among them. 

11 And it came to pass, when all 
that knew him beforetime saw that, 
behold, he prophesied among the 
prophets, then the people said one 
to another, What is this that is 

ome unto the son of Kish? Js Saul 
also among the prophets? 

12 And one of the same place an- 
swered and said, But who is their 
father? Therefore it became a 
proverb, Js Saul also among the 
prophets? 

13. And when he had made an end 
of prophesying, he came to the high 
place. 

14 And Saul’s uncle said unto him 


and to his servant, Whither went ye? 
And he said, To seek the asses: and 
when we saw that they were no 
where, we came to Samuel. 
15. And Saul’s uncle said, Tell me, 
‘I pray thee, what Samuel said unto 


you. ~ 

16 And Saul said unto his uncle, 
He told us plainly that the asses 
were found. But of the matter of 
the kingdom, whereof Samuel 
spake, he told him not. 

17 And Samuel called the people 
together unto the LoRD to Mizpeh; 

18 And ‘said unto the children 
of Israel, Thus saith the LoRD God 
of Israel, I brought up Israel out of 
Egypt, and delivered you out of the 
hand of the Egyptians, and out of 
the hand of all kingdoms, and of 
them that oppressed you: 

19 And ye have this day rejected 
your God, who himself saved you 
out of all your adversities and your 
tribulations; and ye have said unto 
him, Nay, but set a king over us. 
Now therefore present yourselves 
before the LorD by your tribes, and 
by your thousands. 

20 And when Samuel had caused 
all the tribes of Israel to come 
near, the tribe of Benjamin was 
taken. 

21 When he had caused the tribe 
of Benjamin to come near by their 
families, the family of Matri was 
taken, and Saul the son of Kish was 


taken: and when they sought him, 
he could not be found. 

22 Therefore they enquired of the 
Lorp further, if the man should yet 
come thither. And the LorRD an- 
swered, Behold, he hath hid himself 
among the stuff. 

23 And they ran and fetched him 
thence: and when he stood among 
the people, he was higher than any 
of the people from his shoulders 
and upward. 

24 And Samuel said to all the 
people, See ye him whom the LorD 
hath chosen, that there is none like 
him among all the people? And; 
all the people shouted, and said, 
God save the king. 

25 Then Samuel told the people 
the manner of the ¢kingdom, and 
wrote it in a book, and laid it up 
before the Lorp. And Samuel sent 
all the people away, every man to 
his house. 

26 And Saul also went home to 
Gibeah; and there went with him a 
barid of men, whose hearts God had 
touched, 


I SAMUEL 


B.C. 1095. 


a Kingdom 


(O.T.).1 Sam. 
15.1-23.(Gen. 


1.26; Zech. 
12.8.) 


b 1 Sam.12, 
12. 

c Isa.36.16. 

d Holy Spirit. 
1 Sam.16. 


13,14. (Gen. 
1.2; Mal.2. 
15.) 


329 


[11 10 


27 But the children of Belial said,, 
How shail this man save us? And 
they despised him, and brought 
him no presents. But he held his 
peace. 


CHAPTER 11. 
Saul’s victory at Jabesh-gilead. 


HEN ’Nahash the Ammonite 
came up, and encamped against 
Jabesh-gilead: and all the men of 
Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a 
‘covenant with us, and we will 
serve thee. 

2 And Nahash the Ammonite an- 
swered them, On this condition 
will I make a covenant with you, 
that I may thrust out all your right 
eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon 
all Israel. 

3 And the elders of Jabesh said 
unto him, Give us seven days’ 
respite, that we may send messen- 
gers unto all the coasts of Israel: 
and then, if there be no man to 
save us, we will come out to thee. 

4 Then came the messengers to 
Gibeah of Saul, and told the tid- 
ings in the ears of the people: and 
all the people lifted up their voices, 
and wept. 

5 And, behold, Saul came after 
the herd out of the field; and Saul 
said, What arleth the people that 
they weep? And they told him the 
tidings of the men of Jabesh. 

6 And the 4Spirit of God came 
upon Saul when he heard those 
tidings, and his anger was kindled 
greatly. 

7 And he took a yoke of oxen, and. 
hewed them in pieces, and sent 
them throughout all the coasts of 
Israel by the hands of messengers, 
saying, Whosoever cometh not 
forth after Saul and after Samuel, 
so shall it be done unto his oxen. 
And the fear of the Lorp fell on the 
people, and they came out with one 
consent. 

8 And when he numbered them in 
Bezek, the children of Israel were 
three hundred thousand, and the 
men of Judah thirty thousand. 

9 And they said unto the messen- 
gers that came, Thus shall ye say 
unto the men of Jabesh-gilead, 
To morrow, by that time the sun 
be hot, ye shall have help. And 
the messengers came and shewed 
it to the men of Jabesh; and they 
were glad. 

10 Therefore the men of Jabesh 
said, To morrow we will come out 


a1 10] I SAMUEL. 


unto you,-and ye shall do with us! 


fea. 


my hand. And they answered, He 


B.C. 1095. 


all that seemeth good unto you. 
11 And it was so on the morrow, 


until the heat of the day: and it 
came to pass, that they which 
remained were scattered, so tha 
two of them were not left to- 
gether. 

12 And the people said unto Sam- 
uel, Who is he that said, Shall 
Saul reign over us? bring the men, 
that we may put them to death. 

13 And Saul said, There shall not 
a man be put to death this day: for 
to day the Lorp hath wrought sal- 


is witness. 


Samuel rehearses the deliver- 
ances of Jehovah. 


6 And Samuel said unto the peo- 
ple, Jt is the LorD that advanced 
Moses and Aaron, and that brought 
your fathers up out of the land of 
Egypt. 

7 Now therefore stand still, that I 
May ‘reason with you before the 
LorRD of all the righteous acts of 
the Lorp, which he did to you and 
to your fathers. 

8 When Jacob was come into 
Egypt, and your fathers cried unto 
the LorpD, then the Lorp 4sent 
Moses and Aaron, which brought 


yeren i re ' ag 

14 en said Samuel to peo- 
ple, Come, and let us go to Gilgal,|° Ps9-37-5,6. 
and renew the kingdom there. 


The kingdom renewed at Gilgal. 


“15 And all the people went to Gil- 
gal; and there they made Saul king|¢ Jud-4.2. 
before the Lorp in Gilgal; and f Jud.10.7 
there they sacrificed sacrifices of ¥ 
peace-offerings before the Lorp;/¢ Jud.3.12. 
and there Saul and all the men of h Jud.10.10. 
Israel rejoiced greatly. at 


forth your fathers out of Egypt, 
and made them dwell in this 
place. 

9 And when they forgat the Lorre 
their God, he ‘sold them into the 
hand of ¢Sisera, captain of the host. 
of Hazor, and into the hand of the 
/Philistines, and into the hand of the 
king of *Moab, and they fought 
against them. ; 

10 And they cried unto the Lorp, 
and ‘said, We have sinned, because 
we have forsaken the LorpD, and 


i Jud.2.13, have served Baalim and ‘Ashta- 

CHAPTER 12. note. roth: but now deliver us out of the 

Samuel’s proclamation of the |/ J¥4-6-14,23. pent OF ous enemies, and we will 
kingdom. k Jud.11.1. 5 


11 And the LorD sent JJerubbaal, 
and Bedan, and *Jephthah, and 
‘Samuel, and delivered you out of 
the hand of your enemies on every 
side, and ye dwelled safe. 


TAND Samuel said unto all Israel,| 71 sam.7.13. 
Behold, I have hearkened' unto 

your voice in all that ye said unto|”! Sam-11.2. 
me, and have made a king over}, Psa.19.9, 


you. note. 

2 And now, behold, the king walk- 
eth before you: and I am old and 
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons 
are with you: and I have walked 
before you from my childhood unto 
this day. 

3 Behold, here I am: witness 
against me before the Lorp, and 
before his anointed: whose ox have 
I taken? or whose ass have I 
taken? or whom have I defrauded? 
whom have I oppressed? or of 
whose hand have I received any 
bribe to “blind mine eyes therewith? 
and I will restore it you. 

4 And they said, “Thou hast not 
defrauded us, nor oppressed us, 
neither hast thou taken ought of 
any man’s hand. 

5 And he said unto them, The 
LORD is witness against you, and 
his anointed is witness this day, 
that ye have not found ought in 


330 


12 And when ye saw that Na- 
hash the king of the children of 
Ammion came against you, ye said 
unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign 
over us: when the LorpD your God 
was your king. 

13 Now therefore behold the 
king whom ye have chosen, and 
whom ye have desired! and, be- 
hold, the ‘LORD hath set a king 
over you. 

14 If ye will “fear the Lorp, and 
serve him, and obey his voice, and 
not rebel against the commandment 
of the Lorp, then shall both ye and 
also the king that reigneth over you 
pens following the Lorp your 

od: F 

15 But if _ye will not obey the 
voice of the LorD, but rebel against 
the commandment of the Lorp,: 
then shall the hand of the Lorp. 
be against you, as it was against 
your fathers. 


12 16] 


I SAMUEL 


[13 13 


The sign of thunder and rain. 


16 Now therefore stand and see 
this great thing, which the LorpD 
will do before your eyes. 

17 Js it not wheat harvest to day? 
I will call unto the LoRD, and he 
shall send thunder and rain; that 
ye may perceive and see that your 
wickedness is great, which ye have 
done in the sight of the Lorp, in 
asking you a king. 

18 So Samuel called unto the 
Lorp; and the Lorp sent thunder 
and rain that day: and all the peo- 
ple greatly feared the LorD and 
Samuel. 

19 And all the people said unto 
Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto 
the Lorp thy God, that we die not: 
for we have added unto all our sins 
this evil, to ask us a king. 

20 And Samuel said unto the 
people, Fear not: ye have done all 
this wickedness: yet turn not aside 
from following the LORD, but serve 
the LorbD with all your heart; 

21 And turn ye not aside: for 
then should ye go after vain 
things, which cannot profit nor 
deliver; for they are vain. a 

22 For the Lorp will not forsake 
his people for his great name’s 
sake: because it hath pleased the 
Lorp to make you his people. 

23 Moreover as for me;God forbid 
that I should sin against the LoRD 
in ceasing to pray for you: but I 
will teach you the good and the 
right way: 

24 Only @fear the LORD, and serve 
him in truth with all your heart: 
for consider how great things he 
hath done for you. 

925 But if ye shall still do wick- 
edly, ye shall be consumed, both ye 
and your king. 


CHAPTER 13. 
The self-will of Saul. 
AUL reigned one year; 
when he had reigned 
years over Israel, 

2 Saul chose him three thousand 
men of Israel; whereof two thou- 
sand were with Saul in Michmash 
and in mount Beth-el, and a thou- 
sand were with Jonathan in ’Gibeah 
of Benjamin: and the rest of the 
people he sent every man to his 
tent. i 

3 And Jonathan smote the garri- 
son of the Philistines that was in 
Geba, and the Philistines heard of 
at. And Saul blew the trumpet 


and 
two 


B.C. 1095. 


a Psa.19.9, 
note. 


61 Sam.10. 
26. 


c Josh.5.9. 
d Josh.7.2. 


e1 Sam.14. 
11; Jud.6.2. 


f Num.32.1- 
42. 

g Num.16.1- 
3,32-40. 

h 2 Chr.16.9. 


#1 Sam.15. 
11,28. 


331 


throughout all the land, saying, 
Let the Hebrews hear. 

4 And all Israel heard say that 
Saul had smitten a garrison of the 
Philistines, and that Israel also was 
jhad in abomination with the Philis- 
tines. And the people were called 
together after Saul to ¢Gilgal. 

5 And the Philistines gathered 
themselves together to fight with 
Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and 
six thousand horsemen, and people 
as the sand which rs on the sea 
shore in multitude: and they came 
up, and pitched in Michmash, east- 
ward from ¢Beth-aven. 

6 When the men of Israel saw that 
they were in a strait, (for the people 
were distressed,) then the people 
did ¢hide themselves in caves, and 
in thickets, and in rocks, and in 
high places, and in pits. 

7 And some of the Hebrews went 
over Jordan to the land of fGad 
and Gilead. As for Saul, he was 
yet in Gilgal, and all the people 
followed him trembling. 


Saul intrudes into the priest’s 
office. 


8 And he tarried seven days, ac- 
cording to the set time that Samuel 
had appointed: but Samuel came 
not to Gilgal; and the people were 
scattered from him. 

9 And Saul said, Bring hither a 


_|burnt-offering to me, and peace- 


offerings. And he offered the 
burnt-offering. 

10 And it came to pass, that as 
lsoon as he had made an end of 
\offering the burnt-offering, behold, 
iSamuel came; and Saul went out 
to meet him, that he might salute 


The divine rejection of Saul 
announced. 


thou done? And Saul said, Because 
I saw that the people were scattered 
from me, and that thou camest 
not within the days appointed, and 
that the Philistines gathered them- 
selves together at Michmash; 

12 Therefore said I, The Philis- 
tines will come down now upon me 
to Gilgal, and I have not made sup- 
plication unto the Lorp: I forced 
myself therefore, and offered a 
burnt-offering. 

13 And Samuel said to ‘Saul, 
Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast 
not kept the commandment of the 
Lorp thy God, which he ‘com- 


11 And Samuel said, What hast | 


13 14] I SAMUEL. [14 is 


a 

2 And Saul tarried in the utter- 
most part of Gibeah under a pome- 
granate tree which is in Migron: 
and the people that weré with him 
were about six hundred men; 

3 And 4Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, 
I-chabod’s brother, the son of Phin- 
ehas, the son of Eli, the Lorp’s 
priest in Shiloh, ‘wearing an ephod. 
And the people knew not that Jon- 
athan was gone. 

4 And between the passages, by 
which Jonathan sought to go over 
unto the Philistines’ garrison, there 
was a sharp rock on the one side, 
and a sharp rock on the other side: 
and the name of the one was Bo- 
zez, and the name of. the other 
Seneh. 

5 The forefront of the one was 
situate northward over against 
Michmash, and the other south- 


manded thee: for now would the 
Lorp have established thy king- 
dom upon Israel for ever. 

14 But now thy kingdom shall not 
continue: the LorpD hath sought 
him:a man 4after his own heart, and 
the Lorp hath commanded him to 
be captain over his people, because 
thou hast not kept that which the 
Lorp commanded thee. ; 

15 And Samuel arose, and gat him 
up from. Gilgal unto Gibeah of Ben- 
jamin. And Saul numbered the 
people that were present with him, 
about six hundred men. 

16 And Saul, and Jonathan his 
son, and the people that were pres- 
ent with them, abode in Gibeah of 
Benjamin: but the Philistines en- 
camped in Michmash. 

17 And the spoilers came out of 
the camp of the Philistines in three 
companies: one company turned ward over against Gibeah. 
unto the way that leadeth to 6 And Jonathan said to the young 
¢Ophrah, unto the land of Shual: _|¢ F-89.20; man that bare his armour, Come, 

18 And another company turned “~~ Jand let us go over unto the garri- 
the way to “Beth-horon: and an-|b Josh.18.23, {son of these uncircumcised: it may 
other company turned to the way]. 5.4 163 be that the Lorp will work for us: 
of the border that looketh to the ~~“ lfor there is no restraint to the 


yalley of Zeboim toward the wil-|d Called LorD to ‘save by many or by 
derness. fnew fool Wien. 

19 Now there was no smith found ees oh 7 And his armourbearer said unto 
throughout all the land of Israel: him, Do all that is in thine heart: 
for the Philistines said, Lest the 6 ie Senna turn thee; behold, I am with thee 
Hebrews make them swords or| }-3.3249; |according to thy heart. 
spears: Jude 11. 8 Then said Jonathan, Behold, 

20 But all the Israelites went we wili pass over unto these men, 


down to the Philistines, to sharpen|* pater e and we will discover ourselves unto 


every man his share, and his coul-| 2 Chr.14.11; |them. 


ter, and his axe, and his mattock. Rom.8.31. 9 If they say thus unto us, Tarry 
21 Yet they had a file for the mat-|,1 sam.13.6, {until we come to you; then we will 
tocks, and for the coulters, and for stand still in our place, and will not 
the forks, and for the axes, and to go up unto them. 
sharpen the goads. ; 10 But if they say thus, Come up 
22 So it came to pass in the day * lunto us; then we will go up: for the 
of battle, that there was neither Lorp hath delivered them into our 
sword nor spear found in the hand hand: and this shall be a sign unta 
of any of the people that were with us. 
Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul 11 And both of them discovered 
and with Jonathan his son was themselves unto the garrison of the 
there found. : ; Philistines: and the Philistines said, 
23 And the garrison of the Philis- Behold, the Hebrews come forth 
tines went out to the passage of out of the holes where they had 
Michmash. 8hid themselves. 
12 And the men of the garrison 
‘CHAPTER 14. oeions J hapa pe and his armour- 
; : earer, and said, Come up to us, 
J gentham s great victory. and we will shew you a thing, 
Now it came to pass upon a day, And Jonathan said unto his armour- 
‘ that Jonathan the son of Saul bearer, Come up after me: for the 
said unto the young man that bare LorD hath delivered them into the 
his armour, Come, and let us go hand of Israel. 
over to the Philistines’ garrison, 13 And Jonathan climbed up upon 
that is on the other side. But he his hands and upon his feet, and 
told not his father. . his armourbearer after him: and 


332 


they ¢fell before Jonathan; and his 


armourbearer slew after him. 

14 And that first slaughter, which 
Jonathan and his armourbearer 
made, was about twenty men, 
within as it were an half acre of 
land, which a yoke of oxen might 
plow. 

15: And there was “trembling in 
the host, in the field, and among all 
the people: the garrison, and the 
spoilers, they also trembled, and the 
earth quaked: so it was a very 
greattrembling. _ 

16 And the watchmen of Saul in 
Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and, 
behold, the multitude melted away, 
and they went on beating down one 
another. 

17 Then said Saul unto the people 
that were with him, Number now, 
and see who is gone from us. And 
when they had numbered, behold, 
Jonathan and his armourbearer 
were not there. 

18 And Saul said unto Ahiah, 
Bring hither the ark of God. For 
the ark of God was at that time 
with the children of Israel. 

19 And it came to pass, while Saul 
talked unto the priest, that the 
noise that was in the host of the 
Philistines went on and increased: 
and Saul said unto the priest, With- 
draw thine hand. 

20 And Saul and all the people 
that were with him assembled 
themselves, and they came to the 
battle: and, behold, every man’s 
sword was against his fellow, and 
there was avery great discomfiture. 

21 Moreover the Hebrews that 
were with the Philistines before 
that time, which went up with 
them into the camp from the 
country round about, even they 
also turned to be with the Israelites 
that were with Saul and Jonathan. 

22 Likewise all the men of Israel 
which had hid themselves in mount 
Ephraim, when they heard that the 
Philistines fled, even they also fol- 
lowed hard after them in the bat- 


tle. 

23 So the LorpD saved Israel that 
day: and the battle passed over 
unto Beth-aven. : 

24 And the men of Israel were 
distressed that day: for Saul chad 
adjured the people, saying, Cursed 
be the man that eateth any food 
until evening, that I may be avenged 
on mine enemies. So none of the 
people tasted any food. 

925 And all they of the land came! 


I SAMUEL. 


a Lev.26.8. 


b Deut.28.7; 
2 Ki.7.6; 
Job 18.11. 

¢ Cf.Josh.6. 
26. 

d Ex.3.8; 


Num.13.27; | 
Mt.3.4. 


e1 Sam.30. 
12. 


f Lev.3.17; 
17.10; Deut. 
12.23,24; 
Ezk.33.25; 
Acts 15.19, 
20. 


333 


[14 36 


to a wood; and there was “honey 
upon the ground. 

26 And when the people were 
come into the wood, behold, the 
honey dropped; but no man put his 
hand to his mouth: for the people 
feared the oath. 

27 But Jonathan heard not when 
his father charged the people with 
the oath: wherefore he put forth 
the end of the rod that was in his 
hand; and dipped it in an honey- 
comb, and put his hand to his 
mouth; and his eyes were ¢enlight- 
ened. 

28 Then answered one of the peo- 
ple, and said, Thy father straitly 
charged the people with an oath, 
saying, Cursed be the man that 
eateth any food this day. And 
the people were faint. 

29 Then said Jonathan, My father 
hath troubled the land: see, I pray 
you, how mine eyes have been en- 
lightened, because I tasted a little 
of this honey. 

30 How much more, if haply the 
people had eaten freely to day of 
the spoil of their enemies which 
they found? for had there not been 
now a much greater slaughter 
among the Philistines? 

31 And they smote the Philistines 
that day from Michmash to Aijalon: 
and the people were very faint. 

32 And:the people flew upon the 
spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, 
and calves, and slew them on the 
ground: and the people did eat 
them with the fblood. 

33 Then they told Saul, saying, 
Behold, the people sin against the 
Lorp, in that they eat with the 
blood. And he said, Ye have trans- 
gressed: roll a great stone unto me 
this day. F 

34 And Saul said, Disperse your- 
selves among the people, and say 


unto them, Bring me hither every 
man his ox, and every man his 
sheep, and slay them here, and eat; 
and sin not against the LorD in 
eating with the blood. And all the 
people brought every man his ox 
with him that night, and slew them 
there. 

35 And Saul built an altar unto 
the Lorp: the same was the first 
altar that he built unto the LorbD. 

36 And Saul said, Let us go down 
after the Philistines by night, and 
spoil them until the morning light, 
and let us not leave a man of them. 
And they said, Do whatsoever 
seemeth good unto thee. Then 


14 37] 


{ SAMUEL. 


\ a 
[15 : 


said the priest, Let us draw near] B.C. 1087. 


hither unto God. 

37 And Saul asked counsel of God, 
Shall I go down after the Philis- 
tines? wilt thou deliver. them into 
the hand of Israel? But he an- 
swered him not that day. 

38 And Saul said, Draw ye near 
hither, all the chief of the people: 
and know and see wherein this sin 
hath been this day. ’ 

39 For, as the Lorp liveth, which 
saveth Israel, *though it be in Jona- 
than my son, he shall surely die. 
But there was not aman among all 
the people that answered him. 

40 Then said he unto all Israel, Be 
ye on one side, and I and Jonathan 
my son will be on the other side. 
And the people said unto Saul, Do 
what seemeth good unto thee. 

41 Therefore Saul said unto the 
Lorp God of Israel, 5Give a perfect 
Jot. And Saul and Jonathan were 
taken: but the people escaped. 

42 And Saul said, Cast Jots be- 
tween me and Jonathan my son. 
And Jonathan was taken. 

43 Then Saul said to Jonathan, 
Tell me what thou hast done. And 
Jonathan told him, and said, I did 
but taste a little honey with the end 
of the rod that was in mine hand, 
and, lo, I must die. 

44 And Saul answered, God do so 
and more also: ‘for thou shalt 
surely die, Jonathan. 

45 And the people said unto Saul, 
Shall Jonathan die, who’ hath 
wrought this great salvation in 
Israel? God forbid: as the Lorp 
liveth, there shall not one hair of 
his head fall to the ground; for he 
hath wrought ¢with God this day. 
So the people rescued Jonathan, 
that he died not. 

46 Then Saul went up from fol- 
lowing the Philistines: and the Phi- 
listines went to their own place. 
47 So Saul took the kingdom over 

| Israel, and fought against all his 
enemies on every side, against 
Moab, and against the children of 
Ammon, and against Edom, and 
against the kings of Zobah, and 
against the Philistines: and whith- 
ersoever he turned himself, he 
vexed them. 

48 And he gathered an host, and 
smote the ‘Amalekites, and deliv- 
ered Israel out of the hands of them 
that spoiled them. 

49 Now the sons of Saul were 
Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchi- 
shua: and the names of his two 


a Cf.v.44. 


6 Cf. Josh.7. 
14-18. 


c Cf.v.39. 

d 2 Chr.19.11; 
Isa.13.3; 

2 Cor.6.1; 
Phil.2.12,13. 

e Ex.17.16. 

f1Sam.9.16. 

g Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs. 
1-23; 1 Sam. 
16.1-13.(Gen. 
1.26; Zech. 
12.8.) 

h Ex.17.8-14; 
Deut.25.17- 
19, 

# Num.24.20. 

Jj Jud.1.16; 4. 
11-17; 1 Chr, 
2.55, 


& v.18, 


334 


daughters were these ; the name of 
the firstborn Merab, and the name 
of the younger Michal: J 

50 And the name of Saul’s wife 
was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahi- 
maaz: and the name of the captain 
of his host was Abner, the son of 
Ner, Saul’s uncle. 

51 And Kish was the father. of 
Saul; and Ner the father of Abner 
was the son of Abiel. i 

52 And there was sore war against 
the Philistines all the days of Saul: 
and when Saul saw any strong man, 
or any valiant man, he took him 
unto him. 


CHAPTER 15. 


Saul’s incomplete obedience. 
(Cf. Gen. 11. 31.) 


GAMUEL also said unto/Saul, The 

LorD sent me to anoint thee to 
be £king over his people, over Israel: 
now therefore hearken thou unto 
the voice of the words of the LorD. 

2 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, I 
remember that which “Amalek did 
to Israel, how he laid wart for him 
in the way, when he came up from 
Egypt. 

3 Now go and smite Amalek, and 
utterly ‘destroy all that they have, 
and spare them not; but slay both 
man and woman, infant and suck- 
ling, ox and sheep, camel and ass. 

4 And Saul gathered the people 
together, and numbered them in 
Telaim, two hundred thousand foot- 
ee and ten thousand men of Ju- 

ah. 

5 And Saul came to a city of Ama- 
lek, and laid wait in the valley. — 

6 And Saul said unto the jKen- 
ites, Go, depart, get you down from 
among the Amalekites, lest I de- 
stroy you with them: for ye shewed 
kindness to all the children of 
Israel, when they came up out of 
Egypt. So the Kenites departed 
from among the Amalekites. 

7 And Saul smote the Amalekites 
from Havilah until thou comest to 
Shur, that is over against Egypt. 

8 And he took Agag the king of 
the Amalekites alive, and utterly 
destroyed all the people with the 
edge of the sword. 

9 ‘But Saul and the people spared 
Agag, and the best of the sheep, and 
of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and 
the lambs, and all that was good, 
and would not utterly destroy them: 
but every thing that was vile and 
‘refuse, that they destroyed utterly. 


15 10] I SAMUEL. (16 1 


10 Then came the word of the] B.c. 1079. 23 For rebellion is as the sin of 
LorpD unto Samuel, saying, witchcraft, and stubbornness is as 
11 It ¢repenteth me that I have iniquity and idolatry. ¢Because 
set up Saul to be king: for he is thou hast rejected the word of the 
turned back from following me, and LorpD, he hath also rejected thee 
hath not performed my command- from being king. 
ments. And it grieved Samuel; and 24 And Saul said unto Samuel, I 
he cried unto the LorD all night. have sinned: for I have transgressed 

12 And when Samuel rose early to the commandment of the LORD, 
meet Saul in the morning, it was and thy words: because I feared the 
told Samuel, saying, Saul came to people, and obeyed their voice. 
Carmel, and, behold, he set him up 25 Now therefore, I pray thee, 
a place, and is gone about, and pardon my sin, and turn again with 
passed on, and gone down to Gil- me, that I may worship the LorpD. 
gal. 26 And Samuel said unto Saul, I 

13 And Samuel came to Saul: and will not return with thee: for thou 
Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou hast rejected the word of the LorD, 
of the Lorn: I have performed the and the LorpD hath rejected thee 
commandment of the LORD. from being king over Israel. 

14 And Samuel said, What mean- 27 And as Samuel turned about to 
eth then this bleating of the sheep go away, he laid hold upon the skirt 
in mine ears, and the lowing of the of his mantle, and it rent. 
oxen which I hear? 28 And Samuel said unto him, 

15 And Saul said, They have The Lorp hath rent the kingdom 
brought them from the Amalekites: of Israel from thee this day, and 
for the people spared the best of the hath given it to a neighbour of 
sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice|¢ Zech.8.14, thine, that is better than thou. 


unto the Lorp thy God; and the| 7°f* 29 And also the Strength of Israel 
rest we have utterly destroyed. “ b Prov.28.13. |will not lie noe peepentty Hor he is 
Bro, chee Samuel seid nee oe che|<Fense58 {0 Then he aid, 1 have summed: 
Lorp hath said to me this night.! Prov.213; |yet honour me now, I pray thee, 
And he said unto him, Say on. Isa.l11-17; |\before the elders of my people, and 
17 And Samuel said, When thou Wain pelos) zereal: and ine Sone as 
wast little in thine own sight, wast| Heb.10.4-10. |me, that I may worship the LORD 
La eae aed a Joa cae a errs turned again after 
ointed thee king over isso 10.26: 12.48; Berl and Saul worshipped the 
18 And the LorD sent thee on a} 15.22. ORD. ; f 
journey, and said, Go and utterly 32 Then said Samuel, Bring ye 
destroy the sinners the Amalekites, hither to me Agag the king of the 
and fight against them until they Seen sna spas sara uate 
be consumed. im delicately. ni gag said, 
19 Wherefore then didst thou not Surely the bitterness of death is 
obey the voice of the LorD, but past. ; 
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst 33. And Samuel said, As thy sword 
evil in the sight of the LorpD? hath made women childless, so 
20 And Saul said unto Samuel, shall thy mother be childless among 
Yea, I have ‘obeyed the voice of women. And Samuel hewed_Agag 
the Lorp, and have gone the way in pieces before the Lorp in Gilgal. 
which the Lorp sent me, and have 34 Then Samuel went to Ramah; 
brought Agag the king of Amalek, and Saul went up to his house to 
and have utterly destroyed the Ghee Ke out : ; 
Amalekites. nd Samuel came no more te 
21 But the people took of the see Saul until the day of his death: 
spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of nevertheless Samuel mourned for 
the things which should have been Saul: and the LORD ¢repented that 
utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto he had made Saul king over Israel. 
the Lorp thy God in Gilgal. 
22 And Samuel said, “Hath the CHAPTER 16. 
LorD as great delight in burnt The choice of David to be king. 
offerings and sacrifices, as in obey- 4 
ing the voice of the LoRD? Behold, yp ND the LorD said unto Samuel, 
to obey is better than sacrifice, and How long wilt thou mourn for 
to hearken than the fat of rams. Saul, seeing I have rejectedhim from 


335 


,. i ae ht i. 
1 . Ay plo Ch ee 


16 2] - I SAMUEL. [16 23 


reigning over Israel? fill thine horn} B.c.1063. jof a beautiful countenance, an 
wit olf and go, I will send thee to goodly to look to. And the Lorp 
Jesse the Beth-lehemite: = I have . a Arise, anoint him: for this is 
rovided mea “king among his sons. cs : 
ole Samuel den How can I go? 13 Then Samuel took the horn of 
if Saul hear it, he will killme. And oil, and anointed him in the midst 
the LorD said, Take an heifer with of his brethreri: and the ‘Spirit of 
thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice the LORD came upon David from 
to the Lorp. that day forward. So Samuel rose 
3 And call Jesse to the “ap a reed up, and went to Ramah. 
and I will shew thee what thou = bas 
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto David is br euene to Saul. 
me him whom I name unto thee. 14 But the Spirit of the Lorp de- 
4 And Samuel did that which the parted from Saul, and an evil spirit 
LorD spake, and came to Beth- from the LORD troubled him. : 
lehem. And the elders of the town 15 And Saul’s servants said unto 
trembled at his coming, and said, him, Behold now, an-evil spirit from 
Comest thou peaceably? God troubleth thee. 
5 And he said, Peaceably: I am 16 Let our lord now command 
come to sacrifice unto the Lorpb: thy servants, which are before 


sanctify yourselves, and come with|¢ Kingdom .|thee, to seek out a man, who is a 
me to the sacrifice. And he sancti-| {07 vs. |cunning player on an harp: and it 


fied Jesse and his sons, and called ESM shall come to pass, when the evil 
them to the sacrifice. ; 1.26; Zech. | spirit from God is upon thee, that he 
6 And it came to pass, when they| 128-) shall play with his hand, and thou 


were come, that he looked on Eliab,|» Isa.ss.¢,9.  |Shalt be well. 

and said, Surely the Lorp’s an- 17 And Saul said unto his ser- 

ointed is before him. oy el ALS vants, Provide me now a man that 
7 But the LorD said unto Samuel, ae can play well, and bring Aim to 

Look not on his countenance, or on|¢2Sam.7.8; |me. ; : 

the height of his stature; because Ij 5S9.78- 18 Then answered one of the ser- 

have refused him: for the Lorp ; vants, and said, Behold, I have 

seethnotasmanseeth;formanlook-|e Holy Spirit. |seen a son of Jesse the Beth-lehem- 


eth on the ‘outward appearance, but| Y3i31# lite, that is cunning in playing, and 
the Lorp looketh on the heart. 20,23. (Gen. |A Mighty valiant man, and a man 


8 Then Jesse called Abinadab,} 1.2; Mal.2. " lof war, and prudent in matters, and 
and mede him pass beforé Samuel.| 15:) a comely person, and the Lorp is 


And he said, Neither hath the with him. 
LorpD chosen this. : 19 Wherefore Saul sent messen- 

9 Then Jesse made Shammah to gers unto Jesse, and said, Send me 
pass by. And he said, Neither hath David thy son, which is with the 
the Lorpb chosen this. sheep. 

10 Again, Jesse made seven of his 20 And Jesse took an ass Jaden 
sons to pass before Samuel. And with bread, and a bottle of wine, 
Samuel said unto Jesse, The LorpD and a kid, and sent them by David 
hath not-chosen these. his son unto Saul. 

11 And Samuel said unto Jesse, 21 And David !came to Saul, and 
Are here all thy children? And he stood before him: and he loved him 
said, There remaineth yet - the greatly; and he became his armour- 
youngest, and, behold, he keepeth bearer. - . 
the 4sheep. And Samuel said unto 22 And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, 
Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we Let David, I pray thee, stand be- 
will not sit down till he come hither. fore me; for he hath found favour 

° . : in my sight. 
David anointed to be king. : 23 And it came to pass, when the 
_12 And he sent, and brought him evil spirit from God was upon Saul, 
in. Now he was ruddy, and withal that David took an harp, and 


1 Cf.-1 Sam. 17. 58, 56. The order of events is: (1) David, whose skill on the 
harp, and valour in the combat with the lion and bear (1 Sam. 17. 34, 36) were 
known to “one of the servants” of Saul, was brought to play before the king (1 Sam. 
16. 17, 18). (2) David returns to Bethlehem (1 Sam. 17.15). (3) David is sent to 
Saul’s camp (1 Sam, 17. 17, 18) and performs his great exploit. C4) Saul’s question 
(1 Sam. 17. ss, 56) implies only that he had forgotten the name of David’s father 
—not remarkable certainly in an oriental king. } 

336 


. 


I 


played with his hand: so Saul was 
refreshed, and was well, and the 
evil spirit departed from him. 


rena 
| CHAPTER 17. 


© The defiance of Israel by 
Goliath. 


ol hed the Philistines gathered to- 
gether their armies to battle, 
and were gathered together at 
Shochoh, which belongeth to Ju- 
dah, and pitched between Shochoh 
and Azekah, in Ephes-dammim. 

2 And Saul and the men of Israel 
were gathered together, and pitched 
by the valley of Elah, and set the 
battle in array against the Philis- 
tines. s 

3 And the Philistines stood on a 
mountain on the one side, and Israel 
stood-on a mountain on the other 
side: and there was a valley be- 
tween them. 

4 And there went out a champion 
out of the camp of the Philistines, 
named Goliath, of Gath, whose 
height was six cubits and a 
‘span. 

5 And he had an helmet of brass 
upon his head, and he was armed 
with a coat of mail; and the weight 
of the coat was five thousand 
shekels of brass. 

6 And he had greaves of brass 
upon his legs, and a target of brass 
between his shoulders. 

7: And the staff of his spear was 
like a weaver’s beam; and _ his 
spear’s head weighed six hundred 
shekels of iron: and one bearing a 
shield went before him. 

8 And he stood and cried unto the 
armies of Israel, and said unto 
them, Why are. ye come out to set 
your battle in array? am notI a 
Philistine, and ye servants ‘to Saul? 
choose you a man for you, and let 
him come down to me. 

9 If he be able to fight with me, 
and to kill me, then will we be your 
servants: but if I prevail against 
him, and kill him, then shall ye be 
our servants, and serve us. 

10 And the Philistine said, I defy 
the armies of Israel this day; give 


me a man, that we may fight to-|. 


gether. 


11 When Saul and all Israel heard) 


those words of the Philistine, they 
were dismayed, and greatly afraid. 

12 Now David was the ‘son of 
that Ephrathite of Beth-lehem-ju- 
dah, whose name was Jesse; and he 
had ¢eight sons: and the man went 


SAMUEL. [17 26 


among men for an old man in the 
days of Saul. , 

13 And the three eldest sons of 
Jesse went and followed Saul to the 
battle: and the names of his three 
sons that went to the battle were 
Eliab the firstborn, and next unto 
him Abinadab, and the third Sham- 
mah. 

14 And David was the youngest: 
and the three eldest followed Saul. 


David ts sent to the army of 
Saul. 


15 But David went and returned 
from Saul to ¢feed his father’s sheep 
at Beth-lehem. 

16 And the Philistine drew near 
morning and evening, and pre- 
sented himself forty days. 

17 And Jesse said unto David his 
son, Take now for thy brethren an 
fephah of this parched corn, and 
these ten loaves, and run to the 
camp to thy brethren; 

18 And carry these ten cheeses 
unto the captain of their thousand, 
and 4look how thy brethren fare, 
and take their pledge. 


a One cubit = 
1 ft. 5 in. 


b One span = 


about 9 in, 19 Now Saul, and they, and all the 
cRuth 4.22, |men of Israel, were in the valley of 
Elah, fighting with the Philistines. 

a Caviar 20 And David rose up early in the 

ay morning, and left the sheep with a 

é1Sam.16. keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse 

11,19. pe aie and he came 

n= |to the trench, as the host. was going 

sure te forth to the fight, and shouted for 
Gen37.14 the battle. . 

8 en, 21 For Israel and the Philistines 


had put the battle in array, army 
against army. : 

22 And David left his carriage in 
the hand of the keeper of the car- 
riage, and ran into the army, and 
came and saluted his brethren. 

23 And as he talked with them, 
behold, there came up the cham- 
pion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath 
by name, out of the armies of the 
Philistines, and spake according to 
the same words: and David heard 
them. 

24 And all the men of Israel, when 
they saw the man, fled ‘from him, 
and were sore afraid. . 

25 And the men of Israel said, 
Have ye seen this man that is come 
up? surely to defy Israel is he come 
up: and it shall be, that the man 
who killeth him, the king will enrich 
him with great riches, and will give 
him his daughter, and make his 
father’s house free in Israel. 

26 ‘And David spake to the men 


337 


17 27] 


that stood by him, saying, What 
shall be done to the man that kill- 
eth this Philistine, and taketh away 
the reproach from Israel? for who 
is this uncircumcised Philistine, 
that he should defy the armies of 
the ¢living God? : 
27 And the people answered him 
after this manner, saying,So shallit 
be done to the man that killeth him. 
28 And Eliab his eldest brother 
heard when he spake unto the men; 
and Eliab’s “anger was kindled 
against David, and he said, Why 
camest thou down hither? and with 
whom hast thou left those few 
sheep in the wilderness? I know 
thy pride, and the naughtiness of 
thine heart; for thou art come down 
that thou mightest see the battle. 
29 And David said, What have I 
now done? Js there not a cause? 
30 And he turned from him to- 
ward another, and spake after the 
same manner: and the people an- 
swered him again after the former 
manner. 


David’s victory over Goliath. 


31 And when the words were 
heard which David spake, they re- 
hearsed them before Saul: and he 
sent for him. 

32 And David said to Saul, Let no 
man’s heart ‘fail because of him; 
thy servant will go and fight with 
this Philistine. 

33 And Saul said to David, Thou 
art not able to go against this Phi- 
listine to fight with him: for thou 
art but a youth, and he a man of 
war from his youth: 

34 And David said unto Saul, 
Thy servant kept his father’s sheep, 
and there came a lion, and a bear, 
and took a lamb out of the flock: 

35 And I went out after him, and 
smote him, and delivered rt out of 
his mouth: and when he arose 
against me, I caught him by his 
beard, and smote him, and slew 
him. 

36 Thy servant slew both the lion 


and the bear: and this uncircum- 
cised Philistine shall be as one of 
them, seeing he hath defied the 
armies of the living God. 

37 David said moreover, The 
Lorp that delivered me out of the 
paw of the lion, and out of the paw 
of the bear, he will deliver me out 
of the hand of this Philistine. And 
Saul said unto David, Go, and the 
¢LORD be with thee. 

38 And Saul armed David with 


I SAMUEL. . 


a Deut.5.26. 
6 Gen.37.4,8. 
c Deut.20.2,3. 


d 1 Sam.20.13; 
1 Chr.22.11. 


e 2 Sam.3.8; 
2 Ki.8.13. 


f 1 Ki.20.10. 


g 2 Sam.22.33; 
Psa.124.8; 
Heb.11. 
33,34. 


hv.10. 
tv.51. 


j Josh.4,24; 
1 Ki.8.43; 
18.36; 2 Ki. 
19.19; Psa. 
46.10; Isa. 
52.10. 


k Psa.44.6,7; 


Hos.1.7; 
Zech.4.6. 


338 


B.C. 1063. 


[17 4 


his armour, and he put an helmet of 
brass upon his head; also he armed 
him with a coat of mail. ; 

39 And David girded his sword 
upon his armour, and he assayed to 
go; for he had not proved it. And 
David said unto Saul, I cannot go 
with these; for I have not proved 
them. And David put them off 


him. 

40 And he took his staff in his 
hand, and chose him five smooth 
stones out of the brook, and put 
them in a shepherd’s bag which he 
had, even in a scrip; and his sling 
was in his hand: and he drew near 
to the Philistine. 

41 And the Philistine came on 
and drew near unto David; and 
the man that bare the shield went 
before him. 

42 And when the Philistine looked 
about, and saw David, he disdained 
him: for he was but a youth, and 
ruddy, and of a fair countenance. 

43 And the Philistine said unto 
David, Am I a «dog, that thou com- 
est to me with staves? And the 
Philistine cursed David by his gods. 

44 And the Philistine fsaid to Da- 
vid, Come to me, and I will give 
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, 
and to the beasts of the field. 

45 Then said David to the Philis- 
tine, Thou comest to me with a 
sword, and with a spear, and with 
a shield: but £I come to thee in the 
name of the Lorp of hosts, the God 
of the armies of Israel, whom thou 
hast ‘defied. 

46 This day will the Lorp delive 
thee into mine hand; and I will 
smite thee, and ‘take thine head 
from thee; and I will give the car- 
cases of the host of the Philistines 
this day unto the fowls of the air, 
and to the wild beasts of the earth; 
that all the earth may Jknow that 
there is a God in Israel. 

47 And all this assembly shall 
Rknow that the Lorp saveth not 
with sword and spear: for the bat- 
tle is the Lorp’s, and he will give 
you into our hands. 

48 And it came to pass, when the 
Philistine arose, and came and drew 
nigh to meet David, that David 
hastened, and ran toward the army 
to. meet the Philistine. 

49 And David put his hand in his. 
bag, and took thence a stone, and 
slang it, and smote the Philistine in 
his forehead, that the stone sunk 
into his forehead; and he fell upon 
his face to the earth. 


a7 50] I SAMUEL. [18 17 
50 So David prevailed over the} Bc. ey | to hi ’ i 
Philistine with a “sling and with aj Ieregigems his 
ones sae the Philistine, and 5 And David went out whitherso- 
aes See: apr gee no sword CveR, Saul esent bi end behaved 
a. imself wisely: an aul set him 
51 Therefore David ran, and over the men of war, and he was 
pod eee Be Serge and took accepted in the sight of all the peo- 
cine Se eee Siamese ae 
5 : servants. 
cut off his head therewith. And 6 And it 
when the Philistines saw their came, when ‘Dawe eee pee 
Be ecion wes deat bey. bfled. from the slaughter of the Philistine, 
ae ye the anence sed and of that the women came out of all 
us A ees a shouted, and pur- cities of Israel, singing and dancing, 
Re Ge ae eee Deu Gee eee 
3 with joy, and with instruments of 
of Ekron. And the wounded of the |musick. 
peuistinss fell down by the way 7 And the women answered one 
to annals, even unto Gath, and another as they played, and said, 
- See hire children of Israel re apes in pape eae dar an 
- avid his ten thousands. 
turned from chasing after the Phi- EPs P 
Beene cpolediberientsls judge, ee ee ee 
54 And David took the head of| 15.15. he endeavours twice to kill. 
the Philistine, and brought it to], 5y.4.33.34. 8 And Saul was very wroth, and 
Bruise! eos but he put his armour aa ths, saving, isplessed cea eae 
; 4 c Ct. - said, ey have ascribed unto Da- 
Bee, And, when Saul saw David go) 1°?! 7°fe- |vid ten thousands, and to me they 
ort pease ty ja Samussiners He tie d@1Sam.21.11. have ascribed but thousands: and 
Ss nine — is this youth? ex cam 1526. eee eae terete te 
And Abner said, As thy soul liv-|¢1sam.16.14. | 9 And Saul eyed David from that 
eth, O king, I cannot tell, f day and forward. 
56 And the king said, Enquire g1Sam.19.24. | 19 And it came to pass on the 
Bye" guhose ou ng Seatae an h1Sam.19.9, Bebe that the fevil spirit from 
nd as David returned from) 10- 'God came upon Saul, and he 
the slaughter of the Philistine, Ab- i Num.27.17; &prophesied in the midst of the 
ner took him, and brought him} 2 sam-5.2; house: and David played with his 
before Saul with the head of the} 1 Ki3.7. hand, as at other times: and there 
Philistine in his hand. _ j1Sam.17.25. |Was a Ajavelin in Saul’s hand. 
58 And Saul said to him, Whose “= 1 11 And Saul cast the javelin; for 
son art thou, thou young mam?|k1Sam.25.28. |he said, I will smite David even to 


And David answered, J am the son 
of thy servant Jesse the Beth-le- 
hemite. 

CHAPTER 18, 


The love-covenant of Jonatha 
and David. 4 


ND it came to pass, when he 
had made an end of speaking 
unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan 
was knit with the soul of David, 
and Jonathan loved him as his own 


soul. 

2 And Saul took him that day, 
and would let him go no more home 
to his father’s house. 

3 Then Jonathan and David 
made a covenant, because he loved 
him as his own soul. , 

4 And Jonathan stripped himself 
of the robe that was upon him, and 
gave it to David, and his garments, 


339 


the wall with it. And David 
avoided out of his presence twice. 

12 And Saul was afraid of David, 
because the LoRD was with him, 
and was departed from Saul. 

13 Therefore Saul removed him 
from him, and made him his cap- 
tain over a thousand; and he went 
out and came in before the people. 

14 And David behaved himself 
wisely in all his ways; and the 
LorpD was with him. 

15 Wherefore when Saul saw that 
he behaved himself very wisely, he 
was afraid of him. 

16 But all Israel and Judah loved 
David, ‘because he went out and 
came in before them, 

17 And Saul said to David, Be- 
|hold my elder daughter JMerab, her 
will I give thee to wife: only be thou 
valiant for me, and ‘fight the 
ILoORD’s battles. For Saul said, Let 


4 > F . a i = >, ee em AT he 4 yada kes 


I SAMUEL. 


30 Then the princes of the Philis- 
tines went forth: and it came to. 
pass, after they went forth, that 
David behaved himself more éwisely 
than all the servants of Saul; so 
that his name was much set Ly. 


CHAPTER 19. 


Saul’s third attempt fo kill 
David: David's fight. 


ND Saul spake to Jonathan his 
son, and to all his servants, 
that they should kill David. 
2 But Jonathan Saul’s son de- 
lighted *much in David: and Jona- 
than told David, saying, Saul my 


not mine hand be upon him, but let 
the hand of the Philistines be upon 


im, 

18 And David said unto %Saul, 
Who am I? and what is my life, or 
my father’s family in Israel, that I 
should be son in law to the king? 

19 Butit came to pass at the time 
when Merab Saul’s daughter should 
have been given to David, that she 
was given unto ‘Adriel the Meho- 
lathite to wife. 


Michal, Saul’s daughter, given 
to David. 


20 And Michal Saul’s daughter 
loved David: and they told Saul, 


B.C. 1063. 


and the thing pleased him. _ 4 father. seeketh to kill thee: now 

21 And Saul said, I will give him therefore, I pray thee, take heed to 
her, that she ey. ie 2! ate e ate thyself until vee Sik nse a 
and that the ¢hand of the ilis- in a secret place, and hide thyself: 
tines may be against him. Where- 3 And I will go out and stand 
fore Saul said to David, Thou shalt|c vs.21,25; beside my father in the field where 
this day be my son in law in the} 2Sam.12.9. |thou art, and I will commune with 
ibs had ‘Seay Honba emetiy ec| Ss Se Tea Pew airaei de oe cena 

nd Saul commanded hi: -| 9.21; 2 Sam. will te ee. 

vants, saying, Commune with Da-| 7-18. 4 And Jonathan spake good of 
vid secretly, and say, Behold, the], 2sam.21.3, |David unto Saul his father, and 
king hath delight in thee, and all said unto him, Let not the king sin 
his servants love thee: now there- dv.17. against his servant, against David; 
fore be the king’s son in law. e1Sam.14.24, |because he hath not sinned against 
set And gees ie ers weoe ee basi pond cage his Berrie 

ose words in the ears of David. 3.14. een to thee-ward very good: b 
And David said, Seemeth it to you), y.5, 5 For he ‘did put his life in his 
a light thing to be a king’s son in hand, and Jslew the Philistine, and 
law, seeing that I am a poor man,}/ 1 Sam.18.1. the RLORD wrought a great salva- 
and lightly esteemed? i Jud.12.3. tion for all Israel: thou sawest it, 

24 And the servants. of Saul told] _ 3 and didst rejoice: wherefore then 
him, saying, On this manner spake|71Sam.17. wilt thou sin against innocent blood, 


David. f pte to slay David without a cause? 
25 And Saul said, Thus shall ye|z1 Chr.11.14. | 6 And Saul hearkened unto the 
say to David, The king desireth not voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, 


any dowry, but an hundred fore- fe Sara.16.14e the Lorp liveth, he shall not 
skins of the Philistines, to be be slain. : 
favenged of the king’s enemies. 7 And Jonathan called David, 
But Saul thought to make David and Jonathan shewed him all those 
fall by the hand of the Philistines. things. And Jonathan brought 
26 And when his servants told David to Saul, and he was in his 
David these words, it pleased David presence, as in times past. : 
well to be the king’s son in law: 8 And there was war again: and 
and the days were not expired. David went out, and fought with 
27 Wherefore David arose and the Philistines, and slew them with 
went, he and his men, and slew of a great slaughter; and they fled 
the Philistines two hundred men; from him. 
and David brought their /foreskins, 9 And the evil spirit from the 
and they gave them in full tale to LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in 
the mS that ne mene De the sngis his house with his javelin in his 
son in law. n aul gave him hand: and Davi i i 
fee Ais daucissae to wife. hand. : SE Re ae 
nd Saul saw and knew that 10 And Saul sought * i 
the Lorp was with David, and that David even to the eon Oe UE 
Michal Saul’s daughter loved him. javelin; but he slipped away out of 
29 And Saul was yet the. more Saul’s presence, and he smote the 
afraid of David; and Saul became javelin into the wall: and David 
David’s enemy continually. fled, and escaped that night. 


11 Saul also sent messengers unto 
David’s house, to watch him, and 
to slay him in the morning: and 
Michal David’s wife told him, say- 
ing, If thou save not thy life to 
night, to morrow thou shalt be 
slain. 

12 So Michal let David down 
through a window: and he went, 
and fled, and escaped. 

13 And Michal took an image, 
and laid 7¢ in the bed, and put a 
pillow of goats’ hair for his bolster, 
and covered it with a cloth. 

14 And when Saul sent messengers 
to take David, she said, He is sick. 

15 And Saul sent the messengers 
again to see David, saying, Bring 
him up to me in the bed, that I may 
slay him. 

16 And when the messengers were 
come in, behold, there was an 
image in the bed, with a pillow of 
goats’ hazr for his bolster. 


B.C. 1063. 


a Josh.2.15. 

17 And Saul said unto Michal,}, 4 s3n4o0 
Why hast thou deceived me so,| 5,6. ~~ 
and sent away mine enemy, that he 
js escaped? And Michal answered 


c Holy Spirit. 


Saul, He said unto me, Let me go; nee es 
why should I kill thee? tent 4 . 
The Spirit of God protects David. 
d1Sam.10. 
18 So David fled, and escaped,| 10,12. 
and came to Samuel to Ramah, and 


told him all that Saul had done to e1Sam.27.1. 


es pad he pe Samuel went and|f1 Sam.19.2. 
welt in Naioth. 

19 And it was told Saul, sayine,|®7" 7 
Behold, David is at Naioth in Ra-j/ 1Sam.25. 
mah. 17. 

90 And Saul sent messengers tO] ;1Sam.18.3; 
take David: and when they Ysaw| 23-18. 
the company of the prophets proph- 
esying, and Samuel standing as 
appointed over them, the ‘Spirit of 
God was upon the messengers of 
Saul, and they also prophesied. 

21 And when it was told Saul, he 
sent other messengers, and they 
prophesied likewise. And Saul sent 
messengers again the third time, 
and they prophesied also. 

22 Then went he also to Ramah, 
and came to a great well that is in 
Sechu: and he asked and_ said, 
Where are Samuel and David? 
And one said, Behold, they be at 
WNaioth in Ramah. a 

93 And he went thither to Naioth 
jn Ramah: .and the Spirit of God 
‘was upon him also, and he went on, 
and prophesied, until he came to 
Naioth in Ramah. ‘ 4 

24 And he stripped off his clothes 
also, and prophesied before Samuel 


341 


I SAMUEL. 


in like manner, and lay down 


naked all that day and all that 


night. Wherefore they say, Js 
dSaul also among the prophets? 


CHAPTER 20. 
Jonathan protects David. 


ND David fled from Naioth in 

X% Ramah, and came and said be- 

fore Jonathan, What have I done? 

what is mine iniquity? and what is 

my sin before thy father, that he 
seeketh my life? 

2 And he said unto him, God for- 
bid; thou shalt not die: behold, my 
father will do nothing either great 
or small, but that he will shew it 
me: and why should my father 
hide this thing from me? it is not so. 

3 And David sware moreover, and 
said, Thy father certainly knoweth 
that I. have found grace in thine 
eyes; and he saith, Let not Jona- 
than know this, lest he be grieved: 
but ‘truly as the Lorp liveth, and 
as thy soul liveth, there is but a 
step between me and death. 

4 Then said Jonathan unto 
David, Whatsoever thy soul de- 
sireth, I will even do it for thee. 

5 And David said unto Jonathan, 
Behold, to morrow is the new moon, 
and I should not fail to sit with the 
king at meat: but let me go, that I 
may hide myself in the ‘field unto 
the third day at even. 

6 If thy father at all miss me, 
then say, David earnestly asked 
leave of me that he might run to 
gBeth-lehem his city: for there isa 
yearly sacrifice there for. all the 
family. 

7 If he say thus, Jt zs well; thy 
servant shall have peace: but if he 
be very wroth, then be sure that 
evil is ‘determined by him. 

8 Therefore thou shalt deal kindly 
with thy servant; for thou hast 
brought thy servant into a ‘cove- 
nant of the LORD with thee: not- 
withstanding, if there be in me 
iniquity, slay me thyself; for why 
shouldest thou bring me to thy 
father? ‘ 


9 And Jonathan said, Far be it 
from thee: for if I knew certainly, 


that evil were determined by my 
father to come upon: thee, then 
would not I tell it thee? 


10 Then said David to Jonathan, 


Who shall tell me? or what if thy 
father answer thee roughly? 

11 And Jonathan said unto 
David, Come, and let us go out into 


\ 


20 12] 


the field. And they went out both 
of them into the field. 

12 And Jonathan said unto David, 
O Lorp God of Israel, when I have 
sounded my father about to morrow 
any time, or the third day, and, 
behold, if there be good toward 
David, and I then send not unto 
thee, and shew it thee; 

13 The Lorp do so and much 
more to Jonathan: but if it please 
my father to do thee evil, then I 
will shew it thee, and send thee 
away, that thou mayest go in peace: 
and the LorpD be with thee, as he 
hath “been with my father. 

14 And thou shalt not only while 
yet I live shew me the kindness of 
the LorD, that I die not: 

15 But 4a/so thou shalt not cut 
off thy kindness from my house 
for ever: no, not when the LorpD 
hath cut off the enemies of David 
every one from the face of the 
earth. 

16 So Jonathan made a covenant 
with the house of David, saying, 
Let the Lorp even ‘require it at the 
hand of David’s enemies. 

17 And Jonathan caused David to 
swear again, because he loved him: 
for he loved him as he loved his 
own soul. 

18 Then Jonathan said to David, 
To morrow zs the new moon: and 
thou shalt be missed, because thy 
seat will be empty. 

19 And when thou hast stayed 
three days, then thou shalt go 
down quickly, and come to the place 
where thou didst hide thyself when 
the business was in hand, and shalt 
remain by the stone Ezel. 

20 And I will shoot three arrows 
on the side thereof, as though I 
shot at a mark. 

21 And, behold, I will send a lad, 
' saying, Go, find out the arrows. If 
I expressly say unto the lad, Be- 
hold, the arrows are on this side of 
thee, take them; then come thou: 
for there is peace to thee, and no 
hurt; as the Lorp liveth. 

22 But if I say thus unto the 
young man, Behold, the arrows are 
beyond thee; go thy way: for the 
Lorp hath sent thee away. 

23 And as touching the ¢matter 
which thou and I have spoken of, 
behold, the LorpD be between thee 
and me for ever. 

24 So David hid himself in the 
field: and when the new moon was 
come, the king sat him down to eat 
meat. : 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C 1062. 


a 1 Sam.10.7; 
11.6; 2 Sam. 
7.15. 

6 1 Sam.24.21; 
2 Sam.9.1,7. 

¢ 2 Sam4.7. 

d vs.14,15. 

é Lev.15.5. 

fv.6. 

g1Sam.19. 


h 1 Sam.18.11. 


[20. 36 


25 And the king sat upon his seat, 
as at other times, even upon a seat 
by the wall: and-Jonathan arose, 
and Abner sat by Saul’s side, and 
David’s place was empty. 

26 Nevertheless Saul spake not 
any thing that day: for he thought, 
omething.hath befallen him, he is 
not ¢clean; surely he is not clean. 

27 And it came to pass on the 
morrow, which was the second day 
of the month, that David’s place 
was empty: and Saul said unto 
Jonathan his son, Wherefore com- 
eth not the son of Jesse to meat, 
neither yesterday, nor to day? 

28 And Jonathan answered fSaul, 
David earnestly asked Jeave of me 
to go to Beth-lehem: 

29 And he said, Let me go, I pray 
thee; for our family hath a sacri- 
fice in the city; and my brother, he 
hath commanded me to be there: 
and now, if I have found favour in 
thine eyes, let me get away, I pray 
thee, and see my brethren. There- 
fore he cometh not unto the king’s 
table. 

30 Then Saul’s anger was kin- 
dled against Jonathan, and he said 
unto him, Thou son of the perverse 
rebellious woman, do not I know 
that thou hast chosen the son of 
Jesse to thine own confusior, and 
unto the confusion of thy mother’s 
nakedness? 

31 For as long as the son of Jesse 
liveth upon the ground, thou shalt 
not be established, nor thy king- 
dom. Wherefore now send and 
fetch him unto &me, for he shall 
surely die. 

32 And Jonathan answered Saul 
his father, and said unto him, 
Wherefore shall he be slain? what 
hath he done? 

33 And Saul cast a "javelin at 
him to smite him: whereby Jona- 
than knew that it was determined 
of his father to slay David. 

34 So Jonathan arose from the 
table in fierce anger, and did eat no 
meat the second day of the month: 
for he was grieved for David, be- 
cause his father had done him 
shame. 

35 And it came to pass in the 
morning, that Jonathan went out 
into the field at the time appointed 
wath David, and a little lad with 


36 And he said unto his lad, Run, 
find out now the arrows which I 
shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot 
an arrow beyond him. 


a 


20 37) I SAMUEL. [221 
a 
37 And when the lad was come to) B.C. 1062.__|came out, and the vessels of the 
the place of the arrow which Jona-|~———SWS young meen ely, and the bread 
than had shot, Jonathan cried after 7s in a manner common, yea, though 
the lad, and said, Js not the arrow it were sanctified this day in the 
“beyond thee? % vessel. 
38 And Jonathan cried after the 6 So the priest gave him hallowed 
lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. |bread: for there was no bread there 
And Jonathan’s lad gathered up but the ¢shewbread, that was taken 
the arrows, and came to his mas- from before the LORD, to put hot 
ter. ‘bread in the day when it was taken 
39 But the lad knew not any away. 
thing: only Jonathan and David 7 Now a certain man of the ser- 
knew the matter. vants of Saul was there that day, 
40 And Jonathan gave his artil- detained before the LorD; and his 
lery unto his lad, and said unto Iname was “Doeg, an Edomite, the 
him, Go, carry them to the city. \chiefest of the herdmen that be- 
GAL And as soon as the lad was longed to Saul. 

gone, David arose out of a place 8 And David said unto Ahimelech, 
toward the south, and fell on his And is there not here under thine 
face to the ground, and bowed him- hand spear or sword? for I have 
self three times: and they kissed neither brought my sword nor my 
one another, and wept one with weapons with me, because the 
another, until David exceeded. king’s business required haste. 

42 And Jonathan said to David,|¢ vs.21,22. 9 And the priest said, The sword 
Go in peace, forasmuch as we have], , san143 of Goliath the Philistine, ‘whom 
sworn both of us in the name of the] called Ahiah, |thou slewest in the valley of Elah, 
Lorpb, saying, The LorD be be-} also Abia- | behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth 
tween me and thee, and between} ‘?#*- behind the ephod: if thou wilt take 
my seed and thy seed for ever.| ¢ £x.25.30: that, take it: for there 1s no other 
And he arose and departed: and} Lev.24.5-9. jsave that here. And David said, 
Jonathan went into the city. ¢Ex 25.30 There is none like that; give it 

note. me. 
CHAPTER 21. ee 10 And David arose, and fied that 

€ am.22.9; | 

David flees a SRS and to| Psa.52, title. Ve tanneie Shee d>wentsta 
ete f1Sam.17.2, | 11 And the servants of Achish 
HEN came David to Nob to} % said unto him, Js not this David the 
| bAhimelech the priest: and! ¢ Psa.34.4; king of the land? did they not sing 
_Ahimelech was afraid at the meet-| 56.3. one to another of him in dances, 
ing of David, and said unto him, Owes ee saying, Saul hath slain his thou- 
Why art thou alone, and no man)” wict. ts. \sands, and David his ten thousands? 
Heb.11.38. 12 And David laid up these words 


with thee? 

2 And David said unto Ahimelech 
‘the priest, The king hath com- 
“manded me a business, and hath 
‘said unto me, Let no man know 
‘any thing of the business where- 
about I send thee, and what I have 
commanded thee: and I have ap- 
pointed my servants to such and 
such a place. 

3 Now therefore what is under 
thine hand? give me five loaves of 
bread in mine hand, or what there 
is present. 

4 And the priest answered David, 
and said, There is no common 
bread under mine hand, but there 
is ‘hallowed bread; if the young 


men have kept themselves at least) 


from women. 

5 And David answered the priest, 
and said unto him, Of a truth 
women have been kept from us 
about these three days, since I 


343 


in his heart, and was 4sore afraid 
of Achish the king of Gath. 

13 And he changed his behaviour 
before them, and feigned himself 
mad in their hands, and scrabbled 
on the doors of the gate, and let his 
spittle fall down upon his beard. 

14 Then said Achish unto his ser- 
vants, Lo, ye see the man is mad: 
wherefore then have ye brought 
him to me? 

15 Have I need of mad men, that 
ye have brought this fellow to play 
the mad man in my presence? shall 
this fellow come into my house? 


CHAPTER 22. 


David in rejection gathers his 
mighty men. 


epee thersoreccaaien thence, 
and escaped to the cave ?Adul- 


‘Jam: and when his brethren and 


22 2] I 


all his father’s house heard it, they 
went down thither tohim. . 

2 @And every one that.was in dis- 
tress, and every one that was in 
debt, and every one that was dis- 
contented, gathered themselves 
unto him; and he became a °captain 
over them: and there were with 
him about four hundred men. 


David’s wanderings and dangers. 


3 And David went thence to Miz- 
peh of Moab: and he said unto the 
king of Moab, Let my father and 
my mother, I pray thee, come forth, 
and be with you, till I know what 
God will do for me. 

4 And he brought them before the 
king of Moab: and they dwelt with 
him all the while that David was in 
the hold. 

5 And the prophet Gad said unto 
David, Abide not in the hold; de- 
part, and get thee into the land of 
Judah. Then David departedsand 
came into the forest of Hareth. 

6 When Saul heard that David 
was discovered, and the men that 


were with him,-(now Saul abode in 
Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, hav- 
ing his spear in his hand, and all his 
servants were standing about him:;) 

7 Then Saul said unto his servants 
that stood about him, Hear now, ye 
Benjamites; will the “son of Jesse 
give every one of you fields and 
vineyards, and make you all cap- 
tains of thousands, and captains of 
hundreds; 

8 That all of you have conspired 
against me, and there js none that 
sheweth me that my son hath-made 
a league with the son of Jesse, and 
there is none of you that is sorry for 
me, or sheweth unto me that my son 
hath stirred up my servant against 
me, to lie in wait, as at this day? 

9 Then answered Doeg the Edom- 
ite, which was set over the servants 
of Saul, and said, I saw the son of 
Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech 
the son of Ahitub. 

10 And he enquired of the Lorp 
for him, and gave him victuals, and 
gave him the sword of Goliath the 
Philistine. 

* 11 Then the king sent to call 
Ahimelech the priest, the son of 
Ahitub, and ali his father’s house, 
the priests that were in Nob: and 
they came all of them to the king. 

12 And Saul said, Hear now, thou 


Here I am, my lord. 


13 And Saul said unto him. Why! 


son of Ahitub. And he answered, |! 


Le * Se 2}, oP aw 


SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1062. |have ye conspired against me, tho 
and the son of Jesse, in that tho 
hast given him bread, and a sword, 
and hast enquired of God for him, 
that he should rise against me, to 
lie in wait, as at this day? 

14 Then Ahimelech answered the 
king, and said, And who fs so ¢faith- 
ful among all thy servants as David, 
which is the king’s son in law, and 
goeth at thy bidding, and is hon- 
ourable in thine house? 

15 Did I then begin to enquire of 
God for him? be it far from me: let 
not the king impute any thing unto 
his servant, nor to all the house of 
my father: for thy servant knew 
nothing of all this, less or more. 

16 And the king said, Thou shalt 
surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all 
&thy father’s house. 

17 And the king said unto the 
footmen that stood about him,Turn, 
and slay the priests of the Lorp; 
because their hand also is with 
David, and because they knew 
when he fled, and did not shew it to 
me. But the servants of the king 
would not put “forth their hand to 
fall upon the priests of the Lorn. - 

18 And the king said to Doeg, 
Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. 
And Doeg the Edomite turned, and 
he fell upon the priests, and slew on 
that day fourscore and five persons 
that did wear a linen ephod. 

19 And ‘Nob, thecity of the priests, 
smote he with the edge of the sword, 
both men and women, children and 
sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and 
sheep, with the edge of the sword. 

20 And one of the sons of Ahime- 
lech the son of Ahitub, named 7Abi- 
athar, escaped, and fled after David. 

21 And Abiathar shewed David 
that Saul had slain the Lorp’s 
priests. } 


@ Jud.11.3.. 
b Heb.2.10. 


¢1Sam.8.14. 
d Num.27.21. 


e€1Sam.19. 
4,5; 24.11. 


jf Imputa- 
tion. 2 Sam. 
19.18,19. 
(Lev.25.50; 
Jas.2.23.) 


g Deut.24.16. 
h Ex.1.17. 
tvs.9,11. 


j1Sam.23.6; 
1 Ki.2,26,27. 


CHAPTER 23. 
David’s wanderings and 
adventures. 

(HEN they told David, saying, 
_ Behold, the Philistines fight 
jagainst Keilah, and they rob the 
threshingfloors r 
| 


A a 
23 2] 


2 Therefore David enquired of the 
LORD, saying, Shall I go and smite 
these Philistines? And the Lorp 
said unto David, Go, and smite the 
Philistines, and save Keilah. 

3. And David’s men said unto him, 
Behold, we be afraid here in Judah: 
how much more then if we come to 
Keilah against the armies of the 
Philistines? 

4 Then David enquired of the 
LorpD yet again. And the LorpD 
answered him and said, Arise, go 
down to Keilah; for I will deliver 
‘the Philistines into thine hand. 

5 So David and his men went to 
Keilah, and fought with the Philis- 
tines, and brought away their cat- 
tle, and smote them with a great 
slaughter. So David saved the in- 
habitants of Keilah. 

6 And it came to pass, when Abia- 
thar the son of Ahimelech fled to 
David to Keilah, that he came 
down with an ephod in his hand. 

7 And it was told Saul that David 
was come to Keilah. And Saul said, 
God hath delivered him into mine 
hand; for he is shut in, by entering 
into a town that hath gates and 
bars. 

8 ‘And Saul called all the people 
together to war, to go down to Kei- 
lah, to besiege David and his men. 

9 And David knew that Saul se- 
cretly practised mischief against 
him; and he ¢said to Abiathar the 
priest, Bring hither the ephod, 

10 Then said David, O Lorp 
God of Israel, thy servant hath 
certainly heard that Saul seeketh to 
come to Keilah, to destroy the city 
for my sake. 

11 Will the men of Keilah deliver 
me up into his hand? will Saul 
come down, as thy servant hath 
heard? :O Lorp God of Israel, I 
beseech thee, tell thy servant. .And 
the LorRD said, He will come down. 

12 Then said David, Will the men 
of Keilah deliver me and my men 
into the hand of Saul? And the 
Lorp said, They will deliver thee 


up. 
13 Then David and his men, 
which were about six hundred, 
arose and departed out of Keilah, 
and went whithersoever they could 
go. And it was told Saul that 
David was escaped from Keilah; 
and he forbare to go.forth. J 
14 And David abode in the wil- 
derness in strong holds, and re- 
mained in a mountain in the wilder- 
hess of Ziph. And Saul sought him 


I SAMUEL. 


a Num.27.21. 

b Heb.12.12. 

¢ Psa.27.1,3; 
Isa.54.17; 
Heb.13.6. 

d 1 Sam.24.20. 

e 2 Sam.21.7. 

f1Sam.26.1. 


g Jud.17.2; 
Mic.3.11. 


h1 Ki.18.10. 
41 Sam.25.2. 


345 


B.C. 1062. 
‘not into his hand. 


[23 26 
every day, but God delivered him 


15 And David saw that Saul was 
come out to seek his life: and David 
was in the wilderness of Ziph in a 
wood. 

16 And Jonathan Saul’s son arose, 
and went to David into the wood, 
and ‘strengthened his hand in God. 

17 And he said unto him, ‘Fear 
not: for the hand of Saul my father 
shall not find thee; and thou shalt 
be king over Israel, and I shall be 
next unto thee; and that also YSaul 
my father knoweth. i 

18 And they two made a “cove- 
nant before the LorD: and David 
abode in the wood, and Jonathan 
went to his house. 

19 fThen came up the Ziphites to 
Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not 
David hide himself with us in strong 
holds in the wood,. in the hill of 
Hachilah, which is on the south of 
Jeshimon? 

20 Now therefore, O king, come 
down according to all the desire of 
thy soul to come down; and our 
part shall be to deliver. him into 
the king’s hand. 

21 And Saul said, ’Blessed be ye 
of the LorpD; for ye have compas- 
sion on me. f 

22 Go, I pray you, prepare yet, 
and know and see his place where 
his haunt is, and who hath seen him 
there: for it is told me that he 
dealeth very subtilly. 

23 See therefore, and take know- 
ledge of all the lurking places where 
he hideth himself, and come ye 
again to me with the certainty, and 
I will go with you: and it shall come 
to pass, if he be in the land, that I 
will “search him out throughout all 
the thousands of Judah. 

24 And they arose, and went to 
Ziph before Saul: but David and 
his men were in the wilderness of 
‘Maon, in the plain on the south of 
Jeshimon. 

25 Saul also and his men went to 
seek him. And they told David: 
wherefore he came-down into a 
rock, and abode in the wilderness 
of Maon. And when Saul heard 
that, he pursued after David in the 
wilderness of Maon. 

26 And Saul went on this side of 
the mountain, and David and his 
men on that.side of the mountain: 
and David made haste to get away 
for fear of Saul; for Saul and his 
men compassed David and his men 


round about to take them. 


23 27] 


27 But there 4came a messenger 
unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and 
come; for the Philistines have in- 
vaded the land. 

28 Wherefore Saul returned from| 
pursuing after David, and went!) 
against the Philistines: therefore) 
they called that place 'Sela-ham- 
mahlekoth. 

29 And David went up from| 
thence, and dwelt in strong holds 
at En-gedi. 


CHAPTER 24. 
David’s mercy to Saul in En-ged1. 


AND it came to pass, when Saul) 
was returned from following 
the Philistines, that it was told) 
him, saying, Behold, David js in| 
the wilderness of En-gedi. 

2 Then Saul took three thousand 
chosen men out of all Israel, and 
went to seek David and his men 
upon the rocks of the wild goats. 

3 And he came to the sheepcotes 
by the way, where was a cave; and 
Saul went in to ‘cover his feet: and 
David and his men remained in the 
sides of the cave. 

4 And the men of David said unto 
him, ¢Behold the day of which the 
LorbD said unto thee, Behold, I will 
deliver thine enemy into thine hand, 
that thou mayest do to him as it 
shall seem good unto thee. Then 
David arose, and cut off the skirt 
of Saul’s robe privily. 

5 And it came to pass after- 
ward, that David’s heart ‘smote 
him, because he had cut off Saul’s 
skirt. 

6 And he said unto his men, The 
Lorp forbid that I should do this 
thing unto my master, the Lorp’s 
anointed, to stretch forth mine 
hand against him, seeing he is the! 
anointed of the Lorp, 

7 So David stayed his servants 
with these words, and suffered them 
not to rise against Saul. But Saul 
rose up out of the cave, and went 
on Ars way. 

8 David also arose afterward, and 
went out of the cave, and cried 
after Saul, saying, My lord the 
king. And when Saul looked be- 
hind him, David stooped with his 
oy to the earth, and bowed: him- 
self. 

9 And David said to Saul, Where- 
fore hearest ‘thou. men’s words, 
saying, Behold, David seeketh thy 
hurt? 4 

10 Behold, this day thine eyes 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1061. 


a2 Ki.19.9. 


bie. The 
Crag (or 


| Clit) of 


Divisions 

c Jud.3.24. 

d 1 Sam.26. 
8,11. 

e 2 Sam,24.10. 

f 2 Sam,21. 
6-8. 


we 


have seen how that the Lorp had 
delivered thee to day into mine 
hand in the cave: and some bade 
me kill thee: but mine eye spared 
thee; and I said, I will not put forth 
mine hand against my lord; for he 
is the LorpD’s anointed. 

11 Moreover, my father, see, yea, 
see the skirt of thy robe in my 
hand: for in that I cut off the skirt 
of thy robe, and killed thee not, 
know thou and see that there is 
neither evil nor transgression in 
mine hand, and I have not sinned 
against thee; yet thou huntest my 
soul to take it. : 

12 The LorpD judge between me 
and thee, and the LorD avenge me 
of thee: but mine hand shall not be 
upon thee. 

13 As saith the proverb of the 
ancients, Wickedness proceedeth 
from the wicked: but mine hand 
shall not be upon thee. 

14 After whom is the king of Is- 
rael come out? after whom dost 
thou pursue? after a dead dog, after 
a flea. ‘ 

15 The Lorp therefore be judge, 
and judge between me and thee, ° 
and see, and plead my cause, and 
deliver me out of thine hand. 

16 And it came to pass, when 
David had made an end of speaking 
these words unto: Saul, that Saul 
said, Is this thy voice, my son 
David? And Saul lifted up his 
voice, and wept. 

17 And he said to David, Thou 
art more righteous than I: for thou 
hast rewarded me good, whereas I 
have rewarded thee evil. 

18 And thou hast shewed this day 
how that thou hast dealt well with 
me: forasmuch as when the LorpD 
had delivered me into thine hand, 
thou killedst me not. 

19 For if a man find his enemy, 
will he let him go well away? 
wherefore the Lorp reward. thee 
good for that thou hast done unto 
me this day. 

20 And now, behold, I know well 
‘that thou shalt surely be king, and 
that the kingdom of Israel shall be 
established in thine hand. 

21 Swear now therefore unto me 
by the Lorp, /that thou wilt not 
cut off my seed after me, and that 
thou wilt not destroy my name out 
of my father’s house. 

22 And David sware unto Saul. 
And Saul went home; but David 
pe men gat them up unto the 

old. t 


& 


25°1| 
CHAPTER 25. 


The death of Samuel. 


ND Samuel died; ¢and all the 
Israelites were gathered to- 
gether, and lamented him, and 
buried him in his house at Ramah. 
And David arose, and went down 
to the wilderness of “Paran. 


David and Nabal. 


2 And there was aman in Maon, 
whose possessions were in Carmel; 
and the man was very great, and 
he had three thousand sheep, and 
a thousand goats: and he was 
shearing his sheep in Carmel. 


3 Now the name of the man was) 


‘Nabal; and the name of his wife 
Abigail: and she was a woman of 
good understanding, and of a beau- 
tiful countenance: but the man was 
dchurlish and evil in his doings; 
and he was of the house of Caleb. 

4 And David heard in the wilder- 
ness that Nabal did ‘shear his 
sheep. 

5 And David sent out ten young 
men, and David said unto the 
young men, Get you up to Carmel, 
and go to Nabal, and greet him in 
my name: 

6 And thus shall ye say to him 
that liveth in prosperity, Peace be 
both to thee, and peace be to thine 
house, and peace be unto all that 
thou hast. 

7 And now I have heard that thou 
hast shearers: now thy shepherds 
which were with us, we hurt them 
not, neither was there ought miss- 
ing unto them, all the while they 
were in Carmel. 

8 Ask thy young men, and they 
will shew thee. Wherefore let the 
young men find favour in thine 
eyes: for we come in a good day: 
give, I pray thee, whatsoever com- 
eth to thine hand unto thy ser- 
vants, and to thy son David. 

9 And when David’s young men 
came, they spake to Nabal accord- 
ing to all those words in the name 
of David, and ceased. 

10 And Nabal answered David’s 
servants, and said, Who 1s David? 
and who is the son of Jesse? there 
be many servants now a days that 
break away every man from his 
master. 

11 /Shall I then take my bread, 
and my water, and my flesh that I 
have killed for my shearers, and 
give it unto men, whom I know not 
whence they be? 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1060. 


a Num.20.29; 
Deut.34.8. 


6 Gen.21.21; 
Num.10.12. 


ci.e. fool. 
d vs.10,11,17. 


e Gen.38.13; 
2 Sam.13.23. 


f Jud.8.6. 
g 1 Sam.30.24. 
hv.7. 


+ 2 Sam.23. 
6,7. 


gj One meas- 


ure = about | 


4 pecks. 
k Josh,15.18. 


347 


[25 24 


12 So David’s young men turned 
their way, and went again, and 
came and told him all those sayings. 

13 And David said unto his men, 
Gird ye on every man his sword. 
And they girded on every man his 
sword; and David also girded on 
his sword: and there went up after 
David about four hundred men; 
and two hundred sabode by the 
stuff. 

14 But one of the young men told 
Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying, Be- 
hold, David sent messengers out of 
the wilderness to salute our master; 
and he railed on them. 

15 But the men were very good 
unto us, and ‘we were not hurt, 
neither missed we any thing, as long 
as we were conversant with them, 
when we were in the fields: 

16 They were a wall unto us both 
by night and day, all the while we 
were with them keeping the sheep. 

17 Now therefore know and con- 
sider what thou wilt do; for evil is 
determined against our master, and 
against all his household: for he is 
such a son of ‘Belial, that a man 
cannot speak to him. 

18 Then Abigail made haste, and 
took two hundred loaves, and two 
bottles of wine, and five sheep 
ready dressed, and five Jmeasures 
of parched corn, and an hundred 
clusters of raisins, and two hundred 
cakes of figs, and laid them on 


Jasses. 


19 And she said unto her ser- 
vants, Go on before me; behold, I 
come after you. But she told not 
her husband Nabal. 

20 And it was so, as she rode on 
the ass, that she came down by the 
covert of the hill, and, behold, 
David and his men came down 
against her; and she met them. 

21 Now David had said, Surely in 
vain have I kept all that this fellow 
hath in the wilderness, so that noth- 
ing was missed of all that per- 
tained unto him: and he hath 
requited me evil for good. 

22 So and more also do God unto 
the enemies of David, if I leave of 
all that pertain to him by the 
morning light any that pisseth 
against the wall. 

23 And when Abigail saw David, 
she hasted, and “lighted off the ass, 
and fell before David on her face, 
and bowed herself to the ground, 

24 And fell at his feet, and said, 
Upon me, my lord, upon me let 
this iniquity be: and let thine 


25 25] 


handmaid, I pray thee, speak in 
thine audience, and hear the words 
of thine handmaid. 

25 Let not my lord, I pray thee, 
regard this man of Belial, even 
Nabal: for as his name is, so 1s he; 
WNabal is his name, and folly is 
with him: but I thine handmaid 
saw not the young men of my lord, 
whom thou didst send. 

26 Now therefore, my lord, as the 
Lorp liveth, and as thy soul liveth, 
seeing the LorpD hath withholden 
thee from coming to shed blood, 
and from avenging thyself with 
thine own hand, now let thine ene- 
mies, and they that seek evil to my 
lord, be as Nabal: 

27 And now this blessing which 
thine handmaid hath brought unto 
my 'lord, let it even be given unto 
the young men that follow my 
lord. 

28 I pray thee, forgive the tres- 
pass of thine handmaid: for the 
ELorp will certainly make my lord 
a sure house; because my lord 
“fighteth the battles of the Lorp, 
and evil hath not been found in 
thee all thy days. 

29 Yet a man is risen to pursue 
thee, and to seek thy soul: but the 
soul of my lord shall be bound in|¢2 xi1s.5. 
the bundle of life with the Lorp 
thy God; and the souls of thine|?¥-32- 
enemies, them shall he sling out, as| ¢ Prov.22.23. 
out of the middle of a sling. 

30 And it shall come to pass,|/1Sam.27.3. 
when the LorD shall have done to 
my lord according to all the good 
that he hath spoken concerning 
thee, and shall have appointed thee 
ruler over Israel; 

31 That this shall be no grief unto 
thee, nor offence of heart unto my 
lord, either that thou hast shed 
blood causeless, or that my lord 
hath avenged himself: but when the 
LorD shall have dealt well with my 
lord, then remember thine hand- 
maid. 

32 And David said to Abigail, 
Blessed be the LorD God of Israel, 
which sent thee this day to meet 
me: 

33 And blessed be thy advice, and 
blessed be thou, which hast kept 
me this day from coming to shed 
blood, and from avenging myself 
with mine own hand. 

34 For in very deed, as the Lorp 
God of Israel liveth, which hath 
kept me back from hurting thee, ex- 
cept thou hadst hasted and come to 
“meet me, surely there had not been 


a1 Sam.18.17. 


b Psa.66.9; 
Mal.3.17. 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1060. 


[25 4 
left unto Nabal by the morning 
light any that pisseth against the 
wall. 

35 So David received of her hand 
that which she had brought him, 
and said unto her, Go up in peace 
to thine house; see, I have heark- 
ened to thy voice, and have ac- 
cepted thy person. 

36 And Abigail came to Nabal; 
and, behold, he held a feast in his 
house, like the feast of a king; and 
Nabal’s heart was merry within 
him, for he was very drunken: 
wherefore she told him nothing, 
less or more, until the morning 
light. 

37 But it came to pass in the 
morning, when the wine was gone 
out of Nabal, and his wife had told 
him these things, ‘that his heart 
died within him, and he became as 
a stone. ; 

38 And it came to pass about ten 
days after, that the Lorp “smote 
Nabal, and he died. 


Abigail becomes David’s wife. 


39 And when David heard that 
Nabal was dead, he said, ¢Blessed 
be the Lorp, that hath «pleaded 
the cause of my reproach from the 
hand of Nabal, and hath kept his 
servant from evil: for the Lorp 
hath returned the wickedness of 
Nabal upon his own head. And 
David sent and communed with 
Abigail, to take her to him to 
wife, 

40 And when the servants of Da- 
vid were come to Abigail to Carmel, 
they spake unto her, saying, David 
sent us unto thee, to take thee to 
him to wife. 

41 And she arose, and bowed her- 
self on Aer face to the earth, and 
said, Behold, Jet thine handmaid be 
a servant to wash the feet of the 
servants of my lord. 

42 And Abigail hasted, and arose, 
and rode upon an ass, with five 
damsels of her’s that went after 
her; and she went after the mes- 
sengers of David, and became his 
wife, 


|Ahinoam becomes David's wife. 


43 David also took fAhinoam of 
Jezreel; and they were also both of 
them his wives. 

44 But Saul had given Michal his 
daughter, David’s wife, to Phalti 
oe. os of Laish, which was of 

im. ; 


26.0 


: time. 


Ay ND the Ziphites came unto Saul 
to Gibeah, saying, Doth not 
David hide himself in the hill of 
Hachilah, which is before Jeshi- 
mon? 

2 ‘Shen Saul arose, and went down 
to the wilderness of Ziph, having 
three thousand chosen men of Is- 
tael with him, to seek David in the 
wilderness of Ziph. 

3 And Saul pitched in the hill of 
Hachilah, which zs before Jeshimon, 
by the way. But David abode in 
the wilderness, and he saw that 
Saul came after him into the wil- 
derness. 

4 David therefore sent out spies, 
and understood that Saul was come 
in very deed. 

5 And David arose, and came to 
the place where Saul had pitched: 
and David beheld the place where 
Saul lay, and «Abner the son of Ner, 
the captain of his host: and Saul 
Jay in the trench, and the people 
pitched round about him. 

6 Then answered David and said 
to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to 
Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother 
to Joab, saying, Who will go down 
with me to Saul to the camp? And 
Abishai said, I will go down with 
thee. 

7 So David and Abishai came to 
the people by night: and, behold, 
Saul lay sleeping within the trench, 
and his spear stuck in the ground 
at his bolster: but Abner and the 
people lay round about him. 

8 Then said Abishai to David, 
‘God hath delivered thine enemy 
into thine hand this day: now 
therefore let me smite him, I pray 
thee, with the spear even to the 
earth at once, and I will not smite 
him the second time. 

9 And David said to Abishai, De- 
stroy him not: for who can stretch 
forth his hand against the LORD’s 
anointed, and be guiltless? 

10 David said furthermore, As 
the LorpD liveth, the Lorp shall 
smite him; or his day shall come to 
die; or he shall descend into battle, 
and ‘perish. 

11 The Lorp 4forbid that I 
should stretch forth mine hand 
against the Lorp’s anointed: but, 


I pray thee, take thou now the 
spear that is at his bolster, and the 
cruse of water, and let us go. 


I SAMUEL. 


CHAPTER 26. B.C. 1060. 12 So David took the spear and 
David spares Saul the second ra es A sbee coe any hes 


a1 Sam.14.50. 


b 1 Sam.24.6; 
2 Sam.1.16. 


c1Sam.31.6. 
d 1 Sam.24. 


e 1 Sam.24.16. 
f 2 Sam.16.11. 
g 2 Sam.14.16. 


h v.24, 
? Psa.7.8. 


349 


[26 23 


no man saw it, nor knew i¢, neither 
awaked: for they were all asleep; 
because a deep sleep from the LORD 
was fallen upon them, 

13 Then David went over to the 
other side, and stood on the top of 
an hill afar off; a great space being 
between them: : 

14 And David cried to the people, 
and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, 
Answerest thou not, Abner? Then 
Abner answered and said, Who art 
thou that criest to the king? 

15 And David said to Abner, Art 
not thou a valiant man? and who 
is like to thee in Israel? wherefore 
then hast thou not kept thy lord 
the king? for there came one of the 
people in to destroy the king thy 

ord. 

16 This thing zs not good that 
thou hast done. As the LorD liv- 
eth, ye are worthy to die, because 
ye have not kept your master, the 
LorpD’s anointed. And now see 
where the king’s spear is, and the 
cruse of water that was at his bolster. 

17 And Saul knew David’s voice, 
and said, “Is this thy voice, my son 
David? And David said, It is my 
voice, my lord, O king. 

18 And he said, Wherefore doth 
my lord thus pursue after his ser- 
vant? for what have I done? or 
what evil 7s in mine hand? 

19 Now therefore, I pray thee, let 
my lord the king hear the words of 
his servant. If the fLorp have 
stirred thee up against me, let him 
accept an offering: but if they be 
the children of men, cursed be they 
before the Lorp; for they have 
driven me out this day from abid- 
ing in the inheritance of the LORD, 
saying, Go, serve other gods. 

20 Now therefore, let not my 
blood fall to the earth before the 
face of the Lorpb: for the king of 
Israel is come out to seek a flea, as 
when one doth hunt a partridge in 
the mountains. 

21 Then said Saul, I have sinned: 
return, my son David: for I will no 
more do thee harm, because my 
hsoul was precious in thine eyes this 
day: behold, I have played the fool, 
and have erred exceedingly. 

22 And David answered and said, 


Behold the king’s spear! and let 
one of the young men come over 
and fetch it. 

23 The *LorRD render to every 


26 24] 


I SAMUEL. 


(28? 


man his righteousness and his faith- 
fulness: for the LorbD delivered thee 
into my hand to day, but I would 
not stretch forth mine hand against 
the Lorp’s anointed. 

24 And, behold, as thy life was 
much set by this day in mine eyes, 
so let my life be much set by in the 
eyes of the LorD, and let him de- 
liver me out of all tribulation. 

25 Then Saul said to David, 
Blessed be thou, my son David: 
thou shalt both do great things, 
and also shalt still prevail. So 
David went on his way, and Saul 
returned to his place. 


CHAPTER 27. 


David's lapse of faith. He goes 
to Philistia, 


PAD David said in his heart, I 
shall now perish one day by the 
hand of Saul: there is nothing 
better for me than that I should 
speedily escape into the land of the 
Philistines; and Saul shall despair 
of me, to seek me any more in any 
coast of Israel: so shall I escape 
out of his hand. 

2 And David arose, and he passed 
over with the six hundred ¢men 
that were with him unto Achish, 
the son of Maoch, king of Gath. 

3 And David dwelt with Achish 
at Gath, he and his men, every man 
with his household, even David 
with his two wives, Ahinoam the 
Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Car- 
melitess, Nabal’s wife. 

4 And it was told Saul that David 
was fled to Gath: and he sought no 
more again for him. 

5 And David said unto Achish, If 
I have now found grace in thine 
eyes, let them give me a place in 
some town in the country, that I 
may dwell there: for why should 
thy servant dwell in the royal city 
with thee? 

6 Then Achish gave him ‘Ziklag 
that day: wherefore Ziklag per- 
taineth unto the kings of Judah 
unto this day. 

_7 And the time that David dwelt 
in the country of the Philistines 
was a full year and four months. 

8 And = Via and his men went up, 
and invadéd the Geshurites, and 
the ¢Gezrites, and the Amalekites: 
for those nations were of old the 
inhabitants of the land, as thou 
goest to Shur, even unto the land 
of Egypt. 


B.C. 1060. 


a Cf.1 Chr.29. 
28. 


61 Sam.25. 
13. e 

¢ Josh.19.5. 

d Jud.1.29. 


é1 Sam.25.1. 


Ff Josh.19.18; 
2 Ki.4.8. 


g See Ex.28. 
30, note. 


h1 Chr.10.13; 


Isa.8.19. 


350 


9 And David smote the land, and 
left neither man nor woman alive, 
and took away the sheep, and the 
oxen, and the asses, and the camels, 
and the apparel, and returned, and 
came to Achish. 

10 And Achish said,Whither have 
ye made a road to day? And David 
said, Against the south of Judah, 
and against the south of the Jerah- 
meelites, and against the south of 
the Kenites. 

11 And David saved neither man 
nor woman alive, to bring tidings 
to Gath, saying, Lest they should 
tell on us, saying, So did David, 
and so wi/l be his manner all the 
while he dwelleth in the country of 
the Philistines. ; 

12 And Achish believed David, 
saying, He hath made his people 
Israel utterly to abhor him; there: 
fore he shall be my servant for 
ever. 


CHAPTER 28. 
| David among Israel’s enemies. 


AND it came to pass in those 
days, that the Philistines gath- 
ered their armies together for war- 
fare, to fight with Israel. And 
|Achish said unto David, Know 
thou assuredly, that thou shalt go 
out with me to battle, thou and 
thy men. 

2 And David said to Achish, 
Surely thou shalt know what 
thy servant can do. And Achish 
said to David, Therefore will I make 
thee keeper of mine head for ever. 
| 3 Now ‘Samuel was dead, and 
all Israel had lamented him, and 
buried him in Ramah, even in his 
own city. And Saul had put away 
those that had familiar spirits, and 
the wizards, out of the land. 

4 And the Philistines gathered 
themselves together, and came and 
pitched in fShunem: and Saul 
gathered all Israel together, and 
they pitched in Gilboa. 

5 And when Saul saw the host of 
the Philistines, he was afraid, and 
his heart greatly trembled. 

6 And when Saul enquired of the 
Lorp, the LorD answered him not, 
neither by dreams, nor by eUrim, 
nor by prophets. 


Saul and the witch of En-dor. 


7 Then said Saul unto his ser- 
vants, Seek me a woman that hath 
a familiar spirit, ‘that I may go to 
her, and enquire of her. And his 


28 8] 


servants said to him, Behold, there 
1s a woman that hath a familiar 
spirit at En-dor. 

8 And Saul disguised himself, and 
put on other raiment, and he went, 
and two men with him, and they 
came to the woman by night: and 
hesaid, I pray thee, divine untomeby 
the familiar spirit, and bring me him 
up, whom I shall name unto thee. 

9 And the woman said unto him, 
Behold, thou knowest what Saul 
hath done, how he hath 4cut off 
those that have familiar spirits, 
and the wizards, out of the land: 
wherefore then layest thou a snare 
for my life, to cause me to die? 

10 And Saul sware to her by the 
LorpD, saying, As the LorD liveth, 
there shall no punishment happen 
to thee for this thing. 

11 Then said the woman, Whom 
shall I bring up unto thee? And he 
said, Bring me up Samuel. 

12 And when the woman saw 
Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: 
and the woman spake to Saul, 
saying, Why hast thou deceived 
me? for thou art Saul. 

13 And the king said unto her, Be 
not afraid: for what sawest thou? 
And the woman said unto Saul, I 
saw gods ascending out of the 
earth. 

14 And he said unto her, What 
form 1s he of? And she said, An 
old man cometh up; and he is cov- 
ered with a mantle. And Saul 
perceived that it was Samuel, and| 
he stooped with Ars face to the 
ground, and bowed himself. 

15 And Samuel said to Saul, Why 
hast thou disquieted me, to bring 
me up? And Saul answered, I am 
sore distressed; for the Philistines 
make war against me, and God is 
departed from me, and banswereth 
me no more, neither by prophets, 
nor by dreams: therefore I have 
called thee, that thou mayest make 
known unto me what I shall do. 

16 Then said Samuel, Wherefore 
then dost thou ask of me, seeing 
the Lorp is departed from thee, 
and is become thine enemy? 

17 And the Lorp hath done to 
him, as he ‘spake by me: for the 
Lorp hath rent the kingdom out 
of thine hand, and given it to thy 
neighbour, even to David: 

18 4Because thou obeyedst not 
the voice of the LORD, nor exe- 
cutedst his fierce wrath upon 
Amalek, therefore hath the LORD 
done this thing unto thee this day.! 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1056. 


av.3. 


bv.6. 


c¢ 1 Sam.15.28. 


d 1 Sam.13. 
9,13; 15. 
1-26; 1 Chr. 
10.13. 


351 


(29 3 


19 Moreover the LorD will also 
deliver Israel with thee into the 
hand of the Philistines: and to mor- 
row shalt thou and thy sons be 
with me: the Lorp also shall de- 
liver the host of Israel into the hand 
of the Philistines. 

20 Then Saul fell straightway all 
along on the earth, and was sore 
afraid, because of the words of 
Samuel: and there was no strength 
in him; for he had eaten no bread 
all the day, nor all the night. 

21 And the woman came unto 
Saul, and saw that he was sore 
troubled, and said unto him, Be- 
hold, thine handmaid hath obeyed 
thy voice, and I have put my life in 
my hand, and have hearkened unto 
thy words which thou spakest unto 


me. 

22 Now therefore, I pray thee, 
hearken thou also unto the voice of 
thine handmaid, and let me set a 
morsel of bread before thee; and. 
eat, that thoumayest have strength, 
when thou goest on thy way. 

23 But he refused, and said, I will 
not eat. But his servants, together 
with the woman, compelled him; 
and he hearkened unto their voice. 
So he arose from the earth, and sat 
jupon the bed. 

24 And the woman had a fat calf 
in the house; and she hasted, and 
killed it, and took flour, and kneaded 
it, and did bake unleavened bread 
thereof: 

25 And she brought rt before Saul, 
and before his servants; and they 
did eat. Then they rose up, and 
went away that night. 


CHAPTER 29. 


David providentially saved from 
fighting against Israel. 


Nez the Philistines gathered 
together all their armies to 
Aphek: and the Israelites pitched 
by a fountain which 7s in Jezreel. 

2 And the lords of the Philistines 
passed on by hundreds, and by 
thousands: but David and his men 
passed on in the rereward with 
Achish. 

3 Then said the princes of the 
Philistines, What do these Hebrews 
here? And Achish said unto the 
princes of the Philistines, Js not 
this David, the servant of Saul the 
king of Israel, which hath been with 
me these days, or these years, and I 
have found no faut< in him since he 
fell unto me unto this day? 


4 And the princes of the Philis- 
tines were wroth with him; and the 
princes of the Philistines said. unto 
him, Make this fellow return, that 
he may go again to his place which 
thou hast appointed him, and let 
him not go down with us to 
“battle, lest in the battle he be an 
adversary to us: for wherewith 
should he ¢reconcile himself unto 
his master? should it not be with 
the heads of these men? 

5 Is not this David, of whom 
‘they sang one to another in dances, 
saying, Saul slew his thousands, 
and David his ten thousands? 

6 Then Achish called David, and 
said unto him, Surely, as the LORD]¢ 1 Sam.14. 
liveth, thou hast been upright, and} 21: 
thy going out and thy coming in!|s or, make 


with me in the host is good in my| Aimself 
sight: ¢for I have not found evil in| g/easing, 
thee since the day of thy coming]! 34, note. 
unto me unto this day: nevertheless 

_ the lords favour thee not. ¢1 Sam.18.7. 


7 Wherefore now return, and gol7y3. 
in peace, that thou displease not the 
lords of the Philistines. 

8 And David said unto Achish, 
But what have I done? and what! /1Sam.25. 
hast thou found in thy servant so) 42:43- 
long as I have been with thee unto}, psa.i8.6; 
this day, that J may not go fight) 25.1,2; 
against the enemies of my lord the ; 
king? 

9 And Achish answered and said| 56.1.4 


e Heb.1.4, 
note, 


to David, I know that thou art Jer16-19; 
good in my sight, as an “angel of] jyay3:37° 


God: notwithstanding the princes of 
the Philistines have said, He shall ee aaars 
not go up with us to the battle. gy 
_10 Wherefore now rise up early] i1Sam.14. 
in the morning with thy master’s aie Judte 
servants that are come with thee: ; 


and as soon as ye be up early in the! j 2 Sem.8.18; 
1 Ki. 


morning, and have light, depart. 38. 
11 So David and his men rose up 

early to depart in the morning, to 

return into the land of the Philis- 

dines. And the Philistines went up 

to Jezreel. 


CHAPTER 30. 


David avenges the destruction 
of Ziklag. 


AND it came to pass, when David 
4 and his men were come to 
Ziklag on the third day, that the 
Amalekites had invaded the south, 
and Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and 
burned it with fire: 

2 And had taken the women cap- 
tives, that were therein: they slew 
not any, either great or small, but 


352 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1056. 


carried them away, and went o 
their way. = 

3 So David and his men came to 
the city, and, behold, 1t was burned 
with fire; and their wives, and their 
sons, and their daughters, were 
taken captives. : 

4 Then David and the people that 
were with him lifted up their voice 
and wept, until they hadno more 
power to weep. 

5 And David’s two fwives were 
taken captives, Ahinoam the Jez- 
reelitess, and Abigail the wife of 
Nabal the Carmelite. 

6 And David was greatly dis- 
tressed; for the people spake of 
stoning him, because the soul of all 
the people was grieved, every man 
for his sons and for his daughters: 
but David Sencouraged himself in 
the LorD his God. 

7 And David said to Abiathar the 
priest, Ahimelech’s son, I pray thee, 
hbring me hither the ephod. And 
Abiathar brought thither the ephod 
to David. 

8 And David enquired at the 
Lorpb, saying, Shall I, pursue after 
this troop? shall I overtake them? 
And he answered him, Pursue: for 
thou shalt surely overtake them, 
and without fail recover a//. 

9 So David went, he and the six 
hundred men that were with him, 
and came to the brook Besor, where 
those that were left behind stayed. 

10 But David pursted, he and 
four hundred men: for two hundred 
abode behind, which were so faint 
that they could not go over the 
brook Besor. 

11 And they found an Egyptian in 
the field, and brought him to David, 
and gave him bread, and he did eat; 
and they made him drink water; 

12 And they gave him a piece of 
a cake of figs, and two clusters of 
raisins; and when he had eaten, 
his ‘spirit came again to him: for he 
had eaten no bread, nor drunk any 
water, three days and three nights. 

13 And David said unto him, To 
whom belongest thou? and whence 
art thou? And he said, I am a 
young man of Egypt, servant to an 
Amalekite; and my master left me, 
because three days agone I fell sick. 

14 We made an invasion upon 
the south of the JCherethites, and 
upon the coast which belongeth to 
Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; 
and we burned Ziklag with fire, | 

15 And David said to him, Canst 
thou bring me down to this com- 


q 


- o\ . 
30 16] 


I SAMUEL. 


{ 


-(p3ts 


pany? And he said, Swear unto| B.c. 1056. _|forward, that he made it a statute 


me by God, that thou wilt neither 
kill me, nor deliver me into the 
hands of my master, and I will 
bring thee down to this company. 

16 And when he had brought him 
down, behold, they were spread 
abroad upon all the earth, eating 
and drinking, and dancing, because 
of all the great spoil that they had 
taken out of the land of the Philis- 
tines, and out of the land of Judah. 

17 And David smote them from 
the twilight even unto the evening! 
of the next day: and there escaped 
not a man of them, save four hun- 
dred young men, which rode upon 
camels, and fled. 

18 And David recovered all that 
the Amalekites had carried away: 
and David rescued his two wives. 

19 And there was nothing lacking 
to them, neither small nor great, 
neither sons nor daughters, neither] ¢ Josh.i9.8. 
spoil, nor any thing that they had|, Josh.13.16 
taken to them: David “recovered all. ee 

20 And David took all the flocks| e Josh.15.50. 
and the herds, which they drave 
before those other cattle, and said, 
This is David’s spoil. 

21 And David came to the two 
hundred men, which were so faint 
that they could not follow David, 
whom they had made also to abide 
at the brook Besor: and they went! ;1 Chr.10.1. 
forth to meet David, and to meet} 
the people that were with him: and|* 1} Sam.28.4. 
when David came near to the|:1sam.14. 
people, he saluted them. 49; 1 Chr.8. 

22 Then answered all the wicked| 33- 
men and men of Belial, of those 
that went with David, and said, Be- 
cause they went not with us, we will 
not give them oughé of the spoil 
that we haverecovered, savetoevery 
man his wife and his children, that 
they may lead them away, and 
depart. 

23 Thensaid David, Yeshallnotdo 
so,my brethren, with that which the 
Lorp hath given us, who hath pre- 
served us, and delivered the company 
that came against us into our hand. 

24 For who will hearken unto you 
in this matter? “but as his part is 
that goeth down to the battle, so 
shail his part be that tarrieth by 
the stuff: they shall part alike. 

25 And it was so from that day 


avs. 


6 Num.31. 
af Josh.22, 


g Jud.1.16. 
h Jud.1.17. 


4 Josh.14.13; 
2 Sam.2.1. 


mJud.9.54. 


f 1 Sam.27.10. 


and an ordinance for Israel unto 
this day. 

26 And when David came to Zik- 
lag, he sent of the spoil unto the 
elders of Judah, even to his friends, 
saying, Behold a present for you 
of the spoil of the enemies of the 
Lorpb; 

27 To them which were in Beth- 
el, and to them which were in 
south “Ramoth, and to them which, 
were in Jattir, 

28 And to them which were in 
4Aroer, and to them which were in 
Siphmoth, and to them which 
were in ‘Eshtemoa, 

29 And to them which were in 
Rachal, and to them which were in 
the cities of the SJerahmeelites, and 
to them which were in the cities of 
the &Kenites, 

30 And to them which were in 
+Hormah, and to them which were 
'in Chor-ashan, and to them which 
were in Athach, 

31 And to them which were in 
*Hebron, and to all the places 
where David himself and his men 
were wont to haunt. 


CHAPTER 31. 
The death of Saul. 


iXTOW the Philistines fought 

against Israel: and the men 
of Israel fled from before the Philis- 
tines, and fell down slain in mount 
kGilboa. 

2 And the Philistines followed 
hard upon Saul and upon his sons; 
and the Philistines slew Jonathan, 
and Abinadab, and Melchi-shua, 
‘Saul’s sons. 

3 And the battle went sore against 
Saul, and the archers "hit him; and 
he was sore wounded of the archers. 

4 Then said Saul unto his ar- 
mourbearer, Draw thy sword, and 
thrust me through therewith; lest 
these uncircumcised come and 
thrust me through, and abuse me, 
But his armourbearer would not; 
for he was sore afraid. Therefore 
Saul took a sword, and fell upon it. 

5 And when his armourbearer 
saw that Saul was dead, he fell 
likewise upon his sword, and died 
with him. 


1Cf. 2 Sam. 1. 10; 21. 12. The order is: (1) Saul is “hit””—wounded mortally, 
potentially “slain,” by the Philistines; (2) either to escape agony, or insult by 
the enemy, he falls upon his sword, and his armour-bearer, supposing him to be 
dead, slew himself; (3) but Saul was not dead; raising himself upon his spear, he 


besought the Amalekite to put him to cae 
353 


31 §] 


6 So Saul died, and his three 
sons, and his armourbearer, and all 
his men, that same day together. 

7 And when the men of Israel that 
were on the other side of the val- 
ley, and they that were on the 


other side Jordan, saw that the|? J¥d213° 
men of Israel fled, and that Saul and 

his sons were dead, they forsook the} ¢ Josh.17-11; 
cities, and fled; and the Philistines| J&¢-?-27- 
came and dwelt in them. @ Contra, 

8 And it came to pass on the mor-} 2 Chr.16.14. 
row, when the Philistines came to}, 2 sam.24 
strip the slain, that they found Saul! 5, 2 Sam.” 
and his three sons fallen in mount! 2! 12,14. 


Gilboa. 

9 And they cut off his head, and 
stripped off his armour, and sent 
into ‘the iand of the Philistines 


I SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1056. 


a1 Sam.21.9. 


354 


[311 


round about, to publish ft in the 
house of their idols, and among the 
people. E 

10 And they put his ¢armour in 
the house of “Ashtaroth: and they 
fastened his ‘body to the wall of 
Beth-shan. 

11 And when the inhabitants of 
Jabesh-gilead heard of that which 
the Philistines had done to Saul; 

12 All the valiant men arose, and 
went all night, and took the body 
of Saul and the bodies of his sons 
from the wall of Beth-shan, and 
came to Jabesh, and ¢burnt them 
there. 

13 And they took their bones, and 
‘"buried them under a tree at Ja- 
ibesh, and fasted seven days. 


THE SECOND BOOK OF SAMUEL 


OTHERWISE CALLED 
| THE SECOND BOOK OF THE KINGS. {1 17 


As First Samuel marks the failure of man in Eli, Saul, and even Samuel, so Second 
Samuel marks the restoration of order through the enthroning of God’s king, 
David. This book also records the establishment of Israel’s political centre -in 
Jerusalem (2 Sam. 5. 6-12), and her religious centre in Zion (2 Sam. 5. 7; 6. 1-17). 
When all was thus ordered, Jehovah established the great Davidic Covenant (7. 8-17) 
out of which all kingdom truth is henceforth developed. David, in his ‘last words”’ 
(23. 1-7), describes the millennial kingdom yet to be. 

The book is in four parts: I. From the death of Saul to the anointing of David 
over Judah, in Hebron, 1. 1-27. II. From the anointing in Hebron to the establish- 
ment of David over united Israel, 2. 1-5. 25. III. From the conquest of Jerusalem 
to the rebellion of Absalom, 6. 1-14. 33. IV. From the rebellion of Absalom to the 
purchase of the temple-site, 15. 1-24. 25. 

The events recorded in II Samuel cover a period of 38 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. B.C. 1056. | : pray is: upon me, and slay i 
. , or anguish is come upon me, be- 
David hears of Saul’s death cause my life is yet whole in me. 
Now. it came to pass after the 10 Sol ‘stood upon him, and slew 
death of Saul, when David was him, because I was sure that he 
returned from the “slaughter of the could not live after that he was 
Amalekites, and David had abode fallen: and I took the crown that 
two days in Ziklag; was upon his head, and the brace- 
2 It came even to pass on the let that was on his arm, and have 
third day, that, behold, aman came brought them hither unto my lord. 
out of the camp from Saul with his 11 Then David took hold on his 
clothes rent, and earth upon his clothes, and rent them; and like- 
wise all the men that were with 


head: and so it was, when he came 
to David, that he fell to the earth,! 
and did obeisance. | 

3 And David said unto him, From, 
whence comest thou? And he said 
unto him, Out of the camp of Israel|¢ 1 Sam.30. 
‘am I escaped. 17,26. 

4 And David said unto him, "How}» 1 sam.4.16. 
went the matter? I pray thee, tell 
~me. And he answered, That the|‘¢f} 3am. 
people are fied from the battle, and eee 
many of the people also are fallen|d 1 Sam.24.6, 
and dead; and Saul and Jonathan 200; 8 sa. 
his son are dead also. a 

5 And David said unto the young]. 1 Ki.2.32, 
man that told him, How knowest 33,37. 
thou that Saul and Jonathan his 
son be dead? 

6 And the young man that told 
him said, As I happened by chance 
upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul 
leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the 
chariots and horsemen followed 
hard after him. " 

7 And when he looked behind 
him, he saw me, and called unto 
me. And I answered, Here am I. 

8 And he said unto me, Who art 
thou? And I answered him, I am 
an Amalekite. } 

9 He said unto me again, Stand, 


him: 

12 And they mourned, and wept, 
and fasted until even, for Saul, and 
for Jonathan his son, and for the 
people of the Lorb, and for the 
house of Israel; because they were 
allen by the sword. 

13. And David said unto the young 
man that told him, Whence art 
thou? And he answered, I am the 
son of a stranger, an Amalekite. 

14 And David ¢4said unto him, 
How wast thou not afraid to stretch 
forth thine hand to destroy the 
Lorp’s anointed? 

15 And David called one of the 
young men, and said, Go near, and . 
fall upon him. And he smote him 
that he died. 

_} 16 And David said unto him, Thy 

éblood be upon thy head; for thy 
mouth hath testified against thee, 
saying, I have slain the Lorp’s 
anointed. 


David mourns the death of Saul 
and Jonathan. 


17 And David lamented with this 
lamentation over Saul and over 
Jonathan his son: ~ 


355 


e 


“4 18) 


II SAMUEL. 


[2 16 


18 (Also he bade them teach thel B.c. 1056. _|and there they anointed David king 


children of Judah the use of the 
bow: behold, it is. written in the 
book of Jasher.) . : 

19 The beauty of Israel is slain 
upon ‘thy high places: how are the 
mighty fallen! yawn 

20 Tell it not in Gath, publish it 
not in the streets of Askelon; lest 
the daughters of the Philistines 
“rejoice, lest the daughters of the 
uncircumcised triumph. 

21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, Jet 
there be no dew, neither Jet there 
be rain, upon you, nor fields of 
offerings: for there the shield of 
the mighty is vilely cast away, the 
shield of Saul, as though he had 
not been anointed with oil. 

22 From the blood of the slain, 
from the fat of the mighty, the bow 
of Jonathan turned not back, and 
the sword of Saul returned not 
empty. 

23 Saul and Jonathan were 
lovely and pleasant in their lives, 
and in their death they were not 
divided: they were swifter than 
eagles, they were stronger than lions. 

24 Ye daughters of Israel, weep 
over Saul, who clothed you in scar- 
let, with other delights, who put 
on ornaments of gold upon your 
apparel. 

25 How are the mighty fallen in 
the midst of the battle! O J onathan, 
thou wast slain in thine high 
places. 

26 I am distressed for thee, my 
brother Jonathan: very pleasant 
hast thou been unto me: thy love 
to me was wonderful, passing the 
love of women, 


27 How are the mighty fallen, and 
the weapons of war perished! 


CHAPTER 2. 
David received as king by Judah. 


ANP 1t came to pass after this, 
that ‘David enquired of the 
LorRD, saying, Shall I go up into 
any of the cities of Judah? And 
the LorD said unto him, Go up. 
And David said, Whither shall I go 
up? And he said, Unto ¢Hebron, 

2 So David went up thither, and 
his two. wives also, Ahinoam the 
Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal’s 
wife the Carmelite. 

3 And his ‘men that were with 
him did David bring up, every man 
with his household: and they dwelt 
in the cities of Hebron. 

4 And the men of Judah came, 


a 


a Jud.16.23. 

61 Sam.31. 

¢ Kingdom - 
(O.T.). vs. 1- 
4; 2 Sam.5. 


1-3. (Gen.1. 
26; Zech. 12. 
8.) 


d 2 Sam.5.1,3. 

e¢ 1 Sam.27.2, 
3; 1 Chr.12. 
1, 


f1Sam.31. 


»13. 


g Jud.8.1, 
note. 


h Cf.Jud.20.1. 


i Josh.10.2, 
4,12. 


Jj Jer.41.12. 


356 


over the house of Judah. And they 
told David, saying, That the men 
of SJabesh-gilead were they that 
buried Saul. 


David’s message to the men of 
Jabesh-gilead. 


5 And David sent messengers 
unto the men of Jabesh-gilead, and 
said unto them, Blessed be ye of the 
LorpD, that ye have shewed this 
kindness unto your lord, even unto 
Saul, and have buried him. 

6 And now the LorD shew kind- 
ness and truth unto you: and I also 
will requite you this kindness, be- 
cause ye have done this thing. 

7 Therefore now let your hands 
be strengthened, and be ye valiant: 
for your master Saul is dead, and 
also the house of Judah have 
anointed me king over them. 


Abner makes Ish-bosheth king 
over eleven tribes. 


8 But ¢Abner the son of Ner, cap- 
tain of Saul’s host, took Ish-bosheth 
the son of Saul, and brought him 
over to Mahanaim; 

9 And made him king over Gilead, 
and over the Ashurites, and over 
Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and 
over Benjamin, and over all Israel. 

10 Ish-bosheth Saul’s son was 
forty years old when he began to 
reign over Israel, and reigned two 
years. But the house of Judah fol- 
lowed David. 

11 And the time that David was 
king in Hebron over the house of 
Judah was seven years and six 
months, 

The second civil "war. 

12 And Abner the son of Ner, and 
the servants of Ish-bosheth the son 
of Saul, went out from Mahanaim 
to ‘Gibeon. 

13 And Joab the son of Zeruiah, 
and the servants of David, went 
out, and met together by the “pool 
of Gibeon: and they sat down, the 
one on the one side of the pool, and 
the other on the other side of the 
pool. 

14 And Abner said to Joab, Let 
the young men now arise, and play 
before us. And Joab said, Let them 
arise. 

15 Then there arose and went 
over-by number twelve of Benjamin, 
which pertained to Ish-bosheth: 
the son of Saul, and twelve of the 
servants of David. 

16 And they caught every one his 


me UT a ee 
2 17] II SAMUEL. ¢ [3 8 
NS Tite ite: oe eee | . = 
fellow by the head, and thrust his} B.c. 1053. |all the i 
; i yale _ B.C. 1053, _ people stood still, and pur- 
Be ee cee tet Day one ee 
4 - oug ey any more. 
Bloce Kesenllcs *Helkath-hazzurim, 29 And Abner and his men walked 
ty nes api ibeon. all that night through the plain, 
Pirie that’ chy end Abner ras Fey Biel aty eran 
ibeaten, and the men of Israel, before TaMtN Aelea, Rake be 
the servants of David. -30 And Joab returned from fol- 
18 And there were three sons of lowing Abner: and when he had 
peruiah sheets Joab, and Abishai, gathered all the people together, 
on Aeepelvignd cane! was as ee lacked of ee servants 
f nineteen men and Asahel. 
es a ere eee 
3 smitten of Benjamin, and o - 
ant DABS Den to the left from per tate so that care hundred 
mer. an reescore men died. 
gO Then Abner looked behind 32 And they took up Asahel, and 
, and said, Art thou Asahel? buried him in the sepulchre of his 
ns oe: Cp imine I ieee i ae are wes in Beth-lehem. 
: ner said to him, Turn nd Joab an m £ jal 
thee aside to thy right hand or to night, and they cae te Hebron a 
thy left, and lay thee hold on one| je, Field of [break of day. 
ce the yeuns Anen, end take thee] Swords 
$s armour. ut Asahel would not 
turn aside from following of him. a eas CHAPTER 3. 
22 And Abner said again to Asa-|c 2 Sam.3.27; Now there was long war ~be- 
hel, Turn thee aside from following] 4-6: 20-10- tween the house of Saul, and 
me: wherefore should I smite thee|g v.12. the house of David: but David 


to the ground? how then should I 
hold up my face to ‘Joab thy 
brother? 

23 Howbeit he refused to turn 
aside: wherefore Abner with the 
hinder end of the spear “smote him 
under the fifth rib, that the spear 
came out behind him; and he fell 
down there, and died in the same 
place: and it came to pass, that as 
many as came to the place where 
a fell down and died stood 
still, 

24 Joab also and Abishai pursued 
after Abner: and the sun went 

~ down when they were come to the 
hill of Ammah, that Jieth before 
Giah by the way of the wilderness 
of Gibeon. 

25 And the children of Benjamin 

gathered themselves together after 
Abner, and became one troop, and 
stood on the top of an hill. 
26 Then Abner called to Joab, 
and said, Shall the sword devour for 
ever? knowest thou not that it will 
be bitterness in the latter end? how 
long shall it be then, ere thou bid 
the people return from following 
their brethren? 

27 And Joab said, As God liveth, 
unless thou hadst spoken, surely 
then-in the morning the people had 
gone up every one from following 
his brother. 

_ 28 So Joab blew a trumpet, and 


e Cf. 2Sam.5. 
13-16. 


f 1 Chr.3.1, 4. 


4 2 Sam.15. 
1-18. 


1 Sam.27.8. 
j 2 Sam.21.8. 


357 


g 1 Sam.25.43. 


1 2 Sam.13.37; 


waxed stronger and stronger, and 
the house of Saul waxed weaker and 
weaker. 


David’s family in ‘Hebron 
(1 Chr..3. 1-4). 


2 And unto David were sons 
Sborn in Hebron: and his firstborn 
was Amnon, of 2Ahinoam the Jez- 
réelitess; 

3 And his second, Chileab, of Abi- 
gail the wife of Nabal the Carmel- 
ite; and the third, “Absalom the son 
of Maacah the daughter of Talmai 
king of *Geshur; 

4 And the fourth, Adonijah the 
son of Haggith; and the fifth, She- 
phatiah the son of Abital; 

S And the sixth, Ithream, by Eg- 
lah David’s wife. These were born 
to David in Hebron. 

6 And it came to pass, while there 
was war between the house of Saul 
and the house of David, that Abner 
made himself strong for the house 
of Saul. 


Abner deserts to David. 


7 And Saul had a_concubine, 
whose name was /Rizpah, the 
daughter of Aiah: and Ish-bosheth 
said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou 
gone in unto my father’s con- 
cubine? 

8 Then was Abner very wroth for 


the words of Ish-bosheth, and said, 


3 9] 7 


¢Am I a dog’s head, which against 
Judah do shew kindness this day 
unto the house of Saul thy father, 
to his brethren, and to his friends, 
and have not delivered thee into 
the hand of David, that thou 
chargest me to day with a fault 
concerning this woman? 

9 So do God to Abner, and more 
also, except, ’as the LORD hath 
sworn to David, even so I do to 
him; 

10 Totranslate the kingdom from 
the house of Saul, and to set up the 
throne of David over Israel and 
over Judah, from Dan even to Beer- 
sheba. 

11 And he could not answer Ab- 
ner a word again, because he feared 
him. 

12 And Abner sent messengers to 
David on his behalf, saying, Whose 


league with me, and, behold, my 
hand shall be with thee, to bring|? 2 Sam.2.10. 
about all Israel unto thee. e1 Sam.18. 

13 And he said, Well; I will make} 25,27. 
a league with thee: but one thing I Paasara.05 
require of thee, that is, Thou shalt 44, Phalti. 
not see my face, except thou first 
bring ‘Michal Saul’s 
when thou comest to see my face. h 1 Chr.12.29. 

14 And David sent messengers to ; 
4Ish-bosheth Saul’s son, saying,|#Vs-10,12. 
Deliver me my wife Michal, which j1Sam.29.6. 
I espoused to me ‘for an hundred 
foreskins of the Philistines. 

15 And Ish-bosheth sent, and 


k1 Ki.2.5. 


11 Ki.2.32,33. 
took her from Aer husband, even 
from /Phaltiel the son of Laish. ee P 


16 And her husband went with 
her along weeping behind her to 
éBahurim. Then said Abner unto 
him, Go, return. And he returned. 

17 And Abner had communica- 
tion with the elders of Israel, saying, 
Ye sought for David in times past 
to be king over you: 

18 Now then do it: for the Lorp 
hath spoken of David, saying, By 
the hand of my servant David I 
will save my people Israel out of 
the hand of the Philistines, and out 
of the hand of all their enemies. 

19 And Abner also spake in the 
ears ‘of Benjamin: and Abner went 
also to speak in the ears of David 
in Hebron all that seemed good to 
Israel, and that seemed good to the 
whole house of Benjamin. 

20 So Abner came to David to 
Hebron, and twenty men with him. 
And David made Abner and the 
men that were with him a feast. 

21 And Abner said unto David, I 


358 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1053. 


a 1 Sam.24.14. 
b 1 Sam.15.28. 
is the land? saying also, Make thy}; 1 sam.18.20. 


daughter, |¢ 2 Sam.19.16. 


[3 at 
: } 
will arise and go, ‘and will gather 
all Israel unto my lord the king, 
that they may make a league with 
thee, and that thou mayest Teign 
over all that thine heart desireth. 
And David sent Abner away; and 
he went in peace. 

22 And, behold, the servants of 
David and Joab came from pursu- 
ing a troop, and brought in a great 
spoil with them: but Abner was 
not with David in Hebron; for he 
had sent him away, and he was 
gone in peace. 

23 When Joab and all the host 
that was with him were come, they 
told Joab, saying, Abner the son 
of Ner came to the king, and he 
hath sent him away, and he is gone 
in peace. 

24 Then Joab came to the king, 

and said, What hast thou done? 
behold, Abner came unto thee; why 
is it that thou hast sent him away, 
and he is quite gone? 
25 Thou knowest Abner the son 
of Ner, that he came to deceive 
thee, and to know thy /going out 
and thy coming in, and to know all 
that thou doest. 

26 And when Joab was come out 
from David, he sent messengers 
after Abner, which brought him 
again from the well of Sirah: but 
David knew it not. 


Joab’s murder of Abner. 


27 And when Abner was returned 
to Hebron, Joab took him aside in 
the gate to speak with him quietly, 
and smote him there under the fifth 
rib, that he died, for the blood of 
Asahel his brother. 

28 And afterward when David 
heard it, he said, I and my kingdom 
are guiltless before the Lorp for 
ever from the blood of Abner the 
son of Ner: 

29 Let it ‘rest on the head of 
Joab, and on all his father’s house: 
and let there not fail from the house 
of Joab one that hath an issue, or 
that is a leper, or that leaneth on 
a staff, or that falleth on the sword, 
or that lacketh bread. 

30 So Joab and Abishai his 
brother slew Abner, because he had 
slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon 
in the battle. 

31 And David said to Joab, and 
to all the people that were with 


him, ”Rend your clothes, and gird 
you with sackcloth, and mourn be- 
fore Abner. And king David hum: 


‘self followed the bier, 


3 32] 


32 And they buried Abner in 
Hebron: and the king lifted up his 
voice, and wept at the grave of 
Abner; and all the people wept. 

33 And the king lamented over 
Abner, and said, Died Abner as a 
fool dieth? 

34 Thy hands were not bound, 
nor thy feet put into fetters: as a 
man falleth before wicked men, so 
fellest thou. And all the people 
wept again over him. 

35 And when all the people came 
to cause David to eat meat while it 
was yet day, David sware, saying, 
So do God to me, and more also, if 
I taste bread, or ought else, ¢till the 
sun be down. 

36 And all the people took notice 
of it, and it pleased them: as what- 
soever the king did “pleased all the 
people. 

37 For all the people and all 
Israel understood that day that it 
was not of the king to slay Abner 
the son of Ner. 

38 And the king said unto his 
servants, Know ye not that there is 
a prince and a great man fallen this 
day in Israel? 

39 AndIamthis day weak, though 
anointed king; and these men the 
sons of Zeruiah be ‘too hard for me: 

_the Lorp shall reward the doer of 
evil according to his wickedness. 


CHAPTER 4. 
The murder of Ish-bosheth. 


Jat when Saul’s son heard that 
Abner was dead in Hebron, his 
hands were feeble, and all the Is- 
raelites were troubled. 

2 And Saul’s son had two men 
that were captains of bands: the 
name of the one was Baanah, and 
the name of the other Rechab, the 
sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, of the 
children of Benjamin: (for “Beeroth 
also was reckoned to Benjamin: 

3 And the Beerothites fled to 
eGittaim, and were sojourners there 
until this day.) 

4 And Jonathan, Saul’s son, had 
a son that was lame of his feet. 
He was five years old when the tid- 
ings came of Saul and Jonathan 
out of fJezreel, and his nurse took 
him up, and fled: and it came to 
pass, as she made haste to flee, that 
he fell, and became lame. And his 
name was Mephibosheth. 

5 And the sons of Rimmon the 
Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, 
went, and came about the heat of 


II SAMUEL. 


[53 


B.C. 1048. 


a Jud.20.26. 


6 was good in 
their eyes. 


¢ 2 Sam.19.6, 
Ve 


d Josh.18.25. 
e Neh.11.33. 
f1Sam.29.1, 
it 
1 Sam.19.2; 
23.15; 25.29. 
h Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59, 


20, note. 


i 2 Sam.1.2, 
16. 


j Gen.9.5,6. 

k Kingdom 
7.8-16. (Gen. 
1.26; Zech. 
12.8.) 


(Cf.1 Chr, 
12,23-40, 


359 


the day to the house of Ish-bosheth, 
who lay on a bed at noon. 

6 And they came thither into the 
midst of the house, as though they 
would have fetched wheat; and they 
smote him under the fifth rib: and 
Rechab and Baanah his brother 
escaped. 

7 For when they came into the 
house, he lay on his bed in his bed- 
chamber, and they smote him, and 
slew him, and beheaded him, and 
took his head, and gat them away 
through the plain all night. 

8 And they brought the head of 
Ish-bosheth unto David to Hebron, 
and said to the king, Behold the 
head of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul 
thine enemy, ‘which sought thy 
life; and the LorpD hath avenged 
my lord the king this day of Saul, 
and of his seed. 

9 And David answered Rechab 
and Baanah his brother, the sons 
of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said. 
unto them, As the LorD liveth, 
who hath “redeemed my soul out of 
all adversity, . 

10 ‘When one told mx, saying, 
Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to 
have brought good tidings, I took 
hold of him, and slew him in Zik- 
lag, who thought that I would have 
given him a reward for his tidings: 

11 How much more, when wicked 
men have slain a righteous person 
in his own house upon his bed? 
shall I not therefore now /require 
his blood of your hand, and take 
you away from the earth? 

12 And David commanded his 
young men, and they slew them, 
and cut off their hands and their 
feet, and hanged them up over the 
poolin Hebron. But they took the 
head of Ish-bosheth, and buried it 
in the sepulchre of Abner in He- 


bron. 


CHAPTER 5. 


David becomes king over Israel 
(1 Chr. 11. 1-3). 


HEN came all the tribes of Is- 
rael to *David_unto Hebron, 
and spake, saying, Behold, we are 


|Ithy bone and thy flesh. 


2 Also in time past, when Saul 
was king over us, thou wast he that 
leddest out and broughtest in Israel: 
and the LORD said to thee, Thou 
shalt feed my people Israel, and 
thou shalt be a captain over Israel. 

3 So all the ‘elders of Israel came 
to the king to Hebron; and king 


David made a league with them in 
Hebron before the LORD: and they 
anointed David king over Israel. 

4 David was thirty years old 
when he began to reign, and he 
reigned forty years. 

5 In Hebron he reigned over Ju- 
dah seven years and six months: 
and in Jerusalem he feigned thirty 
and three years over all Israel and 
Judah. 


Jerusalem made the capital of 
the united kingdom (1 Chr.11.4-9). 


’ 6 And the king and hismen went 


to “Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, 
the inhabitants of the land: which 
spake unto David, saying, Except 
thou take away the blind and the 
lame, thou shalt not come in 
hither: thinking, David cannot 
come in hither. 

7 Nevertheless David took the 
strong. hold of Zion: the same is 
the city of David. 

8 And David said on that day, 
Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, 
and smiteth the Jebusites, and the 
lame and the blind, that are hated 
of David’s soul, he shali be chief 
and captain. Whereforethey said, 
The blind and the lame shall 
not come into the house. 

9 So David dwelt in the fort, and 
called it the city of David. And 
David built round about from Millo 
and inward. 

10 And David went on, and grew 
great, and the Lorp God of hosts 


was with him. 

11 And Hiram °king of Tyre sent 
Messengers to David, and cedar 
trees, and carpenters, and masons: 
and they built David an house. 

12 And David perceived that the 
Lorp had established him king over 
Israel, and that he had exalted his 
kingdom for his people Israel’s sake. 


Children of David born in Jeru- 
salem. (Cf. 2 Sam. 3. 2-55; 
1 Chr. 32 1=4)) 


13 And David took him more! 
concubines and wives out of Jerusa- 
lem, after he was come from He- 
bron: and there were yet sons and 
daughters born to David. 

14 And these be the names of 
those that were born unto him in 
Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Sho- 
bab, and Nathan, and Solomon, 

15 Ibhar also, and Elishua, and 
Nepheg, and Japhia, 

16 And Elishama, and Eliada, 
and Eliphalet, 


II SAMUEL. 


a Josh.15.63. 

b 1 Chr.14.1,2. 
¢ 2 Sam.23.14. 
d@1 Chr.11.15. 
e Jas.4.15. 


fie.The plain 
of breaches. 


g1 Chr.14.16, 
Gibeon. 


h Josh.15. 


9,60, Kir- 
Jjath-jearim 


360 


War with the Philistines 
(1 Chr. 14. 8-17). 


17 But when the Philistines heard 
that they had anointed David king 
over Israel, all the Philistines came 
up to seek David; and David heard 
of it, and went down to the hold. 


(Here, in theorder of time, comes 
2 Sam. 23. 13-17; 1 Chr. 11. 15-19; 
12. 8-15.) 


18 The ¢Philistines also came and 
spread themselves in the valley of 
Rephaim. ; 

19 And David ‘enquired of the 
Lorp, saying, Shall I go up to the 
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them 
into mine hand? And the LorD said 
unto David, Go up: for I will doubt- 
less deliver the Philistines into thine 
hand. 

20 And David came to Baal-pera- 
zim, and David smote them there, 
and said, The Lorp hath broken 
forth upon mine enemies before me, 
as the breach of waters. Therefore 
he called the name of that place 
fBaal-perazim. 

21 And there they left their im- 
ages, and David and. his men 

urned them. 

22 And the Philistines came up 
yet again, and spread themselves 
in the valley of Rephaim. ; 

23 And when David enquired of 
the Lorp, he said, Thou shalt not 
go up; but fetch a compass behind 
them, and come upon them over 
against the mulberry trees. 

24 And let it be, when thou hear- 
est the sound of a going in the tops 
of the mulberry trees, that then 
thou shalt bestir thyself: for then 
shall the LoRD go out before thee, 
to smite the host of the Philistines. 

25 And David did so, as the LorD 
had commanded him; and smote 
the Philistines from &Geba until 
thou come to Gazer. 


CHAPTER 6. 


David seeks to bring the ark to 
Jerusalem. 


AGA: David gathered together 
all the chosen men of Israel, 
thirty thousand. 

2 And David arose, and went with 
all the people that were with him 
from /Baale of Judah, to bring up 
from thence the ark of God, whose 
name is called by the name of the 
LORD of hosts that dwelleth be- 
tween the cherubims. 


3 And they set the ark of God 
upon a new !cart, and brought it 
out of the house of Abinadab that 
was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and 
Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave 
the new cart. 

4 And they brought it out of the 
house of Abinadab which was at 
Gibeah, accompanying the ark of 
God: and Ahio went before the 


ark. 

5 And David and all the house of 
Israel played before the LoRD on 
all manner of instruments made 
of fir wood, even on harps, and on 
psalteries, and on timbrels, and on 
cornets, and on cymbals. 


6 And when they came to ¢Na-} 


chon’s threshingfloor, Uzzah put 
forth his “hand to the ark of God, 
and took hold of it; for the oxen 
shook it. 

7 And the anger of the LORD was 
kindled against Uzzah; and God 
smote him there for his error; and 
there he died by the ark of God. 

8 And David was displeased, be- 
cause the LorD had made a breach 
upon Uzzah: and he called the 
name of the place Perez-uzzah to 
this day. 

9 And David was afraid of the 
Lorp that day, and said, How shall 
the ark of the LoRD come to me? 

10 So David would not remove 
the ark of the LorD unto him into 
the city of David: but David car- 
tied it aside into the house of 
Obed-edom the Gittite. 

11 And the ark of the LORD con- 
tinued in the house of Obed-edom 
the Gittite three months: and the 
Lorp blessed Obed-edom, and all 
his household. 


David brings up the ark 
(1 Chr. 15, 25-29; 16. 1). 


12 And it was told king David, 
saying, The LorpD hath blessed the 
house of Obed-edom, and all that 
pertaineth unto him, because of 
the ark of God. So David went 
and brought up the ark of God from 
the house of Obed-edsin into the 
city of David witn gladness. 

13. And it was so, that when they 
that bare the ark of the Lorp had 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1042. 


a 1 Chr.13.9, 
Chidon. 


b Num.4.15. 

c Miracles 
(O.T.). 1 Ki. 
13.4-6. (Gen. 
5.24; Jon.2. 
1-10.) 


d One pace = 
about 5 ft. 


e1 Chr.16.1. 
f 1 Sam.13.14. 


g Cf.2 Sam. 
21.8. 


[623 


gone six ¢paces, he sacrificed oxen 
and fatlings. 


15 So David and all the house of 
Israel brought up the ark of the 
Lorp with shouting, and with the 
sound of the trumpet. 

16 And as the ark of the Lorp 
came into the city of David, Michal 
Saul’s daughter looked through a 
window, and saw king David leap- 
ing and dancing before the LORD; 
and she despised him in her heart. 

17 “And they brought in the ark 
of the LorD, and set it in his place, 
in the midst of the tabernacle that 
David had pitched for it: and David 
offered burnt-offerings and peace- 
offerings before the LoRD. ' 

18 And as soon as David had 
made an end of offering burnt- 
offerings and peace-offerings, he 
blessed the people in the name of 
the LorpD of hosts. 

19 And he dealt among all the 
people, even among the whole mul- 
titude of Israel, as well to the wom-. 
ef as men, to every one a cake of 
bread, and a good piece of flesh, 
and a flagon of wine. Soall the peo- 
ple departed every one to his house. 

20 Then David returned to bless 
his household. And Michal the 
daughter of Saul came out to meet 


David, and said, How glorious was 
the king of Israel to day, who un- 
covered himself to day in the eyes 
of the handmaids of his servants, as 
one of the vain fellows shamelessly 
uncovereth himself! 

21 And David said unto Michal, 
It was before the LorpD, fwhich 
chose me before thy father, and 
before all his house, to appoint me 
ruler over the people of the Lorp, 
over Israel: therefore will: I play 
before the LORD. 

22 And I will yet be more vile 
than thus, and will be base in mine 
own sight: and of the maidservants 
which thou hast spoken of, of them 
shall I be had in honour. 

23 Therefore Michal the daughter 
of Saul had no échild unto the day 


of her death. 


1 The story of David’s new cart and its results is a striking illustration of the 


spiritual truth that blessing does not follow even 
of God except as that service is rendered in God’s way, 
God had given explicit directions how the ark should be borne (Num. 4. 
(1 Sarn. 6. 7, 8). 


failure. 


1-15), but David adopted a Philistine expedient 


of Philistine ways of doing service 
See, also, 1 Chr. 15. 2. 


to Christ. 
361 


the best intentions in the service 
It 1s a constant point of 


The church is full 


Cf. 1 Cor. 1. 17-31; 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. 


< 


98) 


CHAPTER 7. 


David’s desire to build the 
Lorp’s house (1 Chr. 17. 1-3). 


AN? it came to pass, when the 
king sat in his house, and the 
Lorp had given him rest round 
about from all his enemies; 

2 That the king said unto Nathan 
the prophet, See now, I dwell in 
an house of cedar, but the ark of 
God dwelleth within curtains. 

3 And Nathan said to the king, 
Go, do all that zs in thine heart; 
for the LoRD /s with thee. 


The Seventhor Davidic Covenant 
(1 Chr. 17. 4-15). 


4 And it came to pass that night, 
that the word of the Lorp came 
unto Nathan, saying, 

5 Go and tell my servant David, 
Thus saith the Lorp, Shalt thou 
build me an house for me to dwell in? 

6 Whereas I have not dwelt in 
any house since the time that I 
brought up the children of Israel 
out of Egypt, even to this day, but 
have walked in a tent and in a tab- 
ernacle. 

7 Inall the places wherein I have 
walked with all the children of Is- 
rael spake I a word with any of the 
tribes of Israel, whom I commanded 
to feed my people Israel, saying, 
Why build ye not me an house of 
cedar? 

8 Now therefore ¢so shalt thou 
say unto my servant "David, Thus 
saith the Lorp of hosts, I took thee 
from the sheepcote, from following 


1 Verses 14 and 15 state the 


the wicked is penal, not remedial. 


_ *The Davidic Covenant (vs. 8-17). 
kingdom of Christ “of the seed of David 


, secures: 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1042. 


a The Eight 
Covenants. 
Heb.8.8. 
(Gen.1.28; 
Heb.8,10.) 


b Israel (his- 
tory). vs. 


8-17; 2 Ki.17. 


6-23. (Gen. 
12.2,3; Rom. 
11.26.) 

c Heb.1.5, 


d Judgments 
(the seven). 


e Christ (first 


advent). Psa. 


2.2. (Gen.3. 
15; Acts 1. 
9.) 


v6 


: 1 
the sheep, to be ruler over my peo- 
ple, over Israel: 4 

9 And I -was with thee whither- 
soever thou wentest, and have cut 
off all thine enemies out of thy 
sight, and have made thee a great 
name, like unto the name of the 
great men that are in the earth. 

10 Moreover I will appoint a 
place for my people Israel, and will 
plant them, that they may dwell in 
a place of their own, and move no 
more; neither shall the children of 
wickedness afflict them any more, 
as beforetime, 

11 And as since the time that I 
commanded judges to be over my 
people Israel, and have caused thee 
to rest from all thine enemies, 
Also the Lorp telleth thee that he 
will make thee an house. 

12 And when thy days be fulfilled, 
and thou shalt sleep with thy 
fathers, I will set up thy seed after 
thee, which shall proceed out of thy 
bowels, and I will establish his 
kingdom. 

13 He shall build an house for my 
name, and I will stablish the 
throne of his kingdom for ever. 

14 I will be his father, and he 
shall be my son. If he commit iniq- 
uity, I will ¢chasten him with the 
rod of men, and with the stripes of 
the children of men: 

15 But Imy mercy shall not de- 
part away from him, as I took it 
from Saul, whom I put away 
before thee. 

16 And thine ‘house and_ thy 
kingdom shall be established for 


principle of judgment within the family of God (see 
1 Cor. 11. 31, note), It is always remedial, not penal 


(Heb. 12. 5-11). Judgment of 


This covenant, upon which the glgrious 
according to the flesh” is to be founded, 


(1) A Davidic “house”; i.e. posterity, family. 
G A “throne”; i.e. royal authority. 
3) A kingdom; i.e. sphere of rule. 
(4) In perpetuity; “for ever.” 
f And this fourfold covenant has but one condition: disobedience in the 
Davidic family is to be visited with chastisement, but not to the abrogation of the 


covenant (2 Sam. 7. 15; Psa. 89. 20-37; Isa. 24. 5; 54. 3). 
first in the division of the kingdom under Rehoboam, and, 


ities (2 Ki, 25. 1-7), 


The chastisement fell; 
finally, in the captiv- 


Since that time but one King of the, Davidic family has been 
crowned at Jerusalem and He was crowned with thorns’ 


But the Davidic Cov- 


enant confirmed to David by the oath of Jehovah, and renewed to Mary by the 


angel Gabriél, is 


immutable (Psa. 89. 30-37), and the Lord 


God will yet give to that 


thorn-crowned One “‘the throne of his father David” (Lk. 1. 31-33; Acts 2. 29-32; 


15. 14-17). 
See, for 
Noahic, Gen. 9. 


1; Abrahamic, 
Deut. 30. 3; New, : 


Heb. 8. 8. 


the other seven covenants: Edenic, 


Gen. 15. 
362 


Gen. 1. 28; Adamic, Gen. 3. 15; 


18; Mosaic, Ex. 19. 25; Palestinian, 


7 17] 


ever before thee: thy ¢throne shall 
be established for ever. 

17 According to all these words, 
and according to all this vision, so 
did Nathan speak unto David. 


David’s worship and prayer 
(1 Chr. 17. 16-27). 


18 Then went king David in, and 
sat before the Lorp, and he ?said, 
Who am I, O Lord Gop? and what 
is my house, that thou hast brought 
me hitherto? 

19 And this was yet a small 
thing in thy sight, O Lord Gop; but 
thou hast spoken also of thy ser- 
vant’s house for a great while to 
come. And is this the manner of 
man, O Lord Gop? 

20 And what can David say more 
unto thee? for thou, Lord Gop, 
knowest thy servant. 

21 For thy word’s sake, and ac- 
cording to thine own heart, hast 
thou done all these great things, to 
make thy servant know them. 

22 Wherefore thou art great, O 
Lorp God: for there is none like 
thee, neither is there any God be- 
side thee, according to all that we 
have heard with our ears. 

23 And what one nation in the 
earth is like thy people, even like 
Israel, whom God went to ‘redeem 
for a people to himself, and to make 
him a name, and to do for you great 
things and terrible, for thy land, 
before thy people, which thou re- 
deemedst to thee from Egypt, from 
the nations and their gods? 

24 For thou hast confirmed to 
thyself thy people Israel to be a 
people unto thee for ever: and thou, 
Lorpb, art become their God. 

25 And now, O Lorp God, the 
word that thou hast spoken con- 
cerning thy servant, and concern- 
ing his house, establish it for ever, 
and do as thou hast said. 

26 And let thy name be magnified 
for ever, saying, The Lor of hosts 
is the God over Israel: and let the 
house of thy servant David be 
established before thee.. 

27 For thou, O Lorp of hosts, 
God of Israel, hast revealed to thy 
servant, saying, I will build thee an 
house: therefore hath thy servant 
found in his heart to pray this 
prayer unto thee. 

28 And now, O Lord Gop, thou 
art that God, and thy words be 
true, and thou hast promised this 
goodness unto thy servant: 

29 Therefore now let it please thee 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1042. 


a Kingdom 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 


c Ex.14.30, 


note. 


d Num.24.17. 


e 2 Sam.12.31, 


f1 Chr.18.4. 


g Or, Tibhath. 


h1 Ki.7.51; 
1 Chr.18.11. 


[Bu , 


to bless the house of thy servant, 
that it may continue for ever before 
thee: for thou, O Lord Gop, hast 
spoken jt: and with thy blessing let 
the house of thy servant be blessed 
for ever. 


CHAPTER 8. 


The fullestablishment of David’s 
kingdom (1 Chr. 18. 1-17). 


ND after this it came to pass, 
that David smote the Philis- 
tines, and subdued them: and 
David took Metheg-ammah out 
of the hand of the Philistines. 

2 And he smote ¢Moab, ‘and 
measured them with a line, casting 
them down to the ground; even 
with two lines measured he to put 
to death, and with one full line to 
keep alive. And so the Moabites 
became David’s servants, and 


- |brought gifts. 


3 David smote also Hadadezer, 
the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as 
he went to recover his border at the 
river Euphrates. 

4 And David took from him a 
thousand /chariots, and seven hun- 
dred horsemen, and twenty thou- 
sand footmen: and David houghed 
all the chariot horses, but reserved 
of them for an hundred chariots. 

5 And when the Syrians of Damas- 
cus came to succour Hadadezer king 
of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians 
two and twenty thousand men. 

6 Then David put garrisons in 
Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians 
became servants to David, and 
brought gifts. And the LorD pre- 
served David whithersoever he 
went. 

7 And David took the shields of 
gold that were on the servants of 


Hadadezer, and brought them to 
Jerusalem. 

8 And from *Betah, and from 
Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king 
David took exceeding much brass... 

9 When Toi king of Hamath 
heard that David had smitten all - 
the host of Hadadezer, 

10 Then Toi sent Joram his son 
unto king David, to salute him, 
and to bless him, because he had 
fought against Hadadezer, and 
smitten him: for Hadadezer had 
wars with Toi. And Joram brought 
with him vessels of silver, and ves- 
sels of gold, and vessels of brass: 

11 Which also king David did 
hdedicate unto the LORD, with the 
silver and gold that he had dedi- 


cated of all nations which he sub- 
dued; 

12 Of Syria, and of Moab, and of 
the children of Ammon, and of the 
Philistines, and of Amalek, and of 
the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Re- 
hob, king of Zobah. 

13 And David gat him a name 
when he returned from smiting of 
the Syrians in the valley of salt, 
being eighteen thousand men. — 

14 And he put garrisons in 
“Edom; throughout all Edom put 
he garrisons, and all they of Edom 
became David’s servants. And the 
Lorp preserved David whitherso- 
ever he went. 

15 And David reigned over all Is- 
rael; and David. executed judgment 
and justice unto all his people. 

16 And Joab the son of Zeruiah 
was over the host; and Jehosha- 
phat the son of Ahilud was re- 
corder; 

17 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, 
and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, 
were the priests; and Seraiah was 
the scribe; 

18 And ‘Benaiah the son of Jehoi- 
ada‘was over both the Cherethites 
and “he Pelethites; and David’s 
sons were chief rulers. 


CHAPTER 9, 
David and Mephibosheth. 


/ Ng D David said, Is'there yet any 
that is left of the house of Saul, 
that I may shew him ¢kindness for 
Jonathan’s sake? 

2 And there was of the house of 
Saul a servant whose name was 
Ziba. And when they had called 
him unto David, the king said unto 
him, Art thou Ziba? And he said, 
Thy servant is he, 

3 And the king said, Js there not 
yet any of the house of Saul, that I 
may shew the kindness of God unto 
him? And Ziba said unto the king, 
Jonathan hath yet a son, which is 
lame on his feet, 

4 And the king said unto him, 
Where 1s he? And Ziba said unto 
the king, Behold, he is in the house 
of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in 
Lo-debar, 

5 Then _king David sent, and 
fetched him out of the house of 
Machir, the son of Ammiel, from 


Lo-debar. 

6 Now when Mephibosheth, the 
son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, 
was come unto David, he fell on his 


face, and did reverence. And Da- 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1040. 


a Gen.27.29; 


Num.24.18. 
61 Ki.4.3. 
¢ 1 Chr.18.17. 


d A lovely pic- 
ture of salva- 
tion by 
grace. (1) 
What grace 
is—kindness 
to a helpless 
one for an- 
other’s sake, 
vs.1-3. (1 
John 2.12.) 
(2) Grace 
gives the 
highest 
place, v.11. 
(Eph.1.1-6.) 
(3) Grace 
keeps the 
saved one, v. 
13. (John 10. 
28,29.) 


e 2 Sam.16.9. 
f 2 Sam.19.29. 
8 vs.7,13. 

h1 Chr.8.34, 
4 2 Ki.25.29. 


364. 


5 P| 
vid said, Mephibosheth. And he 
answered, Behold thy servant! 4 

7 And David said unto him, Fear 
not: for I will surely shew thee kind- 
ness for Jonathan thy father’s sake, 
and will restore thee all the land of 
Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat 
bread at my table continually. 

8 And he bowed himself, and 
said, What is thy servant, that 
thou shouldest look upon such a 
dead ‘dog as I am? ng 

9 Then the king called to Ziba, 
Saul’s servant, and said unto him, 
I have ‘given unto thy master’s son 
all that pertained to Saul and to all 
his house. 

10 Thou therefore, and thy sons, 
and thy servants, shall till the land 
for him, and thou shalt bring in the 
fruits, that thy master’s son may 
have food to eat: but Mephibosheth 
thy master’s son shall eat bread 
Salway at my table. Now Ziba 
had fifteen sons and twenty ser- 
vants. : 

11 Then said Ziba unto the king, 
According to all that my lord the 
king hath commanded his servant, 
so shall thy servant do. As for 
Mephibosheth, said the king, he 
shali eat at my table, as one of the 

ing’s sons. 

12 And Mephibosheth hada young 
son, whose name was /Micha. And 
all that dwelt in the house of Ziba 


- |were servants unto Mephibosheth. 


13. So Mephiboshethdweltin Jeru- 
salem: for he did eat continually 
at the king’s ‘table; and was lame 
on both his feet. : 


CHAPTER 10. 


The Ammonite-Syrian war 
(1 Chr. 19. 1-19), 


ANP it came to pass after this, 
that the king of the children 
of Ammon died, and Hanun his son 
reigned in his stead. 

2 Then said David, I will shew 
kindness unto Hanun the son of 
Nahash, as his father shewed kind- 
ness unto me. And David sent to 
comfort him by the hand of his ser- 
vants for his father. And David’s 
servants came into the land of the 
children of Ammon. 

3 And the princes of the children 
of Ammon said unto Hanun their 
lord, Thinkest thou that David doth 
honour thy father, that he hath 
sent comforters unto thee? hath not 
David rather sent his servants 


o 


10 4] 


unto thee, to search the city, and to 
spy it out, and to overthrow it? 

4 Wherefore Hanun took David’s 
servants, and shaved off the one 
half of their beards, and cut off their 
garments in the middle, even to) 
their buttocks, and sent them away. 

5 When they told zt unto David, 
he sent to meet them, because the 
men were greatly ashamed: and the 
king said, Tarry at Jericho until your 
beards be grown, and then return. 

6 And when the children of Am- 
mon saw that they stank before 
David, the children of Ammon sent 
and hired the “Syrians of Beth- 
rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, 
twenty thousand footmen, and of 
king Maacah a thousand men, and 
of Ish-tob twelve thousand men. 

7 And when David heard of it, he 
sent Joab, and all the host of the 
bmighty men, 

8 And the children of Ammon 
came out, and put the battle in 
array at the entering in of the gate: 
and the Syrians of Zoba, and of 
Rehob, and Ish-tob, and Maacah, 
were by themselves in the field. 

9 When Joab saw that the front 
of the battle was against him before 
and behind, he chose of all the 
choice men of Israel, and put them 
in array against the Syrians: 

10 And the rest of the people he 
delivered into the hand of Abishai 
his brother, that he might put 
them in array against the children 
of Ammon. 

11 And he said, If the Syrians be 
too strong for me, then thou shalt 
help me: but if the children of Am- 
mon be too strong for thee, then I 
will come and help thee. 

12 Be of good ‘courage, and let us 
play the men for our people, and for 
the cities of our God: and the LorD 
do that which seemeth him good. 

13 And Joab drew nigh, and the 
people that were with him, unto the 
battle against the Syrians: and 
they fled before him. 

14 And when the children of Am- 
mon saw that the Syrians were fled, 
then fled they also before Abishai, 
and entered into the city. So Joab 
returned from the children of Am- 
mon, and came to Jerusalem. 

15 And when the Syrians saw that 
they were smitten before Israel, 
they gathered themselves together. 

16 And MHadarezer sent, and 
brought out the Syrians that were 


beyond the river: and they came to 
Helam; and ¢Shobach the captain 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1037. | 


a 2 Sam.8.3, 
5. 


6 2 Sam.23.8. 

¢ Deut.31.6; 
Josh.1-6,7,9; 
Neh.4.14. 


d1 Chr.19.16, 
Shophach. 


é1 Chr.19.18, 
#1 Chr.20.1. 
g1 Chr.3.5. 


365 


[11 8 
of the host of Hadarezer went be- 
fore them. 

‘17 And when it was told David, 
he gathered all Israel together, and 
passed over Jordan, and came to 
Helam. And the Syrians set them- 
selves in array against David, and 
fought with him. 

18 And the Syrians fled before Is- 
rael; and David slew the men of 
seven hundred chariots, of the 
Syrians, and forty thousand ¢horse- 
men, and smote Shobach the cap- 
tain of their host, who died there. 

19 And when all the kings that 
were servants to Hadarezer saw 
that they were smitten before Is- 
rael, they made peace with Israel, 
and served them. So the Syrians 
feared to help the children of Am- 
mon any more. 


CHAPTER 11. 
David’s great sin. 


AND. it came to pass, after the 
year was expired, at the time 
when kings go forth to battle, that 
David sent /Joab, and his servants 
with him, and all Israel; and they 
destroyed the children of Ammon, 
and besieged Rabbah. But David 
tarried still at Jerusalem. 

2 And it came to pass in an even- 
ingtide, that David arose from off 
his bed, and walked upon the roof 
of the king’s house: and from the 
roof he saw a woman washing her- 
self; and the woman was very beau- 
tiful to look upon. 

3 And David sent and enquired 
after the woman. And one said, Is 
not this 8Bath-sheba, the daughter 
of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the 
Hittite? 

4 And David sent messengers, 
and took her; and she came in unto 
him, and he lay with her; for she 
was purified from her uncleanness: 
and she returned unto her house. 

5 And the woman conceived, and 
sent and told David, and said, Iam 
with child. 

6 And David sent to Joab, say- 
ing, Send me Uriah the Hittite. 
And Joab sent Uriah to David. 

7 And when Uriah was come unto 
him, David demanded of him how 
Joab did, and how the people did, 
and how the war prospered. 

8 And David said to Uriah, Go 
down to thy house, and wash thy 
feet. And Uriah departed out of 
the king’s house, and there followed 
him a mess of meat from the king, 


11 9] 


II SAMUEL. 


[12 - 


9 But Uriah slept at the door of} B.c. 1035." 


the king’s house with all the ser- 
vants of his lord, and went not 
down to his house. ; 
10 And when they had told David, 
saying, Uriah went not down unto 
his house, David said unto Uriah, 
Camest thou not from thy journey? 
why then didst thou not go down 
unto thine house? , 
11 And Uriah 4said unto David, 
The ark, and Israel, and Judah, 
abide in tents; and my lord Joab, 


and the servants of my lord, are en-|. 


camped in the open fields; shall I 
then go into mine house, to eat and 
to drink, and to lie with my wife? as 
thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, 
I will not do this thing. . 

12 And David said to Uriah, 
Tarry here to day also, and to mor- 
row I will let thee depart. So 
Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, 
and the morrow. 

13 And when David had called 
him, he did eat and drink before 
him; and he made him drunk: and 
at even he went out to lie on his bed 
with the servants of his lord, but 
went not down to his house. 

14 And it came to pass in the 
morning, that David wrote a 4letter 
to Joab, and sent ft by the hand of 
Uriah. 

15 And he wrote in the letter, 
saying, Set ye Uriah in the fore- 
front of the hottest battle, and 


retire ye from him, that he may be 
fsmitten, and die. 

16 And it came to pass, when 
Joab observed the city, that he 
assigned Uriah unto a place where 
he knew that valiant men were. 

17 And the men of the city went 
out, and fought with Joab: and 
there fell some of the people of the 
servants of David; and Uriah the 
Hittite died also. 

18 Then Joab sent and told David 
all the things concerning the war; 

19 And charged the messenger, 
saying, When thou hast made an 
end of telling the matters of the 
war unto the king, 

20 And if so be that the king’s 
wrath arise, and he say unto thee, 
Wherefore approached ye so nigh 
unto the city when ye did fight? 
knew ye not that they would shoot 
from the wall? 

21 Who smote Abimelech the son 
of 4Jerubbesheth? did not a woman 
cast a piece of a millstone upon him 
from the wall, that he died in The- 
bez? why went ye nigh the wall? 


a 2 Sam.7.2,6. 


61 Ki.21.8,9. 
c 2 Sam,12.9, 


d Jerubbaal, 
Jud.6.32. 


e 2 Sam.12.26. 


f 1 Chr.21.7; 
Heb.13.4. 


g Parables 
(O.T.). vs. 
1-4; 2 Sam. 
14.1-14. 
(Jud.9.7-15; 
Zech.11.7- 
14.) 


366 


then say thou, Thy servant Uriah 
the Hittite is dead also. 

22 So the messenger went, and 
came and shewed David all that 
Joab had sent him for. 

23 And the messenger said unto 
David, Surely the men prevailed 
against us, and came out unto us 
into the field, and we were upon 
them even unto the entering of the 
gate. 

24 And the shooters shot from 
off the wall upon thy servants; and 
some of the king’s servants be 
dead, and thy servant Uriah the 
Hittite is dead also. 

25 Then David said unto the mes- 
senger, Thus shalt thou say unto 
Joab, Let not this thing displease 
thee, for the sword devoureth one 
as well as another: make thy battle 
more strong, against the city, and 
eee roe it: and encourage thou 
im. 

26 And when the wife of Uriah 
heard that Uriah her husband was 
dead, she mourned for her husband. 
27 And when-the mourning was 
past, David sent and fetched ‘her to 
his house, and she became his wife, 
and bare himason. But the thing 
that David had done /displeased 
the Lorpb. 


CHAPTER 12. 
David’s repentance. 


yayris, the Lorp sent &Nathan 
unto David. And he came 
unto him, and said unto him, There 
were two men in one city; the one ' 
rich, and the other poor. 

2 The rich man ‘had exceeding 
many flocks and herds: 

3 But the poor man had nothing, 
save one little ewe lamb, which he 
had bought and nourished up: and 
it grew up together with him, and 
with his children; it did eat of his 
own meat, and drank of his own 
cup, and lay in his bosom, and was 
unto him as a daughter. 

4 And there came a traveller unto 
the rich man, and he spared to take 
of his own flock and of his own 
herd, to dress for the wayfaring 
man that was come unto him; but 
took the poor man’s lamb, and 
dressed it for the man that was 
come to him. 

5 And David’s anger was greatly 
kindled against the man; and he 
said to Nathan, As the Lorn liveth, 
the man that hath done this thing 
shall surely die: 


12 6f: 


II SAMUEL. 


[12 29 


6 And he shall restore the lamb 
fourfold, because he did this thing, 
and because he had no pity. 

7 And Nathan said to David, 
Thou artthe man. Thus saith the 
Lorp God of Israel, I anointed thee 
king over Israel, and I delivered thee 
out of the hand of Saul; 

8 And I gave thee thy master’s 
house, and thy master’s wives into 
thy bosom, and gave thee the house 
of Israel and of Judah; and if that 
had been too little, I would more- 
over have given unto thee such and 
such things. 

9 Wherefore hast thou despised 
the commandment of the LorD, to 
do evil in his sight? thou hast killed 
Uriah the Hittite with the sword, 
and hast taken his wife to be thy 
wife, and hast slain him with the 
sword of the children of Ammon. 

10 Now therefore the sword shall 
never depart from thine house; be- 
cause thou hast despised me, and 
hast taken the wife of Uriah the 
Hittite to be thy wife. 

11 Thus saith the LorbD, Behold, 
I will raise up evil against thee out 
of thine own house, and I will take 
thy wives before thine eyes, and 

give them unto thy neighbour, and 
he shall lie with thy wives in the 
sight of this sun. 

12 For thou didst it secretly: but 
TI will do this thing before all Israel, 
and before the sun. 

13 And David said unto Nathan, 
I have ¢sinned against the LorD. 
And Nathan said unto David, The 
LorD also hath put away thy sin; 
thou shalt not die. 

14 Howbeit, because by this deed 
thou hast given great occasion to 
the enemies of the LorD to blas- 
pheme, the child also that is born 
unto thee &shall surely die. 

15 And Nathan departed unto his 
house. And the Lorp struck the 
child that Uriah’s wife bare unto 
David, and it was very sick. 

16 David therefore besought God 
for the child; and David fasted, and 
went in, and lay all night upon the 
earth. 

17 And the elders of his house 
arose, and went to him, to raise 
him up from the earth: but he 
would not, neither did he eat bread 
with them. 

18 And it came to pass on the 
seventh day, that the child died. 
And the servants of David feared 
to tell him that the child was dead: 
for they said, Behold, while the 


B.C. 1034. 


a Here read 


Psalm 


51. 


b Judgments 
(the seven). 
vs.13,14; 
Psa.50.1-22. 
(2 Sam.7. 
14; Rev.22. 
12.) 


¢ Isa.38.2,3; 
Joel 2.14; 


Jon.3 


9. 


di.e. Beloved 
of theLORD. 
Neh.13.26; 
Mt.3.17. 


2 


67 


child was yet alive, we spake unte 
him, and he would not hearken 
unto our voice: how will he then 
vex himself, if we tell him that the 
child is dead? 

19 But when David saw that his 
servants whispered, David per- 
ceived that the child was dead: 
therefore David said unto his ser- 
vants, Is the child dead? And 
they said, He is dead. 

20 Then David arose from the 
earth, and washed, and anointed 
himself, and changed his apparel, 
and came into the house of the 
LorD, and worshipped: then he 
came to his own house; and when 
he required, they set bread before ‘ 
him, and he did eat. 

21 Then said his servants unto 
him, What thing zs this that thou 
hast done? thou didst fast and weep 
for the child, while it was alive; 
but when the child was dead, thou 
didst rise and eat bread. 

22 And he said, While the child 
was yet alive, I fasted and wept: 
for I said, ‘Who can tell whether 
Gop will be gracious to me, that 
the child may live? 

23 But now he is dead, wherefore 
should I fast? can I bring him back 
again? I shall go to him, but he 
shall not return to me. 


The birth of Solomon. 


24 And David comforted Bath- 
sheba his wife, and went in unto 
her; and lay with her: and she 
bare a son, and he called his 
name Solomon: and the LoRD loved 
him, 

25 And he sent by the hand of 
Nathan the prophet; and he called 
his name ¢Jedidiah, because of the 
LORD. 


David and Joab take Rabbah 
(1 Chrs 20-a1=3))) 


26 And Joab fought against Rab- 
bah of the children of Ammon, and 
took the royal city. 

27 And Joab sent messengers to 
David, and said, I have fought 
against Rabbah, and have taken 
the city of waters. 

28 Now therefore gather the rest 
of the people together, and encamp 
against the city, and take it: lest I 
take the city, and it be called after 
my name, 

29 And David gathered all the 
people together, and went to Rab- 
bah, and fought against it, and 
took it. 


12 30] 


30 And he took their king’s crown 
from off his head, the weight 
whereof was a “talent of gold with 
the precious stones: and it was set 
on David’s head. And he brought 
forth the spoil of the city in great 
abundance. 

31 And he brought forth the peo- 
ple that were therein, and put 
them under saws, and under har- 
rows of iron, and under axes of iron, 
and made them pass through the 
brick-kiln: and thus did he unto all 
the cities of the children of Ammon. 
So David and all the people re- 
turned unto Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER 13. 
Ammnon’s crime. 


(AND it came to pass after this, 
that Absalom the son of David 
had a fair sister, whose name was 
6Tamar; and Amnon the son of 
David loved her. 

2 And Amnon was so ‘vexed, that 
he fell sick for his sister Tamar; 
for she was a virgin; and Amnon 
thought it hard for him to do any 
thing to her, 

3 But Amnon had a friend, whose 
mame was Jonadab, the son of 
4Shimeah David’s brother: and 
Jonadab was a very subtil man. 

4 And he said unto him, Why art 
thou, being the king’s son, lean 
from day to day? wilt thou not 
tell me? And Amnon said unto 
him, I love Tamar, miy brother Ab- 
salom’s sister. 

5 And Jonadab said unto him, 
Lay thee down on thy bed, and 
make thyself sick: and when thy 
father cometh to see thee, say unto 
him, I pray thee, let my sister Ta- 
mar come, and give me meat, and 
dress the meat in my sight, that I 
may see it, and eat it at her hand. 

6 So Amnon lay down, and made 
himself sick: and when the king 
was come to see him, Amnon said 
unto the king, I pray thee, let Ta- 
Mar my sister come, and make me 
a couple of ‘cakes in my sight, that 
I may eat at her hand. 

7 Then David sent home to Ta- 
mar, saying, Go now to thy brother 
Amnon’s house, and dress) him 
meat. 

8 So Tamar went to her brother 
Amnon’s house; and he was laid 
down. And she took flour, and 
kneaded it, and made cakes in his 
sight, and did bake the cakes. 

9 And she took a pan, and poured 


yp. Ser lV? 6e oe 


II SAMUEL. 


a One tal- 
ent = £6150, 
or $29,085. 
6 1 Chr.3.9. 
c1 Ki,21.4. 


d 1 Sam.16.9. 
Shammah, 


e Gen.18.6. 


fLev.18.9, 
11; 20.17. 


g Psa.45.13,14. 


h 2 Sam.1.2; 
Josh.7.6; 
Job 2.12. 


368 


SRE ee 


[13 2 


B.C. 1033. |them out before him; but he re- 


fused to eat. And Amnon said, 
Have out all men from me. And 
they went out every man from him. 

10 And Amnon said unto Tamar, 
Bring the meat into the chamber, 
that I may eat of thine hand. And 
Tamar took the cakes which she 
had made, and brought them into 
the chamber to Amnon her brother. 

11 And when she had brought 
them unto him to eat, he took hold 
ot her, and said unto her, Come lie 
with me, my sister. 

12 And she answered him, Nay, 
my brother, do not force me; for no 
such thing ought to be done in 
‘Israel: do not thou this folly. 

13 And I, whither shall I cause 
my shame to go? and as for thee, 
thou shalt be as one of the fools in 
Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, 
speak unto the king; for he will not 
withhold me from thee. 

14 Howbeit he would not hearken 
unto her voice: but, being stronger 
than she, forced her, and lay with 


er. 

15 Then Amnon hated her ex- 
ceedingly; so that the hatred 
wherewith he hated her was greater 
than the love wherewith he had 
loved her. And Amnon said unto 
her, Arise, be gone. 

16 And she said unto him, There 
is no cause: this evil in sending me 
away is greater than the other that 
thou didst unto me. But he would 
not hearken unto her. ; 

17_Then he called his servant that 
ministered unto him, and said, Put 
now this woman out from me, and 
bolt the door after her. 

18 And she had a garment of 
divers colours upon her: sfor with 
such robes were the king’s daugh- 
ters that were virgins apparelled, 
Then his servant brought her out, 
and bolted the door after her. } 

19 And Tamar put “ashes on her 
head, and rent her garment of 
divers colours that was on her, and 
laid her hand on her head, and 
went on crying. 

20 And Absalom her brother said 
unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother 
been with thee? but hold now thy 
peace, my sister: he zs thy brother; 
regard not this thing. So Tamar 
remained desolate in her brother 
Absalom’s house. 


21 But when king David heard of 
all these things, he was very wroth. | 

22 And Absalom spake unto his 
brother Amnon neither good nor 


«gia. 
13-23] 


because he had forced his sister 
Tamar. 


Absalom’s vengeance for 
Tamar’s wronsg. 


23 And it came to pass after two 
full years, that Absalom had sheep- 
shearers in Baal-hazor, which is 
beside Ephraim: and Absalom in- 
vited all the king’s sons. 

24 And Absalom came to the king, 
and said, Behold now, thy servant 
hath sheepshearers; let the king, I 
beseech thee, and his servants go 
with thy servant. 

25 And the king said to Absalom, 
Nay, my son, let us not all now go, 
lest we be chargeable unto thee. 
And he pressed him: howbeit he 
would not go, but blessed him. 

26 Then said Absalom, If not, I 
pray thee, let my brother Amnon 
gowithus. And the king said unto 
him, Why should he go with thee? 

27 But Absalom pressed him, that 
he let Amnon and all the king’s 
sons go with him. 

28 Now Absalom had commanded 
his servants, saying, Mark ye now 
when Amnon’s heart is merry with 
wine, and when I say unto you, 
Smite Amnon; then kill him, fear 
not: have not I commanded you? 
be courageous, and be valiant. 

29 And the servants of Absalom 
did unto Amnon as Absalom had 
commanded. Then all the king’s 
sons arose, and every man gat him 
up upon his mule, and fled. 

30 And it came to pass, while 
they were in the way, that tidings 
came to David, saying, Absalom 
hath slain all the king’s sons, and 
there is not one of them left. 

31 Then the king arose, and tare 
his garments, and lay on the earth; 
and all his servants stood by with 
their clothes rent. é 

32 And Jonadab, the son of Shim- 
eah David’s brother, answered and 
said, Let not my lord suppose that 
they have slain all the young men 
the king’s sons; for Amnon only is 
dead: for by the appointment of 
Absalom this hath been determined 
from the day that he forced his 
sister Tamar. 


1See 1 Sam. 27. 8. 


upon Geshur, and evidently bore away 


Of her was born Absaiom, and in him was 
of a father who had been the reckless chief of a handful of desperate men (2 Sam. 


3. 3; 23. 8-39), and whom only the divine love could tame (2 Sam, 22. 36). 


Il SAMUEL. 


bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, 


B.C. 1032. 


a Lit. was 
consumed. 


6 2 Chr.11.6. 


c Parables 
(O.T.). vs.1- 
14; 1 Ki.20. 
35-40. (Jud.9. 
7-15; Zech. 
11.7-14.) 


Absalom David reaped from his own sowing. 


369 


[14 5 


33 Now therefore let not my lord 
the king take the thing to his heart, 
to think that all the king’s sons are 
dead: for Amnon only is dead. 

34 But Absalom fied. And the 
young man that kept the watch 
lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, 
behold, there came much people 
Be the way of the hill side behind 

m. 

35 And Jonadab said unto the 
king, Behold, the king’s sons come: 
as thy servant said, so it is. 

36 And it came to pass, as soon as 
he had made an end of speaking; 
that, behold, the king’s sons came, 
and lifted up their voice and wept: 
and the king also and all his ser- 
vants wept very sore. 


Absalom’s flight to Geshur. 


37 But Absalom fled, and went to 
Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king 
of 1Geshur. And David mourned 
for his son every day. 

38 So Absalom fied, and went to 
Geshur, and was there three years. 

39 And the soul of king David 
2Jonged to go forth unto Absalom: 
for he was comforted concerning 
Amnon, seeing he was’ dead. 


CHAPTER 14. 


The recall of Absalom: (1) 
Joab’s craft. 


New Joab the son of Zeruiah 
perceived that the king’s heart 
was toward Absalom, 

2 And Joab sent to Tekoah, and 
fetched thence a wise woman, and 
said unto her, I pray thee, feign 
thyself to be a mourner, and put on 
now mourning apparel, and anoint 
not thyself with oil, but be as a 
woman that had a long time 
mourned for the dead: 

3 And come to the king, and 
speak on this manner unto him, 
So Joab put the words in her mouth. 

4 And when the woman of Tekoah 
spake to the king, she fell on her 
face to the ground, and did obei- 
sance, and said, Help, O king. 

5 And the king said unto. her, 
What aileth thee? And she an- 
swered, I am indeed a widow 


woman, and mine husband is dead. 


David, in the years of his wanderings, made a savage raid 
Maacah, daughter of the king of Geshur. 
her wild Bedouin blood, and the blood 


In 


14 6] 


6 And thy handmaid had two 
sons, and they two strove together 
in the field, and there was none to 
part them, but the one smote the 
other, and slew him. 

7 And, behold, the whole family is 
risen against thine handmaid, and 
they said, Deliver him that smote 
his brother, that we may kill him, 
for the life of his brother whom he 
slew; and we will destroy the heir 
also: and so they shall quench my 
coal which is left, and shall not 
leave to my husband neither name 
nor reminder upon the earth. 

‘8 And the king said unto the 
woman, Go to thine house, and I 
will give charge concerning thee. 

9 And the woman of Tekoah said 
unto the king, My lord, O king, the 
iniquity be on me, and on my 
father’s house: and the king and his 
throne be guiltless. 

10 And the king said, Whosoever 
saith ought unto thee, bring him to 
me, and he shall not touch thee any 
more. 

11 Then said she, I pray thee, let 
the king remember the Lorp thy 
God, that thou wouldest not suffer 
the ¢revengers of blood to destroy 
any more, lest they destroy my son. 
And he said, As the Lorp liveth, 
there shall not one hair of thy son 
fall to the earth. 

12 Then the woman said, Let 
thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak 
one word unto my lord the king. 
And he said, Say on. 

13 And the woman said, Where- 
fore then hast thou thought such a 
thing against the people of God? for 
the king doth speak this thing as 
one which is faulty, in that the 
king doth not fetch home again his 
banished. 

14 For we must needs die, and are 
as water spilt on the ground, which 
cannot be gathered up again; nei- 
ther doth God ‘respect any person: 
yet doth he devise means, that his 
banished be not expelled from him. 

15 Now therefore that I am come 
to speak of this thing unto my lord 
the king, it is because the people 
have made me afraid: and thy hand- 
maid said, I will now speak unto 
the king; it may be that the king 
will perform the request of his 
handmaid. 


II SAMUEL. 


[14 


16 For the king will hear, to de- 
liver his handmaid out of the hand 
of the man that would destroy me 
and my son together out of the in- 
heritance of God. 

17 Then thine handmaid said, The 
word of my lord the king shall now 
be comfortable: for as an ¢angel of 
God, so is my lord the king to dis- 
cern good and bad: therefore the 
LorD thy God will be with thee. 

18 Then the king answered and 
said unto the woman, Hide not 
from me, I pray thee, the thing that 
I shall ask thee. And the woman 
said, Let my lord the king now 
speak. 

19 And the king said, Is not the 
hand of Joab with thee in all this? 
And the woman answered and said, 
As thy soul liveth, my lord the king, 
none can turn to the right hand or 


B.C. 1027. 


aHeb. goel, {to the left from ought that my lord 
een the king hath spoken: for thy ser- 
neta? {vant Joab, he bade me, and he put 
59.20, note. |all these words in the mouth of 
Sy Wedisairy thine handmaid: 
um~o-™- | 20 To fetch about this ferm of 
¢2Sam.13.  |speech hath thy servant Joab done 
37; Job 34... |this thing: and my lord is wise, ac- 
Acts 10.34; | |Cording to the wisdom of an ¢angel 
Rom.2.11. of God, to know all things that are 
dé Hele, in the earth. j=4 
note. David's half-hearted forgiveness 
22 Sam.13. of Absalom. 
37. 


21 And the king said unto Joab, 
Behold now, I have done this thing: 
go therefore, bring the young man 
Absalom again. 

22 And Joab fell to the ground on 
his face, and bowed himself, and 
thanked the king: and Joab said, 
To day thy servant knoweth that 
I have found grace in thy sight, 
my lord, O king, in that the king 
hath fulfilled the request of his ser- 
vant. 

23 So Joab arose and went to 
‘Geshur, and brought Absalom to 
Jerusalem. 

24 And the king said, Let him 
turn to his own house, and let him 
not see my face. So Absalom re- 
turned to his own house, and !saw 
not the king’s face. 


David forgives Absalom. 


25 But in all Israel there was none 
to be so much praised as Absalom. 


1 Not so had God taught David to forgive. 


Legalists have thought Absalom’s. 


wilfulness to have been due to over-indulgence on the part of David. There is no: 


such intimation in Scripture. 
taken Absalom into intimacy, 


Rather it would seem that had David at this time. 
the rebellion might have been averted. | 


370 | 


14 26] II SAMUEL. [15 15 


for his beauty: from the sole of his|* B.C. 1027. 3 And Absalom said unto him, 
foot even to the crown of his head See, thy matters are good and 
there was no blemish in him. right; but there is no man deputed 
26 And when he polled his head, of the king to hear thee. 
(for it was at every year’s end that 4 Absalom ‘said moreover, Oh 
he polled it: because the hair was that I were made judge-in the land, 
heavy on him, therefore he polled that every man which hath any 
it:) he weighed the hair of his head suit or cause might come unto me, 
at two hundred shekels after the and I would do him justice! 
king’s weight. 5 And it was so, that when any 
27 And unto Absalom there were man came nigh to him to do him 
born three “sons, and one daughter, obeisance, he put forth his hand, 
whose name was Tamar: she was a} and took-him, and kissed him. 
woman of a fair countenance. 6 And on this manner did Absa- 
28 So Absalom dwelt two full lom to all Israel that came to the 
years in Jerusalem, and saw not king for judgment: so Absalom 
the king’s face. stole the hearts of the men of Is- 
eo “gees aaa for rael. 
‘oab, to have sent him to the king; ’ 5 
Bettie acaldiorobedmeto bink: aad Outbreak of Absalom’s rebellion. 
7 And it came to pass after ¢forty 


when he sent again the second 
years, that Absalom said unto the 


time, he would not come. ‘ é 
30 Therefore he said unto his ser- king, I pray thee, let me go and 
pay my vow, which I have vowed 


vants, See, Joab’s field is near mine, 

and he hath barley there; go and unto the Lorpb, in Hebron. 

set it on fire. And Absalom’s ser- 8 For thy servant vowed a vow 

vants set the field on fire. while I abode at Geshur in Syria, 

ie Then Joab arose, and came tO} c..9sam. |S2vine; If the LorD shall bring me 
salom unto Ais house, and said} 18.18, note. [again indeed to Jerusalem, then I 

unto him, Wherefore have thy ser- will serve the LoRD. 


vants set my field on fire? 61 Kil.5. 9 And the king said unto him, Go 
32 And Absalom answered Joab,|c Jua.9.29. in peace. _So he arose, and went 

Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, to Hebron. 

Come hither, that I may send thee}? Some au- 10 But Absalom _ sent __ spies 


to the king, to say, By oat g ae am I pene a ere all the tribes ok Israel, 
come from Geshur? it had been saying, As soon as ye hear the 
good for me to have been there|!Sam-16.2. |sound of the trumpet, then ye shall 


still: now therefore let me see the say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron. 
king’s face; and if there be any in- 11 And with Absalom went two 
iquity in me, let him kill me. hundred men out of Jerusalem, 
33 So Joab came to the king, and that were called; and they went in 
told him: and when he had called their simplicity, and they knew not 
for Absalom, he came to the king, any thing. [ 
and bowed himself on his face to 12 And Absalom sent for Ahitho- 
the ground before the king: and the| * phel the Gilonite, David’s coun- ' 
king kissed Absalom. sellor, from his city, even from 
Giloh, ae he offered sacrifices. 
And the conspiracy was strong; 
CHAPTER 15. for the people increased continually 
Absalom steals the love of. the with Absalom. 


ten tribes (‘Israel’). Fight of David from Jerusalem, 


13 And there came a messenger 
to David, saying, The hearts of the 
men of Israel are after Absalom. 

14 And David said unto all his 
servants that were with him at 
Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; 
for we shall not e/se escape from 


ND it came to pass after this, 
that Absalom ‘prepared him 
chariots and horses, and fifty men 
to run before him. 
2 And Absalom rose up early, and 
stood beside the way of the gate: 


and it was so, that when any man 
that had a controversy came to the Absalom: make speed to depart, 
king for judgment, then Absalom jlest he overtake us suddenly, and 
called unto him, and said, Of what (bring evil upon us, and smite the 
city art thou2 And he said, Thy city with the edge of the sword. 


| of the tribes of 15 And the king’s servants said 
ee pect ee ; unto the king, Behold, thy servants 


371 


As 16] 


II SAMUEL. 


[16 


are ready to do whatsoever my 
lord the king shall appoint. 

16 And the king went forth, and 
all his household after him. And 
the king left ten women, which 
were “concubines, to keep the house. 

17 And the king went forth, and 
_all the people after him, and tarried 
in a place that was far off. 

18 And all his servants passed on 
beside him; and all the ’Cherethites, 
and all the Pelethites, and all the 
Gittites, six hundred men which 
came after him from Gath, passed 
on before the king. , 

19 Then said the king to “Ittai the 
Gittite, Wherefore goest thou also 
with us? return to thy place, and 
abide with the king: for thou art a 
stranger, and also an exile. 

20 Whereas thou camest but yes- 
terday, should I this day make thee 
go up and down with us? seeing I 
4g0 whither I may, return thou, 
and take back thy brethren: mercy 
- and truth be with thee. 

21° And Ittai answered the king, 
and said, As the Lorp liveth, and 
as my lord the king liveth, surely 
in what place my lord the king 
shall be, whether in death or life, 

even there also will thy servant be. 

22 And David said to Ittai, Go 
and pass over. And Ittai the Git- 
tite passed over, and all his men, and 
all the little ones that were with 
him. 

23 And all the country wept with 
a loud voice, and all the people 

passed over: the king also himself 
passed over the brook Kidron, and 
all the people passed over, toward 
the way of the «wilderness. 

24 And lo Zadok also, and all the 
Levites were with him, bearing the 
Jark of the covenant of God: and 
they set down the ark of God; and 
Abiathar went up, until all the peo- 
ple had done passing out of the city. 

25 And the king said unto Zadok, 
Carry back the ark of God into the 
city: if I shall find favour in the 
eyes of the Lorp, he will bring me 
again, and shew me both it, and his 
habitation: 

26 But if he thus say, I have no 
8delight in thee; behold, here am I, 
‘let him do to me.as seemeth good 
unto him. 

27 The king said also unto Zadok 
the priest, Art not thou a ‘seer? 
return into the city in peace, and 
your two sons with you, Ahimaaz 


thy son, and Jonathan the son of 
Abiathar, 


B.C. 1023. 


a 2 Sam.12. 
11; 16.21,22. 


6 2 Sam.8.18. 
c 2 Sam.18.2. 


d 1 Sam.23.13, 


e 2 Sam.16.2. 
‘f Num.4.15. 


g Num.14.8; 
1 Ki.10.9. 


hk 1 Sam.3.18. 
71 Sam.9.9, 


j 2 Sam.17.16. 


k 2 Sam.19.4, 
ty.12. 


m2 Sam.16. 
23; 17.14,23. 


n Josh.16.2. 


o 2 Sam.17.15, 
16. 


b 2 Sam.15.30, 
32. 


372 


28 See, I will tarry in the plain of 3 


the Jwilderness, until there come 
word from you to certify me. , 

29 Zadok therefore and Abiathar | 
carried the ark of God again to 
Jerusalem: and they tarried there. 

30 And David went up by the 
ascent of mount Olivet, and wept 
as he went up, and had his *head 
covered, and he went barefoot: and 
all the people that was with him cov- 
ered every man his head, and they 
went up, weeping as they went up. 

31 And one told David, saying, 
'Ahithophel 7s among the conspira- 
tors with Absalom. And David 
said, O Lorp, I pray thee, turn 
the counsel of Ahithophel into fool- 
ishness. 

32 And it came to pass, that 
when David was come to the top 
of the mount, where he worship- 
ped God, behold, Hushai the *Arch- 
ite came to meet him+with his coat 
rent, and earth upon his head: 

33 Unto whom David said, If 
thou passest on with me, then thou 
shalt be a burden unto me: 

34 But if thou return to the city, 
and say unto Absalom, I will be thy 
servant, O king; as I have been 
thy father’s servant hitherto, so 
will I now also be’ thy servant: 
then mayest thou for me defeat the 
counsel of Ahithophel. 

35 And hast thou not there with 
thee °Zadok and- Abiathar the 
priests? therefore it shall be, that 
what thing soever thou shalt hear 
out of the king’s house, thou shalt. 
tell i# to Zadok and Abiathar the 
priests. - 

36 Behold, they have there with. 
them their two sons, Ahimaaz Za-- 


lson; and by them ye shall send 


unto me every thing that ye can 
hear. 


37 So Hushai David's friend came 


into the city, and Absalom came 
into Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER 16. 


The false servant of Mephiba. 
sheth. 


ANP when David was a little 


hold, Ziba the servant of Mephibo- 
sheth met him, with a couple of 
asses saddled, and upon them two 
hundred Joaves of bread, and an 
hundred bunches of Taisins, and 
an hundred of summer 
‘a bottle of wine, 


dok’s son, and Jonathan Abiathar’s: | 


fruits, and. 


’past the top of the hill, be-. | 


| 


16 2] 


» 2 And the king said unto Ziba, 
What meanest thou by these? 
And Ziba said, The asses be for 
the king’s household to ride on; 
and the bread and summer fruit for 
the young men to eat; and the 
wine, that such as be faint in the 
wilderness may drink. 

3 And the king said, And where 
as thy master’s son? And Ziba said 
unto the “king, Behold, he abideth 
at Jerusalem: for he said, To day 
shali the house of Israel restore me 
the kingdom of my father. 

4 Then said the king to Ziba, Be- 
hold, thine are all that pertained 
unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, 
I humbly beseech thee that I may 
find grace in thy sight, my lord, O 
king. 

Shimei curses David. 


5 And when king David came to 
Bahurim, behold, thence came out 
aman of the family of the house of 
Saul, whose name was Shimei, the 
son of Gera: he came forth, and 
cursed still as he came. 

6 And he cast stones at David, 
and at all the servants of king 
David: and all the people and all 
the mighty men were on his right 
hand and on his left. 

7 And thus said Shimei when he 
cursed, Come out, come out, thou 
bloody man, and thou man of 
Belial: 

8 The Lorp hath returned upon 
thee all the “blood of the house of 
Saul, in whose stead thou hast 
teigned; and the LorpD hath deliv- 
ered the kingdom into the hand of, 
Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou 
art taken in thy mischief, because 
thou art a bloody man. 

9 Then said Abishai the son of 
Zeruiah unto the king, Why should 
this dead ‘dog curse my lord the 
king? let me go over, I pray thee, 
and take off his head. 

10 And the king said, What have 
I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? 
so let him curse, because the LORD 
hath said unto him, Curse David. 
Who shall then sav, Wherefore hast 
thou done so? bier 

11 And David said to Abishai, 
and to all his servants, Behold, my 
son, which came forth of my bowels, 
seeketh my life: how much more 
now may this Benjamite do it? 
let him alone, and let him curse; 
for the Lorp hath bidden him. | 

12 It may be that the Lorp will 


It SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1023. 


a 2 Sam.19.27. 


b 2 Sam.1.16; 
3.28,29; 
4.8-12. 

c 2 Sam.9.8. 


d Heb.12.10, 
12. 


e 2 Sam.15.37. 


f 2 Sam.15. 
33,34. 


g 2 Sam.15.12. 


h 2 Sam.2.7. 


i 2 Sam.12. 
11,12. 


j 2 Sam.16.14; 
Deut.25.18. 


look on mine affliction, and that the’. 


373 


[17 2 
LorD will requite me ¢good for his 
cursing this day. 

13 And as David and his men 
went by the way, Shimei went 
along on the hill’s side over against 
him, and cursed as he went, and 
threw stones at him, and cast dust. 

14. And the king, and all the people 
that were with him, came weary, 
and refreshed themselves there. 


Absalom enters Jerusalem. 

15 And Absalom, and all the peo- 
pleof themenof Israel, came to Jeru- 
salem, and Ahithophel with him: 

16 And it came to pass, ‘when 
Hushai the Archite, David’s friend, 
was come unto Absalom, that Hu- 
shai said unto Absalom, God save 
the king, God save the king. 

17 And Absalom said to Hushai, 
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? 
why wentest thou not with thy 
Ffriend? 

18 And Hushai said unto Absa- 
lom, Nay; but whom the LorB, and 
this people, and all the men of 
Israel, choose, his will I be, and with 
him will I abide. 

19 And again, whom should I 
serve? should J not serve in the 
presence of his son? as I have 
served in thy father’s presence, so 
will I be in thy presence. 

20 Then said Absalom to sAhitho- 
phel, Give counsel among you what 
we shall do. 

21 And Ahithophel said unto Ab- 
salom, Go in unto thy father’s con- 
cubines, which he hath left to keep 
the house; and all Israel shall hear 
that thou art abhorred of thy 
father: then shall the “hands of all 
that. are with thee be strong. 

22 So they spread Absalom a tent 
upon the top of the house; and Ab- 
salom went ‘in unto his father’s con- 
cubines in the sight, of all Israel. 

23 And the counsel of Ahithophel, 
which he counselled in those days, 
was as if a man had enquired at the 
oracle of God: so was all the coun- 
sel.of Ahithophel both with David 
and with Absalom, 


CHAPTER 17. 


The diverse counsel of Ahitho- 
phel and Hushati. 

QREOVER Ahithophel said 
unto Absalom, Let me now 

choose out twelve thousand men, 

and I will arise and pursue after 

David this night: 

2 And I will come upon him while 

he is weary and weak handed, and 


17 3] 


II SAMUEL. 


[17 25 


will make him afraid: and all the B.c. 1023. ‘the intent that the LorpD might 


people that are with him shall flee; 
and I will smite the king only: 

3 And I will bring back all the 
people unto thee: the man whom 
thou seekest fs as if all returned: 
so all the people shall be in 
peace. 

4 And the saying pleased Absalom 
well, and all the elders of Israel. 

5 Then said Absalom, Call now 
Hushai the Archite also, and let us 
hear likewise what he saith. 

6 And when Hushai was come to 
Absalom, Absalom spake unto him, 
saying, Ahithophel hath spoken 
after this manner: shall we do after 
his saying? if not; speak thou. 

7. And Hushai said unto Absalom, 
The counsel that Ahithophel hath 
given ys not good at this time. 

8 For, said Hushai, thou knowest 
thy father and his men, that they 
be mighty men, and they be chafed)| 
in their minds, as a bear robbed of 
her whelps in the field: and thy 
father 7s a man of war, and will not 
lodge with the people. 

9 Behold, he is hid now in some 
pit, or in some other place: and it 
will come to pass, when some of 
them be overthrown at the first, 
that whosoever heareth it will say, 
There is a slaughter among the 
people that follow Absalom. 

10 And he also that 1s valiant, 
whose heart 7s as the heart of a 
lion, shall utterly ¢melt: for all Is- 
rael knoweth that thy father is a 
mighty man, and they which be 
with him are valiant men. 

11 Therefore I counsel that all Is- 
tael be generally gathered unto 
thee, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, 
tas the sand that is by the sea for 
multitude; and that thou go to 
battle in thine own person. 

12 So shall we come upon him in 
some place where he shall be found, 
and we will light upon him as the 
dew falleth on the ground: and of 
him and of all the men that are 
with him there shall not be left so 
much as one. 

13. Moreover, if he be gotten into 
a city, then shall all Israel bring 
ropes to that city, and we will draw 
it into the river, until there be not) 
one small stone found there. 

14 And Absalom and all the men 
of Israel said, The counsel of Hu- 
shai the Archite 7s better than the 
counsel of Ahithophel. For the 
‘LORD had appointed to defeat 
the good counsel of Ahithophel, to 


a Josh.2.11, 


6 Josh.11.4; 
1 Ki.20.10. 


¢2Sam.15.31. 
d 2 Sam.15.27, 
36. 


e Josh.15.7. 
f 2 Sam.16.5. 
g 2 Sam.2.8. 


874 


bring evil upon Absalom. 

15 Then said Hushai unto Zadok 
and to Abiathar the priests, Thus 
and thus did Ahithophel counsel 
Absalom and the elders of Israel; 
and thus and thus have I coun- 
selled. } 

16 Now therefore send quickly, 
and tell David, saying, Lodge not 
this night in the plains of the wil- 
derness, but speedily pass over; 
lest the king be swallowed up, and 
all the people that are with him. 

17 Now 4Jonathan and Ahimaaz 
stayed by ‘En-rogel; for they might 
not be seen to come into the city: 
and a wench went and told them; 
and they went and told king David. 

18 Nevertheless a lad saw them, 
and told Absalom: but they went 
both of them away quickly, and 
came to a man’s house in /Bahurim, 
which had a well in his court; 
whither they went down. 

19 And the woman took and 
spread a covering over the well’s 
mouth, and spread ground corn 
thereon; and the thing was not 
known. 

20 And when Absalom’s servants 
came to the woman to the house, 
they said, Where rs Ahimaaz and 
Jonathan? And the woman said 
unto them, They be gone over the 
brook of water. And when they 
had sought and could not find 
them, they returned to Jerusalem. 

21 And it came to pass, after they 
were departed, that they came up 
out of the well, and went and told 
king David, and said unto David, 
Arise, and pass quickly over the 
water: for thus hath Ahithophel 
counselled against you. 

22 Then David arose, and all the 
people that were with him, and 
they passed over Jordan: by the 
morning light there lacked not one 
of them that was not gone over 
Jordan. 

23 And when Ahithophel saw 
that his counsel was not followed, 
he saddled Ais ass, and arose, and 
gat him home to his house, to his 
city, and put his household in order, 
and hanged himself, and died, and 
was buried in the sepulchre of his 
father. 

24 Then David came to Maha- 
naim. And Absalom passed over 
Jordan, he and all the men of Israel 
with him, 

25 And Absalom made Amasa 
captain of the host instead of Joab: 


- 


which Amasa was a man’s son, 
whose name was Ithra an Israelite, 
that went in to Abigail the daughter 
of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab’s 
mother. 

26 So Israel and Absalom pitched 
in the land of Gilead. 

27 And it came to pass, when 
David was come to Mahanaim, that 
*@Shobi the son of Nahash of Rab- 
bah of the children of Ammon, and 
¢Machir the son of Ammiel of Lo- 
debar, and ‘Barzillai the Gileadite 
of Rogelim, 

28 Brought beds, and basons, and 
earthen vessels, and wheat, and 
barley, and flour, and parched corn, 
and beans, and lentiles, and parched 
pulse, 

29 And honey, and butter, and 
sheep, and cheese of kine, for David, 
and for the people that were with 
him, to eat: for they said, The 
épeople is hungry, and weary, and 
thirsty, in the wilderness. 


CHAPTER 18. 
The battle of Mount Ephraim. 


AND David numbered the people 
that were with him, and set 
captains of thousands and captains 
of hundreds over them. 

2 And David sent forth a third 
part of the people under the hand 
of Joab, and a third part under the 
hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah,|¢ v-5. 
Joab’s brother, and a third part), .o.51410 
under the hand of ¢Ittai the Gittite.| 29. © 
And the king said unto the people, 
I will surely go forth with you 
myself also. 

3 But the people answered, Thou 
‘shalt not go forth: for if we flee 
away, they will not care for us; 
neither if half of us die, will they 
care for us: but now thou art worth 
ten thousand of us: therefore now 
it is better that thou succour us out 
of the city. 

4 And the king said unto them, 
What seemeth you best I wiil do. 
And the king stood by the gate side, 
and all the people came out by hun- 
dreds and by thousands. 

‘5S And the king commanded Joab 
and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal 
gently for my sake with the young 
man, even with Absalom. And all 
the people heard when the king 
gave all the captains charge con- 
cerning Absalom. 

6 So the people went out into the 
field against Israel: and the battle 
was in the wood of Ephraim; i 


a 2 Sam.10.1. 

6 2 Sam.9.4. 

c 2 Sam.19. 
31,32; 1 Ki. 
Date 


d 2 Sam.16.2, 
14. 


e 2 Sam.15,19. 
f 2 Sam.21.17. 


375 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1023. 


[18 18 


7_ Where the people of Israel were 
slain before the servants of David, 
and there was there a_ great 
slaughter that day of twenty thou- 
sand men. 

8 For the battle was there scat- 
tered over the face of all the coun- 
try: and the wood devoured more 
people that day than the sword 
devoured. 


The slaying of Absalom. 


9 And Absalom met the servants 
of David. And Absalom rode upon 
a mule, and the mule went under 
the thick boughs of a great oak, and 
his head caught hold of the oak, 
and he was taken up between the 
heaven and the earth; and the mule 
that was under him went away. 

10 And a certain man saw it, and 
told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw 
Absalom hanged in an oak. 

11 And Joab said unto the man 
that told him, And, behold, thou 
sawest him, and why didst thou 
not smite him there to the ground? 
and I would have given thee ten 
shekels of silver, and a girdle. 

12 And the man said unto Joab, 
Though‘I should receive a thousand 
shekels of silver in mine hand, yet 
would I not put forth mine hand 
against the king’s son: for in four 
hearing the king charged thee and 
Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware 
that none touch the young man 
Absalom. 

13 Otherwise I should have 
wrought falsehood against mine 
own hfe: “for there is no matter 
hid from the king, and thou thyself 
wouldest have set thyself against 
me. 

14 Then said Joab, I may not 
tarry thus with thee. And he took 
three darts in his hand, and thrust 
them through the heart of Absalom, 
while he was yet alive in the 
midst of the oak. 

15 And ten young men that bare 
Joab’s armour compassed about 
and smote Absalom, and slew him. 

16 And Joab blew the trumpet, 
and the people returned from pur- 
suing after Israel: for Joab held 
back the people. 

17 And they took Absalom, and 
cast him into a great pit in the 
wood, and laid a very great heap 
of stones upon him: and all Israel 
fled every one to his tent. 

18 Now Absalom in his lifetime 


had taken and reared up for himself 
a pillar, which is in the king’s dale: 


Was 19] 


for he said, 1I have no son to keep 
my name in remembrance: and he 
called the pillar after his own name: 
and it is called unto this day, Ab- 
salom’s place. 


David is told of Absalom’s death. 


19 Then said Ahimaaz the son of 
Zadok, Let me now run, and.bear 
the king tidings, how that the LorD 
hath avenged him of his enemies. 

20 And Joab said unto him, Thou 
shalt not bear tidings this day, but 
thou shalt bear tidings another day: 
but this day thou shalt bear no 
tidings, because the king’s son is 
dead. f 

21 Then said Joab to Cushi, Go 
tell the king what thou hast seen. 
And Cushi bowed himself. unto 
Joab, and ran. 

22 Then said Ahimaaz the son of 
Zadok yet again to Joab, But how- 
soever, let me, I pray thee, also run 
after Cushi. And Joab said, Where- 
fore wilt thou run, my son, seeing 
that thou hast no tidings ready? 

23 But howsoever, said he, let 
me run. And he said unto him, 
Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the 
way of the plain, and overran Cushi. 

24 And David “sat between the 
two gates: and the ’watchman went 
up to the roof over the gate unto 
the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and 
looked, and behold a man running 
alone. 

25 And the watchman cried, and 
told the king. And the king said, 
If he be alone, there is tidings in 
his mouth. And he came apace, 
and drew near. 

26 And the watchman saw an- 
other man running: and the watch- 
man called unto the porter, and 
said, Behold another man running 
alone. And the king said, He also 
bringeth tidings. 

27 And the watchman said, Me 
thinketh the running of the fore- 
most is like the running of Ahimaaz 
the son of Zadok. And the king 
said, He is a ‘good man, and 
cometh with good tidings. 

28 And Ahimaaz called, and said 
unto the king, All is well. And he 
fell down to the earth upon his face 
before the king, and said, ¢Blessed 
be the Lorp thy God, which hath 
delivered up the men that lifted up 
their hand against my lord the king, 


oe a 


res mom eh 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1023. 


a1 Sam44.13. 
b 2 Ki.9.17. 
¢1 Ki.1.42. 

d 2 Sam.16.12. 
é vs.14-17. 

f 2 Sam.12.10. 
g Jud.21.2. 

h 2 Sam.18.14. 


1The pillar mentioned must h 


Absalom. Cf. 2 Sam. 14. 27. 


are not mentioned in the genealogies, 


376 


wa det 
19 6 


29 And the king said, Is the young 
man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz 
answered, When ‘Joab sent the 
king’s servant, and me thy servant, 


wy 


I saw a great tumult, but I knew © 


not what it was. 

30 And the king said unto him, 
Turn aside, and stand here. And 
he turned aside, and stood still. 

31 And, behold, Cushi came; and 
Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the 
king: for the LorpD hath avenged 
thee this day of all them that rose 
up against thee. 


32 And the king said unto Cushi, 


Is the young man Absalom safe? 
And Cushi answered, The enemies 
of my lord the king, and all that 
rise against thee to do thee hurt, be 
as that young man is. 


The touchiné grief of King David. © 


33 And the king was much moved, 
and went up to the chamber over 
the gate, and wept: and as he went, 
thus he said, O my son fAbsalom, 
my son, my son Absalom! would 
God I had died for thee, O Absalom, 
my son, my son! 


CHAPTER 19, 
Joab reproaches David. 


AND it was told Joab, Behold, 
the king weepeth and mourn- 
eth for Absalom. 

2- And the victory that day was 
turned into ‘mourning unto all the 
people: for the people heard say 
that day how the king was grieved 
for his son. 

3 And the people gat them by 
stealth that day into tne city, as 


people being ashamed steal away — 


when they flee in battle, 

But the king covered his face, 
and the king cried with a loud 
voice, O my son Absalom, O Absa- 
lom, my son, my son! 

5 And "Joab came into the house 


to the king, and said, Thou hast — 


shamed this day the faces of all thy 
servants, which this day have saved 
thy life, and the lives of thy sons 
and of thy daughters, and the lives 
of thy wives, and the lives of thy 
concubines; 
6 In that thou lovest thine ene- 
mies, and hatest thy friends. For 
thou hast declared this day, that 
thou regardest neither princes nor 


ave been reared before the birth of sons to 
Another view is that his sons died in youth. They 


— 


t+ 


19 7] 


II SAMUEL. 


[19 28 


servants: for this day I perceive, 
that if Absalom had lived, and all 
qe had died this day, then it had 
pleased thee well. 

7 Now therefore arise, go forth, 
and speak comfortably unto thy ser- 
vants: for I swear by the Lorp, if 
thou go not forth, there will not 
tarry one with thee this night: and 
that will be worse unto thee than 
all the evil that befell thee from 
thy youth until now. 

8 Then the king arose, and sat in 
the gate. And they told unto all 
the people, saying, Behold, the king 
doth sit in the gate. And all the 
people came before the king: for Is- 
tael had “fled every man to his tent. 


David’s return to Jerusalem. 


9 And all the people were at strife 
throughout all the tribes of Israel, 
saying, The king saved us out of 
the hand of our enemies, and he de- 
livered us out of the hand of the 
Philistines: and now Che is fled out 
of the land for Absalom. 

10 And Absalom, whom we an- 
ointed over us, is dead %n battle. 
Now therefore why speak ye not a 
word of bringing the king back? 

11 And king David sent to Zadok 
and to Abiathar the priests, saying, 
Speak unto the elders of Judah, 
saying, Why are ye the last to bring 
the king back to his house? seeing 
the speech of all Israel is come to 
the king, even to his house. 

12 Ye are my brethren, ye are 
my ‘bones and my flesh: wherefore 
then are ye the last to bring back 
the king? 

13 And say ye to 2Amasa, Art 
thou not of my bone, and of my 
flesh? God do so to me, and more 
also, if thou be not captain of the 
host before me continually in the 
room of Joab. 

14 And he bowed the heart of all 
the men of Judah, even as the heart 
of one man; so that they sent this 
word unto the king, Return thou, 
and all thy servants. 

15 Sothe king returned, and came 
to Jordan. And Judah came to 
eGilgal, to go to meet the king, to 
conduct the king over Jordan. 

16 And Shimei the son of Gera, a 
Benjamite, which was of Bahurim, 
hasted and came down with the 
men of Judah to meet king David. 

17 And there were a thousand 
men of Benjamin with him, and 


IZiba the servant of the house of| 


Saul, and his fifteen sons and his 


B.C. 1023. 


a2 Sam.18. 


8. 
b 2 Sam.15.14. 
c2Sam.5.1. 

d 2 Sam.17. 

25; 1 Chr.2. 
17. 

e Josh.5.9. 

f2Sam.9.2, 
10. 

g Imputation. 
vs.18,19; 
Psa.32.2. 
(Lev.25.503 
Jas.2.23.) 

h 2 Sam.16.5. 

4 2 Sam.13.33. 

j 1 Sam.26.9. 


k Heb.1.4, 


note. 


12 Sam.9.7, 


? 


37 


twenty servants with him; and 
they went over Jordan before the 
king. 

18 And there went over a ferry 
boat to carry over the king’s house- 
hoid, and to do what he thought 
good. And Shimei the son of Gera 
fell down before the king, as he was 
come over Jordan; 

19 And said unto the king, Let 
not my lord “impute iniquity unto 
me, neither do thou remember that 
which thy servant did /perversely 
the day that my lord the king went 
out of Jerusalem, that the king 
should take it to his ‘heart. 

20 For thy servant doth know 
that I have sinned: therefore, be- 
hold, I am come the first this day of 
all the house of Joseph to go down 
to meet my lord the king. 

21 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah 
answered and said, Shall not. Shi- 
mei be put to death for this, because 
he Jcursed the LoRD’s anointed? 

22 And David said, What have I 
to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, 
that ye should this day be adver- 
saries unto me? shall there any 
man be put to death this day in 
Israel? for do not I know that I am 
this day king over Israel? 

23 Therefore the king said unto 
Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And 
the king sware unto him. 

24 And Mephibosheth the son of 
Saul came down to meet the king, 
and had neither dressed his feet, 
nor trimmed his beard, nor washed 
his clothes, from the day the king 


departed until the day he came 
again in peace. 

25 And it came to pass, when he 
was come to Jerusalem to meet the 
king, that the king said unto him, 
Wherefore wentest not thou with 
me, Mephibosheth? 

26 And he answered, My lord, O 
king, my servant deceived me: for 
thy servant said, I will saddle me 
an ass, that I may ride thereon, 
and go to the king; because thy 
servant is lame. 

27 And he hath slandered thy ser- 
vant unto my lord the king; but 
my lord the king is as an “angel of 
God: do therefore what is good in 
thine eyes. 

28 For all of my father’s house 
were but dead men before my lord 
the king: yet didst thou. /set thy 
servant among them that did eat at 
thine own table. What right there- 
fore have I yet to cry any more unto 
the king? 


19 29] 
29 And the king said unto him, 
Why speakest thou any more of 
thy matters? I have said, Thou 
and Ziba divide the land. _ 

30 And Mephibosheth said unto 
the king, Yea, let him take all, for- 
asmuch as my lord the king is come 
again in peace unto his own house. 

31 And Barzillai the Gileadite 
came down from Rogelim, and 
went over Jordan with the king, 

‘to conduct him over Jordan. 

32 Now Barziliai was a very aged! 
man, even fourscore years old: and) 
he had provided the king of suste-| 
nance while he lay at Mahanaim;| 

‘ for he was a very great man. | 

_' 33 And the king said unto Bar-| 

zillai, Come thou over with me, and 

I will feed thee with me in Jeru- 
salem. 

34 And Barzillai said unto the 
king, How long have I to live, that 
I should go up with the king unto 
Jerusalem? 

35 I am this day fourscore years 
old: and can I discern between good 
and evil? can thy servant taste 
what I eat or what I drink? can I 
hear any more the voice of singing 
men and singing women? where- 
fore then should thy servant be yet 
a burden unto my lord the king? 

36 Thy servant will go a little 
way over Jordan with the king: 
and why should the king recom-’ 
pense it me with such a reward? 

37 Let thy servant, I pray thee, 
turn back again, that I may die in 
mine own city, and be buried by 
the grave of my father and of my 
mother. But behold thy servant 
*Chimham; let him go over with 
my lord the king; and do to him! 
what shall seem good unto thee. 

38 And the king answered, Chim- 
ham shall go over with me, and I 
will do to him that which shall 
seem good unto thee: and whatso- 
ever thou shalt require of me, that 
will I do for thee. 

39 And all the people went over 
Jordan, And when the king was 
come over, the king kissed Barzillai, 
and blessed him; and he returned 
unto his own place. af 

40 Then the king went on to Gil- 
gal, and Chimham went on with 
him: and all the people of Judah 
conducted the king, and also half 
the people of Israel. 


The old strife begins anew. 


41 And, behold, all the men of 
Israel came to the king, and said 


II SAMUEL. 


a1 Ki.2.7; 
Jer.41.17, 


6 vs.11,15. 


ci Ki.12.16. 


d 2 Sam.15. 
16. 


e 2 Sam.19, 
13. 


378 


[207 


unto the king, Why have our breth- 
ren the men of Judah stolen thee 
away, and have brought the king, 
and his household, and all David’s 
men with him, over Jordan? 

42 And all the men of Judah 
answered the men of Israel, Be- 
cause the king ss near of kin to us: 
wherefore then be ye angry for this 
matter? have we eaten at all of the 
king’s cost? or hath he given us 
any gift? 

43 And the men of Israel answer- 
ed the men of Judah, and said, We 
have ten parts in the king, and we 
have also more right in David than 
ye: why then did ye despise us, 
that our advice should not be first 
had in bringing back our king? 
And the words of the men of Judah 
were fiercer than the words of the 
men of Israel. 


CHAPTER 20. 


ANP there happened to be there 
a_man of Belial, whose name 
was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a 
Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, 
and said, We have no ‘part in 
David, neither have we inheritance 
in the son of Jesse: every man to 
his tents, O Israel. 

2 So every man of Israel went up 
from after David, and followed 
Sheba the son of Bichri: but the 
men of Judah clave unto their king, 
from Jordan even to Jerusalem. 

3 And David came to his house at 
Jerusalem; and the king took the 
ten women Ais ¢concubines, whom 
he had left to keep the house, and 
put them in ward, and fed them, but 
went not in unto them. So they 
were shut up unto the day of their 
death, living in widowhood. 


Joab murders Amasc. 
4 Then said the king to Amasa, 
Assemble me the men of Judah 
within three days, and be thou here 
present. . 
5S So Amasa went to ‘assemble 
the men of Judah: but he tarried 


Cities, and escape us. 


7 And there went out after him 


Joab’s men, and the Ch i 
and the Pelethites, we 


mighty men: and they went out of 


Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba 
the son of Bichri. 

8 When they were at the great 
stone which rs in Gibeon, Amasa 
went before them. And Joab’s gar- 
ment that he had put on was girded 
unto him, and upon it a girdle with 
a sword fastened upon his loins in 
the sheath thereof; and as he went 
forth it fell out. 

9 And Joab said to Amasa, Art 


Joab took Amasa by the beard with 
the right hand to kiss him. 
10 But Amasa took no heed to the 


he ¢smote him therewith in the fifth 
sib, and shed out his bowels to the 
ground, and struck him not again; 
and he died. So Joab and Abishai 
his brother pursued after Sheba the 
son of Bichri. 

11 And one of Joab’s men stood 
by him, and said, He that favoureth 

Joab, and he that is for David, let 
him go after Joab. 

12 And Amasa wallowed in blood 
in the midst of the highway. And 
when the man saw that all the peo- 
ple stood still, he removed Amasa 
out of the highway into the field, 
and cast a cloth upon him, when he 
saw that every one that came by 
him stood still. 


Suppression of Sheba’s revolt. 


13 When he was removed out of 
the highway, all the people went 
on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba 
the son of Bichri. 

14 And he went through all the 
tribes of Israel unto °Abel, and to 
Beth-maachah, and all the Berites: 
and they were gathered together, 
and went also after him. 


15 And they came and besieged} 


him in Abel of Beth-maachah, and 
they cast up a ‘bank against the 
city, and it stood in the trench: and 
all the people that were with Joab 
battered the wall, to throw it 
down. . 

16 Then cried a wise woman out 
of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray 
you, unto Joab, Come near hither, 
that I may speak with thee. 

17 And when he was come near 
unto her, the woman said, Art thou 
Joab? And he answered, I am he. 
Then she said unto him, Hear the 
words of thine handmaid. And he 
answered, I do hear. z 

18 Then she spake, saying, They 
were wont to speak in old time, 
saying, They shall surely ask coun- 


thou in health, my brother? And/ 


sword that was in Joab’s hand: so; 


It SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1022. 


a 1 Ki,2.5. 

b 2 Ki.15.29. 

c 2 Ki.19.32. 

d 2Sam.8.16, 
18. 


e1 Ki.4.6. 
f Josh.9.3, 
oh te 


g See Ex.29. 
33, note. 


so 


-Iman to his tent. 


[21 3 


sel at Abel: and so they ended the 
matter. 4 g 

19 I'am one of them that are 
peaceable and faithful in Israel: 
thou seekest to destroy a city and 
a mother in Israel: why wilt thou 
swallow up the inheritance of the 
Lorpb? : 

20 And Joab answered and said, 
Far be it, far be it from me, that I 
should swallow up or destroy. 

21 The matter 1s not so: but a 
man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the 
son of Bichri by name, hath lifted 
up his hand against the king, even 
against David: deliver him only, 
and I will depart from the city. 
And the woman said unto Joab, 
Behold, his head shall be thrown 
to thee over the wall. 

22 Then the woman went unto all 
the people in her wisdom. And 
they cut off the head of Sheba the 
son of Bichri, and cast it out to 
Joab. And he blew a trumpet, and 
they retired from the city, every 
And Joab re- 
turned to Jerusalem unto the king. 

23 Now 4Joab was over all the 
host of Israel: and Benaiah the son 
of Jehoiada was over the Chereth- 
ites and over the Pelethites: 

24 And Adoram was over the 
étribute: and Jehoshaphat the so: 
of Ahilud was recorder: - 

25 And Sheva was scribe: and. 
Zadok and Abiathar were the 
priests: 

26 And Ira also the Jairite was a 
chief ruler about David. 


CHAPTER 21. 
The three years’ famine. 


HEN there was a famine in the 
days of David three years, year 
after year; and David enquired of 
the Lorp. And the LorD an- 
swered, It is for Saul, and for.his 
bloody house, because he slew the 
Gibeonites. 

2 And the king called the Gibeon- 
ites, and said unto them; (now the 
Gibeonites were /not of the children 
of Israel, but of the remnant of the 
Amorites; and the children of Is- 
rael had sworn unto them: and 
Saul sought to slay them in his 
zeal to the children of Israel and 
Judah. ) ve 

3 Wherefore David said unto the 
Gibeonites, What shall I do for you? 
and wherewith shall I make the 
gatonement, that ye may bless the 
inheritance of the LoRD? 


© 321-4] 


4 And the Gibeonites said unto 
‘him, We will have no silver nor gold 
of Saul, nor of his house; neither 
for us shalt thou kill any man in 
Israel. And he said, What ye shall 
say, that will I do for you. : 

5 And they answered the king, 
The man that consumed us, and 
that devised against us that we 
should be destroyed from remain- 
ing in any of the coasts of Israel, 

a © Let seven men of his sons be 
delivered unto us, and we will hang 

j them up unto the Lorp in 2Gibeah 
of Saul, whom the Lorp did} 
choose. And the king said, I will 
give them. f 

i 7 But the king spared Mephibo- 
; sheth, the son of Jonathan the son 

of Saul, because of the %LorD’s 
¥ oath that was between them, be- 

tween David and Jonathan the son 
of Saul. 

8 But the king took the two sons 
of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, 
whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni 
and Mephibosheth; and the five 
‘sons of Michal the daughter of 
Saul, whom she brought up for 
Adriel the son of Barzillai the 
Meholathite: 

9 And he delivered them into the 
hands of the Gibeonites, and they 
hanged them in the hill before the 
Lorp: and they fell a// seven to- 
gether, and were put to death in 
the days of harvest, in the first 
days, in the beginning of barley 
harvest. 

10 And Rizpah the daughter of 
Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it 
for her upon the rock, from the be- 
ginning of harvest until water 
dropped upon them out of heaven, 
and suffered neither the birds of 
the air to rest on them by day, nor 
the beasts of the field by night. 

11 And it was told David what 
Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the 
concubine of Saul, had done. 

12 And David went and took the 
bones of Saul and the bones of Jon- 
athan his son from the men of 
Jabesh-gilead, which had stolen 
them from the street of Beth-shan, 
where the 4Philistines had hanged 
them, when the Philistines had slain 
Saul in Gilboa: 

13 And he brought up from 
thence the bones of Saul and the 
bones of Jonathan his son; and they 
gathered the bones of them that 
were hanged. 

14 And the bones of Saul and Jon- 
athan his son buried they in the 


| ae | 


II SAMUEL. 
B.C 1021. conan of Benjamin in ¢Zelah, in 


a1 Sam.10. 
2 


b 1 Sam.20. 
15. 


¢ Cf.2 Sam. 
6.23. The 
“five sons” 
were chil- 
dren of Mi- 
chal's sister 
Merab, wife 
of Adriel, 
“whom she 
brought up 
for Adriel” 
(1 Sam.18. 
19)*~ 


d Cf.1 Sam. 


31.4,5, note. 


é Josh.18.28,. 
f 2 Sam.24, 
25. 


g 2 Sam.18.3, 


h1 Ki.11.36. 


#1 Chr.20.4, 


j1Sam.16.9, 
Shammah. 


k Psa.18.. 


1 Psa.91.2. 


mPsa.2.12, 


note, 


n Psa.84.11. 


380 


the sepulchre of Kish his father: 
and they performed all that the 
king commanded. And after that 
God was /intreated for the land. 


A war with the Philistines. 


15 Moreover the Philistines had 
yet war again with Israel; and 
David went down, and his servants _ 
with him, and fought against the 
Philistines: and David waxed faint. 

16 And Ishbi-benob, which was 
of the sons of the giant, the weight 
of whose spear weighed three hun- 
dred shekels of brass in weight, he 
being girded with a new sword, 
thought to have slain David. : 

17 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah 
succoured him, and smote the Phil- 
istine, and killed him. Then the 
men of David sware unto him, say- 
ing, €Thou shalt go no more out 
with us to battle, that thou quench 
not the “light of Israel. 

18 And it came to pass after this, 
that there was again a battle with 
the Philistines at Gob: then ‘Sib- 
bechai the Hushathite slew Saph, 
which was of the sons of the giant. 
_19 And there was again a battle 
in Gob with the Philistines, where 
Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim, a 
Beth-lehemite, slew the brother of 
Goliath the Gittite, the staff of 
whose spear was like a weaver’s 
beam. : 

20 And there was yet a battle in 
Gath, where was a man of Sreat 
stature, that had on every hand 
six fingers, and on every foot six 
toes, four and twenty in number; 
and he also was born to the giant. 

21 And when he defied Israel, Jon- 
athan the son of JShimeah the 
brother of David slew him. 

22 These four were born to the 
giant in Gath, and fell by the hand 
of David, and by the hand of his 


fdeet ace 
| CHAPTER 22, 

David’s song of deliverance. 
AND David spake unto the Lorp 


2 And he said, The Lorp is my 


rock, and my ‘fortress, and my de- 
liverer; 


3 The God of my rock; in him will 
I “trust: he is my "shield, and the | 


| 


a ha + z 174 


II SAMUEL. 


s 


22 4] [22 41 
porn of wis salvation; my high} Bc. 1018. |the Lorp, and have not wickedly 
ower, and my ‘refuge, my sa- departed from my God. 5 
or thou savest me from vio- 23 For all his judgments were 
ogee “ft vate : before me: and as for his statutes, I 
_ ais re ont - ORD, who is did not depart from them, 
ey fe) praised: so shall I be 24 I was also upright before him, 
: af ioe Bee smomiss sy aX and EAR kept myself from mine 
- iniquity. 
Bassed mei the floods of ungodly 25 Therefore the LorD hath rec- 
s ase e me a bat sar ompensed me according to my right- 
Rane er gO tee eis Ge eee 
a re Te- ness in his eye sight. 
a si 26 With the merciful _thou wilt 
e n my distress I called upon the shew thyself merciful, and with the 
ae and cried to my God: and upright man thou wilt shew thyself 
pe ene op ipa toes BT With th age tach 
: id enter into ith the pure thou wilt shew 
his pare: ze thyself pure; and with the froward 
8 I en the earth shook and trem- thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury. 
bled; the foundations of heaven 28 And the afflicted people thou 
poved and shook, because he was|4 Veo wilt save: but thine eyes are upon 
BD There went up a smoke out of|5 Pp: ae ene Waele cet rab 
Z sa.34.6, n em. down. 
his nostrils, and ‘fire out of his) 15. 29 For thou art my lamp, O 
mouth devoured: coals were kin-| - p...97.3.4 LorpD: and the Lorp will lighten 
dled by it. ~~" Imy darkness. 
10 He bowed the heavens also,|¢ Psa.29.3. 30 For by thee I have run through 
Bea cane me and darkness was} , peut.32.23. pana! a my God have I leaped 
11 And he rode upon a cherub, | f Nah.1.4. 31 As for God, his way 1s perfect: 
pad did BY ae he was S€€N UPON) , T.9.43.2 ug word of the LorD js tried: he 1s 
e wings of the wind. eas 3 a buckler to all them that *trust in 
12 Aad fe, made darkness pavil-|/ eaaiee him. 
jons round about him, dark waters,| 7° 32 For who is God, save the 
and thick clouds of the skies. {1 Sam.26. Lorp? and who zs a rock, save our 
13 Through the brightness before} 23- God? 
him were coals a ite kindled. j Job 17.9. 33 God is my strength and power: 
14 The Lorp 4thundered from and he maketh my way perfect. 
heaven, and the most High uttered |é Psa.2.12, 34 He maketh my “feet like hinds’ 
his voice. note. feet: and setteth me upon my high 
i5 And he sent out “arrows, and| } Hab.3.19. places. 


scattered them; lightning, and dis- 
comfited them. 

-16 And the channels of fthe sea 
appeared, the foundations of the 
world were discovered, at the re- 
buking of the LorD, at the blast of 
the breath of his nostrils. 

17 He sent from above, he took 
me; he drew me out of many 8wa- 
ters; 

18 Hedelivered mefrom my strong 
enemy, and from them that hated 
me: for they were too strong for me. 

19 They prevented me in the day 
of my calamity; but the LORD was 
my stay. 

30 He brought me forth also into, 
a large place: he delivered me, be- 
cause he delighted in "me. 4 

21 The Lorp rewarded me ‘ac- 
cording to my righteousness: ac- 
cording to the cleanness of my 
hands hath he recompensed me, 

22 For I have kept the ways of 


381 


35 He teacheth my hands to war; 
so that a bow of steel is broken by 
mine arms. 

36 Thou hast also given me the 
shield of thy salvation: and thy 
gentleness hath made me great. 

37 Thou hast enlarged my steps 
wet me; so that my feet did not 
slip. 

38 I have pursued mine enemies, 
and destroyed them; and turned’ 
not again until I had consumed 
them. : 

39 And I have consumed them, 
and wounded them, that they could 
not arise: yea, they are fallen under 
my feet. 

40 For thou hast girded me with 
strength to battle: them that rose 
up against me hast thou subdued 
under me. 

41 Thou hast also given me the 
necks of mine enemies, that I might 
destroy them that hate me. 


22 42] 


none to save; even unto the LORD, 
but he answered thern not. 
- 43 Then did I beat them as small 
as the dust of the earth, I did stamp 
them as the mire of the street, and 
did spread them abroad. 
44 Thou also hast delivered me 
from the ¢strivings of my people, 
thou hast kept me to be head of the 
‘heathen: a people which I knew 
not shall serve me. 
45 Strangers shall submit them- 
selves unto me: as soon as they 
hear, they shall be obedient unto 
me. . 
46 Strangers shall fade away, 
and they shall be afraid out of 
their close places. 
47 The Lorp liveth; and blessed} 
be my rock; and exalted be thel¢ 2 Sam.3.1. 
God of the rock of my salvation. 
48 It is God that avengeth me, 
and that bringeth down the people|«¢ Kingdom 
under me, (On Ns 


b i.e. nations. 


Q sy jn | Kis 
49 And that bringeth me forth} 20. (Geni. 
from mine enemies: thou also hast| 26; Zech.12 


lifted me up on high above them 
that rose up against me: thou hast d Holy Spirit. | 
delivered me from the violent man.| 2 Ki.2.9. 
50 Therefore I will give thanks eae 
unto thee, O LorbD, among the ree 
‘heathen, and I wili sing praises] Inspiration. 
unto thy name. ee 
51 He is the tower of salvation] Rey.22.19.) 
for his king: and sheweth mercy to ; 
his anointed, unto David, and tol Posada, 
his seed for evermore. nttad 
g fe one be-~ 
Ong 
CHAPTER 23. Ae AS 
The last words of David. h Jua.s.4 
NOW these be the last words of Pilsen so 
“ David. ‘David the son of Jesse 24.05 ‘ 
said, and the man who was raised ; 
up on high, the anointed of the God! 4 ie GAL HE 
of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of| 77 
Israel, said, k See 2 Sam. 
2 The 4Spirit of the LorD spake| 5.18; 1 Chr. 
by me, and his «word was in my| }!151% 
tongue. 
3_ The God of Israel said, the Rock 
of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth 
over men must be just, ruling in 
the ‘fear of God. 
‘4 And he shall be as the light of 
the morning, when the sun riseth, 
even a morning without clouds; as 
the tender grass springing out of | 
the earth by clear shining after 
Tain. 
| 5 Although my house be not so 
with God; yet he hath made with 
me an everlasting covenant, ordered 
in all things, and sure: for this is} 
382 


II SAMUEL. 


42 They looked, but there was|_B.C. 1018. 


[23 16 


all my salvation, and al] my desire, 
although he make /t not to grow. 

6 But the sons of Belial shall be 
all of them as thorns thrust away, 
because they cannot be taken with 
hands: 

7 But the man that shall touch 
them must be fenced with iron and 
the staff of a spear; and they shall 
be utterly burned with fire in the 
same place. 


David’s mighty men. (Cf. 1 Chr. 
11. 10-47.) 


8 These be the names of the 
mighty men whom David had: The 
Tachmonite that sat in the seat, 
chief among the captains; the same 
was Adino the ‘Eznite: he Irft up 
his spear against eight hundred, 
whom he slew at one time. 

9 And after him was Eleazar the 
son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the 
three mighty men with David, when 
they defied the Philistines that 
were there gathered together to 
battle, and the men of Israel were 
gone away: 

10 He arose, and smote the Philis- 
tines until his hand was weary, and 
his hand clave unto the sword: and 


the LORD wrought a great victory 
that day; and the people returned 
after him only to ‘spoil. 

11 And after him was Shammah 
the son of Agee the Hararite. And — 
the Philistines were gathered to- 
gether into a troop, where was a 
piece of ground full of lentiles: and _ 
the people /fled from the Philistines. | 

12 But he stood in the midst of | 
the ground, and defended it, and 
slew the Philistines: and the Lorp _ 
wrought a great victory. | 

13 And *three of the thirty chief 
went down, and came to David in 


‘\the harvest time unto the cave of _ 


Adullam: and the troop of the Phi- _ 
listines pitched in the valley of 
Rephaim. 

14 And David was then in an 
hold, and the garrison of the Phi- 
listines was then in Beth-lehem. 

15 And David longed, and said, 
Oh that one would give me drink of | 
the water of the well of Beth-lehem, | 
which is by the gate! 

16 And the three mighty men | 
brake through the host of the Phi- | 
listines, and drew water out of the | 
well of Beth-lehem, that'was by the | 
gate, and took it, and brought vt to 

avid: nevertheless he would not | 
drink thereof, but poured it out | 
unto the Lorp, 
| 


23 17] 


17 And he said, Be it far from me, 
O Lorp, that I should do this: is 
not this the blood of the men that 
went in jeopardy of their lives? 
therefore he would not drink it. 
These things did these three mighty 


men. 

18 And Abishai, the brother of 
Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief 
among three. And he lifted up his 
spear against three hundred, and 
slew them, and had the name 
among three. 

19 Was he not most honourable 
of three? therefore he was their 
captain: howbeit he attained not 
unto the first three. 

20 And Benaiah the son of Je-|¢ Ex,15.15; 
hoiada, the son of a valiant man, of 


he slew two lionlike men of Moab: 
2he went down also and slew a lion 
in the midst of a pit in time of snow?) 

21 And he slew an Egyptian, aj¢ 2 Sam.2.18. 
bgoodly man: and the Egyptian], yua29, 
had a spear in his hand; but he 


¢ 2 Sam.8.18; 
20.23. 


went down to him with a staff, and| f2 Sam.20.26. 


plucked the spear out of the Egyp-| , > sam.11. 
tian’s hand, and slew him with his|"36. © 
own spear. 

22 These things did Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada, and had the name 
among three mighty men. 

93 He was more honourable than|/ Jud-20-4- 
the thirty, but he attained not to!z Jer.17.5. 
the first three. And David set 
him ‘over his guard. 1 ames 

24 dAsahel the brother of Joab ae 
was one of the thirty; Elhanan the} Num.32. 
son of Dodo of Beth-lehem, 1,3. 

25 Shammah the Harodite, Elika} » Josh.19.28; 
the Harodite, Jud.18.28. 

26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the son 
of Ikkesh the Tekoite, 

27 Abiezer the Anethothite, Me- 
bunnai the Hushathite, 

28 Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai 
the Netophathite, 

29 Heleb the son of Baanah, a 
Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai 
out of Gibeah of the children of 
Benjamin, 

30 Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hid- 
dai of the brooks of ‘Gaash, 

31 Abi-albon the Arbathite, Az- 
maveth the Barhumite, 

32 Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the 
sons of Jashen, Jonathan, 

33 Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam 
the son of Sharar the Hararite, 

34 Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, 


h 2 Sam.21.1. 
#1 Chr.21.1. 


II SAMUEL. 


B.C. 1018. 


1 Chr.11.22. 
Kabzeel, who had done many acts,| 61 Chr.11.23. 


[24 9 


the son of the Maachathite, Eliam 
the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite, 

35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai 
the Arbite, 

36 Igal the son of Nathan of Zo- 
bah, Bani the Gadite, 

37 Zelek the Ammonite, Nahari 
the Beerothite, armourbearer to 
Joab the son of Zeruiah, 

38 fIraanIthrite,GarebanIthrite, 

39 8Uriah the Hittite: thirty and 
seven in all. 


CHAPTER 24. 


David’s sin in numbering the 
people (1 Chr. 21. 1-6). 


Ane hagaintheanger of the LORD 
£'% was kindled against Israel, and 
the moved David against them to 
say, Go, number Israel and Judah. 

2 Forthe king said to Joab the cap- 
tain of the host, which was with him, 
Go now through all the tribes of Is- 
rael, from Dan even to Beersheba, 
and number ye the people, that “I 
may know the number of the people. 

3 And Joab said unto the king, 
Now the Lorp thy God add unto 
the people, how many soever they 
be, an hundredfold, and that the 
eyes of my lord the king may see 
it: but why doth my lord the king 
delight in this thing? 

4 Notwithstandingtheking’s word 
prevailed against Joab, and against 
the captains of the host. And Joab 
and the captains of the host went 
out from the presence of the king, 
to number the people of Israel. 

5 And they passed over Jordan, 
and pitched in /Aroer, on the right 
side of the city that Iveth in the 
midst of the river of Gad, and 
toward ™Jazer: 

6 Then they came to Gilead, and 
to the land of Tahtim-hodshi; and 
they came to Dan-jaan, and about 
to *Zidon, 

7 And came to the strong hold of 
Tyre, and to all the cities of the 
Hivites, and of the Canaanites: and 
they went out to the south of Judah, 
even to Beer-sheba. 

8 So when they had gone through 
all the land, they came to Jerusa- 
lem at the end of nine months and 
twenty days. 

9 And Joab gave up the sum of 
the number of the people unto the 
king: and there were lin Israel eight 


Ch eGhia cles. 
was 1,100,000, and of Judah 500,000. 
Israel, 800,000; of Judah, 470,000. 

383 


The total military strength of Israel (the northern kingdom) 
The numbers actually set in array were, of 


soe 


DA 10] 
hundred thousand valiant men that 


drew the sword; and the menof Judah 
were five hundred thousand men. 


David’s choice of punishment 
(1 Chr, 21. 7-17). 


10 And David’s heart smote him 
after that he had numbered the 
people. And ¢David said unto the 
_ Lorp, I have sinned greatly in that 
I have done: and now, I beseech 
thee, OQ Lorp, take away the in- 
iquity of thy servant; for I have 
done very foolishly. 

11 For when David was up in the 
morning, the word of the Lorp 
came unto the prophet Gad, 
David's seer, saying, 

12 Go and say unto David, Thus 
saith the Lorpb, I offer thee three 
things; choose thee one of them, 
that I may do it unto thee. 


13 So Gad came to David, and 
told him, and said unto him, Shall 
seven years of ‘famine come unto 
thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee 
three months before thine enemies, 
while they pursue thee? or that 
there be three days’ pestilence in 
thy land? now advise, and see what 
answer I shail return to him that 
sent me. 

14 And David said unto Gad, I 
am in a great strait: let us fall now 
into the hand of the LorD; for his 
mercies are great: and let me not 
fall into the hand of man, 

15 So the Lorp sent a pestilence 
upon Israel from the morning even 


to the time appointed: and there 
died of the people from Dan even to 
Beer-sheba seventy thousand men. 
. 16 And when the 4angel stretched 


~Colout his hand upon Jerusalem to 


destroy it, the LorD ‘repented him 
of the evil, and said to the angel 
that destroyed the people, It is 
enough: stay now thine hand. 
And the angel of the Lorp was by 


Il SAMUEL. 


A 
[24 25 


B.C. 1017. 


@1Sam.24.5. 


61 Sam.9.9; 
1 Chr.29.29. 


c Gen.12.10, 
note. 


d Heb.1.4, 
note. 


e Zech.8.14, 
note. 


g Here read 
1 Chr.21.20. 


h 2 Cor.8.1, 
note, 


# Cf.1 Chr. 
21.25, note. 


j One shekel 
= 2s. 9d., or 
65 cts. 


the threshingplace of Araunah the 


Jebusite. 

17 And David ‘spake unto the 
Lorp when he saw the angel that 
smote the people, and said, Lo, I 


334 


have sinned, and I have done wick- 
edly: but these sheep, what have 
they done? let thine hand, I pray 


thee, be against me, and against — 


my father’s house. 


David buys Araunah’s thresh- 
ingfloor ; erects an altar (1 Chr. 
21. 18-30). 


18 And Gad came that day to 
David, and said unto him, Go up, 
rear an altar unto the LORD in 
the threshingfloor of Araunah the 
Jebusite. 

19 And David, according to the 
saying of Gad, went up as the LorD 
commanded. 4 

20 And Araunah looked, and &saw 
the king and his servants coming 
on toward him: and Araunah went 
out, and bowed himself before the 
king on his face upon the ground. 

21 And Araunah said, Wherefore 
is my lord the king come to his ser- 
vant? And David said, To buy 
the threshingfloor of thee, to build 
an altar unto the Lorp, that the 
niague may be stayed from the peo- 
ple. 

22 And Araunah said unto David, 
Let my lord the king take and offer 
up what seemeth good unto him: 
behold, here be oxen for burnt- 
sacrifice, and threshing instruments 
and other instruments of the oxen 
for wood. 

23 All these things did Araunah, 
as a king, give unto the king. And 
Araunah said unto the king, The 
LorpD thy God accept thee. ; 

24 And the king said unto Arau- 
nah, Nay; but I will surely buy it 
of thee at a price: neither will I 
koffer burnt-offerings unto the 
LorD my God of that which doth 
cost me nothing. So David bought 
the *threshingfloor and the oxen for 
fifty Jshelxels of silver. 

25 And David built there an altar 
unto the Lorn, and offered burnt- 
offerings and peace-offerings. So 
the LorD was intreated for the 


land, and the plague was stayed 
from’ Israel. 


ve 


THE FIRST BOOK OF THE KINGS 


COMMONLY CALLED 
1 1] THE THIRD BOOK OF THE KINGS. [etZ 


First Kincs records the death of David, the reign of Solomon, th ildi 
temple, death of Solomon, division of the kingdom under eke boar a Teton 
and the history of the two kingdoms to the reign of Jehoram over Judah, and Aha: 
ziah over Samaria. Includes the mighty ministry of Elijah. : 2 
The book is in seven parts: I. From the rebellion of Adonijah to the death of 
David, 1.1-2.11. II. From the accession of Solomon to the dedication of the temple 
9. 12-8. 66. III. From the confirmation of the Davidic Covenant to the death of 
Solomon, 9. 1-11. 43. IV. From the division of the kingdom to the death of Jero- 
boam and Rehoboam, 12. 1-14. 31. V. The kingdoms to the accession of Ahab 
15. 1-16. 28. VI. Accession of Ahab to his death, 16. 29-22. 40. VII. From the 
reign of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Jehoram over Judah, and Ahaziah over 


Samaria, 22. 41-53. 


The events recorded in First Kings cover a period of 118 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. 
David’s declining strength. 


Wow king David was old and 
stricken in years; and they 
covered him with clothes, but he 
gat no heat. 

2 Wherefore his servants said 
unto him, Let there be sought for 
my lord the king a young virgin: 
and let her stand before the king, 
and let her cherish him, and let her 
lie in thy bosom, that my lord the}, Josh.19.18. 
king may get heat. 

3 So they sought for a fair damsel]? 2 Sam.3-4. 


throughout all the coasts of Israel,| - 2 sam.15.1. 


and found Abishag a ?Shunammite, 
and brought her to the king. 

4 And the damsel was very fair, 
and cherished the king, and minis-|¢ 2 Sam.20. 
tered to him: but the king knew 25. 
her not. f 1 Ki.2.22, 

28. 


Adonijah plots to seize the 
kingdom. 


d 2 Sam.3.3, 
4. 


g1 Ki.4.18, 


‘S Then Adonijah °the son of Hag-|h 2 Sam.23.8. 


gith exalted himself, saying, I will 
be king: and che prepared him char- 
jots and horsemen, and fifty men]71 Chr.22.9, 
to run before him. 10. 

6 And his father had not dis- 
pleased him at any time in saying, 
Why hast thou done so? and he 
also was a very goodly man; ¢and 
his mother bare him aiter Absalom. 

7 And he conferred with Joab the 
son of Zeruiah, and with ¢Abiathar 
the priest: and ‘they following 
Adonijah helped him. : 

8 But Zadok the priest, and Bena- 
jah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan 
the prophet, and sShimei, and Rei, 
and the ‘mighty men ‘which be- 


72 Sam.3.4, 


383 


B.C. 1015. 


longed to David, were not with 
Adonijah. 

9 And Adonijah slew sheep and 
oxen and fat cattle by the stone of 
Zoheleth, which is by En-rogel, and 
called all his brethren the king’s 
sons, and all the men of Judah the 
king’s servants: 


The counter-plot of Nathan and 
Bath-sheba. 


10 But Nathan the prophet, and 
Benaiah, and the mighty men, and 
Solomon his brother, he called not. 

11 Wherefore Nathan spake unto 
Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon, 
saying, Hast thou not heard that 
Adonijah the son of *Haggith doth 
reign, and David our lord knoweth 
it not? 

12 Now therefore come, let me, I 
pray thee, give thee counsel, that 
thou mayest save thine own life, 
and the life of thy son Solomon. 

13 Go and get thee in unto king 
David, and say unto him, Didst not 
thou, my lord, O king, swear unto 
thine handmaid, saying, /Assuredly 
Solomon thy son shall reign after 
me, and he shall sit upon my throne?: 
why then doth Adonijah reign? 

14 Behold, while thou yet talkest 
there withtheking, I alsowillcomein 
after thee, and confirm thy words. 

15 And Bath-sheba went in unto 
the king into the chamber: and the 
king was very old; and Abishag 
the Shunammite ministered unto 
the king. 

16 And Bath-sheba bowed, and 
did obeisance unto the king. And 
the king said, What wouldest thou? 

17 And she said unto him, My 


Jord, thou swarest by the Lorp thy] 
God unto thine handmaid, saying,| 
Assuredly Solomon thy son shall} 
reign after me, and he shall sit upon] 
my throne. fe 

18 And now, behold, Adonijah 
reigneth; and now, my lord the 
king, thou knowest it not: 

19 And-he hath slain oxen and fat 
cattle and sheep in abundance, and 
hath called all the sons of the king, 
‘and Abiathar the priest, and Joab 
the captain of the host: but Solo- 
mon thy servant hath he not called. 

20 And thou, my lord, O king, the 
eyes of all Israel are upon thee, 
that thou shouldest tell them who 
shall sit on the throne of my lord 
the king after him. 

21 Otherwise it shall come to pass 
when my lord the king shall ¢sleep 
with his fathers, that I and my son 
Solomon shall be counted offenders. 

22 And, lo, while she yet talked 
with the king, Nathan the prophet 
also came in. ; 

23 And they told the king, saying, 
Behold Nathan the prophet. And 
when he was come in before the 
king, he bowed himself before the 
king with his face to the ground. 

24 And Nathan said, My lord, O 
king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall 
reign after me, and he shall sit upon 
my throne? 

25 For he is gone down this day, 
and hath slain oxen and fat cattle 
and sheep in abundance, and hath 
called all the king’s sons, and the 
captains of the host, and Abiathar 
the priest; and, behold, they eat 
and drink before him, and say, God 
save king Adonijah. 

26 But me, even me thy servant, 
and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah 
the son of Jehoiada, and thy ser- 
vant Solomon, hath he not called. 

27 Is this thing done by my lord 
the king, and thou hast not shewed 
it unto thy servant, who should sit 
on the throne of my lord the king 
after him? 

28 Then king David answered 
and said, Call me Bath-sheba. And 
she came into the ‘king’s presence, 
and stood before the king, 

29 And the king sware, and said, | 
+As the Lorp liveth, that hath re- 
deemed my soul out of all distress, 

30 Even as I sware unto thee by 
the LorD God of Israel, saying, As- 
suredly Solomon thy son shall reign 
after me, and he shall sit upon my 
throne in my stead; even so will I 
certainly do this day. 


\ 
, 


a Deut.31.16; 
1 Ki.2.10. 


62 Sam.4.9. 
c Ex.14.30, 


e 2 Sam.20.6. 


f 1 Sam.10.1; 
1 Chr.29.22. 


13; 11.14. 
h 2 Sam.8.18. 
i 1 Chr.29.22, 
j1Sam.10:24. 


k 2 Sam.18.27. 


386 


I KINGS. 


B.C. 1015. 


31 Then Bath-sheba bowed with 
her face to the earth, and did rever- 
ence to the king, and said, “Let my 
lord king David live for ever. 

32 And king David said, Call me 
Zadok the priest, and Nathan the 
prophet, and Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada. And they came before 
|the king. ‘ 
| 33. The king also said unto them, 
‘Take with you the servants of 
your lord, and cause Solomon. my 
son to ride upon mine own mule, 
and bring him down to Gihon: 

34 And let Zadok the priest and 
Nathan the prophet fanoint him 
there king over Israel: and &sblow 
lye with the trumpet, and say, God 
|save king Solomon. 

35 Then ye shall come up after 
him, that he may come and sit upon 
my throne; for he shall be king in 
my stead: and I have appointed 
him to be ruler over Israel and over 


_ |Judah. 


36 And Benaiah the son of Je- 
hoiada answered the king, and said, 


|Amen: the LorpD God of my lord 


the king say so too. 

37 As the LorD hath been with 
my lord the king, even so be he with 
Solomon, and make his throne 
greater than the throne of my lord 
king David. 

38 So Zadok the priest, and Na- 
than the prophet, and #Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada, and the Chereth- 
ites, and the Pelethites, went down, 
and caused Solomon to ride upon 
king David’s mule, and brought 
him to Gihon, 


Solomon anointed king 
(1 Chr. 29. 22), 


| 39 And Zadok the priest took an 
horn of oil out of the tabernacle, 
and ‘anointed Solomon. And they 
blew the trumpet; and Jall the peo- 
ple said, God save king Solomon. 

40 And all the people came up 
after him, and the people Piped with | 
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, 
so that the earth rent with the 
sound of them, 

Adonijah’s submission. 

41 And Adonijahand all the guests 
that were with him heard it as they 
had made an end of eating. And 
when Joab heard the sound of the 
trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this 
noise of the city being in an uproar? 

42 And while he yet spake, be- 
hold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar 
\the priest came: and Adonijah said 
unto him, Come in; for *thou art a 


1 43] 


I KINGS. 


i tae 


valiant man, and bringest good 
tidings. 

43 And Jonathan answered and 
said to Adonijah, Verily our lord 
king David hath made Solomon 
king. 

44 And the king hath sent with 
him Zadok the priest, and Nathan 
the prophet, and Benaiah the son of 
Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and 
the Pelethites, and they have caused 
him to ride upon the king’s mule: 

45 And Zadok the priest and Na- 
than the prophet have anointed 
him king in Gihon: and they are 
come up from thence rejoicing, so 
that the city rang again. This is 
the noise that ye have heard. 

46 And also Solomon ¢sitteth on 
the throne of the kingdom. 

47 And moreover the king’s ser- 
vants came to bless our lord king 
David, saying, God make the name 
of Solomon better than thy name, 
and make his throne greater than 
thy throne. And the king bowed 
himself upon the bed. 

48 And also thus said the king, 
Blessed be the LorD God of Israel, 
which hath given one to sit on my 
throne this day, mine eyes even see- 


ing it. 

49 And all the guests that were 
with Adonijah were afraid, and 
rose up, and went every man his 


way. . 

50 And Adonijah feared because 
of Solomon, and arose, and went, 
and caught hold on the horns of 
the altar. 

51 And it was told Solomon, say- 
ing, Behold, Adonijah feareth king 
Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught 
hold on the horns of the altar, say- 
ing, Let king Solomon swear unto 
me to day that he will not slay his 
servant with the sword. 

52 And Solomon said, If he will 
shew himself a worthy man, ‘there 
shall not an hair of him fall to the 
earth: but if wickedness shall be 
found in him, he shall die. 

53 So king Solomon sent, and they 
brought him down from the altar.) 
And he came and bowed himself to 
king Solomon: and Solomon said 
unto him, Go to thine house. 


CHAPTER 2. 


David’s charge to Solomon. 


Now the ¢days of David drew 
nigh that he should die; and he 
charged Solornon his son, saying, 


| 


B.C. 1015. 


a 1 Chr.29.23. 

6 1 Ki.3.6; 
Psa.132.11, 
12. 

¢ 1 Sam.14. 
45; 2 Sam. 
14.11; Acts 

| 27.34. 


d Gen.47.29; 
Deut.31.14, 


e Josh.23.14. 
f Deut.29.9; 
he75 
1 Chr.22. 
12430 ve 
|g 2 Sam.7.25. 
h 2 Ki.20.3. 
4 2 Sam.7.12, 
13; 1 Ki.8. 
25. 


j 2 Sam.3.39; 
18.5,12,14. 


k 2 Sam.3.27. 


1 Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5. 


m 2 Sam.19, 
31,38 


|\n 2 Sam.17. 
27: 

o 2 Sam.16.5. 

p 2 Sam.19, 
18. 

q Ex.20.7; 
Job 9.28. 


387 


(2 14 


ooo 
2 &I go the way of all the earth: 


be thou strong therefore, and shew 
thyself a man; ; 

3 And keep the charge of the 
Lorp thy God, to walk in his ways, 
to keep his statutes, and his com- 
mandments, and his judgments, 
and his testimonies, as it is written 
in the law of Moses, that thou 
mayest ‘prosper in all that thou 
doest, and whithersoever thou turn- 
est thyself: 

4 That the Lorp may écontinue 
his word which he spake concern- 
ing me, saying, If thy children take 
heed to their way, to “walk before 
me in truth with all their heart and 
with all their soul, ‘there shall not 
fail thee (said he) a man on the 
throne of Israel. 

5 Moreover thou knowest also 
what Joab the son of Zeruiah /did 
to me, and what he did to the two 
captains of the hosts of Israel, unto 
kAbner the son of Ner, and unto 
Amasa the son of Jether, whom he 
slew, and shed the blood of war in 
|peace, and put the blood of war 
upon his girdle that was about his 
‘loins, and in his shoes that were on 
his feet. 

6 Do therefore according to thy 
wisdom, and let not his hoar head 
go down to the /grave in peace. 

7 But shew kindness unto the 
sons of ™Barzillai the Gileadite, and 
let them be of those that eat at thy 
table: for so “they came to me 
when I fled because of Absalom thy 
|brother. 

8 And, behold, thou hast with 
thee °Shimei the son of Gera, a Ben- 
jamite of Bahurim, which cursed 
me with a grievous curse in the day 
when I went to Mahanaim: but ?he 
came down to meet me at Jordan, 
and I sware to him by the Lorb, 
saying, I will not put thee to 
death with the sword. 

9 Now therefore ¢hold him not 
guiltless: for thou art a wise man, 
and knowest what thou oughtest to 
do unto him; but his hoar head 
bring thou down to the ‘grave with 
blood. 


The death of David (1 Chr. 29. 
26-30). 


10 So David slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in the city of David. 

11 And the days that David 
reigned over Israel were forty 
years: seven years reigned he in’ 
Hebron, and thirty and three years 
reigned he in Jerusalem. 


NN 


' gith came to Bath-sheba the mother 


23-25). 

12 Then sat Solomon upon the 
throne of David his father; and his 
kingdom was established greatly. 

Execution of Adonijah. 
13 And Adonijah the son of Hag- 


of Solomon. And she said, Comest 
thou peaceably? And he said, 
Peaceably. 


14 He said moreover, I have 
somewhat to say unto thee. And 
she said, Say on. 

15 And he said, Thou knowest 
that the kingdom was mine, and 
that all Israel set their faces on me, 
that I should reign: howbeit the 
kingdom is turned about, and is 
become my brother’s: for 4it was 
his from the LorpD. 

16 And now I ask one petition of 
thee, deny me not. And she said 
unto him, Say on. 

17 And he said, Speak, I pray 
thee, unto Solomon the king, (for 
he will not say thee nay,) that he 
give me Abishag the Shunammite 
to wife. 

18 And Bath-sheba:said, Well; I 
will speak for thee unto the king. 

19 Bath-sheba therefore went 
unto king Solomon, to speak unto 
him for Adonijah. And the king 
rose up to meet her, and bowed 
himself unto-her, and sat down on 
his throne, and caused a seat to be 
set for the king’s mother; and she 
sat on his right hand. 

20 Then she said, I desire one) 
small petition of thee; I pray thee,| 
Say me not nay. And the king said 
unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I} 
will not say thee nay. 

21 And she said, Let Abishag the 
Shunammite be given to Adonijah 
thy brother to wife. 

22 And king Solomon answered 
and said unto his mother, And why 
dost thou ask Abishag the Shu- 
nammite for Adonijah? ask for him 
the kingdom also; for he fs mine 
elder brother; even for him, and 
for “Abiathar the priest, and for 
Joab the son of Zeruiah. 

23 Then king Solomon sware by 
the Lorpb, saying, God do so to me, 
and more also, if Adonijah have not 
ae this word against his own 
ife. 

24 Now ‘therefore, as the Lorp 
liveth, which hath established me, 
and set me on the throne of David 
my father, and who hath made me 


I KINGS. . 
Solomon’s accession (1 Chr. 29.| B.C. 1035. |an house, as he ‘promised, Adoni- 


ai Chr.22. 
9,10; 28.5-7; 
Dan.2.21. 

b 1 Ki.1.7. 


c 2 Sam.7.11, 


13; 1 Chr.22. 


10: 

d Josh.21.18. 

é1 Sam.23.6; 
2 Sam.15.24, 
29. 

£1 Sam.2.31- 
35. 


g 1 Ki.1.50. 

hk Num.35.33; 
Deut.19.13; 
21.8,9. 

i Jud.9.24,57. 


j 2 Sam.3.29. 


388 


[2 


jah shall be put to death this day. 

25. And king Solomon sent by the 
hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoi- 
ada; and he fell upon him that he — 
died. 


Abiathar removed from the 
priesthood. 


26 And unto Abiathar the priest 
said the king, Get thee to ¢Anathoth, 
unto thine own fields; for thou art 
worthy of death: but I will not at 
this time put thee to death, because 
thou barest the ark of the Lord © 
Gop before David my father, and 
ebecause thou hast been afflicted in 
all wherein my father was afflicted. 
27 So Solomon thrust out Abia- 
thar from being priest unto the 
LorpD; that he might /fulfil the 
word of the LorpD, which he spake 
concerning the house of Eli in 
Shiloh. 


The flight and-death of Joab. 


28 Then tidings came to Joab: for 
Joab had turned after Adonijah, 
though he turned not after Absa- 
lom. And Joab fled unto the taber- 
nacle of the LorD, and Scaught hold 
on the horns of the altar. 

29 And it was told king Solomon 
that Joab was fled unto the taber- 
nacle of the Lorp; and, behold, Ae 
is by the altar. Then Solomon sent 
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, say- 
ing, Go, fall upon him. 

30 Benaiah came to the 


\tabernacle of the Lorp, and said 


unto him, Thus saith the king, 
Come forth. And he said, Nay; 
but I will die here. And Benaiah 
brought the king word again, say- 
ing, Thus said Joab, and thus he 
answered me. ; 

31 And the king said unto him, 
Do as he hath said, and fall upon 
him, and bury him; that thou 
|mayest take away the innocent 
blood, which Joab shed, from me, 
and from the house of my father. 

32 And the Lorp shall ‘return his 
blood upon his own head, who fell 
upon two men more righteous and 
better than he, and slew them with 
the sword, my father David not 
knowing thereof, to wit, Abner the’ 
son of Ner, captain of the host of 
Israel, and Amasa the son of Je- 
ther, captain of the host of Judah. 

33 Their blood shall therefore re- 


turn upon the head of Joab, and 
Jupon the head of his seed for ever: 
‘but upon David, and upon his seed, 


ss ne Ble ae 
2 34] I KINGS. bie 


and upon his house, and upon his| B.c. 1014. /|surely die? and thou saidst unto 


eee a be peace for ever me, mes word that I have heard 
D. : is good. 

34 So Benaiah theson of Jehoiada 43 Why then hast thou not kept 
went up, and fell upon him, and the oath of the LorD, and the com: _ 
slew him: and he was buried in his mandment that I have charged thee 
own house in the wilderness. with? 

Fe : E 44 The king said moreover to 

Best em rete Shimei, Thou knowest all the wick- 

35 And the king put ene the nity t. ae pe st oe se Ath 

¢ z b o, tha ou st to David my 

Eee ips Uetonda co room rte] fotge eaetaiele ae LorD ae 
st: and Zado e priest di return thy wic e i 

the king put in the room of Abiathar. own head; Sut ang aah $q3ee 

5 yay 45 And king Solomon shall be 

2 Tot of Shimei. blessed, and the throne of David 

a Se the sea aot and alee shal be established before the LORD 

‘or ei, and said unto him, or ever. 

Build thee an house in Jerusalem, 46 So the king commanded Be- 
i dwell uae and go not forth Meseo naiah the son of Jehoiada; which 

Bi het ot all ben that on the day 16.5. f te diedss ye aarti Spa eee 
pou peers out, goo passest pest the b L Ei 8; established in the hand of Solo- 

TOO. idron, thou s now for, 9-24. mon. 
certain that thou shalt surely die: 
thy, blood shall.be upon thine own| PEE 
head. a1 Kis. Solomon makes alliance with 
ae Sod, ye Ease ee ibe e1 Ki.9.15,19. PL rien and marries his 
the king hath said, so will thy ser- ND Solomon made affinity 
pent aay Sora Ree dwelt in Jeru- i with ttipeet ve o Hesh 

D . and too araoh’s daughter, an 
a And it anes to pass at the end brought her into the “city of David, 
ro} ree years, th at two of the ser- until he had made an end of build- 
Bee Se ees ae rape ing his own house, and ¢the house 
Ga ee ean ag Canpemipmrre 
: , . round about. 
Behold, thy servants be in Gath. *) Only the people sacrificed lin 

40 And Shimei arose, and saddled high places, because there was no 

Be en ee Ay akin eee eeripioge ies oa 
5 + 6 ORD, until those days. 
went, and brought his servants 3 -And Solomon loved the Lorp, 
from Gath. walking in the statutes of David his 
ee Oe Teciaaltee to gape sens oe et eas Ge 
cense in hig aces. 
Gath, and was come again. pis 7. F . 

42 And the king sent and called Solomon sacrifices at Gibeon 

for Shimei, and said unto him, Did (2 Chr. 1. 2-6), ; 
I not make thee to swear by the 4 And the king went to Gibeon 
Lorp, and protested unto thee, to sacrifice there; for that was the 
saying, Know for a certain, on the great high place: a thousand burnt- 
day thou goest out, and walkest offerings did Solomon: offer upon 
abroad any whither, that thou shalt that altar. 


1Cf. Lev. 26. 30; Deut. 12. 11-14. The use of commanding elevations for altars 
seems to have been immemorial and universal. In itself the practice was not 
evil (Gen. 12. 7, 8; 22. 2-4; 31. 54; Jud. 6. 25, 26; 13. 16-23). After the establish- 
ment of Mount Moriah and the temple as the centre of divine worship ae 
12. 5, with 2 Chr. 7. 12) the pentateuchal prohibition of the use of high places (Deut. 
12. 11-14), which had looked forward to the setting up of such a centre, came into 
effect, and high places became identified with idolatrous practices. _The_con- 
stant recurrence to the use of high places, even for Jehovistic worship (1 Ki. 15. 
14, note), and after the building of the temple, proves how deeply rooted the 
custom was. See 2 Ki. 18. 4-22; 23.; 2 Chr. 33. 3, 17, 19. See, also, note on “groves,” 


Jud. 3. 7. 
389 


By 


Solomon’s prayer for wisdom 
(2 Chr. 1. 7-13). 


5 In Gibeon the LorD appeared 
to Solomon in a dream by night: 
and God said, ¢Ask what I shall 
give thee. 

6 And Solomon said, Thou hast 
shewed unto thy servant David my 
father great mercy, according as he 
‘walked before thee in truth, and in 
righteousness, and in uprightness 
of heart with thee; and thou hast 
kept for him this great kindness, 
that thou hast given him a son 
to sit on his throne, as it is this 
day. 

7 And now, O Lorp my God, 

thou hast made thy servant king 
instead of David my father: and I 
am but a little child: I know not 
Ahow to go out or come in. 
_8 And thy servant is in the midst 
of thy people which thou 4hast 
‘chosen, a great people, ‘that cannot 
be numbered nor counted for multi- 
tude. 

9 Give therefore thy servant an 
funderstanding heart to judge thy 
people, that I may discern between 
good and bad: for who is able to 
judge this thy so great a people? 

10 And the speech pleased the 
Lord, that Solomon had asked this 
thing. 

11 And God said unto him, Be- 
cause thou hast asked this thing, 
and hast not asked for thyself long 
life; neither hast asked riches for 
thyself, nor hast asked the life of 
thine enemies; but hast asked for 
thyself understanding to discern 
judgment; 

12 Behold, I have done according 
to thy words: “lo, I have given thee 
a wise and an understanding heart; 
so that there was none like thee 
before thee, neither after thee shall 
any arise like unto thee. 

13 And I have also given thee that 
which thou hast not asked, both 
riches, and honour: so that there 
‘shall not be any among the kings 
like unto thee all thy days. 

14 And if thou wilt walk in my 
ways, to keep my statutes and my 
commandments, Jas thy father Da- 
vid did walk, then I will lengthen 
thy days. . 

15 And Solomon awoke; and, be- 
hold, it was a dream. And he 
came to. Jerusalem, and stood before 
the ark of the covenant of the 
LORD, and offered up burnt-offer- 
ings, and offered peace-offerings, 


a Bible 


prayers 
(O.T.), 1 Ki. 


6 2 Chr.1.8. 

c1 Ki.2.4; 9.4. 

d Deut.7.6. 

e Gen.13.16; 
15.55 

ft Heb. hear- 
ing. 

g Heb.5.14. 

h 1 Ki.4.29,30, 
315/5-12%)10; 
24; Eccl.1.16. 

i Or, hath not 
been. 


j1 Ki.15.5. 
k Num.27.2. 


l Heb. were 
hot. 


m Heb. in the 
midst of 
him. 


390 


I KINGS. 


B.C. 1014. 


[3 
and made a feast to all his ser- 


The wisdom of Solomon. 
16 Then came there two women, 


and *stood before him. 

17 And the one woman said, O my 
lord, I and this woman dwell in one 
house; and I was delivered of a 
‘child with her in the house. : 

18 And it came to pass the third 
day after that I was delivered, that 
this woman was delivered also: and 
we were together; there was no 
stranger with us in the house, save 
we two in the house. 

19 And this woman’s child died 
in the night; because she overlaid 


1t. 

20 And she arose at midnight, and 
took my son from beside me, while 
thine handmaid slept, and laid it in 
her bosom, and laid her dead child 
in my bosom. 

21 And when I rose in the morn- 
ing to give my child suck, behold, it 
was dead: but when I had con- 
sidered it in the morning, behold, it 


was not my son, which I did | 


bear, 

22 And the other woman said, 
Nay; but the living fs my son, and 
the dead is thy son. And this said, 
No; but the dead is thy son, and 
the living is my son. Thus they 
spake before the king. 

3 Then said the king, The one 
saith, This is my son that liveth, 
and thy son is the dead: and the 
other saith, Nay; but thy son is the 
dead, and my son is the living. 

24 And the king said, Bring me a 
sword. And they brought a sword 
before the king. 

25 And the king said, Divide the 
living child in two, and give half to 
the one, and half to the other. 

26 Then spake the woman whose 
the living child was unto the king, 
for her bowels ‘yearned upon her 
son, and she said, O my lord, give 
her the living child, and in no wise 
slay it. But the other said, Let it 
be neither mine nor thine, but di- 
vide it. 

27 Then the king answered and 
said, Give her the living child, and 


in no wise slay it: she is the mother 
thereof. 


28 And all I 
judgment 
judged; 
for they 
God was 


israel heard of the 
which the king had 
and they feared the king: 
saw that the wisdom of 
™in him, to do judgment. 


| 
vants. : 


( 


that were harlots, unto the king, 


41] 
CHAPTER 4. 


The princes of Israel in Sofo- 
mon’s reign. 


Se king Solomon was king over 
all Israel. 

2 And these were the princes 
which he had; Azariah the son of 
Zadok the priest, 

3 Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons 
of Shisha, scribes; ¢Jehoshaphat 
the son of Ahilud, the recorder. 

4 And >Benaiah the son of Jehoi- 
ada was over the host: and Zadok 
and ‘Abiathar were the priests: 

5 And Azariah the son of Nathan 
was over the officers: and Zabud 
the son of Nathan was 4@principal, 
officer, and the ¢king’s friend: 

6 And Ahishar was over the 
household: and fAdoniram the son 
of Abda was over the tribute. 


The twelve commissaries. 


7 And Solomon had twelve offi- 
cers over all Israel, which provided 
victuals for the king and his house- 
hold: each man his month in a year 
made provision. 

8 And these are their names: The 
8son of Hur, in mount Ephraim: 

9 The son of Dekar, in Makaz, 
and in Shaalbim, and Beth-she- 
mesh, ‘and Elon-beth-hanan: 

10 The “son of Hesed, in Aruboth; 
to him pertained Sochoh, and all 
the land of Hepher: 

11 The ‘son of Abinadab, in all the 
region of Dor; which had Taphath 
the daughter of Solomon to wife: 

12 Baana the son of Ahilud; to 
him pertained Taanach an 
Megiddo, and all Beth-shean, which 
is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, 
from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, 
even unto the place that is be- 
yond Jokneam: 

13 The son of Geber, in Ramoth- 
gilead; to him pertained the towns 
of Jair the son of Manasseh, which 
are in Gilead; to him also per- 
tained Jthe region of Argob, which 
ts in-Bashan, threescore great cities 
with walls and brasen bars: 

14 Ahinadab the son of Iddo had 
Mahanaim: 

15 Ahimaaz was in Naphtali; he 
also took Basmath the daughter of 
Solomon to wife: 

16 Baanah the son of Hushai was 
in Asher and in Aloth: 

17 Jehoshaphat the son of Pa- 
ruah, in Issachar: 

18 Shimei the son of Elah, in Ben- 
jamin; 


I KINGS. 


a 2 Sam.8.16; 
20.24. 


61 Ki.2.35. 
c1 Ki.2.27, 


d 2 Sam.8.18; 
20.26. 


é 2 Sam.15. 

37; 16.16; 

1 Chr.27.33. 
f 1 Ki.5.14. 
g Or, Ben-hur. 


h Or, Ben- 
hesed. 


1 Or, Ben- 
abinadab. 


j Deut.3.4. 
k Deut.3.8. 


1 Gen.22.17; 
1 Ki.3.8. 


m2 Chr.9.26; 
Psa.72.8. 


n Heb. bread. 

o One measure 
= about 10 
bu. 

p 1 Chr.22.9. 

q Jer.23.6. 


r Heb. con- 
fidently. 


s Mic.4.4; 
Zech.3.10. 


11 Ki.10.26; 
2 Chr.1.14; 
9.25. 

u Deut.17.16. 

v Acts 7.22. 


wi Ki.3.12. 


_ 31 


[4 3t 


19 Geber the son of Uri wasin the 
country of Gilead, in *the country 
of Sihon king of the Amorites, and 
of Og king of Bashan; and he was 
the only officer which was in the 
land. 

20 Judah and Israel were many, 
las the sand which 1s by the sea in 
multitude, eating and drinking, and 
making merry. 

21 And Solomon reigned over 
all kingdoms from the river unto the 
land of the Philistines, and unto the 
border of Egypt: they brought: 
presents, and served Solomon all 
the days of his life. 

22 And Solomon’s “provision for 
one day was thirty °measures of 
fine flour, and threescore measures 
of meal, 

23 Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen 
out of the pastures, and an hun- 
dred sheep, beside harts, and roe- 
bucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted 
fowl. 

24 For he had dominion over all 
the region on this side the river, 
from Tiphsah even to Azzah, over 
all the kings on this side the river: 
and fhe had peace on all sides round 
about him. ‘ 

25 And Judah and Israel %dwelt 
Ysafely, Severy man under his vine 
and under his fig tree, from Dan 
even to Beer-sheba, all the days of 
Solomon. 

26 And ‘Solomon had forty thou- 


sand stalls of “horses for his 
chariots, and twelve thousand 
horsemen. 


27 And those officers provided 
victual for king Solomon, and for 
all that came unto king Solomon’s 
table, every man in his month: they 
lacked nothing. 

28 Barley also and straw for the 
horses and dromedaries brought 
they unto the place where the 
officers were, every man according 
to his charge. 


The wisdom of Solomon. 


29 And God gave Solomon wisdom 
and understanding exceeding much, 
and largeness of heart, even as the 
sand that is on the sea shore. 

30 And Solomon’s wisdom ex- 
celled the wisdom of all the chil- 
dren of the east country, and “all 
the wisdom of Egypt. 

31 For he was “wiser than all 
men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and 
Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, 
the sons of Mahol: and his fame 
was in all nations round about. 


y,. 32 And he spake three thousand 


proverbs: and his “songs were a 
thousand and five. 

33 And he spake of trees, from the 
‘cedar tree that is in Lebanon even 
unto the hyssop that springeth out 
of the wall: he spake also of beasts, 
and of fowl, and of creeping things, 
and of fishes. : 

34 And there came of all people to 
hear the wisdom of Solomon, from 
all kings of the earth, which had 
heard of his wisdom. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Solomon prepares to build the 
temple (2 Chr, 2. 1-16). 


ND /-Hiram king of Tyre sent 

his servants unto Solomon; for 
he had heard that they had 
anointed him king in the room of 
his father: for Hiram was ever a 
lover of David. 

2 And Solomon sent to Hiram, 
saying, 

3 Thou knowest how that David 
my father could not build an house 
unto the name of the Lorp his God 
4for the wars which were about 
him on every side, until the LorpD 
put them under the soles of his 
feet. 

4 But now the Lorp my God 
hath given me rest on every side, so 
that there is neither adversary 
nor evil occurrent. 

5 And, behold, I purpose to build 
an house unto the name of the 
LorD my God, as the Lorp spake 
unto David my father, saying, Thy 
son, whom I will set. upon thy 
throne in thy room, he shall build 
an house unto my name. 

6 Now therefore command thou 
that they hew me cedar trees out of 
Lebanon; and my servants shall be 
with thy servants: and unto thee 
will I give hire for thy servants 
according to ail that thou shalt 


appoint: for thou knowest that 


there is not among us any that can 
skill to hew timber like unto the 
Sidonians. 

7 And it came to pass, when 
Hiram heatd the words of Sol- 
omon, that he rejoiced greatly, and 
said, Blessed be the Lorp this day, 
which hath given unto David a 
wise son over this great people. 

And Hiram sent to Solomon, 
saying, I have considered the things 
which thou sentest to me for: and 
T will do all thy desire concerning! 


B.C. 1014. 


a Song 1.1. 

6 vs.10,18; 
2 Chr.2.3, 
Huram. 

¢ 2 Chr.2.3. 


d1 Chr.22.8; 
28.3. 


e One meas- 


f One meas- 
ure (liquid) 
= about 86 
gals. 


392 


timber of cedar, and concerning 
timber of fir. ‘ 

9 My servants shall bring them 
down from Lebanon unto the sea: 
and I will convey them by sea in 
floats unto the place that thou 
shalt appoint me, and will cause 
them to be discharged there, and 
thou shalt receive them: and thou 
shalt accomplish my desire, in giv- 
ing food for my household. 

10 So Hiram gave Solomon. cedar 
trees and fir trees according to 
all his desire. ; 

11 And Solomon gave Hiram 
twenty thousand ‘measures of 
wheat for food to his household, 
and twenty ‘measures of pure oil: 
thus gave Solomon to Hiram year 


by year. 

12 And the LorpD gave Solomon 
wisdom, as he promised him: and 
there was peace between Hiram 
and Solomon; and they two madea _ 
league together. 


Preparations for building the 
temple: the labourers and 
their work (2 Chr. 2. Pa ios 


13 And king Solomon raised a 
levy out of all Israel; and the levy 
was thirty thousand men. 

14 And he sent them to Lebanon, 
ten thousand a month by courses: 
a month they were in Lebanon, 
and two months at home: and 
Adoniram was over the levy. 

15 And Solomon had threescore 
and ten thousand that bare bur- 
dens, and fourscore thousand hew- 
ers in the mountains; 

16 Beside the chief of Solomon’s 
officers which were over the work, — 
three thousand and three hundred, 
which ruled over the people that 
wrought in the work. 

17 And the king commanded, and 
they brought great stones, costly 
stones, and hewed stones, to lay the 
foundation of the house. 

18 And Solomon’s builders and 
Hiram’s builders did hew them, and 
the stonesquarers: so they prepared 


timber and stones to build the 
house. 


CHAPTER 6. 


Solomon begins to build the 
temple (2 Chr: 3.1, 2). 


AN? it came to pass in the four 

hundred _ and eightieth year 
after the children of Israel were 
come out of the land of Egypt, in 
the fourth year of Solomon’s reign 


6 2] : I KINGS. [6 22 


— 


over Israel, in the month @Zif, which} B.c. 1012. | 11 And the word of the Lorp 


is the second month, that he began came to Solomon, saying, 
to build the thouse of the LorpD. 12 Concerning this house which 
Dimensions and materials of the ae art in building, if thou wilt 
temple (2 Chr. 3. 3 to 4. 22). walk in my statutes, and execute 
. 3 my judgments, and keep all my 
2 And the house which king Solo- commandments to walk in them; 
mon built for the LorD, the length then will I perform my word with 
thereof was threescore “cubits, and thee, Swhich I spake-unto David thy 
the breadth thereof twenty cubits, father: 
and the height thereof thirty cubits. 13 And *I will dwell among the 
3 And the porch before the temple children of Israel, and will not ‘for- 
of the house, twenty cubits waS|qie, May.  |Sake my people Israel. 
the length thereof, according to the 14 So Solomon built the house, 


breadth of the house; and ten|)Onecubit= | and finished it. 
cubits was the breadth thereof] 30%J3 | 15 And he built the walls of the 


before the house. 10,17,20,23, |house within with boards of cedar, 
4 And for the house he made} 24,25,26. both the floor of the house, and_ the 
2windows of narrow lights. ¢Deut.27.5, | Walls of the cieling: and he covered 
5 And against the wall of the| 6;.1 Kis5.ig. |therm on the inside with wood, and 
Bee he ee en ee pa Wee nee papi of the house with 
about, against the walls o e ‘ ~ |planks o y 
house round about, both of the oa 16 And he built twenty cubits on 
temple and of the oracle: and he} é vs-14,38. the sides of the house, both the floor 
made chambers round about: £1 Ki2.4; 9.4. and the walls with boards of cedar: 


6 The nethermost chamber was he even built them. for it within, 
five cubits broad, and the middle|¢2Sam.7.13; |even for the oracle, even for the 
was six cubits broad, and the third] 1 ©5t-22-10- |most holy place. ¢ 
was seven cubits broad: for with-|; Ex.25.8; 17 And the house, that zs, the tem- 


out in the wall of the house he| Lev.26.11; |ple before it, was.forty cubits long. 
made narrowed rests round about,| 297-616: 18 And the cedar of the house 
that the beams should not be a within was carved with knops and 
fastened in the walls of the house. |i Deut.31.6. {open flowers: all was cedar; there 
7 And the chouse, when it was in) -5, 39135, |WasS no stone seen. ; 
building, was. built of stone made $ ec 19 .And the oracle he prepared in 
ready before it was brought thither: the house within, to set there the 
so that there was neither hammer ark of the covenant of the Lorp. 
nor axe nor any tool of iron heard 20 And the oracle in the forepart 
in the house, while it was in building. : was twenty cubits in length, and 
8 Thedoor for the middle chamber twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty 
was in the right 4side of the house: cubits in the height thereof: and he 
and they went up with winding overlaid it with pure gold; and socov- 
stairs into the middle chamber, ered the altar which was of cedar. 
“and out of the middle into the third. 21 So Solomon overlaid the house 
9 &So he built the house, and fin- within with pure gold: and he made 
ished it; and covered the house a partition by the chains of gold 
with beams and boards of cedar. before the oracle; and he overlaid it 
10° And then he built chambers with gold. 
against all the house, five cubits 22 And the whole house he over- 
high: and they rested on the house laid with gold, until he had finished 
with timber of cedar. all the house: also the Jwhole altar 


1 The typology of the temple, if indeed it has any typical significance, is most 
obscure and difficult. The N.T. invariably expounds the typology of the taber- 
nacle, not of the temple. The symbolism of the latter may be revealed in the 
kingdom-age (see “Kingdom” [O.T.], Gen. 1. 26; Zech. 12. 3; (N.T.], Lk. 1. 32; 
1 Cor. 15, 28). In the N.T. the usual Gk. word for sanctuary (naos) is used (1) of 
the temple in Jerusalem (Mt. 23. 16); (2) of the believer’s body (1 Cor. 3. 16, 17; 
6. 19): (3) of the local church (2 Cor. 6, 16); and (4) of the true church (Eph, 2. 21). 
But in all these instances the thought is simply of a habitation of God. No 
reference to the structure of the temple, as in the case of the tabernacle (Heb. 9.-10.), 
is traceable. \ : 

2 Cf. 2 Chr. 4. 20. In the holy of holies in the tabernacle no light but the shekinah 
glory was provided. In many ways Solomon’s temple manifests the spiritual deteri- 
oration of the people, and Jehovah’s condescension to it in grace. 

393 


6 23] 


with gold. ’ 

23 And within the oracle he made 
two cherubims of olive tree, each 
ten cubits high. _ 

24 And five cubits was the one 
wing of the cherub, and five cubits 
the other wing of the cherub: from 
the uttermost part of the one wing 
unto the uttermost part of the other 
were ten cubits. 

25 And the other cherub was ten 
cubits: both the cherubims were of 
one measure and one size. 

26 The height of the one cherub 
was ten cubits, and so was it of the} 
other cherub. ' 

27 And he set the cherubims with- 
in the inner house: and “they 
stretched forth the wings of the 
cherubims, so that the wing of the 
one touched the one wall, and the 
wing of the other cherub touched the 
other wall; and their wings touched 
one another in the midst of the house. 

28 And he overlaid the cherubims 


a Or, the 
cherubim 
stretched 

| forth their 
wings. 


6 Or, five- 
square. 


c Or, four- 
square. 


di.e. May. 


e i.e. Novem- 


with gold. PEs 
29 And he carved all the walls of| f€fv.1. 
the house round about with carved) gOngeubies 
figures of cherubims and palm trees about 18 in.; 
and open flowers, within and with-| also vs.6,10, 
out. isto, 
30 And the floor of the house he} 3232515? 
overlaid with gold, within and with- : 
out. h Heb. ribs. 


31 And for the entering of the 
oracle he made doors of olive tree: 
the lintel and side posts were %a 
fifth part of the wall. 

32 The two doors also were of 


i Or, spaces 
and pillars 
were square 
in prospect. 


Jj Heb. from 


olive tree; and he carved upon Hoor te 
them carvings of cherubims and| 7° 
palm trees and open flowers, and}£ 1 Ki3.1; 
overlaid them with gold, and| 2 Chr.8.11. 
spread gold upon the cherubims, 1 John 10.23; 
and upon the palm trees. Acts 3.11. 


33 So also made he for the door 
of the temple posts of olive tree, “a 
fourth part of the wall; 

34 And the two doors were of fir 
tree: the two leaves of the one door 
were folding, and the two leaves of 
the other door were folding. 

35 And he carved thereon cher- 
ubims and palm trees and open 
flowers: and covered them with 
gold fitted upon the carved work. 

36 And he built the inner court 
with three rows of hewed stone,-and 
a tow of cedar beams. 

37 In the fourth year was the 
foundation of the house of the 
Lorp laid, in the month @Zif: 

38 And in the eleventh year, in 
the month «Bul, which jis the 


394 


I KINGS. 


that was by the oracle he overlaid} B.c. 1005. 


[7 120 


eighth month, was the house fin- 


ished throughout all the parts 


thereof, and according to all the 
fashion of it. So was he /seven 
years in building it. 


CHAPTER 7. 


Bu Solomon was building his 
own house thirteen years, and 
he finished all his house. 

2 He built also the house of the 
forest of Lebanon; the length 
thereof was an hundred cubits, 
and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, 
and the height thereof thirty cu- 
bits, upon four rows of cedar pil- 
lars, with cedar beams upon the 
pillars. 
| 3 And it was covered with cedar 
above upon the “beams, that Jay on 
forty five pillars, fifteen in a row. 
|4 And 
three rows, and light was against 
light in three ranks, 
| 5 And all the ‘doors and posts 
were square, with the windows: 
and light was against light in three 
ranks. 
| 6 And he made a porch of pillars; 
the length thereof was fifty cubits, 
and the breadth thereof thirty cu- 
‘bits: and the porch was before 
them: and the other pillars and 
the thick beam were before them. 

7 Then he made a porch for the 
throne where he might judge, even 
the porch of judgment: and it was 


covered with cedar /from one side 
of the floor to the other. 

8 And his house where he dwelt 
had another court within the porch, 
which was of the like work. Solo- 
mon made also an house for Pha- 
taoh’s daughter, “whom he had 


9 All these were of costly stones, 
according to the measures of hewed 
stones, sawed with saws, within 
and without, even from the founda- 
tion unto the coping, and so on the 
outside toward the great court. 

10 And the foundation was of 
costly stones, even great stones, 
stones of ten cubits, and stones of 
eight cubits. 

11 And above were costly stones, 
jafter the measures of hewed stones, 
and cedars. 

12 And the great court round 
about was with three rows of 
hewed stones, and a tow of cedar 
beams, both for the inner court of 


the house of the Lorp, and “for the 
porch of the house, 


taken to wife, like unto this porch. 


there were windows in 


7 13], 


I KINGS. 


[7 37 


13 And king Solomon sent and/_ B.C. 1005. 


fetched Hiram out of Tyre. 

14 He was a widow’s son of the 
tribe of Naphtali, and ¢his father 
was a man of Tyre, a worker in 
brass: and She was filled with wis- 
dom, and understanding, and cun- 
ning to work all works in brass. 
And he came to king Solomon, and 
wrought all his work. 

15. For he cast two pillars of brass, 
of eighteen cubits high apiece: and 
a line of twelve cubits did tompass 
either of them about. 

16 And he made two chapiters of 
molten brass, to set upon the tops 
of the pillars: the height of the one 
chapiter was five cubits, and the 
height of the other chapiter was 
five cubits: 

17 And nets of checker work, and 
wreaths of chain work, for the 
chapiters which were upon the top 
of the pillars; seven for the one 
chapiter, and seven for the other 
chapiter. 

18 And he made the pillars, and 
two rows round about upon the one 
network, to cover the chapiters that 
were upon the top, with pomegran- 
ates: and so did he for the other 
chapiter. 

19 And the chapiters that were 
upon the top of the pillars were of 
lily work in the porch, four cubits. 

20 And the chapiters upon the 

two pillars had pomegranates 
also above, over against the belly 
which was by the network: and the 
pomegranates were two hundred 
in rows round about upon the other 
chapiter. 
21 And he set up the pillars in the 
porch of the temple: and he set up 
the right pillar, and called the name 
thereof “Jachin: and he set up the 
left pillar, and called the name 
thereof ¢Boaz. : 

22 And upon the top of the pillars 
was lily work: so was the work of 
the pillars finished. 

23 And he made a “molten sea, 
ten cubits ‘from the one brim to the 
other: it was round all about, and 
his height was five cubits: and a 
line of thirty cubits did compass it 
round about. t 

24 And under the brim of it round 
about there were knops compassing 
it, ten in-a cubit, compassing the 
sea round about: the knops were 
cast in two rows, when it was cast. 

25 It stood upon twelve oxen, 
three looking toward the north, and 
three looking toward the west, and 


a 2 Chr.4.16. 
b Ex.31.3; 36.1. 


ci.e. He shall 
establish. 


di.e. in it is 
strength. 
eé 2 Ki.25.13; 


2 Chr.4.2; 
Jer.52.17. 


f Heb. from 
his brim to 
his brim. 


gz One bath = 
about 8 gals.; 
also v.38. 


h Heb. in the 
base. 


395 


three looking toward the south, 
and three looking toward the east: 
and the sea was set above upon 
them, and all their hinder parts 
were inward. 

26 And it was an hand breadth 
thick, and the brim thereof was 
wrought like the brim of a cup, 
with flowers of lilies: it contained 
two thousand baths. 

27 And he made ten bases of 
brass; four cubits was the length of 
one base, and four cubits the 
breadth thereof, and three cubits 
the height of it. ; 

28 And the work of the bases was 
on this manner: they had borders, 
and the borders were between the 
ledges: 

29 And on the borders that were 
between the ledges were lions, oxen, 
and cherubims: and upon the ledges 
there was a base above: and be- 
neath the lions and oxen ‘were cer- 
tain additions made of thin work. 

30 And every base had four 
brasen wheels, and plates of brass: 
and the four corners thereof had 
undersetters: under the laver were 
undersetters molten, at the side of 
every addition. 

31 And the mouth of it within the 
chapiter and above was a cubit: 
but the mouth thereof was round 
after the work of the base, a cubit 
and an half: and also upon the mouth 
of it were gravings with their bor- 
ders, foursquare, not round. 

32 And under the borders were 
four wheels; and the axletrees of 
the wheels were "joined to the 
base: and the height of a wheel was 
a cubit and half a cubit. 

33 And the work of the wheels 
was like the work of a chariot 
wheel: their axletrees, and their 
naves, and their felloes, and their 
spokes, were all molten. 

34 And there were four under- 
setters to the four corners of one 
base: and the undersetters were of ' 
ithe very base itself. 

35 And in the top of the base was 
\there a round compass of half a 
lcubit high: and on the top of the 
base the ledges thereof and the bor- 
ders thereof were of the same. 

36 For on the plates of the ledges 
thereof, and on the borders thereof, 
he graved cherubims, lions, and 
palm trees, according to the pro- 
portion of every one, and additions 
round about. 

37 After this manner he made 
(the ten bases: all of them had 


v 
* 


7 38} I KINGS. | [8 6 


i ing, on€é measure, and one|_B.C. 1005. _|on the left, before the oracle, with 
fire. saosin the flowers, and the lamps, and the 
38 Then *made he ten lavers of tongs of gold, 
brass: one laver contained forty 50 And the bowls, and the snuf- : 
baths: and every laver was four fers, and the basons, and the 
cubits: and upon every one of the spoons, and the censers of pure 
ten bases one laver. gold; and the hinges of gold, both 
39 And he put five bases on the for the doors of the inner house, the 
right side of the house, and five on most holy place, and for the doors - 
the left side of the house: and he of the house, to wit, of the temple. 
set the sea on the. right side of the 51 So was ended all the work that 
house eastward over against the king Solomon made for the house 
south. of the Lorp. And Solomon brought 
40 And ’Hiram made the lavers, in the things which David his 
and the shovels, and the basons. father had &dedicated; even the 
So Hiram made an end of doing all silver, and the gold, and the yes- 
the work that he made king Solo- sels, did he put among the treasures 


mon for the house of the Lorp, |¢ 2 Chr.4.6. of the house of the Lorpb. 
41 The two pillars, and the two Baris: 
bowls of the chapiters that were on CHAPTER 8. 


i : Heb. for th . 
Bo est Rar da Ti Ie ark brow he ohm 


bowls of the chapiters which were) 7™4/*##4¢e- ele Mare fills the house 
upon the top of the pillars; @ Ex.37.25,26. See Aad 
42 And four hundred pomegran- rear “THEN Solomon assembled the 
ates for the two networks, even two i elders of Israel, and all the 
er i pOrnnaioma es oie ese FELIS, pends of ee jtribgsa the ehiet et ane 
work, to cover the two bowls o i athers of the children of Israel, 
the chapiters that were upon the g Sanctify, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, 
pillars; holy (O.T.). |that they might bring up the ark 
43 And the ten bases, and ten Pee ia of the covenant of the Lorp out of 
lavers on the bases; Zech.8.3.) the city of David, which is Zion. 
44 And one sea, and twelve oxen ‘ 2 And all the men of Israel assem- 
under the sea; hie. October. |bled themselves unto king Solomon 
45 And the pots, and the shovels, at the feast in the month /Etha. 
ead ca pesensianed allichese ee ity CRP ithe Seventh months ‘ 
iram made to king a e elders of Israe 
Solomon for the house of the Lorp, came, and the priests took up the 
were of bright brass. ark. 


46 In the plain of Jordan did the 4 And they brought up the ark of 
king cast them, in the clay ground the Lorp, and the tabernacle of the 
between Succoth and Zarthan. congregation, and all the holy ves- 

47 And Solomon ieft all the ves- sels that were in the tabernacle, 


sels unweighed, ‘because they even those did the priests and the 
were exceeding many: neither was Levites bring up. 
the weight of the brass found out. 5S And king Solomon, and all the 
48 And Solomon made all the congregation of Israel, that were 
vessels that pertained unto the assembled unto him, were with him 
house of the Lorp: the ¢altar of before the ark, sacrificing sheep and 
gold, and the ¢table of gold, where- oxen, that could not be told nor 
upon the /shewbread was, numbered for multitude. 
49 And the candlesticks of pure 6 And the priests brought in thé 
gold, five on the right side, and five ark of the covenant of the Lorp 


1 The consecration of the temple illustrates all consecration s i 
the believer (1 Thes. 5. 23), was threefold: the court, that iden areg nti ee 
visible, answered to the body; the holy place, where everything appealed to the 
sacred emotions, answered to the soul; the holy of holies, the plac 
with God (Ex. 25, 22), answered to the spirit of man. 


396. 


.% 


I KINGS. 


[8 30 


unto his place, into the oracle of 
the house, to the most holy place, 
even under the wings of the cher- 
ubims. 

7 For the cherubims spread forth 

their two wings over the place of 
the ark, and the cherubims covered 
the ark and the staves thereof 
above. 
‘8 And they drew out the staves, 
that the ends of the staves were 
seen out in the holy place before 
the oracle, and they were not seen 
without: and there they are unto 
this day. 

9 There was nothing in the ark 
save the two tables of stone, which 
Moses put there at Horeb, when the 
LorpD made a covenant with the 
children of Israel, when they came 
out of the land of Egypt. 

10 And it came to pass, when the 
priests were come out of the holy 
place, that the ¢cloud filled the 
house of the Lorpb, 

1i So that the priests could not 
stand to minister because of the 
cloud: for the glory of the LorRD 
had filled the house of the LORD. 


The sermon of Solomon (2 Chr. 
6) 1-11); 


12 Then spake Solomon, The 
Lorp said that he would dwell in 
the thick darkness. 

13 I have surely built thee an 
house to dwell in, a settled place 
for thee to abide in for ever. 

14 And the king turned his face 
about, and blessed all the congre- 
gation of Israel: (and all the con- 
gregation of Israel stood;) 

15 And he said, Blessed be the 
Lorp God of Israel, which spake 
with his mouth unto David my 
father, and hath with his hand ful- 
filled it, saying, 

16 Since the day that I brought 
forth my people Israel out of Egypt, 
I chose no city out of all the tribes 
of Israel to build an house, that my 
name might be therein; but I chose 
pavid to be over my people Is- 
Tael. 

17 Andit wasin the heart of David 
my father to build an house for the 
name of the Lorp God of Israel. . 

18 And the LorD said unto David 
my father, Whereas it was in thine 
heart to build an house unto my 
name, thou didst well that it was 
in thine heart. 

19 Nevertheless thou shalt not 
build the house; but thy son that 
shall come forth out of thy loins, 


B.C. 1004. 


a vs.10,11; 
Ex.40.34, 
note. 


b Kingdom 
(O.T.). 1 Ki. 


11.9-13,32,36. 


(Gen.1.26- 
28; Zech. 
12. 8.) 


c Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). 1 Ki. 
17.20. 
15.2; Hab.3. 
1-16.) 


d 2 Chr.2.6; 
Isa.66.1; 
Jer.23.24; 
Acts 7.49; 
17.24. 


e Deut.12.11. 


397 


(Gen. 


he shall build the house unto my 
name. ierkiade 

20 And the Lorp hath performed 
his word that he spake, and I am 
risen up in the room of “David my 
father, and sit on the throne of 
Israel, as the LORD promised, and 
have built an house for the name of 
the Lorp God of Israel. - 

21 And I have set there a place 
for the ark, wherein is the covenant 
of the LORD, which he made with 
our fathers, when he brought them 
out of the land of Egypt. 


Solomon’s prayer of dedication 
(2 Chr. 6, 12-42). 


22 And Solomon stood before the 
altar of the LorD in the presence of 
all the congregation of Israel, and 
spread forth his hands toward 
heaven: 

23 And he ‘said, Lorp God of 
Israel, there is no God like thee, in 
heaven above, or on earth beneath, 
who keepest covenant and mercy 
with thy servants that walk before 
thee with all their heart: 

24 Who hast kept with thy ser- 
vant David my father that thou 
promisedst him: thou spakest also 
with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled 
it with thine hand, as 7t is this day. 

25 Therefore now, LORD God of 
Israel, keep with thy servant David 
my father that thou promisedst him, 
saying, There shall not fail thee a 
man in my sight to sit on the 
throne of Israel; so that thy chil- 
dren take heed to their way, that 
they walk before me as thou hast 
walked before me. 

26 And now, O God of Israel, let 
thy word, I pray thee, be verified, 
which thou spakest unto thy ser- 
vant David my father. 

27 But ¢will God indeed dwell on 
the earth? behold, the heaven and 
heaven of heavens cannot contain 
thee; how much less this house 
that I have builded? 

28 Yet have thou respect unto the 
prayer of thy servant, and to his 
supplication, O LORD my God, to 
hearken unto the cry and to the 
prayer, which thy servant prayeth 
before thee to day: 

29 That thine eyes may be open 
toward this house night and day, 
even toward the place of which thou 
hast said, “My name shall be there: 
that thou mayest hearken unto the 
prayer which thy servant shall 
make toward this place. 

30 And hearken thou to the sup- 


8 31] I KINGS. 


people Israel, when they shall pray 
toward this place: and hear thou 
in heaven thy dwelling place: and 
when thou hearest, forgive. : 

31 If any man trespass against 
his neighbour, and ¢an oath be laid 
upon him to cause him to swear, 
and the oath come before thine 
altar in this house: 

32 Then hear thou in heaven, and 
do, and judge thy servants, con- 
demning the wicked, to bring his 
way upon his head; and justifying 
the righteous, to give him accord- 
ing to his righteousness. 

33 When thy people Israel be 
smitten down before the enemy, be- 
cause they have sinned against|¢ Heb. and he 
thee, and shall turn again to thee, pe niente 
and confess thy name, and pray, 
and make supplication unto thee in|} 1 Sam.12.23. 
this house: 

34 Then hear thou in heaven, and] ° ace Boe. 
forgive the sin of thy people Israel,} 21,22,27,38, 
and bring them again unto the land Ep ehen “ 
which thou gavest unto their fa- 3 
thers. d Psa.19.9, 

35 When heaven is shut up, and] 7°¢e- 
there is no rain, because they have e Deut 3.24, 
Sinned against thee; if they pray 
toward this place, and confess thy 
name, and turn from their sin, 
when thou afflictest them: 

36 Then hear thou in heaven, and! 
forgive the sin of thy servants, and h Lev.26.34, 
of thy people Israel, that thou teach| 44; Deut.28. 
them the good way wherein they] 366 
should walk, and give rain upon 


g Or, right. 


: 2 i Neh.1.6; 
thy land, which thou hast Ziven to] Psa.106.6; 
thy people for an inheritance. an.9.5. 


37 If there be in the land famine,] ; pan.6.10. 
if there be pestilence, blasting, mil- te 
dew, locust, or if there be caterpil- 
ler; if their enemy besiege them in 
the land of their cities; whatsoever 
plague, whatsoever sickness there 

er 
38 What prayer and supplication 
soever be made by any man, or by 
all thy people Israel, which shall 
know every man the plague of his 
own heart, and spread forth his 
hands toward this house: 

39 Then hear thou in heaven thy 
dwelling place, and forgive, and do, 
and give to every man according to 
his ways, whose heart thou know- 
est; (for thou, even thou only, 
knowest the hearts of all the chil- 
dren of men;) 

40 That they may ¢fear thee all 
the days that they live in the land 
which thou gavest unto our fathers. 

41 Moreover concerning a stran-} 


398 


plication of thy servant, and of thy] B.C. 1004. 


[3s 


ger, that zs not of thy people Israel, 
but cometh out of a far country for 
thy name’s sake; } 

42 (For they shall hear of thy 
great name, and of ‘thy strong 
hand, and of thy stretched out 
arm;) when he shall come and pray 
toward this house; 

43 Hear thou in heaven thy dwell- 
ing place, and do according to all 
that the stranger calleth to thee for: 
‘that all people of the earth may 
know thy name, to ¢fear thee, as do 
thy people Israel; and that they 
may know that this house, which I 
have builded, is called by thy 
name. 

44 If thy people go out to battle 
against their enemy, whithersoever 
thou shalt send them, and shall 
pray unto the LorpD toward the 
city which thou hast chosen, and 
toward the house that I have built 
for thy name: 

45 Then hear thou in heaven their 
prayer arid their supplication, and 
maintain their écause. 

46 If they sin against thee, (for 
there is no man that sinneth not,) 
and thou be angry with them, and 
deliver them to the enemy, so that 
they carry them away captives 
’unto-the land of the enemy, far or 
near; 

47 Yet if they shall bethink them- 
selves in the land whither they 
were carried captives, and repent, 
and make supplication unto thee in 


_ |the land of them that carried them 


captives, ‘saying, We have sinned, 
and have done perversely, we have 
committed wickedness; 

48 And so return unto thee with 
all their heart, and with all their 
soul, in the land of their enemies, 
which led them away captive, and 
Pray unto thee Jtoward their land, 
which thou gavest unto their fa. 
thers, the city which thou hast 


chosen, and the house which I have 
built for thy name: : 

49 Then hear thou their prayer 
and their supplication in heaven 
thy dwelling place, and maintain 
their cause, 

50 And forgive thy people that 
have sinned against thee, and all 
their transgressions wherein they 
have transgressed against thee, 
and give them compassion before 
them who carried them captive, 
that they may have compassion on 


them: 
Sl For they be thy people, and 
thine inheritance, which ‘thou 


I KINGS. 


[9s 


broughtest forth out ofEgypt, “from 
the midst of the furnace of iron: 

52 That thine eyes may be open 
unto the supplication of thy ser- 
‘vant, and unto the supplication of 
thy people Israel, to hearken unto 
them in all that they call for unto 
thee. 

53 For thou didst separate them 
from among all the people of the 
earth, to be thine inheritance, as 
thou spakest by the hand of Moses 
thy servant, when thou broughtest 
yd fathers out of Egypt, O Lord 

OD. 


Solomon’s blessing after the 
prayer. 


54 And it was so, that when Solo- 
mon had made an end of praying 
all this prayer and supplication 
unto the LorD, he arose from before 
the altar of the LorD, from kneel- 
ing on his knees with his hands 


a Deut.4.20; 
Jer.11.4. 


b Separation. 
Ezra 6.21. 
(Gen.12.1; 

2 Cor.6.14- 
Tie) 


c The word 


spread up to heaven. 

55 And he stood, and blessed all 
the congregation of Israel with a 
loud voice, saying, 

56 Blessed be the Lord, that hath 
given rest unto his people Israel, 
according to all that he promised: 
there hath not failed one word of 
all his good promise, which he prom- 
ised by the hand of Moses his 
servant. 

57 The Lorp our God be with us, 
as he was with our fathers: let him 
not leave us, nor forsake us: 

58 That he may incline our hearts 
unto him, to walk in all his ways, 
and to keep his commandments, 
and his statutes, and his judgments, 
which he commanded our fathers. 
59 And let these my words, where- 
with I have made supplication be- 
fore the Lorp, be nigh unto the 
Lorp our God day and night, that 
he maintain the cause of his ser- 
vant, and the cause of his people 
Israel at all: times, as the matter 
shall require: 

60 That all the people of the earth 
may know that the Lorp is God, 
and that there is none else. 

61 Let your heart therefore be 
perfect with the LorD our God, to 
walk in his statutes, and to keep his 
commandments, as at this day. 


Sacrifice and rejoicing 
(2 Chr, 7. 4-10). 


62 And the king, and all Israel 
with him, offered sacrifice before 
the LorpD. 

43 And Solomon offered a sacri- 


implies 
whole-heart- 
edness for 
God, single- 
mindedness, 
sincerity — 
not sinless 
perfection. 
d Lit. meal. 
e 2 Chr.7.11. 
f1 Ki.7.2. 
g 2 Chr.8.6. 
h1 Ki.3.5. 


i 2 Ki,20.5; 
Psa.10.17. 


j 1 Ki.8.29. 
k Deut.11.12. 
( Gen.17.1. 


399 


B.C. 1004. 


fice of peace-offerings, which he 
offered unto the LorpD, two and 
twenty thousand oxen, and an 
hundred and twenty thousand 
sheep. So the king and all the chil- 
dren of Israel dedicated the house 
of the LORD. . 

64 The same day did the king hal- 
low the middle of the court that was 
before the house of the Lorpb: for 
there he offered burnt-offerings, and 
émeat-offerings, and the fat of the 
peace-offerings: because the brasen 
altar that was before the LORD was 
too little to receive the burnt-offer- 
ings, and meat-offerings, and the 
fat of the peace-offerings, 

65 And at that time Solomon 
held a feast, and all Israel with him, 
a great congregation, from the en- 
tering in of Hamath unto the river 
of Egypt, before the LorD our God, 
seven days and seven days, even 
fourteen days. : 

66 On the eighth day he sent the 
people away: and they blessed the 
king, and went unto their tents joy- 
ful and glad of heart for all the 
goodness that the Lorp had done 
for David his servant, and for Israel 
his people. 


CHAPTER 9. 


Jehovah appears the second time 
to Solomon (2 Chr. 7. 12-22). 


[avg eit came to pass, when Solo- 
mon had finished the building 
of the house of the Lorp, fand the 
king’s house,° and éall Solomon's 
desire which he was pleased to do, 

2 That the LorD appeared to Sol- 
omon the second time, “as he had 
appeared unto him at Gibeon. 

3 And the LorD said unto him, 
i] have heard thy prayer and thy 
supplication, that thou hast made 
before me: I have hallowed this 
house, which thou hast built, /to 
put my name there for ever; and 
kmine eyes and mine heart shall be 
there perpetually. 

4 And if thou wilt ‘walk before 
me, as David thy father walked, in 
integrity of heart, and’ in upright- 
ness, to do according to all that I 
have commanded thee, and wilt 
keep my statutes and my jude- 
ments: 

5 Then I will establish the throne 
of thy kingdom upon Israel for 
ever, as I promised to David thy 
father, saying, There shall not fail 
thee a man upon the throne of 
Israel, 


‘I KINGS. 


6 But if ye shall at all turn from 
following me, ye or your children, 
and will not keep my command- 
ments and my statutes which I 
have set before you, but go and 
serve other gods, and worship 

nem: 

7 @Then will I cut off Israel out of 
the land which I have given them; 
and this house, which I have hal- 
lowed ‘for my name, will I cast out 
of my sight; and ‘Israel shall be a 


proverb and a byword among all 


people: f 

8 And at this house, wArch is 
high, every one that passeth by it 
shall be astonished, and shall hiss; 
and they shall say, 2?Why hath the 
Lorp done thus unto this land, and 
to this house? 

9 And they shall answer, Because 
they forsook the Lorp their God, 
who brought forth their fathers out 
of the land of Egypt, and have 
taken hold upon other gods, and 
have worshipped them, and served 
them: therefore hath the Lorp 
brought upon them all this evil. 


The energy and fame of Solomon 
(2 Chr. 8. 1-18). : 


10 And it came to pass at the end 
of twenty years, when Solomon had 
built the two houses, the house of 
the Lorp, and the king’s house, 

11 (Now Hiram the king of Tyre 
had furnished Solomon with cedar 
trees and fir trees, and with gold, 
according to all his desire,) that 
then king Solomor? gave Hiram 
twenty cities in the land of Galilee. 

12 And Hiram came out from 
Tyre to see the cities which Solo- 
mon had given him; and they 
pleased him not, 

13 And he said, What cities are 
these which thou hast given me, 
my brother? And he called them 
the land of Cabul unto this day. 

14 And Hiram sent to the king 
sixscore ‘talents of gold. 

15 And this is the reason of the 
flevy which king Solomon raised; 
fer to build the house of the Lorp, 
and his own house, and 8Millo, and 
the wall of Jerusalem, and hHazor, 


_ and ‘Megiddo, and jGezer. 


16 For Pharaoh king of Egypt 
had. gone up, and taken Gezer, and 
burnt it with fire, and slain the 
Canaanites that dwelt in the city, 
and given it for a present unto his 
daughter, Solomon’s wife, 

17 And Solomon built Gezer, and 
Beth-horon the nether, 


a a 


B.C. 992. 


@ Deut.4.26; 
2 Ki.17.23; 
25.21. 


6 Jer.7.14. 


c Deut.28.37; 
Psa.44.14. 


d Deut.29. 
24-26; Jer. 


e One talent= 
£6150, or 
$29,085; 
also v.28. 


f1 Ki.5.13. 


& v.24; 2 Sam. 
5.9. 


h Josh.19.36. 
# Josh.17.11. 
J Josh.16.10; 
Jud.1.29. 
k1 Ki.3.1; 
2 Chr.8.11. 
12 Sam.5.9; 
1 Ki.11.27; 
2 Chr.32.5, 
m2 Chr. 
Mt.12 


Lk, 11. 


9.1; 
42; 
31, 


400 


eset. fi 


18 And Baalath, and Tadmor ir 
the wilderness, in the land, 

19 And all the cities of store that 
Solomon had, and cities for his 
chariots, and cities for his horse- 
men, and that which Solomon de- 
sired to build in Jerusalem, and in 
Lebanon, and in all the land of his 
dominion. 

20 And all the people that were 
left of the Amorites, Hittites, Periz- 
zites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which 
were not of the children of Israel, 

21 Their children that were left 
after them in the land, whom the 
children of Israel also were not able 
utterly to destroy, upon those did 
Solomon levy a tribute of bondser- 
vice unto this day. 

22 But of the children of Israel 
did Solomon make no bondmen: 
but they were men of war, and his 
servants, and his princes, and his 
captains, and rulers of his chariots, 
and his horsemen. 

23 These were the chief of the 
officers that were over Solomon’s 
work, five hundred and fifty, which 
bare rule over the people that 
wrought in the work. 


24 But *Pharaoh’s daughter came 
up out of the city of David unto her 
house which Solomon had built for 
her: ‘then did he build Millo. 

25 And three times in a year did 
Solomon offer burnt-offerings and 
peace-offerings upon the altar which 
he built unto the LorpbD, and he 
burnt incense upon the altar that 
was before the Lord. So he fin- 
ished the house. 

26 And king Solomon made a 
navy of ships in Ezion-geber, which 
1s beside Eloth, on the shore of the 
Red sea, in the land of Edom. 

27 And Hiram sent in the navy 
his servants, shipmen that had 
knowledge of the sea, with the ser- 
vants of Solomon, F 

28 And they came to Ophir, and 
fetched from thence gold, four hun- 
dred and twenty talents, and 
brought s¢ to king Solomon. 


CHAPTER 10. 


Solomon and the queen of Sheba 
(2 Chr. 9, 1-12), 


ND when the ™queen of Sheba 
heard of the fame of Solomon 
concerning the name of the Lorp, 
she came to prove him with hard 


questions, 


And she came to Jerusalem with 
avery great train, with camels that 


a 


10 3] 


bare spices, and very much gold, 
and precious stones: and when she 
was come to Solomon, she com- 
muned with him of all that was in 
her heart. 

3 And Solomon told her all her 
questions: there was not any thing 
hid from the king, which he told 
her not. . 

4 And when the queen of Sheba 
had seen all Solomon’s wisdom, 
and the house that he had built, 

5 And the meat of his table, and 
the sitting of his servants, and the 
attendance of his ministers, and 
their apparel, and his cupbearers, 
fand his ascent by which he went 
up unto the house of the LorRD; 
there was no more spirit in her. 

6 And she said to the king, It was 
a true report that I heard in mine 
own land of thy acts and of thy 
wisdom. 

7 Howbeit I believed not the 
words, until I came, and mine eyes 
had seen it: and, behold, the half 
was not told me: thy wisdom and 
prosperity exceedeth the fame 
which I heard. 

8 Happy are thy men, happy are 
these thy servants, which stand 
continually before thee, and that 
hear thy wisdom. 


9. Blessed be the LORD thy God,| 


which delighted in thee, to set thee 
on the throne of Israel: because the 
Lorp loved Israel for ever, there- 
fore made he thee king, to do judg- 
ment and justice. 

10 And she ‘gave the king an hun- 
dred and twenty “talents of gold, 
and of spices very great store, and 
precious stones: there came no 
more such abundance of spices as 
these which the queen of Sheba 
gave to king Solomon. 

11 And the navy also of Hiram, 
that brought gold from Ophir, 
brought in from Ophir great plenty 
of almug trees, and precious 
stones. 

12 And the king made of the 
almug trees pillars for the house of 
the Lorb, and for the king’s house, 
harps also and psalteries for sing- 
ers: there came no such ‘almug 
trees, nor were seen unto this 
day. 

13 And king Solomon gave unto 
the queen of Sheba all her desire, 
whatsoever she asked, beside that 
which Solomon gave her of his 
royal bounty. So she turned and 
went to her own country, she and 
her servants. 


I KINGS. 


B.C. 992. 


|a 2 Chr.9.4. 

61 Ki.s.7. 

¢ Psa.72.10,15. 

\d One talent = 
£6150, or 
$29,085; also 
v.14. 

e 2 Chr.9.10. 


f2 Chr.9.24; 
Psa.72.10. 


g 2 Chr.9.20. 


kt Gen.10.4; 
2 Chr.20.36. 


#41 Ki3.12, 
13; 4.30. 


j1 Ki.4.26; 
2 Chr.1.14; 
9.25. 


k 2 Chr.1. 
15-17. 


l Heb. gave. 


401 


[10 27 


Solomon’s revenue and splen- 
dour (2 Chr. 9. 13-28). 


14 Now the weight of gold that 
came to Solomon in one year was 
six hundred threescore and six tal- 
ents of gold, 

15 Beside that he had of the 
merchantmen, and of the traffick of 
the spice merchants, and Jof all the 
kings of Arabia, and of the gover- 
nors of the country. 

16 And king Solomon made two 
hundred targets of beaten gold: six 
hundred shekels of gold went to 
one target. 

17 And he made three hundred 
shields of beaten gold; three pound 
of gold went to one shield: and the 
king put them in the house of the 
forest of Lebanon. 

18 Moreover the king made a 


\great throne of ivory, and overlaid 


it with the best gold. 

19 The throne had six steps, and 
the top of the throne was round be- 
hind: and there were stays on 
either side on the piace of the seat, 
and two lions stood beside the stays. 

20 And twelve lions stood there 
on the one side and on the other 
upon the six steps: there was not 
the like made in any kingdom. 

21 %And all king Solomon’s drink- 
ing vessels were of gold, and all 
the vessels of the house of the for- 
est of Lebanon were of pure gold; 
none were of silver: it was nothing 
accounted of in the days of Solo- 
mon, 

22 For the king had at sea a navy 
of Tharshish with the navy of 
Hiram: once in three years came 
the navy of *Tharshish, bringing 
gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, 
and peacocks, 

23 iSo king Solomon exceeded all 
the kings of the earth for riches 
and for wisdom. ‘ 

24 And all the earth sought to 
Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which 
God had put in his heart. 

25 And they brought every man 
his present, vessels of silver, and 
vessels of gold, and garments, and 
armour, and spices, horses, and 
mules, a rate year by year. 

26 jAnd Solomon gathered to- 
gether chariots and horsemen: and 
he had a thousand and four hun- 
dred chariots, and twelve thousand 
horsemen, whom he bestowed in 
the cities for chariots, and with the 
king at Jerusalem. 

27 And the king ’made silver to 


10 28} 


be in Jerusalem as stones, and 
cedars made he to be as the syco- 
more trees that are in the vale, for 
abundance. 

28 And Solomon had horses 
brought out of Egypt, and linen 
yarn: the king’s merchants re- 
ceived the linen yarn at a price. 

29 And a chariot came up and 
went out of Egypt for six hundred 
shekeis of silver, and an horse for 
an hundred and fifty: and so for all! 
the kings of the Hittites, “and for 
the kings of Syria, did they bring 
them out by their means. 


CHAPTER 11. 


Solomon’s heart turned away 
from Jehovah. 


Bu king Solomon loved many 

strange women, together with 
the daughter of Pharaoh, women of 
the Moabites, Ammonites, Edom- 
ites, Zidonians, and Hittites; 

2 Of the nations concerning 
which the Lorp said unto the chil- 
dren of Israel, Ye shall not go in to 
them, neither shall they come in 
unto you: for surely they will turn 
away your heart after their gods: 
Solomon clave unto these in love. 

3 And he had seven hundred 
wives, princesses, and three hun- 
dred concubines: and his wives 
turned away his heart. 

4 For it came to pass, when Solo- 
mon was old, that his wives turned 
away his heart after other gods: 
and his heart was not perfect with 
the Lorp his God, as was the heart 
of David his father. 

5 For Solomon went after <Ashto- 
reth the goddess of the Zidonians, 
and after ¢Milcom the abomination 
of the Ammonites. 

6 And Solomon did evil in the 
sight of the Lorp, and went not 
fully after the LorD, as did David 
his father. 

7 Then did Solomon build an high 
place for Chemosh, the abomination 
of Moab, in the hill that is before 
Jerusalem, and for Molech, the 
abomination of the children of 
Ammon. 

8 And likewise did he for all his 
strange wives, which burnt incense 
and sacrificed unto their gods. 


The anger and chastening of 
Jehovah, 


9 And the Lorp was angty with 
Solomon, because his heart was 
turned from the Lorp God of ¢Is- 


a Josh.1.4; 
2 Ki.7.6. 


b See 1 Ki.8.61. 


¢ v.33; Jud.2. 
13, note. 


d Called Mo- 
lech, v.7. 


e 1 Ki.3.5; 
9.2. 

{1 Ki.6.12; 
916;7% 


g v.31; 1 Ki. 
12.15,16. 


h Num.24.19; 
Deut.20.13. 


#1 Ki.2.10,34. 


402 


I KINGS. 


twice, 

10 And fhad commanded him con- 
cerning this thing, that. he should 
not go after other gods: but he kept 
not that which the LORD com- 
manded. 

11 Wherefore the LORD said unto 
Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done 
of thee, and thou hast not kept my 
covenant and my statutes, which I 
have commanded thee, 48I will 
lsurely: rend the kingdom from thee, 
and will give it to thy servant. 

12 Notwithstanding in thy days I 
will not do it for David thy 
father’s sake: but I will rend it 
out of the hand of thy son. 

13 Howbeit I will not rend away 
all the kingdom; but will give one 
tribe to thy son for David my ser- 
vant’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s 
sake which I have chosen. 

14 And the Lorp stirred up an 
adversary unto Solomon, Hadad 
the Edomite: he was of the king’s 
seed in Edom. 

15 For it came to pass, when 
David was in Edom, and Joab the 
captain of the host was ‘gone up to 
bury the slain, “after he had smitten 
every male in Edom; 

16 (For six months did Joab re- 
main there with all Israel, until he 
had cut off every male in Edom:) 

17 That Hadad fled, he and cer- 
tain Edomites of his father’s ser- 
vants with him, to go into Egypt; 
Hadad being yet a little child. 

18 And they arose out of Midian, 
and came to Paran: and they took 
men with them out of Paran, and 
they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh 
king of Egypt; which gave him an 
house, and appointed him victuals, 
and gave him land. 

_19 And Hadad found great favour 
in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he 
gave him to wife the sister of his 
own wife, the sister of Tahpenes 
the queen. 

20 And the sister of Tahpenes 
bare him Genubath his son, whom 
Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh’s 
house: and Genubath was in Pha- 
taoh’s household among the sons of 
ee 

1 ‘And when Hadad heard in 
Egypt that David slept with his 
athers, and that Joab the captain 
of the host was dead, Hadad said 
to Pharaoh, Let me depart, that I 
may go to mine own country. 

22 Then Pharaoh said unto him, 
But what hast thou lacked with 


[11 2 


rael, which had appeared unto him > 


me, that, behold, thou seekest to go 
to thine own country? And he an- 
swered, Nothing: howbeit let me go 
in any wise. 

23 And God stirred him up 
another adversary, Rezon the son 
of Eliadah, which fled from his lord 
*Hadadezer king of Zobah: 

24 And he gathered men unto 
him, and became captain over a 
band, “when David slew them of 
Zobah: and they went to Damas- 
cus, and dwelt therein, and reigned 
in Damascus. 

25 And he was an adversary to 
Israel all the days. of Solomon, 
beside the mischief that Hadad 
did: and he abhorred Israel, and 
reigned over Syria. 


The rise of Jeroboam. 


’ 26 And <Jeroboam the son of Ne- 

bat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Sol- 
omon’s servant, whose mother’s 
name was Zeruah, a widow woman, 
even he 4lifted up As hand against 
the king. 

27 And this was the cause that he 
lifted up his hand against the king: 
“eSolomon built Millo, and Jrepaired 
the breaches of the city of David 
his father. 

98 And the man Jeroboam was a 
mighty man of valour: and Solo- 
mon seeing the young man that he 
was industrious, he made him ruler 
over all the charge of the house of 
Joseph. i 

29 And it came to pass at that 
time when Jeroboam went out of 
Jerusalem, that the prophet #Ahijah 
the Shilonite found him in the way; 
and he had clad himself with a new 
garment; and they two were alone 
in, the field: 

30 And Ahijah caught the new 
ogee that was on him, and 

rent it in twelve pieces: 

31 And he said to Jeroboam, Take 
thee ten pieces: for ‘thus saith the 
Lorp, the God of Israel, Behold, I 
will rend the kingdom out of the 
hand of Solomon, and will give ten 
tribes to thee: 

32 (But he shall have one tribe 
for my servant David’s sake, and 
for Jerusalem’s sake, the city which 
I have chosen out of all the tribes of 
Tsrael:) 

33 jBecause that they have for- 
saken me, and have worshipped 
Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zido- 
nians, Chemosh the god of the Mo- 
abites, and Milcom the god of the 

children of Ammon, and have not! 


I KINGS. 


B.C. 984. 


a 2 Sam.8.3. 


b 2 Sam.8.3; 
10.8,18. 


Cal s53.1 2-85 
2 Chr.13.6. 


d 2 Sam.20.21. 
e1 Ki.9.24. 
f Heb. closed. 
g1 Ki.14.2. 


h 1 Sam.15.27; 
24.5. 


i vs,11,13, 


j vs.5-7. 


ik Kingdom 


(O.T.). 2 Ki. 


12 Sam.7.11, 
27. 

m2 Chr.9.29. 

n 2 Chr.9.31. 

o Mt.1.7, 
called 
Roboam. 

p 2 Chr.10.1. 

q1 Ki.11.26. 


403 


ments, as did David his father. 

34 Howbeit I will not take the 
whole kingdom out of his hand: 
but I will make him prince all the 
days of his life for David my ser- 
vant’s sake, whom I chose, because 
he kept my commandments and 
‘my statutes: 

35 But I will take the kingdom 
out of his son’s hand, and will give 
it unto thee, even ten tribes. 

36 And unto his son will I give 
one tribe, that *David my servant 
may have a light alway before me 
in Jerusalem, the city which I have 
chosen me to put my name there. 
| 37 And I will take thee, and thou 
shalt reign according to all that thy 
lsoul desireth, ana shalt be king 
jover Israel. ¢ 

38 And it shall be, if thou wilt 
hearken unto all that I command 
thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and 
do that is right in my sight, to keep 
my statutes and my command- 
ments, as David my servant did; 
that I will be with thee, and ‘build 
thee a sure house, as I built for Da- 
vid, and will give Israel unto thee. 
| 39 And I will for this afflict the 


- |seed of David, but not for ever. 


! 40° Solomon sought therefore to 
kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, 
and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak 
\king of Egypt, and was in Egypt 
until the death of Solomon. 


The death of Solomon (2 Chr. 9. 
29-31). 


41 And the “rest of the acts of 
Solomon, and ail that he did, and 
his wisdom, are they not written in 
the book of the acts of Solomon? 

42 And the time that Solomon 
reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel 
was forty years. 

43 And ‘**Solomon slept with his 
fathers, and was buried in the city ~ 
of David his father: and °Rehoboam 
his son reigned in his stead, 


CHAPTER 12. 


Accession and folly of Rehoboam 
(2 Chr. 10. 1-11), 


ND ?*Rehoboam went to She- 
chem: for all Israel were come 
to Shechem to make him king. 

2 And it came to pass, when ?Jero- 
boam the son of Nebat, who was 
yet in Egypt, heard of it, (for he 
was fled from the presence of king 


z 


& 
“ 


" 


tn ee hyd te 
12 3] I KINGS. [12 24 
i .C. 975. 15 Wherefore the king hearkened 

Eecroes ane neh tote oo not unto the people; for the ‘cause — 


3 That they sent and called him. 
And Jeroboam and all the congre- 
gation of Israel came, and spake 
unto Rehoboam, saying, 

4 Thy father made our °yoke 
grievous: now therefore make thou: 
the grievous service of thy father, 
and his heavy yoke which he put 
upon us, lighter, and we will serve 
thee. 

5 And he said unto them, Depart 
yet for three days, then come again 
to me. And the people departed. 

6 And king Rehoboam consulted 
with the old men, that stood before 
Solomon his father while he yet 
lived, and said, How do ye advise 
that I may answer this people? 

7 And they spake unto him, say- 
ing, ‘If thou wilt be a servant unto 
this people this day, and wilt serve 
them, and answer them, and speak 
good words to them, then they will 
be thy servants for ever. 

8 But he forsook the counsel of 
the old men, which they had given 
him, and consulted with the young 
men that were grown up with him, 
and which stood before him: 

9 And he said unto them, What 
counsel give ye that we may an- 
swer this people, who have spoken 
to me, saying, Make the yoke 
which thy father did put upon us 
lighter? 

10 And the young men that were 
grown up with him spake unto 
him, saying, Thus shalt thou speak 
unto this people that spake unto 
thee, saying, Thy father made our 
yoke heavy, but make thou it 
lighter unto us; thus shalt thou say 
unto them, My little Anger shall be 
thicker than my father’s loins. 

11 And now whereas my father 
did lade you with a heavy yoke, I 
will add to your yoke: my father 
hath chastised you with whips, but 
I will chastise you with scorpions. 

12 So Jeroboam and all the people 
came to Rehoboam the third day, 
as the king had appointed, saying, 
Come to me again the third day. 

13 And the king answered the 
people “roughly, and forsook the old 
men’s counsel that they gave him: 
14 And spake to them after the 
counsel of the young men, saying, 
My father made your yoke heavy, 
and I will add to your yoke: my 
father also chastised you with 
whips, but I will chastise you with 
scorpions. 


41 Ki.11.40. 

61Sam.8. 
11-18; 1 Ki. 
4.7. 

c 2 Chr.10.7; 
Prov.15.1. 

d Heb. hardly. 

e v.24; Jud. 
14.4; 2 Chr. 
10.15; 22.7; 
25.20. 


f Jud 8.1, 


note. 
g 2 Sam.20.1. 
hi Ki.11.13, 
36. 


21 Ki.4.6; 
5.14. 


404 


was from the LorD, that he might ~ 


perform his saying, which the LORD 
spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 


Division of the kingdom: acces- 


sion of Jeroboam over Jsrael 


(2°Chri10. 327-195 11-14 


16 So when all Israel saw that the 
king hearkened not unto them, the 
people answered the king, fsaying, 
sWhat portion have we in David? 
neither have we inheritance in the 
son of Jesse: to your tents, O 
Israel: now see to thine own house, 
David. So Israel departed unto 
their tents. 

17 But “as for the children of 
Israel which dwelt in the cities of 
Judah, Rehoboam reigned over’ 
them. ; 

18 Then king Rehoboam ‘sent 
Adoram, who was over the tribute; 
and all Israel stoned him with 
stones, that he died. Therefore 
king Rehoboam made speed to get 
him up to his chariot, to flee to 
Jerusalem. 

-19 So Israel rebelled against the 
house of David unto this day. 

20 And it came to pass, when all 
Israel heard that Jeroboam was 
come again, that they sent and 
called him unto the congregation, 
and made him king over all Israel: 
there was none that followed the 
house of David, but the tribe of 
Judah only. 

21_ And when Rehoboam was come 
to Jerusalem, he assembled all the 
house of Judah, with the tribe of 
Benjamin, an hundred and four- 
score thousand chosen men, which 
were warriors, to fight against the 
house of Israel, to bring the king- 
dom again to Rehohoam the son of 
Solomon. 

22 But the word of God came unto 
Shemaiah the man of God, say- 
ing, 

23 Speak unto Rehoboam, the son 
of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto 
all the house of Judah and Benja- 
min, and to the remnant of the 
people, saying, 

24 Thus saith the Lorn, Ye shall 
not go up, nor fight against your 
brethren the children of Israel; re- 
turn every man to his house; for 
this thing is from me. They heark- 
ened therefore to the word of the 
Lorp, and returned to depart, ac- 
cording to the word of the Lorpb. 


# 


— dlepiagass 
12 25) 


I KINGS. 


[13 12. 


Jeroboam destroys the religious 
unity of the nation. 


25 Then Jeroboam ¢built She- 
chem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt 
therein; and went out from thence, 
and built Penuel. 

26 And Jeroboam said in his 
heart, Now shall the kingdom return 
to the house of David: 

27 If this people go up to do sacri- 
fice in the house of the LorpD at 
Jerusalem, then shall the heart of 
this people turn again unto their 
lord, even unto Rehoboam king of 
Judah, and they shall kill me, and 
go again to Rehoboam king of 
Judah. 

28 Whereupon the king took coun- 
sel, and made two calves of gold, 
and said unto them, It is too much 
for you to go up to Jerusalem: be- 
hold thy gods, O Israel, which 
brought thee up out of the land of 
Egypt. ; 

29 And he set the one in Beth-el, 
and the ofher put he in Dan. 

30 And this thing became a sin: 
for the people went to worship be- 
fore the one, even unto Dan. 

31 And he made an house of high 
places, and made priests of the 
lowest of the people, which were 
not of the sons of Levi. 

32 And Jeroboam ordained a feast 

in the ¢eighth month, on the fif- 
teenth day of the month, like unto 
the feast that 7s in Judah, and he 
offered upon the ‘altar. So did he 
in Beth-el, sacrificing unto the calves 
that he had made: and he placed 
in Beth-el the priests of the high 
places which he had made. 
“33 So he offered upon the altar 
which he had made in Beth-el the 
fifteenth day of the eighth month, 
even in the month which he had 
devised of his own heart; and or- 
dained a feast unto the children of 
Israel: and he offered upon the 
altar, and burnt incense. 


CHAPTER 13. 


Prophecy against Jeroboam’s 
false altar. 


AND: behold, ‘there came a man 
of God out of Judah by the 
word of the LorpD unto Beth-el: 
gand Jeroboam stood by the altar 
to burn incense. 

2 And he cried against the altar 
in the word of the Lorp, and said, 
O altar, altar, thus saith the LORD; 
Behold, a child shall be born unto 


B:G:975. 


a Jud.9.45. 

6 Jud.8.17. 

¢ Cf.2 Chr.i1. 
is. 

di.e. Novern- 
ber; also 
v.33. 

€ vs.25-33; 
see Amos 4. 
4, note; 
Deut.12. 
4-14. 

f 2 Ki.23.17. 

g1 Ki.12.32,33. 

h 2 Ki.23.15,16. 

1 Isa.7.14; 
John 2.18; 

1 Cor.1,22. 


j Miracles 


k 1 Sam.9.7; 
2 Ki.5.15. 


1 Num.22.18; 
24.13. 


405 


the house of David, “Josiah by 
name; and upon thee shall he offer 
the priests of the high places that 
burn incense upon thee, and men’s 
bones shall be burnt upon thee. 

3 And he gave a ‘sign the same 
day, saying, This 7s the sign which 
the LORD hath spoken; Behold, the 
altar shall be rent, and the ashes 
that are upon it shall be poured 
out. 


The sign from God upon 
Jeroboam. 


4 And it came to pass, when king 
Jeroboam heard the saying of the 
man of God, which had cried 
against the altar in Beth-el, that he 
put forth his hand from the altar, 
saying, Lay hold on him. And his 
hand, which he put forth against 
him, /dried up, so that he could not 
pull it in again to him. 

5 The altar also was rent, and the 
ashes poured out from the altar, 
according to the sign which the 
man of God had given by the word 
of the LORD. 

6 And the king answered and said 
unto the man of God, Intreat now 
the face of the LoRD thy God, and 
pray for me, that my hand may be 
restored me again. And the man 
of God besought the LorD, and the 
king’s hand was restored him again, 
and became as it was before. 

7 And the king said unto the man 
of God, Come home with me, and 


.|refresh thyself, and I will give thee 


a Freward. 

8 And the man of God said unto 
the king, /If thou wilt give me half 
thine house, I will not go in with 
thee, neither will I eat bread nor 
drink water in this place: 

9 For so was it charged me by 
the word of the LORD, saying, Eat 
no bread, nor drink water, nor turn 
again by the same way that thou 
camest. 

10 So he went another way, and 
returned not by the way that he 
came to Beth-el. 


Disobedience and death of the 
man of God. 


11 Now there dwelt an old pro- 
phet in Beth-el; and his sons came 
and told him all the works that the 
man of God had done that day in 
Beth-el: the words which he had 
spoken unto the king, them they 
told also to their father. 

12 And their father said unto 
them, What way went he? For his 


sons had seen what way the man 
of God went, which came from Ju- 
dah. . as 

13 And he said unto his sons, 
Saddle me the ass. So they sad- 
dled him the ass: and he rode 
thereon. 

14 And went after the man of| 
God, and found him sitting under 
an oak: and he said unto him, Art 
thou the man of God that camest 
from Judah? And he said, I am. 

15 Then he said unto him, Come 
home with me, and eat bread. 

16 And he said, ¢I may not return} 
with thee, nor go in with thee: 
neither will I eat bread nor drink! 
water with thee in this place: 

17 For it was said to me by the} 
word of the LorD, Thou shalt eat 
no bread nor drink water there, nor} 
turn again to go by the way that) 
thou camest. 

18 He said unto him, I am a) 
prophet also as thou art; %and an| 
‘angel spake unto me by the word 
of the LorpD, saying, Bring him 
back with thee into thine house, 
that he may eat bread and drink 
water. But he Hed unto him. 

19 So he went back with him, and 
did eat bread in his house, and 
drank water. 

20 And it came to pass, as they 
sat at the table, that the word of 
the LoRD came unto the prophet 
that brought him back: 

21 And he cried unto the man of 
God that came from Judah, saying, 
Thus saith the Lorb, Forasmuch as 
thou hast disobeyed the mouth of 
the LorpD, and hast not kept the| 
commandment which the Lorb thy 
God commanded thee, 

22 But camest back, and hast 
eaten bread and drunk water in the 
Uplace, of the which the Lorp did 
Say to thee, Eat no bread, and 
drink no water; thy carcase shall! 
not come unto the sepulchre of thy 
fathers. | 

23 And it came to pass, after he 
had eaten bread, and after he had 
drunk, that he saddled for him the 
ass, to wit, for the prophet whom 
he had brought back. 

24 And when he was gone, ¢a lion 
met him by the way, and slew him: 
and his carcase was cast in the way, 
and the ass stood by it, the lion 
also stood by the carcase. 

25 And, behold, men passed by, 
and saw the carcase cast in the! 
way, and the lion standing by the! 
carcase: and they came and told /#| 


I KINGS. 


B.C. 975. 


a vs.8,9. 

6 An impres- 
sive illustra 
tion of Gal. 
1.8,9. 


c Heb.1.4, - 
note. 


dv.9. 

é1 Ki.20.36. 

SF Jer.22.18. 

g 2 Ki.23.17, 
18. 


hv.2; 2 Ki, 
23.16,17. 


#1 Ki.16.24, 
Jj 1 Ki.14.10. 


406 


in the city where the old prophe 
dwelt. 

26 And when the prophet that 
brought him back from the way 
heard thereof, he said, It rs the 
man of God, who was disobedient 
unto the word of the LORD: there- 
fore the Lorp hath delivered him 
unto the lion, which hath torn him, 
and slain him, according to the 
word of the LorpD, which he spake 
unto him. . : 

27 And he spake to his sons, say- 
ing, Saddle me the ass. And they 
saddled Aim. ! 

28 And he went and found his 
carcase cast in the way, and the ass 
and the lion standing by the car- 
case: the lion had not eaten the 
carcase, nor torn the ass. - 

29 And the prophet took up the 


jcarcase of the man of God, and laid 


it upon the ass, and brought it 
back: and the old prophet came to 
the city, to mourn and to bury him. 

30 And he laid his carcase in his 
own grave; and they mourned over 
him, saying, fAlas, my brother! 

31 And it came to pass, after he 
had buried him, that he spake to 
his sons, saying, When I am dead, 
then bury me in the sepulchre 
wherein the man of God is buried; 
slay my bones beside his bones: 

32 ‘For the saying which he cried 
by the word of the LorpD against 
the altar in Beth-el, and against all 
the houses of the high places which 
are in the cities of ‘Samaria, shall 
surely come to pass. 


Jeroboam persists in evil. 


33 After this thing Jeroboam re- 

turned not from his evil way, but 
made again of the lowest of the 
people priests of the high places: 
whosoever would, he consecrated 
him, and he became one of the 
priests of the high places. 

34 And this thing became sin unto 
the house of Jeroboam, even /to cut 
it off, and to destroy it from off the 
face of the earth. 


“CHAPTER 14, 


Prophecy against Jeroboam: 
Partial fulfilment. ; 


At that time Abijah the son of 
Jeroboam fell sick, 


2 And Jeroboam said to his wife, 
Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thy- 
self, that thou be not known to be 
the wife of Jeroboam:; and get thee 
to Shiloh: behold, there is Alijah | 


“Fe 


14 3] 


I KINGS. 


[14 24 


the prophet, which told me that ¢J B.C. 956. |Jeroboam shall come to the grave, 


should be king over this people. 

3 And take with thee ten loaves, 
and cracknels, and a cruse of 
honey, and go to him: he shall tell 
thee what shall become of the 
child. 

4 And Jeroboam’s wife did so, and 


arose, and went to Shiloh, and) 


came to the house of Ahijah, But 
Ahijah could not see; for his eyes 
were set by reason of his age. 

5 And the Lorp said unto Ahijah, 
Behold, the wife of Jeroboam com- 
eth to ask a thing of thee for her 
son; for he is sick: thus and thus 
shalt thou say unto her: for it 
shall be, when she cometh in, that 
she shall feign herself to be another 
woman. 

6 And it was so, when Ahijah 
heard. the sound of her feet, as she 
came in at the door, that he said, 
Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; 
why feignest thou thyself to be 


another? for I am sent to thee with) 


theavy tidings. 

7 Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith 
the Lorv God of Israel, ¢Foras- 
much as I exalted thee from among 
the people, and made thee prince 
over my people Israel, 

8 And «rent the kingdom away 
from the house of David, and gave 
it thee: and yet thou hast not been 
as my servant David, fwho kept my 
commandments, and who followed 
me with all his heart, to do that 
only which was right in mine eyes; 

9 But hast done evil above all 
that were before thee: ‘for thou 
hast gone and made thee other 
gods, and molten images, to pro- 
voke me to anger, and hast cast 
me behind thy back: 

10 Therefore, behold, I will bring 
evil upon.the house of Jeroboam, 
and will cut off from Jeroboam 
him that pisseth against the wall, 
and him that is shut up and left in 
Israel, and will take away the 
remnant of the house of Jeroboam, 
as a man taketh away dung, till it 
be all gone. 

11 Him that dieth of Jeroboam in 
the city shall the dogs eat; and him 
that dieth in the field shall the 


fowls of the air eat: for the LORD; 


hath spoken it. 

12 Arise thou therefore, get thee 
to thine own house: and when thy 
feet enter into the city, the child 
shall die. 

13 And all Israel shall mourn for 
him, and bury him: for he only of 


a1 Ki.11.31. 


61Sam9. 
7,8. 


c Heb. hard, 

d 2 Sam.12. 
7,8; 1 Ki. 
16.2. 

e 1 Ki.11.31. 

f 1 Ki.11.33, 
38; 15.5. 

g 1 Ki.12.28; 
2, ChriiaAs. 


h See Deut. 
16.21. 


407 


because in him there is found some 
good thing toward the Lorp God 
of Israel in the house of Jeroboam. 

14 Moreover the LorD shall raise 
him up a king over Israel, who 
shall cut off the house of Jeroboam 
that day: but what? even now. A 

15 For the Lorpb shall smite Is- 
rael, as a reed is shaken in the 
water, and he shall root up Israel 
out of this good land, which he gave 
to their fathers, and shall scatter 
them beyond the river, because they 
have made their “groves, provoking 
the LorpD to anger. 

16 And he shall give Israel up be- 
cause of the sins of Jeroboam, who 
did sin, and who made Israel to sin. 

17 And Jeroboam’s wife arose, and 
departed, and came to Tirzah: and 
when she came to the threshold of 
the door, the child died; 

18 And they buried him; and all 
Israel mourned for him, according 
to the word of the LorD, which he 
spake by the hand of his servant 
Ahijah the prophet. 


Death of Jeroboam (2 Chr. 13. 20). 


19 And the rest of the acts of 
Jeroboam, how he warred, and how 
he reigned, behold, they are writ- 
ten in the book of the chronicles of 
the kings of Israel. 

20 And the days which Jeroboam 
reigned were two and twenty years: 
and he’slept with his fathers, and 
Nadab his son reigned in his stead. 


Judah’s apostasy under Reho- 
boam (2 Chr. 12. 1). 


21 And Rehoboam the son of Solo- 
mon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam 
was forty and one years old when 
he began to reign, and he reigned 
seventeen years in Jerusalem, the 
city which the LorD did choose out 
of all the tribes of Israel, to put his 
name there. And his mother’s 
name was Naamah an Ammonitess. 

22 And Judah did evil in the sight 
of the Lorp, and they provoked 
him to jealousy with their sins 
which they had committed, above 
all that their fathers had done. 

23 For they also built them high 
places, and images, and kgroves, on 
every high hill, and under every 
green tree. 

24 And there were also sodomites 
in the land: and they did according 
to all the abominations of the na- 
tions which the LORD cast out be- 
fore the children of Israel. 


‘ures of the house of the LorD, and 


' Invasion of Sean (2° Chro1'2; 
2-12). 

25 And it came to pass in the fifth 

year of king Rehoboam, that Shi- 

shak king of Egypt came up against 

Jerusalem: 

26 And he took away the treas- 


the treasures of the king’s house; 
he even took away all: and he took 
away all the shields of gold which 
Solomon had made. : 

' 27 And king Rehoboam made in 
their stead brasen shields, and com- 
mitted thern unto the hands of the 
chief of the guard, which kept the 
door of the king’s house. 

28 And it was so, when the king 
went into the house of the LORD, 
that the guard bare them, and 
brought them back into the guard 
chamber. 

29 Now the rest of the acts of 
Rehoboam, and.all that he did, are 


they not written in the book of the) 


chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
30 And. there was war between 

Be oboam and Jeroboam all their 
ays. 


Death of Rehoboam (2 Chr. 12. 
13-16). 

31 And Rehoboam slept with his 
fathers, and was buried with his 
fathers in the city of David. And 
his mother’s name was Naamah an 
Ammonitess. And Abijam his son 
reigned in his stead. 


= CHAPTER 15. 


Accession of os a (2aCirs a3: 
22 
No in the eighteenth year of 
king Jeroboam the son of Ne- 
bat reigned “Abijam over Judah. 

2 Three years reigned he in Jeru- 
salem. And his mother’s name was 
be satay the daughter of Abisha- 
om, 

3 And he walked in all the sins of 
his father, which he had done be- 
fore him: and his heart was not 
‘perfect with the LorD his God, as 
the heart of David his father. 

4 Nevertheless for David’s sake 
did the Lorp his God give him a 
lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his 
son after him, and to establish Je- 


rp pe ee 


I KINGS. 


13.1, etc. 

b See 1 Ki.8. 
61. 

¢ See 2 Chr. 
13.2-20. 


d 2 Chr.13.2, 
3,22. 


e2 Chr.14.1, 

f 2 Chr.14.2. 

g 1 Ki.14.24; 
22.46. 


h See Deut. 
16.21. 


rusalem: 


a Called Abi- 
jah, 2 Chr. 


i 2 Chr.16.1. 


and turned not aside from any 
thing that he commanded him all 
the days of his life, save only in the 
matter of Uriah the Hittite. : 

6 And there was Cwar between 
Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the 
days of his life. a 

7 4Now the rest of the acts of Abi- 
jam, and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
And there was war between Abijam 
and Jeroboam. 4 


Death of Abijam (2 Cnr. 14, 1), 


8 And ¢Abijam slept with his fa- 
thers; and they buried him in the 
city of David: and Asa his son 
reigned in his stead. 


Accession of Asa (2 Chr. 14. 1), 
9 And in the twentieth year of 


|Jeroboam king of Israel reigned 


Asa over Judah. } 
10 And forty and one years | 
reigned he in Jerusalem. And his 
mother’s name was Maachah, the 
daughter of Abishalom. : 
11 fAnd Asa did that which was 
right in the eyes of the Lorp, as 
did David his father. | 
12 8And he took away the sodom- 
ites out of the land, and removed all 
the idols that his fathers had made. — 
13. And also Maachah his mother, - 
even her he removed from being 
queen, because she had made an > 
idol in a “grove; and Asa destroyed 
her idol, and burnt it by the brook 
Kidron. | 
14 But !the high places were not 
removed: nevertheless Asa’s heart 
was >perfect with the LorD all his 
days. | 
15 And he brought in the things | 
which his father had dedicated, and | 
the things which himself had dedi- 
cated, into the house of the LorbD, 
silver, and gold, and vessels. 


The war with Baasha: Asa’s | 
league with Syria (2 Chr. 16. 1-6). 


16 And there was war between. 
Asa and Baasha king of Israel all. 
their days. 


17 And ‘Baasha king of Israel! 


1 Cf. 2 Chr. 14, 3. 


went up against Judah, and built! 


It appears that local sacrifices to Jehovah (though not ae-| 


cording to the divine order) were offered in the times of the kings upon ‘‘high places”’ 


(cf. 1 Sam. 9. 12). 
(Kar 15.133). 
“high places,” 


408 


Apparently Asa’s mother had defiled one of th i i 
Asa destroyed the idol and the idolatrous an oa 
But see “high places,” 1 Ki, 3. 2, note, 


(but not the Jehovistic) 


4 


i f ba a: 5 Sl | 
5: 18] 


#Ramah, ’that he might not suffer 
any to go out or come in to Asa 
king of Judah. 

18 Then Asa took all the silver 
and the gold that were left in the 
treasures of the house of the Lorp, 
and the treasures of the king’s 
house, and delivered them into the 
hand of his servants: and king Asa 
sent them to Ben-hadad, the son of 
Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king 
of Syria, that dwelt at ‘Damascus, 
Saying, 

19 There rs a league between me 
and thee, and between my father 
and thy father: behold, I have sent 
unto thee a present of silver and 
gold; come and break thy league 
with Baasha king of Israel, that he 
may depart from me. 

20 So Ben-hadad hearkened unto 
king Asa, and sent the captains of 
the hosts which he had against the 
cities of Israel, and smote 4Ijon, and 
Dan, and fAbel-beth-maachah, and 
all Cinneroth, with all the land of 
Naphtali. 

21 And it came to pass, when 
Baasha heard thereof, that he left 
off building of Ramah, and dwelt in 
Tirzah. 

22 Then king Asa made a procla- 
mation throughout all Judah; none 
was exempted: and they took away 
the stones of Ramah, and the tim- 
ber thereof, wherewith Baasha had 
builded: and king Asa built with 
them Geba of Benjamin, and Miz- 
pah. 

Illness and death of Asa (2 Chr. 
16.12-14). Accession of Jehosha- 
phat (2 Chr. 17.1). 


93 The rest of all the acts of Asa, 
and all his might, and all that he 
did, and the cities which he built, 
are they not written in the book 
of the chronicles of the kings of 
Judah? Nevertheless in the time 
of his old age he was diseased in 
his feet. 

24 And Asa slept with his fathers, 
and was buried with his fathers in 


I KINGS. 


B.C. 951. 


a Josh.18.25. 

b1 Ki.12.27. 

¢1 Ki.11.23, 
24. 


d 2 Ki.15.29. 

| € Jud.18.29. 

f 2 Sam.20.14. 

g 2 Chr.17.1. 

h Called Josa- 
phate Mt.1. 


i Josh.19.44; 
21.23; 1 Ki. 
16.15. 

j1 Ki.14.10, 
14. 

kv.7; 2 Chr. 
19.2; 20.34. 

71 Ki.14.7. 

mv.11, 


n 1 Ki.14.10; 
15.29. 


the city of David his father: sand 
hJehoshaphat his son reigned in 

his stead. 

Accession of Nadab over Israel. 
25 And Nadab the son of Jero- 

boam began to reign over Israel in 


the second year of Asa king of 
Judah, and reigned over Israel two 


years. y 
26 And he did evil in the sight of 
the Lorp, and walked in the way 


409 


[16 3 


of his father, and in his sin where- 
with he made Israel to sin. 


Rebellion and accession of 
Baasha over Israel. 


27 And Baasha the son of Ahijah, 
of the house of Issachar, conspired 
against him; and Baasha smote 
him at ‘Gibbethon, which belonged 
to the Philistines; for Nadab and 
all Israel laid siege to Gibbethon. 

28 Even in the third year of Asa 
king of Judah did Baasha slay him, 
and reigned in his stead. 

29 And it came to pass, when he 
reigned, that he smote all the house 
of Jeroboam; he left not to Jero- 
boam any that breathed, until he 
had destroyed him, according unto 
the Jsaying of the LORD, which he 
spake by his servant Ahijah the 
Shilonite: 

30 Because of the sins of Jeroboam 
which he sinned, and which he! 
made Israel sin, by his provocation 
wherewith he provoked the Lorp 
God of Israel to anger. 

31 Now the rest of the acts of 
Nadab, and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the chron- 


icles of the kings of Israel? 


War between Asa, king of Judah, 
and Baasha, king of Israel. 


32 And there was war between 
Asa and Baasha king of Israel all 
their days. 

33 Inthe third year of Asa king of 
Judah began Baasha the son of 
Ahijah to reign over all Israel in 
Tirzah, twenty and four years. 

34 And he did evil in the sight of 
the Lorp, and walked in the way 
of Jeroboam, and in his sin where- 
with he made Israel to sin, 


CHAPTER 16. 


Prophecy against Baasha: his 
death. 


HHEN the word of the Lorp 
came to *Jehu the son of Ha- 
nani against Baasha, saying, 

2 'Forasmuch as I exalted thee 
out of the dust, and made thee 
prince over my people Israel; and 
thou hast walked in the way of 
Jeroboam, and hast made my people 
Israel te.sin, to provoke me to anger 
with their sins; 

3 Behold, I will “take away the 
posterity of Baasha, and the pos- 
terity of his house; and will make 
thy house like the “house of Jero- 
boam the son of Nebat. 


16 4} 


4 ¢Him that dieth of Baasha in 
the city shall the dogs eat; and him 
that dieth of his in the fields shall 
the fowls of the air eat. 

5 Now the rest of the acts of Baa- 
sha, and what he did, and his might, 


bare they not written in the book of 


the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 

6 So Baasha slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in °“Tirzah: and Elah 
his son reigned in his stead. 

7 And also by the hand of the 
prophet Jehu the son of Hanani 
came the word of the LORD against 
Baasha, and against his house, even 
for all the evil that he did in the 
sight of the LorD, in provoking 
him to anger with the work of his 
hands, in being like the house of 
Jeroboam; and because he killed 
him. 


Accession of Elah over Israel. 


8 In the twenty and sixth year of 
Asa king of Judah began Elah the 
son of Baasha to reign over Israel 
in Tirzah, two years. 

9 “And his servant Zimfi, cap- 
tain of half his chariots, conspired 
against him, as he was in Tirzah, 
drinking himself drunk in the house 
of Arza steward of his house in 
Tirzah. 

10 And Zimri went in and smote 
him, and killed him, in the twenty 
and seventh year of Asa king of 
Judah, and reigned in his stead. 


The reign of Zimri over Israel. 


11 And it came to pass, when he 
began to reign, as soon as he sat on 
his throne, that he slew all the 
house of Baasha: he left him ‘not 
one that pisseth against a wall, 
neither of his skinsfolks, nor of his 
friends. 

12 Thus did Zimri destroy all the 
house of Baasha, according to the 
word of the Lorp, which he 
spake against Baasha by Jehu the 
prophet. 

13 For all the sins of Baasha; and 
the sins of Elah his son, by which 
they sinned, and by which they 
made Israel to sin, in provoking the 
Lorp God of Israel to anger with 
their vanities. 

14 Now the rest of the acts of 
Elah and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the chron- 
icles of the kings of Israel? 

15 In the twenty and seventh 
year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri 
reign seven days in Tirzah. And 
the people were encamped against 


I KINGS. 


B.C. 930._ 


a1Ki.14.11. 

6 2 Chr.16.1. 

¢1 Ki.14.17; 
15.21. 

d1 Ki.15.27, 
29; Hos.1.4, 

e2 Ki.9.31, 

f 1 Sam,25.22. 

g Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 


(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 


| 59.20, note. 


h 1 Ki.12.28; 
15.26,34. 


i One tal- 
ent = £410, 
or $1940. 


410 


'Ginath, to make him king; 


Gibbethon, which belonged to the © 
Philistines. 

16 And the people that were en- 
camped heard say, Zimri hath con- 
spired, and hath also slain the king: 
wherefcre all Israel made Omri, the 
captain of the host, king over Israel 
that day in the camp. c 

17 And Omri went up from Gib- ~ 
bethon, and all Israel with him, and © 
they besieged Tirzah. 

18 And it came to pass, when 
Zimri saw that the city was taken, 
that he went into the palace of the 
king’s house, and burnt the king’s 
house over him with fire, and died, 

19 For his sins which he sinned in 
doing evil in the sight of the LoRD, 
4in walking in the way of Jeroboam, 
and in his sin which he did, to make 
Israel to sin. : 

20 Now the rest of the acts of 
Zimri, and his treason that he 
wrought, are they not written in 
the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Israel? 


Tibni and Omri rival kings of 
Israel: death of Tibni. 


21 Then were the people of Israel 
divided into two parts: half of the 
people followed Tibni the son of 

and 
half followed Omri. 

22 But the people that followed 
Omri prevailed against the people 


that followed Tibni the son of Gi- 
nath: so Tibni died, and Omri 
reigned. 


Reign of Omri over Israel: he 
makes Samaria the capital. 


23 In the thirty and first year of 
Asa king of Judah began Omri to 
reign over Israel, twelve years: six 
years reigned he in Tirzah. 

24 And he bought the hill Samaria 
of Shemer for two ‘talents of silver, 
and built on the hill, and called the 
name of the city which he built, af- 
ter the name of Shemer, owner of 
the hill, Samaria. 

25 But Omri wrought evil in the 
eyes of the Lorp, and did worse 
than all that were before him. 

26 For he walked in all the way 
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and 
in his sin wherewith he made Israel 
to sin, to provoke the Lorp God of 
Israel to anger with their vanities. 

27 Now the rest of the acts of 
Omri which he did, and his might 
that he shewed, are they not writ+ 
ten in the book of the chronicles of 
the kings of Israel? 


16 23] 


Accession of Ahab over fsrael: 
he marries Jezebel. 


28 So Omri slept with his fathers, 
and was buried in Samaria: and’ 
Ahab his son reigned in his stead. 

29 And in the thirty and eighth’ 
year of Asa king of Judah began 
Ahab the son. of Omri to reign: over} 
Israel: and Ahab the son of Omni 
reigned over Israel in Samaria 
twenty and two years. 

30° And Ahab the son of Omri did 
evil in the sight of the LorD above 
all that were before him. 

3Y Andit came to pass, as if it had 
been a light thing for him to walk 
in the sins of Jeroboam the son of| 
Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel 
the daughter of Ethbaal king of the 
Zidonians, and went and served 
Baal, and worshipped him. 

32 And he reared up an altar for 
Baal in. the house of Baal, which he 
had built in Samaria. 

33 And Ahab made-a “grove; and 
Ahab did more to provoke the 
Lorp God of Israel’ to anger than 
all the kings of Israel that were be- 
fore him. 

34 In his days did’ Hiel the Beth- 
elite build Jericho: he laid! the 
foundation thereof in Abiram his 
firstborn, and set up the gates 
thereof in his youngest son Segub, 
according to the word of the LoRD, 
which he spake by Joshua the son 
of Nun. 


CHAPTER 17. 
Ministry of Elijah: his predic- 
tion.of three years’ drought. 


ND Elijah the Tishbite, who 
was of the inhabitants of Gil- 
ead, said unto ¢Ahab, As the Lorp 
God of Israel liveth, before whom I 
stand, there shall not be dew nor 
rain these years, but according to 
my word.: 
Elijah fed at Cherith. 

2 And the word of the LorD came 
unto him, saying, 

3. Get thee hence, and. turn thee 
eastward, and, hide thyself by the 
brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. 

4. And it shall. be, that thou shalt 
drink of the brook; and I have 
commanded the ravens to feed thee 
there. 3 ohh 

5. So he went and: did, according) 
unto the word of the Lorn: for he 
went and dwelt by the brools Che- 
rith, that is before Jordan. i 
6 And the ravens brought him 


I KINGS. 


[17 18 


bread and flesh in the morning, 
and bread and flesh im the evening; 
and he: drank of the brook. 

7 And it came to pass after a 
while, that the brook dried: up,. be- 
oR there had been: no rain in the 

and. 


Elijah fed at Zarephath. 


8 And the word of the Lorp came 
unto him, saying, 

9 Arise, get thee to ‘Zarephath, 
which belongeth to Zidon, and 
dwell there: behold, I have com- 
manded a widow woman: there to 
sustain thee: 

10 So he arose and went to Zare- 
phath. And when he came to the 
gate of the city, behold, the widow 


a See. Deut, i 
16.21. wont “deed there gathering of 
sticks: an e called to her, and 
5 Seaates. p26. said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little 
c Heb. Eli- water in a vessel, that I may drink. 
jahu,Lk.1. | 11 And as she was going to fetch 


17; Lk.4.25, 
called 
Elias. 


it, he called to her, and said, Bring 
me; I pray thee, a morsel of bread 
in. thine hand. 


g ci 12 Andshe said, As the LoRD thy 
foraman  |God liveth, I have not a cake, but 
view life. jan handful of meal in a barrel, and 
in Jehovah’s {2 little oil in a cruse: and, behold, I 

ceto. jam gathering two sticks, that I 
stand before |may go in and dress it for me and 
my son, that we may eat it, and 

¢ Oba.20; die. ‘ 
ete 13. And Elijah said unto her, Fear 
repta. not; go and do as thou hast said: 
c but make me thereof a little cake 

f aes ate first, and bring it unto me, and 
14:16,i7-24. |after make for thee and for thy son. 
1 Ki.i8.30-38.| 14 For thus saith the Lorp God 
Genet: of Israel, The barrel of meal shall 
Jon.2.1-10.) |oo¢ waste, neither shall the cruse 


of oil fail, until the day that the 
LorpD sendeth rain upon the earth, 

15 And she went and. did accord- 
ing to the saying of Elijah: and she, 
and he, and her house, did eat 
many days. 

16 And the barrel of meal wasted 
not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, 
faccording to the word of the LorD, 
which he spake by Elijah. 


Elijah raises the widow’s son. 


17 And it came to pass.after these 
things, that the son of the woman, 
the mistress. of the house,, fell sick; 
and his sickness. was so sore, that 
there was no breath left in him. 

18. And she said. unto Elijah,What 
have I to do with thee, O thou.man 
of God? art thou come unto me to 
call my sin to remembrance, and to 
slay my son? 

411 


I KINGS. 


19 And he said unto her, Give me 


thy son. And he took him out of 
her bosom, and carried him up into 
a loft, where he abode, and laid him 
upon his own bed. 

20 And he “cried unto the Lorb, 
and said, O LorD my God, hast 
thou also brought evil upon the 
widow with whom I sojourn, by 
slaying her son? 

21 And he stretched himself upon 
the child three times, and cried unto 
the Lorb, and said, O LorD my 
God, I pray thee, let this child’s 
soul come into him again. 

22 And the Lorp heard the voice 
of Elijah; and the soul of the child 
came into him again, and he re- 
vived. 

23 And Elijah took the child, and 
brought him down out of the cham- 
ber into the house, and delivered 
him unto his mother: and Elijah 
said, See, thy son liveth. 

24 And the woman said to Elijah, 
Now by this I know that thou art a 
man of God, and that the word of 
the Lorp in thy mouth is truth. 


CHAPTER 18. 
Elijah goes to meet Ahab. 


AND it came to pass after many 
days, thatthe word of the LORD 
came to Elijah in the third year, 
saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab; 
and I will send rain upon the earth. 

2 And Elijah went to shew him- 
self unto Ahab. And there was a 
sore famine in Samaria. 


A believer out of touch with 
God. 


3 And Ahab called ’Obadiah, which 
wasthe governor of hishouse. (Now 
Obadiah “feared the Lorp greatly; 

4 For it was so, when Jezebel cut 
off the prophets of the LorpD, that 
Obadiah took an hundred prophets, 
and hid them by fifty in a cave, and 
fed them with bread and water.) 

5 And Ahab said unto Obadiah, 
Go into the land, unto all fountains 
of water, and unto all brooks: per- 
adventure we may find grass to save 
the horses and mules alive, that we 
lose not all the beasts. 

6 So they divided the land between 
them to pass throughout it: Ahab 
went one way by himself, and Oba- 
diah went another way by himself. 

7 And as Obadiah was in the way, 
behold, Elijah met him: and he 
knew him, and fell on his face, and 
said, Art thou that my lord Elijah? 


B.C. 910. 

a Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). 1 Ki. 
18.36. (Gen. 
15.2; Hab. 
3.1-16.) 


bIn sucha 
time as the 
reign of 
Ahab and 
Jezebel a 
believer’s 
true place 
was by Eli- 
jah’s side. 
Obadiah is a 
warning 
type of the 
men of God 
who adhere 


to the world 
while still 
seeking to 
serve God. 
The secret of 
the Lord, and 
the power of 
the Lord 
were with 
Elijah, the 
separated 
servant. 
Cf.2 Tim.2. 
20,21. 

c Psa.19.9, 
note. 


d 2 Ki.2.16; 
Ezk.3.12,14. 


e1 Ki.21.20. 
Ff Josh.7.25. 

g 2 Chr.15.2. 
h Josh.19.26. 
4 Deut.16.21, 


j 2 Ki.17.41; 
Mt.6.24. 


412 


8 And he answered him, I am: go, 
tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here. 

9 And he said, What have I 
sinned, that thou wouldest deliver 
thy servant into the hand of Ahab, 
to slay me? ’ 

10 As the Lorp thy God liveth, 
there is no hation or kingdom, 
whither my lord hath not sent to 
seek thee: and when they said, He 
is not there; he took an oath of 
the kingdom and nation, that they 
found thee not. 

11 And now thou sayest, Go, tell 
thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here. 

12 And it shali come to pass, as 
soon as 1 am gone from thee, that 
the 4Spirit of the Lorp shall carry 
thee whither I know not; and so 
when I come and tell Ahab, and he 
cannot find thee, he shall slay me: 
but I thy servant ‘fear the Lorp 
from my youth. 

13 Was it not told my lord what I 
did when Jezebel slew the prophets 
of the Lorb, how I hid an hundred 
men of the Lorp’s prophets by fifty 
in a cave, and fed them with bread 
and water? 

14 And now thou sayest, Go, tell 
thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: 
and he shall slay me. . 

15 And Elijah said, As the orp 
of hosts liveth, before whom I 
stand, I will surely shew myself 
unto him to day. 

16 So Obadiah went to meet 
Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went 
to meet Elijah. 


Elijah meets Ahab: the 
prophet’s challenge. 


17 And it came to.pass, when 
Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said 
unto him, ¢Art thou he that /troub- 
leth Israel? ; 

18 And he answered,I have not 
troubled Israel; but thou, and thy 
father’s house, in that ye have for: 
saken the commandments of the 
OED and thou hast followed Ba- 
alim. 

19 Now therefore send, and 
gather to me all Israel unto mount 
’Carmel, and the prophets of Baal 
four hundred and fifty, and the 
prophets of the ‘groves four hun- 
|dred, which eat at Jezebel’s table. 

20 So Ahab sent unto all the chil- 
dren of Israel, and gathered the 
prophets together unto mount Car- 
mel. 

21 And Elijah came unto all the 
people, and said, “How long halt ye 
between two opinions? if the LorpD 


then follow him. And the people 
answered him not a word. 

22 Then said Elijah unto the 
people, “I, even I only, remain a 
prophet of the LorD; but Baal’s 
prophets are four hundred and fifty 
men. 

23 Let them therefore give us two 
bullocks; and let them choose one 
bullock for themselves, and cut it in 
pieces, and lay it on wood, and put 
no fire under: and I will dress the 
other bullock, and lay it on wood, 
and put no fire under: 

24 And call ye on the name of 
your gods, and I will call on the 
name of the LorpD: and the God 
that Sanswereth by fire, let him be 
God. And ali the people answered 
and said, It is well spoken. 


Jehovah versus Baal. 


295 And Elijah said unto the 
prophets of Baal, Choose you one 
bullock for yourselves, and dress it 
first; for ye are many; and call on 
the name of your gods, but put no 
fire under. 

26 And they took the bullock 
which was given them, and they 
dressed it, and called on the name 
of Baal from morning even until 
noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But 
there was no voice, nor any that 
answered. And they leaped upon 
the altar which was made. 

27 And it came to pass at noon, 
that Elijah mocked them, and said, 
Cry aloud: for he is a god; either 
he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he 
is in a journey, or peradventure 
he sleepeth, and must be awaked. 

28 And they cried aloud, and cut 
themselves after their manner with 
knives and lancets, till the blood 
gushed out upon them. 

29 And it came to pass, when 
midday was past, and they proph- 
esied until the time of the offer- 
ing of the evening sacrifice, that 
there was neither voice, nor any 
to answer, nor any that regarded. 

30 And Elijah said unto all the 
people, Come near unto me. And 
all the people came near unto him. 
And he repaired the altar of the 
Lorp that was broken down. 

31 And Elijah took twelve stones, 
according to the number of the 
tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto 
whom the word of the LORD came, 
saying, Israel shall be thy name: 

32 And with the stones he built an 
altar in the name of the LorpD: and 


I KINGS. 


[18 44 


B.C. 906. 


(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


413 


Ihe made atrench about the altar, as 

great as would contain two “meas- 
ures of seed. 

33 And he put the wood in order, 
and cut the bullock in pieces, and 
laid Aim on the wood, and said, 
Fill four barrels with water, and 
pour it on the burnt-sacrifice, and 
on the wood. 

34 And he said, Do it the second 
time. And they did rt the second 
time. And he said, Do it the 
third time. And they did it the 
third time. 

35 And the water ran round about 
the altar; and he filled the trench 
also with water. 

36 And it came to pass at the 
time of the offering of the evening 
sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet 
came near, and ¢said, Lorp God of 
Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it 
be known this day that thou art 
God in Israel, and that I am thy 
servant, and that I have done all 
these things at thy word. . 

37 Hear me, O LorD, hear me, 
that this people may know that 
thou art the Lorp God, and that 
jthou hast turned their heart back 


again. 
38 Then the fire of the Lorn ¢fell 


;. {and consumed the burnt-sacrifice, 


and the wood, and the stones, and 
the dust, and licked up the water 
that was in the trench. 

39 And when all the people saw 
it, they fell on their faces: and they 
said, The LorD, he is the God; the 
Lorp, he is the God. 

40 And Elijah said unto them, 
Take the prophets of Baal; let not 
one of them escape. And they took 
them: and Elijah brought them 
down to the brook Kishon, and slew 
them there. 

41 And Elijah said unto Ahab, 
Get thee up, eat and drink; for 
there is a sound of abundance of 
rain. 

Elijah on Carmel. 


42 So Ahab went up to eat and to 
drink. And Elijah went up to the 
top of Carmel; and he cast himself 
down upon the earth, and pvt his 
face between his knees, 

43 And said to his servant, Go up 
now, look toward the sea. And he 
went up, and looked, and. said, 
There is nothing. And he said, Go 
again seven times. 

44 And it came to pass at the 
seventh time, that he said, Behold, 
there ariseth a little cloud out of 


18 45] I KINGS. 


[19 dl 


the sea, like a man’s hand. Andhe| B.C. 906. [dened he said unto him, What doest — 


said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Pre- 
pare thy chariot, and get thee 
down, that the rain stop thee not. 

45 And it came to pass in the 
mean while, that the heaven was 
black with clouds and wind, and 
there was a great rain. And Ahab 
rode, and went to Jezreel. 

46 And the hand of the LoRD was 
ion Elijah; and he girded up his 
Joins, and ran before Ahab to the 
‘entrance of Jezreel. 


CHAPTER 19. 


Jehovah’s tender care of His |« Bible 
overwrought prophet. 


Hy Ahab told Jezebel all that} 15.2; Hab. 
Elijah had done, and withal| 3.1-16.) 
how he had slain all the prophets b Heb.1.4, 
with the sword. 

2 Then Jezebel sent a messenger 
unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods 
do to’me, and mote also, if I make 
not thy life as the life of one of |¢ Ezk.1.4; 
them by to morrow about this| 37-9: 
time. 

3 And when he saw that, he arose, 
and went for his life, and came to 
Beer-sheba, which belongeth to 
Judah, and left his servant there. |¢v.10. 

4- But ‘he himself went a day’s h2 Kig12.13. 
journey into ‘the wilderness, and i 
came and sat down under a juniper] i2 Ki.9.1-3. 
tree: and he “requested for himself j Called 
that he might die; and said, It is Eliseus, Lk. 
enough; now, O Lorp, take away| .4.27. 
my life; for I am not better than my k Rem 41.4 
fathers. soa a: 

5 And as he lay and slept under a| /See Rem- 
juniper tree; behold, then an “angel oan 
touched him, and said unto him, Ss). a 
- Arise and eat. 

6 And he looked, ‘and, behold,| 
there was a cake baken on the| 
coals, and a cruse of water at his 
head. And he did eat and drink, 
and laid him down again. 

7 And the angel of the Lorp 

, came again the second time, and 
touched him, and said, Arise and 
eat; because the journey is too) 
great for thee. 


Elijah on Horeb. 


8 And he arose, and did eat and 
drink, and went in the strength of 
that meat forty days and forty 
nights unto Horeb the mount of 
God. 

-9 And he came thither unto a 
cave, and lodged there; and, behold, 
the word of the Lorp came to him, 


fv9. 


414 


thou here, Elijah? ! 

10 And he said, I have been very 
jealous for the LorD God of hosts: 
for ‘the children of Israel have for- 
saken thy covenant, thrown down 
thine altars, and slain thy °proph- 
ets with the sword; and I, even I 
only, am left; and they seek my 
life, to take it away. 

11 And he said, Go forth, and 


stand upon the mount before the 
LORD. 


And, behold, the Lorp 
passed by, and a 4great and strong 
wind rent the mountains, and brake 
in pieces the rocks before the LoRD;: 
but the LORD was not in the wind: 
and after the wind an earthquake; 


‘. ‘but the LORD was not in the earth. 


quake: 

12 And after the earthquake a 
fire; but the LorD was not in the 
fire: and after the fire a still smali 


|voice. 


13 And it was so, when Elijah 


\heard 7t, that he ‘wrapped his face 


in his mantle, and went out; and 
stood in the entering in of the cave. 
fAnd, behold, there came a -voice 
unto him, and said, What -doest 
thou here, Elijah? 

14 And he said, I have been very 
jealous for the Lorp ‘God of hosts: 


because the children of Israel have 
|forsaken thy covenant, thrown 
\down thine altars, and slain thy 
|Prophets with the sword; and I, 


even I only, am left; and they seek 
my life, to take it away. 

15 And the Lorn said unto him, 
Go, return.on thy way to the wilder- 
ness of Damascus: “and when thou 
comest, anoint Hazael to be king 
over Syria: 

16 And ‘Jehu the son of Nimshi 


shalt thou anoint to be king over 
Israel: and JElisha the son of Sha- 
phat of Abel-meholah shalt thou 
anoint to be prophet in thy room. 

17 And it shall come to pass, that 
him that escapeth the sword of 
Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him 
that escapeth from the sword ‘of 
Jehu shall Elisha slay. 

18 Yet *I have 4eft me seven 
thousand in Israel, all the knees 
which have not bowed unto Baal, 


and €very mouth which hat 
kissed him. pre 


The call of Elisha. 


19 So he departed thence, and 
found Elisha the son of Shaphat, 
who was plowing with twelve yoke © 
of oxen before him, and he with 


19 20] I KINGS. (20 20 


the twelfth: and Elijah passed by|_ B.c.906.__|do, And the messengers departed, 
him, and: cast his mantle upon him. and brought him word again. 

20. And he left the oxen, and ran! . 10 And Ben-hadad sent unto him, 
after Elijah, and said, Let me, I and said, The “gods do:so unto-me, 
pray thee, kiss my father and my and more also, if the dust of Sama- 
mother, and then E will follow thee. ria shall suffice for handfuls for all 
And he said unto him, Go back the people that °follow me. 
again: for what have I done to thee? 

21 And he returned back from 
him, and took a yoke of oxen, and 
slew them, and boiled their flesh with 
the instruments of the oxen, and 
gave unto the people, and they did 
eat. Then he arose, and’ went after 
Elijah, and’ ministered unto him. 


CHAPTER 20. 
Ahab’s first Syrian campaign. 


of NDsBen-hatiad the king of Syria 
gathered: all his host together: 
and there were thirty and two 
kings with him, and horses, and 
chariots: and he went up and be- 
sieged Samaria, and warred against 
at. 

2 And hesent messengers to Ahab 2 
king of Israel into the city, and said 14 And Ahab said, By -whom? 
unto: him, Thus saith Ben-hadad, . And he said, Thus saith the LorpD, 

3, Thy silver and thy gold is mine;|@ ! Ki-19.2. Even by the young men of the 
thy wives also and thy children,|, pep. are ae |Ptinces of the provinces. Then he 
even the goodliest, are mine. " my feet, said, Who shall order the battle? 
: hay the a a cae peste ooh And he answered, Thou. 
and: said;, My lord,,: ing, accord-|" ~~ pert . 
ing to thy saying, I am thine, and bya ae Ahab’s victory over the Syrians. 


11 And the king of Israel answered 
and said, Tell Aim, Let not him 
that girdeth on Ars harness boast 
himself as he that putteth it off. 

12 And it came to pass, when 
Ben-hadad heard this message, as 
he was drinking, he and the kings 
in the pavilions, that he said. unto 
his servants, Set yourselves in 
array. And they set themselves 
in array against the city. 


God’s promise of victory. 


13 And, behold, there came a 
prophet unto Ahab king of Israel, 
saying, Thus saith the Lorp, Hast 
thou seen: all this great multitude? 
behold, <I will deliver it into thine 
hand this day; and thou shalt know 
that I am the Lorp. 


all that I have. 15 Then he numbered the young 
5, And the messengersicame again, men of the princes of the provinces, 
and said, Thus speaketh Ben-hadad, and they were two hundred and 
saying, Although I have sent unto thirty two: and after them he num- 
thee, saying, Thow shalt deliver me bered ail the people, even all the 
thy silver, and thy gold, and thy children of Israel, betng seven 
wives, and thy children; ~ thousand. 
-6 Yet I will send my servants 16 And they went out at noon. 
“unto thee to morrow about this But Ben-hadad was 4drinking him- 
time, and they shall search thine self drunk in the pavilions, he and 
house, and the houses of thy ser- the kings, the thirty and two kings 
vants; and it shall be, that whatso- that helped him. 
ever is pleasant-in thine eyes, they 17 And the young men of the 
shall put. rt in their hand, and take princes of the provinces went out 
it away. = first; and Ben-hadad sent. out, and 
7 Then the king of Israel called they told him, saying, There are 
all the elders of the land, and said, men come out of Samaria. 
Mark, I pray you, and see how this 18 And he said, Whether they be 
man seeketh mischief: for he sent come-out for peace, take them alive; 
unto me for my wives, and for my or whether they be come out for 
children, and for my silver, and for war, take them alive: 
my gold; and I denied him not. 19 So these young men of the 
8 And all the elders and all the princes of the provinces came out of 
people said unto him, Hearken not the city, and the army which fol- 
unto him, nor consent. lowed thei. i 
9 Wherefore he said unto the 20 And they slew every one his 
messengers of Ben-hadad, Tell my man: and the Syrians fled; and Is- 
lord.the king, All that thou didst rael pursued them: and Ben-hadad 
send for to thy servant at the first the king of Syria escaped on an 
I will do: but. this thing I may not horse with the horsemen. 


415 


2G 
My 
ie 
i 


‘21 And the king of Israel went 
out, and smote the horses and char- 
jots, and slew the Syrians with a 
great slaughter. 


The prophet warns Ahab. 


22 And the prophet came to the 
king of Israel, and said unto him, 
Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, 
and see what thou doest: ¢for at 
the return of the year the king of 
Syria will come up against thee. 


Ahab’s second Syrian campaign. 


23 And the servants of the king of 
Syria said unto him, Their gods 


that the kings of the house of Israel 
are merciful kings: tet us, I pray 
thee, “put sackcloth on our loins, 


out to the king of Israel: peradven- 
ture he will save thy life. 

32 So they girded sackcloth on 
their loins, and put ropes on their 
heads, and came to the king of Is- 
rael, and said, Thy servant Ben- 
hadad saith, I pray thee, let me 


he 1s my brother. 
33 Now the men did diligently ob- 
serve whether any thing would 


are gods of the hills; therefore they come from him, and did hastily 
were stronger than we; but let us catch it: and they said, Thy brother 
fight against them in the plain, and Ben-hadad. Then he said, Go ye, 
surely we shall be stronger than bring him. Then Ben-hadad came 
they. forth to him; and he caused him to 
24 And do this thing, Take the come up into the chariot. 
kings away, every man out of his|¢ 2 Sam-11.1. 34 And Ben-hadad said unto 
place, and put captains in their|s Josh.13.4. him, The “cities, which my father 
rooms: took from thy father, I will restore; 
25 And number thee an army, like] ¢ ¥-13- and thou shalt make streets for thee 
the army that thou hast lost, horse|g Gen.37.34. in Damascus, as my father made in 
for horse, and chariot for chariot: Samaria. Then said Ahab, I will 


and we will fight against them in|¢! 15.20. | send thee away with this covenant. 


the plain, and surely we shall bel s parables So he made a covenant with him, 
stronger than they. And he heark-| (.T.). vs. land sent him away. 


20 21] I KINGS. | (20 40 | 


him, Behold now, we have heard © 


and ropes upon our heads, and go © 


live. And he said, Is he yet alive? — 


ened unto their voice, and did so. 35-40; Bi.” f Byer . 

OG. And ittesthe torpeserattehaiee: acer Ahab’s sin in sparing Ben-hadad. 
pat fhe. ‘ake that Benhadad fake: es fAnd as tac “ne the eer 
numbere e Syrians, and went up 5 of the prophets said unto’his neigh- 
sd Bee, to eae oo ireel g Qne talent = boys in the Wire: of the Lorp, Smite 

n e , or i 
numbered, aid ee all presentstens $1940. Aisod tiie ie bao 
went against them: and the chil-|;, teb. he was | 36 Then said he unto him, Be- — 
dren of Israel pitched before them| not. cause thou hast not obeyed the 
like two little flocks of kids; but the voice of the Lorn, behold, as soon 
os ous the country. be a nen hea oa oe me,a wee: 

ere came a man of God, 8 Slay thee. And as soon as he 

. See nBte ies sey Hi ea ic we ee ba em him, a lion found 
j s sai e , Be- im, and slew him. 

cause the Syrians have said, The 37 Then he found another man 

LORD is God of the hills, but he is and said, Smite me, I pray thee. 

not God of the valleys, therefore And the man smote him, so that in 


ewill I deliver all this great multi- 


tude into thine hand, and ye shall 38 So the prophet departed, and 
ay ee Samer he oe pices for the king by the way, and 
_ An ey pitched one over isguised himself with 
ae the ed seven days. And his face. nett 3 
so it was, that in the seventh day 39 And as the kin 
the battle was joined: and the chil- cried unto the deme Peco eae 
dren of Israel slew of the Syrians Thy servant went out into the 
eat thousand footmen in midst of the battle; and, behold, a 
‘one day. man turned aside, d 
30 But the rest fled to Aphek, into man unto me, anid ced bebo race 
the city; and there a wall fell upon man: if by any means he be miss- 
twenty and seven thousand of the ing, then shall thy life be for his 


men that were left. And Ben- life, or else th 
hadad fled, and came into the city, of sil venta SE ete pee 


into an inner chamber, 40 And as thy servant 
: 5 was bus: 
31 And his servants said unto here and there, “he was gone. And 


smiting he wounded him. 


416 


eet a 
20 41] 


the king of Israel said unto him, So 
shall thy judgment be ; thyself hast 
decided it. 

41 And he hasted, and took the 
ashes away from his face; and the 
king of Israel discerned him that he 
was of the prophets. 

42 And he said unto him, Thus 
saith the LorbD, *Because thou hast 
let go out of thy hand a man whom 
I appointed to utter destruction, 
therefore thy life shall go for his 
life, and thy people for his people. 

43 And the king of Israel went to 
his house heavy and displeased, and 


I KINGS. 


came to Samaria. 


CHAPTER 21. 
Ahab covets Naboth’s vineyard. 


‘ND it came to pass after these 
things, that Naboth the Jez- 
reelite had a vineyard, which was 
in Jezreel, hard by the palace .of 
Ahab king of Samaria. 

2 And Ahab spake unto-Naboth, 
saying, Give me thy ‘vineyard, that 
I may have it for a’garden of herbs, 
because it 7s near unto my house: 
and I will give thee for it a better 
vineyard than it; or, if it seem good 
to thee, I will give thee the worth 
of it in money. 

3 And Naboth said to Ahab, The 
Lorp forbid it me, ¢that I should 
give the inheritance of my fathers 
unto thee. 

4 And Ahab came into his house 
heavy and displeased because of the 
word which Naboth the Jezreelite 
had spoken to him: for he had said, 
I will not give thee the inheritance 
of my fathers. And he laid him 
down upon his bed, and turned 
away his face, and would eat no 
bread. ; 

5 But Jezebel his wife came to 
him, and said unto him, Why is 
thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest 
no bread? 

6 And he said unto her, Because 
I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, 
and’ said unto him, Give me thy 
vineyard for money; or else, if it 
please thee, I will give thee another 
vineyard for it: and he answered, 
I will not give thee my vineyard. 

7 And Jezebel his wife said unto 
him, Dost thou now govern the 
kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat 
bread, and let thine heart be merry: 
IT will give thee the vineyard of 
Naboth the Jezreelite. 

Ahab’s 


a1 Ki.22.31- 
37. 


61 Ki.21.4. 


d Lev.25.23; 
Num.36.7; 
Ezk.46.18. 

e Ex.22.28; 
Lev.24.15, 
16; Acts 6. 
ii: 


f Lev.24.14. 


g Isa.58.4. 
h.Psa.9.12. 


#1 Ki.13.32; 
2 Chr.22.9. 


j1 Ki.22.38. 
k 1 Ki.18.17. 


8 So she wrote letters in J Y 
name, and sealed them with his! 


417 


¢1Sam.8.14. 


[21 20 


seal, and sent the ietters unto the 
elders and to the nobles that were 
in his city, dwelling with Naboth. 

9 And she wrote in the letters, 
saying, Proclaim a fast, and set 
WNaboth on high among the people: 

10 And set two men, sons of Be- 
lial, before him, to bear witness 
against him, saying, Thou didst 
eblaspheme God and the king. And 
then carry him out, and stone 
him, that he may die. 

11 And the men of his city, even 
the elders and the nobles who were 
the inhabitants in his city, did as 
Jezebel had sent unto them, and as 
it was written in the letters which 
she had sent unto them. 

12 &They proclaimed a fast, and 
be Naboth on high among the peo- 
ple. 

13 And there came in two men, 
children of Belial, and sat before 
him: and the men of Belial wit- 
nessed against him, even against 
Naboth, in the presence of the peo- 
ple, saying, Naboth did blaspheme 
God and the king. Then they car- 
ried him forth out of the city, and 
stoned him with stones, that he 
died. 

14 Then they sent to Jezebel, say- 
ing, Naboth is stoned, and is dead. 

15 And it came to pass, when 
Jezebel heard that Naboth was 
stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel 
said to Ahab, Arise, take possession 
of the vineyard of Naboth the Jez: 
reelite, which he refused to give 
thee for money: for Naboth is not 
alive, but dead. 

16 And it came to pass, when 
Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, 
that Ahab rose up to go down to the 
vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, 
to take possession of it. 


Elijah announces Ahab’s doom. 


17 And the word of the LorD 
came to Elijah the Tishbite, say- 
ing, 

18 Arise, go down to meet Ahab 
king of Israel, ‘which is in Samaria: 
behold, he is in the vineyard of 
Naboth, whither he is gone down 
to possess it. 

19 And thou shalt speak unto 
him, saying, Thus saith the Lorp, 
Hast thou killed, and also taken 
possession? And thou shalt speak 
unto him, saying, Thus saith the 
Lorp, ‘In the place where dogs 
licked the blood of Naboth shall 
dogs lick thy blood, even thine. 

20 And Ahab said to Elijah, *Hast 


21 21] 


I KINGS. 


thou found me, O mine enemy?! B.C. 299. 


And he answered, I have found 
thee: because “thou hast sold thy- 
self to work evil in the sight of the 
Lorp. 

21 Behold, 4I will bring evil wpon 
thee, and will take away thy ‘pos- 
terity, and will cut off from Ahab 
him that pisseth against the wall, 
and him that is shut up and left in 
Israel, ' 

22 And will, make thine house like 
the house of Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat, and like the house of Baasha 
the son of Ahijah, for the provoca- 
tion wherewith thou hast provoked 
me to anger, and made Israel to sin. 

23 And 4of Jezebel also spake the 
LORD, saying, The dogs shall eat 
Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel. 

24 ¢Him that dieth of Ahab in the 
city the dogs shall eat; and him that 
dieth in the field shall the fowls of 
the air eat. 

25 But there was none like unto 
Ahab, which did sell himself to 
work wickedness in the sight of 
the Lorp, whom Jezebel his wife 
stirred up. 

26 And he did very abominably 
in following idols, according to all 
things as did the Amorites, whom 
the LorD cast out before the chil- 
dren of Israel. 


Ahab’s repentance gains him a 
respite. 

27 And it came to pass, when 
Ahab heard those words, that he 
rent his clothes, and put /sackcloth 
upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay 
in sackcloth, and went softly. 

28 And the word ofthe LoRDcame 
to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 

29 Seest thou how Ahab humbleth 
himself before me? because he hum- 
bleth himself before me, I will not 
bring the evil in his days: but 4in 
his son’s days will I bring the evil 
upon his house. 


CHAPTER 22. 
The three years’ peace between 
Syria and Israel. 
AN»? they continued three years 


without war between Syria and 
Israel. 


Ahab, aided by Jehoshaphat, 
makes his third Syrian cam- 
paign. 

2 And it. came to pass in the third 
year, that 4Jehoshaphat the king of 
ducah came down to the king of 

a 


a 2 Ki.17.17; 
Rom.7.14. 


61 Ki.14.10; 
2 Ki.98. 


c 2 Ki.10.10. 
d 2 Ki.9.36. 


e1 Ki.14.11; 
16.4. 


Ff Gen.37.34. 

g 2 Ki.9.25. 

h 2 Chr.18.2. 

# Deut.4.43. 

j Heb. silent 
from taking 
it. 

k See vs.7-9. 


418 


3 And the king of Israel said unto ' 
his servants, Know ye that ‘Ra- 
moth in Gilead is our’s, and we be 
listill, and take it not out of the 
(hand of the king of Syria? 

4 And he said unto Jehoshaphat, 
Wilt thou go with me to battle to 
Ramoth-gilead? And Jehoshaphat 
said to the king of Israel, I am as 
‘thou art, my people as thy people, 
my horses as thy horses. . 

5 And Jehoshaphat said unto the 
king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee. 
at the word of the LORD to day. 


The lying prophets of Ahab 
(2 Chr. 18. 4-11). 


6 Then the king of Israel gathered 
ithe prophets together, about four 
hundred men, and said unto them, 
‘Shall I go against Ramoth-gilead 
to battle, or shall-I forbear? And 
they said, Go up; for the Lord 
geal deliver it into the hand. of the 

ng. 

7 And Jehoshaphat said, Is there 
not here a prophet of the Lorp 
besides: that we might enquire of 


8 And the king of Israel said unto’ 
Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, 
Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom 
we may enquire of the Lorpb: but I 


hate him; for he doth not prophesy 
good concerning me, but evil. And 
Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king 
say so. 

9. Then the king of Israel called 
lan officer, and said, Hasten hither 
Micaiah the son of Imlah. 

10 And the king of Israel and 
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat 
each on his throne, having put on 
‘their robes, in a void place in the 
entrance of the gate of Samaria; 
and all the prophets prophesied be- 
fore them. 

11 And Zedekiah the son of Che- 
maanah made him horns of iron: 
and -he said, Thus saith the Lorp, 
With these shalt thou ‘push the 
Syrians, until thou have consumed 
‘them. * 

12 And all the prophets prophe- 
sted so, saying, Go up to Ramoth- 
igilead, and prosper: for the LorRD 
shall deliver it into the king’s hand. 


Micaiah’s true prophecy 
(2 Chr. 18. 12-27), 


13 And the ‘messenger that was 
‘gone to call Micaiah spake unto 
him, saying, Behold now, the words 
lof the prophets declare good unto 
the king with one mouth: let thy 


22 14] 

word, I pray thee, be like the word 
of one of them, and speak. that 
which is good. 

14 And Micaiah said, Asthe LorD 
liveth, what the Lorp saith unto 
me, that will I speak. 

15 So he came to the king. And 
the king said unto him, Micaiah, 
shall we go against Ramoth-gilead 
to battle, or shall we forbear? And 
he answered him, Go, and: prosper: 
for the Lorp shall deliver it into 
the hand of the king. 

16 And the king said unto him, 
How many times shall I adjure 
thee that thou tell me nothing but 
that which is true in the name of 
the Lorp? 

17 And he said, I saw all Israel 
scattered upon the hills, as sheep 
that have not a shepherd: and the} 7-15; Zech. 
Lorp said, These have no master: 
let them return every man to his 
house in peace. 

18 And the king of Israel said 
unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell 
thee that he would prophesy ‘no 
good: concerning me, but evil? 

19 And he said, “Hear thou there- 
fore the word of the Lorp: “I saw 
the LorD sitting om his throne, ‘and. 
all the host of heavem standing by 
-. om his: right hand and on his 

t. 


I KINGS. 


d Heb. or, en- 
tice. 


e Jud.9.23; 
Job 12.16; 
Ezk.i4.9. 


-20 And the Lorb said, Who shall f 2 Chr.18.23. 
Heb. a 


persuade Ahab, that he may go up} ; 

and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one| chamber in 
eo on A manner, and another] 1 Ki.20.30. 
said. on that manner. 

21 And there: came forth a spirit,|” eee 
and stood before the Lorp, and} 20-22. © 
said, I will persuade him. 

22 And the Lorp said unto him, 
Wherewith? And he said, I will go 
forth, and I will be a lying spirit 
in the mouth of all his prophets. 
And he said, ‘Thou shalt persuade 
him, and prevail also: go forth, and 
do so. 

23 Now therefore, behold, the 
Lorp hath put a lying spirit in the 
mouth of all these thy prophets, 
and the Lorp hath spoken evil 
concerning thee. 

24 But Zedekiah the son of Che- 
naanah went near, and smote 
Micaiah on the cheek, and said, 
fWhich way went the Spirit of the 
Lorp from me to speak unto thee? 

25 And Micaiah said, Behold, 
thou shalt see in that day, when 
thou shalt go into an Sinner cham- 
ber to hide thyself. : 

26 And the king of Israel said, 
Take Micaiah, and carry him back 


419 


[22 38 


unto Amon the governor of the city, 

and to Joash the king’s son; 

27 And say, Thus saith the king, 
Put this fellow in the prison, and 
feed him with bread of affliction 
and with water of affliction, until I 
come: im peace. 

28 And Micaiah said, If thou re- 
turn at all in peace, “the Lorp hath 
not spoken by me. And he said, 
Hearken, O people, every one of 
you. 

‘Battle of Ramoth-gilead: defeat 
and death of Ahab (2 Chr. 18. 
28-34). 

| 29 So the king of Israel and Je- 

lhoshaphat the king of Judah went 

up to Ramoth-gilead.. 

30 And the king of Israel said 


‘lunto Jehoshaphat, I will 


i disguise 
myself, and enter into the battle; 
but put thou on thy robes. And the 
king of Israel disguised. himself, and 
went into the battle. 

31 But the king of Syria com- 


. Imanded his thirty and two-captains 


that had rule over his, chariots, 
saying, Fight neither with. small 
nor great, save only with the king 
of Israel. 

32. And it came to pass, when. the 
captains of the chariots saw Je- 
hoshaphat, that they said, Surely it 
lis the king of Israel. And they 
turned aside to fight against him: 
and Jehoshaphat cried out. 
| 33. And it came to pass, when the 
‘captains of the chariots perceived 
that it was not the king of Israel, 
that they turned back from pursu- 
ing him. 

34 And a certain man drew a 
bow at a venture, and smote the 
king of Israel between the joints of 
the harness: wherefore he said unto 
the driver of his chariot, Turn thine 
hand, and carry me out of the host; 
for I am wounded. 

35 And the battle increased that 
day: and the king was stayed up in 
his chariot against the Syrians, and 
died at even: and the blood ran out 
of the wound into the midst of the 
chariot. 

36 And there went a proclama- 
tion throughout the host about the 
going down of the sun, saying, 
Every man to his city, and every 
man to his own country. 

37 So the king died, and was 
brought to Samaria; and they bur- 
ied the king in Samaria. 

38 And one washed the chariot in 


the pool of Samaria; and the dogs 


Fk 
; ; 


, 


22 39) 


I KINGS. 


= a: >=, 


[22 53. 


licked up his blood; and they 
washed his armour; according “unto 
the word of the LorpD which he 
spake. 

39 Now the rest of the acts of 
Ahab, and all that he did, ’and the 
ivory house which he made, and all 
the cities that he built, are they not 
written in the book of the chroni- 
cles of the kings of Israel? 


Accession of Ahaziah over Israel. 


40 So Ahab slept with his fathers; 
and Ahaziah his son reigned in his 
stead. - 


Accession of Jehoshaphat over 
Judah (2 Chr. 17. 1; 20, 31). 


41 And ‘Jehoshaphat the son of 
Asa began to reign over Judah in the 
fourth year of Ahab king of Israel. 

42 Jehoshaphat was thirty and 
five years old when he began to 
reign; and he reigned twenty and 
five years in Jerusalem. And his 
mother’s name was Azubah the 
daughter of Shilhi. 

43 And he 4walked in all the ways 
of Asa his father; he turned not 
aside from it, doing that which 
was right in the eyes of the LorpD: 
nevertheless ‘the high places were 
not taken away; for the people 
offered and burnt incense yet in 
the high places, 

44 And fJehoshaphat made peace 
with the king of Israel. 

45 Now the rest of the acts of 
Jehoshaphat, and his might that he 
shewed, and how he warred, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 


‘B.C. 897. 


a1 Ki.21.19. 
6 Amos 3.15. 


c 2 Chr.20.31. 
d Cf.2 Chr.20. 
32,33. 


e 1 Ki.14,23; 


15.14; 2 Ki. 


12.3. 
f 2 Chr.19.2. 
rg Cf.2 Chr, 
18.1. 


h1 Ki.14.24; 
15.12. 


+ Cf.2 Chr.20. 
35-37. 


j 1 Ki.9.26. 
k 2 Chr.21.1, 
1 v.40. 

m1 Ki,.15.26. 


n Jud.2.11; 
1 Ki.16.31. 


420 


46 #And the remnant of the 
sodomites, which remained in the 
days of his father Asa, he took out 
of the land. 

47 There was then no king in 
Edom: a deputy was king. : 

48 Jehoshaphat made ‘ships of 
Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: 
but they went not; for the ships 
were broken at JEzion-geber. 

49 Then said Ahaziah the son of 
Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my 
servants go with thy servants in 
the ships. But Jehoshaphat would 
not. 


Death of Jehoshaphat: acces- 
sion of Jehoram over Judah 
(2.Chr. 21.. 1). 


50 And “Jehoshaphat slept with 
his fathers, and was buried with his 
fathers in the city of David his 
father: and Jehoram his son reigned 
in his stead. 


Character of Ahaziah. 


51 /Ahaziah the son of Ahab be- 
gan to reign over Israel in Samaria 
the seventeenth year of Jehosha- 
phat’ king of Judah, and reigned two 
years over Israel. 

92 And he did evil in the sight of 
the Lorn, and “walked in the way 
of ‘his father, and in the way of his 
mother, and in the way of Jero-. 
boam the son of Nebat, who made 
Israel to sin: 

53 For he served Baal, and wor- 
shipped him, and provoked to anget 
the LorD God of Israel, according 
to all that his father had done, 


a 
a 
. 


ae Soe me Bark its 


THE SECOND BOOK OF THE KINGS 


COMMONLY CALLED 
1 1) THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE KINGS. {1 4 


Tuis book continues the history of the kingdoms to the captivities. It includes 
the translation of Elijah and the ministry of Elisha. During this period Amos and 
Hosea prophesied in Israel, and Obadiah, Joel, Isaiah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, 
Zephaniah, and Jeremiah in Judah. : 

Second Kings is in seven parts: I. The last ministry and translation of Elijah, 
1. i-2. 11. II. The ministry of Elisha from the translation of Elijah to the anoint- 
ing of Jehu, 2. 12-9. 10. III. The reign of Jehu over Israel, 9. 11-10. 36. IV. The 
Teigns of Athaliah and Jehoash over Judah, 11. 1-12. 21. V. The reigns of Jehoa- 
kaz and Joash over Israel, and the last ministry of Elisha, 13. 1-25. VI. From the 
death of Elisha to the captivity of Israel, 14. 1-17. 41. VII. From the accession 
of Hezekiah to the captivity of Judah, 18. 1-25. 30. 

The events recorded in Second Kings cover a period of 308 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. B.C. 896. |up fo pe you, and told you these 
- . words? 
res ie Sees es of 8 And they answered him, He was 
PAA Bente E pOhsa EAEN- ‘an hairy man, and girt with a gir- 
othe: Moab rebelled against Is- dle of leather about his loins. And 
rael after the death of Ahab. he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite. 

2 And Ahaziah fell down through 9 Then the king sent unto him a 
a lattice in his upper chamber that captain of fifty with his fifty. And 
was in Samaria, and was sick: and he went up to him: and, behold, 
he sent messengers, and said unto he sat on the top of an hill, And 
them, Go, enquire of Baal-zebub he spake unto him, Thou man of 
the god of ¢Ekron whether I shall God, the king hath said, Come 
Tecover of this disease. a 1 Sam.5.10. eres ‘saath pert 

ahs ithe cs n ijah answered and sai 

Elijah iM Blot to Ahaziah: |? piety to the captain of fifty, If I be aman 

Elijah’s deliverance. of God, then 4let fire come down 

3 But the “angel of the LorD said| ° Zech.13.4. | from heaven, and consume thee and 
to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up|d Lk.9.54. thy fifty. And there came down 
to meet the messengers of the king) 4). 00, fire from heaven, and ‘consumed 
of Samaria, and say unto them, Is|°(OT), vs. {him and his fifty. ) 
it not because there isnot a Godin| 10-12;2Ki. | 11 Again also he sent unto him 
Israel, that ye go to enquire of| 2-7,8. (Gen. janother captain of fifty with his 
-Baal-zebub the god of Ekron? heir” fifty. And he answered and said 

4 Now therefore thus saith the é unto him, O man of God, thus hath 
Lorp, Thou shalt not come down|f1Sam.26. |the king said, Come down quickly. 
from that bed on which thou art a Fsa.72s 12 And Elijah answered and said 
gone up, but shalt surely die. And y unto them, If I be a man of God, 
Elijah departed. let fire come down from heaven, and 

5 And when the messengers turned consume thee and thy fifty. And 
back unto him, he said unto them, the fire of God came down from 
Why are ye now turned back? . heaven, and consumed him and his 

6 And they said unto him, There fifty. ; f 
came a man up to meet us, and 13 And he sent again a captain of 
said unto us, Go, turn again unto the third fifty with his fifty. And 
the king that sent you, and say the third captain of fifty went up, 
unto him, Thus saith the Lorp, Js and came and fell on his knees, be- 
it not because there is not a Godin fore Elijah, and besought him, and 
Israel, that thou sendest to enquire said unto him, O man of God, I 
of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron? pray thee, let my life, and the life 
therefore thou shalt not come down of these fifty thy servants, be 
from that bed on which thou art fprecious in thy sight. 
gone up, but shalt surely die. 14 Behold, there came fire down 

7 And he said unto them, What from heaven, and burnt up the two, 
manner of man was he which came captains of the former fifties with’ 


421 


1 15] 


II KINGS. 


[2 15 


their fifties: therefore let my life| B.C. 896. 


now be precious in thy sight. 

15 And the ¢angel of the LorD 
‘said unto Elijah, Go down with 
him: be not afraid of him. And he} 
arose, and went down with him 
unto. the king. 

16 And he said unto him, Thus 
saith the LorD, Forasmuch as thou 
hast sent messengers to enquire of 
Baal-zebub the.god of Ekron, is it 
not because there is no God in Is- 
rael to enquire of his word? there- 
fore thou shalt not come down off 
that bed on which thou art gone 
up, but shalt surely. die. 


Death of Ahaziah: accession of 
Jehoram king over Israel. 


17 So he died according to the 
word of the LorD which Elijah had 
spoken. And Jehoram reigned in 
his stead in the second year of Je- 
thoram the son of Jehoshaphat king 
‘of Judah; because he had no son. 

18 Now the rest of the acts of 
Ahaziah, which he did, are they not 
written in the book of the chronicles 
of the kings of Israel? 


CHAPTER 2. 
The translation of Elijah. 


ND it came to pass, when the 

Lorp would *take up Elijah 
into. heaven ‘by a whirlwind, that 
Elijah went with Elisha from 
Gilgal. 

2 And Elijah said unto Elisha, 
Tarry here, I pray thee; for the 
Lorp hath sent me to Beth-el. 
And Elisha said unto Aim, As the 
Lorp liveth, and ¢as thy soul liv- 
eth, I will not leave thee. So they 
went down to Beth-el. | 

3 And the ‘sons of the prophets 
that were at Beth-el came forth to 
Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest 
thou that the Lorp will take away 
thy master from thy head to day? 
And he said, Yea, I know it ; hold 
ye your peace. 

4 And Elijah said unto him, Eli- 
sha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the 
Lorp hath sent me to Jericho. 
And he said, As the Lorp liveth, 
and as thy soul liveth, I will not 
leave thee. So they came to 
Jericho. 

5 And the sons of the prophets 
that were at Jericho came to Elisha, 
and said unto him, Knowest thou 
that the Lorp will take away thy 
master from thy head to day? And 


a Heb.1.4, 


note. 
6 Gen.5.24. 
¢1 Ki.19.21, 


d vs.4,6; 2 Ki. 


4.30; 1 Sam. 
1.26. 


e vs.5,7,15; 
1 Ki.20.35. 


f Miracles 


& Holy Spirit. 
9,15,16; 


(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 
h Gen:5.24; 


he answered, Yea, I know it; hold — 


e your peace. . 
6 vA Elijah said unto him, 


Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the 
LORD hath sent me to Jordan. And ~ 


he said, As the LoRD liveth, and as 
thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. 
And they two went on. 

7 And fifty men of the sons of the 
prophets went, and stood to view 
afar off: and they two stood by 
Jordan. u 

8 And Elijah took his mantle, and 
wrapped it together, and smote the 
waters, and they were /divided 
hither and thither, so that they two 
went over on dry ground. 

9 And it.:came to pass, when they 
were gone -oyer, that Elijah said 
unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for 
thee, before I be taken away from 
thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, 


let a double portion of thy £spirit be A 


upon me. | 

10 And he said, Thou hast asked. 
a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou 
see me when I am taken from‘thee, 
it shall be so unto thee; but if not, 
it shall not be so. 

11 And it came to pass, as they 
still went on, and talled, that, be- 
hold, there appeared a chariot of 
fire, and horses of fire, and parted 


_|them both asunder; and Elijah #went 


up by a whirlwind into heaven. 


The Spirit who was upon Elijah 
comes upon Elisha. 


12 And Elisha saw it, and he cried, 
My father, my father, the chariot of 
Israel, and the horsemen thereof. 
And he saw him no more: and he 
took hold of his own clothes, and 
rent them in two pieces. 

13 He took up.also the mantle of 
Elijah that fell from him, and went 
back, and stood by the -bank of 
Jordan; 


| Eisha’s faith to use the power. 


_14 And he took the mantle of Eli- 
jah that fell from him, and smote 
the waters, and said, Where is the 
LorD God of Elijah? and when 
he also had smitten the waters, 
they parted hither and thither: and 
Elisha went over, 

15 And when the sons of the 
prophets which were to view at 
Jericho saw him, they said, The 
spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha. 
And they came to meet him, and 
bowed themselves to ‘the ground 


before him, 


jo» 


2 16} 


The knowledge (vs. 3, 5) of the 
theological students, an 
their total lack of faith. 


16 And they said unto him, Be- 
hold now, there be with thy ser- 
yants fifty strong men; let them go, 
we pray thee, and seek thy master: 
lest peradventure the *Spirit of the 
LorD hath taken him up, and cast 
him upon some mountain, or into 


some valley. And he said, Ye shall} 


not send. 


17 And when they urged him till} 
he was ashamed, he said, Send.} 


They sent therefore fifty men; and 


they sought three days, but found} 


him not. 

18 And when they came again to 
him, (for he tarried at Jericho,) he 
said unto them, Did I not say unto 
you, Go not? 


Elisha’s second miracle. 

19 And, the men: of the city said 
unto Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, 
the situation of this city is pleasant, 
as my lord seeth: but the water is 
naught, and the ground barren. 

20 And he said, Bring me a new 
cruse, and put salt therein. And 
they brought i¢ to him. : 

21 And he went forth unto the 
spring of the waters, and %cast the 
salt in there, and said, Thus. saith 
the Lorn, I have healed these wa- 
ters; there shall not be from thence 
any more death or barren land. 

22 SSothe waters were healed unto 
this day, according to the saying of 
Elisha which he spake. 


Irreverence cursed. 

_.23 And he went up from thence 
“unto Beth-el: and as, he was going 
up by the way, there came forth 
little children out of the city, and 
mocked him, and said unto him, Go 
up, thou bald head; go up, thou 
bald head. 

24 And he turned back, and 
looked on them, and cursed. them in 
the name of the Lorp. And there 
came forth two she bears out of the 
wood, and tare forty and. two chil- 
dren of them. 

25 And he went from thence to 
mount Carmel, and from thence he 
returned to Samaria. 


CHAPTER 3. 
Accession of Jehoram overIsrael. 


OW 2Jehoram the son of Ahab 
began to reign over Israel in 
Samaria the eighteenth year of 


II KINGS. 


B.c 396. _|Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and 
d reigned twelve years. 


a Holy Spirit. 
vs.9,15,16; 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


6 2 Ki.4.41; 
Ex.15.25. 

c Miracles 
(O.T.).. vs: 
19-22; 2 Ki.3. 
16-20. (Gen.5. 
24; Jon.2. 
1-10.) 

d 2 Ki.1.17. 


e1 Ki.16. 
31,32. 


f 1 Ki.12,28, 
31,32. 


g 1 Ki.22.4. 
h 1 Ki.22.7. 
i 2 Ki.2.25. 


423 


[3 13 


2 And he wrought evil in the 
sight of the Lorpb;. but not like his 
father, and like his mother: for he 
put away the image of Baal. ¢that 
his father had made. 

3 Nevertheless he cleaved unto 
tthe sins of Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat, which made Israel to sin; 
he departed not therefrom. 


Moab rebels against Israel. 
| 4 And Mesha king of Moab was 


la sheepmaster, and rendered unto 
the king of Israel an hundred thou- 
sand lambs, and an hundred thou- 
sand rams, with the wool. 

5 But it came to pass, when 
Ahab was dead, that the king of 
Moab rebelled against the king of 
Israel. 

6 And king Jehoram went out of 
Samaria the same time, and num- 
bered all Israel. 

7 And he went and sent to Jehosh- - 
aphat the king of Judah, saying, 
The king of Moab hath rebelled 
against me: wilt thou go with me 
against Moab to battle? And he 
said, I will go up: %1 am as thou 
art, my people as thy people, and 
my horses as. thy horses. 

8 And he said, Which way shall 
wegoup? And he answered, The 
way through the wilderness of 
Edom. 

9 So the king of Israel went, and 
the king of Judah, and the king of 
Edom: and they fetched a compass 
of seven days’ journey: and there 
was no water for the host, and for 
the cattle that followed them. 


Elisha reproves the alliance of 
Jehoshaphat with Jehoram. 


10 And the king of Israel said, 
Alas! that the Lorp hath called 
these three kings together, to de- 
liver them into the hand of Moab! 

11 But “Jehoshaphat said, Is 
there not here a prophet of the 
Lorp, that we may enquire of the 
Lorp by him? And one of the 
king of Israel’s servants answered 
and said, Here is Elisha the son of 
Shaphat, which poured water on 
the hands of Elijah. 

12 And Jehoshaphat said, The 
word of the LorD is with him. So 
the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat 
and the king of Edom ‘went down 
to him. 

13. And Elisha said unto the king 
of Israel, What have I to do with 


cay 


3 14] 


hl) 4 li 


II KINGS. 


thee? ¢get thee to the prophets of 
thy father, and to the prophets of 
thy mother. And the king of Israel 
said unto him, Nay: for the Lorp 
hath called these three kings to- 
gether, to deliver them into the 
hand of Moab. 

. 14 And Elisha said, “As the Lorp 
of hosts liveth, before whom I 
stand, surely, were it not that I re- 
gard the presence of Jehoshaphat 
the king of Judah, I would not look 
toward thee, nor see thee. 

15 But now bring me a ¢minstrel. 
And it came to pass, when the min- 
strel played, that the ‘hand of the 
LorD came upon him. 


Elisha’s promise of water and 
victory. 


16 And he said, Thus saith the 
LorpD, Make this valley full of 
ditches. 

17 For thus saith the Lorp, Ye 
shall not see wind, neither shall 
ye see rain; yet that valley shall be 
filled with water, that ye may drink, 
both ye, and your cattle, and your 
beasts. 

18 And this is but a light thing in 
the sight of the Lorp: he will de- 
liver the Moabites also into your 
hand. 

19 And ye shall smite every fenced 
city, and every choice city, and 
shall fell every good tree, and stop 
all wells of water, and mar every 
good piece of land with stones. 

20 And it came to pass in the 
morning, when the ‘meat-offering 
was offered, that, behold, there 
came Swater by the way of Edom, 


and the country was filled with 
water. 


Defeat of the Moabites. 


21 And when all the Moabites 
heard that the kings were come up 
to fight against them, they gath- 
ered all that were able to put on 
armour and upward, and stood in 
the border. 

22 And they rose up early in the 
morning, and the sun shone upon 
the water, and the Moabites saw 
the water on the other side as red 
as blood: 

23 And they said, This is blood: 
the kings are surely slain, and they 
have smitten one another: now 
therefore, Moab, to the spoil. 

24 And when they came to the 
camp of Israel, the Israelites rose 
up and smote the Moabites, so that 


—— 
B.C. 895. 


@ Jud.10.14. 
61 Ki.18.19 


¢1 Ki.17.1; 
2 Ki.5.16. 


d@ 1 Sam.10.5. 


e Ezk.1.3; 
3.14,22; 8.1. 


f Lit. meal. 


g Miracles 
(O.T.). vs. 
16-20; 2 Ki.4. 


h Psa.19.9, 
note, 


# Lev.25.39. 


j Miracles 
.T.). VS. 
2-7,32-37, 
38-41,42-44; 
2 Ki.5.10-14. 
(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


they fled before them: but they 
went forward smiting the Moabites, — 
even in their country. a a 

25 And they beat down the cities, 

and on every good piece of land 
cast every man his stone, and filled 
it; and they stopped all the wells of 
water, and felled all the good trees: 
only in Kir-haraseth left they the 
stones thereof; howbeit the slingers 
went about it, and smote it. 
26 And when the king of Moab 
saw that the battle was too sore 
for him, he took with him seven 
hundred men that drew swords, to 
break through even unto the king 
of Edom: but they could not. 

27 Then he took his eldest son 
that should have reigned in his 
stead, and offered him for a burnt- 
offering upon the wall. And there 
was great indignation against Is- 
rael: and they departed from him, 
and returned to their own land. 


CHAPTER 4. 
The increase of the widow’s oil. 


Now there cried a certain woman 
of the wives of the sons of the 
prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy 
servant my husband is dead; and 
thou knowest that thy servant did 
fear the LorD: and the creditor is 
come to ‘take unto him my two 
sons to be bondmen. 

2 And Elisha said unto her, What 
shall I do for thee? tell me, what 
hast thou in the house? And she 
said, Thine handmaid hath not any 
pane in the house, save a pot of 
oil. 

3 Then he said, Go, borrow thee 
vessels abroad of all thy neighbours, 
even empty vessels; borrow not a 
few. 

4 And when thou art come in, 
thou shalt shut the door upon thee 
and upon thy sons, and shalt pour 
out into all those vessels, and 
pate shalt set aside that which is 
‘ull. 

5 So she went from him, and shut 
the door upon her and upon her 
sons, who brought the vessels to 
her; and she poured out. 

6 And it came to pass, when the 
vessels were full, that she said unto 

er son, Bring me yet a vessel. 
And he said unto her, There is not 
avessel more. And the oil Jstayed. 

7 Then she came and told the man 
of God. And he said, Go, sell the 


oil, end pay thy debt, and live thou 
and thy children of the rest. 


passed to “Shunem, where was a 
great woman; and she constrained 
him to eat bread. And so it was, 
that as oft as he passed by, he 
turned in thither to eat bread. 

9 And she said unto her husband, 
Behold now, I perceive that this is 
an holy man of God, which pass- 
eth by us continually. 

10 Let us make a little chamber, I 
pray thee, on the wall; and let us 
set for him there a bed, and a table, 
and a stool, and a candlestick: and 
it shall be, when he cometh to us, 
that he shall turn in thither. 

11 And it fell on a day, that he 
rame thither, and he turned into 
the chamber, and lay there. 

12 And he said to Gehazi his ser- 
vant, Call this Shunammite. And 
when he had called her, she stood 
before him. 

13 And he said unto him, Say now 
unto her, Behold, thou hast been 
careful for us with all this care; 
what is to be done for thee? would- 
est thou be spoken for to the king, 
or to the captain of the host? And 
she answered, I dwell among mine 
own people. 

14 And he said, What then is to 
be done for her? And Gehazi an- 
swered, Verily she hath no child, 
and her husband is old. we 

n 


15 And he said, Call her. 
when he had called her, she stood 
in the door. 

16 And he said, ?About this sea- 
son, according to the time of life, 
thou shalt embrace a son. And she 
said, Nay, my lord, thow man of 
God, ‘do not lie unto thine hand- 


maid. 

17 And the woman conceived, and 
bare a son at that season that Elisha 
had said unto her, according to the 
time of life. 


Elisha restores life to the son 

of the Shunammite, 

18 And when the child was grown, 
it fell on a day, that he went out to 
his father to the reapers. — 

19 And he said unto his father, 
My head, my head. And he said 
to alad, Carry him to his mother. 

20 And when he had taken him, 
and brought him to his mother, he 
sat on her knees till noon, and then 
died. [idee 
“91 And she went up, and laid him 
on the bed of the man of God. and 


II KINGS. 


The “great woman” of Shunem|__B.c.895._|shut the door upon him, and went 
and her reward. Pact ieee Tones 
8 And it fell on a day, that Elisha 22 And she called unto her hus- 


a Josh.19.18. 


6 Gen.18.10, 
14. 


c v.28. 
d Heb. peace. 
e 2 Ki.2.25. 


f Heb. bitter. 
1 Sam.1.10. 


g v.16. 


hk 2 Ki.9.1; 
1 Ki.18.46. 


42 Ki.2.2. 


425 


_ (4 34 


band, and said, Send me, I pray 
thee, one of the young men, and 
one of the asses, that I may run to 
the man of God, and come again. 

23 And he said, Wherefore wilt 
thou go to him to day? it 1s neither 
new moon, nor sabbath. And she 
said, ¢I¢ shall be well. 

24 Then she saddled an ass, and 
said to her servant, Drive, and go 
forward; slack not thy riding for 
me, except I bid thee. 

25 So she went and came unto the 
man of God to mount ‘Carmel. And 
it came to pass, when the man of 
God saw her afar off, that he said to 
Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder 
is that Shunammite: 

26 Run now, I pray thee, to meet 
her, and say unto her, Js it well 
with thee? zs zt well with thy hus- 
band? zs it well with the child? 
And she answered, Jt is well. 

27 And when she came to the man 
of God to the hill, she caught him 
by the feet: but Gehazi came near 
to thrust her away. And the man 
of God said, Let her alone; for her 
soul is fvexed within her: and the 
Lorp hath hid s¢ from me, and hath 
not told me. 

28 Then she said, Did I desire a 
son of my lord? édid I not say, Do 
not deceive me? 

29 Then he said to Gehazi, *Gird 

up thy loins, and take my staff in 
thine hand, and go thy way: if 
thou meet any man, salute him not; 
and if any salute thee, answer him 
not again: and lay my staff upon 
the face of the child. 
1 30 And the mother of the child 
said, ‘As the LorD liveth, and as thy 
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. 
And he arose, and followed her. 

31 And Gehazi passed on before 
them, and laid the staff upon the 
face of the child; but there was 
neither voice, nor hearing. Where- 
fore he went again to meet him, and 
told him, saying, The child is not 
awaked. 7 

32 And when Elisha was come 
into the house, behold, the child 
was dead, and laid upon his bed. 

33 He went in therefore, and shut 
the door upon them twain, and 
prayed unto the Lorp. 

34 And he went up, and lay upon 
the child, and put his mouth upon 


his mouth, and his eyes upon his 
eyes, and his hands upon his hands: 


4 35] 


and he stretched himself upon the 
child; and the flesh of the child 
waxed warm. 

35 Then he returned, and walked 
in the house ‘to and fro; :and went 
up, and stretched ‘himself-upon him: 
and ‘the child sneezed seven times, 
and the child 4opened his eyes. _ 

36 And he called Gehazi, and said, 
Call this Shunammite. So he called 
her. And when she was come in 
unto ‘him, he said, Take up thy 
son. 

37 Then she went in, and fell at 
his feet, and bowed herself ‘to the 
ground, and “took up her son, and 
went out. 


Elisha heals the noxious 
pottage. 

38 And Elisha came again to ¢Gil-| 4 1 Ki-17.23. 
gal: and there was a dearth in}|,2 xj01. 
the land; and ‘the sons of the 
prophets were sitting before him:]¢ Ex-10.17. 
and ‘he said unto his servant, Set}. 7215-25: 


a Resurrec- 
tion. 
vs.32-35; 
Psa.16.9-11, 
(Job 19.25; 
1 Cor.15.52.) 


on the great pot, and seethe pot-} 2 Ki.2.21. 
tage for the sons of the prophets. Vsaoke 

39 And one went out into the|/! S394 
field to gather herbs, and found al zbx.9.13; 
wild vine, and gathered thereof) John 6.9. 
wild gourds his lap full, and came), 5). 9 13; 
and shred them into the pot of| John 6.i2. 
pa for they knew them Me ne 0 

40 Sothey poured out for the men| 6.13.’ os 
to-eat. And it came to pass, as they| . 

j 1.Sam.9.8. 


were eating of the pottage,that they 
cried out, and said,-O thou man of}|z One-talent = 


God, there is ¢death in the pot. 418. OC 
And they could not eat thereof. | $191?) lse 


41 But he said, Then bring meal. 
And “he cast it into the pot; and| ! Gen.30.2; 


he ‘said, Pour out for the people,| Peut3?.395 
that they may eat. And there was! 
no harm in the pot. m 2 Ki.4.41, 


Elisha feeds an hundred men 
muraculously. 


42 And there came a man from 
JBaal-shalisha, and brought ‘the 
man of God bread of the firstfruits, 
twenty loaves of barley, and full 
ears of corn in the husk thereof. 
And he said, Give unto the people, 
that they may -eat. 

43 And his servitor said, ¢What, 
should I set this before an hundred 
men? He said again, Give the 
people, that they may eat:‘for thus 
saith the Lorp, They shall eat, 
and shall leave thereof. 

44 ‘So he set it before them, and 
they did eat, and “left thereof, 
according to the word of the 
LorD. 


426 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 895. 


[51 
CHAPTER 5. 
The healing of Naaman. 


Now. Naaman, captain of the 
.4N host of the king of Syria, was 
a great man with his master, and 
honourable, because by him the 
LorpD had given deliverance unto 
Syria: he was also a mighty man 
in valour, but he was a leper. 

2 And the Syrians had gone out 
by companies, and had brought 
away captive out of the land of 
Israel a little maid; and she waited 
on Naaman’s wife. 

3 And she said unto her mistress, 
Would God my lord were with 
the prophet that is in Samaria! 


for he would recover him of his 
leprosy. 


4 And.one went in, and told his 
lord, saying, Thus and thus said the 
maid that is.of the land of Israel. 

5 And the king of Syria said, Go 
to, go, and I will send a letter unto 
the king of Israel. And he de- 
parted, and Jtook with him ten 
’talents of silver, and six thousand 
pieces of gold, and ten changes of 
raiment. 

6 And he brought the letter to 
the king of- Israel, saying, Now 
when this letter is come unto thee, 
behold, I have therewith sent 
Naaman my servant to thee, that 
thou mayest recover him of his 
leprosy. 

7 And it came to pass, when the 
king of Israel had read the letter, 
that he rent his clothes, and said, 
Am I ‘God, to kill and to make 
alive, that this man doth send unto 
me to recover a man of his leprosy? 
wherefore consider, I pray you, and 
see how he seeketh a quarrel against 
me. 


8 And it was-so, when ‘Elisha the 
man of God had heard that the 
‘king of Israel had rent his clothes, 
that he sent to the king, saying, 
Wherefore hast thou rent thy 
clothes? let him come now to me, 
and he shall know that there is a 
prophet in Israel. 

9 So Naaman came with his 
horses and with his chariot, and 
stood at the door of the house of 
Elisha. 

10 And Elisha sent a messenger 
unto him, saying, Go and wash in 
Jordan seven times, and thy fiesh 
shall come again to thee, and thou 
shalt be clean. 

11 But Naaman was wroth, and 


went away, and said, Behold, I 


x 


gs Az] II KINGS. [6 6 


from the chariot to meet him, and 
said, Is all well? 

22 And he said, All is well. My 
master hath sent me, saying, Be- 
hold, even now there be corne to me 
from mount Ephraim two young 


thought, He will surely come out 
to me, and stand, and call on the 
name of the LorpD his God, and 
strike his hand over the place, and 
recover the leper. 

12 Are not ¢Abana and Pharpar, 


rivers of Damascus, better than all imen of the sons of the prophets: 
the waters of Israel? may I not lgive them, I pray thee, a talent 
wash in them,.and beclean? Sohe lof silver, and two changes of gar- 
turned and went away in a rage. ments. 

13 And his servants came near, 23 And Naaman said, Be content, 
and spake unto him, and said, My take two talents. And he urged. 
father, if the prophet had bid thee him, and bound two talents of silver 
do.some great thing, wouldest thou lin two bags, with two changes of 
not have done it? how much rather garments, and laid them upon two 
then, when he saith to-thee, Wash, of his servants; and they bare them 
and be clean? before him. 

14 Then went he down, and 24 And when he came to the 
bdipped himself seven times in tower, he took them from, their 


Jordan, according to the saying of|¢0r, Amana. |hand, and bestowed them in the 
the man of God: and his flesh came), yyiracies lhouse: and he let the men go, and 
again like unto the flesh of.a little) ©.T.). vs.10- lthey departed. ’ 


child, and he was clean. 14,27;2Ki. | 25 But he went.in, and stood be- 

15 And he returned to the man of| $%;’-{Se?- |fore his master. And Elisha said 
God, he and all his company, and| 1/10)" junto him, Whence comest thou, 
came, and stood before him: and he Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant 


said, Behold, now I know that|©J°>%5-25- (went /no whither. 
there is no God in all the earth,|¢ Dan.2.47; 26 And he said unto him, Went 
but in Israel: now therefore, I pray| 3.29;6.26, |not mine heart with thee, when the 
thee, take a blessing of thy servant.’ 27. man turned again from his chariot 

16 But he said, ¢As the LorD liv-)}; 2 xi.3.14. tomeet thee? Isut.a time to receive 
eth, before whom I stand, I will money, and to receive garments, 
receive none. And he urged him to f Heb. not and oliveyards, and vineyards, and 


take ean a he cenep yen a Be Le : oe deme sep — menservants, 
17 A aaman said, there F and maidservants: 
not then, I pray re a am aa gi Tim.6.9. 27 te aie eos plas 
£ servant two mules’ burden h 2 Kil5.5; man s) cleave unto e, an 
eae for thy servant will hence- Ex 4G, unto thy seed’ for ever. And he 
forth offer neither burnt-offering) Nv™-12-10. |went out from his presence a Meper 
nor ie teas unto other gods, but|;2xi4as. (a8 white as snow. 
unto the LORD. , 
18 In this thing yer ‘Lorp pardon CHAPTER 6. 
thy servant, that when my master ‘lish ens thot 
_. goeth into the house of Rimmon to Elisha recovers ost axe. 
worship there, and she leaneth on ND the ‘sons of the prophets 


my hand, and I bow myself in the said unto Elisha, Behold now, 
house of Rimmon: when I bow the place where we dwell with thee. 
down myself in the house of Rim- is too strait for us. 


mon, the LorD pardon thy servant 2 Let us go, we pray thee, unto 
in this thing. Jordan, and take thence every man 


19 And he said unto him, Go in a beam, and let us make us a place ‘ 
peace. So he departed from him.a there, where we may dwell. And 
little way. 4 he answered, Go ye. 

| 3 And one said, Be content, I pray 


Gehazi’s sin and its penalty. 


20 ‘But Gehazi, the servant.of Eli- [ 
sha the man of God, said, Behold, 4 So he went with them. And 
my master hath spared Naaman |when they came to Jordan. they 
this Syrian, in not receiving at his icut down wo: fi 
hands that which he brought: but, | 5 But as one was felling a beam, 
as the LorD liveth, I will run after Ithe axe head fell into the water: 
him, and take somewhat of him. jand he cried, and said, Alas, mas- 

21 So Gehazi followed after Naa- iter! for it was borrowed. : 
man, And when Naaman saw him | 6 And the man of God said, 
running after him, he lighted down iWhere fell it? And he shewed him 


thee, and go with thy servants. 
And he answered, I will go. 


427 


ia 67] 


_ the place. s 
_ stick, and cast it in thither; and the 


‘And héteat “down 'a 


iron did “swim. ‘ 

7 Therefore said he, Take it up to 
thee. And he put out his hand, 
and took it. 


Elisha reveals Ben-hadad’s 
plans. 


8 Then the king of Syria warred|- 


against Israel, and took counsel 
with his servants, saying, In such 
and such a place shal] be my camp. 

9 And the man of God sent unto 


' the king of Israel, saying, Beware 


that. thou pass not such a place; for 
thither the Syrians are come down. 

10 And the king of Israel sent to 
the place which the man of God told 
him and warned him of, and saved 
himself there, not once nor twice. | 
‘11. Therefore the heart of the king 
of Syria was sore troubled for this 
thing; and he called his servants, 
and said unto them, Will ye not 
shew me which of us is for the king 
of Israel? 

12 And one of his servants said, 
None, my lord, O king: but Elisha, 


the prophet that fs in Israel, telleth 
the king of Israel the words that 
thou speakest in thy bedchamber. 


Elisha at Dothan. 


13_ And he said, Go and spy where 
he is, that I may send and fetch 
him. And it was told him, saying, 
Behold, he is in ‘Dothan. 

14 Therefore sent he thither 
horses, and chariots, and a great 
host: and they came by night, and 
compassed the city about. 

15 And when the servant of the 
man of God was risen early, and 
gone forth, behold, an host com- 


passed the city both with horses 
and chariots. And his servant said 
unto him, Alas, my master! how 
shall we do? 

16 And he answered, Fear not: for 
they that be with us are more than 
they that be with them. 

17 And Elisha prayed, and dsaid, 
Lorp, I pray thee, open his eyes, 
that he may see. And the Lorp 
opened the eyes of the young man; 
and he saw: and, behold, the moun- 
tain was full of ¢horses and chariots 
of fire round about Elisha. 


Elisha leads the blinded Syrians 
to Samaria. 


18 And when they came down to 


him, Elisha prayed unto the Lorp, 
and ‘said, Smite this people, I pray 


“II KINGS. 


a Miracles 


(Gen.5.24; 
Jon.2.1-10.) 


b Gen.37.17. 
¢2 Chr.32.7; 


Psa.55.18; 
Rom.8.31. 


é 2 Ki.2.11; 
Psa.34.7 


f Bible 
prayers 


(O.T.). 2 Ki. 


19.15. (Gen. 
15.2; Hab.3. 
1-16.) 

g Gen.19.11, 


h One cab = 
3.84 pts. 

i Lev.26.29; 
Deut.28.53, 
57. 


31 Ki.21.27, 


jeat 


thee, with blindness. And he ésmote 
them with blindness according to 
the word of Elisha. ; 

19 And Elisha said unto them, 
This zs not the way, neither 7s this 
the city: follow me, and I will bring 
you to the man whom ye seek. But 
he led them to Samaria. 

20 And it came to pass, when they 
were come into Samaria, that Eli- 
sha said, LorRD, open the eyes of — 
these men, that they may see. And 
the LorpD opened their eyes, and 
they saw; and, behold, they were 
in the midst of Samaria. 

21 And the king of Israel said 
unto Elisha, when he saw them, My 
father, shall I smite them? shall I 
smite them? 

22 And he answered, Thou shalt 
not smite them: wouldest thou 
smite those whom thou hast taken 
captive with thy sword and with 
thy bow? set bread and water be- 
fore them, that they may eat and 


i, |drink, and go to their master. 


23 And he prepared great provi- 
sion for them: and when they had 
eaten and drunk, he sent them away, 
and they went to their master, So 
the bands of Syria came no more 
into the land of Israel. 


The Syrian siege of Samaria. 


24 And it came to pass after this, 
that Ben-hadad king of Syria gath- 
ered all his host, and went up, and 
besieged Samaria. 

_25 And there was a great famine 
in Samaria: and, behold, they be- 
sieged it, until an ass’s head was 
sold for fourscore pieces of silver, 
and the fourth part of a ‘cab of 
dove’s dung for five pieces of silver. 

26 And as the king of Israel was 
passing by upon the wall, there 
cried a woman unto him, saying, 
Help, my lord, O king, 

27 And he said, If the Lorp do 
not help thee, whence shall I help 
thee? out of the barnfloor, or out 
of the winepress? 

28 And the king said unto her, 
What aileth thee? And she an- 
swered, This woman said unto me, 
Give thy son, that we may eat him 
to day, and we will eat my son to 
morrow, __ 

29 So we *boiled my son, and did 
eat him: and I said unto her on the 
next day, Give thy son, that we may 

him; and she hath hid her son. 

30 And it came to pass, when the 
king heard the words of the woman, 
that he Jrent his clothes; and He 


passed by upon the wall; and the 
people looked, and, behold, he had 
sackcloth within upon his flesh. 

31 Then he said, God do so and 
more also to me, if the head of 
Elisha the son of Shaphat shall 
stand on him this day. 


The king’s messenger of venge- 
ance and the _ untroubled 
prophet. 


32 But Elisha sat in his house, and 
the elders sat with him; and the 
king sent a man from before him: 
but ere the messenger came to him, 
he said to the elders, See ye how this 
son of a “murderer hath sent to take 
away mine head? look, when the mes- 
senger cometh, shut the door, and 
hold him fast at the door: rs not the 
sound of his master’s feet behind 
him? 

33 And while he yet talked with 
them, behold, the messenger came 
down unto him: and he said, Be- 
hold, this evil 7s of the LoRD; ‘what 
should I wait for the LORD any 
longer? 


CHAPTER 7. 


Elisha’s promise of food and Je- 
hevah’s terror upon the Syrians. 


peat tal Elisha said, Hear ye the 
word of the Lord; Thus saith 
the Lorp, To morrow about this 
time shal/ a ¢measure of fine flour 
be sold for a ¢shekel, and two meas- 
ures of barley for a shekel, in the 
gate of Samaria. 

2 Then a lord on whose hand the 
king leaned answered the man of 
God, and said, Behold, if the LorD 
would make windows in heaven, 
might this thing be? And he said, 
Behold, thou shalt see it with thine 
eyes, but shalt not eat thereof. 

3 And there were four leprous 
men fat the entering in of the gate: 
and they said one to another, Why 
sit we here until we die?. 

4 If we say, We will enter into the 
city, then the famine is in the city, 
and we shall die there: and if we 
sit still here, we die also. Now 
therefore come, and let us fall unto 
the host of the Syrians: if they save 
us alive, we shall live; and if they 
kill us, we shall but die._ Ke 

5 And they rose up in the twilight, 
to go unto the camp of the Syrians: 
and when they were come to the 
uttermost part of the camp of Syria, 
behold, there was no man there. 

6 For the Lord had made the host 


II KINGS. 


a Ruth 1.17; 
1 Ki.19.2. 


61 Ki.18.4. 
c¢ Job 2.9. 


d One measure 
= about 4 
pecks; also 
vs.16,18. 


e One shekel = 
2s. 9d., or 65 
cts.; also vs. 
16,18. 


f Lev.13.46. 


g 2 Ki.19.7; 
Job 15.21; 
2 Sam.5.24. 


429 


B.C. 892. 


[7 15 


of the Syrians sto hear a noise of 
chariots, and a noise of horses, even 
the noise of a great host: and they 
said one to another, Lo, the king of 
Israel hath hired against us the 
kings of the Hittites, and the kings 
of the Egyptians, to come upon us. 

7 Wherefore they arose and fled in 
the twilight, and left their tents, 
and their horses, and their asses, 
even the camp as it was, and fled 
for their life. 

8 And when these lepers came to 
the uttermost part of the camp, they 
went into one tent, and did eat and 
drink, and carried thence silver, and 
gold, and raiment, and went and hid 
it; and came again, and entered 
into another tent, and carried 
thence also, and went and hid /t. 

9 Then they said one to another, 
We do not well: this day is a day 
of good tidings, and we hold our 
peace: if we tarry till the morning 
light, some mischief will come upon 
us: now therefore come, that we 
may go and tell the king’s house- 
hold. 

10 So they came and called unto 
the porter of the city: and they told 
them, saying, We came to the camp 
of the Syrians, and, behold, there 
was no man there, neither voice of 
man, but horses tied, and asses tied, 
and the tents as they were. 

11 And he called the porters; and 
they told it to the king’s house 
within. 

12 And the king arose in the 
night, and said unto his servants, I 
will now shew you what the Syrians 
have done to us. They know that 
we be hungry; therefore are they 
gone out of the camp to hide them- 
selves in the field, saying, When 
they come out of the city, we shall 
catch them alive, and get into the 
city. 

13 And one of his servants an- 
swered and said, Let some take, I 
pray thee, five of the horses that 
remain, which are left in the city, 
(behold, they are as all the multi- 
tude of Israel that-are left in it: be- 
hold, I say, they are even as all the 
multitude of the Israelites that are 
consumed:) and let us send and see. 

14 They took therefore two char- 
iot horses; and the king sent after 
the host of the Syrians, saying, Go 
and see. 

15 And they went after them unto 
Jordan: and, lo, all the way was 
full of garments and vessels, which 
the Syrians had cast away in their 


7 16] 


haste. And the messengers re- 
turned, and told the king, 


Elisha’s promise fulfilled. 


16 And the people: went out, and 
spoiled the tents of the Syrians. 
So a measure of fine flour was: sold. 
for-a shekel, and two measures of 
barley for a shekel,, “according to 
the word of the LorbD. | 
_ 7 And the king appointed the 

‘lord on whose hand he leaned to 
have-the charge of the gate: and the 
people trode upon him im the gate; 
and: he died, °as the man of God: 
had: said, who: spake whem the king 
came down to him. 

18 And it came to: pass as the-man 
of God: had spoken to the king, say-| 
ing, “Two measures of barley for al, y1, 
shekel, and a measure of fine flour 
for a shekel, shall be to: morrow]? Mone aan 
about this time in the gate of Sa- Sth 
maria: c2 Ki4.35. 

19 And that lord answered. the D pentos a6: 
man of God, and said, Now, behold, |* pag.tti. 
if the LorpD should make windows 
in heaven, might such a thing. be? |e 2 Ki.5.27. 
And he-said, Behold, thou shalt see if 1 Ki,19.15, 
it with thine eyes, but shalt not. eat 
thereof. 

20. And so it fell out unto him: for 
the people trode upon him in the 
gate, and he died. 


CHAPTER 8. 


Elisha predicts the seven 
years’ famine. 


‘TREN spake Elisha unto the] 
woman, ‘whose son he had re- 
stored to life, saying, Arise, and gol! 
thou and thine household, and. so- 
journ wheresoever thou canst so-| 
journ: for the Lorp ¢hath called 
for a famine; and) it shall also come} 
upon the land seven years; 

2 And the woman arose, and. did) 
after the saying of the man of God:| 
and she went with her household,| 
and sojourned in the land of the] 
Philistines seven years, 


Jehoram restores the Shunam- | 
mite’s land. 


3 Andit cameto pass at the seven! 
years’ end, that the woman returned| 
out of the land of the Philistines:} 
and’ she went forth to ery unto thei! 
king for her house and.for her land, | 

4 And the king tallted with ¢Ge-| 
hazi the servant of the man, of God, || 
saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the} 
great things that Elisha hath done.| 

it came to pass, as he was! 


* 430, 


ig 2 Ki.10.32; 
12:17; 13. 
3,7; Amos. 
1.3,4. 

A 2 Ki.15.16; 
Hos.13.16; 
Amos: 1.13. 


i 1 Sam.17.43. 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 892. 


[8 15 


telling the king how he had re- 
stored a dead body to life, that, be- 
hold, the woman, whose son: he had: 
‘restored to life, cried: to the: king for 
her house and for her land. And 
Gehazi| said, My lord, O: king, this. 
is the woman, and this) 7s her son,, 
whom Elisha restored to life. ES 

6 And when the king asked the 
woman, she told him. So the king 
appointed unto her a certain officer, 
saying, Restore all that was her’s, 
and all the fruits of the field since 
the day that she left the land, even 
until now. 


Elisha Predicts Hazael’s Reign 
Over Syria. 


7 And Elisha came to Damascus; 
and Ben-hadad the king of Syria 
was sick; and it was told him, say- 
ing, The man of God is come hither. 

8 And the king said. unto Hazael, 
Take a present in thine hand, and 
go, meet the man of God} and’ en- 
auire of the Lorp by him, saying,, 
Shalt I recover of this disease? 

9 So fHazael went to meet him, 
and took a present with him, even 
of every good thing of Damascus, 
forty camels’ burden, and came and 
stood before him, and’ said, Thy 


son Ben-hadad king of Syria hath ~ 


Sent me to thee, saying, Shall I re- 
cover of this disease? 

_ 10 And*Elisha said unto him, Go, 
Say unto him, Thou mayest cer- 
tainly recover: howbeit the Lorp: 
hath shewed me that he shall surely 


ie. 

11 And he settled his countenance 
stedfastly, until he was ashamed: 
and the man of God wept, 

12 And Hazael said, Why weep: 
eth my lord? And he answered, Be-- 
cause I know éthe evil, that theay 
wilt do unto the children: of Israel: 
their strong hoids wilt thow set on 
fire, and their young: men wilt thou 
slay with the sword, and: ‘wilt dash 
their children, and rip..up their 
women: with child. 

13 And Hazael said, But what, izs. 
thy servant a dog, that he should. 
do this great thing? And Elisha 
answered, The Lorp hath shewed 
me that thou shalt be king over 
Syria. 
| 14 So he departed from Elisha, 
and came to his master; who said 
to him, What said Elisha to thee? 
[And he answered, He told me that 
thou shouldest surely recover. 
| 15 And it came to pass on the 
morrow. that he took a thick cloth, 


and dipped it in water, and spread 
it on his face, so that he died: and 
Hazael reigned in his stead. 


Jehoram co-king with his father 
Jehoshaphat over Judah (2 
Chiral .35 le 


16 And in the fifth year of Joram 
the son of Ahab king of Israel, 
Jehoshaphat berng then king of 
Judah, ¢Jehoram the son of Jehosh- 
aphat king of Judah ‘began to 
reign.. 

17 Thirty and two years old was 
he when he began to reign; and he 
reigned eight years in Jerusalem.” 

18 And he walked in the way of 
the kings of Israel, as did the house 
of Ahab: for the daughter-of Ahab 
was his wife: and: he did evil in the 
sight of the LorbD. 

19 Yet the Lorp would not de- 
stroy Judah for David his servant’s 
sake, “as he promised him to give 
ae alway a light, and to his chil- 

en. 


The revolt of Edom (2 Chr, 
21. 8-10). 


20 In his days ¢Edom revolted 
from under the hand of Judah, and 
made a king over themselves. 

21 So Joram went over to Zair, 
and all the chariots with him: and 
he rose by night, and smote the 
Edomites which compassed him 
about, and the captains of the char- 
jots: and the people fled into their 
tents. 
The revolt of Libnah(2'Chr.21.10). 


22 Yet Edom revolted from under 
the hand of Judah unto this day. 


_Then ‘Libnah revolted at the same 


time. 

23 And the rest of the acts of Jo- 
ram, and all that he did, are ‘they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 


Death of Jehoram(2-Chr.21.19,20). 


24 And Joram slept with his fa- 
thers, and was buried with his 
fathers in the city of David: and 
Ahaziah his son reigned in his 
stead, 

Accession of Ahaziah over 
Judah (2 Chr. 22. 1, 2). 


25 In the twelfth year of Jotam| 
the son of Ahab king of Israel did 
Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of 
Judah begin to reign. 

26 Two and twenty years old was 
Ahaziah when he began ‘to reign; 
and he reigned one year in Jerusa 


II KINGS. 


a Called 
Joram, vs. 
21,23,24. 


b Heb.reigned, 
ie an to 
reign in con- 
sort with his 


2 Chr.21.10. 


f 2 Ki:9.16; 
2:Chr.22.6,7. 


g 1-Ki.20.35. 


hh 2 Ki.4.29; 
Jer-3-17. 


+1,Ki19.16. 


j1 Ki.19.16; 
2 Chr.22.7. 


433 


[9 6 


lem, And his mother’s name was 
Athaliah, the daughter of Omri 
king of Israel. 

27 And he waiked in the way of 
the house of Ahab, and did evil in 
the sight of the Lorp, as did the 


‘house of Ahab: for he was the son 
lin law of the house of Ahab. 


Ahaziah joins Jehoram in de- 
ctilny of Ramoth-gilead (2 Chr. 
SaDi)'6 


28 And hewent with Joram the son 
of Ahab. to the war against Hazael 
king of Syria in Ramoth-gilead; and 
the Syrians wounded Joram. 


Ahaziah visits Jehoram at Jez- 
reel (2 Chr. 22. 6). 


29 And king Joram went back to 
be healed in Jezreel of the wounds 
which the Syrians had given him 
at Ramah, when he fought against 
Hazael king of Syria. .And SAha- 
ziah the son of Jehoram king of 
Judah went down to see Joram the 
son of Ahab in Jezreel; because 
he was sick. 


CHAPTER 9. 


Jehu anointed king-over Israel 
at Ramoth-éilead. 


ND Elisha the prophet called 
Sone of the children of the 
prophets, and said unto him, *Gird 
up thy loins, and take this box of 
|oil in thine hand, and go to Ramoth- 
\gilead: sf 

2 And when thou comest thither, 
look out there Jehu the son of Je- 
hoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and 
go in, and make him arise up from 
lamong his brethren,-.and carry him 
to an inner chamber; 

3 Then ‘take the box of oil, and 
pour it on his head, and say, Thus 
saith the Lorp, I have anointed 
thee king over Israel. Then open 
the door; and flee, and tarry not. 

4 So the young man, even the 
young man the prophet, went to 
Ramoth-gilead. j 

5 And when he came, behold, the 
captains of the host were sitting; 
and he said, I have an errand to 
thee, O captain. And Jehu said, 
Unto which of all us? And he said, 
To thee, O captain. 

6 And he arose, and went into the 
house; and he poured the oil on his 
head, and said unto him, /Thus 
saith the Lorp God of Israel, I 
Ihave anointed thee king over the 


eae 


e hy: 


people of the LoRD, even over 
Israel. " 

7 And thou shalt smite the house 
of Ahab thy master, that I may 
avenge the blood of my servants 
the prophets, and the blood of ail 
the servants _ the Lorpb, at the 
hand of Jezebel. 

8 For is whole house of .Ahab 
shall perish: and °I will cut off from 
Ahab him that pisseth against the 
wall, and him that is shut up and 
left in Israel: 

9 And I will make the house of 
Ahab like the house of “Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat, and like the 
house of “Baasha the son of Ahi- 


jah: 
-10 ¢And the dogs shall eat Jezebel 
in the portion of Jezreel, and there 
shall be none to bury her. And he 
opened the door, and fled. 
Jehu proclaimed king by the 
army of Israel. 
11 Then Jehu came forth to the 
servants of his lord: and one said 
unto him, Zs all well? wherefore 


a1 Ki.18.4; 
21.15. 

b 1 Ki 14.10; 
21.21. 


c1 Ki.14.10; 
£5.29; 23.22. 


II KINGS. 


came ‘this mad fellow to thee? And 
he said unto them, Ye know the 
man, and his communication. 

12 And they said, Jt is false; tell 
us now. And he said, Thus and 
thus spake he to me, saying, Thus 
saith the Lorp, I have anointed 
thee king over Israel. 

13 Then they hasted, and took 
every man his garment, and put it 
under him on the top of the stairs, 
and blew with trumpets, saying, 
Jehu is king. 


Jehu slays Jehoram. 


14 So Jehu the son of J ehoshaphat 
the son of Nimshi conspired against 
Joram. (Now Joram had kept Ra- 
moth-gilead, he and all Israel, be- 
cause of Hazael king of Syria. 

15 But king Joram was returned 
to be healed in Jezreel of the 
wounds which the Syrians had 
given him, when he fought with 
Hazael king of Syria.) And Jehu 
said, If it be your minds, then let 
none go forth nor escape out of the 
city to go to tell it in Jezreel. 

16 So Jehu rode in a chariot, and 
went to Jezreel; for Joram lay 
there. And Ahaziah king of Judah 
was come down to, see Joram. 

17 And there stood a watchman 
on the tower in J ezreel, and he spied 
the company of Jehu as he came, 
and said, I see a company. And 
Joram said, Take an horseman, and 


d@ 1 Ki.16.3,11. 


€ vs.35,36; 
1 Ki.21.23. 


Ff Jer.29.26; 
John 10.20; 
Acts 26.24; 
1 Cor.4.10. 

g 2 Chr.22.7. 

hk 1 Ki.21.29. 


71 Ki.21.19. 


432 


send to meet them, and let him say, 
Is 1t peace? 

18 So there went one on horse- 
back to meet him, and said, Thus 
saith the king, Js 1t peace? And 
Jehu said, What hast thou to do 
with peace? turn thee behind me. 
And the watchman told, saying, 
The messenger came to them, but 
he cometh not again. 

19 Then he sent out a second on 
horseback, which came to them, 
and said, Thus saith the king, Js it 
peace? And Jehu answered, What 
hast thou to do with peace? turn 
thee behind me. 

20 And the watchman told, say- 
ing, He came even unto them, and 
cometh not again: and the driving 
is like the driving of Jehu the son 
of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously. 

21 And Joram said, Make ready. 
And his chariot was made ready? 
And 
Ahaziah king of Judah went out, 
each in his chariot, and they went 
out against Jehu, and met him in 
the portion of Naboth the Jez- 
reelite. 

22 And it came to pass, when 
Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it 
peace, Jehu? And he answered, 
What peace, so long as the whore- 
doms of thy mother Jezebel and her 
witchcrafts are so many? 

23 And Joram turned his hands, 
and fled, and said to Ahaziah, 
There is treachery, O Ahaziah. 

24 And Jehu drew a bow with his 
full strength, and ésmote Jehoram 
between his arms, and the arrow 
went out at his heart, and he sunk 
down in his chariot. - 

25 Then said Jehu to Bidkar his 
captain, Take up, and cast him in 
the portion of the field of Naboth 
the Jezreelite: for remember how 


that, when I and thou rode together _ 


after Ahab his father, ‘the Lorp 
laid this burden upon him; 

26 Surely I have seen yesterday 
the blood of Naboth, and the blood 
of his sons, saith the Lorp; iand I 
will requite thee in this plat, saith 
the Lord. Now therefore take and 
cast him into the plat of ground, 
according to the word of the Lorp. 


Ahaziah slain (2 Chr, 22.9). 


27 But when Ahaziah the king of 
Judah saw this, he fled by the way. 


of the garden house. And Jehu 
followed after him, and said, Smite 
him also in the chariot, And they 


did so at the going up to Gur, which 


&Joram king of Israel and — 


‘ 


9 


II KINGS. 


[10 13 


is by Ibleam. And he fled to *Me- 
giddo, and died there. 
_28 And his servants carried him 
in’ a chariot to Jerusalem, and 
buried him in his sepulchre with his 
fathers in the city of David. 

29 And in the eleventh year of 
Joram the son of Ahab began Aha- 
ziah to reign over Judah. 


The slaying of Jezebel. 


30 And when Jehu was come to 
Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; Sand 
she painted her face, and tired her 
head, and looked out at a window. 

31 And as Jehu entered in at the 

gate, she said, Had Zimri peace, 
who slew his master? 
» 82 And he lifted up his face to the 
window, and said, Who is on my 
side? who? And there jooked out 
to him’two or three eunuchs. 

33 And he said, Throw her down. 
So they threw her down: and some 
of her blood was sprinkled on the 
wall, and on the horses: and he 
trode her under foot. 


34 And when he was come in, he|/ 


did eat and drink, and said, Go, see 
now this cursed woman, and bury 
her: for “she is a king’s daughter. 

35 And they went to bury her: 
but they found no more of her than 
the skull, and the feet, and the 
palms of her hands. 

36 Wherefore they came again, 
and told him. And he said, This is 
the word of the LorD, which he 
spake by his servant Elijah the 
Tishbite, saying, ¢In the portion of 
Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of 
Jezebel: 

-37 And the carcase of Jezebel 

“shall be ¢as dung upon the face of 
the field in the portion of Jezreel; 
so that they shall not say, This is 
Jezebel. 


CHAPTER 10. 
Judgment on the house of Ahab. 


ND Ahab had seventy sons in 
Samaria. And Jehu wrote let- 
ters, and sent to Samaria, unto the 
rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and 
to ‘them that brought up Ahab’s 
children, saying, 

2 Now as soon as this letter com- 
eth to you, seeing your master’s 
sons are with you, and there are 
with you chariots and horses, a 
fenced city also, and armour; 

3 Look even out the best and 
meetest of your master’s sons, and 


B.C. 884. 


a 2 Chr.22.9. 
b Ezk.23.40. 
c1 Ki.16.31. 
d1 Ki.21 23. 
e Psa.83.10. 


Heb. 
nourishers, 


g Heb. for me. 
hi Ki.21.21. 


4 2 Ki.9.14, 
24. 


j1 Ki.21.19- 
24. 


433 


set Him on his father’s throne, and 
fight for your master’s house. 

4 But they were exceedingly 
afraid, and said, Behold, two kings 
stood not before him: how then 
shall we stand? 

5 And he that was over the house, 
and he that was over the city, the 
elders also, and the bringers up of 
the children, sent to Jehu, saying, 
We are thy servants, and will do 
ali that thou shalt bid us; we will 
not make any king: do thou that 
which is good in thine eyes. 

6 Then he wrote a letter the sec- 
ond time to them; saying, If ye be 
émine, and if ye will hearken unto 
my voice, take ye the heads of the 
men your master’s sons, and come 
to me to Jezreel by to morrow this 
time. Now the king’s sons, being 
seventy persons, were with the 
great men of the city, which 
brought them up. 

7 And it came to pass, when the 
letter came to them, that they took 
the king’s sons, and “slew seventy 
persons, and put their heads in bas- 
kets, and cent him them to Jezreel. 

8 And there came a messénger, 
and told him, saying, They have 
brought. the heads of the king’s 
sons. And he said, Lay ye them 
in two heaps at the entering in of 
the gate until the morning. 

9 And it came to pass in the morn- 
ing, that, he went out, and stood, 
and said to all the people, Ye be 
righteous: behold, ‘I conspired 
against my master, and slew him: 
but who slew all these? 

10 Know now that there shall fall 
unto the earth nothing of the word 
of the LoRD, which the Lorp 
jspake concerning the house of 
Ahab: for the LoRD hath done that 
which he spake by his servant 
Elijah. 

11 So Jehu slew all that remained 
of the house of Ahab.in Jezreel, and 
all his great men, and his kinsfolks, 
and his priests, until he left him 
‘Pere remaining. 

12 And he arose and departed, 
and came to Samaria, And as he 
was at the shearing house in the 
way, 


The princes pt J geen, slain (2 Chr. 
ms)s 


13 Jehu met with the brethren of 
Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, 
|Who are ye? And they answered, 
We are the brethren of Ahaziah; 
and we go down to salute the chil- 


10 14] 


dren of the king and the children of 
the queen. ‘ 

14 And he said, Take them alive. 
And they took them alive, and slew) 
them at the pit of the shearing! 
house, even two -and forty men;' 
neither left he any of them. 


Jehu spares Jehonadab: 


15 And when he was departed! 
thence, he lighted on ¢Jehonadab 
the son of "Rechab coming to meet 
him: and he saluted him, and said 

| to him, Is thine heart right, as my 
heart is with thy heart? And Je- 
‘honadab answered, It is. If it be, 
, give me thine hand. And he gave)? 92,°9 2.927 
‘him his hand; and he took him up} 6,8,10,14,16, 
to him into the chariot. 18,19. 

16 And he said, Come with me,|, 5 s..3.4.7. 
and see my zeal for the LorD. So i 
they made him ride in his chariot.|¢ 1 Ki21.21- 

17 And when he came to Samaria, 21 Ki22.6. 
he slew all that remained unto Ahab 
in Samaria, till he had destroyed] 1 Ki.16.32. 
him, according to the saying of the 71 Ki,20.39. 
Lorp, which he spake to “Elijah. 

18 And Jehu gathered all the peo-|¢ Ezra 6.11; 
ple together, and said unto: them, Ten tetige 
Ahab served Baal a little; but Jehu a 
shall serve him much. h 1 Ki.12.28,29. 


Jehu exterminates Baal worship] i 2 Ki9.6,7. 
in Israel. j v.35; 2 Ki. 


19 Now therefore call unto me all} 13.1;10; 14. 
the ¢prophets of Baal, all his. ser- iechiaaeed! 
vants, and all his priests; let none!é 1 Ki.14.16: 
be wanting: for I have a great’ sac- 
rifice to do to Baal; whosoever 
shall be wanting, he shall not live. 
But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the 
intent that he might destroy the 
worshippers’ of Baal. 

20 And Jehu said, Proclaim a sol- 
emn assembly for Baal. And they 
proclaimed it. 

21 And Jehw sent through all Is- 
rael: and all the worshippers of 
Baal came, so that there was not a 
man left that came not: And they 

/came into the house of Baal; and 
‘the house of Baal was full from one 
end to another. 

22 And he said unto him that was 
over the vestry, Bring forth vest- 
ments: for all the worshippers of 

And he brought them forth 
vestments. 

23 And Jehu went, and Jehona- 
dab the son of Rechab, into the 
house: of Baal, and’ said unto the 
worshippers of Baal, Search, and 
look that there be here with ‘you 
none of the servants of the LorD, 
but the worshippers of Baal only. 


a Calied Jona- 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 884. 


[10 34 


24 And when they went in to offer — 
sacrifices and burnt-offerings, Jehu 
appointed fourscore men without, 
and said, If any of the men whom 
I have brought into your hands es- 
cape, he that letteth him go, Shis 
life shall be for the life of him. 

25 And it came to pass, as soon as 
jhe had made an end of offering the 
burnt-offering, that Jehu said to the 
guard and to the captains, Go in, 
and slay them; let none come forth. 
And they smote them with the edge 
of the sword; and the guard and 
the captains cast them out, and 
went to the city of the house of Baal. 

26 And they brought forth the 
images out of the house of Baal, 
and burned them. 

27 And they brake down the 
jimage of Baal, and brake down the 
house of Baal, sand made it a 
draught house unto this day. 
| 28 Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out 
of Israel. / 
| 29° Howbeit from:the sins of Jero- 
boam the son: of Nebat, who made 
Israel to sin, Jehw departed not 
from after them, to wit, the golden 
calves that were in Beth-el, and 
that were in Dan. 


Four generations promised to 
ehu. 


30 And the Lorn ‘said unto Jehu, 

Because thou hast done well in exe- 
cuting that which is right in mine 
eyes, and hast done unto the house 
of Ahab according to all that was 
in mine heart, jthy children of the 
fourth generation shall sit on the 
throne of Israel. 
_31 But Jehu took no heed to walk 
in the law of the Lorp God of Israel 
with all his heart: for he departed 
not. from the ‘sins of Jeroboam, 
which made Israel to sin, 


Power of Israel diminished. 


32 In those days the Lorp began 
to cut Israel short: and Hazael 
smote them in all the coasts of 
Israel; 

33 From Jordan eastward, all the 
land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the 
Reubenites, and the Manassites,, 
from Aroer, which: is by the: river 
Arnon, even. Gilead and Bashan. 


Death of Jehu: accession of 
Jehoahaz over Israel. 


34 Now the rest of the acts of 
Jehu, and all that he did, and all 
his might, are they not. written in 


10 35] 


the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Israel? 

35 And Jehu slept with his 
fathers: and they buried him in 
Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son 
reigned in his stead. 

36 And the time that Jehu reigned 
ever Israel in Samaria was twenty 
and. eight years. 


CHAPTER 11. 


The seed royal of Judah destroy- 
ed, save Joash (2 Chr. 22. 10-12). 


ND when @Athaliah the “mother 

of Ahaziah saw that her son 

was dead, she arose and destroyed 
all the seed royal. 

2 But Jehosheba, the daughter of 
king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took 
Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole 
him from among the king’s sons 
which were slain; and they hid 
him, even him and his nurse, in the 
“‘bedchamber from Athaliah, so that 
he was not slain. 

3 And he was with her hid in the 
house of the Lorpb six years. And 
Athaliah did reign over the land. 


Joash becomes king over Judah 
(2 Chr. 23. 1-11). 


4 And the seventh ‘year Je- 
hoiada sent and fetched the rulers 
over hundreds, with the captains 
‘and the guard, and brought them 
to him into the house of the LorD, 
and made a covenant with them, 
and took an oath of them in the 
house of the LorpD, and shewed 
them the king’s son. | 
-5 And he commanded them, say- 
ing, This 7s the thing that ye shall 
«do; A third part of you that enter 
in ¢on the sabbath shall even be 
keepers of the watch of the king’s 
house; 

6 And athird part shall be at the 
gate of Sur; and a third part at 
the gate behind the guard: so shall 
ye keep the watch of the house, that 
it be not broken down. 

7 And two parts of all you that go 
forth on the sabbath, even they 
shall keep the watch of the house 
of the LorpD about the king. 

§ And ye shall compass the king 


II KINGS. 


a 2 Chr.22.10. 


b 2 Ki.8.26. 

¢ 2 Chr.23.1. 
d 1 Chr.9.25. 
e 2 Chr.23.8. 


f1Sam.10.24. 
g 2-Chr.23.12. 


h 2 Ki.23.3; 
2 Chr.34.31. 


¢ 2 Chr.23.16. 


j 2 Sam.5.3. 
k 2 Ki.10.26. 
1 Deut.12.3; 


2 Chr.23.17. 


round about, every man with his} - 


weapons in his hand: and he that 
cometh within the ranges, let him 
be slain: and be ye with the king 
as he goeth out and as he cometh in. 

Q And the <captains over the hun- 
dreds did according to all things 
that Jehoiada the priest com- 


435 


[11 18 


manded: and they took every man 
his men that were to come in on the 
sabbath, with them that should go 
out on the sabbath, and came to 
Jehoiada the priest. 

10 And ‘to the captains over hun- 
dreds did the priest give king 
David’s spears and shields, that 
were in the temple of the LORD. 
| 11 And the guard stood, every 
man with his weapons in his hand, 
round about the king, from the 
tight corner of the temple to the 
left corner of the temple, along by 
the altar and the temple. 

12 And he brought forth the 
jkine’s son, and put the crown upon 
jhim, and gave him the testimony; 
and they made him king, and an- 
ointed him; and they clapped their 
hands, and said, /God save the king. 


Execution of Athaliah 
(2 Chr. 23. 12-15). 


13 And éwhen Athaliah heard the 
noise of the guard and of the peo- 
ple, she came to the people into the 
temple of the LORD. 

14 And when she looked, behold, 
the king stood by “a pillar, as the 
manner was, and the princes and 
the trumpeters by the king, and all 
the people of the land rejoiced, and 
blew with trumpets: and Athaliah 
rent her clothes, and cried, Treason, 
Treason. 

15 But Jehoiada the priest com- 
manded the captains of the hun- 
dreds, the officers of the host, and 
said unto them, Have her forth 
without the ranges: and him that 
followeth her kill with the sword. 
For the priest had said, Let her not 
Ibe slain in the house .of the LorD. 

16 And they laid hands on her; 
and she went by the way by the 
which the horses came into the 
king’s house: and there was she 
slain. ; 


The revival through Jehoiada 
(2 Chr. 23. 16-21). 


17 4And Jehoiada made a cove- 
nant Jbetween the LorpD and the 
king and the people, that they 
should be the LorRD’s people; be- 
tween the king also and the people. 

18 And all the people of the Jand 
went into the *house of Baal, and 
brake it down; his altars and his 
images ‘brake they in pieces thor- 
oughly, and slew Mattan the priest 
of Baal before the altars. And the 
priest appointed officers over the 
house of the LorD- 


19 And he took the rulers over 
hundreds, and the captains, and 
the guard, and all the people of the 
land; and they brought down the 
king from the house of the Lorp, 
and came by the way of the gate of 
the guard to the king’s house. And 
he sat on the throne of the kings. 

20 And all the people of the land 
rejoiced, and the city was in quiet: 
and they slew Athaliah with the 
sword beside the king’s house. 

21 Seven years old was Jehoash 
when he began to reign. 


Py 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 878. 


CHAPTER 12. 
The reign of Jehoash (Joash) 
(2 Chr. 24. 2). Sates 
a . whe 
yN the seventh year of Jehu : 
eJehoash began to reign; and|>? Ki.t4.4;_ 
forty years reigned he in Jerusa- 22.43. 
lem. And his mother’s name was ’ 
Zibiah of Beer-sheba. 6 Dae Bee | 
2 And Jehoash did that which) [piso holy 
was right in the sight of the Lorp 
all his days hes Jehoiada the) ¢ 2 Chr.24.5. 
priest instructe f 
3 But the high places were not|°? ©"7** 
taken away: the people still sacri-| 2 Chr.24.8. 
ficed and burnt incense in the high! g2 Chr.24.14, 
places, 
Dies 
The faithless priests aia 
(2 Chr. 24..4,.5). # Lev.5.15,18. 
4 And Jehoash said to the priests, | i Lev-7.7; 
All the money of the ‘dedicated| Nvm-18.9. 
things that is brought into the k2 Ki.8.12. 
house of the LorbD, even the money 
of every one that passeth the ac-|! 2 Chr.24.23. 
count, the money that every man|n2 Ki.18.15, 
is set at, and all the money that] 16; 1 Ki 15. 
cometh into any man’s heart to} 18: 
bring into the house of the Lorp, 
5 Let the priests take it to them, 
every man of his acquaintance: and 
let them repair the breaches of the 
house, wheresoever any breach 
shall be found. - 
6 But it was so, that in the’ 
three and twentieth year of king! 
Jehoash the ¢priests had not re- 
paired the breaches of the house. 
Then ¢king Jehodsh called for 
Jehoiada the priest, and the other 
priests, and said unto them, Why 
fepair ye not the breaches of the 
house? now therefore receive no 
more money of your acquaintance, 
but deliver it for the breaches of 
the house. 
8 And the priests consented to re-| 
celve no more money of the people, 
neither to repair the breaches of the 
house. 
436 


The temple repaired 
(2 Chr. 24. 8-14). 


9 But Jehoiada the priest took a 
chest, and bored a hole in the lid 
of it, and set it beside the altar, on 
the right side as one cometh into 
the house of the LorpD: and the 
priests that kept the door put 
therein all the money that was 
brought into the house of the 
Lorp. 

10 And it was so, when they saw 
that there was much money in the 
chest, that the king’s scribe and 
the high priest came up, and they 
put up in bags, and told the money 
that was found in the house of the 
Lorp. 

11 And they gave the money, 
being told, into the hands of them 
that did the work, that had the 
oversight of the house of the LorD: 
and they laid it out to the carpen- 
ters and builders, that wrought 
upon the house of the Lor», 

12 And to masons, and hewers of 
stone, and to buy timber and hewed 
stone to repair the breaches of the 
house of the Lorp, and for all that 
was laid out for the house to re- 
pair it. 

13 Howbeit there were not made 
for the house of the Lorp bowls of 
silver, snuffers, basons, trumpets, 
any vessels of gold, or vessels of 
silver, of the money that was 


brought into the house of the LORD: 

14 But they gave that to the 
workmen, and repaired therewith 
the house of the Lorp. 

13 Moreover “they reckoned not 
with the men, into whose hand 
they delivered the money to be 
bestowed on workmen: for they 
dealt faithfully. 

16 The ‘trespass money and sin 
tnoney was not brought into the 
house of the Lorn: Jit was the 
priests’. 


The Syrians take Gath: Je- 
hoash. ransoms Jerusalem by 
despoiling the temple. 


17 Then ‘Fazael king of Syria 
went up, and fought against Gath, 
and took it: and ’Hazael set his 
face to go up to Jerusalem. 

18 And Jehoash king of Judah 
™took all the hallowed things that 
Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and 
Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Ju- 
dah, had dedicated, and his own 
hallowed things, and all the gold 
that was found in the treasures of 


t 


the house of the Lorb, and in the 
king’s house, and sent i# to Hazael 
king of Syria: and he went away 
from Jerusalem. 


Death of Joash: accession of 
Amaziah (2 Chr. 24. 25-27). 


19 And the rest of the acts of 
Joash, and all that he did, are they 
not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 

20 And ¢his servants arose, and 
made a conspiracy, and slew Joash 
in the “house of Millo, which goeth 
down. to Silla. } 

21 For <Jozachar the son of Shi- 
meath, and Jehozabad the son of 
Shomer, his servants, smote him,|¢ 2 Ki.14.5; 
and he died; and they buried him| ? ©hr-2425- 
with his fathers in the city of David:|» or, Beth- 
and ¢Amaziah his son reigned in| mullo. 
his stead. ¢2 Chr.24.26. 


CHAPTER 13. d 2 Chr.24.27. 


The reign of Jehoahaz over | ¢ Jud.2.14. 
Israel. f 2 Ki8.12. 


JN the three and twentieth year of 2 Psa.78.34. 
Joash the son of Ahaziah king of 

Judah Jehoahaz the son of Jehu be-|/ Ex.3.7; 
gan 10 reign over Israel in Samaria,| ? ¥-14.26. 
and reigned seventeen years. iv.25; 2 Ki. 

2 And he did that which was| 14.25,27. 
evil in the sight of the Lorp, and j1 Ki.16.33. 
followed the sins of Jeroboam the ; 
son of Nebat, which made Israel to|# See Deut. 
sin; he departed not therefrom. 16.21. 

3 And the “anger of the LORD}: Amos 1.3. 
was kindled against Israel, and he ; 
delivered them into the hand of|”? ¥i-1415. 
fHazael king of Syria, and into the], 2 xi.14.9. 
hand of Ben-hadad the son of Ha- i 
zael, all their days. o 2 Ki.2.12. 


“Jehoahaz repents, but suffers |?! Ki.20.26. 
the grove in Samaria. 


4 And Jehoahaz *besought the 
Lorp, and the Lorp hearkened 
unto him: for he “saw the oppres- 
sion of Israel, because the king of 
Syria oppressed them. 

5 7(And the Lorp gave Israel a 
saviour, so that they went out from 
under the hand of the Syrians: and 
the children of Israel dwelt in their 
tents, as beforetime. 

6 Nevertheless they departed not 
from the sins of the house of Jero- 
boam, who made Israel sin, but 
walked therein: jand there remained 
the “grove also in Samaria.) 

7 Neither did he leave of the peo- 
ple to Jehoahaz but fifty horsemen, 
and ten chariots, and ten thousand 
footmen: for the king of Syria had va 


__|destroyed themj and had made 
them ‘like the dust by threshing. 


Death of Jehcahaz., 

8 Now the rest of the acts of Je- 
hoahaz, and all that he did, and 
his might, are they not written in 
the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Israel? 

9 And Jehoahaz slept with his 
fathers; and they buried him in 
Samaria: and Joash his son reigned 
in his stead. 


Accession of Jehoash over Israel. 

10 In the thirty and seventh year 
of Joash king of Judah began 
Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to 
reign over Israel in Samaria, and 
reigned sixteen years. 

11 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LorD; he de- 
parted not from all the sins of Jero- 
‘boam the son of Nebat, who made 
Israel sin: but he walked therein. 


Death of Jehoash (2 Ki. 14. 15, 16). 

12 And the rest of the acts of 
Joash, and all that he did, and *his 
might wherewith he fought against 
Amaziah king of Judah, are they 
not written in the book of the chron- 
icles of the kings of Israel? 

13 And Joash slept with his fa- 
thers; and Jeroboam sat upon his 
throne: and Joash was buried in 
Samaria with the kings of Israel. 


Illness of Elisha: visit of Joash. 

14 Now Elisha was fallen sick of 
his sickness whereof he died. And 
Joash the king of Israel came down 
unto him, and wept over his face, 
and said, O my father, my father, 
the °chariot of Israel, and the horse- 
men thereof. 

15 And Elisha said unto him, 
Take bow and arrows. And he 
took unto him bow and arrows. 

16 And he said to the king of 
Israel, Put thine hand upon the 
bow. And he put his hand upon 
it: and Elisha put his hands upon 
the king’s hands. 

17. And he said, Open the window 
eastward. And heopened it. Then 
Elisha said, Shoot. And hé shot. 
And he said, The arrow of the 
LORD’s deliverance, and the arrow 
of deliverance from Syria: for thou 
shalt smite the Syrians in ?Aphek, 
\till thou have consumed them. 


The scant faith of Joash. 


18 And he said, Take the arrows. 
And he took them. And-he said 


13 19] 


Il KINGS. 


unto the king of Israel, Smite upon 
the ground. And he smote thrice, 
and stayed. 

19 And the man of God was wroth 
with him, and said, Thou shouldest 
have smitten five or six times; then} 
hadst thou smitten Syria till thou 
hadst consumed it: ‘whereas. now 
thou shalt smite Syria but thrice. 


Death of Elisha: the miracle at 
his tomb. 


20 And Elisha died, and they bur- 
ied him. And the bands of the 
Moabites invaded the land at the 
coming in of the year. 

21 And it came to pass, as they 
were burying a man, that. behold, 
they spied a band of men; and they 
cast the man into the sepulchre of 
Elisha: and when. the man. was. let 
down, and touched the bones of 
Elisha, he ‘revived, and stood up 
on his feet. 

22 But “Hazael king of Syria op- 
pressed Israel all the days of Je- 
hoahaz. . ‘ 

23 ¢And the Lorp was gracious 
unto them, and had compassion on 
them, and had respect unto them, 
/because of his covenant with Abra- 
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would 
not -destroy them, neither cast he 
them from his presence as yet. 

24 So Hazael king of Syria died; 
and Ben-hadad his son reigned. in 
his stead. 

25 And Jehoash the son of Jehoa-| 
haz took again out of the hand of| 
Ben-hadad the son of Hazael the 
cities, which he had taken out of the 


B.C. 839: 


c 2 Ki.8.12. 


d@ 2.Ki.14.27, 


e Ex.2.24,25. 


f Ex.32.13. 
g vs.18,19., 
h 2 Chr.25.1. 


#2 Ki.12.3. 


j 2 Ki.12.20: 
k Deut.24.15; 


Ezk.18.4,20. 
1 See 2 Chr.25. 
5-16. 


m Parables 


GT.) 2Chr:| +h 


25.18. 


(Jud: 917-155 
hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. ech i. 
sThree times did Joash beat him,| 7-14) 
and recovered the cities of Israel. |, one cubit = 
about 18 in. 


CHAPTER 14. 


The reign of Amaziah over 
Judah (2 Chr. 25.1). 


i ja the second year of Joash son of} 

‘4 Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned 
*Amaziah the son of Joash king of| 
judah. 

2 He was twenty and five years 
old when he began to reign, and! 
reigned twenty and nine years in| 
Jerusalem. And his mother’s name 
was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 

3 And he did that which was 
right in the sight of the Lorp, yet 
not like David his father: he did ac- 
cording to all things as Joash his 
father did. ‘ 

4 ‘Howbeit the high: places were 
not taken away: as yet the people 


the high places. 

5 And it came to pass, as soon as 
the kingdom was confirmed in his) 
hand, that he slew his servants 
jwhich had slain the king his 
father. ; 

6 But the children of the murder- 


jers he slew not: according unto 


that which is written in the book 
of the law of Moses, wherein the 
LoRD commanded, saying, he 
fathers shall not be put to death 
for the children, nor the children be 
put to death for the fathers; but 
every man shall be put to death for 
his own sin. 

7 He slew of ‘Edom in the valley 


"/of salt ten thousand, and. took Selah 


by war, and called the name of it 
Joktheel unto this day. 


War between Israel and Judah 
(2. Chr. 25. 17-24). 


8 Then Amaziah sent messengers 
to Jehoash, the.son of Jehoahaz son 


of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, 


let us look one another in the face. 

9 And Jehoash the king: of Israel. 
sent to Amaziah king of Judah, 
saying, "The thistle that was in 
Lebanon sent to the cedar that 
was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy 
daughter to: my son to wife: and 
there passed: by a wild beast that 
was, in Lebanon, and trode down 
the thistle. 

10 Thow hast indeed smitten 
Edom, and thine heart hath lifted 
ee up: glory of this, and tarry at. 
home: for why shouldest thou med- 


die to thy hurt, that thou shouldest 
fall, even thou, and Judah with 
thee? 

11 But Amaziah would not hear. 
Therefore Jehoash king of Israel 
went up; and he and Amaziah king 
of Judah looked one another in the 
face at Beth-shemesh, which be- 
longeth to Judah. 

12 And Judah was put: to the 
worse before Israel; and they fled 
every man to their tents, ; 

13 And Jehoash king of Israel took 
Amaziah king of Judah, the son of 
Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth- 
shemesh, and came to Jerusalem, 
and brake down the wall of Jeru- 
salem from the gate of Ephraim 
unto the corner gate, four hundred 
"cubits, 

14 And he took all the gold and 
silver, and all the vessels that were 
found in the house of the Lorp, and 
dn the treasures of the king’s house, 


14 15] 


and hostages, and returned to Sa- 
maria. 
(See 2 Ki. 13. 12, 13.) 

15 Now the rest of the acts of Je- 
hoash which he did, and his might, 
and how he fought with Amaziah 
king of Judah, are they not written 
in the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Israel? 


Jetoboam succeeds Jehoash as 
king of Israel. 


16 And Jehoash slept with his 
fathers, and was buried in Samaria 
with the kings of Israel; and Jer- 
oboam his son reigned in his stead. 


Death of Amaziah (2 Chr. 25. 
26-28). 


17 And Amaziah the son of Joash 
king of Judah lived after the death 
of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of 
Israel fifteen years. 

18 And-the ‘rest of the acts of 
Amaziah, are they not written in 
the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Judah? ‘ 

19 Now they made a conspiracy 
against him in Jerusalem: and he 
fied to Lachish; but they sent after 
him to Lachish, and slew him there. 

20 And they brought him on 
horses: and he was buried at 
Jerusalem with his fathers in the 
city of David. 


Azariah succeeds Amaziah as 
king of Judah. 


91 And all the people of Judah 
took ¢Azariah, which was sixteen 
years old, and made him king in- 
‘stead of his father Amaziah. 

22 He built *Elath, and restored it 
to Judah, after that the king slept 
with his fathers. | 


Reign of Jeroboam II, over 
Israel. 


93 In the fifteenth year of Ama-| 
ziah the son of Joash king of Judah 
Jeroboam the son of Joash king of 
Israel began to reign in Samaria, 
and reigned forty and one.years.. 

24 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LorpD: he de- 
parted not from all the sins of Jerd- 
boam the son of Nebat, who made 
Israel to sin. 

25 He restored the coast of Israel 
from the entering of Hamath unto 
the “sea of the plain, according,to 
the word of the LorD God of Israel, 
which he spake by the hand of his 
servant “Jonah, the son of Amittai, 


II KINGS. 


B. C. 826. 


a Called Uz- 
ziah, 2'Chr. 
26.1; Isa.1,1. 


'b 2: Ki.16:6; 
2 Chr.26.2. 


c Deut.3.17. 
d Jon.1.1. 


é Josh.19.13. 

f 2 Ki3.4. 

g Deut.32.36. 

h 2 Sam.8.6; 
1 Ki.11.24; 

- 2.Chr.8.3. 

7 After an in- 
terregnum 
of 11 years. 

2 Ki.15.8. 


j v.35; 2 Ki. 
12.3; 14.4. 
Rk 2 Chr.26,16- 

Ze 


1 2 Chr.26.23. 


439 


[157 


the prophet, which was of ¢Gath- 
hepher. : 

26 For the Lorp ‘saw the afflic- 
|tion of Israel, that it was very 
bitter: for ‘there was not any shut 
up, nor any left, nor any helper for 
Israel. 
| 27 And the LorD said not ‘that he 
lwould blot out the name of Israel 
from under heaven: but he saved 
them by the hand of Jeroboam the 
son of Joash. 


Death of feroboam II.: acces- 
sion of Zachariah king over 
Israel. 


28 Now the rest of the acts of 
Jeroboam, and all that he did, and 
his might, how he warred, and how. 
he recovered Damascus, and Ha- 
math, *which belonged to Judah, 
for Israel, are they not written in 
the book of the chronicles of the 
kings of Israel? 

29 And Jeroboam slept with his 
fathers, éven with the kings of Is- 
rael; and ‘Zachariah his son reigned 
in his stead. 


CHAPTER 15. 


Reign of Azariah (Uzziah) over 
Judah (2 Chr. 26. 1-3). 


ie the twenty and seventh year of 
Jeroboam -king of Israel began 
Azariah son of Amaziah king of 
Judah to reign. 

2 Sixteen years old was he when 
he began to reign, and he reigned 
two and fifty years in Jerusalem. 
And his mother’s name was Jecho- 
liah of Jerusalem. 

3 And he did that which was 
right in the sight of the LorD, ac- 
cording to all that his father Ama- 
ziah had done; 


| 4 sSave that the high places were 


not removed: the people sacrificed 
and burnt incense still on the high 


places. 
5 And the LorpD “smote the king, 
so that he was a leper unto the day 


| of his death, and dwelt in a several 
| house. 9 
lwas over the house, judging the 


And Jotham the king’s son 


people of the land. 


Death of Azariah (Uzziah): ac- 


cession of Jotham., 


| 6 And the rest of the acts of Aza- 
Iriah, and all that he did, are they 


not written in the book of the 


ichronicles of the kings of Judah? 


7-So Azariah slept with his fa- 
thers; and they ‘buried him with his 


15 8] 


fathers in the city of David: and 
Jotham his son reigned in his stead. 


‘Reign of Zachariah over Israel. 


8 Inthe thirty and eighth year of 
Azariah king of Judah did Zacha- 
riah the son of Jeroboam reign over 
Israel in Samaria six months, 

9 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LoRD, as his 
fathers had done: he departed not 
from the sins of Jeroboam the son 
of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. 


Death of Zachariah: accession 
of Shallum over Israel. 


10 And Shallum the son of Jabesh 
conspired against him, and @smote 
him before the people, and slew him, 
and reigned in his stead. 

11 And the rest of the acts of 
Zachariah, behold, they are writ- 
ten in the book of the chronicles of 
the kings of Israel. 

12 This was the 4word of the 
Lorp which he spake unto Jehu, 
saying, Thy sons shall sit on the 
throne of Israel unto the fourth gen- 
eration. And so it came to pass. 


Reign of Shallum: his death. 


13 Shallum the son of Jabesh be- 
gan to reign in the nine and thirtieth 
year of ‘Uzziah king of Judah; and 
he reigned a full month in Samaria. 

14 For Menahem the son of Gadi 
went up from ¢Tirzah, and came to 
Samaria, and smote Shallum the 
son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew 
him, and reigned in his stead. 

15 And the rest of the acts of 
Shallum, and his conspiracy which 
he made, behold, they are written in 


the book of the chronicles of the 


kings of Israel. 


Reign of Menahem over Israel. 


16 Then Menahem smote ¢Tiph- 
sah, and all that were therein, and 
the coasts thereof from Tirzah: be- 
cause they opened not to Aim, 
therefore he smote it; and all the 
women therein that were with child 
he ripped up. 

17 In the nine and thirtieth year 


of Azariah king of Judah began). 


Menahem the son of Gadi to reign 
over Israel, and reigned ten years 
in Samaria. 

18 And he did’ that which was 
evil in the sight of the LorpD: he de- 
parted not all his days from the sins 
of Jeroboam the son of N ebat, who 
made Israel to sin, 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 758. 


a As prophe- 
sied, Amos 
7.9. 


b 2 Ki.10.30. 


c Mt.1.8,9, 
called Ozias, 
and v.1, 
Azariah. 


* 


di Ki.14.17, 

e1 Ki.4.24, 

Ff 1 Chr.5.26; 
Isa.9.1; 
Hos.8.9. 

g One tal- 
ent =£410, 
or $1940. 

h One shekel 


= 2s. 9d., or 
65 cts. 


# Isa.7.1. 
j 1 Chr.5,26; 
Isa.9.1. 


& 1 Ki.15.20. 


440 


is 
An Assyrian invasion of Israel 
(1 Chr. 5. 26) 


19 And /Pul the king of Assyria. 
came against the land: and Mena- 
hem gave Pul a thousand @talents 
of silver, that his hand might be 
with him to confirm the kingdom 
in his hand. 

20 And Menahem exacted the 
money of Israel, even of all the 
mighty men of wealth, of each man 
fifty “shekels of silver, to give to 
the king of Assyria. So the king 
of Assyria turned back, and stayed 
not there in the jand. | 


7 


Death of Menahem: accession 
of Pekahiah over Israel. — 


21 And the rest of the acts of 
Menahem, and all that he did, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel? 

22 And Menahem slept with his 
fathers; and Pekahiah his son 
reigned in his stead. 


Death of Pekahiah: accession of 
Pekah over Israel. 
23 In the fiftieth year of Azariah 


king of Judah Pekahiah the son of 
Menahem began to reign over Israel 


‘|in Samaria, and reigned two years. 


24 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the Lorp: he 
departed not from the sins cf Jero- 
boam the son of Nebat, who made 
Israel to sin. 

25 But Pekah the son of Remaliah, 
a captain of his, conspired against 
him, and smote him in Samaria, in 
the palace of the king’s house, with 
Argob and Arieh, and with him 
fifty men of the Gileadites: and he 
killed him, and reigned in his room, 

26 And the rest of the acts of Pe- 
kahiah, and all that he did, behold, 
they are written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel. 


Reign of Pekah over Israel: his 
death. 


27 In the two and fiftieth year of 
Azariah king of Judah ‘Pekah the 
son of Remaliah began to reign over 
Israel in Samaria, and reigned 
twenty years. 
°28 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the Lorp: he 
departed not from the sins of Jero- 
boam the son of Nebat, who made 
Israel to sin. : 

29 In the days of Pekah king of. 
Israel came JTiglath-pileser king of 

Sssymia, and took *Ijon, and Abel- 
beth-maachah, and Janoah, and 


15 30] 


Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and 
Galilee, ail the land of Naphtali, 
and carried them captive to Assyria. 

30 And Hoshea the son of Elah 
made a conspiracy against Pekah 
the son of Remaliah, and smote 
him, and slew him, and ¢reigned in 
his stead, in the twentieth year of 
Jotham the son of Uzziah. 

31 And the rest of the acts of Pe- 
kah, and all that he did, behold, 
they are written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Israel. 


Reign of Jotham over Judah 
(2 Chr. 26. 23; 27). 


32 In the second year of Pekah 
the son of Remaliah king of Israel 
began “Jotham the son of Uzziah 

' king of Judah to reign. 

33 Five and twenty years old was 
he when he began to reign, and he 
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. 
And his mother’s name was Jeru- 
sha, the daughter of Zadok. 

34 And he did that which was 
right in the sight of the LorD: he 
did according to all that his father 
Uzziah had done. 

35 ‘Howbeit the high places were 
not removed: the people sacrificed 
and burned incense still in the high 
places. He built the higher gate of 
the house of the LORD. . 

36 Now the rest of the acts of 
Jotham, and all that he did, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 

37 In those days the LorD began 
to send against Judah ¢Rezin the 
king of Syria, and Pekah the son 
of Remaliah. 

38 And Jotham slept with his fa- 
thers, and was buried with his 
fathers in the city of David his 
father: and Ahaz his son reigned 
in his stead. 


CHAPTER 16. 


Reign of Ahaz over Judah 
(2 Chr. 28. 1). 


qt the seventeenth year of Pekah 
the son of Remaliah ‘Ahaz the 
son of Jotham king of Judah began 
to reign. 

2 Twenty years old was Ahaz 
when he began to reign, and reigned 
sixteen years in Jerusalem, and did 
not that which was right in the 
sight of the Lorp his God, like 
David his father. 

3 But he walked in the way of the 
kings of Israel, yea, Sand made his 
son to pass through the fire, accord- 


“II KINGS. 


a 2 Ki.17.1; 
Hos.10.3,7, 
15. 


6 2 Chr.27.1. 
cv.4. 

d Isa.7.1-17. 
e2 Chr.28.1. 
f Lev.18.21; 

2 Chr.28.3; 
Psa.106.37, 
g Deut.12.31. 
hi.e. nations. 
i Heb, Eloth. 
j Heb. Tilgath- 

pilneser, 
1 Chr.5.26; 
2 Chr.28.20. 


k 2 Ki.12.18; 
2 Chr.28.21. 


1 Lit. meal. 


[16 14 


ing to the &gabominations of the 
hheathen, whom the Lorp cast out 
from before the children of Israel. 

4 And he sacrificed and burnt in- 
cense in the high places, and on the 
hills, and under every green tree. 


Invasion of Judah by Syria and 
Israel (2 Chr. 28. 5-8). 


5 Then Rezin king of Syria and 
Pekah son of Remaliah king of Is- 
rael came up to Jerusalem to war: 
and they besieged Ahaz, but could 
not overcome him. 

6 At that time Rezin king of 
Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and 
drave the Jews from ‘Elath: and the 
Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt 
there unto this day. 


Ahaz seeks the assistance of 
Assyria (2 Chr. 28. 16-21). 


7 So Ahaz sent messengers to 
JTiglath-pileser king of Assyria, 
saying, I am thy servant and thy 
son: come up, and save me out of 
the hand of the king of Syria, and 
out of the hand of the king of Is- 
rael, whick rise up against me. 

8 And Ahaz *took the silver and 
gold that was found in the house 
of the LorD, and in the treasures of 
the king’s house, and sent it for a 
present to the king of Assyria. 


The Assyrians take Damascus. 
9 And the king of Assyria heark- 


lened unto him: for the king of As- 


syria went up against Damascus, 
and took it, and carried the people 
of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin. 

10 And king Ahaz went to Da- 
mascus to meet Tiglath-pileser king 
of Assyria, and saw an altar that 
was at Damascus: and king Ahaz 
sent to Urijah the priest the fashion 
of the altar, and the pattern of it, 
according to all the workmanship 
thereof. 

11 And Urijah the priest built an 
altar according to all that king 
Ahaz had sent from Damascus: so 
Urijah the priest made it against 
king Ahaz came from Damascus. 

12 And when the king was come 
from Damascus, the king saw the 
altar: and the king approached to 
the altar, and offered thereon. 


|] 13 And he burnt his burnt-offer- 


441 


ing and his /meat-offering, and 
poured his drink-offering, and 
sprinkled the blood of his peace- 
offerings, upon the altar. 

14 And he brought also the brasen 
altar, which was before the Lorpb, 


16 15] Il KINGS. [17 2 


maneser king of Assyria; and Ho- — 
shea: became his' servant, and’ gave 
\him: presents, 


_ Israel (the ten tribes) carried 
away into Assyria. 


4 And the king of Assyria found 
conspiracy in Hoshea: for he had 
sent messengers to So king of 
Egypt, and brought no present to 
the king of Assyria, as he had done — 
year by year: therefore the king of 
Assyria shut him up, and bound 
him in prison. 

5 Then the king of Assyria came 
up throughout all the land, and 
went up. to Samaria, and besieged 
it three years, 

6. In the ninth year of Hoshea the 
jking of Assyria took Samaria, and 
carried £Israel away into Assyria, 
and placed them in Halah and in 
Habor by the river of Gozan, and 
in the cities of the Medes. 


The sins for which Israel was 
carried into captivity. 


from the forefront of the house,) Bic. 740. 
from between the altar and the 
house: of the Lorp, and put it on 
the north side of the altar. 

15 And king Ahaz commanded 
. Urijah the priest, saying, Upon the 
great altar burn the morning burnt- 
offering, and the evening “meat- 
offering, and the king’s burnt-sacri- 
fice, and his meat-offering, with the 
burnt-offering of all the people of 
the land, and their meat-offering, 
and their drink-offerings; and sprin- 
kle upon it all the blood of the 
bufnt-offering, and all the blood of 
the sacrifice: and the brasen altar 
shall be for me to enquire by. 

16 Thus did Urijah the priest, ac- 
cording to all that king Ahaz com-| .. 
manded. a Lit. rneal. 

17 And king Ahaz cut off °the|s1 Ki.7.27,28. 
borders of the bases, and removed eas = 
the laver from off them; and took|¢! ®-7-23,25- 
down the ‘sea from off the ‘brasen|d 2: Chr.28:27. 
oxen that were under it, and put it = 
upon a pavement of stones. PSS Sib 
18 And'the covert for the sabbath! f2 Ki.18:9. 


‘that they had built in the house, its 7 For so-it was that the children 
and the king’s entry without,|* oo (i lof Israel had Jsinnéd against the 
turned he from the house of the| 23;,2 Ki.24.. |LORD their God, which had brought 
Lorw for the king of Assyria. 10-16. (Gen. |them up out of the land of Egypt, 


H 1223S from under the hand of Pharaoh 
! Rom.11.26.) |22 
“Frosetiah (2 Cie Sac 26,27). |hse nations [EREO! BEY, and had feared othe 


gods, 
Ber he ey gh he acteet bass a 8 And walked in the statutes of 


hie. nations: 


: 8 ) the “heathen, n the LorpD cast 
pastse et “iid beeing he chroni- ue out frais ieee: Waele 
cles of the kings of Judah; Israel, > king: 

20 And Ahaz slept with his which has ites piece 


fathers, and ¢was buried with his 
fathers in the city of David: and 
pens his son reigned in his 
stead. 


9 And the children of Israel did 
secretly those things.that were not 
right against the Lorp their God, 
and they built them high places’ in 
CHAPTER 17. ail’ their cities, from the tower of 


4 the wat : i 
Reign of Hoshea over Israel. 10 beers erie tpe aaa 


TW the twelfth year of Ahaz king and ‘groves in every high hill, and 
of Judah began “Hoshea the son under every green tree: 
of Elah to reign in Samaria over] _11 And there they burnt incense 
Israel nine years. an all the high places, as did. the 
2 And he did that which was| heathen whom the Lorb carried 
evil'in the sight of the Lorb, but nqt away before them; and wrought 
as the kings of Israel that were be- wicked things to provoke the LORD 
fore him. 1 bs aes 
Israel becomes tributary to the Lorn hela eee 
NM Assyria. shallinot:do this thing; — : 
3 Against him came up JShal- 13: Yet the Lorp testified:against 
an : mR ra tee nt ee 


1Cf. Deut. 28, 15-68. From this captivity the ten tribes h 
‘stored to Palestine. A remnant of Judah returned under eculstinbedee tes dee 
Nehemiah, and individuals out of the ten tribes (called, after the division of ’Solo- 
mon’s kingdom, “Israel!” in the historical books; and Prophets, also “Ephraim” b: 
the latter) went back, but the national restoration is yet to be fulfilled See Prices 
finian Covenant, Deut. 30. 1-9; Kingdom. 2 Sam, 7, 8-17, refs, { 


442 


bys i alg a a a 


17 14] 


Israel, and against Judah, by all 


the prophets, and by all the 4seers, 
saying, Turn ye from your evil 
ways, and keep my commandments 
and my statutes, according to all 
the law which I commanded your 
fathers, and which I sent to you by 
my servants the prophets. 

14 Notwithstanding they would 
not hear, but ‘hardened their necks, 
like to the neck of their fathers, 
that did not believe in the LORD 
their God. 

15 Andthey rejected his statutes, 
and his covenant that he made with 
their fathers, and his testimonies 
which he testified against them; 
and they followed vanity, and “be- 
came vain, and went after the 
fheathen that were round about 
them, concerning whom the LoRD 
had charged them, that they should 
not do like them. 

16 And they left all the command- 
ments of the LorpD their God, and 
&made them molten images, even 
two calves, and made a “grove, and 
worshipped all the host of heaven, 
and served Baal. 

17 And they caused their sons and 
their daughters to pass through the 
fire, and ‘used divination and en- 
chantments, and sold themselves to 
do evil in the sight of the LORD, to 
provoke him to anger. 

18 Therefore the LORD was very 
angry with Israel, and removed 
them out of his sight: there was 
none left but the tribe of Judah 


only. 

19 Also Judah kept not the com- 
mandments of the LorD their God, 
but walked in the statutes of Israel 
which they made. 

20 And the LorD rejected all the 
seed of Israel, and afflicted them, 
and delivered them into the hand 
of spoilers, until he had cast them 
out of his sight. 

21 For he rent Israel from the 
house of David; and they made 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat king: 
and Jeroboam drave Israel from 
following the LorD, and made them 
sin a great sin. 

22 For the children of Israel 
walked in all the sins of Jeroboam 
which he did; they departed not 
from them; 

23 Until the LorD removed Israel 
out of his sight, ’as he had said by 
all his servants the prophets. mSo 
was Israel carried away out of 
their own land to Assyria unto this 


day. 


iI KINGS. 


B.C. 721. Th 


a1 Sam.9.9. 


b Jer.18.11; 
25:53)35cL5~ 


¢ Deut.31.27; 
Prov.29.1. 


d Deut.32.21; 
1 Ki.16.13. 


e Psa.115.8; 
Rom.1.21. 


fi.e. nations. 
g 1 Ki.12.28. 


h See Deut. 
16.21. 


4 Deut.18.10. 

j 1 Ki.11,13,32. 

k 2 Ki.13.3; 
15.29. 


21 Ki.14.16. 
mv.6. 
n v.30. 


o Psa.19.9, 
note, 


e king of Assyria repeoples 
the cities of Israel. 


24 And the king of Assyria 
brought men from *Babylon, and 
from Cuthah, and from Ava, and 
from Hamath, and from Sephar- 
vaim, and placed them in the cities 
of Samaria instead of the children 
of Israel: and they possessed Sa- 
maria, and dwelt in the cities 
thereof. 

25 And so it was at the beginning 
of their dwelling there, that they 
ofeared not the Lorp: therefore the 
LorD sent lions among them, which 
slew some of them. 

26 Wherefore they spake to the 
king of Assyria, saying, The na- 
tions which thou hast removed, and 
placed in the cities of Samaria, 
know not the manner of the God of 
the land: therefore he hath sent 
lions among them, and, behold, 
they slay them, because they know 
not the manner of the God of the 
land. 

27 Then the king of Assyria com- 
manded, saying, Carry thither one 
of the priests whom ye brought 
from thence; and let them go and 
dwell there, and let him teach them 
the manner of the God of the land. 

28 Then one of the priests whom 
they had carried away from Sama- 
ria came and dwelt in Beth-el, and 
taught them how they should °fear 
the LorD. 

29 Howbeit every nation made 
gods of their own, and put them in 
the houses of the high places which 
the Samaritans had made, every 
nation in their cities wherein they 
dwelt. 

30 And the men of Babylon made 
Succoth-benoth, and the men of 
Cuth made Nergal, and the men of 
Hamath made Ashima, 

31 And the Avites made Nibhaz 
and Tartak, and the Sepharvites 
burnt their children in fire to 
Adrammelech and Anammelech, 
the gods of Sepharvaim. 

32 So they °feared the LorD, and 
made unto themselves of the lowest 
of them priests of the high places, 
which sacrificed for them in the 
houses of the high places. 

33 They feared the LorpD, and 
served their own gods, after the 
manner cf the nations whom they 
carried away from thence. 

34 Unto this day they do after the 
former manners: they °fear not the 
Lorp, neither do they after their 


a= 


17 35) II KINGS. ~ ipis 


Israel; so that after him was non e 
like him among all the kings of Ju- 
dah, nor any that were before him. 

6 For he clave to the Lorp, and 
departed not from following him, 
but kept his commandments, which 
the LorD commanded Moses. 


statutes, or after their ordinances, 
or after the law and commandment 
which the LorD commanded the 
children of Jacob, whom he named 
Israel; 

35 With whom the Lorp had 
madeacovenant, and charged them, 


saying, Ye shall not fear other gods, 7 And the LorpD was. with him; 
nor bow yourselves to them, nor and he prospered whithersoever he 
serve them, nor sacrifice to them: went forth: and he rebelled against 

36 But the Lord, who brought the king of Assyria, and served him 
you up out of the land of Egypt not. 


with great power and a stretched 


BA) aaia.+ Trinnctehall ie mat ei Hezekiah victorious over the 


him ‘shall ye worship, and to him P gee ; 
shall ye do sacrifice. 8 He smote the Philistines, even 
37 And the statutes, and the ordi- unto Gaza, and the borders thereof, 
nances, and the law, and the com- from the tower of the watchmen to 
mandment, which he wrote for you, the fenced city. ‘ 
ye shall observe to do for evermore;|c Psa.19.9, 9 And it came to pass in the 
and ye shall not fear other gods. note. |fourth year of king Hezekiah, which 
38 And the covenant that I have}, <,. Deut. was the seventh year of Hoshea son 
jo sae re a ets not ire, 16.21. of Elah king of lesecl that Shal- 
neither shall ye fear other gods. maneser king 0} ssyria came up 
39 But the Lorp your God ye ao ope) against Samaria, and besieged it. 
shall “fear; and he shall deliver you 10 And at the end of three years 


out of the hand of all your enemies.|¢ Times of the |they took it: even in the sixth year 
40 Howbeit they did aot hearken,| Gentiles. [of Hezekiah, that is the ninth year 
but they did after their former] 2ki2¢1-01. |of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria 
manner. (Lk.21.24; was taken. : 
41 So these nations “feared the} Rev-©19) | 11 And the king of Assyria 4did 
Lorn, and served their graven im-|cone talent (Carry away Israel unto Assyria, and 


ages, both their children, and their} (silver) = put them in Halah and in Habor by 
children’s children: as did their sIGsG Ge ithe river of Gozan, and in the cities 
fathers, so do they unto this day. . of the Medes: 
f One talent 12 Because they obeyed not the 
CHAPTER 18. geld = [Voice of the Tage their God, but 
. C $29,085. transgressed his covenant, and all 
Reign of geyser 2) Judah Kites, |t#at Moses the servant of the LoRD 
; eh ahs 2 haat commanded, and would not hear 
New it are cr in the ne them, nor do them. 
year of Hoshea son o a as 
king of Israel, that Hezekiah the Sennacherib invades Judah. 
son of Ahaz king of Judah began 13 Now in the fourteenth year of 
to reign. king Hezekiah did Sennacherib 
2 Twenty and five years old was king of Assyria come up against all 
he when he began to reign; and he the fenced cities of Judah, and took 
Teigned twenty and nine years in them. 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name also 14 And Hezekiah king of Judah 
was Abi, the daughter of Zachariah. sent to the king of Assyria to La- 


3 And he did that which was 


3 Ar chish, saying, I ha ff ; 
right in the sight of the LorpD, ac- we or cudleds aay 


turn from me: that which thou 


cording to all that David his father puttest on me will I bear. And the 
did. king of Assyria appointed unto 
Revival under Hezekiah Fee Serato ive > pee fee | 

(2 Chr. 29. 3-31. 21). ftalents of gold enya ee 

4 He removed the high places, and 15 And Hezekiah egave him all 


brake the images, and cut down the 


the silver that was : 
®groves, and brake in pieces the found in the 


house of the Lorpb, and in the 


brasen serpent that Moses had treasures of the king’ 

made: for unto those days the chil- 16 At that time Richtee! cut 

dren of Israel did burn incense to off the gold from the doors of the 

it: and he called it Nehushtan. temple of the Lorp, and from the 
9 He “trusted in the LorD God of pillars which Hezekiah king of Ju- 


18 17] 


dah had overlaid, and gave it to the 
king of Assyria. 


Sennachertb seeks to terrify the 
‘ae of Jerusalem (2 Chr. 
. 9-19). 


17 And the king of Assyria sent 
Tartan and Rabsaris and Rab-sha- 
keh from Lachish to king Hezekiah 
with a great host against Jerusa- 
lem. And they went up and came 
to Jerusalem. And when they were 
come up, they came and stood by 
the conduit of the upper pool, ¢which 
isin the highway of the fuller’s field. 

18 And when they had called to 
the king, there came out to them 
Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which 
was over the household, and 
Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son 
of Asaph the recorder. 

19 And Rab-shakeh said unto 
them, Speak ye now to Hezekiah, 
Thus saith the great king, the king 
of Assyria, °What confidence is this 
wherein thou trustest? 

20 Thou sayest, (but they are 
but ‘vain words,) I have counsel 
and strength for the war. Now on 
whom dost thou trust, that thou re- 
bellest against me? 

21 4Now, behold, thou trustest 
upon the staff of this bruised reed,| j or, deceiv- 
even upon Egypt, on which if a} eth 
manlean, it will gointo his hand, and), » 4319.12: 
pierce it: so 1s Pharaoh king of] 2 Chr.32.14; 
Egypt unto all that trust on him. Isa.10.9-11. 

22 But if ye say unto me, We!,, xi49 13 
trust in the LorD our God: is not ext 
that he, ‘whose high places and|m2 Ki.17.24, 
whose altars Hezekiah hath taken| 4’? 
away, and hath said to Judah and|» Dan.3.15. 
Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before 
this altar in Jerusalem? GLEE 

23 Now therefore, I pray thee, 
give fpledges to my lord the king of 
Assyria, and I will deliver thee two 
thousand horses, if thou be able on 
thy part to set riders upon them. 

24 How then wilt thou turn away 
the face of one captain of the least 
of my master’s servants, and put 
thy trust on Egypt for chariots and 
for horsemen? : 

25 Am I now come up without; 
the LorD against this place to de-; 
stroy it? ~The LorD said to me, Go 
up against this land, and destroy it. 


The Jewish answer to Rab-sha- 
keh’s threats. 


26 Then said Eliakim the son of 
Hilkiah, and Shebna, and_Joah, 
unto Rab-shakeh, Speak, I_ pray 
thee, to thy servants in the Syrian 


a {sa.7.3. 
6 2 Chr.32.10. 


the lips. 

d Ezk.29.6,7. | 

ev.4; 2 Chr. 
31.1;-32.12. 
Or, 
hostages. 

g 2 Chr.32.15, 


h Or, seek my 
favour. 


# Deut.8.7,8. 


445 


II KINGS. 


[18 37 


language; for we understand it: and 
talk not with us in the Jews’ lan- 
/guage in the ears of the people that 
are on the wall. 


Rab-shakeh’s further insolence. 


27 But Rab-shakeh said unto 
them, Hath my master sent me to 
thy master, and to thee, to speak 
these words? hath he not sent me 
to the men which sit on the wall, 


c Heb. word of 


that they may eat their own dung, 
and drink their own piss with you? 

28 Then Rab-shakeh stood and 
cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ 
language, and spake, saying, Hear 
the word of the great king, the king 
of Assyria: 

29 Thus saith the king, sLet not 
Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall 
not be able to deliver you out of his 
hand: 

30 Neither let Hezekiah make you 
trust in the LORD, saying, The 
LORD will surely deliver us, and 
|this city shall not be delivered into 
the hand of the king of Assyria. 

31 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for 
thus saith the king of Assyria, 
hMake an agreement with me by a 
present, and come out to me, and 
then eat ye every man of his own 
vine, and every one of his fig tree, 
and drink ye every one the waters 
of his cistern: 

32 Until I come and take you 
away to a land like your own land, 
ig land of corn and wine, a land of 
bread and vineyards, a land of oil 
olive and of honey, that ye may live, 
and not die: and hearken not unto 
Hezekiah, when he Jpersuadeth you, 
saying, The Lorp will deliver us. 

33 Hath any of the gods of the 
nations delivered at all his land out 
of the hand of the king of Assyria? 

34 'Where are the gods of Ha- 
math, and of Arpad? where are the 
gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and 
mIvah? have they delivered Sama- 
ria out of mine hand? 

35 Who are they among all the 
gods of the countries, that have de- 
livered their country out of mine 
hand, “that the LorpD should de- 
liver Jerusalem out of mine hand? 

36 But the people held their 
peace, and answered him not a 
word: for the king’s commandment 
was, saying, Answer him not. 

37 Then came Eliakim the son of 
Hilkiah, which was over the house- 
hold, and Shebna the scribe, and 
Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, 
to Hezekiah °with their clothes 


a 


B19 1] 


rent, and told him the words of 
Rab-shakeh. : 


CHAPTER 19. 
Hezekiah’s message to Isaiah. 


ND 4it came to pass, when king 

Hezekiah heard it, that he rent 

his clothes, and covered himself 

with sackcloth, and went into the 
house of the LORD. : 

2 And he sent Eliakim, which was 


| over the household, and Shebna 


the scribe, and the elders of the 
priests, covered with sackcloth, to 
‘Tsaiah the prophet the son of 
Amoz. ; ‘ 

3 And they said unto him, Thus 
saith Hezekiah, This day is a day 
of trouble, and of rebuke, and blas- 
phemy: for the children are come to 
the birth, and there is not strength 
to bring forth. 

4 ‘It may be the Lorp thy God 
will hear all the words of Rab- 
shakeh, whom the king of Assyria 
his master hath sent to reproach 
the living God; and will reprove 
the words which the Lorp thy 
God hath heard: wherefore lift up 
thy prayer for the remnant that 
are left. 

5 So the servants of king Heze- 
kiah came to Isaiah. 


Isaiah’s answer. 


6 And Isaiah said unto them, 
Thus shall ye say to your master, 
Thus saith the LorD, Be not afraid 
of the words which thou hast heard, 
with which the ¢servants of the king 
of Assyria have blasphemed me. 

7 Behold, I will send a fblast upon 
him, and he shall hear a rumour, 
and shall return to his own land; 


and I will cause him tq fall by the 
sword in his own land. 


. Sennacherib defies the God of 
Hezekiah (2 Chr. 32.17). 


8 So Rab-shakeh returned, and 
found the king. of Assyria warring 
against Libnah: for he had heard 
that he was departed from ¢Lachish. 

9 And £when he heard say of Tir- 
hakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he 
is come out to fight against thee: 
he sent messengers again unto 
Hezekiah, saying, 

10 Thus shall ye speak to Heze- 
kiah king of Judah, saying, Let not 
thy God in whom thou “trustest 
deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem 
shall not be delivered into the hand 


a6 an a *{ : 
Il KINGS. 


B.C. 710. 


a Isa.37.1. 


b Lk.3.4, called 
aias. 


c 2 Sam.16.12 
d Isa.37.6. 
e 2 Ki.18.17. 


f vs.35-37; 
Jer.51.1. 


g 1 Sam.23.27. 


h Psa.2.12, 
note. 


i Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). 2 Ki. 
20.3. (Gen. 
15.2; Hab.3. 
1-16.) 

j Psa.31.2. 


k Psa.115.4; 
Jer.10.3. 


/ Psa.83.18. 
m Isa.37.21. 
n Lam.2.13. 


of the king of Assyria. 


11 Behold, thou hast heard what 
the kings of Assyria have done to 
all lands, by destroying them ut- 
terly: and shalt thou be delivered? 

12 Have the gods of the nations 
delivered them which my fathers 
have destroyed; as Gozan, and 
Haran, and Rezeph, and the chil- 
dren of Eden which were in The- 
lasar? 

13. Where is the king of Hamath, 
and the king of Arpad, and the king 


- lof the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, 


and Ivah? & 
Hezekiah’s prayer (2 Chr. 32. 20). 


14 And Hezekiah received the 
letter of the hand of the messen- 
gers, and read it: and Hezekiah 
went up into the house of the Lorb, 
and spread it before the Lorp. 

15 And Hezekiah prayed before 
the Lorp, and ‘said, O Lorp God 
of Israel, which dwellest between 
the cherubims, thou art the God, 
even thou alone, of all the kingdoms 
of the earth; thou hast made heaven 
and earth. | 

16 LorpD, Jbow down thine ear, 
and hear: open, LorD, thine eyes, 
and see: and hear the words of 
Sennacherib, which hath sent him 
to reproach the living God. 

17 Of a truth, Lorp, the kings of 
Assyria have destroyed the nations 
and their lands, 

18 And have cast their gods into 
the fire: for they were no gods, but 
‘the work of men’s hands, wood 
and stone: therefore they have de- 
stroyed them. 

19 Now therefore, O LorpD our 
God, I beseech thee, save thou us 
out of his hand, ‘that all the king- 
doms of the earth may know that 
te: art the LoRD God, even thou 
only. 


Jehovah’s answer through 
Isaiah. 


20 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz 
sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus 
saith the Lorp God of Israel, 
™That which thou hast prayed to 
me against Sennacherib king of As- 
sytia I have heard. 

21 This is the word that the 
LorpD hath spoken concerning him: 
The virgin "the daughter of Zion 
hath despised thee, and laughed 
thee to scorn; the daughter of Jeru- 
salem hath shaken her head at thee. 

22 Whom hast thou reproached 


and blasphemed? and against whom 
hast thou exalted thy voice, and 


& 


‘lifted up thine eyes on high? even 
against the Holy One of Israel. _ 

23 By thy messengers thou hast 
reproached the Lord, and hast said, 
With the multitude of my chariots 
I am come up to the height of the 
mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, 
and will cut down the tall cedar 
trees thereof, and the choice fir 
trees thereof: and I will enter into 
the lodgings of his borders, and into 
the forest of his Carmel. 

24 I have’ digged and drunk 
strange waters, and with the sole 
of my feet have I dried up all the 
rivers of besieged places. 

25 Hast thou not heard long ago 
how I have done it, and of ancient 
times that I have formed it? now 
have I brought it to pass, that thou 
shouldest be to lay waste fenced 
cities into ruinous heaps. 

26 Therefore their inhabitants 
were of small power, they were dis- 
mayed and confounded; they were 
as the grass of the field, and as the 
green herb, as the grass on the 
house tops, and as corn blasted 
before it be grown up. r 

27 But I know thy abode, and thy 
going out, and thy coming in, and 
thy rage against me. 

28 Because thy rage against me 
and thy tumult is come up into mine 
ears, therefore ¢I will put my hook 
in thy nose, and my bridle in thy 
lips, and I will turn thee back by 
the way by which thou camest. 

29 And this shall be a °sign unto 
thee, Ye shall eat this year such 
things as grow of themselves, and 
inthe second year that which spring- 
eth of the same; and in the third 
year sow ye, and reap, and plant 
vineyards, and eat the fruits there- 


of. 

30 And the remnant that is es- 
caped of the house of Judah shall 
yet again take root downward, and 
bear fruit upward. 

31 For out of Jerusalem shall go 
forth a remnant, and they that es- 
cape out of mount Zion: the zeal of 
the Lorb of hosts shall do this. 

32 Therefore thus saith the LORD 
concerning the king of Assyria, He 
shall not come into this city, nor 
shoot an arrow there, nor come be- 
fore it with shield, nor cast a bank 
against it. 

33 By the way that he came, by 
the same shall he return, and shall 
not come into this city, saith the 
Lorp. 

34 For <I will defend this city, to 


, } A 
II KINGS. 


B.C.'710. 


a Job 41.2; 
Ezk.29.4; 
38.4; Amos 
4.2. 

b 1 Sam.2.34; 
2 Ki.20.8,9; 
Isa.7.11,14; 
Lk.2.12. 

c 2 Ki.20.6. 

d1 Ki.11.12, 
13. 

e 2 Chr.32.21; 
Isa.37.36. 


Ff Heb.1.4, 
note, 


g Miracles 
(O.T.). 2 Ki. 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 

i See 1 Ki.8, 
61. 

j 2 Ki.19.20; 
Psa.65.2. 

2 Psa.39.12; 
56.8. 


12 Ki.19,34, 


| 


447 


i RN 
[20 7 
save it, for mine own sake, and 


¢for my servant David’s sake. 


Jehovah destroys the Assyrian 
army (2 Chr. 32. 21, 22), 


35 And “it came to pass_ that)... 
night, that the fangel of the Lorp\/ ‘~~ 


went out, and smote in the camp 
of the Assyrians an hundred four- 
score and five thousand: and when 
they arose early in the morning, 
behold, they were all dead corpses. 


Death of Sennacherib 
OriChr Soars 


36 So Sennacherib king 
departed, and went and 
and dwelt at Nineveh. 

37 And it came to pass, as he was 
worshipping in the house of Nis- 
toch his god, that Adrammelech 
and Sharezer his sons smote him 
with the sword: and they escaped 
into the land of Armenia. And 
Eeeason his son reigned in his 
stead. 


of Assyria 
returned, 


CHAPTER 20. 


Hezekiah’s illness and recovery 
(2 Chr. 32. 24). 


1 those days was Hezekiah sick 
unto death. And the prophet 
Isaiah the son of Amoz came to 
him, and said unto him, Thus saith 
the Lorpb, Set thine house in order; 
for thou shalt die, and not live. 


| 2 Then he turned his face to the 


wall, and prayed unto the Lorpb, 
saying, 

3 I beseech thee, O Lorp, re- 
member now how I have walked 
before thee in truth and with a ‘per- 
fect heart, and have done that 


which is good in thy sight. And 
Hezekiah wept sore. 
4 And it came to pass, afore 


Isaiah was gone out into the middle 
court, that the word of the LorD 
came to him, saying, 

5 Turn again, and tell Hezekiah 
the captain of my people, Thus 
saith the Lorp, the God of David 
thy father, JI have heard thy prayer, 
I have seen *thy tears: behold, I 
will heal thee: on the third day 
thou shalt go up unto the house of 
the Lorp. 

6 And I will add unto thy days 
fifteen years; and I will deliver 
thee and this city out of the hand 
of the king of Assyria; and /I will 
defend this city for mine own sake, 
and for my servant David’s sake. 

7 And Isaiah said, Take a lump of 


-< 


20 8] 


figs. 
the boil, and he recovered. : 

8 And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, 
eWhat shall be the sign that the 
Lorp will heal me, and that I shall 
go up into the house of the LoRD 
the third day? . : 

9 And Isaiah said, This sign 
shalt thou have of the Lorb, that 
the Lorp will do the thing that he 
hath spoken: shall the shadow go 
forward ten degrees, or go back 
ten degrees? : 

10 And Hezekiah answered, It is 
a light thing for the shadow to go 
down ten degrees: nay, but let the 
shadow return backward ten de- 
grees. : 

11 And Isaiah the Fae cried 
unto the Lorp: and ‘he brought 
the shadow ten degrees “backward, 
by which it had gone down in the 
dial of Ahaz. 


Hezekiah imprudently exposes 
his treasures to men of Baby- 
Jon (2 Chr. 32. 27-31). 


12 At that time Berodach-bala- 
dan, the son of Baladan, king of 
Babylon, sent letters and a present 
unto Hezekiah: for hehad heard that 
Hezekiah had been sick. 

13 And ‘Hezekiah hearkened unto 
them, and shewed them all the 
house of his precious things, the sil- 
ver, and the gold, and the spices, 
and the precious ointment, and all 
the house of his armour, and all that 
was found in his treasures: there 
was nothing in his house, nor in all 
his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed 
them not. 

14 Then came Isaiah the prophet 
unto king Hezekiah, and said unto 
him, What said these men? and from 
whence came they unto thee? And 
Hezekiah said, They are come from 
a far country, even from Babylon. 

15 And he said, What have they 
seen in thine house? And Hezekiah 
answered, All the things that are 
in mine house have they seen: there 
is nothing among my treasures that 
I have not shewed them. 

16 And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, 
Hear the word of the LoRD. 

17 Behold, the days come, that 
all that is in thine house, and that 
which thy fathers have laid up in 
store unto this day, /shall be carried 
into Babylon: nothing shall be left, 
saith the Lorp. 

18 And of thy sons that shall issue 
from thee, which thou shalt beget, 
&shall they take away; “and they 


II KINGS. 


And they: took and laid it on} 


a Jud.6.17,37, 
39; Isa.7.11, 
14; 38.22. 


b Isa.38.7,8. 


¢ Josh.10.12- 
14; Isa.38.8. 


d Miracles 


f 2 Ki.24,.13; 
25.13; 


13; 
Jer.27.21,22; 
52.17. 


& 2 Ki.24.12; 
2 Chr.33.11. 


h Fulfilled, 
Dan.1.3. 


7 Neh.3.16. 
j 2 Chr.32.30. 
k 2 Chr.32.33. 


lie. nations. 


m Deut.16.21. 


n 2 Sam.7.13; 
1 Ki.8.29; 
9.3. 


o Lev.18.21; 
2 


20.2; 
2 Ki.16.3; 
17.17, 

p Lev.19.26; 


Deut.18.10; 
2 Ki.17.17, 


(21 @ 


' shall be eunuchs in the palace of the 
king of Babylon. 


-: 


7 
1$ Then said Hezekiah unto Isa- 
iah, Good is the word of the Lora 


{which thou hast spoken. And he 
said, Js it not good, if peace and 
[truth be in my days? 


Death of Hezekiah (2 Chr. 32. 
32, 33). 


20 And the rest of the acts of Hez- 
ekiah, and all his might, and how 
he ‘made a pool, and a conduit, and 
Jbrought water into the city, are 
ness not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 

} 21 And #Hezekiah slept with his 
fathers: and Manasseh his son 
teigned in his stead. 


CHAPTER 21. 


Accession and reign of Manas- 
se his evil ways (2 Chr. 33. 
sO) 


MANASSEH was twelve years 
old when he began to reign, 
and reigned fifty and five years in 
Jerusalem. And his mother’s name 
was Hephzi-bah. 

2 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the Lorp, after 
the abominations of the ‘heathen, 
whom the LorD cast out before the 
children of Israel. 

3 For he built up again the high 
places which Hezekiah his father 
had destroyed; and he reared up 
altars for Baal, and made a grove, 
as did Ahab king of Israel; and 
worshipped all the host of heaven, 
and served them. 

} 4 And he built altars in the house 
of the LorD, of which the Lorp said, 
In “Jerusalem will I put my name. 

5 And he built altars for all the 
host of heaven in the two courts of 
\the house of the Lorp. 

6 °And he made his son pass 
through the fire,and observed ’times, 
and used enchantments, and dealt 
with familiar spirits and wizards: 
he wrought much wickedness in the 
sight of the Lorp, to provoke him 
}to anger. 

7 And he set a graven image of 
the ™grove that he had made in the 
thouse, of which the Lorp said to 
David, and to Solomon his son, In 
| this house, and in J erusalem, which 
I have chosen out of all tribes of 
Israel, will I put my name for ever: 

8 Neither will I make the feet of 
Israel move any more out of the 
land which I gave their fathers ; only 


a 
21 9] 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 698. 


[22 5 


ret ewes 2 ee a fr 


if they will observe to do according 
to all that I have commanded them, 
and according to all the law that my 
servant Moses commanded them. 

9 But they hearkened not: and 
Manasseh seduced them to do more 
evil than did the nations whom the 
Lorp destroyed before the children 
of Israel. 


Jehovah’s message concerning 
Manasseh’s idolatries. 


10 And the Lorpb spake by his 
seryants the prophets, saying, 

11 *Because Manasseh king of Ju- 
dah hath done these abominations, 
band hath done wickedly above ail 
that the Amorites did, which were 
before him, and hath made Judah 
also to sin with his idols: 

12 Therefore thus saith the LorpD 
God of Israel, Behold, I am bring- 
ing such evil upon Jerusalem and 
Judah, that whosoever heareth of 
it, both ¢his ears shall tingle. 

13 And I will stretch over Jeru- 
salem the 4line of Samaria, and the 
plummet of the house of Ahab: and 
I will wipe Jerusalem as a man 
wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turn- 
ing it upside down. 

14 And I will forsake the remnant 
of mine inheritance, and deliver 
them into the hand of their ene- 
mies; and they shall become a prey 
and a spoil to all their enemies; 

15 Because they have done that 
which was evil in my sight, and 
have provoked me to anger, since 
the day their fathers came forth out 
of Egypt, even unto this day. 


Manasseh’s continued reign and 
; death (2 Chr. 33. 18-20). 


16 “Moreover Manasseh shed in- 
nocent blood very much, till he had 
filled Jerusalem from one end to 
another; beside his sin wherewith 
he made Judah to sin, in doing that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
Lorp. 

17 Now the ‘rest of the acts of 
&’Manasseh, and all that he did, and 
his sin that he sinned, are they not 
written in the book of the chroni- 
cles of the kings of Judah? : 

18 And Manasseh slept with his 
fathers, and was buried in the gar- 
den of his own house, in the garden 
of Uzza: and Amon his son reigned 
in his stead. 


Reign of Amon over Judah 
(2 Chr. 33. 20-23). 


19 “Amon was twenty and two 


a 2 Ki.23.26, 
27; 24.3,4; 
Jer.15.4. 

6 1 Ki.21.26. 


¢1 Sam.3.11; 
Jer.19.3. 


d Isa.34.11; 
Lam.?2.8; 
Amos 7.7,8. 

e 2 Ki.24.4, 


f 2 Chr.33.11- 
19. 


g 2 Chr.33.20. 


h 2 Chr.33. 
21-23. 


#1 Ki.11.33. 
7 2 Chr.33.24, 
25. 


k Mt.1.10, 


called Josias. 


12 Chr.34.1. 
m Josh.15.39. 
n Deut.5.32. 
o 2 Chr.34.8. 


» 2 Ki.12.11, 
12,14. 


. 449 


years old when he began to reign, 
and he reigned two years in Jeru- 
salem. And his mother’s name 
was Meshullemeth, the daughter of 
Haruz of Jotbah. 

20 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LoRD, as his: 
father Manasseh did. 

21 And he walked in all the way 
that his father walked in, and 
served the idols that his father 
served, and worshipped them: 

22 And he ‘forsook the LoRD God 
of his fathers, and walked not in 
the way of the Lorn. 


Death of Amon: accession of 
Josiah (2 Chr. 33. 24, 25). 


23 jJAnd the servants of Amon 
conspired against him, and slew the 
king in his own house. 

24 And the people of the land slew 
all them that had conspired against 
king Amon; and the people of the 


jland made Josiah his son king in 


his stead. 

25 Now the rest of the acts of 
Amon which he did, are they not 
written in the book of the chroni- 
cles of the kings of Judah? 

26 And he was buried in his 
sepulchre in the garden of Uzza: 
and *Josiah his son reigned in his 


stead. 
CHAPTER 22. 
Reign of Josiah (2 Chr. 34. 1). 


OSIAH was ‘eight years old 
when he began to reign, and he 
reigned thirty and one years in 
Jerusalem. And his mother’s name 
was Jedidah, the daughter of Ada- 
iah of ™Boscath. 

2 And he did that which was 
right in the sight of the Lorp, and 
walked in all the way of David his 
father, and “turned not aside to the 
right hand or to the left. 


The repairing of the temple 
(2 Chr. 34. 8-13). 


3 oAnd it came to pass in the 
eighteenth year of king Josiah, that 
the king sent Shaphan the son of 
Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the 
scribe, to the house of the Lorb, 
saying, 

4 Goup to Hilkiah the high priest, 
that he may sum the silver which 
is brought into the house of the 


Lorp, which the keepers of 
the door have gathered of the 
people: 


5 And let them ?deliver it into the 
hand of the doers of the work, that 


have the oversight of the house 
of the Lorb: and let them give it to 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 624. 


the doers of the work which is in| 


the house of the LorD, to repair the 
breaches of the heuse, ; 

6 Unto carpenters, and builders, 
and masons, and to buy timber and 
hewn stone to repair the house. 

7 Howbeit there was no reckoning 
made with them of the money that 
was delivered into their hand, be- 
cause they dealt faithfully. 


The law of Moses discovered 
(2 Chr. 34. 14, 15). 


8 And Hilkiah the high priest 
said unto Shaphan the scribe, 21 
have found the book of the law in 
the house of the Lorp. And Hil- 
kiah gave the book to Shaphan, 
and he read it. 

9 And Shaphan the scribe came 
to the king, and brought the king 
word again, and said, Thy servants 
have gathered the money that was 
found in the house, and have deliv- 
ered it into the hand of them that 
do the work, that have the over- 
sight of the house of the Lorp. 

10 And Shaphan the scribe shewed 
the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest 
hath delivered me a book. And 
Shaphan read it before the king. 


“By the law is the knowledge of 
sin” (2 Chr. 34. 16-21). 


11 And it came to pass, when the 
king had heard the words of the 
book of the law, that he rent his 
clothes. 

12 And the king commanded Hil- 
kiah the priest, and Ahikam the son 
of Shaphan, and °Achbor the son of 
Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, 
and Asahiah a servant of the king’s, 
saying, 

13 Go ye, enquire of the Lorp for 
me, and for the people, and for all 
Judah, concerning the words ‘of 
this book that is found: for great is 
the ‘wrath of the LorD that is kin- 
dled against us, because our fathers 
have not hearkened unto the words 
of this book, to do according unto 
all that which is written concern- 
ing us. 

14 So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahi- 
kam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, 
and Asahiah, went unto Huldah the 
prophetess, the wife of Shallum 
the son of ¢Tilkvah, the son of Har- 
has, keeper of the wardrobe; (now 
she dwelt in Jerusalem in the col- 
hae ;) and they commumned with 

er. 


@ Deut.31. 
24-26; 2 Chr. 
34.14. 

b 2 Chr.34.20. 

c Deut.29.27. 


d@ Tikvath, 
2 Chr.34.22. 


e Deut.29.27; 
Dan.9.11-14. 


f Deut.29. 
25-27. 


g 2 Chr.34.26. 


h Psa.51.17; 
Isa.57.15. 


#1 Ki.21.29, 


j 2 Chr.34. 
29,30. 


k 2 Ki.22.8. 
12 Ki.11.14,17. 


450 


1D ih Pr at OA 


(123 3 


The words of Huldah the proph- 
etess (2 Chr. 34. 22-28). 


15 And she said unto them, Thus 
saith the LorD God of Israel, Tell 
the man that sent you to me, 

16 Thus saith the LorpD, Behold, 
eI will bring evil upon this place, 
and upon the inhabitants thereof, 
even all the words of the book 
which the king of Judah hath read: 

17 ‘Because they have, forsaken 
me, and have burned incense unto 
other gods, that they might pro- 
voke me to anger with all the 
works of their hands; therefore my 
wrath shall be kindled against this 
place, and shall not be quenched. 

18 But to the &king of Judah 
which sent you to enquire of the 
Lorp, thus shall ye say to him, 
Thus saith the LorD God of Israel, 
As touching the words which thou 
hast heard; 

19 ‘Because thine heart was ten- 
der, and thou hast ‘humbled thyself 
before the LORD, when thou heard- 
est what I spake against this place, 
and against the inhabitants thereof, 
that they should become a desola- 
tion and a curse, and hast rent thy 
clothes, and wept before me; I also 
have heard thee, saith the Lorp. 

20 Behold therefore, I will gather 
thee unto thy fathers, and thou 
shalt be gathered into thy grave in 
peace; and thine eyes shall not see 
all the evil which I will bring upon. 
this place. And they brought the 
king word again. 


CHAPTER 23. 


The law read to the people 
(2 Chr. 34, 29, 30). 


Axe Jthe king sent, and they 
gathered unto him all the el- 
ders of Judah and of Jerusalem. 

2 And the king went up into the 
house of the LorD, and all the men 
of Judah and all the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem with him, and the priests, 
and the prophets, and all the peo- 
ple, both small and great: and he 
read in their ears all the words of 
the book of the covenant which 


was found in the house of the 
LORD. 


The king’s covenant 
(2 Chr. 34. 31, 32), 


3 And the king /stood by a pillar, 


and made a covenant before the 
Lorp, to walk after the Lorp, and 
to keep his commandments and his 


i. 


23 4] II KINGS. [23 19 
testimonies and his statutes with 
all their heart and all their soul, 
to perform the words of this cove- 
nant that were written in this book. 


And all the people stood to the 
covenant. 


house of the Lorb, by the chamber 
of Nathan-melech the chamberlain, 
which was in the suburbs, and 
burned the chariots of the sun with 


e. 

12 And the altars that were “on 
the top of the upper chamber of 
Ahaz, which the kings of Judah 
had made, and the altars which 
‘Manasseh had made in the two 
courts of the house of. the Lorb, 
did the king beat down, and brake 


Josiah’s further reformations 
_ (2 Chr. 34. 33). 


4 And the king commanded Hil- 
kiah the high priest, and the priests 
of the second order, and the keepers 
of the door, to bring forth out of the them down from thence, and cast 
temple of the LORD all the vessels the dust of them into the brook 
that were made for Baal, and for|,gcepeut. |Kidron. 
the ¢grove, and for all the host of| 16.21; 2 Ki. 13 And the high places that were 
heaven: and he burned them with-} 21-3,7- before Jerusalem, which were on 
out J dete = ane rn <4 hee 52 Ki.21.3. the right hands of one mount of oor 
ron, i as fo) em. ruption, ich ™ the ki 
Rgganethcbouhar a ¢ See Deut. ©) lof tsrael had builded for *Ashtoreth 

5 And ee put ake the sos Leet alle oa Bboranahibe hf thera eme 
priests, whom the kings of Ju d2Chr.34.4. |and for emosh the abomination 
had ordained to burn incense in the é of the Moabites, and for Milcom 
ay ee fe the ates nl pase oe Seemann ac es he: children of 
and in the places round about Jeru- on, did the king defile. 
salem; them also that burned in-|/Ezk-16.16. 14 And he °brake in pieces the 
cense unto Baal, to the sun, and to}, ..444.10- |images, and cut down the ‘groves, 
the moon, and to the planets, and|" 14. and filled their places with the bones 

6 ae icne Tote the ¢grove|* 1 Sam-2.36. nee Mareower the altar that was at 
from the house of the LORD, with-|iJosh.1s.s.  |Beth-el, and the high place which 
out Jerusalem, unto the brook Kid-| . _|Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who 
ron, and burned it at the brook|/5veiaio; |made Israel to sin, had made, both 
pocen. ee Gite Hocadan to Ezk.23.32, fai ee and he high, Race he 
powder, and cast the powder there- - rake down, and burne e hig 
of upon the 4graves of the children], j.,.1913; | |Place, and stamped it small to pow- 
Bie oktno tenes) dosnt tre fi Fe ee Te ha eee 

e brake down the houses a ; 
eof the sodomites, that were by the|’? *+?1-5- _/he spied the sepulchres that were 
house of the Lorp, ‘where the|m1xKi.11.5,7. |there in the mount, and sent, and 
women wove hangings for the wae the paneer out of the sepulchres. 
“grove. ; an urne: em upon the ar, 

8 And he brought all the priests and polluted it, according to the 
out of sdieicities ‘of Judah ahd de-| 0 Ex.23.24; aword of the LoRD which the man 
filed the high places where the| Pe*?%5- lof God proclaimed, who proclaimed 
bee “ees ati uncer eo) bUE12.28, 

eba to eer-sheba, an rake D 
down the high places of the gates), 4 xi.13.2. that that I see? And the men of the 
that were in the entering in of the 
gate of Joshua the governor of Ser r 1 Ki.13.31. 
city, which were on a man’s left ’ 
hand at the gate of the city. EE igs ean gl 

9 gNevertheless the priests of the 
high places came not up to the altar 
of the LorD in Jerusalem, “but they 
did eat of the unleavened bread 
among their brethren. ‘ 

10 And he defiled Topheth, which 
is in the ‘valley of the children of 
Hinnom, ‘that no man might make 
his son or his daughter to pass 
through the fire to Molech. 

11 And he took away the horses 
that the kings of Judah had given 
to the sun, at the entering in of the 


Judah, and proclaimed these things 
that thou hast done against the 
altar of Beth-el. 

18 And he said, Let him alone; let 
no man move his bones. So they 
let his bones alone, with the bones 
of the "prophet that came out of 
Samaria. 

19 And all the houses also of the 
high places that were ‘in the cities 
of Samaria, which the kings of Is- 
rael had made to provoke the 
Lorp to anger, Josiah took away, 
and did to them according to all 
the acts that he had done in Beth-el. 


451 


23 20} II KINGS. 


20 And he 4slew all the priests of] B.c. 624. 
the high places that were there 
upon the altars, and burned men’s 
bones upon them, and returned to 
Jerusalem. 


The passover kept 
(2 Chr. 35. 1-19). 


21 And the king commanded all 
the people, saying, "Keep the pass- 
over unto the LORD your God, “as 
it 1s written in the book of this cove- 
nant. : 

22 Surely there was not holden 
such a passover from the days of the 
judges that judged Israel, nor in all 
the days of the kings of Israel, nor 
of the kings of Judah; 

23 But in the eighteenth year of 
king Josiah, wherein this Passover 
was holden to the LorD in Jeru- 
salem. 

24 Moreover the workers with 
familiar spirits, and the wizards, 
and the images, and the idols, and 
all the abominations that were 
spied in the land of Judah and in 
Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, 
that he might perform the words of 
the law which were written in the| ; > xi348. 
book that Hilkiah the priest found| “ 
in the house of the Lorp. Jj 2 Chr.36.1. 

25 And 4like unto him was there], Ki.24.18. 
no king before him, that turned to 
the Lorp with all his heart, and Pee eae 
with all his soul, and with all his| iver) = 
might, according to all the law of| $1940. 

oses; neither after him arose 
there any like him. ees 

26 Notwithstanding the Lorp £6150, or 
turned not from the fierceness of] $29,085. 
his great wrath, wherewith his anger n2 Chr.36.4 
was kindled against Judah, because 5 
of all the provocations that Ma-|o2 Ki.24.17. 
nasseh had provoked him withal. > Called 

27 And the Lorp said, I will re- Jakim, Mt.1. 
move Judah also out of my sight,| 11, marg. 
as “I have removed Israel, and will q Jer.22.11:19- 
cast off this city Jerusalem which I Ezk.19.3,4. 
have chosen, and the house of 
which I said, fMy name shall be "3 
there. 


Death of Josiah (2 Chr. 35. 20-27). 


28 Now the rest of the acts of 
Josiah, and all that he did, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 

29 8In his days Pharaoh-nechoh 
king of Egypt went up against the 
king of Assyria to the river Eu- 
phrates;: and king Josiah went 
against him; and he slew him at 
4Megiddo, when he ‘had seen him. 
30 And his servants carried him 


@1 Ki.13.2. 

6 2 Chr.35.1. 

¢ Ex.12.3; 
Lev.23.5; 
Num.9.2; 
Deut.16.2. 

d 2 Ki.18.5. 

e 2 Ki.17.18, 
20;18.11; 
21.13. 

f 1 Ki.8.29; 
9.3; 2 Ki.21. 
4,7. 

g 2 Chr.35.20. 


h Zech.12.11, 


Chr.36.6; 
er.25.1,9; - 
Dan.1.1. 


452 


[242 


in a chariot dead from Megiddo, 
and brought him to Jerusalem, and 
buried him in his own sepulchre. 
jAnd the people of the land took 
Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and 
anointed him, and made him king 
in his father’s stead. 


Reign and dethronement of 
Jehoahaz (2 Chr. 36-1, 2). 


31 Jehoahaz was twenty and 
three years old when he began to 
reign; and he reigned three months 
in Jerusalem. And his mother’s 
name was *Hamutal, the daughter 
of Jeremiah of Libnah. 

32 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the Lorp, ac- 
cording to all that his fathers had 
done. 

33 And Pharaoh-nechoh put him - 
in bands at Riblah in the land of 
Hamath, that he might not reign 
in Jerusalem; and put the land to 
a tribute of an hundred ‘talents of 
silver, and a “talent of gold. 


Jehoiakim made king 
(2 Chr. 36. 4,5). 


34 And *”Pharaoh-nechoh made 
Eliakim the son of Josiah king in 
the room of Josiah his father, and 
‘turned his name to /Jehoiakim, 
and took Jehoahaz away: and che 
came to Egypt, and died there. 

35 And Jehoiakim gave the silver 
and the gold to Pharaoh; but he 
taxed the land to give the money 
according to the commandment of 
Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and 
the gold of the people of the land, 
of every one according to his taxa- 
tion,to give it unto Pharaoh-nechoh. 

36 Jehoiakim was twenty and five 
years old when he began to reign; 
and he reigned eleven yeérs in 
Jerusalem. And his mother’s name 
was Zebudah, the daughter of 
Pedaiah of Rumah. 

37 And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the Lorp, ac- 
cording to all that his fathers had 


done. 
CHAPTER 24. 


Jehoiakim tributary to Nebu- 
chadnezzar (2 Chr. 36. 6, 7). 


i oe this days Nebuchadnezzar king 
- of Babylon came up, and Jehoia- 
became his servant © three 
years: then he turned and rebelled 
against him, 
2 And the Lorp sent against him 
bands-of the Chaldees, and bands 
of the Syrians, and bands of the 


5 - 
24 3] 


II KINGS. 


B.C. 600. 


[25 4 


14 And “he carried away all Jeru- 


. : * 
Moabites, and bands of the children 


_of Ammon, and sent them against 
Judah to destroy it, “according to 
the word of the LorpD, which he 
spake by his servants the prophets. 

3 Surely at the commandment of 
the LorD came this upon Judah, to 
remove them out of his sight, for 
the sins of Manasseh, according to 
all that he did; 

_ 4 And also for the innocent blood 
that he shed: for he filled Jerusa- 
lem with innocent blood; which the 
LorpD would not pardon. 

5 Now the rest of the acts of Je- 
hoiakim, and all that he did, are 
they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 


Death of Jehoiakim (2 Chr. 36. 
8): Brat of Jehoiachin (2 Chr. 
. 8,9). 


6 So Jehoiakim slept with his 
fathers: and Jehoiachin his son 
reigned in his stead. 

7 And the king of Egypt came not 
again any more out of his land: for 
the king of Babylon had taken 
from the river of Egypt unto the 
river Euphrates all that pertained 
to the kirig of Egypt. 

8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years 
old when he began to reign, and he 
reigned in Jerusalem three months. 
And his mother’s name was Ne- 
hushta, the daughter of Elnathan of 
Jerusalem. 

9 And he did that which was 
evilin the sight of the LorD, accord- 
ing to all that his father had done. 

10 At that time the servants of 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
came up against ‘Jerusalem, and 
the city was besieged. 


The first deportation to Babylon. 


11 And Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon came against the city, and 
his servants did besiege it. — 

12 ¢And Jehoiachin the king of 
Judah went out to the king of 
Babylon, he, and his mother, and 
his servants, and his princes, and 
his officers: and ¢the king of Baby- 
lon took him in the eighth year of 
his reign, 

13 And he carried out thence all 
the treasures of the house of the 
Lorp, and the treasures of the 
king’s house, and ‘cut in pieces all 
the vessels of gold which Solomon 
king of Israel had made in the 
temple of the LorD, fas the LORD 
had said. 


a 2 Ki.20.17; 
21.12-14. 


b Cf.2 Chr, 
36.9; see 
1 Cor.10.8, 
note, 


c Israel (his- 
tory). vs.10- 
16; 2 Ki.25. 
1-7. (Gen.12. 
2,3; Rom.11. 
26.) 


d Jer.24.1; 
29.1,2; Ezk. 
17.12. 


e Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s 
eighth year. 
Jer.25.1. 


{See Dan.5. 


g Jer.20.5. 
h Jer.24.1. 


¢ 2 Chr.36.10; 
Esth.2.6; 
Jer.22.24. 


j Jer.37.1, 


k 2 Ki.23.34; 
2 Chr.36.4. 


12 Chr.36. 
11; Jer.37.1; 
52.1. 


mi.e. January. 


n Israel (his- 
tory). vs.1-7; 
Ezra 1.3-5. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


oi. July. 


p Times of 
the Gen- 
tiles. 
vs.1-21; 
Dan.2.29- 
45. (Lk.21. 
24; Rev.16. 
19.) 


wo 453 


salem, and all the princes, and alt 
the mighty men of valour, even ten 
thousand captives, and all the 
craftsmen and smiths: none re- 
mained, save the poorest sort of the 
people of the land. 

15 And he ‘carried away Jehoia- 
chin to Babylon, and the king’s 
mother, and the king’s wives, and 
his officers, and the mighty of the 
land, those carried he into captivity 
from Jerusalem to Babylon. 

16 And ali the men of might, even 
seven thousand, and craftsmen and 
smiths a thousand, all that were 
strong and apt for war, even them 
the king of Babylon brought cap- 


tive to Babylon. 


Zedekiah made king 
(2 Chr. 36. 10-18). 


17 And the/’king of Babylon made 
Mattaniah his father’s brother king 
in his stead, and “changed his name 
to Zedekiah. 

18 ‘Zedekiah was twenty and one 
years old when he began to reign, 
and he reigned eleven years in 
Jerusalem. And his mother’s name 
was Hamutal, the daughter of Jere- 
miah of Libnah. 

19 And he did that which was 
evilin the sight of the LORD, accord- 
ing to all that Jehoiakim had done. 


Zedekiah rebels against 
Nebuchadnezzar. 


20 For through the anger ‘of the 
LorD it came to pass in Jerusalem 
and Judah, until he had cast them 
out from his presence, that Zede- 
kiah rebelled against the king of 
Babylon. 


CHAPTER 25. 


Siege of Jerusalem and final de- 
portation (2 Chr. 36. 17-20; Jer. 
39. 8-10). 


ND it came to pass in the ninth 
year of his reign, in the “tenth 
month, in the tenth day of the 
month, that Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon came, he, and all his 
host, against “Jerusalem, and 
pitched against it; and they built 
forts against it round about. 


2 And the city was besieged unto 
the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. 

3 And on the ninth day of the 
ofourth month the famine pre- 
vailed in the city, and there was no 
bread for the people of the land. 

4 ?And the city was broken up, 


| i ae § of) uf eh Viger: or on a a oe . ae! mgr et Ss Sate 
25 3] II KINGS. [25 


and all the men of war fled by night 


by the way of the gate between two 
walls, which is by the king’s gar- 
den: (now the Chaldees were 
against the city round about:) and 
the king went the way toward the 
plain. 

5 And the army of the Chaldees 
pursued after the king, and over- 
took him in the plains of Jericho: 
and all his army were scattered 
from him. : 

6 So they took the king, and 
brought him up to the king of Baby- 
Jon to Riblah; and they gave judg- 
ment upon him: 

7 And they slew the sons of Zede- 
kiah before his eyes, and put out 
the eyes of ¢Zedekiah, and bound 

im with fetters of brass, and 
carried him to Babylon. 

8 And in the fifth month, on the 
seventh day of the month, which is 
the ‘nineteenth year of king Nebu- 
ehadnezzar king of Babylon, came 
Nebuzar-adan, captain of the guard, 
a servant of the king of Babylon, 
unto Jerusalem: 

9 And he ¢burnt the house of the 
Lorp, and the king’s house, and all 
the houses of Jerusalem, and every 
prcat man’s house burnt he with 

re. 

10 And all the army of the Chal- 
dees, that were with the captain of 
the guard, ‘brake down the walls 
of Jerusalem round about. 

11 Now the rest of the people 
that were left in the city, and the 
fugitives that fell away to the king 
of Babylon, with the remnant of the 
multitude, did Nebuzar-adan the 
captain of the guard carry away. 

12 But the captain of the guard 
fleft- of the poor of the land to be 
vinedressers and husbandmen. 

13 And the pillars of brass that 
were in the house of the Lorp, and 
the bases, and the brasen sea that 
was in the house of the Lorp, did 
the Chaldees break in Pieces, and 
cartied the brass of them to 
Babylon. 

414 And the pots, and the shovels, 
and the snuffers, and the spoons, 
and all the vessels of brass where. 
with they ministered, took they 
away. 

15 And the firepans, and the 
bowls, and such things as were of 
gold, in gold, and of silver, in silver, 
the captain of the guard took away. 
16 The two pillars, one sea, and 
the bases which Solomon had made 
for the house of the LorD; the 


B.C. 588. 


a Kingdom 
O.T.). Psa. 


bie. August. 

¢ v.27; 2 Ki. 
24.12. 

d 2 Chr.36.19; 
Psa.79.1. 


e Neh.1.3; 
Jer.52.14. 


f 2 Ki.24.14; 
Jer.39.10; 
40.7; 52.16. 


g One cubit = 
about 18 in. 


h Jer.40.5. 


tice. October. 


454 


brass of all these vessels was with- 
out weight. : 

17 The height of the one pillar 
was eighteen cubits, and the chap- 
iter upon it was brass: and the 
height of the chapiter three cubits; 
and the wreathen work, and pome- 
granates upon the chapiter round 
about, all of brass: and like unto 
these had the second pillar with 
wreathen work. : 

18 And the captain of the guard 
took Seraiah the chief priest, and 
Zephaniah the second priest, and 
the three keepers of the door: 

19 And out of the city he took an 
officer that was set over the men of 
war, and five men of them that were 
in the king’s presence, which were 
found in the city, and the principal 
scribe of the host, which mustered 
the people of the land, and three- 
score men of the people of the land 
that were found in the city: ; 

20 And Nebuzar-adan captain of 
the guard took these, and brought 
them to the king of Babylon to 
Riblah: 

21 And the king of Babylon smote 
them, and slew them at Riblah in 
the land of Hamath. So Judah was 
carried away out of their land. 


Gedaliah made governor of 
Palestine. 


22 And as for the people that re- 
mained in the land of Judah, whom 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
had left, even over them he made 
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the 
son of Shaphan, ruler. 

23 And when all the captains of 
the armies, they and their men, 
heard that the king of Babylon had 
made Gedaliah governor, there came 
to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ish- 
mael the son of Nethaniah, and Jo- 
hanan the son of Careah, and Se- 
raiah the son of Tanhumeth the Ne- 
tophathite, and Jaazaniah the son 
of a Maachathite, they and their 
men. 

24 And Gedaliah sware to them, 


¥ 


and to their men, and said unto 
them, Fear not to be the servants of 
the Chaldees: dwell in the land, and 
serve the king of Babylon: and it 
shall be well with you. 


Murder of Gedaliah and flight 
of the people to Egypt. 


25 But it came to pass in the ‘sev- 
enth month, that Ishmael the son 
of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, 
of the seed royal, came, and ten 


7 
. 


Hog in Calbee ou ig A OEE halt rs et hee Ic ea YN 
come JG ~UOCTP KINGS.’ © [25 30° 


men with him, and smote Gedaliah, 

that he died, and the Jews and the 

cS that were with him at of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of 
a prison; 

26 6 And all the people, both small] c Jer.43.4,7. 28 And he spake kindly to him, 
and great, and the captains of the Ria: Marah and set his throne above the 
armies, arose, and “came to Egypt:|°*"° “"*""" |throne of the kings that were with 
for they were afraid of the Chaldees.| c Gen.40.13, his tad pabyieg ‘ ee . 

4 4 - changed his prison gar- 
Jehoiachin released. d2Sam9.7, |Ments: and he did ¢eat bread con- 
27 And it came to pass in the 


tinually beford him all the days of 
seven and thirtieth year of the cap- his life. 
tivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, 30 And his allowance was a con- 
in the “twelfth month, on the seven tinual allowance given him of the 
and twentieth day of the month, 


king, a daily rate for every day, all 
that Evil-merodach king of Baby- the days of his life, 


on in the year that he began 
to reign ‘did lift up the head 


we ASS 


THE FIRST BOOK OF THE 


ve CHRONICLES. fe 


THE two books of Chronicles (like the two books of Kings) are but one book in the 
Jewish canon. Together they cover the period from the death of Saul to the cap- 
tivities. They were written probably during the Babylonian captivity, and are 
distinguished from the two books of the Kings in a fuller account of Judah, and in 
the omission of many details. The blessing of God’s earthly people in connection 
with the Davidic monarchy is probably the typical significance of these books. 

First Chronicles is in three parts: I. Official genealogies, 1. 1-9. 44. II. From 
the death of Saul to the accession of David, 10. i-12. 40. III. From the accession’ 
of David to his death, 13. 1-29. 30. 

Excluding the genealogies (ch. 1.-9.) the events recorded in First Chronicles 
cover a period of 41 years (Ussher). 


B.C. 4004. 18 And Arphaxad begat Shelah, 
CHAPTER 1. ~~ land Shelah begat Eber. 
Adam’s line to Noah. 19 rae unto Ee were born wa 
sons: the name of the one was ‘Pe- 
pea she tee ered leg; because in his days the earth 
Cutcndch: Mathissiah il aniech was po eaecs and his brother’s name 
4 >Noah,Shem,Ham,and Japheth. a Oar 
, 2 ’ 20 And Joktan begat Almodad, 
The sons of Japheth. and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, 
5 The sons of <Japheth; Gomer,|? $£2:4;25: and Jerah, 
end4Magog, and Madel, and Javan |) ae ' ee also, and Uzal, and 
and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. |? Gen.5.32; res : 
6 And the sons of Gomer; Ashche-| 9:26?7- 22 And Ebal, and Abimael, and 
naz, and Riphath, and Togarmah. |cGen.10.2, Sritire d Ophi : 
7 ‘And the sons of Javan; Elishah,| etc. Jape. Mea 
and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. @ Gen.10.2; Tole ese were the sons of 
The sons of Ham. coors S eo TS 
; 39.6; hem’s line to Abraham. 
8 The sons of “Ham; Cush, and| ®*¥-70-6- 24 JShem, Arph a 
Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. e Gen.10.6. 25 Eber P 7 phaxad, Shelah, 
9 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and cr, Feleg, Reu, 
Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, | Gen-10.8, as mae Nahor, Terah, 
and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raa- ; 28 Th ram; the same is Abraham. 
mah; Sheba, and Dedan. g Gen.10.15, atl Ishiaal s of Abraham; ‘Isaac, 
10 And Cush begat fNimrod: he ‘ 2 
pecan te Ber mebty eon ae earth i ETRE | Ishmael’s sons. 

Z eee 1m,|.. Sat ‘ : - 
and Anamim, and Lehabim, and|‘#* division. |) inese are their generations: 
Naphtuhim, 7 L.3.36. then Ked dA , “14 

- And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, rane sam, sirene Asbecl cau ae 
icf cme the Philistines, ) and oe ee : 0 Misha, erid: Damen ante 
: ; : -21.2,3; , and Tema, 
sat af He net ae a. ear each eta 
4 PPE reJebisitemcloeendaehe(” Gen.25.1,2. Tee € sons of Ishmael. 
morite, and the Girgashite, € sons of Keturah. 
15 And the Hivite, and the Ark- 32 Now the ™. i 
ite, and the Sinite, Aube e pectin tae a ee 
16 And the Arvadite, and the Ze- Zimran, and Jokshan, : 
Marite, and the H thit idi ehishhek em 
: e Hamathite, pod Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. 
The sons of Shean peeps sie of Jokshan; Sheba, 
17 The sons of ‘Shem; Elam, and 33 And the: sons idian; 
Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, Ephah, and Epher, phe pee 


and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and and Abida, a 


Gether, and Meshech. nd Eldaah. All these | 


are the sons of Ket f 
456 eturah 


The sons of Abraham and Isaac.| 3-C. 4004 


34 And Abraham begat Isaac. The 
¢gons of Isaac; Esau and Israel. 


The sons of Esau. 


35 The sons of Esau; Eliphaz, 
Reuel, and Jeush, and Jaalam, and 
Korah. 

36 The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, 
and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Ke- 
naz, and Timna, and Amalek. 

37 The sons of Reuel; Nahath, 
Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. 

38 And the sons of Seir; Lotan, 
and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, 
and Dishon, and Ezar, and Dishan. 

39 And the sons.of Lotan; Hori, 
and Homam: and Timna was Lo- 
tan’s sister. 

40 The sons of Shobal; Alian, and 

_Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and 
Onam. And the sons of Zibeon; 
Aiah, and Anah. 

41 Thesons of Anah; Dishon. And 
the sons of Dishon; Amram, and 
Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran. 

42 The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and 
Zavan, and Jakan. The sons of 
Dishan; Uz, and Aran. 


Early kings of Edom. 
; (Cf. Gen. 36. 1-43.) 


42 Now these are the kings that 
reigned in the land of Edom before 
any king reigned over the children 
of Israel; Bela the son of Beor: and 
the name of his city was Dinha- 
bah. 16.9. 

44 And when Bela was dead, Jo-|; 2 sam.2.18. 
bab the son of Zerah of Bozrah| 
reigned in his stead. 
~45 And when Jobab was dead, 
Husham of the land of the Teman- 
ites reigned in his stead. 

46 And when Husham was dead, 
Hadad the son of Bedad, which 
smote Midian in the field of Moab, 
reigned in his stead: and the name 
of his city was Avith. 

47 And when Hadad was dead, 
Samiah of Masrekah reigned in his 
stead. 

48 And when Samlah was dead, 
Shaul of Rehoboth by the river 
reigned in his stead. 

49 And when Shaul was dead, 
Baal-hanan the son of Achbor 
reigned in his stead, 

50 And when Baal-hanan was 
dead, Hadad reigned in his stead: 
and the name of his city was Pai; 
and his wife’s name was Mehetabel, 
the daughter of Matred, the daugh- 
ter of Mezahab. 


a Gen.25.25, 
26. 


¢ Gen.29.32; 


18-22; 46.8, 
etc. 


d See Gen.32. 
24-28. 


e Ruth 4.19; 
Mt.1.4. 


f Num.1.7. 
g Ruth 4.21; 
Mt.1.5. 


h 1 Sam.16.6. 
4 Or, Sham- 


457 


I CHRONICLES. 


ta 1056. 


bR.V. chiefs. 


30.5,etc.; 35. 


mah, 1 Sam. 


k 2 Sam.17.25. 


[217 


The dukes of Edom. 


51 Hadad died also. And the 
bdukes of Edom were; duke Tim- 
nah, duke Aliah, duke Jetheth, 

52 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, 
duke Pinon, ~ ; 

53 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, 
duke Mibzar, 

54 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram. 
These are the dukes of Edom. 


CHAPTER 2. 
The sons of Jacob (Israel). 


HESE are the ‘sons of 2Israel; 
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Ju- 
dah, Issachar, and Zebulun, 
2 Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, 
Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. 


The sons of Judah. 


3 The sons of Judah; Er, and 
Onan, and Shelah: which three 
were born unto him of the daughter 
lof Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, 
the firstborn of Judah, was evil in 
the sight of the Lorp; and he slew 


4 And Tamar his daughter in law 
bare him Pharez and Zerah. Alt 
the sons of Judah were five. 

5 The sons of Pharez; Hezron, 
and Hamul. 

6 And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, 
and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, 
and Dara: five of them in all. 

7 And the sons of Carmi; Achar, 
the troubler of Israel, who. trans- 
gressed in the thing accursed. 

8 And the sons of Ethan; Azariah. 

9 The sons also of Hezron, that 
were born unto him; Jerahmeel, 
and Ram, and Chelubai. 

10 And Ram “begat Amminadab; 
and Amminadab ‘begat Nahshon, 
fprince of the children of Judah; 

11 And Nahshon begat Salma, 


jand sSalma begat Boaz, 


12 And Boaz begat Obed, and 
Obed begat Jesse, 


The posterity of Jesse.: 


13 And “Jesse begat his firstborn 
Eliab, and Abinadab the second, 
and ‘Shimma the third, 

14 Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai 
the fifth, ; : 

15 Ozem the sixth, David the 
seventh: 

16 Whose sisters were Zeruiah, 
and Abigail. And the sons of Ze- 
ruiah; Abishai, and Joab, and Asa: 
hel, three. 

1 17 And *Abigail bare Amasa: and 


the father of Amasa was Jether the 


ie Ishmeelite. 


The posterity of Caleb. 


18 And Caleb the son of Hezron 
begat children of Azubah his wife, 
and of Jerioth: her sons are these; 
Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon. 

19 And when Azubah was dead, 
Caleb took unto him Ephrath, 
which bare him Hur. ; 

20 And Hur begat Uri, and Uri 
begat Bezaleel. 


Posterity of Hezron, father of 

Caleb, by the daughter of 

Machir. 

21 And afterward Hezron went in 
to the daughter of Machir the father 
of Gilead, whom he married when 
he was threescore years old; and 
she bare him Segub. 

22 And Segub begat Jair, who had 
three and twenty cities in the land 
of Gilead. 

23 And he took Geshur, and 
Aram, with the towns of Jair, from 
them, with Kenath, and the towns 
thereof, even threescore cities. All 
these belonged to the sons of 
Machir the father of Gilead. 

24 And after that Hezron was 
dead in  Caleb-ephratah, then 
*Abiah Hezron’s wife bare him 
Ashur the father of Tekoa. 


Jerahmeel’s posterity. 

25 And the sons of Jerahmeel the 
firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the 
firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, 
and Ozem, and Ahijah. 

26 Jerahmeel had also another 
wife, whose name was Atarah; she 
was the mother of Onam. 

27 And the sons of Ram the first- 
born of Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and 
Jamin, and Eker, 

28 And the sons of Onam were, 
Shammai, and Jada. And the sons 
of Shammai; Nadab, and Abishur. 

29 And the name of the wife of 
Abishur was Abihail, and she bare 
him Ahban, and Molid. 

30 And the sons of Nadab; Seled, 
and Appaim: but Seled died with- 


out children. 


31 And the sons of Appaim; Ishi. 
And the sons of Ishi; Sheshan. And 
’the children of Sheshan ; Ahlai. 

32 And the sons of Jada the 
brother of Shammai; Jether, and 
Jonathan: and Jether died without 
children. 

33 And the sons of Jonathan ; Pe- 
leth, and Zaza. These were the 
sons of Jerdhmeel. 


VT) Pa aT weenie en ats 
Pe RSOeP ; 


i CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 4004 


to 1056. 


a1 Chr.4.5. 

6 See vs.34,35. 
¢1 Chr.11.41. 
d Josh.15.17. 
ev.19. 

f1 Chr.4.2. 


458 


[2 3 


Sheshan’s posterity. 

34 Now Sheshan had no sons, but 
daughters. And Sheshan had a 
servant, an Egyptian, whose name 
was Jarha. j 

35 And Sheshan gave his daugh- 
ter to Jarha his servant to wife; and 
she bare him Attai. 

36 And Attai begat Nathan, and 
Nathan begat ‘Zabad, __ 

37 And Zabad begat Ephlal, and 
Ephlal begat Obed, 

38 And Obed begat Jehu, and 
Jehu begat Azariah, 

39 And Azariah begat Helez, and 
Helez begat Eleasah, ; { 

40 And Eleasah begat Sisamai, 
and Sisamai begat Shallum, ‘ 

41 And Shallum begat Jekamiah, 
and Jekamiah begat Elishama. 


Another branch of Caleb’s 
posterity. 

42 Now the sons of Caleb the 
brother of Jerahmeel were, Mesha 
his firstborn, which was the father 
of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah 
the father of Hebron. 

43 And the sons of Hebron; Ko- 
rah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and 
Shema. 

44 And Shema begat Raham, the 
father of Jorkoam: and Rekem be- 
gat Shammai. 

45 And the son of Shammai was 
Maon: and Maon was the father of 
Beth-zur. 

46 And Ephah, Caleb’s concubine, 
bare Haran, and Moza, and Gazez: 
and Haran begat Gazez. 

47 And the sons of Jahdai: Re- 
gem, and Jotham, and Gesham, and 
Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph. 

48 Maachah, Caleb’s concubine, 
bare Sheber, and Tirhanah. 

49 She bare also Shaaph the 
father of Madmannah, Sheva the 
father of Machbenah, and the father 
of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb 
was 4Achsa. 


The posterity of Caleb the son 
of Hur. 

50 These were the sons of Caleb 
the son of Hur, the firstborn of 
‘Ephratah; Shobal the father of 
Kirjath-jearim, 

51 Salmathefather of Beth-lehem, 
Hareph the father of Beth-gader. 
52 And Shobal the father of Kir- 
jath-jearim had sons; fHaroeh, and 
half of the Manahethites. 

_93 And the families of Kirjath- 
jearim; the Ithrites, and the Pu- 
hites, and the Shumathites, and the 


m4 


reathites, and the Eshtaulites. 

‘54 Thesons of Salma; Beth-lehem, 
and the Netophathites, ¢Ataroth, 
the house of Joab, and half of the 
Manahethites, the Zorites. 

55 And the families of the scribes 
which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirath- 
ites, the Shimeathites, and Suchath- 
ites. These are the “Kenites that 
came of Hemath, the father of the 
house of “Rechab. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Family of David, born in Hebron 
(2 Sam. 3. 2-5; 5. 13-16). 


Now these were the sons of 
David, which were born unto 
him in Hebron; the firstborn ¢Am- 
non, of Ahinoam the “Jezreelitess; 
the second fDaniel, of Abigail the 
Carmelitess: 

2 The third, sAbsalom the son of 
Maachah the daughter of Talmai 
king of Geshur: the fourth, Adoni- 
jah the son of Haggith: 

3 The fifth, Shephatiah of Abital: 
the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his 
wife. 

4 These six were born unto him 
in Hebron; and there he reigned 
seven years and six months: and 
in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and 
three years. 

5 And these were born unto him 
in Jerusalem; Shimea, and Shobab, 
and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of 
Bath-shua the daughter of Ammiel: 

6 Ibhar also, and Elishama, and 
Eliphelet, 

7 And Nogah, and Nepheg, and 


Japhia, 

8 And Elishama, and Eliada, and 
Eliphelet, “nine. 

9 These were all the sons of 
David, beside the sons of the con- 
cubines, and Tamar their sister. 


David's line to Zedekiah. 


10 And Solomon’s son was Reho- 
boam, Abia his son, Asa his son, 
Jehoshaphat his son, 

11 Joram his son, Ahaziah his 
son, Joash his son, 

12 Amaziah his son, Azariah his 
son, Jotham his son, ; 

13 Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his 
son, Manasseh his son, 

14 Amon his son, Josiah his son. 

15 And the sons of Josiah were, 
the firstborn ‘Johanan, the second 
jJehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the 
fourth Shallum. 


MeO wt ee pa d 


I CHRONICLES. 


Mishraites; of them came the Za-}. 


B.C. 4004 
to 1056. 


aOr, Atarites, 
or, crowns 
of the house 
of Joab. 

b Jud.1.16. 

¢ Jer.35.2. 

d 2 Sam.3.2. 

e Josh.15.56. 

f 2 Sam.3.3. 


g 2 Sam.13.37, 
note. 


h See 2 Sam. 
5.14-16. 


i 2 Ki.23.30, 
j 2 Ki.23.34. 
k Mt.1.11. 


1 Heb. She- 
altiel. 


m Ezra 8.2. 


n Gen.38.29; 
46.12. 


459 


OTe | 
i4 6 


16 And the sons of *Jehoiakim: Je- 
coniah his son, Zedekiah his son. 


The successors of Jeconiah. 


17 And the sons of Jeconiah; As- 
sir, ‘Salathiel his son, 

18 Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, 
and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, 
and Nedabiah. 

19 And the sons of Pedaiah were, 
Zerubbabel, and Shimei: and the 
sons of Zerubbabel; Meshullam, 
and Hananiah, and Shelomith their 
sister: 

20 And Hashubah, and Ohel, and 
Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushab- 
hesed, five. 

21 And the sons of Hananiah; Pe- 
latiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of 
Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the 
sons of Obadiah, the sons of She- 
chaniah. 

22 And the sons of Shechaniah; 
Shemaiah: and the sons of She- 
maiah; “Hattush, and Igeal, and 
Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, 


six. 
23 And the sons of Neariah; Eli- 
oenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam, 
three. 
24 And the sons of Elioenai were, 
Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, 
and Akkub, and Johanan, and Da- 


laiah, and Anani, seven. 


CHAPTER 4. 


The posterity of Judah by Caleb 
the son of Hur. 


fig sons of Judah; "Pharez, 
Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, 
and Shobal. 

2 And Reaiah the son of Shobal 
begat Jahath; and Jahath begat 
Ahumai, and Lahad. These are the 
families of the Zorathites. 

3 And these were of the father of 
Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and Id- 
bash: and the name of their sister 
was Hazelelponi: 

4 And Penuel the father of Gedor, 
and Ezer the father of Hushah. 
These are the sons of Hur, the 
firstborn of Ephratah, the father of 
Beth-lehem. 


Of Ashur, the posthumous son 
of Hezron. 


5 And Ashur the father of Tekoa 
had two wives, Helah and Naarah. 

6 And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, 
and Hepher, and Temeni, and 
Haahashtari. These were the sons 
of Naarah. 


47] 


7 And the sons of Helah were, 
Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan. 

8 And Coz begat Anub, and Zobe- 
bah, and the families of Aharhel the 
son of Harum. 


Of Jabez, and his prayer. 


9 And Jabez was more honourable} 
than his brethren: and his mother 
called his name Jabez, saying, Be- 
cause I bare him with sorrow. 

10 And Jabez called on the God 
of Israel, saying, Oh that thou 
wouldest bless me indeed, and en- 
large my coast, and that thine hand 
might be with me, and that thou 
wouldest keep me from evil, that it 
may not grieve me! And God 
granted him that which he re- 
quested. 

11 And Chelub the brother of 
Shuah begat Mehir, which was 
the father of Eshton. 

12 And Eshton begat Beth-rapha, 
and Paseah, and Tehinnah the 
father of Ir-nahash. These are the 
men of Rechah. 

13 And the sons of Kenaz; ®Oth- 
niel, and Seraiah: and the sons of 
Othniel; Hathath. 

14 And Meonothai begat Ophrah: 
and Seraiah begat Joab, the father 
of the ‘valley of Charashim ; for they 
were craftsmen. 

15 And the sons of Caleb the son 
of Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam: 
and the sons of Elah, even Kenaz. 

16 And the sons of Jehaleleel; 
Zinh, and. Ziphah, Tiria, and Asa- 
reel. 

17 And the sons of Ezra were, 
Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and 
Jalon: and she bare Miriam, and 
Shammai, and Ishbah the father of 
Eshtemoa. 

18 And his 


wife Jehudijah bare 
Jered the father of Gedor, and 
Heber the father of Socho, and 
Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. 
And these are the sons of Bithiah 
the daughter of Pharaoh, which 
Mered took, 

19 And thesons of Ais wifeHodiah 
the sister of Naham, the father of 
Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa 
the Maachathite. 

20 And the sons of Shimon were, 

Rinnah, Ben-hanan, 
And the sons of Ishi 
were, Zoheth, and Ben-zoheth. 


The Posterity of Shelah. 


21 The sons of Shelah ¢the son of 
Judah were, Er the father of Lecah, 
and Laadah the father of Mareshah, 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 4004 
to 1056. 


a Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). 
1 Chr.29.10- 


19. (Gen.15. 


2; Hab.3.1- 

16.) 

b Josh. 15.17. 

c Neh.11.35, 

d Gen.38.1, 
5; 46.12. 

e Or, Jemuel, 
Gen.46.10; 
Ex.6.15; 
iWum.26.12. 

Ff Josh.19.2. 


g Josh.19.3. 


hk Or, Eltolad, 


Josh.19.4, 


i Or, Ether, 
Josh.19.7, 


460 


} [4 9 


and the families of the house of 
them that wrought fine linen, of 
the house of Ashbea, j ; 

22 And Jokim, and the men of 
Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, 
who had the dominion in Moab, and 
Jashubi-lehem. And these are an- 
cient things. 

23 These were the potters, and 
those that dwelt among plants and ~ 
hedges: there they dwelt with the 
king for his work, 


The posterity and cities of 
Simeon. 


24 The sons of Simeon were, ‘Ne- 
muel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and 

haul: 

25 Shallum his son, Mibsam his 
son, Mishma hisson. ~ 

26 And the sons of Mishma; Ha- 
muel his son, Zacchur his son, Shi- 
mei his son. 

27 And Shimei had sixteen sons 
and six daughters; but his brethren 
had not many children, neither did 
all their family multiply, like to the 
children of Judah. 

28 And they dwelt at /Beer-sheba, 
and Moladah, and Hazar-shual, 

29 And at ‘Bilhah, and at Ezem, 
and at *Tolad, 

30 And at Bethuel, and at Hor- 
mah, and at Ziklag, 

31 And at Beth-marcaboth, and 
Hazar-susim, and at Beth-birei, and 
at Shaaraim. These were their 
cities unto the reign of David. ; 

32 And their villages were, ‘Etam, 
and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and 
Ashan, five cities: 

33 And all their villages that 
were round about the same Cities, 
unto Baal. These were their habi. 
tations, and their genealogy. 

34 And Meshobab, and Jamlech, 
and Joshah the son of Amaziah, 

35 And Joel, and Jehu the son of 


Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the 
son of Asiel, 
36 And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, 
and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and 
Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah, 
37 And Ziza the son of Shiphi, the 
son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the 
son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah; 
38 These mentioned by their 
names were princes in their fami- 
lies: and the house of their fathers 
increased greatly. 


The conquest of Gedor and of 


the Amalekites in Mount Seir. 


39 And they went to the entrance 
of Gedor, even unto the east side of 


4 40) 


the valley, to seek pasture for their 
flocks. 

40 And they found fat pasture 
and good, and the land was wide, 
and quiet, and peaceable; for they 
of Ham had dwelt there of old. 

41 And these written by name 
came in the days of Hezekiah king 
of Judah, and ¢smote their tents, 
and the habitations that were found 
there, and destroyed them utterly 
unto this day, and dwelt in their 
rooms: because there was pasture 
there for their flocks. 

42 And some of them, even of the 
sons of Simeon, five hundred men, 
went to mount Seir, having for 
their captains Pelatiah, and Nea- 
riah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the 
sons of Ishi, 

43 And they smote %the rest of 
the Amalekites that were escaped, 
and dwelt there unto this day. 


CHAPTER 5. 


The line of Reuben (who lost his 
birthright) unto the captivity. 


Ne the sons of Reuben the first- 
born of Israel, (for ‘he was the 
firstborn; but, forasmuch as he ¢de- 
filed his father’s bed, “his birthright 
was given unto the sons of Joseph 
the son of Israel: and the geneal- 
ogy is not to be reckoned after the 
birthright. 

2 For fJudah prevailed above his 
brethren, and of him came the 
chief ruler; but the birthright was 
Joseph’s:) 

3 The sons, I say, of Reuben the 
firstborn of Israel were, Hanoch, 
and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 

4 The sons of Joel; Shemaiah his 
son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, 

5 Micah his son, Reaia his son, 
Baal his son, 

6 Beerah his son, whom /Tilgath- 
pilneser king of Assyria carried 
away captive: he was prince of the 
Reubenites. 

7 And his brethren by their fami- 
lies, when the genealogy of their 
generations was reckoned, were the 
chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah, 

g And Bela the son of Azaz, the 
son of Shema, the son of Joel, who 
dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and 
Baal-meon: 


Theit habitation and conquest 
of the Haégarites. 


9 And eastward he inhabited unto 
the entering in of the wilderness 
from the river Euphrates: because 


I CHRONICLES. 


a 2 Ki.18.8. 


61 Sam.15.8; 
30.17; 
2Sam.8.12. 


c Gen.29.32; 
49.3. 


d Gen.35.22; 
49.4. 

e Gen.48.15, 
22. 


f Gen.49.8,10; 
ane 108. 


eg Gen.46.9; 
Ex.6.14; 
Num.26.5. 

h Or, Tiglath- 
15.29; 16.7. 

3 Gen.25.12. 

j Josh.13.11, 
24. 

k 1 Chr.27.29. 

1 2 Ki.15.5,32. 

m 2 Ki.14.16, 
28. 


n Gen.25,15; 
1 Chr.1.31. 


o Psa.2.12, 
note. 


461 


pileser, 2 Ki. 


[5 21 


their cattle were multiplied in the 
land of Gilead. 

10 And in the days of Saul they 
made war with the ‘Hagarites, who 
fell by their hand: and they dwelt 
in their tents throughout all the 
east Jand of Gilead. 


The chief men and habitations 
of Gad. 


11 And the children of Gad dwelt 
over against them, in the land of 
JBashan unto Salcah: 

12 Joel the chief, and Shapharm 
the next, and Jaanai, and Shaphat 
in Bashan. 

13 And their brethren of the house 
of their fathers were, Michael, and 
Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, 
and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, 
seven. 

14 These are the children of Abi- 
hail the son of Huri, the son of 
Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son 
of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the 
son of Jahdo, the son of Buz; 

15 Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son 
of Guni, chief of the house of their 
fathers. 

16 And they dwelt in Gilead in 
Bashan, and in her towns, and in 
all the suburbs of *Sharon, upon 
their borders. : 

17 All these were reckoned by 
genealogies in the days of ‘Jotham 
king of Judah, and in the days of 
mJeroboam king of Israel. 


The number and conquests of 
Reuben, Gad, and the half of 
Manasseh. 


18 The sons of Reuben, and the 
Gadites, and half the tribe of 
Manasseh, of valiant men, men able 
to bear buckler and sword, and to 
shoot with bow, and skilful in war, 
were four and forty thousand seven 
hundred and threescore, that went 
out to the war. 

19 And they made war with the 
Hagarites, with ”Jetur, and Ne- 
phish, and Nodab. 

20 And they were helped against 
them, and the Hagarites were de- 
livered into their hand, and all that 
were with them: for they cried to 
God in the battle, and he was in- 
treated of them; because they put 
their “trust in him. 

21 And they took away their 
cattle; of their camels fifty thou- 
sand, and of sheep two hundred 
and fifty thousand, and of asses 
two thousand, and of men an hun- 
dred thousand. 


a! of that half tribe. 


x 


22 For there fell down many slain, 

_ because the war was of God. And 

_ they dwelt in their steads until the 
captivity. 


B.C. 4004 


The habitations and chief men 


23 And the children of the half 
tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the 
land: they increased from Bashan 
unto Baal-hermon and Senir, and 
unto mount Hermon. : 
24 And these were the heads of 
the house of their fathers, even 
Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and 

_ Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hoda-! 
viah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of 
valour, famous men, and heads of 

the house of their fathers. 


Their captivity for their sins. 


_ 25 And they transgressed against 
the God of their fathers, and went 
a whoring after the gods of the 
people of the land, whom God de- 
stroyed before them. 

26 And the God of Israel stirred 
up the spirit of Pul king of 2As- 
syria, and the spirit of Tilgath- 
pilneser king of Assyria, and he 
carried them away, even the Reu- 
benites, and the Gadites, and the 4 
half tribe of Manasseh, and brought|" OF Adaiah, 
them unto Halah, and Habor, and| Y** 


a Cf.2 Ki.15. 
19. 


b Lev.10.1. 
c¢ 2 Sam.8.17. 
d 2 Sam.15.27. 
e 2 Ki.25.18. 
fEx.6.16. 


g Or, Ethan, 
v.42. 


Hara, and to the river Gozan, unto] i Or, Ethni,, 
this day, v.41. 
j See vs.35,36. 
CHAPTER 6. Pe yore his 


The sons of Levi. 


‘THE sons of Levi; Gershon, Ko-|?1 Chr.16.1. 
hath, and Merari. 


2 And the sons of Kohath; 
Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and) 
Uzziel. 


3 And the children of Amram; 
Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. 
he sons also of Aaron; 'Nadab, 
and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. | 


The line of the Priests unto the 
captivity. 

4 Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phine- 
has begat Abishua, 

9 And Abishua begat Bukki, and 
Bukki begat Uzzi, 

6 And Uzzi begat ‘Zerahiah, and 
Zerahiah begat Meraioth, 

7 Meraioth begat Amariah, and 

ariah begat Ahitub, 

8 And ‘Ahitub begat Zadok, and 
dZadok begat Ahimaaz, 

9 And Ahimaaz begat Azariah, 


n 
and Azariah begat Johanan, 


oh hy RARE RAPD YET 
I CHRONICLES. 


to. 1056. 


10 And Johanan begat Azariah, 
(he it is that executed the priest’s 
office in the temple that Solomon — 
built in Jerusalem:) : 

11 And Azariah begat Amariah, 
and Amariah begat Ahitub, 

12 And Ahitub begat Zadok, and 
Zadok begat Shallum, Ok Of 

13 And Shallum begat ‘Hilkiah, 
and Hilkiah begat Azariah, : 

14 And Azariah beget Seraiah,. 
and Seraiah begat Jehozadak, , 

15 And Jehozadak went into 
captivity, ‘when the LorD carried 
away Judah and Jerusalem by the 
hand of Nebuchadnezzar. 


The families of Gershom, Me- 
rari, and Kohath. 


16 The sons of Levi; fGershom, 
Kohath, and Merari. 

17 And these be the names of the 
sons of Gershom; Libni, and 
Shimei. 

18 And the sons of Kohath were, 
Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, 
and Uzziel. ‘ 

19 The sons of Merari; Mahli, and 
Mushi. And these are the families 
of the Levites according. to. their 


fathers. 


20 Of Gershom; Libni his son, 
Jahath his son, Zimmah his son, 

21 £Joah his son, /Iddo his son, 
Zerah his son, ‘Jeaterai his son. 

22 The sons of Kohath; Ammina- 
Sel his son, Korah his son, Assir 

S$ son, 


23 Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph 
his son, and Assir his son, 

24 Tahath his son, Uriel his son, 

zziah his son, and Shaul his son. 
.25 And the sons of Elkanah; 
jJAmasai, and Ahimoth. 

26 As for Elkanah: the sons of 
Elkanah; *Zophai his son, and 


|Nahath his son, 


27 Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, 
Elkanah his son. 

28 And the sons of Samuel; the 
firstborn Vashni, and Abiah. * 

29 The sons of Merari; Mahli, 

ibni his son, Shimei his son, Uzza 

S$ son, 

30 Shimea his son, Haggiah ‘his 
son, Asaiah his son. 

31 And these are. they whom 
David set over the service of song 
in the house of the Lorp, after.that 
the ‘ark had rest. 

32 And they ministered before the 
dwelling place of cue tabernacle of 

€ congregation with singing, until 
Solomon had built the Hotder of the 
LorD in Jerusalem: and then they 


; 


waited on their office according to 
their order. 

33 Andthese arethey that *waited 
with their children. Of the sons of 
the Kohathites: Heman a singer,|. 
the son of Joel, the son of Shem- 
uel, 

34 The son of Elkanah, the son of 
Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son 


Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the 
son of Amasai, 

36 The son of Elkanah, the son 
of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son 
of Zephaniah, 

37 The son of Tahath, the son of 
Assir, the son of “Ebiasaph, the son} Ex.6.24. 
of Korah, ¢ Called 

38 The son of Izhar, the son of| Jeduthun, 
Kohath, the son of Levi, the son oe gt 
of Israel. . hee 

39 And his brother Asaph, whold Or, Kusha- 
stood on his right hand, even Asaph = 1 Chr. 
the son of Berachiah, the son-of cok 
Shimea, e Lev.1.9. 

40 The son of Michael, the son of adtiese 
Baaseiah, the son of Malchiah, if Soom 

41 The son of Ethni, the son of} ” 
Zerah, the son of Adaiah, g Josh.21. 

42 The son of Ethan, the son of}, Josh.21.13 
Zimmah, the son of Shimei, f ; 

43 The son of Jahath, the son of eee? 
Gershom, the son of Levi. ate 

44 And their brethren the sons of} Or, Ain, 
Merari stood on the left hand:| Josh.21.16. 
¢Ethan the son of ¢Kishi, the son of}; 9,, Atmon, 
Abdi, the son of Malluch, Josh.21:18. 

45 The'son of Hashabiah, the son fee 
of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah, ged! 
Ave ibe son of ae i, the son Of|m Josh.21.5. 

ani, the son o: amet, 

47 The son of Mahli, the son of preloatssais 7s *2 
Mushi, the son of Merari, the son|o v.61. 
of Levi. osh.21.21. 

48 - Their brethren also the Levites|? 121. 
were appointed unto all manner of 
service of the tabernacle of the 
house of God. 


The office of Aaron and his line 
unto Ahimaaz. 


49 But Aaron and his sons offered 
éupon the altar of the burnt-offer- 
ing, and on the altar of incense, 
and were appointed for all the 
work of the place most holy, and 
to make an fatonement for Israel, 
according to all that Moses the ser- 
vant of God had commanded. 

50 And these are the sons of 
Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinehas 
his son, Abishua his son, _ 

51 Bukki his son,, Uzzi his son, 
Zerahiah his son, 


a Heb. stood. 


463 


I CHRONICLES. 


[6 67 


52 Meraioth his son, Amariah his 
son, Ahitub his son, 
53 Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son. 


The cities of the priests and 
Levites. 


54 Now &these are their dwelling 
places throughout their castles in 
their coasts, of the sons of Aaron, 
of the families of the Kohathites: 
for their’s was the lot. 

_55 And they gave them Hebron 
in the land of Judah, and the sub- 
urbs thereof round about it. 

56 But the fields of the city, and 
the villages thereof, they gave to 
Caleb the son of Jephunneh. 

57 And “to the sons of Aaron they 
gave the cities of Judah, namely, 
Hebron, the city of refuge, and Lib- 
nah with her suburbs, and Jattir, 
and Eshtemoa, with their suburbs, 

58 And ‘Hilen with her suburbs, 
Debir with her suburbs, 

59 And JAshan with her suburbs, 
aad Beth-shemesh with her sub: 
urbs: 


| 60 And out of the tribe of Ben- 


jamin; Geba with her suburbs, and 
kAlemeth with her suburbs, and 
Anathoth with her suburbs. 
their cities throughout their families 
were thirteen cities. 

61 And unto the sons of Kohatk, 
lwhich were left of the family of 
that tribe, were cities given out of 
the half tribe, namely, out of the 
half tribe of Manasseh, “by lot, 
ten cities. 

62 And to the sons of Gershom 
throughout-their families out of the 
tribe of Issachar, and out of the 
tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe 
of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of 
Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities. 

63 Unto the sons of Merari were 
given by lot, throughout their fami- 
lies, out of the tribe of Reuben, and 
out of the tribe of Gad, and out of 
the tribe of Zebulun, “twelve cities. 

64 And the children of Israel gave 
to the Levites these cities with 
their suburbs. 

65 And they gave by lot out of the 
tribe of the children of Judah, and 
out of the tribe of the children of 
Simeon, and out of the tribe of the 
children of Benjamin, these cities, 
which are called by their names. 

66 And the °residue of the fami- 
lies of the sons of Kohath had 
cities of their coasts out of the tribe 
of Ephraim. 

67 ?And they gave unto them, of 
the cities of refuge, Shechem in 


6 68] 


mount Ephraim with her suburbs; 
they gave also Gezer with her sub- 


urbs, 

68 And ¢Jokmeam with her sub- 
urbs, and Beth-horon with her 
suburbs, . 

69 And Aijalon with her suburbs, 
and Gath-rimmon with her suburbs: 

70 And out of the half tribe of 
Manasseh; Aner with her suburbs, 
and Bileam with her suburbs, for 
the family of the remnant of the 
sons of Kohath. 

71 Unto the sons of Gershom 
were given out of the family of the 
half tribe of Manasseh, Golan in 
Bashan with her suburbs, and Ash- 
taroth with her suburbs: 

72 And out of the tribe of Issa- 
char; Kedesh with her suburbs, 
Daberath with her suburbs, 

73 And Ramoth with her suburbs, 
and Anem with her suburbs: 

74 And out of the tribe of Asher; 
Mashal with her suburbs, and 
Abdon with her suburbs, 

75 And Hukok with her suburbs, 
and Rehob with her suburbs: 

76 And out of the tribe of Naph- 
tali; Kedesh in Galilee with her sub- 
urbs, and Hammon with her suburbs, 
and Kirjathaim with her suburbs. 

77 Unto the rest of the children of 
Merari were given out of the tribe 
of Zebulun, Rimmon with her sub- 
urbs, Tabor with her suburbs: 

78 And on the other side Jordan 
by Jericho, on the east side of Jor- 
dan, were given them out of the 
tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wil- 
derness with her suburbs, and 
Jahzah with her suburbs, 

79 Kedemoth also with her sub- 
urbs, and Mephaath with her sub- 


urbs: 

80 And out of the tribe of Gad; 
Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, 
and Mahanaim with her suburbs, 

81 And Heshbon with her sub- 


urbs, and Jazer with her suburbs. 


CHAPTER 7. 
The sons of Issachar. 


New the sons of Issachar were, 
* oTola, and Puah, Jashub, and 
Shimrom, four, 

2_ And the sons of Tola ; Uzzi, and 
Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, 
and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of 
their father’s house, to wit, of Tola: 
they were valiant men of might in 
their generations; ‘whose number 
was in the days of David two and 
twenty thousand and six hundred, 


| 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 4004 
to 1056. 


a See Josh.21. 
22-35, where 
many of 
these cities 
have other 
mames, 


6 Gen.46.13; 
Num.26.23, ° 


c 2 Sam.24.1, 


2; 1 Chr.27.1. 


d Gen.46.21; 
Num.26.38; 
1 Car.8.1, 


e Num.26.39; 
Shupham 
and Hup- 

ham. 


J Or, Iri, v.7. 


g Or, Ahiram, 
Num.26.38. 


h Or, Shillem, 
Gen.46.24, 


[7 is 


3 And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah: — 
and the sons of Izrahiah; Michael, 
and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five: 
all of them chief men. 

4 And with therm; by their gener- 
ations, after the house of their 
fathers, were bands of soldiers for 
war, six and thirty thousand men: 
for they had many wives and sons. 

5 And their brethren among all 
the families of Issachar were valiant 
men of might, reckoned in all by 
their genealogies fourscore and 
seven thousand. 


The sons of Benjamin. 


6 The sons of “Benjamin; Bela, 
and Becher, and Jediael, threé. 

7 And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, 
and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, 
and Iri, five; heads of the house of 
their fathers, mighty men of valour; 
and were reckoned by their genealo- 
gies twenty and two thousand and 
thirty and four. 

8 And the sons of Becher; Zemira, 
and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elio- 
enai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and 
Abiah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. 
All these are the sons of Becher. 

9 And the number of them, after 
their genealogy by their genera- 
tions, heads of the house of their 
fathers, mighty men of valour,*was 
twenty thousand and two hundred. 

10 The sons also of Jediael; Bil- 
han: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush, 
and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Che- 
naanah, and Zethan, and Thar- 
shish, and Ahishahar. 


12 eShuppim also, and Huppim, 
the children of fIr, and Hushim, the 
sons of Aher. 

The sons of Naphtalj. 


13 The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, 
and Guni, and Jezer, and ‘Shallum, 
the sons of Bilhah. 


The sons of Manasseh. 
14 The sons of Manasseh; Ash- 


7 16] 


16 And Maachah the wife of Ma- 
chir bare a son, and she called his 
name Peresh; and the name of his 
brother was Sheresh; and his sons 
were Ulam and Rakem. 

17 And the sons of Ulam; ¢Bedan. 
These were the sons of Gilead, the 
son of Machir, the son of Manasseh. 

18 And his sister Hammoleketh 
bare Ishod, and 2Abiezer, and Ma- 
halah. 

19 And the sons of Shemidah 
were, Ahian, and Shechem, and 
Likhi, and Aniam. 


The sons of Ephraim. 

20 And the ‘sons of Ephraim; 
Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and 
Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, 
and Tahath his son, 

21 And Zabad his son, and Shu- 
thelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, 
whom the men of Gath that were 
born in that land slew, because 
they came down to take away their 
cattle. 

22 And Ephraim their father 
mourned many days, and his breth- 
Ten came to comfort 

23 And when he went in to his 
wife, she conceived, and bare a son, 
and he called his name Beriah, be- 
cause it went evil with his house. 

24 (And his daughter was Sherah, 
who built Beth-horon the nether, 
and the upper, and Uzzen-sherah. y 

25 And Rephah was his son, also 
Resheph, and Telah his son, and 
Tahan his son, 

26 Laadan his son, Ammihud his 
son, Elishama his son, 

27 4Non his son, Jehoshuah his 

son. 
Ephraim’s habitations. 

28 And their possessions and hab- 
itations were, Beth-el and the towns 
thereof, and eastward ‘Naaran, and 
westward Gezer, with the towns 
thereof; Shechem also and the 
towns thereof, unto Gaza and the 
towns thereof: 

29 And by the borders of the chil- 
dren of /Manasseh, Beth-shean and 
her towns, Taanach and her towns, 
&Megiddo and her towns, Dor and 
her towns. In these dwelt the chil- 
dren of Joseph the son of Israel. 


The sons of Asher. 

30 The “sons of Asher; Imnah, 
and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, 
and Serah "their sister. 

31 And the sons of Beriah; Heber, 
and Malchiel, who is the father of 
Birzavith. 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C, 4004 


to 1056. 


a1 Sam.12.11 

6 Num.26.30. 

c Num.26.35. 

d Or, Nun, 
Num.13 
8,16. 


e Naarath, 
Josh.16.7, 


Ff Josh.17.7. 
g Josh.17.11. 


h Gen.46.17; 
Num.26.44. 


t Shamer, 

v.34. 

j Shomer, 
v.32. 

k Gen.46.21; 
Num.26.38; 
1 Chr.7.6. 


1 Or, Ard, 
Gen.46.21. 


m Or, Shup- 


ham, Num. 


26.39. See 
1 Chr.7.12. 


1 Chr.2.52. 


~ 465 


[8 12 


32 And Heber begat Japhlet, and 
‘Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua 
their sister. 

33 And the sons of Japhlet; Pa- 
sach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. 
These are the children of Japhlet. 

34 And the sons of JShamer; Ahi, 
and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram. 

35 And the sons of his brother 
Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and 
Shelesh, and Amal. 

36 The sons of Zophah, Suah, 
and Harnepher, and Shual, and 
Beri, and Imrah, 

37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, 
and Shilshah, and Ithran, and 
Beera. 

38 And the sons of Jether; Je- 
phunneh, and Pispah, and Ara. 

39 And the sons of Ulia; Arah, 
and Haniel, and Rezia. 

40 All these were the children of 
Asher, heads of their father’s house, 
choice and mighty men of valour, 
chief of the princes. And the num- 
ber throughout the genealogy of 
them that were apt to the war and 
to battle was twenty and six thou- 
sand men. 


CHAPTER 8. 


The sons and chief men of 
Benjamin. 


Now Benjamin begat *Bela his 
firstborn, Ashbel the second, 
and Aharah the third, 

2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha 
the fifth. 

3 And the sons of Bela were, /Ad- 
dar, and Gera, and Abihud, 

4 And Abishua, and Naaman, 
and Ahoah, 

5 And Gera, and ”Shephuphan, 
and Huram. 

6 And these are the sons of Ehud: 
these are the heads of the fathers 
of the inhabitants of Geba, and they 
removed them to *Manahath: 

7 And Naaman, and Ahiah, and 
Gera, he removed them, and begat 
Uzza, and Ahihud. 

8 And Shaharaim begat children 
in the country of Moab, after he had 
sent them away; Hushim and 
Baara were his wives. 

9 And he begat of Hodesh his 
wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, 
and Malcham, 

10 And Jeuz, and Shachia, and 
Mirma. These were his sons, heads 
of the fathers. 

11 And of Hushim he begat 
Abitub, and Elpaal. 

12 The sons of Elpaal; Eber, and 


| 
4 
- 

BM 


| 813] | I CHRONICLES. 
Mi d Shamed, who built! B.c. 4004 
EMG end Lod} with the towns} __to 1056. 
thereof: 


13 Beriah also, and *Shema, who 
were heads of .the fathers of the 
inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove 
away the inhabitants of Gath: 

14 And Ahio, Shashak, and Jere- 


moth, 
15 And Zebadiah, and Arad, and 
Ader, 
16 And-Michael, and Ispah, and 
Joha, the sons of Beriah; oh 
17 And Zebadiah, and Meshullam,|* ¥** 
and Hezeki, and Heber, b Or, Shema, 
18 Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and| v-13- 


Jobab, the sons of Elpaal; ed 
19 And Jakim, and Zichri, and|° Soo, 
Zabdi, 1 Chr.9.35. 


20 And Elienai, and Zilthai, and d1 Chr.9.35. 


El, 
21 And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and| Or, ee 
Shimrath, the sons of ?Shimhi; ee 1 Chr. 
22 And Ishpan, and Heber, and 
Eliel, f Or, Shi- 
am ily Abdon, and Zichri, and 1 che $38. 
Re And Hananiah, and Elam, and] ¢ 1 Sam.14.51. 
tothijah, 
25 And Iphedeiah, and Penuel,|* O,Js#>o 
the sons of Shashak; 2 Sam.2.8. 
26 And Shamsherai, and Sheha-| . 


riah, and ‘Athaliah, Speaker 
27 And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and| 2 Sam.4.4; 
Zichri, the sons of Jeroham. 2.020: 
_ 28 These were heads of the fath-| ; or, Tahrea, 
ers, by their generations, chief men.|" 1 Chr.9.41. 


These-dwelt in Jerusalem. Rarer 

29 And at Gibeon dwelt the|” 7‘Chro.42. 
‘father of Gibeon; whose 4wife’s : 
name was Maachah: equal 

30 And his firstborn son Abdon, idee 
and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and|m Ezra 2.59. 
Nadab, Hera 2:70: 

31 And Gedor, and Ahio, and|"Non773, 
¢Zacher. 

32 And Mikloth begat fShimeah.|¢ Josh.9.27; 
And these also dwelt with their 
prethren in Jerusalem, over against 

em, 


8.20. 
> Neh.11,1,2. 


The stock of Saul and Jonathan. 


33 And &Ner begat Kish, and 
Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat 
Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and 
Abinadab, and *Esh-baal. 

34 And the son of Jonathan was 
*Merib-baal; and Merib-baal begat 
Micah. 

35 And the sons’ of Micah were, 
Pithon, and Melech, and /Tarea, 
and Ahaz, 

36 And Ahaz begat *Jehoadah; 
and Jehoadah begat Alemeth, and 


466 


Ezra 2.43-54; 


ee = 


qi ge age) Coe rer Clee a 


ci 


Azmaveth; and Zimri; and Zimri 
begat Moza, “ 
37 And Moza begat Binea: /Ra- | 
pha was his son, Eleasah his son, 
Azel his son: 

38 And Azel had six sons, whose 
names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, 
and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and 
Obadiah, and Hanan. All these 
were the sons of Azel. 

39 And the sons of Eshek his 
brother were, Ulam his firstborn, 
Jehush the second, and Eliphelet 
the third. 

40 And the sons of Ulam were 
mighty men of valour, archers, and 
had many sons, and sons’ sons, an 
hundred and fifty. All these are of 
the sons of Benjamin. 


CHAPTER 9. 


The original of Israel’s and 
Judah’s genealogies. 


S° mali Israel were reckoned by 
genealogies; and, ‘behold, they 
were written in the book of the 
kings of Israel and Judah, who 
were carried away to Babylon for 
their transgression. 


The Israelites, 


2 Now the “first inhabitants that 
dwelt in their possessions in their 
cities were, the Israelites, the 
priests, Levites, and the °Nethi- 
nims. 

3 And in Jerusalem dwelt of the 
children of Judah, and of the chil- 
dren of Benjamin, and of the 
ee ES of Ephraim, and Manas- 
seh; 

4 Uthai the son of Ammihud, the 
son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son 
of Bani, of the children of Pharez 
the son of Judah. 

5 And of the Shilonites; Asaiah 
the firstborn, and his sons. 

6 And of the sons of Zerah; Jeuel, 
and their brethren, six hundred and 
ninety. 

7. And of the sons of Benjamin; 
Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son 
of Hodaviah, ‘the son of Hase- 
nuah, 

8 And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, 
and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son 
of Michri, and Meshullam the son 
of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, 
the son of Ibnijah; 

9 And their brethren, according 
to their generations, nine hundred 
and fifty and six. All these men 
were chief of the fathers in the 
house of their fathers. 


ee oe EE eh ee 


9 10] 


B.C. 4004 
to 1056. 


The priests. 


10 And of the 4priests; Jedaiah, 
and Jehoiarib, and Jachin, 

11 And “Azariah the son of Hil- 
kiah, the son of Meshullam, the son 
of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the 
son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house 
of God; 

12 And Adaiah the son of Jero- 
ham, the son of Pashur, the son of 
Malchijah, and Maasiai the son 
of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the 
son of Meshullam, the son of Me- 
shillemith, the son of Immer; 

13 And their brethren, heads of 
the house of their fathers, a thou- 
sand and seven hundred and three- 
score; very ‘able men for the work 
of the service of the house of God. 

b Called Se- 
raiah, Neh. 


And the Levites, with Nethi-| 72! 
nims, who dwelt in Jerusalem. ‘ 


14 And of the Levites; Shema- 
jah the son of Hasshub, the son 
of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, 
of the sons of Merari; 

15 And Bakbakkar, "Heresh, and 
Galal, and Mattaniah the son of se 
Micah, the son of Zichri, the son of| ~~” 
Asaph; f 1 Chr.26, 

16 And Obadiah the son of She-| 12: 
maiah, the son of Galal, the son of| , 2 xi.11.4-7, 
Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son] _ 
of Asa, the son of Elkanah, that ge ict 
dwelt in the villages of the Netopha- - 

7 Ex.30.22-25. 


thites. 
J Lev.2.5; 


a Neh.11.10- 
14, 


c Heb. strong 
courageous 
men. 


olds. 


eCf.Num, 


17 And the porters were, Shallum, 
and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahi-}” 691 
man, and their -brethren: Shallum 
was the chief; k Lev.24.8. 

18 Who hitherto waited in the}; 5.95.30, 


king’s gate eastward: they were] note. 
porters in the companies of the chil- in 1 Chr.6.31 
dren of Levi. 32; 25.1-7. 


19 And Shallum the son of Kore, 
the son of Ebiasaph, the son -of 
Korah, and his brethren, of the 
house of his father, the Korahites, 
were over the work of the service, 
keepers of the ¢gates‘of the taber- 
nacle: and their fathers, being over 
the host of the LORD, were keepers, 
of the entry. 

20 And ‘Phinehas the son of 
Eleazar was the ruler over them in 

_ time past, and the LorD was with 


m. 

21 And Zechariah the son of Me- 
shelemiah was porter of the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation. 

22 All these which were chosen} 
to be porters in the ¢gates were two 
hundred and twelve. These were 
reckoned by their genealogy in 


n1 Chr.8.29, 
etc. 


467 


I CHRONICLES. _ | 


d Heb. thresh- 


[9 36 


their villages, whom /fDavid and 
Samuel the seer did ordain in their 
set office. 

23 So they and their children had 
the oversight of the gates of the 
house of the LorpD, namely, the 
house of the tabernacle, by wards. 

24 In four quarters were the por- 
ters, toward the east, west, north, 
and south. 

25 And their brethren, which 
were in their villages, were to come 
after seven days from time to time 
with them. 


The charge of certain Levites. 


26 For these Levites, the four 
chief porters, were in their set 
office, and were over the “chambers 
and treasuries of the house of God. 

27 And they lodged round about 
the house of God, because the 
charge was upon them, and the 
opening thereof every morning 
pértained to them. 

28 And certain of them had the 
charge of the ministering ‘vessels, 
that they should bring them in and 
out by tale. 

29 Some of them also were ap- 
pointed to oversee the vessels, and 
all the instruments of the sanctuary, 
and the fine flour, and the wine, and 
the oil, and the frankincense, and 
the spices. 

30 And some of the sons of the 


.|priests made the ‘ointment of the 


spices. 

31 And Mattithiah, one of the 
Levites, who was the firstborn of 
Shallum the Korahite, had the set 
joffice over the things that were 
made in the pans. 

32 And other of their brethren, 
of the sons of the *Kohathites, were 
over the /shewbread, to prepare it 
every sabbath. 

33 And these are the “singers, 
chief of the fathers of the Levites, 
who remaining in the chambers 
were free: for they were employed 
in that work day and night, 

34 These chief fathers of the Le- 
vites were chief throughout their 
generations; these dwelt at Jeru- 
salem. 


The stock of Saul and Jonathan. 


35 And .in Gibeon dwelt the 
father’ of Gibeon, Jehiel, whose 
wife’s name was *Maachah: 

36 And his firstborn son Abdon, 
then Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and 
Ner, and Nadab, 


9 37] 


I CHRONICLES. 


. [il 3 


37 And Gedor, and Ahio, and 
Zechariah, and Mikloth. _ 

38 And Mikloth begat Shimeam. 
And they also dwelt with their 
brethren at Jerusalem, over against 
their brethren. ; 

39 And Ner begat Kish; and 
Kish begat Saul; and Saul bega 
Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and 
Abinadab, and Esh-baal. 

40 And the son of Jonathan was 
Merib-baal: and Merib-baal begat 
Micah. 

41 And the sons of Micah were, 
Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, 
band Ahaz. 

42 And Ahaz begat Jarah; and 
Jarah begat Alemeth, and Azma- 
veth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat 
Moza; 

43 And Moza begat Binea; and 
Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, 
Azel his son. 

44 And Azel had six sons, whose 
names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, 
and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and 
Obadiah, and Hanan: these were 


the sons of Azel. 


CHAPTER 10. 
Saul’s overthrow and death. 


Now the Philistines fought 
against Israel; and the men 
of Israel fled from before the Philis- 
tines, and fell down slain in mount 
Gilboa. 

2 And the Philistines followed 
hard after Saul, and after his sons; 
and the Philistines slew Jonathan, 
and ¢Abinadab, and -Malchi-shua, 
the sons of Saul, 

3 And the battle went sore against 
Saul, and the archers hit him, and 
he was wounded of the archers. 

4 °Then said Saul to his armour- 
bearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust 
me through therewith: lest these 
uncircumcised come and abuse me. 
But his armourbearer would not; 
for he was sore afraid. So Saul 
took a sword, and fell upon it. 

3S And when his armourbearer 
saw that Saul was dead, he fell like- 
Wise on the sword, and died. 

6 So Saul died, and his three 
Sons, and all his house died to- 
gether. 

7 And when all the men of Israel 
that were in the valley saw that 
they fied, and that Saul and his 
sons were dead, then they forsook 
their cities, and fled: and the Phi- 
listines came and dwelt in them. 


| 


B.C. 4004 
to 1056. 


@ 1 Chr.8.33. 


b Added from 
1 Chr.8.35. 


¢ 1 Sam.31.1, 
etc. 

d Called Ishui, 
-1 Sam.14.49, 


e Cf.1 Sam. 
31.4-7. 


fCf.1 Sam. 
31.9,10. 


B.C. 1056. 


g1Sam.31. 
11-13. 


A 1 Sam.13.13, 
14; 15.22,26. 


#1 Sam.28.7, 
etc. 


j 2 Sam.5.4, 
etc. 


Rk 1 Sam.16. 
1-13; Psa.78. 
70-72. 


1 Cf.1 Sam, 
16.1-13. 


468 


The Philistines triumph over 
Saul. 


8 And it came to pass on the mor- 
row, when the Philistines came to 
strip the slain, that they found Saul 
and his sons fallen in mount 
Gilboa. . 

9 And when they had stripped 
him, they ‘took his head, and ‘his 
armour, and sent into the land of 
the Philistines round about, to carry 
tidings unto their idols, and to the 
people. 

10 And they put his armour in the 


house of their gods, and fastened 


his head in the temple of Dagon. 


The kindness of Jabesh-gilead 
toward Saul and his sons. 


11 And 4when all Jabesh-giiead 
heard all that the Philistines had 
done to Saul, 

12 They arose, all the valiant men, 
and took away the body of Saul, 
and the bodies of his sons, and 
brought them to Jabesh, and buried 
their bones under the oak in Jabesh, 
and fasted seven days. 


Saul’s sin for which he lost the 
kingdom. 


13 So Saul died for his “transgres- 
sion which he committed against 
the LORD, even against the word of 
the LORD, which he kept not, and 
talso for asking counsel of one that 
hadafamiliar spirit, to enquire of it ; 

14 And enquired not of the Lorp: 
therefore he slew him, and turned 
ee kingdom unto David the son of 

esse. 


CHAPTER 11. 


David becomes king over Israe] 
(2 Sam. 5..1-3), 


‘THEN all Israel jgathered them- 

selves to David unto Hebron, 
saying, Behold, we are thy bone 
and thy flesh. 

2 And moreover in time past, even 
when Saul was king, thou wast he 
that leddest out and broughtest in 
Israel: and the Lorp thy *God said 
unto thee, Thou shalt feed my peo- 


ple Israel, and thou shalt be ruler — 


over my people Israel, 

3 Therefore came all the elders of 
Israel to the king to Hebron; and 
David made a covenant with them 
in Hebron before the Lorp; and 
they ‘anointed David king over 
Israel, according to the word of the 
Lorp by Samuel, 


_— 


a: 
11 4] 


Jerusalem made the capital of 
Eaten te kingdom (2 Sam. 5. 
6-12). | 

4 And David and all Israel went to 
Jerusalem, which is *Jebus; where 
the Jebusites were, the inhabitants 
of the land. 

5 And the inhabitants of Jebus 
said to David, Thou shait not come 
hither. Nevertheless David took 
the 4castle of 1Zion, which is the 
city of David. 

6 And David said, Whosoever 
smiteth the Jebusites first shall be 
chief and captain. So Joab the son 
of Zeruiah went first up, and was 
chief. 

7 And David dwelt in the castle; 
therefore they called “it the city of 
David. 

8 Andhebuiltthecityround about, 
even from Millo round about: and 
Joab repaired the rest of the city. 

9 So David waxed greater and 
greater: for the LorD of hosts was 
with him. 


A catalogue of David’s mighty | 7°*5% 
men. e Cf.2 Sam.5. 
10 @These also are the chief of the] 38%! Chr. 
mighty men whom David had, who c 
strengthened themselves with him|/ One cubit = 
in his kingdom, and with all Israel,| 2>°Ut 18 in. 
to make him king, according to the 
word of the LorD concerning Israel. 
11 And this 7s the number of the 
mighty men whom David had; Ja- 
shobeam, an Hachmonite, the chief 
of the captains: he lifted up his 
spear against three hundred slain 
by him at one time. 
12 And after him was Eleazar the 
--son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was 
one of the three mighties. 
13 He was with David at Pas-dam- 
mim, and there the Philistines were 
gathered together to battle, where 
was a parcel of ground full of bar- 
ley: and the people fled from before 
the Philistines. 
14 And they set themselves in the 
midst of that parcel, and delivered 
it, and slew the Philistines; and the 
LorD saved them by a great deliv- 
erance. 
15 Now “three of the thirty cap- 


a Cf.Jud.1. 
21;19.10,11. 


bv.7. 
c See v.5. 
d Cf.2 Sam, 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1047. 


{al 25 


tains went down to the rock to ~ 
David, into the cave of Adullam; 
and the host of the Philistines en- 
camped in the valley of Rephaim. 

16 And David was then in the 
hold, and the Philistines’ garrison 
was then at Beth-lehem. 

17 And David longed, and said, 
Oh that one would give me drink 
of the water of the well of Beth- 
lehem, that is at the gate! 

18 And the three brake through 
the host of the Philistines, and drew 
water out of the well of Beth-lehem, 
that was by the gate, and took if, 
and brought it to David: but David 
would not drink of it, but poured it 
out to the LoRD, 

19 And said, My God forbid it me, 
that I should do this thing: shall I 
drink the blood of these men that 
have ‘put their lives in jeopardy? 
for with the jeopardy of their 
lives they brought it. Therefore 
he would not drink it. These things 
did these three mightiest. 

20 And Abishai the brother of 
Joab, he was chief of the three: for 
lifting up his spear against three 
hundred, he slew them, and had a 
name among the three. 

21 Of the three, he was more hon- 
ourable than the two; for he was 
their captain: howbeit he attained 
not to the first three. 

22 Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, 
the son of a valiant man of Kab- 
zeel, who had done many acts; he 
slew two lionlike men of Moab: also 
he went down and slew a lion in a 
pit in a snowy day. 

23 And he slew an Egyptian, a 
man of great stature, five Scubits 
high; and in the Egyptian’s hand 
was a spear like a weaver’s beam; 
and he went down to him with a 
staff, and plucked the spear out of 
the Egyptian’s hand, and slew him 
with his own spear. 

24 These things did Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada, and had the name 
among the three mighties. 

25 Behold, he was honourable 
among the thirty, but attained not 
to the frst three: and David set 
[him over his guard. 


1 Heb. castle. (1) Zion, the ancient Jebusite stronghold, is the southwest eminence 
in Jerusalem, called in Scripture the city of David, and associated with the Davidic 
soyalty both historically and prophetically (1 Chr. 11. 7; Psa. 2. 6; Isa. 2.3). The 


word is often used of the whole city of Jerusalem . 
in passages referring to the future kingdom-age (Isa. 1, 
Zech. 1. 16, 17; 8. 3-8; Rom, 11. 26). oped 
(2) In Deut. 4. 48 the name is given to a 


(Psa. 48. 2, 3), especially 
27; 2. 3; 4. 1-6; Joel 3. 16; 
word is used symbolically of heaven. 
projection or peak of Mount Hermon. 

469 


considered as the city of God 


In Heb. 12. 22 the 


nite, 


jah the Pelonite, U 


Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of 
Beth-lehem, 

27 Shainmoth the Harorite, Helez 
‘the Pelonite, 


98 Ira the son of Ikkesh the Te-| 


koite, Abi-ezer the Antothite, i 
29 Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai 
‘the Ahohite, : 
30 Maharai the Netophathite, He-) 
led the son of Baanah the Netopha- 


te; 
31 Ithaithe son of RibaiofGibeah, 
that pertained to the children of 
Benjamin, Benaiah the Piratho- 


32 Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, 
Abiel the Arbathite, R 

33 Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eli- 
ahba the Shaalbonite, 

34 The sons of Hashem the Gi- 
zonite, Jonathan the son of Shage 
the Hararite, 

35 Ahiam the son of Sacar the 
Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur, 

36 Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahi- 


37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai 
the son of Ezbai, 
38 Joel the brother of Nathan, 


Mibhar the son of Haggeri, 
39 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai 


the Berothite, the armourbearer of} cic. April, 


Joab the son of Zeruiah, ‘ 
40 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the 


and Joshaphat the Mithnite, 
44 zzia the Ashterathite, Shama 
and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the 


45 Jediael the son of Shimri, and 
Joha his brother, the Tizite, 

46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeri- 
bai, and Joshaviah, the sons of El- 
naam, and Ithmah the Moabite, 

47 Hliel, and Obed, and Jasiel the 
Mesobaite. 


CHAPTER 12, 


The companies that came to 
David at Ziklas. 


were among the mighty men, help- 
ers of the war. 


rhe ete Bey Ab? 2 a 9p: eas ete a (Sint yi yh Be ted ae 
" ele St Mi e aes 
I CHRONICLES. — 

26 Also the valiant men of the] B.c. 1047. 
armies were, Asahel the brother of|~ Perla 


a1 Sam.27.6. 
b Cf.Jud.20. 
16. 


2 They were armed with bows, 
and could use both the right hand 
and the left bin hurling stones and _ 
shooting arrows out of a bow, even 
of Saul’s brethren of Benjamin, 

3 The chief was Ahiezer, then 
Joash, the sons of Shemaah the 
Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, 
the sons of Azmaveth; and Ber- 
achah, and Jehu the Antothite, 

4 And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a 
mighty man among the thirty, and 
over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and 
Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josa- 
bad the Gederathite, 

5 Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bea- 
liah, and Shemariah, and Shepha- 
tiah the Haruphite, 

6 Elkanah, and Jesiah; and Aza- 
reel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, 
the Korhites, 

7 And Joelah, and Zebadiah, the 
sons of Jeroham of Gedor. 


(In the order of the history 
1 Chr. 12. 8-15 follows 2 Sam. 5. 
i701 ‘Chr. 14. 8:) 


8 And of the Gadites there sepa- 
tated themselves unto David into 
the hold to the wilderness men of 
might, and men of war fit for the 
battle, that could handle shield and 
buckler, whose faces were like the 
faces of lions, and were as swift as 
the roés upon the mountains; 

9 Ezer the first, Obadiah the sec- | 
ond, Eliab the third, 

10 Mishmannah the fourth, Jere- 
miah the fifth, 

11 Attai the sixth, Eliel the sev- 
.enth, 

12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad 
the ninth, 

13. Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai 
the eleventh. 

14 These were of the sons of Gad, 
Captains of the host: one of the 
least was over an hundred, and the 
greatest over a thousand. 

15 These are they that went over 
Jordan in the “first month, when it 
had overflown all his banks; and 
they put to flight all them of the 
valleys, both toward the east, and 
toward the west, f 

16 And there came of the children 
of Benjamin and Judah to the hold 
unto David. 

17 And David went out to meet 
them, and answered and said unto 
them, If ye be come peaceably unto 
me to help me, mine heart shall be 
knit unto-you: but if ye be cometo 
betray.me to mine enemies, seeing 
‘there ig no wrong in mine hands, 


\ 


as’ Geel ame. | tell a | a a. 


I CHRONICLES. 


the God of our fathers look thereon, 
and rebuke it. 

18 Then the “spirit came upon 

>Amasai, who was chief of the cap- 
tains, and he said, Thine are we, 
David, and on thy side, thou son of 
Jesse: peace, peace be unto thee, 
and peace be to thine helpers; for 
thy God helpeth thee. Then David 
received them, and made them cap- 
tains of the band. 

19 And there fell some of “Manas- 
seh to David, when he came with 
the Philistines against Saul to bat- 
tle: but they helped them not: for 
the lords of the Philistines upon 
advisement sent him away, 4say- 
ing, He will fall to his master Saul 
to the jeopardy of our heads. 

20 As he went to Ziklag, there fell 
to him of Manasseh, Adnah, and 
Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, 
and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zilthai, 
captains.of the thousands that were 
of Manasseh. 

21 Andthey helped David against 
the band of the rovers: for they 
were all mighty men of valour, and 
were captains in the host. 

22 For at that time day by day, 
there came to David to help him, 
until i¢ was a great host, like the 
host of God. 


The men of Israel who made 
David king. (Cf. 2 Sam. 5. 1-3.) 


23 And these are the numbers of 
the bands that were ready armed 
to the war, and came to David /to 
Hebron, to turn the kingdom of 
Saul to him, éaccording to the word 
of the LORD. 

24 The children of J udah that bare 
shield and spear were six thousand 


ee eight hundred, ready armed to 
€ W: 

25 Of the children of Simeon, 
mighty men of valour for the war, 
seven thousand and one hundred. 

26 Of the children of Levi four 
thousand and six hundred. 

27 And Jehoiada was the leader 
of the Aaronites, and with him were 
three thousand and seven hundred; 

28 And “Zadok, a young man 
mighty of valour, and of his father’s 
house twenty and two captains. 

29 And of the children of Benja- 
min, the kindred of Saul, three 
thousand: for hitherto the greatest 
part of them had ‘kept the ward of 
the house of Saul. 

30 And of the children of Ephraim 
twenty thousand and eight hun- 
dred, mighty: men of valour, fa- 


a Holy Spirit. 
1 Chr.28.12. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Ma!l.2.15.) 

b 2 Sam.17.25, 
called 
Amasa. 

¢1 Sam.29.2. 

d 1 Sam.29.4. 


e1 Sam.30. 


f 2 Sam.2.1-4;- 
5.1-3. 

g1Sam.16. 
14. 


h 2 Sam.8.17. 
#2 Sam.2.4-7. . 
j See 1 Ki.8.61. 


k Cf.2 Sam. 
6,1-10. 


471 


mous throughout the house of their. 
fathers. 

31 And of the half tribe of Manas- 
seh eighteen thousand, which were 
expressed by name, to come and 
make David king. 

32 And of the children of Issachar, 


.|which were men that had under- 


standing of the times, to know what 
Israel ought to do; the heads of 
them were two hundred; and ail 
their brethren were at their com- 
mandment. 

33 Of Zebulun, such as went forth 
to battle, expert. in war, with all in- 
struments of war, fifty thousand, 


34 And of Naphtali a thousand 
captains, and with them with shield 
and spear thirty and seven thou- 


sand. 

35 And of the Danites expert in 
war twenty and eight thousand and 
six hundred. 

36 And of Asher, such as went 
forth to battle, expert in war, forty 
thousand. 

37 And on the other side of Jor- 


idan, of the Reubenites, and the 


Gadites, and of the half tribe of 
Manasseh, with all manner of in- 
struments of war for the battle, an 
hundred and twenty thousand. 

38 All these men of war, that 
could keep rank, came with a Jper- 
fect heart ’to ‘Hebron, to make 
David king over all Israel: and all 
the rest also of Israel were of one 
heart to make David king. 

39 And there they were with 
David three days, eating and drink- 

ing: for their brethren had pre- 
pared for them. 

40 Moreover they that were nigh 
them, even unto Issachar and Zebu- 
lun and Naphtali, brought bread on 
asses, and on camels, and on mules, 
and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes 
of figs, and bunches of raisins, and 
wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep 
abundantly: for there was joy in 
Israel. 


CHAPTER 13. 


Doing a right thing in the 
wrong Way. 


| ‘Ane David consulted with the 


captains: of thousands and 
hundreds, and with every leader. 
2 And *David said unto all the 
congregation of Israel, If it seern 
good unto you, and that it be of the 


ILoRD our God, let us send abroad 


I CHRONICLES. 


unto our brethren every where, that 
are left in all the land of Israel, 
and with them. a/so to the priests 
and Levites which are in their 
cities and suburbs, that they may 
gather themselves unto us: 

3 And let us bring again the ark 
of our God to us: for we enquired 
not at it in the days of Saul. ; 

4 And all the congregation said 
that they would do so: for the thing 
was right in the eyes of all the 
people. 

5 So David gathered all Israel 
together, from Shihor of Egypt 
even unto the entering of Hemath, 
to bring the ark of God from 
*Kirjath-jearim. 

6 And David went up, and all 
Israel, to “Baalah, that is, to 
Kirjath-jearim, which belonged to 
Judah, to bring up thence the ark 
of God the Lorp, that ‘dwelleth 
between thecherubims, whosename 
is called on it. 

7 And they carried the ark of 
God in a new cart out of the house 
of Abinadab: and Uzza and Ahio 
drave the cart. 

8 And David and all Israel played 
before God with all their might, 
and with singing, and with harps, 
and with. psalteries, and with tim- 
brels, and with cymbals, and with 
trumpets. 


Uzza being smitten, the ark is 
left at the house of Obed- 
edom. 


9 And when they came unto the 
threshingfloor of ¢Chidon, Uzza put 
forth his hand to hold the ark; for 
the oxen stumbled. 

10 And the anger of the LoRD was 
kindled against Uzza, and he smote 
him, fbecause he put his hand to 
the ark: and there he died before 
God. 

11 And David was displeased, be- 
cause the Lorp had made a breach 
upon Uzza: wherefore that place is 
called ¢Perez-uzza to this. day. 

12 And David was afraid of God 
that day, saying, How shall I bring 
the ark of God home to me? 

13 So David brought not the ark 
home to himself to the city of| 
David, but carried it aside into 
the house of Obed-edom the Git- 


tite. 

14 And the ark of God ‘remained 
with the family of Obed-edom in| 
“his house three months. And the 
Lorp ‘blessed the house of Obed- 
edom, and all that he had. 


B.C. 1045. 


(B.C, 1043.) 


a1 Sam.6.1- 
2ES fel 2e 


6 Josh.15.9, 
etc. 


c Ex.25.22. 

d Cf.Num.4, 
15; 1 Che, 
15.2525. 

e Cailed 
Nachon, 

2 Sam.6.6. 

f See Num.4. 
15° 

gi.e. the 
breach of 
Uzza. 

hk 2 Sam.6.11, 

#1 Chr.26.4-8. 

j2Sam.5.11, 
12. 

k Called El- 
ada, 2 Sam, 
5.16. 

12 Sam.5. 
17-21, 


m 2 Sam.5, 
22-25. 


CHAPTER 14. 
The prosperity of King David. 


[14 is 


; 


OW /Hiram king of Tyre sent — 
messengers to David, and tim- > 


ber of cedars, with masons and car- 
penters, to build him an house. 

2 And David perceived that the 
Lorp had confirmed him king over 
Israel, for his kingdom was lifted 


up on high, because of his people _ 


Israel. 


3 And David took more wives at 


Jerusalem: and David begat more 
sons and daughters. 

4 Now these are the names of Ars 
children which he had in Jerusa- 
lem; Shammua, and Shobab, Na- 
than, and Solomon, 

5 And Ibhar, and Elishua, and 
Elpalet, 

6 And Nogah, and Nepheg, and 
Japhia, 

7 And Elishama, and -Beeliada, 
and Eliphalet. 

8 And ‘when the Philistines heard 
that David was anointed king over 
all Israel, all the Philistines went 
up to seek David. And David 


heard of it, and went out against — 


them. 

9 And the Philistines came and 
spread themselves in the valley of 
Rephaim., 

10 And David enquired of God, 
saying, Shall I go up against the 
Philistines? and wilt thou deliver 
them into mine hand? And the 
LORD said unto him, Go up; for I 
will deliver them into thine hand. 

11 So they came up to Baal-pera- 
zim; and David smote them there. 
Then David said, God hath broken 
in upon mine enemies by mine hand 
like the breaking forth of waters: 
therefore they called the name of 
that place Baal-perazim. 

12 And when they had left their 
gods there, David gave a command- 
ment, and they were burned with 


re. 

13 ™And the Philistines yet again 
spread themselves abroad in the 
valley. 

*14. Therefore David enquired again 

of God; and God said unto him, Go 
not up after them; turn away from 
them, and come upon them over 
against the mulberry trees. 

15 Andit shall be, when thou shalt 
hear a sound of going in the tops of 
the mulberry trees, that then thou 
shalt go out to battle: for God is 
gone forth before thee to smite the 
host of the Philistines. 


16 David therefore did as God 
commanded him: and they smote 
the host of the Philistines from 
2Gibeon even to Gazer. 

17 And the fame of David went! 
out into all lands; and the Lorp 
brought the fear of him upon all 
nations, . 


CHAPTER 15. 


Doing a right thing in the right 
way. (Cf.1 Chr. 13.) 


AND David made him houses in 
the city of David, and ‘pre- 
pared a place for the ark of God, 
and pitched for it a tent. 

2 Then Davidsaid, 2Noneoughtto 
carry the ark of God but the Levites: 
for «them hath the LorD chosen to 
carry the ark of God, and to minis- 
ter unto him for ever. 

3 fAnd David gathered all Israel 
together to Jerusalem, to bring up 
the ark of the LorD unto his place, 
which he had prepared for it. 

4 And David assembled the chil- 
dren of Aaron, and the Levites: 

5 Of the sons of Kohath; Uriel the 
chief, and his brethren an hundred 
and twenty: 


6 Of the sons of Merari; Asaiah 


the chief, and his brethren two) vic. separate. 


hundred and twenty: 

7 Of the sons of Gershom; Joel the 
chief, and his brethren an hundred 
and thirty: 

8 Of the sons of Elizaphan; She- 
maiah the chief, and his brethren 
two hundred: 

9 Of the sons of Hebron; Eliel the 
chief, and his brethren fourscore: 

“10 Of the sons of Uzziel; Ammina- 
dab the chief, and his brethren an 
hundred and twelve. 

11 And David called for Zadok and 
Abiathar the priests, and for the 
Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, 
ee ge and Eliel, and Ammina- 

abd, 

12 And said unto them, Ye are 
the chief of the fathers of the Le- 
vites: sanctify yourselves, both ye 
and your brethren, that ye may 
bring up the ark of the LorpD God 
of Israel unto the place that I 
have prepared for it. , 

13 For “because ye did it not at 
the first, the LorD our God made a 
breach upon us, for that we sought 
him not after the due order. a 
14 So the priests and the Levites 
sanctified themselves to bring up| 
the ark of the Lorp God of Israel. 


15 And the children of the Levites 


I CHRONICLES. 


(B.C. 1042.) 


a Called Geba, 
2 Sam.5.25. 


b Cf.Deut. 
2,25; 11.253. 
2 Chr.20.29, 

c1 Chr.16.1. 


d Cf.2 Sam.6. 
1-11, 

e Num.4.2, 
15; Deut.10. 
8; 31.9. 

f Cf.2 Chr.5. 
3-14. 


Ex.19.10; 
28.41; Lev. 
10.3; Josh. 
7.13. 

h 1 Chr.13.7- 
11. 

i Jaaziel, in 
v.18. 

jv.5; 1 Chr, 
13.14. 


ki Ki.8.1, 


473 


B.C... 1045. 


[15 27 


bare the ark of God upon their 
shoulders with the staves thereon, 
as Moses commanded according to 
the word of the Lorpb. 

16 And David spake to the chief 
of the Levites to appoint their 
brethren to be the singers with in- 
struments of musick, psalteries and 
harps and cymbals, sounding, by 
lifting up the voice with joy. 

17 So the Levites appointed He- 
man the son of Joel; and of his 
brethren, Asaph the son of Bere- 
chiah; and of the sons of Merari 
their brethren, Ethan the son of 
Kushaiah; 

18 And with them their brethren 
of the second degree, Zechariah, 
Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, 
and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and 
Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Matti- 
thiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, 
and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the 
porters. 

19 So the singers, Heman, Asaph, 
and Ethan, were appointed to 
sound with cymbals of brass; 

20 And Zechariah, and ‘Aziel, 
and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and 
Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, 
and Benaiah, with psalteries on 
Alamoth; 

21 And Mattithiah, and Eliph- 
eleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed- 
edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with 
harps on the Sheminith to excel. 

22 And Chenaniah, chief of the 
Levites, was for song:,he instructed 
about the song, because he was 
skilful. 

23 And Berechiah and Elkanah 
were doorkeepers for the ark. 


| 24 And Shebaniah, and Jehosha- 


phat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, 
and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and 
Eliezer, the priests, did blow with 
the trumpets before the ark of God: 
and jObed-edom and Jehiah were 
doorkeepers for the ark. 


David brings up the ark 
(2 Sami. 6. 12-23). 


25 *So David, and the elders of 
Israel, and the captains over thou- 
sands, went to bring up the ark of 
the covenant of the LorD out of 
the house of Obed-edom with joy. 

26 And it came to pass, when God 
helped the Levites that bare the ark 
of the covenant of the LorpD, that 
they offered seven bullocks and 
seven rams. 

27 And David was clothed with a 
robe of fine linen, and all the Le- 
vites that bare the ark, and the 


_ of the song with the singers: David 
also had upon him an ephod of 


linen. ; 

28 Thus 2all Israel brought up the 
ark of the covenant of the Lorp 
with shouting, and with sound of 
the cornet, and with trumpets, and 
with cymbals, making a noise with 
psalteries and harps. 


Michal despises David. 


29 And it came to pass, as the ark 
of the covenant of the LorpD came 
to the city of David, that ‘Michal 
the daughter of Saul looking out at 
ry, 


a1 Chr.13.8. 


6 Num.23.21; 


‘ ; s A h.6.5,20; 
a window saw king David dancing pee 


and playing: and she despised him! 1 Thes.4.16. 


in her heart. ee Parse) 


20,27; 19.11- 


CHAPTER 16. 13 a bored 


David’s festival sacrifice. 


S° they brought the ¢ark of God,|¢ Chena 
and set it in the midst of the nave 
tent that David had pitched for it:] ¢ See tities of 
and they offered burnt-sacrifices = 38 
and peace-offerings before God. isc 
} ‘2 And when David had made an| See 2 Sam. 
end of offering the burnt-offerings| 23-1. 
and the peace-offerings, he blessed gCE£Psa.105. 
the people in the name of the Lorp. 
3 And he dealt to every one of Is-|# Gen-15.18, 
rael, both man and woman, to every| 7°fe 
an one -a loaf of bread, and a good| #Gen.26.3; 
‘ piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. ae: 35.11, 


David orders a choir. 


: jie. nations. 


4 And he appointed certain of 
the Levites to minister before the 
ark of the LorD, and to ‘record,| ?Psa-19.9, 
and to thank and praise the Lorp| 7°fe: 
God of Israel: ] m Lev.19.4; 
5S Asaph the chief, and next to| ef-1 Cor.10, 
} him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemira-| 20 
moth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, 
and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed- 
edom: and Jeiel with psalteries and 
with harps; but Asaph made a 
sound with cymbals; 

6 Benaiah also and Jahaziel the 
priests with trumpets continually 
petare the ark of the covenant.of 

od, 


The psalm. of thanksgiving, 


7 Then on that-day fDavid deliv- 

ered first this psalm to thank the 

LORD into the hand of Asaph and 
4) his brethren. 

8 &8Give thanks unto the Lorp, 
call upon his name, make known his 
deeds among the people. 

9 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto 


474 


Bcc Novi uht bea at 
45 28] I CHRONICLES. 


singers, and Chenaniah the master] B.c. 1042. 


ki.e. peoples. 


him, talk ye of all his wondro 
works. 

10 Glory ye in his holy name: let 
the heart of them rejoice that seek 
the Lorp. ‘ 

11 Seek the Lorp and-= his 
strength, seek his face continually. 

12 Remember his marvellous 
works that he hath done, his won- 
ders,and the judgments of his mouth; 
13 O ye seed of Israel his servant, 
ye children of Jacob, his chosen 
ones. 

14 He is the LorpD our God; his 
judgments are in all the earth. ; 

15 Be ye mindful always of his 
covenant; the word which he com- 
manded to a thousand generations; 

16 Even of the covenant which 
he made with “Abraham, and of his 
oath unto Isaac; 

17 And hath ‘confirmed the same 
to Jacob for alaw, and to Israel for 
an everlasting covenant, , 

18 Saying, Unto thee will I give 
the land of Canaan, the lot of your 
inheritance; 

19 When ye were but few, even a 
few, and strangers in it. 

20 And when they went from na- 
tion to nation, and from one king- 
dom to another people: 

21 He suffered no man to do them 
wrong: yea, he reproved kings for 
their sakes, 

22 Saying, Touch not mine an- 
ointed, and do my prophets no 
harm. 

23 Sing unto the Lorp, all the 
earth; shew forth from day to day 
his salvation. 

24 Declare his glory among the 
Jheathen; his marvellous works 
among all nations. ; 

25 For great is the Lorp, and 
greatly to be praised: he also is to 
be ‘feared above all gods. 

26 For all the “gods of the people 
are idols: but the Lorp made the 
heavens. 

27 Glory and honour are in his 
presence; strength and gladness are 
in his place. 

28 Give unto the Lorp, ye kins 
dreds of the people, give unto the 
Lorp glory and strength. 

29 Give unto the Lorp the glory 
due unto his name: bring an offer- 
ing, and come before him: worship 
the Lorp in the beauty of holiness, 

30 Fear before him, all the earth: 
the world also shall be stable, that 
it be not moved. 

31 Let the heavens be glad, and 
let the earth rejoice; and let men 

‘ 
+d 


:. 


' a : 

16 32] I CHRONICLES. [17.8 
say among the nations, The LORD) _B:c. 1042. |bals: for those that should make a 
reigneth. — 4 sound, and’ with musical instru- 

32 Let the sea roar, and the ful- ments of God! And the sons of 
ness thereof : let the fields rejoice, Jeduthun were porters. 
and all that is therein: 43° sAnd: all the people departed 
33 Then shall the trees’ of the every man to his house: and David 
wood sing out at the presence of returned to bless his house: 
the Lorn, because he ’cometh to 
oS the ee CHAPTER 17. 
for he BN eboas aE ae ah Dari desire to build the Lord’s 
dureth for ever. a Isa.55.12,13. ouse (2 Sam. 7. 1-3). 


35 And say ye, Save us, O God of eenh> Now it came to pass, as David 
our salvation, and gather us to- b jot die, |+™ sat_in his house, that David 
gether, and deliver us from the} Mt.25.31-46. |said to Nathan the prophet, Lo, If 


cheathen, that we may give thanks] . t dwell in an house of ‘cedars, but 
to thy holy name, and glory in thy] °i: mations. |the ark of the covenant of the Lorp 
praise. dt Chr6.39; |remaineth under curtains. 


36 Blessed be the Lorp Ged of| 15-17;.25.1- | 2 Then Nathan tgaid unto David, 
Israel’ for ever and ever. And all 93 2 Chr.5- |Do all that is‘ in thine heart; for 
the people said, Amen, and praised] 41” writer of|God' 1s with thee. 
the Lorp. See 3 And it came to pass the same 
David appoints ministers, por- 77,78,79,80, night, that the word of God came 

t 5 sss 81,82,83- to Nathan, saying, 
‘ers, priests, and musicians to oeeY : 
attend continually on the ark.| ¢1 Chr.13.14 4: Go and tell David my servant, 
ai 13.14 |/Thus saith the LorpD, Thou shalt 


37 So he left there before the lark] ¢2 sam.g:17; |not build me an house’ to dwell in: 


of the covenant of the Lord Asaph] 1524-36; 'S For havenot dwelt in an house 
and his brethren, to minister before! } Ke) )2, |Since the day that I brought up Is- 
the ark continually, as every day’s| Ezra 7.2;. rael unto this day; but have gone 
work required: ghee _ | Ezk.40.46.  |from tent to tent, and from one 
Bo And eObed-edom with their e%Sams. tabernacle to another. 

ethren, threescore and eight; 18-21. 6 Wheresoever I have walked 
Obed-edom also the son of Jedu- with ali Israel, spake I a word to 
thun and Hosah to be porters: h1Chr.i4.l. Jany of the judges of Israel, whom I 


39° And fZadok the priest, and his} ; cf.vs.3;4; commanded to feed my people, say- 
brethren the priests, before’ the tab-| the follyof jing, Why have ye not built me an 


{ by human opin- |} 
ernacle of the Lorp in the high) = wua7;b house of cedars? 


place that was at Gibeon, Auneslok ares 
40. To offer burnt-offerings unto God. wa ie Blass Pas ee 
the LorpD upon the altar of the], o.046 Bor E Chr 
burnt-offering continually morning|’ 17-13. 7 Now therefore thus shalt thou 
and evening, and to do according say unto my servant David, Thus 
to all that is written in the law of saith the Lorp of hosts, I took 
the Lorp, which. he commanded thee Jfrom. the sheepcote, even 
Israel; 2from following the sheep, that thou 
41 And'with them Heman and Je- shouldest be ruler over my people 
duthun, and the rest that were Israel: \ 
chosen, who were expressed by. 8 And I have been with thee 
name, to give thanks to the Lorb, whithersoever thou’ hast walked, 
because his mercy endureth for and have cut off all thine enemies 
ever; from before thee, and have made 
42. And with them Heman and thee a name like the name of the 
Jeduthun with trumpets and cym- great men that are in the earth. 


1 It will be understood that the ancient tabernacle was now divided; the ark was 
brought into ‘‘Zion’” (1 Chr. 11. 5, note), while the brazen altar, at least, and prob- 
ably the vessels of the holy place (Ex. 25. 23-40; 37. 10-25; 40) 22-27) were estab- 
lished in the high-place at Gibeon. Asaph and the singers (1 Chr: 6. 31-39; 15. 16-19; 
16. 5s; 25. 6) were “left before the ark” (1 Chr. 16, 37), while the priests ministered 
in Gibeon “before the tabernacle” (I Chr. 16. 39). All this’ was’ mere confusion: 
cf Heb. 9. 1-7. With the construction of the’ temple the divine order seems to 
have been restored. ¢ 
“2 David is here, as often, a type of his Son after the flesh (Mt. 1. 1; Rom. 1. 3), 
Jesus the Shepherd-King. At His first coming He took the shepherd’s place, first 

ee AIS 


B79 


9 Also I will ordain a place for my 
people Israel, and will ¢plant them, 
and they shall dwell in their place, 
and shall be moved no more; neither 
shall the children of wickedness 
waste them any more, as at the 
beginning, ' 

10 And %since the time that I 
commanded ‘judges to be over my 
people Israel. Moreover I will 
subdue all thine enemies. Further- 
more I tell thee that the LORD will 
build thee an house. 

11 And it shall come to pass, 
é4when thy days be expired that-thou 
must go to be with thy fathers, that 
I will raise up ¢thy seed after thee, 
which shall be of thy sons; and I 
will establish his kingdom. 

12 fHe shall build me an house, 

i and I will stablish his throne for 
‘ ever. 
: 13 I will be his father, and he shall 
be my son: and I will not take my 
mercy away from him, gas I took it 
from him that was before thee: 

14 But I will settle him in mine 
house and in my kingdom for ever: 
and his throne shall be established 
for evermore. ; 

15 According to all these words, 
and according to all this vision, so 
did Nathan speak unto David. 


David’s worship and prayer 
(2 Sam. 7. 18-29). 


16 And David the king came and 

sat before the Lorp, and said, Who 
am I, O Lorp God, and what is 
mine house, that thou hast brought 
me hitherto? 
_17_ And yet this was a small thing 
in thine eyes, O God; for thou hast 
also spoken of thy servant’s house 
for a great white to come, and hast 
regarded me according to the estate 
of a man of high degree, O LoRD 
God. 

18 What can David speak more 
to thee for the honour of thy ser- 
vant? for thou knowest thy servant. 

19 O Lorpb, for thy servant’s 
sake, and according to thine own 
heart, hast thou done all this great- 
ness, in making known all these 
great things. 

20 O Lorp, there is none like 
thee, neither is there any God be- 


in death (John 10. 11 


I CHRONICLES. 


ty ig Rae eee To HV ES ES Nae eine al eS ee 


B.C. 1042. 


a Deut.30.1- 
9; Isa.11. 
11-13; Jer. 
16.14-16; 23. 
5-8; 24.6; 
Ezk.37.21- 
27; Amos 9. 
14. 


6.1 Ki.2.1; 
Acts 13.36. 


c Or, as at the 
beginning, 
when I set 
judges over 
my peopie, 
etc. 


1 Chr.22.10, 
etc.; 28.20. 


f Psa.89.3,4, 
20-37. 


g1 Sam.15. 
23-28. 


h Deut.4.6-8, 
33-38; Psa. 
147.20. 


# Ex.14.30, 
note. 


j 2 Sam.8.1. 

k 2 Sam.8.2; 
cf.Num.24. 
17; Zeph. 
2.9. 

11 Sam.10.27. 


m 2 Sam.8.3. 


be 
[18 


side thee, according to all that we 
have heard with our ears. 

21 4And what one nation in the 
earth ss like thy people Israel, 
whom God went to ‘redeem to be 
his own people, to make thee aname 
of greatness and terribleness, by 
driving out nations from before thy 
people, whom thou hast ‘redeemed 
out of Egypt? . 

22 For thy people Israel didst 
thou make thine own people for 
ever; and thou, LoRD, becamest 
their God. 

23 Therefore now, LORD, let the 
thing that thou hast spoken con- 
cerning thy servant and concerning. 
his house be established for ever, 
and do as thou hast said. 

24 Let it even be established, that 
thy name may be magnified for 
ever, saying, The Lorp of hosts 
is the God of Israel, even a God to 
Israel: and Jet the house of David 
thy servant be established before 
thee. 

25 For thou, O my God, hast told 
thy servant that thou wilt build 
him an house: therefore thy servant 
hath found in his heart to pray be- 
fore thee. , 

26 And now, LorD, thou art God, 
and hast promised this goodness 
unto thy servant: ; 

27 Now therefore let it please thee 
to bless the house of thy servant, 
that it may be before thee for ever: 
for thou blessest, O Lorp, and it 
shall be blessed for ever. : 


‘ 


CHAPTER 18. 


The full establishment of Da- 
vid’s kingdom (2 Sam. 8. 1-18). 


Now after this it came to pass; 
Jthat David smote the Philis- 
tines, and subdued them, and took 
Gath and her towns out of the hand 
of the Philistines. 

2 And he smote *Moab; and the 
Moabites became David’s servants, 
and 'brought gifts. 

3 ™And David smote Hadarezer 
king of Zobah unto Hamath, as he 
went to stablish his dominion by 
the river Euphrates. 

4 And David took from him a 


thousand chariots, and seven thou- 


), and now in resurrection power (Heb. 13. 20). At His return 


He will take the place of “ruler over Israel” (Isa. 11, 10-12; Jer. 23. 5-8; Lk. 1. 32, 33; 


Acts 15. 14-17), 


This is 
good Shepherd is 


his the precise order of Psalms 22, 23, 24. 
I is giving His life for the she 
sheep; in the third He comes to reign as K 


476 


CED; 
ing of Glory. 


In the first the 
in the second He is caring for the 


tai a ding) Bumeot Te Rae. ye 4 : emma eek Ms 

18 5] I CHRONICLES. [19 10 
sand horsemen, and twenty thou- 
sand footmen: David also houghed 
all the chariot horses, but reserved 
of them an hundred chariots. 

5 ¢And when the Syrians of Da- 
mascus came to help Hadarezer 
king of Zobah, David slew of the 
Syrians two and twenty thousand 
men. 

6 Then David put garrisons in 
Syria-damascus; and the Syrians 
became David’s servants, and 
brought gifts. Thus the LorpD 


the Pelethites; and the sons of 
David were chief about the king. 


CHAPTER 19, 


The Ammonite-Syrian war (2 
Sam. 10.1-19). First campaign 
under Joab. 


Now it came to pass after this, 
that Nahash the king of the 
children of Ammon died, and his 
son reigned in his stead. 

2 And David said, I will shew 


B.C. 1040. 


preserved David whithersoever he kindness unto Hanun the son of 
went. a few mre ea oxipie We err because his da(vier wed 
7 And David too e shields o indness to me. An avid sent 
gold that were on the servants of messengers to comfort him concern- 
Hadarezer, and brought them to salle ing his father. So the servants of 
Be Likewise from Tibhath, and 5-7. See chaldsen aa | oe Ga 
from Chun, cities of Hadarezer,| 23-25. comfort him. 

brought David very much brass, 3 But the princes of the children 


wherewith Solomon made the bra-|Galled lof Ammon said to Hanun, Thinkest 
sen sea, and the pillars, and the| Berothai, |thou that David doth honour thy 


vessels of brass. 2Sam.8.8. |father, that he hath sent comforters 

9 Now when Tou king of Hamath] - op 9 sam. unto thee? are not his servants 
heard how David had smitten “ip 8.10-12. come unto thee fos to search, and He 
the host of Hadarezer king ©: overthrow, and to spy out the 

d Nephi 
ao. oie sent Hadoram his son to of David ee Hanun took David’s 
re er to 

king David, to enquire of his wel- Joabs 2Sam. |servants, and shaved them, and cut 
fare, and to congratulate sto7 ie oy deal oft thas cerments in fie mnastberd 
cause he had fought against Hadar-} ~ ~ y their buttocks, and sen em 
ezer, and smitten him; (for Hadar-] ¢ Gen.27. away. ; 
ezer had war with Tou;) and with psp aon 5 Then there went certain, and 
him all manner of ‘vessels of gold} 3.14.’ ‘\told waa tea oe ae ake 

i ed. nd he sent to mee em: 
at rahe oetagdertie th David dedi-|/v-12, ref for the men were greatly ashamed. 
cated unto the Lorp, with the sil-|, one talent |And the king said, Tarry at Jericho 
ver and the gold that he brought] of silver= until your beards be grown, and 
from all these nations; from Edom, bier then return. en : : 
and from Moab, and from the chil- 6 And when the children of Am 
dren of Ammon, and from the mon saw that they had made them- 
Philistines, and from Amalek. fibees ck ipten te hoes 

12 Moreover @¢Abishai the son the children o nmon sent a thou- 
of Zertiah slew of the Edomites sand étalents of silver to hire them 
in the valley of salt eighteen thou- chariots and horsemen out of Meso- 
sand. ae Hoon a of Syria-maachah, 

13 And he put garrisons in Edom; and out of Zobah. __ 
eand all the Edomites became Da- 7 So they hired thirty and two 
vid’s servants. Thus the LORD thousand chariots, and the king of 
preserved David whithersoever he Sa ptr enya ae spar be are 

tr and pitcne elore edeba. n 
“a So David reigned over all Is- the children of Ammon gathered 
rael, and executed judgment and Lacey a ele oh be their 
justice among ail his people. cities, and came to battle. fh 
M5 And fJoab the son of Zeruiah 8 And when David heard of it, he 
was over the host; and Jehoshaphat rae Joab, and all the host of the 
the son of Ahilud, recorder. | mighty men. ; 

16 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, 9 And the children of Ammon 
and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, came out, and put the battle in 
‘were the priests; and Shavsha was array before the gate of the city: 
scribe; and the kings that were come were 

17 And Benaiah the son of Jehoi- by themselves in the field. 
ada was over the Cherethites and 10 Now when Joab saw that the 


477 


19 11] 


battle was set against him before 
and behind, he chose out of all the 
choice of tree, ae put them in 
array against the Syrians. 

11 ac the rest of the people he 
delivered unto the hand of Abishai 
his brother, and they set them- 
selves in array against the children 
of Ammon. . 

12 And he said, If the Syrians be 
too strong for me, then thou ‘shalt 
help me: but if the children of Am- 
mon be too strong for thee, then I 
will help thee. : 

13: Be of good courage, and let us 
behave ourselves valiantly for our 
people, and for the cities of our 
God: and let the Lorp do that 
which is good in his sight. 

14 So Joab and the people that 
were with him drew nigh before the 
Syrians unto the battle; and they 
fled ‘before him. 

15 And when the children of Am- 
mon saw that the Syrians were fled, 
they likewise fled before Abishai his 
brother, and entered into the city. 
Then Joab came to Jerusalem. 

16 And when the Syrians saw that 
they were put to the worse before 
Israel, they sent messengers, and 
drew forth the Syrians that were 
beyond the river: and Shophach the 
captain of the host of Hadarezer 
went before them. 


Second campaign under David 
in person. | 

17 And it was told David; and he 
gathered all Israel, and passed over 
Jordan, and came upon them, and 
set the battle in array against 
them. So when David had put the 
battle in array against the Syrians, 
they fought with him. 

18 But the Syrians fled before Is- 
rael; and David slew of the Syrians 
seven thousand men which fought 
in chariots, and forty thousand 


footmen, and killed Shophach the’ 


captain of the host. 

19 And when the servants of Had- 
arezer saw that they were put to 
the worse before Israel, they made 
peace with David, and became his 
servants: neither would the Syrians 


help the children of Ammon any 
more. 


CHAPTER 20. 
Joab and David take Rabbah 
(2 Sam. 12. 26-31). 
ND it came to pass, that after 
“> the year was expired, at the 
time that kings go out to battle, 


a 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1037. 


a 2 Sam.11.1. 


6 Here should 
be read 
2 Sam.11.2- 
12.25, with 
Psa.51. 


c One talent of 
gold = £6150, 
or $29,085. 


d 2 Sam.21.18. 
e 2 Sam.21.20. 


f Or, Sham- 
mah, 1 Sam. 
16.9. 


g Satan, Job 
1.6,7,8,9,12. 
“Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


Joab led forth the power of the 
army, and wasted the country of 
the children of Ammon, and_ came 


their king from off his head, and 
found it to weigh a ‘talent of gold, 
and there were precious stones in 
it; and it was set upon David’s 
head: and he brought also exceed- 
ing much spoil out of the city. 

3 And he brought out the people 
that were in it, and cut them with 
saws, and with harrows of iron, ‘and 
with axes. Even so dealt David 
with all the cities of the children of 
Ammon. And David and all the 
people returned to Jerusalem. 


War with the Philistines. 


4 ¢And it came to pass after this, 
that there arose war at Gezer with 
the Philistines; at which time Sib- 
bechai the Hushathite slew Sippai, 
that was of the children of the 
giant: and they were subdued. 

5 And there was war again with 
the Philistines; and Elhanan the 
son of Jair slew Lahmi the brother 
of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear 
staff was like a weaver’s beam. 

6 And yet again there was war at 


\¢Gath, where was aman of great 


|stature, whose fingers and toes were 


h 2 Sam.24.1-9. | 


i Heb. en- 
ticed. 


j Cf.1-Chr.27. 
23,24, 
\ 


four and twenty, six on each hand, 


jand six on each foot: and he also 
was the son of the giant. 


7 But when he defied Israel, Jona- 


|than the son of /Shimea David’s 
brother shew him. 


8 These were born unto the giant 


jin Gath; and they fell by the hand 


[B.C. 1017. 


B.C. 1035.} 


478 


of David, and by the hand of his 
servants: 


CHAPTER 21. 


David sins in numbering the 
people (2 Sam. 24. 1-9). 


Ape sSatan stood up against Is- 
trael, “and ‘provoked David to 
number Israel. 

2 And David said to Joab and to 
the rulers of the people, Go, num- 
ber Israel from Beer-sheba even to 
Dan; and ‘bring the number of 
them to me, that I may know if. 


Joab’s faithful protest. 


3 And Joab answered, The LorD 
make his people an hundred’ times 


so many more as they be: but, my 
lord the king, are they not all 


q 


my lord’s servants? why then doth 
my lord require this thing? why will 
he be a cause of trespass to Is- 
rael? 

4 Nevertheless the king’s word 
prevailed against Joab. Wherefore 
Joab ¢departed, and went through- 
out all Israel, and came to Jeru- 
salem. 

5 And Joab gave the sum of the 
number of the people unto David. 
And all they of Israel "were a thou- 
sand thousand and an hundred 
thousand men that drew sword: and 
Judah was four hundred threescore 
and ten, thousand men that drew 
sword. 

6 But Leviand Benjamin counted 
he not among them: for the king’s 
word. was. abominable to Joab, 

7 And God was: displeased with 
this thing; therefore he smote 
Israel. 


David chooses his punishment 
(2 Sam. 24. 10-17). 


8 And David said unto God, I 
have sinned greatly; because I have 
done this thing: but now, I beseech 
thee, do away the iniquity of thy 
servant; for I have done very fool- 


ishly. 

9 And the LorD.spake unto Gad, 
David’s ‘seer, saying, 

10 Go. and. tell David, 4saying, 
Thus saith the Lorpb,. I. offer thee 
three things: choose thee one of 
them, that I may do-#t unto.thee. 

ll So Gad. came to. David, and 
said unto him, Thus saith the LorpD; 
Choose thee 

12: Either three years’ famine; or 
_three months to be destroyed, before 
thy foes, while that the sword of 
thine enemies overtaketh thee; or 
else three days the sword of the 
Lorb, even the pestilence, in the 
land, and the “angel of the LorRD 
destroying throughout all the coasts 
of Israel. Now. therefore advise 
thyself what word I shall bring 
again to him that sent. me. 

13. And’ David said unto Gad, I 
am ina great strait: let me fall now 
into the hand of the Lorpb; for very 
great are his mercies: but let me 
not fall into the hand of man. 

14 So the Lorp sent. pestilence 
upon Israel: and there fell of Israel 
seventy thousand men. 

15 fAnd God sent an éangel unto 
Jerusalem.to destroy it: and as he 
was destroying, the Lorp beheld, 
and he repented him of the evil, 
and said to the angel that destroyed, 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1017. 


a Here should 
be read 
2 Sam.24.4-9. 


b C£.2 Sam. 
24.9, note. 


¢ 1Sam.9.9; 
see 2 Ki.17. 
13; 1 Chr.29. 
29; 2: Chr.16. 
7,10; Isa. 
30.9,10; 


Amos 7.12,13. 


d 2Sam.24, 
12-14. 


e Heb.1.4, 
note. 


f Cf.2 Sam. 
24.16. 

g Called Arau- 
nah, 2 Sam. 
24.16. 


h Lit. meal. 


479 


(21 28 


It is enough, stay now thine hand. 
And the angel of the LorD stood 
by the threshingfloor of ¢Ornan the 
Jebusite. ; ; 

16 And David lifted up his eyes, 
and saw the “angel of the Lorp ~ 
stand between the earth and the 
heaven, having a drawn sword in 
his hand stretched out over Jeru- 
salem. Then David and the elders 
of Israel, who were clothed in 
sackcloth, fell upon their faces. 
_1y And David said unto God, Is 
it not I that commanded the peo- 
ple to be numbered? even I it is:\that 
have sinned and done evil indeed; 
but as. for these sheep, what have 
they done? let thine hand, I pray 
thee, O LorD my God, be on me, 
and on my father’s house; but not 
on thy people, that they should be 
plagued, 


David buys Ornan’s threshing- 
floor (2 Sam. 24. 18-25). 


18 Then the “angel of the Lorp 


‘commanded Gad to say to David, 


that David should go up, and set up 
an altar unto the LorD in the 
threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebu- 
site. 

19 And David: went up at the say- 
ing of Gad, which he spake in the 
name of the LORD. 

20 And Ornan turned back, and 
saw the “angel; and his four sons 
with him, hid themselves. Now 
Ornan. was. threshing wheat. 

21 And as David came to Ornan, 
Ornan looked and saw David, and 
went.out of the threshingfloor, and 
bowed. himself to David with his 
face to the ground. 

22 Then David said to Ornan, 
Grant me the place of this thresh- 
ingfloor, that I may build an altar 
therein unto. the LORD; thou shalt 
grant it me for the full price: that 
the plague may be stayed from the 
people, 

23 And Ornan said unto David, 
Take i¢ to thee, and let my lord the 
king do that which is good in his 
eyes: lo, I give thee the oxen also 
for burnt-offerings, and the thresh- 
ing instruments for wood, and the 
mess for the ‘meat-offering; I give 
it all. 

24 And king David said to Ornan,. 
Nay; but I will verily buy it for 
the full price: for I will not take 
that which is thine for the 
Lorb, nor offer burnt-offerings 
without cost. 

25 So David. gave to. Ornan for 


<a : 4 ‘ y. rae ey OU ts eae ie 
pe 2, 26] ; I CHRONICLES. ; [22 15 
ee ee f 


4 the place Jsix hundred 4shekels of! B.c. 1017. - 
gold by weight. 


He instructs Solomon in God’s 


, d hi [n. 
26 And David built there an altar punlding Pied duty, im 
unto the LorD, and offered burnt- Y 
offerings and peace-offerings, and 6 Then he called for Solomon his 
called upon the LorpD; and he an- son, and charged him to build an 
swered him from heaven by fire house for the Lorp God of Is- 
upon the altar of burnt-offering. rael. : d 
27 And the LorD commanded the 7 And David said to Solomon, My 
bangel; and he put up his sword son, as for me, Sit was in my mind 
again into the sheath thereof. to build an house unto the name of 
28 At that time when David the Lorp my God: 
saw that the LoRD had answered 8 But the word of the LorpD came 
him in the threshingfloor of Or- to me, “saying, Thou hast shed 
nan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed blood abundantly, and hast made 
there. great wars: thou shalt not build-an 
29 ‘For the tabernacle of the house unto my name, because thou 
LorD, which Moses made in the], one sheer {hast shed much blood upon the 
wilderness, and the altar of the! Gold) = jearth in my sight. 
burnt-offering, were at that season| £2. 1s., or 9. Behold, a son shall be born to 
in the high place at Gibeon. $9.69. thee, who shall be a man of rest: 
_30 But David could not go before!» Heb.1.4, ‘and I will give him rest from all 
it to enquire of God: for he was| note. his enemies round about: for his 
afraid because of the sword of the ¢1 Chr.16.37, |name shall be Solomon, and I will 
angel of the Lorp. note; 1 Ki.3. |Zive peace and quietness unto Israel 
4; 2 Chr.1.3. in here aed : 
. |°10 JHe's uild an house for 
CHAPTER 22. é ei: mi my name; and he shall be my son, 


David prepares materia! for the| 18-25;.1 Chr. jand I will be his father: atid I will 


. 
‘ 


temple. rasan 2 establish the throne of his kingdom 


‘ ; over Israel for ever. 
aoe David said, ¢This is the|¢1Ki9.20,21.) 11 Now, my son, the Lorp be 


- house of the Lorp God, and f1 Chr.29 with thee; and prosper thou, and 
this is the altar of the burnt-offer- i ek ae build the house of the Lorp thy 
ing for Israel. God, as he hath said of thee. 


2 And David commanded _ to|£?Sa™.7-1,2. | 12 ‘Only the LoRD give thee kwis- 
gather together the ‘strangers that]; 1 Chr.28.3; |dom and understanding, and give 
were in the land of Israel; and he| 2 Sam.7.5,13. |thee charge concerning Israel, that 
fo build the house of Gage ONE| sx ies. PRON mayest Keep the law of the 
x eo eke plgiets cee in|j2Sam.7.13. | 13 Then shalt thou prosper, if 

undance for the nails : - 
doors of the gates, and for the jon Rl Ki3.9-12, aioe Sas SCBA: AGH LTS 
ings; and brass in abundance with- charged Moses with concerning Is- 
ne Nigar ub eae hbtatie ts Bee hg ae on good oa 
cedas abundance: read not, nor be dismayed. 
Hat aaah and they of Tyre 14 Now, behold, in my trouble I 
ve much cedar wood to Da- have prepared for the house of the 
ip ‘el SAN LorpD an hundred thousand talents 
Share: vou Rew selqese i oF as os a Seer oe Bicol 
p ler, an e alents of silver; and of brass and 
house that is to be builded for the iron without weight; for it is in 


Lorp must be exceeding magnifi- abundance: timber also and stone 
cal, of fame and of glory throughout 


L f have I prepared; and thou mayest 
all Pacis: I wil therefore now add thereto. OF 

make preparation for it. So David 15 Moreover there are workmen 
‘Sale abundantly before his with thee in. abundance, hewers 
deat . and workers of stone and timber, 


1 A discrepancy has been imagined in the two accounts, 2 Sam 24 
1 : ; - 24. 24, and 1 Chr. 
21. 25. 2 Sam. 24. 24 records the price of the threshingfloor (Heb. Soren); 1 Chr. 
21. 25, of the place (Heb. magom, lit. “home,” 1 Sam, 2. 20, same word) or area 
a aoe afterward the great temple, with its spacious courts, was built (2 Chr. 


ait , ues eave » shekels of silver for the “goren’’; six hundred shekels of 
480 


22 16] 


and all manner of cunning men for 
every manner of work. 

16 Of the gold, the silver, and the 
brass, and the iron, there is no 
number. Arise therefore; and be 
doing, and the LorpD be with thee. 


The princes are charged to as- 
sist Solomon. 


17. David also commanded all the 
princes of Israel to help Solomon 
his son, saying, 

18 Jsnot the LoRD your God with 
you? and hath he not given you 
rest on every side? for he hath 
given the inhabitants of the land 
into mine hand; and the land is 
subdued before the Lorpb, and be- 
fore his people. 

19 Now set your heart and your 
soul to seek the LorpD your God; 
arise therefore, and build ye the 
sanctuary of the LorpD God, to 
*bring the ark of the covenant of 
the Lorb, and the holy vessels of 
God, into the house that is to be 
built to the name of the LorpD. 


CHAPTER 23. 


David in his old age makes 
Solomon king. 


Sy when David was old and fuil 
of days, he “made Solomon his 
son king over Israel. 


The number and distribution 
of the Levites. 


2 And he gathered together all the 
princes of Israel, with the priests 
and the Levites. 

3 Now the Levites were numbered 
from the ‘age of thirty years and 
upward: and their number by their 
polls, man by man, was thirty and 
eight thousand. 

4 Of which, twenty and four thou- 
sand were to set forward the work 
cf the house of the Lorp; and six 
thousand were officers and 4judges: 

5 Moreover four thousand were 
porters; and four thousand praised 
the LorpD with the instruments 
which ¢I made, said David, to 
praise therewith. ; 

6 And David divided them_into 
courses among the sons of Levi, 
namely, Gershon, Kohath, and 
Merari. 

The families of the Gershonites. 
(Cf. Num. 3. 25, 26.) 


7 Ofthe Gershoniteswere, Laadan, 
and Shimei. 


8 The sons of Laadan; the chief! 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1017. 


Ke Re 


BS} 
33-40; 


Cc 
Ki.1. 3 
1 Chr.28.4,5. 


c Num.4.1-3. 
d Deut.16.18- 
20. 


e Cf.2 Chr.29. 
25-27. 
B.C. 1015.] 


f Called Zizah, 
v-ll. 


g Ex.6.18,20. 


h Ex.28.1; 
Heb.5.4. 


ti.e. cousins. 


481 


[23 24 


was Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel, 
three. 

9 The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, 
and Haziel,.and Haran, three. 
These were the chief of the fathers 
of Laadan. 

10 And the sons of Shimei were, 
Jahath, fZina, and Jeush, and Be- 
riah. These four were the sons of 
Shimei. 

11 And Jahath was the chief, and 
Zizah the second: but Jeush and 
Beriah had not many sons; there- 
fore they were in one reckoning, 
according to their father’s house. 


The sons of Kohath. 
(Cf, Num. 3. 27-31.) 


12 The sons of Kohath; Amram, . 
Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four. 

13 The sons of Amram; Aaron 
and Moses: and “Aaron was sepa- 
rated, that he should sanctify the 
most holy things, he and his sons 
for ever,,to burn incense before the 
LorD, to minister unto him, and to 
bless in his name for ever. 

14 Now concerning Moses the 
man of God, his sons were named 
of the tribe of Levi. 

15 The sons of Moses were, Ger- 
shom, and Eliezer. 

16 Ofthe sons of Gershom, Shebuel 
was the chief. 

17 And the sons of Eliezer were, 
Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer 
had none other sqns: but the sons 
of Rehabiah were very many. 

18 Of the sons of Izhar; Shelomith 
the chief. 

19 Of the sons of Hebron; Jeriah 
the first, Amariah the second, Jaha- 
ziel the third, and Jekameam the 
fourth. 

20 Of the sons of Uzziel; Micah 
the first, and Jesiah the second. 


The sons of Merart. 
(Cf. Num. 3. 33-37.) 


21 The sons of Merari; Mahli; and 
Mushi. The sons of Mahli; Elea- 
zar, and Kish. 

22 And Eleazar died, and had no 
sons, but daughters: and their 
ibrethren the sons of Kish took 
them. 

23 The sons of Mushi; Mahli, and 
Eder, and Jeremoth, three. 


The new office of the Levites. 
(Cf. Num. 3. 5-12.) 


24 These were the sons of Levi 
after the house of their fathers; 
even the chief of the fathers, as 


Ithey were counted by number of 


23 25] 


names by their polis, that did the 
work for the service of the house of 
the Lorp, from oe age of twenty 

ears and upward. 

*98 For David said, The Lorp 
God of Israel hath given rest unto 
his people, that they may dwell in 
Jerusalem for ever: : 

‘26 And also unto the Levites; 
they shall no more carry the taber- 
nacle, nor any vessels of it for the 
service thereof. i 

27 For by the last words of David 
the Levites were numbered from 
twenty years old and above: 

28 Because their “office was to 
wait on the sons of Aaron for fhe 
service of the house of the Lorp, in 
thecourts, and in the chambers, and 
in the purifying of .all holy things, 
and the work of the service of the 
house of God; 

29 Both for the *shewbread, and 
for the fine flour for <meat-offering, 
and for the unleavened cakes, and 
for that which is baked in the 
pan, and for that whichis fried, and 
for all manner of measure and size; 

30 And to stand every morning to 
thank and praise the Lorp, and 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1015. 


@ i.e. their 


new Office, 
since their 
former office 
of bearing 
the taber- 
nacle Was 
ended. 


6 Ex.25.30, 


note. 


c Lit. meal. 


5 a 4 Lev.10.1-6; 
likewise at even; , Num.26.60, 
31 And to offer.all burnt-sacrifices| 61. 


unto the Lorp in the sabbaths, in 
the new moons, and on the set 
feasts, by number, according to the 
order commanded unto them, con- 


e Num.3.1-4; 
26.60,61, 


fLi1.5. 


tinually before the Lorp: g Called She- 


32 And that they should keep the 
charge of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, and the charge of the 
holy place, and the charge of the 
sons of Aaron their brethren, in the 
service of the house of the Lorp. 


CHAPTER 24. 


The divisions of the sons of 
Aaron by lot into four and 
twenty orders, 


New these are the divisions of 

the sons of Aaron. ‘The 4sons 
of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Elea- 
gar, and Ithamar, 

2 ‘But Nadab and Abihu died be- 
fore their father, and had no ‘chil- 
dren: therefore Eleazar and Ithamar 
executed the priest’s office. 

3 And. David distributed them, 
both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, 
and Ahimelech of the sons of Itha- 
mar, according to their offices in 
‘their service. | 

4 And there were more-chief men 
found of the sons of Eleazar than of| 
the sons.of Ithamar; and thus were 


buel, 1 Chr. 
23.16. 


482 


|Shubael; Jehdeiah. 


[24 22 


they divided. Among the sons of 
Eleazar there were sixteen chief 
men of the house of their fathers, 

and eight among the sons of itha- 

mar according to the house of their 

fathers. 


The four and twenty orders. 


5 Thus were they divided by lot, 
one sort with another; for the gov- 
ernors of the sanctuary, and govern- 
ors of the house of God, were of 
the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons 
of Ithamar. 

6 And Shemaiah theson of Netha- 
neel the scribe, one of the Levites, 
wrote them before the king, and the 
princes, and Zadok the priest; and 
Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and 
before the chief of the fathers of 
the priests and Levites: one princi- 
pal household being taken for Elea- 
zar and one taken for Ithamar. 

7 Now the first lot came forth to 
Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaigh, 

8 The third to:Harim, the fourth 
to Seorim, 

9 The fifth to Malchijah, the sixth 
to Mijamin, 

10 The seventh to Hakkoz, the 
eighth to fAbijah, 

11 Theninthto Jeshuah, the tenth 
to Shecaniah, 

12 The eleventh to Eliashib, the 
twelfth to Jakim, 

13 The thirteenth to Huppah, the 
fourteenth to Jeshebeah, 

14 The fifteenth to Bilgah, the 
sixteenth to Immer, 

15 The seventeenth to Hezir, the 
eighteenth to Aphses, 

16 The nineteenth to Pethahiah, 
the twentieth to Jehezekel, ; 

17 Theoneandtwentiethto Jachin, 
the two and twentieth to Gamul, 

18 The three and twentieth to 
Delaiah, the four and twentieth to 
Maaziah. 

19 These were tthe orderings of 
them jin their service to come into 
theshouse of the Lorp, according ito 
their manner, under Aaron their 
father, as the Lord God:of Israel 
had commanded him. 


The Kohathites divided. 


20 And the rest of the sons.of Levi 
were these: Of the sons .of 
Amram; &Shubael: of the sons of 


21 Concerning Rehabiah: -of the 


jsons of Rehabiah, the first was 
|Isshiah. 
| 22 Of the Izharites; Shelomoth: 


of the sons of Shelomoth; Jahath, 


24 23) I CHRONICLES. [25 24 


23 And the sons of Hebron; Je-| 
tiah the first, Amariahthe second, 
Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the] 
fourth. 

24 Of the sons of Uzziel; Michahz:}) 
of the sons of Michah;.Shamir:. 

25 The brother of Micah was Is-|) 
pa of the sons of Isshiah; Zech-|| 
ariah, 


And the Merarites divided by Ict. 


26 The sons of Merari were Mahlil| 
and Mushi: the sons of Jaaziah;|) 
Beno. | 

27 The sons of Merari by Jaaziah;) 
Aaa and Shoham, and Zaccur, and/} 
‘bri. 
28 Of Mahli came Eleazar, who} 
had no sons. 

29 Concerning Kish: the son of] 
Kish was Jerahmeel. 


man. the king’s seer in the words of 
God, to lift up the horn. And. God 
gave to Heman fourteen sons. and: 
three: daughters. 

6 All these were under the hands: 
of their father for song in the house. 
of the Lorp, with cymbals, psal- 
teries, and harps, for the service of 
the house of God, according to the 
king’s) order to Asaph, Jeduthun, 
and Heman. 
| 7 So the number of them, with 
their brethren that were instructed _ 
in the songs of the LORD, even. all 
that were cunning, was. two hun-. 
dred fourscore and: eight. 


Their division by lot into four 
and twenty orders. 


8 And they cast lots, ward against 
ward, as well the small as the 
great, the teacher as the scholar. 

9 Now the first lot came forth for 
[Asaph to Joseph: the second to 
Gedaliah, who with his brethren 
and. sons were twelve: 
| 10; The third to Zaccur, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve:. 
| 11 The fourth to Izri, he, his.sons,, 
and. his brethren, were twelve: 
| 12 The fifth to Nethaniah, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
113 The sixth to Bukkiah, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 

14 The seventh to Jesharelah, he, 
his sons, and his brethren, were 
twelve: 
| 15. The eighth to Jeshaiah, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
| 16 The ninth to Mattaniah, he, 
‘his' sons, and his. brethren, were 
twelve: 

'17 The tenth to Shimei, he, his 
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
| 18 The eleventh to, Azareel, he,, 
his sons, and his brethren, were 
twelve: 

| 19 The twelfth to Hashabiah, he, 
his sons, and his brethren, were 
twelve: 

20 The thirteenth to Shubael, he, 
his sons, and his brethren, were 
twelve: 

21 The fourteenth to Mattithiah, 
he, his sons, and his brethren, were 
twelve: 

22 The fifteenth to Jeremoth, he, 
his sons, and. his brethren, were 
‘twelve: 

23. The sixteenth to Hananiah, 
he, his sons, and his brethren, were 
twelve: . 

24 The seventeenth to Joshbeka- 
shah, he, his'sons, and his brethren, 
were twelve: 


BC. 1035. 


the house of their fathers. 

31 These likewise cast lots over}, 
against their brethren the sons of}, 
Aaron in the presence of David the]; 
king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech,|) 
and the chief of the fathers of the], 
priests and Levites, even the prin- 
cipal fathers. over against their 
younger brethren. 


-CHAPTER 25. 


The number and offices of the || 
singers. 


4 tepemeloes David and the cap- 
tains of the host separated to 
the service of the sons of Asaph, 
and of Heman, and of Jeduthun,} 
who should prophesy with harps,} 
with psalteries, and: with cymbals:) 
and the number of the workmen|! 
according to their service was: } 

2 Of the sons of Asaph; Zaccur,|) 
and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asa-}) 


the LorpD. 

4 Of Heman: the sons of Heman; 
Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, She- 
buel; and Jerimoth, Hananiah, 
Wanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, andj 
Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mal-| 
lothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth: 

5 All these were the sons of He- 


483 


brethren, able men for strength for 


5 25] I CHRONICLES. [26 26 


é ; * 
25 The eighteenth to Hanani, he,|_B.C.1015._|the sons and brethren of Hosa 
i i ,» were were thirteen. OAT 2 : 
ee prepa ata a 12 Amongthese were the divisions 
26 The nineteenth to Mallothi, of the porters, even among the chief 
he, his sons, and his brethren, were men, having wards _one against 
twelve: another, to minister in the house 
27 The twentieth to Eliathah, he, of the Lorpb. 
his sons, and his brethren, were 
twelve: i 
28 The one and twentieth to Ho- 
thir, he, his sons, and his brethren, 
were twelve: : i 
_ 29 The two and twentieth to Gid- 
dalti, he, his sons, and his brethren, 
were twelve: ; 
30 The three and twentieth to 
Mahazioth, he, his sons, and his 
brethren, were twelve: 
31 The four and twentieth to Ro- 
mamti-ezer, he, his sons, and his 
brethren, were twelve. 


CHAPTER 26. 
The division of the porters. 


CONCERNING the divisions of 
the porters: Of the Korhites 
was Meshelemiah the son of Kore, 
of the sons of Asaph. 

2 And the sons of Meshelemiah 
were, Zechariah the firstborn, Je- 
diael the second, Zebadiah the 
third, Jathniel the fourth, 

3 Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the 
sixth, Elioenai the seventh. 

4 Moreover, thesonsofObed-edom 
were, Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehoz- 
abad_the second, Joah the third, 
and Sacar the fourth, and Nethan- 
eel the fifth, 

5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the 
seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for 
God blessed him. 

6 Also unto Shemaiah his son 
were sons born, that ruled through- 
out the house of their father: for 
they were mighty men of valour. 

7 The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, 
and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, 
whose brethren were strong men, 
Elihu, and Semachiah. 

8 All these of the sons of Obed- 
edom: they and their sons and their 


The gates assigned by lot. 


13 And they cast lots, as well the 
small as the great, according to the 
house of their fathers, for every 
gate. 

14 And the lot eastward fell to 
Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his 
son, a wise counsellor, they cast lots; 
and his lot came out northward. 

15 To Obed-edom southward; and 
to his sons the house of Asuppim. 

16 To Shuppim .and Hosah the 
lot came forth westward, with the 
gate Shallecheth, by the causeway 
of the going up, ward against ward. 

17 Eastward were six Levites, 

northward four a day, southward 
four a day, and toward Asuppim 
two and two. 
18 At Parbar westward, four at 
the causeway, and two at Parbar. 
19 These are the divisions of the 
porters among the sons of Kore, 
and among the sons of Merari. 


The Levites that had charge of 
the treasures. 


20 And of the Levites, Ahijah 
was over the treasures of the house 
of God, and over the treasures of 
the dedicated things. 

21 As concerning the sons of 
Laadan; the sons of the Gershonite - 
Laadan, chief fathers, even of Laa- 
dan the Gershonite, were Jehieli. 
22 The sons of Jehieli; Zetham, 
and Joel his brother, which were 
over the treasures of the house of 
the Lorp. 

23 Of the Amramites, and the 
Izharites, the Hebronites, and the 
Uzzielites: 

24 And Shebuel the son of Ger- 
shom, the son of Moses, was ruler 
of the treasures. 

25 And his brethren by Eliezer; 
Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaigh his 
son, and Joram his son, and Zichri 
his son, and Shelomith his son. 

26 Which Shelomith and_his 
brethren were over all the treasures 
of the dedicated things, which David 
the king, and the chief fathers, the 
captains over thousands and hun- 
dreds, and the captains of the host, 
had dedicated. 


the service, were threescore and 
two of Obed-edom., 

9 And Meshelemiah had sons and 
brethren, strong men, eighteen, 

10 Also Hosah, of the children of 
Merari, had sons; Simri the chief, 
(for though he was not the first. 
born, yet his father made him the 
chief;) 

11 Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah 
the third, Zechariah the fourth: all 


484 


27 Out of the spoils won in battles 
did they dedicate to maintain the 
house of the Lorp. 

28 And all that Samuel the seer, 
and Saul the son of Kish, and Ab- 
ner the son of Ner, and Joab the 
son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; 
and whosoever had dedicated any 
thing, it was under the hand of 
Shelomith, and of his brethren. 


Officers and judges. 


29 Of the Izharites, Chenaniah 
and his sons were for the outward 
business over Israel, for officers and 
judges. ; 

30 And of the Hebronites, Hasha- 
biah and his brethren, men of val- 
our, a thousand and seven hundred, 
were officers among them of Israel 
on this side Jordan westward in all 
the business of the LorD, and in 
the service of the king. 

31 Among the Hebronites was Je- 
rijah the chief, even among the 
Hebronites, according to the gen- 
erations of his fathers. In the for- 
tieth year of the reign of Davi 
they were sought for, and there 
were found among them mighty 
men of valour at Jazer of Gilead. 

32 And his brethren, men of val- 
our, were two thousand and seven 
hundred chief fathers, whom king 
David made rulers over the Reu- 
benites, the Gadites, and the half 
tribe of Manasseh, for every matter 
pertaining to God, and affairs of 
the king. 


CHAPTER 27 


The twelve captains for every 
several month 


NO the children of Israel after 
their number, to wit, the chief 
fathers and captains of thousands 
and hundreds, and their officers 
that served the king in any matter 
of the courses, which came in and 
went out month by month through- 
out all the months of the year, of 
every course were twenty and four 
thousand. 

2 Over the first course for the 
@first month was Jashobeam the 
son of Zabdiel: and in his course 
were twenty and four thousand. 

3 Of the children of Perez was the 
chief of all the captains of the host 
for the first month. 

4 And over the course of the bsec- 
ond month was Dodai an Ahohite, 
and of his course was Mikloth also 


ok, oe. 12 el Phd of  N: LA 


the ruler: in his course likewise 
were twenty and four thousand. 


4 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1015. 


ai.e. April; 
also v.3. 


bie. May. 
ci.e. June. 
die. July. 
ei.e. August. 


ji.e. Septem- 
ber. 


gi.e. October. 


hi.e. Novermm- 
ber. 


ii.e. Decem- 
ber. 


jie. January. 


k i.e. Febru- 
ary. 


lie. March. 


485 


5 The third captain of the host for 
the ‘third month was Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada, a chief priest: and 
in his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 

6 This is that Benaiah, who was 
mighty among the thirty, and 
above the thirty: and in his course 
was Ammizabad his son. 

7 The fourth captain for the. 
@fourth month was Asahel the 
brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his 
son after him: and in his course 
were twenty and four thousand. 

8 The fifth captain for the ¢fifth 
month was Shamhuth the Izrahite: 
and in his course were twenty and 
four thousand. i 

9 The sixth captain for the fsixth 
month was Ira the son of Ikkesh 
the Tekoite: and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 

10 The seventh captain for the 
seventh month was Helez the 
Pelonite, of the children of Eph- 
raim: and in his course were twenty 
and four thousand, 

11 The eighth captain for the 
heighth month was Sibbecai the 
Hushathite, of the Zarhites: and in 
his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 

12 Theninthcaptarn forthe ‘ninth 
month was Abiezer the Anetothite, 
of the Benjamites: and in his course 
were twenty and four thousand. 

13 The tenth captain for the 
jtenth month was Maharai the 
Netophathite, of the Zarhites: and 
in his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 

14 The eleventh captain for the 
keleventh month was Benaiah the 
Pirathonite, of the children of 
Ephraim: and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 

15 The twelfth captain for the 
‘twelfth month was Heldai the Ne- 
tophathite, of Othniel: and in his 
course were twenty and four thou- 
sand, 


The princes of the twelve tribes. 


16 Furthermore over the tribes of 
Israel: the ruler of the Reubenites 
was Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the 
Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of 
Maachah: ° 

17 Of the Levites, Hashabiah the 
son of Kemuel: of the Aaronites, 
Zadok: 

18 Of Judah, Elihu, one of the 
brethren of David: of Issachar, 
Omri the son of Michael: 

19 Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son 


27 20) I CHRONICLES. {28 8 


the son of Azriel: | 

20 Of the children of Ephraim, 
Hoshea the son of Azaziah: of the 
half tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son 
of Pedaiah: 

21 Of the half tribe of Manasseh 
in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zecha- 
riah: of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son 
of Abner: 


Jeroham. These were the princes| 
of the tribes of Israel. 


The numbering of the people is 
hindered. | 


23 But David took not the num- 
ber of them from twenty years old 


and under: because the LorpD had}? 1 Chr.27.1,2. 


said he would increase Israel like to 
the stars of the heavens. 


24 Joab the son of Zeruiah began|d 1 Chr.11.10; 


to number, but he finished not, be- 
cause there fell wrath for it against 


Israel; neither was the number put} ¢ 2 Sam.7.2, 
in the account of the chronicles of} 24 refs. 


king David. 
David’s several officers. 


25 And over the king’s treasures 
was Azmaveth the son of Adiel: 
and over the storehouses in the 
fields, in the cities, and in the vil- 
lages, and in the castles, was Jehon- 
athan the son of Uzziah: 

26 And over them that did the 
work of the field for tillage of the 
ground was Ezri the son of Chelub: 

27 And over the vineyards was 
Shimei the Ramathite: over the 
increase of the vineyards for the 
wine cellars was Zabdi the Shiph- 
mite: : 

28 And over the olive trees and 
the sycomore trees that were in the 
low plains was Baal-hanan the 
Gederite: and over the cellars of oil 
was Joash: 


30 Over the camels also was Obil 
the Ishmaelite: and over the asses 
was Jehdeiah the Meronothite: 

And over the flocks was Jaziz 
the Hagerite. All these were the 
Tulers of the substance which was 
king David’s. 

32 Also Jonathan David’s uncle 
Was a counsellor, a wise man, and 
a scribe: and Jehiel the son of 
Hachmoni was with the king’s 
sons: 


33 And Ahithophel was the king’s 
jcounsellor: and Hushai the Archite 
was the king’s companion: . 


CHAPTER 28. 


|David in a solemn assembly 
| gives counsel to Israel and to 
| Solomon. 


rate) David assembled all the 

princes of Israel, the @princes 
of the tribes, and the “captains of 
the companies that ministered to 
the king by course, and the captains 
over the thousands, and captains 
over the hundreds, and the “stew- 
ards over all the substance and 


possession of the king, and of ‘his 


sons, with the officers, and with the 
dmighty men, and with all the 
|valiant men, unto Jerusalem. 

2 Then David the king stood up 
upon his feet, and said, Hear me, 
my brethren, and my people: As 


-|for me, I had in mine heart ¢to 


build an house of rest for the ark 
of the covenant of the Lorpb, and 
for the ‘footstool of our God, and 
had made ready for the building: 

3 But God said unto me, Thou 
Shalt not ‘build an ‘house for my 
name, because thou hast been a 
man of war, and hast shed blood. 

4 Howbeit the Lorp God of Is- 
rael chose me “before all the ‘house 
of my father to be king over Israel 
for ever: for he hath chosen ‘Judah 
to be the ruler; and of the ‘house of 
Judah, the house of my father; and 
among the sons of my father he 
jliked me to make me king:over all 
Israel: 

5 And of all my sons, (for the 
Lorp hath given me many sons,) 
he hath chosen #Solomon my-son to 
sit upon the throne of the kingdom 
of the Lorp over Israel, 

6 ‘And he said unto me, Solonion 
thy son, he shall build my ‘house 
and my courts: for I have ichosen 
him to be my son, and I will be his 
father. 

7 Moreover I will establish his 
kingdom for ever, if he be constant 
to do my commandments and my 
judgments, as at this day. 

8 Now therefore in ithe sight Of all 
Israel the:congregation of the Lorp, 
and an the audience of our ‘God, 
keep and seek for all the command- 
ments of the LorD your God: that 


-°of all manner of service; silver also 


ye may possess this good land, and 
leave it for an inheritance for your 
children after you for ever. 
9 And thou, Solomon my son, 
know thou the God of thy father,} 
and serve him with a ¢perfect heart} 
and with a willing mind: for the} 
Lorp searcheth all hearts, and un-/! 
derstandeth all the imaginations of|| 
the thoughts: if thou seek him, he} 
will be found of thee; but if thou! 
forsake him, he will cast thee off} 
for ever. \ 
10° Take heed now; for the LoRD}), 
hath chosen thee to build an house 
tea the sanctuary: be strong, and 
lo: it. 


He gives him patterns for the 


|a See 1 Ki.8. 
6l. 


form, and gold and silver for|b Holy Spirit. 


rah 2 Chr.15.1. 
the materials. Sashet 


11 Then David gave to:Solomon} Mal.2.15.) 
his son the pattern of the porch,| . 5, 95.39 
and of the houses thereof, and: of} note. ’ 
the treasuries thereof, and of the 
upper chambers thereof, and of the|? Cf E*25-40 
inner parlours thereof, and of the] ¢1 Chr.22:13; 
place of the mercy seat, Deut.31.7,83 

12 And the pattern of all that he] Josh 1.6-9- 
had by the °spirit, of the courts of| ¢cf. Josh.1.5. 
the house of the Lorp, and of all 
the chambers. round about, of the|*} orga 
treasuries of the house: of God, and Len 
of the treasuries of the: dedicated) One talent 
things: ea 

13° Also for the courses: of the] $29,085. 
priests and the Levites, and for all 


the work of the serviceiof the house] * One talent 


of the Lorp; and for alk the vessels} £410, or 
of service in the house: of the LORD. $1990 also 


14 He gave of gold: by weight for) 
things of gold, for all instruments 


for all instruments of silver by 
weight, for all instruments of every 


weight, both for the candlestick, 
and also for the lamps thereof, ac- 
cording to the use of every candle- 
stick. , 

16 And by weight he gave gold 
for the tables of ‘shewbread, for) 
every table; and likewise silver for | 
the tables of silver: | 

17 Also pure gold for the flesh-) 
hooks, and the bowls, and the cups:) 
and for the golden basons he gave) 
gold by weight for every, bason;} 
and likewise silver by weight for} 


every bason of silver: 
487 


I CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1015. 


[294 


18 And for the altar of incense 
refined gold by weight; and gold 
for the pattern of the chariot of 
the cherubims,. that spread out 
their wings, and covered the ark 
lof the covenant of the Lorb. 

| 19 4All this, said David, the 
LorpD made me understand in 
writing by Ais hand upon me, even 
all the works of this pattern. 


| David encourages Solomon to 
! build the temple. 


20 And David said to Solomon his: 
son, ‘Be strong and of good courage, 
and doit: fear not, nor be dismayed: 
for the Lorp God, even my God, 
will be with thee; fhe will not fail 
thee, nor forsake thee, until thou 
hast finished all the work for the 
service of the house of the LorD. 

21 And, behold, the courses of the 
priests and the Levites, even they 
shall be with thee for all the ser- 
vice of the house of God: and there 
shall be with thee for all manner of 
workmanship every willing skilful 
man, for any manner of service: also 
the princes and all the people will 
he wholly at thy commandment. 


CHAPTER 29. 
David exhorts the people. 


Furt HERMORE David the 
king said unto all the congrega- 
tion, Solomon. my son, whom alone 
God hath chosen, zs yet young and. 
tender, and’ the work 1s. great: for 
the palace is not for man, but for 
the Lorp. God. 

2 Now I have prepared with all 
my might for the house of my God 
the gold for things to be made of 
gold, and the silver for things of sil- 
iver, and the brass. for things of 
brass, the iron for things of iron, 
and wood for things of wood; onyx 
stones, and stones to be set, glister- 
ing stones, and of divers. colours, 
and all manner of precious stones, 
and marble stones in abundance. 

3 Moreover, because I have set 
my affection to the house of my 
God, I have of mine own proper 
good, of gold and silver, which I 
have given to.the house of my God, 
over and above all that I have pre- 
pared for the holy house, 

4 Even three thousand /talents of 
gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven 
thousand ‘talents of refined silver, 
to overlay the walls of the houses 
withal: 


5 The gold for things of gold, and 
_ the silver for things of silver, and 
for all manner of work to be made 
by the hands of artificers. And 
who then is willing to consecrate 
his service this day unto the LorD? 


'The princes and people 
offer willingly. 


6 Then the chief of the fathers 
and princes of the tribes of Israel, 
and the captains of thousands and 
of hundreds, with the rulers of the 
king’s work, offered willingly, 

7 And gave for the service of the 
house of God of gold five thousand 
talents and ten thousand 4drams, 

- and of silver ten thousand talents, 
and of brass eighteen thousand tal- 
ents, and one hundred thousand 
talents of iron. 

8 And they with whom precious 
stones were found gave them to the 
treasure of the house of the Lorp, 
by the hand of Jehiel the Ger- 
Ny shonite. 

9 Then the people rejoiced, for 

i that they offered willingly, because 

with ‘perfect heart they offered 

willingly to the Lorp: and David 

rad the king also rejoiced with great 
joy. 

David’s thanksgiving and prayer. 


10 Wherefore David blessed the 
LorD before all the congregation: 
and David ¢said, Blessed be thou, 
Ae Lorp God of Israel our father, for 


Ald ith ever. 

vhine, QO Lorp, is the great- 
¢ 7 VAN A Ge eae 
jpese, and the power, “and ‘the glory, 
/ and the victory,"ahd the majesty: 
| for all that is in the heaven and in 
thé earth ‘is thine} thine is the 
kingdom,"O Lorp, and thou art 
‘exaltec as head above. all. 
“Y2< Bot A Tiches and honour come 
of thee, and thou reignest over all: 
and. in’ thine hand ‘is* power and 


f Inight; and-in thine hand it is to 
make teat, and to give strength 

unto’ all. > 

‘T3 Now therefore, our God, we 


thank thee, and praise thy glorious 
name. . 


| 14 But whoam I, and what is my 


people, that we should be able to 

offer So willingly after this sort? for 

all things come of thee, and of 

thine own have we given thee. 

15 &For we are strangers before 
{ ‘thee, and so} ners, as were all 

our fathers: or days on the earth 


| are as a shadow, and there is none| 


abiding. 


I CHRONICLES. | 


B.C. 1015. 


a One dram = 
£1. 1s., or 
$4.97. 


b Cf.Ex.25.2; 
2 Cor.8.12; 


c See 1 Ki.8.61. 


d Note the 
order: 
giving, vs. 
3-8; joy, v.95 
blessing, 
v.10; prayer, 
vs.11-19; 
worship, v.20. 


e Bible 
prayers 

O.T.). 

2 Chr.6.14. 

(Gen.15.2; 

Hab.3.1-16.) 


f1 Tim.1,17. 


& Psa.39.12; 
Heb.11.13, 
14; 1 Pet.2. 
11,12. 


= 


h Trans. a 
straight 


way, 
Jer.31.9. 

i See 1 Ki.8.61, 
ref, 

j Cf.1 Sam. 


10.1; 1 Ki.l. 
32-35. 


* a¥ ty J 


ry — 
16 OLorp our God, all this store 
that we have prepared to build thee 
an house for thine holy name com- 
eth of thine hand, and is all thine 
own. 

17 I know also, my God, that thou 
triest the heart, and hast pleasure 
in uprightness. As for me, in the 
Muprightness of mine heart I have 
willingly offered all these things: 
and now have I seen with joy thy 
people, which are present here, to 
offer willingly unto thee. 

18 OLORD God of Abraham, Isaac, 
and of Israel, our fathers, keep this 
for ever in the imagination of the 
thoughts of the heart of thy people, 
and prepare their heart unto thee: 

19 And give unto Solomon my son 
a ‘perfect heart, to keep thy com- 
mandments, thy testimonies, and 
thy statutes, and to do all these 
things, and to build the palace, for 
the which I have made provision. 


The people, having blessed God 
and sacrificed, make Solomon 
king. 


20 And David said to all the con- 
gregation, Now bless the Lorp 
your:-God. And all the congrega- 
tion blessed the LorD God of their 
fathers, and bowed down their 
heads, and worshipped the LorpD, 
and the king. : 

21 And they sacrificed sacrifices 
unte the Lorp, and offered burnt- 
offerings unto the Lorb, on the 
morrow after that day, even a thou- 
sand bullocks, a thousand rams, 
and a thousand lambs, with their 
drink-offerings, and sacrifices in 
abundance for all Israel: 

22 And did eat and drink before 
the LorD on that day with great 
gladness. And they made Solomon 
the son of David king the jsecond 


jtime, and anointed Aim unto the 


LORD to be the chief governor, and 
Zadok to be priest. 


Accession of Solomon 
(1 Ki. 2. 12), 


23. Then Solomon sat on the 
throne of the LorpD as king instead 
of David his father, and prospered; 
and all Israel obeyed him. 

24 And all the princes, and the 
mighty men, and all the sons like- 
wise of king David, submitted 
themselves unto Solomon the 

ing. 

25 And the LorD magnified Solo- 
mon exceedingly in the sight of all 
Israel, and bestowed upon him such 


29 26] I CHRONICLES. [29 30 


royal majesty as had not been on} _B.c. 1015. |full of days, riches, and honour: 
any king before him in Israel. and Solomon his son reigned in his 


. ° stead. 
Reign ang eyeen ne David 29 Now the acts of David the 


king, first and last, behold, they are 
26 Thus David the son of Jesse octa Sam. |Written in the book of Samuel the 
reigned over all Israel. 27.1 


seer, and in the “book of Nathan the 
27 And the time that he reigned febeg ated, prophet, and in the book of Gad the 
over Israel was forty years; seven] have per- 


seer. 
years reigned he in *Hebron, and} ished. 


30 With all his reign and his 
thirty and three years reigned he might, and the times that went 
in Jerusalem. 


over him, and over Israel, and over 
28 And he died in a good old age, all the kingdoms of the countries. 


489 


THE SECOND BOOK OF THE 


Bayern CHRONICLES dad 


TuIs book continues the history begun in First Chronicles. It falls into-eighteen 
divisions, by reigns, from Solomon to the captivities: records the division of the 
kingdom of David under Jeroboam and Rehoboam, and is marked by an ever 
growing apostasy, broken temporarily by, reformations under Asa, 14—16.; 
Jehoshaphat, 17. 1-19; Joash, 24.: Hezekiah, 29-32.; and Josish, 34., 35. 
But the religious state of the people, even at the best, is described in Isaiah 
1-5. 
The events recorded in Second Chronicles cover a period of 427 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. B.c.1015. |David my father, eset ee made 
ue Sein. i i is stead. 

Solomon established in his nO to OMOILEN God, let thy 
kingdom. ‘promise unto David my father be 
je @Solomon the son of David established: for thou hast made me 
was strengthened in his king- king over a people like the dust of 

dom, and the LorpD his God was the earth in multitude. | 
with him, and magnified him ex- 10 Give me now wisdom and 
ceedingly. knowledge, that I may go out and 
Sol fi t Gib come in before this people: for who 
olomon sacrifices at Gibeon can judge this thy people, that is 

(1 Forse 4). so great? 

2 Then Solomon spake unto all 11 And God said to Solomon, Be- 


Israel, to the ‘captains of thousands at Ki.2.46. ore ve = ee ee 
and of hundreds, and to the judges, ~ ou hast not asked riches, wealth, 
and to every governor in all Israel,| 6 } eyes or peepee net the ae of oF — 
the chief of the fathers. ED mies, neither yet hast asked long 

3 So Solomon, and all the congre-|; 1 Chr.27. re put oat ieee gece i: 
gation with him, went to the high] 1-34. owledge for thyself, that thou 
place that was at Gibeon; for ¢there d1Chrig)  |Mayest judge my people, over 
was the tabernacle of the congrega- Z7enote: whom I have made thee king: ; 
tion of God, which Moses the ser- 12 Wisdom and knowledge is 


vant of the Lorp had made in the] eee granted unto thee; and I will give 
Sa cic ce Gare 15.25-16.2.. |thee arenes: and See S Ee 

ut the ¢ark of God had Davi ‘jour, such as none of the kings have 
brought up from Kirjath-jearim tol SE*.27.2,2. had that have been before thee, 


the place which David had pre- 21K13.4. neither shall there any after thee 
pared for it: for he had pitched a : have the like. 
tent for it at Jerusalem. hY Ki3.5-15. 


13 Then Solomon came from his 
Moreover the /brasen altar, that i 2 Sam.7.8-x6! |JOurney to the high place that was 
Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of at Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before 
Hur, had made, he put before the|#Cf1 Ki.10. the tabernacle of the congregation, 


tabernacle of the Lorp: and Solo- il es (56 reigned over Israel. 


mon and the congregation sought 14 And Solomon gathered char- 
unto it. iots and ‘horsemen: and ‘he had a 
6 And Solomon went up thither to thousand and four hundred char- 
the brasen altar before the Lorpb, iots, and. twelve thousand horse- 
which was at the tabernacle of the men, which he placed in the chariot 
congregation, and offered a &thou- cities, and with the king at Jerusa- 
sand burnt-offerings upon it, We ee 
Fi ee : 1 nd the king made silver and 
eeomon eae et ety ies gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as, 
5-15) : os stones, and cedar trees made he as 
y the sycomore trees that are in the 
7 In that night did God happear vale for abundance. 
unto Solomon, and said unto him, 16 And Solomon had horses 
Ask what I shall’ give thee. brought out of Egypt, and linen 
8 And Solomon said unto God, yarn: the king’s merchants received 
Thou hast shewed great mercy unto the linen yarn ata price, 


490 


117] 


17 And they fetched up, and 
brought forth out of Egypt.a char-| 
jot for six hundred shekels of silver, 
and an horse for an hundred and 
fifty: and so brought they out 
horses for all the kings of the Hit- 
tites, and for the kings of Syria, by 
their means. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Solomon prepares to-‘build the 
temple (1 Ki. 5. 1-18). 
A ND ‘Solomon determined to 
build an house for the name of 
the Lorp, and an house for his 
kingdom. 

2 And ¢Solomon told out three- 
score and ten thousand men to 
bear burdens, and fourscore thou- 
sand to hew in the mountain, and 


three thousand and six hundred to 
oversee them. a Cf.1 Ki.5. 
3 And Solomon sent to 2Huram|} 13-18- 
the king of Tyre, saying, As thou], cated 
didst deal with David my father,| Hiram, 
and didst send him cedars to build} 1 Ki5.1. 
him an house to dwell therein, even} . sanctify, 
so deal with me. i holy (O.T.). 
4 Behold, I build an house to the rh mee 
name of the LORD my God, to “ded-) {27333 
icate it to him, and to burn before 
him sweet incense, and for the con-|¢ Ex.25.30, 
tinual ¢shewbread, and for the| 7° 


burnt-offerings morning and even-| ¢ One meas- 
ing, on the sabbaths, and on the| ure— about 
new moons, and on the solemn|_ BDNSe 
feasts of the LorD our God. This} One bath = 
gs an ordinance for ever to Israel. 
5 And the house which I build is 2Cf Kis. 
great: for great is our God above] ‘13-18. 
all gods. ‘ ; aoe 
6 But.who is able to build him an" 7'Ghr91‘18- 
“house, seeing the heaven and} 24. 
heaven of heavens cannot contain 
him? who am I then, that I should 
build him an house, save only to 
burn sacrifice before him? 
7 Send me now therefore a man, 
‘ cunning to workin gold, andinsilver, 
and in brass, and in iron, and in 
purple, and crimson, and blue, and 
that can skill to grave with the 
cunning men that are with me in 
Judah and in Jerusalem, whom Da- 
vid my father did provide. 
8 Send me also cedar trees, fir 
trees, and algum trees, out of Leb- 
anon: for I know that thy servants 
can skill to cut timber in Lebanon; 
and, behold, my ‘servants shall be 
with thy servants, j ; 
9 Even to prepare me timber in 
‘abundance: for the house which I 
am about to build shall be wonder- 
ful great. } 
491- 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1015. 


about 8 gals. 


Bi 


10 And, behold, I will give to thy 
servants, the hewers that cut tim- 
ber, twenty thousand «measures of 
beaten wheat, and twenty thousand 
measures of barley, and twenty 
thousand fbaths of wine, and 
twenty thousand baths of oil. 

11 Then Huram the king of Tyre 
answered in writing, which he sent 
to Solomon, Because the LorD hath 
loved his people, he hath made thee 
king over them. 

12 Huram said moreover, Blessed 
be the Lorp God of Israel, that 
made heaven and earth, who hath 
given to David the king a wise'son, 
fendued with prudence and under- 
standing, that might build an house 
for the Lorp, and an house for ‘his 
kingdom. 

13 ‘And now I have sent'a cunning 
man, endued with understanding, 
of Huram my father’s, 

14 The son of a woman of the 
daughters of Dan, and his father 
was aman of Tyre, skilful ‘to work 
in gold, and in silver, in brass, in 
iron, in stone, and in timber, in pur- 
ple, in blue, and in fine linen, and 
in crimson; also to grave any man- 
ner of graving, and to find out every 
device which shall be put to him, 
with thy cunning men, and with 
the cunning men of my lord David 
thy father. 

15 Now therefore the wheat, and 
the barley, the oil, and the wine, 
which my lord hath spoken of, let 
him send unto his servants: 

16 And we will cut wood out of 
Lebanon, as much as thou shalt 
need: and we will bring it to thee 
in flotes by sea to Joppa; and thou 
shalt carry it up to Jerusalem. 

1Z And &Solomon numbered all 


|the strangers that were in the land 


of Israel, afterthe numbering where- 
with David his father had num- 


|bered them; and they were found 


an hundred .and fifty thousand and 
three thousand and six hundred. 
18 And he set threescore and ‘ten 


thousand of them fo be bearers of 
burdens, and fourscore thousand to 
be hewers in the mountain, and 
three thousand and six hundred 
overseers to set the people a work. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Solomon begins to build the 
temple (1 Ki. 6. 1, note). 


Spee Solomon began to build 
the house of the LorD at Jeru- 
salem in mount “Moriah, where the 


» 


LorD appeared unto David his 
father, in the place that David had 
prepared in the threshingfloor of 
Ornan the Jebusite. 

2 And he began to build in the 
second day of the “second month, 
in the fourth year of his reign. 


Dimensions and materials of 
the temple (1 Ki. 6. 2-7. 51). 


3 Now these are the things 
wherein Solomon was ®%instructed 
for the building of the house of God. 
The length by ‘cubits after the first 
measure was threescore cubits, and 
the breadth twenty cubits. 

4 And the ¢porch that was in the 
front of the house, the length of it 
was according to the breadth of the 
house, twenty cubits, and the height 
was an hundred and twenty: and 
he overlaid it within with pure 
gold. 

5 And the ¢greater house he cieled 
with fir tree, which he overlaid 
with fine gold, and set thereon 
palm trees and chains. 

‘6 And he /fgarnished the house 
with precious: stones for beauty: 
and the gold was gold of Parvaim. 

7 He overlaid also the house, the 
beams, the posts, and the walls 
thereof, and the doors thereof, with 
gold; and graved cherubims on the 
walls. 3 

8 And he made the most holy 
house, the length whereof was -ac- 
cording to the breadth of the house, 
twenty cubits, and the breadth 
thereof twenty cubits: and he over- 
laid it with fine gold, amounting 
to six hundred talents. 

9 And the weight of the nails was 
fifty shekels of gold, And he over- 
laid the upper chambers with 
gold. 

10 And in the most holy house he 
made two cherubims of image work, 
and “overlaid them with gold. 

11 And the wings of the cheru- 

ims were twenty cubits long: one 
wing of the one cherub was five 
cubits, reaching to the wall of the 
house: and the other wing was 
likewise five cubits, reaching to the 
wing of the other cherub. 

12 And one 
cherub was five cubits, reaching to 
the wall of the house: and the other 
wing was five cubits also, joining 
to the wing of the other cherub. 

he wings of these cherubims 
spread themselves forth twenty cu- 
bits: and they stood on their feet, 
and their faces were inward. 


wing of the other 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 1012. 


ai.e. May. 


61 Chr.28, 
11-18. 


¢ One cubit = 
about 18 in.; 
also vs.8,11, 
12,13,15. 

d1 Ki.6.3. 

é1 Ki.6.17. 

fice. covered. 

g One talent 
= £6150, or 
$29,085. 


h C£.Ex.25, 
18,19. 


# Ex.26.31; 
Mt.27.51; 
Heb.9.3. 

j 1 Ki.7.15-22. 

k Cf.Ex.27.1-8. 

2 Cubit = 
about 18 in.; 
also vs.2,3. 

m1 Ki.7.23; 
cf.Ex.30. 
17-21. 


n Bath = 
about 8 gals. 


o Ex.30.19-21. 


b Cf.Ex.25, 
31-40. 


492 


14 And he made the ‘vail of blue, 
and purple, and crimson, and fine 
linen, and wrought cherubims 
thereon. 

15 JAlso he made before the house 
two pillars of thirty and five cubits 
high, and the chapiter that was on 
the top of each of them was five 
cubits. F 

16 And he made chains, as in the 
oracle, and put them on the heads 
of the pillars; and made an hun- 
dred pomegranates, and put them 
on the chains. , 

17 And he reared up the pillars 
before the temple, one on the right 
hand, and ‘the other on the left; 
and called the name of that on the 
right hand Jachin, and the name of 
that on the left Boaz. 


CHAPTER 4. 
The temple, continued. 


MOREOVER he-made an “altar 
of brass, twenty ‘cubits the 
length thereof, and twenty cubits 
the breadth thereof, and ten cubits 
the height thereof. i 

2 Also he made a molten sea of 
ten cubits from brim to brim, round 
in compass, and five cubits the 
height thereof; and a line of thirty 
cubits did compass it round about. 

3 And under it was the similitude 
of oxen, which did compass it round 
about: ten in a cubit, compassing 
the sea round about. Two rows 
of oxen were cast, when it was 
cast. 

4 It stood upon twelve oxen, 
three looking toward the north, 
and three looking toward the west, 
and three looking toward the south, 
and three looking toward the east: 
and the sea was set above upon 
them, and all their hinder parts 
were inward. 

5 And the thickness of it was an’ 
handbreadth, and the brim of it 
like the work of the brim of a cup, 
with flowers of lilies; and it re- 
ceived and held three thousand 
baths. 

6 He made also ten lavers, and. 
put five on the right hand, and five 
on the left, to wash in them: such 
things as they offered for the burnt- 
offering they washed in them; but 
the sea was for the priests to wash 
in. 

7 And he made ten fcandlesticks 
of gold according to their form, and 
set them in the ternple, five on the 
Iright hand, and five on the left. 


And he made an hundred basons 
of gold. 
9 Furthermore he made the court 
of the priests, and the great court, 
and doors for the court, and over- 
laid the doors of them with brass. 
10 And he set the sea on the right 
side of the east end, over against 
the south. 
11 And Huram made the pots, 
and the shovels, and the basons. 
And Huram finished the work that 
he was to make for king Solomon 
for the house of God; 
12 To wit, the two pillars, and 
the pommels, and the chapiters 
which were on the top of the two 
pillars, and the two wreaths to cover], or rx.o5. 
the two pommels of the chapiters] 23-30. 


pubich were on the top of the pil poe Fe 
= nacle had no 
13. And four hundred pomegran-| “court of 
ates on the two wreaths; two rows] the priests.” 
of pomegranates on each wreath,| .5 537.47. 
to cover the two pommels of the ha 
chapiters which were upori the|¢Ex.25.30, 
pillars. note. 
14 He made also bases, and lavers! ¢1 xi.6.4, 
made he upon the bases; note. 

15 One sea, and twelve oxen un- f Sanctify 
der it. holy ©.5)- 
16 The pots also, and the shovels,| 2 Chr.29.5. 
and the fleshhooks, and ali their Sarr eys 

instruments, did Huram his father oe 


make to king Solomon for the}g1 Ki.8.1-11, 
house of the Lorp of bright brass.) "°f* 
17 In the plain of Jordan did the}; ic. October. 
king cast them, in the clay groun 
between Succoth and Zeredathah. 
“18 cThus Solomon made all these 
vessels in great abundance: for the 
weight of the brass could not be 
found out. 
19 And Solomon made all the ves- 
sels that were for the house of God, 
the golden altar also, and the 
tables whereon the ¢shewbread was 
set; : 
20 Moreover the. candlesticks 
with their lamps, that they should 
burn after the manner before the 
oracle, of pure gold; 
21 And the flowers, and the 
lamps, and the tongs, made he of 
gold, and that perfect gold; 
22 And the snuffers, and the 
basons, and the spoons, and the 
censers, of pure gold: and the entry 
of the house, the inner doors thereof 
for the most holy place, and the 
doors of the house of the temple, 


were of gold. 
493 


{fT CHRONICLES. 


: = nip jet saicieirs and| B.C. 1012. CHAPTER 5S. 
placed them in the temple, five on : 
the right side, and five on the left. The ark brought in: the glory 


Aer id Rha 


[5:12 


fills the house (1 Ki. 8. 1-11). ° 


HUS all the work that Solomon 
made for the house of the 
LORD was finished: and Solomon 
brought in ali the things that 
David his father had Jdedicated; 
and the silver, and the gold, and all 
the instruments, put he among the © 
treasures of the house of God. 

2 &Then Solomon assembled the 
elders of Israel, and all the heads of 
the tribes, the chief of the fathers 
of the children of Israel, unto Jeru- 
salem, to bring up the ark of the 
covenant of the LorpD out of the 
city of David, which is Zion. 

3 Wherefore all the men of Israel 
assembled themselves unto the king 
in the feast which was in the 
hseventh month. 

4 And all the elders of Israel came; 
and the Levites took up the ark. 

5 And they brought up the ark, 
and the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion, and all the holy vessels that 
were in the tabernacle, these did the 
priests and the Levites bring. up. 

6 Also king Solomon, and all the 
congregation of Israel that were 
assembled unto him before the ark, 
sacrificed sheep and oxen, which 
could not be told nor numbered for 
multitude. 

7 And the priests brought in the 
ark of the covenant of the Lorp 
unto his place, to the oracle of the 
house, into the most holy place, 
even under the wings of the cher- 
ubims: 

8 For the cherubims spread forth 
their wings over the place of the 
ark, and the cherubims covered the 
ark and the staves thereof above. 

9 And they drew out the staves 
of the ark, that the ends of the 
staves were seen from the ark be- 
fore the oracle; but they were not 
seen without. And there it is unto 
this day. 

10 There was nothing in the ark 
save the two tables which Moses 


put therein at Horeb, when the 
LorpD made a covenant with the 
children of Israel, when they came 
out of Egypt. 

11 And-it came to pass, when the 
priests were come-out of the holy 
place: (for all the priests that 
were present were sanctified, and 
did not then wait by course: 

12 Also the Levites which were 


Ithe singers, all of them of Asaph, of 


Heman, of Jeduthun, with their 
sons. and their brethren, being 
arrayed in white linen, having 
cymbals and psalteries and harps, 
stood at the east. end of the altar, 
and with them an hundred and 
twenty priests sounding with trum- 
pets:) 

13 It came even to pass, as the 
trumpeters and singers were as one, 
to make one sound to be heard in) 
praising and thanking the Lorp; 
and when they lifted up their voice 
with the trumpets and cymbals and/| 
instruments of musick, and praised! 
the LorD, saying, For he is good; 
for his mercy endureth for ever: 
that then the house was filled’ with 
a ‘cloud, even the house of the 
Lorp; 

14 So that the priests could not 
stand to: minister by reason of the 


cloud: for the glory of the Lorp d1Kis.14-21. 


had filled the house of God. 


II CHRONICLES. 
Bic. 1004. |build the house; but thy son which 


a vs.11-13; 


Ex.40.34, 


note, 


b 1 Ki.8.12-21. 


c Ex.19.93 
20.21. 


e 2 Chr.12.13; 


shall come forth out of thy loins, he 
shall build the house for my name. 

10 The Lorp therefore hath per- 
formed his word that he hath spo- 
ken: for I am risen up in the room 
of David my father, and am set on 
the throne of Israel, as the LoRD 
promised, and have built the house 
for the name of the LorpD God of 
Israel. 

11 ‘And “in it have I put the ark, 
wherein is the covenant of the 
Lorpb, that he made with the chik 
dren of Esrael. 


Solomon’s prayer of dedication 
(1 Ki, 8. 22-53). 


12 #And he stood before the altar 
of the Lorp in the presence of 
fall the congregation of Israel, and 
spread forth his hands: 

13 ForSolomon hadmadea brasen 
scaffold, of five Jcubits long, and 
five cubits broad, and three cubits 


Deut-12.5-7. |high, and had set it in the midst of 

CHAPTER 6. f1Sam.16: the court: and upon it he stood, and 

The sermon of Solomon (1 Ki, | 7,13:1 Chr. |kneeled down upon his knees be- 
8. 12-21). Ae fore all the congregation of Israel, 


and spread forth his hands toward 
heaven, 

14 And ¥said, O Lorp God of Is- 
rael, ‘there is no God like thee in 
the heaven, nor in the earth; which 
keepest covenant, and shewest 
about 18 in, |Mercy unto thy servants, that walk 


g 2 Sam.7.2; 
*PREN bsaid Solomon, The LorD] 1 Clir.17.1. 
= hath ‘said that he would dwell h2 Chr.5.7,10. 
in the thick darkness. u 
2 But I have built an house of|i1Ki8.22-61. 
habitation for thee, and a place for ig K cubic 
thy dwelling for ever. 


3 ¢And the king turned_his face, 
and blessed the whole congregation 


spake with his mouth to my father 
avid, saying, 
5 Since the day that I brought 
forth my people out of the land of 


Egypt I chose no. city among all the] n 2 chr.2.6; 
tribes of Israel to build an house in,| CfIsa.66.1. 


that my name might be there; nei- 
ther chose I any man to be a ruler 


9 Notwithstanding thou shalt not 


k Bible 
prayers 


before thee with all their hearts: 
1S Thou which hast kept with thy 


es Sth ow all the congregation of: O-F). an ray ace ae oe re is 

srael stood, = — thou has promise im; and spakest 
Lon God of farsel wig hare wi] TeeoT1o) (Math thy mouth, and hast fulfilled 
‘his hands fulfilled that which he tEx15.11;  [day, ‘ 


16 Now therefore, OLorD God of 


m 2 Chr.7.18; 2| Israel, keep with thy servant David 
Sam.7.12-16;--my father that which thou hast 


1 Ki.2.4, 


494 


promised him, ”saying, There shall 
not fail thee a man in my sight to 
sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so 
that thy children take heed to their 
way to walk in my law, as. thou 
hast walked before me. 

| 17 Now then, O Lorp God of 
Israel, let thy word be verified, 
which thou hast spoken unto thy 
servant David. 


cannot contain thee; how much less 
‘this house which I have built! 

| 19 Have respect therefore to the 
prayer of thy servant, and to his 
supplication, O Lorp my God, to 
arken unto the cry and the prayer 


6 20] Il CHRONICLES. [6 39 


his own sore and his own grief, and 
shall spread forth his hands in this 
house: 
30 Then hear thou from heaven 
thy dwelling place, and forgive, and 
render unto’ every man according 
unto all his ways, whose heart thou 
knowest; (for “thou only knowest 
the hearts of the children of men:) 
31 That they may ‘fear thee, to 
walk in thy ways, so long as they 
live in the land which thou gavest 
unto our fathers. 
32 Moreover concerning the stran- 
ger, which is not of thy people 
Israel, but is come from a far coun- 
try for thy great name’s sake, and 
thy mighty hand, and thy stretched 
out arm; if they come and pray in 
this house; : 
33° Then hear thou from the heav- 
23 Then hear thou from heaven, ens, even from thy dwelling place, 
and do, and judge thy servants, by and do according to all-that the 
requiting the wicked, by recompens-|, peut.28.23, |Sttanger calleth to thee for; that all 
ing his way upon his own head;| 24; 1 Ki.17.1;|people of the earth may know thy 


thee: 


upon this house day and night, upon 
the place whereof thou hast said 
that thou wouldest put thy name 
there; to hearken unto the prayer 
which thy servant prayeth toward 
this place. 

21 Hearkenthereforeuntothesup- 
plications of thy servant, and of thy 
people Israel, which they shall make 
toward this place: hear thou from 
thy dwelling place, even from 
heaven; and when thou hearest, 
forgive. i 

22 If aman sin against his neigh- 
bour, and an oath be laid upon him 
to make him swear, and the oath 
come before thine altar in this 
house; 


and by justifying the righteous, by| 18-45- name, and fear thee, as doth thy 

giving him according to his right-|,1 chr.28.9, |people Israel, and may know that 

eousness. Prov.21.2;, |this house which I have built is 
24 And if thy people Israel be put} 2442, ~ {called by thy name. 


to the worse before the enemy, be-}, psa.19.9, 34 If thy people go out to war 
cause they have sinned against thee;| note. against their enemies by the way 
and calc eae nk, ee oy Fee ich rte thou nel Bante eric si 
mame, and pray and make suppli-|" Fec1.7.20; ey pray unto thee towar sicity 
cation before thee in this house; | Rom.3.9,i9, |which thou hast chosen, and the 
25 Then hear thou from the heav- house which I have built for thy 
ens, and forgive the sin of thy| jas.3.2; name; 
people Israel, and bring them again] 1 John 1.8. 35 Then hear thou from the heav- 
unto the land which thou gavest to} | 1 640 ens their prayer and their supplica- 
them and ‘to their fathers. aia s tO, Aer pi their ene. (é 
26 When the heaven is @shut up, 36 they sin against thee, (for 
and there is no rain, because they) there is ¢no man which sinneth 
thave sinned against thee; yet if not,) and thou be angry with them, 
they pray toward this place, and and deliver them over before their 
confess thy name, and turn from enemies,-and they carry them away 


their sin, when thou dost afflict captives unto a land far off or near; 
them; | 37 Yet if they bethink themselves 


in the land whither they are:carried 
captive, and turn and pray unto 
thee in the land of their cap- 
tivity, saying, We have sinned, we 
have done amiss, and have dealt 
wickedly; 

38 If they return to thee with all 
their heart and. with all ‘their soul 
in the land of their captivity, 
whither they have carried them 
captives, and pray toward their 
land, which thou gavest unto their 
fathers, and toward the “city which 
thou hast chosen, and toward the 
house which I have built for thy 
Iname: 

39 Then hear thou from the heav- 
ens, even from thy dwelling place, 
their prayer and their supplications, 


and forgive the sin of thy servants, 
and of thy people Israel, when thou 
hast taught them the good way, 
wherein they should walk; and 
‘send rain upon thy land, which thou 
hast given unto thy people for an 
inheritance. 

28 If there be dearth in the land, 
if there be pestilence, if there be 
blasting, or mildew, locusts, or cat- 
erpillers; if their enemies besiege 
them in the cities of their land; 
whatsoever sore or whatsoever sick- 
ness there be: 

29 Then what prayer or what 
‘supplication soever shall be made 
of any man, or of all thy people 
Israel, when every one shall know 


A95 


= 


eye iy 


and maintain their cause, and for- 
give thy people which have sinned 
against thee. 

40 Now, my God, let, I beseech 
thee, thine eyes be open, and Jet 
thine ears be attent unto the prayer 
that is made in this place. 

41 Now therefore ¢arise, O LorD 
God, into thy resting place, thou, 


- and the ark of thy strength: let thy 


priests, O LorpD God, be clothed 
with salvation, and let thy saints 
rejoice in goodness. 

42 O LorpD God, turn not away 
the face of thine anointed: remem- 
ber the mercies of David thy ser- 
vant. 


CHAPTER 7. 
The divine acceptance. 


OW when Solomon had made 

an ‘end of praying, the fire 

came down from heaven, and con- 

sumed the burnt-offering and the 

sacrifices; and the glory of the 
Lorp filled the house. 

2 ¢And the priests could not enter 
into the house of the LorD, because 
the glory of the Lorp had filled the 
Lorp’s house. 

3. And when all the children of Is- 
rael saw how the fire came down, 
and the glory of the Lorp upon 
the house, they bowed themselves 
with their faces to the ground upon 
the pavement, and worshipped, and 
praised the Lorpb, saying, fFor he 


is good; for his mercy endureth for 
ever, 


Sacrifice and rejoicing 
(1 Ki. 8. 62-66). 


4 Then the king and all the peo- 
ple offered sacrifices before the 

ORD. 

5 And king Solomon offered a sac- 
rifice of twenty and two thousand 
oxen, and an hundred and twenty 
thousand sheep: so the king and all 
cote ae dedicated the house of 


od. 

6 And the priests waited on their 
offices: the éLevites also with in- 
struments of musick of the Lorpb, 
which David the king had made to 
praise the LorD, because his mercy 
endureth for ever, when Dayid 
praised by their ministry; and the 
priests sounded trumpets before 
them, and all Israel stood. 

7 Moreover Solomon “hallowed 
the middle of the court that was 
before the house of the Lorp: for 
there he offered burnt-offerings, and 


co 


II CHRONICLES. 


a Psa.132.8,9, 
10,16. 


b Isu.55.3. 
ci Ki.8.54. 
d Lev.9.24; 
Jud.6.21; 
1 Ki.18.38; 
1 Chr.21,26. 
e 2 Chr.5.14. 
f Psa.136.1. 
g1 Chr.15.16. 
|h 1 Ki.8.64. 


t Lit. meal. 


J 1 Ki.8.65. 


71 Ki.9.1. 
m1 Ki.9.2. 
n Deut.12.5. 


o 2 Chr.6.26, 
refs. 


?1 Ki.9.3. 


k i.e. October. 


the fat of the peace-offerings, be- 
cause the brasen altar which Solo- 
mon had made was not able to re- — 
ceive the burnt-offerings, and the 
‘meat-offerings, and the fat. 

8 jAlso at the same time Solomon — 
kept the feast seven days, and all 
Israel with him, a very great con- 
gregation, from the entering in of 
Hamath unto the river of Egypt. 

9 And in the eighth day they 
made a solemn assembly: for they 
kept the dedication of the altar 
seven days, and the feast seven 
days. : 

10 And on the three and twentieth 
day of the “seventh month he sent 
the people away into their tents, © 
glad and merry in heart for the 
goodness that the LorD had shewed 
unto David, and to Solomon, and 
to Israel his people. 

11 Thus Solomon 4finished the 
house of the Lorpb, and the king’s 
house: and all that came into Solo- 
mon’s heart to make in the house 
of the LorD, and in his own house, 
he prosperously effected. 


Jehovah appears to Solomon 
(1 Ki. 9. 1-9). 


12 And the Lorp “appeared to 
Solomon by night, and said unto 
him, I have heard thy prayer, and 
have "chosen this place to myself 
for an house of sacrifice. 

13 IfI °shut up heaven that there 
be no rain, or if I command the 
locusts to devour the land, or if 
EEES pestilence among my peo- 
ple; 

14 If my people, which are called 
by my name, shall humble them- 
selves, and pray, and seek my face, 
and turnefrom their wicked ways; 
then will I hear from heaven, and 
will forgive their sin, and will heal 
their land. 

15 Now mine eyes shall be open, 
and mine ears attent unto the 
prayer that is made in this place. 

16 For now have I *chosen and 
sanctified this house, that my name 
may be there for ever: and mine 
eyes and mine heart shall be there 
perpetually. 

17 And as for thee, if thou wilt 
walk before me, as David thy father 
walked, and do according to all 
that I have commanded thee, and 
shalt observe my statutes and my 
judgments; 

18 Then will I stablish the throne 
of thy kingdom, according as I have 
covenanted with David thy father, 


, 3 


saying, @There shall not fail thee a 
man to be ruler in Israel. 

19 But if ye turn away, and for- 
sake my statutes and my command- 
ments, which I have set before you, 
and shall go and serve other gods, 
and worship them; 

20 4Then will I pluck them up by 
the roots out of my land which I 
have given them; and this house, 
which I have sanctified for my 
name, will I cast out of my sight, 
and will make it to be a proverb 
and a byword among all nations. 

21 And ‘this house, which is high, 
shall be an astonishment to every 
one that passeth by it; so that he 
shall say, Why hath the LorD done 
thus unto this land, and unto this 
house? 

22 And it shall be answered, Be- 


a 2 Chr.6.16, 
refs. 


6b Deut.28.63- 
68; 2 Ki.25. 
1-7. 


¢ 2 Ki.25.9. 


cause they forsook the LORD God| 1 xi.9.10-14. 


of their fathers, which brought ; 
them forth out of the land of Egypt,|¢ ! Ki-9-18- 
and laid hold on other gods, and] ¢ Deut.20. 

worshipped them, and served them:} 17; Josh.3. 
therefore hath he brought all this 


evil upon them. oes, 4.3: 
g Cf.1 Ki.9.23. 
CHAPTER 8. 


The energy and fame of Solo-|. 
mon (1 Ki. 9. 10-28). i ae 


ND it came to pass @at the end] ; rey.23.1-43. 
of twenty years, wherein Solo- 
mon had built the house of the|* been 
LorD, and his own house, - 

2 That the cities which Huram| 7/1 Ki.9.26. 
had restored to Solomon, Solomon) aod 
built them, and caused the children|” Fjath, 2 Ki. 
of Israel to dwell there. 14.22. 

3 And Solomon went to Hamath- 
zobah, and prevailed against it. 

4 And he ¢built Tadmor in the 
wilderness, and all the store cities, 
which he built in Hamath. 

5 Also he built Beth-horon the 
upper, and Beth-horon the nether, 
fenced cities, with walls, gates, and 
bars; 

6 And Baalath, and all the store 
cities that Solomon had, and all 
the chariot cities, and the cities of 
the horsemen, and all that Solo- 
mon desired to build in Jerusalem, 
and in Lebanon, and throughout all 
the land of his dominion. i 

7 As for all the people that were 
left fof the Hittites, and the Amo- 
rites, and the Perizzites, and the 
Hivites, and the Jebusites, which 
were not of Israel, 

8 But of their children, who were 
jeft after them in the land, whom 
the children of Israel consumed not, 


n1 Ki.9.27. 


o One talent 
(gold) = 
£6150, or 
$29,085. 


497 


II CHRONICLES. 


__B.C. 1004. 


i 5 qin A 


them did Solomon make to pay trib- 
ute until this day. 

9 But of the children of Israel did 
Solomon make no servants for his 
work; but they were men of war, 
and chief of his captains, and 
captains of his chariots and horse- 
men. 

10 And these were the &chief of 
king Solomon’s officers, even two 
hundred and fifty, that bare rule 
over the people. 

11 And Solomon brought up the 
hdaughter of Pharaoh out of the city 
of David unto the house that he had 
built for her: for he said, My wife 
shall not dwell in the house, of Da- 
vid king of Israel, because the 
places are holy, whereunto the ark 
of the LorD hath come. 

12 Then Solomon offered burnt- 
offerings unto the LoRD on the altar 
of the Lorp, which he had built be- 
fore the porch, 

13 Even after a certain rate every 
day, offering ‘according to the com- 
mandment of Moses, on the sab- 
baths, and on the new moons, and 
on the solemn /feasts, three times 
in the year, even in the feast of 
unleavened bread, and in the feast 
of weeks, and in the feast of taber- 
nacles. 

14 And he appointed, according 
to the order of David his father, the 
kcourses of the priests to their ser- 
vice, and the Levites to their 
charges, to praise and minister be- 
fore the priests, as the duty of every 
day required: the porters also by 
their courses at every gate: for so 
had David the man of God com- 
manded: 

15 And they departed not from 
the commandment of the king unto 
the priests and Levites concerning 
any matter, or concerning the trea- 


sures. 

16 Now all the work of Solomon 
was prepared unto the day of the 
foundation of the house of the Lorb, 
and until it was finished, So 
the house of the LORD was per- 
fected. 

17 Then went Solomon to /Ezion- 
geber, and to ”Eloth, at the sea side 
in theland of Edom. 

18 And Huram “sent him by the 
hands of his servants ships, and 
servants that had knowledge of the 
sea; and they went with the ser- 
vants of Solomon’to Ophir, and 
took thence four hundred and fifty 
talents of gold, and brought them 
tg king Solomon. 


91] II CHRONICLES. IP 
CHAPTER 9. and harps and psalteries for singers: 


d there were none such, seen 
polar. 5 ne mes BF before in the land of Judah. 


12: And king yeeros sth 

the: queen of Sheba queen of Sheba er desire, whnat~ 

)  tabearery the iced of Solomon, soever she:asked, beside that which, 

she came to prove Solomon: with: she had brought.unto the king. So 

hard questions at Jerusalem, witha _Jshe turned, and went away to her 
very great company, and camels own land, she and her servants. 

that bare spices, and gold in abun- 


5 Solomon’s revenue and splen- 
dance, and precious stones: and 


i. 10. 14-29). 
when she was come to Solomon, dour (1 Hes Uy ) 
she communed: with him of all that 13 Now the weight of gold that 
Pain is res Id her all h See hn epics tediny-, 

2 And. Solomon: to! er a er six hundred an : 
questions: and there was nothing talents of gold; 2 
hid from Solomon which he told her 14 Beside that which chapmen 
and merchants brought., And all 
the kings of Arabia and governors 
of the country brought gold. and 
silver to Solomon. 

15 And king Solomon made two 
hundred targets of beaten gold: six 
hundred shekels of beaten gold 
gra een very dred. shields 

ee hun shie 

made he of beaten gold: three 
of the Lorpy there was: no more hundred shekels of gold. went to 
spirit in her. 2 x a1 Ki10.1-13, (OD¢ shield. And the king put them 

5| And'she said to the king; Jt was in the houseoftheforest of Lebanon. 
a true report which I heard’ in. mine] One talent |! 17 Moreover _ the king made a 
ove land of thine: acts, and of thy| (gold) = ate throne by ivory, and overlaid it 
wisdom: $29,085; also |W1LN pure gold, 

6 Howbeit I believed not their] v3, ° 18 And there were six steps 
words, until I came, and mine eyes Cand 
had seen i#: and, behold, the one] ° almug, 1Ki. 
half of the greatness of thy wisdom] 10.11. the throne, and stays om each side 
was. my told oP ace betes exceed- { i 
est the fame that eard. 

Happy are thy men, and’ happy 
are these thy servants, which stand 
continually before thee, and hear 
thy wisdom. 

8 Blessed be the Lorp thy God, 
which delighted in thee to set thee 
on his throne, to be king for the 
Lorp thy God: because thy God] 
loved Israel, to establish them for 
ever, therefore made he thee king 
over them, to do judgment and 
justice. 

9 And she gave the king an hun- 
dred and twenty ¢talents of gold, 
and of spices great abundance, and 
precious stones: neither was there 
any such spice as the queen of Sheba 
gave king Solomon, y 

1@ And the servants also of Hu- 
ram, and the servants of Solomon, 
which brought gold from Ophir, 
brought “algum trees and precious 
stones. 


attendance of his ministers, and 
their apparel; his cupbearers also, 
and their apparel; and his: ascent 
by which he went up into the house 


21 For the king’s ships went to 
Tarshish with the servants of Hu- 
ram: every three years once came 
the ships of Tarshish, bringing gold; 


and silver, ivory, and apes, and pea- 
cocks. 


23 And all the kings of the earth 
sought the presence of Solomon, to 
hear his wisdom, that God had put 


ah the king made Fess oe in his heart, 
aigum trees terraces to the house o 24 And they b 
the Lorp, and to the king’s palace, hi eat 


S present, vessels of silver, 
498 a 


‘ 


9 25] 
vessels of gold, and raiment, har- 
ness, and spices, ‘horses, and mules, 
va rate year by year. 

25 And Solomon had four thou- 
ssand stalls for horses and ‘chariots, 
and twelve thousand horsemen;! 
whom he bestowed in the chariot 
«ities, and with the king at Jeru- 


lem. 

26 And he reigned over all the 
kings from the 4river even unto 
tthe land of the Philistines, and to 
the border of Egypt. 

27 And the king made ®silver in 
Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees 
made he as the sycomore trees that 
are inthe low plains in abundance. 

28 And they “brought unto Solo- 
‘mon ‘horses out of Egypt, and out 
sof all Jands. 


The death of Solomon 
(i Ki. 12. 41-43). 


29 Now the “rest of the acts of 
Solomon, first and last, arethey not 
written in the book of Nathan the 
prophet, and in the prophecy of 
‘Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the 
visions of Iddo -the seer against 
Jeroboam’the-son of Nebat? 

30 And Solomon ‘reigned in Jeru- 
salem over all Israel forty years. 

31 And Solomon «slept with his 
fathers, and he was buried in the 
icity of David his father: and Reho- 
-boam his son reigned in his stead. 


CHAPTER 10. 


Accession and folly of Reho- 
boam (1 Ki. 12, 1-15). 


LAND &Rehoboam went to She- 
* chem: for to Shechem were 
all Israel come to make him king. 

2 And it came to pass, when 
hJeroboam the son of Nebat, who 
was in Bgypt, whither he had ‘fled 
from ‘the presence of Solomon the 
king, theard it, that Jeroboam re- 
turned out of Egypt. 

3 And they sent and called him. 
So Jeroboam and all Israel came 
and spake to Rehoboam, saying, 

4 sjThy father made our yoke 
grievous: now therefore ease thou 
somewhat the grievous servitude of 
thy father, and his heavy yoke that 
he put upon us, and we will serve 
thee. 

5 And he 4said unto them, Come 
again unto me after three days. 
And the people departed. 


II CHRONICLES. 


a “The river,” 
i.e. Euphra- 
tes, to the 
border of 
Egypt, but 


yet to be ful- 
filled. 


6 1KiL10.27. 

c 1 Ki.10.28. 

d1Ki141. 

-€1 Ki.11.29. 
These books 
have per- 
ished. 


f1 Ki-11.42, 
43. 


g1 Ki.12.1-15. 

B.C. 975.] 

hk 1 Ki-11.26- 
40; 12.3-20; 
14.7-20. 

71 Ki.11.40. 

j1 Ki.12.4. 

k1 Ki.12.5. 

71 Ki.12.6. 

m 1 Ki.12.7. 

n1 Ki.12.8,9. 

o1 Ki.12.10,11. 

p 1 Ki.12.12-14. 

qv-14; Jud. 
14.4; 2 Chr. 


10.15; 11.4; 
22.7; 25.20. 


[10 16 


6 ‘And king Rehoboam ‘took 
counsel with the old men that had 
stood before Solomon his father 
while he yet lived, saying, What 
counsel give ye me to return answer 
to this people? 

7 And they :spakeunto him, “say- 
ing, If thou be kind to this people, 
and please them, and speak good 
words to them, they will be thy 
servants for ever. 

8 *But he forsook the counsel 
which the old men gave him, and 
took counsel with the young men 
that were brought up with him, 
that stood before him. 

9 And he said unto them, What 
advice give ye that we may return 
answer to this people, which thave 
spoken to me, saying, Ease some- 
what the yoke that thy father did 
put upon us? , 

10 °And the young men that were 
brought up with him spake unto 
him, saying, Thus shalt thou answer 
the people that spake unto thee, 
saying, Thy father made our yoke 
heavy, but make thou zt somewhat 
lighter for us; thus shalt thou say 
unto them, My little finger shall be 
thicker than my father’s loins. 

11 For whereas my father put a 
heavy yoke upon you, I will put 
more to your yoke: my father chas- 
tised you with whips, but I will 
chastise you with scorpions. 


Division of the kingdom: acces- 
sion of Jeroboam over Israel 
(1 Ki. 12. 15-24). 


12 So ?Jeroboam and all the peo- 
ple came to Rehoboam on the third 
day, as the king bade, saying, Come 
again to me on the third day. 

13 And the king answered them 
roughly; and king Rehoboam for- 
sook the counsel of the old men, 

14 And answered them after the 
advice of the young men, saying, 
My father made your yoke heavy, 
but I will add thereto: my father 
chastised you with whips, but Iwill 
chastise you with scorpions. 

15 So the king hearkened not 
unto the people: for tthe cause was 
of God, that the LORD might per- 
form his word, which he spake by 
the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite 
to Jeroboam the:son of Nebat. 

16 And when all /Israel saw that 
the king would not hearken unto 
them, the people answered the king, 


1“‘Ysrael,” the ten tribes other than Judah and Benjamin, often called “Israel” 
in distinction from Judah. This division of the kingdom marks an epoch of great im- 


499 


a 


_man to your tents, O Israel: and 


saying, What portion have we in 
David? and we have none inheri- 
tance in the son of Jesse: every 


now, David, see to thine own house. 
So all Israel went to their tents. 

17 But as for the children of Is- 
rael that dwelt in the cities of 
Judah, Rehoboam reigned over 
them. 2 

18 Then king Rehoboam sent Ha- 
doram that was over the tribute; 
and the children of Israel stoned 
him with stones, that he died. But 
king Rehoboam made speed to get 
him up to Ais chariot, to flee to 
Jerusalem. 

19 And 2Israel rebelled against 
the house of David unto this day. 


CHAPTER li. 
Rehoboam returns to Jerusalem. |$ 1 Ki.12.21. 


feND bwhen Rehoboam was — ¢ 2 Chr.12.15, 
to Jerusalem, he gathered of|;;. Terobbera! 
the house of Judah and Benjamin ; < 
an hundred and fourscore thousand | ¢ Cf-1 Ki.12.31. 
chosen men, which were warriors, FAD HES 
to fight against Israel, that he 


a1 Ki.12.19. 


ones, i.e. 
might bring the kingdom again to betas Isa. 
Rehoboam, Papo 


2 ‘But the word of the LorbD}|, Caled 
came to Shemaiah the man of God,| Michaiah, 
saying, 2 Chr.13.2. 

3 Speak unto Rehoboam the son|; Or, Abisha- 
of Solomon, king of Judah, and to| /om, 1 Ki.is. 
all Israel in Judah and Benjamin,| 2: 
saying, 

4 Thus saith the Lorp, Ye shall 
not go up, nor fight against your 
brethren: return every man to his 
house: for this thing is done of me. 
And they obeyed the words of the 
LorpD, and returned from going 
against Jeroboam. 


Rehoboam fortifies his kingdom. 


5S And Rehoboam dwelt in Jeru- 
salem, and built cities for defence 
in Judah. 

6 He built even Beth-lehem, and 
Etam, and Tekoa, 

7 And Beth-zur, and Shoco, and 
Adullam, 

8 And Gath, and Mareshah, and 
Ziph, 

9 And Adoraim, and Lachish, and 
Azekah, 


10 And Zorah, and Aijalon, and 


¢ 2 Chr.13.1. 


II CHRONICLES. 


[11 


Hebron, which are in Judah and 
Benjamin fenced cities. . 

11 And he fortified the strong 
holds, and put captains in them, 
and store of victual, and of oil and 
wine. i 

12 And in every several city he 
put shields and spears, and made 
them exceeding strong, having Ju- 
dah and Benjamin on his side. 

13 And the priests and the Le- 
vites that were in all Israel resorted 
to him out of all their coasts. 


Jeroboam rejects the worship of 
Jehovah. 


14 For the Levites left their sub- 
urbs and their possession, and 
|came to Judah and Jerusalem: for 
Jeroboam and his sons had cast 
them off from executing the priest’s 
office unto the Lorb: 

15 And ¢he ordained him priests 
for the high “places, and for the 
fdevils, and for the calves which he 
had made. 

16 And after them out of all the 
tribes of Israel such as set their 
hearts to seek the LORD God of Is- 
tael came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice 
unto the Lorp God of their fathers. 

17 So they strengthened the king- 
dom of Judah, and made Rehoboam 
the son of Solomon strong, three 
years: for three years they’ walked 
in the way of David and Solo- 
mon. 


Rehoboam’s family, 


18 And Rehoboam took him Ma- 
halath the daughter of Jerimoth the 
son of David to wife, and Abihail 
the daughter of Eliab the son of 
Jesse; ; 

19 Which bare him children; 
Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham. 

20 And after her he took 
8Maachah the daughter of Absa- 
lom; which bare him Abijah, and 
Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith. 

21 And Rehoboam loved Maachah 
the daughter of Absalom above all 
his wives and his concubines: (for 
he took eighteen wives, and three- 
score concubines; and begat twenty 
and eight sons, and threescore 
daughters. ) 

22 And Rehoboam made ‘Abijah 
the son of Maachah the chief, to be 


portance in the history of the nation. 

itself’? (Mt. 12. 25). 1 

(Usaseatl+10-1ateeferaae?Saaisumess lize. 37. 

ee 1. 26; Zech: 12. 8; (N.T.), Lk. 1. 31; 1 Cor. 1 
30 26; 


500 


Henceforth it is “a kin 
ms are to be reunited in the future kingdom 


D828t 


15-28). See 


(O.T.), 
“Tsrael,” , ) 


Gen, 12. 2,3: Rom, 


a: 


11 23] 


II CHRONICLES. 


> Ft3is 


ruler among his brethren: for he|_B.c.974. _|away also the shields of gold which 


thought to make him king. 

23 ‘And he dealt wisely, and dis- 
persed of all his children through- 
out all the countries of Judah and 
Benjamin, unte every fenced city: 
and he gave them victual in abun- 
dance. And he desired many wives. 


CHAPTER 12. 


Rehoboam’s apostasy (1 Ki. 14. 
21-24), 


ND it came to pass, when Reho-| 
boam had established the king- 
dom, and had strengthened him- 
self, he *forsook the law of the 
Lorp, and all Israel with hirs. 


Invasion of Shishak 
(1 Ki. 14. 25-28). 


2 And it came to pass, that in the 
fifth year of king Rehoboam Shi- 
shak king of Egypt came up against 
Jerusalem, because they had trans- 
gressed against the LorbD, 

3 With twelve hundred chariots, 
and threescore thousand horsemen: 
and the people were without num- 
ber that came with him out cf 
Egypt; the “Lubims, the Sukkiims, 
and the Ethiopians. 

4 And he took the fenced cities 
which pertained to Judah, and 
came to Jerusalem. 

5 Then came ‘Shemaiah the 
prophet to Rehoboam, and to the 
princes of Judah, that were gath- 
ered together to Jerusalem because 
of Shishak, and said unto them, 
Thus saith the LorD, “Ye have for- 
saken me, and therefore have I also 
Jeft you in the hand of Shishak. 

6 éWhereupon the princes of Is- 
rael and the king humbled them- 
selves; and they said, The Lorp is 
righteous. 

7 And fwhen the LorD saw that 
they humbled themselves, the word 
of the LorD came to Shemaiah, 
saying, They have humbled them- 
selves; therefore I will not destroy 
them, but I will grant them some 
deliverance; and my wrath shall) 
not be poured out upon Jerusalem 
by the hand of Shishak. ) 

8 &Nevertheless they shall be his 
servants; that they may know my 
service, and the service of the king- 
doms of the countries. 

9 So Shishak king of Egypt came 
up against Jerusalem, and htook 
away the treasures of the house of 
the LorD, and the treasures of the 


king’s house; he took all: he carried 


a Cf.v.14. 

6 2 Chr.16.8. 

¢ 2 Chr.11.2. 

d 2 Chr.15.2. 

e 2 Chr.6.24. 

f 2 Chr.6.25. 

g Isa.26.13. 

h1 Ki.14.25, 

26. Cf.2 Ki, 

24.13. 

42 Sam.8.8. 

j1 Ki.14.21. 

k 2 Chr.6.6. 

7 Cf.2 Chr. 
27.6; 30.19; 
1 Sam.7.3; 

1 Chr.29.18. 
m 1 Ki.14.30. 
n Called Abi- 

jam, 1 Ki.14 

3k. 

o1 Ki.15.1. 

p 1 Ki.15.2. 

q Cf.2 Chr.11. 
20. Probably 
a grandchild 
of Absalom, 
called Abi- 
shalom, 

1 Ki.15.2. 


[B.C. 958. 


501 


Solomon had made. 

10 Instead of which king Reho- 
boam made shields of brass, and 
icommitted thém to the hands of 
the chief of the guard, that kept 
the entrance of the king’s house. 
_11 And when the king entered 
into the house of the Lorpb, the 
guard came and fetched them, and 
brought them again into the guard 
chamber. 

i2 And when he humbied him- 
self, the wrath of the LorD turned 
from him, that he would not de- 
stroy him altogether: and also in 
Judah things went well. 


Death of Rehoboam (1 Ki. 14.31). 


13 So king Rehoboam strength- 
ened himself in Jerusalem, and 
reigned: for Rehoboam was Jone 
and forty years old when he began 
to reign, and he reigned seventeen 
years in Jerusalem, the city which 
the LorD had “chosen out of all the 
tribes of Israel, to put his name 
there. And his mother’s name was 
Naamah an Ammonitess. 

14 And he did evil; ‘because he 
prepared not his heart to seek the 
LORD. 

15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, 
first and last, are they not written 
in the ) of Shemaiah the 
prophet, and of Iddo the seer con- 


cerning genealogies? ™And there 


_|were wars between Rehoboam and 


Jeroboam continually. 

16 And Rehoboam slept with his 
fathers, and was buried in the city 
of David: and *Abijah his son 
reigned in his stead. 


CHAPTER 13 


Accession of Abijah over Judah 
(CLS hiey 5h, 7))o 


Now in the eighteenth year of 
king Jeroboam °began Abijah © 
to reign over Judah. 

2 He reigned *three years in Jeru- 
salem, His mother’s name also was 
gMichaiah the daughter of Uriel of 
Gibeah. And there was war be- 
tween Abijah and Jeroboam. 


The war between Abijah and 
Jeroboam (1 Ki. 15. 7). 


3 And Abijah set the battle in 
array with an army of valiant men 
of war, even four hundred thousand 


chosen men: Jeroboam also set the 
battle in array against him with 


II CHRONICLES. [144 


14 And when Judah looked back, 
behold, the battle was before and 
behind: and they cried unto the 
LORD, and the priests sounded with 
the trumpets. 

15 Then the men of Judah gave a 
shout: and as the men of Judah 
shouted, it came to pass, that God 
smote Jeroboam and all Israel be- 
fore Abijah and Judah. 

16 And the children of Israel fled 
before Judah: and God delivered 
them into their hand. 

17. And Abijah and his people slew 
them with a great slaughter: sa_ 
there fell down slain of Israel ‘five 
hundred thousand chosen men. 


13 4] 


eight hundred thousand chosen 
men, being mighty men of valour. 

4 And Abijah stood up upon 
mount ¢Zemaraim, which is in 
mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, 
thou Jeroboam, and all Israel; 

5 Ought ye not to know that the 
_ Lorp God of Israel gave the king- 
dom over Israel to David for ever, 
even to him and to his sons by a 
covenant of salt? 

6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 
. the servant of Solomon the son of 
David, is risen up, and hath 4¢re- 
belled against his lord. 

7 And there are gathered unto 
him vain men, the children of Be- 
lial, and have strengthened them- 18 Thus the children of Israef 
selves against Rehoboam the son of|¢ Josh-18.22.. | werebrought under atthat time, and 
Solomon, when Rehoboam was}, 2 sam.7.g-16.|the children of Judah prevailed, 


young and tenderhearted, and could because they relied upon the LorRD 
not withstand them. ¢Num.18.19. |God of their fathers. 

8 And now ye think to. withstand] 41 xj.11.26, 19 And Abijah pursued after Jero= 
the kingdom of the LorRD in the} etc. boam, and took cities from him, 


fond of the srs of awe % and wel eee. aa with the towns thereof, and 
e a great multitude, and there} *}49:¥os.g, |Jeshanah with the towns thereof, 
are with you golden calves, ¢‘which| 4-6. cfex. jand Ephrain with the towns 


Sesepoas made ee for ae 32.1-4. thereof. 
Have ye not f/cast out the priests] ¢2 chr.11. D 
of the Lorp, the sons of Aaron, and tA early piv Jerobers 


; y 1 Ki. 14. 19, 20) 

the Levites, and have made you : ( : Cee 
Jpeg _| ¢ Ex.25.30, 20 Neither did Jeroboam recover 

P s after the manner of the na-|” noje, strength again in the days of Abi- 


tions of other lands? so that who- a : A 
soever cometh to consecrate him-|/ Cf-Acts 5.39. jen. Recs ee Lorp /struck him, 
e died. 


self with a young bullock and seven] ; see 1 Cor. 
ee, phe saree may Be a priest of] 10.8, note. The family of Abijah. 

10, But one ates bond is.our}? 1 XG-24.20; SC ppt tee eerie Ei 
God. ed ae ee ane ee cf.Acts 12.23. ee dela wives, and begat 
him;;and the priests, which minister|* 2 Chr.12.15. Geeah cease plehindiaieeac! oe 


unto the LorD are the sons of 1C£.T Ki An i 

y _ = i as Ps au d the rest of the acts of Abi- 

Aaron, and the Lev ites wait upon} note, and jah, and his Ways and his sayings, 
> 


their business: 15,14, note. : A 
1 ; ae are written ki 
11 And they burn unto the LORD], see Deut. prophet Iddo. S ieaaaeocna 
every morning and every evening)! 16.21; Jud. ‘ 


burnt-sacrifices and sweet incense:| 3,7, note. 

the sshewbread. also set they in Death ys ee si 

order upon the pure table; and the ged of Abijah (1 Ki. 15. 7, 8). 

can dlestick of acl Wahhelenies ccession of Asa (1 Ki. 15. 8-10), 
1ereof, to burn every evening: for O Abijah sl i i : 

we’ keep the charge of the Lorp S and SNe paar pace 

pee God; but ye have forsaken of hie and Asa his son reigned 

: : ; in his stead. In hi 

a aa behold, God. cpa al ae was quiet ten se dayerkheiten 
th us for our captain, and his 2 And Asa di q 

priests with sounding trumpets to good and are cee =e pate 

iat ree you:., Ochildren Lorpb his God: “ 

: srael, “fight ye not against the 3 For h | 

ae God. of your fathers; for ye the eee Saas ne core 
m3 not prosper. ‘places, and brake down the images; 

b But Jeroboam. caused an am- and cut down the groves: a 

Sloan to come about behind! 4 And commanded Judah to seek 

pelbte poe mia icaetee thedsen God of their fathers, and. 

© do the law and iand- 
ies. _ hasan the command 


“4 5 


II CHRONICLES. 


[15 13 


5 Also he took away out of all the 
cities of Judah the high places and 
the “images: and the kingdom was 
quiet before him. 

6 And he built fenced cities in 
Judah: for the land had rest, and 
the had no war in those years; be- 
cause the LorD had given him rest. 

7 Therefore he said unto Judah, 
Let us build these cities, and make 
about them walls, and towers, gates, 
and bars; wAile the land zs yet be- 
fore us;. because we have sought 
the Lorp our God, we have sought 
him, and he hath given us rest on 
every ‘side. ‘So they built and 
prospered. 

8 And Asa had an army of men 
that bare targets and spears, out of 
Judah *three hundred thousand; 
and out of Benjamin, that ‘bare 
shields and drew bows, two ‘hun- 
dred and fourscore thousand: all 
these were mighty men of valour, 


Asa’s victory over Zerah. 
« (See 2-Chr. 16.8.) 


© And there came out against 
them Zerah the Ethiopian with an 
host of a “thousand thousand, and 
three hundred chariots; and came 
unto Mareshah. 

10 Then Asa went out against 
him, and they set the battle in 
array in the valley of Zephathah 
at Mareshah. 

11 And Asa ‘cried unto the LORD 
his God, and ‘said, LorD, it is 
nothing with thee to help, ¢2whether 
with many, or with them that have 
no power: help us, O LorpD our 
God: for we rest on thee, and ‘in 
thy name we go against this multi- 
tude. O Lorp, thou art our God; 
let not man prevail against thee. 

12 So the LorD smote the Ethio- 
pians before Asa, and before Judah; 
and the Ethiopians fled. 

13 And Asa and the people that 
were with him pursued them unto 
Gerar: and the Hthiopians were 
overthrown, that they could not 
recover themselves; for they were 


destroyed before the Lorp, and| 


before his host; and they carried 
away very much spoil. 

14. And they smote all the cities 
round about Gerar; for the ‘fear of 
the Lorp came upon them: and 
they-spoiled all the cities; for there 
was exceeding much spoil in them. 

15 They smote also the tents of 
cattle, and carried away sheep and 
camels in abundance, and returned 
to Jerusalem. 


B:C. 951. 


a Heb. sun 
Bods. 


b See 1 Cor. 
10.8, note. 


c Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). 
2.Chr.20.6. 
(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 


41 Sam.14.6. 

e 1 Sam.17.45. 

f Deut.11.25; 
Josh.2.9. 


g Holy Spirit, 
2 Chr.20.14. 
(Gen. 
Mal. 


hv.8. 
B.C. 941.) 
#1 Ki.12.28-33. 


j Chapter 14 
describes the 
outward 
prosperity 
of the king- 
dom, and 
Asa’s super- 
ficial refor- 
mation; 
chapter 15 
the true ref- 
ormation, 


kv.3. 


lens 
159 


lie. June. 
m 2°Chr.14. 
13-15. 


n 2 Chr.23.16. 


a 808 


CHAPTER 15. 


The warning of the Prophet 
Azariah. 


eee the éSpirit of God came upon 
Azariah the son of "Oded: 

2 And he went out to meet Asa, 
and said unto him, Hear ye me, 
Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; 
The Lorp is with you, while ye be 
with him; and if ye seek him, he 
will be found of you; but if ye for- 
sake him, he will forsake you. 

3 Now for a long season ‘Israel 
hath been without the true God, 
and without a teaching priest, and. 
without law. 

4 But when they in their trouble 
did turn unto the Lorp God of 
Israel, and sought him, he was 
found of them. 

5 Andinthose times therewasno 
peace to him that went out, mor to 
him that came in, but great vexa- 
tions were upon all the inhabitants 
of the countries. 

6 And nation was destroyed of 
nation, and city of city: for 
God did vex them with all adver- _ 
sity. 

7 Be ye strong therefore, and let 
not your hands be weak: for your 
work shall be rewarded. 


The reform under Asa. 


8 And %when Asa heard these 
words, and the prophecy of Oded 
the prophet, he took courage, and 
put away the abominable idols out 
of all the land of Judah and Benja- 
min, and out of the cities which he 
had taken from mount Ephraim, 
and renewed the altar of the Lorp, 
that was before the porch of the 
Lorpb. 

9 And he gathered all Judah and 
Benjamin, and the strangers with 
them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, 
and out of Simeon: for they fell to 
him “out of Israel in abundance, 
when they saw that the LorD his 
God was with him. 

10 So they gathered themselves 
together at Jerusalem in the ‘third 
month, in the fifteenth year of the 
reign of Asa. 


11 And they offered unto the LorD 
the same time, of the "spoil which 
they had brought, seven hundred 
oxen and seven thousand sheep. 

12 And “they entered into a cove- 
nant to seek the LorD God of their 
fathers with all their heart and 
with all their soul; 

13 That whosoever would not seek 


the Lorp God of Israel ¢should be 


.moved her from bering queen, be- 


put to death, whether small or 
great, whether man or woman. 

14 And they sware unto the Lorp 
with a loud voice, and with shout- 
ing, and with trumpets, and with 
cornets. 

15 And all Judah rejoiced at the 
oath: for they had sworn with all 
their heart, and “sought him with 
their whole desire; and he was 
found of them: and the LORD gave 
them rest round about. 

16 Andalsoconcerning Maachah 
the ‘mother of Asa the king, he re- 


cause she had made an idol in a 
@grove: and Asa cut down her idol, 
and stamped it, and burnt it at the 
brook Kidron. 

17 But the high places were not 
taken away out of ¢Israel: never- 
theless the heart of Asa was /per- 
fect all his days. 

18 And he brought into the house 
of God the things that his father 
had dedicated, and that he himself 
had dedicated, silver, and gold, and 
vessels. 

19 And there was no more war 
unto the five and thirtieth year of 
the reign of Asa. 


CHAPTER 16. 


War between Asa and Baasha 
(1 Ki. 15. 16-22). 


ibs the sixth and thirtieth year of 
the reign of Asa ’Baasha king 
of Israel came up against Judah, 
and built Ramah, to the intent that 
he might let none go out or come 
in “to Asa king of Judah. 

2 Then Asa brought out silver 
and gold out of the treasures of 
the house of the LorpD and of the 
king’s house, and sent to Ben-hadad 
king of Syria, that dwelt at Damas- 
cus, saying, 

3 There is a league between me 
and thee, as there was between my 
father and thy father: behold, I 
have sent thee silver and gold; go, 
break thy league with Baasha king 
of Israel, that he: may depart from 
me. 

4 And Ben-hadad hearkened unto 
king Asa, and sent the captains of 
his armies against the cities of Is- 
rael; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, 
and Abel-maim, and all the store 
cities of Naphtali. 

9 And it came to pass, when 


> 
At 


II CHRONICLES. 


a Ex.22.20; 
Deut.13. 
5-10. 


bv.2. 


cle. grand- 
mother, 
1 Ki.15.13. 


d See Deut.16. 
21; Jud.3.7, 
note. 


fSee 1 Ki. 
8.61, ref 


g1 Ki.15. 
16-22. 


hi.e. none of 
his subjects. 
See vs.5,6; 
2 Chr.15.9. 


4 2-Chr.19.1,2; 
1 Ki.16.1. 


J vs.2-4; Jer. 
17.5. 


k 2 Chr.14.9. 


1 Job 34.21,22; 


Prov.5.21; 
Jer.16.17; 
Zech.4.10.. 


m Cf. Jer.32.2,3; 


Dan.6.16,17; 
Mt.14.3. 


n 1 Ki.15.23. 
o Cf.2 Ki.20. 
1-5. 


p Cf.2 Chr.21. 
18,19. * 


Baasha heard it, that he left off 


904 


¥ 


building of Ramah, and let his wor! 
cease. 
6 Then Asa the king took all Ju- 


dah; and they carried away the | 


stones of Ramah, and the timber 
thereof, wherewith Baasha was 
building; and he built therewith 


Geba and Mizpah. . | 


Asa rebuked by Hanani. 


7 And at that time *Hanani the 
seer came to Asa king of Judah, and 


said unto him, Because thou hast | 


relied on the king of Syria, and 
not relied on the LorpD thy God, 
therefore is the host of the king 
of Syria escaped out of thine 
hand. 

8 Were not *the Ethiopians and 
the Lubims a huge host, with very 
many chariots and horsemen? yet, 
because thou didst rely on the 


| 


LORD, he delivered them into thine | 


hand. 
9 'For_the eyes.of the 


1¢ LORD run 
to And fro throughout the Wwhole™ 


earth, to shew himself strong in the | 


behalf of them whose heart is fper- | 


fect toward him. Herein thou hast | 


done foolishly : therefore from hence- 


forth thou shalt have wars. 


Asa imprisons Hanani. 


10 Then Asa was wroth with the 


seer, and put him in a ™prison 
house; for he was in a rage with 
him because of this thing. And 
Asa oppressed some of the people 
the same time. 

11 And, behold, the “acts of Asa, 
first and last, lo, they are written 
in the book of the kings of Judah 
and Israel. , 


Asa’s illness and death 
(1 Kil 15. 23,24): 


12 And Asain the thirty and ninth 
year of his reign was diseased in 


his feet, until his disease was ex- _ 
ceeding great: yet in his disease he | 


°sought not to the Lorpb, but to the 


physicians. 


13. And Asa slept with his fathers, | 


and died in the one and fortieth 
year of his reign. 

14 And they buried him in his own 
sepulchres, which he had made for 
himself in the city of David, and 
laid him in the bed which was filled 
with sweet odours and divers kinds 
.of spices prepared by the apoth- 
ecaries’ art: and they made a very 
great /burning for him, ' 


hiph 


ney &] 
CHAPTER 17. 
Accession of Jehoshaphat 
(1 Ki. 15. 24). 
ND ‘Jehoshaphat his son 
reigned in his stead, and 


strengthened himself against Israel. 

2 And he placed forces in all the 
fenced cities of Judah, and set gar- 
Tisons in the land of Judah, and in 
the cities of Ephraim, which °Asa 
his father had taken. 

3 And the LorpD was with Jehosh- 
aphat, because he walked in the 
first ways of his ‘father David, and 
sought not unto Baalim; 

4 But sought to the LORD God of 
his father, and walked in his com- 
mandments, and not after the 
doings of Israel. 

5 Therefore the LorpD stablished 
the kingdom in his hand; and all 
Judah ‘brought to Jehoshaphat 
presents; and he had riches and 
honour in abundance. 


The revival under Jehoshaphat. 


6 And his heart was lifted up in| 


the ways of the LorD: moreover he 
took away the fhigh places and 
groves out of Judah. 

7 Also in the third year of his 
reign he sent to his princes, even to 
Ben-hail, and to Obadiah, and to 
Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and 
to Michaiah, to teach in the cities 
of Judah. 

8 And with them he sent Levites, 
even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, 
and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and 
Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and 
Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob- 
‘adonijah, Levites; and with them 
Elishama and Jehoram, priests. 

9 And they taught in Judah, and 
hhad the book of the law of the 
LorpD with them, and went about 
throughout all the cities of Judah, 
and taught the people. 


Jehoshaphat’s growing power. 


10 And the fear of the LorD fell 
upon all the kingdoms of the lands 
that were round about Judah, so 
that they made no war against 
Jehoshaphat. 

11 Also some of the Philistines 
brought Jehoshaphat presents, and 
tribute silver; and the Arabians 
brought him flocks, seven thousand 
and seven hundred rams, and seven 
thousand and seven hundred he 
goats. 


12 And Jehoshaphat waxed great 


Ii CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 914. 


a1 Ki.15.24. 
6 2 Chr.15.8. 


c After the 
Jewish cus- 
tom of call- 
ing a family, 
or tribal 
head, father; 
e.g. John 8. 
Boe 


di.e. the ten- 
tribe king- 
dom. 

e1 Ki.10.25. 


fi Ki.3.2, 
note. 


g Deut.16.21, 
ref.; Jud.3.7, 
note. 

h vs.15-18; 

1 Cor.10.8, 
note. 
tv.2. 

j 2 Chr.17.5 


k 2 Chr.19.1-3; 
1 Ki.22.44 


1 See 1 Ki.16. 
29; 22.40. « 


m1 Ki.22. 
2-40, 


n 1Sam.23.2-9, 
2 Sam.2.1,2. 


505 


[18 5 


exceedingly; and he built in Judah 
castles, and cities of store. 

13 And he had much business in 
the cities of Judah: and the men of 
war, mighty men of valour, were 
in Jerusalem. 

14 And these are the numbers of 
them according to the house of their 
fathers: Of Judah, the captains of 
thousands; Adnah the chief, and 
with him mighty men of valour 
hthree hundred thousand. 

15 And next to him was Jehoha- 
nan the captain, and with him two 
hundred and fqurscore thousand. 

16 And next .him was Amasiahthe 
son of Zichri, who willingly offered | 
himself unto the LorD; and with 
him two hundred thousand mighty 
men of valour. 

17 And of Benjamin; Eliada a 
mighty man of valour, and with 
him armed men with bow and 
shield two hundred thousand. 

18 And next him was Jehozabad, 
and with him an hundred and four- 
score thousand ready prepared for 
the war. 

19 These waited on the king, be- 
side those whom the king ‘put in 
the fenced cities throughout aH 
Judah. 


CHAPTER 18. 


Jehoshaphat’s alliance with 
Ahab (1 Ki. 22. 2). 


No Jehoshaphat had /riches 
and honour in abundance, and 
kjoined affinity with ‘Ahab. 

2 Andafter certain years he™went 
down to Ahab to Samaria. And 
Ahab killed sheep and oxen for 
him in abundance, and for the peo- 
ple that he had with him, and per- 
suaded him to go up with him to 
Ramoth-gilead. 

3 And Ahab king of Israel said 
unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, 
Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth- 
gilead? And he answered him, I 
am as thou art, and my people as 
thy people; and we will be with 
thee in the war. 


The lying prophets of Ahab 
(1 Ki, 22. 5-12). 


4 And Jehoshaphat said unto the 
king of Israel, "Enquire, I pray thee, 
at the word of the LorD to day. 

5 Therefore the king of Israel 
gathered together of prophets four 
hundred men, and said unto them, 
Shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to 
battle, or shall I forbear? And they 


18 6] 


said, Go up; for God will deliver zt 
into the king’shand. _ 

6 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there 
not here.a prophet of the Lorp 
besides; that we might enquire of 
him? 

7 And the king of Israel said unto 
Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, 
by whom we may enquire: of the 
Lorp: but I hate him; for he never 
prophesied good unto me, but al- 
ways evil: the same zs Micaiah the 
son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat 
said, Let not the king say so. 

8 And the king of Israel called for 
one of his officers, and said, Fetch 
quickly Micaiah the son of Imla. 

9 And the king of Israel; and Je- 
hoshaphat king: of Judah sat either 
of them on his throne, clothed in 
their robes, and they sat in-a void 
place at the entering in of the gate 
of Samaria; and ail the prophets 
prophesied before them. 

10. And Zedekiah the son of Che- 
naanah had made him horns of 
iron, and said, Thus saith the Lorn, 
With these thou shalt push Syria 
until they be consumed. 

11 Andallthe prophets prophesied 
80, Saying, Goup to Ramoth-gilead, 
and prosper: for the LorpD shall 
deliver it into the hand of the king. 


Micaiah’s true prophecy 
(1 Ki. 22. 13-28), 


12 And the ¢messenger that went 
to call Micaiah spake to him, 
Saying, Behold, the words of the 
prophets declare good to the king 
with one assent; let thy word 


therefore, I pray thee, be like one} 


of their’s, and speak thou good: 

13 And Micaiah said, As the LorD 
liveth, even 'what my God saith, 
that will I speak. 

14 And when he was:come to the 
king, the king said’ unto him,, Mi- 
caiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead 
to battle, or shalliI forbear? And 
he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and 
they shall be delivered: into your 
hand. 

15 And the king said to him, How 
many times shall I adjure thee that 
thou say nothing but the truth to 
me in the name of the Lorp? 

16 Then he said, I did see all 
Israel ‘scattered wpon the moun- 
tains, as sheep that have no shep- 
herd: and the Lorp said, These 


have no master; let them return! 


therefore every man to his house 
in peace. 


17 And the king of Israel said to! 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 897: 


a See vs.6-8. 

b Num.22.18, 
20335; 23:12, 
26; 24.13. 


¢ Jer.23.1-8;. 
31.10. 


d.Job 12:16;17; 


Isa.19.12-14. 
e 2 Chr.16.10, 
refs. 


f 1 Ki.22.29-40. 


[18 30 


Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee 
that he would not prophesy good 
unto me, but evil? ; 

18 Again he said; Therefore hear 
the word of the Lorp; I saw the 
LorD sitting upon his throne, and 
all the host of heaven standing on 
his:right hand: and on his left. 

19 And the LorD said, Who. shall 
entice Ahab king of Israel, that he 
may go up and fall at Ramoth- 
gilead? And one spake saying after 
this. manner, and another saying 
after that manner. te 

20: Then there came out a spirit; 
and stood before the LorpD, and 
said, I will entice him. And the 
LorpD said unto him, Wherewith? 

21 And he:said, I will go-out, and 
be a lying spirit in the mouth of ali 
his prophets: And the LorD said, 
Thou shalt entice Arm, and thou 
shalt also prevail: go out, and do 
even so. 

22 Now therefore, ¢behold, the 
Lorp hath put a lying spirit in the 
mouth of these thy prophets, and 
ae Lorp. hath spoken evil against 
thee: . 

23 Then Zedekiah the son of Che- 
naanah came near, and smote Mi- 
caiah upon the cheek, and said; 
Which way went the Spirit of the 
LORD from me to speak unto thee? 

24 And Micaiah said, Behold thow 
shalt see on that day when thow 
shalt go into an inner chamber to 
hide thyself. ° 

25. Then the king of Israel’ said, 
Take ye Micaiah, and: carry hiny 
back to Amon the governor of the 
city, and to Joash the king’s son; 
_26 And say, Thus saith the king, 
fPut this fellow in the prison, and’ 
feed him with bread of affliction 
and with water of affliction, until’ I 
return in peace. 

27 And Micaiah said, If thou cer- 
tainly return in peace, then hath 
not the LoRD spoken by me. And 


,he. said, Hearken, all. ye people. 


Battle of Ramoth-gilead: defeat 
ar of Ahab (1 Ki. 22. 
29-40). 


28 So the king of Israel and Je- 
hoshaphat the king of Judah fwent 
up to: Ramoth-gilead, 

29 And the king of Israel said 
unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise 
myself, and will go to the battle: 
‘but put thou on:thy robes; So the 
king of Israel: disguised himself;, 
and they went to the battle, i 

30 Now the king of Syria had 


A 


= 


~ 
18 31] 


commanded the captains of the 
chariots that were with him, say- 
ing, Fight ye not with small or 
great, save only with the king of 
Israel. 

31 And it‘came to pass, when the 
captains of the chariots saw Je- 
hoshaphat, that they said, It is 
the king of Israel. Therefore they 
compassed about him to fight: but 
Jehoshaphat cried out, and the 
Lorp helped him; and God moved 
them to depart from him. 

32 For it came to pass, that, when 
the captains of the chariots per- 
ceived that it was not the king of 
Israel, they turned back again from 
pursuing him. 

33 And acertarn man drew a bow 
at a-venture, and smote the king 
of Israel between the joints of the 
harness: therefore he said to his 
chariot man, Turn thine hand, that|¢See Deut. — 
thou mayest carry me out of the es 
host; for I am wounded. note. ” 

34 And the battle increased that F 
day: howbeit the king of Israel] bev29-15: 
stayed Aimself up in his chariot] Psa.58.1;° 
against the Syrians until the even:| 1sa-11.3,4. 
and about the time of the sun going] ¢ peut.32.4; 


a 1 Ki.22.37,38. 
6 Cf.Isa.7.1-9; 
8.12. 


c Psa.139.21. 


down he @died. Rom.9.14. 
Psa.19.9, 
CHAPTER 19. s Eres 
Jehu rebukes Jehoshaphat’s |), see 1 Ki.8.61, 


ref. 


alliance with Ahab. 


my Jehoshaphat Ce king of|B.c. 896.} 

Judah returned to his house]. 

in peace to Jerusalem. d vVChe 200. 
2 And Jehu the son of Hanani the] ; Bible 

seer went out to meet him, and ’said a as 

to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou ( 


2 Chr.30.18. 
help the ungodly, and love them] (Gen.15.2; 
that ‘hate the LoRpD? therefore is] Hab.3.1-16.) 


wrath upon thee from before the 
Lorp. 

3 Nevertheless there are good 
things found in thee, in that thou 
hast taken away the “groves out of 
the land, and hast prepared thine 
heart to seek God. 


Jehoshaphat restores order in 
worship. 


4 And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jeru- 
salem: and he went out again 
through the people from Beer-sheba 
to mount Ephraim, and brought 
them back unto the LorpD God of 
their fathers. 

5 And he set judges in the land 
throughout all the fenced cities of 
Judah, city by city, 

6 And said to the judges, Take 
heed what ye do: «for ye judge not Se 


II CHRONICLES. 


[20 6 


for man, but for the LorD, who is 
with you in the judgment. 

7 Wherefore now let the fear of 
the Lorp be upon you; take heed 
and do it: for there is Jno iniquity 
with the LorD our God, nor respect 
of persons, nor taking of gifts. 

8 Moreover in Jerusalem did Je- 
hoshaphat set of the Levites, and of 
the priests, and of the chief of the 
fathers of Israel, for the judgment 
of the LorD, and for controversies, 
when they returned to Jerusalem. 

9 And he charged them, saying, 
Thus shall ye do in the fear of the 
LorD, faithfully, and with a “per- 
fect heart. 

10 And what. cause soever shall 
come to you of your brethren that 
dwell in their cities, between blood 
and blood, between law and com- 
mandment, statutes and judgments, 
ye shall even warn them that they 
trespass not against the LorbD, and 
so wrath come upon you, and upon 
your brethren: this do, and ye shall 
not trespass. : 

11 And, behold, Amariah the chief 
priest is over you in all ‘matters of 
the Lorp; and Zebadiah the son 
of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of 
Judah, for all the king’s matters: 
also the Levites shall be officers be- 
fore you. Deal courageously, and 
the LorD shall be with the good. 


CHAPTER 20. 
Judah invaded by Moab. 


1* came to pass after this also, 
that the children of Moab, and 
the children of Ammon, and with 
them other beside the Ammonites, 
came against Jehoshaphat to battle. 

2 Then there came some that told 
Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh 
a great multitude against thee from 
beyond the sea on this side Syria; 
and, behold, they be in Hazazon- 
tamar, which is En-gedi. 


Jehoshaphat’s prayer. 


3 And Jehoshaphat feared, and 
set himself to seek the Lorpb, and 
proclaimed a fast throughout all 
Judah. 

4 And Judah gathered themselves 
together, to ask help of the LorD: 
even out of all the cities of Judah 
they came to seek the Lorp. 

5 And Jehoshaphat stood in the 
congregation of Judah and Jerusa- 
lem, in the house of the LorRD, be- 
fore the new court, 

1 6 And Jsaid, O Lorp God of our 


fathers, art not thou God in heaven? 
and rulest not thou over all the 
kingdoms of the “heathen? and in 
thine hand is there not power and 
might, so that none is able to with- 
stand thee? i 

7 Artnotthou our God, who didst 
drive out the inhabitants of this 
land before thy people Israel, and 
bgavest it to the seed of Abraham 
thy friend for ever? 

8 And they dwelt therein, and 
have built thee a sanctuary therein 
for thy name, saying, 

9 If, when evil cometh upon us, 
as the sword, judgment, or pesti- 
lence, or famine, we stand before 
this house, and in thy presence, (for 
thy name is in this house,) and cry 
unto thee in our affliction, then thou 
wilt hear and help. 

10 And now, behold, the children 
of Ammon and Moab and mount 
Seir, whom thou wouldest not let 
Israel invade, when they came out 
of the land of Egypt, but they 
turned from them, and destroyed 
them not; 

11 Behold, J say, how they re- 
ward us, to come to cast us out of 
thy possession, which thou hast 
given us to inherit. 

12 Oour God, wilt thou not judge 
them? for we have no might against 
this great company that cometh 
against us; neither know we what 
to do: but our eyes are upon thee. 

13 And all Judah stood before the 
LORD, with their little ones, their 
wives, and their children. 


Jehovah answers through 
Jahaziel. 


14 Then upon Jahaziel the son of 
Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the 
son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, 
a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came 
the ‘Spirit of the Lorb in the midst 
of the congregation: 

15 And he said, Hearken ye, all 
Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, 
Thus dsaith the LORD unto you, Be 
not afraid nor dismayed by reason 
of this great multitude; ¢for the bat- 
tle is not your’s, but God’s. 

16 To morrow go ye down against 
them: Behold, they come up by the 
cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them 
at the end of the brook, before the 
wilderness of Jeruel. 

17 Ye shall not need to fight in 
this battle: set yourselves, stand ye! 
still, and see the salvation of the 
LORD with you, O Judah and Jeru- 


ai.e. nations. 
Dan.4.17,25, 
325 


b Gen.13.14- 
Lie 


2 Chr.24.20. 


€ vs.24,25; 
1 Sam.17.47; 
Zech.14.3. 


JHeb. _ 
praisers. 
1 Chr. 
16.29. 


g Psa.29.2; 
90.17; 96.9; 
110.3. 


t Jud.7.22; 
1 Sam.14.20. 


508 


II CHRONICLES. 


¢ Holy Spirit. 


d Deut.1.29,30. 


h Psa.136.1-26. 


salem: fear not, nor be dismayed; 
1o morrow go out against them: for 
the LorD will be with you. ; 

18 And Jehoshaphat bowed his 
head with Ais face to the ground: 
and all Judah and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem fell before the LORD, 
worshipping the LORD. : 

19 And the Levites, of ‘the chil- 
dren of the Kohathites, and of the 
children of the Korhites, stood up 
to praise the LorpD God of Israel 
with a loud voice on high. 


The invading armies stricken 
with death, 


20 And they rose early in the 
morning, and went forth into the 
wilderness of Tekoa: and as they 
went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and 
said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye in- 
habitants of Jerusalem; Believe in 
the LoRD your God, so shall ye be 
established; believe his prophets, so 
shall ye prosper. 

21 And when he had censulted 
with the people, he appointed ‘sing- 
ers unto the Lorp, and that should 
praise the Sbeauty of holiness, as 
they went out before the army, and 
to say, Praise the Lorp; “for his 
mercy endureth for ever. 

22 And when they began to sing 
and to praise, the LORD set am- 
bushments against the children of 
Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, 
which were come against Judah; 
and they were smitten. 

23 For the children of Ammon and 
Moab stood up against the inhabi- 
tants of mount Seir, utterly to slay 
and destroy them: and when they 
had made an end of the inhabitants 
of Seir, ‘every one helped to de- 
stroy another. : 

24 And when Judah came toward 
the watch tower in the wilderness, 
they looked unto the multitude, and, 
behold, they were dead bodies fallen 
to the earth, and none escaped. 

25 And when Jehoshaphat and his 
people came to take away the spoil 
of them, they found among them in 
abundance both riches with the dead 
bodies, and precious jewels, which 
they stripped off for themselves, 
more than they could carry away: 
and they were three days in gather- 
ing of the spoil, it was so much. 


The triumphant return to 
Jerusalem. 


26 And on the fourth day they 
assembled themselves in the valley 


a 


the Lorp: therefore the name of 
the same place was called, The 
valley of Berachah, unto this 


ay. 

27 Then they returned, every man} 
of Judah and Jerusalem, and Je- 
hoshaphat in the forefront of them, 
to go again to Jerusalem with joy; 
for the Lorp had made them to 
Tejoice over their enemies. 

28 And they came to Jerusalem 
bwith psalteries and harps and 
trumpets unto the house of the 
Lorp. 

29 And the fear of God was on 
all the kingdoms of those coun- 
tries, when they had heard that the 
Lorp fought against the enemies 
of Israel. 

30 So the realm of Jehoshaphat 
was quiet: ‘for his God gave him 
rest round about. 

31 And Jehoshaphat ¢reigned over 
Judah: he was thirty and five years 
old when he began to reign, and 
he reigned twenty and five years 
in Jerusalem. And his mother’s 
name was Azubah the daughter of 
Shilhi. 

32 And he walked in the way of 
Asa his father, and departed not 
from it, doing that which was 
tight in the sight of the Lorb. 

33 Howbeit the ~chigh places 
were not taken away: for as yet 
the people had not prepared their 
hearts unto the God of their fa- 
thers. 

34 Now the rest of the acts of Je- 
hoshaphat, first and last, behold, 
they are written in the book of 
Jehu the son of Hanani, who is 
mentioned in the book of the kings 
of Israel. 


Jehoshaphat’s trading venture 
with Ahaziah, king of Israel 
(1 Ki. 22. 47-49). 


35 And after this did Jehoshaphat 
king of Judah ‘join himself with 
Ahaziah king of Israel, ¢who did 
very wickedly: i 

36 And he joined himself with 
him /to make ships to go to Tar- 
shish: and they made the ships in) 
Ezion-gaber. 

37 Then Eliezer the son of Doda- 
vah of Mareshah prophesied against 
Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou 
hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, 
the Lorp hath broken thy works. 
And the ships were broken, that 
they were not able to go to Tar- 
shish. 


iI CHRONICLES. 


of ¢Berachah; for there they blessed] _B.c. a96. CHAPTER 21. 


[B.C. 839. 


ai.e. blessing. 
See also, 
1 Chr.12.3.- 
b Cf.v.21, 
¢ Job 34.29. 
d1 Ki.22.41. 


e1 Ki.3.2, 
note. 


f 1 Ki.22.48,49. 
g 1 Ki.22.51-53. 
h 2 Cor.6.14-18. 


#1 Ki.22.50. 


j Jehoram 
reigned fora 
time as co- 
king with 
his father. 

2 Ki.8.16. 


k Began, that 
is, as co-king. 
v.1, ref. 

C£.2 Chr. 
22.2. 


1 2 Sam.7.8-16. 


509 


[21 11 


Jehoram’s reign over Judah 
after his father’s death (2 Ki. 
8. 16-24). 


Noe Jehoshaphat ‘slept with 
his fathers, and was buried 
with his fathers in the city of 
David. And /Jehoram his. son 
reigned in his stead. 

2 And he had brethren the sons 
of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Je- 
hiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, 
and Michael, and Shephatiah: all 
these were the sons of Jehoshaphat 
king of Israel. 

3 And their father gave them great 
gifts of silver, and of gold, and of 
precious things, with fenced cities 
in Judah: but the kingdom gave 
he to Jehoram; because he was the 
firstborn. 

4 Now when Jehoram was risen 
up to the kingdom of his father, he 
strengthened himself, and slew all 
his brethren with the sword, and 
divers also of the princes of Israel. 

5 Jehoram was thirty and two 
years old when he “began to reign, 
and he reigned eight years in Jeru- 
salem. 

6 And he walked in the way of 
the kings of Israel, like as did the 
house of Ahab: for he had the 
daughter of Ahab to wife: and he 
wrought that which was evil in 
the eyes of the LORD. 

7 Howbeit the LoRD would not 
destroy the house of David, be- 
cause of the ‘covenant that he 
had .made with David, and as he 
promised to ‘give a light to him and 
to his sons for ever. 


Revolt of Edom (2 Ki. 8. 20-22). 


8 In his days the Edomites re- 
volted from under the dominion of 
Judah, and made themselves a 


king. 

9 Then Jehoram went forth with 
his princes, and all his chariots 
with him; and he rose up by night, 
and smote the Edomites which 
compassed him in, and the captains 
of the chariots. 


Revolt of Libnah (2 Ki. 8. 22). 


10 So the Edomites revolted from 
under the hand of Judah unto this 
day. The same time also did Lib- 
nah revolt from under his hand; be- 
cause he had forsaken the LorD 
God of his fathers. f 

11 Moreover he made ¢high places 
in the mountains of Judah, and 


21 12] 


II CHRONICLES. 


(22 


caused the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem to commit fornication, and com- 
pelled Judah thereto. 


The message of Elijah, written 
before his translation 


12 And there came a writing to 
him from @Elijah the prophet, say- 
ing, Thus saith the LorD God of 
David thy father, Because thou 
hast not walked in the ways of 
Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the 
ways of Asa king of Judah, 

13 But hast walked in the way of 
the kings of Israel, and hast made 
Judah and the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem to go a whoring, ‘like to the 
whoredoms of the house of Ahab, 
and also hast 4slain thy brethren 
of thy father’s house, which were 
better than thyself: 

14 Behold, with a great plague 
will the LorD smite thy people, and 
thy children, and thy wives, and all 
thy goods: 

15 And thou shalt have great 
sickness ‘by disease of thy bowels, 
until thy bowels fall out by reason 
of the sickness day by day. 


Invasion of Judah by Arabians 
and Philistines. 


16 Moreover the Lorn /stirred up 
against Jehoram the spirit of the 
Philistines, and of the Arabians, 
that were near the Ethiopians: 

17 And they came up into Judah, 
and brake into it, and carried away 
all the substance that was found in 
the king’s house, and his gsons also, 
and his wives; so that there was 
never a son left him, save “Je- 
hoahaz, the youngest of his sons. 


Jehoram’s incurable 
disease. 


.18 And after all this the Lorp 
‘smote him in his bowels with an 
incurable disease. 

19 And it came to pass, that in 
process of time, after the end of two 
years, his bowels fell out by reason 
of his sickness: so he died of sore 
diseases. And his people made no 
Jburning for him, like the burning 
of his fathers. 

20 Thirty and two years old was 
he when he began to reign, and he 
Teigned in Jerusalem eight years, 
and departed without being desired. 
Howbeit they buried him in the city 


of David, but not in the sepulchres 
of the kings. 


a See Elijah’s 
history, 1 Ki. 
17.1; 2 Ki. 
2A2s 

bv.11. 


¢1 Ki.16.31- 
34; 2 Ki.9.22. 


dv.4. 

é vs.18,19. 

f 1 Ki.11.14-24. 

g 2 Chr.24.7. 

h Called Aha- 
ziah, 2 Chr. 
22.1, and 
Azariah, 

2 Chr.22.6. 

iv.15. 


j Cf£.2 Chr. 
16.14. 

k Cf.2 Chr. 
21.17, where 
he is called 
Jehoahaz. 


1See 2 Ki.9. 
22-24. 


m 2 Ki.9.27. 


B.C. 885.] 


510 


| CHAPTER 22. 


Accession of Ahaziah over 
Judah (2 Ki. 8. 24-26). 


: 
ND the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem made *Ahaziah his young- 
est son king in his stead: for the 
band of men that came with the 
lAganians to the camp had slain all 
the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of 
Jehoram king of Judah reigned. 

2 Forty and two years old was 
Ahaziah when he began to reign, 
and he reigned one year in Jerusa- 
lem. His mother’s name also was 
Athaliah the daughter of Omri. 

3 He also walked in the ways of 
the house of Ahab: for his mother 
was his counsellor to do wickedly. 

4 Wherefore he did evil in the 
sight of the LorD like the house of 
Ahab: for they were his counsellors. 
after the death of his father to his 
destruction. 


Ahaziah assists Jehoram‘in the 
ane of Ramoth-gilead (2 Ki. 
. 28). 

5S He walked also after their coun- 
sel, and went with Jehoram the.son 
of Ahab king of Israel to war 
against Hazael king of Syria at 
Ramoth-gilead: and the Syrians 

smote Joram. 


Ahaziah visits Jehoram at Jez- 
reel (2 Ki. 8. 29). } 

6 And he returned to be healed in 

Jezreel because of the wounds 
which were given him at Ramah, 
lied he fought. with Hazael king 
of Syria. And Azariah the son of 
Jehoram king of Judah went down 
to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at 
Jezreel, because he was sick. : 
| 7 And the ‘destruction of Ahaziah 
was of God bycoming to Joram: 
for when he was come, he went out 
with Jehoram against Jehu the son 
of Nimshi, whom the Lorp had 


anointed to cut off the house of 
Ahab. 


The princes of Judah slain 
(2 Ki. 10. 12-14). 
1.8 And it came to pass, that, when 
Jehu was executing judgment upon 
the house of Ahab, and found the 
princes of Judah, and the sons of 
jthe brethren of Ahaziah, that min- 
istered to Ahaziah, he slew them. 


Ahaziah slain (2 Ki. 9. 27, 28). 


9 ™And he sought Ahaziah: and 
they caught him, (for he was hid in 
Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: 


q 


. 
22 10) 


Il CHRONICLES. 


[23 15 


and when they had slain him, they 
buried him: Because, said they, he 
is the son of Jehoshaphat, who 
4sought the LORD with all his heart. 
So the house of Ahaziah had no 
power to keep still the kingdom. 


The seed royal of Judah de- 
stroyed, save Joash (2 Ki.11.1-3). 


10 But 6when Athaliah the mother 
of Ahaziah saw that her son was 
dead, she arose and destroyed all 
the seed royal of the house of Judah. 

11 But <Jehoshabeath, the daugh- 
ter of the king, took Joash the son 
of Ahaziah, and stole him from 
among the king’s sons that were 
slain, and put him and his nurse in 
a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, 
the daughter of king Jehoram, the 
wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she 
was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him 
from Athaliah, so that she slew him 
not. 

12 And he was with them hid in 
the house of God six years: and 
Athaliah reigned over the land. 


CHAPTER 23. 


Joash becomes king over Judah 
(2 Ki. 11. 4-12). 


Ax D in the ¢seventh year Jehoi- 

ada strengthened himself, and 

took the captains of hundreds, Aza- 
riah the son of Jercham, and Ish- 
mael the son of Jehohanan, and 
Azariah the son of Obed, and Maa- 
seiah the son of Adaiah, and Elish- 
aphat the son of Zichri, into 
covenant with him. 

2 And they went about in Judah, 

-and gathered the Levites out of all 
the cities of Judah. and the chief of 
the fathers of Israel, and they came 
to Jerusalem. 

3 And all the congregation made 
a covenant with the king in the 
house of God. And he said unto 
them, Behold, the king’s son shall 
reign, as the Lorp hath ‘said of the 
sons of David. 

4 This is the thing that ye shall 
do; A third part of you /entering 
on the sabbath, of the priests and 
of the Levites, shal/ be porters of 
the doors; 

5 And athird part shal/ be at the 
king’s house; and a third ‘part at 
the gate of the foundation: and all 
the people shall be in the courts 
of the house of the LORD. 

6 But Jet none come into the 
house of the LORD, save the priests, 
and &sthey that minister of the Le- 


| 


a 2 Chr.17.4. 
b 2 Ki.11.1. 
¢ 2 Ki.11.2. 

d 2 Ki.11.4. 

e 2 Sam.7.12; 
1 Ki.2.4; 9. 
5; 2 Chr.6. 
16; 7.18; 
2a7S 

f 1 Chr.9.25. 


g1 Chr.23. 
28,32, 


hl Chr.24.5-31. 
B.C. 878.] 

i Deut.17.18. 
j1 Chr.25.8. 

k Neh.3.28. 


Sil 


B.C. 884. 


vites: they shall go in, for they are 
holy: but all the people shall keep, 
the watch of the LORD. 

7 And the Levites shall compass 
the king round about, every man 
with his weapons in his hand; and 
whosoever else cometh into the 
house, he shall be put to death: but 
be ye with the king when he cometh 
in, and when he goeth out. 

8 So the Levites and all Judah 
did according to all things that Je- 
hoiada the priest had commanded, 
and took every man his men that 
were to come in on the sabbath, 
with them that were to go out on 
the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest 
dismissed not the “courses. 

9 Moreover Jehoiada the priest 
delivered to the captains of hun- 
dreds spears, and bucklers, and 
shields, that had been king Da- 
vid’s, which were in the house of 
God. 

10 And he set all the people, 
every man having his weapon in his 
hand, from the right side of the 
temple to the left side of the temple, 
along by the altar and the temple, 
by the king round about. 

11 Then they brought out the 
king’s son, and put upon him the 
crown, and ‘gave him the testi- 
mony, and made him king. And 
Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, 
and said, God save the king. 


Execution of Athaliah (2 Ki. 
S513=16))) 


12 Now when Athaliah heard the 
noise of the people running and 
praising-the king, she came to the 
people into the house of the LorD: 

13 And she looked, and, behold, 
the king stood at his pillar at the 
entering in, and the princes and 
the trumpets by the king: and ail 
the people of the land rejoiced, and 
sounded with trumpets, also the 
singers with instruments of musick, 
and Jsuch as taught to sing praise. 
Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and 
said, Treason, Treason. 

14 Then Jehoiada the priest 
brought out the captains of hun- 
dreds that were set over the host, 
and said unto them, Have her forth 
of the ranges: and whoso followeth 
her, let him be slain with the sword. 
For the priest said, Slay her not in 
the house of the LORD. 

15 So they laid hands on her; and 
when she was come to the entering 
kof the horse gate by the king’¢ 
house, they slew her there. 


11. 


fe 
y 


' 


23 16) 


16 And Jehoiada made a covenant 
between him, and between all the 
people, and between the king, that 
they should be the LORD’s people. 

17 Then all the people went to the 
house of Baal, and brake it down, 
and brake his altars and his images 
in pieces, and 4slew Mattan the 
priest of Baal before the altars. 

18 Also Jehoiada appointed the 
offices of the house of the LorD by 
the hand of the priests the Levites, 
whom David had $distributed in the 
house of the Lorp, to offer the 
burnt-offerings of the LorD, as it is 
written in the daw of Moses, with 
Tejoicing and with singing, as it 
was ordained by David. 

19 And he set the “porters at the 
gates of the house of the LorD, that 
none which was unclean in any 
thing should enter in. 

20 ¢And he took the captains of 
hundreds, and the nobles, and the 
governors of the people, and all the 
people of the land, and brought 
down the king from the house of 
the Lorp: and they came through 
the high gate into the king’s house, 
and set the king upon the throne of 
the kingdom. 

21 And all the people of the land 
Tejoiced: and the city was quiet, 
after that they had slain Athaliah 
with the sword. 


CHAPTER 24. 


Reign of Joash (Jehoash) 
(2 Ki. 1291-3), 


abet Jwas seven years old 
_ when he began to reign, and he 
reigned forty years in Jerusalem. 
His mother’s name also was Zibiah 
of Beer-sheba. 

2 And Joash did that which was 
Tight in the sight of the Lorp all 
the days of Jehoiada the priest. 

3 And Jehoiada took for him two 
wives; and he begat sons and 
daughters. 


The faithless priests(2 Ki.1 2.4-8). 


4 And it came to pass after this, 
that Joash was minded to repair 
the house of the Lorp. 

5 And he gathered together the 
Priests and the Levites, and said 
to them, Go out unto the cities of 
Judah, and ¢gather of all Israel 
money to repair the house of your 
God from year to year, and see that 


* 


II CHRONICLES. 


= 


} The revival through Jehoiada B.C. 878. 
4 (2 Ki. 11. 17-20). L 


@ Deut.13.9. 


61 Chr.23.6, 
30,31; 24.1. 


c Num.28.2. 
d1 Chr.26. 

e 2 Ki.11.19. 
i hte ead 


g 2 Ki.12.4, 
h 2 Ki.12.7. 


+ Ex.30.11-16. 


j Num.1.50; 
Acts 7.44. 


k 2 Chr.21.17. 


22 Ki.12.9. 
m 2 Ki.i2.10. 


512 


ye hasten the matter. Howbeit the 
evites hastened ié¢ not. ; 
6 “And the king called for Jehoi- 

ada the chief, and said unto him, 

Why hast thou not required of the 

Levites to bring in out of Judah and 

out of Jerusalem the collection, ac- 

cording to the commandment 

of ‘Moses the servant of the Lorpb, 

and of the congregation of Israel, 

for the jtabernacle of witness? 

7 For the “sons of Athaliah, that 
wicked woman, had broken up the 
house of God; and also all the ded- 
icated things of the house of the 
Lorp did they bestow upon Baalim. 


The temple repaired 
(2 Ki. 12. 9-16). 


8 And at the king’s command- 
ment ‘they made a chest, and set it 
without at the gate of the house of 
the Lorp. 

9 And they made a proclamation 
through Judah and Jerusalem, to 
bring in to the Lorp the collection 
that Moses the servant of God Jaid 
upon Israel in the wilderness. 

10 And all the princes and all the 
people rejoiced, and brought in, and 
cast into the chest, until they had 
made an end. 

11 Now it came to pass, that at 
what time the chest was brought 
unto the king’s office by the hand 
of the Levites, and ™when they saw 
that there was much money, the 
king’s scribe and the high priest’s 
officer came and emptied the chest, 
and tock it, and carried it to his 
place again. Thus they did day by 
day, and gathered money in abun- 
dance. 

12 And the king and Jehoiada 
gave it to such as did the work of 
the service of the house of the Lorp, 
and hired masons and carpenters to 
repair the house of the Lorp, and 
also such as wrought iron and brass 
to mend the house of the Lorp. 

13 So the workmen wrought, and 
the work was perfected by them, 
and they set the house of God in 
his state, and strengthened. it. 

14 And when they had finished /f, 
they brought the rest of the nroney 
before the king and Jehoiada, 
whereof were made vessels for the 
house of the LORD, even vessels to 
minister, and to offer withal, and 
spoons, and vessels of gold and sil-. 
ver. And they offered burnt-offer- 
ings in the house of the LorD 


continually all the days of Jehoi- 
ada. 


fe "! _f 


Death of Jehoiada the good 

priest. 

15 But Jehoiada waxed old, and 
was full of days when he died; an 
hundred and thirty years old was 
he when he died. 

16 And they buried him in the 
city of David among the kings, 
because he had done good in Israel, 
ee toward God, and toward his 

ouse. 


The apostasy of the princes. 


17 Now after the death of Jehoi- 
ada came the princes of Judah, and 
made obeisance to the king. Then 
the king hearkened unto them. 

18 And they left the house of the 
Lorp God of their fathers, and 
served “groves and idols: and 
wrath came upon Judah and Jeru- 
salem for this their trespass. 

19 Yet he sent prophets to them, 
to bring them again unto the LorD; 
and they testified against them: 
but they would not give ear. 


Zechariah stoned. 


20 And the Spirit of God came 
upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada 
the priest, which stood above the 
people, and said unto them, Thus 
saith God, Why transgress ye the 
commandments of the Lorp, that 
ye cannot prosper? because ye have 
forsaken the LORD, he hath also 
forsaken you. 

21 And they conspired against 
him, and stoned him with stones at 
the commandment of the -king in 
the court of the house of the LorD. 

92 Thus Joash the king remem- 
bered not the kindness which Je- 
hoiada his father had done to him, 
but slew his son. And when he 
died, he said, The Lorp look upon 
it, and require it. 


A Syrian invasion: Judah de- 

feated. 

23 And it came to pass at the end 
of the year, that the host of Syria 
came up against him: and they 
came to Judah und J erusalem, and 
destroyed all the princes of the 
people from.among the people, and 
sent all the spoil of them unto the 
king of Damascus. , 

24 For the army of the Syrians 
came with a small company of men, 
and the Lorp delivered a very 
great host into their hand, because 
they had forsaken the LORD God of 
their fathers. So they executed 
judgment against Joash. 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 839.] 


a See Deut. 
16.21; Jud. 
3.7, note. 

[B.C. 827. 


b Holy Spirit. 
Neh.9.20,30, 


(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 
|c See 1 Ki.8.61. 


513 


[25 6 


Death of Joash (2 Ki. 12. 19-21). 


25 And when they-were departed 
from him, (for they left him in great 
diseases,) his own servants con- 
spired against him for the blood of 
the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and 
slew him on his bed, and he died: 
and they buried him in the city of 
David, but they buried him not in 
the sepulchres of the kings. i 

26 And these are they that con- 
spired against him; Zabad the son 
of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and 
Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a 
Moabitess. 

27 Now concerning his sons, and 
the greatness of the burdens lard 
upon him, and the repairing of the 
house of God, behold, they are 
written in the story of the book of 
the kings. And Amaziah his son 
reigned in his stead. 


CHAPTER 25. 


The reign of Amaziah over Ju- 
dah (2 Ki. 14. 1, 2). 


ee ae was twenty and five 
years old when he began to 
reign, and he reigned twenty and 
nine years in Jerusalem. And his 
mother’s name was Jehoaddan of 
Jerusalem. 

2 And he did that which was 
right in the sight of the Lorp, but 


not with a “perfect heart. 

3 Now it came to pass, when the 
kingdom was established’ to him, 
that he slew his servants that had 
killed the king his father. 

4 But he slew not their children, 
but did as it is written in the law 
in the book of Moses, where the 
Lorp commanded, saying, The fa- 
thers shall not die for the children, 
neither shall the children die for the 
fathers, but every man shall die for 
his own sin. 


The expedition against Edom. 


5 Moreover Amaziah gathered 
Judah together, and made them 
captains over thousands, and cap- 
tains over hundreds, according to 
the houses of their fathers, through- 
out all Judah and Benjamin: and 
he numbered them from twenty 
years old and above, and found 
them three hundred thousand 
choice men, able to go forth to 
war, that could handle spear and 
shield. 

6 He hired also an hundred thou- 
sand mighty men of valour out of, 


[25 2s 


"25 7] II CHRONICLES. 
e B.c. 827. |unto him, Art thou made of the 
oo for an hundred @¢talents of iane’s counsel? forbear; hy 
, re came a man of God to shouldest thou be smitten? Then 
eer nee 0 king, let not the the prophet forbare, and see I 
army of Israel go with thee; for the know that God hath ag ey Ke 
Lorp is not with Israel, to wit, destroy thee, because thou has 
with all the children of 1Ephraim. done this, and hast not hearkened 
'8 But if thou wilt go, do it, be unto my counsel. 
strong for the battle: God shall War between Judah and Israel 
make ‘thee fall before she enemys (2 Ki. 14. 8-14). 
0 . . 
log ees ty eer [B.c. 826.| 17 Then Amaziah king of Judah 
9 And Amaziah said to the man took advice, and sent to Joash, the 
of God, But what shall we do for son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, 
the hundred talents which I ‘have jking of Israel, saying, Come, let us 
given to the army of Israel? And see one another in the face. 
the man of God answered, The 18 And Joash king of Israel sent 
Lorp is able to give thee much to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, 
more than this. 6The thistle that was in Lebanon 
10 Then Amaziah separated them, sent to the cedar that was in Leba- 
to wit, the army that was come to non, saying, Give thy daughter to 
him out of Ephraim, to go home my son to wife: and there passed 
again: wherefore their anger was by a wild beast that was in Leba- 
greatly kindled against Judah, and non, and trode down the thistle. 
they returned home in great anger. 19 Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast 
11 And Amaziah strengthened smitten the Edomites; and thine 
himself, and led forth his people,|c One talent | heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide 
and went to the valley of salt, and ives) = now at home; why shouldest thou 
smote of the children of Seir ten| £(i2°° meddle to thine hurt, that thou 
thousand. also v.9. shouldest fall, even thou, and 
12 And other ten thousand left + Petes Judah with thee? 
alive did the children of Judah carry|” (6-7). tsa. | 20. But Amaziah would not hear; 
away captive, and brought them! 5.1-7. (Jud. for it came of God, that he might 
unto the top of the rock, and cast| 9-7-15; Zech. |deliver them into the hand of their 
them down from the top of the| 1:71* enemies, because they sought after 
tock, that they all were broken in|cOne cubit= |the gods of Edom. 
Pieces. about 18 in. 


13 But the soldiers of the army 
which Amaziah sent back, that 
they should not go with him to 
battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, 
from Samaria even unto Beth- 
horon, and smote three thousand 
of them, and took much spoil. 

14: Now it came to pass, after that 
Amaziah was come from the 
slaughter of the Edomites, that he 
brought the gods of the children of 
Seir, and set them up to be his 
gods, and bowed down himself be- 
fore them, and burned incense unto 
them. 

15 Wherefore the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against Ama- 
ziah, and he sent unto him a 
prophet, which said unto him, Why 
hast thou sought after the gods of 
the people, which could not- deliver 
their own people out of thine 
hand? 

16 And it came to pass, as he 
talked with him, that the king said 


a AE Ne 


21 So Joash the king of Israel 
went up; and they saw one another 
in the face, both he and Amaziah 
king of Judah, at Beth-shemesh, 
which belongeth to Judah. 

22 And Judah was put to the 
worse before Israel, and they fled 
every man to his tent. 

23 And Joash the king of Israel 
took Amaziah king of Judah, the 
son_of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, 
at Beth-shemesh, and brought him 
to Jerusalem, and brake down the 
wall of Jerusalem from the gate of 
Ephraim to the corner gate, four 
hundred “cubits. 

24 And he took all the gold and 
the silver, and all the vessels that 
were found in the house of God 
with Obed-edom, and the treasures 
of the king’s house, the hostages 
also, and returned to Samaria. 

25° And Amaziah the son of Joash 
king of Judah lived after the death 
of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of 
Israel fifteen years. 


ett OT De ae 


1 Used 


ees in a collective sense for the northern ten-tribe kingdom, called also” 
“Tsrael. 


514 


i 
25 26] 


Ii CHRONICLES. 


[26 20 


Death of Amaziah(?2 Ki. 14. 17-20).| B.C. 826. 


26 Now the rest of the acts of 
Amaziah, first and last, behold, are 
they not written in the book of the 
kings of Judah and Israel? 

27 Now after the time that Ama- 
ziah did turn away from following 
the Lorp they made a conspiracy} 
against him in Jerusalem; and he 
fled to Lachish: but they sent to 


Lachish after him, and slew him 
there. 

28 And they brought him upon 
horses, and buried him with his 
fathers in the city of Judah. 


CHAPTER 26. 
Accession of Uzziah (2 Ki. 14. 21). 


eee all the people of Judah 
took *Uzziah, who was sixteen 
years old, and made him king in 
the room of his father Amaziah. 

2 He built Eloth, and restored it 
to Judah, after that the king slept 
with his fathers. 

3 Sixteen years old was Uzziah 
when he began to reign, and he 
reigned fifty and two years in Jeru- 
salem. His mother’s name also 
was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 

4 And he did that which was 
right in the sight of the LorDp, 
according to all that his father 
Amaziah did. 

5 And he ’sought God in the days 
of Zechariah, who ‘had understand- 
ing in the visions of God: and as 


long as he sought the Lorp, God 
made him to prosper. 


Uzziah successful in war: his 
works and fame. 


6 And he went forth and warred 
against the Philistines, and brake 
down the wall of Gath, and the wall 
of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, 
and built cities about Ashdod, and 
among the Philistines. 

7 And God helped him against 
4the Philistines, and against the 
Arabians that dwelt in Gur-baal, 
and the Mehunims. 

8 And the Ammonites ‘gave gifts 
to Uzziah: and his name spread 
abroad even to the entering in of 
Egypt; for he strengthened Aim- 
self exceedingly. 

9 Moreover Uzziah built towers 
in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and 
at the valley gate, and at the turn- 
ing of the wall, and fortified them. 

10 Also he built towers in the 
desert, and digged many wells: for 


ut 


B.C. 810.] 


a 2 Ki.14.21, 
22; 15.1. 


6 2 Chr.24.2. 


c¢ Gen.41.15; 
Dan.1.17. 


d 2 Chr.21.16. 


e 2 Chr.17.11; 
2 Sam.8.2. 


f Cf.Num.16. 
8-10; 1 Sam. 
13.9-14. 


g 2 Ki.16.12,13.) 


h 1 Chr.6.10. 
i Num.16.40. 
J Ex.30.7,8. 


Jon.2.1-10.) 


__ SiS 


he had much cattle, both in the 
low country, and in the plains: 
husbandmen also, and vine dressers 
in the mountains, and in Carmel: 
for he loved husbandry. 

11 Moreover Uzziah had an host 
of fighting men, that went out to 
war by bands, according to the num- 
ber of-their account by the hand 
of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the 
ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, 
one of the king’s captains. 

12 The whole number of the chief 
of the fathers of the mighty men 
of valour were. two thousand and 
six hundred. 

13 And under their hand was an 
army, three hundred thousand and 
seven thousand and five hundred, 


-|that made war with mighty power, 


to help the king against the enemy. 

14 And Uzziah prepared for them 
throughout all the host shields, and 
spears, and helmets, and haber- 
geons, and bows, and slings to cast 
stones. 

15 And he made in Jerusalem en- 
gines, invented by cunning men, to 
be on the towers and upon the bul- 
warks, to shoot arrows and great 
stones withal. And his name 
spread far abroad; for he was mar- 
vellously helped, till he was strong. 


Uzziah’s intrusion into the 
priest’s office: his punishment, 


16 But when he was strong, his 
heart was lifted up to his destruc- 
tion: for he ‘transgressed against 


- ithe LorpD his God, and £went into 


the temple of the LoRD to burn 
incense upon the altar of incense. 

17 And “Azariah the priest went 
in after him, and with him four- 
score priests of the LORD, that 
were valiant men: 

18 And they withstood Uzziah the 
king, and said unto him, Jt ‘apper- 
taizieth not unto thee, Uzziah, to 
burn incense unto the LORD, but to 
the Jpriests the sons of Aaron, that 
are consecrated to burn incense: go 
out of the sanctuary; for thou hast 
trespassed; neither shall it be for 
thine honour from the LorD God. 

19 Then Uzziah was wroth, and 
had a censer in his hand to burn 
incense: and while he was wroth 
with the priests, the ‘leprosy even 
rose up in his forehead before the 
priests in the house of the Lorp, 
from beside the incense. altar. 

20 And Azariah the chief priest, 
and all the priests, looked upon 
him, and, behold, he was leprous 


26 21] 


in his forehead, and they thrust 
him out from thence; yea, himself 
hasted also to go out, because the 
Lorp had smitten him. — 

21 And 4Uzziah the king was a 
leper unto the day of his death, and 
dwelt in a “several house, being a 
leper; for he was cut off from the 
house of the LorD: and Jotham 
his son was over the king’s house, 
judging the people of the land. 


Death of Uzziah: accession of 
Jotham over Judah (2 Ki. 15.32). 


22 Now the rest:of the acts of 
Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah 
the prophet, the son of Amoz, write. 

23 4So Uzziah slept with his fath- 
ers, and they buried him with his 
fathers in the field of the burial 
which belonged to the kings; for 
they said, He is a leper: and Jo- 
tham his son reigned in his stead. 


CHAPTER 27. 


Reign of Jotham over Judah 
(2 Ki. 15. 32-38). 


OTHAM ¢was twenty and five 

years old when he began to 
reign, and he reigned sixteen years 
in Jerusalem. His mother’s name 
also was Jerushah, the daughter of 
Zadok. 


2 And he did that which was: 


tight in the sight of the Lorp, ac- 
cording to all that his father Uzziah 
did: howbeit he entered not into the 
temple of the Lorp. fAnd the peo- 
ple did yet corruptly. 

3 He built the high gate of the 
house of the Lorp, and on the 
wall of Ophel he built much. 

4 Moreover he built cities in the 
mountains of Judah, and in the 
forests he built castles and towers. 

5S He fought also with the king 
of the Ammonites, and prevailed 
against them, And the children of 
Ammon gave him the same year an 
hundred étalents of silver, and ten 
thousand ‘measures of wheat, and 
ten thousand of barley. So much 
did the children of Ammon pay 
unto him, both the second year, 
and the third. 

6 So Jotham became mighty, be- 
cause he ‘prepared his ways before 
the LorD his God. 


Death of Jotham king of Judah 
(2 Ki. 15. 36-38), 
TE 


Now the rest of the acts of Jo- 
tham, and all his wars, and his 
ways, lo, they are written in the 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 765. 


[B.C. 742. 


a 2 Ki.15.5. 


b Lev.13.46; 
Num.5.2. 


cIsa.1.1, 


d 2 Ki.15.7; 
TIsa.6.1. 


e 2 Ki.15.33. 
f 2 Ki.15.35. 
B.C. 758.] 

g One talent 
(silver) = 
£410, or 
$1940. 

h One meas- 
ure = about 
10 bu. 


i Or, estab- 
lished. 


j 2 Ki.15:38. 
k 2 Ki.16.2. 


1 Ex.34.17; 
Lev.19.4. 


m 2 Chr.33.6. 
ni.e. nations. 
o 2 Ki.16 5,6. 


p 2 Ki.15.27; 
Isa.7.1-17. 


q 2 Chr.11.4, 


516 


[28 


book of the kings of Israel “a 
Judah. . 

8 He was five and twenty year 
old when he began to reign, and 
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. 

9 jAnd Jotham slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in the 
city of David: and Ahaz his son 
reigned in his stead. 


CHAPTER 28. 
Reign of Ahaz (2 Ki. 16. 1). 


fy eZ kwas twenty years old 
when he began to reign, and 
he reigned sixteen years in Jeru- 
salem: but he did not that which 
‘was right in the sight of the Lorp, 
like David his father: 

2 For he walked in the ways of 
the kings of Israel, and made also 
‘molten images for Baalim. 

3 Moreover he burnt incense in 
the valley of the son of Hinnom, 
and burnt his children in the fire, 
after the abominations of the “hea- 
then whom the Lorp had cast out 
before the children of Israel. 

4 He sacrificed also and burnt in- 
cense in the high places, and on 
the hills, and under every green 
ferees 


War between Ahaz and Pekah 
(2 Ki. 16. s, 6). 


5 Wherefore the Lorp his God 
delivered him into the hand of the 
king of Syria; and othey smote him, 
and carried away a great multitude 
of them captives, and brought 
them to Damascus. And he was 
also delivered into the hand of the 
Aing of Israel, who smote him with 
a great slaughter. 

6 For ?Pekah the son of Remaliah 
slew in Judah an hundred and 
twenty thousand in one day, which 
were all valiant men; because they 
had forsaken the Lorp God of 
their fathers. 

7 And Zichri, a mighty man of 
Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king’s 
son, and Azrikam the governor of 
the house, and Elkanah that was 
next to the king. 

8 And the children of Israel car- 
tied away captive of ‘their brethren 
two hundred thousand, women, 
sons, and daughters, and took also 
away much spoil from them, and 
brought the spoil to Samaria. 


The intercession of Oded. 


9 But a prophet of the Lorp was 
there, whose name was Oded: and 


& 


he went out before the host that 
came to Samaria, and said unto 
them, Behold; ¢because the Lorp 
God of your fathers was wroth with 
Judah,-he hath delivered them into 
your hand, and ye have slain them 
in a rage that “reacheth up unto 
heaven. 

10 And now ye purpose to keep 
under the children of Judah and 
Jerusalem for bondmen and bond- 
women unto you: but are there not 
with you, even with you, sins 
against the LORD your God? 

11 Now hear me therefore, and 
deliver the captives again, which 
ye have taken captive of your 
brethren: for ‘the fierce wrath of 
the LorD is upon you. 

12 Then certain of the heads of 
the children of Ephraim, Azariah 
the son of Johanan, Berechiah the 
son of Méshillemoth,.and Jehizkiah 
the son of Shallum, and Amasa the 
son of Hadlai, stood up against 
them that came from the war, 

13. And said unto them, Ye shall 
not bring in the captives hither: 
for whereas we have offended 
against the LorD already, ye in- 
tend to add more to our sins and 
to our trespass: for our trespass is 
great, and there is fierce wrath 
against Israel. 

14 So the armed men left the cap- 
tives and the spoil before the princes 
and all the congregation. 

15 And the men ¢which were ex- 
pressed by name rose up, and took 
the captives, and with the spoil 
clothed all that were naked among 
them, and arrayed them, and 
shod them, and ‘gave them to eat 
and to drink, and anointed them, 
and carried all the feeble of them 
upon asses, and brought them to 
Jericho, the ‘city of palm trees, to 
their brethren: then they returned 
to Samaria. 


Edomite and Philistine inva- 
sions of Judah. 


16 sAt that time did king Ahaz 
send unto the kings of Assyria to 
help him. 

17 For again the Edomites had 
come and smitten Judah, and car- 
tied away captives. 7 
18 The “Philistines also had in- 
vaded the cities of the low country, 
and.of the south of Judah, and had 
taken Beth-shemesh, and Ajalon, 
and Gederoth, and Shocho with the 
villages thereof, and Timnah with 
the villages thereof, Gimzo also 


II CHRONICLES. 


B:C.- 741. 


a Psa.69.26; 
15; 26.2; 
Zech.1.15. 

b Ezra 9.6. 

c Jas.2.13. 

d v.12. 

é 2 Ki.6.22. 


f Deut.34.3; 
Jud.1.16. 


g Cf.2 Ki.16.7. 
h Ezk.16.27,57. 
4 2 Chr.21.2. 

j Ex.32.25. 

k 2 Ki.15.29. 
12 Chr.25.14. 
m Jer.44.17,18. 
n 2 Chr.29.3,7. 
o 2 Ki.16.19,20. 


[B.C. 726. 


517 


ee Al 


[29 2 


and the villages thereof: and they 
dwelt there. 

19 For the Lorp brought Judah 
low because of Ahaz king of ‘Is- 
rael; for he jmade Judah naked, 
and transgressed sore against the 
Lorpb. 

20 And “Tilgath-pilneser king of 
Assyria came unto him, and dis- 
tressed him, but strengthened him 
not. 

21 For Ahaz took away a portion 
out of the house of the Lorp, 
and out of the house of the king, 
and of the princes, and gave rt unto 
the king of Assyria: but he helped 
him not. 

22 And in the time of his distress 
did he trespass yet more against 
‘the Lorp: this is that king Ahaz. 

23 For he ’sacrificed unto the gods 
of Damascus, which smote him: 
and he said, Because the gods of the 
kings of Syria help them, therefore 
will I sacrifice to them, that “they 
may help me. But they were the 
ruin of him, and of all Israel. 

24 And Ahaz gathered together 
the vessels of the house of God, 
and cut in pieces the vessels of the 
house of God, “and shut up the 
doors of the house of the LorD, and 
he made him altars in every cor- 
ner of Jerusalem. 

25 And in every several city of 
Judah he made high places to burn 
incense unto other gods, and pro- 
voked to anger the LorD God of 
his fathers. 


Death of Ahaz: accession of 
Hezekiah (2 Ki. 16. 19, 20). 


26 Now °the rest of his acts and 
of all his ways, first and last, behold, 
they are written in the book of the 
kings of Judah and Israel. 

27 And Ahaz slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in the 
city, even in Jerusalem: but they 
brought him not into the sepul- 
chres of the kings of Israel: and 
Hezekiah his son reigned in his 
stead. 


CHAPTER 29. 


Reign of Hezekiah over Judah 
(2 Ki. 18.1. Cf. Isa. 36.-39.). 


|S Lcaacamiele began to reign 
when he was five and twenty 


years old, and he reigned nine and 
twenty years. in Jerusalem. And 
his mother’s name was Abijah, the 
daughter of Zechariah. 

2 And he did that which was 


29 3] 


' right in the sight of the LorD, ac- 
cording to all that David his father 
had done. 


The revival under Hezekiah 
(2 Ki. 18. 3-7). 


3 He in the first year of his reign, 
in the first month, opened the 
doors of the house of the LORD, and 
repaired them. : : 

4 And he brought in the priests 
and the Levites, and gathered them 
together into the east street, 

5 And said unto them, Hear me, 
ye Levites, sanctify now  your- 
selves, and ‘sanctify the house of 
the LorpD God of your fathers, and 
carry forth the filthiness out of the 
holy place. 

6 For our fathers have trespassed, 
and done that which was evil in 
the eyes of the LorD our God, and 
have forsaken him, and have turned 
away their faces from the habita- 
tion of the Lorp, and turned their 
backs. 

7 Also they have shut up the 
doors of the porch, and put out the 
lamps, and have not burned in- 
cense nor offered burnt-offerings in 
the holy place unto the God of 
Israel. 

8 Wherefore the ¢wrath of the 
LORD was upon Judah ard Jeru- 
salem, and he hath delivered them 
to trouble, to astonishment, and to 
ehissing, as ye see with your eyes. 

9 For, lo, our fathers have fallen 
by the sword, and our sons and our 
daughters and our wives are in 
captivity for this. 

10 Now it is in mine heart to 
make a covenant with the Lorp 
God of Israel, that his fierce wrath 
may turn away from us. 

11 My sons, be not now negligent: 
for the Lorp hath chosen you to 
stand before him, to serve him, and 
that ye should minister unto him, 
and burn incense. 

12 Then the Levites arose, Ma- 
hath the son of Amasai, and Joel 
the son of Azariah, of the sons of 
the Kohathites::and of the sons of 
Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and 
Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and 
of the Gershonites; Joah the son of 
Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah: 

13 And of the sons of Elizaphan; 
Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons 
of Asaph; Zechariah, and Matta- 
niah: . 

14 And of the sons of Heman; Je- 
hiel, and Shimei: and of the sons 
of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel. 


II CHRONICLES. 


aie. April. 


b Heb. godesh. 


c Sanctity, 
holy (O.T.). 
Psa. 2.6. 
(Gen.2.3; 
Zech.8.3.) 


d 2 Chr.24.18. 


e1 Ki.9.8; 
Jer.18.16; 
19.8; 25.9, 
18; 29.18. 


f Ex.25.30, 


note, 


g Or, an offer- 
ing. See 
Dan.9.24, 
note, 


h See Ex.29. 
33, note, 


518 


[29 24 


15 And they gathered their breth- 
ren, and sanctified themselves, and 
came, according to the command- 
ment of the king, by the words of 
the Lorpb, to cleanse the house of 
the LorpD. ; 

16 And the priests went into the 
inner part of the house of the LORD, 
to cleanse it, and brought out all 
the uncleanness that they found in 
the temple of the LORD into the 
court of the house of the LORD. 
And the Levites took it, to carry it 
out abroad into the brook Kidron. 

17 Now they began on the first 
day of the @first month to sanctify, 
and on the eighth day of the month 
came they to the porch of the 
Lorp: so they sanctified the house 
of the LorD in eight days; and in 
the sixteenth day of the first month 
they made an end. , 

18 Then they went in to Hezekiah 
the king, and said, We have 
cleansed all the house of the Lorp, 


with all the vessels thereof, and 


vessels thereof. 

19 Moreover all the vessels, which 
king Ahaz in his reign did cast 
away in his transgression, have we 
prepared and sanctified, and, be- 
hold, they are before the altar of 
the Lorpb. 


The temple worship restored. 


20 Then Hezekiah the king rose 
early, and gathered the rulers of 
the city, and went up to the house 
of the Lorp. 

21 And they brought seven bul- 
locks, and seven rams, and seven 
lambs, .and seven he goats, for a 
sin-offering for the kingdom, and 
for the sanctuary, and for Judah. 
And he commanded the priests the 
sons of Aaron to offer them on the 
altar of the Lorp. 

22 So they killed the buliocks, 
and the priests received the blood, 
and sprinkled i# on the altar: like- 
wise, when they had killed the 
trams, they sprinkled the blood upon 
the altar: they killed also the lambs, 


and they sprinkled the blood upon 
the altar. 


goats for the sin-offering before the 
king and the congregation; and they 
laid their hands upon them: 


24 And the priests killed them, 


‘their blood upon the altar, to make 
‘an /atonement for all Israel: for the 


é 


and the altar of burnt-offering, 


the fshewbread table, with all the 


23 And they brought forth the he — 


jand they made £reconciliation with 


Je i 


29 25] 


Il CHRONICLES. 


[30 9 


king commanded that the burnt- 
offering and the sin-offering should 
be made for all Israel. 

25 2And he set the Levites in the 
house of the LorD with cymbals, 
with psalteries, and with harps, 
baccording to the commandment of 
David, and of ‘Gad the king’s seer, 
and Nathan the prophet: for ¢so 
was the commandment of the 
LORD by his prophets. 

_26 And the Levites stood with the 
instruments of David, and the 
priests with the trumpets. 

27 And Hezekiah commanded to 
offer the burnt-offering upon the 
altar. And when the burnt-offering 
began, ‘the song of the LORD began 
also with the trumpets, and with 
the instruments ordained by David 
king of Israel. 

28 And all the congregation wor- 
shipped, and the singers sang, and 
the trumpeters sounded: and all 
this continued until the burnt- 
offering was finished. 

29 And when they had made an 
end of offering, ‘the king and all 
that were present with him bowed 
themselves, and worshipped. 

30 Moreover Hezekiah the king 
and the princes commanded the 
Levites to sing praise unto the 
Lorp with the words of David, and 

_of Asaph the seer. And they sang 
praises with gladness, and they 
bowed their heads and worshipped. 

31 Then Hezekiah answered and 

said, Now ye have consecrated 
yourselves unto the LORD, come 
mear and bring sacrifices and 
éthank-offerings into the house of 
the Lorp. And the congregation 
brought in sacrifices and thank- 
offerings; and as many as were of 
a free heart burnt-offerings. 

32 And the number of the burnt- 
offerings, which the congregation 
brought, was threescore and ten 
bullocks, an hundred rams, and 
two hundred lambs: all these were 
for a burnt-offering to the LorD. 

33 And the consecrated things 
were six hundred oxen and three 
thousand sheep. 

34 But the priests were too few, 
so that they could not flay all the 
burnt-offerings: wherefore ‘their 
brethren the Levites did help them, 
till the work was ended, and until 
the other priests had sanctified | 
themselves: ‘for the Levites were) 


more upright in heart to sanctify 
themselves than the priests. 
35 And also the burnt-offerings 


B.C. 726. 


a 1 Chr.16.4; 
25.6. 


6 1 Chr.23.5; 
25.1. 


c 2 Sam.24. 
Ls 


d 2 Chr.30.12. 
e 2 Chr.23.18. 
f 2 Chr.20.18. 


g Lev.7.12. 


h 2 Chr.35.11, 


#2 Chr.30.3. 
j Psa.7.10. 
k Lev.3.16. 
lice. May; 
also vs. 
1s; i5- 


m Ex.12.6,18. 


n 2 Chr.29.34. 


o Jer.4.1; 
Joel 2.13. 


pb 2 Ki.15. 
19,29. 


q Ezk.20.18. 


y 2 Chr.29.10. 


s Psa.106.46. 


519 


were in abundance, with the “fat of 
the peace-offerings, and the drink- 
offerings for every burnt-offering. 
So the service of the house of the 
LORD was set in order. 

36 And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all 
the people, that God had prepared 
the people: for the thing was done 
suddenly. 


CHAPTER 30. 
Preparations for the passover. 


Ave Hezekiah sent to all Israel 
and Judah, and wrote letters 
also te Ephraim and Manasseh, that 
they should come to the house of the 
LorD at Jerusalem, to keep the pass- 
over unto the LorD God of Israel. 

2 For the king had taken counsel, 
and his princes, and all the con- 
gregation in Jerusalem, to keep the 
passover in the ‘second month. 

3 For they could not keep it ™at 
that time, “because the priests 
had not sanctified themselves suffi- 
ciently, neither had the people 
gathered themselves together to 
Jerusalem. 

4 And the thing pleased the king 
and all the congregation. 

5 So they established a decree to 
make proclamation throughout all 
Israel, from Beer-sheba even to 
Dan, that they should come to keep 
the passover unto the LorD God of 
Israel at Jerusalem: for they had 
not done it of a long time in such 
sort as it was written. 

6 So the posts went with the let- 
ters from the king and his princes 
throughout all Israel and Judah, 
and according to the commandment 
of the king, saying, Ye children of 
Israel, °turn again unto the Lorp 
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, 
and he will return to the remnant 
of you, that are escaped out of the 
hand of the ?kings of Assyria. 

7 And be not ye “like your fathers, 
and like your brethren, which tres- 
passed against the LorD God of 
their fathers, who therefore gave 
them up to desolation, as ye see. 

8 Now be ye not stiffnecked, as 
your fathers were, but yield your- 
selves unto the LORD, and enter 
into his sanctuary, which he hath 
sanctified for ever: and serve the 
Lorp your God, “that the fierce- 
ness of his wrath may turn away 
from you. 

9 For if ye turn again unto the 
LorpD, your brethren and your chil- 
dren shall find ‘compassion before 


them that lead them captive, so 
that they shall come again into this 
land: for the LoRD your God is 
@gracious and merciful, and will 
not turn away his face from you, 
if ye return unto him. : 

10 So the posts passed from city to 
city through the country of Ephraim 
and Manasseh even unto Zebulun: 
but they %laughed them to scorn, 
and mocked them. 

11 Nevertheless divers of Asher 
and Manasseh and of Zebulun 
humbled themselves. and came to 
Jerusalem. 

12 Also in Judah the hand of God 
was to give them one heart to do 
the commandment of the king and 
of the princes, “by the word of the 
Lorp. 

13 And there assembled at Jeru- 
salem much people to keep the feast 
of unleavened bread in the second 
month, a very great congregation. 

14 And they arose and took away 
the “altars that were in Jerusalem, 
and all the altars for incense took 
they away, and cast them into the 
brook Kidron. 


The passover kept. 


15 Then they killed the passover 
on the fourteenth day of the second 
month: and the priests and the 
Levites were ‘ashamed, and sanc- 
tified themselves, and brought in 
the burnt-offerings into the house 
of the Lorp. 

16 And they stood in their -place 
after their manner, according to the 
law of Moses the man of God: the 
priests sprinkled the blood, which 
they received of the hand of the 

evites. 

17 For there were many in the 
congregation that were not sancti- 
fied: therefore the Levites had the 
charge of the killing of the passovers 
for every one that was not clean, to 
sanctify them unto the’Lorp. 

18 For a multitude of the people, 
éven many of Ephraim, and Manas- 
seh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not 
cleansed themselves, fyet did they 
eat the passover otherwise than it 
was written. But Hezekiah prayed 
for them, saying, The good Lorp 
pardon every one 

19 That "prepareth his heart to 
seek God, the Lorp God of his 
fathers, though he be not cleansed 
according to the purification of the 
sanctuary. 

20 And the Lorp hearkened to 
Hezekiah, and healed the people. 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 726. 


a Ex.34.6. 

6 2 Chr.36.16. 
¢ 2 Chr.29.25. 
d 2 Chr.28.24. 
e 2 Chr.29.34. 


f Ex.12.43; 
Num.9.10. 


g Bible 


prayers 
(.T.). 


h 2 Chr.19:3; 
Ex.12.15; 
13.6. 

#1 Ki.8.65. 


j Heb. to the 
heart of all. 


k 2 Chr.17.9; 
2 Chr.35.3; 
Deut.33.10. 

1 Ezra 10.11. 


m 2 Chr.35. 
17,18. 


n 2 Chr.29,3-9. 


o Jud.3.7, 
note. 


> 1 Chr.23.6; 
24.1, 


520 


21 And the children of Israel that _ 
were present at Jerusalem kept ‘the 
feast of unleavened bread seven 
days with great gladness: and the 
Levites and the priests praised the 
LorpD day by day, singing with 
loud instruments unto the LorpD. 

22 And Hezekiah spake Jcomfort- 
ably unto all the Levites *that 
taught the good knowledge of the 
LorbD: and they did eat throughout 
the feast seven days, offering peace- 
offerings, and ‘making confession 
to the LorpD God of their fathers. 


“Other seven” days kept. 


23 And the whole assembly took. 
counsel to keep- “other seven days: 
and they kept other seven days 
with gladness. 

24 For Hezekiah king of Judah 
"did give to the congregation a 


thousand bullocks and seven thou- 
sand sheep; and the princes gave to 
the congregation a thousand bul- 
locks and ten thousand sheep: and 
a great number of priests ‘sanctified 
themselves. 

25 And all the congregation of 
Judah, with the priests and the Le- 
vites, and all the congregation that 
came out of Israel, and the strangers 
that came out of the land of Israel, 
and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced. 

26 So there was great joy in Jeru- 
salem: for since the time of Solomon 
the son of David king of Israel there 
was not the like in Jerusalem. 

27 Then the priests the Levites 
arose and blessed the people: and 
their voice was heard, and their 
prayer came up to his holy dwelling 
place, even unto heaven, 


CHAPTER 31. 
Idols destroyed (2 Ki. 18. 4). 


Now when all this was finished, 
' all Israel that were present 
went out to the cities of Judah, and 
brake the images in pieces, and cut 
down the °groves, and threw down 
the high places and the altars out of 
all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim 
also and Manasseh, until they had 
utterly destroyed them all. Then 
all the children of Israel returned, 


every man to his possession, into 
their own cities. 


Hezekiah’s further religious 
reforms. 


2 And Hezekiah appointed ?the 
courses of. the priests and the Le- 
vites after their courses, every man 

4 


f 


31 3] 


according to his service, the priests 
and Levites for ¢burnt-offerings and 
for peace-offerings, to minister, and 
to give thanks, and to praise in the 
gates of the tents of the Lorp. 

3 He appointed also the king’s 
portion ‘of his substance for the 
burnt-offerings, 
morning and_ evening burnt-offer- 
ings, and. the burnt-offerings for the 
sabbaths, and for the new moons, 
and for the set feasts, as it is writ- 
ten in the Slaw of the Lorp. 

4 Moreover he commanded the 
people that dwelt in Jerusalem to 
give the “portion of the priests and 
the Levites, that they might be en- 
couraged in the law of the LORD. 

5 And as soon as the command- 
ment came abroad, the children of 
Israel brought in abundance the 
dfrstfruits of corn, wine, and oil, 
and honey, and of all the increase of 
the field; and the tithe of all things 
brought they in abundantly. 

6 And concerning the children of 
Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the 
cities of Judah, they also brought 
in the tithe of oxeh and sheep, and 
the ¢tithe of holy things which, were 
consecrated unto the Lorp their 
God, and laid them by heaps. 

7 In the /third month they began 
to lay the foundation of the heaps, 
and finished them in the seventh 
month. 

8 And when Hezekiah and the 
princes came and saw the heaps, 
they blessed the Lorp, and his 
people Israel. 

9 Then Hezekiah questioned with 
the priests and the Levites concern- 
ing the heaps. 

10 And Azariah the chief priest of 
the house of Zadok answered him, 
and said, Since the people began to 
bring the offerings into the house 
of the Lorp, we have had enough 
to eat, and have left plenty: for the 
Lorp hath blessed his people; and 
that which is ieft is this great 
store. 

11 Then Hezekiah commanded to 
prepare chambers in the house of 
the Lorp; and they prepared them, 

12 And brought in the offerings 
and the tithes and the dedicated 
things faithfully: over which "Co- 
noniah the Levite was ruler, and 
Shimei his brother was the next. 

13. And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and 
Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, 
and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Isma- 
chiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, 
were overseers under the hand of 


to wit, for the 


II CHRONICLES. 


a1 Chr.23. 
30,31. 


b Num.28.,29. 


c Num.18.8; 
Neh.13.10. 


d Ex.22.29; 
Neh.13.12. 


e Lev.27.30; 
Deut.14.28. 


fie. June. 
gi.e. October. 
h Neh.13.13. 
t Josh.21.9. 


j 1 Chr.9.22, 
etc. 


k Lev.25.34, 
35; Num.35. 
1-4. 

1 2 Ki.20.3. 


m 2 Ki.18.13, 


(B.C. 713. 


521 


[32 2 


Cononiah and Shimei his brother, 
at the commandment of Hezekiah 
the king, and Azariah the ruler of 
the house of God. 

14 And Kore the son of Imnah the 
Levite, the porter toward the east, 
was over the freewill-offerings of 
God, to distribute the oblations 
of the Lorp, and the most holy 
things. 

15 And next him were Eden, and 
Miniamin, and Jeshua, and She- 


jmaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, ‘in 


the cities of the priests, in their set 
joffice, to give to their brethren by 
courses, as well to the great as to 
the small: 

16 Beside their genealogy of males, 
from three years old and upward, 
even unto every one that entereth 
into the house of the Lorp, his 
daily portion for their service in, 


\their charges according to their 


courses; 

17 Both to the genealogy of the 
priests by the house of their fathers, 
and the Levites from twenty years 
old and upward, in their charges by 
their courses; 

18 And to the genealogy of all 
their little ones, their wives, and 
their sons, and their daughters, 
through all the congregation: for 
in their set office they sanctified 
themselves in holiness: 

19 Also of the sons of Aaron the 
priests, which were “in the fields of 
the suburbs of their cities, in every 
several city, the men that were 
expressed by name, to give portions 
to all the males among the priests, 
and to all that were reckoned by 
genealogies among the Levites. 

20 And thus did Hezekiah through- 
out all Judah, ’and wrought that 
which was good and right and 
truth before the LorD his God. 

21 And in every work that he 
began in the service of the house of 
God, and in the law, and in the 
commandments, to seek his God, he 
did it with all his heart, and pros- 
pered. 


CHAPTER 32. 


Sennacherib invades Judah ‘(2 
Ki. 18. 13-19. 37; Isa. 36. 1-22). 


Aaees these things, and the 
establishment thereof, ”Senna- 
cherib king of Assyria came, and 
entered into Judah, and encamped 
against the fenced cities, and 
thought to win them for himself, 

2 And when Hezekiah saw that 


6275] 
Sennacherib was come, and that he 
was purposed to fight against Jeru- 
salem, State 

3 He took counsel with his princes 
and his mighty men to stop the) 
waters of the fountains which were 
without the city: and they did help 
him. 

4 So there was gathered much 
people together, who stopped all the 
fountains, and the brook that ran 
through the midst of the land, 
saying, Why should the kings of 
Assyria come, and find much 
water? : 

5 @Also he strengthened himself, 
tand built up all the wall that was 
broken, and raised if up to the 
towers, and another wall without, 
and repaired “Millo in the city of 
David, and made darts and shields 


in abundance. 

6 And he set captains of war 
over the people, and gathered them 
together to him in the street of the 
gate of the city, and spake ¢com- 
fortably to them, saying, 

7 Be strong and courageous, be 
not afraid nor dismayed for the 
king of Assyria, nor for all the mul- 
titude that zs with him: ¢for there 
be more with us than with him: 

8 With him is an farm of flesh; but 
with us is the LorD our God to help 
us, and to fight our battles. And 
the people rested themselves upon 
the words of Hezekiah king of 
Judah. 


Sennacherib seeks to terrify the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. (2 
Ki. 18. 17-25). 


9 After this did Sennacherib king 
of Assyria send his servants to Je- 
rusalem, (but he Aimself Jaid 
siege against Lachish, and all his 
power with him,) unto Hezekiah 
king of Judah, and unto all Judah 
that were at Jerusalem, ésaying, 

10 Thus saith Sennacherib king of 
Assyria, Whereon do ye trust, that 
ye abide in the siege in Jerusa- 
lem? 

11 Doth not Hezekiah persuade 
you to give over yourselves to die 
by famine and by thirst, gsaying, 


The LorD our God shall deliver us 
out of the hand of the king of 
Assyria? 

12 Hath not the same Hezekiah 
htaken away his ‘high places and 
his altars, and commanded Judah 
and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall 
worship before one altar, and burn 
incense upon it? 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 713. 


a Cf.Isa.22. 
1-13, the di- 
vine view at 
this time. 


b 2 Chr.25. 
22-24. 


c 2 Sam.5.9; 
1 Ki.9.15, 
1 Chr. 11.8; 
2 Chr.32.5. 


d Heb. to the 
heart. 


e Rom.8.31. 
f Jer.17.5. 

g 2 Ki.18.19. 
h 2 Ki.18.22. 


11 Ki.3.2, 
note. 


j Cf.2 Ki.18, 
29-35. 
k 2 Ki.19.9. 


12 Ki.19.12. 


m 2 Ki.18. 
26-31. 


n Cf.Isa.37. 
15-20. 


o Isa.37.33-37. 


See, also, 
Zech.14.3. 


b Cf.2 Ki.19, 
37. 


522 


[32 21 


13 Know ye not Jwhat I and my 
fathers have done unto all the 
people of other lands? were the 
'gods of the nations of those lands — 
any ways able to deliver their lands 
out of mine hand? 

14 Who was there among all the 
gods of those nations that my fa- 
thers utterly destroyed, that could 
deliver his people out of mine hand, 
that your God should be able to 
deliver you out of mine hand? 

15 Now therefore let not Heze- 
kiah deceive you, nor persuade you 
on this manner, neither yet believe 
him: for no god of any nation or 
kingdom was able to deliver his 
people out of mine hand, and out of 
the hand of my fathers: how much 
less shall your God deliver you out 
of mine hand? 

16 And his servants spake yet 
more against the LorD God, and 
against his servant Hezekiah. 


Sennacherib defies the God of 
Hezekiah (2 Ki. 19. 9-13). 

17 He wrote also letters to rail 
on the Lorp God of Israel, and to 
speak against him, ‘saying, As the 
gods of the nations of other lands 
have not delivered their people out 
of mine hand, so shall not the God 
of Hezekiah deliver his people out 
of mine hand. 

18 ™Then they cried with a loud. 
voice in the Jews’ speech unto the 
people of Jerusalem that were on 
the wall, to affright them, and to 
trouble them; that they might take 
the city. 

19 And -they spake against the 
God of Jerusalem, as against the ; 
gods of the people of the earth, 
which were the work of the hands 
of man. 

Hezekiah’s prayer (2 Ki. 19. 
14-19), 

20 “And for this cause Hezekiah 

the king, and the prophet Isaiah 


the son of Amoz, prayed and cried 
to heaven. 


Jehovah destroys the Assyrian 
army (2 Ki. 19. 35, 36). 


21 And the Lorp °sent an angel, 
which cut off all the mighty men of 
valour, and the leaders and captains 
in the camp of the king of Assyria. 
So he returned with shame of face 
to his own land. And when he 
was come into the house of his god, 
they that came forth of his own 


| bowels slew him there with the 
‘sword. 


32 22] 
Hezekiah again prosperous. 


22 Thus the LorpD saved Heze- 
kiah and the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
lem from the hand of Sennacherib 
the king of Assyria, and from the 
hand of all other, and guided them 
on every side. 

23 And many “brought gifts unto 
the LorpD to Jerusalem, and presents 
to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that 
he was magnified in the sight of all 
nations from thenceforth. 


Hezekiah’s illness and recovery 
(2 Ki. 20. 1-11). 


24 In those days Hezekiah was 
bsick to the death, and prayed unto 
the LorpD: and he spake unto him, 
and he gave him a sign. 

25 But Hezekiah rendered not 
again according to the benefit done 
unto him; for his ‘heart was lifted 
up: therefore there was 4wrath 
upon him, and upon Judah and 
Jerusalem. 

26 Notwithstanding Hezekiah 
humbled himself for the pride of 
his heart, both he and the inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem, so that the 
wrath of the LORD came not upon 
them in the days of Hezekiah. 


Hezekiah’s wealth. 


27 And Hezekiah had exceeding 
much riches and honour: and he 
made himself treasuries for silver, 
and for gold, and for precious stones, 
and for spices, and for shields, and 
for all manner of pleasant jewels; 

28 Storehouses also for the in- 

_-erease of corn, and wine, and oil; 
and stalls for all manner of beasts, 
and cotes for flocks. 

29 Moreover he provided him cit- 
jes, and possessions of flocks and 
herds in abundance: for God had 
given him substance very much, 

30 This same Hezekiah also 
estopped the upper. watercourse of 
Gihon, and brought it straight 
down to the west side of the city of 
David. And Hezekiah prospered 
in all his works. 


Hezekiah receives an embassy 
from Babylon (2 Ki. 20. 12-19). 


31 Howbeitin the business of the 
ambassadors of the princes of Baby- 
Jon, who sent unto him to enquire 
of the wonder that was done in the 
Jand, God left him, to try him, that 
he might know all that-was in his 
heart. 


a 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 710. 


a 2 Chr.17.5. 


b 2 Ki.20,1; 
Isa.38.1-22. 


¢ 2 Chr.26.16; 
Hab.2.4. 


d 2 Chr.24.18. 
e Is&.22.9-12. 
f I1sa.36.-39. 

g 2 Ki.20.21. 
h 2 Ki.21.1. 


i 2 Chr.28.3; 
Deut.138.9. 


jie. nations. 


k See Deut, 
16.21. 


1 Deut.17.3. 
m 2 Chr.6.6; 


n 2 Chr.4.9. 
o 2 Chr.28.3; 

Lev.18.21; 
Deut.18.10; 
2 Ki.23.10; 
Ezk.23. 
37,39. 


p Deut.18.10, 
11. 


q 2 Ki.21.6, 
r 2 Ki.21.7. 
s Psa.132.14. 
t 2 Sam.7.10. 


523 


[33 8 


Death of Hezekiah: accession of 
Manasseh (2 Ki. 20. 20, 21). 


32 Now the rest of the acts of 
Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold, 
they are fwritten in the vision of 
Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, 
and in the book of the kings of 
Judah and Israel. 

33 And Hezekiah ‘slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in the 
chiefest of the sepulchres of the 
sons of David: and all Judah and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem did 
him honour at his death. And 
Manasseh his son reigned in his 
stead, 


CHAPTER 33. 


Accession ef Manasseh: his evil 
ways (2 Ki. 21. 2-9). 


ie hwas twelve years 
old when he began to reign, 
and he reigned fifty and five years 
in Jerusalem: 

2 But did that which was evilin 
‘the sight of the LorD, like unto the 
iabominations of the Jheathen, whom 
[the LorD had cast out before the 
children of Israel. 

3 For he built again the high 
places which Hezekiah his father 
had broken down, and he reared 
up altars for Baalim, and made 
kgroves, and worshipped /all the 
host of heaven, and served them. 

4 Also he built altars in the house 
of the LorpD, whereof the LorD had 
said, In Jerusalem shall my name 
be for ever. 
| 5 And he built altars for all the 
host of heaven “in the two courts of 
\the house of the LORD. 
| 6 °And he caused his children to 

pass through the fire in the valley 
of the son of Hinnom: ?also he ob- 
served times, and used enchant- 
ments, and used witchcraft, and 
ddealt with a familiar spirit, and 
with wizards: he wrought much 
evil in the sight of the LORD, to, 
'provoke him to anger. 

|"7 And he “set a carved image, the 
idol which he had made, in the 
house of God, of which God had 
said tu David and to Solomon his 
son, In ‘this house, and in Jeru- 
salem, which I have chosen before 
all the tribes of Israel, will I put my 
name for ever: 

8 ‘Neither will I any more remove 
the foot of Israel from out of the 
land which I have appointed for 
your fathers; so that they will take 


| 


33 9) II CHRONICLES. [34 : 


sins, and his trespass, and the 
places wherein he built high places, 
and set up Jgroves and graven im-— 
ages, before he was humbled: be- 
hold, they are written among the 
sayings of the seers. 

20 So *Manasseh slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in his 
own house: and Amon his son 


heed to do all that I have com- 
manded them, according to the 
whole law and the statutes and the 
ordinances by the hand of Moses. 

9 So Manasseh made Judah and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, 


whom the LorD had destroyed be- 
fore the chiidren of Israel. 


yo ad the a See aa arenes reigned in his stead. 

seh, and to his people: but they . an 

would not hearken. Reign of uae (2 Ki. 21. 
18-22). 


bh’ ivi d 
Manansel Sennhriy. an 21 ‘Amon was two and twenty 


: : years old when he began to reign, 
11 45Wherefore the Lorp brought|/*** nares. and reigned two years in Jerusalem, 


upon them the captains of the host/5 Deut.28.36. 22 But he did that which was 

of the king of Assyria, which took| , 4.59, evil in the sight of the Lorn, as did 

Manasseh among the thorns, and|°pxa'g93, Manasseh his father: for Amon sac- 

bound him with fetters, and carried Pron ae rificed unto all the carved images 

him to Babylon. : ty ~~“ lwhich Manasseh his father had 
12 And when he was in affliction,| .2 chr27.3. |made, and served them; 


he besought the Lorpb his God, and 23 And humbled not himself be- 


humbled himself greatly before the) fvs-3,5,7- fore the Lorp, as Manasseh his 
God of his fathers, ; g Lev.7.12. father had humbled himself; but 
13 And prayed unto him: and he Amor: trespassed more and more. 


was ‘intreated of him, and heard his 


supplication, and brought him again hUCE S282) Death of Amon: accession of 
a Jerusalem into his kingdom.|:1Sam.9.9. Josiah (2 Ki, 21. 23-26). 
pa genni io gory that the jee Deut. | 24, And skis petvants consi 
21. against him, and slew him in his 
Manasseh’s continued reign, |, 2 xi211g, |own house. 
and death (2 Ki, 21. 17, 18). 25 But the people of the land 


5 Z : i 2 Ki.21.19. lew all them that had ired 
14 Now after this he built a-walll | Sore : Se oe a 
without the city of David, on the|"2Ki21.  |@gainst king Amon; and the people 
west side of 4Gihon, in the valley,| 2°24” of the land made Josiah his son 
even to oe rutin’ in at the fish)» 2 Ki.22.1. king in his stead. 
gate, and compassed “about Ophel, 
and raised it up a very great height,|°? te CHAPTER 34. 


pod put captains of war in all the!» 1 Ki.13.2. Reign of Josiah (2 Ki, 22. 1-23.30). | 
z - 30). 


nced cities of Judah. 

15 And he took away the /strange (B.C. 641. i Neer “was eight years old when 
gods, and the idol out of the house| ¢ 2 Chr.33. i he began to reign, and he reigned 
of the Lorp, and all the altars that| 17,22. in Jerusalem one and thirty years. 
he had built in the mount of the|,seepeut, | 2 And he did that which was 
house of the Lorp, and in Jerusa-|’ 16.21; Jud. |tight in the sight of the Lorp, and 
lem, and cast them out of the city.| 3.7, cote. |walked in the ways of David his 

16 And he repaired the altarof the father, and declined nerther to the 
Lorp, and sacrificed thereon peace- right hand, nor to the left.. 
offerings and sthank-offerings, and 


commanded Judah to serve the Josiah’s early reformations, 


Lorp God of Israel. 3 For in the eighth yecr of his 
17 Nevertheless the people did reign, while he eae vee young, he 
sacrifice still in the high places, yet began to seek after the God of 
unto the Lorp their God only. _ David his father: and in the twelfth 
18 Now the rest of the acts of year he began to purge Judah and 
Manasseh, and his prayer unto his Jerusalem “from the high places 
God, and the words of ‘the seers and the ‘groves, and the carved 


that spake to him in the name of 


the LORD God of Israel, behold, mp Ree, Gnd the molten images. 


4 And they brake down the altars 


they are written in the book of the of Baalim in his i 
b c presence; and the 
kings of Israel. images, that were on high above 
19 His prayer also, and how God them, he cut down; and the *groves 
was intreated of him, and all his and the carved images, and the 


524 


molten images, he brake in pieces, 
and made dust of them, and 
estrowed if upon the graves of 
them. that had sacrificed unto 
them. 3 

5. And he burnt the bones of the 
priests upon their altars, and 
cleansed Judah and Jerusalem. 

6 And so did he in the cities of 
Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Sim- 
eon, even unto Naphtali, with their 
mattocks round about. 

7 And when he had broken down 
the altars and the ‘groves, and had 
@beaten the graven images into 
powder, and cut down all the idols 
throughout all the land of Israel, 
he returned te Jerusalem. 


The repairing of the temple |*? Ki.23.6. 
(2 Ki. 22. 3-7). 5 1 Ki.13.2. 


8 Now 4in the eighteenth year of|B.c. 624.] 
his reign, when he had purged the 
land, and the house, he sent|° 
Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and! 7, note. 
Maaseiah the governor of the city, perked 
and Joah the son of Joahaz the|*?°t??* 
recorder, to repair the house of the} e 2 Ki.22.3. 
Lorp his Gad. een rie 

9 And when they came to Hilkiah|7 3°? *'1? 
the high priest, they delivered /the 
money that was brought into the ss ees. 
house of God, which the Levites} °” 
that kept the doors had gathered); 2 Ki.22.8. 
of the hand of Manasseh and 
Ephraim, and of all the remnant of 


See Deut. 
16.21; Jud.3. 


i Heb. poured 
out, or 


Israel, and of all Judah and Benja-| melted. 
as taro they returned to Jeru- j ChNchs. 
10 And they put-it in the hand of i 
the workmen that had the over- giroteas 
sight of the house of the LorD, and|- ”’ sev 
“they gave it to the workmen that} ?2 Ki.22.14. 


wrought in the house of the LORD, 
to repair and amend the house: 

11 Even to the artificers and 
builders gave they it, to buy hewn 
stone, and timber for couplings, and 
to floor the houses which the kings 
of Judah had destroyed. 

12 And the men did the work 
faithfully: and the overseers of 
them were Jahath and Obadiah, 
the Levites, of the sons of Merari; 
and Zechariah and Meshullam, of 
the sons of the Kohathites, to set it 
forward; and other of the Levites, 
all that could skill of instruments 
of musick. 

13 Also they were over the bear- 
ers of burdens, and were overseers 
of all that wrought the work in any 
manner of service: and éof the 
Levites there were scribes, and 


officers, and porters. 
525 


Ii CHRONICLES. 


[5424 


The law of Moses discovered 
(2 Ki, 22. 8). 


14 And when they brought out 
the money that was brought into 
the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the 
priest “found a book of the law of 
the LorD given by Moses. 

15 And Hilkiah answered and 


16 And Shaphan carried the book 
to the king, and brought the king 
word back again, saying, All that 
was committed to thy servants, 
they do it. ‘ 

17 And they have ‘gathered to- 
gether the money that was found 
in the house of the LorD, and have 
delivered it into the hand of the 
overseers, and to the hand of the 
workmen. 


“By the law is the knowledge of 
sin” (2 Ki. 22. 9-13). 


18 Then Shaphan the scribe told 
the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest 
hath given me a book. And Sha- 
phan Jread it-before the king. 

19 And it came to pass, when the 
king had “heard the words of the 
law, that he rent his clothes. 

20 And the king commanded Hil- 
kiah, and Ahikam the son of Sha- 
phan, and Abdon the son of Micah, 
and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah 
a servant of the king’s, saying, 

21 Go, enquire of the Lorp for 
me, and for them that are left in Is- 
rael and in Judah, concerning the 
words of the book that is found: for 
great is the wrath of the LorD that 
is poured out upon us, because our 
fathers have not kept the word of 
the Lorpb, to do after all that is 


written in this book. 
The words of Huldah the proph- 
etess (2 Ki. 22. 14-20). 


22 And Hilkiah, and they that 
the king had appointed, went to 
Wuldah the prophetess, the wife of 


hel the son of /Tikvath, the 


on of Hasrah, keeper of the ward- 
robe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem 
in the college:) and they spake to 
her to that effect. 

23 And she answered them, Thus 
\saith the LorD God of Israel, Tell 
jye the man that sent you to me, 
| 94 Thus saith the Lorp, Behold, 
rf will bring evil upon this place, and 
upon the inhabitants thereof, even 


34 25] 


all the curses that are written in the 
book which they have read before 
the king of Judah: 

25 Because they have forsaken 
me, and have burned incense unto 
other gods, that they might provoke 
me to anger with all the works of 
their hands; therefore my wrath 
shall be poured out upon this place, 
and shall not be quenched. 

26 And as for the king of Judah, 
who sent you to enquire of the 
Lorp, so shall ye say unto him, 
Thus saith the Lorp God of Israel 
concerning the words which thou 


hast heard: | 


27 Because thine heart was ten- 
der, and thou didst humble thyself, 
before God, when thou heardest his 
words against this place, and 
against the inhabitants thereof, and 
humbledst thyself before me, and 
didst rend thy clothes, and weep 
before me; I have even heard thee 
also, saith the Lorp. 

28 Behold, I will gather thee to 
thy fathers, and thou shalt be 
gathered to thy grave in peace, 
neither shall thine eyes see all the 
evil that I will bring upon this| 
place, and upon the inhabitants of 
the same. So they brought the 
king word again, 


The law read to the people (2 Ki. | 
23. dei2)a 


29 Then the king sent and gath- 
ered together all the elders of Judah 
and Jerusalem, 


house of the LorD, and all the men| 


of Judah, and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and the priests, and the 
Levites, and all the people, great 
and small: and he read in their ears 
all the words of the book of the 


covenant that was found in thel 


house of the Lorp. 
The king’s covenant (2 Ki. 23. 3). 


31 And the king stood in chis 
place, and made a covenant before 
the Lorp, to walk after the Lorp, 
and to keep his commandments, 
and his testimonies, and. his stat. 
utes, with all his heart, and with all 
his soul, to perform the words of the 
covenant which are written in this 
book. \ 

32 And he caused all that were 
present in Jerusalem and Benjamin 
to stand tot. And the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem did according to the 
covenant of God, the God of their 
fathers. 


30 And the king went up into the! 


II CHRONICLES. 


B.C. 624. 


a 2 Ki.11.14, 
b Cf.2 Chr.6. 
13. 


¢1 Ki.11.5, 
d Jer.3.10. 
e Ex.12.6. 
fice. April. 


g 2 Chr.23.18. 
h Cf.2 Chr.29, 
5-12. 


7 Deut.33.9, 
10. 

j 2 Chr.5.7; 
Ex.40.20. 

k 1 Chr.9.10. 


11 Chr.23 - 
26., incl. 


m Cf.Ezra 6, 


n Cf.2 Chr.30, 
24, 


526 


* [35.9 


The further reforms of Josiah 
(2 Ki, 23. 4-24). 


33 And Josiah took away all the 
‘abominations out of all the coun- 
tries that pertained to the children 
of Israel, and made all that were 
present in Israel to serve, even to 
serve the Lorp their God. ¢And 
all his days they departed not from 
following the Lorp, the God of 
their fathers. 


CHAPTER 35. 
The passover kept (2 Ki. 23. 21-23), 


[WICREOVER Josiah kept a pass- 
over unto the LorpD in Jerusa< 
lem: and they killed the passover 
on the ‘fourteenth day of the /first 
month. ‘ 

2 And he set the priests in their 
Scharges, and “encouraged them to 
the service of the house of the Lorp, 
_3 And said unto the Levites that 
‘taught all Israel, which were holy 
unto the Lorn, Put the holy ark in 
the Jhouse which Solomon the son 
of David king of Israel did build: i¢ 
shall not be a burden upon your 
shoulders: serve now the Lorp 
your God, and his people Israel, 

4 And prepare yourselves kby 
the houses of your fathers, after 
your courses, according to the 
writing of David king of Israel, and 
according to the writing of Solomon 
his son. 

5S And stand in the holy place ac- 
cording to the divisions of the fam- 
ilies of the fathers of your brethren 
the people, and after the division 
of the families of the Levites. 

6 So «kill the Passover, and 
™sanctify yourselves, and prepare 
your brethren, that they may do 
according to the word of the Lorp 
- rere a Moses. 

nd Josiah "gave to-the peo le, 

of the flock, lambs and kids, all for 

the passover offerings, for all that 

were present, to the number of 

thirty thousand, and three thou- 

sand bullocks: these were of the 
ng’s substance. 

8 And his princes 


tiah and Jehiel, rulers of the house 
of God, gave unto the priests for 
the Passover offerings two thousand 
and six hundred small cattle, and 


es hundred oxen, 
~ Conaniah also, and Shemaiah 
and Nethaneei, his brethren, and 


35 10] 


II CHRONICLES. 


[36 3 


‘ 


Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad,|  B.c. 623. Death of Josiah (2 Ki. 23. 


chief of the Levites, gave unto the 
Levites for passover offerings five 
thousand small cattle, and five 
hundred oxen. 

10 So the service was prepared, 
and the “priests stood in their place, 
and the 4Levites in their courses, 
according to the king’s command- 
ment. 

11 And they ‘killed the passover, 
and the priests sprinkled the blood 
from their hands, and the Levites 
flayed them. 

12 And they removed the burnt- 
Offerings, that they might give 
according to the divisions of the 
families of the people, to offer unto 
the Lorp, as it is ‘written in the 
book of Moses. And so did they 
with the oxen. 

13 And they froasted the passover 

with fire according to the ordinance: 
but the other holy offerings sod 
they in pots, and in caldrons, and in 
pafis, and divided them speedily 
among all the people. 
14 And afterward they made 
Tteady for themselves, and for the 
pfiests: because the priests the sons 
of Aaron were busied in offering of 
burnt-offerings and the fat until 
night; therefore the Levites pre- 
pared for themselves, and for the 
priests the sons of Aaron. 

15 And the singers the sons of 
Asaph were in their place, Saccord- 
ing to the commandment of David, 
and Asaph, and Heman, and Jedu- 
thun the king’s seer; and the porters 
waited at every gate; they might 
not depart from their service; for 

“their brethren the Levites prepared 
for them. 

16 So all the service of the LorD 
was prepared the same day, to keep 
the passover, and to offer burnt- 
offerings upon the altar of the 
Lorp, according to the command- 
ment of king Josiah. 

17 And the children of Israel that 
were present kept the passover at 
that time, and the “feast of unleav- 
ened bread seven days. 

18 And there was no passover ‘like 
to that kept in Israel from the days 
of Samuel the prophet; neither did 
all the kings of Israel kéep such a 
passover as Josiah kept, and the 
priests, and the Levites, and all Ju- 
dah and Israel that were present, 
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

19 In the eighteenth year of the 
reign of Josiah was this passover 
kept. 


| 


[B.C. 610. 


a Heb.9.6. 

b 2 Chr.5.12; 
7.6; 8.14,15; 
13.10; 29. 
25-34. 

cv. 6, ref. 


@ Cf.Ex.12. 
22. 


e Lev.3.3. 
f Ex.12.8,9. 
g 1 Chr.25.1-6. 


h Ex.12.15; 
1 Cor.5.8. 


42 Ki.23. 
22,23. 


j 2 Ki.23.29; 
Jer.46.1-12. 


Rk Cf. 2 Ki.23. 
29,30. 


1 Lam.4.20. 


[B.C. 610. 


52/7 


ee 


28-30). 


20 After all this, jwhen Josiah 
had prepared the temple, Necho 
king of Egypt came up to fight 
against Charchemish by Euphrates: 
and Josiah went out against him. 

21 But he sent ambassadors to 
him, saying,What have I to do with 
thee, thou king of Judah? J come 
not against thee this day, but 
against the house wherewith I have 
war: for God commanded me to 
make haste: forbear thee from 
meddling with God, who is with 
me, that he destroy thee not. 

22 Nevertheless Josiah would not 
turn his face from him, but dis- 
guised himself, that he might fight 
with him, and hearkened not unto 
the words of Necho from the mouth 
of God, and came to fight in the 
valley of Megiddo. 

23 And the archers shot at king 
Josiah; and the king said to his 
servants, Have me away; for I am 
sore wounded. 

24 His servants therefore *took 
him out of that chariot, and put him 
in the second chariot that he had; 
and they brought him to Jerusalem, 
and he died, and was buried in one 
of the sepulchres of his fathers. 
And all Judah and Jerusalem 
mourned for Josiah. 

25 And Jeremiah ‘lamented for 
Josiah: and all the singing men 
and the singing women spake of 
Josiah in their lamentations to this 
day, and made them an ordinance 
in Israel: and, behold, they are 
written in the lamentations. 

26 Now the rest of the acts of 
Josiah, and his goodness, according 
to that which was written in the 
law of the LorD, 

27 And his deeds, first and last, 
behold, they are written in the book 
of the kings of Israel and Judah. 


CHAPTER 36. 


Reign and dethronement of Je- 
hoahaz (2 Ki. 23. 30-33). 


a! the people of the land 
took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, 
and made him king in his father’s 
stead in Jerusalem. 

2 Jehoahaz was twenty and three 
years old when he began to reign, 
and he reigned three months in 
Jerusalem. 

3 And the king of Egypt put him 
‘down at Jerusalem, and condemned 


evil in the sight of the Lorp his 


36 4] ‘ 


It CHRONICLES. 


the land in an hundred “talents of 
silver and a “talent of gold. 

4 And the king of Egypt made 
Eliakim his brother king over Judah 
and Jerusalem, and turned his name 
to Jehoiakim. » And Necho took Je- 
hoahaz his brother, and carried him 
to Egypt. 

5 Jehoiakim was “twenty and five 
years old when he began to reign, 
and he reigned eleven years in Jeru- 
salem: and he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LorD his God. 

6 Against him ¢came up Nebu- 
chadnezzar king of Babylon, and 
bound him in fetters, to carry him 
to Babylon. ; 

7 Nebuchadnezzar also carried of 
the vessels of the house of the LorD 
to Babylon, and put them in his 
temple at Babylon. 


Accession and reign of Jehoia- 
chin (2 Ki. 24: 6-10). 


8 Now the rest of the acts of 
Jehoiakim, and his abominations 
which he did, and that which was 
found in him, behold, they are 
written in the book of the kings of 
Israel and Judah: and Jechoiachin 
his son reigned in his stead.. 

9 Jehoiachin was “eight years old 
when he began to reign, and he 
teigned three months and ten days 
in Jerusalem: and he did that which 
was evil in the sight of the Lorp. 

10 And when the year was ex- 
pired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, 
and brought him to Babylon, with 
the goodly vessels of the house of the 
Lorpb,and madeZedekiahhis brother 
king over Judah and Jerusalem. 


Zedekiah made king 
(2 Ki. 24. 17, 18). 


11 Zedekiah was one and twenty 
years old when he began toreign, and 
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, 

12 And he did that which was 


God, and humbled not himself be- 
fore Jeremiah the prophet speak- 
ing from the mouth of the Lorp. 

13 And he also rebelled against 
king Nebuchadnezzar, who had 
made him swear by God: but he 
stiffened his neck, and hardened his 
heart from turning unto the LoRD 
God of Israel. 

14 Moreover all the chief of the 
priests, ahd the people, transgressea 
very much after all the abomina- 
tions of the heathen; and polluted 


B.C. 610. lRinalidesortdtion : the captivity 4 


B.C. 607.) 


a One talent 
(silver) = 
£410, or 
$1940. 


6 One talent 
(gold) = 
£6150 or 
$29,085. 


This was the 
first deporta- 


tion of Judah. 


See vs.15-21, 
the final 
deportation, 


B.C. 599.] 


e Cf.2 Ki. 
24.8. 


f Cf.Deut. 
28.36,37. 


Jer.25. 
9-12; 27.6-8; 
29.10. 

h Lev.26. 
34-43. 

i Ezra 1.1; 
Isa.44.28; 
45.1; Jer.25. 
12; Dan.S.2. 


Jj Ezra 1.2,3. 


B.C, 593,] 


the house of the Lorp which he 
had hallowed in Jerusalem. \ 


528 


Thisss ome in Babylon (2 Ki. 25. 
1-17). 


15 And the Lorp God of their 
fathers sent to them by his messen- 
gets, rising up betimes, and send- 
ing; because he had compassion on 
his people, and on his dwelling 
place: ‘ 

16 But they mocked the messen- 
gers of God, and despised his words, 
and misused his prophets, until the 
wrath of the LorD arose against his 
people, till there was no remedy. 

17 Therefore he brought upon 
them the king of the Chaldees, who 
slew their young men with the 
sword in the house of their sanctu- 
ary, and had no compassion upon 
young man or maiden, old man, or 
him that stooped for age: he gave 
them all into his hand. 

18 And all the vessels of the house 
of God, great and small, and the 
treasures of the house of the LorbD, 
and the treasures of the king, and 
of his princes; all these he brought 
to Babylon. 4 

19 And they burnt the house of 
God, and brake down the wall of 
Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces 
thereof with fire, and destroyed ali 
the goodly vessels thereof. 

20 And them that had escaped 
from the sword carried he away to 
Babylon; where they were servants 
to him and his sons until the reign 
of the kingdom of Persia: 

21 To fulfil the word of the Lorp 
by the smouth of Jeremiah, until 
the “land had enjoyed her sab- 
baths: for as long as she lay deso- 
late she kept sabbath, to full 
threescore and ten years, 


Decree of Cyrus for rebuilding 
the ternple. 


22 Now in the first year of Cyrus 
king of Persia, that the word of the 
LorD spoken by the mouth of Jere- 
miah might be accomplished, the 
Lor stirred up the spirit of iCyrus 
king of Persia, that he madea procia- 
mation throughout all his kingdom, 
and put it also in writing, saying, 

23 Thus Jsaith Cyrus King * of 
Persia, All the kingdoms of the 
earth hath the Lorp God of heaven 
given me; and he hath charged me 
to build him an house in J erusalem, 
which is in Judah. Who is there 
among you of all his people? The 
Lorp his God be with him, and let 
him go up, 


: 


Pan 


oe EZRA. lee 


Ezra, the first of the post-captivity books (Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Haggai, 
Zechariah, and Malachi), records the return to Palestine under Zerubbabel, by 
decree of Cyrus, of a Jewish remnant who: laid the templé foundations (B.c. 536). 
Later (B.c. 458) Ezra followed, and restored the law and ritual. But the mass of 
the nation, and most of the princes, remained by preference in Babylonia and As- 
syria, where they were prospering. The post-captivity books deal with that feeble 
Temnant which alone had a heart for God. 

The book is in two parts: I. From the decree of Cyrus to the dedication of the 
restored temple, 1. 1-6. 22. II. The ministry of Ezra, 7. 1-10. 44. 

The events recorded in Ezra cover a period of 80 years (Ussher). 


=— 


CHAPTER 1. B.C. 536. a And ali eae Sere rahi ES 
em &strengthene eir hands 
Renree of Oe use op tne Pia dared with vessels of silver, with gold, 
oe fi ‘: td P “ vase goods, and ne beaste. and 
in the first year of Cyrus with precious things, beside 
king of Persia, that the ¢word|¢2 Chr.36.22, |that was willingly offered. 
of the LORD by the mouth of Jere-) 23: me r.|.7 Also Cyrus the king “brought 
cater be erage Poa pe 95/12; 29.10; fortis the woe os tbe Beaver of fhe 
stirred up the spirit o yrus king} 33.7-13. ORD, whic ebuchadnezzar ha 
of Persia,. that he made a proclama-|, 5. 4s 4. brought forth out of Jerusalem, and 
tion throughout all his king-|"E7rasi3, |had put them in the house of his 
dom, and put it also in writing,| 14. gods; ‘ , 
i 8 Even those did Cyrus king of 


saying, : ; 
2 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, poet Dan2. /Persia bring forth by the hand of 

‘The Lorp God of heaven hath Mithredath the treasurer, and num- 

¢given me all the pepe of the Bice bered oo oe tSheshbazzar, the 

earth; and he hath ¢charged me to meant prince of Judah. 

build him an house at Jerusalém,|¢ Jsrael (his-_ | 9 And this is the number of them: 

which is in Judah. tory). vs.1-5;|thirty chargers of gold, a thousand 


3 Who is there among you of “all eerie chargers of silver, nine and twenty 


his people? his God be with him,] 3;Rom.11. |knives, | " 

and let him go up to Jerusalem,| 2°) 10 Thirty basons of gold, silver 
which is in Judah, and build the|;cfpans. |basons of a second sort four hun- 
house: of the LorpD God of Israel,|” 26. dred and ten, and other vessels a 


fhe is the God,) which is in Jeru-| . thousand. 
‘Sisie gic. helped .| 11 ‘All the vessels of gold and of 
4 And whosoever remaineth in j silver were five thousand_and tour 
any place where he sojourneth, let Lp inl rai hundred. All these did Sheshbaz- 
the men of his place help him with) 97223." |zar bring up with them of the cap- 


silver, and with gold, and with] _ tivity that were brought up from 
goods, and with beasts, beside the Mere Ezra |Babylon unto Jerusalem. 
freewill-offering for the house of} ~ ™ 


God that is in Jerusalem. 4 OLNeh.7, CHAPTER 2. 
ion for th turn of | ___ The returning remnant: 

Leased 5 fornhante. Ree else (1) the people. 

5 Then rose up the chief of the 19-21. OW /these Jare the children of 
fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the province that went up out 
the priests, and the Levites, with of the captivity, of those which had 
all them whose spirit God had been carried away, whom _*Nebu- 
raised, to go up to build the house chadnezzar the king of Babylon 
of the LoRD which is in Jerusalem. had carried away unto Babylon, 


1 sndividuals from all of the tribes returned to Jerusalem under Zerub- 
en eee Nebentah, but speaking broadly, the dispersion of the ten tribes 
529 


2 2] EZRA. [2 #3 


and came again unto Jerusalem| B.c.536. |Chephirah, and MBeeroth, seven 
“and Judah, every one unto his city; hundred and forty and three. 

2 Which came with @Zerubbabel: 26 The children of Ramah and 
Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Ree- Gaba, six hundred twenty and one. 
laiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mizpar, 27 The men of Michmas, an hun-— 
Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The num- dred twenty and two. a 
ber of the men of the people of 28 The men of Beth-el and Ai, 
Israel: two hundred twenty and three. 

3 The children of Parosh, two 29 The children of Nebo, fifty and 
thousand an hundred seventy and two. : 
two. 30 The children of Magbish, an 

4 The children of Shephatiah, hundred fifty and six. 
three hundred seventy and two. 31 The children of the other 

5 The children of Arah, seven Elam, a thousand two hundred 
hundred seventy and five. fifty and four. 

_ 6 The children of Pahath-moab, of 32 The children of Harim, three 
the children of Jeshua and Joab, two hundred and twenty. 
thousand eight hundred and twelve. 33 The children of Lod, Hadid, 

7 The children of Elam, a thou- and Ono, seven hundred twenty and 
sand two hundred fifty and four. ve. 

8 The children of Zattu, nine hun- 34 The children of Jericho, three 
dred forty and five. hundred forty and five. 

9 The children of Zaccai, seven 35 The children of Senaah, three 
hundred and threescore. thousand and six hundred and 

10 The children of Bani, six hun- thirty. ; 
dred forty and two. i 

11 The children of Bebai, six hun- The returning remnant: (2) the 


priests. 
36 The priests: the children of 


dred twenty and. three. 
12 The children of Azgad, a thou-|7 S2led Zore- 
sand two hundred twenty and two.| 12,13- 


13 Th : ‘ : Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, 
Pee i ee ead S28 nine hundred seventy and three. 

14 The children of Bigvai, two 37 The children of Immer, a thou- 
thousand fifty and six. sand ity and two: 

15 ‘The children oP Adimtour heat 38 The children of Pashur, a thou- 
dred: fiftsandhteun! sand two hundred forty and seven. 

16 The children of Ater of Heze- 39 | The children of Harim, a thou- 
Se and eight. sand and seventeen. 

17 The children of Bezai, three . : 
hundred twenty and three. he (3) the ae rites neni 
i a yee ae of Jorah, an hun- SE) eid Ans 

red and twelve. 40 The Levites: i 
“ere cee = emer two tare aha TRadeoieiea aekutel 

undred twenty and three, _ of Hodaviah, seventy and four. 
a Hee children of Gibbar, ninety) re ne Sere the childten of 
1 Rite grate of Behe ae ache: Resirety aca eR aaa 

undred twenty and three. 42 The children of the porters: 
a aes men of Netophah, fifty the children of Shallum, the chil- 

i dren of Ater, the children of Tal- 


23 The men of Anathoth, an hun- mon, the childr 
ose AG pagel tans me a abcde of Hatita, pecs 
e. children o zmaveth, Lomeli i 
forty and two. eee Pee a 


25 The children of Kirjath-arim, 43 The Nethinims: the children of 


(Ephraim—Israel) still continues; nor can they now be iti i i 

are. ass) Heep distinct from other peoples Be Seip nae au 

Ho, 3. eve % penne: few in number, know Him not (Deut. 28. 62; Isa. 11. 11-13; 
he order of the restoration was as follows: (1) Th 

ment under Zerubbabel and Jeshua (B.c. 536), peed Le6ih eadthe {Sioa eer 

and Zechariah; (2) the expedition of Ezra (B.c. 458), seventy-eight years fated 


(Ezra 7.-10.); (3) th issi f i 
ere ee pete Gena es f Nehemiah (8.c, 444), fourteen years after 


530 


2 44] 


[32 


Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the 
children of Tabbaoth, 

44 The children of Keros, the 
children of Siaha, the children of 
Padon, 

45 The children of Lebanah, the 
children of Hagabah, the children 
of Akkub, 

46 The children of Hagab, the 
children of Shalmai, the children of 
Hanan, 

47 The children of Giddel, the 
children of Gahar, the children of 
Reaiah, 

48 The children of Rezin, the chil- 
dren of Nekoda, the children of 
Gazzam, 

49 The children of Uzza, the chil- 
dren of Paseah, the children of Besai, 

50 The children of Asnah, the 
children of Mehunim, the children 
of Nephusim, 

51 The children of Bakbuk, the 
children of Hakupha, the children| 
of Harhur, 

52 The children of Bazluth, the 
children of Mehida, the children of 
Harsha, 

53 The children of Barkos, the 
children of Sisera, the children of 
Thamah, 

54 The children of Neziah, the 
children of Hatipha. 


The returning remnant: (4) de- 
scendantsofSolomon’sservants. 


55 The children of Solomon’s ser- 
vants: the children of Sotai, the 
children of Sophereth, the children 
of Peruda, 

56 The children of Jaalah, the 
children of Darkon, the children of 
Giddel, 

57 The children of Shephatiah, 
the children of Hattil, the children 
of Pochereth of Zebaim, the chil- 
dren of Ami. 

58 All the Nethinims, and the 
children of Solomon’s servants,were 
three hundred ninety and two. 

59 And these were they which 
went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsa,| 
Cherub, Addan, and Immer: but 
they could not shew their father’s 
house, and their seed, whether they 
were of Israel: 

60 The children of Delaiah, the 
children of Tobiah, the children of 
Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two. 


The returning remnant: (5) 
priests whose pedigrees were 
Jost. 


61 And of the children of the 
priests: the children of Habaiah, 


the children of Koz, the children of 
Barzillai; which took a wife of the 
daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, 
and was called after their name: 

62 These sought their register 
lamong those that were reckoned 
jby genealogy, but they were not 
found: therefore were they, as pol- 
tuted, put from the priesthood. 

63 And the Tirshatha said unto 
them, that they should not eat of 
the most holy things, till there stood 
up a priest with ¢Urim and with 
Thummim. 


The returning remnant: (6) the 
total number. 


64 The whole congregation to- 
gether was forty and two thousand 
lthree hundred and threescore, 

65 Beside their servants and their 
maids, of whom there were seven 
thousand three hundred thirty and 
seven: and there were among them 
two hundred singing men and sing- 
ing women, 


The returning remnant: (7) 
their substance and Sifts. 


66 Their horses were seven hun- 
dred thirty and. six; their mules, 
two hundred forty and five; 

67 Their camels, four hundred 
thirty and five; their asses, six 
thousand seven hundred and 
twenty. 

68 %And some of the chief of the 
fathers, when they came to the 
house of the LoRD which 7s at Jeru- 
salem, offered freely for the house 
of God to set it up in his place: 

69 They gave after their ability 
unto the treasure of the work three- 
score and one thousand ‘drams of 
gold, and five thousand pound of 
silver, and one hundred priests’ 
garments. 

70 So the priests, and the Levites, 
and some of the people, and the 
|singers, and the porters, and the 
‘Nethinims, dwelt in their cities, 
land all Israel in their cities. 


CHAPTER 3. 
The altar is set up. 


ND when the ¢seventh month 
was come, and the children of 
Israel were in the cities, the people 
gathered themselves together as 
an to Jerusalem. 
Spee stood up Jeshua the son 
of Jozadak, and ‘his. brethren the 
priests, and Zerubbabel the son of 
|Shealtiel, and his brethren, and 


builded the altar of the God of 
Israel, to offer burnt-offerings 
thereon; as 1¢ is written in the law 
of Moses the man of God. ; 

3 And they set the altar upon his 
bases; for fear was upon them be- 
cause of the people of those coun- 
tries: and they offered burnt-offer- 
ings thereon unto the LorpD, even 
burnt-offerings morning and even- 
ing. 


The ancient worship estab- 
lished. 


4 Theykept also the feast of taber- 
nacles, as it is written, and offered 
the daily burnt-offerings by num- 


EZRA. 


B.C. 536. 


aie. May. 


4 


to set forward the workmen in the 
house of God: the sons of Henadad, 
with their sons and their brethren 
the Levites. ¥ ‘ 

10 And when the builders laid the 
foundation of the temple of the 
Lorp, they 4set the priests in their 
apparel with trumpets, and the Le- 
vites the sons of Asaph with cym- 
bals, to praise the LORD, after the 
ordinance of David king of Israel. 

11 And they ‘sang together by 
course in praising and giving thanks 
unto the LORD; ‘because he is good, 
for his mercy endureth for ever 
toward Israel. And all the people 
shouted with a great shout, when 


: b 1 Chr.23. ; th 

ber, according to the custom, as the 27. they praised the Lorn, because the 
duty of every day required; phe foundation of the house of the LoRD 

5 And afterward offered the con-| ¢ vs.2,8; was laid. , 

tinual burnt-offering, both of the Foes 12 But émany of the priests and 
new moons, and of all the set feasts) Neh.7.7; Levites and chief of the fathers, 
of the LorD that were consecrated,| 12.1,7,10, who were ancicnt men, that had 
and of every one that willingly ier: seen the first house, when the foun- 
offered a freewill-offering untothe| Zech3.1-3; |dation of this house was laid be- 
Lorp. 6.11. fore their eyes, wept with a loud 
He jen er Gn Dace Reg eerie 41 Gazeais | fronee ens aaah Gute ealee Ga 
burnt-offerings unto the Lorp.| ~~ 13 So that che people could not 
But the foundation of the temple of} ¢ poe discern the noise of the shout of joy 
the LORD was not yet laid. WNch.12.24.  |from the noise of the weeping of the 


7 They gave money also unto the 


people: for the people shouted with 


masons, and to the carpenters; and|/Psa-136.1. 
meat, and drink, and oil, unto them| , ceHag.2.3. 
of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to 


a loud shout, and the noise was 
heard afar off. 


pene Soe from Lebanon ae h vs.7-9. CHAPTER 4. 

the sea of Joppa, according to the] ; 2 xi. 7.32. : . 

grant that they had of Cyrus king 72 Ki17.32. | Adversaries Seer he hinder the 
of Persia. Wort: 


Temple foundations laid in 
mingled joy and mourning. 


8 Now in the second year of their 
coming unto the house of God at 
Jerusalem, in the ¢second month, 
began Zerubbabel the son of Sheal- 
tiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, 
and the remnant of their brethren 
the priests and the Levites, and all 
they that were come out of the cap- 
tivity unto Jerusalem; and ap- 
pointed the “Levites, from twenty 
years old and upward, to set for- 
ward the work of the house of the 
LORD. 

9 Then stood ‘Jeshua with his 
sons and his brethren, Kadmiel and! 


his sons, the sons of Judah, together, 


jv-10; 2 Ki. 
17.24, 


k Cf.Neh.2, 
20. 


Now when the “adversaries of 
Judah and Benjamin heard 
that the children of the captivity 
builded the temple unto the LorD 
God of Israel; 

2 Then they came to Zerubbabel, 
and to the chief of the fathers, and 
said unto them, Let us build with 
you: lfor ‘we seek your God, as ye 
do; and we do sacrifice unto him 
since the days of Esar-haddon king 
of Assur, which jbrought us up 
hither. 

3 But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, 
and the rest of the chief of the 
fathers of Israel, said unto them, 
FYe have nothing to do with us to 
build an house unto our God; but 


we ourselves together will build 


1 The people of the land sought to hinder the work i 


to draw the Jews into an:unreal union, v. 3 - 17. 32); (2 3s i 
the hands of the people of Judah,” v. 4, i.e. by withholding su )s 2) by “weakening 


accusations lodged with Ahasuerus and Darius, The fir: 
The lives of Ezra and i 
See 2 Cor. 6. 14-18; 2 Tim. 2, 19-21, 


subtle and dangerous. 
of true separation. 


532 


(cf. 2 Ki 


‘ 


4 4] 


EZRA 


[4 24 


unto the Lorp God of Israel, ¢as}__B.c. 534. 14 Now: because we have main- 


king Cyrus the king of Persia hath 
commanded us. 

4 Then the peopie of the land 
weakened the hands of the people 
of Judah, and troubled them in 
building, 

5 And hired counsellors against 
them, to frustrate their purpose, all 
the days of Cyrus king of Persia, 
even until the reign of $Darius king 
of Persia. 

6 And in the reign of <Ahasuerus, 
in the beginning of his reign, wrote 
they unto him an accusation 
against the inhabitants of Judah 
and Jerusalem. 

7 And in the days of @Artax- 
erxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, 
Tabeel, and the rest of their com- 
panions, unto Artaxerxes king of 
Persia; and the writing of the let- 
ter was written in the Syrian 
tongue, and interpreted in the 
Syrian tongue. 

8 Rehum the chancellor and 
Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter 
against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the 
king in this sort: 

9 Then wrote Rehum the chan- 
cellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and 
the rest of their companions; the 
Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the 
Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Ar- 
chevites, the Babylonians, thé Su- 
sanchites, the Dehavites, and the 
Elamites, 

10 And the rest of the nations 
whom the great and noble Asnap- 
per bfought over, and set in the 
cities of Samaria, and the rest that 
are on this side the river, and at 
Such a,time. 


The adversaries’ Jetter to 
Artaxerxes. 


a Sec Ezra 1. 
1-3. 


b Ezra 6.1. 


c The Cam- 
byses of sec- 
ular history 
(529-521 
B.C.); 
not the 
Ahasuerus 
of Esther, 
who is the 
Xerxes of 
secular his- 
tory (485 
B.C.). 

See Dan. 
5.31, note. 


byses of pro- 
fane history. 
The Artax- 
erxes of Ezra 
7.1 is the 
Longimanus 
of secular 
history, B.C. 
418. But 
see Dan.5. . 
31, note. 


e1 Ki.4.21; 
Psa.72.8. . 


f Gen.15.18; 
Josh.1.4. 


11 This is the copy of the letter|B.c. 522.) 


that they sent unto him, even unto 
Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants 
the men on this side the river, and 
at such a time. 

12 Be it known unto the king, 
that the Jews which came up from 
thee to us are come unto Jerusalem, 
building the rebellious and the bad 
city, and have set up the walls 
thereof, and joined the founda- 
tions. 4 

13 Beit known now unto the king, 
that, if this city be builded, and the 
walls set up again, then will they 
not pay toll, tribute, and custom, 


g Chald. 
make a new 
decree. 


[B.C. 520. 


and so thou shalt endamage the). 


revenue of the kings. 


tenance from the king’s palace, and 
it was not meet for us to see the 
king’s dishonour, therefore have we 
sent and certified the king; 

15 That search may be made in the 
book of the records of thy fathers: 
so shalt thou find in the book of 
the records, and know that this 
city is a rebellious city, and hurtful 
unto kings and provinces, and that 
they have moved sedition within 
the same of old time: for which 


cause was this city destroyed. 

16 Wecertify the king that, if this 
city be builded again, and the walls 
thereof set up, by this means thou 
shalt have no portion on this side 
the river. 


Decree of Artaxerxes. 


17 Then sent the king an answer 
unto Rehum the chancellor, and to 
Shimshai the scribe, and to the 
rest of their companions that dwell 
in Samaria, and unto the rest be- 
yond the river, Peace, and at such 
a time. 

18 The letter which ye sent unto 
us hath been plainly read before 


me. 

19 And I commanded, and search 
hath been made, and it is found 
that this city of old time hath made 
insurrection against kings, and that 
rebellion and sedition have been 
made therein. 

20 There have been mighty kings 
also over Jerusalem, which have 
eruled over all countries beyond 
the river; and toll, tribute, and 
custom, was paid unto them. 

21 &8Give ye now commandment 
to cause these men to cease, and 
that this city be not builded, until 
another commandment shall be 
given from me. 

22 Take heed now that ye fail not 
to do this: why should damage 
grow to the hurt of the kings? 


The work suspended. 


23 Now when the copy of king 
Artaxerxes’ letter was read before 
Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, 
and their companions, they went up 
in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, 
and made them to cease by force 
and power. 

24 Then ceased the work of the 
house of God which is at Jerusalem. 
So it ceased unto the second year of 
the reign of Darius king of Per- 
sia. 


CHAPTER 5. 


The prophets encourage the 
vince and the priest; work 
begun again. 


HEN the prophets, “Haggai the 

prophet, and Zechariah the 

son of Iddo, prophesied unto the 

Jews that were in Judah and Jeru- 

salem in the name of the God of 
Israel, even unto them, 

2 Then rose up ‘Zerubbabel the 
son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son 
of Jozadak, and began to build the 
house of God which is at Jerusalem: 
and with them were the prophets of 
God helping them. 

3 At the same time came to them 
@Tatnai, governor on this side the 
river, and Shethar-boznai, and their 
companions, and said thus unto 
them, ‘Who hath commanded you 
to build this house, and to make up 
this wail? 

4 fThen said we unto them after 
this manner, What are the names 
of os men that make this build- 
ing 

5 But ¢the eye of their God was 
upon the elders of the Jews, that 
they could not cause them to cease, 
till the matter came to Darius: and 


then they returned answer by letter) 


concerning this matter. 

5 The copy of the letter that ‘Tat- 
nai, governor on this side the river, 
and Shethar-boznai, and his #com- 
panions the Apharsachites, which 
were on this side the river, sent 
unto Darius the king: 


The adversaries’ letter to Darius. 


7 They sent a letter unto him, 
wherein was written thus; Unto 
Darius the king, all peace. 

8 Beit known unto the king, that 
we went into the province of Judea, 
to the house of the great God, which 
is builded with ‘great stones, and 
timber is laid in the walls, and this 
work goeth fast on, and prospereth 
in their hands: 

9 Then asked we those elders, 
and said unto them thus, 7Who 
commanded you to build this house, 
and to make up these walls? 

10 We asked their names also, to 
certify thee, that we might write 
the names of the men that were the 
chief of them. 

il And thus they returned us an- 
swer, saying, We are the servants of 
the God of heaven and earth, and 
build the house that was builded 
these many years ago, which a 


B.C. 520. 


a Hag.1.1. 

6 Zech,1,1. 

c Ezra 3.2. 

d v.6; Ezra 
6.6. 

ev.9. 

f v.10. 

g See Ezra 7. 
6,28; Psa. 
33.18. 

h Bzra 4.9. 

i Chald. 
stones of 
rolling. 

[B.C. 519. 

J vs.3,4. 

k1 Ki.6.1. 

12 Chr.36.16, 
X75 

m 2 Ki.24.2; 
25.8,9,11. 

n Ezra 1.1. 

o Hag.1.14; 

1. 


2 
p Ezra 3.8,10, 
q Ezra 6.15. 
r Ezra 6.1,2. 


s Ezra 5.17. 


[B.C. 519. 


534 


great king of Israel builded and 
kget up. 4 

12 But /after that our fathers had 
provoked the God of heaven unto 
wrath, he gave them into the hand 
of ™Nebuchadnezzar the king of 
Babylon, the Chaldean, who de- 
stroyed this house, and carried the 
people away.into Babylon. 

13 But in the first year of "Cyrus 
the king of Babylon the same 
king Cyrus made a decree to build 
this house of God. 

14 And the vessels also of gold 
and silver of the house of God, 
which Nebuchadnezzar took out of 
the temple that was in Jerusalem, 
and brought them into the temple 
of Babylon, those did Cyrus the 
king take out of the temple of 
Babylon, and they were delivered 
unto one, °whose name was Shesh- 
bazzar, whom he had made gov- 
ernor; 

15 And said unto him, Take these 
vessels, go, carry them into the 
temple that is in Jerusalem, and let 
the house of God be builded in his 
place. 

16 Then came the same Sheshbaz- 
zar, and ?laid the foundation of the 
house of God which is in Jerusalem: 
and since that timé even until now 
hath it been in building, and ¢ye¢ it 
is not finished. 

17 Now therefore, if 7t seem good 
to the king, “let there be search 
made in the king’s treasure house, 
which zs there at Babylon, whether 
it be so, that a decree was made of 
Cyrus the king to build this house 
of God at, Jerusalem, and let the 
king send his pleasure to us con- 
cerning this matter, 


CHAPTER 6. 


Darius confirms the decree of 
Cyrus. 


fPHEN Darius the king made a 
decree, Sand search was made in 
the house of the rolls, where the 
treasures were laid up in Babylon. 

2 And there was found at Ach- 
metha, in the palace that is in 
the province of the Medes, a roll, 
rae therein was a record thus writ- 

en: 

3 In the first year of Cyrus the 
king the same Cyrus the king made 
a decree concerning the house of 
God at Jerusalem, Let the house be 
builded, the place where they offered 
sacrifices, and let the foundations 
thereof be strongly laid: the height 


5 


6 4] 


thereof threescore ¢cubits, and the 
breadth. thereof threescore cubits; 

4 With three rows of great 
stones, and a row of new timber: 
and let the expenses be given out 
of the king’s house: 

5 And also let the ‘golden and 
silver vessels of the house of God, 
which Nebuchadnezzar took forth 
out of the temple which is at Jeru- 
salem, and brought unto Babylon, 
be restored, and brought again unto 
the temple which zs at Jerusalem, 
every one to his place, and place 
them in the house of God. 

6 4Now therefore, Tatnai gov- 
ernor beyond the river, Shethar- 
boznai, and “your companions the 
Apharsachites, which are beyond 
the river, be ye far from thence: 

7 Let the work of this house of 
God alone; let the governor of the 
Jews and the elders of the Jews 
build this house of God in his 
place. 

8 Moreover I make a decree what 
ye shall do to the elders of these 
Jews for the building of this house 
of God: that of the king’s goods, 
even of the tribute beyond the 
river, forthwith expenses be given 
unto these men, that they be not 
hindered. 

9 And that which they have need 
of, both young bullocks, and rams, 
and lambs, for the burnt-offerings 
of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, 
wine, and oil, according to the ap- 
pointment of the priests which are 
at Jerusalem, let it be given them 
day by day without fail: f 

10 /That they may offer sacrifices 
of sweet savours unto the God of 
heaven, and “pray for the life of the 
king, and of his sons. 

11 Also I have made a decree, that 
whosoever shall alter this word, let 
timber be pulled down from his 
house, and being set up, let him be 
hanged thereon; and “let his house 
be made a dunghill for this. : 

12 And the God that hath caused 
ihis name to dwell there destroy all 
kings and people, that shall put to 
their hand to alter and to destroy 
this house of God which is at Jeru- 
salem. I Darius have made a de-} 
cree; let it be done with speed. 


EZRA. 


BX. 519. 


a One cubit = 
about 18 in. 


b 1 Ki.6.36. 


¢ Ezra 1.7,8; 
5.14. 


d Ezra 5.3. 


e Chald. their 
societies. 


f Ezra 7.23; 
Jer.29.7. 


(B.C. 515. 
g1 Tim.2.1,2. 


hk Dan.2.5; 
3.29. 


i1 Ki.9.3. 
j Ezra 5.1,2. 


kv.3; Ezra 
1.1; 5-132 


1 Ezra 4.24; 
6.12. 


m Ezra 7.1. 


n Israel (his- 
tory), VS. 
15-18; Neh. 
2.1-9. (Gen. 
12.2,3; Rom. 
11.26.) 


loie. March. 


p 1 Chr.24.1. 
q1 Chr.23.6. 
+ Ex.12.6. 
sie. April. 
¢ 2 Chr.30.15. 
u Separation. 
Ezra 9.10-12. 
(Gen.12.1; 
2 Cor.6. 
14-17.) 
v i.e. nations. 
w Ex.12.15; 


13.6; 2 Chr. 
30.21; 35.17. 


[6 22 


13 Then Tatnai, governor on this 
side the river, Shethar-boznai, and 
their companions, according to that 
which Darius the king had sent, so 
they did speedily. 

14 jAnd the elders of the Jews 
builded, and they prospered through 
the prophesying of Haggai the 
prophet and Zechariah the son of 
Iddo. And they builded, and !fin- 
ished z¢, according to the com- 
mandment of the Ged of Israel, and 


. faccording to the commandment of 


kCyrus, and ‘Darius, and ™Artax- 
erxes king of Persia. 


The restoration temple finished 
and dedicated. 


15 And this *house was finished 
on the third day of the month 
oAdar, which was in the sixth year 
of the reign of Darius the king. 

16 And the children of Israel, the 
priests, and the Levites, and the 
rest of the children of the captivity, 
kept the dedication of this house of 
God with joy, 

17 And offered at the dedication 


"lof this house of God an hundred bul- 
_llocks, two hundred rams, four hun- 
“!dred lambs; and fora sin-offering 


for all Israel, twelve he goats, ac- 
cording to the number of the tribes 
of Israel. 

18 And they set the priests in 


itheir divisions, and the Levites din 


their courses, for the service of God, 


‘which is at Jerusalem; as it is writ- 


ten in the book of Moses. 
The passover restored. 


19 And the children of the cap- 
tivity kept the passover "upon the 
fourteenth day of the ‘first month. 

20 For the priests and the Levites 
were ‘purified together, all of them 
were pure, and killed the passover 
for all the children of the captivity, 
and for their brethren the priests, 


and for themselves. 
21 And the children of Israel, 
hich were come again out of cap- 
ivity, and all such as had “sepa 
ated themselves unto them fro 
he filthiness of the *heathen o 
he land, to seek the LoRD God o 
srael, did eat, 
22 And kept the “feast of unleav- 


1 The worship of Jehovah was thus re-established in Jerusalem, but the theoc- 


racy was not restored. The remnant which 
tivity lived in the land by Gentile sufferance, 
care of Jehovah, till Messiah came, and 


Gentile world-empire (Rome, Dan. 2. 40; 7.7). 


the city and temple. 


See “Times of the Gentiles” 


“— 535 


returned from the Babylonian cap- 
though doubtless by the providential 
was crucified by soldiers of the fourth 
Soon after (A.D. 70:) Rome destroyed 


(LE. 21, 24; Rey. 16. 19). 


73 


oa 


ened bread seven days with joy: for 
the LorD had made them joyful, 
and turned the heart of the king of 
Assyria unto them, to strengthen 
their hands in the work of the 
house of God, the God of Israel. 


CHAPTER 7. 


The expedition of Ezra: his 
descent and companions. 


mNCY after these things, in the 
teign of bArtaxerxes king of 
Persia, Ezra ‘the son of Seraiah, 
the son of Azariah, the son of Hil- 
kiah, 

2 The son of Shallum, the son of 
Zadok, the son of Ahitub, 

3 The son of Amariah, the son of 
Azariah, the son of Meraioth, 

4 The son of Zerahiah, the son of 
Uzzi, the son of Bukki, 

5 The son of Abishua, the son of 
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the 
son of Aaron the chief priest: 

6 This Ezra went up from Baby- 
lon; and he was 4a ready scribe 
in the law of Moses, which the 
Lorp God of Israel had given: and 
the king granted him all his re- 
quest, according to the hand of the 
LORD his God upon him. 

7 And there went up some of the 
children of Israel, and of the priests, 
and the Levites, and the singers, 
and the porters, and the Nethinims, 
unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year 
of Artaxerxes the king. 

8 And he came to Jerusalem in 


the «fifth month, which was in the 


seventh year of the king. 

9 For upon the first day of the 
first month began he to go up from 
Babylon, and on the first day of the 
efifth month came he to Jerusalem, 
according to the good hand of his 
God upon him. 

10 For Ezra had prepared his 
heart to seek'the law of the LORD, 
and to do tf, and &to teach in Israel 
statutes and judgments. 


Decree of Artaxerxes in Ezra’s 
behalf. 


/11 Now this fs the copy of the let- 
ter that the king Artaxerxes gave 
unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, 
even a scribe of the words of the 
commandments of the Lorp, and 
of his statutes to Israel. 

12 Artaxerxes,’king of kings, unto 
Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law 
of the God of heaven, perfect peace, 
and at such a time. 


B.C. 457.] 


a v.6; Ezra 1, 
15:2 Bras: 


b Neh.2.1. 

c1 Chr.6.14. 

d vs.11,12,21. 

ei. August. 

fice. April. 

g vs.6,25; 
Deut.33.10; 
Neh.8.1-8; 
Mal.2.7. 


hk Ezk.26.7; 
Dan.2.37. 


¢ Esth.1.14. 
j 1 Chr.29. 
6,9. 

k Lit. meal. 
1 One talent 
(silver) = 

£410, or 
$1940. 

m One meas- 
ure = about 


10 bu. 


n One bath = 


about 8 gals. 


536 


¥ 
13 I make a decree, that all they 
of the people of Israel, and of his 
priests and Levites, in my realm, 
which are minded of their own free- 
will to go up to Jerusalem, go with 
thee. 

14 Forasmuch as thou art sent of 
the king, and of his ‘seven coun- 
sellors, to enquire concerning Judah 
and Jerusalem, according to the law 
of thy God which is in thine hand; 

15 And to carry the silver and 
gold, which the king and his coun- 
sellors have freely offered unto the 
God of Israel, whose habitation is 
in Jerusalem, 

16 And ail the silver and gold 


_ |that thou canst find in all the prov- 


ince of Babylon, with the Jfreewill- 
offering of the people, and of the 
priests, offering willingly for the 
house of their God which js in Je- 
rusalem: 

17 That thou mayest buy speedily 
with this money bullocks, rams, 
lambs, with their ‘meat-offerings 
and their drink-offerings, and offer 
them upon thé altar of the house of 
your God which is in Jerusalem. 

18 And whatsoever shall seem 
good to thee, and to thy brethren, 
to do with the rest of the silver and 
the gold, that do after the will of 
your God. 

19 The vessels also that are given 
thee for the service of the house of 
thy God, those deliver thou before 
the God of Jerusalem. , 

20 And whatsoever more shall be 
needful for the house of thy God, 
which thou shalt have occasion to 
bestow, bestow it out of the king’s 
treasure house. 

21 And I, even I Artaxerxes the 
king, do make a decree to all 
the treasurers which are beyond 
the river, that whatsnever Ezra the 
priest, the scribe of the law. of the 
God of heaven, shall Tequire of you, 
it be done speedily, 

22 Unto an hundred ’talents of sil- 
ver, and to an hundred ™measures 
of wheat, and to an hundred baths 
of wine, and to an hundred baths of 
oil, arid salt without prescribing 
how much. 

23 Whatsoever is commanded by 
the God of heaven, let it be dili- 
gently done for the house of the 
God of heaven: for why should 
there be wrath against the realm 
of the king and his sons? 

_24 Alsowe certify you, that touch- | 
ing any of the priests and Levites, 
Singers, porters, Nethinims, or min- 


isters of this house of God, it shall 
not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, 
or custom, upon them. 

25 And thou, Ezra, after the wis- 
dom of thy God, that is in thine 
hand, “set magistrates and judges, 
which may judge all the people 
that are beyond the river, all such 
as know the laws of thy God; and 
bteach ye them that know them not. 

26 And whosoever will not do the 
law of thy God, and the law of 
the king, let judgment be executed 
speedily upon him, whether it be 
unto death, or to banishment, or to 
confiscation of goods, or to impris- 
enment, 


zra’s thanksgiving. 


97 ‘Blessed be the LorD God of 
our fathers, ¢which hath put sucha 
thing as this in the king’s heart, 
to beautify the house of the LoRD 
which zs in Jerusalem: 

28 And hath extended mercy unto 
me before the king, and his coun- 
sellors, and before all the king’s 
mighty princes. And Iwas strength- 
ened as “the hand of the Lorp my 
God was upon me, and I gathered 
together out of Israel chief men to 

‘go up with me. 


CHAPTER 8&8. 
List of Ezra’s companions. 


HESE are now the chief of their 
fathers, and this is the gene- 
alogy of them that went up with 
me from Babylon, in the reign of 
Artaxerxes the king. 
2 Of the sons of Phinehas; Ger- 
shom: of the sons of Ithamar; 
Daniel: of the sons of David; fHat- 


tush. 

3 Ofthe sons of Shechaniah, of the 
sons of ¢Pharosh; Zechariah: and 
with him were reckoned by gene- 
NS of the males an hundred and 

fty. 

4 Of the sons of Pahath-moab; 
Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and 
with him two hundred males. 

5 Of the sons of Shechaniah; the 
son of Jahaziel, and with him three 
hundred males. " 

6 Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed 
the son of Jonathan, and with him 
fifty males. 

7 And of the sons of Elam; Je- 
shaiah the son of Athaliah, and) 
with him seventy males. , 

8 And of the sons of Shephatiah; 
Zebadiah the son of Michael, and 
with him fourscore males. 


EZRA. 


a Ex.18.21,22; 
Deut.16.18. 


6 v.10; 
2 Chr.17.7; 
Mail.2.7. 
ci Chr.29.10. 
d Ezra 6.22. 
e See vs.6,9; 
Ezra 5.5; 
8.18. 
f1 Chr.3.22. 
g Ezra 2.3. 
h Neh.2.8. 


i Neh.8.7; 
9.4,5. 


j See Ezra 2. 
43. 


k 2 Chr.20.3. 

1 Lev.16.29; 
23.29; Isa. 
58.3,5. 


m Paa.5.8. 


537 


lAriel, for Shemaiah, and for 


[8 2 


9 Of the'sons of Joab; Obadiah 
the son of Jehiel, and with him two 
hundred and eighteen males. 

10 And of the sons of Shelomith; 
the son of Josiphiah, and with him 
an hundred and threescore males. 

11 And of the sons of Bebai; Zech- 
ariah the son of Bebai, and with 
him twenty and eight males. 

12 And of the sons of Azgad; Jo- 
hanan theson of Hakkatan, and with 
him an hundred and ten males. 

13 And of the last sons of Adoni- 
kam, whose names are these, Eli- 
phelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and 
with them threescore males. 

14 Of the sons also of Bigvai; 
Uthai, and Zabbud, and with them 
seventy males. 


Ezra sends for Levites and 
Nethinims. 


15 And I gathered them together 
to the river that runneth to Ahava; 
and there abode we in tents three 
days: and I viewed the people, and 
the priests, and found there none 
of the sons of Levi. 

16 Then sent I for Eliezer, for 
Elna- 
than, and for Jarib, and for El- 
nathan, and for Nathan, and for 
Zechariah, and for Meshullam, 
chief men; also for Joiarib, and for 
Elnathan, men of understanding. 

17 And I sent them with com- 
mandment unto Iddo the chief at 
the place Casiphia, and I told them 
what they should say unto Iddo, 
and to his brethren the Nethinims, 
at the place Casiphia, that they 
should bring unto us ministers for 
the house of our God. 

18 And by the #good hand of our 
God upon us they ‘brought us a 
man of understanding, of the sons 
of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of 
Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons 
and his brethren, eighteen; 

19 And Hashabiah, and with him 
Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his 
brethren and their sons, twenty; 

20 jAlso of the Nethinims, whom 
David and the princes had ap- 
pointed for the service of the Le- 
vites, two hundred and twenty 
Nethinims: all of them were ex- 
pressed by name. 


The fast at the river Ahava. 


21 Then I “proclaimed a fast 
there, at the river of Ahava, that 
we might /afflict ourselves before 
our God, to seek of him a “right 


8 22] 


way for us, and for our little ones, 
and for all our substance. ? 

22 For I was ashamed to require 
of the king a band of soldiers and 
horsemen to help us against the! 
enemy in the way: because we had) 
spoken unto the king, saying, ¢The!| 
hand of our God is upon all them 
for good that seek him; but his 
power and his wrath 7s against all 
them that forsake him. 

23 So we fasted and besought our 
God for this: and he was ‘intreated 
of us. 


The treasure committed to 
twelve priests. 


24 Then I separated twelve of the 
chief of the priests, Sherebiah, 
Hashabiah, and ten of their breth- 
ren with them, 

25 And weighed unto them the 
silver, and the gold, and the ves- 
sels, even the offering of the house 
of our God, which the king, and 
his counsellors, and his lords, 
and all Israel there present, had 
offered: 

26 I even weighed unto their hand 
six hundred and fifty ¢talents of 
silver, and silver vessels an hundred 
talents, and of gold an hundred 
talents; 

27 Also twenty basons of gold, of 
a thousand ¢drams; and two vessels 
of fine copper, precious as gold. 

28 And I said unto them, Ye are 
holy unto the Lorp; the vessels are 
holy also; and the silver and the 
gold are a freewill-offering unto the 
LorpD God of your fathers. 

29 Watch ye, and keep them, 
until ye weigh them before the 
chief of the priests and the Levites, 
and chief of the fathers of Israel, at 
Jerusalem, in the chambets of the 
house of the Lorb. 

30 So took the priests and the 


Levites the weight of the silver, 
and the gold, and the vessels, to 
bring them to Jerusalem unto the 
house of our God. 


The arrival of Ezra at 
Jerusalem. 


31 Then we departed from the 
river of Ahava on the twelfth day 
of the /first month, to go unto Jeru- 
salem: and the hand of our God 
was upon us, and he delivered us 
from the hand of the enemy, and of 
such as lay in wait by the way. 

32 And we écame to Jerusalem, 
and abode there three days. 


EZRA. 


B.C. 457. 


a Ezra 7.6,9, 
28. 


6 Psa.33.18, 


19; 34.15,22. 


¢1 Chr.5.20; 


2 Chr.33.13; 


Isa.19.22. 


$29,085. 

e One dram = 
£i5f1s., or 
$4.97. 

fie. April. 

g Neh.2.11. 

h vs.26,30. 

t Ezra 6.17. 


j Ezra 6.21; 
Neh.9,2. 


Rk Deut.12. 
30,31. 


1 Ex.34.16; 
Deut.7.3; 
Neh.13.23. 


m Ex.19.6; 


22.31; Deut. 


7.6; 14.2. 
n Ezra 10.3. 


538 


[9 : 


The treasure 1s brought into — 
the temple. i 
33 Now on the fourth day was the 
silver and the gold and the vessels 
‘weighed in the house of our God 
by the hand of Meremoth the son of 
Uriah the priest; and with him was 
Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and 
with them was Jozabad the son of 
Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of 
Binnui, Levites; ; 
34 By number and by weight of 
every one: and all the weight was 


’ |written at that time. 


35 Also the children of those that. 
had been carried away, which were 
come out of the captivity, ‘offered 
burnt-offerings unto the God of Is- 
rael, twelve bullocks for all Israel, 
ninety and six rams, seventy and 
seven lambs, twelve he goats for a 
sin-offering: all this was a burnt- 
offering unto the LorbD. 


The king’s decree delivered to 
. the governors. 


36 And they delivered the king’s 
commissions unto the king’s lieu- 
tenants, and to the governors on 
this side the river: and they fur- 
paced the people, and the house of ' 

od. 


CHAPTER 9, 


The remnant loses its separated 
position, 


INC when these things were 
| done, the princes came to me, 
saying, The people of Israel, and 
the priests, and the Levites, have 
not Jseparated themselves from the 
people of the lands, «doing accord- 
ing to their abominations, even of 
the Canaanites, the Hittites, the 
Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Am- 
monites, the Moabites, the Egyp-’ 
tians, and the Amorites, 

2 For they have ‘taken of their 
daughters for themselves, and for 
their sons:.so that the holy seed. 
have mingled themselves with the 
people of those lands: yea, the hand 
of the princes and rulers hath been 
chief in this trespass. 

3 And when I heard this thing, I 
rent my garment and my mantle, 
and plucked off the hair of my head 
and of my beard, and sat down 
astonied. 

4 Then were assembled unto me 
every one that “trembled at the 
words of the God of Israel, because 


of the transgression of those that 


] 
* 


EZRA. 


astonied until the “evening sacrifice. 


The- prayer and confession of 
zra. 


5 And at ‘the evening sacrifice I 
aroseup frommy heaviness; andhav- 
ing rent my garment and my mantle, 
I fell upon my knees, and spread out 
my hands unto the LorD my God, 

6 And ®said, O my God, I am 
ashamed and blush to lift up my 
face to thee, my God: for our ini- 
quities are increased over our head, 
and our trespass is grown up unto 
the heavens. 


7 Since the days of our fathers|¢ Ex.29.39. 
have we been in a great trespass), Bible 
unto this day; and for our iniquities| prayers 
have we, our kings, and our priests, {QetenNeh 
been delivered into the hand of the) 45.2; Hob” 
kings of the lands, to the sword, to) 3.1-16.) 


captivity, and to a spoil, and to 
confusion of face, as it is this day. 

8 And now for a little space grace 
hath been shewed from the LorD 
our God, to leave us a remnant to 
escape, and to give us.a nail in his 
holy place, that our God may lighten 
our eyes, and give us a little reviv- 
ing in our bondage. ‘ 

9 For we were bondmen; yet our 
God hath not forsaken us in our 
bondage, but hath extended mercy 
unto us in the sight of the kings of 
Persia, to give us a reviving, to set 
up the house of our God, and to 
repair the desolations thereof, and 
to give us a wall in Judah and in 


vs.10-12, 
Ezra 10.10. 
(Gen.12.1; 
2 Cor.6. 
14-17.) 

d Deut.9.8. 


e Neh.9.33; 
Dan.9.14. 


f 2-Chr.20;9, 
g Neh.13.27. 


j Neh.5.12. 
k Deut,9.18, 


by thy servants the prophets, say- 
ing, The land, unto which ye go to 
possess it, is an unclean land with 
the filthiness of the people of the 
ands, with their abominations, 
hich have filled it from one end 
‘o another with their uncleanness. 
12 Now therefore ‘give not your 
daughters unto their sons, neither 
ke their daughters unto your 
ons, nor seek their peace or their 
ealth for ever: that ye may be 
trong, and eat the good of the land, 
and leave it for an inheritance to 
our children for ever. 

13 And after all that is come upon 
us for our evil deeds, and for our 
great trespass, seeing that thou our 
God hast punished us less than our 
iniquities deserve, and hast given 
us such deliverance as this; 

539 


had. been carried away; and Isat} B.c. 457. 


c Separation. 


h 2 Chr.34.31. 
i 1 Chr.28.10. 


14 ‘Should we again break thy 
commandments, and join in affinity 
with the people of these abomina- 
tions? wouldest not thou be danery 
with us till thou hadst consumed 
‘us, so that there should be no 
remnant mor escaping? 

15 O Lorp God of Israel, “thou 
art righteous: for -we remain yet es- 
caped, as it is this day: behold, we 
are before thee in our trespasses: 
for we cannot stand before thee be- 
cause of this. 


CHAPTER 10. 
Separation restored. 


INC! when Ezra had prayed, 
and when he had confessed, 
weeping and casting himself down 
fbefore the house of God, there as- 
sembled unto him out of Israel a 
very great congregation of men and 
women and children: for the people 
wept very sore. ‘ 

2 And Shechaniah the son of Je- 
thiel, one of the sons of Elam, an- 
lswered and said unto Ezra, We 
have £trespassed against our God, 
and have taken strange wives of 
‘the people of the land: yet now 
there is hope in Israel concerning 
this thing. 

3 Now therefore let us make a 
kcovenant with our God to put 
away all the wives, and such as are 
born of them, according to the 
counsel of my lord, and of those 
that tremble at the commandment 
of our God; and let it be done.ac- 
cording to the law. 

4 Arise; for this matter belong- 
eth unto thee: we also will be with 
thee: ‘be of good courage, and do zt. 

5 Then arose Ezra, and made the 
chief priests, the Levites, and all 
Israel, Jto swear that they should 
do according to this word. And 
they sware. 

6 Then Ezra rose up from before 
the house of God, and went into 
the chamber of Johanan the son of 
Eliashib: and when he came thither, 
he ‘did eat no bread, nor drink 
water: for he mourned because of 
‘the transgression of them that had 
been carried away. 

7 And they made proclamation 
throughout Judah and Jerusalem 
unto all the children of the captiv- 
ity, that they should gather them- 
selves together unto Jerusalem; 

8 And that whosoever would not 
lcome within three days, according 
to the counsel of the princes and 


10 9] EZRA. [10 4 


wives; and being guilty, they of- 
fered a ram of the flock for their 
trespass. . 

20 And of the sons of Immer; Ha- 
nani, and Zebadiah. : 

21 And of thesons of Harim; Maa- 
seiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, 
and Jehiel, and Uzziah. 

22 And of the sons of Pashur; 
Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Ne-- 
thaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah. 

23 Also of the Levites; Jozabad, 
and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same 
is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and 
Eliezer. 

24 Of the singers also; Eliashib: 
and of the porters; Shallum, and 


the elders, all his substance should 
be forfeited, and himself separated 
from the congregation of those that 
had been carried away. 

9 Then all the men of Judah and 
Benjamin gathered themselves to- 
gether unto Jerusalem within three 
days. It was the ¢ninth month, on 
the twentieth day of the month; 
and 4all the people sat in the street 
of the house of God, trembling be- 
cause of this matter, and for the 
great rain. 

10 And Ezra the priest stood up, 
and said unto them, Ye have trans- 
gressed, and have taken strange 
wives, to increase the trespass of 
Israel. Telem, and Uri. 

11 Now therefore make confession] _ 25 Moreover of Israel: of the sons 
unto the LoRD God of your fathers, |¢ ae Decem- |of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and 
and do his pleasure: and ‘separate| °°" Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, 
yourselves from the people of the|)See1Sam. [and Malchijah, and Benaiah. 
land, and from the strange wives. 12.18. 26 And of the sons of Elam; Mat- 

12 Then all the congregation an-] ; separation. |taniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and 


swered and said with a loud voice,| vs.10,11; Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah. 
_As thou hast said, so must we do. pose 1, |.27, And of the sons of Zattu; Elio- 

13 But the people are many, and § Cor6i4- |enai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jere- 
it is a time of much rain, and weare] 17.) moth, and Zabad, and Aziza. 


not able to stand without, neither 28 Of the sons also of Bebai:; Jeho- 
is this a work of one day or two: hanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and 
for we are many that have trans-!¢i.e. April. Athlai: a 

gressed in this thing. f2Ki10.15% 29 And of the sons of Bani; Me- 
poneicuctian Mandl nd letell then] Geechee a eee aelooee 

n stand, and le em] marg.; s]ub, an eal, and Ramoth. 

which have taken strange wives in| 30.8. 30 And of the sons of Pahath- 
Bnd with: them the elders of every| "POSS merce keenly Bensiay 
1 em the e every aaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, an 
city, and the judges thereof, until]/ Or, Mabna- |Binnui, and Manasseh. 


di.e. January. 


the fierce wrath of our God for this oleae 31 And of the sons of Harim; 
ae Pe pats gy 5a some copies. parted Ishijah, Malchiah, Shem- 
nly Jonathan the son of Asa- aiah, Shimeon, ) 
hel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah 32 Benjamin, Malluch, andShem- 
were employed about this matter: ariah. 
GaSe es ae and Shabbethai the 33 Of the sons of Hashum; Mat- 
pate elas them. . tenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, 
pail eal Ana ee ee Bae» ea OFihe oe eee 
HN 5 € so ; 
with certain chief of the fathers, Amram, and Ue rie es 
after the house of their fathers, and 35 Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh 
all of oe Py pes ert wae 36 Vaniah, Meremoth Eliashib 
separated, and sat down in the first 37 Mattani ‘ai as 
ay of the ¢tenth month to examine sau, f ovie oe aioe ee 
e matter, 38 And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei 
17 And they made an end with all 39 And Shelemi : ’ 
the men that had taken strange and Ataae eg 
eda the first day of the ¢first 40 #Machnadebai,Shashai,Sharai, 
"18. And among the sons of the samasient Sie ee 
priests there were found that had 42 § i 
taken strange wives: namely, of 43 Sones hat one 
the sons of Jeshua the son of Joza- Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebin "y, dau, 
ee and his brethren; Maaseiah, and and Joel, Benaiah. : ames 
fO"And ty Meayeneae Bea, iiekataad Come ee ae a 
that they would put away their by whom they had children. { 


$40 


14] 


THE BOOK OF NEHEMIAH. 


[238 


FOURTEEN years after the return of Ezra to Jerusalem, Nehemiah led u 
t 27a to. m, : p a compan 
(B.c..444) and restored the walls and the civil authority. Of those events this ook 


is the record. 


8. 1-11. 36. 
of the wall, 12. 27-43. 
The legal order restored, 13. 1-31. 
prophet Malachi. 


It is in eight divisions: 
Il. The building of the wall, 3. 1-6. 19. -III. The census, 7. 1-73. 

V. The census of the priests and Levites, 12. 1-26. 
VII. Restoration of the temple worship, 12. 44-47. 


the written word (e.g. 1. 8, 9; 13. 1). 
The events recorded in Nehemiah cover a period of 11 years (Ussher). 


I. The journey to Jerusalem, 1. 1-2. 20. 


IV. The revival, 
VI. Dedication 
Vill. 


The moral state of the time is disclosed by the 


This book affords many instances of individual faith acting on 
It is the principle of 2 Tim. 2. 


CHAPTER 1. 


Nehemiah learns of the distress 
of the remnant in Jerusalem. 


ae words of #Nehemiah the son 

of Hachaliah. And it came to 
pass in the month @Chisleu, in the 
twentieth year, as I wasin ‘SShushan 
the palace, 

2 That Hanani, one of my breth- 
ren, came, he and certain men of 
Judah; and I asked them concern- 
ing the Jews that had escaped, 
which were left of the captivity, 
and concerning Jerusalem. 

3 And they said unto me, The 
remnant that are left of the captiv- 
ity there in the province are in 
great affliction and reproach: the 
wall of Jerusalem also is broken 
down, and the gates thereof are 
burned with fire. 

4 And it came to pass, when I 
heard these words, that I sat down 
and wept, and mourned certain 
days, and fasted, and prayed before 
the God of heaven, 


Nehemiah’s prayer. 


5 And 4dsaid, I beseech thee, O 
Lorp God of heaven, the great and 
terrible God, that keepeth covenant 
and mercy for them that love him 
and observe his commandments: 

6 Let thine ear now be attentive, 
and thine eyes open, that thou may- 
est hear the prayer of thy servant, 
which I pray before thee now, day 
and night, for the children of Israel 
thy servants, and confess the sins 
of the children of Israel, which we 
have sinned against thee: both I 
and my father’s house have sinned. 

7 We have dealt very corruptly 
against thee, and have not kept the 
commandments, nor the statutes, 


B.C. 446. 


a Neh.10.1. 


bi.e. Decem- 
ber. 


cOr, Susa, | 
ancient capi- 
tal of Persia. 


d Bible 
prayers 
(O.T:). sNeh- 
4.4. (Gen.15. 
2; Hab.3. 
1-16.) 


e Deut.28. 
63-67; 30.1-5. 


f Ex.14,30, 
note. 


g Psa.19.9, 
note. 


h Neh.2.1. 
tie. April. 


j See Ezra 
4.6; 7.1. 


541 


nor the judgments, which thou com- 
mandedst thy servant Moses. 

8 Remember, I beseech thee, the 
word that thou commandedst thy 
servant Moses, ‘saying, Jf ye trans- 
gress, I will scatter you abroad 
among the nations: 

9 But if ye turn unto me,andkeep 
my commandments, and do them; 
though there were of you cast out 
unto the uttermost part of the 
heaven, yet will I gather them from 
thence, and will bring them unto 
the place that I have chosen to set 
my name there. 

10 Now these are thy servants 
and thy people, whom thou hast 
fredeemed by thy great power, and 
by thy strong hand. ‘ 

11 OLord, I beseech thee, let now 
thine ear be attentive to the prayer 
of thy servant, and to the prayer 
of thy servants, who desire to ‘fear 
thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, 
thy servant this day, and grant him 
mercy in the sight of thisman. For 
I was the king’s /cupbearer. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Artaxerxes sends Nehemiah to 
Jerusalem. 


ND it came to pass in the month 

iNisan, in the twentieth year 

of JArtaxerxes the king, that wine 

was before him: and I took up the 

wine, and gave it unto the king. 

Now I had not been beforetime 
sad in his presence. 

2 Wherefore the king said unto 
me, Why is thy countenance sad, 
seeing thou art not sick? this is 
nothing else but sorrow of heart. 
Then I was very sore afraid, 

3 And said unto the king, Let the 
king live for ever: why should not 


2 4) 


my countenance be sad, ¢when the 
city, the place of my fathers’ sepul- 
chres, lieth waste, and the gates 
thereof are consumed with fire? 

4 Then the king said unto me, 
For what dost thou make request? 
So I prayed to the God of heaven. 

5 And I said unto the king, If it 
please the king, and if thy servant 
have found favour in thy sight, that 
thou wouldest send me unto Judah, 
unto the city of my fathers’ sepul- 
chres, that I may build it. 

6 And the king said unto me, (the 
queen also sitting by him,) For how 
long shall thy journey be? and when 
wilt thou return? So it pleased the 
king to send me; and I set him a 
>time. 

7 Moreover I said unto, the king, 
If it please the king, let letters be 
given me to the governors beyond 
the river, that they may convey me 
over till I come into Judah: 

8 And a letter unto Asaph the 
keeper of the king’s forest, that he 
may give me timber to make beams 
for the gates of the palace which ap- 
pertained to the house, and for the 
wall of the city, and for the house 
that I shall enter into. And the 
king granted me, according to “the 
good hand of my God upon me. 

9 Then I came to the governors 
beyond the river, and gave them 
the king’s letters. Now the king 
had sent captains of the army and 
horsemen with. me. 

10 When Sanballat the Horonite, 
and !Tobiah the servant, the Am- 
monite, heard of if, it grieved them 
exceedingly that there was come a 
man to seek the welfare of the chil- 
dren of Israel. 


Nehemiah views the ruined 
walls. 


11 So I came ¢to Jerusalem, and 
was there three days. 

12 And I arose in the night, I and 
some few men with me; neither 
told I any man what my God had 
put in my heart to do at Jerusalem: 
neither was there any beast with 
me, save the beast that I rode upon. 

13 And I went out by night by the 
‘gate of the valley, even before the 


NEHEMIAH. 


B.C. 445. 


a Israel (his- 
tory). vs.1-9; 
Neh.8.1-8. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


6 Neh.5.14; 
13.6. 


¢ v.18; 6.9; 
Ezra 5.5; 
7.6,9,28. 


d Cf.Ezra 8. 
32. 


e 2 Chr.26.9. 

f Neh.3.15. 

g Isa.7.3. 

h 2 Sam.15. 
23. 

iv.8, etc. 

j Cf.Ezra 
4.4. 

k The obstacle 
of ridicule. 

1 CfEzra 
4.3. 

m vs.20,21; 
Neh.13.4,7, 
28. 


n John 5.2, 
marg. The 
sheep for sac- 
rifice were 
brought in 
here. 


o The towers 
appear to 
have been on 
either side 
the sheep 
gate. 


p Jer.31.38. 


dragon well, and to the dung port, 


and viewed the walls of eer 


which were broken down, and the 


1 Two Tobiahs are distinguished 
ite,’ Neh. 2. 10, 19; 4. 3, 7; 6. 1, 12, 
But the reference to the latter 


2 


gates thereof were consumed with 


e. 

14 Then I went on to the /gate of 
the fountain, and to the ¢king’s pool: 
but there was no place for the 
beast that was under me to pass. 

15 Then went I up in the night by 
the brook, and viewed the wall, 
and turned back, and entered by 
the gate of the valley, and so re- 
turned. : 

16 And the rulers knew not 
whither I went, or what I did; 
neither had I as yet told z# to the 
Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the 


|nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the 
\rest that did the work. 


\Nehemrah encourages the peo- 


ple to build the walls. 


17 Then said I unto them, Ye see 
the distress that we are in, how 
Jerusalem lieth waste, and the 
gates thereof are burned with fire: 
come, and let us build up the wall of 
Jerusalem, that we be no more a 
reproach. 

18 Then I told them of ‘the hand 
of my God-which was good upon 
me; as also the king’s words that 
he had spoken unto me. And they 
said, Let us rise up and build. So 
they Jstrengthened their hands for 
this good work. 

19 But when Sanballat the Ho- 
ronite, and Tobiah the servant, the 
Ammonite, and Geshem the Ara- 
bian, heard it, they ‘laughed us to 


scorn, and despised us, and said, 
What is this thing that ye do? will 
ye rebel against the king? : 

20 Then answered I them, and 
said unto them, The God of heaven, 
he will prosper us; therefore we 
his servants will arise and build: 
but ‘ye have no portion, nor right, 


nor memorial, in Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER 3. 
The builders of the wall. 


HEN ™Eliashib the high priest 
= rose up with his brethren. the 
priests, and they builded the sheep 
\gate; they sanctified it, atid set up 
the doors of it; even unto the 
°tower of Meah they sanctified it, 
unto the tower of Hananeel. 
2 And next unto him builded the 


by many? (1) 
(2) A Jew, unable to 


(Neh. 7. 62) indicates that 
But one Tobiah, and he the Ammonite, is active in this bok; 


4. 


542 


“Tobiah the servant, the Ammon- 
prove his genealogy. 
he was already dead. 


, 
ean 


33] 


men of Jericho. And next to them 
builded Zaccur the son of Imri. 

3 But the @fish gate did the sons 
of Hassenaah build, who also laid 
the beams thereof, and set up the 
doors thereof, the locks thereof, and 
the bars thereof. 

4 And next unto them repaired 
Meremoth the son of Urijah, the 
son of Koz. And next unto them 
repaired Meshullam the son of Ber- 
echiah, the son of Meshezabeel. 
And next unto them repaired Zadok 
the son of Baana. 

5 And next unto them the Teko- 
ites repaired; but their nobles put 
not their necks to the work of their 
Lord. 

6 Moreover the old gate repaired 
Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and 
Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; 
they laid the beams thereof, and set 
up the doors thereof, and the locks 
thereof, and the bars thereof, 

7 And next unto them repaired 
Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon 
the Meronothite, the men of Gib- 
eon, and of Mizpah, unto the 
throne of the governor on this side 
the ‘river. 

8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel 
the son of Harhaiah, of the gold- 
smiths. Next unto him also re- 
paired Hananiah the son of one of 
the apothecaries, and they fortified 
Jerusalem unto the broad wall. 

9 And next unto them repaired 
Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler 
of the half part of Jerusalem. 

10 And next unto them repaired 
Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even 
over against his house. And next 
‘unto him repaired Hattush the son 
of Hashabniah. 

11 Malchijah the son of Harim, 
and Hashub the son of Pahath- 
moab, repaired the other piece, and 
the tower of the furnaces. 

12 And next unto him repaired 
Shallum the son of Halohesh, the 
ruler of the half part of Jerusalem, 
he and his daughters. 

13 The valley gate repaired Ha- 
nun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; 
they built it, and set up the doors 
thereof, the locks thereof, and the 


NEHEMIAH. 


a Zeph.1.10. 
b Neh.2.9. 


c i.e. Euphra- 
tes. 


d Cubit = 
about 18 in. 


e Isa.8.6; 
John 9.7. 


f Jer.32.2; 37. 
2¢ 


gie. dedi- 
cated 
(persons), 
probably de- 
scendants 
of the Gib- 
eonites (2 
Sam.21.1-3) 
devoted to 
the service of 
the Levites. 
But see Josh. 
9.17-21. 


h Trans. 
tower, 2 Ki.5. 
24. C£.2 Chr. 
27.3; 33.14. 
Perhaps part 
of the fort 
called Millo, 
1 Ki.9.15: 

2 Chr.32.5. 


bars thereof, and a thousand 4cubits| . 


on the wall unto the dung gate. 

14 But the dung gate repaired 
Malchiah the son of Rechab, the 
ruler of part of Beth-haccerem; he 
built it, and set up the doors 
thereof, the locks thereof, and the 
bars thereof. 


15 But the gate of the fountain 


543 


a 


repaired Shallun the son of Col- 
hozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah: 
he built it, and covered it, and set 
up the doors thereof, the locks 
thereof, and the bars thereof, and 
the wall of the “pool of Siloah by 
the king’s garden, and unto the 
stairs that go down from the city of 
David. 

16 After him repaired Nehemiah 
the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the 
half part of Beth-zur, unto the 
place over against the sepulchres 
of David, and to the pool that was 
made, and unto the house of the 
mighty. 

17 After him repaired the Levites, 
Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto 
him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler 
of the half part of Keilah, in his 
part, 

18 After him repaired their breth- 
ren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the 
ruler of the half part of Keilah. 

19 And next to him repaired Ezer 
the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Miz- 
pah, another piece over against the 
going up to the armoury at: the 
turning of the wall. 

20 After him Baruch the son of 
Zabbai earnestly repaired the other 
piece, from the turning of the wall 
unto the door of the house of Elia- 
shib the high priest. 

21 After him repaired Meremoth 
the son of Urijah the son of Koz 
another piece, from the door of the 
house of Eliashib even to the end 
of the house of Eliashib. 

22 And after him repaired the 
priests, the men of the plain. 

23 After him repaired Benjamin 
and Hashub over against their 
house. After him repaired Azariah 
the son of Maaseiah the son of 
Ananiah by his house. 

24 After him repaired Binnui the 
son of Henadad another piece, from 
the house of Azariah unto the turn- 
ing of the wall, even unto the 
corner. 

25 Palal the son of Uzai, over 
against the turning of the wall, and 
the tower which lieth out from the 
king’s high house, that was by the 
fcourt of the prison. After him Pe- 
daiah the son of Parosh. 

96 Moreover the &Nethinims 
dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over 
against the water gate toward the 
east, and the tower that lieth out. 

27 After them the Tekoites re- 
paired another piece, over against 
the great tower that lieth out, even 
unto the wall of “Ophel. 


28 From above the horse gate re- 
paired the priests, every one over 
against his house. 

29 After them repaired Zadok the 
son of Immer over against his house. 
After him repaired also Shemaiah 
the son of Shechaniah, the keeper 
of the east gate. 5 

30 After him repaired Hananiah 
the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun 
the sixth son of Zalaph, another 
piece. ‘After him repaired Meshul- 
lam the son of Berechiah over 
against his chamber. 

31 After him repaired Malchiah 
the goldsmith’s son unto the place 
of the Nethinims, and of the mer- 
chants, over against the gate Miph- 
kad, and to the going up of the 
corner. 

32 And between the going up of 
the corner unto the sheep gate re- 
paired the goldsmiths and the mer- 
chants. 


CHAPTER 4. 
Opposition by ridicule. 


Bu it came to pass, that when 
4Sanballat heard that we 
builded the wall, he was wroth, and 
took great indignation, and mocked 
the Jews. 

2 And he spake before his breth- 
ten and the army of Samaria, and 
said, What do these feeble Jews? 
will they fortify themselves? will 


they sacrifice? will they make an 
end in a day? will they revive the 
stones out of the heaps of the rub- 
bish which are burned? 

3 Now Tobiah the Ammonite was 
by him, and he said, Even that 
which they build, if a fox go up, he 
eet even break down their stone 
wall. 


Nehemiah answers by prayer. 


4 Hear, O our God; for we are. 
despised: and ‘turn their reproach 
upon their own head, and give them 
for a prey in the land of captivity: 

29 And cover not their iniquity, 
and let not their sin be blotted out 
from before. thee: for they have 
provoked thee to anger before the 
builders. 

6 So built we the wall; and all 
the wall was joined together unto 
the half thereof: for the people had 
a mind to work. 


Opposition by anger: the 
resource of prayer. 


7 But it came to pass, that when 
Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the 


Pe 


NEHEMIAH. ‘ 


B.C. 445. 


a Neh.2.10,19. 


c Psa.69.4-7. 


544 


7] 
Arabians, and the Ammonites, and 
the Ashdodites, heard that the walls 
of Jerusalem were made up, and 
that the breaches began to be 
stopped, then they were very wroth, 
8 And conspired all of them to- 
gether to come and to fight against 
Jerusalem, and to hinder it. : 
9 Nevertheless we made our 
prayer unto our God, and set a 
watch against them day and night, 
because of them. 


Opposition by discouraged 
brethren: the resource of 
faith (vs. 14, 20). 


10 And Judah said, The strength 
of the bearers of burdens is decayed, 
and there is much rubbish; so that 
we are not able to build the wall. / 

11 And our adversaries said, They 
shall not know, neither see, till we 
come in the midst among them, and 
slay them, and cause the work to 
cease. 

12 And it came to pass, that when 
the Jews which dwelt by them 
came, they said unto us ten times, 
From all places whence ye shall 


.|feturn unto us they will be upon 


you. 

13 Therefore set I in the lower 
places behind the wall, and on the 
higher places, I even set the people 
after their families with their 
swords, their spears, and their 
bows. 

14 And I looked, and rose up, and 
said unto the nobles, and to the 
rulers, and to the rest of the people, 
Be not ye afraid of them: remember 
the Lord, which is great and tere 
rible, and fight for your brethren, 
your sons, and your daughters, 
your wives, and your houses. 

15 And it came:to pass, when our 
enemies heard that it was known 
unto us, and God had brought their 
counsel to nought, that we returned 
all of us to the wail, every one unto 
his work. 

16 And it came to pass from that 
time forth, that the half of my ser- 
vants wrought in the work,- and 
the other half of them held both the 
spears, the shields, and the bows, 
and the habergeons; and the rulers 
were behind all the house of Judah. 

17 They which builded on the 
wall, and they that bare burdens, 
with those that laded, every one 
with one of his hands wrought in 
the work, and with the other hand 
held a weapon. ¢ ; 

18 For the builders, every one had. 


Fr 


his sword girded by his side, and so 
builded. And he that sounded the 
trumpet was by me. 

19 And I said unto the nobles, 
and to the rulers, and to the rest 
of the people, The work is great 
and large, and we are separated 
upon the wall, one far from an- 
other. 

20 In what place therefore ye 
hear the sound of the trumpet, re- 
sort ye thither unto us: our God 
shall fight for us. 

21 So we laboured in the work: 
and half of them held the spears 
from the rising of the morning till 
the stars appeared. 

22 Likewise at the same time said 
I unto the people, Let every one 
with his servant lodge within Jeru- 
salem, that in the night they may 
= a guard to us, and labour on the 

ay. 

23 So neither I, nor my brethren, 
nor my servants, nor the men of the 
guard which followed me, none of 
us put off our clothes, saving that 
‘every one put them off for washing. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Opposition by greed and heart- 
lessness: the resource of resti- 
tution. 


AND there was a great cry of 
the people and of their wives 
against their “brethren the Jews. 

2 For there were that said, We, 


many: therefore we take up corn 
.. them, that we may eat, and 
ive. 

“3 Some also there were that said, 
We have mortgaged our lands, 
vineyards, and houses, that we 
might buy corn, because of the 
dearth. 

4 There were also that said, We 
have borrowed money for the king’s 
tribute, and that upon our lands 
and vineyards. 

5 Yet now our flesh is as the flesh 
of our brethren, our children as 
their children: and, lo, we bring 
jnto bondage our sons and our 
daughters to be servants, and some 
of our daughters are brought unto 
bondage already: neither is i¢ in 
our power to redeem them; for 
other men have our lands and 
vineyards. : 

6 And I was very angry when I 
heard their cry and these words. 

7 Then I consulted with myself, 
and I rebuked the nobles, and the 


Ps 


Lo! J 


NEHEMIAH. 


a Isa.5.7,8. 


b Ex.14.30, 
note; Lev, 


25.48. 


ci.e. nations. 


d Psa.19.9, 


note. 


€ One shekel 


= 2s. 


our sons, and our daughters, are} ¢5 ent Seis aa 


545 


rulers, and said unto them, Ye 
exact usury, every one of his 
brother. And I set a great assem- 
bly against them. 

8 And I said unto them, We after 
our ability have redeemed our 
brethren the Jews, which were sold 
unto the cheathen;.and will ye 
even sell your brethren? or shall 
they be sold unto us? Then held 
they their peace, and found nothing 
to answer. : 

9 Also I said, It is not good that 
ye do: ought ye not to walk in the 
dfear of our God because of the re- 
proach of the ‘heathen our ene- 
mies? 

10 I likewise, and my brethren, 
and my servants, might exact of 
them money and corn: I pray you, 
let us leave off this usury. 

11 Restore, I pray you, to them, 

even this day, their lands, their 
vineyards, their oliveyards, and 
their houses, also the hundredth 
part of the money, and of the corn, 
the wine, and the.oil, that ye exact 
of them. ] 
.12 Then said they, We will restore 
them, and will require nothing of 
them; so will we do as thou sayest. 
Then I called the priests, and took 
an oath of them, that they should 
do according to this promise. 

13 Also I shook my lap, and said, 
So God shake out every man from 
his house, and from his labour, that 
iperformeth not this promise, even 
thus be he shaken out, and emptied. 
And all the congregation said, 
Amen, and praised the Lorp. And 
the people did according to this 
promise. 


Nehemiah’s example of 
unselfishness. 


14 Moreover-from the time that I 
was appointed to be their governor 
in the land of Judah, from the 
twentieth year even unto the two 
and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes 
the king, that is, twelve years, I 
and my brethren have not eaten the. 
bread of the governor. : 

15 But the former governors that 
had been before me were charge- 
able unto the people, and had taken 
of them bread and wine, beside 
forty ¢shekels of silver; yea, even 
their servants bare rule over the 
people: but so did not I, because of 
the ¢fear of God. 

16 Yea, also I continued in the 
work of this wall, neither bought 
we any land: and all my servants 


ies 


5 17] 


NEHEMIAH. 


[6 1 


were gathered thither unto the 
work. 

17 Moreover there were at my 
table an hundred and fifty of the 
Jews and rulers; beside those that 
came unto us from among the “hea-| 
then that are about us. 

18 Now that which was prepared 
for me daily was one ox and six 
choice sheep; also fowls were pre- 
pared for me, and. once in tem days 
store of all sorts of wine: yet for all 
this required not I the bread of the} 
governor, because the bondage was} 
heavy upon this people. 

19 Think upon me, my God, for} 
good, according to all that I have] 
done for this people. 


CHAPTER 6. 


Oppositionby craft: theresource| 
of manly firmness. 
Now it.came to pass, when}? Neh,2:10, 
tN Sanballat, and Tobiah, and cae 

¢Geshem the Arabian, and the rest} Calied 
of our enemies, heard that I had] Gsm. 
builded the wall, and that there| ~~” 


was no breach left therein; (though|¢ ee 
at that time I had not set up the} S#@™, ¥-2- 


doors upon the gates;) 


e Ezra 4.4. 
2 That Sanballat and Geshem 


sent unto me, saying, Come, let|/? Cor11.26, 


us meet together in some one 


of the villages in the plain of|¢ Neh.13.29. 


Ono. But they thought to do me 
mischief. 
3 And I sent messengers unto} | 
them, saying, I am doing a great peerage 
work, so that I cannot come ‘ 
down: why should the work cease, 
whilst I leave it, and come down to 
you? } 
4 Yet they sent unto me four 
times after this sort; and I answered] 
them after the same manner. 
5| Then sent Sanballat his servant} 
unto me in like manner the fifth} 


er. 


cause thou buildest the wall, that! 
thou mayest be their king, accord-! 
ing to these words. 


Come now therefore, andj 
let us take counsel together. 
8 Then I sent unto him, saying, 


546 


B.C. 445. 


aie. nations. 


lh i.e. Septem- 


There are no such things done as 
thou sayest, but thou feignest them 
out of thine own heart. 

9 For they all made us afraid, say- 
ing, Their ¢hands shall be weakened 
from the work, that it be not done. 
Now therefore, O God, strengthen 
my hands. 

10 Afterward I came unto the 

house of Shemaiah the son of Dela- 
iah the son of Mehetabeel, who was 
shut up; and he said, Let us meet 
together in the house of God; within 
|the temple, and let us shut the 
idoors of the temple: for they wilk 
come to slay thee; yea, in the night 
will they come to:slay thee: 
; It And I said, Should such a man 
as I flee? and who is there, that, 
being as I am, would go into the 
itemple to save: his life? I wilk not 
go im. 

12 And, lo, I perceived that God 
had not sent him; /but that he pro- 
nounced this prophecy against me: 
for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired 


13 Therefore was he hired, that I 
ishould be afraid, and do so, and 
sin, and that they might have mat- 
ter for an evil report, that they 
might reproach me. 

14 My God, think thou upon To- 
biah and Sanballat gaccording to 
these their works, and on the proph- 
etess Noadiah, and the rest of the 
prophets, that would have put me 
in fear. 


The wail is finished. 


15 So the wall was finished in the 
twenty and fifth day of the month 
+EAui, in fifty and two days. 
| 16 And it came to pass, that when 
alt our enemies heard thereof, and 
all the ¢heathen that were about us 
saw these things, they were much 
cast down in their own eyes: for 
they perceived that this work was 
wrought of our God. 

17 Moreover in those days the 
nobles of Judah sent many letters 
junto *Tobiah, and the Jetters of 
Tobiah came unto them, 

18 For there were many in Ju- 

ah. sworn unto him, because he 
was the son in law of Shechaniah 
the son of Arah; and his son 
Johanan. had taken the daughter 
lof Meshullam the son of Bere- 
chiah. 

19 Also they reported his good 
ideeds before me, and uttered. my 
words to him. And Tobiah sent 
letters to put me in fear. 


= 
7 1] 
CHAPTER 7. 


Jerusalem given in charge to 
Hanani and Hananiah. 


nNOw it came to pass, when the 
wall was built, and I had set up) 
the doors, and the porters and the 
singers and the Levites were ap-} 
pointed, 

2 That J gave my brother Ha- 
nani, and Hananiah the ruler of| 
the palace, charge over Jerusalem: 
fot he was a faithful man, and 
“feared God above many. 

3 And I said unto them, Let not 
the gates of Jerusalem be opened 
until the sun be hot; and while they 
stand by, let them shut the doors, 
and bar them: and appoint watches 
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem,| 
every one in his watch, and every) 
one to be over against his house. 

4 Now the city was large and 
great: but the people were few 
therein, and the houses were not; 
builded. 


Register of the genealogy of the 
first remnant: the people. 


5 And my God put into mine 
heart to gather together the nobles, 
and the rulers, and the people, that 
they might be reckoned by geneal- 
ogy. And I found a register of the 
genealogy of them which came 
up bat the first, and found written) 
therein, H 

6 These are the children of the 
province, that went up out of the! 
captivity, of those that had been 
carried away, whom Nebuchadnez- 


zar the king of Babylon had carried 

_away, and came again to Jerusalem 
and to Judah, every one unto his 
city; 

7 Who came with ‘Zerubbabel, 
Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raa- 
miah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bil- 
shan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, 
Baanah. The number,/ say,of the 
men of the people of Israel was this; 

8 Thechildrenof Parosh, two thou- 
sand an hundred seventy and two. 

9 The children of Shephatiah, 
three hundred seventy and two. 

10 The children’of Arah, six hun- 
dred fifty and two. 

11 The children of Pahath-moab, 
of the children of Jeshua and Joab, 
two thousand and eight hundred 
and eighteen. 

12 The children of Elam, a thou- 
sand two hundred fifty and four 

13 The children of Zattu, eight 
hundred forty and five 


NEHEMIAH. 


[7 41 


B.C. 445. 


a Psa.19.9, 
note. 


b€f.Ezra 2. 
1-64. 


c Called Zoro- 
babel, Mt.1. 
12,13. 


547 


14 The children of Zaccai, seven 
hundred and threescore. 

15 The children of Binnui, six 
hundred forty and eight. 

16 The children of Bebai, six hun- 
dred twenty and eight. 

17 The children of Azgad, two 
thousand three hundred twenty and 


two. 

18 The children of Adonikam, six 
hundred threescore and seven. 

19 The children of Bigvai, two 
thousand threescore and seven. 

20 The children of Adin, six hun- 
dred fifty and five. 

21 The children of Ater of Heze- 
kiah, ninety and eight. 

22 The children of Hashum, three 
hundred twenty and eight. 

23 The children of Bezai, three 
hundred twenty and four. 

24 The children of Hariph, an 
hundred and twelve. 

25 The children of Gibeon, ninety 
and five. 

26 The men of Beth-lehem and 
Netophah, an hundred fourscore 
and eight. 

27 Themen of Anathoth, an hun- 
dred twenty and eight. 

28 The men of Beth-azmaveth, 
forty and two. 

29 The men of Kirjath-jearim, 
Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hun- 
dred forty and three. 

30 The men of Ramah and Gaba, 
lsix hundred twenty and one. 
| 31 The men of Michmas, an hun- 
idred and twenty and two, 

32 The men of Beth-el and Ai, an 
hundred twenty and three. 

33 The men of the other Nebo, 
fifty and two. 

34 The children of the other 
Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty 
and four. 
| 35 The children of Harim, three 
jhundred and twenty. 
| 36 The children of Jericho, three 
lhundred forty and five. 

{37 The children of Lod, Hadid, 
land Ono, seven hundred twenty 
land one. 2 

| 38 The children of Senaah, three 
thousand nine hundred and thirty. 


Register of the priests of 
the remnant. 


39 The priests: the children of 
Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, 
nine hundred seventy and three. 

40 The children of Immer, a thou- 
sand fifty and two. 

41 The children of Pashur, a thou- 
sand two hundred forty and seven. 


42 The children of Harim, a thou- 
sand and seventeen. 


Register of the Levites of the 
remnant, 


43 The Levites: the children. of 
Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the chil- 
dren of Hodevah, seventy and four. 

44 The singers: the children of 
Asaph, an hundred forty and eight. 

45 The porters: the children of 
Shallum, the children of Ater, the 
children of Talmon, the children of 
Akkub, the children of Hatita, the 
children of Shobai, an hundred 
thirty and eight. 


Register of the Nethinims 
of the remnant. 


46 The Nethinims: the children 
of Ziha, the children of Hashupha, 
the children of Tabbaoth, 

47 The children of Keros, the chil- 
dren of Sia, the children of Padon, 

48 The children of Lebana, the 
children of Hagaba, the children of 
Shalmai, 

49 The children of Hanan, the 
children of Giddel, the children of 
Gahar, 

50 The children of Reaiah, the 
children of Rezin, the children of 
Nekoda, 

51 The children of Gazzam, the 
children of Uzza, the children of 
Phaseah, 

52 The children of Besai, the chil- 
dren of Meunim, the children of Ne- 
phishesim, 

53 The children of Bakbuk, the 
children of Hakupha, the children 
of Harhur, 

54 The children of Bazlith, the 
children of Mehida, the children of 
Harsha, 

55 The children of Barkos, the 
children of Sisera, the children of 
Tamah, 

56 The children of Neziah, the 
children of Hatipha. 


Register of the children of 
Solomon’s servants. 


57 The children of Solomon’s ser- 
vants: the children of Sotai, the 
children of Sophereth, the children 
of Perida, 

58 The children of Jaala, the chil- 
dren of Darkon, the children of 
Giddel, 

59 The children of Shephatiah, 
the children of Hattil, the children 
of Pochereth of Zebaim, the chil- 
dren of Amon. 

60 All the Nethinims. and the 


NEHEMIAH. 


B.C. 445. 


ai.e. overnor. 
Neh.8.9. 


b See Ex.28. 
30, note. 


ec One dram = 
£1. 1s., or 
$4.97; also 
vs.71,72. 


children of Solomon’s servants, 
were three hundred ninety and two. 

61 And these were they which 
went up also from Tel-melah, Tel- 
haresha, Cherub, Addon, and Im- 
mer: but they could not shew their 


father’s house, nor their seed, 
whether they were of Israel. 

62 The children of Delaiah, the 
children of Tobiah, the children of 
Nekoda, six hundred forty and two. 


Register of the priests without 
pedigree. 


63 And of the priests: the chil- 
dren of Habaiah, the children of 
Koz, the children of Barzillai, which 
took one of the daughters of Bar- 
zillai the Gileadite to wife, and was 
called after their name. 

64 These sought their register 
among those that were reckoned 
by genealogy, but it was not found: 
therefore were they, as polluted, 
put from the priesthood. 

65 And the ¢Tirshatha said unto 
them, that they should not eat of 
the most holy things, till there 
stood up a priest with SUrim and 
Thummim. 


Total number of the remnant. 


66 The whole congregation to- 
gether was forty and two thousand 
three hundred and threescore, 

67 Beside their manservants and 
their maidservants, of whom there 
were-seven thousand three‘hundred 
thirty and seven: and they had 


jtwo hundred forty and five singing 
;men and singing women. 


Their substance and Sifts. 


68 Their horses, seven hundred 
thirty and six: their mules, two 
hundred forty and five: 

69 Their camels, four hundred 
thirty and five: six thousand seven 
hundred and twenty asses. 

70 And some of the chief of the 
fathers gave unto the work. The 
Tirshatha gave to the treasure a 
thousand ‘drams of gold, fifty ba- 
sons, five hundred and _ thirty 
|priests’ garments. i , 
71 And some of the chief of the 
|fathers gave to the treasure of the 
\work twenty thousand «drams of 
gold, and two thousand and two 
hundred pound of silver, ; 

72 And that which the rest of the 
people gave was twenty thousand 
¢drams of gold, and two thousand 
pound of silver, and threescore and 
seven priests’ garments. 


eke sale | 
7 73] 


73 So the priests, and thé Levites, 
and the porters, and the singers, 
and some of the people, and the 
Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in 
their cities; and when the ¢seventh 
month came, the children of Israel 
were in their cities. 


CHAPTER 8. - 
The law read and explained. 


AN? all the people gathered 
themselves together as oneman 
into the street that was before the 
water gate; and they spake unto 
bEzra the scribe to bring the “book 
of the law of Moses, which the 


NEHEMIAH. . 


B.C. 445. 


9 And Nehemiah, which is the 
Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the 
scribe, and the Levites that taught 
the people, said unto all the people, 
This day is holy unto the LorD 
your God; mourn not, nor weep. 
For all the people wept, when they 
heard the words of the law. 

10 Then he said unto them, Go 
your way, eat the fat, and drink 
the sweet, and send ‘portions unto 
them for whom nothing is prepared: 
for this day is holy unto our Lord: 
neither be ye sorry; for the joy of 
the Lorp is your strength. 

11 So the Levites stilled all the 
people, saying, Hold your peace, 


Lorp had commanded to Israel. [ai.c. October; |for the day is holy; neither be ye 
2 And Ezrathe priest brought the) also Neh.8. | grieved. 
law before the congregation both of} 2.14- 12 And ail the people went their 
men and women, and all that could); 7.,2e7 (nis- | Way, to eat, and to drink, and to 
hear with understanding, upon the! tory). vs.1-8; send portions, and to make great 
first day of the ¢seventh month. Portes mirth, because they had under- 
er ode read neh late vel 2 Rom. 11. sree ae words that were declared 
stree at was before the water| 26.) unto them. 
gate from the morning until midday, 13 And on the second day were 
before the men and the women, and) ‘ Cie |gathered together the chief of the 
those that could understand; and fathers of all the people, the priests, 
the ears of all the aay ete at-|¢ Cf.v.2. and eas Levites, vata Bae ihe 
tentive unto the book of the law. Deut.33.10;  |SCTi even to understand the 
4 And Ezra the dscribe stood upon ° Mal.2.7. words of the law. 
peer Eee We tsbccics j Esth.9.19, Feast of tabernacles restored. 
him stood Mattithiah, and Shema,| 11.10. — 14 And they found written in the 
and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hil- Sag law which the Lorp had com- 
kiah, and Maaseiah, on his right/* °°" ~ manded by Moses, that the chil- 
hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, |; Lev.28. a ae! ; ie Suds dwell ck 
and Mishael, and Malchiah, and) 34-42. ‘booths in the feast o e sevent 
ae d MI sesh eae TE ce Moan that they should publish 
ariah, an eshullam. that ould | 
5 And Ezra opened the book in|? Ce bere and proclaim in all their cities, and 
the sight of all the people; (for he 2 Chr.8.13. in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto 
was above all the people;) and when the mount, and fetch olive branches, 
he opened it, all the people stood up: and pine branches, and myrtle 
6 And Ezra blessed the LorD, the branches, and palm branches, and 
great God. And all the people branches of thick trees, to make 


answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting 
up their hands: and they bowed 
their heads, and worshipped the 
Lorpwith their faces to the ground. 

7 Also Jeshua, and Bani, and She- 
rebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai,} 
Hodijah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, 
Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the 
Levites, ‘caused the people to un- 
derstand the law: and the people 
stood in their place. . 

8 So they read in the book in the’ 
Jaw of God distinctly, and gave the 
sense, and caused them to under- 
stand the reading. 


‘1 It is not meant that ther 
tabernacles (cf. 2 Chr. 8. 13; 
since Joshua’s days. 


booths, as 1t is ‘written. 

16 So the people went forth, and 
brought them, and made them- 
selves booths, every one upon the 
roof of his house, and in their courts, 
and in the courts of the house of 
God, and in the street of the water 
gate, and in the street of the gate 
of Ephraim. 

17 And all the congregation of 
them that were come again out of 
the captivity made booths, and sat 
under the booths: !for since the 
days of Jeshua the son of Nun unto 
that day had Jot the children of 


e had not been some formal observance of the feast of 
Ezra 3. 4), but that the people had not dwelt in booths 


549 


8 18} , 


Israel done so. And there was very 
eat gladness. 

18 Also day by day, from the first 
day unto the last day, he read in 
the book of the law of God. And 
they kept the feast seven days; 
and on the eighth day was a sol- 
emn assembly, according unto the 
manner. 


{a See Neh. 
8.14. 


CHAPTER 9, 


The people fast and repent. aga 
No in the twenty and fourth] 2 Sort 
day of ¢this month the children| 14-17-) 

' of Israel were assembled with fast- ¢ Neh.8.7,8. 
ing, and with sackclothes, and pene 
earth upon them. a raped 

2 And theseed of Israel ’separated| 46.1). Psa 
themselves from all strangers, and| 51. i 
stood and confessed their sins, and) 357; 48 
the iniquities of their fathers. 

3 And they stood up in their e Gen.11.31; 
place, and ‘read in the book of the| 12-1-3: 17-5. 


law of the LorpD their God one f Gen.22.1-3; 
fourth part of the day; and another} Jas.2.21-23. 
fourth part they confessed, and gGen.15.18 

worshipped the Lorp their God. note. 


Confession of the priests and h Josh.23.14. 
Levites. = 
1 Ex.2.25; 


4 Then stood up upon the stairs,| 3.7 
of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, 
Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sher- 
ebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and|k Ex.14.20-28. 
cried with a loud voice unto the Mx 13°91 
Lorp their God. pay 

5S Then the Levites, Jeshua, and|m Ex.19.-24. 
Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Shere-  SabHath 
biah, Hodijah, Shebaniah and Peth-|’ vs.13,14, 


J Ex.7 -14. 


ahiah, said, Stand up and 4bless| Mt.i2.1 
€ LORD your God for ever and errs 


ever: and blessed be thy glorious 

name, which is exalted above all|o Ex.16.14- 

blessing and praise, aye gone 6. 
hou, even thou, art Lorp eas 

alone; thou hast made heaven, the] Num.20.8, 

heaven of heavens, with all their| 1 Cor 104 

host, the earth, and all things that q Deut.1.8. 

are therein, the seas, and all that is 

therein, and thou preservest them|" E*-32-1-10. 

all; and the host of heaven wor- 

shippeth thee. 

7 Thou aré the Lorp the God, 

who didst ‘choose Abram, and 

broughtest him forth out of Ur of 

the Chaldees, and gavest him the 

name of Abraham; 

8 And foundest his heart /faithful 


NEHEMIAH. 


b Separation, 


nant with him to give the land of 
the Canaanites, the Hittites, the 
Amorites, and the Perizzites, and 
the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, 
to give it, I say, to his seed, and 
hast “performed thy words; for 
thou art righteous: rice ; 

9 And didst ‘see the affliction of 
our fathers in Egypt, and heardest 
their cry by the Red sea; 

10 And shewedst /signs and won- 
ders upon Pharaoh, and on all hi 
servants, and on all the people of 
his land: for thou knewest that 
they dealt proudly against them. 
So didst thou get thee a name, as 
it is this day. 

11 And thou didst *divide the sea 


. |before them, so that they went 


through the midst of the sea on the 
dry land; and their persecutors thou 
threwest into the deeps, as a stone 
into the mighty waters. 

12 Moreover thou “leddest them 
in the day by a cloudy pillar; and in 
the night by a pillar of fire, to give 
them light in the way wherein they 
should go. ; 

13. Thou camest down also upon 
mount Sinai, and spakest with them 
from heaven, and gavest them right 
judgments, and true laws, good 
statutes and commandments: 

14 And Imadest known unto 
them thy holy sabbath, and com- 
mandedst them precepts, statutes, 
and laws, by the hand of Moses thy 
servant: ‘ : 

15 And °gavest them bread from 
heaven for their hunger, and 
broughtest forth *water for them 
out of the rock for their thirst, and 
¢promisedst them that they should 
go 1n to possess the land which thou 
hadst sworn to give them. 

16 But they and our fathers dealt 
proudly, and hardened their necks, 
and hearkened not to thy com- 
mandments, 


[ 17 And refused to obey, neither 


‘were mindful of thy wonders that 
thou didst among them: but hard- 
ened their necks, and in their 
febellion appointed a captain ‘to 
return to their bondage: but thou 
arta God. ready to pardon, gracious 
and merciful, slow to anger, and of 
great kindness, and forsookest them 


not. 
before thee, and madest a écove- 18 Yea, "when they had made 
Se ea 


1 This important passage fixes beyond all cavil t 


God’s rest (Gen. 2. 1-3), was given to man. 


Mt. 12. 1, note. 
550 


st : Cf. Ex. 20. 9-11, 
sabbath is invested with the character of a sign between Jehoy 


he time when the sabbath, 
In Ex. 31. 13-17 the 
ah and Israel. See 


ie: 


¢ 


9 19) — 


‘them a molten calf, and said, This 


is thy God that brought thee up out 
of Egypt, and had wrought great 
provocations; 

19 Yet thou in thy manifold mer- 
cies forsookest them not in the 
wilderness: the ¢pillar of the cloud 
departed not from them by day, to 
lead them in the way; neither the 
pillar of fire by night, to shew them 
light, and the way wherein they 
should go. 

20 Thou gavest also thy good 


‘bspirit to instruct them, and with- 


heldest not thy “manna from their 
mouth, and gavest them water for 
their thirst. 

21 Yea, torty years didst thou 
sustain them in the wilderness, so 
that they lacked nothing; ¢their 
clothes waxed not old, and their 
feet swelled not. 

22 Moreover thou gavest them 
kingdoms and nations, and didst 


‘divide them into corners: so they 


possessed the land of Sihon, and 
the land of the king of Heshbon, 
and the land of Og king of Bashan. 

23 Their children also multipliedst 


‘thou as the stars of heaven, and 


‘ proughtest them into the land, con- 


cerning which thou hadst promised 
to their fathers, that they should go 
in to possess it. 

24 So the children ‘went in and 
possessed the land, and thou sub- 
duedst before them the inhabitants 
of the land, the Canaanites, and 
gavest them into their hands, with 
their kings, and the people of the 
land, that they might do with them 
as they would. 


25 And they took strong cities, 


and a fat land, and possessed houses 
full of all goods, wells digged, vine- 
yards, and oliveyards, and fruit 
trees in abundance: so they did 
eat, and were filled, and became fat. 
and delighted themselves in thy 
great goodness. 

26 Nevertheless they were disobe- 
dient, and rebelled against thee, and 
cast thy law behind their backs, and 
fslew thy prophets which testified 
against them to turn them to thee, 
andtheywroughtgreat provocations. 

27 Therefore thou  deliveredst 
them into the hand of their enemies, 
who vexed them; and in the time of 
their trouble, ‘when they cried unto 
thee, thou heardest them from 
heaven, and according to thy mani- 
fold mercies thou gavest them 
saviours, who saved them out of 
the hand. of their enemies. 


NEHEMIAH. 


B.C. 445. 


a Ex.13.20- 
23; 1 Cor. 
10.1. 

b Holy Spirit. 
vs.20,30. 
Job 26.13. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 

o Ex.16.14- 
16;John 6. 
22-60. 

d.Deut.29.5. 

e Josh.1.2. 

f 1 Ki.18.4; 
19.10; Mt. 
23.37; Acts 
7.52. 

g Jud.2.18. 

h 2 Ki.17.13- 
18; 2 Chr.36. 
11-20. 


i Deut.28.48; 
Ezra 9.9, 


551 


[9 37 


28 But after they had rest, they 
did evil again before thee: therefore 


‘leftest thou them in the hand of 


their enemies, so that they had the 
dominion over them: yet when 
they returned, and cried unto thee, 
thou. heardest them from heaven; 
and many times didst thou deliver 
them according to thy mercies; 

29 And testifiedst against them, 
that thou mightest bring them 
again unto thy law: yet they dealt 
proudly, and hearkened not unto 
thy commandments, but sinned 
against thy judgments, (which if a 
man do, he shall live in them;) and 
withdrew the shoulder, and hard- 
ened their neck, and would not 
hear. 

30 Yet many years didst thou for- 
bear them, and testifiedst against 
them by thy %spirit in thy proph- 
ets: yet would they not give ear: 
‘therefore gavest thou. them into 
the hand of the people of the lands. 

31 Nevertheless for thy great mer- 
cies’ sake thou didst not utterly con- 
sume them, nor forsake them; for 
thou art a gracious and merciful 
God. 

32 Now therefore, our God, the 
great, the mighty, and the terrible 
God, who keepest covenant and 
mercy, let not all the trouble seem 
little before thee, that hath come 
upon us, on our kings, on our 
princes, and on our priests, and on 
our prophets, and on our fathers, 
and on all thy people, since the 
time of the kings of Assyria unto 
this day. 

33 Howbeit thou art just in all 
that is brought upon us; for thou 


hast done right, but we have done 
wickedly: 

34 Neither have our kings, our 
princes, our priests, nor our fathers, 
kept ‘thy law, nor hearkened unto 
thy commandments and thy testi- 
monies, wherewith thou didst tes- 
tify against them. 

35 For they have not served thee 
in their kingdom, and in thy great 
goodness that thou gavest them, 
and in the large and fat land which 
thou gavest before them, neither 
turned they from their wicked 
works. 

36 Behold, we are ‘servants this 
day, and for the land that thou 
gavest unto our fathers to eat the 
fruit thereof and the good thereof, 
behold, we are servants in it: 

37 And it yieldeth much increase 
unto the kings whom thou hast set 


over us because of our sins: also 
they have dominion over our bodies, 
and over our cattle, at their pleas- 
ure, and we are in great distress. 

38 And because of all this we 
make a sure covenant, and write 
it; and our princes, Levites, and 
priests, ?seal unto it. 


CHAPTER 10. 


The covenant signers: the 
covenant. 


H OW those that sealed were, Ne- 
; hemiah, the &Tirshatha, the 
’ son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah, 

2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 

, 3 Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah, 
i 4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 
| 5 Harini, Meremoth, Obadiah, 

6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 

7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin, 

8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: 
these were the priests. 

9 And the Levites: both Jeshua 
the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the 
sons of Henadad, Kadmiel; 

10 And their brethren, Shebaniah, 
Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, 

11 Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah, 

12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 

13 Hodijah, Bani, Beninu. 

14 The chief of the people; Parosh, 
Pahath-moab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani, 

15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 
Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 
Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur, 
Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai, 
Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai, 
Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, 
j 21 Meshezabeel, Zadok; Jaddua, 
Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 
Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub, 
Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek, 
Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, 
And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan, 
Malluch, Harim, Baanah. 
And the rest of the people, the 
priests, the Levites, the porters, the 
singers, the ‘Nethinims, and all 
they that had separated themselves 
from the people of the lands unto 
the law of God, their wives, their 
sons, and their daughters, every 
one having knowledge, and having 
understanding; 

29 They clave to their brethren, 
their nobles, and entered into a 
curse, and into an oath, to walk in 


God’s law, which was given by|’ 


Moses the servant of God, and to 
observe and do all the command- 
ments of the Lorp our Lord, and 
his judgments and his statutes; 

30 And that we would not give 


B.C. 445. 


a Weh.10.1. 
6 Neh.7.65, 


ref, 


¢ Neh.3.26, 


ref. 


d One shekel 
=2s. 9d., or 
65 cts. 


e Ex.25.30, 


note. 
f Lit. meal. 


g See Ex.29. 
33, note. / 


h Ex.23.19; 
34.26; Deut. 


6.1,2. 


t Ex.13.1-15; 


Lev.27.26,27. 


j Lev.27.30; 
Mal.3.10. 


k Heb.10.25. 


952 


NEHEMIAH. 


our daughters unto the people of th 
land, nor take their daughters for 
our sons: j 

31 And if the people of the land 
bring ware or any victuals on the 
sabbath day to sell, that we would 
not buy it of them on the sabbath, 
or on the holy day: and that we 
would leave the seventh year, and 
the exaction of every debt. 

32 Also we made ordinances for 
us, to charge ourselves yearly with 
the third part of a “shekel for the 
service of the house of our God; 

33 For the ‘shewbread, and for 
the continual /meat-offering, and for 
the continual burnt-offering, of the 
sabbaths, of the new moons, for the 
set feasts, and for the holy things, 
and for the sin-offerings to make an 
gatonement for Israel, and for all 
the work of the house of our God. 

34 And we cast the lots among the 
priests, the Levites, and the people, 
for the wood-offering, to bring it 
into the house of our God, after the 
houses of our fathers, at times ap- 
pointed year by year, to burn upon 
the altar of the Lorp our God, as 
it 1s written in the law: 

35 And to bring the “firstfruits of 
our ground, and the firstfruits of all 
fruit of all trees, year by year, unto 
the house of the Lorb: 

36 Also the ‘firstborn of our sons, 
and of our cattle, as it is written in 
the law, and the firstlings of our 
herds and: of our flocks, to bring #0 
the house of our God, unto the 
priests that minister in the house of 
our God: 

37 And that we should bring the 
firstfruits of our dough, and our of- 
ferings, and the fruit of all manner 
of trees, of wine and of oil, unto the 
priests, to the chambers of the house 
of our God; and the Jtithes of our 
ground unto the Levites, that the 
same Levites might have the tithes 
in all the cities of our tillage. 

38 And the priest the son of Aaron 
shall be with the Levites, when the 
Levites take tithes: and the Levites 
shall bring up the tithe of the tithes 
unto the house of our God, to the 
chambers, into the treasure house. 

39 For the children of Israel and 
the children of Levi shall bring the 
offering of the corn, of the new 
wine, and the oil, unto the cham- 
bers, where are the vessels of the 
sanctuary, and the priests that min- 
ister, and the porters, and the sing- 
ers: and we will not “forsake the 
house of our God. i 


i 


ty *  NIBHEMTAH! ang 


CHAPTER 11. 
The dwellers at Jerusalem. 


son of Ahasai, the son of Meshille- 
moth, the son of Immer, 

14 And their brethren, mighty 
men of valour, an hundred twenty 
and eight: and their overseer was 
Zabdiel, the son of one of the great 
men. 

15 Also of the Levites: Shemaiah 
the son of Hashub, the son of Azri- 
kam, the son of Hashabiah, the son 
of Bunni; 

16 And Shabbethai and Jozabad, 
of the chief of the Levites, had the 
oversight of the outward business, 
of the house of God. 

17 And Mattaniah the son of 
Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son 
of Asaph, was the principal to 
begin the thanksgiving in prayer: 
and Bakbukiah the second among 
his brethren, and Abda the son of 


dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of 
the people also cast lots, to bring 
one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem 
the “holy city, and nine parts to 
dwell in other cities. 

2 And the people blessed ali the 
men, that willingly offered them- 
selves to dwell at Jerusalem. 

3 Now these are the chief of the 
province that dwelt in Jerusalem: 
but in the cities of Judah dwelt 
every one in his possession in their 
cities, to wit, Israel, the priests, 
and the Levites, and the %Nethi- 
nims, and the ‘children of Solc- 
mon’s servants. 

4 And at Jerusalem dwelt certain 


of the children of Judah, and of the Shammua, the son of Galal, the 
children of Benjamin. Of the chil- son of Jeduthun. 
dren of Judah; Athaiah the son of 18 All the Levites in the holy city 
Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the were two hundred fourscore and 
son of Amariah, the son of Shepha- four. 
tiah, the son of Mahalaleel, of the], v.18: mt.4.5; |_19 Moreover the porters, Akkub, 
children of Perez; 5.35. Cf£Rev.|Talmon, and their brethren that 
5 And Maaseiah the son of Ba-| 21-2- kept the gates, were an hundred 
hey the oy - trent pie ao b Neh.3.26 seventy and two. 
of Hazaiah, the son o aiah, the] ref. ¥ " 4 
son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, =i lea The dwellers in the other cities. 
the son of Shiloni. cSee 1 Ki9.21.| 99 And the residue of Israel, of 
6 All the sons of Perez that dwelt|d Nch.3.26, the priests, and the Levites, were 
at Jerusalem were four hun-] re in all the cities of Judah, every one 
dred threescore and eight valiant], josn.14.15, [im his inheritance. 
men. 21 But the 4Nethinims dwelt in 
7 And these are the sons of Ben- Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were 
jamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, over the Nethinims. 
the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, 22 The overseer also of the Levites 
the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maa- at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of 
seiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son 
Jesaiah. f : of Mattaniah, the son of Micha. Of 
8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, the sons of Asaph, the singers were 
nine hundred twenty and eight. over the business of the house of 
9 And Joel the son of Zichri was God. 


23 For it was the king’s com- 


their overseer: and Judah the son L 
mandment concerning them, that 


of Senuah was second over the city. 


10 Of the priests: Jedaiah the son a certain portion should be for the 
of Joiarib, Jachin. singers, due for every day. 

11 Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the 24 And Pethahiah the son of Me- 
son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, shezabeel, of the children of Zerah 
the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahi- the son of Judah, was at the king’s 
tub, was the ruler of the house of ‘ hand in all matters concerning the 
God. people. J ' ; 

12 And their brethren that did the 25 And for the villages, with their 
work of the house were eight hun- fields, some of the children of Judah 
dred twenty and two: and Adaiah dwelt at ‘Kirjath-arba, and in the 
the son of Jeroham, the son of Pe- villages thereof, and at Dibon, and 
Jaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of in the villages thereof, and at 
Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the Jekabzeel, and in the villages there- 
son of Malchiah, of, 

13 And his brethren, chief of the 96 And at Jeshua, and at Mola- 
fathers, two hundred forty and two: dah, and at Beth-phelet, 
and Amashai the son of Azareel, the 27 And at Hazar-shual, and at 


11 28] 


NEHEMIAH. 


[12 


Beer-sheba, and im the villages 
thereof, 

28 And at Ziklag, and at Meko- 
nah, and in the villages thereof, 

29 And at En-rimmon, and at 
Zareah, and at Jarmuth, : 

30 Zanoah, Adullam, and in their 
villages, at Lachish, and the fields 
thereof, at Azekah, and in the vil- 
lages thereof. And they dwelt from 


B.C. 445. 


Beer-sheba unto the valley of Hin-| 


nom. 
31 The children also of Benjamin 
from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and 


Aija, and Beth-el, and fn their vil-} 


lages, 

32 And at Anathoth, Nob, Ana- 
niah, 

33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim, 

34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, 

35. Lod, and Ono, the valley of 
craftsmen. 

36 And of the Levites were divi- 
sions in Judah, and in Benjamin. 


CHAPTER 12. 


The priests and Levites who 
went up with Zerubbabel. 


NOW “these are the priests and 
the Levites that went up with 
>Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, 
and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, 
Ezra, 

2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, 

3 Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 

4 Iddo, Ginnetho, Abijah, 

5 Miamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 

6 Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah, 

7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. 
These were the chief of the priests 
and of their brethren in the days of 
Jeshua. 

8 Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, 
Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, 
and Mattaniah, which wasoverthe 
thanksgiving, he and his brethren. 

9 Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their 
brethren, were over against them in 
the watches. 


Descent of the priests. 


10 And Jeshua begat Joiakim, Jo- 
iakim also begat Eliashib, and Eli- 
ashib begat Joiada, 

11 And Joiada begat Jonathan, 
and Jonathan begat Jaddua. 

12 And in the days of Joiakim 
were priests, the chief of the frthers: 
of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, 
Hananiah; 

13 Of Ezra, Meshullam; of Ama- 
riah, Jehohanan; 

14. Of Melicu, Jonathan; of She- 
baniah, Joseph; 


}a Cf£.Ezra 2, 
1-61. 


b Called Zoro- 
babel, Mt. 
1.12,13. 


¢1 Chr.9. 
14-22, 


d 1 Chr.23.-25. 


554 


15 Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, 
Helkai; ; 

16 Of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginne-— 
thon, Meshullam; f 

17 Of Abijah, Zichri; of Minia- 
min, of Moadiah, Piltai; 

18 Of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shem- 
aiah, Jehonathan; ; 

19 And of Joiarib, Mattenai; of 
Jedaiah, Uzzi; 

20 Of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, 
Eber; : § 
| 21 Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Je- 
daiah, Nethaneel. 


The chief Levites. 


| 22 The Levites in the days of 
Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and 
\Jaddua, were recorded chief of the 
fathers: also the priests, to the 
Teign of Darius the Persian. 

23 The sons of Levi, the chief of 
the fathers, were ‘written in the 
book of the chronicles, even until 
the days of Johanan the son of 
|Eliashib. 

24 And the chief of the Levites: 
Hashabiah, , Sherebiah, and Jeshua 
the son of Kadmiel, with their 
brethren over against them, to 
praise and to give thanks, ¢accord- 
ing to the commandment of David 
the man of God, ward over against 
ward. 

25 Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, 
Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Ak- 
kub, were porters keeping the ward 
at the thresholds of the gates. 

26 These were in the days of Joia- 
kim the son of Jeshua, the son of 
Jozadak, and in the days of Nehe- 


miah the governor, and of Ezra the 
priest, the scribe. 


The dedication of the walls. 


27. And at the dedication of the 
wall of Jerusalem they sought the 
Levites out of all their places, to 
bring them to Jerusalem, to keep 
the dedication with gladness, both 
with thanksgivings, and with sing- 
ing, with cymbals, psalteries, and 
with harps. 

28 And the sons of the singers 
gathered themselves together, both 
out of the plain country round 
about Jerusalem, and from the 
villages of Netophathi; : 

29 Also from the house of Gilgal, 
and out of the fields of Geba and 
Azmaveth: for the singers had 
builded them villages round about 
Jerusalem. 

30 And the priests and the Le- 
vites purified themselves, and puri- 


7 


\ 


12:31] 


NEHEMIAH. 


[13's 


fied the people, and the gates, and| B.c. 445." lof Jerusalem was heard even afar 


the wall. - 

31 Then I brought up the princes 
of Judah upon the wall, and ap- 
pointed two great companies of 
them that gave thanks, whereof 
one went on the right hand upon 
the wall toward the dung gate: 
_32 And after them went Hosha- 
jah, and half of the princes of 
Judah, 

33 And Azariah, Ezra, and Me- 
shullam, | 

34 Judah, and Benjamin, and 
Shemaiah, and Jeremiah, 

35 And certain of the priests’ 
sons with trumpets; namely, Zech- 
ariah the son of Jonathan, the son 
of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, 
the son of Michaiah, the son of 
Zaccur, the son of Asaph: 

36 And his brethren, Shemaiah, 
and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, 
Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, 
éwith the musical instruments of 
David the man of God, and Ezra 
the Sscribe before them. 

37 And at the fountain gate, 
which was over against them, they 
went up by the stairs of the ‘city of 


a 


1 Chr.23.5. 
b v.26. 


c2Sam,5. 
7-9. 


d 1 Chr.25.1-7; 
2 Chr.29.30. 


e Deut.23.3,4. 
f Num.22.-24. 


g Separation. 


David, at the going up of the wall,| John 15.18, - 
above the house of David, even| 122 Gg” 
unto the water gate eastward. 14-17.) 

38 And the other company of y 
them that gave thanks went over|” Be ees, 
against them, and I after them, 

i Lit. meal, 


and the half of the people upon 
the wall, from beyond the tower of 
the furnaces even unto the broad 
wall; 

39 And from above the gate of| 
Ephraim, and above the old gate,| 
and above the fish gate, and the 
tower of Hananeel, and the tower 
of Mesh, even unto the sheep gate:} 
and they stood still in the prison 
gate. | 

40. So stood the two companies} 
of them that gave thanks in the} 
house of God, and I, and the half} 
of the rulers with me: 

41 And the priests; Eliakim, Maa- 
seiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioe- 
nai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with 
trumpets; ; 

42 And Maaseiah,and Shemaiah,| 
and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jeho-} 
hanan, and Malchijah, and Elam,} 
and Ezer. And the singers sang] 
loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.| 

43 Also that day they offered] 
great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for} 
God had made them rejoice with] 
great joy: the wives also and the} 
children rejoiced: so that the joy’ 


555 


off. 


Restoration of the temple order. 

44 And at that time were some 
appointed over the chambers for 
the treasures, for the offerings, for 
the firstfruits, and for the tithes, to 
gather into them out of the fields of 
the cities the portions of the law 
for the priests and Levites: for 
Judah rejoiced for the priests and 
for the Levites that waited. 

45 And both the singers and the 
porters kept the ward of their God, 
and the ward of the purification, 
according to the commandment of 
David, arid of Solomon his son. 

46 For 4in the days of David and 
Asaph of old there were chief of 
the singers, and songs of praise and 
thanksgiving unto God. 

47 And all Israel in the days of 
Zerubbabel, and in the days of Ne- 
hemiah, gave the portions of the 
singers and the porters, every day 
his portion: and they sanctified 
holy things unto the Levites; and 
the Levites sanctified them unto 
the children of Aaron. 


CHAPTER 13. 
The law, and separation. 


‘Oy that day they read in the 
ebook of Moses in the audience 
of the people; and therein was 
found written, that the Ammonite 
and the Moabite should not come 
into the congregation of God for 
ever; 

2 Because they met not the chil- 


dren of Israel with bread and with 


water, but hired /Balaam against 
them, that he should curse them: 
howbeit our God turned the curse 
into a blessing. 

3 Nowit came to pass, when they 
had heard the law, that they ¢sep- 
arated from Israel all the “mixed 
multitude. 


Cleansing of the temple. 

4 And before this, Eliashib the 
priest, having the oversight of the 
‘chamber of the house of our God, 
was allied unto Tobiah: 

5 And he had prepared for him a 
great chamber, where aforetime 
they laid the ‘meat-offerings, the 
frankincense, and the vessels, and 
the tithes of the corn, the new 
wine, and the oil, which was com- 
manded to be given to the Levites, 
and the singers, and the porters; 


and the offerings of the priests. 


o~ “2 


oA 


Ja» Se 


13 6] 


NEHEMIAH. 


[13 *27e 


6 But in all this time was not I|_ Buc. 434. Nabhan unto the children of Judah, 


at Jerusalem: ¢for in the two and 


thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of 
Babylon came I unto the king, and 
after certain days obtained I leave 
of the king: 


Nehemiah’s second visit to 
Jerusalem. 


7 And I came to Jerusalem, and 
understood of the evil that Eliashib 
did for “Tobiah, in preparing him a 
chamber in the courts of the house 
of God. 

8 And it grieved me sore: there- 
fore I cast forth all the household 
stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber. 

9 Then I commanded, and they 
cleansed the chambers: and thither 
brought I again the vessels of the 
house of God, with the ‘meat-offer- 
ing and the frankincense. 


The order of God’s house. 


10 And I perceived that the por- 
tions of the Levites had ¢not been 
given them: for the Levites and 
the singers, that did the work, were 
fled every one to his field. 

11 Then contended I with the 
rulers, and said, Why is the house 
of God forsaken? And I gathered 
them together, and set them in 
their place, 

12 Then brought all Judah the 
tithe of the corn and the new wine 
and the oil unto the treasuries. 

13 And I made treasurers over the 
treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, 


and Zadok the scribe, and of the 
Levites, Pedaiah: and next to them 
was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the 
son of Mattaniah: for they were 
counted faithful, and their office was 
to distribute unto their brethren. 

14 Remember me, O my God, 
concerning this, and wipe nof out 
my good deeds that I have done 
for the house of my God, and for 
the offices thereof. 


Violation of the sabbath rest, 


15 In those days saw I in Judah 
some treading wine presses on the 
‘sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, 
and lading asses; as also wine, 
grapes, and figs, and all manner of 
burdens, which they brought into 
Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and 
I testified against them in the day 
wherein they sold victuals. 

16 There dwelt men of Tyre also 


therein, which brought fish, and all 
manner of ware, and sold on the 


a Neh.5.14-16, 


b Neh.2.10, 
note. 


cv.5, ref. 


d Cf.Mal.3. 
7-10. 


e Ex.20.10. 
f Neh.12.30. 


2 Ex.34.16; 
Deut.7.3,4. 


hi Ki.11,1,2. 
#1 Ki.11.4-8. 


556 


i 


and in Jerusalem. ’ 

17 Then I contended with the no- 
bles of Judah, and said unto them, 
What evil thing is this that ye do, 
and profane the sabbath day? 

18 Did not your fathers thus, and 
did not our God bring all this evil 
upon us, and upon this city? yet ye 
bring more wrath upon Israel by 
profaning the sabbath. 

19 And it came to pass, that when 
the gates of Jerusalem began to be 
dark before the sabbath, I com- 
manded that the gates should be 
shut, and charged that they should 
not be opened till after the sabbath: 
and some of my servants set I at 
the gates, that there should no bur- 
den be brought in on the sabbath 
day. 

20 So the merchants and sellers 
of all kind of ware lodged without 
Jerusalem once or twice. 

21 Then I testified against them, 
and said unto them, Why lodge ye 
about the wall? if ye do so again, 
I will lay hands on you. From that 
time forth came they no more on 
the sabbath. 

22 And I commanded the Levites 
‘that they should cleanse them- 
selves, and that they should come 
and keep the gates, to sanctify the 
sabbath day. Remember me, Omy 
God, concerning this also, and 
spare me according to the greatness 
of thy mercy. 


Intermarriage with other races 
rebuked. 


23 In those days also saw I Jews 
that had gmarried wives of Ashdod, 
of Ammon, and of Moab: 

24 And their children spake half 
in the speech of Ashdod, and could 
not speak in the Jews’ language, 
but according to the language of 
each people. 

25 And I contended with them, 
and cursed them, and smote certain 
of them, and plucked off their hair, 
and made them swear by God, say- 
ing, Ye shall not give your daugh- 
ters unto their sons, nor take their 
daughters unto your sons, or for 
yourselves. 

26 Did not Solomon king of Is- 
rael sin by these things? yet among 
many nations was there no king 
like him, who was beloved of his 
God, and God made him king over 
all Israel: nevertheless ‘even him 
did outlandish women cause to sin, 

27 Shall we then hearken unto 


Sie wade ei as a al a 
a ia 


you to do all this great evil, to 
transgress against our God in mar- 
Tying strange wives? 

28 And one of the 4sons of Joiada, 
the son of Eliashib the high priest, 
was son in law to °Sanballat the 
Horonite: therefore I chased him 
from me. 

- 29 Remember them, O my God, 
because they have defiled the 


NEHEMIAH. 


B.C. 434. 


a Neh.12.10. 
b Neh.4.1,7; 


6.1,2. 


c Mal.2.4,11, 


12. 


557 


verge Le 


priesthood, and the covenant ‘of 
the priesthood, and of the Levites. 

30 Thus cleansed I them from all 
strangers, and appointed the wards 
of the priests and the Levites, every 
one in his business; 

31 And for the wood-offering, at 
times appointed, and for the first- 
fruits. Remember me, O my God, 
for good. 


e 


1%) 


THE BOOK OF ESTHER. 


[1 16 


THE significance of the Book of Esther is that it testifies to the secret watch care 


of Jehovah over dispersed Israel. 


The name of God does not once occur, but in no 


; SF ease . : team 
book of the Bible is His providence more conspicuous. A mere remnant r 
Dencd to Jerusalem. The mass of the nation preferred the easy and lucrative life 


under the Persian rule. 


I. The story of Vashti, 1. 1-22. 
spiracy of Haman, 3. 1-15. 
V. The vengeance, 8. 1-9. 19. 
10. 1-3. 


But God did not forsake them. What Hehere does for 

i ing for all the covenant people. 
Pernd store ob Wena te II, Esther made queen, 2. 1-23, 
IV. The courage of Esther brings deliverance, 4. i= / 410. 
VI. The feast of Purim, 9. 20-32. VII. Epilogue, 


The book is in seven parts: 
III. The con- 


The events recorded in Esther cover a period of 12 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1° 
The story of Vashti. 


Now it came to pass in the days 
of ¢Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasu- 
erus which reigned, from %India 
even unto Ethiopia, ‘over an hun- 
dred and seven and twenty Prov-| 
inces:) 

2 That in those days, when the 
king Ahasuerus ¢sat on the throne 
of his kingdom, which was in ¢Shu- 
shan the palace, 

3 In the third year of his reign, he 
‘made a feast unto all his princes 
and his servants; the power of 
Persia and Media, the nobles and 
princes of the provinces, being be- 
fore him: 

4 When he shewed the riches of 
his glorious kingdom and _ the 
honour of his excellent majesty 
many days, even an hundred and 
fourscore days. 

5 And when these days were ex- 
pired, the king made a feast unto 
all the people that were present in 
Shushan the palace, both unto great 
and small, seven days, in the court 
of the garden of the king’s palace; 

6 Where were white, green, and 
blue, Aangings, fastened with 
cords of fine linen and purple to 
silver rings and pillars of marble: 
the beds were of gold and silver, 
upor a pavement of red, and blue, 
and white, and black, marble. 

7 And they gave them drink in 
vessels of gold, (the vessels being| 
diverse one from another,) and 
royal wine in abundance, according 
to the state of the king. 

8 And the drinking was according 
to the law; none did compel: for so 
the king had appointed to all the 
officers of his house, that they 


B.C. 521. 


SS ee 
Dan.9.1. 

6 Esth.8.9. 

¢ Dan.6.1. 

@1 Ki.1.46. 

e Neh.1.1. 

f Gen.40.20. 

g 2 Sam.13.28. 

h Esth.7.9, 

# Or, eunuchs, 

j1 Chr.12.32. 

k Ezra 7.14. 

12 Ki,25.19., 


558 


should do according to every man’s 
pleasure. 

9 Also Vashti the queen made a 
feast for the women in the royal — 
house which belonged to king 
Ahasuerus. 

10 On the seventh day, when the 
Sheart of the king was merry with 
wine, he commanded Mehuman, 
Biztha, *Harbona, Bigtha, and 
Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the 
seven ‘chamberlains that served in 
the presence of Ahasuerus the king, 

11 To bring Vashti the queen be- 
fore the king with the crown royal, 
to shew the people and the princes 
her beauty: for she was fair to look 


on. 

12 But the queen Vashti refused 
to come at the king’s commandment 
by his chamberlains: therefore was 
the king very wroth, and his anger 
burned in him. 

13 Then the king said to the wise 
men, Jwhich knew the times, (for so 
was the king’s manner toward all 
that knew law and judgment: 

14 And the next unto him was 
Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tar- 
shish, Meres, Marsena, and Memu- 
can, the ‘seven princes of Persia’ 
and Media, ‘which saw the king’s 
face, and which sat the first in the 
kingdom; 

15 What shall we do unto the 
queen Vashti according to law, be- 
cause she hath not performed the 
commandment of the king Ahasue- 
tus by the chamberlains? 

16 And Memucan answered be- 
fore the king and the princes, 
Vashti the queen hath not done 
wrong to the king only, but also to 
all the Princes, and to all the people 
that are in all the provinces of the 
king Ahasuerus, 


Pi ESTHER. [2 33 


eth the king be queen instead of 
Vashti. And the thing pleased the 
king; and he did so. 

5 Now in Shushan the palace 
there was a certain Jéw, whose 
name was Mordecai, the son of 
Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of 
Kish, a Benjamite; 

6 ¢Who had been carried away 
from Jerusalem with the captivity 
which had been carried away with 
éJeconiah king of Judah, whom 
Webuchadnezzar the king of Baby- 
lom had carried away. 

7 And he brought up Hadassah, 
that is, Esther, ‘his uncle’s daugh- 
ter: for she had neither father 
nor mother, and the maid was 


17 For this deed of the queen 
shall come abroad unto all women, 
so that they shall despise their hus- 
bands in their eyes, when it shall be 
reported, The king Ahasuerus com- 
manded Vashti the queen to be 
brought in before him, but she 
came not. 

18 Likewise shall the ladies of 
Persia and Media say this day unto 
all the king’s princes, which have 
heard of the deed of the queen. 
Thus shail there arise too much 
contempt and wrath. 

19 If it please the king, let there 
go a royal commandment from him, 
and let it be written among the laws 


it be not altered, That Vashti come fair and beautiful; whom Mordecai, 
no more before king Ahasuerus; when her father and mother 
and let the king give her royal), pongo. were dead, took for his own 
estate unto another that is better daughter. 

than she. » Esth.1.19,20. | § So it came to pass, when the 


20 And when the king’s decree}. 5,, Hegai, |King’s commandment and his de- 
Boek ne sal nie Be cic be pub-| v.s. men was heard, aad me sises 

s oughout Ss empire, maidens were gathered together 
(for it is great,) all the wives shall 7 Ging6, [unto Shushan the palace, to the 
give to their husbands honour, both| 10,20; Jer. | |custody of Hegai, that. Esther was 
to great and small. 24.1. brought also unto the king’s house, 

21 And the saying pleased the),o,, sehoia. |to the custody of Hegai, keeper of 
king and the princes; and the king| chin;2 Ki. |the women. 


did according to the word of Me-| 24.6. 9 And the maiden pleased him, 
mucan: fvAs. and she obtained kindness of him; 

22 For he sent letters into all the and he speedily gave her her “things 
king’s provinces, into every prov-|é v-3- for purification, with such things as 
ince according to the writing); ,.3 12. belonged to her, and seven maidens, 
thereof, and to every people after 4 which were meet to be given her, 


their language, that every man yew fe. her, (CUt of the king’s house: and he ‘pre- 
should bear rule in his own house,| “#"4°¢"*"|ferred her and her maids unto the 


and that it should be published) j v.20. best place of the house of the 
according to the language of every) women, 
Hy 10 JEsther had not shewed her 


ople, 
ae * people nor her kindred: for Mor- 


decai had charged her that she 
should not shew it. 
11 And Mordecai walked every 
day before the court of the women’s 
wrath of king Ahasuerus was house, to know how Esther did, and 
appeased, he remembered Vashti, what should become of her. 
and what she had done, and ’what 12 Now when every maid’s turn 
was decreed against her. as come to go in to king Ahas- 
. 2 Then said the king’s servants uerus, after that she had been 
that ministered unto him, Let there twelve months, according to the 
be fair young virgins sought for the manner of the women, (for so were 


king: the days of their purifications ac- 
3 And let the king appoint officers 


complished, to wit, six months 
in all the provinces of his kingdom, with oil of myrrh, and six months 
that they may gather together all with sweet odours, and with other 
the fair young virgins unto Shu- 


things for the purifying of the wo- 
shan the palace, to the house of the 


men;) | ‘ 
women, unto the custody of “Hege 13 Then thus came every maiden 
the king’s chamberlain, keeper of 


unto the king; whatsoever she de- 
the women; and let their things f sired was given her to go with her 
purification be given them: 


out of the house of the women unte 
4 And let the maiden which pleas- 


CHAPTER 2. 
Esther made queen. 
FTER these things, when the 


the king’s house. 
559 


ial 


4 


y 


tained grace and favour in his sight 


_ had charged her: for Esther did the 


. 23 And when 


2 14] 


14 In the evening she went, and 
on the morrow she returned into 
the second house of the women, to) 
the custody of Shaashgaz, the king’s| 
chamberlain, which kept the con- 
cubines: she came in unto the king 
no more, except the king delighted 
in her, and that she were called by 
name. 

15 Now when the turn of Esther, 
“the daughter of Abihail the uncle 
of Mordecai, who had taken her for 
his daughter, was come to go in 
unto the king, she required nothing 
but what Hegai the king’s chamber- 
lain, the keeper of the women, ap- 
pointed. And Esther obtained fa- 
vour in the sight of all them that 
looked upon her. 

16 So Esther was taken unto king 
Ahasuerus into his house royal in 
the tenth month, which is the 
month Tebeth, in the seventh year 
of his reign. 

17 And the king loved Esther 
above all the women, and she ob- 


more than all the virgins; so that 
he set the royal crown upon her 
head, and made her queen instead 
of Vashti. 

18 Then the king «made a great 
feast unto all his princes and his 
servants, even Esther’s feast; and 
he made a 4release to the provinces, 
and gave gifts, according to the 
state of the king. 

19 And when the virgins were 
gathered together the second time, 
then Mordecai sat in the king’s gate. 

20 Esther had not yet shewed her 
kindred nor her people; as Mordecai 


commandment of Mordecai, like as 


when she was brought up with 
him, 


Mordecai saves the king’s life. 


21 In those days, while Mordecai! 
Sat in the king’s gate, two of the 
king’s chamberlains, ¢Bigthan and 
Teresh, of those which kept the 
door, were wroth, and sought to lay 
hand on the king Ahasuerus. 

22 And the thing was known. to 
Mordecai, fwho told it unto Esther 
the queen; and Esther certified 
the king thereof in Mordecai’s 
name. 
inquisition was 
made of the matter, it was found 
out; therefore they were both 


hanged on a tree: and it was written 
£in the book of the chronicles before 
the king. 


he 


ESTHER. 


av.7. 

bie. January. 

c Esth.1.3. 

d Heb. rest. 

e Or, Big- 
thana, Esth. 
6.2. 

f Esth.6.2. 

g Esth.6.1. 


h Num.24.7; 
1 Sam.15.8. 


tv.5. 
j Psa.83.4. 


ki.e. April; 
also v.12. 


lice. March; 
also v.13. 


(B.C. 510. 
m One talent 
(silver) = 
£410, or 
$1940. 
n Esth.8.2,8. 
o Or, op- 


pressor. 
Esth.7.6. 


560 


Ne ae) 


. q 
+ ts 


“A 


CHAPTER 3. 
The conspiracy of Haman. 
AFIER these things did king 


oe 


Ahasuerus promote Haman the © 


son of Hammedatha the “Agagite, 
and advanced him, and set his seat 
above all the princes that were with 
him. 

2 And all the king’s servants, 
that were in the king’s gate, bowed, 
and reverenced Haman: for the 
king had so commanded concerning 
him. But Mordecai ‘bowed not, 
nor did Aim reverence. 

3 Then the king’s servants, which 
were in the king’s gate, said unto 


|Mordecai, Why transgressest thou 


the king’s commandment? 

4 Now it came to pass, when they 
spake daily unto him, and he heark- 
ened not unto them, that they told 
Haman, to see whether Mordecai’s 
matters would stand: for he had 
told them that he was a Jew. 

5 And when Haman saw that 
Mordecai bowed not, nor did him 
reverence, then was Haman full of 
wrath. 

6 And he thought scorn to lay 
hands on Mordecai alone; for they 
had shewed him the people of Mor- 
decai: wherefore Haman Jsought to 
destroy all the Jews that were 
throughout the whole kingdom of 
Ahasuerus, even the people of Mor- 
decai. - 

7 In the *first month, that is, the 
month Nisan, in the twelfth year of 
king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that 
is, the lot, before Haman from day 
to day, and from month to month, 
to the ‘twelfth month, that is, the 
month Adar. 

8 And Haman said unto king 
Ahasuerus, There is a certain people 
scattered abroad and dispersed 
among the people in all the prov- 
inces of thy kingdom; and their 
laws are diverse from all people; 
neither keep they the king’s laws: 
therefore it is not for the king’s 
profit to suffer them. 

9 If it please the king, let it be 
written that they may be destroyed: 
and I will pay ten thousand talents 
of silver to the hands of those that 
have the charge of the business, 
to bring it into the king’s treas- 
‘uries. 

10 And the king took “his ring 
from his hand, and gave it unto 
Haman the son of Hammedatha the 
Agagite, the Jews’ enemy. 


11 And the king said unto Haman, - 


Ww 


3:12] 


The silver is given to thee, the 
people also, to do with them as it 
seemeth good to thee. 

12 Then were the king’s scribes 
called on the thirteenth day of the 
first month, and there was written 
according to all that Haman had 
commanded unto the king’s lieu- 
tenants, and to the governors that 
were over every province, and to 
the rulers of every people of every 
province @according to the writing 
thereof, and to every people after 
their language; in the name of king 
Ahasuerus was it written, and 
sealed with the king’s ring. 

13 And the letters were ‘sent by 
posts into all the king’s provinces, 
to destroy, to kill, and to cause to 
perish, all Jews, both young and old, 
little children and women, in one 
day, even upon the thirteenth day 
of the twelfth month, which is the 
month Adar, and ¢to take the spoil 
of them for a ‘prey. 

14 The copy of the writing for a 
commandment to be given in every 
province was published unto all 
people, that they should be ready 
against that day. 

15 The posts went out, being has- 
tened by the king’s commandment, 
and the decree was given in Shu- 
shan the palace. And the king and 
Haman sat down to drink; but 
éthe city Shushan was perplexed. 


CHAPTER 4. 
Fasting among the Jews. 


VAN feoeaa Mordecai perceived all 
that was done, Mordecai /rent 
his clothes, and put on sackcloth 
with ashes, and went out into the 
midst of the.city, and cried with a 
loud and a bitter cry; 

2 And came even before the king’s 
gate: for none might enter into the 
king’s gate clothed with sackcloth. 

3 And in every province, whither- 
soever the king’s commandment 
and -his decree came, there was 
great mourning among the Jews, 
and fasting, and weeping, and wail- 
ing; Sand many lay in sackcloth 
and ashes. 

4 So Esther’s maids and her 
chamberlains came and told it her. 


Then was the queen exceedingly} 


grieved; and she sent raiment to 
clothe Mordecai, and-to take away 
his sackcloth from him: but he re- 
ceived it not. 

5 Then called Esther for Hatach, 
one of the king’s chamberlains, 


ESTHER. 


B.C. 510. 


a Esth.1.22; 
8.9. 

b Esth.8.8,10; 
1 Ki.21.8. 

c Esth.8.10. 

d Esth.8.11. 

e Esth.8.15. 

f 2 Sam.1.11. 

g Heb. sack- 
cloth and 
ashes were 
Jaid under 
many. Isa. 
58.5; Dan. 
9.3, 

h Esth.3.9. 

4 Esth.5.1. 

j Dan.2.9. 

k Esth.5.2; 8.4. 

1 Esth.5.1. 


561 


[4 16 


whom he had appointed to attend 
upon her, and gave him a command- 
ment to Mordecai, to know what it 
was, and why it was. 

6 So Hatach went forth to. Mor- 
decai unto the street of the city, 
which was before the king’s gate. 

7 And Mordecai told him of all 
that had happened unto him, and 
of ‘the sum of the money that 
Haman had promised to pay to the 
king’s treasuries for the Jews, to 
destroy them. 

8 Also he gave him the copy of 
the writing of the decree that was 
given at Shushan to destroy them, 
to shew 1t unto Esther, and to de- 
clare it unto her, and to charge her 
that she should go in unto the king, 
to make supplication unto him, and 
to make request before him for her 
people. 

9 And Hatach came and told Es- 
ther the words of Mordecai. 

10 Again Esther spake unto Ha- 
tach, and gave him commandment 
unto Mordecai; 

11 All the king’s servants, and the 
people of the king’s provinces, do 
know, that whosoever, whether 
man or woman, shall come unto the 
king ‘into the inner court, who is 
not called, jthere is one law of his 
to put Aim to death, except such 
kto whom the king shall hold. out 
the golden sceptre, that he may 
live: but I have not been called to 
come in unto the king these thirty 
days. 

12 And they told to Mordecai Es- 
ther’s words. 

13. Then Mordecai commanded to 
answer Esther, Think not with thy- 
self that thou shalt escape in the 
king’s house, more than all the 
Jews. 

14 For if thou altogether holdest 
thy peace at this time, then shall 
there enlargement ‘and deliverance 
arise to the Jews from another 
place; but thou and thy father’s 
house shall be destroyed: and who 
knoweth whether thou art come to 
the kingdom for such a time as 
this? 

15 Then Esther bade them re- 
turn Mordecai this answer, 

16 Go, gather together all the 
Jews that are present in Shushan, 
and fast ye for me, and neither eat 
nor drink /three days, night or day: 
I also and my maidens will fast like- 
wise; and so will I go in unto the 
king, which is not according to the 
law: and if I perish, I perish. 


417} 


17 So Mordecai went his way, and 
did according to all that Esther 
had commanded him, 


CHAPTER 5. 
The courage of Esther, 


OW it came to pass on “the 
third day, that Esther put on 
her royal apparel, and stood in the 
inner court of the king’s house, 
over against the king’s house: and 
the king sat upon his royal throne 
in the royal house, over against the 
gate of the house. 

2 And it was so, when the king 
saw Esther the queen standing in 
the court, that she obtained fa- 
vour in his sight: and “the king held 
out to Esther the golden sceptre 
that was in his hand. So Esther 
drew near, and touched the top of 
the sceptre. ; 

3 Then said the king unto her, 
What wilt thou, queen Esther? 
and what is thy request? it shall 
be even given thee to the half of 
the kingdom. 

4 And Esther answered, If it 
seem? good unto the king, let the 
king and Haman come this day 
unto the banquet that I have 
prepared for him. 

5 Then the king said, Cause Ha- 
man to make haste, that he may do 
as Esther hath said. So the king 
and Haman came to the banquet 
that Esther had prepared. 

6 And the king said unto Esther 
at the banquet of wine, ¢What is 
thy petition? and it shall be granted 
thee: and what is thy request? even 
to the half of the kingdom it shall 
be performed. 

7 Then answered Esther, and 
said, My petition and my request 


is; 

‘ 8 If I have found favour in the 
‘Sight of the king, and if it please 
the king to grant my petition, and 
to perform my request, let the king 
and Haman come to the banquet 
that I shall prepare for them, and I 
ee do to morrow as the king hath 
said. - 

9 Then went Haman. forth that 
day joyful and with a glad heart: 
but when Haman saw Mordecai in 
the king’s gate, ¢that he stood not 
up, nor moved for him, he was full 
of indignation against Mordecai. 

10 Nevertheless Haman refrained 
himself: and when he came home, 
he sent and called for his friends, 
and Zeresh his wife. 


\ 


ESTHER. 


a Esth.4.16, 

b Prov.21.1, 

c Esth.4.11; 
8.4. 


d Esth:s.12, 

e Esth.3.5. 

f Esth.9.7-10. 
g Esth.3.1. 


h One cubit = 
about 18 in. 


# Esth.7.9. 

j Esth.7.10, 

k Heb. the 
king’s sleep 
fled away. 

i Esth.2.21, 

m Esth.5.1. 


n Esth.5.14. 


{6 57 


11 And Haman told them of the 
glory of his riches, and /the multi- 
tude of his children, and all the 
things wherein the king had pro- 
moted him, and how he had éad- 
vanced him above the princes and 
servants of the king. 

12 Haman said moreover, Yea, 
Esther the queen did let no man 
come in with the king unto the 
banquet that she had prepared but 
myself; and to morrow am I invited 
unto her also with the king. 

13 Yet all this availeth me 
nothing, so long as I see Mordecai 
the Jew sitting at the king’s gate. 

14 Then said Zeresh his wife and 
all his friends unto him, Let a gal- 
lows be made of fifty ‘cubits high, 
and to morrow ‘speak thou unto 
the king that Mordecai may be 
hanged thereon: then go thou in 
merrily with the king unto the ban- 
quet. And the thing pleased Ha- 
man; and he caused the gallows ta 
be made. 


CHAPTER 6, 


Haman compelied to exalt 
Mordecai. 


ON that night -could not the king 
sleep, and he commanded to 
bring the book of records of the 
chronicles; and they were read be- 
fore the king. 

2 And it was found written, that 
Mordecai had told of “Bigthana and 
Teresh, two of the king’s chamber- 
lains, the keepers of the door, who 
sought to lay hand on the king 
Ahasuerus, 

3 And the king said, What honour 
and dignity hath been done to Mor- 
decai for this? Then said the king’s 


‘\servants that ministered unto him, 


562 


There is nothing done for him, 

4 And the king said, Who is in 
the court? Now Haman was come 
into ”the outward court of the 
king’s house, to “speak unto the 
king to hang Mordecai on the gal- 
lows that he had prepared for him. 

5 And the king’s servants said 
unto him, Behold, Haman standeth 
in the court. And the king said, 
Let him come in. 

6 So Haman came in. And the 
king said unto.him, What shall be 
done unto the man whom the king 
delighteth to honour? Now Haman 
thought in his heart, To whom 
would the king delight to do hon- 
our more than to myself? 

7 And Haman answered the king, 


6 8] 


For the man whom the king de- 
lighteth to honour, 

8 Let the royal apparel be brought 
which the king useth to wear, and 
the horse that the king rideth upon, 
and the crown royal which: is set 
upon his head: 

9. And let this apparel and horse 
be delivered to the hand of one of 
the king’s most noble: princes, that 
they may array the man withal 
whom the king delighteth to, hon- 
our, and bring him on horseback 
through the street of the city, and 
proclaim before him, Thus shall it 
be done to the man whom the king 
delighteth to honour. 

10 Then the king said to Haman, 
Make haste, and take the apparel 
and the horse, as thou hast said, 
and.do-even so to Mordecai the Jew, 
that sitteth at the king’s gate: let 
nothing fail of all that thou hast 


spoken. 

11 Then took Haman the apparel 
and the horse, and arrayed. Morde- 
cai, and brought him on horseback 
through the street of the city, and 
proclaimed before him, Thus: shall 
it be done unto the man whom the 
king delighteth to honour. 

12 And Mordecaicameagaintothe 
king’s gate. But Haman ¢hasted to 
his house mourning, Sand. having 
his head covered. 

13 And Haman told Zeresh his 


wife and all his friends every thin&| i 


that had befallen him. Then said 
his wise men and Zeresh his wife 
unto him, If Mordecai be of the 
seed of the Jews, before whom thou 
hast begun to fall, thou shalt not 

_ prevail against him, but shalt surely 
fall before him. 

14 And while they were yet talk- 
ing with him, came the king’s cham- 
berlains, and hasted to bring Haman 
unto ‘the banquet that Esther had 
‘prepared. 

CHAPTER 7. 
Esther’s banquet: Haman 
hanged. 
S° the king and Haman came to 
banquet with Esther the queen. 

2 And the king said again unto 
Esther on the second day ¢at the 
banquet of wine, What is. thy peti- 
tion, queen Esther? and it shall be 
granted thee: and what is thy re- 

“quest? and it shall be performed, 
even to the half of the kingdom. 

3 Then Esther the queen answered 
and said, If I have found favour in 
thy sight, O-king, and if it please! 


ESTHER. 


a 2 Chr.26.20. 


6b 2 Sam.15.30; 
Jer.14.3,4. 


c Esth.5.8. 

d Esth.5.6. 

e Esth.3.9; 4.7: 

f Esth.1.6. 

g Esth.5.14; 
Psa.7.16; 
Prov.11.5,6. 


h One cubit = 
about 18 in. 


j Esth.2.7. 
k Esth.3.10. 


563 


ri 


[8 3 


the king, let my life be given me at 
my petition, and my people at my 
request: 

4 For we are ¢sold, I and my peo- 
ple, to be destroyed, to be: slain, 
land to perish. But if we had been 
sold for bondmen and bondwomen, 
I had held my tongue, although the 
enemy could not countervail the 
king’s damage. i i 

5 Then the king Ahasuerus an- 
swered and said wnto Esther the 
queen, Who is he, and where is he, 
that durst presume in his heart to 


do so? 

6 And Esther said, The adversary 
and enemy is this wicked Haman. 
‘Then Haman was afraid before the 
king and the queen. 

7 And the king arising from the 
banquet of wine in his wrath went 
into the palace garden: and Haman 
stood up to make request’ for his 
life to Esther the queen; for he 
saw that there was evil determined 
against him by the king. 

8 Then the king returned out of 
the palace garden into the place of 
the banquet of wine; and Haman 
was fallen upon ‘the bed whereon 
Esther was. Then said the king, 
Will he force the queen also before 
me in the house? As the word 
went out of the king’s mouth, they 
covered Haman’s face. 

9 And Harbonah, one of the 
chamberlains, said before the king, 
Behold also, &the gallows fifty 
hkeubits high, which Haman had 
made for Mordecai, who had spoken 
good for the king, standeth in the 
house of Haman. Then the king 
said, Hang him thereon. 

10: So they ‘hanged Haman on the 
gallows that he had prepared for 
Mordecai. Then was the king’s 
wrath pacified. 


CHAPTER 8. 
The vengeance ordered, 


ON that day did the king Ahas- 
uerus give the house of Haman 
the Jews’ enemy unto Esther the 
queen. And Mordecai came before 
the king; for Esther had told jwhat 
he was unto her. 5 

2 And the king took off *his ring, 
which he had taken from Haman, 
and gave it unto Mordecai. And 
Esther set Mordecai over the house 
of Haman. 

3 And Esther spake yet again be- 
fore the king, and fell down at his 
feet, and besought him with tears to 


put away the mischief of Haman 
the Agagite, and his device that he 
had devised against the Jews. 

4 Then “the king held out the 
golden sceptre toward Esther. So 
Esther arose, and stood before the 
king, : ; 

5 And said, If it please the king, 
and if I have found favour in his 
sight, and the thing seem right be- 
fore the king, and I be pleasing in 
his eyes, let it be written to reverse 
the letters devised by Haman the 
son of Hammedatha the Agagite, 
which he wrote to destroy the Jews 
which are in all the king’s prov- 
inces: : 

6 For how can I endure to see ®the 
evil that shall come unto my peo- 
ple? or how can I endure to see the 
destruction of my kindred? 

7 Then the king Ahasuerus said 
unto Esther the queen and to Mor- 
decai the Jew, Behold, <I have 
given Esther the house of Haman, 
and him they have hanged upon 
the gallows, because he laid his 
hand upon the Jews. 

8 Write ye also for the Jews, as it 
liketh you, in the king’s name, and 
seal it with the king’s ring: for the 
writing which is written in the 
king’s name, and sealed with 
the king’s ring, ¢may no man re- 
verse. 

9 Then were the king’s scribes 
called at that time in the e¢third 
month, that is, the month Sivan, on 
the three and twentieth day thereof 
and it was written according to all 
that Mordecai commanded unto the 
Jews, and to the lieutenants, and 
the deputies and rulers of the Prov- 
inces which are from ‘India unto 
Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and 
seven provinces, unto every prov- 
ince faccording to the writing 
thereof, and unto every people after 
their language, and to the Jews 
according to their writing, and 
according to their language. 

10 #And he wrote in the king 
Ahasuerus’ name, and sealed it with 
the king’s ring, and sent letters by 
posts on horseback, and riders on 
mules, camels, and young drome- 
daries: 

11 Wherein the king granted the 
Jews which were in every city to 
gather themselves together, and 
to stand for their life, to destroy, 
to slay, and to cause to perish, 
all the power of the people and 
province that would assault them, 
both little ones and women, and 


ESTHER. 


a Esth.4.11; 
5.2. 


b Esth.7.4; 
Neh.2.3. 


¢ v.1; Prov. 
13.22. 


d Esth.1.19; 
Dan.6.8,12, 
15. 

€i.e. June. 


f Esth.1.1. 


‘| g Esth.1.22; 


3.12. 


h Esth.3.12, 
13; 1 Ki.21.8. 


i Esth.9.10, 
15,16. 


9 Esth.3.13; 
9.1. 

k i.e. March; 
also vs.15,17, 
19,21,22. 


7 Esth.3.15. 
Prov.29.2. 


m Psa.97.11, 

n Esth.9.2; 
Gen.35.5; 
Ex.15.16; 
Deut.2.25, 
11.25. 


o Esth.3.13. 


564 


ito take the spoil of them for a 
prey, : 

12 JUpon one day in all the prov- 
inces of king Ahasuerus, namely, 
upon the thirteenth day of the 
twelfth month, which is the month 
Adar. 

13 The copy of the writing for a 
commandment to be given in every 


province was published unto all 


people, and that the Jews should be 
ready against that day to avenge 
themselves on their enemies. 

14 So the posts that rode upon 
mules and camels went out, being 
hastened and pressed on by the 
king’s commandment. And the de- 
cree was given at Shushan the © 
palace. 

15 And Mordecai went out from 
the presence of the king in royal 
apparel of blue and white, and with 
a great crown of gold, and with 
a garment of fine linen and purple: 
fand the city of Shushan rejoiced 
and was glad. 

16 The Jews had “light, and glad- 
ness, and joy, and honour. 

17 And in every province, and in 
every city, whithersoever the king’s 
commandment and his decree came, 
the Jews had joy and gladness, a 
feast and a good day. And many of 
the people of the land became Jews; 
“for the fear of the Jews fell upon 
them. 


CHAPTER 9. 
The vengeance executed. 


OW in the twelfth month, that 
is, the month Adar, on the thir- 
teenth day of the same, °when the 
king’s commandment and his decree 
drew near to be put in execution, 
in the day that the enemies of the 
Jews hoped to have power over 
them, (though it was turned to the 
contrary, that the Jews had rule 
over them that hated them;) 

2 The Jews gathered themselves 
together in their cities throughout 
all the provinces of the king Ahas- 
uerus, to lay hand on such as 
sought their hurt: and no man 
could withstand them; for the fear 
of them fell upon all people. 

3 And all the rulers of the prov- 
inces, and the lieutenants, and the 
deputies, and officers of the king, : 
helped the Jews; because the fear 
of Mordecai fell upon them. 

4 For Mordecai was great in the 
|King’s house, and his fame went 
out throughout all the provinces: 


ee AE hp AN 
. \ 


ESTHER. 


95] 


[9 28 


for this man Mordecai waxed| B.c.s09. |the fourteenth thereof; and on the 


greater and greater. 

5 Thus the Jews smote all their 
enemies with the stroke of the 
sword, and slaughter, and destruc- 
tion, and did what they would unto 
those that hated’ them. 

6 And in Shushan the palace the 
Jews slew and destroyed five hun- 
dred men. 

7 And Parshandatha, and Dal- 
phon, and Aspatha, 

8 And Poratha, and Adalia, and 
Aridatha, 

9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, 
and Aridai, and Vajezatha, 

10 The ten sons of Hanian the son 
of Hammedatha, the enemy of the 
Jews, slew they; ¢but on the spoil 
laid they not their hand. 

11 On that day the number of 
those that were slain in Shushan 
the palace was brought before the 


king. 

12 And the king said unto Esther 
the queen, The Jews have slain and 
destroyed five hundred men in Shu- 
shan the palace, and the ten sons 
of Haman; what have they done in 
the rest of the king’s provinces? 
bnow what is thy petition? and it 
shall be granted thee: or what is 
thy request further? and it shall be 
done. 

13 Then said Esther, If it please 
the king, let it be granted to the 
Jews which are in Shushan to do 
to morrow also ‘according unto this 
day’s decree, and let Haman’s ten 
sons be hanged upon the gallows. 

14 And the king commanded it so 
to be done: and the decree was 

_-given at Shushan; and they hanged 
Haman’s ten sons. : 

15 For the Jews that were in Shu- 
shan @gathered themselves together 
on the fourteenth day also of the 
month Adar, and slew three hun- 
dred men at Shushan; “but on the 
prey they laid not their hand. 

16 But the other Jews that were 
jn the king’s provinces gathered 
themselves together, and stood for 
their lives, and had rest from their 
enemies, and slew of their foes sev- 
enty and five thousand, fput they 
laid not their hands on the prey, 

17 On the thirteenth day of the 
month Adar; and on the fourteenth 
day of the same rested they, and 
made it a day of feasting and glad- 


ness. 

18 But the Jews that were at 
Shushan assembled together on 
the thirteenth day thereof, and on 


a See Esth. 
8.11. 


b Esth.5.6; 7.2. 


c Esth.8.11. 

dv.2; Esth. 
8.11. 

ev.10. 


{See Esth. 
8.11. 


g vs.11,15. 
hie. March; 


also vs.15,17. 


? Deut.16. 
11,14. 


j v.22; Neh. 
8,10,12. 


k Psa.30.11. 


1 Esth.7.10; 
Psa.7.16. 


m Esth.8.17; 


Isa.56.3,6; 
Zech.2.11. 


565 


fifteenth day of the same they 
rested, and made it a day of feasting 
and gladness. 

19 Therefore the Jews of the vil- 
lages, that dwelt in the unwalled 
towns, made the fourteenth day of 
the *#month Adar ‘a day of glad- 
ness and feasting, and a good day, 
and of jsending portions one to 
another. 


The feast of Purim instituted. 


20 And Mordecai wrote these 
things, and sent letters unto all 
the Jews that were in all the 
provinces of the king Ahasuerus, 
both nigh and far, 

21 To stablish this among them, 
that they should keep the four- 
teenth day of the month Adar, and 
the fifteenth day of the same, 
yearly, 

22 As the days wherein the Jews 
rested from their enemies, and the 
month which was turned unto 
them from sorrow to joy, and from 
mourning into a good day: that 
they should make them days of 
feasting and joy, and of sending 
portions one to another, and gifts 
to the poor. 

23 And the Jews undertook to do 
as they had begun, and as Mordecai 
had written unto them; 

24 Because Haman the son of 
Hammedatha, the Agagite, the en- 
emy of all the Jews, had devised 
against the Jews to destroy them, 
and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, 
to consume them, and to destroy 
them; 

25 But when Esther came before 
the king, he commanded by letters 
that his wicked device, which he 
devised against. the Jews, should 
lreturn upon his own head, and 
that he and his sons should be 
hanged on the gallows. 

26 Wherefore they called these 
days Purim after the name of Pur. 
Therefore for all the words of this 
letter, and of that which they had 
seen concerning this matter, and 
which had come unto them, 

27 The Jews ordained, and took 
upon them, and upon their seed, 
and upon all such “as joined them- 
selves unto them, so as it should 
not fail, that they would keep these 
two days according to their writing, 
and according to their appointed 
time every year; 

298 And that these days should 
be remembered and kept through- 


9 29] 


ESTHER. 


[10 3 


out every generation, every family,| B.C. 509. 
every province, and every city; and 
that these days of Purim should 
not fail from. among the Jews, nor 
the memorial of them perish from A Sees iia 


their seed. 
29 Then Esther the queen, “thelé See v.20; 
daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai] Esth.8.10. 


the Jew, wrote with all authority, | . msin.4.3,16, 


to confirm this second letter of| 

Purim. d i.e. coasts. 
30 And he sent the letters unto}, Beth. 15: 
all the Jews, to the hundred twenty 

and seven provinces of the king 


dom of Ahasuerus, with words of Z Eee 9. 


, peace and truth, 
;, 31 Toconfirm these days of Purim 
.in their times appointed, accord- 
ing as Mordecai the Jew and Esther 
the queen had enjoined them, and 
as they had decreed for themselves 
and for their seed, the matters of 
‘the fastings and their cry. 


32 And the decree of Esther con- 
firmed these matters of Purim; and 
it was written in the book. 


CHAPTER 10. 
Mordecai prime minister. 


aoe the king Ahasuerus laid a 
stribute upon the land, _and 
upon the 4isles of the sea. 

2 And all the acts of his power 
and of his might, and the declara- 
tion of the greatness of Mordecai, 
ewhereunto the king advanced him, 
are they not written in the book of 
the chronicles of the kings of Media 
and Persia? 

3 For Mordecai the Jew was next 
unto king Ahasuerus, and great 
among the Jews, and accepted of the 
multitude of his brethren, ‘seeking 
the wealth of his people, and speak- 
ing peace to all his seed. 


THE POETICAL BOOKS, 


THE books classed as poetical are Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Sony of 
Solomon, Lamentations. The term “poetical” is not to be taken as implying fan- 
cifulness or unreality, but as relating to form only. They are the books of the 
human experiences of the people of God under the various exercises of earthly life; 
but those experiences are, apart from the mere external setting, wrought in them by 
the Spirit, interpreted to us by the Spirit, and written by holy men of God as they 
were moved by the Spirit. While this is true of all these books, the Psalms in- 
cluded, the latter have also a prophetic character. 

The Hebrew poetic form is peculiar, and demands a word of explanation. Rhythm 
is not achieved by repetition of similar sounds, as in rhymed verse; nor by rhyth- 
mic accent as in blank verse, but by repetition of ideas. This is called parallel- 
ism; e.g. 

“The Lorp also will be a refuge for the oppressed, 
A refuge in times of trouble.” (Psa. 9. 9.) 


Parallelism is called synonymous when the thought is identical, as in the above 
instance; antithetic when the primary and the secondary ideas are in con- 
trast; e.g. 

“For the LorD knoweth the way of the righteous: 
But the way of the ungodly shall perish’ (Psa. 1. 6); 


and synthetic when the thought is developed or enriched by the parallel; e.g. 


“And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; 
Yea, thou shalt dig about thee, and thou shalt take 
thy rest in safety.”’ (Job 11. 18.) 


Under this method the Poetical Books are epic, lyric, and drarnatic, and supply 
examples of literary expression unmatched in uninspired literature. 


ioat 
a 
a | 


HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


: a THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 
_ to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 
so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference 


a and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 


wy 
“as . ILLUSTRATION 
(at Mark 1. 1.) 


ie Here Gospel is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place: 
_ Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the references in parenthesis are 


wt 
. 


se the first and last. 


568 re 


11) [1 13 


THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Jos is in form a dramatic poem. It is probably the oldest of the Bible books, and 
was certainly written before the giving of the law. It would have been impossible, 
in a discussion covering the whole field of sin, of the providential government of 
God, and of man’s relation to Him, to avoid all reference to the law if the law had 
then been known. Job was a veritable personage (Ezk. 14. 20; James 5. 11), and 
the events are historical. The book sheds a-remarkable light on the philosophic 
breadth and intellectual culture of the patriarchal age. The problem is, Why do 


the godly suffer? 
II. Job and his wife, 2.9,10. III. 


Job is in seven parts: I. Prologue, 1. 1-2. 8. 


Job and his three friends, 2. 11-31. 40. 
VI. Job’s final answer, 42. 1-6. 


and Job, 38. 1-41. 34. 


IV. Job and Elihu, 32. 1-37. 24. 


3 V. Jehovah 
VII. Epilogue, 42. 7-17. 


The events recorded in Job cover a period of within 1 year. 


a ae een Pore ne eee Tn aT? 
(4) Satan’s theory: Job was g00d 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. Prologue: (1) The char- 
acter of Job. 


HERE was a man in the lard 
of 2Uz, whose name was °Job; 


B.C. 1520. 


because prosperous. 

6 Now there was a day when the 
fgons of God came to present them- 
selves before the LorD, and ¢Satan 
came also among them. 

7 And the LorD said unto “Satan, 


and that man was “perfect. and _up- 25.20. 
right, and one thats dfeared God, @ See Jer.25-20. |v7hence comest thou? Then Satan 
and eschewed evil. bEzk.14.14; |answered the Lorp, and said, From 
Jas.5.11. going to and fro in the earth, and 

(2) The family and prosperity | see 1 Ki.8.61./ffom walking up and down in it. 

of Job. Seciées if age the ORD end unto Satan, 
: Saag ‘Hast thou considered my servant 
Sac aergeS ae ela app aes Job, that there is none like him in 
a e1 Ki.21.10,13./the earth, a (perfect and an upright 


3 His substance also was seven 
thousand sheep, and three thousand 


f This scene 
is in heaven. 


man, one that ¢feareth God, and 
escheweth evil? 


ee Cf.Job 21-7. | 9 Then Satan answered the Lorp, 
and a very great household; so that @ Satan. vs. pes Doth Job “fear God for 
; -9,12; Jo! £ 
_Saaeeone greatest of all the 21-3.) 10 Hast not thou made, an hedge 
: k : 3.15 about him, and about his house, and 
4 rena ie Sons ee anh ee pees 00:) about all that he hath on every 
Bed a icy Be ipepes three|Heb. the —|side? thou hast blessed the work 
ey eee an e a Ms d ink ith Fete H of his hands, and his substance is 
te SEN ee ee eee ee itl Rey.i2.9,10. |ancreased in the,land, 
em. Bite 3) 11 But eal thie hand now, 
- -. |?Heb. has and touch all that he hath, and he 
(3) The piety of Job and his thou set thy/ 11 curse thee to thy face. 
household. heart on. : 
. Job 2.3. 12 And the LorD said unto Satan, 
5 And it was so, when the days of Fane te Behold, all that he hath is in thy 


their feasting were gone about, that 
Job sent and sanctified them, and 
rose up early in the morning, and 
offered burnt-offerings according 
to the number of them all: for Job 
said, It may be that my sons 
have sinned, and ‘cursed God in 
their hearts. Thus did Job contin- 
ually. 


power; only upon himself put not 
forth thine hand. So Satan went 
forth from the presence of the LorD. 


(5) In the sieve of Satan: mys- 
tery of God’s permissive will. 
(See “Satan,” Gen. 3. 1; Rev. 
20. 10.) 

13 And there was a day Jwhen his 


1A region at the south of Edom, and west of the Arabian desert, extending to 


Chaldea. 


569 


1 14] 


sons and his daughters were eating 
and drinking wine in their eldest 
brother’s house: 

14 And there came a messenger 
unto Job, and said, The oxen were 
plowing, and the asses feeding ~be- 
side them: 

15 And the Sabeans fell upon 
them, and took them away; yea, 
they have slain the servants with 
the edge of the sword; and I only 
am escaped alone'to tell thee. _ 

16 While he was yet speaking, 
there came also another, and said, 
The fire of God is fallen from 
heaven, and hath burned up the 
sheep, and the servants, and con- 
sumed them; and I only am escaped 
alone to tell thee. : 

17 While he was yet speaking, 
there came also another, and said, 
The Chaldeans made out three 
bands, and fell upon the camels, 
and have carried them away, yea, 
and slain the servants with the 
edge of the sword; and I only am 
escaped alone to tell thee. 

18 While he was yet speaking, 
there came also another, and ‘said, 
@Thy sons and tHy daughters were 
eating and drinking wine in their 
eldest brother’s house: 

19 And, behold, there came a 
great wind from the wilderness, and 
smote the four corners of the house, 
and it fell upon the young men, and 
they are dead; and I only am 
escaped alone to teil thee. 

20 Then Job arose, and rent his 
mantle, and shaved his head, and 
fell down upon the ground, and 
worshipped. 

21 And said, Naked came I out 
of my mother’s womb, and naked 
shall I return thither: the Lorp 
gave, and the Lorp hath taken 
away; blessed be the nameof the 
Lorp. 

22 In all this Job sinned not, nor 
charged God foolishly. 


CHAPTER 2. 


(6) Again in Satan’s sieve: fam- 
ily, property, health gone. 


GAIN °there was a day when 
the sons of‘God came to pre- 
sent themselves before the LorD| 
and Satan ‘came also among them 
to present himself before the 
Lorp. 
2 And the Lorp said unto Satan, 
From whence comest thou? And 
dSatan answered the LorD, and 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. 


a vs.4,13. 
b Job 1.6. 


c Satan. vs.2, 


d Job 1.7. 
e See 1 Ki.8.61, 


f Psa.19.9, 
note. 


g Job 27.5,6. 

h Heb. to swal- 
low him up. 
Job 9.17. 

# Job 1.11. 

J Job 19.20. 

R Job 1.12. 


l Job 1.21; 
Jas.5.10,11. 


$70 


[2 13 


said, From going to and fro in the 
earth, and from walking up and 
down in it. 
3 And the LorD said unto Satan, 
Hast thou considered my servant 


\Job, that there is none like him in 


the earth, a “perfect and an upright 
man, one that /feareth God, and es- 


icheweth evil? and still he sheldeth 


fast his integrity, although thou 
movedst me against him, to /de- 
stroy him without cause. 

4 And Satan answered the Lorp, 
and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that 
a man hath will he give for his life. 

5 *But put forth thine hand now, 
and touch his Jbone and his flesh, 
and he will curse thee to thy face. 

6 #And the LorD said unto Satan, 
Behold, he zs in thine hand; but 
save his life. 

7 So went Satan forth from the 
presence of the LORD, and smote 


- |Job with sore boils from the sole of 


his foot unto his crown. - 

8 And he took him a potsherd to 
scrape himself withal; and the ‘sat 
down among the. ashes. 


Part i. Job and his wife. 


9 Then said his wife unto him, 
Dost thou still retain thine integ- 
rity? curse God, and die. 

10 But he said unto her, Thou 
speakest as one of the foolish 
women speaketh. What? /shall we 
receive good at the hand of God, 
and shall wenot receive evil? In all 
this did not Job sin with his lips. 


Part III. Job and his three 
friends: scene, the ash ‘heap 
outside an oriental village. 
(1) The friends arrive. 


11 Now when Job’s three friends 
heard of all this evil that was come 
upon him, they came every one 
from his own place; Eliphaz the 
Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, 
and Zophar the Naamathite: for 
they had made an appointment to- 
gether to come to mourn with him 
and to comfort him. 

12 And when they lifted up their 
eyes afar off, and knew him not, 
they lifted up their voice, and wept: 
and they rent every one his mantle, 
and_ sprinkled dust upon their 
heads toward ‘heaven. 

13 So they sat down with ‘him 
upon the ground seven days and 
seven nights, and none spake a 
word unto him: for they saw that 
his grief was very great, 


3 1) JOB. 


[4 10 


CHAPTER 3. 


(2) Job’s first discourse: he tells 
his misery and despair. 


el TER this opened Job his 
4 mouth, and cursed his day. 

2 And Job spake, and said, 

3 “Let the day perish wherein I 
was born, and the night in which 
it. was said, There is a man child 
conceived. 

4 Let that day be darkness; let 
not God regard it from above, 
neither let the light shine upon it, 


of death stain it; let a cloud dwel 


upon it; let the blackness of the|‘ Hs}. s#2, 
day terrify it. the morn- 


6 As for that night, let darkness 
seize upon it; let it not be joined 
unto the days of the year, let it not|¢ Job 10.18. 
come intothe number of the months. 

7 Lo, let that night be solitary, 
let no joyful voice come therein. 

8 Let them curse it that curse the 
day, who are ready to raise up 
their mourning. 

9 Let the stars of the twilight] _ 
thereof be dark; let it look for light,| * } $am-1,20: 
but Aave none; neither let it see the] Prov.31.6. 
¢dawning of the day: ¢ ; 

10 Because. it shut not up the|/ Heb wait. 
doors of my mother’s womb, nor THR 
hid sorrow from miné eyes. 

1i ¢Why died I not from the 
womb? why did I not give up 
the ghost when I came out of the 
belly? 

12 Why did the knees prevent 
me? or why the breasts that I 
should suck? 

13 For now should I have lain 
_still and been quiet, I should have 
slept: then had I been at rest, 

14 With kings and counsellors of 
the earth, ‘which built desolate 
places for themselves; 

15 Or with princes that had gold, 
who filled their houses with silver: 

16 Or fas an hidden untimely 
birth I had not been; as infants 
which never saw light. 

17 There the wicked cease from 
troubling; and there the weary be 
at rest. 

18 There the prisoners rest to- 
gether; éthey hear not the voice of! 
the oppressor. 


e Job 15.28. 
f Psa.58.8. 
g Job 39.7. 
h Jer.20.18. 


k Job 19.8; 
Lam.3.7. 


1 1sa.35.3. 
m i.e. by His 


15.30; Isa. 
2.8. 


B.C. 1520. 


a Job 10.18,19. 
5 Let darkness and the ’shadow}» Job 10.21,22. 


ing. Job 41. 
18. 


11.4; 2 Thes, 


19 The small and great are there; 
and the servant is free from his 
master. 

20 #Wherefore is light .given to 
him that is in misery, and life unto 
the *bitter in soul; 

21 Which Ylong for death, but it 
cometh not; and dig for it more 
than for hid treasures; 

22 Which rejoice exceedingly, and 
are glad, when they can find the 
grave? 

23 Why is light given to aman 
whose way is hid, and *~whom God 
hath hedged in? 

24 For my sighing cometh before 
I eat, and my roarings are poured 
out like the waters. 

25 For the thing which I greatly 
feared is come upon me, and that 
which I was afraid of is come unto 


me. 

26'I was not in safety, neither 
had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet 
trouble came. 


CHAPTER 4. 
(3) First discourse of Eliphaz. 


HEN !Eliphaz the Temanite 
answered and said, 

2 If we assay to commune with 
thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who 
can withhold himself from speaking? 

3 Behold, thou hast instructed 
many, and thou hast strengthened 
the weak hands. 

4 Thy words have upholden him 
that was falling, and thou ‘hast 
strengthened the feeble knees. 

5 But now it is come upon thee, 
and thou faintest; it toucheth thee, 
and thou art troubled. 

6 Is not this thy fear, thy confi- 
dence, thy hope, and the upright- 
ness of thy ways? 

7 Remember, I pray thee, who 
ever perished, being innocent? or 
where were the righteous cut off? 

‘8 Even as I have seen, they that 
plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, 
reap the same. 

9 By the blast of God they perish, 
and by the “breath of his nostrils 
are they consumed. 

10 The roaring of the lion, and 
the voice of the fierce lion, and the 


teeth of the young lions, are broken, 


1 Eliphaz is a religious dogmatist whose dogmatism rests upon a mysterious and 


remarkable experience (vs. 12-16). 


Did a spirit ever pass before Job’s face? Did 


fob’s hair of his flesh ever stand up? Then let him be meek while one so superior 


as Eliphaz declares the 


causes of his misfortunes. 


Eliphaz says many true things 


(as do the others), and often rises into eloquence, but he remains hard and cruel, a 
dogmatist who must be heard because of one remarkable experience, 


574 


i a 
< 


4 11] 


11 The old lion perisheth for lack 
of prey, and the stout lion’s whelps 
are scattered abroad. 

12 Now a thing was 4secretly 
brought to me, and mine ear re- 
ceived a little thereof. 

13 In thoughts from the visions of 
the night, when deep sleep falleth 
on men, 

14 Fear came upon me, and trem- 
bling, which made all my bones to 
shake. 

15 Then a spirit passed before my 
face; the hair of my flesh stood 


up: 

16 It stood still, but I-could not 
discern the form thereof: an image 
was before mine eyes, there was 
silence, and I heard a voice, say- 
ing, 

17 Shall mortal man be more just 
than God? shall a man be more 
pure than his maker? 

18 Behold, he put no ®trist in his 
servants; and his ‘angels he charged 
with folly: 

19 How much less in them 
that dwell in houses of clay, 
whose foundation is in the dust, 
which are crushed before the 
moth? 

20 They are destroyed from morn- 
ing to evening: they perish for ever 
without any regarding it. 

21 Doth not their excellency 
which is in them go away? they 
die, even without wisdom. 


CHAPTER 5. 


(First discourse of Eliphaz, 
continued.) 


Gan now, if there be any that 
will answer thee; and to which 
of the saints wilt thou turn? 

2 For wrath killeth the foolish 
man, and envy slayeth the silly 
one. 

3 4T have seen the foolish taking 
root: but suddenly I cursed his 
habitation. 

4 ‘His children are far from 
safety, and they are crushed in 
the gate, ‘neither is there any to 
deliver them. 

5S Whose harvest the hungry eat- 
eth up, and taketh it even out of 
the thorns, and the robber swal- 
loweth up their substance. 

6 Although affliction cometh not 
forth of the dust, neither doth 
trouble spring out of the ground; 

7 Yet man is éborn unto trouble, 
as the sparks fly upward, 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. 


a Heb. by 
stealth. 


b Psa.2.12, 
note, 


c Heb.1.4, 
note. 


d Psa.37.35, 
36; Jer-12. 
250 

e Psa.119 155. 

J Psa.109.12. 

g Gen.3.17-19. 

h Job 28.26. 

1 Or, cannot 
perform 
anything. 

j1 Cor.3.19. 

k Psa.35.10. 


11 Sam.2.8; 
Psa.107.42. 


m Psa.94.12; 
Prov.3.11, 
12; Heb.12. 
5; Jas.1.12; 
Rev.3.19. 


n Deut.32.39; 
1 Sam.2.6; 
Isa.30.26; 
Hos.6.1. 

o Psa.34.19; 
91.3; Prov. 
24.16; 1 Cor. 
10.13. 

> Psa.91.10. 

q Psa.33.19; 
37.19. 

r Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59. 
20, note. 

s Psa.31.20. 

tIsa.11.9; 
35.9; 65.25; 
Ezk.34.25, 

u Hos.2.18. 

v Or, that 
peace is thy 
tabernacle, 

w Psa.72.16. 


x Prov.9.i1; 
10.27. 


y Psa.111.2. 


572 


[5 27 


8 I would seek unto God, and unto 
‘God would I commit my cause: 

9 Which doeth great things and 
unsearchable; marvellous things 
without number: 

10 #Who giveth rain upon the 
earth, and sendeth waters upon the 
fields: 

11 Toset up on high those that be 
low; that those which mourn may 
be exalted to safety. 

12 He disappointeth the de- 
vices of the crafty, so that their 
hands ‘cannot perform their enter- 
prise. k 

13. He taketh the Jwise in their 
own craftiness: and the counsel of 
the froward is carried headlong. 

14 They meet with darkness in 
the daytime, and grope in the 
noonday as in the night. 

15 But he “sayeth the poor from 
the sword, from their mouth, and 
from the hand of the mighty. 

16 ‘So the poor hath hope, and 
iniquity stoppeth her mouth. 

17 ™Behold, happy 1s the man 
whom God correcteth: therefore 
despise not thou the chastening of 
the Almighty: 

18 For he *maketh sore, and bind- 
eth up: he woundeth, and his hands 
make whole. 

19 °He shall deliver thee in six 
troubles: yea, in *seven there shall 
no evil touch thee. 

20 In %famine he shall tredeem 
thee from death: and in war from 
the power of the sword. 

21 SThou shalt be hid from the 
scourge of the tongue: neither shalt 
thou be afraid of destruction when 
it cometh. 

22 At destruction and’ famine 
thou shalt laugh: ‘neither shait 
thou be afraid of the beasts of the 
earth. 

23 For thou shalt be in league 
with the stones of the field: “and 
the beasts of the field shall be at 
peacé with thee. 

24 And thou shait know tHat *thy 
tabernacle shall be in peace: and 
thou shalt visit thy habitation, ‘and 
shalt not sin. 

25 Thou shalt know also that 
thy seed shall be great, arid thine 
offspring “as the grass of the 
earth, 

26 *Thou shalt come to thy grave 
in a full age, like as a shock of corn 
cometh in in his season. 

27 Lo this, we have Ysearched it, 
so it 7s; hear it, and know thou it 
for thy good. 


CHAPTER 6. 


(4) Job’s answer to Eliphaz: a 
touching appeal for pity. 


UT Job answered and said, 

2 Oh that my grief were 
throughly weighed, and my calam- 
ity laid in the balances together! 

3 For now it would be heavier 
than the sand of the sea: therefore 
my words are swallowed up. 

4 For the arrows of the Almighty 
are within me, the poison whereof 
drinketh up my spirit: ¢the terrors 
of God do set themselves in array 
against me. 

5 Doth the wild ass bray when he 
hath grass? or loweth the ox over 
his fodder? 

6 Can that which is unsavoury be 
eaten without salt? or is there any 
taste in the white of an egg? 

7 The things that my soul re- 
fused to touch are as my sorrowful 
meat. 

8 Oh that I might have my re- 
quest; and that God would grant 
me the thing that I long for! 

9 Even that it would please God 
to destroy me; that he would 
A loose his hand, and cut me 
off! 

10 Then should I yet have com- 
fort; yea, I would harden myself in 
sorrow: let him not spare; for I 
have not concealed othe words of 
the Holy One. 

11 What is my strength, that I 
should hope? and what is mine 
end, that I should prolong my 
life? 

12 Is my strength the strength of 
stones? or is my flesh of brass? 

13 Is not my help in me? and is 
wisdom driven quite from me? 

14 ©To him that is afflicted pity 
should be shewed from his friend; 
but he forsaketh the ¢fear of the 
Almighty. : 

15 ¢My brethren havedealt deceit- 
fully as a brook, and as the stream 
of brooks they pass away; 

16 Which are blackish by reason 
of the ice, and wherein the snow is 
hid: 

17 What time they wax warm, 
they vanish: when it is hot, they 
are consumed out of their place. 

18 The paths of their way are 
turned aside; they go to nothing, 
and perish. 

19 The troops of Tema looked, 
the companies 4of Sheba waited 
for them. 

20 They were confounded because 


JOB. 


a Psa.88.15,16. 


6 Inspiration. 
Job 32.18. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19) 


¢ Heb. to him 
that melt- 
eth, Prov. 
WAT. 


d Psa.19.9, 
note. 


e Psa.38.11; 
41.9. 


f Gen.25.15. 


g 1 Ki.10.1; 
Psa.72.10; 
Ezk.27.22,23. 


h Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa. 
59.20, note. 


t Job 17.10. 


Jj Job 14.5,13, 
14; Psa.39.4. 


k Heb. gapeth 
after. 


1 Job 17.12; 
Deut.28.67. 


m Isa.14.11. 


n Job 9.25; 
16.22; 17.11; 
Psa.90.5; 
102.11; 103. 
15; 144.4; 
Isa.38.12; 
40.6; Jas.4. 
14. 


o Psa.78.39; 
89.47. 


573 


B.C. 1520. 


(79 


they had hoped; they came thither, 
and were ashamed. 

21 .For now ye are nothing; ye see 
my casting down, and are afraid. 

22 Did I say, Bring unto me? or, 
Give a reward for me of your sub- 
stance? 

23 Or, Delivermefromtheenemy’s 
hand? or, “Redeem me from the 
hand of the mighty? 

24 Teach me, and I will hold my 
tongue: and cause me to understand 
wherein I have erred. 

25 How forcible are right words! 
but what doth your arguing re- 
prove? 

26 Do ye imagine to reprove 
words, and the speeches of one 
that is desperate, which are as 
wind? 

27 Yea, ye overwhelm the father- 
less, and ye dig a pit for your 
friend. 

28 Now therefore be content, look 
upon me; for it is evident unto you 
if I lie. 

29 *Return, I pray you, let it not 
be iniquity; yea, return again, my 
righteousness is in it. 

30 Isthere iniquity in my tongue? 
cannot my taste discern perverse 
things? 


CHAPTER 7. 


(Job’s answer to Eliphaz, 
continued.) 


[s there not jan appointed time 
to man upon earth? are not his 
days also like the days of an hire- 
ling? 

2 Asaservant “earnestly desireth 
the shadow, and as an hireling look- 
eth for the reward of his work: 

3 So am I made to possess months 
of vanity, and wearisome nights are 
appointed to me. 

4 When I lie down, I say, When 
shall I arise, and the night be gone? 
and I am full of tossings to and fro 
unto the dawning of the day, 

5 My-flesh is *clothed with worms 
and clods of dust; my skin is broken, 
and become loathsome. 

6 My days are swifter than a 
weaver’s shuttle, and are spent 
without hope. 

7 O remember that °my life is 
wind: mine eye shall no more see 
good. ; 

8 The eye of him that hath seen 
me shall see me no more: thine 
eyes are upon me, and I am not. 

9 As the cloud is consumed and 
vanisheth away: so he that goeth 


¥ 


down to the “grave shall come up 
no more. { 

10 He shall return no more to his 
house, neither shall his place know 
him any more. ; 

11 Therefore I will not refrain my 
mouth; I will speak in the anguish 
of my spirit; I will complain in the 
bitterness of my soul. 

12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that 
thou settest a watch over me? 

13. When I say, My bed shall com- 
fort me, my couch shall ease my 
complaint; : 

14 Then thou scarest me with 
dreams, and terrifiest me through 
visions: 

15 So that my soul chooseth 
strangling, and death rather than 
my life. 

16 I loathe it; I would not live 
alway: let me alone; for my days 
are vanity. 

17 *Whatisman,thatthoushould- 
est magnify him? and that thou 
shouldest set thine heart upon him? 

18 And that thou shouldest visit 
chim every morning, and try him 
every moment? 

19 How long wilt thou not depart 
from me, nor let me alone till I 
swallow down my spittle? 

20 I have sinned; what shall I do 
unto thee, O thou preserver of men? 
why hast thou set me as a mark 
against thee, so that I am a burden 
to myself? 

21 And why dost thounot pardon 
my transgression, and take away 
mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep 
in the dust; and thou shalt seek 
me in the morning, but I shall 
not be. 


CHAPTER 8. 


(5) First discourse of Bildad: he 
thinks Job a hypocrite. 


words of thy mouth be like a strong 
wind? : ¢ 

3 DothGod pervert judgment? or 
doth the Almighty pervert justice? 

4 If thy children have sinned 
against him, and he have cast them 
away for their transgression; 

5. If thou wouldest seek unto God 
betimes, and make thy supplication 
to the Almighty: 


B.C: 1520. 


6 If thou wert pure and upnght; 
surely now he would awake for 
thee, and make the habitation of 
thy righteousness prosperous. 

7 Though thy beginning was 
small, yet thy latter end should 
greatly increase. 

8 For enquire, I pray thee, of the 
former age, and prepare thyself to 
the search of their fathers: 

9 (For 4we are but of yesterday, 
and know nothing, because our 
days upon earth are a shadow:) 

10 Shall not they teach thee; and 
tell thee, and utter words out of 
their heart? 

11 Can the rush grow up without 


aHeb Sheof, |Mire?_can the flag grow without 
‘See Hab. water? 
2.5, note, 12 Whilst it is yet in his green- 
Meanie ness, and not cut down, it withereth 
144.35 Heb. |before any other herb. : 
2.6. 13 So are the paths of all that for- 
¢ Job 34.12 get God; and the ¢hypocrite’s hope 
17; Gen.18.. {shall perish: 
25; Deut.32. | 14 Whose hope shall be cut off, 
187:Den, [and whose Strust shall be a spider’s 
9.14; Rom. |web. 
3.5. 15 He shall lean upon his house, 
d Job 7.6; but it shall not stand: he shall hold 
Gen.47.9; it fast, but it shall not endure. 
1 Chr.29.15; | 16 He is green before the sun, and 


eriaaiee a his branch shooteth forth in his 
garden. 


¢ Job 11.20; ‘17 His roots are wrapped about 


Peciiniet the heap, and seeth the place of 
Prov.10.28, |Stones. 
sd 18 If he destroy him from his 
i eee place, then it shall deny him, say- 
ing, I have not seen thee. 
g Heb. take 19 Behold, this is the joy of his 


Hast ey ed way, and out of the earth shall 


others grow. 

20 Behold, God will not cast away 
a perfect man, neither will he thelp 
the evil doers: 


h Psa.35.26; 
109.29, 


# Psa.143.2; 


Rom.3.20. 21 Till he fill thy mouth with 
<p fefore laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing. 


22 They that hate thee shall be 
clothed with shame; and the 
dwelling place of the wicked shall 
come to nought. 


CHAPTER 9, 


(6) Job answers Bildad: he is a 
sinner,andknowsnot how tobe 
Justified—but not a hypocrite. 


he Job answered and said, 
2 I know it is.so of a truth: 
ook pow, should ‘man be just with 
‘O 


1 Bildad is a religious dogmatist of the superficial kind, whose dogmatism rests 


upon tradition (e.g. 8. 8-10) and 


upon proverbial wisdom and approved pious 
574 


9 3] 


3 If he will contend with him, he 
cannot answer him one of a thou- 
sand. 

4 *He is wise in heart, and mighty 
in strength: who hath hardened 
himseif against him, and hath 
prospered? 

5 Which removeth the mountains, 
and they know not: which over- 
tutneth them in his anger. 

6 4Which shaketh the earth out 
of her place, and the pillars thereof 
tremble. 

7 Which commandeth the sun, 
and it riseth not; and sealeth up the 


stars. 

8 Which alone spreadeth out the 
heavens, and treadeth upon the 
waves of the sea. 

9 ‘Which maketh ¢Arcturus, 
Orion, and Pleiades, and the cham-|°‘Géo;1" and 
bers of the south. Cimah. 

10 Which doeth great things past . 
finding out; yea, and wonders) * {9P7612 
without number. pres 

11 Lo, he goeth by me, and I see} f Job 2.3. 
him not: he passeth on also, but I),5.. 1 xis.61. 
perceive him not. as 

12 Behold, he taketh away, who}? Eccl.9.2,3; 
can hinder him? who will say unto) ©7*#!+- 
him, What doest thou? i Job 7.6,7. 

13 If God will not withdraw his| . ) 
anger, ‘the proud helpers do stoop|/ Qr,s/ips of. 
under him. ‘ 

14 How much less shall I answer|* Job 7.13. 
him, and choose out my words to} ; 5; 20.7, 
reason with him? 

15 Whom, though I were right- 
eous, yet would I not answer, but I 
would make supplication to my 


judge. 

16 If I had called,. and he had 
answered me; yet would I not be- 
lieve that he had hearkened unto 
my voice. 

17 For he breaketh me with a 
tempest, and multiplieth my 
wounds fwithout cause. 

18 He will not suffer me to take 
my breath, but filleth me with bit- 
terness. 

19 if I speak of strength, lo, he is 
strong: and if of judgment, who 
shall set me a time to plead? 

20 If I justify myself, mine own 
mouth shall condemn me: if I say, 
I am £perfect, it shall also prove me 
perverse. 

21 Though I were £perfect, yet 
would I not know my soul: I would 
despise my life. 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. 


a Job 36.5. 


6 Isa.2.19,21; 
Hag.2.6,21; 
Heb.12.26. 


¢ Job 38.31; 
Gert.1.16; 
Amos 5.8. 


d Heb. Ash, 


mJer.2.22. 


n 1sa.45.9; 
Jer.49.19; 
Rom.9.20. 


0 v.19; 
1 Sam.2.25, 


pl Sam.16.7. 


phrases. These abound in all his discourses. 
then every one knows them (Job 9. 4, 2; 


a problem as Job’s. 
575 


13273), 


[10 5 


22 This is one thing, therefore I 

said it, He destroyeth the ‘perfect 
and the wicked. 
| 23 If the scourge slay suddenly, 
he will laugh at the trial of the 
innocent. 
24 The earth is given into the 
hand of the wicked: he covereth the 
faces of the judges thereof; if not, 
where, and who is he? 

25 Now ‘my days are swifter than 
a post: they flee away, they see no 
good. . 

_26 They are passed away as the 
Jswift ships: as.the eagle that hast- 
eth to the prey. 

27 *IfI say, I will forget my com- 
plaint, I will leave off.my heaviness, 
and comfort myself: 

28 I am afraid of all my sorrows, 
I know that ‘thou wilt not hold me 
innocent, 

29 If I be wicked, why then la- 
bour I in vain? 

30 If I wash myself with snow 
water, and make my hands never 
so clean; 

31 Yet shalt thou plunge me in 
the ditch, and mine own clothes 
shall abhor me. 

32 For he isnot aman, as! am, 
that I should answer him, and we 
should come together in judgment. 

33 Neither is there any daysman 
betwixt us, that might lay his hand 
upon us both. ; 

34 Let him take his rod away from 
me, and let not his fear terrify me: 

35 Then would I speak, and not 
fear him; but if is not so with me. 


CHAPTER 10. 


(Job’s answer to Bildad, 
continued. ) 


MY’ soul is weary of my life; I 
will leave my complaint upon 
myself; I will speak in the bitter- 
ness of my soul. 

2 I willsay unto God, Do not con- 
demn me; shew me wherefore thou 
contendest with me. 

3 Is it good unto thee that thou 
shouldest oppress, that thou should- 
est despise the work of thine hands, 
and shine upon the counsel of the 
wicked? 

4 Hast thou eyes of flesh? ?or 
seest thou as man seeth? 

5 Are thy days as the days of 
man? are thy years as man’s days, 


His platitudes are true enough, but 


nor do they shed any light on such 


10. 6} 


‘ 


JOB. 


6 That thou enquirest after mine 
iniquity, and searchest after my sin? 

7 Thou knowest that I am not 
wicked; and there is none that can 
deliver out of thine hand. 

8 *Thine hands have made me 
and fashioned me together round 
about; yet thou dost destroy me. 

9 Remember, I beseech thee, that 
thou hast made me as the clay; and 
wilt thou bring me into dust again? 

10 Hast thou not poured me out 
as milk, and curdled me like cheese? 

11 Thou hast clothed me with 
skin and flesh, and hast fenced me 
with bones and sinews. 

12 Thou hast granted me life and 
favour, and thy visitation hath pre- 
served my spirit. 

13 And these things hast thou 
hid in thine heart: I know that this 
is with thee. 

14 If I sin, “then thou markest 
me, and thou wilt not acquit me 
from mine iniquity. 

15 IfI be wicked, woeuntome; and 
if I be righteous, yet will I not lift 
up my head. fam full of confusion; 
therefore see thou tine affliction: 

16 Foritincreaseth. Thou huntest 
me as a fierce lion: and again thou 
shewest thyself marvellous upon me. 

17 Thou renewest thy witnesses 
against me, and increasest thine 
indignation upon me; changes and 
war are against me. 

18 Wherefore then hast thou 
brought me forth out of the womb? 
Oh that I had given up the ghost, 
and no eye had seen me! 

19 I should have been as though I 
had not been; I should have been 
carried from the womb to the grave. 

20 Are not my days few? cease 
then, and let me alone, that I may 
take comfort a little, 

21 Before I go whence I shall not 
return, even ‘to the land of dark- 
ness ¢and the shadow of death; 

22 A land of darkness, as dark- 
ness itself; and of the shadow of 
death, without any order, and 
where the light is as darkness. 


CHAPTER i1. 


(7) Zophar’s first discourse: he 


thinks Job both hypocrite 
and Iiar, 


PL HEN answered 1Zophar the 
Naamathite, and said, 


B.C. 1520. 


a Psa.119.73. 
6 Psa.139.1. 
c Psa.88.12. 
d Psa.23.4. 

e Ezra 9.13. 


f Eccl.3.11; 
Rom.11.33. 


g Heb. the 
heights of 
heaven. 


h Psa.10.11, 
14; 35.22; 
94.11. 


t Lev.26,16; 
Deut.28.65. 


j Or, a puff of 
zreath. 


1 Zophar is 


: a religious dogmatist 
will do in any gi 


given case, why He will do it, 
forms of dogmatism this is most irreverent, 


i 


2 Should not the multitude of. 
words be answered? and should a 
man full of talk be justified? 

3 Should thy lies make men hold 
their peace? and when thou mock- 
est, shall no man make thee 
ashamed? 

4 For thou hast said, My doctrine 
1s pure, and 1 am clean in thine 
eyes. 

5 But oh that God would speak, 
and open his lips against thee; 

6 And that he would shew thee 
the secrets of wisdom, that they are 
double to that which is! Know 
therefore that «God exacteth of 
thee Jess than thine iniquity de- 
serveth. 

7 fCanst thou by searching find 
out God? canst thou find out the 
Almighty unto perfection? 

8 It is as %high as heaven: what 
canst thou do? deeper than hell; 
what canst thou know? 

9 The measure thereof is longer 
than the earth, and broader than 
the sea. 

10 If he cut off, and shut up, or 
gather together, then who can hin- 
der him? 

11 “For he knoweth vain men: he 
seeth wickedness also; will he not 
then consider it? 

12 For vain man would be wise, 
though man be born Iike a wild 
ass’s colt. 

13 Ifthou prepare thine heart, and 
stretch out thine hands toward him; 

14 If iniquity be in thine hand, 
put it far away, and let not wicked- 
ness dwell in thy tabernacles. 

15 For then shalt.thou lift up thy 
face without spot; yea, thou shalt 
be stedfast, and shalt not fear: 

16 Because thou shalt forget thy 
misery, and remember jé as waters 
that pass away: 

17 And thine age shall be clearer 
than the noonday; thou shalt shine 
forth, thou shalt be as the morning, 

18 And thou shalt be secure, be- 
cause there is hope; yea, thou shalt 
dig about thee, and thou shalt 
take thy rest in safety, 

19 Also thou shalt lie down, and 
none shall make thee afraid; yea, 
many shall make suit unto thee. 

20 But ‘the eyes of the wicked 
shall fail, and they shall not escape, 
and their hope shall be jas the 
giving up of the ghost 


who assumes to know all about God; what God 


576 


and all His thoughts about it. 
and least open to reason, 


Of all 


JOB. 


CHAPTER 12. 


(8) Job answers the three: he is 
familiar with their platitudes. 


ARP Job answered and said, 

2 No doubt but ye are the peo- 
ple, and wisdom shall die with you. 

3 But I have understanding as 
well as you; I am not inferior to 
you: yea, who knoweth not such 
things as these? 

4 I am as one mocked of his 
neighbour, ¢who calleth upon God, 
and he answereth him: the just 
upright man is laughed to scorn. 

5 4He that is ready to slip with 
his feet is as a lamp despised in the 
thought of him that is at ease. 

6 The tabernacles of robbers pros- 
per, and they that provoke God are|¢ Psa-91.15. 
secure; into whose hand God], proy-14.2. 
bringeth abundantly. Oe 


7 Butask now the beasts, and they] ¢ Num.16.22; 


Dan.5.23; 


shall teach thee; and the fowls of] acts 17.28. 


the air, and they shall tell thee: 
8 Or speak to the earth, and it/¢ic. with 
shall teach thee: and the fishes of} 7 
the sea shall declare unto thee. e Job 11.10. 
9 Who knoweth not in ail these ee bs 
that the hand of the Lorp hath)? }/4'835 
wrought this? 
10 «In whose hand is the soul of|¢ Gen.7.11. 
every living thing, and the breath], p,, 107.40; 


of all mankind. Dan.2.21. 
11 Doth not the ear try words?| |, * 
and the mouth taste his meat? y ren eas 
12 With the ancient zs wisdom:) 1 Cor.4.5. 
and in length of days understand-) . 
: 3 Psa.23.4; 
Prov.14.32. 


ing. 

13 ¢With him fs wisdom and 
strength, he hath counsel and 
understanding. 

14 Behold, che breaketh down, 
and it cannot be built again: he 
shutteth up a man, and there can be 
no opening. 

15 Behold, fhe withholdeth the 
waters, and they dry up: éalso he 
sendeth them out, and they over-| 
turn the earth. : | 

16 With him is strength and wis- 
dom: the deceived and the deceiver 
are his. 

17 He leadeth counsellors away 
spoiled, and maketh the judges 
fools. q 

18 He looseth the bond of kings, 
and girdeth their loins with a gir- 


e. 

19 He leadeth princes away 
spoiled, and overthroweth the 
mighty. 

20 He removeth away the speech 
of the trusty, and taketh away the 
understanding of the aged. a7 


B.C. 1520. | 


{13 17 


21 4He poureth contempt upon 
princes, and weakeneth the strength 
of the mighty. 

22 ‘He discovereth deep things 
out of darkness, and bringeth out 
to light the shadow of death. 

23 He increaseth the nations, and 
destroyeth them: he enlargeth the 
nations, and straiteneth them again. 

24 He taketh away the heart of 
the chief of the people of the earth, 
and causeth them to wander in a 
wilderness where there is no way. 

25 They grope in the dark with- 
out light, and he maketh them to 
stagger like a drunken man. 


CHAPTER 13. 
(Job’s answer, continued.) 


L2: mine eye hath seen all this, 
mine ear hath heard and un- 
derstood it. 

2 What ye know, the same do I 
know also: I am not inferior unto 


you. 

3 Surely I would speak to the 
Almighty, and I desire to reason 
with God. 

4 But ye are forgers of lies, ye 
are all physicians of no value. 

5 Othat ye would altogether hold 
your peace! and it should be your 
wisdom. 

6 Hear now my reasoning, and 
hearken to the pleadings of my lips. 

7 Will ye speak wickedly for God? 
and talk deceitfully for him? 

8 Will ye accept his person? will 
ye contend for God? 

9 Isit good that he should search 
you out? or as one man mocketh 
another, do ye so mock him? 

10 He will surely reprove you, if 
ye do secretly accept persons. 

jl Shall not his excellency make 
you afraid? and his dread fall upon 
you? 

12 Your remembrances are like 
unto ashes, your bodies to bodies 
of clay. 

13 Hold your peace, let me alone, 
that I may speak, and let come on 
me what will. 

14 Wherefore do I take my flesh 
in my teeth, and put my life in 
mine hand? 

15 jThough he slay me, yet will I 
trust in him: but I will maintain 
mine own ways before him. 

16 Healso shall be my salvation: 
for an hypocrite shall not come 
before him. 

17 Hear diligently my speech, and 
my declaration with your ears, 


J3 18] 


JOB. 


18 Behold now, I have ordered] B.c. 1520. 10 But man dieth, and wasteth 


my cause; I know that I shall be 
justified. . 

: 19 Whois he that will plead with 
me? for now, if I hold my tongue, I 
shall give up the ghost. ; 

20 Only do not two things unto! 
me: then will I not hide myself 
from thee. 

21 ¢Withdraw thine hand far 
from me: and let not thy dread 
make me afraid. 

22 Then call thou, and I will an- 
swer: or let me speak, and answer 
thou me. 1 Daa, MN, 

23 How many are mine iniquities} 
and sins? make me to know my 
transgression and my sin. 

24 Wherefore hidest thou thy 
face, and holdest me for thine 
enemy? 

25 Wilt thou break a leaf driven 
to and fro? and wilt thou pursue 
the dry stubble? 

26 For thou writest bitter things 
against me, and makest me to pos- 
sess the iniquities of my youth. 

27 Thou puttest my feet also in 
the stocks, and lookest narrowly 
unto all my paths; thou settest a 
print upon the heels of my feet. 

28 And he, as a rotten thing, con- 
sumeth, as a garment that is moth 
eaten. 


CHAPTER 14. 
(Job’s answer, continued.) 


AN that is born of a woman is 
of few days, “and fulloftrouble, 

2 ¢He cometh forth like a flower, 
and is cut down: he fleeth also as a 
shadow, and continueth not. 

3 And dost thou open thine eyes 
upon such an one, and bringest me 
into judgment with thee? 

4 Who can bring a clean thing 
Out of an unclean? not one. 

5 Seeing his days are determined, 
the number of his months are with 
thee, thou hast appointed his 
bounds that he cannot pass; 

6 Turn from ‘him, that he may 

rest, till he shall accomplish, as an 
hireling, his day. 
./ For there is hope of a tree, if 
it be cut down, that it will sprout 
again, and that the tender branch 
thereof will not cease, 

8 Though the root thereof wax 
old in the earth, and .the stock 
thereof die in the ground; 

2 Yet through the‘scent of water 
it will bud, and bring forth boughs 
like a plant, 


a Psa.39.10. 


6 Deut.32.20; 
Psa.13.1; 


¢ Job 5.7; 
Eccl.2.23. 


d Job 8.9; 
Psa.90. 


1 Pet.1.24. 


e Psa.102.26; 
Isa.51.6; 


f Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note. 


g Job 10.6,14; 
13.27; 31.4; 


Prov.5.21; 
Jer.32.19. 


h Deut.32.34; 
Hos,.13.12. 


i Lk.19.22. 


578 


away: yea, man giveth up the 
ghost, and wheré is he? 


[15 7 


: 


11 As the waters fail from the sea, 


and theflood decayeth and driéth up: 

12 So man Heth down, and riseth 
not: ¢till the heavens be no more, 
they shall not awake, nor be raised 
out of their sleep. 

13 O that thou wouldest hide me 
in the /grave, that thou wouldest 
keep me secret, until thy wrath be 
past, that thou wouldest appoint 
me a set time, and remember me! 

14 If a man die, shall he tive 
again? all the days of my appointed 
time will I wait, till my change come. 

15 Thou shalt call, and I will an- 
swer thee: thou wilt have a desire 
to the work of thine hands. 

16 sFor now thou numberest my 
Steps: dost thou not watch over my 
sin: 

17 ‘My transgression is sealed up 
in a bag, and thou sewest up mine 
iniquity. 

18 And surely the mountain fall- 
ing cometh to nought, and the rock 
is removed out of his place. 

19 The waters wear the stones: 
thou washest away the things 
which grow out of the dust of the 
earth; and thou destroyest the hope 
of man. 

20 Thou  prevailest for ever 
against him, and he passeth: thou 
changest his countenance, and send- 
est him away. 

21 His sons come to honour, and 
he knoweth it not; and they are 
brought low, but he perceiveth it 
not of them. 

22 But his flesh upon him shall 
have pain, and his soul within him 
shall mourn. 


CHAPTER 15. 


(9) Second discourse of Eliphaz: 
again rests upon superior expe- 
rience(v.8) and tradition(v.10). 


‘HEN answered Eliphaz the 
Temanite, and said, 

2 Should a wise man utter vain 
knowledge, and fill his belly with 
the east wind? 

3 Should he reason with unprofit- 
able talk? or with speeches where- 
with he can do no good? 

4 Yea, thou castest off fear, and 
restrainest prayer before God. 

2 For thy mouth uttereth thine 
iniquity, and thou choosest the 
tongue.of the ‘crafty. 

6 ‘Thine own mouth condemneth 


15 7] JOB. 


* 


[16 10 


thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips! B.c. 1520. | 27 Because he covereth his face 


testify against thee. 

7 Art thou the first man that was 
born? or wast thou made before the 
hills? 

8 Hast thou heard the secret of 
God? and dost thou restrain wis- 
dom to thyself? 

9 What knowest thou, that we 
know not? what understandest 
thou, which ss not in us? 

10 With us- are both the gray- 

‘headed and very aged men, much 
elder than thy father. 

11 Are the consolations of God 
small with thee? is there any secret 
thing with thee? 

12 Why doth thine heart carry 
thee away? and what do thy eyes|c Psa.2.12, 
wink at, note. 

13 That thou turnest thy spirit, Job 4.19; 
against God, and lettest such words} Psa.14.3; 
go out of thy mouth? 53.3. 


14 What is man, cha he should| ; teb. A 
be.clean?..and.he_w. [n_Of| sound of 


fears. 


COS: d Job 18,12. 

3° Behold, he putteth no ¢trust 4 
in his saints; yea, the heavens are|¢ Psa-17-10. 
not clean in his sight. ’ f Job 4.9. 

16 *How much more abominable 
and filthy zs man, which drinketh ise 
iniquity like water? Hos.10.13, 

17 I will shew thee, hear me; and 
that which I have seen I will de-|# Or trouble 
clare; some. 

18 Which wise men have told from]| i Psa.22.13; 
their fathers, and have not hid z¢;| 39-21- 

19 Unto whom alone the earth 
was given, and no stranger passed 
among them. 

20 The wicked man travaileth 
with pain all his days, and the 
“number of years is hidden to the 
oppressor. 

21 cA dreadful sound is in his 
ears: in prosperity the destroyer 
shall come upon him. 

22 He believeth not that he shall 
return out of darkness, and he is 
waited for of the sword. 

23 He wandereth abroad _ for 
bread, saying, Where is it? he 
knoweth that ¢the day of darkness 
is ready at his hand. . 

24 Trouble and anguish shall 
make him afraid; they shall pre- 
vail against him, as a king ready to 
the battle. , 

25 For he stretcheth out his hand 
against God, and strengtheneth 
himself against the Almighty. 

26 He runneth upon him, even 
on his neck, upon the thick bosses 
of his bucklers: 


with his fatness, and maketh col- 
lops of fat on Ars flanks. ‘ 

28 And he dwelleth in .desolate 
cities, and in houses which no man 
inhabiteth, which are ready to be- 
come heaps. 

29 He shall not be rich, neither 
shall his substance continue, neither 
shall he prolong the perfection 
thereof upon the earth. 

30 He shall not depart out of 
darkness; the flame shall dry up his 
branches, and /by the breath of his 
mouth shall he go away. 

31 Let not him that is deceived 
trust in vanity: for vanity shall be 
his recompence. 

32 It shall be accomplished before 
his time, and his branch shall not 
be green. , 

33 He shall shake off his unripe 
grape as the vine, and shall cast off 
his flower as the olive. 

34 For the congregation of hypo- 
crites shall be desolate, and fire 
shall consume the tabernacles of 
bribery. , 

35 &They conceive mischief, and 
bring forth vanity, and their belly 
prepareth deceit. i 


CHAPTER 16. 


(10) Job’s fourth answer: Eli- 
phaz has but heaped up words, 


hp Job answered and said, 

2 I have heard many such 
things: ’miserable comforters are 
ye all. 

3 Shall vain words have an end? 
or what emboldeneth thee that thou 
answerest? 

4 I also could speak as ye do: if 
your soul were in my soul’s stead, 
I could heap up words against you, 
and shake mine head at you. 

5 But I would strengthen you 
with my mouth, and the moving of 
my lips should asswage your Srief. 

6 Though I speak, my grief is not 
asswaged: and though I forbear, 
what am I* eased? 

7 But now he hath made me 
weary: thou hast made desolate all 
my company. 

8 And thou hast filled me with 
wrinkles, whichis a witnessagainst 
me: and my leanness rising up in 
me beareth witness to my face. 

9 He teareth me in his wrath, 
who hateth me: he gnasheth upon 
me with his teeth; mine enemy 
sharpeneth his eyes upon me. 
‘10 They have ‘gaped upon me 


« ofan 
‘ 
7% 
aD 


16 11] 


JOB. 


1 ae. . 
‘ » 


t 


[18 10 


with their mouth; they have smit- 
ten me upon the cheek reproach- 
fully; they have gathered them- 
selves together against me. 

11 God hath delivered me to the 
ungodly, and turned me over into 
the hands of the wicked. 

12 I was at ease, but he hath 
broken me asunder: he hath also 
taken me by my neck, and shaken 
me to pjeces, and set me up for his 
mark, 

13 His archers compass me’round 
about, he cleaveth my reins asun- 
der, and doth not spare; he poureth 


out my gall upon the ground. 


14 He breaketh me with breach 
upon breach, he runneth upon me 
like a giant. 

15 I have sewed sackcloth upon 
my skin, and ¢defiled my horn in 
the dust. 

16 My face is foul with weeping, 
and on my eyelids is the shadow of 
death; 

17 Not for any injustice in mine 
hands: also my prayer is pure. 

18 O earth, cover not thou my 
blood, and let my cry have no 
place. © 

19 Also now, behold, 'my witness 
is in heaven, and my record is on 
high. 

20 My friends scorn me: but mine 
eye poureth out tears unto God. 

21 O that one might plead for a 


“man with God, as a man pleadeth 


fcr his neighbour! 


22 When a few years are come, 


then I shall go the way whence I 
shall not return. 


CHAPTER 17. | 


(Job’s fourth answer, continued. ) 


MY breath is corrupt, my days 
are extinct, the graves are 
ready for me. 

2 Are there not mockers with 
me? and doth not mine eye continue 
in their provocation? 

ay down now, put me in a 
surety with thee; ¢who is he that 
will strike hands with me? 

4 For thou hast hid their heart 
from understanding: therefore shalt 
thou not exalt them. 

5 He that speaketh flattery to 
Ais friends, even the eyes of his 
children shall fail. 

6 He hath made me also a by- 


word of the people; and aforetime I 
was as a tabret. 


ine eye also 1s dim by reason! 


B.C. 1520. 


a Job 30.19; 
Psa.7.5. 


6 Rom.1.9. 
¢ Job 31.35. 


d Prov.6.1; 17. 
18; 22.26. 


e Psa.24.4. 
f Heb, Sheol. 


g Prov.13.9; 
20.20; 24.20. 


h Job 21,17, 
Psa.18.28. 


i Heb. hidden. 


580 


of sorrow, and all my members are 
as a shadow. ies, 

8 Upright men shall be astonied © 
at this, and the innocent shall stir 
up himself against the hypocrite. 

9 The righteous also shall hold 
on his way, and he that hath 
éclean hands shall be stronger and 
stronger. 

10 Butas for you all, do ye return, 
and come now: for I cannot find 
one wise man among you. 

11 My days are past, my purposes * 
are broken off, even the thoughts 
of my heart. 

12 They change the night into 
day: the light is short because of 
darkness. 

13 If I wait, the grave is mine 
house: I have made my bed in the 
darkness. 

14 I have said to corruption, 
Thou art my father: to the worm, 
Thou art my mother, and my sister. 

15 And where is now my hope? — 
as for my hope, who shall see it? 

16 They shall go down to the bars 
of the fpit, when our rest together 
1s in the dust. 


CHAPTER 18. 


(11) Bildad’s second discourse: 
a string of oriental proverbs. 


ALN answered Bildad the Shu- 
hite, and said, 

2 How long will it be ere ye 
make an end of words? mark, and 
afterwards we will speak. 

3 Wherefore are we counted as 
beasts, and reputed vile in your 
sight? 

4 He teareth himself in his anger: 
shall the earth be forsaken for 
thee? and shall the rock be removed 
out of his place? 

5 Yea, &the light of the wicked 
shall be put out, and the spark of 
his fire shall not shine. ; 

6 The light shall be dark in his 
tabernacle, and “his candle shall be 
put out with him. 

7 The steps of his strength shall 
be straitened, and his own counsel 
shall cast him down. 

8 For he is cast into a net by his 
own feet, and he walketh upon a 
snare. 

9 The gin shall take Aim by the 
heel, and the robber shall prevail 
against him. 

10 The snare is ‘laid for him in 
the ground, and a trap for him in 
the way. 


11 Terrors shall make him afraid 
on every side; and shall drive him 
to his feet. 

12 His strength shall be hunger- 
bitten, and ¢destruction shall be 
ready at his side. 

13 It shall devour the strength of} 
his skin: even the firstborn of 
death shall devour his strength. 

14 His confidence shall be rooted 
out of his tabernacle, and it shall 
bring him to the king of terrors. 

15 It shall dwell in his tabernacle, 
because st ys none of his: brimstone 
shall be scattered upon his habita- 
tion. 

16 His roots shall*be dried up) 
beneath, and above shall his branch 
be cut off. 

17 His “remembrance shall perish| 
from the earth, and he shall have 
no name in the street. 

18 He shall be driven from light! 
into darkness, and chased out of 
the world. 

19 He shall neither have son nor 
nephew among his people, nor any 
remaining in his dwellings. 

20 ‘They that come after Aim 
shall be astonied ¢at his day, as they 
that went before were affrighted. 

21 Surely such are the dwellings 
of the wicked, and this is the place 
of him that knoweth not God. 


CHAPTER 19. 


(12) Job’s fifth answer: his sub- 
lime faith (vs. 25-27). | 


pe geht Job answered and said, 

2 How long will ye vex my 
soul, and break me in pieces with 
_words? 

3 These ten times have ye re- 
proached me: ye are not ashamed 
that ye ‘make yourselves strange 
to me. 

4 And be it indeed that I have 
erred, mine error remaineth with 
myself, 

5 Ifindeed ye will magnify your- 
selves against me, and plead 
against me my reproach: | 
6 Know now that God hath over- 
thrown me, and hath compassed 
me with his net. 

7 Behold, I cry out of wrong, but 
I am not heard: I cry aloud, but 
there 1s no judgment. 

8 fHe hath fenced up my way 
that I cannot ‘pass, and he hath set 
darkness in my paths. 

Q &He hath stripped me of my 
glory, and taken the crown from 
my head. 


JOB. 


a Job 15.23. 
b Job 29.19. 
c Psa.34.16. 
d Psa.37.13. 


e Or, harden 
yourselves 
against me. 


f Job 3.235 
Psa.88.8. 


g Psa.89.44. 


h Psa.31.11; 
38.11; 69.8; 
88.8,18. 


i Job 1.11; 
Psa.38.2. 


j Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


k Resurrec- 
tion. 
vs.25-27; 
Gen.22.5. 
(Job 19,25; 
1 Cor.15.52.) 


1 Psa.17.15; 


i Cor.13.12; 
1 John 3.2. 


$81 


BIC. 1520. 


Pe Oe a ee ae 
| [19 29 


10 He hath destroyed me on every 
side, and I am gone: and mine 
hope hath he removed like a tree. 

11 He hath also kindled his wrath 
against me, and he counteth me 
unto him as one of his enemies. 

12 His troops come together, and 
Taise up their way against me, and 
encamp round about my taber- 
nacie, ; 

13 *He hath put my brethren far 
from me, and mine acquaintance 
are verily estranged from me. 

14. My kinsfolk have failed, and 
my familiar friends have forgotten 


me. 

15 They that dwell in mine house, 
and my maids, count me for a 
stranger: I am an alien in their 
sight. 

16 I called my servant, and he 
gave me no answer; I intreated 
him with my mouth. 

17 My breath is strange to my 
wife, though I intreated for the 
children’s sake of mine own 
body. 

18 Yea, young children despised 
me; I arose, and they spake against 
me. 

19 All my inward friends ab- 
horred me: and they whom I 
loved are turned against me. 

20 My bone cleaveth to my skin’ 
and to my flesh, and I am escaped 
with the skin of my teeth. 

21 Have pity upon me, have pity 
upon me, O ye my friends; ‘for the 
hand of God hath touched me, 

22 Why do ye persecute me as 
God, and are not satisfied with my 
flesh? 

23 Oh that my words were now 
written! oh that they were printed 
in a book! : 

24 That they were graven with 
an iron pen and lead in the rock 
for ever. ! 

25 ForI know that my Jredeemer 
liveth, and that he shall *stand at 
the latter day upon the earth: 

26 And though after my skin 
worms destroy this body, yet ‘in 
my flesh shall I see God: 

27. Whom I shali see for myself, 
and mine eyes shall behold, and 
not another; though my reins be 
consumed within me. 

28 But ye should say, Why perse- 
cute we him, seeing the root of the 
matter is found in, me? 

29 Be ye afraid of the sword: for 
wrath bringeth the punishments 
of the sword, that ye may know 
there is a judgment. 


20 1] [21 105 
CHAPTER 20. 20 Surely he shall not feel quiet-— 


ness in his belly, he shall not save 


(23) Zophar’s second discourse: 
tradition and proverb. 


HEN answered Zophar the Naa- 
mathite, and said, 

2 Therefore do my thoughts cause 
me to answer, and for this I make 
haste. 

3 I have heard the check of my 
reproach, and the spirit of my un- 
derstanding causeth me to answer. 

4 Knowest thou not this of old, 
since man was placed upon earth, 

5 That ¢the triumphing of the 
wicked is short, and the joy of the 
hypocrite but for a moment? 

6 Though his excellency mount 
up to the heavens, and his head 
Teach unto the clouds; 

7 Yet he shall perish for ever like 
his own dung: they which have 
seen him shall say, Where is he? 

8 He shall fly away %as a dream, 
and shall not be found: yea, he 
shall be chased away as a vision of 
the night. 

9 The eye also which saw him 
shall see him no more: neither 
hell his place any more behold 


m, 

10 His children shall seek to 
please the poor, and his hands 
‘shall restore their goods. 

11 His bones are full of the sin of 
his youth, which shall lie down 
with him in the dust. 

12 Though wickedness be sweet 
in his mouth, though he hide it 
under his tongue; 

13. Though he spare it, and for- 
sake it not; but keep it still within 
his mouth: 

14 Yet his meat in. his bowels is 
turned, it is the gall of asps within 
him, 

15 He hath swallowed down 
Tiches, and he shall vomit them up 
again: God shall cast them out of 
his belly. 

16 He shall suck the poison of 
ee the viper’s tongue shall slay 

im. 

17 He shall not see the rivers, the 
floods, the brooks of honey and 
butter. 

18 That which he laboured for 
shall he restore, and shall not 
swallow it down: according to his 
substance shal/ the restitution be, 
and he shall not rejoice therein. 

19:.-Because he hath oppressed 
and hath forsaken the poor; be- 
cause he hath violently taken away 
an house which he builded not; 


a Psa.37.35, 
36. 

b Psa.73.20;, 
90.5. 


cv.18. 


d Heb. 
crushed, 


e Psa,21.9. 

f Job 27.13; 
31.2,3. 

g Job 12.6; 


Psa.17.10, 
14; 73.3,12; 
pa 


982, 


of that which he desired. 

21 There shall none of his meat be 
left; therefore shall no man look for 
his goods. : é 

22 In the fulness of his sufficiency 
he shall.be in straits: every hand 
of the wicked shall come upon him. 

23 When he is about to fill his 
belly, God shall cast the fury of 
his wrath upon him, and shall rain 
it upon him while he is eating. 

24 He shall flee from the iron 
weapon, and the bow of steel shall 
strike him through. 

25 Itis drawn, and cometh out of 
the body; yea, the glittering sword 
cometh out of his gall: terrors are 
upon him. 

26 All darkness shall be hid in 
his secret places: ¢a fire not blown 
shall consume him; it shall go ill 
with him that is left in his taber- 
nacle. 

27 The heaven shall reveal his 
iniquity; and the earth shall rise 
up against him. 

28 The increase of his house shail 
depart, and his goods shall flow 
away in the day of his wrath. 

29 fThis is the portion of a wicked 
man from God, and the heritage 
appointed unto him by God. 


CHAPTER 21. 


(14) Job’s sixth answer: the 
prosperity of the wicked re- 
futes the view that he jis 
afflicted because a secret sin- 
ner, 


Be Job answered and said, 
2 Hear diligently my speech, 
and let this be your consolations. 

3 Suffer me that I may speak; and 
after that I have spoken, mock on. 

4 As for me, is my complaint to 
man? and if it were so, why should 
not my spirit be troubled? 

5 Markme, and beastonished, and 
lay your hand upon your mouth. 

6 Even when I remember I am 
afraid, and trembling taketh hold 
on my flesh. 

7 &Wherefore do the wicked live, 
become old, yea, are mighty in 
power? 

8 Their seed is established in 
their sight with them, and their 
offspring before their eyes. 

9 Their houses are safe from fear, 
ineither is the rod of God upon 
them. 

10 Their bull gendereth, and fail- 


a 


21 11] 


eth not; their cow calveth, and 
casteth not her calf. ‘ 

11 They send forth their little 
ones like a flock, and their chil- 
dren dance. 

12 They take the timbrel and 
harp, and rejoice at the sound of 
the organ. 

13 They spend their days ¢in 
wealth, and in a moment go down 
to the %grave. 

14 Therefore they say unto God, 
Depart from us; for we desire not 
the knowledge of thy ways. 

15 ‘What is the Almighty, that 
we should serve him? and ¢what 
profit should we have, if we pray 
unto him? 

16 Lo, their good is not in their 
hand: ‘the counsel of the wicked is 
far from me. 

17, How oft is the candle of the 
wicked put out! and how oft com- 
eth their destruction upon them! 
{God distributeth sorrows in his 
anger. 

18 They are as stubble before the 
wind, and as chaff that the stotm 
&carrieth away. 

19 God layeth up his “iniquity for 
his children: he rewardeth him, and 
he shall-know it. 

20 His eyes shall see his destruc- 
tion, and ‘he shall drink of the 
wrath of the Almighty. 

21 For what pleasure hath he in 
his house after him, when the num- 
ber of his months is cut off in the 
midst? 

22 iShall any teach God know- 
ledge? seeing he judgeth those that 
are high. 

23 One dieth in his full strength, 
being wholly at ease and quiet. _ 

- 24 His breasts are full of milk, 
and his bones are moistened with 
marrow. ‘ 

25 And another dieth in the bit- 
terness of his soul, and never eateth 
with pleasure. hodt 

296 They shall lie down alike in 
the dust, and the worms shall cover 


them. 

27 Behold, I know your thoughts, 
and the devices which ye wrong- 
fully imagine against me. 

28 For ye say, Where is the house 
of the prince? and where are the 
kdwelling places of the wicked? 

29 Have ye not asked them that 
go by the way? and do ye not 
know their tokens, 

30 That the wicked is reserved to 
‘the day of destruction? they shall 
be brought forth to the day of wrath. 


JOB. 


b Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab. 
2.5, note. 


c Job 34.9; 
Ex.5.2. 


d Job 35.3; 
Mal.3.14. 
e Job 22.18; 
Psa.1.1; 


f Lk.12.46. 


g Heb. steal- 
eth away. 


hi.e. the pun- 
ishment of 


his iniquity. 


i Psa.75.8; 
Isa.51.17}; 
Jer.25.15; 
Rev.14.10; 
19.15. 


j 1sa.40.13; 
45.9; Rom. 
11.34; 1 Cor. 
2.16. 


k Heb. the 
tent of the 
tabernacles 
of the 
wicked. 


l Day (of de- 
struction). 
Isa.34.1-9. 
(Job 21.30; 
Rev.20.11- 
15.) 


m Job 35.7; 
Psa.16.2; 
Lk.17.10. 


n Ex.22.26,27; 
Deut.24.10. 


0 Job 31.17; 
Deut.15.7; 
Isa.58.7; 
Ezk.18.7; 
Mt.25.42. 


p Or, what. 
q Psa.139. 


ph de 


B.C. 1520. 


a Or, in mirth. 


31 Who shall declare his way to 


this face? and who shall repay him 


remain in the 
tomb. 

33 The clods of the valley shall 
be sweet unto him, and every man 
shall draw after him, as there are 
innumerable before him. 

34 How then comfort ye me in 
vain, seeing in your answers there 
remaineth falsehood? 


CHAPTER 22. 


(15) Eliphaz’ third discourse: 
the old theory—Job hag 
sinned (vs. 6, 7, 9). 


Cte Eliphaz the Temanite an- 
swered and said, 

2 Can a man be profitable unto 
God, as he that is wise may be 
profitable unto himself? 

3 Is it any pleasure to the Al- 
mighty, that thou art righteous? 
or is it gain to him, that thou 
makest thy ways perfect? 

4 Will he reprove thee for fear of 
thee? will he enter with thee into 
judgment? 

5 Is not thy wickedness great? 
and thine iniquities infinite? 

6 For thou hast “taken a pledge 
from thy brother for nought, and 
stripped the naked of their clothing. 

7 Thou hast not given water to 
the weary to drink, and thou hast 
withholden bread from the hungry. 

8 But as for the mighty man, he 
had the earth; and the honourable 
man dwelt in it. 

9 Thou hast sent widows away 
empty, and the arms of the father- 
less have been broken. 

10 Therefore snares are round 
about thee, and sudden fear troub- 
leth thee; 

11 Or darkness, that thou canst 
not see; and abundance of waters 
cover thee. 

12 Is not God in the height of 
heaven? and behold the height of 
the stars, how high they are! 

13 And thou sayest, *How doth 
God know? can he judge through 
the dark cloud? 

14 @Thick clouds are a covering 
to him, that he seeth not; and he 
walketh in the circuit of heaven. 

15 Hast thou marked the old way 
which wicked men have trodden? 

16 Which were cut down out of 
time, whose foundation was over- 
flown with a flood: 


22 17] 


JOB. 


[24.7 


17 Which said unto God, Depart 
from us: and what can the Al- 
mighty do for them? f 

18 Yet he filled their houses with 
good things: but the counsel of the 
wicked is far from me. 

19 The righteous see it, and are 
giad: and the innocent laugh them 
to scorn. 2 

20 Whereas our substance is not 
cut down, but the remnant of them 
the fire consumeth. : t 

21 Acquaint now thyself with him, 
and be at peace: thereby good shall 
come unto thee. 

22 Receive, I pray thee, the law 
from his mouth, and 4lay up his 
words in thine heart. 

23 >ifthoureturn tothe Almighty, 
thou shalt be built up, thou shalt 
put away iniquity far from thy 
tabernacles. 

24 Then shalt thou lay up gold as 
dust, and the gold of Ophir as the 
stones of the brooks.’ 

25 Yea, the Almighty shall be thy 
defence, and thou shalt have plenty 
of silver. 

26 For then shalt thou have thy 
delight in the Almighty, and shalt 
lift up thy face unto God. 

27 Thou shalt make thy prayer 
unto him, and he shall hear thee, 
and thou shalt pay thy vows. 

28 Thou shalt also decree a thing, 
and it shall be established unto 
thee: and the light shall shine upon 
thy ways. 

29 When men are cast down, 
then thou shalt say, There is 
lifting up; and he shall save the 
chumble person. 

30 He shall deliver the ¢island of 
the innocent: and it is delivered by 
the pureness of thine hands. 


CHAPTER 23. 


(16) Job’s seventh answer: he 
longs for God. 


aL HEN Job answered and said, 

~ 2 Even to day is my complaint 
bitter: my stroke is heavier than 
my groaning. 

3 ‘Oh that I knew where I might 
find him! ¢ha¢ I might come even 
to his seat! 

4 I would order my cause before 
him, and fill my mouth with argu- 
ments. 

5 I would know the words which 
he would answer me, and under- 
stand what he would say unto 


me. 
6 /Will he plead against me with 


B.C. 1520. 


@ Psa.119.11. 


b Job 8.5,6; 
11.13,14. 

¢ Prov.29.23; 
Jas.4.6; 
2) Pet.3.5. 
Heb. him 
that hath 
low eyes. 

d i.e. coast. 


2 Job 13.3; 
16.21, 

f Isa.27.4,8; 
57.16. 

g Job 9.11. 

h Psa.139.1, 
PE 

zt Psa.17.3; 
66.10; Jas. 
1.12. 


j Acts 1.7. 


584 


his great power? No; but he would 
put strength in me. i i 

7 There the righteous might dis- 
pute with him; so should I be de- 
livered for ever from my judge. 

8 Behold, I go forward, but he 
is not there; and backward, but I 
cannot perceive him: 

9 On the left hand, where he doth 
work, but I cannot behold Aim: he 
hideth himself on the right hand, 
that I cannot see Aim: 

10 But “he knoweth the way that 
I take: ‘when he hath tried me, I 
shall come forth as gold. 

11 My foot hath held his steps, his 
way have I kept, and not de- 
clined. 

12 Neither have I gone back from 
the commandment of his lips: I 
have esteemed the words of his 
mouth more than my necessary 
food. 

13 But he is in one mind, and 
who can turn him? and what his 
soul desireth, even that he doeth. 


14 For he performeth the thing 
that is appointed for me: and 
many such things are with him. 

15 Therefore am I troubled at his 
presence: when I consider, I am 
afraid of him. 

16 For God maketh my heart soft, 
and the Almighty troubleth me: 

17 Because I was not cut off be- 
fore the darkness, nefther hath he 
covered the darkness from my face. 


CHAPTER 24, 


(Job’s seventh answer, con- 
tinued.) 


WEY: seeing Jtimes are not hid- 
den from the Almighty, do 
they that know him not see his days? 

2 Some remove the landmarks; 
jthey violently take away flocks, 
and feed thereof. 

3 They drive away the ass of the 
fatherless, they take the widow’s 
ox for a pledge. 

4 They turn the needy out of the 
way: the poor of the earth hide 
themselves together. 

5 Behold, as wild asses in the 
desert, go they forth to their work ; 
rising betimes for a prey: the wil- 
derness yieldeth food for them and 
for their children. 

6 They reap every one his corn in 
the field: and they gather the vin- 
tage of the wicked. 

7 They cause the naked to lodge 
without clothing, that they have 


‘NO Covering in the cold, 


8 They are wet with the showers 
of the mountains, and “embrace the 
rock for want of a shelter. 

9 They pluck the fatherless from 
the breast, and take a pledge of the 


poor. 
10 They cause hin to go naked 
without clothing, and they take 
away the sheaf from the hun- 


ery; 

11 Which make oil within their 
walls, and tread their winepresses, 
and suffer thirst. 

12 Men groan from out of the 
city, and the soul of the wounded 
crieth out: yet God layeth not folly 
to them. 

13 They are of those that rebel 
against the light; they know not 
the ways thereof, nor abide in the 
paths thereof. 

14 The murderer rising with the 
light killeth the poor and needy, 
and in the night is as a thief. 

15 The eye also of the adulterer 
waiteth for the twilight, saying, 
No eye shall see me: and disguiseth 
his face. 

16 In the dark they dig through 
houses, which they had marked for 
themselves in the daytime: they 
know not the light. 

17 For the morning is to them 
even as the shadow of death: if one 
know them, they are in the ter- 
rors of the shadow of death. 

18 He is swift as the waters; their 
portion is cursed in the earth: he 
beholdeth not the way of the vine- 
yards. 

19 Drought and heat consume the 
snow waters: so doth the ‘grave 
those which have sinned. 

20 The womb shall forget him; 
the worm shall feed sweetly on him; 
dhe shall be no more remembered; 
and wickedness shall be broken as 
fl etrees 

21 He evil entreateth the barren 
that beareth not: and doeth not 
good to the widow. 

22 We draweth also the mighty 
with his power: he riseth up, and 
no man is sure of life. 

23 Theuégh it be given him to be 
in safety, whereon he resteth; “yet; 
his eyes are upon their ways. 

24 They are exalted for a little 
while, but are gone and brought 
low; they are taken out of the way) 
as all other, and cut off as the tops 
of the ears of corn. 

25 And if it be not so now, who 
will make me a liar, and make my 
speech nothing worth? 


JOB. 


a Lam.4.5. 
6b Prov.7.9. 


c Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab. 
2.5, note. 


d Prov.10.7. 


e Psa.11.4; 
Prov.15.3. 


f Jas.1.17. 
g Job 4.17; 
15.14; 


Psa.130.3; 
143.2. 


h Psa.22.6. 


? Psa.139.8, 
11; Prov.15. 
11; Heb.4. 
13. Heb. 
Sheol. 


j Job 38.8; 
Psa.33.7; 
104.9; 
Prov.8.29; 
Jer.5.22. 


k Holy Spirit. 
Job 33.4, 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


585 


B.C. 1520. 


CHAPTER 25. 


(17) Bildad’s third discourse: 
sententious sayings. 


HEN answered Bildad the Shu- 
hite, and said, 

2. Dominion and fear are with him, 
he maketh peace in his high places. 

3 Is there any number of his ar- 
mies? and upon whom doth not his 
flight arise? 

4 sHow then can man be iustified 
with Sore oe ek can | - e clean 

hat.is..born..of a woman?" 
_5 Behold even to the moon, and 
it shineth not; yea, the stars are not 
pure in his sight. 


6 How l, 
wor ECTS a eee | 
¢ 


1S o2e/ WOT? 
CHAPTER 26. 


(18) Job’s eighth answer: Bil- 
dad’s view leads to despair. 
Job’s faith in God. 


Bu Job answered and said, 

2 How hast thou helped him 
that is without power? how savest 
thou the arm that hath no 
strength? 

3 How hast thou counselled him 
that hath no wisdom? and how 
hast thou plentifully declared the 
thing as it is? 

4 To whom hast thou uttered 
words? and whose spirit came from 


thee? 


5 Dead things are formed from 
under the waters, and the inhabi- 
tants thereof. 

6 ‘Hell is naked before him, and 
destruction hath no covering. 

7 He stretcheth out the north 
over the empty place, and hangeth 
the earth upon nothing. 

8 He bindeth up the waters in his 
thick clouds; and the cloud is not 
rent under them. 

9 He holdeth back the face of his 
throne, and spreadeth his cloud 
upon it. 

10 #He hath compassed the waters 
with bounds, until the day and 
night come to an end. 

11 The pillars of heaven tremble 
and are astonished at his reproof. 

12 He divideth the sea with his 
power, and by his understanding he 
smiteth through the proud. 

13 By his “spirit he hath gar- 
nished the heavens; his hand hath 
formed the crooked serpent. 

14 Lo, these are parts of his ways: 
but low little a portion is heard of 


27 14 


JOB. 


[28 18 


hin? but the thunder of his power| B.c. 1520. 


who can understand? 


CHAPTER 27. 
(Job’s eighth answer, continued.) 


TUL Ce LOcER Job continued his 
parable, and said, 

2 As God liveth, who hath taken 
away my judgment; and the Al- 
mighty, who hath ¢vexed my soul; 
3 All the while my breath is in 
me, and the spirit of God is in my 
nostrils; : 

4 My lips shalt not speak wicked- 
ness, nor my tongue utter deceit. 

5 God forbid that I should justify 
you: till I die I will not remove 
mine integrity from me. 

6 My righteousness I hold fast, 
and will not let it go: my heart shall 
not reproach me so long as I live. 

Let mine enemy be as the 
wicked, and he that riseth up 
against me-as the unrighteous. 

8 ‘For what is the hope of the 
hypocrite, though he hath gained, 
when God taketh away his soul? 

9 Will God hear his cry when 
trouble cometh upon him? 

10 Will he delight himself in the 
Almighty? wil) he always call upon 
God? 

11 I will teach you by the hand of 
God: that which;is with the Al- 
mighty will I not: conceal. 

12 Behold, ail ye yourselves have 
seen it; why then are ye thus alto- 
gether vain? 

13 This is the portion of a wicked 
man with God, and the heritage of 
oppressors, which they shall re- 
ceive of the Almighty. 

14. If his children be multiplied, it 
is for the sword: and his offspring 
shall not be satisfied with bread. 

15 Those that remain of him shall 
be buried in death: and his widows 
shall not weep. 

16 Though he heap up silver as 
the dust, and prepare raiment as 
the clay; 

_17 He may prepare it, ¢but the 
just shall put zt on, and the inno- 
cent shall divide the silver. 

18 He buildeth his house as a 
moth, and as a booth that the 
keeper maketh. 

19 The rich man shall lie down, 
but he shall not be gathered: he 
openeth his eyes, and he is not. 

20 *Terrors take hold on him as 
waters, a tempest stealeth him 
away in the night. 

21 The east wind carrieth him 


a Heb. made 
my soul 
bitter. 

6 Gen.2.7. 


c Mt.16.26; 
Lk.12.20. 


d Prov.28.8; 
Eccl.2.26. 


e Job 18.11. 


f Or, a mine. 


g Heb. from 
weeping. 
h v.20; Eccl. 

7.24. 


# Prov.3.15. 


586 


away, and he departeth: and as a © 
storm hurleth him out of his place. 

22 For God shall cast upon him, 
and not spare: he would fain flee 
out of his hand. 

23 Men shall clap-their hands at 
him, and shall hiss him out of his 
place. 


CHAPTER 28. 
(Job’s eighth answer, continued.) 


URELY there is a fvein for the 
silver, and a place for gold 
where they fine it. 

2. Iron is taken out of the earth, 
and brass is molten out of the stone. 

3 He. setteth an end to darkness, 
and searcheth out all perfection: 
the stones of darkness, and the 
shadow of death. 

4 The flood breaketh out from the 
inhabitant; even the waters for- 
gotten of the foot: they are dried 
up, they are gone away from men. 

5 As for the earth, out of it 
cometh bread: and under it is 
turned up as it were fire. 

6 The stones of it are the place of 
sapphires: and it hath dust of gold. 

7 There is a path which no fowl 
knoweth, and which the vulture’s 
eye hath not seen: 

8 The lion’s whelps haye not 
trodden it, nor the fierce lion 
passed by it. 

9 He putteth forth his hand upon 
the rock; he overturneth the moun- 
tains by the roots. 

10 He cutteth out rivers among 
the rocks; arid his eye seeth every 
precious thing. 

11 He bindeth the floods £from 
overflowing; and the thing that 
is hid bringeth he forth to light. 

12 But ’where shall wisdom be 
found? and where is the place of 
understanding? 

13 Man knoweth not the ‘price 
thereof; neither is it found in the 
land of the living. 

14 The depth saith, It is not in 
me: and the sea saith, It is not 
with me. 

15 It cannot be gotten for: gold, 
neither shall silver be weighed for 
the price thereof. : 

16 It cannot be valued with the 
gold of Ophir, with the precious 
onyx, or the sapphire, 

17 The gold and the crystal can- 
not equal it: and the exchange of 
it shall not be for jewels of fine 


gold. i 
18 No mention shall be made of 


28. 19] oes 


coral, or of pearls: for the price of 
wisdom is above rubies. 

19 The topaz of Ethiopia shall 
not equal it, neither shall it be 
valued with pure gold. 

50 *Whence then cometh wis- 
dom? and where is the place of 
understanding? 

.2i Seeing it is hid from the eyes of 
all living, and kept close from the 
fowls of the air. 

22 +Destruction and death say, 
We have heard the fame thereof 
with our ears. 

23 God understandeth the way 
thereof, and he knoweth the place 


the earth, and seeth under the 
whole heaven; 

25 ‘To make the weight for the 
winds; and he weigheth the waters 
by measure. 

26 When he made a decree for the 


[30 4 


| 10 The nobles held their peace, 
and their tongue cleaved to the roof 
of their mouth. 

11 When the ear heard me, then 
it blessed me; and when the eye 
saw me, it gave witness to me: 

12 Because I delivered the poor 
that cried, and the fatherless, and 
him that had none to help him. 

13 The blessing of him that was 
ready to perish came upon me: and 
I caused the widow’s heart to sing 
for joy. 

14 I put on frighteousness, and it 
clothed me: my judgment was as a 
robe and a diadem. 

i5 I was eyes to the blind, and 
feet was I to the lame. 

16 I was a father to the poor: and 
the cause which I knew not I 
searched out. 

17 And I brake the jaws of the 
wicked, and plucked the spoil out 
of his teeth. 


rain, and a way for the lightning of] v.12. 18 Then I said, I shall die in my 

the thunder: nest, and I shall multiply my days 
27 Then did he see it. and declare]? ¥-1* as the sand. 

it; he prepared it, yea, and searched| ¢ Psa.135.7. 19 My root was spread out by the 

it out. , waters, and the dew lay all night 
28 And unto man he said, Behold, |? eis ge upon my branch. 


the “fear of the Lord, that is wis- 20 My glory was fresh in me, and 

dom; and to depart from evil is|¢ Psa-25-14. my bow was renewed in my hand. 

understanding. / Righteous: 21 Unto me men gave ear, and 
ness (gar- |Waited, and kept silence at my 

CHAPTER 29. meee ae vil fs — ‘ 

. ’ Hf oe 22) ter my words they spake not 

(Job’s eighth answer, continued.| 3.21; Rev. ageinvand a speech dang apn 


He answers the false charges 19.8.) 
of Eliphaz, Job 22. 69.) 


pt dee Job continued his 
parable, and said, 

2° Oh that I were as in months 

_past, as in the days when God pre- 
served me; 

3 When his candle shined upon 
my head, and when by his light I 
walked through darkness; 

4 As I was in the, days of my 
youth, when ¢the secret of God 
was upon my tabernacle; 

5 When the Almighty was yet 
with me, when rny children were 
about me; . 

6 When I washed my steps with 
butter, and the rock poured me out 
Trivers of oil; 

7 When f went out to the gate 
through the city, when I prepared 
my seat in the street! 

8 The young men saw me, and 
hid themselves: and the aged arose, 
and stood up. ; . 

9 The princes refrained talking, 
and laid their hand on their 
mouth. 


them. 

23 And they waited for me as for 
the rain; and they opened their 
mouth wide as for the latter 


rain. 

24 If I laughed on them, they 
believed i¢ not; and the light of my 
countenance they cast not down 

25 I chose out their way, and sat 
chief, and dwelt as a king in the 
army, as one that comforteth the 
mourners. 


CHAPTER 30. 
(Job’s eighth answer, continued. ) 


Be now they that are younger 
than I have me in derision, 
whose fathers I would have dis- 
'dained to have set with the dogs of 
|my flock. 

2 Yea, whereto might the 
strength of their hands profit me, in 
whom old age was perished? 

3 For want and famine they were 
solitary; fleeing into the wilderness 
in former time desolate and waste. 

4 Who cut up mallows by the 


bushes, and juniper roots for their 
meat. 

5 They were driven forth from 
among men, (they cried after them 
as after a thief;) 

6 To dwell in the cliffs of the val- 
leys, in caves of the earth, and in 
the rocks. 

7 Among the bushes they brayed; 
under the nettles they were gath- 
ered together. 

8 They were children of fools, yea, 
children of base men: they were 
viler than the earth. f 

9 ¢And now am I their song, yea, 
I am their byword. : 

10 They abhor me, they flee far 
from me, and spare not “to spit in 
my face. 

11 Because he hath loosed my 
cord, and afflicted me, they have 
also let loose the bridle before me. 

12 Upon my right hand rise the 
youth; “they push away my feet, 
and they raise up against me the 
ways of their destruction. 

13 They mar my path, they set 
forward my calamity, they have no 
helper. 

14 They came upon me asa wide 
breaking in of waters: in the deso- 
lation they rolled themselves upon 
me. 

15 Terrors are turned upon me: 
they pursue my soul as the wind: 
and my welfare passeth away as a 
cloud. 

16 «And now my soul is poured 
out upon me; the days of affliction 
have taken hold upon me. 

17 My bones are pierced in me in 
the night season: and my sinews 
take no rest. 

18 By the great force of my dis- 
ease is my garment changed: it 
bindeth me about as the collar of 
my coat. 

19 He hath cast me into the mire, 
and I am become like dust and 
ashes. 

20 Icry unto thee, and thou dost 
not hear me: I stand up, and thou 
regardest me not. 

21 Thou art become cruel to me: 
with thy strong hand thou opposest} 
thyself against me, 

22 Thou liftest me up to the wind; 
thou causest me to ride upon it,! 
and dissolvest my substance. 

23 For I know that thou wilt 
bring me fo death, and to the house 
Jappointed for all living. 

24 Howbeit he will not stretch 
out his hand to the grave, though 
they cry in his destruction. { 


B.C. 1520. 


a Job 17.6; 


6 Num.12.14; 
Deut.25.9; 
Isa.50.6; 
Mt.26.67; 
27.30. 


cSee Job 12. 
18. 


d Job 19,12. 
e Psa.42.4, 
f Heb.9.27. 
g Jer.8.15. 


h Psa.38.6; 
42.9; 43.2, 


# Psa.102.6, 
Mic.1.8. 


J Psa.119.83; 
Lam.4.87 
5.10 


k Psa.102.3, 
1 Heb. Let 


him weigh 
me in bal- 
ances of 
Justice. 


m Lev.26.16, 
Deut.28, 
30,38 


n 2 Sam.12. 


11;. Jer.8.10. 


o Gen.38.24, 
Lev.20.10, 
Deut.22.22; 
see v.28. 


P Psa.44.21, 


588 


25 Did not I weep for him that 


was in trouble? was not my soul 


grieved for the poor? 

26 &When I looked for good, then 
evil came unto me: and when I 
waited for light, there came dark- 
ness. 

27 My bowels boiled, and rested 
not; the days of affliction prevented 
me. 

28 4I went mourning without the 
sun: I stood up, and I cried in the 
congregation. 

29 *I am a brother to dragons, 
and a companion to owls. 

30 7My skin is black upon me, 
and *my bones are burned with 
heat. 

31 My harp also is turned to 
mourning, and my organ into the 
voice of them that weep. 


CHAPTER 31. 
(Job’s eighth answer, continued.) 


I MADE a covenant with mine 
eyes; why then should I think 
upon a maid? 

2 For what portion of God. is 
there from above? and what inher- 
itance of the Almighty from on 
high? 

3 Isnot destruction tothe wicked? 


and a strange punishment to the © 


workers of iniquity? 

4 Doth not he see my ways, and 
count all my steps? 

5 If I have walked with vanity, or 
if my foot hath hasted to deceit; 

6 ‘Let me be weighed in an even 
balance, that God may know mine 
integrity. 

7 If my step hath turned out of 
the way, and mine heart walked 
after mine eyes, and if any blot 
hath cleaved to mine hands; 

8 ™Then let me sow, and let an- 
other eat; yea, let my offspring be 
rooted out. 

9 If mine heart have been de- 


ceived by a woman, or 7f I have laid 
wait at my neighbour’s door; 

10 Then let my wife grind unto 
"another, and let others bow down 
upon her, 

11 For this is an heinous crime; 
yea, %t is an iniquity to be pun- 
ished by the judges. 

12° For it is a fire that consumeth 
to destruction, and would root out 
all mine increase. 

13 IfI did despise the cause of my 
Mmanservant or of my maidservant, 
when they contended with me; 


- 


14 What then shall I do *when ) 


31 15] ki JOB. [32 2) 


God riseth up? and when he visit- 
eth, what shall I answer him? 

15 @Did not he that made me in 
the womb make him? and did not 


B.c. 1520. | 30 Neither have I suffered my 
mouth to sin by wishing a curse to 
his soul. 

31 If the men of my tabernacle 


one fashion us in the womb? said not, Oh that we had of his 

16 If I have withheld the poor flesh! we cannot be satisfied. 
de thest Resins or nee causes fa The stranger did not lodge in 

he eyes of the widow to fail; the street: but I opened my doors 

17 Or have eaten my morsel .my- to the traveller. 
self alone, and the fatherless hath 33. If I covered my transgressions 
not ee thereof; oe as Adam. by hiding mine iniquity 

18 or from my yout e was in my bosom: 
brought up with me, as with a fa- 34 Did I fear a great multitude, or 
ther, and I have guided her from did the contempt of families terrify 
my mother’s womb;) : 'me, that I kept silence, and went 
- 19 If I have seen any perish for not out of the door? 
want of clothing, or any poor with-|a Job 34.19; 35 ¢Oh that one would hear me! 
out covering; Prov.14.31;  /behold, my desire 1s, that the Al- 

20 If his loins have not blessed} 37;2>M*" mighty would anawet se, and that 
me, and if he were not warmed mine adversary had written a 
with the fleece of my sheep; b Deut.24.13._ | book. ee 

21 If I-have lifted up my hand 36 Surely I would take it upon my 
‘against the fatherless, when I saw|c Job 22.9 shoulder, and bind it as a crown 
my help in the gate: to me. 

92 Then let mine arm fall from|? 27 }95 37 I would declare unto him the 
my shoulder blade, and mine arm number of my steps; as a prince 
be broken from the bone. e Job 33.6. would I go near unto him, 

23 For 4destruction from God f1 Ki.21.19. 38 If my land cry against me, or 
was a terror to me, and by reason |that the furrows likewise thereof 
of his highness I could not en-|¢ Job 33.9. cgunplaits E I odo@ EF 
dure, ave eaten e. fruits 

24 If I have made gold my hope, hGen.22.21.  |+hereof without money, for have 
or have said to the fine gold, Thou race ne owners thereof to lose 
art my confidence; itheir life: _ ' 

25 If lrejoiced because my wealth | 40 Let thistles grow instead of 
was great, and because mine hand} wheat, and cockle instead of barley. 
had gotten much; The words of Job are ended. 

26 If I beheld the sun when it 
shined, or the moon walking in CHAPTER 32. 
brightness; ° 

27 And my heart hath been se- Part IV. Job and Elihu, 
cretly enticed, or my mouth hath "So these three men ceased to 
kissed my hand: , ~ cans en ak because he was 

28 This also were an iniquity to Srighteous im his own eyes. 
be punished by the judge: for I egibes : 
should have denied’the God) that G) Elche s' discouer 
is above. 2 Then was kindled the wrath of 

99 If I rejoiced at the destruction 2Elihu the son of Barachel the 
of him that hated me, or lifted up ABuzite, of the kindred of Ram: 
myself when evil found him: lagainst Job was his wrath kindled, 


1 Despite minor differences, Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar have one view of the 
problem of Job’s afflictions. He is a hypocrite. Outwardly good, he is, they hold, 
really a bad man. Otherwise, according to their conception of God, Job’s sufferings 
would be unjust. Job, though himself the sufferer, will not so accuse the justice of. 
God, and his self-defence is complete. Before God he is guilty, heipless, and un- 
done, and there is no daysman (9.), Later, his faith is rewarded by a revelation 
of a coming Redeemer, and of the resurrection (19.). But Eliphaz, Bildad, and 
Zophar are: sinners also as before God, and yet they are not afflicted. Job refutes 
the theory of the three that he is a secret sinner as against the common moralities, 
but the real problem, Why are the righteous afflicted? remains. It is solved in 
the last chapter. i : i 

2 Elihu “he a far juster and more spiritual conception of the problem than Eliphaz, 
Bildad, and Zophar because he has an infinitely higher conception of God, The 
God of Eliphaz and the others, great though they perceive Him to be in His works, 

; 589 


32 3] JOB. 7 [33 1 
20 I will speak, that I may be 


because he justified himself rather 
than God. A 

3 Also against his three friends 
was his wrath kindled, because they 
had found no answer, and yet had 
condemned Job. . 

4 Now Elihu had waited till Job 
had spoken, because they were 
elder than he. 

5 When Elihu saw that there 


B.C. 1520. 


answer. 


give flattering titles unto man. 


ing titles; ir: so doing my maker 
would soon take me away. 


was no answer in the mouth of CHAPTER 33. 

cee Hance men, then his wrath (Elihu’s discourse, continued.) 
6 And Elihu the son of Barachel VV HEREFORE, Job, I pray 

the Buzite answered and said, I am|, rey. pis thee, hear my speeches, and 

young, and 4ye are very old; where-| soul. hearken to all my words. 


fore I was afraid, and durst not 5 2 Behold, now I have opened my 

shew you mine opinion. b Job 15.10, | outh, my tongue hath spoken in 
7 I:said, Days should speak, and} < Job 35.11; |my mouth. . 

multitude of years should teach] 3836;1Ki. | 3 My words shall be of the up- 


wisdom, 3. 32? |rightness of my heart: and my lips 
8 But there is a spirit in man:} Eccl.2.26; shall utter knowledge clearly. 

and the ‘inspiration of the Almighty} Dan.1.17; 4 The Spirit of God shath made 

giveth them understanding. Meit.2s;  {me, and the breath of the Almighty 
9 Great men are not always wise:| Jas.1.5. hath given me life. 

neither do the aged understand 3 5 Ifthou canst answer me, set thy 

judgment. @ Jer.9-23;. | words in-order before me, stand up. 
10 Therefore I said, Hearken to $L, 6 Behold, I am according to thy 


me; I also will shew mine opinion.|¢ Inspiration. |wish in God’s stead: I also am 
11 Behold, I waited for your) FS2¢8t!- formed out of the clay. 
aor ; I gave ess to ea oo Rev.22.19.) (test ee et He not 
whilst ye searched out what to say. .., |mMake thee afraid, neither s my 
nt Yea, I attended unto you, and,|/ uae Fis ‘* thand be heavy upon thee. ee 
ehold, there was none of you that| 12. (Gen.1.2; | 8 Surely thou hast spoken in mine 
Se aie Job. or that answered] Mal.2.15.) oo om I have heard the voice 
is words: 27. fo) y words, saying, 
13 4¢Lest ye should say, We have Bore! 9 *I am clean without transgres- 


os foe wisdom. God thrusteth h Job eR ig I am ‘ee neither is 
: mtatise ae | 16:17; 23.40, ere iniquity in me. 
14 Now he hath not directed his Hees 29. | 10 Behold, he findeth occasions 
words se gs eee seen I} 14; 31.1. against me, he counteth me for his 
3. enemy, 
15 They were amazed, they an- 11 He putteth my feet in the 
Ge no more: they left off speak- eis ei to all my paths. 
; ehold, in this thou art not 
16 When I had waited, (for they just: I will answer thee, that God 
spake not, but stood still, and an- is greater than man. ‘ 
Pert Sori answer also my Heeaaoeine ct an Nadee 
} : i c 
part, I also will shew mine opinion. any of his nigereds! ve nolecuneee 
18. For I am full of matter, the 14 For God speaketh once, yea 
an ad ve) ioe eee Ring pire ehh ec perceiveth it ein 
: ; y i is in a dream, in a vision of the 
ec no Aisi it is ready to night, when deep sleep falleth upon 
ike new bottles, men, in slumberings upon the bed: 


becomes in their thought petty and exacting in His relations with mankind. It is 
the fatal misconception of all religious externalists and moralizers. Their God is 
always a small God. Elihu’s account of God is noble and true, and it is noteworthy 
that at the last Jehovah does not class him with Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar (cf. 
Job 42. 7); but he is still a dogmatist, and his eloquent discourse is marred by self- 
assertiveness (e.g. 32. 8,9; 33.3). Jehovah’s judgment of Elihu is that he darkened 
counsel by words (38. 2); the very charge that Elihu had brought against Job (34. 35; 
35. 16). Furthermore, the discourse of Jehovah is wholly free from the accusations 
of Job with which even Elihu’s lofty discourse abounds. 


590 


refreshed: I will open my lips and- 


21° Let me not, I pray you, accept” 
any man’s person, neither let me 


22 For I know not to give flatter- © 


JOB. 


[34 23 


16 Then he openeth the ears of 
men, and sealeth their instruction, 
17 That he may withdraw man 
from his purpose, and hide pride 
m man. 

18 He keepeth back his soul from 
the pit, and his life from perishing 
by the sword. 

19 He is chastened also with pain 
upon his bed, and the multitude of 
his bones with strong pain: 

20 2So that his life abhorreth 
bread, and his soul dainty meat. - 

21 His flesh is consumed away, 
that it cannot be seen; and his 
bones that were not seen stick out. 

22 Yea, his soul draweth near 
unto the grave, and his life to the 
destroyers. 

23 If there be a messenger with 
him, an interpreter, one among a 
thousand, to shew unto man his 
uprightness: 

24 Then he is gracious unto him, 
and saith, Deliver him from going 
down to the pit: I have found a 
bransom. 

25 His flesh shall be fresher than 
a child’s: he shall return to the 
days of his youth: 

26 He shall pray unto God, and 
he will be favourable unto him: 
and he shall see his face with joy: 
for he will render unto man his 
righteousness. 

27 He looketh upon men, and if 
any “say, I have sinned, and per- 
verted that which was right, and 
it profited me not; 

28 He will deliver his soul from 
going into the pit, and his life shall 
see the light. 

29 Lo, all these things worketh 
God oftentimes with man, 

30 To bring back his soul from 
the pit, to be enlightened with the 
light of the living. 

31 Mark well, O Job, hearken 
unto me: hold thy peace, and I will 


speak. 

32 If thou hast any thing to say, 
answer me: speak, for I desire to 
justify thee. 

33 If not, hearken unto me: hold 
thy peace, and I shall teach thee 
wisdom. , 


CHAPTER 34. 
(Elihu’s discourse, continued. ) 
URI BEE MORE Elihu an- 
swered and said, . 
2 Hear my words, O ye wise men, 
and give ear unto me, ye that have 
knowledge. 


B.C. 1520. 


a Psa.107.18. 


6 Or, an 
atonement. 


c 2 Sam.12.13; 
Prov.28.13; 
Lk.15.21; 

1 John 1.9. 


d Job 6.30; 
12.11. 


e Job 33.9. 

f Job 8.3; 36. 
23; Gen.18. 
25; Deut.32. 
4; 2 Chr.19. 
7; Psa.92.15; 
Rom.9.14. 

g Psa.104.29. 


hk Gen.3.19; 
Eccl.12.7. 


# Job 31.15. 


j Job 31.4; 
2 Chr.16.9; 


591 


3 4For the ear trieth words, as the 
mouth tasteth meat. 

4 Let us choose to us judgment: 
let us know among ourselves what 
is good. 

5 For Job hath said, «I am right- 
eous: and God hath taken away my 
judgment. 

6 Should I lie against my right? 
my wound is incurable without 
transgression. 

7 What man is like Job, wha 
drinketh up scorning like water? 

8 Which goeth in company with 
the workers of iniquity, and walk- 
eth with wicked men. 

9 For he hath said, It profiteth a 
man nothing that he should delight 
himself with God. 

10 Therefore hearken unto me, ye 
men of understanding: /far be it 
from God, that he should do wick- 
edness; and from the Almighty, 
that he should commit iniquity. 

11 For the work of a man shall he 
render unto him, and cause every 
man to find according to his ways. 

12 Yea, surely God will not do 
wickedly, neither will the Almighty 
pervert judgment. 

13 Who hath given him a charge 
over the earth? or who hath dis- 
posed the whole ‘world? 

14 If he set his heart upon man, 
if he égather unto himself his spirit 
and his breath; 

15 All flesh shall perish together, 
and man shall turn again unto dust. 

16 If now thou hast understand- 
ing, hear this: hearken to the voice 
of my words. 

17 Shall even he that hateth right 


; |govern? and wilt thou condemn 


him that is most just? 

18 Is it fit tosay to aking, Thou 
art wicked? and to princes, Ye are 
ungodly? 

19 How much less to him that 
accepteth not the persons of princes, 
nor regardeth the rich more than 
the poor? ‘for they all are the work 
of his hands. 

20 In a moment shall they die, 
and the people shall be troubled at 
midnight, and pass away: and the 
mighty shall be taken away without 
hand. 

21 JForhis eyes are upon the ways 
of man, and he seeth all his goings. 

22 There is no darkness, nor 
shadow of death, where the workers 
of iniquity may hide themselves. 

23 For he will not lay upon man 
more than right; that he should 
enter into judgment with God. 


5 


1 


he 


34 24] 


24 *He shall break in pieces 
mighty men without number, and 
set others in their stead. 

25. Therefore he knoweth their 
works, and he: overturneth them 
in the night, so that they are de- 
stroyed. : 

26 He striketh them as wicked 
men in the open sight of others; 

27 “Because they turned back 
from him, and would not consider 


_ any of his ways: 


28 So that they ‘cause the cry of 
the poor to come unto him, ¢and he 
heareth the cry of the afflicted. 

29 When he giveth quietness, 
who then can make trouble? and 
when he hideth Ais face, who then 
can behold him? whether it be 
done against a nation, or against a 
man only: 

30 That the hypocrite reign not, 


. lest the people be ensnared. 


31 Surely it is meet to be said 
unto God, I have borne chastise- 
ment, I will not offend any more: 

32 That which I see not teach 
thou me: if I have done iniquity, I 
will do no more. 

33 Should it be according to thy 
mind? he will recompense it, 
whether thou refuse, or whether 
thou choose; and not I: therefore 
speak what thou knowest. 

34 Let men of understanding tell 
me, and let a wise man hearken 
unto me. 

35 Job hath spoken without know- 
ledge, and his words were without 
wisdom. 

36 My desire is that Job may be 
tried unto the end because of his 
answers for wicked men. 

37 For he addeth rebellion unto 
his sin, he clappeth his hands 
among us, and multiplieth his words 
against God. 


CHAPTER 35. 
(Elihu’s discourse, continued. ) 


[;, LIAMU spake moreover, and said, 

-/ 2 Thinkest thou this to be 
tight, that thou saidst, My right- 
cousness ys more than God’s? 

3 For fthou saidst, What advan- 
tage will it be unto thee? and, 
What profit shall I haver if I be 
cleansed from my sin? 

4 I will answer thee, and éthy 
companions with thee. 

hLook unto the heavens, and 
see; and behold the clouds which 
are higher than thou. 

6 If thou sinnest, what doest thou 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. 


a Dan.2.21, 
61 Sam.15.11. 


¢ Job 35.9; 
Jas.5.4. 


d Ex.22.23. 

e Or, My fa- 
ther, let Job 
be tried, 


f Job 21,15; 
34.9. 


g Job 34.8. 

h Job 22.12. 

# Isa.51.13. 

j Psa.42.8; 
77.6; 149.5; 
Acts 16,25. 

k Job 9.4; 12. 
13,16; 37.23; 
Psa.99.4. 


1 Psa.107,10. 


592 


[36 3 


against him? or if thy transgres-_ 
sions be multiplied, what doest thou 
unto him? } 

7 Ifthou berighteous, what givest 
thou him? or what receiveth he of 
thine hand? { 

8 Thy wickedness may hAurt a 
man as thou art; and thy right- 
eousness may profit the son of 
man. 

9 By reason of the multitude of - 
oppressions they make the op-— 
pressed to cry: they cry out by 
reason of the arm of the mighty. 

10 But none saith, ‘Where is God 
my maker, Jjwho giveth songs in 
the night; 

11 Who teacheth us more than 
the beasts of the earth, and maketh 
us wiser than the fowls of heaven? 

12 There they cry, but none 
giveth answer, because of the pride 
of evil men. 

13 Surely God will not hear van- 
ity, neither will the Almighty re- 
gard it. 

14 Although thou sayest thou 
shalt not see him, yet judgment is 
Hr sesigh him; therefore trust thou in 

im. 

15 But now, because it is not so, 
he hath visited in his anger: yet he 
knoweth it not in great extrem- 
ity: 

16 Therefore doth Job open his 
mouth in vain; he multiplieth 
words without knowledge. 


CHAPTER 36. 
(Elihu’s discourse, continued.’ 


| Sesh also proceeded, and said, 
2 Suffer me a little, and I will 
shew thee that I have yet to speak 
on God’s behalf. 

3 I will fetch my knowledge from 
afar, and will ascribe righteousness 
to my Maker. 

4 For truly my words shall/ not 
be false: he that is perfect in 
knowledge is with. thee. 

5 Behold, God is mighty, and de- 
spiseth not any: *he is mighty in 
strength and wisdom. 

6 He preserveth not the life of the 
wicked: but giveth right to the 
poor. 

7 He withdraweth not his eyes 
from the righteous: but with kings 
are they on the throne; yea, he 


doth establish them for ever, and 
they are exalted. 
8 And Jif they be bound in fetters, 
and be holden in cords of affliction: 
9 Then he sheweth them their 


61 : 


work, and their transgressions that 
they have exceeded. 

10 ?He openeth also their ear to 
discipline, and commandeth that 
they return from iniquity. 

11 If they obey and serve him, 
they shall spend their days in pros- 
perity, and their years in pleas- 
ures. 

12 Butif they obey not, they shall 
perish by the sword, and they shall 
die without knowledge. 

13 But the hypocrites in heart 
bheap up wrath: they cry not when 
he bindeth them. 

14 They die in youth, and their 
life 7s among the unclean. 

15 He delivereth the poor in his 
affliction, and openeth their ears in 
oppression. 

16 Even so would he have re- 
moved thee out of the strait “into 
a broad place, where there is no 
straitness; and that which should 
be set on thy table should be full 
of fatness. 

17 But thou hast fulfilled the 
judgment of the wicked: judgment 
and justice take hold-on thee. 

18 Because there is wrath, be- 
ware lest he take thee away with 
his stroke: then a great ransom 
cannot deliver thee. 

19 Will he esteem thy riches? no, 
not gold, nor aH the forces of 
strength. 

20 Desire not the night, when 
people are cut off in their place. 

21 Take heed, regard not iniquity: 
for “this hast thou chosen rather 
than affliction. 

22 Behold, God exalteth by his 
power: who teacheth like him? 

23 Who hath enjoined him his 
way? or who can say, Thou hast 
wrought iniquity? ! 

24 Remember that thou magnify 
his work, which men behold. 

25 Every man may see it; man 
may behold #t afar off. 

26 Behold, God is great, and we 
eknow him not, neither can the 
number of his years be searched 
out. 

27 For he maketh small the drops 
of water: they pour down rain ac- 
cording to the vapour thereof: 

28 Which the clouds do drop and 
distil upon man abundantly. 

29 Also can any understand the 
spreadings” of the clouds, or the 
noise of his tabernacle? me! 

30 Behold, he spreadeth his light 
upon it, and -covereth the bottom 
of the sea. 


[37 16 


31 For by them judgeth he the 
people; he giveth meat in abun- 


ance. 
_ 32. With fclouds he covereth the 
light; and commandeth it not to 
shine by the cloud that cometh 
betwixt. 

33 The noise thereof sheweth con- 
cerning it, the cattle also concern- 
ing the vapour. 


CHAPTER 37. 
(Elihu’s discourse, continued.) 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. 


Ae this also my heart trembleth, 
a Job 33.16. and is moved out of his 
D Remotes ae Pee : : 
sates 2 Hear attentively the noise of 
¢Psa.1g.19; |his voice, and the sound that goeth 
31.8; 118.5. |out of his mouth. 
dSee Heb, | 3 He directeth it under the whole 
251 heaven, and his lightning unto the 
ends of the earth. 
e1Cor-13.12. | 4 After it a voice roareth: he 
fPsa.147.8. |thundereth with the voice of his 
; exceilency; and he will not stay 
= ices them when his voice is heard. 
Rev.15.3. peers thundereth martellovaly 
wi is voice; ‘great things 
hPsa.147-16, ldoeth he, which we cannot com- 
prehend. 


6 4For he saith to the snow, Be 
thou on the earth; likewise to the 
small rain, and to the great rain of 


i Psa.109.27. 
j Psa.104.22. 


k Job 38.29, | his strength. 
Piebigrarrt 7 He sealeth up the hand of every 
aa man; ‘that all men may know his 
1Psa.14&.8.  |work. 1 
m Job 36.31, 8 Then the beasts Jgo into dens, 
x.9.18,23; |and remain in their places. 
1Sam.i12.18, | 9 Out of the south cometh the 
Pate ty whirlwind: and cold out of the 
ir north. 
10 #By the breath of God frost is 
nPsa.1l1.2. given: and the breadth of the 


waters is straitened. 

11 Also by watering he wearieth 
the thick cloud: he scattereth his 
bright cloud: 

12 And it is turned round about 
by his counsels: ‘that they may do 
whatsoever he commandeth them 
upon the face of the world in the 
earth. 

13 ™He causeth it to come, 
whether for correction, or for his 
land, or for mercy. 

14 Hearken unto this, O Job: 
stand still, and "consider the won- 
drous works of God. 

15 Dost thou know when God dis- 
posed them, and caused the light of 
his cloud to shine? 

16 Dost thou know the balancings 

: of the clouds, the wondrous works 
59, 


37 17] 


of him which is perfect in know- 
ledge? 

17 How thy garments are warm, 
when he quieteth the earth by the 
south wind? 

18 Hast thou with him ¢spread 
out the sky, which is strong, and 
as a molten looking glass? 

19 Teach us what we shall say 
unto him; for we cannot order our 
speech by reason of darkness. 

20 Shall it be told him that I 
speak? if a man speak, surely he 
shall be swallowed up. 

21 And now men see not the 
bright light which is in the clouds: 
but the wind passeth, and cleanseth 
them. 

22 Fair weather cometh out of the 
north: with God is terrible majesty. 

23 Touching the Almighty, we 
cannot find him out: he is excellent 
in power, and in judgment, and in 
plenty of justice: he will not afflict. 

24 Men do therefore ‘fear him: he 
Tespecteth not any that are wise 
of heart. 


CHAPTER 38. 
Part V. Jehovah and Job. 


HEN the Lorp lanswered Job 
“ fout of the whirlwind, and 
sai 


2 ‘Who is this that darkeneth 
counsel by words without know- 
ledge? 

3 Gird up now thy loins like a 
man; for I will demand of thee, 
and answer thou me. 

4 fWhere wast thou when I laid 
the foundations of the earth? de- 
clare, if thou hast understanding. 

5 Who hath laid the measures 
thereof, if thou knowest? or who 
hath stretched the line upon it? 

6 Whereupon are the foundations 
thereof fastened? or who laid the 
corner stone thereof; 

7 When the morning stars sang 
together, and ali the gsons of God 
shouted for joy? 

8 “Or who shut up the sea with 
doors, when it brake forth, as if it 
had issued out of the womb? 

9 When I made the cloud the gar- 
ment thereof, and thick darkness a 


swaddlingband for it, 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. 


a Gen.1.6; 
Isa.44.24. 


61 Tim.6.16. 
c Mt.10.28. 


d So Ex.19.16, 
18; 1 Ki.19. 
1i; Ezk.1.4; 
Nah.1.3. 


e Job 34.35; 
42.3. 


f Psa.104.5; 
Prov.8.29; 
30.4. 


g Heb.1.4, 
note. 


h Gen.1.9; 
Psa.33.7; 
104.9; Prov. 
8.29; Jer, 
5.22. 

# Psa.89.9; 
93.4. 

j Psa.74.16; 
148.5. 

k Psa.77.19. 

1 Psa.9.13. 

m Psa.147.16. 

n Ex.9.18; 
Josh.10.11; 
Isa.30.30; 


Ezk.13.11, 
13; Rev.16, 
21. 


o Psa.147.8; 
Jer.14,22. 


10 And brake up for it my decreed 
place, and set bars and doors, 

11 And said, Hitherto shalt thou — 
come, but no further: and here shall — 
‘thy proud waves be stayed? 

12 Hast thou Jcommanded the — 
i since thy days; 
caused the dayspring to know his 
place; 

13. That it might take hold of the 
ends of the earth, that the wicked 
might be shaken out of it? 

14 It is turned as clay to the 
seal; and they stand as a garment. 

15 And from the wicked their 
light is withholden, and the high 
arm shall be broken. 

16 *Hast thou entered into the 
springs of the sea? or hast thou 
walked in the search of the depth? 

17 ‘Have the gates of death been 
opened unto thee? or hast thou 
seen the doors of the shadow of 
death? 

18 Hast thou perceived the 
breadth of the earth? declare if 
thou knowest it all. 

19 Where is the way where light 
dwelleth? and as for darkness, 
where is the place thereof, 

20° That thou shouldest take it to. 
the bound thereof, and that thou 
shouldest know the paths to the 
house thereof? 

21 Knowest thou it, because thou 
wast then born? or because the 
number of thy days is great? 

22 ™Hast thou entered into the 
treasures of the snow? or hast thou 
seen the treasures of the hail, 

23 "Which I have reserved 
against the time of trouble, against. 
the day of battle and war? 

24 By what way is the light 
parted, which scattereth the east 
wind upon the earth? 

25 Who hath divided a water- 
course for the overflowing of wa- 
ters, or a way for the lightning of 
thunder; 

26 Tocauseit to rain on the earth, 
where no man is; on the wilder- 
ness, wherein there is no man; 

27 To satisfy the desolate and 
waste round ; and to cause the bud 
of the tender herb to spring forth? 
28 °Hath the rain a father? or who 


hath begotten the drops of dew? 


1 The words of Jehovah have the effect of bri 
Hitherto the discussions hav. 


ence (Job 42. s). 
conceived of as absent: 
that Job does not answer Elihu. 
truly about God that Job remains 


silent. 
Jehovah answered for {or on behalf of] Job.” 


nging’ Job consciously into His pres- 
e been 
Now Job and the Lorn are face to face, 


about God, but He has been 
It is noteworthy 


Despite his harsh judgment he has spoken so 


594 


Job 38. 1 might be paraphrased, ‘‘Then 


38 29] 

_29 Out of whose womb came the 
ice? “and the hoary frost of heaven, 
who hath gendered it? 


30 The waters are hid as with a 
stone, and the face of the deep is 
frozen. 

31 Canst thou bind the sweet in- 
fluences of 5Pleiades, or loose the 
bands of Orion? 

32 Canst thou bring forth Mazza- 
roth in his season? or canst thou 
guide Arcturus with his sons? 

33 Knowest thou “the ordinances 
of heaven? canst thou set the do- 
minion thereof in the 

34 Canst thou lift up thy voice to 
the clouds, that abundance of wa- 
ters may cover thee? 

+ 35 Canst thou send lightnings, 
that they may go, and say unto 
thee, Here we are? 

36 Who hath put wisdom in the 
inward parts? or who hath given 
understanding to the heart? 

37 Who can number the clouds in 
‘wisdom? or who can stay the bottles 
of heaven, 

_38 When the dust groweth into 
hardness, and the clods cleave fast 
together? 

39 ¢Wilt thou hunt the prey for 
the lion? or fill the appetite of the 
young lions, 

40 When they couch in their 
dens; and abide in the covert to lie 
in wait? 

41 ¢Who provideth for the raven 
his food? when his young ones cry 
unto God, they wander for lack of 
meat. 


CHAPTER 39. 
_(Jehovah and Job, continued.) 


NOWEST thou the time when 

the wild goats of the rock bring 
forth? or canst thou -mark when 
the hinds do calve? 

2 Canst thou number the months 
that they fulfil? or knowest thou 
the time when they bring forth? 

3 They bow themselves, they 
bring forth their young ones, they 
cast out their sorrows. 

4 Their young ones are in good 
liking, they grow up with corn; 
they go forth, and return not unto 
them. 

5 Who hath sent out the wild ass 
free? or who hath loosed the bands 
of the wild ass? 

6 fWhose house I have made the 
wilderness, and the barren land 


his dwellings. 
7 He scorneth the multitude of 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. __ 


a Psa.147.16. 


6 Or, the 


seven stars. 


Job 9.9 
Amos 5.8. 


¢ Jer.31.35. 


d Psa.104.21; 
145.15. 


¢ Psa.147.9; 
Mt.6.26. 


f Job 24.5; 
Jer.2.24; 
Hos.8.9. 


g Heb. salt 
places. 


hk Num.23.22; 
Deut.33.17. 


1 Lam.4.3. 
j Jer.49.16; 
Oba.4. 


595 


[39 28 


the city, neither regardeth he the 
crying of the driver. 

8 The range of the mountains is 
his pasture, and he searcheth after 
jevery green thing. 

9 AWill the unicorn be willing to 
serve thee, or abide by thy crib? 

10 Canst thou bind the unicorn 
with his band in the furrow? or 
will he harrow the valleys after 
thee? 

11 Wilt thou trust him, because 
his strength is great? or wilt thou 
leave thy labour to him? 

12 Wilt thou believe him, that he 
‘will bring home thy seed, and 
gather it into thy barn? 

13 Gavest thou the goodly wings 
unto the peacocks? or wings and 
feathers unto the ostrich? 

14 Which leaveth her eggs in the 
earth, and warmeth them in dust, 

15 And forgetteth that the foot 
may crush them, or that the wild 
beast may break them. 

16 She is *hardened against her 
young ones, as though they were 
not her’s: her labour is in vain 
without fear; 

17 Because God hath deprived 
her of wisdom, neither hath he im- 
parted to her understanding. 

18 What time she lifteth up her- 
self on high, she scorneth the horse 
and his rider. 

19 Hast thou given the horse 
strength? hast thou clothed his 
neck with thunder? 

20 Canst thou make him afraid 
as a grasshopper? the glory of his 
nostrils zs terrible. 

21 He paweth in the valley, and 
rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth 
on to meet the armed men. 

22 He mocketh at fear, and is not 
affrighted; neither turneth he back 
from the sword. 

23 The quiver rattleth against 
him, the glittering spear and the 
shield. 

24 Heswalloweth the ground with 
fierceness and rage: neither beliey- 
eth he that it is the sound of the 
trumpet. 

25 He saith among the trumpets, 
Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle 
afar off, the thunder of the captains, 
and the shouting. 

26 Doth the hawk fly by thy wis- 
dom, and stretch her wings toward 
the south? ' 

27 Doth the eagle Jmount up at 
thy command, and make her nest 
on high? 

28 She dwelleth and abideth on 


39 29) 


the rock, upon the crag of the rock, 
and the strong place. 

29 From thence she seeketh the 
prey, and her eyes behold afar 
off. 

30 Her young ones also suck up 
blood: and where the slain are, 
there is she. 


CHAPTER 40. 
(Jehovah and Job, continued.) 


OREOVER the LorpD answer- 
ed Job, and said, 

2 Shall he that contendeth with 
the Almighty instruct him? he 
that reproveth God, let him an- 
swer it. 

3 Then Job answered the Lorp, 
and said. 

4 ¢Behold, I am vile; what shall 
I answer thee? I will lay mine hand 
upon my mouth. : 

5 Once have I spoken; but I will 
not answer: yea, twice; but I will 
proceed. no further. 

6 Then ’answered the LorpD unto 
Job out of the whirlwind, and said, 

7 Gird up thy loins now like a 
man: I will demand of thee, and 
declare thou unto me. 

8 Wilt thou also disannul my 
judgment? wilt thou condemn me, 
that thou mayest be righteous? 

9 Hast thou an arm like God? or 
canst thou thunder with a voice 


like him? 


10 Deck thyself now with ma- 
jesty and excellency; and array thy- 
self with glory and beauty. 

11 Cast abroad the rage of thy 
wrath: and behold every one that 
is proud, and abase him. 

12 Look on every one that is 
‘proud, and bring him low; and 
tread down the wicked in their 
place. 

13 Hide them in the dust together: 
and bind their faces in secret. 

14 Then will I also confess unto 
thee that thine own right hand can 
save thee. 

15 Behold now ¢behemoth, which 
I made with thee; he eateth grass 
as an ox. 

16 Lo now, his strength is in his 
loins, and his force is in the navel 
of his belly. 

17 He moveth his tail like a cedar: 
the sinews of his stones are wrapped 
together. 

13 His bones are as strong pieces 
of brass; his bones are like bars 
of iron. 


19 He is the chief of the ways of 


JOB. 


B.C. 1520. 


a Job 42.6; 
Ezra 9.6; 
Psa.51.4. 

b Job 38.1. 


c Isa.2.12; 
Dan.4.37 


d Or, thé ele- 
phant, as 
some think. 

é Psa.104.14. 


f Rom.11.35. 


596 


God: he that made him can mak 
his sword to approach unto him. — 

20 Surely the mountains ‘bring 
him forth food, where all the beasts 
of the field play. 

21 He lieth under the shady trees, 
in the covert of the reed, and 
fens. 

22 The shady trees cover him 
with their shadow; the willows of 
the brook compass him about. 

23 Behold, he drinketh up a river, 
and hasteth not: he trusteth that 
he can draw up Jordan into his 
mouth. : 

24° He taketh it with his eyes: Ais 
nose pierceth through snares. 


CHAPTER 41 
(Jehovah and Job, continued.) 


oes thou draw out leviathan 
with an hook? or his tongue 
with a cord which thou lettest 
down? 

2 Canst thou put an hook into his 
nose? or bore his jaw through with 
a thorn? 

3 Will he make many supplica- 
tions unto thee? will he speak soft 
words unto thee? 

4 Will he make a covenant with 
thee? wilt thou take him for a ser- 
vant for ever? 

5 Wilt thou play with him as 
with a bird? or wilt thou bind him 
for thy maidens? 

6 Shall the companions make a 
banquet of him? shall they part 
him among the merchants? 

7 Canst thou fill his skin with 
barbed irons? or his head with fish 
spears? 

8 Lay thine hand upon him, re- 
member the battle, do no more. 

9 Behold, the hope of him is in 
vain: shall not one be cast down 
even at the sight of him? 

10 None is so fierce that dare stir 
him up: who then is able to stand 
before me? 

11 Who hath prevented me, that 
I should repay him? whatsoever 
is under the whole heaven is fmine. 

12 I will not conceal his parts, 
nor his power, nor his comely pro- 
portion. 

13. Who can discover the face of 
his garment? or who can come fo 
him with his double bridle? 

14 Who can open the doors of his 
face? his teeth are terrible round 
about. 

15 His scales are his pride, shut 
up together as with a close seal. 


41 16) JOB. 424 


ed 16 One is so near to another, that] B.c. 1520. CHAPTER 42. 
No air.can come between them. Part VI. Job’s self-judgment. 


17 They are joined one to another, é 
they stick together, that they can- EN ek answered the LORD, 
and said, 


not be sundered. 
-18. By his neesings a light doth 2 I know that thou canst do 
shine, and his eyes are like the eye- every thing, and that no thought 
lids of the morning. can be withholden from thee. 
19 Out of his mouth go burning 3 Who is he that hideth counsel 
lamps, and sparks of fire leap out. without knowledge? therefore have 
I uttered that I understood not; 


20 Out of his nostrils goeth 
smoke, as out of a seething pot or things too wonderful for me, which 
I knew not. 


caldron. 


a His amen indies eoalss and 4 Blears I beseech thee, and I will 
a flame goeth out of his mouth. speak: I will demand of thee, and 
22 Inhisneck remaineth strength, fe ee declare thou unto me. 
and or ow is turned into joy be-|" rejoiceth. e I have ened of thee by the 
- ft . 
a The flakes of his flesh are Bor preest: ene see eine 
joined together: they are firm in| °** 6 1Wherefore I abhor myself, 


- yagtpee : a Sarmade be mere. ‘tee and ‘repent in dust and ashes. 
is heart is as firm as a stone; 5 ; ae 
yes, aghard ana piece of thenether] PT! (P80! (ated and honoured: 
25 When he raiseth up himself,| ave them- | 7 And it was so,‘that after the 
the mighty are afraid: by rea-| 9” |Lorp had spoken these words unto 
son of breakings they purify them- Job, the Lorp said to Eliphaz the 
on “The sword of him that layeth pete Aisi s phere a: ae ee 
at him cannot hold: the spear, the|/Num.23.1. _|friends: for ye have not spoken of 


dart, nor the “habergeon. See vig me the thing that is right, as my 
27 He esteemeth iron as straw,|*jo¢1.'~—« [servant Job Aath. 
and brass as rotten wood. 8 Therefore take unto you now 


28 The arrow cannot make him| a Job19. |fseven bullocks and seven rams, 
flee: slingstones are turned with : and go to my servant Job, and offer 


him into stubble. up for yourselves. a burnt-offering; 

29 Darts are counted as stubble: and my servant Job shall pray for 
he laugheth at the shaking of a you: for him will I accept: lest I 
spear. deal with you after your folly, in 

30 ‘Sharp stones are under him: that ye have not spoken of me the 
he spreadeth sharp pointed things thing which 1s right, like my ser- 
upon the mire. vant Job. . 

31 He maketh the deep to boil 9 So Eliphaz the Temanite and 
Vike a pot: he maketh the sea like a Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the 
pot of ointment. Naamathite went, and did accord- 

32 He maketh a path to shine ing as the LorD commanded them: 
after him; one would think the the LorD also accepted Job. 
deep to be hoary. 10 sAnd the Lorp turned the 

33 Upon earth there is not his captivity of Job, when he prayed for 
like, 4who is made without fear. his friends: also the LORD gave Job 

34 He beholdeth ali high things: twice as much as he had before. 
he is a king over all the children of 11 Then came there unto him “all 


pride. his brethren, and all his sisters, 


1 The problem, of which the book of Job is the profound discussion, finds here its 
solution. Brought into the presence of God, Job is revealed to himself. In no sense 
a hypocrite, but godly and possessing a faith which all his afflictions couid not 
shake, Job was yet self-righteous and lacking in humility. Chapter 29 fully dis- 
closes this. But in the presence of God he anticipates, as it were, the experience of 
Paul (Phil. 3. 4-9), and the problem is solved. The godly are afflicted that they 
may be brought to self-knowledge and self- judgment. Such afflictions are not 
penal for their sins, but remedial and purifying. The book of Job affords a sublime 
illustration of the truth announced in 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32, and Heb. 12. 7-11. Best of 
all, such self-knowledge and self-judgment is the prelude to greater fruitfulness (vs. 
7-17; John 15.2). Cf. Josh. 5. 13, 14; Ezk. 1. 28; 2. 1-3; Dan. 10. 5-11; Rev. 1. 17-19. 


597 


42 12] 


and all they that had been of his 
. acquaintance before, and did eat 

bread with him in his house: and) 
they bemoaned him, and comforted 
him over all the evil that the LorD 
had brought upon him: every. man 
also gave him a piece of money, and 
every one an earring of gold. 

12 So the LorD blessed “the 
latter end of Job more ‘than his 
beginning: for he had “fourteen 
thousand sheep, and six thousand 
camels, and a thousand yoke of 
oxen, and a thousand she asses. 

13 ‘He had also seven sons and 
three daughters, 


| 


B.C. 1520. 


a Job 8.7; 
Jas.5.11. 


b Job 1.3. 
¢ Job 1.2. 


d Job 5.26; 
Prov.3.16, 


e Gen,25.8. 


14 And he called the name 


of the first, Jemima; and the 
name of the second, Kezia; and 
the name of the third, Keren- 
happuch. 

15 And in all the land were no 
women found so fair as the daugh- 
ters of Job: and their father gave 
them inheritance among their 
brethren. 

16 After this 4lived’ Job an hun- 
dred and forty years, and saw his 
sons, and his sons’ sons, even four 
nh So sided) beings and 

o Jo e eing old an 
full of days. ‘ 


11] 


THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 


[25 


THE simplest description of the five books of Psalms is that they were the inspired 
prayer-and-praise book of Israel. They are revelations of truth, not abstractly, but 
in the terms of human experience. The truth revealed is wrought into the emo- 
tions, desires, and sufferings of the people of God by the circumstances through 
which they pass. But those circumstances are such as to constitute an anticipation 
of analogous conditions through which Christ in His incarnation, and the Jewish 
remnant in the tribulation (Isa. 10. 21, refs.), should pass; so that many Psalms are 
prophetic of the sufferings, the faith, and the victory of both. Psalms 22. and 60. 
are examples. The former—the holy of holies of the Bible—reveals all that was in 
the mind of Christ when He uttered the desolate cry, “My God, My God, why hast 


Thou forsaken Me?”’’ 


Israel when she shall turn to Jehovah again (Deut. 30. 1, 2). 


The latter is an anticipation of what will be in the heart of 


Other Psalms are 


directly prophetic of “the sufferings of Christ, and the glories which should follow” 


(Luke 24. 25-27, 44). 


Psa. 2. is a notable instance, presenting Jehovah’s Anointed as 


rejected and crucified (vs. 1-3; Acts 4. 24-28), but afterward set as Kingin Zion. - 

The great themes of the Psalms are, Christ, Jehovah, the Law, Creation, the 
future of Israel, and the exercises of the renewed heart in suffering, in joy, in per- 
plexity. The promises of the Psalms are primarily Jewish, and suited to a people 
under the law, but are spiritually true in Christian experience also, in the sense that 
they disclose the mind of God, and the exercises of His heart toward those who are 


perplexed, afflicted, or cast down. 


‘The imprecatory Psalms are the cry of the oppressed in Israel for j ustice—a cry 
appropriate and right in the earthly people of God, and based upon a distinct prom- 
ise in the Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 15. 18, refs.); but a cry unsuited, to the church, 
a heavenly people who have taken their place with a rejected and crucified Christ 


(Luke 9. 52-55). 
The Psalms are in five books, 
II. Psalms 42.—72. 


each ending in a doxology: 
III. Psalms 73.-89. IV. Psalms 90.—106. 


BOOK I. 


PSALM 1. 


“Psalm of the two ways: intro- 
ductory to entire Psalter. 


LESSED is the man that walk- 

eth not in the counsel of the 
ungodly, nor standeth in the way 
of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of 
the scornful. 

2 But his delight is in the “law of 
the Lorpb; and in his law doth he 

-meditate day and night. 

3 And he shall be like a tree 
planted by the rivers of water, that 
bringeth forth his fruit in his sea- 
son; his leaf also shall not wither; 
and whatsoever he doeth shall 
prosper. 

4 The ungodly are not so: but 
are like the chaff which the wind 
driveth away. 

5 Therefore the ungodly shall not 
stand in the judgment, nor sinners 
in the congregation of the righteous. 


a Law (of Mo- 
. Psa. 


¢ Sacrifice 
(prophetic). 
vs.1-3; Psa. 
22.1-18. 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

d Mt.12.14; 
26.3,4,47,57, 


Lk.6.11; 
John 5.16,18; 
8.40,59; 10. 
e Christ 
(First Ad- 
vent). Psa. 


3.15; Acts 
1.9.) 
599 


I. Psalms 1.-41. 
V. Psalms 107.-150. 


6 For the LorpD knoweth the way 
of the righteous: but the way of the 
ungodly shall perish. 


PSALM 2. 


. |Psalm of the King: (1) rejected; 


(2) established, (3) reigning 
over the nations. 


HY %do the heathen rage, 
and the people imagine ‘a 

vain thing? 
2 The kings of the earth set them- 
selves, and the rulers take counsel 
together, against the Lorp, and 


’ lagainst his ‘anointed, saying, 


3 Let us break their bands asun- 
der, and cast away their cords from 


us. 
4 He that sitteth in the heavens 
shall laugh: the Lord shall have 


*ithem in derision. 


5 Then shall he speak unto them 


PSALMS. 


in his wrath, and ¢vex them in his 
sore displeasure. $ 

6 Yet have I set my ‘king upon 
my °choly hill of Zion. 


7 I will declare the decree: the oe cece 
Lorp hath said unto me, ¢Thou) Jer.30.4-7. 
art my Son; this day have I begot- 7 Fy 
ten thee. 

8 Ask of me, and I ee ee thee} } Heb.qodesh. 
the heathen for thine inheritance, ; 
and the uttermost parts of the a narok ae 
earth for thy possession. a Psa.20.2. 

9 eThou shalt break them with enna. 

a rod of iron; thou shait fdash = 

them in pieces like a potter’s ves-|d Acts 13.33; 

sel. Heb.1.5; 

10 Be wise now therefore, O ye! >> 

kings: be instructed, ye judges of| ¢ Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 

Pec 7 Psa.24.1-10 

11 Serve the LorpD with 4fear, (Deut.30.3; 
and rejoice with trembling. Acts 1.9-11.) 

12 Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, 
and ye perish from the way, when|* an a bid 
his wrath is kindled but a Hittle.! Rev.6.15.17. 
Blessed are all they that "put their} (sa.2.10-22; 
2trust in him. peach 

PSALM 3. £ Psa.19.9, 
note, 
A Psalm of David, when he fled : 
from Absalom his son, Bee ee 
LORD. how are they increased} 3293 teb- 
that trouble me! many are they 
that rise up against me. # Eph.4.26. 

2 Many there be which say of 5 Psa.2.12 

my soul, There is no help for him|” note. ” 


in God. Selah. 

3 But thou, O Lorp, art a shield 
for me; my glory, and the lifter up 
of mine head. 

4 Icried unto the LorpD with my 


1 The second Psalm gives the order of the establishment of the kingdom. 


voice, and he heard me out of his 
holy hill. Selah. 
5 I laid me down and slept; I 


selves against me round about. 
7 Arise, O LORD; save me, O my 
God: for thou hast smitten all mine 


hast broken the teeth of the un- 
godly. 

8 Salvation belongeth unto the 
Lorpb: thy blessing is upon thy 
people. Selah. 


PSALM 4. 


To the chief Musician on 3Negi- 
noth, A Psalm of David. 


i SH BS me when I call, O God of 


enlarged me when I was in dis- 
tress; have mercy upon me, and 
hear my prayer. 

2 Oye sons of men, how long will 


Iong will ye love vanity, and seek 
after leasing? Selah. 


set apart him that is godly for him- 
self: the Lorp will hear when I 
call unto him. 

4 Stand in awe, ‘and sin not: com- 


awaked; for the LorpD sustained 


me. 
6 I will not be afraid of ten thou- 
sands of people,that have set them- 


enemies upon the cheek bone; thou — 


my righteousnéss: thou hast 


ye turn my glory into shame? how 


3 But know’ that the Lorp hath 


mune with your own heart upon 


your bed, and be still. Selah. 


5 Offer the sacrifices of right-— 


eousness, and put your Jtrust in the 
LORD. 
6 There be many that say, Who 


Itisin 


six parts: (1) The rage of the Gentiles, the vain imagination of “the people” (Jews), 


and the antagonism of rulers against Jehovah’s anointéd (vs. 1-3). 


The inspired 


interpretation of this is in Acts 4. 25-28, which asserts its fulfilment in the cruci- 


fixion of Christ. 
possible to set aside His covenant (2 S 


(2) The derision of Jehovah (v. 4) that men should suppose it 
am. 7. 8-17), and oath (Psa. 89. 34-37). 


(3) The vexation (v. 5) fulfilled, frst in the destruction of Jerusalem, A.D. 70; and in 


the final dispersion of the 


the tribulation (Mt. 24. 29) which immediatel 


(Mt. 24. 30). 


Jews at that time; and to be fulfilled more completely in 


1 y precedes the return of the King 
(4) The establishment of the rejected King upon Zion (v. 6). 


(5) The subjection of the earth to the King’s rule (vs. 7-9); and (6) the present 


appeal to the world-powers (vs. 10-12). 
Psalms. (Note. 
102.; 110.; 118., are classed: as Messianic. 
Psalms also refer to Christ.) 


2 Trust is the characteristic O. T. word for the N. T. “faith,” “believe.” 


152 times in the O. 


upon (e.g. Job 35. 14). 


It occurs 


T., and is the rendering of Heb. words signifying to take refuge 
(e.g. Ruth 2. 12); to lean on (e.g. Psa. 56. 3); to roll on (e.g. Psa. 22. 8) 


; to stay 


° Neginoth: stringed instruments mentioned in connection with Psalms 3. $1535 
93.; 54.; 60.; 66.; 75., where it seems clear that the musical directions now appear- 


ing as titles of Psalms 4.; 6.; 54.; 55.; 61 ; 


67 
to the preceding Psalms. 


600 


, and 76., were anciently appended 


See Psa. 8., next in order of the Messianic 
Psalms 2.; 8.; 16.; 22.; 23.; 24.: 40.: 41.; 45.;.68.; 69.; 72.; 89.; 
It is not questioned that many other. 


will shew us any good? Lorn, 4lift 
thou up the light of thy counte- 
mance upon us. 

7 Thou hast put gladness in my 
heart, more than in the time that 
their corn and their wine in- 
creased, 

8 <I will both lay me down in 
peace, and sleep: for thou, Lorp, 
Sonly makest me dwell in safety. 


PSALM 5. 


To the chief Musician upon 1Nehi- 
loth, A Psalm of David. 


IVE ear to my words, O LorpD, 
consider my meditation. 

2 Hearken unto the voice of my 
cry, my King, and my God: for unto 
thee will I pray. 

3 My voice shalt thou hear in the 
morning, O LorRD; in the morning 
will I direct my prayer unto thee, 
and will look up. 

4 For thou art not a God that 
hath pleasure in wickedness: neither 
shall evil dwell with thee. 

5 eThe foolish shall not stand in 
thy sight: thou hatest all workers 
of iniquity. 

6 Thou shalt destroy them that 
speak leasing: the LorpD will abhor 
the bloody and deceitful man. 

7 But as for me, I will come into 
thy house in the multitude of 
thy mercy: and in thy /fear will 
I worship toward thy holy tem- 


ple. 

8 Lead me, O Lorp, in thy right- 
€ousness because of mine enemies; 
make thy way straight before my 
face. 

9 For there is no faithfulness in 
their mouth; their inward part is 
very wickedness; &their throat zs an 
open sepulchre; they flatter with 
their tongue. 

10 Destroy thou them, O God; let 
them fall by their own counsels; 
east them out in the multitude of 
their transgressions; for they have 
tebelled against thee. i 

11 But let all those that put their 
Atrust in thee rejoice: let them ever 
shout for joy, because thou defend- 
est them: let them also that love 
thy name be joyful in thee. 

12 For thou, Lorp, wilt bless 
the righteous; with favour wilt 
thou compass him as with a 
shield, 


PSALMS. 


a Num.6.26; 
Psa.80.3,7, 
19; 119.135. 


6 Isa.9.3. 


¢ Job 11.18,19; 
Psa.3.5. 


d Lev.25.18, 
19; 26.5; 
Deut.12.10. 

e Hab.1.13. 


f Psa.19.9, 
note. 


g Rom.3.13. 


h Psa.2.12, 
note. 


i Stringed in- 
struments, 

j The word 
means “the 
eighth”—in 
music an 
octave. 


k Mt.7.23. 


1 Shiggaion 
= praise. 


m Psa.31.15. 


n Heb. nota 
deliverer. 


o 2 Sam.16. 
7,8. 


p Psa.94.2. 


Fok (Ben 


176 


PSALM 6. 


To the chief Musician on ‘Negincth 
upon JSheminith, A Psalm of 
David. 


LORD, rebuke me not in thine 
anger, neither chasten me in 
thy hot displeasure. 

2 Have mercy upon me, O Lorp; 
for I am weak: O Lorn, heal me; 
for my bones are vexed. 

3 My soul is also sore vexed: but 
thou, C Lorp, how long? 

4 Return, O Lorp, deliver my 
soul: oh save me for thy mercies’ 
sake. 

5 For in death there is noremem- 
brance of thee: in the grave who 
shall give thee thanks? 

6 I am weary with my groaning; 
all the night make I my bed to 
swim; I water my couch with my 
tears. 

7 Mine eye is consumed because 
of grief; it waxeth old because of all 
mine enemies. 

8 Depart from me, all ye workers 
of Ainiquity; for the Lorp hath 
heard the voice of my weeping. 

9 The Lorp hath heard my sup- 
plication; the LorD will receive my 
prayer. 

10 Let all mine enemies be 
ashamed and-sore vexed: let them 
return, and be ashamed suddenly. 


PSALM 7. 


IShiggaion of David, which he sang 
unto the LORD, concerning the 
words of Cush the Benjamite. 


LORD my God, in thee do I 

put my “trust: “save me from 
all them that persecute me, and 
deliver me: 

2 T.est he tear my soul like a lion, 
rending it in pieces, while there is 
mnone to deliver. 

3 O Lorp my God, *%f I have 
done this; if there be iniquity in my 
hands; 

4 If I have rewarded evil unto 
him that was at peace with me; 
(yea, I have delivered him that 
without cause is mine enemy:) 

5 Let the enemy persecute my 
soul, and take it; yea, let him tread 
down my life upon the earth, and 
lay mine honour in the dust. Selah. 

6 Arise, O Lorp, in thine anger, 
P\lift up thyself because of the rage 


1 Nehiloth is not a musical instrument, but means “inheritance,” and indicates 
the character of the Psalm. ‘The righteous are the Lord’s inheritance, 


601 


77 


me to the judgment that thou hast 
commanded. _ 

7 So shall the congregation of the 
people compass thee about: for 
their sakes therefore return thou 
on high. ‘ 

8 The Lorp shall judge the peo- 
ple: judge me, O LORD, “according 
te my righteousness, and accord- 
ing to mine integrity that 1s in 


me. 

9 Oh let the wickedness of the) 
wicked come to an end; but estab-} 
lish the just: for the righteous God 
trieth the hearts and reins. : 

10 My ‘defence is of God, which 
saveth the upright in heart. ios 

11 God judgeth the righteous,}’ 79°." 
and God is angry with the wicked| upon God. 
every day. 

12 If he turn not, he will whet his) ©Mt21-16- 
sword; ke hath bent his bow, and|¢ Heb.2.6-8. 
made it ready. 

13 He hath also prepared for i png 
him_the instruments of death; he 
ordaineth his arrows against the 
persecutors. 

14 Behold, he travaileth with ini- 
quity, and hath conceived mischief, 
and brought forth falsehood. 

15 He made a pit, and digged it, 
and is fallen inte the ditch which 
he made, 

16 His mischief shall return upon 

his own head, and his violent deal- 
ing shail come down upon his own 
pate. 
_17 I will praise the Lorn accord- 
ing to his righteousness: and will 
sing praise to the name of the LorpD 
most high. 


a Psa.18.203 


35.24, 


f 1 Cor.15.27. 


gi.e. nations. 


PSALM 8, 
To the chief Musician upon !Gittith, 
A Psalm of David. 


LORD our Lord, how exce!- 
lent is thy mame in all the 


PSALMS. 


of mine enemies: and awake for| learth! who hast set thy glory above 


the heavens. 

2 Qut of the mouth of babes and” 
‘suckings hast thou ordained 
strength because of thine enemies, 
that thou mightest still the enemy 
and the avenger. 

3 When I consider thy heavens, 
the work of thy fingers, the moon 
and the stars, which thou hast 
ordained; 

4 What is ¢man, that thou art 
mindful of him? and the son of 
man, that thou visitest him? 

5 2For thou hast made him a little 
lower than the ‘angels, and hast 
crowned him with glory and 
honour. 

6 Thou madest him to have do- 
Minion over the works of thy 
hands; thou hast put fall things 
under his feet: : 

7 All sheep and oxen, yea, and the 
beasts_of the field; 

8 The fowl of the air, and the fish 
of the sea, and whatsoever passeth 
through the paths of the seas. 

9 OLorpD our Lord, how excellent 
is thy name in all the earthi 


PSALM 9, 


To the chief Musician upon 3Muth- 
labben, A Psalm of David. 


I WILL praise thee, O Lorp, with 
my whole heart; I will shew forth 
ali thy marvellous works. 

2 Iwill be glad and rejoice in thee: 
I will sing praise to thy name, O 
thou most High. 

3 When mine enemies are turned 
back, they shall fall and perish at 
thy presence. 

4 For thou hast maintained my 
right and my cause; thou satest in 
the throne judging right. 

5 Thouhastrebuked the 2heathen, 


1 Gittith = “winepress,’”’ and so, of the harvest, in the sense of judgment (Isa. 


63. 3; Rev. 19. 1s). 
Psalm of judgment. 


Psalm 7., to which the title of Psalm 8. properly belongs, is a 


2In Psa. 2. Christ was presented as Jehovah’s Son and King, rejected and cruci- 


fied but yet to reign in Zion. 
Psa. 110. with Mt. 22. 41-46), 
a little [while] lower than the 
tion (Heb. 2. 6-11). 
divine as in Psa. 
second man and 


In Psa. 8., while His deity is fully recognized (v. 1; 
He is seen as Son of man (vs. 4~6) who, ‘“‘made for 
angels,” is to have dominion over the redeemed crea- 
The authority here is racial and Adamic, rather than purely 
2., or Davidic as in Psa. 89. That which the first man lost, the 
“last Adam” more than regained. Heb. 2. 6-11, in connection with 


Psa. 8., and Rom. 8. 17-21, show that the “naany sons” whom He is bringing to glory, 


are joint heirs with 
Heb. 2. 


Him in both the royal right of Psa. 2. and the human right of 
See Psa. 16., next in order of the Messianic Psalms. 


3 Muth-labben, “death of the son,” is not a musical instrument but the title of 


the Psalm. Possibly connected with 2 


602 


Sam, 12. 20. 


ahi : 
Abe el 


9 6] 


PSALMS. 


[10 18 


thou hast destroyed the wicked, 
thou hast put out their name for 
ever and ever. 

6 O thou enemy, destructions are 
come to a perpetual end: and thou 
hast destroyed cities; their memo- 
rial is perished with them. 

7 «But the LorD shall endure for 
ever: he hath prepared his throne 
for judgment. ’ 

8 And he shall judge the world 
in righteousness, he shall minister 
judgment to the people in upright- 
ness. i 

9 ©The LorD also will be a refuge 
for the oppressed, a refuge in times 
of trouble. 

10 And they that know thy name 
will put their ¢trust in thee: for 
thou, Lorp, hast not forsaken them 
that seek thee. 

11 Sing praises to the Lorp, 
which dwelleth in Zion: declare 
among the people his doings. 

12 “When he maketh inquisition 
for blood, he remembereth them: he 
eco not the cry of the fhum- 

e. 

13 Have mercy upon me, O 
Lorp; consider my trouble which 
I suffer of them that hate me, 
thou that liftest me up from the 
gates of death: 

14 That I may shew forth all thy 
praise in the gates of the daughter 
of Zion: £I will rejoice in thy salva- 
tion. 

15 The “heathen are sunk down 
in the pit that they made: in the 
net which they hid is their own foot 
taken. 

16 The Lorp is known by the 
judgment which he_ executeth: 
the wicked is snared in the work 
of his own hands. Higgaion. 
Selah. 

17 The wicked shall be turned 
into hell, and all the nations that 
forget God. 

18 For the meedy shall not 
alway be forgotten: the expecta- 
tion of the poor shall not perish 
for ever. 

19 Arise, O Lorp; let not man 
prevail: let the “heathen be judged 
in thy sight. 

20 Put them in fear, O LORD: 
that the nations may know them- 
selves to be but men. Selah. 


PSALM 10. 


HY standest thou afar off, O 
Lorp? why hidest thou thy- 
self in times of trouble? 


a Psa.102.12, 
26; Heb. 
1-11. 

6 Psa.96.13; 
98.9; Acts 
17.31. 

¢ Psa.32.7; 
37.39; 46.1; 
91.2. 


d Psa.2.12, 
note. 


e Gen.9.5. 
f Or, afflicted. 


g Psa.13.5; 
20.5; 35.9. 


hive. nations. 
1 Meditation. 
j Rom.3.14. 


k Heb. hide 
themselves. 


Or, into his 
strong 
parts. 

m Mic.5.9, 


n Psa.68.5; 
Hos.14.3. 


603 


2 The wicked in Ais pride doth 
persecute the poor: let them be 
taken in the devices that they have 
imagined. 3 

3 For the wicked boasteth of his 
heart’s desire, and blesseth the 
covetous, whom the Lorpb abhor- 
reth. 

4 The wicked, through the pride 


of his countenance, will not seek 
after God: God is not in all his 
thoughts. 

5 His ways are always grievous; 
thy judgments are far above out of 
his sight: as for all his enemies, 
he puffeth at them. 

6 He hath said in his heart, I shall 
not be moved: for J shall never be 
in adversity. 

7 His mouth is full of Jcursing and 
deceit and fraud: under his tongue 
is mischief and vanity. 

8 He sitteth in the lurking places 
of the villages: in the secret places 
doth he murder the innocent: his 
eyes “are privily set against the 
poor. 

9 He lieth in wait secretly as a 
lion in his den: he lieth in wait to 
catch the poor: he doth catch the 
poor, when he draweth him into 
his net. 

10 He croucheth, and humbleth 
himself, that the poor may fall ‘by 
his strong ones. 

11 He hath said in his heart, God 
hath forgotten: he hideth his face; 
he will never see it. 

12 Arise, O LorD; O God, lift up 
Bae hand: forget not the hum- 

le. 

13 Wherefore doth the wicked 
contemn God? he hath said in 
his heart, Thou wilt not require 
it. 


14 Thou hast seen 1t; for thou 
beholdest mischief and spite, to 
requite it with thy hand: the poor 
committeth himself unto thee; 
nthou art the helper of the father- 
less. 

15 Break thou the arm of the 
wicked and the evil man: seek 
out his wickedness ftil/ thou find 
none. 

16 The Lorp is King for ever 
and ever: the “heathen are perished 
out of his land. 

17 Lorp, thou hast heard the 
desire of the humble: thou wilt 
prepare their heart, thou wilt cause 
thine ear to hear: 

18 To judge the fatherless and the 
oppressed, that the man of the 
earth may no more oppress, 


a) 5 it 


Bl 2] PSALMS. 
PSALM 11. 
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
David. 


N the Lorpb put I my ¢trust: how 
say ye to my soul, Flee asia bird 
to your mountain? 

2 For, lo; the wicked bend therr 
bow, they make ready their arrow 
upon. the string, that they may rien 
bprivily shoot at the upright in} 7°°* 
heart. b Heb. in 

3 ‘If thefoundations be destroyed,| ¢arkness. 
what can the righteous do? 


‘c Psa.82.5. 
-4 The Lorp js in his holy tem-|° ~~ 


ple, the Lorp’s ¢throne 73 in pease 

heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids} yri5°34 

try, the children of men. 23.22; Acts 
5 The Lorp ‘¢trieth the right- Laken 


eous: but the wicked and him 
that loveth violence his soul hat-|¢ Gen.22:1; 


eth. Jas.4.12. 

6 Upon the wicked he shall rain O ‘ck 
snares, fire and brimstone, and an ee 
horrible tempest: sthis shall be| coals. 
the portion of their cup. See Gen.43. 

7 For the righteous LorD loveth an Ses 
Tighteousness; his countenance aoa Psa. 
doth behold the upright. Bar 

h See Psa.6, 
title. 
PSALM 12. rae 
z, nye ¢ Psa.17.10; 
To the chief Musician upon “Shem-| 1Sam.2:3; 
Dan.7.8,25. 


inith, A Psalm of David. 


HEL: Lorp; for the godly Cael 
<* man ceaseth; for the faithful} Aim. 

fail from among the children of k Psa.18.30: 

men. 119.140; 

2 They speak vanity every one| Prov.30.5. 
with his neighbour: with flattering 
lips and with a double heart do 
they speak. 

3 The LorD shall cut off all flate/™ Rom.3.11. 
tering lips, and ‘the tongue that], Rom.3.12. 
speaketh proud things: 

# Who have said, With our|° Jer10.25; 
tongue will we prevail; our lips are] yic3.3. 
our own: who rs lord! over us? 

5 For,the oppression of the poor,|? Sera 
for the sighing of the needy, now| 977°" 
will I arise, saith the Lorp; I will 
set him in safety from him that 
Jpuffeth at him. 

6 The words of the Lorp are 
kpure words: as silver tried in a 
furnace of earth, purified seven 
times, 

7 Thou shalt keep them, O Lorp, 
thou shalt preserve them from this 
generation for ever. 

8 The wicked walk on every] 
side, when the vilest men are ex- 
alted. 


Uv.3; Rom: 
3.10. 


115 
PSALM. 13. 
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
David. ; 


HOw long wilt thou forget me, 
O Lorp? for ever? how long 
wilt thou hide thy face from me? _ 

2 How long shall I take counsel 
in my soul, having sorrow in my 
heart daily? how. long shall mine 
enemy be exalted over me? : 
| 3 Consider and hear me,,Q Lorp. 
my God: lighten mine eyes, Iest TI 
sleep the sleep of death; : 

4 Lest mine enemy say, I have 
prevailed against him; and’ those 
that trouble me rejoice when I am 
moved. 

5 But I have “trusted in thy 
mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy 
salvation. 

6 I will sing unto the Lorb, be- 
cause he hath dealt bountifully 
with me. 


PSALM 14. 


To the chief Musician, A Psaim of 
David. 


(are fool hath said in his heart, 
There is no God. /They are 
corrupt, they have done abomina- 
ble works, there is none that: 
doeth good. 

2 The Lorp looked down from 
heaven Upon the-childrén 6! men,. 
to. Seed ESS were. any, that di 
understand, and seek God. 
3 PaaS EST i 


one..aside,, they _ 

ar l r...become filthy: 

here.is none, th at. locth good, no, 
ne. 


ave all the workers of iniquity 

no knowledge? owho eat up my 

people as they eat bread’ and call 

not. upon the Lorp. : 

5S There were they in great fear; 

for God is in the generation. of “he 
righteous. 

6 Ye have shamed the counsel of 
the poor, because the Lorp js his 
refuge. 

7 ?Qh that the salvation of Israel 
were come out of Zion! when the 
LorD bringeth back the captivity 
of his people, Jacob shall Tejoice, 
and Israel shall be glad, 


PSALM 15, 
A Psalm of David. 


ORD, who shall abide in thy 


tabernacle? who shall dwell in 
‘thy holy hill? 


a 


15 2] PSALMS. [17 18 


2 He that walketh uprightly, and 
he Sdn mets and speak- PSALM 17. 
the truth in his heart. ; 
3 He that backbiteth not with Sb Ug ae rye 
his tongue, nor doeth evil to his Hy the right, O Lorb, attend 
neighbour, nor taketh up.a reproach unto my cry, give ear unto my 
against his neighbour. prayer, that goeth not out of 
4 In whose eyes a vile person is feigned lips. 
contemned; but he honoureth them 2 Let my sentence come forth 
that “fear the Lorp. He that from thy presence; let thine eyes 
sweareth to his own hurt, and behold the things that are equal. 
cchangeth not. 3 Thou hast proved mine heart; 
5 He that putteth not out his|c Psa.19.9, thou hast visited me in the night; 
money to usury, nor ‘taketh reward) note. thou hast tried me, and shalt find 
against the innocent. He that do-|, p...219 nothing; I am purposed that my 
eth these things shall never be] note. ” mouth shall not transgress. 
moved. pos 4 Concerning the works of men, 
Camere by the word of thy lips I have kept 
PSALM 16. 1 1 Hee “yi ae the paths of the nae 
Ing: P * -20. mn. | old up my goings in ithy paths, 
1Michtam of David. 1.26; Zech. that my footsteps slip not. 
TDRESERVE me, O God: for in i 6 I have called upon thee, for thou 


thee do I put my “trust. @Resurrec- |wilt hear me, O God: incline thine 

2 O my soul, thou hast said unto| {/2%.,%29 lear unto me, and hear my speech. 
the Lorp, Thou art my Lord: my} 19. (Job19.| 7 Shew thy marvellous loving- 
goodness extendeth not to thee; 25; 1 Cor. kindness, O thou that savest by thy 


3 But tothe saints that areinthe| 15?) right hand them which put their 
okt and to the excellent, in whom eve8-11 is ‘trust in chee from those that rise 
is all my delight. cts 2.25- up against them. 

4 Their sorrows shall be multi-| 28 19-3- 8 Keep me as the apple of the 
plied . that se after os f Christ Pigst ae: hide me under the shadow of 
god: their drink-offerings of bloo vent). thy wings, ; 
will I not offer, nor take up their] fQ27345.° | 9 From the wicked that oppress 
names into my lips. ; Acts 1.9.) me, from my shire enemies, who 
Be adebetite ware tee sities berg mg “10 They : ol inclosed in their own 
thou a eee lot. note. fat: tte their mouth they speak 

6 The lines are fallen unto me in|. proudly. 
pleasant places; yea, I have al"* c#rth. 11 They have now compassed us 
goodly heritage. in our steps: they have set their 

7 L-will bless the LorbD, who hath eyes bowing down to the earth; 
given me counsel: my reins also | 12 Like asa lion that is greedy of 
anstruct me in the night seasons. |his prey, and as it were a young 
~8 I have set the LorpD always be- lion lurking in secret places. _ 
fore me: because he zs at my right 13 Arise, O LORD, disappoint 
hand, I shall not be moved. Jhim, cast him down: deliver my 


9 Therefore my heartis glad, and soul from the wicked, which 1s thy 


joiceth: 2my flesh also |sword: f 
sees aa hope: “hs |] 14 Frommenwhich are thy hand, 


10 For thou wilt not <leave my O Lorp, from men of the /world, 
‘soul in ehell; neither wilt thou suf- which have their portion in this 
fer thine Holy One to see corrup- life, and whose belly thou fillest 
tion. with thy hid treasure: they are 

1i Thou wilt shew me the path of full of children, and leave the 
life: in thy presence is fulness of rest of their substance to their 
joy; at thy right hand there are babes. 


pleasures for eyermore. 15 As for me, I will behold thy 


1 Mi “aq prayer,” or “meditation.” See Psa. 56.; 57.5 58.; 59.; 60. 

2 me eae ae prediction of the resurrection of the King. As a prophet 
David understood that, not at His first advent, but at some time subsequent to His 
death and resurrection Messiah would assume the Davidic throne. See Acts 2. 25-31, 
with Lk. 1. 32, 33, and Acts 15. 13-17. See “Davidic Covenant, 2 Sam. 7. 14, refs. ; 
“Kingdom (O. T.),” Zech. 12. 8. See Psa. 22., next in order of the Messianic 


Psalms. 
605 


“me about: the snares of death pre- 


face in righteousness: I shall be 
satished, when I awake, with thy 
likeness. 


PSALM 18. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
David, the servant of the Lorb, 
who spake unto the LorpD the 
words of this song in the day 
that the Lorp delivered him 
from the hand of all his enemies, 
and from the hand of Saul: And 
he said, 


a | WILL love thee, O LorD, my 
strength. 

2 The LorD ts my rock, and my 
fortress, and my deliverer; my God, 
my strength, %in whom I will trust; 
my buckler, and the horn of my 
salvation, and my high tower. 

3 I will call upon the Lorb, ‘who 
is worthy to be praised:’so shall I 
be saved from mine enemies. 

4 ¢The sorrows of death com- 
passed me, and the floods of ¢un- 
godly men made me afraid. 

5 The sorrows of Shell compassed 


vented me. 

6 In my distress I called upon the 
Lorp, and cried unto my God: he 
heard my voice out of his temple, 
and my cry came before him, even 
into his ears. 

7 &Then the earth shook and 
trembled; the foundations also of 
the hills moved and were shaken, 
because he was wroth. 

8 There went up a smoke “out of 
his nostrils, and fire out of his 
mouth devoured: coals were kin- 
dled by it. 

9 ‘He bowed the heavens also, 
and came down: and darkness was 
under his fee't. . 

10 ZAnd he rode upon a cherub, 
and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the 
wings of the wind. 

11 He made darkness his secret 
place; “his pavilion round about 
him were dark waters and thick 
clouds of the skies. 

12 ‘At the brightness that was 
before him his thick clouds passed, 
hail stones and coals of fire. 

13 The Lorp also thundered in 
the heavens, and the Highest gave 
™his voice; hail stones and coals of 

re. 

14 "Yea, he sent out his arrows, 
and scattered them; and he shot 
out lightnings, and discomfited 
them. 

15 Then the channels of waters 


“ee 


PSALMS. 


a Psa.144.1, 
b Heb.2.13. 
c Rev.5.12. 
d Psa.116.3. 
e Heb. Belial. 
f Sheol. See 


Hab.2.5, 
note. 


g Mt.27.45-51. 
h Heb. by his. 


i Psa.144.5. 

j Psa.99.1. 

k Psa.97.2. 

1 Psa.97.3. 

m Psa.29.3. 

n Psa.144.6; 
Josh.10.10; 
Isa.30.30. 

o Psa.144.7. 


p Psa.31.8; 
118.5. 


q 1 Sam.26.23. 


r Job 18.6; 
29.3. 


Ss Psa.12.6; 
119.140; 
Prov.30.5. 


1 Psa.2.12, 
note, 


u 2 Sam.2.18; 
Hab.3.19. 


v Deut.32.13; 
33.29, 


606 


were seen, and the foundations of 
the world were discovered at th: 
rebuke, O LORD, at the blast of the 
breath of thy nostrils. q 

16 °He sent from above, he took 
me, he drew me out of many waters. 

17 He delivered me from my 
strong enemy, and from them 
which hated me: for they were too 
strong for me. 

18 They prevented me in the day 
of my calamity: but the Lorp was 
my stay. 

19 *He brought me forth also into 
a large place: he delivered me, be- 
cause he delighted in me. 

20 The Lorp rewarded me ac- 
cording to my righteousness: ac- 
cording to the cleanness of my 
hands hath he recompensed me. 

21 For I have kept the ways of 
the Lorp, and have not wickedly 
departed from my God. 

22 For all his judgments were 
before me, and I did not put away 
his statutes from me. 

23 I was also upright before him, 
and I kept myself from mine ini- 
quity. 

24 9Therefore hath the Lorp 
recompensed me according to my 
righteousness, according to the 
cleanness of my hands in his eye-’ 
sight. 

25 With the merciful thou wilt 
shew thyself merciful; with an up- 
right man thou wilt shew thyself 
upright; 

26 With the pure thou wilt shew 
thyself pure; and with the froward 
thou wilt shew thyself froward. 

27 .For thou wilt save the afflicted 
people; but wilt bring down high 
looks. 

28 7For thou wilt light my candle: 
the Lorp my God will enlighten 
my darkness, 

29 For by thee I have run through 
a troop; and by my God have I 
leaped over a wall, 

30 As for God, his way is perfect: 
sthe word of the Lorb is tried: he 
is a buckler to ail those that ‘trust 
in him. 

31 For whois God save the Lorp? 
or who is a rock save our God? 

32 It is God that girdeth me with 
strength, and maketh my way 
Se 

Jd “Fie maketh my feet like 
hinds’ feet, and *setteth me upon 


my high places. 
34 He teacheth my hands to war, 


so that a bow of steel is broken by 
Mine arms. 


be! eee 


18 35] 


PSALMS. 


Tele. tee Fhe 


[20 4 


35 Thou hast also given me the | 2 Day unto day uttereth speech, 
shield of thy salvation: and thy and night unto night sheweth 


right hand hath holden me up, and 
thy gentleness hath made me great. 
36 Thou hast enlarged my steps 
under me, that my feet did not slip. 
37 I have pursued mine enemies, 
and overtaken them: neither did I 
turn again till they were consumed. 
38 I have wounded them that 


they were not able to rise: they are, 


fallen under my feet. 

39 For thou hast girded me with 
strength unto the battle: thou hast 
“subdued under me those that rose 
up against me. : 

40 Thou hast also given me the 
necks of mine enemies; that I might 
destroy them that hate me. 

41 They cried, but there was 
none to save them: even unto the 
LorpD, but he answered them not. 

42 Then did I beat them smail as 
the dust before the wind: I did ¢cast 
them out as the dirt in the streets. 

43 Thou hast delivered me from 
the strivings of the people; and 
thou hast made me the head of the 
cheathen: a ¢people whom I have 
not known shall serve me. 

44 As soon as they hear of me, 
they shall obey me: the strangers 
shall submit themselves unto me. 

45 The strangers shall fade away, 
and be afraid out of their ciose 
‘places. 

46 The Lorn liveth; and blessed 
be my rock; and let the God of my 
salvation be exalted. 

47 It is God that avengeth me, 
and subdueth the people under me. 

48 He delivereth me from mine 
enemies: yea, thou liftest me up 
above those that rise up against 
me: thou hast delivered me from 
the violent man. 

49 Therefore will I give ‘thanks 
unto thee, O Lorp, among the 
cheathen, and sing praises unto thy 
name. . 

50 Great deliverance giveth he to 
his king; and sheweth mercy to his 
anointed, to David, and to his seed 
for evermore. 


PSALM 19. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm 
of David. 


oe heavens declare the glory of 
God; and the firmament shew- 


eth his handywork. 


a Heb. caused 
to bow. 


6 Zech.10.5. 


{ 
ci.e. nations. 


d Isa.52.15; 
55.5. 


|¢ Rom.15.9. 


f Cited in 
Rom.i0.18. 


g Eccl.1.5. 


|h Law (of Mo- 
ses). vs.7,8; 
Psa.37.31. 
(Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3,1-29.) 


+ Psa.12.6. 


j Psa.119.72, 
127; Prov.8. 
10,11,19. 


k Lev-4.2. 


1 Psa.119.133; 
Rom.6.12,14. 


m Psa.51.15. 


2 Heb. my 
rock. 


o Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


pb Heb. set 
thee on an 
high place. 


q Heb. qodesh 
(tr. “holy,” 
v.6). 


knowledge. 

3 Thereisnospeechnor language, 
where their voice is not heard. 

4 fTheir line is gone out through 
all the earth, and their words to the 
end of the world. In them hath he 
set a tabernacle for the sun, 

5 Which zs as a bridegroom com- 
ing out of his chamber, and £rejoic- 
eth as a strong man to run a race. 

6 His going forth is from the end 
of the heaven, and his circuit unto 
the ends of it: and there is nothing 
hid from the heat thereof. 

7 The law of the LorD is per- 
fect, converting the soul: the testi- 
mony of the LORD is sure, making 
wise the simple. 

8 The statutes of the LorRD are 
right, rejoicing the heart: ‘the com- 
mandment of the LORD 1s pure, en- 
lightening the eyes. 

9 The !fear of the LORD is clean, 
enduring for ever: the judgments of 
the LorD are true and righteous 
altogether. 

10 More to be desired are they 
than gold, Zyea, than much fine 
gold: sweeter also than honey and 
the honeycomb. 

11 Moreover by them is thy ser- 
vant .warned: and in keeping of 
them there is great reward. 

12 Who can understand his er- 
rors? “cleanse thou me from secret 
faults. 

13 Keep back thy servant also 
from presumptuous sins; ‘let them 
not have dominion over me: then 
shall I be upright, and I shall be in- 
nocent from the great transgression. 

14 mLet the words of my mouth, 
and the meditation of my heart, be 
acceptable in thy sight, O Lorn, 
my “strength, and my °redeemer. 


PSALM 20. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm 
of David. 


plese Lorp hear thee in the day 
of trouble; the name of the God 
of Jacob ?defend thee; 

2 Send thee help from the %sanc- 
tuary, and strengthen thee cut of 
Zion; 

3 Remember all thy offerings, and 
accept thy burnt-sacrifice; Selah. 

4 Grant thee according to thine 
own heart, and fulfil all thy counsel. 


Fs 


1 The “fear of the Lord,” a phrase of the O.T. piety, meaning reverential trust. 


with hatred of evil. 


607 


20 5] 


and in the name of our God we will 
set up our banners: the Lorp fulfil 
all thy petitions. 


6 Now know I that the Lorp! 


saveth his anointed; he will hear 
him ‘from his “holy heaven with 
the saving strength of his right 
hand. 

7 Some trust in chariots, and 
some in horses: “but we will remem- 


ber the name of the Lorp our God.) 


8 They are brought down and 
fallen: but we are risen, and stand 
upright. 

9 Save, Lorb: let the king hear 
us when we call. 


PSALM 21. 
To the chief Musician, A Psalm 
of David. 
HE king shall joy in thy 


it strength, O Lorp; and in thy 
salvation how greatly shall he re- 
joice! 

2 Thow hast given him his heart’s 


desire, and hast not withholden the} 


request of his lips. Selah. i 
3. For thou preventest him with 
the blessings of goodness: thou set- 


test a crown of pure gold on his/ 


head. 


4 ¢He asked life of thee, and thou 


gavest it him, even length of days’ 
for ever and ever. 


5 His glory is great in thy salva-| 
tion: honour and majesty hast thou 


laid upon him. 

6 For thou hast made him most 
blessed for ever: ‘thou hast made 
him exceeding glad with thy coun- 
tenance. 

7 For the king ftrusteth in the 
Lorp, and through the mercy of 
the most High he shall not be 
moved, 


2 


3 Psalm 22. isa 


Christ. 
ness of verse 2 (Mt. 27 
the casting lots of verse 18 (Mt. 
remembered that ¢ 
proof of inspiration is irresistible. 


5 We will rejoice in thy salvation, 


PSALMS. 


a Heb. from 
the heaven 
of his 
holiness. 


b Sanctify, 
holy (O.T.). 
Psa.89.20. 
(Gen.2.3; 
Zech.8.3.) 


c 2 Chr.32.8. 

d Psa.61.5,6. 

e Psa.16.11; 
45.7. 

f Psa.2.12, 
note. 

g Mt.27.46; 
Mk.15.34. 

h Sacrifice 
(prophetic). 
vs.1-18; 


| (Gen.4.4; 

| Heb.10.18.) 
t Christ (First 
Advent). vs. 


9 V%7,8, 11-13; 
Psa.109.25; 
Mt.27.39-44, 


1 Or, Ay-ys-leth Shachar, “hind of the morning,” 


608 


[22 7 


8 Thine hand shall find out all 
thine enemies: thy right hand shalt 
find out those that hate thee. 


- 
5 
q 


9 Thou shalt make them as a fiery 


oven in the time of thine anger: the 
Lorp shall swallow them up in 
his wrath, and the fire shail devour 
them. ; 

10 Their fruit shalt thou destroy 


from the earth, and their seed from 


among the children of men. 

11 For they intended evil against 
thee: they imagined a mischievous 
device, which they are not able to 
perform. 

12 Therefore shalt thow make 
them turn their back, when thou 
shaltmakeready thinearrowsupon 
thy strings against the face of them. 

13 Be thou exalted, Lorpb, in 


|thine own strength: so will we sing 


and praise thy power. 


PSALM 22, 


To the chief Musician upon lAije- 
leth Shahar, A Psalm of David. 


"M*. &God, ‘my God, why hast 
thou forsaken ‘me? why art 
thou so far from helping me, and 
from the words of my roaring? 

2 Omy God, I cry in the daytime, 
but thou hearest not; and‘ in the 
night season, and am not silent. 
_3 But thou art holy, O: thou that 
inhabitest the praises of Israel. 

4 Our fathers trusted in thee: they 
trusted, and thoudidst deliver them. 

5. They cried unto thee, and were 
delivered: they trusted in thee, and 
were not confounded. 

6 But Iam aworm, and no man; 
a reproach of men, and Jdespised- 
of the people. 

7 3All they that see me laugh me 
to scorn: they shoot out the lip, 
they shake the head, saying, 


a title, not a musical instrument. 


Psalms 22., 23., and 24. form a trilogy. In Psalm 22. the good Shepherd gives 
His life for the sheep (John 10. 11); in Psalm 23, 
again from the dead through the blood of the everlasting covenant” 
tenderly cares for the sheep; in Psalm 24. the 
glory to own and reward the sheep (1 Pet. 5. 4) 
graphic picture of death by crucifixion. 
and pelvis) out of joint (v. 14); the profuse perspiration caused 


(Heb. 13. 20), 


chief Shepherd appears as King of 


The bones (of the hands, 
affected (v. 14); strength 


crucifixion was a Roman, not Jewish, form of execution, the 


the great Shepherd, “Drought > 


PSALMS. 


[24.1 


the great congregation: I will pay 
my vows before them that Jfear him. 


him, seeing he delighted in him. 26 The meek sh e 
9 But thou art he that took me|” eee isfied: they. shail peng es 
eut of the womb: thou “didst make| > Psa.71.6. that seek him: your heart shall live 
me hope when I was upon my|.o,, reptest |for ever. 
mother’s breasts. me in 27 Ali the ends of ithe world shall 
es . — cast rpaeet = eae the} safety. remember and turn unto the LorD: 
womb: thou art my rom My], p.a6g.30: {and all the kindreds of the nations 
mother’s belly. Deut32.14; |shall worship before thee. 
11 Bemot far from me; for trouble} Ezk.39-18; 28 2For ‘the kingd I 
is near; for there is none to help. Amos4.1.  |Torp»s: and me Ke ‘the! one 
12 @Many bulls have compassed|e Job 16.10. {among the nations. 
a cescne vaaiiie of Bashan have f Rev.22.15. 29 All they that be fat ‘upon 
13 aii eeabed upon me with) ¢ Isa.53.7 tn ce Fos 
x S$a.03./. : 
their mouths, as a ravening and a : before him: and ena an heap 
foaring lion. ; h Mt 2723 lalive chis own soul. as 
14 I am poured out like water,| 1:23.34; 30 A seed shall serve him; it shall 
ie my Lee are out of Sorts pers 19.23, |be accounted to the Lord for a:gen- 
my heart is like wax; it is melted in H leration. 
he adstro: my ewe oae av i Heb.2.12. Pe They shall come, and shall de- 
Ee oherelt and Ga tongue eave j By rags Spode pear that be hath 
to my Janes and Sem hast brought done this. 
int ith. k Isa.40.11; 
26 ft For dogs have Cesta weib me: Jer.28.45 PSALM 23. 
the assembly of the wicked have in-| 12,93; ” . 
closed me: éthey pierced my hands} Jobn 10.11; A Psalm of David. 
and my feet. Ree EY HE Lorp is *my shepherd; 4I 
17 I may tell ail my bones: they: ipa shall not want. 
look and stare upon me. 1 Phil.4.19. 2 ™He maketh me to lie down in 
oes They pat my garmentsamong|,,, mar34.14, |reen pastures: he leadeth me be- 
em, and “cast lots upon my| Heb.pas- {side the “still waters. 
vesture. ag of ten-| 3 He restoreth my soul: °he lead- 
19 But be not thou far from me,| %° 8°45: leth me in the paths of righteousness 
© Lorp: O my strength, haste thee], Heb. waters |for his name’s sake. 


to help me. 

20 Deliver my soul from the 
sword; my darling from the power 
of the dog. 

21 Save me from the lion’s mouth: 
for thou hast heard me from the 


of quietness. 


Rev.7.17. 


o Psa.5.8; 
31.3; Prov. 
8.20. 


b Job 3.5; 10. 


4 Yea, though I walk through the 
valley of ?the shadow of death, 9I 
will fear no evil: "for thou art with 
me; thy rod:and thy staff they com- 
fort me. 

5 ‘Thou preparest a table before 


thorns of the unicorns. 21,22; 24.17; |me in the presence.of mine enemies: 
92 11 will declare thy name unto] P*4419- |thou ‘anointest my head with oil; 
my ‘brethren: in the midst of the}q Psa.3.6; 27. |my cup runneth over. 
congregation will I praise thee. 1; 118.6. 6 Surely goodness and mercy shall 
23 Ye thatJfear the LORD, praise], 1.5.43.2. follow me all the days of my life: 
him; all ye the seed .of Jacob, glorify : and I will dwell in the house of the 
him; and fear him, all ye the seed) sPsa-104.15. /LORD for ever. 


of Israel. 

24 For he hath not despised nor 
abhorred the affliction of the af- 
flicted; neither hath he hid his face 
from him; but when he cried unto 
him, he heard. 

25 My praise shall be of thee in 


t Heb.makest 


u 1 Cor.10,26. 


PSALM 24. 
A Psalm of David. 


epee tearth is the Lorp’s, and 
the fulness thereof; the world, 
and they that dwell therein. 


1 At verse 22 the Psalm breaks from crucifixion to resurrection; fulfilled in the 


Go to my brethren,” etc., of John 20. 17, 


the name, “Father.” 


2Cf. y. 30. The kingdom is Jehovah’s. 


The risen Christ declares to His brethren 


In verse 30 Adonai is in view as ruling 


on behalf of Jehovah. See Psa. 110., with Mt. 22..42-45. The great end and object 
of the rule of Adonai (Lord) is the restoration of the kingdom to Jehovah (LorpD). 
See 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24. See “Names of Deity,” Gen. 2. 4, note; Gen, 15. 2, note. 

609 


24 2] 

2 For he hath founded it upon 
the seas, and established it upon 
the floods. ” ; 

3 1Who shall ascend into the hill 
of the LorpD? of who shall stand in 
his holy place: 

4 He that hath clean hands, and 
a pure heart; who hath not lifted 
up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn 
deceitfully. ; ; 

5 He shall receive the blessing 
from the Lorp, and righteousness 
from the God of his salvation. 

6 This is the generation of them 
that seek him, that seek thy face, 
O Jacob. Selah. 

7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates; 
and be ye lift up, ye everlasting 
doors; and the King of glory shall 
come in. 

8 Who fs this King of glory? The 
LorbD strong and mighty, the Lorp 
mighty in battle. 

9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates; 
even lift them up, ye everlasting 
doors; and the King of glory shall 
come in. 

10 Who is this *King of glory? 
The Lorp of hosts, he is the King 
of glory. Selah. 


PSALM 25. 
A Psalm of David. 


(pei thee, O Lorn, do I lift up 
my soul. 

2 O my God, I trust in thee: let 
me not be ashamed, ‘let not mine 
enemies triumph over me. 

3 Yea, let none that wait on thee 
be ashamed: let them be med 
which transgress without cause. 

4 dShew me thy ways, O Lorp; 
teach me thy paths. 

5S Lead me in thy truth, and teach 
me: for thou art the God of my 
aves ; on thee do I wait all the 

ay. 

6 Remember, O Lorn, ethy ten- 
der mercies and thy lovingkind- 
nesses; forthey have beeneverofold. 

7 Remember not /the sins of my 
youth, nor my transgressions: gac- 
cording to thy mercy remember 
thou me for thy goodness’ sake, O 
Loro. 

8 Good and upright is the Lorp: 
therefore will he teach sinners in 
the way. 


PSALMS. 


a Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
Psa.50.1-5. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 


6 Psa.2.12, 
note. 


c Psa.13.4. 


d Ex.33.13; 
Psa.5.8; 27. 


119.10; 143. 
8,10. 


é Psa.103.17; 
106.1; 107.1; 
Isa.63.15; 
Jer.33.11. 


f Job 13.26; 
20.11; Jer. 
3.25. 


g Psa.51.1. 


h Psa.31.3; 
79.9; 109.21; 
143.11. 


# See Rom.5. 
20. 


j Psa.19.9, 
note, 


k Heb. shall 
lodge in 
goodness, 


1 Prov.3.32; 
see John 7, 
17; 15.15. 


m Heb. bring 
forth. 


n Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59. 
20, note. 


[26 ¢ 


9 The meek will he guide in judg- 
ment: and the meek will he teach 
his way. 

10 All the paths of the LorD are 
mercy and truth unto such as keep 
his covenant and his testimonies. 

11 “For thy name’s sake, O Lorp, 
pardon mine iniquity; ‘for it is 
great. 

12 What man is he that /feareth 
the Lorp? him shall he teach in 
the way that he shall choose. 

13 His soul ‘shall dwell at ease; 
and his seed shall inherit the earth. 
14 ‘The secret of the Lorp js 
with them that fear him; and he will 
shew them his covenant. 

15 Mine eyes are ever toward the 
Lorp; for he shall “pluck my feet 
out of the net. 

16 Turn thee unto me, and have 
mercy upon me; for I am desolate 
and afflicted. 

17 The troubles of my heart are 
enlarged: O bring thou me out of 
my distresses. 

18 Look upon mine affliction and 
my pain; and forgive all my sins. 
19 Consider mine enemies; for 
they are many; and they hate me 
with cruel hatred. 

20 O keep my soul, and deliver 
me: let me e ashamed; for ly 
put my °trust in thee: 

21 Let integrity and uprightness 
preserve me; for I wait on thee. 

22 Redeem Israel, O God, out of 
all his troubles. 


PSALM 26. 
A Psalm of David. 


U sfeties me, O Lorn; for I have 
walked in mine integrity: I 
have °trusted also in the LorpD; 
therefore I shall not slide. 

2 Examine me, OLorp, and prove 
me; try my reins and my heart. 

3 For thy lovingkindness is be- 
fore mine eyes: and I have walked 
in thy truth. 

4 I have not sat with vain per- 
sons, neither will I go in with dis- 
semblers. 

5 I have hated the congregation 
of evil doers; and will not sit with 
the wicked. 

6 I will wash mine hands in inno- 


1 The order is: 


(1) the deciarati 
(2) Who shat] rule 


the earth? (vs. 


one is worthy but the Lamb. Cf. Dan. 7 
glory takes the throne of earth ( 


King of 
the Messianic Psalms. 


on of title, 
3-6). 


610 


“The earth is the Lorp’s” 

It is a question of worthiness, and no 
- 13, 14; Rev. 5. 3-10; Mt. 25. 31. 
vs. 7—10), 


vst 2ya 


(3) The 
See Psa. 40., next in order of 


PSALMS. 


so will I compass thine 
altar, O LorD: 

7. That I may publish with the 
voice of thanksgiving, and tell of 

all thy wondrous works. 

8 Lorp, I have loved the habita- 
tion of thy house, and the place|c Ex.14.30, 


where thine honour dwelleth. . note; Isa.59. 

9 Gather not my soul with sin-| 7% 70% 
ners, nor my life with bloody men: |b Psa.84.11; 

10 In whose hands is mischief,| 1s2-60.19, 
and their right hand is full of| 7°) Mic7* 
bribes. c Psa.62.2,6; 

11 But as for me, I will walk inj 118.14,21; 
mine integrity: ¢redeem me, and be| 18*22-?- 
merciful unto me. d Psa.3.6. 

12 My foot standeth in an even 
place: in the congregations will I ee 
bless the LoRD. f Psa.65.4; 

Lk.2.37. 
Psa.31.20; 
PSALM 27. oat SLs 
A Psalm of David. ese 
‘jie Lorp is °my light and my fade ch ~: 
salvation; whom shall I fear?| ‘Or, My heart 
cthe LORD is the strength of my) $70 47Pmy 
life; of whom shall I be afraid? face seek 

2 When the wicked, even mine} ‘hy face. 
enemies and my foes, came upon) ; psa.69.17; 
me to eat up my flesh, they stum-| 143.7.. : 
bled and fell. | ‘ 

3 ¢Though an host should encamp * na) 
against me, my heart shall not fear:) 1sa.40.11. 
though war should rise against me,| : 
in this will I be confident. Pere ces 


4 «One thing have I desired of} 33. 

the Lorp, that will I seek after; eaten 
that I may ‘dwell in the house of the) "in op. 
Lorp all the days of my life, to) serve me. 
behold the beauty of the LORD, and 


to enquire in his temple. Cre eras 
5 &For in the time of trouble he) 2Sam.16. 
shall hide me in his pavilion: in| 7% 
the secret of his tabernacle shall), psa.31.24: 
he hide me; “he shall set me up) 62.1,5: 130. 
upon a rock. a ae Ry 
6 And now shall mine head be) “*"~ 
lifted up above mine enemies round |p Psa.138.2. 
about me: therefore will I offer in|. 7.0414: 
his tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I|"Ra tg.” 
will sing, yea, I will sing praises , 
unto the LORD. r Fore fee 
7 Hear, O LORD, whenIcry with) 340; Heb. 
my voice: have mercy also upon, 11.39.) 


me, and answer me. 

8 iWhenthou saidst, Seek ye my 
face; my heart said unto thee, Thy) 
face, LORD, will I seek. 

9 sjHide not thy-face far from me; 
put not thy servant away in anger: 
thou hast been my help; leave me 
not, neither forsake me, O God of 
my salvation. 

10 When my father and my 


611 


[29 2 


mother forsake me, then the Lorp 
kwill take me up. 

11 /Teach me thy way, O Lorn, 
and lead me in a plain path, be- 
cause of ™mine enemies. 

12 Deliver me not over unto the 
will of mine enemies: “for false wit- 
nesses are risen up against me, and 
such as breathe out cruelty. 

13 I had fainted, unless I had 
believed to see the goodness of the 
LORD in the land of the living. 

14 oWait on the LorD: be of good 
courage, and he shall strengthen 
thine heart: wait, I say, on the 
LORD. 


PSALM 28. 
A Psalm of David. 


NTO thee will I cry, O Lorp 

my rock; be not silent to me: 
lest, if thou be silent to me, I be- 
come like them that go down into 
the pit. 

2 Hear the voice of my supplica- 
tions, when I cry unto thee, when I 
lift up my hands ?toward thy holy 
oracle. 

3 Draw me not away with the 
wicked, and with the workers of 
iniquity, which speak peace to 
their neighbours, but mischief is 
in their hearts. 

4 «Give them according to their 
deeds, and according to the wicked- 
ness of their endeavours: give them 
after the work of their hands; ren- 
der to them their desert. 

5 Because they regard not the 
works of the LORD, nor the opera- 
tion of his hands, he shall destroy 
them, and not build them up. 

6 Blessed be the LORD, because 
he hath heard the voice of my sup- 
plications. 

7 The Lorp is my strength and 
my shield; my heart ‘trusted in 
him, and I am helped: therefore 
my heart greatly rejoiceth; and 
with my song will I praise him. 

8 The Lorp is their strength, 
and he is the saving strength of his 
anointed. 

9 Save thy people, and bless thine 
inheritance: feed them also, and 
lift them up for ever. 


PSALM 29. 
A Psalm of David. 


Give unto the Lorp, O ye 
mighty, give unto the LORD 
glory and strength. 

2 Give unto the Lorp the glory 


29 3] 


due unto his name; worship the 
Lorp in the beauty of holiness. 

3. The voice of the LORD is upon 
the waters: the God of glory thun- 
dereth: the LORD. is upon many 
waters. ; 

4 The voice of the LORD is power- 
ful; the voice of the LorD. is full of 

ajesty. 

"3 "The voice of the LorD breaketh 
the cedars; yea, the LORD breaketh 
the cedars of Lebanon. : 

6 He maketh them. also to skip 
like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like 
a young unicorn. Ly 

7 The voice of the LorpD divideth 
the flames of fire. 

8 The voice of the Lorp shaketh 
the wilderness; the LorD shaketh 
the wilderness of Kadesh. 

9. The voice of the Lornp maketh 
the hinds. to. calve, and) discovereth 
the forests: and in his temple doth’ 
every one speak of Ars glory. 


10 “The LorD sitteth upon the] 


flood; yea, ‘the LORD sitteth King 
for ever. 

11 ‘The Lorp will give strength 
unto his people; the LorpD will bless 
his. people with peace. 


PSALM 30. 


A Psalm and Song at the 
dedication of the house 
of David. 


WILL extol thee, O Lorn: for 
thou hast lifted me up, and hast 


I 


not made my foes to reioice over| 


me. _ 

2 O Lorp my God, I cried unto 
thee, and thou hast healed me. 

3 O Lorn, thou hast brought up 


my soul from the ¢grave: thou. hast! 


kept me alive, that 
down to the pit. 

4 JSing unto the Lorp, O ye 
saints of his, and give thanks at the 
remembrance of his holiness. 

5 &For his anger endureth but a 
moment; in his favour fs life: weep- 
ing may endure “for a night, ‘but 
Joy-cometh in the morning. 

6 And in my prosperity I said, I 
shall never be moved. 


I should not go) 


_7 Lorp, by thy favour thou hast| 
Jmade my Mountain to stand 
strong: thou didst hide thy face,| 


and I was troubled. 
8 I cried to thee, O Lorp; and 
unto the Lorp I made supplication. 
9 What profit is «there in my 
blood, when I go dawn to the pit? 
Shall the dust praise thee? shall it 
declare thy truth? 


[31 14 


10 Hear, O Lorn, and have mercy: 
upon me: LorD, be thou my helper.- 

11 #Thow hast turned for me my 
mourning into dancing: thou hast — 
put off my sackcloth, and girded 


PSALMS. 


me with gladness; 

12 Tothe end that 4my glory may’ 
sing praise to thee, and not be, 
silent. OLoRD my God, I willgive 

aGen.6.17; _ |thanks unto thee for ever. 
Job 38.8,25. 
b Psa.10.16. PSALM 31. 
¢Psa.288- To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
d Psa.6.2; David.. 
103.3. 
bis thee, O Lorp, do I put my 
e Bebashect mtrust; let me never be ashamed: 
5, note. deliver me in thy righteousness. 
! 2 Bow down thine ear to me; de- 
f ees liver me speedily: be thou my 
“—” |strong rock, for an house of defence 
g Psa.103.9; to save me. 
pea so20; 3 For thou art my rock and my 
2 Cor.4.17. |fortress; therefore for thy name’s 
; sake lead me, and guide me. 
h Heb. fovene 4 Pull me out of the net that they 
ieee have laid privily for me: for thou 
i Heb. sing- art my strength. 
ings 5 Into thine *hand I commit my 
j Heb. settled |Spirit: thou hast °redeemed me, O 
strendth Lorp God a truth. i f 
ON IEAY ae 6 I have hated them that regar 
mountei™ living vanities: but I trust in the 
k 2 Sam.6.14; |LORD. 
=o 7 I will be glad and rejoice in thy 4 
cae he mercy: for thou hast considered 
lie. ys ane fouble: thou hast known my' 
ORaUe; soul in adversities; 
Ge aoe ai 8 And hast not shut me up into 
Psa.16.9; the hand of the enemy: *thou hast 
| 57.8. set my feet in a large room. 
mm Psa.2.12, 9. Have mercy upon me, O LORD, 
note. for I am in trouble: mine eye is 
bLk23.46. consumed with grief, yea, my soul 
and my belly. 
o Ex.14.30, 10 For my life is spent with grief, 
50 os 5% land my years with sighing: my 
¢ strength faileth because of mine ini- 
p Psa.4.1; quity, and my bones are consumed. 
18.19. 11 I was a reproach among all 
qJob 19.13; |mine enemies, but especially 
Poa.38. 11; among my neighbours, and a fear to 


mine acquaintance: they that did 
see me without fled from me. 

12 I am forgotten as a dead man 
out of mind: I am like a broken 
vessel. 
¥3 For I have heard the slander 
| of many: fear was on every side: 


while they took counsel’ together 


against me, they devised to: take 

away my life, 

| 14 But I trusted in thee, O Lorp:. 

I said, Thou art my God. 
612 


15 My times are in thy hand: 
deliver me from the hand of mine 
enemies, and from them that perse- 
cute me. 

16 Make thy face to shine upon 
thy servant: save me for thy mer- 
cies’ sake. 

17 Let me not be ashamed, O 
Lorn; for I have called upon thee: 
let the wicked be ashamed, and let 
them be silent in the grave. 

18 Let theslying lips be put to 
silence; . which speak grievous 
things proudly and contemptuously 
against the righteous. 

19 Oh how great is thy good- 


PSALMS. 


a Psa.19.9, 
note. 


b Psa.27.5; 
32.7. 


ness, which thou hast laid up for 
them that @fear thee; which thou 
hast wrought for them that trust in 
thee before the sons of men! 

20 >Thou shalt hide them in the 
secret of thy presence from the 
pride of man: thou shalt keep them 
secretly in a pavilion from the:strife 
of tongues. 

21 Blessed be the Lorn: for he 
hath shewed me his marvellous 
kindness in a strong city. 

22 For I said in my haste, I am 
cut off from before thine eyes: 
nevertheless thou heardest the 
voice of my supplications when I 
‘cried unto thee. 

23 O love the Lorp, all ye his 
saints: for the Lorp preserveth 
the faithful, and plentifully reward- 
eth the proud doer. 

24 Be of good courage, and he 
shall strengthen your heart, all ye 
that hope in the LORD- 


PSALM 32. 
A Psalm.of David, “Maschil. 


PgLesseb is he whose trans- 
: gression as forgiven, whose sin 
is covered. 

2 Blessed is the man unto whom 
the Lorp 4imputeth not iniquity, 
and in whose spirit there is no 
guile. 

3 When I kept silence, my bones 
waxed old through my roaring all 
the day tong. 

4 For day and night thy hand was 
‘heavy upon me: my moisture 1s 
turned into the drought of summer. 
Selah. f | 

5 I acknowledged my sin unto 
thee, and mine iniquity have I not 
hid. I-said, I will confess my trans- 
gressions unto the LoRD; and thou 
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. 
Selah. 


d Imputation. 
vs.1,2; 
Lk.22.37. 
(Lev.25.50; 
Jas.2.23.) 


e Forgiveness. 
Psa.99.8. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 


f Faith. Psa. 
37.3-5. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 

g Psa.32.11; 
97.12. 

h Psa.119.64. 

i Gen.1.6,7; 
Heb.11.3; 

2 Pet.3.5. 

j Gen.2.1, 

k Job 26.13. 

1 Gen.1.9; 
Job 26.10; 
38:8. 


m Gen.1.3; 
Psa.148.5. 


n Isa.8.10; 
19.3. 


oie. nations, 
Heb. Sheol. 


p 
See Hab. 2. 
5, note. 


613 


[33 12 


6 For this shall every one that is 
godly pray unto thee in a time when 
thou mayest be found: surely in 
the floods of great waters they 
shall not come nigh unto hiin. 

7 Thou art my hiding place;thou 
shalt preserve me from trouble; 
thou shalt compass me about with 
songs of deliverance. Selah. 

8 I will instruct thee and teach 
thee in the way which thou shalt 
go: I will guide thee 


a. Be ye not as the horse, or.as the 
mule, which have no understand- 
ing: whose mouth must be held in 
‘with bit and bridle, lest they come 
near unto thee. * 

10 Many ‘sorrows shall be to the 
wicked: but he that /trusteth in 
the LORD, mercy shall compass him 
about. 

11 Be glad in the Lorpb, and re- 
joice, ye righteous: and shout for 
joy, all ye that are upright in 
heart, 


PSALM 33. 


REO in the LorpD, O ye 
righteous: for praise is comely 
for the upright. 

2 Praise the LoRD with harp: 
sing unto him with the psaltery 
and an instrument of ten strings. 

3 Sing unto him a new song; play- 
skilfully with.a loud noise. 

4 For the word of the LORD is 
right; and all his works are done 
in. truth. 

5 He loveth righteousness and 
judgment: “the earth is full of the 
goodness of the LORD. 

6 *By the word of the LORD were 
the heavens made; Jand all the 
host of them “by the breath of his 
mouth. 

7 tHe gathereth the waters of the 
sea together as an heap: he layeth 
up the depth in storehouses. 

8 Let all the earth fear the 
Lorp: let all the inhabitants of 
the world stand in awe of him. 

9 For he spake, and it was 
done; he commanded, and it stood 
fast. 

10 The LorD bringeth the coun- 
sel of the “heathen to nought: he 
maketh the devices of the people of 
none effect. 

11 The counsel of the LorpD 
standeth for ever, the thoughts of 
his heart to.all generations. 

12 Blessed is the nation whose 
God is the LorD; and the people 


33 13] 


whom he hath ¢chosen for his own 
inheritance. 
13 TheLorDlooketh from heaven; 
he beholdeth all the sons of men. 
14 From the place of his habita- 


h, 
_ 
Pe “ 

oe 


tion he looketh upon all the inhabi- 
~ tants’ of the earth. : 
15 He fashioneth their hearts 
: alike; he considereth all their 
works. 
vA 16 There is no king saved by the 


‘ 


multitude of an host: a mighty man 
is not delivered by much strength. 
17 An horse is a vain thing for 
safety: neither shall he deliver any 
by his great strength. f 
18 Behold, Dae of.the 2D is 
upon them that féat “himy upon 
' them that hope in his mercy; 
19 Todeliver their soul from death, 
and to keep them alive in famine.- 
20 Our soul waiteth for the LorD: 
he zs our help and our shield. ny 
21 For our heart shall rejoice in 


Cr 2 Si = 


a Tyres 


ak ae 


him, because we have ‘trusted in| 


his holy name. 
22 Let thymercy,O LorD, beupon 
as, according as we hope in thee. 


PSALM 34. 


\ A Psalm of David, when he 

: changed his behaviour before 
Abimelech; who drove him away, 
and he departed. 


if WILL bless the Lorp at all 
times: his praise shall continu- 
ally be in my mouth. 

2 My soul shall make her boast in 
the Lorp: the humble shall hear 
thereof, and be glad. 

3 O magnify the LorD with me, 
and let us exalt his name together. 

4 47 sought the Lorp, and he 
heard me, and delivered me from 
all my fears. 

5 They looked unto him, and 


were lightened: and their faces 
srs not ashame 


This poor man cried, and the 
LorD heard him, and saved him 
out of all his troubles. 

7 ‘The angel of the Lorp en- 
v campeth round about them that 
fear him, and delivereth them. 
.8 O taste and see that the Lorp 
1s good: blessed is the man fhat 
‘trusteth in him. 
9 O fear the LorpD, ye his saints: 
for there is no want to them that 
‘fear him. 
10 The young lions do Jack, and 
suffer hunger: but they that seek 
the LorD shall not want any good 
f thing. 


PSALMS. 


a Election 


(corporate). 


Psa.105.43. 
(Deut.7.6; 
1 Pet.1.2.) 


6 Psa.19.9, 
note. 


c Psa.2.12, 
note. 


a Mt.7.7; 
Lk.11.9. 


e Heb.1.4, 
note. 


Ff vs.12-16; 
HPeesa. 
10-12. 


g Ex.12.46; 
John 19.36, 


h Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa. 


59.20, note. 


i Isa.42.13. 
j v.26; Psa. 
40.14,15; 

70.2,3. 
k Psa.129.5, 


11 Thes.5.3. 


614 


11 Come, ye children, hearken 
unto me: I will teach you the /fear 
of the Lorp. y : 

12 What man is he that /desireth - 
life, and loveth many days, that he 
may see good? : 19 

13 Keep thy tongue from evil, 
and thy lips from speaking guile. 

14 Depart from evil, and do good; 
seek peace, and pursue it. 


15) 5E eyes..of the RD are 
upon eaten Saisie ears” 
are open unto their cry. : 

16 The face of the LORD fs against 
them that do evil, to cut off the 
remembrance of them from the 
earth. 

17 The righteous cry, and the 
Lorp heareth, and delivereth them 
out of all their troubles. 

18 The LorpD is nigh unto them 
that are of a broken heart; and 
saveth such as be of a contrite 
spirit. 

19 Many are the afflictions of the 
righteous: but the Lorp delivereth 
him out of them all. 

20 &sHe keepeth all his bones: not 
one of them is broken. 

21 Evil shall slay the wicked: and 
they that hate the righteous shall 
be desolate. 

22 The Lorp /redeemeth the soul 
of his servants: and none of them 
that ‘trust in him shall be desolate. 


PSALM 35. 
A Psalm of David. 


PLEAD my cause, O LorD, with © 
them that strive with me: fight 
against them that fight against me. 

2 ?#Take hold of shield and buck- 
ler, and stand up for mine help. 

3 Draw out also the spear, and 
stop the way against them that 
persecute me: say unto my soul, I 
am thy salvation. 

4 jLet them be confounded and 
put to shame that seek after my 
soul: let them be *turned back and 
prose to confusion that devise my 

urt. ; 

5 Let them be as chaff before the 
wind: and let the ceangel of the 
LORD chase them. 

6 Let their way be dark and slip: 
pery: and let the “angel of the LorpD 
persecute them. 

7 For without cause have they 


hid for me their net ina pit, which 
without cause they have digged for 
my soul. 
8 Let ‘destruction come upon him 
at unawares; and let his net that 


PSALMS. 


[36 12 


he hath hid catch himself: into that 
very destruction let him fall. 

9 And my soul shall be joyful in 
the Lorp: it shall rejoice in his 
salvation. 

10 All my bones shall say, Lorp, 
bwho is like unto thee, which de- 
liverest the poor from him that is 
too strong for him, yea, the poor 
and the needy from him that spoil- 
eth him? 

11 ‘False witnesses did rise up; 
they laid to my charge things that 
I knew not. 

12 They rewarded me evil for 
good to the spoiling of my soul. 

13 But as for me, ¢when they 
were sick, my clothing was sack- 
cloth: I humbled my soul with fast- 
ing; ‘and my prayer returned into 
mine own bosom. 

14 I fbehaved myself as though 
he had been my friend or brother: 
I bowed down heavily, as one that 
mourneth for his mother. 

15 Butin mine adversity they re- 
joiced, and. gathered themselves to- 
gether: yea, the abjects gathered 
themselves together against me, 
and I knew :t not; they did tear me, 
and ceased not: 

16 With hypocritical mockers in 
feasts, they gnashed upon me with 
their teeth. 

17 Lord, how long wilt thou 4look 
on? rescue my soul from their de- 
structions, #my darling from the 
lions. 

18 I will give thee thanks in the 
great congregation: I will praise 
thee among much people. 

19 ‘Let not them that are mine 
-enemies wrongfully rejoice over 
me: neither let them wink with 
the eye that hate me without a 
cause. 

20 For they speak not peace: 
but they devise deceitful matters 
against them that are quiet in 
the land. 

21 Yea, they opened their mouth 
wide against me, and said, Aha, 
aha, our eye hath seen it. 

22 This thou hast seen, O LORD: 
keep not silence: O Lord, be not 
far from me. 

23 Stir up thyself, and awake to 
my judgment, even unto my cause, 
my God and my Lord. 

24 Judze me, O Lorp my God, 
jaccording to thy righteousness; 
and let them not rejoice over 


me. . 
25 Let them not say in their 
hearts, Ah, so would we have it: 


a Psa.51.8. 


b Ex.15.11; 
Psa.71.19. 


c Heb. wit- 
nesses of 
wrong. 


d Job 30.25; 
Psa.69.10,11. 


e Mt.10.13; 
Lk.10.6. 


f Heb. walked. 

g Hab.1.13. 

h Heb. my 
only one. 
Psa.22.20. 

t Psa.69.4; 
109.3; 119. 
161; Lam. 
3.52; John 
15.25. 

j 2 Thes.1.6. 

k Rev.16.5-7; 
18.20. 

1 Rom.3.18. 


m Psa.2.12, 
note. 


n Heb. wa- 
tered. Psa. 
65.4. 


o Jer.2.18; 
John 4.10,14, 


p Heb. draw 


out at 
length. 


. 615 


| 
heavens; 


let them not say, We have swal- 
lowed him up. 

26 Let them be ashamed and 
brought to confusion together that 
rejoice at mine hurt: let them be 
clothed with shame and dishorour 
that magnify themselves against 


me. 

27 Let them shout for joy, and 
be glad, that favour my righteous 
cause: yea, let them say continually, 
Let the LorD be magnified, which 
hath pleasure in the prosperity of 
his servant. 

28 And my tongue shall speak of 
thy righteousness and of thy praise 
all the day long. 


PSALM 36. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
David the servant of the Lorp. 


HE transgression of the wicked 
saith within my heart, that 
there is ‘no fear of God before his 


eyes. 

2 For he flattereth himself in his 
own eyes, until his iniquity be 
found to be hateful. 

3 The words of his mouth are ini- 
quity and deceit: he hath left off to 
be wise, and to do good. 

4 He deviseth mischief upon his 
bed; he setteth himself in a way 
ber is not good; he abhorreth not 
evil. 

5 Thy mercy, O Lorn, is in the 
and thy faithfulness 
reacheth unto the clouds" """ 

6 Thy righteousness is like the 
great mountains; thy judgments 
are a great deep: O Lorp, thou 
preservest man and beast. 

7 How excellent is thy loving: 
kindness, O God! therefore the 
children of men put their “trust 
under ,the shadow of thy wings. 

8 They shall be “abundantly sat- 
isfied with the fatness of thy house; 
and thou shalt make them drink of 
the river of thy pleasures. 

9 For with thee is the fountain 
of life: in thy light shall we see 
light. 

10 £O continue thy lovingkind- 
ness unto them that know thee; and 
thy righteousness to the upright in 
heart. 

11 Let not the foot of pride come 
against me, and let not the hand of 
the wicked remove me. 

12 There are the workers of ini- 


quity fallen: they are cast down, 
and shall not be able to rise. 


PSALMS. 


37 1] 


PSALM 37. 
A Psalm of David. 


RET “not thyself because of evil- 

doers, neither be-thou envious 
against the workers of iniquity. 

2 For they shall soon be cut down 


a v.7; Psa. 
73.3; Prov. 
like the grass, and wither as the] 23.17; 24.19. 


een herb. . 

73 PDrust. in the LORD, and. dol? Feith. Esa. 
good; so shalt thou dwell in the| 3.20; Heb. 
land, and verily thow shalt be fed. 11,39.) 

4 ‘Delight thyself also in the}. ya5¢14. 
Lorp; and he shall give thee the 
desires of thine heart. psec 

5 ¢Commit thy way unto the| Jay (Per 
Lorp; trust also in him; and he 
shall bring i# to pass. e Pao 

6 ¢And he shall bring forth thy a 
righteousness as the light, and| sHeb. be 
thy judgment as the noonday., _| silent to the 

7 fRest in the LorpD, and wait 
patiently for him: fret not thyself 
because of him who prospereth in 
his way, because of the man who 
bringeth wicked devices to pass. 

& Cease from anger, and) forsake 
wrath: “fret not thyself in any 
wise to do evil. 

9 For evildoers shall be cut off: 
but those that wait upon the Lorb, 
they shall inherit the earth. 

10 For ‘yet a little while, and the 
wicked sha/IJ not be: yea, thou 
shalt diligently consider his place, 
and it shall not be. 

11 But the meek shall inherit the 
earth; and shall delight themselves 
in the abundance of peace. 

12 The wicked plotteth against 
the just, and gnasheth upon him 
with his teeth. 

13. The Lord shall laugh at him: 
for he seeth that his day is coming. | 

14 The wicked have drawn out 
the sword, and have bent their 
bow, to cast down the poor and 
needy, and to slay such as*be of 
upright conversation. 

15 “Their sword shall enter into 
their own heart, and their bows| 
shall be broken. 

16 /A little that a righteous man 
hath is better than the riches of 
many wicked. 

17 For the arms of the wicked 
shall be broken: but the LoRD 
upholdeth the righteous. | 

18 The Lorp knoweth the days 
of the upright: and their inheri-| 
tance shall be for ever. 

19 They shall not be ashamed in|) 
the evil time: and in the days of] 
famine they shall be satisfied. 


rd. Psa 
62.1. 


g vs.1,8; Jer. 
12.1, 

h Psa.73.3; 
Eph.4.26, 

# Heb.10.36, 
37. 


7 Mt.s.5. 


k 1 Sam.17. 
50,51. 


1 Prov.15.16; 
16.8; 1 Tim. 
6.6. 


m Heb. the 
precious- 
ness of 
lambs. 


n Law (of 
Moses). Psa. 
40.8. (Ex.19. 
1; Gal.3. 
1-29.) 


ov.9; Psa. 
27.14; Prov. 
20.22. 


p Or, a green 
tree that 
groweth in 
his own soil. 


q See 1 Ki.8.61. 


r Psa.2.12, 
note. 


616 


[37 40 


20: But the wicked shall perish, 
and the enemies of the LORD shall 
be as ™the fat of lambs: they shall 
consume; inte smoke shall they 
consume away. 


‘ 


‘ 


21 The wicked borroweth, and 


payeth not again: but the right- 
eous sheweth mercy, and giveth. 

22 For such as be blessed. of him 
shall inherit the earth; and they 
that be cursed of him shall be cut. 
off. 


23 The steps of a good man: are 
ordered by the Lorb: and he de- 
lighteth in his way. 

24 Though he fall, he shall not be 
utterly cast down: for the Lorp 
upholdeth Aim with his hand. 

25 I have been young, and now 
am old; yet have I not seen the 
righteous forsaken, nor his seed 
begging bread. 

26 He is ever merciful, and lend- 
eth; and. his seed is blessed. 

27 Depart from evil, and do good; 
and: dwell for evermore. 

28 For the LorpD loveth judgment, 
and forsaketh not his saints; they 
are preserved for ever: but the seed 
of the wicked shall be cut off. 

29 The righteous shall inherit the 
land,.and dwell therein for ever. 

30 The mouth of the righteous 
speaketh wisdom, and his tongue 
talketh. of judgment. 

31 The law of his. God is in his 
heart; none of his steps shall slide. 

32 The wicked watcheth the right- 
eous, and seeketh to slay him. 

33. The Lorp will not leave him 
in his hand, nor condemn him when 
he is judged. 

34 Wait on the Lorp, and keep 
his way, and he shall exalt thee to 
inherit the land: when the wicked 
are cut off, thou shalt see it. 

35 Ihave seen the wicked in great 
power, and spreading himself like 
?a green bay tree. 

36 Yet he passed away, and, lo, 
he was not: yea, I-sought him, but 
he could not be found. 

37 Mark the %perfect man, and 
behold the upright: for the end of 


that man is peace. 

38 But the transgressors shall be 
destroyed together: the end of the 
wicked shall be cut off. 

39 But the salvation of the right- 
eous is of the Lorp: he is their 
strength in the time of trouble, 

40 And the LorD shall help them, 
and deliver them: he shall deliver 
them from the wicked, and save 
them, because they ‘trust in him, 


PSALMS. 


PSALM 38. 


A Psalm of David, to bring to 
remembrance. 


LORD, rebuke me not in thy 
wrath: neither chasten me in 
thy hot displeasure. 

2 For thine arrows stick fast in 
me, and thy hand presseth me 
sore. 

3 There is no soundness in my 
flesh because of thine anger; neither 
is there any “rest in my ‘bones be-|} Lk.23.49. 
cause.ofmysin, Aoiseaie: 

4 For mine iniquities are gone} 7,8. 
over mine head: as an heavy bur- 
den they are too heavy for me. 

5 My wounds stink and are -cor-|¢ Psa. 51.3. 
rupt because of my foolishness, 

6 I am troubled; I am bowed|f? ©o-7-910- 
down, greatly; I go mourning allj¢See 1 Pet.3. 
the day long. 14; 1 John 3. 

7 For my loins are filled with a 
loathsome disease: and there 1S|) Psa.35.22. 


no soundness in my flesh. ‘ : 
8 I am feebie and sore broken: I] * 2b: 2 b+ 


a Heb. peace, 
or health, 


d Or, answer. 


have roared by reason of the dis- mae ao 
quietness of my heart. mouth. 

9 Lord, :all my desire is before ; Jer.20.9 
thee; and my groaning is not hid|’*"" 
from thee. k Bene ts 


10 Myheartpanteth,my strength 
faileth me: as for the light of mine} jor, what 
eyes, it also is gone from me. time I have 

11 Myloversand my friends stand| ¢re- 
aloof from my sore; *and my kins-]» Heb. an 
men stand afar off. image. 

12 They also that seek after my janie” 
life lay snares for me: and they a i 
that ne my Ask aire feo naa n Psa.38.15. 
ous things, and imagine deceits ‘ 
the day long. oeeras 

13 But I, as a deaf man, heard ; 

‘not; and J was as a dumb man|? Lev-25.23; 


that openeth not his mouth.  cucceg 
14 Thus I was as a man that! 2 Cor.5.6; 

hheareth not, and in whose mouth ieee 

are no reproofs. pee ae 


15 Feorinthee,O Lorn, dol hope: 
thou wilt ¢hear, O Lord my God. 

16 Forlsaid,Hearme, lestother- 
wise they should rejoice over me: 
when my foot ‘slippeth, they mag- 
nify themselves against me. 

17 ©For I am ready to halt, and 
my sorrow is-continually before me. 

18 For I will declare my iniquity; 
FI will be sorry for my sin. 

19 But mine enemies are lively, 
and they are strong: and they that 
hate me wrongfully are multiplied. 


[39 13 
20 They also that render evil for 


good are mine:adversaries; because 


I follow the thing that good is. 
21 Forsake me not, O LorbD: O 
my God, "be not far from me. 
22 Make haste to help me, O Lord 
my salvation. 


PSALM 39. 


To the chief Musician, even to 
1Jeduthun, A Psalm of David. 
I SAID, I will take heed to my 

ways, that I sin not with my 
tongue: I will ‘keep my mouth 
with a bridle, while the wicked is 
before me. 

2 I was dumb with silence, I held 
my peace, even from good; and my 
sorrow was stirred. 

3 My heart was hot within me, 
while I was musing Jthe fire burned: 
then spake I with my tongue, 

4 Lorp, #make me to:know mine 
end, and the measure of my days, 
what it is; that I may know thow 
frail I am. 

5 Behold, thou hast mademy days 
as an handbreadth; ‘and mine age 
fs as mothing ‘before ‘thee: verily 
every man at his best state zs ialto- 
gether vanity. Selah. 

6 Surely every man walketh in ™q 
vain shew: surely they are disqui- 
eted in vain: he heapeth up riches, 
and knoweth not who shall gather 
them. 

7 And now, Lord, what wait I 
for? “my hope is in thee. 

8 Deliver me from all my trans- 
gressions: make me not the re- 
proach of the foolish. 

9 I was dumb, I opened not my 
mouth; because thou didst st. 

10 “Remove thy stroke away from 
me: I am consumed by the blow of 
thine hand. 

11 When thou with rebukes dost 
correct man for iniquity, thou mak- 
est his beauty to consume away 
like a moth: surely every man 1s 
vanity. Selah. 

12 Hear my prayer, O,LorD, and 
give ear unto my cry; hold not thy 
peace at my tears: ?for I ama 
stranger with thee, and a so- 
jougn r, as all my fathers were. 

13 spare me, that I may recover 


strength, before I go hence, and be 


no more. 


1 Jeduthun, a Levite, 
25.1, 3,16; 2 Chr, 5. 12; 35. 15; Neh. 11. 17. 


Jeduthun was first called Ethan. Ae 


chief singer and instructor. See 1 Chr. 9. 16; 16. 38, 41, 423 
He is mentioned in Psalms 39.; 62., 77, 


; 
Fy 
; 


401) PSALMS. _ [41s 


PSALM 40. 13 Be pleased, O LorD, to deliver 
: ice me: O LorD, make haste to help me. 
To the chief Musician, A Psalm 14 Let them be ashamed and con- 
of David. ska pian she — a 
1 ITED tiently for the my soul to destroy it; let them be 
7 ees 3; and Sine anchised unto Sriven baciawiaré and put to shame 
d heard my cry. that wish me evil. 
Die proushe ee a also out of 15 Let them be desolate for a re- 
fan horrible pit, out of the miry werd os one shame that say unto 
feet upon a rock,|aHeb.a pit j|me, Aha, aha. 
oa ea ieee! ees. y * of noise. _16 Let all those that seek thee re- 
3 And he hath put a new song in}, psa.19.9, joice and be glad in thee: let such 
my mouth, even praise bend our| note. _ eye my eon mor contin 
God: many shall see it, and fear, ally, The i 
and shall trust in the Lorp. My oe tae 17 ButI am poor and needy; “yet 
4 Blessed 1s that man that maketh the Lord thinketh upon me: thou 


the Lorp his ‘trust, and respecteth/|¢ aay et 
not the proud, nor such as turn it 
aside to lies. € vs.7,8; Mt. 

5 Many, O LorpD my God, are} 26.39; John PSALM 41. 


thy wonderful works which thou| }2¢3,93% 


art my help and my deliverer; 
make no tarrying, O my God. 


hast done, and thy thoughts which Se ae eee ie eae Ua 
are to us-ward: they cannot be|fLaw (of | 4 5 tn 
reckoned up in order unto thee: if I] 9°49) ES°| IQLESSED iis he that consider- 
would deciare and speak of them,| 109.1: Gal. ’ eth the poor: the Lorp will 
they are more than can be num-| 1-29.) deliver him in time of trouble. 
bered. Acts 30 2 The Lorp will preserve him, 
6 Sacrifice and offering thou didst|” 20,27. and keep him alive; and he shall 


not desire; mine ears hast thou be blessed upon the earth: and thou 
opened: burnt-offering and sin-|/1 Pet-S.7. wilt not deliver him unto the will 
offering hast thou not required. |; Prov.14.21; |of his enemies. 

7 Then said I, Lo, I come: in the| or, the weak,) 3 The Lorp will strengthen him 
volumeofthe book it iswrittenofme,| °% sick: upon the bed of languishing: thou 

8 I delight to do thy ¢will, O my|jPpsa.6.2; wilt make all his bed in his sick- 
God:yea,/thy law is within my heart.| 147.3; 2 Chr. ness. 

9 I have preached righteousness| 3°-20- 4 I said, Lorp, be merciful unto 
in the great congregation: lo, I havelz Heb. a thingjme: Jheal my soul; for I have. 
not refrained my lips, O LORD, thou| of Belial. sinned against thee. 
knowest. 1 Psa.55.12-14; |_ 2. Mine enemies speak evil of me, 

10 &I have not hid thy righteous-| " mt.26.14-16, |When shall he die, and his name 
ness within my heart; I have] 21-25,47-50; |perish? 
declared thy faithfulness and thy iissiu3. | © And if he come to see me, he 
salvation: I have not concealed] 45:LK22.  |speaketh vanity: his heart gather- 
thy lovingkindness and thy truth] 3-6,21-23,47, eth iniquity to itself; when he 


from the great congregation. Sayre 13 |goeth abroad, he telleth it. 

11 Withhold not thou thy tender| 3:’Actsiie. | 7 All that hate me whisper to- 
mercies from me, O Lorp: let thy gether against me: against me do 
lovingkindness and thy truth con- they devise my hurt. 
tinually preserve me. 8 FAnevil disease, say they, cleav- 

12 For innumerable evils have eth fast unto him: and now that he 
compassed me about: mine iniqui- lieth he shall rise up no more. 
ties have taken hold upon me, so 9 “Yea, mine own familiar friend, 
that I am not able to look up; they in whom I trusted, which did eat of 
are more than the hairs of.mine my ‘bread, hath lifted up Ais heel 
head: therefore my heart faileth me. against me. 


1The 40th Psalm speaks of Messiah, Jehovah’s Servant, obedient unto death. 
The Psalm begins with the joy of Christ in resurrection (vs. 1, 2). He has been in 
the horrible pit of the grave, but has been brought up. Verses 3-5 are His resur- 
tection testimony, His ‘new song.’’ Verses 6 and 7 are retrospective. When sacri- 
fice and offering had become abominable because of the wickedness of the people 
(Isa. 1. Tee then the obedient Servant came to make the pure offering (vs. 7-17; 
Hebs10%5=17); _ See Psalm 41., next in order of the Messianic Psalms. 

2 Psalm 41. is the Psalm of the betrayal of the Son of man, as Jesus Himself taught 
(John 13. 18, 19). See Psa. 45., next in order of the Messianic Psalms. 


618 


41 10] SE 2.0503 [44 6 


12 And as for me, thou upholdest 
me in mine integrity, and 4settest 
me before thy face for ever. 

13 oBlessed be the LORD God of 
Israel from everlasting, and to ever- 
lasting. Amen, and Amen. 


10 But thou, O Lorn, be merciful|a Psa.34.15; 
unto me, and raise me up, that I| Job 36.7. 
may requite them. b Psa.106.48. 

11 By this I know that thou fa- on 
vourest me, because mine enemy 
doth not triumph over me, 


BOOK IL. 
id 
PSALM 42. PSALM 43. 
To the chief Musician, “Maschil,| , yascnit, DGE me, O God, and plead my 
for the sons of Korah. “instruc- cause against an ungodly nation: 
tion.” O deliver me frorn the deceitful 


As the ie sc eee the 
water brooks, so panteth my : 
soul after thee, O God. Et aOR: 

2 4dMy soul thirsteth for God, ¢for 
the living God: when shall I come|¢ 1 Thes-1.9. 


0 and unjust man. 
eomee 2 For thou art the God of my 
strength: why dost thou cast me 
off? why go I mourning because of 
lthe oppression of the enemy? 


and appear before God? f Psa.80.5; : 
B°VAly tears have been my meat|/TORSS |, 5,0. send out thy, light and thy 
day and night, while sthey continu-|,, 19, psa, {bring me unto thy holy hill, and to 


* g v.10; - 
ay, oe unto me, Where is thy)” 79.10; 115.2. |thy tabernacles. 


hHeb. bowed | 4 Then will I go unto the altar of 


4 When I remember these things, down. God, unto God my exceeding joy: 


I pour out my soul in me: for I had : 4 
gone with the multitude, I went| iLam.3.24. tess pe ime le will I praise 


with them to the house of God,|. ; 

P - : “442/45 Or, give 5 Why art thou cast down, O my 

SEONG GARIN a thanks. soul? and why art thou_disquieted 
iy art thd feast dows © my| Or, the little within me? hope in God: for I 
iit? And who ait thou dis “nieted| Til, Psa shall yet praise him, who is the 

7m ao ager io ta Go aL et 133.3. health of my countenance, and my 

shall yet Jpraise him for the help|/Psa-1338; got 

of his countenance. Deut.28.8. PSALM 44. 


6 Omy God, my soul is cast down 


within me: therefore will I remem- es ay a To the chief Musician for the sons 


ber thee from the land of Jordan,) job 35.10. of Korah, “Maschil. 
and of the Hermonites, from the j 

hil¥ #Mizar. Dilan, E have heard with our ears, 
51, Deep galleth unto deep at the) 7101 | TN OP cork thou cidst ia thes 
A aterspouts: 5 I 

Boies and ia enous are gone|? V-5; Psa- days, in the times of old. 

over me. abo) 2 How thou didst drive out the 


8 Yet the Lorp will command|>p Heb. the sheathen with thy hand, and plant- 
his lovingkindness in the daytime, gladness of |edst them; how thou didst_ af- 
and ™in the night his song shall be| ™”/7°” flict the people, and cast them 

ith me, and my prayer unto the} Psa.42.5,11. jout. : 
God of MERITS ao. it 3 ‘For they got not the land in 

9 I will say unto God my rock, Dees pear possession by their own sword, 


hou forgotten me? why neither did their own arm save 
ied aa ee of the op-|sie- nations. |them: but thy right hand, and thine 
arm, and the light of thy counte- 


ression of the enemy? 1 Deut.8.17; 
PTO As with a sword in my pone Josh.24.12. mene Re ae thou hadst a favour 
mine enemies reproach me; “while _ junto : ’ 
they say daily unto me, Where is aera OGRE 1 2p hours Los: t Godscoms 
mand delivera’ ‘ 
Hy Pee art thou cast down, O}” Dan.8.4. 5 Through thee *will we push 


1? and why art thou dis- io. down our enemies: through thy 
Bras within ae hope thou in A Sore - name _ will we tread them under 
God: for I shall yet praise him, who that rise up against us. — 


countenance, 6 For I will not “trust in my bow, 
pees apg neither shall my sword save me. 


619 


44 7] 


7 But'thou hast savedius from-our 
‘enemes, and hast put them to 
shame that hated us. 

8 4In God we boast all the day 
long, and praise thy mame forever. 
Selah. 

9 But thou hast cast off, and put 
us to shame; and goest not forth 
with our armies. 

10 Thou makest us to turn back 
from the enemy: and they which 
hate us spoil for themselves. 

11 Thou hast given us like sheep 
appointed for meat; and hast scat- 
tered us among the ‘heathen. 

12 Thou sellest thy people ¢for 
nought, and dost not increase thy 
wealth by their price. 

13 «Thou makest us a.reproach to 
our neighbours, a scorn and a de- 
rision to them that.are round about 
us. 

14 Thou makest us a byword 
among the ‘heathen, a shaking of 
the head among the people. 

15 My confusion is continually 
before me, and the shame of my 
face hath covered me, 

16 For the voice of him that re- 
proacheth and blasphemeth; by rea- 
son of the enemy and avenger. 

17 All this is come upon us; yet 
have we not forgotten thee, neither 
have we dealt falsely in thy cove- 
nant. 

18 Our heart is not turned back, 
neither have our steps declined 
from thy way; 

19 Though thou hast sore broken 
us in the place of dragons, and 
covered us with the shadow of 
death. 

20 If we have forgotten the name 
of our God, or stretched out our 
hands to a strange god; 

21 J/Shall not God search this out? 
for he knoweth the secrets of the 
heart. 

22 Yea, “for thy sake are we 


PSALMS. 


a Psa.34.2; 


Jer.9.24; 
Rom.2.17. 


6 Rom.8.36. 


ci.e. nations. 


d Heb. with- 


out riches. 
e Psa.79.4; 
80.6; Deut. 
28.37. 
f Psa.139.1; 
Job 31.14; 
Jer.17.10. 


g Psa.119.25, 


h Heb. a helo 


for us. 
7 Ex.14.30, 


note; Isa.59, 
20, note. 


7 Lk.4.22. 


k Psa.93.2; 


Heb.1.8. 


| 2 Psa.21.6; 


Heb.1.8,9. 


m Song 1.3. 


620 


(vs. 9-13), and in 
),.as in verse 6, but Adonai, the husband name of 


[45° 


killed all the day Jong; we are’ 
counted as sheep for the slaughter. 

23 Awake, why sleepest thou, O 
Lord? arise, cast us not off for 
ever. ; 

24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face, 
and forgettest our affliction and our 
oppression? 

25 8For our soul is bowed down, to 
the dust: our belly cleaveth unto 
the earth. : 

26 Arise ‘for our help, and ‘re- 
deem us for thy mercies’ sake. 


PSALM 45. 


To the chief Musician upon 1Sho- 
shannim, for the sons of Korah, 
Maschil, A Song of loves. 


M* heart is inditing a good mat- 

ter: I speak of the things which 
I have made touching the 2king: 
my tongue zs the pen of a ready 
writer. 

2 Thou art fairer than the chil- 
dren of men: Jgrace is poured into 
thy lips: therefore God ‘hath blessed 
thee for ever. 

3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, 


|O most mighty, with thy glory and 


thy majesty. 

4 And in thy majesty ride pros- 
perously because of truth and meek- 
ness and righteousness; and thy 


right hand shall teach thee terrible 


things. 

S Thine arrows are sharp in the 
heart of the king’s enemies; where- 
by the people fall under thee. 
| 6 *Thy throne, © God, is for ever 

and ever: the sceptre of thy king- 
|dom is a right sceptre, 

7 Thou lovest tighteousness, and 
hatest wickedness: therefore God, 
thy God, hath anointed thee with 
‘the oil of gladness above thy 
fellows. 

8 ™AIl thy garments smel{ of 
myrrh, and aloes, and cassta, out 


the Shoshannim Psalms were prob- 
hence reminders of redemption out 


, obviously looks forward ‘to 
not so much to the anointing 
‘Cf. Isa. 41. 1,2, 
(2) the coming 
e King and the 
(4) as associated with Him 
that relation the King is 


. 15); 


45 9] 


of the ivory palaces, whereby they 
have made thee glad. 

9 eKings’ daughters were among 
thy honourable women: upon thy 
right hand did stand the queen in 
gold of Ophir. 

10 Hearken, O daughter, and con- 
sider, and incline thine ear; ‘forget 
also thine own people, and thy 
father’s house; 


11 So shall the king greatly desire 


thy beauty: ¢for he is thy Lord; 
and worship thou him. : 

12 And the daughter of Tyre 
shall be there with a gift; even 
the rich among the people shall 
intreat ‘thy favour. 

13 The king’s daughter is all 
glorious within: her clothing is of 
wrought gold. 

14 &She shall be brought-unto the 
king in raiment of needlework: the 
virgins her companions that follow 
her shall be brought unto thee. 


15 With gladness and rejoicing 


shall they be brought: they shall 
enter into the king’s palace. : 
16 Instead of thy fathers shall be 


thy children, whom thou mayest 


make princes in all the earth. 
17 *I will make thy name to be re- 
membered. in all generations: there- 


fore shall the people praise thee for 


ever and ever. 


PSALM 46. 


‘To the chief Musician for the sons 
of Korah, A Song upon: !Alamoth. 


Go? is our ‘refuge and strength, 
ja very present help in trouble. 
_2 Therefore will not we fear, 
“though the earth be removed, and 
though the mountains be carried 
jnto the *midst of the sea; 
3 Thouéh the waters thereof roar 
and be troubled, though the moun- 
tains shake with the swelling thereof. 


Selah 


- 


4 (There is a river, the streams 


whereof shall make glad the city 
of God, the holy place of the taber- 
nacles of the most High. 

5 God is *in the midst of her; she 
shall not be moved: God shall help 
her, and that right early. t 

6 The °heathen raged, the king- 
doms were moved: he uttered his 
voice, the earth melted. ’ 

7 ?The LoRv of hosts is with us; 


1 Alamoth, “soprano,” from a 
“virgins,” were a temple choir, 
choir. See Psa. 6., title, note. 


Inoah, a virgin. 
singing antiphona 
But contra, see 1 Chr. 15. 20. 


PSALMS. [48 2 


the God of Jacob is Your refuge. 
Selah. ‘ 

8 Come, behold the works of the 
LorpD, what desolations he hath 


made in the earth. i 
Q@ 7*He maketh wars to céase unto 


‘a Song 4.8. 
ib See 1 Ki.2.19. 


c See Deut.21. 
13. 


d Psa.95.6; 
Tsa.54.5. the end of the earth; She breaketh 
eHeb. thy the bow, and cutteth the spear in 
face. ~ ae the burneth the chariot in 
the fire , 
Rev.19.7,8. 20% 
ee 10 Be still, and know that I am 
'g Song 1.4. God: I will be exalted among the 
by Mald.it. cheathen, I will be exalted in the 
earth. 
i Psa.62.7,83 11 The Lorp of hosts is with us; 
91.2;142.5. |the God of Jacob is our refuge. 
j Deut.4.7; Selah. 
Psa.145.18. PSALM 47. 
k Heb. the To the chief Musician, A Psalm for 


heart of the 
seas. 


the sons of Korah. 
CLAP your hands, all ye peo- 


1 See Ezk.47. O d 
ne ple; shout unto God with the 
‘voice of triumph. 

Psa.48.1,8; i é 
goers 2 For the LoRD most high “is 
‘ terrible; “he is a great King over 
p Deus 145 all the earth. 

Esk.43.7; 3 He shall subdue the people 
Hos.11.9; under us, and the nations under 
dost 2a our feet. 

Zech2.510, |.4 He shall choose *our inheritance 

11; 8.3. for us, the excellency of Jacob whom 


he loved. Selah. 


oue, nations. | 5 »God is gone up with a shout, 


pv.l;Num. |the LoRD with the sound of a 

| 14.9;2 Chr. |trumpet. : 
ie. 6 Sing praises to. God, sing praises: 

q Heb. an sing praises unto our King, sing 
high place praises. 
for us. Psa. |'7 For 2God is the King of all the 
xual earth: sing ye praises with under- 

ues 8 standing. 

s Psa.76.3. 8 God eles ie ie shen: 

God sitteth upon the throne of his 

t Ezk.39.9. holiness. 

u Psa.76.12; 9 The princes. of the people are 
Deut.7.21; |gathered together, “even the peo- 
Rania ple of the God of Abraham: ?for 

vy Mal.1.14. the shields of the earth belong 

unto God: he is greatly exalted. 

w Psa.18.47. 

x1 Pet.1.4. PSALM 48. 

y Psa.68.24.25. | A Song and Psalm for the sons 

[ of Korah. 

z Zech.14.9. 

REAT is the Lorp, and greatly 

ere Ths to be praised in ‘the city of 

[ene our God, in the mountain of his 

'b Psa.89.18. holiness. 

c¢ Psa.46.4; 9? Beautiful for situation, the joy 
87.3. of the whole earth, 7s mount Zion, 


Some have thought the alamoth, 
lly to the sheminith, or male 


621 


48 3] 


on the sides of the north, “the city 
of the great King. 3 

3 God is known in her palaces for 
a refuge. 

4 For, lo, the kings were as- 
sembled, they passed by together. 

5 They saw it, and so they mar- 
velled; they were troubled, and 
hasted away. 

6 Fear took hold upon them there, 
and pain, as of a woman in travail. 

7 &Thou breakest the ships of 
Tarshish with an east wind. 

8 As we have heard, so have we 
seen in the city of the LorpD of 
hosts, in the city of our God: 4God 
will establish it for ever. Selah. 

9 We have thought of thy loving- 
kindness, O God, in the midst of thy 
temple. 

10 According to thy name, O God, 
so is thy praise unto the ends of the 
earth: thy right hand is full of 
righteousness. 

11 Let mount Zion rejoice, let the 
daughters of Judah be glad, because 
of thy judgments. 

12 Walk about Zion, and go round 
' about her: tell the towers thereof. 

13 ¢Mark ye well her bulwarks, 
consider her palaces; that ye may 
tell 7¢ to the generation following. 

14 For this God is our God for 
ever and ever: fhe will be our guide 
even unto death. 


PSALM 49. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm for 
the sons of Korah. 


EAR this, all ye people; give 
ear, all ye inhabitants of the 
éworld: 

2 Both low and high, rich and 
poor, together. 

3 My mouth shall speak of wis- 
dom; and the meditation of my 
heart shall be of understanding. 

4 I will incline mine ear to a para- 
ble: I will open my dark saying 
upon the harp. 

5S Wherefore should I fear in the 
days of evil, when the iniquity of 
my heels shall compass me about? 

6 They that trust in their wealth, 
and boast themselves in the multi- 
tude of their riches; 

7 None of them can by any 
means ‘redeem his brother, nor 
give to God a ransom for him: 

8 (Forthe ‘redemption oftheir soul 
1s precious, and it ceaseth for ever:) 

9 That he should still live for 
ever, and not see corruption. 

10 For he seeth that wise men 


i 


PSALMS. | 


a Mt.5.35. 
h Ezk.27.26. 
¢ vs.1,2. 


d Isa.2.2; 
Mic.4.1. 


e Heb. set 
your heart 
to her 
bulwarks. 


f Isa.58.11. 
gi.e. earth. 


h Psa.2.12, 
note. 


# Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59. 
20, note. 


J Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note. 


k Christ 
(Second Ad- 
vent). Psa. 
96.10-13. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 


l Judgments 
(the seven). 
vs.3,4,22; 
Ezk.20.33- 

(2 Sam. 

7.14; Rev. 

22.12.) 


m Lev.10.2; 
Num.16.35; 
Dan.7.10. 

n Psa.97.6. 


o Ex.20.2. 


44. 


622 


die, likewise the fool and the brut- 
ish person perish, and leave their 
wealth to others. 

11 Their inward thought is, that 
their houses shall continue for 
ever, and their dwelling places to 
all generations; they call their lands 
after their own names. 

12 Nevertheless man being in 
honour abideth not: he is like the 
beasts that perish. 

13 This their way is their folly: 
yet their posterity approve their 
sayings. Selah. 

14 Like sheep they are laid in the 
jgrave; death shall feed on them; 
and the upright shall have domin- 
ion over them in the morning; and 
their beauty shall consume in the 
grave from their dwelling. 

15 But God will ‘redeem my soul 
from the power of the Jgrave: for he 
shall receive me. Selah. 

16 Be not thou afraid when one 


,|is made rich, when the glory of his 


house is increased; 

17 For when he dieth he shall 
carry nothing away: his glory shall 
not descend after him, 

18 Thoughwhilehelivedheblessed © 
his soul: and men will praise thee, 
when thou doest well to thyself. 

19 He shall go to the generation of 
his fathers; they shall never see light. 

20 Man that is in honour, and 
understandeth not, is like the beasts 
that perish. 


PSALM 50. 
A Psalm of Asaph. 


aR mighty God, even the Lorp, 
hath spoken, and called the 
earth from the rising of the sun 
unto the going down thereof. 

2 Out of Zion, the perfection of 
beauty, God hath shined. 

3 Our God shall “come, and shall 
not keep silence: /a fire shail ™de- 
vour before him, and it shall be very 
tempestuous round about him. 


4 He shall call to the heavens 
from above, and to the earth, that 
he may judge his people. 

5 Gather my saints together unto 
me; those that have made a cove- 
nant with me by sacrifice. . 

6 And the “heayens shall declare 
his righteousness: for God is judge 
himself. Selah. 

7 Hear, O my people, and I will 
speak; O Israel, and I will testify 
rast: thee: °I am God, even thy 


81 will not reprove thee for thy 


50 9] PSALMS. oo StH 


sacrifices or thy burnt-offerings, to] c vs.9-16. 
have been continually before me. 


get God, lest I Jtear you in pieces, 
and there be none to deliver. 


9 I will ¢take no bullock out of}, pos 241; 23 Whoso offereth praise glorifieth 
thy house, nor he goats out of thy| Ex.i9.5; me: and to him that ordereth his 
folds. Deut.10.14; |conversation aright will-I shew the 


10 For every beast of the forest! J@4113, [salvation of God. 


is ere the cattle upon a thou- 
sand hills. c¢ Hos.14.2; PSALM 51. 
11 I know all the fowls of the| Heb-15-15- To th : ne 
mountains: and the wild beasts of!¢ Psa.91.15; o the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
Bee field ars mine: 107.6,13: David, when Nathan the prophet 
12 If I were hungry, I would not| Job 22:27: came unto him, after he had gone 
tell thee: ‘for the world is mine, cain in to Bath-sheba. 
and the fulness thereof. e Neh.9.26. “HAVE kmercy upon me, O God, 
13 Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or according to thy lovingkind- 
drink the blood of goats? bee ness: according unto the multitude 
14 ‘Offer unto God thanksgiving;|¢1Tim.5.22. jof thy tender mercies blot out my 
and pay thy vows unto the most], >... Rom.24. Hirde sata ang 
igh: 2 ash me oughly from mine 
15 And 4call upon me in the day} : Psa.90.8. iniquity, and cleanse me from my 


of trouble: I will deliver thee, and]... 54 sin, 
thou shalt glorify me. ; cpa 3 For I acknowledge my trans- 
16 But unto the wicked God saith, |k Bible gressions: and my sin 1s ever be- 


What hast thou to do to declare my Ot). Isa. |fore me. 
statutes, or that thoushouldesttake| 37.15. (Gen. | 4 Against thee, thee only, have I 


my covenant in thy mouth? 15.2;Hab. sinned, and done this evil in thy 

17 Seeing thou hatest instruction,} 3-1-1) sight: that thou mightest be /justi- 
and ¢castest my words behind}; Rom.3.4. fied when thou speakest, and be 
thee. clear when thou judgest. 

18 When thou sawest a thief, then ne Te 5m in in- 
thou fconsentedst with him, and Toh 3.6: iquity; and “in sin my mother 
hast been gpartaker with adul-| Rom.5.12; poser me. tesitnectnabeabneiaent 
terers. Eph.2.3. 6 Behold, thou desirest truth in 


19 Thou givest thy mouth to evil,|,, Job 14.4. the inward parts: and in the hidden 
a Wig sine Paces o Heb. warm ap lieaper See ne eee 
against thy brother; thou slander-| ™* 7 #Purge me with 2hyssop, and I 
ara a dons |" erie MR anor Wear ce OE 
and I kept silence; *thou thoughtest| 18 #°P-1% |g” Make me to hear joy and glad- 


that I was altogether such an one|qIsa.1.18. ness; that the bones which thou 
as thyself: hut I will reprove thee, MtLs4 hast broken may rejoice. 

and set them in order before thine|” ~~” 9 Hide thy face from my sins, 
eyes. E s Acts 15.9; jand blot out all mine iniquities. 
“22 Now consider this, ye that for-| Epbh-2-10- 10 sCreate in me a clean heart, O 


1 This Psalm must ever be, in its successive steps, the mould of the experience of 
a sinning saint who comes back to full communion and service. The steps are: 
(1) sin thoroughly judged before God (vs. aes (2) forgiveness and cleansing 
through the blood (v. 7, f.c.); (3) cleansing (v. 7, lc. to 10. Cf. John 13. 4-10; Eph. 
5.26; 1 John 1.9); (4) Spirit-filled for joy and power (vs. 11, 12); (5) service (v. 13); 
(6) worship (vs. 14-17); (7) the restored saint in fellowship with God, not about 
self, but about the blessing of Zion. Personally, it was David’s pathway to restored 
communion after his sin with Bathsheba. Dispensationally, it will be the pathway 
of returning Israel (Deut. 30. 1-10, refs.). 

2Hyssop was the little shrub (1 Ki. 4. 33) with which the blood and water of 
purification were applied (Lev. 14. 1-7; Num. 19. 1-19). 

Cleansing in Scripture is twofold: (1) Of a sinner from the guilt of sin; the 
blood (“hyssop”’) aspect; (2) of a saint from the defilement of sin—the water (“wash 
me’) aspect. Under grace the sinner is purged by blood when he believes (Mt. 26. 28; 
Heb. 1. 3; 9. 12; 10. 14). Both aspects of cleansing, by blood and by water, are 
brought out in John 13. 10, and Eph. 5. 25, 26: ‘““He that is bathed needeth not save 
to wash his feet”; “Christ loved the church and gave Himself for it [redemption 
by blood, “hyssop,” the “bath”] that He might sanctify and cleanse it with the 
washing of water by the word’’: answering to the ‘‘wash me”’ of verse 7. 

623 


$1 11] 


God; and renew a right spirit within 
me. 

11 Cast me not away from thy 
presence; and lItake not thy holy 
4spirit from me. 

12 Restore unto me the joy of thy 
salvation; and uphold me with thy 
‘free spirit. 

13. Then will I teach transgres- 
sors thy ways; and sinners shall be 
converted unto thee. 

14 Deliver me from bloodguilti- 
ness, O Gad, thou 'God of my salva- 
tion: and my tongue shall sing 
aloud of thy righteousness. 


15 O Lord, open thou my lips;) 


and my mouth shall shew forth thy 
praise. = 

16 For thou desirest not sacri- 
fice; else would I give 1¢: thou de- 
lightest not in burnt-offering. 

17 ©The sacrifices of God are a 
broken spirit: a broken and a con- 
trite heart, O God, thou wilt not 
despise. 

18 Do good in thy good pleasure 
unto Zion: build thou the walls of 
Jerusalem, 

19 Then shalt thou be pleased 
with the 4sacrifices of righteous- 
ness, with burnt-offering and whole 
burnt-offering: then shall they offer 
bullocks upon thine altar. 


PSALM 52. 


To the chief Musician, ‘Maschil, A 
Psalm of David, when Doeg the 
Edomite came and told Saul, and 
said unto him, David is come to 
the house of Ahimelech. 


WHE: boastest thou thyself in 
mischief, O mighty man? the 
goodness of God endureth contin- 
ually. 

2 Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs p 
like a sharp razor, working deceit- 
fully. 

3 Thou lovest evil more than 
good; and lying rather than to 
speak righteousness. Selah. 

Thou lovest all devouring 
words, O thou deceitful tongue. 

5 God shall likewise fdestroy thee 
for ever, he shall take thee away, 
and pluck thee out of thy dwelling 
place, and root thee out of the land 
of the living. Selah. 

6 The righteous also shall see, and 
fear, and shall laugh at him: 

7 Lo, this is the man that made 


PSALMS. 


a Holy Spirit. 
vs.11,12; 


(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


b 2 Cor.3.17. 
¢ Psa.34.18; 


f Heb. beat 
thee down. 


g Psa.2.12, 
note, 


h Mahalath, 
apparently a 
temple choir. 


i Psa.10.4; 
14.1. 


j Rom.3.10. 

k 2 Chr.15.2; 
19.3. 

1 Lev.26.17,36; 
Prov.28.1. 

m Psa.14.7. 

n Neginoth, 
stringed 
instruments. 

oOr, Ziphites. 


f. 1 Sam. 
23.19. 


[54 4 


not God his strength; but “trusted 
in the abundance of his riches, and 
strengthened himself in his wicked- 
ness. 

8 But I am like a green olive tree 
in the house of God: I trust in the 
thercy of God for ever and ever. 

9 I will praise thee for ever, be- 
cause thou hast done it: and I will 
wait on thy name; for it is good 
before thy saints. 


PSALM 53. 


To the chief Musician upon #Maha- 
lath, ‘Maschil, A Psalm of David. 


HE ‘fool hath said in his heart, 
There isno God. ‘Corrupt are 
they, and have done abominable 
iniquity: Jthere is none that doeth 
good. 

2 God looked down from heaven 
upon the children of men, to see if 
there were any that did understand, 
that did “seek God. 

3 Every one of them is gone back: 
they are altogether become filthy; 
there is none that doeth good, no, 
not one. 7 

4 Have the workers of iniquity no 
knowledge? who eat up my people 
as they eat bread: they have not 
called upon God. 

5 /!There were they in great fear, 
where no fear was: for God hath 
scattered the bones of him that en- 
campeth against thee: thou hast 
put them to shame, because God 
hath despised them. 

6 ™Qh that the salvation of Israel 
were come out of Zion! When ‘God 
bringeth back the captivity of his 
people, Jacob :shall rejoice, and 
Israel shall be glad. 


PSALM 54. 


To the chief Musician on “Neginoth, 
e‘Maschil, A Psalm of David, 
when the °Ziphims came and said 
to Saul, Doth not David hide him- 
self with us? ; 


Save me, O'God, by thy name, 
and judge me by thy strength. 
2 Hear my prayer, O God; give 

ear to the words of my mouth. 

3 For strangers are risen “up 
against me, and oppressors -seek 
after my soul: they have not set 
God before them. ‘Selah. 

4. Behold, God is mine helper: the 


'No believer of this dispensation, aware of the promise of His abiding (John 


14. 16), should pray, “take not Thy Holy Spirit from me” 


(Eph. 4. 30); but, while 


Christian position is not found here, Christian experience in essence is. 


624 


"54 5) 


ee =a 
Lord fs with them that uphold my 


soul. 

5 He shall reward evil unto mine 
fenemies: cut them off in thy 
truth. ; 

6 I will-freely sacrifice unto thee: 
I will praisé thy name, O LorD; 
for if 7s good. : : 

7 For he hath delivered me out of 
all trouble: ’and mine eye hath seen: 
‘his desire upon mine enemies. 


PSALM 55. 


To the chief Musician on ‘Neginoth, 
@Maschil, A Psalm. of David. 


IVE ear to my prayer, O God; 
and hide not thyself from my 
supplication. 

2 Attend unto me, and hear me: I 
mourn in. my complaint, and make 
a noise; 

3 Because of the voice of the 
enemy, because of the oppression 
of the wicked: for they cast. ini- 
quity upon me, and in wrath they 
hate me. 

4 My heart is sore pained within 
me: and the terrors of death are 
fallen upon me. 

5 Fearfulness and trembling are 
come upon me, and horror hath 
eoverwhelmed me. 

6 And I said, Oh that I had wings 
like a dove! for then would I fiy 
away, and be at rest. 

7 Lo, then would I wander far 
off, and remain in the wilderness. 
Selah. 

8 I would hasten my escape from 
the windy storm and tempest. | 

9 Destroy, O Lord, and divide 
their tongues: for I have.seen vio- 

tence and strife in the city. 

10 Day and night they go about 


it upon the walls thereof: mischief) 


also and sorrow are in the midst 
Of it. ‘ 

11 Wickedness is’ in the midst 
thereof: deceit and guile depart not 
from her streets. 

12 fFor it was not an enemy that 
reproached me; then I could have 
borne it: neither was it he that 
hated me that did ‘magnify him- 
self against me; then I would have 
hid myself from him: f 

13 But it was thou, a man mine 
equal, my guide, and mine “ac- 
quaintance.. 

14 We took sweet counsel to- 


PSALMS. 


[56 7 


a Heb. those 
that ob- 
serve me. 


b Psa.59.10; 
92.11. 


ci.e. stringed 
instruments. 


d i.e. instruc- 
tion. 


e Heb: covered 
me, 


f Psa.41.9. 
g Psa.35.26; 
38.16. 


h Psa.41.9; 
Jer.9:4. 


i Or, the 


grave: 
4 2 Chr-32-7,8. 
k Deut.33.27. 
1 Acts 12.1. 
m Psa.7.4. 


n Heb. he 
hath. pro- 
faned. 


o Psa.2&3; 
57.4; 62.45: 
64.3; Prov. 
5.3545 12.08. 


p Psa.37-S5 
Mt.6.25; 
Lk.121225 
1 Pet.S.7. 


iq Psa.37.24. 


iv Meaning, 
“the cry of 
the dove of 
distant tere- 
binth trees.” 


s Michtam, a 
prayer. 


1 Psa.57.1. 


u Psa.2.12, 
note. 


v Psa.118.6, 
IsaSU3sic 
Heb.13.6. 


gether, and: walked unto the house} 


of God in company. 
15 Let death seize upon 


them, 


625 


and let them go down quick, into 
hell: “for wickedness is in their 
dwellings, and among them. 

16 As forme, I will call upon God; 
and the Lorpb shall save me. 


| 17 Evening, and morning, and at 


noon, will I pray, and ery aloud: 
and he shall hear my voice. 
| 18 He hath delivered my soul in 
peace from the battle that was 
against me: Jfor there were many. 
with. me. 
| 19 God shall hear, and afflict 
them, “even he that abideth of old. 
Selah. Because they have no: 
changes,therefore they fear not God. 
20° ‘He hath put forth his hands 
against such as “be at peace with 
him: *he hath broken his cove- 
nant. 

21 °The words of his: mouth 
were smoother than: butter,, but war 
was in his heart: his words were 
softer than oil, yet were they drawn 
swords: 
| 22 »Cast. thy burden upon the 
LorpD, and he: shall sustain thee: 
the shall never suffer the righteous 
to be moved. 

23 But thou, O God, shalt bring 
them down into the pit of destruc- 
tion: bloody, and deceitful men shall 
not livé out half their days; but I 
will trust in thee. 


PSALM 56. 


To the chief Musician upon ‘Jo- 
nath-elem-rechokim, SMichtam of 
David, when the Philistines took 
him in Gath. 


‘DE merciful unto me, O God: for 
man would swallow me up; he 
fighting daily oppresseth me. 

2. Mine enemies would daily swal- 
low me up: for they be many that 
fight against me, O thou most 
High. 

3 What time I am afraid, I willl 
“trust in thee. ; 


| 4 In God I will praise his word, 


in God I have put my trust; +I 
will not fear what flesh can do 
unto me. 

5 Every day they wrest my 
words: ali their thoughts are against 
me for evil. 
| 6 They gather themselves to- 
gether, they hide themselves, they 
mark my steps, when they wait for 
my soul. .. eb 
| 7 Shall they escape by iniquity? 
in thine anger cast down the peo- 


ple, O God. 


56 8} 


8 Thou tellest my wanderings: 
put thou my tears into thy bottle: 
fare they not in thy book? 

9 When I cry unto thee, then 
shall mine enemies turn back: this I 
know; for “God is for me. — 

10 In God will I praise his word: 
in the Lorp will I praise Ais word. 

11 In God have I put my trust: I 
will not be afraid what man can do 
unto me. 

12 Thy vows are upon me, O God: 
I will render praises unto thee. 

13. “For thou hast delivered my 
soul from death: wilt not thou de- 
liver my feet from falling, that I 
may walk before God in the light of 
the living? 


PSALM 57. 


To the chief Musician, ¢Al-taschith, 
éMichtam of David, when he fled 
from Saul in the cave. 


E merciful unto me, O God, be 
merciful unto me: for my soul 
Strusteth in thee: ¢yea, in the shadow 
of thy wings will I make my refuge, 
huntil these calamities be overpast. 
2 I will cry unto God most high; 
unto God that performeth al] 
things for me. 

3 +He shall send from heaven, and 
save me from the reproach of him 
that would swallow me up. Selah. 
God shall send forth his mercy and 
his truth. 

4 My soul is among lions: and I 
lie even among them that are set 
on fire, even the sons of men, whose 
teeth are spears and arrows, and 
their tongue a sharp sword. 

5 Be thou exalted, O God, above 
the heavens; Jet thy glory be above 
all the earth. 

6 They have prepared a net for 
my steps; my soul is bowed down: 
they have digged a pit before me, 
into the midst whereof they are fal- 
len themselves. Selah. 

7 My heart is fixed, O God, my 
heart is fixed: I will sing and give 
praise. 

8 Awake up, my glory; awake, 
psaltery and harp: I myself will 
awake early. 

9 I will praise thee, O Lord, 
among the people: I will sing unto 
thee among the nations. 

10 For thy mercy is great unto 
the heavens, and thy truth unto the 
clouds. 

11 Be thou exalted, O God, above 
the heavens: Jet thy glory be above 
all the earth. 


A 


PSALMS. 


a Mal.3.16. 
b Rom.8.31. 
c Psa.116.8. 


d Al-taschith, 
destroy not. 


e Michtam, a 
prayer. 


f Psa.2.12, 


note. 


g Psa.17.8; 
63.7. 


h Isa.26.20. 
i Psa.144.5,7. 


j Psa.112.10; 
Josh.7.5. 


k Heb. as liv- 
ing as 
wrath. 

1 Psa.68.23. 

m 1 Sam.24.11. 


ni.e. nations. 


626 


PSALM 58. 


To the chief Musician, ¢Al-taschith, 
eMichtam of David. 


ips ye indeed speak righteous- 
ness, O congregation? do ye 
judge uprightly, O ye sons of men? 

2 Yea, in heart ye work wicked- 
ness; ye weigh the violence of your 
hands in the earth. 

3 The wicked are estranged from 
the womb: they go astray as soon 
as they be born, speaking lies. 

4 Their poison zs like the poison 
of a serpent: they are like the deaf 
adder that stoppeth her ear; 

5 Which will not hearken to the 
voice of charmers, charming never 
so wisely. 

6 Break their teeth, O God, in 
their mouth: break out the great 
teeth of the young lions, O Lorp. 

7 JLet them melt away as waters 
which run continually: when he 
bendeth his bow to shoot his ar- 
rows, let them be as cut in pieces. 

8 As a snail wAich melteth, let 
every one of them pass away: like 
the untimely birth of a woman, 
that they may not see the sun. 

9 Before your pots can feel the 
thorns, he shall take them away as 
with a whirlwind, *both living, and 
in his wrath. 

10 The righteous shall rejoice 
when he seeth the vengeance: “he 
shall wash his feet in the blood of 
the wicked. 

11 So that a man shall say, Verily 


there is a reward for the righteous: 
verily he is a God that judgeth in 
the earth. 


PSALM. 59. 


To the chief Musician, ¢Al-taschith, 
eMichtam of David; when Saul 


sent, and they watched the house 
to kill him. 


DELIVER me from mine ene- 
mies, O my God: defend me 
from them that rise up against me. 

2 Deliver me from the workers 
of iniquity, and save me from 
bloody men. 

3 For, lo, they lie in wait for my 
soul: the mighty are gathered 
against me; “not for my transgres- 
sion, nor for my sin, O Lorp. 

4 They run and prepare them- 
selves without my fault: awake to 
help me, and behold. 


5 Thou therefore, O Lorp God of 
hosts, the God of Israel, awake to 
visit all the heathen: be not merci- 


| a ol 


59 6] 


PSALMS. 


[61 8 


3 
ful to any wicked transgressors. 3 #Thou hast shewed thy people 


Selah. 

6 They return at evening: they 
make a noise like a dog, and go 
round about the city: 

7 Behold, they belch out with 
their mouth: swords are in their 
lips: for who, say they, doth 
hear? 

8 But thou, O Lorp, shalt laugh 
at them; thou shalt have all the 
“heathen in derision. 

9 Because of his strength will I 
wait upon thee: for God is “my de- 
fence. 

10 The God of my mercy shall 
prevent me: God shall let ‘me see 
my desire upon mine enemies. 

11 Slay them not, lest my people 
forget: scatter them by thy power; 
and bring them down, O Lord our 
shield. 

12 For the sin of their mouth and 
the words of their lips let them 
even be taken in their pride: and 
for cursing and lying which they 
speak. 

13 ¢Consume them in wrath, 
consume them, that they may not 
be: and ¢let them know that God 
ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the 
earth. Selah. 

14 And at evening let them re- 
turn; and let them make a noise 
like a dog, and go round about the 


city. 

15 Let them wander up and down 
for meat, and grudge if they be not 
satisfied. 

16 But I will sing of thy power; 
yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy 
in the morning: for thou hast been 
my defence and refuge in the day 
of my. trouble. 

17 Unto thee, O my strength, will 
I sing: for God is my defence, and 
the God of my mercy. 


PSALM 60. 


To the chief Musician upon /Shu- 
shan-eduth, *Michtam of David, 
to teach; “when he strove with 
Aram-naharaim and with Aram- 
zobah, when Joab returned, and 
smote of Edom in the valley of 
salt twelve thousand. 


GOD, thou hast cast us off, 

thou hast scattered us, thou 
hast been displeased; O turn thy- 
self to us again. 

2 Thou hast made the earth to 
tremble; thou hast broken it: heal 
Ee breaches thereof; for it shak- 
eth. 


ai.e. nations. 


6 Heb. my 
high place. 


c Psa.54.7; 
92.11; 112.8. 


d Psa.7.9. 

e Psa.83.18. 

f Shushan- 
eduth, the 
lily of 
speech. 


g Michtam,a 
prayer. 


h 2 Sam.8. 
3-13. 


t Psa.71.20. 


jlsa. Si. 17, 22; 
Jer-25 


k Psa.19.9, 
note. 


1Vs.5-12 are 
identical 


with Psa.108. 
6-13. 


m Josh.1.6. 

» Gen.12.6. 

o Josh.13.27, 

p See Deut. 
33,17. 

g Gen.49.10. 

\y 2Sam.8.2, 


5 2Sam.8.14; 
Psa.108.9. 


{2 Sam.8.1. 
u Pre a 
46.3. 

v Heb. salva- 
tion. 

w Or, Negi- 
noth, 
stringed 


instruments. 


ix Psa.2.12, 
note. 


627 


hard things: /thou hast made us to 
drink the wine of astonishment. 

4 Thou hast given a banner to 
them that fear thee, that it may 
Seba because of the truth. 


5 /That thy beloved may be deliv- 
ered; save with thy right hand, and 
hear me. 

6 God hath spoken in his holi- 
ness; I will rejoice, I will divide 
nShechem, and mete out the valley 
oof Succoth. 

7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is 
mine; ?Ephraim also is the strength 
of mine head; %Judah is my law- 
giver; 

8 *Moab is my washpot; Sover 
Edom will I cast out my shoe: 
‘Philistia, triumph thou because of 


me. 

9 Who will bring me into the 
strong city? who will lead me into 
Edom? 

10 Wilt not thou, O God, which 
hadst cast us off? and thou, O God, 
which didst not go out with our 
armies? 

11 Give us help from trouble: “for 
vain is the *help of man. 

12 Through God we shall do val- 
iantly: for he it is thaf shall tread 
down our enemies. 


PSALM 61. 


To the chief Musician upon “Negi- 
nah, A Psalm of David. 


HEAR my cry, O God; attend 
unto my prayer. 

2 From the end of the earth will I 
cry unto thee, when my heart is 
overwhelmed: lead me to the rock 
that is higher than I. 

3 For thou hast been a shelter for 
me, and a strong tower from the 
enemy. 

4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for 
ever: I will *trust in the covert of 
thy wings. Selah. 

5 For thou, O God, hast heard 
my vows: thou hast given me 
the heritage of those that fear thy 
name. 

6 Thou wilt prolong the king’s 
life: and his years as many genera- 
tions. 

7 He shall abide before God for 
ever: O prepare mercy and truth, 
which may preserve him. 

8 So will I sing praise unto thy 
name for ever, that I may daily 
perform my vows. 


62 1] 


PSALM 62. 


To-the chief Musician, to *Jedu- 
thuh, A Psalm of David. 


7EXYRULY my ‘soul owaiteth upon 
God: from him cometh my sal- 
vation. 

2 He only 7s my rock and my sal- 
vation; he is my ‘defence; I shall 
not be greatly moved. 4 ; 

3 How long will ye imagine mis- 
chief against a man? ye shall be 
stain all of you: as a bowing wall 
shall ye be, and as a tottering 
fence, . 

4 They only consult to cast him 
down from his excellency: they 
delight in lies: they bless with their 
mouth, but they curse inwardly. 
Selah. 

5 My soul, wait thou only upen 
God; for my expectation is from 
him. 

6 He only ts my rock and my sal- 
vation: he is my defence; I shall 
not be ‘moved. 

7 In God fs my salvation and my 
glory: the rock of my strength, and 
my refuge, zs in God. 

8 ¢Trust in him at all times; ye 
people, ‘pour out your heart before 
gen: God zs a refuge for us. Se- 
Tah. 

9 Surely men of low degree are 
vanity, and men of high degree are 
a lie: to be laid in the balance, they 
are altogether lighter than van- 
tty. 

10 Trust not in oppression, and 
become not vain in robbery: if 
Tiches increase, set not your heart 
upon them. 


11 God hath spoken once; twice} 


have I heard this; that power be- 
Jongeth unto ‘God. 

12 Also untothee, OLord, belong- 
eth mercy: for thou renderest to 
every man according ‘to his work. 


PSALM 63. 


A Psalm of David, when he was in 
the wilderness of Judah. 


GOD, thou art my God; early 

will I seek thee: ‘my soul 
thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth 
for thee in a dry and thirsty land, 
where no water is; 

2 To see thy power and thy glory, 
so as I have seen thee in the sanc- 
tuary. 

3 8Because thy lovingkindness is 
peer than life,.my lips shall praise 

ee, 


PSALMS. 


a See Psa.39, 
title, note. 


6 Heb. is 
silent. 
Psa.65.1. 


c Heb. high 
place. 


d Psa.2.12, 
note. 


e Psa.42.4; 
1 Sam.1.15; 
Lam.2.19. 


f Psa.42.2; 
84.2; 143.6. 


g Psa.30.5. 
h Psa.42.8; 


j Or, we are 
consumed 
by that 
which they 
have thor- 
oughly 
searched. 


k Psa.32.11; 
58.10; 68.3. 


4 


628 


119.55; 149.5. 
i See 1 Ki.8.61. 


4 Thus will I bless thee while I 
live: I will lift up my hands in thy 
name. 

5 My soul shall be satisfied as 
with marrow and fatness; and my 
apomth shall praise thee with joyful 
lips: 

6 When ‘I remember thee upon 
my bed, and meditate on thee in 
the night watches. 

7 Because thou hast been my 
help, therefore in the shadow of thy 
wings will I rejoice. 

8 My soul followeth hard after 
thee: thy right hand upholdeth me. 

9 But those that seek my soul, to 
destroy it, shall go into the lower 
parts of the earth. 

10 They shall fall by the sword: 
they shall be a portion for foxes. 

11 But the king shall rejoice in 
|God; every one that sweareth by 
him ‘shall glory: ‘but the mouth of 
them that speak lies shall be 
stopped. 


PSALM 64. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
David 


FEAR my voice, O God, in my 
prayer: preserve my life from 
jfear of the enemy. 

2 Hide me from the secret counsel 
of the wicked; from the insurrection 
of the workers of iniquity: 

3 Who whet their tongue like a 
sword, and bend their bows to 
shoot their arrows, even bitter 
words: 

4 That they may shoot in secret 
at the ‘perfect: suddenly do they 
shoot at him, and fear not. 

5 They encourage themselves in 
an evil, matter: they commune of 
laying snares privily; they say, 
Who shall see them? 

6 They search out iniquities; 
Jthey accomplish a diligent search: 
both the inward thought of every 
one of them, and the heart, is 
deep. 

7 But God shall shoot at them 
with an arrow; suddenly shall they 
be wounded. 

8 So they shall make their own 
tongue to fall upon themselves: all 
that see them shall flee away. 

9 And all men shall fear, and shall 
declare the work of God; for they 
shall wisely consider of his doing. 

10 The righteous shall be glad in 
the Lorp, and shall “trust in him: 
aed all the upright in heart shall 
lglory. 


65 1] 


PSALM 65. 
To the chief Musician, A Psalm and 
Song of David. 


RAISE waiteth for thee, O 
God, in Sion: and unto thee 
shall the vow be performed. 
2 O thou that hearest prayer, 
@unto thee shall all flesh come. 
3 Iniquities prevail against me: 


as for our transgressions, thou 
shalt “’purge them away. 
4 Blessed is the man whom 


thou choosest, and causest to ap- 
proach unto thee, that he may 
dwell in thy courts: ‘we shall be sat- 
isfied with the goodness of thy 
house, even of thy holy temple. 

5 By terrible things in righteous- 
ness wilt thou answer us, O God of 
our salvation; who art the confi- 
dence of all the ends of the earth, 
and of them that are afar off upon 
the sea: 

6 Which by his strength setteth 
fast the mountains; being girded 
with power: 

7 Which stilleth the noise of the 
seas, the noise of their waves, and 
the tumult of the people: 

8 They also that dwell in the 
uttermost parts are afraid at thy 
tokens: thou makest the outgoings 
of the morning and’ evening to re- 
joice. 

9 Thou ¢visitest the earth, and 
waterest it: thou greatly enrichest 
it ‘with the river of God, which is 
full of water: thou preparest them 
corn, when. thou hast so provided 
for it. 

10 Thou waterest the ridges 
thereof abundantly: thou settlest 
the furrows thereof: fthou makest 
“it soft with showers: thou blessest 
the springing thereof. 

11 Thou crownest the year with 
thy goodness; and thy paths drop 
fatness. 

12 They drop upon the pastures 
of the wilderness: and the little hills 
Tejoice on every side. . 

13 The pastures are clothed with 
flocks; the valleys also are covered 
over with corn; they shout for joy, 
they also sing. 


PSALM 66. 


To the chief Musician, A Song 
or Psalm. 
AKE a joyful noise unto God, 


all ye lands: 1 
2 Sing forth the honour of his 


PSALMS. 


a Isa.66.23. 


b Psa.51.2; 
79.93 Isa.6.7; 


c Psa.36.8. 

d Deut.11.12. 

e Psa.46.4. 

f Heb. thou 
dissolvest 
it. 

g Psa.65.5. 

h Psa.18.44. 

i Ex.14.21. 

j Josh.3.14,16. 


k Heb. put- 
teth. 


1 Zech.13.95 
1 Pet.1.6,7. 


m Psa.100.4; 
116.14,17-19. 


n Psa.19.9, 
note. 


o Job 27.9; 
Prov.15.29; 
28.9; Isa.l. 
15; John 9. 
31; Jas.4.3. 


629 


[66 20 


name: make his praise glori- 
ous. 

3. Say unto God, How %terrible 
art thou in thy works! through 
the greatness of thy power shall 
thine enemies submit themselves 
unto thee. 


4 All the earth shall worship 


thee, and shall sing unto thee; 
they shall sing to. thy name. 
Selah. 


5 Comeand see the works of God: 
he 1s terrible in his doing toward 
the children of men. 

6 *He turned the sea into dry 
land: Jthey went through the flood: 
on foot: there did we rejoice in 
him. 

7 He ruleth by his power for ever; 
his eyes behold the nations: let not 
the rebellious exalt themselves. 
Selah. 

8 O bless our God, ye people, and 
make the voice of his praise to be 
heard: 


| 9 Which *holdeth our soul in life, 


and suffereth not our feet to be 
moved. 

10 For thou, O God, hast proved 
us: ‘thou hast tried us, as silver is 
tried. 

11 Thou broughtest us into the 
net; thou laidst affliction upon our 
loins. 

12 Thou hast caused men to ride 
over our heads; we went through 
fire and through water: but thou 
broughtest us out into a wealthy 
place. 

13 I will go into thy house with 
burnt-offerings: I will pay thee my 
vows, 

14 Which my lips have uttered, 
and my mouth hath spoken, when I 
was in trouble. 

15 I will offer unto thee burnt- 
sacrifices of fatlings, with the in- 
cense of rams; I will offer bullocks 


with goats. Selah. 
16 Come and hear, all ye 
that "fear God, and I will de- 


clare what he hath done for my 


soul. 

17 I cried unto him with my 
mouth, and he was extolled with 
my tongue. 

18 olf I regard iniquity in my. 
heart, the Lord will not hear 
me: 

19 But verily God hath heard 
me; he hath attended to the voice 
of my prayer. ‘ 

20 Blessed be God, which hath 
not turned away my prayer, nor his 
mercy from me. 


67 1] 


PSALM 67. 


To the chief Musician on ¢Neginoth, 
A Psalm or Song. 


OD be merciful unto us, and 
bless us; and cause his face to 
shine upon us; Selah. 

2 That thy way may be known 
upon earth, thy saving health 
among ail nations. 

3 Let the people praise thee, O 
God; let all the people praise thee. 

4 O let the nations be glad and 
sing for joy: >for thou shalt judge 
the people righteously, and ‘govern 
the nations upon earth. Selah. 

5 Let the people praise-thee, O 
God; let all the people praise thee. 

6 ¢Then shall the earth yield her 
increase; and God, even our own 
God, shall bless us. 

7 God shall bless us; and all the 
ends of the earth shall ‘fear him. 


PSALM 68. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm 
or Song of David. 


*L=Et God arise, let his enemies be 
scattered: let them also that 
hate him flee before him. 

2 As smoke is driven away, so 
drive them away: fas wax melteth 
before the fire, so let the wicked 
perish at the presence of God. 

3 But 4let the righteous be glad; 
let them rejoice before God: yea, 
let them exceedingly rejoice. 

4 Sing unto God, sing praises to 
his name: extol him that rideth 
upon the heavens *by his name 
JAH, and rejoice before him. 

5 JA father of the fatherless, and 
a judge of the widows, is God in his 
holy habitation. 

6 *God setteth the solitary in 
families: ‘he bringeth out - those 
which are bound with chains: but 
the rebellious dwell in a dry Jand. 

7 OGod, when thou wentest forth 
before thy people, when thou didst 
march through the wilderness; 
Selah: 

8 The earth shook, the heavens 
also dropped at the presence of 


PSALMS. 


a Neginoth, 
stringed 
instruments. 

b Psa.96.10,13; 
98.9, 


c Heb. lead. 

d Lev.26.4; 
Psa.85.12; 
Ezk.34.27. 


e Psa.19.9, 
note. 


f Psa.97.5; 
Mic.1.4. 


g Psa.32.11; 


58.10; 64.10. Ss 


h v.33; Deut. 
33.26. 


4 Ex.6.3. 


j Psa.10.14, 
18; 146.9. 


k 1 Sam.2.5; 
Psa.113.9. 


1 Psa.107.10, 
14; 146.7; 
Acts 12.7. 


m Deut.26.5,9; 
Psa.74.19. 


n Inspiration. 
Isa.6.5-9. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


o Heb.1.4, 
note, 


pb Eph.4.8. 


q Acts 2.4,33; 
10,44-46; 
1 Cor.12. 
4-11; Eph. 
4.7-12. 


r Deut.30.1-9. 


God: even Sinai itself was moved 
at the presence of God, the God of 
Israel. 

9 Thou, O God, didst send a 
plentiful rain, whereby thou didst 
confirm thine inheritance, when it 
was weary. 

10 Thy congregation hath dwelt 
therein: “thou, O God, hast pre- 
pared of thy goodness for the poor. 

11 The Lord gave the "word: 
great was the company of those 
that published /t. 

12 Kings of armies did flee apace: 
and she that tarried at home 
divided the spoil. ; 

13 Though ye have lien among 
the pots, yet shall ye be as the 
wings of a dove covered with silver, 
and her feathers with yellow gold. 

14. When the Almighty scattered 
kings in it, it was white as snow in 


on. 
15 The hill of God is as the hill 
of Bashan; an high hill as the hill of 
Bashan. : 

16 Why leap ye, ye high hills? 
this 1s the hill which God desireth 
to dwell in; yea, the Lorp will 
dwell in it for ever. 

17 The chariots of God are 4 
twenty thousand, even thousands| = 
of “angels: the Lord is among them,” 
as in Sinai, in the holy place. 

18 Thou hast ascended on high, 
thou. hast led captivity ?captive: 
thou hast received @gifts for men; 
yea, for the rebellious also, that the 
LorD God might dwell among 
them. 
| 19 Blessed be the Lord, who daily 
loadeth us with benefits, even the 
God of our salvation. Selah. 

20 He that is our God is the God 
of salvation; and unto Gop the 
Lord belong the issues from death. 

21 But God shall wound the head 
of his enemies, and the hairy scalp 
of such an one as goeth on still in 
his trespasses. 

22 The Lord said, I will bring 
ragain from Bashan, I will bring 
my people again from the depths 
of the sea: 

23 That thy foot may be dipped 
in the blood of thine enemies, and 
the tongue of thy dogs in the same. 


1 The entire Psalm is pervaded by the joy of Israel in the kingdom, but a stricter 
18. This is quoted (Eph. 4. 7-16) of Christ’s 


order of events begins with verse 


ascension ministry. Verses 21-23 refer to th 
(See “Be 
don,” Rev. 16. 16; Rev. 19. 17-19, noée.) 
(See “Kingdom 
See Psalm 69., next in order of the Messianic 


tion of the Beast and his armies. 


universal kingdom blessing. 


630 


e regathering of Israel, and the destruc: 
ast,” Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19. 20; “Armaged- 
Verses 24-35 are descriptive of full and 
” (O.T.), Gen. 1. 26; 
Psalms, 


Zech. 12. 8.) 


68 24] PSALMS. [69 17 
24 They have seen thy goings, O 


3 I am weary of my crying: my 


God; even the goings of my God, throat is dried: mine eyes fail while 
my King, in the sanctuary. I wait for my God. 

25 The singers went before, the 4 ¢They that hate me without a. 
players on instruments followed cause are more than the hairs of 
after; among them were the dam- mine head: they that would de- 
sels playing with timbrels. stroy me, being mine enemies 

26 Bless ye God in the congrega- wrongfully, are mighty: then I re- 
tions, even the Lord, “from the stored that which I took not away. 
fountain of Asrael. Ge 5 O God, thou knowest my fool- 

27 There is ‘little Benjamin with ishness; and my sins are not hid 
their ruler, the princes of Judah from thee. 
and their council, the princes of 6 Let not them that wait on thee, 
Zebulun, and the princes of Naph- O Lord Gop of hosts, be ashamed 
tali. for my sake: let not those that seek 

28 Thy God hath commanded thy thee be confounded for my sake, O 
strength: strengthen, O God, that God of Israel. 
which thou hast wrought for us. 7 Because for thy sake I have 

29 Because of thy temple at Jeru- borne reproach; shame hath cov- 
salem shall kings bring presents ered my face. 
unto thee. a Onyeithat 8 «I am become a stranger unto 


30 Rebuke beet a eas ee are of the ee Edah ead an alien unto my 
men, the m ude o: e s,| fountain mother’s c en. 

with the calves of the people, tili| °* Israel. 9 fFor the zeal of thine house 
every one submit himself with|s1sam.9.21. |hath eaten me up; and the ére- 
pieces of silver: scatter thou the auroras proaches of them that reproached 
SP Petia come out beg] Meme cag! Wed I wens arid okaatened 
Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch|¢ Psa.35.19; my soul with fasting, that was to 
out her hands unto God. John 15.25. |my reproach. 

32 Sing unto God, ye kingdoms Of| ¢ John 7.3-5. 11 I made sackcloth also my gar- 
the earth; O sing praises unto the ment; and I became a proverb to 


Lord; Selah: f John 2.17. \them. 

33 To him that rideth upon the], Rom.15.3. 12 They that sit in the gate speak 
heavens of heavens, which were of against me; and I was the song of 
old; lo, he doth send out his voice, the drunkards. 
and that a mighty voice. 13 But as for me, my prayer is 

34 Ascribe ye strength unto God: unto thee, O LORD, in an accept- 
his excellency is over Israel, and able time: O' God, in the multitude 
his strength is in the clouds. of thy mercy hear me, in the truth 

35 O God, thou art terrible out of thy salvation. 
of thy holy places: the God of 14 Deliver me out of the mire, and 
Israel is he that giveth strength let me not sink: let me be delivered 

and power unto his _ people. from them that hate me, and out of 
Blessed be God. the deep waters. 

15 Let not the waterflood over- 

PSALM 69. flow me, neither let the deep swal- 

To the chief Musician upon ‘Sho- ey PRCiTt oe ere oe 

shannim, A Psalm of David. | 16 Hear me, O Lorn; for thy lov- 

SAVE Ime, O God; for the wa- ingkindness is good: turn unto me 

ters are come in unto my soul. according to:the multitude of thy 

2 Isink in deep mire, where there tender mercies. 


17 And hide not thy face from thy . 
servant; for I am in trouble: hear 
me speedily. 


gs no standing: I am come into 
deep waters, where the floods over- 
flow me. 


1 The N.T. quotations from, and references to, this Psalm indicate in what way 
it adumbrates Christ. It is the Psalm of His humiliation and rejection (vs. 4, 7, 8, 
10-12). Verses 14-20 may well describe the exercises of His holy soul in Geth- 
semane (Mt. 26. 36-45); while verse 21 is a direct reference to the cross (Mt. 27. 
34, 48; John 19. 28). The imprecatory verses (22-28) are connected (Rom, 11. 9, 10) 
with the present judicial blindness of Israel, verse, 25 having special reference to 
Judas (Acts 1. 20), who is thus made typical of his generation, which shared his 
guilt. See Psalm 72., next in order of the Messianic Psalms. 

631 


69 18] PSALMS. 


{71 13 : 


18 Draw nigh unto my soul, and 
“redeem it: deliver me because of 
mine enemies. 

19 Thou hast known my reproach, 
and my shame, and my dishonour: 
mine adversaries are all before 
thee. 

20 Reproach hath broken my 
heart; and I am full of heaviness: 
and I looked for some to take 
pity, but there was none; and 


for comforters, but I found|? ae 
none. | (Kinsman 
21 They gave me also gall for my] type). Isa. 
meat; and in my thirst they gave| °9-20 o¢e- 
‘me vinegar to drink. b Mt.27.34,48. 


22 ‘Let their table become a snare 
before them: and that which|¢R0m-11.9,10. 
should have been for their wel-|¢ Mt.23.38: 
fare, let it become a trap. Acts 1.20. 

23 Let their eyes be darkened,| ,..35 35 
that they see not; and make their] ppii.43- 
loins continually to shake. Rev.3.5; 

24 Pour out thine indignation| 1-5 
upon them, and let thy wrathfull ¢psaso.13, 
anger take hold of them. 14,23. 

25 Let their habitation be ¢deso- 
late; and let none dwell in their 
tents. 


g Psa.34.2. 
h Psa:22.26. 


26 For they persecute him whom] . J 
thou hast smitten; and they talk to| ’ Hg? cree? 
the grief of those whom thou hast| 

j Psa:51.18; 
wounded. MOOI Tsa.44296: 

27 Add imiquity unto their ini- we 
quity; and let them not come into|s Heb. to my 
thy righteousness. help. 

28 Let them “be blotted out of the 1 Psa.40.15. 
book of the living, and not be writ- 
ten with the righteous. m Psa.40.17; 

29 But I am poor and sorrowful:},, psa.141.1. 
let thy salvation, O God, set me up 
on high. eta 

30 I will praise the name of God| "°° 
with a song, and will magnify him|p Heb: be 
with thanksgiving. ice tone 

31 JThis also shall please the| oO; Aabsea. 
Lorp better than an ox or bullock] tion. 
that hath horns and hoofs. Ae 

32 8The humble shall see this.|? 727'3 5. 
and be glad: and "your heart shall] 1 Cor.4.9. 


live that seek God. 

33 For the LorD heareth the 
poor, and despiseth not his prison- 
ers, 

34 Let the heaven and earth 
praise him, the seas, and every 

thing that ‘moveth therein. 

35 JFor God will save Zion, and 
will build the cities of Judah: that 
they may dwell there, and have it 
in possession. 

36 The seed also of .his serv- 


r Psa.22.11,19; 
35.22; 38. 
21522: 


ants shall inherit it: and they 
that love his name shall dwell 
therein. 


632 


PSALM 70. 
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
David, to bring to remembrance. 


[VAABE haste, O God, to deliver 
me; make haste *to help me, 
O Lorpb. 


2 Let them be ashamed and con- 
founded that seek after my soul: let 
them be turned backward, and put 
to confusion, that desire my hurt. 

3 ‘Let them be turned back for a 
reward of their shame that say, 
Aha, aha. 

4 Let all those that seek thee re- 
joice and be glad in thee: and let 
such as love thy salvation say con- 
tinually, Let God be magnified. 

5 “But I am poor and needy: 
"make haste unto me, O God: thou 
art my help and my deliverer; O 
LorbD, make no tarrying. 


PSALM 71. 


qN thee, QOLORD,doIputmy trust: 
let me never be put to confusion. 

2 Deliver me in thy righteousness, 
and cause me to escape: incline 
thine ear unto me, and save me. 

3 *Be thou my strong habitation, 
whereunto I may continually re- 
sort: thou hast given command- 
ment to save me; for thou art my 
rock and my fortress. 

4 Deliverme,O my God, out of the 
hand of the wicked, out of the hand 
of the unrighteous and cruel man. 

5 For thou art my hope, O Lord 
Gop: thou art my “trust from my 
youth. 

6 By thee have I been holden up 
fromthe womb: thouarthethattook 
me out of my mother’s bowels: my 
praise shall be continually of thee. 

7 91 am as a wonder unto many; 
but thou art my strong refuge. 

8 Let my mouth be filled with 
thy praise and with thy honour 
all the day. 

9 Cast me’ not off in the time of 
old age; forsake me not when my 
strength faileth. 

10 For mine enemies speak 
against me; and they that lay wait 
for my soul take counsel together, 

11 Saying, God hath forsaken 
him: persecute and take him: for 
there 1s none to deliver Aim. 

12 *O God, be not far from me: O 
my God, make haste for my help. 

13 Let them be confounded and 
consumed that are adversaries to 
my soul; let them be covered with 
reproach and dishonour that seek 
my hurt. 


71 14) 


14 But I will hope continually,and 
will yet praise thee more and 
more. 

15 My mouth shall shew forth thy 
righteousness and thy salvation all 
the day; for I know not the num- 
bers. thereof. 

16 i will go in the strength of the 
Lord Gop: I will make mention of 
thy righteousness, even of thine 
only. 

17 O God, thou hast taught me 
from my youth: and hitherto have 
I declared thy wondrous works. 

18 *Now also when I am old and 
greyheaded, O God, forsake me not; 
until I have shewed thy strength 
unto this generation, and thy 
power to every one that is to.come. 

19 4Thy righteousness also, O 
God, is very high, who hast done 
great things: O God, who is like 
unto thee! 

20 Thou, which hast. shewed me 
great and sore troubles, shalt 
quicken me again, and shalt. bring 
me up again from the depths of the 
earth. 

21 Thou shalt increase my great- 
ness, and comfort me on every 


side. 

22 I will also praise thee with the 
psaltery, even thy truth, O my 
God unto thee will I sing with the 
harp, O thou Holy One of Israel. 

23 My lips shall greatly rejoice 
when I sing unto thee; and my 
soul, which thou hast ‘redeemed. 

24 My tongue also shall talk of 
thy righteousness all the day long: 
for they are confounded, for they 
are brought unto shame, that seek 
my hurt. 


PSALM 72. 
A Psalm for Solomon. 


I@XIVE the ¢king thy judgments, 
O God, and thy righteousness 
unto the king’s son. ° 
2 He shall judge thy people with 
righteousness, and thy poor with 
judgment. 
3 The mountains shall bring peace 


to the people, and the little hills, by) 


righteousness. 
4 He shall judge the poor of the 
people, he shall! save the children of 


PSALMS. 


a Heb. unto 
old age and 
grey hairs. 


6 Psa.57.10. 


c Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59. 
20, note. 


d Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs.1- 
20;: Psa.89. 
3,4,21,28-36. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12:8.) 


e Psa.19:9, 
note. 


fi.e. coasts. 


g Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


h 1 Ki.4.20, 

1 Psa.89.36. 

j Heb. shall 
be. 


k Heb. shall 
be as a son 
to continue 
his father’s 
name for 
ever. 


1 Num.14.21; 
Zech.14.9. 


m Lit. to be 
ended, i.e. in 
complete an- 
swer. 2 Sam. 
23.1-4, 


[72 20 


the needy, and shall break in pieces 


the oppressor. 

5 They shall fear thee as long as 
the sun and moon endure, through- 
out all generations. 

6 He shall come down like rain 
upon the mown grass: as showers 
that water the earth. ; 

7 In his days shall the righteous 
flourish; and abundance of peace so 
long as the moon endureth. 

8 He shall have dominion also 
from sea to sea, and from the river 
unto the ends of the earth. 

9 They that dwell in the wilder- 
ness shall bow before him; and his 
enemies shall lick the dust. 

10 The kings of Tarshish and of 
the fisles, shall bring presents: the 
kings of Sheba and Seba shallk offer 
gifts. 

11 Yea, all kings shall fall. down 
petoEe him: all nations shall serve 

m. 


12 For he shall deliver the needy 


when he crieth, the poor also, and 
him that hath no helper. 

13. He shall spare the poor and 
needy, and shall save the souls of 
the needy. 

14 He shall sredeem their soul 
from deceit and violence: and. pre- 
cious shall their blood be in his sight. 

15. And he shall live, and. to him: 
shall be given of the gold of Sheba: 
prayer also shall be made for him 
continually; and daily shall he be: 
praised. 

16 There shall be an handful of 
corn in the earth upon the top of the 
mountains; the fruit thereof shall 
shake like Lebanon: ’and they of 
the city shall flourish like grass of 
the earth. : 

17 ‘His name Jshall endure for 
ever: “his name shall be continued 
as long as the sun: and men shall. 
be blessed in him: all nations shail 
call him blessed. ; 

18 Blessed be the Lord God,.the 
God of Israel, who. only doeth won- 
drous things. 

19 And blessed be his glorious 
mame for ever: ‘and let the whole 
earth be filled with his glory; Amen,. 
and Amen. 

20 The prayers of David the son 
of Jesse are “ended. ; 


1 The Psalm as a whole forms a complete vision. of Messiah’s kingdom so far as 


.T. revelation extended. All David’s prayers will find their fruition in the 
are fe 205 2 Sam. 23. 14). Verse 1-refers to the investiture of the King’s 
Son with the kingdom, of which investiture the formal description is given in Dan. 


7. 13, 14; Rev. 5. 5-10, 


Verses. 2-7, 12-14 give the character of the kingdom. 


(Cf. Isa. 11. 3-9.) The emphatic word is righteousness. .The Sermon on the 


633 


‘ 


ZS 1) PSALMS. {74 4 
BOOK III. 
slippery places: thou castedst them 
PSALM 73. down into destruction. j 
A Psalm of Asaph. ate bch are iy. brought ne 
esolation, as in a moment! ey 
peels God is good 5 ister are utterly consumed with ter- 
even to such as are of a clean rere 


heart. 

2 But as for me, my feet were 
almost gone; my steps had well 
nigh slipped. 

3 For I was envious at the foolish, 
when I saw the prosperity of the 
wicked. 

4 For there are no bands in their 
death: but their strength is firm. 

5 They are not in trouble as 


20 Asadream when one awaketh; 
so, O Lord, when thou awakest, 
thou shalt despise their image. 

21 Thus my heart was grieved, 
and I was pricked in my reins. 

22 So foolish was I, and ignorant: 
I was as a beast before thee. 

23 Nevertheless I am continually 
aHeb. with. |with thee: thou hast holden me 
by my right hand. 


other men; neither are they) 2 Pet.2.18; : . 
plagued “like other men. |” Jude 16. 24 hou se guide ice with thy 
oy J ber efore Bride | compere ¢ Revie: Pio? an erward receive me 
em about as-a chain; violence 95 Wh ; 
d Job 22.13; om have I in heaven but 
covereth them as a garment. Pei thee? and there is none upon 


7 Their eyes stand out with fat-) 94:7. . : 
ness: they have more’ than heart earth that I desire beside thee. 


could wish + anti. | 20 My Seah at sae heat 
8 Th a t, : A 

ical conconanatupadhiod canaeen ae Abang. 
RA nag mouth against] Ps2:2-12, thee shall perish: thou hast de- 
the heavensil'and” their ttenene note. stroyed all them that go a whoring 


. from thee. 
h Maschil, od 
Liane ear ae aaa Leiak ‘instruction.| 28 But it is good for me to draw 


hither: and waters of a full cup are|iHeb. goer, |P°2" to God: I have put my trust 


Redemp.  |in the Lord Gop, that I may declare 
Mian Ape they OS litiow doth God (Kinsman all thy works. 
know? and is there knowledge in| 5020, note. 
me most High? pana PSALM 74. 
2 Behold, these are the ungodly, ion : 
who prosper ¢in the world; they|s Dan.6.27. “Maschil of Asaph. 
increase in riches. O GOD, why hast thou cast us 

13 Verily fI have cleansed my off for ever? why doth thine 
eat in vain, and washed my gaa pricks against the sheep of 

ands in innocency. y pasture? 

14 For all the day long have I 2 Remember thy congregation, 
been plagued, and chastened every which thou hast purchased of old; 
See roth Heine fe for rs pane nee which 

say, will spea US; ou hast ‘redeemed; this mount 
behold, I should offend againsz the Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt. 
generation of thy children. 4 3 Lift up thy feet unto the per- 
ya aires I ea to know this, od hess See even He see, 
was too painful for me; enemy hath do ickedly i 
17_Until I went into the sanctuary the sanctuary. sateen 
of God; then understood I their 4 JThine enemies roar in the midst 
eng 2 } | of thy congregations; ‘they set up 
urely thou didst set them in their ensigns for signs. 


Mount describes the kingdom righteousness. Verses 8-11 speak of the universality 
of the kingdom. Verse 16 hints at the means by which universal blessing is to be 
brought in. Converted Israel will be the “handful of corn” (Amos 9. 9) as the 
King Himself in death and resurrection was the single grain, the “corn of wheat” 
(John 12. 24). “To the Jew first” is the order alike of Church and kingdom (Rom. 
1. 16; Acts 13. 46; 15. 16, 17). It is through restored Israel that the kingdom is to 


be extended over the earth (Zech. 8. 13, 20-23). See Psa. 89., the next in order of 
the Messianic Psalms. 
634. 


: 


74 5} 


5 A man was famous according 
as he had lifted up axes upon the 
thick trees. 

6 But now they break down the 
carved work thereof at once with 
axes and hammers. 

7 2They have cast fire into thy 
sanctuary, they have defiled by 
casting down the dwelling place 
of thy name to the ground. 

8 They said in their hearts, Let us 
destroy them together: they have 
burned up all the synagogues of 
God in the land. 

9 We see not our signs: there is 
no bmore any prophet: neither is 
there among us any that knoweth 
how long. 

10 O God, how long shall the ad- 
versary reproach? shall the enemy 
blaspheme thy name for ever? 

11 Why withdrawest thou thy 
hand, even thy right hand? pluck 
it out of thy bosom. 

12 For ‘God is my King of old, 
working salvation in the midst of 
the earth. 

13 Thou didst ¢divide the sea by 
thy strength: thou brakest the heads 
of the dragons in the waters. 

14 Thou brakest the heads of levi- 
athan in pieces, and gavest him to 
be meat to the people inhabiting 
the wilderness. 

15 ¢eThou didst cleave the foun- 
tain and, the flood: /thou driedst up 
mighty rivers. 

16 The day is thine, the night 
also is thine: &thou hast prepared 
the light and the sun. 

17 Thou hast “set all the borders 
of the earth: ‘thou hast made sum- 
mer and winter. 

18 Rememberthis, thattheenemy 
‘hath reproached, O Lorn, and that 
the foolish people have blasphemed 
thy name. ; 

19 O deliver not the soul jof thy 
turtledove unto the multitude of 
the wicked: forget not the con- 
gregation of thy poor for ever. 

20 *Have respect unto the cove- 
nant: for the dark places of the 


earth are full of the habitations of} 


cruelty. 

21 O let not the oppressed return 
ashamed: let the poor and needy 
praise thy name. 

22 Arise, O God, plead thine own 
cause: remember how the foolish 
man reproacheth thee daily. 

23 Forget not the voice of thine 
enemies: the tumult of those that 
rise up against thee /increaseth 
continually. 


- PSALMS. 


a Heb. they 
have sent 
thy sanc- 
tuary into 
the fire. 


61 Sam.3.1; 
Amos 8.11. 


¢ Psa.44.4. 

d Heb. break. 

e Ex.17.5,6; 
Num.20.11; 
Psa.105.41; 
Isa.48.21. 

F Josh.3.13. 

g Gen.1.14, 

h Acts 17.26. 

# Gen.8.22. 

j Song 2.14. 


k Gen.17.7,8; 
Lev.26.44,45. 

1 Heb. as- 
cendeth. 
Jon.1.2. 


m Al-taschith, 
destroy not. 


n Zech.1.21. 


pb Psa.101.8; 
Jer.48.25. 


q Psa.89:17; 
148.14. 


r Neginoth, 


{Ex.15.1,21; 
Ezk.39.20; 
Nah.2.13; 
Zech.12.4. 


635 


[76 9 


PSALM 75. 


To the chief Musician, Al-taschith, 
A Psalm or Song of Asaph. 


jE eae! thee, O God, do we give 
thanks, unto thee do we 
give thanks: for that thy name is 
near thy wondrous works declare. 

2 When I shall receive the con- 
gregation I will judge uprightly. _ 

3 The earth and all the inhabi- 
tants thereof are dissolved: I bear 
up the pillars of it. Selah. 

4 I said unto the fools, Deal not 
foolishly: and to the wicked, nLiit 
not up the horn: 

5 Lift not up your horn on high: 
speak not with a stiff neck. 

6 For promotion cometh neither 
from the east, nor from the west 
nor from the south. 

7 But God ‘s the judge: he putteth 
down one, and setteth up another. 

8 For °in the hand of the Lorp 
there is a cup, and the wine is red; 
it is full of mixture; and he poureth 
out of the same: but the dregs 
thereof, all the wicked of the earth 
shall wring them out, and drink 
them. 

9 But I will declare for ever; I 
will sing praises to the God of 
Jacob. 

10 *All the horns of the wicked 
also will I cut off; %but the horns 
of the righteous shall be exalted. 


PSALM 76. 


To the chief Musician on *Neginoth, 
A Psalm or Song of Asaph. 


i he: Judah is God known: his name 
is great in Israel. 

2 In Salem also is his tabernacle, 
and his dwelling place in Zion. 

3 There brake he the arrows of 
the bow, the shield, and the sword, 
and the battle. Selah. 

4 Thou art more glorious and ex- 
cellent than the mountains of prey. 

5 The stouthearted are spoiled, 
they have slept their sleep: and 
none of the men of might have 
found their hands. 

6 ‘At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, 
both the chariot and horse are cast 


‘into a dead sleep. 


7 Thou, even thou, art to be 
feared: and who may stand in thy 
sight when once thou art angry? 

8 Thou didst cause judgment to 
be heard from heaven; the earth 
feared, and was still, 

9 When God arose to judgment, 


praise thee: the remainder of wrath 
shalt thou restrain. 

11 Vow, and pay unto the LorpD 
your God: let all that be round 
about him bring presents unto him 
that ought to be feared. k 

12 He shall cut. off the spirit. of 
princes: he is terrible to the kings 


of the earth. 
PSALM 77. 2 See Psa.39, 
Tothe chief Musician, to 7Jeduthun,| ttle, note. 
A Psalm of Asaph. ' b Hebagoalt 
I CRIED unto God with my voice, ae = 
even unto God with my voice;| type). Isa. 
and he gave ear unto me. 59.20, note. 


2 Inthe day of my trouble I sought 
the Lord: my sore ran in the night, 
and ceased not: my soul refused to 
be comforted. 


struction. 


d Israel (his- 


tory). vs.1- 
3 I remembered God, and was} 72; Psa.106. 
troubled:. I complained, and my| 1;46-, (Gen. 
spirit was overwhelmed. Selah. Rom.11.26.) 
4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: 
I am so troubled that I cannot] ¢Mt-13.35. 
speak. f Psa.147.19. 
5 I have considered the days of 
old, the years of ancient times. g SS 
6 I call to remembrance my song| °“*? ~***" 
in the night: I commune with mine]; Heb. that 
own heart: and my spirit made dili-| P moana 
gent search. jake poet 
7 Will the Lord cast off for ever? 1 
and will he be favourable no more?} #2 Ki.17.15. 
8 Is his mercy clean gone for] ; yaw (of 
ever? doth Ais promise fail for|’ Moses). vs. 
evermore? 7 Toe 
9 Hath God forgotten to be gra- Gist x 
cious? hath he in anger shut up his} Gall3.1-29.) 


tender mercies? Selah. 

10 And I said, This 7s my infirm- 
ity: but I willremember the years 
of the right hand of the most High. 

11 I will remember the works of 
the Lorp: surely I will remember 
thy wonders of old. 

12 I will meditate also of all thy 
work, and talk of thy doings. 

13 Thy way, O God, is in the 
sanctuary: who is so great a God 
as our God? 

14 Thou art the God that doest 
wonders: thou hast declared thy 
strength among the people. 

15 Thou hast with thine arm ¢re- 
deemed thy people, the sons of 
Jacob and Joseph. Selah. 

16 The waters saw thee, O God, 
the waters saw thee; they were 
ps the depths also were trou- 


636 


PSALMS. 


c¢ Maschil, in- 


17 The clouds poured out water: 
the skies sent out a sound: thine 
arrows also went abroad. 

18 The voice of thy thunder was 
in the: heaven: the lightnings light- 
ened the world: the earth trembled 
and shook. 

19 Thy way 1s in the sea, and thy 
path in the great waters, and thy 
footsteps are not known. 

20 Thou leddest thy people like 
a flock by the hand of Moses and 
Aaron. 


PSALM 78. 
‘Maschil of Asaph. 


Gwe ear, O my people, to my 
law: incline your ears to the 
words of my ¢mouth. 

2 I will open my mouth in a ¢para- 
ble: I will utter dark sayings of old: 

3 Whichwe have heard andknown, 
and our fathers have told us. 

4 Wewillnot hide them fromtheir 
children, shewing to the generation 


to come the praises of the Lorpb, 
and his strength, and his wonder- 
ful works that he hath done. 

5 fFor he established a testimony 
in Jacob, and appointed a law in 
Israel, which he commanded our 
fathers, &that they should make 
them known to their children: 

6 That the generation to come 
might know them, even the chil- 
dren which should be born; who 
should arise and declare them to 
their children: 

7 That they might set their hope 
in God, and not forget the works of 
God, but keep his commandiments: 

8 And might not beas their fathers, 


a stubborn and rebellious genera- 
tion; a generation “that set not 
their heart aright, and: whose spirit 
was not stedfast with God. 

9 The children of Ephraim, being 
armed, and carrying bows, turned 
back in the day of battle. 

10 ‘They kept not the covenant 
of God, and refused to walk in his 
Naw; 

11 And forgat his works, and his 
wonders that he had shewed' them. 

12 Marvellous things did hein the 
sight of their fathers, in the land of 
Egypt, in the field of Zoan. 

13 He divided'the sea, and caused 
them to pass through; and he made 
the waters to stand as an heap: 

14 In the daytime also he led 
them with a cloud, and all the night 
with a light of fire. 

15 He clave the rocks in the wil- 


78 16] 


derness, and gave them drink as 
out of the great depths. 

16 He brought streams also out of 
the rock, and caused waters to run 
down like rivers. 

17 And they sinned yet more 
against him by provoking the most 
High in the wilderness. 

18 Andthey *tempted Godin their 
heart by asking meat for their lust. 

19 Yea, they spake against God; 
they said, Can God furnish a table 
in the wilderness? 

20 Behold, he smote the rock, 
that the waters gushed out, and 
the streams overflowed; can he give 
bread also? can he provide flesh 
for his people? 

21 Therefore the LorpD heard 
this, and was wroth: so a fire was 
kindled against Jacob, and anger 
also came up against Israel; 

22 Because they believed not in 
God, and “trusted not in his salva- 
tion: 

23 Though he had commanded the 
clouds from above, and opened the 
doors of heaven, 

24 And had rained down manna 
upon them to eat, and had given 
them of the corn of ‘heaven. 

25 Man did eat ¢angels’ food: he 
sent them meat to the full. 

26 “He caused an east wind to 
blow in the heaven: and by his 
power he brought in the south 
wind. 

27 Herained flesh also upon them 
as dust, and feathered fowls like as 
the sand of the sea: 

28 And he let it fall in the midst 
of their camp, round about their 
habitations. 

29 fSo they did eat, and were well 
filled: for he gave them their own 
desire; 

30 They were not estranged from 
their lust. But while their meat 
was yet in their mouths, 

31 The wrath of God came upon 
them, and slew the fattest of them, 
and smote down the chosen men 
of Israel. 3 : 

32 For all this they sinned still, 
and believed not for his wondrous 
works. : 

33 Therefore their days did he 
consume in vanity, and their years 
in trouble. 

34 tWhen he slew them, then 
they sought him: and they returned 
and enquired early after God. 

35 And they remembered that 
' God was their rock, and the high 
God their ‘redeemer. 


PSALMS. 


a Tempta- 
tion. vs. 
18,41,56; 
Psa.95.9. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.2.) 


6 Psa.2.12, 
note. 


c John 6.31. 


d Heb.1.4, 
note. 


e Num.11.31. 
f Num.11.20. 
g Num.11.33. 
h Hos.5.15. 

7 Bx.15.13; 
Deut.7.8; 
Isa.41.14; 
44.6; 63.9. 

j Ezk.33.31. 


k Num.14:18, 
20. 

1 Psa.103.14, 
16. 

m Job 7.7,16; 


Jas.4.14. 


n Num.14.22; 
Deut.6.16. 


0 i.e. nations. 
pb Psa.136.21; 


Josh.13.7; 
19.51. 


637 


[78 55 


36 Nevertheless they did /flatter 
him with their mouth, and they lied 
unto him with their tongues. 

37 For their heart was not right 
with him, neither were they sted- 
fast in his covenant. 

38 But he, being full of compas- 
sion, forgave their iniquity, and de- 
stroyed them not: yea, many a 
time turned he his anger away, and 
did not stir up all his wrath. 

39 /'For he remembered that they 
were but flesh; ”a wind that pass- 
eth away, and cometh not again. 

40 How oft did they provoke him 
in the wilderness, and grieve him 
in the desert! 

41 Yea, “they turned back and 
tempted God, and limited the Holy 
One of Israel. 

42 They remembered not his hand, 
nor the day when he delivered them 
from the enemy. 

43 How he had wrought his signs 
in Egypt, and his wonders in the 
field of Zoan: 

44 And had turned their rivers 
into blood; and their floods, that 
they could not drink. 

45 He sent divers sorts of flies 
among them, which devoured them; 
and frogs, which destroyed them. 

46 He gave also their increase 
unto the caterpiller, and their 
labour unto the locust. 

47 He destroyed their vines with 
hail, and their sycomore trees with 
frost. 

48 He gave up their cattle also to 
the hail, and their flocks to hot 
thunderbolts. 

49 He cast upon them the fierce- 
ness of his anger, wrath, and indig- 
nation, and trouble, by sending evil 
angels amoné them. 

50 He made a way to his anger; 
he spared not their soul from death, 
but gave their life over to the pes- 
tilence; 

51 And smote all the firstborn in 
Egypt; the chief of their strength 
in the tabernacles of Ham: 

52 But made his own people to go 
forth like sheep, and guided them 
in the wilderness like a flock. 

53 And he led them on safely, so 
that they feared not: but the sea 
overwhelmed their enemies. 

54 And he brought them to the 
border of his sanctuary, even to 
this mountain, which his right hand 
lad purchased. 

55 He cast out the “heathen also 


|before them, and ?divided them an 


inheritance by line, and made the 


78 56] 


PSALMS. 


’ oe ,. Lae 


8 


[80 


tribes of Israel to dwell in their 
tents. 

56 *Yet they tempted and pro- 
voked the most high God, and kept 
not his testimonies: 

57 But °turned back, and dealt 
unfaithfully like their fathers: they 
were turned aside like a deceitful 
bow. : 

58 For they provoked him to an- 
ger with their chigh places, and 
moved him to jealousy with their 
graven images. 

59 When God heard this, he was 
wroth,-and greatly abhorred Israel: 

60 4¢So that he forsook the taber- 
nacle of Shiloh, the tent which he 
placed among men; 

61 And delivered his strength into 
captivity, and his glory into the 
enemy’s hand. 

62 «He gave his people over also 
unto the sword; and was wroth 
with his inheritance. 

63 The fire consumed their young 
men; and ftheir maidens were not 
given to marriage. 

64 Their priests fell by the sword; 
and their widows made no lamenta- 
tion. 

65 Then the Lord awaked as one 
out of sleep, and likea mighty man 
that shouteth by reason of wine. 

66 And he smote his enemies in 
the hinder parts: he put them to a 
perpetual reproach. 

67 Moreover he refused the taber- 
nacle of Joseph, and chose not the 
tribe of Ephraim: 

68 But chose the tribe of Judah, 
the mount Zion &which he loved. 

69 And he built his sanctuary like 
high palaces, like the earth which 
he hath established for ever. 

70 *He chose David also his ser- 
vant, and took him from the sheep- 
folds: 

71 From following the ewes great 
with young he brought him ‘to feed 
Jacob his people, and Israel his 
inheritance. 

72 So he fed them according to 
the Jintegrity of his heart; and 
guided them by the skilfulness of 
his hands. 


PSALM 79. 
A Psalm of Asaph. 
O GOD, the *heathen are come 
into thine inheritance; thy 


holy temple have they defiled; 
‘they have laid Jerusalem on 
eaps. 

2 The dead bodies of thy servants 


@ Jud.2.11,12. 


6 v.41; Ezk. 
20.27,28; 
Hos.7.16. 


c Deut.12.2,4; 
1 Ki.11.7; 
1. 


d 1 Sam.4.11; 
Jer.7.12,14; 


6,9. 


ei Sam.4.10. 

f Jer.7.34; 

16.9; 25.10. 

g Psa.87.2. 

k 1 Sam.16. 
11,12; 2 Sam. 
7.8. 


¢ 2 Sam.5.2; 
1 Chr.11.2. 


j1Ki.9.4, 
ki.e. nations, 
1 2 Ki.25.9,10; 
2 Chr.36.19; 
Mic.3.12. 
m Psa.44.13; 
80.6. 
n Isa.45.4,53 
2 Thes.1.8. 
o Jer.14.7,21. 


p Psa.74.13; 
95.7; 100.3. 


q See Psa.45, 
title, note. 


y Ex.25.20,22; 
1 Sam.4.4; 
2 Sam.6.2; 
Psa.99.1. 


s Psa.4.6; 
67.1; Num. 
6.25. 


t Psa.42.3; 
102.9; Isa, 


30.20, 


638 


have they given to be meat unto 
the fowls of the heaven, the flesh 
of thy saints unto the beasts of the 


e ‘ 
3 Their blood have they shed like 

water round about Jerusalem; and 

there was none to bury them. 

4 ™We are become a reproach to 
our neighbours, a scorn and derision 
to them that are round about us. 

5 How long, Lorp? wilt thou be 
angry for ever? shall thy jealousy 
burn like fire? 

6 Pour out thy wrath upon the 
Eheathen that have “not known 
thee, and upon the kingdoms that 
have not called upon thy name. 

7 For they have devoured Jacob, 
and laid waste his dwelling place. 

8 Oremember not against us for- 
mer iniquities: let thy tender mer- 
cies speedily prevent us: for we are 
brought very low. 

§ Help us, O God of our salvation, 
for the glory of thy name: and 
deliver us, and purge away our 
isins, for thy name’s sake. 
| 10 Wherefore should the “heathen 
say, Where is their God? let him 
be known among the “heathen in 
our sight by the revenging of the 
blood of thy servants which is shed. 

11 Let the sighing of the prisoner 
come before thee; according to the 
greatness of thy power preserve 
oe those that are appointed to 

€; 

12 And render unto our neigh- 
bours sevenfold into their bosom 
their reproach, wherewith they 
have reproached thee, O Lord. 

13 So we thy people and sheep of 
thy pasture will give thee thanks 
for ever: we will shew forth thy 
praise to all generations. 


PSALM 80. 


To the chief Musician upon ¢Sho- 
shannim-Eduth, A Psalm of 
Asaph. 


han ear, O Shepherd of Israel, 
thou that leadest Joseph like 
a flock; ‘thou that dwellest be- 
tween the cherubims, shine forth. 

2 Before Ephraim and Benjamin 
and Manasseh stir up thy strength, 
and come and save us. 

3 Turn us again, O God, and 
Scause thy face to shine; and we 
shall be saved. 

4 OLorpD God of hosts, how long 
wilt thou be angry against the 
prayer of thy people? 

5 ‘Thou feedest them with the 


80 6] PSALMS. 


bread of tears; and givest them 
tears to drink in great measure. 

6 Thou makest us a strife unto 
our neighbours: and our enemies 
laugh among themselves. 

7 Turn us again, O God of hosts, 
and cause thy face to shine; and 
we shall be saved. 

8 Thou hast brought a ¢vine out 
of Egypt: thou hast cast out the 
+heathen, and planted it. 

9 Thou preparedst room before it, 
and didst cause it to take deep 
root, and it filled the land. 

10 The hills were covered with), y..537; 
the shadow of it, and the boughs] Jer.2.21;' 
thereof were like the goodly cedars.| Ezk-15.6; 

11 She sent out her boughs unto) 17-6 19-10- 


the sea, and her branches unto the|6 ice. nations. 


river. 

12 Why hast thou then broken! ¢ 12-63-15. 
down, her poets so eae ok they 41sa.49.5. 
which pass e Wi o pluc 
eesti ae SUN oper 

13 The boar out of the wood doth ‘ x 
waste it, and the wild beast of the} fLev.23.24; 
field doth devour it. miarmte 20; 

14 Return, we beseech thee, O God | ¢ Ex.2.23; 
cf hosts: ‘look down from heaven,| 14-16; 
and behold, and visit this vine; 50.15. 

15 And the vineyard which thy), z#x.19.19. 
right hand hath planted, and the]. 
branch that thou madest strong| ‘ $™17.6.75, 
¢for thyself. i ae 

16 It is burned with fire, it is cut} 7 Deut.32.12; 
down: they perish at the rebuke of| %52-45-12- 

_-thy countenance. k Ex.20.2. 

17 Let thy hand be upon the man 
of thy right hand, upon the son of|/ Acts 7.42) 
man neg thou madest strong for] 1.24,26. 
thyself. 

18 So will not we go back from|™Psuts.29; 
thee: quicken us, and we will call) 32:29; isa. 
upon thy name. 48.18. 

19 Turn us again, O Lorn God of |,» cnr 19.6: 
hosts, cause thy face to shine; and| feels. * 
we shall be saved. cae 


PSALM 81. 


To the chief Musician upon ¢Gittith, 
A Psalm of Asaph. 


ING aloud unto God our 
strength: make a joyful noise 
unto the God of Jacob. ! 

2 Take a psalm, and bring hither 
the timbrel, the pleasant harp with 
the psaltery. A 

3 Blow up the trumpet in the new 
moon, in the time appointed, on 
our solemn feast day. 

4 For /this was a statute for Is- 
rael, and a law of the God of Jacob. 

5 This he ordained in Joseph for 
a testimony, when he went out 


639 


[82.6 


through the land of Egypt: where 
I heard a language that I under- 
stood not. 

6 Iremoved his shoulder from the 
burden: his hands were delivered 
from the pots. 

7 &Thou calledst in trouble, and 
I delivered thee; 7I answered thee 
in the secret place of thunder: I 
iproved thee at the waters of 
Meribah. Selah. 

8 Hear, O my people, and I will 
testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou 
wilt hearken unto me; 

_9 There shall Jno strange god be 
in thee; neither shalt thou worship 
any strange god. 

10 *I am the Lorp thy God, 
which brought thee out of the land 
of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, 
and I will fill it. 

11 But my people would not 
hearken to my voice; and Israel 
would none of me. 

12 ‘SoI gave them up unto their 
own hearts’ lust: and they walked 
in their own counsels. 

13 ™Oh that my people had heark- 
ened unto me, and Israel had 
walked in my ways! 

14 I should soon have subdued 
their enemies, and turned my hand 
against their adversaries. 

15 The haters of the LorD should 
have submitted themselves unto 
him: but their time should have 
endured for ever. 

16 He should have fed them also 
with the finest of the wheat: and 
with honey out of the rock should 
I have satisfied thee. 


PSALM 82. 
A Psalm of Asaph. 


OD *standeth in the congrega- 
tion of the mighty; he judgeth 
among the gods. 

2 How long will ye judge unjustly, 
and accept the persons of the 
wicked? Selah. 

3 Defend the poor and fatherless: 
do justice to the afflicted and 
needy. 

4 Deliver the poor and needy: rid 
them out of the hand of the 
wicked. 

5 They know not, neither will they 
understand; they walk on in dark- 
ness: all the foundations of the 
earth are out of course. 

6 I have said, °Ye are gods; and 
all of yon are children of the most 
High. 


827) 


7 But ye shall die like men, and 
| fall like one of the princes: 

8 Arise, O God, judge the earth: 
bfor thou shalt inherit all nations. 


PSALM 83. 
A Song or Psalm of Asaph. 


EEP not thou silence, O God: 
hold not thy peace, and be not 
still, O God. 

2 For, lo, ‘thine enemies make a 
tumult: and they that hate thee 
have lifted up the head. 

3 They have taken crafty counsel 
against thy people, and consulted 
against thy hidden ones. 

4 They have said, Come, and 4let 
us. cut them off from being a nation: 
that the name of Israel may be no 
more in remembrance. 

5 For they have consulted to- 
gether with one ‘consent: they are 
confederate against thee: 

6 The tabernacles of Edom, and 
the Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the 
Hagarenes; 

7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Ama- 
lek; the Philistines with the inhabi- 
tants of Tyre; 

8 Assur also is joined with them: 
they have fholpen the children of 
Lot. Selah. : 

9 Do unto them as unto the 
eMidianites; as to ‘Sisera, as to 
Jabin, at the brook of Kison: 

10° Which perished at En-dor: 
they became as dung for the 
earth. 

11 Make their nobles like ‘Oreb, 
and like Zeeb: yea, all their princes 
as JZebah, and as Zalmunna: 

12 Who said, Let us take to our- 
selves the houses of God in posses- 
sion, 

13° O my God, make them like a 
wheel; as the stubble before the 
wind. 

14 As the fire burneth a wood, and 
as the flame setteth the mountains 
on fire; 

15 So persecute them with thy 
tempest, and make them afraid 
with thy storm. 

16. Fill their faces with shame: 
that they may seek thy name, O 
Lorpb. 

17 Let them be confounded and 
troubled for ever; yea, let them be 
put to shame, and perish: 

18 That men may know that 
thou, whose ‘name alone is JE- 
HOVAH, art the most high over 
all the earth, 


PSALMS. 


a Mic.7.2,7. 


6 Psa.2.8; 
Rev.11.15. 


¢ Psa.2.1; 
Acts 4.25. 


d See Esth.3. 
6,9; Jer.11. 
19; 31.30. 


e Heb. heart. 


f Heb. they 
have been 
an arm to 
the children 
of Lot. 


g Num.31.7; 
Jud.7.22. 


h Jad.4.15,24; 
5.21. 


# Jud.7.25. 
Jj Jud.8,12,21. 
k Ex.6.3: 


|] See Psa.8, 
title, note. 


m Psa.27.4. 


n Psa:42.1,2; 
63.1; 73.26; 
119.20. 


o Or, weep- 
ing. Nota 
literal valley, 
but any place 
of tears. Cf. 
Psa.23.4. 


> Gen.15.1. 


q Heb. I would 
choose 
rather to 
sit at the 
threshold. 


r Psa.34.9,10. 

s Faith, Psa. 
125.1. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 


t Psa.14.7; 


640 


[85 4 


PSALM 84. 


To the chief Musician upon /Gittith, 
A Psalm for the sons of Korah. 


How mamiable are thy taberna- 
cles, O LorD of hosts! 

2 "My soul Iongeth, yea, even 
fainteth for the courts of the Lorb: 
my heart and my flesh crieth out 
for the living God. 

3 Yea, the sparrow hath found an 
house, and the swallow a nest for 
herself, where she may lay her 
young, even thine altars, O Lorp 
of hosts, my King, and my God. 

4 Blessed are they that dwell in 
thy house: they will be still prais- 
ing thee. Selah. 

5 Blessed is the man whose 
strength zs in thee; in whose heart 
are the ways of them. 

6 Who passing through the valley 
of “Baca make it a well; the rain 
also filleth the pools. 

7 They go from strength to 
strength, every one of them in 
Zion appeareth before God. 

8 O LorD God of hosts, hear my 
prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. 
Selah. 

9 Behold, ?0 God our shield, and 
look upon the face of thine 
anointed. 

10 For a day in thy courts fs bet- 
ter than.a thousand. 4I had rather 
be a doorkeeper in the house of my 
God, than to dwell in the tents of 
wickedness. 

11 For the LorD God isa sun and 
shield: the Lorp will give grace 
and glory: ’no good thing will he 
withhold from them that waik up- 
rightly. 

12 OLorRD of hosts, blessed is the 
man that Strusteth in thee. 


PSALM 85, 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm for 
the sons of Korah. 


T-ORD, thou hast been favourable 
unto thy land: thou hast 
‘brought back the captivity of 
Jacob. 

2 Thou hast forgiven the iniquity 
of thy people, thou hast covered all 
their sin. Selah. 

3 Thou hast taken away all thy 
wrath: thou hast turned thyself 
from the fierceness of thine 
anger. 

4 Turn us, O God of our salvation, 


and cause thine anger toward us to 
cease, 


85 5] 


5 Wilt thou be angry with us for 
ever? wilt thou draw out thine 
anger to all generations? 

6 Wilt thou not revive us again: 
that thy people may rejoice in thee? 

7 Shew us thy mercy, O Lorpb, 
and grant us thy salvation. 

8 I will hear what God the LorD 
will speak: for he will speak peace 
unto his people, and to his saints: 
but let them not turn again to folly. 

9 Surely ‘his salvation zs nigh 
them that ¢fear him; that glory may 
dwell in our land. 

10 Mercy and truth are met 
together; “righteousness and peace 
have kissed each other. 

11 Truth shall spring out of the 
earth; and righteousness shall look 
down from heaven. 

12 Yea, the LorD shall give that 
which is good; and our land shall 
yield her increase. 

13 Righteousness shall go before 
him; and shall set us in the way of 
his steps. 


PSALM 86. 
A Prayer of David. 


Bow down thine ear, O Lorb, 
hear me: for I am poor and 
needy. 

2 Preserve my soul; for I am 
holy: O thou my God, save thy ser- 
vant that ‘trusteth in thee. 

3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: 
for I cry unto thee-daily. 

4 Rejoice the soul.of thy servant: 
@for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up 
my soul. 

5 For thou, Lord, art good, and 
ready to forgive; and plenteous in 
mercy unto all them that call upon 


“thee, 


6 Give ear, O LORD, unto my 
prayer; and attend to the voice of 


‘my supplications. 


7 In the day of my trouble I will 
call upon thee: for thou wilt answer 


‘me. 

8 fAmong the gods there js none 
like unto thee, O Lord; neither are 
there any works like unto thy 
works. 

9 All nations whom thou hast 
made shall come and worship be- 
fore thee, O Lord; and shall glorify 
thy name. 

10 For thou art great, and doest 
wondrous things: thou art God 
alone. 

11 Teach me thy way, O Lorp; I 
will walk in thy truth: unite my 
heart to “fear thy name. 


PSALMS. 


a Psa.19.9, 
note. 


b Psa.72.3; 
Isa.32.17; 
Lk.2.14. 


¢ Psa,2.12,_ 
note. 


d Psa.25.1; 
143.8. 


ev-15; Psa. 
130.7; 145.9; 
Joel 2.13. 


f Ex.15.11; 
Psa.89.6. 


g Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note. 


h v.5; Psa. 


i Psa.89.10; 
Isa.51.9. 


j Ezk.13.9. 


k Or, M’hé- 
16th, mean- 
ing dancing 
with glad 


noises. 


| Maschil, in- 
struction. 


m Lk.18.7. 


O41 


[88 3 


12 I will praise thee, O Lord my 
God, with all my heart: and I will 
glorify thy name for evermore. 

13 For great zs thy mercy toward 
me: and thou hast delivered my 
soul from the lowest ‘hell. 

14 O God, the proud are risen 
against me, and the assemblies of 
violent men have sought after my 
soul; and have not set thee before 
them. 

15 “But thou, O Lord, art a God 
full of compassion, and gracious, 
longsuffering, and plenteous in 
merey and truth. 

16 O turn unto me, and have 
mercy upon me; give thy strength 
unto thy servant, and save the son 
of thine handmaid. 

17 Shew mea token for good; that 
they which hate me may see it, and 
be ashamed: because thou, LORD, 
hast holpen me, and comforted me. 


PSALM 87. 


A Psalm or Song for the sons. 
of Korah. 


Hs foundation is in the holy 
mountains. 

2 The Lorp loveth the gates of 
Zion more than all the dwellings 
of Jaccb. 

3 Glorious things are spoken of 
thee, O city of God. Selah, 

4 I will make mention of ‘Rahab 
and Babylon to them that know 
me: behold Philistia, and Tyre, 
with Ethiopia; this man was born 
there. ; 

5 And of Zion it shall be said, 
This and that man was born in 
her: and the highest himself shall 
establish her. 

6 The LorpD shall count, when he 
jwriteth up the people, that this 
man was born there. Selah. 

7 As well the singers as the 
players on instruments shall be 
there: all my springs are in thee. 


PSALM 88. 


A Song or Psalm for the sons of 
Korah, to the chief Musician 
upon *Mahalath Leannoth, ‘Mas- 
chil of Heman the Ezrahite. 


LORD God of my salvation, T 
have “cried day and night be- 


fore thee: 
2 Let my prayer come before 


thee: incline thine ear unto my 


cry; 
3 For my soul is full of troubles: 


88 4] 


PSALMS. 


ee a 


i th ni to the}c Heb. Sheol. | 4 Thy seed will I establish for 
goates eas ah ie dias eon * See Hab. ever, and build up thy throne “to 


4 +I am counted with them that 
' go down into the pit? “I am as a 
man that hath no strength: 

5 Free among the dead, like the 
slain that lie in the grave, whom 
thou rememberest no more: and 
they are cut off from thy hand. 

6 Thou hast laid me in the lowest 
pit, in darkness, in the deeps. 

7 Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, 
and ¢thou hast afflicted me with all 
thy waves. Selah. 

8 ‘Thou hast put away mine ac- 
quaintance far from me; thou hast 
made me an abomination unto 
them: ST am shut up, and I cannot 
come forth. 

9 Mine eye mourneth by reason 
of affliction: SLorp, I have called 
daily upon thee, I have stretched 
out my hands unto thee. 

10 Wilt thou shew wonders to the 
dead? shall the “dead arise and 
praise thee? Selah. 

11 Shall thy lovingkindness be 
declared in the grave? or thy faith- 
fulness in destruction? 

12 Shall thy wonders be known in 
the dark? and thy righteousness 
in the land of forgetfulness? 

13 But unto thee have I cried, O 
Lorp; and in the morning shall 
my prayer prevent thee. 

14 LorD, why castest thou off my 
soul? ‘why hidest thou thy face 
from me? 

15 I am afflicted and ready to die 
from my youth up: while I suffer 
thy terrors I am distracted. 

16 Thy fierce wrath goeth over 
me; thy terrors have cut me off. 

17 They came round about me 
daily like water; they compassed 
me about together. 

18 jLover and friend hast thou 
put far from me, and mine ac- 
quaintance into darkness. 


PSALM 89. 
RMaschil of Ethan the Ezrahite. 


T WILL sing of the mercies of the 
Lorp for ever: with my mouth 
will I make known thy faithfulness 
to all generations. 

2 For I have said, Mercy. shall be 
built up for ever: thy faithfulness 
shalt thou establish in the very 
heavens. 

3 I have made a /covenant with 
my chosen, I have sworn unto 
David my servant, 


2.5, note. 
6 Psa.28.1. 
¢ Psa.31.12. 
d Psa.42.7. 


e Psa.31.11; 
142.4; Job 
19.13,19. 


f Lam.3.7. 
g Psa.86.3. 


h Eccl.9.10, 
note. 

i Mt.27.46; 
Mk.15.34. 


j Psa.31.11; 
38.11; Job 
19.13. 


k Maschil, in- 
struction. 


| Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs. 
3,4,20,21,28- 
36; Isa.1.25, 


m 2 Sam.7.11; 
1 Chr.17.10. 
See Jer.30.9; 
Ezk.34.23; 
Hos.3.5. 


nv.1; Lk.1. 
«32,33. 
o Psa.40.5; 


71.19; 86.8; 
113.5. 


> Psa.35.10; 
71.19; Ex.15. 
11; 1 Sam. 
es 


q Psa.65.7; 93. 
3,4; 107.29. 


r Psa.87.4; Ex. 
14.26-28; Isa. 
30.7; 51.9. 


s Or, Egypt. 
t Josh.19.22. 
u Josh.12.1. 


v Heb. an arm 
with might. 


w Psa.98.6; 
Num.10.10; 
23.21. 

x v.24; Psa. 
75.10; 92.10; 
132.17. 

¥ v.33; 1 Ki. 
11.34. 


z Acts 13.22. 


a Reb. 
qgodesh, 


b Sanctify, 
holy (O.T.). 
Jer.1.5. 
(Gen.2.3; 
Zech.8.3.) 


642 


all generations. Selah. 3 

5 And the heavens shall praise 
thy wonders, O Lorp: thy faithful- 
ness also in the congregation of the 
saints. 

6 °For who in the heaven can be 
compared unto the LorD? who 
among the sons of the mighty can 
be likened unto the LorD? 

7 God is greatly to be feared in 
the assembly of the saints, and to 
be had in reverence of all them 
that are about him. 

8 O LorD God of hosts, who is a 
strong LORD ?like unto thee? or 
to thy faithfulness’ round about 
thee? 

9 @Thou rulest the raging of the 
sea: when the waves thereof arise, 
thou stillest them. 

10 *Thou hast broken sRahab in 
pieces, as one that is slain; thou 
hast scattered thine enemies with 
thy strong arm. 

11 The heavens are thine, the 
earth also 1s thine: as for the world 
and the fulness thereof, thou hast 
founded them. 

12 The north and the south thou 
hast created them: ‘Tabor and 
“Hermon shall rejoice in thy name. 

13 Thou hast a "mighty arm: 
strong is thy hand, and high is thy 
right hand. 

14 Justice and judgment are the 
habitation of thy throne: mercy 
and truth shall go before thy 
face. 

15 Blessed ss the people that 
know the “joyful sound: they shall 
walk, O Lor», in the light of thy 
countenance. 

16 In thy name shall they rejoice 
all the day: and in thy righteous- 
ness shall they be exalted. 

17 For thou art the glory of their 
strength: *and in thy favour our 
horn shall be exalted, 

18 For the Lorp /s our defence; 
and the Holy One of Israel is our 
king. 

19 Then thou spakest in vision to 
thy holy one, and saidst, I have laid 
help upon one that is mighty; I 
have exalted one ‘chosen out of the 
people. 

20 I have found David my ‘ser- 
vant; with my “holy 4oil have I 
anointed him: 

21 With whom my hand shall be 
established: mine arm also shall 
strengthen him. 

! 22 The enemy shall not exact upon 


~ok 


89 23} PSALMS. | [89 82 


5 ; 
him; nor the son of wickedness horred, thou hast been wroth with 
afflict him: | : thine anointed. 

23 And I will beat down his foes 39 Thou hast made void the cove- 
before his face, and plague them nant of thy servant: thou hast pro- 
that hate him. | faned his crown by casting it to the 

24 But my faithfulness and my ground. 
mercy shall be with him: and in 40 Thou hast broken down all his 
my name shall his horn be ex- hedges; thou hast brought his 
ated ‘ L strong holds to ruin. 

2501 ie set his hand also in the 41 All that pass by the way spoil 
sea, and his right hand in the him: he is a reproach to his neigh- 
Tivers. bours. : 

26 He shall cry unto me, Thou 42 Thou hast set up the right 
art my father, my God, and the hand of his adversaries; thou 
rock of my salvation. | hast made all his enemies to re- 

27 Also I will make him my first- joice. 
born, higher 1than the kings of the 43 Thou hast also turned the edge 
earth. 5 r of his sword, and hast not made him 

28 My mercy will I keep for him to stand in the battle. 
for evermore, and my covenant shall 44 Thou hast made his glory to 
stand fast with him. cease, and cast his throne down to 

29 His seed also will I make to en-|a Heb. Sheoi. |the ground 
dure for ever, and his throne as the See Sab) 45 The days of his youth hast 
days of heaven, ; thou shortened: thou hast covered 

30 If his children forsake my})Psa41.13. {him with shame. Selah. 
led walk not in my jude- 46 How long, Lorp? wilt thou 

31. If they break my statutes, and ie eee ke Bree ae ae 


keep not my commandments; 

32 Then will I visit their trans- 
gression with the rod, and their raeHine wenn 
Se tien lovingkind- 48 What man is he that liveth, 
ness will I not utterly take from ae sell not if deat tea 
: H ‘ eliver his soul from the hand 0: 
him, nor suffer my faithfulness to the “grave? Selah, 


47 Remember how short my time 
is: wherefore hast thou made all 


fail. 

i hy former 
34 My covenant will I not break, 49 Lord, where are t 
nor alter the thing that is gone out elise 4 wien) ae 
of my lips. swarest unto David in thy 


50 Remember, Lord, the reproach 
of thy servants; how I do bear in 
my bosom the reproach of all the 


35 Once have I sworn by my holi- 
ness that I will not lie unto Da- 


vid. J 
36 His seed shall endure for ever, mighty people; : 

and his throne as the sun before 51 Wherewith thine enemies have 

me. reproached, O LorpD; wherewith 
37 It shall be established for ever they have reproached the footsteps 

as the moon, and as a faithful wit- of thine anointed. 

ness in heaven. Selah. 52 Blessed be the LorD for ever- 
38 But thou hast cast off and ab- more. Amen, and Amen. 


1 The eighty-ninth Psalm is at once the confirmation and exposition of the Davidic 
Covenant (2 Sam. 7. 9-14). That the covenant itself looks far beyond David and 
Solomon is sure from verse 27. “Higher than the kings of the earth” can only refer 
to Immanuel (Isa. 7. 13-15; 9. 6, 7; Mic. 5. 2). The Psalm is in four parts: (1) The 
covenant, though springing from the lovingkindness of Jehovah, yet rests upon His 
oath (vs. 1-4). (2) Jehovah is glorified for His power and goodness in connection 
with the covenant (vs. 5-18). (3) The response of Jehovah (vs. 19-37). This 
is‘in two parts: (a), it confirms the covenant (vs. 19-29), but, (b), warns that 
disobedience in the royal posterity of David will be punished with chastening (vs. 
30-32). Historically this chastening began in the division of the Davidic kingdom 
(1 Ki. 11. 26-36; 12. 16-20) and culminated in the captivities and that subordina- 
tion of Israel to the Gentiles which still continues. See “Gentiles, times of” (Lk. 
21. 24; Rev. 16. 14). (4) The plea of the Remnant (Isa. 1. 9; Rom. 11.5) who urge 
the severity and fong continuance of the chastening (vs. 38-52). See Psa. 102., 
next in order of the Messianic Psalms. 

g 643 


“# ; i 
90 1] PSALMS. [91 16 — 


BOOK IV. 


Lorp our God be upon us: and 
Restablish thou the work of our 
hands upon us; yea, the work of 
our hands establish thou it. 


PSALM 90. 


A Prayer of Moses the man of 
God. 


a Deut.33.27; 


ORD, thou hast been our dwell-| ©7*-11-16- 


ing place in all generations. _ |» Prov.8.25,26. get of 

2 'Before the mountains were ars E ‘that dwelleth in the secret: 
brought forth, or ever thou hadst|° oa y37° 4 place of the most High shall 
formed the earth and the world, abide under the shadow of the 
even from everlasting to. everlast-|¢ 2 Pet.3.8. Almighty. : 
ing, thou art God. 4 ePsa.103.15: || 2 2 ee say - the Orme He is 

3 Thou turnest man to destruc-] Isa.40.6..’ |my refuge and my fortress:. my 
tion; and sayest, “Return, ye chil- Psa.so.21, |GOd: in him will I trust. 
dren of men. f Jer.16.17. 3 Surely he shall deliver thee 

4 4For a thousand. years in thy from the snare of the fowler, and: 
sight are but as yesterday when it}£Psa-19.12._ |from the noisome pestilence. : 
Baht Gan he oe Pe eed elie eee 

agnt. ie ; 

5 Thou carriest them. away as Se sgoadh pag oat his truth shall be thy: 
with.a flood; they are as. a sleep: 2 shield and buckler. 
in the morning ¢they are like grass| j Psa.27.4. 5 ?Thou shalt not be afraid. for 
which groweth up. ‘ ? Dre acae the terror by night; nor for the 

6 In the morning it flourisheth,}* *S*-7°+*- arrow that flieth by day; 
and groweth up; in the evening it] 7 Psa.27.s; 6 Nor for the pestilence that 
is cut down, and withereth. 31.20; 32.7. |walketh in darkness; nor for the 

7 For we are consumed by thine m Psa.2.12, destruction that wasteth at noon- 
enact ane by thy wrath are wel note. ones a pox ah 
troubled. ousand sha all at th 

8 /Thou hast set our iniquities be-|” REE side, and ten thousand at tn 
Hag thee, Sour secret sins in the|o Psa.17.8; right eae but it shall not come 
ight of thy countenance. 57.1; 61.4. |nigh thee. 

9 For all our days are passed p Psa.112.7; 8 Only ¢with thine eyes shalt thou 
away in thy wrath: we spend our] 121.7: Job behold and see the reward of the 
years as a tale that is told. 5.19; Prov. |wicked. 
ay The days of our years are| 3.23243 9 Because thou hast made the 
threescore years and ten; and if by ae LorpD, which is: my refuge, ever 
reason of strength they be fourscore er EO Y the most High, ’thy habitation; 
peers yet is ae strength labour ee “5 a Es evil befall thee, 
and -sorrow; tor it 1s soon cut}, Psa.71.3; neither shall any plague come nigh 
off, and we fly away. "90.1. thy dwelling. ait a \, 

1i Who knoweth the power of]. p.oy19.21. | 11 ‘For he shall give his “angels | 
thine anger? even according to thy charge over thee, to keep thee in all 
fear, so is thy wrath. 'Psa.34.7; _ ithy ways. 

12 "So teach us to number our Pecan ae 12 They shallbear thee up intheir 
days, that we may apply our hearts] Heb.1.14.’ |hands, *lest thou dash thy foot 


unto wisdom, against a stone. 


13 Return, O Lorp, how long?|* Heb-1-4, 13, Thou shalt tread upon the lion 
and let it ‘repent thee concerning i and “adder: the young lion and the 
thy servants. » Mt.4.6; dragon shalt thou trample under 

14 O satisfy us early with thy} ©4111. |feet, 
mercy; that we may rejoice and be} w Or, asp. 14 Because he hath set his love 


glad all our days. , upon me, therefore will I deliver 
15 Make us glad according to. the|* Ps2-9-10- him: I will set him on high, because 

days wherein thou hast afflicted us,|) Psa.so1s. |he hath *known my name, 

and the years wherein we have 15 He shall call upon me, and I 


seen evil. = Isa.43.2. will answer him: 2I will be with 
16 Let thy work appear unto thy him in trouble; I will deliver him 

servants, and thy glory unto their and honour him: j 

children. 16 With long life will I satisfy 
17 /And let the beauty of the him, and shew him my salvation, 


644 


92 1) PSALMS. [94 18 


their voice; the floods lift up their 


PSALM 92. Bs ee 
A Psalm or Song for the sabbath 4 The LorpD on high is mightier 
day. than the noise of many waters, yea, 


than the mighty waves of the sea. 

5 Thy testimonies are very sure: 
holiness becometh thine house, O 
Lorp, for ever. 


T is a %good thing to give 

* thanks unto the Lorp, and to 
sing praises unto thy name, O most 
High: 

2 6To shew forth thy lovingkind- 
ness in the morning, and thy faith- 
fulness ‘every night, 

3 Upon an instrument of ten|¢ Psa-147.1. 
strings, and upon the psaltery;), p.ag9.1, 


PSALM 94. 


LORD “God, to whom ven- 
geance belongeth; O God, to 
whom vengeance belongeth, °shew 


upon the harp with a solemn Heb. in the |thyself 

in t ey : 
a or thou, Lorp, hast made me “nights. | 2 Lift up thyself, thou judge of 
Ptironch, two Tad ee uPates! His Sates render a reward ‘to the 
umph in the works of thy hands. 139.17. : : 


5 ¢Q Lorp, how great are thy], toa.08.20; 3 LorpD, how long shall the 


works! and thy thoughts are very Rom-I1. eee long shall the wicked 
deep. 134. an How 

E : ow Iong shall they ?utter and 
6_A brutish man knoweth not:| ¢psa.37.1,2, |speak hard things? and all the 
neither doth a fool understand this.}° 35,38; Job workers of iniquity boast them- 


; ; 12.6; 21.7; 
7 When /the wicked spring as the 12-6 ol ae a leaigesp 


FES, ad en an ere Chat they| Mal345- | 8 They break in pieces thy people, 
shall be destroyed for ever: ___ |g Psa.89.17,24. Cores ipraeaeet pe 
8 But thou, Lorb, art most high) ; psa.23.s, stranger, and murder the fatherless. 


for evermore. 7 Yet they say, The Lorp shall 


i i D,| ¢ Psa.54.7; ; 

<2, or Jo thine enemies, OLORD.|/E538 fina, |not see, neither shall the God of 
220> ES a) acob regard it. ‘ 

all the workers of iniquity shall be j Psa52.8; 8 Understand, ye brutish among 

scattered. Hos.14.5,6, |the people: and ye fools, when will 


10 sBut my horn shalt thou exalt ; ee wise? 
like the aes a elaciee I shall! Heb. green. 9 «He that planted the ear, shall 
PE FR eye oie chet ase my de-| ! Rom.9.14. he ngt heats pe ees formed the 
5 : : : eye, shall he not see? 
sire on mine enemies, and Fi aa TARE DMs) 10 Hethatchastiseththe heathen, 
ears shall hear my desire 0 €| . Heb. God of |Shall not he correct? he that teach- 


wicked that rise up against me. — : alge lohan ate 
12 jThe righteous shall flourish Ube Sere knowledge, 


like the palm tree: he shall grow/|° Heb. shine li The Lorp ‘knoweth “the 


like a cedar in Lebanon. ey that they are 
13 Those that be planted in the!» Psa.31.18; homens ge eed, if 


house of the LORD shall flourish in} Jude 1s. oe is the man whom thou 
the courts of our God. qEx.4.11; chastenest, O LorD, and teachest 


14 They shall stillbring forth fruit} Prov.20.12, |pim out of thy law; 
in old age; they shall be fat and [ 13 That thou mayest give him rest 


yi.e. nations. 


‘flourishing; out from the days of adversity, until the 
15 To shew that the LORD js up-|s1Cor.3.20. | Hit be digged for the wicked. 
right: he is my rock, and ‘there is 14 For the Lorp will not cast off 
no unrighteousness in him. his people, neither will he forsake 
his inheritance. 
PSALM 93. 15 Butjudgment eal return unig 
igneth, he is clothed righteousness: and all the upright 
4 Wp at ht the LoRD is in heart shall follow it. . 
clothed- with strength, wherewith 16 Who will rise up for me against 
he hath girded himself: ™the world theevildocrshar who wills am aes 
i i i e against the workers of iniquity? 
ered Se i) orate 17 Unless the LorD had been 
eT: hy throne is established of old: my “eee my soul had almost dwelt 
f ing. in silence. ‘ q 
SS the PH ivaeaateeaserts up, O 18 When I said, My foot slippeth; 
Lorp, the floods have lifted up thy mercy, O LorD, held me up. 


645 


94 19} 


19 Inthemultitudeofmy thoughts 
within me thy comforts delight my 


soul. 

20 Shall the throne of iniquity 
have fellowship with thee, which 
frameth mischief by a law? 

21 They gather themselves to- 
gether against the soul of the 
righteous, and condemn the inno- 
cent blood. 

22 But the Lorpb is my defence; 
and my God is the rock of my 
refuge. 

23 And he shall bring upon them 
their own iniquity, and shall cut 
them off in their own wickedness; 
yea, the LoRD our God shall cut 
them oif. 


PSALM 95. 


COME, let us sing unto the 
Lorp: let us make a joyful 
noise to the rock of our salvation. 

2 Let us come before his presence 
with thanksgiving, and make a joy- 
ful noise unto him with psalms. 

3 For the LorpD is a great God, 
and a great King above all gods. 

4 In his hand are the deep places 
of the earth: the strength of the 
hills zs his also. 

5 The sea is his, and he made it: 
and his hands formed the dry Jand. 

6 Ocome, let us worship and bow 
down: let us kneel before the LorD 
our maker, 

7 For he is our God; and we are 
the people of his pasture, and the 
sheep of his hand. °To day if ye 
will hear his voice, > 

8 Harden not your heart, as in 
the provocation, and as in the day 
of temptation in the wilderness: 

9 When your fathers (tempted me, 
proved me, and saw my work. 

10 Forty years long was I grieved 
with this generation, and said, It is 
a people that do err in their heart, 
and they have not known my ways: 

11 Unto whom I ‘sware in my 
wrath that they should not enter 
into my rest. 


PSALM 96. 
O SING unto the Lorp a new 
song: sing unto the Lorp, all 
the earth. 

2 Sing unto the Lorp, bless his 
name; shew forth his salvation from 
day to day. 

3 Declare his glory among the 


theathen, his wonders among all 
people. 


4 For the Lorp is great, and 


PSALMS. 


197 “04 


a vs.7-11; 
Heb.3.7-11. 


b Tempta- 
tion. Psa. 
106.14. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.2.) 


c Heb.4.3. 
di.e. nations. 


e Psa.19.9, 
note. 


f See Jer.10. 
11,12. 


g Psa.115.15; 
Isa.42.5. 


h Heb. of his 
name. 


1 Or, in the 
glorious 
sanctuary. 


97.1; Rev. 
11.15; 19.6. 


k Christ 
(Second Ad- 
vent). Psa. 
110.1. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 


lice. coasts. 
m Heb.1.6. 


n Psa.95.3; 
sot Ex.18, 


646 


greatly to be praised: he is to be 
efeared above all gods. x 

5 For fall the gods of the nations 
are idols: but the LoRD made the 
heavens. 

6 Honour and majesty are before 
him: strength and beauty are in 
his sanctuary. : 

7 Give unto the LorpD, O ye kin- 
dreds of the people, give unto the 
Lorp glory and strength. 

8 Give unto the Lorp the glory 
hdue unto his name: bring an offer- 
ing, and come into his courts. 

9 OQ worship the LorpD ‘in the 
beauty of holiness: fear before him, 
all the earth. 

10 Say among the “heathen that 
jthe LORD reigneth: the world also 
shali be established that it. shall 
not be moved: he shall judge the 
people righteously. 

11 Let the heavens rejoice, and 
let the earth be glad; let the sea 
roar, and the fulness thereof. 

12 Let the field be joyful, and all 
that is therein: then shall all the 
trees of the wood rejoice 

13 Before the Lorn: for he *com- 
eth, for he cometh to judge the 
earth: he shall judge the world 
with righteousness, and the people 
with his truth. 


PSALM 97. 


A Rests Lor reigneth; let the earth 
Tejoice; let the multitude of 
4sles be glad thereof. 

2 Clouds and darkness are round 
about hirn: righteousness and judg- 
ment are the habitation of his 
throne. 

3 A fire goeth before him, and 
burneth up his enemies round 
about. 

4 His lightnings enlightened the 
world: the earth saw, and trembled. 

5 The hills melted like wax at the 
presence of the Lorp, at the pres- 
ence of the Lord of the whole earth. 

6 The heavens declare his right- 
eousness, and all the people see his 


glory. 

7 Confounded be all they that 
serve graven images, that boast 
themselves of idols: "worship him, — 
all ye gods. : 

8 Zion heard, and was glad; and 
the daughters of Judah rejoiced be- 
cause of thy judgments, O Lorp. 

9 For thou, LorD, art high above 
all the earth: “thou art exalted far 
above all gods. 

10 Ye that love the Lorp, hate 


_ 97 11] 


evil: ¢he preserveth the souls of his 
saints; he delivereth them out of 
the hand of the wicked. 

11 Light is sown for the righteous, 
and gladness for the upright in 
heart. 

12 Rejoice in the LORD, ye right- 
eous; and give thanks at the re- 
membrance of his holiness. 


PSALM 98. 
A Psalm, 


bSING unto the LoRD a new 

song; for ‘he hath done mar- 
vellous things: his right hand, and 
his holy arm, hath gotten him the 
victory. 

2 @¢The Lorp hath made known 
his salvation: his righteousness 
hath he openly shewed in the 
sight of the “heathen. 

3 He hath remembered his mercy 
and his truth toward the house of 
Israel: fall the ends of the earth 
have seen the salvation of our God. 

4 Make a joyful noise unto the 
Lorp, all the earth: make a loud 
noise, and rejoice, and sing praise. 

5 Sing unto the LoRD with the 
harp; with the harp, and the voice 
of a psalm. 

6 With trumpets and sound of 
cornet make a joyful noise before 
the LorpD, the King. 

7 Let the sea roar, and the fulness 
thereof; the world, and they that 
dwell therein. 

8 Let the floods clap their hands: 
let the hills be joyful together 

9 Before the LORD; ¢for he com- 
eth to judge the earth: with right- 
eousness shall he judge the world, 
~ and the people with equity. 


PSALM 99. 
ay 


HE Lorp reigneth; let the peo- 
ple tremble: “he sitteth*be- 

tween the cherubims; let the earth 
be moved. 

2 The Lorp is great in Zion; and 
he is high above all the people. 

3 Let them praise ‘thy great and 
terrible name; for it is holy. 

4 The king’s strength also loveth 
judgment; thou dost establish 
equity, thou executest judgment 


PSALMS. 


a Psa.31.23; 
37.28; 145.20; 
Prov.2.8. 


6 Psa.33.3; 
96.1; Isa.42. 
10. 


¢ Ex.15.11; 
Psa.77.14; 
86.10; 105.5; 
136.4; 139.14. 


d Isa.52.10; 
Lk.2.30,31. 


ei.e. nations. 


f 13a.49.6; 
52.10; Lk.2. 
30,31; 3.6; 
Acts 13.47; 
28.28. 


g Psa.96.10,13. 


h Psa.80.1; 
Ex.25.22. 


# Deut.28.58; 
Rev.15.4. 


(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 


k Psa.119.73; 
139.13; 149.2; 
Eph.2.10 


1 Psa.95.7; 
Ezk.34.30,31. 


m Psa.66.13; 
116-17-19. 


n Heb. to gen- 
eration and 
&eneration. 


o See 1 Ki.8. 
61; also v.6. 


p Psa.75.10; 
Jer.21.12. 


and righteousness in Jacob. 

5 Exalt ye the Lorp our God, 
and worship at his footstool; for 
he is holy. é 

6 Moses and Aaron among his 
priests, and Samuel among them 
that call upon his name; they called 


647 


. [101 8 


upon the LORD, and he answered 
them. 

7 He spake unto them in the 
cloudy pillar: they kept his testi- 
monies, and the ordinance that he 
gave them. 

8 Thou answeredst them, OLoRD 
our God: thou wast a God that Jfor- 
gavest them, though thou tookest 
vengeance of their inventions. 

9 Exalt the Lorp our God, and 
worship at his holy hill; for the 
Lorp our God is holy. 


PSALM 100. 
A Psalm of praise. 


MARE a joyful noise unto the 
Lorp, all ye lands. 

2 Serve the LorpD with gladness: 
come before his presence with sing- 
ing. 

3 Know ye that the Lorp he is 
God: “it is he that hath made us, 
and not we ourselves; we are his 
people, and the sheep of his pas- 
ture. 

4 mEnter into his gates with 
thanksgiving, and into his courts 
with praise: be thankful unto him, 
and bless his name. 

5 For the Lorp 1s good; his 
mercy is everlasting; and his truth 
endureth “to all generations. 


PSALM 101. 
A Psalm of David. 


WILL sing of mercy and judg- 
ment: unto thee, O Lorp, will 


Leal 


sing. 
2 I will behave myself wisely in a 
operfect way. O when wilt thou 
come unto me? I will walk within 
my house with a perfect heart. 

3 I will set no wicked thing before 
mine eyes: I hate the work of them 
that turn aside; zt shall not cleave 
to me. 

4 A froward heart shall depart 
from me: I will not know a wicked 
person. 

5 Whoso privily slandereth his 
neighbour, him will I cut off; him 
that hath an high look and a proud 
heart will not I suffer. 

6 Mine eyes shali be upon the 
faithful of the land, that they may 
dwell with me: he that walketh in 
a perfect way, he shall serve me. 

7 He that worketh deceit shall not 
dwell within my house: he that 
telleth lies shall not tarry in my 


sight. 
8 I will *early destroy all the 


102 1} - 


PSALMS. 


[103 7 


wicked of the land: that I may cut 
off all wicked doers ¢from the city 
of the LorD. 


PSALM 102. 


A Prayer of the afflicted, when he 
is overwhelmed, and poureth out 
his complaint before the Lorpb. 


HEA Imy prayer, O LorD, and 
let my cry come unto thee. 

2 %Hide not thy face from me in 
the day when I am in trouble; in- 
cline thine ear unto me: in the day 
when I call answer me speedily. 

3 For my days are consumed like 
smoke, and my bones are burned as 
an hearth. 

4 My heart is smitten, and with- 
ered like grass; so that I forget to 
eat my bread. 

5 By reason of the voice of my 
groaning my bones cleave to my 
skin. 

6 Lam like a pelican of the wilder- 
ness: I am like an owl of the desert. 

7 I watch, and am as a sparrow 
alone upon the house top. 

8 Mine enemies reproach me all 
the day; and they that are mad 
against me are sworn against me. 

9 For I have eaten ashes like 
bread, and mingled my drink with 
Weeping, 

10 Because of thine indignation 
and thy wrath: for thou: hast lifted 
me up, and cast me down. 

11 My days are like a shadow 
that declineth; and I am withered 
like grass. 

12 But thou, O Lorp, shalt en- 
dure for ever; and thy remem- 
brance unto all generations. 

13 Thou shalt arise, and have 
mercy upon Zion: for the time to 
favour her, yea, the set time, is 
come. 

_14 For thy servants take pleasure 


a Psa.48.2,8. 


b Psa.27.9; 
69.17, 


ci.e. nations, 


d Psa.19.9, 


note. 


e Neh.1.6,11; 
2.8. 


J Psa.79.11. 

g Heb. the 
children of 
death. 


h vs.25-27; 


Heb.1.10-12. 


7 Isa.34.4; 
51.6; 65.17; 
66.22; 


j Mal.3.6; 
Heb.13.8; 
Jas.1.17. 


k Psa.130.8; 
Isa.33.24; 
Mt.9.2,6; 
Mk.2.5,10, 
11; Lk.7.47. 


1 Ex.15.26; 
Psa.147.3; 
Jer.17.14, 


m Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note, 


n Isa.40:31. 


in her stones, and favour the dust}. 


thereof. 

15 So the cheathen shall ¢fear the 
name of the LorD, and all the kings 
of the earth thy glory. 

16 When the LorD shall build up 
Zion, he shall appear in his glory. 

17 ‘He will regard the prayer of 
the destitute, and not despise their 
prayer. 

18 This shall be written for the 
generation to come: and the people 


1 The reference of verses 25-27 to Christ 
preceding verses of Psalm 102, we have, prop 
in the days of His humiliation and rejection, 


Messianic Psalms 


648 


which shall be created’ shall praise 
the Lorp. 

19 For he hath looked down from 
the height of his sanctuary; from 
heaven did the Lorp behold the 
earth; 

20 #To hear the groaning of the 
prisoner; to loose &those that are 
appointed to death: 

21 To declare the name of the 
LorD in Zion, and his praise in 
Jerusalem; 

22 When the people are gathered 
together, and the kingdoms, to 
serve the LorD. 

23 He weakened my strength in 
the way; he shortened my days. 

24 I said, O my God, take me not 
away in the midst of my days: thy 
years. are throughout all genera- 
tions. 

25 Of old hast thou laid the 
rfoundation of the earth: and the 
heavens are the work of thy 
hands. 

26 They shall perish, but ‘thou 
shalt endure: yea, all of them shall 
wax old like a garment; as a ves- 


ture shalt thou change them, and 
they shall be changed. 

27 JBut thou art the same, and 
thy years shall have no end. 

28 The children of thy servants 
shall continue, and their seed shall 
be established before thee, 


PSALM. 103. 
A Psalm of David. 


BESS the LorbD,.O my soul: and 
all that is within me, bless his 
holy name. 

2 Bless the Lorp, O my soul, and 
forget not all his benefits: 

3 Who #forgiveth all thine ini- 
quities; who /healeth all thy 
diseases; 

4 Who ”redeemeth thy life from 
destruction; who crowneth thee 
with lovingkindness and tender 
mercies; 

5 Who satisfieth thy mouth with 
good things; "so that thy, youth 
is renewed like the eagle’s, 

6 The LorD executeth righteous- 
ness and judgment for all that are 
oppressed. 

7 He made known his ways junto 


Moses, his acts unto the children of 
Israel. 


(Heb. 1. 10-12) assures us that in the 
hetically, 


the exercises of His holy soul 


See Psa. 110., next in order of the 


. 


‘ 


103 8] PSALMS. (104 22 


8 “The LorpD is merciful and 


: ‘who walketh upon the win 
gracious, slow to anger, and plen- iP gs of 


the wind: 


teous in mercy. 4 Who. maketh his angels Sspir- 
9 5He will not always chide: its; his ministers a flami u 
y 1 alw : $ c ming fire: 
neither will he keep this anger for 5 Who laid ithe foundations of the 
Meo pes bombay hit, O° poe that it should not be removed 
t ‘or-ever. 
cae od pains: ee wpomarsiass us 6 Thew coveredst af with the deep 
F as witha garment: t g 
11 For as the heaven is high above}, p.a 36.15: above “ee Sec ae walernereeS 
a Ene Sp ercet is pis mercy Ex.34.6,7;, 7 At thy rebuke they fled; at the 
to’ c um.14.18; T 
Bias BE a eA SEY Dears 10, (MRSC MOP NUR Cee 
west, so far hath he ¢removed Jour] Jer.32.18: 8 They go up by the mountains; 


transgressions from us. they go down: by the valleys unto 


13 Like as a father pitieth Ais pies the place which thow hast founded 
ony so the LorD pitieth them) Jer.3.5; for them. p “. 
that fear him. Mic.7.18. 9 sThou hast set a bound that 
a elatne te cae ign Por aa Peres Seenteg ee 8 
e¢ . sa.19.9, urn not again to.cover the earth. 
15 As for man, his days are as| 7°fe- 10 He sendeth the springs into the 
Gs) as a flower of the field, so he] 7 rorgive- valleys, which run among the hills. 
ourisheth. F : ness. Jer. 11 They give drink to every beast 
16 For the wind passeth over it, 31.34. (Lev. lof the field: the wild asses quench 
one (a is gone; and the place thereof ae their thirst. 
shall know it no more. 12 By them shall the fowls of the 
17 But the mercy of the LorD is] ¢ Heb-1-4, heaven have their habitation, which 
from everlasting to everlasting ery sing among the branches. ¢ 
upon them that fear him, and his} fHeb.1.7. 13 ‘He watereth the hills from his 
Hy teousbase unto children’s chil- 2 Psal33.7% chambers: the earth is satisfied with 
ren; F e610;  |the fruit of thy works. 
18 Tosuch as keep his covenant, sep ooo. 14 He causeth the grass to grow 
and to those that remember -his for the cattle, and herb for the ser- 


commandments to do them. hGen.9.11,15: |Vice of man: that he may bring 
19 The Lorp hath prepared his| : Psa.147.8. forth food out of the earth; 


throne in the heavens; and his! . : 15 And Jwine that maketh glad 
kingdom ruleth over all. UP cer tapss the heart of man, an@ oil to make 
5 20 Biss the LorD, ye his separ Prov.31.6. his send to apne. and bread which 

that excel in strength, that do his strengtheneth man’s heart. 
mena, heatksging gsol oe os 1p The pe pre bore ae full 
t ice is word. 1Gen.1.14. of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, 
2 areoe. AG one all ye his ts ais Ewhich-he hath planted; nee 
hosts; ye ministers of his, that do MID 17 Where the birds make their 
his oe ? 7 Ri n Isa.4527. Bests 2° for the stork, the fir trees 

22 Bless the LorD, all his works _ are her house. 
in all places of his dominion: bless ee pe 18 The high hills are a refuge for 
the LorpD, O my soul. the wild goats; and the rocks for 
the Fey se casa 
' , 19 e appointed the moon for 
PSALM 104. seasons: ”the sun knoweth his go- 
LESS the Lorp, O my soul. O ing down. 

B Lorp my God, thou art very 20 “Thou makest darkness, and it 


is night: wherein all the beasts of 


great; thou art clothed with honour 
the forest do creep forth. 


and majesty. 


2 Whocoverest thyself with light 21 °The young lions roar after 
as with a garment: who stretchest their prey, and seek their meat 
out the heavens like a curtain: from God. : 

3 Who layeth the beams of his 22 The sun ariseth, they gather 
chambers in the waters: who themselves together, and lay them 
maketh the clouds his chariot: down in their dens. 

TEE ne ee Oe i* 


1 Three Hebrew words are trans. forgive, forgiven: kaphar, to cover; nasa, to 
lift away; salach, to send away (cf. Lev. 16. 21, 22), the fundamental O.T. idea of 
forgiveness being not the remission of penalty, but the separation of the sinner from 


his sin, . Psa. 103. 12 expresses this. 
649 


104 23] 


23 Man goethforth unto @his work 
and. to his labour until the evening. 

24 OLorD, how manifold are thy 
works! in wisdom hast thou made 
them all: the earth is full of thy 
riches. 

25 So is this great and wide sea, 
wherein are things creeping innu- 
merable, both small and great 
beasts. . 

26 There go the ships: there is 
that leviathan, whom thou hast 
made to play therein. 

27 >These wait all upon thee; that 
thou mayest give them their meat 
in due season. 

28 That thou givest them they 
gather: thou openest thine hand, 
they are filled with good. 

29 Thou hidest thy face, they are 
troubled: thou takest away their 
breath, they die, and return to their 
dust. 

30 ‘Thou sendest forth thy spirit, 
they are created: and thou renew- 
est the face of the earth. 


31 The glory of the Lorp shall 
endure for ever: the LORD shall re- 
joice in his works. 

' 32 He looketh on the earth, and it 
4trembleth: he toucheth the hills, 
and they smoke. 

33 I will sing unto the Lorp as 
long as I live: I will sing praise to 
my God while I have my being. 

34 My meditation of him shall be 
sweet: I will be glad in the Lorpb. 

35 Let the sinners be consumed 
out of the earth, and let the wicked 
be no more, Bless thou the Lorp, 
O my soul. Praise ye the Lorp. 


PSALM 105. 


O ‘GIVE thanks unto the Lorp; 
call upon his name: make 
known his deeds among the people. 

2 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto 
him: talk ye of all his wondrous 
works. 

3 Glory ye in his holy name: let 
the heart of them rejoice that seek 
the Lorp. 

4 Seek the Lorp, and his strength: 
Jseek his face evermore. 

5S @Remember his marvellous 
works that he hath done; his 
wonders, and the judgments of 
his mouth; 

6 O ye seed of Abraham his ser- 
vant, ye children of Jacob his 
chosen. 

_7 He is the Lorp our God: “his 
judgments are in all the earth. 

& He hath ‘remembered his cove- 


PSALMS. 


a Gen,3.19. 


5 Psa.136.25; 
145.15; 147.9. 


¢ Isa.32.15; 
Ezk.37.9. 


d Hab.3.10. 


e 1 Chr.16.8- 
36; Isa.12.4. 


f Psa.27.8. 

g Psa.77.11. 

h Isa.26.9. 

# LK.1.72. 

j Gen.17.2; 
22.16; 26.3; 
28.13; 35.11; 
LE-1.73;3 
Heb.6.17. 

k Gen.13.15; 
15.18. 

1 Heb. the 
cord. 

m Gen.34.30; 
Deut.7.7; 
26.5. 

n Heb,11.9. 

o Gen.35.5. 

> Ex.1.7. 

q Ex.1.8. 

ry Ex.3.10; 


4.12,14; 
Num.16.5; 
L7.5- 


s Ex.7.-12.; 
Psa.78.43. 


t Ex.7.20; 
Psa.78.44. 


650 


ca 
[105 31 


nant for ever, the word which he 
commanded to a thousand genera- 
tions. 

9 JWhich covenant he made with 
Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac; 

10 And confirmed the same unto 
Jacob for a law, and to Israel for 
an everlasting covenant: 

11 Saying, ‘Unto thee will I give 
the land of Canaan, the lot of your 
inheritance: 

12 ™When they were but a few 
men in number; yea, very few, and 
“strangers in it. 

13 When they went from one na- 
tion to another, from one kingdom 
to another people; 

14 °He suffered no man to do 
them wrong: yea, he reproved kings 
for their sakes; 

15 Saying, Touch not mine an- 
ointed, and do my prophets no 
harm. 

16 Moreover he called for a famine 
upon the land: he brake the whole 
staff of bread. 

17 He sent a man before them, 
even Joseph, who was sold for a 
servant: 

18 Whose feet they hurt with fet- 
ters: he was laid in iron: 

19 Until the time that his word 
ao the word of the Lorp tried 

m. 

20 The king sent and loosed him; 
even the ruler of the people, and let 
him go free. 

21 He made him lord of his house, 
and ruler of all his substance: 

22 To bind his princes at his 
pleasure; and teach his senators 
wisdom. 

23 Israel also came into Egypt; 
end Jacob sojourned in the land of 

am 


24 And he ?increased his people 
greatly; and made them stronger 
than their enemies. 

25 9He turned their heart to hate 
his people, to deal subtilly with his 
servants. 

26 *He sent Moses his servant; 
and Aaron whom he had chosen, 

27 sThey shewed his signs among 
them, and wonders in the land of 
Ham. 

28 He sent darkness, and made it 
dark; and they rebelled not against 
his word. 

29 ‘He turned their waters into 
blood, and slew their fish. 

_30 Their land brought forth frogs 
in abundance, in the chambers of 
their kings. 

31 Hespake, and therccame divers 


105 32] 


PSALMS. 


[106 26 


sorts of flies, and lice in all their 
coasts. 

32 He gave them hail for rain, 
and flaming fire in their land. 

33 He smote their vines also and 
their fig trees; and brake the trees 
of their coasts. 

34 He spake, and the locusts 
came, and caterpillers, and that 
without number, 


35 And did eat up all the herbs in| 


their land, and devoured the fruit 
of their ground. 

36 He smote also all the firstborn 
in their land, the chief of all their 
strength. 

37 ¢He brought them forth also 
with silver and gold: and there 
was not one feeble person among 
their tribes. 

38 Egypt was glad when they de- 
parted: for the fear of them fell 
upon them. 

39 5He spread a cloud for a cover- 
ing; and fire to give light in the 
night. 

40 The people asked, and he 
brought quails, and satisfied them 
with the bread of heaven. 

41 He opened the rock, and -the 
waters gushed out; they ran in the 
dry places Jike a river. 

42 For he remembered his holy 
promise, and Abraham his servant. 

43 And he brought forth his peo- 
ple with joy, and his ‘chosen with 
gladness: 

44 And: gave them. the lands of 
the ¢heathen: and -they inherited 
the labour of the people; 

45 That they might observe his 
‘statutes, and keep his laws. Praise 
ye the LorD. 


PSALM. 106. 


PEASE ye the Lorp. O give 
thanks unto the LorpD; for he 
zs good: for his mercy endureth 
for ever. 4 

2 Who can’ utter the mighty acts 
of the Lorp? who can shew forth 
all his praise? 

3 Blessed are they that keep 
judgment, and he that doeth right- 
eousness at ‘all times. 

4 Remember me, O LorD, with 
the favour ¢that thou bearest 
unto thy people; O visit me with 
thy salvation; 

5 That I may see the good of thy 
fchosen, that I may rejoice in the 
gladness of thy nation, that I may 
glory with thine inheritance. 

6 8We have sinned with our fa- 


a Ex.12.35, 


6 Ex.13.21; 
Neh.9.12. 


c Election 
(corporate). 
Psa.106.5. 
(Deut.7.6; 
1 Pet.1.2.) 


di.e. nations. 


e Israel (his- 
tory). VS. 
1-45; Isa.1. 
24-26. (Gen. 
12.2,3; Rom. 
11.26.) 


f Election 
(corporate). 
Isa.43.20. 
(Deut.7.6; 

1 Pet.1.2, J 


g Lev.26.40; 

1 Ki.8.47; 
Dan.9.5. 

h Ex.14.11,12. 

¢ Ezk.20.14. 

j Ex.9.16. 

k Ex.14.21; 
Psa.18.15; 
Nah.1.4, 

1 Isa.63.11-14. 

m Ex.14.30. 

n Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 


(Kinsman 


type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


o Temptation. 


Isa.7.12. 

(Gen.3.1; 

Jas.1.2.) 
p Isa.10.16, 

q Num.16.3. 
r Num.16.31, 
32; Deut. 

11.6. 
s Ex.32.4. 


t Jer.2,11; 
Rom.1.23. 


u Heb.3.18. 

v Num.14.2,27. 

w Psa.95.11; 
Num.14.28; 


Ezk.20.15; 
Heb.3.11,18. 


651 


thers, we have committed iniquity, 
we have done wickedly. 

7 Our fathers understood not thy 
wonders in Egypt; they remem- 
bered not the multitude of thy mer-. 
cies; but provoked Aim at the sea, 
heven at the Red sea. 

8 Nevertheless he saved them ‘for 
his name’s sake, Jthat he might 
make his mighty power to be 
known. 

9 kHe rebuked the Red sea also, 
and it was dried up: /so he led them 
through the depths, as through the 
wilderness. 

10 And he saved them from the 
hand of him that hated them, and 
nredeemed them from the hand of 
the enemy. 

11 And the waters covered their 
ae there was not one of them 
eft 

12 Then believed they his words: 
they sang his praise. 

13 They soon forgat his works; 
they waited not for his counsel: 

14 But lusted exceedingly in the 
wilderness, and °tempted God in 
the desert. 

15 And he gave them their re- 
aa but ?sent leanness into their 
so 

16 9They envied Moses also in 
the camp, and Aaron the saint of 
the Lorb. 

17 ‘The earth opened and swal- 
lowed up Dathan, and covered the 
company of Abiram. 

18 And a fire was kindled in their 
company; the flame burned up the 


wicked. ' 
19 sThey made a calf in Horeb, 
and worshipped the molten image. 
20 !Thus they changed their glory 


into the similitude of an ox that 
eateth grass. 

21 They forgat God their saviour, 
which had done great things in 
Egypt;” 

22 Wondrous works in the land 
of Ham, and terrible things by the 
Red sea. 

23 Therefore he said that he would 
destroy them, had not Moses his 
chosen stood before him in the 
breach, to turn away his wrath, 
lest he should destroy them. 

24 Yea, they despised the pleasant 
land, “they believed not his word: 

25 *But murmured in their tents, 
and hearkened not unto the voice 
of the LorbD. 

.26 ’Therefore he lifted up his 
hand against them, to overthrow 
them in the wilderness: 


\ 


106 27] 


[107 16 q 


SALMS. 


27 “To overthrow their seed also 
among the nations, and to scatter 
them in the lands. 

28 They joined themselves also 
unto Baal-peor, and ate the sacri- 
fices of the dead. 

29 Thus they provoked Aim to 
anger with their inventions: and 
the plague brake in upon them. 

30 °Then:stood up Phinehas, and 
executed judgment: and so the 
plague was stayed. 

31 And that was counted unto 
him ¢for righteousness unto all gen- 
erations for evermore. 

32 ¢They angered Aim also at the 
waters of ‘strife, ‘so that it went ill 
with Moses for their sakes: 


33 fBecause they provoked his} 


spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly 
with his lips. 

34 &They did not destroy the na- 
tions, concerning whom the LorpD 
commanded them: 

35 But were mingled among the 
hheathen, and learned their works. 

36 And they served their idols: 
which were a snare unto them. 

37 Yea, they sacrificed their sons 
and their daughters unto ‘devils, 

38 And shed innocent blood, even 
the blood of their sons and of their 
daughters, whom they sacrificed 
unto the idols of Canaan: and the 
land was polluted with blood. 


1 


a Psa.44.11; 
Lev.26.33; 
Ezk.20.23. 


b Num.25.7,8. 


¢ Num.25. 
11-13 


d Psa.81.7; 
Num.20.3,13. 


e Num.20.12; 
Deut.1.37; 
3.26. 

f Num.20.10. 


2g Deut.7.2,16; 
Jud.2.2. 


hie. nations. 


i Lit. sporlers, 
destroyers. 


PSALM 107. 


GIVE thanks unto the Lorp, 
for he is good: for his mercy 
endureth for ever. 

2 Let the “redeemed of the Lorp 
say so, whom the hath redeemed 
from the hand of the enemy; 

3 And ?gathered them out.of the 
lands, from the east, and from the 
west, from the north, and from 
the south. 

-4 {They wandered in the wilder- 
ness in a solitary way; they found 
no city to dwell in. 

5 Hungry and thirsty, their soul 
fainted in them. 

_© ’Then they cried unto the Lorp 
in their trouble, and he delivered 
them out of their distresses. 

7 And he led them forth ‘by the 
right way, that they might go to a 
city of habitation. 

8 Oh that men would praise the 
LorD for his goodness, and for his 


39 Thus were they defiled with 
\|their own works, and went a whor- 
ing with their own ‘inventions. 

40 Therefore was the wrath of 
ithe LorpD kindled against his peo- 
ple, insomuch that he abhorred his 
own inheritance. 

41 And ‘he gave them into the 
hand of the “heathen; and they 
that hated them ruled over them. 

42 Their enemies also oppressed 
them, and they were brought into 
subjection under their hand. 

43 JMany times did he deliver 
them; but they provoked Arm with 
\their counsel, and were brought low 
for their iniquity. 

44 Nevertheless he regarded their 
affliction, when he heard their.cry: 

45 And he remembered for them 
hi’ covenant, and “repented accord- 
ing to the multitude of \his mer- 


j Jud.2.16; cies. 

ENS 46 ‘He made them also to be 

k Zech.8.14, pitied of all those that carried 

note. them captives. 

] Ezra 9.9: 47 ™Save us, O LorpD our God, 

Jer.42.12. and gather us from among the 

a Cutee hheathen, to give thanks unto thy 

35,36... +|holy name, and to triumph in thy 
praise. 

n Psa.41.13. 48 "Blessed be the LoRD God of 
Israel from everlasting to everlast- 
ing: and Jet all the people say, 
Amen. Rraise ye the LorD. 

BOOK V. 

° jee wonderful works to the children of 

(Kinsman men! s 
type). Isa. 9 ‘For he satisfieth the longing 
59.20, note. |soul, and filleth the hungry soul 

p Psa.106.47; |With goodness. 

Isa.43.5,6; 10 “Such as sit in darkness and in 


Jer.29.14; 
31,8,10; 
Ezk.39,27,28. 

q v.40; Deut. 
32.10. 

r vs.13,19,28; 
Psa.50.15; 
Hos.5.15. 

s Ezra 8.21. 

t Psa.34.10; 
Lk.1.53. 

u Lk.1.79. 

v Lam.3.42, 

w Psa.68.6; 


146.7; Acts 
12.7; 16.26. 


692 


the shadow of death, being bound 
in affliction and iron; 

11 ‘Because they rebelled against 
the words of God, and contemned 
the counsel of the most High: 

12 Therefore he brought down 
their heart with labour; they fell 
down, and there was none to help. 

13 Then they cried unto the 
LorD in their trouble, and he 
saved them out of their distresses. 

14 He brought them out of dark- 
ness and the shadow of death, and 
brake “their ‘bands in sunder. 

15 Oh that men would praise the 
|LorD for his goodness, and for 
his wonderful works to the children 
\of men! 


16 For he hath broken the gates 


107 17] 


of brass, and cut the bars of iron in 
sunder. 

17 Fools because of their trans- 
gression, and because of their ini- 
quities, are afflicted. 

18 Their soul abhorreth all man- 
ner of meat; and they draw near 
unto the gates of death. 

19 Then they cry unto the Lorp 
in their trouble, and he saveth 
them out of their distresses. 

20 ¢He sent his word, and healed 
them, and delivered them from 
their destructions. 

21 Oh that men would praise the 
LorpD for his goodness, and for his 
wonderful works to the children of 
men! 

22 And fet them sacrifice the sac- 
rifices of thanksgiving, and declare 
his works with rejoicing. 

23 They that go down to the sea 
in ships, that do business in great 
waters; 

. 24 These see the works of the 

LorD, and his wonders in the deep. 

25 For he commandeth, and ‘rais- 
eth the stormy wind, which lifteth 
up the waves thereof. 

26 They mount up to the heaven, 
they go down again to the depths: 
their soul is melted because of 
trouble. 

27 They reel to and fro, and stag- 
ger lke a drunken man, and are Zat 

their wit’s end. - 

' 28 Then they cry unto the LorD’ 
in their trouble, and he bringeth 
them out of their distresses, 

29° ‘He maketh the storm a calm, 
so that the waves thereof are still. 

30 Then are they glad because 
they be quiet; so he bringeth them 
_unto their desired haven. 


31 Oh that men would praise the|! 


Lorp for his goodness, and for his 
wonderful works to the children of 
men! 

32 Let them exalt him also in 
the congregation of the people, and 


PSALMS. 


@ 2 Ki.20.4,5; 
Psa.147.15, 
18; Mt.8.8. 


6 Lev.7.12; 
Psa.50.14; 
116.17; Heb. 
13:15: 


c Heb. mak- 
eth to 
stand; 
Jon.1.4. 


d Heb. all 
their wis- 
dom is 
swallowed 
up. 


e Psa.89.9, 
Mt.8.26. 


f1 Ki.17.1,7. 


g Gen:13.10; 
14.3; 19.25. 


/h Psa.114.8; 
Tsa.41.18. 


i Gen.12.2; 
17.16,20. 


j Job 12.21,24. 


k 1 Sam.2.8; 
Psa.113.7,8. 


\1 Psa.64.9; 
Jer.9.12; 
Hos.14.9. 


mVs.6-13 are 
identical with 
Psa.60,5-12. 


n Gen. 49,19. 


praise him in the assembly of the 
elders. | 


33 He turneth rivers into a wil-|| 


derness, and the watersprings into 


dry ground; 
34 8A fruitful land into barren- 


ness, for the wickedness of them] 


that dwell therein. 

35 *He turneth the wilderness 
into a standing water, and dry 
ground into watersprings. 

36 And there he maketh the hun- 
gry to dwell, that they may prepare 
a city for habitation; 

37 And sow the fields, and plant 


653 


(108 12 
vineyards, which may yield fruits 
of increase. 

38 ‘He blesseth them also, so that 
they are multiplied greatly; and 
suffereth not their cattle to’ de- 
crease. 

39 Again, they are minished and 
brought low through oppression, 
affliction, and sorrow. 

40 JHe poureth contempt upon 
princes, and causeth them to wan- 
der in the wilderness, where there 


is no way. 

41 *Yet setteth he the poor on 
high from affliction, and maketh 
hirm families like a flock. 

42 The righteous shall see it, and 
rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop 
her mouth. 

43 'Whoso is wise, and will ob- 
serve these things, even they shall 
understand the lovingkindness of 
the Lorb. 


PSALM 108. 
A Song or Psalm of David. 


O GOD, my heart is fixed; I will 
sing and give praise, even with 
my glory. 

2 Awake, psaltery and harp: I 
myself will awake early. 

3 I will praise thee, O Lorp, 
among the people: and I will sing 
praises unto thee among the na- 
tions.. 

4 For thy mercy is great above 
the heavens: and thy truth reach- 
eth unto the clouds. 

5 Be thou exalted, O God, above 
the heavens: and thy glory above 
all the earth; 

6 ™That thy beloved may. be de- 
livered: save with thy right hand, 
and answer me. 

7 God hath spoken in his holi- 
ness; I will rejoice, I will divide 
Shechem, and mete out the valley 
of Succoth. 

8 Gilead is mine; Manasseh is 
mine; Ephraim also is the strength 
of mine head; "Judah is my law- 
giver; 

9 Moab fs my washpot; over 
Edom will I cast out my shoe; 
over Philistia will I triumph. 

10 Who will bring me into the 
strong city? who will lead me into 
Edom? 

11 Wilt not thou, O God, who 
hast cast us off? and wilt not 
ithou, O God, go forth with our 
hosts? 

12 Give us help from trouble: for 
vain is the help of man. 


PSALMS. 


108 13] 


13 ¢Through God we shall do 
valiantly: for he it is that shall 
tread down our enemies. 


PSALM 109. 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm 
of David. 


Hop not thy peace, O God of 
my praise; : 

2 For the mouth of the wicked 
and the mouth of the deceitful are 
bopened against me: they have 
spoken against me with a ‘lying 
tongue. 

3 They compassed me about also}? PS4-5-1?- 
with words of pees and fought] >} Heb. have 
against me ¢without a cause. Oper 
4 For my love they are my adver-| *#°™selves- 
saries: but I give myself unto 
prayer, 

5 And they have rewarded me 
evil for good, and hatred for my 
love. 

6 Set thou a wicked man over 
him: and let ‘Satan stand at his 
right hand. 

7 When he shall be judged, let 
him be condemned: and let his 
prayer become sin. 

8 Let his days be few; fand let 
another take his office. 


¢ Psa.27.12; 
Mt.25.59-62; 
Lk.23.1-5. 

d Psa.35.7; 
69.4; 
John 15.25. 

e Satan. Isa. 
14.12-14. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

f Acts 1.20. 


g Mt.27.39. 


h See Mt.22.44; 
Mk.12.36; 

| Lk.20.42,43; 

Acts 2.34,35; 

Heb.1.13; 

10.12,13. 


t Christ 
(Second Ad- 
vent). Isa. 


9 Let his children be fatherless, 
and his wife a. widow. 

10 Let his children be continually 
vagabonds, and beg: let them seek 
their bread also out of their deso- 
late places. 

11 Let the extortioner catch all 


that he hath; and let the strangers 
spoil his labour. 

12 Let there be none to extend 
mercy unto him: neither let there 
be any to favour his fatherless 
children. 

13 Let his posterity be cut off; 
and in the generation following let 
their name be blotted out. 

14 Let the iniquity of his fathers 
be remembered with the Lorp; and 
let not the sin of his mother be 
blotted out. 

15 Let them be before the LorD 
continually, that he may cut off the 
memory of them from the earth. 

16 Because that he remembered 
not to shew mercy, but persecuted 
the poor and needy man, that he 
might even slay the broken in 
heart. 

17 As he loved cursing, so let it 


j 1 Cor.15,25. 
k Rom.11.26, 
27. 


i af 


come unto him: as he delighted not 
in blessing, so let it be far from 
him. 

18 As he clothed himself with 
cursing like as with his garment, 
so let it come into his bowels like 
water, and like oil into his bones. 

19 Let it be unto him as the gar- 
ment which covereth him, and for 
a girdle wherewith he is girded 
continually. 

20 Let this be the reward of mine 
adversaries from the LorD, and of 
them that speak evil against my 


soul. 

21 But do thou for me, O Gop the 
Lord, for thy name’s sake: because 
thy mercy is good, deliver thou me. 

22 For I am poor and needy, and 
my heart is wounded within me. 

23 I am gone like the shadow 
when it declineth: I am tossed up 
and down as the locust. : 

24 My knees are weak through 
fasting; and my flesh faileth of 
fatness. 


| 25 I became also a reproach unto 


them: when they looked upon me 
they sshaked their heads. 

26 Help me, O LorpD my God: O 
save me according to thy mercy: 

27 That they may know that this 
is thy hand; that thou, LORD, hast 
done it. 

28 Let them curse, but bless thou: 
when they arise,- let them be 
ashamed; but let thy servant re- 
joice. : 

29 Let mine adversaries be 
clothed with shame, and let them 
cover themselves with their own 
confusion, as with a mantle. 

30 I will greatly praise the Lorp 
with my mouth; yea, I will praise — 
him among the multitude. 

31 For he shall stand at the right 
hand of the poor, to save him from 
those that condemn his soul. 


PSALM 110. 
A Psalm of David. 


+4 hats LorD said unto my Lord, 
‘ Sit thou at my right “hand, 
‘until I make thine enemies thy 
Jfootstool. 

2 The LorD shall send the rod of 
thy strength “out of Zion: rule thou 
in the midst of thine enemies, 

3 Thy people shall be willing in 
the day of thy power, in the beau- 


1 The importance of Psalm 110. is attested b 
to it in the New Testament. (1) It affirms the 
who deny the full divine meaning of His N.T. 


654 


y the remarkable prominence given 
deity of Jesus, thus answering those 
title of “Lord” (v. 1; Mt. 22. 41-45; 


110 4] PSALMS. {113 3 


ties of holiness from the womb of beginning of wisdom: a good un- 


the morning: thou hast the dew derstanding have all they that do 

of thy youth. his commandments: his praise 
4 The LorpD hath sworn, and will endureth for ever. 

not “repent, Thou art a priest for 

ever after the order of “Melchizedek. PSAIM 112. 


5 The Lord at thy right hand 4 
shall strike through kings in the|¢2Zech-8.14, pes ye the Lorp. &Blessed 
day of his wrath. para is the man that feareth the 

6 He shall judge among the|i See Heb.5.6; |LoRD, that delighteth greatly in 
theathen, he shall fill the places} ©-20;721.  /his commandments. 
with the dead bodies; he shall|.;. nations: | 2 “His seed shall be mighty upon 


wound the heads over many coun-} also Psa. earth: the generation of the upright 
tries. é 111.6: shall be blessed. 

7 He shall drink of the brook in) 7 psa.19.9, 3 Wealth and riches shall be in 
the way: therefore shall he lift up} note. his house: and his righteousness 
the head. ere endureth for ever. 

“note: Ica. |.4 *Unto the upright there ariseth 
PSALM 111. 59.20, note. |light in the amen he is ere 
+31.  jcious, and full of compassion, an 
PRAISE ye the Lorp. I will//PU2\o, |righteous. 

Role heart regen tag of gus pe endemic pret eee ae 
w 3 : - - 
upright, and in the congregation.|*P5*178! | fairs *with discretion. 

2. The works of the LORD are|h Psa.25.13; 6 Surely he shall not be moved 
great, sought out of all them that] 37.26; 102.28-|for ever: ‘the righteous shall be in 
have pleasure therein. |;Psa.o711;  |€vetlasting remembrance. 

3 His work is honourable andj Job 11.17. 7 He shall not be afraid of evil 
glorious: and his righteousness en-} . _ |tidings: his heart is fixed, “trusting 
dureth for ever. 9 Psa3726; lin the LORD. : 

4 He hath made his wonderful 8 His heart 1s established, he shall 


works to be remembered: the LORD bees as not be afraid, until he see his de- 
is gracious and full of compassion.| ~°"*” sire upon his enemies. 
5 He hath given meat unto them| / Prov.10.7. 9 He hath “dispersed, he hath 


that ¢fear him: he will ever be pila given to the poor; his righteousness 
mindful of his covenant. m Psa-2-12,  lendureth for ever; his horn shall 
6 He hath shewed his people the be exalted with honour. 

power of his works, that he may)" 2 Cor.9.9. 10 The wicked shall see it, and be 


give them the heritage of the|,pan220, /gtieved; he shall gnash with his 
heathen. teeth, and melt away: the desire of 


7 The works of his hands are bee Rit the wicked shall perish. 
verity and judgment; all nis com- ST 


mandments are sure. 

8 They stand fast for ever and PSALM 113. 4 

“ever, and are done in truth and up- jee ye the Lorp. Praise, 

rightness. O ye servants of the LorpD, 

9 He sent ‘redemption unto his praise the name of the LORD. 
people: he hath commanded his 2 Blessed be the name of the 
covenant for ever: holy and rev- Lorp from this time forth and for 
erend is his name. evermore. ee 

10 The ‘fear of the LorD is the! 3 From the rising of the sun unto 


Mk. 12. 35-37; Lk. 20. 41-44; Acts 2. 34, 35; Heb. 1. 13; 10. 12, 13). _ (2) This Psalm 
announces the eternal priesthood of Messiah—one of the most important state- 
ments of Scripture (v. 4; Gen. 14. 18, note; Heb. 5. 6, note; 7. 1-28; 1 Tim. 2. 
s, 6; John 14. 6). (3) Historically, the Psalm begins with the ascension of Christ 
v. 1: John 20. 17; Acts 7. 56; Rev. 3. 21). (4) Prophetically, the Psalm looks on 
fs to the time when Christ will appear as the Rod of Jehovah’s strength, the 
Deliverer out of Zion (Rom. 11. 25-27), and the conversion of Israel (v..33Joel 255275 
Zech. 13. 9. See Deut. 30. 1-9, note); and (b) to the judgment upon the Gentile 
powers which precedes the setting up of the kingdom (vs. 5, 6; Joel 3. 9-17; Zech. 
14. 1-4; Rev. 19. 11-21). See “Armageddon” (Rev. 16. 14; 19. 17, note); ‘Israel’ 
(Gen. 12. 2, 3; Rom. 11. 26, note); “Kingdom” (Zech. 12. 8, note; 1 Cor. 15. 28, 
note). See Psa. 2., note, first, and Psa. 118., last in order of the Messianic 


Psalms. 
655 


‘ 


113 4) 


PSALMS. 
the going down of the same the walk not: neither speak they 


Lorp’s name is to be praised. 

4 The Lorp is high above all na- 
tions, and @4his glory above the 
heavens. 

5 Who is like unto the LoRD our 
God, who dwelleth on high, 

6 'Who humbleth himself to be- 
hold the things that are in heaven, 
and in the earth! 

7 ‘He raiseth up the poor out of 
the dust, and lifteth the needy out 
of the dunghill; t 

8 ¢That he may set him with 
princes, even with the princes of 
his people. 

9 He maketh the barren woman 
to keep house, and to be a joyful 
mother of children. Praise ye the 
LorbD. 


PSALM 114. 


VJTEN Israel went out of Egypt, 
the house of Jacob “from a 
people of strange language; 

2 fJudah was his sanctuary, and 
Israel his dominion. 

3 &8The sea saw it, and fled: /Jor- 
dan was driven back. 

4 The mountains skipped like 
rams, and the little hills like lambs. 

5 *What ailed thee, O thou sea, 
that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, 
that thou wast driven back? 

6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped 
like rams; and ye little hills, like 
lambs? 

7 Tremble, thou earth, at the 
presence of the Lord, at the pres- 
ence of the God of Jacob; 

8 jJWhich turned the rock into a 
standing water, the flint into a 
fountain of waters. 


PSALM 115. 


*NOT unto us, O LorD, not unto 
us, but unto thy name give 
glory, for thy merey, and for thy 
truth’s sake. 

2 Wherefore should the “heathen 
say, Where is now their God? 

3 ™But our God isin the heavens: 
he hath done whatsoever he hath 
pleased. 

4 Their idols are silver and gold, 
the work of men’s hands. 

5 They have mouths, but they 
speak not: eyes have they, but they 
see not: 

6 They have ears, but they hear 
not: noses have they, but they 
smell not: 

7 They have hands, but they han- 
dle not: feet have they, but they 


a Psa.8.1. 

6 Psa.11.4; 
138.6; Isa. 
57.15. 


¢1 Sam.2.8; 
Psa.107.41. 


d Job 36.7. 

e Psa.81.5. 

f Ex.6.7; 19.6; 
25.8; 29.45, 
46; Deut. 
27.9. 

g Psa.77.16; 
Ex.14.21. 

h Josh.3.13,16. 

i Hab.3.8. 

j Psa.107.35; 
Ex.17.6; 
Num.20.11. 

k See Isa.48. 
11; Ezk. 
36.32. 

lie. nations. 

m Psa.135.6; 

1 Chr.16.26; 
Dan.4.35. 

n Also v.11; 
Psa.2.12, 
note. 

o Also v.13; 
Psa,19,9, 
note. 

p Psa.128,1,4. 


q Eccl.9.5, 
note. 


r Psa.18.4-6. 

s Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note, 


t Heb. found 
me. 


u Psa.119.137; 
145.17; 


v Jer.6.16; 
Mt.11.29, 


w Psa.13.6; 
119.17. 


x Psa.56.13. 


656 


[116 7 


through their throat. 


8 They that make them are like © 


unto' them; so 1s every one that 
trusteth in them. i 

9 O Israel, “trust thou in the 
Lorp: he is their help and their 
shield. 

10 O house of Aaron, trust in the 
Lorp: he is their help and. their 
shield. 


11 Ye that fear the Lorp, trust — 


in the Lorp: he ss their help and 
their shield. 

12 The Lorp hath been mindful 
of us: he will bless us; he will bless 
the house of Israel; he will bless 
the house of Aaron. 

13 He will bless them that fear 
the LorD, both small and great. 

14 The Lorp shall increase you 
more and more, you and your chil- 
dren. ; 

15 Ye are blessed of the Lorp 
which made heaven and earth. 

16 The heaven, even the heav- 
ens, are the LORD’s: but the earth 
hath he given to the children of 
men. 

17 The /@dead praise not the 
LorpD, neither any that go down 
into silence. 

18 But we will bless the Lorp 
from this time forth and for ever- 
more. Praise the Lorp. 


PSALM 116. 


I LOVE the Lorpb, because he 
hath heard my voice and my 
supplications. 

2 Because he hath inclined his ear 
unto me, therefore will I call upon 
him as long as I live. 

3 ’The sorrows of death com- 
passed me, and the pains of shell 
‘gat hold upon me: I found trouble 
and sorrow. 

4 Then called I upon the name of 
the LorD; O Lorp, I beseech thee, 
deliver my soul. 

5 Gracious is the Lorp, and 
“righteous; yea, our God ss mer- 
ciful. 

6 The Lorp preserveth the sim- 
ple: I was brought low, and he 
helped me. 

7 "Return unto thy rest, O my 
soul; “for the Lorp hath dealt 
bountifully with thee. 

8 *For thou hast delivered my 


soul from death, mine eyes from 
tears, and my feet from falling, 

9 I will walk before the Lorp in 
the land of the living. 


116 10] 


10 I believed, °*therefore have I 
spoken: I was greatly afflicted: 

ll Isaidin my haste, All men are 
liars. i 

12 What shall I render unto the 
Lorp for all his benefits toward 
me? 

13 I will take the cup of salvation, 
and call upon the name of the 
Lorp. : 

14 I will pay my vows unto the 
LORD now in the presence of all his 
people. 

15 Precious in the sight of the 
LorD rs the death of his saints. 

16 O Lorp, truly I am thy ser- 
vant; I am thy servant, and the 
son of thine handmaid: thou hast 
loosed my bonds. 

17. <I will offer to thee the sacrifice’ 
of thanksgiving, and will call upon 
the name of the LorbD. 

18 I will pay my vows unto the 
LorD now in the presence of all his 
people, 

19 In the courts of the Lorp’s 
house, in the midst of thee,. O: Jeru- 
‘salem. Praise ye the LORD. 


PSALM 117. 


@PRAISE the LorD, all ye na- 

tions: praise him, all ye people. 

2 For his merciful kindness is 

great toward us: and the truth of 

the LorD endureth for ever. 
Praise ye the Lorp. 


PSALM 118. 


GIVE thanks unto the LorpD; 
for he is good: because his 
mercy endureth for ever. 

2 Let Israel now say, that his 
mercy endureth for ever. 

_- 3 Let the house of Aaron now say, 
that his mercy endureth for ever. 

4 Let them now that ‘fear the 
Lorp say, that his mercy en- 
dureth for ever. 

5 I called upon the Lorp in dis- 
tress: the LORD answered me, and 
set me in a large place. 

6 The fLorpD is on my side; I will 
not fear: what can man do unto 
me? ; 

7 The Lorp taketh my part with 
them that help me: therefore shall 
I see my desire upon them that 
hate me. 

8 Itis better to trust in the LORD 


PSALMS. 


a 2 Cor.4.13. 
b Psa:72.14. 


¢ Psa.50.14; 
107.22; Lev. 
“ile 


d Rom.15.11. 


e Psa.19.9, 
note. 


J Heb.13.6. 


g Psa.2.12, 
note. 


h Psa.88.17. 
i Deut.1.44. 


j Ex.15.2; 
Isa.12.2. 


k Psa.6.5; 
Hab.1.12. 


\L 2 Cor.6.9. 
li Psa.24.7. 


n 1sa.35.8; 
Rev.21.27; 
22.14,15. 


o Christ 
(as Stone). 
Isa.8.14. 
(Ex.17.6; 
1 Pet.2.8.) 


pb Heb. This is 
from the 
Lord. 


q Mt.21.9; 
23.39; Mk. 
11.9; Lk.13. 
35; 19.38; 
John 12.13. 


[118 28 


9 It is better to &trust in the LorD 
than to put confidence in princes. 
10 All nations compassed me 
about: but in the name of the LorD 
will I destroy them. 

11 They compassed me about; 
yea, they compassed me about: but 
in the name of the Lorp I will de- 
stroy them. 

12 They compassed me about like 
"bees; they are quenched as the fire 
of thorns: for in the name of the 
LorD I will destroy them. 

13 Thou hast thrust sore at me 
that I might fall: but the: Lorp 
helped me. 

14 JThe LorpD is my strength and 
song, and is become. my salva- 
tion. privd 

15 The voice of rejoicing and sal- 
vation isin the tabernacles of the 
righteous: the right hand of the 
LorpD doeth valiantly. 

16 The right hand of the Lorp is 
exalted: the right hand of the Lorp 
doeth valiantly. 

17 *I shall not die, but live; and 
declare the works of the Lorp. 

18 The LorpD ‘hath chastened me 
sore: but he hath not given me over 
unto death. 

19 Open to me the gates of right- 
eousness: I will go into them, and 
I will praise the Lorpb: 

20 This gate of the Lorp, “into 
which the righteous shall enter. 

21 I will praise thee: for thou hast 
heard me, and art become my sal- 
vation. 

22 1The °stone which the build- 
ers refused is become the head 
stone of the corner. 

23 2This is the LorD’s doing; it 
is marvellous in our eyes, 

24 This is the day which the 
LorD hath made; we will rejoice 
and. be glad in it. 

25 Save now, I beseech thee, O 
Lorp: O Lorp, I beseech thee, 
send now prosperity. 

26 Blessed be he that cometh in 
the name of the 7LORD: we have 
blessed you out of the house of the 
LORD. 

27 God is the LorD, which hath’ 
shewed us light: bind the sacrifice 
with cords, even unto the horns of 
the altar. 

28 Thou art my God, and I will 
praise thee: thou art my God, I 


than to put confidence in man. will exalt thee. } 


1See “Christ (as Stone 
the rejection of the Stone 


),” Ex. 17. 6; 1 Pet. 2. 8, note. | ‘ 
(Christ) to His final exaltation in the kingdom (v. 22). 


Sée'Psa. 2., first of the Messianic Psalms. 


657 


Psa. 118. looks beyond 


118 29] PSALMS. . [119 29° 


15 I will meditate in thy precepts, 

and have respect unto thy ways. 
16 I will. delight myself in thy 

statutes: I will not forget thy word. 


29 10 give thanks unto the Lorp; 
for he is good: for his mercy en- 
dureth for ever. 


PSALM 119. 4 GIMEL. 
S 17 ¢Deal bountifully with thy 
BLESSED are the undefiled in servant, that I may live, and keep 
the way, who walk 4in the law thy word. 
_ of the Lorp. a Law (of 18 Open thou mine eyes, that I 
2 Blessed are they that keep his Bonet: vs: |may behold wondrous things out of 
testimonies, and that seek him) 30-14’ (ex. |thy law. 

with the whole heart. 19.1, Gal.3. 19 “I am a stranger in the earth: =~ 
3 They also do no iniquity: they| 1-29-) hide not thy c andments from 


walk in his ways. b1John3.9; {me. 
4 Thou hast commanded us to) 5.18. _20 My soul breaketh for the long- 

keep thy precepts diligently. 62 Che1s.ise [De that it hath unto thy judg- 
5 O'that my ways were directed|~° “"* Iments at all times. 

to keep thy statutes! d Psa.116.7. 21 Thou hast rebuked the proud 
6 Then shall I not be ashamed, Ped cece that are cursed, which do err from 

when I have respect unto all thy|°Gara79; [thy commandments. 

commandments. 1 Chr.29.15; | 22 fRemove from me reproach 
7 I will praise thee with upright- pans and contempt; for I have kept thy 

ness of heart, when I shall have| ““""*"*  |testimonies. 

learned thy righteous judgments. | Psa.39.8. 23 Princes also did sit and speak 
8 I will keep thy statutes: O for- against me: buf thy servant did 


sake me not utterly. SSG Ee ees in thy panes 
h v.40; Psa. 24 y testimonies also are my’ 
J BETH. 143.11. delight and my counsellors. 


9 Wherewithal shall a young man] ; psa.145.5.6. 
cleanse his way? by taking heed!‘ : ‘T DALETH. 
thereto according to thy word. j Heb. drop- 25 My soul cleaveth unto the 


10 ‘With my whole heart have I ese dust: #quicken thou me according 
sought thee: O let me not wander to thy word. 
from thy commandments. 26 I have declared my ways, and © 
11 Thy word have I hid in mine thou heardest me: teach me thy 
heart, that I might not sin against statutes. 
thee, 27 Make me to. understand the 
12 Blessed art thou, O Lorp: way of thy precepts: ‘so shall I 
teach me thy statutes. talk of thy wondrous works. 
13 With my lips have I declared 28 My soul Jmelteth for heavi- 
all the judgments of thy mouth. ness: strengthen thou me according 
14 Ihave rejoicedin the way of thy unto thy word. 
testimonies, as muchas inall riches. 29 Remove from meé thé way of 


1 The Messianic Psalms: Summary. That the Psalms contain a testimony to 
Christ our Lord Himself affirmed (Lk. 24. 44, etc.); and the N.T. quotations from 
the Psalter point unerringly to those Psalms which have the Messianic character. 
A close spiritual and prophetic character as surely identifies others. Christ is seen 
in the Psalms (1) in two general characters, as suffering (e.g. Psa. 22.), and as 
entering into His kingdom glory (e.g. Psa. 2.; 24. Cf, Lk. 24. 25-27), 

(2) Christ is seen in His person (a) as Son of God (Psa. 2. 7), and very God 

Se 45. 6, 7; 102. 25; 110. 1); (6) as Son of man (Psa. 8. 4-6); (c) as Son of David 

Psa. & ate 27, 29). (a) 

) rist is seen in His offices (a) as Prophet (Psa. 22. 22, 25; 40. 

(b) as Priest (Psa. 110. 4); and (c) as King (e.g. Psa. es ts Sigil 
4) Christ is seen in His varied work. As Priest He offers Himself in sacrifice 

(Psa, 22.; 40. 6, with Heb. 10. 5-12), and, in resurrection, as the Priest-Shepherd, 
ever living to make intercession (Psa. 23., with Heb. 7. 21-25; 13. 20). As Prophet 
He proclaims the name of Jehovah as Father (Psa. 22. 22, with John 20, 17). As 
King He fulfils the Davidic Covenant (Psa. 89.) and restores alike the dominion 


a es sae creation (Psa. 8. 4-8; Rom. 8. 17-21); and of the Father over all (1 Cor. 
. 25-28). 


(5) The Messianic Psalms give, also, the inner thoughts, the exercises of soul, — 


of Christ in His earthly experiences. (See, e.g., Psa. 16. 8-11; 22. 1-21; 40, 1-17.) 
658 


119 30] 


lying: and grant me thy law gra- 
ciously. 

30 I have chosen the way of 
truth: thy judgments have I laid 
before me. 

31 I have stuck unto thy testi- 
monies: O LORD, put me not to 
shame. 

32 I will run the way of thy com- 
mandments, when thou shalt ¢en- 
large my heart. 


1 RY 


33 Teach me, O LorD, the way of 
thy statutes; and I shall keep it 
unto the end. 

34 Give me understanding, and I 
shall keep thy law; yea, I shall ob- 
serve it with my whole heart. 

35 Make me to go in the path of 
thy commandments; for therein do 
I delight. 

36 Incline my heart unto thy testi- 
monies, and not to ‘covetousness. 

37 Turn away mine eyes from be- 
holding vanity; and quicken thou 
me in thy way. 

38 Stablish thy word unto thy 
servant, who is devoted tothy @fear. 

39 Turn away my reproach which 


I fear: for thy judgments are good.| Mt.10.18,19; 


40 Behold, I have longed after thy 
precepts: quicken me in thy right- 
eousness. 


Y VAU. 


41 Let thy mercies come also unto 
me, O LorD, even thy salvation, 
according to thy word. 

42 So shall I have wherewith to 
answer him that reproacheth me: 
for I ‘trust in thy word. 

43 And take not the word of truth 
utterly out of my mouth; for I have 
hoped in thy judgments. 

44 So shall I keep thy law con- 
tinually for-ever and ever. 

45 And I will walk at liberty: for 
I seek thy precepts. 

46 JI will speak of thy testimonies 
also before kings. and will not be 
ashamed. 

47 And I will delight myself in 
thy commandments, which I have 
loved. 

48 My hands also will I lift up 
unto thy- commandments, which I 
have loved; and I will meditate in 
thy statutes. 

? ZAIN. 

49 Remember the word unto thy 

servant, upon which thou hast 


caused me to hope. ’ 
50 £This is my comfort in my 


PSALMS. 


e Psa.2.12, 
note. 


f Psa.138.1; 
Acts 26.1,2. 

g Rom.15.4, 

h Jer.20.7, 

i Ezra 9.3, 

j Psa.16.5; 
Jer.10.16; 
Lam.3.24- 


k Heb. face. 
Job 11.19. 


1 Lk.15.17,18. 
m Also v.74. 


Psa.19.9, 
note. 


659 


[119 72 


from thy law. 

52 I remembered thy judgments 
of old, O Lorp; and have comforted 
myself. 

53 *Horror hath taken hold upon 
me because of the wicked that for- 
sake thy law. 

54 Thy statutes have been my 
songs in the house of my pil tjmage, 

55 I have remembered thy name, 
O Lorp, in the night, and have 
kept thy law. 

56 This I had, because I kept thy 
precepts. 


mM CHETH 


57 JThou art my portion, O 
Lorp: I have said that I would 
keep thy words. 

58 I intreated thy *favour with 
my whole heart: be merciful unto 
me according to thy word. 

59 4I thought on my ways, and 
turned my feet unto thy testimonies, 

60 I made haste, and delayed not 
to keep thy commandments, 

61 The bands of the wicked have 
robbed me: but I have not forgot: 
ten thy law. 

62 At midnight I will rise to give 
thanks unto thee because of thy 
righteous judgments. 

63 I amacompanion of all them 
that “fear thee, and of them that 
keep thy precepts. 

64 The earth, O LorpD, is full of 
thy mercy: teach me thy statutes. 


0 TETH. 


65 Thou hast dealt well with thy 
servant, O LORD, according unto 
thy word. 

66 Teach me good judgment and 
knowledge: for I have believed thy 
commandments. 

67 Before I was afflicted I went 
astray: but now have I kept thy 
word. 

68 Thou art good, and doest 
good; teach me thy statutes. 

69 The proud have forged a lie 
against me: but I will keep thy 
precepts with my whole heart. 

70 Their heart is as fat as grease; 
but I delight in thy law. 

71 It is good for me that I have 
been afflicted; that I might learn 
thy statutes. 

72 The law of thy mouth is better 
woe me than thousands of gold and 

ver. 


Fil 


119 73} 


joD. 


73 Thy hands have made me and 
fashioned me: give me understand- 
ing, that I may learn thy command- 
ments. 

74 They that fear thee will be 
glad when they see me; because I 
have hoped in thy word. 

75 I know, O Lorp, that thy 
judgments are right, and *that thou 
in faithfulness hast afflicted me. 

76 Let, I pray thee, thy merciful 
kindness be for my comfort, accord- 
ing to thy word unto thy servant. 

77 Let thy tender mercies come 
unto me, that I may live: >for thy 
law is my delight. 

_ 78 Let the proud be ashamed; for 
they dealt perversely with me with- 
out a cause: but I will meditate in 
thy precepts. 

79 Let those that fear thee turn 
unto me, and those that have known 
thy testimonies. 

80 Let my heart be sound in thy 
statutes; that I be not ashamed. 


2 CAPH. 


81 “My soul fainteth for thy sal- 
vation: but I hope in thy word. 

82 Mine eyes fail for thy word, 
saying, When wilt thou comfort me? 

83 4For I am become like a bottle 
in the smoke; yet do I not forget 
thy statutes. 

84 How many are the days of thy 
servant? ‘when wilt thou execute 
judgment on them that persecute 
me? 

85 The proud have digged pits for 
me, which are not after thy law. 

86 All thy commandments are 
faithful: /they persecute me wrong- 
fully; help thou me. 

87 They had almost consumed me 
upon earth; but I forsook not thy 
precepts. 

88 Quicken me after thy loving- 
kindness; so shall I keep the testi- 
mony of thy mouth. 


5 LAMED. 


89 8For ever, O Lorp, thy word 
is settled in heaven. 

90 Thy faithfulness 7s unto all 
generations: thou hast established 
the earth, and it “abideth. 

_91 They continue this day accord- 
ing to thine ordinances: for all are 
thy servants. 

92 Unless thy law had been my 
delights, I should then have per- 
ished in mine affliction. 

93 I will never forget thy pre- 


PSALMS. 


a Heb.12.10. 

b vs.24,47,174. 

c Psa,73,26; 
84.2. 


d Job 30.30. 

e Rev:6.10. 

f Psa.35.19; 
38.19. 

g Psa:89.2; 
Mt.24:34,35; 
1 Pet.1,25. 

h Heb. stand- 
eth. 


1 Rom.3.10-19. 


j Psa-1.2. 
k 2 Tim.3.15. 
1 Prov.1.15. 


m Psa.19:10; 
Prov.8.11. 


n Prov:6.23. 
o Neh.10.29. 


Pp Hos.14.2; 
Heb.13.15. 


q Deut.33.4. 


r Psa.32.7; 
91.1. 


660 


[119 114 


cepts: for with them thou ‘hast — 
quickened me. 

94 Iam thine, save me; for I have 
sought thy precepts. 

95 The wicked have waited for 
me to destroy me: but I will con- 
sider thy ‘testimonies. 

96 I ‘have seen an end of all per- 
fection: but thy commandment ss 
exceeding broad. : 


D MEM. 


97 O how love I thy law! Jit is 
my meditation all the day. 

98 Thou through thy command- 
ments hast made me wiser than © 
mine enemies: for they are ever 
with me. 

99 I have more understanding 
than all my teachers: “for thy tes- 
timonies are my meditation. 

100 I understand more than the 
ancients, because I keep thy precepts. 

101 ‘I have refrained my feet 
from every evil way, that I might 
keep thy word. 

102 I have not departed from thy 
judgments: for thou hast taught me. 

103 “How sweet are thy words 
unto my taste! yea, sweeter than 
honey to my mouth! 

104 Through thy precepts I get 


understanding: therefore I ‘hate 
every false way. 

3} NUN. 
105 “Thy word is a lamp unto 


my feet, and a light unto my path. 

106 °I have-sworn, and I will per- 
form it, that I will keep thy right- 
eous judgments. 

107 I am afflicted very much: 
quicken me, O Lorp, according 
unto thy word. 

108 Accept, I beseech thee, *the 
freewill-offerings of my mouth, © 
LorRD, and teach me thy judg- 
ments. 

109 My soul zs continually in my 
hand: yet do I not forget thy Jaw. 

110 The wicked ‘have laid a snare 
for me: yet I erred not from thy 
precepts. 

lll °’Thy ‘testimonies have T 
taken as an heritage for ever: for 
they are the rejoicing of my heart. 

112 I have inclined mine heart to 
perform thy statutes alway, even 
unto the end. 


D SAMECH. 


113 TI hate vain thoughts: but thy 
law do I love. 

114 ’Thou art my hiding place 
and my shield: I hope in thy word. 


“119 115] 


115 *Depart from me, ye evil- 


doers: for I will keep the com-} 


mandments of my God. 

116 Uphold me according. unto 
thy word, that I may live: °and let 
me not be ashamed of my hope. 

117 Hold thou me up, and I shall 


be safe: and I will have respect|? 


unto thy statutes continually. 

118 Thou hast trodden down all 
them that err from thy statutes: for 
their deceit is falsehood. 

119 Thou puttest away all the 
wicked of the earth ‘Jike dross: 
therefore I love thy testimonies. 

120 ¢My flesh trembleth for fear 
of thee; and I am afraid of thy 
judgments. 


y AIN. 


421 I have done judgment and 
justice: leave me not to mine op- 
‘pressors. 

122 ¢Be surety for thy servant for 
good: let not the proud oppress 


me. 

123 Mine eyes fail for thy salva- 
tion, and for the word of thy right- 
eousness. 

124 Deal with thy servant accord- 
ing unto thy mercy, and ‘teach me 
thy statutes. 

125 I am thy servant; give me 
understanding, that I may know 
thy testimonies. 

126 It is time for thee, LORD, to 
por for they have made void thy 
aw. 


127 &Therefore I love thy com- é 


mandments above gold; yea, above) 
fine gold. 


128 Therefore I esteem all thy] 17 


precepts concerning all things to 
be right; and I hate every false 
way. 

DPE. 


129 Thy testimonies are wonder- 
ful: therefore doth my soul keep 
them. 

130 The entrance of thy words 
giveth light; “it giveth understand- 
ing unto the simple. 

131 I opened my mouth, and 


panted: for I longed for thy com- 
mandments. 


PSALMS. 


Psa.6.8; 
139.19; Mt. 
7.23- 

b Psa.25.2; 
Rom.5.5; 
9.33; 10.11. 

¢ Ezk.22.18. 

d Hab.3.16. 

¢ Heb.7.22. 

fvl2. 

g v.72; Psa. 
19.10; Prov. 
8.11. 

h Psa.19.7; 

| Prov.1.4. 

\t Psa.106.4. 

7 Psa.51.1. 

pe Vk:1.74. 

1 Psa.4.6. 

m Jer.9.1; 


n Heb. right- 
eousness. 


o faithful- 
ness. 


Heb. tried, 
or refined. 


qv.151; Psa. 
19:9; John 
Ee 


r Psa.5.3; 


88.13; 130.6. 


Is Psa.63.1,6. 

t Psa.145.18. 

4 Lk.21.33. 

vLam.5.1, 

w Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 


type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


132 ‘Look thou upon me, and be} 


jmerciful unto me, as thou usest to} 


do unto those that love thy name. 
133: Order my steps in thy word: 
and let not any iniquity have do- 
minion over me. 
134 Deliver me from the oppres- 
sion of man: so will I keep thy pre-{ 
cepts. 


661 


[119 156 


135 ‘Make thy face to shine upon 
thy servant; and teach me thy 
statutes. 

136 “Rivers of waters run down 
mine eyes, because they keep not 
thy law. 


Y TZADDI. 


137 *Righteousart thou, OLORD, 
and upright are thy judgments. 

138 Thy testimonies that thou 
hast commanded are righteous 
and very faithful. 

139 My zeal hath consumed me, 
because mine enemies have fer- 
gotten thy words. 

140 Thy word ss very ?pure: 
therefore thy servant loveth it. 

141 I am small and despised: yet 
do not I forget thy precepts. 

142 Thy righteousness ss an ever- 
lasting righteousness, and %’thy_law 
is the truth. 

143 Trouble and anguish have 
taken hold on me: yet thy com- 
mandments are my delights. 

144 The righteousness of thy 
testimonies is everlasting: give me 
understanding, and I shail live. 


‘D KOPH. 


145. I cried with my whole heart; 
hear me, O Lorp: I will keep thy 
statutes. 

146. I cried unto thee; save me, 
and I shall keep thy testimonies, 

147 *I prevented the dawning of 
the morning, and cried: I hoped. in 
thy word. 

148 sSMine eyes prevent the night 
watches, that I might meditate in 
thy word. , 

149 Hear my voice according 
unto thy lovingkindness: O Lorb, 
quicken me according to thy judg- 
ment. 

150 They draw nigh that follow 
after mischief: they are far from 
thy law. 

151 ‘Thou art near, O,LORD; and 
all thy commandments are truth. 

152 Concerning thy. testimonies, I 
have known. of old “that thou hast 
founded them for ever. 


“ RESH. 


153 *Consider mine affliction, and 
deliver me: for I do not forget thy ° 
law. 

154 Plead my cause, and “deliver 
me: quicken me according to thy 
word, 

155 Salvation is far from the wick- 
ed: for they seek not thy statutes. 

156 Great are thy tender mercies, 


7 YF ‘ vail, te “ee Soa S. 


, + f Cie ole poe 
119 157] PSALMS. {122 4 
O Lorp: quicken me according to PSALM 120. 
thy judgments. A 

137 Many are my persecutors Poa A Song of. !degrees. 
and mine enemies; yet do I not) NN my distress I cried unto the 
‘decline from thy testimonies. aaa eee I Lorp, and he heard me. 

158 I beheld the transgressors,| 14;'6.18. 2 Deliver my soul, O Lorp, from 
and was grieved; because they kept) | | liying lips, and from a deceitful 
not ue ere eed lovetiy we “Jsa.32.17, — |tongue. 

LSS NC ORSHIEE METER OV S\EiY PEe- 3 What shall be given unto thee? 
cepts: quicken me, Sharan accord-|d Heb. they 14> what shall be done unto thee, 
ing to thy lovingkin — the| 2°.stum- thou false tongue? ; 
ro Thy werd cai aes gone fas bling block. | 4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, 
righteous judgments endur eth for) * errs 18 aan ere ae Bors sojourn in 
ever. van Meech. okie I dwell in the tents 

W SCHIN, = gee of Kedar %: -. 

) ira g Josh.24.22; 6 My soul hath long dwelt with 
161 °Princes have persecuted me}° proy1.29; him that hateth peace. 

Aa es a ean ae aa heart) Lk.10.42. 7 I am for peace: but when I 
162 I rejoice at thy word, as one 4 feist: Break, they. are don arar, 
Segre acetate Meroe age PSALM 121, 

Baas do res Pago ecat eestiets A Song of !degrees. 

ER EOE Se EES RWILL lift up mine eyes unto 
; 7 <25.13s 

AU le of thy righteous judg- F585, 29. I ine hills, from whence cometh 
: : my help. 

i rae peace pee ae Naseer kOn, Sg ten 2 ‘My help cometh from the 
Aas at ea Phaaieponrbes yt gp eyes to the |LORD, which made heaven and 

= iss: earth. 

ae ee ee gene coped for a aout my | 3 ™He will not suffer thy foot to 
riweron cAGIs Sake) ates CON fers aE ae help come? bemueyed: she that keepeth thee 

: F ly help ill not slumber. 

167, My ee perk thy neat: fonevre | 4 Behold, he that keepeth Israel 
ele saa Se ea roms eens slumber ve sleep. 

; Lats e LORD is thy keeper: the 

168 I have kept thy precepts and] /See Jer.3.23. 5 Ott rs f 
thy testimonies: for all my ways Ls Peat ow are a8 shade ?upon thy right 
are before thee. Prov.3.23,26. 8 gas sun pbel Bet Sinise thee 

Nn TAU. n Psa.127.1: y day, nor the moon by night. 
27.3. 7 The Lorpb shall preserve thee 

169 Let my cry come near before| 1-273 ae 
ips Be helen aid Cy me understand. o Isa.25.4. arse evil: he shall ‘preserve 
ing according to thy word. ; 8 The Lorp shall preserve thy 
170 Let my supplication come|? aca stan . nhac 
as thes deliver me according to ag viper hae oak =) Bh cntat bakes 
thy word. ia SRE Op z 

171 Mylipsshallutterpraise,when| $2420) — jmiore. 
thou hast taught ae thy statute arte PSALM 122. 

172 My tongue shall speak of thy|” Psa.41.2; A Song of 1d f David 
word: for all thy commandments| 97-10 145.20. ong oO egrees of David. 
are righteousness. s Deut.28.6; WAS glad when they said unto 

173 Let thine hand help me; for Pena me, ‘Let us go into the house of 
8] have chosen thy precepts. an the LORD. 

174 I havelonged for thy salvation, | ¢ Isa.2.3; 2 Our feet shall stand within thy 
OLorp; and thy law is my delight. | Zech8.21.  |gates, O Jerusalem. 

175 Let my soul live, and it shall|,,see2sam. | 3 Jerusalem is builded as a city 
praise thee; and let thy judgments} 5.9. that is “compact together: 
help me. CLES 4 YWhither the tribes go up, the 


176 “I have gone astray like a lost 
sheep; seek thy servant; for I do 
not forget thy commandments. 


mony of Israel, to give thanks unto 


Deut.16.16. free of the LorD, unto the testi- 


the name of the Lorp. 


‘1 Literally, “of ascents.” 
Jerusalem to the feasts, 


662 


Perhaps chanted by the people as they went up to 
See, e.g. Psa. 122.1, 2. 


122 5] 

5 “For there are set thrones of 
judgment, the thrones of the house 
of David. 

6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: 
they shall prosper that love thee. 

7 Peace be within thy walls, and 
prosperity within thy palaces. 

8 For my brethren and compan- 
ions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace 
be within thee. 

9 Because of the house of the 
Lorp our God I will seek thy good. 


a Deut.17.8; 
2 Chr.19.8. 


b See Psa.120, 
title, note. 


c Psa.56.1,2; 
57.3; Prov. 
1.12. 


PSALM 123. 
A Song of 4degrees. 
NTO thee lift I up mine eyes, 
-O thou that dwellest in the 
heavens. 

2 Behold, as the eyes of servants 
look unto the hand of their mas- 
ters, and as the eyes of a maiden 
unto the hand of her mistress; so 
our eyes wait upon the LORD our 
God, until that he have mercy 
upon us. 

3 Have mercy upon us, O LorD, 
have mercy upon us: for we are 
exceedingly filled with contempt. 

4 Our soul is exceedingly filled, 
with the scorning of those that are 
at ease, and withthe conternptofthe 
proud. 


d Psa.91,3; 
Prov.6.5. 


e Faith. Jon. 
3.5. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 


tre, 
g Psa.53.6; 85. 


1; Hos.6.11. 
hk Joel 3.1; 
Acts 12.9. 


PSALM 124. ii.e. nations. 
A Song of ®degrees of David., | 7See Jer.31.9. 


EF it had not been the LORD whojé Or, singing. 
was on our side, now may Israel Teo 


say; 
2 If it had not been the LorD 
who was on our Side, when men rose|™ Gen-3-17,19. 
up against us: n Gen.33.5; 
3 Then they had swallowed us| 48.4; Josh. 
up quick, when their wrath was| 243+ 
~ kindled against us: o Deut.28.4. 
4 Then the waters had over- 
whelmed us, the stream had gone 
over our soul: 
5 Then the proud waters had gone 
over our soul. 
6 Blessed be the LorD, who hath 
not given us as a prey to their teeth. 
7 ¢4QOur soul is escaped as a bird 
out of the snare of the fowlers: the 
snare is broken, and we are escaped. 
8 Qur help is in the name of the 
Lorp, who made-heaven and earth, 


PSALM 125. 
A Song of ®degrees. 
HEY that trust in the LORD 
shall be as mount Zion, which 
cannot be removed, but abideth for 


ever. 
663 


PSALMS. 


fOr, the scep- 
Cf. Prov. 
22.8; Isa.14.5. 


1127 5 


2 As the mountains are round 
about Jerusalem, so the LORD is 
round about his people from hence- 
forth even for ever. 

3 For ‘the rod of the wicked shall 
not rest upon the lot of the right- 
eous; lest the righteous put forth 
their hands unto iniquity. 

4 Do good, O Lerpb, unto those 
that be good, and to them that 
are upright in their hearts. 

5 As for such as turn aside unto 


‘|their crooked ways, the LorD shall 


lead them forth with the workers 
of iniquity: but peace shall be 
upon Israel. 


PSALM 126. 
A Song of Sdegrees 


Nie the LorD turned again 
the captivity of Zion, "we 
were like them that dream. 

2 Then was our mouth filled with 
laughter, and our tongue with sing- 
ing: then said they among the 
theathen, The Lorp hath done 
great things for them. 

3 The Lorp hath done great 
things for us; whereof we are 
glad. , 

4 Turn again our captivity, O 
Lorp, as the streams in the south. 

5 jThey that sow in tears shall 
reap in -joy. 

6 He that goeth forth and weep- 
eth, bearing precious seed, shall 
doubtless come again with rejoic- 
ing, bringing his sheaves with 
him. 


PSALM 127 
A Song of °degrees for Solomon. 


PY sceer the Lorp build the 
house, they labour in vain that 
build it: “ex¢ept the LORD keep the 
city, the watchman waketh but in 
vain. 

2 it is vain for you to rise up 
early, to sit up late, “to eat the 
bread of sorrows: for so he giveth 
his beloved sleep. 

3 Lo, *children are an heritage of 
the LorD: and °the fruit of the 
wornb is his reward. 

4 As arrows are in the hand of a 
mighty man; so are children of the 
youth. 

5 Happy is the man that hath 
his quiver full of them: they 
shall not be ashamed, but they 
shall speak with the enemies in 
the gate. 


128 1} 


PSALMS. 


[132 12 


PSALM 128. 
A Song of @degrees. 


BLESSED is every one that 
ofeareth the LorpD; that walk- 
eth in his ways. 

2 For thou shalt eat the labour of 
thine hands: happy shalt thou be, 
and it shall be well with thee. 

3 Thy wife shall be ‘as a fruitful 
vine by the sides of thine house: 
thy children 4like olive plants 
round about thy table. 

4 Behold, that thus shall the man 
be blessed that feareth the Lorp. 

5 The LorD shall bless thee out 
of Zion: and thou shalt see the good 
of Jerusalem all the days of thy 
ife. 

6 Yea, ‘thou shalt see thy chil- 
dren’s children, and peace upon 
Israel. 


PSALM 129. 
A Song of ¢degrees. 


MAXY a time have they afflicted 
me ‘from my youth, may 
Israel now say: 

2 Many atime have they afflicted 
me from my youth: yet they have 
not prevailed against me. 

3 The plowers plowed upon my 
back: they made long their fur- 
rows. 

4 The Lorn Js righteous: he hath 
cut asunder the cords of the wicked. 

5 Let them all be confounded and 
turned back that hate Zion. 

6 Let them be as the grass upon 
the housetops, which withereth 
afore it groweth up: 

‘7 Wherewith the mower filleth not 
his hand; nor he that bindeth 
sheaves his bosom. 

8 Neither do they which go by 
say, The blessing of the Lorp be 
upon you: we bless you in the name 
of the Lorp. 


PSALM 130. 
A Song of “degrees. 


‘oe of the depths have I cried 
unto thee, O Lorp. 

2 Lord, hear my voice: let thine 
ears be attentive to the voice of my 
supplications. 

_3 If thou, Lorn, shouldest mark 
iniquittés~O"Lord who: shall stand? 

4 But there is forgiveness with 
thee, that thou mayest be °feared. 

5 I wait for the Lorp, my soul 
doth wait, and in his word do I 
hope. 


a See Psa.120, 
title, note. 


b Psa.19.9, 
note. 


c Ezk.19.10. 


d Psa.52.8; 
144.12. 


e:Gen.50.23; 
Job 42.16. 


f See Ezk.23. 
3; Hos.2.15; 
ai: 

g.Psa.37.2. 


h Psa.63.6; 
119.147. 


7 Psa.86.5,15; 
Tsa.55.7. 


7Ex.14.30, 


note; Isa.59, 


20, note. 
k Acts 7.46. 
1 Psai122.1,2. 


m Righteous- 
ness (gar- 
ment), Isa. 
11.5. (Gen. 
3.21; Rev. 
19.8.) 


n Psa.89.3,4, 
33; 110.4, 


o 2 Sam.7.12; 
1 Ki.8.25; 
2 Chr.6.16; 
Lk.1.69; 
Acts 2.30. 


6 4My soul waiteth for the Lord — 
more than they that watch for the 
morning: I say, more than they 
that watch for the morning. 

7 Let Israel hope in the Lorpb: 
for with the LorD ‘there is mercy, 
and with him is plenteous Jredemp- 
tion. 

8 And he shall redeem Israel from 
all his iniquities. 


PSALM 131. 
A Song of ¢degrees of David. 


iL FO82: my heart is not haughty, 
nor mine eyes lofty: neither do 
I exercise myself in great matters, 
or in things too high for me. 

2 Surely I have behaved and 
quieted myself, as a child that is 
weaned of his mother: my soul is 
even as a weaned child. 

3 Let Israel hope in the Lorp © 
from henceforth and for ever. 


PSALM 132. 
A Song of @degrees. 


LO. temember David, and all 
his afflictions: 

2 How he sware unto the Lorp, 
and vowed unto the mighty God 
of Jacob; 

3 Surely I will not come into the 
tabernacle of my house, nor go up 
into my bed; 

4 I will not give sleep to mine 
eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, 

5 Until I find out a place for the 
LorD, an habitation for the mighty 
God of Jacob. 

6 Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: 
we found it in the fields of the 
wood. 

7 ‘We will go into his taber- 
nacles: we will worship at his foot- 
stool. 

8 Arise, O Lorp, into thy rest; 
thou, and the ark of thy strength. 

9 Let thy priests be clothed with 
mrighteousness; and let thy saints 
shout for joy. 

10 For thy servant David’s sake 
turn not away the face of thine 
anointed. 

11 "The LorD hath sworn in 
truth unto David; he will not turn 
from it; °Of the fruit of thy body 
will I set upon thy throne. 

12 If thy children will keep my 
covenant and my testimony that I 
shall teach them, their children 
shall also sit upon thy throne for 
evermore, 


132 13] 


PSALMS. [136.5 
aoe. ee 

_ 13 ¢For the Lorp hath chosen that did he in heaven, and in earth, 
Zion; he hath desired it for his|a Psa.48.1,2. jin the seas, and all deep places: 5 
habitation. | pe eate 7 He causeth the vapours to 
14 oThis is my rest for ever: here east ascend from the ends of the earth; 
will I dwell; for I have desired it. |cv.9; Psa. the maketh lightnings for the rain; 


Tse will abundantly bless her pro- 
vision: I will satisfy her poor with 
bread. 

16 <I will also clothe her priests 
with salvation: ¢and her saints 
shall shout aloud for joy. 

17 ¢There will I make the horn of 
David to bud: fI have ordained a 
lamp for mine anointed. 

18 His enemies will ¢I clothe with 
shame: but upon himself shall his 
crown flourish. 


PSALM 133. 
A Song of degrees. of David. 
d and how 


precious ointment 
upon the head, that ran down upon 
the beard, even Aaron’s beard: 
that went down.to the skirts of his 
garments; 

3 jAs the dew of Hermon, and as 
the dew that descended upon the 
mountains of Zion: for *there the 
LorD commanded the blessing, 
even life for evermore. 


PSALM 134. 
A Song of ‘degrees. 


| Baines bless ye the LorpD, all 
ye servants of the LorD, which 
by night stand in the house of the 
LORD. 
2 Lift up your hands in the sanc- 

tuary, and bless the LORD. 

3 The Lorp that made heaven 
and earth bless thee out of Zion. 


PSALM 135. 


PRASE ye the LorD. Praise ye 
the name of the LORD; praise 
him, O ye servants of the LORD. 

2 Ye that stand in the house of 
the LorD, ‘in the courts of the 
house of our God, 

3 Praise the LorD; ™for the LORD 
is good: sing praises unto his name; 
for it is pleasant. 

4 For the Lorp hath chosen 
Jacob unto himself, and Israel for 
his peculiar treasure. ) 

5 oFor I know that the LORD 1s 
great, and that our Lord is above 
all gods. | 

6 *Whatsoever the LorD pleased,’ 


DPrethren TO 


149.4; 2 Chr. 
6.41. 


d 1 Sam.4.5. 


e Ezk.29.21; 
Lk:1.69: 


f See 1 Ki.11. 
36; 15.4; 
2 Chr.21.7. 


g Psa.35.26; 
109.29. 


h See Psa.120, 
title, note. 


¢ Gen.13.8; 
Heb.13.1. 


j Deut.4.48. 

k Lev.25.21; 
Deut.28.8; 
Psa.42.8. 


1 Psa.92.13; 
96.8; 116.19. 


m Psa.119.68. 

n Ex.19:5; 
Deut.7.6,7; 
10:15. 

o Psa.95.3. 

p Psa.115.3. 

gq Job 28.25;26; 
38.24; Zech, 
10.1. 

r Job 38.22. 

s Psa.78.51; 
136.10; 
Ex.12.12,29. 

t Ex.7.-14. 

u Josh.12.7. 


v Psa.78.55; 
136.21,22. 


w Psa.102.12; 
Ex.3.15. 


x Zech.8.14; 
note, 


yie. nations. 


3 Psa.19.9, 
note: 


a1 Chr.16. 
34,41; 2 Chr. 
20.21. 


b Deut.10.17. 
¢ Gen.1.1,6; 


Prov.3.19; 
Jer.51.15, 


665 


he bringeth the wind out of "his 
treasuries. 

8 sWho smote the firstborn of 
Egypt, both of man and beast. 

9 'Who sent tokens and wonders 
into the midst of thee, O Egypt, 
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his 
servants. 

10 Who smote great nations, and 
slew mighty kings; 

11 Sihon king of the Amorites, 
and Og king of Bashan, “and all . 
the kingdoms of Canaan: 

12 %And gave their land for an 
heritage, an heritage unto Israel 
his people. 

13. ’Thy name,.O LorbD, endur- 
eth for ever; and thy memorial, 
O Lorp, throughout. all genera- 
tions. 

14 For the Lorp will judge his 
people, and he will *repent himself 
concerning his servants. 

15 The idols of the Yheathen are 
silver and gold, the work of men’s 
hands. 

16 They have mouths, but they 
speak not; eyes have they, but 
they see not; 

17 They have ears, but they hear 
not; neither is there any breath in 
their mouths. 

18 They that make them are like 
unto them: so is every one that 
trusteth in them. 

19 Bless the LorpD, O house of 
Israel: bless the LorD, O house 
of Aaron: 

20 Bless the Lorp, O house: of 
Levi: ye that #fear the Lorp, bless 
the LORD. 

21 Blessed be the LorD out of 
Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem. 
Praise ye the LORD. 


PSALM 136. 


O GIVE thanks unto the LorD; 
for he is good: ¢for his mercy 
endureth for ever 

2 O give thanks unto the God of 
gods: for his mercy endureth for 
ever. 

3 © give thanks to the Lord of 
lords: for his mercy endureth for 
ever. 

4 To him who alone doeth great 
wonders: for his mercy endureth 
for ever. ; 

5 °To him that by wisdom made 


136 6] 


PSALMS. 


[138 7 


the heavens: for his mercy endur- 
eth for ever. 

6 °To him that stretched out the 
earth above the waters: for his 
mercy endureth for ever. : 

7 °To him that made great lights: 
for his mercy endureth for ever: 

8 ‘The sun to rule by day: for 
his mercy endureth for ever: 

9 The-moon and stars to rule by 
night: for his mercy endureth for 
ever, 

10 4To him that smote Egypt in 
their firstborn: for his mercy en- 
dureth for ever: 

11 ¢And brought out Israel from 
among them: for his mercy endur- 
eth for ever: 

12 fWith a strong hand, and with 
a stretched out arm: for his mercy 
endureth for ever. 

13. 8To him which divided the Red 
sea into parts: for his mercy endur- 
eth for ever: 

14 And made Israel to pass 
through the midst of it: for his 
mercy endureth for ever: 

15 But overthrew Pharaoh and 
his host in the Red sea: for his 
mercy endureth for ever. 

16 To him which led his people 


a Gen.1.9, 
Psa.24.2; 
Jer.10.12. 

6 Gen.1.14. 

c Gen.1.16, 


d Psa.135.8; 
Ex.12.29. 


e Ex.12.51; 
13.3,17. 


f Ex.6.6. 


g Psa.78.13; 
Ex.14.21,22. 


h Psa.135.9; 
Ex.14.27. 


# Psa.135.10, 
ll. 


j Deut.29.7. 
& Num.21.21. 
1 Num.21.33. 
m Psa.135.12; 
Josh.1 


2 We hanged our harps upon the ~ 
willows in the midst thereof. 

3 For there they that carried 
us away captive required of 
us fa song; and they that 
wasted us required of us mirth, 
saying, Sing us one of the songs 
of Zion. 

4 How shall we sing the Lorp’s 
song in a strange land? 

5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, 
let my right hand forget her cun- 
ning. 

6 If I do not remember thee, let 
my ‘tongue cleave to the roof of 
my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem 
above my chief joy. 

7 Remember, O Lorp, the chil- 
dren of ‘Edom in the day of Je- 
rusalem; who said, Raseit, rase 
it, even to the foundation there- 


of. 
‘8°O daughter of Babylon, ‘who || 


‘art to be destroyed; happy shall] he | 


be; that rewardeth thee as thou 
hast served us. 

9 Happy shall he be, that taketh 
and dasheth thy little ones against 
the stones. 


through the wilderness: for his 
mercy endureth for ever. 

17 ‘To him which smote great 
kings: for his mercy endureth for 
ever: 

18 jAnd slew famous kings: for 
his mercy endureth for ever: 

19 *Sihon king of the Amorites: 
for his mercy endureth for 
ever: 

20 'And Og the king of Bashan: 
for his mercy endureth for ever: 

21 ™And gave their land for an 
heritage: for his mercy endureth 
for ever: 

22 Even an heritage unto Israel 
his servant: for his mercy endur- 
eth for ever. 

23 "Who rernembered us in our 
low estate: for his mercy endureth 
for ever: 

24 And hath “redeemed us from 
our enemies: for his mercy endur- 
eth for ever. 

25 Who giveth food to all flesh: 
for his mercy endureth for ever. 

26 O give thanks unto the God of 
heaven: for his mercy endureth 
for ever, 


PSALM 137, 


BY the rivers of Babylon, there 
we sat down, yea, we wept, 
when we remembered Zion. 


n Psa.113.7; 
Gen.8.1; 
Deut.32.36. 


o Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa. 
59.20, note. 


PD Psa.104.27; 
145.15; 147.9. 


q Heb. the 
words of a 
song. 


r Ezk.3.26. 


t Isa.13.1,6; 
47.1; Jer.25. 
3; 50.2. 


u Psa.102.15, 
22. 


25 


w Psa.23.3,4. 


x Psa.57.2; 
Phil.1.6. 


PSALM 138. 
A Psalm of David. 


i WILL praise thee with my 
whole heart: before the gods 
will I sing praise unto thee. 

2 I will worship toward thy holy 
temple, and praise thy name for thy 
lovingkindness and for thy truth: 
for thou hast magnified thy word 
above all thy name, 

3 In the day when I cried thou 
answeredst me, and strengthenedst 
me with strength in my soul, 

4 #All the kings of the earth shall 
praise thee, O Lorp, when they 
hear the words of thy mouth. 

5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways 
of the Lorn: for great is the glory 
of the Lorp. 

6 Though the Lorp be high, yet 
*hath he respect unto the lowly: 
bat the proud he knoweth afar 
fo) 


7 ’Though I walk in the midst of 
trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou 
shalt stretch forth thine hand 
against the wrath of mine enemies, 
and thy right hand shall. save 
me. 

8 *The Lorp will perfect that 
which concerneth me: thy mercy, 
O Lord, endureth for ever: for- 


sake not the works of thine own 
hands, 


139 1] 


PSALM 139 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm of 
David © ‘ 


LORD, thou hast searched me, 
and known me. 


2 #Thou knowest my downsitting! 


and mine uprising, thou S“under- 
standest my thought afar off. 

3 Thou compassest my path and 
my lying down, and art acquainted 
with all my ways- 

4 For there is not a word in my 
tongue, but, lo, O LorD ‘thou 
knowest it altogether. 

5 Thou hast beset me behind and 
before, and laid thine hand upon 


me 

6 %Such knowledge 1s too won- 
derful for me, it is high, I cannot 
attain unto it. 

7 ¢Whither shall I go from thy 
fspirit? or whither shall I flee from 
thy presence? 

8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou 
art there: if I make my bed in 4hell, 
behold, thou art there 

Q If I take the wings of the morn- 
ing, and dwell in the uttermost 
parts of the sea, 

10 Even there shall thy hand lead 
me, and thy right hand shall hold 


me. 

11 If I say, Surely the darkness 
shall cover me, even the night shall 
be light about me. 

12 Yea, "the darkness hideth not 
from thee; but the night shineth as 
‘the day: the darkness and the light 
are both alike to thee. 

13 For thou hast possessed my 

reins: thou hast covered me in my 
mother’s womb. 
“14 I will praise thee; for I am 
fearfully and wonderfully made: 
marvellous are thy works; and that 
my soul knoweth right well. 

15 *My substance was not hid 
from thee, when I was made in 
secret, and curiously wrought in 
the lowest parts of the earth. 

16 Thine eyes did see my sub- 
stance, yet being unperfect; and in 
thy book all my members were 
written, which in continuance were 
fashioned, when as yet there was 
none of them. 

17 j3How precious also are thy 
thoughts unto me, O God! how 
great is the sum of them! 

18 If I should count them, they 


are more in number than the sand: 


when I awake, I am still with thee. 
19 ‘Surely thou wilt slay the 


PSALMS. 


wicked, O God! depart from me 


a 2 Ki.19.27 


6 Mt.9.4; 
John 2.24,25 


| c Heb 4.13 

d Psa.40-5; 
131.1; Job 
42.3. 


é Jer.23.24, 
Jon.1.3. 

f Holy Spirit 
Isa.4.4 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


g Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5. 
note 

h Job 26.6, 
34.22; Dan. 
2.22; Heb.4- 
13. 


i Job 10.8,9; 
Eccl.11.5. 


j Psa.40.5. 
k Isa.114. 
1 Jude 15. 


m Psa.26.2 
Job 31.6. 


n Psa.5.83 
143.10. 


o Heb. man 
of violences. 


pb Psa.58.4; 
Rom.3.13. 


q Psa.35.7; 
57.6; 119. 
110; 141.9; 
Jer.18.22. 


r Deut.32.27 


5 Psa.9.4; 
1 Ki.8.45. 


667 


{140 12 


therefore, ye bloody men. 

20 For they ‘speak against thee 
wickedly, and thine enemies take 
thy name in vain. 

21 Do not I hate them, O LorpD, 
that hate thee? and am not I 
grieved with those that rise up 
against thee? 

22 I hate them with perfect ha- 
tred I count them mine enemies. 

23 ™Search me, O God, and know 
my heart: try me, and know my 
thoughts:- 

24 And see if there be any 
wicked way in me, “and lead me in 
the way everlasting. 


PSALM 140 


To the chief Musician, A Psalm 
of David. 


ELIVER me, O Lorn, from the 
evil man; °preserve me from 
the violent man; 

2 Which imagine mischiefs in 
their heart; continually are they 
gathered together for war. 

3 They have sharpened their 
tongues like a serpent; adders’ 
poison zs under their lips. Selah. 

4 Keep me, O Lorp, from the 
hands of the wicked; preserve 
me from the violent man; who 
have purposed to overthrow my 
goings. 

5 The proud have hid a snare for 
me, and cords; they have spread a 
net by the wayside; they have set 
gins for me. Selah. 

6 Isaid unto the Lorp, Thou art 
my God. hear the voice of my sup- 
plications, O Lorb. 

7 O Gop the Lord, the strength 
of my salvation, thou hast covered 
my head in the day of battle. 

8 Grant not, O LorD, the desires 
of the wicked: further not his 
wicked device; “lest they exalt 
themselves. Selah. 

9 As for the head of those that 
compass me about, let the mis- 
chief of their own lips cover 
them. 

10 Let burning coals fall upon 
them: let them be cast into the 
fire; into deep pits, that they rise 
not up again. 

11 Let not an evil speaker be 
established in the earth: evil shall 
hunt the violent man to overthrow 
him. 

12 I know ‘that the Lorp will 
maintain the cause of the afflicted, 
and the right of the poor 


140 13] 


PSALMS. 


[144 h 


i3 Surely the righteous shall give 
thanks unto thy name: the upright 
shall dwell in thy presence. 


PSALM 141. 
A Psalm of David. 


2 ORD, I cry unto thee: make 
haste unto me; give ear unto 
my voice, when I cry unto thee. 

2 Let my prayer be set forth be- 
fore thee “as incense; and °the 
lifting up of my hands as the 
evening sacrifice. 

3 Set a watch, O Lorb, before 
my mouth; keep the door of my lips. 

4 Incline not my heart to any 
evil thing, to practise wicked works 
with men that work iniquity: and let 
me not eat of their dainties. 

5 ‘Let the righteous smite me; it 
shall be a kindness: and let him 
reprove me; it shal/ be an excellent 
oil, which shall not break my head: 
for yet my prayer also shall be in 
their calamities. 

6 When their judges are over- 
thrown in stony places, they shall 
hear my words; for they are sweet. 

7 4Qur bones are scattered at the 
grave’s mouth, as when one cutteth 
and cleaveth wood upon the earth. 

8 ‘But mine eyes are unto thee, O 
Gop the Lord: in thee is my /trust; 
leave not my soul édestitute. 

9 Keep me from the snares which 
they have laid for me, and the gins 
of the workers of iniquity. 

10 Let the wicked fall into their 
own nets, whilst that I withal 
hescape. 


PSALM 142. 


*Maschil of David; A Prayer when 
he was in the cave. 


i CRIED unto the Lorp with my 
voice; with my voice unto the 
Lorp did I make my supplication. 

2 I poured out my complaint be- 
fore him; I shewed before him my 
trouble. 

3 JWhen niy spirit was over- 
whelmed within me, then thou 
knewest_my path. In the way 
wherein I walked have they privily 
laid a snare for me. 

4 I looked on my right hand, and 
beheld, but there was no man that 
would know me: refuge failed me; 
kno man cared for my soul. 

5. I cried unto thee, O Lorp: I 
said, Thou art my refuge and my 
portion in the land of the living. 

6 Attend unto my cry; for I am 


a Rev.8.3. 


6 Psa.134.2; 
1 Tim.2.8. 


¢ Prov.9.8; 

19.25, 25.12; 
Gal.6.1. 

d 2 Cor.1.9. 


e Psa.25.15; 
123.1,2; 
2 Chr.20.12. 


f Psa.2.12, 
note. 


g Heb. make 
not my soul 
bare. 


h Heb. pass 
over. 


+ Maschil, 
instruction. 


j Psa.143.4. 


k Heb. no 
man sought 
after my 
soul. 


1 Psa.34.2. 


m Psa.130.3; 
Ex.34.7; 
Job 4.17; 
9.2; 15.14; 
25.4; Eccl. 
7.20; Rom. 
3.20; Gal. 
2.16. 

n Psa.77.3; 
142.3. 


o Psa.77.5, 
10,11. 


PD Psa.5.8. 

q Heb. hide 
me with 
thee. 

r Neh.9.20. 


s Isa.26.10. 


668 


brought very low: deliver me from 
my persecutors; for they are 
stronger than I. 

7 Bring my soul out of prison, 
that I may praise thy name: ‘the 
righteous shall compass me about; 
for thou shalt deal bountifully with 
me. 


PSALM 143. 
A Psalm of David. 


HEAR my prayer, O LORD, give 

ear to my supplications: in thy 
faithfulness answer me, and in thy 
righteousness. 

2 And enter not into judgment 
with thy servant: for in thy sight 
shall no man living be justified. 

3 For the enemy hath persecuted 
my soul; he hath smitten my life 
down to the ground; he hath made 
me to dwell in darkness, as those 
that have been long dead. 

4 Therefore is my spirit over- 
whelmed within me; my heart 
within me is desolate. 

5 °I remember the days of old; I 
Imeditate on all thy works; I muse 
on the work of thy hands. 

6 I stretch forth my hands unto 
thee: my soul thirsteth after thee, 
as a thirsty land. Selah. 

Hear me speedily, O LorD: my 
spirit faileth: hide not thy face 
from me, lest I be like unto them 
that go down into the pit. 

8 Cause me to hear thy loving- 
kindness in the morning; for in 
thee do I trust: *cause me to know 
the way wherein I should walk; for 
I lift up my soul unto thee. 

9 Deliver me, O Lorn, from mine 
enemies: I ¢flee unto thee to hide 


me. 

10 Teach me to do thy will; for 
thou art my God: ‘thy spirit is 
good; lead me into ‘the land of 
uprightness. 

11 Quicken me, O Lorn, for thy 
name’s sake: for thy righteousness’ 
sake bring my soul out of trouble. 

12 And of thy mercy cut off mine 
enemies, and destroy all them that 
afflict my soul: for I am thy ser- 
vant. 


PSALM 144, 
A Psalm of David. 


BLESSED be the Lorp my 
strength, which teacheth my 

hands to war, and my fingers to 

fight: 

2 My goodness, and my fortress; 


PSALMS. 


my high tower, and my deliverer; 
my, shield, and he in whom I trust; 
who subdueth my.people under me. 

3 Lorpb, ¢what is man, that thou 
takest knowledge of him! or the 
son of man, that thou makest ac- 
count of him! 

4 Manis like to vanity: Shis days 
are as a shadow that passeth 
away. 

5 ‘Bow. thy heavens, O Lorp, 
and come down: touch the moun- 
tains, and they shall smoke. 

6 Cast forth lightning, and scat- 
ter them: shoot out thine arrows, 
and destroy them. 

7 Send thine hand from above; 
rid me, and deliver me out of great 
waters, ¢from the hand of strange 
children; 

8 Whose mouth speaketh vanity, 
and their right hand is a right hand|f Deut.33.29; 
of falsehood, Peg cert 

9 I will sing “a new song unto ‘ 
thee, O God: upon a psaltery and|s Psa.96.4; 
an instrument of ten strings will I| 147 
sing praises unto thee. h Job 5.9; 

10 Jt is he that giveth salvation] 9.10; 
unto kings: who delivereth David Rom:1J-S3 


a Psa.8.4; 
Job 7.17; 
Heb.2.6, 


b Psa.102.11. 


¢ Psa.18.9; 
Isa.64.1, 


d Psa.54.3; 
Mal.2.11. - 


e Psa.33.2,3; 
40.3. : 


his servant from the hurtful) ; Psa.s6.5,15; 
sword. 1033 Ex 
11 Rid me, and deliver me from} jyum.is.1s. 


the hand of strange children, whose 
mouth speaketh vanity, and their) J Psa-100.5; 


right hand is a right hand of false-} Neh”: 
hood: k Psa.146.10; 
12 That our sons may be as} 1 Tim.1.17. 


plants grown up in their youth; are 
that our daughters may be as pea ome 
corner stones, polished after the| 2ées- 
similitude of a palace: m Deut.4.7 

13 That our garners may be full, Md 
affording all manner of store: that|” John 4.24. 
our sheep may bring forth thou-|, p..19.9 
sands and ten thousands in our} note. ' 
streets: ; 

14 That our oxen may be strong]? 538-31-235 
to labour; that there be no break- ay 
ing in, nor going out; that there be|¢ Psa-103.1- 
no complaining in our streets. + Psa.2,12 

15 fHappy is that people, that is} note. ’ 
in such a case: yea, happy is that 
people, whose God is the Lor. 


PSALM i145. 
David’s Psalm of praise. 


WILL extol thee, my God, O| 
king; and I will bless thy name 
for ever and ever. 
2 Every day will I bless thee; and 
I will praise thy name for ever and 


ever. 
3 Great is the LorD, and greatly as 


[146 3 


to be praised; and “his greatness is 
unsearchable. . 

4 One generation shall praise thy 
works to another, and shall declare 
thy mighty acts. : 

5 I will speak of the glorious hon- 
our of thy majesty, and of thy 
wondrous works. 

6 And men shall speak of the 
might of thy terrible acts: and I 
will declare thy greatness. 

7 They shali abundantly utter the 
memory of thy great goodness, and 
shall sing of thy righteousness, 

8 The Lorp ‘is gracious, and full 
of compassion; slow to anger, and 
of great mercy. 

9 The LorD /is good to all: and 
his tender mercies are over all his 
works. 

10 All thy works shall praise thee, 
O Lorp; and thy saints shall bless 
thee. 

11 They shall speak of the glory 
of thy kingdom, and talk of thy 
power; 

12 To make known to the sons of 
men his mighty acts, and the glo- 
rious majesty of his kingdom. - ~ 

13 *Thy kingdom is an ‘everlast- 
ing kingdom, and thy dominion en- 
dureth throughout all generations. 

14 The Lorp upholdeth all that 
fall, and raiseth up all those that 
be bowed down. 

15 The eyes of all wait upon thee; 
and thou givest them their meat in 
due season. 

16 Thou openest thine hand, and 
satisfiest the desire of every living 
thing. 

17 The Lorp is righteous in all 
his ways, and holy in all his works. 

18 The Lorp “is nigh unto all 
them that call upon him, to all that 
call upon him “in truth. 

19 He will fulfil the desire of 
them that °fear him: he also will 
hear their cry, and will save ther. 

20 The Lorp ?preserveth all 
them that love him: but all the 
wicked will he destroy. 

21 My mouth shall speak the 
praise of the LorD: and let all flesh 
bless his holy name for ever and 
ever. 


PSALM 146. 


PRMSE ye the Lorp. 
the Lorp, O my soul. 
2 While I live will I praise the 
Lorp: I will sing praises unto my 
God while I have any being. | 

3 Put not your ’trust in princes, 


9Praise 


146 4] 


PSALMS, 


[148 i“ 


nor in the son of man, in whom 
there is no help. 

4 His breath goeth forth, he re- 
turneth to his earth; in that very @eeree 
day “his thoughts perish. ike 

5 *Happy is he that hath the}cGen.1.1; 
God of Jacob for his help, whose] Rev-14.7. 
hope is in the LorpD his God: d Psa.107.9. 

6 ‘Which made heaven, and earth, 
the sea, and all that therein is: race, 
which. keepeth truth for ever: Pee 

7 Which executeth judgment for] ¢ Mt.9.30; 
the oppressed: ¢which giveth food} John 9.7,32. 
tothe hungry. ¢The LorD looseth), psa 145.14: 
the prisoners: 

8 /The Lorp openeth the eyes of 
the blind: the Lorp ¢raiseth them}, p., 6g.5: 
that are bowed down: the LorD| Deut.10.18. 
loveth the righteous: : 

9 The LorD “"preserveth the 
strangers; he relieveth the father-| ; 
less and widow: ‘but the way of 
the wicked he turneth upside down.| §5737.45. 

10 The LorD Jshall reign for ever, 
even thy God, O Zion, unto all gen-|* Deut.30.3. 


a See 1 Cor, 
2.6. 


erations. Praise ye the Lorp. 1 Psa.51.17: 
1 es 
61.1; Lk.4. 

PSALM 147. | 18. 


PRAISE ye the Lorp: for it is|m Heb. griefs. 


good to sing praises unto our 


God, for it is pleasant; and praise|” $¢2,35;5: 
is comely. . 

2 The LorpD doth build wp Jeru-|o Isa.40.28. 
salem: "he gathereth together the], pea 146.89. 
outcasts of Israel. 

3 He ‘healeth the broken in heart,]| 2 Fa eu 
and bindeth up their “wounds. aS ; 

4 He “telleth the number of the 
stars; he calleth them all by their] " Psa-104.27, 
ames ae 28; 136.25; 

5 Great is our Lord, and of great} Job 38:41. 
ate °his understanding is in- 5 Pea.19.9, 

. . te. 

6 The Lord Plifteth up the meek: hae 
he casteth the wicked down to the| ¢ Psa.76.1; 
ground 78.51 105.7; 

ay Fe s 't.33.2-4, 

7 Sing unto the LorD with i 
thanksgiving; sing praise upon the| Mal.4.4. 


harp unto our God: 1 See Deut 

8 Who covereth the heaven with|' 432-34; 
clouds, who prepareth rain for the| Rom.3.1,2, 
earth, who maketh grass to grow 


w Heb.1.4, 
upon the mountains. note. 
9 He "giveth to the beast his food, 
x Isa.43.20. 


and to the young ravens which cry. 
10 He delighteth not in thely Psa... 
strength of the horse: he taketh not 
pleasure in the legs of a man. ¢ Bisby ox: 
11 The Lorp taketh pleasure in 
age et ‘fear him, in those that}¢ Psa.75.10. 
ope in his mercy. 
12 Praise the LorD, O Jerusalem;|’*°* 74° 
praise thy God, O Zion. ¢ Eph.2.17. 
13 For he hath strengthened the 


| 147.6; Lk.13. 
13. 


bars of thy gates; he hath blessed 
thy children within thee. 

14 He maketh peace in thy bor- 
ders, and filleth thee with the finest 
of the wheat. 

15 He sendeth forth his com- 
mandment upon earth: his word 
runneth very swiftly. 

16 He giveth snow like wool: he 
scattereth the hoarfrost like ashes. 

17 He casteth forth his ice like 
morsels: who can stand before his. 
cold? 

18 He seudeth out his word, and 
melteth them: he causeth his wind 
to blow, and the waters flow. 

19 ‘He sheweth his word unto 
Jacob, “his statutes and his judg- 
ments unto Israel. 

20 ‘He hath not dealt so with any 
nation: and as for his judgments, 
they have not known them. Praise 
ye the Lorp. 


PSALM 148, 


PRAISE yethe LorD. Praise ye 
the Lorp from the heavens: 
praise him in the heights. 

2 Praise ye him, all his wangels:| 
praise ye him, all his hosts. 

3 Praise ye him, sun and moon: 
praise him, all ye stars of light. 3 

4 Praise him, ye heavens of 
heavens, and ye waters that be 
above the heavens. 

5 Let them praise the name of the 
Lorp: for he commanded, and they 
were created, 

6 He hath also stablished them 
for ever and ever: he hath made a 
decree which shall not pass. 

7 Praise the LorD from the earth, 
*ye dragons, and all deeps: 

8 Fire, and hail; snow, and va- 
pours; stormy wind fulfilling his 
word: 

9 Mountains, and all hills; fruit- 
ful trees, and all cedars: 

10 Beasts, and all cattle; creeping 
things, and flying fowl: 

11 Kings of the earth, and all 
people; princes, and all judges of 
the earth: 

12 Both young men, and maidens: 
eld men, and children: 


rael, a ‘people near unto him. 
Praise ye the Lorpb, 


14994] 


PSALM 149. 


RAISE ye the Lorp. Sing) 

unto the LORD a new song, and} 

his praise in the congregation of| 

saints. 

2 Let Israel rejoice in him that} 

made him: let the children of Zion} 
be joyful in their ¢King. 

3 Let them praise his name in the 
dance: let them sing praises unto 
him with the timbrel and harp. 

4 For the LorpD “taketh pleasure 
in his people: ‘he will beautify the 
meek with salvation. 

§ Let the saints be joyful in glory: 
let them ¢sing aloud upon their 
beds. 

6 Let the high prajses of God be 
éin their mouth, and /a twoedged 
sword in their hand; 

7 To execute vengeance upon the 


PSALMS. 


a Zech.9.9; 
NMt.21.5. 


b Psa,35.27. 
¢ Psa.132.16, 
d Job 35.10. 


e Heb. in 
their throat. 


f Heb.4.12; 
Rev.1.16. 


gi.e. nations. 
h Deut.7.1,2. 

1 Psa.148.14. 
j Psa.145. 


6. 


k Deut.3.24. 


8heathen, and punishments upon 
the) peoplessig Vann ; i 
8 To bind their kings with chains. 


671 


[150 6 


and their nobles with fetters of 
iron; 

9 To ‘execute upon them the 
judgment written: ‘this honour have 
all his saints. Praise ye the LorbD. 


PSALM 150. 


PRAGE ye the Lorp. Praise 
God in his sanctuary: praise 
him in the firmament of his power. 

2 JPraise him for his mighty acts: 
praise him according to his excel- 
lent “greatness. 

3 Praise him with the sound of 
the trumpet: praise him with the 
psaltery and harp. 

4 Praise him with the timbrel 
and dance: praise him with stringed 
instruments and organs, 

5 Praise him upon the loud cym- 
bals: praise him upon the high 
sounding cymbals. 

6 Let every thing that hath 


breath praise the LORD. Praise ye 
the LORD. 


1 1) [1 29 


THE PROVERBS. 


Tis collection of sententious sayings is divine wisdom applied to the earthly 
conditions of the people of God. That the Proverbs were Solomon’s (1. 1) implies 
no more than that he gathered into orderly arrangement sayings already current 
amongst the people, the wisdom of the Spirit, perhaps through many centuries 
(Eccl. 12. 9), Chapters 25.-29. were current in Hezekiah’s time (25.1). Chap- 


ters 30. and 31. are by Agur and Lemuel. 


The book is in six parts: 
III. The folly of sin, 10.-19. 
of Agur, 


I. To sons, 1.=7. 
IV. Warnings and instructions, 20-29. V, The words 
30. VI. The words of King Lemuel, 31. 


II. The praise of wisdom, 8.-9. 


—sanks 
CHAPTER 1. B.C. 1000. poy eine eae refrain thy foot 

Part I. Instruction and exhor- a Prov.10.1; 16 /For their feet run to evil, and 

tation to sons. 25.1;1Ki. |make haste to shed blood. 

of Bee “proverbs of Solomon the io Eccl, | 17 Surely in vain the net is spread 

; saon 1 David king of Israel; nee in the sight of any bird. 

F o know wisdom and instruc-|s Prov.9.4. 18 And they lay wait for their 
tion; to perceive the words of un- On davies (OE blood; they lurk privily for 
is ite oes the instruction of ae SOLO: ae f 

3 ceive “ : are the ways of every one 
wisdom, justice, and judgment,|¢ Prov.9.9. that is greedy of gain; which taketh 
and equity; : : ePsa.78.2. away the life of the owners thereof. 
is ee, give subtilty to the ‘simple, ‘ 20 "Wisdom crieth without; she 

29. ice j : 
ie aaone man knowledge and|f £ SHC oes nee Holes Ae a crreees: ; 

5 4A wise man will hear, and will] "°** concourse ae tie cc = yl 
increase learning; and a man_ of|gProv.3.22. ates: in ¢ i ms oe : 
ines le 8; Co eae : g S in the city she uttereth her 

nderstanding shall attain unto}, pep, words, saying, 

Ee ate 4 neeeng: 22 How long, ye simple ones, will 
the interpretation; inane oe ae eh Oalieht Snes pe 
os Kas oe ne sayings, Eph.5.11,  |fools hate knowledge? 

ernie bf (abled. "hart oD j Heb. Sheol, noid ao ears steal 
despise wisdom and instruction Mace ae a will ae ss ee ee 

5 , note. 3 7) 

8 My son, hear the instruction of Pee : unto you. on See 
ung pares, poe forsake not the law|* 77-78-13 24 *Because I have called, and ye 

9 eFor ther eHal be an "orna-) ! Isa.59.7; eee pbdaena Aaa 
ment of grace unto thy head, and| Ro™-3-15. 25 But ye have set at nought all 
wee about oy, neck. tice thee sar [my counsel, and would none of my 
; y son, if sinners entice thee, im.6.10.  /reproof: 
¥consent thou not. 2 Prov.8.1; 26 I also will S 

Ae If ae ey, Boe wes us, let ‘ 9.3; John ity; I Sat meen as rae 
us lay wait for blood, let us lurk| 7-37: cometh; 

Beye for the innocent without|o ee 2 ig Ween yeu feos cometh as des- 
: -65.123 a ? i - 

12 Let us swallow them up alive * 0.4: jer-7. eth as a Enea ey ‘dieeees 
as the grave; and whole, as those| 33 Zech.7-11.|anq anguish cometh upon you 
that go down into the pit: g Job 27.9; 28 {Then shail they call : 

13 We shall find all precious sub- cn ree but I will not meee thom bee 
pete. we shall fill our houses with ni 14.125) ee me early, but they shall not 

: eevee Sb) me; 
4 5 Mic.3.4; 
ioe itera ay sot aman us; let Zech.7.13; 29 For that they hated knowl- 
45 “Niy ia oe ae BH Ras Jas.4.3. edge, and did not choose the fear 


672 


of the Lorb: 


1 30) 

30 They would none of my coun- 
sel: they despised all my reproof. 

31 Therefore shall they eat of the 
fruit of their own way, and be filled 
with their own devices. 

32 For the turning away of the 
simple shall slay them, and the 
prosperity of fools shall destroy 
them. 

33 But whoso hearkeneth unto 
me shall dwell safely, and shall be 
quiet from fear of evil. 


CHAPTER 2. 
(To sons, continued.) 


Y son, if thou wilt receive my 
words, and %hide my com- 
mandments with thee; 

2 So that thou incline thine ear 
unto wisdom, and apply thine 
heart to understanding; 

3 Yea, if thou criest after know- 
ledge, and liftest up thy voice for 
understanding; 

4 If thou seekest her as silver, 
and searchest for her as for hid 
treasures; 

5 Then shalt thou understand the 
ear of the Lorp, and find the 
knowledge of God. 

6 For the LorpD giveth wisdom: 
out of his mouth cometh know- 
ledge and understanding. 

7 He layeth up sound wisdom for 
the righteous: “he is a buckler to 
them that walk uprightly. 

8 He keepeth the paths of judg- 
ment, and ¢preserveth the way of 
his saints. 

9 Then shalt thou understand 
righteousness, and judgment, and 
equity; yea, every good path. 

_-10 When wisdom entereth into 
thine heart, and knowledge is plea- 
sant unto thy soul; 

11 Discretion shall preserve thee, 
understanding shall keep thee: 

12 To deliver thee from the way 
of the evil man, from the man that 
speaketh froward things; 

13 Who leave the paths of up- 
rightness, to walk in the ways of 
darkness; 

14 fWho rejoice to do evil, and 
delight in the frowardness of the 
wicked; 

15 Whose ways are crooked, and 
they froward in their paths: 

16 Todelivertheefrom the strange 
woman, even from the stranger 
which flattereth with her words; 

17 Which forsaketh the guide of 
her youth, and forgetteth the cove- 
nant of her God. 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. 


a Psa.112.7. 
6 Prov.4.21; 
Tay 


c Also Prov 
3.7; Psa.19. 
9, note. 


d Prov.30.5; 
Psa.84.11. 


e 1 Sam.2.9; 
Psa.66.9. 


J Prov.10.23; 
Jer.11.15; 
Rom.1.32. 


g See 1 Ki.8. 
61, note. 


\h Prov.6.21; 
7.3; Ex.13.9; 
Deut.6.8. 


4 Jer.17.1; 
2'Cor.3-3. 


j Psa.2.12, 
note, 


k Jer.9.23. 
11 Chr.28.9. 


m Heb. medi- 
cine. 


n Ex.22.29; 
23.19; 34.26; 
Deut.26.2; 
Mal.3.10; 
Lk.14.13. 


o Deut.28.8. 


p vs.11,12; 
Job 5.17; 
Psa.94.12; 
Heb.12.5,6; 
Rev.3.19. 


gq Job 28.13, 


673 


[3 16 


18 For her house inclineth unto 
death, and her paths unto the dead. 

19 None that go unto her return 
again, neither take they hold of the 
paths of life. 

20 That thou mayest walk in the 
way of good men, and keep the 
paths of the righteous. 

21 For the upright shall dweli in 
the land, and the éperfect shall re- 
main in it. 

22 But the wicked shall be cut off 
from the earth, and the transgress- 
ors shall be rooted out of it. 


CHAPTER 3. 
(To sons, continued.) 


M* son, forget not my law; but 
let thine heart keep my com- 
mandments: 

2 For length of days, and long life, 
and peace, shall they add to thee. 

3 Let not mercy and truth forsake 
thee: ‘bind them about thy neck; 
twrite them upon the table of thine 
heart: 

4 So shalt thou find favour and 
good understanding in the sight of 
God and man. 

5 JTrust in the Lorp with all 
thine heart; and *lean not unto 
thine own understanding. 

6 ‘In all thy ways acknowledge 
him, and he shall direct thy paths. 

7 Be not wise in thine own eyes: 
fear the LORD, and depart from 


evil. 

8 It shall be “health to thy navel, 
and marrow to thy bones. 

9 Honour the Lorp with thy 
substance, and with the firstfruits 
of all thine increase: 

10 °So shall thy barns be filled 
with plenty, and thy presses shall 
burst out with new wine. 

11 ?#My son, despise not the chas- 
tening of the Lorp; neither be 
weary of his correction: 

12. For whom the Lorp loveth he 
correcteth; even as a father the son 
in whom he delighteth. 

13 Happy is the man that findeth 
wisdom, and the man that getteth 
understanding. 

14 For the merchandise of it is 
better than the merchandise of 
silver, and the gain thereof than 
fine gold 

15 @She is more precious than 
rubies: and all the things thou 
canst ae are not to be compared 
unto her. 

16 Length of days is in her right 


3 17] 


PROVERBS. 


[4 23 


hand; “and in her left hand riches 
and honour. 

17 Her ways are ways of pleasant? 
ness, and all her paths are peace. 

18 She is a tree of life to them 
that lay hold upon her: and happy 
1s every one that retaineth her. 

19 The LorD by wisdom hath 
founded the earth; by under- 
standing hath he established the 
heavens. 

20 By his knowledge the depths 
are broken up, and the clouds drop 
down the dew. 

21 My son, let not them depart 
from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom 
and discretion: 

22 So shall they be life unto thy 
soul, and grace to thy neck. 

23 >Then shalt thou walk in thy 
way safely, and thy foot shall not 
stumble. 

24 When thou liest down, thou 
shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt 
lie down, and thy sleep shall be 
sweet. 

25 Be not afraid of sudden fear, 
neither of the desolation of the 
wicked, when it cometh. 

26 For the LorD shall be thy con- 
fidence, and shall keep thy foot 
from being taken. 

27 ‘Withhold not good from them 
to whom it is due, when it is in the 
power of thine hand to do #t. 

28 4¢Say not unto thy neighbour, 
Go, and come again, and to morrow 
I will give; when thou hast it by 
thee. A 

29 Devise not evil against thy 
neighbour, seeing he dwelleth se- 
curely by thee. 

30 ‘Strive not with a man with- 
out cause, if he have done thee no 
harm, 

31 fEnvy thou not the soppressor, 
and choose none of his ways. 

32 For the froward is abomina- 
tion to the Lorpb: “but his secret 
is with the righteous. 

33 The ‘curse of the Lorp is in 
the house of the wicked: Jbut he 
blesseth the habitation of the just. 

34 Surely he scorneth the scorn- 
ers: but he giveth “grace unto the 
lowly. 

35 The wise shall inherit glory: 


B.C. 1000. 


a Prov.8.18; 
1 Tim.4.8. 


6 Prov.10.9; 
Psa.37.24; 
91.11,12. 


c¢ Rom.13.7; 
Gal.6.10. 


d Lev.19.13; 
Deut.24.15. 


e Rom.12.18. 


2 For I give you good doctrine, 
forsake ye not my law. 


3 For I was my father’s son, ten- 


der and only beloved in the sight 
of my mother. f 
4 mHe taught me also, and said 
unto me, Let thine heart retain my 
words: keep my commandments, 
and live. . 
5 Get wisdom, get understanding: 


forget zt not; neither decline from 
ithe words of my mouth. 


6 Forsake her not, and she shall 
preserve thee: “love her, and she 
shall keep thee. 

7 °Wisdom ss the principal thing: 
therefore get wisdom: and with all 
thy getting get understanding. 

8 ?Exalt her, and she shall pro- 
mote thee: she shall bring thee to 
honour, when thou dost embrace 


f Prov.24.1; 
Psa.37.1; 
73.3. 


g Heb. a man 
of violence. 


h Psa,25.14. 
it Lev.26.14; 


j Psa.1.3. 


k Jas.4.6; 
1 Pet:5.55 


1 Prov.1.8; 
Psa.34.11. 


m 1 Chr.28.9; 
Eph.6.4. 


n 2 Thes.2.10. 

o Prov.3.13,14. 

Pp 1 Sam.2.30. 

q Or, she shall 
compass 
thee witha 


crown of 
glory. 


r Mt.5.14; 
Phil.2.15. 
s 2 Sam.23.4. 


t1 Sam.2.9; 
Job 18.5,6; 
Isa.59.9,10; 


her. 

9 She shall give to thine head an 
ornament of grace: %a crown of 
glory shall she deliver to thee. 

10 Hear, O my son, and receive 
my sayings; and the years of thy 
life shall be many. 

11 I have taught thee in the way 
of wisdom; I have led thee in right 
paths. 

12 When thou goest, thy steps 
shall not be straitened; and when 
thou runnest, thou shalt not 
stumble. 

13. Take fast hold of instruction; 
let her not go: keep her; for she is 
thy life. 

14 Enter not into the path of the 
wicked, and go not in the way of 
evil men. 

15 Avoid it, pass not by it, turn 
from it, and pass away. 

16 For they sleep not, except they 
have done mischief; and their sleep 
is taken away, unless they cause 
some to fall. 

17 For they eat the bread of wick- 
edness, and drink the wine of 
violence. 

18 "But the path of the just Sis as 
the shining light, that shineth more 
and more unto the perfect day. 

19 ‘The way of the wicked is as 
darkness: they know not at what 


Jer.23.12; 
John 12.35. 


but shame shall be the promotion} 


of fools. 
CHAPTER 4. 
(To sons, continued.) 
EAR, /ye children, the instruc- 


tion of a father, and attend to 
know understanding, 


674 


they stumble. 

20 My son, attend to my words; 
incline thine i 

21 Let them not depart from thine 
eyes; keep them in the midst of 
thine heart. 

22 For they are life unto those 
that find them, and health to all 
their flesh. 

23 Keep thy heart with all dili- 


ear unto my sayings. : 


’ 


4 24] 


eee ; for out of it are the issues of 
ife. 

24 Put away from thee a froward 
mouth, and perverse lips put far 
from thee. 

25 Let thine eyes look right on, 
and let thine eyelids look straight 
before thee. 

26 Ponder the path of thy feet, 
and 2let all thy ways be established. 

27 Turn not to the right hand nor 
to ot left: remove thy foot from 
evil. 


CHAPTER 5. 


(To sons, continued.) 


M~ son, attend unto my wisdom, 
and bow -thine ear to my un- 
derstanding: 

2 That thou mayest regard dis- 
cretion, and that thy lips ’may 
keep knowledge. 

3 For the lips of a strange woman 
drop as an honeycomb, and her 
mouth fs ‘smoother than oil: 

4 But her end is 4bitter as worm- 
wood, sharp as a twoedged sword. 

5 Her feet go down to death; cher 
steps take hold on Shell. 

6 Lest thou shouldest ponder the 
path of life, her ways are moveable, 
that thou canst not know them. 

7 Hear me now therefore, O ye 
children, and depart not from the 
words of my mouth. 

8 Remove thy way far from her, 
and come not nigh the door of her 
house: 

9 Lest thou give thine honour 
unto others, and thy years unto the 
cruel: 

10 Lest strangers be filled with 
sthy wealth; and thy labours be in 
the house of a stranger; 

11 And thou mourn at the last, 
when thy flesh and thy body are 
consumed, 

12 And say, How have I hated in- 
struction, and my heart despised 
reproof; 7 

13 And have not obeyed the voice 
of my teachers, nor inclined mine 
ear to them that instructed me! 

14 I was almost in all evil in the 
midst of the congregation and as- 
sembly. 

15 Drink waters out of thine own 
cistern, and running waters out of 
thine own well. 

16 Let thy fountains be dispersed 
abroad, and rivers of waters in the 
streets. - 

17 Let them be only thine own, 
and not strangers’ with thee. 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. 


a Or, all thy 
ways shall 
be ordered 
aright. 

6 Mal.2.7. 

c Psa.55.21. 

d Eccl.7.26. 

e Prov.7.27, 


f Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note. 


g Heb, thy 
strength. 


h Mal.2.14, 
t Song 2.9; 
4.5; 7.3. 
j Heb. err 

thou al- 


ways in her 
love. 


k Prov.15.3; 


1 Or, so shalt 
thou prevail 
with thy 
friend, 


m Job 12.7. 

n Prov.24.33, 
34. 

o Prov.10.4; 
13.4; 20.4. 


b Heb. cast- 
eth forth. 


675 


(6 14 


18 Let thy fountain be blessed: 
and rejoice “with the wife of thy 
youth. 

19 ‘Let her be as the loving hind 
and pleasant roe; let her ‘breasts 
satisfy thee at all times; and be 
thou ravished always with her 
love. 

20 And why wilt thou, my son, be 
ravished with a strange woman, 
and embrace the bosom of a 
stranger? 

21 *For the ways of man are be- 


fore CY ESe 4ORD, and he_« 
sore DE aN goings. . 


22 His own iniquities shall take 
the wicked himself, and he shall be 
holden with the cords of his sins. 

23 He shall die without instruc- 
tion; and in the greatness of his 
folly he shall go astray. 


CHAPTER 6. 
(To sons, continued.) 


M* son, if thou be surety for thy 
friend, if thou hast stricken 
thy hand with a stranger, 

2 Thou art snared with the:words 
of thy mouth, thou art taken with 
the words of thy mouth. 

3 Do this now, my son, and deliver 
thyself, when thou art come into 
the hand of thy friend; go, humble 
thyself, and ‘make sure thy friend. 

4 Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor 
slumber to thine eyelids. 

5 Deliver thyself as a roe from the 
hand of the hunter, and as a bird 
from the hand of the fowler. 

6 ™Go to the ant, thou sluggard; 
consider her ways, and be wise: 

7 Which having no guide, over- 
seer, or ruler, 

8 Provideth her meat in the sum- 
mer, and gathereth her food in the 
harvest. : 

9 “How long wilt thou sleep, O 
sluggard? when wilt thou arise out 
of thy sleep? 

10 Yet alittle sleep, a little slum- 
bér, a little folding of the hands to 
sleep: 

11 °So shall thy poverty come as 
one that travelleth, and thy want 
as an armed man. 

12 A naughty person, a wicked 
man, walketh with a froward 
mouth. 

13 He winketh with his eyes, he 
speaketh with his feet, he teacheth 
with his fingers; 

14 Frowardness is in his heart, he 
deviseth mischief continually; he 
Psoweth discord. 


es 


6 15) 


15 Therefore shall his calamity 
come suddenly; suddenly shall he 
be broken without remedy. 

16 These six things doth the 
Lorp hate: yea, seven are an 
abomination unto him: 

17 A proud look, 2a lying tongue, 
and hands that shed innocent 
blood, : 

18 An heart that deviseth wicked 
imaginations, feet that be swift in 
running to mischief, 

19 “A false witness that speaketh 
lies, and he that soweth discord 
among brethren. 

20 My son, ¢keep thy father’s 
‘commandment, and forsake not the 
law of thy mother: 

21 «Bind them continually upon 
‘thine heart, and tie them about thy] ¢ roe oo 
peaciet sa.27.12. 

22 fWhen thou goest, it shall lead|¢ Prov.1.8; 
thee; when thou sleepest, it shall] Eph.6.1. 
keep thee; and when thou awakest,| , poy 3 3; 
it shall talk with thee. 73. 

23. &For the commandment jis a 


a Psa.120.2,3. 
6 Isa.59.7; 
Rom.3.15. 


lamp; and the law is light; and J Prov-3.23,24. 


reproofs of instruction are the way} ¢ Psa.19.8; 
-of life: 119.105. 

24 To keep thee from the evil 
woman, from the flattery of the 
‘tongue of a strange woman. 

25 ‘Lust not after her beauty in jEx.22.1,4 
‘thine heart; neither let her take ig sacs 
thee with her eyelids. k Prov.4.4; 

26 For by means of a whorish| 1<v185i 
‘woman a man is brought to a o"% 
‘piece of bread: and the adulteress| / Deut.6.8. 
will *hunt for the precious life. m Job 24.15 

27 Can a man take fire in his bo- Fok 
som, and his clothes not be burned?|7 1 Tim.5.13; 

28 Can one go upon hot coals, and| Tit-2-5- 
his feet not be burned? o Psa.12.2. 

29 So he that goeth in to his 

p Heb. sud- 
denly, 


h Mt.5.28. 
¢ Ezk.13.18. 


neighbour’s wife; whosoever touch- 
eth her shall not be innocent. 

30 Men do not despise a thief, if 
he steal to satisfy his soul when he 
‘is hungry; 

31 But if he be found, she shall 
restore sevenfold; he shail give all 
the substance of his house. 

32 But whoso committeth adul- 
‘tery with a woman lacketh under- 
standing: he that doeth it de- 
stroyeth his own soul. 

33 A wound and dishonour shall 
he get; and his reproach shall not 
be wiped away. 

34 For jealousy is the rage of a 
‘man: therefore he will not spare in 
the day of vengeance. 

35 He will not regard any ran- 
som; neither will he rest content, 
‘though thou givest many gifts. 


676 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. 


[7 2 


CHAPTER 7. 
(To sons, concluded.) 


MY son, keep my words, and lay 
up my commandments with 
thee. 


2 Keep my commandments, and 
live; and my law as the apple of 
thine eye. 

3 /Bind them upon thy fingers, 
write them upon the table of thine 
heart. 

4 Say unto wisdom, Thou art my 
sister; and call understanding thy 
kinswoman: 

5 That they may keep thee from 
the strange woman, from the stran- 
ger which flattereth with her words. 

6 For at the window of my house 
I looked through my casement, 

7 And beheld among the simple 
ones, I discerned among the youths, 
a young man void of understanding, 

8 Passing through the street near 
her corner; and he went the way 
to her house, 

9 ™In the twilight, in the evening, 
in the black and dark night: 

10 And, behold, there met him a 
woman with the attire of an harlot, 
and subtil of heart. 

11 (She is loud and stubborn; 
her feet abide not in her house: 

12 Now is she without, now in 
the streets, and lieth in wait at 
every corner. ) 

13 So she caught him, and kissed 
him, and with an impudent face 
said unto him, 

14 I have peace-offerings with 
me; this day have I payed my vows. 

15 Therefore came I forth to meet 
thee, diligently to seek thy face, 
and I have found thee. 

16 I have decked my bed with 
coverings of tapestry, with carved 
works, with fine linen of Egypt. 

17 I have perfumed my bed with 
myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon, 

18 Come, let us take our fill of 
love until the morning: let us solace 
ourselves with loves. 

19 For the goodman jis not at 
home, he is gone a long jovérney: 

20 He hath taken a bag of money 
with him, and will come home at 
the day appointed. 

21 With her much fair speech she 
caused him to yield, “with the flat- 
tering of her lips she forced him. 

22 He goeth after her ’straight- 
way, as an ox goeth to the slaugh- 


ter, or as a fool to the correction of 
the stocks; 


7 23] PROVERBS. [8 34 


23 Till a dart strike through his 
liver; ¢as a bird hasteth to the 
snare, and knoweth not that it is 
for his life. 

24 Hearken unto me now there- 
fore, O ye children, and attend to ithose that seek me early shall find 
the words of my mouth. me. 

25 Let not thine heart decline to 18 JRiches and honour are with 
her ways, go not astray in her|, 912, |me; yea, durable riches and right- 
paths. eousness. 

26 For she hath cast down many)? Neh.13.26. 19 My fruit zs better than gold, 
wounded: yea, 'many strong men! rep. Sheos, |yea, than fine gold; and my rev- 


B.C. 1000. 15 “By me kings reign, and 
princes decree justice. 
16 By me princes rule, and nobles, 
even all the judges of the earth. 
17 *I love them that love me; and 


have been slain by, her. See Hab.2.5, enue than choice silver. 
27 Her house is the way to ¢hell,| note. 20 I lead in the way of righteous- 
ok down to the chambers of/gep tne |mess, in the midst of the paths of 
eath. CHAPTER’ 8 ebomins- judgment: 
10n Of m 
ape ar | eee he eae ae 
analy % mea g Rak, See 4.5,7; 16.16. Mee an amis treasures. ’ 
not wisdomcry?andunder- ; 2 e LorpD possessed Ime in 
D standing put forth her voice?|* ioe the beginning of his way, before his 
2 She standeth in the top of high} 119.127. works of old. 
places, by the way in the places of P0199, 23 ‘I was set up from everlasting, 
the paths. pera from the beginning, or ever the 
3 She crieth at the gates, at the earth was. 
ha ie city, at the coming in|: Dantas 24 ee oy teat ie rs depths, I 
: “*3-2+ | was brought forth; when there were 
4 Unto you, O men, I call; and my]; 1Sam.2.30; |no fountains abounding with water. 
es is to the ce Se ae 5 a Tees aot ss : i Ered iye hey 
ye simple, understand wis- “**+ Isettled, before e hills was 
dom: and, ye fools, be ye of an} i Jas.1.5. brought forth: 
understanding heart. ¥ : 26 While as yet he had not made 
6 Hear; for I will speak of excel-|/ fyeg33.* the earth, nor the fields, nor the 
lent things; and the opening of my highest part of the dust of the world. 
lips shall be right things. Wes eese! 27 When he prepared the heavens, 
7 Formy mouth shall speak truth; John 4.1: I was there: when he set a compass 
and wickedness zs dan abomination| | Psa.2.6. upon the face of the depth: 
to my lips. 28 When he established the clouds 


8 All the words of my mouth are|” Job 15.7.8. |above: when he strengthened the 
in righteousness; there is nothing|nGen.1.9,10; |fountains of the deep: 


froward or perverse in them. Job 38.10,11; | 29 When he gave to the sea his 
9 They are all plain to him that tere 5, |decree, that the waters should not 
understandeth, and right to them] 22..'° ~° |pass his commandment: °when he 
_-that find knowledge. appointed the foundations of the 
10 Receive my instruction, and|? J» 38-+- earth: 


not silver: and knowledge rather} John 1.1,2,18. 30 ?Then I was by him, as one 
than choice gold. brought up with him: Yand I was 


11 ¢For wisdom is better than ru-|?Mt347: — |daily Ais delight, rejoicing always 
bies; and all the things that may be before him; | ‘ 
desired are not to be compared to it, |r Psa-16.3. 31 Rejoicing in the habitable part 


12 I wisdom dwell with prudence,} . p...419.1,2; of his earth; and ‘my delights were 
and find out knowledge of witty in-| 128.1,2; Uk, |with the sons of men. 


ventions. 11,28. 32 Now therefore hearken unto 
13 fThe fear of the LorD is to me, O ye children: for ‘blessed are 
hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, |they that keep my ways. 
and the evil way, and the froward 33 Hear instruction, and be wise, 
mouth, do I hate. and refuse it not. 
14 Counsel is mine, and sound 34 Blessed is the man that hear- 


eth me, watching daily at my gates, 


wisdom: I am understanding; I 1 n 
waiting at the posts of my doors. 


have strength. 


1 That wisdom is more than the personification of an attribute of God, or of the 
will of God as best for man, but is a distinct adumbration of Christ, is sure to the 
devout mind. Prov. 8. 22-36, with John 1. 1-3; Col. 1. 17, can refer to nothing less 


than the Eternal Son of God, 
677 


8 35] 


35 For whoso findeth me findeth| B.c. 1000. 


life, and shall obtain favour of the 
Lorp. tH i 

36 But he that sinneth against 
me wrongeth his own soul: all they 
that hate me love death. 


CHAPTER 9. 


(The praise of wisdom, 
continued.) 


ISDOM hath 4builded her 
house, she hath hewn out pes Pe 
her seven pillars: Tsa.55-1; 

2 She hath killed her beasts; she} John 6.27, 
hath mingled her wine; she hath dMt.7.6 
also furnished her table. 1s 

3 She hath sent forth her maid-|e Psa.141.5. 
ens: she crieth upon the highest f Psa.19.9 
places of the city, motes 

4 Whoso is simple, let him turn 
in hither: as for him that wanteth|® Fbséan 
understanding, she saith to him, ee 

5 *Come, eat of my bread, and|A Prov.20.17. 
drink of the wine which I have i Prova.1s: 
mingled. ray fee pane 

6 Forsake the foolish, and live;] _ 
and go in the way of understanding. |/ pkg El a 

7 He that reproveth a scorner get-| § note.’ 
teth to himself shame: and he that 
rebuketh a wicked man getteth Ne Beye 
himself a blot. 19.13; 29.3, 

8 ¢Reprove not a scorner, lest he] 15. 
hate thee: ‘rebuke a wise man, and 1 Pas 1014s 
he will love thee. 34.9,10: 

9 Give instruction to a wise} 37.25. 
man, and he will be yet wiser: teach ? 
a just man, and he will increase in}""9y'5)° ~~"? 
learning. 

10 The ‘fear of the Lorp is the Syaas : 
beginning of wisdom: and the| “’> 
knowledge of the holy is under-]o Psa.112.6, 
standing. Eccl.8.10. 

11 For by me thy days shall bel» sep. 2 fool 
multiplied, and the years of thy life| of dips. 
shall be increased. 1 Cor 13.7 

12 4If thou be wise, thou shalt be|%* “°%73:7+ 


wise for thyself: but if thou scorn-|r Prov.18.11; 
est, thou alone shalt bear it. poh oh 
13 A foolish woman is clamorous:} 4 ‘tim.¢.17, 


she 1s simple, and knoweth nothing. 
14 For she sitteth at the door of 
her house, on a seat in the high 
places of the city, 
15 Tocall passengers who go right 
on their ways: 
_16 Whoso is simple, let him turn 
in hither:- and as for him that} 


1A “fool’? in Scripture is never a mentally deficient person, but rather one arro- 
one who orders his life as if there were no God. See, for 
The rich man was not mentally deficient, but he was 


gant and self-sufficient; 
illustration, Lk. 12. 16-20. 


PROVERBS. 


[10 15 ' 


wanteth understanding, she saith 
to him, 
17 "Stolen waters are sweet, and 
bread eaten in secret is pleasant. 
18 But he knoweth not. that the 
tdead are there; &nd that her 
guests are in the depths of hell. 


CHAPTER 10. 


Part III. The folly of wickedness; 
the wisdom of righteousness. 


HE proverbs of Solomon. 7A 

& wise son maketh a glad father: 
but a lfoolish son is the heaviness 
of his mother. 

2 Treasures of wickedness profit 
nothing: but righteousness deliver- 
eth from death. 

3 'The Lorp will not suffer the 
soul of the righteous to famish: but 
he casteth away the substance of 
the wicked. 

4 He becometh poor that dealeth 
witha slack hand: “but the hand of 
the diligent maketh rich. 

5 He that gathereth in summer is 
a wise son: but he that sleepeth in 
harvest 1s a son that causeth 
shame. 

6 Blessings are upon the head of 
the just: “but violence covereth the 
mouth of the wicked. 

7 °The memory of the just is 
blessed: but the name of the wicked 
shall rot. 

8 The wise in heart will receive 
commandments: but %a prating 
fool shall fall. 

9 He that walketh uprightly 
walketh surely: but he that per- 
verteth his ways shall be known. 

10 He that winketh with the eye 
causeth sorrow: but a prating fool 
shall fall. 

11 The mouth of a righteous man 
is a well of life: but violence cover- 
eth the mouth of the wicked. 

12 Hatred stirreth up strifes: but 
Move covereth all sins. 

13 In the lips of him that hath un- 
derstanding wisdom is found: but 
a rod is for the back of him that is 


lyoid of understanding. 


14 Wise men lay up knowledge: 
but the mouth of the foolish is near 
destruction. 

15 7’The rich man’s wealth is. his 


a “fool” because he supposed that his soul could live on the things in the barn, 


giving no thought to his eternal wellbeing. 
678 


10 16]. 


strong city: the destruction of the 
poor is their poverty, 

16 The labour of the righteous 
tendeth to life: the fruit of the 
wicked to sin. 

17 He is in the way of life that 
keepeth instruction: but he that re- 
fuseth reproof erreth. 

18 He that hideth hatred with 
lying lips, and he that uttereth a 
slander, is a fool. 

19 In the multitude of words 
there wanteth not sin: “but he that 
refraineth his lips zs wise. 

20 The tongue of the just is as 
choice silver: the heart of the 
wicked is little worth. 

21 The lips of the righteous feed|¢ Jas.3.2. 
many: but fools die for want of}; Gen.24.35; 
wisdom. 26.12; 

22 >The blessing of the LorD, it} Psa-37-22 
maketh rich, and he addeth no}, pya 145.19; 

Mt.5.6; 
1 John 5.14, 
15. 


sorrow with it. 

23 It is as sport to a fool to do 
mischief: but a man of understand- 
ing hath wisdom. 

24 The fear of the wicked, it shall 
come upon him: “but the desire of 
the righteous shall be granted. 

25 As the whirlwind passeth, so 
is the wicked no more: 4but the 
righteous 7s an everlasting founda- 
tion. 

26 As vinegar to the teeth, and as 
smoke to the eyes, so is the slug- 
gard to them that send him, 

27 The fear of the LORD pro- 
longeth days: but the years of the} Prov.10.2; 
wicked shall be shortened. pete 

28 The hope of the righteous ESTEE 
shail be gladness: but the expecta-| i See 1 Ki. 
tion of the wicked shall perish. 8.61, note. 

29 The way of the LORD 1S} ; 40s.10.12; 
strength to the upright: but de-|” Gal.6.8,9;” 
struction shall be to the workers| Jas3.18. 
of iniquity. 

30 fThe righteous shall never be 
removed: but the wicked shall not 
inhabit the earth. 

31 The mouth of the just bringeth 
forth wisdom: but the froward 
tongue shall be cut out. 

32 The lips of the righteous know 
what is acceptable: but the mouth 
of the wicked speaketh froward- 


ness. 


d v.30; Psa. 
15.5; Mt.7 
24,25. 


e Psa.19.9, 
note. 


f Psa.37.22, 
29; 125.1. 


g Prov.16.11; 
20.10,23; 
Lev.19.35, 


13-16. 


CHAPTER 11. 


(The contrast of righteousness 
and wickedness, continued.) 


8 A FALSE baiance is abomina- 
tion to the LorpD:-but a just 
weight is his delight. 
2 When pride cometh, then com- Fa 


« 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. 


36; Deut.25. 


[11 21 


eth shame; but with the lowly is: 
wisdom. . 

3 The integrity of the upright 
shall guide them: but the perverse- 
ness of transgressors shall destroy 
them. 

4 Riches profit not in the day of 
wrath: but righteousness delivereth 
from death. 

5 The righteousness of the “*per- 
fect shall direct his way: but the 
wicked shall fall by his own 
wickedness. 

6 The righteousness of the up- 
right shall deliver them: but trans- 
gressors shall be taken in their own 
naughtiness. 

7 When a wicked man dieth, his 
expectation shall perish: and the 
hope of unjust men perisheth. 

8 The righteous is delivered out 
of trouble, and the wicked cometh 
in his stead. 

9 An hypocrite with his mouth 
destroyeth his neighbour: but 
through knowledge shall the just 
be delivered. 

10 When it goeth well with the 
righteous, the city rejoiceth: and 
when the wicked perish, there is 
shouting. 

11 By the blessing of the upright 
the city is exalted: but it is over- 
thrown by the mouth of the wicked. 

12 He that is void of wisdom de- 
spiseth his neighbour: but a man 
of understanding holdeth his peace. 

13 A talebearer revealeth secrets: 
but he that is of a faithful spirit 
concealeth the matter. 

14. Where no counsel is, the peo: 
ple fall: but in the multitude of 
counsellors there is safety. 

15 He that is surety for a stranger 
shall smart for it; and he that 
hateth suretiship is sure. 

16 A gracious woman retaineth 
honour: and strong men retain 
riches. 

17 The merciful man doeth good 
to his own soul: but he that is 
cruel troubleth his own flesh. 

18 The wicked worketh a deceit- 
ful work: but to him /that soweth 
righteousness shali be a sure re- 
ward, 

19 As righteousness tendeth to 
life: so he that pursueth evil pur- 
sueth it to his own death. 

20 They that are of a froward 
heart are abomination to the LORD: 
but such as are upright in their 
way are his delight. 

21 Though hand join in hand, 
the wicked shall not be unpunished: 


li 22] 


PROVERBS. 


[12 28 1 


but °the seed of the righteous shall| B.c. 1000._|is of a perverse heart shall be de- _ 


be delivered. : 

22 As a jewel of gold in 2 swine’s 
snout, so is a fair woman which 
is without discretion. i 

23 The desire of the righteous is 
only good: but the expectation of 
the wicked is wrath. 3 

24 There is that scattereth, and 
yet increaseth; and there is that 
withholdeth more than is meet, but 
it tendeth to poverty. 

25 >The liberal soul shall be made 
fat: and he that watereth shall be a Pea.112.2 
watered also himself. i? age 

26 ‘He that withholdeth corn, the/» 2 Cor.9. 
people shall curse him: but blessing} ©10- 
shall be upon the head of him that}, amos 8.5,6. 
selleth it. 

27 He that diligently seeketh/¢ Fes-2i38 
good procureth favour: but he that) 7°** 
seeketh mischief, it shall come unto] c Psa.1.3; 
him. $2.8: 92.12; 

28 He that 4trusteth in his riches} J&-178- 
shall fall: but ‘the righteous shall| fDan.12.3; 
flourish as a branch. bast rias 

29 He that troubleth his own seas 
house shall inherit the wind: and|¢ Prov.31.23; 
the fool shall be servant to the| 1 Cor-11.7. 
wise of heart. h Psa.37.36, 

30 The fruit of the righteous is a 
tree of life; and fhe that winneth Petra 
souls 7s wise. 9 

31 Behold, the righteous shall be] i Deut.25.4. 
recompensed in the earth: much 


more the wicked and the sinner. |7 S¢2-3-19- 
k Prov.3.7; 
CHAPTER 12. Lk.18.11. 


{The contrast of righteousness TEROY Aes 
and wickedness, continued.) ie 


VV oso loveth instruction lov- arene ed 
= ee poate par he that] 22.15: 
ateth reproof is brutish. 

2 A good man obtaineth favour|” Prev-10-4- 
of the Lorp: but a man of wicked|o Prov.15.13. 
devices will he condemn. ease 

3 A man shall not be established|? 18-5°-4- 
by wickedness: but the root of the 
righteous shall not be moved. 

4 A &virfuous woman is a crown 
to her husband: but she that mak- 
eth ashamed is as rottenness in his 
bones. 

5 The thoughts of the righteous 
are right: but the counsels of the 
wicked are deceit. 

6 The words of the wicked are to 
lie in wait for blood: but the mouth 
of the upright shall deliver them. | 

The wicked are overthrown, 
and are not: but the house of the 
tighteous shall stand. 

8 A man shall be commended ac- 
cording to his wisdom: but he that 


680 


37; Prov.11. 


spised. ‘ 

9 He that is despised, and hatha 
servant, is better than he that hon- 
oureth himself, and lacketh bread. 

10 *A righteous man regardeth 
the life of his beast: but the tender 
mercies of the wicked are cruel. 

11 JHe that tilleth his land shall 
be satisfied with bread: but he that 
followeth vain persons is void of 
understanding. 

12 The wicked desireth the net of 
evil men: but the root of the right- 
eous yieldeth fruit. 

13 The wicked is snared by the 
transgression of Ais lips: but the 


|just shall come out of trouble. 


14 A man shall be satisfied with 
good by the fruit of his mouth: and 
the recompence of a man’s hands 
shall be rendered unto him. 

15 *The way of a fool is right in 
his own eyes: but he that hearken- 
eth unto counsel is wise. 

16 A fool’s wrath is presently 
known: but a prudent man cover- 
eth shame. 

17 He that speaketh truth shew- 
eth forth righteousness: but a false 
witness deceit. 

18 There is that speaketh like the 
piercings of a sword: but the tongue 
of the wise is health. 

19 The lip of truth shall be estab- 
lished for ever: but /a lying tongue 
is but for a moment. 

20 Deceit is in the heart of them 
that imagine evil: but to the coun- 
sellors of peace is joy. 

21 There shall no evil happen to 
the just: but the wicked shall be 
filled with mischief. 

22 ™Lying lips are abomination 
to the Lorp: but they that deal 
truly are his delight. 

23 A prudent man concealeth 
knowledge: but the heart of fools 
proclaimeth foolishness, 

24 "The hand of the diligent shall 
bear rule: but the slothful shall be 
under tribute. 
| 25 °Heaviness in the heart of man 
maketh it stoop: /but a good word 
\maketh it glad. 

26 The righteous fs more excel- 
lent than his neighbour: but the 
way of the wicked seduceth them. 

27 The slothful man roasteth not 
that which he took in hunting: but 
the substance of a diligent man is 
precious. 

28 In the way of righteousness is 


\life; and in the pathway thereof 


there is no death. 


13 1] 


CHAPTER 13. 


(The contrast of righteousness 
and wickedness, continued.) 


WISE son heareth his father’s 
instruction: but 2a _ scorner 
heareth not rebuke. 

2 A man shall eat good by the 
fruit of his mouth: but the soul of 
the transgressors shall eat violence. 

3 Hethat keepeth his mouth keep- 
eth his life: but he that openeth 
wide his lips shall have destruction. 

4 The soul of the sluggard de- 
sireth, and Aath nothing: but the 
aay of the diligent shall be made|4 1 Sam.2.25. 

at. b Prov.10.4. 

5 A righteous man hateth lying: of 
but a wicked man is loathsome,}|°¢ eed 
and cometh to shame. oe 

6 ‘Righteousness keepeth Ahim/|d Prov.12.9. 
that is upright in the way: but Se ony. 
wickedness overthroweth the sin-|° job is.5.6; 


ner. 21.17. 

7 @There is that maketh himself 
rich, yet hath nothing: there is 
that maketh himself poor, yet hath|g Heb. with 
great riches. the hand. 

8 The ransom of a man’s life are]; Heb. 
his riches: but the poor heareth| spreadeth. 
not rebuke. 

9 The light of the righteous re- 
joiceth: “but the ‘lamp of the 
wicked shall be put out. 

10 Only by pride cometh conten- 
tion: but with the well advised is 
wisdom. 

11 Wealth gotten by vanity shall 
be diminished: but he that gather- 
eth &by labour shall increase.. 

12 Hope deferred maketh the 
heart sick: but when the desire 
cometh, it is a tree of life. 

13 Whoso despiseth the word 
shall be destroyed: but he that fear- 
eth the commandment shall be re- 
warded. 

14 The law of the wise is a foun- 
tain of life, to depart from the 
snares of death, 

15 Good understanding giveth fa- 
your: but the way of transgressors 
is hard. 

16 Every prudent man dealeth 
with knowledge: but a fool “layeth 
open his folly. 

17 A wicked messenger falleth 
into mischief: but a faithful am- 
bassador is health. 

18 Poverty and shame shall be 
to him that refuseth instruction: 
but he that regardeth reproof shall 
be honoured. i § 

19 The desire accomplished is 


j Or, candle. 


# Prov.28.8; 
Job 27.16, 
17; Eccl. 
2.26, 

j Prov.19.18; 
29.15,17. 


k Psa.19.9, 
note. 


1 Prov.10.23. 
m Heb. the 


bitterness 


n Rom.6.21. 


681 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. 


22.15; 23.13; 


of his soul. 


[414 


sweet to the soul: but it is abomi- 
nation to fools to depart from evil. 
20 He that, walketh with wise 
men shall be wise: but a companion. 
of fools shall be destroyed. 
21 Evil pursueth sinners: but to: 


|the righteous good shall be repayed. 


22 Agood man leaveth an inheri- 
tance to his children’s children: 
and the wealth of the sinner is laid 
up for the just. 

23 Much food is in the tillage of 
the poor: but there is that is de- 
stroyed for want of judgment. 

24 JHe that spareth his rod hateth 
his son: but he that loveth him 
chasteneth him betimes. 

25 The righteous eateth to the 
satisfying of his soul: but the belly 
of the wicked shall want. 


CHAPTER 14: 


(The contrast of goodness and . 
evil, continued.) 


VERY wise woman buildeth 
her house: but the foolish 
plucketh it down with her hands. 
2 He that walketh in his upright- 
ness *feareth the LorpD: but he: 
that is perverse in his ways de- 
spiseth him. 
3 In the mouth of the foolish ss: 


./a rod of pride: but the lips of the 


wise shall preserve them. 

4 Where no oxen are, the crib is 
clean: but much increase 1s by the 
strength of the ox. 

5 A faithful witness will not lie: 
but a false witness will utter lies. 

6 A scorner seeketh wisdom, and 
findeth it not: but knowledge is 
easy unto him that understandeth. 

7 Go from the presence of a fool- 
ish man, when thou perceivest not 
in him the lips of knowledge. 

8 The wisdom of the prudent 1s to 
understand his way: but the folly 
of fools 1s deceit. 

9 !Fools make a mock at sin: but 
among the righteous there 1s fa- 


vour. 

10 ™The heart knoweth his own 
‘bitterness; and a stranger doth not 
intermeddle with his joy. 

11 The house of the wicked shall 
be overthrown: but the tabernacle 
of the upright shall flourish. 

12 There is a way which seemeth 
right unto a man, but "the end 
thereof are the ways of death. 

13 Even in laughter the heart is 
sorrowful; and the end of that 
mirth zs heaviness. 

14 The backslider in heart shall 


14 15] 


be 4filled with his own ways: and 
a good man shall be satisfied from 
himself. 

15 The simple believeth every 
word: but the prudent man looketh 
well to his going. 

16 A wise man feareth, and de- 
parteth from evil: but the fool 
rageth, and is confident. 

17 He that is soon angry dealeth 
foolishly: and a man of wicked de- 
vices is hated. 

18 The simple inherit folly: but 
the prudent are crowned with 
knowledge. 

19 The evil bow before the good; 
and the wicked at the gates of the 
righteous. . 

20 The poor is hated even of his 
own néighbour: “but the rich hath 
many friends. ‘ 

21 He that despiseth his neigh- 
bour sinneth: but he that hath 
mercy on the poor, happy is he. 

22 Do they not err that devise 
evil? but mercy and truth shall be 
to them that devise good. 

23 In all labour there is profit: 
but the talk of the lips tendeth 
only to penury. 

24 The crown of the wise zs their 
riches: but the foolishness of fools 
is folly. 

25 A true witness delivereth souls: 
but a deceitful witnessspeaketh lies. 

26 In the ‘fear of the Lorp is 

‘strong confidence: and his children 
shall have a place of refuge. 

27 The 4fear of the LorpD is a 
fountain of life, to depart from the 
snares of death, 

28 In the multitude of people is 
the king’s honour but in the want 
of people zs the destruction of the 
prince. 

29 ¢He that is slow to wrath is of 
great understanding. but he that 
is hasty of spirit exalteth folly. 

30 A sound heart is the life of the 
flesh: but envy the rottenness of 
the bones. 

31 fHe that oppresseth the poor 
reproacheth his Maker; but he that 
honoureth him hath mercy on the 
poor 

32 The wicked is driven away in 
his wickedness. but the righteous 
hath hope in his death. 

33 Wisdom resteth in the heart of 
him that hath understanding: but 
that which is in the midst of fools 
is made known. 

34 Righteousness exalteth a na- 
tion: but sin is a reproach to any 
people. 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. 


a Prov.1.31. 
12.14, 


b Heb. many 
are the 
lovers of the 
rich, 


c Also, Prov 
15.16, Psa.19. 
9, note. 


d Prov.13.14. 


e Prov.16.32, 
Jas.1.19. 


f Prov.17.5, 
Mt.25.40,45, 


g Mt.24.45,47. 


h Prov.25.15, 
Jud.8.1-3. 


¢1Sam.25. 
10, 1 Ki.12, 
13-16. 


J Heb. belch- 
eth. 


k Prov.5.21, 


Heb.4.13. 


1 Prov.21.27, 
28.9; Isa. 
1.11; 61.8, 
66.3, Jer.6. 
20, 7 22; 
Amos 5.22. 


m Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab. 2, 
5, note. 
Job 26.6; 
Psa.139.8. 


n Prov.17.22. 

o Prov.16.8; 
Psa.37.16; 
1 Tim.6.6. 


p Prov.17.1 


682 


j CHAPTER 15. 


Sees 23 


35 &The king’s 36 PThe angie seuaiecs tower is ‘oad a 
wise servant: but his wrath is 
against him that causeth shame. 


(The contrast of goodness and 
evil, continued.) 


‘SOFT answer turneth away 
wrath: ‘but grievous words | 
stir up anger. 4 

2 The tongue of the wise useth 
knowledge aright: but the mouth 
of fools Jpoureth out foolishness. 

3 °E ye re in 
cvery/ofice Bbaottind & tne il and 
the good 

4A wholesome tongue 1s a tree 
of life: but perverseness therein is 
a breach in the spirit. 

5 A fool despiseth his father’s in- 
struction: but he that regardeth 
reproof is prudent. } 

6 In the house of the righteous is 
much treasure: but in the revenues 
of the wicked is trouble. 

7 The lips of the wise disperse 
knowledge: but the heart of the 
foolish doeth not so. 

8 'The sacrifice of the wicked is 
an abomination to the LorpD: but 
the prayer of the upright is his 
delight. 

9 The way of the wicked is an 
abomination unto the LorD: but 
he loveth him that followeth after 
righteousness. 

10 Correction is grievous unto 
him that forsaketh the way: and he 
that hateth reproof shall die. 

11 Hell and destruction are be- 
fore the LORD: how much more then 
the hearts of the children of men? 

12 A scorner loveth not one that 
reproveth him neither will he go 
unto the wise. 

13 "A merry heart “maketh a 
cheerful countenance: but by sor. 
row of the heart the spirit is broken, 

14 The heart of him that hath 
understanding seeketh knowledge: 
but the mouth of fools feedeth on 
foolishness. 

15 All the days of the afflicted are 
evil. but he that is of a merry heart 
hath a continual feast. 

16 Better ss little with the fear of 
the LorpD than great treasure and 
trouble therewith. 

17 Better zs a dinner of herbs 
where love is, than a stalled ox and 
hatred therewith. 

18 A wrathful man stirreth up 
strife but he that is slow to anger 
appeaseth strife, 


15 19] 


19 The way of the slothful man is 
~ as an hedge of thorns: but the way 
of the righteous is made plain. 

20 A wise son maketh a glad 
father: but a foolish man despiseth 
his mother. 

21 Folly is joy to him that is 
destitute of wisdom: ¢but a man of 
understanding walketh uprightly. 

22 Without counsel purposes are 
disappointed: but in the multitude 
of counsellors they are established. 

23 Aman hath joy by the answer 
of his mouth: and a word spoken 
in due season, how good is it! 

24 >The way of life is above to 
the wise, that he may depart from 
chell beneath. 

25 The Lorp will destroy the 
house of the proud: but he will 
establish the border of the widow.: 

26 The thoughts of the wicked 
are an abomination to the Lorb: 
but the words of the pure are 
pleasant words. 

27 4He that is greedy of gain trou- 
bleth his own house; but he that 
hateth gifts shall live. 

28 The heart of the righteous 
€studieth to answer: but the mouth 
of the wicked poureth out evil 
things. 

29 The LorpD is far from the 
wicked: but he heareth the prayer 
of the righteous. 

30 The light of the eyes rejoiceth 
the heart: and a good report mak- 
eth the bones fat. 

31 The ear that heareth the re- 
proof of life abideth among the 


wise. 
32 He that refuseth instruction 
despiseth his own soul: but he that 
_heareth reproof getteth under- 
standing. 
33 The ffear of the LorpD is the 
instruction of wisdom; and. before 
honour is humility. 


CHAPTER 16. 


(The contrast of goodness and 
evil, continued.) 


pel preparations of the heart in 
man, and the answer of the 
tongue, is from the LORD. 

2 All the ways of a man are clean 
in his own eyes; but the LORD) 
gweigheth the spirits. 

3 tkCommit thy works unto the 
Lorp, and thy thoughts shall be 
established. 

4 'The Lorp hath made all 
things for himself: 7yea, even the 
wicked for the day of evil. 


PROVERBS. 


a Eph.5.15. 


6 Phil.3.20; 
Col.3.1,2. 


c Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2. 
5, note. 


d Isa.5.8, 
Jer.17.11, 


e 1 Pet.3.15. 


f Psa.19.9, 
note. 


g 1 Sam.16.7. 
h Heb. roll. 


1 Isa.43.7; 
Rom.11.36. 


J Job 21.30; 
Rom.9:22. 


k Prov.6.17; 
8.13. 


1 Prov.15.16; 
Psa.37.16. 


m Prov.20.24; 
Psa.37.23; 
Jer.10.23. 


n Heb. divina- 
tion. 


o Job 29.23; 
Zech.10.1. 


pb Prov.8.11, 
19. 


gq Psa.2.12, 
note. 


B.C 1000. 


[16 26 


5 kEvery one that is proud in 
heart ss an abomination to the 
Lorp: though hand join im hand, 
he shall not be unpunished. 

6 By mercy and truth iniquity is 
purged: and by the fear of the LORD 
men depart from evil. 

7 When a man’s ways please the 
LorbD, he maketh even his enemies 
to be at peace with him. 

8 ‘Better sa little with righteous- 
ness than great revenues without 
right. 

9 A man’s heart deviseth his 
way: ™but the Lorp directeth his 
steps. 

10 A divine sentence is in the lips 
of the king: his mouth transgress- 
eth not in judgment. 

11 A just weight and balance are 
\the Lorp’s: all the weights of the 
bag are his work. 

12 It isan abomination to kings to 
commit wickedness: for the throne 
is established by righteousness. 

13 Righteous lips are the delight 
of kings; and they love him that 
speaketh right. 

14 The wrath of a king Is as 
messengers of death: but a wise 
man will pacify it. 

15 In the light of the king’s coun- 
tenance is life; and his favour is as 
°a cloud of the latter rain. 

16 *How much better is it to get 
wisdom than gold! and to get un- 
derstanding rather to be chosen 
than silver! 

17 The highway of the upright 1s 
ito depart from evil: he that keepeth 
his way preserveth his soul. : 

18 Pride goeth before destruction, 
and an haughty spirit before a fall. 

19 Better it is to be of an humble 
spirit with the lowly, than to divide 
the spoil with the proud. 

20 He that handleth a matter 
wisely shall find good: and whoso 
atrusteth in the LoRD, happy is he. 

21 The wise in heart shall be 
called prudent: and the sweetness 
of the lips increaseth learning. 

22 Understanding is a wellspring 
of life unto him that hath it: but 
the instruction of fools is folly. 

23. The heart of the wise teacheth 
his mouth, and addeth learning to 
his lips. 

24 Pleasant words are as an 
honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and 
health to the bones. 

! 95 There is a way that seemeth 
\right unto a man, but the end there- 
‘of are the ways of death. 

| 26 He that laboureth laboureth 


evil: and in his lips there is as a 
burning fire. ‘ 

28 A froward man soweth strife: 
and 2a whisperer separateth chief 
friends. 3 4 

29 A violent man enticeth his 
neighbour, and leadeth him into the 
way that is not good. L 

30 He shutteth his eyes to devise 
froward things: moving his lips he 

’ bringeth evil to pass. 

31 The hoary head is a crown of 
glory, if it be found in the way of|» Prov.20.29. 
righteousness. 

32 He that is slow to anger is 
better than the mighty; and he d Prov 27-213 


a Prov.17.9. 


that ruleth his spirit than he that 26.25 
; Jer.17.10; 

taketh a city. Mai.33. 

33 The lot is cast into the lap; 

but the whole disposing thereof sj ¢ Prov-14.31. 

of the Lorn. f Job 31.29: 

Oba,12. 

CHAPTER 17. gHeb. held 

(The contrast of goodness and | innccent. 


evil, continued.) 


BEtrER is a dry morsel, and 
quietness therewith, than an 
chouse full of sacrifices with strife. 

2 A wise servant shall have rule 
over a son that causeth shame, and 
shail have part of the inheritance 
among the brethren. 

3 ?The fining pot is for silver, and 
the furnace for gold: but the Lorp k Prov.24.24; 
trieth the hearts. Smaps 

4 A wicked doer giveth heed to Vas 
false lips; and a liar giveth ear to] / Jas.3.8. 

a naughty tongue, m Prov.12.25; 
15.13,15. 


h Psa.127.3; 
128.3. 


t Hos.13.8, 


j Psa.109.4, 
5; Jer.18.20. 


5 ¢‘Whoso mocketh the poor re- 
proacheth his Maker: fand he that 
is glad at calamities shall not be|"¥:743,) 4. 
8unpunished. ); 19.4 

6 Children’s children are the 
crown of old men; and the glory of|? J#8-1-19. 
children are their fathers. 

7 Excellent speech becometh not 
a fool: much less do lying lips a 
prince. 

8 A gift 1s as a precious stone in 
the eyes of him that hath it: whith- 
ersoever it turneth, it prospereth. 
‘9 He that covereth a transgres- 
sion seeketh love; but he that 
repeateth a matter separateth very 
friends. 

10 A reproof entereth more into 
@ wise man than an hundred stripes 
into a fool. 

11 An evil man seeketh only re- 
bellion: therefore a cruel messenger 
shall be sent against him. 


PROVERBS. 


ci.e. feasting. 


15.20; 19.13. 


sz. 


12 *Let a bear robbed of her 
whelps meet a man, rather than a 
fool in his folly. ; 

13 JWhoso rewardeth evil for 
good, evil shall not depart from his 
house. fi DOG: 

14 The beginning of strife is as 
when one letteth out water: there- 
fore leave off contention, before it 
be meddled with. 

15 “He that justifieth the wicked, 
and he that condemneth the just, 
even they both are abomination to 
the LorpD. 

16 Wherefore is there a price in 
the hand of a fool to get wisdom, 
seeing he hath no heart to it? 

17 A friend loveth at all times, and 
a brother is born for adversity. 

18 A man void of understanding 
striketh hands, and becometh 
surety in the presence of his friend. 

19 He loveth transgression that 
loveth strife: and he that exalteth 
his gate seeketh destruction. 

20 He that hath a froward heart 
findeth no good: /and he that hath a 
perverse tongue falleth into mis- 
chief, 

21 He that begetteth a fool doeth 
it to his sorrow: and the father of a 
fool hath no joy. 

22 ™A merry heart doeth good 
like a medicine: but a broken spirit 
drieth the bones. 

23 A wicked man taketh a gift 
out of the bosom to pervert the 
ways of judgment. 

24 Wisdom is before him that 
hath understanding; but the eyes of 
a fool are in the ends of the earth. 

25 “A foolish son is a grief to his 
father, and bitterness to her that 
bare him. 

26 Also to punish the just is not 
good, mor to strike princes for 


equity. 

27 °He that hath knowledge spar- 
eth his words: and a man of under- 
standing is of an excellent spirit. 

28 Even a fool, when he holdeth 
his peace, is counted wise: and he 
that shutteth his lips is esteemed 
a man of understanding, 


CHAPTER 18. 


(The contrast of goodness and 
evil, continued.) 


"THROUGH desire a man, hay- 
ing separated himself, seeketh 


and intermeddleth with all wisdom. 
2 A fool hath no delight in under- 


standing, but that his heart may 
discover itself, 


18 3] 


3 When the wicked cometh, then 
cometh also contempt, and with i ig- 
nominy reproach, 

4 The words of a man’s mouth 
are as deep waters, and the well- 
spring of wisdom as a flowing 
brook. 

5 It 1s not good to accept the per- 
son of the wicked, to overthrow the 
Tightecus in judgment. 

6 A fool’s lips enter into conten- 
tion, and his mouth calleth for 
strokes. 

7 & focl’s mouth is his destruc- 
tion, and his lips are the snare of 
his soul. 

8 The words of a “talebearer are 
as wounds, and they go down into 
the innermost parts of the belly. 

9 He also that is slothful in his 
work is brother to him that is a 
great waster. 

10 ‘The name of the LorD is a 
strong tower: the righteous runneth 
into it, and is safe. 


ii The rich man’s wealth is his 


strong city, and as an high wall in 
his own conceit. 

12 Before destruction the heart of 
man is haughty, and before honour 
is humility. 

13 He that answereth a matter 
¢before he heareth /t, it zs folly and 
shame unto him. 

14. The spirit of a man will sustain 
his infirmity; but a wounded spirit 
who can bear? 

15 The heart of the prudent get- 
teth knowledge; and the ear of the 
wise seeketh knowledge. 

16 ¢A man’s gift maketh room for 
him, and bringeth him before great 
men. 

17 He that is first in his own 
cause seemeth just; but his neigh- 
bour cometh and searcheth him. 

18 The lot causeth contentions 
to cease, and parteth between the 
mighty. , 

19 A brother offended is harder 
to be won than a strong city: and 
their contentions are like the bars 
of a castle. ’ 

20 A man’s belly shall be satisfied 
with the fruit of his mouth; and 
with the increase of his lips shall 
he be filled. 

21 fDeath and life are in the 
power of the tongue: and they that 
love it shall eat the fruit thereof. 

22 &Whoso findeth a wife findeth 
a good thing, and obtaineth favour 
of the LORD. 

23 The poor useth intreaties; but 
the rich answereth “roughly. 


PROVERBS. 


ce Or, whis- 
perer. 


6 Or, like as 
when men 
are 
wounded. 


¢ 2 Sam.22.3, 
51; Psa.18. 
2; 61.3,4; 
91.2; 144.2. 


d John 7.51. 

e Prov.17.8; 
21.14; Gen. 
32.20; 1 Sam. 
25.27. 

f Mt.12.37. 


g Prov.19.14; 
31.10. 


h Jas.2.3. 
# Prov.17.17. 
j Prov.14.20. 


kv.9; Prov.6. 
29% "91. 28; Ex. 
23:13 Deut. 
19.16,19. 


1 Prov.17.8; 
18.16; 21.14. 


m Hos.14.5. 

n Prov.18.22. 

o LE.10.28; 
11.28. 


pb Prov.28.27; 
Eccl.11.1; 
Mt.10.42; 
25.40; 2 Cor. 
9.6-8; Heb. 
6.10. 


B.C. 1000. 


[19 18 


24 Aman that hath friends must 
shew himself friendly: and ‘there 
is a friend that sticketh closer than 
a brother. 


CHAPTER 19. 


(The contrast of goodness and 
evil, continued.) 


BETTER is the poor that walk- 
eth in his integrity, than he 
that is perverse in his lips, and is 
a fool. 

2 Also, that the soul be without 
knowledge, it is not good; and he 
that hasteth with Ais feet sinneth. 

3 The foolishness of man pervert- 
eth his way: and his heart fretteth 
against the Lorp, 

4 JWealth maketh many friends; 
but the poor is separated from his 
neighbour. 

5 *A false witness shall not be un- 
punished, and he that speaketh lies 
shall not escape. 

6 Many will intreat the favour of 
the prince: and ‘every man is a 
friend to him that giveth gifts. 

7 All the brethren of the poor do 
hate him: how much more do his 
friends go far from him? he pursu- 
eth them with words, yet they are 
wanting to him. 

8 He that getteth wisdom loveth 
his own soul: he that keepeth un- 
derstanding shall find good. 

9 A false witness shall not be un- 
punished, and he that speaketh lies 
shall perish. 

10 Delight is not seemly for a fool; 
much less for a servant to have rule 
over princes. 

11 The discretion of a man defer- 
reth his anger; and it is his glory 
jto pass over a transgression. 

;, 12 Theking’s wrath is as the roar- 
ing of a lion; but his favour is “as 
dew upon the grass. 

13 A foolish son is the calamity of 
\his father: and the contentions of a 
wife are a continual dropping. 

14 House and riches are the in- 
theritance of fathers: and "a pru- 
dent wife is from the LorD. 

15 Slothfulness casteth into a deep 
sleep; and an idle soul shall suffer 
hunger. 

16 °Hethatkeepeth the command- 
ment keepeth his ownsoul; but he 
that despiseth his ways shall die. 

17 ?He that hath pity upon the 
poor lendeth unto the LorpD; and 
that which he hath given will he 
pay him again. ‘ 

18 Chasten thy son while there is 


ait 


19 19] 


hope, and let not thy soul spare for 
his crying. 

19 A man of great wrath shall suf- 
fer punishment: for if thou deliver 
hirn, yet thou must do it again. 

20 Hear counsel, and receive in- 
struction, that thou mayest be wise 
in thy latter end. ’ d 

21 “There are many devices in a 
man’s heart; nevertheless the coun- 
sel of the Lorpb, that shall stand. 

22 The desire of a man Js his kind- 
ness: and a poor man rs better than 
a liar. 

23 >The fear of the LorD tendeth 
to life: and he that hath it shall 
abide satisfied; he shall not be vis- 
ited with evil. 

24 Aslothful man hideth his hand 
in his bosom, and will not so much 
as bring it to his mouth again. 

25 Smite ascorner, and the simple 
cwill beware: and reprove one that 
hath understanding, and he will 
understand knowledge. 

26 He that wasteth his father, 
and chaseth away his mother, is a 
son that causeth shame, and 
bringeth reproach. 

27 Cease, my son, to hear the in- 
struction that causeth to err from 
the words of knowledge. 

28 An ungodly witness scorneth 
judgment: and the mouth of the 
wicked devoureth iniquity. 

29 -Judgments are prepared for 
scorners, and stripes for the back 
of fools. 


CHAPTER 20. 


Part IV. Warnings and instruc- 
tions. 


INE 4¢is a mocker, strong 

drink is raging: and whoso- 

ever is deceived thereby is not wise. 

2 The fear of a king is as the roar- 

ing of a lion: whoso provoketh him 

to anger sinneth against his own 
soul. 

3 It is an honour for a man to 
cease from strife: but every fool will 
be meddling. 

4 The sluggard will not plow by 
reason of the cold; therefore shall 
he beg in.harvest, and have nothing. 

5 ‘Counsel in the heart of man is 
like deep water; but a man of un- 
Gerstending will draw it out. 

6 fMost men will proclaim every 
one his own goodness: but a faith- 
ful man who can find? 

‘7 &The just man walketh in his 
integrity: his children are blessed 
after him, 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. 


a Prov.16.1,9; 
Job 23.13; 
Psa.33.10,11; 
Isa.14.26,27; 
46.10; 

Acts 5.39; 
Heb.6.17. 


b Psa.19.9, 
note. 


c Heb. wull be 
cunning 


d Prov.23.29, 


30, Gen.9.21, 


Isa.28.7; 
Hos.4.11. 


é Prov.18.4, 


f Prov.25 14; 
Mt.6.2, Lk. 
18.11. 


g 2 Cor.1.12. 


h1 Ki.8.46; 
2 Chr.6.36; 
Job 9.30; 14. 
4; Psa.51.5; 
Ecci.7.20; 
1 John 1.8. 


t v.23; Prov. 
Lith; 26.143 
Deut.25.13; 
Mic.6.10,11. 
Heb.a stone 
and a stone. 


j Heb. an 
ephah and 
an ephah. 

& Prov.3.15; 
8.11; Job 28. 
12,16-19, 

2 Rom.16.18. 

m Ex.21.17; 
Lev.20.9; 
Mt.15.4. 


n Prov.24.20; 
Job 18.5,6. 


o Prov.28.20. 
b Hab.2.6. 
gq Prov.17.13; 


1 Thes.5.15; 
1 Pet.3.9. 


r 2 Sam.16.12, 
51 Cor.2.11, 


(20 29 


8 Aking that sitteth in the throne 
of judgment scattereth away all — 
evil with his eyes. 

9 kWho can say, I have made my 
heart clean, I am pure from my 
sin? : 

10 ‘Divers weights, and Jdivers 
measures, both of them are alike 
abomination to the Lorp. 

11 Even a child is known by his 
doings, whether his work be pure, 
and whether it be right. 

12 The hearing ear, and the seeing 
eye, the LorD hath made even both 
of them. 

13 Love not sleep, lest thou come 
to poverty; open thine eyes, and 
thou shalt be satisfied with bread. 

14 Jtrsnaught, 1t is naught, saith 
the buyer: but when he is gone his 
way, then he boasteth. 

15 There is gold, and a multitude 
of rubies: *but the lips of knowledge 
are a precious jewel. 

16 Take his garment that is 
surety for a stranger: and take a 
pledge of him for a strange woman. 

17 Bread of deceit is sweet to a 
man; but afterwards his mouth 
shall be filled with gravel. 

18 Every purpose is established 
by counsel: and with good advice 
make war. 

19 He that goeth about as a tale- 
bearer revealeth secrets: therefore 
meddle not with him ‘that flatter- 
eth with his lips. 

20 ™Whoso curseth his father or 
his mother, “his lamp shall be put 
out in obscure darkness. 

21 °An inheritance may be gotten 
hastily at the beginning; *but the 
end thereof shall not be blessed. 

22 Say not thou, I will recom- 
pense evil; but rwait on the Lorpb, 
and he shall save thee. 

23 Divers weights are an abomi- 
nation unto the Lorp; and a false 
balance is not good. 

24 Man’s goings are of the Lorp; 
how can 2 man then understand his 
own way? 

25 It is a snare to the man who 
devoureth that which is Joly, and 
after vows to make enquiry. 

26 A wise king scattereth the 
wicked, and bringeth the wheel 
over them. 

27 sThe spirit of man is the can- 
dle of the LorD, searching all the 
inward parts of the bel ly. 

28 Mercy and truth preserve the 
king: and his throne is upholden 
by mercy. 

29 The glory of young men is 


20 30) 


their strength: and the beauty of 
old men ss the grey head. 

30 The blueness of a wound 
cleanseth away evil: so do stripes 
the inward parts of the belly. 


CHAPTER 21. 


(Warnings and instructions, 
continued.) 


HE king’s heart ss in the hand 

of the Lorb, as the rivers of 
water: he turneth it whithersoever 
he will. 

2 Every way of a man is right in 
his own eyes: “but the LORD pon- 
dereth the hearts. 

3 >To do justice and judgment is 
more acceptable to the LORD than 
sacrifice. 

4 Anhigh look, and a proud heart, 
and the ¢ plowing of the wicked, ss 
sin. 

5 Thethoughtsofthediligent tend 
only to plenteousness; but of every 
one that is hasty only to want. 

6 The getting of treasures by a 


lying tongue is a vanity tossed to) 


and fro of them that seek death. 

7 The robbery of the wicked shall 
destroy them; because they refuse 
to do judgment. 

8 The way of man is froward and 
strange: but as for the pure, his 
work js right. 

9 It is better to dwell in a corner 
of the housetop, than with a brawi- 
ing woman in a wide house. 

10 ¢The soul of the wicked de- 
sireth evil: his neighbour findeth 
no favour in his eyes. 

11: When the scorner is punished, 
the simple is made wise: and when 

_.the wise is instructed, he receiveth 
_ knowledge. 

12 The righteous man wisely 
considereth the house of the wicked: 
but God overthroweth the wicked 
for their wickedness. 

13 ¢Whoso stoppeth his ears at 
the cry of the poor, he also shali 
ery himself, but shall not be heard. 

14 A gift in secret pacifieth anger; 
and a reward in the bosom strong 
wrath. 

15 It is joy to the ‘just to do 
judgment: but destruction shall 
be to the workers of iniquity. 

16 The man that wandereth out 
of the way of understanding shall 
Temain in the congregation of the 
dead. 

17 He that loveth pleasure shall 
be a poor man: he that loveth wine 
and oil shall not be rich. 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000 18 The wicked shall be a ransom 


a Prov.24.12; 
Lk.16.15. 


b Prov.15.8; 
1 Sam.15.22; 
Psa.50.8; 
Isa.1.11; 
Hos.6.6; 
Mic.6.7,8. 


c Or,the light 
of the 
wicked, 


d Jas.2.16. 


e Mt.18.30,33; 
Jas.2.13. 


f Righteous- 
ness. vs.15, 
21; Eccl.7- 
20. (Gen.6.9; 
Lk.2.25.) 


g Prov.15.9; 
Mt.5.6. 


h Prov.12.13; 
13135)18-21. 
Jas.3.2. 


i Psa.50.; 
2 Cor.9.6,15. 


j Eccl.7.1. 


k Prov.29.13; 
1 Cor.12.21. 


1 Prov.14.31; 
Job 31.15. 


m Psa.19.9, 
note, 


n Eph.6.4; 
2 Tim.3.15. 


687 


[22 6 


for the righteous, and the trans- 
|gressor for the upright. 

19 Jt is better to dwell in the wil- 
derness, than with a contentious 
and an angry woman. 

20 There is treasure to be desired 
and oil in the dwelling of the wise; 
but a foolish man spendeth it up. 

21 &He that followeth after right- 
eousness and mercy findeth life, 
righteousness, and honour. 

22 A wise man scaleth the city of 
the mighty, and casteth down the 
strength of the confidence thereof. 

23 #Whoso keepeth his mouth and 
his tongue keepeth his soul from 
troubles. 

24 Proud and haughty scorner 1s 
his name, who dealeth in proud 
wrath. 

25 The desire of the slothful kill- 
eth him; for his hands refuse to 
labour. 

26 He coveteth greedily all the 
day long: but the righteous giveth 
and spareth not. 

27 The ‘sacrifice of the wicked is 
abomination: how much more, 
when he bringeth it with a wicked 
mind? 

28 A false witness shall perish: 
|but the man that heareth speaketh 
constantly. 

29 A wicked man hardeneth his 
face: but as for the upright, he di- 
recteth his way. 

30 There is no wisdom nor un- 
derstanding nor counsel against the 
LORD. 

31 The horse is prepared against 
the day of battle: but safety is of 
the LORD. 


CHAPTER 22. 


(Warnings and instructions, 
continued. ) 


ig GOOD name is rather to be 
\ chosen than great riches, and 
loving favour rather than silver 
and gold 

2 kThe rich and poor meet to- 
gether: the ‘LORD is the maker of 
them all. 

3 A prudent man foreseeth the 
evil, and hideth himself: but the 
simple pass on; and are punished. 

4 By humility and the fear of 
the LorD are riches, and honour, 
jand life. 

5 Thorns and snares are in the 
way of the froward: he that doth 
keep his soul shall be far from them. 

6 Train up-a child in the way he 


22 7] 


should go: and when he is old, he 
will not depart from it. 

7 °The rich ruleth over the poor, 
and the borrower is servant to the 
lender. Bie *, 

8 He that soweth iniquity shall 
reap vanity: and the rod of his} 
anger shall fail. ; 

9 *He that hath a bountiful eye 
shall be blessed; for he giveth of 
his bread to the poor. 

10 Cast out the scorner, and con- 
tention shall go out; yea, strife and 
reproach shall cease. 

11 He that loveth pureness of 
heart, for the grace of his lips the 
king shall be his friend. 

12 The eyes of the LORD preserve 
knowledge, and he overthroweth 
the words of the transgressor. 

13. The slothful man saith, There 
is a lion without, I shall be slain in 
the streets. 

14 The mouth of strange women 
is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of 
the LorD shall fall therein. 

15 Foolishness is bound in the 
heart of a child; but the rod of cor- 
rection shall drive it far from him. 

16 He that oppresseth the poor to 
increase his riches, and he that 
giveth to the rich, shall surely 
come to want. 

17 Bow down thine ear, and hear 
the words of the wise, and apply 
thine heart unto my knowledge. 

18 For it is a pleasant thing if 
thou keep them within thee; they 
shall withal be fitted in thy lips. 

: 19 That thy ‘trust may be in the 
Lorp, I have made known to thee 
this day, even to thee. 

20 Have not I written to thee 
excellent things in counsels and 
knowledge, 

21 ¢That I might make thee know 
the certainty of the words of truth; 
‘that thou mightest answer the 
words of truth to them that send 
unto thee? 

22 fRob not the poor, because he} 
ts poor: neither oppress the afflicted 
in the gate: 

23 8&For the LorD will plead their 
cause, and spoil the soul of those 


that spoiled them. 

24 Make no friendship with an 
angry man; and with a furious man 
thou shalt not go: 

25 Lest thou learn his ways, and 
get a snare to thy soul. 

26 Be not thou one of them that 
strike hands, or of them that are 
sureties for debts. 

27 If thou hast nothing to pay, 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000. |why should he take away thy bed — 
from under thee? ~ 
28 Remove not the ancient land- 
mark, which thy fathers have set. 
29 Seest thou a man diligent in 
his business? he shall stand before 
kings; he shall not stand before 
‘mean men. 
CHAPTER 23. 
(Warnings and instructions, 
continued. ) 
HEN thou sittest to eat with 
Pete a ruler, consider diligently 
b2Cor.9.6. what is before thee: 
Peek brd 2 And put a knife to thy throat, if 
Ble ao thou be a man given to appetite. 
3 Be not desirous of his dainties: 
d Lk.1.3,4. for they are deceitful meat. 
e1 Pet.3.15. 4 jLabour not to be rich: cease 


Ex.23.6; 
Job 31.16,21. 


g Zech.7.10; 
Mal.3.5. 


h Prov.23.10; 
Deut.19,14; 
27.17. 


+ Heb. ob- 
scure men. 


j Prov.28.20; 


1 Tim.6.9,10. 


k Deut.15.9. 


1 Prov.9.8; 
Mt.7.6. 


m Prov.22.28; 
Deut.19.14; 
27.17. 


n Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


o Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2. 
5, note. 


Dp Psa.19.9, 
note, 


688 


[23 18 


from thine own wisdom. 

5 Wilt thou set thine eyes upon 
that which is not? for riches cer- 
tainly make themselves wings; 
they fly away as an eagle toward 
heaven. 

6 Eat thou not the bread of him 
that hath an evil eye, neither 
desire thou his dainty meats: 

7 For as he thinketh in his heart, 
so is he: Eat and drink, saith he to 
thee; but his heart is not with 
thee. 

8 The morsel which thou hast 
eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose 
thy sweet words. 

9 ‘Speak not in the ears of a fool: 
for he will despise the wisdom of 
thy words. 

10 “Remove not the old land- 
mark; and enter not into the fields 
of the fatherless: 

11 For their “redeemer is mighty; 
he shali plead their cause with 
thee. 

12 Apply thine heart unto in- 


\struction, and thine ears to the 


words of knowledge. 

13 Withhold not correction from 
the child: for if thou beatest him 
with the rod, he shall not die. 

14 Thou shalt beat him with the 
rod, and shalt deliver his soul from 
hell, 

15 My son, if thine heart be wise, 
my heart shall rejoice, even mine. 

16 Yea, my reins shall rejoice, 
when thy lips speak right things. 

17 Let not thine heart envy sin- 
ners: but be thou in the ?fear of 
the Lorp all the day long. 

18 For surely there is an end; and 
enh expectation shall not be cut 
off. 


19 Hear thou, my son, and be wise, 
and guide thine heart in the way. 

20 ¢Be not among winebibbers; 
among riotous eaters of flesh: 

21 For the drunkard and the glut- 
ton shall come to poverty: and 
drowsiness shall clothe a man with 
Tags. 

22 Hearken unto thy father that 
begat thee, and despise not thy 
mother when she is old. 

23 Buy the truth, and sell 7# not; 
also wisdom, and instruction, and 

“ understanding. 

24 The father of the righteous 
shall greatly rejoice: and he that 
begetteth a wise child shall have 
joy of him. 

25 Thy father and thy mother 
shall be glad, and she that bare 
thee shall rejoice. 

26 My son, give me thine heart, 
and let thine eyes observe my ways. 

27 For a whore is a deep ditch; 
sod a strange woman zs a narrow 
pit 

28 She also lieth in wait as for a 
prey, and increaseth the transgress- 
ors among men. 

29 Who hath woe? who hath 
sorrow? who hath contentions? 
who hath babbling? who hath 
wounds without cause? who hath 
redness of eyes? 

30 “They that tarry long at the 
wine; they that go to seek mixed 


wine. 

31 Look not thou upon the wine 
when it is red, when it giveth his 
colour in the cup, when it moveth 
itself aright. 

32 At the last it biteth like a ser- 
pent, and stingeth like an adder. 

33 Thine eyes shall behold strange 
‘women, and thine heart shall utter 
perverse things. 

34 Yea, thou shalt be as he that 
lieth down in the midst of the sea, 
or as he that lieth upon the top of a 
mast. 

35 They have stricken me, shalt 
thou,say, and I was not sick; they 
have beaten me, and I felt it not: 
when shall I awake? I will seek it 
yet again. 


CHAPTER 24. 


(Warnings and instructions, 
continued. 


E not thou envious against evil 
men, neither desire to be with 
them. 
2 For their heart studieth destruc- 
tion, and their lips talk of mischief. 


PROVERBS. 


a Isa.5.22; 
Mt.24.49; 
Lk.21.34; 
Rom.13.13; 
Eph.5.18. 


6 Prov.20.1; 
Eph.5.18. 


¢ Prov.21.22; 
Eccl.9.16. 


d Prov.14.6; 
Psa.10.5. 


e Rom.1.30. 


f Psa.82.4, 
Isa.58.6,7; 
1 John 3.16. 


g Job 34.11; 
Psa.62.12; 
Jer.32.19; 
Rom.2.6; 
Rev.2.23; 
22.12. 


h Job 5.19; 
Psa.. 34. 19; 


# Prov.17.5; 
Job 31.29; 
pied sere 
Oba.1 


j Psa.19.9. 
note 


689 


B.C. 1000. 


[24 23 


3 Through wisdom is an house 
builded; and by understanding it 
is established: 

4 And by knowledge shall the 
chambers be filled with all precious 
and pleasant riches. 

5 ‘A wise man is strong; yea, 
a man of knowledge increaseth 
strength. 

6 For by wise counsel thou shalt 
make thy war: and in multitude of 
counsellors there is safety. 

7 4Wisdom is too high for a fool: 
he openeth not his mouth in the 
gate. 

8 He that edevinetha to do evil 
shall be called a mischievous per- 
son. 

9 The thought of foolishness is 
sin: an e scorner 7S an ina- 
tion to men. 

10 Jf thou faint in the day of ad- 
versity, thy strength is small. 

11 ff thouforbear to deliver them 
that are drawn unto death, and 
those that are ready to be slain; 

12 If thou sayest, Behoid, we 
knew it not; doth not he that pon- 
dereth the heart consider it? and he 
that keepeth thy soul, doth not he 
know it? and shall not he render to 
every man “according to his works? 

13 My son, eat thou honey, be- 
cause it is good; and the honey- 
comb, which is sweet to thy taste: 

14 So shall the knowledge of wis- 
dom be unto thy soul: when thou 
hast found it, then there shall be a 
reward, and thy expectation shall 
not be cut off. 

15 Lay not wait, O wicked man, 
against the dwelling of the right- 
eous; spoil not his resting place: 

16 4For a just man falleth seven 
times, and riseth up again: but the 
wicked shall fall into mischief. 

17 *Rejoice not when thine enemy 
falleth, and let not thine heart be 
glad when he stumbleth: 

18 Lest the Lorp see it, and it 
displease him, and he turn away 
his wrath from him. 

19 Fret not thyself because of evil 
men, neither be thou envious at the 
wicked; 

20 For there shall be no reward 
to the evil man; the candle of the 
wicked shall be put out. 

21 My son, /fear thou the Lorp 
and the king: and meddle not with 
them that are given to change: 

22 For their calamity shall rise 
suddenly; and who knoweth the 
ruin of them both? 

23 These things also belong to 


24 24] 


the wise. ¢Jt 1s not good to have 
respect of persons in judgment. 

24 He that saith unto the wicked, 
Thou art righteous; him shall the 
people curse, nations shall abhor 
him: E 

25 But to them that rebuke him 
shall be delight, and a good blessing 
shall come upon them. 

26 Every man shall kiss Ais lips 
that giveth a right answer. 

27 Prepare thy work without, and 
make it fit for thyself in the field; 
and afterwards build thine house. 

28 Be not a witness against thy 
neighbour without cause; and de- 
ceive not with thy lips. 

29 ‘Say not, I will do so to him as 
he hath done to me: I will render to 
the man according to his work. 

30 I went by the field of the sloth- 
ful, and by the vineyard of the man 
void of understanding; 

31 And, lo, it was all grown over 
with thorns, and nettles had cov- 
ered the face thereof, and the stone 
wall thereof was broken down. 

32 Then I saw, and considered it 
well: I looked upon it, and received 
instruction. 

33 Yet a little sleep, a little slum- 
ber, a little folding of the hands to 
sleep: 

34 So shall thy poverty come as 
one that travelleth; and thy want 
as an armed man. 


CHAPTER 25. 


(Warnings and instructions, 
continued. ) 


SP.HESE are also proverbs of 
Solomon, which the men of 
Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. 

2 ‘It is the glory of God to con- 
ceal a thing: but the honour of kings 
is to search out a matter 

3 The heaven for height, and the 
earth for depth, and the heart of 
kings is unsearchable. 

4 /Take away the dross from the 
silver, and there shall come forth a 
vessel for the finer. 

5 Take away the wicked from be- 
fore the king, and his throne shall 
be established in righteousness. 

6 Put not forth thyselfin the pres- 
ence of the king, and stand not in 
the place of great men: 

7 8¥For better it is that it be said 
unto thee, Come up hither; than 
that thou shouldest be put lower 
in the presence of the prince whom 
thine eyes have seen. 

8 Go not forth hastily to strive, 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 1000 


a Prov.18.5, 


6 Eph.4.25. 

¢ Prov.20.22; 
Mt.5.39,44; 
Rom.12.17, 
19, 

d 1 K1.4.32. 


e Deut.29.29; 
Rom.11.33. 


f 2 Tim.2.21. 
g Lk.14.8-10. 


h Prov.17.14; 
Mt.5.25. 


t Mt.5.25; 
18.15, 

j Or,discover 
not the 
secret of 


another. 


k& Prov.15.23; 
Tsa.50.4. 


1 Jude 12. 
B.C. 700.) 


m Proy.15.1; 
16.14; Gen. 


32.4; 1 Sam. 


25.24 


n Dan.6.18, 
Rom.12.15. 


o vs.21,22; 
Mt.5.44; 
Rom.12.20. 


p 2 Sam.16.12. 


690 


[25 27 


lest thou know not what to do in 
ithe end thereof, when thy neigh- 
bour hath put thee to shame. 

9 ‘Debate thy cause with thy 
neighbour Aimself; and /Jdiscover 
not a secret to another: 

10 Lest he that heareth 7t put 
thee to shame, and thine infamy 
turn not away. 

11 “A word fitly spoken is like 
apples of gold in pictures of silver. 

12 As an earring of gold, and an 
ornament of fine gold, so 1s a wise 
reprover upon an opedient ear. 

13 As the cold of snow in the time 
of harvest, so is a faithful mes- 
senger to them that send him: for 
he refresheth the soul of his masters. 

14 Whoso boasteth himself of a 
false gift 1s ‘ike clouds and wind 
without rain. 

15 ™By long forbearing is a prince 
persuaded, and a soft tongue break- 
eth the bone. 

16 Hast thou found honey? eat 
so much as is sufficient for thee, 
lest thou be filled therewith, and 
vomit it. 

17 Withdraw thy foot from thy 


_ 


le 


neighbour’s house; lest he be weary — 


of thee, and so hate thee. 

18 A man that beareth false wit- 
ness against his neighbour is a 
maul, and a sword, and a sharp 
arrow. 

19 Confidence in an unfaithful 
man in time of trouble is like a 
broken tooth, and a foot out of 
joint. 

20 As he that taketh away a gar- 
ment in cold weather, and as 
vinegar upon nitre, so zs he that 
"singeth songs to an heavy heart. 

21 olf thine enemy be hungry, 
give him bread to eat; and if he be 
thirsty, give him water to drink: 

22 For thou shalt heap coals of 
fire upon his head, ’and the Lorp 
shall reward thee. 

23 The north wind driveth away 
rain: so doth an angry countenance 
a backbiting tongue. 

24 It 1s better to dwell in the cor- 
ner of the housetop, than with a 
brawling woman and in a wide 
house. 

25 As cold waters to a thirsty 
soul, so is good news from a far 


country. 

26 A righteous man falling down 
before the wicked is as a troubled 
fountain, and a corrupt spring. 

27 It is not good to eat much 
honey: so for men to search their 
own glory is not glory. 


25 28} 


PROVERBS. 


[27 11 


28 °He that hath no rule over his 
Own spirit is like a city that is 
broken down, and without walls. 


CHAPTER 26. 


(Warnings and instructions, 
continued.) 


S snow in summer, and %as rain 
in harvest, so honour is not 
seemly for a fool. 

2 As the bird by wandering, as 
the swallow by flying, ‘so the curse 
causeless shall not come. 

3 A whip for the horse, a bridle 
for the ass, and a rod for the fool’s 
back. 

4 Answer not a fool according to 
ep folly, lest thou also be like unto 

im. 

5 ¢Answer a fool according to his 
folly, lest he be wise in his own 
conceit. 

6 He that sendeth a message by 
the hand cf a fool cutteth off the 
feet, and drinketh damage. 

7 The legs of the lame are not 
equal: so 1s a parable in the mouth 
of fools. 

8 As he that bindeth a stone"in a 
sling, so is he that giveth honour 
to a fool. 

9 As a thorn goeth up into the 
hand of a drunkard, so zs a parable 
in the mouth of fools. 

10 The great God that formed all 
things both rewardeth the fool, and 
tewardeth transgressors. 

11 Asa «dog returneth to his vom- 
it, so a fool returneth to his folly. 

12 fSeest thou a man wise in his 
own conceit? there is more hope 
of a fool than of him. 

_. 13 Theslothful man saith, There 
gs a lion in the way; a lion is in the 
streets. 

14 As the door turneth upon his 
hinges, so doth the slothful upon 
his bed. 

15 &The slothful hideth his hand 
in his bosom; it grieveth him to 
bring it again to his mouth. 

16 The sluggard is wiser in his 
own conceit than seven men that 
ean render a reason. 

17 He that passeth by, and med- 
dleth with strife belonging not to 
him, is Jike one that taketh a dog 
by the ears. 

18 As a mad man who casteth 
firebrands, arrows, and death, 

19 So is the man that deceiveth 
his neighbour, and saith, “Am not 
I in sport? . 

20 Where no wood is, there the 


B.C. 700. 


a Prov.16.32. 
61 Sam.12.17. 
c Num.23.8. 


d Mt.16.1-4; 
21,24-27. 


e2 Pet.2.22. 
f Prov.29.20; 
Lk.18.11; 


Rom.12.16; 
Rev.3.17. 


g Prov-19.24. 
h Eph.5.4. 


1 Prov.15.18; 
29.22. 


j Prov.28.10; 
Psa.7.15,16; 
9.15; 10.2, 
57.6; Eccl. 
10.8. 


ke Lk.12.19,20; 
Jas.4.13. 


1 Prov.25.27. 


m Heb. wrath 
1s cruelty 
and anger 
an over- 
Howing. 


n 1 John 3.12. 


o Prov.28.23, 
Gal.2.14. 


p Heb. from 
the counsel 
of the soul. 


q Prov.10.1, 
23.15,24. 


691 


fire goeth out: so where there is no 
talebearer, the strife ceaseth. 

21 #As coals are to burning coals, 
and wood to fire; so is a conten- 
tious man to kindle strife. 

22 The words of a talebearer are 
as wounds, and they go down into 
the innermost parts of the belly. 

23 Burning lips and a wicked 
heart are like a potsherd covered 
with silver dross. 

24 He that hateth dissembleth 
with his lips, and layeth up deceit 
within him; 

25 When he speaketh fair, believe 
him not: for there are seven abomi- 
nations in his heart. 

26 Whose hatred is covered by 
deceit, his wickedness shall be 
shewed before the whole congrega- 
tion. 

27- jWhoso diggeth a pit shall fall 
therein: and he that rolleth a stone, 
it will return upon him. 

28 A lying tongue hateth those 
that are afflicted by it; and a flat- 
tering mouth worketh ruin. 


CHAPTER 27. 


(Warnings and instructions, 
continued.) 


OAST ‘not thyself of te mor- 
row; for thou knowest not 
what a day may bring forth. 

2 ‘Let another man praise thee, 
and not thine own mouth; a stran- 
ger, and not thine own lips. 

3 A stone is heavy, and the sand 
weighty; but a fool’s wrath 1s 
heavier than them both. 

4 Wrath is cruel, and anger rs 
outrageous; “but who is able to 
stand before envy? 

5 °Open rebuke ss better than se- 
cret love. 

6 Faithful are the wounds of a 
friend; but the kisses of an enemy 
are deceitful. 

7 The full soul loatheth an honey- 
comb; but to the hungry soul every 
bitter thing is sweet. 

8 As a bird that wandereth from 
her nest, so is a man that wander- 
eth from his place. 

9 Ointment and perfume rejoice 
the heart. so doth the sweetness of 
ja man’s friend Pby hearty counsel. 
} 10 Thine own friend, and thy fa- 
ther’s friend, forsake not; ueither 
go into thy brother’s house in the 
day of thy calamity: for better 1s a 
lneighbour that 1s near than a 
brother far off 
‘11 9My son, be wise, and make 


27 12] 


my heart glad, that I may answer 
him that reproacheth me. 

12 A prudent man foreseeth the 
evil, and hideth himself; but the 
simple pass on, and are punished. 

13 Take his garment that is 
surety for a stranger, and take a 
pledge of him for a strange woman. 

14 He that blesseth his friend 
with a loud voice, rising early in the 
morning, it shall be counted a curse 
to him. oi oe 

15 4A continual dropping in a 
very rainy day and a contentious 
woman are alike. 

16 Whosoever hideth her hideth 
the wind, and the ointment of his 
right hand, which bewrayeth itself. 

17 Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man 
sharpeneth the countenance of his 
friend. 

18 ‘Whoso keepeth the fig tree 
shall eat the fruit thereof: so he 
that waiteth on his master shall be 
honoured. 

19 Asin water face answereth to 
face, so the heart of man to man. 

20 ‘Hell and destruction are never 
full; so the eyes of man are ¢never 
satisfied. 

21 As the fining pot for silver, 
and the furnace for gold; so is a 
man to his praise. 

22 Though thou shouldest bray 
a fool in a mortar among wheat 
with a pestle, yet will not his fool- 
ishness depart from him. 

23 Be thou diligent to know the 
state of thy flocks, and look well to 
thy herds. 

24 For riches are not for ever: 
and doth the crown endure to 
every generation? 

25 ¢The hay appeareth, and the 
tender grass sheweth itself, and 
hesbs of the mountains are gath- 
ered. 

26 Thelambs are for thy clothing, 
and the goats are the price of the 
field. 

27 And thou shalt have goats’ 
milk enough for thy food, for the 
food of thy household, and for the 
maintenance for thy maidens. 


CHAPTER 28. 


(Warnings and instructions, 
continued.) 


THE fwicked flee when no man) 
pursueth: but the righteous are 
bold as_a lion. 

2 For the transgression of a land 
many are the princes thereof: but 
by a man of understanding and 


PROVERBS. 


‘_B.C. 700. 


a Prov.19.13. 

6 1 Cor.9.7,13. 

¢ Prov.30.16; 
Hab.2.5. 
Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2. 
5, note. 

d Heb. not. 

e Psa.104.14, 


f Lev.26.17, 
36; Psa.53.5. 


g Mt.18.28. 
h 1 Ki.18.18, 


21; Mt.3.7; 
14.4; Eph, 
5.11. 


t John 7.17; 
1 Cor.2.15; 
ear 2.20, 
27. 


J Prov.13.22; 
Job 27.16,17; 
Eccl.2.26. 

k Zech.7.11, 

! Prov.15.8; 
Psa.66.18; 
109.7. 

m Psa.32.3,5; 
1 John 1.8- 
10. 

n1 Pet.5.8. 


0 v.22; Prov. 
13.11; 20.21; 
23.4; 


1 Tim.6.9. 


692 


[28 21 


knowledge the state thereof shall — 
be prolonged. 

3 8A poor man that oppresseth 
the poor is like a sweeping rain 
which leaveth no food. 

4 They that forsake the law praise 
the wicked: “but such as keep the 
law contend with them. 

5 Evil men understand not judg- 


‘ment: but ‘they that seek the Lorp 


understand all things. 

6 Better is the poor that walketh 
in his uprightness, than he that is 
peayerse in his ways, though he be 
ri 


7 Whoso keepeth the law is a wise 
son: but he that is a companion of 
tiotous men shameth his father. 

8 JHe that by usury and unjust 
gain increaseth his substance, he 
shall gather it for him that will 
pity the poor. 

9 *He that turneth away his ear 
from hearing the law, ‘even his 
prayer shall be abomination. 

10 Whoso causeth the righteous 
to go astray in an evil way, he shall 
fall himself into his own pit: but 
the upright shall have good things 


in possession. 

11 The rich man is wise in his own 
conceit; but the poor that hath un- 
derstanding searcheth him out. 

12 When righteous men do re- 
joice, there is great glory: but when 
the wicked rise, a man is hidden, 

13. “He that covereth his sins 
shall not prosper: but whoso con- 
fesseth and forsaketh them shall 
have mercy. 

14 Happy is the man that feareth 
alway: but he that hardeneth his 
heart shall fall into mischief, 

15 As a roaring lion, and a Trang- 
ing bear; so is a wicked ruler over 
the poor people. 

16 The prince that wanteth un- 
derstanding is also a great oppres- 
sor: but he that hateth covetous- 
ness shall prolong his days. 

A man that doeth violence to 
the blood of any person shall flee 
to the pit; let no man stay him. 

18 Whoso walketh uprightly shall 
be saved: but he that is perverse 
in his ways shall fall at once. 

19. He that tilleth his land shall 
have plenty of bread: but he that 
followeth after vain persons shall 
have poverty enough. 

20 A faithful man shall abound 
with blessings: “but he that maketh 
haste to be rich shall not be inno- 
cent. 

21 To have respect of persons is 


28 22] 


not good: for for a piece of bread 
that man will transgress. 

22 He that hasteth to be rich 
hath an evil eye, and considereth 
sat that poverty shall come upon 


23 He that rebuketh a man after- 
wards shall find more favour than 
he that flattereth with the tongue. 

24 Whoso robbeth his father or 
his mother, and saith, It zs no 
transgression; the same zs the com- 
panion of a destroyer. 

25 He that is of a proud heart 
stirreth up strife: but he that put- 
teth his “trust in the LorD shall be 
made fat. 

26 He that trusteth in his own 
heart is a fool: but whoso walketh 
wisely, he shall be delivered. 

27 ®He that giveth unto the poor 
shall not lack: but he that hideth] 15.7. 
his eyes shall have many a curse. | | 1.5, 99.16; 

28 When the wicked rise, men|°3343: °° 
hide themselves: but when they] Psa.41.1. 
perish, the righteous increase. Jouise 


a Psa.2.12, 
note; also 
Prov.29.25. 


b Prov.19.17; 
22.9; Deut. 


CHAPTER 29 pa 
- ; 5 Psa.37.36; 
(Warnings and instructions, “58.10; 91.8; 
continued.) 92.11. 
Treproved f 1 Sam.3.1; 


HE: that being often heer 
hardeneth Ais neck, shall sud-| 777° °° 
denly be destroyed, and that with- 
i ahead ich ; g Prov.26.12. 
en the righteous are in au- P 
thority, the people rejoice: but ec hice pe 
when the wicked beareth rule, the ; 
people mourn. Mt.23.12- 

3 Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth 
his father: but he that keepeth 
company with harlots spendeth his 
substance. 

4 The king by judgment estab-|. 
lisheth the land: but he that re-|*Prov-31-1. 
ceiveth gifts overthroweth it. j John 3.13. 

5 Aman that flattereth his neigh- 
bour spreadeth a net for his feet. 

6 In the transgression of an evil 
man there is a snare: but the 
righteous doth sing and rejoice. 

7 ©The righteous considereth the 
cause of the poor: but the wicked 
regardeth not to know it. 

8 Scornful men bring a city into a 
snare: but wise men turn away 
wrath. f 

9 If a wise man contendeth with 
a foolish man, whether he rage or 
laugh, there rs no rest. 

10 4The bloodthirsty hate the up- 
right: but the just seek his soul. 

11 A fool uttereth all his mind: 
but a wise man keepeth it in 
afterwards. 


18.14; 
Acts 12.23; 
Jas.4.6,10; 
1 Pet.5.5. 


693 


PROVERBS. 


B.C. 700. 


[30 4 


12 If a ruler hearken to lies, all 
his servants are wicked. 

13 The poor and the deceitful 
man meet together: the LorpD 
lighteneth both their eyes. 

14 The king that faithfully judg- 
eth the poor, his throne shall be 
established for ever. 

15 The rod and reproof give wis- 
\dom: but a child left to himself 
‘bringeth his mother to shame. 

16 When the wicked are multi- 
plied, transgression increaseth: “but 
the righteous shall see their. fall. 

17 Correct thy son, and he shall 
give thee rest; yea, he shall give de- 
light unto thy soul. 

18 fWhere there is no vision, the 
people perish: but he that keepeth 
the law, happy is he. 

19 A servant will not be corrected 
by words: for though he understand 
he will not answer. 

20 Seest thou a man that 1s hasty 
in his words? &there is more hope 
of a fool than of him. 

21 He that delicately bringeth up 
his servant from a child shall have 
him become his son at the length. 

22 An angry man stirreth up 
strife, and a furious man aboundeth 
in transgression. 

23 4A man’s pride shall bring 
him low: but honour shall uphold 
the humble in spirit. 

24 Whoso is partner with a thief 
hateth his own soul: he heareth 
cursing, and bewrayeth it not. 

25 The fear of man bringeth a 
snare: but whoso putteth his trust 
in the LorD shall be safe. 

26 Many seek the ruler’s favour; 
but every man’s judgment cometh 
from the LorD. 

27 Anunjust man is an abomina- 
tion to the just: and he that is 
upright in the way is abomination 
to the wicked. 


CHAPTER 30. 
Part V. The words of Agur. 


4 bece twords of Agur the son of 
Jakeh, even the prophecy: the 
jman spake unto Ithiel, even unto 

Ithiel and Ucal, 

2 Surely I am more brutish than 
any man, and have not the under- 
standing of a man. 

3 I neither learned wisdom, nor 
have the knowledge of the holy. 

4 3jWho hath ascended up into 
heaven, or descended? who hath 
gathered the wind in his fists? who 


30 5] 


PROVERBS. 


(31 7 


hath bound the waters in a ae B.C. 700. 21 For three things the earth is 


ment? who hath established all the 
ends of the earth? what is his 
name, and what is his son’s name, 
if thou canst tell? 

5 *Every word of God is pure: 
he is a ‘shield unto them that put 
their ¢trust in him. ; 

6 Add thou not unto his words, 
lest he reprove thee, and thou be 
found a liar. f 

7 Two things have I required of 
thee; deny me them not before I 
die: 

8 Remove far from me vanity and 
lies: give me neither poverty nor 
riches; feed me with food conve- 
nient for me: 

9 Lest I be full, and deny thee, 
and say, Who is the Lorp? or lest 
I be poor, and steal, and take the 
name of my God in vain. 

10 fAccuse not a servant unto his 
master, lest he curse thee, and thou 
be found guilty. 

11 There is a generation that 
curseth their father, and doth not 
bless their mother. 

12 There is a generation that 
are pure in their own eyes, and yet 
is not washed from their filthiness. 

13 There is a generation, O how 
lofty are their eyes! and their eye- 
lids are lifted up. 

14 There is a generation, whose 
teeth are as swords, and their jaw 
teeth as knives, to devour the 
poor from off the earth, and the 
needy from among men. 

15 The horseleach hath’ two 
daughters, crying, Give, give. 
There are three things that are 
never satisfied, yea, four things 
say not, Jt is enough: 

16 The ‘grave; and the barren 
womb; the earth that is not filled 
with water; and the fire that saith 
not, It is enough. 

17 ‘The eye that mocketh at Ais 
father, and despiseth to obey his 
mother, the ravens of the valley 
shall pick it out, and the young 
eagles shall eat it. 

18 There be three things which 
are too wonderful for me, yea, four 
which I know not: 


19 The way of an eagle in the aii: 


the way of a serpent upon a rock: 
the way of a ship in the midst 
of the sea; and the way of a man 
with a maid. 

20 Such is the way of an adulter- 
ous woman; she eateth, and wipeth 
her mouth. and saith, I have done 
no wickedness. 


a Psa.12.6; 
18.30; 19.8; 
119.149. 


|b Heb. puri- 
fied. 


c Psa.18.30; 84. 
11; 115.9-11. 


|d Psa.2.12, 
note, 


e Deut.8.12, 
14,17; 31.20; 
32.15; Neh. 
9.25,26; 

Job 31.24; 
Hos.13.6. 


f Heb. Aurt 
not with 
thy tongue. 


g Psa.14.4; 
Amos 8.4. 


h Heb. Sheol. 


See Hab.2. 


5, note. 
i Prov.20.20; 
23.22; 


Gen.9.22; 
Lev.20.9. 


j Heb. made 
wise. 


k Prov.6.6. 
| l Psa.104.18. 
m Job 215; 
40.4. 
(B.C. 1015. 


n Eccl.10.17; 
Hos.4.11. 


o Heb. bitter 
of soul, 
| 1Sam.1.10. 


694 


disquieted, and for four which it 
cannot bear: s 

22 For a servant when he reign- 
eth; and a fool when he is filled 
with meat; 

23 For an odious woman when 
she is married; and an handmaid 
‘that is heir to her mistress. 

24 There be four things which 
are little upon the earth, but they 
are Jexceeding wise: 

25 *The ants are a people not 
trong, yet they prepare their meat 
in the summer; 

26 /The conies are but a feeble 
folk, yet make they their houses in 
the rocks; 

27 The locusts have no king, yet 
go they forth all of them by bands; 

28 The spider taketh hold with 
her hands, and is in king’s pal- 
aces. 

29 There be three things which 
go well, yea, four are comely in 
going: 

30 A lion which 
among beasts, 
away for any; 

31 A greyhound; an he goat also; 
and a king, against whom there is 
no rising up. ; 

32 If thou hast done foolishly in 
lifting up thyself, or if thou hast 
thought evil, "lay thine hand upon 
thy mouth. 

33 Surely the churning of milk 
bringeth forth butter, and the 
wringing of the nose bringeth forth 
blood: so the forcing of wrath 
bringeth forth strife. 


CHAPTER 31, 


Part VI. The words of 
King Lemuel. 


J Ras words of king Lemuel, the 
prophecy that his mother 
taught him. 

2 What, my son? and what, the 
son of my womb? and what, the son 
of my vows? 

3 Give not thy strength unto 
women, nor thy ways to that which 
destroyeth kings. 

4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel, 
it is not for kings to drink wine; 
nor for princes strong drink: 

5 Lest they drink, and forget the 
law, and pervert the judgment of 
any of the afflicted. : 

6 Give strong drink unto him that 
is ready to perish, and wine unto 
those that be of “heavy hearts. 

7 Let him drink, and forget his 


is strongest 
and turneth not 


31 8] 


PROVERBS. 


£31 31 


poverty, and remember his misery! B.C. 1015. 20 She ‘stretcheth out her hand 


no more. 

8 Open thy mouth for the dumb 
bin the cause of all such as are ap- 
pointed to destruction. 

9 Open thy mouth, judge right- 
eously, and ¢plead the cause of the 
poor and needy. 

10 Who can find a virtuous wo- 
man? for her price zs far above 
rubies. 

11 The heart of her husband doth 
safely ‘trust in her, so that he shall 
have no need of spoil. 

12 She will do him good and not 
evil all the days of her life. 

13 She seeketh wool, and flax, and 
worketh willingly with her hands. 

14 She is like the merchants’ 
ships; she bringeth her food from 
afar. 

15 fShe riseth also while it is yet 
night, and giveth meat to her 
household, and a portion to her 
maidens. 

16 She considereth a field, and 
buyeth it: with the fruit of her 
hands she planteth a vineyard. 

17 She girdeth her loins with 
strength, and strengtheneth her 
arms. 

18 She “perceiveth that her mer- 
chandise is good: her candle goeth 
not out by night. , 

19 Shelayethher hands tothespin- 
dle, and her hands hold the distaff. 


a Job 29.15,16. 


6 1 Sam.19.4; 
Esth.4.16. 


c Lev.19.15; 
Deut.1.16. 


d Job 29.12; 
Isa.1.17; 
Jer.22.16. 


é Psa.2.12, 
note, 


f Rom.12.11. 
g Lk.12.42. 


h Heb. tast- 
eth, 


i Eph.4.28; 
Heb.13.16. 


j Prov.12.4. 

k Or, have 
gotten 
riches. 


1 Psa.19.9, 
note. 


695 


to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth 
her hands to the needy. 

21 She is net afraid of the snow 
for her household: for all her house- 
hold are clothed with scarlet. 

22 She maketh herself coverings 
of tapestry; her clothing rs silk and 
purple: ws: 

23 jJHer husband is known in the 
gates, when he sitteth among the 
elders of the land. 

24 She maketh fine linen, and 
selleth it; and delivereth girdles 
unto the merchant. 

25 Strength and honour are her 
clothing; and she shall rejoice in 
time to come. 

26 She openeth her mouth with 
wisdom; and in her tongue is the 
law of kindness. 

27 She looketh well to the ways 
of her household, and eateth not 
the bread of idleness. 

28 Her children arise up, and call 
her blessed; her husband also, and 
he praiseth her. 

29 Many daughters *have done 
virtuously, but thou excellest them 
all. 

30 Favour is deceitful, and beauty 
is vain: but a woman that ‘feareth 
the Lorpb, she shall be praised. 

31 Give her of the fruit of her 
hands; and let her own works praise 
her in the gates. 


ECCLESIASTES; 
11] OR, THE PREACHER. [1.17 


Tus is the book of man ‘‘under the sun,”’ reasoning about life; it is the best man 
can do, with the knowledge that there is a holy God, and that He will bring every- 
thing into judgment. The key phrases are “under the sun”; “I perceived”; “I 
said in my heart.” Inspiration sets down accurately what passes, but the conclu- 
sions and reasonings are, after all, man’s. That those conclusions are just in 
declaring it “vanity,” in view of judgment, to devote life to earthly things, is surely 
true; but the “conclusion” (12. 13) is legal, the best that man apart from redemp- 
tion can do, and does not anticipate the Gospel. Ecclesiastes is in five parts: 
I. Theme, 1. 1-3. II. Theme proved, 1. 4-3. 22. III. Theme unfolded in the 
light of human sufferings, hypocrisies, uncertainties, poverty and riches, 4. 1-10. 20. 
IV. The best thing possible to the natural man apart from God, 11, 1-12.12. V. The 
best thing possible to man under the law, 12. 13, 14. 


B.C. 977. 10 Is there any thing whereof it 

CHAPTER 1. may be said, See, this rs new? it 

PartI. The theme: Allis vanity. eed been ke of old time, 
which was before us. 

per aon Daceiredinen peters 11 There is no remembrance of 

ais . gs former things; neither shall there 

2 lVanity of vanities, saith the be any remembrance of things 


! zy Ses : that are to come with those that 
a ae vanity of vanities; ¢all is ehall come! after. 
3 What profit hath a man of all 


his labour which he taketh under|a Rom.8.20. 
the sun? 


(The proof, continued: (2) evil re- 
mains despite power, wisdom, 


b Eecl.2.22; and knowledée.) 
Part II. The theme proved:(1)by| 3-9- 12 I . 
; ae tice ‘ the Preacher was king over 
the transitoriness of all things. ¢ Psa.104.5; Israel in Jerusalem, 


4 One generation passeth away, 13 And I gave my heart to seek 
and another generation cometh:/dHeb. pant- {and search out by wisdom concern- 


but ‘the earth abideth for ever. eth. ing all things that are done under 
5 The ane also puacths apt the ¢ John 3.8. heaven : as sore Saye hath God 
sun goe own, an aste fe) ven to e ex 
his place where he arose. F Prov.27.20. erosed herent: begeeie a ye: 
i dtonen ae es ea ny d a ee Ss — apr We 
. are done under the sun; and, be- 
me : inu-|# Gen.3.19; i i i 
atta Rieke ber aeeregto waste ce 1s vanity and vexation of 
“apes to his circuits. a # Becl.2.3,125 1S That which is crooked cannot 
yet the ati tne, caste he 1Thes.5.21. ager ae epeaqeren 
place from whence the rivers come, 16 I communed with mine own 
thither they return again. heart, saying, Lo, I am come to 
8 All things are full of labour; great estate, and have gotten more 
man cannot utter it: /the eye is not wisdom than all they that have 
ee ee nor the ear been. before ae in Jerusalem: yea, 
C earing. ny h i 

9 &The thing that hath been, it is wieder heer oe “ 
that which shall be; and that which 17 ‘And I gave my heart to know 
is done is that which shall be done: wisdom, and to know madness and 
and there is no new thing under folly: I perceived that this also is 


the sun. vexation of spirit. 


1 “Vanity,” in Ecclesiastes, and usually in Scripture, means, not foolish prid 
4 iS > 5 > > ce; 
put ie poptiness in final result of all life apart from God. It is to be born, oO toil, 
© sulter, to experience some transitory joy, which.is as nothing in view of eternit 
to leave it all, and to.die, See Rom. 8. 20-22. vs 


696 


i 18) 
18 For in much wisdom fs much 


grief: and he that increaseth know- 
ledge increaseth sorrow. 


CHAPTER 2. 
(The proof, continued: (3) pleas- 
ure ends in emptiness.) 
I “SAID in mine heart, Go to now, 
I will prove thee with mirth, 
therefore enjoy pleasure: and, be- 
hold, this also zs vanity. 

2 I said of laughter, It rs mad: 
and of mirth, What doeth it? 

3 I sought in mine heart "to give 
myself unto wine, yet acquainting 
mine heart with wisdom; and to lay 
hold on folly, till I might see what 
was that good for the sons of men, 


which they should do under the 
heaven all the days of their life. 


(The proof, continued: (4) riches 
and great works give no en- 
during satisfaction.) 


4 I made me great works; I 
builded me houses; I planted me 
vineyards: 

5 I made me gardens and orchards, 
and I planted trees in them of all 
kind of fruits: 

6 I made me pools of water, to 
water therewith the wood that 
bringeth forth trees: 

7 I got me servants and maidens, 
and had servants born in my house; 
also I had great possessions of great 
and small cattle above all that were 
in Jerusalem before me: 

8 <I gathered me also silver and 
-gold, and the peculiar treasure of 
kings and of the provinces: I gat 
me men singers and women sing- 
ers, and the delights of the sons of 
men, as musical instruments, and 
that of all sorts. 

9 4So I was great, and increased 
more than all that were before me 
in Jerusalem: also my wisdom re- 
mained with me. 

10 And whatsoever mine eyes de- 
sired I kept not from them, I with- 
held not my heart from any joy; 
for my heart rejoiced in all my 
labour: and ‘this was my portion 
of all my labour. 

11 Then I looked on all the works 
that my hands had wrought, and 
on the labour that I had laboured 
to do: and, behold, all was /vanity 
and vexation of spirit, and there 
was no profit under the sun. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


[2 24 


(The proof, continued: (5) wis- 
dom is better than folly, but 
both have an end.) 


12 And I turned myself to behold 
wisdom, and madness, and folly: 
for what can the man do that com- 
eth after the king? even that which 
hath been already done. 

13 Then I saw that wisdom excel- 
leth folly, as far as light excelleth 
darkness. 

14 *The wise man’s eyes are in 
his head; but the fool walketh in 
darkness: and I myself perceived 
also that ‘one event happeneth to 
them all. 

15 Then said I in my heart, As it 
happeneth to the fool, so it happen- 
eth even to me; and why was I 
‘then more wise? Then I said in 


a LE.12.19, 
b Heb. to 


draw my 
flesh with |my heart, that this also 1s vanity. 
wines 16 For there is no remembrance 
¢1Ki9.28; | |of the wise more than of the fool for 
10.10,14,21. |ever; seeing that which now is in 
a Rech 1.16 the days to come shall all be for- 
sacs gotten. And how dieth the wise 
e Eccl.3.22; man? as the fool. 
5-18; 9.9. 17 Therefore I hated life; because 
f¥cel.1.2,14. |the work that is wrought under the 
sun zs grievous unto me: for all fs 
 Eodl.1.17; vanity and vexation of spirit. 
a 18 Yea, I hated all my labour 
h Eccl.8.1; which I had taken under the sun: 
Prov.17.24. |because JI should leave it unto the 
iEccl.9.2,3; | |man that shall be after me. 
Psa.49.10. 19 And who knoweth whether he 
eras ie shall be a wise man or a fool? yet 
7 £98.49-*"- {shall he have rule over all my la- 
k Eccl.1.3; 3.9. tp sao I pane ebeateds and 
; wherein ave shewed myself wise 
B Oxrieleliehet under the sun. This is also van- 


ity. 

20 Therefore I went about to 
cause my heart to despair of all 
the labour which I took under the 
sun. 

21 For there is a man whose la- 
baur is in wisdom, and in know- 
ledge, and in equity; yet to a man 
that hath not laboured therein shall 
he leave it for his portion. This 
also is vanity and a great evil. 

22 *For what hath man of all his 
labour, and of the vexation of his 
heart, wherein he hath laboured 
under the sun? 

23 For all his days are sorrows, 
and his travail grief; yea, his heart 
taketh not rest in the night. This 
is also vanity. 

24 There is nothing better for a 
man, than that he should eat and 
drink, and that he ‘should make 
his soul enjoy good in his labour. 


697 


2 25) 


This also I saw, that it was from 
the hand of God. 

25 For who can eat, or who else 
can hasten hereunto, more than I? 

26 For God giveth to a man that 
is good 4in his sight wisdom, and 
knowledge, and joy: but to the 
sinner he giveth travail, to gather 
and to heap up, that “he may give 
to him that is good before God. 
This also is vanity and vexation 
of spirit. 


CHAPTER 3. 


(The proof, continued: (6) the 
weary round of life.) 


ae every thing there is a season, 
and a time to every purpose 
under the heaven: 

2 Atime to be born, and <a time to 
die; a time to plant, and a time to 
pluck up that which is planted; 

3 A time to kill, and a time to 
heal; a time to break down, and a 
time to build up; 

4 A time to weep, and a time to 
laugh; a time to mourn, and a time 
to dance; 

5 A time to cast away stones, and 
a time to gather stones together; a 
time to embrace, and a 4time to re- 
frain from embracing: 

6 Atime to get, and a time to lose; 
a time to keep, and a time to cast 
away; 

7 A time to rend, and a time to 
sew; a time to keep silence, and a 
time to speak; 

8 A time to love, and a time to 
Shate; a time of war, and a time of 
peace. 

9 What profit hath he that work- 
eth in that wherein he laboureth? 

10 I have seen the travail, which 
God hath given to the sons of men 
to be exercised in it. 

11 He hath made every thing 
beautiful in his time: also he hath 
set the &world in their heart, so that 
no man can find out the work that 
God maketh from the beginning to 
the end. 

12 I know that there is no good 
in them, but for a man to rejoice, 
and to do good in his life. 

13 And also that every man 
should eat and drink, and enjoy the 
good of all his labour, it is the gift 
of God. 

14 I know that, whatsoever God 
doeth, it shall be for ever: *nothing 
can be put to it, nor any thing taken 
from it: and God doeth it, that 
men should ‘fear before him. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


B.C. 977. 


u Heb. before 
Him. Gen. 
7.1; Lk.1.6. 


b Job 27.16,17; 
Prov.28.8. 


c Heb.9.27. 


d Joel 2.16; 
1 Cor.7.5. 


e Amos S.13. 
f Lk.14.26. 
gi.e. ages. 
hk Jas.1.17. 


t Psa.19.9, 
note, 


j Rom.2.6-8; 
2 Cor.5.10; 
2 Thes.1.6,7. 


k Eccl.2.16; 
Psa.49.12, 
20; 73.22. 


1 Gen.3.19. 


m Heb. of the 
sons of 
man. 


at Eccl.3.16; 
5.8. 


o Heb. hand. 


p Heb. all the 
rightness of 
work, 


q Heb. this is 
the envy 
of aman 
from his 
neighbour. 


698 


[45 


15 That which hath been,is now; 
and that which is to be hath already 
been; and God requireth that 
which is past. 

16 And moreover I saw under the 
sun the place of judgment, that 
wickedness was there; and the 
place of righteousness, that in- 
iquity was there. ¢ 

17 I said in mine heart, JGod shall 
judge the righteous and the wicked: 
for there is a time there for every 
purpose and for every work. 

18 I said in mine heart concerning 
the estate of the sons of men, that 
God might manifest them, and that 
they might see that they them- 
selves are beasts. 

19 *For that which befalleth the 
sons of men befalleth beasts; even 
one thing befalleth them: as the 
one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, 
they have all one breath; so that a 
man hath no preeminence above a 
beast: for all rs vanity. 

20 All go unto one place; ‘all are 
of the dust, and all turn to dust 
again. 

21 Who knoweth the spirit “of 
man that goeth upward, and the 
spirit of the beast that goeth down- 
ward to the earth? 

22 Wherefore I perceive that 
there is nothing better, than that 
a man should rejoice in his own 
works; for that is his portion: for 
who shall bring him to see what 
shall be after him? 


CHAPTER 4. 


Part III, The theme unfolded: 
(1) in view of the oppressions 
and iniquities of life. 


S2 I returned, and considered all 
the “oppressions that are done 
under the sun: and behold the tears 
of such as were oppressed, and 
they had no comforter; and on the 
°side of their oppressors there was 
power; but they had no comforter. 

2 Wherefore I praised the dead 
which are already dead more than 
the living which are yet alive. 

3 Yea, better is he than both 
they, which hath not yet been, who 
hath not seen the evil work that is 
done under the sun. 

4 Again, I considered all travail, 
and every right work, that @fo1 
this a man is envied of his neigh- 
bour. This is also vanity and vex- 


ation of spirit. 
5 The fool foldeth his hands to- 
gether, and eateth his own flesh. 


ae 


ECCLESIASTES. 


[5 19 


6 *Better is an handful with| B.c. 977. |hath no pleasure in fools: “pay 


quietness, than both the hands full 
with travail and vexation of spirit. 

7 Then I returned, and I saw van- 
ity under the sun. 

8 There is one alone, and there is 
mot a second; yea, he hath neither 
child nor brother: yet zs there no 
end of all his labour; neither is his 
beye satisfied with riches; ‘neither 
saith he, For whom do [I labour, 
and bereave my soul of good? This 
is also vanity, yea, it zs a sore 
travail. 

9 Two are better than one; be- 
cause they have a good reward for 
their labour. 

10 For if they fall, the one will lift 
up his fellow: but woe to him that 
is alone when he falleth; for he 
hath not another to help him up. 

11 Again, if two lie together, then 
they have heat: but how can one 
be warm alone? 

12 And if one prevail against him, 
two shall withstand him; and a 
threefold cord is not quickly broken. 

13 Better is a poor and a wise 
child than an old and foolish king, 
who will no more be admonished. 

14 For out of prison he cometh to 
reign; whereas also he that is born 
in his kingdom becometh poor. 

15 I considered all the living 
which walk under the sun, with the 
second child that shall stand up in 
his stead. 

16 There is no end of all the peo- 
ple, even of all that have been 
before them: they also that come 
‘after shall not rejoice in him. 
Surely this also is vanity and vex- 
ation of spirit. 


CHAPTER 5. 


(The unfolding, continued: (2) in 
view of riches and poverty.) 


KEEFE ¢thy foot when thou goest 
to the house of God, and be 
more ready to hear, ¢than to give 
the sacrifice of fools: for they con- 
sider not that they do evil. 

2 Benotrash with thy mouth, and 
let not thine heart be hasty to utter 
any thing before God: for God is in 
heaven, and thou upon earth: there- 
fore let thy words ‘be few. 

3 Fora dream cometh through the 
multitude of business; and a fool’s 
voice is known by multitude of 
words. 

4 8When thou vowest a vow unto 
God, defer not to pay it; for he 


a Prov.15.16, 
8. 


73 


b Prov.27.20; 
1 John 2.16. 


¢ Psa.39.6. 
d Ex.3.5. 
é1 Sam.15.22; 


f Prov.10.19; 
Mt.6.7. 


g Num.30.2; 
Deut.23.21- 
23; Psa.50. 
14; 76.11. 


h Psa.66.13,14. 


4 Prov.20.25; 
Acts 5.4. 


j 1 Cor.11.10. 


k Heb.1.4, 
note. 


1 Psa.19.9, 
note, 


m Job 1.21; 
Psa.49.17; 
1 Tim.6.7. 

n Prov.11.29. 


o Eccl.2.24; 
# 12j13; 9.7; 
1.9; 


1 Tins. 17. 


p Eccl.2.24; 
3.13; 6.2. 


699 


that which thou hast vowed. 

5 ‘Better is it that thou shouldest 
not vow, than that thou shouldest 
vow and not pay. 

6 Suffer not thy mouth to cause 
thy flesh to sin; Jneither say thou, 
before the “angel, that it was an 
error: wherefore should God be an-” 
gry at thy voice, and destroy the 
work of thine hands? 

7 For in the multitude of dreams 
and many words there are also di- 
vers vanities: but ‘fear thou God. 

8 If thou seest the oppression of 
the poor, and violent perverting of 
judgment and justice in a province, 
marvel not at the matter: for he i My 
that is higher than the highest reé- re: | 
parce and theré be higher than | 
t ‘ 

ahtoeca ten the profit of the earth 
is ee all: the king himself is served 
by the field. 

10 He that loveth silver shall not 
be satisfied with silver; nor he that 
loveth abundance with increase: 
this is also vanity. 

11 When goods increase, they are 
increased that eat them: and what 
good rs there to the owners thereof, 
saving the beholding of them with 
their eyes? 

12 Thesleep of a labouring man rs 
sweet, whether he eat little or 
much: but the abundance of the 
rich will not suffer him to sleep. 

13 There is a sore evil which I 
have seen under the sun, namely, 
riches kept for the owners thereof 
to their hurt. 

14 But those riches perish by evil 
travail: and he begetteth a son, and 
there is nothing in his hand. 

15 ™As he came forth of his 
mother’s womb, naked shall he 
return to go as he came, and shall 
take nothing of his labour, which he 
may carry away in his hand. 

16 And this also 1s a sore evil,that 
in all points as he came, so shall he 
go: and what profit hath he "that 
hath laboured for the wind? 

17 All his days also he eateth in * 
darkness, and he hath much sor- 
row and wrath with his sickness. 

18 Behold that which I have 
seen: °1¢ 1s good and comely for one 
to eat and to drink, and to enjoy 
the good of all his jabour that he 
taketh under the sun all the days of 
his life, which God giveth him: for 
it 1s his portion. 

19 Every man also to whom God 
hath given riches and wealth, and 


ro 


5 20] 


hath given him power ‘to eat 
thereof, and to take his portion, and 
to rejoice in his labour; this is the’ 
gift of God. | 

20 For he shall not much remem-| 
er the days of his life; because God) 
answereth Aim in the joy of his 
heart. 


CHAPTER 6. 

i 
(The unfolding, continued: (3) in 
view of man’s inevitable end.) | 


WHERE is an evil which I have’ 
seen under the sun, and it is 
common among men: : 

2 Aman to whom God hath given| 
riches, wealth, and honour, 4so tha’ 
he wanteth nothing for his soul of 
all that he desireth, “yet God giv-) 


ECCLESIASTES. 


B.C. 977. 


CHAPTER 7. 


| (The unfolding, continued: (4) in 
view of the incurable evii cf 
man.) 


A *GOOD name is better than 
precious ointment; and the 
day of death than the day of one’s 


| 2 Its better to go to the house of 


eth him not power to eat thereof, 
but a stranger eateth it: this is 
vanity, and it zs an evil disease. 

3 If a man beget an hundred) 
children, and live many years, so 
that the days of his years be many, 
and his soul be not filled with good, 
and “also that he have no burial; I 
say, that an untimely birth Is bet- 
ter than he. 

4 For he comethin with vanity, 
and departeth in darkness, and his 
name shall be covered with dark- 
ness: 

5 Moreover he hath not seen the 
sun, nor known any thing: this 
hath more rest than the other. 

6 Yea, though he live a thousand 
years twice told, yet hath he seen 


no good: do not all go to one 
place? 

7 4AM the labour of man fs for his 
‘mouth, and yet the “appetite is not 
filled, | 

8 For what hath the wise more 
than the fool? what hath the poor, 
that knoweth to walk before the 
living? 

9 Better 7s the sight of the eyes’ 
‘than the wandering of the desire: 
this is also vanity and vexation of 
spirit. | 

10 That which hath been is named) 
already, and it is known that it is 
man: £neither may he contend with 
him that is mightier than he. | 

11 Seeing there be many things 
that. increase vanity, what zs man| 
the better? { 

12 For who knoweth what is good 
for man in this life, all the days of 
his vain life which he spendeth “as 
a shadow? for who can tell a man 
“Het shall be after him under the 
sun 


a Job 21:9; ourning, than to go to the house 
Psa.i7.14; of feasting: for that is the end of 
73.7. reat and the living will lay zt 

to eart. 

sea .3 Sorrow is better than laughter: 

¢ 2 Ki.9.35; Jfor by the sadness of the counte- 
apts nance the heart is made better, 

19. 4 The heart of the wise is in the 
house of mourning; but the heart 
¢Prov.16.26. lof fools is in the house of mirth. __ 
eblebveca! 5 *It is better to hear the rebuke © 
Liners the — neh for aman to hear 
‘walking |tne song of fools. 
of ieee © For as the crackling of thorns 
under a pot, so-is the laughter of 
fae the fool: this also is vanity. 
Jer.49.19. 7 Surely oppression maketh a wise 
man mad; /and a gift destroyeth 
ie eat eee the heart. 
4; Jas.4.14.. | 8 Better zs the.end of a thing than 

: the beginning thereof: and the 

?Prov-15.30; Impatient in spirit is better than the 

ti proud in spirit. ; 

j 2 Cor.7.10. 9 “Be not hasty in thy spirit to be 

k See Psa.igi, }@nery: for anger resteth in the 
5; Prov.13.__|bosom of fools. 

18; 15.31,32. | 10 Say not thou, What is the 

1Ex.23.8: ‘cause that the former days were 

Deut.16.29. ‘better than these? for ‘thou dost not 
enquire wisely concerning this. 

m Prov.14.29. | 41 Wisdom is good with an in- 

nProv.14.17; |heritance: and by it there is profit 
fee iz to them that see the sun. 


12 For wisdom ss.a defence, and ~ 
0 Or, as good |MOney 1s a defence: but the excei- 
as.an inheri-\lency of knowledge is, that wisdom 
pene 7S2 |giveth life to them that have it. 
~ | 13 Consider the work of God: for 
who can make that straight, which 
eae |he hath made crooked? t 
moderately | 14 In theday of prosperity be joy- 
religious and |ful, but in the day of adversity con- 
sig d sider: God also hath set the one 
; jover against the other, to ‘the end 
nes man should find nothing after 


| 15 All things have I seen in the 
days of my vanity: there is a just 
man that perisheth im -his right- 
eousness, and there is a wicked man 
that prolongeth Ais fife in his 
wickedness. 

16 ?Be not righteous over much; 
neither make thyself over 


p vs.16,17. 
Natural wis- 


wise: 
700 


vo 17] 


oS shouldest thou destroy thy- 
self: 

17 Be not over much wicked, nei- 
ther be thou foolish: why shouldest 
thou die before thy time? 

18 It is good that thou shouldest 
take hold of this; yea, also from 
this withdraw not thine hand: for he 
that feareth God shall come forth 
of them all. 

19 Wisdom strengtheneth the wise 
more than ten mighty men which 
are in the city. 

20 x or there is not a 


Al pot take no heed unto all 
words that are spoken; lest thou 
hear thy servant curse thee: 

22 For oftentimes also thine own 
heart knoweth that thou thyself 
likewise hast cursed others. 

23 All this have I proved by wis- 
dom: I said, I will be wise; but it 
was far from me. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


a Righteous- 
ness. Isa.26. 
7. (Gen.6.9; 
Lk.2.25.) 


56 1 Ki.8.46; 
2 Chr.6.36; 
Prov.20.9; 
Rom.3.23; 
1 John 1.8. 


¢ Job 28.12,20; 
1 Tim.6.16. 


d@ Rom.11.33. 
e Prov.4.8,9; 


24 ¢That which is far off, and ¢ex-| 17.24. 


ceeding deep, who can find it out? 
25 I applied mine heart to know, 


and to search, and to seek out wis-}| 


dom, and the reason of things, and 
to know the wickedness of folly, 
even of foolishness and madness: 

26 And I find more bitter than 
death the woman, whose heart is 
snares and nets, and her hands as 
bands: whosd pleaseth God shail 
escape from her; but the sinner 
shall be taken by her. 

27 Behold, this have I found, 
saith the preacher, counting one 
by one, to find out the account: 

28 Which yet my soul seeketh, 
but I find not: one man among a 
thousand have I found; but a 
woman among all those have I not 
found. 

29 Lo, this only have I found, that 
God hath made man upright; but 
they have sought out many inven- 
tions.. 


CHAPTER 8. 


(The unfolding, continued: (5) in 
view of the mystery of the di- 
vine providences.) 


V8 is as the wise man? and 
who knoweth the interpreta- 
tion of a thing? “a man’s wisdom 
maketh his face to shine, and the 
fboldness of his face shall be 
changed. 

2 I counsel thee to keep the 
king’s commandment, rie Nae in| 
regard of the oath of God 


f Heb. 
strength. 


g 1 Chr.29.24; 
Ezk.17.18; 
Rom.13.5. 


h Job 34.18. 


¢ Heb. shall 
know. 


j Eccl.6.12; 
9.12; 10.14; 
Prov.24.22. 


k Job 14.5. 


1 Isa.65.20; 
Rom.2.5, 


m Psa.37.11, 
18,19; Prov. 
1.32,33; Isa, 


3.10,11; 
Mt.25.34,41. 


n Psa.19.9, 
note. 


701 


[8 16 


3 :Be not hasty to go out of his 
sight: stand not in an evil thing; 
for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth 


4 Where the word of a king is, 

pt is power:.and *who may say 
unto him, What doest thou? 
5 Whoso keepeth the command- 
ment ‘shall feel no evil thing: and 
a wise man’s heart discerneth both 
time and judgment. 

6 Because to every purpose there 
is time and judgment, therefore the 
misery of man is great upon him. 

7 jJFor he knoweth not that which 
shall be: for who can tell him when 
it shall be? 

8 There is no man that hath 
power over the spirit to retain the 
spirit; neither hath he power in 
the day of death: and there is no 
discharge in that war; neither shall 
wickedness deliver those that are 
given to it. 

9 All this have I seen, and ap- 
plied my heart unto every work 
that is done under the sun: there 
is a time wherein one man ruleth 
over another to his own ‘hurt. 

10 AndsoI saw the wicked buried, 
who had come and gone from the 
place of the holy, and they were 
forgotten in the city where they 
had so done: this is also vanity. 

11 Because sentence against an 
evil work is not executed speedily, 
therefore the heart of the sons of 
men is fully set in them to do evil. 

12 ’Though a sinner do evil an 
hundred times, and his days be pro- 
longed, yet surely I know that it 
shall be well with them that “fear 
God, which fear before him: 

13 But it shall not be well with 
the wicked, neither shall he prolong 
his days, which are as a shadow; 
because he feareth not before God. 

14 There is a vanity which is 
done upon the earth; that there be 
just men, unto whom it happen- 
eth according to the work of the 
wicked; again, there be wicked 
men, to whom it happeneth accord- 
ing to the work of the righteous: I 
said that this also is vanity. 

15 Then I commended mirth, be- 
cause a man hath no better thing 
under the sun, than to eat, and to 
drink, and to be merry: for that 
shall abide with him of his labour 
the days of his life, which God giv- 
eth him under the sun. 

16 When I applied mine heart to 
know wisdom, and to see the busi- 
ness that is done upon the earth: 


8 17] 


nor night seeth sleep with his 
eyes:) 

17 Then I beheld all the work of 
God, that 4a man cannot find out 
the work that is done under the 
sun: because though a man labour 
to seek it out, yet he shall not find 
it; yea farther; though a wise man 
think to know it, “yet shall he not 
be able to find it. 


6 tse 
CHAPTER 9. Kom 11-33. 
(The unfolding, continued: (6) in| Psa.73.16. 
view of the world’s wrong ¢ Job 21.7; 
standard of values.) Psa.73.3,12, 
FoR all this I considered in my HER SS 
heart even to declare all this,!¢ Becl.g.15. 


that the righteous, and the wise, 
and their works, are in the hand of 
God: no man knoweth either love 
or hatred by all that is before 
them. 

2 ‘All things come alike to all: 
there is one event to the righteous, 
and to the wicked; to the good and 


e Heb. see, or 
enjoy life. 


f Eccl.2.10, 
24; 3.13,22; 
5.18. 


g Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2. 


to the clean, and to the unclean; to Sy mote: 
him that sacrificeth, and to him|h Jer.9.23; 
that sacrificeth not: as is the good, ere 2. 
so is the sinner; and he that swear- wa 
eth, as he that feareth an oath. ¢ Prov.29.6; 

3 This is an evil among all things iy ta 
that are done under the sun, that) 1 ‘fhes.s.3. 
there is one event unto all: yea,|_ 
also the heart of the sons of men is|/ ove Ee 
full of evil, and madness /s in their Lee 
heart while they live, and after that|% Mk.6.2,3. 
they go to the dead. byostiia’ 

4 For to him that is joined to all|/{9°7)) 


the living there is hope: for a liv- 
ing dog is better than a dead lion. 

5 For the living know that they 
shall die: but the dead know not 
any thing, neither have they any 
more a reward; for the memory of 
them is forgotten. 

6 Also their love, and their ha- 
tred, and their envy, is now per- 
ished; neither have they any more 
a portion for ever in any thing that 
is done under the sun. 

7 Go thy way, deat thy bread with 
joy, and drink thy wine with a 


ECCLESIASTES. 


(for also there is that neither day|_B.c. 977. ete heart; for God now accepteth | 


[9 6 


4 


thy works. 

8 Let thy garments be always © 
white; and let thy head lack no 
ointment. W 

9 «Live joyfully with the wife 
whom thou lovest all the days of 
the life of thy vanity, which he 
hath given thee under the sun, all © 
the days of thy vanity: /for that is 
thy portion in this life, and in thy — 
labour which thou takest under the 
sun. 

10 Whatsoever thy hand findeth © 
to do, do it with thy might; !for 
there is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the 
8grave, whither thou goest. 

11 Ireturned, “and saw under the 
sun, that the race is not to the swift, 
nor the battle to the strong, neither 
yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches 
to men of understanding, nor yet 
favour to men of skill; but time and 
chance happeneth to them all. 

12 For man also knoweth not his 
time: as the fishes that are taken 
in an evil net, and as the birds that 
are caught in the snare; so are the 
sons of men ‘snared in an evil time, 
when it falleth suddenly upon 
them. 

13 This wisdom have I seen also 
under the sun, and it seemed great 
unto me: 

14 JThere was a little city, and 
few men within it; and there came 
a great king against it, and be- 
sieged it, and built great bulwarks 
against it: 

15 Now there was found in it a 
poor wise man, and he by his wis- 
dom delivered the city; yet no man 
remembered that same poor man. 

16 Then said I, Wisdom is better 
than strength: nevertheless ‘the 
poor man’s wisdom is despised, 
and his words are not heard. 

17 The words of wise men are 
heard in quiet more than the cry of 
him that ruleth among fools. 

18 Wisdom is better than weap- 
ons of war: but /one sinner destroy- 
eth much good. 


1 Verse 10 is no more a divine revelation concerning the state of the dead than 


any other conclusion of ‘‘the Preacher’ 


(Eccl. 1,1) 


is such a revelation. Reasoning 


from the standpoint of man “under the sun,” the natural man can see no difference 


between a dead man and a 


dead lion (v. 
No one would quote verse 2 


4). 


as a divine revelation. 


A living dog is better than either. 
These reasonings of man apart 


from divine revelation are set down by inspiration just as the words of Satan (Gen. 


3. 4; Job 2. 4, 5, etc.) are so set down. 


But that life and consciousness continue 


between death and resurrection is directly affirmed in Scripture (Isa. 14.. 9-11; Mt. 


22. 32; Mk, 9, 43-48; Lk. 16. 19-31; John 11. 26; 2 Cor. 


9-11), 
202 


5. 6-8; Phil. 1, 21-23; Rev. 6. 


CHAPTER 10. 


(The unfolding, continued: (7) in 
view of the anarchy of the 
world.) 


EAD flies cause the ointment of 

/ the apothecary to send forth a 
stinking savour: so doth a little 
folly him that is in reputation for 


ye 


ECCLESIASTES. __ [11 10 


18 By much slothfulness the 
building decayeth; and through 
idleness of the hands the house 
droppeth through. 

19 A feast is made for laughter, 
and wine maketh merry: but 
money answereth all things. 

20 ‘Curse not the king, no not in 
thy thought; and curse not the rich 
in thy bedchamber: for a bird of 


wisdom and honour. : : the air shall carry the voice, and 
2 A wise man’s heart is at his), pep. pis that which hath wings shall tell the 


pant hand; but a fool’s heart at his} heart. matter. 
eft. 
3 Yea also, when he that is a fool|? Frov-15-165 CHAPTER 11. 


walketh by the way, “his wisdom 2 : 
faileth him, and Che saith to every|¢ 1Sam.25.24; Part IV. The best thing possible 
Oe PREG Te a inal Proy.25.15. to the natural man. 

4 If the spirit of the ruler Tise Up] d Psa.7.15; AST thy bread Jupon the 
against thee, leave not thy place; Prov.26.27, waters: ‘for thou shalt find it 
for ‘yielding pacifieth great offences.| , p.a.5g.4,5,; |after_ many days, 


5 age is an evil which I have} Jer.8.17. 4 ‘Give aa to seven, and 
seen under the sun, as an error also to eight; for thou knowest 
eae pigen seca et ae en ae g epeer 
the rich sit in low place. ‘ g Prov.31.4, 3 Ifthe clouds be full of rain, they 
Berna ea ee NE OESSS UPC roids tgt / [ODES ciicicon fallatomanda tie 

: ar e 
servants upon the earth. 1 Ex.22.28; south, or toward the north, in the 


8 ‘He be diggeth ade Se fai, “eee fers ae the tree falleth, there 
into it; and whoso breaketh an|/jJsa.32.20. [it sha b 
hedge, a serpent shall bite him. aor \n0 He that observeth the wind 
9 Whoso removeth stones shall be F eg Ne shall not sow; and he that regard- 
hurt therewith; and he that cleav-| Mt.10.42; eth the clouds shall not reap. 


eth wood shall be endangered) 2¢°r98; | 5S As ™thou knowest not what 1s 
thereby. Gal.6.9-10;  |the way of the spirit, *ner how the 


10 If the iron be blunt, and he do bones do grow in the womb of her 
not whet the edge, then must he|/Psa-112.9; |that is with child: even so thou 


put to more strength: but wisdom ents knowest not the works of God who 
is profitable to direct. 18,19. maketh all. 


11 Surely the serpent will bite 6 In the morning sow thy seed, 
ewithout enchantment; and a bab-|"J°h= 3-8. /and in the evening withhold not 
bler is no better. ; n Psa.139. thine hand: for thou knowest not 

12 The words of a wise man’s| 14,15 whether °shall prosper, either this 
Piouthiare era-iots: bate the Us Of) obs, shalt Oe ee ee 

. e right. ne 4 

13 The beginning of the words of 7 Truly the light is sweet, and a 

his mouth is foolishness: and the|?Eccl-7-- [pleasant thing it is for the eyes ?to 


end of his talk is mischievous|7Num.is.39. |behold the sun: 
madness. 8 But if a man live many years, 


14 A fool also is full of words: al’ Eccl-12.14; [and rejoice in them all; yet let him 


man cannot tell what shall be; and Pot 2-B-t. 
what shall be after him, who can 
tell him? ; 

15 The labour of the foolish weari- 
eth every one of them, because he 
knoweth not how to go to the city. 

16 fWoe to thee, O land, when 
thy king is a child, and thy princes 
eat in the morning! 

17 Blessed art thou, O land, when 
thy king is the son of nobles, and 
éthy princes eat in due season, for 
strength, and not for drunken- 
ness! 


remember the days of darkness; for 
they shall be many. All that 
cometh is vanity. 

9 Rejoice, O young man, in thy 
youth; and let thy heart cheer thee 
in the days of thy youth, and %walk 
in the ways of thine heart, and in 
the sight of thine eyes: but know 
thou, that for all these things "God 
will bring thee into judgment. 

10 Therefore remove sorrow from 
thy heart, and Sput away evil from 
thy flesh: for childhood and youth 
are vanity. 


12 1] 


ECCLESIASTES. 


12 af 


CHAPTER 12. 


The best thing possible to the : 
‘ Taticaernnss a Prov fier 


Tee “now thy Creator] See 2 Sam. 
in the days of thy youth, while| 19-35. 
the evil days come not, nor the 
years draw nigh, when thou shalt 
say, I have no pleasure in them; 

2 While the sun, or the light, or 
the moon, or the stars, be not dark- 


ened, nor the clouds return after] fGen.3.19; 
; Job 34.15; 
Psa.90.3. 


d Job 17.13. 
e Jer.9.17. 


strong men shall bow themselves, : 
and the grinders cease because they| ‘ end oee 
are few, and those that look out of} Job 34.14; 
the windows be darkened, ; 
4 And the doors shall be shut in 
the streets, when the sound of the| i 
grinding is low, and he shall rise}. 


note. 


k Eccl.11.9; 
Mt.12.36; 


5 Also when they shall be afraid 
of that which is high, and fears 
shall be in the way, and the almond 
tree shall flourish, and the grass- 
hopper shall be a burden, and de- 
sire shall fail: because man goeth tc 
“his long home, and the “mourners 
go about the streets: 

6 Orever the silver cord be loosed, 
or the golden bowl be broken, or the 


|__B.C. 977. 


c 2 Sam.19.35. 


pitcher be broken at the fountain, ; 


jor the wheel broken at the cistern. 


| 7 Then shall the dust return to 
the earth as it was: and -éthe spirit 
shall return unto God who gave it. 

8 Vanity of vanities, saith the 
preacher; all is vanity. 

9 And moreover, because the 
preacher was wise, he still taught 
the people knowledge; yea, he gave 
good heed, and sought out, and 
fset in order many proverbs. 

10 The preacher sought to find 
out acceptable words: and that 
which was written was upright, 
even words of truth. 

11 The words of the wise are as 
goads, and as nails fastened by the 
masters of assemblies, which are 
given from one shepherd. 

12 And further, by these, my son, 
be admonished: of making many 
books there fs no end; and much 
study is a weariness of the flesh. 


Part V. The best thing possible 
to man under the law. 


13 ‘Let us hear the conclusion of 
the whole matter: JFear God, and 
keep his commandments: for this 
is the whole duty of man. 

14 For *God shall bring every 
work into judgment, with every 
secret thing, whether it be good, or 
iwhether it be evil. 


lil THE SONG OF SOLOMON. #! 


NOWHERE in Scripture does the unspiritual mind tread upon ground so mysterious: 
and incomprehensible as in this book, while the saintliest men and women of the 
ages have found it a source of pure and exquisite delight. That the love of the 
divine Bridegroom should follow all the analogies of the marriage relation seems: 
evil only to minds so ascetic that marital desire itself seems to them unholy. 

The interpretation is twofold: Primarily, the book is the expression of pure 
marital love as ordained of God in creation, and the vindication of that love as: 
against both asceticism and lust—the two profanations of the holiness of matriage. 
The secondary and larger interpretation is of Christ,-the Son and His heavenly 
bride, the Church (2 Cor, 11. 14, refs.).. 

In this sense the book has six divisions: I. The bride seen im restful communion 
with the Bridegroom, 1. 1-2. 7. II. A lapse and restoration, 2. 8-3.5. III. Joy of 
fellowship, 3. 6-5. 1. IV. Separation of interest—the bride satisfied, the Bride- 
groom toiling for others, 5. 2-5. V. The bride seeking and witnessing, 5. 6-6. 3. 
VI. Unbroken communion, 6. 4-8. 14. 


B.c. 1014. |that turneth aside by the flocks of 
thy companions? 

8 If thou know not, O'thou fairest 
among women, go thy way forth by 
the footsteps of the flock, and feed 
a1Ki432, |thy kids beside the shepherds’ tents. 
9 I have compared thee, 20 my 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I.The brideand Bridegroom 
in joyful 1communion (to 2. 7). 


‘a pe ésong of songs, which is 


2 Pe Hee kiss me with the kisses] ’ “10: love, to, a: company’ of horses i 
pitiaanonths “ar hy loveds Better | Homti-4:_.. | PHerack’s chatiote: ‘ 
peice iss John 6.44; 10 ate ae ae Be: wee 

3 Because of the savour‘of thy| ~~ Pecineie f Trolel. eh wt 


good ointments thy name is as/?PhUS1214. \"1) ‘We will make thee borders of 
ointment poured forth, therefore do} , psa.45.14,15; |gold with studs of silver. 


ev emcacs wines ar joha 14.2; |"19 While the king sitteth at his 
Shebee ee, ling pltebantany ts iter ae table, my spikenard sendeth forth 
into his chambers: we will be glad Pelee Ce te fray! sshirap hits Sey Grell 
_.and rejoice in thee, we will remem-| veded- nensced Nae a wre shall ae all 
ber thy love more than wine: the eSong 2.2,10, |night betwixt my’ breasts. 
ais ee cee comely, O ye 54; 64," 14 My pee as unto mes as 3 
sa : ’ 2 115. 4 . om ee 
daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents ear pees sohthe eas eT Bens 
of Kedar, as the curtains of Solo- eee 1S JBehold, thou-lar® fairs ene 
bes b 1} 13: 4 love; behold, thou arf fair; thou 
6 Look not upon me, because hast doves” eyes. 


am black, because the sun hath iOr,cypress. | 16 Behold, thou arf fair, my be- 
pooked - Upon mes Ty mother’s} Song 4.13. loved, yea, pleasant: also our bed! 
children were angry with me; they] ; song 4:2; glace 

made me the keeper of the vine-|’ 5.12. 17 The beams of our house are 


oe mine own vineyard have cedar, and’ our rafters-of fir. 

n ept. 

7 Tell me, O thou whom my soul CHAPTER 2. 

loveth, where thou feedest, where 

thou makest thy flock to rest at } AM the. rose of Sharon, and the 
noon: for why should I be fas one! lily of the valleys. 


SON cate ee an i ee ee 
1 It is. most comforting to see that. all these tender thoughts of Christ are for His 
bride in her unperfected state. The varied. exercises of her heart are part of that 


inner discipline suggested by Eph. 5. gee 
05 


2 2] . SONG OF SOLOMON. 


2 As the lily among thorns, !so is|__B.c. 1014. countenance, let me hear thy voice; 

my love among the daughters. hes for weet a - spt ia and 
s the apple tree among the countenance is s , 

Saige: the eae so is my beloved 15 Take us éthe foxes, the little 
among the sons. I sat down under foxes, that spoil the vines: for our 
his shadow with great delight, and vines have tender. grapes, 
chis fruit was sweet to my taste. 16 +My beloved is mine, andIlam 

4 He brought me to the banquet- his: he feedeth among the lilies. 
ing house, and his banner over me 17 ‘Until the day break, and the 


was love. shadows flee away, turn, my be- 

5 Stay me with flagons, comfort loved, and be thou /like a roe or a 
me with apples: for I am sick of|, pey932, {young hart upon the mountains of 
love. mie Bether. 


6 ?His left hand is under my head, |> Song 8.3. 
and his right hand doth embrace CHAPTER ot 
me. , 

Y *night on my bed I sought 
of Jerusalem, by the foes, and by“, four |IB "yim whom my’ soul lovethe f 
the hinds of the field, that ye stir) “”""* sought him, but I found him not. 
not up, nor awake my love, till he! v-10. ae ane mee pada Bag go nous me 

f : § city in the streets, and in the broa 
eae F _ JF Omit places. | ays I will seek him whom my soul 
Part II. A lapse and restoration gPsa.80.13; |loveth: I sought him, but I found 
(to 3.5). Ezk.13.4; him not, 


8 The voice of my beloved! be- ek 3 /The watchmen that go about 


c Song 3.5; 
8.4. 


hold, he cometh leaping upon the] Song 6.3; the city found me: to whom I said, 
mountains, skipping upon the hills.| 7-12 Saw ye him whom my soul loveth? 

9 My beloved is like aroeora i Song 4.6. 4 It was but a little that I passed 
young hart: behold, he standeth from them, but I found him whom 


behind our wall, he looketh forth}/¥-9;S°"¢ | |my soul loveth: I held him, and 
at the windows, ¢shewing himself} °!* would not let him go, until I had 
through the lattice. k Isa.26.9. brought him into my mother’s 

10 My beloved spake, and said house, and into the chamber of her 


unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair| / 5°" >” that conceived me. 
one, and come away. m Song 2.7; 5 _™I charge you, O ye daughters 

11 For, lo, the winter is past, the| 8-4: of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the 
rain is over and gone; Song 8:5) hinds of the field, that ye stir not 

12 The flowers appear on the up, nor awake my love, till he please, 
earth; the time of the singing of : 
birds is come, and the voice of the CE eT aDRy communion (ep 
turtle is heard in our land; she Sa? DEES SPeakss 

13 The fig tree putteth forth her 6 *Who is this that cometh out of 
green figs, and the vines with the the wilderness like pillars of smoke, 
tender grape give a good smell. perfumed with myrrh and frankin- 
‘Arise, my love, my fair one, and cense, with all powders of the mer- 
come away. chant? 

14 O my 3dove, that art in the 7 Behold his bed, which is Solo- 
clefts of the rock, in the secret mon’s; threescore valiant men are. 
Splaces of the stairs, let me see thy about it, of the valiant of Israel. 


1 How poor are the similes of the bride as compared with those of the Bridegroom. 
To Him she is a “‘lily among thorns” ; she can only say that He is “as the apple 
tree among the trees of the wood.” 
% 2 “Our wall.” The bride had returned to her own home: the Bridegroom seeks 
er 


3 There is a beautiful order here. First we have what the bride is as seen in 
Christ, “My dove.” In herself most faulty; in Him “blameless and harmless’”’ 
(Phil, 2. 15), the very character of the dove. Then the bride’s place of safety, “in 
the clefts of the rock””—hidden, so to speak, in the wounds of Christ. Thirdly, her 
privilege. “Stairs” speaks of access. It is not “secret places,’ as in A.V., but 
“the secret of the stairs” —the way and privilege of access to His presence (Eph. 2. 18; 
Col. 3. 1; Heb. 10. 19-22). F ourthly, the order of approach: she is to come near 
before she speaks, “Let Me see thy countenance,” then “Let Me hear thy voice.’ 


Lastly, now that she is near and has spoken, He speaks a tender word of admoni- 
tion: “Take us the foxes,” etc. 
706 


y Ve eae i a) Soe Y -"— , 2 Pe * vc - 5-3 Le y 4 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 8 (5.2 


8 They all hold swords, being ex-|_B.C. 1014. _|from the lions’ dens, from the moun- 
i tains of the leopards. 

9 Thou hast /ravished my heart, 
my lsister, my spouse; thou hast 
tavished my heart with one of thine 
eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 

10 How fair is thy love, my sister, 


fear in the night. 

9 King Solomon made himself a 
chariot of the wood of Lebanon. 
10 He made the pillars thereof of 
Buc fs the pore: as ot eo Ey spouse) how, mech better aS Ee 
th veri it of purple, the ove than wine! and the smell o 
ae Serer bene eta wel @ Sobe 1.15; |thine ointments than all spicés! 
ove, for the daughters of Jerusalem.| »-14- 11 Thy lips, O my spouse, drop 
ae Go er eae ace Of| 4 Song 6.5. ABs hs honeycomb: honey and 

ion, an eho ing Solomon milk are under thy tongue; and the. 
i eas oN ede gest noe c Song 6.6. snag of exe garments is “like the 
crowne im in the day of his|q song 6.7. smell of Lebanon. 
espousals, and in the day of the as 12 A garden “inclosed is my sis- 
gladness of his heart. ter, my spouse; a spring shut up, a 


fountain sealed. 
CHAFPTER 4. 13 Thy plants are an orchard of 
The Bridegroom speaks. 


pomegranates, with pleasant fruits; 
camphire, with spikenard, 
BEHOLD, ethou art fair, my 
love; behold, thou art fair; thou|"Song 2-17. {mus and cinnamon, with all trees 


14 Spikenard and saffron; cala- 


hast doves’ eyes within thy locks:| ; rep. of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, 

thy hair is as a “flock of goats, that| breathe. with all the chief spices: 

appear from mount Gilead. Feeley 15 A fountain of gardens, ?a well 
2 ‘Thy teeth are like a flock of|’?~?"”*” _Jof living waters, and streams from 

sheep that are even shorn, which|k Deut.33. Lebanon. 


came up from the washing; whereof . 

every one bear twins, and none is|’O7,52%er The bride speaks, 

barren among them. heart. 16 Awake, O north wind; and 
3 Thy lips are like if thread ie Saeie CORE? Fon peng eae ean my 
scarlet, and thy speech is comely:]” proy.24.13, |garden, that the spices thereo! may 
thy ¢temples are like a piece of a| 14. flow out. Let my beloved come 
COS OS SRG Gags ra oaee al eeay aa eriaemossmm ren 
David builded for an farmoury, 


woceey pte pane. a pues o Heb.barred. CHAPTER 5. 
bucklers, all shields of mighty men.}» Jonn 4.10; < ; 
5 &8Thy two breasts are like two eee The Bridegroom replies. 


young roes that are twins, which) ..00 51 if ‘AM come into my garden, my 
feed among the lilies. " at sister, my spouse: I have gath- 


6 Until the day ‘break, and the|rSong4.16. {ered my myrrh with my spice; ‘I 


shadows flee away, I will get me to) ,.0o 44) have eaten my honeycomb with my 
the mountain of myrrh, and to the|°°°"=*"*"  |honey; I have drunk my wine with 
hill of frankincense. my milk: eat, O friends; drink, yea, 
7 Thou art all fair, my love; drink abundantly, O beloved. 
there is no spot in oe Leb Part IV. Aseparation of interest: 
87 Comeswith me from Lepanon, the bride speaks (to v.5). 
my spouse, with me from Lebanon: 
look from the top of Amana, from Lee 2sleep, but my heart waketh: 
the top of Shenir “and Hermon, it is the voice of my beloved that 


1 The word “sister” here is of infinitely delicate significance, intimating the very 
whiteness of purity in the midst of an ardour which is, like the shekinah, aglow 
but unspeakably holy. Sin has almost deprived us of the capacity even to stand 
with unshod feet before this burning bush. 2 i j 

2 The bride is satisfied with her washed feet while the Bridegroom, His “head 
filled with dew,” and His “locks with the drops of the night,” is toiling for others. 
See Lk. 6. 12; 14. 21-23. The state of the bride is not one of sin, but of neglect 
of service. She is preoccupied with the graces and perfections which she has in 
Christ through the Spirit (1 Cor. 12. 4-11; Gal. 5. 22, 23). Itis mysticism, unbalanced 
by the activities of the Christian warfare. Her feet are washed, her hands drop 
with sweet-smelling myrrh; but He has gone on, and now she must seek Him 


(cf. Lk. 2. 44, 45). 
707 


$ 3] 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


[611 


knocketh, saying, Open to me, my 
sister, my love, my dove, my un- 
defiled: for my ‘head is filled with 
dew, and my locks with the drops 
of the night. 

3 I have put off my coat; how 
shall I put it on? I ‘have washed 
my feet; how shall I defile them? 

4 My beloved put in his hand ‘by 
the hole.of the door, and my bow- 
els were moved for ‘him. 

5 Irose up to open’ to my beloved; 
and my hands dropped with 
myrrh, and my fingers with sweet 
smelling myrrh, upon the ‘handles 
of the lock. 

Part V. The seeking bride(to 6.3). 


© I opened to my beloved: but 
my beloved had withdrawn himself, 
and was gone: my ‘soul failed when 
he spake: I sought “him, but I could 
not find him; I called him, but he 
gave me no answer. 

7 8The watchmen that went 
about the city found me, they smote 
me, they wounded ‘me; the keepers 
of the walls took away my veil from 


me. 

8 I charge you, O daughters of Je- 
fusalem, if ye find my beloved, that 
ye tell him, that I am sick of love. 


The daughters of Jerusalem 
speak. 


9 What is thy beloved more than 
another beloved, °O thou fairest 
among women? what is thy be- 
loved more than another beloved, 
that thou dost so charge us? 


The bride answers. 


10 My beloved is white andruddy, 
the ‘chiefest among ten thousand. 

11 His head is as the most fine 
gold, his locks are bushy, and black 
as a raven. 

12 ¢His eyes are as the eyes of 
doves by the rivers of waters, 
washed with milk, and éfitly set, 

13 His cheeks are as a bed of 
Spices, as sweet flowers: his lips 
like lilies, dropping sweet smelling 
myrrh. \ 

14 His hands are as gold rings 
set with the beryl: his belly is as 
bright ivory overlaid with sap- 
phires. 

15 His legs are as pillars of mar- 
ble, set upon sockets of fine gold: 


BC. 1014. 


a Song.3.3. 

5 Song 1.8. 

c Heb. a 
standard 
bearer.. 


d@ Song 1.15; 
4.1. 


e Heb..sitting 


in fulness; 
i.e. fitly 
placed, and 
set as a pre- 
cious stone, 
in the foil of 
a ring. 


f Song 1:8. 
g Song 2.16; 
7.140. 


h Song 4.1. 
4 Song 4.2. 
J Song 4.3. 
kv.4. 

T Song 7.12. 


cellent as the cedars. 

16 His mouth zs most sweet: yea, 
he is altogether lovely. This is my 
beloved, and this is my friend, O 
daughters of Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER 6. 
The daughters of Jerusalem 
speak. 


AJHITHER is thy beloved gone, 
JQ thou fairest among -wo- 
men? whither is thy beloved turned 
aside? that we may seek him with 
thee. ¢ 
The bride answers. 

2 My beloved is gonedowninto his 
garden, to the beds of spices, to feed 
in the gardens, and to gather lilies. 

3 81am my beloved’s, and my be- 
loved is mine: he feedeth among 


' |the lilies. 


Part VI. Unbroken communion 
(to the end): the Bridegroom 
speaks. 

4 Thou art beautiful, O my love, 
as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, 
terrible as an army with banners. 

5 Turn away thine eyes from me, 
for they have overcome me: thy 
hair is ’as a flock of goats that 
appear from Gilead. 

6 ‘Thy teeth are as a flock of 
sheep which go up from the wash- 
ing, whereof every one beareth 
twins, and there is not.one ‘barren 
among them. 

7 JAs a piece of a pomegranate are 
thy temples within thy locks. 

8 There are threescare queens, 
and fourscore concubines, and vir- 
gins without number. 

9 My dove, my undefiled is but 
one; she is the anly one of her 
mother, she is the choice one of her 
that bare her. ‘The daughters saw 
her, and blessed ther: yea, the 
queens and the concubines, and 
they praised ‘her. 

10 ‘Who is she tha# looketh forth 
jas the morning, fair as the moon, 
|clear as the sun, ‘and terrible as 
|an army with banners? 

11 I went down into the garden 
{of nuts to see the fruits of the val- 
ley, and 'to see whether the vine 
|flourished, and the pomegranates 
\budded. 


p._ Observe, it is now the Bridegroom Himself who occupies her heart, not His 
gifts—myrrh and washed feet (John 13. 2-9). bit 


2So soon as the 


“Sc e bride witnesses to the Bridegroom’s 
desire is awakened in the daughters of Jerusalem to seek 


708 


own personal loveliness, .a 
Him. 


his countenance zs as Lebanon, ex- — 


12 Or ever I was aware, my soul 
*made me like the chariots of Am- 
mi-nadib. 

13 Return, return, O Shulamite; 
return, return, that we may look 
upon thee. What will ye see in the 
Shulamite? As it were the com- 
pany °of two armies. 


CHAPTER 7. 


OW beautiful are thy feet with 
¢O- prince’s daughter! 
the joints of thy thighs are like 
jewels, the work of the hands of a 
cunning workman. 

2 Thy navel is like a round gob- 
let, which wanteth not 4liquor: thy 
belly is like an heap of wheat set 
about with lilies. 

3 Thy two breasts are like two 
young roes that are twins. 

4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; 
thine eyes like the fishpools in Hesh- 
bon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim: 
thy nose is asthe towerofLebanon| 
“aera eenrande = Jamas — e Or, crimson, 

e head upon thee is like 
eCarmel, and the hair of thine head Mie Oech 
like purple; the king is fheld in the} Or, of the 
galleries. SES 

6 How fair and how pleasant art|/ Psa.45.11. 
thou, O love, for delights! ‘ 

7 This thy stature is like to al *$e25-1*- 
palm tree, and thy breasts to clus-| j Mt.13.52. 

k Song 2.7; 
3.5. 


a Or, set me 
on the 
chariots of 
my willing 
people. 

b Or, of 
Mahanaim, 
Gen.32.2. © 


ters of grapes. 

8 I said, I will go up to the palm 
tree, I will take hold of the boughs] 
thereof: now also thy breasts shall}? Isa.49.16; 
be as clusters of the vine, and the romped 
smell of thy nose like apples; 

9 And the roof of thy mouth like] Prov.6.35. 
the best wine for my beloved, that], 24. sneol. 
goeth down sweetly, causing thelips| See Hab.2. 
Zof those that are asleep to speak. | 5, 7o0¢te- 


The bride speaks. 

10 I.am my beloved’s, and “his 
desire is toward me. 

11 Come, my beloved, let us go 
forth into the field; let us lodge in 
the villages. ‘ 

12 Let us get up early to the vine- 
yards; let us see if the vine flourish, 
whether the tender grape appear, 
and the pomegranates bud forth: 
there will I give thee my loves. 

13 The‘mandrakes giveasmell,and 
atour gatesJareall manner of pleas- 
ant fruits, new and old, which I 
have laid up for thee, O my beloved. 


CHAPTER 8. 
O 


THAT thou wert as my bro- 
my mother! when I should find 


o The refer- 
ence here is 
obscure. 

p Heb. peace. 

g Mt.21.33. 


r See Rev.22. 
17,20. 


ther, that sucked the breasts of 
709 


SONG OF SOLOMON. 


B.C. 1014. 


[8 14 


thee without, I would kiss thee; 
yea, I should not be despised. 

2 I would lead thee, and bring 
thee into my mother’s house, who 
would instruct me: I would cause 
thee to drink of spiced wine of the 
juice of my pomegranate. 

3 His left hand should be under 
my head, and his right hand should 
embrace me. 

4 FI charge you, O daughters of 
Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor 
awake my love, until he please. 


The Bridegroom speaks, 


5 Who is this that cometh up 
from the wilderness, leaning upon 
her beloved? I raised thee up under 
the apple tree: there thy mother 
brought thee forth: there she 
brought thee forth that bare thee. 

6 ‘Set me as a seal upon thine 
heart, as a seal upon thine arm: 
for love rs strong as death; ”jeal- 
ousy is cruel as the “grave: the 
coals thereof are coals of fire, whicb 
hath a most vehement flame. 

7 Many waters cannot quench 
love, neither can the floods drown 
it: if a man would give all the sub- 
stance of his house for love, it 
would utterly be contemned, 


The bride speaks. 


8 We have a little sister, and she 
hath no breasts: what shall we do 
for our sister in the day when she 
shall be spoken for? ! 


The Bridegroom speaks. 


9 If she be a wall, we will build 
upon her a palace of silver: and if 
she be a door, we will inclose her 
with boards of cedar. 


The bride speaks, 


10 I am a wall, and my breasts 
like towers: then was I in his eyes 
as one that found ?favour. 

11 Solomon had a vineyard at 
Baal-hamon; ¢he let out the vine- 
yard unto keepers; every one for 
the fruit thereof was to bring a 
thousand pieces of silver. 

12 My vineyard, which is mine, is 
before me: thou, O Solomon, must 
have a thousand, and those that 
keep the fruit thereof two hundred. 

13 Thou that dwellest in the gar- 
dens, the companions hearken to 
thy. voice: cause me to hear it. 

14 *Make haste, my beloved, and 
be thou like to a roe or to a young 
hart upon the mountains of spices, 


™ tojthe last. 


; 


pe 


BP HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 


The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 
_ so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference 
and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 


ILLUSTRATION 


{at Mark 1. 1.) 


b Gospel. vs. 
1,14,15; Mk. 


if) f Here Gospel is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place; 
Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the references in parenthesis are 


___ the first and last. 


we 


710 


THE PROPHETICAL BOOKS. 


PROPHETS were men raised up of God in times of declension and apostasy in 
Israel. They were primarily revivalists and patriots, speaking on behalf of God to 
the heart and conscience of the nation. The prophetic messages have a twofold 
character: first, that which was local and for the prophet’s time; secondly, that 
which was predictive of the divine purpose in the future. Often the prediction 
springs immediately from the local circumstance (e.g. Isa. 7. 1-11 with vs. 12-14). 

_ It is necessary to keep this Israelitish character of the prophet in mind. Usually 
his predictive, equally with his local and immediate ministry, is not didactic and 
abstract, but has in view the covenant people, their sin and failure, and their glo- 
rious future. The Gentile is mentioned as used for the chastisement of Israel, as 
judged therefor, but also as sharing the grace that is yet to be shown toward Israel. 
The Church, corporately, is not in the vision of the O.T. prophet (Eph, 3. 1-6). 
The future blessing of Israel_as a nation rests upon the Palestinian Covenant of 
restoration and conversion (Deut. 30. 1-9, refs.), and the Davidic Covenant of 
the Kingship of the Messiah, David’s Son (2 Sam. 7. 8-17, refs.), and this gives to 
predictive prophecy its Messianic character. The exaltation of Israel is secured in 
the kingdom, and the kingdom takes its power to bless from the Person of the King, 
David’s Son, but also “Immanuel.” 

But as the King is also Son of Abraham (Mt. 1.1), the promised Redeemer, and as 
redemption is only through the sacrifice of Christ, so Messianic prophecy of neces- 
sity presents Christ in a twofold character—a suffering Messiah (e.g. Isa. 53.), and 
a reigning Messiah (e.g. Isa. 11). This duality, suffering and glory, weakness and 
aes involved a mystery which perplexed the prophets (1 Pet. 1. 10-12; Lk. 24. 
26, 27)... 

The solution of that mystery lies, as the New Testament makes clear, in the two 
advents—the first advent to redemption through suffering; the second advent to 
the kingdom in glory, when the national promises to Israel will be fulfilled (Mt. 1. 
21-23; Lk. 2. 28-35; 24. 46-48, with Lk. 1. 31-33, 68-75; Mt. 2. 2, 6; 19. 27, 28; Acts 2. 30-32; 
15. 14-16). The prophets indeed describe the advent in two forms which could 
not be contemporaneous (e.g. Zech. 9. 9; contra, 14. 1-9), but to them it was not re- 
vealed that between the advent to suffering, and the advent to glory, would be 
accomplished certain “mysteries of the kingdom” (Mt. 13. 11-16), nor that, con- 
sequent upon Messiah’s rejection, the New Testament Church would be called 
out. These were, to them, ‘‘mysteries hid in God’? (Eph. 3. 1-10). 

Speaking broadly, then, predictive prophecy is occupied with the fulfilment of 
ee Palestinian and Davidic Covenants; the Abrahamic Covenant having also its 
place. 

Gentile powers are mentioned as connected with Israel, but prophecy, save in 
Daniel, Obadiah, Jonah, and Nahum, is not occupied with Gentile world-history. 
Daniel, as will be seen, has a distinctive character. 

The predictions of the restoration from the Babylonian captivity at the end of 
seventy years, must be distinguished from those of the restoration from the present 
world-wide dispersion. The context is always clear. The Palestinian Covenant 
(Deut. 28. 1-30. 9) is the mould of predictive prophecy in its larger sense—national 
disobedience, world-wide dispersion, repentance, the return of the Lord, the regath- 
ering of Israel and establishment of the kingdom, the conversion and blessing of 
Israel, and the judgment of Israel’s oppressors. mi : 

The true division of the prophets is into pre-exilic, viz., in Judah: Isaiah, Jere- 
miah (extending into the exile), Joel, Obadiah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zepha- 
niah. In Israel: Hosea, Amos, and Jonah. £xilic, Ezekiel and Daniel, both of 
Judah, but prophesying to the whole nation. Post-exilic, all of Judah: Haggai, 
Zechariah, and Malachi. The division into major and minor prophetic writings, 
based upon the mere bulk of the books, is unhistoric and non-chronological. 

The keys which unlock the meanings of prophecy are: the two advents of Mes- 
siah, the advent to suffer (Gen. 3. 15; Acts 1.9), and the advent to reign (Deut. 30. 3; 
Acts 1. 9-11); the doctrine of the Remnant (Isa. 10. 21, refs.), the doctrine of the 
day of the Lorp (Isa. 2. 10-22; Rev. 19. 11-21), and the doctrine of the Kingdom 


711 


(O.T., Gen. 1. 26-28: Zech. 12. 8, note; N.T., Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15. 28, note). 
eee pivotal chapters, taking prophecy as a whole, are, Deut. 28., 29., 30.; Psa. 2.; 
AN.) Zesedione pos 

The whole scope of prophecy must_be taken into account in determining -the 
meaning of any particular passage (2 Pet. 1. 20). Hence the importance of first — 
mastering the great themes above indicated, which, in this edition of the Scrip- 
tures, may readily be done by tracing through the body of the prophetic writings 
the subjects mentioned in the preceding paragraph. The detail of the “time of the 
end,” upon which all prophecy converges, will be more clearly understood if to 
those subjects the student adds the Beast (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19. 20), and Armaged- 
don (Rev. 16. 14; 19. 17, note). 


CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER OF THE PROPHETS, 
ACCORDING TO USSHER. 


I. Prophets Before the Exile. 

(1) To Nineveh. 
Jonah, 862 B.C. 

(2) To the 10 tribes “Israel.” 
Amos, 787 B.C. 
Hosea, 785-725 B.C. 
Obadiah, 887 B.C. 
Joel, 800 BC. 

(3) To Judah. 

Isaiah, 760-698 B.C. 

Micah, 750-710 B.C. 

Nahum, 713 B.C. 

Habakkuk, 626 B.C. 

Zephaniah, 630 B-C. 

Jeremiah, 629-588 B.C x 


Il. Prophets During the Exile. 
Ezekiel, 595-574 B.C. 
Daniel, 607-534 B.C. 
TTI. Prophets After the Exile. 


Haggai, 520 B.C. 
Zechariah, 520-518 B.C 
Malachi, 397 B.C. 


712 


THE BOOK OF THE; PROPHET 


ISAIAH. 


ISAIAH is justly accounted the chief of the writing prophets. He has the more com- 
prehensive testimony and is distinctively the prophet of redemption. Nowhere else 
in the Scriptures written under the law have we so clear a view of grace. The 
New Testament Church does not appear (Eph. 3. 3-10), but Messiah in His Person 
and sufferings, and the blessing of the Gentiles through Him, are in full vision. 

_ Apart from his testimony to his own time, which includes warnings of coming 
judgments upon the great nations of that day, the predictive messages of Isaiah 
cover seven great themes: I. Israel in exile and divine judgment upon Israel’s 
oppressors. II. The return from Babylon. III. The manifestation of Messiah in 
humiliation (e.g. chap. 53.). IV. The blessing of the Gentiles, V. The manifesta- 
tion of Messiah in judgment (‘the day of vengeance of our God”). VI. The reign 
of David’s righteous Branch in the kingdom-age. VII. The new heavens and the 
new earth. 

Isaiah is in two chief divisions: I. Looking toward the captivities, 1. 1-39. 8. 
Key verses, 1. 1, 2, IE. Looking beyond the captivities, 40. 1-66. 24. Key verses, 
40.1, 2. These chief divisions fall into subdivisions, as indicated in the text. 

The events recorded in Isaiah cover a period of 62 years (Ussher). 


I 1} [1 12 


PART I. LOOKING TOWARD THE CAPTIVITIES: CHAPTERS 1.-39, 


CHAPTER 1 B.c. 760. {unto - head oe mt Oy baie Hoe 
z in it; but wounds, and bruises, an 

Jehovah's case against Judah |*7“™1?°-_ |putrifying sores: they have not 
vs. 1-24). &2Chr.26.23. |been closed, neither bound up, 

=e ‘ ¢Deut.32.1; [neither mollified with ointment. 
HE ‘vision of Isaiah the son of! Jer.2.12; 6. 7 *Your country is desolate; your 
Amoz, which he saw concern- wt cities are burned with fire: your 
ing Judah and Jerusalem in the) \ici.o:' land, strangers devour it in your 
days %of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz,| 6.1,2. presence, and it 1s desolate, as over- 
and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. dGal.4.1-4. we cha ten ee nee 
Garth: fort thob one waunoe vent! Cer at | (asa rouktage bad isicxaactaees a 
nate nourished and die arte Ue sen todee in f eat of cucumbers, as 

hildren, and they have rebelle pe a besieged city. 

against me. g Isa.9.13; 9 Except the Lorp of hosts had 


3 The ox knoweth his owner, and| "730: °-3. 
the ass his master’s crib: but Israel |’ Pee 2eet, 
doth not know, my people doth : 


not consider. i Remnant. 
4 Ah sinful nation, a people laden} (54.1.9; 
with iniquity, a ‘seed of evildoers,| Rom.11.5.) 


children that are corrupters: they| ; Rom.9.29. 
have forsaken the Lorn, they have}, ; - jerusa- 
provoked the Holy One of Israel” iqn7/ 0: 
unto. anger, they are gone away] Rev.11.8. 
backward. LEaw (ok 
5 8&Why should ye be stricken any} Moses). 
more? ye will revolt more and more:}| Ys-10-18; 


the whole -head is sick, and the] (i164; 
whole heart faint. Gal.3.1-29.) 


6 From the sole of the foot even 


left unto us a very small ‘remnant, 
we should have been as 7Sodom, 
and we should have been like unto 
Gomorrah. 

10 Hear the word of the Lorn, 
ye rulers of "Sodom; give ear unto 
the ‘law of our God, ye people of 
Gomorrah, 

11 To what purpose is the multi- 
tude of your sacrifices unto me? 
saith the Lorp: I am full of the 
burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat 
of fed beasts; and I delight not in 
the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, 
or of he goats. 


12 When ye come to appear before 


1The chapter, down to verse 23, states the case of Jehovah against Judah. 
Chastening, according to Deut. 28., 29., had been visited upon Israel in the land 


(vs. 5-8), and now the time of expulsion from the land is near. 


But just here 


Jehovah renews the promise of the Palestinian Covenant of future restoration and 


exaltation (Isa. 1. 26, 27; 2. 1-4). 
713 


ant 13] 


ISAIAH. 


me, who hath required this at your 
hand, to tread my courts? ‘ 

13 4Bring no more vain oblations; 
incense is an abomination unto me; 
the new moons and sabbaths, the 
calling of assemblies, I cannot away 
with; it 1s iniquity, even the sol- 
emn meeting. 

14 Your new moons and your ap- 
pointed feasts my soul hateth: they 
are a trouble unto me; I am weary 
to bear them. 

15 And when ye spread forth 
your hands, I will hide mine eyes 


11-17; 
from you: yea, when ye make many|”° 3 


2 Cor.8.1, 
prayers, I will not hear: your hands] note. 
are full of blood. 

16 Wash you, make you clean; retary i 
put away the evil of your doings] vs.24-26; 
from, before mine eyes; cease to do (Gen-12-23; 

> 7 om.11.26.) 

17 Learn to do well; seek judg-| 
ment, relieve the oppressed, judge areneiors 
the fatherless, plead for the widow.| 95°96: Isa. 

18 Come now, and let us reason} 2.1-4. (Gen. 
together, saith the Lorp: though Set “& 


your sins be as scarlet, they shall 
be as white as snow; though they|d Kingdom 
be red like crimson, they shall be as| (0-T:)- vs. 


wool im ees 1 
19 If ye be willing and obedient,| 26; Zech. 
ye shall eat the good of the land: 12.8.) 


20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye] ¢ ysraer (pro- 


shall be devoured with the sword:) phecies). 
for the mouth of the Lorp hath 367. oo 
spoken it. Gye SES 
21 How is the faithful city become pal 11.26. ) 
an harlot! it was full of judement;| . >. 3 93. 
righteousness lodged in it; but now]! 7¢p:8:235 


murderers. 

22 Thy silver is become dross, thy 
wine mixed with water: 

23 Thy princes are rebellious, 
and companions of thieves: every 
one loveth gifts, and followeth after 
rewards: they judge not the father- 
less, neither doth the cause of the 
widow come unto them. 

24 Therefore saith the Lord, the 
Lorp of hosts, the mighty One of 
Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine 
adversaries, and avenge me of mine 
enemies: 


Mingled warning and promise. 


25 And I will turn my hand upon 
’thee, and purely ‘purge away thy 


B.C. 760. 


27 Zion shall be redeemed with 
judgment, and her converts with 
righteousness. 

28 And the destruction of the 
transgressors and of the sinners 
shall be together, and they that 
forsake the LorD shall be con- 
sumed. 

29 For they shall be ashamed of 
the oaks which ye have desired, 
and ye shall be confounded for the 
gardens that ye have chosen. 

30 For ye shall be as an oak 
whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden 
that hath no water. 

31 And the strong shall be as tow, 
and the maker of it as a spark, and 
they shall both burn together, and 
none shall quench them. 


CHAPTER 2. 
The promise for the last days. 


HE word that Isaiah the son of 
Amoz saw concerning “Judah 
and Jerusalem. 

2 And it shall come to “pass in the 
last days, that the mountain of the 
LorRD’s house shall be established 
in the top of the mountains, and 
shall be exalted above the hills; 
and all nations shall flow unto it. 

3 fAnd many people shall go and 
say, Come ye, and let us go up to 
the mountain of the LORD, to the 
house of the God of Jacob; and he 
will teach us of his ways, and we 
will walk in his paths: for out of 
Zion shall go forth the law, and the 
word of the Lorp from Jerusalem. 

4 And he shall judge among thé 
nations, and shall rebuke many 
people: and they shall beat their 
swords into plowshares, and their 
spears into pruninghooks: nation 
shall not lift up sword against na- 
tion, neither shall they learn war 
any more. 

5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and 
let us walk in the light of the 
LorpD. 


Chastisement before blessing 
(2. 6-3. 26).* 


— 


dross, and take away all thy tin: 
26 And I will restore Ithy judges 
as at the first, and thy counsellors 


6 Therefore thou hast forsaken 
thy people the house of Jacob, be- 
cause they be replenished from the 


1 Under the kingdom the ancient method of partes ane the theocratic govern- 
ment over Israel is to be restored. Cf. Jud. 2. 18; Mt. 19. 


2 A mountain, in Scripture symbolism, means a pte cy (pare 2. 35; Rev. 13. 1, 
with Rey. 17. 9-11). 
714 


east, and are soothsayers like the 
Philistines, and they please them- 
selves in the children of strangers. 

7 Their land also is full of silver 
and gold, neither is there any end 
of their treasures; their land is also 
full of horses, neither is there any 
end of their chariots: 

8 Their land also is full of idols; 
they worship the work of their own 
hands, that which their own fingers 
have made: 

9 And the mean man boweth 
down, and the great man humbleth 
himself: therefore forgive them not. 

10 Enter into the rock, and hide 
thee in the dust, for fear of the 
Lorp, and for the glory of his 
majesty. 

11 The lofty looks of man shall 
be humbled, and the haughtiness 
of men shall be bowed down, and 
the Lorp alone shall be exalted in 
that day. 

12 ¢For the day of the Lorp of 
hosts shall be upon every one that 
is proud and lofty, and upon every 
one that is lifted up; and he shall 
be brought low: 

13 And upon all the cedars of 
Lebanon, that are high and lifted 
up, and upon all the oaks of Ba- 
shan, 

14 And upon all the high moun- 
tains, and upon all the hills that 
are lifted up, 

15 And upon every high tower, 
and upon every fenced wall, 

16 And ‘upon all the ships of 
Tarshish, and upon all ¢pleasart 
pictures. 

17. And the loftiness of man shall 
be bowed down, and the haughti- 
_-ness of men shall be made low: and 
the LorD alone shall be exalted in 
that day. 

18 And the idols he shall utterly 
abolish. 

19 And they shall go into “the 
holes of the rocks, and into the 
caves of the earth, /for fear of 
the LORD, and for the glory of his 
majesty, when he ariseth to &shake 
terribly the earth. 

20 In that day a man shall cast 
his idols of silver, and his idols of 
gold, which they made each one 
for himself to worship, to the moles 
and to the bats; 

21 To go into the clefts of the 
rocks, and into the tops of the rag- 
ged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and 
for the glory of his majesty, when 
he ariseth to shake terribly the 
earth. 


ISAIAH. : 
760. | 22 iCease ye from man, whose 


B.C. 


a Day (of Je- 
hovah). vs. 
10-22; Isa.4. 
1-6. (Isa.2. 
10-22; Rev. 
19.11-21.) 


| 0 Isa.14.8; 
37.24; Ezk. 
31.3; Zech. 
11.1,2. 


ci Ki.10.22. 
d Heb. pic- 


tures of 
desire. 


f 2 Thes.1.9, 

g Isa.30.32; 
Hag.2.6,21; 
Heb.12.26. 

hv.19, 


# Psa.146.3; 
Jer.17.5. 


j Jer.37.21; 
38.9, 

k See 2 Ki.24. 
14. 


1 Eccl.10.16. 


m Heb. binder 
up. 


n Mic.3.12. 
o Gen.13.13; 
18.20,21; 

19.5, a 
p Eccl.8.12. 


q Psa.11.6; 
Eccl.8.13. 


r Mic.6.2. 


715 


at 


{3 14 


breath is in his nostrils: for wherein 
is he to be accounted of? 


CHAPTER 3. 


FOR. behold, the Lord, the LorD 
of hosts, Jdoth take away from 
Jerusalem and from Judah the stay 
and the staff, the whole stay of 
bread, and the whole stay of water, 

2 ®The mighty man, and the man 
of war, the judge, and the prophet, 
and the prudent, and the ancient, 

3 The captain of fifty, and the 
honourable man, and the coun- 
sellor, and the cunning artificer, 
and the eloquent orator. 

4 And I will give ‘children to be 
their princes, and babes shall rule 
over them. 

5 And the people shall be op- 
pressed, every one by another, and 
every one by his neighbour: the 
child shall behave himself proudly 
against the ancient, and the base 
against the honourable. 

6 When a man shall take hold of 
his brother of the house of his 
father, saying, Thou hast clothing, 
be thou our ruier, and Jet this ruin 
be under thy hand: 

7 In that day shall he swear, say- 
ing, I will not be an healer; for in 
my house is neither bread nor cloth- 
ing: make me not a ruler of the 
}people. 

8 For *Jerusalem is ruined, and 
Judah is fallen: because their 
tongue and their doings are against 
the LorpD, to provoke the eyes of 
his glory. 

9 The shew of their countenance 
doth witness against them; and 
they declare their sin as "Sodom, 
they hide it not. Woe unto their 
soul! for they have rewarded evil 
unto themselves. 

10 Say ye to the righteous, ?that 
it shall be well with him: for they 
shall eat the fruit of their doings. 

11 Woe unto the wicked! 2it shall 
be ill with him: for the reward of 
his hands shall be given him. 

12 As for my people, children are 
their oppressors, and women rule 
over them. O my people, they 
which lead thee cause thee to err, 
and destroy the way of thy paths. 

13 The Lorp standeth up ’to 
plead, and standeth to judge the 
people. 

14 The Lorp will enter into judg- 
ment with the ancients of his peo- 
ple, and the princes thereof: for ve 


3 15] ISAIAH. [5 . 


us be called: by thy name, to take : 
away our reproach. : 
2 +In that day shall the 4branch of 


have eaten up ¢the vineyard; the 
spoil of the poor is in your houses. 
15 What mean ye that ye beat} 


my people to pieces, and grind the the Lorp be beautiful and glorious, 

Faces of the poor? saith the Lord and the fruit of the earth shal/ be 

Gop of hosts. excellent and comely for them that 
16: Moreover the LorD saith, Be-| are escaped of Israel. 

cause the daughters of Ziom are 3 And it shall come to pass, that 

haughty, and walk with stretched he that is left in Zion, and he that 

forth necks and wanton eyes, walk- remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be 

ing and mincing as they go, and called holy, even every one that is 

making a tinkling with their feet | written among the living im Jeru- 
17 Therefore the Lord will smite} salem: 

with a ‘scab the crown of the head/¢ Isa-5.7; 4 When the Lord shall have 


of the daughters of Zion, and the| Mt-21-33. washed away the filth of the daugh- 
Lorp will 4discover their secret|, Ts0-58.45 ae Pe wees shall nae sliced 
arts. ic.3.2,3. € blood of Jerusalem from the _ 
"18 In that day a Lord gue Paes ¢ Deut.28.27, |midst sia ed bd sree is judg: 
away the bravery of their tinkling) ment, and by the spirit of burning, 
Sevvaiienies about their feet, and|¢ Heb. make 5S And the Lorpb will create upon 


their cauls, and their round tires| "#*e¢ oo ae place v3 rsigise _— 
like the moon, e Isa.22.12; and upon r assemblies, a cloud 
19 The chains, and the bracelets,| Mic.1.16. and smoke by day, and the shining 
and the mufflers, f Jer.14.2; of a flaming fire by night: for upon 
20 aan reer i mite ia site Lam.1.4. ed oy ees ae as a cet 
ments. 0! he legs, and the head- ere s. e a tabernacle 
bands, and the tablets, and the|#%9™210. [for a shadow in the daytime from 
lato . a eal h Kingdom sai nee — se eee wor 
~h we VS.L- 
i The hacen fap! pies” San, v= om erm a 
parel, and the mantles, and the] Zech.12.8:) 
wimples, and the baler pas Dep (either CHAPTER 5. 
23 The glasses, an e fine linen, 5 ; 
and the hoods, and the vails. fovea: Ss patahie af ehoreh an vine are 
24 And it shall come to pass, tha#| 10-13. (Isa.2. : ar xs : 


instead of sweet smell there shall be eres Now will I sing to my wellbe- 
stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; F LN loved a song of my beloved 
and instead of well set hair ¢bald-|j Holy Spirit. touching his kvineyard. My well- 
ness; and instead of a stomacher a pees beloved hath a vineyard in a very 
girding of sackcloth; and burning} Mal.2.1s°) rete es: ~ ee 
i , t 3 
OS ie Gees ren fall by the|* Ferebles (0. out the stones thereof, and planted 
sword, and thy mighty in the war.| Jer134-11. |it with the choicest vine, and built 
26 ‘And her gates shall lament! (ua.9.7-15; |a tower in the midst of it, and also 


and, mourn; and she being desolate} Rehan made a winepress therein: and he 
shall sit upon the: ground. POR looked that it should bring forth 
grapes, and it brought forth wild 

grapes. 
CHAPTER 4, 3 And now, O inhabitants of Jeru- 
The vision of the future king-| salem, and men of Judah, judge, I 
dom. (vs. 1-6. Cf. Isa. 11. 1-16.) Pray yeu, betwixt me and my vine- 

yard. 

ND in that “day seven women] 4 What could have been. done 
shall take hold of one man, more to my vineyard, that I have 
saying, We will eat our own bread, not done in it? wherefore, when I 
and wear our own apparel: only Tet! looked that it should bring forth 


1A name of Christ, used in a fourfold way: (1) “The Branch of Jehovah” 
(Isa. 4. 2), that is, the “Immanuel” character of Christ (Isa. 7. 14) to be fully: mani- 
fested to restored and converted Israel after His return in divine glory (Mt. 25. 31); 
(2) the “Branch of David” (Isa. 11. 1; Jer. 23. 5; 33. 15), that is, the Messiah, “of 
the seed of David according to the flesh” (Rom. 1. 3), revealed in His earthly glory 
as King of kings, and Lord of lords; (3) Jehovah’s “Servant, the Branch” (Zech. 
3. 8), Messiah’s humiliation and obedience unto death according to Isa. 52. 13-5; 
93. 1-12; Phil. 2. 5-8; (4) the “man whose name is the Branch” (Zech. 6, 12, 13), 

716 


5 5} 
Srapes, brought it forth wild 


grapes: 

5 And now go to; I will tell you 
what I will do to my vineyard: I 
will take away the hedge thereof, 
and it shall be eaten up; and break 
down the wall thereof, and it shall 
be trodden down: 

6 And I will lay it waste: it shall 
not be pruned, nor digged; but there 
shall come up briers and thorns: I 
will also command the clouds that 
they rain no rain upon it. 

7 For the vineyard of the LorD 
of hosts 7s the house of Israel, and 
the men of Judah his pleasant plant: 
and he looked for judgment, but be- 
hold oppression; for righteousness, 
but behold a cry. 


The six woes upon Israel. 


8 Woe unto them that join house 
to house, that lay field to field, till 
there be no place, that they may 
be placed alone in the midst of the 
earth! 

9 In mine ears said the LorD of 
hosts, Of a truth many houses shail 
be desolate, even great and fair, 
without inhabitant. 

10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall 
yield one “bath, and the seed of an 
homer shall yield an ‘ephah. 

11 Woe unto them that rise up 
early in the morning, that they may 
follow strong drink; that continue 
until night, ¢7// wine inflame them! 

12 And the harp, and the viol, the 
tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in 
their feasts: but they regard not 
the work of the LORD, neither con- 
sider the operation of his hands. 

13 ¢Therefore my people are gone 
“into captivity, because they have 
no knowledge: and their honourable 
men are famished, and their multi- 
tude dried up with thirst. 

14 Therefore “hell hath enlarged 
herself, and opened her mouth with- 
out measure: and their glory, and 
their multitude, and their pomp, 
and he that rejoiceth, shall descend 
into it. 

15 And the mean man shail be 
brought down, and the mighty man 
shall be humbled, and the eyes of 
the lofty shall be humbled: _, 

16 But the Lorn of hosts shall be 
exalted in judgment, and God that 


ISATAH. 


a One bath = 
about 8 gals. 


b One homer = 
about 86 
gals. 


c One ephah = 
1 bu..3 pts. 


dé Hos.4.6. 


.¢ Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note. 


Ff Isa.J0.16. 


g Jer.17.15; 
2 Pet.3.3,4. 


h Prov.3.7; 
Rom.1.22; 
12.16. 


4 Prov.17.15; 
24.24. 

j Job 18.16; 
Hos.9.16; 
Amos 2.9. 

k Law (of Mo- 
ses). -vs.24, 
25; Jer-9.13- 
16. (Ex.19. 
1; Gai.3.1- 
29.) 

1 Isa.9.12,17, 
21; 10.4; 
Lev.26.14. 


m Isa.11.12. 
n Zech.10.8. 
o Joel 2.7. 
p Dan.5.6. 


[5 29 


is holy shall be sanctified in right- 
leousness. ‘ 

17 Then shall the lambs feed after 
‘their manner, and the waste places 
lof the ffat ones shall strangers eat. 
18 Woe unto them that draw ini- 
iquity with cords of vanity, and sin 
las it were with a cart rope: 

19 sThat say, Let him make 
speed, and hasten his work, that 
we may see it: and let the counsel 
lof the Holy One of Israel draw nigh 
and come, that we may know it! 

20 Woe unto them that call evil 
good, and good evil; that put dark- 
ness for light, and light for dark- 
ness; that put bitter for sweet, and 
sweet for bitter! 

21 Woe wnto them that are 
lwise in their own eyes, and pru- 
dent in their own sight! 

22 Woe unto them that are 
mighty to drink wine, and men of 
strength to mingle strong drink: 

23. Which “justify the wicked for 
reward, and take away the right- 
eousness of the righteous from him! 

24 Therefore as the fire devoureth 
the stubble, and the flame consum- 
eth the chaff, so their Jroot shall be 
as rottenness, and their blossom 
shall go up as dust: because they 
have cast away the “law of the 
Lorp of hosts, and despised the 
word of the Holy One of Israel. 

25 Therefore is the anger of the 
Lorp kindled against his people, 
and he,hath stretched forth his 
hand against them, and hath smit- 
ten them: and the hills did tremble, 
and their carcases were torn in the 
midst of the streets. /For all this 
his anger is not turned away, but 
his hand is stretched out still. ~ 

26 And “he will lift up an ensign 
to the nations from far, and will 
hiss unto them “from the end of the 
earth: and, behold, °they shall come 
with speed swiftly: 

27 None shall be weary nor stum- 
ble among them; none shall slum- 
ber nor sleep; neither ?shall the 
girdle of their loins be loosed, nor 
the latchet of their shoes be broken: 

28 Whose arrows are sharp, and 
all their bows bent, their horses’ 
hoofs shall be counted like flint, and 
their wheels like a whirlwind: 
| 99 Their roaring shail be like a 


|= 


that is, His character as Son of man, the “last Adam,” the “second Man” (1 Cor. 


15. 45-47), reigning, 
lost by the 


as Priest-King, 
first Adam. Matthew is the Gosp 


over the earth in the dominion given to and 
el of the “Branch of David’’; Mark 


of “‘Jehovah’s Servant, the Branch”; ‘Luke of “‘the man whose name is the Branch’’; 


John of “the Branch of Jehovah.” 


717 


5 30] ISAIAH, [7 


lion, they shall roar like young|_3.c. 758.__|Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, - 
lions: yea, they shall roar, and lay and who will go for us? Then said 
hold of the prey, and shall carry it I, Here am I; send me. 
away safe, and none shall deliver it. "ah? SOPmserO 
30 And’ in that day they shall rots CBT Sane 
roar against them like the roaring ; } 
of the sea: and if one 4look unto 9 And he said, Go, and &tell this 
the land, behold darkness and sor- people, Hear ye indeed, but under- 
row, and the light is darkened in stand not; and see ye indeed, but 
he h thereof. perceive not. ' 
ou 10 Make the heart of this people 
CHAPTER 6. fat, and make their ears heavy, and 
aah f x shut their eyes; lest they see with 
Tsaiah’s transfor re yee ; . their eyes, and hear with their ears, 
(Cf. Josh. 5. 13, 145 Job 42. a recy and understand with their heart, 
Ezk. 1. 28: Dan. 10. 5-11; Rev. 1. Lam.3.2; and convert, and be healed. 
12-19.) Ezk.32.7,8. 11 Then said I, Lord, how long? 
Do siedcn Somralse the Lond te, Lee ate ene aha Cite: 
a ; = , 
ete ainrores nee tet lifted C 5 ees the houses without man, and the 
Si) Above ihstanl chet Free La at ee 
ve it sto e lseraphims: 
each one had six wings; with twain|?Fzk1.11. — |men far away, and there be a great 
he covered his face, and éwith| . px 40.34: forsaking in the midst of the land. 
twain he covered his feet, and with| 1 Ki.8.10. 13 But yet in it shal] be a tenth, 
twain he did Ay. and it shall 3return, and shall be 


5 irati 3 . 
3 And one cried unto another, and|/ Ea ane eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, 


said, Holy, holy, holy, is the LorD] 8.1. Ex... |whose substance is in them, when 
of hosts: the whole earth is full of 13, Rev-22. they cast their leaves: so the holy 
his glory. ) seed shall be the substance thereof. 


4 And the posts of the door moved|¢ vs.9,10; 
at the voice of him that cried, and ees CHAPTER 7. 
‘the house was filled with smoke. L810; Under the reign of Ahaz (Isa. 7. 
The effect of the vision. rons 28.26, 1-14, 32. Cf. 2 Chr. 28. 1-27): 
5 Then said I, Woe is me! for I| 27.2 Cord. The evil confederacy of Rezin 


14,15. and Pekah. 
am undone; because I am a man of . . 
unclean lips, and I dwell in the (B.C. 742. AD it came to pass in the days 
midst of a people of unclean lips: of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the 


ffor mine eyes have seen the King, son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that 
the Lorp of hosts. nea gis: Ang ai Swe. ong Relish 
: the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, 
The cleansing fire. went up toward Jerusalem to war 
6 Then flew one of the seraphims against it, but could not prevail 
unto me, having a live coal in his against it. 
hand, which he had taken with the 2 And it was told the house of 
tongs from off the altar: David, saying, Syria is confederate 
7 And he laid 7t upon my mouth, with 4Ephraim And his heart was 
and said, Lo, this hath touched thy moved, and the heart of his people, 
lips; and thine iniquity is taken as the trees of the wood are moved 
away, and-thy sin purged. with the wind. 
8 Also I heard the voice of the 3 Then said the Lorb unto Isaiah, 


1 Heb. Burners. The word occurs only here. Cf. Ezk. 1.5, note. The Ser- 
aphim are, in many respects, in contrast with the Cherubim, though both are 
expressive of the divine holiness, which demands that the sinner shall have access 
to the divine presence only through a sacrifice which teally vindicates the right- 
eousness of God (Rom. 3. 24-26, notes), and that the saint shall be cleansed before 
serving. Gen. 3. 22-24 illustrates the first; Isa. 6. 1-8 the second. The Cherubim 
may be said to have to do with the altar, the Seraphim with the laver. See Psa, 51. De 
note; John 13. 10, note. The Seraphim appear to be actual angelic beings. 

2 See “Remnant,” Rom. 11. 5, note. 

3 See Isa. 8. 18, note. 

4 In the prophetic books “Ephraim” and “Israel’’ are the collective names of the 
ten tribes who, under Jeroboam, established the northern kingdom, subsequently 


718 


Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, 
and “*Shear-jashub thy son, at the 
end of the conduit of the upper pool 
in the highway of the fuller’s field; 

4 And say unto him, Take heed, 
and be quiet; fear not, neither be 
fainthearted for the two tails of 
these smoking firebrands, for the 
fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, 
and of the son of Remaliah. 

5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and 
the son of Remaliah, have taken 
evil counsel against thee, saying, 

6 Let us go up against Judah, and 
vex it, and let us make a breach 
therein for us, and set a king in the 
midst of it, even the son of Tabeal: 

7 Thus saith the Lord Gop, It 
shall not stand, neither shall it 
come to pass. 

8 For the head of Syria is Damas- 
cus, and the head of Damascus 1s 
Rezin; and within threescore and 
five years shall Ephraim be broken, 
that it be not a people. 

9 And the head of Ephraim is Sa- 
maria, and the head of Samaria 1s 
Remaliah’s son. 
lieve, surely ye shall not be estab- 
lished. 


The great sign: Immanuel, the 
virgin’s son. 


10 Moreover the LorD spake 
again unto Ahaz, saying, 

-- 11 Ask thee a sign of the LorpD; 
thy God; ask it either in the depth, 
or in the height above. 

12 But Ahaz said, I will not ask, 
neither will I “tempt the Lorp. 

13 And he said, Hear 1ye now, O 
house of David; Js it a small thing 
for you to weary men, but will ye 
_-weary my God also? , 

14 Therefore the Lord himself 
shall give you a sign; Behold, a 
virgin shall ‘conceive, and bear a 
éson, and shall ¢call his name /Im- 
manuel. 

15 2Butter and honey shall he eat, 
that he may know to refuse the evil, 
and choose the good. 

16 For before the child shall know 


If ye will not be-! g 


ISAIAH. 


B.C. 742. 


a Meaning, a 
remnant 
shall retuen. 
Cf. Isa.8.3. 


b Tempta- 
tion. Mal.3. 
15.=(Gen.3, 
1; Jas.1.2.) 


c Mt.1.23. 


d Christ (First 
Advent), 
Isa.9.6. 
(Gen.3.15; 
Acts 1.9.) 


e Kingdom 
(O.T.). Isa.9. 


fie. God with 
us. 


g 2 Chr.28.19. 
h 1 Ki.12.16, 


i Isa.2,19; 
Jer.16.16. 


j 2 Ki.16.7,8; 
2 Chr.28.20, 
21; see Ezk. 
5.1, 


[7 23 


to refuse the evil, and choose the 
good, the land that thou abhorrest 
shall be forsaken of both her kings. 


Prediction of an impending in-, 
caaicn of Judah. (Cf. 2 Chr.28. 
1-20. 


17 &The Lorpb shall bring upon 
thee, and upon thy people, and 
upon thy father’s house, days that 
have not come, from the day that 
hEphraim departed from Judah; 
even the king of Assyria. 

18 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that the LorD shall hiss 
for the fly that is in the uttermost 
part of the rivers of Egypt, and for 
the bee that 1s in the land of As- 
syTia. 

19 And they shall come, and shall 
rest all of them in the desolate val- 
leys, and in the ‘holes of the rocks, 
and upon all thorns, and upon all 
bushes. 

20 In the same day shall! the Lord 
shave with a Jrazor that is hired, 


- |namely, by them beyond the river, 


by the king of Assyria, the head, 
and the hair of the feet: and it shall 
also consume the beard. 

21 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that a man shall nourish 
a young cow, and two sheep; 

22 And it shall come to pass, for 
the abundance of milk that they 
shali give he shall eat butter: for 
butter and honey shall every one 
eat that is left in the land. 

23 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that every place shall be, 
where there were a thousand vines 
at a thousand silverlings, it shall 
leven be for briers and thorns. 
| 24 With arrows and with bows 
shall men come thither; because 
all the land shall become briers and 
thorns. 

25 And on all hills that shall be 
digged with the mattock, there 
shall not come thither the fear of 
briers and thorns: but it shall be 
for the sending forth of oxen, and 
for the treading of lesser cattle. 


Peete air ge ecer peer peeme tne tee. eres ee ee 
called Samaria (1 Ki. 16. 24), and were (B.C. 722) sent into an exile which still con- 


tinues (2 Ki. 17. 1-6). 


“the dispersed of Judah” (Isa. 11. 12). 


They are distinguished as ‘“‘the outcasts of Israei” from 
“Hidden” in the world (Mt. 13. 44) they, 


with Judah, are yet to be restored to Palestine and made one nation again (Jer, 23. 


5-8; Ezk. 37. 11-24). 


1 The prophecy is not addressed to the faithless Ahaz, but to the whole “house 


of David.” 


no “sign’’ to Ahaz, is, therefore, puerile. 


The objection that such a far-off event as the birth of Christ could be 
It was a continuing prophecy addressed 


to the Davidic family, and accounts at once for the instant assent of Mary (Lk. 1. 38). 
2 Indicating the plainness and simplicity of the life in which the young Immanuel 


should be brought up. 


719 


8 1] ISAIAH. [91 


say, A confederacy; /neither fear — 
ye their fear, nor be afraid. : 
13 *Sanctify the LorpD of hosts — 
himself; and Jet him be your fear, 
and Jet him be your dread. ; 
14 And he shall be for a sanctu- 
ary; but for a Jstone of stumbling 
and for a rock of offence to both the 
2 And I took unto me faithful wit- houses of Israel, for a gin and for a 
nesses to record, Uriah the priest, snare to the inhabitants of Jerusa- 
and Zechariah the son of Jebere-|o snspiration. |lem, 
15 And many among them shall 


chiah. Isa.30.8. 
stumble, and fall, and be broken, 


3 And I went unto the prophetess;| (E*415: 
; Rev.27-1%:); land be snared, and be taken: 
16 Bind up the testimony, seal 


and she conceived, and bare a son. 
Then said the LorD to me, Cail his} ¢ ie. haste ye, esti 
the law among my disciples. 
17 And I will wait upon the Lorp, 


name 4Maher-shalal-hash-baz. BGs aKa 
that hideth his face from the house 


4 For before the child shall have en ners 
of Jacob, and I will look for *him. 
18 Behold, I and the children 


knowledge to cry, My father, and ees 
my mother, fhe riches of Damascus} © jo,n6.7. 
J 
whom the Lorn hath given me ‘are 
for 2signs and for wonders in Israel 


q 


CHAPTER 8. 


Prediction of the Assyrian 
invasion. 


1 ese re the LorD said unto 

me, Take thee a great roll, and 
4write in it with a man’s pen con- 
cerning “Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 


and the spoil of Samaria shall be r 
taken away before the king of As-| ? 1¢.7-1,2.6. 


syTla. e Isa.30.28. < 

5 The Lorp spake also unto me a> pe joi LorpD A hosts, which 
again, saying, Sexe welleth in mount Zion. 

6 Forasmuch as this people refu- Cai 19 And when they shall say unto 
seth the waters of Shiloah that go \4 you, Seek unto them that have 
softly, and rejoice in ¢Rezin and)‘ 5274)... [familiar spirits, and unto wizards 
Remaliah’s son; Rom.8.31. | |that peep, and that mutter: should 

7 Nowtherefore, behold, the Lord Mee not a people seek unto their God? 
peipeeth up upon on the waters Saey ed es ae pie to seal rere 
fe) e river, strong and many, even o the law and to the testi- 
the king of Assyria, and all his) ‘Num.20.12. |mony: if they speak not according 
glory: and he shall come up over! ; cy,;,4(,, _|to this word, it is because there is 
all his channels, and go over all)* Sone). Isa, |no light in them. 


his banks: 28.16. (Ex. | 21 And they shall pass through it, 
8 And he shall pass through Ju-| }/,°°!P*'- |hardly bestead and hungry: and it 
dah; he shall overflow and go over, shall come to pass, that when they 
‘he shall reach even to the neck;|/ Cited in, shall be hungry, they shall fret 
and the stretching out of his wings tors ‘Septaa. themselves, and curse their king 
shall fill the breadth of thy land, O} gint Version. |and their God, and look upward. 
rare Soe es 22 And they shall look unto the 
ssociate yourselves, O ye peo-| Heb.2 13 earth; and behold trouble and dark- 


ple, and ye shall be broken in pieces;| from Septua- |ness, dimness of anguish; and they 
and give ear, all ye of far countries:| 8™t Version. |shail be driven to darkness, 
ort yourselves, and oe shen be 
roken in pieces; gird yourselves, 
Bed a shall be praben in pe CHAPTER 9. 7 
ake counsel together, and it ivi. i, % 
Shell come’ to ncusht Mocs bthel A divine child Israel’s only hope. 
word, and it shall not stand: ¢for NEVERTHELESS the dimness 
God is with us. shail not be such as was in her 
11 For the Lorp spake thus to vexation, when at the first he 
me with a strong hand, and in- lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun 
structed me that I should not walk and the land of Naphtali, and after- 
in the way of this people, saying, ward did more grievously afflict 
12 Say ye not, A ‘confederacy, to! her by the way of the sea, beyond 
all them to whom this people shall] Jordan, in Galilee of the nations. 


1 The reference is to the attempt to terrify Judah by the confederacy between 
Syria and Samaria (Isa. 7. 1, 2). 

* The primary application here is to the two sons of Isaiah, Maher-shalal-hash- 
baz = “haste ye, haste ye to the spoil,” a “sign” of the coming judgment of the 
captivity of Judah; Shear-jashub = ‘“‘a remnant shall return,” a “sign” of the return 
of a remnant of Judah at the end of the seventy years (Jer. 25. 11, 13; Dan. 9, 2), 
The larger and final reference is to our Lord (Heb. 2. 13, 14), 


720 


ISATAH. 


“The people that walked in| 
Searncrs have seen a great light:| 
they that dwell in the land of the| 
shadow of death, upon them hath! 
the light shined. 

3 Thou hast multiplied the -na- 


|a vs.1,2; 


tion, and ‘not increased the joy:| Mt.4.15,16. 
they joy before thee according to eee 
the joy in harvest, and as men re-|° Omit not. 
joice when they divide the spoil. plains that 
4 For thou hast broken the yoke] despite the 
of his ‘burden, and the staff of his] ‘ckedness 
shoulder, the rod of his oppressor,} erm kingdom 
as in the day of Midian. her afflic- 
5 For every battle of the warrior| jit tc. 
is with confused noise, and gar-| prosperity 
ments rolled in blood; but this shall| great. 
be with burning and fuel of fire. | -p.97 
6 For unto us a “child is @born,} John 3.16; 
unto us a “son is given: and the| 1 John 49. 


government shall be upon _ his 3 - 
fshoulder: and his name shall be ee ey 
called Wonderful, Counsellor, The} 28-16. (Gen. 
mighty God, The everlasting Fa-| rick isa 
ther, The Prince of Peace. : 

7 Of the increase of his govern-|e¢ Kingdom 
ment and peacé there shall be no Oe pe 

end, upon the ‘throne lof David,} 1sai1/1-12 
and upon his kingdom, to order it, ve eee 


and to establish it with judgment 
and with justice from henceforth] ¢ tsrae? (pro- 


even for ever. The zeal of the LORD pheer. 
of hosts will perform this. RED $f 
The vision of the stretched-out | aE 
hand: the unavailing chas- 5 
tisement. g pega 
8 The Lord sent a word into) vent). 
hJacob, and it hath lighted upon Goatees 
Israel. | Acts 1.9-11.) 
9 And all the people shall know, | 
even Ephraim and the inhabitant}! pee 
of Samaria, that say in the pride : 
and stoutness of heart, i Isa.10.17; 


10 The bricks are fallen down, but| Rev-18-8. 
we will build with hewn stones:| ; Heb. swal- 
the sycomores are cut down, but we] Jowed up. 
will change them into cedars. k Is0.10.17 

11 Therefore the LORD shall set up] © Mai.4.1.’ 
the adversaries of Rezin against 
him, and join his enemies together;| / Mic-7.2,6. 

12 The Syrians before, and the)», Hos.9.7; 
Philistines behind; and they shall] Lk.19.44. 
devour Israel with open mouth. 
2For all this his anger is not turned 
away, but his hand zs stretched out 
still. 


[10 3 


13 For the people turneth not 
unto him that smiteth them, neither 
do they seek the LorRD of hosts. 

14 Therefore the Lorp will cut 
off from Israel head and tail, branch 
and rush, tin one day. 

15 The ancient and honourable, 
he is the head; and the prophet 
that teacheth lies, he zs the tail. 

16 For the leaders of this people 
cause them to err;.and they that 
are led of them are Jdestroyed. 

17_ Therefore the Lord shall have 
ino joy in their young men, neither 
shall have mercy on their fatherless 
rand widows: for every one is an 
hypocrite and an evildoer, and 
levery mouth speaketh folly. For 
‘all this his anger is not turned 
perce but his hand is stretched out 
still. 

18 For wickedness “burneth as 
the fire: it shall devour the briers 
and‘thorns, and shall kindle in the 
thickets of the forest, and they 
shall mount up Jike the lifting up-of 
smoke. 

19 Through the wrath of the 
LorD of hosts is the land darkened, 
and the people shall be as the fuel 
of ‘the fire: ‘no man shall spare ‘his 
brother. 

20 And he shall snatch on the' 
right hand, and be hungry; and he 
shall eat on the left hand, and they 
‘shall not be satisfied: they shall 
jeat every man the flesh of his own 
‘arm: 

21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Eph- 
jraim, Manasseh: and they together 
|\shajl be against Judah. For all 
|this his anger is not turned away, 
\but his hand zs stretched out still. 


i 


CHAPTER 10. 


‘OE unto them that-decree un- 
righteous decrees, and that 
write grievousness which they have 
prescribed ; 
j 2 To turn aside the needy ftom 
judgment, and to take away the 
jright from the poor of my people, 
Ithat widows may be their prey, 
and that they may rob the father- 


ess! t 
3 And what will ye doin ™the day 


1 The “throne of David” is a phrase as definite, historically, as “throne of the 


Cesars,’”-and as little admits of “spiritualizing” (Lk. 1. 82, 33). 


See “Kingdom 


(O.T.)," Zech.12, 8; “Davidic Covenant,» 2 Sam. 7. 8-17,.note; Acts. 15. 


24-16. 
_ 2See vs. 17, 21, and Isa. 5.25; 10. 4. 
outstretched still because His chastisement is 
part of Israel. +34 

2 


The context explains. Jehovah’s hand is 


followed by no amendment on the 


10 4] 


of visitation, and in the desolation 
‘which shall come from far? to 
whom will ye flee for help? and 
where will ye leave your glory? 

4 Without me they shall bow 
down under the prisoners, and they 
shall fall under the slain. ¢For all 
this his anger is not turned away, 
but his hand is stretched out still. 


Predicted judgment on Assyria, 
God’s rod on Samaria. 


5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine 


anger, and the staff in their hand is i 


mine indignation. ] 
6 I willsend him against an hypo- 


critical nation, and against the peo-|? Heb. Asshur. 
ple of my wrath will I ‘give him a} ¢ Jer.34.22 


charge, to take the spoil, and to 


take the prey, and to tread them|? Gen-50.20, 


down like the mire of the streets. 


7 4Howbeit he meaneth not so,|e Amos 6.2 


neither doth his heart:think so; 


one gathereth eggs that are left, 
have I gathered all the earth; and 
there was none that moved the © 
wing, or opened the mouth, or — 
peeped. " ; 

15 Shall ‘the axe boast itself 
against him that heweth therewith? 
or shall the saw magnify itself 
against him that shaketh it? as if 
the rod should shake itself against 
them that lift it up, or as if the staff 
should lift up itself, as if it were 
no wood, 

16 Therefore shall the Lord, the 
Lord of hosts, send among -his fat 
ones leanness; and under his glory 
he shall kindle a burning like the 
burning of a fire. 

17 And the light of Israel shail 
be for a fire, and his Holy One for 
a flame: and it shall burn and de- 
vour his thorns and his briers in 
one day; 


but it is in his heart to destroy and io aes 18 And shall consume the glory 


cut off nations not a few. |g Jer.50.18. of his forest, and of his fruitful 
8 For he saith, Are not my PP se field, both soul and body: and they 
princes altogether kings? le 28.42 shall be as when a standardbearer 


fainteth. 

19 And the rest of the trees of his 
forest shall be few, that a child may 
write them. 


9 Is not *Calno as Carchemish? Dene. 
fs not Hamath as Arpad? is not! . 
Samaria as Damascus? PUCMSUZB: 

10 As my hand hath found the} 7 Remnant. 


i i 20-22; e's . 
kingdoms of the idols, and whose} YS THS-V ition oTithe Jew ieern 


graven images did excel them of] (a1: ° . . . 
Jerusalem and of Samaria; Romil's.) nant in the great tribulation. 
11 Shall I not, as I have done 20 And it shall come to pass in 


unto Samaria and her idols, so do|* #32733) og. 


r 2that day, that the /remnant of Is- 
to Jerusalem and her idols? 


12 Wherefore it shall come to 
pass, that !when the Lord hath per- 
formed his whole work fupon mount 
Zion and on Jerusalem, &I will pun- 
ish the fruit of the stout heart of 
the king of Assyria, and the glory 
of his high looks. 

13 AFor he saith, By the strength 
of my hand I have done it, and by 
my wisdom; for I am prudent: 
and I have removed the bounds of 
the people, and have robbed their 
treasures, and I have put down 
the inhabitants like a valiant man: 

14 And my hand hath found as a 
nest the riches of the people: and as 


rael, and such as are escaped of the 
house of Jacob, shall no more again 
stay upon him that smote them; 
but shall stay upon the Lorb, the 
Holy One of Israel, in truth. 

21 The remnant shall return, 
even the remnant of Jacob, unto 
the mighty God. 

22 For ‘though thy people Israel 
be as the sand of the sea, yet a rem- 
nant of them shall return: the con: 
sumption decreed shall overflow 
with righteousness. 

23 For the Lord Gop of hosts 
shall make a consumption, even de- 
peomined, in the midst of all the 

and. 


1A permanent method in the divine government of the earth. Israel is always 
the centre of the divine counsels earthward (Deut. 32. 8): The Gentile nations 
are permitted to afflict Israel in chastisement for her national sins, but invariably 
and inevitably retribution falls upon them. (See Gen. 15. 13, 14; Deut. 30. 5-7; 
Isa. 14. 1, 2; Joel 3. 1-8; Mic. 5. 7-9; Mt. 25. 31-40.) 

2“That day’: often the equivalent of “the day of the Lorp” (Isa. 2. 10-22; 
Rev. 19. 11-21). The prophecy here passes from the general to the particular, from 
historic and fulfilled judgments upon Assyria to the final destruction of ali Gentile 
world-power at the return of the Lord in glory. (See “‘Armageddon,” Rev. 16. 14; 
19. 21; “Times of the Gentiles,’ Luke 21. 24; Rev. 16. 19; ‘““The great tribulation,’” 
Psa, 2.5; Rev. 7. 14, and Isa. 13. 19, note.) 


722 


24 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop of hosts, O iny people that 
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of 
the Assyrian: he shall smite thee 
with a rod, and shall lift up his staff 
against thee, after the manner of 
Egypt. 

25 For yet a very little while, and 
the indignation shall cease, and 
mine anger in their destruction. 

26 And the Lorp of hosts shall 
stir up a scourge for him according 
to the slaughter of Midian at the 
rock of Oreb: and as his rod was 
upon the sea, so shall he lift it up 
after the manner of Egypt. 

27 And it shall come to pass in 
that ¢day, that his burden shall be 
taken away from off thy shoulder, 
and his yoke from off thy neck, and 
the yoke shall be destroyed because 
of the anointing. 


The approach of the Gentile 
hosts to the battle of Arma- 
Seddon (Rev. 16. 14; 19. 11). 


28 He is come to Aiath, he is 
passed to Migron; at Michmash he 
hath laid up his carriages: 

29 They are gone over the pas- 
sage: they have taken up their lodg- 
ing at Geba; Ramah is afraid; 
Gibeah of Saul is fled. 

30 Lift up thy voice, O daughter 
of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto 

_ Laish, O poor Anathoth. 

31 Madmenah is removed; the in- 
habitants of Gebim gather them- 
selves to flee. ; 

32 As yet shall he remain at Nob 
that day: he shall shake his hand 
against the mount of the daughter; 
_of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. 

33 Behold, the Lord, the LorD of 
hosts, shall lop the bough with ter- 
ror: and the high ones of stature 


ISAIAH. 


B.C. 713. 


a Armaged- 
don (battle 
of). vs.27-34 
Isa.24.21-23, 
(Rev.16.14; 
19.21.) 


b Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs.1- 
12; Isa.24.23 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


¢ Israel (pro- 
phecies). 
vs.1-13; 
Isa.60.1212. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


d Isa.4.2, 
note. 


e Holy 
Spirit. 
Isa.32.15. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15,) 


f Psa.19.9, 
note, 


g Psa.72.2,4; 
Rev.19.11. 


h Righteous- 
ness (gar- 
ment). Isa. 


$18a.65,255 
Ezk.34.25; 
Hos.2.18. 


[117 


34 And he shall cut down the 
thickets of the forest with iron, and 
Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one. 


CHAPTER 11. 


1The Davidic kingdom set up: 
(1) The King’s ancestry. (Cf. 
Mt. 1. 1.) 


: ANP there shall 2come forth a 

brod out of the stem of “Jesse, 
and a 4Branch shall grow out of his 
roots: 


.|(2) The source of the King’s 
power: the sevenfold Spirit. 
(Cf. Rev. 1. 4.) 


2 And the éspirit of the Lorp 
shall rest? upon him, the spirit of 
wisdom and understanding, the 
spirit of counsel and might, the 
spirit of knowledge and of the /fear 
of the LoRD; 

(3) The character of his reign. 

3 And shall make him of quick 
understanding in the ‘fear of the 
Lorp: and he shall not judge after 
the sight of his eyes, neither reprove 
after the hearing of his ears: 

4 But with righteousness shall he 
judge.the poor, and reprove with 
equity for the meek of the earth: 
and he shall smite the earth with 
the rod of his mouth, and with the 
breath of his lips shall he slay the 


, |wicked. 


5 And righteousness shall be the 
hgirdle of his loins, and faithfulness 
the girdle of his reins. 

(4) The quality of the kingdom, 

6 The ‘wolf also shall dwell with 
the lamb, and the leopard shall lie 
down with the kid; and the calf 
and the young lion and the fatling - 
together; and a little child shall lead 
them. 


shall be hewn down, and the 7 And the cow and the bear shall 
haughty shall be humbled. | feed; their young ones shall lie 


1 The order of events in Isa. 10., 11.,is noteworthy. 


Isa. 10. gives the distress of 


the Remnant in Palestine in the great tribulation (Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 7. 14), and_the 
approach and destruction of the Gentile hosts under the Beast (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 
19. 20). Isa. 11. immediately follows with its glorious picture of the kingdom-age. 


Precisely the same order is found in Rev. 19., 20. 
26-28; Zech. 12. 8; N.T., Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15. 28. 


note.) 
comparison o 
prophecies. ) fai 
earth, His crucifixion was soon 


(See “Kingdom,” O.T., Gen. f 
Also Mt. 3. 2, note; 6. 33, 


That nothing of this occurred at the first coming of Christ is evident from a 
f the history of the times of Christ with this and all the other parallel 
So far from regathering dispersed Israel and establishing peace in the 
followed (A.D. 70) by the destruction of Jerusalem, 


and the utter scattering of the Palestinian Jews amongst the nations, ee 
2 This chapter is a prophetic picture of the glory of the future kingdom. This is 


the kingdom announced by John Baptist as “‘at hand.” 
will be set up when David’s Son returns in glory (Lk. 1. 31, 32; Acts 15. 15, 16 


723 


It was then rejected, but 


yf 


11 8] : ISAIAH. [13 4 
16 And there shall be an highway © 
or the remnant of his people, which 
shall be left, from Assyria; like as 


came up out of the land of Egypt. 


down: together: and: the lion shall 
eat straw hke the ox. 

8 And the sucking child shall play’ 
on the hole of the asp, and the 
weaned child shall put his hand on 
the cockatrice’ den. 


(5) The extent of the kingdom. 


9 They shall not hurt nor destroy 
in all my holy mountain: ¢for the 


CHAPTER 12. 
(7) The worship of the kingdom. 


earth shall be full of the knowledge AND e that eaxithan SO Ss 
of the Lorp, as the waters cover|, cr Hab. 2. ORD, I Wl mba : 
the sea. 14, note. |though thou wast angry with me, 
: thine: anger is turned away, and 
(6) How the kingdom will be |» Rom.15.12. |thow comfortedst me. f 

set up. t Dest (os a Pehales ee is iby Daeg ur I 
“10 And in that day there shall be} Jefovah). | will “trust, and not be afraid: for the 
ba root of Jesse, which shall stand| Ya't3a46, |LORD JEHOVAH is my strength 
for ‘an ensign of the people; to it| (tsa.2.10-22; |and my song; he also is become my 
shall the Gentiles seek: and his} Rev-19.11-" |salvation. 


= 20.) 3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw 
rest shall be: glorious. | d ar 

1% And it shall come to pass in|d Christ ‘water out of the wells of salvation. 
that day, that the Lord shall set his| (Second 4 And in that day shall ye say, 
hand again the second. time to 4re- ocvee es Praise the Lorp, call upon his — 
cover the ‘remnant of his people,| Jer.23.5,6. name, declare his doings among 


which shall be left, from: Assyria,| (Deut.30.3; | |the people, make mention that his 
and from Egypt, and from Pathros,) “Ss *°4!) |name is exalted. ‘ 

and from Cush, and from Elam, and|¢ Remnant. |, 5 Sing unto the Lorp; for he 
from Shinar, and from Hamath,| vs11-13,16; |hath done excellent things: this is 


and from the /islands: of the sea. 192,24.33-15._|known in all the earth. . j 
12 And he shall set up an ensign| Ronirs). | © Cry out and shout, thou in- 
for the nations, and shall assemble habitant of Zion: for great is the 


the outeasts of Israel, and gather|/'* ©°#ss- |Holy One of Israel in the midst of 

together ak coieee = — gZech.10.11, | thee. 

from. the four corners of the earth. 
13. The envy also of Ephraim shail) " Ps3.2-12, CHAPTER 13. 

depart, and the adversaries of Ju-|_ The burden of Babylon: a prophA- 

oa fast ao yar oe sae 109 37 oh ecy to be fulfilled in the day of 


ye chrai yee the Nick (Isa. 2. 10-22; By rhs 

not vex Ephraim. J Isa.54.1; | 121-21), Chapters 13., 14.: (1) The 
14 But they shall fly upom the) Zeph3.14. | Gongiy ; a 

shoulders. of the Philistines toward| Seat ORE ote 

the west; they shall spoil them of, were Iburden of 2Babylon, which 

the east together: they shall lay Isaiah the son of Amoz did see. 


their hand upon Edom: and Moab:;| 
and the children of Ammon shall 
obey them. 

15 And theLorp 8shalk utterly de- 
stroy the tongue of theEgyptian sea; 
and with his mighty wind shall he 
shake his hand over the river, and 
shall smite it in the seven. streams, 
and make men go over dryshod. 


2 Lift ye up a banner upon the 
high mountain, exalt the voice unto 
them, shake the hand, that they 
may go into the gates of the nobles. 

I have commanded my sancti- 
fied ones, I have also called my 
mighty ones for mine anger, even 
ithem that rejoice in my highness, 

4 The noise of a multitude in the 


LA “burden,” Heb. massa = a heavy, weighty thing, 
concerning Babylon, Assyria, Jerusalem, ete. 
God is in it, and grievous for the prophet to declare. 

_ 2? The city, Babylon, is not in view here, as the immediate context shows. It is 
important to note the significance of the name when used symbolically. “Babylon?” 


* 


into which the whole social order of the world has fallen under Gentile 
Lk. 21. 24; Rev. 16. 14.) Isa. 13. 4 


entile powers. The divine order 
724 


13 5] ISAIAH. : [13 19 


(2) The Jewish remnant (Isa. 
1. 9; Rom. 11. 5) in the great 
tribulation (Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 7. 
14). (Cf. Zech. 14. 1, 2.) 

ss They come from a far country, ave | ae (apache gt a pice 

; even a man 
rom the end of heaven, even the than the golden wedge of Ophir. 


LorRD, and th is in- : 

Giitation 6 eae) ae PS a Day (of 13 ¢Therefore I will shake the 

Sad as heavens, ey ae earth shall re- 

6 Howl ye; for the “day of the| Isa-24.21-  /move out of her place, in the wrath 
att nae 23. (Isa.2. |of the LorD of hosts, and in the 

Lorp is at hand; it shall come as! 9.29: Rev. day of his fierce anger. 


a destruction from the Almighty. | 19.11-21.) 1a Abd it shall be 2o theca 


7 Therefore shall all hands be 
ag 7|5 Mal.4.1. toe, and as a sheep that no man 
faint, and every man’s heart shall taketh up: ‘they shall every man 


mountains, ike as of a great peo- 
ple; a tumultuous noise of the king- 
doms of nations gathered together: 
the LorD of hosts mustereth the 
host of the battle. 


melt: ¢ Isa.24.21- 5 
8 And they shall be afraid: pangs Bee ? aires eee people, aod flee 
"7; Joe i is own land. 

and sorrows shall take hold of| 3°33? 3.15. 15° Every, one that is found ehant 


them; they shall be in pain as aj Mt.24.29; ; 
woman that travaileth: they shall) Saree 4 thrust through; and every one 
be amazed one at another; their got 23. Bee Bey unto them shall fall 
faces shall he as flames. O Hog 208 16 Their Jchildren also shall be 

9 Behold, othe day of the Lorp : 
cometh, cruel both with wrath and] © Je dashed to pieces before their eyes; 
Pccelaneen tondesithe danddeso 51.9. their houses shall be spoiled, and 
late: and he Bhel aewos the sin-| /Psa.137.9; ae wives ravished. 
ners thereof out of it. Zeki. 4 F 

iii Fou. the stars of heaven andl sone a: (3) The destruction of 


the constellations thereof shall not|£ aaa a: ‘Babylon.” 

ae veer Bish ‘the ae eat be) pans.28'31. se éBehold, I will stir up the 
arkened in his going forth, and edes against them, which shall 

the yenen shall not cause her light Mae tiie ye nee Saag sheen se as for gold, 

to shine. : they s! not ight in it. 

11 And I will punish the world for 18 Their bows also shall dash the 
their evil, on Let pa ya their ets men to Taste ane they shall 
iniquity; an will cause the arro- have no pity on the fruit of the 
gancy of the proud to cease, and womb; their eye shall not spare 
will lay low the haughtiness of the children. 
terrible. 19 1And ‘Babylon, the glory of 


4s given in Isa. 11. Israel in her own land, the centre of the divine government of 
the world and channel of the divine blessing; and the Gentiles blessed in associa- 
tion with Israel. Anything else is, politically, mere “Babel.” (2) In Rev. 14. 8-11; 
“7§. 19 the Gentile world-system is in view in connection with Armageddon (Rev. 
16. 14; 19. 21), while in Rev.17. the reference is to apostate Christianity, destroyed 
by the nations (Rev. 17. 16) headed up under the Beast (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19. 20) 
and false prophet. In Isaiah the political Babylon is in view, literally as to the 
then existing city, and symbolically as to the times of the Gentiles. In the Revela- 
tion both the symbolical-political and symbolical-religious Babylon are in view, 
for there both are alike under the tyranny of the Beast. Religious Babylon is 
destroyed by political Babylon (Rev. 17. 16); political Babylon by the appearing 
of the Lord (Rev. 19. 19-21). That Babylon the city is not to be rebuilt is clear 
from Isa. 13. 19-22; Jer. 51. 24-26, 62-64. By political Babylon is meant the Gentile 
world-system. (See “World,” John 7. 7; Rev. 13. 3.) It may be added that, in 
Scripture symbolism, Egypt stands for the world as such; Babylon for the world 
of corrupt power and corrupted religion; Nineveh for the pride, the haughty glory 
of the world. 

1 Verses 12-16 look forward to the apocalyptic judgments (Rev. 6.-13.). Verses 
17-22 have anear and far view. They predict the destruction of the literal Babylon 
then existing; with the further statement that, once destroyed, Babylon should never 
be rebuilt (cf. Jer. ‘51. 61-64). All of this has been literally fulfilled. But the place 
of this prediction in a great prophetic strain which looks forward to the destruction 
of both politico-Babylon and ecclesio-Babylon in the time of the Beast shows that 
the destruction of the actual Babylon typifies the greater destruction yet to come 
upon the mystical Babylons. Cf. v. 1, note. 

725 


13 20] 


kingdoms, the beauty of the Chal- 

dees’ excellency, shall be as when 

God overthrew Sodom and Go- 
* morrah. ) ; 

20 It shall never be inhabited, 
neither shall it be dwelt in from 
generation to generation: neither 
shall the Arabian pitch tent there; 
neither shall the shepherds make 
their fold there. 

21 But wild beasts of the desert 
shall lie there; and their houses 
shall be full of doleful creatures; 
and owls shail dwell there, and 
satyrs shall dance there. 

22 And the wild beasts of the 
islands shall cry in their desolate 
houses, and dragons in therr plea- 
sant palaces: 29and her time is near 


a Jer.50.3,39; 
$1.29,62. 


to come, and her days shall not be}? Jer-51.33. 
prolonged. c Zech.1.17; 
CHAPTER 14. d Tea.13.19: 
(4) The kingdom set up: Israel| Hb.2.6. 
restored and exalted. (See|¢ tsa.55.12; 
“Kingdom, O.T.,” nen eae Ezk.31.16. 
Zech. 12. 8, note; N.T., apa : 
31-33; 1 Cony] 5.) 285) pene f 
FFOR the Lorp will have mercy ae ae 
on Jacob, and will ‘yet choose 
Israel, and set them in their own alee 
land: and the strangers shall be] Pore” 
joined with them, and they shall 
cleave to the house of Jacob. h ee 
2 And the people shall take them,| *¢v:}2-%9- 
and bring them to their place: and| i Satan. vs. 
tne house of Israel shall possess AER = 
them in the land of the LorD for) (Gen3.1: 
servants and handmaids: and they| Rev.20.10.) 
shall take them captives, whose Tee OS 


captives they were; and they shall 
rule over their oppressors. 

3 And it shall come to pass in the 
day that the LorD shall give thee 
rest from thy sorrow, and from thy 
fear, and from the hard bondage 
wherein thou wast made to serve, 

4 That thon ¢shalt take up this 
proverb against the king of Baby- 
lon, and say, How hath the oppres- 
sor ceased! the golden city ceased! 

5 The Lorp hath broken the 
staff of the wicked, and the sceptre 
of the rulers. 

6 He who smote the people in 
wrath with a continual stroke, he 


ISAIAH. 


that ruled the nations in anger, is — 
persecuted, and none hindereth. 


(5) The joy of the kingdom. 

7 The whole earth is at rest, and 
is quiet: they break forth into 
singing. 

8 °Yea, the fir trees rejoice at 
thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, 
saying, Since thou art laid down, 
no feller is come up against us. 


The “Beast” in heli (Dan. 7. 8; 
Rev. 19. 20). 

9 fHell from beneath is moved for 
thee to meet thee at thy coming: it 
stirreth up the dead for thee, even 
all the chief ones of the earth; it 
hath raised up from their thrones 
all the kings of the nations. 

10 All they shall speak and say 
unto thee, Art thou also become 
weak as we? art thou become like 
unto us? 

11 Thy pomp is brought down to 
the Sgrave, and the noise of thy 
viols: the worm is spread under 
thee, and the worms cover thee. 


Satan, the real prince of this 
world, and organizer of ‘‘Baby- 
Jon’ (Isa. 13.1, note), addressed 
through his tool, the “Beast.” 


12 How art thou fallen from 
heaven, “O Lucifet, lson of the 
‘morning! how art thou cut down 
to the ground, which didst weaken 
the nations! 

13 For thou hast said in thine 
heart, I will ascend into heaven, I 
will exalt my throne above the 
stars of God: I will sit also upon 
lthe mount of the congregation, in 
the sides of the north: 

14 I will ascend above the heights 
of the clouds; I will be like the 
most High. 

15 Yet thou shalt be brought 
down to Jhell, to the sides of the pit. 

16 They that see thee shall nar- 
trowly look upon thee, and consider 
thee, saying, Is this the man that 
made the earth to tremble, that did 
shake kingdoms; 

17 That made the world as a wil- 
derness, and destroyed the cities 
thereof; that opened not the house 
of his prisoners? 


! Verses 12-14 evidently refer to Satan, who, as prince of this world-system (see 


“World,” John 7.7; Rev. 13.8, 


note), is the real though unseen ruler of the succes- 


sive world-powers, Tyre, Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, Rome, etc. (see Ezk. 28. 


12-14), 


sin began. See Rev. 20. 10, note. 
another, Gen, 3. 15; Mt. 16. 22, 23. 


726 


Lucifer, “day-star,”” can be none other than Satan. 
passage marks the beginning of sin in the universe. 


This tremendous 
When Lucifer said, “I will,” 


See other instances of addressing Satan through 


ISAIAH. 
Judgment of “Babylon.” (Cf, | 2&2? 
Rev. 18. 1-24; 18. 2, note.) 

18 All the kings of the nations, 
even all of them, lie in glory, every 
one in his own house. 

19 But thou art cast out of thy 
grave like an abominable branch, 
and as the raiment of those that 
are slain, thrust through with a 
sword, that go down to the stones 
of the pit; as a carcase trodden 
under feet. 

20 Thou shait not be joined with 
them in burial, because thou hast 
destroyed thy land, and slain thy 
people: the seed of evildoers shall Se yea 
never be renowned. cee 
21 Prepare slaughter for his chil- 
dren for the iniquity of their fatherg;|? [s2.34,11; 
that they do not rise, nor possess} ““P"*"™ 
the land, nor fill the face of the} Isa.13.1, 
world with cities. HOLE: 

22 For I will rise up against them,|, ie. Ahaz. 
saith the LORD of hosts, and cut off 
from ¢Babylon the name, and rem-!¢ The ean 
nant, and son, and nephew, saith) ofAhas. 


the LorD. 
23 I will also make it a possession} Pea2-12, 

for the bittern, and pools of water:| "°°* 

and I will sweep it with the besom 


g See Lev.21, 


of destruction, saith the Lorp of; 5; 1s4.3.24; 
h 22.12; Jer. 
osts. 47.5; 48.1, 


24 The Lorp of hosts hath sworn, 
saying, Surely as I have thought, 
so shall it come to pass; and); Jer.4g.38, 
as I have purposed, so shall it 
stand: 

25 That I will break the Assyrian 
in my land, and upon my moun- 
tains tread him under foot: then 
shall his yoke depart from off them, 
and his burden depart from off their 

~shoulders. . 

26 This fs the purpose that is pur- 
posed upon the !whole earth: and 
this 7s the hand that is stretched 
out upon all the nations. 

27 For the Lorp of hosts hath 
purposed, and who shall disannul 
it? and his hand is stretched out, 
and who shall turn it back? | 


37,38; Ezk.. 
7.18, 


The burden of Palestina: worse 
oppressors than Ahaz yet to 
come. 

28 In the year that king Ahaz 
died was this “burden, 

29 Rejoice not thou, whole Pales- 
tina, because the rod of “him that 
smote thee is broken: for out of 
the serpent’s root shall ‘come forth 
a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be 
a fiery flying serpent. 

30 And the firstborn of the poor 
shall feed, and the needy shall lie 
down in safety: and I will kill thy 
root with famine, and he shali slay 
thy remnant. : 

31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; 
thou, whole Palestina, art dis- 
solved: for there shall come from the 
north a smoke, and none shall be 
alone in his appointed times. 

32 What shall one then answer 
the messengers of the nation? That 
the LorpD hath founded Zion, and 
the poor of his people shall /trust 
in it, 

CHAPTER 15. 
The burden of Moab: (1) the 
destruction (vs. 1-9). 


HE “burden of 7Moab. Because 
in the night Ar of Moab is laid 
waste, and brought to silence; be- 
cause ‘in the night Kir of Moab is 
laid waste, and brought to silence; 
2. He is gone up to Bajith, and to 
Dibon, the high places, to weep: 
Moab shall howl over Nebo, and 
over Medeba: 4on all their heads 
shall be baldness, and every beard 
cut off. 

3 In their streets they shali gird 
themselves with sackcloth: “on the 
tops of their houses, and in their 
streets, every one shall howl, weep- 
ing abundantly. 

4 And Heshbon shall cry, and 
Elealeh: their voice shall be heard 
even unto Jahaz: therefore the 
armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; 
his life shall be grievous unto him, 


Beer et ee 
1 This universality is significant and marks the whole passage as referring, not 
merely to a near judgment upon Assyria, but in a yet larger sense to the final crash 


of the present world-system at the end of the age. 


(See ‘Times of the Gentiles,” 


Luke 21. 24; Rev. 16. 14; Dan. 2. 44, 45; “Armageddon,” Rev. 16. 14;:19. 17.) No 
other such universal catastrophe on the nations is known to Scripture. 
2 This “burden” had a precursive fulfilment in Sennacherib’s invasion, B.C. 704, 


three years after the prediction (Isa. 16.14), but 


ing which includes also the final world-battle. 


1-s, which is a continuation of this ‘burden,’ 


? shows the “‘tabernacle of David 


the words have a breadth of mean- 
(See Rev. 19. 17, note.) Isa. 16. 


” 


set up, the next event in order after the destruction of the Beast and his armies. 
Cf. the order in Isa. 10. 28-34, and 11. 1-10; also Acts 15. 14-17; Rev., 19. 17-21, and 


20. 1-4. 
727 


15 5] 


ISAIAH. 


[17 y 


5 2My heart shall cry out for 
Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto 
Zoar, an heifer of three years old: 
for by the mounting up of Luhith 
with weeping shall they go it up; 
for in the way of Horonaim they 
shall raise up a cry of destruction. 

6 For the waters “of Nimrim shall 
be desolate: for the hay is withered 
away, the grass faileth, there is no 
green thing. 

7 Therefore the abundance they 
have gotten, and that which they 
have laid up, shall they carry away 
to the “brook of the willows. 

8 For the cry is gone round about 
the borders of Moab; the howling 
thereof unto Eglaim, and the howl- 
ing thereof unto Beer-elim. 

9 For the waters of Dimon shall 
be full of blood: for I will bring 
more upon Dimon, 4lions upon him 
that escapeth of Moab, and upon 
the remnant of the land. 


CHAPTER 16. 


(2) The women of Moab antici- 
pate the Davidic kingdom, 


END ye the lamb to the ruler of 

the land ‘from /Sela to the 

wilderness, unto the mount of the 
daughter of Zion. 

2 For it shall be, that, as a wan- 
dering bird cast out of the nest, so 
the daughters of Moab shall be at 
the fords of Arnon. 

3 Take counsel, execute judg- 
ment; make thy shadow as the 
night in the midst of the noonday; 
hide the outcasts;. bewray not him 
that wandereth. 

4 Let mine outcasts dwell with 
thee, Moab; be thou a covert to 
them from the face of the spoiler: 
for the extortioner is at an end, the 
spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are 
consumed out of the land. 

5 And in mercy shall the throne 
be established: and he shall sit 
upon it in truth in the “tabernacle 
of David, judging, and seeking judg- 
ment, and hasting righteousness. 


(3) They lament the pride 
of Moab. 


6 We have heard of the pride 
of Moab; he is very proud: even of 
his haughtiness, and his pride, and 
his wrath: but his lies shall not be 
so. 


a Isa.16.11; 
Jer.48.31. 


6 Num.32.36. 
c Or, valley 
of the 
Arabians. 
d 2 Ki.17.25. 
e 2 Ki.14.7. 


jf Or, Petra: 
eb. 2 rock. 


g Num.21.13. 


h See Acts 15. 
13-17, note. 


‘Lie. mations. 
j Jer.48.32. 


k Isa.24.8; 
Jer.48.33. 

1 Isa.15.5; 
63.15; Jer. 
48.36. 


m 2 Ki.16.9; 


7 Therefore shall Moab howl for 
Moab, every one shall howl: for the 
foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye 
mourn; surely they are stricken. 
| 8 For the fields of Heshbon lan- 
|guish, and the vine of Sibmah: the 
lords of the heathen have broken 
|down the principal plants thereof, 
|they are come even unto Jazer, they 
jwandered through the wilderness: 
her branches are stretched out, they 
jare gone over the sea. 


weeping of Jazer the vine of Sib- 
;mah: I will water thee with my 
tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for 
the shouting for thy summer fruits 
and for thy harvest is fallen. 

10 And “gladness is taken away, 
and joy out of the plentiful field; 
and in the vineyards there shall be 
no singing, neither shall there be 
'shouting: the treaders shall tread 
/out no wine in their presses; I have 
made their vintage shouting to 
cease. 

11 Wherefore ‘my bowels shall 
sound like an harp for Moab, and 
mine inward parts for Kir-haresh. 

12 And it shall come to pass, when 
it is seen that Moab is weary on the 
high place, that he shall come to 
his sanctuary to pray; but he shall 
not prevail. 


(4) A first fulfilment within three 
years (Isa. 15. 1, note). 


13 This zs the word that the 
|[LorD hath spoken concerning 
\Moab since that time. 

14 But now the Lorp hath 
spoken, saying, Within three years, 
as the years of an hireling, and the 
glory of Moab shall be contemned, 
with ail that great multitude; and 
the remnant shall be very small 
and feeble. 


CHAPTER 17. 
The. burden of Damascus. 


THE lburden of Damascus. Be- 
hold, "Damascus is taken away 
from being a city, and it shall be a 
ruinous heap. 

2 Thecities of Aroer are forsaken: 
they shall be for flocks, which shall 
lie down, and *”none shall make 
them afraid. 

3 The fortress also shall cease 
from Ephraim, and the kingdom 


1 As in the burden of Moab, there was doubtless a near fulfilment in Sennacherib’s 
approaching invasion, but verses 12-14 as evidently look forward to the final inva- 


sion and battle. 


(‘‘Armageddon,” Rev. 16. 14; 19. 17, no¢e. 


728 


Cf. Isa. 10. 26-34.) 


9 Therefore JI will bewail with the — 


s 


17 4) (ISAIAH. [i9 1 


from Damascus, and the remnant of| . B.C. 741. 
Syria: they shall be as the glory of 
the children of Israel, saith the 


CHAPTER 18. 
The woe of the land beyond the 


Lorp of hosts. a | rivers of Ethiopia, in the day of 
4 And in that day it shall come to the regathering of Israel. (See 
saee reer oe ene of Jacob poner “Tsrael,” Gen.12.2,3; Rom.11.26.) 
flesh ch aibing ot fatness of his Wo fto the land shadowing 
5 *And it shall be as when the Wit wines, Witch see oe 
harvestman gathereth the corn, and the siver s of Ethiopia: ; 
reapeth the ears iis ger hicekd 2 +That sendeth ambassadors by 
it shall be as he that Batherstts the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes 


upon the waters, saying, Go, ye 
‘swift messengers, to a nation scat- 
tered and peeled, to a people terrible 
from their beginning hitherto; a 
nation meted out and trodden down, 
whose land the rivers have spoiled! 

3 All ye inhabitants of the world, 


ears in the valley of Rephaim. 

6 Yet gleaning grapes shall ‘be 
left in it, as the shaking of an olive 
tree, two or three berries in the top 
of the uppermost bough, four or 
five in the outmost fruitful branches 


(aaa saith the Lorp God of and dwellers on the earth, see ye, 
7 At that day shall aman Yodktole Jer.51.33. [When he #lifteth up an ensign on the 


his Maker, and this eyes shall have], yic.7.7, tied ete’ woe ae he Dbloweth 


respect to the Holy One of Israel. 4. Bor so thek-one sete 
; : : ito me, 
8 And he shall not look to the al-|¢Deut-16.21. ty | i take my rest, and I will con- 


tars, the work of his hands, neither|; 1,437.29. |sider in my dwelfing place like a 


shall respect that which his fingers} 38. 7 

F A clear heat upon herbs, and like 

ide eats vig a wan aan ePsa.83.13; a cloud of dew in the heat of har- 
mages. Hos.13.3. vest . 


9 In that day shall his strong 5 For afore the harvest, when the 


cities be as a forsaken bough, and|/fIsa.20.4,5; |, 3 j ; 
F Ezk.30.4,5, |bud ts perfect, and the sour grape is 
an uppermost branch, which they 95. Zeph.2.12; |ripening in the flower, he shall both 


ae darwin i ora Shaner pte eph cut off the sprigs with pruning 
10 Because thou hast forgotten eer a eae hooks, and ‘take away and cut 
the God of thy salvation, and hast 4 . eee ee shell beiate together unto 
not been mindful of the rock of thy} tsa.14. ae the fowls of the mountains, and 


strength, therefore shalt thou plant] $"." ‘to the beasts of the earth: and the 
“aaah ent and shalt set it Rene fowls shall summer upon them, and 
“1 In ihet Fe “ahalt thou make} 7°f*- ; ail ‘the Beasts 1h the ‘earth ‘shall 
thy plant to grow, and in the morn-] j Ex.12.12; Wintec aeons ae the present 


ing shalt thou make thy seed to| Jer-43.12. Be prod 
Aare ght unto the LorD of hosts 
flourish: but the harvest shall be lof a people scattered and peeled, 


4 ane pee of grief and ea and from a Pega terrible from 

: | their beginning hitherto; a nation 

12 Bs oat 73 multitude bogie meted out and trodden under foot, 

peop ee ibe, make ieee iS af whose land the rivers have spoiled, 

ee ti S ern vais tat ee aes to the place of the name of the 
AOS Eo & Lorp of hosts, the mount Zion. 


like the rushing of mighty waters! 

13 Thé nations shall rush like the 
‘rushing of many waters: 4-but God 
shall rebuke them, and they shall 
flee far off, and éshall be chased as 
the chaff of the mountains ‘before 
the wind, and like a rolling thing 
before the whirlwind 

14 And behold at eveningtide 
trouble; and before the-morning he 
is not. ‘ This is the portion of them 
that spoil us, and the lot of them 
that rob us. 


1 The local reference is evidently to an embassy from Egypt, resulting in the 
‘alliance denounced in Isa. 30.,.31.; Jer. 37. 7-11. 
_ 729 


ea 


CHAPTER 19. 


The burden of Egypt. Looks 
forward through desolations 
to kingdom blessing with 
Israel. (See “Kingdom, O.T.,” 
Zech. 12. 8, note.) 


HE ‘burden of Egypt. Behold, 
the Lorp rideth upon a swift 
cloud, and shall come into Egypt: 
and the Jidols of Egypt shall be 


| * 


19 2] 


moved at his presence, and the 
_ heart of Egypt shall melt in the 
midst of it. 

2 And I will “set the Egyptians 
against the Egyptians: and they 
shall fight every one against his 
brother, and every one against his 
neighbour; city against city, and 
kingdom against kingdom. : 

3 And the spirit of Egypt shall fail 
in the midst thereof; and I will de- 
stroy the counsel thereof: and they 
shall seek to the idols, and to the 
charmers, and to them that have 
familiar spirits, and to the wizards. 

4 And the Egyptians will I give 
over 4into the hand of a cruel lord; 
and a fierce king shall rule over 
them, saith the Lord, the LorpD of 
hosts. 

5 ‘And the waters shall fail from 
the sea, and the river shall be 
wasted and dried up. 

6 And they shall turn the rivers 
far away; and the brooks of defence 
shall be emptied and dried up: thejc Jud. 7.22; 
reeds and flags shall wither. Sam.14. 


ié an pea 


7 The paper reeds by the brooks,} 99'9 
by the mouth of the brooks, and 


every thing sown by the brooks,|® !sa.20.4; 


shall wither, be driven away, and iia 

be no more. 

8 The fishers also shall mourn,]|¢ Jer-51.36; 
Ezk.30.12. 


and all they that cast angle into 
the brooks shall lament, and they}d Jer.2.16. 
that spread nets upon the waters 
shall languish. 

9 Moreover they that work in fine 
flax, and they that weave networks, 
shall be confounded. 

10 And they shall be broken in 
the purposes thereof, all that make 
sluices and ponds for fish. 

11 Surely the princes of Zoan are 
fools, the counsel of the wise coun- 
sellors of Pharaoh is become brut- 
ish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I} 
am the son of the wise, the son of 
ancient kings? 

12 Where are they? where are 
thy wise men? and let them tell! 
thee now, and let them know what) 
the LorpD of hosts hath purposed!) 
upon Egypt. 

13 The princes of Zoan are be- 
come fools, ¢the princes of Noph are 
deceived; ‘they have also seduced 
Egypt, even they that are the 
stay of the tribes thereof. 

14 The Lorp hath mingled a per-! 
verse spirit in the midst thereof: 
and they have caused Egypt to err 
in every work thereof, as a drunken 
man staggereth in his vomit, 

15 Neither shall there be any! 


e Jer.51.30; 
Nah.3.13, 


f Zeph.3.9. 
g 2 Ki.18.17. 


730 


ISAIAH. 


work for Egypt, which the head or 
tail. branch or rush, may do. 

16 In that day shall Egypt ebe 
like unto women: and it shall be 
afraid and fear because of the 
shaking of the hand of the LorD of 
hosts, which he shaketh over it. 

17 And the land of Judah shall be ° 
a terror unto Egypt, every one that 
maketh mention thereof shall be 
afraid in himself, because of the 
counsel of the LorD of hosts, which 
he hath determined against it. 

18 In that day shall five cities in 
the land of Egypt ‘speak the lan- 
guage of Canaan, and swear to the 
LorpD of hosts; one shall be called, 
The city of destruction. 

19 In that day shall there be an 
altar to the LorD in the midst of 
the land of Egypt, and a pillar at 
the border thereof to the Lorp. 

20 And it shall be for a sign and 
for a witness unto the Lorp of 
hosts in the land of Egypt: for they 
shall cry unto the LorD because of 
the oppressors, and he shall send: 
them a saviour, and a great one, 
and he shall deliver them. 

21 And the LorD shall be known 
to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall 
know the LorpD in that day, and 
shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, 
they shall vow a vow unto the 
LORD, and perform it. 

22 And the Lorp shall smite 
Egypt: he shall smite and heal it: 
and they shall return even to the 
Lorp, and he shail be intreated of 
them, and shall heal them. 

23 In that day shall there be a 
highway out of Egypt to Assyria. 
and the Assyrian shall come into 
Egypt, and the Egyptian into As- 
syria, and the Egyptians shall 
serve with the Assyrians. : 

24 In that day shall Israel be the 
third with Egypt and with Assyria, 
even a blessing in the midst of the 
land: 

25 Whom the Lorn of hosts shali 
bless, saying, Biessed be Egypt 
my people, and Assyria the work 
of my hands, and Israel mine in- 
heritance. 


CHAPTER 20. 


A prophecy that Assyria will 
waste Egypt and Ethiopia. 


ie the year that &Tartan came 
unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the 
king of Assyria sent him,) and 
fought against Ashdod, and took it; 
2 At the same time spake the 


ISAIAH. 


Lorp by Isaiah the son of Amoz, 
saying, Go and loose the ¢sack- 
cioth from off thy loins, and put 
off thy shoe from thy foot. And 
ak did so, walking naked and bare- 
oot. 

3 And the Lorp said, Like as my 
servant Isaiah hath walked naked 
and barefoot three years for a sign 
and wonder upon Egypt and upon 
Ethiopia; 

4 So shall the king of Assyria 
lead away the Egyptians prisoners, 
and the Ethiopians captives, young 
and old, naked and barefoot, “even 
with their buttocks uncovered, to 
the shame of Egypt. 

5 ¢And they shall be afraid and 
ashamed of Ethiopia their expecta- 
tion, and of Egypt their glory. 

6 And the inhabitant of this ¢isle 
shall say in that day, Behold, such 
is our expectation, whither we flee 
for help to be delivered from the 
king of Assyria: and how shall we 
escape? 


a Zech.13.4. 


6b 1 Sam.19.24; 
Mic.1.8,11. 


¢ Isa.3.17; 
,2 Sam.10.4; 
Jer.13.22,26; 
Mic.1.11. 


d 2 Ki.18.21; 
Isa.30.3,5,7; 
36.6. 


CHAPTER 21. 


The four burdens, anticipating 
Sennacherib’s invasion (2 Ki. 
18. 13): (1) The burden of the 
desert. 


HE fburden of the desert of the 

sea. As 4Swhirlwinds in the 
south pass through; so it cometh 
from the desert, from a terrible 
land. 

2 A grievous vision is declared 
unto me; the treacherous dealer 
dealeth treacherously, and the 
spoiler spoileth. “Go up, O Elam: 
besiege, O Media; all the sighing 
thereof have I made to cease. 

3 Therefore are my loins filled 
with pain: pangs have taken hold 
upon me, as the pangs of a woman 
that travaileth: I was bowed down 
at the hearing of it;-I was dis- 
mayed at the seeing of it. 

4. My heart panted, fearfulness 
affrighted me: *the night of my 
pleasure hath he turned into fear} 
unto me. 
5 Prepare the table, watch in the 
watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye 
princes, and anoint the shield. 

6 For thus hath the Lord said un- 
to me, Go, set a watchman, let him): 
declare what he seeth. 

7 And he saw a chariot with a 
couple of horsemen, a chariot of 
asses, and a chariot of camels; and 
he hearkened diligently with much 
heed; 


ei.e. coast. 


f Isa.13.1, 
note. 


g Zech.9.14. » 


h Isa.13.17; 
Jer.49.34. 


t Deut.28.67. 

Jj Jer.51.8; 
Rev.14.8; 
18.2. 


k 1 Chr.1.30; 
Jer.49.7,8; 
Ezk.35.2; 
Oba.1. 


71 Chr.1.9,32. 


731 


[22 3 


8 And he cried, A lion: My lord, 
I stand continually upon the watch- 
tower in the daytime, and I am set 
in my ward whole nights: 

9 And, behold, here cometh a 
chariot of men, with a couple of 
horsemen. And he answered and 
said, JBabylon is fallen, is fallen; 
and all the graven images of her 
gods he hath broken unto the 
ground. 

10 O my threshing, and the corn 
of my floor: that which I have 
heard of the Lorp of hosts, the 
God of Israel, have I declared unto 
you. 


(2) The burden of Dumah. 


11 The fburden of *-Dumah. He 
calleth to me out of Seir, Watch- 
man, what of the night? Watch- 
man, what of the night? 

12 The watchman said, The morn- 
ing cometh, and also the night: if 
ye will enquire, enquire ye: return, 
come. 


(3) The burden upon Arabia. 


13  The/fburden upon Arabia. In 
the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, 
O ye travelling companies /of 
Dedanim. ; 

14 The inhabitants of the land of 
Tema brought water to him that 
was thirsty, they prevented with 
their bread him that fled. 

15 For they fled from the swords, 
from the drawn sword, and from 
the bent bow, and from the griev- 
ousness of war. 

16 For thus hath the Lorp said 
unto me, Within a year, according 
to the years of an hireling, and all 
the glory of Kedar shall fail: 

17 And the residue of the number 
of archers, the mighty men of the 
children of Kedar, shall be dimin- 
ished: for the LorD God of Israel 
hath spoken it. 


CHAPTER 22. 


(4) The burden of the valley 
of vision. 
HE fburden of the valley of 
vision. What aileth thee now, 
that thou art wholly gone up to the 
housetops? 

2 Thou that art fuil of stirs, a 
tumultuous city, a joyous city: thy 
slain men are not slain with the 
sword, nor dead in battle. 

3 All thy rulers are fled together, 
they are bound by the archers: all 
that aré found in thee are bound 


Zoe | ISAIAH. : {23 | 
together, which have fled from 


‘ar. 

4 Therefore said I, Look away 
from me; “I will weep bitterly, 
jabour not to comfort me, kecause 
of the spoiling of the daughter of 
my people. 

5 For it is a day of trouble, and 
of treading down, and of perplexity 
bby the Lord Gop of hosts in the 
valley of vision, breaking down the 
walls, and of crying to the moun- 
tains. : ; 

6 And Elam bare the quiver with 


thee away with a mighty captivity, , 
and will surely cover thee. 

18 He will surely violently turn 
and toss thee like a ball into a 
large country: there shalt thou die, 
and there the chariots of thy glory 
shall be the shame of thy lord’s 
house. 

19 And I will drive thee from thy 
station, and from thy state shall he 
pull thee down. 

20 And it shail come to pass in 
that day, that I will call my ser- 
vant /Eliakim the son of Hilkiah: 


chariots of ase = ee and|? Jer-4-19: al rae I math Sethe hiss wre os 

‘Kir uncover e shield. robe, and strengthen wi y 

7 And it shall come to pass, that gene girdle, and I will commit thy gov- 
thy choicest valleys shall be full of} “* ernment into his hand: and he shall 
chariots, and the horsemen shall} c Isa.15.1. be a father to the inhabitants of 
set themselves in array at the Poe hoe and to the house of 
gate. 2 Chr.32.4, |Judah. 

8 And he discovered the covering] 5,30. 22 And the key of the house of 
of Judah, and thou didst look in eReon 3 16. David will i lay upon his shoulder; 
that day to the armour of the house so he shall “open, and none shall 
of the forest. f Joel 1.13. ae and he shall shut, and none 

9 Ye have seen also the breaches : Ss open. 
of the city of David, that they are] * $235; 23 And I will fasten him as a nail 
many: and ye gathered together] Mic.1.16. in a sure place; and he shall be for 


the pater of Ai lower pear the|# 152.56:12: a glorious throne to his father’s 
10 And ye have number €]” 1 Cor.15.32, |house. 

houses of Jerusalem, and the houses| _ 24 And they shall hang upon him 

Bs ye broken down to fortify the] * yoo es a vie glory of hee father’ CR 
, a e offspring an e issue es- 

“i Ye made also a ditch between] j vs.15-19. sels of pnt quantity. from the 

the two walls for the water of the Pah ipl ap vessels of cups, even to all the ves- 

old pool: but ye have not looked] fAvourite dis- |Sels of flagons. 


unto the maker thereof, neither had] placed as 25 In that day, saith the LorpD of 
respect unto him that fashioned it Esser by |hosts, shall the nail that is fastened 
long ago. sea in the sure place be removed, and 

12 And in that day did the Lord} 37.2. be cut down, and fall; and the bur- 


Gop of hosts /call to weeping, and 


ER 8. den that was upon it shall be cut. 
to mourning, and to Sbaldness, and ne 


off: for the LorD hath spoken it. 


to aaa at ree AES se 12 Ki.18.18. 

13 ehold joy an adness, 
slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eat- stein CHAPTER 23. 
ing flesh, and drinking wine: “Tet us looks for- | The burden of Tyre: desolations 
eat and drink; for to morrow we} Ward t Beet the final deliverance 

. Rev.3.7. 

14 And it was revealed in mine ae teen gs 
ears by the LorpD of hosts, Surely} 2. THE "burden of Tyre. Howl, ye 
this iniquity ‘shall not be purged| "* ships of Tarshish; for it is laid 


from you till ye die, saith the Lord] ice. coast. waste, so that there is no house, no 


Gop of hosts. entering in: from the land of Chit- 
15 Thus saith the Lord Gop of tim it is revealed to them. 


hosts, Go, get thee unto this treas- 2 Be still, ye inhabitants of the 


urer, even unto JShebna, which is %sle; thou whom the merchants of 

over the house, and say, Zidon, that pass over the sea, have 
16 What hast thou here? and replenished. 

whom hast thou here, that thou 3 And by great waters the seed of 

hast hewed thee out a sepulchre Sihor, the harvest of the river, is 

here, as he that heweth him out a her revenue; and she is a mart of 

sepulchre on high, and that gray- nations. 

eth an habitation for himself in a 4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for 

tock? : the sea hath spoken, even the 
17 Behold, the Lorp will carry strength of the sea, saying, I travail 


732 


23 5) ISAIAH. [24 14 


them that dwell before the Lorp, 
to eat sufficiently, and for durable 
clothing. 


CHAPTER 24. 


Looking through troubles to the 
kingdom-aége (v. 23). 


BEHOLD, the LorD ‘maketh the 
earth empty, and maketh it 
waste, and turneth it upside down, 
and scattereth abroad the inhabit- 
ants thereof. 

2 And it shall be, as with the peo- 
ple, so with the priest; as with the 
servant, so with his master; as 
with she maid. so with nee Resi 
: 5 3 buyer, so wit e seller; 
posed it, to stain the pride of ail See c : 
glory, and to bring into contempt} . ae es oe Saat =o ke of ae bos 
all the honourable of the earth. |? +: as¢ Rae Ha inet abe 4 s 

10 Pass through thy land as 4)» See Ezk.28. | 3 The land shall be utterly emp- 


not, nor bring forth children, 
neither do I nourish up young men, 
nor bring up virgins. 


6 .Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, 
ye inhabitants of the isle. 

7 Is this your joyous city, whose 
antiquity 1s of ancient days? her 
own feet shall carry her afar off to 


against Tyre, othe crowning city, 
whose merchants are princes, whose 
traffickers are the honourable of the 
earth? 


9 The Lorp of hosts hath pur- 


river, O daughter of Tarshish:| 2.12. : : 

2 tied, and utterly spoiled: for the 
peer Fee ee pega eer dover|“ev-1822, |Lorp hath spoken this word. 
the sea, he shook the kingdoms: the|¢ Hak 27-25, eS ee St ee 
LorpD hath given a commandment bp fadeth away, the haughty people 


against the merchant city, to de-) ¢ Zech.14.20, h aeh 

dtoy. the strong holds thereof. [“2i'*7™ [of the carth do languish a 
12 And he said, ‘Thou shalt no) ;...Gen1. |the inhabitants thereof; because 

more rejoice, O thou oppressed vir-|* 2, note 3; they have transgressed the laws, 


gin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass) Jer.4.23, changed the ordinance, broken the 
ieee Soe Se there also shalt a re everlasting covenant. 

Been id che Ind Or the Chaldel| am ses3) | ae eee eee a eran 
ans; this Peon pip pages till pase h Mal.4.6. dwell therein are desolate: there- 
Assyrian founded it for them that fore the inhabitants of the earth 


dwell in the wilderness: they set} 7 Ise.16.8,9; 
up the towers thereof, they raised| Joe! 1-10.12. or pola ioe ee the 
up the palaces thereof; and he); Remnant. |yine languisheth, all the merry- 


brought it to ruin. Y Isa.37.32. helcted Go sigd. 
pis Howl ve ships of Tarshish: (5545) |'5 "The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, 
: ers the noise 0. em at rejoice 
Beco geelcorsds pee crit the oy of the har ceaseth 
, : ey not drink wine wi' 
ER Ga ea agi a sone: strong drink shal be bite 
, . to them that it, 
of seventy years shall Tyre sing as 10 The city of confusion is broken 
Bane an harp, go about the down: every house is shut up, that 
city, thou harlot that hast been Mla here sa evn for wine in 
forgotten; make pie melody, Pie the streets; all joy is darkened, the 
many songs, that thou mayest be mirth of the land is gone. — 
Benes. 1 t Ue after 12 In the city is left desolation, and 
ed <a ari eT ottl Ye at Le brea the gate is smitten with destruction. 
Lorp will visit Tyre, and she shall The Jewish remnant, 


turn to her hire, and shall commit 
fornication with all the kingdoms 


13 When thus it shall be in the 


of the midst of the land Jamong the peo- 

Be a ee eats Agee ple, there shall be as the shaking 

18 And her merchandise and her of an olive tree, and as the gleaning 
hire ¢shali be holiness to the LORD: grapes when the vintage is done. 

it shall not be treasured nor laid up; 14 They shall lift up their voice, 

for her merchandise shall be for they shall sing for the majesty of 


733 . 


24 15] 


the LORD, they shali cry aloud from 
the sea. 

15 Wherefore glorify ye the LorpD 
in the fires, even the ¢name of the 
LorpD God of Israel in the isles of 
the sea. 


The great tribulation (Psa. 2. 5; 
Rev. 7. 14). 


16 From the uttermost part of the 
earth have we heard songs, even 
glory to the righteous. But I said, 
My leanness, my leanness, woe unto 
me! the treacherous dealers have 
dealt treacherously; yea, the trea- 
cherous dealers have dealt very 
treacherously. 

17 ‘Fear, and the pit, and the 
snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant 
of the earth. 

18 And it shall come to pass, that 
he who fleeth from the noise of the 
fear shall fall into the pit; and he 
that cometh up out of the midst of 
the pit shall be taken in the snare: 
for the windows from on high are 
open, and the foundations of the 
earth do shake. 

19 The earth is utterly broken 
down, the earth is clean dissolved, 
the earth is moved exceedingly. 

20 The earth shall reel to and fro 
like a drunkard, and shall be re- 
moved like a cottage; and the 
transgression thereof shall be heavy 
upon it; and it shall fall, and not 
rise again. 


Destruction of Gentile world- 
power. (See “Kingdom, O.T.,” 
Gen. 1. 26; Zech. 12. 8, note.) 

21 And it shall come to pass 4in 
that day, that the Lorp shall 
€punish the host of the high ones 
that are on high, and the kings of 
the earth upon the earth. 


The first resurrection: the 
kingdom-age begun. 

22 And they shall be gathered to- 
gether, as prisoners are gathered in 
the pit, and shall be shut up in the 
prison, and after many days shall 
they be visited. 

23 Then the moon shall be con- 
founded, and the sun ashamed, 
when the Lorp of hosts shall freign 
in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, 
and before his ancients gloriously. 


CHAPTER 25. 
Triumphs of the kingdom-aége. 
O LORD, thou art my God; I will 


exalt thee, I will praise thy 
name; for thou hast done wonder- 


ISAIAH. 


B.C. 712. 


a Mal.1.11. 
bi.e. coasts. 


c See 1 Ki.19. 
17; jer.48. 
43; Amos 5. 
19. 


d Day (of Je- 
hovah). vs. 
21-23; Isa. 
26.20,21. 
(Isa.2.10-22; 
Rev.19.11- 
21.) 


e Armaged- 
ae (battle 


of). 
Isa.26.20,21. 
(Rev.16.14; 
19.11-21.) 


f Kingdom 
(O.T.). Isa. 
32.1,2,14-18. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


g Hos.13.14; 
1 Cor.15.54; 
Rev.20.14; 
21.4. 

h Rev.7.17; 
21.4, 

t Gen.49.18; 
Cit 2235 

j \sa.2.11. 


& Isa.60.18. 


734 


ful things; thy counsels of old ar 
faithfulness and truth. ; 

2 For thou hast made of a city 
an heap; of a defenced city a ruin: 
a palace of strangers to be no city; 
it shall never be built. 

3 Therefore shall the strong peo- 
ple glorify thee, the city of the ter- 
rible nations shall fear thee. 

4 For thou hast been a strength 
to the poor, a strength to the needy 
in his*distress, a refuge from the 
storm, a shadow from the heat, 
when the blast of the terrible ones 
is as a storm against the wall. 

5 Thou shalt bring down the noise 
of strangers, as the heat in a dry 
place; even the heat with the 
shadow of a cloud: the branch of the 
terrible ones shall be brought low. 

6 And in this mountain shall the 
LORD of hosts make unto all people 
a feast of fat things, a feast of wines 
on the lees, of fat things full of 
marrow, of wines on the lees well 
refined, . 

7 And he will destroy in this 
mountain the face of the covering 
cast over all people, and the vail 
that is spread over all nations. 

8 He will ‘swallow up death in 
victory; and the Lord Gop will 
hwipe away tears from off all faces; 
and the rebuke of his people shall 
he take away from off all the earth: 
for the LorD hath spoken it. 

9 And it shall be said in that day, 
Lo, this zs our God; we have 
waited for him, and he will save 
us: this 7s the LorpD; ‘we have 
waited for him, we will be glad and 
rejoice in his salvation. 

10 For in this mountain shall the 
hand of the Lorp rest, and Moab 
shall be trodden down under him, 
even as straw is trodden down for 
the dunghill. 

11 And he shall spread forth his 
hands in the midst of them, as he 
that swimmeth spreadeth forth Ais 
hands to swim: and he shall bring 
down their pride together with the 
spoils of their hands. 

12 And the fortress of the high 
fort of thy walls shall he bring 
down, lay low, and bring to the 
ground, even to the dust. 


CHAPTER 26. 


The worship and testimony of 
restored and converted Israel. 


ITN that day shall this song be 
sung in the land of Judah; We 
have a strong city; ‘salvation will 


t 


God appoint for walls and bul- 
warks. 

2 Open ye the gates, that the 
righteous nation which keepeth the 
truth may enter in. 

3 Thou wilt keep Aim in perfect 
peace, whose mind is stayed on 
thee: because he “trusteth in thee. 

4 Trust ye in the Lorp for ever: 
for in the LorD JEHOVAH is 
beverlasting strength: 

5 For he bringeth down them that 
dwell on high; the lofty city, he 
layeth it low; he layeth it low, even 
to the ground; he bringeth.it even 
to the dust. 

6: The foot shall tread it down, 
even the feet of the poor, and the 
steps of the needy. 

7 The way of the just zs “upright- 
ness: thou, most upright, dost 
weigh the path of the just. 

8 Yea, in the way of thy judg- 
ments, O LorD, have we waited for 
thee; the desire of our soul is to 
thy name, and to the remembrance 
of thee. 

9 With my soul have I desired 
thee in the night; yea, with my 
spirit within me will I seek thee 
early: for when thy judgments are 
in the earth, the inhabitants of the 
world will learn righteousness. 

10 Let favour be shewed to the 
wicked, yet will he not learn right- 
eousness: in the land of upright- 
ness will he deal unjustly, and will 
not behold the majesty of the LorRD. 

11 LoRD, when thy hand is lifted 
up, they will not see: but they shall 
see, and be ashamed for their envy 
at the people; yea, the fire of thine 
enemies shall devour them. 

12 Lorp, thou wilt ordain peace 
for us: for thou also hast wrought 
all our works in us. 

13 O Lorp our God, other lords 
beside thee have had dominion over 
us: but by thee only will we make 
mention of thy name. 

14 They are dead, they shall not 
live; they are deceased, they shall 
not rise: therefore hast thou visited 
and destroyed them, and made all 
their memory to perish. 

15 Thou hast increased the na- 


1 Bliminate the supplied words, men, and, together with. 
Verses 19-21, with chapter 27., constitute Jehovah’s answer to 
ses 11-18. Verse 19 should read: ‘‘Thy dead shall live: my 
(i.e. the dead bodies of Jehovah’s people). The restoration 


plural, ‘‘bodies.” 
the plaint of Israel, ver 
dead bodies shall rise” 


ISATAH. 


(27 4 


tion, O Lorp, thou hast increased 
the nation: thou art glorified: thou 
hadst removed it far unto all the 
ends of the earth. 

i6 Lorp, 4in trouble have they 
visited thee, they poured out a 
prayer when thy chastening was 
upon them. 

17 Like as a woman with child, 
that draweth near the time of her 
delivery, is in pain, and crieth out 
in her pangs; so have we been in 


thy sight, O Lorp. 

See os 18 We have been with child, we 
pore have been in pain, we have as it 

were brought forth wind; we have 

b Be. re. ges,/nOt wrought any deliverance in the 
Deut.32.4. \earth; neither have the inhabitants 

, lof the world fallen. 

o Regntecus 19 Thy dead 1men shall live, 
Ez iss-9, |together with my dead body shall 
(Gen.6.9; they arise. Awake and sing, ye 
Lk.2.25.) that dwell in dust: for thy dew is 

d¥Hos.5.15.  |as the dew of herbs, and the earth 

shall cast out the dead. 

e Resurrec- 
ei nas Retrospect: order of events in 
Gob 19.25: | establishing the kingdom. (1) 
1 Cor.15.52.) The Gentile world-power de- 

f Day (of Je stroyed. 
hovab) vs. | 20 Come, my people, enter thou 
341-8. (sa. |into thy chambers, and shut thy 


2.10-22; Rev. |\doors about thee: hide thyself as it 


19.11-21.) ieie for a little moment, until the 
A a indignation be overpast. 

Fgh: Ceattle 21 For, behold, the Lorp cometh 
& Tsa.34. lout of his place to &punish the in- 
taaaae habitants of the earth for their ini- 
11-21.) quity: the earth also shall disclose 


her blood, and shall no more cover 
her slain. 


CHAPTER 27. 


1B that day the Lorp with his 
sore and great and strong sword 
shall punish leviathan the piercing 
serpent, even leviathan that crooked 
serpent; and he shall slay the 
dragon that is in the sea. 

2 In that day sing ye unto her, A 
vineyard of red wine. 

3 I the Lorp do keep it; I will 
water it every moment: lest any 
hurt it, I will keep it night and day. 

4 Fury is not in me: who would 


“Body” is in the 


and re-establishment of Israel as a nation is also spoken of as a resurrection (Ezk. 
37. 1-11), and many hold that no more than this is meant in Isa. 26. 19. But since 
the first resurrection is unto participation in the kingdom (Rev. 20. 4-6), it seems 
the better view that both meanings are here. 

735 


27 5] 


set the briers and thorns against 
me in battle? I would go through 
them, I would burn them together. 

5 Or let him take hold of my 
strength, that he may make peace 
with me; and he shall make peace 
with me. 

6 He shall cause them that come 
of Jacob to take root: Israel shall 
blossom and bud, and fill the face 
of the world with fruit. 

7 Hath he smitten him, as he 
smote those that smote him? or is 
he slain according to the slaughter 
of them that are slain by him? 

8 In measure, when it shooteth 
forth, thou wilt debate with it: he 
stayeth his rough wind in the day 
of the east wind. Th 

9 By this therefore shall the ini- 
quity of Jacob be purged; and this 
is all the fruit to take away his sin; 
when he maketh all the stones of 
the altar as chalkstones that are 
beaten in sunder, the ¢groves and 
images shall not stand up. 

10 Yet the defenced city shall be 
desolate, and the habitation for- 
saken, and left like a wilderness: 
there shall the calf feed, and there 
shall he lie down, and consume the 
branches thereof. 

11 When the boughs thereof are 
withered, they shall be broken off: 
the women come, and set them on 
fire: for it is a people of no under- 
standing: therefore he that made 
them will not have mercy on them, 
and he that formed them will shew 
them no favour. 


(2) Israel regathered. 


2 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that the Lorp shall beat 
off from the channel of the river 
unto thé stream of Egypt, and ye 
shall be gathered one by one, O ye 
children of Israel. 

13 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that the great trumpet 
shall be blown, and they shall come 
which were ready to perish in the 
land of Assyria, and the outcasts 
in the land of Egypt, and shall wor- 
ship the LorD in the holy mount at 
Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER 28. 


The woe of Ephraim. Predic- 
tion of the Assyrian captivity 
of Ephraim (2 Ki. 17. 3-18). 


OE to the crown of pride, to 
the drunkards of “Ephraim, 
whose glorious beauty is a fading 


ISAIAH. 


a Deut.16.21. 


b See Isa.7. 
2, note. 


¢ Isa.30.30; 
Ezk.13.11. 


d Prov.20.1; 
Hos.4.11. 


736 


B.C. 712. 


sa 


flower, which are on the head of 
the fat valleys of them that are 
overcome with wine! 4 

2 Behold, the Lord hath a.mighty 
and strong one, ‘which as a tem- 
pest of hail and a destroying storm, 
as a flood of mighty waters over- 
flowing, shall cast down to the 
earth with the hand. 

3 The crown of pride, the drunk- 
ards of Ephraim, shall be trodden 
under feet: 

4 And the glorious beauty, which 
is on the head of the fat valley, 
shall be a fading flower, and as 
the hasty fruit before the summer; 
which when he that looketh upon 
it seeth, while it is yet in his hand 
he eateth it up. 

5 In that day shall the Lorp of 
hosts be for a crown of glory, and 
for a diadem of beauty, unto the 
residue of his people, 

6 And for a spirit of judgment to 
him that sitteth in judgment, and 
for strength to them that turn the 
battle to the gate. 

7 But they also ¢have erred 
through wine, and through strong 
drink are out of the way; the priest 
and the prophet have erred through 
strong drink, they are swallowed 
up of wine, they are out of the way 
through strong drink; they err in 
vision, they stumble in judgment. 

8 For all tables are full of vomit 
and filthiness, so that there is no 
place clean. 

9 Whom shall he teach know- 
ledge? and whom shall he make to 
understand doctrine? them that 
are weaned from the milk, and 
drawn from the breasts. 

10 For precept must be upon 
precept, precept-upon precept; line 
upon line, line upon line; here a 


|little, and there a little: 


11 For with stammering lips and 
another tongue will he speak to this 
people. 

12 To whom he said, This is the 
rest wherewith ye may cause the 
weary to rest; and this is the re- 
freshing: yet they would not hear. 

13. But the word of the Lorp was 
unto them precept upon precept, 
precept upon precept; line upon 
line, line upon line; here a little, and 
there a little; that they might go, 
and fall backward, and be broken, 
and snared, and taken. 


The fate of Ephraima warning 
to Judah. 


14 Wherefore hear the word of 


28 15} ISAIAH. [29 3 


the LorD, ye scornful men, that 
Tule this people whichis in Jeru- 
salem. 

15 Because ye have said, We have 
made a covenant with death, and 
with ¢hell are we at agreement; 
when the overflowing scourge shall 
pass through, it shall not come unto 
us: for we have made lies our ref- 
uge, and under falsehood have we 
hid ourselves: 

16 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop, Behold, I lay in Zion for a 
foundation a stone, a tried ‘stone, 

a precious corner stone, a sure oe ee 
foundation: he that believeth shall) 5 note. {he will not ever be threshing it, 
not make haste. ; nor break it with the wheel of his 

17 Judgment also will I ley us the]? eee (as \cart, nor bruise it with his horse- 
line, and righteousness to the plum-} pan.2/34. men, 
met: and the hail shall sweep away| (£x.17.6; } 29 This also cometh forth from 
the refuge of lies, and the waters} 1Pet?8) ithe Lorn of hests, ‘which is won- 
shall overflow the hiding place. c Christ jderful in counsel, and excellent in 

18 And your covenant with death! (First jworking. 
shall be disannulled, and your} Adven), | 
agreement with ¢hell shall not} (Gen.3.15; CHAPTER 29. 
stand; when the overflowing scourge} Acts 1.9.) 


‘ Warnings to Judah and Jerusa- 
arene els jit ye shall be d See wl. lem of impending discipline 
19 From the time that it goeth|¢2Sam.5.20; (Chapters 29., 30., 31.): (1) The 


25 When he hath made plain the 
face thereof, doth he not cast 
abroad the fitches, and scatter the 
cummin, and cast in the principal 


26 For his God doth instruct him 
to discretion, and doth teach him, 

27 For the fitches are not threshed 
with a threshing instrument, neither 
is a cart wheel turned about upon 
the cummin; but the fitches are 
beaten out with a staff, and the 
cummin with a rod. 

28 Bread corn is bruised; because 


forth it shali take you: for morn-| 1 Christi, | discipline — ; ; 
ing by morning shall it pass over,! ¢ Josh.10.10, OE to ‘Ariel, to Ariel, the city 
by day and by night: and it shall) 12; 2 Sam.5s. where David dwelt! add ye 
be a vexation only fo understand aa 1 Chr.14. ‘year to vear; let them kill sacri- 
the report. 3 fices. 


20 For the bed is shorter than|¢ Psa.92.5; 2 Yet I will distress Ariel, and 
that a man can stretch himself on| Jer-32.19. there shall be heaviness and sor- 
it; and the covering narrower than}; «zion of row: and it shall be unto me as 
that he can wrap himself in rt. God” = Je |Ariel. , ; 

21 For the Lorp shall rise up as| 7¥sa/em. 3 And I will camp against thee 
im mount ‘Perazim, he shall be] ; 15.17.13 round about, and will lay siege 


. 


wroth as in the valley of fGibeon,| Job 21.18  jagainst thee with a mount, and I 
that he may do his work, his strange will raise forts against thee. 
work; and bring to pass his act, his} i 4 And thou shalt be brought 
strange act. | down, and shalt speak out of the 
22 Now therefore be ye not mock- ground, and thy speech shall be 
ers, lest your bands be made strong: low out of the dust, and thy voice 
for I have heard from the Lord Gop shall be, as of one that hath a fa- 
of hosts a consumption, even deter- miliar spirit, out of the ground, and 
mined upon the whole earth. — | thy speech shall whisper out of the 
23 Give ye ear, and hear my voice; dust. : 
hearken, and hear my speech. : 5 Moreover the multitude of thy 
24 Doth the plowman plow all strangers shall be like small dust, 
day to sow? doth he open and break and the multitude of the terrible 
the clods of his ground? | ones shall be ‘as chaff that passeth 


i in prophecy, and especially in Isaiah, the near and far horizons 
Rene eee i of Sennacherib’s invasion and the destruction of the 
Assyrian host by the angel of the Lorp (Isa. 36., 37.); the far view is that of the 
final gathering of the Gentile hosts against Jerusalem at the end of the great tribu- 
lation (Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 7. 14), when a still greater deliverance will be wrought. 
(See ‘‘Times of the Gentiles,” Lk, 21. 24; Rev. 16. 14.) The same remark applies 
also to Isa. 28. 14-18, where there is a near reference to the Egyptian alliance (“we 
have made a covenant,” etc.), while the reference to the stone (v.16) carries the 
meaning forward to the end-time, and the covenant of unbelieving Israel with 
the Beast (Dan. 9. 27). ie 


29 6] 


ISAIAH. 


away: yea, it shall be at an instant 
suddenly. 

6 Thou shalt be visited of the 
LorpD of hosts with thunder, and 
with “earthquake, and great noise, 
with storm and tempest, and the 
flame of devouring fire. 

7 And the multitude of all the 
nations that fight against Ariel, 
even all that fight against her and 
her munition, and that distress her, 
shall be as a dream of a night 
vision, 

8 It shall even be as when an 
hungry man dreameth, and, be- 
hold, he eateth; but he awaketh, 
and his soul is empty: or as when a 
thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, 
he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, 
behold, he is faint, and his soul 
hath appetite: so shall the multi- 
tude of all the nations be, that fight 
against mount Zion. 


(2) The reasons for the discipline. 


9 Stay yourselves, and wonder; 
cry ye out, and cry: they are 
drunken, but not with wine; they 
stagger, but not with strong drink. 

10 For the Lorp hath poured out 
upon you the spirit of deep “sleep, 
and hath closed your eyes: the 
prophets and your rulers, the seers 
hath he covered. 

11 And the vision of all is become 
unto you as the words of a book 
that is sealed, which men deliver to 
one that is learned, saying, Read 
this, I pray thee: and he saith, I 
cannot; for it 1s sealed: 

12 And the book is delivered to 
him that is not learned, saying, 
Read this, I pray thee: and he 
saith, I am not learned. 

13. Wherefore the Lord said, For- 
asmuch as this people draw near me 
with their mouth, ‘and with their 
lips do honour me, but have re- 
moved their heart far from me, and 
their fear toward me is taught by 
the precept of men: 

14 Therefore, behold, I will pro- 
ceed to do a ¢marvellous work 
among this people, even a marvel- 
lous work and a wonder: for the 
‘wisdom of their wise men shall 
perish, and the understanding of 
their prudent men shall be hid. 

15 Woe unto them that seek deep 
to hide their counsel from the Lorp, 


B.C. 712. 


a Zech.14.4; 
Rev.16.19. 


6b Rom.11.8, 


¢ Ezk.33.31; 
Mt.15.8,9; 
MK.7.6,7. 


d Hab.1.5. 


e Jer.49.7; 
Oba.8; 
1 Cor.1.19. 


f Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59. 
20, note. 


g Deut.29.19, 


h Num.27.21; 
Josh.9.14; 
1 Ki.22.7; 
Jer.21.2; 42. 
2,3,20. 


# Psa.2.12, 
note, 


and their works are in the dark,|. 


and they say, Who seeth us? and 
who knoweth us? 

16. Surely your turning of things 
upside down shall be esteemed as 


738 


the potter’s clay: for shall the work © 
say of him that made it, He made > 
me not? or shall the thing framed 
say of him that framed it, He had 
no understanding? 


(3) Blessing after deliverance 
(Isa. 37. 33-36): type of blessing 
in the kingdom after Rev. 19. 
19-21, 


17 Js it not yet a very little while, 
and Lebanon shall be turned into a 
fruitful field, and the fruitful field 
shall be esteemed as a forest? 

18 And in that day shall the deaf 
hear the words of the book, and the 
eyes of the blind shall see out of 
obscurity, and out of darkness. 

19 The meek also shall increase 
their joy in the LorD, and the poor 
among men shall rejoice in the 
Holy One of Israel. 

20 For the terrible one is brought 
to nought, and the scorner is con- 
sumed, and all that watch for ini- 
quity are cut off: | 

21 That make a man an offender 
for a word, and lay a snare for him 
that reproveth in the gate, and turn 
aside the just for a thing of nought. 

22 Therefore thus saith the Lorp, 


- |who fredeemed Abraham, concern- 


ing the house of Jacob, Jacob shall 
not now be ashamed, neither shall 
his face now wax pale. 

23 But when he seeth his children, 
the work of mine hands, in the 
midst of him, they shall sanctify 
my name, and. sanctify the Holy 
One of Jacob, and shall fear the 
God of Israel. 

24 They also that erred in spirit 
shall come to understanding, and 
they that murmured shall learn 
doctrine. 


CHAPTER 30. 


(4)Warnings against an alliance 
with Egypt against Sennacherib. 


OE to the rebellious children, 
saith the Lorp, that take 
counsel, but not of me; and that 
cover with a covering, but not of 
my spirit, éthat they may add sin 
to sin: 

2 That walk to go down into 
Egypt, and “have not asked at my 
mouth; to strengthen themselves 
in the strength of Pharaoh, and to 
trust in the shadow of Egypt! 

3 Therefore shall the strength of 
Pharaoh be your shame, and the 
‘trust in the shadow of Egypt your 
confusion. 


os ab ‘ Fe Se 


4 For his princes were at Zoan, and 
his ambassadors came to Hanes. 

5 They were all ashamed of a 
people that could not profit them, 
nor be an help nor profit, but a 
shame, and also a reproach. 

6 The “burden of the beasts of the 
south: into the land of trouble and 
anguish, from whence come the 
young and old lion, the viper and 
fiery flying serpent, they will carry 
their riches upon the shoulders of 
young asses, and their treasures 
upon the bunches of camels, to a 
people that shall not _ profit 
them. 

7 For the Egyptians shall help in 
vain, and to no purpose: therefore 
have I cried concerning this, Their 
strength is to sit still. 

8 Now go, 5write it before them 
in a table, ‘and note it in a book, 
that it may be for the time to come 
for ever and ever: 

9 That this is a rebellious people, 
lying children, children that will 
not hear the law of the LorpD: 

10 Which say to the seers, See 
not; and to the prophets, Prophesy 
not unto us right things, speak 
unto us smooth things, prophesy 
deceits: 

11 Get you out of the way, turn 
aside out of the path, cause the 
Holy One of Israel to cease from 
before us. 

12 Wherefore thus saith the Holy 
One of Israel, Because ye despise! 
this word, and “trust in oppres- 
sion and perverseness, and stay 
thereon: 

13 Therefore this iniquity shall 
be to you as a breach ready to fall, 
swelling out in a high wall, whose 

“breaking cometh suddenly at an 
instant. 

14 And he shall break it as the’ 
breaking of the potters’ vessel that! 
is broken in pieces; he shall not 
spare: so that there shall not be 
found in the bursting of it a sherd) 
to take fire from the hearth, or to 
take water withal out of the pit. | 

(5) Exhortation to turn to the 
LorD for help against Sen- 
nacherib: foreshadowing of 
kingdom blessing. 


15 For thus saith the Lord Gon, 
the Holy One of Israel; In return- 
ing and rest shall ye be saved; in 
quietness and in confidence shall 
be your strength: ¢and ye would 
not. 4 


ISATAH. 


a 1sa.13.1, 
note. 


b Inspiration. 


Isa.59.21. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


c Psalm 2.12, 
note. 


d Mt.23.37. 


e Lev.26.8; 
Deut.28.25; 
32.30; Josh. 
23.10. 


f Psa.2.12; 
34.8; Prov. 
16:20; Jer. 
Werth, 


g Mt.6.33; 
1 Tim.4.8. 


739 


[30 26 


16 But ye said, No; for we will 
flee upon horses; therefore shall ye 
flee: and, We will ride upon the 
swift; therefore shall they that 
pursue you be swift. 

17 ‘One thousand shalI flee at 
the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of 
five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a 
beacon upon the top of a mountain, 
and as an ensign on an hill. 

18 And therefore will the Lorp 
wait, that he may be gracious unto 
you, and therefore will he be. ex- 
alted, that he may have mercy 
upon you: for the LorpD is a God 
of judgment: fblessed are all they 
that wait for him. 

19 For the people shall dwell! in 
Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt weep 
no more: he will be --ery gracious 
unto thee at the voice of thy cry; 
when he shall hear it, he will an- 
swer thee. 

20' And though the Lord give 
you the bread of adversity, and the 
water of affliction, yet shall not thy 
teachers be removed into a corner 
any more, but thine eyes shall see 
thy teachers: 

21 And thine ears shall hear a 
word behind thee, saying, This is 
the way, walk ye in it, when ye 
turn to the right hand, and when 
ye turn to the left. 

22 Ye shall defile also the cover- 
ing of thy graven images of silver, 
and the ornament of thy molten 
images of gold: thou «shalt cast 
them away as a menstruous cloth; 
thou shalt say unto it, Get thee 
hence. 

23 Then shall he give the rain of 
thy seed, that thou shalt sow the 
ground withal; and bread of the 
increase of the earth, and it shall 
be fat and plenteous: in that day 
shail thy cattle feed in large pas- 
tures. 

24 The oxen likewise and the 
young asses that ear the ground 
shall eat clean provender, which 
hath been winnowed with the 
shovel and with the fan. 

25 And there shall be upon every 
high mountain, and upon every 
high hill, rivers and streams of 
waters in the day of the great 
slaughter, when the towers fall. 

26 Moreover the light of the moon 


shall be as the light of the sun, and 


the light of the sun shail be seven- 
fold, as the light of seven days, in 
the day that the Lorp bindeth up 


the breach of his people, and heal- 
eth the stroke of their wound. 


30 27] ISAIAH. [32 2 


bring evil, and will not call back hts 
words: but will arise against the 
house of the evildoers, and against 
the help of them that work iniquity. 

3 Now the Egyptians are men, 
aIsa.11.4; and not God; and their horses flesh, 

2 Thes.2.8. jand not spirit. When the Lorp 
shall stretch out his hand, both he 


27 'Behold, the name of the 
Lorp cometh from far, burning 
with his anger, and the burden 
thereof is heavy: his lips are full of 
indignation, and his tongue as a 
devouring fire: 

28 And “his breath, as an over- 
flowing stream, shall reach to the 


midst of the neck, to sift the nations eee that helpeth shall fall, and he that 
ee etl an, , ty na ees 
By caaillacen wor oia'tie| "= easoibe, ile aot oat 
night whan dohholge eokeniniey is|@ Jer.7-31, young lion roaring on his prey, — 


kept; and gladness of heart, as Ee oe when a multitude of shepherds is 


when one goeth with a pipe to come} toricallya _|called forth against him, he will not 
into poe mountain ot ee eo to a ea oi epee of oe ee a abase 
the Smighty One of Israel. Hinn self for the noise o' em: so 
“30 And the Lor shall cause chis| where hu- _ |shall the LORD of. hosts come down 
glorious voice to be heard, and shall oe sacti- to fight for mount Zion, and for the 
Senlehe ieignetion oF Tl shaee ofered The [Pe As bards flying, so will the 
wt er »| word means ’ 
and with the flame of a devouring| ‘place of Lorp of hosts defend Jerusalem; 
fire, with scattering, and tempest,| ®¢-" The. |defending also he will deliver it; 
and hailstones. symbolic ef | 2nd passing over he will preserve if. 
31 For through the voice of the] thelakeof | 6 Turn ye unto him from whom 
Lorp shall the Assyrian be beaten] ®¢ 2d the /the children of Israel have ‘deeply 


down, which smote with a rod. Fon caer revolted. 

32 And in every place where the] 19.20). 7 For in that day every man shall 
grounded staff shall pass, which the] , 5... 9 19 cast. away his idols of silver, and 
eee spellay ote him, c nige ba notes pe ae of ae pee Ha ven ee 
with tabrets and harps: and in bat- ands have made unto you for a 
tles of shaking will he fight with|/Ba938: si 


Hos.7.7 a, eh 
8 Then shall the Assyrian Jfall 


it. 

33 For ¢Tophet fs ordained of old;|¢ Hos.11.10; [with the sword, not of a mighty 
yea, for the king it is prepared; he} “™°S3-8- [|man; and the sword, not of a mean 
hath made it deep and large: the], Deut.32.11; |Mman, shall devour him: but he shall 
pile thereof zs fire and much wood;| Psa.91.4. flee from the sword, and his young 
the breath of the Lorp, like a men shall be discomfited. 
stream of brimstone, doth kindle it. 9 And he shall pass over to his 
j See 2 Ki.19. (strong hold for fear, and his princes 

CHAPTER 31. 35,36; es eid one cin saith 
5 bi the Lorpb, whose fire rs in Zion, and 
(6) Judah again warned against}, ,,. : af , 
Peel barptsenalieccecadehot Pagnecces his furnace in Jerusalem. 
vah will defend Jerusalem. 2,14-18; Isa. 


33.17-22. CHAPTER 32. 
WU inde cede oe potion Promise and warning: tribula- 
horses, and ¢trust in chariots, be- 


tion: the King-Deliverer (Chap- 
cause they are many; and in horse- 


ters 32.-35.). 
men, because they are very strong; 


BEHOLD, a *king shall freign in 
but they look not unto the Holy righteousness, and princes shail 
One of Israel, ‘neither seek the 


rule in judgment. 
Lorp! 2 Andaman shall be as an hiding 
2 Yet he also is wise, and will place from the wind, and a covert 


1 The imagery of verses 27, 28 is cumulative. Judah is making an alliance with 
Egypt when she might be in league with Him whose judgment upon the world- 
powers will be like a terrible thunder-tempest (v. 27), turning streams into torrents 
neck-deep (v. 28, f.c.); who will sift the nations in their own sieve of vanity (or 
“destruction”’), and put His bridle into the jaws of the peoples. 4 

2 See Isa. 29. 3, note. In chapters 32.-35. the same blended meanings of near 
and far fulfilments are found. The near view is still of Sennacherib’s invasion, 
the far view of the day of the Lorp (Isa. 2. 10-22; Rev. 19. 11-21), and the king- 
dom blessing to follow. f 

740 


from the tempest; as rivers of water 
in a dry place, as the shadow of a 
great rock in a weary land. 

3 And the eyes of them that see 
shall not be dim, and the ears of 
them that hear shall hearken. 

4 The heart also of the rash shail 
understand knowledge, and the 
tongue of the stammerers shall be 
ready to speak plainly. 

The vile person shail be no more 
called liberal, nor the churl said to 
be bountiful. 

6 For the vile person will speak 
villany, and his heart will work 
iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and 
to utter error against the LORD, to 
make empty the soul of the hungry, 
and he will cause the drink of the 
thirsty to fail. 

7 The instruments also of the 
churl are evil: he deviseth wicked 
devices to destroy the poor with 
lying words, even when the needy 
speaketh right. 


8 But the liberal deviseth liberal]” 


things; and by liberal things shall 
he stand. 

9 Rise up, ye women that are at 
ease; hear my voice, ye careless 
daughters; give ear unto my speech. 

10 Many days and years shall ye 
be troubled, ye careless women: for 
the vintage shall fail, the gathering 
shall not come. 

11 Tremble, ye women that are at 
ease; be troubled, ye careless ones: 
strip you, and make you bare, and 
gird sackcloth upon your loins. 

12 They shall lament for the teats, 
for the pleasant fields, for the fruit- 
ful vine. 

13 Upon the land of my people 
_shall come up thorns and briers; 
"yea, upon all the houses of joy in 
the joyous city: 

14 Because the palaces shall be 
forsaken; the multitude of the city 
shall be left; the forts and towers 
shall be for dens for ever, a joy of 
wild asses, a pasture of flocks; 

15 Until the ¢spirit be poured 
upon us from on high, and the 
wilderness be a fruitful field, and the 
fruitful fieid be counted for a for- 


Est.) 

16 Then judgment shall dwell in 
the wilderness, and righteousness 
remain in the fruitful field. 

17 And the work of righteousness 
shall be peace; and the effect of 
righteousness quietness and assur- 
ance for ever- : 

18 And my people shall dwell in) 
a peaceable habitation, and in sure 


ISAIAH. 


a Holy Spirit. 
Isa.40.7 


of 


g 


2 Ki.18.18, 
37. 


2 Ki.18.14- 
17, 


741 


dwellings, 
places; 

19 When it shali hail, coming 
down on the forest; and the city 
shall be low in a low place. , 

20 Blessed are ye that sow beside 
all waters,.that send forth thither 
the feet of the ox and the ass. 


CHAPTER 33. 


(Promise and warning, 
continued.) 


OE to thee ‘that spoilest, and 

thou wast not spoiled; and 
dealest treacherously; and they 
dealt not treacherously with thee! 
when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou 
shalt be spoiled; and when thou 
shalt make an end to deal treacher- 
ously, they shall deal treacherously 
with thee. 

2 O Lorp, be gracious unto us; 
we have waited for thee: be thou 
their arm every morning, our salva- 
tion also in the time of trouble. 

3 At the noise of the tumult the 
people fled; at the lifting up of thy- 
self the nations were scattered. 

4 And your spoil shall be gathered 
like the gathering of the caterpiller: 
as the running to and fro of locusts 
shall he run upon them. 

5 ¢The Lorn is exalted; for he 
dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion 
with judgment and righteousness. 

6 And wisdom and knowledge 
shall be the stability of thy times, 
and strength of salvation: the ‘fear 
of the LorD is his treasure. 

7 Behold, their valiant ones shall 
cry without: the Jambassadors of 
peace shall weep bitterly. ~ 

8 The highways lie waste, the 
wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath 
broken the covenant, “he hath de- 
spised the cities, he regardeth no 
man. 

9 The earth mourneth and lan- 
guisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and 
hewn down: Sharon is like a wil- 
derness; and Bashan and Carmel 
shake off their fruits, 

10 Now will I rise, saith the 
Lorp; now will I be exalted; now 
will I lift up myself. 

11 Ye shall conceive chaff, ye 
shall bring forth stubble: your 
breath, as fire, shall devour you. 

12 And the people shall be as the 
|burnings of lime: as thorns cut up 
shall they be burned in the fire. 

13 Hear, ye that are far off, 
what I have done; and, ye that are 
near, acknowledge my might. 


and in quiet resting 


ISAIAH. 


14 The sinners in Zion are afraid; 

fearfulness hath surprised the hypo- 
crites. Who among us shall dwell 
with the devouring fire? who 
among us shall dwell with ever- 
lasting burnings? ; 

15 He that walketh righteously, 
and speaketh uprightly; he that 
despiseth the gain of oppressions; 
that shaketh his hands from hold- 
ing of bribes, that stoppeth his ears 
from hearing of blood, and shutteth 
his eyes from seeing evil; : ; 

16 He shall dwell on high: his 
‘place of defence shall be the muni- 
tions of rocks: bread shall be given 
him; his waters shall be sure. : 

17 Thine eyes shall ¢see the king 
in his beauty: they shall behold 
the land that is very far off. 

18 Thine heart shall meditate ter- 
ror. Where is the scribe? where 
is the receiver? where is he that 
counted the towers? 

19 Thou shalt not see a fierce peo- 
ple, a people of a deeper speech 
than thou canst perceive; of a 
stammering tongue, that thou 
canst not understand. . 

20 Look upon Zion, the city of 
our solemnities: thine eyes shall 
see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a 
tabernacle that shall not be taken 
down; not one of the stakes thereof 
shall ever be removed, neither shall 
any of the cords thereof be broken. 19.11.21.) 

21 But there the glorious Lorp ; ; 
will be unto us a place of broad|f Deut.29.23. 
Tivers and streams; wherein shall 
go no galley with oars, neither shall 
gallant ship pass thereby. 

22 For the Lorn is our judge, the 
Lorp is our lawgiver, the Lorp js 
our king; he will save us. 

23 Thy tacklings are loosed; they 
could not well strengthen their 
mast, they could not spread the 
sail: then is the prey of a great 
spoil divided; the lame take the 
prey. 


6 Day (of de- 
struction). 
vs.1-9; Isa. 
61.2.. (Job 
21.30; Rev. 
20.11-15.) 


c Armaged-, 
don (battle 
of). vs.1-8; 
Isa.63.1-6. 
(Rev.16.14; 
19.11-21.) 


d vs.1-8; 


Gen.36.1, 
note, 


e Day (of Je- 


hovah). vs. 
1-8; Isa.63. 


g Rev.14.11; 
18.18; 19.3. 


h Isa.14.23; 


Zeph.2.14; 
Rev.18.2. 


CHAPTER 34. 


The day of the Lorp: 
Armaégeddon. 


2 For the %indignation of the 
742 


B.C. 713. 


LorD is upon all nations, and Ais 
fury upon all their armies: ‘he hath 
utterly destroyed them, he hath 
delivered them to the slaughter. 

3 Their slain also shall be cast 
out, and their stink shall come up 
out of their carcases, and the moun- 


be rolled together as a scroll: and 
all their host shall fall down, as the 
leaf falleth off from the vine, and as 
a falling fig from the fig tree. 

5 For my sword shall be bathed in 
heaven: behold, it shall come down 
upon ¢Idumea, and upon the people 
of my curse, to judgment. 

6 The sword of the LorD is filled 
with blood, it is made fat with fat- 
ness, and with the blood of lambs 
and goats, with the fat of the kid- 
neys of rams: for the LorpD hath a 
sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great 
slaughter in the land of Idumea. 

7 And the unicorns shall come 
down with them, and the bullocks 
with the bulls; and their land shall 
be soaked with blood, and their 
dust made fat with fatness, 

8 “For it is the day of the Lorp’s 
vengeance, and the year of recom- 
pences for the controversy of Zion. 

9 And fthe streams thereof shall 
be turned into pitch, and the dust 
thereof into brimstone, and the land 
thereof shall become burning pitch. 

10 It shall not be quenched night 
nor day; &the smoke thereof shall 
go up for ever: from generation to 
generation it shall lie waste; none 
shall pass through it for ever and 
ever. 

11 *But the cormorant and the 
bittern shall possess it; the owl 
also and the raven shall dwell in 
it: and he shall stretch out upon it 
the line of confusion, and the stones 
of emptiness. 

12 They shall call the nobles 
thereof to the kingdom, but none 
shall be there, and all her princes 
shall be nothing. 

13 And thorns shall come up in 
her palaces, nettles and brambles in 
the fortresses thereof: and it shall 
be an habitation of dragons, and a 
court for owls. 

14 The wild beasts of the desert 
shall also meet with the wild beasts 
of the island, and the satyr shall 
cry to his fellow; the screech owl 
also shall rest there, and find for 
herself a place of rest. 


ISAIAH. 


[36 11 


15 There shall the great owl make 
her nest, and lay, and hatch, and 
gather under her shadow: there 
shall the vultures also be gathered, 
every one with her mate. 

16 Seek ye out of the book of the 
Lorp, and read: no one of these 
shall fail, none shall want her mate: 
for my mouth it hath commanded, 
and his spirit it hath gathered them. 

17 And he hath cast the lot for 
them, and his hand hath divided it 
unto them by line: they shall pos- 
sess it for ever, from generation to 
generation shall they dwell therein. 


CHAPTER 35. 


Kingdom blessing: the regath- 
ering of Israel. 


HE wilderness and the solitary 

place shall be glad for “then; 

and the desert shall rejoice, and 
blossom as the rose. 

2 It shall blossom abundantly, 
and rejoice even with joy an 
singing: the glory of Lebanon shall 
be given unto it, the excellency of 
Carmel and Sharon, they shall see 
the glory of the LorD, and the 
excellency of our God. 

3 Strengthen ye the weak Shands, 
and confirm the feeble knees. 

4 Say to them that are of a fear- 
ful heart, Be strong, fear not: be- 

hold, your God will come with 
vengeance, even God with a recom- 
pence; he will come and save you. 

5 Then the eyes of the blind shall 
be opened, and the ears of the deaf 
shall be unstopped. 

6 Then shall the lame man leap 
as an hart, and the tongue of the 

-dumb sing: for in the wilderness 
shall waters break out, and streams 
in the desert. 

7 And the parched ground shall 
become a pool, and the thirsty land 
springs of water: in the habitation 
of dragons, where each lay, shall 
be grass with reeds and rushes. 

8 And an highway shall be there, 
and a way, and it shall be called 
The way of holiness; ‘the unclean 
shall not pass over it; but it shall 
be for those: the wayfaring men, 
though fools, shall not err therein. 

9 No 4ion shall be there, nor any 
ravenous beast shall go up thereon, 
it shall not be found there; but the 
éredeemed shall walk there: 

10 And the ransomed of the LORD 
shall return, and come to Zion with 
songs and everlasting joy upon 
their heads: they shall obtain joy 


B.C. 713. 


a Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs. 


(Gen.1.26; © 

Zech.12.8.) 
b Job 4.3,4; 

Heb.12.12. 


¢ Isa.52.1; 
Joel 3.17; 
Rev.21.27. 

d Isa.11.9; 
Lev.26.6; 


Ezk.34.25. 


e Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). 


f Psa.2.12, 
note. 


743 


Isa. 
59.20, note. 


and gladness, and sorrow and sigh- 
ing shall flee away. 


CHAPTER 36. 


Sennacherib’s invasion and Je- 
hovah’s deliverance (Chapters 
36., 37.): (1) The invasion. 


Now it came to pass in the four- 
teenth year of king Hezekiah, 
that Sennacherib king of Assyria 
came up against all the defenced 
cities of Judah, and took them. 


great army. And he stood by the 
conduit of the upper pool in the 
highway of the fuller’s field. 

3 Then came forth unto him Elia- 
kim, Hilkiah’s son, which was 
over the house, and Shebna the 
scribe, and Joah, Asaph’s son, the 
recorder. 


(2) The threats of Rabshakeh. 


4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, 
Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus 
saith the great king, the king of 
Assyria, What confidence is this 
wherein thou trustest? 

5 I say, sayest thou, (but they 
are but vain words) I have counsel 
and strength for war: now on whom 
dost thou ‘trust, that thou rebellest 
against me? 

6 Lo, thou trustest in the staff of 
this broken reed, on Egypt; where- 
on if a man lean, it will go into his 
hand, and pietce it: so is Pharaoh 
king of Egypt to all that trust in 
him. 

7 But if thou say to me, We trust 
in the LorpD our God: fs it not he, 
whose high places and whose altars 
Hezekiah hath taken away, and 
said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye 
shall worship before this altar? 

8 Now therefore give pledges, I 
pray thee, to my master the king of 
Assyria, and I will give thee two 
thousand horses, if thou be able on 
thy part to set riders upon them. 

9 How then wilt thou turn away 
the face of one captain of the least 
of my master’s servants, and put 
thy trust on Egypt for chariots and 
for horsemen? 

10 And am I now come up with- 
out the LoRD against this land to 
destroy it? the Lorp said unto 
me, Go up against this land, and 
destroy it. ; 

11 Then said Eliakim and Shebna 


36 12} ISAIAH. [37 7 


and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, 
I pray thee, unto thy servants in the 
Syrian language; for we under- 
stand it: and speak not to us in the 
Jews’ language, in the ears of the 
people that are on the wall. 

12 But Rabshakeh said, Hath my 
master sent me to thy master and 
to thee to speak these words? hath 
he not sent me to the men that 
sit upon the wall, that they may 
eat their own dung, and drink their 
own piss with you? 

13 Then Rabshakeh stood, and 
cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ 
language, and said, Hear ye the 
words of the great king, the king of 
Assyria. 

14 Thus saith the king, Let not 
Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall 
not be able to deliver you. 

15 Neither let Hezekiah make 
you trust in the LorD, saying, The 
Lorp will surely deliver us: this 
city shall not be delivered into the 
hand of the king of Assyria. 

16 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for 
thus saith the king of Assyria, 


to Hezekiah with their clothes 
rent, and told him the words of — 
Rabshakeh. : 


CHAPTER 37 


ANP bit came to pass, when king 
Hezekiah heard i¢, that he rent 
his clothes, and covered himself 
with sackcloth, and went into the 
house of the Lorp. 

2 And he sent Eliakim, who was 
over the household, and Shebna the 
scribe, and the elders of the priests 
covered with sackcloth, unto Isaiah 
the prophet the son of Amoz. 

3 And they said unto him, Thus 
saith Hezekiah, This day is a day 
of trouble, and of rebuke, and of 
‘blasphemy: for the children are 
come to the birth, and there is not 
strength to bring forth. 

4 It may be the Lorp thy God 
will hear the words of Rabshakeh, 
whom the king of Assyria his master 
hath sent to reproach the living 
wid thd Heo ie ea 
a Zech.3.10. | whic e Lorp thy at 
5 : heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer 
i ihpacooment with ine bane b2Ki191. | for the remnant that is 4left. 
eat ye every one of his vine, and|° Of Provoca- | (4) Messageof Jehovah by Isaiah. 
Ye ever one the water of his own“ ound [2 50, the servants of King Heze 

f , came to Isaiah. 
cistern; eOr, put a 6 And Isaiah said unto them, 

17 Lay I me and take you om into |Thus shall ye say unto your mas- 
away to a land like your own land, a} Aim. ter, Thus saith the Lorp, Be not 
land of corn and wine, a land of f Psa.2.12, afraid of the words that thou hast 
Preed and neards: : note. heard, wherewith the servants of 
iel8.id ba et Lae pa Lass ae — of Assyria have blas- 

t » Saying, phemed me. 
deliver us. Hath any of the gods ill -e 
of the nations delivered his land ae rene pee entrees he 
out of the hand of the king of As- i 
sytia: 

19 Where are the gods of Hamath 
and Arphad? where are the gods of 
Sepharvaim? and have they deliv- 
ered Samaria out of my hand? 

20 Who are they among all the 
gods of these lands, that have de- 
livered their land out of my hand, 
that the Lorpb should deliver Jeru- 
salem out of my hand? 

21 But they held their peace, and 
answered him not a word: for the 
king’s commandment was, saying, 
Answer him not. 


(5) Sennacherib’s message to - 
Hezekiah, ’ 
8 So Rabshakeh returned, and 
found the king of Assyria warring 
against Libnah: for he had heard 
that he was departed from Lachish. 
9 And he heard say concerning 
Tirhakah king of. Ethiopia, He is 
come forth to make ‘war with thee 


(3) Rabshakeh’s threats told to 


Hezekiah. thy God, in whom thou Strustest, 


deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem 
shall not be given into the hand of 
the king of Assyria. 

11 Behold, thou hast heard what 
the kings of Assyria have done to _ 


22 Then came Eliakim, the son of 
Hilkiah, that was over the house- 
hold, and Shebna the scribe, and 
Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, 


744 


37 12] 


all lands by destroying them utter- 
ly; and shalt thou be delivered? 

12 Have the gods of the nations 
delivered them which my fathers 
have destroyed, as Gozan, and Ha- 
ran, and Rezeph, and the children 
of Eden which were in Telassar? 

13 Where ss the king of Hamath, 
and the king of Arphad, and the 
king of the city of Sepharvaim, 
Hena, and Ivah? 


(6) Hezekiah’s prayer 


14. And Hezekiah received the let- 
ter from the hand of the messengers, 
and read it: and Hezekiah went up 
unto the house of the LorD, and 
spread it before the LorD. 

15 And Hezekiah ¢prayed-unto 
the LORD, saying, 

16 OLorD of hosts, God of Israel, 
that dwellest between the cheru- 
bims, thou art the God, even thou 
alone, of all the kingdoms of the 
earth: thou hast made heaven and 


earth. 

17 ‘Incline thine ear, O Lorp, 
and hear; open thine eyes, O Lorp, 
and see: and hear all the words of 
Sennacherib, which hath sent to re- 
proach the living God. 

18 Of a truth, Lorn, the kings of 
Assyria have laid waste all the na- 
tions, and their countries, 

19 And have cast their gods into 
the fire: for they were no gods, but 
the work of men’s hands, wood 
and stone: therefore they have de- 
stroyed them. 

20 Now therefore, O LORD our 
God, save us from his hand, that all 
the kingdoms of the earth may 
know that thou art the LORD, even 

~thou only. 


(7) Jehovah’s answer by Isaiah. 


21 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz 
sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus 
saith the Lorp God of Israel, 
Whereas thou hast prayed to me 
against Sennacherib king of As- 
syria: 

22 This is the word which the 
Lorp hath spoken concerning him; 
The virgin, the daughter of Zion, 
hath despised thee, and laughed 
thee to scorn; the daughter of Je- 
rusalem hath shaken her head at 
thee. 

23 Whom hast thou reproached 
and blasphemed? and against whom 
hast thou exalted thy voice, and 
lifted up thine eyes on high? even 
against the Holy One of Israel. 


ISAIAH. 


B.C. 710. 


a Bible 
prayers 
(O.T.). 
Isa.38.3. 
(Gen.15.2; 

Hab.3.1-16.) 


6 Dan.9.18. 

c Heb. by the 
hand of thy 
servants. 


d Or, fenced 
and closed. 


e Heb. short 
of hand. 


f Or, sitting. 


g Isa.30.28; 
Ezk.38.4. 


hk Remnant. 
Isa.46.3. 
(Isa.1.9; 
Rom.11.5.) 


t Isa.9.7; 
2 Ki.19.31. 


745 


[37 35 


24 ‘By thy servants hast thou re- 
proached the Lord, and hast said, 
By the multitude of my chariots 
am I come up to the height of the 
mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; 
and I will cut down the tall cedars 
thereof, and the choice fir trees 
thereof: and I will enter into the 
height of his border, and the forest 
of his Carmel. 

25 I have digged, and drunk 
water; and with the sole of my feet 
have I dried up all the rivers of the 
4besieged places. 

26 Hast thou not heard long ago, 
how I have done it: and of ancient 
times, that I have formed it? now 
have I brought it to pass, that thou 
shouldest be to lay waste defenced 
cities into ruinous heaps. 

27 ‘Therefore their inhabitants 
were ‘of small power, they were 
dismayed and confounded: they 
were as the grass of the field, and as 
the green herb, as the grass on the 
housetops, and as corn blasted 
before it be grown up. 

28 But I know thy ‘Sabode, and 
thy going out, and thy coming in, 
and thy rage against me. 

29 Because thy rage against me, 
and thy tumult, is come up into 
mine ears, therefore ¢will I put my 
hook in thy nose, and my bridle 


lin thy lips, and I will turn thee 


back by the way by which thou 
camest. t 

30 And this shall bea sign unto 
thee, Ye shall eat this year such as 
groweth of itself; and the second 


lyear that which springeth of the 


same: and in the third year sow ye, 
and reap, and plant vineyards, and 


eat the fruit thereof. 

31 And the remnant that is es- 
caped of the house of Judah shall 
again take root downward, and bear 
fruit upward: 

32 For out of Jerusalem shall go 
forth a ‘remnant, and they that es- 
cape out of mount Zion: ‘the zeal of 
the LorD of hosts shall do this. 

33 Therefore thus saith the Lorp 
concerning the king of Assyria, He 
shall not come into this city, nor 
shoot an arrow there, nor come be- 
fore it with shields, nor cast a bank 
against it. 

34 By the way that he came, by 
the same shall he return, and shall 
not come into this city, saith the 
Lorb. ; 

35 For I will defend this city to 
save it for mine own sake, and for 
my servant David’s sake. 


37 36] 


ISAIAH. 


[39 1 


(8) Destruction of the Assyrian| B.c. 710. |4grave: I am deprived of the residue 


host. (Cf, Isa. 10. 12.) 


36 Then the “angel of the Lorp 
went forth, and smote in the camp 
of the Assyrians a hundred and four- 
score and five thousand:and when 
they arose early in the morning, be- 
hold, they were all dead corpses. 

37 So Sennacherib king of Assy- 
ria departed, and went and re- 
turned, and dwelt at Nineveh. 

38 And it came to pass, as he was 
worshipping in the house of Nis- 
roch his god, that Adrammelech 
and Sharezer his sons smote him 
with the sword; and they escaped 
into the land of Armenia: and Esar- 
haddon his son reigned in his stead. 


CHAPTER 38. 


Hezekiah’s sickness and 
recovery. 


as those days was Hezekiah sick 
unto death, And Isaiah the pro- 
phet the son of Amoz came unto 
him, and said unto him, Thus saith 
the Lorp, Set thine house in order: 
for thou shalt die, and not live. 

2 Then Hezekiah turned his face 
toward the wall, and prayed unto 
the Lorpb, 

3 And said, Remember now, O 
Lorp, I “beseech thee, how I have 
walked before thee in truth and 
with a “perfect heart, and have 
done that which is good in thy 
sight. And Hezekiah wept sore. 

4 Then came the word of the 
Lorp to Isaiah, saying, 

5 Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus 
saith the Lorp, the God of David 
thy father, I have heard thy prayer, 
I have seen thy tears: behold, I will 
add unto thy days fifteen years. 

6 And I will deliver thee and this 
city out of the hand of the king of 
Assyria: and I will defend this city. 

7 And this shali be a sign unto 
thee from the Lorp, that the Lorp 
will do this thing that he hath 
spoken; 

8 Behold, I will bring again the 
shadow of the degrees, which is 
gone down in the sun dial of Ahaz, 
ten degrees backward. So the sun 
returned ten degrees, by which de- 
grees it was gone down. 

9 The writing of Hezekiah king 
of Judah, when he had been sick, 
and was recovered of his sickness: 

10 I said in the cutting off of my 
days, I shall go to the gates of the 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 


c1 Ki.8.61. 
d Heb. Sheol. 


of my years. 

11 I said, I shall not see the LorD, 
even the LORD, in the land of the 
living: I shall behold man no more 
with the inhabitants of the world. 

12 Mine age is departed, and is 
removed from me as a shepherd’s 
tent: I have cut off like a weaver 
my life: he will cut me off with pin- 


ing sickness: from day even to night 
wilt thou make an end of me. 

13 I reckoned till morning, that, 
as a lion, so will he break all my 
bones: from day even to night wilt 
thou make an end of me. 

14 Like a crane or a swallow, so 
did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: 
mine eyes fail with looking up- 
ward: O Lorp, I am oppressed; 
undertake for me. 

15 What shall I say? he hath both 
spoken unto me, and himself hath 
done it: I shall go softly all my 
years in the bitterness of my soul. 

16 OLord, by.these things men 
live, and in all these things is the 
life of my spirit: so wilt thou re- 
cover me, and make me to live. 

17 Behold, for peace I had great 


See Hab.2.5, |bitterness: but thou hast in love to 


note, 

e Forgive- 
ness. 
Isa.44.22. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 


f Eccl.9.5, 
note. 


g 2 Ki.20.7. 
hk 2 Ki.20.8. 


746 


my, soul delivered it from the pit of 
corruption: for thou hast cast all 
my sins behind thy “back. 

18 For the ¢grave cannot praise 
thee, ‘death can not celebrate thee: 
they that go down into the pit can- 
not hope for thy truth: 

19 The living, the living, he shall 
praise thee, as I do this day: the 
father to the children shall make 
known thy truth. 

20 The LorD was ready to save 
me: therefore we will sing my songs 
to the stringed instruments all the 
days of our life in the house of the _ 
LorpD. ’ ; 

21 For Isaiah had said, Let them 
take a lump of figs, and lay it fora 
plaister upon the boil, and he shall 
recover. 

22 Hezekiah also had said, What 
is the sign that I shall go up to the 
house of the LorpD? 


CHAPTER 39. 


Hezekiah’s folly: the Babylo- 
nian captivity of Judah fore- 
told. (Cf. 2 Ki. 24., 25.) 


Al that time Merodach-baladan, 
the son of Baladan, king of 
Babylon, sent letters and a present 
to Hezekiah: for he had heard 


yw AMR a 
NY eh 


39:2) 


ISAIAH. 


[40 9 


that he had been sick, and was 
Tecovered. 

2 And Hezekiah was glad of them, 
and shewed them the house of his 
precious things, the silver, and the 
gold, and the spices, and the pre- 
cious ointment, and all the house 
of his armour, and all that was 
found in his treasures: there was 
nothing in his house, nor in all his 
dominion, that Hezekiah shewed 
them not. 

3 Then came Isaiah the prophet 
unto king Hezekiah, and said unto 
him, What said these men? and 
from whence came they unto thee? 
And Hezekiah said, They are come 
from a far country unto me, even 
from Babylon. 

4 Then said he, What have they 
seen in thine house? And Heze- 
kiah answered, All that is in mine 


B.C. 712: 


a Dan.1.3,4. 


PART Il. 


CHAPTER 40. 
The prophet’s new message. 


IZ.OMFORT ye, comfort ye my| 


people, saith your God. 

2 Speak ye comfortably to Jeru- 
salem, and cry unto her, that her 
warfare is accomplished, that her 
iniquity is pardoned: for she hath 
received of the Lorp’s hand double 
for all her sins. 


The mission of John the Bap- 
tist. (Cf. Mt. 3. 3.) 


3. The voice of him that crieth in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way 
of the LorpD, make straight in the 

~ desert a highway for our God. 

4 Every valley shall be exalted, 
and every mountain and hill shall 
be made low: and the crooked shall 
be made straight, and the rough 
places plain: 


1 The first two verses of Isa. 40. giv: 


] 
B:C.. 712, 


John 1.23. 


¢ vs.6-8; 
Jas.1.10; 
1 Pet.1.24, 
25a 


|d Holy Spirit. 
vs.7,13; 
Isa.42.1. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


e Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs.9- 


‘lings, get thee up into 


house have they seen: there is 
nothing among my treasures that 
I have not shewed them. 

5 Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, 
Hear the word of the Lorp of 
hosts: 

6 Behold, the days come, that all 
that is in thine house, and that 
which thy fathers have laid up in 
store until this day, shall be carried 
to Babylon: nothing shall be left, 
saith the LorD. 

7 And of thy ¢sons that shall issue 
from thee, which thou shalt beget, 
shall they take away; and they 
shall be eunuchs in the palace of 
the king of Babylon. 

8 Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, 
Good is the word of the LorD 
which thou hast spoken. He said 
moreover, For there shall be peace 
and truth in my days, 


LOOKING BEYOND THE CAPTIVITIES: CHAPTERS 40.-66. 


5 And the glory of the LorD shall 
ibe revealed, and all flesh shall see 
lit together: for the mouth of the 
LorD hath spoken it. 


The greatness of God and man’s 
weakness (Isa. 40. 6-41. 29). 


6 The voice said. Cry. And he 
said, What shallI cry? All flesh is 
grass, and all the goodliness thereof 
is as the flower of the field: 

7 The grass withereth, the flower 
fadeth: because the ¢spirit of the 
Lorp bloweth upon it: surely the 
people is grass. 

8 The grass withereth, the flower 
fadeth: but the word of our God 
shall stand for ever. 

9 O Zion, that bringest good tid- 
i the high 
mountain; O ¢Jerusalem, that bring- 
lest good tidings, lift up thy voice 
lwith strength; lift 7 up, be not 


prophecy of Isaiah. The great theme of-this s 


ings, and the glory that shall follow in the Davidic kingdom. 


O.T.,” sufferings, Gen. 4. 4; Heb. 10. 18; glory, 


Israel is to be regathered, 
when the kingdom is set up, 
prophecies concerning those events 


Christ (e.g. Isa.53.) leads to the evangelic strain so 


(e.g. 44. 22, 23; 55. 1-3). 
The change in style, 

than the change of theme. 

the sins and coming captivity of 


which he would use to describe their redemption, blessing, 


converted, and made : ‘ 
this part of Isaiah appropriately contains glowing 
The full view of the redemptive sufferings of 


e the key-note of the second part of the 


ection is Jesus Christ in His suffer- 
(See ‘‘Christ in 
2 Sam. 7. 8-15; Zech. 12.8.) Since 
the centre of the new social order 


prominent in this part of Isaiah 


about which so much has been said, is no more remarkable 
A prophet who was also a patriot would not write of 
his people in the same exultant and joyous style 


and power. In John 12. 


37-44 quotations from Isaiah 53. and 6. are both ascribed to Isaiah. 


747 


# 


40 10] ISAIAH. [41 2 


afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, 
Behold your God! 

10 Behold, the Lord Gop will come 
with strong hand, and his arm shall 
rule for him: behold, his reward is 
with him, and his work before him. 
11 He shall feed his flock like a 


ants thereof are as grasshoppers; 
that stretcheth out the heavens as 
a curtain, and spreadeth them out 
as a tent to dwell in: 

23 That bringeth the princes to 
nothing; he maketh the judges of 
the earth as vanity. 


¢shepherd: he shall gather the 24 Yea, they shall not be planted: 
lambs with his arm, and carry yea, they shall not be sown: yea, 
them in his bosom, and shall gently their stock shall not take root in the 
lead those that are with young. earth: and he shall also blow upon 
12 Who hath measured the waters them, and they shall wither, and 
in the hollow of his hand, and the whirlwind shall take them away 
meted out heaven with the span, as stubble. i ; 
and comprehended the dust of the Be rcee 10. | 25 “To whom then will ye liken 


earth in a measure, Oe ae Heb.13.20; 1: oe shall I be equal? saith the 

the mountains in scales, and the] 1 Pet.2.25: oly One. 

hills in a balance? 5.4. 26 Lift up your eyes on high, and 

13. Who hath $directed the Spirit . |behold who hath created these 

4 a b Rom.11.34; : x : 

of the Lorp, or being his coun-| 1Cor.2.16. |things, that bringeth out their host 
: te 

ne sip ane Bi counsel, | ° + coasts: hee fee os Su treiawl gs: ree 

and who instructed him, and taught|d¢ Dan.4.35. might, for that he is strong in 

him in the path of judgment, and power; not one faileth. 


taught him knowledge, and shewed|° ae is ; 27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and 
to him the way of understanding? | Acts 17.23. |speakest, O Israel, My way is hid 
15 Behold, the nations are as a from the LorpD, and my judgment 


drop of a bucket, and are counted|/5%-'01i,. lis passed over from my God? 


as the small dust of the balance:} Rom.1.19,20.} 28 Hast thou not known? hast 
behold, he taketh up the isles as Parente sae pot oe ee ire pleat. 
a very little thing. ble celeste [Ne , the LorD, the Creator o 

16 And Lebanon is not sufficient| ence to the the ends of the earth, fainteth not, 
to burn, nor the beasts thereof suf-| sphericity of. |neither is weary? there is no 


ficient for a burnt-offering. Sea searching of his understanding. | 
17 All nations before him are as| Isa.42.5; 29 He giveth power to the faint; 


4nothing; and they are counted to Tobe: gi13: land to them that have no might 
him less than nothing, and vanity.! p2jos2, {he increaseth strength. 


18 To whom then will ye ¢liken| Jer.10.12. 30 Even the youths shall faint 
God? or what likeness will ye com- Prive and be weary, and the young men 
pare unto him? 415. {shall utterly fall: 


_19 The workman melteth a graven| _ 31 But they that wait upon the 
image, and the goldsmith spreadeth| # Psa-147.4..  |Lorp Jshall renew their strength; 
it over with gold, and castéth sil-| ;psa.393,5, [they shall mount up with wings as 


ver chains. eagles; they shall run, and not be 
20 He that is so impoverished weary; and they shall walk, and 

that he hath no oblation chooseth a not faint. 

tree that will not rot; he seeketh 

unto him a cunning workman to CHAPTER 41. 

Bee he wither umage, that shall (The greatness of God and the 
21 Have ye not known? have ye weakness of man, continued.) 
not heard? hath it not been told [ere silence before me, O <is- 
you from the beginning? have ye . lands; and let the people renew 
not understood from the founda- their strength: let them come near; 
tions of the earth? then let them speak: let us come 

22 It is he that sitteth upon the near together to judgment, 
8circle of the earth, and the inhabit- 2 Who raised up !the righteous 


' The reference here seems to be to Cyrus, whose victories and rapid growth in 
power are here ascribed to the providence of God. Verses ‘5-7 describe the effect 
upon the nations of the rise of the Persian power. They heartened each other, 
and made (v. 7) new idols. At verse 8 the prophet addresses Israel. Since it was 
their God who raised up Cyrus, they should expect good, not evil, from him (vs. 8-20). 


oe 21-24 form a contemptuous challenge to the idols in whom the nations are 
rusting, 
748 


ISAIAH. 


kings? he gave them as the dust to 
his sword, and as driven stubble to 
his bow. 

3 He pursued them, and passed 
-safely; even by the way that he 
had not gone with his feet. 

4 Who hath wrought and done it, 
calling the generations from the 
beginning? I the Lorp, the first, 
and with the last; I am he. 

5 The isles saw it, and feared; 
the ends of the earth were afraid, 
drew near, and came. 

6 They helped every one his 
neighbour; and every one said to 
his brother, Be of good courage. 

7 So the carpenter encouraged the 
goldsmith, and he that smootheth 
with the hammer him that smote 
the anvil, saying, It is ready for 
the sodering: and he fastened it 


ai.e. coasts. 
b Heb. goel, 


with nails, that it should not be| Redemp. 
d (Kinsman 

moved. type). Isa. 

8 But thou, Israel, art my Jser-| 59.20, note. 


vant, Jacob whom I have chosen, 
the seed of Abraham my friend. 

9 Thou whom I have taken from 
the ends of the earth, and called 


ci.e. acacia. 


d Heb. set our 
heart upon 


thee from the chief men thereof, ther 
and said unto thee, Thou art my} Isa.44.9; 
servant; I have chosen thee, and ere 


not cast thee away. 

10 Fear thou not; for I am with 
thee: be not dismayed; for I am 
thy God: I will strengthen thee; 
yea, 1 will help thee; yea, I will 
uphold thee with the right hand of 
my righteousness. 

11 Behold, all they that were in- 
censed against thee shall be 
_.ashamed and_ confounded: they 
shall be as nothing; and they that 
strive with thee shall perish. 

12 Thou shalt seek them, and 
shalt not find them, even them that 
contended with thee: they that 
war against thee shall be as noth- 
ing, and as a thing of nought. |. 

13 For I the Lorp thy God will 


hold thy right hand, _saying 
unto thee, Fear not; I will help 
thee. 


14 Fear not, thou worm J acob,and 
ye men of Israel; I will help thee, 


[41 25 


saith the LorD, and thy °redeemer, 
the Holy One of Israel. 

15 Behold, I will make thee a new 
sharp threshing instrument having 
teeth: thou shalt thresh the moun- 
tains, and beat them small, and 
shalt make the hills as chaff. 

16 Thou shalt fan them, and the 
wind shall carry them away, and 
the whirlwind shall scatter them: 
and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, 
and shalt glory in the Holy One of 
Israel. 

17 When the poor and needy seek 
water, and there is none, and their 
tongue faileth for thirst, I the LorD 
will hear them, J the God of Israel 
will not forsake them. 

18 I will open rivers in high 
places, and fountains in the midst of 
the valleys: I will make the wilder- 
Iness a pool of water, and the dry 
land springs of water. 

19 I will plant in the wilderness 
the cedar, the ‘shittah tree, and the 
myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set 
in the desert the fir tree, and the 
pine, and the box tree together: ° 

20 That they may see, and know, 
and consider, and understand to- 
gether, that the hand of the LoRD 
hath done this, and the Holy One 
of Israel hath created it. 

21 Produce your cause, saith the 
Lorp; bring forth your strong 
reasons, saith the King of Jacob. 

22 Let them bring them forth, 
and shew us what shall happen: let 
them shew the former things, what 
they be, that we may 4consider 
them, and know the latter end of 
them; or declare us things for to 


come. 

23 Shew the things that are to 
come hereafter, that we may know 
that ye are gods: yea, do good, or 
do evil, that we may be dismayed, 
and behold it together. 

24 Behold, ‘ye aré of nothing, and 
your work of nought: an abomina- 
tion is he that chooseth you. 

25 I have raised up one from the 
north, and he shall come: from the 
rising of the sun shall he call upon 
my name: and he shall come upon 
princes as upon morter, and as the’ 
potter treadeth clay. 


1 Three servants of Jehovah are mentioned 
a Israel the nation (Isa. 41. 8-16; 
42.1-12; J 
Christ restores the servant nation; 50. 4-6; 


43. 1-10; 44. 
49., entire chapter, but note especially verses 5-7, where the Servant 
52. 


in Isaiah: (1) David (Isa. 37. 35); 
1-8, 21; 45. 4; 48. 20); (3) Messiah 


13-15; 53. 1-12). Israel the nation 


was a faithless servant, but restored and converted will yet thresh mountains. 


Against the Servant Christ no charge of unfaithfulness 


Isa. 42, 1, note. 
749 


or failure is brought. See 


41 26] ISAIAH. ; eh a 


Om 

} trom the] B.c. 712. _|hand, and will keep thee, and give 
sa UNA Rs bx Siclen oae a and thee for a covenant of the people, 
beforetime, that we'may say, He is *for a light of the ‘Gentiles; ; 
tighteous? yea, there is none that 7 To open the blind eyes, to bring 
sheweth, yea, there is none that de- jout the prisoners from the prison, 
clareth, yea, there is none that and them that sit in darkness out 
heareth your words. a Gospel. of the prison house. 


ne ek wire Pen ip kts (Gen i2.1-3; Israel, chosen, sinning, chas-’ 
ehold, . : 


: Rev.14.6.) | tened, restored (Isa. 42. 3-44, 27). 
give to Jerusalem one that bringeth ene ( ) 


idi > Holy Spirit. | 8 T am the Lorp: that is my 
good “tidings. nen A E 
28 For I beheld, and there was ae? name: and my glory will I not give 


no man; even among them; and}. Mal.2.15.) to another, neither my praise to 
there was no counsellor, that, graven images. 


when I asked of them, could an-|° (zg 9 Behold, the ‘former things are 
swer a word. Advent). come to pass, and new things do I 
29 Behold, they are all vanity; Mapua declare: before they spring forth I 
their works are nothing: their (Gen.3.15: tell you of them. 

molten images are wind and con-| Acts 1.9.) 10 Sing unto the Lorp anew song, 
fusion. ieee and his praise from the end of the 
pe ceereeahs earth, ye that go down to the sea, 
CHAPTER 42. cie. coasts. [and all that is therein; the <isles, 

Christ, the Servant of Jehovah| f tsa.49.6; and the inhabitants thereof. 


2 3 11 Let the wilderness and the 
(Mt. 12. 18-21. Cf. Phil. 2. 5-8). 16; bea 33: cities sivas lift ae ghia pose 
EHOLD my lservant, whom I| Acts 13-47, |the villages that Kedar doth in. 
B Gphowle faite elect, in whom igo 16-19, habit: let the inhabitants of the 
my soul delighteth; I have put my] 20; 11.11;12; /rock sing, let them shout from the 
spirit upon him: he shall bring| 15-9-12. top of the mountains. 
forth judgment to the Gentiles. eile: Isaiah's 12 Let them give glory unto the 
2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor] ’ prediction of |LORD, and declare his praise in the 


i j ; Sennache- ej 
au his voice to be heard in the Seen islands. 


d its re- melt. Gt 
3 °A bruised reed shall he not sults, teat, (1) The chastening of Israel. 
break, and ¢the smoking flax shall} 2nd 37. See} 13 The LorRD shall go forth as a 


he not quench: he shall bring forth aoe ee mighty man, he shall stir up jeal- 
judgment: unto truth. 12; 44.7; 48. jousy like a man of war: he shall 
4 He shall not fail nor be discour- pale ue cty, yea, roar; he shall prevail 
the darth: and the Ades shell wo] Bomae | [*aginet bisienemiless!ac fips 
earth: an e “isles shall wai : ve lo e holden 
For his law ment of his peace; I have been still, and ‘tee 
5 Thus saith God the Lorp, he] Sums* Pre |frained myself: now will I cry like 
that created the heavens, and|_ strongly a travailing woman; I will destroy 


stretched them out; he that spread ours and devour at once. ; 
forth the earth, and that which Beaks 15 I will make waste mountains 


cometh out of it; he that giveth and hills, and dry up all their herbs s 
breath unto the people upon its and I will make the rivers islands, 
and spirit to them that walk! and I will dry up the pools, 
therein: 16 And I will bring the blind bya 
6 I the Lorpb have called thee in way that they knew not; I will 
righteousness, and will hold thine lead them in paths that they have 


1 There is a twofold account of the Coming Servant: (1) He is represented as 
weak, despised, rejected, slain; (2) and also as a mighty conqueror, taking ven- 
geance on the nations and restoring Israel (e.g. 40. 10; 63. 1-4). The former class 

“of passages relate to the first advent, and are fulfilled; the iatter to the second 
advent, and are unfulfilled. ( 

_ 2 The prophets connect the Gentiles with Christ in a threefold way: (1) as the 
Light He brings salvation to the Gentiles (Lk. 2. 32; Acts 13. 47, 48); (2) as the 
“Root of Jesse” He is to reign over the Gentiles in His kingdom (Isa. 11. 10; Rom. 
15. 12). He saves the Gentiles, which is the distinctive feature of this present 
age (Rom. 11. 17-24; Eph. 2. 11, 12). He reigns over the Gentiles in the kingdom- 
age. to follow this. See “Kingdom (0.T.),” Gen. 1, 26-28; Zech. 12.8. (3) Belieyv- 
ing Gentiles in the present age, together with believing Jews, constitute “the church 
which is His body” (Eph. 1, 23). See Eph. 3. 6, note. 


750 


not known: I will make darkness] 


light before them, and crooked 
things straight. These things will 
I do unto them, and not forsake 
them. 

17 They shall be turned back, they 
shall be greatly ashamed, that trust 
in graven images, that say to the 
molten images, Ye ere our gods. 

18 Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye 
blind, that ye may see. 

19 Who is blind, but my servant? 
or deaf, as my messenger that I 
sent? who is blind as he that is 
perfect, and blind as the LorpD’s 
servant? 

20 Seeing many things, but thou 
observest not; opening the ears, 
but he heareth not. 

21 The LORD is well pleased for 
his righteousness’ sake; he will 
magnify the law, and make it hon- 
ourable. 

22 But this is a people robbed and 
spoiled; they are all of them snared 
in holes, and they are hid in prison 
houses: they are for a prey, and 
none delivereth; for a spoil, and 
none saith, Restore. 

23 Who among you will give ear 
to this? who will hearken and hear 
for the time to come? 

24 Who gave Jacob for a spoil, 
and Israel to the robbers? did not 
the Lorp, he against whom we 
have sinned? for they would not 
walk in his ways, neither were 
they obedient unto his law. 

25 Therefore he hath poured upon 
him the fury of his anger, and the 
strength of battle: and it hath set 
him on fire round about, yet he 
knew not; and it burned him, yet 
he laid it not to heart. 


CHAPTER 43. 


(2) The chosen nation redeemed, 
and restored. 


Bet now thus saith the LorpD 
that created thee, O Jacob, and 
he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear 
not: for I have “redeemed thee, I 
have called thee by thy name; thou 
art mine. 

2 When thou passest through the 
waters, I will be with thee; and 
through the rivers, they shall not 
overflow thee: when thou walkest 
through the fire, thou shalt not be 
burned; neither shall the flame kin- 
dle upon thee. 

3 For Iam the Lorp thy God, the 
Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I 


mS 


ISAIAH. 


a Heb. goel, 


Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


6 Dan.3.25,27. 
c Prov.11.8; 


21.18. 


d Isa.41.10, 


14; 44.2; 
Jer.30.10,11; 
46.27,28. 


¢ Isa.63.19; 
Jas.2.7. 


f Isa.29.23; 


Psa.100.3; 
John 3.3,5; 
2. Cor.5.173 
Eph.2.10. 


g Isa.44.8. 
h Isa.41.4; 


44.6. 


i Isa.45.21; 
Hos.13.4. 


751 


[43.7 


gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethio- 
pia and Seba for thee. 

4 Since thou wast precious in my 
sight. thou hast been honourable, 
and I have loved thee: therefore 
will I give men for thee, and people 
for thy life. 

5 4Fear not: for I am with thee: 
I will bring thy seed from the east, 
and gather thee from the west; 

6 I will say to the north, Give up; 
and to the south, Keep not: back: 
bring my sons from far, and my 
daughters from the ends of the 
earth; 

7 Even every one that is called 
by my name: for /I have created 
him for my glory, I have formed 
him; yea, I have made him. 

8 Bring forth the blind people 
that have eyes, and the deaf that 
have ears. 

9 Let all the nations be gathered 
together, and let the people be as- 
sembled: who among them can de- 
clare this, and shew us former 
things? let them bring forth theiz 
witnesses, that they may be justi- 
fied: or let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. 

10 sYe are my witnesses, saith 
the LorD, and my servant whom I 
have chosen: that ye may know 
and believe me, and understand 
that I am he: “before me there was 
no God formed, neither shall there 
be after me. 

11 ‘I, even I, am the Lorp; and 
beside me there 1s no saviour. 

12 I have declared, and have 
saved, and I have shewed, when 
there was no strange god among 
you: therefore ye are my witnesses, 
saith the LorpD, that I am God. 

13 Yea, before the day wasI am 
he; and there is none that can de- 
liver out of my hand: I will work, 
and who shall let it? 

14 Thus saith the LORD, your re- 
deemer, the Holy One of Israel; For 
your sake I have sent to Babylon, 
and have brought down all their 
nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose 
cry is in the ships. 


15 Iam the LorD, your Holy One, 
the creator of Israel, your King. 

16 Thus saith the Lorp, which 
maketh a way in the sea, and a 
path in the mighty waters; 

17 Which bringeth forth the 
chariot and horse, the army and 
the power; they shall lie down to- 
gether, they shall not rise: they 
are extinct, they are quenched as 
tow. 


43 18] / 


ISAIAH. 


as a 


18 Remember ye not the former 
things, neither consider the things 
of old. £ 

19 Behold, I will do a new thing; 
now it shall spring forth; shall ye 
not know it? I will even make a 
way in the wilderness, and rivers 
in the desert. 

20 The beast of the field shall 
honour me, the dragons and the 
owls: because I give waters in the 
wilderness, and rivers in the desert, 
to give drink to my people, my 
@chosen, 

21 This people have I formed for 
myself; they shall shew forth my 
praise. 

22 But thou hast not called upon 
me, O Jacob; but thou hast been 
weary of me, O Israel. 

23 Thou hast not brought me the 
small cattle of thy burnt-offerings; 
neither hast thou honoured me with 
thy sacrifices. I have not caused 
thee to serve with an offering, nor 
wearied thee with incense, 

24 Thou hast bought me no sweet 
cane with money, neither hast thou 
filled me with the fat of thy sacri- 
fices: but thou hast made me to 
serve with thy sins, thou hast 
wearied me with thine iniquities, 

25 I, evenI, am he that oblotteth 
out thy transgressions ‘for mine 
own sake, Zand will not remember 
thy sins. 

26 Put me in remembrance: let 
us plead together: declare thou, 
that thou mayest be justified. 

27 Thy first father hath sinned, 
and thy “teachers have trans- 
gressed against me. 

28 Therefore I have profaned the 
princes of the sanctuary, fand have 
given Jacob to the curse, and Israel 
to reproaches. 


CHAPTER 44. 


(3) The promise of the Spirit: 
the folly of idolatry. 


Wer now hear, O Jacob my ser- 
vant; and Israel, whom I have 
chosen: 

2 Thus saith the Lorp that made 
thee, and formed thee from the 
womb, which will help thee; Fear 
not, O Jacob, my servant: and thou, 
sJesurun, whom I have chosen. 

3 For I will ‘pour water upon him 
that is thirsty, and floods upon the 
dry ground: I will pour my spirit 
upon thy seed, and my blessing 
upon thine offspring: 

4, And they shall spring up as 


B.C..-712. 


a Election 


(corporate), 


Mk.13.20. 
(Deut.7.6; 
1 Pet.1.2:) 


6 Isa.44.22; 


c Ezk.36.22. 


d Isa.1.18; 
Jer.31.34. 


e Heb. inter- 
preters. 
Mal.2.7,8. 


f Psa.79.4; 
Jer.24.9; 
Dan.9.11; 
Zech.8.13, 


g i.e. upright, 


Symbolical 
name of Is- 
rael. 
Deut.32.15; 
33.5,26. 


h Isa.35.7;3 
Joel 2.28; 
John 7.38; 
Acts 2.18. 


j Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


k Isa.41.4; 48. 
12; Rev.1.8, 
17; 22.13. 


? Isa.43.10,12. 


Aa 


among the grass, as willows by the 
water courses. 

5 One shall say, I am the Lorp’s; 
and another shall call himself by 
the name of Jacob; and another 
shall subscribe with his hand unto 
the LorpD, and surname himself by © 
the name of Israel. 

6 Thus saith the Lorp the King 
of Israel, and his jredeemer the 
LorD of hosts; *I am the first, and 
I am the last; and beside me there 
is no God. 

7 And who, as I, shall call, and 
shall declare it, and set it in order 
for me, since I appointed the an- 
cient people? and the things that 
are coming, and shall come, let 
them shew unto them. 

8 Fear ye not, neither be afraid: 
have not I told thee from that time, 
and have declared it? ‘ye are even 
my witnesses. Is there a God be- 
side me? yea, there is no God; I 
know not any. 

9 They that make a graven image 
are ali of them vanity; and their 
delectable things shall not profit; 
and they are their own witnesses; 
they see not, nor know; that they 
may be ashamed. 

10 Who hath formed a god, or 
molten a graven image that is 
profitable for nothing? 

11 Behold, all his fellows shall be 
ashamed: and the workmen, they 
are of men: let them all be gath- 
ered together, let them stand up; 
yet they shall fear, and they shall 


. |be ashamed together. 


12 The smith with the tongs both 
worketh in the coals, and fashion- 
eth it with hammers, and worketh 
it with the strength of his _arms: 
yea, he is hungry, and his strength 
faileth: he drinketh no water, and 
is faint. 

13 The carpenter stretcheth out 
his rule; he marketh it out with a 
line; he fitteth it with planes, and 
he marketh it out with the compass, 
and maketh it after the figure of a 
man, according to the beauty of a 
man; that it may remain in the 
house. 

14 He heweth him down cedars, 
and taketh the cypress and the oak, 
which he strengtheneth for himself 
among the trees of the forest: he 
planteth an ash, and the rain doth 
nourish 7t, 

15 Then shall it be for a man to 
burn: for he will take thereof, and 
warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, 
and baketh bread; yea, he maketh 


44 16] 


a god, and worshippeth it ; he mak- 
eth it a graven image, and falleth 
down thereto. 

16 He burneth part thereof in the 
fire; with part thereof he eateth 
flesh; he roasteth roast, and is sat- 
isfied: yea, he warmeth himself, 
and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have 
seen the fire: 

17 And the residue thereof he 
maketh a god, even his graven im- 
age: he falleth down unto it, and 
worshippeth it, and prayeth unto 
it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou 
art my god. 

18 They have not known nor 
understood: for he hath shut their 


eyes, that they cannot see; and 


their hearts, that they cannot un- 
derstand. 

19 And none considereth in his 
heart, neither 1s there knowledge 
nor understanding to say, I have 
burned part of it in the fire; yea, 
also I have baked bread upon the 
coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, 


and eaten it: and shall I make the], 1... 49. # 


residue thereof an abomination? 


shall I fall down to the stock of aj Psa.107.16. 
tree? ql 7150.41.23. 


20 He feedeth on ashes: a deceive 


heart hath turned him aside, that)¢ 1 Thes.4.5. 
he cannot deliver his soul, nor say,|, 5... 44 9: 


Is there not a lie in my right hand? 

21 Remember these, O Jacob and 
Israel; for thou art my servant: I 
have formed thee; thou art my ser- 
vant: O Israel, thou shalt not be 
forgotten of me. 

22 I have blotted out, as a thick 
cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a 
cloud, thy sins: ¢return unto me; 
for I have ’redeemed thee. 

.. 23 Sing, O ye heavens; for the 
Lorp hath done t: shout, ye lower 
parts of the earth: break forth into 
singing, ye mountains, O forest, and 
every tree therein: for the LORD 
hath “redeemed Jacob, and glorified 
himself in Israel. 

24 Thus saith the Lorp, thy /re- 
deemer, and he that formed thee 
from the womb, I am the LorD 
that maketh all things; that 
stretcheth forth the heavens alone; 


[45 5 


that spreadeth abroad the earth by 
myself; 

25 That frustrateth the tokens of 
the liars, and maketh diviners mad; 
that turneth wise men backward, 
and maketh their knowledge foolish; 

26 That confirmeth the word of 
his servant, and performeth the 
counsel of his messengers; that 
saith to Jerusalem, Thou, shalt be 
inhabited; and to the cities of Ju- 
dah, Ye shall be built, and I will 
raise up the decayed places thereof: 

27 ‘That saith to the deep, Be 
dry, and I will dry up thy rivers: 


a Ber Bence. The prophecy concerning Cyrus, 


and the restoration under 
Ezra and Nehemiah. 


28 That saith of 1Cyrus, He is my 
shepherd, and shall perform all my 
pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, 
Thou shalt be built; and to the tem- 
ple, Thy foundation shall be laid. 


CHAPTER 45. 


HUS saith the Lorp to his 
2anointed, to Cyrus, whose 
right hand I have holden, to subdue 
nations before him; and I will loose 
the loins of kings, to open before 
him the two leaved gates; and the 
gates shall not be shut; 

2 Iwill go before thee, ¢and make 
the crooked places straight: ¢I will 
break in pieces the gates of brass, 
and cut in sunder the bars of iron: 

3 And I will give thee the treas- 
ures of darkness, and hidden riches 
of secret places, fthat thou mayest 
know that I, the LoRD, which call 
thee by thy name, am the God of 
Israel. - 

4 For Jacob my servant’s sake, 
and Israel mine elect, I have even 
called thee by thy name: I have 
surnamed thee, though thou hast 
8not known me. 


Israel reminded that safety and 
salvation are to be found only 
in Jehovah. 


5 I am the LorD, and there is 
none else, there is no God beside 


1 Cf, 1 Ki. 13.2, where Josiah was mentioned by name three hundred years before 
his birth. y : 

2 The only instance where the word is applied to a Gentile. Nebuchadnezzar is 
called the “‘servant” of Jehovah (Jer. 25. 9; 27. 6; 43. 10). This, with the designation 
“My shepherd” (Isa. 44. 28), also a Messianic title, marks Cyrus as that startling 
exception, a Gentile type of Christ. The points are: (1) both are irresistible con- 
querors of Israel’s enemies (Isa. 45. 1; Rev. 19. 19-21); (2) both are restorers of the 
holy city (Isa. 44. 28; Zech. 14. 1-11); (3) through both is the name of the one true 


God glorified (Isa. 45. 6; 1 Cor. 15. 28). to 


45 6] 


ISAIAH. 


f 


me: I girded thee, though thou hast 
not known me: 

6 #That they may know from the 
rising of the’ sun, and from the 
west, that there is none beside me. 
I am the LorpD, and there is none 
else. 

7. I form the light, and create 
darkness: I make peace, and 2cre- 
ate levil. I the LorpD do all these 
things. 

8 Drop down, ye heavens, from 
above, and let the skies pour down 
righteousness: let the earth open, 
and let them bring forth salvation, 
and let righteousness spring up to- 
gether; I the LorpD have created it. 

9 Woe unto him that striveth with 
his Maker! Let the potsherd strive 
with the potsherds of the earth. 
Shall the clay say to him that 
fashioneth it, What makest thou? 
or thy work, He hath no hands? 

10 Woe unto him that saith unto 
his father, What begettest thou? or 
to the woman, What hast thou 
brought forth? 

11 Thus saith the Lorp, the Holy 
One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask 
me of things to come concerning 
dmy sons, and concerning the work 
of my hands command ye me. 

12 I have made the earth, and 
created man upon it: I, even my 
hands, have stretched out the 
heavens, and all their host have 
I commanded. 

13 I have raised him up in right- 
eousness, and I will direct all his 
ways: he shall build my city, and 
he shall let go my captives, not for 
price nor reward, saith the Lorp 
of hosts. 

14 Thus saith the Lorp, ¢The la- 
bour of Egypt, and merchandise of 
Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of 
stature, shall come over unto thee, 
and they shall be thine: they shall 
come after thee; in chains they 
shall come over, and they shall fall 
down unto thee, they shall make 
supplication unto thee, saying, 
Surely God is in thee; and there is 
none else, there is no God. 

15 Verily thou art a God that 
hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the 
Saviour. 

16 They shall be ashamed, and 
also confounded, all of them: they 
shall go to confusion together that 
are makers of idols. 


B.C. 742% i 


a Isa.37.20; 
Psa.102.15; 
Mal.1.11. 


b Amos 3.6. 


c Isa.29.16; 
Jer.18.6; 
Rom.9.20. 


d Jer.31.9. 


e Psa.68.31; 
72.10,11; 
Isa.49.23; 
60.9,10,14, 
16; Zech.8. 
CBee 


f v.25; Isa.26. 
4; Rom.11. 
26. 

g Psa.22.27; 
65.5. 

hk Gen.22.16; 
Heb.6.13. 


i Rom.14.11; 
Phil.2.10. 


17 fBut Israel shall be saved in 
the LorD with an everlasting sal- 
vation: ye shall not be ashamed 
nor confounded world without 
end. 

18 For thus saith the Lorp that 
created the heavens; God himself 
that formed the earth and made it; 
he hath established it, he created it 
not in vain, he formed it to be in- 
habited: I am the Lorpb; and there 
is none else. 

19 I have not spoken in secret, in 
a dark place of the earth: I said not 
unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me 
in vain: I the Lorp speak right- 
eousness, I declare things that are 
right. 

20 Assemble yourselves and come; 
draw near together, ye that are 
escaped of the nations: they have 
no knowledge that set up the wood 
of their graven image, and pray 
unto a god that cannot save. 

21 Tell ye, and bring them near; - 
yea, let them take counsel together: 
who hath declared this from an- 
cient time? who hath told it from 
that time? Aave not I the Lorp? 
and there 1s no God else beside 
me; a just God and a Saviour; 
there is none beside me. 

22 sLook unto me, and be ye 
saved, all the ends of the earth: for I 
am God, and there is none else. 

23 "I have sworn by myself, the 
word is gone out of my mouth in 
righteousness, and shall not return, 
That unto me ‘every knee shall 
bow, every tongue shall swear. 

24 Surely, shall one say, in the 
LorD have I righteousness and 
strength: even to him shall men 
come; and all that are incensed 
against him shall be ashamed. 

25 In the LORD shall all the seed 
of Israel be justified, and shall ~ 
glory. 


CHAPTER 46. 


israel exhorted to remember the 
power of Jehovah, and the 
powerlessness of idols, 


BEL boweth down, Nebo stoop- 
eth, their idols were upon the 
beasts, and upon the cattle: your 
carriages were heavy loaden; they 
are a burden to the weary beast. 
2 They stoop, they bow down to- 
gether; they could not deliver the 


1 Heb. ra, translated “sorrow,” 
“calamities,” but never translated sin. 
He made sorrow, wretchedness, etc., to b 


754 


“wretchedness,” ‘‘adversity,’* 


“afflictions,” 


God created evil only in the sense that 
e the sure fruits of sin. 


burden, “but themselves are gone 
into captivity. 

3 Hearken unto me, O house of 
Jacob, and all the ’remnant of the 
house of Israel, which are borne by 
‘me from the belly, which are car- 
tied from the womb: 

4 And even to your old age lam 
he; and even to hoart hairs will I 
carry you: I have made, and I will 
bear; even I will carry, and will 
deliver you. 

5 To whom will ye liken me, and 
make me equal, and compare me, 
that*we may be like? 

6 They lavish gold out of the bag, 
and weigh silver in the balance, and 
hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it 
a god: they fall down, yea, they 
worship.. 

7 They bear him upon the shoul- 
der, they carry him, and set him in 
his place, and he standeth; from 
his place shall he not remove: yea, 
one shall cry unto him, yet can he 
not answer, nor save him out of his 
trouble. 

8 Remember this, and shew your- 
selves men: bring it again to mind, 
O ye transgressors. 

9 ¢Remember the former things of 
old: for I am God, and there is 
none else; J am God, and there is 
none like me, 

10 Declaring the end from the be- 
ginning, and from ancient times the 
things that are not yet done, say- 
ing, “My counsel shall stand, and I 
will do all my pleasure: 

11 Calling a ravenous bird from 
the east, the man ¢that executeth 
my counsel from a far country: yea, 
I have spoken it, I will also bring it 
to pass; I. have purposed it. I will 
also do it. 

12 Hearken unto me, ye /stout- 
hearted, that are far from right- 
eousness: 

13 I bring near my righteousness; 
it shall not be far off, and my salva- 
tion shall not tarry: and I will place 
salvation in Zion for Israel my 
glory. 


CHAPTER 47. 
Judgment upon Babylon. 


oe down, and sit in the dust, 
O virgin daughter of Babylon, 
sit on the ground: there is no 
throne, O daughter of the Chal- 
deans: for thou shalt no more be 
called tender and delicate. ; 

2 Take the millstones, and grind 
meal: uncover thy locks, make bare 


ISATAH. 


B.C. 712. 


a Jer.48.7. 


6 Remnant. 
Jer.15.11-21. 


c Deut.32.7. 


d Psa.33.11; 
Prov.19.21; 
21.30; Acts 
5.39; Heb. 
6.17. 


e Isa.44.28; 
45.13. 


t Psa.76.5. 


g Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type).- Isa. 
59.20, note. 


h 2 Sam.24.14; 
2 Chr.28.9; 
Zech.1.15. 


i Psa.2.12, 
note. 


j1 Thes.5.3. 


k 1sa.44.25; 
Dan.2.2. 


1 Nah.1.10; 
Mal.4.1. 


m Heb. their 
souls, 


755 


[47 14 


the leg, uncover the thigh, pass 
over the rivers. 

3 Thy nakedness shall be uncov- 
ered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: 
I will take vengeance, and I will 
not meet thee as a man. 

4 As for our £redeemer, the LORD 
of hosts zs his name, the Holy One 


of Israel. 

5 Sit thou silent, and get thee into 
darkness, O daughter of the Chal- 
deans: for thou shalt no more be 
called, The lady of kingdoms. 

6 I was wroth with my people, I 
have polluted mine inheritance, and 
given them into thine hand: thou 
didst shew them no mercy; upon 
the ancient hast thou very heavily 
laid thy yoke. 

7 And thou saidst, I shall be a lady 
for ever: so that thou didst not lay 
these things to thy heart, neither 
didst remember the latter end of it, 
| 8 Therefore hear now this, thou 
that art given to pleasures, that 
dwellest carelessly, that sayest in 
thine heart, I am, and none else 
beside me; I shall not sit as a 
widow, neither shall I know the 
loss of children: 

9 But these two things shall come 
to thee in a moment in one day, 
the loss of children, and widow- 
hood: they shall come upon thee in 
their perfection for the multitude of 
thy sorceries, and for the great 
abundance of thine enchantments. 

10 For thou hast ‘trusted in thy 
wickedness: thou hast said, None 
séeth me. Thy wisdom and thy 
knowledge, it hath perverted thee; 
and thou hast said in thine heart, I 
am, and none else beside me. 

11 Therefore shall evil come upon 


thee; thou shalt not know from 
whence it riseth: and mischief shall 
fall upon thee; thou shalt not be 
able to put it off: and Jdesolation 
shall come upon thee suddenly, 
which thou shalt not know. 

12 Stand now with thine enchant- 
ments, and with the multitude of 
thy sorceries, wherein thou hast 
laboured from thy youth; if so be 
thou shalt be able to profit, if so be 
thou mayest prevail. 

13 Thou art wearied in the multi- 
tude of thy counsels. *Let now the 
astrologers, the stargazers, the 
monthly prognosticators, stand up, 
and save thee from these things 
that shall come upon thee. 

14 Behold, they shall be ‘as stub- 
ble; the fire shall burn them; they 
shall not deliver "themselves from 


47 15] 


the power of the flame: there shall 
not be a coal to warm at, nor fire 
to sit before it. 

15 Thus shall they be unto thee 
with whom thou hast iaboured, 
even thy merchants, from thy 
youth: they shall wander every one 
to his quarter; none shall save 
‘thee. 


CHAPTER 48. 


Israel to be restored under the 
Holy One, Jehovah’s servant 
(Isa. 48. 1-52. 15): (1) Israel re- 
minded of the promises. 


HEAR ye this, O house of Jacob, 
which are called by the name 
of Israel, and are come forth out of 
the waters of Judah, which. swear 
by the name of the Lorp, and make 
mention of the God of Israel, but 
“not in truth, nor in righteous- 
ness. 

2 For they call themselves of the 
holy city, and stay themselves 
upon the God of Israel; The LorpD 
of hosts is his name. 

3 I have declared the former 
things from the beginning; and 
they went forth out of my mouth, 
and I shewed them; I did them 
suddenly, and they came to pass. 

4 Because I knew that thou art 
‘obstinate, and thy neck is an iron 
sinew, and thy brow brass; 

5 I have even from the beginning 
declared rt to thee; before it came 
to pass I shewed it thee: lest thou 
shouldest say, Mine idol hath done 
ther, and my graven image, and 
my molten image, hath commanded 
them. 

6 Thou hast heard, see all this; 
and will not.ye declare it? I have 
shewed thee new things from this 
time, even hidden things, and thou 
didst not know them. 

7 They are created now, and not 
from the beginning; even before 
the day when thou heardest them 
not; lest thou shouldest say, Be- 
hold, I knew them, 

8 Yea, thou heardest not; yea, 
thou knewest not; yea, from that 
time that thine ear was not opened: 
for I knew that thou wouldest deal 
very treacherously, and wast called 
a transgressor from the womb. 

9 4For my name’s sake will I de- 
fer mine anger, and for my praise 
will I refrain for thee, that I cut 
thee not off, 

10 ‘Behold, I have refined thee, 


ISAIAH. 


a Jer.4.2; 5.2. 


6 Mic.3.11; 
Rom.2.17. 


¢ Heb. hard. 


d v.11; Isa.43. 
25; Psa.79.9; 
106.8; Ezk, 
20.9,14,22, 
44. 


e Psa.66.10. 
fv.9. 


g Isa.41.4; 
44.6; Rev.1. 
17; 22.13. 


h Isa.61.1; 
Zech.2.3,9, 
Boe 


i Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


J i.e. coasts. 


k Christ 
(First 


Advent). vs. 


1-6; Isa.50. 
5,6. (Gen.3. 
15; Acts 
1.9.) 


Ga 


but not with silver; I have chosen 
thee in the furnace of affliction. 

11 For mine own sake, even for 
mine own sake, will I dot: for how 
should my name be polluted? and I 
will not give my glory unto another. 

12 Hearken unto me, O Jacob and 
Israel, my called; I am he; I 4am 
the first, I also am the last. 

13 Mine hand also hath laid the 
foundation of the earth, and my 
right hand hath spanned the hea- 
vens: when I call unto them, they 
stand up together. 

14 All ye, assemble yourselves, 
and hear; which among them hath 
declared these things? The Lorp 
hath loved him: he will do his 
pleasure on Babylon, and his arm 
shall be on the Chaldeans. 

15 I, even I, have spoken; yea, I 
have called him: I have brought 
him, and he shall make his way 
prosperous, 

16 Come ye near unto me, hear ye 
this; I have not spoken in secret 
from the beginning; from the time 
that it was, there am I: and now 
’Athe Lord Gop, and his Spirit, hath 
sent me. } 

17 Thus saith the Lorn, thy ‘Re- 
deemer, the Holy One of Israel; lam 
the LorpD thy God which teacheth 
thee to profit, which leadeth thee 
by the way that thou shouldest go. 

18 Othat thou hadst hearkened to 
my commandments! then had thy 
peace been as a river, and thy right- _ 
eousness as the waves of the sea: 

19 Thy seed also had been as the 
sand, and the offspring of thy bow- 
els like the gravel thereof; his name 
should not have been cut off nor 
destroyed from before me. 

20 Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye 
from the Chaldeans, with a voice of 
singing declare ye, tell this, utter it - 
even to the end of the earth; say 
ye, The Lorp hath ‘redeemed his 
servant Jacob. 

21 And they thirsted not when he 
led them through the deserts: he 
caused the waters to flow out of 
the rock for them: he clave the rock 
also, and the waters gushed out. 

22 There is no peace, saith the 
LorD, unto the wicked. 


CHAPTER 49. 


(2) The Holy One, Israel’s 
Redeemer. 
LISTEN, O Jisles, unto me; and 

hearken, ye people, from far; 
The Lorp hath called *me from 


the womb; from the bowels of my 
mother hath he made mention of 


of his hand hath he hid me, and 
made me a polished shaft; in his 
quiver hath he hid me; 

3 And said unto me, Thou art my 
servant, O Israel, in whom I will be 
glorified. 

4 Then I said, I have laboured in 
vain, I have spent my strength for 
nought, and in vain: yet surely my 
judgment is with the Lorp, and 
my work with my God. 

5 And now, saith the LorD that 
formed me from the womb fo be his|? Reresastas A 
servant, to bring Jacob again to| °° 7°°* 
him, Though Israel be not gathered,|} Heb. goel, 


: : Redemp. 
yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of| fedemp. | 


the Lorp, and my God shall be my]. type). Isa. 
strength. : 59.20, note. 
6 And he said, It is a light thing), Q.6 0 


that thou shouldest be my servant 
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and|d Cf. Mt.13. 
to restore the preserved of Israel: I} 44 
will also give thee for a light tof, Rev.7.16. 
the “Gentiles, that thou mayest 
be my salvation unto the end of|fPsa-121.6. 
the earth. g Psa.23.2. 
7 Thus saith the Lorn, “the Re- 
deemer of Israel, and his Holy One, | 1s4.40-4. 
to him whom man despiseth, to him] ; q5a.43.5,6. 
whom the nation abhorreth, to al. ; 
servant of rulers, Kings shall see|/ fas 
and arise, princes also shall wor- 71.’ 
ship, because of the Lorp that is 
faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, 
and he shall choose thee. 


(3) Wsrael to be preserved and 
restored. 


8 Thus saith the Lorp, “In an 
~ acceptable time have I heard thee, 
and in a day of salvation have I 
helped thee: and I will preserve 
thee, and-give thee for a covenant 
of the people, to establish the earth, 
to cause to inherit the desolate 
heritages; 

9 @That thou mayest say to the 
prisoners, Go forth; to them that 
are in darkness, Shew yourselves. 
They shall feed in the ways, :and 
their pastures shall be in all high 
places. é 

10 ¢They shall not hunger nor 
thirst; /neither shall the heat nor 
sun smite them: for he that hath 
mercy on them &shall lead them, 


k Rom.11.29. 


1 Ex.13.9; 
Song 8.6. 


ISATAH. 


[49 22 


even by the springs of water shall 
he guide them. 

11 “And I will make all my moun- 
tains a way, and my highways 
shall be exalted. 

12 Behold, ‘these shall come from 
far: and, lo, these from the north 
and from the west; and these from 
the land of ?Sinim. 

13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, 
O earth; and break forth into sing- 
ing, O mountains: for the LorD 
hath comforted his people, and will ' 
have mercy upon his afflicted. 

14 But Zion said, The Lorp hath 
forsaken me, and my Lord hath 
forgotten me. 

15 JCan a woman forget her suck- 
ing child, that she should not have 
compassion on the son of her 
womb? yea, they may forget, *yet 
will I not forget thee. 

16 Behold, ‘I have graven thee 
upon the palms of my hands; thy 
walls are continually before me. 

17 Thy children shall make haste; 
thy destroyers and they that made 
thee waste shall go forth of thee. 

18 Lift up thine eyes round about, 
and behold: all these gather them- 
selves together, and come to thee. 
As I live, saith the Lorp, thou 
shalt surely clothe thee with them 
all, as with an ornament, and bind 
them on thee, as a bride doeth. 

19 For thy waste and thy desolate 
places, and the land of thy destruc- 
tion, shall even now be too narrow 
by reason of the inhabitants, and 
they that swallowed thee up shall 
be far away. 

20 The children which thou shalt 
have, after thou hast lost the other, 
shall say again in thine ears, The 
place is too strait for me: give place 
to me that I may dwell. 

21 Then shalt thou say in thine 
heart, Who hath begotten me these, 
seeing I have lost my children, and 
am desolate, a captive, and remov- 
ing to and fro? and who hath 
brought up these? Behold, I was left 
alone; these, where had they been? 


(4) Judgment on Israel’s oppres- 
sors (Gen. 12. 3; 15. 14). 


22 Thus saith the Lord Gop, Be- 
hold, I will lift up mine hand to the 
Gentiles, and set up my standard to 
the people: and they shall bring 
thy sons in their arms, and thy 


1 The Lord Jesus and the believing remnant of Israel are here joined. Whats 


said is true of both. 


2 The word is supposed to refer to a people of the far East, perhaps the Chinese. 


757 


49 23) 


ISAIAH. 


daughters shall be carried upon 
their shoulders. 2 

23 And kings shall be thy nursing 
fathers, and their queens thy nurs- 
ing mothers: they shall bow down 
to thee with their face toward the 
earth, and lick up the dust of thy 
feet; and thou shalt know that I 
am the Lorp: @for they--shall not 
be ashamed that wait fo : 

24 Shattttie prey be taken from 
the mighty, or the lawful captive 
delivered? 

25 But thus saith the Lorp, Even 
the captives of the mighty shall be 
taken away, and the prey of the 
terrible shall be delivered: for I 
will contend with him that con- 
tendeth with thee, and I will save 


thy children. 

26 And I will feed them that op- 
press thee with their own flesh; 
and they shall be drunken with 
their own blood, as with sweet 
wine: and all flesh %shall know 


that I the LoRD am thy Saviour 
and thy ‘Redeemer, the mighty 
One of Jacob. 


CHAPTER 50. 


(5) The humiliation of the 
Holy One. 


HUS saith the Lorp, Where is 
4the bill of your mother’s di- 
vorcement, whom I have put away? 
or which of my “creditors 1s it to 
whom I ‘have sold you? Behold, 
for your iniquities have ye sold 
yourselves, and for your transgres- 
sions is your mother put away. 
*2 Wherefore, when I came, was 
there no man? when I called, 
was there none to answer? Is my 
hand shortened at all, that it can- 
not ‘redeem? or have I no power 
to deliver? behold, sat my rebuke 
I dry up the sea, I make the rivers 


a wilderness: their fish stinketh, 
because there is no water, and 
dieth for thirst. 

3 I clothe the heavens with black- 
ness, and I make sackcloth their 
covering. 

4 hThe Lord Gop hath given me 
the tongue of the learned, that I 
should know how to speak a word 
in season to him that is weary: he 
wakeneth morning by morning, 
he wakeneth mine ear to hear as 
the learned. . 

5 The Lord Gop hath ‘opened 
mine ear, and I was not rebellious, 
neither turned away back. 


a Psa.34.22; 
Rom.5.5; 
9.33; 10.11. 


6 Psa.9.16. 


c Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


d Deut.24.1; 
Jer.3.8; 
Hos.2.2. 


e See 2 Ki.4.1; 
Mt.i8.25. 


f Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59. 
20, note. 


g Psa.106.9; 
Nah.1.4, 
hEx.4.11. 


t Mt.26.39; 
John 14.31; 
Phil.2.8; 
Heb.10.5. 


j Mt.26.67; 
27.26; John 
18.22. 


k Christ 
(First 

. Advent). 
vs.4-7; 
Isa.52.13-15. 
(Gen.3:15; 
Acts 1.9.) 


1 Mt.26.67; 
27.30; Mk. 
14.65; 15.19. 

m Ezk.3.8,9. 

n Rom.8.32-34. 

o Isa.51.6,8; 
Job 13.28; 
Psa.102.26. 


> Psa.19.9, 
note. 


q 2 Chr.20.20; 
Psa.20.7. 


r Rom.4.1,16; 
Heb.11.11. 


s Isa.40.1; 
52.9; Psa. 
102.13. 


t Gen.13.10; 
Joel 2.3. 


u i.e, coasts. 


758 


6 JI gave my back to the smiters, 
and my cheeks to them that plucked 
off the hair: *I hid not my face from 
‘shame and spitting. 

7 For the Lord Gop will help me; 
therefore shall I not be confounded: 
therefore “have I set my face like a 
flint, and I know that I shall not be 
ashamed. 

8 “He is near that justifieth me; 
who will contend with me? let us 
stand together: who is mine adver- 
sary? let him come near to me. 

9 Behold, the Lord Gop will help 
me; who is he that shall condemn 
me? lo, they all shall wax old asa 
garment; the moth shall eat them 
up. 

10 Who is among you that ?fear- 
eth the Lorp, that obeyeth the 
voice of his servant, that walketh 
in darkness, and hath no light? det 
him trust in the name of the Lorp, 
and stay upon his God. 

11 Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, 
that compass yourselves about 
with sparks: walk in the light of 
your fire, and in the sparks that ye 
have kindled. This shall ye have 


of mine hand; ye shall lie down in ~ 


sorrow. 


CHAPTER 51. 


(6) Israel to be redeemed: op- 
pressors punished. 


HIEARREN to me, ye that fol- 
low after righteousness, ye that 
seek the LorpD: look unto the rock 
whence ye are hewn, and to thé 
hole of the pit whence ye are 
digged. 

2 7Look unto Abraham your fa- 
ther, and unto Sarah that bare you: 
for I called him alone, and blessed 
him, and increased him. 

3 For the Lorpb ‘shall comfort 
Zion: he will comfort all her waste 
places; and he will make her wil- 
derness like Eden, and ‘her desert 
like the garden of the Lorp; joy 
and gladness shall be found therein, 
thanksgiving, and the voice of 
melody. ; 

4 Hearken unto me, my people; 
and give ear unto me, O my nation: 
for a law shall proceed from me, 
and I will make my judgment to 
rest for a light of the people. 

5 My righteousness is near; my 
salvation is gone forth, and mine 
arms shall judge the people; the 
4isles shall wait upon me, and on 
mine arm shall they trust. 

6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, 


=e~ 


a 2 i 


ISAIAH. 


[52 5 


and look upon the earth beneath: 
for the heavens shall vanish away 
like smoke, and “the earth shall 
wax old like a garment, and they 
that dwell therein shall die in like 
manner: but my salvation shall be 
for ever, and my righteousness shail 
not be abolished. 

7 WHearken unto me, ye that know 
tighteousness, the people in whose 
heart zs my law; fear ye not the 
reproach of men, neither be ye 
afraid of their revilings. 

8 For the moth shall eat them up 
like a garment, and the worm shall 
eat them like wool: but my right- 
eousness shall be for ever, and my 
salvation from generation to gen- 
eration. 

9 Awake, awake, put on strength, 
O arm of the LoRD; awake, as in 
the ancient days, in the generations 


of old. Art thou not it that hath 
cut Rahab, and wounded the 
dragon? 


10 Art thou not it which hath 
dried the sea, the waters of the 
great deep; that hath made the 
depths of the sea a way for the “ran- 
somed to pass over? 

11 Therefore the redeemed of the 
Lorp shall return, and come with 


singing unto Zion; and everlasting 


joy shall be upon their head: they 
shall obtain gladness and joy; and 
sorrow and ‘mourning shall flee 
away. 

12 I, even I, am he 4that com- 
forteth you: who art thou, that 
thou shouldest be afraid of a man 
that shall die, and of the son of man 
which shall be made as grass; 

13 And forgettest the Lorp thy 
maker, that hath stretched forth 
the heavens, and laid the founda- 
tions of the earth; and hast feared 
continually every day because of 
the fury of the oppressor, as if he 
were ready to destroy? and where 
is the fury of the oppressor? 

14 The captive exile hasteneth 
that he may be loosed, and that he 
should not die in the pit, nor that 
his bread should fail. 

15 But I am the LorD thy God, 
that divided the sea, whose waves 
roared: The Lorp of hosts is his 


name. 

16 ¢And I have put my words in 
thy mouth, and I have covered thee 
in the shadow of mine hand, that I 
may plant the heavens, and lay the 
foundations of the earth, and say 
unto Zion, Thou art my people. 

17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Je- 


B.C. 712. 


a Isa.50.9. 


b The ref. is to 
Egypt (Isa. 
30.7) at the 
Exodus. 


c Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 

dv.3;.2 Cor. 
is; 

e Deut.18.18; 
Isa.59.21; 
John 3.34. 

F Jer.50.34.. 

g Jer.25.17, 


26,28; 
Zech.12.2. 


759 


rusalemt, which hast drunk at the 
hand of the Lorp the cup of his 
fury; thou t drunken the dregs 
of the cup of €rembling, and wrung 
them out. 

18 There is none to guide her 
among all the sons whom she hath 
brought forth; neither is there any 
that taketh her by the hand of ali 
the sons that she hath brought up. 

19 These two things are come 
unto thee; who shall be sorry for 
thee? desolation, and destruction, 
and the famine, and the sword: by 
whom shall I comfort thee? 

20 Thy sons have fainted, they 
lie at the head of all the streets, as 
a wild bull in a net: they are full of 
the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of 
thy God. 

21 Therefore hear now this, thou 
afflicted, and drunken, but not with 
wine: 

22 Thus saith thy Lord the 
Lorp, and thy God fthat pleadeth 
the cause of his people, Behold, I 
have taken out of thine hand the 
cup of trembling, even the dregs of 
the cup of my fury; thou shalt no 
more drink it again: 

23 sBut I will put it into the hand 
of them that afflict thee; which 
have said to thy soul, Bow down, 
that we may go over: and thou hast 
laid thy body as the ground, and as 
the street, to them that went over. 


CHAPTER 52. 


(7) Vision of Jerusalem in the 
kingdom-age. 


WAKE, awake; put on thy 

strength, O Zion; put on thy 
beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, 
the holy city: for henceforth there 
shall no more come into thee the 
uncircumcised and the unclean. 

2 Shake thyself from the dust; 
arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: 
loose thyself from the bands of thy 
neck, O captive daughter of Zion. 

3 For thus saith the LorRD, Ye 
have sold yourselves for nought; 
and ye shali be ‘redeemed without 
money. 

4 For thus saith the Lord Gop, 
My people went down aforetime 
into Egypt to sojourn there; and 
the Assyrian oppressed them with- 
out cause. 

5 Now therefore, what have I 
here, saith the Lorp, that my peo- 
ple is taken away for nought? they 
that rule over them make them to 
howl, saith the LORD; and my name 


[53 12_ 


52 6] ISAIAH. 
continually every day is* *blas-| B.C. 712. 
phemed. 

6 Therefore ae ae e chet ee a Rom.2.24. 
my name: thereforé* they sha } 
know in that day that I am he that|? ie 
doth speak: behold, it 1s I. Nah.1.15; 

7 How beautiful upon the moun- pies: 
tains are the feet of him that bring-} Roin"10'1s: 
eth good ‘tidings, that publisheth| Rev.1.15,17. 
peace; that bringeth good tidings of} rs 
good, that publisheth salvation;|‘° 72%4°y3. 
that saith unto Zion, Thy God} (Gen.12.1-3; 
reigneth! Rev.14.6.) 

8 Thy watchmen shall lift up the] 99 cor.6.17, 
voice; with the voice together shall 
they sing: for they shall see eye to a Contr, an 
eye, when the LorpD shall bring| ©*1?3%39- 
again Zion. : f Mic.2.13. 

9 Break forth into joy, sing to- ee 
gether, ye waste places of Jerusalem:|% C& E¥-14-19. 
for the Lorp hath comforted his!) Sacrifice 
people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.| (prophetic). 

10 The Lorp hath made bare his faa 
holy arm in the eyes of all the na-| Heb.i0.13.) 
tions; and all the ends of the earth] . . 
shall see the salvation of our|? Giese 
God. Advent). 

11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out} Isa.53.1-12. 
from thence, touch no unclean Se eo 
thing; go ye out of the midst of my 
her; be ye 4clean, that bear the ves-| j Rom.15.21, 
sels of the LorD. i 

12 For ye shall not go out with|* fobs 12-38 


haste, nor go by flight: ffor the 
Lorp will go before you; and the| ’ Sacrifice 
God of Israel will be your 8rereward. 


vs.1-12; 
( ) J h n’s S t 5 ee. 
8 ehovah’s Servant, marre en.4.4; 
and afterward exalted. Heb.10.18.) 
m Mt.27.30,31. 


13 Behold, my servant shall deal 
prudently, he shall be exalted and kee 17; 
extolled, and be very high. 1 Pet.2.24, 

14 As many were astonied at thee}! 5 mt.26.62, 
his visage was !so #marred more 
than any man, and his form more 
than the sons of men: 

15 So shall ‘he sprinkle many na- 
tions; the kings shall shut their 
mouths at him: for that which had 
not been told them shall they Jsee; 


Mk.15.3-5; 
Lk.23.9; 
John 19.9; 


Lk.23.1-25. 


and that which they had not heard|¢ Mt-27.57-60. 


shall they consider. 


v1 Pet.2.22. 

Acts 13.38, 

CHAPTER 53. NaguBons: 
The vicarious sacrifice of Christ,| ° 
Jehovah's Servant. A 


VJ HO hath believed our report?|,, mt.27.38, 
and ‘to whom is the arm of} Mt.15.28; 
the Lorp revealed? Lk. 22.37. 


1 The literal rendering is terrible: 


(prophetic). 


63; 27.12-14; 


Acts 8.32,33. 
p Mt.27.11-26; 


2 For he shall grow up before him 
as a tender plant, and as a root out 
of a dry ground: he hath no form 
nor comeliness; and when we shall 
see him, there 1s no beauty that we 
should desire him. 

3 ™He is despised and rejected of 
men; a man of sorrows, and ac- 
quainted with grief: and we hid as 
it were our faces from him; he was 
despised, and we esteemed him 
not. 

4 Surely he hath borne our griefs, 
and “carried our sorrows: yet we 
did esteem him stricken, smitten of 
God, and afflicted. 

5 But he was wounded for our 
transgressions, he was bruised for 
our iniquities: the chastisement of 
our peace was upon him; and with 
his stripes we are healed. 

6 2 


7 He was oppressed, and he was 
afflicted, yet he opened not his 
mouth: he is brought as a lamb to 
the slaughter, and as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, °so he openeth 
not his mouth. 

8 He was taken from prison and 
from judgment: and who shall de- 
clare his generation? for he was 
cut off out of the land of the living: 
for the transgression of my people 
was he stricken. 

9 And he made his grave with the 
wicked, and ¢with the rich in his 
death; because he had done no 
violence, either was any deceit 
in his mouth. 

10 Yet it pleaséd the Lorp to 
bruise him; he hath put him to 
grief: when: thou shalt make his 
soul an offering for sin, he shall see ~ 
his seed, he shall prolong his days, 
and the pleasure of the LorD shall 
prosper in his hand. 

11 He shall see of the travail of 
his soul, and shall be satisfied: by 
his knowledge : shall my righteous 
servant ‘justify many: for he shall 
bear their iniquities. 

12 Therefore will I divide him a 
portion with the great, and he 
shall divide the spoil with the 
strong; because he ‘hath poured 
out his soul unto death: and “he 
was numbered with the transgress- 


_—_——$—[—_$——:. eee 
“So marred from the form of man was His 


aspect that His appearance was not that of a son of man”—i.e. not human—the 
effect of the Paklich described in Mt. 26. 67, 68; 27. 27-30. 


760 


54 1) 


ISAIAH. [55 6 
ors; and ¢he bare the sin of many,| B.c. 712. |tempest. and not comforted, be- 
and made intercession for the hold, I will lay thy stones with fair 
transgressors. colours, and lay thy foundations 

with sapphires. 
CHAPTER 54. 12 And I will make thy windows 


Israel] the restored wife of Jeho- 
vah. (Cf. Hos. 2. 1-23.) 


ING, O barren, ‘thou that didst 

not bear; break forth into sing- 

ing, and cry aloud, thou that didst 

not 4travail with child: for more 

are the children of the desolate 

than the children of the married 
wife, saith the Lorpb. 

2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, 
and let them stretch forth the cur- 
tains of thine habitations: spare not, 
lengthen thy cords, and strengthen 
thy stakes; 

3 For thou shalt break forth on 
the right hand and on the left; and 
thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, 
and make the desolate cities to be 
inhabited. 

4 Fear not; for thou shalt not be 
ashamed: neither be thou con- 
founded; for thou shalt not be put 
to shame: for thou shalt forget the 
shame of thy youth, and shalt not 
remember the reproach of thy 
widowhood any more. 

5 For thy Maker is thine ¢hus- 
band; the Lorp of hosts is _ his 
name; and-thy Redeemer the Holy 
One of Israel; The God of the 
whole earth shall he be called. 

6 For the Lorp hath called thee 
as a woman forsaken and grieved 
in spirit, and a wife of youth, when 
thou wast refused, saith thy God. 

7 For asmall moment have I for- 
saken thee; but with great mercies 
will I gather thee. 

8 In a little wrath I hid my face 
from thee for a moment; but with 
everlasting kindness will I have 
mercy on thee, saith the LorD thy 
Redeemer. 

9 For this 7s as the waters of 
Noah unto me: for as I have sworn 
that the fwaters of Noah should no 
more go over the earth; so have I 
sworn that I would not be wroth 
with thee, nor rebuke thee. 

10 For the mountains shall de- 
part, and the hills be removed; but 
my kindness shall not depart from 
thee, neither shall the covenant of 
my peace be removed, saith the 
Lorp that hath mercy on thee. 


Security and blessing of restored 
Israel. (Cf. Deut. 30. 1-9, note.) 


11 O thou afflicted, tossed with 


a Christ 
(First 
Advent). 
Tsa.61.1. 
(Gen.3.15; 
Acts 1.9.) 


6 Lk.23.34. 
¢ Gal.4.27. 


d Mic.5.1, 
note. 


e Wife (of Je- 
hovah). 


(Isa.54.5; 
Hos.2.1-23.) 


Ff Isa.55.11; 
Gen.8.21; 9. 
11; Jer.31. 

5,36, 

g John 6.45; 

1 Cor.2.10; 


1 Thes.4.9; 
1 John 2.20. 


h John 4.14; 
7.37; Rev. 
21.6; 22.17. 

# Rev.3.18. 

j 2 Sam.7.8; 
Psa.89.28; 
Acts 13.34. 


Rk Isa.52.15; 
Eph.2.11,12. 


1 Psa.32.6; 
Mt.5.25; 25. 


2 Cor.6.1,2. 


761 


of agates, and thy gates of carbun- 
cles, and all thy borders of pleasant 
stones. 

13 And all thy children shall be 
taught of the LORD; and great 
shall be the peace of thy children. 

14 In righteousness shalt thou be 
established: thou shalt be far from 
oppression; for thou shalt not fear: 
and from terror; for it shall not 
come near thee. 

15 Behold, they shall surely 
gather together, but not by me: 
whosoever shall gather together 
against thee shall fail for thy sake. 

16 Behold, I have created the 
smith that bloweth the coals in the 
fire, and that bringeth forth an in- 
strument for his work; and I have 
created the waster to destroy. 

17 No weapon that is formed 
against thee shall prosper; and 
every tongue that shall rise against 
thee in judgment thou shalt con- 
demn. This zs the heritage of the 
servants of the Lorp, and their 
righteousness is of me, saith the 
LORD. 


CHAPTER 55. 
The everlasting salvation. 


O, every one that thirsteth, 

come ye to the waters, and he 

that hath no money; *tcome ye, buy, 

and eat; yea, come, buy wine and 

milk without money and without 
price. 

2 Wherefore do ye spend money 
for that which is not bread? and 
your labour for that which satisfi- 
eth not? hearken diligently unto 
me, and eat ye that which 1s good, 
and let your soul delight itself in 
fatness. 

3 Incline your ear, and come unto 
me: hear, and your soul shall live; 
and I will make an everlasting cove- 
nant with you, even the sure mer- 
cies of David. 

4 Behold, I have given him for a 
witness to the people, a leader and 
commander to the people. 

5 Behold, *thou shalt call a nation 
that thou knowest not, and nations 
that knew not thee shall run unto 
thee because of the LorD thy God, 
and for the Holy One of Israel; for 
he hath glorified thee. 

6 ‘Seek ye the LorD while he 


55 7] 


may -be found, call ye upon him 
while he is near: 

7 Let the wicked forsake his way, 
and the unrighteous man “¢his 
thoughts: and let him return unto 
the LorpD, and he will have mercy 
upon him; and to our God, for %he 
will abundantly pardon. 

8 ‘For my thoughts are not your 
thoughts, neither are your ways 
my ways, saith the LorD. __ 

9 For as the heavens are higher 
than the earth, so are my ways 
higher than your ways, and my 
thoughts than your thoughts. 

10 For as the rain cometh down, 
and the snow from heaven, and re- 
turneth not thither, but watereth 
the earth, and maketh it bring forth 
and bud, that it may give seed to 
the sower, and bread to the eater: 

11 So shall my word be that 
goeth forth out of my mouth: it 
shall not return unto me void, but 
it shall accomplish that which I 
please, and it shall prosper in the 
thing whereto I sent it. | 

12 For ye shall go out with joy, 
and be led forth with peace: the 
mountains and the hills shall break 
forth before you into singing. and 
all the trees of the field shall clap 
their hands. 

13 ¢Instead of the thorn shall 
come up the fir tree, and instead of. 
the brier shall come up the myrtle 
tree: and it shall be to the Lorp for 
a name, for an everlasting sign that 
shall not be cut off. 


CHAPTER 56. 
Ethical instructions. 


OEHUS saith the Lorp, Keep ye 
judgment, and do justice: ¢for 
my salvation 1s near to come, and 
my righteousness to be revealed. 

2 Blessed is the man that doeth 
this, and the son of man that layeth 
hold on it; that keepeth the sab- 
bath from polluting it, and keepeth 
his hand from doing any evil. 

3 Neither let the son of the 
stranger, that hath joined himself 
to the Lorb, speak, saying, The 
Lorp hath utterly separated me 
from his people: neither let the 
eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry 
tree. 

4 For thus saith the Lorp unto 
the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, 
and choose the things that please 
me, and take hold of my covenant; 

5 Even’ unto them will I give in 
mine house and within my walls a 


ISATAH. 


B.C. 712. 


a Zech.8.17. 


b Heb. he will 
multiply to 
Pardon. 


¢ 2 Sam.7.19. 
d Isa.41.19. 


e Isa.46.13; 
Mt.3.2; 
4.17; Rom. 
F3-11; 723 


f Mt.21.13; 
ME.11,17; 
Lk.19.46. 

g Rom.12.1; 


Heb.13.15; 
2) Pet:2°5. 


h Isa.11.12; 
Psa.147.2. 


# Psa.10.6; 
Prov.23.35; 
Isa.22.13; 
Lk.12.19; 

1 Cor.15.32. 


762 


place and a name better than of 
sons and of daughters: I will give 
them an everlasting name, that 
shall not be cut off. 

6 Also the sons of the stranger, 
that join themselves to the LorD, 
to serve him, and to love the name 
of the Lorpb, to be his servants, 
every one that keepeth the sabbath 
from polluting it, and taketh hold 
of my covenant; 

7 Even them will I bring to my 


holy mountain, and make them joy- — 


ful iri my Shouse of prayer: &their 
burnt-offerings and their sacrifices 
shall be accepted upon mine altar; 
for mine Shouse shall be called an 
house of prayer for all people. 

8 The Lord Gop /which gathereth 
the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet 
will I gather others to him, beside 
those that are gathered unto him. 

9 All ye beasts of the field, come 
to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the 
forest. 

10 His watchmen are blind: they 
are all ignorant, they are all dumb 
dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, 
lying down, loving to slumber. 

11 Yea, they are greedy dogs 
which can never have enough, and 
they are shepherds that cannot 
understand: they all look to their 
own way, every one for his gain, 
from his quarter. 

12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch 
wine, and we will fill ourselves with 
strong drink; and ‘to morrow shall 
be as this day, and much more 
abundant, 


CHAPTER 57. 
(Ethical instructions, continued.) 


Apts righteous perisheth, and no 
man layeth xt to heart: and 
merciful men are taken away, none 
considering that the righteous is 
taken away from the evil to come. 

2 He shall enter into peace: they 
shall rest in their beds, each one 
walking in his uprightness. 

3 But draw near hither, ye sons 
of the sorceress, the seed of the 
adulterer and the whore. 

4 Against whom do ye sport your- 
selves? against whom make ye a 
wide mouth, and draw out the 
tongue? are -ye not children of 
transgression, a seed of falsehood, 

5 Enflaming yourselves with idols 
under every green tree, slaying the 
children in the valleys under the 
clifts of the rocks? 


» 


57 6] 
6 Among the smooth stones of 
the stream ys thy portion; they, 
they are thy lot: even to them hast 
thou poured a drink-offering, thou 
hast offered a 4meat-offering. 
Should I receive comfort in these? 

7 Upon alofty and high mountain 
hast thou set thy bed: even thither 
wentest thou up to offer sacrifice. 

8 Behind the doors also and the 
posts hast thou set up thy remem- 
brance: for thou hast discovered 
thyself to another than me, and 
art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy 
bed, and made thee a covenant 
with them; thou lovedst their bed 
where thou sawest it. 

9 And thou wentest to the king 
with ointment, and didst increase 
thy perfumes, and didst send thy 
messengers far off, and didst debase 
thyself even unto %hell. 

10 Thou art wearied in the great- 
ness of thy way; yet saidst thou 
not, There is no hope: thou hast 
found the life of thine hand; there- 
fore thou wast not grieved. 

11 And of whom hast thou been 
afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, 
and hast not remembered me, nor 
laid rt to thy heart? chave not I 
held my peace even of old, and thou 
fearest me not? 

12 I will declare thy righteous- 
ness, and thy works; for they shall 
not profit thee. 

13. When thou criest, let thy com- 

panies deliver thee; but the wind 
shall carry them all away; vanity 
shall take them: but he that put- 
teth his ¢trust in me shall possess 
the land, and shall inherit my holy 
mountain; 
- 14 And shall say, Cast ye up, cast 
ye up, prepare the way, take up the 
stumblingblock out of the way of 
my people. 

15 For thus saith the high and 
lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 
ewhose name 1s Holy; fI dwell in 
the high and holy place, with him 
also that is of a contrite and hum- 
ble spirit, to revive the spirit of the 
humble, and to revive the heart of 
the contrite ones. 

16 &For I will not contend for 
ever, neither will I be always 
wroth: for the spirit should fail be- 
fore me, and the souls which I have 
made. : 

17 For the iniquity of his “covet- 
ousness was I wroth, and smote 
him: I hid me, and was wroth, and 
he went on frowardly in the way of 
his heart. 


ISAIAH. 


a Lit. meal. 


b Heb. Sheol. 


See Hab. 
2.5, note. 


¢ Psa.50.21. 


d Psa.2.12, 
note. 


e Job 6.10; 
Lk.1.49. 

f Psa.68.4; 
Zech.2.13. 

g Psa.85.5; 
103.9; Mic. 
7.18. 

h Jer.6.13. 

t Jer.3.22. 

j Heb.13.15. 


k Acts 2.39; 
Eph.2.17. 


1 Job 15.20; 
Prov.4.16. 


m 1 Ki.21.9, 
12,13. 


n Zech.7.5. 
o Lk.4.18,19. 


b Neh.5.10-12. 


q Jer.34.9. 

v Ezk.18.7, 
16; Mt.25. 
35. 

s Job 31.19. 


t Gen.29.14; 
Neh.5.5. } 


763 


{58 8 


18 I have seen his ways, and ‘will 
heal him: I will lead him also, and 
restore comforts unto him and to 
his mourners. 

19 I create Jthe fruit of the lips; 
Peace, peace *to him that is far 
off, and to Aim that is near, saith 
the Lorp; and I will heal him. 

20 ‘But the wicked are like the 
troubled sea, when it cannot rest, 
whose waters cast up mire and 
dirt. 

21 There is no peace, saith my 
God, to the wicked. 


CHAPTER 58. 
(Ethical instructions, continued.) 


Ce aloud, spare not, lift up thy 
voice like a trumpet, and shew 
my people their transgression, and 
the house of Jacob their sins. 

2 Yet they seek me daily, and de- 
light to know my ways, as a nation 
that did righteousness, and forsook 
not the ordinance of their God: they 
ask of me the ordinances of justice; 
ae take delight in approaching to 

od, 

3 Wherefore have we fasted, say 
they, and thou seest not? where- 
fore have we afflicted our soul, and 
thou takest no knowledge? Behold, 
in the day of your fast ye find pleas- 
ure, and exact all your labours. 

4 ™Behold, ye fast for strife and 
debate, and to smite with the fist of 
wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye 
do this day, to make your voice to 
be heard on high. 

5 Is it *such a fast that I have 
chosen? a day for a man to afflict 
his soul? zs it to bow down his head 
as a bulrush, and to spread sack- 
cloth and ashes under him? wilt 
thou call this a fast, and an accept- 
able day to the LoRD? 

6 Is not this the fast that I have 
chosen? to loose the bands of 
wickedness, to ’undo the heavy 
burdens, and %to let the oppressed 
go free, and that ye break every 
yoke? 

7 Is it not to “deal thy bread to 
the hungry, and that thou bring 
the poor that are cast out to thy 
house? Swhen thou seest the naked, 
that thou cover him; and that thou 
hide not thyself ‘from thine own 
flesh? 

8 Then shall thy light break forth 
as the morning, and thine health 
shall spring forth speedily: and thy 
righteousness shall go before thee; 


58 ¥{ 


*the glory of the LORD shall be thy} 


rereward. 

9 Then shalt thou call, and the 
Lorp shall answer; thou shalt cry, 
and he shall say, Here lam. If 
thou take away from the midst of 
thee the yoke, the putting forth of 
the finger, and speaking vanity; 

10 And if thou draw out thy soul 
to the hungry, and satisfy the 
afflicted soul; then shall thy light 
rise in obscurity, and thy darkness 
be as the noon day: c 

11 And the Lorp shall guide thee 
continually, and satisfy thy soul in 
drought, and make fat thy bones: 
and thou shalt be like a watered 
garden, and like a spring of water, 
whose waters fail not. 

12 And they that shali be of 
thee shall build the old waste places: 
thou shalt raise up the foundations 
of many generations; and thou 
shalt be called, The repairer of the 
breach, The restorer of paths to 
dwell in, 

13 If thou turn away thy foot 
from the sabbath, from doing thy 
pleasure on my holy day; and call 
the sabbath a delight, the holy of 
the Lorp, honourable; and shalt 
honour him, not doing thine own 
ways, nor finding thine own pleas- 
ure, nor speaking thine own words: 

14 Then shalt thou delight thyself 
in the Lorpb; and I will cause thee 
to ride upon the high places of the 
earth, and feed thee with the heri- 
tage of Jacob thy father: for the 
mouth of the LorD hath spoken it. 


CHAPTER 59. 
(Ethical instructions, continued.) 


EHOLD, the Lorp’s hand is 

not shortened, that it cannot 

save; neither his ear heavy, that it 
cannot hear: 

2 But your iniquities have sepa- 
rated between you and your God, 
and your sins have hid Ays face 
from you, that he will not hear. 

3 For your hands are defiled with 
blood, and your fingers with ini- 
quity; your lips have spoken lies, 
your tongue hath muttered per- 
verseness. 

4 None calleth for justice, nor 
any pleadeth for truth: they trust 
in vanity, and speak lies; they con- 
ceive mischief, and bring forth 
iniquity. 

5 They hatch cockatrice’ eggs, 
and weave the spider’s web: he 
that eateth of their eggs dieth, and 


ISAIAH. 


a Isa.52.12; 
Ex.14.19. 


6 Psa.2.12, 
note. 


c Rom.3.15, 
d vs.7,8; 


Rom.3.16,17. 


e Righteous- 
ness (gar- 


764 


B.C. 698. 


(9 8 


ee 


that which is crushed breaketh out 
into a viper. 

6 Their webs shall not become 
garments, neither shall they cover 
themselves with their works: their 
works are works of iniquity, and 
the act of violence is in their hands. 

7 Their feet run to evil, and they 
make haste to shed innocent blood: 
their thoughts are thoughts of ini- 


quity; wasting and ¢destruction are 
in their paths. 

8 The way of peace they know 
not; and there is no judgment m 
their goings: they have made them 
crooked paths: whosoever goeth 
therein shall not know peace. 

9 Therefore is judgment far from 
us, neither doth justice overtake 
us: we wait for light, but behold 
ebscurity; for brightness, but we 
walk in darkness. ‘ 

10 We grope for the wall like the 
blind, and we grope as if we had 
no eyes: we stumble at noon day 
as in the night; we are in desolate 
places as dead men. 

11 We roar all like bears, and 
mourn sore like doves: we look for 
judgment, but there is none: for 
salvation, but it is far off from us. 

12 For our transgressions are mul- 
tiplied before thee, and our sins 
testify against us: for our trans- 
gressions are with us; and as for 
our iniquities, we know them; 

13 In transgressing and lying 


- jagainst the LORD, and departing 


away from our God, speaking op- 
pression and revolt, conceiving and 
uttering from the heart words of 
falsehood. 

14 And judgment is turned away 
backward, and justice standeth afar 
off: for truth is fallen in the street, 
and equity cannot enter. 

15° Yea, truth faileth; and he that 
departeth from evil maketh himself 
a prey: and the LorpD saw it, and 
it displeased him that there was 
no judgment. 

16 And he saw that there was no 
man, and wondered that there was 
no intercessor: therefore his arm 
brought salvation unto him; and 
his righteousness, it sustained him. 

17 For he put on ‘righteousness as 
a breastplate, and an helmet of sal- 
vation upon his head; and he put 


-lon the garments of vengeance for 


clothing, and was clad with zeal as 
a cloke. 


18 According to their deeds, ac- 


|cordingly he will repay, fury to his 


adversaries, recompence to his ene- 


t 


mies; to the islands he will repay) 3B.c. 698. 


recompence. 

19 Soshall they ®fear the name of 
the Lorp from the west, and his 
glory from the rising of the sun. 
When the enemy shall come in like 
a flood, the ‘Spirit of the LorD shall 
lift up a standard against him. 

The Deliverer out of Zion. 
(Cf. Rom. 11. 23-29.) 

20 1And the Redeemer shall 
2come to 2Zion, and unto them that 
turn from transgression in Jacob, 
saith the Lorp. : 

21 As for me, this 7s my covenant 
with them, saith the Lorp; My 
spirit that 1s upon thee, and my 
ewords which I have put in thy 
mouth, shall not depart out of thy 
mouth, nor out of the mouth of 
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of 


a i.e. coasts. 


6 Psa.19.9, 
note. 


Tsa.61.1. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


d vs.20,21; 
Rom.11. 
26,27. 


thy seed’s seed, saith the Lorp, yore 
from henceforth and for ever. (Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 
CHAPTER 60. 
Israel (pro- 
(The Deliverer out of Zion, " phecres) 
continued. vs.I-12; 
er.23.3-8 
RISE, shine; for thy light 1s 1Gni323: 
come, and the glory of the| Rom-11-20.) 
Lorp is risen upon thee. g See Isa.42. 
2 For, behold, the darkness shall} 6, and note. 
cover the earth, and gross darkness Ree hiees 
the people: but the Lorp shall|’37° 
arise upon thee, and his glory shall] . 
be seers upon thee. # Gen.25.4. 
3 And the Gentiles shall come to} ; Gen.25.13. 
thy élight, and kings to the bright- 
ness of thy rising. k Hag.2.7,9. 
4 Lift up thine eyes round about,| ; fsa.52.7. - 


and see: all they gather themselves 
together, they come to thee: thy 
sons shall come from far, and thy 
daughters shall be nursed at thy side. 

“5 Then thou shalt see, and flow 
together, and thine heart shall fear, 
and be enlarged; because the abun- 
dance of the sea shall be converted 
unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles 
shall come unto thee. 


1 Redemption: Kinsman type, summary, 
a beautiful type of Christ. 


(1) The kinsman redemption was of persons, and an inheritance 


48; 25. 25; Gal. 4. 5; Eph. 1. 7, 11, 14). 


(2) The Redeemer must be a kinsman (Lev. 25. 48, 49; Ruth 3. 12, 


4, 4; Heb. 2. 14, 15). 

(3) The Redeemer must 
10. ta) 
25. 27; 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19; Gal. 3. 13). 


2The tire when the “Redeemer shalt come to Zion” 


ISAIAH. 


c Holy Spirit. 


e Inspiration. 


[60 14 


| 6 The multitude of camels shall 
cover thee, the dromedaries of 
Midian and ‘Ephah; all they 
from Sheba shall come: they shall 
bring gold and incense; and they 
shall shew forth the praises of the 
LORD. P 

7 All the flocks of 7Kedar shall be 
gathered together unto thee, the 
rams of Nebaioth shall minister 
unto thee: they shall come up with 
acceptance on mine altar, and *I 
will glorify the house of my glory. 

8 Who are these that fly as a 
cloud, and as the doves to their 
windows? 

9 Surely the ¢isles shall wait for 
ime, and the ships of Tarshish first, 
to bring thy sons from far, their 
silver and their gold with them, 
unto the name of the Lorp thy 
God, and to the Holy One of Israel, 
because he hath glorified thee. 

10 And the sons of strangers shalt , 
build up thy walls, and their kings 
shall minister unto thee: for in my 
wrath I smote thee, but in my fa- 
vour have I had mercy on thee. 

11 Therefore thy gates shall be 
open continually; they shall not be 
shut day nor night; that men may 
bring unto thee the forces of the 
Gentiles, and that their kings may 
be brought. 

12 For the nation and kingdom 
that will not serve thee shall per- 
ish; yea, those nations shall be 
utterly wasted. 

13 The glory of Lebanon shall. 
come unto thee, the fir tree, the 
pine tree, and the box together, to 
beautify the place of my sanctuary; 
and I will make the place of my 
feet glorious. 

14 The sons also of them that af- 
flicted thee shall come bending unto 
thee; and all they that despised 
thee shall bow themselves down 
at the soles of thy ‘feet; and they 
shall call thee, The city of the 


The goel, or Kinsman-Redeemer, is 
(Lev. 25. 
13; Gal. 


be able to redeem (Ruth 4. 4-6; Jer. 50. 34; John 


Redemption is effected by the goe! paying the just demand in full (Lev. 
See Ex. 14. 30, note; Rom, 3. 24, note. 


is fixed, relatively, by 


Rom. 11. 23-29 as following the completion of the Gentile Church. That is also 


the order of the great dispensational passage, Acts 15. 14-17. 


In both, the return 


of the Lord to Zion follows the outcalling of the Church. 


765 


60 15] ISAIAH. . 
Lorp, The Zion of the Holy One! _B.c. 698.__|the prison to therm that are 


of Israel. bound; ; 

15 Whereas thou hast been for- 2 To proclaim the acceptable 
saken and hated, so that no man}, yb. goer, |1year of the LorD, and the “day of 
went through thee, I will make| Redemp.’ |yengeance of our God; to: comfort 
thee an eternal excellency, a joy} (Kinsman |ajl that mourn; 


. type). Isa. 
Chere cbaletaiee ‘suck the miik 99:20, note. |Kingdom peace and blessing 
of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the|? Rev.21.23; | after the day of vengeance an: 
- breast of kings: and thou shalt 22.5. ticipated (Isa. (Si pewaiee 24): (1) 


The restoration of Israel (ex- 


know that I the LorD am thy} c Zech.2:5. tends to Isa. 62. 12). 


Saviour and thy *Redeemer, the 


mighty One of Jacob. See 3 To appoint unto them that 

17 For brass I will bring gold, and mourn in Zion, to give unto them 

for iron I will bring silver, and sepa oe " beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for 
eV. - . 


for wood brass, and for stones mourning, ‘the garment of praise 
iron: I will also make thy officers) fPsa.37.11, |for the spirit of heaviness; -that 
peace, and thine exactors righteous-| 22; Mt.5.5. |they might be called trees of right- 


ness, — g 1sa.61.3: eousness, the planting of the LorD, 
18 Violence shall no more be|” mti5.13. that he might be glorified. 
heard ‘in thy land, wasting nor 4 And they shall build the old 


destruction within thy borders; but rere wastes, they shall raise up the 
thou shalt call thy walls Salvation,| 2°19.’ °~ former desolations, and they shall 


and thy gates Praise. ; .., |\repair the waste cities, the desola- 
19 The sun shall be no more thy| ‘ #04 Spirit. |tions of many generations. 
light by day; neither for brightness] (Gen1.2: 5 And strangers shall stand and 


shall the moon give light unto thee:| Mal.2.15.) |feed your flocks, and the sons of 
but the Lorp shall be unto thee j Lie-4.18,19 the alien shall be your plowmen 
an everlasting light, and ‘thy God “~—""* land your vinedressers. 


thy glory. k Christ 6 But ye shall be named the 
20 ¢Thy sun shall no more go est A. Priests of the LORD: men shall call 


down; neither shall thy moon with- Dan.9.25,26, |you the Ministers of our God: ye 
draw itself: for the LorD shall be] (Gen.3.15; [shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, 
thine everlasting light, and the] Acts19) jand in their glory shall’ye boast 


days of thy mourning shall be} ;1x.7:20; yourselves. 

ended. Acts 10.38. 7 For your shame ye shall have 
Binet hy: pangs also shall be all iGeueet double; and for_ confusion they 
righteous: ‘they shall inherit the]”ys-5. shall rejoice in their portion: there- 
land for ever, the %branch of my] Mt.3.1,2. fore in their land they shall possess 
planting, the work of my hands, mite the double: everlasting joy shall be 
that I may be glorified. ie unto them. 


22 A “little one shall become an Day (of dee | 8 For I the Loeb love judgment, 
thousand, and a small one a strong| S‘ruction). |] hate robbery for burnt-offering: 


nation: I the LorD will hasten it tee atone and I will direct their work in truth, 
in his time. Rev.20.11- jand I will make an everlasting 
15, ree aan En them. } 

B Covenant 9 And their seed shall be known 

CHAPTER 61. (New). among, the Gentiles, and their off- 


Jer-31-31-34. |spring among the people: all that 


The two advents in one view. : 
Seen P eRe ie) see them shall acknowledge them, 
HE ‘Spirit of the yore sep 1s  eiateebae rage ine we the Sere. which the 

Jupon “me; because the LorD ef P ORD ha essed. 

hath ‘anointed me to preach good Se 10 I will greatly rejoice in the 
mtidings unto the meek; he hath} sa.64.6. _ |LorRD, my soul shall be joyful in 
ene me to bind up the broken- Soames my God; for he hath clothed me 
earted, to proclaim liberty to with the garments of salvation, he 
the captives, and the opening of hath covered me with the *robe 


1 Observe that Jesus suspended the reading of this passage in the synagogue at 
Nazareth (Lk. 4. 16-21) at the comma in the middle of Isa. 61.2. The first advent, 
therefore, opened the day of grace, “the acceptable year of Jehovah,” but does not 
fulfil the day of vengeance. That will be taken up when Messiah returns (2 Thes, 
1, 7-10). Cf. Isa. 34. 8; 35. 4-10. The last verse, taken with the 4th, gives the 
historic connection: the vengeance precedes the regathering of Israel, and syn- 
chronizes with the day of the LorD (Isa. 2. 10-22; Rev. 19. 11-21; also Isa. 63, 1-6). 


766 


Pee eee Nae fy J fel Nia | 


ISAIAH. 


of righteousness, as a bridegroom] _B.c. 698. 


decketh Aimself with ornaments, 
and as a bride adorneth herseif 
with her jewels. 

11 For as the earth bringeth forth 
her bud, and as the garden causeth 
the things that are sown in it to 
spring forth; so the Lord Gop will 
cause righteousness and praise to 
spring forth before all the nations. 


a vs.4.12; 
Isa.65.15. 


b Zech.9.16: 


¢ Hos.1.10; 
1 Pet.2.10. 


di.e. My de. 
light 1s in 
her. 


CHAPTER 62. 
(Restorationof Israel, continued.) 


FoR Zion’s sake will I not hold 
my peace, and for Jerusalem’s 
sake I will not rest, until the right- 
eousness thereof go forth as bright- 
ness, and the salvation thereof as a 
lamp that burneth. 

2 And the Gentiles shall see thy 
righteousness, and all kings thy 
glory: and “thou shalt be cailed by 
a new name, which the mouth of 


ei.e. Married. 


f Ezk.3.17; 
33.7. ; 


g Kingdom 
(O.T.) 


the LorD shall name. vs.10-12; 

3 Thou shalt also be 4a crown of Teer aes 
glory in the hand of the Lorb, and] Zech.12.8,) 
a royal diadem in the hand of thy 
God. hMt.21.5. 

4 Thou shalt no more be termed) ; eb. goel, 
Forsaken; neither shall thy land]. Redemp. 
any more be termed Desolate: but ein eng 
thou shalt be called ¢Hephzi-bah,| 58°20, note. 
and thy land. ‘Beulah: for the|- 

Lorp delighteth in thee, and thy ese Je- 
land shall be married. raticoam 

5 For as a young man marrieth a| Isa.66.15-24. 
virgin, so shall thy sons marry oer Tre 
thee: and as the bridegroom re-| 91.) ~~ 
joiceth over the bride, so shall thy 
God rejoice over thee. eon ad 

6 fI have set watchmen upon thy| drmaged- 

walls, O Jerusalem, which shail} don (battle 
never hold their peace day nor Pak ae 
night: ye that make mention of the} (Rev.16.i4; 
Lorp, keep uct silence, * 19.11-21.) 

‘7 And give him no rest, till he 4 
establish, and till he make Jerusa- Pay lok oo 
lem a praise in the earth. _ | Mt.25.31-46. 

8 The LorpD hath sworn by his oot 
right hand, and by the arm of his] 35) ~ 


strength, Surely I will no more 
give thy corn to be meat for thine 
enemies; and the sons of the stran- 
ger shall not drink thy wine, for 
the which thou hast laboured: | 
9 But they that have gathered it 
shall eat it, and praise the LORD; 
and they that have brought it to- 
gether shall drink it in the COUFES| 
of my holiness. 

10 Go through, go through the 
gates; prepare ye the way of the 
people; cast up, cast up the high- 


767 


[63 9 


way; gather out the stones; lift up 
a Sstandard for the people. 

11 Behold, the Lorp hath pro- 
claimed unto the end of the world, 
hSay ye to the daughter of Zion, 
Behold; thy salvation cometh; he- 
hold, his reward is with him, and 
his work before him. 

12 And they shall call them, The 
holy people, The ‘redeemed ‘of the 
LoRD: and thou shalt be called, 
Sought out, A city not forsaken. 


CHAPTER 63. 


(2) The day of vengeance. (Cf. 
Isa..2. 10-22; Rev. 19. 11-21.) 


Ei HO is this that cometh from 

Edom, with dyed garments 
from Bozrah? this that is glorious 
in his apparel, travelling in the 
greatness of his strength? I that 
speak in righteousness, mighty to 
save. 

2 Wherefore art thou red in thine 
apparel, and thy garments like him 
that treadeth in the winefat? 

3 I have trodden the winepress 
alone; and of the people there was 
none with me: for I will *tread them 
in mine anger, and trample them in 
my fury; and their blood shall be 
sprinkled upon my garments, and I 
will stain all my raiment. ; 

4 For the ‘day of vengeance is in 
mine heart, and the year of my ‘re- 
deemed is come. 

5 And I looked, and there was 
none to help; and I wondered that 
there was none to uphold: there- 
fore mine own arm brought salva- 
tion unto me; and my fury, it up- 
held me. 

6 And I will tread down the peo- 
ple in mine anger, and make them 
drunk in my fury, and [I will 
bring down their strength to the 
earth. 


Fear and hope of the Remnant 
(Isa. 1.9; Rom. 11.5) in the day 
of vengeance. 


7 I will mention the lovingkind- 
nesses of the LORD, and the praises 
of the Lorp, according to all that 
the Lorp hath bestowed on us, and 
the great goodness toward the 
house of Israel, which he hath be- 
stowed on them according to his 
mercies, and according to the mul- 
titude of his lovingkindnesses. 

8 For he said, Surely they are my 
people, children that will not lie: so 


he was their Saviour. | 
Q In all their affliction he was 


afflicted, and the ¢angel of his pres-|__B.C. 698. 
ence saved them: in his love and in : CHAPTER 64. 


his pity he 4redeemed them; and (Fear and hope of the Remnant, 


he bare them, and carried them all continued.) 
the days of old. : 

10 -But they rebelled, and ‘vexed H that thou wouldest rend the 
his 2holy Spirit: therefore he was heavens, that thou wouldest 
turned to be their enemy, and he come down, that the mountains 
fought against them. might flow down at thy presence, 

11 Then he remembered the days 2 As when the melting fire burn- 
of old, Moses, and his people, eth, the fire causeth the waters ta 
saying, Where is he that brought|¢ Heb.1.4, boil, to make thy name known to 
them up out of the sea with the] 7°*¢ thine adversaries, that the nations 


shepherd of his flock? where is|b Heb. goel, |may tremble at thy presence! _ 
he that put his holy Spirit within| Redemp. 3 When thou didst terrible things 


him? Yinsman \which we looked not for, thou 
12 That led them by the right} 59.20, note. |camest down, the mountains flowed 
hand of Moses with his glorious down at thy presence. 


erm, dividing the water before|°** ved | 4 For since the beginning of the 
them, to make himself an everlast-|¢ aoe Spitit. world men have not heard, nor per- 
ZKL.2. 


ing name? reget ceived by the ear, neither hath the 
Beco tal cn Lie tn thence ea eee ee 
q orse ress, : 
that they shout Por stumble? se e Fes12-2, eth for eae ' . 
14 Asa beast goeth down into the} "0° 5 Thou meetest him that rejoiceth 


valley, the Spirit of the LoRD|sor,whohath|and worketh righteousness, those 
caused him to rest: so didst thou Worked for |that remember thee in thy ways: 
lead thy people, to make thyself a| #27,%"° |behold, thou art wroth: for we have 
glorious name. waited for |sinned: in those is continuance, and 
15 Look down from heaven, and him, Cf Isa. we shall be saved. 
yehold axe Roe abitation gf thy] john 14.2; 6 But Wears 
oliness and of thy glory: where is} 1 Cor.2.9; ing.and alt % 
thy zeal and thy strength, the] Rev-21.1. a b 
sounding of thy bowels and of thy], righteous- 
mercies toward me? are they re-|° ness (gar- 
strained? mene: A 
16 Doubtless thou art our father, (Gaon upon thy name, that stirreth up 
though Abraham be ignorant of us,| Rev.i9.8.) |himself to take hold of thee: for 
and Israel acknowledge us not: hsa.29.16,  |tHOu hast hid thy face from us, and 
thou, O Lorp, art our father, our!" 423. jec1g, [hast consumed us, because of our 
’redeemer; thy name is from ever-| 6:Rom.9._ |iniquities. 


lasting. 20,21, 8 But now, O Lorb, thou art our 
17 O Lorp, why hast thou made 2father; we.are the clay, and thou 

us to err from thy ways, and hard- hour potter; and we all are the 

ened our heart from thy ¢fear? work of thy hand. 

Return for thy servants’ sake, the 9 Be not wroth very sore, O 

tribes of thine inheritance, Lorb, neither remember iniquity . 
18 The people of thy holiness for ever: behold, see, we beseech 

have possessed it but a little while: thee, we are all thy people. 

our adversaries have trodden down 10 Thy holy cities are a wilder- 

thy sanctuary. ness, Zion is a wilderness, Jeru- 
19 Weare thine: thou never bar- salem a desolation. . 

est rule over them; they were not 11 Our holy and our beautiful 

called by thy name. house, where our fathers praised 


1Cf, Isa. 1. 2; 64. 8. Israel, collectively, the national Israel, recognizes God as 
the national Father (cf. Ex. 4. 22, 23). Doubtless the believing Israelite was born 
anew (cf. John 3. 3, 5 with Lk. 13. 28), but the O.T. Scriptures show no trace of 
the consciousness of personal sonship. The explanation is given in Gal. 4. 1-7. 
The Israelite, though a child, “differed nothing from a servant.” The Spirit, as 
the “Spirit of His Son,” could not be given to impart the consciousness of sonship 
ment uat had been accomplished (Gal. 4. 4-6). See “Adoption” (Rom. &. 
15; Eph. 1. 5). 


_? Here the reference is to relationship through creation, rather than through 
faith, as in Acts 17. 28, 29, note. 
768 


64 12] 


thee, is burned up with fire: and 
all our pleasant things are laid 
waste. 

12 Wilt thou refrain thyself for 
these things, O LorpD? wilt thou 
hoid thy peace, and afflict us very 
sore? 

CHAPTER 65. 


The answer of Jehovah to the 
Remnant. 


AM sought of them that asked 

not for me; I am found of them 
that sought me “not: I said, Behold 
me, behold me, unto a nation that 
was not called by my name. 

2 *I have spread out my hands:all 
the day unto a rebellious people, 
which walketh in a way that was 
not good, after their own thoughts; 

3 A people ‘that provoketh me to 
anger continually to my face; that 
sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth 
incense upon altars of brick; 

4 dWhich remain among the 
graves, and lodge in the monu- 
ments, which eat swine’s flesh, and 
broth of abominable things is in 
their vessels; 

5 Which say, Stand by thyself, 
come not near to me; for I am 
holier than thou. These are a 
smoke in my nose, a fire that burn- 

- eth all the day. 

6 Behold, it is written before me: 
I will- not keep silence, but will 
recompense, even recompense into 
their bosom, 

7 Your iniquities, and ¢the iniqui- 
ties of your fathers together, saith 
the Lorp, fwhich have burned in- 
cense upon the mountains, and 
&blasphemed me upon the _ hills: 
therefore will I measure their for- 

“mer work into their bosom. 

8 Thus saith the Lorp, As the 
new wine is found in the cluster, 
and one saith, Destroy it not; for 
a blessing is in it: so will I do for 
my servants’ sakes, that I may not 
. destroy them all. 

9 And I will bring forth a seed 
out of Jacob, and out of Judah an 
inheritor of my mountains: and 
mine “elect shall inherit it, and my 
servants shall dwell there. 

10 And ‘Sharon shall be a fold of 
flocks, and the jvalley of Achor a 
place for the herds to lie down in, 
for my people that have sought me. 


ISAIAH. 


11 But ye are they that forsake 
the Lorp, that forget my holy 
mountain, that prepare a table for 
and that furnish the 


12 Therefore will I number you 
to the sword, and ye shall all bow 
down to the slaughter: because 
when I called, ye did not answer; 
when I spake, ye did not hear; but 
did evil before mine eyes, and did 
choose that wherein I delighted not. 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop, Behold, my servants shall eat, 


aRom.10.20, |but ye shall be hungry: behold, my 

servants shall drink, but ye shall 

6 Rom.10.21. |be thirsty: behold, my servants 

¢Deut.32.21, |Shall rejoice, but ye shall be 

ashamed: 

d ee ; 14 Behold, my servants shall sing 

Pay for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for 

e Ex.20.5. sorrow of heart, and shall how! for 
fEzk.18.6 ‘vexation of spirit. 

ae 15 And ye shall leave your name 

g Ezk.20.27,28.|*for a curse unto my chosen: for 

Bo eee the Lord Gop shall slay thee, and 

Mt.24.22; ‘call his servants by another name: 

Rom.11.5,7. | 16 That he who blesseth himself 


in the earth shall bless himself in 
the God of truth; and he that 
sweareth in the earth shall swear by 
the God of truth; because the for- 


i Isa,33.9; 
35.2. 


j Josh.7.24,26; 


J teiLee mer troubles are forgotten, and be- 

k Jer.29.22; cause they are hid from mine eyes. 
Zech.8.13. 3 

ae ‘The eternal blessing of Israel in 
re Ewe the new earth. (Cf. Rev. 21., 22.), 

is tae 17 For, 1behold, I “create new 
66.22: 2 Bet, |neavens and a new earth: and the 
3.13; Rev. |former shall not be remembered, 
21.1. nor come into mind. 

n 1sa.35.10; 18 But be ye glad and rejoice for 
51.11; Rev. {ever im that which I create: for, be- 
7.17; 21.4. |hold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, 

oIsa.61.9. and her people a joy. 


19 And I willrejoice in Jerusalem, 
and joy in my people: and "the 
voice of weeping shall be no more 
heard in her, nor the voice of 
crying. 

20 There shall be no more thence 
an infant of days, nor an old man 
that hath not filled his days: for 
the child shall die an hundred years 
old; but the sinner being an hun- 
dred years old shall be accursed. 

21 °And- they shall build houses, 
and inhabit them; and they shall 
plant vineyards, and eat the fruit 
of them. 


I Verse 17 looks beyond the kingdom-age to the new heavens and the new earth 


(see refs. at “‘create’’), but verses 


18-25 describe.the kingdom-age itself. Longevity 


is restored, but death, the “last enemy” (1 Cor. 15. 26), is not destroyed till after 
Satan’s rebellion at the end of the thousand years (Rev. 20. 7-14). 


769 


(66 9 


65 22] ISAIAH. 


22 They shall not build, and an-|__B.c.698.__|came, she was delivered of .a man 


other inhabit; they shall not plant, 
and another eat: for as the days of 
a tree are the days of my people, 
and mine elect shall long enjoy the 
work of their hands. 4 

‘23. They shall not labour in vain, 
nor bring forth for trouble; @for 
they are the seed of the blessed of 
the Lorp, and their offspring with 
them. 

24 And it shall come to pass, that 
before they call, I will answer; and 
while they are yet speaking, I will 
hear. 

25 The wolf and the lamb shall 


a Kingdom 


child. 

8 Who hath heard such a thing? 
who hath seen such things? Shall 
the earth be made to bring forth in 
one day? or shall a nation be born 
at once? for as soon as Zion trav- 
ailed, she brought forth her chil- 
dren. 

9 Shall I bring to the birth, and 
not cause to bring forth? saith the 
Lorp: shall I cause to bring forth, 
and shut the womb? saith thy God. 

10 Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and 
be glad with her, all ye that love 
her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye 


feed together, and the lion shall eat| (0-T.).vs. |that mourn for her: 
straw ike the bullock: and dust eaak _11 That ye may suck, and be sat- 
shall be the serpent’s meat. @They| (Gen.1.26; _ |isfied with the breasts of her con- 
shall not hurt nor destroy in all| Zech.12.8.) |solations; that ye may milk out, and 
my holy mountain, saith the LORD.|, 35. act, |be delighted with the abundance of 

.| 7.49,50;17. |her glory. 
CHAPTER 66. 24. 12 Bat thus saith the Lorp, ee 
Kingdom blessing, continued, |¢Psa34.s; |Pold. eee pene: aoe 
<3 agate S saith the Lorp, The ®hea- Gentiles like a fowing stream: then 
ven is my throne, and the/? qe ts shall ye suck, ye shall be borne 
earth 7s my footstool: where is the “~~ lupon her sides, and be dandled 
house that ye build unto me? and eter Mic. upon her knees. 


where is the place of my rest? 

2 For all those things hath mine 
hand made, and all those things 
have been, saith the Lorp: but to 
this man will I look, “even to him 
that is poor and of a contrite 
spirit, and trembleth at my word. 


Ff Isa.48.18; 
60.5. 

g See Ezk, 
37.1. 


h Xsa.9.5; 


i3 As one whom his mother com- 
forteth, so will I comfort you; and 
ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. 

14 And when ye see this, your 
heart shall rejoice, and your bones 
shall flourish like an herb: and the 
hand of the LorpD shall be known 


3 He that killeth an ox is as if 4 Faces toward his servants, and Ais indig- 
he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a| i Day (of nation toward his enemies. 
lamb, as if he cut off a dog’s neck;| Jehovah). | 15 For, behold, the "Lorp will 
he that offereth an oblation, as 1f he Jer.25.29-38. |Come with fire, and with his chariots 
offered swine’s blood; he that burn-| (sa.2.10-22; |like a whirlwind, to ‘render his 


eth incense, as if he blessed an 
idol. Yea, they have chosen their 


Rev.19.11- 
21.) 


anger with fury, and his rebuke 
with flames of fire. 


own ways, and their soul delight-|7 Armaged- 16 For by fire and by his jsword 
eth in their abominations. ae erie will the Lorp plead with all flesh: 
4 T also will choose their delu-| fez/o¢90-33.’|and the slain of the Lorp shall be 
sions, and will bring their fears upon| (Rev.16.14;\ |many. 

them; because when I called, none| 19-11-21.) 17 They that sanctify themselves, 


did answer; when I spake, they did 
not hear: but they did evil before 
mine eyes, and chose that in which 
I delighted not. 

5 Hear the word of the Lorp, ye 
that tremble at his word; Your 
brethren that hated you, that cast 
you out for my name’s sake, said, 
Let the Lorp be glorified: but ¢he 
Shall appear to your joy, and they| 


shall be ashamed, aagtis 
(ia - . 
voice of noise from the city, 


a voice from the temple, a voice 
of the Lorp that rendereth recom- 
pence to his enemies. 

7 Before she ¢travailed, she 
brought forth; before her pain 


k i.e. coasts. 


770 


and purify themselves in the gar- 
dens behind one tree in the midst, 
eating swine’s flesh, and the abomi- 
nation, and the mouse, shall be con- 
sumed together, saith the Lorp. 

18 For I know their works and 
their_ thoughts: it shall come, 
that I will gather all nations and 
tongues; and they shall come, and 
see my glory. 

19 And I will set a sign among 
them, .and I will send those that 
escape of them unto the nations, to 
Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw 
the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to 


the “isles afar off, that have not 
heard my fame, neither have seen 


D 
ae : 


66 20] 


‘ 


ISAIAH. 


[66 24 


my glory; ¢and they shall declare} B.c.698. _|the new earth, which I will make, 


my glory among the Gentiles. 

20 And they shall bring all your 
brethren °for an offering unto the 
LorpD out of all nations upon 
horses, and in chariots, and in 
litters, and upon mules, and upon 
swift beasts, to my holy mountain 
Jerusalem, saith the Lorn, as the 
children of Israel bring an offering 
in a clean vessel into the house of 
the Lorpb. 

21 And I will also take of them 
for priests and for Levites, saith 
the Lorb. 

22 For ‘as the new heavens and 


a Mal.1.11. 

b Isa.18.7. 

c Isa.65.17; 
2'Pet-3.135 
Rev.21.1. 


d Zech.14.17- 
21. 


e Mk.9.44. 


7 


shall remain before me, saith the 
LORD, so shall your seed and your 
name remain. 

23 And it shall come to pass, 
¢that from one new moon to an- 
other, and from one sabbath to an- 
other, shail all flesh come to worship 
before me, saith the Lorp. 

24 And they shall go forth, and 
look upon the carcases of the men 
that have transgressed against me: 
for ‘their worm .shall not die, 
neither shall their fire be quenched; 
and they shall be an abhorring unto 
all flesh. 


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET 


1]j 


JEREMIAH. 


{1 35 


JEREMIAH began his ministry in the 13th year of Josiah, about 60 years after Isaiah’s 
death. Zephaniah and Habakkuk were contemporaries of his earlier ministry, 


‘Daniel of his later. 


After the death of Josiah, the kingdom of Judah hastened 


‘to is end in the Babylonian captivity. Jeremiah remained in the land ministering 
to the poor Remnant (2 Ki. 24. 14) until they went into Egypt, whither he followed 
them, and where he died, early in the 70 years’ captivity. Jeremiah, prophesying 
before and during the exile of Judah, connects the pre-exile prophets with Ezekiel 


and Daniel, prophets of the exile. 


F Jeremiah’s vision includes: the Babylonian captivity; the return after 70 years; 
the world-wide dispersion; the final regathering; the kingdom-age; the day of judg- 


ment on the Gentile powers, and the Remnant. 
Jeremiah is in six chief divisions: 


the first captives, 1. 1-29. 32. 
36. 32. 


prophet in Egypt, 43. 1-44. 30. 


I. From the prophet’s call to his message to 
II. Prophecies and events not chronological, 30. 1- 
III. From the accession to the captivity of Zedekiah, 37. 1-39. 18. 

miah’s prophecies in the land after the final captivity of Judah, 40. 1-42. 22. 


IV. Jere- 
V. The 


VI. Miscellaneous prophecies, 45. 1-52. 34. 


The events recorded in Jeremiah cover a period of 41 years (Ussher). 


PART I. FROM THE CALL OF JEREMIAH TO HIS MESSAGE TO THE 
FIRST CAPTIVES: CHAPTERS 1.-29. 


CHAPTER 1. 
Introduction. 


P[HE words of Jeremiah the son 
of Hilkiah, of the priests that 
were in Anathoth in the land of 
Benjamin: 

2 To whom the word of the Lorp 
came in the days of Josiah the son 
of Amon king of Judah, in the thir- 
teenth year of his reign. 

3 It came also in the days of 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king 
of. Judah, unto the end of the elev- 
enth year of Zedekiah the son of 
Josiah king of Judah, unto the 
carrying away of Jerusalem cap- 
tive in the “fifth month, 


The prophet’s call and 
‘enduement. 


4 Then the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

5 Before I formed thee in the belly 
I knew thee; and before thou cam- 
est forth out of the womb I 4sanc- 
tified thee, and I ordained thee a 
Prophet unto the nations. 

6 Then said.I, Ah, Lord Gop! be- 
hold, I cannot speak: for I am a 
child. 

7 But the Lorp said unto me, Say 
not, I am a child: for thou shalt go 
to all that I shall send thee, and 


B-C. 629. 


ai.e. August. 


b Sanctify, 
holy (O.T.). 
Dan.4.13, 
25. (Gen. 
2.3; Zech. 
8.3.) 


¢ Jer.15.20; 
Ex.3.12; 


d Inspiration, 


Jer.30.2. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.2%19.) 


e Num.17.8, 
note, 


f Ezk.11.3,7; 
~ 24.3-14, 


g Jer.5.15; 
6.22; 10.22; 
25.9. 


772 


whatsoever I command thee thou — 


shalt speak. 

8 Be not afraid of their faces: for 
I ‘am with thee to deliver thee, 
saith the Lorp. 

9 Then the LorD put forth his 
hand, and touched my mouth. And 
the LorD said unto me, Behold, I 
have put my 4words in thy mouth. 

10 See, I have this day set thee 
over the nations and over the king- 
doms, to root out, and to pull down, 
and to destroy, and to throw 
down, to build, and to plant. 


The sign of the almond rod 
and seething pot. 


11 Moreover the word of the. 


LORD came unto me, saying, Jere- 
miah, what seest thou? And I said, 
I see a “rod of an almond tree, 

12 Then said the LorpD unto me, 
Thou hast well. seen: for I will 
hasten my word to perform it. 

13 And the word of the Lorp 
came unto me the second time, 
saying, What seest thou? And I 
said, I see fa seething pot; and the 
face thereof is toward the north, 

14 Then the LorD said unto me, 
Out of the north an evil shall.break 
forth upon all the inhabitants of the 
land. 

AS For, lo, I will gcall all the fami- 
lies of the kingdoms of the north, 


‘1 16] JEREMIAH. [2 19 


saith the Lorp; and they shall 
come, and they shall set every one 
his throne at the entering of the 
gates of Jerusalem, and against all 
the walls thereof round about, and 
against all the cities of Judah. 

16 And I will utter my judgments 
against them touching all their 
wickedness, who have forsaken 


the wilderness, through a land of 
deserts and of pits, through a land 
of drought, and of the shadow of 
death, through a land that no man 
passed through, and where no man 
dwelt? ; 
.| 7 And I brought you into “a 
plentiful country, to eat the fruit 
thereof and the goodness thereof; 


me, and have burned incense unto jbut when ye entered, ye defiled my 
other gods, and worshipped the land, and made mine heritage an 
works of their own hands. abomination. 

17 Thou therefore gird up thy 8 The priests said not, Where is 


loins, and arise, and speak unto}/4 jer: the LoRD? and they that handle the 

them all that I command thee: be} P&t+?8-2® jaw knew me not: the pastors also 

not dismayed at their faces, lest I}b Jer.6.27; transgressed against me, and the 

confound thee before them. 15.20; Isa. |prophets prophesied by Baal, and 
18 For, behold, I have made thee SME walked after things that do not 

this day %a defenced city, and an|}c Ezk.16.8, profit. 4 

iron pillar, and brasen walls against| 2760; 23.3, | 9 Wherefore I ‘will yet plead with 


the whole land, against the kings of aa you, saith the LORD, and with your 
Judah, against the princes thereof, ; children’s children will I plead. 
against the priests thereof, and/¢Deut.2.7. 10 For pass over the Jisles of Chit- 
against the people of the land. _ | -px195,. |tim, and see; and send unto Kedar, 
ae Eran cons sual ees nema aiid ae eae Ciligen cys and see if 
ee; bu ey shall not preva’ sa.5.4; ere be such a thing. 
against thee: for I am with thee,| Mic-63- 11 Hath a nation changed their 
saith the LorD, to deliver thee. | ¢ Isa.63.9, gods, which are yet no gods? 
vases Hos. |but my people have changed their 
CHAPTER 2. 38: glory for that which doth not 
. . h Or, the Jand | profit. 
Fir Pe NE lg ens Pa of Carmel. | 12 Be astonished, O ye heavens, 
wie pride asd 14.7.8; Deut. |at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye 
OREOVER the !word of the! 3.7-9. very Sates aeehs Lorpb. ib 
LORD came to me, saying, 4 13 For my people have committ 
Be Se ae cate tao] OEE lene Mountann oC vig watee ad 
salem, saying, ; 
Lorp; I remernbes thee, the kind-|7i-e. coasts. {hewed them out cisterns, broken 
ness of thy youth, the love of thine}, Jer.17.13; cisterns, that can hold no water. 
espousals, when “thou wentest after] 18.14; Psa. 14 Js Israel a servant? is he a 


me in the wilderness, in aland that] 36.9; John 4. |homeborn slave? why is hespoiled? 
was not sown. if. 15 The young lions roared upon 
3 Israel was holiness unto the]? Jer.43.7-9. |him, and yelled, and they made his 


LorbD, and the firstfruits of his in- land waste: his cities are burned 

“crease: all that devour him shall|” Devt3210. | without inhabitant. : 

offend; evil shall come upon them,}|» Josh.13.3. 16 Also the children of Noph and 

saith the LORD. ’Tahapanes have broken the crown 
4 Hear ye the word of the LorpD, of thy head. : 

9D house of Jacob, and all the fami- 17 Hast thou not procured this 

lies of the house of Israel: unto thyself, in that thou hast for- 
5 Thus saith the Lorp, fWhat) saken the LorD thy God, "when he 

iniquity have your fathers found in led thee by the way? 

me, that they are gone far from me, 18 And now what hast thou to do 


in the way of Egypt, to drink the 
waters of *Sihor? or what hast thou 
to do in the way of Assyria, to drink 
the waters of the river? 

19 Thine own wickedness shall 


and have walked after vanity, and 
are become vain? 

6 Neither said they, Where is the} 
Lorp that *brought us up out of the} 
land of Egypt, that led us through} 


1 The general character of the first message from Jehovah to Judah by Jeremiah 
is threefold: (1) He reminds Israel of the days of blessing and deliverance, e.g. 
9. 1-7; (2) He reproaches them with forsaking Him, e.g. 2. 13; (3) He accuses them 
of choosing other, and impotent, gods, e.g. 2. 10-12, 26-28. All these messages are 
to be thought of as inspired sermons, spoken to the people and subsequently written. 
Cf. Jer. 36. 1-32. ae 


2 20; 


JEREMIAH. 


correct thee, and thy backslidings 


shall reprove thee: know therefore 
and see that it zs an evil thing and 
bitter, that thou hast forsaken the 
Lorp thy God, and that my fear 
is not in thee, saith the Lord Gop 
of hosts. 

20 For of old time I have broken 
thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and 
“thou saidst, I will not transgress; 
when Supon every high hill and 
under every green tree thou wander- 
est, playing the harlot. 

21 Yet I had planted thee a noble 
vine, wholly a right seed: how then 
art thou turned into ‘the degener- 
ate plant of a strange vine unto 
me? 

22 For though thou wash thee 
with nitre, and take thee much 
soap, yet ¢thine iniquity is marked 
before me, saith the Lord Gop. 

23 How canst thou say, I am not 
polluted, I have not gone after Ba- 
alim? see thy way in the valley, 
know what thou hast done: thou 
art a swift dromedary traversing 
her ways; 

24 A wild ass used to the wilder- 
ness, that snuffeth up the wind at 
her pleasure; in her occasion who 
can turn her away? all they that 
seek her will not weary themselves; 
in her month they shall find her. 

25 Withhold thy foot from being 
unshod, and thy throat from thirst: 
but thou saidst, There is no hope: 


no; for I have loved strangers, and] . 


after them will I go. 

26 As the thief is ashamed when 
he is found, so is the house of Israel 
ashamed; they, their kings, their 
princes, and their priests, and their 
prophets, 

27 Saying to a stock, Thou art 
my father; and to a stone, Thou 
hast brought me forth: for they 
have turned their back unto me, 
and not their face: but in the time 
of their trouble they will say, Arise, 
and save us. 

28 But ‘where are thy gods that 
thou hast made thee? let them arise, 
if they can save thee in the time of 
thy trouble: for according to the 
number of thy cities are thy gods, 
O Judah. 

29 fWherefore will ye plead with 
me? ye all have transgressed 
against me, saith the Lorp. 

30 In vain have I smitten your 
children; they received no correc- 
tion: your own sword hath éde- 
voured your prophets, like 
destroying lion. 


B.C. 629. 


a Ex.19.8; 
Josh.24.18; 
Jud.10.16; 


1 Sam.12.10. 


b Jer.3.6; 
Deut.12.2; 
Isa.57.5,7. 


¢ Deut.32.32; 
Isa.1.21; 
5.4. 


d Deut.32.34; 
Job 14.17; 
Hos.13.12. 


e Deut.32.37; 
Jud.10.14, 


Ff vs.23,35. 


g 2 Chr.36.16; 
Neh.9.26; 
Mt.23.29; 
Acts 7.52; 

1 Thes.2.15. 


h Jer.13.25; 
Psa.106.21; 
Hos.8.14, 


j Jer.2.20; 
Ezk.16.26, 
28,29. 

k Jer.9.12; 
14.4; 


Ley.26.19; 
Deut.28.23, 
24. 


i Jer:2.2¢ 
Hos.2.15. 


a 


794 


3120 generation, see ye the word 
of the Lorp. Have I been a wil- 
derness unto Israel? a land of dark- 


ness? wherefore say my people, We 


are lords; we will come no more 
unto thee? 

32 Can a maid forget her orna- 
ments, or a bride her attire? yet 
my people “have forgotten me days 
without number. 

33 Why trimmest thou thy way 
to seek love? therefore hast thou 
also taught the wicked ones thy 
ways. 

34 Also in thy skirts is found the 
blood of the souls of the poor inno- 
cents: I have not found it by secret 
search, but upon all these. 

35 Yet thou sayest, Because I am 
innocent, surely his anger shall turn 
from me. Behold, I will plead with 
thee, because thou sayest, I have 
not sinned. 

36 *Why gaddest thou about so 
much to change thy way? thou also 
shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou 
wast ashamed of Assyria. 

37 Yea, thou shalt go forth from 
him, and thine hands upon thine 
head: for the Lorp hath rejected 
thy confidences, and thou shalt not 
prosper in them. 


CHAPTER 3. 
(First message, continued.) 


a Ree g say, If a man put away 
his wife, and she go from him, 
and become another man’s, shall he 
return unto her again? shall not 
that land be greatly polluted? but 
Jthou hast played the harlot with 
many lovers; yet return again to 
me, saith the Lorn. 

2 Lift up thine eyes unto the high 
places, and see where thou hast 
not been lien with. In the ways 
hast thou sat for them, as the 
Arabian in the wilderness; and 
thou hast polluted the land with 
thy whoredoms and with thy wick- 
edness. 


| 3 Therefore the “showers have 


been withholden, and there hath 
been no latter rain; and thou hadst 
a whore’s forehead, thou refusedst 
to be ashamed. 

4 Wilt thou not from this time cry 
unto me, My father, thou art the 
guide ‘of my youth? 

5 Will he reserve his anger for 
ever? will he keep it to the end? 
Behold, thou hast spoken and done 
evil things as thou couldest. 


* 


ape JEREMIAH. [3 24 


shall ‘feed you with knowledge 
and understanding. 

16 And it shall come to pass, when 
ye be multiplied and increased in 


The second message to backslid- 
den Judah (Jer. 3. 6-6. 30). 


6 The Lorn ‘said also unto me in 


the days of Josiah the king, Hast the land, in those days, saith the 
thou seen that which backsliding Lorp, they shall say no more, The 
2Tsrael hath done? she is gone up ark of the covenant of the LorbD: 
upon every high mountain and neither shall it come to mind: nei- 
under every green tree, and there ther shall they remember it; neither 
ben Lg a ee pane hg a 7 rae Ase visit it; neither shall 
nd I said after she had done al at be done any more. 
eee fetes ues ars ee ap 17 ee that Hime spey sek el Je- 
ut she returned not. n er rusalem the throne o e LORD; 
treacherous ¢sister Judah saw it. |aRet.16.46; {and all the nations shall be gath- 
8 And I saw, when for all the} 23.2,4. ered unto it, Sto the name of the 
eb ace 3e 38s ar Yl wremnore afte eee 
away and given hed a bill of di- ARTES ean of their Gal Reakt were 
gorse: us hen acres sister pg aele rea 18 In those days /'the house of Ju- 
udah feared not, but went and| 9.p;c,.’ |dah shall walk with the house of 
played the harlot also. 28.13. Israel, and they shall come together 
Ce ee ere Frsiearl, land tua Titers ene foe 
defiled the land, and poiniitsed ra ay eves Pattee Petters cage 
ery with stones and with er. 19 pe said ews shall pee Ges 
stocks. f Eph4.i1. among the children, and give thee 
10 And yet for all this her treach- a pleasant land, a goodly heritage 
erous eigen Bees nae se ha f Acts 20.28, oes Rah of mabonsy panded eon, 
unto me °wi er whole heart, but}, rs3.60.9 ou shalt call me, ‘My father; 
feignedly, saith the Lorp. paper aS and shalt not turn away from me. 
11 And the Lorp said unto me, ocala 20 Surely as a wife treacherously 
The backsliding Israel hath justi-] 99. 3716 |departeth from her husband, so 
a ned more than treacherous} 11. have a dealt goer bebe oc 
a “Go and prorat phese ards aoreoe se. een Borat ral me a 
- towar e north, and say, Return,| 7 Hos.6.1; 21 A voice was heard upon the 
thou backsliding Israel, saith the 14.4, high places, weeping and supplica- 
Lorb; and I will not cause mine}; psa.3.g. tions of the children of Israel: for 
anger to fall upon you: for I am they have perverted their way, and 
iene saith ee OEY and I any have forgotten the Lorp their 
will not keep anger for ever. od. 
13 ‘Only acknowledge thine ini- 22 Return, ye backsliding chil- 
quity, that thou hast transgressed dren, and JI wili heal your back- 
against the LorD thy God, and slidings. Behold, we come unto 
hast scattered thy ways to the thee; for thou art the LorD our 
strangers under ow ee tree, epee i | 
and ye have not obeyed my voice, 2 ruly in vain is salvation 
saith the LORD. hoped for. from the hills, and 
14 Turn, O backsliding children, from the multitude of mountains: 
saith the Lorp; for I am ¢married truly in the LorD our God is the 
unto you: and I will take you one salvation of Israel. 


of acity, and two of a family, and I 24 For shame hath devoured the 

will bring you to Zion: labour of our fathers from our 
15 And I will give you “pastors youth; their flocks and their herds, 

according to mine heart, which their sons and their daughters. 

1 The general character of the second message to Judah is: (1) of reproach that the 
example of Jehovah’s chastening of the northern kingdom (2 Ki. 17. 1-18) had pro- 
duced no effect upon Judah, e.g. 3. 6-10; (2) of warning of a like chastisement im- 
pending over Judah, e.g. vs. 15-17; (3) of touching appeals to return to Jehovah, 
€.g. 3. 12-14; and (4) of promises of final national restoration and blessing, e.g. 3. 


6-18. 

2 “Israel”? and “Ephraim”: names by which the northern kingdom (the ten 
tribes) is usually called in the prophets. When by “Israel” the’ whole nation 1s 
meant, it will appear from the context. 

775 


ee 


3 25] 


25 We lie down in our shame, 
and our confusion covereth us: @for 
we have sinned against the Lorp 
our God, we and our fathers, from 
our youth even unto this day, and 
have not obeyed the voice of the 
LORD our God. 


CHAPTER 4. 
(Second message, continued.) 


F thou wilt return, O Israel, saith 

the Lorp, return unto me: and 

if thou wilt put away thine abomi- 

nations out of my sight, then shalt 
thou not remove. 

2 And thou shalt swear, The 
Lorp liveth, in truth, in judgment, 
and in righteousness; and the na- 
tions shall bless themselves in him, 
and in him shall they glory. 

3 For thus saith the LorD to the 
men of Judah and Jerusalem, 
‘Break up your fallow ground, and 
sow not among thorns. ele das; 

4 4Circumcise yourselves to the| 6.1,22. 
Lorp, and take away the foreskins ane 
of your heart, ye men of Judah and|* Jee G ase. 
inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my 
fury come forth like fire, and burn|¢ eae ay 
that none can quench it, because cares 
of the evil of your doings. 

5 Declare ye in Judah, and pub- 
lish in Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye 
the trumpet in the land: cry, gather 
together, and say, Assemble your- 
selves, and let us go into the de- 
fenced cities. 

6 Set up the standard toward 
Zion: retire, stay not: for I will 
bring evil from the north, and a 
great destruction. 

7 The lion is come up from his 
thicket, and the destroyer of the 
Gentiles is on his way; he is gone 
forth from his place to make thy 
land desolate; and thy cities shall 
be laid waste, without an inhab- 
itant. 

8 For this ‘gird you with sack- 
cloth, lament and howl: for the 
fierce anger of the LORD is not 
turned back from us. 

9 And it shall come to pass at 
that day, saith the Lorp, that the 
heart of the king shall perish, and 
the heart of the princes; and the! 
priests shall be astonished, and the 
prophets shall wonder. 

Then said I, Ah, Lord Gop! 
8surely thou hast greatly deceived 


1 Cf. Gen. 1. 2. 


a Ezra 9.7. 


b Jer.3.1,22; 
Joel 2.12. 


¢ Hos.10.12. 


d Jer.9.26; 
Deut.10. 
16;30.6; 
Rom.2.28, 


h Jer.51.1; 
Ezk.17.10; 
Hos.13.15. 


i Isa.5.28. 

j Deut.28.49; 
Lam.4.19; 
Hos.8.1; 
Hab.1.8. 


k Isa.1.16; 
Jas.4.8. 


1 Ezk.7.26. 


“Without form and void” 


of Gen. 1.1. 


776 


JEREMIAH. 


29; Col.2.11. 


[4 23 


5 f 
this people and Jerusalem, saying, 
Ye shall have peace; whereas the 
sword reacheth unto the soul. 

11 At that time shall it be said to 
this people and to Jerusalem, “A 
dry wind of the high places in the - 
wilderness toward the daughter of 
my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse, 

12 Even a full wind from those 
places shall come unto me: now 
also will I give sentence against 
them. 

13 Behold, he shall come up as 
clouds, and his ‘chariots shall be 
as a whirlwind: his ‘Jhorses are 
swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! 
for we are spoiled. 

14 O Jerusalem, *wash thine heart 
from wickedness, that thou mayest 
be saved. How long shall thy vain 
thoughts lodge within thee? 

15 For a voice declareth from 
Dan, and publisheth affliction from 
mount Ephraim. 

16 Make ye mention to the na- 
tions; behold, publish against Jeru- 
salem, that watchers come from a 
far country, and give out their 
voice against the cities of Judah. 

17_ As keepers of a field, are they 
against her round about; because 
she hath been rebellious against 
me, saith the Lorp. 

18 Thy way and thy doings have 
procured these things unto thee; 
this 7s thy wickedness, because it is 
bitter, because it reacheth unto 
thine heart. 

19 My bowels, my bowels! I am 
pained at my very heart; my heart 
maketh a noise in me; I cannot 
hold my peace, because thou hast 
«heard, O my soul, the sound of the 
trumpet, the alarm of war. 

20 ‘Destruction upon destruction 
is cried; for the whole land is 
spoiled: suddenly are my tents 
spoiled, and my curtains in a mo- 
ment. 

21 How long shall I see the stan- 
dard, and hear the sound of the 
trumpet? 

22 For my people is foolish, they 
have not known me; they are sot- 
tish children, and they have none 
understanding: they are wise to do 
evil, but to do good they have no 
iknowledge. 

23 I beheld the earth, and, lo, it 
lwas without form, and void 3 and 
the heavens, and they had no light. 


y 


describes the condition. of the earth as 
the result of the judgment (vs. 24-26: Isa. 24. 


1) which overthrew the primal order 


4 24] 


24 °I beheld the mountains, and, 
lo, they trembled, and all the hills: 
moved lightly. 

25 I beheld, and, lo, there was no 
man, and. all the birds. of the hea- 
vens. were fled. 

26 I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful 
place was a wilderness, and all the 
Cities thereof were broken down at 
the presence of the LORD, and by 
his fierce anger. 

27 For thus hath the Lorpb said, 
The whole land shall be desolate; 
yet will I not make a full end. 

28 For this shall the earth mourn, 
and the heavens above be black: 
because I have spoken it, I have 
purposed it, and will not repent, ey 
neither will I turn back from it. page 

29 The whole city shall flee for the] 5 Zech.8.14, 
noise of the horsemen and bowmen;} 7?¢e- 
they shall go into thickets, and 
climb up upon the rocks: every city 
shall be forsaken, and not a man 
dwell therein. 

30 And when thou art spoiled, 
what wilt thou do? Though thou 
clothest thyself with crimson,}’ zepn'3.3. 
though thou deckest thee with or-| _ 
naments of gold, ‘though thou rent-| Mic.3.1. 
est thy face with painting, in vain]; josh.23.7; 
shalt thou pate coe oe st 4 Zeph.1.5. 
lovers will despise thee, they will} . , 
seek thy life. gem eny 

31 For I have heard a voice as of| © 
a woman in travail, and the anguish] 7 ©zk.22.11. 


¢ 2 Ki.9.30; 
Ezk.23.40. 


d Tit.1.16. 
e 2 Chr.16.9. 


Ff Jer.7.28; 


as of her that bringeth forth her}; 9 chr.36.16. 


first child, the voice of the daughter 
of Zion, that bewaileth herself, 


1 Jer.1.15; 
that spreadeth her hands, saying, ae 


Deut.28.49; 


Woe is me now! for my soul is] Isa.5.26. 
wearied because of murderers. i ghel S6-tak 
Deut.28.31, 
CHAPTER 5. 33. 


i (Secorid message, continued.) 
Rw ye to and fro through the 


streets of Jerusalem, and see 
mow, and know, and seek in the 
broad places thereof, if ye can find 
aman, if there be any that execut- 
eth judgment, that seeketh the 
truth; and I will pardon it. 

2 And “though they say, The 
Lorp liveth; surely they swear 
falsely. : 

3 OLorD, are not “thine eyes upon 
the truth? thou hast stricken them, 
but they have not grieved; thou 
hast consumed them, but they have 
frefused to receive correction: they 
have made their faces harder than 
a rock; they have refused to return. 

4 Therefore I said, Surely these 
are poor; they are foolish: for they 2 

7 


JEREMIAH. 


[5 17 


know not the way of the Lorp, 
nor the judgment of their God. 

5 I will get me unto the great men, 
and will speak unto them; for &they. 
have known the way of the Lorp, 
and the judgment of their God: but 
these have altogether broken the 
yoke, and burst the bonds. 

6. Wherefore a lion out of the 
forest shall slay them, and a wolf 
of the evenings shall spoil them, a 
leopard shall. watch over their 
cities: every one that goeth out 
thence shall be torn in pieces: be- 
cause their transgressions are 
many, and their backslidings are 
increased. 

7, How shall I pardon thee for 
this? thy children have forsaken 
me, and sworn by them that tare 
no gods: when I had fed them to 
the full, they then committed 
adultery, and assembled themselves 
by troops in the harlots’ houses. 

8 JThey were as fed horses in the 
morning: every one neighed after 
his neighbour’s wife. 

9 Shall I not visit for these 
things? saith the Lorpb: and shall 
not my soul be avenged on such a 
nation as this? 

10 Go ye up upon her walls, and 
destroy; but make not a full end: 
take away her battlements; for 
they are not the Lorp’s. 

11 For the house of Israel and the 
house of Judah have dealt very 
treacherously against me, saith the 
LORD. 

12 *They have belied the Lorp, 
and said, /¢ 1s not he; neither shall 
evil come upon us; neither shall we 
see sword nor famine: 
| 13 And the prophets shall become 
wind, and the word is not in them: 
thus shall it be done unto them. 

14 Wherefore thus saith the Lorp. 
God of hosts, Because ye speak this 
word,. behold, I will make my words 
in thy mouth fire, and this people 
wood, and it shall devour them. 

15 Lo, /I will bring a nation upon 
you from far, O house of Israel, 
saith the LoRD: it rs a mighty na- 
tion, it 7s an ancient nation, a 
nation whose language thou know- 
est not, neither understandest what 
they say. * 

16 Their quiver zs as an open 
sepulchre, they are all mighty 


men. 

17. And they shall eat up ”thine 
harvest, and thy bread, which thy 
sons and thy daughters should eat: 
they shall eat up thy flocks and 


5 18] 


thine herds: they shall eat up thy 
vines and thy fig trees: they 
shall impoverish thy fenced cities, 
wherein thou “trustedst, with the 
sword. 

18 Nevertheless in those, days, 
saith the Lorp, I will not make a 
full end with you. 

19 And it shall come to pass, 
when ye shall say, Wherefore 
' doeth the Lorp our God all these 
things unto us? then shalt thou an- 
swer them, Like as ye have for- 
saken me, and served strange gods 
in your land, so shall ye serve 
strangers in a land that is not 
your’s. 

20 Declare this in the house of 
yao and publish it in Judah, say- 


vot Hear now this, “O foolish peo- 
ple, and without understanding; 
which have eyes, and see not; which 
have ears, and hear not: 

22 Fear ye not me? saith the 
Lorp: will ye not tremble at my 
presence, which have placed the 
sand for the bound of the sea by a 
perpetual decree, that it cannot 
pass it: and though the waves 
thereof toss themselves, yet can 
they not prevail; though. they 
BOGE, yet can they not pass over 
it? 

23 But this people hath a revolt- 
ing and a rebellious heart; they are 
tevolted and gone. 


24 Neither say they in their heart, 


Let us now @fear the LoRD our God, 
‘that giveth rain, both the ‘former 
and the latter, in his season: he re- 
serveth unto us the appointed 
weeks of the harvest. 

25 Your iniquities have turned 
away these things, and your sins 
have withholden gaod things from 
you. 

26 For among my people are 
found wicked men: they lay wait, 
as he that setteth snares; they set a 
trap, they catch men. 

27 Asacage is full of birds, so are 
their houses fuil of deceit: therefore 
they are become great, and waxen 
rich, 

28 They are waxen fat,they shine: 
yea, they overpass the deeds of the 
wicked: they judge not the cause, 
the cause of the fatherless, yet 
they prosper; and the right of the 
needy do they not judge. 

29 &sShali I not visit for these 
things? saith the Lorp: shall not 
my soul be avenged on such.a na- 
tion as this? 


JEREMIAH. 


a Psa.2.12, 
note. 


b Jer.13.22; 
16.10; 
Deut. 29. 24; 
1 Ki.9.8,9, 


¢ Isa.6.9; 
Ezk.12.2; 
Mt.13.14; 
John 12.40; 
Acts 28.26; 
Rom.11.8. 


d Psa.19.9, 
note. 


€ Jer.14.22; 
Psa.147.8; 
Mt.5.45; 
Acts 14.17. 


f Deut.11.14; 
Joel 2.23. 


gv.9; Mal. 
3.5. 

h Jer.23.14; 
Hos.6.10; 
2 Tim.4.3. 

i Neh.3.14. 


j Jer.4.17; 
2 Ki.25.1,4. 


k Jer.51.27; 
Joel 3.9. 


1 Ezk.23.18; 
Hos.9.12. 


m Jer.7. aes 
Ex.6 
Acts. 7. Sl. 


n Jer.20.9. 


778 


[6 1 


30 A wonderful and thorrible. 
thing is committed in the land; 

31 The prophets prophesy falsely, 
and the priests bear rule by their 


‘\means; and my people love to have: 


it so: and what will ye do in the 
end thereof? 


CHAPTER 6. 
(Second message, tontinued.) 


YE children of Benjamin, 

gather yourselves to flee out of 
the midst of Jerusalem, and blow 
the trumpet in Tekoa, and:set up a 
sign of fire in *Beth-haccerem: for 
evil appeareth out of the north, and 
great destruction. 

2 I have likened the daughter of 
Zion to a comely and delicate 
woman. 

3 The shepherds with their flocks: 
shall come unto her; Jthey shall 
pitch their tents against her round 
about; they shali feed every one in 
his place. 

4 kPrepare ye war against her; 
arise, and let us go up at noon. 
Woe unto us! for the day goeth 
away, for the shadows of the even- 
ing are stretched out. 

5 Arise, and let us go by night, 
and let us destroy her palaces. 

6 For thus hath the Lorn of hosts 
said, Hew ye down trees, and cast 
a mount against Jerusalem: this is 
the city to be visited; she is wholly 
oppression in the midst of her. 

7 As a fountain casteth out her 
waters, so she casteth out her wick- 
edness: violence and spoil is heard 
in her; before me continually is. 
grief and wounds. 

8 Be thou instructed, O Jerusa- 
lem, ‘lest my soul depart from thee; 
lest I make thee desolate, a land not_ 
inhabited. 

9 Thus saith the LorpD of hosts, 


|They shail throughly glean the 


remnant of Israel as a vine: turn 
back thine hand as a grapegatherer 
into the baskets. 

10 To whom shall I speak, and 
give warning, that they may hear? 
behold, “their ear 7s uncircumcised, 
and they cannot hearken: behold, 
the word of the LORD is unto them 
a reproach; they have no. delight 
in it. 

11 Therefore I am full of the fury 
of the Lorp; “I am weary with 
holding in: I will pour it out 
upon the children abroad, and upon 
the assembly of young men to- 
gether: for even the husband with 


6 12] 


the wife shall be taken, the aged 
with him that js full of days. 

12 And ¢4their houses shall be 
turned unto others, with their 
fields and wives together: for I will 
stretch out my hand upon the in- 
habitants of the land, saith the 
Lorpb. 

13 For from the least of them even 
unto the greatest of them every one 
is given to bcovetousness; and from 
the prophet even unto the priest 
every one dealeth falsely. 

14 They have healed also the 
churt of the daughter of my peo- 
ple slightly, saying, Peace, peace; 
when there ss no peace. 

15 Were they ashamed when they 


. had committed abomination? nay, 


they were not at all ashamed, nei- 
ther could they blush: therefore 
they shall fall among them that fall: 
at the time that I visit them they 
shall be cast down, saith the LORD. 

16 Thus saith the Lorp, Stand 
ye in the ways, and see, and ask 
for the dold paths, where is the good 
way, and walk therein, and ye shall 
find rest for your souls. But they 
said, We will not walk therein. 

17 Also I set watchmen over you, 
saying, ‘Hearken to the sound of 
the trumpet. But they said, We 
will not hearken. 

18 Therefore hear, ye nations, and 
know, O congregation, what is 
among them. 

19 fHear, O earth: behold, I will 
bring evil upon this people, even 
&the fruit of their thoughts, because 
they have not hearkened unto my 
words, nor to my law, but rejected 
it. 
20 *To what purpose cometh there 


~ to me incense from Sheba, and the 


sweet cane from a far country? your 
burnt-offerings are not acceptable, 
nor your sacrifices sweet unto me. 

21 Therefore thus saith the LORD, 
Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks 
before this people, and the fathers 
and the sons together shall fall upon 
them; the neighbour and his friend 
shall perish. 

22 Thus saith the Lorp, Behold, 
a people cometh from ‘the north 
country, and a great nation shall 
be raised from the sides of the earth. 

23 They shall lay hold on bow and 
spear; they are cruel, and have no 


1 The general. character of the message 
one of rebuke, warning, 


second messages, 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.8.10; 
Deut.28.30- 


6 Jer.8.10; 
25245 
Isa.56.11; 
Mic.3.5,11. 


¢ Heb. bruise, 
or breach, 


d Jer.18.15. 


e Isa.8.20; 
Mal.4.4; 
Lk.16.29. 


f Isa.1.2. 
g Prov.1.31. 


h Psa.40.6; 
50.7-9; Isa. 
1.11 966,35 
Amos 5.21; 
Mic.6.6. 


# Jer.1.15; 
5.15; 10.22; 
50.41-43. 


[B.C. 600. 


j Jer.25.34; 
Mic.1.10. 


k Or, refuse 
silver. 


1 Mic,3.11, 


[7 6 


mercy; their voice roareth like the 
sea; and they ride upon horses, set 
in array as men for war against 
thee, O daughter of Zion. , 

24 We have heard the fame there- 
of: our hands wax feeble: anguish 
hath taken hold of us, and pain, as 
of a woman in travail. 

25 Go not forth into the field, nor 
walk by the way; for the sword of 
the enemy and fear is on every 
side. 

26 O daughter of my people, gird 
thee with sackcloth, and Jwallow 


‘thyself in ashes: make thee mourn- 


ing, as for an only son, most bitter 
lamentation: for the spoiler shall 
suddenly come upon us. 

27 Lhave set thee for a tower and 
a fortress among my people, that 
thou mayest know and try their 


ay. 

28 They are all grievous revolt- 
ers, walking with slanders: they 
are brass and iron; they are all cor- 
rupters. 

29 The bellows are burned, the 
lead is consumed of the fire; the 
founder melteth in vain: for the 
wicked are not plucked away. 

30 *Reprobate silver shall men 
call them, because the LorD hath 
rejected them, 


CHAPTER 7. 


The message.in the gate of the 
Lorp’s house (Jer. 7. 1-10. 25). 


HE lword that came to Jere- 
miah from the LorD, saying, 

2 Stand in the gate of the LoRD’S 
house, and proclaim there this word, 
and say, Hear the word of the 
LorD, all ye of Judah, that enter in 
at these gates to worship the LORD. 

3 Thus saith the LorpD of hosts, 
the God of Israel, Amend your ways 
and your doings, and I will cause 
you to dwell in this place. 

4 'Trust ye not in lying words, 
saying, The temple of the LORD, 
The temple of the Lorp, The tem- 
ple of the LorD, are these. 

5 For if ye throughly amend 
your ways and your doings; if ye 
throughly execute judgment be- 
tween a man and his neighbour; 

6 If-ye-oppress not the stranger, 
the fatherless, and the widow, and 
shed not innocent blood in this 


in the temple gate is, like the first and 
and exhortation, but this message is ad- 


dressed more to such in Judah as still maintain outwardly the worship of Jehovah; 
it is a message to religious Judah, e.g. 7. 2, 9, 10; 8. 10, 11. 


779 


7 7) 


place, ¢neither walk after other 
gods to your hurt: 

7 Then will I cause you to dwell 
in this place, in the land that I gave 
to your fathers, for ever and ever. 

8 Behold, ye “trust in lying words, 
that cannot profit. 

9 Will ye steal, murder, and com- 
mit adultery, and swear falsely, and 
burn incense unto Baal, and walk 
after other gods whom ye know not; 

10 And come and stand before me 
in this house, which is called by my 
name, and say, We are delivered to 
do all these abominations? 

11 Is this house, ‘which is called 
by my name, become a den of rob- 
bers in your eyes? Behold, even I 
have seen it, saith the Lorp. 

12 But go ye now unto ¢my place 
which was in Shiloh, where I set 
my name at the first, and see what 
I did to it for the wickedness of my 
people Israel. 

13. And now, because ye have done 
all these works, saith the Lorpb, and 
I spake unto you, rising up early 
and speaking, but ye heard not; and 
I called you, but ye answered not; 

14 Therefore will I do unto this 
house, which is called by my name, 
wherein ye trust, and unto the place 
which I gave to you and to your 
fathers, as I have done to ¢Shiloh. 

15 And I will cast you out of my 
sight, as I have cast out all your 
brethren, even the whole seed of 
Ephraim. 

16 Therefore fpray not thou for 
this people, neither lift up cry nor 
prayer for them, neither make inter- 
cession tome: for I will not hear thee, 

17 Seest thou not what they do 
in the cities of Judah and in the 
stréets of Jerusalem? 

18 The children gather wood, and 
the fathers. kindle the fire, and the 
women knead their dough, to make 
cakes to the queen of heaven, and 
to pour out drink-offerings unto 
other gods, that they may provoke 
me to anger. 

19 &£Do they provoke me to anger? 
saith the Lorp: do they not pro- 
voke themselves to the confusion of 
their own faces? 

20 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Behold, mine anger and my 
fury shall be poured out upon this 
place, upon man, and upon beast, 
and upon the trees of the field, and 


1 Cf. Ex. 20. 4, note 2, the threefold giving of the law. 
was not given to the people 


burnt-offerings and sacrifices 
decalogue, the law of obedience. 


B.C. 600. 


a Deut.6.14, 
15; 8.19; 
11.28; 13.10. 


6 Psa.2.12, 
note. 


c Mt.21.13; 
Mk.11.17; 
Lk.19.46. 


d@ Josh.18.1; 
Jud.18.31. 


e Jer.26.6; 
1 Sam.4.10, 
11; Psa.78. 
60. 


Ff Jer.11.14; 
14.11. 

g Deut.32.16, 
by 


h Jer.6.20; 
Tsa.1.11; 
Amos 5.21; 
Hos.8.13. 


#1 Sam.15.22; 
Psa.51.16,17; 
Hos.6.6. 


J Jer.11.4,7; 
Ex.15.26; 
Deut.6.3. 


k Ex.19.5; 
Lev.26.12. 


1 Jer.11.8; 
Psa.81.11. 


m Deut.29.19; 
Psa.81.12. 


n Jer.25.4; 
29.19; 2 Chr. 
36.1 


o Ezk.2.7. 

pb Jer.16.6; 
48.37; 
Job 1.20; 


Isa.15.2; 
Mic.1.16, 


q Jer.23.11; 
32.34; 
2 Ki.21.4,7; 
2 Chr.33.4,7; 
Ezk.7.20. 


780 


upon the fruit of the ground; and 
it shall burn, and shall not be 
quenched. 

21 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
the God of Israel; “Put your burnt- 
offerings unto your sacrifices, and 
eat flesh. 

22 ‘For I spake not unto your 
fathers, Inor commanded them in 
the day that I brought them out of 
the land of Egypt, concerning 
burnt-offerings or sacrifices: 

23 But this thing commanded I 
them, saying, JObey my voice, and 
I éwill be your God, and ye shall be 
my people: and walk ye in all the 
ways that I have commanded you, 
that it may. be well unto you. 


JEREMIAH. Pixs [7 1 


i 


7 
4 


24 ‘But they hearkened not, nor - 


inclined their ear, but “walked in 
the counsels and in the imagination 
of their evil heart, and went back- 
ward, and not forward. 

25 Since the day that your fathers 
came forth out of the land of Egypt 
unto this day I have even sent unto 
you “all my servants the prophets, 
daily rising up early and sending 
them: 

26 Yet they hearkened not unto 
me, nor inclined their ear, but har- 
dened their neck: they did worse 
than. their fathers. 

27 °Therefore thou shalt speak all 
these words unto them; but they 
will not hearken to thee: thou 
shalt also call unto them; but they 
will not answer thee. 

28 But thou shalt say unto them, 
This is a nation that obeyeth not 
the voice of the Lorp their God, 
nor receiveth correction: truth is 
perished, and is cut off from their 
mouth. 

29 ?Cut off thine hair, O Jerusa- 
Jem, and cast it away, and take up 
a lamentation on high places; for 
the Lorp hath rejected and for- 
saken_the generation of his wrath. 

30: For the children of Judah have 
done evil in my sight, saith the 
LorD: %they have set their abomi- 
nations in the house which is called 
by my name, to pollute it. 

31 And they have built the high 
places of Tophet, which is in the 


.|valley of the son of Hinnom, to 


burn their sons and their daughters 
in the fire; which I commanded 
them not, neither came it into my 
heart. 


The command concerning 
till they had broken the 


5 32] 


32 Therefore, behold, the days 
come, saith the Lorp, that it shall 
mo more be called Tophet, nor the 
valley of the son of Hinnom, but the 
valley of slaughter: for they shall 
bury in Tophet, till there be no 
place. 

33 And the ¢carcases of this peo- 
ple shall be meat for the fowls of 
the heaven, and for the beasts of 
the earth; and none shall fray 
them away. 

34 Then will I cause to cease from 
the cities of Judah, and from the 
streets of Jerusalem, the voice of 
mirth, and the voice of gladness, 
the voice of the bridegroom, and 
the voice of the bride: “for the land 
shall be desolate. 


CHAPTER 8. 


(The message in the temple 
gate, continued.) 


T that time, saith the Lorp, 
they shall bring out the bones 
of the kings of Judah, and the bones 
of his princes, and the bones of the 
priests, and the bones of the proph- 
ets, and the bones of the inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem, out of their 
graves: 

2 And they shall spread them be- 
fore the sun, and the moon, and all 
the host of heaven, whom they have 
loved, and whom they have served, 
and after whom they have walked, 
and whom they have sought, and 
whom they have worshipped: they 
shall not be gathered, nor be 
buried; they shall be for dung upon 
the face of the earth. 
.~ 3 And death shall be chosen 

rather than life by all the residue 
of them that remain of this evil 
family, which remain in all the 
places whither I have driven them, 
saith the LorD of hosts. 

4 Moreover thou shalt say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lorp; Shall 
they fall, and not arise? shall he 
turn away, and not return? 

5 Why thenis this people of Jeru- 
salem slidden back by a perpetual 
backsliding? they hold fast deceit, 
they refuse to return. 

6 41 hearkened and heard, but 
they spake not aright: no man “re- 
pented him of his wickedness, say- 
ing, What have I done? every one 
turned to his course, as the horse 
rusheth into the battle. 

7 Yea, fthe stork in the heaven 
knoweth her appointed times; and 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 600. 


Ezk.6.5. 
Fulfilled in 
part in all 
the destruc- 
tions of 


final look to- 


ward Revs 
19.17-21. 


b Lev.26.33; 
Isa.1.7; 
3.26. 

¢ Job 3.21, 
22; 7.15,16; 
Rev.9.6. 

d 2 Pet.3.9. 


e Zech.8.14, 
note. 


f Isa.1.3. 

g Song 2.12. 

hk Rom.2.17. 

4 Jer.6.12; 
Deut.28.30; 
Amos 5.11; 
Zeph.1.13. 

j Ezk.13.10. 


k Jer.14.19. 


781 


[8 19 


the ‘turtle and the crane and the 
swallow observe the time of their 
coming; but my people know not 
the judgment of the Lorb. 

8 How do ye say, “We are wise, 
and the law of the LoRD is with us? 
Lo, certainly in vain made he it; 
the pen of the scribes is in vain. 

9 The wise men are ashamed, 
they are dismayed and taken: lo, 
they have rejected the word of the 
Lorp; and what wisdom isin them? 

10 Therefore ‘will I give their 
wives unto others, and their fields 
to them that shall inherit them: for 
every one from the least even unto 
the greatest is given to covetous- 
ness, from the prophet even unto 
the priest every one dealeth falsely. 

11 For they have healed the hurt 
of the daughter of my people 
slightly, saying, JPeace, peace; 
when there is no peace. 

12 Were they ashamed when they 
had committed abomination? nay, 
they were not at all ashamed, 
neither could they blush: therefore 
shall they fall among them that 
fall: in the time of their visitation 
they shall be cast down, saith the 
|LORD. 
| 13 I will surely consume them, 
saith the Lorpb: there shall be no 
grapes on the vine, nor figs on the 
fig tree, and the leaf shall fade; and 
the things that I have given them 
shall pass away from them. 

14 Why do we sit still? assemble 
yourselves, and let us enter into 
the defenced cities, and let us be 
silent there: for the LoRD our God 
hath put us to silence, and given us 
water of gall to drink, because we 
have sinned against the LorD. 

15 We *looked for peace, but no 
good came; and for a time of 
health, and behold trouble! 

16 The snorting of his horses was 
heard from Dan: the whole land 
trembled at the sound of the neigh- 
ing of his strong ones; for they are 
come, and have devoured the land, 
and all that is in it; the city, and 
those that dwell therein. 

17 For, behold, I will send ser- 
pents, cockatrices, among you, which 
will not be charmed, and they shall 
bite you, saith the LorD. 

18 When I would comfort myself 


against sorrow, my heart is faint 


in me. 

19 Behold the voice of the cry of 
the daughter of my people because 
of them that dwell in a far country: 
Is not the LorD in Zion? is not her 


king in her? Why have they pro- 
voked me to anger with their 
graven images, and with strange 
vanities? 

20 The harvest is past, the sum- 
mer is ended, and we are not saved. 

21 For the hurt of the daughter of 
my people am I hurt; I am black; 
astonishment hath taken hold on 
me. 

22 42Is there no balm in Gilead; 
is there no physician there? why 
then is not the health of the daugh- 
ter of my people recovered? 


CHAPTER 9. 


(The message in the temple 
gate, continued.) 


O# that my head were waters, 
and mine eyes a fountain of 
tears, that I might weep day and 
night for the slain of the daughter 
of my people! 

2. Oh that I had in the wilderness 
a lodging place of wayfaring men; 
that I might leave my people, and 
go from them! for they be all adul- 
terers, an assembly of treacherous 
men. 

3 And they bend their tongues 
like their bow-for lies: but they are 
not valiant for the truth upon the 
earth; for they proceed from evil to 
evil, and they “know not me, saith 
the Lorp. 

4 Take ye heed every one of his 
neighbour, and “trust ye not in any 
brother: for every brother will 
utterly supplant, and every neigh- 
bour will walk with slanders. 

5 And they will deceive every one 
his neighbour, and will not speak 
the truth: they have taught their 
tongue to speak lies, and weary 
themselves to commit iniquity. 

6 Thine habitation is in the midst 
of deceit; through deceit they re- 
fuse to know me, saith the Lorp. | 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lorp| 
of hosts, Behold, 4I will melt them, 
and try them; for how shall I do 
for the daughter of my people? 

8 Their tongue is as an arrow 
shot out; it speaketh deceit: one 
speaketh peaceably to his neighbour 
with his mouth, but in heart he 
layeth his wait. 

9 ‘Shall I not visit them for these 
things? saith the Lorp: shall not 
my soul be avenged on such a na- 
tion as this? 

10 For the mountains will I take 
up a weeping and wailing, and for 
the habitations of the wilderness! 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.46.11; 
51.8; Gen. 


37.25; 43.11. 


61 Sam.2.12; 
Hos.4.1. 


¢ Psa.2.12, 
note. 


d Isa.1.25; 
Mal.3.3. 


é Jer.5.9,29. 

F Isa.25.2. 

g Law (of 
Moses). 
vs.13-16; 
Ezk.22.26. 
(Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 

h Jer.3.17; 
7.24. 

¢ Gal.1.14. 


Jj Lev.26.33; 
Deut.28.64, 


k i.e, nations. 


782 


B.C. 600. 


a lamentation, because they are 
burned up, so that none can pass — 
through them; neither can men 
hear the voice of the cattle; both — 
the fowl of the heavens and the 
beast are fled; they are gone. 

11 fAnd I will make Jerusalem — 
heaps, and a den of dragons; and — 
I will make the cities of Judah © 
desolate, without an inhabitant. 

12 Who its the wise man, that may 
understand this? and who is he to 
whom the mouth of the LorD hath 
spoken, that he may declare it, for 
what the land perisheth and is 
burned up like a wilderness, that 
none passeth through? 

13 And the LorpD saith, Because 
they have forsaken my ‘law which 
I set before them, and have not 
obeyed my voice, neither walked 
therein; 

14 But have ‘walked after the 
imagination of their own heart, and 
after Baalim, ‘which their fathers 
taught them: 

15 Therefore thus saith the Lorp 
of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, 
I will feed them, even this people, 
with wormwood, and give them 
water of gall to drink. 

16 I will Jscatter them also among 
the ‘heathen, whom neither they 
nor their fathers have known: and 
I will send a sword after them, till 
I have consumed them. 

17 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
Consider ye, and call sor the mourn- 
ing women, that they may come; 
and send for cunning women, that 
they may come: 

18 And let them make haste, and 
take up a wailing for us, that our 
eyes may run down with tears, 
and our eyelids gush out with 
waters. 

19 For a voice of wailing is heard 
out of Zion, How are we spoiled! 
we are greatly confounded, because 
we have forsaken the land, because 
our dwellings have’cast us out. 

20 Yet hear the word of the 
LorbD, O ye women, and let your 
ear receive the word of his mouth, 
and teach your daughters wailing, 
and every one her neighbour lam- 
entation. 

21 For death is come up into our 
windows, and is entered into our 
palaces, to cut off the children from 
without, and the young men from 
the streets. 

22 Speak, Thus saith the Lorp, 
Even the carcases of men shall fall 
as dung upon the open field, and 


JEREMIAH. 


[10 22 


as the handful after the harvest- 
man, and none shall gather them. 

23 Thus saith the Lorp, Let not 
the wise man glory in his wisdom, 
neither let the mighty man glory 
in his might, let not the rich man 
glory in his riches: 


. nowet 

eRe act © ci8e Movingkind> 
eésjurdgement, and “righteousness: 
inthe earth™ efor in these-t hi eI 


delight saith the-LORD. 
95 Benold, ‘the’ days ‘come, nine 


the Lorp, ‘that I will punish ail 
them which are circumcised with 
the uncircumcised: 

26 Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, 
and the children of Ammon, and 
Moab, and all that are in the ut- 
most corners, that dwell in the wil- 
derness: for all these nations are 
uncircumcised, and all the house of 
Israel are ‘uncircumcised in the 
heart. 


CHAPTER 10. 


(The message in the temple 
gate, concluded.) 


HEAR ye the word which the 
Lorp speaketh unto you, O 
house of Israel: 

2 Thus saith the LorD, Learn not 
the way of the éheathen, and be 
not dismayed at the signs of hea- 
ven; for the heathen are dismayed 
at them. 

3 For the customs of the people 
are vain: for one cutteth a tree out 
of the forest, the work of the hands 
of the workman, with the axe. 

"4 They deck it with silver and 
with gold; they fasten it with nails 
and with hammers, that it move 

not. 

5 They are upright as the palm 
tree, but speak not: they must 
needs be borne, because they can- 
not go. Be not afraid of them; for 
they cannot do evil, neither also is 
it in them to do good. 

6 Forasmu s there is none like 
a € IL RD; thou art great, 

thy name is ‘great in i inight. 
Or would’not ‘féar theé, O 

King of nations? for to thee doth 

it appertain: forasmuch as among; 

all the wise men of the nations, and: 
in all their kingdoms, there 7s none 
like unto thee. 

8 But they are altogether brutish 
and foolish: the stock is a doctrine 
of vanities. 


, 


a1 Cor,.1.31; 
2 Cor.10.17. 


b Mic.6.8; 
7.18. 


c Lev.26.41; 
Ezk.44.7; 


Rom.2.28,29. 


di.e. nations. 


e Psa.19.9, 
note. 


f Dan.10.5. 
g Heb. God 
of truth. 
Psa.31.5. 
h1 Tim.6.17. 


i Heb. King 


of Eternity. 


j Jer-51.15; 
Gen.1.1, 
6,7; Psa. 
136.5,6. 


k Psa.93.1, 

1 Job 9.8; 
Psa.104.2; 
Isa.40.22. 

m Psa.135.7 


n Deut.32.9; 
Psa.74.2. 


783 


ee th” shail 


9 Silver spread into plates is 
brought from Tarshish, and ‘gold 
from Uphaz, the work of the 
workman, and of the hands of the 
founder: blue and purple is their 


lclothing: they are all the work of 


are poet ee 
10 e LORD, c 
God hee the Pang God, Gash 
verlast’ ne eine at his “wrath 
“tremble; ‘andthe™na- 
s Shalt not be” able to “abide“his 
Gots Saat bay 

11 ‘Thus’ shail ye say unto them, 
The gods that have not made the 
heavens and the earth, even they 
shall perish from the earth, and 
tT efe S under these eicrhae tnd 

j made e earth, 
his ocnee ComiN hath AOE the 
“by “his wisdom, and. /hath 
stretched out the heavens by his 
discretion: 

13 _he .uttereth his. 
phere ee of We ers 8 / 
the ens, ani Sug seth “the 
the jieavens ascend from the ends of 

7 ec maketh lightnings 

j ngéth forth” the 
wind ° Car ‘of sity treasures.” 
e1?4~Every man is brutish in his 
knowledge: every founder is con- 
founded by the graven image: for 
his molten image is falsehood, and 
there is no breath in them. 

15 They are vanity, and the 
work of errors: in the time of their 
visitation they shall perish. 

16 The portion of: Jacob rs not 
like them: for he is the former of ail 
things; and “Israel is the rod of his 
inheritance: The Lorp of hosts is 
his name. 

17 Gather up thy wares out of the 
land, O inhabitant of the fortress. 

18 For thus saith the Lorp, Be- 
hold, I will sling out the inhabitants 
of the land at this once, and will 
distress them, that they may find 
1 so. 

19 Woe is me for my hurt! my 
wound is grievous: but I said, Truly 


this is a grief, and I must bear it. 

20 My tabernacle is spoiled, and 
all my cords are broken: my chil- 
dren are gone forth of me, and they 
are not: there is none to stretch 
forth my tent any more, and to set 
up my curtains. 

21 For the pastors are become 
brutish, and have not sought the 
Lorp: therefore they shall not 
prosper, and all their flocks shall 
be scattered. é 

22 Behold, the noise of the bruit 


~ 
‘4 
y (PA, 
GL 
. a 
\ 5) 
U 
e 


Fi 


10 23] 


is come, and a great commotion out 
of the north country, to make the 
cities of Judah desolate, and a den 
of dragons. , 

23 OLorp, I know that the way 
of man zs not in himself: rt 1s not 
in man that walketh to direct his 
steps. 4 

24 OLorpD, “correct me, but with 
judgment; not in thine anger, lest 
thou bring me to nothing. 

25 Pour out thy fury upon the 
cheathen that know thee not, and 
upon the families that call not on 
thy name: for they have eaten up 
Jacob, and devoured him, and con- 
sumed him, and have made his 
habitation desolate. 


CHAPTER 11. 


The message on the broken cor- 
enant (Jer. 11. 1-12. 17). 


‘HE lword that came to Jere- 
miah from the LorD, saying, 

2 Hear ye the words of this cove- 
nant, and speak unto the men of 
Judah, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem; 

3 And say thou unto them, Thus 
saith the LorD God of Israel: 
4Cursed be the man that obeyeth 
not the words of this covenant, 

4 Which I commanded your fa- 
thers in the day that I brought 
them forth out of the land of 
Egypt, from the ¢iron furnace, say- 
ing, Obey my voice, and do them, 
according to all which I command 
you: so shall ye be my people, and 
I will be your God: 

5 That I may perform sthe oath 
which I have sworn unto your fa- 
thers, to give them a land flowing 
with milk and honey, as it is this 
day. Then answered I, and said, 
4So be it, O Lorp. 

6 Then the Lorp said unto me, 
Proclaim all these words in the 
cities of Judah, and in the streets 
of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the 
words of this covenant, ‘and do 
them, 

7 For I earnestly protested unto 
your fathers in the day that I 
brought them up out of the land of 
Egypt, even unto this day, rising 
early and protesting, saying, Obey 
my voice. 


' This, like the other messages, is made u 
but in this instance these are based u 
(Deut. 28. 1 to 30. 1-9, note). The 
and of Judah were the execution of the 


JEREMIAH. 


a Prov.16.1; 
20.24. 


b Jer.30.11; 
Psa.6.1; 
38.1. 


ci.e. nations, 


d Deut.27.26; 
Gal.3.10. 


e Deut.4.20; 
1 Ki.8.51. 


f Jer.7.23; 
Lev.26.3,12, 


g Deut.7.12, 
13; Psa.10S. 
9,10. 


B.C. 608.] 
h Heb. Amen. 


i Rom.2.13; 
Jas.1.22. 


J Jer.14.12; 
Psa.18.41; 
Proy.1.28; 
Isa.1.15; 
Ezk.8.18; 
Mic.3.4; 
Zech.7.13. 


k Heb. evil. 
U Jer.7.16; 
14.11; 


Ex.32.10; 
1 John 5.16. 


m Hag,2.12. 
i.e. to what 
purpose the 
“holy flesh”’ 
of sacrifices? 
Its efficacy 
is “passed 
from thee’’ 
who rejoicest 
in evil. 

Cf, Isa.1. 
13-15. 


n Psa.52.8; 
Rom.11.17. 


784 


B.C. 600. 


[11 17 


8 Yet they obeyed not, nor in-— 
clined their ear, but walked every 
one in the imagination of their evil 
heart: therefore I will bring upon — 
them all the words of this covenant, 
which I commanded them to do; 
but they did them not. 

9 And the LorD said unto me, A 
conspiracy is found among the men 
of Judah, and among the inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem. 

10 They are turned back to the 
iniquities of their forefathers, which 
refused to hear my words; and they — 
went after other gods to serve 
them: the house of Israel and the 
house of Judah have broken my 
covenant which I made with their 
fathers. 

11 Therefore thus saith the Lorp, 
Behold, I will bring evil upon them, 
which they shall not be able to es- 
cape; Jand though they shall cry 
unto me, I will not hearken unto 
them. 

12 Then shall the cities of Judah 
and inhabitants of Jerusalem go, 
and cry unto the gods unto whom 
they offer incense: but they shall 


not save them at all in the time of 


their trouble. 

13 For according to the number 
of thy cities were thy gods, OJ udah; 
and according to the number of the 
streets of Jerusalem have ye set up 
altars to that shameful thing, even 
altars to burn incense unto Baal. 

14 Therefore ‘pray not thou for 
this people, neither lift up a ery or 
prayer for them: for I will not hear 
them in the time that they cry 
unto me for their trouble. 

15 What hath my beloved to do 
in mine house, seeing she hath 
wrought lewdness with many, and 
the "holy flesh is passed from thee? 
when thou doest evil, then thou 
rejoicest. 

16 The LorD called thy name, "A 
green olive tree, fair, and of goodly 
fruit: with the noise of a great 
tumult he hath kindled fire upon 
it, and the branches of it are 
broken. 

17 For the Lorp of hosts, that 
planted thee, hath pronounced evil 
against thee, for the evil of the 
house of Israel and of the house 
of Judah, which they’ have done 
against themselves to provoke me 

ae SS TS SES FS Ree neta Saharan 


p of rebuke, exhortation, and warning, 
pon the violation of the Palestinian Covenant , 
Assyrian and Babylonian Captivities of Israel 
warning, Deut. 28. 63-68. 


11 18] 


to anger in offering incense unto 
Baal. 

18 And the Lorp hath given me 
knowledge of it, and I know it: 
then thou shewedst me their do- 
ings. 

19 But I was lke alamb or an ox 
that is brought to the slaughter; 
and I knew not that they had de- 
vised devices against me, sayiné, 
Let us destroy the tree with the 
fruit thereof, and let us cut him off 


fromthe land of the living, that his|? 367471 


name may be no more remembered.| 1 Sam.16.7; 
20 But, O LorpD of hosts, that Ey eal 
judgest righteously, that ¢triest the] Rey 393. 


Teins and the heart, let me see thy 
vengeance on them: for unto thee}? 1sa.30.10; 
have I revealed my cause. eee 
21 Therefore thus saith the LORD] Mic.2.6. 
of the men of Anathoth, that seek ’ 
thy life, saying, ‘Prophesy not in] ‘3$53°-43'44; 
the name of the Lorp, that thou] 50.27;Lk. * 
die not by our hand: 19.44. 
22 Therefore thus saith the LORD]  psa.51.4. 
of hosts, Behold, I will punish 


them: the young men shall die by] ¢ Jer-5.28; 


the sword; their sons and their ie Sone ta 
daughters shall die by famine: 35; 73.3; 


23 And there shall be no remnant Serpe 
of them: for I will bring evil upon| ~*~" 
the men of Anathoth, even ‘the| fIsa.29.13; 
year of their visitation. Mt.15.8; 


MK.7.6. 
CHAPTER 12. eae 
(The message on the broken hie. junder | 
such a tes 
covenant, concluded.) or ee wo 
IGHTEOUS art thou, O} jounsis: 
Lorpb, when I plead with thee:} 1 Chr.12.15. 
yet let me talk with thee of thy 
judgments: ‘Wherefore doth the} + OF Yomaee 
_way of the wicked prosper? where-|j Lev.26.16; 
~ fore are ali they happy that deal} Pcut.28.38; 
very treacherously? Hag.1.6.. 


2 Thou hast planted them, yea, 
they have taken root: they grow,|* 2ch.-2.8. 
yea, they bring forth fruit: /thou| 7 gph.2.20, 
art near in their mouth, and far| 21; 1 Pet.2.5. 
from their reins. 
3 But thou, O LorD, knowest me: 
thou hast seen me, and tried mine 
heart toward thee: pull them out 
like sheep for the slaughter, and pre- 
pare them for the day of slaughter. 
4 How longshall sthe land mourn, 
and the herbs of every field wither, 
for the wickedness of them that 
dwell therein? the beasts are con- 
sumed, and the birds; because they 
said, He shall not see our last end. 
5 If thou hast run with the foot- 
men, and they have wearied thee, 
then how canst thou contend with oe 


JEREMIAH. 


[12 16 


horses? and if in the land of peace, 
wherein thou trustedst, they wea- 
ried thee, then how wilt thou do 
in the ‘swelling of Jordan? 

6 For even thy brethren, and the 
house of thy father, even they have 
dealt treacherously with thee; yea, 
they have called a multitude after 
thee: believe them not, though they 
‘speak fair words unto thee. 

7 I have forsaken mine house, I 
have left mine heritage; I have 
given the dearly beloved of my soul 
into the hand of her enemies. 

8 Mine heritage is unto me as a 
lion in the forest; it ‘crieth out 
against me: therefore have I hated 
1G. 

9 Mine ‘heritage is unto me as a 
speckled bird, the birds round about 
are against her; come ye, assemble 
all the beasts of the field, come to 
devour. . 

10 Many pastors have destroyed 
my vineyard, they have trodden 
my portion under foot, they have 
made my pleasant portion a deso- 
late wilderness. 

11 They have made it desolate, 
and being desolate it mourneth 
unto me; the whole land is made 
desolate, because no man layeth it 
to heart. 

12 The spoilers are come upon all 
high places through the wilderness: 
for the sword of the LORD shall de- 
vour from the one end of the land 
even to the other end of the land: 
no flesh shall have peace. 

13 jJThey have sown wheat, but 
shall reap thorns: they have put 
themselves to pain, but shall not 
profit: and they shall be ashamed 
of your revenues because of the 
fierce anger of the LoRD. 

14 Thus saith the LorpD against 
all mine evil neighbours, that 
ktouch the inheritance which I have 
caused my people Israel to inherit; 
Behold, I will pluck them out of 
their land, and pluck out the house 
of Judah from among them. 

15 And it shall come to pass, after 
that I have plucked them out I will 
return, and have compassion on 
them, and will bring them again, 
every man to his heritage, and 
every man to his land. 

16 And it shall come to pass, if 
they will diligently learn the ways 
of my people, to swear by my name, 
The Lorp liveth; as they taught 
my people to swear by Baal; then 
shall they be /built in the midst of 
my people. 


OF fn, Foe 


[13 27 


12 17] JEREMIAH. 
17 But if they will not ¢obey, I/ B.c. 602. 
will utterly pluck up and destroy 
that nation, saith the Lorp. 
_ CHAPTER 13. 
The sign of the linen girdle 
(vs. 1-27). 
HUS saith the LorpD unto me, 
6Go and get thee a linen ‘girdle, 
and put it upon thy loins, and put 
it not in water. 
2 So I got a girdle according to 
the word of the Lorpb, and put it 
on my loins. 
3 And the word of the LorD came 
unto me the second time, saying, 
4 Take the girdle that thou hast 
got, which is upon thy loins, and 
arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it An Btasé 
there in a hole of the rock. < hee 
5 So I went, and hid it by Eu-]6 See vs.9-11. 
phrates, as the LoRD commanded A Saeyres 
me. O.T.) vs.1- 
6 And it came to pass after many if: fete. 
days, that the LorD said unto me, is. Opes 
Arise, go to Euphrates, and take] {1.7/14) 
the girdle from thence, which I 
commanded thee to hide there. d Lev.26.19. 
7 Then I went to Euphrates, and! . jer9.14; 
digged, and took the girdle from] 11.8; 16.12. 
the place where I had hid it: and, feces 
behold, the girdle was marred, it|/ ®*:19-> 
was profitable for nothing. g Jer.25.27; 
8 Then the word of the Lorp oe oe eae 


came unto me, saying, 

9 Thus saith the Lorp, After this}; Josh.7.19, 
manner 4will I mar the pride of 
Judah, and the great pride of Jeru- 
salem. 

10 This evil people, which refuse 
to hear my words, which ewalk in 
the imagination of their heart, and 
walk after other gods, to servel# agp 
them, and to worship them, shall{ #9:-13-3- 
even be as this girdle, which is good] ? Psa.2.12, 
for nothing. note, 

11 For as the girdle cleaveth to 
the loins of a man, so have I caused 
to cleave urito me the whole house 
of Israel and the whole house of Ju- 
dah, saith the Lorp; that ‘they 
might be unto me for a people, and 
for a name, and for a praise, and 
for a glory: but they would not 
hear. 

12 Therefore thou shalt speak 
unto them this word; Thus saith the 
Lorp God of Israel, Every bottle 
shall be filled with wine: and they 
shall say unto thee, Do we not cer- 
tainly know that every bottle shall 
be filled with wine? 

13 Then shalt thou say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lorp, Be- 


# Isa.5.30; 
8.22; Amos 
8.9. 


j Jer.5.19; 
16.10, 


786 


hold, I will fill all the inhabitants of _ 
this land, even the kings that sit 


upon David’s throne, and the 
priests, and the prophets, and all 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ¢with 
drunkenness. 

14 And I will dash them one 
against another, even the fathers 
and the sons together, saith the 
Lorp: I will not pity, nor spare, 
nor have mercy, but destroy them. 

15 Hear ye, and give ear; be not 
proud: for the LorpD hath spoken. 

16 "Give glory to the LorpD your 
God, before he cause ‘darkness, and 
before your feét stumble upon the 
dark mountains, and, while ye look 
for light, he turn it into the shadow 
of death, and make it gross dark- 
ness. 

17 But if ye will not hear it, my 
soul shall weep in secret piaces for - 
your pride; and mine eye shall 
weep sore, and run down with tears, 
because the Lorp’s flock is carried 
away captive. 

18 Say unto the king and to the 
queen, Humble yourselves, sit 
down: for your principalities shall 
come down, even the crown of your 
glory. 

19 The cities of the south shall be 
shut up, and none shall open them: 
Judah shall be carried away cap- 
tive all of it, it shall be wholly 
carried away captive. 

20 Lift up your eyes, and behold 
them that come from the north: 
where is the flock that was given 
thee, thy beautiful flock? 

21 What wilt thou say when he 
shall punish thee? for thou hast 
taught them to be captains, and as 
chief over thee: shall not sorrows 
take thee, as a woman in travail? 

22 And if thou say in thine heart, 
|’Wherefore come these things upon 
me? For the greatness of thine 
iniquity are thy skirts discovered, 
and thy heels made bare. 

23 Can the Ethiopian change his 
skin, or the leopard his spots? then 
may ye also do good, that are ac- 
customed to do evil. 

24 Therefore will I scatter them 

kas the stubble that passeth away 
by the wind of the wilderness. 
} 25 This is thy lot, the portion of 
thy measures from me, saith the 
LORD; because thou hast forgotten 
me, and ‘trusted in falsehood. 

26 Therefore will I discover thy 
skirts upon thy face, that thy 
\Shame may appear. 

" 27 I have seen thine adulteries, 


and thy neighings, the lewdness of 
thy whoredom, and thine abomina- 
tions on the hills in the fields. Woe 
unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt theu 
not be made clean? when shai/ it 
once be? 


CHAPTER 14. 


The message on the drought 
(Jer. 14, 1-15. 21). 


HE word of the Lorp that/B.c. 601.) 
came to Jeremiah concerning 
the idearth. 

2 Judah mourneth, and the gates 
thereof languish; they are black|¢ Bible 
unto the ground: and the cry of| {6°45‘° 
Jerusalem is gone up. 

3 And their nobles have sent their 
little ones to the waters: they came 
to the pits, and found no water; 
they returned with their vessels 
empty; they were ashamed and con- 
founded, and covered their heads. |d Ex.29.45, 

4 Because the ground is chapt, for pli —> 
there was no rain in the earth, the tes 
plowmen were ashamed, they cov-|e See Jer.2.’ 
ered their heads. 23-25. 

5 Yea, the hind also calved in the! ¢ jer.7.16; 
field, and forsook it, because there| 11.14; 
was no grass. Ex.32.10. 

6 And the wild asses did stand in| ¢ jer.11.11; 
the high places, they snuffed up the] Prov.1.28; 
wind like dragons; their eyes did Prise 
fail, because there was no grass. 18: Mic.3.4; 

7 © 4LorD, though our iniquities| Zech.7.13. 
testify against us, do thou it for thy hi Theas 
name’s sake: for our backslidings|” 23. "”" 
are many; we have sinned against; | 

ee. i Psa.79.3. 

8 O the hope of Israel, the sav-| ; rex.7.15 
iour thereof in time of trouble, why 
shouldest thou be as a stranger in 
the land, and as a wayfaring man 
that turneth aside to tarry for a 
night? 

9 Why shouldest thou be as a 
man astonied, as a mighty man 
¢that cannot save? yet thou, O 
Lorp, art in the midst of us, and 
we are called by thy name; leave us 
not. 

10 Thus saith the LorD unto 
this people, “Thus have they loved 
to wander, they have not refrained 
their feet, therefore the Lorp doth 
not accept them; he will now re- 
member their iniquity, and visit) 
their sins. H 


(Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 


6 Jer.17.13. 
2 Isa.59.1. 


1 The significance of a drought at this time was very great. 
Covenant (Deut. 28. 23, 24), and already fulfilled 


WT) etc.). 


signs predicted in the Palestinian C 
in part in the reign of Ahab (1 Ki. 


[14 20 


11 Then said the LorD unto me, 


lecod not for this people for their 


good. 

12 &8When they fast, I will not hear 
their cry; and when they offer 
burnt-offering and an oblation, I 
will not accept them: but I will con- 
sume them by the sword, and by the 
famine, and by the pestilence. 

13. Then said I, Ah, Lord Gop! 
behold, the prophets say unto them, 
Ye shall not see the sword, neither 
shali ye have famine; but I will give 
you assured /peace in this place. 

14 Then the Lorpb said unto me, 
The prophets prophesy lies in my 
name: I sent them not, neither have 
I comrnanded them, neither spake 
unto them: they prophesy unto you 
a false vision and divination, and a 
thing of nought, and the deceit of 
their heart. 

15 Therefore thus saith the LorD 
concerning the prophets that proph- 
esy in my name, and I sent them 
not, yet they say, Sword and fam- 
ine shall not be in this land; By 
sword and famine shall those 
prophets be consumed. 

16 And the people to whom they 
prophesy shall be cast out in the 
streets of Jerusalem because of the 
famine and the sword; ‘and they 
shall have none te bury them, them, 
their wives, nor their sons, nor their 
daughters: for I will pour their 
wickedness upon them. 

17 Therefore thou shalt say this 
word unto them; Let mine eyes run 
down with tears night and day, and 


let them not cease: for the virgin 
daughter of my people is broken 
with a great breach, with a very 
grievous blow. ; 

18 If I go forth into /the field, 
then behold the slain with the 
sword! and if I enter into the city, 
then behold them that are sick with 
famine! yea, Doth the prophet and 
the priest go about into a Jand that 
they know not. 

19 Hast thou utterly rejected 
Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion? 
why hast thou smitten us, and 
there is no healing for us? we 
looked for peace, and there is no 
good; and for the time of healing, 


and behold trouble! 
20 We acknowledge, O LORD, our 


It was one of the 


As that sign had been followed, 


even though after a long interval, by the Assyrian captivity of the northern kingdom. 
it should have been received by Judah as a most solemn warning. 


_ 187 


14 21] 


JEREMIAH. 


15 18 


wickedness, and the iniquity of our 


fathers: *for we have sinned against 


thee. 

21 Do not abhor us, for thy 
name’s sake, do not disgrace the 
throne of thy glory: remember, 
break not thy covenant with us. 

22 Arethere any among “the van- 
ities of the Gentiles that can cause 
rain? or can the heavens give 
showers? art not thou he, O Lorp 
our God? therefore we will wait 
upon thee: for thou hast made all 
these things. — 


CHAPTER 15. 


(The message on the drought, 
concluded.) 


HEN said the Lorp unto me, 
Though ‘Moses and 4Samuel 
stood before me, yet my mind 
could not be toward this people: 
cast them out of my sight, and let 
them go forth. 

2 And it shall come to pass, if 
they say unto thee, Whither shall 
we go forth? then thou shalt tell 
them, Thus saith the Lorp; ‘Such 
ag are for death, to death; and such 
as are for the sword, to the sword; 
and such as are for the famine, to 
the famine; and such as are for the 
captivity, to the captivity. 

3 And I will fappoint over them 
four kinds, saith the Lorp: the 
sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, 
and the fowls of the heaven, and 
the beasts of the earth, to devour 
and destroy. 

4 And I will cause them to be 
8removed into all kingdoms of the 
earth, because of Manasseh the son 
of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that 
which he did in Jerusalem. 

5 For who shall have pity upon 
thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall 
bemoan thee? or who shall go aside 
to ask how thou doest? 

6 Thou hast forsaken me, saith 
the Lorn, thou art gone backward: 
therefore will I stretch out my hand 
against thee, and destroy thee; ‘I 
am weary with Jrepenting. 

_7 And I will fan them with a fan 
in the gates of the land; I will be- 
teave them of children, I will de- 


B.C. 601. 


a Psa.106.6; 
Dan.9.8. 


b Deut.32.21. 


¢ Ex.32.11, 
12; Psa.99.6. 


d 1 Sam.7.9. 

e Jer.43.11; 
Ezk.5.2,12; 
Zech.11.9. 

f Lev.26.16. 

g Deut.28.25; 
2 Ki.21.1-18; 
23.26,27; 
24.3,4. 

h Isa.51.19. 

+ Hos.13.14. 


j Zech.8.14, 
note. 


k Jer:S.3; 
Isa.9.13; 
Amos 4.10, 
11. 

11 Sam.2.5. 

m Jer.16.13; 
17.4. 

n Ezk,3.1,3; 
Rey.10.9,10. 


stroy my people, since ‘they return’ 
not from their ways. 

8 Their widows are increased to 
me above the sand of the seas: I 
have brought upon them against 
the mother of the young men a 
spoiler at noonday: I have caused 
him to fall upon it suddenly, and 
terrors upon the city. 

9 ‘She that hath borne seven lan- 
guisheth: she hath given up the 
ghost; her sun is gone down while 
it was yet day: she hath been 
ashamed and confounded: and the 
residue of them will I deliver to the 
sword before their enemies, saith 
the Lorp. 

10 Woe is me, my mother, that 
thou hast borne me a man of strife 
and a man of contention to the 
whole earth! I have neither lent 
on usury, nor men have lent to me. 
on usury; yet every one of them 


‘doth curse me. 


11 The Lorp !said, Verily it shall 
be well with thy remnant; verily I 
will cause the enemy to entreat thee 
well in the time of evil and in the 
time of affliction. 

12 Shall iron break the northern 
iron and the steel? 

13 Thy substance and thy treas- 
ures will I give to the spoil without 
price, and that for all thy sins, even 
in all thy borders. 

14 And I will make thee to pass 
with thine enemies “into a land 
wich thou knowest not: for a fire 
is kindled in mine anger, which 
shall burn upon you. 

15 O LorpbD, thou knowest: re- 
member me, and visit me, and re- 
venge me of my persecutors; take 
me not away in thy longsuffering: 
know that for thy sake I have 
suffered rebuke. 

16 Thy words were found, and I 
did "eat them; and thy word was 
unto me the joy and rejoicing of 
mine heart: for I am called by thy 
name, O LORD God of hosts. 

17 Isat not in the assembly of the 
mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone 
because of thy hand: for thou hast 
filled me with indignation. 

18 Why is my pain perpetual, and 
my wound incurable, which re- 


1 The Remnant, of whom 


; vhom Jeremiah was the representative, are carefully distin- 
guished from the unbelieving mass of the people. 


The coming captivity, which 


they must share, for they too have sinned (v. 13), though Jehovah’s judgment upon 
the nation, will be but a purifying chastisement to them, and they receive a special 


promise (v.11). 


Verses 15-18 give the answer of the 


Remnant to verses 11-14. Two 


things characterize the believing Remnant always—loyalty to the word of God, 


and separation from those who mock at that word 


788 


(vs. 16,17. Cf. Rev. 3. 8-10). 


15 19] 


altogether unto me as a liar, and as 
waters that fail? 

19 Therefore thus saith the LorD, 
“Tf thou return, then will I bring 
thee again, and thou shalt stand 
before me: and if thou “take forth 
the precious from the vile, thou 
shalt be as my mouth: let them 
Tteturn unto thee; but return not 
thou unto them. 

20 And I will make thee unto this 
people a fenced brasen wall: and] Jer.23.3-8. 
they shall fight against thee, but] (Jsa-1.9 
they shall not prevail against thee: 
for Iam with thee to save theeld Ex.14.30, 
and to deliver thee, saith the; 20¢e; Isa. 
Lorp. 59.20, note. 

21 And I will deliver ‘thee out of| Jer.7.33; 


a Zech.3.7. 
b Ezk.22.26; 
44.23. 


c Remnant.” 


the hand of the wicked, and I will] 34-20; Psa. 
dredeem thee out of the hand of the 
terrible. | f Jer.41.5; 
} 47.5; Lev.19. 
CHAPTER 16. hei 
The sign of the unmarried g Jer.7.29; 
prophet (Jer. 16. 1-17. 18). Isa.22.12. 
HE word of the LorD came}s Jer.7.34; 25. 
also unto me, !saying, 10; Isa.24. 

2 Thou shalt not take thee a wife,| 7:8: E726. 
neither shalt thou have sons or} 11: Rev.18. 
daughters in this place. 23. 

3 For thus saith the LORD con-| ; Jer.5.19; 
cerning the sons and concerning] 13.22; 22.8; 
the daughters that are born in this; Deut.29.24. 
place, and concerning their mothers j Jer.22.9; 
that bare them, and concerning} Deut.29'25. 
their fathers that begat them in y 
this land; k popes 

4 They shall die of grievous} vs.12-16 
deaths; they shall not be lamented;] Jer.23.5-8 
neither shali they be buried; but Ese goed 
they shall be as dung upon the face cgi 
of the earth: and they shall be con-] /-Deut.4.26- 
‘sumed by the sword, and by famine;| 28: 28-3°- 
and their ‘carcases shall be meat J 
for the fowls of heaven, and for the} Isa.11.11,12; 
beasts of the earth. ee om 

5 For thus saith the LORD, Enter} 37.21-25. 
not into the house of mourning, 
neither go to lament nor bemoan pierre 
them: for I have taken away my| ~~’ ” 
peace from this people, saith the|o Amos 4.2; 
Lorp, even lovingkindness and| 1>-1.15 
mercies. 

6 Both the great and the small 
shall die in this land: they shall 
not be buried, neither shall men 
lament for them, nor ‘cut them- 
selves, nor &make themselves bald 


for them: 


JEREMIAH. 
fuseth to be healed? wilt thou be| B.C. 601. 


[16 16 


7 Neither shall men tear them- 
selves for them in mourning, to 
comfort them for the dead; neither 


- |shall men give them the cup of con- 


solation to drink for their father or 
for their mother. 

8 Thou shalt not also go into the 
house of feasting, to sit with them 
to eat and to drink. 

9 For thus saith the,LoRD of 
hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, 
AY will cause to cease out of this 
place in your eyes, and in your 
days, the voice of mirth, and the 
voice of gladness, the voice of 
the bridegroom, and the voice 
of the bride. 

10 And it shall come to pass, when 
thou shalt shew this people all 
these words, and they shall say 
unto thee, *Wherefore hath the 
LorRD pronounced all this great 
evil against us? or what 1s our 
liniquity? or what 7s our sin that 
lwe have committed against the 
LorD our God? 

11 Then shalt thou say unto them. 
JBecause your fathers have for- 
saken me, saith the LorRD, and 
jhave walked after other gods, and 
have served them, and have wor- 
shipped them, and have forsaken 
me, and have not kept my law; 

12 And ye have done worse than 
your fathers; for, behold, “ye walk 
every one after the imagination of 
his evil heart, that they may not 
hearken unto me: 

13 /Therefore will I cast you out 
of this land into a land that ye 
know not, neither ye nor your fa- 
thers; and there shall ye serve 
other gods day and night; where 
I will not shew you favour. 

14 Therefore, behold, the “days 
come, saith the LORD, that it shall 
no more be said, The Lorp liveth, 
that brought up the children of 
Israel out of the land of Egypt; 

15 But, The Lorp liveth, that 
brought up the children of Israel 
from the land of the north, and 
from all the lands whither he had 
driven them: “and I will bring them 
again into their land that I gave 
unto their fathers. 

16 Behold, I will send for many 
fishers, saith the LorD, and they 
shall fish them; and after will I 
send for many hunters, and they 
shall hunt them from every moun- 


1 The sign of the unmarried prophet is interpreted by the context. The whole 
social life of Judah was about to be disrupted and cease from the land. But note the 


promises of verses 14-16; Jer. 17. 7, 8. 
| 789. 


tain, and from every hiil, and out 


of Lane of the rocks. ae 

17 *Formin are upon 
their Ca eeak not hid from 
my face, neither is their iniquity 
hid from mine 

18 And* first F will recompense 
their iniquity and their sin double; 
“because they have defiled my land, 
they have filled mine inheritance 
with the carcases of their detest- 
able and abominable things. 

19 O Lorp, my strength, and my 
fortress, and my refuge in the day 
of affliction, the Gentiles shall come 
unto thee from the ends of the earth, 
and shall say, Surely our fathers 
have inherited lies, vanity, and 
things wherein there is no profit. 

20 Shail a man make gods unto 
himself, and they are no gods? _ 

21 Therefore, behold, I will this 
once cause them to know, I will 
cause them to know mine hand and 
my might; and they shall know 
that ¢my name is The Lorb. 


CHAPTER 17. 


(The sign of the unmarried 
prophet, concluded.) 


HE sin of Judah is written with 

a pen of iron, and with the 

point of a diamond: it is /graven 

upon the table of their heart, and 
upon the horns of your altars; 

2 Whilst their children remember 
their altars and their groves by 
the green trees upon the high hills. 

3 O my mountain in the field, I 
will give thy substance and all thy 
treasures to the spoil, and thy high 
places for sin, throughout all thy 
borders. 

4 And thou, even thyself, shalt 
discontinue from thine heritage 
that I gave thee; and I will cause 
thee to serve thine enemies in the 
land which thou knowest not: for 
ye have kindled a fire in mine 
anger, which shall burn for ever. 

5 Thus saith the LorbD; Cursed be 
the man that /“trusteth in man, and 
maketh flesh his arm, and whose 
heart departeth from the Lorp. 

6 For he shali be like the heath in 
the desert, and shall not see when 
good cometh; but shall inhabit the 
parched places in the wilderness, in 
a salt land and not inhabited. 

7 *Blessed is the man that trust- 
eth in the LorpD, and whose hope 
the LORD is. 

8 For he shall beZas a tree planted 
by the waters, and that spreadeth 


—_ 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.32.19; 
Job 34.21; 
Prav.5.21; 
15.3. 


b Jer.17.18; 
Tsa.40.2. 


c Ezk.43.7,9. 

d Or, JEHO- 
VAH. 
Psa.83.18. 

e Job 19.24. 


f Prov.3.3; 
2 Cor.3.3. 


g Deut.16.21, 


h Psa.2.12, 
note. 


t Psa.2.12; 
34.8; 125.1; 
146.5; 
Prov.16.20; 
Isa.30.18. 


j Job 8.16; 
Psa.1.3. 


k Jer.11.20; 
20.12; 


1 Jer.14.8. 


m Psa.73.27; 
Tsa.1.28. 


n See Lk.10. 
20. 

o Isa.5.19; 
Ezk.12.22; 
2 Pet.3.4. 


p Num.15.32; 
Neh.13.19. 


790 


VEN PLbA Ree. Id 


not see when heat cometh, but her 
leaf shall be green; and shall not be 
careful in the year of drought, 
neither shall cease from yielding 
fruit. 

9 The heart is deceitful above all - 
thing tely_.waiciced : 
W. - ; s 

10 I the Lorp “search the heart, £ 
try the reins, even to give every 
man according to his ways, and 
according to the fruit of his doings. 

11 As the partridge sitteth on 
eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he 
that getteth riches, and not by fight, 
shall leave them in the midst of his 
days, and at his end shall be a fool. 

12 A glorious high throne from 
the beginning is the place of our 
sanctuary. 

13 O Lorn, ‘the hope of Israel, 
mall that forsake thee shall be 
ashamed, and they that depart from 
me shall be “written in the earth, 
because they have forsaken the 
Lorp, the fountain of living waters. 

14 Heal me, O LorD, and I shall 
be healed; save me, and I shall be 
saved: for thou art my praise. 

15 Behold, they say unto me, 
oWhere is the word of the Lorp? 
let it come now. 

16 As for me, I have not hastened 
from being a pastor to follow thee: 
neither have I desired the woeful 
day; thou knowest: that which 
came out of my lips was right be- 
fore thee. 

17 Be not a terror unto me: thou 
art my hope in the day of evil. 

18 Let them be confounded that 
persecute me, but tet not me be con- 
founded: let them be dismayed, but 
let not me be dismayed: bring upon 
them the day of evil, and destroy 
them with double destruction. 


The message in the gates con- 
cerning the sabbath. 


19 Thus said the Lorp’ unto me; 
Go and stand in the gate of the 
children of the people, whereby the 
kings of Judah come in, and by 
the which they go out, and in all 
the gates of Jerusalem; 

20 And say unto them, Hear ye 
the word of the Lorp, ye kings ‘of 
judah, and all Judah, and all the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter 
in by these gates: 

21 Thus saith the Lorp; Take 
heed to yourselves, and bear no bur- 
den on the sabbath day, nor bring 
it in by the gates of Jerusalem: 


‘4 


17 22) 


22 Neither carry forth a burden 

out of your houses on the sabbath 
day, neither do ye any work, but 
hallow ye the sabbath day, as I 
commanded your fathers. 
_23, ¢But they obeyed not, neither 
inclined their ear, but made their 
neck stiff, that they might not 
hear, nor receive instruction. 

24 And it shall come to pass, if ye 
diligently hearken unto me, saith 
the Lorp, to bring in no burden 
through the gates of this city on the 
sabbath day, but hallow the sab- 
bath day, to do no work therein; 

25 Then shall there enter into the 
gates of this city kings and princes 
sitting upon the throne of David, 
riding in chariots and on horses, 
they, and their princes, the men of 
Judah, and the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem: and this city shall remain 
for ever. 

26 And they shall come from ‘he 
cities of Judah, and from the places 
about Jerusalem, and from the land 
of Benjamin, and from the plain, 
and from the mountains, and from 
the 4south, bringing burnt-offerings, 
and sacrifices, and ‘meat-offerings, 
and incense, and bringing sacrifices 
of praise, unto the house of the 
Lorpb. 

27 But if ye will not hearken unto 
me to hallow the sabbath day, and 
not to bear a burden, even entering 
in at the gates of Jerusalem on the 
sabbath day; then will I kindle a 
fire in the gates thereof, and it shall 
devour the palaces of Jerusalem, 
and it shall not be quenched. 


“ CHAPTER i8. 


The sign of the potter’s house 
(Jer. 18. 1-19, 13)- 


1 Nate) lword which came to Jere- 
miah from the LORD, 4saying, 

2 Arise, and go down to the pot- 
ter’s house, and there I will cause 
thee to hear my words. 

3 Then I went down to the pot- 
ter’s house, and, behold, he wrought 
a work on the wheels. 

4 And the vessel that he made of 
clay was marred in the hand of the 
potter: so he made it again another 
vessel, as seemed good to the potter 
to make it. 

5 Then the word of the LorRD 
came to me, saying, 


1 Israel (the whole nation) a vessel ma 
prophetic strain. But Jehovah will make 


, OMe 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.7.24,26; 
11.10. 
6 Zech.7.7. 


c Lit. meal. 
d Parables 


e Isa.45.9; 


f 1sa.64.8. 


& Zech.8.14, 
note. 


hi.e. nations. 

t Jer.2.13,32; 
3.245,13.25; 
17.13. 


j Jer.19.8; 
49.13; 50.13. 


k1 Ki.9.8; 
Lam.2.15; 
Mic.6.16. 


1 Jer.13.24. 


m See Jer.2.27. 


| 
n Lev.10.11; 


Mal.2.7; 
John 7.48,49. 


gsi 


B.C. 691. 


Rom.9.20,21. 


[18 18 

6 O house of Israel, ‘cannot I do 
with you as this potter? saith the 
Lorp. Behold, fas the clay is in 
the potter’s hand, so are ye in mine 
hand, O house of Israel. 

7 At what instant I shall speak 
concerning a nation, and concern- 
ing a kingdom, to pluck up, and to 
pull down, and to destroy it; 

8 If that nation, against whom I 
have pronounced, turn from their 
evil, I will &repent of the evil that I 
thought to do unto them. 

9 And at what instant J shall 
speak concerning a nation, and 
concerning a kingdom, to build and 
to plant 1t; 

10 Ifit do evil in my sight, that it 
obey not my voice, then I will re- 
pent of the good, wherewith I said 
I would benefit them. 

11 Now therefore go to, speak to 


.|the men of Judah, and to the 


inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, 
Thus saith the Lorp; Behold, I 
frame evil against you, and devise 
a device against you: return ye 
now every one from his evil way, 
and make your ways and your do- 
ings good, 

12 And they said, There is no 
hope: but we will walk after our 
own devices, and we will every one 
do the imagination of his evil 
heart. 

13 Therefore thus saith the LorD; 
Ask ye now among the “heathen, 
who hath heard such things: the 
virgin of Israel hath done a very 
horrible thing. 

14 Will a man leave the snow of 
Lebanon which cometh from the 
rock of the field? or shall the cold 
flowing waters that come from 
another place be forsaken? ; 

15 Because my people have “for- 
gotten me, they have burned in- 
cense to vanity, and they have 
caused them to stumble in their 
ways from the ancient paths, to 
walk in paths, in a way not cast up; 

16 To make their land ‘desolate, 
and a perpetual “hissing; every 
one that passeth thereby shall be 
astonished, and wag his head. 

17 /I will scatter them as with an 
east wind before the enemy; I will 
shew them the back, and not the 
face, in the day of their calamity. 

18 Then said they, Come, and let 
us devise devices against Jeremiah; 
nfor the law shall not perish from 


rred in the Potter’s hand, is the key tc this 
“Gt again another vessel” (v. 4). 


18 19] 


the priest, nor counsel from the 
wise, nor the word from the prophet. 
Come, and let us smite him with 
the tongue, and let us not give heed 
to any of his words. 

19 Give heed to me, O LorD, and 
hearken to the voice of them that 
contend with me. 


for my soul. Remember that I 
stood before thee to speak good for 
them, and toe turn away thy wrath 
from them. ‘ 
21 Therefore deliver up their chil- 
dren to the famine, and pour out 
their blood by the force of the 
sword; and Jet their wives be be- 
reaved of their children, and be 
widows; and let their men be put 
to death; Jet their young men bela Jer.7.31: 
slain by the sword in battle. Serie ae 
22 Let a cry be heard from their} S renee 
houses, when thou shalt bring a(b1Sam.3.11, 
troop suddenly upon them: for they| 2 Ki-21-12. 
have digged a pit to take me, and| ¢ Jer.2.13,17,° 


hid snares for my feet. 19; 15.6, 17. 
23 Yet, Lorp, thou knowest all) 235 beacect 


their counsel against me to slay 
me: forgive not their iniquity,|¢ Josh.15.8. 
- neither blot out their sin from thy 


sight, but let them be overthrow. tee 
before thee; deal thus with them in ; 
the time of thine anger. f Denn oan 
Isa.9.20; 
CHAPTER 19. Lam.4.10. 


(The sign of the potter’s house, |g Psa.2.9; 
concluded.) Isa,30.14; 


‘ Lam.4.2. 
US saith the Lorp, Go and , 
get a potter’s earthen bottle, Perens 

and take of the ancients of the} Zeph.1.5. 
people, and of the ancients of the 

priests; 

2 And go forth unto the ¢valley of 
the son. of Hinnom, which ss by the 

entry of the east gate, and proclaim 

there the words that I shall tell 
thee, 

3 And say, Hear ye the word of 
the Lorw, O kings of Judah, and 
inhabitants of Jerusalem: Thus 

saith the LorpD of hosts, the God of 

Israel; Behold, I will bring evil 
upon this place, the which whoso- 
ever heareth, his ears shall 5tingle. 

4 ‘Because they have forsaken 
me, and have estranged this place, 
and have burned incense in it unto 
other gods. whom neither they nor 
their fathers have known, nor. the 
kings of Judah, and have filled this 
place with the blood of innocents: 

9 They have built also the high 
places of Baal, to burn their sons 


792 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 605. 


lwith fire for burnt-offerings unto 
Baal, which I commanded not, nor 
spake it, neither came it into my 
mind: 

6 Therefore, behold, the days 
come, saith the LorD, that this place 


: 
: 


shail no more be called Tophet, | 


@nor The valley of the son of Hin. 
nom, but The valley of slaughter. 

7 And I will make void the coun- 
jsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this 
|place; and «I will cause them to 
ifall by the sword before their ene- 
mies, and by the hands of them that 
seek their lives: and their carcases 
will I give to be meat for the fowls 
of the heaven, and for the beasts of 
the earth. 


8 And I will make this city deso- © 


late, and an hissing; every one that 
passeth thereby shall be astonished 
and hiss because of all the plagues 
thereof. 

9 And I will cause them to eat 
ithe flesh of their sons and the /flesh 
of their daughters, and they shall 
yeat every one the flesh of his friend 
in the siege and straitness, where- 


with their enemies, and they that — 


seek their lives, shall straiten them. 


10 Then shalt thou break the 


bottle in the sight of the men that 
go with thee, 

11 And shalt say unto them, Thus 
saith the LorpD of hosts; sEven so 
will I break this people and this 
city, as one breaketh a potter’s ves- 
sel, that cannot be made whole 
again: and they shall bury them in 
Tophet, till there be no place to 
bury. 

12. Thus will I do unto this place, 
saith the Lorp, and to the inhab- 


itants thereof, and even make this . 


city as Tophet: 

13° And the houses of Jerusalem, 
and the houses of the kings of Ju- 
dah, shall be defiled as the place of 
‘Tophet, because of all the houses 
upon whose “roofs they have burned 
incense unto all the host of ‘heaven, 
and have poured out drink-offerings 
junto other gods, 


Parenthetic: Jeremiah’s frst 
persecution (Jer. 19, 14-20, i 
Cf. Jer. 32. 2/. 


14 Then came Jeremiah from To- 
phet, whither the Lorp had sent 


him to prophesy; and he stood in 


the court of the Lorp's house; and 
said to all the people, 

15 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
the God of Israel; Behold, I will 
‘bring upon this city and upon all 


201] 


her towns all the evil that I have 
pronounced against it, because they 
have hardened their necks, that 
they might not hear my words. 


CHAPTER 20. 


OW Pashur the son of Immer 

the priest, who was also chief 
governor in the house of the LORD, 
heard that Jeremiah prophesied 
these things. 

2 Then Pashur smote Jeremiah 
the prophet, and put him in the 
stocks that were in the high gate of 
Benjamin, which was by the house 
of the LorbD. 

3 And it came to pass on the mor- 
row, that Pashur brought forth 
Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then 
said Jeremiah unto him, The LORD 


a i.e. Terror on 


hath not called thy name Pashur, eases 
but *Magor-missabib. b 2 Ki.20.17; 
4 For thus saith the LorpD, Be- ee Gat aaa 
hold, I will make thee a terror to ‘ 
thyself, and to all thy friends: and} c Job 32.18, 
they shall fall by the sword of their! 19: Psa.39.3. 
enemies, and thine eyes shail behold} job 32.18: 
it: and I will give all Judah into the] Acts 18.5. 
hand of the king of Babylon, and 2 Heb. BSD 
he shall carry them captive into] man of my 
Babylon, and shall slay them with] peace. 


the sword. 

5 Moreover °I will deliver all the 
strength of this city, and all the 
jabours thereof, and all the precious 


f Jer.11.20; 
17.10. 


g Psa.35:9,10; * 


things thereof, and all the treasures 10a 
of the kings of Judah will I give|h Zech.8.14, 
into the hand of their enemies,| 7°%¢ 
which shall spoil them, and take] ; 2 xi.24.17, 
them, and carry them to Babylon. |. 

6 And thou, Pashur, and all that/’ pees. 
dwell in thine house shall go into! 2538 ~~ 


captivity: and thou shalt come to 
Babylon, and there thou shalt die, 
and shalt be buried there, thou, and 
all thy friends, to whom thou hast 
prophesied lies. 

7 OLorbD, thou hast deceived me, 
and I was deceived: thou art 
stronger than I, and hast prevailed: 
I am in derision daily, every one 
mocketh me. f 

8 For since I spake, I cried out, I 
cried violence and spoil; because the 
word of the LorD was made a re- 
proach unto me, and a derision, 
daily. 

9 Then I said, I will not make 
mention of him, nor speak any 
more in his name. But his word 
was in mine heart ‘as a burning 
fire shut up in my bones, and I was 
weary with forbearing, and 4I) 
could not stay. i 

793 


JEREMIAH. 


[21 2 


10 For I heard the defaming of 
many, fear on every side. Report, 
say they, and we will report it. 


(‘All my familiars watched for my 


halting, saying, Peradventure he: 
will be enticed, and we shall pre- 
vail against him, and we shall take 
our revenge on him. 

11 But the LorD is with me asa 
mighty terrible one: therefore my 
persecutors shall stumble, and they 
shall not prevail: they shall be 
greatly ashamed; for they shall not 
prosper: their everlasting confusion 
shall never be forgotten. 

12 But, O LorpD of hosts, that 
Striest the righteous, and seest the 
reins and the heart, let me see thy 
vengeance on them: for unto thee 
have I opened my cause. 

13 Sing unto the Lorp, praise ye 
the Lorp: for She hath delivered 
the soul of the poor from the hand 
of evildoers. 


14 Cursed be the day wherein I 
was born: let not the day wherein 
my mother bare me be blessed. 

15 Cursed be the man who 
brought tidings to my father, say- 
ing, A man child is born unto thee; 
making him very glad. 

16 And let that man be as the 
cities which the LorpD overthrew, 
and ‘repented not: and let him 
hear the cry in the morning, and 
the shouting at noontide; 

17 Because he slew me not from 
the womb; or that my mother 
might have been my grave, and 
her womb to be always great with 


me. 
18 Wherefore came I forth out of 


the womb to see labour and sorrow, 
that my days should be consumed 
with shame? 


CHAPTER 21. 


The message to King Zedekiah 
(Jer. 21. 1-22. 30). The Baby- 
lJonian captivity foretold. (Cf, 
2, Ka. 25, 1-11.) 


id Raa word which came unto Jere- 
miah from the LoRD, when 
tking Zedekiah sent unto him 
Pashur the son of Melchiah, and 
JZephaniah the son of Maaseiah 
the priest, saying, 

2 Enquire, I pray thee, of the 
‘Lorp for us; for Nebuchadrezzar 


\king of Babylon maketh war 


against us; if so be that the Lorp 
will -deal with us according to all his 
wondrous works, that he may go up 
from us. 


21 3) 

3. Then said Jeremiah unto them, 
Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah: 

4 Thus saith the Lorp God of 
Israel; Behold, I will turn back the 
weapons of war that are in your 
hands, wherewith ye fight against 
the king of Babylon, and against 
the Chaldeans, which besiege you 
without the walls, and I will assem- 
ble them into the midst of this city. 

5 wind I myself will fight against 
you with ¢an outstretched hand and 
with a strong arm, even in anger, 
and in fury, and in great wrath. 

6 And I will smite the inhabitants 
of this city, both man and beast: 
they shall die of a great pestilence. ore 

7 And afterward, saith the Lorp,|° ~~ 
I will deliver Zedekiah king of |b Deut.28.50, 
Judah, and his servants, and the| 2 Chr.36.17, 
people, and such as are left in this} - peut.30.19. 
city from the pestilence, from the as 
‘sword, and from the famine, into oo ne. life 
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king] fp2+ fone 
of Babylon, and into the hand] Aunted. 
of their enemies, and into the} Jer-39.18. 
hand of those that seek their life:|, p24.13.8. 
and he shall smite them with the * 
e€ge of the sword; “he shall not|f Heb. visit 
spare them, neither have pity, nor; 4?°" 
have mercy. |g Prov.1.31; 

8 And unto this people thou shalt} 1sa.3.10,11. 
say, Thus saith the LorD; Behold,|, Jer.17.20. 
‘I set before you the way of life, 
and the way of death. i Jer.21.12. 

9 He that abideth in this city j Jer.17.25. 
shall die by the sword, and by the 

k Heb.6.13,17, 
1 Deut.29.24, 
25; 1 Ki.9. 


famine, and by the pestilence: but 
he that goeth out, and falleth to the 
Chaldeans that besiege you, he 


shall live, and ¢his life shall be| 3,9. 

unto him for a prey. m2 Ki.22.17: 
10 For I have set my face against; 2 Chr.34.25. 

this city for evil, and not for good, J 

saith the Lorp: it shall be given|”? 4-22-20. 

into the hand of the king of Baby-}o1 Chr.3.15, 

lon, and he shall burn it with fire. | with 2 Ki.23. 


11 And touching the house of the} 32: 


king of Judah, say, Hear ye the 
word of the LorpD; 

12 O house of David, thus saith 
the LorD; Execute judgment in the 
morning, and deliver him that is 
spoiled out of the hand of the op- 
pressor, lest my fury go out like 
fire, and burn that none can quench 
it, because of the evil of your 
doings. 

13 Behold, ‘I am against thee, O 
inhabitant of the valley, and rock 
of the plain, saith the LorD; which 
say, Who shall come down against 
us? or who shall enter into our 
habitations? 

14 But I will ‘punish you accord 


794 


jEREMIAH. 


wn 


ing to the 4fruit of your doings, 
saith the LorD: and I will kindle 
a fire in the forest thereof, and 
it shall devour all things round 
about it. 


CHAPTER 22. 


(The message to Zedekiah, 
concluded. } 


HUS saith the LorD; Go down 
to the house of the king of 
Judah, and speak there this word, 
i 2 And say, “Hear the word of the 
|LorD, O king°of Judah, that sittest 
Lapow the throne of David, thou, and 
jthy servants, and thy people that 
enter in by these gates: 

3 Thus saith the LorD; ‘Execute 
ye judgment and righteousness, and 
deliver the spoiled out of the hand 
of the oppressor: and do no wrong, 
do no violence to the stranger, the 
fatherless, nor the widow, neither 
ished innocent blood in this place. 

4 For if ye do this thing indeed, 
jthen shali there enter in by the 
gates of this house kings sitting 
upon the throne of David, riding in 
chariots and on horses, he, and his 
servants, and his people. 

5 But if ye will not hear these 
words, *I swear by myself, saith 
the Lorpb, that this house shall 
become a desolation. 

6 For thus saith the Lorp unto 
the king’s house of Judah; Thou 
art Gilead unto me, and the head 
jof Lebanon: yet surely I will make 
thee a wilderness, and cities which 
fare not inhabited. 

7 And I will prepare destroyers 
against thee, every one with his 
weapons: and they shall cut down 
thy choice cedars, and cast them 
into the fire, 

8 And many nations shall pass by 
this city, and they shall say every 
man to his neighbour, “Wherefore 
hath the LORD done thus unto this 
great city? 

9 Then they shall answer, ”Be- 
cause they have forsaken the cove- 
nant of the Lorp their God, and 
worshipped other gods, and served 
them. 

10 Weep ye not for “the dead, 
neither bemoan him: but weep sore 
for him that goeth away: for he 
‘shall return no more, nor see his 
native country. 

11 For thus saith the Lorpb touch- 
ing °Shallum the son of Josiah king 
of Judah, which reigned instead of 
Josiah his father, which went forth 


22° 12] 


out of this place; He shall not re- 
turn thither any more: 

12 But he shall die in the place 
whither they have Ied him captive, 
and shall see this land no more. 

13. Woe unto him that buildeth 
his house by unrighteousness, and 
his chambers by wrong; “that 
useth his neighbour’s service with- 
out wages, and giveth him not for 
his work; 

14 That saith, I will build me a 
wide house and large chambers, 
and cutteth him out windows; and 
it is cieled with cedar, and painted 
with vermilion. 

15 Shalt thou reign, because thou 
closest thyself in cedar? did not thy 
father eat and drink, and do judg- 
ment and justice, and then it was 
well with him? 

16 He judged the cause of the 
poor and needy; then it was well 
with him: was not this to know 
me? saith the LORD. 

17: But thine eyes and thine heart 
are not but for thy covetousness, 
and for to shed innocent blood, and 
for oppression, and for violence, to 


out. 

18 Therefore thus saith the LORD 
concerning Jehoiakim the son of 
Josiah xing of Judah; They shall 
not lament for him, saying, Ah my 
brother! or, Ah sister! they shall 
not lament for him, saying, Ah 
lord! or, Ah his glory! 

19 He shall be buried with the 
burial of an ass, drawn and cast 
forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. 

20 Go up to Lebanon, and cry; 
and lift up thy voice in Bashan, 
and cry from the passages: for all 
thy lovers are destroyed. 

21 I spake unto thee in thy pros- 
perity; but thou saidst, I will not 
hear. This hath been thy manner 
from thy youth, that thou obeyedst 
not my voice. 

22 The wind shall eat up all thy 
pastors, and thy iovers shall go into 
captivity: surely then shalt thou be 
ashamed and confounded for all 
thy wickedness. 

23 O inhabitant of Lebanon, that 


JEREMIAH. 


a Lev.19.13; 
Deut.24.14, 
15; Mal.3. 
10; Jas.5.4. 


6 Contracted 
from 
Jeconiah, 

1 Chr.3.16. 


c Jer.36.30. 


vs.3-8; 
Jer.31.7-14. 
(Isa,1.9; 
Rom.11.5.) 


e Israel 


vs.3-8; 
Jer.30.1-9. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom,11.26.) 


B.C. 609. 


(prophecies). 


[23 3 


makest thy nest in the cedars, how 
gracious shalt thou be when pangs 
come upon thee, the pain as of a 
woman in travail! 

24 As I live, saith the Lorpb, 
though ®Coniah the son of Jehoia- 
kim king of Judah were the signet 
upon my right hand, yet would I 
pluck thee thence; 

25 And I will give thee inta the 
hand of them that seek thy life, and 
into the hand of them whose face 
thou fearest, even into the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, 
and into the hand of the Chaldeans. 

26 And I will cast thee out, and 
thy mother that bare thee, into 
another country, where ye were not 
born; and there shall ye die. 

27 But to the land whereunto 
they desire to return, thither shall 
they not return. 

28 Is this man Coniah a despised 
broken idol? is he a vessel wherein 
is no pleasure? wherefore are they 
cast out, he and his seed, and are 
cast into a land which they know 
not? 

29 O earth, earth, earth, hear the 
word of the LORD. 

30 Thus saith the LORD, Write ye 
this man childless, aman that shall 
not prosper in his days: ‘for no 
man of his seed shall prosper, sit- 
ting upon the throne of David, and 
ruling any more in Judah. 


CHAPTER 23. 


The future ‘restoration and 
conversion of Israel: message 
against the faithless shep- 
herds (vs. 1-40). 


WE be unto the pastors that 
destroy and scatter the sheep 
of my pasture! saith the LorpD. 

2 Therefore thus saith the LoRD 
God of Israel against the pastors 
that feed my people; Ye have scat- 
tered my flock, and driven them 
away, and have not visited them: 
behold, I will visit upon you the 
evil of your doings, saith the LORD. 
| 3 And I will gather the “remnant 
of my ¢flock out of all countries 


1 This final restoration is shown to be accomplished after a period of unexampled 
tribulation (Jer. 30. 3-10), and in connection with the manifestation of David’s 


righteous Branch (v. 5), who is also J ehovah-tsidkenu (v. 6). 


The restoration here 


foretold is not to be confounded with the return of a feeble remnant of Judah under 


Ezra. Nehemiah, and Zerubbabel at the end of the 70 years (Jer. 29. 10). 


At His first 


advent Christ, David’s righteous Branch (Lk. 1. 31-33), did not “‘execute justice and 


judgment in the earth,” but was c 


Israel the nation restored, nor did the Jewish people 
The prophecy is yet to be 


ness.” Cf. Rom. 10. 3. 


rowne 


795 


d with thorns and crucified. Neither was 


say, “The Lord our righteous- 
fulfilled (Acts 15. 14-17). 


Zaye 


JEREMIAH. 


whither I have driven them, and|_B.c. 599._|of them unto me Jas Sodom, and 


will bring them again to their folds; 
and they shall be fruitful and in- 
crease. 

4 And I will set up shepherds over 
them which shall feed them: and 
they shall fear no more, nor be dis- 
mayed, neither shall they be lack- 
ing, saith the Lorp. : 

5 Behold, the days come, saith 
the Lorp, that I will raise unto Da- 
vid a righteous ¢Branch, and a 
‘King shall reign and prosper, and 
shall execute judgment and justice 
in the earth. 

6 “In his days Judah shall be 
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: 
and this is his name whereby he 
shall be called, “THE LORD OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

7 Therefore, behold, the, days 
come, saith the Lorp, that they 
shall no more say, The Lorp liveth, 
which brought up the children of 
Israel out of the land of Egypt; 

8 But, The Lorp liveth, which 
brought up and which led the seed 
of the house of Israel out of the 
north country, and ¢from all coun- 
tries whither I had driven them; 
and they shall dwell in their own 
land. 

9 Mine heart within me is broken 
because of the prophets: all my 
bones shake; I am like a drunken 
man, and like a man whom wine 
hath overcome, because of the 
Lorp, and because of the words of 
his holiness. 

10 For the land is full of adul- 
terers; for because of swearing the 
land mourneth; the pleasant places 
of the wilderness are dried up, and 
their course is evil, and their force 
is not right. 

11 For both prophet and priest 
are profane; yea, in my house have 
I found their wickedness, saith the 
Lorp. 

12 Wherefore their way shall be 
unto them as slippery ways in the 
darkness: they shall be driven on, 
and fall therein: for I will bring 
evil upon them, even the year of 
their visitation, saith the Lorp. 

13. And I have seen folly in the 
‘prophets of Samaria; they prophe- 
sied in Baal, and caused my people 
Israel to err. 

14 [have seen also in the prophets 
of Jerusalem an horrible thing: they 
commit adultery, and walk in lies: 
they strengthen also the hands of 
evildoers, that none doth return 
from his wickedness:, they are all 


a Isa.4.2, 
note. 


b Kingdom 
(O.T.). 
vs.5-8; 
Jer.30.7-9. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


c Christ 


vs.5,6; 


Ezk.37.21,22. 


(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 


d Heb. Jeho- 
vah- 
tsidkenu. 


é v.3; Isa.43. 
5,6. 


? 


Ff Deut.32.32; 
Isa.1.9,10. 


& v.21; 
Jer.14.14. 


h Job 15.8; 
1 Cor.2.16. 


t Jer.30.24, 
j Gen.49.1. 


k Jer.14.14; 
27.15; 29.9. 


1 Psa.139.7; 
Amos 9.2,3. 


m1 Ki.8.273 
Psa.139.8. 


796 


the inhabitants thereof as Gomor- 
rah. ; 

15 Therefore thus saith the Lorp 
of hosts concerning the prophets; 
Behold, I will feed them with worm, 
wood, and make them drink the 
water of gall: for from the prophets 
of Jerusalem is profaneness gone 
forth into all the land. 

16 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
Hearken not unto the words of the 
prophets that prophesy unto you: 
they make you vain: sthey speak a 
vision of their own heart, and not 
out of the mouth of the Lorp: 

17 They say still unto them that 
despise me, The Lorp hath said, 
Ye shall have peace; and they say 
unto every one that walketh after 
the imagination of his own heart, 
No evil shall come upon you. 

18 For “who hath stood in the 
counsel of the Lorb, and hath per- 
ceived and heard his word? whc 
hath marked his word, and heard. 
it? 


19 Behold, a whirlwind of the 


LORD is gone forth in fury, even a 
grievous whirlwind: it shall fall 
grievously upon the head of the 
wicked. 

20 *The anger of the Lorp shall 
not return, until he have executed) 
and till he have performed the 
thoughts of his heart: jin the latter 
days ye shall consider it perfectly. 

21 *I have not sent these proph- 
ets, yet they ran: I have not spoken 
to them, yet they prophesied, 

22 But if they had stood in my 
counsel, and had caused my pecple 
to hear my words, then they should 
have turned them from their evil 
way, and from the evil of their 
doings. : 

23. Am Ia God at hand, saith the 
Lorp, and not a God afar off? 

24 !Can any hide himself in secret 
places that I shall not see him? 
saith the Lorp. ™Do not I flr 
heaven and earth? saith the Lorp. 

25 I have heard what the proph- 
ets said, that prophesy lies in my 
mame, saying, I have dreamed, I 
have dreamed. 

26 How long shall this be in the 
heart of the prophets that prophesy 
lies? yea, they are prophets of the 
deceit of their own heart; , 

27 Which think to cause my peo- 
ple to forget my name by their 
dreams which they tell every man 
to his neighbour, as their fathers 


have forgotten my name for Baal. 


aa 


23 28] 


28 The prophet that hatha dream, 

let him tell a dream; and he that 
hath my word, let him speak my 
word faithfully. What is the chaff 
to the wheat? saith the Lorb. 

29 Is not my word like as a fire? 
saith the LorD; and like a hammer 
that breaketh the rock in pieces? 

30 Therefore, behold, “I am 
against the prophets, saith the 
Lorp, that steal my words every 
one from his neighbour. 

31 Behold, I am against the 
prophets, saith the LORD, that use 
their tongues, and say, He saith. 

32 Behold, I am against them 
that prophesy false dreams, saith 
the LorpD, and do tell them, and 
cause my people to err by their 
lies, and by their lightness; yet 
I sent them not, nor commanded 
them: therefore they shall not profit 
this people at all, saith the LorD. 

33 And when this people, or the 
prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, 
saying, “What is the burden of the 
Lorp? thou shalt then say unto 
them, What burden? I will even 
forsake you, saith the LORD. 

34 And as for the prophet, and 
the priest, and the people, that shall 
say, The burden of the Lorn, I 
will even punish that man and his 
house. 

35 Thus shall ye say every one to 
his neighbour, and every one to his 
brother, What hath the LORD an- 
swered? and, What hath the LORD 
spoken? 

36 And the burden of the LorD 


shall ye mention no more: for every} 


man’s word shall be his burden; 
for ye have perverted the words of 
the living God, of the Lorp of 
hosts our God. 

37 Thus shalt thou say to the 
prophet, What hath the LORD an- 
swered thee? and, What hath the 
LorRD spoken? ; 

38 But since ye say, The burden 
of the Lorp; therefore thus saith 
the LoRD; Because ye say this 
word, The burden of the Lorp, 
and I have sent unto you, saying, 
Ye shall not say, The burden of 
the LORD; 

39 Therefore, behold, I, even I, 
dwill utterly forget you, and I will 
forsake you, and the city that I 
gave you and your fathers, and 
cast you out of my presence: 

40 And I will bring an everlast- 
ing reproach upon you, and a per- 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.14.14, 
: 5; Deut.18. 


b Zeph.3.4.. ~ > 


¢ Mal.1.1... ~ 

d Hos.4.6. 

| eJer.23°39,40. 

f Parables 
(O.T.). 
vs.1-10; 
Jer.27.1-7. 
(Jud.9.7-15; 


Zech.11. 
7-14.) 


g 2 Ki.24.12; 
2 Chr.36.10. 


h Jer.12.15; 
29.10. 


4 Deut.30.6; 
Ezk.11.19; 
36.26,27. 


j Jer.30.22; 
31.33; 32.38. 


k Jer.15.4; 
29.18; 34.17; 
Deut.28.25, 
37; 1 Ki.9.7; 
2 Chr.7.20. 


petual shame, which shall not bel 


forgotten. 


797 


[24 10 


CHAPTER 24. 


The sign of the figs (vs. 1-3). 
Judah yet to be restored, ‘but 
not they of the second de- 
portation (vs. 4-10). 


HE Lorp shewed me, and, be- 
hold, ftwo baskets of figs were 
set before the temple of the Lorp, 
after that Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon had carried away captive 
Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king 
of Judah, and the princes of Judah, 
with the carpenters and smiths, 
from Jerusalem, and had brought 
them to Babylon. 

2 One basket had very good figs, 
even like the figs that are first 
ripe: and the other basket had very 
naughty figs, which could not be 
jeaten, they were so bad. 

3 Then said the LoRD unto me, 
What seest thou, Jeremiah? And 
I said, Figs; the good figs, very 
good; and the evil, very evil, that 
cannot be eaten, they are so evil. 

4 Again the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

5 Thus saith the LoRD, the God of 
Israel; Like these good figs, so will 
I acknowledge them that are carried 
away captive of Judah, whom I have 
sent out of this place into the land 
of the Chaldeans for their good. 

6 For I will set mine eyes upon 
them for good, and “I will bring 
them again to this land: and I will 
build them, and not pull them 
down; and I will plant them, and 
not pluck them up. , 

7 And I will give them ‘an heart 
to know me, that I am the LorD: 
and they shall be ¥my people, and I 
will be their God: for they shali 
return unto me with their whole 
heart. 

8 And as the evil figs, which can- 
not be eaten, they are so evil; surely 
thus saith the LorD, So will I give 
Zedekiah the king of Judah, and 
his princes, and the residue of Je- 
rusalem, that remain in this land, 
and them that dwell in the land of 
Egypt: | ; 

9 And “I will deliver them to be 
removed into all the kingdoms of 
the earth for their hurt, to be a re- 
proach and a proverb, a taunt and 
a curse, in all places whither I shall 
drive them. 

10 And I will send the sword, the 
famine, and the pestilence, among 
them, till they be consumed from off 
the land that I gave unto them and 
to their fathers. 


12504] JEREMIAH. 


CHAPTER 25. 


Prophecy of the seventy years’ 
captivity (vs. 1-14. Cf. Dan. 9. 


) 


2 
ee word. that came to’ Jeremiah 
concerning all the people of Ju- 
dah 4in the fourth year of Jehoiakim 
the son of Josiah king of Judah, 


them, and make them an astonish 
ment, and an hissing, and perpetu 
desolations. 

10 Moreover I will take from 
them the voice of mirth, and the 
voice of gladness, the voice of the 
bridegroom, and the voice of the 
bride, the sound of the millstones, 
and the light of the candle. 


that was the first year of Nebu- 11 And this whole land shall be a 
chadrezzar king of Babylon; desolation, and an astonishment: 
2 The which Jeremiah the pro- and these nations shall serve the 
phet spake unto all the people of |king of Babylon !seventy years. — 


Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jer.36.1 12 And it shall come to pass, when” 
Jerusalem, saying, BJeE0-2s seventy years are accomplished, 
3 From the thirteenth year of Jo-|6 Jer.18.11; that I will punish the king of Baby- 
siah the son of Amon king of Judah,| 35-15; lon, and that nation, saith the 


even unto this day, that /s the three joe Lorn, for their iniquity, «and the 
and twentieth year, the word of the land of the Chaldeans, ‘and will 
LorpD hath come unto me, and I lee jmake it perpetual desolations. 
pave apes Se you, rising early| 39731’ : ' A es I will bring upon Ree: 
and speaking; but ye have not an my words which I have 
hearkened. 5 d ss proiouinted Meena it, even all that 
4 And the Lorp hath sent unto] 44’9g! 484. 1S written in this book, which Jere- 
you all his servants the prophets,| -~ ’ "” ~_|miah hath prophesied against all 
Tising early and sending them; but] ¢ Te ian the nations. ; 
ye have not hearkened, nor inclined 47.1; Jer.50. | 14 For many nations and great 
your ear to hear. ; 3,13,23,39, |kings shall serve themselves of them 
5S They said, ‘Turn ye again now| 40.45; 51. also: and I will recompense them 


every one from his evil way, and sept according to their deeds, and accord- 
from the evil of your doings, and|fJob 21.20; ing to the works of their own hands. 
dwell in the land that the Lorp| Psa.75.8; 


hath given unto you and to your Popa. The sign of the wine cup of fury 


fathers for ever and ever: (vs. 15-38). 
6 And go not after other gods to|£ eG ie 15 For thus saith the Lorp God 
ee Bas = hens aw yet Nahi. {Of qe pets pie aes 
O anger wi cup o is fury at my hand, an 
ee works ot ag hands; and I will Hee eae the pies to whom ] 
0 you no hurt. sen ee, to drink it. 
7 Yet ye have riot hearkened unto 16 And &they shall drink, and be 
me, saith the Lorpb; that ye might moved, and be mad, because of the 
provoke me to anger with the sword that I will send among them. 
pos of your hands to your own a then abe 4 the cup at the 
urt. ORD’S hand, and made alf th - 
8 Therefore thus saith the Lorp tions to drink, unto whom the Tae 
of hosts i Because ye have not heard aS sat me: 
my words, 8 Towit, Jerusalem, and the cit- 
9 Behold, I will send and take all ies of Judah, aad the leites ticreor 
the families of the north, saith the and the princes thereof, to make 
re ar Sat Ra Gate ira 4 ts page Se git an astonishment, 
i : , ¢my servant, an an hissing, and a : it 7 
will bring them against this land, this dupe” oe ated ae 
and against the inhabitants thereof, 19 Pharaoh king of Egypt, and 
and against all these nations round his servants, and his princes, and 
about, and will utterly destroy all his péople: 


decree of Cyrus for the return (Ezra 1. 1-3), B.c. 534 (Assyr. Ep. Canon B.c 
536 (Ussher). In the second case the 70 years terminate B.C. 516 (Assyr. ey Cana 


with the completion of the temple. The latter is th i 
Eiicht cr pcckone Pp is the more probable reckoning 
798 


/ 


r 
25 20] 


20 And all the mingied people, 
and all the kings of the land of Uz, 
and all the kings of the land of the 
Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Az- 
gah, and Ekron, and the remnant 
of Ashdod, 

21 Edom, and Moab, and the 
children of Ammon, 

22 And all the kings of Tyrus, 
and all the kings of Zidon, and the 
kings of the isles which are be- 
yond the sea, 

23 Dedan,and Tema, and Buz, and 
‘all that are in the utmost corners, 


24 And all the kings of Arabia, 
and all the kings of the mingled 
people that dwell in the desert, 

25 And all the kings of Zimn, and 
all the kings of Elam, and all the 
kings of the Medes, 

26 And all the kings of the north, 
far and near, one with another, and 
all the kingdoms of the world, 
which are upon the face of ,the 
earth: and the king of 9Sheshach 
shall drink after them. 

27 Therefore thou shalt say unto 
them, Thus saith the LoRD of hosts, | 
the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be 
drunken, and spue, and fall, and 
rise no more, because of the sword 
which I will send among you. 

28 And it shall be, if they refuse 
to take the cup at thine hand to 
drink, then shalt thou say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lorp. of 

hosts; Ye shall certainly drink. 

29 For, lo, I begin to bring evil on 
the city which is called by my 
name, and should ye be utterly un- 
punished? Ye shall not be unpun- 
ished: for <I will call for a ¢sword 
upon tall the inhabitants of the 
earth, saith the LorD of hosts. 

30 Therefore prophesy thou 
against them all these words, and 
say unto them, The Lorp shall| 
roar from on high, and utter his 
voice from his holy habitation; he 
shall mightily ‘roar upon his habita- 
tion; he shall give a shout, as they 
that tread the grapes, against all 
the inhabitants of the earth. 

31 A noise shall come even to the 
ends of the earth; for the LORD 
hath a fcontroversy with the na- 


tions, She will plead with all flesh;! 


he will give them that are wicked 


to the sword, saith the Lorp. 


JEREMIAH. 


ai.e. coasts. 


b> A name for 
Babylon. 
Jer.51.41. 


c Day (of Je- 
hovah). 
vs.29-38; 
Ezk.30.3. 
(Isa.2.10-22; 
Rev.19.11- 
21.) 


d Armaged- 
don (battle 


of). vs.29-33; 


Ezk.38.1-39. 
16. (Rev.16. 
14; 19.11- 
21.) 


e Isa.42.13; 
Joel 3.16; 
Amos 1.2. 


Ff Hos.4.1; 
Mic.6.2. 


g Isa.66.16; 
Joel 3.2. 


h 1sa.66.16. 


t Ezk.3.10; 
Mt.28.20. 


j Zech.8.14, 
note. 


32 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
Behold, evil shall go forth from na- 
tion to nation, and a great whirl- 
wind shall be raised up from the 


fend of the earth: they shall not be 
lamented, neither gathered, nor 
buried; they shall be dung upon 
the ground. 

34 Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; 
and wallow yourselves in the ashes, 
ye principal of the flock: for the 
days of your slaughter and of your 
dispersions are accomplished; and 
ye shail fall like a pleasant vessel. 

35 And the shepherds shall have 
no way to flee, nor the principal of 
the flock to escape. 

36 A voice of the cry of the Shep- 
herds, and an howling of the prin- 
cipal of the flock, shall be heard: 
for the LorD hath spoiled their 
pasture. 

37 And the peaceable habitations 
are cut down because of the fierce 
anger of the LORD. 

38 He hath forsaken his covert, as 
the lion: for their land is desolate 
because of the fierceness of the op- 
pressor, and because of his fierce 
anger. 


CHAPTER 26. 


The message in the temple court 
(vs.1-19). (Cf. Jer. 7. 1, note.) 


WN the beginning of the reign of 

Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king 

of Judah came this word from the 
LORD, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorp; Stand in 
the court of the LorRpD’s house, and 
speak unto all the cities of Judah, 
which come to worship in the 
Lorp’s house, ‘all the words that I 
command thee to speak unto them; 
diminish not a word: 

3 If so be they will hearken, and 
turn every man from his evil way, 
that I may Jrepent me of the evil, 
which I purpose to do unto them 
because of the evil of their doings. 

4 And thou shalt say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lorb; If ye will not 
hearken to me, to walk in my law, 
which I have set before you, 


1 The scope of this great prophecy cannot be limited to the invasion of Nebuchad- 
nezzar. If Jehovah does not spare His own city, should the Gentile nations imagine 


that there is no judgment for them? 


The prophecy leaps to the very end of this 


age. (See “Day of the Lorn,” Isa. 2, 10-22; Rev. 19. 11-21; “Armageddon,” Rev. 


16. 14; 19, 11-21.) 


799 


26 5] 


5 To hearken to the words of my 
servants the prophets, whom I sent 
unto you, both rising up early, and 
sending them, but ye have not 
hearkened; 


¢Shiloh, and will make this city a 
curse to all the nations of the earth. 

7 So the priests and the prophets 
and all the people heard Jeremiah 
speaking these words in the house 
of the Lorp. 

8 Now jit came to pass, when J: ere- 
miah had made an end of speaking 
all that the Lorp had commanded 
him to speak unto all the people, 
that the priests and the prophets 
and all the people took him, saying, 
Thou shalt surely die. q 

9 Why hast thou prophesied in 
the name of the LorD, saying, This 
house shall be like Shiloh, and this 
city shall be desolate without an 
inhabitant? And all the people were 
gathered against Jeremiah in the 
house of the Lorp. 

10 When the princes of Judah 
heard these things, then they came 
up from the king’s house unto the 
house of the Lorp, and sat down 
in the entry of the new gate of the 
Lorp’s house. 

11 Then spake the priests and the 
prophets unto the princes and to 
all the people, saying, This man is 
worthy to die; for he hath prophe- 
sied against this city, as ye have 
heard with your ears. 

12 Then spake Jeremiah unto all 
the princes and to all the people, 
saying, The Lorp sent me to 
prophesy against this house and 
against this city all the words that 
ye have heard. 

13 Therefore now amend your 
ways and your doings, and obey 
the voice of the LorD your God: 
and the Lorp will trepent him of 
the evil that he hath pronounced 
against you. 

14 As for me, behold, I am in 
your hand: do with me as seemeth 
good and meet unto you. 

15 But know ye for certain, thatif 
ye put me to death, ye shall surely 
bring innocent blood upon your- 
selves, and upon this city, and upon 
theinhabitants thereof: for ofa truth 
the Lorp hath sent me unto you to 
speak all these words in your ears. 

16 Then said the princes and all 
the people unto the priests and to 
the prophets; This man is not wor- 
thy to die: for he hath spoken to us 
in the name of the LorD our God, 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.7.12,14; 
1 Sam.4.10, 
11; Psa.78. 
60. 


6 Zech.8.14, 


nore. 
¢ Mic.1.1. 
4 Mic.3.12. 


e Psa.19.9, 
note, 


Ff Jer.39.14; 
2 Ki.22.12,14. 


g Parables 
(O.T.). 
vs.1-7; 
Ezk.17.1-14. 
(Jud.9.7-15; 


Zech.11.7- 
14.) 


800 


17 Then rose up certain of the 
elders of the land, and spake to all 
the assembly of the people, saying, 

18 ‘Micah the Morasthite prophe- 
sied in the days of Hezekiah king 
of Judah, and spake to all the peo- 
ple of Judah, saying, Thus saith 
the LorpD of hosts; ¢Zion shall be 
plowed Iike a field, and Jerusalem 
shall become heaps, and the moun- 
tain of the house as the high places 
of a forest. 

19 Did Hezekiah king of Judah 
and all Judah ‘put him at all to 
death? did he not ‘fear the Lorp, 
and besought the Lorp, and the 
Lorp érepented him of the evil 
which he had pronounced against 
them? Thus might we procure great 
evil against our souls. 


Martyrdom of Urijah (vs. 20-24). 


20 And there was also a man that 
prophesied in the name of the 
LORD, Urijah the son of Shemaiah 


lof Kirjath-jearim, who prophesied 


against this city and against this 
land according to all the words of 
Jeremiah: 

21 And when Jehoiakim the king, 
with all his mighty men, and all 
the princes, heard his words, the 
king sought to put him to death: 
but when Urijah heard it, he was 
afraid, and fled, and went into 


gypt; 

22 And Jehoiakim the king sent 
men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan 
the son of Achbor, and certain 
men with him into Egypt. 

23 And they fetched forth Urijah 
out of Egypt, and brought him unto 
Jehoiakim the king: who slew 
him with the sword, and cast his 
dead body into the graves of the 
common people. 

24 Nevertheless /the hand of Ahi- 
kam the son of Shaphan was with 
Jeremiah, that they should not give 
him into the hand of the people to 


put him to death. 


CHAPTER 27. 


The sign of the yokes (vs. 1-11): 
to surrounding Gentile kings. 


1X the beginning of the reign ot 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king 

of Judah came this word unto Jere- 

miah from the Lorp, 8saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorp to me: 
Make thee bonds and yokes, and 
put them upon thy neck, 

3 And send them to the king of 
Edom, and to the king of Moab, and 


to the king of the Ammonites, and 
to the king of Tyrus, and to the 
king of Zidon, by the hand of the 
messengers which come to Jerusa- 
lem unto Zedekiah king of Judah; 

4 And command them to say unto 
their masters, Thus saith the LoRD 
of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus 
shall ye say unto your masters; 

5 I have made the earth, the man 
and the beast that are upon the 
ground, by my great power and by 
my outstretched arm, and have 
given it unto whom it seemed meet 
unto me. 

6 And now have I given all these 
lands into the hand of Nebuchad- 
nezzar the king of Babylon, “my 
servant; and the beasts of the field 
have I given him also to serve him. 

7 And all nations shali serve him, 
and his son, and his son’s son, °un- 
til the very time of his land come: 
and then many nations and great 
kings shall serve themselves of 


him. : 

8 And it shall come to pass, that 
the nation and kingdom which will 
not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar 
the king of Babylon, and that will 
not put their neck under the yoke 
of the king of Babylon, that nation 
will I punish, saith the LorD, with 
the sword, and with the famine, and 
with the pestilence, until I have 
consumed them by his hand. 

9 Therefore hearken not ye to 
your prophets, nor to your divin- 
ers, nor to your dreamers, nor to 
your enchanters, nor to your sor- 
cerers, which speak unto you, say- 
ing, Ye shall not serve the king of 
Babylon: 

10 For they prophesy a lie unto 
you, to remove you far from your 
Jand; and that I should drive you 
out, and ye should perish. : 

11 But the nations that bring 
their neck under the yoke of the 
king of Babylon, and serve him, 
those will I let remain still in their 
own land, saith the LorpD; and they 
shall till it, and dwell therein. 


(The sign of the yokes, contin- 
ued: to King Zedekiah.) 


12 I spake also to Zedekiah king 
of Judah according to all these 
words, saying, Bring your necks 
under the yoke of the king of Baby- 
jon, and serve him and his people, 
and live. 

13. Why will ye die, thou and thy 
people, by the sword, by the famine, 
and by the pestilence, as the LORD 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.25.9; 43. 


10; Ezk.29. 
18,20. 


b Jer.25.12; 
50.27; 


2 Chr.36. 


d Jer.52.17, 


20,21; 2 Ki 
25.13. 


e Jer.24.1; 
2 Ki.24. 
14,15. 


f 2 Ki.25 13; 


2 Chr.36.18. 


g Jer.29.10; 


32.5; 
2 Chr.36.21. 


h Ezra 1.7; 
7.19. 


801 


[28 1 


hath spoken against the nation that 
will not serve the king of Babylon? 

14 Therefore hearken not unto the 
words of the prophets that speak 
unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve 
the king of Babylon: for they 
prophesy a lie unto you. 

15 ForI have not sent them, saith 
the Lorb, yet they prophesy a lie 
in my name; that I might drive you 
out, and that ye might perish, ye, 
and the prophets that prophesy 
unto you. 

16 Also I spake to the priests and 
to all this people, saying, Thus 
saith the Lorp; Hearken not to the 
words of your prophets that proph- 
esy unto you, saying, “Behold, the 
vessels of the LorpD’s house shall 
now shortly be_brought again from 
Babylon: for they prophesy a lie 
unto you. 

17 Hearken not unto them; serve 
the king of Babylon, and live: 
wherefore should this city be laid 
waste? 

18 But if they be prophets, and if 
the word of the LorpD be with them, 
let them now make intercession to 
the Lorp of hosts, that the vessels 
which are left in the house of the 
Lorpb, and in the house of the king 
of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not 
to Babylon. 

19 For thus saith the Lorp of 
hosts ¢concerning the pillars, and 
concerning the sea, and concerning 
the bases, and concerning the resi- 
due of the vessels that remain in 
this city, 

20 Which Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon took not, when he car- 
ried away “captive Jeconiah the son 
of Jehoiakim king of Judah from 
Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the 
nobles of Judah and Jerusalem; 

21 Yea, thus saith the Lorp of 
hosts, the God of Israel, concerning 
the vessels that remain in the house 
of the Lorp, and in the house of 
the king of Judah and of Jerusalem; 

22 They shall fbe carried to Baby- 
lon, and there shall they be until 
the day that ¢I visit them, saith the 
Lorp; then /will I bring them up,, 
and restore them to this place. 


CHAPTER 28. 


(Sign of the yokes, continued: 
the false prophecy and death 
of Hananiah.) 

ND it came to pass the same 
year, in the beginning of the 
reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in 


JEREMIAH. | [29 : 


the fourth year, and in the “fifth 
month, that Hananiah the son of 
Azur the prophet, which was of 
Gibeon, spake unto me in the house 
of the Lorp, in the presence of the 
priests and of all the people, say- 
ing, 

2 Thus speaketh the Lorp of 
hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I 
have broken “the yoke of the king 
of Babylon. 

_3 Within two full years will I 
bring again into this place all the 
vessels of the LORD’s house, that 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
took away from this place, and car- 
tied them to Babylon: | 

4 And I will bring again to this : 
place Jeconiah the son of Jehoia-} jmiah unto Hananiah the prophet, 
kim king of Judah, with all the Hear now, Hananiah; The Lorp 
captives of Judah, that went into/*‘¢- August. |hath not sent thee; “but thou mak- 
Babylon, saith the Lorp: for I will}, yer.2712, . \est this people to ‘trust in a lie. 
break the yoxe of the king of Baby- : 16 Therefore thus saith the LorbD; 
lon. ci Ki.1.36. Behold, I will cast thee from off the 

5 Then the prophet Jeremiah said]; peutig.22. |face of the earth: this year thou 
unto the prophet Hananiah in the shalt die, because thou hast taught 


came unto Jeremiah the prophet, 
after that Hananiah the prophet 
had broken ‘the yoke from off the 
neck of the prophet Jeremiah, say- 
ing, 

13 Go and tell Hananiah, saying, 
Thus saith the Lorp; Thou hast 
broken the yokes of wood; but thou 
shalt make for them yokes of iron. 

14 For thus saith the LorpD of 
hosts, the God of Israel; *I have put 
a yoke of iron upon the neck of all 
these nations, that they may serve 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; 
and they shall serve him: and I 
have given him the beasts of the 
field also. 

15 Then said the prophet Jere- 


presence of the priests, and in the| ¢ Jer-27.7. Tebellion against the LorpD. 
presence of all the people that stood] + yer.27.2. 17 So Hananiah the prophet died 
in the house of the Lorb, the same year in the Jseventh 
6 Even the prophet Jeremiah/¢ Saath a month. 
said, ‘Amen: the Lorp do so: the| Deut-28-48- 
LorD pants te - words which]: Jer.29.31 ; CHAPTER 29. 
ha fe) ied, ri in| ©2k-13.22. 
fic yoke oF the Lomaeire| . tuoak pene Fispeeds selene wien 
and all that is carried away captive,| note. rst captivity (vs. ). 
from Babylon into this place. ee 4 Noe these are the words of the 
7 Nevertheless hear thou now this|?#* October- letter that Jeremiah the pro- 
word that I speak in thine ears, and|& Jer.22.26: phet sent from Jerusalem unto the 
in the ears of all the people; 2 Ki.24.12. |pesidue of the elders which were 


8 The prophets that have been) 
before me and before thee of old 
prophesied both against many! 
countries, and against great king-| 
doms, of war, and of evil, and of 
pestilence. 

9 ¢The prophet which prophesieth| 
of peace, when the word of the 
prophet shall come to pass, then 
shall the prophet be known, that 
the LorD hath truly sent him. 

10 Then Hananiah the prophet 
took the yoke from off the prophet 
Jeremiah’s neck, and brake it. 

11 And Hananiah spake in the 
presence of all the people, saying, 
Thus saith the Lorb; Even so willl 
I break the yoke of Nebuchad-! 
nezzar king of Babylon ‘from the} 
neck of all nations within the space 
of two full years. And the prophet 
Jeremiah went his way. 

12 Then the word of the Lorp| 


lcarried away captives, and to the 
priests, and to the prophets, and to 
all the people whom WNebuchad- 
nezzar had carried away captive 
from Jerusalem to Babylon; 

2 (After that *Jeconiah the king, 
and the queen, and the eunuchs, 
the princes of Judah and Jeru- 
salem, and the carpenters, and the 
smiths, were departed from Jeru- 
salem:;) 

3 By the hand of Elasah the son 
of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son 
of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of 
Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebu- 
chadnezzar king of Babylon) say- 
ing, 

4 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
the God of Israel, unto all that are 
carried away captives, whom I have 
jcaused to be carried away from 
jJerusalem unto Babylon; 

5 Build ye houses, and dwell in 


'Cf. 2 Ki. 24. 10-16. The complete captivity of Judah came eleven years later 
(2.525. 1-7). 
802 


29 6] 


them; and plant gardens, and eat 
the fruit of them; 

6 Take ye wives, and beget sons 
and daughters; and take wives for 
your sons, and give your daughters 
to husbands, that they may bear 
sons and daughters; that ye may be 
increased there, and not diminished. 

7 And seek the peace of the city 
whither I have caused you to be 
carried away captives, “and pray 
unto the Lorp for it: for in the 
peace thereof shall ye have peace. 

8 For thus saith the Lorp of 
hosts, the God of Israel; Let not 
your prophets and your diviners, 
that be in the midst of you, @de- 
ceive you, neither hearken to your 
dreams which ye cause to be 
dreamed. 

9 For they prophesy falsely unto 
you in my name: I have not sent 
them, saith the LoRD. 

10 For thus saith the LorbD, That 
cafter seventy years be accomplished 
at Babylon I will visit you, and per- 
form my good word toward you, in 
causing you to return to this place. 

11 For I know the thoughts that I 
think toward you, saith the Lorpb, 
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, 
to‘give you an expected end. 

12 ¢Then shall ye call upon me, 
and ye shall go and pray unto me, 
and I will hearken unto you. 

13° And ¢ye shall seek me, and find 
me, when ye shall search for me 
with all your heart. 

14 fAnd I will be found of you, 
saith the Lorp: and I will turn 
away your captivity, and 41 will 
gather you from all the nations, 
and from all the places whither I 
have driven you, saith the Lorp; 

“and I will bring you again into the 
place whence I caused you to be 
carried away captive. 

15 Because ye have said, The 
Lorp hath raised us up prophets 
in Babylon; 

16 Know that thus saith the 
Lorp of the king that sitteth upon 
the throne of David, and of all the 
people that dwelleth in this city, 
and of your brethren that are not 
gone forth with you into captivity; 

17. Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
Behold, I will send upon them the 
sword, the famine, and the pesti- 
lence, and will make them like vile 
figs, that cannot be eaten, they are 
so evil. : 

18 And I will persecute them with 
the sword, with the famine, and 
with the pestilence, and /will de- 


JEREMIAH. 


a Ezra 6.10; 
1 Tim.2.2. 


b Jer.14.14; 
23.21; 27.14, 
15; Eph.5.6. 


¢ Jer.25.12; 
27.22; 


e Lev.26.39, 
40,42; Deut. 
30.1-3. 


f Deut.4.7; 
Psa.32.6; 
46.1; Isa. 
55.6. 


g Jer.23.3,8; 
30.3; 32.37. 


h Jer.15.4; 
24.9; 34.17; 
Deut.28.25; 
2 Chr.29.8. 


i See Gen. 
48.20;. 
Isa.65.15. 

j Dan.3.6. 


k Jer.21.1; 
2 Ki.25.18, 


12 Ki.9.11; 
Acts 26.24. 


803 


[29 28 


liver them to be removed to all 
the kingdoms of the earth, to be a 
curse, and an astonishment, and an 
hissing, and a reproach, among all 
the nations whither I have driven 
them: 

19 Because they have not heark- 
ened to my words, saith the LorbD, 
which I sent unto them by my ser- 
vants the prophets, rising up early- 
and sending them; but ye would 
not hear, saith the LorpD. 

20 Hear ye therefore the word of 
the Lorp, all ye of the captivity, 
whom I have sent from Jerusalem 
to Babylon: 

21 Thus saith the LorD of hosts, 
the God of Israel, of Ahab the son 
of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah the son 
of Maaseiah, which prophesy a lie 
unto ‘you in my name; Behold, I 
will deliver them into the hand of 


; |Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; 


and he shall slay them before your 
eyes; 

22 And ‘of them shall be taken up. 
a curse by all the captivity of Judah 
which are in Babylon, saying, The 
LorpD make thee like Zedekiah and 
like JAhab, whom the king of Baby- 
lon roasted in the fire; 

23 Because they have committed 
villany in Israel, and have com- 
mitted adultery with their neigh- 
bours’ wives, and have spoken 
lying words in my name, which I 
have not commanded them; even 
I know, and am a witness, saith 
the LORD. 

24 Thus shalt thou also speak to 
Shemaiah the Nehelamite, saying, 

25 Thus speaketh the LorpD of 
hosts, the God of Israel, saying, 
Because thou hast sent letters in 
thy name unto all the people that 
are at Jerusalem, and “to Zepha- 
niah the son of Maaseiah the priest, 
and to all the priests, saying, 

26 The Lorp hath made thee 
priest in the stead of Jehoiada the 
priest, that ye should be officers 
in the house of the LORD, for every 
man that is ’mad, and maketh him- 
self a prophet, that thou shouldest 
put him in prison, and in the 
stocks. 

27 Now therefore why hast thou 
not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, 
which maketh himself a prophet to 
you? 

28 For therefore he sent unto us 
in Babylon, saying, This captivity 
is long: build ye houses, and dwell 
in them; and plant gardens, and 
eat the fruit of them. 


29 29} 


JEREMIAH. 


[30 18 


29 And Zephaniah the priest read 
this letter in the ears of Jeremiah 
the prophet. : 

30 Then came the word of the 
LorD unto Jeremiah, saying, 

31 Send to all them of the cap- 
tivity, saying, Thus saith the Lorp 
concerning Shemaiah the Nehela- 
mite; Because that Shemaiah hath 
prophesied unto you, and I sent 


B.C. 606. 


him not, and he caused you to trust | 
in a lie: 

32 Therefore thus saith the Lorp: 
Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the 
Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall 
not have a man to dwell among this 
people; neither shall he behold the 
good that I will do for my people, 
saith the LorD; because he hath 
taught rebellion against the Lorp. 


PART II. PROPHECIES NOT CHRONOLOGICAL: 
CHAPTERS 30.-36. 


CHAPTER 30. 


Jeremiah’s first writing. (Cf. Jer. 
36. 1-23, 28.) Summary of Israel 
in the tribulation (Jer. 30. 
1-31. 40)... 


‘THE tword that came to Jere- 
miah from the LorRD, saying, 

2 Thus speaketh the Lorp God 
of Israel, saying, 7Write thee all the 
“words that I have spoken unto 
thee in a book. 

3 For, lo, the days come, saith the 
Lorp, that °I will bring again the 
captivity of my people Israel and 
Judah, saith the Lorp: and I will 
cause them to return to the land 
that I gave to their fathers, and 
they shall possess it. 

4 And these are the words that 
the Lorp spake concerning Israel 
and concerning Judah. 

5 For thus saith the Lorp; We 
have heard a voice of trembling, of 
fear, and not of peace. 

6 Ask ye now, and see whether a 
man doth “travail with child? 
wherefore do I see every man with 
his hands on his loins, as a woman 
in travail, and all faces are turned 
into paleness? 

7 Alas! for ¢that day is great, so 
that none is like it: it 7s even the 
time of Jacob’s trouble, but he shall 
be saved out of it. 

8 For it shall come to pass in that 
day, saith the Lorn of hosts, that I 
will break his yoke from off thy 


a Inspiration. 
Jer.36.1-32. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


b Israel. 
(prophecies). 
vs.1-9; 
Jer.31.7-14, 
31-40. (Gen. 
12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


¢ Mic.5.1, 
note. 


d Tribulation 
(the great). 
(Psa.2.5; 
Rev.7.14.) 

e Kingdom 
(O.T.). 
vs.7-9; 
Jer.33.14-17. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


f Isa.55.3,4; 
Ezk.34.23; 


g Jer.3.18. 
h Amos 9.8. 


t Jer.15.18; 
2 Chr.36.16. 


1 The writings of Jeremiah in Chapters 30. 
Certain dates are men 
but retrospectively. The narrative, so far 
€ These chapters constitute 
cerning Israel as a nation, looking on espec 
LoRD, and the kingdom-age to follow. 
followed the order will become clear. 

much historical matter concerning Jere 


in consecutive order. 


sumed at 37. 1. 


Three “writings” 
is impersonal—a 
destroyed by Jehoiakim. 
the writing preserved to us, 


as 


804 


and probably the earliest. 
(3) The destroyed writing re-written (36. 27), doubtless 


neck, and will burst thy bonds, and 
strangers shall no more serve them- 
selves of him: 

9 «But they shall serve the Lorp 
their God, and ‘David their king, 
whom I will raise up unto them. 

10 Therefore fear thou not, O my 
servant Jacob, saith the Lorp: 
neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, 
lo, I will save thee from afar, and 
thy seed from the éland of their 
captivity; and Jacob shall return; 
and shall be in rest, and be quiet, 
and none shall make him afraid. 

11 For I am with thee, saith the 
LORD, to save thee: ‘though I make 
a full end of all nations whither I 
have scattered thee, yet will I riot 
make a full end of thee: but I will 
correct thee in measure, and will not 
leave _thee altogether unpunished. 

12. For thus saith the Lorb, ‘Thy 
bruise rs incurable, and thy wound 
is grievous. 

13 There is none to plead thy 
cause, that thou mayest be bound 
up: thou hast no healing medi- 
cines. 

14 All thy lovers have forgotten 
thee; they seek thee not; for I have 
wounded thee with the wound of an 
enemy, with the chastisement of a 
cruel one, for the multitude of thine 
iniquity; because thy sins were in- 
creased. 

15 Why criest thou for thine afflic- 
tion? thy sorrow is incurable for 
the multitude of thine iniquity: 


~36. cannot with certainty be arranged 
tioned (e.g. 32. 1; 33.1 


> 34.29,18; BOUl)s 


Jeremiah gives a narrative, is re- 


a kind of summary of prophecy con- 
ially to the last days, the day of the 
If the marginal references are carefully 
But these prophecies are interspersed with 
miah and his time. 
by Jeremiah are to be distinguished: 
general prophecy, 


(1) 30. 1-31. 40. 


This 
(2) 


1. 1-36. 23, 


30 16] 


because thy sins were increased, I 
have done these things unto thee. 

16 Therefore all they that devour 
thee 4shali be devoured; and all 
thine adversaries, every one of 
them, shall go into captivity; and 
they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, 
and all that prey upon thee will I 
give for a prey. 

17 4For I will restore health unto 
thee, and I will heal thee of thy 
wounds, saith the LorD; because 
they called thee an Outcast, say- 
ing, This is Zionj whom no man 
seeketh after. 

18 Thus saith the LorD; Behold, 
I will bring again the captivity of 
Jacob’s tents, and have mercy on 
his dwellingplaces; and the city 
shall be builded upon her own heap, 
and the palace shall remain after 
the manner thereof. 

19 And out of them shall proceed 
thanksgiving and the voice of them 
that make merry: and I will muliti- 
ply them,.and they shail not be 
few: I will also glorify them, and 
they shail not be small. 

20 Their children also shall be as 
aforetime, and their congregation 
shall be established before me, and 
I will punish all that oppress them. 

21 And their nobles shall be of 
themselves, and their governor shall 
proceed from the midst of them; 
and I will cause him to draw near, 
and he shall approach unto me: 
for who is this that engaged his 
heart to approach unto me? saith 
the LorD. 

22 And ye shall be ‘my people, 
and I will be your God. 

23 Behold, the whirlwind of the 
“orp goeth forth with fury, a con- 
tinuing whirlwind: it shall fall with 
pain upon the head of the wicked. 

24 The fierce anger of the LORD 
shall not return, until he have done 
it, and until he have performed the 
intents of his heart: in the latter 
days ye shall consider it. 


CHAPTER 31. 
Summary: Israelin the Jast days. 


JT the same time, saith the 

Lorp, will I be the God of all 

the families of Israel, and they shall 
be my people. 

2 Thus saith the LorD, The peo- 
ple which were left of the sword 
found grace in the wilderness; even 
Israel, when I went to cause him 
to rest. 

3 The Lorp hath appeared of old 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 606. 


a Jer.10.25; 
Ex.23.22; 
Isa.33.1; 
41.11. 


b Jer.33.6. 


c Jer.24.7; 
31.1,33;,32. 
38; Ezk.11. 
20; 36.28; 
37.27. 


d Remnant. 


e Israel (pro- 
phecies). 
vs.7-14, 31- 
40; Ezk.36. 
22-38. (Gen. 
12:23:81 
Rom.11.26.) 

fi.e. coasts. 


g Ex.14.30, 


note; Isa.59. 


20, note. 


h Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). Isa. 
59.20, note. 


805° 


[31 14 


unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved 
thee with an everlasting love: 
therefore with lovingkindness have 
I drawn thee. 

4 Again I will build thee, and 
thou shalt be built, O virgin of Is- 
rael: thou shalt again be adorned 
with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth 
in the dances of them that make 
merry. 

5 Thou shalt yet plant vines upon. 
the mountains of Samaria: the 
planters shall plant, and shall eat 
them as common things. 

6 Forthere shall bea day, that the 
watchmen upon the mount Ephraim 
shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up 
to Zion unto the LorD our God. 

7 For thus saith the Lorp; Sing 
with gladness for Jacob, and shout 
among the chief of the nations: 
publish ye, praise ye, and say, O 
LorpD, save thy people, the ¢rem- 
nant of Israel. 

8 Behold, I will bring them from 
the north country, and gather them 
from the coasts of the earth, and 
with them the blind and the lame, 
the woman with child and her that 
travaileth with child together: a 
great company shall return thither. 

9 They shall come with weeping, 
and with supplications will I lead 
them: I will cause them to walk by 
the rivers of waters in a straight 
way, wherein they shall not stum- 
ble: for I am a father to Israel, and 
Ephraim is my firstborn. 

10 Hear the word of the Lorp, O 
ye nations, and declare it in the 
fisles afar off, and say, He that 
scattered Israel will gather him, 
and keep him, as a shepherd doth 
his flock. 

11 For the Lorp hath sredeemed 
Jacob, and ‘ransomed him from the 
hand of him that was stronger 
than he. 

12 Therefore they shall come and 

sing in the height of Zion, and shall 
flow together to the goodness of the 
Lorp, for wheat, and for wine, and 
for oil, and for the young of the 
flock and of the herd: and their 
soul shall be as a watered garden; 
and they shall not sorrow any more 
at all. : 
13 Then shall the virgin rejoice in 
the dance, both young men and old 
together: for I will turn their 
mourning into joy, and will com- 
fort them, and make them rejoice 
from their sorrow. 

14 And I will satiate the soul of 
the priests with fatness, and my 


31 15] 


people shall be satisfied with my 
goodness, saith the Lorb. : 

15 Thus saith the LoRD; A voice 
was heard in Ramah, lamentation, 
and bitter weeping; Rahel “weep- 
ing for her children refused to be 
comforted for her children, because 
they were not. y 

16 Thus saith the LorD; Refrain 
thy voice from weeping, and thine 
eyes from tears: for thy work shall 
be rewarded, saith the LorpD; and 
they shall come again from the 
land of the enemy. 

17 And there is hope in thine end, 
saith the Lorb, that thy children 
shall come again to their own 
border. « 

18 I have surely heard Ephraim 
bemoaning himself thus; Thou 
hast chastised me, and I was chas- 
tised, as a bullock unaccustomed 
to the yoke: turn thou me, and I 
shall be turned; for thou art the 
LorD my God. 

19 Surely after that I was turned, 
I ‘repented; and after that I was 
instructed, I smote upon my thigh: 
I was ashamed, yea, even con- 
founded, because I did bear the re- 
proach of my youth. 

20 Js Ephraim my dear son? fs he 
a pleasant child? for since I spake 
against him, I do earnestly remem- 
ber him still: therefore my bowels 
are troubled for him; I will surely 


have mercy upon him, saith the 
LorpD. 

21 Set thee up waymarks, make 
thee high heaps: set thine heart 
toward the highway, even the way 
which thou wentest: turn again, O 
virgin of Israel, turn again to these 
thy cities. 

22 How long wilt thou go about, 
O thou backsliding daughter? for 


the Lorp hath created a new thing 
in the earth, A woman shall com- 
pass a man. 

23 Thus saith the Lorn of hosts, 
the God of Israel; As yet they shall 
use this speech in the land of Judah 
and in the cities thereof, when I 
shall bring again their captivity; 
The Lorp bless thee, O habitation 
of justice, and mountain of holi- 
ness. 

24 And there shall dwell in Judah 
itself, and in all the cities thereof 
together, husbandmen, and they 
that go forth with flocks. 

25 For I have satiated the weary 
soul, and I have replenished every 
sorrowful soul. 

26 Upon this I awaked, and be- 


JEREMIAH. 


a Mt.2.18. 


6 Zech.8.14, 
note. 


¢ vs.31-34; 
Heb.8.8-12. 


d Covenant 
(New). 
vs.31-34; 
Jer.32.37-40. 
(Isa.61.8; 
Heb.8.8-12.) 


e Wife (of Je- 
hovah). 
Hos.2.1-23. 
(Isa.54.5; 
Hos.2.1-23.) 


F vs.33,343 
Heb.10.16, 
17. 


8 Forgive- 
mess. 
Isa.38.17. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 


hk Jer.33.20; 
Psa.148.6; 
Isa.54.9,10. 


@ Jer.33.22. 


806 


[31 37 


held; and my sleep was sweet unto 
me. 

27 Behold, the days come, saith 
the LorD, that I will sow the house 
of Israel and the house of Judah 
with the seed of man, and with the 
seed of beast. 

28 And it shall come to pass, that 
like as I have watched over them, 
to pluck up,- and to break down, 
and to throw down, and to destroy, 
and to afflict; so will I watch over 
them, to build, and to plant, saith 
the Lorp. 

29 In those days they shall say 
no more, The fathers have eaten a 
sour grape, and the children’s teeth 
are set on edge. 

30 But every one shall die for his 
own iniquity: every man that eat- 
eth the sour grape, his teeth shall 
be set on edge. 

31 ‘Behold, the days come, saith 
the Lorp, that I will make a new 
dcovenant with the house of Israel, 
and with the house of Judah: 

32 Not according to the covenant 
that I made with their fathers in 
the day that I took them by the 
hand to bring them out of the land 
of Egypt; which my covenant they 
brake, although I was an ‘husband 
unto them, saith the Lorp: 

33 But this shal/ be the covenant 
that I will make with the house of 
Israel; After those days, saith the 
Lorp, I will put my /law in their 
inward parts, and write it in their 
hearts; and will be their God, and 
they shall be my people. 

34 And they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbour, and every 
man his brother, saying, Know the 
Lorp: for they shall all know me, 
from the least of them unto the 
greatest of them, saith the Lorp: 
for I will ‘forgive their iniquity, 
and I will remember their sin no 
more. 


35 Thus saith the Lorp, which 
giveth the sun for a light by day, 
and the ordinances of the moon and 
of the stars for a light by night, 
which divideth the sea when the 
waves thereof roar; The Lorp of 
hosts is his name: 

36 "If those ordinances depart 
from before me, saith the Lorp, 
then the seed of Israel also shall 


.jcease from being a nation before 


me for ever. 

37 Thus saith the Lorp; ‘If hea- 
ven above can be measured, and the 
foundations of the earth searched 
out beneath, I will also cast off all 


en 


> 


31 38] JEREMIAH... [32 18. 


the seed of Israel for all that they 
have done, saith the Lorb. 

38 Behold, the days come, saith 
the LorbD, that the city shall be 
built to the Lorp “from the tower 
of Hananeel unto the gate of the 
corner. 

39 And “the measuring line shall 
yet go forth over against it upon 
the hill Gareb, and shall compass 
about to Goath. 

40 And the whole valley of the 
dead bodies, and of the ashes, and 
all the fields unto the brook of 


8 So Hanameel mine uncle’s son 
came to me in the court of the 
prison according to the word of the 
Lorp, and said unto me, Buy my 
field, I pray thee, that 7s in Ana- 
thoth, which fs in the country of 
Benjamin: for the right of inheri- 
tance zs thine, and the redemption 
is thine; buy 7f for thyself. Then 
I knew that this was the word of 
the Lorb. 

9 AndI !bought the field of Hana- 
meel my uncle’sson, that wasin Ana- 
thoth, and weighed him the money, 


Kidron, ‘unto the corner of the even seventeen shekels of silver. 
horse gate toward the east, ¢shal/ 10 And I subscribed the evidence, 
be holy unto the Lorp; it shall and sealed it, and took witnesses, 
not be plucked up, nor thrown down!4 ete and weighed him the money in the 

any more for ever. ——- |balances: 

b Ezk.40.8; 11 So I took the evidence of the 
CHAPTER 32. Zech.2.1. eer on both that which was 
5 _|¢2Chr.23.15; |Sealed according to the law and 
The sign of the field of Hana-)°3,G573"° custom, and that which was open: 


meel: Jeremiah’s second per- 12 And I ° 
: E [ gave the evidence of the 
scoution. (Cf. Jer. 20. 1-18; 37.}d Joel 3.17. purchase unto Baruch the son of 
: i e Jer.39.1; Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the 
HE word that came to Jere-| 2 Ki-25-1,2- {sight of Hanameel mine uncle’s son, 
miah from the LoRD 4in the] ;Lev.2s.24, |and in the presence of the /wit- 
tenth year of Zedekiah king of Ju-| 25,32; Ruth |nesses that subscribed the book of 


dah, which was the eighteenth year} +-4- the purchase, before all the Jews 
Seer enters” ey [1a And T cursed Basactonarora 
en the kin a = 2s. 9d., Cc € 
army besieged Pucnieeet Sandtenes G5 cts. them, saying, ; apr 
pach the prapect was shut a in] j, See Isa.8.2. he nee — cp nis hosts, 
t t of th i hic t od of Israe! - 
‘ Rahs Ling of Fitetvs ince: nas en oe deneess te evidence of the pur. 
3 For Zedekiah king of Judah had| %6%45'‘Gen. |Chase, both which is sealed, an 
shut him up, saying, Wherefore ei ™ |this evidence which is open; and 


dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus eee put them in an earthen vessel, that 
saith the LORD, Behold, I will give|7 “~~” 9-15. |they may continue many days. 
this city into the hand of the king|& Gen.18.14; 15 For thus saith the Lorp of 
of Babylon, and he shall take it; Lk.1.37. hosts, the God of Israel; Houses 
4 And Zedekiah king of Judah]; px 206; and fields and vineyards shall be 
shall pot escape ce mM ue neat 34 Ta Dette possessed again in this land. 
the Chaldeans, but shall surely be} »-7> : 
delivered into the hand of the king A prayer of sere aer 
of Babylon, and shall speak with 16 Now when I had delivered the 
evidence of the purchase unto 


him mouth to mouth, and his eyes é 
Baruch the son of Neriah, I ‘prayed 


shall behold his eyes; 
5 And he shall lead Zedekiah to unto the LORD, saying, 
17 Ab Teor Lord. G9 ! _behold, Jthou 


Babylon, and there shall he be 

until I visit him, saith the Lorp: hast, “made. eaven ~ and™ “the 

though ye fight with the Chaldeans, €art an “Ereaty Dower “and 
Stretc a tts 


ye shall not prosper. c 

6 And Jeremiah said, The word of nothing too”hard” for theer’™ 
the LorD came unto me, saying, 18 Thow_ ‘Shewest “Hovingkindness 
7 Behold, Hanameel the son of unto thousands, and recomipensést 
thé iniquity of the fathers into the 


Shallum thine uncle shall come unto 
thee, saying, Buy thee my field that bosom of their children after them: 
the Great, the Mighty God, the 


is in Anathoth: for fthe right of re- 
demption is thine to buy it. LORD of | hosts,” “4s his” hame, 


1 A (1) sign of Jeremiah’s faith in his own predictions of the restoration of Judah 
(v. 15), for the field was then occupied by the Babylonian army; and (2) a sign to 
Judah of that coming restoration. 
807 


tii, and ethere ds" 


Meop 19 Grea de counsel and mighty 
=~, in.wofk: for, 


in.work eyes are open 
~ apon all tnewbee or the sons of 


32 19] 


JEREMIAH. 


men: to give every one according 
to his ways, and according to the 
fruit of his doings: 

20 Which hast set signs and 
wonders in the land of Egypt, even 
unto this day, and in Israel, and 
among other men; and hast made 
thee a name, as at this day; 

21 And ¢hast brought forth thy 
people Israel out of the land of 
Egypt with signs, and with won- 
ders, and with a strong hand, and 
with a stretched out arm, and with 
great terror; 

22 And hast given them this land, 
which thou didst swear to their 
fathers to give them; a 4land flow- 
ing with milk and honey; 

23 And they came in, and pos- 
sessed it; but they obeyed not thy 
voice, neither walked in thy law; 
they have done nothing of all that 
thou commandedst them to do: 
therefore thou hast caused all this 
evil to come upon them: 

24 Behold the ‘mounts, they are 
come unto the city to take it; and 
the city is given into the hand of 
the Chaldeans, that fight against it, 
because of the sword, and of the 
famine, and of the pestilence: and 
what thou hast spoken is come to 
pass; and, behold, thou seest 7¢#. 

25 And thou hast said unto me, O 
Lord Gop, Buy thee the field for 
money, and take witnesses; for the 
city is given into the hand of the 
Chaldeans. 


The answer of Jehovah. 


26 Then came the word of the 
Lord unto Jeremiah, saying, 

27 Behold, I am the Lorp, the 
IGod of all flesh: is there any thing 
too hard for me? f 

28 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; 
Behold, I will give this city into 
the hand of the Chaldeans, and into 
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar’ king 
of Babylon, and he shall take it: 

29 And the Chaldeans, that fight 


against this city, shall come and set}. 


fire on this city, and burn it with 
the houses, upon whose roofs they 
have offered incense unto Baal, and 
poured out drink-offerings unto 
other gods, to provoke me to anger. 

30 For the children of Israel and 
the children of Judah have only 
done evil before me from their 
youth: for the children of Israel 
have only provoked me to anger 


if 


a Jer.16.17; 
Job 34.21; 
Psa.33.13; 
Prov.5.21. 


6 Ex.9.16; 
1 Chr.17.21; 
Isa.63.12; 
Dan.9.15. 


c Ex.6.6; 
2 Sam.7.23; 
1. Chr.17.21; 
Psa.136.11, 
123 


d Jer.11.5; 
Ex,3.8,17. 


e Or, engines 
of shot. 


f Num.16.22. 
g 2 Ki.23.27. 


kh Isa.1.4,6; 
Dan.9.8. 


i Ley.18.21; 
1 Ki.11,33. 


j Jer.23.3; 
29.14; 31.10; 
Deut.30.3; 

2k.37.21. 


k Jer.24.7; 
30.22; 31.33. 


1 Jer.24.7; 
Ezk.11.19, 
20. 


m Covenant 
(New). 
vs.37-40; 
Jer.50.4,5. 
(Isa.61.8; 
Heb.8.8-12.) 


n Psa.19.9, 
note, 


o Deut.30.9; 
Zeph.3.17. 


b Jer.24.6; 
31.28; 
Amos 9.15, 


a) ee 
[32 41 


with the work of their hands, saith ; 


the LORD. 


31 For this city hath been to me 


as a provocation of mine anger and 
of my fury from the day that they 
built it even unto this day; éthaz 
I should remove it from before my 
face, 

32 Because of all the evil of the 
children of Israel and of the chil- 
dren of Judah, which they have 
done to provoke me to anger, they, 
their kings, their princes, their 
priests, and their prophets, and the 
men of Judah, and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem. 

33 And they have turned unto me 
the back, and not the face: though 
I taught them, rising up early and 
teaching them, yet they have not 
hearkened to receive instruction. 

34 But they set their abomina- 
tions in the house, which is called 
by my name, to defile it. 

35 And they built the high places 
of Baal, which are in the valley of 
the son of Hinnom, to cause their 
sons and their daughters to pass 
through the fire unto ‘Molech; 
which I commanded them not, 
neither came it into my mind, that 
they should do this abomination, 
to cause Judah to sin. 

36 And now therefore thus saith 
the Lorp, the God of Israel, con- 
cerning this city, whereof ye say, 
It shall be delivered into the hand 
of the king of Babylon by the sword, 
and by the famine, and by the pes- 
tilence; : ° 

37 Behold, JI will gather them out 
of all countries, whither I have 
driven them in mine anger, and 
in my fury, and in great wrath; 
and I will bring them again unto 
this place, and I will cause them to 
dwell safely: 

38 And “they shall be my people, 
and I will be their God: 

39 And I will ’give them one 
heart, and one way, that they may 
fear me for ever, for the good of 
them, and of their children after 
them: 

40 And I will make an *everlast- 
ing covenant with them, that I will 
not turn away from them, to do 
them good; but I will put my “fear 
in their hearts, that they shall not 
depart from me. 

41 Yea, I will crejoice over them 
to do them good, and I will plant 
them in this land assuredly with my 
piney heart and with my whole 
soul. 


32 42] 


42 For thus saith the Lorp; ¢Like 
as I have brought ail this great evil 
upon this people, so will I bring 
upon them all the good that I have 
promised them. 

43 And fields shall be bought in 
this land, whereof ye say, It is 
desolate without man or beast; it 
is given into the hand of the Chal- 
deans. 

44 Men shall buy fields for money, 
and subscribe evidences, and seal 
them, and take witnesses 4in the 
land of Benjamin, and in the places 
about Jerusalem, and in the cities 
of Judah, and in the cities of the 
mountains, and in the cities of the 
valley, and in the cities of the south: 
for <I will cause their captivity to 
return, saith the LorD. 


CHAPTER 33. 


The great prophecy concerning 
the Davidic Kingdom. (Cf. 
2 Sam. 7. 8-16.) 


OREOVER the word of the 
LORD came unto Jeremiah the 
second time, ¢while he was yet shut 
up in the court of the prison, saying, 
2 Thus saith the LORD the maker 
thereof, the Lorp that formed it, to 
establish it; the LorD 1s his name; 
3 ¢Call unto me, and I will answer 
thee, and shew thee great and 
mighty things, which thou know- 
est not. 
.4 For thus saith the LorpD, the 
God of Israel, concerning the houses 
‘of this city, and concerning the 
houses of the kings of Judah, which 
are thrown down by the mounts, 
and by the sword; 
+5 They come to fight with the 
Chaldeans, but it rs to fill them 
with the dead bodies of men, whom 
I have slain in mine anger and in 
my fury, and for all whose wicked- 
a I have hid my face from this 


a Y Behold, I will bring it health 
and cure, and I will cure them, and 
will reveal unto them the abun- 
dance of peace and truth. 

7 fAnd I will cause the captivity 
of Judah and the captivity of Israel 
to return, and will build them, as 
at the first. 

8 And I will scleanse them from all 
their iniquity, whereby they have 
sinned against me; and I will par- 
don all their iniquities, whereby 


1 See ‘““‘Davidic Covenant”’ (2 Sam. 7 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 590. 


@ Jer.31.28. 

b Jer.17.26. 

¢ Jer.33.7, 
1,26. 


d Cf. Jer.37. 
11, note. 


e Jer.29.12; 
Psa.91.15. 


f-v.11;. Jer. 
30.3; 32.44. 


g Ezk.36.25; 
Zech.13.1; 
Heb.9.13,14. 

h Jer.7. oe 16. 
9; 25 
Rey. ik. 33. 

i ast: oe 24; 
inal 168. 10. 

j Kingdom 
(O.T.). 
vs.14-17; 
Ezk.11.14- 


20.(Gen.1.26; 


Zech.12.8.) 


k Isa.4.2, 
note. 


1 Heb. 
Jehovah- 
tsidkenu. 


m 2 Sam.7.16; 


1 Ki.2.4; 
Poa. 89.29,36; 
Lk.1.32,33. 


[33 17 


they have sinned, and whereby they 
have transgressed against me. 

9 And it shall be to me a name of 
joy, a praise and an honour before 
all the nations of the earth; which 
shall hear all the good that I do 
unto them: and they shall fear and 
tremble for all the goodness and 


for all the prosperity that I procure 


unto it. 

10 Thus saith the Lorp; Again 
there shall be heard ih this place, 
which ye say shall be desolate with- 
out man and without beast, even 
in the cities of Judah, and in the 
streets of Jerusalem, that are deso- 
late, without man, and without in- 
habitant, and without beast, 

11 #The voice of j joy, and the voice 

of gladness, the voice of the bride- 
groom, and the voice of the bride, 
the voice of them that shall say, 
Praise the Lorp of hosts: for the 
Lorp is good; for his mercy en- 
dureth for ever: and of them that 
shall bring the sacrifice of praise 
into the house of the Lorp. ForI 
will cause to return the captivity of 
the land, as at the first, saith the 
Lorp. 
12 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
Again in this place, which is deso- 
late without man and without 
beast, and in all the cities thereof, 
shall be an habitation of shepherds 
causing their flocks to lie down. 

13 In the cities of the mountains, 
in the cities of the vale, and in the 
cities of the south, and in the land 
of Benjamin; and in the places 
about Jerusalem, and in the cities of 
Judah, shall the flocks pass again 
under the hands of him that telleth 
them, saith the Lorp, 

14 Behold, the days come, saith 
the LorpD, that I will perform that 
good thing which I have promised 
unto the house of Israel and to the 
house of Judah. 

15 lIn those days, and at that 
time, will I cause the *Branch of 
righteousness to grow up unto Da- 
vid; and he shall execute judgment 
and righteousness in the land. 

16 In those days shall Judah be 
saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell 
safely: and this is the name where- 
with she shall be called, ‘The LorpD 
our righteousness. 

17 For thus saith the LorD; David 
shall never “want a man to sit upon 
the throne of the house of Israel; 


8-17, note); ‘Kingdom (O.T.)” (Gen.1.26; 


Zech. 12. 8, note); “Kingdom (N.T.)” (Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15. 28). 


809 


33 18] 


18 Neither shali the priests the 
Levites want a man before me to 
offer burnt-offerings, and to kindle 
“meat-offerings, and to do sacrifice 
continually. 

19 And the word of the Lorp 
came unto Jeremiah, saying, 

20 Thus saith the LorbD; If ye can 
break my covenant of the day, and 
my covenant of the night, and that 
there should not be day and night 
in their season; 

21 Then may also my covenant 
be broken with Dawid my servant, 
that he should not have a son to 
reign upon his throne; and with the 
Levites the priests, my ministers. 

22 As the host of heaven cannot 
be numbered, neither the sand of 
the sea measured: so will I multi- 
ply the seed of David my servant, 
and the Levites that minister unto 
me. 

23 Moreover the word of the 
LORD came to Jeremiah, saying, 

24 Considerest thou not what this 
people have spoken, saying, The 
two families which the Lorp hath 
chosen, he hath even cast them off? 
thus they have despised my people, 
that they should be no more a na- 
tion before them. 

25 Thus saith the Lorn; °If my 
covenant de not with day and night, 
and if I have not appointed the 
ordinances of heaven and earth; 

26 Then will I cast away the 
seed of Jacob, and David my ser- 
vant, so that I will not take any of 
his seed to be rulers over the seed 
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I 
will cause their captivity to return, 
and have mercy on them. 


CHAPTER 34. 


The message to Zedekiah con- 
cerning his coming captivity. 
(ChPQRKa, 2551-79) 


Ope word which came unto Jere-| 
miah from the Lorp, ¢when 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, 
and all his army, and all the king- 
doms of the earth of his dominion, | 
and all the people, fought against 
Jerusalem, and against all the cities 
thereof, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorb, the God 
of Israel; Go and speak to Zedekiah 
king of Judah, and tell him, Thus 
saith the LorD; Behold, I will give 
this city into the hand of the king 
of Babylon, and he shall burn it 
with fire: 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 590. 


a Lit. meal. 


b v.20; 
Gen.8.22. 


¢ Jer.31.37. 


d Jer.39.1; 
52.4; 


2 Ki.25.1. 
e 2 Ki.18.13; 


19.8; 
2 Chr.11. 
5,9 


810: 


(34 sf 


3 And thou shalt not escape out ? 
of his hand, but shalt surely be 
taken, and delivered into his hand; 
and thine eyes shall behold the eyes 
of the king of Babylon, and he 
shall speak with thee mouth to 
mouth, and thou shalt go to 
Babylon. 

4 Yet hear the word of the Lorpb, 
O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus 
saith the LorpD of thee, Thou shalt 
not die by the sword: 

5 But thou shalt die in peace: and 
with the burnings of thy fathers, 
the former kings which were before 
thee, so shall they burn odours for 
thee; and they will lament thee, 
saying, Ah lord! for-I have pro- 
nounced the word, saith the Lorp. 

6 Then Jeremiah the prophet 
spake all these words unto Zede- 
kiah king of Judah in Jerusalem, 

When the king of Babylon’s 
army fought against Jerusalem, and 
against all the cities of Judah that 
were left, against Lachish, and 
against Azekah: for «these defenced 
cities remained of the cities of 
Judah. 


Zedekiah’s ineffectual decree 
(vs. 8-22). 


8 This isthe word that came unto 
Jeremiah from the Lorp, after that 
the king Zedekiah had made a 
covenant with all the people which 
were at Jerusalem, to proclaim 
liberty unto them: : 

9 That every man should let hi 
Manservant, and every man his 
maidservant, being an Hebrew or 
an Hebrewess, go free; that none 
should serve himself of them, to 
wit, of a Jew his brother. 

10 Now when all the princes, and 
all the people, which had entered 
into the covenant, heard that every 
one should let his manservant, and 
every one his maidservant, go free, 


jthat none should serve themselves 


of them any more, then they 
obeyed, and let them go. 

11 But afterward they turned, 
and caused the servants and the 
handmaids, whom they had let go 
free, to return, and brought them 
into subjection for servants and for 
handmaids. 

12 Therefore the word of the 
LORD came to Jeremiah from the 
LORD, saying, ‘ 

13 Thus saith the Lorp, the God 
of Israel; I made a covenant with 
your fathers in the day that I 
brought them forth out of the land 


34 14] JEREMIAH. [35 33 


CHAPTER 35. 


The obedience of the Rechabites 
in the reign of Jehoiakim. 
(Cf. 2 Ki. 23. 36-24. 5.) 


HE word which came unto 

Jeremiah from the LORD in 
the days of Jehoiakim the son of 
Josiah king of Judah, saying, 

2 Go unto the house of the “Re- 
chabites, and speak unto them, and 
bring them into the house of the 
Lorpb, into one of the chambers, 
and give them wine to drink. 


of Egypt, out of the house of bond- 
men, saying, 

14 At the end of “seven years let 
ye go every man his brother an 
Hebrew, which hath been sold unto 
thee; and when he hath served thee 
six years, thou shalt let him go free 
from thee: but your fathers heark- 
ened not unto me, neither inclined 
their ear. 

15 And ye were now turned, and 
had done right in my sight, in pro- 
claiming liberty every man to his 
neighbour, and ye had made a cove- 


nant before me in the house which 3 Then I took Jaazaniah the son 
is called by my name’ of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, 
16 But ye turned and polluted my and his brethren, and all his sons, 
name, iy 3 eeu soba aia oH we the whole house of the Rechab- 
servant, and every man his hand- ites; 
said, whom he had set at liberty at 4 And I brought them into the 
their pleasure,to return,and brought RON house of the LorpD, into the cham- 
see into so ee ad ae youl DPeut.15-12. Mate Soa sons of gore: en 
or servants and for handmaids. of Igdaliah, a man of God, whic 
17 Therefore thus saith the LorpD;|? sees was by the chamber of the princes, 
Ye have not hearkened unto me, in| Jas.2-13. which was above the chamber of 
“teats Wee every ons "a | cent es ig oe a of Shallum, /the 
s brother, and every man to his -15.10, eeper of the door: : 
neighbour: behold, °I proclaim a oi 5 And I set before the sons of the 
liberty for you, saith the LORD, to/d Jer.9.11, house of the Rechabites pots full 
pie ples to the ea ae to| 44-2,6- Ch Baie ae cups, and I said unto 
e famine; an make you|.2sam.4.2, _|them, Drink ye wine. 
to be removed into all the king-|“ Ls 6 But they said, We will drink no 
doms of the earth. 2 wii 5s |, (pues for Jonadab the son of Re- 
18 And I will give the men that] {Ghroig, |Chab our father commanded us, 
19. saying, Ye shall drink no wine, 


have transgressed my covenant, 1 
which have not performed the 7; Exonevs os ye, nor your sons for ever: 


words of the covenant which they|* Eph.6.2,3. 7 Neither shall ye build house, 
had made before me, “when they nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, 
cut the calf in twain, and passed nor have any: but all your days ye 
between the parts thereof, 

19 The princes of Judah, and the 
princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, 
and the priests, and all the people 

_of the land, which passed between 
the parts of the calf; 

20 I will even give them into the 
hand of their enemies, and into the 
hand of them that seek their life: 
and their dead bodies shall be for 
meat unto the fowls of the heaven, 
and to the beasts of the earth. 

21 And Zedekiah king of Judah 
and his princes will I give into the 
hand of their enemies, and into the 
hand of them that seek their life, 
and into the hand of the king of 
Babylon’s army, which are gone up 
from you. af 

22 Behold, I will command, saith 

the Lorp, and cause them to fre- 
turn to this city, and they shall 
‘fight against it, and take it, and 
burn it with fire: and ¢I will make 
the cities of Judah a desolation 
without an inhabitant. 


shall dwell in tents; that ye may 
live many days in the land where 
ye be strangers. 

8 Thus have we obeyed the voice 
of Jonadab the son of Rechab our 
father in all that he hath charged us, 
to drink no wine all our days, we, our 
wives, our sons, nor our daughters; 

9 Nor to build houses for us to 
dwell in: neither have we vineyard. 
nor field, nor seed: 

10 But we have dwelt in tents, 
and have obeyed, and done accord- - 
ing to all that Jonadab our father 
commanded us. 

11 But it came to pass, when 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
came up into the land, that we said, 
Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for 
fear of the army of the Chaldeans, 
and for fear of the army of the Syri- 
ans: so we dwell at Jerusalem. 

12 Then came the word of the 
Lorp unto Jeremiah, saying, 

13 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
the God of Israel; Go and tell the 


811 


35 14] 


JEREMIAH. 


me P| 


men of Judah and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive 
instruction to hearken to my 
words? saith the Lorp. 

14 The words of Jonadab the son 
of Rechab, that he commanded his 
sons not to drink wine, are per- 
formed; for unto this day they 
drink none, but obey their father’s 
commandment: ¢notwithstanding I 
have spoken unto you, ?rising 
early and speaking; but ye heark- 
ened not unto me. 

15 I have sent also unto you all 
my servants the prophets, rising up 
early and sending them, saying, 
Return ye now every man from his 
evil way, and amend your doings, 
and go not after other gods to serve 
them, and ye shall dwell in the land 
which I have given to you and to 
your fathers: but ye: have not in- 
clined your ear, nor hearkened unto 
me. 

16 Because the sons of Jonadab 
the son of Rechab have performed 
the commandment of their father, 
which he commanded them; but this 
people hath not hearkened unto me: 

17, Therefore thus saith the Lorp 
God of hosts, the God of Israel; Be- 
hold, I will bring upon Judah and up- 
on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
all the evil that I have pronounced 
against them: “because I have 
spoken unto them, but they have 
not heard; and I have called unto 
them, but they have not answered. 

18 And Jeremiah said unto the 
house of the Rechabites, Thus saith 
the Lorp of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael; Because ye have obeyed the 
commandment of Jonadab your fa- 
ther, and kept all his precepts, and 
done according unto all that he 
hath commanded you: 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lorp 
of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab 
the son of Rechab shall not want a 
man to stand before me for ever. 


CHAPTER 36. 


Jeremiah’s writing in the days 
of Jehoiakim, (Cf. vs. 27-32: 
Jer. 30. 2.) 


AN D it came to pass in the fourth 
year of ¢Jehoiakim the son of 
Josiah king of Judah, that this 
‘word came unto Jeremiah from the 
LORD, saying, 

2 Take thee fa roll of a book, and 
write therein all the words that I 
have spoken unto thee against Is- 
rael, and against Judah, and against 


B.C. 607. 


@ 2 Chr.36.15. 
6 Jer.7.13; 
25.3- 


¢ Jer.7.13; 
Prov.1.24; 
Isa.65.12; 
66.4. 


d 2 Ki.23. 
34-37. 


e Inspiration. 


1-32; 


(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


f Isa.8.1; 
Ezk.2.9; 
Zech.5.1. 

g Jer.18.8; 
Jon.3.8. 

h Jer.32.12; 
45.1. 

# Lev.16.29; 
23.27-32; 
Acts 27.9. 


ji.e. Decem- 
ber. 


812 


all the nations, from the day I spake 
unto thee, from the days of Josiah, 
even unto this day. 

3 It may be that the house of 
Judah will hear all the evil which I 
purpose to do unto them; that they 
may éreturn every man from his 
evil way; that I may forgive their 
iniquity and their sin. 

4 Then Jeremiah called *Baruch 
the son of Neriah: and Baruch 
wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah 
all the words of the Lorpb, which 
he had spoken unto him, upon a 
roll of a book. 

5 And Jeremiah commanded Ba- 
ruch, saying, I am shut up; I can- 
not go into the housé of the Lorb: 

6 Therefore go thou, and read in ~ 
the roll, which thou hast written 
from my mouth, the words of the 
LorD in the ears of the people in 
the Lorp’s house upon the ‘fasting 
day: and also thou shalt read them 
in the ears of all Judah that come 
out of their cities. 

7 Itmay be they will present their 
supplication before the LorpD, and 
will return every one from his evil 
way: for great is the anger and the 
fury that the Lorp hath pro- 
nounced against this people. 

8 And Baruch the son of Neriah 
did according to all that Jeremiah 
the prophet commanded him, read- 
ing in the book the words of the 
LorD in the Lorp’s house. F 

9 And it came to pass in the fifth 
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah 
king of Judah, in the Jninth month, 
that they proclaimed a fast before 
the Lorp to all the people in Jeru- 
salem, and to all the people that 
came from the cities of Judah unto 
Jerusalem. 

10 Then read Baruch in the book 
the words of Jeremiah in the house 
of the Lorb, in the chamber of 
Gemariah the son of Shaphan the 
scribe, in the higher court, at the 
entry of the new gate of the Lorp’s 
house, in the ears of all the people. 

11 When Michaiah the son of 
Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had 
heard out of the book all the words 
of the Lorp, 

12 Then he went down into the 
king’s house, into the scribe’s cham- 
ber: and, Jo, all the princes sat 
there, even Elishama the scribe, 
and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, 
and Elnathan the son of Ach- 
bor, and Gemariah the son of Sha- 
phan, and Zedekiah the son of 
Hananiah, and all the princes. 


a ~~ ae , 
36 134 JEREMIAH. [37 2 


13 Then Michaiah declared unto 
them all the words that he had 
heard, when Baruch read the book 
in the ears of the people. 

14 Therefore all the princes sent 
Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the 
son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, 
unto Baruch, saying, Take in thine 
hand the roll wherein thou hast read 
in the ears of the people, and come. 
So Baruch the sonof Neriahtook the 
rollin his hand,andcame unto them. 

15 And they said unto him, Sit 
down now, and read it in our ears. 
So Baruch read it in their ears. 

16 Now it came to pass, wnen 
they had heard all the words, they 
were afraid both one and other, and 
said unto Baruch, We will surely 
tell the king of ail these words. words which Baruch wrote at 

17 And they asked Baruch, say-] . the mouth of Jeremiah, saying, 
ing, Tell us now, How didst thou Rhee S 28 Takethee again anotherroll, and 
write all these words at his mouth? “Ys write init all the former words that 

18 Then Baruch answered them,]|? 2 Ki.22.11; |wereinthefirst roll, which Jehoiakim 
He pronounced all these words unto| 3543°225 the king of Judah hath burned. 
me with his mouth, and I wrote a 29 And thou shalt say to Jehoia- 
them with ink in the book. ¢ Jer.22.30. kim king of Judah, Thus saith the 

19 Then said the princes unto}, Jer.22.19 Lorp: Thou hast burned this roll, 
Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and sk ts saying, Why hast thou written 


king, nor any of-his servants that 
heard all these words. 

25 Nevertheless Elnathan and 
Delaiah and Gemariah had made 
intercession to the king that he 
would not burn the roll: but he 
would not hear them. 

26 But the king commanded Je- 
rahmeel the son of Hammelech, and 
Seraiah the son of Azriel, and She- 
lemiah the son of Abdeel, to take 
Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the 
prophet: but the LorbD hid them. 


The destroyed roll rewritten. 
(Cf. Jer. 30. 2, note.) 


27 Then the word of the Lorp 
came to Jeremiah, after that the 
king had burned the roll, and the 


Jeremiah; and iet no man know therein, saying, The king of Baby- 

where ye be. lon shall certainly come and destroy 
20 And they went in to the king this land, and shall cause to cease 

into the court, but they laid up the from thence man and beast? 

roll in the chamber of Elishama the 30 Therefore thus saith the LorD 

scribe, and told all the words in of Jehoiakim king of Judah; “He 

the ears of the king. shall have none to sit upon the 

21 So the king sent Jehudi to throne of David: and his dead body 
fetch the roll: and he took it out of shali be ¢cast out in the day to the 
Elishama the scribe’s chamber. heat, and in the night to the frost. 
And Jehudi read it in the ears of 31 And I will punish him and his 
the king, and in the ears of all the iseed and his servants for their imiq- 
princes which stood beside the king. uity; and I will bring uponthem, and 

22 Now the king sat in the winter- upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 

house in the ¢ninth month: and and upon the men of Judah, all the 
there was a fire on the hearth evil that I have pronounced against 
burning before him. them; but they hearkened not. 

23 Anditcameto pass, that when 32 Then took Jeremiah another 
Jehudi had read three or four leaves, roll, and gave it to Baruch the 
he cut it with the penknife, and cast scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote 
itintothefirethatwas onthe hearth, therein from the mouth of Jeremiah 
until all the roll -was consumed in all the words of the book which Je- 
the fire that was on the hearth. hoiakim king of Judah had burned 

24 Yet they were not afraid, nor in the fire: and there were added 
brent their garments, neither the besides unto them many like words. 
bse sites are Pee Wines SE Sg a 


PART Il]. FROM THE ACCESSION TO THE CAPTIVITY OF 
ZEDEKIAH: CHAPTERS 37.-39. 


B.c. 599. |Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
made king in the land of Judah. 
¢ Jer.22.24; 2 fBut neither he, nor his ser- 
2€i2417; |vants, nor the people of the land, 
2 Chr.36.10.. |did hearken unto the words of the 
f2chr36,.  |LORD, which he spake by the 
12,14, prophet Jeremiah. 


__ 813 


CHAPTER 37. 


Jeremiah’s imprisonment in the 
days of Zedekiah. (Cf.v. 11, note.) 


ote king ¢Zedekiah the son_of 
Josiah reigned instead of Co- 
niah the son of Jehoiakim, whom 


37 3] JEREMIAH. [38 2 
3 And Zedekiah the king sent) Bc. 509. _|Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought _ 


Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and him to the princes. 3 
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the’ 15 Wherefore the princes were 
priest to the prophet Jeremiah, say- wroth with Jeremiah, and smote 
ing, Pray now unto the LorpD our him, ‘and put him in prison in the 
God for us. house of Jonathan the scribe: for 
4 Now Jeremiah came in and they had made that the prison. 
went out among the people: for they _16 When Jeremiah was. entered 
had not put him into prison. into the dungeon, and into _ the 
5 Then ¢Pharach’s army was cabins, and Jeremiah had remained 
come forth out of Egypt: and when there many days : 
the Chaldeans that besieged Jeru- 17 Then Zedekiah the king sent, 
salem heard tidings of them, they and took him out: and the king 
departed from Jerusalem. asked him secretly in his house, 
6 Then came the word of the and said, Is there any word from 
LorD unto the prophet Jeremiah, the Lorp? And Jeremiah said, 
saying, There is: for, said he, thou shalt 
7 Thus saith the Lorp, the God be delivered into the hand of the 
of Israel; Thus shall ye say to the king of Babylon. 


king of Judah, that eee UNtO] | see Oey hes pees Jeremiah said unto 
me to enquire of me; Behold, Pha-|? \sa047, ing Zedekiah, What have I of- 
raoh’s army, which is come forth to! 15. fended against thee, or against thy 
Predict deadetas wate en acecmeal se pavaaeed peeCA ee, 

8 And the Chaldeans shall come} c Jer.38.26. 19 Where are now your prophets 
again, and fight against this city, which prophesied unto you, saying, 


and take it, and burn it with fire, |¢ Jet32-2; The king of Babylon shall not come 
9 Thus saith the Lorp; Deceive| *°?*?* against you, nor against this 1 a? 
3 » N10) aL £ 
not yourselves, saying, The Chal-|¢ Jer.38.9; 50 Therefore hene now 1 oe 
deans shall surely depart from us:| °?-% thee, O my lord the king: let my 
for they shall not depart. : supplication, I pray thee, be ac- 
10 For though ye had smitten the cepted before thee; that thou cause 
whole army of the Chaldeans that me not to return to the house of 
fight. bape a — there re-| eee pointes I Sots there. 
maine ut wounded men among ; en ekiah the g com- 
them, yet should they rise up every manded that they should commit 
man in his tent, and burn this city Jeremiah ‘into the court of the 
with fire. — ‘ prison, and that they should give 
11 And it came to Ipass, that him daily a piece of bread out of the 
when the army of the Chaldeans bakers’ street, ‘until all the bread in 
i fe i Be from Jerusalem for the city eps ee a ee 
araoh’s army, remained in the court o ison. 
aoe ree Jeremiah went forth out Oat te 
of Jerusalem to go into the land 
of Benjamin, to separate himself CHAPTER 38. 
Har in the midst of the peo- (Jeremiah’s imprisonment, 
13 And when he was in the gate pg nally 
of Benjamin, a captain of the ward Pp Shephatiah the son of 
was there, whose name was Irijah, Mattan, and Gedaliah the son 
the son of Shelemiah, the son of of Pashur, and Jucal the son of 
Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of 
the Ne (eae Thou fallest ree heard the words that 
away to the Chaldeans. ; eremiah had spoken unto all 
14 Then said Jeremiah, I¢ is false; people, saying, 1 ane 


I fall not away to the Chaldeans. 2 Thus saith the Lorpb, He that 
But he hearkened not to him: so remaineth in this city shall die by 


| Five phases of Jeremiah’s prison experiences are recorded: (1) Hei i 
; : € 1s arrested in 
the gate and committed to a dungeon on the false charge of treason (Jer. 37. 11-15); 


of the city; (5) carried in chains from the city by Nebuzar-adan, captain of the 


814 


38 3] 


the sword, by the famine, and by 
the pestilence: but he that goeth 
forth to the Chaldeans shall live; 
for he shall have his life for a prey, 
and shall live. 

3 Thus saith the LorD, *This city 
shall surely be given into the hand 
of the king of Babylon’s army, 
which shall take it. 

4 Therefore the princes said unto 
the king, We beseech thee, “let this 
man be put to death: for thus he 
weakeneth the hands of the men of 
war that remain in this city, and 
the hands of all the people, in speak- 
ing such words unto them: for this 
man seeketh not the welfare of this 
people, but the hurt. 

5 Then Zedekiah the king said, 
Behold, he is in your hand: for the 
king is not he that can do any 
thing against you. 

6 ©Then took they Jeremiah, and 
cast him into the dungeon of Mal- 
chiah the son of Hammelech, that 
was in the court of the prison: and) 
they let down Jeremiah with cords. 
And in the dungeon there was no 
water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk 
in the mire. 

7 4Now when Ebed-melech the 
Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs 
which was in the king’s house, heard 
that they had put Jeremiah in the 
dungeon; the king then sitting in 
the gate of Benjamin; 

8 Ebed-melech went forth out of 
the king’s house, and spake to the 
king, saying, 

9 My lord the king, these men 
have done evil in all that they have 
done to Jeremiah the prophet, 
whom they have cast into the dun- 
geon; and he is like to die for hun- 
ger in the place where he is: for 
aa is no more bread in the 


ar “Then the king commanded 
Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, 
Take from hence thirty men with 
thee, and take up Jeremiah the 
prophet out of the dungeon, before 
he die. 

11 So Ebed-melech took the men 
with him, and went into the house 
of the king under the treasury, and 
took thence old cast clouts and old 
rotten rags, and let them down by 
cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah. 

12 And Ebed-melech the Ethio- 
pian said unto Jeremiah, Put now 
these old cast clouts and rotten 
rags under thine armholes under the 
cords. And Jeremiah did so. 

13 So they drew up Jeremiah with 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 589. 


a Jer.21.10, 
32.3. 


b See Jer.26. 
11. The fun- 
damental 
Treason why 
the prophetic 
warnings of 
the Old and 
New Testa- 
ments are 
unwelcome 
to an unrea- 
soning opti- 
mism. 


6 Jev-Satis 
note. 


d Jer.39.16. 
e Isa.5/.16. 
f 2 Ki.24.12. 
g Jer.39.6; 
41.10. 


hv.18& 


85 


[38 24 


cords, and took him up out of the 
dungeon: and Jeremiah remained 
in the court of the prison. 

14 Then Zedekiah the king sent, 
and took Jeremiah the prophet unto 
him into the third entry that fs in 
the house of the Lorp: and the 
king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask 
thee a thing; hide nothing from 
me. 

15 Then Jeremiah said unto Zede- 
kiah, If I declare zt unto thee, wilt 
thou not surely put me to death? 
and if I give thee counsel, wilt thou 
not hearken unto me? 

16 So Zedekiah the king sware se- 
cretly unto Jeremiah, saying, As the 
Lorp liveth, «that made us this 
soul, I will not put thee to death, 
neither will I give thee into the 
hand of these men that seek thy life. 

17 Then said Jeremiah unto Zede- 
kiah, Thus saith the Lorp, the 
God of hosts, the God of Israel; If 
thou wilt assuredly ‘go forth unto 
the king of Babylon’s princes, then 
thy soul shall live, and this city 
shall not be burned with fire; and 
thou shalt live, and thine house: 

18 But if thou wilt not go forth to 
the king of Babylon’s princes, then 
shall this city be given into the 
hand of the Chaldeans, and they 
shall burn it with fire, and thou 
shalt not escape out of their hand. 

19 And Zedekiah the king said 
unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the 
Jews that are fallen to the Chal- 
ideans, lest they deliver me into 
their hand, and they mock me. 

26 But Jeremiah said, They shall 
not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech 
thee, the voice of the LorD, which I 
speak unto thee: so it shall be well 
unto thee, and thy soul shall live. 

21 But if thou refuse to go forth, 
this 7s the word that the LorD hath 
shewed me: 

22 And, behold, ali the women 
that are left in the king of Judah’s 
house shall be brought forth to the 
king of Babylon’s princes, and those 
women shall say, Thy friends have 
set thee on, and have prevailed 
against thee: thy feet are sunk in 
the mire, and they are turned away 
‘back. 

23 So they shall bring out all thy 
lwives and Sthy children to the 
Chaldeans: and “thou shalt not 
escape out of their hand, but shalt 
be taken by the hand of the king of 
Babylon: and thou shalt cause this 
gee to be burned with fire. 

24 Then said Zedekiah unto Jere- 


miah, Let no man know of these 
words, and thou shalt not die. 

25 But if the princes hear that I 
have talked with thee, and they 
come unto thee, and say unto thee, 
Declare unto us now what thou hast 
said unto the king, hide it not from 
us, and we will not put thee to 
death; also what the king said unto 
thee: 

26 Then thou shalt. say unto 
them, I ¢presented my supplication 
before the king, that he would not 
cause me to return to Jonathan’s 
house, to die there. 

27 Then came all the princes unto 
Jeremiah, and asked him: and he 
told them according to all these 
words that the king had com- 
manded. So they left off speaking 
with him; for the matter was not 
perceived. 

28 So ‘Jeremiah abode in the 
court of the prison until the day 
that Jerusalem was taken: and he 
was there when Jerusalem was 
taken. 


CHAPTER 39. 
The final captivity of Judah. 


(Chao “Ki 5 lore o Chir SG; 
17-21; Jer. 52. 4-17.) 


WN the ¢ninth year of Zedekiah 
king of Judah, in the ¢tenth 
month, came Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon and all his army against 
Jerusalem, and they besieged it. 

2 And in the eleventh year of 
Zedekiah, in the /fourth month, the 
ninth day of the month, the city 
was broken up. 

3 And all the princes of the king 
of Babylon came in, and sat in the 
middle gate, even Nergal-sharezer, 
Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab-saris, 
Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all 
the residue of the princes of the 
king: of Babylon. 

4 sAnd it came to pass, that when 
Zedekiah the king of Judah saw 
them, and all the men of war, then 
they fled, and went forth out of the 
city by night, by the way of the 
king’s garden, by the gate betwixt 
the two walls: and he went out the 
way of the plain. 

S But the Chaldeans’ army pur- 
sued after them, and “overtook 


1 Here began the “times of the Gentiles,”’ 


“trodden down of the Gentiles,” i 
true from the time of Nebuchadn 
(Lk, 21. 24, note; Rey. 16. 19, 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.37.20. 

6 Jer.37.15. 

¢ Jer.37.21; 
39.14. 

d 2 Ki.25.1-4. 

ei.e. January. 

fie. July. 


g Jer.52.7; 
2 Ki.25.4. 


h Jer.32.4; 
38.18,23. 


#2 Ki.23.33. 


j Jer.32.4; 
Ezk.12.13. 


k Jer.38.18; 
2.13; 

2 Ki.25.9. 

t Dan.9.12. 


816 


Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: 
and when they had taken him, they ‘ 
brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon to *Riblah in the 
land of Hamath, where he gave 
judgment upon him. 

6 Then the king of Babylon slew 
the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah 
before his eyes: also the king of 
Babylon slew all. the nobles of 
Judah. i 
_7 Moreover he put out Zedekiah’s 
Jeyes, and bound him with chains, 
to carry him to 1Babylon. 

8 And the *Chaldeans burned the 
king’s house, and the houses of the 
people, with fire, and brake down 
the walls of Jerusalem. 

9 Then Nebuzar-adan the captain 
of the guard carried away captive 
into Babylon the remnant of the 
people that remained in the city, 
and those that fell away, that fell 
to him, with the rest of the people 
that remained. 

10 But Nebuzar-adan the captain 
of the guard left of the poor of the 
people, which had nothing, in the 
land of Judah, and gave them vine- 
yards and fields at the same time. 

11 Now Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon gave charge concerning 
Jeremiah to Nebuzar-adan the cap- 
tain of the guard, saying, 

12 Take him, and look well to 
him, and do him no harm; but do. 
unto him even as he shall say unto 


ee. 

13 So Nebuzar-adan the captain 
of the guard sent, and Nebushas- 
ban, Rab-saris, and Nergal-share- 
zer, Rab-mag, and all the king of 
Babylon’s princes; 


people. 
15 Now the word of the Lorp 
came unto Jeremiah, while he was 
shut up. in the court of the prison, 
Saying, 

16 Go and speak to Ebed-melech 
the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith 
the Lorp of hosts, the God of 
Israel; Behold, ‘I will bring my 
words upon this city for evil, and 
not for good; and they shall be 


the mark of which is that Jerusalem is 
i.e. under Gentile overlordship: This has been 


ezzar to this day. See “Times of the Gentiles” 
note). 


39 17] 


JEREMIAH. 


accomplished in that day before 
thee. 


B.C. 588. 


17 But I will deliver thee in that|¢ 1 Chr.5.20; 


day, saith the Lorp: and thou 


Psa.37.40. 


shalt not be given into the hand of|6 Psa.2.12, 


the men of whom thou arf afraid. 


note. 


18 For I will surely deliver thee, 
and thou shalt not fall by the 
sword, but thy life shall be for a 
prey nto thee: “because thou hast 
put thy %trust in me, saith the 
LORD. 


PART IV. JEREMIAH’S PROPHECIES AMONGST THE REMNANT 
IN THE LAND, AFTER THE CAPTIVITY OF ZEDEKIAH: 
CHAPTERS 40.-42. 


CHAPTER 40. 


HE word that came to Jeremiah 
from the Lorpb, ‘after that 
WNebuzar-adan the captain of the 
guard had let him go from Ramah, 
when he had taken him being 
bound in chains among all that 
were carried away captive of Jeru- 
salem and Judah, which were car- 
Tied away captive unto Babylon. 

2 And the captain of the guard 
took Jeremiah, and said unto him, 
The Lorp thy God hath pro- 
nounced this evil upon this place. 

3 Now the Lorp hath brought if, 
and done according as he hath said: 
“because ye have sinned against 
the LorD, and have not obeyed his 
voice, therefore this thing is come 
upon you, 

4 And now, behold, I loose thee 
this day from the chains which 
were upon thine hand. If it seem 
good unto thee to come with me 
into Babylon, come; and I will look 
well unto thee: but if it seem ill 
unto thee to come with me into 
Babylon, forbear: behold, ¢all the 
land is before thee: whither it seem- 
eth good and convenient for thee to 
go, thither go. 

5 Now while he was not yet gone 
back, he said, Go back also to 
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the 
son of Shaphan, fwhom the king 
of Babylon hath made governor 
over the cities of Judah, and dweil 
with him among the people: or go 
wheresoever it seemeth convenient 
unto thee to go. So the captain of 
the guard gave him victuals and a 
reward, and let him go. 

6 Then went Jeremiah unto Geda- 
liah the son of Ahikam to ¢Mizpah; 
and dwelt with him among the peo- 
ple that were left in the land. 

7 kNow when all the captains of 
the forces which were in the fields, 
even they and their men, heard 
that the king of Babylon had made 
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam gov- 
ernor in the land, and had com- 


B.C. 588. 


¢ Jer.39.14. 

d Deut.29.24, 
25; Dan. 
9:11. 

e Gen.20.15. 

f2 Ki.25.22. 

g Jud.20.1. 

h 2 Ki.25.23. 


i Jer.41.10. 


817 


mitted unto him men, and women, 
and children, and of the poor of the 
land, of thern that were not carried 
laway captive to Babylon; 

8 Then they came to Gedaliah to 
Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jon- 
athan the sons of Kareah, and 
Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, 
and the sons of Ephai the Netoph- 
athite, and Jezaniah the son of a 
Maachathite, they and their men. 

9 And Gedaliah the son of Ahi- 
kam the son of Shaphan sware unto 
them and to their men, saying, Fear 
not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell 
in the land, and serve the king of 
Babylon, and it shall be well with 


you. 

10 As for me, behold, I will dwell 
at Mizpah, to serve the Chaldeans, 
which will come unto us: but ye, 
gather ye wine, and summer fruits, 
and oil, and put them in your ves- 
sels, and dwell in your cities that 
ye have taken. 

11 Likewise when all the Jews 
that were in Moab, and among the 
Ammonites, and in Edom, and that 
were in all the countries, heard that 
the king of Babylon had left a rem- 
nant of Judah, and that he had set 
over them Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam the son of Shaphan; 

12 Even all the Jews returned out 
of all places whither they were 
driven, and came to the land of 
Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, 
and gathered wine and summer 
fruits very much. 

13 Moreover Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were in the fields, came 
to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 

14 And said unto him, Dost thou 
certainly know that ‘Baalis the 
king of the Ammonites hath sent 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to 
slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam believed them not. 

15 Then Johanan the son of Ka- 
reah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah 
secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray 


40 16] 


thee, and I will slay Ishmael the 
son of Nethaniah, and no man shall 
know it: wherefore should he slay 
thee, that all the Jews which are 
gathered unto thee should be scat- 
tered, and the remnant in Judah 
perish? . 

16 But Gedaliah the son of Ahi- 
kam said unto Johanan the son of 
Kareah, Thou shalt net do this 
thing: for thou speakest falsely: of 
Ishmael. 


CHAPTER 41. 


(Jeremiah’s prophecies to the 
remnant in the land, continued.) 


No“ it came to pass in the 2sev- 
enth month, that Ishmael the 
son of Nethaniah the son of Elish- 
ama, of the seed royal, and the 
princes of the king, even ten men 
with him, came unto Gedaliah the 
son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and 
there they did eat bread together 
in Mizpah. 

2 Then arose Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, and the ten men that 
were, with him, and ‘smote Geda- 
liah the son of Ahikam the son of 
Shaphan with the sword, and slew 
him, whom the king of Babylon had 
made governor over the land. 

3 Ishmael also slew all the Jews 
that were with him, even with 
Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chal- 
deans that were found there, and 
the men of war. 

4 And it came to pass the second 
day after he had slain Gedaliah, 
and no man knew it, 

5 That there came certain from 
Shechem, from Shiloh, and from 
Samaria, even fourscore men, hav- 
ing their beards shaven, and their 
clothes rent, and having cut them- 
selves, with offerings and incense 
in their hand, to bring them to 4the 
house of the Lorp. 

6 And Ishmael the son of Netha- 
niah went forth from Mizpah to 
meet them, weeping all along as he 
went: and it came to pass, as he met 


JEREMIAH. 


b Jer.40.8; 
2 Ki.25.25. 


¢ 2 Ki.25.25. 


e 1 Ki.15.22; 
2 Chr.16.6. 


Ff Jer.40.14. 
g 2 Sam.2.13. 


hk 2 Sam.19, 
37,38. 


them, he said unto them, Come to} 


Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. 

7 And it was so, when they came 
into the midst of the city, that Ish- 
mael the son of Nethaniah slew 
them, and cast them into the 
midst of the pit, he, and the men 
that were with him. 

8 But ten men were found among 
them that said unto Ishmael, Slay 
us not: for we have treasures in 
the field, of wheat, and of barley, 


818 


ai.e. October. 


me 


and of oil, and of honey. So he 
forbare, and slew them not among. 
their brethren. 

9 Now the pit wherein Ishmael 
had cast all the dead bodies of the 
men, whom he had slain because 
of Gedaliah, was it ‘which Asa the 
king had made for fear of Baasha 
king of Israel: and Ishmael the son 
of Nethaniah filled it with them 
that were slain. 

10 Then Ishmael carried away 
captive all the residue of the people 
that were in Mizpah, even the 
king’s daughters, and all the people 
that remained in Mizpah, whom 
Nebuzar-adan the captain of the 
guard had committed to Gedaliah 
the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the 
son of Nethaniah carried them away 
captive, and departed to go over to 
the fAmmonites. 

11 But when Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were with him, heard of 
all the evil that Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah had done, 

12 Then they took all the men, 
and went to fight with Ishmael the 
son of Nethaniah, and found him 
by &the great waters that are in 
Gibeon. 

13 Now it came to pass, that 
when all the people which were with 
Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Ka- 
teah, and all the captains of the 
forces that were with him, then 
they were glad. o 

14 So all the people that Ishmael 
had carried away captive from Miz- 
pah cast about and returned, and 
went unto Johanan the son of Ka- 
reah. 

15 But Ishmael the son of Netha- 
niah escaped from Johanan with 
eight men, and went to the Am- 
monites. 
|_16 Then took Johanan the son of 


remnant of the people whom he had 
recovered from Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after 
that he had slain Gedaliah the son 
of Ahikam, even mighty men of 
war, and the women, and the chil- 
dren, and the eunuchs, whom he 
had brought again from Gibeon: 

17 And they departed, and dwelt 
in the habitation of hChimham, 
which is by Beth-lehem, to go to 
enter into Egypt, 

18 Because of the Chaldeans: for 
they were afraid of them, because 
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had 


ih 
42 1 


whom the king of Babylon made 
governor in the land. 


CHAPTER 42 


HEN all the captains of the 

forces, and *Johanan the son 
of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of 
Hoshaiah, and all the people from 
the least even unto the greatest, 
came near, 

2 And said unto Jeremiah the 
prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our 
supplication be accepted before 
thee, and “pray for us unto the 
Lorp thy God, even for all this 
remnant; (for we are left but a few 
of many, as thine eyes do behold 


us:) 

3 That the Lorp thy God may 
shew us ‘the way wherein we may 
walk, and the thing that we may do. 

4 Then Jeremiah the prophet said 
unto them, I have heard you; be- 
hold, I will pray unto the LORD 
your God according to your words; 
and it shall come to pass, that 
dwhatsoever thing the LorD shall 
answer you, I willdeclarezt unto you; 
I will ‘keep nothing back from you. 

5 Then they said to Jeremiah, 
fThe Lorp be a true and faithful 
witness between us, if we do not 
even according to all things for the 
which the LorD thy God shall send 

_ thee to us. 

6 Whether it be good, or whether 
it be evil, we will obey the voice of 
the LorpD our God, to whom we 
send thee; ¢that it may be well with 
us, when we obey the voice of the 
Lorp our God. 

7 And it came to pass after ten 
_days, that the word of the LorD 
came unto Jeremiah. 

8 Then called he Johanan the son 
of Kareah, and all the captains of 
the forces which were with him, 
and all the people from the least 
even to the greatest, 

9 And said unto them, Thus saith 
the Lorpb, the God of Israel, unto 

hom ye sent me to present your 
supplication before him; 

10 If ye will still abide in this land, 
then will I build you, and not pull 
you down, and I will plant you, and 
not pluck you up: for I “repent me 
of the evil that I have done unto 
you. 


JEREMIAH. 
slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, 


a Jer.40.8, 
13; 41.11. 


1sa.37.4; 
Jas.5.16. 


c Ezra 8.21. 
d1 Ki.22.14. 


e 1 Sam.3.18; 
Acts 20.20. 


Ff Gen.31.56: 


g Jer.7.23; 
Deut.6.3- 


h Zech.8.14., 
note. 


t Jer.44.12-14; 
Deut.17.16- 


j Uk.9.51. 
k Ezk.11.8,. 
1 See Jer.44 


| 14,28. 


m Jer.18.16; 
24.9; 26.6; 
29.18; 44.12; 
Zech.8.13. 


n Deut.17.16. 


o v.17; 
Ezk.6.11. 


11 Be not: afraid of the king of] | 


Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be 
not afraid of him, saith the LORD: 
for I am with you to save you, and 
td: deliver you from his hand. 


819 


| 
B.C. 588. 


[42 22 


12 And I will shew mercies unto 
you, that he may have mercy upon 
you, and cause you to return t¢ 
‘your own land. 

' 13 But if ye say, We will not 
jdwell in this land, neither obey the 
voice of the LorD your God, 

14 Saying, No; but we will go into 
the land of Egypt, where we shall 
‘see no war, nor hear the sound of 
the trumpet, nor have hunger of 
bread; and there will we dwell: 

; 15 And now therefore hear the 
word of the LORD, ye remnant of 
Judah; Thus saith the Lorp of 
jhosts, the God of Israel; If ye 
\;wholly set your faces to enter 
into Egypt, and go to sojourn 
there: 

} 16 Then it shall come to pass, 
jthat the sword, “which ye feared, 
shali overtake you there in the land 
of Egypt, and the famine, whereof 
ye were afraid, shall follow close 
after you there in Egypt; and there 
lye shall die. 

| 17 So shall it be with all the men 
jthat set their faces to go into Egypt 
to sojourn there; they shall die by 
the sword, by the famine, and by 
the pestilence: and ‘none of them 
shall remain or escape from the evil ° 
that I will bring upon them. 

18 For thus saith the Lorp of 
hosts, the God of Israel; As mine 
anger and my fury hath been poured 
forth upon the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem; so shall my fury be poured 
forth upon you, when ye shall enter 
into Egypt: and ye shall be an 
mexecration, and an astonishment, 
and a curse, and a reproach; and 
ye shall see this place no more. 
| 19 The Lorp hath said concern- 
ing you, O ye remnant of Judah; 
nGo ye not into Egypt: know cer- 
tainly that I have admonished you 
|this day. 

20 For ye dissembled in your 
hearts, when ye sent me unto the 
Lorp your God, saying, Pray for 
us unto the Lorp our God; and 
according unto all that the Lorp 
our God shall say. so declare unto 
us, and we will do it. 

21 And now I have this day de- 
clared it to you; but ye have not 
obeyed the voice of the LORD your 
God, nor any thing for the which 
he hath sent me unto you. 

22 Now therefore know certainly 
that °ye shall die by the sword, by 
the famine, and by the pestilence, 
in the place whither ye desire to go 
‘and to sojourn. 


43 1] 


JEREMIAH. 


[44 7 


PART V. JEREMIAH’S MINISTRY IN EGYPT: CHAPTERS 43., 44. 


CHAPTER 43. 


Jeremiah carried to Tahpanhes 
in Egypt. 


te it came to pass, that when 
Jeremiah had made an end of 
speaking unto all the people all the 
words of the LorpD their God, for 
which the LorD their God had sent 
him to them, even all these words, 

2 Then “spake Azariah the son of 
Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of 
Kareah, and all the proud men, say- 
ing unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest 
falsely: the LorD our God hath not 
sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt 
to sojourn there: 

3 But Baruch the son of Neriah 
setteth thee orf against us, for to 
deliver us into the hand of the 
Chaldeans, that they might put us 
to death, and carry us away cap- 
tives into Babylon. 

4 So Johanan the son of Kareah, 
and all the captains of the forces, 
and all the people, obeyed not the 
voice of the LorD, to dwell in the 
land of Judah. 

5 But Johanan the son of Kareah, 
and all'the captains of the forces, 
took all the remnant of Judah, that 
were returned from all nations, 
whither they had been driven, to 
dwell in the land of Judah; 

6 Even men, and women, and 
children, and ‘the king’s daughters, 
dand every person that Nebuzar- 
adan the captain of the guard had 
left with Gedaliah the son of Ahi- 
kam the son of Shaphan, and Jere- 
miah the prophet, and Baruch the 
son of Neriah. 

7 So they came into the land of 
Egypt: for they obeyed not the 
voice of the LorpD: thus came they 
even to “Tahpanhes. 


The sign of the hidden stones. 


8 Then came the word of the 
Lorp unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, 
saying, 

9 Take great stones in thine hand, 
and hide them in the clay in the 
brickkiln, which is at the entry of 
Pharaoh’s house in Tahpanhes, in 
the sight of the men of Judah; 

10 And say unto them, Thus saith 
the Lorp of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael; Behold, I will send and take 
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Baby- 
lon, ‘my servant, and will set his 
throne upon these stones that I 


B.C. 588. 


a Jer.42.1. 

b Jer.40,11,12. 

c Jer.41.10. 

d Jer.39.10; 
40.7. 

e Jer.2.16; 
44.1. Called 
Hanes, 


Isa.30.4. 
Ff Jer.25.9; 


g Jer.15.2; 
Zech.11.9. 


h Jer.9.11; 
34.22. 

t Deut.13.6; 
32:17. 

j Jer.7.25; 
25.4; 26.5; 
29.19; 

2 Chr.36.15. 


k Jer.7.19; 
Num.16.38. 


820 


have hid; and he shall spread his 
royal pavilion over them. 

11 And when he cometh, he shall 
smite the land of Egypt, and de- 
liver &such as are for death to 
death; and such as are for captivity 
to captivity; and such as are for 
the sword to the sword. 

12 And I will kindle a fire in the 
houses of the gods of Egypt; and 
he shall burn them, and carry them 
away captives: and he shall array 
himself with the land of Egypt, as 
a shepherd putteth on his garment; 
and he shall go forth from thence 
in peace. 

13 He shall break also the images 
of Beth-shemesh, that is in the land 
of Egypt; and the houses of the 
gods of the Egyptians shall he burn 
with fire. ; 


CHAPTER 44. 
The message tothe Jewsin Egypt. 


14 oh word that came to Jeremiah 
concerning all the Jews which 
dwell in the land of Egypt, which 
dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, 
and at Noph, and in the country of 
Pathros, saying, 

2 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
the God of Israel; Ye have seen all 
the evil that I have brought upon 
Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of 
Judah; and, behold, this day they 
are a ‘desolation, and no man 
dwelleth therein, 

3 Because of their wickedness 
which they have committed to pro- 
voke me to anger, in that they 
went to burn incense, and to ‘serve 
other gods, whom they knew not, 
neither they, ye, nor your fathers. © 

4 Howbeit I sent unto you all 
my servants the prophets, rising 
early and sending them, saying, 
Oh, do not this abominable thing 
that I hate. 

5 But they hearkened not, nor in- 
clined their ear to turn from their 
wickedness, to burn no incense 
unto other gods. 

6 Wherefore my fury and mine 
anger was poured forth, and was 
kindled in the cities of Judah and 
in the streets of Jerusalem; and’ 
they are wasted and desolate, as at 
this day. 

7 Therefore now thus saith the 
Lorp, the God of hosts, the God of 
Israel; Wherefore commit ye this 
great evil “against your souls, to 


ae JEREMIAH. [44 25 


cut off from you man and woman, 
child and suckling, out of Judah, to 
leave you none to remain; 

8 In that ye provoke me unto 
wrath with the works of your hands, 
burning incense unto other gods in 
the land of Egypt, whither ye be 
gone to dwell, that ye might cut 
yourselves off, and that ye might 
be a curse and a reproach among 
ail the nations of the earth? 

9 Have ye forgotten the wicked- 
ness of your fathers, and the wick- 
edness of the kings of Judah, and 
the wickedness of their wives, and 
your own wickedness, and the 
wickedness of your wives, which 
they have committed in the land of 
Judah, and in the streets of Jeru- 
salem? 

10 They are not humbled even 
unto this day, neither have they 
“feared, nor walked in my law, nor 


Lorp, we will not hearken unto 
thee. 

17 But we will certainly do /what- 
soever thing goeth forth out of our 
own mouth, to burn incense unto 
the Squeen of heaven, and to pour 
out drink-offerings unto her, as we 
have done, we, and our fathers, our 


of victuals, and were well, and saw 
no evil. 

18 But since we left off to burn 
incense to the queen of heaven, and 
to pour out drink-offerings unto 
her, we have wanted all things, and 
have been consumed by the sword 
and by the famine. 

19 And when we burned incense 
to the queen of heaven, and poured 
out drink-offerings unto her, did we 
make her cakes to worship her, and 


in my paarioe that ‘- fa before a Peat pos out drink-offerings unto her, 
you and before your fathers. without our men? 

11 Therefore thus saith the Lorp gee 20 Then Jeremiah said unto all 
of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold,] 205.6; ’ |the people, to the men, and to the 


I *will set my face against you for| Amos 9.4. |women, and to all the people which 
evil, and to cut off all Judah. ie had given him that answer, saying, 

12’ And I will take the remnant of| °{$370. 21 The incense that ye burned in 
Judah, that have set their faces to the cities of Judah, and in the 
go into the land of Egypt to sojourn]? Jer-42.18. streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your 
there, and “they shall all be con-|¢ jer.43.11. fathers, your kings, and your 


sumed, and fall in the land of princes, and the people of the land, 
Egypt; they shall even be con-|f Ses Sea did not the LORD remember them, 
sumed by the sword and by the} i214: ° and came it not into his mind? 


famine: they shall die, from the] Deut-23.23; | 22 So that the LorD could no 
least even unto the greatest, by| Jud-1136. {longer bear, because of the evil of 
the sword and by the famine: and] ,see Jud.2, |your doings, and because of the 


éthey shall be an execration, and] 13, note. abominations which ye have com- 
an astonishment, and a curse, and mitted; therefore is your land a 
a reproach. ' desolation, and an astonishment, 
13 For «I will punish them that and a curse, without an inhabitant, 
dwell in the land of Egypt, as I as at this day. : 
have punished Jerusalem, by the 23 Because ye have burned in- 
sword, by the famine, and by the cense, and because ye have sinned 
pestilence: against the Lorp, and_have not 
14 So that none of the remnant obeyed the voice of the LORD, nor 
of Judah, which are gone into the walked in his law, nor in his stat- 
land of Egypt to sojourn there, utes, nor in his testimonies; there- 
shali escape or remain, that they fore this evil is happened unto you, 
should return into the land of as at this day. , ; 
Judah, to the which they have a 24 Moreover Jeremiah said unto 
desire to return to dwell there: for all the people, and to all the women, 
none shall return but such as shall Hear the word of the Lorp, all 
escape. Judah that are in the land of 
15 Then all the men which knew Egypt: : 
that their wives had burned incense 25 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts, 
unto other gods, and all the women the God of Israel, saying; Ye and 
that stood by, a great multitude, your wives have both spoken with 
even ali the people that dwelt in your mouths, and fulfilled with 
the land of Egypt, in Pathros, an- your hand, saying, We will surely 
swered Jeremiah, saying, perform our vows that we have 
16 As for the word that thou hast vowed, to burn incense to the queen 


spoken unto us in the name of the of heaven, and to pour out drink- 


821 


44, 26] 


JEREMIAH. 


[46 9 


offerings unto her: ye will surely] B.C. 5387. _|the land of Egypt into the land of © 


accomplish your vows, and surely 
perform your vows. 

26 Therefore hear ye the word of 
the Lorb, all Judah that dwell in 
the land of Egypt; Behold, oF have 
sworn by my great name, saith the 
Lorp, that “my name shall no more 
be named in the mouth of any man 
of Judah in all the land of Egypt; 
saying, The Lord Gop liveth. 

27 Behold, «I will watch over 
them for evil, and not for good: and 
all the men of Judah that are in the 
land of Egypt shall be consumed by 
the sword and by the famine, until 
there be an end of them. 

28 ¢Yet a small number that es- 


cape the swerd shall return cut of, 


a Heb.6.13. 
6 Ezk.20.39. 
c Jer.31.28. 


d v.14; 
Isa.27.13. 


e Psa.33.11. 
Ff Jer.46.25, 


26; Ezk.29. 
3; 30.21. 


PART VI. 


Judah, and all the remnant of Ju- 


dah, that are gone into the land of 
Egypt to sojourn there, shall know 
whose words shall stand, mine, or 
their’s. 

29 And this shall be a sign unto 
you, saith the Lorp, that I will 
punish you in this place, that ye 
may know that my words shall 
surely stand against you for evil: 

30 Thus saith the LorD; Behold, 
I will give fPharaoh-hophre king of 
Egypt into the hand of his enemies, 
and inéo the hand of them that seek 
his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of 
Judah into the hand of Nebuchad. 
rezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, 
and that sought his life. 


MISCELLANEOUS PROPHECIES: CHAPTERS 45-52. 


CHAPTER 45. 


A message to Baruch in the 
days of Jehoiakim. (Cf. 2 Ki. 
23. 34-25. 6; Jer. 36. 1-32.) 


es word that Jeremiah the 
prophet spake unto Baruch 
the son of Neriah, when he had 
written these words in a book at 
the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth 
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah 
king of Judah, saying, 

2 &Thus saith the Lorp, the God 
of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch: 

3 Thou didst say, Woe is me now! 
for the LorD hath added grief to 
my sorrow; I fainted in my sigh- 
ing, and I find no rest. 

4 Thus shalt thou say unto him, 
The Lorp saith thus, Behold, that 
which I have built will I break 
down, and that which I have 
planted I will pluck up, even this 
whole land. 

5 And seekest thou great things 
for thyself? seek them not: for, 
behold, I will bring evil upon all 
flesh, saith the Lorp: but thy life 
will I give unto thee “for a prey in 
all places whither thou goest. 


CHAPTER 46. 


Prophecies against Gentile pow- 
ers (Jer. 46, 1-51. 64). 


aa word of thé Lorp which 
came to Jeremiah the prophet 
against the !Gentiles; 


B.C. 607. 


g Inspiration. 
vs.1,2; 


Ezk.2.2. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


h Jer.21.9; 
38.2; 39.18. 


72 Ki.23.29; 
2 Chr.35.20. 


j Dan.11.19. 
k Jer.47.2; 


Isa.8.7,8; 
Dan.11.22, 


1 A near and a far fulfilment of th 
In Chapter 46. the n 
but verses 27, 28 look forward to the judgment of the 


distinguished. 


‘ 


822 


(1) Against Egypt. . 


2 Against Egypt, ‘against the 
army of Pharaoh-necho king of 
Egypt, which was by the river 
Euphrates in Carchemish, which 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
smote in the fourth year of Jehoia- 
kim the son of Josiah king of 
Judah. 

3 Order ye the buckler and shield, 
and draw near to battle. 

4 Harness the horses; and get up, 
ye horsemen, and stand forth with 
your helmets; furbish the spears, 
and put on the brigandines, 

5 Wherefore have I seen them 
dismayed and turned away back? 
and their mighty ones are beaten 
down, and are fled apace, and look 
not back: for fear was round about, 


isaith-the Lorp. 


6 Let not the swift flee away, nor 
the mighty man escape; /they shall 
stumble, and fall toward the north 
|by the river Euphrates. 


| 7 Who is this that cometh up as 


‘a flood, whose waters are moved as 
the rivers? 

8 Egypt riseth up like a flood, and 
his waters are moved like the riv- 
ers; and he saith, I will go up, and 
will cover the earth: I will de- 
istroy the city and the inhabitants 
thereof. 

9 Come up, ye horses; and rage, 
ye chariots; and let the mighty 
men come forth; the Ethiopians 
and the Libyans, that handle the 


ese prophecies against Gentile powers are to be 
€ar vision is of a Babylonian invasion of Egypt, 


nations (Mt. 25. 32, note) 


46 10] JEREMIAH. [47 3 


shield; and the Lydians, that handle 
and bend the bow. 

10 For this is the “day of the Lord 
Gop of hosts, a day of vengeance, 
that he may avenge him of his ad- 
versaries: and the sword shall de- 
vour, and it shall be satiate and 
made drunk with their blood: for 
the Lord Gop of hosts hath a sacri- 
fice in the north country by the 
tiver Euphrates. 

11 Go up into Gilead, and take 
balm, O virgin, the daughter of 
Egypt: in vain shalt thou use 
many medicines; for thou shalt 
not be cured. 


a serpent; for they shail:march with 
an army, and come against her with 
axes, as hewers of wood. 

23 They shall “cut down her for- 
est, saith the LorpD, though it can- 
not be searched; because they are 
more than the grasshoppers, and 
are innumerable. 

24 The daughter of Egypt shall 
be confounded; she shall be de- 
livered into the hand of the people 
of the north. } 

25 The Lorn of hosts, the God of 
Israel, saith; Behold, I will punish 
the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, 
and Egypt, with their gods, and 


12 The nations have heard of thy|a See Day (of |their kings; even Pharaoh, and all 
shame, and thy cry hath filled the} Jehovah). |them that étrust in him: 
land: for the mighty man hath| 12-?-10-22. | 26 And I will deliver them into 
stumbled against the mighty, and!» Jer.43.10,11; |the hand of those that seek their 


they are fallen both together. Isa.19.1; lives, and into the hand of Nebu- 

13 The word that the LORD spake} #2-29- chadrezzar king of Babylon, and 
to Jeremiah the prophet, how Nebu-| ¢ 1sa.47.4; into the hand of his servants: and 
chadrezzar king of Babylon should| 48.2. ‘afterward it shall be inhabited, as 


come and smite the land of Egypt.| , |. ¢ 19: in the days of old, saith the Lorp. 
14 Perlis ye 33. peas and Aes Jer.1.14; 27 ee paces He thou, O my ser- 
lish in Migdol, and publish in Noph} 47.2. vant Jacob, and be not dismayed, O 
and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand] , 1sa.10.34. Israel: for, behold, I will save thee 
fast, and prepare thee; for the sword from afar off, and thy seed from the 
shall devour round about thee. fEzk.30.14-. |land of their captivity; and Jacob 
15 Why Bra ES, vali oe 16; Nah.3.8. /shall ree, and be an es and at 
swept away: ey stood not, be-|¢ Psa.2.12, ease, and none s make him 
cause the Lorp did drive them. # advel afraid. 
an He made many to fall, yea, one} , Jer.44.30- 28 Fear thou not, O Jacob my 
ell upon another: and they said,| &2¢.32.11. ae Abo g baits ae LOR: a if ant 
Arise, and let us go again to our] with thee; for I will make a full en 
own people, and to the land of our}? eine ‘jof all the nations whither I have 
nativity, from the oppressing sword. ees driven thee: but { will not make a 
17 They did cry there, Pharaoh] j Jer.30.10,11; |full end of thee, but correct thee in 
king of Egypt is but a noise; he year sricasiisey yet ah not leave thee 
hath passed the time appointed. ee wholly unpunished. 
18 As. I live, saith the King.|k Jer.46.7,8; 
“whose name is the LorD of hosts,| 1s2-8-7 
“Surely as Tabor is among the 
mountains, and as Carmel by the 


CHAPTER 47. 
(2) Against Philistia-Tyre, etc. 


sea, so shall he come. 

19 O thou daughter dwelling in 
Egypt, furnish thyself to go into 
captivity: for Noph shall be waste 
and desolate without an inhabitant. 

20 Egypt 1s like avery fair heifer, 
but destruction cometh; it cometh 
dout of the north. 

91 Also her hired men are in the 
midst of her like fatted bullocks; 
for they also are turned back, and 
are fled away together: they did 
not stand, because the day of their 
calamity was come upon them, and 
the time of their visitation. Sa) 

22 The voice thereof shall go like 


HE word of the Lorp that 

came to Jeremiah the prophet 

against the Philistines, before that 
Pharaoh smote Gaza. © 

2 Thus saith the LorpD; Behold, 
kwaters rise up out of the north, and 
shall be an overflowing flood, and 
shall overflow the land, and all that 
is therein; the city, and them that 
dwell therein: then the men shall 
cry, and all the inhabitants of the 
land shail howl. 

3 At the noise of the stamping of 
the hoofs of his strong horses, at 
the rushing of his chariots, and at 
the rumbling of his wheels, the 


after Armageddon (Rew 16. 14; Rev. 19. 17, note), and the deliverance of Israel 
(“Israel,” Gen. 12. 2, 3; Rom. 11, 26, note). Jer. 50. 4-7 also looks forward to the 


dast days. . 
_ 823 


a 


47 4] 


fathers shall not look back to their 
children for feebleness of hands; 

4 Because of the day that cometh 
to spoil all the. Philistines, and to 
cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every 
helper that remaineth: for the 
Lorp will spoil the Philistines; the 
“remnant of the country of Caphtor. 

5 5Baldness is come upon Gaza; 
Ashkelon is cut off with the rem- 
nant of their valley: how long wilt 
thou cut thyself? 

6 O thou ‘sword of the Lorp, 
how long will it be ére thou be 
quiet? put up thyself into thy scab- 
bard, rest, and be still. 

7 How can it be quiet, seeing the 
LorpD hath given it 4a charge 
against Ashkelon, and against the 
sea shore? there hath he appointed 
it. 


CHAPTER 48. 
(3) Against Moab. 


GAINST Moab thus saith the 
LorpD of hosts, the God of Is- 
rael; Woe unto «Nebo! for it is 
spoiled: fKiriathaim is confounded 
and taken: Misgab is confounded 
and dismayed 

2 There shall be no more praise 
of Moab: in Heshbon they have 
devised evil against it; come, and 
let us cut it off from being a na- 
tion. Also thou shalt be cut down, 
OQ Madmen; the sword shall pursue 
thee. 

3 A voice of crying shall be from 
Horonaim, spoiling and great de- 
struction. 

4 Moab is destroyed; her little 
ones have caused a cry to be heard. 

5 For in the going up of Luhith 
continual weeping shall go up; for 
in the going down of Horonaim the 
enemies have heard a cry of de- 
struction. 

6 Flee, save your lives, and be like 
the heath in the wilderness. 

7 For because thou hast strusted 
in thy works and in thy treasures, 
thou shalt also be taken: and ’Che- 
mosh shall go forth into captivity 
with his priests and his princes to- 
gether. 

8 And the spoiler shall come upon 
every city, and no city shall escape: 
the valley also shall perish, and the 
plain shall be destroyed, as the 
LorpD hath spoken. 

9 Give wings unto Moab, that it 
may flee and get away: for the cit- 
ies thereof shall be desolate, without 
any to dwell therein. 


JEREMIAH. 


@ Ezk.25.16; 
Amos 1.8; 
9.7. 


6 Amos 1.7; 
Mic.1.16; 
Zeph.2.4; 
Zech.9.5. 


c Deut.32.41; 
Ezk.21.3-5. 


d Ezk.14.17. 


f Num.32.37. 


g Psa.2.12, 
note, 


hk Num.21.29; 


Tee 43.12. 


1 Or, negli- 
gently, 


Jj Zeph.1.12. 


k Jud. et ate 
1 Kil 


1 Hos.10.6. 
m 1 Ki.12.29. 


n Num.21.30; 
Tsa.15.2. 


o Deut.2.36. 


pv.4l; 
Amos 2.2, 


824 


B.C. 600. 


Bae 
[48 26 


10 Cursed be ie thet doeth the © 
work of the Lorp ‘deceitfully, and 
cursed be he that keepeth back his 
sword from blood. 

11 Moab hath been at ease from 
his youth, and he hath Jsettled on 
his lees, and hath not been emptied 
from vessel to vessel, neither hath 
he gone into captivity: therefore 
his taste remained in him, and his 
scent is not changed. 

12 Therefore, behold, the days 
come, saith the Lorp, that I will 
send unto him wanderers, that shall 
cause him to wander, and shall 
empty his vessels, and break their 
bottles. 

13 And Moab shall be ashamed 
of *Chemosh, as the house of Israel 
‘was ashamed of ”Beth-el their con- 
fidence. 

14 How say ye, We are mighty 
and strong men for the war? 

15 Moab is spoiled, and gone up 
out of her cities, and his chosen 
young men are gone down to the 
slaughter, saith the King, whose 
name is the LorD of hosts. 

16 The calamity of Moab is near 
te come, and his affliction hasteth 

ast. 

17 All ye that are about him, be- 
moan him; and all ye that know 
his name, say, How is the strong 
staff broken, and the beautiful rod! 

18 Thou daughter that dost in- 
habit “Dibon, come down from thy 
glory, and sit in thirst: for the 
spoiler of Moab shall come upon 
thee, and he shall destroy thy 
strong holds. 

19 O inhabitant of °Aroer, stand 
by the way, and espy; ask him that 
fleeth, and her that escapeth, and 
say, What is done? 

20 Moab is confounded; for it is 
broken down: howl and cry; tell 
ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled, 

21 And judgment is come upon 
the plain country; upon Holon, and 
upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath, 

22 And upon Dibon, and upon 
Nebo, and upon Beth- diblathaim, 

23 And upon Kiriathaim, and 
upon Beth-gamul, and upon "Beth- 
meon, 

24 And upon /Kerioth, and upon 
Bozrah, and upon all the cities of 
the land of Moab, far or near. 

25 The horn of Moab is cut off, 
and his arm is broken, saith the 
Lorp. 

26 Make ye him drunken: for he 
magnified himself against the 
LorD: Moab also shall wallow in 


48 27] 


his vomit, and he also shall be in 
derision. 

27 For was not Israel a derision 
unto thee? was he found among 
thieves? for since thou spakest of 
him, thou skippedst for joy. 

28 Oye that dwell in Moab, leave 
the cities, and dwell in the rock, 
and be like the “dove that maketh 
her nest in the sides of the hole’s 
mouth. 

29 We have heard the 4pride of 
Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his 
loftiness, and his arrogancy, and 
his pride, and the haughtiness of 
his heart. 

30 I know his wrath, saith the 
LorbD; but it shall not be so; his 
lies shall not so effect it. 

31 Therefore will I howl for 
Moab, and I will cry out for all 
Moab; mine heart shall mourn 
for the men of Kir-heres. 

32 © vine of Sibmah, I will weep 
for thee with the weeping of Jazer: 
thy plants are gone over the sea, 
they reach even to the sea of Jazer: 
the spoiler is fallen upon thy surn- 
mer fruits and upon thy vintage. 

33 And joy and gladness is taken 
from the plentiful field,. and from 
the land of Moab; and I have 
caused wine to fail from the wine- 
presses: none shall tread with 
shouting; their shouting shall be 
no shouting. 

34 ‘From thecry of Heshbon even 
unto Elealeh, and even unto Jahaz, 
have they uttered their voice, from 
Zoar even unto Horonaim, as an 
heifer of three years old: for the 
waters also of Nimrim shall be 
desolate. 

_35 Moreover I will cause to cease 
in Moab, saith the LorD, him that 
offereth in the high places, and him 
that burneth incense to his gods. 

36 Therefore mine heart shall 
sound for Moab like pipes, and mine 
heart shall sound like pipes for the 
men of Kir-heres: because the riches 
that he hath gotten are perished. 

37 For every head shall be bald, 
and every beard clipped: upon all 
the hands shall be cuttings, and 
upon the loins sackcloth. : 

38 There shall be lamentation 
generally upon all the housetops 
of Moab, and in the streets thereof: 
for ¢I have broken Moab like a ves- 


sel wherein zs no pleasure, saith the 
Lorp. 

39 They shall howl, saying, How 
is it broken down! how hath Moab 
turned the back with shame! so 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 600. 


a Song 2.14. 
b Isa.16.6. 

c Isa.15.4-6. 
d Jer.22.28. 


e Jer.49.22; 
Deut.28.49; 


f Num.21.28. 
g Num.24.17. 
h Amos 1,12. 


4 Ezk.25.5; 
Amos 1.14, 


825 


[49 3 


shall Moab be a derision and a 
dismaying to all them about him. 

40 For thus saith the Lorp; Be- 
hold, ¢he shall fly as an eagle, and 
shall spread his wings over Moab. 

41 Kerioth is taken, and the 
strong holds are surprised, and the 
mighty men’s hearts in Moab at 
that day shall be as the heart of a 
woman in her pangs. 

42 And Moab shall be destroyed 
from being a people, because he 
hath magnified Aimse/f against the 
LorbD. 

43 Fear, and the pit, and the 
snare, shall be upon thee, O inhab- 
itant of Moab, saith the LORD. 

44 He that fleeth from the fear 
shall fall into the pit; and he that 
getteth up out of the pit shall be 
taken in the snare: for I will bring 
upon it, even upon Moab, the year 
of their visitation, saith the LorpD. 

45 They that fled stood under the 
shadow of Heshbon because of the 
force: but a /fire shall come forth 
out of Heshbon, and a flame from 
the midst of Sihon, and &shall de- 
vour the corner of Moab, and the 
crown of the head of the tumul- 
fuous ones. 

46 Woe be unto thee, O Moab! 
the people of Chemosh perisheth: 
for thy sons are taken captives, and 
thy daughters captives. 

47 Yet will I bring again the cap- 
tivity of Moab in the latter days, 
saith the Lorp. ‘Thus far is the 
judgment of Moab. 


CHAPTER 49. 


(4) Against the Amrnonites and 
their cities, 


GONCEENENG the Ammonites, 
thus saith the Lorp; Hath Is- 
rael no sons? hath he no heir? why 
then doth their king inherit Gad, 
and his people dwell in his cities? 

2 Therefore, behold, the days 
come, saith the Lorp, that I will 
cause an alarm of war to be heard in 
iRabbah of the Ammonites; and it 
shall be a desolate heap, and her 
daughters shall be burned with fire: 
then shall Israel be heir unto them 
that were his heirs, saith the LorD. 

3 Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is 
spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Rab- 
bah, gird you with sackcloth; la- 
ment, and run to and fro by the 
hedges; for their king shall gc into 
captivity, and his priests and his 
princes together. 


49 4] 


4 Wherefore gloriest thou in the 
valleys, thy flowing valley, O back- 
sliding daughter? that trusted in 
her treasures, saying, Who shall 
come unto me? 

5 Behold, I will bring a fear upon 
thee, saith the Lord Gop of hosts, 
from all those that be about thee; 
and ye shall be driven out every 
man right forth; and none shall 
gather up him that wandereth. ~ 

6 And ¢@afterward I will bring 
again the captivity of the children 
of Ammon, saith the LORD. 


(5) Against Edom, 


7 >Concerning Edom, thus saith 
the Lorp of hosts; Js wisdom no 
more in Teman? is counsel perished 
from the prudent? is their wisdom 
vanished? 

8 Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, 
O inhabitants of “Dedan; for I will 
bring the calamity of Esau upon 
ee the time that I will visit 


9 it grapegatherers come to thee, 
would they not leave some glean- 
ing grapes? if thieves by night, 
they will destroy till they have 
enough. 

10 4But I have made Esau bare, I 
have uncovered his secret places, 
and he shall not be able to hide 
himself: his seed is spoiled, and his 
brethren, and his neighbours, and 
he is not. 

11 Leave thy fatherless children, 


JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 600. 


I will preserve them alive; and let 
thy widows ‘trust in me. 

12 For thus saith the Lorpb; Be- 
hold, they whose judgment was not 


@ v.39; Jer. 
48.47. 


6 Ezk.25.12; 
Amos 1.11. 


c Jer.25.23. 
d Mal.1.3. 


e Psa.2.12, 
note. 


f 1sa.34.6; 
63.1. 


gi.e. nations, 


h vs.14-22; 
Gen.36.1, 
note. 


i Jer.50.40; 
Gen.19.25; 
Deut.29.23; 
Amos 4.11. 


j Heb. weedy 
sea. 


k Xsa.17.1; 


| 37.13; Amos 


1.3; Zech.9. 


to drink of the cup have assuredly! ! Jer.50.30;: 


drunken; and art thou he that 
shall altogether go unpunished? 
thou shalt not go unpunished, but 
thou shalt surely drink of it. 

13. For I have sworn by myself, 
saith the Lorn, that fBozrah shall 
become a desolation, a reproach, a 
waste, and a curse; and all the 
cities thereof shall be perpetual 
wastes. 

14 I have heard a rumour from 
the Lorp, and an ambassador is 
sent unto the ‘heathen, saying, 
Gather ye together, and come 
against her, and rise up to the 
battle. 

15 For, lo, I will male thee small 
among the heathen, and despised 
among men. 

16 Thy terribleness hath deceived 
thee, and the pride of thine heart, 


51.4. 


826 


[49 27 


O thou that dwellest in the clefts of — 
the rock, that holdest the height of — 
the hill: though thou shouldest 
make thy nest as high as the eagle, 
I will bring thee down from thence, 
saith the LorpD. 

17 Also “Edom shall be a desola- 
tion: every one that goeth by it 
shall be astonished, and shall hiss 
at all the plagues thereof. 

18 7As in the overthrow of Sodom 
and Gomorrah and the neighbour 
cities thereof, saith the LorpD, no 
man shall abide there, neither shall 
a son of man dwell in it. 

19 Behold, he shall come up like 
a lion from the swelling of Jordan 
against the habitation of the strong: 
but I will suddenly make him run 
away from her: and who is a 
chosen man, that I may appoint 
over her? for who is like me? and 
who will appoint me the time? and 
who is that shepherd that will - 
stand before me? 

20 Therefore hear the counsel of 
the LorpD, that he hath taken 
against Edom; and his purposes, 
that he hath purposed against the 
inhabitants of Teman: Surely the 
least of the flock shall draw them 
out: surely he shall make their 
habitations desolate with them. 

21 The earth is moved at the noise 
of their fall, at the cry the noise 
thereof was heard in the JRed 


sea. 

22 Behold, he shall come up and 
fly as the eagle, and spread his 
wings over Bozrah: and at that 
day shall the heart of the mighty 
men of Edom be as the heart of a 
woman in her pangs. 


(6) Against Damascus. 


23 Concerning Damascus. Ha- 
math is confounded, and Arpad: for 
they have heard evil tidings: they 
are fainthearted; there is sorrow 
on the sea; it cannot be quiet. 

24 Damascus is waxed feeble, 
and turneth herself to flee, and 
fear hath seized on her: anguish 
and sorrows have tdken her, as a 
woman in travail. 

25 How is the city of praise not 
left, the city of my joy! 

26 Therefore “her young men 
shall fall in her streets, and all the 
men of war shall be cut off in that 
day, saith the Lorp of hosts. 

27 And I will kindle a fire in the 
wall of Damascus, and it shall con- 
sume the palaces of Ben-hadad. 


hoa 


49 28] 


JEREMIAH. 


[50 11 


(7) Against Kedar and the king- 
doms of Hazor. 


28 Concerning Kedar, and con- 
cerning the kingdoms of Hazor, 
which Nebuchadrezzar king of 
Babylon shall smite, thus saith the 
Lorpb; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, 
and spoil the men of the east. 

29 Their tents and their flocks 
shall they take away: they shall 
take to themselves their curtains, 
and all their vessels, and their 
camels; and they shall cry unto 
them, Fear is on every side. 

30 Flee, get you far off, dwell 
deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, 
saith the Lorp; for Nebuchad- 
tezzar king of Babylon hath taken 
counsel against you, and hath con- 
ceived a purpose against you. 

31 Arise, get you up unto “the 
wealthy nation, that dwelleth with- 
out care, saith the LorD, which 
have fheither gates nor bars, "which 
dwell dlone. 

32 And their camels shall be a 
booty, and the multitude of their 
cattle a spoil: and I will ‘scatter 
into all winds them that are in the 
utmost corners; and I will bring 
their calamity from all sides thereof, 
saith the LorbD. 

33 And Hazor ¢shall be a dwell- 
ing for dragons, and a desolation 
for ever: there shall no man abide 
there, nor any son of man dwell 
in it. 

(8) Against Elam. 
| 34 The word of the LorD that 
came to Jeremiah the prophet 
against Elam in the beginning of 
the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, 
saying, 

35 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
Behold, I will break the bow of 
Elam, the chief of their might. 

36 And upon Elam will I bring 
the four winds from the four quar- 
ters of heaven, and will scatter 
them toward all those winds; and 
there shall be no nation whither 
the outcasts of Elam shall not 
come. { 
37 For I will cause Elam to be 
dismayed before their enemies, and 
before them that seek their life: and 
I will bring evil upon them, even 
my fierce anger, saith the LORD; 
and I will send the sword after 
them, till I have consumed them: 
38 And I will set my throne in 
Elam, and will destroy from thence 
the king and the princes, saith the 
LORD. 


\ 


B.C. 600. 


‘ 


a Ezk.38.11. 


6 Num.23.9; 
Deut.33.28; 
Mic.7.14. 


c v.36; Ezk. 
5.10. 

d Jer.9.11; 
10.22; Mal. 
1.3. 


e Isa.13.17, 
18,20; vs. 
39,40. 


f Covenant 
(New). vs.4, 
5; Mt.26.28. 
(Isa.61.8; 
Heb.8.8-12.) 

gv.17; Isa. 
53.6; 1 Pet. 
2.25. 

h vs.3,41; 
Jer.51.27. 

i vs.14,29. 


7 2 Sam.1.22. 


$27 


39 But it shall come to pass in the 


\latter days, that I will bring again 


the captivity of Elam, saith the 
LorbD. 


CHAPTER 50. 


(9) Against Babylon and 
Chaldea. 


“THE word that the LorD spake 

against Babylon and against 
the land of the Chaldeans by Jere- 
miah the prophet. 

2 Declare ye among the nations, 
and publish, and set up a standard; 
publish, and conceal not: say, 
Babylon is taken, Bel is con- 
founded, Merodach is broken in 
pieces; her idols are confounded, her 
images are broken in pieces. 

3 For “out of the north there com- 
eth up a nation against her, which 
shall make her land desolate, and 
none shall dwell therein: they shall 
remove, they shall depart, both 
man and beast. 

4 In those days, and in that time, 
saith the Lorp, the children of 
Israel shall come, they and the 
children of Judah together, going 
and weeping: they shall go, and 
seek the LorpD their God. 

5 They shall ask the way to Zion 
with their faces thitherward, say- 
ing, Come, and let us join ourselves 
to the Lorp in a perpetual Jcove- 
nant that shall not be forgotten. 

6 My people hath been 4lost sheep: 
their shepherds have caused them to 


go astray, they have turned them 
away on the mountains: they have 
gone from mountain to hill, they 
have forgotten their restingplace. 

7 All that found them have de- 
voured them: and their adversaries 
said, We offend not, because they 
have sinned against the LORD, the 
habitation of justice, even the 
LorD, the hope of their fathers. 

8 Remove out of the midst of 
Babylon, and go forth out of the 
land of the Chaldeans, and be as 
the he goats before the flocks. , 

9 For, lo, “I will raise and cause to 
come up against Babylon an assem- 
bly of great nations from the north 
country: and they shall ‘set them- 
selves in array against her; from 
thence she shall be taken: their 
arrows shall be as of a mighty ex- 
pert man; Jnone shall return in vain, 

10 And Chaldea shall be a spoil: 
all that spoil her shall be satisfied, 
saith the LORD. 

11 Because ye were glad, because 


ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine] B.C. 595. 


heritage, because ye are grown fat 
as the heifer at grass, and bellow 
as bulls; 

12 Your mother shall be sore con- 
founded; she that bare you shall be 
ashamed: behold, the hindermost 
of the nations shall be a wilderness, 
a dry land, and a desert. 

13 Because of the wrath of the 
Lorp it shail not be inhabited, 
but it shall be wholly desolate: 
“every one that goeth by Babylon 
shall be astonished, and hiss at all 
her plagues. ; : 

14 Put yourselves in array against 
Babylon round about: all ye that 
bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no 

‘arrows: for she hath sinned against 
the Lorp. 

15 Shout against her round about: 
she hath given her hand: her foun- 
dations are failen, her walls are 
thrown down: for %it zs the ven- 
geance of the Lorpb: take ven- 
geance upon her; as she hath done, 
do unto her. 

16 Cut off the sower from Baby- 
lon, and. him that handleth the 
sickle in the time of harvest: for fear 
of the oppressing sword they shall 
turn every one to his people, and 
they shall flee every one to his own 
land. 

17 Israel is “a scattered sheep; the 
lions have driven Aim away: first 
the king of Assyria hath devoured 
him; and last this ¢Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon hath broken his 
bones. 

18 Therefore thus saith the Lorp 
of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, 
I will punish the king of Babylon 
and his land, as I have punished the 
king of Assyria. 

19 And I will bring Israel again 
to his habitation, and he shall feed 
on Carmel and Bashan, and his 
soul shall be satisfied upon mount 
Ephraim and Gilead. 

20 In those days, and in that 
time, saith the LorD, the iniquity 
ef Israel shall be sought for, and 
there shall be none; and the sins 
of Judah, and they shall not be 
found: for I will pardon them 
Fwhom I reserve. 

21 Go up against the land of Me- 
tathaim, even against it, and against 
the inhabitants of #sPekod: waste 
and utterly destroy after them, saith 
the Lorpb, and do according to all 
that I have commanded thee. 

22 A sound of battle is in the 
land, and of great destruction. 


JEREMIAH. 


a Jer.49.17. 
6 Jer.51.6,11. 
cv.6, 


d 2 Ki.24.10, 
14. 


e Jer.31.34. 
Ff Isa.1.9. 
g Ezk.23.23. 


h Isa.47.10. 


i Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). 
Isa.59.20, 
note. 


828 


23 How is the hammer of the 
whole earth cut asunder and bro- 
ken! how is Babylon become a deso- 
lation among the nations! 

24 I have laid a snare for thee, 
and thou art also taken, O Babylon, 
and thou wast not aware: thou art 
found, and also caught, because 
thou hast striven against the Lorb. 

25 The Lorp hath opened his 
armoury, and hath brought forth 
the weapons of his indignation: 
for this 7s the work of the Lord 
Gop of hosts in the land of the 
Chaldeans. 

26 Come against her from the 
utmost border, open her store- 
houses: cast her up as heaps, and 
destroy her utterly: let nothing of 
her be left. 

27 Slay all her bullocks; let them 
go down to the slaughter: woe unto 
them! for their day is come, the 
time of their visitation. 

28 The voice of them that flee and 
escape out of the land of Babylon, 
to declare in Zion the vengeance of 
the Lorp our God, the vengeance 
of his temple. 

29 Call together the archers 
against Babylon: all ye that bend 
the bow, camp against it round 
about; let none thereof escape: 
Tecompense her according to her 
work; according to all that she 
hath done, do unto her: for she hath 
been ‘proud against the Lorp, 
against the Holy One of Israel. 

30 Therefore shall her young men 
fallin the streets, and all her men # 
of war shall be cut off in that day, 
saith the Lorp. 

31 Behold, I am against thee, O 
thou most proud, saith the Lord 
Gop of hosts: for thy day is come, 
the time that I will visit thee. 

32 And the most proud shall 
stumble and fall, and none shall 
taise him up: and I will’ kindle a 
fire in his cities, and it shall devour 
all round about him. 

33 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts 3 
The children of Israel and the chil- 
dren of Judah were oppressed to- 
gether: and all that took them 
captives held them fast; they re- 
fused to let them go. 

34 Their ‘Redeemer is strong; the 
Lorp of hosts is his name: he shall 
throughly. plead their cause, that 
he may give rest to the land, and .- 
cicawiss the inhabitants of Baby- 

on. 

35 A sword is upon the Chai- 
deans, saith the Lorp, and upon the 


inhabitants of Babylon, and upon 
her princes, and upon her wise 
men. 

36 A sword is upon the liars; and 
they shall dote: a sword is upon her 
mighty men; and they shall be 
dismayed. 

37 A sword is upon their horses, 
and upon their chariots, and upon 
all the mingled people that are in 
the midst of her; and they shall 
become as women: a sword is upon 
her treasures; and they shall be 
robbed. 

38 A drought zs upon her waters; 
and they shall be dried up: for it is 
the land of graven images, and they 
are mad upon their idols. 

39 Therefore the wild beasts of 
the desert with the wild beasts of 
the ‘islands shall dwell there, and 
the owls shall dwell therein: and it 
shall be no more inhabited for ever; 
neither shall it be dwelt in from 
generation to generation. 

40 °As God overthrew Sodom and 
Gomorrah and the neighbour cities 
thereof, saith the LoRD; so shall 
no man abide there, neither shail 
any son of man dwell therein. 

41 Behold, a people shall come 
from the north, and a great nation, 
and many kings shall be raised up 
from the coasts of the earth. 

42 They shall hold the bow and 
the lance: they are cruel, and will 
not shew mercy: their voice shall 
roar like the sea, and they shall 
ride upon horses, every one put in 
array, like a man to the battle, 
ot thee, O daughter of Baby- 

on. 

43 The king of Babylon hath 
heard the report of them, and his 
thands waxed feeble: anguish took 
hold of him, and pangs as of a 
woman in travail. 

44 Behold, he shall come up like 
a lion from the swelling of Jordan 
unto the habitation of the strong: 
but I will make them suddenly run 
away from her: and who zs a cho- 
sen man, that I may appoint over 
her? for who is like me? and who 
will appoint me the time? and who 
is that ‘shepherd that will stand 
before me? | 

45 Therefore hear ye the counsel! 
of the Lorp, that he hath taken; 
against Babylon; and his purposes, 
that he hath purposed against the 
land of the Chaldeans: Surely the 
least of the flock shall draw them 
out: surely he shall make their! 
habitation desolate with them. 


bP FF ee 


4 


@i.e. coasts. 


b Jer.49.18; 
51.26; 


Gen.19.25; 


Isa.13.19. 


c Jer.49.19; 
Job 41.10. 


d Jer.50.14. 


e Jer.50.8; 
Rev.18.4. 


f Rev.17.4. 

g Rev.14.8. 

h Isa.21.9; 
Rev.14.8; 
18.2. 

t Psa.37.6. 

j 1sa.13.17. 


k Jer.50.28. 


829 


JEREMIAH. 


vr: 7 4 ite iz Tt? 


46 At the noise of the taking of 
Babylon the earth is moved, and 
the cry is heard among the nations. 


CHAPTER 51. 


(The prophecy against Babylon, 
continued.) 


HUS saith the Lorp; Bekold, I 
will raise up against Babylon, 
and against them that dwell in the 
midst of them that rise up against 
me, a destroying wind; 

2 And will send unto Babylon 
fanners, that shall fan her, and 
shall empty her land: for 4in the 
day of trouble they shall be against 
her round about. 

3 Against him that bendeth let 
the archer bend his bow, and 
against him that lifteth himself up 
in his brigandine: and spare ye not 
her young ‘men; destroy ye utterly 
all her host. 

4 Thus the slain shall fall in the’ 
land of the Chaldeans, and they 
that are thrust through in her 
streets. 

5 For Israel hath not been for- 
saken, nor Judah of his God, of the 
Lorp of hosts; though their land 
was filled with sin against the Holy 
One of Israel. 

6 Flee out of the midst of Baby- 
jon, and deliver every man his soul: 
be not cut off in her iniquity; for 
this is the time of the LORD’S ven- 
geance; he will render unto her a 
recompence. 

7 fBabylon hath been a golden 
cup in the Lorp’s hand, that made 
all the earth drunken: the énations 
have drunken of her wine; there- 
fore the nations are mad. 

8 Babylon is suddenly “fallen and 
destroyed: howl for her; take balm 
for her pain, if so be she may be 
healed. 

9 We would have healed Baby- 
lon, but she is not healed: forsake 
her, and let us go every one into 
his own country: for her judgment 
reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted 
up even to the skies. 

10 The Lorp ‘hath brought forth 
our righteousness: come, and let us 
declare in Zion the work of the 
Lorp our God. : 

11 Make bright the arrows; gather 
the shields: the 7LoRD hath raised 
up the spirit of the kings of the 
Medes: for his device is against 
Babylon, to destroy it; because it is 
|Athe vengeance of the LorD, the 
vengeance of his temple. 


12 °Set up the standard upon the 
walls of Babylon, make the watch 
strong, set up the watchmen, pre- 
pare the ambushes: for the LorD 
hath both devised and done that 
which he spake against the inhab- 
itants of Babylon. 

13, O thou that dwellest upon 
many waters, abundant in treas- 
ures, thine end is come, and the 
measure of thy covetousness. 

14 The Lorp of hosts hath sworn 
by himself, saying, Surely I will fill 
thee with men, as with caterpillers; 
and they shall lift up a shout 
against thee. , 

15 He hath made the earth by his 
power, he hath established the 
world by his wisdom, and *hath 
stretched out the heaven by his 
understanding. ; 

16 When he uttereth his voice, 
there is a multitude of waters in 
the heavens; and he causeth the va- 
pours to ascend from the ends of 
the earth: he maketh lightnings 
with rain, and bringeth forth the 
wind out of his treasures. 

17 Every man is brutish by his 
knowledge; every founder is con- 
founded by the graven image: for 
his molten image is falsehood, and 
there 1s'no breath in them. 

18 They are vanity, the work of 
errors: in the time of their visita- 
tion they shall perish. 

19 The portion of Jacob is not 
like them; for he is the former of all 
things: and Israel is the rod of 
his inheritance: the LorD of hosts 
is his name. 

20 Thou art my battle axe and 
weapons of war: for with thee will 
I break in pieces the nations, and 
with thee will I destroy king- 
doms; 

21 And with thee will I break in 
pieces the horse and his rider; and 
with thee will I break in pieces the 
chariot and his rider; 

22 With thee also will I break in 
pieces man and woman; and with 
thee will I break in pieces old and 
young; and with thee will I break 
in pieces the young man and the 
maid; 

23 I will also break in pieces with 
thee the shepherd and his flock; 
and with thee will I break in pieces 
the husbandman and his yoke of 
oxen; and with thee will I break in 
pieces captains and rulers. 

24 And ¢I will render unto Baby- 
lon and to all the inhabitants of 
Chaldea all their evil that they: 


@ Nah.2.1; 
3.14. 


6 Job 9.8; 
Psa.104.2; 


Jsa.40.22. 


¢ Jer.50.15, 
29. 


d Isa.13.1, 
note; 
Zech.4.7. 

é Jer.50.40. 


F Jer.50.24, 


830 


have done in Zion in your sight, 
saith the Lorpb. 


destroying mountain, saith the 
LorD, which destroyest all the 
earth: and I will stretch out mine 
hand upon thee, and roll thee down 
from the rocks, and will make thee 
a burnt mountain. 

26 And they shall not take of thee 
a stone for a corner, nor a stone for 
foundations; but ¢thou shalt be 
desolate for ever, saith the Lorpb. 

27 Set ye up a standard in the 
land, blow the trumpet among the 
nations, prepare the nations against 
her, call together against her the 
kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and 
Ashchenaz; appoint a _ captain 
against her; cause the horses to 
come up as the rough caterpillers. 

28 Prepare against her the na- 
tions with the kings of the Medes, 
the captains thereof, and all the 
rulers thereof, and all the land of his 
dominion. 

29 And the land shall tremble and 
sorrow: for every purpose of the 
LORD shall be performed against 
Babylon, to make the land of Baby- 
lon a desolation without an inhabi- 
tant. 

30 The mighty men of Babylon 
have forborn to fight, they have re- 
mained in their holds: their might 
hath failed; they became as women: 
they have burned her dwelling- 
places; her bars are broken. 


31 One post shall run to meet an- ~ 


other, and one messenger to meet 
another, to shew the king of Baby- 
lon that his city is taken at one 
end, 

32 And that the passages are 
stopped, and the reeds they have 
burned with fire, and the men of 
war are affrighted. 4 

33 For thus saith the Lorp of 
hosts, the God of Israel; The daugh- 
ter of Babylon js like’a threshing- 
floor, it is time to thresh her: yet a 
little while, and the time of her 
harvest shall come. 

34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of 
Babylon hath devoured me, he hath 
crushed me, he hath made me an 
empty vessel, he hath. swallowed 
me up like a dragon, he hath filled 
his belly with my delicates, he hath 
cast me out. 

35 The violence done to me and 
to my flesh be upon Babylon, shail 
the inhabitant of Zion say; and my 
blood upon the inhabitants of Chai- 
dea, shall Jerusalem say. 


& 
i 


25 Behold, I am against thee, 40 © 


51 36] 


JEREMIAH. : 


[51 62 


36 Therefore thus saith the LorpD; 
Behold, ¢I will plead thy cause and 
take vengeance for thee; and I will 
dry up her sea, and make her 
springs 3 

37 “And Babylon shall become 
heaps, a dwellingplace for dragons, 
an astonishment, and an hissing, 
without an inhabitant. 

38 They shall roar together like 
lions: they shall yell as lions’ 
whelps. 

39 In their heat I will make their 
feasts, and I will make them 
drunken, that they may rejoice, 
and sleep a perpetual sleep, and 
not wake, saith the LorD. 

40 I will bring them down like 
lambs to the slaughter, like rams 
with he goats. 

41 How is SSheshach taken! and 
how is ¢the praise of the whole 
earth surprised! how is Babylon 
become an astonishment among the 
nations! 

42 eThe sea is come up upon 
Babylon: she is covered with the 
multitude-of the waves thereof. 

43 fHer cities are a desolation, a 
dry land, and a wilderness, a land 
wherein no man dwelleth, neither 

doth any son of man pass thereby. 

- 44 And I will punish Bel in Baby- 
lon, and I will bring forth out of 
his mouth that which he hath 
swallowed up: and the nations 
shall not flow together any more 
unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon 
shall fall. 

45 sMy people, go ye out of the 
midst of her, and deliver ye every 
man his soul from the fierce anger 
of the LORD. 

46 And lest your heart faint, and 
ye fear for the rumour that shall be 
heard in the land; a rumour shall 
both come one year, and after that 
in another year shall come a fu- 
mour, and violence in the land, 
ruler against ruler. 

47 Therefore, behold, the days 
come, that I will. do judgment upon 
the graven images of Babylon: and 
her whole land shall be confounded, 
and all her slain shall fall in the 
midst of her. 

48 Then the heaven and the 
earth, and all that is therein, shall 
sing for Babylon: for the spoilers 
shall come unto her from the north, 
saith the LORD. 

49 As Babylon hath caused the 
slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon 
shall fall the slain of all the earth. 

50 Ye that have escaped the 


B.C. 595. 


a Jer.50.34. 


b Jer.50.39; 
Isa.13.22; 
Rev.18.2. 


¢ Jer.25.26. 
d Jer.49.25; 
Isa.13.29; 
Dan.4.30. 


e See Isa.8. 
7,8. 


f Jer.50.39,40. 


gv.6; Jer.50. 
8; Rev.18.4. 


h 1sa.44.23; 
49.13; Rev. 
18.20. 

i Jer.49.16; 


Amos 9.2; 
Oba.4. 


j v.24; Jer.50. 
29; Psa.94.1. 


k Jer.46.18; 
48.15. 


831 


sword, go away, stand not still: 
remember the LORD afar off, and 
let Jerusalem come into your 
mind. 

51 We are confounded, because 
we have heard reproach: shame 
hath covered our faces: for strangers 
are come into the sanctuaries of the 
Lorp’s house. 

52 Wherefore, behold, the days 
come, saith the Lorb, that I will 
do judgment upon her graven im- 
ages: and through all her land the 
wounded shall groan. 

53 ‘Though Babylon should 
mount up to heaven, and though 
she should fortify the height of her 
strength, yet from me shall spoilers 
come unto her, saith the Lorp. 

54 Asound of acry cometh from 
Babylon, and great destruction 
from the land of the Chaldeans: 

55 Because the Lorb hath spoiled 
Babylon, and destroyed out of her 
the great voice; when her waves 
do roar like great waters, a noise 
of their voice is uttered: 

56 Because the spoiler is come 
upon her, even upon Babylon, and 
her mighty men are taken, every 
one of their bows is broken: for 
the Lorp God of recompences shall 
surely requite. , 

57 And I will make drunk her 
princes, and her wise men, her 
captains, and her rulers, and her 
mighty men: and they shall sleep 
a perpetual sleep, and not wake,’ 
saith *#the King, whose name is 
the LoRD of hosts. 

58 Thus saith the LorD of hosts; 
The broad walls of Babylon shall 
be utterly broken, and her high 
gates shall be burned with fire; and 
the people shall labour in vain, and 
the folk in the fire, and they shall 
be weary. 

59 The word which Jeremiah the 
prophet commanded Seraiah the 
son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, 
when he went with Zedekiah the 
king of Judah into Babylon in the 
fourth year of his reign. And this 
Seraiah was a quiet prince. 

60 So Jeremiah wrote in a book 
all the evil that should come upon 
Babylon, even all these words that 
are written against Babylon. 

61 And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, 
When thou comest to Babylon, and 
shalt see, and shalt read all these 
words; 

62 Then shalt thou say, O LorD, 
thou hast spoken against this place, 
to cut it off, that none shall remain 


51 63] 


in it, neither man nor beast, but 
that it shall be desolate for ever-. 

63 And_it shall be, when thou 
hast made an end of reading this 
book, ¢that thou shalt bind a stone 
to it, and cast it into the midst of 
Euphrates: 

64 And thou shalt say, Thus shall 
Babylon sink, and shall not rise 
from the evil that I will bring upon 
her: and they shall be weary. Thus 
far are the words of Jeremiah. 


CHAPTER 52, 


A retrospect: the overthrow and 
captivity of Judah. (Cf. Jer. 
39. 1-10.) 


ZPDEKIAN bwas one and twenty 
years old when he began to 
reign, and he reigned eleven years 
in Jerusalem. And his mother’s 
name was Hamutal the daughter 
of Jeremiah of Libnah. 

2 And he did that which was 
evil in the eyes of the LorpD, accord- 
ing to all that Jehoiakim had done. 

3 For through the anger of the 
LORD it came to pass in Jerusalem 
and Judah, till he had cast them 
out from his presence, that Zede- 
kiah rebelled against the king of 
Babylon. 

4 And it came to pass in the 
‘ninth year of his reign, in the 
4tenth month, in the tenth day of 
the month, that Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon came, he and all 
his, army, against Jerusalem, and 
pitched against it, and built forts 
against it round about. 

5 So the city was besieged unto 
the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. 

6 And in the «fourth month, in 
the ninth day of the month, the 
famine was sore in the city, so that 
there was no bread for the people of 
the land, 

7 Then the city was broken up, 
and all the men of war fled, and 
went forth out of the city by night 
by the way of the gate between the 
two walls, which was by the king’s 
garden; (now the Chaldeans were 
by the city round about:) and they 
went by the way of the plain. 

8 But the army of the Chaldeans 
pursued after the king, and over- 
took Zedekiah in the plains of Jeri- 
cho; and all his army was scattered 
from him. 

9 /Then they took the king, and 
carried him up unto the king of 
Babylon to Riblah in the land of 


ate ot Se a, Ee 
JEREMIAH. 


B.C. 595. 


a Rev.18.21. 

6 2 Ki.24.18. 

¢ 2 Ki.25.1-27; 
Jer.39.1; 
Zech.8.19. 

die. January. 

ele. July. 

Ff Jer.32.4. 

g Ezk.12.13. 

hice. August. 

@ Jer.39.9. 


j See 1 Ki.7. 
15,23,27. 


k Ex.27.3; 
2 Ki.25.14- 
16. 
11 Ki.7.47. 
m 1 Ki.7.15; 


2 Ki.25.17; 
2 Chr.3.15. 


832 


4 hy 1a 


Hamath; where he gave judgment 
upon him. 7 
10 And the king of Babylon slew 
the sons of Zedekiah before his 
eyes: he slew also all the princes of 

Judah in Riblah. 

11 &Then he put out the eyes of 
Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon 
bound him in chains, and carried 
him to Babylon, and put him in 
prison till the day of his death. 

12 Now in the /fifth month, in the 
tenth day of the month, which was 
the nineteenth year of Nebuchad- 
rezzar king of Babylon, came #Neb- 
uzar-adan, captain of the guard, 
which served the king of Babylon, 
into Jerusalem, 

13 And burned the house of the 
LORD, and the king’s house; and 
all the houses of Jerusalem, and all 
the houses of the great men, burned 
he ‘with fire: 

14 And all the army of the Chal- 
deans, that were with the captain 
of the guard, brake down all the 
walls of Jerusalem round about. 

15 Then ‘Nebuzar-adan the cap- 
tain of the guard carried away 
captive certain of the poor of the 
people, and the residue of the peo- 
ple that remained in the city, and 
those that fell away, that fell to the 
king of Babylon, and the rest of the 
multitude. 

16 But Nebuzar-adan the captain 
of the guard left certain of the poor 
of the land for vinedressers and for 
husbandmen. 

17 JAlso the pillars of brass that 
were in the house of the Lorp, and 
the bases, and the brasen sea that 
was in the house of the Lorp, the 
Chaldeans brake, and carried alk 
the brass of them to Babylon. 

18 “The caldrons also, and the 
shovels, and the snuffers, and the 
bowls, and the spoons, and all the 
vessels of brass wherewith they 
ministered, took they away. 

19 And the basons, and the fire- 
pans, and the bowls, and the cal- 
drons, and the candlesticks, and the 
spoons, and the cups; that which 
was of gold in gold, and that which 
was of silver in silver, took the 
captain of the guard away. 

20 The two pillars, one sea, and 
twelve brasen bulls that were under 
the bases, which king Solomon had 
made in the house of the Lorp: 
'the brass of all these vessels was 
without weight. 

21 And concerning “the pillars, 
the height of one pillar was eigh- 


! 


7 


JEREMIAH. 


[52 34 


teen “cubits; and a fillet of twelve 
eubits did compass it; and the 
thickness thereof was four fingers: 
it was hollow. 

22 And a chapiter of brass was 
upon it; and the height of one chap- 
iter was five cubits, with network 
and pomegranates upon the chap- 
iters round about, all of brass. The 
second pillar also and the pome- 
granates were like unto these. 

23 And there were ninety and six 
pomegranates on a side; and ball 
the pomegranates upon the network 
were an hundred round about. 

94 And the captain of the guard 
took ‘Seraiah the chief priest, and 
@Zephaniah the second priest, and 
the three keepers of the door: 

25 He took also out of the city an 
eunuch, which had the charge of the 
men of war; and seven men of 
them that were near the king’s per- 
son, which were found in the city; 
and the principal scribe of the host, 
who mustered the people of the 
land; and threescore men of the 
people of the land, that were found 
in the midst of the city. 

26 So Nebuzar-adan the captain 

of the guard took them, and 
brought them to the king of Baby- 
lon to Riblah. 

27 And the king of Babylon smote 
them, and put them to death in Rib- 
{ah in the land of Hamath. Thus 
Judah was carried away captive out 
of his own land. 

28 ¢Thisis the peoplewhom Nebu- 
chadrezzar carried away captive: 


B.C. 588. 


a One cubit = 


about 18 in.; 


also v.22. 
b See 1 Ki.7. 
20. 
¢ 2 Ki.25.18, 
d Jer.21.1; 
29.25. 
e 2 Ki.24.2. 
f See 2 Ki.24. 
12. 
g 2 Ki.24.14. 
h 2 Ki.25.27- 
30. 


tie. March. 


j Gen.40.13, 
20. 


k 2 Sam.9.13. 


833 


in the fseventh year &three thou- 
sand Jews and three and twenty: 

29 In the eighteenth year of 
Nebuchadrezzar he carried away 
captive from Jerusalem eight hun- 
dred thirty and two persons: 

30 In the three and twentieth 
year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzar- 
adan the captain of the guard car- 
ried away captive of the Jews seven 
hundred forty and five persons: all 
the persons were four thousand and 
six hundred. 


The latter days of Jehcoiachin. 
(Cf. 2 Ki. 25, 27-30.) 


31 And it came to pass in the 
seven and thirtieth year of the cap- 
tivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, 
in the ‘twelfth month, in the five 
and twentieth day of the month, 
that Evil-merodach king of Baby- 
lon in the first year of his reign 
jlifted up the head of Jehoiachin 
king of Judah, and brought him 
forth out of prison, 

32 And spake kindly unto him, 
and set his throne above the throne 
of the kings that were with him in 
Babylon, 

33 And changed his prison gar- 
ments: and “he did continually eat 
bread before him all the days of his 
life. 

34 And for his diet, there was a 
continual diet given him of the king 
of Babylon, every day a portion 
until the day of his death, all the 
days of his life. 


11] 


THE 


[1 16 


LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 


THE Heres a significance of this book lies in the fact that it is the disclosure of the. 
love and sorrow of Jehovah for the very people whom He is chastening—a _sor- 
row wrought by the Spirit in the heart of Jeremiah (Jer. 13. 17; Mt. 23. 36, 33; Rom. 


9. 1-5). 


The chapters indicate the analysis, viz., five lamentations. 


e 


CHAPTER 1. 
The first lamentation. 


How doth the city sit solitary, 
that was full of people! “how 
is she become as a widow! she that 

“was great among the nations, and 
‘princess among the provinces, how 
is she become tributary! 

2 She weepeth sore in the night, 
and her tears are on her cheeks: 
among all her lovers she hath none 
to comfort her: all her friends have 
dealt treacherously with her, they 
are become her enemies. 

3 ‘Judah is gone into captivity 
because of affliction, and because 
of great servitude: she dwelleth 
among the “heathen, she findeth no 
rest: all her persecutors overtook 
her between the straits. 

4 The ways of Zion do mourn, be- 
cause none come to the solemn 
feasts: all her gates are desolate: 
her priests sigh, her ‘virgins are 
afflicted, and she is in bitterness. 

5 Her adversaries are the chief, 


her enemies prosper; for the Lorp 
hath afflicted her ¢for the multitude 
of her transgressions: her children 
are gone into captivity before the 
enemy. 


6 And from the daughter of Zion 
all her beauty is departed: her 
princes are ‘become like harts that 
find no pasture, and they are gone 
without strength before the pur- 
suer. : 

7 Jerusalem remembered in the 
days of her affliction and of her 
miseries all her pleasant things that 
she had in the days of old, when 
her people fell into the hand of the 
enemy, and none did help her: the 
adversaries saw her, and did mock 
at her sabbaths. 

8 JJerusalem hath grievously 
sinned; therefore she is removed: 
all that honoured her despise her, 
because they have seen her naked- 


B.C. 588. 


a Isa.47.7,8. 

b Ezra 4.20. 

€ Jer.52.27. 

di.e. nations. 

eé Jer.30.14, 
15; 52.28; 
Dan.9.7,16. 

f1 Ki.8.46. 

g Jer.51.51. 

h Dan.9.12. 

# Ezk.12.13; 
17.20. 

j Deut.28.48. 

k 1sa.63.3; 


Rev.14.19, 
20; 19.15, 


ness: yea, she sigheth, and turneth 
backward. ; 

9 Her filthiness is in her skirts; 
she remembereth not her last end: 
therefore she came down wonder- 
fully: she had no comforter. O 
LORD, behold my affliction: for the 
enemy hath magnified himself. 

10 The adversary hath spread out 
his hand upon all her pleasant 
things: for she hath seen that the 
¢heathen entered sinto her sanctu- 
ary, whom thou didst command 
that they should not enter into thy 
congregation. 

11 All her people sigh, they seek 
bread; they have given their plea- 
sant things for meat to relieve the 
soul: see. O Lorp, and consider; 
for I am become vile. 

12 Is it nothing to you, all ye that 
pass by? behold, and see “if there 
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, 
which is done unto me, wherewith 
the LorD hath afflicted me in the 
day of his fierce anger. 

13 From above hath he sent fire 
into my bones, and it prevaileth 
against them: ‘he hath spread a net 
for my feet, he hath turned me 
back: he hath made me desolate 
and faint all the day. 

14 JThe yoke of my transgressions 
is bound by his hand: they are 
wreathed, and come up upon my 
neck: he hath made my strength to 
fall, the Lord hath delivered me 
into their hands, from whom Iam 
not able to rise up. 

15 The Lord hath trodden under 
foot all my mighty men in the 
midst of me: he hath called an 
assembly against me to crush my 
young men: *the Lord hath trodden 
the virgin, the daughter of Judah, 
as in a winepress. 

16 For these things I weep; mine 
eye, mine eye runneth down with 
water, because the comforter that 
‘should relieve my soul is far from 


Py 47] 


LAMENTATIONS. 


[2 13 


me: my children are desolate, be- 
cause the enemy prevailed. , 

17 Zion spreadeth forth her 
hands, and there is none to com- 
fort her: the LorpD hath com- 
manded concerning Jacob, that his 
adversaries should be round about 
him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous 
woman among them. 

18 The Lorp is righteous; for I 
have rebelled against his com- 
mandment: hear, I pray you, all 
people, and behold my sorrow: my 
virgins and my young men are gone 
into captivity. 

19 I called for my lovers, but 
they deceived me: my priests and 
mine elders gave up the ghost in the 
’ city, while they sought their meat 
to relieve their souls. 

20 Behold, O Lorp; for I am in 
distress: my bowels are troubled; 
mine heart is turned within me; for 
I have grievously rebelled: “abroad 
the sword bereaveth, at home there 
is as death. 

21 They have heard that I sigh: 
there is none to comfort me: all 
mine enemies have heard of my 
trouble; they are glad that thou 
hast done it: thou wilt bring the 
day that thou hast called, and they 
shall.be like unto me. 


22 Let all their wickedness come] ; 


before thee; and do unto them, as 
thou hast done unto me for all my 
transgressions: for my sighs are 
many, and my heart is faint. 


CHAPTER 2. 
The second lamentation. 


Ho” hath the Lord covered the 
daughter of Zion with a cloud 

“in his anger, “and cast down from 
heaven unto the earth the beauty of 
Istael, and remembered not his 
footstool in the day of his anger! 

2 The Lord hath swallowed up 
all the habitations of Jacob, ¢and 
hath not pitied: he hath thrown 
down in his wrath the strong holds 
of the daughter of Judah; he hath 
brought them down to the ground: 
he hath polluted the kingdom and 
the princes thereof. 

3 He hath cut off in Ars fierce 
anger all the horn of Israel: he hath 
drawn back his right hand from be- 
fore the enemy, and he burned 
against Jacob like a flaming fire, 
which devoureth round about. 

4 «He hath bent his bow like an 
enemy: he stood with his right 
hand as an adversary, and slew all 


B.C. 588. 


a Deut.32.25; 


Ezk.7.15. 


6 Isa.13.; 
Jer.46. 


c Mt.11.23. 


d vs.17,21; 
Lam.3.43. 


e Isa.63.10. 


f 2 Ki.25.9; 
Jer.52.13. 


g Psa. 80. 2 


Isa.34.11. 


Deut.28. 36; 
2 Ki.24.15; 
CET 


j Lam.3.48; 
Psa.6.7- 


k Lam.1.12; 
Dan.9.12. 


835 


that were pleasant to the eye in 
the tabernacle of the daughter of 
a he poured out his fury like 
re. 

5 The Lord was as an enemy: he 
hath swallowed up Israel, fhe hath 
swallowed up all her palaces: he 
hath destroyed his strong holds, 
and hath increased in the daughter 
of Judah mourning and lamenta- 
tion. 

6 And he hath violently #taken 
away his tabernacle, as if it were 
of a garden: he hath destroyed his 
places of the assembly: the LorD 
hath caused the solemn feasts and 
sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, 
and hath despised in the indigna- 
tion of his anger the king and the 
priest. 

7 The Lord hath cast off his altar, 
he hath abhorred his sanctuary, he 
hath given up into the hand of the 
enemy the walls of her palaces; 
they have made a noise in the house 
of the LORD, as in the day of a sol- 
emn feast. 

8 The Lorp hath purposed to de- 
stroy the wall of the daughter of. 
Zion: "he hath stretched out a line, 
he hath not withdrawn his hand 
from destroying: therefore he made 
the rampart and the wall to lament; 
they languished together. 

9 Her gates are sunk into the 
ground; he hath destroyed and 
broken her bars: “her king and her 
princes are among the Gentiles: the 
law is no more; her prophets also: 
find no vision from the LORD. 

10 The elders of the daughter of 
Zion sit upon the ground, and keep 
silence: they have cast up dust upon 
their heads; they have girded them- 
selves with sackcloth: the virgins 
of Jerusalem hang down their heads 
to the ground. 

11 jMine eyes do fail with tears, 
my bowels are troubled, my liver is 
poured upon the earth, for the de- 
struction of the daughter of my 
people; because the children and 
the sucklings swoon in the streets 
of the city. 

12 They say to their mothers, 
Where is corn and wine? when 
they swooned as the wounded in 
the streets of the city, when their 
soul was poured out into their 
mothers’ bosom. 

13 *What thing shall I take to 
witness for thee? what thing shall 
I liken to thee, O daughter of 
Jerusalem? what shall I equal to 
thee, that I may comfort thee, O 


Brahe LAMENTATIONS. {3 20 


virgin daughter of Zion? for thy} B.c. 588. |none escaped nor remained: those 


i like the sea: who that I have swaddled and brought — 

7 Sh rs a up hath mine enemy consumed. 

14 Thy prophets Lave seen vain oy 
and foolish things for thee: and ICHAPTER 3. 
they have not discovered thine ini- The thinner aot 
quity, to turn away thy captivity; 
but have seen for thee false burdens AM the man that hath seen 
and causes of banishment. - affliction by the rod of his wrath. 

15 All that pass by clap their 2 He hath led me, and brought 
hands at thee; they hiss and wag me into darkness, but not into 
their head at the daughter of Jeru- light. ; A 
salem, saying, Is this the city that 3 Surely against me is he turned; 
men call The perfection of beauty, he turneth his hand against me 
The joy of the whole earth? all the day. : 

16 All thine enemies have opened|a1 Ki.9.8; 4 &My flesh and my skin hath he 


ir mouth against thee: they hiss| Jer-18-16; made old; he hath broken my bones. 
aa gnash ee teeth: they say,| Nat-s-19- 5 He hath builded against me, and 
We have swallowed her up: cer-!} Lev.26.16; |compassed me with gall and travail. 
tainly this is the day that we} Deut.2815. | 6 He hath set me in dark places, 
looked for; we have found, we},;amiie; |as they that be dead of old. 


have seen it. Jer.14.17. 7 ‘He hath hedged me about, that 
17 >The LorpD hath done that I cannot get out: he hath made my 

which he had devised; he hath ful-|?Fs*-628- [chain heavy. 

filled his word that he had com-|¢tLam.4.10: 8 JAlso when I cry and shout, he 


manded in the days of old: he hath| Lev.26.29; /shutteth out my prayer. 


thrown down, and hath not pitied: Rerees 9 He hath inclosed my ways with 


and he hath caused thine enemy to| £zt.5.16. sages eae he hath made my paths 
rejoice over thee, he hath set up the 3 crooked. 
horn of thine adversaries. F About 9 in. ae He was (eels as : bear 
18 Their heart cried unto the}, Job 16.8. ying in wait, and as a lion in 
Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion, if secret places. f 
let tears run. down like a river day|’ Frome iy sales turned aside ee, Wass. 
and night: give thyself no rest; let it and pulled me in pieces: he hat 
not the apple of thine eye cease. | i Job 3.23; made me desolate. — 
19 Arise, cry out'in the night: mal eee 12 -He fone ine his bow, and set 
the beginning of the watches ¢pour| ~~” me as a mark for the arrow. 
out thine heart like water before} J Job 30.20; 13 He hath caused the arrows of 
the face of the Lord: lift up thy| Ps4-22-2- his quiver to’enter into my reins. 
hands toward him for the life of|p job 7.20; 14 I was a derision to all my peo- 


thy young children, that faint for| 16.12; Psa. | ple; and their song all the day. 
unger in the top of every street. 38.2. 15 ‘He hath filled me with bitter- 


20 Behold, O Lorp, and consider} ; Jer.9.15 ness, he hath made me drunken 
to whom thou hast done this. with wormwood. 
«Shall the women eat their fruit, 16 He hath also broken my teeth 
and children of a fspan long? shall with gravel stones, he hath covered 
the priest and the prophet be slain me with ashes. 
in the sanctuary of the Lord? 17 And thou hast removed my 
21 The young and the old lie on soul far off from peace: I forgat 
the ground in the streets: my vir- prosperity. : 
gins and my young men are fallen 18 And I said, My strength and 
by the sword; thou hast slain them my hope is perished from the 
in the day of thine anger: thou Lorpb: 


hast killed, and not pitied. 19 Remembering mine affliction 


22 Thou hast called as in a solemn and my misery, the wormwood and 
aay my terrors round about, so that the gall. 


in the day of the Lorp’s anger) 20 My soul hath them still in re- 


2 The literary form of Lamentations is necessarily obscured in the translation. 
It is an acrostic dirge, the lines arranged in couplets or triplets, each of which be- 
gins with a letter of the Hebrew alphabet. In the third Lament, which consists of 
sixty-six stanzas instead of twenty-two, each Line of each triplet begins with the 
same letter, so that the entire sixty-six verses are required to give the twenty-two 
letters of the alphabet. Thus verses 1-3 of our version form but three lines of the 
original, each line beginning with A, etc. 


836 


} 


gpl ees foal ha hi ed a bar ce a IRN LANA i a 
ra LAMENTATIONS. [41 


21] 


membrance, and is humbled in 


me. 

21 This I recall to my mind, there- 
fore have I hope. 

22 “It is of the LoRD’s mercies 
that we are not consumed, because 
his compassions fail not. 

23 They are new every morn- 
ing: great 1s thy faithfulness. 

24 The Lorp is “my portion, 


saith my soul; therefore will I hope} 


in . 

25 The Lorp is good unto them 
that ¢wait for him, to the soul that 
seeketh him. 


26 It is good that a man should) 


both hope and quietly wait for the 
salvation of the LorD. 

97 It is good for a man that he 
bear the yoke in his youth. 

98 He sitteth alone and keepeth 
silence, because he hath borne it 
upon him. 

29 He putteth his mouth in the 
dust; if so be there may be hope. 

30 He giveth his cheek to him 
that ‘smiteth him: he is filled full 
with reproach. 

31 fFor the Lord will not cast off 
for ever: 

32 But though he cause grief, yet 
will he have compassion according 
to the multitude of his mercies. 

33 &¥or he doth not afflict will- 
ingly nor grieve the children of men. 

34 To crush under his feet all the 
prisoners of the earth, 

35 To turn aside the right of a 
man before the face of the most 
High, 

36 To subvert a man in his cause, 
kthe Lord approveth not. 

37 Who is he that saith, and it 
cometh to pass, when the Lord 

-commandeth it not? 

38 Out of the mouth of the most 
High proceedeth ‘not evil and 
good? 4 

39 Wherefore doth a living man 
complain, a man for the punish- 
ment of his sins? 

40 Let us search and try our 
ways, and turn again to the LORD. 

41 Let us lift up our heart with 
our hands unto God in the heavens. 
42 We have transgressed and 
have rebelled: thou hast not par- 
doned. 

43 Thou hast covered with anger, 
and persecuted us: thou hast slain, 
thou hast not pitied. : 

44 Thou hast covered thyself with 
a cloud, that our prayer should not 
‘pass through. 
45 jThou hast made us as the off- 


B.C. 588. Beene and refuse in the midst of 
the people. 


46 All our enemies have opened 
their mouths against us. 

47 Fear and a snare is come upon 
us, desolation and destruction. 

48 Mine eye runneth down with 
rivers of water for the destruction 
of the daughter of my people. 

49 Mine eye trickleth down, and 
ceaseth not, without any intermis- 


sion, 
50 Till the LorD look down, and 
behold from heaven. 


a Mal.3.6. 51 Mine eye affecteth mine heart 
b Isa.33.2. because of all the daughters of my 
city. ‘ 
¢ wrt 52 Mine enemies chased me sore, 
57: Jer. {like a bird, without cause. 
10.16. 53 They have cut off my life in 
g Psa.130.6: the dungeon, and cast a stone upon 
Isa.30.18; me. 
Mic.7.7. 54 Waters flowed over mine head; 
2 Mt 27:30: then I said, I am cut off. 
Mk.15.19; 55 ’I called upon thy name, O 
Lk.22.63; LORD, out of the low dungeon. 


John 18.22, | 56 Thou hast heard my voice: 
7Psa.4.14. [hide not thine ear at my breathing, 
at my cry. 

g eae et 57 ™Thou drewest near in the 
2 |day that I called upon thee: thou 

h Hab.1.13. saidst, Fear not. 

j Jas.3.10,12 58 O Lord, thou hast pleaded the 
ee |eauses of my soul; thou hast “re- 

j1Cor.4.13. |deemed my life. 

59 O LorD, thou hast seen my 


k1sa.63.15. | rong: judge thou my cause. 

1 Psa.130.1; 60 Thou hast seen all their ven- 
Jon.2.2. geance and all their imaginations 

m Jas.4.8. against me. 


61 Thou hast heard their re- 
n Heb. goel, proach, O LorD, and all their im- 


Redemp-  |aginations against me; 

type). Isa.59.| 62 The lips of those that rose up 

20, note. against me, and their device against 
o Psa.28.4 me allthe day. 

Jer.11.20; 63 Behold their sitting down, and 


2 Tim.4.14. |their rising up; I am their musick. 

64 9Render unto them a recom- 
pence, O Lorp, according to the 
work of their hands. 

65 Give them sorrow of heart, 
thy curse unto them. 

66 Persecute and destroy them in 
anger from under the heavens of 
the LorD. 


CHAPTER 4. 
The fourth lamentation. 


Ho” is the gold become dim! 
how is the most fine gold 
changed! the stones of the sanctu- 
ary are poured out in the top of 
every street. 


837 


te 


4 2] 


LAMENTATIONS. 


neh: 


[59 


2 The precious sons of Zion, com- 
parable to fine gold, how are they 
esteemed as “earthen pitchers, the 
work of the hands of the potter! 

3 Even the sea monsters draw out 
the breast, they give suck to their 
young ones: the daughter of my 
people is become cruel, like the 
ostriches in the wilderness. ; 

4 The tongue of the sucking child 
cleaveth to the roof of his mouth 
for thirst: the young children ask 
bread, and no man breaketh it unto 
them. , 

5 They that did feed delicately 
are desolate in the streets: they 
that were brought up in scarlet 
embrace dunghills. : 

6 For the punishment of the ini- 
quity of the daughter of my people 
is greater than the punishment of 
the sin of Sodom, that was over- 
thrown as in a moment, and no 
hands stayed on her. 

7 Her Nazarites were purer than 
snow, they were whiter than milk, 
they were more ruddy in body than 
rubies, their polishing was of sap- 
phire: 

8 Their visage is blacker than a 
coal; they are not known in the 
streets: their skin cleaveth to their 
bones; it is withered, it is become 
like a stick. 

9 They that be slain with the 
sword are better than they that be 
slain with hunger: for these pine 
away, stricken through for want 
of the fruits of the field. 

10 The hands of the pitiful women 
have sodden their own children: 
they were their meat in the de- 
struction of the daughter of my 
people. 

11 The LorpD hath accomplished 
his fury; che hath poured out his 
fierce anger, and ¢hath kindled a 
fire in Zion, and it hath devoured 
the foundations thereof. 

12 The Kings of the earth, and all 
the inhabitants of the world, would 
not have believed that the adver- 
sary and the enemy should have 
entered into the gates of Jerusalem. 

13 «For the sins of her prophets, 
and the iniquities of her priests, 
that have shed the blood of the just 
in the midst of her, 

14 They have wandered as blind 
men in the streets, they have pol- 
luted themselves with blood, so 
that men could not touch their 
garments. 

15 They cried unto them, Depart 
ye; it is unclean; depart, depart, 


B.C. 588. 


@ Isa.30.14; 
Jer.19.11; 
2 Cor.4.7. 


6 Gen.19.25. 
ce Jer.7.20. 


d Deut.32.22; 
Jer.21.14, 


e Jer.5.31; 
6.13; 14.14; 
23.11,21; 
Ezk.22.26, 


28; Zeph.3.4. 


fi.e. nations. 


g Ezk.7.2,3,6; 
os 8.2. 

h Eccl.11.9. 

t Psa.137.7. 


j Psa.79.1. 


k Deut.28.48; 
Jer.28.14, 


838 


i 
touch not: when they fled away — 
and wandered, they said among © 
the fheathen, They shall no more 
sojourn there. ~ 

16 The anger of the LorpD hath 
divided them; he will no more re- 
gard them: they respected not the 
persons of the priests, they favoured 
not the elders. ' 

17 As for us, our eyes as yet failed 
for our vain help: in our watching 
we have watched for a nation that 
could not save us. 

18 They hunt our steps, that we 
cannot go in our streets: our end is 
near, our days are fulfilled; for our 
end is come. ¢ 

19 Our persecutors are swifter 
than the eagles of the heaven: they 
pursued us upon the mountains, 
they laid wait for us in the wilder- 
ness. 

20 The breath of our nostrils, the 
anointed of the Lorn, was taken in 
their pits, of whom we said, Under 
his shadow we shall live among the 
fheathen. 

21 Rejoice and be glad, O daugh- 
ter of Edom, that dwellest in the 
land of Uz; the cup also shall pass 
through unto thee: thou shalt be 
drunken, and shalt make thyself 
naked. h 

22° The punishment of thine ini- 
quity is accomplished, O daughter 
of Zion; he will no more carry thee 
away into captivity: ‘he will visit 
thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; 
he will discover thy sins. 


CHAPTER 5S. 
The fifth lamentation. 


FREMEMBER, O Lorn, what is 
come upon us: consider, and 

behold our reproach. 

2 jOur inheritance is turned to 
strangers, our houses to aliens. 

3 We are orphans and fatherless, 
our mothers are as widows. 

4 We have drunken our water for 
money; our wood is sold unto us. 

5 *Our necks are under persecu- 
tion: we labour, and have no rest. 

6 We have given the hand to the 
Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, 
to be satisfied with bread. 


7 Our fathers have sinned, and 
are not; and we have borne their 
iniquities. 

8 Servants have ruled over us: 
there is none that doth deliver us 
out of their hand. : 

9 We gat our bread with the peril 


os 


5 10] 


LAMENTATIONS. 


of our lives because of the sword of 
the wilderness. 

10 Our skin was black like an oven 
because of the terrible famine. 

11 ¢They ravished the women in 
Zion, and the maids in the cities of 
Judah. 

12 Princes are hanged up by their 
hand: the faces of elders were not 
honoured. 

13 4They took the young men to 
grind, and the children fell under 
the wood. 

14 The elders have ceased from 
the gate, the young men from their 
musick. 

15 The joy of our heart is ceased; 
our dance is turned into mourning. 

16 The crown is fallen from our 


B.C. 588. 


a Isa.13.16; 
Zech.14.2. 


b Jud.16.21. 


c Psa.9.7; 
10.16; 29.10; 
90.2; 102.12: 
145.13; 
Hab.1.12. 


d Psa.80. 


3,7,19; 
Jer.31.18. 


839 


[5 22 


head: woe unto us, that we have 
sinned! 

17 For this our heart is faint; for 
these things our eyes are dim. 

18 Because of the mountain of 
Zion, which is desolate, the foxes 
walk upon it. 

19 cThou, O LorD, remainest for 
ever; thy throne from generation 
to generation. 

20 Wherefore dost thou forget us 
for ever, and forsake us so long 
time? 

21 ?Turn thou us unto thee, O 
Lorp, and we shall be turned; re- 
new our days as of old. 

22 But thou hast utterly rejected 
us: thou art very wroth against 
us. 


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET 


11) EZEKIEL. [1s 


EZEKIEL was carried away to Babylon between the first and final deportations of Ju- 
dah (2 Ki. 24. 11-16). Like Daniel and the Apostle John, he prophesied out of the 
land, and his prophecy, like theirs, follows the method of symbol and vision. Un- 
like the pre-exilic prophets, whose ministry was primarily to either Judah or the 
ten-tribe kingdom, Ezekiel is the voice of Jehovah to ‘‘the whole house of Israel.” 

Speaking broadly, the purpose of his ministry is to keep before the generation 
born in exile the national sins which had brought Israel so low (e.g. Ezk. 14. 23); to 
sustain the faith of the exiles by predictions of national restoration, of the execution 
of justice upon their oppressors, and of national glory under the Davidic monarchy. 

Ezekiel is in seven great prophetic strains indicated by the expression, “The hand 
of the LorD was upon me” (Ezk. 1. 3; 3. 14, 22; 8. 1; 33. 22; 37.1; 40.1). The minor 
divisions are indicated by the formula, ‘‘And the word of the .orD came unto me.” 
These divisions are indicated in the text. : 

The events recorded in Ezekiel cover a period of 21 years (Ussher). 


PART I. EZEKIEL’S PREPARATION AND COMMISSION 
: (SEE v. 3): CHAPTERS 1.-3. 9. 


CHAPTER 1. —B.C. 595.__/a great cloud, and a fire infolding 

GY tatreducton itself, and a brightness was about 

; it, and out of the midst thereof as 

WN OW it came to pass in the thir- ae ee a amber, out of the 

tieth year, in the fourth midst o e fire. 

month, in the fifth day of the 5 Also out of the midst thereof 
month, as I was among the cap- came the likeness of four Miving — 

ne bby the river of Chebar, that aher Fale ee creatures. And this was. their ap- 

e heavens were opened, and I saw]” the thictieth |Pearance; they had the likeness of 

visions of God. year of Eze- |a man. 
‘ iel’s age.’’ 
Cube waren Of the sien: Bs 6 And every one had four faces, 


bv.3;Ezk.3. |and every one had four wings. 

2 In the fifth day of the month,| 15,23; 10.15. | 7 And their feet were straight 
ae a the fifth year of king spe Sia aa ee nae eo of cae ye 
“3 The word of He lake came ex val oa es Spirited ake the alee oe 
pressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the 1 Ki.18 463 nished brass. 
son of Buzi, in the land of the Chal- san tne 8 And they had the hands of a 


deans Ey the river Chebar; and the man under their wings on their four 
chand of the LorpD was there upon sides; and they four had their faces 
him, and their wings. 


4 And I looked, and, behold, a 9 Their wings were joined one to 
whirlwind came out of the north, another; they turned not when they 


1 The “living creatures” are identical with the Cherubim. The subject is some- 
what obscure, but from the position of the Cherubim at the gate of Eden, upon the 
cover of the ark of the covenant, and in Rev. 4., it is clearly gathered that they 
have to do with the vindication of the holiness of God as against the presumptuous 
pride of sinful man who, despite his sin, would ‘“‘put forth his hand, and take also 
of the tree of life” (Gen. 3. 22-24). Upon the ark of the covenant, of one substance 
with the mercy-seat, they saw the sprinkled blood which, in type, spake of the 
perfect maintenance of the divine righteousness by the sacrifice of Christ (Ex. 25. 
17-20; Rom. 3. 24-26, notes). The living creatures (or Cherubim) appear to be 
actual beings of the angelic order. Cf. Isa. 6. 2, note. The Cherubim or living 
creatures are not identical with the Seraphim (Isa. 6. 2-7). They appear to have 
to do with the holiness of God as outraged by sin; the Seraphim with uncleanness 
in the people of God. The passage in Ezekiel is highly figurative, but the effect 
was the revelation to the prophet of the Shekinah glory of the LorD. Such revela- 
tions are connected invariably with new blessing and service. Cf. Ex. 3. 2-10; Isa, 
6. 1-10; Dan. 10. 5-14; Rev. 1. 12-19 


40 


PIM MMRIOSS | te fas SES il 


f 


1 10) 


went; they went every one straight 
forward. 

10 As for the likeness of their 
faces, they four “had the face of a 
man, and ‘the face of a lion, on the 
right side: ¢and they four had the 
face of an ox on the left side; ‘they 
four also had the face of an, eagle. 

11 Thus were their faces: and 
their wings were stretched upward; 
two wings of every one were 
joined one to another, and two cov- 
ered their bodies. 

12 And they went every one 
straight forward: fwhither the spirit 
was to go, they went; and they 
turned not when they went. 

13 As for the likeness of the living 
creatures, their appearance was like 
burning coals of fire, and like the 
appearance of lamps: it went up 
and down among the living crea- 
tures; and the fire was bright, and 
out of the fire went forth lightning. 

14 And the living creatures 4ran 
and returned as the appearance of 
a flash of lightning. 

15 Now as I beheld the living 
creatures, behold one wheel upon 
the earth by the living creatures, 
with his four faces. 

16 The appearance of the wheels 
and their work was “like unto the 
colour of a beryl: and they four had 
one likeness: and their appearance 
and their work was as it were a 
wheel in the middle of a wheel. 

17 When they went, they went 
upon their four sides: and they 
turned not when they went. 

18 As for their rings, they were so 
high that they were dreadful; and 
their rings ‘were full of eyes round 
about them four. 

19 And when the living creatures 
went, the wheels went by them: 
and when the living creatures were 
lifted up from the earth, the wheels 
were lifted up. 

20 Whithersoever the spirit was 
to go, they went, thither was their 
spirit to go; and the wheels were 
lifted up over against them: for the 
spirit of the living creature was in 
the wheels. 

21 When those went, these went; 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 595. 


a Cf. Rev.4.7. 
6 Num.?2.10. 
c¢ Num.2.3. 

d Num.?2.18. 
e Num.2.25. 
f v.20, 

g Zech.4.10. 

h Dan.10.6. 


4 Ezk.10.12; 
Zech.4.10. 


j Ezk.43.2; 
Dan.10.6; 
Rev.1.15. 


k Job 37.4,5; 
Psa.29.3,4; 
68.33. 

7 Ex.24.10. 

m Rev.4.3; 
10.1. 

n Ezk.3.23; 
Dan.8.17; 
Acts 9.4; 
Rev.i.17. 


o Dan.10.11. 


[i202 
and when those stood, these stood; 
and when those were lifted up from 
the earth, the wheels were lifted up 
over against them: for the spirit of 
the living creature was in the wheels. 

22 And the likeness of the firma- 
ment upon the heads of the living 
creature was as the colour of the 
terrible crystal, stretched forth over 
their heads above. 

23 And under the firmament were 
their wings straight, the one toward 
the other: every one had two, which 
covered on this side, and every one 
had two, which covered on that 
side, their bodies. 

24 And when they went, I heard 
the noise of their wings, Jlike the’ 
noise of great waters, “as the voice 
of the Almighty, the voice of speech, 
as the noise of an host: when they 
stood, they let down their wings. 

25 And there was a voice from 
the firmament that was over their 
heads, when they stood, and had 
let down their wings. 

26 And above the firmament that 
was over their heads was the like- 
ness of a throne, /as the appear- 
ance of a sapphire stone: and upon 
the likeness of the throne was the 
likeness as the appearance of a man 
above upon it. 

27 And I saw as the colour of am- 
ber, as the appearance of fire round 
about within it, from the appear- 
ance of his loins even upward, and 
from the appearance of his loins 
even downward, I saw as it were 
the appearance of fire, and it had 
brightness round about. 

28 ™As the appearance of the bow 
that is in the cloud in the day of 
rain, so was the appearance of the 
brightness round about. This was 
the appearance of the likeness of 
the glory of the Lorp. And when 
I saw if, “I fell upon my face, and I 
heard a voice of one that spake. 


CHAPTER 2 


(3) The filling with the Spirit, 


ND he said unto me, !Son of 
man, °stand upon thy feet, 
and I will speak unto thee. 


1 “Son of man,” used by our Lord of Himself seventy-nine times, is used by Jeho- 


vah ninety-one times when addressing Ezekiel. 


(1) In the case of our Lord the 


meaning is clear: it is His racial name as the representative Man in the sense of 


1 Cor. 15. 45-47. 


involved in the phrase when applied to Ezekiel. ra 5 
Now, in her captivity, Jehovah will not forsake 


them that they are but a small part of the race for 


(Gen. 11. 10, note; Ezk. 5. 5-8). 
His people, but He will remind 
whom He also cares. 


Hence the emphasis upon the word “‘man.” 


841 


The same thought, implying transcendence of mere Judaism, is 


Israel had forgotten her mission 


The Cherubim 


2 2] 


EZEKIEL. 


2 And the 4spirit entered into me 
when he spake unto me, and set 
_ me upon my feet, that I heard. him 
that spake unto me. 


{4) The prophet commissioned. 


3 And he said unto me, Son of 
man, I send thee to the children of 
Israel, to a rebellious nation that 
hath rebelled against me: they and 
their fathers have transgressed 
against me, even unto this very 
day. ed 

4 For they are impudent children enrol Sous 
and stiffhearted. I do send thee] 3793. Gen. 
unto them; and thou shalt say] 1.2; Mal. 
unto them, Thus saith the Lord} 2-15.) 
Gop. 


b Inspiration. 


5 And they, whether they will! Amos 3.7. 
hear, or whether they will forbear,| (x.4-15; 
(for they ave a rebellious house,)| F*¥-22-19-) 
yet shall know that there hath been! ; crEzt.2. 

a prophet among them. 10 and Rev. 

6 And thou, son of man, be not| 10.9- What- 
afraid of them, neither be afraid of| Sage, the 
their words, though briers and word of God 
thorns be with thee, and thou dost pl 


dwell among scorpions: be not 
afraid of their words, nor be dis- 
mayed at their looks, though they 
be a rebellious house. 


cause it is 
the word of 
God. 


d Isa.50.7; 
7 And thou shalt speak my words Jer.1.18; 
unto them, whether they will hear, Sree ee 


or whether they will forbear: for 
they are most rebellious. 

8 But thou, son of man, hear what 
I say unto thee; Be not thou rebel- 
lious like that rebellious house: 
open thy mouth, and eat that I give 

ee. 
-9 And when I looked, behold, an 
hand was sent unto me; and, lo, 
a roll of a book was therein; 

10 And he spread it before me; 
and it was written within and 
without: and there was written 


B.C. 595. 


therein lamentations, and mourn- 
ing, and woe. 


CHAPTER 3. 


(The prophet’s commission, 
continued, ends v. 21.) 


OREOVER he said unto me, 

Son of man, eat that thou find- 

est; eat this roll, and go speak unto 
the house of Israel. 

2 So I opened my mouth, and he 
caused me to eat that roll. 

3 And he said unto me, Son of 
man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill 
thy bowels with this roll that I 
give thee. Then did I “eat it; and 
it was in my mouth as honey for 
sweetness. 

4 And he said unto me, Son of 
man, go, get thee unto the house of 
Israel, and speak with my words 
unto them. 

5 For thou art not sent to a people 
of a strange speech and of an hard 
language, but to the house of Israel; 

6 Not to many people of a strange 
speech and of an hard language, 
whose words thou canst not under- 
stand. Surely, had I sent thee to 
them, they would have hearkened 
unto thee. 

7 But the house of Israel will not 
hearken unto thee; for they will 
not hearken unto me: for all the 
house of Israel are impudent and 
hardhearted. 

8 Behold, I have made thy face 
strong against their faces, and thy 
forehead strong against their fore- 
heads. 

9 ¢As an adamant harder than 
flint have I made thy forehead: 
fear them not, neither be dismayed 
at their looks, though they be a 


rebellious house. 


PART II. THE PROPHET’S COMMISSION AS WATCHMAN (SEE v. 14): 


CHAPTER 3. 10-21. 
i Se Se ee 2 ee 


10 Moreover he said unto me, Son 
of man, all my words that I shall e Holy Spirit. 
speak unto thee receive in thine| vs-12,14,24; 
heart, and hear with thine ears. | H2kS3, 
11 And go, get thee to them of the] Mal. 
captivity, unto the children of thy 
people, and speak unto them, and 


Rbeae 
15.) 


tell them, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; whether they will hear, or 
whether they will forbear. 

12 Then ‘the spirit took me up, 
and I heard behind me a voice of a 
great rushing, saying, Blessed be the 


glory of the Lorp from his place. 


“had the likeness of a man” (Ezk. 1. 5); and when the prophet beheld the throne 


of God, he saw 


26), See Mt. 8. 20, note; Rey. 1. 12, 13. 


“the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it” (Ezk. 1. 


(2) As used of Ezekiel, the expression indicates, not what the prophet is in him- 


self, but what he is to God: a son of man 


(a) chosen, (6) enduéd with the Spirit, 


and (c) sent of God. All this is true also of Christ who was, furthermore, the 
representative man—the head of regenerate humanity. 


842 


3 13) EZEKIEL. [44 


to warn the wicked from his wicked 
way, to save his life; the same 
wicked: man ‘shall die in his ini- 
quity; but his blood will I requir 
at thine hand. ; 

19 Yet if thou warn the wicked, 
and he turn not from his wicked- 
ness, nor from his wicked way, he 
shall die in his iniquity; ¢but thou 
hast delivered thy soul. 

20 Again, When a righteous man 
doth turn from his righteousness, 
and commit iniquity, and I lay a 
stumblingblock before him, he shall 
die: because thou hast not given 
him warning, he shall die in his 
sin, and his righteousness which he 
hath done shall not be remembered; 
but his blood will I require at thine 
hand. 

21 Nevertheless if thou warn the 
righteous man, that the righteous 


13 I heard also the noise of the} B.C. 595. 
wings of the living creatures that 

touched one another, and the noise 

of the wheels over against them, 

and a noise of a great rushing. 

14 So the spirit lifted me up, and 
took me away, and I went in bitter- 
ness, in the heat of my spirit; but], 9 xi3.15; 
the “hand of the Lorp was strong} Ezk.1.3;” 
upon me. 8.1; 37.1. 

15 Then I came to them of the], t5a.52.8; 
captivity at Tel-abib, that dwelt by| 56.10; 62.6; 
the river of Chebar, and I sat where| Jer-9-17- 
they sat, and remained there aston-| - pz. 33.6; 
ished among them seven days. John 8.21,24. 

16 And it came to pass at the end| , : 
of seven days, that the word of the Tees 
LorpD came unto me, saying, 

17 Son of man, I have made thee 
a ‘watchman unto the house of Is- 
tael: therefore hear the word at 
my mouth, and give them warning 


from me. sin not, and he doth not sin, he 

18 When I say unto the wicked, ishall surely live, because he is 
Thou shalt surely die; and thou giv- warned; also thou hast delivered 
est him not warning, nor speakest thy soul. 


PART Ili. EZEKIEL’S SECOND VISION OF THE GLORY, AND THE 
RESULT IN SERVICE: CHAPTERS 3. 22-7. 27. 


22 And the hand of the LORD was Gop; He that heareth, let him 
there upon me; and he said unto hear; and he that forbeareth, let 
me, Arise, go forth into the plain, him forbear: for they are a rebel- 
and I will there talk with thee. lious house. 

23° Then I arose, and went forth 
into ire a and, Pe the CHAPTER 4. 
glory o e LorpD stood there, as ° Pps t 
the glory which I saw by the river (2) The pian ure Ske, SY E% 
of Chebar: and I fell on my face. ii 3 


1 
(1). Ezekiel again filled with the Sedleraarc ee nk er utes 
epi (cf: Acts 2. 4; 4. 31): his ect Eek24, |thee, and pourtray upon iethe cise 
nele leek 27; 29.21. jeven Jerusalem: : . 
24 Then the spirit entered into : 2 And lay siege against it, and 
me, and set me upon my feet, and fEzk.24.27; |buiid a fort against it, and cast a 


33.22. : ; 
spake with me, and said unto me, mount against it; set the camp 


Go, shut thyself within thine house.|# Ezk.12.6,,_ |also against it, and set battering 
2& But thou, O son of man, behold,| ** 24.24,27. |rams against it round about. 
they, shall put bands upon thee, 3 Moreover take thou unto thee 


and shall bind thee with them, and an iron pan, and set it for a wall 
thou shalt not go out among them: of iron between thee and the city: 
26 And I will make thy tongue and-set thy face against it, and it 
cleave to the roof of thy mouth, shall be besieged, and thou shalt 
that thou shalt be ‘dumb, and shalt jlay. siege against 1t. &This shall be 

not be to them a reprover: for they ja sign to the house of Israel. | 
' 4 Lie thou also upon thy left side, 


are a rebellious house. also 1 
27 fBut when I speak with thee, I land lay the iniquity of the house of 


will open thy mouth, and thou shalt Israel upon it: according to the 
say anto them, Thus saith the Lord number of the days that thou shalt 

1 The symbolic actions during the prophet’s dumbness were testimonies to the 
past wickedness and chastisement of the house of Israel (the whole nation), and 


prophetic. of a coming siege. They are therefore intermediate between the siege of 
2 Ki. 24. 10-16, at which time Ezekiel was carried to Babylon, and the siege of 


2 Ki. 25. 1-11, eleven years later. 
843 


4 4 ee ee Raley 
ite ee : ie: 
4B EZEKIEL. [5 10 
ikon it! thou shalt bear their} B.C. 595. 17 That they may want bread and 
iniquity. water, and be astonied one with 


5 For I have laid upon thee the 
years of their iniquity, according to 
the number of the days, three hun- 
dred and ninety days: so shalt thou 
bear the iniquity of the house of 
Israel. 

6 And when thou hast accom- 
plished them, lie again on thy tight 
side, and thou shalt bear the ini- 
quity of the house of Judah forty 
days: I have appointed thee each 
day for a year. 

7 Therefore thou shalt set thy face 
toward the siege of Jerusalem, and 
thine arm shail be uncovered, and 
thou shalt prophesy against it. 

8 And, behold, I will lay bands 
upon thee, and thou shalt not turn 
thee from one side to another, till 
thou hast ended the days of thy 
siege. 

9 Take thou also unto thee wheat, 
and barley, and beans, and lentiles, 
and millet, and fitches, and put 
them in one vessel, and make thee 
bread thereof, according to the 
number of the days that thou shalt 
lie upon thy side, three hundred 
and ninety days shalt thou eat 
thereof. 

10 And thy meat which thou shalt 
eat shall be by weight, twenty 
shekels a day: from time to time 
shalt thou eat it. 

11 Thou shalt drink also water by 
measure, the sixth part of an ¢hin: 
from time to time shalt thou drink. 

12 And thou shalt eat it as barley 
cakes, and thou shalt bake it with 
dung that cometh out of man, in 
their sight. 

13 And the Lorn said, Even thus 
shall the children of Israel eat 
their defiled bread among the Gen- 
tiles, whither I will drive them. 

14 Then said I, “Ah Lord Gop! 
behold, my soul hath not been pol- 
luted: for from my youth up even 
till now have I not eaten of that 
which dieth of itself, or is torn in 
pieces; neither came there abomina- 
ble flesh into my mouth. 

15 Then he said unto me, Lo, I 
have given thee cow’s dung for 
man’s ding, and thou shalt prepare 
thy bread therewith. : 

16 Moreover he said unto me, Son 
of man, behold, I will break ¢the 
staff of bread in Jerusalem: and 
they shall eat bread by weight, and 
with caré; and they shall drink 
water by measure, and with aston- 
ishment: 


a One hin = 


ahout 6 gts 


6 Hos.9.3, 


c Acts 10.14. 
d Lév.26.26; 


f Jer.40.6; 
52.16. 
8g Lam.4.6; 


Dan.9.12; 
Amos 3.2. 


another, and consume away for — 


their iniquity 
CHAPTER 5. 
(3) The sign of the sharp knife: 


l.e. famine, pestilence, the 
sword. 


aoe D thou, son of man, take thee 
a sharp knife, take thee a bar- 
ber’s razor, “and cause it to pass 
upon thine head and upon thy 


beard: then take thee balances to _ 


weigh, and divide the hair. 

2 Thou shalt burn with fire a third 
part in the midst of the city, when 
the days of the siege are fulfilled: 
and thou shalt take a third part, 
and smite about it with a knife: 
and a third part thou shalt scatter 
in the wind; and I will draw out a 
sword after them. 

3 fThou shalt also take thereof a 
few in number,. and bind them in 
jthy skirts. 

4 Then take of them again, and 
cast them into the midst of the fire, 
and burn them in the fire; for 
thereof shall a fire come forth into 
all the house of Israel. 

5 Thus saith the Lord Gop; This 
is Jerusalem: I have set it in the 
midst of the nations and countries 
that are round about her. 

6 And she hath changed my judg- 
ments int? wickedness more than 
the nations, and my statutes more 
than the countries that are round 
about her: for they have refused 
my judgments and my statutes, 
they have not walked in them. 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Because ye multiplied more 
than the nations that are round 
about you, and have not walked in 
my statutes, neither have kept my 
judgments, neither have done ac- 
jcording to the judgments of the 
nations that are round about you; 

8 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Behold, I, even I, am against 
thee, and will execute judgments 
in the midst of thee in the sight of 
the nations. 

9 And I will do in thee that 
which I have not done, and where- 
unto I will not do any more the 
like, because of all thine abomina- 
tions. 

10 Therefore the fathers shall eat 
the sons in the midst of thee, and 
the sons shall eat their fathers; 
and I will execute judgments in 


- 


7 


se Oe 
& 


thee, and the whole remnant of 


thee will I “scatter into all the 
winds. 

11 Wherefore, as I live, saith the 
Lord Gop; Surely, because thou 
hast defiled my sanctuary with all 
thy detestable things, and with all 
thine abominations, therefore will I 
also diminish thee; neither shall 
mine eye spare, neither will I have 
any pity. 

12 A third part of thee shall die 
with the pestilence, and with fam- 
ine shall they be consumed in the 
midst of thee: and a third part shail 
fall by the sword round about thee; 
and I ‘will scatter a third part into 
all the winds, and I will draw out 
a sword after them. 

13 Thus shall mine anger be ac- 
complished, and I will cause my 
fury to rest upon them, and I wiil 
be comforted: ¢and they shall know 
that I the Lorp have spoken i¢ in 
my zeal, when I have accomplished 
my fury in them. 

14 Moreover © will make thee 
waste, and a reproach among the 
nations that are round about thee, 
in the sight of all that pass by. 

15 So it shail be a freproach and a 
‘taunt, an instruction and an aston- 
ishment unto the nations that are 
round about thee, when I shall 
execute judgments in thee in anger 
and in fury and in furious rebukes. 
I the Lorp have spoken it. 

16 When I shall send upon them 
the evil arrows of famine, which 
shall be for their destruction, and 
which I will send to destroy you: 
and I will increase the famine upon 
you, and will break your staff of 
bread: 

17 So will I send upon you famine 
and evil beasts, and they shall be- 
reave thee; and pestilence and blood 
shall pass through thee; and I will 
bring the sword upon thee. I the 
Lorp have spoken it 


CHAPTER 6. 


(4) The message against the 
mountains of Israel. 


an D the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, set thy face toward 
the mountains of Israel, and proph- 
esy against them, 

3 And say, Ye mountains of Is- 
rael, hear the word of the Lord 
Gop; Thus saith the Lord Gop to 
the mountains, and to the hills, to 

_ the rivers, and to the valleys; Be- 


EZEKIEL. 


_ B.C. 594. 


@v.i2; 
Ezk.12.14; 
Lev.26.33; 
Deut.28.64; 
Zech.2.6. 


b Ezk.7.4,9; 
8.18; 9.10. 


c vs.2,10; 
Ezk.6.8; 
Jer.9.16. 

d Ezk.36.6; 
38.19. 

e Lev.26.31, 
32; Neh. 
2.17. 

f Deut.28.37; 
1 Ki.9.7; 
Psa.79.4; 
Jer.24.9; 
Lam.2.15. 

g Lev.26.30. 

kh Remnant. 
vs.8.11-14; 
Ezk.9.4. 
(Isa.1.9; 
Rom.11.5.) 

4 Ezk.21.14. 

j Ezk.5.12. 

k Ezk.5.13. 

1 Jer.2.20. 

m Hos.4.13. 


n Isa.57.5- 


845 


{6 3 


hold, I, even I, will bring a sword 
upon you, and éI will destroy your 
high places. 

4 And your altars shall be deso- 
late, and your images shall be bro- 
ken: and &I will cast down your 
slain men before your idols. 

5 And I will lay the dead carcases 
of the children of Israel before their 
idols; and I will scatter your bones 
round about your altars. 

6 In all your dwellingplaces the 
cities shall be laid waste, and the 
high places shall be desolate; that 
your altars may be laid waste and 
made desolate, and your idols may 
be broken and cease, and your im- 
ages may be cut down, and your 
works may be abolished. 

7 And the slain shall fall in the 
midst of you, and ye shall know 
that I am the LorD. 


(5) A remnant to be spared, 


8 Yet will I leave a ‘remnant, 
that ye may have some that shall 
escape the sword among the na- 
tions, when ye shall be scattered 
through the countries. 

9 And they that escape of you 
shall remember me among the na- 
tions whither they shall be carried 
captives, because I am broken with 
their whorish heart, which hath 
departed from me, and with their 
eyes, which go a whoring after 
their idols: and they shall lothe 
themselves for the evils which they 
have committed in all their abom- 
inations. 

10 And they shall know that I.am 
the Lorp, and that I have not 
said in vain that I would do this 
evil unto them. 


(6) Desolation,upon the Jand. 


11 Thus saith the Lord Gop; 
iSmite with thine hand, and stamp 
with thy foot, and say, Alas for all 
the evil abominations of the house 
of Israel! for they shall fall by the } 
sword, by the famine, and by the 
pestilence. 

12 He that is far off shall die of 
the pestilence; and he that is near 
shall fall by the sword; and he that 
remaineth and is besieged shall die 
by the famine: *thus will I accom- 
plish my fury upon them. 

13 Then shall ye know that I am 
the LorbD, when their slain men 
shall be among their idols round 
about their altars, Jupon every high 
hill, “in all the tops of the moun- 
tains, and “under every green tree, 


6 14] 


and under every thick oak, the! B.C. 594. 


place where they did offer sweet 
savour to all their idols. 

14 So will I stretch out my hand 
upon them, and make the land 
desolate, yea, more desolate than 
the wilderness toward ¢*Diblath, in 
all their habitations: and they shall 
know that I am the Lorb. 


CHAPTER 7. 
(Part ITI., concluded.) 


OREOVER the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying, 

2 Also, thou son of man, thus 2 
saith the Lord Gop unto the land 
of Israel; 2An end, the end is come 
upon the four corners of the land. 

3 Now is the end come upon thee, 
and I will send mine anger upon 
thee, and will judge thee according . 
to thy ways, and will recompense 
upon thee all thine abominations. 

4 ‘And mine eye shall not spare 
thee, neither will I have pity: but 
I will recompense ways upon 
thee, and thine abominations shall 
be in the midst of thee: ¢and ye 
shall know that I am the Lorn. 

5 Thus saith the Lord Gop; An 
evil, an only evil, behold, is come. 

6 Anend is come, the end is come: 
it watcheth for thee; behold, it is 
come. h 

7 The morning is come unto thee, 
O thou that dwellest in the land: 
the ¢time is come, the day of trouble] ; 
is near, and not the sounding again 
of the mountains. 

8 Now will I shortly pour out my 
fury upon thee, and accomplish] ; 
mine anger upon thee: and I will 
judge thee according to thy ways, 
and will recompense thee for all 
thine abominations. 

9 And mine eye shall not spare, 
neither will I have pity: I will 
recompense thee according to thy 
ways and thine abominations that 
are in the midst of thee; and ye 
shall know that I am the Lorp 
that smiteth. 

10 Behold the day, behold, it is 
come: the morning is gone forth: 

*the-rod hath blossomed, pride hath 
budded. 

11 Violence is risen up into a rod 
of wickedness: none of them shall 
remain, nor of their multitude, nor 
of any of their’s: neither shal! 
‘there be wailing for them. 

12 #The time is come, the day 
draweth near: let not the buver 


Num.33.46; 
Jer.48.22. 


6 vs.3,6; 


3-11; 


Ezk.6.7; 
12.20. 


Jer.6.24. 


k i.e. nations. 


846 


EZEKIEL. 


[7 25 
rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for 


thereof. 

13 For the seller shall not return 
to that which is sold, although 
they were yet alive: for the vision 
is touching the whole multitude 
thereof, which shall not return; 
neither shall any strengthen him- 
self in the iniquity of his life. 

14 They have blown the trumpet, 
even to make all ready; but none © 
goeth to the battle: for my wrath 
is upon all the multitude thereof. 


pestilence and the famine within: 
he that is in the field shall die with 
the sword; and he that is in the 
city, famine and pestilence shall de- 
vour him. : 

16 But they that escape of them 
shall escape, and shall be on the 
mountains like doves of the valleys, 
all of them mourning, every one 
for his iniquity. 

17 All hands shall be feeble, and 
all knees shall be weak as water. 

18 ‘They shall also gird them- 
selves with sackcloth, and horror 
shall cover them; and shame shal] 
be upon all faces, and baldness upon 
all their heads. 7 

19 They shall cast their silver in 
the streets, and their gold shall be 
removed: Jtheir silver and their gold 
shall not be able to deliver them in 
the day of the wrath of the Lorp: 


bomina- 
tions and of their detestable things 
therein: therefore have I set it far 
from them. 

21 And I will give it into the 
hands of the strangers for a prey, 
and to the wicked of the earth for a 
spoil; and they shall pollute it. 

22 My face will I turn also from 
them, and they shail pollute my 
secret place: for the robbers shall 
enter into it, and defile it, 

23 Make a chain: for the land is 
full of bloody crimes, and the city is 
full of violence. 

24 Wherefore I will bring the 
worst of the *heathen, and they 
shall possess their houses: I will also 
make the pomp of the strong to 
ate and their holy places shall be 


25 Destruction cometh; and they 


| 


wrath is upon all the multitude 


| 
| 
| 


15 &The sword fs without, and the | 


mo? 


7:2) EZEKIEL. [8 12 


shall seek peace, and there shall be|__B.c. 594. 27 The king shall mourn, and the 
mone. prince shall be clothed with desola- 

26 Mischief shall come upon mis- tion, and the hands of the people of 
chief, and rumour shall be upon ru-|e Ezk.20.1,3; |the land shall be troubled: I will 
mour; “then shall they seek a vision erie do unto them after their way, and 
of the prophet; but the law shall ite according to their deserts will I 
perish from the priest, and counsel judge them; and they shall know 
from the ancients. that I am the Lorpb. 


PART IV. GENERAL THEME: JEHOVAH JUSTIFIED IN SENDING HIS 
PEOPLE INTO CAPTIVITY: CHAPTERS 8.-33. 21; KEY VERSE, 33. 20. 


toward the north. So I lifted up 
CHAPTER 8. mine eyes the way toward the 
ND it came to pass in the sixth north, and behold northward at the 
year, in the ‘sixth month, m gate of the altar this image of jeal- 
the fifth day of the month, as I sat ousy in the entry. 
in mine house, and the elders of Ju- 6 He said furthermore unto me, 
dah sat before me, that the hand of Son of man, seest thou what they 
the Lord Gop fell there upon me. do? even: the teat ebb mina 
. “7 at the house of Israel committet 
Ge Eee ie ne gio tf here, that I should go far off from 
E ee na ee bie. Septem- |my sanctuary? but turn thee yet 
2 Then I beheld, and lo a likeness| 4er- again, and thou shalt see greater 
as the appearance of fire: from the] ; oiy Spirit, |abominations. 
appearance of his loins even down-) Ezk.10.17. 7 And he brought me to the door 
ward, fire; and from his loins even Ca of the court; and when [I looked, 
upward, as the appearance of 2.15.) |behold a hole in the wall. 
brightness, as the colour of amber.|d Acts 8.39. 8 Then said he unto me, Son of 


3 And he put forth the form of an). gay. man, dig now in the- wall: and 
hand, and took me by a lock of mine! * jz.730;, | [when I had digged in the wall, be- 


head; and the ‘spirit 4lifted me up| 32.34. hold adoor. 
between the earth and the heaven, ak 9 And he said unto me, Go in, 
and brought me in the !visions of f Deut32.16, land behold the wicked abomina- 
God to Jerusalem, to the door of the tions that they do here. 
inner gate that looketh toward the|é periree 10 So I went in and saw; and be- 
north; ‘where was the seat of the SAE SE hold every form of creeping things, 
image of jealousy, fwhich provok- and abominable beasts, and all the 
eth to jealousy. idols of the house of Israel, pour- 
4 And, behold, the glory of the trayed upon the wall round about. 
God of Israel was there, according 11 And there stood before them 
to the vision that I saw in the seventy men of the ancients of the 
plain. house of Israel, and in the midst of 
F f ti f th them stood Jaazaniah the son of 
ormer pro aa iONs ©. e Shaphan, with every man his cen- 
temple. ser in his hand; and a thick cloud 
5 Then said he unto me, “Son of of incense went up. 
man, lift up thine eyes now the way ; 12 Then said he unto me, Son of 


1 Visions, that is, of former profanations of the temple, and of the wickedness 
because of which Israel was then in Babylon, shown the prophet that he might 
justify to the new generation born in Assyria and Babylonia during the captivity, 
the righteousness of God in the present national chastening. The visions are retro- 
spective; Israel had done these things, hence the captivities. This strain continues 
to Ezk. 33. 21. It is the divine view of the national sinfulness and apostasy, re- 
vi to Ezekiel in a series of visions so vivid that though the prophet was by 
the river Chebar (Ezk. 1. 1, 3; 3. 23; 10. 15, 20, 22; 43. 3) it was as if he were trans- 
ported back to Jerusalem, and to the time when these things were occurring. | These 
visions of the sinfulness of Israel are interspersed with promises of restoration and 
blessing which are yet to be fulfilled. See “Israel” (Gen. 12. 2, 3; Rom. 11. 26). 
Also “Kingdom, (O.T.)” (Gen. 1. 26-28; Zech. 12.8). Al 

2 The combined purport of the four visions of profanation in Chapter 8. is idolatry 
set up in the entire temple, even in the holy of holies (vs. 10, 11); women given 
over to phallic cults (v. 14); and nature-worship (v. 16). 

847 


al bs eR re ai 
vb 7 


8 13] 


man, hast thou seen what the an- 
cients of the house of Israel do in 
the dark, every man in the cham- 
bers of his imagery? for they say. 
The LorpD seeth us not; the Lorp 
hath forsaken the earth. 

13 He said also unto me, Turn 
thee yet again, and thou shalt see 
greater abominations that they 


14 Then he brought me to the 
door of the gate of the Lorp’s 
house which was toward the 
north; and, behold, there 
women weeping for ¢Tammuz. ; 

15 Then said he unto me, Hast 
thou seen this, O son of man? 
turn thee yet again, and thou shalt 
see greater abominations than 
these. 

16 And he brought me into the 
inner court of the Lorp’s house, 
and, behold, at the door of the tem- 
ple of the Lorp, “between the porch 
and the altar, were about five and 
twenty men, with their backs to- 
ward the temple of the Lorp, and 
their faces toward the east; and 
they worshipped the ‘sun toward 
the east. 

17 Then he said unto me, Hast 
thou seen this, O son of man? Is 
it a light thing to the house of 
Judah that they commit the abom- 
inations which they commit here? 


sat 


“5 paced i 


~ 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 594. 


fEx.12.7; 
Rev.7.3; 
9.4; 13.16, 
17; 26.4. 


g Remnant. 


Ezk..11. 
for they have filled the land with) 16-21. 
violence, and have returned to pro-| {2s2-1.9: 5) 
voke me to anger: and, lo, they put ag 
the branch to their nose. h 2 Chr.36.17. 
18 Therefore will I also deal in 1 Pet.4.17 
ry: mine eye shall not spare, vk 
neither will I have pity: and|j Bible 
though they 4cry in mine ears (Ot). 
with a loud voice, yet will I not Dan.9.4. 
hear them. (Gen.15.2; 
Hab.3.1-16.) 
k Ezk.8.17; 
CHAPTER 9. 2 Kil 16. 
The vision of the slaying in 
Jerusalem. 


HE cried also in mine ears’with a 
loud voice, saying, Cause them 
that have charge over the city to 
draw near, even every man with 
his destroying weapon in his 
hand. 


2 And, behold, six men came from 
the way of the higher gate, which 


10. 4); 


on the East of Jerusalem (Olivet, Ezk. 11, 23) 


temple to abide (Ezk. 43, 2-5). 


848 


Pek Got Coe he aE ey ee 
‘ Mth q 


lieth toward the north, and every 
man a slaughter weapon in his 
hand; and one man among them 
was clothed with linen, with a 

writer’s inkhorn by his side: and 
they went in, and stood beside the 

brasen altar. 

3 And the glory of the God of Is- 
tael was !gone up from the cherub, 
whereupon he was, to the threshold 
of the house. And he called to the 
man clothed with linen, which 
had the writer’s inkhorn by his 
side; 

4 And the Lorp said unto him, 
JGo through the midst of the city, 
through the midst of Jerusalem, 
and Sset a mark upon the foreheads 


: * lof the men that sigh and that cry 


for all the abominations that be 
done im the midst thereof, 

5 And to the others he said in mine 
hearing, Go ye after him through 
the city, and smite: let not your 
eye spare, neither have ye pity: 

6 *Slay utterly old and young, 
both maids, and little children, and 
women: but come not near any 
Man upon whom is the mark; and 


*begin at my sanctuary. Then they 
began at the ancient men which 
were before the house. 

7 And he said unto them, Defile 
the house, and fill the courts with 
the slain: go ye forth. And they 
went forth, and slew in the city. 

8 And it came to pass, while they 
were slaying them, and I was left, 
that I fell upon my face, and cried. 
and Jsaid, Ah Lord Gop! wilt thou 
destroy all the residue of Israel in 
thy pouring out of thy fury upon 
Jerusalem? 

9 Then said he unto me, The ini- 
quity of the house of Israel and 
Judah is exceeding great, and ?the 
land is full of blood, and the city 
full of perverseness: for they say, 
The Lorp hath forsaken the earth, 
and the LORD seeth not. 

10 And as for me also, mine eye 
shall not spare, neither will I have 
pity, but I will recompense their 
way upon their head, 

11 And, behold, the man clothed 
with linen, which Aad the inkhorn 
by his side, reported the matter, 
saying, I have done as thou hast 
commanded me. 


a ia 
é 


1] 


4 


ry 
a 


CHAPTER 10. 


The vision of altar fire scattered 
over Jerusalem. 


HEN I looked, and, behold, in 

the firmament that was above 

the head of the cherubims there ap- 

peared over them as it were a sap- 

phire stone, as the appearance of 
the likeness of a throne. 

2 ¢And he spake unto the man 
clothed with linen, and said, Go in 
between the wheels, even under the 
cherub, and fill 5thine hand with 
coals of fire from between the cher- 


ubims, and ‘scatter them over 
the city. And he went in in my 
sight. 


3 Now the cherubims stood on 
the right side of the house, when the 
man went in; and the cloud filled 
the inner court. 

4 Then the glory of the Lorp 
went up from the cherub, and stood 
over the threshold of the house; and 
4the house was filled with the cloud, 
and the court was full of the bright- 
ness of the Lorp’s glory. 

5 And the sound of the cherubims’ 
wings was heard even to the outer 
court, as the voice of the Almighty 
God when he speaketh. 

6 And it came to pass, that when 
he had commanded the man clothed 
with linen, saying, Take fire from 
between the wheels, from between 
the cherubims; then he went in, and 
stood beside the wheels. 

7 And one cherub stretched forth 
his hand from between the cheru- 
bims unto the fire that was between 
the cherubims, and took thereof, 
and put it into the hands of him 
that was clothed with linen: who 
took it, and went out. 


Description of the cherubim. 


8 And there appeared in the cher- 
ubims the form of a man’s hand 
under their wings. 

9 And when I looked, behold the 
four wheels by the cherubims, one 
wheel by one cherub, and another 
wheel by another cherub: and the 
appearance of the wheels was as 
the colour of a beryl stone. 

10 And as for their appearances, 
they four had one likeness, as if a 
wheel had been in the midst of a 
vrheel. 

11 fWhen they went, they went 
upon their four sides; they turned 
not as they went, but to the place 


whither the head looked they fol- 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 594. 


a Ezk.9.2,3-. 

b Heb. the 
hollow of 
thine hand. 

c See Rev.8.5. 


d Ezk.43.5; 
1 Ki.8.10,11. 


e Psa.29.3. 

f Ezk.1.17. 

g Heb. flesh. 

h Ezk.1.5, 

t Holy Spirit. 
Ezk.36.27, 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 

j Hos.9.12. 


k Ezk.1.22; 
10.15. 


Ll v.24; 


Ezk.3.12, 
14; 8.2 


849 


fil i 


lowed it; they turned not as they 
went. 

12 And their whole 8body, and 
their backs, and their hands, and 
their wings, and the wheels, were 
full of eyes round about, even the 
wheels that they four had. 

13 As for the wheels, it was cried 
unto them in my hearing, O wheel. 

14 And every one had four faces: 
the first face was the face of a 
cherub, and the second face was 
the face of a man, and the third the 
face of a lion, and the fourth the 
face of an eagle. 

15 And the cherubims were lifted 
up. This is the living creature 
that I saw by the river of Chebar. 

16 And when the cherubims went, 
the wheels went by them: and when 
the cherubims lifted up their wings 
to mount up from the earth, the 
same wheels also turned not from 
beside them. 

17 When they stood, these stood; 
and when they were lifted up, 
these lifted up themselves also: for 
the ‘spirit of the living creature 
was in them. : 
18 Then the glory of the Lorp 
jdeparted from off the threshold of 
the house, and stood over the cher- 
ubims. 

19 And the cherubims lifted up 
their wings, and mounted up from 
the earth in my sight: when they 
went out, the wheels also were be- 
side them, and every one stood at 
the door of the east gate of the 


Lorp’s house; and the glory of the 
God of Israel was over them above. 
20 *This is the living creature 
that I saw under the God of Israel 
by the river of Chebar; and I knew 
that they were the cherubims. 
21 Every one had four faces apiece, 


‘and every one four wings; and the 


likeness of the hands of a man was 
under their wings. 

22 And the likeness of their faces 
was the same faces which I saw by 
the river of Chebar, their appear- 
ances and themselves: they went 
every one straight forward. 


| 
| CHAPTER 11, 


Vision of wrath against the 
lying princes. 


OREOVER "the spirit lifted me 

up, and brought me unto the 

east gate of the LORD’s house, 
which looketh eastward: and be- 
hold at the door of the gate five and 


11 2] 


twenty men; among whom I saw 
Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and 
Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes 
of the people. 

2 Then said he unto me, Son of 
man, these are the men that devise 
mischief, and give wicked counsel 
in this city: 

3 Which say, It is not near; let 
us build houses: this city is the 
caldron, and we be the flesh. _ 

4 Therefore prophesy against 
them, prophesy, O son of man. 

5 And ¢the Spirit of the Lorp fell 
upon me, and said unto me, Speak; 
Thus saith the Lorp; Thus have 
ye said, O house of Israel: for I 
know the things that come into 
your mind, every one of them. , 

6 Ye have multiplied your slain 
in this city, and ye have filled the 
streets thereof with the slain. 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Your slain whom ye have 
laid in the midst of it, they are 
the flesh, and this city is the cal- 
dron: but I will bring you forth out 
of the midst of it. 

- 8 Ye have feared the sword; and 
I will bring a sword upon you, saith 
the Lord Gop. : 

9 And I will bring you out of the 
midst thereof, and deliver you into 
the hands of strangers, and will 
execute judgments among you. 

10 “Ye shall fall by the sword: I 
will judge you in the border of Is- 
rael; and ye shall know that I am 
the Lorp. 

11 This city shall not be your cal- 
dron, neither shall ye be the flesh 
in the midst thereof; but I will 
judge you in the border of Israel: 

12 And ye shall know that I am 
the Lorn: for ye have not walked 
in my statutes, neither executed my 
judgments, but have done after the 
manners of the 4heathen that are 
round about you. 

13 And it came to pass, when I 
prophesied, that Pelatiah the son 
of Benaiah died. Then fell I down 
upon my face, and cried with a 
loud voice, and said, Ah Lord Gop! 
wilt thou make a full end of the 
remnant of Israel? 


The promise to spare the 
remnant, 

14 Again the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

15 Son of man, thy brethren, even 
thy brethren, the men of thy kin- 
dred, and ¢all the house of Israel 
wholly, are they unto whom the 


EZEKIEL. 


__ B.C. 594. 


@ Ezk.2.2; 
3.24, 


b Ezk.24.3,6, 
10,11; 
Mic.3.3. 


c 2 Ki.25.19- 
21; Jer.39.6; 
52.10. 


di.e. nations. 

e Kingdom 
(O.T.). 
vs.14-20; 
Ezk.20.33- 


44. (Gen.1. 
26; Zech.12. 
8.) 


f Remnant. 


hk Ezk.28.25; 
34.13; 36.24; 
Jer.24.6. 


¢ Ezk.36.26; 
Jer.32.39;- 
Zeph.3.9, 


j Ezk.18.31; 
Psa.51.10; 
Jer.31.33; 
32.39. 


k Eezk.14.11; 
36.28; 37.27; 
Jer.24.7. 


1 Ezk.8.4; 
9.3; 10.4,18; 
43.4. 


850 


[12 2 


inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, 
Get you far from the LorD: unto us 
is this land given in possession. 

16 Therefore say,. Thus saith the 


them far off among the ¢heathen, 


Lord Gop; Although I havé cast — 
and although I have /scattered them — 


among the countries, %yet will I be © 


to them as a little sanctuary in the 
countries where they shall come. 


Israel to be restored to the land 
and converted. 


17 Therefore say, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop; I will even “gather you 
from the people, and assemble you 
out of the countries where ye have 
been scattered, and I will give you 
the land of Israel. 

18 And they shall come thither, 
and they shall take away all the 
detestable things thereof and all the 
aborninations thereof from thence. 

19 And ‘I will give them one 
heart, and JI will put a new spirit 
within you; and I will take the 
stony heart out of their flesh, and 
will give them an heart of flesh: 

20 That they may walk in my 
statutes, and keep mine ordinances, 
and do them: and they shall be 
my people, and I will be their God: 
, 21 But as for them whose heart 
walketh after the heart of their de- 
testable things and their abomina- 
tions, I will recompense their way 
upon their own heads, saith the 
Lord Gop. 


Vision of the departure of the 
Slory from Jerusalem. (Cf.1 Ki. 
8. 5-11; Ezra 3. 12; Ezk. 43. 2-5.) 

22 Then did the cherubims lift up 
their wings, and the wheels beside 
them; and the glory of the God of 
Israel was over them above. 

23 ‘And the glory of the Lorp 
went up from the midst of the city, 
and stood upon the mountain which 
is on the east side of the city. 

24 Afterwards the spirit took me 
up, and brought me in a vision by the 
Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them 
of the captivity. So the vision that 
I had seen went up from me. 

25 Then I spake unto them of the 
captivity all the things that the 
Lorp had shewed me. 


CHAPTER 12. 
Vision of the prophet as a sign 
v. 11). 
"THE word of the Lorp also 
came unto me, saying, 
2 Son of man, thou dwellest in the 


j 


2 3) 


midst of a 


EZEKIEL. 


[12 27 


rebellious house, which] B.c. 594. |help him, and all his bands; and I 
have eyes to see, and see not; they will draw out the sword after them. 
have ears to hear, and hear not: for 15 fAnd they shall know that I 


they are a rebellious house. 

3 Therefore, thou son of man, pre- 
pare thee stuff for removing, and re- 
move by day in their sight; and 
thou shalt remove from thy place 
to another place in their sight: it 
may be they will consider, though 
they be a rebellious house. 

4 Then shalt thou bring forth thy 
stuff by day in their sight, as stuff 
for removing: and thou shalt go 
forth at even in their sight, as they 
that go forth into captivity. 

5 Dig thou through the wall in 
their sight, and carry out thereby. 

6 In their sight shalt thou. bear 
it upon thy shoulders, and carry it 
forth in the twilight: thou shalt 
cover thy face, that thou see not 
the ground: “for I have set thee]. 
for a sign unto the house of Is- 
rael. 

7 And I did so as I was com- 
manded: I brought forth my stuff 
by day, as stuff for captivity, and 
in the even I digged through the 
wall with mine hand; I brought| 
it forth in the twilight, and I bare it 
upon my shoulder in their sight. 

8 And in the morning came the 
word of the LorRD unto me, saying, 

9 Son of man, hath not the house 


c Jer.39.4, 
d Jez.32.4,5. 


e Ezk.5.10; 
2 Ki.25.4,5. 


Ff vs.16,20; 


gi.e. nations. 


of Israel, the rebellious house, said 1 13; 
unto thee, What doest thou? 2 Pet.3.4. 
10 Say thou unto them, Thus] ; Joe 2.1; 
saith the Lord Gop; This %burden| Zeph.1.14. 
concerneth the prince in Jerusa-| 7... 44. 
lem, and all the house of Israel|? pac i228; 
that are among them. Dan.9.12; 
11 Say, I am your sign: like as Ij Lk-21.33. 


have done, so shall it be done unto 
them: they shall remove and gol 
into captivity. 

12 And the “prince that 7s among 
them shall bear upon Ais shoulder 
in the twilight, and shall go forth: 
they shall dig through the wall to 
carry out thereby: he shall cover 
his face, that he see not the ground 
with Ais eyes. 

13. My net also will I spread upon 
him, ¢and he shall, be taken in my 
snare: and I will bring him to Baby- 
lon to the land of the Chaldeans; 
yet shall he not see it, though he 
shall die there. 

14 And «I will scatter toward 
every wind all that are about him to 


am, the Lorb, when I shall scatter 
them among the nations, and dis- 
perse them in the countries. 

16 But I.will leave a few men of 
them from the sword, from the fam- 
ine, and from the pestilence; that 
they may declare all their abomina- 
tions among the “heathen whither 


ithey come; and they shall know 


that I am the LorbD. 


The full captivity near at hand. 
(Cf. 2 Ki. 25. 1-10.) 


17 Moreover the word of the 
LorD came to me, saying, 

18 Son of man, eat thy bread with 
quaking, and drink thy water with 
trembling and with carefulness; 

19- And say unto the people of the 
land, Thus saith the Lord Gop of 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and 
of the land of Israel; They shall eat 
their bread with carefulness, and 
drink their water with astonish- 
ment, that her land may be desolate 


ifrom all that is therein, because of 


the violence of all them that dwell 
therein. 

20 And the cities that are inhab- 
ited shall be laid waste, and the 
land shall be desolate; and ye shall 
know that I am the Lorp. 

21 And the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

22 Son of man, what is that prov- 
erb that ye have in the land of 
Israel, saying, “The days are pro- 
longed, and every vision faileth? 

23 Tell them therefore, Thus saith 
the Lord Gop; I will make this 
proverb to cease, and they shall no 
more use it as a proverb in Israel; 
but say unto them, *The days are 


lat hand, and the effect of every 


vision. 

24 For there shall be no more any 
vain vision nor flattering divination 
within the house of Israel. 

25 For I am the Lorp: I will 
speak, and /the word that I shall 
speak shall come to pass; it shall be 
no more prolonged: !for in your 
days, O rebellious house, will I say 
the word, and will perform it, saith 
the Lord Gop. 

26 Again the word of the LorRD 
came to me, saying, 

27 Son of man, behold, they of 


1 It must constantly be remembered that though the prophet was in Babylonia he 
prophesies as if in the land, and during the eleven years’ interval between the first 


and the final deportation. See Ezk. 8. 3, note. 


851 


‘ 


12 28] 


the house of Israel say, The vision 
that he seeth is “for many days to 
come, and he prophesieth of the 
times that are far off. 

28 Therefore say unto them, Thus 
saith the Lord Gop; There shall 
none of my words be prolonged any 
more, but the word which I have 
spoken shall be done, saith the Lord 
Gop. 


CHAPTER 13. | 


The message against the lying 
prophets. 


ND the word of the LorD came 
unto me, saying, F 

2 Son of man, prophesy against 
the prophets of Israel that prophesy,} 
and say thou unto them that proph- 
esy out of their own hearts, Hear ye 
the word of the LorD; 

3 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Woe 
unto the foolish prophets, that fol- 
low their own spirit, and have seen 
nothing! ; 

4 O Israel), thy prophets are like 
the foxes in the deserts. 

5 %Ye have not gone up into the 
gaps, neither made up the hedge for 
the house of Israel to stand in the} 
battle in the day of the Lorp. | 

6 They have seen vanity and 
lying divination, saying, The Lorp 
saith: and the Lorp hath not sent 
them: and they have made others 
to hope that they would confirm the 
word. 

7 Have ye not seen a vain vision, 


and have ye not spoken a lying|.- 


divination, whereas ye say, The 
LorD saith it; albeit I have not 
spoken? 

8 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Because ye have spoken van- 
ity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, 
I am against you, saith the Lord 
Gop. 

9 And mine hand shall be upon 
the prophets that see vanity, and 
that divine lies: they shall not be 
in the assembly of my people, 
‘neither shall they be written in 
the writing of the house of Israel, 
neither shall they enter into the 
land of Israel; and ye shall know 
that I am the Lord Gop. 

10 Because, even because they 
have seduced my people, saying, 
Peace; and there was no peace; 
and one built up a wall, and, lo, 
others “daubed it with untempered 
morter: 

11 Say unto them which daub it 
with untempered morter, that it 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 594. 


a 2 Pet.3.4. 


6 Ezk.22.30; 
Psa.106.23, 
30. 


c Ezra 2.59,62; 


Neh.7.5; 
Psa.69.28. 


d Ezk.22.28. 
e Ezk,38.22. 


Ff vs.9,21,23; 
Ezk.14.8. 

g Jer.6.14; 
28.9. 


Ah 2 Pet.2.14, 


852 


flowing shower; and ye, O great 


wind shall rend 2#. 

12 Lo, when the wall is fallen, 
shall it not be said unto you, Where 
is the daubing wherewith ye have 
daubed it? 


Gop; I will even rend it with a 
stormy wind in my fury; and there 
shall be an overflowing shower in 
mine anger, and great hailstones in 
my fury to consume it. 

14 So will I break down the wall 
that ye have daubed with untem- 
pered morter, and bring it down to 
the ground, so that the foundation 
jthereof shall be discovered, and it 
shall fall, and ye shall be consumed 
in the midst thereof: and ‘ye shall 
know that I am the Lorpb. 

15 Thus will I accomplish my 
wrath upon the wall, and upon them 
that have daubed it with untem- 
pered morter, and will say unto 
you, The wall is no more, neither 
they that daubed it; 

16 To wit, the prophets of Israel 
which prophesy concerning Jerusa- 
lem, and which see visions of peace 
for her, and there is no peace, saith 
the Lord Gop. 

17 Likewise, thou son of man, set 
thy face against the daughters of 
thy people, which prophesy out of 
their own heart; and prophesy thou 
against them, 


18 And say, Thus saith the Lord © 


Gop; Woe to the women that sew 
pillows to all armholes, and make 
kerchiefs upon the head of every 
stature to hunt souls! ‘Will ye 
hunt the souls of my people, and 
will ve save the souls alive that 
come unto you? 

19 And will ye pollute me among 
my people ‘for handfuls of barley 
and for pieces of bread, to slay the 
souls that should not die, and to 
save the souls alive that should not 
live, by your lying to my people 
that hear your lies? 

20 Wherefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Behold, I am against your 
pillows, wherewith ye there hunt 
the souls to make them fly, and I 
will tear them from your arms, and 
will let the souls go, even the souls 
that ye hunt to make them fly. 

21 Your kerchiefs also will I tear, 
and deliver my people out of your 
hand, and they shall be no more in 
your hand to be hunted; and ye 
shall know that {| am the Lorpb, 


shall fall: «there shall be an over- 
hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy © 


13 Therefore thus saith the Lord © 


Tf, > ie Irn v2 eee * seat e® oman ' 
2" 
a ae , 


13 22) 


EZEKIEL. 


[14 21 


- 22 Because with lies ye have made 
the heart of the righteous sad, 
whom I have net made sad; and 
“strengthened the hands of the 
wicked, that he should not return 
from his wicked way, by promising 
him life: 

23. Therefore 5ye shall see no more 
vanity, nor divine divinations: for I 
will deliver my people out of your 
hand: and ye shall know that I am 
the Lorp. 


CHAPTER 14. 
The vision of the elders of Israel. 


HEN ‘came certain of the elders 
of Israel unto me, and sat be- 
fore me. 

2 And the word of the LorpD 
came unto me, saying, 

3 Son of man, these men have set 
up their idols in their heart, and 
put the stumblingblock of their 
iniquity before their face: ¢should I 
be enquired of at all by them? 

4 Therefore speak unto them, and 
say unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop: Every man of the house of 
Israel that setteth up his idols in 
his heart, and putteth the stum- 
blingblock of his iniquity before his 
face, and cometh to the prophet; I 
the Lorp will answer him that 
cometh according to the multitude 
of his idols; 

5 That I may take the house of 
Israel in their own heart, because 
they are all estranged from me 
through their idols. 

6 Therefore say unto the house of 
Israel, Thus saith the Lord Gop; 
Repent, and turn yourselves from 
your idols; and turn away your 
faces from all your abominations. 


7 For every one of the nouse of | 


Israel, or of the stranger that so- 
journeth in Israel, which separateth 
himself from me, and setteth up his 
idols in his heart, and putteth the 
stumblingblock of his iniquity be- 
fore his face, and cometh to a pro- 
phet to enquire of him concerning 
me; I the Lorp will answer him by 
myself: : 

8 ¢And I will set my face against 
that man, and fwill make him a 
sign and a proverb, and I will cut 
him off from the midst of my peo- 
ple; and ye shall know that I am 
the Lorb. . 

9 And if the prophet be deceived 
when he hath spoken a thing, I the 
Lorp have édeceived that prophet, 
and I will stretch out my hand upon 


B.C. 594. 


a Jer.23.14. 


6 v.6; Ezk. 
12.24; Mic. 
3.6. 


c Ezk.8.1; 
20.1; 33.31. 


d 2 Ki.3.13. 


e Ezk.15.7; 
Lev.17.10; 
20.3,5,6; 
Jer.44.11. 


S Ezk.5.15; 
Num.26.10; 
Deut.28.37. 


g1 Ki.22.23; 
Job 12.16; 
Jer.4.10; 
2 Thes.2.11. 


h 2 Pet.2.15. 


i Important 
contempo- 
raneous tes- 
timony to the 
character 
and histor- 
icity of 
Daniel who 
was yet 
living. 

Cf. Jer.15-1; 
Ezk.14.15, 
18,20. See 
Jer.7.16; 11. 
14; 14.11. 


him, and will destroy him from the 
midst of my people Israel. 4 
_10 And they shall bear the pun- 
ishment of their iniquity: the pun- 
ishment of the prophet shall be even 
as the punishment of him that 
seeketh unto him; 

11 That the house of Israel may 
hgo no more astray from me, neither 
be polluted any more with all their 
transgressions; but that they may 
be my people, and I may be their 
God, saith the Lord Gob. 


Jerusalem on no account to be 
spared. 


12. The word of the Lorp came 
again to me, saying, 

13 Son of man, when the land sin- 
neth against me by trespassing 
grievously, then will I stretch out 
mine hand upon it, and will break 
the staff of the bread thereof,.and 
will send famine upon it, and will 
cut off man and beast from it: 

14 ‘Though these three men, 
Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, 
they should deliver but their own 
souls by their righteousness, saith 
the Lord Gop. 

15 If I cause noisome beasts to 
pass through the land, and they 
spoil it, so that it be desolate, that 
no man may pass through because 
of the beasts: 

16 Though these three men were 
in it, as I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
they shall deliver neither sons: nor 
daughters; they only shall be de- 
peared but the land shall be deso- 
ate. 

17 Or if I bring a sword upon that 
land, and say, Sword, go through 
the land; so that I jcut off man and 


j Ezk.25.13; 
Zeph.1.3. 


k Ezk.38.22; 
2 Sam.24.15. 


853 


beast from it: 

18 Though these three men were 
in it, as I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
they shall deliver neither sons nor 
daughters, but they only shall be 
delivered themselves. 

19 Or if I send a “pestilence into 
that land, and pour out my fury 
upon it in blood, to cut off from it 
man and beast: 

20 Though Noah. Daniel, and 
Job, were in it, as I live, saith the 
Lord Gop, they shall deliver 
neither son nor daughter; they shall 
but deliver their own souls by their 
righteousness. 

21 For thus saith the Lord Gop; 
How much more when I send my 
four sore judgments upon Jeru- 
salem, the sword, and the famine, 
and the noisome beast, and the 


[16 15 


14 22] EZEKIEL. 
pestilence, to cut off from it man) __ B.C. 594. 
and beast? 


22 Yet, behold, therein shall be 
left a remnant that shall be brought 
forth, both sons and daughters: be- 
hold, they shall come forth unto 
you, and ye shall see their way and 
their doings: and ye shall be com- 
forted concerning the evil that I 
have brought upon Jerusalem, even 
concerning all that I have brought 
upon it. 

23 And they shall comfort you, 
when ye see their ways and their 
doings: and ye shall know that I 
have not done ¢withcut cause all 
that I have done in it, saith the 
Lord Gop. 


CHAPTER 15. 


The vision of the burning vine. 
Cf. Isa. 5. 1-24.) 


ND the word of the Lorp came|? J&-22-8,9- 
unto me, saying, _  |0 Cf. Isa.5.1-7; 
2 Son of man, What is the ®vine] John 15.6. 
- tree more than any tree, or than a). ney 14.8: 
branch which is among the trees of] Ley.17.10. 
the forest? dweabs 
3 Shall wood be taken thereof to} * *°**- 
do any work? or will men take ale x.19.5; 
pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?} Jer.2.2. 
4 Behold, it is cast into the fire 
for fuel; the fire devoureth both the 
ends of it, and the midst of it is 
burned. Is it meet for any work? 
5S Behold, when it was whole, it 
was meet for no work: how much 
less shall it be meet yet for any 
work, when the fire hath devoured] 32.15; Jer. 
it, and it is burned? 7.4; Mic. 
6 Therefore thus saith the Lord] 34+ 
Gop; As the vine tree among the 
trees of the forest, which I have 
given to the fire for fuel, so will I 
give the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
7 And “I will set my face against 
them; they shall go out from one 
fire, and another fire shail devour 
them; and ye shall know that I 
am the Lorp, when I set my face 
against them. 
8 And I will make the land deso- 
late, because they have committed 
a trespass, saith the Lord Gop. 


CHAPTER 16. 
The harlotry of Jerusalem. 


AGAIN the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 
2 Son of man, cause Jerusalem to 
know her abominations, 
3 And say, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop unto Jerusalem; Thy birth 


ft Heb. nose. 
See Isa.3.21. 


gi.e. nations. 


h Psa.2.12, 
note, 


4 See Deut. 


854 


and thy nativity 1s of the land of © 
Canaan; thy father was an Amor- — 
ite, and thy mother an Hittite. 

4 And as for thy nativity, 4in the 
day thou wast born thy navel was 
not cut, neither wast thou washed 
in water to supple thee; thou wast 
not salted at all, nor swaddled at 
all 


5 None eye pitied thee, to do any 
of these unto thee, to have compas- 
sion upon thee; but thou wast cast 
out in the open field, to the lothing 
of thy person, in the day that thou 
wast born, 

6 And when I passed by thee, and 
saw thee polluted in thine own 
blood, I said unto thee when thou 
wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said 
unto thee when thou wast in thy 
blood, Live. : 

7 I have caused thee to multiply 
as the bud of the field, and thou 
hast increased and waxen great, 
and thou art come to excellent orna- 
ments: thy breasts are fashioned, 
and thine hair is grown, whereas 
thou wast naked and bare. 

8 Now when I passed by thee, and 
looked upon thee, behold, thy time 
was the time of love; and I spread 
my skirt over thee, and covered thy 
nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, 
and entered inte a covenant with ~ 
thee, saith the Lord Gop. and ‘thou 
becamest mine. 

9 Then washed I thee with water; 
yea, I throughly washed away thy 
blood from thee, and I anointed 
thee with oil. 

10 I clothed thee also with 
broidered work, and shod thee with 
badgers’ skin, and I girded thee 
about with fine linen, and I covered 
thee with silk. 

11 I decked thee also with orna- 
ments, and I put bracelets upon thy 
hands, and a chain on thy neck. 

12 And I put a jewel on thy ffore- 
head, and earrings in thine ears, 
and a beautiful crown upon thine 
head. 

13 Thus wast thou decked with 
gold and silver; and thy raiment 
was of fine linen, and silk, and 
broidered work; thou didst eat fine 
flour, and honey, and oil: and thou 
wast exceeding beautiful, and thou 
didst prosper into a kingdom. 

14 And thy renown went forth 
among the £heathen for thy beauty: 
for it was perfect through my come- 
liness, which I had put upon thee, 
saith the Lord Gop. 

153 But thou didst “trust ‘in thine 


16 16) _ EZEKIEL. [16 39 


28 ¢Thou hast played the whore 
also with the Assyrians, because 
thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou 
hast played the harlot with thent, 
and yet couldest not be satisfied. 

29 Thou hast moreover multi- 
plied thy fornication in the land of 


own beauty, and ¢playedst the har- 
lot because of thy renown, and 
pouredst out thy fornications on 
every one that passed by; his it was. 
16 And of thy garments thou 
didst take, and deckedst thy high 
places with divers colours, and 


playedst the harlot thereupon: the Canaan unto Chaldea; and yet thou 
like things shall not come, neither wast not satisfied herewith. 
Siaethee thse also taken thy fair ae Lee tet rae eeoaddc: oO 
; y e OD, seeing ou doest 
jewels of my gold and of my silver, all these things, the work of an 
which I had given thee, and madest imperious whorish woman; 
ee a tarecar i enoat itenit place tar the hectioat Svea 
with them, inent place in the head of every 

18 And tookest thy broidered gar- way, and makest thine high place 
ments, and coveredst them: and in every street; and hast not been 
thou Set: set eae oil and mine in- te an harlot, in that thou scornest 
cense before them. e; 

19 My meat also which I gave 32 But asa wife that committeth 
thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, adultery, which taketh strangers 
wherewith I fed thee, thou hast), p.23.3,8, instead of her husband! 
even set it before them for a sweet| 11;12;Isa. | 33 They give gifts to all whores: 
savour: and thus it was, saith the point pele but thou givest thy gifts to all thy 
Lord Gop. 35620, lovers, and hirest them, that they 

20 piatone ts! a hast waa tes Hos.1.2. ey pitied thee on every side 
sons an y daughters, whom thou or thy whoredom. 
hast borne unto me, and these hast}? ¥2-43.605 34 And the contrary is in thee 
thou sacrificed unto them to be de- Hos.11.1, from other women in thy whore- 
voured. Is this of thy whoredoms| | aod 7s doms, whereas none followeth thee 
Bot That thou: hast slain my chil “Ye 20, ; inet npg rewind a soa 

of de ’ e- 
dren, and delivered them to cause Kars _ {ward is given unto thee, therefore 
them to pass through the fire for|?P%7% "79, |thou art contrary. 
them? 2 Chr.28.20; | 35 Wherefore, O harlot, hear the 


22 And in all thine abominations] Jer-2.18,36. | word of the LORD: 
and thy whoredoms thou hast not], pox 93.45: 36 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
remembered the days of thy “youth,| Lev.20.10: [cause thy filthiness was poured out, 
when thou wast naked and bare,| Deut.22.22. land thy nakedness discovered 


and wast polluted in thy blood. through thy whoredoms with thy 

23 And it came to pass after all lovers, and with all the idols of thy 
thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto abominations, and by the blood of 
thee! saith the Lord Gop;) thy children, which thou didst give 

24 That thou hast also built unto unto them; ; 
thee an eminent, place, and ‘hast 37 Behold, therefore I will gather 
made thee an high place in every all thy lovers, with whom thou hast 
street. : taken pleasure, and all them that 

25 Thou hast built thy high place thou hast loved, with all them that 
at every head of the way, and hast thou hast hated; I will even gather 
made thy beauty to be abhorred, them round about against thee, and 
and hast opened thy feet to every will discover thy nakedness unto 
one that passed by, and multiplied them, that they may see all thy 
thy whoredoms. nakedness. yes 

26 Thou hast also committed for- 38 And I will judge thee, “as 
nication with the Egyptians thy women that break wedlock and 
neighbours, great of flesh; and hast shed blood are judged; and I will 
increased thy whoredoms, to pro- give thee blood in fury and jeal- 
voke me to anger.. : ousy. ‘ y 

27 Behold, therefore I have 39 And I will also give thee into 
stretched out my hand over thee, their hand, and they shall throw 
and have diminished thine ordi- down thine eminent place, and shall 
nary food, and delivered thee unto break down thy high places: they 
the will of them-that hate thee, the shall strip thee also of thy clothes, 
daughters of the Philistines, which and shall take thy fair jewels, and 
are ashamed of thy lewd way- leave thee naked and bare. 


855 


16 40] 


EZEKIEL. 


Ra AP 2, 9 ee 


40 They shall also bring up a 
company against thee, and they 
shall stone thee with stones, and 
thrust thee through with their 
swords. i 

41 And “they shall burn thine 
-houses with fire, and execute judg- 
ments upon thee in the sight of 
many women: and I will cause thee 
to cease from playing the harlot, 
and thou also shalt give no hire 
any more. 

42 So will I make my fury toward 
thee to rest, and my jealousy shall 
départ from thee; and I will be 
quiet, and will be no more angry. 

43 Because thou hast not remem- 
bered the days of thy youth, but 
hast fretted me in all these things; 
behold, therefore °I also-will recom- 
pense thy way upon thine head, 
saith the Lord Gop: and thou shalt 
not commit this lewdness above all 
thine abominations. 

44 Behold, every one that useth 
proverbs shail use this proverb 
against thee, saying, As is the 
mother, so is her daughter. 

45 Thou art thy mother’s daugh- 
ter, that lotheth her husband and 
her children; and thou art the sis- 
ter of thy sisters, which lothed 
their husbands and their children: 
your mother was an Hittite, and 
your father an Amorite._ 

46 And thine elder sister is Sa- 
maria, she and her daughters that 
dwell at thy left hand: and thy 
younger sister, that dwelleth at thy 
tight hand, is Sodom and her 
daughters. 

47 Yet hast thou not walked after 
their ways, nor done after their 
abominations: but, as if that were 
a very little thing, thou wast cor- 
rupted more than they in all thy 
ways. 

48 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
Sodom thy sister hath not done, 
she nor her daughters, as thou hast 
done, thou and thy daughters, 

49 Behold, this was the iniquity 
of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness 
of bread, and abundance of idleness 
was in her and in her daughters, 
neither did she strengthen the hand 
of the poor and needy. 

50 And they were haughty, and 
4committed abomination before me: 
therefore I took them away as I 
saw good. 

51 Neither hath Samaria commit- 
ted half of thy sins; but thou hast 
multiplied thine abominations more 


than they, and hast justified thy 


B.C. 594. 


a Deut.13.16; 
2 Ki.25.95 
Jer.39.8; 
52:13; 


6 Ezk.9.10; 


11.21; 22.31. 


c Mt.10.15; 
11.24. 


d Gen.13.13; 
18.20; 19.5. 


é See vs.60,61; 
Tsa.1.9. 


f 2 Ki.16.5; 


2 Chr.28.18. 


g Psa.106.45. 
h Jer.32.40; 
50.5. 


4 Hos.2.19,20. 


856 


[16 63 
stare in all thine abominations 
which thou hast done. 

52 Thou also, which hast judged 
thy sisters, bear thine own shame 
for thy sins that thou hast commit- 
ced more abominable than they: 
they are more righteous than thou: 
yea, be thou confounded also, and 
bear thy shame, in that thou hast 
justified thy sisters. 3 

93 ‘When I shall bring again 
their captivity, the captivity of 
Sodom and her daughters, and the 
captivity of Samaria and her 
daughters, then will I bring again 
the captivity of thy captives in the 
midst of them: 

54 That thou mayest bear thine 
own shame, and mayest be con- 
foundedin all that thou hast done, in 
that thou art a comfort unto them. 

55. When thy sisters, Sodom and 
her daughters, shall return to their 
former estate, and Samaria and her 
daughters shall return to their 
former estate, then thou and thy 
daughters shall return to your for- 
mer estate. 

56 For thy sister Sodom was not 
mentioned by thy mouth in the day 
of thy pride, 

57 Before thy wickedness was 
discovered, as at the time of thy 
Sreproach of the daughters of Syria, 
and all that are round about her, 
the daughters of the Philistines, 
which despise thee round about. 

58 Thou hast borne thy iewdness 
and thine abominations, saith the 
Lorb. 

59 For thus saith the Lord Gop, 
I will even deal with thee as thou 
hast done, which hast despised the 
oath in breaking the covenant. 


The promise of future blessing 
under the Palestinian Cove- 
nant (Deut. 30. 1-10, note) and 
the New Covenant (Heb. 8. 8-12, 
note). 


60 Nevertheless éI will remember 
My covenant with thee in the days 
of thy youth, and I will establish 
unto thee “an everlasting covenant. 

61 Then thou shalt remember thy 
ways, and be ashamed, when thou 
shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder 
and thy younger: and I will give 
them unto thee for daughters, but 
not by thy covenant, 

62 And ‘I will establish my cove- 
nant with thee; and thou shalt 
know that I am the Lorp: 

63 That thou mayest remember, 
and be confounded, and never open 


EZEKIEL, 


[17 23 


thy mouth any more because of thy 
shame, when I am pacified toward 
thee for all that thou hast done, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


CHAPTER 17. 
The parable of the great eagle. 


ND the word of the LoRD came 
unto me, 4saying, 

2 Son of man, put forth a riddle, 
and speak a parable unto the house 
of Israel; 

3 And say, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; A great eagle with great 
wings, longwinged, full of feathers, 
which had divers colours, came 
unto Lebanon, and took the highest 
branch of the cedar: 

4 He cropped off the top of his 
young twigs, and carried it into a 
land of traffick; he set it in a city 
of merchants. 

5 He took also of the seed of the 
land, and planted it in a fruitful 
field; he placed it by great waters, 
and set it as a willow tree. 

6 And it grew, and became a 
spreading vine of low stature, whose 
branches turned toward him, and 
the roots thereof were under him: so 
it became a vine, and brought forth 
branches, and shot forth sprigs. 

7 There was also another great 
eagle with great wings and many 
feathers: and, behold, this vine did 
bend her roots toward him, and 
shot forth her branches toward him, 
that he might water it by the fur- 
tows of her plantation. : 

8 It was planted in a good soil by 
great waters, that it might bring 
forth branches, and that it might 
bear fruit, that it might be a goodly 


Vine. 

9 Say thou, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Shall it prosper? shall he 
not pull up the roots thereof, and 
cut off the fruit thereof, that it 
wither? it shall wither in all the 
leaves of her spring, even without 
great power or many people to 
pluck it up by the roots thereof. 

10 Yea, behold, being planted, 
shall it prosper? ‘shall it not utterly 
wither, when the east wind touch- 
eth it? it shall wither in the fur- 
rows where it grew. 

The rebellion of Zedekiah and 
its results. (Cf. 2 Ki. 24. 17-20; 
25. 1-10.) 


11 Moreover the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying, 
12 Say now to the rebellious 


__ B.C. 594. 


a Parables 
(C.T.). 
vs.1-14; 
Ezk.19.1-14. 
(Jud.9.7-15; 
Zech.11. 
7-14.) 


b 2 Ki.25.7. 


¢ Ezk.19.12; 
Hos.13.15. 


dv.3; 2 Ki.24. 
11-16. 


e 2 Ki.24.17. 
f Deut.17.16; 
Isa.31.1,3; 
36.6,9. 

g Jer.37.7. 


h Ezk.4.2; 
Jer.52.4. 


#1 Chr.29.24; 
Lam.5.6. 

j 1sa.11.1; 
Jer.23.5; 
Zech.3.8. 

k ¥sa.53.2, 

1 Ezk.20.40; 


Isa.2.2,3; 
Mic.4.1. 


857 


house, Know ye not what these 
things mean? tell them, Behold, 
éthe king of Babylon is come to Je- 
rusalem, and hath taken the king 
thereof, and the princes thereof, and 
led them with him to Babylon; 

13 «And hath taken of the king’s 
seed, and made a covenant with 
him, and hath taken an oath of 
him: he hath also taken the mighty 
of the land: 

14 That the kingdom might be 
base, that it might not lift itself up, 
but that by kceping of his cove- 
nant it might stand. 

_15 But he rebelled against him 
in sending his ambassadors into 
Egypt, that they might give him 
horses and much people. JShall he 
prosper? shall he escape that doeth 
such things? or shall he break the 
covenant, and be delivered? 

16 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
surely in the place where the king 
dwelleth that made him king, whose 
oath he despised, and whose cove- 
nant he brake, even with him in the 
midst of Babylon he shall die. 

17 sNeither shall Pharaoh with 
his mighty army and great com- 
pany make for him in the war, “by. 
casting up mounts, and building 
forts, to cut off many persons: 

18 Seeing he despised the oath by 
breaking the covenant, when, lo, 
he had ‘given his hand, and hath 
done all these things, he shall not 
jescane. ; 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; As I live, surely mine oath 
that he hath despised, and my cov- 
enant that he hath broken, even it 
will I recompense upon his own 
head. f 

20 And I will spread my net upon 
him, and he shall be taken in my 
snare, and I will bring him to Baby- 
lon, and will plead with him there 
for his trespass that he hath tres- 
passed against me. 

21 And all his fugitives with all 
his bands shall fall by the sword, 
and they that remain shall be scat- 
tered toward all winds: and ye 
shall know that I the Lorp have 
spoken 1t. 

22 Thus saith the Lord Gop; I 
will also take of the highest Jbranch 
of the high cedar, and will set it; 
I will crop off from the top of his 
young twigs *a tender one, and will 
plant i# upon an high mountain 
and eminent: 

23 !'In the mountain of the height 
of Israel will I plant it: and it shall 


17 24) 


EZEKIEL 


[18 25 


bring forth boughs, and bear fruit,| 


and be a goodly cedar: and “under 
it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; 
in the shadow of the branches 
thereof shall they dwell. 

24 And all the trees of the field 
shall know that I the LorD have 
brought down the high tree, have 
exalted the low tree, have dried up 


B.C. 594. 


the green tree, and have made the 
dry tree to flourish: I the Lorp 
have spoken and have done it. 


CHAPTER 18. 


Ethical instructions for Israel in 
captivity. 


HE word of the LorpD came 
unto me again, saying, 

2 What mean ye, that ye use this 
proverb concerning the land of Is- 
rael, saying, The fathers have eaten. 
sour grapes, and the children’s teeth 
are set on edge? 

3 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
ye shall not have occasion any 
more to use this proverb in Israel.| 

4 Behold, all souls are mine; as 
the soul of the father, so also the! 
soul of the son is mine: “the soul 
that sinneth, it shall die. 

5 But if a man be Sjust, and do 
that which is lawful and right, 

6 And hath not eaten upon the 


mountains, neither hath lifted up|; 


his eyes to the idols of the house of 
Israel, neither hath defiled his 
neighbour’s wife, neither hath come 
near to a menstruous woman, 

7 And hath not oppressed any, 
but hath restored to the debtor his 
@pledge, hath spoiled none by vio- 
lence, hath given his bread to the 
hungry, and hath covered the na- 
ked with a garment; 

8 He that hath not given forth 
upon ‘usury, neither hath taken 
any increase, that hath withdrawn 
his hand from iniquity, hath exe- 
cuted true judgment between man 
and man, 

9 Hath walked in my statutes, 
and hath kept my judgments, to 
deal truly; he is just, he shall surely 
flive, saith the Lord Gop. 

10 If he beget a son that is a rob: 
ber, a shedder of blood, and that 
doeth the like to any one of these 
things, 

11 And that doeth not any of| 
those duties, but even hath eaten 
upon the mountains, and defiled 
his neighbour’s wife, 

12 Hath oppressed the poor and 


@ Ezk.31.6; 
Dan.4.12. 


6 v.20; Rom. 
6.23. 


c Righteous- 
ness. vs.5-9; 


e Ex.22.25; 
Lev.25.36,37; 
Seppe 


f Ezk.20.11; 
Amos 5.4. 


£ Gen.9.6; 


Ex.21.12; 
Num.35.31. 


jV.4. 
& Deut.24.16; 
2 Ki.14.6; 
2 Chr.25.4; 
Jer.31.29,30. 
Tisa.3.10,11. 
m Rom.2.9. 


n v.27; Ezk. 
33.12,19, 


0 v.32; Ezk. 


33.11; 1 Tim. 
2.4; 2 Pet. 
3.9. 


858 


needy, hath spoiled by violence, — 
hath not restored the pledge, and 
hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, 
hath committed abomination, 

13 Hath given forth upon usury, 
and hath taken increase: shall he 
then live? he shall not Hve: he 
hath done all these abominations; 
he shall surely die; “his blood shall 
be upon him. 

14 Now, lo, 1f he beget 4 son, that 


‘ Iseeth all his father’s sins which he 


hath done, and considereth, and 
doeth not such like, 

15 That hath not eaten upon the 
mountains, neither hath lifted up 
his eyes to the idols of the house 
of Israel, hath not defiled his neigh- 
bour’s wife, 

16 Neither hath oppressed any, 
hath not withholden the pledge, 
neither hath spoiled by violence, 
but hath given his bread to the 
hungry, and hath covered the na- 
ked with 4 garment, 

17 That hath taken off his hand 
from the poor, that hath not re- 
ceived usury nor increase, hath exe- 
cuted my judgments, hath walked 
in my statutes; he shall not die for 
the iniquity of his father, he shall 
surely live. 

18 As for his father, because he 
cruelly oppressed, spoiled his bro- 
thet by violence, and did that 
which is not good among his peo- 
ple, lo, even he shall die in his 
iniquity. 

19 Yet say ye, Why? ‘doth not 
the son bear the iniquity of the fa- 
ther? When the son hath done 
that which is lawful and right, and 
hath kept all my statutes, and hath 
done them, he shall surely live. 

20 JThe soul that sinneth, it shall 
die. The son shall not bear the 
iniquity of the father, neither shail 
the father bear the iniquity of the 
son: the ‘righteousness of the right- 
eous shall be upon him, and the 
mwickedness of the wicked shall be 
upon him. 

21 But “if the wicked will turn 
from all his sins that he hath com- 
mitted, and keep all my statutes, 
and do that which is lawful and 
right, he shall surely live, he shall 
not die. 

22 All his transgressions that he 
hath committed, they shall not be 
mentioned unto him: in his right- 
eousness that he hath done he shall 
ive. 

23 °Have I any pleasure at all 
that the wicked should die? saith 


the Lord Gop: and not that he 
peoye return from his ways, and 
ver 


24 But when the righteous turn-| 


eth away from his righteousness, 
and committeth iniquity, and 
doeth according to all the abomina- 
tions that the wicked man doeth, 
shall he live? All his righteousness 
that he hath done shall not be men- 
tioned: in his trespass that he hath 
trespassed, and in his sin that he 
hath sinned, in them shall he die. 

25 Yet ye say, *The way of the 
Lord is not equal. Hear now, O 
house of Israel; Is not my way 
equal? are not your ways unequal? 

26 When a righteous man turn- 
eth away from his righteousness, 
‘and committeth iniquity, and dieth 
in them; for his iniquity that he 
hath done shall he die. 

27 Again, when the wicked man 
turneth away from his wickedness 
that he hath committed, and doeth 
that which is lawful and right, he 
shall save his soul alive. 

28 Because he’ considereth, and 
turneth away from all his transgres- 
Sions that he hath committed, he 
shall surely live, he shall not die. 

29 Yet saith the house of Israel, 
The way of the Lord is not equal. 
O house of Israel, are not my ways 
equal? are not your ways unequal? 

30 Therefore I will judge you, O 
house of Israel, every one accord- 
ing to his ways, saith the Lord 
Gop. Repent, and turn your- 
selves from all your transgressions; 
$0 iniquity shall not be your ruin. 

31 “Cast away from you all your 
transgressions, whereby ye have 
transgressed: and make you'a 2new 
heart and a new spirit: for why will 
ye die, O house of Israel? 

32 &For I have no pleasure in, the 
death of him that dieth, saith the 
Lord Gop: wherefore turn your- 
selves, and live ye. 


CHAPTER 19. 


Lamentation for the princes 
of Israel. 


PYTOREOVER take thou up a 
flamentation for the princes 
of Israel, 

2 And say, What is thy mother? 
A lioness: she lay down among 
lions, she nourished’ her whelps 
among young lions. 

3 And she brought up one of her 


EZEKIEL. 


a v.29; Ezk, 
33.17,20. 


b Mt.3.2; 
Reyv.2.5. 


d Ezk.11,19; 
36.26; 
Jer.32.39. 

é v.23; 
Ezk.33.11: 
Lam.3.33; 

2 Pet.3.9. 

f Parables 
(O.T,). 
vs.1-14; 
Ezk.23.1-17. 
(Jud.9.7-15; 


Zech.11.7- 
14.) 


g v.6; 2 Ki. 
23.31,32. 


h 2 Ki.23.33; 
2 Chr.36.4; 

t 2 Ki.23.34. 

j 2 Ki.24.2. 


k 2 Chr.36.6; 
Jer.52.11. 


1 Jud.9.15; 
2 Ki.24.20. 


whelps: sit became a young lion, 


859 


¢ Eph.4.22,23. 


Jer.22.11,12. 


mie. August. 


(201 


and it learned to catch the prey; it 
devoured men. 

4 The nations also heard of him; 
he was taken in their pit, and they 
brought him with chains unto the 
land of “Egypt. 

5 Now when she saw that she had 
waited, and her hope was lost, then 
she took ‘another of her whelps, 
and made him a young lion. 

6 And he went up and down 
among the lions, he became a 
young lion, and learned to catch 
the prey, and devoured men. 

7 And he knew their desolate 
palaces, and he laid waste their 
cities; andthe land was desolate, 
and the fulness thereof, by the noise 
of his roaring. 

8 jThen the nations set against 
him on every side from the prov~ 
inces, and spread their net over 
him: he was taken in their pit. 

9 *And they put him in ward in 
chains, and brought him to the king 
of Babylon: they brought him into 
holds, that his voice should no more 
be heard upon the mountains of 
Israel. 

10 Thy mother is like a vine in 
thy blood, planted by the waters: 
she was fruitful and full of branches 
by reason of many waters. 

11 And she had strong rods for 
the sceptres of them that bare rule, 
and her stature was exalted among 
the thick branches, and she ap- 
peared in her height with the 
multitude of her branches. 

12 But she was plucked up in 
fury, she was cast down to the 
ground, and the east wind dried up 
her fruit: her strong rods were 
broken and withered; the fire con- 
sumed them. 

13. And now she is planted in 
the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty 
ground. 

14 And /fire is gone out of a rod 
of her branches, which hath de- 
voured, her fruit, so that she hath 
no strong rod to be a sceptre to 
rule. This is a lamentation, and 
shall be for a lamentation. 


CHAPTER 20. 


Jehovah vindicated in the chas- 
tisement of Israel. 


Ae it came to pass in the 
seventh year, in the “fifth 
month, the tenth day of the 
month, that certain of the elders of 
Israel came to enquire of the LorD, 


land sat before me. 


20 2] 


EZEKIEL. 


[20 2st 


2 


2 Then came the word of the 
LORD unto me, saying, 

3 Son of man, speak unto the 
elders of Israel, and say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; Are ye 
come to enquire of me? As I live, 
saith the Lord Gop, I will not be 
enquired of by you. 

4 Wilt thou judge them, son of 
man, wilt thou judge them? cause 
them to know the abominations of 
their fathers: 

5 And say unto them, Thus saith 
the Lord Gop; In the day when I 
chose Israel, and lifted up mine 
hand unto the seed of the house of 
Jacob, and made myself known 
unto them in the land of Egypt, 
when I lifted up mine hand unto 
them, saying, I am the LORD your 
God; : 

6 Inthe day that I lifted up mine 
hand unto them, “to bring them 
forth of the land of Egypt into a 
land that I had espied for them, 
flowing with milk and _ honey, 
bwhich is the glory of all lands: 

7 Then said I unto them, Cast ye 
away every man the abominations 
of his eyes, and defile not yourselves 
with the ‘idols of Egypt: I am the 
LorpD your God. 

8 But they rebelled against me, 
and would not -hearken unto me: 
they did not every man cast away 
the abominations of their eyes, 
neither did they forsake the idols 
of Egypt: then I said, I will pour 
out my fury upon them, to accom- 
plish my anger against them in the 
midst of the land of Egypt. 

9 4But I wrought for my name’s 
sake, that it should not be polluted 
before the ‘heathen, among whom 
they were, in whose sight I made 
myself known unto them, in bring- 
ing them forth out of the land of 
Egypt. 

10 Wherefore I caused them to go 
forth out of the land of Egypt, and 
brought them into the wilderness. 

11 fAnd I gave them my statutes, 
and shewed them my judgments, 
which if a man do, he shall even 


live in them. 

12 Moreover also I gave them my 
&sabbaths, to be a sign between me 
and them, that they might know 
that I am the Lorp that sanctify 
them. 

13. But the house of Israel rebelled 
against me in the wilderness: they 
walked not in my statutes, and they 
despised my judgments, which if a 
man do, he shall even live in them; 


B.C. 593. 


a Ex.3-8,17; 
Deut.8 7-9, 
Jer.32.22. 


b v.15. 
Psa-48.2, 
Dan.8 9, 
11 16,41, 
Zech.7.14. 


c Lev 17.7; 
18.3; 
Deut.29. 
16-18; Josh 
24.14. 


d vs.14,22, 
Ezk.36.21, 


22, Ex.32.12; 


Num.14.13; 
Deut.9.28 


€i.e. nations 


f Deut.4.8; 
Neh.9.13,14, 
Psa.147.19, 
20. 


g Ex.20.8; 


h Num.14.28, 
Psa.95.11; 
106.26. 


# Num.15.39; 
Psa.78.37; 
Amos 5.25, 
26; Acts 7. 
42,43. 


j v.12; Jer. 
17.22. 


k Num.25. 
1,2; Deut.9. 
23,24; 31.27. 


1 Lev.26.33; 
Deut.28.64; 
Psa.106.27; 
Jer.15.4. 


m See v.39; 
Psa.81.12; 
Rom.1.24; 
2 Thes.2.11. 


860 


and my sabbaths they greatly pol- 
luted: then I said, I would pour out 
my fury upon them in the wilder- 
ness, to consume them. 

14 But I wrought for my name’s 
sake, that it should not be polluted 
before the ‘heathen, in whose sight 
I brought them out. 

15 “Yet also I lifted up my hand 
unto them in the wilderness, that I 
would not bring them into the land 
which I had given them, flowing 
with milk and honey, which is the 
glory of all lands; 

16 Because they despised my 
judgments, and walked not in my 
statutes, but polluted my sabbaths: 
for their heart went after their idols. 

17 Nevertheless mine eye spared 
them from destroying them, neither 
did I make an end of them in the 
wilderness. 

18 But I said unto their children 
in the wilderness, Walk ye not in 
the statutes of your fathers, neither 
observe their judgments, nor defile 
yourselves with their idols: 

19 I am the LorD your God; 
walk in my statutes, and keep my 
judgments, and do them; 

20 And shallow my sabbaths; and 
they shall be a sign between me and 
you, that ye may know that I am 
the Lorp your God. : 

21 Notwithstanding “the children 
rebelled against me: they walked 
not in my statutes, neither kept 
my judgments to do them, which if 
aman do, he shall even live in them; 
they polluted my sabbaths: then I 
said, I would pour out my fury upon 
them, to accomplish my anger 
against them in the wilderness. 

22 Nevertheless I withdrew mine 
hand, and wrought for my name’s 
sake, that it should not be polluted 
in the sight of the ‘heathen, in 
whose sight I brought them forth. 

23 I lifted up mine hand unto 
them also in the wilderness, that I 
would ‘scatter them among the 
fheathen, and disperse them 
through the countries; 

24 Because they had not executed 
my judgments, but had despised 
my statutes, and had polluted my 
sabbaths, and their eyes were after 
their fathers’ idols. 

25 Wherefore “I gave them also 
statutes that were not good, and 
judgments whereby they should 
not live; 

26 And I polluted them in their: 


own gifts, in that they caused to 
pass through the fire all that open- 


See ‘ 
20 27] 


EZEKIEL. 


[20 45 


eth the womb, that I might make} B.c. 593. _|fathers in the wilderness of the 


them desolate, to the end that they 
might know that I am the LorpD. 

27 Therefore, son of man, speak 
unto the house of Israel, and say 
unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Yet in this your fathers have 
blasphemed me, in that they have 
committed a trespass against me. 

28 For when I had brought them 
into'the land, for the which I lifted 
up mine hand to give it to them, 
then they saw every high hill, and 
all the thick trees, and they offered 
there their sacrifices, and there they 
presented the provocation of their 
offering: there also they made their 
sweet savour, and poured out there 
their drink-offerings. 

29 Then I said unto them, What 
is the high place whereunto ye go? 
And the name thereof is called 
Bamah unto this day. 

30 Wherefore say unto the house 
of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Gop; 
Are ye polluted after the manner of 
your fathers? and commit ye whore- 
dom after their abominations? 

31 For when ye offer your gifts, 
when ye make your sons to pass 
through the fire, ye pollute your- 
selves with all your idols, even unto 
this day: and shall I be enquired 
of by you, O house of Israel? As I 
live, saith the Lord Gop, I will 
not be enquired of by you. 

32 And that which cometh into 
your mind shall not be at all, that 
ye say, We will be as the “heathen, 
as the families of the countries, to 
serve wood and stone. 


The future judgment of Israel. 


33 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
surely with a mighty hand, and 
with a stretched out arm, and with 
fury poured out, will I rule ‘over 


you: 

34 And I will bring you out from 
the people, and will gather you out 
of the countries wherein ye are 
scattered, with a mighty hand, and 
with a stretched out arm, and 
with fury poured out. . 

35 And JI will bring you into the 
wilderness of the people, and there 
will I plead with you face to face. 

36 4Like as I pleaded with your 


@ i.e. nations. 


6 Judgments 


(the seven). 


vs.3344. 
Dan.7.22. 

(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.22.12.) 


c Kingdom 
i Ee 


d See Num. 
14.21,22,23, 
28,29. 


e Lev.27.32; 
Jer.33.13. 


f Jud.10.14; 
Psa.81.12; 
Amos 4.4. 


h Ezk.11.17; 
34.13; 36.24. 


+ Lev.26.39; 
Ezk.6.9; 
Hos.5.15. 


land of Egypt, so will I. plead with 
you, saith the Lord Gop. 

37 And I will cause you to ‘pass 
under the !rod, and I will bring 
you into the bond of the covenant: 

38 And I will purge out from 
among you the rebels, and them 
that transgress against me: I will 
bring them forth out of the country 
where they sojourn, and they shall 
not enter into the land of Israel: and 
ye shall know that I ana the LorD. 

39 As for you, O house of Israel, 
thus saith the Lord Gop; /Go ye, 
serve ye every one his idols, and 
hereafter also, if ye will not 
hearken unto me: but pollute ye my 
holy name no more with your gifts, 
and with your idols. 

40 For in mine holy mountain, in 
the mountain of the height of Is- 
rael, saith the Lord Gop, there shall 
all the house of Israel, all of them 
in the land, serve me: &there will I 
accept them, and there will I re- 
quire your offerings, and the first- 
fruits of your oblations, with all 
your holy things. 

41 I will accept you with your 
sweet savour, when I bring you out 
from the people, and gather you out 
of the countries wherein ye have 
been scattered; and I will be sancti- 
fied in you before the “heathen. 

42 And ye shall know that I am 
the Lorp, “when I shall.bring you 
into the land of Israel, into the 
country for the which I lifted up 
mine hand to give it to your fathers. 

43 And there shall ye remember 
your ways, and ali your doings, 
wherein ye have been defiled; and 
tye shall lothe yourselves in your 
own sight for all your evils that ye 
have committed. 

44 And ye shall know that I am 
the Lorp, when I have wrought 
with you for my name’s sake, not 
according to your wicked ways, 
nor according to your corrupt 
doings, O ye house of Israel, saith 
the Lord Gop. 


The parable of the forest of the 
south field. 


45 Moreover the word of the 
LorD came unto me, saying, 


1 The passage is a prophecy of the future judgment upon Israel, regathered from 


all nations (see “Israel,” 
(v. 35). The issue of 


enter the land for kingdom blessing (Psa. 50, 1-7; 


Isa. 1. 24-26, refs.) into the old wilderness of the wanderings 
this judgment determines who of Israel in that day shall 


Ezk. 20. 33-44; Mal. 3.2-5; 4. 1,2); 


see other judgments, John 12. 31, notes 1 Cor. 11.31, note; 2 Cor. 5.10, note; Mt. 
25.32, note; Jude6, note; Rey. 20.12, note: 


EZEKIEL. 


toward the south, and drop thy 
word toward the south, 
prophesy against the forest of the 
south field; 

47 And say to the forest of the 
south, Hear the word of the LorD; 
Thus:saith the Lord Gop; Behold, 
I will kindle a fire in thee, and it 
shall devour every green tree in 
thee, and every dry tree: the flam- 
ing flame shall not be quenched, 
and all faces from the south to the 
north shall be burned therein. 

48 And all flesh shall see that I 
the LorpD have kindled it: it shall 
not be quenched. ; 

49 Then said I, Ah Lord Gop! 
they say of me, Doth he not speak 
parables? 


CHAPTER 21. 


The parable of the sighing 
prophet. 


ND the word of the LorD came 
unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, set thy face toward 
Jerusalem, and “drop thy word 
toward the holy places, and proph- 
esy against the land of Israel, 

3 And say to the land of Israel, 
Thus saith the LORD; Behold, Iam 
against thee, and will draw forth 
my sword out of his sheath, and 
will cut off from thee the righteous 
and the wicked. 

4 Seeing then that I will cut off 
from thee the righteous and the 
wicked, therefore shall my sword 
go forth out of his sheath against 
all flesh from the south to the 
north: 

5 That all flesh may know that I 
the LorD have drawn ‘forth my 
sword out of his sheath: it shall 
not return any more. 

6 Sigh therefore, thou son of man, 
with the breaking of thy loins; and 
with bitterness sigh before their 
eyes. 

7 And it shall be, when they say 
unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou? 
that thou shalt answer, For the 
tidings; because it cometh: and 
every heart shall melt, and all 
hands shall be feeble, and every 
spirit shall faint, and all knees shall 
be weak as water: behold, it com- 
eth, and shall be brought to pass, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


The parable of the sword of God. 


8 Again the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 


a Deut.32.2; 
Amos 7.16; 
Mic.2.6,11. 


b vs.15,28; 
Deut.32.41. 


c¢ v.14; Ezk. 
22.13. 
d@ Ezk.25.5; 


Jer.49.2; 
Amos 1.14. 


862 


9 Son of man, prophesy, and say, 
Thus saith the Lorp; Say, %A 
sword, a sword is sharpened, and 
also furbished: 

10 It is sharpened to make a sore 
slaughter; it is furbished that it 
may glitter: should we then make 
mirth? it contemneth the rod of 
my. son, as every tree. 

11 And he hath given it to be fur- 
bished, that it may be handled: 
this sword is sharpened, and it is 
furbished, to give it into the hand 
of the slayer. 

12 Cry and howl, son of man: for 
it shall be upon my people, it shall 
be upon all the princes of Israel: 
terrors by reason of the sword shall 
be upon my people: smite there- 
fore upon thy thigh. 

13 Because it is a trial, and what 
if the sword contemn even the 
rod? it shall be no more, saith the 
Lord Gop. 

14 Thou therefore, son of man, 
prophesy, and smite thine hands 
together, and let the sword be 
doubled the third time, the sword 
of the slain: it is the sword of the 
great men that are slain, which 
entereth into their privy chambers. 

15 I have set the point of the 
sword against all their gates, that 
their heart may faint, and their 
ruins be multiplied: ah! 1# is made 
bright, i# is wrapped up for the 
slaughter. 

16 Go thee one way or other, 
either on the right hand, or on the 
left, whithersoever thy face is set. 

17 I will also “smite mine hands 
together, and I will cause my fury 
to rest: I the LorD have said it. 


No king till Messiah comes to 
reign (vs. 26, 27; Acts 15. 14-17). 


18 The word of the LorpD came 
unto me again, saying, 

19 Also, thou son of man, appoint 
thee two ways, that the sword of 
the king of Babylon may come: 
both twain shall come forth out of 
one land: and choose thou a place; 
choose it at the head of the way to 
the city. _ 

20 Appoint a way, that the sword 
may come to ¢Rabbath of the Am- 
monites, and to Judah in Jerusalem 
the defenced. 

21 For the king of Babylon stood 
at the parting of the way, at the 
head of the two ways, to use divi- 
nation: he made his arrows bright; 
he consulted with images, he looked 
in the liver, 


21 22] EZEKIEL. [22 15. 


_22 At his right hand was the div- 
ination for Jerusalem, to appoint 
captains, to open the mouth in the 
slaughter, to lift up the voice with 
shouting, to appoint battering 
rams against the gates, to cast a 
mount, and to build a fort. 

23 And it shall be unto them as a 
false divination in their sight, to 


judge, wilt thou judge the bloody 
city? yea, thou shalt shew her all 
her abominations. , 

3 Then say thou, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop, The City sheddeth blood 
in the midst of it, that her time may 
come, and maketh idols against her- 
self to defile herself. 

4 Thou art become guilty in thy 


them that have sworn oaths: but blood that thou hast sshed; and 
he will call to remembrance the ini- hast defiled thyself in thine idols 
quity, that they may be taken. which thou hast made; and thou 


Pes Therefore thusrenitinthel odio pantry, |e aa come oven anes thy wean 
Gop; made your 36.13; jan come even unto thy years: 
poataityy to be ateomitsy in = Jer.52.2. nehereite Hye I nig thee atl 
your transgressions are discovered, |, y.13; proach unto the “heathen, and a 
so that in all your doings your sins Gen.49.10; |mocking to all countries. 

do appear; because, J say, that ye recente 5 Those that be near, and those 
are come to remembrance, ye shall ate that be far from thee, shall mock 
yaar pat the Sead aca Cada ecto Bee wien art infamous and 

nd ou, “profane wicke Loree toh much vexed. 
prince of Israel, whose day is come, Zeph.2.8-10. | & Behold, jthe princes of Israel, 


when iniquity shall have an end, |d v.25; every one were in thee to their 
26 Thus saith the Lord Gop;. Re- feo Bae power to shed blood. 

move the diadem, and take off the wae rey 7 In thee have they ‘set light by: 

crown: this shall not be the same:|eGen.15.14.  |father and mother: in the midst of 

pat fim aos low, and abase fE2k.163 thee ere they dealt by oppression 
im that is high. = with the stranger: in thee have 
27 Iwill overturn, overturn, Over-|g 2 Ki.21.16. they vexed the fatherless and the 

turn, it: and it shall be NO MOTs), pe 5.14; widow. , ; 

until he come whose rigut it 1s; and|" Deat2837; | 8 Thou hast despised mine holy 

I will give it him. 1 Ki.9.7; things, and hast profaned my sab- 


28 Andthou, son ofman, prophesy| Dan-9-16. | baths. 
and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD] ; ic. nations. | 9 In thee are men that carry tales 
éconcerning the Ammonites,andcon-| | to shed blood: and in thee they eat 
cerningtheirreproach; evensay thou, Se Vag ke _ |upon the mountains: in the midst 
The sword, the sword is drawn: for vehaan of thee they commit lewdness. 
the slaughter it is furbished, to 10 In thee have they discovered 
consume because of the glittering: |*Deut-27-16. their fathers’ nakedness: in thee 
29 Whiles they see vanity unto] ; w2.18.6; have they humbled her that was 
thee, whiles they divine a lie unto] Lev.18.19; lset apart for pollution. 


thee, to bring thee upon the necks 20.18. 11 And one hath committed 
of them that are slain, of thel,, rx.23.8; abomination with his neighbour’s 
wicked, ¢2whose day is come, when Deut.i6.19; |wife; and another hath lewdly de- 
_their iniquity shall have an end. 27.25. filed his daughter in law; and an- 


30 Shall I cause if to return into|,, po4.23.35; |other in thee hath humbled his 
his sheath? “I will judge thee in) Deut.32.18; sister, his father’s daughter. 


the place where thou wast created, Jer.3,21. 12 In thee “have they taken gifts 
fin the land of thy nativity. to shed blood; thou hast taken 
31 And I will pour out mine in- usury and increase, and thou hast 
dignation upon thee, I will blow greedily gained of thy neighbours 
against thee in the fire of my wrath, by extortion, and “hast forgotten 
and deliver thee into the hand of me, saith the Lord Gop. 
brutish men, and skilful to destroy. 13 Behold, therefore I have smit- 
32 Thou shaltbe for fuel tothe fire; ten mine hand at thy dishonest 
thy blood shall be in the midst ofthe gain which thou hast made, and at 
land; thou shalt be no more remem- thy blood which hath been in the 
bered: for Ithe LoRD have spoken it. midst of thee. 
14 Can thine heart endure, or can 
CHAPTER 22. pine hand? he ganas - one fae 
. that Is eal with thee? the 
‘The sins of Israel enumerated. Lorp have spoken oe aadailt do 


OREOVER the word of. the it. : 
Lorp came unto me, saying. 15 And I will scatter thee among 


2 Now, thou son of man, wilt thou the ‘heathen, and disperse thee in 
863 


22 16] 


the countries, and will consume thy 
filthiness out of thee. ed 
16 And thou shalt take thine in- 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 593. 


heritance in thyself in the sight of]. 


the “heathen, and thou shalt know 
that I am the Lorpb. 


The parable of the dross in 
the furnace, 


17 And the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

18 Son of man, “the house of Is- 
rael is to me become dross: all they 
are brass, and tin, and iron, and 
lead, in the midst of the furnace; 
they are even the dross of silver. 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Because ye are all become 
dross, behold, therefore I will gather 
you into the midst of Jerusalem. 

20 As they gather silver, and 
brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, 
into the midst of the furnace, to 
blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so 
will I gather you in mine anger and 
in my fury, and I will leave you 
there, and melt you. 

21 Yea, I will gather you, and 
“blow upon you in the fire of my 
wrath, and ye shall be melted in 
the midst thereof. 

22 As silver is melted in the midst 
of the furnace, so shall ye be melted 
in the midst thereof: and ye shall 
know that I the Lorp have ¢poured 
out my fury upon you. 


Sins of the priests, princes, 
prophets, and people. 


23 And the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

24 Son of man, say unto her, Thou 
art the land that is not cleansed, 
nor rained upon in the day of indig- 
nation. 

25 There is a conspiracy of her 
prophets in the midst thereof, like a 
Toaring lon ravening the prey; 
they have devoured souls; ‘they 
have taken the treasure and 
precious things; they have made 
her many widows in the midst 
thereof. 

26 Her priests have violated my 
Slaw, and have &£profaned mine holy 
things: they have put no difference 
between the holy and profane, 
neither have they shewed differ- 
ence between the unclean and the 
clean, and have hid their eyes from 
my sabbaths, and I am profaned 
among them. 

27 *Her princes in the midst 
thereof are like wolves ravening the 


@ i.e. nations. 

6 Psa.119.119, 
Isa.1.22; 
Jer.6.28. 


¢ Ezk.22. 
20-22. 


d v.31; Ezk. 
20.8,33. 


¢ Mic.3.11; 
Zeph.3.3,4. 


(Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 


g Lev.22.2; 
1 Sam.2.29. 


h v.6; Isa.1.23; 
Mic.3.2,3, 
9-11; Zeph. 
3.3. 

§ Psa.106.23, 

j Parables 


7-14.) 
k Ezk.16.8,20, 


[238 


{ 


1 
{ 


prey, to shed blood. and to destroy — 


souls, to get dishonest gain. 


28 And her prophets have daubed 


them with untempered morter, 
seeing vanity, and divining lies 
unto them, saying, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop, when the LorpD hath 
not spoken. 

29 The people of the land have 
used oppression, and exercised rob- 
bery, and have vexed the poor and 
needy: yea, they have oppressed 
the stranger wrongfully. 

30 And I sought for a man among 
them, that should make up the 
hedge, and ‘stand in the gap before 
me for the land, that I should not 
destroy it: but I found none. 

31 Therefore have I poured out 
mine indignation upon them; I 
have consumed them with the fire 
of my wrath: their own way have 
I recompensed upon their heads, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


CHAPTER 23. 


The parable of Aholah and 
Aholibah. 


i Res word of the LorD came 
again unto me, Jsaying, 

2 Son of man, there were two wo- 
men, the daughters of one mother: 

3 And they committed whore- 
doms in Egypt; they committed 
whoredoms in their youth: there 
were their breasts pressed, and 
there they bruised the teats of their 
virginity. 

4 And the names of them were 
Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her 
sister: and #they were mine, and 
they bare sons and daughters. 
Thus were their names; Samaria is 
Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah. 

5 And Aholah played the harlot 
when she was mine; and she doted 
on her lovers, on the Assyrians her 
neighbours, 

6 Which were clothed with blue, 
captains and rulers, all of them de- 
sirable young men, horsemen riding 
upon horses. 

7 Thus she committed her whore- 
doms with them, with all them that 
were the chosen men of Assyria, 
and with all on whom she doted: 
Mere all their idols she defiled her- 
self. 

8 Neither left she her whoredoms 
brought from Egypt: for in her 
youth they lay with her, and they 
bruised the breasts of her virginity, 
aoe poured their whoredom upon 

er. 


23 9] 


_9 Wherefore I have delivered her 
into the hand of her lovers, into the 
hand of the ¢Assyrians, upon whom 
she doted. 

10 These discovered her naked- 
ness: they took her sons and her 
daughters, and slew her with the 
sword: and she became famous 
among women; for they had exe- 
cuted judgment upon her. 

11 And when her sister Aholibah 
saw this, she was more corrupt in 
her inordinate love than she, and 
in her whoredoms more than her 
sister in her whoredoms. 

12 She doted upon the Assyrians 
her neighbours, captains and rulers 
clothed most gorgeously, horsemen 
riding upon horses, all of them de- 
sirable young men. 

13 Then I saw that she was de- 
filed, that they took both one way, 

14 And that she increased her 
whoredoms: for when she saw men 
pourtrayed upon the wall, the im- 
ages of the Chaldeans pourtrayed 
with vermilion, 

15 Girded with girdles upon their 
loins, exceeding in dyed attire upon 
their heads, all of them princes to 
look to, after the manner of- the 
Babylonians of Chaldea, the land 
of their nativity: 

16 >And as soon as she saw them 
with her eyes, she doted upon them, 
and sent messengers unto them into 

_Chaldea. 

17 And the Babylonians came to 


her into the bed of love, and they| 


defiled her with their whoredom, 
and she was polluted with them, 
and her mind was alienated from 
them. 

18 So she discovered her whore- 
-doms, and discovered her naked- 


ness: then ‘my mind was alienated 
from her, like as my mind was 
alienated from her sister. 

19 Yet she multiplied her whore- 
doms, in calling to remembrance 
the days of her youth, wherein she 


had played the harlot in the land 
of Egypt. : 

20 For she doted upon their para- 
mours, whose flesh is as the flesh 
of asses, and whose issue is like the 
issue of horses. 

21 Thus thou calliedst to remem- 
brance the lewdness of thy youth 
in bruising thy teats by the Egyp-| 
tians for the paps of thy youth. | 

22 Therefore, O Aholibah, thus 
3aith the Lord Gop; ¢Behold, I will 
raise up thy lovers against thee, 
from whom thy mind is alienated, 


EZEKIEL. 


a 2 Ki.17.3-6, 
23; 18.9-11. 


6 2 Ki.24.1. 

c Jer.6.8. 

d v.28; Ezk, 
16.37. 

e Jer.50.21. 

f Ezk.16.39. 


g Ezk.16.37- 
hv.17. 


zie, nations. 


j Jer.25.15. 


865 


[23 33 


and I will bring them against thee 
on every side; 

23 The Babylonians, and all the 
Chaldeans, ‘Pekod, and Shoa, and 
Koa, and all the Assyrians with 
them: all of them desirable young 
men, captains and rulers, great 
lords and renowned, all of them 
riding upon horses. 

24 And.they shall come against 
thee with chariots, wagons, and 
wheels, and with an ‘assembly of 
people, which shall set against thee 
buckler and shield and helmet 
round about: and I will set judg- 
ment before them, and they shall 
judge thee according to their judg- 
ments. 

25 And I will set my: jealousy 
against thee, and they shall deal 
furiously with thee: they Shall take 
away thy nose and thine ears; and 
thy remnant shall fall by the sword: 
they shall take thy sons and thy 
daughters; and thy residue shall 
be devoured by the fire. 

26 They shall also ‘strip thee out 
of thy clothes, and take away thy 
fair jewels. 

27 Thus will I make thy lewdness 
to cease from thee, and thy whore- 
dom brought from the land of 
Egypt: so that thou shalt not lift 
up thine eyes unto them, nor re- 
member Egypt any more. 

28 For thus saith the Lord Gop; 
Behold, I will deliver thee into the 
hand of them whom thou hatest, 
into the hand of them "from whom 
thy mind is alienated: 

29 And they shall deal with thee 
hatefully, and shall take away all 
thy labour, and shall Jeave thee 
naked and bare: and the nakedness 
of thy whoredoms shall be discov- 
ered, both thy lewdness and thy 
whoredoms. 

30 I will do 
thee, because 
whoring after 
because thou 
their idols. 

31 Thou hast walked in the way 
of thy sister; therefore will I give 
her Jcup into thine hand. 

32 Thus saith the Lord Gop; 
Thou shalt drink of thy sister’s 
cup deep and large: thou shalt be 
laughed to scorn and had in deri- 
sion; it containeth much. 

33 Thou shalt be filled with 
drunkenness and sorrow, with the 
cup of astonishment and desola- 
tion, with the cup of thy sister 
Samaria. 


these things unto 
thou hast gone a 
the *heathen, and 
art polluted with 


23 34] 


34 Thou shalt even ¢drink it and 
suck it out, and thou shalt break 
the sherds thereof, and pluck off 
thine own breasts: for I have 
spoken it, saith the Lord Gob. 

35 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
‘Gop; Because thou “hast forgotten 
me, and cast me behind thy back, 
therefore bear thou also thy lewd- 

ness and thy whoredoms. 

* 36 The Lorp said moreover unto 
me; Son of man, wilt. thou judge 
Aholah and Aholibah? yea, declare 
unto them their abominations; 

_ 37 That they have committed 
adultery, and blood is in their 
hands, and with their idols have 
they committed adultery, and have 
also caused their sons, “whom they 
bare unto me, to pass for them 
through the fire, to devour them. 

38 Moreover this they have done 
unto me: they have defiled my} 
sanctuary in the same day, and 
have profaned my sabbaths. 

39 For when they had slain their 
children to their idols, then they 
came the same day into my sanctu- 
ary to profane it; and, lo, ¢thus 
have they done in the midst of 
mine house. 

40 And furthermore, that ye have 
sent for men to come from far, unto 
whom a messenger was sent; and, 
lo, they came: for whom thou didst 
wash thyself, ‘paintedst thy eyes, 
and deckedst thyself with orna- 
ments, 

41 And satest upon a stately bed, 
and a table prepared before it, 
whereupon thou hast set mine in- 
cense and mine oil. ; 

42. And a voice of a multitude be- 
ing at ease was with her: and with 
the men of the common sort were eneea 
brought Sabeans from the wilder-| ets ‘io. 
ness, which put bracelets upon their 
hands, and beautiful crowns upon|™ Lev.17.13; 
their heads, ies 

43 Then said I unto her that 


B.C. 593. 


a Psa.75.8; 
Isa.51.17. 


6 Ezk.22.12; 
Jer.2.32; 
3.21; 13.25. 


c Ezk.16.20. 
21,36,45; 
20.26,31. 


d 2 Ki.21.4, 


é 2 Ki.9.30; 
Jer.4.30. 


f Ezk.16. 
18,19; 


g Ezk.24.21; 
2 Chr.36. 
17,19. 


h Deut.13.11; 
2 Pet.2.6. 


j Parables 
(O.T:): 
vs.3-6; 
Ezk.31.3-14. 
(Jud.9.7-15; 


Zech.11.7- 
14.) 


kv.9; Ezk. 
22.3; 23.37. 


See 2 Sam. 


was old in adulteries, Will they] v-6; 
: : Nah.3.1; 
now commit whoredoms with her,| yap'3'1). 


and she with them? 

44 Yet they went in unto her, as 
they go in unto a woman that play- 
€th the harlot: so went they in unto 
Aholah and unto Aholibah, the 
lewd women. 

45 And the righteous men, they 
shall judge them after the manner 
of adulteresses, and after the man- 
ner of women that shed blood; be- 
cause they are adulteresses, and 
blood is in their hands. 

46 For thus saith the Lord Gop; 


866 


EZEKIEL. 


them, and will give them to be. 
removed and spoiled. 

47 And the company: shail stone 
them with stones, and dispatch 
them with their swords; sthey shall 
slay their sons and their daugh- 
ters, and burn up their houses with 
fire. 

48 Thus will I cause lewdness to 
cease out of the land, “that all 
women may be taught not to do 
after your lewdness. 

49 And they shall recompense 
your lewdness upon you, and ye 
shall bear the sins of your idols: 


iice. January. 


8.2; Joel 3.3; 


and ye shall know that I am the 
Lord Gop. ; 


CHAPTER 24. 
The parable of the boiling pot. 


Awan in the ninth year, in the 
?tenth month, in the tenth day 
of the month, the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, write thee the name 
of the day, even of this same day: 


ithe king of Babylon set himself 


against Jerusalem this same day. 

3 And utter a jparable unto the 
rebellious house, and say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lord Gop; Set 
on a pot, set it on, and also pour 
water into it: 

4 Gather the pieces thereof into 
it, even every good piece, the thigh, 
and the shoulder; fill 7¢ with the 
choice bones. 

5 Take the choice of the flock, and 
burn also the bones under it, and 
make it boil well, and let them 
seethe the bones of it therein. 

6 Wherefore thus saith the Lord 

Gop; *Woe to the bloody city, to 
the pot whose scum is therein, and 
whose scum is not gone out of it! 
bririg it out piece by piece; let no 
‘ot fall upon it. 
..7 For her blood is in the midst of 
her; she set it upon the top of a 
rock; “she poured it not upon the 
ground, to cover it with dust: 

8 That it might cause fury to 


ceme up to take vengeance; I have - 


set her blood upon the top of a rock, 
that it should not be covered. 

9 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; "Woe to the bloody city! I 
will even make the pile for fire 
great. 

10 Heap on wood, kindle the fire, 
consume the flesh, and spice it well, 
and let the bones be burned. 


(11 Then set it empty upon the 


[24.11 : 


I will bring up a company upon 


24 12] 


‘coals thereof, that the brass of it 
may be hot, and may burn, and 
that the filthiness of it may be 
molten in it, that the scum of it 
may be consumed. 

12 She hath wearied herself 
with lies, and her great scum went| 
not forth out of her: her scum shall 
be in the fire. 

13 In thy filthiness is lewdness: 
because I have purged thee, and 
thou wast not purged, thou shalt 
not be purged from thy filthiness 
any more, @till I have caused my 
fury to rest upon thee. 

14 4I the Lorp have spoken it: it 
shall come to pass, and I will do it; 
I will not go back, neither will I 
spare, neither will I ‘repent; ac- 
cording to thy ways, and according 
to thy doings, shall they judge thee, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


Ezekiel again made a sign to 
Israel. (Cf. Ezk. 12. 11.) 


15 Also the word of the LorD 
came unto me, saying, 

16 Son of man, behold, I take 
away from thee the desire of thine 
eyes with a stroke: yet neither shalt 
thou mourn nor weep, neither shall 
thy tears run down. 

17 Forbear to cry, make no 
mourning for the dead, bind the 
tire of thine head upon thee, and 
¢put on thy shoes upon thy feet, 
and cover not thy lips, and eat 
not the bread of men. 

18 So I spake unto the people in 
the morning: and at even my wife 
died; and I did in the morning as I 
was commanded. 

19 And the people said unto me, 
eWilt. thou not tell us what these 
things areto us, that thou doest so? 

~ 20 Then I answered them, The) 
word of the LoRD came unto me, 
saying, 

21 Speak unto the house of Israel, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, 
I will profane my sanctuary, the 
excellency of your strength, the de-| 
sire of your eyes, and that which 
your soul pitieth; and your sons 
and your daughters whom ye have 
left shall fall by the sword. 

92 And ye shall do as I have done: 
ye shall not cover your lips, nor eat 
the bread of men. 

23 And your tires shall be upon 
your heads, and your shoes upon 
your feet: ye shall not mourn nor 
weep; fbut ye shall pine away for 
your iniquities, and mourn one 
toward another. 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 590. 


a Ezk.5.13; 
8.18; 16.42. 


6b 1 Sam.15.29. 


c Zech.8.14, 
note. 


d 2 Sam.15.30. 


e Ezk.12.9; 
37.18. 


f Ezk.33.10; 
Lev.26.39. 


g Ezk.4.3; 
12.6,11; 
Isa.20.3. 


h v.24. 


¢ Ezk.21.28; 
Jer.49.1; 
Amos 1.13; 
Zeph.2.9. 


j Ezk.26.2; 
Prov.17.5. 


& Job 27.23; 
Lam.2.15; 
Zeph.2Z.15. 


li.e. nations. 


867 


[25 7 


24 Thus Ezekiel is unto you a 
sign: according to all that he hath 
done shall ye do: and when this 
cometh, ye shall know that I am 
the Lord Gop. 

25 Also, thou son of man, shall it 
not be in the day when I take from 
them their strength, the joy of their 
glory, the desire of their eyes, and 
that whereupon they set their 
minds, their sons and their daugh- 
ters, 

26 That he that escapeth in that 
day shall come unto thee, to cause 
thee to hear it with thine ears? 

27 In that day shall thy mouth be 
opened to him which is escaped, 


and thou shalt speak, and be no 
more dumb: and /thou shalt be a 
sign unto them; and they shall 
know that I am the LorD. 


CHAPTER 25. 


The prophecy against the 
monites. 


HE word of the LorRD came 
again unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, set thy face ‘against 
the Ammonites, and prophesy 
against them; 

3 And say unto the Ammonites, 
Hear the word of the Lord Gop; 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; /JBe- 
cause thou saidst, Aha, against my 
sanctuary, when it was profaned; 
and against the land of Israel, when 
it was desolate; and against the 
house of Judah, when they went 
into captivity; 

4 Behold, therefore I will deliver 
thee to the men of the east for a 
possession, and they shall set their 
palaces in thee, and make their 
dwellings in thee: they shall eat 
thy fruit, and they shall drink thy 


milk. 

5 And I will make Rabbah a sta- 
ble for camels, and the Ammonites 
a couchingplace for flocks: and ye 
shall know that I am the Lorn. 

6 For thus saith the Lord Gop; 
kBecause thou hast clapped thine 
hands, and stamped with the feet, 
and rejoiced in heart with all thy 
despite against the land of Is- 


rael; 

7 Behold, therefore I will stretch 
out mine hand upon thee, and will 
deliver thee for a spoil to the 
theathen; and I will cut thee off 
from the people, and I will cause 
thee to perish out of the countries: 
I will destroy thee; and thou shalt 
know that I am the LorD. 


25 8] _ EZEKIEL. [26 0 


The coming judgment upon B.c. 590.__|rebukes; and they shall know that I 


Moab. am the Lorp, when I shall lay my 
i vengeance upon them. 

8 !Thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 

cause that Moab and oes do ey, CHAPTER 26. 
is like ‘ : 

Behe ids ae prose : i The coming judgment upon 

9 Therefore, behold, I will open Tyre. 
the side of Moab from the cities, ND it came to pass in the elev 
from his cities which are on his A enth year, in the first day of 
frontiers, the glory of the country, ‘lthe month that the wordsof-the 
Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and LorD came unto me, saying, 
Rirathaim, : 2 Son of man, “because that Tyrus 

10 Unto the men of the east with hath said against Jerusalem. Aha, 
the Ammonites, and will give them she is broken that was the gates of 
in possession, that the Ammonites thie ‘peoples sheds baledto hae: 
may not be remembered among the T'ishall ‘be Besa nttiey 4. GW stints 
nations. laid waste: 


(ORE TES Oeinone luciana aie. nations. | 3 Therefore thus saith the Lord 


Gop; Behold, I am against thee, Q 
that I am the Lorp. > Bek-39-2;,. |Tyrus, and will cause many nations 
The coming judgment upon Psa.137.7; ' |t0 come up against thee, as the sea 
dom. Jer49780 causetby Bis waves h coms Ae ws 
12 Thus ae — may sey ae Obato of Tyrus a break poe he 
cause that “Edom hath de t agains oe ay wal 1 her dust 
ere poliemot Judah, by, taking then Gees a tll aes tor careers een cron aa 
geance, and hath greatly offended,| nore. te of a toeke : 
sib ‘Therdore thus sal he Etel¢2 ewan. | FE Sha be @ place for the 
. : Fi : spreading of nets in the midst o 
Os I, will also strete) eres: ieee the sea: for I have spoken it, saith 
hand upon Edom, sur etile “11| 47.4; the Lord Gop: and it shall become 
Bane dette or heme mall hate sooth coe elon 
make it deso ; Zech.9.2. : ; 

‘ 6 And her daughters which are 
they of Dedan shall fall by the in the field shall be “slain by the 
sword, f Ezra 7.12; in C € sha Ate 

14 And I will lay my vengeance Dan.2.37. ote nd they shall know that I 
upon Edom by the hand of my peo- 7 For thus saith the Lord Gop: 
ple Israel: and they shall do in ©; Se : , 
Edom according to mine anger and OE ee ae at BAe: 
according to my fury; and they fa"\kihg of kings” from the none: 
shall know my vengeance, saith See cS s , 
the Lord Gop with horses, and se chariots, o 

with horsemen, and companies, an 

mt ae ee Ela ge mee an weniy 1 ith th d 

tlistia, e shall slay wit e€ swor 

15 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- thy daughters in the field: and’ he 
cause the ‘Philistines have dealt shall make a fort against thee, and 
by revenge, and have taken ven- cast a mount against thee, and lift 
geance with a despiteful heart, to up the buckler against thee. 
destroy it for the old hatred; 9 audits a set ee of war 

16 Therefore thus saith the Lord against thy walls, and with his axes 
Gop; Behold, I will stretch out mine he shall break down thy towers. 
hand upon the Philistines, and I will 10 By reason of the abundance of 
cut off the Chetethims, and destroy his horses their dust shall cover 
the remnant of the sea coast. thee: thy walls shall shake at the 

17 And I will execute great ven- noise of the horsemen, and of the 
geance upon them with furious wheels, and of the chariots, when 


1 The prophecies upon Gentile powers (extending to Ezk. 32. 32) have doubt- 
less had partial fulfilments of which history and the present condition of those 
cities and countries bear witness, but the mention of the day of Jehovah (Ezk. 
30. 3) makes it evident that a fulfilment in the final sense is still future. See “‘Day 
of Jehovah” (Isa. 2. 10-22: Rey. 19.-21, note). Also “Armageddon” (Rev. 1614; 


19. 17, note), Those countries are once more to be the battle-ground of the 
nations, 
868 


26 11] 


he shall enter into thy gates, as 
men enter into a city wherein is 
made a breach. 

11 With the hoofs of his horses 
shall he tread down all thy streets: 
he shall slay thy people by the 
sword, and thy strong garrisons 
shall go down to the ground. 

12 And they shall make a spoil of 
thy riches, and make a prey of thy 
merchandise: and they shall break 
down thy walls, and destroy thy 
pleasant houses: and they shall lay 
thy stones and thy timber and thy 
dust in the midst of the water. 

13 2And I will cause the noise of 
thy songs to cease; and the sound of 
thy harps shall be no more heard. 

14 And I will make thee like the 
top of a rock: thou shalt be a place 
to spread nets upon; thou shalt be 
built no more: for I the LorD have 
spoken it, saith the Lord Gop. 

15 Thus saith the Lord Gop to 
Tyrus; Shall not the “isles shake at 
the sound of thy fall, when the 
wounded cry, when the slaughter 
is made in the midst of thee? 

16 Then all the “princes of the sea 
shall come down from their thrones, 
and lay away their robes, and put 
off their broidered garments: they 
shall clothe themselves with trem- 
bling; they shall sit upon the 
ground, and 4shall tremble at every 
moment, and ¢be astonished at thee. 

17 And they shall take up a 
lamentation for thee, and say to 
thee, How art thou destroyed, that 
wast inhabited of. seafaring men, 
the renowned city, which wast 
strong in the sea, she and her in- 
habitants, which cause their terror 
to be on all that haunt it! 

18 Now shall the.%isles tremble in 
the day of thy fall; yea, the isles 
that are in the sea shall be troubled 
at thy departure. 

19 For thus saith the Lord Gop; 
When I shall make thee a desolate 
city, like the cities that are not in- 
habited; when I shall bring up the 
deep upon thee, and great waters 
shall cover thee; 

20 When I shall bring thee down 
fwith them that descend into the 
pit, with the people of old time, and 
shall Set thee in the low parts of the 
earth, in places desolate of old, with 
them that go down to the pit, that 
thou be not inhabited; and I shall 
set glory in the land of the liv- 


ing; 
21 I will make thee a terror, and 
thou shalt be no more: ‘though 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 588. 


@ Isa.14.11; 
24.8; Jer.7. 
34; 16.9; 
25.10. 

b i.e. coasts. 

¢ Isa.23.8. 

d Ezk.32.10. 

e Ezk.27.35. 

fF Ezk.32.18,24. 

g Psa.37.36. 

hk Ezk.28.2. 

# Ezk.28.12. 

j Psa.83.7. 

k Ezk.30.5; 

8.5; 
Jer.46.9. 


1 Gen.10.4; 
2 Chr.20.36. 


m Ezk.38.6; 
Gen.10.3. 


869 


[27 14 


thou be sought for, yet shalt thou 
never be found again, saith the 
Lord Gop. 


CHAPTER 27. 


The lamentation for Tyre. 
(Cf. Rev. 18. 1-24.) 


HE word of the LorpD came 
again unto me, saying, 

2 Now, thou son of man, take up 
a lamentation for Tyrus; 

3 And say unto Tyrus, “O thou 
that art situate at the entry of the 
sea, which art a merchant of the 
people for many isles, Thus saith 
the Lord Gop; O Tyrus, thou hast 
said, ‘I am of perfect beauty. 

4 Thy borders are in the midst of 
the seas, thy builders have per- 
fected thy beauty. 

5 They have made ali thy ship 
boards of fir trees of Senir: they 
have taken cedars from Lebanon to 
make masts for thee. 

6 Of the oaks of Bashan have 
they made thine oars; the company 
of the Ashurites have made thy 
benches of ivory, brought out of 
the Yisles of Chittim. 

7 Fine linen with broidered work 
from Egypt was that which thou 
spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue 
and purple from the isles of Elishah 
was that which covered thee. 

8 The inhabitants of Zidon and 
Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise 
men, O Tyrus, that were in thee, 
were thy pilots. ; 

9 The ancients of JGebal and the 
wise men thereof were in thee thy 
calkers: all the ships of the sea with 
their mariners were in thee to oc- 
cupy thy merchandise. 

10 They of Persia and of Lud and 
of *Phut were in thine army, thy 
men of war: they hanged the shield 
and helmet in thee; they set forth 
thy comeliness. 

11 The men of Arvad with thine 
army were upon thy walls round 
about, and the Gammadims were in 
thy towers: they hanged their 
shields upon thy walls round about; 
they have made thy beauty perfect. 

12 /Tarshish was thy merchant 
by reason of the multitude of all 
kind of riches; with silver, iron, 
tin, and lead, they traded in thy 
fairs. 

13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, 
they were thy merchants: they 
traded the persons of men and ves- 
sels of brass in thy market. 


' 14 They of the house of ”Togar- 


27 15] EZEKIEL. [28 5 


mah traded in thy fairs with horses 
and horsemen and mules. 

15 The men of *Dedan were thy 
merchants; many Visles were the 
merchandise of thine hand: they 
brought thee for a present horns of 
ivory and ebony. 

16 Syria was thy merchant by 
reason of the multitude of the wares 
of thy making: they occupied in thy 
fairs with emeralds, purple, and 
broidered work, and fine linen, and 
coral, and agate. 


Minnith. and Pannag, and honey, 
and oil, and balm. 

18 Damascus was thy merchant 
in the multitude of the wares of thy 
making, for the multitude of all 
riches; in the wine of Helbon, and 
white wool. 

19 Dan also and Javan going to 
and fro occupied in thy fairs: bright], Gen.10.7. 
iron, cassia, and calamus, were in 
thy market. b i.e. coasts. 


20 Dedan was thy merchant in|, xi5.9.11; 


precious clothes for chariots. Ezra 3.7 

21 Arabia, and all the princes of| Acts 12.20. 
Kedar, they occupied with thee in a Gernitar 
lambs, and rams, and goats: in} 2Ki.1912. 
these were they thy merchants. 

22 The merchants of Sheba and| ° @e-25-3- 
Raamah, they were thy merchants:] / Rev.18.18. 
they occupied in thy fairs with chief 
of all spices, and with all precious|* 
stones, and gold. h Bzk.27.3,4; 

23 4Haran,andCanneh,andEden,| 2 Thes.2: 
the merchants of ‘Sheba, Asshur,| 3-12 
and Chilmad, were thy merchants. 

24 These were thy merchants in 
all sorts of things, in blue clothes, 
and broidered work, and in chests 
of rich apparel, bound with cords, 
and made of cedar, among thy mer- 
chandise. 

25 The ships of Tarshish did sing 
of thee in thy market: and thou 
wast replenished, and made very 
glorious in the midst of the seas. 
_26 Thy rowers have brought thee 
into great waters: the east wind 
hath broken thee in the midst of 
the seas. 

27 Thy Tiches, and thy fairs, thy 
merchandise, thy mariners, and thy 
pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers 
of thy merchandise, and all thy men 
of war, that are in thee, and in all 
thy company which js in the midst 
of thee, shall fall into the midst of 
the seas in the day of thy ruin. 

28 The suburbs shall shake at the 
sound of the cry of thy pilots. 


870 


29 And all that handle the oar, 
the mariners, and all the pilots of — 
the sea, shall come down from their | 
ships, they shall stand upon the 


land; 

30 And shall cause their voice to 
be heard against thee, and shall cry 
bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon 
their heads, they shall wallow them- 
selves in the ashes: 

31 And they shall make them- 
selves utterly bald for thee, and 
gird them with sackcloth, and they 
shall weep for thee with bitterness 
of heart and bitter wailing. 

32 And in their wailing they shall 
take up a lamentation for thee, and. 
lament over thee, saying, fWhat 
city is like Tyrus, like the de- 
stroyed in the midst of the sea? 

33 When thy wares went forth 
out of the seas, thou filledst many 
people; thou didst enrich the kings 
of the earth with the multitude — 
oe thy riches and of thy merchan- 

se. 

34 In the time when thou shalt 
be broken by the seas in the depths 
of the waters thy merchandise and 
all thy company in the midst of thee 
shall fall. 

35 All the inhabitants of the Pisles 
shall be astonished at thee, and 
their kings shall be sore afiaid, 
they shall be troubled in their 
countenance. 

36 The merchants among the peo- 
ple shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be 
a terror, and never shalt be any 
more. 


CHAPTER 28. 


The rebuke of the king of Tyre. 


APHE word of the Lorp came 
again unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, say unto the prince 

of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord Gop; 


sBecause thine 
ou hast f 


tanding tho as 


ti thou increased 
riches, and thine heart is lifted up 
because of ches: 


28 6] 


6 ith the Lord 
; *Becaus: ou hast set thine 
7 Beho erefore I will bring 
-strangers upon thee, the terrible of 
the nations: at they shall draw 


their swords against the beauty of 
thy wisdom, and they shall defile 


and they. 
Bes brightness. 
8 They shall bring thee down to 


rin; 
thou shalt die the 
d that are slain in 


the midst of the seas. 
ilt thou yet say before him|? The Beast. 


that slaveth thee, I am God? but 
thou shalt be a man, and no God, 
in the hand of him that slayeth 
thee. 

10 Thou shalt die the deaths of 
the uncircumcised by the hand of 
strangers: for I have spoken it, 
saith the Lord Gop. 

11 Moreover the word of the 
Lorp came unto me, saying, 

12 Son of man, take up a lamen- 
tation upon the king of Tyrus, and 
say unto him, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; !Thou “sealest up the sum, 
full of wisdom, and “perfect in 


(Dan.7.8; 
Rev.19.20.) 


6 Ezk.27.3; 
28.2. 


c Satan. 
vs.12-15; 
Zech.3.1,2. 
(Gen:3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


d See v.16. 
Ex.25.20. 


e Ezk.26.21; 
27.36. 


f Ezk.39.13; 


beauty. «14.417. 
13 Thou hast been in Eden the Belated 
garden of God; every precious stone] 22k-38.22. 
was thy covering, the sardius,|; num.33.55; 
topaz, and the diamond, the beryl,| Josh.23.13. 
the onyx, and the jasper, the sap-| 2.43.17; 
phire, the emerald, and the car-|’ 99.41; 34.13; 
buncle, and gold: the workmanship 37-215 Isa. 


of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was 
prepared in thee in the day that 
thou wast created. 

14 Thou art the anointed ¢cherub 
that covereth; and I have set thee 
so: thou wast upon the holy moun- 
tain of God; thou hast walked up 
and down in the midst of the stones 
of fire. 

15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways 
from the day that thou wast cre- 
ated, till iniquity was found in 
thee. 

16 By the multitude of thy mer- 
chandise they have filled the midst 
of thee with violence, and thou hast 
sinned: therefore I will cast thee as 
profane out of the mountain of God: 
and I will destroy thee, O covering 


jie. nations. 


k Ezk.36.28; 
Jer.23.6. 


1 Here (vs. 12-15), as in Isa. 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 588. 


[28 26 


cherub, from the midst of the stones 
of fire. : 

17 Thine heart was lifted up be- 
cause of thy beauty, thou hast cor- 
rupted thy wisdom by reason of thy 
brightness: I will cast thee to the 
ground, I will lay thee before kings, 
that they may behold thee. 

18 Thou hast defiled thy sanctu- 
aries by the multitude of thine ini- 
quities, by the iniquity of thy traf- 
fick; therefore will I bring forth a 
fire from the midst of thee, it shall 
devour thee, and I will bring thee to 
ashes upon the earth in the sight of 
all them that behold thee. 

19 All they that know thee among 
the people shall be astonished at - 
thee: «thou shalt be a terror, and 
never shalt thou be any more, 


The judgment of Zidon. 
20 Again the word of the Lorp 


jcame unto me, saying, 


21 Son of man, set thy face against 
Zidon, and prophesy against it, 

22 And say, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; /Behold, I am against thee, O 
Zidon; and I will be glorified in the 
midst of thee: and they shall know 
that I am the LorbD, when I shall 
have executed judgments in her, 
and shall be sanctified in her. 

23 &For I will send into her pesti- 
lence, and blood into her streets; 
and the wounded shall be judged 
in the midst of her by the sword 
upon her on every side; and they 
shall know that I am the LORD. 

24 And there shall be no more “a 
pricking brier unto the house of 
Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all 
that are round about. them, that 
despised them; and they shall know 
that I am the Lord Gop. 


The future regatheriné of Israel. 


25 Thus saith the Lord Gop; 
When I shall have ‘gathered the 
house of Israel from the people 
among whom they are scattered, 
and shall be sanctified in them in 
the sight of the Jheathen, then shall 
they dwell in their land that I have 
given to my servant Jacob. 

26 And they shall “dwell safely 


14. 12, the language goes beyond the king of Tyre 


to Satan, inspirer and unseen ruler of all such pomp and pride as that of Tyre. 


Instances of thus indirectly addressing Satan are: | 
unfallen state of Satan is here described; his fall in Isa. 14, 12-14. 
The vision is not of Satan in his own person, but 


10, note.) But there is more. 


re: Gen. 3. 14, 15; Mt. 16. 23. 


The 
(See Rev. 20. 


of Satan fulfilling himself in and through an earthly king who arrogates to himself 
divine honours, so that the prince of Tyrus foreshadows the Beast (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 


19. 20). ES 


29 1] 


therein, and shall build houses, and 
plant vineyards; yea, they shall 
dwell with confidence, when I have 
executed judgments upon all those 
that despise them round about 
them; and they shall know that I 
am the Lorp their God. 


CHAPTER 29. 
The prophecy against Egypt. 


i hy the tenth year, in the ¢tenth 
month, in the twelfth day of the 
month, the word of the LorpD came 
unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, set thy face against 
Pharaoh kingofEgypt, and prophesy 
against him, and against all Egypt: 

3 Speak, and say, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop; *Behold, I am against 
thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the 
great ‘dragon that lieth in the 
midst of his rivers, which hath 
said, My river is mine own, and I 
have made it for myself. 

4 But 4I will put hooks in thy 
jaws, and I will cause the fish of 
thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, 
and I will bring thee up out of the 
midst of thy rivers, and all the fish 
of thy rivers shall stick unto thy 
scales. 

5 And I will leave thee thrown 
into the wilderness, thee and all 
the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt 
fall upon the open fields; thou 
shalt not be brought together, ‘nor 
gathered: I have given thee for 
meat to the beasts of the field and 
to the fowls of the heaven. 

6 And all the inhabitants of 
Egypt shall know that I am the 
Lorp, because they have been fa 
staff of reed to the house of Israel. 

7 When they took hold of thee by 
thy hand, thou didst break, and 
rend all their shoulder: and when 
they leaned upon thee, thou brak- 
est, and madest all their loins to be 
at a stand. 

8 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Behold, I will bring a sword 
upon thee, and cut off man and 
beast out of thee. 

9 And the land of Egypt shall be 
desolate and waste; and they shall 
know that I am the Lorp: because 
he hath said, The river is mine, 
and I have made if. 

10 Behold, therefore I am against 
thee, and against thy rivers, and I 
will make the land of Egypt utterly 
waste and desolate, éfrom the tower 


of Syene even unto the border of 
Ethiopia. 


EZEKIEL. 


ai.e. January. 


6 v.10; 
Ezk.28.22; 
Jer.44.30. 


c Ezk.32.2; 
Psa.74.13,14; 
Isa.27.1; 
51.9. 


d Ezk.38.4; 
Isa.37.29. 


é Jer.8.2; 
16.4; 25.33. 


f 2 Ki.18.21; 
Isa.36.6. 

g Or, from 
Migdol to 
Syene. 
Ex.14.2; 
Jer.44.1. 

hi.e. April. 


# Ezk.26.7,8; 
Jer.27.6. 


J Psa.132.17. 


872 


11 No foot of man shall pass 
through it, nor foot of beast shall 
pass through it, neither shall it be 
inhabited forty years. 

12 And I will make the land of 
Egypt desolate in the midst of the 
countries that are desolate, and her 
cities among the cities that are laid 
waste shall be desolate forty years: 
and I will scatter the Egyptians 
among the nations, and will dis- 
perse them through the countries. 

13 Yet thus saith the Lord Gop; 
At the end of forty years will I 
gather the Egyptians from the peo- 
ple whither they were scattered: 

14 And I will bring again the 
captivity of Egypt, and will cause 
them to return into the land of 
Pathros, into the land of their habi- 
tation; and they shall be there a 
base kingdom. ~ 

15 It shall be the basest of the 
kingdoms; neither shall it exalt 
itself any more above the nations: 
for I will diminish them, that they 
Shall no more rule over the na- 
tions. 

16 And it shail be no more the 
confidence of the house of Israel, 
which bringeth their iniquity to re- 
membrance, when they shall look 
after them: but they shall know 
that I am the Lord Gop. 

17 And it came to pass in the 
seven and twentieth year, in the 
‘first month, in the first day of the 
month, the word of the LorD came 
unto me, saying, 

18 Son of man, *Nebuchadrezzar 
king of Babylon caused his army to 
setve a great service against Ty- 
Tus: every head was made bald, 
and every shoulder was peeled: yet 
had he no wages, nor his army, for 
Tyrus, for the service that he had 
served against it: 

19 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gon; Behold, I will give the land of 
Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king 
of Babylon; and he shall take her 
multitude, and take her spoil, and 
take her prey; and it shall be the 
wages for his army. 

20 I have given him the land of 
Egypt for his labour wherewith he 
served against it, because they 
wrought for me, saith the Lord 
Gop. : 

21 In that day Jwill I cause the 
horn of the house of Israel to bud 
forth, and I will give thee the open- 
ing of the mouth in the midst of 
them; and they shall know that I 
am the Lorp. 


30 1] 


CHAPTER 30. 
Egypt in the day of Jehovah. 


HE word of the Lorp came 
again unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, prophesy and say, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; Howl ye, 
Woe worth the day! 

3 For “the day is near, even the 
bday of the LorD is near, a cloudy 
day; it shall be the time of the 
cheathen. 

4 And the sword shall come upon 
Egypt, and great pain shall be in 
Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall 
in Egypt, and they shall take away 
her multitude, and her foundations 
shall be broken down. 

5 Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia,| Joel 2.1; 
and all the mingled people, and) Zeph-1.7. 
Chub, and the men of the land that], pay (of 
is in league, shall fall with them by 
the sword. 

6 Thus saith the LorD; They also 
that uphold Egypt shall fall; and 
the pride of her power shall come 
down: from the tower of Syene 
shall they fall in it by the sword,]d Ezk.29.12. 
saith the Lord Gop. 

7 And ¢they shall be desolate in Bi So Eee 
the midst of the countries that are| f Isa.19.1; 
desolate, and her cities shall be in} Jer-43-12; 
the midst of the cities that are psec 
wasted. { 

8 And they shall know that I am|s 2ech.10.11. 
the Lorpb, when I have set a fire in], po499.14. 
Egypt, and when all her helpers 
shall be destroyed. i Jer.2.16. 

9 In that day shall messengers 20] ;j.¢. April. 
forth from me in ships to make the 
careless Ethiopians afraid, and great|* v-26; Ezk. 
pain shall come upon them, as in ee 
the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh. | / Psa.9.16. 

10 Thus saith the Lord Gop; I 
will also make the multitude of 
Egypt to cease by the hand of 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon. 

11 He and his people with him, 
the terrible of the nations, shall be 
brought to destroy the land: and 
they shall draw their swords 
against Egypt, and fill the land 
with the slain. 

12 ¢And I will make the rivers 
dry, and sell the land into the hand 
of the wicked: and I will make the 
land waste, and all that is therein, 
by the hand of strangers: I the 
Lorp have spoken it. | 

13 Thus saith the Lord Gop; I 
will also ‘destroy the idols, and I 
will cause their images to cease out 
of Noph; and &there shall be no 
more a prince of the land of Egypt:! 


a Ezk.7.7,12; 


Joel 1.15. 


Rev.19. 
11-21.) 


873 


“* 


EZEKIEL. 


(Isa.2.10-22; 


ci.e. nations. 


[30 26 


and I will put a fear in the land of 
Egypt. 

14 And I will make “Pathros deso- 
late, and will set fire in Zoan, and 
will execute judgments in No. 

15 And I will pour my fury upon 
Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I 
will cut off the multitude of No. 

16 And I will set fire in Egypt: 
Sin shall have great pain, and No. 
shall be rent asunder, and Noph 
shall have distresses daily. 

17 The young men of Aven and of 
Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword; 
and these cities shall go into cap- 


tivity. _ 4 

18 At *Tehaphnehes also the day 
shall be darkened, when I shall 
break there the yokes of Egypt: 
and the pomp of her strength shall 
cease in her: as for her, a cloud 
shall cover her, and her daughters 
shall go into captivity. 

19 Thus will I execute judgments 
in Egypt: and they shall know that 
I am the LorpD. 


Jehovah against Pharaoh in the 
war with Babylon. 


20 And it came to pass in the 
eleventh year, in the /first month, 
in the seventh day of the month, 
that the word of the LORD came 
unto me, saying, 

21 Son of man, I have broken the 
arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; 
and, lo, it shall not be bound up to 
be healed, to put a roller to bind 
it, to make it strong to hold the 
sword. 

22 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Behold, I am against Pha- 
raoh king of Egypt, and will break 
his arms, the strong, and that which 


was broken; and I will cause the 
sword to fall out of his hand. 

23 *And I will scatter the Egvn- 
tians among the nations, and will 
disperse them through the coun- 
tries. 

24 And I will strengthen the arms 
of the king of Babylon, and put my 
sword in his hand: but I will break 
Pharaoh’s arms, and he shall groan 
before him with the groanings of a 
deadly wounded man. 

25 But I will strengthen the arms 
of the king of Babylon, and the 
arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; 
and /they shall know that I am the 
Lorpb, when I shall put my sword 
into the hand of the king of Baby- 
lon, and he shall stretch it out upon 
the land of Egypt. 

96 And I will scatter the Egyp- 


31 1] 


EZEKIEL. 


tians among the nations, and dis-| B.C. 588. 12 And strangers, the terrible of 


perse them among the countries; 
and they shall know that I am the 
Lorp. 


CHAPTER 31. 
The prophecy against Pharaoh. 


Ake it carne to pass in the 
eleventh year, in the “third 
month, in the first day of the 
month, that the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh 
king of Egypt, and to his multitude; 
Whom art thou like in thy great- 

ess? 

3 4Behold, the Assyrian was a 
Ccedar in Lebanon with fair 
branches, and with a shadowing 
shroud, and of an high stature; and 
his top was among the thick 
boughs. L 

4 @The waters made him great, 
the deep set him up on high with 
her rivers running round about his 
plants, and sent out her little rivers 
unto all the trees of the field. 

5 Therefore his height was ex- 
alted above all the trees of the field, 
and his boughs were multiplied, and 
his branches became long because 
of the multitude of waters, when he 
shot forth. 

6 All the fowls of heaven made 
their nests in his boughs, and under 
his branches did all the beasts of 
the field bring forth their young, 
and under his shadow dwelt all 
great nations. 

Thus was he fair in his great- 


ness, in the length of his branches:], 


for his root was by great waters. 

8 The cedars in the ‘garden of 
God could not hide him: the fir 
trees were not like his boughs, and 
the chesnut trees were not like his 
branches; nor any tree in the gar- 
den of God was like unto him in his 
beauty. 

9 I have made him fair by the 
multitude of his branches: so that 
all the trees of Eden, that were in 
the garden of God, envied him. 

10 Therefore thus saith the Lord 

Gop; Because thou hast lifted up 
thyself in height, and he hath shot 
up his top among the thick boughs, 
and his heart is lifted up in his 
height; 
_11 I have therefore delivered him 
into the hand of the mighty one of 
the ‘heathen; he shall surely deal 
with him: I have driven him out 
for his wickedness, 


aie. June. 

b Parables 
37.1-14. 
(Jud.9.7-15; 
Zech.1i. 
7-14.) 

¢ Ezk.17.23, 
24; Dan.¢. 
4-37; Rev. 
715 

@. Jer.51.36. 

e Ezk.28.13; 


fie. nations. 


g Ezk.32.4; 
Isa.18.6. 


h Ezk.32.18. 

i Heb. Sheol. 
See Hab.2.5, 
note. 

j Isa.14.15. 

k Ezk.32.31. 


7 Ezk.28.10; 
32.19,21,24, 


mi.e. March; 
also v.17, 


874 


the nations, have cut him off, and 


and in all the valleys his branches 
are fallen, and his boughs are 
broken by all the rivers of the Jand; 
and all the people of the earth are 
gone down from his shadow, and 
thave left him. 

13 sUpon his ruin shall all the 


the beasts of the field shall be upon 
his branches: 

14 To the end that none of all the 
trees by the waters exalt themselves 
for their height, neither shoot up 
their top among the thick boughs, 
neither their trees stand up in their 
jheight, all that drink water: for 
they are all delivered unto death, 
|4to the nether parts of the earth, in 
ithe midst of the children of men, 
with them that go down to the pit. 

15. Thus saith the Lord Gop; In 
the day when he went down to the 
?grave I caused a mourning: I cov- 
ered the deep for him, and I re- 
strained the floods thereof, and the 
great waters were stayed: and I 
caused Lebanon to mourn for him, 
and all the trees of the field fainted 
for him. 

16 I made the nations to shake at 
the sound of his fall, when I Jcast 
him down to thell with them that 
descend into the pit: and all the 
trees of Eden, the choice and best of 
Lebanon, all that drink water, 
kshall be comforted in the nether 
parts of the earth. 

17 They also went down into heil 
with him unto them that be slain 
with the sword; and they that 
were his arm, that dwelt under his 
shadow in the midst of the Sheathen. 

18 To whom art thou thus like in 
glory and in greatness among the 
trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be 
brought down with the trees of 
Eden unto the nether parts of the 
earth: /thou shalt lie in the midst 
of the uncircumcised with them 
that be slain by the sword. This 
is Pharaoh and all his multitude, 
saith the Lord Gop, 


CHAPTER 32. 
The lamentation for Pharaoh. 


ANP it came to pass in the 
twelfth year, in the twelfth 
month, in the first day of the 
month, that the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 


fowls of the heaven remain, and all. 


pan 


have left him: upon the mountains © 


132 2] 


2 Son of man, take up a lamenta- 
tion for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and 
say unto him, Thou art like a young 
lion of the nations, and thou art as 
a whale in the seas: and thou cam- 
est forth with thy rivers, and trou- 
bledst the waters with thy feet, and 
fouledst their rivers. 

3 Thus saith the Lord Gop; I will 
therefore spread out my net over 
thee with a company of many peo- 
ple; and they shall bring thee up in 
my net. 

4 Then will I leave thee upon the 
land, I will cast thee forth upon 
the open field, and will cause all 
the fowls of the heaven to remain 
upon thee, and I will fill the beasts 
of the whole earth with thee. 

5 And I will lay thy flesh upon the 
mountains, and fill the valleys with 
thy height. 

6 I will also water with thy blood 
the land wherein thou swimmest,| 31°. 4. 
even to the mountains; and the] wre4.20° 
rivers shall be full of thee. | 

7 And when I 'shall put thee out, 
bJ will cover the heaven, and make 
the stars thereof dark; I will cover 
the sun with a cloud, and the moon|¢ ¥-2 
shall not give her light. 

8 All the bright lights of heaven 
will I make dark over thee, and set 
darkness upon thy land, saith the 
Lord Gop. f v.27; Isa.1. 

9 I will also vex the hearts of| 31; 14-910. 
many people, when I shall bring}, y.27. Heb. 


a Ezk.29.5. 
6 Isa.13.10; 


c Ezk.30.4; 
Jer.46.26. 


thy destruction among the nations,| Sheol. See 
into the countries which thou hast Hab rs , 


not known. 

10 Yea, I will make many people] Isa.14.15. 
amazed at thee, and their kings}. naae 
Shall be horribly afraid for thee,|‘J*49%* 
--when I shall brandish my sword 
before them; and they shall tremble 
at every moment, every man for 
his own life, in the day of thy fall. 

11 For ‘thus saith the Lord Gop; 
The sword of the king of Babylon 
shall come upon thee. 

12 By the swords of the mighty 
will I cause thy multitude to fall, 
the terrible of the nations, all of 
them: and they shall spoil the 
pomp of Egypt, and all the multi- 
tude thereof shall be destroyed. 

13 I will destroy also all the beasts 
thereof from beside the great 
waters; neither shall the foot of 
man trouble them any more, nor 
the hoofs of beasts trouble them. 

14 Then will I make their waters 
deep, and cause their rivers to run 
like oil, saith the Lord Gop. 

15 When I shall make the land of : 

87 


EZEKIEL. 


Rev.6.12,13. 


2 Chr.35.25. 
e Ezk.31.2,18. 


[32 25 


Egypt desolate, and the country 
shall be destitute of that whereof it 
was full, when I shall smite all 
them that dwell therein, then shall 
they know that I am the Lorb. 
16 ¢This is. the lamentation 
wherewith they shall lament her: 
the daughters of the nations shall 
lament her: they shall lament. for 
her, even for Egypt, and for all her 
multitude, saith the Lord Gop. 


Lamentation for Egypt. 


17 It came to pass also in the 
twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of 
the month, that the word of the 
LorD came unto me, saying, 

18 Son of man, wail for the multi- 


|tude of Egypt, and cast them down, 


even her, and the daughters of the 
famous nations, unto the nether 
parts of the earth, with them that 
go down into the pit. 

19 ‘Whom dost thou pass im 
beauty? go down, and be thou laid 
with the uncircumcised. 

20 They shall fall in the midst of 
them that are slain by the sword: 
she is delivered to the sword: draw 
her and all her multitudes. 

21 fThe strong among the mighty. 
shall speak to him out of the midst 
of Shell with them that help him: 
they are gone down, they lie uncir- 
cumcised, slain by the sword. 

22 Asshur is there and all her 
company: his graves are about him: 
all of them slain, fallen by the 
sword: 

23 "Whose graves are set in the 
sides of the pit, and her company is 
round about her grave: all of them 
slain, fallen by the sword, which 
caused terror in the land of the 
living. ‘ 

24 There is *Elam and all her 
multitude round about her grave, 
all of them slain, fallen by the 
sword, which are gone down uncir- 
cumcised into the nether parts of 
the earth, which caused their terror 
in the land of the living; yet have 
they borne their shame with them 
that go down to the pit. 


| 25 They have set her a bed in the 


midst of the slain with all her mul- 
titude: her graves are round about 
him: all of them uncircumcised, 
slain by the sword: though their 
terror was caused in the land of the 
living, yet have they borne their 
shame with them that go down to 
the pit: he is put in the midst of 
them that be slain. 


as 


. 


- circumcised, which are gone down 


32 26] 


26 There 1s 2Meshech, Tubal, and 
all her multitude: her graves are 
round about him. ‘all of them un- 
circumcised, slain by the sword, 
though they caused their terror in 
the land of the living. : 

27 And they shall not lie with the 
mighty that are fallen of the un- 


to hell with their weapons of war: 
and they have laid their swords 
under their heads, but their in- 
iquities shall be upon their bones, 
though they were the terror of the 
mighty in the land of the living. 
28 Yea, thou shalt be broken in 
the midst of the uncircumcised, and 
shalt lie with them that are slain 
with the sword. 
29 There is “Edom, her kings, and 
all her princes, which with their|® Ezk.25.12. 
might are laid by them that were cEzk.38.6, 
slain by the sword: they shall lie} 15; 39.2. 
with the uncircumcised, and with ad eek 3016 
them that go down to the pit. ry 
30 “There be the princes of the|e2Sam.18._ 
north, all of them, and all the Rice ahs 
Zidonians, which ‘are gone down| 9/3/° #* 
with the slain; with their terror 
they are ashamed of their might;|Ezk.3.17. 
and they lie uncircumcised with 2 The nation 
them that be slain by the sword,| having failed 
and bear their shame with them Aipoeibe 
that go down to the pit. ity the ap- 
31 Pharaoh shall see them, and} peal is now 
shall be 4¢comforted over all his Bo au eee 
multitude, even Pharaoh and all his Tae se. 
army slain by the sword, saith the 
Lord Gop. h Ezk.18.23, 
32 For I have caused my terror in| 74°14 52Bet, 
the land of the living: and he shall] 3.9. 
be laid in the midst of the uncir-| . Eekt83i 
cumcised with them that are slain| * =7*-18-31- 
with the sword, even Pharaoh and j Ezk.3.20; 
a his multitude, saith the Lord] 18.24,26,27. 
OD. 


a Ezk.27.13; 
38.2; Gen. 
10.2. 


k Ezk.3.20; 
18.24, 
CHAPTER 33. 
Ethical instructions for the 
captivity. 


ASAIN the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

2 Son of man, speak to the chil- 
dren of chy people, and say unto 
them, When I bring the sword upon 
a land, if the people of the land take 
a man of their coasts, and set him 
for their «watchman: 

3 Ifwhen he seeth the sword come! 
upon the land, he blow the trumpet, 
and warn the people; 

4 Then fwhosoever heareth the 
sound of the trumpet, and taketh 
not warning; if the sword come, 


876 


EZEKIEL. 


and take him away, his blood shail 
be upon his own head. 

5 He heard the sound of the trum- 
pet, and took not warning; his blood 
shall be upon him. But he that 
taketh warning shall deliver his 
soul. 

6 But if the watchman see the 
sword come, and blow not the trum- 
pet, and the people be not warned; 
if the sword come, and take any 
person from among them, he is 
taken away in his iniquity; but his 
blood will I require at the watch- 
man’s hand. 

7 &So thou, O son of man, I have 
set thee a watchman unto the house 
of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear 
the word at my mouth, and warn 
them from me. 

8 When I say unto the wicked, O 
wicked man, thou shalt surely die; 
if thou dost not speak to warn the 
wicked from his way, that wicked 
man Shall die in his iniquity; but 
his blood will I require at thine 
hand. 

9 Nevertheless, if thou warn the 
wicked of his way to turn from it; 
if he do not turn from his way, he 
shall die in his iniquity; but thou 
hast delivered thy soul. 

10 Therefore, O thou son of man, 
speak unto the house of Israel : 
Thus ye speak, saying, If our trans-. 
gressions and our sins be upon us, 
and we pine away in them, how 
should we then live? 

11 Say unto them, As I live, saith 
the Lord Gop, “I have no pleasure 
in the death of the wicked; but that 
the wicked turn from his way and 
live: turn ye, turn ye from your 
evil ways; for ‘why will ye die, O 
house of Israel? 

12 Therefore, thou son of man, 
say unto the children of thy people, 
The Jrighteousness of the righteous 
shall not deliver him in the day of 
his transgression: as for the wick- 
edness of the wicked, he shall not 
fall thereby in the day that he 
turneth from his wickedness : 
neither shall the righteous be able 
to live for his righteousness in the 
day that he sinneth. 

13. When I shall say to the right- 
cous, that he shall surely live; ‘if 
he trust to his own righteousness, 
ana commit iniquity, all his right- 
cousnesses shall not be remembered: 
but for his iniquity that he hath 
committed, he shall die for it. 

14 Again, when I say unto the 


‘wicked. Thou shalt surely die; if 


7. 


: 1 


33 15] EZEKIEL. [34 3 


equal: but as for them, their way 
is not equal. : g 

18 When the righteous turneth 
from his righteousness, and com- 


he turn from his sin, and do that 
which is lawful and right; 

15 If the wicked restore the 
pledge, give again that he had 
robbed, walk in the statutes of life,|*#k18.7. | mitteth iniquity, he shall even die 
without committing iniquity; he|,px2214; |thereby. 
shall surely live, he shall not die. Lev.6.2,4,5; | 19 Butifthe wicked turn from his 

16 None of his sins that he hath ao wickedness, and do that which 
committed shall be mentioned unto] “19%: jis lawful and right, he shall live 
him: he hath done that which is|cv.17;Ezk. |thereby. 
lawful and right; he shall surely| 18-25,29. 20 Yet ye say, ‘The way of the 


ive. j Lord is not equal. O ye house of 
17 Yet the children of thy people Israel, I will judge you every one 
say, The way of the Lord is not 


after his ways. 
Ie hichg tie eI ran oats ieiae ell be pe ee a ee tS 
PART V. GENERAL THEME: THE FUTURE KINGDOM OF THE SON 
OF DAVID: CHAPTERS 33. 21-36. 38. 


21 And it came to pass in the 29 Then shall they know that I 
twelfth year of our captivity, in the am the Lorpb, when I have laid the 
étenth month, in the fifth day of land most desolate because of all 
the month, that one that had es- their abominations which they have 
caped out of Jerusalem came unto committed. 
me, saying, The city is smitten. 30 Also, thou son of man, the 

22 Now the hand of the LORD children of thy people still are talk- 
was upon me in the evening, afore ing against thee by the walls and 
he that was escaped came; and had in the doors of the houses, and 
opened my mouth, until he came to] . speak one to another, every one to 
me in the morning; and my mouth|¢i-e- January. |his brother, saying, Come, I pray 
was opened, and I was no more} Jca.51.2; you, and hear what is the word 
dumb. Acts 7.5. that cometh forth from the LORD. 


, is 31 And they come unto thee as. 
Hearers of the word, but not |fMic311; the people cometh, and /they sit 


Mt.3.9; 

doers. John 8.39. |before thee as my people, and they 
23 Then the word of the LorD| .43,3,  |hear thy words, but they will not 
came unto me, saying, ; _ |? 38; Jer44.2, |do them: ‘for with their mouth 
24 Son of man, they that inhabit| 6,22. they seers love, but their 
ae Wes Ste nee es reel wees pat goeth after their covetous- 
and he inherited the land: fbut we] i Psa.78.36, 32 And, lo, thou art unto them as 
are many; the land is given us for| 32: 189-29. [a very lovely song of one that hath 
inheritance. ; a pleasant voice, and can play well 
__ 25 Wherefore say unto them,|j1Sam.3.20. |on an instrument: for they hear 

Thus saith the Lord Gop; Ye eat), . os, thy words, but they do them not. 
with the blood, and lift up your 33 jAnd when this cometh to 


eyes toward your idols, and shed)? Jer.23.1; pass, (lo, it will come,) then ‘shall 
blood: and shali ye possess the} 2ch-11.17. they know that a prophet hath been 
pode 5 " misa.s6.11; |among them. 

26 Ye stand upon your sword, ye} Zech.11.16. 
work abomination, and ye defile] | 433.25 CHAPTER 34. 
every one his neighbour’s wife: and)” 26: Mic.3.1- | Message to the faithless shep- 


shall ye possess the land? 3; Zech.11.5. 
27 Say thou thus unto them, Thus herds of Israel. 
saith the Lord Gop; As I live, ANE the word of the LorD came 
unto me, saying, 


surely they that are in the wastes 


shall fall by the sword, and him 2 Son of man, prophesy against 


that is in the open field will I give the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, 
to the beasts to be devoured, and and say unto them, Thus saith the 
they that be in the forts and in the Lord Gop unto the shepherds; 
caves shall die of the pestilence. lWoe be to the shepherds of Israel 

28 &For I will lay the land most that do feed themselves! should not 


the shepherds feed the flocks? 

3 mYe eat the fat, and ye clothe . 
you with the wool, ye *kill them that 
are fed: but ye feed not the flock. 


desolate, and the pomp of her 
strength shail cease; and the moun- 
tains of Israel shall be desolate, 


that none shall pass through. 
877 


34 4] 


4 The 4diseased have ye not 
strengthened, neither _ have ye 
healed that which was sick, neither 


EZEKIEL. 


have ye bound up that which was| 


broken, neither have ye brought 
again that which was driven away, 
neither have ye 4sought that which 
was lost; but with ‘force and with 
cruelty have ye ruled them. 

5 And they were scattered, be- 
cause there is no shepherd: ¢and 
they became meat to all the beasts 
of the field, when they were scat- 
tered. 

6 My sheep wandered through all 
the mountains, and upon every high 
hill: yea, my flock was scattered 
upon all the face of the earth, and 
none did séarch or seek after them. 

7 Therefore, ye shepherds, hear 
the word of the Lorp; 

8 As I live, saith the Lord Gop, 
surely because my flock became a 
prey, and my flock became meat to 
every beast of the field, because 
there was no shepherd, neither did 
my shepherds search for my flock, 
but the shepherds fed themselves, 
and fed not my flock: 

9 Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear 
the word of the Lorp; 

10 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
hold, I am against the shepherds; 
and I will ‘require my flock at their 
hand, and cause them to cease from 
feeding the flock; neither shall the 
shepherds feed themselves any 
more; for I will deliver my flock 
from their mouth, that they may 
not be meat for them. 


Israel to be restored: the Davidic 
kingdom to be set up. 


11 For thus saith the Lord Gop; 
Behold, I, even I, will both search 
my sheep, fand seek them out. 

12 As a shepherd seeketh out his 
flock in the day that he is among his 
sheep that are scattered 3 so will I 
seek out my sheep, and will deliver 
them out of all places where they 
have been scattered in the cloudy 
and. dark day. 

13 And «I will bring them out 
from the people, and gather them 
from the countries, and will bring 
them to their own land, and feed 
them upon the mountains of Israel 
by the rivers, and in all the inhab- 
ited places of the country. 

14 I will feed them in a good pas- 
ture, and upon the high mountains 
of Israel shall their fold be: there 
shall they lie in a good fold, and in 


a v.16; 
Zech.11.16. 


b Lk.15.4, 
¢1 Pet.5.3. 


d v.8; Isa.56. 
9; Jer.12.9. 


e Ezk.3.18; 
Heb.13.17. 


Kingdo 
3 (Ol) vel 1- 


(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 
g Ezk.28.25; 
36.24; 37.21, 
22; Isa.65.9, 
10; Jer.23.3. 


i Isa.11.1-5, 
10; 40.11; 
Jer.23.4,5; 
John 10.11; 
Heb.13.20; 
1 Reti2ta5< 
5.4.5 


j v-30; Ezk. 
.37.27; Ex. 
29.45. 


k Ezk.37.26. 

I Lev.26.6; 
Isa.11.6-9; 
35.9; Hos. 
2.18. 

m Gen.12.2; 


Isa.19.24; 
Zech.8.13. 


878 


[34.27 


a fat pasture shall they feed upon 
the mountains of Israel. i 

15 I will feed my flock, and I will 
cause them to lie down, saith the 
Lord Gop. 

16 I ‘will seek that which was 
lost, and bring again that which 
was driven away, and will bind up 
that which was broken, and will 
strengthen that which was sick: 
but I will destroy the fat and the 
strong; I will feed them with judg- 
ment. 1 

17 And as for you, O my flock, 
thus saith the Lord Gop; Behold, I 
judge between cattle and cattle, be- 
tween the rams and the he goats. 

18 Seemeth it a small thing unto 
you to have eaten up the good pas- 
ture, but ye must tread down with 
your feet the residue of your pas- 
tures? and to have drunk of the 
deep waters, but ye must foul the 
residue with your feet? ‘ 

19 And as for my flock, they eat 
that which ye have trodden with 
your feet; and they drink that 
winch, ye have fouled with your 
eet. 

20 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop unto them; Behold, I, even i, 
will judge between the fat cattle 
and between the lean cattle. 

21 Because ye have thrust with 
side and with shoulder, and pushed 
all the diseased with your horns, 
till ye.have scattered them abroad; 

22 Therefore will I save my flock, 
and they shall no more be a prey; 
and I will judge between cattle and 
cattle. 

23 And I will set up ‘one shepherd 
over them, and he shall feed them; 
even my servant David; he shall 
feed them, and he shall be their 
shepherd. 

24 JjAnd I the Lorp will be their 
God, and my servant David a 
prince among them; I the LorD 
have spoken it. 

25 And I will make with them a 
covenant of peace, and ‘will cause 
the evil beasts to cease out of the 
land: and they shall dwell safely in 
the wilderness, and sleep in the 


woods. 

26 And I will make them and the 
places round about my hill a bless- 
ing; and I will cause the shower to 
come down in his season; there 
shall be showers of blessing. 

27 And the tree of the field shall 
yield her fruit, and the earth shall 
yield her increase, and they shall be 
safe in their land, and shall know 


34 28] EZEKIEL. [36 3 


with his slain men: in.thy hills, 
and in thy valleys, and in-all thy 
rivers, shall they fall that are slain 
with the sword. 

9 JI will make thee perpetual des- 
olations, and thy cities shall not 
return: and ye shall know that I 
am the Lorb. 

10 Because thou hast said, These 
two nations and these two countries 


that I am the Lorp, when I have 

®broken the bands of their yoke, 
and delivered them out of the hand 
of those that served themselves of 
them. 

28 And they shall no more be a 
lprey to the “heathen, neither shall 
the beast of the land devour them; 
but ‘they shall dwell safely, and 
none shall make them afraid. 


29 And I will raise up for them a shall be mine, and we will possess 
plant of renown, and they shall be it; whereas the LORD was there: 
no more consumed with hunger in 11 Therefore, as I live, saith the 
the land, neither bear the shame of Lord Gop, I will even do according 
the Sheathen any more. to thine anger, and according to 

30 Thus shall they know that I thine envy which thou hast used out 
the LorD their God am with them, of thy hatred against them; and I 
and that they, even the house of will make myself known among 
Israel, are my people, saith the them. when I have judged thee. 
Lord Gop. 12 And thou shalt know that lam 


31 And ye my flock, the flock of|aLev.26.13; |the LORD, and that I have heard 
my pasture, are men, and I am| Jer-2.20. all thy blasphemies which thou hast 


your God, saith the Lord Gop. bie. nations. |SPOken against the mountains of Is- 
rael, saying, They are laid desolate, 


CHAPTER 35. é Brrr 97, |they pe given us to consume. x 
; ; or“ | 13° Thus with your mouth ye have 
The prophecy rads Mount |, Deut.2.5. boasted against me, and have mul- 
; Fseoemoe tiplied your words against me: I 
OREOVER the word of the!“ opaio.’ + jhave heard them. 


LORD came unto me, saying, 14 Thus saith the Lord Gop; 


2 Son of man, set thy face against f West sWhen the whole earth rejoiceth, I 
@mountSeir, and prophesy againstit,| 43: Mal.1.3-4. will make thee desolate. 


3 And say unto it, Thus saith the 15 “As thou didst rejoice at the 
Lord Gop; Behold, O mount Seir, I g Isa.65.13,14. [inheritance of the house of Israel, 
am against thee, and I will stretch], p..35.12; |because it was desolate, so will I 


out mine hand against thee, and I} 36.4-7; do unto thee: thou shalt be deso- 
will make thee most desolate. Oba.12,15. |Jate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, 
4 I will lay thy cities waste, and even all of it: and they shall know 
thou shalt be desolate, and thou that I am the LorpD. 
shalt know that I am the LORD. 
5 Because, tow hast pad per- 2CHAPTER 36. 
petu atred, an ast shed the > 
blood of the children of Israel by eed $5 anes ‘Reletgs 4 ‘of 
the force of the sword in the time di re ad P 
of their calamity, in the time that dCEGGs 
their iniquity had an end: LSO, thou son of man, prophesy 
6 Therefore, as I live, saith the unto the mountains of Israel, 
Lord Gop, I will prepare thee unto and say, Ye mountains of Israel, 
blood, and blood shall pursue thee: hear the word of the LorpD: 
sith thou hast not hated blood, even 2 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
blood shall pursue thee. cause the enemy hath said against 
7 Thus will I make mount Seir you, Aha, even the ancient high 
most desolate, and cut off from it places are our’s in possession: 
him that passeth out and him that 3 Therefore prophesy and say, 
returneth. Thus saith the Lord Gop; Because 
8 And I will fill his mountains they have made you desolate, and 


1 The whole passage (vs. 23-30) speaks of a restoration yet future, for the rem- , 
nant which returned after the 70 years, and their posterity, were continually under 
the Gentile yoke, until, in A.D. 70, they were finally- driven from the land into a 
dispersion which still continues. 5 ; 

* 2 A beautiful order is discernible in this and the succeeding prophecies: (1) Resto- 
ration of the land (36. 1-15); (2) of the people (36. 16-37. 28); (3) judgment on Israel’s 
enemies (38. 1-39. 24). Afterward follows that which concerns the worship of 
Jehovah that He may dwell amongst His people. 

879 


36 4] 


EZEKIEL. 


[36 2s 


swallowed you up on every side,| B.c. 587. 14 Therefore thou shalt devour 
that ye might be a possession unto men no more, neither bereave thy 
nations any more, saith the Lord 


the residue of the “heathen, and ye}. 


are taken up in the lips of talkers, 
and are an infamy of the people: 

4 Therefore, ye mountains of Is- 
rael, hear the word of the Lord 
Gop; Thus saith the Lord Gop to 
the mountains, and to the hills, to 
the rivers, and to the valleys, to the 
desolate wastes, and to the cities 
that are forsaken, which became a 
prey and derision to the residue of 
the 2heathen that are round about; 

5 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Surely in the fire of my jeal- 
ousy have I spoken against the 
residue of the “heathen, and against 
all Idumea, which have appointed 
my land into their possession with 
the joy of all their heart, with de- 
spiteful minds, to cast it out for a 
prey. 

6 Prophesy therefore concerning 
the land of Israel, and say unto the 
mountains, and to the hills, to the 
rivers, and to the valleys, Thus 
saith the Lord Gop; Behold, I have 
spoken in my jealousy and in my 
fury, because ye have “borne the 
shame of the “heathen: 

7 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; I have lifted up mine hand, 
Surely the “heathen that are about 
you, they shall bear their shame. 

8 But ye, O mountains of Israel, 
ye shall shoot forth your branches, 
and yield your fruit to my people 
of Israel; for they are at hand to 
come. 

9 For, behold, I am for you, and I 
will turn unto you, and ye shall be 
tilled and sown: 

10 And I will multiply men upon 
you, all the house of Israel, even; 
all of it: and the cities shall be 
inhabited, and the wastes shall be 
builded: 

11 And I will multiply upon you 
man and beast; and they shall in- 
crease and bring fruit: and I will 
settle you after your old estates, and 
will do better unto you than at 
your beginnings: and ye shall know 
that I am the Lorp. 

12 Yea, I will cause men to walk 

_upon you, even my people Israel; 
and ¢they shall possess thee, and 
thou shalt be their inheritance, and 
thou shalt no more henceforth ¢be- 
reave them of men, 

13. Thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
cause they say unto you, Thou land 
devourest up men, and hast be- 
reaved thy nations; 


ai.e. nations. 
6 Deut.28.37; 
1 Ki.9.7; 
Lam.2.15; 
Dan.9.16. 
v.19 
Ezk.34.29; 
Psa.123.3,4. 
d Oba.17. 
eSee Jer.15.7. 
Ff Lev.18.25, 
27,28; 
Jer.2.7. 


g Isa.52.5; 
Rom.2.24, 


h Israel 
(prophecies). 


# Ezk.20.41; 
28.22. 


j Isa.52.15; 
Heb.10.22. 


Gop. 

15 Neither will I cause men to 
hear in thee the shame of the 
“heathen any more, neither shalt 
thou bear the reproach of the peo- 
ple any more, neither shalt thou 
cause thy nations to fall any more, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


The past sins of Israel: her fu- 
ture restoration and conver- 
sion. 


16 Moreover the word of the 
LORD came unto me, saying, 

17 Son of man, when the house of 
Israel dwelt in their own land, 
‘they defiled it by their own way 
and by their doings: their way was 
before me as the uncleanness of a 
removed woman. 

18 Wherefore I poured my fury 
upon them for the blood that they 
had shed upon the land, and for 
their idols wherewith they had 
polluted it: 

19 And I scattered them among 
the @heathen, and they were dis- 
persed through the countries: ac- 
cording to their way and according 
‘to their doings I judged them. 

20 And when they entered unto 
the “heathen, whither they went, 
they ¢profaned my holy name, when 
they said to them, These are the - 
people of the LORD, and are gone 


12. \forth out of his land. 


21 But I had pity for mine holy 
name, which the house of Israel 
had profaned among the 2heathen, 
whither they went. 

22 Therefore say unto the house of 
Israel, Thus saith the Lord Gop; I 
do not this for your sakes, ?O house — 
of Israel, but for mine holy name’s 
sake, which ye have profaned among 
the “heathen, whither ye went. 

23 And I will sanctify my great 
name, which was profaned among 
the “heathen, which ye have pro- 
faned in the midst of them: and the 
“heathen shall know that I am the 
LorbD, saith the Lord Gop, when I 
shall be ‘sanctified in you before 
their eyes. : 

24 For I will take you from among 
the Zheathen, and gather you out of 
all countries, and will bring you 
into your own land. 

25 JThen will I sprinkle clean 
water upon you, and ye shall be 
clean: from all your filthiness, and 


36 26}, EZEKIEL. 137 6 


founded for your own ways, O house 
of Israel. 

33 Thus saith the Lord Gop; In 
the day that I shall have cleansed 
the stony heart out of your flesh,/aEzk.11.19; |you from all your iniquities I will 
and I will give you an heart of| Jer.32.39. also cause you to dwell in the cities, 


flesh. . j ._ _ |’ Holy Spirit. |and the wastes shall be builded. 
27 And I will put my spirit) Ezt,37.1,14. | 34 And the desolate land shall be 
Se ee as Eee ae 
y , and ye s eep “2% lsightie' at passed by. 
my judgments, and do them. ¢ Ezk.28.25; 35 And they shall say, This land 
28 ‘And ye shall dwell in the land} 37-25.. that was desolate is become like the 
that I gave to your fathers; and ¢ye|; 72.11.20, |’garden of Eden; and the waste 
shall Sey people, and I will be ae és aie ee a Pag serie ae 
your God. er-30-22. ecome fenced, and are inhab-: 
29 «I will also save you from all), yq¢.1.91; ited. 


your uncleannesses: and I will call] Rom.1126. | 36 Then the Sheathen that are 
for the corn, and will increase it, left round about you shall know 


and lay no famine upon you. fie. nations. lthat J the LorD build the ruined 
30 And I will multiply the fruit of| ¢ Ezk.6.9; places, and plant that that was 

the tree, and the increase of the| 20.43. desolate: I the LorD have spoken 

field, that ye shall receive no more], , 99. it, and I will do it. 

Niebraiag of famine among the] Deut.9.5. at Ue sah ibe Lord Se i 
eathen. : _ jwill yet for this be enquired of by 
31 Then shall ye remember your|‘ F2538;'35 —_|the house of Israel, to do it for them; 

own evil ways, and your doings}! Joel 2.3. I will increase them with men like 

that were not good, and éshall lothe a flock. 


yourselves in your own sight for 4 Seas 38 As the holy flock, as the flock 
your iniquities and for your abom- of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; 


inations. so shall the waste cities be filled 
32 ANot for your sakes do I this, with flocks of men: and they shall 
saith the Lord Gop, be it known know that I am the Lorp. 


PART VI. GENERAL THEME: RESTORATION OF ISRAEL; THE DAVIDIC 
KINGDOM; JUDGMENT ON THE NATIONS: CHAPTERS 37. 1-39. 29. 


B.C. 587. |man, can these bones live? And I 


CHAPTER 37. = raanaaiad?2 O Lord Gop, thou 
The vision of the valley nowest. ‘i 
fay ap bones. b Parables 4 Again he said unto me, Proph- 


(O.T.). vs.-l- |esy upon these bones, and say 
HE hand of the Lorp was upon; 4; Ezk.37. _|unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the 


me, and ‘carried me out in the] 7°15; Zech. |word of the Lorp. 
Ispirit of the Lorp, and set mej 11.7-14.) 5 Thus saith the Lord Gop unto 
down in the midst of the valley these bones; Behold, I will cause 


which was full of !bones, Dey endt. breath to enter into you, and ye 


2 And caused me to pass by them| Ezk.39.29. [shall live: _ : 
round about: and, behold, there! (Gsp125,' | 6 And I will lay sinews upon you, 
were very many in the open valley; aa and will bring up flesh upon you, 


and, lo, they were very dry. and cover you with skin, and put 
3 And he said unto me, Son of breath in you, and ye shall live; 
SEEPS a RS 1 eae eben Sea oes 


1 Having announced (Ezk. 36. 24-38) the restoration of the nation, Jehovah 
now gives in vision and symbol the method of its accomplishment. Verse 11 gives 
the clue. ‘The “bones” are the whole house of Israel who shall then be living. 
The “graves” are the nations where they dwell. The order of procedure is: (1) 
the bringing of the people out (v. 12); (2) the bringing of them in (v.12); (3) their 
conversion (v. 13); (4) the filling with the Spirit (v. 14). The symbol follows. 
The two sticks are Judah and the ten tribes; united, they are one nation (vs. 19- 
21). Then foliows (vs. 21-27) the plain declaratiort as to Jehowah’s purpose, and 
verse 28 implies that then Jehovah will become known to the Gentiles in a marked 
way. This is also the order of Acts 15. 16, 17, and the two passages strongly indi- 
cate the time of full Gentile conversion. See also Isa. If. 10: 

881 


EZEKIEL. 


[37 a 


37 7] 


and ye shall know that I am the 


LorpD. 

7 So I prophesied as I was com- 
manded: and as I prophesied, there 
was a noise, and behold a shaking, 
and the bones came together, bone 
to his bone. 5 

8 And when I beheld, lo, the 
sinews and the flesh came up upon 
them, and the skin covered them 
above: but there was no breath in 
them. 

9 Then said he unto me, Prophesy 
unto the wind, prophesy, son of 
man, and say to the wind, Thus 
saith the Lord Gop; Come from 
the four winds, O breath, and 
breathe upon these slain, that they 
may live. 

10 So I prophesied as he com- 
manded me, and the breath came 
into them, and they lived, and 
stood up upon their feet, an exceed- 
ing great army, 


The vision explained. 


11 Then he said unto me,-Son of 
man, these bones are the whole 
house of Israel: behold, they say, 
Our bones are dried, and our hope 
is lost: we are cut off for our 
parts. 

12 Therefore prophesy and say 
unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
Gop; Behold, O my people, I will 
open your graves, and cause you to 
come up out of your graves, and 
bring you into the land of Israel. 

13_ And ye shall know that I am 
the Lorb, when I have opened your 
graves, O my people, and brought 
you up out of your graves, 

14 And shall put my spirit in you, 
and ye shall live, and I shall place 
you in your own land: then shall 
ye know that I the Lorp have 
spoken it, and performed it, saith 
the Lorp, 


The sign of the two sticks. 


15 The word of the Lorp came 
again unto me, saying, 

16 Moreover, thou son of man, 
take thee one “stick, and write upon 
it, For Judah, and for the children 
of Israel his companions: then take 
another. stick, and write upon it; 
For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, 
and for all the house of Israel his 
companions: 

_17 And join them one to another 
into one stick; and, they shall be- 
come one in thine hand. 

18 And when the children of thy 


B.C. 587. 


a Parables 


b Israel 
(prophecies). 
vs.21-28; 
Ezk.39.25, 

29. (Gen.12. 
2,3; Rom. 
11.26.) 


c i.e. nations. 


d Kingdom 
(O.T.).vs. 
21-28; Dan. . 
2.34-45. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


e Christ 
(Second 
Advent). 
Dan.7.13,14. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 


f Isa.40.11; 
Jer.23.5; 30. 
9; Ezk.34.23, 
24; Hos.3.5; 
LK.1.32. 


g Isa.60.21; 
Joel 3.20; 
Amos 9.15, 


h v.24; 
John 12.34, 


i Ezk.34.25; 


| Psa.89.3; 


Isa.55.3; 
Jer.32.40. 


882 


people shall speak unto thee, say- 


jing, Wilt thou not shew us what — 


thou meanest by these? 

19 Say unto them, Thus saith the 
Lord Gop; Behold, I will take the 
stick of Joseph, which zs in the 
hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of 
Israel his fellows, and will put them 
with him, even with the stick of 
Judah, and make them one stick, 
and they shall be one in mine 
hand. 

20 And the sticks whereon thou 
writest shall be in thine hand before 
their eyes. 

21 And say unto them, Thus 
saith the Lord Gop; Behold, I will 
take the children: of Israel from 
among the ‘heathen, whither they 
be gone, and will gather them on 
every side, and ¢bring them into 
their own land: 

22 And I will make them one na- 
tion in the land upon the mountains 
of Israel; and one ‘king shall be 
king to them all: and they shall be 
no more two nations, neither shall 
they be divided into two kingdoms 
any more at all: 

23 Neither shall they defile them- 
selves any more with their idols, nor 
with their detestable things, nor 
with any of their transgressions: 
but I will save them out of all their 


dwellingplaces, wherein they have 
sinned, and will cleanse them: so 
shall they be my people, and I will 
be their God. 

24 And fDavid my servant shall 
be king over them; and they all 
shall have one shepherd: they 
shall also walk in my judgments, 
and observe my statutes, and do 
them. 

25 And they shall dwell in the 
land that I have given unto Jacob 
my servant, wherein your fathers 
have dwelt; and they shall dwell 
therein, even they, and their chil- 
dren, and their children’s children 
sfor ever: and my servant David 
shall be their prince for ever. 

26 Moreover I will make a ‘cove- 
nant of peace with them; it shall be 
an everlasting covenant with them: 
and I will place them, and multiply 
them, and will set my sanctuary in 
the midst of them for evermore. 

27 My tabernacle also shall be 
with them: yea, I will be their God, 
and they shall be my people. 

28 And the ‘heathen shall know 
that I the Lorn do sanctify Israel, 
when my sanctuary shall be in the - 
midst of them for evermore. 


38 1] EZEKIEL. [38 19 
ee 
CHAPTER 38. 11 And thou shalt say, I will go up 


B.C. 587. 
. to the land of unwalled villages; I 
The prophecy against Gog. will go to them that are at rest, that 
ND the word of the LorD tame dwell safely, all of them dwelling 
unto me, saying, without walls, and having neither 

2 Son of man, set thy face against bars nor gates, 
1Gog, the land of Magog, the chief 12 To take a spoil, and to take a 
prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prey; to turn thine hand upon the 
prophesy against him, desolate places that are now in- 

3 And say, Thus saith the Lord habited, and upon the people that 
Gop; Behold, I am against thee, are gathered out of the nations, , 
O °Gog, the chief prince of Meshech which have gotten cattle and goods, 
and Tubal: that dwell in the midst of the land. 

4 And I will turn thee back, and 13 Sheba, and Dedan, and the 
put hooks into thy jaws, and I will merchants of Tarshish, with all the 
bring thee forth, and all thine army, young lions thereof, shall say unto 
horses and horsemen, all of them thee, Art thou come to take a spoil? 
clothed with all sorts of armour, hast thou gathered thy company to 
even a great company with buck- take a prey? to carry away silver 
lers and shields, all of them hand- and gold, to take away cattle and 
ling swords: goods, to take a great spoil? 

5 Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya 14 Therefore, son of man, proph- 
with them; all of them with shield esy and say unto 4%Gog, Thus 
and helmet: : saith the Lord Gop; In that day 

6 Gomer, and all his bands; the when my people of Israel dwelleth 
house of Togarmah of the north safely, shalt thou not know it? 
quarters, and all his bands: and|cv.2, note. 15. And thou shalt come from thy 
many people with thee. bieteeee |place out of the north parts, thou, 

7 Be thou prepared, and prepare|’** 77"7°"* |and many people with thee, all of 
for thyself, thou, and all thy com- them riding upon horses, a great 
pany that are assembled unto thee, company, and a mighty army: 
and be thou a guard unto them. 16 And thou shalt come up 

8 After many days thou shalt be against my people of Israel, as a 
visited: in the latter years thou cloud to cover the land; it shall be in 
shalt come into the land that 7s the latter days, and I will bring thee 
brought back from the sword, and against my land, that the “heathen 
is gathered out of many people, may know me, when I shall be sanc- 
against the mountains of Israel, tified in thee, O “Gog, before their 
which have been always waste: but; eyes. 
it is brought forth out of the na- 17 Thus saith the Lord Gop; Art 
tions, and they shall dwell safely all thou he of whom I have spoken in 
of them. old time by my servants the proph- 


9 Thou shalt ascend and come ets of Israel, which prophesied in 
Tike a storm, thou shalt be like a those days many years that I 
cloud to cover the land, thou, and would bring thee against them? 

all thy bands, and many people with 18 And it shall come to pass at the 
thee. same time when 4Gog shall come 
10 Thus saith the Lord Gop; It Lo G the land of Israel, saith the 


shall also come to pass, that at the Lord Gov, that my fury shall come 
same time shall things come into up in my face. : 

thy mind, and thou shalt think an 19 For in my jealousy and in the 
evil thought: fire of my wrath have I spoken, 


1 That the primary reference is to the northern (European) powers, headed 
up by Russia, all agree. The whole passage should be read in connection with 
Zech. 12. 1-4; 14. 1-9; Mt. 24. 14-30; Rev. 14. 14-20; 19. 17-21. “‘Gog”’ is the prince, 
“Magog,” his land. The reference to Meshech and Tubal (Moscow and Tobolsk ) 
is a clear mark of identification. Russia and the northern powers have been the 
latest persecutors of dispersed Israel, and it is congruous both with divine justice 
and with the covenants (e.g. Gen. 15. 18, note, Deut. 30. 3, note) that destruction 
should fall at the climax of the last mad attempt to exterminate the remnant of 
Israel in Jerusalem. The whole prophecy belongs to the yet future ‘‘day of Jeho- 
vah” (Isa. 2. 10-22; Rey, 19. 11-21), and to the battle of Armageddon (Rev. 16. 14; 
19 19, note), but includes also the final revolt of the nations at the close of the 


kingdom-age (Rev. 20. 7-9). 
883 


38 20] 


«Surely in that day there shall be a 
great shaking in the land of Israel; 

20 So that the fishes of the sea, 
and the fowls of the heaven, and 
the beasts of the'field, and all creep- 
ing things that creep upon the 
earth, and all the men that are 
upon the face of the earth, shall 
shake at my presence, “and the 
mountains shall be thrown down, 
and the steep places shall fall, and 
every wall shall fall to the ground. 

21 And I will call for a ‘sword 
against him throughout all my 
mountains, saith the Lord Gop: 
deyery man’s sword shall be against 
his brother. 

22 And I will plead against him 
with pestilence and with blood; and 
T will rain upon him, and upon his 
bands, and upon the many people 
that are with him, an overflowing 
rain, and great hailstones, fire, and 
brimstone. 

23 Thus will I magnify myself, 
and sanctify myself; ¢and I will be 
known in the eyes of many nations, 
and they shall know that I am the 
Lorp. 


CHAPTER 39. 


(The prophecy against Gog, 
continued.) 


(THEREFORE, thou son of man, 
prophesy against ‘Gog, and 
say, Thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
hold, I am against thee, O Gog, the 
chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: 

2 And I will turn thee back, and 
leave but the sixth part of thee, and 
will cause thee to come up from the 
north parts, and will bring thee 
upon the mountains of Israel: 

3 And I will smite thy bow out of 
thy left hand, and will cause thine 
_ arrows to fall out of thy right 

hand. 

4 Thou shalt fall upon the moun- 
tains of Israel, thou, and all thy 
bands, and the people that is 
with thee: I will give thee unto the 
Tavenous birds of every sort, and to 
the beasts of the field to be? de- 
voured. 

5 Thou shalt fall upon the open 
field: for I have spoken it, saith the 
Lord Gop. 

6 And £I will send a fire on Ma- 
gog, and among them that dwell 
carelessly in the ‘isles: and they 
shall know that I am the Lorp. 

7 So will I make my: holy name 
known in the midst of my people 
Israel; and I will not Jet them pol- 


EZEKIEL. 


a Hag.2.6,7; 
Rev.16.18. 


b Jer.4.24; 
Nah.1.5,6. 


c Armaged- 
don 
(battle of). 
vs.1-23; and 


Joel 2.1-11. 
(Rev.16.14; 
19.11-21.) 


d Jud.7.22; 


é v.16; 
Ezk.37.28; 
39.7; Psa. 
9.16. 

f Ezk.38.2, 
note. 


g Ezk.38.22; 
Amos 1.4. 


hi.e. coasts, 


tive. nations, 


j Rev.16.17; 
21.6. 
& Isa.14.2, 


lie. The 
multitude, 

m See Arma- 
&eddon, 
Rev.19.17 


n Zeph.1.7, 


Ezk.39.1-16; 


1 Sam.14.20. 


[39 7 


lute my holy name any more: and 
the ‘heathen shall know that I am 
the Lorp, the Holy One in Israel. 

8 jBehold, it is come, and it is 
done, saith the Lord Gop; “this is 
the day whereof I have spoken, | 

9 And they that dwell in the cities 
of Israel shall go forth, and shall 
set on fire and burn the weapons, 
both the shields and the bucklers, 
the bows and the arrows, and the 
handstaves, and the spears, and 
they shall burn them with fire 
seven years: 

10 So that they shall take no wood 
out of the field, neither cut down 
any out of the forests; for they 
shall burn the weapons with fire: 
Rand they shall spoil those that 
spoiled them, and rob those that 
robbed them, saith the Lord Gop. 

11 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that I will give unto /Gog 
a place there of graves in Israel, 
the valley of the passengers on the 
east of the sea: and it shall stop the 
noses of the passengers: and there 
shall they bury Gog and all his 
multitude: and they shall call it 
The valley of Hamon-gog. 

i2 And seven months shall. the 
house of Israel be burying of them, 
that they may cleanse the land. 

13 Yea, all the people of the land 
shall bury them; and it shall be to 
them a renown the day that I shall 
be glorified, saith the Lord Gop. 

14 And they shall sever out men 
of continual employment, passing 
through the land to bury with the 
passengers those that remain upon 
the face of the earth, to cleanse it: 
after the end of seven months shall 
they search. 4 

15 And the passengers that pass 
through the land, when any seeth a 
man’s bone, then shall he set up a 
sign by it, till the buriers have 
buried it in the valley of Hamon- 
gog. 

16 And also the name of the city 
shall be ‘Hamonah. Thus shall 
they cleanse the land. 

17 And, thou son of man, thus 
saith the Lord Gop; ™Speak unto 
every feathered fowl, and to every 
beast of the field, “Assemble your- 
selves, and come; gather yourselves 
on every side to my sacrifice that I 
do sacrifice for you, even a great 
sacrifice upon the mountains of 
Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and 
drink blood. 

18 Ye shall eat the flesh of the 
mighty, and drink the blood of the 


30 19] 


princes of the earth, of rams, of 
lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all 
of them ¢fatlings of Bashan. 

19 And ye shall eat fat till ye be|@ 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 587. 


Deut.32.14; 


full, and drink blood till ye be| °°???) 
drunken, of my sacrifice which I) Ezk.38.16, 


ne aOR for you. 

us ye shall be filled at my},; ‘ 
table with horses and chariots, with Aare Gite 
mighty men, and with all men of/?¢ 
war, saith the Lord Gop. 

21 And I will set my glory among] e Deut.31.17; 
the ‘heathen, and all the heathen] 153-59.2- 
shall see my judgment that I have| ¢ 7sraer 
executed, and my hand that I have] (prophecies). 
laid upon them. Hos.3.4,5. 

22 So the house of Israel shall boeeeerrtat 
know that I am the LorD their 
God from that day and forward. |¢ pee: 

23 And the ‘heathen ¢shall know| S21): 
that the house of Israel went into]/ Ezk.28.25, 
captivity for their iniquity: because| 2° 
they trespassed against me, there- 
fore ‘hid I my face from them, and 
gave them into the hand of their 
enemies: so fell they all by the 
sword. 

24 According to their uncleanness 
and according to their transgres- 
sions have I done unto them, and 
hid my face from them. 


Ezk.36.18- 
20,23. 


# Ezk.34.30; 
v.22. 


j Holy Spirit. 
Ezk.43.5. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


[409 


Vision of restored and converted 
Israel. 


25 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; fNow will I bring again the 
captivity of Jacob, and have mercy 
upon &the whole house of Israel, 
and will be jealous for my holy 


mame; °* 

26 After that they have borne 
their shame, and all their trespasses 
whereby they have _ trespassed 
against me, when they dwelt safely 
in their land, and none made them 
afraid. i 

27 When I have brought them 
again from the people, and gathered 
them out of their enemies’ lands, 
and am sanctified in them in the 
sight of many nations; 

28 *Then shall they know that J 
am the Lorp their God, which 
caused them to be led into captivity 
among the ‘heathen: but I have 
gathered them unto their own land, 
and have left none of them any 
more there. 

29 Neither will I hide my face 
any more from them: for I have 
poured out my /spirit upon the 
house of Israel, saith the Lord Gop. 


ee 


PART VII. 


GENERAL THEME: ISRAEL IN THE LAND DURING THE 


RS 40. 1-48. 35. 


KINGDOM-AGE: CHAPTE 


CHAPTER 40. Bienes SBM 
Vision of the man with the 
measuring reed. 


pn the five and twentieth year of 
our captivity, in the beginning 
of the year, in the tenth day of the 
tonth, in the fourteenth year after 
that the city was smitten, in the 
selfsame day the hand of the LoRD 
was upon me, and brought me 
thither. 

2 Inthe visions of God brought he 
me into the land of Israel, and set 
me upon a very high mountain, by| / One reed = 
which was as the frame of a city| about.10 ft.; 
on the south. also 

3 And he brought me thither, and,|m One cubit = 
behold, there was a ‘man, whose| about 18 in. 
appearance was like the appearance 
of brass, with a line of flax in his 
hand, and a measuring ‘reed; and 
he stood in the gate. 

4 And the man said unto me, Son 
of man, behold with thine eyes, and 
hear with thine ears, and set thine 
heart upon all that I shall shew 
thee; for to the intent that I might 
shew them unto thee art thou 


k The theoph- 


vs.5-8. 


885 


brought hither: declare all that 
thou seest to the house of Israel. 

Vision of the future temple. 

5 And behold a wall on the out- 
side of the house round about, and 
in the man’s hand a measuring reed 
of six "cubits Jong by the cubit and 
an hand breadth: so he measured 
the breadth of the building, one 
reed; and the height, one reed. 

6 Then came he unto the gate 
which looked toward the east, and 
went up the stairs thereof, and 
measured the threshold of the gate, 
which was one reed broad; and the 
other threshold of the gate, which 
was one reed broad. 

7 And every little chamber was 
one reed long, and one reed broad; 
and between the little chambers 
were five cubits; and the threshold 
of the gate by the porch of the gate 
within was one reed. 

8 He measured also the porch of 
the gate within, one reed. 

9 Then measured he the porch of 
the gate, eight cubits; and the posts 
thereof, two cubits; and the porch 
of the gate was inward. 


40 10] i 


EZEKIEL. 


08 


10 And the little chambers of the 
gate eastward were three on this 
side, and three on that side; they 
three were of one measure: and the 
posts had one measure on this side 
and on that side. 

11 And he measured the breadth 

of the entry of the gate, ten cubits : 
and the length of the gate, thirteen 
cubits. a: 
» 12 The space also before the little 
chambers was one cubit on this 
side, and the space was one cubit 
on that side: and the little chambers 
were six cubits on this side, and six 
cubits on that side. : 

13. He measured then the gat 
rom the roof of one little chamber 
to the roof of another: the breadth 
was five and twenty cubits, door 
against door. 

14 He made also posts of three- 
score cubits, even unto the post of 
the court round about the gate. 

15 And from the face of the gate 
of the entrance unto the face of the 
porch of the inner gate were fifty 
cubits. 

16 And there were “narrow win- 
dows to the little chambers, and to 
their posts within the gate round 
about, and likewise to the arches: 
and windows were round about in- 
ward: and upon each post were 
palm trees. 

17 Then brought he me into 
the outward court, and, lo, there 
were ‘chambers, and a pavement 
made for the court round about: 
“thirty chambers were upon the 
Pavement. 

18 And the pavement by the side 
of the gates over against the length 
of the gates was the lower pave- 
ment. 

19 Then he measured the breadth 
from the forefront of the lower gate 
unto the forefront of the inner court 
without, an hundred cubits east- 
ward and northward. 

20 And the gate of the outward 
court that looked toward the north, 
he measured the length thereof » and 
the breadth thereof. 

21 And the little chambers thereof 
were three on this side and three on 
that side; and the posts thereof and 
the arches thereof were after the 
measure of the first gate: the length 
thereof was fifty cubits, and the 
breadth five and twenty cubits. 

22 And their windows, and their 
arches, and their palm trees, were 
after the measure of the gate that 
looketh toward the east: and they 


B.C. 574. 


a1 Ki.6.4. 
b Rev.11.2. 
¢1 Ki.6.5. 
d Ezk.45.5. 


e See vs.21, 
25,33,36. 


886 


went up unto it by seven steps; and 
the arches thereof were before them. 

23 And the gate of the inner court 
was over against the gate toward 
the north, and toward the east; and 
he measured from gate to gate an 
hundred cubits. 

24 After that he brought me 
toward the south, and behold a gate 
toward the south: and he measured 
the posts thereof and the arches 
thereof according to these measures. 

25 And there were windows in it 
and in the arches thereof round 
about, like those windows: the 
length was fifty cubits, and the 
breadth five and twenty cubits. 

26 And there were seven steps to 


go up to it, and the arches thereof 
were before them: and it had palm 
trees, one on this side, and another 
on that side, upon the posts thereof, 

27 And there was a gate in the 
inner court toward the south: and 
he measured from gate to gate to- 
ward the south an hundred cubits. 

28 And he brought me to the 
inner court by the south gate: 
and he measured the south gate 
according to these measures; 

29 And the little chambers there- 
of, and the posts thereof, and the 
arches thereof, according to these 
measures: and there were win- 
dows in it and in the arches there- 
of round about: it was fifty cubits 
long, and ¢five and twenty cubits 

road. 

30 And the arches round about 
were five and twenty cubits long, 
and five cubits broad. 

31 And the arches thereof were 

toward the utter court: and palm 
trees were upon the posts thereof: 
and the going up to it had eight 
Steps. 
_32 And he brought me into the 
inner court toward the east: and 
he measured the gate according to 
these measures. 

33 And the little chambers there- 
of, and the posts thereof, and the 
arches thereof, were according to 
these measures: and there were 
windows therein and in the arches 
thereof round about: it was fifty 
cubits long, and five and twenty 
cubits broad. 

34 And the arches thereof were 
toward the outward court; and 
palm trees were upon the posts 
thereof, on this side, and on that 
side: aud the going up to it had 
eight steps. __ 

35 And he brought me to the 


40 36} 


EZEKIEL. 


[41 7 


north gate, and measured it ac- 
cording to these measures; 

36 The little chambers thereof, 
the posts thereof, and the arches 
thereof, and the windows to it 
round about: the length was fifty 
cubits, and the breadth five and 
twenty cubits. 

37 And the posts thereof were 
toward the utter court; and palm 
trees were upon the posts thereof, 
on this side, and on that side: and 
the going up to it had eight steps. 

38 And the chambers and the en- 
tries thereof were by the posts of, 
the gates, where they washed the 
burnt-offering. 

39 And in the porch of the gate 
were two tables on this side, and 
two tables on that side, to slay there- 
on the burnt-offering and the ¢sin- 
offering and the trespass-offering. 

40 And at the side without, ‘as 
one goeth up to the entry of the 
north gate, were two tables; and 
on the other side, which was at the 
porch of the gate, were two tables. 

41 Four tables were on this side, 
and four tables on that side, by the 
side of the gate; eight tables, where- 
upon they slew their sacrifices. 

42 And the four tables were of 
hewn stone for the burnt-offering, 
of a cubit and an half long, and a 
eubit and an half broad, and one 
cubit high: whereupon also they|/ 
laid the instruments wherewith 
they slew the burnt-offering and 
the sacrifice. 

43 And within were ¢hooks, an 
hand broad, fastened round about: 
and upon the tables was the flesh 
of the offering. i 


The chambers of the singers and 
priests. 


44 And without the inner gate 
were the chambers of the singers 
in the inner court, which was at 
the side of the north gate; and 
their prospect was toward the 
south: one at the side of the east 
gate having the prospect toward 
the north. 

45 And he said unto me, This 
chamber, whose prospect is toward 
the south, is for the priests, the 
ékeepers of the charge of the house. 

46 And the chamber whose pros- 
pect is toward the north is for the 
priests, the keepers of the charge 
of the altar: these are the sons of 
{Zadok among the sons of Levi, 
which come near to the LORD to 
minister unto him. 


a 


b 


c 


é 


& 


h 


B.C. 574. 


Lev.4.2,3. 


Lev.5.6; 
6.6; 7.1. 


Or, at the 
step. 


d Or, endirons, 


or, the two 
hearth- 
stones. 


Lev.8.35; 
Num.3.27, 
28,32,38; 18. 
5; 1 Chr.9. 
23; 2 Chr.13. 
11; Psa.134.1 
Ezk.43.19; 
44.15,16; 

1 Ki.2.35. 


1 Ki.6.20; 
2 Chr.3.8. 


One cubit = 
about 18 in. 


1 Ki.6.8. 


887 


47 So he measured the court, an 
hundred cubits long, and an hun- 
dred cubits broad, foursquare; and 
the altar that was before the house. 


The porch of the temple. 


48 And he brought me to: the 
porch of the house, and measured 
each post of the porch, five cubits 
on this side, and five cubits on that 
side: and the breadth of the gate 

as three cubits on this side, and 
three cubits on that side. 

49 The length of the porch was 
twenty cubits, and the breadth 
eleven cubits; and he brought me 
by the steps whereby they went up 
to it: and there were pillars by the 
posts, one on this side, and another 
on that side. 


CHAPTER 41. 
Description of the temple. 


FTERWARD he brought me 

to the temple, and measured. 
the posts, six cubits broad on the 
one side, and six cubits broad on 
the other side, which was the 
breadth of the tabernacle. 
‘2 And the breadth of the door 
was ten cubits; and the sides of the 
door were five cubits on the one 
side, and five cubits on the other 
side: and he measured the length 


thereof, forty cubits: and the 
breadth, twenty cubits. 
3 Then went he inward, and 


measured the post of the door, two 
cubits; and the door, six cubits; 
and the breadth of the door, seven 
cubits. 

4 So She measured the length 
thereof, twenty cubits; and the 
breadth, twenty cubits, before the 
temple: and he said unto me, This 
is the most holy place. 

5 After he measured the wall of 
the house, six cubits; and the 
breadth of every side chamber, four 
cubits, round about the house on 
every side. 

6 And the side chambers were 
three, one over another, and thirty 
in order; and they entered into the 
wall which was of the house for 
the side chambers round about, that 
they might have hold, but they had 
not hold in the wall of the house. 

7 And ‘there was an enlarging, 
and a winding about still upward 
to the side chambers: for the wind- 
ing about of the house went still 
upward round about the house: 
therefore the breadth of the house 


41 3] 


was still upward, and so increased 
from the lowest chamber to the 
highest byethe midst. _ 

8 I saw also the height of the 
house round about: the foundations 
of the side chambers were a full 
“reed of six great cubits. 3 

9 The thickness of the wall, which 
was for the side chamber with- 
out, was five cubits: and that which 
was left was the place of the side’ 
chambers that were within. ' 

10 And between the chambers 
was the wideness of twenty cubits} 
round about the house on every 
side. 

11 And the doors of the side 
chambers were toward the place! 
that was left, one door toward the! 
north, and another door toward) 
the south: and the breadth of the 
place that was left was five cubits) 
round about. 

12 Now the building that was be- 
fore the separate place at the end|a One reed = 
toward the west was seventy cubits| about 10 ft. 
broad; and the wall of the building! , , Ki.6.29. 
was five cubits thick round about, 
and the length thereof ninety cubits,| ¢ Ex-30.1. 
_13 So he measured the house, an! 1 xj.631- 
hundred cubits long; and the sep-| 3 
arate place, and the building, with EAS 
the walls thereof, an hundred|‘f2*41-12, 
cubits long; : 

14 Also the breadth of the face of] f One cubit = 
the house, and of the separate place 
toward the east, an hundred 
cubits. 

15 And he measured the length of 
the building over against the sep- 
arate place which was behind it, 
and the galleries thereof on the one 
side and on the other side, an hun- 
dred cubits, with the inner temple, 
and the porches of the court; 

16 The door posts, and the narrow 
windows, and the galleries round 
about on their three stories, over 
against the door, cieled with wood 
round about, and from the ground 
up to the windows, and the windows 
were covered; 

17 To that above the door, even 
unto the inner house, and without, 
and by all the wall round about 
within and without, by measure, 

18 And st was made with cher- 
ubims and palm trees, so that a 
palm tree was between a cherub 
and a cherub; and every cherub 
had two faces; 

19 So that the face of a man was 
toward the palm tree on the one 
side, and the face of a young lion 
toward the palm tree on the other 


888 


EZEKIEL. 


about 18 in.; 
also vs.4,7,8. 


house round about. 

20 From the ground unto above 
the door were cherubims and palm 
trees made, and on the wall of the 
temple. 

21 The posts of the temple were 
squared, and the face of the sanc- 
tuary; the appearance of the one 
as the appearance of the other. 

22. ‘The altar of wood was three 
cubits high, and the length thereof 
two cubits; and the corners thereof, 
and the length thereof, and the 
walls thereof, were of wood: and 
he said unto me, This is the table 
that is before the Lorp. 

23 4And the temple and the sanc- 
tuary had two doors. 

24 And the doors had two leaves 
apiece, two turning leaves: two 
leaves for the one door, and two 
leaves for the other door. 

25 And there were made on 
them, on the doors of the temple, 
cherubims and palm trees, like as 
were made upon the walls; and 
there were thick planks upon the 
face of the porch without. 

26 And there were narrow win- 
dows and palm trees on the one 
side and on the other side, on the 
sides of the porch, and wpon the 
side chambers of the house, and 
thick planks. 


CHAPTER 42. 


(Description of the temple, 
continued.) 


“THEN he brought me forth into 

the utter court, the way toward 
the north: and he brought me into 
the ‘chamber that was over against 
the separate place, and which was 
before the building toward the 
north. 

2 Before the length of an hundred 
Scubits was the north door, and the 
breadth was fifty cubits. 

3 Over against the twenty cubits 
which were for the inner court, and 
over against the pavement which 
was for the utter court, was gallery 
against gallery in three stories. 

4 And before the chambers was a 
walk of ten cubits breadth inward, 
a way of one cubit; and their doors 
toward the north. 

5S Now the upper chambers. were 
shorter: for the galleries were 
higher than these, than the lower, 
and than the middlemost of the 
building. 

6 For they were in three stories, 


side: 1t was made through all the — 


42.7] 


EZEKIEL. 


[43 8 


but had not pillars as the pillars of | B.C. 574.__|five hundred reeds, with the mea- 


the courts: therefore the building 
was straitened more than the low- 
est and the middlemost from the 
ground. 

7 And the wall that was without 
over against the chambers, toward 
the utter court on the forepart of 
the chambers, the length thereof 
was fifty cubits. 

8 For the length of the chambers 
that were in the utter court was 
fifty cubits: and, lo, before the tem- 
ple were an hundred cubits. 

9 And from under these chambers 
was the entry on the east side, as 
one goeth into them from the utter 
court. 

10 The chambers were in the 
thickness of the wall of the court 
toward the east, over against the 
separate place, and over against the 
building. 

11 And the way before them was 
like the appearance of the cham- 
bers which were toward the north 
as long as they, and as broad as 
they: and all their goings cut were 
both according to their fashions, 
and according to their doors. 

12 And according to the doors of 
the chambers that were toward the 
south was a door in the head of the 
way, even the way directly before 
the wall toward the east, as one 
entereth into them. 

13 Then said he unto me, The 
north chambers and the south 
chambers, which are before the 
separate place, they be holy cham- 
bers, where the priests that ap- 
proach unto the Lorp ¢shall eat 
the most holy things: there shall 
they lay the most holy things, and 
the %meat-offering, and the sin- 
offering, and the trespass-offering; 
for the place is holy. 

14 When the priests enter therein, 
then shall they not go out of the 
holy place into the utter court, but 
there they shall lay their garments 
wherein they minister; for they are 
holy; and shall put on other gar- 
ments, and shail approach to those 
things which are for the people. 

15 Now when he had made an end 
of measuring the inner house, he 
brought me forth toward the gate 
whose prospect is toward the east, 
and measured it round about. | 

16 He measured the east side with 
the measuring ‘reed, five hundred 
reeds, with the measuring reed 
round about. ) . 

17 He measured the north side, 


. 


a Lev.6.16, 
26; 24.9. 


6 Lit. meal. 
Lev.2.3,10; 


@ Ezk.11.23. 

¢ Ezk.1.24; 
Rev.1.15; 
14.2; 19.1,6. 


f Ezk.10.4; 
Rev.18 1. 


g Ezk.11.23. 


h Holy Spirit. 


Joel 2.28,29, 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


i Ezk.44.4; 
1 Ki.8.10,11, 


j See King- 


889 


suring reed round about. 

18 He measured the south side, 
five hundred reeds, with the mea- 
suring reed. 

19 He turned about to the west 
side, and measured five hundred 
reeds with the measuring reed. 

20 He measured it by the four 
sides: it had a wall round about, 
five hundred reeds long, and five 
hundred broad, to make a separa- 
tion between the sanctuary and the 
profane place. 


CHAPTER 43. 


(Description of the temple, 
continued.) 
Pe ee he brought me to 
the gate, even the gate that 
looketh toward the east: 


Vision of the glory of the Lord 
filling the temple. 


2 ¢And, behold, the glory of the 


* 1God of Israel came from the way of 


the east: and “his voice was like a 
noise of many waters: fand the 
earth shined with his glory. 

3 And it was according to the ap- 
pearance of the vision which I saw, 
even according to the vision that I 
saw when I came to destroy the 
city: and the visions were like the 
vision that I saw by the river Che- 
bar; and I fell upon my face. 

4 And the glory of the Lorp 
came into the house by the way of 
the gate whose prospect is towar¢ 
the east. 

5 So the “spirit took me up, and 
brought me into the inner court; 
and, behold, ‘the glory of the LorD 


2: \filled the house. 


6 And I heard Aim speaking unto 


<1. |me out of the house; and the man 
*Istood by me. 


The place of the throne of the 
future kingdom. 


7 And he said unto me, Son of 
man, the Jplace of my throne, and 
the place of the soles of my feet, 
where I will dwell in the midst of 
the children of Israel for ever, and” 
my holy name, shall the house of 
Israel no more defile, neither they, 
nor their kings, by their whoredom, 
nor by the carcases of their kings 
in their high places. 

8. In their setting of their thresh- 
old by my thresholds, and their 
post by my posts, and the wall be- 
tween me and them, they have even 


43 9] 


defiled my holy name by their 
abominations that they have com- 
mitted: wherefore I have consumed 
them in mine anger. ; 

9 Now let them put away their 
whoredom, and the carcases of 
their kings, far from me, and I will 
dwell in the midst of them for ever. 

10 Thou son of man, shew the 
house to the house of Israel, that 
they may be ashamed of their in- 


iquities: and let them measure the} ° 


pattern. 

11 And if they be ashamed of all 
that they have done, shew them the 
form of the house, and the fashion 
thereof, and the goings out thereof, 
and the comings in thereof, and all 
the forms thereof, and all the ordi- 
nances thereof, and all the forms 
thereof, and all the laws thereof: 
and write it in their sight, that they 
may keep the whole form thereof, 
and all the ordinances thereof, and 
do them. 

12 This zs the Jaw of the house; 
Upon the top of the mountain the’ 
whole limit thereof round about 
shall be most holy. Behold, this is 
the law of the house. 


The measure of the altar. 


13 And these are the measures of 
the altar after the “cubits: The cu- 
bit is a cubit and an hand breadth; 
even the bottom shali be a cubit, 
and the breadth a cubit, and the 
border thereof by the edge thereof 
round about shall be a span: and 
this shall be the higher place of the 
altar, 

14 And from the bottom upon 
the ground even to the lower set- 


15 So the altar shall be four cu- 
bits; and from the altar and up- 
ward shall be four horns. 

16 And the altar shall be twelve 
cubits long, twelve broad, square 
in the four squares thereof. 

17 And the settle shall be four- 
teen cubits long and fourteen 
broad in the four squares thereof; 
and the border about it shall be 
half a cubit; and the bottom thereof 
shall be a cubit about; and his 
stairs shall look toward the east. 


1 Doubtless these offerings will 


offerings under the old covenant were 
neither case have animal sacrifices po 


EZEKIEL. 


a One cubit = 
18 in.; also 
vs.14-17, 


6 One span = 
about 9 in. 


c Lev.1.5. 

d Ezk.44.15, 

e Ezk.45.18, 
19; Ex.29. 
10,12; Lev.8. 
14,15. 

f Ex.29.14, 

g Heb.13.11. 

h Lev.2.13. 


t Ex.29.35,36; 
Lev.8.33. 


j Lev.9.1. 


890 


(44 


18 And he said unto me, Son of 
man, thus saith the Lord Gop; 
These are the ordinances of the 
altar in the day when they shall 
make it, to offer burnt-offerings 
thereon, and to ‘sprinkle blood 
thereon. 


The offerings. 


19 1And thou shalt give to the 
dpriests the Levites that be of the 
seed of Zadok, which approach unto 
me, to minister unto me, saith the 
Lord Gop, a ‘young bullock for a 
sin-offering. 

20 And thou shalt take of the 
blood thereof, and put it on the 
four horns of it, and on the four 
corners of the settle, and upon the 
border round about: thus shalt thou 
cleanse and purge it. 

21 Thou shalt take the bullock 
also of the sin-offering, and he /shall 
burn it in the appointed place of the 
house, &without the sanctuary. 

22 And on the second day thou 
shalt offer a kid of the goats with- 
out blemish for a sin-offering; and 
they shall cleanse the altar, as they 
did cleanse it with the bullock. 

23 When thou hast made an end 
of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a 
young bullock without blemish, and 
a ram out of the flock without 
blemish. 

24 And thou shalt offer them be- 
fore the LorD, “and the priests shall 
cast salt upon them, and they shall 
offer them up for a burnt-offering 
unto the Lorpb. 

25 ‘Seven days shalt thou pre- 
pare every day a goat for a sin- 
offering: they shall also prepare a 
young bullock, and a ram out of 
the flock, without blemish. 

26 Seven days shall they purge 
the altar and purify it; and they 
shall consecrate themselves. 

27 JAnd when these days are ex- 
pired, it shall be, that upon the 
eighth day, and so forward, the 
priests shall make your burnt-offer- 
ings upon the altar, and your peace- 
offerings; and I will accept you, 
saith the Lord Gop. 


CHAPTER 44, 
The gate for the prince. 


(THEN he brought me back the 
way of the gate of the outward 


bi 


be memorial, looking Lack to the cross, as the 
anticipatory, looking forward to the cross, In 
wer to put away sin (Heb. 10, 4; Rom, 3. 25). 


44 2] 


sanctuary which looketh toward 
the east; and it was shut, 

2 Then said the Lorp unto me; 
This gate shall be shut, it shall not 
be opened, and no man shall enter 
in by it; because the LorpD, the God 
of Israél, hath entered in by it, 
therefore it shall be shut. 

3 It is for the prince; the prince, 
he shall sit in it to ¢eat bread before 
the Lorp; “he shall enter by the 
way of the porch of that gate, and 
shall go out by the way of the same. 


The glory filis the house. 


4 Then brought he me the way of 
the north gate before the house: 
and I looked, and, behold. ‘the glory 
of the Lorp filled the house of the 
Lorp: and I fell upon my face. 

5 And the Lorp said unto me, 
Son of man, mark well, and behold 
with thine eyes, and hear with thine 
ears all that I say unto thee con- 
cerning all the ordinances of the 
house of the LorD, and all the laws 
thereof; and mark well the entering 
in of the house, with every going 
forth of the sanctuary. 

6 And thou shalt say to the rebel- 
lious, even to the house of Israel, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop; O ye 
house of Israel, @let it suffice you of 
all your abominations, 

7 Im that ¢ye have brought into 
my sanctuary strangers, uncir- 
cumcised in heart, and uncircum- 
cised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, 
to pollute it, even my house, when 
ye offer my bread, the fat and the 
blood, and they have broken my 
covenant because of all your abom- 
inations. 

8 And ye have not kept the charge 

of mine holy things: but ye have 
set keepers of my charge in my 
sanctuary for yourselves. 


The priests of the future temple. 


9 Thus saith the Lord Gop; No 
stranger, uncircumcised in heart, 
nor -uncircumcised in flesh, shall 
enter into my sanctuary, of any 
stranger that is among the children 
of Israel. 

10 fAnd the Levites that are gone 
away far from me, when Israel went 
astray, which went astray away 
from me after their idols; they shall 
even bear their iniquity. 

11 Yet they shall be ministers in 
my sanctuary, having charge at the 
gates of the house, and ministering 
to the house: they shall slay the 


purnt-offering and the sacrifice for’ 


EZEKIEL. 


a Gen.31.54; 
1 Cor.10.18. 


6 Ezk.46.2,8. 
¢ Ezk.3.23; 
4 


d Ezk.45.9; 
1 Pet.4.3. 


ev.9; 
Ezk.43.8; 
Acts 21.28. 


f See 2 Ki. 
23.8; 2 Chr. 
29.4,5. 


g Psa.106.26. 


h Num.18.3; 
2 Ki.23.9. 


¢ Num.18.4; 
1 Chr.23.28, 


8.17; 15. 
24-29; 20.25. 


k Deut.10.8. 


1 Ex.28.39, 
40,43; 39. 

m Ex.28.40,42; 
39.28. “ 


n Ezk.46.20; 
Lev.6.27; 
Mt.23.17,19. 


o Lev.21.7, 
13,14. 


891 


[44 22 


the people, and they shall stand be- 
fore them to minister unto them. 

12 Because they ministered unto 
them before their idols, and caused 
the house of Israel to fall into in- 
iquity; therefore have I 4lifted up 
mine hand against them, saith the 
Lord Gop, and they shail bear their 
iniquity. 

13. #And they shall not come near 
unto me, to do the office of a priest 
unto me, nor to come near to any 
of my holy things, in the most holy 
place: but they shall bear their 
shame, and their abominations 
which they have committed. 

14 But I will make them ‘keepers 

of the charge of the house, for all 
the service thereof, and for all that 
shall be done therein. 
15 But the priests the Levites, the 
jsons of Zadok, that kept the charge 
of my sanctuary when the children 
of Israel went astray from me, they 
shall come near to me to minister 
unto me, and they “shall stand be- 
fore me to offer unto me the fat and 
the blood, saith the Lord Gop: 

16 They shall enter into my sanc- 
tuary, and they shall come near to 
my table, to minister unto me, and 
they shall keep my charge. 

17 And it shall come to pass, that 
when they enter in at the gates of 
the inner court, ‘they shall be 
clothed with linen garments; and 
no wool shall come upon them, 
whiles they minister in the gates of 
the inner court, and within. 

18 ™They shall have linen bonnets 
upon their heads, and shall have 
linen breeches upon their loins; 
they shall not gird themselves with 
any thing that causeth sweat. 

19 And when they go forth into 
the utter court, even into the utter 
court to the people, they shall put 
off their garments wherein they 
ministered, and lay them in the 
holy chambers, and they shall put 
on other garments; and they shall 
mnot sanctify the people with their 
garments. 

20 Neither shall they shave their 
heads, nor suffer their locks to grow 
long; they shall only poll their 
heads. 

21 Neither shall any priest drink 
wine, when they enter into the 
inner court. 

22 Neither shall they take for their 
wives a widow, nor her that is put 
away: but they shall take maidens 
of the seed of the house of Israel, or 
a widow that had a priest before. 


44 23] 


23 And “they shall teach my peo- 
ple the difference between the 
holy and profane, and cause them 
to discern between the unclean and 
the clean. 

24 And in ’controversy they shall 
stand in judgment; and they shall 
judge it according to my judgments:| 
and they shall keep my laws and 
my statutes in all mine assemblies;| 
and they shall hallow my sabbaths.| 

25 And they shall come at no dead, 
person to defile themselves: but for 
father, or for mother, or for son, or 
for daughter, for brother, or for 
sister that hath had no husband, 
they may defile themselves. 

26 And after he is cleansed, they 
shall reckon unto him seven days. 

27 And in the day that he goeth 
into the sanctuary, unto the inner' 
court, to minister in the sanctuary, 
he shall offer his sin-offering, saith 
the Lord Gop. 

28 And it shall be unto them for 
an inheritance: “I am their in- 
heritance: and ye shall give them 
no possession in Israel: I am their 
possession. 

29 They shall eat the ¢meat-offer- 
ing, and the sin-offering, and the 
trespass-offering; and every dedi- 
cated thing in Israel shall be 
their’s. 

30 “And the first of all the first- 
fruits of all things, and every obla- 
tion of all, of every sort of your 
oblations, shall be the priest’s: ye 
shall also give unto the priest the 
first of your dough, that he may 
cause the blessing to rest in thine 
house. 

31 The priests shall not eat of any 
thing that is dead of itself, or torn, 
whether it be fowl or beast. 


CHAPTER 45. 
The Lord’s portion of the land. 


MICREOVER, when ye shall di- 
vide by lot the land for inheri- 
ye shall offer an oblation 


3 And of this measure shalt thou 


EZEKIEL. 


[45 13 


measure the length of five and 
twenty thousand, and the breadth 
of ten thousand: and in it shall be 
the sanctuary and the most holy 


| place. 


4 The holy portion of the land 
shall be for the priests the ministers 
of the sanctuary, which shall come 
near to minister unto the Lorn: 


land it shall be a place for their 


houses, and an holy place for the 


jsanctuary. 


a Ezk.22.26; 
Lev.10.10, 
11; Mal.2.7. 


6 Deut.17:8; 
2 Chr.19.8, 
10. 


c Num.18.20; 
Deut.10:9; 
18.1,2; 
Josh.-13-14,;33. 

d Lit.. meal. 


e Ex.13.2; 
Num.3.13. 


f One cubit = 
about 18 in. 


g One ephah 
=1bu.3 
pts.; also vs. 


3 And the five and twenty thou- 


jsand of length, and the ten thou- 


sand of breadth, shall also the 
Levites, the ministers of the house, 
have for themselves, for a posses- 
sion for twenty chambers. 

6 And ye shall appoint the posses- 
sion of the city five thousand ‘bread, 
and five and twenty thousand jong, 
over against the oblation of the 
holy portion: it shall be for the 
whole house of Israel. 


The portion-for the prince. 

7 And a portion shall be for the 
prince on the one side and on the 
other side of the oblation of the 
holy portion, and of the possession 
of the city, before the oblation of 


10,11,13,24. 


h One bath = 
about 8 gals.;| 
also vs.11,14. 


# One homer 
= about 86 
gals.; also 
vs.11,14. 


j One shekel 
= 2s..9d.,.or 
65 cts. 


k One gerah = 
11.2 grains. 


7 One maneh - 
= one sixti- 
eth of a tal- 
ent. 


the holy portion, and before the 
possession of the city, from the 
west side westward, and from the 
east side eastward: and the length 
shall be over against one of the 
portions, from the west border unto 
the east border. 

8 In the fand shall be his posses- 
sion in Israel: aad my princes shall 


jmo more oppress my people; and 


the rest of the land shall they give 


|to the house of Israel according to 


their tribes. 
§ Thus saith the Lord Gop; Let 


|it suffice you, © princes of Israel: 


remove violence and spoil, and exe- 


jcute judgment and justice, take 


away your exactions from my peo- 
‘ple, saith the Lord Gop. 

10 Ye shall have just balances, 
anda just Sephah, and a just “bath. 

11 The ephah and the bath shall 
be of one measure, that the bath 
may contain the tenth part of an 
*homer, andthe ephah the tenth part 
‘of an homer: the measure thereof 
shall be after the homer. 

12 And the Jshekel shall be 
twenty *gerahs: twenty shekels, five 
and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, 
shall be your ‘maneh. 

13 This is the oblation that ye 
shall offer; the sixth part of an 
‘ephah of an ‘homer of wheat, and 


45 14] 


ye shall give the sixth part of an 
ephah of an homer of barley: 

14 Concerning the ordinance of 
oil, the bath of oil, ye shall offer 
the tenth part of a bath out of the 
2cor, which is an homer of ten 
baths; for ten baths are an homer: 

15 And one lamb out of the flock, 
out of two hundred, out of the fat 
pastures of Israel; for a meat- 
offering, and for a burnt-offering, 
and for peace-offerings, to make 
‘reconciliation for them, saith the 
Lord Gob. 

16 All the people of the land shall 
give this oblation for the prince in 
Israel. 

17 Andit shall be the prince’s part 
to sive burnt-offerings, and meat- 
offerings, and drink-offerings, in the 


feasts, and in the new moons, and|, 


in the sabbaths, in all solemnities 
of the house of Israel: he shall pre- 
pare the sin-offering, and the meat- 
offering, and the burnt-offering, and 
the peace-offerings, to make ‘recon- 
ciliation for the house. of Israel. 

18 Thus saith the Lord Gop; In 
the “first month, in the first day 
of the month, thou shalt take a 
young bullock without blemish, and 
cleanse the sanctuary: ; 


19. And the priest shall take of the| 


blood of the sin-offering, and put it 
upon the posts of the house, and 
upon the four corners: of the settle 


of the altar, and upon the posts of| 


the gate of the inner court. 


20 And. so thou shalt do the sev-| 


enth day of the month for every 
one that erreth, and for him that 
ts simple: so shall ye ‘reconcile the 
house. 

21 ‘Im the first month, in the 


fourteenth day of the month, ye} 


shall have the passover, a feast of 
seven days; unleavened bread shall 
be eaten. 


22 And upon that day shall the} 
prince prepare for himself and for| 
all the people of the land’ a /bullock| 


for a sin-offering. 
23 And seven days of the feast he 


shall prepare a burnt-offering to the} 


Lorp, seven bullocks and seven 


rams without blemish daily the} 
seven days; and a kid of the goats} 


daily for a sin-offering. 

24 And he shall prepare a “meat- 
offering of an Sephah for a bullock, 
and an ephah for aram, and an "him 
of oil for an ephah. 

25 In the ‘seventh month, in the 
fifteenth day of the month, shall he 
do the like in the feast of the seven 


EZEKIEL. 


a One cor = 
about 86 


di.e. April; 
also v.21.» 


e Ex.12.18; 
Num.9.2,3; 
| 28.16,17; 
Deut.16.1. 


| f Lev.4.14. 


One ephah 
= 1 bu. 3. 
| pts.; also 

| Ezk.46.5,7, 
11,14. 


hk 1 hin = 
about 6 qts. 


ii.e. October. 


1g 


893 


[46 10 


days, according to the sin-offer- 
ing, according to the burnt-offering, 
and according to the "meat-offering, 
and according to the oil. 


CHAPTER 46. 


The worship of the prince and 
the people. 


HUS saith the Lord Gop; The 
gate of the inmer court that 
looketh toward the east shall be 
shut the six working days; but on 
the sabbath it shall be opened, and 
in the day of the new moon it shalh 
be opened. 

2 And the prince shall enter by the 
way of the porch of that gate with- 
out, and shall stand by the post of 
the gate, and the priests shall pre- 
pare his burnt-offering and his 
peace-offerings, and he shall wor- 
ship at the threshold of the gate: 
then he shall go forth; but the gate 
shall not be shut until the evening. 

3 Likewise the people of the land 
shall worship at the door of this 
gate before the Lorp in the sab- 
baths and in the new moons. 

4 And the burnt-offering that the 
prince shall offer unto the LorD in 
the sabbath day shall be six lambs 
without blemish, and a ram without 
blemish. 

5 And the ’meat-offering shall be 
an ephah for a ram, and the meat- 
offering for the lambs as he shall be 
lable to give, and an “hin of oil to an 


ephah. 

6 And in the day of the new moon 
it shall be a young bullock without 
Iblemish, and six lambs, and a ram 
they shall be without blemish. 

7 And he shall prepare a ’meat- 


lephah. 
| 8 And when the prince shall en- 
ter, he shall go in by the way of the 
porch of that gate, and he shall go 
forth by the way thereof. 
_9 But when the people of the land 
shall come before the LorD in the 
solemn feasts, he that entereth in 
by the way of the north gate to 
worship shall go out by the way of 
the south gate; and he that entereth 
by the way of the south gate shall 
go forth by the way of the north 
gate: he shall not return by the 
way of the gate whereby he came 
in, but shall go forth over against it. 
10 And the prince in the midst of 


them, when they go in, shall go in; 
and when they go forth, shall go 
forth. i ; 

11 And in the feasts and in the 
solemnities the ¢meat-offering shall 
be an ephah to a bullock, and an 
ephah to a ram, and to the lambs 
as he is able to give, and an ®hin 
of oil to an ephah. 

12 Now when the prince shall pre- 
pare a voluntary burnt-offering or 
peace-offerings voluntarily unto the 
Lorp, one shall then open him the 
gate that looketh toward thé east, 
and he shall prepare his burnt-offer- 
ing and his peace-offerings, as he 
did on the sabbath day: then he 
shall go forth; and after his going 
forth one shall shut the gate. 

13 Thou shalt daily prepare a 
burnt-offering unto the LorD of a 
lamb of the first year without blem- 
ish: thou shalt prepare it every 
morning. 

14 And thou shalt prepare a 
“meat-offering for it every morning, 
the sixth part of an ephah, and the 
third part of an ¢hin of oil, to tem- 
per with the fine flour; a meat- 
offering continually by a perpetual 
ordinance unto the Lorp. 

15 Thus shall they prepare the 
lamb, and the ¢meat-offering, and 
the oil, every morning for a con- 
tinual burnt-offering. 

16 Thus saith the Lord Gop; If 
the prince give a gift unto any of 
his sons, the inheritance thereof 
shall be his sons’; it shal/ be their 
possession by inheritance. 

17 But if he give a gift of his in- 
heritance to one of his servants, 
then it shall be his to ‘the year of 
liberty; after it shall return to the 
prince: but his inheritance shall be 
his sons’ for them. 

18 Moreover “the prince shall not 
take of the people’s inheritance by 
oppression, to thrust them out of 
their possession; but he shall give 
his sons inheritance out of his own 
possession: that my people be not 
scattered every man from his pos- 
session. 


The place for boiling the 
offerings. 


19 After he brought me through 
the entry, which was at the side of 
the gate, into the holy chambers 
of the priests, which looked toward 
the north: and, behold, there was a 
place on the two sides westward, 

20 Then said he unto me, This is 
the place where: the priests shall 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 574. 


a Lit. meal. 
6 One hin = 


about 6 gts. 


¢ Lev.25.10. 
d Ezk.45.8. 


e 2 Chr.35.13. 


f Lev.2.4,5,7. 

g Joel 3.18; 
Zech.13.1; 
14.8; Rev. 
22:14 

h Ezk.40.3. 


# One cubit = 


about 18 in. 


894 


‘boil the trespass-offering and the © 
sin-offering, where they shall fbake 
the “meat-offering; that they bear — 
them not out into the utter court, 
to sanctify the people. 

21 Then he brought me forth into 
the utter court, and caused me to 
pass by the four corners of the 
court; and, behold, in every corner 
of the court there was a court. 

22 Inthe four corners of the court 
there were courts joined of forty 
cubits long and thirty broad: these 
four corners were of one measure. 

23 And there was a row of 
building round about in them, 
round about them four, and it was 
made with boiling places under the 
rows round about. 

24 Then said he unto me, These 
are the places of them that boil, 
where the ministers of the house 
shall boil the sacrifice of the people. 


CHAPTER 47. 


The river of the sanctuary. (Cf. 
Zech. 14. 8, 9; Rev. 22.1, 2.) 


AFIERWARD he brought me 
again unto the door of the 


‘|house; and, behold, swaters issued 


out from under the threshold of the 
house eastward: for the forefront 
of the house stood toward the east, 
and the waters came down from 
under from the right side of the 
house, at the south side of the 
altar. 

2 Then brought he me out of the 
way of the gate northward, and led 
me about the way without unto the 
utter gate by the way that looketh 
eastward; and, behold, there ran 
out waters on the right side, 

3 And when ‘the man that had ° 
the line in his hand went forth 
eastward, he measured a thousand 
‘cubits, and he brought me through 
the waters; the waters were to the 
ankles. 1 

4 Again he measured a thousand, 
and brought me through the wa- 
ters; the waters were to the knees. 
Again he measured a thousand, and 
brought me through; the waters 
were to the loins. 

5 Afterward he measured a thou- 
sand; and it was a river that I 
could not pass over: for the waters 
were risen, waters to swim in, a 
Tiver that could not be passed over. 

6 And he said unto me, Son of 
man, hast thou seen this? Then 
he brought me, and caused me to 
return to the brink of the river, 


_ 


47 7) 


7 Now when I had returned, be- 
hold, at the bank of the river were 
very many “trees on the one side 
and on the other. 

8 Then said he unto me, These 
waters issue out toward the east 
country, and go down into the des- 
ert, and go into the sea: which 
being brought forth into the sea, 
the waters shall be healed.’ 

9 And it shall come to pass, that 
every thing that liveth, which mov- 
eth, whithersoever the “rivers shali 
come, shail live: and there shall be 
a very great multitude of fish, be- 
cause these waters shall come 
thither: for they shall be healed; 
and every thing shall live whither 
the river cometh. 

10 And it shall come to pass, that 
the fishers shall stand upon it from 
En-gedi even unto En-eglaim; they 
shall be a place to spread forth 
nets: their fish shall be according 
to their kinds, as the fish ‘of the 
great sea, exceeding many- 

11 But the miry places thereof 
and the marishes thereof shall not be 
healed; they shall be given to salt. 

12 And by the river upon the 
bank thereof, on this side and on 
that side, shall grow all trees for 
meat, ¢whose leaf shall not fade, 
neither shall the fruit thereof be 
consumed: it shall bring forth new 
fruit according to his months, be- 
eause their waters they issued out 
of the sanctuary: and the fruit 
thereof shall be for meat, and the 
leaf thereof for medicine. 


The borders of the land. 
(Cf. Gen. 15. 18-21.) 


_.13 Thus saith the Lord Gop; This 
shall be the border, whereby ye 
shall inherit the land according to 
the twelve tribes of Israel: ‘Joseph 
shall have two portions. 

14 And ye shall inherit it, one as 
well as another: concerning the 
which I /flifted up mine hand to 
give it unto your fathers: and this 
land shall fall unto you for inheri- 
tance. 

15 And this shall be the border 
of the land toward the north side, 
from the great sea, 8the way of 
Hethion, as men go to *Zedad; 

16 “Hamath, ‘Berothah, Sibraim, 
which is between the border of Da- 
mascus and the border of Hamath; 
Hazar-hatticon, which is by the 
coast of Hauran. ; 

17 And the border from the sea 
shall be “Hazar-enan, the border of 


EZEKIEL. 


av.12; Rev. 
22,2 


b Heb. two 
rivers. 


c Ezk.48.28; 
Num.34.6; 
Josh.23.4. 


d Job 8.16; 
Psa..3; 
Jer.17.8. 


e Ezk.48.4,5; 
Gen.48.5; 
1 Chr.5.1. 


f Ezk.20.5,6, 
28,42; Gen. 
12°7;,13-15; 
TS ais" 0728; 
26.3; 28.13. 


g Ezk.48.1. 
h Num.34.8. 
1 2 Sam.8.8. 


j Ezk.48.1; 
Num.34.9. 


k Ezk.48.28; 
Num.20.13; 
Deut.32.51; 
Psa.81.7. 


1 Cf. Eph.3.6; 
Rev.7.9,10. 


m Rom.10.12; 
Gal.3.28; 
Col.3.11. 


n Ezk.47.15. 


895 


[48 7 


Damascus, and the north north- 
ward, and the border of Hamath. 
And this is the north side. 

18 And the east side ye shall mea- 
sure fromm Hauran, and from Da- 
mascus, and from Gilead, and from 
the land of Israel by Jordan, from 
the border unto the east sea. And 
this is the east side. 

19 And the south side southward, 
from Tamar even to *the waters of 
strife 1n Kadesh, the river to the 
great sea. And this is the south 
side southward. 

20 The west side also shall be the 
great sea from the border, till a 
man come over against Hamath. 
This is the west side. 

21 Soshall ye divide this land unto 
you according to the tribes of Israel. 

22 And it shall come to pass, that 
ye shall divide it by lot for an in- 
heritance unto you, ‘and to the 
strangers that sojourn among you, 
which shall beget children among 
you: and they shall be unto you 
as born in the country among the 
\children of Israel; they shall have 
inheritance with you among the 
tribes of Israel. 

23 And it shall come to pass, that 
in what tribe the stranger sojourn- 
eth, there shall ye give him his in- 
heritance, saith the Lord Gob. 


CHAPTER 48. 


The division of the land. 
(Cf, Josh. 13. 1-19. 51.) 


Ne these are the names of the 
tribes. “From the north end 
to the coast of the way of Hethlon, 
as one goeth to Hamath, Hazar- 
enan, the border of Damascus 
northward, to the coast of Hamath; 
for these are his sides east and 
west; a portion for Dan. 

2 And by the border of Dan, from 
the east side unto the west side, a 
portion for Asher. 

3 And by the border of Asher, 
from the east side even unto the 
west side, a portion for Naphtali. 

4 And by the border of Naphtali, 
from the east side unto the west 
side, a portion for Manasseh. ‘ 

5 And by the border of Manasseh, 
from the east side unto the west 
side, a portion for Ephraim. 

6 And by the border of Ephraim, 
from the east side even unto the 
west side, a portion for Reuben. 

7 And by the border of Reuben, 
from the east side unto the west 
side, a portion for Judah. 


8 And by the. border of Judah, 
from the east side unto the west 
side, shall be ¢the offering which ye 
‘shall offer of five and twenty thou- 
sand reeds in breadth, and in 
length as one of the other parts, 
from the east side unto the west 
side: and the sanctuary shall be in 
the midst of it. 

9 The oblation that ye shall offer 
unto the LORD shall be of five and 
twenty thousand in length, and of 
ten thousand in breadth. | 


For the priests and Levites. 


10 And for them, even for the} 
priests, shall be this holy oblation; 
toward the north five and twenty 
thousand in length, and toward 
the west ten thousand in breadth, 
and toward the east ten thousand in 
breadth, and toward the south five 
and twenty thousand in length: 
and the sanctuary of the Lorp 
shall be in the midst thereof, 

11 °It shall be for the priests that 
are sanctified of the sons of Zadok; 
which have kept my charge, which 
went not astray when the children 
of Israel went astray, “as the Le- 
vites went astray. 


12 And this oblation of the land 
that is offered shall be unto them a 
thing most holy by the border of 
the Levites. 

13 And over against the border of 
the priests the Levites shali have 
five and twenty thousand in length, 
and ten thousand in breadth: all 
the length shail be five and twenty 
thousand, and the breadth ten 
thousand. 

14 4And they shall not sell of it, 
neither exchange, nor alienate the 
firstfruits of the land: for it is holy 
unto the Lorp. 

15 And the five thousand, that 
are left in the breadth over against 
the five and twenty thousand, shall 
be a “profane place for the city, for 
dwelling, and for suburbs: and the 
city shall be in the midst thereof. 

16 And these shail be the mes- 
sures thereof; the north side four 
thousand and five hundred, and the 
south side four thousand and five 
hundred, and on the east side four 
thousand and five hundred, and the 
west side four thousand and five 
hundred. 

17 And the suburbs of the city 
shall be toward the north two hun- 
dred and fifty, and toward the 
south two hundred and fifty, and 
toward the east two hundred and 


EZEKIEL. 


a Ezk.45.1-6. 
6 Ezk.44.15. 
c Ezk.44.10. 
d Lev.27.10, 


e Ezk.42.20. 
f Ezk.45.7. 
g vs.8,10. 


h Heb. one 
portion. 


# Ezk.47.19. 
j Heb. Meri- 


bah-Kadesh. 


k Ezk.47.14, 
2. 


B96 


fifty, and toward the west two hun- 
dred and fifty. 

18 And the residue in length over 
against the oblation of the holy 
portion shall be ten thousand 
jeastward, and ten thousand west- 
ward: and it shall be over against 
the oblation of the holy portion; 
and the increase thereof shall be for 
food unto them that serve the city. 

19 And they that serve the city 
shall serve it out of all the tribes of 
Israel. 

20 All the oblation shall be five 
and twenty thousand by five and 
twenty thousand: ye shall offer the 
holy oblation foursquare, with the 
possession of the city. 


The portion for the prince. 
21 fAnd the residue shail be for 


the other of the holy oblation, and. 
of the possession of the city, over 
against the five and twenty thou- 
sand of the oblation toward the 
east border, and westward over 
against the five and twenty thou- 


against the portions for the prince: 
and it shall be the holy oblation;: 
Sand the sanctuary of the house 
shall be in the midst thereof. 

22 Moreover from the possession 
of the Levites, and from the pos- 
session of the city, being in the 
midst of that which is the prince’s, 
between the border of Judah and 
the border of Benjamin, shall be for 
the prince. 

23 As for the rest of the tribes, 
from the east side unto the west 
ade Benjamin shall have a ‘por- 

ion. 

24 And by the border of Benja- 
min, from the east side unto the west 
side, Simeon shai] have a portion. 

25 And by the border of Simeon, 
from the east side unto the west 
side, Issachar a portion. 

26 And by the border of Issachar, 
from the éast side unto the west 
side, Zebulun a portion. 

27 And by the border of Zebulun, 
from the east side unto the west 
side, Gad a portion. 

28 And by the border of Gad, at 
the south side southward, the bor- 
der shall be even from Tamar unto 
the ‘waters of Jstrife in Kadesh, and 
to the river toward- the great sea. 

29 &This is the land which ye shall 
divide by lot unto the tribes of Is- 
rael for inheritance, and these are 
their portions, saith the Lord Gop. 


[48 29. 


the prince, on the one side and on | 


sand toward the west border, over _ 


48 30] 


The city and its gates. 
(Cf. Rev. 21. 10-27.) 


30 And these are the goings out 
of the city on the north side, four 
thousand and five hundred mea- 
sures. 

31 2And the gates. of the city 
shall be after the names of the 
tribes. of Israel: three gates north- 
ward; one gate of Reuben, one gate 
of Judah, one gate of Levi. 

32 And at the east side four thou- 


sand and five hundred: and three} 


gates; and one gate of Joseph, 


EZEKIEL. 


B.C. 574. 


a Rev.21.12. 


b Heb. Jeho- 
vah-sham- 
mah. See 
Ex.17.15; 
Jud.6.24. 


6 Jer.3.17; 
Joel 3.21; 
Zech.2.10; 
Rev.21.3; 
2203s 


bo7 


[48 35 


one gate of Benjamin, one gate of 
Dan. 

33 And at the south side four 
thousand and five hundred mea- 
sures: and three gates; one gate of 


‘Simeon, .one gate of Issachar, one 


gate of Zebulun. 

34 Atthe west side four thousand 
land five hundred, with their three 
gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of 
Asher, one gate of Naphtali. 

35 It was round about eighteen 
thousand measures: Yand the 
name of the city from that day 


shall be, “The Lorp is there. 


‘THE BOOK OF DANIEL. "* 


DANIEL, like Ezekiel, was a Jewish captive in Babylon. He was of royal or princely 
descent (1. 3). For his rank and comeliness he was trained for palace service. In 
the polluted atmosphere of an oriental court he lived a life of singular piety and 
usefulness. His long life extended from Nebuchadnezzar to Cyrus. He was a con- 
temporary of Jeremiah, Ezekiel (14. 20), Joshua, the high priest of the restoration, 
Ezra, and Zerubbabel. a 

Daniel is the indispensable introduction to New Testament prophecy, the themes 
of which are, the apostasy of the Church, the manifestation of the man of sin, the 
great tribulation, the return of the Lord, the resurrections and the judgments. 
These, except the first, are Daniel’s themes also. 

But Daniel is distinctively the prophet of the “times of the Gentiles” (Lk. 21. 
24, refs.). His vision sweeps the whole course of Gentile world-rule to its end in 
catastrophe, and to the setting up of the Messianic kingdom. 

Daniel is in four broad divisions: I. Introduction. The personal history of 
Daniel from the conquest of Jerusalem to the second year of N ebuchadnezzar, 1. 1- 
21. II. The visions of Nebuchadnezzar and their results, 2. 1-4. 37. III. The per- 
sonal history of Daniel under Belshazzar and Darius, 5. 1-6. 28. IV. The visions of 
Daniel, 7. 1-12. 13. 

The events recorded in Daniel cover a period of 73 years (Ussher). 


B.C. 607. 7 Unto whom the prince of the 

CHAPTER 1. eunuchs gave names: for he gave 

Part I. Introduction: the per- unto Daniel the name of “Belte- 
sonal history of Daniel (vs. 1-21). shazzar; and to Hananiah, of Sha- 


; : a 2 Ki.24.1,2; |drach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; 
IX me ea yee of ie rele of ae and ~ Azariah, of Abed-nego. 
TRS eeree ae a Babion pases hee het co ee eas 
unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. ere self with the portion of the king’s 
King of Judah wero hie Bean Bestel Grant therclore ie tone 
part of the ‘vessels of the house of|? Dan.5.1-3; prince of the eunuchs that he might 


God: which he carried into the land a yeton not defile himself. 

of Shinar to the house of his god;| 19,20. .9 Now God had fbrought Daniel 
and he brought the vessels into the eee el into favour and tender love with 
treasure house of his god. 2 Ki.20.18; |the prince of the eunuchs. 

3 eid the king spake unto bi Isa.39.7. 10 And the prince of the eunuchs 
that he should bring certain of the|“4s,the (guid. Unto Daniel, I a ae 
children of Israel, and of the ‘king’s| Zeader,or /|meat and your drink: for why 
seed, and of the princes; Daves should he see your faces éworse 


_4 Children in whom was no blem- 4.8,9,18,19; |liking than the children which are 
ish, but well favoured, and skilful in 5.12. Iden- jof your sort? then shall ye make 
all wisdom, and cunning in know-| tical in me endanger my head to the king. 


ledge, and understanding science, ok 11 Then said Daniel to Melzar, 
and such as had ability in them to] shazzar. whom the prince of the eunuchs 


stand in the king’s palace, and had set over Dani i 
whom they might teach the learning RNa * |Mishael, and Aeenaee anemia, 
an a coe of the ee 10.21. 12 Prove thy servants, I beseech 
daily provision of tee Renee mene [/Genapay |i, ten days: and let them give 
and of the wine which he drank.| A710 [US Pulse to eat, and uitcna cae 
a the : k nm let our countenances be 
. Nate eS three years,|£Or, sadder. |}ooked upon before thee, and the 
: ae ne pad thereof they might countenance of the children that 
fe Now aes ee were of the aN os ee ee a ee foes 
: { meat: and as thou seest, deal wi 
children of Judah, Daniel, Hana- thy servants. ye 


niah, Mishael, and Azariah: 14 So he consented to them in 


898 


1 15] DANIEL. 7 [2 10 


this matter, and proved them ten| B.c. 606. _jcall the magicians, and the astrolo- 


days. gers, and the sorcerers, and the 
15 And at the end of ten days eChaldea s, for to she ; i 
their countenances appeared fairer his dveaanss “So Nebey ed nae 
and fatter in flesh than all the chil- stood before the king. 
S pateneeers eat the portion of Ei ue es oe sa unto them, 
eat. ave dream: 
16 Thus Melzar took away the spirit was cratibied Conta the 
portion of their meat, and the wine dream. 
ahs a should drink; and gave } _ Ee sense the Chaldeans to 
pulse. i i i 
17 As for these four children, God | ea ea fon net CE ning sores oaiea es 
ee ere oaa| ic? \\prseseec hua saab aoe 
! - E as.1.5-7. pretation. 
Daniel had understanding in all weet 5 The king answered and said to 
visions anti dreams. hire the Chaldeans, The thing is gone 


18 Now at the end of the days|c Heb. wisdom from me: if ye will not make known 
that the king had said he should pe unto me the dream, with the inter- 
pete ee 2 sri ae Aes of ot pretation eae oe shall be cut in 

e eunuchs broug em in before|d ice. t the |pieces, an 
Nebuchadnezzar. ; return of the madd a dinehills Sain Mada 

19 And the king communed with| JuGan at the | 6 But if ye shew the dream, and 
them; and among them all was] end of the 70 the interpretation thereof, ye shall 
found. none like Daniel, Hananiah,| Ye4r> Orr receive of me gifts and rewards and 
Mishael, and Azariah: therefore) 9/10}. Dan- |ereat honour: therefore shew me 
stood they before the king. iel actually |the dream, and the interpretation 

20 And in all matters of ‘wisdom lived beyond | thereof. 
and understanding, that the king] of Cyrus. 7 They answered again and said, 
enquired of them, he found them] Dan.10.1. Let the king tell his servants the 
ten times Se ae ind 085| os cathe dream, ne re will shew the inter- 
gicians and astrologers that were] "paving the |Pretation o it. 
in all his realm. ancient wis- | 8 The king answered and said, I 

21 And Daniel ¢continued_even oe know of certainty that ye would 
unto the first year of king Cyrus.] Chaldeans |gain the time, because ye see the 
parexcel- |thing is gone from me. 


CHAPTER 2. ost 9 But if ve wall not make known 

ahys ; unto me the dream, there 1s but 

P. ae ata 4 phe eaeions oF igs tes one decree for you: for ye have pre- 

(Dan. 2.14.37). (1) The forgot- pared lying and corrupt words to 

ten dream: failure of the magi. speak before me, till the time be 

; j changed: therefore tell me the 

ND in the second year of the dream, and I shall know that ye 

reign of Nebuchadnezzar Neb- can shew me the interpretation 
uchadnezzar dreamed dreams, thereof. 

wherewith his spirit was troubled, 10 The Chaldeans answered be- 

and his sleep brake from him. fore the king, and said, There is not 

2 Then the king commanded to a man upon the earth that can 


i From Dan. 2. 4 to 7. 28 the Book of Daniel is written in Aramaic, the ancient 
language of Syria, and substantially identical with Chaldaic, the language of ancient 
Babylonia. Upon this fact, together with the occurrence of fifteen Persian, and 
three Greek words, has been based an argument against the historicity of Daniel, 
and in favour of a date after the conquest of Palestine by Alexander (B.c. 332)... alt 
has, however, seemed, with some modern exceptions, to the Hebrew and Christian 
scholarship of the ages an unanswerable proof rather of the Danielic authorship of 
the book that, living from boyhood in a land the language of which was Chaldaic, a 
great part of his writing should be in that tongue. It has often been pointed out 
that the Chaldaic of Daniel is of high antiquity, as is shown by comparison with 
that of the Targums. The few words of Persian and Greek in like manner confirm 
the writer’s residence at a court constantly visited by emissaries from those peoples. 
It is noteworthy that the Aramaic section is precisely that part of Daniel which most 
concerned the peoples amongst whom he lived, and to whom a prophecy written in 
Hebrew would have been unintelligible. The language returns to Hebrew in the 
predictive portions which have to do with the future of Israel. “The Hebrew of 
Daniel is closely related to that of Ezekiel.’’—Delitzsch. 

899 


211] DANIEL. {2 32 


23 I thank thee, and praise thee, 
O thou God of my fathers, who hast 
given me wisdom and might, and 
hast made known unto me now 
what we desired of thee: for thou 
hast mow made known unto us the 
king’s matter. 

24 Therefore Daniel went in unto 
fArioch, whom the king had or- 
|dained to destroy the wise men of 
Babylon: he went and said thus 
unto him; Destroy not the wise 
men of Babylon: bring me in before 
the king, and I will shew unto the 
king the interpretation. 


shew the king’s matter: therefore} 
thereisno king,lord,nor ruler, that 
asked such things at any magician, 
or astrologer, or ‘Chaldean. 

11 And it is a rare thing that the 
king requireth, and there is none 
other that can shew it before the 
king, except the gods, whose dwell- 
ing is not with flesh. 

42 For this cause the king was 
angry and very furious, and com- 
manded to destroy all the wise men 
of Babylon. 

13 And the decree went forth that 
the wise men ‘should be slain; and 
they sought Daniel and his fellows 


to be slain. iel before the king in haste, and 


a Or, execu- 


(2) The prayer for wisdom. tioner(v-24). bape ie oe eesti pepe ea 
14 Then Daniel answered with}? ae of the |will make icakvoisi unto the king the 

counsel and wisdom to Arioch the] 519.2837, |interpretation. E 

captain of the king’s guard, which] 44; Dan4. 26 The king answered and said to 


was gone forth to slay the wise men| 37; 5-23. Daniel, whose name was Belteshaz- 
of ‘Babylon: cCfDan.7, |Zar, Art thou able to make known 
15 He answered and said to} 25. unto me the dream which I have 


rap the king’s a Saat Why as Beal ed oes an SEL Eira iat sen 
the decree so hasty from the king? “ae aniel answered in the pres- 
Then Arioch made the thing known} e Gen.41.45, {ence or ee ew ara ne The = 
to Daniel. marg.; cret whic e king hat mande 
sed of the king fiat hewonidl Reittic!’ [gees tee tances the oot 
give him time, and that he would| Prov-3-32; |ers, shew unto the king; 


shew the king the interpretation. ee 28 But there is a God in heaven 

17 Then Daniel went tohis house,| f v.14. that érevealeth secrets, and maketh 
and made the thing known to known to the king Nebuchadnezzar 
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,|° 2? what shall’ be in the latter days. 
his companions: h Times Thy dream, and the visions of thy 


18 That they would desire mer-| (of the head upon thy bed, are these: 
cies of the God bof heaven concern-| Gentiles). | 99 As for thee, O king, thy 
ing this secret; that Daniel and his} Rev.16.i9. |thoughts came into thy mind 
fellows should not perish with the a upon thy bed, “what should come 
rest of the wise men of Babylon. tv-10.19.) |to pass hereafter: and he that re- 


(5) The secret revealad toaceat, vealeth secrets maketh known to 


thee what shall come to pass. 
19 Then was the secret revealed 30 But as for me, this secret is not 


unto Daniel in a night vision. Then revealed to me for any wisdom that 
Daniel blessed the God of heaven. I have more than any living, but 
20 Daniel answered and _ said, for their sakes that shall make 
Blessed be the name of God for known the interpretation to the 
ever and ever: for wisdom and king, and that thou mightest know 


might are his: 


theethoughts of thy heart. 
21 Andhe “changeth the times and 


the seasons: ¢he removeth kings, (4) The forgotten dream 
and setteth up kings: he giveth wis- recovered. 

dom unto the wise, and knowledge 31 Thou, O king, sawest, and 
to them that know understanding: behold a great limage. This great 
22 He ‘revealeth the deep and image, whose brightness was excel- 

secret things: he knoweth what is lent, stood before thee; and the 

in the darkness, and the light dwell- form thereof was terrible. 

eth with him. 


32 This image’s head was of fine 


_ 1 The monarchy-vision. Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, as interpreted by Daniel, 
gives the course and end of “the times of the Gentiles” (Lk. 21. 24; Rev. 16. 19, note), 
that is, of Gentile world-empire. The four metals composing the image are explained 
as symbolizing (vs. 38-40) four empires, not necessarily possessing the inhabited 

900 


25 Then Arioch brought in Dan-’ 


- 


i 


2 33] DANIEL. [2 42 


gold, his breast and his arms of sil. B.C. 603. _|of men dwell, the beasts of the field 
ver, his belly and his “thighs of and the fowls of the heaven hath 


brass, 20r, sides. | he given into thine hand, and hath 
33 His legs of iron, his feet part pS aida aS made thee ruler over them all. 
of iron and part of clay. vs.34,35,44, |Thou art this head of gold. 
34 Thou sawest till that a stone re ee (BY The secand world. 5 
icains - ‘17.6; orld-empire: 
was cut out without hands, which] ; p28) Media-Persia. (Cf Dati. 7,5.) 


smote the image upon his feet. that} ; pan.7.23-27. 
ere gf iron and clay, and brake See Rev.19. (c) The third world-empire: 
em to pieces. pees Greece. (Cf. Dan. 7. 6. 
35 °Then was the iron, the clay,) gorr@sct f ; 
the brass, the silver, and the gold, 16.14; 19.17).| 39 And after thee shall arise 


broken to pieces together, and be-|d Psa.1.4; another kingdom inferior to thee, 
came like the ¢chaff of the summer] Mt-3.12. and another third kingdom of 
Wireshinesloors: and the wind car-|¢ — Has which shall bear rule over all 
ried them away, that no place was 34-45- e earth. t 
found for them: ¢and the stone that Dan7.1-27. (d) The fourth world-empire: 
smote the image became a great} (Gen.1.26- R Cf D Bes 
fmountain, and filled the whole| 28},2° abe ies 138: Mae) 
earth. fe Avenountain ae kAnd the too kingdom shall 
. - is one of the |be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron 
a ot Bhs ree rete se A eng vas bean e in pes and sebdoste a 
nis is the dream; and we will) jingd ings: and as iron that breake 
tell the interpretation thereof before Tea no. all these, shall it break in pieces 
the king. note. and bruise. 


= 7 se g This isuni- | 41 And whereas thou sawest the 
(a) The first world-empire: Baby-| versatdo- | r.c¢ and toes, part of potters’ clay, 


inion. It 
Jon under Nebuchadnezzar.) Vor ne and part of iron, the kingdom shall 


(CE. Dan. 7 4.) was never pa shal 

mie ' fully real- | be divided; 1pbut there shall be in it 
37 Thou, O king, art a king off power was Of the strength of the iron, foras- 

kings: for the God of heaven hath} given for it. much as thou sawest the iron mixed 

given thee a kingdom, power, and}; Dan.7.7,23. |with ‘miry clay. _ 

strength, and glory. iLit. brittle. | 42 And as the /toes of the feet 


38 And &wheresoever the children| j Dan.7.24. were part of iron, and part of clay, 


earth, but able to do so (v. 38), and fulfilled in Babylon, Media-Persia, Greece (under 
Alexander), and Rome. The latter power is seen divided, first into two (the legs), 
fulfilled in the Eastern and Western Roman empires, and then into ten (the toes) 
(see Dan. 7.26, note). As a whole, the image gives the imposing outward greatness 
and splendour of the Gentile world-power. 

The smiting Stone (2. 34, 35) destroys the Gentile world-system. (in its final form) 
by a sudden and irremediable blow, not by the gradual processes of conversion 
and assimilation; and then, and not before, does the Stone become a mountain which 
fills “the whole earth.” (Cf. Dan. 7. 26, 27.) Such a destruction of the Gentile mon- 
archy-system did not occur at the first advent of Christ. On the contrary, He was put 
to death by the sentence of an officer of the fourth empire, which was then at the 
zenith of its power. Since the crucifixion the Roman empire has followed the course 
marked out in the vision, but Gentile world-dominion still continues, and the crush- 
ing blow is still suspended. The detail of the end-time is given in Dan. 7. 1-28, 
and Rev. 13.-19. It is important to see (1) that Gentile world-power is to end in 
a sudden catastrophic judgment (see “Armageddon,” Rev. 16. 14; 19. 21); (2) that 
it is immediately followed by the kingdom of heaven, and that the God of the heavens 
does not set up His kingdom till after the destruction of the Gentile world-system, 
Tt is noteworthy that Gentile world-dominion begins and ends with a great image 
(Dan. 2. 31; Rev. 13. 14, 15). ? 

1 From the “head of gold” (v. 38) to the “iron” of the “fourth kingdom” (Rome) 
there is deterioration in fineness, but increase of strength (v. 40). Then comes the 
deterioration of the “fourth kingdom” in that very quality, strength. (1) Deterio- 
ration by division: The kingdom is divided into two, the legs (Eastern and Western 
empires), and these are again divided into kingdoms, the number of which when 
the Stone smites the image will be ten (toes, v. 42; cf. Dan. 7.23, 24). (2) Deteriora- 
tion by admixture; the iron of the Roman imperium mixed with the clay of the 
popular will, fickle and easily moulded. This is precisely what has come to pass 
in the constitutional monarchies which, with the Republic of France and the despotism 
of Turkey, cover the sphere of ancient Roman rule. 

901 


2 43] DANIEL. [3 6 
ined hall be partl B.C. 603. 49 Then Daniel requested of the 7} 
ret Mee a sb ehrokea. si dan king, and he set Shadrach, Me- 
43 And whereas thou sawest iron shach, and Abed-nego, over the. © 
mixed with miry clay; they shall affairs of the province of Babylon: 
mingle themselves with the seed of but “Daniel sat in the gate of the 
men: but they shall not cleave one king. 
to another, even as iron is not ; 
mixed with clay. CHAPTER 3. 
one The pride of Nebuchadnezzar 
(e) The final world-empire: the ee hes oh 2 
: punishment: (1) the, 
ganador os heaven. (See Mt. Haze of Zolt! 
44 1And in the days of these WNEBUCHADNEZZAR the king 


a made an *4image of gold, whose 
kings shall the God of heaven set}, o;,aritt/e. height was threescore cubits, and 
up a ‘kingdom, which shall never 


: the breadth thereof six cubits: he 
ae etre ae ae iepgcon tet poe heey it up in the plain of Dura, in 
shall not be left to other people, the province of Babylon. 

Dut it shall break ui ver and Con c Lk 182, 2. “Then Nekehadnezcar-th e king 
pt gle theses deine oms, and it ' ” i rae to gather soutien the Prine 
s . v.34, refs. e governors, an e captains, 
t that : 
che oprah ious that Cyan, [ibe dees, the treasurers, the coum 
‘ ) 2 | 28,30. se , 

tain without hands, and that it : malena of the : ny 

3 gr hes a provinces, to come to 
ae ue Dens HOR, saene fv.22, refs. |+he dedication of the image which 
nae great God hath made ktown|*Provis. |Nebuchadnezzar the king had 


A 353 21.1. set up 

to the king what shall come to pass 5 . 

petericey ana the dream is ter hCfGen.19, | 3 Then the princes, the governors, 
tain, and the inter retation thereof| 2%t the and captains, the judges, the wer 
genet P compro-.,, _ |surers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, 


Daniel the [and all the rulers of the provinces, 
(6) The promotion of Daniel, | infexible. were gathered together unto the 
i CfRev.13 dedication of the image that Nebu- 


46 ¢Then the king Nebuchadnez- 14,15. chadnezzar the king had set up; 
zar fell upon his face, and wor- and they stood before the image 
shipped Daniel, and commanded that Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 
that they should offer an oblation -4 Then an herald cried aloud, To 
and sweet odours unto him. you it is commanded, O people, na- 

47 The king answered unto Dan- tions, and languages, 
iel, and said, Of a truth it is, that S That at what time ye hear the 
your God is a God of gods, and a sound of the cornet, flute, harp, 
Lord of kings, and a /revealer of sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all 
secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal kinds of musick, ye fall down and 
this secret. worship the golden image that 

48 &Then the king made Daniel a Nebuchadnezzar the king hath 
great man, and gave him many set up: 
great gifts, and made him ruler 6 And whoso falleth not down 
over the whole province of Baby- and worshippeth shall the same 
lon, and chief of the governors over hour be cast into the midst of a 
all the wise men of Babylon. burning fiery furnace. 


when the kingdom of the heavens will be set up. It will be’ “in the days of these 
kings,” i.e. the days of the ten kings (cf. Dan. 7. 24-27) symbolized by the toes of 
the image. That condition did not exist at the advent of Messiah, nor was it even 
possible until the dissolution of the Roman empire, and the rise of the present na- 
tional world-system. See ‘Kingdom (O.T.)” (Gen. 1. 26; Zech. 12. 8); “Kingdom 
(N.T.)” (Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15, 28); Mt. 3. 2, note (defining “kingdom of heaven’’). 
Verse 45 repeats the method by which the kingdom will be setup. (Cf. v.31, note 5 
Psa. 2.5 with Psa. 2. 6; Zech. 14. 1-8 with Zech. 14. 9.) 

+ The attempt of this great king of Babylon to unify the religions of his empire 
by self-deification will be repeated by the beast, the last head of the Gentile world- 
dominion (Rev. 13. 11-15). See ‘Beast, the” (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19. 20). It has 
repeatedly characterized Gentile authority in the earth, e.g. Dan, 6. 7; Acts 12. 22, 
and the later Roman emperors. 


1 The passage fixes authoritatively the time relative to other predicted events, 


902 


“4h 


sa 


7 Therefore at that time, when| 


all the people heard the sound of 
the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, 
psaltery, and all kinds of musick, 
all the people, the nations, and the 
languages, fell down and worship- 
ped the golden image that Nebu- 
chadnezzar the king had set up. 


(2) The three Jews refuse to wor- 
ship the image. 


8 Wherefore at that time certain 
@Chaideans came near, and accused 
the Jews. 

9 They spake and said to the king 
Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for 
ever. 

10 Thou, O king, hast made a de- 
cree, that every man that shall 
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, 
harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulci- 
mer, and all kinds of musick, shall 
fall down and worship the golden 
image: 

11 And whoso falleth not down 
and worshippeth, that he should 
be cast into the midst of a burning 
fiery furnace. 

12 There are certain Jews >whom 
thou hast set over the affairs of the 
province of Babylon, Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego; these 
men, O king, have not regarded 
thee: they serve not thy gods, nor 
worship the golden image which 
thou hast set up. 

13 Then Nebuchadnezzar in his 
rage and fury commanded to bring 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego. Then they brought these 
men before the king. 

14 Nebuchadnezzar spake and said 
unto them, Js 1¢ true, O Shadrach, 

_Meshach, and Abed-nego, do not ye 
serve my gods, nor worship the 
golden image which I have set up? 

15 Now if ye be ready that at 
what time ye hear the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psal- 
tery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of 
musick, ye fall down and worship 
the image which I have made; well: 
but if ye worship not, ye shall be 
cast the same hour into the midst of 
a burning fiery furnace; and who is 
that God that shall deliver you out 
of my hands? 

16 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, answered and said to the 
king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are 


DANIEL. 


B.C. 580. 


a Cf. the con- 
duct of Dan- 
iel, Dan 2.24. 

6 Dan.2.49. 

c Cf.Dan.6. 
19-22; 
Jer.30.7-9. 


d Job 13.15; 
Acts 4.19. 


e Ex.20.3-S; 
Lev.19.4. 


f 1sa.43.2. 

g Phil.2.6-8. 

h Or, a Son of | 
God. 


+ Cf.Dan.4. 
2,3,17,34,35. 


[3 26 


not careful to answer thee in this 
matter. 

17 Ifit be so, our “God whom we 
serve is able to deliver us from the 
burning fiery furnace, land he will 
deliver us out of thine hand, O king. 

18 But if not, be it known unto 
thee, O king, that 4we will not serve 
thy gods, nor “worship the golden 
image which thou hast set up. 


(3) The harmless furnace. 


19 Then was Nebuchadnezzar 
full of fury, and the form of his 
visage was changed against Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: 
therefore he spake, and command- 
ed that they should heat the furnace 
one seven times more than it was 
wont to be heated. 

20 And he commanded the most 
mighty men that were in his army 
to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, and to cast them into 
the burning fiery furnace. 

21 Then these men were bound in 
their coats, their hosen, and their 
hats, and their other garments, 
and were cast into the midst of the 
burning fiery furnace. 

22 Therefore because the king’s 
commandment was urgent, and the 
furnace exceeding hot, the flames of 
the fire slew those men that took up 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. 

23 And these three men, Sha- 
drach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, 
fell down bound into the midst of 
the burning fiery furnace. 

24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the 
king was astonied, and rose up in 
haste, and spake, and said unto his 
counsellors, Did not we cast three 
men bound into the midst of the 
fire? They answered and said unto 
the king, True, O king. 

25 He answered and said, Lo, I 
see four men loose, walking in the 
midst of the fire, and they have ‘no 
hurt; and the form of the fourth is 
like “the Son of God. 


(4) The convinced king. 


26 Then Nebuchadnezzar came 
near to the mouth of the burning 
fiery furnace, and spake, and said, 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, ye servants ‘of the most high 
God, come forth, and come Azther. 
Then Shadrach, Meshach, and 


bear no testimony, are a 


Rom. il. 5), who will be faithful in ‘the 


Rev. 7. 14). 


903 


1 The three Jews, faithful to God while the nation of Israel far from their land 
fit type of the Jewish remnant in the last days (isaelao% 
furnace of the great tribulation (Psa. 2. 5; 


3 27] DANIEL. ‘[4 16 


6 Therefore made I a decree “to 
bring in all the wise men of Baby- 
jon before me, that they might 
make known unto me the interpre- 
tation of the dream. 

7 Then came in the magicians, the 
astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the 
soothsayers: and I told the dream 
before them; but they did not make 


Abed-nego, “came forth of the 
midst of the fire. P 

27 And the princes, governors, 
and captains, and the king’s coun- 
sellors, being gathered together, 
saw these men, upon whose bodies 
the fire had no power, nor was an 
hair of their head singed, neither 
were their coats changed, nor the 


smell of fire had passed on them. known unto me the interpretation 
28 Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, thereof. : 

and said, Blessed be the God of|¢ Miracles 8 But at the last Daniel came in 

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-| (0-7),vs- | lbefore me, whose name was Belte- 

nego, who hath sent his "angel, and} 16-23. shazzar, according to the name of 


delivered his servants ae) — Carers my god, and in ene oe rae 
in him, and have change: e king’s ~~" lof the holy gods: and before hi 
word, and yielded their bodies, that] » Heb.1.4, told the dream, saying, 
they might not serve nor worship| 7o¢e. 9 © Belteshazzar, master of the 
any god, except their own God. magicians, because I know that the 
c Cf.Dan.2. AS Sptaais 
The d. Fe icahar 37,38; 3.29. |spirit of the holy gods is in thee, 
(S) The decree of Nebuchad- ¢2S8am.7.16, |22dnosecret troubleth thee, tell me 
ez ZnS Psa.g035-' |thevisions of my dream thatI have 
i genet mets a aeney 37; Dan.7.__{seen, oe _— 
at every people, nation, and jan- 14; 10 us were the visions of mine 
SaaS eee pe eral ESSER ke in — ‘ ln behold 
again: 5 -| ¢ Cf.Dan.2. a Stree in the midst of the earth, 
shach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut| 1,2. and the height thereof was great. 
in pieces, and their houses shall be 11 The tree grew, and was strong 
rk ~~ | f Symbol of a I ? , 
made a dunghill: because there is|’ great king. and the height thereof reached unto 
no eee God that can deliver after aes Sh ee the sight thereof to the 
is sort. F * Jend o the earth: 
30 Then the king promoted Sha-| 27 


drach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, in| g vs.17,23; and the fruit thereof much, and in 


the province of Babylon. plural in 17. |i+ was meat for all: the beasts of 
h Sanctify, the field had shadow under it, and 
CHAPTER 4. holy (O.T.). |the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the 


(6) The king’s proclamation. cee boughs thereof, and all flesh was 


JNEBUCHADNEZZAR the king,| 28:3) fed of it. ete 

cunto all people, nations, and] ; cp me3. 13 I saw in the visions of my 

languages, that !dwell in all the] ‘10: 7.19: head upon my bed, and, behold, a 

earth; Peace be multiplied unto you,| Lk-13.6-10. Tees we an “holy one came 
2 I thought it good to shew the! ; 7, b OWL SEORISNCAV EIN : 

signs and wonders that the high we Sompietes 14 He cried aloud, and said thus, 


God hath wrought toward me. ness. *Hew down the tree, and cut off his 
3 How great are his signs! and branches, shake off his leaves, and 

how mighty are his wonders! his scatter his fruit: let the beasts get 

kingdom jis an 4everlasting king- away from under it, and the fowls 

dom, and his dominion is from gen- from his branches: 

eration to generation. 15 Nevertheless leave the stump 


of his roots in the earth, even with 


(7) The tree vision of Nebuchad- a band of iron and brass, in the ten- 


nezZar. der grass of the field; and let it be 

_4 I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest wet with the dew of heaven, and Jet 

in mine house, and flourishing in his portion be with the beasts in 
my palace: the grass of the earth: 

5 I saw a dream which made me 16 Let his heart be changed from 

afraid, and the thoughts upon my man’s, and let a beast’s heart be 

bed and the visions of my head given unto him; and let Jseven 


troubled me. times pass over him. 


! Nebuchadnezzar, first of the Gentile world-kings in whom the times of the 
Gentiles (Lk. 21. 243 Rev. 16. 14) began, perfectly comprehended the universality 
of the sway committed to him (Dan. 2. 37, 38); as also did Cyrus (Ezra 1.2). That 
they did not actually subject the known earth to their sway is true, but they might 
have done so, The earth lay in their power. 


904 


12 The leaves thereof were fair, : 


~~ 


34 7] DANIEL. [4 34 


25 That they shall drive thee from 
men, and thy dwelling shall be with 
ithe beasts of the field; and they 
shall make thee to eat grass as 
loxen, and they shall wet thee with 
the dew of heaven, and seven times 
shall pass over thee, till thou know 
‘that the most High ruleth in the 
kingdom of men, and giveth it to 
whomsoever he will. 

26 And whereas they commanded 
to leave the stump of the tree roots; 
thy kingdom shall be sure unto 
thee, after that thou shalt have 


whomsoever he will, and setteth up 
over it the basest of men. 

18 This dream I king Nebuchad- 
nezzar have seen. Now thou, O 
Belteshazzar, declare the inter- 
pretation thereof, forasmuch as all 
the wise men of my kingdom are 
not able to make known unto me 


the interpretation: but thou art known that the heavens do rule. 
able; for the spirit of the holy gods | 27 Wherefore, O king, let my 
1s in thee. } counsel be acceptable unto thee, 


and “break off thy sins by righteous- 


(8) The tree vision interpreted. ness, and thine iniquities by shew- 


19 Then Daniel, whose name was], psa.9.16. ing mercy to the poor; if it may be 
Belteshazzar, was astonied for one tee} a lengthening of thy tranquillity. 
vs.25,32; 
hour, and his thoughts troubled Dan.2.24; |(9) ‘The tree vision fulfilled: res- 


him. The king spake, and said,| Pon?-?H) : 
Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or br toration of Nebuchadnezzar. 
the interpretation thereof, trouble] ¢See,2 Sam. 28 All this came upon the king 


thee. Belteshazzar answered and Fege Nebuchadnezzar. 

said, My lord, ‘the dream be to 29 At the end of twelve months 

them that hate thee, and the inter-|@ The dis- he walked in the palace of the king- 

pretation thereof to thine enemies.| GPlB® ¥**,, [dom of Babylon. £ 
20 The tree that thou sawest,| v.30 with 30 The king spake, and said, Is 

which grew, and was strong, whose} v-37- not this great Babylon, that /I have 

height reached unto the heaven,}, 15a.55.7; built for the house of the kingdom 


and the sight thereof to all the| Rom.2.9-11. |by the might of my power, and for 


earth; fCEV.37 the honour of-my majesty? 

21 Whose leaves were fair, and pve 31 sWhile the word was in the 
the fruit thereof much, and in it|/zg1Thes.5.3. |king’s mouth, there fell a voice from 
was meat for all; under which the ey. heaven, saying, “O king Nebuchad- 
beasts of the field dwelt, and upon|” ope Inezzar, to thee it is spoken; The 
whose branches the fowls of the kingdom is departed from thee. 
heaven had their habitation: 32 And they shall drive thee from 

22 It is thou, O king, that art men, and thy dwelling shall be 
grown and become strong: for ‘thy with the beasts. of the field: they 
greatness is grown, and reacheth shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, 
unto heaven, and thy dominion to and seven times shall pass over 

the end of the earth. thee, until thou know that the most 

23 And whereas the king saw a High ruleth in the kingdom of men, 
watcher and an holy one coming and giveth it to whomsoever he 
down from heaven, and saying, ill. 

Hew the tree down, and destroy it; 33. The same hour was the thing 
yet leave the stump of the roots fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and 
thereof in the earth, even with a he was driven from men, and did 
band. of iron and brass, in the ten- eat grass as oxen, and his body was 
der grass of the field; and Tet it be wet with the dew of heaven, till his. 
wet with the dew of heaven, and hairs were grown like eagles’ feath~ 
let his portion be with the beasts of ers, and his nails like birds’ claws: 
the field, till seven times pass over 34 And at the end of the days I 
him; Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine 

24 This is the interpretation, O eyes unto heaven, and mine under- 
king, and this zs the decree of the standing returned unto me, and 1q 
most High, which is come upon my blessed the most High, and I 
lord the king: praised and honoured him that 


1 A progress may be traced in Nebuchadnezzar’s apprehension of the true God. 
(1) “God is a God of gods [one amongst the national or tribal gods, but greater than 
they], and a Lord [Adonai = Master] of kings, and a revealer of secrets” (Dan. 2. 

905 


DANIEL. 


liveth for ever, whose dominion is 
@an everlasting dominion, and his 
kingdom 1s from generation to gen- 
eration: 3 F 

35 And all the inhabitants of the 
earth are reputed as nothing: and 
he doeth according to his will in 
the army of heaven, and among 
the inhabitants of the earth: and 
none can stay his hand, or say unto 
him, What doest thou? 

36 At the same time my reason 
returned unto me; and for the glory 
of my kingdom, mine honour and 
brightness returned unto me; and 
my counsellors and my lords sought 


~ ~|a@ Dan.2.44; 
unto me; and I was established in} 7.14; 
my kingdom, and excellent majesty reas 
ic.4.7; 
was added unto me. Lk.1.33. 
37 Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise 
and extol and honour the King of he ere 
heaven, all whose works are truth,| ©*18-11- 
and his ways judgment: and) Nebuchad- 
those that walk in pride he is able ceeatie! 
to abase. Belshazzar 
in the bi = 
CHAPTER 5. that David is 
Part III, The personal history ee Gk Iakad 
of Daniel under Belshazzar} (Lk.1.32). " 
and Darius (Dan. 5. 1-6. 28). pe eae 
The pride of Belshazzar and| grandson. 
his downfall. LAL aase 
BELSHAZZAR the king made] 2%) } The 
a great feast to a thousand of 
his lords, and drank wine before] ¢ Cf-Isa.21. 
the thousand. 1s 
2 Belshazzar, whiles he tasted f Isa.47.13. 


the wine, commanded to bring the 
golden and silver vessels which his 
ather Nebuchadnezzar had taken 
out of the temple which was in Je- 
Tusalem; that the king, and his 


g Chald. 
bright- 
nesses. v.6. 


h Or, grand- 


: 3 5 = father. v.2. 
princes, his wives, and his concu- 
bines, might drink therein. t Chald. 
3 Then they brought the golden| *7°¢s 


vessels that were taken out of the 
temple of the house of God which 
was at Jerusalem; and the king, 
and his princes, his wives, and his 
concubines, drank in them. 

4 They drank wine, and praised 
the gods of gold, and of silver, of 
brass, of iron, of wood, and. of 
stone. 


(1) The writing on the wall. 


5 4In the same hour came forth 
fingers of a man’s hand, and wrote 
over against the candlestick upon 


[4 


the plaister of the wall of the king’s 
palace: and the king saw the part 
of the hand that wrote. 

6 Then the king’s countenance 
was changed, ‘and his thoughts 
troubled him, so that the joints of 
his loins were loosed, and his knees 
smote one against another. — i 

7 The king cried aloud to bring in 
the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and 
the soothsayers. And the king 
spake, and said to the wise men 
of Babylon, Whosoever shall read 
this writing, and shew me the in- 
terpretation thereof, shall be clothed 
with scarlet, and have a chain of 
gold about his neck, and shall be 
the third ruler in the kingdom. 

8 Then came in all the king’s 
wise men: but they could not read 
the writing, nor make known to the 
king the interpretation thereof. 

9 Then was king Belshazzar 
greatly troubled, and his scounte- 
nance was changed in him, and his 
lords were astonied. 

10 Now the queen by reason of 
the words of the king and his lords 
came into the banquet house: and 
the queen spake and said, O king, 
live for ever: let not thy thoughts 
trouble thee, nor let thy counte- 
nance be changed: © 

11 Thereis a man in thy kingdom, 
in whom is the spirit of the holy 
gods; and in the days of /'thy father 
light and understanding and wis- 
dom, like the wisdom of the gods, 
was found in him; whom the king 
Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the 


jking, I say, thy father, made mas- 


ter of the magicians, astrologers, 
Chaldeans, and soothsayers; 

12 Forasmuch as an_ excellent 
spirit, and knowledge, and under- 
standing, interpreting of dreams, 
and shewing of hard sentences, and 
dissolving of ‘doubts, were found in 
the same Daniel, whom the king 
named Belteshazzar: now let Dan- 
iel be called, and he will shew the 
interpretation. 

13 Then was Daniel brought in 
before the king. And the king 
spake and said unto Daniel, Art 
thou that Daniel, which art of the 
children of the captivity of Judah, 
whom the king my father brought 
out of Jewry? 

14 I have even heard of thee, that 
the spirit of the gods is in thee, 


47). (2) He is still a Hebrew deity, but Master of angels, and a God who responds to 


faith (Dan. 3. 28 
of God. Cf. Darius; Dan. 6. 25-27. 


906 


): (3) Here (Dan. 4. 34, 35) the king rises into a true apprehension 


and that light and understanding 
and excellent wisdom is found in 
thee. 

15 And now the wise men, the 
astrologers, have been brought in 
before me, ‘that they should read 
this writing, and make known unto 
me the interpretation thereof: but 
they could not shew the interpreta- 
tion of the thing: 

16 And I have heard of thee, that 
thou canst make interpretations, 
and dissolve doubts: now if thou’ 
canst read the writing, and make 
known to me the interpretation], pan.2.37 
thereof, thou shalt be clothed with] 38. 
scarlet, and have a chain of gold 


about thy neck, and shalt be the|’jopea? 
third ruler in the kingdom. 
c Ex.40.9; 
(2) The writing interpreted. | Txe2 ti) 
Heb.9.21. 


17 Then Daniel answered and), .0004 93. 
said before the king, Let thy gifts|“3.23. °° 
be to thyself, and give thy rewards 
to another; yet I will read the sae 
writing unto the king, and make] Cfy.3i, and 
known to him the interpretation. | Dan.9.1. 

18 O thou king, the most high 
4God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy 
father a kingdom, and majesty, 
and glory, and honour: 

19 And for the majesty that he 
gave him, all people, nations, and 
languages, trembled and feared be- 
fore him: whom he would he slew; 
and whom he would he kept alive; 
and whom he would he set up; and 
whom he would he put down. 

20 But when his heart was lifted 
up, and his mind hardened in pride, 
he was deposed from his kingly 
throne, and they took his glory 
from him: 

21 And he was driven from the 
sons of men; and his heart was 
made like the beasts, and his dwell- 
ing was with the wild asses: they 


DANIEL. 


[5 31 


fed him with grass like oxen, and 
his body was wet with the dew of 
heaven; till he knew that the most 
high God ruled in the kingdom of 
men, and that he appointeth over 
it whomsoever he will. 

22 And thou his son, O Belshaz- 
zar, hast not humbled thine heart, 
though thou knewest all this; 

23 But hast “lifted up thyself 
against the Lord of heaven; and 
they have brought the ‘vessels of 
his house before thee, and thou. 
and thy lords, thy wives, and thy 
concubines, have drunk wine in 
them; and thou hast praised the 
gods of silver, and gold, of brass, 
iron, wood, and stone, which see 
not, nor hear, nor know: ¢and the 
God in whose hand thy breath 1s, 
and whose are all thy ways, hast 
thou not glorified: 

24 Then was the part of the hand 
sent from him; and this writing 
was written. 

25 And this is the writing that was 
written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, 
UPHARSIN. 

26 This is the interpretation of 
the thing: MENE; God-hath num- 
bered thy kingdom, and finished it. 

27 TEKEL; Thou art weighed in 
the balances, and art found want- 


ing. 

28 PERES; Thy kingdom is di- 
vided, and ¢given to the Medes and 
Persians. 

29 Then commanded Belshazzar, 
and they clothed Daniel with scar- 
let, and put a chain of gold about 
his neck, and made a proclamation 
concerning him, that he should be 
the third ruler in the kingdom. 

30 In that night was Belshazzar 
the king of the Chaldeans slain. 

31 And 1Darius the Median took 
the kingdom, being about three- 
score and two years old. 


1 The biblical order of the monarchs of Daniel’s time, and of the period of the cap- 


tivity and restoration of Judah, is as follows: 


(1) Nebuchadnezzar (B.C. 604-561) with whom the captivity of Judah and the 
“times of the Gentiles” (Lk. 21. 24, note; Rev. 16. 19, note) began, and who es- 


tablished the first of the four world-monarchies (Dan. 2. 37, 38; 7. 4). 
(2) Belshazzar (prob. B.C. 556), the Bel-shar-uzzar of the inscriptions, grandson 


of Nebuchadnezzar, and son of the victorious general Nabonidus. 


seems to have reigned as viceroy. 


(3) Darius the Mede (Dan. 5, 31; 6. 1-27; 9. i). 


Belshazzar 


Concerning this Darius secu- 


lar history awaits further discoveries, as formerly in the case of Belshazzar. He 


has been conjectured to be identical with Gobryas, 
Darius was “the son of Ahasuerus, of the see 
king over the realm of the Chaldeans” (Dan. 9. 1). 
a name, the equivalent of the modern “Majesty,” 
rather than Median. 
Ahasuerus proves no more than that he was, probably 


personages, and is Persian 
“son” (or grandson) of an 
907 


a Persian general. This 
d of the Medes, which was made 
“‘Ahasuerus,” more a title than 


“3s used in Scripture of at least four 


That Darius the Mede was the 


61] . DANIEL. [6 7 


CHAPTER 6. 


History of Daniel to the acces- 
sion of Cyrus. 
E pleased Darius to set 4over the 
kingdom an hundred and twenty 
princes, which should be over the 
whole kingdom; : 
2 And over these three presidents; 
of whom Daniel was first: that the 
princes might give accounts unto 
them, and the king should have no 
damage. " 
3 Then this Daniel was preferred 
above the presidents and princes, 
because an excellent spirit was in 
him; and the king thought to set|¢ CfEsth.1.1. 
him over the whole realm. b Acts 24, 
13.21: 


the writing was signed, he went 
into his house; and his windows 
being open in his chamber Stoward 
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his 
knees. three times a, day, and 
prayed, and gave thanks before his 
God, as he did aforetime. ’ 

11 Then these men assembled, and 
found Daniel praying and making 
supplication before his God. 

12 Then they came near, and > 
spake before the king concerning 
the king’s decree; Hast thou not 
signed a decree, that every man 
that shall ask a petition of any 
God or man within thirty days, save 
of thee, O king, shall be cast into the 
den of lions? The king answered 
and said, The thing 7s true, accord- 
‘ing to the law of the Medes and Per- 
Isians, which altereth not, 
| 13 Then answered they and said 
before the king, That Daniel, which 
1s 80f the children of the captivity 
of Judah, regardeth not thee, O 
king, nor the decree that thou hast 
signed, but maketh his petition 
three times a day. 

14 Then the king, when he heard 
these words, was sore displeased 
with himself, and set Ais heart on 
Daniel to deliver him: and he ‘Ja- 


B.C. 538: 


(1) The decree of Darius. ee hae 
4 Then the presidents and princes 
sought to find occasion against 
Daniel concerning the kingdom ;]¢ Esth.1.19. 
but they could find none occasion 
nor fault; forasmuch as he was 
faithful, neither was there any 1 
error or fault found in him. f ee 
5 Then said these men, We shall) 32° 57st 
not find any occasion against this} Jon.2.4. 
Daniel, except we find it against Dens 
him concerning the law of his God.|£ ?2"->-!3- 
6 Then these presidents and|h Psa.49.7. 
princes assembled together to the 


¢ Rev.13.15. 


e Acts 20. 
22-24. 


king, and said thus unto him, King] PERE. 33 punted Ma the eos down of the 
Darius, live for ever. 40; 50.15; | |SUN to deliver him, 
7 All the presidents of the king-| Mt.27.43: 15 Then these men assembled un- 


‘ 1.1.13; 
dom, the governors, and the princes, Gee: 


the counsellors, and the captains,| 2 Pet.2.9. 
have consulted together to estab. 
lish a royal statute, and to make a 
firm decree, that whosoever shall 
ask a petition of any God or man 
for thirty days, ‘save of thee, O 
king, he shall be cast into the den 
of lions. 

8 Now, O king, establish the de- 
cree, and sign the writing, that it be 
not changed, ¢according to the law 
of the Medes and Persians, which 
altereth not. 

9 Wherefore king Darius signed 
the writing and the decree, 


(2) The steadfastness of Daniel. 
10 Now when Daniel «knew that 


to the king, and said unto the king, 
Know, O king, that the law of the 
Medes and Persians is, That no 
decree nor statute which the king 
establisheth may be changed. 


(3)Daniel cast into the lions’ den. 


16 Then the king commanded, 
and they brought Daniel, and cast 


continually, he will ‘deliver thee. 

17 And a stone was brought, and 
laid upon the mouth of the den; 
and the king sealed it with his own 
signet, and with the signet of his 
lords; that the purpose might not - 
be changed concerning Daniel. 


= ae a 
through his mother, of the seed royal not only of Media, but also. of Persia. There 
is but one Darius in Daniel, (See Dan. 9. 1.) 

_ (4) Cyrus, with whose rise to power came fully into existence the Medo- 
Persian, second of the world-empires (Dan. 2. 39: 7, 5). In Daniel’s vision of this 
empire in “the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar” (Dan. 8. 1-4) the 
Median power of Darius is seen as the lesser of the two horns of the Tam; the 
Persian power of Cyrus, under whom the Medo-Persian power was consolidated, 
as the “higher” horn which “came up last.” Under Cyrus, who was. propheti- 
cally named more than a century before his birth (Isa. 44. 28-45. 1-4), the return 
to Palestine of the Jewish remnant began (Ezra 1. 1-4). See Dan, 11. 2, marg. ref, 


$08 


(4) The delivering God. 


18 Then the king went to his pal- 
ace, and passed the night fasting: 
neither were instruments of musick 
brought before him: and his sleep 
went from him. 

19 Then the “king arose very 
early in the morning, and went in 
haste unto the den of lions. 

20 And when he came to the den, 
he cried with a lamentable voice 
unto Daniel: and the king spake 
and said to Daniel, O Daniel, ser- 
vant of the living God, is thy God, 
whom thou servest continually, 
able to deliver thee from the lions? 

21 Then said Daniel unto the 
king, O king, live for ever. 

- 22 My God hath 4sent his ‘angel, 

and hath shut the lions’ mouths, 
that they have not hurt me: foras- 
much as before him innocency was 
found in me; and also before thee, 
O king, have I done no hurt. 

23 Thea was the king exceeding 


glad for him, and commanded that! 
they should take Daniel up out of| 


the den. So Daniel was taken up 
out of the den, and no manner of 
hurt was found upon him, because 
he believed in his God. 

24 And the king commanded, and 
they brought those men which had 
accused Daniel, and they cast them 
into the den of lions, them, their 
children, and their wives; and the 
lions had the mastery of them, and 
brake all their bones in pieces or 
ha they came at the bottom of the 

en. 

(5) The decree of Darius. 


25 Then king Darius wrote ¢unto 
all people, nations, and languages, 
that dwell in all the earth; Peace 
be multiplied unto you. 

26 Imakea decree, “That in every 
dominion of my kingdom men trem- 
ble and fear before the God of Dan- 
jel: for he is the living God, and 
stedfast for ever, and his kingdom 
that which shall not be destroyed, 
and his dominion shall be even 
unto the end. 

27 He delivereth and rescueth, 
and he worketh signs and wonders 
in heaven and in earth, who hath 
delivered Daniel from the power of 
the lions. 

28 So this Daniel prospered in the 
reign of Darius, and in the reign of 
Cyrus the Persian. 


— 


DANIEL. 


a Cf.Dan.3.17, 


Jon.2.1-10.) 


cHeb.1.4, 
note. 


d Dan.4.1, 
note. 


e Cf.Dan.2.47; 
3.28,29; 4. 
1-3,34,35. 


f CfRev.1.19. 


g Times (of 
the Gen- 
tiles). 
vs.1-27; 
Rev.16.19, 
(Lk.21.24; 
Rev.16.19.) 


h Cf.v.17. 


i Jer.4.7 with 
Jer.25.9. 


j Ezk.17.3 
with Ezk.17. 
12. 


k Dan.4.16, 
34. 


1A reference 
to the three- 
fold domin- 
ion of the 
second em- 
pire, Media, 
Persia, 
Babylonia. 


m 1.e. Lydia, 
Babylonia, 
Egypt, etc. 


n Swiftness of 
Alexander’s 
conquests. 


o Cf.Dan.8. 
22. 


p A horn 
symbolizes a 


king. 
Cf.Rev.17. 
#2; 


[78 


CHAPTER 7. 


Part IV. The visions of Daniei 
(Dan, 7, 1-12. 13). The beast _ 
vision of Daniel. 


jee: the first year of Belshazzar 
king of Babylon Daniel had a 
dream and visions of his head upon 
his bed: ‘then he wrote the dream, 
and told the sum of the matters. 

2 Daniel spake and said, 8I saw 
in my vision by night, and, behold, 
the four winds of the heaven strove 
upon the !great sea. 

3 And “four great beasts camé up 
from the sea, diverse one from 
another. 


(1) The world-empire of Nebu- 
chadnezzar. (Cf. Dan. 2.37, 38.) 


4 The first was like a ‘lion, and 
had Jeagle’s wings: I beheld till the 
wings thereof were plucked, and it 
was lifted up from the earth, and 
made stand upon the feet as a man, 
and a *man’s heart was given to it. 


(2) The world-empire of Media- 
Persia. (Cf. Dan. 2. 39.) 


5 And behold another beast, a 
second, like to a bear, and it raised 
up itself on one side, and 1t had 
‘three ribs in the mouth of it be- 
tween the teeth of it: and they said 
a unto it, Arise, “devour much 

esh. 


(3) The world-empire of Greece 
under Alexander. (Cf. Dan. 2. 
39; 8. 20-22; 10. 20; 11. 2-4.) 


6 After this I beheld, and lo 
another, like a “leopard, which had 
upon the back of it four wings of a 
fowl; the beast had also °four 
heads; and dominion was given to it. 


(4) The Roman world-empire. 
Cf. vs. 23, 24; Dan. 2. 40-43.) 


7 After this I saw in the night 
visions, and behold a fourth beast, 
dreadful and terrible, and strong 
exceedingly; and it had great iron 
teeth: it devoured and brake in 
pieces, and stamped the residue 
with the feet of it: and it was di- 
verse from all the beasts that were 
before it; and it had ten “horns. 


|(5) The ten kings (v. 24) and the 


“Iittle horn” (vs. 24-27). See 
v. 14, note. 
8 I considered the horns, and, be- 


1 The “sea” in Scripture imagery stands for the populace, the mere unorganized 


mass of mankind (Mt. 13. 47; Rev. 


= 


1329)). 
909 


7 94 DANIEL. [7 17 


taken away: yet their lives were 
prolonged for a season and time. 


Scene in heaven before the com- 


hold, there came up among them 
another 14little horn, before whom 
there were three of the first horns 
plucked up by the roots: and, be- 
hold, i i € 
the eye: an, and a mouth 
speaking great things. 


13 I ¢saw in the night visions, and, 
behold, one like the Son of man 


rit 7 The Beast, |Came with the clouds of heaven, and 
(6) The vision of the coming a v v3.20-26." came to the Ancient of days, 2and 
: Hd pon oF ae: paey 2 ee hoo ionels they brought him near before him. 


14 And there was given °him do- 
minion, and glory, and a kingdom, 
that all people, nations, and lan- 
guages, should serve him: his édo- 
minion is an everlasting dominion, 
which shall not pass away, and his 
kingdom that which shall not be 
destroyed. 


(7) The interpretation of the 
beast vision. 


15 I Daniel was grieved in my 
spirit in the midst of my body, and 
the visions of my head troubled 
me. 

16 I came near unto one of them 
that stood by, and asked him the 
truth of all this. So he told me, 
and made me know the interpreta- 
tion of the things. 

17 These great 4beasts, which are 
four, are four kings, which shall 
arise out of the earth. 


11-21.) 


9 I beheld till the thrones were 
bcast down, and the Ancient of days 
did sit, whose garment was white 
as snow, and the hair of his head 
like the pure wool: his ‘throne was 
like the fiery flame, and his wheels 
as burning fire. 

10 A fiery stream issued and came 
forth from before him: thousand Pte oe ay 
thousands ministered unto him, and| ¥s.13,14. 
ten thousand times ten thousand| Hos.3.4,5. 
stood before him: the judgment was pee ea, 
set, and the books were opened. ony 

11 I beheld then because of the 
voice of the great words which the 
horn spake: I beheld even till the 
beast was slain, and his body de- 
stroyed, and given to the burning 
flame. 

12 As concerning the rest of the 
beasts, they had their dominion 


6 placed. 


c Kingdom 
(O.T. 


Zech.12.8.) 
d Cf.Rev.5. 
6-10. 


the king on Zion (Psa. 2. 6; Rev. 20. 4). The vision (Dan. 7. 9-14) reverses the 
order of events as they will be fulfilled. Verse 13 describes the scene in heaven 
cf, Rev. 5. 6-10) which, in fulfilment, precedes the events which Daniel sees in 
vision in vs, 9-12. The historic order will be: (1) The investiture of the Son of man 
with the kingdom (Dan. 7. 13, 14; Rev. 5. 6-10). (2) Th 
fully described in Mt. 24, 21, 22: Rev. 6-18. (3) The return of the 
in glory to deliver the “smiting” blow of Dan. 2. 45 (Dan. 7. 9-11; Rey. 19. 11-21), 
(4) The judgment of the nations and the setting up of the kingdom (Dan. 7. 10, 
26, 27; Mt. 25. 31-46; Rev. 20. 1-5). 
3 Dan, 7. 13, 14 is identical with Rev. 5. 1-7, and antedates the fulfilment of Dan. 
2. 34, 35. Dan. 7, 13, 14 and Rev. 5. 1-7 describe the investiture of the Son of man 
and Son of David with the kingdom authority, while Dan, 2. 34, 35 describes the 
crushing blow (Armageddon, Rev. 16. 14, refs.) which destroys Gentile world- 
power, thus clearing the way for the actual setting up of the kingdom of heaven. 
Dan. 2. 34, 35 paar 19, aa the same event. 
€ monarchy vision of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 2.) covers the same historic 
order as the beast vision of Daniel, but with this whom Nebuchadnezzar saw 
910 


ing of the Son of maninvs. 9-12. — 


a 18] DANIEL. [8 3 
18 But the “saints of the most] B.C. 555. most High, and think to change 


Bree shall take the kingdom, and 


| ged eee for ever, even given into his hand until a time and 
for ever and ever. : |times e dividin t nee 

.18,22,25, iding of time. 
“19 Then I would ’know the truth!” 27. That 


ut the “judgment shall sit, 


of the fourth beast, which was di-| church saints |1 gers Sok: 
fi : will also ne e away his do- 
verse from all the others, exceeding} Share in the |Mimion, to consume and to destroy 


each, whose teeth were of iron,| ruleseems [1 
an is nails of brass; which) clear from” 27 And the kingdom and domin- 
devoured, brake in pieces, and Poa ion, and the greatness of the king- 
stamped the residue with his feet; | 2 Tim.2.10- |dom under the whole heaven, shall 


20 And of the ten horns that were et Rt oe be given to the people of the saints 


in his head, and of the other which} 3791; 5.10; [of the most High, whose kingdom. 
came up, and before whom three} 20.4-6. is an ‘everlasting kingdom, and all, 
fell; even of that chorn that had ac P dominions shall serve and obey, 
eyes, and a mouth that spake very|"S°oin” ” [him. 
great things, whose look was more 28 Hitherto zs the end of the mat- 
stout than his fellows. é The oe ter. As for me Daniel, my cogita- 
21 I beheld, and the same horn Mees Ae tions much troubled me, and my 
made war with the saints, and pre-| 25. (Dan.7.8; |countenance changed in me: but I 
vailed against them; Rev.19.20.) /kept the matter in my heart. 
22 Until the Ancient of days|y ;uagments 
came, and ¢judgment was given to| (the seven). CHAPTER 8. 


the saints of the most High; and| Joel 3-1;14. rant 
the time came that the saints pos-| QS39'{s/y" ua. i a ste! is LAAN Sele WiSIOTR 
sessed the kingdom. c an. 8, 1-27), (1) The vision. 
23 Thus he said, The fourth beast| ¢ Rev-15-1. WN the ’third year of the reign of 
shall be the fourth kingdom upon| yg. I king Belshazzar a “vision ap- 
earth, which shall be diverse from peared unto me, even unto me 
a Sai) eat g Rev-13.1-6. |Daniel, after that which appeared 
whole earth, and shall tread it|;sceepan.2, |unto me at the first. 
down, and break it in pieces. 35, ref. c. 2 And I saw in a vision; and it 
24 And the ¢ten horns out of this ese Ne came to pass, when I saw, that I 
kingdom are ten kings that shall)’ rez.’ was at Shushan in the palace, 
arise: and fanother shall rise after which is in the province of Elam; 


them; he shall be di ese from j one B.C. |and I saw in a vision, and I was by 
nal be div 1 


rst, and he shail subdue three the river of Ulai. 
aay k v.20. 3 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and 
ond he shall ¢speak sreat saw, and, behold, there stood be- 
ords against the most High, and fore the river a “ram which had two 
Rue teen the saints of the horns: and the two horns were 


the imposing outward power and splendour of the “times of the Gentiles” (Lk. 
21. 24: Rev. 16. 19), while Daniel saw the true character of Gentile world-govern- 
ment as rapacious and warlike, established and maintained by force. It is re- 
markable that the heraldic insignia of the Gentile nations are all beasts or birds 
of prey. 

1 The end of Gentile world-power. (1) In the beast vision of Daniel 7. the 
fourth beast (v. 7) is declared to be “the fourth kingdom,” i.e. the Roman empire, | 
the “iron” kingdom of Dan. 2. The “ten horns” upon the fourth beast (Roman 
empire), v. 7, are declared to be “‘ten kings that shall arise” (v. 24) answering to 
the ten toes of the image vision of Dan. 2. The ten kingdoms, covering the regions . 
formerly ruled by Rome, will constitute, therefore, the form: in which the fourth or 
Roman empire will exist when the whole fabric of Gentile world-domination is smit- 
ten by the “stone cut out without hands” = Christ (Dan. 2. 44, 45; 7. 9). (2) But 
Daniel sees a “little horn” rise up and subdue three of the ten kings (vs. 24-26). 
His distinguishing mark is hatred of God and of the saints. He is not to be con- 
founded with the “little horn” of Dan. 8.—a prophecy fulfilled in Antiochus 
Epiphanes (Dan. 8. 9, note). In Rev. 13. additional particulars of the ‘‘little horn” 
of Dan. 7. are given (Rev. 13.1, note). f 4 

2 The eighth chapter gives details concerning the second and third world-king- 
doms: the silver and brass kingdoms of Dan. 2.; the bear and leopard kingdoms of 
Dan. 7.,. viz., the Medo-Persian and Macedonian kingdoms of history. At the 
time of this vision (Dan. 8. 1) the first monarchy was nearing its end. Belshazzar 


was the last king of that monarchy. : 
91 


- 
8 4] DANIEL. [8 16 


high; but one was higher than the 
other, and the higher came up 
last. 

4 I saw the ram pushing west- 
ward, and northward, and south- 
ward; so that no beasts might stand 
before him, neither was there any 
that could deliver out of his: hand; Bap * 
but he did according to his will,|?%*) 
and a oe pit “s b v.22. 

5 And as I was considering, be- ? 
hold, an he ¢goat came from the Tae 
west on the face of the whole earth,| came out of 
and touched not the ground: and| Syria, one 
the goat had a notable horn be- 
tween his eyes. kingdoms 

6 And he came to the ram that ytsel eccrieat 
had two horns, which I had seen| usec’ 
standing before the river, and ran} divided. 
unto him in the fury of his dress 
power. 27, where 

7 And I saw him come close unto} the Beast 
the ram, and he was moved with| comes into 
choler against him, and smote the! Vi’ 
ram, and brake his two horns: and e Or, holy one, 
there was no power in the ram to ‘ete 
stand before him, but he cast him| *}%17- 
down to the ground, and stamped| The theo- 
upon him: and there was none that pees 
could deliver the ram out of his| Gan‘) 
hand. Rey.1.9.) 

8 Therefore the he goat waxed 
very great: and when he was strong, 
the “great horn was broken; and 
for it came up °four notable ones 
toward the four winds of heaven. 

9 And out of “one of them came 
forth a llittle horn, which waxed 


exceeding great, toward the south, 
and toward the east, and toward 
the pleasant Jand. 

10 2And it waxed great, even to 
the host of heaven; and it cast 
down some of the host and of the 
stars to the ground, and stamped 
upon them. 

11 Yea, he magnified himself 
even to the prince of the host, 
and by him the daily sacrifice 
was taken away, and the place of 
his sanctuary was cast down. 

12 And an host was given Arm 
against the ¢daily sacrifice by rea- 
son of transgression, and it cast 
down the truth to the ground; and 
it practised, and prospered. 

13. Then I heard one ¢saint speak- 
ing, and another saint said unte 
that certain saint which spake, 
How long shall be the vision con- 
cerning the daily sacrifice, and 
the transgression of 3desolation, to 
give both the sanctuary and the 
host to be trodden under foot? 

14 And he said unto me, Unto 
two thousand and three hundred 
days; then shall the sanctuary be 
cleansed. 


(2) The-vision interpreted, 


-16 And I heard a man’s Voice be- 


1 The “little horn” here is a prophecy fulfilled in Antiochus Epiphanes, B.c. 
175, who profaned the temple and terribly persecuted the Jews. He is not to be 
confounded with the “little horn” of Dan. 7. who is yet to come, and who. will 
dominate the earth during the great tribulation. See “The Beast,” Dan. 7. 8: 
Rev. 19. 20, notes, and “The great tribulation,” Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 7.14, note. But 
Antiochus is a remarkable type of the Beast, the terrible “little horn” of the last 
days. Verses 24, 25 go beyond Antiochus and evidently refer to the “‘little horn” 
of Daniel 7. Both Antiochus and the Beast, but the Beast pre-eminently, are in 
view In verses 24, 25. That the “little horn” of Dan. 7. cannot be the little horn of 
Dan. 8. 9-13, 23, is evident. The former comes up among the ten horns into which 
the fourth empire (Roman) is to be divided; the little horn of Dan. 8. comes out 
of one of the four kingdoms into which the third (Grecian) empire was divided 
(v. 23), and in “the latter time” of the four kingdoms (vs. 22, 23). This was 
historically true of Antiochus Epiphanes. They are alike in hatred of the Jews 
and of God, and in profaning the temple. Cf. 7. 25 (the Beast) with 8. 10-12 
(Antiochus). 

2 This passage (vs. 10-14) is confessedly the most difficult in prophecy, a dif- 
ficulty increased by the present state of the text. Historically this was fulfilled 
in and by Antiochus Epiphanes, but in a more intense and final sense Antiochus 
but adumbrates the awful blasphemy of the “little horn” of Dan. 7, 8, 24, 25; 9, 
27; 11. 36-45; 12.11. In Daniel 8. 10-14 the actions of both “little horns”’ blend, 

Seven times in Daniel the “desolation”? is spoken of: (1) Of the sanctuary, 8. 

13, fulfilled by Antiochus Epiphanes, B.c. 175-170. (2) Of the sanctuary, 9. 17, 

the condition in Daniel’s time, when the Jews were in exile and the sanctuary desolate. 

(3) Generally, of the land, 9. 18, also referring to Daniel’s time. (4) Of the sanctu- 

ary, 9, 26, fulfilled a. 70, in the destruction of city and temple after the cutting 
912 


8 17] 


tween the banks of Ulai, which 
‘called, and said, ¢Gabriel, make this 
man to understand the vision. 

17 Sohe came near where I stood: 
and when the came, I was afraid, 
and fell upon my face: but he said 
unto me, Understand, O son of|? 
man: for at the time of ‘the end 
shall be the vision. 

18 Now as he was speaking with 
me, I was in a deep sleep on my 
face toward the ground: but he 
touched me, and set me upright. 

19 And he said, Behold, I will 
make thee know what shall be in 
the last end of the indignation: for 
at the time appointed the Jend 
shail be. 

20 The ‘ram which thou ssawest 
having two horns are the kings of 
Media and Persia. 

21 And the rough goat is the king 
of Grecia: and the great horn that! 
is ‘between his eyes is the dfirst 


Dan.9.21; 
Lk.1.19,26. 


5 v.20. 


cvs.3,4. The 
“higher” 
horn which 
“came up 
last”’ is 
Cyrus, the 


Great. 


e The four 
empires into 


king. | Ghost B.C 
22 Now that being broken, where-| 300; 

as four stood up for it, ‘four king-| eae 

doms shall stand up out of the} S93 30p°r 

nation, but not in his power. | Syria, Egypt, 
93 And in the latter time of their] the East. 

kingdom, when the transgressors} fj. Antio- 

‘are come to the full, a ‘king of] chus Epiph- 

anes who 


fierce countenance, and understand- 
shall stand 


dark sentences, arose out of 


ing 
up. 

24 And his power shall be mighty, 
but not by his own power: and he 
shall destroy wonderfully, and shall 
prosper, and practise, and shall 
destroy the mighty and the holy} (an.73: 

Rev.19.20.) 


people. : J 

25 And through his policy also}, Q 1919 
he shall cause craft to prosper in his)" 99° ~~” 
thand; and he shall magnify him- 
self in his 


alte. f 
heart, and by peace shall 
‘: he shall 4also stand 


‘destroy many 

inst the Prince of princes;)7 Bible 
but he. shall be broken. without, prayers 
hand. hoes 
26 And the vision of the evening] (Gen.15.2; 
and the morning which was told is] Hab.3.1-16.) 
true: wherefore shut thou up the 
vision; for it shall be for many 


the “‘four 
kingdoms,” 
B.C. 170. 


g The Beast. 
vs.24,25; 


# Cf. Jer.25. 
11,12, note. 


days. t I 
27 And I Daniel fainted, and was 


DANIEL. 


which Alex- | 


Syria, one of 


[9 9 


and I was astonished at the vision, 
but none understood /t. 


CHAPTER 9, 


Vision of the seventy weeks 
(vs. 1-27). 


N the first year of Darius the son 

of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the 

Medes, which was made king over 
the realm of the Chaldeans; 

2 In the first year of his reign I 
Daniel understood by books the 
number of the years, whereof the 
word of the LoRD came to Jere- 
miah the prophet, that he would 
accomplish ‘seventy years in ‘the 
desolations of Jerusalem. 


(1) Daniel’s prayer and 
confession. 
3 And I set my face unto the Lord 


God, to seek by prayer and suppli- 
cations, with fasting, and sackcloth, 


and ashes: 


4 And I Jprayed unto the Lorp 


jmy God, and made my confession, 


and said, O Lord, the great and 
dreadful Ged, keeping the covenant 
and mercy to them that love him, 


land to them that keep his com- 


mandments; 

5 We have sinned, and have com- 
mitted iniquity, and have done 
wickedly, and have rebelled, even 
by departing from thy precepts and 
from thy judgments: 

6 Neither have we hearkened un- 
to thy servants the prophets, which 
spake in thy name to our kings, our 
princes, and our fathers, and to all 
the people of the land. 

7. O Lord, righteousness belong- 
eth unto thee, but unto us confu- 
sion of faces, as at this day; to the 
men of Judah, and to the inhabit- 
ants of Jerusalem, and unto all Is- 
rael, that are near, and that are 
far off, through all the countries 
whither thou hast driven them, be- 
cause of their trespass that they 
have trespassed against thee. 

8 OLord, to us belongeth confu- 
sion of face, to our kings, to our 
princes, and to our fathers, because 


sick certain days; afterward I rose we have sinned against thee. 
up, and did the king’s business; 9 To the Lord our God belong 


off of Messiah (Lk. 21. 20). 
12, 11. 


(5, 6, 7) Of the sanctuary, by the Beast, 9. 27; 11. 31; 
(Cf. Mt. 24. 15; Mk. 13. 143.2 Thes. 2. 3, 8-12; Rev. 13. 14, 15.) : 
1 Two “ends” are in view here: (1) historically, the end of the third, or Grecian 


‘empire of Alexander out of one of the divisions of which the little horn of verse 9 
(Antiochus) ‘arose; (2) prophetically, the end of the times of the Gentiles (Lk, 21. 
‘94: Rev. 16. 14), when the “little horn” of Dan. 7. 8, 24-26, the Beast, will arise— 
Daniel’s final time of the end (Dan. 12. 4, note). 


913 


9 10] DANIEL. [9 a 


are become a reproach to all that 
are about us. 

17 Now therefore, O our God, 
hear the prayer of thy servant, and 
his supplications, and cause thy face 
to shine upon thy sanctuary that is 


mercies and forgivenesses, though 
we have rebelled against him; 

10 Neither have we obeyed the 
voice of the LorD our God, to walk 
in his laws, which he set before us 
by his servants the prophets. 


11 Yea, all Israel have trans- desolate, for the Lord’s sake; 
gressed thy law, even by departing, 18 O my God, incline thine ear, 
that they might not obey thy voice; and hear; open thine eyes, and be- 
therefore the curse is poured upon hold our desolations, and the city 
us, and the oath that #s written in which is called by thy name: for 
the “law of Moses the servant of we do not present our supplications 
God, because we have sinned \before thee for our righteousnesses, 
against him. but for thy great mercies. 

12 And he hath confirmed his 19 O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; 
words, which he spake against us, O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, 


and against our judges that judged|c Law (of for thine own sake, O my God: for 
us, by bringing upon us a great evil: Moses)..vs-8-\thy city and thy people are called 
for under the whole heaven hath| j3' ‘Gs i9i.|/by thy name. 
Br ben es as hath been done} Gal.3.1-29.) (2) The seventy weeks of years: 

13 As it is written in the law of DUUIE SON 20 And whiles I was speaking, 
Moses, all this evil is come upon us:| ¢ Cf.Hos.1.9. and praying, and confessing my 
yet made we not our prayer before} The Jews, |sin and the sin of my people Israel, 


the ORD our God, that we might pac eatie by and presenting my supplication be- 


turn aoe our ees and under- ple,” ic. ps the Lorp — God for the 
stand thy truth. aniel’s, not |holy mountain of my God; 
(aie pera ane aoe Oe rye Ea 
ry oO be re- ’ , 
it upon us: for the LorD our God /s|_ stored. whom I had seen in the vision at 
righteous in all his works which he the beginning, being caused to fly 
gocrh a or we oe tee ey his ay ee touched te about the time 
nd now, ord our God, of the evening oblation. 
that hast brought thy people forth 22 And he informed me, and 
out of the land of Egypt with a talked with me, and said, O Daniel, 
mighty hand, a — gotten Bock I Pie a come forth to give thee 
renown, as at this day; we have skill and understanding. 
sinned, we have done wickedly. 23 At the beginning of thy sup- 
16 O Lord, according to all thy plications the commandment came 
righteousness, I beseech thee, let forth, and I am come to shew thee; 
thine rede ae etd Fe oe — eu art ereaty beloved: — 
away from thy ci erusalem, thy ore understan e matter, an 
holy mountain: because for our consider the vision. 
sins, and for the iniquities of our 24 Seventy weeks are determined 
fathers, Jerusalem and thy people upon ‘thy people and upon thy holy 
Sse ED eS EE NCEE hen ap ae prep Se Os ene oo de Pe 


1 These are “weeks” or, more accurately, sevens of years; seventy weeks of seven 
years each. Within these “weeks” the national chastisement must be ended and the 
nation re-established in everlasting righteousness (v. 24). The seventy weeks are 
divided into seven = 49 yeans; sixty-two = 434 years; one = 7 years (vs. 25-27). In 
the seven weeks = 49 years, Jerusalem was to be rebuilt in “‘troublous times.” This 
was fulfilled, as Ezra and Nehemiah record. Sixty-two weeks = 434 years, there- 
after Messiah was to come (v. 25). This was fulfilled in the birth and manifestation 
of Christ. Verse 26 is obviously an indeterminate period. The date of the cruci- 
fixion is not fixed. It is only said to be “after” the threescore and two weeks. It. 
is the fitst event in verse 26. The second event is the destruction of the city, ful- 
filled A.D. 70. Then, “unto the end,” a period not fixed, but which has already 
lasted nearly 2000 years. To Daniel was revealed only that wars and desolations 
should continue (cf. Mt. 24. 6-14). The N.T. reveals, that which was hidden from | 
the O.T. prophets (Mt. 13, 11-17; Eph. 3. 1-10), that during this period should be _ 
accomplished the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven (Mt. 13. 1-50), and the out- | 
calling of the Church (Mt. 16. 18; Rom. 11. 25), When the Church-age will end, 
and the seventieth week begin, is nowhere revealed. Its duration can be but seven | 
years. To make it more violates the principle of interpretation already confirmed | 
by fulfillment. Verse 27 deals with the last week. The “he” of verse 27 is the | 


914 | 


peed 


9 25] , DANIEL. [10 5 


city, to finish the transgression, and|__B.c.538.__|desolate, even until the consumma- 
to make an end of sins, and_ to|aHeb. kaphar,|tion, and that determined shall be 
make reconciliation for iniquity,| atonement. |poured upon the édesolate. 


and to bring in everlasting right-| S°¥-78) 4, 

eousness, and to seal up the vision] 33, note. CHAPTER 10 

and prophecy, and to anoint the be tenn rang r 
vent).fios. eos 

most Holy. 2.23. (Gen.3.|2 he vision of the glory of God. 


25 Know therefore and under-| 15: Acts i.9.) 


stand, that from the going forth of|¢ Sacrifice _ WN the third year of Cyrus king 
the commandment to restore and to fprophete)- of Persia a “thing was revealed 
build Jerusalem unto the Messiah] (Gen.4.4;/° |unto Daniel, whose ‘name was 


the Prince shall be seven weeks,}| Heb.10.18.) [called Belteshazzar; Jand the thing 
and threescore and two weeks: the 4 Létvehell was true, but the time appointed 
erect Sreyuparene ware and the ing. Nothing, was ponge ane be understood the 
is, wl 
“6 Onad after ‘threescore and two rightly WSs, Sch Se ed Fs 
weeks shall ’Messiah be ‘cut off,| eThe Beast.vs.| 2 In those days I Daniel was 
but not for himself: and the people} 26,27;Dan.11. mourning three full weeks. 
of the ¢prince that shall come shall eer 3 I ate no pleasant bread, neither 
destroy the city and the sanctuary;| f Lit. unto the|came flesh nor wine in my mouth, 
and the end thereof shall be witha ones and|neither did I anoint myself at all, 
flood, and unto the Jend of the war desolenone till three whole weeks were ful- 
desolations are determined. mined. Cf. |filled. _ 
27 And _he.shall confirm.the.cove-| Mt-24.6-14. | 4 And in the four and twentieth 
ant. with many for one week: and/f Gi*-deso/ator day of the ‘first month, as I was by 
iC of vee Pe i Dan.1.7. oe sce gf the great river, which is 
sacrifice an £0 10n| 7 Dan.8.26; iddekel; ; 
to cease, and for the overspreading], a ar aeons 5 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and 
3abominations he shall make it) 7ie. April. _ |looked, and behold a certain man 
abominath 1 7 


“prince that shall come” of verse 26, whose people (Rome) destroyed the temple, 
AD. 70. He,is the same with the “‘little horn’ of chapter 7, He will covenant 
with the Jews to restore their temple sacrifices for one week (seven years), but in 
the middle of that time he will break the covenant and fulfil Dan. 12. 11; 2 Thes. 
2. 3, 4. Between the sixty-ninth week, after which Messiah was cut off, and the 
seventieth week, within which the ‘“‘little horn” of Dan. 7. will run his awful course, 
intervenes this entire Church-age. Verse 27 deals with the last three and a half 
years of the seven, which are identical with the “great tribulation” (Mt. 24. 15-28); 
“time of trouble’? (Dan. 12. 1); “hour of temptation” (Rev. 3. 10). (See “Tribula- 
tion,” Psa. 2.5; Rev. 7. 14.) 

1 There is no word in the O.T. properly rendered reconcile. In A.V.*the Eng- 
lish word is found in 1 Sam. 29. 4; 2 Chr. 29. 24; Lev. 6. 30; 8. 15; 16. 20; Ezk. 45. 
15, 17, 20; Dan. 9. 24, but always improperly; atonement is invariably the meaning, 
Reconciliation is a N.T. doctrine (Rom. 5. 10; Col. 1. 21, note). 

2 Three decrees concerning Jerusalem are recorded, that of Cyrus, B.c. 536 
(Ussher), for the restoration of the “house of the LorpD God of Israel’’ (2 Chr. 36. 
22, 23; Ezra 1. 1-3); that of Darius (Ezra 6. 3-8, B.C. 521-486), and that. of Artaxerxes 
in his seventh year (Ezra 7. 7, say, B.c. 458). Artaxerxes in his twentieth year, 
B.c. 444 (Hales, Jahn), 446 (A.V.), 454 (Ussher, Hengstenberg), gave permission 
for the rebuilding of the ‘“‘city,’’ i.e. “Jerusalem” (Neh. 2. 1-8). The latter decree 
is, obviously, that from which the “seven weeks” (49 years) run, unless by “the 
commandment to restore,’’ etc., is meant the divine decree (Dan. 9. 23). In the 
present state of biblical chronology the date of the decree of Artaxerxes cannot 
be unanswerably fixed farther than to say that it was issued between 454 and 444 
Bc. In either case we are brought to the time of Christ. Prophetic time is in- 
variably so near as to give full warning, so indeterminate as to give no satisfaction 
to mere curiosity (cf. Mt. 24. 36; Acts 1.7). The 434 years reckon, of course, from 
the end of the seven weeks, so that the whole time from “the going forth of the 
commandment to restore,” etc., ‘unto the Messiah’”’ is sixty-nine weeks of years, 
or 483 years. 

3 Cf, Mt. 24. 15. The expression occurs three times in Daniel. In Dan. 9. 27 
and 12. 11 the reference is to the ‘Beast,’ “man of sin’; (2 Thes. 2. 3, 4), and is 
identical with Mt. 24. 15. In Dan. 11. 31 the reference is to the act of Antiochus 
Epiphanes, the prototype of the man of sin, who sacrificed a sow upon the altar, 


and entered the holy of holies. 
915 


[11 2 


15 And when he had spoken suc 
words unto me,I set my face to- 
ward the ground, and I became 
dumb. f = 
16 And, behold, onelike the simil- 
itude of the sons of men touched 
my lips: then I opened my mouth, 
and spake, and said unto him that 


DANIEL. 


clothed in linen, whose 2loins were 
girded with fine gold of Uphaz: 

6 ‘His body also was like the 
‘beryl, and his face as the appear- 
ance of lightning, and his eyes as} 
lamps of fire, and his arms and his|# pio 
feet like in colour to polished brass, : 
and the voice of his words like the|s The the- 


voice of a multitude. i pe stood before me, O my lord, by the 
7 And I Daniel alone saw the| (Gcq.12.7; |Vision my sorrows are turned upon 
vision: for the men that were Rev.1.9.) me, and I have retained no 


with me saw not the vision; but 


ae strength. 
a great quaking fell upon them,|° C2xso/te- 


17 For how can the servant of 


Cf.Ezk.1.16. | +! ‘ } 
so that they fled to hide them- a ‘this my lord talk with this my lord? 
selves. @CfEx32-  |for as for me, straightway there re- 
8 Therefore I was left alone, and} ]°)°%° |mained no strength in me, neither 


saw this great vision, and there} 1.12.19. 
4remained no strength in me: for| 
my comeliness was turned in me}*¥S2035 
into corruption, and I retained no} angel. The 
strength. theophany 
9 Yet heard I the voice of his} Dems again 
words: and when I heard the voice} 
of his words, then was I in a deep|fv-20. The 
sleep on my face, and my face to-| umatisn | 
ward the ground. as the holy 
10 ¢And, behold, an hand touched| angels are 


me, which set me upon my knees} f¢7t forth in 


me. . 
and upon the palms of my] heirs of sal- e ees said he, rcepamst 
t 4 F 
Tau he said. unto me, O Daniel, demons are now will I Peemcrre : with ‘the 
aman greatly beloved, understand] behalf of the |prince of Persia: and when I am 
the words that I speak unto thee,| world-sys- [gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia 


and stand upright: for unto thee} ($0, °0S#t#"|shall come. 


am I now sent. And when he had} Rev.13.8} | 21 But I wilt shew thee that which 
spoken this word unto me, I stood +i is noted in the scripture of truth: 

oer tie said he unto me, Fear “Bu Jude aS bs Stes ease eee 
: ’ 3 ev. ° > 

not, Daniel: for from the first day| 7- your prince. 

that thoy didst set thine heart to}, anasuerus 

understand, and to chasten thyself| (&zra 4.6); CHAPTER 11 

before thy God, thy words were] Artaxerxes “4 


(Ezra 4.7); 4 
heard, and I am come for thy and Darius |From Darius to the man of 


is there breath left in me. 

18 Then there came again and 
touched mé one like the appear- 
ance of a man, and he strengthened 


Ime, 

19 And said, O man greatly be- 
loved, fear not: peace be unto thee, 
be strong, yea, be strong. And 
when he had spoken unto me, I was 
strengthened, and said, Let my lord 
speak; for thou hast strengthened 


words. called “Fiys- | sin (2 Thes..2. 3 <1 
13_ But the /prince of the kingdom A yaoi sia lee » 4), Dan- 11, 
of Persia withstood me one and| ‘ta 4-24)- 


twenty days: but, lo, ¢Michael, one] i Xerxes, who A? Tin the first year of Darius 
of the chief princes, came to help| invaded the Mede, ever I, stood to con- 


me; and I remained there with the} $'2°°S,, 4g) |firm and to strengthen him. 
kings of Persia. 2 And now will I shew thee the 
14 Now I am come to make thee truth. ‘Behold, there shall stand 


understand what shall befall thy} up yet /three kings in Persia; and 


people in the latter days: for yet the the fourth shall be far richer than 
vision 7s for many days. they all: and by his strength 

t Phe spirit of prophecy here returns to that which more immediately concerned 
Daniel and his royal masters—the near future of the empire in which he was so 
great a personage. Four kings were yet to follow in Media-Persia. Then will come 
Alexander the “mighty king” of Grecia (v. 3). The division of Alexander’s empire 
into four parts (v. 4) as already predicted (Dan. 8. 22) is foretold. The troublous 
course of affairs in two parts of the disintegrated Alexandrian empire, Syria and. 
Egypt, is then traced down to verse 20. Here Antiochus Epiphanes, the “little 
-horn”’ of Chapter 8., occupies the vision down to verse 36. His pollution of the 
sanctuary is again mentioned. (Cf. Dan. 8. 9, note.) From verse 36 the interpre-. 
tation is of the final ‘little horn” (Dan. 7. 8, 24-26). See Dan. 11. 35, note. 


916 


Bt1rs) 


DANIEL. 


[11 23 


through his riches he shall stir up 
all against the realm of Grecia. 

3 And a mighty ¢king shall stand 
up, that shall rule with great do- 
minion, and do according to his 
will. 

4 And when he shall stand up, his 

kingdom shall be broken, and shall 
be divided toward the four winds of 
heaven; and not to his posterity, 
nor according to his dominion which 
he ruled: for his kingdom shall be 
plucked up, even for others beside 
those. 

5 And the king of the 4south shall 
be strong, and one of ‘his princes; 
and ¢he shall be strong above him, 
and have dominion; his dominion 
shall be a great dominion. 

6 And in the end of years ‘they 
shall join themselves together; for 
the king’s daughter of the south 
shall come to the king of the north 
to make an agreement: but she 
shall not retain the power of the 
arm; neither shall he stand, nor 
his arm: but she shall be given up, 
and they that brought her, and he 
that begat her, and he that 
strengthened her in these times. 

7 But out of afbranch of her roots 
shall one stand up in his estate, 
which shall come with an army, 
and shall enter into the fortress of 
the king of the north, and shall deal 
against them, and shall prevail: 

8 And shall also carry captives 
into Egypt their gods, with their 
princes, and with their precious 
vessels of silver and of gold; and he 
shall continue more years than the 
king of the north. 

9 So the king of the south shall 
€ome into his kingdom, and shall 
return into his own land. 

10 “But his sons shall be stirred 
up, and shall assemble a multitude 
sof great forces: and one shall cer- 
tainly come, and overflow, and pass 
through: then shall he return, and 
be stirred up, even to his fortress. 

11 And the king of the south shall 
be moved with choler, and shall 
come forth and fight with him, even 
with the king of the north: and he 
shall set forth a great multitude; 
but the multitude shall be given 
qnto his hand. 

12 And when he hath taken away 
the multitude, his heart shall be 
lifted up; and he shall cast down 
many ten thousands: but he shall 
not be strengthened by it. 

13 For the king of the north shall 
return, and shali set forth a multi- 


B.C. 534. 


@ Alexander 
the Great, 
B.C. 332. 
See Dan.8. 
5-8,21,22. 


bie. ‘‘south’’ 
of Palestine. 
Egypt is meant. 


¢ci.e. One of 
Alexander's 
princes; histori- 
cally Ptolemy 
Lagidae. 


d Not the “king of 
the south’* 
(Ptolemy 
Lagidae, to 
whom Egypt'was 
given), but the 
“king of the 
north” (v.6), 
Seleucus, to 
whom Syria was 
given. 


€i.e the descend- 
ants and succes- 
sors of Ptolemy 
Lagidae and 
Seleucus, not 
those very per- 
sonages. The 
prediction was 
fulfilled in the 
marriage of 
Berenice, daugh- 
ter of Ptolemy 
Philadelphus, to 
Antiochus 
Theos, third king 
of Syria, 
B C. 285-247. 


FS Ptolemy Euer- 
getes, brother of 
Berenice, who in- 
vadedSyria as de- 
scribed in vs. 7-9. 


9 vs.10-19, pro- 
phetic foreview 
of the wars of 
Egypt and Syria, 
Palestine (v.17) 
the battleground, 
B.C. 284-175. 


h Antiochus the 
Great, B.C. 198, 


i Probably a refer- 
ence to the mar- 
riage of Cleo- 
patra to an 
Egyptian king, 
Ptolemy 
Philometor, 


Ji.e. of Greece. 


k i.e. Historically 
one of the 
Scipios: the 
power of Rome 
felt in the East 
for the first time. 


1A reference to 
the fribute ex- 
acted of the son 
of Antiochus the 
Great by the 
Romans. 


ANAT 


tude greater than the former, and 
shall certainly come after certain 
years with a great army and with 
much riches. 

14 And in those times there shall 
many stand up against the king of 
the south: also the robbers of thy 
people shall exalt themselves to es- 
peblis the vision; but they shall 

all. 

15 So the “king of the north shall 
come, and cast up a mount, and 
take the most fenced cities: and the 
arms of the south shall not with- 
stand, neither his chosen people, 
neither shall there be any 
strength to withstand. 

16 But he that cometh against 
him shall do according to his own 
will, and none shail stand before 
him: and he shall stand in the 
glorious land, which by his hand 
shall be consumed. 

17 He shall also set his face to 
enter with the strength of his whole 
kingdom, and upright ones with 
him; thus shall he do: and he shall 
give him the ‘daughter of women, 
corrupting her: but she shall not 
stand on his side, neither be for | 


him. 

18 After this shall he turn his face 
unto the Jisles, and shall take many: 
but a “prince for his own behalf 
shall cause the reproach offered by 
him to cease; without his own re- 
proach he shall cause it to turn 
upon him. 

19 Then he shall turn his face 
toward the fort of his own land: 
but he shall stumble and fall, and 
not be found. 

20 Then shall stand up in his es- 
tate ‘a raiser of taxes in the glory 
of the kingdom: but within few 
days he shall be destroyed, neither 
in anger, nor in battle. 


The “little horn” of Dan. 8.: 
Antiochus Epiphanes (to v. 
35). (See Dan. 11. 2, note.) 


21 And in his estate shall stand 
up a vile person, to whom they 
shall not give the honour of the 
kingdom: but he shall come in 
peaceably, and obtain the kingdom 
by flatteries. 

22 And with the arms of a flood 
shall they be overflown from before 


him, and shall be broken; yea, also 
the prince of the covenant. 

23 And after the league made 
with him he shall work deceitfully: 
for he shall come up, and shall be- 
come strong with a small people. 


DANIEL. [11 

He shall enter peaceably even| B.c. 534. [indignation against the holy cov- 
ahi the fattest places of the prov- enant: so shall he do; he shall even 
ince; and he shall do that which return, and have intelligence with 
his fathers have not done, nor his = that forsake the holy cov- 

thers’ fathers; he shall scatter enant. i 

sist them the prey, and spoil, 31 And arms shall stand on his 
and riches: yea, and he shall fore-|c Egypt. part, and they shall pollute the 


ast his devices against the strong sanctuary of ‘strength, and shall 
holds: even for a time. Epiphanes’ |take away the daily sacrifice, and 
25 And he shall stir up his power} second expe- |they shall place the ‘abomination 


and his courage against the king} dition — that maketh desolate. 3 
of the “south with a great army;| 7eenrt 32 And such as do wickedly 


and the king of the south shall be] Stoppedby |against the covenant shall he cor- 
stirred up to battle with fe wo! ae Eng ee by RS is ratte 
great and mighty army; bu €| 30), he tums at do ow ; 

shall not stand: for they shall fore- posed the |@strong, and do exploits. 

cast devices against him. Jews. 33 And they that understand 
26 Yea, they that feed of the por-| - 7:5 is hise among the people ape aa 
tion of his meat shall destroy him,]" toric—+he many: yet they shall f. y the 
and his army shall overflow: and| act of Antio- sword, and by flame, by captivity, 
many shall fail down slain. chus Eyiphe and by spoil, many days. 


27 And both these kings’ hearts] 9415 refers 34 Now when they shall fall, they 


shall be to do mischief, and) to Dan.i2.11./shall be holpen with a little help: 
they shall speak lies at ate table; peepee ag a many shail cleave to them with 
but it shall not prosper: for yet p 3 atteries. 
the end shall be at the time ap- de.g. the 35 And some of them of under- 
pointed. f - aay tines 4 |Standing ane aoe tn tay thes aeg 
feldlvitivereatsichespanditoweadt| SESE Orn de 
and with great riches; and his ; i: be- 
shall be against the holy coveee 3] ¢ i evs cause it is yet for a time appointed, 
and he shall do exploits, and return) p3n.1231. The end-time. The “little horn™ 
to his own land. (Dan.7.8; z rea 

29 At the time appointed he shall| Rev.19.20.) | of Dan. 7. foe Dan.11, 2, note.) 
return, and “come toward the south; _36 And the king shall do accord- 
but it shall not be as the former. or ine tings stig d € t 
as the latter. i 

30 For the ships of Chittim shall ever: . h = 
come against him: therefore he shall vellous thin ins 
be grieved, and return, and have! igods, and shall prosp. : 


l\Here the prophetic foreview, having traced the history of the two parts of 
Alexander’s empire which had to do with Palestine and the Jews, viz. Syria and 
Egypt, to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, and having described his career, Over- 
leaps the centuries to “‘the time of the end,’’ when he of whom Antiochus Epiphanes 
was a type, the ‘‘little horn” of Dan. 7. 8, the ‘“Beast out of the sea” of Rev. 13. 4-10, 
shall appear (cf. Dan. 7. 8, note). Prophecy does not concern itself with history 
as such, but only with history as it affects Israel and the Holy Land. Antiochus 
Epiphanes was insignificant as compared with historical personages whom the Bible 
does not mention, but he scourged the covenant people and defiled God’s altar, 
thus coming into prophetic light. From verse 36 the “little horn”? of Dan. 7.8, 24-26 
fills the scene. His prosperity lasts until “the indignation” (the “time of trouble” 
of Dan. 12. 1 and Mt. 24. 21) is accomplished (v. 36). This is parallel with Rev. 
17, 10-14; 19. 19-21. Verses 37-45 supply details not mentioned in the N.T. The | 
expression “God of his fathers” (v. 37) has been held to indicate that the ‘“‘king” | 
is an apostate Jew, but this does not accord with Dan. 9. 26, which was fulfilled by | 
the Gentile armies of Rome. The “‘little horn” is an apostate, but from Christianity, 
not Judaism (cf. 1 John 2. 18, 19). Werses 38-45 describe his career. Substituting - 
“the god of forces” (i.e. forces of nature) for the true God (vs. 38, 39), he soon pre- | 
sents himself as that god (cf. 2 Thes. 2.3, 4). While his career lasts he is an irre- | 
sistible conqueror (vs. 40-44). He establishes his palace in Jerusalem, probably | 
at the time of his supreme act of blasphemous impiety (Dan. 9. 27; 12. 113) 
Mt. 24.15; 2 Thes. 2.4). From this time begins the great tribulation (Dan. 12. 
1; Mt. 24, 21) which runs its course during the last half of Daniel’s seventieth : 


week, viz. three and one half years (Dan. 7. 25; 12. 7, 11; Rev. 13. 5). See Rey. 
19. 20, note. 
918 


y 


ie 
a137]. - DANIEL. [12 7 
uetanemantg cee ished: for yet he shall come to his end, and 
at is determined shall be none shall helphim. = 


don 


e. 
ee pee cial. he. peaeast -the 
athers, nor the desire of 
nor regard any god: for he 

shall magnify himself above all. 
38 But in his estate shall he hon- 


our the God of forces: and a god 


whom his fathers knew not shall 
h ur with gold, and silver, 


CHAPTER 12. 


The great tribulation (Psa. 2. 5; 
Rev. 7.14). (See Dan. 11.35, note.) 


ND at that time shall Michael)». 


which standeth for the children of 
\thy people: and there shall be a 


and with neereprernananr eee time a trouble, ’such as never was 
“on pe ae : t since there was a nation even to 
strong holds with, Te that same time: and at that time 
yn ds with a strang y people shall be delivered, every 
whom he separ peace tor mt it one that shall be found written in 

ca o rule over many, and|¢ See Dan.11. the book. 
ric e land for gain. Pasa The Resurrections (Job 19. 25; 

40 And at the time of the end) Tribulation |1 Cor. 15.52). (See nS Ne 1.35, note.) 
shall the king of the south push at| {the great). 

: : woeere 2 And many of them that sleep in 
c i i irlwind,| Rev.7.14.)  |the dust of ia caret shall caw, 
with chariots, id wi lorsemen, some to ever. asting ife, and some 
and with many ships; and he shall|° ainttey es to shame and everlasting contempt. 
enter into the countries, and shall| Hos.13.14. ’ | 3, And they that be wise shall 
overflow and pass “over. (Job 19.25; |shine 2as the brightness of the fir- 

41 enter also into the| } ©°F15-52.) |mament; and they that turn many 
glorious land, and many countries|d Rewards. _ |to righteousness as the stars for ever 
shall be overthrown: but these shail eo é and ever. 

1 Cor.3.14.) The last message to Daniel. 


a untries: and the 


e out of his hand, even Edom, 
eae 
10n. ia 
42 He shall stretch forth his hand 
Gea toe 3 


4 But thou, O Daniel, shut up the 
words, and seal the book, even to 
the time of the 2end: many shall 
run to and fro, and knowledge shall 


43 But he a all have power over be increased. 
the treasures of gold and of silver, 5 Then I Daniel looked, and, be- 


be at his steps. 
of the east and 
ouble him: 


nacles of @ 
seas in the glorious 


hold, there stood other two, the one 
on this side of the bank of the river, 
and the other on that side of the 
bank of the river. 

6 And one said to the man clothed 


e he shall go forth with in linen, which was upon the waters 
ary to destroy, and utterly to of the river, How long shal/ it be 
ny. to the end of these wonders? 


7 And I heard the man clothed in 
linen, which was upon the waters of 
the river, when he held up his right 


1 That is, Daniel’s people, the Jews. Cf, Dan. 9. 15, 16, 20, 24; 10. 14. 


2 The “time of the end” in Daniel. 
end.”’ occurs, Dan. 8. 17-19; 9. 26; 11. 35, 40, 45; 12. 4, 6, 9. 


The expression, or its equivalent, “in the 


Summary: (1) The time 


stand up, the great prince ~~ 


of the end in Daniel begins with the violation by “the prince that shail come”’ (i.e. 
‘4ittle horn,” “man of sin,” “Beast’”’) of his covenant with the Jews for the restora- 
tion of the temple and sacrifice (Dan. 9. 27), and his presentation of himself as 
God (Dan. 9. 27; 11. 36-28; Mt. 24. 15; 2 Thes. 2. 4; Rev. 13. 4-6), and ends with 
his destruction by the appearing of the Lorp in glory (2 Thes. 2. 8; Rev. 19. 19, 20). 
(2) The duration of the “time of the end” is three and one half years, coinciding 
with the last half of the seventieth week of Daniel (Dan. 7. 25; -12. 7; Rev. 13.5). 
(3) This “time of the end” is the “time of Jacob’s trouble” (Jer. 30. 7); “a time 
of trouble such as never was since there was a nation” (Dan. 12. 1); “great tribu- 
lation such as was not from the beginning of the world ... . nor ever shall be” 
(Mt. 24. 21). The N.T., especially the Book of the Revelation, adds many 
details. 
919 


rs 


12 8] DANIEL. . [12 13 


hand and his left hand unto heaven,| B.C. 534.__|mone of the wicked shall under- 
and sware by him that liveth for/z a prophecy |Stand; but the wise shall under- . 


ever that it shall] be for a time,| describing the|/stand. : 
times, and an half; and when he] Moral state of) 11 And from the time that the. 
shall have accomplished to scatter] Daniel's day |daily sacrifice shall be taken away, 
the power of the holy people, all] to the time of/an b G ‘ 


these things shall be finished. eee. Hesalate. setninetinecs aieih he a 
8 And I heard, but I padenstood 36-43,47-49,. |thousand two hundred and ninety 
not: then said I, O my Lord, what|® See Dan.9. ee eee ee ee 


days. 
shall be the end of these things?) . pa oan 12 Blessed is he that waiteth, and 


9 And he said, Go thy way, Dan-| Ezi.28.2-8.. |cometh to the thousand three hun- 
iel: for the words are closed up and| (Dan.7.8; dred and five and thirty days. 
sealed till the time of the end. Rev.19.20.) 13 But go thou thy way till the 


10 ¢Many shall be purified, and T cen sa00. end be: for thou shalt rest, and 
made white, and tried; but the}. and 1335 stand in thy lot at the end of the 
wicked shall do wickedly: and| 42ys- édays. 


1 Three periods of “days” date from the “abomination” (i.e. the blasphemous 
assumption of deity by the Beast, v. 11; Mt. 24. 15; 2 Thes. 2.4): (1) Twelve hun- 
dred and sixty days to the destruction of the Beast (Dan. 7. 25; 12. 7; Rev. 13. 5; 
19. 19, 20). This is also the duration of the great tribulation (cf. Dan. 12. 4, note). 
(2) Dating from the same event is a period of 1290 days, an addition of thirty 
days (Dan. 12.11). (3) Again forty-five days are added, and with them the promise 
of verse 12. No account is directly given of that which occupies the interval of 
seventy-five days between the end of the tribulation and the full blessing of verse 
12. It is suggested that the explanation may be found in the prophetic descriptions 
of the events following the battle of Armageddon (Rev. 16. 14; 19. 21). The Beast 
is destroyed, and Gentile world-dominion ended, by the smiting of the “Stone cut 
out without hands” at the end of the 1260 days, but the scene is, so to speak, filled 


with the debris of the image which the “wind” must carry away before full blessing 
comes in (Dan. 2. 35). 1 


920 


a 


i HOSEA. nn 


HOSEA was a contemporary of Amos in Israel, and of Isaiah and Micah in Judah, 
and his ministry continued after the first, or Assyrian, captivity of the northern 
kingdom (2 Ki. 15. 29). His style is abrupt, metaphorical, and figurative. 

Israel is Jehovah’s adulterous wife, repudiated, but ultimately to be purified and 
restored.. This is Hosea’s distinctive message, which may be summed up in his two 
words, Lo-ammi, “not my people,” and Ammi, “‘my people.” Israel is not merely 
apostate and sinful—that is said also; but her sin takes its character from the exalted 
relationship into which she has been brought. 

The book is in three parts: I. The dishonoured wife, 1.1-3.5. II. The sinful 
people, 4. 1-13. 8. III. The ultimate blessing and glory of Israel, 13. 9-14.9. 

The events recorded in Hosea cover a period of 60 years (Ussher). 


bare a daughter. And God said 
‘unto him, Call her name ‘Lio-ruha- 
imah: for I will no more have mercy 
‘upon the house of Israel; but I will 
utterly take them away. 

7 4¢But I will have mercy upon the 
house of Judah, and will save them 
by the Lorp their God, and will 
not save them by bow, nor by 
sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor 
by horsemen. 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. Israel Jehovah’s dishon- 
oured wife, repudiated but to 
be restored (Hos. 1. 1-3. 5). 


‘HE word of the Lorp that came 
unto Hosea, the son of Beeri, 
in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, 
Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Ju- 
dah, and in the days of Jeroboam 
the son of Joash, king of Israel. eae 

a ut. . > rn 3 = 

(1) The symbolic marriage: the| Psa.73.27; (3) The birth of Lo-ammi. 
i f Jezreel. Jer.2.13; 8 Now when she had weaned Lo- 

birth of J Hea 3 r 

o~The beak ad Se thd Wend of Zi. 25.S- ruhamah, she conceived, and bare a 


the Lorp by Hosea. Anti the Lorp|?? ¥#1014#- |SO™ 74 on said God, Call his name 
said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a] cic. unpitied.|e1o-ammi: for ye are not Imy peo- 
wife of whoredoms and children of|,, 4: 3935. |ple, and I will not be your God. 
whoredoms: @for the land hath com- Saami x 
mitted great whoredom, departin&| ec i.e. not my (4) The future blessing and res- 
from the LorD. | people. toration of Israel. 
3 So he went and took Gomer the] ¢Rom.9.25,26. | 10. Yet the number of the children 
daughter of Diblaim; which con- of 2Israel shall be as the sand of the 
ceived, and bare him a son. | sea, which cannot be measured nor 
4 And the LorD said unto him, per es fee i eer come to 
Call his name Jezreel; for yet a jpass, that in the place where it was 
little while, and I will avenge the said unto them, Ye are not my 
blood of ®Jezreel upon the house of fpeople, there it shall be said unto 
Jehu, and will cause 7 ae the ate Ye are the sons of the living 
kingdom of the house of Israel. od. 
5 Ped it shall come to pass at that 11 Then shall the children of Ju- 
day, that I will break the bow of dah and the children of Israel be 
gathered together, and appoint 


Israel in the valley of Jezreel. 
rhe Birthof Lh pret themselves one head, and they shall 
(2) DUSLES DANONE ETAL IE) : come up out of the land: for great 
6 And she conceived again, and shall be the day of Jezreel. 


1 “Wily people” is an expression used in the O.T. exclusively of Israel the nation. 
It is never used of the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. See Mt. 2.6. . 

2 “Tsrael” in Hosea means the ten tribes forming the northern kingdom as dis- 
tinguished from “Judah” (the tribes of Judah and Benjamin) forming the southern 
kingdom which adhered to the Davidic family. (See 1 Ki. 12. 1-21.) The promise 
of verse 10 awaits fulfilment. See “Israel” (Gen. 12, 2, 3; Rom. 11, 26), 

. 921 


ro 


2 1] 


CHAPTER 2. 


(5) The chastisement of adulter- 
ous Israel. (Cf. 2 Ki. 17. 1-18.) 


SY ye unto your brethren, 
¢Ammi; and to your sisters, 
6’Ruhamah. 

2. Plead with your mother, plead: 
for 1she is not my ‘wife, neither am 
I her husband: let her therefore put 
away her whoredoms out of her 
sight, and her adulteries from be- 
tween her breasts; 

3 4Lest I strip her naked, and set 
her as in the day that she was born, 
and make her as a wilderness, and 
set her like a dry land, and slay her 
with thirst. 

4 And I will not have mercy upon 
her children; for they be the chil- 
dren of whoredoms. 

5 For their mother hath played 
the harlot: she that conceived them 
hath done shamefully: for she said, 
I will go after my lovers, that give 
me my bread and my water, my 
nee my flax, mine oil and my 


nk, 

6 Therefore, ‘behold, I will hedge 
up thy way with thorns, and make 
a wall, that she shall not find her 
paths. 

7 And she shall follow after her 
lovers, but she shall not overtake 
them; and she shall seek them, but 
shall not find them; then shall she 
say, I will go and return to my 
first husband; for then was it bet- 
ter with me than now. 

8 For she did not know that I 
gave her corn, and wine, and oil, 
and multiplied her silver and gold, 
which they prepared for Baal. 

9 Therefore will I return, and 
take away my corn in the time 


thereof, and my wine in the season 
thereof, and will recover my wool 
and my flax given to cover her na- 
kedness. 

10 And now will I discover her 
lewdness in the sight of her lovers, 
and none shall deliver her out of 
mine hand. 

11 I will also cause all her mirth 
to cease, her feast days, her new 


1 That Israel is the wife of Jehovah 


HOSEA. 


a@i.e. my peo- 
ple. 


bie. having 
obtained 


pity. 


c Wife of Je- 
hovah. vs. 


d Jer.13.22,26; 
Ezk.16.37, 
39. 


é Job 3.23; 
19.8; Lam, 
3.7,9. 


fi.e. trouble, 
Josh.7.26; 
Tsa.65.10. 


gice. my 
husband. 


hi.e. my lord. 


restored, is the-clear teaching of the passages. 


founded with that of the Church to Christ (Jo 
the Divine tri-unity both are true. 


é 


moons, and her sabbaths, and all 
her solemn feasts. : 

12 And I will destroy her-vines 
and her fig trees, whereof she hath 
said, These are my rewards that 
my lovers have given me: and I 
will make them a forest, and the 
beasts of the field shall eat them. 

13 And I will visit upon her the 


idays of Baalim, wherein she burned 


incense to them, and she decked 


herself with her earrings and her 
jewels, and she went after her 
lovers, and forgat me, saith the 
LorRD. 


(6) Israel, the adulterous wife, 
to be restored. 


14 Therefore, behold, I will allure 
her, and bring her into the wilder- 
ness, and speak comfortably unto 


er. 

15 And I will give her her vine- 
yards from thence, and the valley 
of fAchor for a door of hope: and 
she shall sing there, as in the days 
of her youth, and as in the day 
when she came up out of the land 
of Egypt. 

16 And it shall be at that day, 
saith the Lorp, that thou shalt call 
me Ishi; and shalt call me no more 
*Baali. 

17_ For I will take away the names 
of Baalim out of her mouth, and 
they shall no moré be remembered 
by their name. 

18 And in that day will I make a 
covenant for them with the beasts 
of the field, and with the fowls of 
heaven, and with the creeping 
things of the ground: and I will 
break the bow and the sword and 
the battle out of the earth, and will. 


hn 3. 29, refs.), 
The N.T. speaks of the Church as 4 virgin 


make them to lie down safely. 

19 And I will betroth thee unto 
me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee 
unto me in righteousness, and in 
judgment, and in lovingkindness, 
and in mercies. 

20 I will even betroth thee unto 
me in faithfulness: and thou shalt ~ 
know the Lorp2=" 4 

21 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, I will hear, saith the 


(see vs. 16-23), now disowned but yet to be 


This relationship is not to be con- 
In the mystery of 


espoused to one husband (2 Cor, 11. 1, 2); which could never be said of an adulterous 


wife, restored in grace. 


Jehovah’s earthly wife (Hos. 
19. 7). 


2. 23); the Church the Lamb’s heavenly bri 


922 


Israel is, then, to be the restored and forgi i 2 
hovah, the Church the virgin wife of the Lamb (John 3. 29 entero? Baie 


; Rev. 19, 6-8); Israel 
e (Rev. 


Lorp, I will hear the heavens, and 
they shall hear the earth; 

22 And the earth shall hear the 
corn, and the wine, and the oil; 
and they shall hear Jezreel. 

23 And I will sow her unto me in 


the earth; and I will have mercy|? 20%9;?5 


upon her that had not -obtained Tage t Bet. 
mercy; and I will say to them] ?-10- 
which were not my “people, Thou}; chrise 
art my people; and “they shall say,|. (First 
Thou art my God. Advent) 
(Gen.3.i5; 
CHAPTER 3. ners tS.) 
iif 
(7) The undyiné love of Jehovah: peice os 
the future Davidic kingdom. | ®!*- 
HEN said the Lorp unto me, Bias 
Go yet, love a woman beloved! 4,5; Joel 
of her friend, yet an adulteress, ac- soe a 
cording to the love of the Lorp| $2'ivs} 
toward the children of Israel, who 
e John 19.15. 


look to other gods, and love flagons 
of wine. 

2 SoI bought her to me for fifteen 
pieces of silver, and for an ‘homer 
of barley, and an half homer of 
barley: 

3 And I said unto her, Thou shalt 
abide for me many days; thou shalt 
not play the harlot, and thou 
shalt not be for another man: so 
will1 also be for thee. 

4 For the children of Israel shall} 9-11.) 
abide many days 4without a “king,|, 5.0. 19.9. 


f Israel (pro- 
phecies). 
vs.4,5. 
3.1-8,15-20. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


g Christ 
(Second 


and without a prince, and without} y.4.1.18;’3. 
a sacrifice, and without an itmage,| 13,14; Jer- 
and without an ephod, and with- ravage Mic. 
out teraphim: a 

5 Afterward shall the children of} i Jer.4.28; 
Israel freturn, and seek the Lorp| 224: ae 


their God, and David their ‘king; 


“and shall fear the Lorp and his|jfsa.5 13. 


goodness in the latter days. k 1 Sam.2.30; 


Mal.2.9; 
CHAPTER 4. Phil.3.19. 
2 Tim.4. 


1 
Part Il. The sinful people (Hos.| 3,4. 
bse 8). (1) The general), rey.26.26; 


HES the word of the LORD, 

ye children of Israel: for the Carer 
Lorp hath “a controversy with the) kzx'6/13; 
inhabitants of the land, because| 20.28. 
there is no truth, nor mercy, nor), 40. 7.17; 
knowledge of God in the land. |” Rom.1.28.. 
2 By swearing, and lying, and) 
killing, and stealing, and com-) 
mitting adultery, they break ont. | 
and blood toucheth blood. 

3 ?Therefore shall the land mourn, 
and every one that dwelleth there-| 

in shall languish, with the beasts -. 


HOSEA. 


Joel 


[4 15 


of the field, and with the fowls of 
heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea 
also shall be taken away. 

4 Yet let no man strive, nor 
reprove another: for thy peopie 
are as they that strive with the 
priest. , 

5 Therefore shalt thou fall in the 
day, and the prophet also shall fall 
with thee in the night, and I will 
destroy thy mother. 


(2) The wilful ignorance of Israel. 


6 JMy people are destroyed for 
lack of knowledge: because thou 
hast rejected knowiedge, I will also 
reject thee, that thou shalt be no 
priest to me: seeing thou hast for- 
gotten the law of thy God, I will 
also forget thy children, 

7 As they were increased, so they 
sinned against me: “therefore will 
I change their glory into shame. 

8 They eat up the sin of my peo- 
ple, and they set their heart on 
their iniquity. 

9 And there shall be, ‘like people, 
like priest: and I will punish them 
for their ways, and reward them 
their doings. 

10 “For they shall eat, and not 
lhave enough: they shall commit 
whoredom, and shall not increase: 
because they have left off to take 
heed to the LorpD, 

11 Whoredom and wine and new 
wine take away the heart. 


(3) The idolatry of Israel. 


12 My people ask counsel at their 
stocks, and their staff declareth 
unto them: for the spirit of whore- 
doms hath caused them to err, and 
they have gone a whoring from 
under their God. 

13 "They sacrifice upon the tops 
of the mountains, and burn incense 
upon the hilis, under oaks and pop- 
lars and elms, because the shadow 
thereof is good: therefore your 
|daughters shall commit whoredom, 
and your spouses shall commit 
adultery. 

14 I will not punish your daugh- 
ters when they commit whoredom, 
nor your spouses when they commit 
adultery: for themselves are sepa- 
rated with whores, and they sacri- 
fice with harlots: therefore the 
people that doth not understand 
shall fall. 

15 Though thou, Israel, play the 
harlot, yet let not Judah offend; 
and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither 


4 16] 


go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, 
The Lorp liveth. 

16 ®For Israel slideth back as a 
backsliding heifer: now the LorpD 
will feed them as a lamb in a large 
place. & 

17 Ephraim 1s joined to idols: let 
him alone. 

18 Their drink is sour: they have 
committed whoredom continually: 
her rulers with shame do love, Give 


ye. 

19 The wind hath bound her up 
in her wings, and they shall be 
‘ashamed because of their sacrifices. 


CHAPTER 5. 


(4) The withdrawn face of 
Jehovah. .- 


HEAk ye this, O priests; and 
hearken, ye house of Israel; 
and give ye ear, O house of the 
king; for judgment is toward you, 
because ye have been a snare on 
Mizpah, and a net spread upon 
Tabor. 

2 And the revolters are profound 
to make slaughter, though I have 
been a rebuker of them all. 

3 I know Ephraim, and Israel is 
not hid from me: for now, O Eph- 
taim, thou committest whoredom, 
and Israel is defiled. 

4 They will not frame their do- 
ings to turn unto their God: for the 
spirit of whoredoms is in the midst 
of them, and they have not known 
the Lorp. 


5 And ‘the pride of Israel doth} 
testify to his face: therefore shall] 


Israel and Ephraim fall in their 


iniquity; Judah also shall fall with] 
m. 


HOSEA. 


6 Mt.15.14. 

¢ Hos.7.10. 

d Prov.1.28; 
Isa.1.15; 
Jer-11.11; 
Ezk.8.18; 
Mic.3.4; 
John 7.34. 


e Hos.8.1; 
Joel 2.1. 


f Hos.4:15; 
Josh.7.2. 


g Jud.5.14. 
h Deut.19.14; 
27.17. 


¢ Deut.28.33. 
| 7 Prov.12.4. 
k Jer.30.12. 


| | Hos.13.7,8; 
| Lam.3.10. 


and with their herds to seek the| 12.7 


Lorp; but they shall not find him; 


he hath withdrawn himself from] 


now 
shall a month devour them with 
their portions. 

8 ‘Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, 
and the trumpet in Ramah: /Scery 
aloud at Beth-aven, éafter thee, O 
Benjamin. 


10 The princes of Judah were like 
them that ‘remove the bound: 


924 


[68 


therefore I will pour out my wrath 
upon them like water. 

11 Ephraim is ‘oppressed and 
broken in judgment, because he 
willingly walked after the com- 
mandment. ~ 

12 Therefore will I be unto Eph- 

faim as a moth, and to the house 
of Judah Yas rottenness. 
13 When Ephraim saw his sick- 
ness, and Judah saw *his wound, 
then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, 
and sent to king Jareb: yet could 
he not heal you, nor cure you of 
your wound. 

14 For ‘I will be unto Ephraim as 
a hon, and as a young lion to the 
house of Judah: I, even I, will tear 
and go away; I will take away, 
and none shall rescue. him. 

15 I will go and retum to my 
place, till they acknowledge their 
offence, and seek my face: in their 
affliction they will seek me early. 


CHAPTER 6. 


(5) The voice of the remnant in 
the last days. (Cf. “Remnant,” 
Isa. 1. 9; Rom. 11. s.) 


Gome: and let us return unto the 
LorpD: for he hath torn, and 
he will heal us; he hath smitten, 
and he will bind us up. 

2 After two days will he revive 
us: in the third day he will raise us 
up, and we shall live in his sight. 

3 Then shall we know, if we fol- 
low on to know the Lorn: his go- 
ing forth is prepared as the morn- 
ing; and he shall come unto us as 
the rain, as the latter and former 
Tain unto the earth. 


(6) The response of Jehovah. 


4 ™O Ephraim, what shall I do 
junto thee? O Judah, what shall I 
do unto thee? for your goodness is 
jas a morning cloud, and as the 
early dew it goeth away. 

5 Therefore have I hewed them 
by the prophets; I have slain them 
by the words of my mouth: and 
thy judgments are as the light that 
goeth forth. 

6 For I desired *mercy, and not 
sacrifice; and the knowledge of God 
more than burnt-offerings. 

7 But they like men have trans- 
gressed the covenant: there have 
they dealt treacherously against 


me. 
8 Gilead is a city of them that 
roe iniquity, and is polluted with 


re 


6 9] 


9 And as troops of robbers wait 
for aman, so the company of priests 
murder in the way by consent: for 
they commit lewdness- 

10 I have seen an horrible thing 
in the house of Israel: there is the 
whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is 
defiled. 

11 Also, O Judah, he hath set an 
harvest for thee, when I returned 
the captivity of my people. 


CHAPTER 7. 


(Response of Jehovah, continued. 
Begins Hos. 6. 4.) 


HEN I would have healed 

Israel, then the iniquity of 
Ephraim was discovered, and the 
wickedness of Samaria: for they 
commit falsehood; and the thief 
cometh in, and the troop of robbers 
spoileth without. 

2 And they consider not in their 
hearts that I remember all their 
wickedness: now their own doings 
have beset them about; they are 
before my face. 

3 They make the king glad with 
their wickedness, and the princes 
with their lies. 

4 They are ali adulterers, a. an 
oven heated by the baker, who 
ceaseth from raising after he hath 
kneaded the dough, until it be 
leavened. 

5 In the day of our king the 
princes have made him sick with 
bottles of wine; he stretched out 
his hand with scorners. 

6 For they have made ready their 
heart like an oven, whiles they lie 
~ in wait: their baker sleepeth all the 
night; in the morning it burneth as 
a flaming fire. 

7 They are all hot as an oven, 
and have devoured their judges; 
all their kings are fallen: ¢there is 
none among them that calleth unto 


me. 

8 Ephraim, he hath mixed him- 
self among the people; Ephraim is 
a cake not turned. 

9 Strangers have devoured his 
strength, and he knoweth it not: 
yea, gray hairs are here and there 
upon him, yet he knoweth not. | 

10 And the pride of Israel testifi- 
eth to his face: and they do not re- 
turn to the Lorp their God, nor 
seek him for all this. : 
‘11 Ephraim also is like a silly 
dove without heart: they call to 
Egypt thev go to Assyria. 


HOSEA. 


[89 


B.C. 780. 


a 1sa.64.7. 
6 Hos.11.11, 
¢ Ezk.12.13. 


d Ex.14.30, 
note; 
Isa.59.20, 
note. 


é Job 35.9,10; 
Psa.78.36; 
Jer.3.10; 
Zech.7.5. 


f Hos.5.15; 
Psa.78.34. 


12 When they shall go, I will 
spread my net upon them; I will 
bring them down as the fowls of 
the heaven; I will chastise them, 
as their congregation hath heard. 

13 Woe unto them! for they have 
fled from me: destruction unto 
them! because they have trans- 
gressed against me: though I have 
dredeemed them, yet they have 
spoken lies against me. 

14 ¢And they have not cried unto 
me with their heart, when they 
howled upon their beds: they as- 
semble themselves for corn and 
wine, and they rebel against me. 

15 Though I have bound and 
strengthened their arms, yet do 
they imagine mischief against me. 

16 They return, but not to the 
most High: they are like a deceitful 
bow: their princes shall fall by the 
sword for the rage of their tongue: 
this shall be their derision in the 
land of Egypt. 


CHAPTER 8. 


(Response of Jehovah, continued, 
Begins Hos. 6. 4.) 


ET the trumpet to thy mouth. 

He shall come as an eagle 
against the house of the LoRD, be- 
cause they have transgressed my 
covenant, and trespassed against 
my law. 

2 fIsrael shali cry unto me, My 
God, we know thee. 

3 Israel hath cast off the thing 
that is good: the enemy shall pur- 
sue him, 

4 They have set up kings, but not 
by me: they have made princes, 
and I knew it not: of their silver 
and their gold have they made them 
idols, that they may be cut off. 

5 Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast 
thee off; mine anger is kindled 
against them: how long will it be 
ere they attain to innocency? 

6 For from Israel was it also: the 
workman made it; therefore it rs 
not God: but the calf of Samaria 
shall be broken in pieces. 

7 &For they have sown the wind, 
and they shall reap the whirlwind: 
it hath no stalk: the bud shall 


lyield no meal: if so be it yield, the 


strangers shall swallow it up. 

8 Israel is swallowed up: now 
shall they be among the Gentiles 
as a vessel wherein is no pleasure. 

9 For they are gone up to Assyria, 
a wild ass alone by himself: Eph- 
raim hath hired lovers. 


~ 


10 Yea, though they have hired 
among the nations, now will I 
gather them, and they shail sorrow 
a little for the burden of the king 
of princes. 

"11 Because Ephraim hath made 
many altars to sin, altars shall be 
unto him to sin. 

12 I have written to him ¢the 
great things of my law, but they 
were counted as a strange thing. 

13 They sacrifice flesh for the 
sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat 
it; but the LorD accepteth them 
not; “now will he remember their 
iniquity, and visit their sins: they 
shall return to Egypt. 


14 ‘For Israel hath forgotten his|? Devty68 


Psa.119.18; 
Maker, and buildeth temples 3 and} 147.19,20. 
Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: Ave wate 
but I will send a fire upon his cities,|” Amos 8.7. 
and it shall devour the palaces 
thereof, c Deut.32.18. 
d Lev.25.23; 
CHAPTER 9. ead 


(Response of Jehovah, continued. |e Hos.8.13; 
Begins Hos. 6. 4.) 11.5. 


REJOICE not, O Israel, for joy, 
as other people: for thou hast 
gone a whoring from thy God, thou|s Hos.10.8:, 
hast loved a reward upon every| 13-3443.” 
cornfloor. 

2 The floor and the winepress|/ ee Hee 
shall not feed them, and the new} 3357." ” 
wine shall fail in her. : 

3 They shall not dwell 4in thel# woe 
Lorp’s land; “but Ephraim shall| “27-1: 
return to Egypt, and ‘they shall eat! j Num.25.3; 
unclean things in Assyria. Psa.106.28. 

4 They shall not offer wine offer-};. Ki.18.21; 
ings to the LorpD, neither shall they| Mt.6.24. 
be pleasing unto him: their sacri- : ES 
fices shall be unto them as the)! v:2633: 
bread of mourners; all that eat|m CfHos. 
thereof shall be polluted: for their| 14-8. 
bread for their soul shall not come 
into the house of the Lorp. 

5 What will ye do in the solemn 
day, and in the day of the feast of 
the Lorp? 

6 For, lo, they are gone because of 
destruction: Egypt shali gather 
them up, Memphis shall bury them: 
the pleasant places for their silver, 
nettles shall possess them: thorns 
shall be in their tabernacles. 

7 The days of visitation are come, 
the days of recompence are come:| 
{srael shall know it: the prophet zs 
a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for 
the multitude of thine iniquity, and 
the great hatred, ‘ 

8 The “watchman of Ephraim! 


f Ezk.4.13; 
Dan.1.8. 


926 


was with my God: but the prophet 
is a snare of a fowler in all his ways, 
and hatred in the house of his 
God. 

9 They have deeply corrupted 
themselves, as in the days of 
Gibeah: therefore he will Temem- 
ber their iniquity, he will visit 
their sins. A 

10 I found Israel like grapes in the 
wilderness; I saw your fathers as 
the ‘firstripe in the fig tree at her 
first time: but they went to JBaal- 
peor, and separated themselves unto 
that shame; and their abomina- 
tions were according as they loved. 

11 As for Ephraim, their glory 
shall fly away like a bird, from the 
birth, and from the womb, and from 
the conception. : 

12 Though they bring up their 
children, yet will I bereave them, 
that there shall not be a man 
left: yea, woe also to them when I 
depart from them! , 

13 Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is 
planted in a pleasant place: but 
Ephraim shall bring forth his chil- 
dren to the murderer. 

14 Give them, O LorpD: what wilt 
thou give? give them a miscarrying 
womb and dry breasts. 

15 All their wickedness is in Gil- 

gal: for there I hated them: for the 
wickedness of their doings I will 
drive them out of mine house, I will 
love them no more: all their princes 
are revolters. 
_16 Ephraim is smitten, their root 
is dried up, they shall bear no fruit: 
yea, though they bring forth, vet 
will I slay even the beloved fruit 
of their womb, 

17_ My God will *cast them away, 
because they did not hearken unto 
him: and they shall be ‘wanderers 
among the nations. 


CHAPTER 10. 


(Response of Jehovah, continued, 
| Begins Hos. 6. 4.) 


[SRAEL is an empty vine, he 
bringeth forth fruit unto him- 
self: according to the multitude of 
his fruit he hath increased the al- 
tars; according to the goodness of 
his land they have made goodly 
"2 Their, heart is divided 

eir he: is divided; now 
shall they be found faulty: he shall 
break down their altars, he shall 
spoil their images. 
3 For now they shall say, We 


a. ne) 


10 4] 


have no king, because we feared not 


the LorD; what then should a king 


do to us? 

4 They have spoken words, swear- 
ing falsely in making a covenant: 
thus judgment springeth up as 
hemlock in the furrows of the 
field. 

5 The inhabitants of Samaria} 
shall fear because of “the calves of | 
Beth-aven: for the people thereof 
shall mourn over it, and the priests 
thereof that rejoiced on it, >for the 
glory thereof, because it is departed 
from it. 

6 It shall be also carried unto As- 
syria for a present to king Jareb: 
Ephraim shall receive shame, and 
Israel shall be ashamed of his own 
counsel, 

7 As for Samaria, her king is cut 
off as the foam upon the water. 

8 The high places also of Aven, 
the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed: 
the thorn and the thistle shall come 
up on their altars; and they shall 
say to the mountains, “Cover us: 
and to the hills, Fall on us. 

9 O Israel, thou hast sinned from 
the days of Gibeah: there they 
stood: ¢the battle in Gibeah against 
the children of iniquity did not 
overtake them. 

10 f¢1s in my desire that I should 
chastise them; and the people shall 
be gathered against them, whcn 
they shall bind themselves in their 
two furrows. 

11 And Ephraim is as “an heifer 
that is taught, and loveth to tread 
out the corn; but I passed over 
upon her fair neck: I will 
make Ephraim to ride; Judah 
_. shall plow, and Jacob shall break 
his clods. 

12 Sow to pcb in righteous- 
ness, reap in mercy; fbreak up your 
fallow ground: for it 1s time to seek 
the Lorp, till he come and rain 
righteousness upon you. 

13 Ye have plowed wickedness, ye 
have reaped iniquity; ye have 
eaten the fruit of lies: because thou) 
didst strust in thy way, in the mul-; 
titude of thy mighty men. 

14 Therefore shail a tumult arise] 
among thy people, and all thy for- 
tresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman 
spoiled *Beth-arbel in the day of 
battle: the mother was dashed in 
pieces upon her children. 

15 So shall Beth-el do unto you 
because of your great wicledness: 
in a morning shall the king of Israel 
utterly be cut off. 


@ Hos.8.5,5; 
1 Ki.12,28, 
29. 

6 Hos.9.11 

¢ Lk.23.30. 

d See Jud.20. 


e Jer.50.11; 
Mic.4.13, 


f Jer.4.3, 


g Psa.2.12, 
note, 


h 2 Ki,18.34; 
19/13. 


z Mt.2.15. 
j Lev.26.13. 


k i.e. to Jeho- 
vah. 


1 Gen.14.8; 19. 


24,25; Deut. 
29.23; Amos 
4.11. 


m Zech.8.14, 
note, 


n Hos.8.7, 


927 


{121 


CHAPTER 11. 


~  itReseanee of Jehovah, continued, 
Begins Hos, 6, 4.) 


HEN Israel was a child, then 
I loved him, and called ‘my 
json out of Egypt. 

2 As they called them, so they 
went from them: they "sacrificed 
unto Baalim, and burned incense 
to graven images. 

3 I taught Ephraim also to go, 
taking them by their arms; but they 
knew not that I healed them. 

4 I drew them with cords of a 
man, with bands of love: and JI 
was to them as they that take off 
the yoke on their jaws, and I laid 
meat unto them. 

5 He shall not return into the land 
of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be 
his king, because they refused to 
kreturn. 

6 And the sword shall abide on 
his cities, and shall consume his 
branches, and devour them, be- 
cause of their own counsels. 

7 And my people are bent to 
backsliding from me: though they 
called them to the most High, none 
at all would exalt him. 

8 How shail I give thee up, 
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, 
Israel? how shall I make thee as 
‘Admah? how shall I set thee as 
Zeboim? mine heart is turned 
within me, my “repentings are 
kindled together. 

9 I will not execute the fierceness 
of mine anger, I will not return to 


fe \, 


destroy Ephraim: for.l.am_ “God Ct eh 


and not man; the Holy One inthe 
midst of thee: and I will not’enter 
into the city. 

10 They shall walk after the 
Lorb: he shall roar like a lion: 
when he shall roar, then the chil- 
dren shall tremble from the west. 

11 They shall tremble as a bird 
out of Egypt, and as a dove out of 
the land of Assyria: and I will place 
them in their’ houses, saith the 
LorpD. 

12 Ephraim compasseth me about 
with lies, and the house of Is- 
rael with deceit: but Judah yet 
ruleth with God, and is faithful 
with the saints. 


CHAPTER 12. 
(Response of Jehovah, continued. 
Begins Hos. 6. 4.) 

PHRAIM “feedeth on wind, and 
followeth after the east wind: 
he daily increaseth lies and desola- 


“\ 


12 2] HOSEA. 
tion; and they do make a covenant| B.C. 725. 
with the Assyrians, and oil is car- 
ried into Egypt. 

2 %The LorpD hath also a contro- 
versy with Judah, and will punish 
Jacob according to his ways; ac- 
cording to his doings will he recom- 
pense him. 

3 He took his brother >by the heel) , proe.4.1; 
in the womb, and by oe strength] Mic.6.2. 
he ‘had power with God: 

4 Yea, he had power over the]? G¢7-25-26- 
@angel, and prevailed: he wept, and} c Gen.32.24. 
made supplication unto him: he Parenti a 
found him in «Beth-el, and there he|* 757..°" 
spake with us; 

5 Even the Lorp God of hosts; aay 
the LorD is his ‘memorial. ee eg 

6 Therefore Sturn thou to thy 
God: keep mercy and judgment,|/Ex-3.15. 
and wait on thy God continually. |. v5.14 1; 

A He isa poe ae eee Mic.6.8. 
of deceit are in his hand: he love’ f 
£0 oppress. h 2 Ki.17.13. 

; 8 And Ephraim said, Yet I am be-] i Gen.28.5; 
come rich, I have found me out sub-| Deut.26.5. 


stance: in all my labours they shall 


Rig es j Gen.29.20, 
find none iniquity in me that were!” 28. 


sin. 3 
9 And I that am the Lorp thy Rees 
God from the land of Egypt will yet| Psa.77.20; 
make thee to dwell in tabernacles,| Isa-63.11; 
as in the days of the solemn feast.| Mic-&4- 
10 AI have also spoken by the| 1! Hos.11.2: 
prophets, and I have multiplied| 2 Ki.17.16, 
visions, and used similitudes, by| !* 
the ministry of the prophets. m 2 Sam.17. 
11 Is there iniquity in Gilead? ee 


surely they are vanity: they sacri- 
fice bullocks in Gilgal; yea, their]: Resurrec- 


altars are as heaps in the furrows] tion. 
Mt.9.23-25. 
of the fields. (Job 19.25; 


1Z And Jacob ‘fled into the coun- 
try of Syria, and Israel served for 
a wife, and for a wife he kept 
sheep. 

13 And *by a prophet the Lorp 
brought Israel out of Egypt, and by 
a prophet was he preserved. 

14 Ephraim provoked him to 
anger most bitterly: therefore shall 
he leave his biood upon him, and 
his reproach shall his Lord return 
unto him. 


CHAPTER 13. 
(Response of Jehovah, concluded. 
Begins Hos. 6. 4.) 
WEEN Ephraim spake trem- 

bling, he exalted himself in 


Israel; but ‘when he offended in 
Baal, he died. 


o Heb. goel, 
Redemp. 
(Kinsman 
type). 
Tsa.59.20, 
note. 


p 1 Cor.15.55. 


q Heb. Sheol, 
also in pre- 
ceding 
clause. See 
Hab.2.5, 
note. 


1 The response of Jehovah continues 


~~ treaty and promise. 928 


ne 


[13 15 


2 And now they sin more and 
more, and have made them molten 
images of their silver, and idols ac- 
cording to their own understanding, 
all of 1t the work of the craftsmen: 
they say of them, Let the men that 
sacrifice kiss the calves. 

3 Therefore they shall be as the 
morning cloud, and as the early 
dew that passeth away, as the chaff 
that is driven with the whirlwind 
out of the floor, and as the smoke 
out of the chimney. 

4 Yet I arm the Lorp thy God 
from the land of Egypt, and thou 
shalt know no god but me: for there 
is no saviour beside me. 

5 I did know thee ‘in the wilder- 
ness, in the land of great drought. 

6 According to their pasture, so 
were they filled; they were filled, 
and their heart was exalted; there- 
fore have they forgotten me. 

7 Therefore I will be unto them as 
a lion: as a leopard by the way will 
I observe them: 

8 I will meet them “as a bear 
that is bereaved of her whelps, 
and will rend the caul of their heart, 
and there will I devour them like a 
lion: the wild beast shall tear them. 


toe III. 1The ultimate blessing 
of Israel in the kingdom (Hos. 
13. 9-14, 9), 


9 O Israel, thou hast destroyed 
thyself; but in me is thine help. 

10 Iwill be thy king: where is any 
other that may save thee in all thy 
cities? and thy judges of whom thou 
saidst, Give me a king and princes? 

11 I gave thee a king in mine 


1 Cor.15.52.) }|anger, and took Arm away in my 


wrath. 

12 The iniquity of Ephraim is 
bound up; his sin is hid. 

13 The sorrows of a travailing 
woman shall come upon him: he is 
an unwise son; for he should not 
stay long in the place of the break- 
ing forth of children. 

4 I will ransom them from the 
power of the “grave; I will °redeem 
them from ?death: O death, I will 
be thy plagues; 2O grave, I will be 
thy destruction: repentance shall be 
hid from mine eyes. 

15 Though he be fruitful among 
his brethren, an east wind shall 
come, the wind of the Lorp shall 
come up from the wilderness, and 
his spring shall become dry, and 


to the end, but at verse 9 changes to en- 


13 16] 


HOSEA. 


[14 9 


his fountain shall be dried up: he 
‘shail spoil the treasure of all pleas- 
ant vessels. 

16 Samaria shall become desolate; 
“for she hath rebelled against her 
God: they shall fall by the sword: 
their infants shall be dashed in 
pieces, and their women with child 
shall be ripped up. 


CHAPTER 14. 


ISRAEL, return unto the 
LorpD thy God; for thou hast 
fallen by thine iniquity. 

2 Take with you words, and turn 
to the LorpD: say unto him, Take 
away all iniquity, and receive us 
graciously: so will we render the 
calves of our lips. 

3 Asshur shall not save us; we} 
wili not ride upon horses: neither 


will we say any more to the work 
of our hands, Ye are our guds: for 
in thee the fatherless findeth mercy. 


B.C. 725. 


a 2 Ki.18.12, 


b Hos.12.6; 
Joel 2.13. 


d Eph.1.6. 


e Job 29.19; 
Prov.19.12, 


f Psa.52.8; 
128.3. 


g John 15.4. 
Cf.Hos.10. 


1. 


929 


1. See Jas. 
17. 


4 I will heal their backsliding, 
4J will love them freely: for mine 
anger is turned away from him. 

5 ¢I will be as the dew unto Israel: 
he shall grow as the lily, and cast 
forth his roots as Lebanon. 

6 His branches shall spread, and 
fhis beauty shall be as the olivé 
tree, and his smell as Lebanon. 

7 They that dwell under his 
shadow shail return; they shall re- 
vive as the corn, and grow as the 
vine: the scent thereof shall be as 
the wine of Lebanon. * 

8 Ephraim shall say, What have 
I to do any more with idols? I have 
heard him, and observed him: I 
am like a green fir tree. &From 
me is thy fruit found. 

9 Who is wise, and he shall un, 
derstand these things? prudent, 
and he shall know them? for the 
ways of the LORD are right, and 
the just shall walk in them: but the 
transgressors shail fall therein. 


nH JOEL. a? 


JOEL, a prophet of Judah, probably exercised his ministry during the reign of Joash 
(2 Chr, 2%. to 24.). In his youth he may have known Elijah, and he certainly was 
a contemporary of Elisha. The plagues of insects, which were the token of the 
divine chastening, give occasion for the unveiling of the coming ‘“‘day of the LorD” 
oat 12, refs.), in its two aspects of judgment on the Gentiles and blessing for 
srael, 
Joel is in three chief parts: I. The plague of insects, 1.1-20. II. The day of 


the Lorp, 2. 1-3. 8. III. Retrospect of the day of the Lorp, and full kingdom bless- 
ing, 3. 9-21. 


B.C. 800. |which the cankerworm hath left 
hath the caterpiller eaten. 

5 Awake, ye drunkards, and 
weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of 
wine, because of the new wine; for 
it is cut off from your mouth. 

6 For a nation is come up upon 
my land, strong, and without num- 
ber, whose teeth are the teeth of a 

aLit. meat. lion, and he hath the cheek teeth 
of a great lion. 

7 He hath laid my vine waste, 
and barked my fig tree: he hath 
made it clean bare, and cast it 
away; the branches thereof are 
made white. 

8 Lament like a virgin girded 
with sackcloth for the husband of 
her youth. 

9 The “‘meat-offering and the 
drink-offering is cut off from the 


‘ CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. The plague of insects (vs. 
1-20). (1) Introduction (vs. 1-3). 


HE word of the Lorp that came 
to Joel the son of Pethuel. 

2 Hear this, ye old men, and give 
ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. 
Hath this been in your days, or 
even in the days of your fathers? 

3 Tell ye your children of it, and 
Jet your children tel] their children, 
and their children another genera- 
tion. 


(2) Desolation of the land. 


4 That which the !palmerworm 
hath left hath the locust eaten; and 
that which the locust hath left hath 
the cankerworm eaten; and that 


1 The palmerworm, locust, etc., are thought to be different forms, at different 
stages of development, of one insect. The essential fact is that, according to the 
usual method of the Spirit in prophecy, some local circumstance is shown to be of 
spiritual significance, and is made the occasion of a far-reaching prophecy (e.g. Isa. 
7. 1-14, where the Syrian invasion and the unbelief of Ahaz give occasion to the 
great prophecy of verse 14). Here in Joel a plague of devouring insects is shown 
to have spiritual significance (Joel J. 13, 14), and is made the occasion of the proph- 
ecy of the day of the Lorp, not yet fulfilled (Isa. 2. 12, refs.). This is more devel- 
oped in Joel 2., where the literal locusts are left behind, and the future day of Jehovah 
fills the scene. j 

The whole picture is of the end-time of this present age, of the “times of the 
Gentiles” (Lk. 21. 24; Rev. 16. 14); of the battle of Armageddon (Rev. 16. 14; 19. 
11-21); of the regathering of Israel (Rom. 11. 26, note), and of kingdom blessing. 
It is remarkable that Joel, coming at the very beginning of written prophecy (B.c. 
836), gives the fullest view of the consummation of all written prophecy. 

The order of events is: (1) The invasion of Palestine from the north by Gentile 
world-powers headed up under the Beast and false prophet (Joel 2. 1-10; ““Arma- 
geddon,” Rev. 16. 14, refs.); (2) the’ Lord’s army and destruction of the invaders 
(Joel 2. 11; Rev. 19. 11-21); (3) the repentance of Judah in the land (Joel 2. 12-17; 
Deut. 30. 1-9, note); (4) the answer of Jehovah (Joel 2. 18-27); (5) the effusion of 
the Spirit in the (Jewish) “last days” (Joel 2. 28, 29); (6) the return of the Lord 
in glory and the setting up of the kingdom (Joel 2. 30-32; Acts 15. 15-17) by the re- 
gathering of the nation and the judgment of the nations (Joel 3. 1-16); (7) full and 
permanent Kingdom blessing (Joel 3. 17-21; Zech. 14. 1-21; Mt, 25. 32, note). 


930, 


Pr my JOEL. yay, 


house of the LORD; the priests, the 
LorpD’s ministers, mourn. 

10 The field is wasted, the land 
mourneth; for the corn is wasted: 
the new wine is dried up, the oil 
languisheth. 

11 Be ye ashamed, O ye husband- 
men; howl, O ye vinedressers, for 


CHAPTER 2. 

Part II. The day of the Lorp: 
(1) The invading host from 
the north preparatory to Ar- 
mageddon (Rev. 16. 14, refs.). 

Bow ye the trumpet in Zion, 

and sound an alarm in my holy 


the wheat and for the barley; be- mountain: let all the inhabitants 
cause the harvest of the field is of the land tremble: for the day of 
perished. : the Lorp ¢cometh, for it is nigh at 
12 The vine is dried up, and the hand; 
fig tree languisheth; the pome- _2 A day of darkness and of gloom- 
granate tree, the palm tree also, and iness, a day of clouds and of thick 
the apple tree, even all the trees of darkness, as the morning spread 
the field, are withered: because joy} upon the mountains: a great peo- 
is withered away from the sons of| |... ear ple and a strong; there hath not 
men. * |been ever the like, neither shall be 


13 Gird yourselves, and lament,|b Sanctify, jany more after it, even to the years 
ye priests: howl, ye ministers of the’ pe Gta of many. generations. 
altar: come, lie all night in sack-| (Gen.23: 3 A fire devoureth before them; 
cloth, ye ministers of my God: for| Zech.8.3.) and behind them a flame burneth: 
the ¢meat-offering and the drink- the land is “as the garden of Eden 


offering is withholden from the|*7éfocan). |before them, and behind them a 
Beret re ioe tea| Beit, (een means a 
emn assembly, gather the elders qtv2i>” | 4 The appearance of them is as 
Be De ae Seto See joey rl. Ineeeeren eo chal they mark OM 
God, and cry unto the Lorp, icy so 5 Like the noise of chariots on the 


32; Joel 3.5- |tops of mountains shall they leap, 
The piague of insects: (3) A type a al like the noise of a flame of fire that 

of the day of the Lord. 19.11-21.) ceo bee eubies a8 a strong 
pe se attle array. , 

15 Alas for the day! ‘for the day|*Gen2-8: 32. | 6 Before their face the people 
of the Lorp is at hand, and as a pera Baal pe ma pained: all.faces shall 
destruction from the Almighty|f jcel 3.16; gather blackness. _ ‘ 
shall it come. wargie 7 They shall run like mighty men; 

16 Is not the meat cut off before they shall climb the wall like men 
our eyes, yea, joy and ladness g ee of war; and they shall march every 

2 lon (62 a 
Sere ce Hees OF MEGS fe] oth ved at Wercethsie nanicss a aris 
clods, the garners are laid desolate,| 13. (Rev.16. 8 Neither shall one thrust another; 
the barns are broken down; for| 14; 19-11-21) \they shall walk every one in his 


“the corn is withered. path: and when they fali upon the 
18 How do the beasts groan! the sword, they shall not be wounded, 
herds of cattle are perplexed, be- 9 They shall run to and fro in the 
cause they have no pasture; yea, city; they shall run upon the wall, 
the flocks of sheep are made deso- they shall climb up upon the houses; 
late. they shall enter in at the windows 
19 OLorD, to thee will I cry: for like a thief, 
the fire hath devoured the pastures 10 The earth shall quake before 
of the wilderness, and the flame them: the heavens shall tremble: the 
hath burned all the trees of the sun and the moon shall be dark, and 
field. thestars shall withdraw their shining: 
20 The beasts of the field cry also (2) Ther Lord's atmy-atvAcmar 


unto thee: for the rivers of waters! ; af 
are dried up, and the fire hath de- geddon (Rev. 19. 11-21). > 
voured the pastures of the wilder-| 11 And the Lorp /shall utter his 
ness, i voice before this farmy: for his 

1 To verse 10 inclusive the invading army is described; at verse 11 Jehovah's 
army, This “army” is described, Rev. 19, 11-18. The call to repentance 1s based 
upon the Lord’s promise of deliverance, vs. 12-17. At verses 18-20 we have the 
deliverance (v. 20; see “Armageddon,” Rev. 16. 14, refs.), and kingdom blessing 

931 


2 12] 


camp is very great: for he is strong 
that executeth his word: “for the 
day of the Lorp is great and very 
terrible; and who can abide it? 


(3) Repentance of the Jews who 
are in the land. 


12 Therefore also now, saith the 
Lorp, turn “ye even to me with all 
your heart, and with fasting, and 
with weeping, and with mourning: 

13. And rend your heart, and not 
your garments, and turn unto the 
LorD your God: for he is gracious 
and merciful, slow to anger, and of| 
great kindness, and ‘repenteth him 
of the evil. 

14 Who knoweth if he will returnja 
and ‘repent, and leave a blessing 
behind him; even a ¢meat-offering 


JOEL. 


B.C. 800. 


Jer.30.7; 
Amos 


and a drink-offering unto the LorpD|» Jer.4.1; 


your God? 3 ah 
15 Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanc- 


tify a fast. call a solemn assembly: | c Zech.8.14, 


16 Gather the people, sanctify the 


note, 


congregation, assemble the elders,| rit. meal. 


gather the children, and those that 


suck the breasts: let the bridegroom] ¢i-¢- nations. 


go forth of his chamber, and the EON 


bride out of her closet. 

17 Let the priests, the ministers of 
the LORD, weep between the porch 
and the altar, and let them say, 
Spare thy people, O Lorb, and give! 
not thine heritage to reproach, that 
the ‘heathen should rule over them: 
wherefore should they say among 
the people, Where is their God? 


(4) The Lorn’s response (a) in 
promise of deliverance. 


18 Then will the Lorn be jealous 
for his land, and pity his people. 

19 Yea, the LoRD will answer and 
say unto his people, Behold, I will 
send you corn, and wine, and oil, 
and ye shall be satisfied therewith: 
and I will no more make you a re- 
proach among the ‘heathen: 

20 But I will remove far off from 
you the northern army, and will 
drive him into a land barren and 
desolate, with his face toward the 
east sea, and his hinder part toward 
the utmost sea, and his stink shall 
come up, and his ill savour shall 


the ‘last days’’ as applied to Israel, 


last days.” 


Spirit. 
vs.28,29; 
Mic.2.7. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


vs.28-32; 
Acts 2.17-21. 


932 


[28 


come up, because he hath done © 

great things. : 
21 Fear not, O land; be glad and 

rejoice: for the LORD will do great 


things 
| 


field: for the pastures of the wilder- 
ness do spring, for the tree beareth 
her fruit, the fig tree and the vine 
do yield their strength. 

23 Be glad then, ye children of 
Zion, and rejoice in the LoRD your 
God: for he hath given you the 
former rain moderately, and he will 
cause to come down for you the 
rain, the former rain, and the latter 
rain in the first month. 

24 And the floors shall be full of 
wheat, and the fats shall overflow 
with wine and oil. 

25 And I will restore to you the 
years that the locust hath eaten, 
the cankerworm, and the caterpil- 
ler, and the palmerworm, my great 
army which I sent among you. 

26 And ye shall eat in plenty, and 
be satisfied, and praise the name of 
the LorpD your God, that hath dealt 


wondrously with you: and my peo- 4 
ple shall never be ed. : A 
shall kn at lam*® ' 


in the midst of Israel, and that I 
am the LorpD your God, and none 


else: and m: people shall never be 


(b) The promise of the Spirit. 


28 And it shall come to pass !af- 
terward, that I will pour out my 
Jspirit upon all flesh; and your sons 
and your daughters shall prophesy, 
your old men shall dream dreams, 
your young men shall see visions: 

29 And also upon the servants 
and upon the handmaids in those 
days will I pour out my spirit. 


(5) The signs preceding the sec- 
ond advent and the day of the 
Lorp. (Cf. Isa. 13. 9, 10; 24. 21- 
23; Ezk. 32. 7-10; Mt. 24. 29, 30.) 


22 Be not afraid, ye beasts of the 


| 


31 The sun shall be turned into 
darkness, and the moon into blood, 


. 1, 2); but the greater fulfilment awaits 
See Acts 2. 17, note, for phrase, “the 


2 32] 


* before the great and the terrible 
day of the LoRD come. 

32 And it shall come to pass, that 
@éwhosoever shall call on the name 
of the LorpD shall be delivered: for 
jn mount Zion and in Jerusalem 
shall be deliverance, asthe LORD 
hath said, and in the remnant 
whom the LorD shall call. 


CHAPTER 3. 


(6) The restoration _of Israel. 
(Cf. Isa. 11. 10-12; Jer. 23_.5-8;5 
Ezk. 37. 21-28; Acts 15. 15-17.) 


Fo. behold, in those days, ‘and 
in that time, ¢when I shall 
bring again the captivity of Judah 
and Jerusalem, 


(7) The judgment of the Gentile 
natjons after Armageddon. 
(See Mt. 25. 32, note.) 


2 I will also gather all nations, 
and will bring them down into the 
valley of Jehoshaphat, and will 
plead with them there for my peo- 
ple and for my heritage Israel, 
whom they have scattered among 
the nations, and parted my land. 

3 And they have cast lots for my 
people; and have given a boy for 
an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, 
that they might drink. 

4 Yea, and what have ye to do 
with me, O Tyre, and Zidon, and 
all the coasts of Palestine? will ye 
render me a recompence? and if ye 
recompense me, swiftly and speed- 
ily will I return your recompence 
upon your own head; 

5. Because ye have taken my sil- 
ver and my gold, and have carried 
_-into your temples my goodly plea- 
sant things: 

6 The children also of Judah and 
the children of Jerusalem have ye 
sold unto the Grecians, that ye might 
remove them far from their border. 

7 Behold, I will raise them out of 
the place whither ye have sold 
them, and will return your recom- 
pence upon your own head: 

“8 And I will sell your sons and 
your daughters into the hand of the 
children of Judah, and they shall 
sell them to the Sabeans, to a people 
far off: for the LORD hath spoken it. 


Part III. (1) Retrospect: the 
day of the LORD. 


9 <Proclaim ye this among the 


JOEL. 


B.C. 800. 


@ Rom.10.13. 


6 Remnant. 
Amos 5.15. 
(Isa.1.9; 
Rom.11.5.) 


c Judgments 
(the seven). 
vs.1-14; 
Mt.13.40-42. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Reyv.22.12.) 


d Israel (pro- 
phecies). 
vs.1-8,15-20; 
Zech.10.6-12. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 


e Day (of 
Jehovah). 
vs.9-21; 


f Armaged- 
don (battle 
of). vs.9-13; 
Oba.15. 
(Rev.16.14; 
19.11-21.) 


gi.e. nations. 


\h Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs.16- 
20; Amos 9. 


# Dan.11.453 
Oba.16; 
Zech.8-.3. 


j 1sa.35.8; 
52.1; Nah.1. 
15; Zech.14. 
21, Rev.21. 
27 


k Psa 46.4, 
Ezk.47.1,; 
Zech.14 8; 
Rev 22.1, 


| Amos 9.15. 


[3 21 


Gentiles; 1Prepare-fwar, wake up 
the mighty men, let all the men of 
war draw near; let them come 
up: 
10 Beat your plowshares into 
swords, and your pruninghooks 
into spears: let the weak say, Iam 
strong. 

11 Assemble yourselves, and 
come, all ye Sheathen, and gather 
lyourselves together round about: 
thither cause thy mighty ones to 
come down, O LORD. 

12 Let the %heathen be wakened, 
and come up to the valley of Jehosh- 
aphat: for there will I sit to judge 
all the heathen round about. 

13 Put ye in the sickle, for the 
harvest is ripe: come, get you down; 
for the press is full. the fats over- 
flow; for their wickedness is great. 

14 Multitudes, multitudes in the 
valley of decision: for the day of 
the Lorp is near in the valley of 
decision. 

15 The sun and the moon shall be 
darkened, and the stars shall with- 
draw their shining. 

16 The Lorp also shall roar out 
of Zion, and utter his voice from 
hJerusalem; and the heavens and 
the earth shall shake: but the LorD 
will be the hope of his people, and 
the strength of the children of Israel. 


(2) Full kingdom blessing. 
(See Zech. 12. 8, note.) 


17 Soshall ye know that Iam the 
Lorp your God dwelling in Zion, 


‘\imy holy mountain: then shall Jeru- 


lsalem be holy, and there shall Jno 
strangers pass through her any more. 
18 And it shall come to pass in 


shall water the valley of Shittim. 

19 Egyptshall bea desolation, and 
Edom shall be a desolate wilder- 
ness, for the violence against the 
children of Judah, because they 
have shed innocent blood in their 
Nand. 

20 But Judah shall ‘dwell for ever, 
and Jerusalem from generation to 
generation. 

21 For I will cleanse their blood 
that I have not cleansed: for the 
Lorb dwelleth in Zion. 


1 Verses 9-14 refer to Armageddon; verses 15. 16 are parallel with Joel 2. 30-32. 
From verses 2 to 16 we have a résumé of Joel 2. 9-32. 


933 


i AMOS. ae 


Amos, a Jew, but prophesying (B.C. 776-763) in the northern kingdom (1. 1; 7. 14, 
15), exercised his ministry during the reign of Jeroboam II, an able but idolatrous 
king who brought his kingdom to the zenith of its power. Nothing could seem 
more improbable than the fulfilment of Amos’ warnings; yet within fifty years the 
kingdom was utterly destroyed. The vision of Amos is, however, wider than the 
northern kingdom, including the whole “house offJacol. Lm ; 

Amos is in four parts: I. Judgments on the cities surrounding Palestine, 1y4=25 3, 
Ii. Judgments on Judah and Israel, 2. 4-16. III. Jehovah’s controversy with ‘‘the 
whole family” of Jacob, 3. 1-9. 10. IV. The future glory of the Davidic kingdom, 
9, 11-15, 


B.C. 787.__|captivity, to deliver them up to 
CHAPTER i. —e Edom: ee iene fa 
é 7 But I will send a fire on the w: 

iat eae Cen Ba ce of Gaza, which shall devour the 
; palaces thereof: 

HE words of Amos, who was 8 And I will cut off the inhabitant 

among the “herdmen of Tekoa, from Ashdod, and him that holdeth 

which he saw concerning Israel in the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I 


the days of /Uzziah king of Judah,/a Amos 7.14. |will turn mine hand against Ekron: 
and in the days of Jeroboam the], , Kias1-7 {and the remnant of the Philistines 


son of Joash king of Israel, two} (marg.: shall perish, saith the Lord Gop. 
years before the “earthquake. 2 Chr.26. 9 Thus saith the Lorp; For three 

2 And he said, The Lorp will Fae transgressions of Tyrus, and for 
lroar from Zion, and utter his| posj7. four, I will not turn away the pun- 
voice from Jerusalem; and the ishment thereof; because they de- 
habitations of the shepherds shall es livered up the whole captivity to 
mourn, and the top of Carmel shall] 39! ysei3.16; |Edom, and remembered not the 
wither. Zech.14.5. _|brotherly covenant: 

3 Thus saith the Lorp; For three Tees o: 10 But I will send a fire on the 
transgressions of ¢4Damascus, and|° ;>j'~’ wall of Tyrus, which shall devour 
for four, I will not turn away the the palaces thereof. 
punishment thereof; because they) ¢ Jer-49-27. 11 Thus saith the Lerp; For 
have threshed Gilead with thresh- f1Ki201;  |three transgressions of Edom, and 
ing instruments of iron: 2 Ki.6.24, for four, I will not turn away the 


4 But I will send a fire into the Jer. 81°s0, punishment thereof; because he 
house of ‘Hazael, which shall de-|° 324; 0%, |did pursue his brother with the 
vour the palaces of fBen-hadad. sword, and did cast off all pity, and 


5 I will sbreak also the bar of|' eae é his anger did tear perpetually, and 
srt a Roa “ A We age Zeph.2.4. he kept bis wrate fos avers i 
ant from the plain of Aven, an ut I will send a fire upon Te- 
him that holdeth the sceptre from man, which shall devour the pal- 
the house of Eden: and the people aces of Bozrah. 
of Syria shall go into captivity unto 13 Thus saith the Lorp: For 
bees — aa my ee Bites presen cesions ios the children 
a ORD; For three j 5 i 

Sfadbghestions of hGaza, ee for a aa the pte Mel 
ead I will an Oats bee the Pan of; because they have ripped up the 
ishment ereof; because they women with child of Gilead, that 
carried away captive the whole \they might enlarge their border: 


1 “Roar,” etc. Cf. Isa. 42. 13; Jer. 25. 30-33; Hos. 11. 10, 11; Joel 3. 16. It will 
be found that wherever the phrase occurs it is connected with the destruction of 
Gentile dominion (see “Times of the Gentiles,”’ Lk, 21. 24: Rev. 164. 19, note), and 
the blessing of Israel in the kingdom. Without doubt a near fulfilment upon Syria 
occurred (2 Ki. 14. 28), but the expression, “the LorD will roar.” looks forward te’ 
a vaster fulfilment. See Joel 1. 4, note. 


934 


1 14] AMOS. (32 


14 But I will kindle a fire in the 
wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour 
the palaces thereof, with shouting 
in the day of battle, with a tempest 
in the day of the whirlwind: 

15 And their king shall go into 
captivity, he and his princes to- 
gether, saith the LorpD. 


CHAPTER 2. 


(Judgments on surrounding 
peoples, continued.) 


HUS saith the Lorp; “For three 
transgressions of Moab, and 
for four, I will not turn away the 
punishment thereof; because he 
burned the bones of the king of 
Edom zato Hane: . 
2 But will send a fire upon 
Moab, and it shall devour the pal-|? #758 
aces of Kirioth: and Moab shall die|5 Amos 3.2; 
with tumult, with shouting, and 2s 
with the sound of the trumpet: pee 
3 And I will cut off the judgelcctf. Jud.2. 
from the midst thereof, and. will pee: Ki. 
slay all the princes thereof with ; 
him, saith the LorD. d Num.6.1-8. 


Part II. Judgments on Judah 
and Israel (vs. 4-16). 


4 Thus’ saith the Lorp; 1For 
three transgressions of Judah, and 
for four, J will not turn away the 
punishment thereof; because they 
have despised the law of the LorbD, 
and have not kept his command- 
ments, and their lies caused them 
to err, after the which their fathers 
have walked: 

5 But I will send a fire upon Ju- 
dah, and it shail devour the palaces 
of Jerusalem. 
.. 6 Thus saith the Lorp; For three 

transgressions of ‘Israel, and for 
four, I will not turn away the pun- 
ishment thereof; because they sold 
the righteous for silver, and the 
poor for a pair of shoes; 

7 That pant after the dust of the 
earth on the head of the poor, and} 
turn aside the way of the meek: 
and a man and his father will go in 


_junto the same maid, to profane my 
holy name: 

8 And they lay themselves down 
upon clothes laid to pledge by every 
altar, and they drink the wine of 
the condemned in the house of 
their god. 

9 Yet destroyed I the Amorite 
before them, whose height was like 
the height of the cedars, and he was 
strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed 
his fruit from above, and his roots 
from beneath. 

10 Also I brought you up from the 
land of Egypt, and led you forty 
years through the wilderness, to 
possess the land of the Amorite. 

11 And I raised up of your sons 


even thus, O ye children of Israel? 
saith the LorD. 

12 But ye gave the Nazarites wine 
to drink; and commanded the 
prophets, saying, Prophesy not. 

13 Behold, I am pressed under 
you, as a cart is pressed that is full 
of sheaves. 

14 Therefore the flight shall perish 
from the swift, and the strong shall 
not strengthen his force, neither 
shall the mighty deliver himself: 

15 Neither shall he stand that 
handleth the bow; and he that is 
swift of foot shall not deliver him- 
self: neither shall he that rideth 
the horse deliver himself. 

16 And he that is courageous 
among the mighty shall flee away 
naked in that day, saith the LorD. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part Ill. Jehovah’s controversy 
with “the whole family” of 
Jacob (Amos 3. 1-9. 10). 


EAR this word that the Lorp 
hath spoken against you, O 
children of Israel, against the 
2whole family which I brought up 
from the land of Egypt, saying, 
2 You only have I known of all 
the families of the earth: ®therefore 


1 The judgments on Judah and Israel were fulfilled as to Judah in the 70 years’ 
captivity; as to Israel (the northern kingdom) in the world-wide dispersion which 
still continues. : : 

2 The language here, and the expression “house of Jacob,” v. 13, evidently gives 
the prophecy a wider application than to “Israel,”’ the ten-tribe northern kingdom, 
though the judgment was, in the event, executed first upon the northern kingdom 
(2) Kay, 117. 18293), eee se 5 

3 It is noteworthy that Jehovah’s controversy with the Gentile cities which hated 
Israel is brief: “I will send a fire.” But Israel had been brought into the place of 
privilege and so of responsibility, and the Lorp’s indictment is detailed and unspar- 


ing. Cf, Mt. 11, 23; Lk, 12. 47, 48. 
935 


23 


I will punish you for all your ini- 
quities. 

3 Can two walk together, except 
they be agreed? 

4 Wili a lion roar in the forest, 
when he hath no prey? will a young 
lion cry out of his den, if he have 
taken nothing? 

5 Can a bird fall in a snare upon 
the earth, where no gin is for him? 
shall one take up a snare from the 
earth, and have taken nothing at 
all? 

6 Shall a trumpet be blown in the 
city, and the people not be afraid? 
shall there be evil in a city, “and 
the LorD hath not done it? 

7 Surely the Lord Gop will do 
nothing, but he revealeth his secret 
unto, his servants the prophets. 

8 The lion hath roared, who will 
not fear? the Lord Gop hath 
spoken, ‘who can but prophesy? 

9 Publish in the palaces at Ash- 
dod, and in the palaces in the land 
of Egypt, and say, Assemble your- 
selves upon the mountains of Sa- 
maria, and behold the great tumults 
in the midst thereof, and the op- 
pressed in the midst thereof. 

10 For they know not to do right, 
saith the Lorp, who store up 
violence and robbery in their pal- 
aces. 

11 Therefore thus saith the Lord 
Gop; An adversary there shall be 
even round about the land; and he 


do some- 
what? 


Mic.3.8. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


d Psa.22.12; 
Ezk.39.18. 


e Psa.89.35. 


Mt.13.33.) 


shall bring down thy strength from|hie. freewill. 


thee, and thy palaces shall be|. woe 

spoiled. "Ysa.3611; 
12 Thus saith the Lorp; As the} Jer.5.3;_ 

shepherd taketh out of the mouth| Hag.2.17. 


of the lion two legs, or a piece of 
an ear; so shall the children of 
Israel be taken out that dwell in 
Samaria in the corner of a bed, and 
in Damascus in a couch. 

13 Hear ye, and testify in the 
house of Jacob, saith the Lord Gop, 
the God of hosts, 

14 That in the day that I shall 
visit the transgressions of Israel 
upon him I will also visit the altars 
of Beth-el: and the horns of the 
altar shall be cut off, and fall to the 
ground. 

15 And I will smite the winter 
house with the summer house; and 
the houses of ivory shall perish, 
and the great houses shall have an 
end, saith the Lorp. 


1 Cf. 1 Ki. 12. 25-33. 


AMOS. 


B.C. 787. 


a Or, and shall 
not the Lord 


b Inspiration. 


[4 10 


CHAPTER 4. 


The very sacrifices at Beth-el 
were the scorn of Jehovah. 


EAR this word, “ye kine of 
Bashan, that are in the moun- 
tain of Samaria, which oppress the 
poor, which crush the needy, which 
say to their masters, Bring, and let 
us drink. 

2 The Lord Gop hath sworn by 
his holiness, that, lo, the days shall 
come upon you, that he will take 
you away with hooks, and your 
posterity with fishhooks. 

3 And ye shall go out at the 
breaches, every cow at that which 
is before her; and ye shall cast 
them into the palace, saith the 
LorpD. 

4 Come to 1Beth-el, and. trans- 
gress; at Gilgal multiply trans- 
gression; and bring your sacrifices 
every morning, and your tithes 
after three years: 

5 And offer a sacrifice of /thanks- 
giving with 4leaven, and proclaim 
and publish the free “offerings: for 
this liketh you, O ye children of 
Israel, saith the Lord Gop. 


Israel reminded of Jehovah's 
chastenings. 


6 And I also have given you 
cleanness of teeth in all your cities, 
and want of bread in all your 
places: tyet have ye not returned 
unto me, saith the Lorp. 

7 And also I have withholden the 
rain from you, when there were yet 
three months to the harvest: and 
I caused it to rain upon one city, 
and caused it not to rain upon an- 
other city: one piece was rained 
upon, and the piece whereupon it 
rained not withered. 

8 So two or three cities wandered 
unto one city, to drink water; but 
they were not satisfied: yet have 
ye not returned unto. me, saith the 
LORD. ‘ 

9 I have smitten you with blast- 
ing and mildew: when your gardens 
and your vineyards and your fig 
trees and your olive trees increased, 
the palmerworm devoured them: 
yet have ye not returned unto me, 
saith the Lorp. 

10 Ihave sent among you the pes- 
tilence after the manner of Egypt: 
your young men have I slain with 


Any altar at Beth-el, after the establishment of Jehovah’s 


worship at Jerusalem, was of necessity divisive and schismatic (Deut. 12. 4-14). 


Cf. John 4. 21-24; Mt. 18. 20; Heb. 13, 10-14. 
936 


"4 11] 


the sword, and have taken away 
your horses; and I have made the 
stink of your camps to come up 
unto your nostrils: yet have ye not 
returned unto me, ‘saith the LorD. 
11 I have overthrown some of 
you, ¢as God overthrew Sodom and 
Gomorrah, and ye were as a fire- 
brand plucked out of the burning: 
yet have ye not returned unto me, 
saith the Lorp. 
* 12 Therefore thus will I do unto 
thee, O Israel: and because I will 
do this unto thee, "prepare to meet 
thy God, O Israel. 
13 Fer, lo, he that formeth 


AMOS. 


the} Gen.19. 


mountains, and createth the wind,| 24,25; 
and ‘declareth unto man what is arent 


his thought, that maketh the morn- 
ing darkness, and treadeth upon|b See Ezk. 


the high places of the earth, The 43-35 225 
Lorp, The God of hosts, 1s his : tia 
name. ¢ Psa.139.25 
CHAPTER 5. awe 
i 2 Chr.15.2; 
Jehovah’s lamentation over Jer.29.13. 
Israel. 
i 2 e Hos.4.15; 
HEAR ye this word which I take; 10.8. 
up against you, even a lamen- f Job 9.9; 
tation, O house of Israei. 38.31. 
2 The virgin of Israel is fallen; 
she shall no more rise: she is for-|# Deut.2830,. 
saken upon her land; there fs none| 15: Zeph.1. 
to raise her up. 13; Hag.1.6. 
3 For thus saith the Lord GoD;|, , 4349.4. 
The city that went out by a thou-| Joel 2.14. 
sand shall leave an hundred, andj . 
that which went forth by an hundred] * barter | fz 
shall leave ten, tothe honse of Israel.) (1sa.19;) 
4 For thus saith the LoRD unto} Rom.11.5.) 
the house of Israel, Seek ye me, 5 Dar 
and ye shall live: Jehovah). 
5 But seek not Beth-el, nor enter] vs.18-20; 
into Gilgal, and pass not to Beer- eer 6-49: 
sheba: for Gilgal shall surely go} Rev.19.11-’ 
into captivity, and °Beth-el shall} 21.) 
come to nought. By teerneal: 


6 Seek the Lorp, and ye shall 
live; lest he break out like fire in 
the house of Joseph, and devour it,: 
and there be none to quench it in} 
Beth-el. 

7 Yewho turn judgment to worm- 
wood, and leave off righteousness 
in the earth, 

8 fSeek him that maketh the 
seven stars and Orion, and turneth 
the shadow of death into the morn- 
ing, and maketh the day dark with 
night: that calleth for the waters 
of the sea, and poureth them out 
upon the face of the earth: The 
LorbD is his name: ; 

9 That strengtheneth the spoiled es 


[5 23 


against the strong, so that the 
spoiled shall come against the 
fortress. 

10 They hate him that rebuketh 
in the gate, and they abhor him 
that speaketh uprightly. 

11 Forasmuch therefore as your 
treading fs upon the poor, and ye 
take from him burdens of wheat: 
8ye have built houses of hewn stone, 
but ye shall not dwell in them; ye 
have planted pleasant vineyards, 
but ye shall not drink wine of them. 

12 For I know your manifold 
transgressions and your mighty 
sins: they afflict the just, they take 
a bribe, and they turn aside the 
poor in the gate from their right. 

13 Therefore the prudent shall 
keep silence in that time; for it 1s an 
evil time. 

14 Seek good, and not evil, that 
ye may live: and so the LorD, the 
God of hosts, shall be with you, as 
ye have spoken. 

15 Hate the evil, and love the 
good, and establish judgment in the 
gate: “it may be that the LorD God 
of hosts will be gracious unto the 
‘remnant of Joseph. 


The day of the Lorp. 


16 Therefore the LorpD, the God 
of hosts, the Lord, saith thus; Wail- 
ing shall be in all streets; and they 
shall say in all the highways, Alas! 
alas! and they shall call the hus- 
bandman to mourning, and such as 
are skilful of lamentation to wailing. 

17 And in all vineyards shall be 
wailing: for I will pass through 
thee, saith the Lorp. 

18 Woe unto you that desire the 
jday of the Lorp! to what end is 
it for you? the day of the LorD is 
darkness, and not light. | 

19 As if a man did flee from a 
lion, and a bear met him; or went 
into the house, and leaned his hand 
on the wall, and a serpent bit him. 

20 Shall not the day of the LORD 
be darkness, and not light? even 
very dark, and no brightness in it? 


Worship without righteousness 
Jehovah’s abomination. 


21 I hate, I despise your feast 
days, and I will not smell in your 
solemn assemblies. 

22 Though ye offer me burnt- 
offerings and your *meat-offerings, 
{ will not accept them: neither will 
I regard the peace-offerings of your 
fat beasts. 

23 ‘Take thou away from me the 


i % 


5 24] AMOS. 


al oe A 
i hi" eR 


Ni) 8* 


noise of thy songs; for I will not|_ B.C. 787 
hear the melody of thy viols. 

' 24 But let judgment run down 

as waters, and righteousness as a 

mighty stream. 

25 Have ye offered unto me @sac- 
tifices and offerings in the wilder- 
ness forty years, O house of Israel? 

26 But ye have borne the taber- 
nacle of your Moloch and China| 
your images, the star of your god, 
which ye made to yourselves. 

27 Therefore will I cause you to 
go into captivity beyond Damascus, | 
saith the Lorp, whose name is| 
The God of hosts. 


225-275 9 + 
CHAPTER 6. Kee 7.42,43. 


1 Ki.11.33. 


Woe to those at ease in a day of 
unrighteousness. 


is by the sides of the house, Js 
there yet any with thee? and he 
shall say, No. Then shall he say, 
Hold thy tongue: for we may not 
make mention of the name of the 
Lorb. 

11 For, behold, the LorD com- 
mandeth, and he will smite the 
great house with breaches, and the 
little house with clefts. 

12 Shall horses run upon the 
rock? will one plow there with 
oxen? for ye have turned judgment 
into gall, and the fruit of righteous- 
ness into hemlock: 

13 Ye which rejoice in a thing of 
nought, which say, Have we not 
taken to us horns by our own 
strength? 

14 But, behold, I will raise up 


against you a nation, O house of 


OE ‘to them that are at ease|“*°7* Israel, saith the Lorp the God of 
in Zion, and ¢4trust in theld Psa.2.12, hosts; and they shall afflict you 
mountain of Samaria, which are| 7°¢- from the entering in of Hemath 


named chief of the nations, to whom] ¢ Jsa.30.9. 
the house of Israel came! ; 

2 Pass ye unto ¢Calneh, and see;|/2 ¥i-18.34, 
and from thence go ye to /Haimath] ¢1 chr.23.5. 
the great: then go down to Gath 
of the Philistines: be they better|/ Gen-49.23. 
than these kingdoms? or their bor-] ; yer.51.14; 
der greater than your border? Heb.6.13,17. 

3 Ye that put far away the evil! . ERS cigs 
day, and cause the seat of violence]? Psad74:’ 
to come near; Ezk.24.21, 

4 That lie upon beds of ivory, 5 Deal 
and stretch themselves upon their] Zore. 
couches, and eat the lambs out of 
the flock, and the calves out of the / Sarina 
midst of the stall; po Reon 

5 That chant to the sound of the 
viol, and invent to themselves in- Wig ts Hemalige 
struments of musick, élike David;! 2ccosding to 
6 That drink wine in bowls, and) rightecus- 
anoint themselves with the chief] ¢ss- 
ointments: “but they are not grieved 
for the affliction of Joseph. 

7 Therefore now shall they go 
captive with the first that go cap- 
tive, and the banquet of them that 
stretched themselves shall be re- 
moved. 

8 ‘The Lord Gop hath sworn by 
himself, saith the LoRD the God of 
hosts, JI abhor the excellency of 
Jacob, and hate his paiaces: there- 
fore will I deliver up the city with 
all that is therein. 

Y And it shall come to pass, if 
there remain ten men in one house, 
that they shall die. 

10 And a man’s uncle shall take 
him up, and he that burneth him, 
to bring out the bones out of the 
house, and shall say unto him that 


938 


| 


unto the river of the wilderness. 


CHAPTER 7. 


The prophet’s intercession to 
prevail no longer. 


us hath the Lord Gop 
shewed unto me; and, behold, 
he formed grasshoppers in the be- 
ginning of the shooting up of the 
latter growth; and, lo, it was the 
latter growth after the king’s mow- 
ings. 

2 And it came to pass, that when 
they had made an end of eating the 
grass of the land, then I said, O 
Lord Gop, forgive, I beseech thee: 
by whom shall Jacob arise? for he 
is small. 

3 The Lorn “repented for this: It 
shall not be, saith the Lorp. 

4 Thus hath the Lord Gop 
shewed unto me: and, behold, the 
Lord Gop called to contend by fire, 
and it devoured the great deep, and 
did eat up a part. 

5 Then said I, O Lord Gop, cease, 
I beseech thee: by whom shall 
Jacob arise? for he fs small. 7 

6 The Lorp repented for this: 
This also shall not be, saith the 
Lord Gop. 

7 Thus he shewed me: and, be- 
hojid, the Lord stood upon a wall 
made by a plumbline, with a 
plumbline in his hand. 

8 And the Lorp said unto me, 
Amos, what seest thou? And I said, 
A 'plumbline. Then said the Lord, 
Behold, I will set a ™plumbline 
in the midst of my people Israel: 


ale = 


2 * 794 


AMOS. 


[8 14 


I will not again pass by them any 
more: | 

9 And the high places of Isaac 
shall be desolate, and the sanctu- 
aries of Israel shall be laid waste; 
and I will rise against the house of| 
Jeroboam with the sword. 


The priest of Beth-el charges 
Amos before the king. 


10 Then ¢Amaziah the priest of| 
Beth-el sent to Jeroboam king of 
Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired 
against thee in the midst of the 
house of Israel: the land is not able 
to bear all his words. 

11 For thus Amos saith, Jero- 
boam shall die by the sword, and 
Israel shall surely be led away cap- 
tive out of their own land. 

12 Also Amaziah said unto Amos, 
O thou seer, go, flee thee away into 
the land of Judah, and there eat 
bread, and prophesy there: 

13 But prophesy not again any 
more at Beth-el: for it rs the king’s 
chapel, and it is the king’s court. 


The answer of Amos. 


14 Then answered Amos, and said 
to Amaziah, I was no prophet, 
neither was I a prophet’s son; but 
I was an herdman, and a gatherer 
of sycomore fruit: 

15 And the Lorpd took me as I 
followed the flock, and the Lorp 
said unto me, Go, prophesy unto 
my people Israel. : 

16 Now therefore hear thou the 
word of the Lorp: Thou sayest, 
Prophesy not against Israel, and 
drop not thy word against the 
house of Isaac. 

17 Therefore thus saith the 
Lorp;: Thy wife shall be an harlot 
in the city, and thy sons and thy 
daughters shall fall by the sword, 
and thy land shall be divided by 
line; and thou shalt die in a polluted 
land: and Israel shail surely go into 
captivity forth of his land, 


CHAPTER 8. 


The basket of summer fruit: 
Israel soon to perish. 


HUS hath the Lord Gop 
shewed unto me: and behold a 
basket of summer fruit. ‘ 

2 And he said, Amos, what seest 
thou? And I said. A “basket of 
‘summer fruit. Then said the 
Lorp unto me, The end is come 


B.C. 787. 


a1 Ki.12.31, 
32. 

b Cf. Jer.24. 
1-3. 


ci.e. soon to 
perish. 


d One ephah = 
1 bu. 3 pts. 


eCf.1 Sam. 
28.6; 2 Chr. 


f Heb. ways. 
See Acts 9.2; 
18.25; 19.9, 
23; 24.14. 


upon my people of Israel; I will not 
again pass by them any more. 

3 And the songs of the temple 
shall be howlings in that day, saith 
the Lord Gop: there shall be many 
dead bodies in every place; they 
shall cast therm forth with silence. 


Jehovah's full case agains# 
Israel. 


4 Hear this, O ye that swallow 
up the needy, even to make the 
poor of the land to fail, 

5 Saying, When will the new! 
moon be gone, that we may sell 
corn? and the sabbath, that we may 
set forth wheat, making the “ephah 
small, and the shekel great, and 
falsifying the balances by deceit? 

6 That we may buy the poor for 
silver, and the needy for a pair of 
shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of 
the wheat? 

7 The Lorp hath sworn by the 
excellency of Jacob, Surely I will 
never forget any of their works. 

8 Shall not the land tremble for 
this, and every one mourn that 
dwelleth therein? and it shall rise 
up wholly as a flood; and it shall 
be cast out and drowned, as by 
the flood of Egypt. 

9 And it shall come to pass in that 
day, saith the Lord Gop, that I will 
cause the sun to go down at noon, 
and I will darken the earth in the 
clear day: 

10 And I will turn your feasts into 
mourning, and all your songs into 
lamentation; and I will bring up 
sackcloth upon all loins, and baid- 
mess upon every head; and I will 
make it as the mourning of an only 
son, and the end thereof as a bitter 


ay. 

11 Behold, the days come, saith 
the Lord Gop, that I will send a 
famine in the land, not a famine of 
bread, nor a thirst for water, “but 
of hearing the words of the 
LorD: 

12 And they shall wander from 
sea to sea, and from the north even 
to the east, they shall run to and 
fro to seek the word of the LORD, 
and shall not find it¢. 

13 In that day shall the fair vir- 
gins and young men faint for 
thirst. 

14 They that swear by the sin of 
iSamaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan, 
liveth; and, The ‘manner of Beer- 
sheba liveth; even they shall fall, 
and never rise up again. 


9 1] 


AMOS. 


CHAPTER 9. 


The final prophecy of dispersion. 

(Cf. v. 9; Deut. 28. 63-68.) 
I the altar: and he said, Smite the 
lintel of the door, that the posts 
may shake: and cut them in the 
head, all of them; and I will slay 
the last of them with the sword: he 
that fleeth of them shall not flee 
away, and he that escapeth of them 
shall not be delivered. 

2 “Though they dig into °hell, 
thence shall mine hand take them; 
‘though they climb up to heaven, 
thence will I bring them down: 

3 And though they hide them- 
selves in the top of Carmel, I will 
search and take them out thence; 
and though they be hid from my 
sight in the bottom of the sea, 
thence will I command the serpent, 
and he shall bite them: 

4 And though they go into cap- 
tivity before their enemies, thence 
will I command the sword, and it 
shall slay them: and I will set mine 
eyes upon them for evil, and not for 
good. 

5 And the Lord Gop of hosts is 
he that toucheth the land, and it 
shall melt, and all that dwell therein 
shall mourn: and it shall rise up 
wholly like a flood; and shall be 
drowned, as by the flood of 
Egypt. 

6 It is he that buildeth his stories 
in the heaven, and hath founded 
his troop in the earth; he that call- 
eth for the waters of the sea, and 
poureth them out upon the face of 
the earth: The Lorp js his name. 

7 Are ye not as children of the 
Ethiopians unto me, O children of 
Israel? saith the LoRD. Have not 
I brought up Israel out of the land! 
of Egypt? and the Philistines from 
Caphtor, and the Syrians from 


SAW the Lord ‘!standing upon| - 


Kir? 


1 The position of the Lord 


B.C. 797. 


a Psa.139.8. 


6 Heb. Sheol 
See Hab.2. 
5, note. 


c Job 20.6; 
Jer.51.53; 
Oba.4- 


d See Psa.72, 
1, note, 


eivs Mi hs 
Acts 15.16, 
17. 


f Kingdom 
(Coos woe 
vs.11-15; 
Mic.4.1-3. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


i.e. nations. 


h Isa.60.21; 
Jer.32.41; 
Ezk.34.28; 
Joel 3.20. 


8 Behold, the eyes of the Lord 
|Gop are upon the sinful kingdom, 
and I will destroy it from off the 


9 For, lo, I will command, and I 
will ¢sift the house of Israel among 
all nations, like as corn is sifted in 
a sieve, yet shall not the least grain 
fall upon the earth. 


| 10 All the sinners of my people 


shall die by the sword, which say, 
The evil shall not overtake nor 
prevent us. 


Part IV. Future kingdom bless- 
ing: (1) The Lorv’s return 
and the re-establishment of 
the Davidic monarchy. 


11 In that ¢day will I raise up the 
tabernacle of David that is fallen, 
and close up the breaches thereof; 
and I will raise up his ruins, and I 
will build it as in the days of old: 

12 That they may possess the 
remnant of Edom, and of all the 
Sheathen, which are called by my 
name, saith the Lorp that doeth 
this. 


(2) Full kingdom blessing of 
restored Israel. 


13 Behold, the days come, saith 
the Lorp, that the plowman shall 
overtake the reaper, and the treader 
of grapes him that soweth seed; and 
the mountains shall drop sweet 
wine, and all the hills shall melt. 

14 And I will bring again the cap- 
tivity of my people of Israel, and 
they shall build the waste cities, 
and inhabit them; and they shall 
plant vineyards, and drink the wine 
thereof; they shall also make gar- 
dens, and eat the fruit of them. 

15 And I will plant them upon 
their land, ‘and they shall no more 
be pulled up out of their land which 
I have given them, saith the Lorp 
thy God. 


(Adonai) is significant. The altar speaks properly of 


mercy because of judgment executed upon an interposed sacrifice, but when altar 


and 


sacrifice are despised the altar becomes a place of 


judgment. Cf. John 12. 3: 


VER. 1] OB ADI AH. [VER. 16 


INTERNAL evidence seems to fix the date of Obadiah’s ministry in the reign of the 
bloody Athaliah (2 Ki. 8. 16-26). If this be true, and if the ministry ied was 
during the reign of Joash, then Obadiah is chronologically first of the writing proph- 
ets, and first to use the formula, “the day of the Lorp.” (Cf. Joel 1. 4, note.) 

_ The book is in four parts: I. Edom’s humiliation, vs. 1-9. II. The crowning 
sin of Edom, vs. 10-14. HII. The future visitation of Edom in the day of the Lorp, 
vs. 15, 16 (Isa. 34., 63. 1-6). IV. The inclusion of Edom in the future kingdom, 
vs. 17-21 (Num. 24. 17-19). 


Part II. The great sin of Edom. 
(Cf Num. 205 74-21; Psarts7 7; 
Ezk. 35. 5.) 


10 For thy violence against thy 
brother Jacob shame shall cover 
thee, and thou shalt be cut off for 
ever. 

11 In the day that thou stoodest 
on the other side, in the day that 
the strangers carried away captive 
his forces, and foreigners entered’ 
into his gates, and cast lots upon 


Part I. The humiliation 
of Edom. 


from the LORD, and an ambassador 
is sent among the “heathen, Arise 
ye, and let us rise up against her in 
battle. 

2 Behold, I have made thee srnall 
among the “heathen: thou art 
greatly despised. 


I : Psa.137.7; 
. pas pie st Soe piots evs “Yea. 34.1.15; Jere even thou wast as one 
eceiv ee, thou that dwelies -1-6; Jer. jof them. 
in the clefts of the rock, whose hab-| F7y>s4. | 12 But thou shouldest not have 
itation is high; that saith in his} 13. looked on the day of thy brother in 
heart, Who shall bring me down to ee : the day that he became a stranger; 
the ground? eo ERIE neither shouldest thou have re- 
4 Though thou exalt thyself as| c Gen.36.1, joiced over the children of Judah in 
the eagle, and though thou set thy] note. the day of their destruction; neither 
nest among the stars, thence will I|j 4.,.36.11: shouldest thou have spoken proudly 


bring thee down, saith the LorD. | 1 Chr.1.45; [in the day of distress. 
5 If thieves came to thee, if rob-| Jer-49.7,20. 13 Thou shouldest not have en- 


bers by night, (how art thou cut], p., (of tered into the gate of my people in 
off!) would they not have stolen till Jehovah) |the day of their calamity; yea, 
they had enough? if the grape-| vs.15-21; thou shouldest not have looked on 
gatherers came to thee, would they Par aee their affliction in the day of their 
not leave some grapes? 10-22; Rey, |calamity, nor have laid hands on 


6 How are the things of Esau] 19.11-21.) their substance in the:day of their 
searched out! how are his hidden Feet calamity; 
things sought up! don (battle | 14 Neither shouldest thou have 
7 All the men of thy confederacy] of). Zeph.3. |stood in the crossway, to cut off 
have brought thee even to the bor- Pe Ape those of his that did escape; neither , 
der: the men that were at peace ae » Ishouldest thou have delivered up 


with thee have deceived thee, and those of his that did remain in the 


prevailed against thee; they that day of distress. 

eat thy bread have laid a wound Part IIT. Edom in the dayiot 

under thee: there is none under-| - the LORD. 

standing in him. ¢ 
15 For the “day of the LorpD is 


8 Shail I not in that day, saith the 
Lorb, even destroy the wise men near Jupon all the “heathen: as thou 
out of “Edom, and understanding hast done, it shall be done unto 
out of the mount of Esau? thee: thy reward shall return upon 


9 And thy mighty men, O ¢Te- thine own head. 
man, shall be dismayed, to the end 16 For as ye have drunk upon my 
that every one of the mount of holy mountain, so shall all the 


Esau may be cut off by slaughter. bheathen drink continually, yea, 


941 


Ver. 17] 


OBADIAH. 


[VER. 21 


they shall drink, and they shall) 8B.c..88s. 19 And they of the south “shall 
possess the mount of Esau; and 


swallow down, and they shall be as 
though they had not been. 


Part IV. Edom to be included in 
the kingdom. 


17 ¢But upon mount Zion shall be 
deliverance, and there shall be 
holiness; and the house of Jacob 
shall possess their possessions. 

18 **And the house of Jacob shall 
be a fire, and the house of Joseph a 
flame, and the house of Esau for 
stubble, and they shall kindle in 
them, and devour them; and there 
shall not be any remaining of the 
house of Esau; for the Lorp’ hath 
spoken it. 


a Joel 2.32. 


b Ezk.25.14; 
Dan.11.41. 


c Amos 9.12. 


d Zeph.2.7. 


e See King- 
dom, Zech. 
12.8, note; 
1 Cor.15.28, 
note. 


942 


¢they of the plain the Philistines: 
and they shall possess the fields of 
Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: 
iH Benjamin shall possess Gil- 
ead. 

20 And the captivity of this host 
of the children of Israel shall pos- 
sess that of the Canaanites, even 
unto Zarephath; and the captivity 
of Jerusalem, which zs in Sepharad, 
shall possess the cities of the 
south. 

21 And saviours shall come up on 
mount Zion to judge the mount of 
Esau; and the “kingdom shall be 
the LORD’s. 


— 


1) JONAH. [1 6 


TuE historical character of the man Jonah is vouched for by Jesus Christ (Mt. 


' 12. 39-41), as also that his preservation in the great fish was a “sign” or type of 


_ence of the LORD. 


our Lord’s own entombment and resurrection. Both are miraculous and both are 
equally credible. 2 Ki. 14. 25 records the fulfilment of a prophecy by Jonah. ‘The 
man himself was a bigoted Jew, unwilling to testify to a Gentile city, and angry 
that God had spared it. Typically he foreshadows the nation of Israel out of its 
own land; a trouble to the Gentiles, yet witnessing to them; cast out by them, but 
miraculously preserved; in their future deepest distress calling upon Jehovah- 
Saviour, and finding deliverance, and then becoming missionaries to the Gentiles 
(Zech. 8. 7-23). He typifies Christ as the sent One, raised from the dead, and 
carrying salvation to the Gentiles. The chapter divisions indicate the analysis of 


Jonah. 


us, we pray thee, for whose cause 
this evil is upon us; What is thine 
occupation? and whence comest 
thou? what is thy country? and 
of what people art thou? 

9 And he said unto them, Iam an 
Hebrew; and I “fear the Lorb, the 
God of heaven, ‘which hath made 
the sea and the dry Jand. 

10 Then were the men exceed- 
ingly afraid, and said unto him, 
Why hast thou done this? For the 
men knew that he fied from the 
presence of the LORD, because he 
had told them. 


CHAPTER 1. . 
The prophet’s first commission. 


OW the word of the LoRD came 
unto Jonah the son of Amittai, 
saying, 

2 Arise, go to %Nineveh, that 
bgreat city, and cry against it; for 
their wickedness is come up before 
me. 


The prophet’s flight from Jeho- 
vah; the great storm. 


3 But Jonah rose up to flee unto ‘ 
Tarshish from the presence of the 11 Then said they unto him,What 
Lorp, and went down to Joppa;|, Nab.1.1, shall we do unto thee, that the sea 
and he found a ship going to Tar-| note. may be calm unto us? for the sea 
shish: so he paid the fare thereof, wrought, and was tempestuous. 


and went down into it, to go with|? Jon 32,3; 
them unto Tarshish ‘from the pres- CERRY ony Ripe bearer PB Ea 


4 But the LorD sent out a great|* ey nim 7,12 And he said unto them, Take 
wind into the sea, and there was a “ey tne up, and cast me forth into the 
mighty tempest in the sea, so that|d Psa.19.9, sea; so shall the sea be calm unto 


the ship was like to be broken. note. you: for I know that for my sake 


5 Then the mariners were afraid,|, psa.146.6;  |this great tempest is upon you. 
and cried every man unto his god,| Acts 17.24. 13 Nevertheless the men rowed 


and cast forth the wares that were hard to bring it to the iand; but 
in the ship into the sea, to lighten they could not: for the sea wrought, 
it of them. But Jonah was gone and was tempestuous against them. 
down into the sides of the ship; 14 Wherefore they cried unto the 
and he lay, and was fast asleep. LorpD, and said, We beseech thee, 

6 So the shipmaster came to him, O Lorp, we beseech thee, let us 
and said unto him, What meanest not perish for this man’s life, and 
thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy lay not upon us innocent blood: for 
God, if so be that Ged will think thou, O Lorp, hast done as it 
upon us, that we perish not. pleased thee. 


15 So they took up Jonah, and 
cast him forth into the sea: and the 
sea ceased from her raging. 


7 And they said every one to his 
fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, 


that we may know for whose cause 
this evil is upon us. So they cast 16 Thenthe men @feared the LorD 


lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice 
8 Then said they unto him, Tell unto the Lorp, and made vows. 


Pe iZ| - JONAH. [4 3 


great city, and preach unto it the 
preaching that I bid thee. 

3 So Jonah arose, and went unto 
Nineveh, according to the word of 
the Lorp. Now Nineveh was an 


17. Now the Lorp had ¢prepared 
a !great fish to swallow up Jonah. 
And Jonah was in the belly of the 
fish three days and three nights. 


CHAPTER 2. exceeding great city of three days’ 
The prophet’s prayer; Jehovah's et AGd Jonah began to enter into 
AUST the city a day’s journey, and he 
HEN Jonah prayed unto the cried, and said, Yet forty days, and - 
‘ Lorp his God out of the fish’s Nineveh shall be overthrown. 
belly, 5 So the people of Nineveh Jbe- 
2 And said, <I cried by reason of}, Four pre- lieved God, and proclaimed a fast, 


mine affliction unte the LORD, and| pared things. |and put on sackcloth, from the 
he heard me, out of the belly of| Jo™-4-6.7.8- |greatest of them even to the least 


thell cried I, and thou heardest my] Bpie of them. 

voice. prayers 6 For word came unto the king of 
3 For thou hadst cast me into the se 34:15, |Nineveh, and he arose from_his 

deep, in the midst of the seas; and ~~" \throne, and he laid his robe from 

the floods compassed me about: ¢all| c Psa.120.1; him, and covered Aim with sack- 

thy billows and thy waves passed peers cloth, and sat in ashes. 

over me. ~~" 1 7 And he caused it to be pro- 


4 fThen I said, I am cast out of|d Heb. Sheol. |claimed and published through 
thy sight, yet I will look again See Bab = {Nineveh by the decree of the king 
toward thy holy temple. ; jand his nobles, saying, Let neither 

5 8The waters sumapessed me} e Psa.42.7, |man nor béast, herd nor flock, taste 
Eretavonnde der batieeeeae tt deer eo eae 
aes Moi about freee 4 g nes : rata he enaibsre be spe 

went down to the bottoms o RSID wi sackcloth, and cry mi ily 
the mountains; the earth with her], agiractes unto God: yea, let them turn every 
bars was about me for ever: yet| (O.T.). vs.1 one from his evil way, and from the 
hast thou brought up my life from ah) (Gens. violence that is in their hands. 
corruption, O LoRD my God. . 9 Who can tell if God will tum 


When my soul fainted within} :Nah.1.1, and “repent, and turn away from 
me I remembered the LorpD: andj 7°te- his fierce anger, that we perish not? 
my prayer came in unto thee, into! ; raity. 10 And God saw their works, that 
thine holy temple. Hab.2.4.- they turned from their evil way: 


8 They that observe lying vanities eee and God “repented of the evil, that 
forsake their own mercy. oor) lhe had said that he would do unto 
9 But I will sacrifice unto thee|& Zech.8.14, them; and he did sé not. 
with the voice of thanksgiving; I| 7°fe- 


will pay oan atte vowed.| ) rx.34.6; CHAPTER 4. 

alvation is 0 ORD. Psa.86.5; ‘ = 

10 And the ee hspake unto the Joe! 2.3, The prophet s displeasure; the 

fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon sheltering gourd. 

the dry Jand. But it displeased Jonah exceed- 
= Tea. ingly, and he was very angry. 


2 And he prayed unto the Lorp, 
and said, I pray thee, O Lorp, was 
not this my saying, when I was yet 
in my country? Therefore I fled be- 
fore unto Tarshish: for I knew that 
thou art a “gracious God, and merci- 
ful, slow to anger, and of great kind- 
ness, and “repentest thee of the evil. 

3 Therefore now, O Lorn, take, I 


The prophet’s second commis- 
sion; his obedience; the re- 
pentance of Nineveh. 


AA the word of the Lorp came 
- unto Jonah the second time, 

saying, 

2 Arise, go unto *Nineveh, that 


! No miracle of Scripture has called forth so much unbelief. i i 
tween the doubter and this ancient record, but between the Pree atc eon 
Jesus Christ (Mt. 12. 39, 40). Science, “falsely so called” (1 Tim. 6. 20), failing to 
take account of the fact that it deals only with the outward phenomena ‘of a fallen 
race, and of an earth under a curse (Gen. 3. 17-19), is intolerant of miracle. To 
faith, and to true science, miracle is what might be expected of divine love inter- \ 
posing for good in a physically and morally disordered universe (Rom. 8. 19-23), 
944 


Pa 4] 


JONAH. 


[4 


Se SS Sn ee ee EE SS eee eee 


beseech thee, my life from me; for 
it is better for me to die than to 
live. 

4 Then said the Lorp, Doest 
thou well to be angry? ‘ 

5 So Jonah went out of the city, 
and sat on the east side of the city, 
* and there made him a booth, and 
sat under it in the shadow, till he 
might see what would become of 

e city. 

6 And the LorD God “prepared a 
gourd, and made it to come up over} 
Jonah, that it might be a shadow 
over his head, to deliver him from 
his grief. So Jonah was exceeding 
glad of the gourd. 

7 But God prepared a worm when 
the morning rose the next day, and 
it smote the gourd that it withered. 

8 And it came to pass, when the 


1Cf. 1 Ki. 19, a8. 


B.C. 862. 


a Four pre- 
pared things. 
Jon.1.17; 4. 
6,7,8. 


6 Nah.1.1, 
note. 


sun did arise, that God prepared a 
vehement east wind; and the sun 
beat upon the head of Jonah, that 
he !fainted, and wished in himself 
to die, and said, It is better for me 
to die than to live. 

9 And God said to Jonah, Doest 
thou well to be angry for the gourd? 
And he said, I do well to be angry, 
even unto death. 

10 Then said the LorpD, Thou 
hast had pity on the gourd, for the 
which thou hast not laboured, nei- 
ther madest 1t grow; which came up 
in a night, and perished in a night: 

11 And should not I spare ®Nine- 
veh, that great city, wherein are 
more than sixscore thousand per- 
sons that cannot discern between 
their right hand and their left hand, 
jand also much cattle? 


Taken as a lesson in service we have in Jonah a servant, 


(1) disobedient, Chapter 1 1-11, (2) afflicted, Chapter 1. 12-17, (3) praying, 


Chapter 2. 1-9; (4) delivered, Chapter 2. 10: (5) 


5) recommussioned, Chapter 3. 


1-3; (6) powerful, Chapter 3. 4-9; (7) perplexed and fainting but not forsaken, 


Chapter 4. 1-11. 


945 


a MICAH. oe 


MicauH, a contemporary of Isaiah, prophesied during the reigns of Jotham, Ahaz, . 
and Hezekiah over Judah, and of Pekahiah, Pekah, and Hoshea over Israel (2 Ki. 
15. 23-30; 17. 1-6). He was a prophet in Judah (Jer. 26. 17-19), but the book called 
by his name chiefly concerns Samaria. pac : 

Micah falls into three prophetic strains, each beginning, ““Hear’’: I. 1. 1-2. 13. 
If. 3.1-5. 15. III. 6. 1-7. 20. 

The events recorded in Micah cover a period of 40 years (Ussher). 


B.c. 750. |will make a wailing like the drag- 
CHAPTER 1. ons, and mourning as the owls. 
Part I. (1) The case of Jehovah 9 For her wound is incurable; for 
against the “house of Israel” it is come unto Judah; he is come 
(Mic. 1, 1-2. 13). unto the gate of my people, even to 
Jerusalem. 

HE word of the LorD that came 10 Declare ye zt not at Gath, 
to ¢Micah the Morasthite inthe weep ye not at all: in the house of 

days of “Jotham, Ahaz, and Heze- Aphrah roll thyself in the dust. 
kiah, kings of Judah, which he saw 11 Pass ye away, thou inhabitant 
concerning Samaria and Jerusalem. of Saphir, having thy shame naked: 
2 Hear, all ye people; hearken, O}¢ Jer-26.18. the inhabitant of Zaanan came not 


earth, and all that therein is: and); xi151-5, |forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel; 
let the Lord Gop be witness against} 7,32-38; he shall receive of you his standing. 


you, the Lord from his holy temple. 2 Sie 12 For the inhabitant of Maroth 
3 For, behold, the LoRD ‘cometh| ~~ waited carefully for good: but “evil 
forth out of his place, and will come} ¢ Isa. 63.1; came down from the LORD unto the 


down, and tread upon 4the high Lae Teg gate of Jerusalem. 
places of the earth. | Mt.24.27-30; | 13. O thou inhabitant of Lachish, 
4 And the mountains shall be! 2Thes.2.8; {bind the chariot to the swift beast: 
alten under him, end the valleys ata ae se the pe of the sin to the 
shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, rae. _|daughter of Zion: for the transgres- 
and as the waters that are poured|d Deut 32.13; sions of Israel were found in thee. 
OS For the Cancetecionsat Jace) SAIS lagen nee ne eee en eee 
is all this, and for the sins of the) ¢ Mic.3.12; of ‘Achzib shall be alie to the kings 
house of Israel. What is the trans-| 2 Ki19.25.  |of Israel. 
Ec otst socthe Wek Dae cde SO. Nay tae eae 
ee, O inhabitant of Mareshah: he 

Judah? are they not Jerusalem?  [¢ Job 30.29; |shall come unto JAdullam the glory 
6 sbheretove I will make Samaria] PS2-192-6-  |of Israel. 
fas an heap of the field, and asjh Amos 3.6. 16 Make thee bald, and poll thee 
plantings of a vineyard: and I will) . en for thy delicate children; enlarge 
pour down the stones thereof into} *¥°5™ “44. \thy baldness as the eagle; for they 
ee velirs end I al discover the!j2Chr.11.7. {are gone into captivity from thee. 
oundations thereof. 

7 And all the graven images there- 


2 sane be oe to pieces, and ail CHAPTER 2. 

the Shires thereof shall be burned 5 

with the fire, and all the idols ehoraiiaen ns Assael. 

eireek ae gine iepeye 1 gue ‘ 

gathered it of the hire of an harlot, WOE to them that d ise ini- 

and they shall return to the hire of quity, and mre col isen 
an. harlot. Y . their beds! when the morning is 
8 Therefore I will wail and howl, light, they practise it, because it is 

E will go stripped and naked: &I in the power of their hand. 


_ _In verses 6-16 the Assyrian invasion is described. Cf. 2 Ki. 17. 1-18. This 
is the local circumstance which gives rise to the prophecy of the greater invasion in 


the last days (Mic. 4. 9-13), and of the Lord’s deliverance at Armageddon (Rev. 
16. 14; 19. 17), 
946 


2 And they covet fields, and take 
them by violence; and houses, and 
take them away: so they oppress a 
man and his house, even a man and 
his heritage. 

3 Therefore thus saith the LorD; 
Behold, against “this family do I 
devise an evil, from which ye shall 
not remove your necks; neither 
shall; ye go haughtily: for this 
time is evil. 

4 In that day shall one take up a 
parable against you, and lament 
with a doleful lamentation, and 
say, We be utterly spoiled: he hath 
changed the portion of my people: 
how hath he removed it from me! 
turning away he hath divided our 
fields. 

5 Therefore thou shalt have none 
that shall cast a cord by lot in the 
congregation of the Lorpb. 

6 Prophesy ye not, say they to 
them that prophesy: they shall not 
prophesy to them, that they shall 
not take shame. 

7 O thou that art named the 
house of Jacob, is the “spirit of the 
Lorp straitened? are these his 
doings? do not my words do good 
to him that walketh uprightly? 

8 Even of late my people is risen 
up as an enemy: ye pull off the 
robe with the garment from them 
that pass by securely as men averse 
from war. 

9 The women of my people have 
ye cast out from their pleasant 
houses; from their children have 
ye taken away my glory for ever. 

10 Arise ye, and depart; for this 
is not your rest: because it is pol- 
luted, it shall destroy you, even 
with a sore destruction. 

11 If a man walking in the spirit 
and falsehood do lie, saying, I will 
prophesy unto thee of wine and of 
strong drink; he shall even be the 
prophet of this people. 


(2) The promise to the remnant. 


12 Iwill surely assemble, O Jacob, 
all of thee; I will surely gather the 
éremnant of Israel; I will put them 
together as the sheep of Bozrah, 
as the flock in the midst of their 
fold: they shall make great noise 
by reason of the multitude of 


men. 

13 The breaker is come up before 
them: they have broken up, and 
have passed through the gate, and 
are gone out by it: and their king 
shall pass before them, and the 
Lorp on the head of them. 


MICAH. 


a Jer.8.3. 


b Amos 5.13; 
Eph.5 16. 


c Holy Spirit. 


Mic.3.8. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


d Remnant. 
vs.12,13; 
Mic.4.1-7. 
(Isa.1.9; 
Rom.11.5.) 


e Inspiration. 


Hab.2.2. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


f Holy Spirit. 


Zech.4.6. 
(Gen.1.2; 
Mal.2.15.) 


g Prediction 
of the de- 
struction of 
Jerusalem, 


fulfilled A.D. 


70. Cf.Dan. 
9. 


947 


[3 12 


. CHAPTER 3. 


Part II. (Mic. 3. 1-5. 15.) (1) The 
coming judgment of the cap- 
tivities. 

An I said, Hear, I pray you, O 

heads of Jacob, and ye princes 
of the house of Israel; Zs zt not for 
you to know judgment? 

2 Who hate the good, and love 
the evil; who pluck off their skin 
from off them, and their flesh from 
off their bones; 

3 Who also eat the flesh of my 
people, and flay their skin from off 
them; and they break their bones, 
and chop them in pieces, as for 
the pot, and as flesh within the cal- 
dron. 

4 Then shall they cry unto the 
LORD, but he will not hear them: 
he will even hide his face from 
them at that time, as they have 
behaved themselves ill in their 
doings. 

5 Thus saith the LorD concerning 
the prophets that make my people 
err, that bite with their teeth, and 
cry, Peace; and he that putteth 
not into their mouths, they even 
prepare war against him. 

6 Therefore night shall be unto 
you, that ye shall not have a vision; 
and it shall be dark unto you, that 
ye shall not divine; and the sun 
shall go down over the prophets, 
and the day shall be dark over 


them. . 

‘7 Then shall the seers be ashamed, 
and the diviners confounded: yea, 
they shall all cover their lips; for 
there is no answer of God. 

8 But truly I am full of ‘power by 
the fspirit of the Lorp, and of 
judgment, and of might, to declare 
unto Jacob his transgression, and 
to Israel his sin. 

9 Hear this, I pray you, ye heads 
of the house of Jacob, and princes 
of the house of Israel, that abhor 
judgment, and pervert all equity. 

10 They build up Zion with blood, 
and Jerusalem with iniquity. 

11 The heads thereof judge for 
reward, and the priests thereof 
teach for hire, and the prophets 
thereof divine for money: yet will 
they lean upon the LORD, and say, 
Is not the LorRD among us? none 
evil can come upon us. 

12 &Therefore shall Zion for your 
sake be plowed as a field, and Jeru- 
salem shall become heaps, and the 
mountain of the house as the high 
places of the forest. 


41] MICAH. 


Ti 5824 


CHAPTER 4.- 


(2) The future kingdom of Mes- 
siah: (a) the kingdom to be 
supreme. 


Bor in the last days it shall come} 

to pass, that the !mountain of 

the house of the LorD shall be es- 

tablished in the “top of the moun-! 

tains, and 4it shall be exalted above’ 

the hills; and people shall flow ae 

aahes | 1:3; Mics.2. 
(b) The kingdom to be universal.| ie 
2 And many nations shall come, 

and say, Come, and let us go up to]? Reesor 

the mountain of the Lorn, and to} ¥3'o/* (25° 

the house of the God of Jacob; and] 1.9; Rom.11. 

he will teach us of his ways, and]! 5-) 

we will walk in his paths: for the SPRATT 

law shall go forth of Zion, and the peoples do 


word of the LORD from Jerusalem.| now walk in 
the name of 


(c) The kingdom to be peaceful.|_ their god, 
’ but shall 

3 And he shall judge among many] Walk in the 
people, and rebuke strong nations| name of 
afar off; and they shall beat their Aimer soon 
swords into plowshares, and their| ?5r ever. 
spears into pruninghooks: nation f 
shall not lift up a sword against ore 
nation, neither shall they learn Advent). 
war any more. pee: 
(d) The kingdom to secure uni-| 30.3; Acts 


versal prosperity. 1.9-11.) 

4 But they shall sit every man|e Heb. goel, 
under his vine and under his fig Resemes 
tree; and none shall make them] type). 
afraid: for the mouth of the Lorp| Isa.59.20, 
of hosts hath spoken :#. : note. 

5 For “all people will walk every f Zech.12.1- 
one in the name of his god, and wel 8; 14.14. 
will walk in the name of the Lorp CEMt.26 
our God for ever and ever. S67: 27.30. 


(e) Israel to be regathered. 


6 In that day, saith the Lorn, 
will I assemble her that halteth, 
and I will gather her that is driven 
out, and her that I have afflicted; 

7 And I will make her that halted 
a remnant, and her that was cast 
far off a strong nation: and ¢the 
Lorp shall reign over them in 
mount Zion from henceforth, even 
for ever. 

8 And thou, O tower of the flock, 


B.C. 710. 


the strong hold of the daughter of 
Zion, unto thee shall it come, even 
the first dominion; the kingdom 


shall come to the daughter of Jern- 


salem, 


(f) The intervening Babylonian 

captivity. 

9 Now why dost thou cry out 
aloud? is there no king in thee? is 
thy counsellor perished? for pangs 
have taken thee as a woman in 
travail. 

10 Bein pain, and labour to bring 
forth, O daughter of Zion, like a 
woman in travail: for now shalt 
thou go forth out of the city, and 
thou shalt dwellinthe field, andthou 
shalt go even to Babylon; there 
shalt thou be delivered; there the 
Lorpb shall ‘redeem thee from the 
hand of thine enemies. 


(g) How the kingdom is set up: 
the gathering of the Gentile 
nations against Jerusalem, 
and battle of Armageddon 
(Rev. 16. 14; 19. 17, note). 


11 Now also many nations are 
gathered against thee, that say, 
Let her be defiled, and let our eye 
look upon Zion. 

12 Butthey knownot the thoughts 
of the LorD, neither understand 
they his counsel: for he shall gather 
them as the sheaves into the fioor. 

13 Arise and thresh, O daughter 
of Zion: for I will make thine horn 
iron, and I will make thy hoofs 
brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces 
many people: and I will consecrate 
their gain unto the Lorp, and their 
substance unto the Lord of the 
whole earth. 


CHAPTER 5. 
Parenthesis: the birth and re- 
jection of the King. (Cf. Mt. 
“1-6; 2/2¢sasa sr) 


2 

"Now gather thyself in troops, O 
daughter of troops: he hath 

laid siege against us: they shall 

ssmite the judge of Israel with a 

rod upon the cheek. 

2 But thou, Beth-lehem Ephra- 

tah, though thou be little among 


1 General predictions concerning the kingdom. 
symbol of a great earth power (Dan. 2. 35); hills, 
diction asserts (1) the ultimate establishment of the 
the capital (v. 1); (2) the universality of the future 
acter—peace (v. 3); (4) its effect—prosperity (v. 4). 

2 ‘word of the Lorp that came to Micah” 


‘ 


The 
future kingdom 


948 


(Mic. 4. 1-8), and glanced at the 
9-10), goes forward into the last days to refer to 


In Scripture a mountain is the 
of smaller powers. The pre- 
kingdom, with Jerusalem for 
kingdom (vy. 2); (3) its char- 
Cf. Isa. 2. 1-5; 11. 1-12. 

(Mic. 1. 1), having described the 
Babylonian captivities (Mic. 4. 
the great battle (see “Armaged- 


} 
, 
} 


mS 


5 3] MICAH. : [61 


the thousands of Judah, yet “out of; B.C. 710. 8 And the remnant of Jacob shall 
bthee shall he come forth unto me be among the Gentiles in the midst 
that is to be ‘ruler in Israel; whose of many people as a lion among the 
goings forth have been from of old,} beasts of the forest, as a young lion 


from everlasting. among the flocks of sheep: who, if 
Interval between the rejection|¢Mt25-12; he ue through, both treadeth down, 
pod return of the King. End Tenn Pan, acl eae in pieces, and none can 
eee ee ay os Pee 9 Thine hand shall be lifted up 

3 Therefore will he give them up,} (First upon thine adversaries, and all 
until the time that she which trav- ier thine enemies shall be cut off. 
aileth hath brought forth: then the] (Géi3.is; 10 “And it shall come to pass in 
¢remnant of his brethren shall re-| Acts 1.9.) that day, saith the Lorn, that I 
¢ Rinedom will cut off thy horses out of the 
In the kingdom-aége. Sethen er ee marty ne pie bag 

4 And he shall stand and feed in} 20. (Gent. | 11 And I will cut off the cities of 
the aie ane of the repre the} 49's) thy — oe throw down all thy 
majesty o e name oO: e LORD strong holds: 
his God; and they shall abide: for|¢ Remnant. j(12: And:1 will cut off witchcrafts 
= oe he Be great unto the] \eic7 18. aed of thind ee and thou shalt 
ends of the earth. (Isa.1.9; ave no more soothsayers: 

5 And Le igs wre be an Rom.11.5.) se whe ae Be “ieee also will I 
peace, when e Assyrian s : 8: cut off, and thy standing images 
come into our land: and when he pre out of the midst of thee; and thou 
shall tread in our palaces, then Zech shalt no more worship the work of 
shall we raise against him seven ee, thine hands. 


turn unto the children of Israel. 


shepherds, and eight principal men.| f Gen.10.8, 14 And I will pluck up thy ‘groves 
6 And they shall waste the land| 19.11- out of the midst of thee: so will I 

of Assyria with the sword, and the}, peut322, [destroy thy cities. 

fland of Nimrod in the entrances] ” Psa.72.6; ° 15 And I will execute vengeance 

thereof: thus shall he deliver us| 110-3. in anger and fury upon the Jheathen, 


from the Assyrian, when he cometh], 7.4939, | |Such as they have not heard. 
into our land, and when he tread- 
eth ras ne omager queso ean i Deut.16.21. CHAPTER 6. 

‘7 An e 2remnant of Jacob shall| ; . ; 

be in the midst of many people “as a fe eS gests ie. Bat he ae () ine 
dew from the LorD, as the showers! eas a eh Pp ‘; eRe (Cons 
upon the grass, that tarrieth not for PVE LSNy Watch tShees 
man, nor waiteth for the sons of 1S Ger ye now what the Lorp 
men. saith; Arise, contend thou be- 


don,” Rev. 16. 14; 19. 17, note), which immediately precedes the setting up of the 
Messianic kingdom (see “Kingdom (O.T.),” Gen. 1. 26; Zech. 12. 8, note; also, 
“Kingdom (N.T.),” Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15, 28). 

Mic. 5. 1, 2 forms a parenthesis in which the “‘word of the LORD” goes back 
from the time of the great battle (yet future) to the birth and rejection of the King, 
Messiah-Christ (Mt. 27. 24, 25, 37). This is followed by the statement that He 
will “give them up until the time that she which travaileth hath brought forth” 
(v. 3). There is a twofold ‘“‘travail’’ of Israel: (1) that which brings forth the 

‘man child” (Christ) (Rev 12.1, 2): and (2) that which, in the last days, brings 
forth a believing “‘remnant’’ out of the still dispersed and unbelieving nation 
(v. 3: Jer. 30. 6-14; Mic. 4. 10). Both aspects are combined in Isa. 66. In verse 
7 we have the “man child’? (Christ) of Rev. 12. 1.2; in verses 8-24 the remnant, 
established in kingdom blessing. ‘The meaning of Mic. 5. 3 is that, from the rejec- 
tion of Christ at His first coming Jehovah will give Israel up till the believing remnant 
appears; then He stands and feeds in His proper strength as Jehovah (v. 4); He 
is the defence of His people as in Mic. 4.3, 11-13, and afterward the remnant go as 
missionaries to Israel and to all the world (vs. 7, 8; Zech. 8. 23). 

1 Cf, Isa. 7. 13, 14; 9.6, 7. The “child” was born in Bethiehem, but the “Son” 
was “from everlasting.” 

2 The ministry of the Jewish remnant (Isa. 1. 9; Rom. 11. 5, note) has a twofold 
aspect, “a dew from the Lorp”; “a lion among the beasts.” Turning to the Lord 
in the great tribulation (Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 7. 14, note), the remnant takes up the 
beautiful gospel of the kingdom (Rev. 14. 6, note) and proclaims it under awfui 

< 949 


6 2] MICAH. Pe 


thee sick in smiting thee, in mak- 
ing thee desolate because of thy 
sins. 

14 Thou shalt eat, but not be sat- — 
isfied; and thy casting down shall © 
be in the midst of thee; and thou 
shalt take hold, but shalt not de- 
liver; and that which thou deliver- 
est will I give up to the sword. 

15 *Thou shalt sow, but thou 
shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the 
olives, but thou shalt not anoint — 
thee with oil; and sweet wine, but 
shalt not drink wine. 

16 For the statutes of fOmri are 


fore the mountains, and let the hills 
hear thy voice. 
2 Hear ye, O mountains, the 
Lorp’s controversy, and ye strong 
foundations of the earth: for the 
Lorp hath a controversy with his 
_ people, and he will plead with 
Israel. 
3 Omy people, what have I done 
unto thee? and wherein have I 
wearied thee? testify against me. 
4 For I brought thee up out of the 
land of Egypt, and “redeemed thee 
out of the house of servants; and I 
sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and 
Miriam. kept, and all the works of the house 
5 O my people, remember now of 8Ahab, and ye walk in their coun- 
what Balak king of Moab con- Ceccit 59, |Scls;_ that I should make thee a 
sulted, and what Balaam the son] 20, note. |desolation, and the inhabitants 
of Beor answered him from Shittim thereof an hissing: therefore ye 
unto Gilgal; that ye may know the|?Num23,— |shall bear the reproach of my 
righteousness of the LorpD. 24.3-9,15-24. |People. 


6 Wherewith shall I come before Dp 
the LORD, and bow myself before|¢Deut-10.12;_ ete SER Ts 
the high God? shall I come be-| Hose6; OE is me! for I am as when 


fore him with burnt-offerings, with| 12.6. they have gathered the sum- 
calves of a year old? dGen.18.19,  |mer fruits, as the grapegleanings of 

7 Will the Lorp be pleased with|" t:,1.17.' |the vintage: there is no cluster to 
thousands of rams, or with ten eat: my soul desired the firstripe 


thousands of rivers of oil? shall I eee fruit. 

give my firstborn for my trans-| Amos's.11; | 2 The good man is perished out 
gression, the fruit of my body for| Zeph.1.13; of the earth: and there is none up- 
the sin of my soul? Hag.1.6. right among men: they all lie in 


8 ‘He hath shewed thee, O man,| +1 xi.16.25,26,|Wait for blood; they hunt every 
what is good; and what doth the ‘ man his brother with a net, 
LoRD require of thee, but ¢to do &} Ki.16-30; | 3 That they may do evil with both 
justly, and to love mercy, and to| 2xi313. {hands earnestly, the prince asketh, 
walk humbly with thy God? and the judge asketh for a reward: 
9 The LorD’s voice crieth unto and the great man, he uttereth his 
the city, and the man of wis- mischievous desire: so they wrap: 
dom shall see thy name: hear ye it up. 
the rod, and who hath appointed 4 The best of them is as a brier: 
the most upright is sharper than a 


it. 
10 Are there yet the treasures of thorn hedge: the day of thy watch- 


wickedness in the house of the 
wicked, and the scant measure that 


is abominable? 5 ‘Trust ye not in a friend, put 


ye not confidence in a guide: keep 
the doors of thy mouth from her 
that lieth in thy bosom. 

For the son dishorioureth the 
father, the daughter riseth up 
against her mother, the daughter 
in law against her mother in law; 


a man’s enemies are the men of his 
own house. 


full of violence, and the inhabi- 
tants thereof have spoken lies, and 
their tongue is deceitful in their 
mouth. 

13 Therefore also will I make 


persecution “unto all nations, for a witness” (Mt. 24. 14). The result is s i 
Rev. 7. 4-14. This is the “dew” aspect, and mS ah i the “day of the LozD” 
QEER DE 10-22; Rev. 19. 11-21), in the morning of which the kingdom is set up in 
power. Again there is a world-wide preaching to Jew and Gentile, but now it is 
the word that the King is on His holy hill of Zion (Psa. 2.), and the unrepentant wilk 
be broken with His rod of iron (Psa. 2. 6-9). The preaching is given in Psa. 2. 10-12. 
This is the “lion” aspect of the remnant’s testimony (Rev. 2. 26-28). The full 
kingdom-age of blessing follows the “rod of iron”? aspect. 


950 


(2) The voice of the remnant in 
the last days. 


7 ‘Therefore I will look unte the 
Lorp; I will wait for the God of 
my salvation: my God will hear 
me. 

8 Rejoice not against me, O mine 
enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; 
when I sit in darkness, the LorD 
Shall be a light unto me. 

9 I will bear the indignation of 
the Lorpb, because I have sinned 
against him, until he plead my/ Amos 9.11, 
cause, and execute judgment for SSS 
me: he will bring-me forth to the Ske 
light, and I shall behold ¢his right-|¢ Psa.72.9; 
eousness. Isa.49.23. 

10 Then she that is mine enemy]| ¢ Jer.33.9. 
shall see it, and shame shall cover 
her which said unto me, Where is|/ peep ype 
the Lorp thy God? mine eyes shall] 7°" Gea’ 
behold her: now shall she be] 1.9; Rom. 
trodden down as the mire of the| 41-5-) 
streets. 

11 In the day that thy 4walls are 
to be built, in that day shall the 
decree be far removed. 

12 In that day also he shall come 
even to thee from Assyria, and 
from the fortified cities, and from 
the fortress even to the river, and 
from sea to sea, and from moun- 
tain to mountain. 

13 Notwithstanding the land shall 
be desolate because of them that 


a Rom.10.1-4; 
11.23-27. 


MICAH. 


[7 20 


dwell therein, for the fruit of their 
doings. 

14 Feed thy people with thy rod, 
the flock of thine heritage, which 
dwell solitarily in the wood, in the 
midst of Carmel: let them feed in 
Bashan and Gilead, as in the days 
of old. 

15 ‘According to the days of thy 
coming out of the land of Egypt 
will I shew unto him marvellous 
things. 

16 The nations shall see and be 
confounded at all their might: they 
shall lay their hand upon their 
mouth, their ears shall be deaf. 

17 They shall 4lick the dust like a 
serpent, they shall move out of their 
holes like worms of the earth: ‘they 
shall be afraid of the Lorp our 
God, and shail fear because of thee. 

18 Who is a God like unto thee, 
that pardoneth iniquity, and pass- 
eth by the transgression of the 
fremnant of his heritage? he re- 
taineth not his anger for ever, be- 
cause he delighteth zn mercy. 

19 He will turn again, he will have 
compassion upon us; he will subdue 
our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all 
their sins into the depths of the 
sea. 

20 Thou wilt perform the truth to 
Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, 
which thou hast sworn unto our 
fathers from the days of old. 


1 Mic. 7. 7-20 is, primarily, the confession and intercession of the prophet, who 


identifies himself with Israel. 
prophetic office (Jer. 27. 18; Gen. 20. 7). 
exercise of the remnant in the last days. 
near and the far. (Cf. Psa. 22.1; Mt. 27. 46.) 


951 


Cf. Dan. 9. 3-19, 
But Micah’s prayer voices also the heart 
Such is prophecy, an intermingling of the 


Intercession was a test of the 


vy NAHUM. na 


NauuM prophesied during the reign of Hezekiah, probably about one hundred and 
fifty aes aiter Jonah. He has but one subject—the destruction of Nineveh. 
According to Diodorus Siculus, the city was destroyed nearly a century later, pre- 
cisely as here predicted. The prophecy is one continuous strain which does not 
yield to analysis. The moral theme is: the holiness of Jehovah which must deal with 
sin in judgment. 


CHAPTER 1 __ B.C. 713. |and the hills melt, and the earth is 


burned G? para aoe the 
4 world, an at dwe erein. 

The holiness of Jehovah. wer 6 eWito carl stand’ befare tis ae 
HE “burden of 1Nineveh. The} noe. dignation? and who can abide in 
book of the vision of Nahum! Frese \the fierceness of his anger? his fury 

“2 2God 19 jeal cher cies) Noun US Sees Ou ep eaeisae Tay 

is jealous, an e€ D) Psa.103.8; 1 i 

revengeth; the LorpD revengeth,| Jon-4.2. 7 The LorpD is “good, a strong 


and is furious; the Lorn will take) , psa.1g.7: hold in the day of trouble; and fhe 
vengeance on his adversaries, and “97.2; Hab. jknoweth them that trust in him. 


he reserveth wrath for his enemies.| 3-5,11,12. 8 But with an overrunning flood 
3 The Lorp is slow to anger,|g yai3.2. he will make an utter end of the 
and great in power, and will not at place thereof, and darkness shall 


all acquit the wicked: ‘the Lorn) é Psa.25.8; jpursue his enemies. _ ~ 

hath his way in the whirlwind and teas ina 9 What do ye imagine against the 

in the storm, and the clouds are the] Lam.3.25. Lorp? he will make an utter end: 

ie dated the sea, and mak-|7 FR se bs rapes sey DPRSee neath tee 
’ im.2. > 2 Ly 

eth it dry, and drieth up all the} Psa.2.12, 10 For while they be folden to- 


Tivers: Bashan languisheth, and] 7°fe- gether as thorns, and while they 
Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon are drunken as drunkards, they 
languisheth. 


shall be devoured as stubble fully 
5 The mountains quake at him, idry. 
a ee ee ee Wen SLL SP 
1 Nineveh stands in Scripture as the representative of apostate religious Gentile- 
dom, as Babylon represents the confusion into which the Gentile political world- 
system has fallen (Dan. 2. 41-43). See Isa. 13. 1, nofe. Under the preaching of 
Jonah, B.c. 862, the city and king had turned to God (Elohim), Jon. 3. 3-10. But 
in the time of Nahum, more than a century later, the city had wholly apostatized 
from God. It is this which distinguishes Nineveh from all the other ancient Gen- 
tile cities, and which makes her the suited symbol of the present religious Gentile 
world-system in the last days. Morally, Nineveh is described in Rom. 1. 21-23. 
The chief deity of apostate Nineveh was the bull-god, with the face of a man and 
the wings of a bird: ‘‘an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four- 
footed beasts.” 

The message of Nahum, uttered about one hundred years before the destruction 
of Nineveh, is, therefore, not a call to repentance, but an unrelieved warning of 
judgment: “He will make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time,”’ 
v. 9; see, also, Nah. 3. 10. For there is no remedy for apostasy but utter judg- 
ment, and a new beginning. Cf. Isa. 1. 4, 5, 24-28: Heb. 6. 4-8; Prov. 29.1. It is 
the way of God; apostasy is punished by catastrophic destruction. Of this the 
flood and the destruction of Nineveh are witnesses. The coming destruction of 
apostate Christendom is foreshadowed by these. (Cf. Dan. 2. 34, 35, Lk. 17. 26, 
27; Rev. 19. 17-21.) 

2 The great ethical lesson of Nahum is that the character of God makes Him 
not only “slow to anger,” and “‘a stronghold to them that trust Him,” but also one 
who “will not at all acquit the wicked.” He can be “just, and the justifier of him 


which believeth in Jesus” (Rom. 3. 26), but only because His holy law has been 
viidicated in the cross. 


952 


11 There is one come out of thee, 
that imagineth evil against the 
Lorp, a wicked counsellor. 

12 Thus saith the Lorp; Though 
they be quiet, and likewise many, 
yet thus shall they be cut down, 
when he shall pass through. 
Though I have afflicted thee, I 
will afflict thee no more. 


bonds in sunder. 

14 And the LorpD hath given aj 
commandment concerning thee,| 
that no more of thy name be sown: 
out of the house of thy gods will I 
cut off the graven image and the 
molten image: I will make thy 
grave; for thou art vile. 


The future evanégel. 


15 Behold upon the mountains 
the “feet of him that bringeth good 
tidings, that publisheth peace! O 
Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, per- 
form thy vows: for the wicked shail]? m= a0; 1 
no more pass through thee; he is} °“* 


utterly cut off. ¢ Job 4.10,11; 
Ezk.19.2,7. 


a Isa.52.7; 
Rom.10.15. 


CHAPTER 2. aap 
zk.29.3; 
The battle in the streets. 38.3; 39.1. 
e Ezk.22.2,3; 
24.6.9; 


HE that dasheth in pieces is come 
up before thy face: keep the Hab.2.12. 
munition, watch the way, make thy f1sa.47.9,12 
ae Getrdns, fortify thy power|’ Rev.i8.2,3. 
mi y. 

2 "For the Lorp hath turned 
away the excellency of Jacob, as the 
excellency of Israel: for the emptiers 
have emptied them out, and marred 

their vine branches. 

3 The shield of his mighty men is 
made red, the valiant men are in 
scarlet: the chariots shall be with 
flaming torches in the day of his 
preparation, and the fir trees shall 
be terribly shaken. 

4 The chariots shall rage in the 
streets, they shall justle one against 
another in the broad ways: they 
shall seem like torches, they shall 
run like the lightnings. 

5 He shall recount his worthies: 
they shall stumble in their walk; 
they shall make haste to the wall 
thereof, and the defence shall be 
prepared. 

6 The gates of the rivers shall be 
opened, and the palace shall be dis- 
solved. 

7 And Huzzab shall be led away 
captive, she shall be brought up, 
and her maids shall lead Aer as : 

wo 95 


NAHUM. 


B.C. 713. 


136 


with the voice of doves, tabering 
upon their breasts. 

8 But Nineveh is of old like a pool 
of water: yet they shall flee away. 
Stand, stand, shall they cry; but 
none shall look back. 

G Take ye the spoil of silver, take 
the spoil of gold: for there is none 
end of the store and glory out of 
all the pleasant furniture. 

10 She is empty, and void, and 
waste: and the heart melteth, and 
the knees smite together, and much 
pain is in all loins, and the faces of 
them. all gather blackness. 

11 Where zs the dwelling of the 
icons, and the feedingplace of the 
young lions, where the lion, even 
the old lion, walked, and the lion’s 
whelp, and none made them afraid? 

12 The lion did tear in pieces 
enough for his whelps, and stran- 
gled for his lionesses, and filled his 
holes with prey, and his dens with 


avin. 

13 4Behold, I am against thee, 
saith the Lorp of hosts, and I will 
burn her chariots in the smoke, and 
the sword shall devour thy young 
lions: and I will cut off thy prey 
from the earth, and the voice of thy 
messengers shall no more be heard. 


CHAPTER 3. 


As Nineveh sowed, so must 
she reap. 


OE to ¢the bloody city! it is 
all full of lies and robbery; 
the prey departeth not; 

2 The noise of a whip, and the 
noise of the rattling of the wheels, 
and of the pransing horses, and of 
the jumping chariots. 

3 The horseman lifteth up both 
the bright sword and the glittering 
spear: and there is a multitude of 
slain, and a great number of car- 
cases; and there is none end of 
their corpses; they stumble upon 
their corpses: 

4 Because of the multitude of the 
whoredoms of the wellfavoured 
harlot, the ‘mistress of witchcrafts, 
that selleth nations through her 
whoredoms, and families through 
her witchcrafts. 

5 Behold, I am against thee, saith 
the Lorp of hosts; and I will dis- 
cover thy skirts upon thy face, and 
I will shew the nations thy naked- 
ness, and the kingdoms thy shame. 

6 And I will cast abominable filth 
upon thee, and make thee vile, and 
will set thee as a gazingstock. 


37] 


7 And it shall come to pass, that 
all they that look upon thee shall 
flee from thee, and say, “Nineveh is 
laid waste: who will bemoan her? 
whence shall I seek comforters for 
thee? 

8 Art thou better than populous 
‘No, that was situate among the 
tivers, that had the waters round 
about it, whose rampart was the eee gt 
sea, and her wall was from the) 7°” 


sea? b Or, No- 
j 7 men. 
9 Ethiopia and Egypt were her jer46.25: 


strength, and zt was infinite; Put 
and Lubim were thy helpers. 

10 Yet was she carried away, she 
went into captivity: her young chil- 
dren also were dashed in pieces at|d Joel 1.4. 
the top of all the streets: and they 
cast lots for her honourable men,’ S45°""1* 
and all her great men were bound 
in chains. 

11 Thou also shalt be drunken: 
thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt 
seek strength because of the en- 


emy. 

12 Ali thy strong holds shall be 
like fig trees with the firstripe figs: 
if they be shaken, they shall even 
fall into the mouth of the eater. 

13 Behold, thy people in the midst 
of thee are women: the gates of thy 
land shall be set wide open unto 


Ezk.30.15, 
16. 


f Lam.2.15; 
Zeph.2.15. 


OR. 


NAHUM. 


c Rev.6.12,13. 


See Isa.14.8. 


thine enemies: the fire shall devour 
thy bars. j 

14 Draw thee waters for the siege, 
fortify thy strong holds: go into 
clay, and tread the morter, make 
strong the brickkiln. 

15 There shall the fire devour 
thee; the sword shall cut thee off, 
it shall eat thee up like the 4can- 
kerworm: make thyself many as the 
cankerworm, make thyself many as 
the locusts. 

16 Thou hast multiplied thy ‘mer- 
chants above the stars of heaven: 
the cankerworm spoileth, and fleeth 
away. 

17 Thycrowned areas thelocusts, 
and thy captains as the great grass- 
hoppers, which camp in the hedges 
in the cold day, but when the sun 
ariseth they flee away, and their 
place is not known where they are. 

18 Thy shepherds slumber, O king 
of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell 
in the dust: thy people is scat- 
tered upon the mountains, and no 
man gathereth them. 

19 There is no healing of thy 


bruise: thy wound is grievous: Jall 
that hear the bruit of thee shall 
clap the hands over thee: for upon 
whom hath not thy wickedness 
passed continually? 


ewe 


Bu HABAKKUK. ue 


It seems most probable that Habakkuk prophesied in the fatter years of Josiah. 
Of the prophet himself nothing is known. To him the character of Jehovah was 
revealed in terms of the highest spirituality. He alone of the prophets was more 
concerned that the holiness of Jehovah should be vindicated than that Israel should 
escape chastisement. Written just upon the eve of the captivity, Habakkuk was 
God’s testimony to Himself as against both idolatry and pantheism. 

The book is in five parts: I. Habakkuk’s perplexity in view of the sins of Israel 
and the silence of God, 1. 14. Historically this was the time of Jehovah’s for- 
bearance because of Josiah’s repentance (2 Ki. 22. 18-20). II. The answer of Je- 
hovah to the prophet’s perplexity, 1. 5-11. III. The prophet, thus answered, 
utters the testimony to Jehovah, 1. 12-17; but he will watch for further answers, 
2.1. IV. To the watching prophet comes the response of the “‘vision,’’ 2. 2-20. 
V. All ends in Habakkuk’s sublime Psalm of the Kingdom. 

As a whole the Book of Habakkuk raises and answers the question of God’s con- 
sistency with Himself in view of permitted evil. The prophet thought that the 
holiness of God forbade him to go on with evil Israel. The answer of Jehovah 
announces a Chaldean invasion (1. 6), and a world-wide dispersion (1, 5). But 
Jehovah is not mere wrath; “‘He delighteth in mercy” (Mic. 7. 18), and introduces 
into His answers to the perplexed prophet the great promises, 1. 5; 2. 3, 4, 
14, 20. 


B.c. 626. |that bitter and hasty nation, which 


CHAPTER 1. shall march through the breadth of 
Part I. Prayer of Habakkuk: evil the land, to possess the dwelling- 
in dispersed Israel. (Cf. Deut. places that are not their’s. 
28. 64-67.) fe They, are perible end sient 
: j their judgment and their dignity 
HE “burden which Habakkuk shall proceed of themselves. 
the prophet did see. 8 Their horses also are swifter 
2 O Lorp, how long shall I cry, than the leopards, and are more 
and thou wilt not hear! even cry fierce than the evening wolves: and 
out unto thee of violence, and thou their horsemen shall spread them- 
wilt not save! _ , (2 1sa.13.1, selves, and their horsemen shall 
3 Why dost thou shew me ini-| 7°fe- come from far; they shall fly as the 


quity, and cause me to behold|yic. nations. jeagle that hasteth to eat. 
grievance? for spoiling and violence 9 They shall come all for violence: 
are before me: and there are that their faces shall sup up as the east 
raise up strife and contention. wind, and they shall gather the 
4 Therefore the law is slacked, captivity as the sand. 
and judgment doth never go forth: 10 And they shall scoff at the 
for the wicked doth compass about kings, and the princes shall be a 
the righteous; therefore wrong judg- scorn unto them: they shall deride 
ment proceedeth. every strong hold; for they shall 


4 ‘ heap dust, and take it. 
perils, Vows re wie Por eis £646 11. Then shall Ais mind change, 


and he shall pass over, and offend, 
5 Behold ye among the *heathen, irnputing this his power unto his 
and regard, and wonder marvel- 


, A god. 
lously: Mor J will ‘work a work in Part IJ. Habakkuk’s testimony 
your days, which ye will not be- 


lieve, though it be told you to Jehovah (extends to Hab. 2.1). 
6 For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, 12 Art thou not from everlasting, 


c Acts 13.41. 


l Verse 5 anticipates the dispersion “among the nations” (cf. Deut. 28. 64-67) 
While Israel as a nation is thus dispersed, Jehovah will “work a work” which Israeh 
“will not believe.” Acts 13. 37-41 interprets this prediction of the redemptive 
work of Christ. It is significant that Paul quotes this to Jews of the dispersion in 


the synagogue at Antioch. 
955 


PASTY 7 HABAKKUK. pare 


O LorD my God, mine Holy One?! B.c. 626. |unto me, and what I shall answer 
we shall not die. O Lorp, thou when I am reproved. ' 


hast ordained them for judgment; Part IV. Jehovah's response to 
and, O mighty God, thou hast es- Habakkuk’s testimony: the 


tablished them for correction. ear aer 2? 
13. Thou art of purer eyes than to 
behold evil, and canst not look on 2 And the Lorp answered me, 
iniquity: wherefore lookest thou and said, *Write the vision, and 
upon them that deal treacherously. th eee make it plain upon tables, that he 
and holdest thy tongue when the]® 72:P73"7°™ |may Irun that readeth it. 
wicked devoureth the man that ts} (Ex.4.15; 3. For the vision is yet for an 2ap- 
more righteous than he? Rev.22.19.) | nointed time, but at the end it shall 
14 And makest men as the fishes], y5.3,4 speak, and not lie: though it “tarry, 


of the sea, as the creeping things,} Heb.10.37, | wait for it; because it will surely 
that have no ruler over them? — 38. come, it will not tarry, Nears vos 

15. They take up all of them with], Righteous. | 4 Behold, his soul which is lifted 
the angle, they catch them in their} ness. Mal. |up is not ‘upright in him: but the 
net, and gather them in their drag: akeaay a oe Salt ave by his Sheila 
therefore. they rejoice and are| ~° Sye8 5 Yea also, ecause he transgres- 
glad. : Hom 117: seth by wine, he s3 proud man, 
RRO Ce gree ete eegaehin CETL SI ea oop at ee a at et eae 
their drag: because by them their] e Faith. Mts. |death, and cannot be satisfied, but 
portion is fat, and their meat plen-} 10. _(Gen.3. |gathereth unto him all nations, and 


teous. 30) |heapeth unto him all people: 

17 Shall they therefore empty] _ 6 Shall not all these ‘take up a 
their net, and not spare continually| f Mic. 2.4. parable against him, and a taunt- 
to slay the nations? ing proverb against him, and say, 

: | Woe to him a neg 
; which is not his! how long? and to 
CHARDER 2 | him that ladeth himself with thick 

I WILL stand upon my watch,| clay! : 
and set me upon the tower, and) 7 Shall they not rise up suddenly 
will watch to see what he will say| that shall bite thee, and awake that 


1 Not, as usually quoted, “that he that runneth may read,” but, ‘‘that he may run 
that readeth”; i.e. as a messenger of the “vision.” Cf. Zech. 2.4, 5. 

2 To the watching prophet comes the response of the “vision” (vs. 2-20). Three 
elements are to be distinguished: (1) The moral judgment of Jehovah upon the evils 
practised by dispersed Israel (ys. 5-13, 15-19), (2) The future purpose.of God that, 
“the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah, as the waters 
cover the sea” (v.14). That this revelation awaits the return of the Lord in glory 
is shown (a) by the parallel passage in Isa. 11. 9-12; and (b) by the quotation of 
verse 3 in Heb. 10. 37, 38, where the “it”? of the “vision” becomes ‘‘he”’ and refers 
to the return of the Lord. It is then, after the “vision” is fulfilled, that ‘“‘the 
knowledge of the glory,” etc., shall fill the earth. But (3) meantime, “the just 
shall live by his faith.” This great evangelic word is applied to Jew and Gentile in 
Rom. 1. 17; to the Gentiles in Gal. 3. 11-14; and to Hebrews (especially) in Heb, 10, 38. 
This opening of life to faith alone, makes possible not only the salvation of the 
Gentiles during the dispersion of Israel “among the nations” (Hab. 1. 5; Gal. 3. 11-14), 
but also makes possible a believing remnant in Israel while the nation, as such, is 
in blindness and unbelief (Rom. 11. 1-5, note), with neither priesthood nor temple, 
and consequently unable to keep the ordinances of the law. Such is Jehovah! In 
disciplinary government His ancient Israel is cast out of the land and judicially 
blinded (2 Cor. 3. 12-15), but in covenanted mercy the individual Jew may resort to 
the simple faith of Abraham (Gen. 15. 6: Rom. 4. 1-5) and _ be saved. But this 
does not set aside the Palestinian (Deut. 30. 1-9, refs.) and Davidic (2 Sam. 7..8- 
16, refs.) Covenants, for “the earth shail be filled,” etc. (v. 14), and Jehovah wili 
again be in His temple (v.20). Cf. Rom. 11. 25-27. 

8 Sheol is, in the O.T., the place to which the dead go. (1) Often, therefore, it is 
spoken of as the equivalent of the grave, merely, where all human activities cease; 
the terminus toward which all human life moves (e.g. Gen. 42. 38, rave; Job 14. 13, 
Srave; Psa. 88. 3. grave). (2)°To the man “under the sun,” the natural man, 
who of necessity judges from appearances, sheol seems no more than the grave— 
the end and total cessation, not only of the activities of life, but of life itself (Eccl. 

956 


2 8] 


shall vex thee, and thou shalt be 

for booties unto them? 
8 *Because thou hast spoiled 
many nations, all the remnant of 
the people shall spoil thee; because 
of men’s blood, and for the violence 
of the land, of the city, and of all 
that dwell therein. 

9 Woe to him that coveteth an 
evil covetousness to his house, that 
he may %set his nest on high, that 

he may be delivered from the power 
of evil! 

10 Thou hast consulted shame to 
thy house by cutting off many peo- 
ple, and hast sinned against thy 
soul, 

11 For the stone shall cry out of 
the wall, and the beam out of the 
timber shall answer it. 

12 Woe to him that buildeth a 
town ‘with blood, and stablisheth 
a city by iniquity! 

13 Behold, 47s it not of the LorD 
of hosts that the people shall labour 
in the very fire, and the people shalt 
peaty. themselves for very van- 
ity? 

14 1For the earth shall be filled 
with the ‘knowledge of the glory 
of the Lorpb, as the waters cover 
the sea. 


15 Woe unto him that giveth his!‘ 


neighbour drink, that puttest thy 
bottle to him, and makest him 
drunken also, that thou mayest look 
on their nakedness! 

16 Thou art filled with shame for 
glory: drink thou also, and let thy 
foreskin be uncovered: the cup of 
the Lorp’s right hand shall be 
turned unto thee, and shameful 
_spewing shall be on thy glory. 

17 For the violence of Lebanon 


9. 5, 10). 
1 


' HABAKRUE. 


a Isa.33.1. 


b Jer.49.16; 
Oba.4. 


c Jer.22.13;, 
Ezk.24.9; 
Mic.3.10; 
Nah.3.1. 

d Or, it is not 
of the 
LORD, 
etc., i.e. 
though per- 
mitted in His 
providence, 
not His plan. 


Cf.Mic.4. 
2-4. 


e Isa.11.9. 


F Jer.10:8,14; 
Zech.10.2. 


g Psa.2.12, 
note, 


h Zeph.1.7; 
Zech.2.13.. 


Gen.15.2. 
j Deut.33.2; 
Jud.5.4; 


[3 5 


shall cover thee, and the spoil of 
beasts, which made them afraid, 
because of men’s blood, and for the 
violence of the land, of the city, and 
of all that dwell therein. 

18 What profiteth the graven im- 
age that the maker thereof hath 
graven it; the molten image, and a 
Steacher of lies, that the maker of 
his work &trusteth theréin, to make 
dumb idols? 

19 Woe unto him that saith to the 
wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, 
‘Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it rs 
laid over with gold and silver, and 
there is no breath at all in the 
midst of it. 

20 But the LoRD is in his holy 
temple: let all the earth keep silence 


before him. 
CHAPTER 3. 
Part V. Habakkuk’s answer of 
faith. 


A 23PRAYER of Habakkuk the 
‘ prophet upon Shigionoth. 

2 O Lorp, I have heard thy 
speech, and was afraid: O Lorpb, 
revive thy work in the midst of the 
years, in the midst of the years make 
known; in wrath remember mercy. 
3 God came from Teman, and the 
JHoly One from mount Paran, 
Selah. His glory covered the 
heavens, and the earth was full of 
his praise. 

4 And his brightness was as the 
light; he had horns coming out of 
his hand: and there was the hiding 
of his power. 
| 5 Before him went the pestilence, 
lect burning coals went forth at his 

eet. 


(3) But Scripture reveals sheol as a place of sorrow (2 Sam. 22. 6; Psa. 


8. 5; 116. 3), into which the wicked are turned (Psa. 9. 17), and where they are 


fully conscious (Isa. 14. 9-17; Ezk. 32. 21; see, especially, 
of the great fish was to Jonah that sheol is to those who ar 
of the O.T. and hades of the N.T. (Lk. 16. 23, note) are identical. 
1 Cf, Isa. 11. 9, which fixes the time when “the earth,” etc. 
righteous Branch has set up the kingdom. 


Zech. 12. 8; also, “Kingdom (N.T.),” Lk. 1. 
phrase marks an advance on that of Isaiah. 


the Lorp.” 


That, in a certain sense, is being. 


Jon. 2. 2; what the belly 
are therein), The sheol 


It is when David’s 


(See “Kingdom (O.T.),” 2 Sam. 7. 9; 
3123371 Cored.) 28.) 
In the latter it is “the knowledge of 
diffused now; but in Habakkuk it is 


Habakkuk’s 


“the knowledge of the glory of the Lorp,” and that cannot be till He is manifested 


in glory (Mt. 24. 30; 25. 31; Lk. 9. 26; 2 Thes. 1. 7; 2. 8; Jude 14). 
tion was a foreview of this (Lk. 9. 26-29). 

2 Prayer in the O.T. is in contrast wit 
the former the basis of prayer is a covenan 
character as merciful, gracious, etc. I 
ye pray, say, Our Father” (Mt. 6. 9). 


Moses and Paul, will show that one was pray1 
the other for a heavenly people whose dangers 


gers and blessings were earthly; 
and blessings were spiritual. 


The transfigura- 


h prayer in the N.T. in two respects: (1) In 
t of God, or an appeal to his revealed 


In the latter the basis is relationship: ““When 


- 957 


(2) A comparison, e.g. of the prayers of 
ing for an earthly people whose dan- 


3 6] 


HABAKKUK. 


Cat SS a ee 


[3 19 


6 He stood, and measured the 
earth: he beheld, and drove asun- 
der the nations; and the everlast- 
ing mountains were scattered, the 
perpetual hills did bow: his ways 
are everlasting. f 

7 I saw the tents of *Cushan in 
affliction: and the curtains of the 
land of Midian did tremble. 

8 Was the Lorp displeased 
against the rivers? was thine 
anger against the rivers? was thy 
wrath against the sea, °that thou 
didst ride upon thine horses and 
thy chariots of salvation? 

9 Thy bow was made quite naked, 
according to the oaths of the tribes, 
even thy word. Selah. Thou 
didst cleave the earth with rivers. 

10 “The mountains saw thee, and 
they trembled: the overflowing of 
the water passed by: the deep ut- 
tered his voice, Zand lifted up his 
hands on high. 

11 The sun and moon stood still 
in their habitation: fat the light of 
thine arrows they went, and at the 
shining of thy glittering spear. 

12 Thou didst march through the 

land in indignation, thou didst 
thresh the Sheathen in anger. 

13. Thou wentest forth for the sal- 
vation of thy people, even for salva- 
tion with thine anointed; thou 
woundedst the head out of the 


B.C. 626. 


@ Or, Ethiopia. 

b v.15; 
Deut.33.26, 
27; Psa.68. 
4; 104.3. 

c Ex.19.16,18; 
Jud.5.4,5; 
Psa.68.8; 77. 
18; 114.4. 

d Ex.14.22; 
Josh.3.16. 


e Josh.10.12, 
is 


f Or,thine ar- 
rows walked 
in the light, 
etc. 

gi.e. nations. 

hv.8; Psa. 
77.19. 

ti.e. despite 
the affllic- 
tions of Is- 
rael in 
dispersion, 
the prophet 
will rejoice 
because of 
the Lord, as 
yet to return 
to His 
temple. 


j Isa.41.16; 
61.10. 
k Psa.27.1. 


1 2 Sam.22.34; 
Psa.18.33. 


m Deut.32.13; 
33.29. 


958 


house of the wicked, by discovering 
the foundation unto the neck. 
Selah. 

14 Thou didst strike through with — 
his staves the head of his villages: 
they came out as a whirlwind to 
scatter me: their rejoicing was as 
to devour the poor secretly. 

15 “Thou didst walk through the 
sea with thine horses, through the 
heap of great waters. 

16 When I heard, my belly trem- 
bled; my lips quivered at the voice: 
rottenness entered into my bones, 
and I trembled in myself, that I 
might rest in the day of trouble: 
when he cometh up unto the peo- 
ple, he will invade them with his 
troops. 

17 ‘Although the fig tree shall not 
blossom, neither shall fruit be in 
the vines; the labour of the olive 
shall fail, and the fields shall yield 
no meat; the flock shall be cut off 
from the fold, and there shall be 
no herd in the stalls: 

18 Yet I will/rejoice in the LorbD, 
I will joy in the God of my salva- 
tion. 

19 The LorD God is ‘my 
strength, and he will make my feet 
like 4hinds’ feet, and he will make 
me to ™walk upon mine high 
places. ‘To the chief singer on my 
stringed instruments. 


1 


oo 


eh 


ZEPHANIA®. 


{1 18 


Tus prophet, a contemporary of Jeremiah, exercised his ministry during the 


reign of Josiah. 


It was a time of revival (2 Ki. 22.), but the captivity was im- 


pending, nevertheless, and Zephaniah points out the moral state which, despite the 
superficial revival under Josiah (Jer. 2. 11-13), made it inevitable. 
Zephaniah is in four parts: I. The coming invasion of Nebuchadnezzar a figure 


of the day of the Lorp, 1. 1-2. 3. 
2. 4-15. 


II. Predictions of judgment on certain peoples, 
III. The moral state of Israel for which the captivity was to come, 3, 1-7. 


ae The judgment of the nations followed by kingdom blessing under Messiah, 
. 8-20. 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. The coming judgment 
on Judaha figure of the future 
day of the LorpD (Zeph.1.1-2.3). 


-_, |@ 2 Ki.22.1-20; 
ae word of the Lorp which! 2 Chr.34.1- 
came unto Zephaniah the son Fa care 


of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, 
the son of Amariah, the son Of|bic. idola- 


Hizkiah, in the days of ¢Josiah| trous 
the son of Amon, king of Judah. iar 3 

2 Iwill utterly consume all things ee? a 
from off the land, saith the LORD. |¢ 2 Ki.23.12; 

3 I will consume man and beast;| Je-19-15- 

I will consume the fowls of the|d An idol of 
heaven, and the fishes of the sea,| the on- 
and the stumblingblocks with the| *75,S2r<25 
wicked; and I will cut off man from] Milcom. 
off the land, saith the LorbD. 

4 I will also stretch out mine|° Day Jer 
hand upon Judah, and upon all the} 7-18; Zech. 
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and Ij 12.1-14. (Isa. 
will cut. off the remnant of Baal] 3,192; Rev: 
from this place, and the name of ‘ ‘ 

“the ’Chemarims with the priests; | /Lit. The 

5 And them that worship the reed ge 
chost of heaven upon the housetops;| Jerusalem 
and them that worship and that] where the 
swear by the Lorp, and that bazaars were. 
swear by ¢Malcham; g Jer.48.11; 

6 And them that are turned back] Amos 6.1. 
from the Lorp; and those that h Joel 2.1,11. 
have not sought the LORD, nor en- x 
quired for him. v.23 Isa.22.5; 

7. Hold thy peace at the presence Joel seep 
of the Lord Gop: !for the ‘day of| Amos 5.18) 
the LoRD js at hand: for the LORD 
hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath 
bid his guests. 

8 And it shall come to pass in 


| 3 
B.c. 630. {the day of the Lorp’s sacrifice, 


that I will punish the princes, and 
the king’s children, and all such as 
are clothed with strange apparel. 

9 Inthe same day also will I pun- 


. lish all those that leap on the thresh- 


old, which fill their masters’ houses 
with violence and deceit. 

10 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, saith the Lorpb, that 
there shall be the noise of a cry 
from the fish gate, and an howling 
from the second, and a great crash- 
ing from the hills. 

11 Howl, ye inhabitants of /Mak- 
tesh, for all the merchant people 
are cut down; all they that bear 
silver are cut off. 

12 And it shall come to pass at 
that time, that I will search Jerusa- 
lem with candles, and punish the 
men that are &settled on their 
lees: that say in their heart, The 
Lorp will not do good, neither will 
he do evil. 

13 Therefore their goods shali be- 
come a booty, and their houses a 
desolation: they shali also build 
houses, but not inhabit them; and 
they shall plant vineyards, but not 
drink the wine thereof. 

14 *The great day of the Lorp 
is near, it is near, and hasteth 
greatly, even the voice of the day of 
the LorpD: the mighty man shall 
cry there bitterly. 

15 ?That day is a day of wrath, a 
day of trouble and distress, a day 
of wasteness and desolation, a day 
of darkness and gloominess, a 
day of clouds and thick darkness, 


1 As in the other Prophets, the approaching invasion of Nebuchadnezzar is treated 


as an adumbration of the true day of 


the LORD in which ali earth-judgments will 


culminate, to be followed by the restoration and blessing of Israel and the nations 


in the kingdom. See “Day of the LORD” 
(Gen. 12.2, 3; Rom. 11,26). Cf. Joel 1., 2. 
959 


ar 


(Isa. 2. 10-22; Rev. 19. 11-21); “Israel?” 


1 16] 


ZEPHANIAH. 


[34 


16 A day of the trumpet and 
alarm against the fenced cities, and 
against the high towers. 

17 And I will bring distress upon 
men, that they shall walk like 
blind men, because they have 
sinned against the LorpD: and their 
blood shall be poured out as dust, 
and their flesh as the dung. 

18 @Neither their silver nor their 
gold shall be able to deliver them 
in the day of the Lorp’s wrath; 
but the whole land shall be de- 
voured by the fire of his jealousy: 
for he shall make even a speedy 
riddance of all them that dwell in 
the land. 


CHAPTER 2. 


The call to the remnant (Isa. 1, 9; 
Rom. 11.5), in the day of judg- 
ment on the nations. 


QA ATHER yourselves together, 
yea, gather together, O nation 
not 4desired; 

2 Before the decree bring forth, 
before the day pass as the chaff, 
before the fierce anger of the LorpD 
come upon you, before the day of 
the LorpD’s anger come upon you. 

3 Seek ye the Lorp, all ye meek 
of the earth, which have wrought 
his judgment; seek righteousness, 
seek meekness: it may be ye shall 
be hid in the day of the Lorp’s 
anger. 


Part II. Judgments on certain 
nations. 


4 For Gaza shall be forsaken, and 
Ashkelon a desolation: they shall 
drive out Ashdod at the noon day, 
and Ekron shall be rooted up. 

5 Woe unto the inhabitants of the 
sea coast, the nation of the Cher- 
ethites! the word of the Lorp js 
against you; O Canaan, the land 
of the Philistines, I will even de- 
stroy thee, that there shall be no 
inhabitant. 

6 And the sea coast shall be 
dwellings and cottages for shep- 
herds, and folds for flocks. 

7 And the coast shall be for the 
‘remnant of the house of Judah; 
they shall feed thereupon: in the 
houses of Ashkelon shall they lie 
down in the evening: for the Lorp 
their God shall visit them, ¢and 
turn away their captivity. 

8 I have heard the reproach of 
Moab, and the revilings of the chil- 
dren of Ammon, whereby they have 


B.C. 630. 


a Prov.11.4; 
Ezk.7.19. 


6 Lit. that 
hath not 
shame. 


Cf. Jer.3.3. 


c Remnant. 
vs.1-3,7-9; 
Zeph,3.13- 
20:° (Fsad 
9; Rom. 
11.5.) 


d Or, bring 


again. 
‘Cf.Zeph. 


Jer.23.5-8. 
ei.e. coasts. 
fie. nations. 


g Isa.10.12; 
Ezk.31.3; 


h Nah. 1.1, 
note, 


i Psa.2.12, 
note, 


960 


reproached my people, and magni- 
fied themselves against their bor- 
der. 

9 Therefore as I live, saith the 
Lorp of hosts, the God of Israel, 
Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, 
and the children.of Ammon as Go- 
morrah, even the breeding of net- 
tles, and saltpits, and a perpetual 
desolation: the residue of my peo- 
ple shall spoil them, and the rem- 
nant of my people shall possess 
them. 

10 This shall they have for their 
pride, because they have reproached 
and magnified themselves against 
the people of the Lorp of hosts. 

11 The Lorp will be terrible 
unto them: for he will famish all 


|the gods of the earth; and men 


shall worship him, every one from 
his place, even all the ¢isles of the 
fheathen. 

12 Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall 
be slain by my sword. 

13 And he will stretch out his 
hand against the north, and destroy 
8Assyria; and will make "Nineveh 
a desolation, and dry like a wil- 
derness. 

14 And flocks shall lie down in the 
midst of her, all the beasts of the 
nations: both the cormorant and 
the bittern shall lodge in the upper 
lintels of it; their voice shall sing 
in the windows; desolation shall 
be in the thresholds: for he shall 
uncover the cedar work. 

15 This fs the rejoicing city that 
dwelt carelessly, that said in her 
heart, I am, and there is none be- 
side me: how is she become a deso- 
lation, a place for beasts to lie 
down in! every one that passeth by 
her shall hiss, and wag his hand. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part III. The moral state of Je- 
rusalem in the _ prophet’s 
time. (Cf. Isa, 3, 1-26; Jer. 6. 


1-15.) 


WV to her that is filthy and 
polluted, to the oppressing 
city! 

2 She obeyed not the voice: she 

received not correction; she ‘trusted 
not in the Lor»; she drew not near 
to her God. 
_3 Her princes within her are roar- 
ing lions; her judges are evening 
wolves; they gnaw not the bones 
till the morrow. 

4 Her prophets are light and 
treacherous persons: her priests 


35] 


ZEPHANIAH. 


[3 20 


have polluted the sanctuary, they 
have done violence to the law. 

5 The just LorD zs in the midst 
thereof; he will not do iniquity: 
every morning doth he bring his 
judgment to light, he faileth not; 


but the knoweth 
shame. 

6 I have cut off the nations: their 
towers are desolate; I made their 
streets waste, that none passeth by: 
their cities are destroyed, so that 
there is no man, that there is none 
inhabitant. 

7 L said, Surely.thou wilt “fear 
me, thou wilt receive instruction; 
so their dwelling should not be cut 
off, howsoever I punished them: 
but they rose early, and corrupted 
all their domgs. 


Part IV. (1) The judgment of 
the nations. (Cf. Zech. 14. 1-21; 
Mt. 25. 32, note.) 


unjust no 


8 Therefore wait ye upon me, 
saith the LoRD, until the day that 
I rise up to the prey: for my deter- 
mination is to gather the nations, 
that I may assemble the kingdoms, 
4t0 pour upon them mine indigna- 
tion, even all my fierce anger: for 
all the earth shall be devoured with 
the fire of my jealousy. 

9 For !then will I turn to the 

“¢epeople a pure language, that they 
may all call upon the name of the 
Lorp, to serve him with one con- 
sent. 

10 From beyond the rivers of 
Ethiopia my suppliants, even the 
daughter of my dispersed, shall 
bring mine offering. 

11 In that day shalt thou not be 
ashamed for all thy doings, wherein 
thou hast transgressed against me: 
for then I will take away out of the 
midst of thee them that “rejoice in 
thy pride, and thou shalt no more 


B.C. 630. 


@ Psa.19.9, 
note. 


b Armaged- 
don. Zech. 
12.1-9, 
16.14; 19.11- 
2¥.) 


c Lit. the 
peoples, i.e. 
Genftties. 


d Jer.7.4; 
Mic.3-11; 
Mt.3 9. 


e Heb. in my 
holy name. 


f Psa.2.12, 
note. 


g Remnant. 
vs.13-20; 
Hag.1.14. 
(Isa.1.9; 
Rom.11.5.) 


h Kingdom 
(O.T.). vs. 
13-20; Zech. 
6.12,13. 
(Gen.1.26; 
Zech.12.8.) 


z Isa.35.3,4-. 


j Deut.30.9; 
Isa.62.5; 65. 
19; Jer.32.41. 


k Isa.11.123, 
27.12; 56.8; 
Ezk.28.25; 
34.13; 37.21; 
Amos 9.14. 


(Rev. 


be haughty “because of my holy 
mountain. 

12 I will also leave in the midst of 
thee an afflicted and poor people, 
and they shall /trust in the name of 
the LorpD. 


. 13. The éremnant of Israel shall 


not do iniquity, nor speak lies; 
neither shall a deceitful tongue be 
found in their mouth: for they shall 
feed, and lie down, and none shall 
make them afraid. 


(2) The kingdom blessing of 
Lsrael. 


14 Sing, O daughter of Zion; 
shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice 
with all the heart, O daughter of 
Jerusalem. 

15 TheLorp hath taken away thy 
judgments, he hath cast out thine 
enemy: the “king of Israel, even the 
LORD, is in the midst of thee: thou 
shalt not see evil any more. : 

16 In that day ‘it shall be said to 
Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to 
Zion, Let not thine hands be slack. 

17 The Lorp thy God in the 
midst of thee is mighty; he will 
save, Jhe will rejoice over thee with 
joy; he will rest in his love, he will 
joy over thee with singing. 

18 I will gather ther that are 
sorrowful for the solemn assembly, 
who are of thee, to whom the re- 
proach of it was a burden. 

19 Behold, at that time I will undo 
all that afflict thee: and I will save 
her that halteth, and gather her that 
was driven out; and I will get them 
praise and fame in every land where 
they have been put to shame. 

20 At. that time will I bring you 
again, even in the time that I 
gather you: for I will make you a 
name and a praise among all people: 
of the earth, when I turn back your 
captivity before your eyes, saith the 
LORD. : 


1 In Zephaniah the conversion of “‘the peoples” is stated out of the usual prophetic 


order, § 
the conversion of the Gentiles. 


the passage gives clear testimony as to w 
Tt is after the smiting of the nations. 
34, 35; Psa. 2. 5-8; Acts 15. 15-17; Rev. 19. 19-20. 6. 

2 That this, and all like passages in the Pr 


occur, 


1. 26; Zech. 1”. 8), cannot refer to anything w 


Christ is clear ‘rom the context. 


The precise reverse was true. 


9561 


ophets (see ‘ 
hich occurred at the first coming of 


in which the blessing of Israel and the setting up of the kingdom precedes 
See Zech. 12.1, note, and Zech. 12. 8, note. 
hen the conversion of the nations will 


But 
Cf. Isa. 11. 9 with context; Dan. 2. 
“Kingdom (O.T.),” Gen. 


See Isa. 11. 1, note. 


1] 3 HAGGAL [1s 


HAGGAI was a prophet of the restored remnant after the 70 years’ captivity. The 
circumstances are detailed in Ezra and Nehemiah. To hearten, rebuke, and in- 
struct that feeble and divided remnant was the task of Haggai, Zechariah, and 
Malachi. The theme of Haggai is the unfinished temple, and his mission to 
admonish and encourage the builders. , 

The divisions of the book are marked by the formula, “came the word of the 
LorpD by Haggai’: I. The event which drew out the prophecy, 1. 1, 2.. II. The 
divine displeasure because of the interrupted work, 1. 3-15. III. The temples— 
Solomon’s, the restoration temple, and the kingdom-age temple, 2. 1-9. IV. Un- 
cleanness and chastening, 2. 10-19. V. The final victory, 2. 20-23 (see Rev. 19. 17-20; 
14. 19, 20; Zech. 14. 1-3). 


B.c. 520. __|it home, I did blow upon it. Why? 
CHAPTER 1. saith the LorD of hosts. Because 
Part I. The occasion and theme of mine house that is waste, and ye 
of the prophecy (vy. 2, l.c). Aue every man unto his own 
4 ouse. 

Ly the isopod thea a5 pais we _10 Baeteiore ‘hg peed LOS vu 

ing, in €. "six month, 13 staye m » an € eart. 
the first day of the month, came is ae ae hee fruit. 
the word of the LorpD by ‘Hag- 11 And I called for a drought 
gai the prophet unto ¢Zerubbabel upon the land, and upon the 
the son of Shealtiel, governor of - mountains, and upon the corn, and 
Judah, and to “Joshua the son of|*#9&219;  |u5on the new wine, and upon the 


Josedech, the high priest, saying, Zech.1.1,7.. |oil, and upon that which the ground 
2 Thus speaketh the LorpD of] | bringeth forth, and upon men, and 
hosts, saying, This people say, The) ie. Septem: | oon cattle, and upon all the 


time is not come, the time that the] Pe" “°% [ob oue of the hands. 
Lorp’s house should be built. 
c Ezra 5.1; (2) The work recommenced. 


Part IT. (1) Jehovah’s chastening| ©14. 


because of the interrupted work.|, 1 Chr.3.19; gee ieee soph! te = of 


3. Then came the word of the Ny Josedech, the high priest, with all 
Lorp by Haggaithe prophet, saying,| Zech.4.6; the remnant of the people, obeyed 
4 Is it time for you, O ye, to) Mt1-1213. the voice of the Lorp their God, 
dwell in your cieled houses, and eEzra 3.2; and the words of Haggai the 
this house lie waste? Neh.12.1; prophet, as the Lorp their God 


5 Now therefore thus saith the ree had sent him, and the people did 
Lorp of hosts; Consider your| °*)'?- fear before the Lorp. 
ways. f Psa.19.9, 13 Then spake Haggai the 
_6 Ye have sown much, and bring} 7°¢e- Lorp’s messenger in the Lorp’s 
in little; ye eat, but ye have not|, remnant, |message unto the people, saying, I 
enough; ye drink, but ye are not| Zech.8.6-12. lam with you, saith the Lorp. 


filled with drink; ye clothe you, but Na iss, 14 And the Lorp stirred up the 
there is none warm; and he that att spirit of Zerubbabel the son of She- 
earneth wages earneth wages to altiel, governor of Judah, and the 
put it into a bag with holes. spirit of Joshua | the son of Jose- 
7 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; dech, the high priest, and the spirit 
Consider your ways. R of all the remnant of the people; 
bing fond aa Bee eee peas Ohthe Pony ae eeetene 
a i ouse; ouse of - ORD i 
and I will take pleasure in it, and I God, R CASS at 
mut be poner saith the Lorb. | 15 In the four and twentieth day 
€ looked for much, and, lo, it of the sixth month, in the second 
came to little; and when ye brought year of Darius the king. 


962 


wat} - HAGGAI. [2 19 


of the ninth month, in the second 
year of Darius, came the word of 
the LorD by Haggai the prophet, 
saying, 

11 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
Ask now the priests concerning 
the law, saying, 

12 If one bear holy flesh in the 
skirt of his garment, and with his 
skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or 
wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be 
holy? And the priests answered 
and said, No. 

13 Then said Haggai, If one that 
is unclean by a dead body touch 
any of these, shall it be unclean? 
And the priests answered and said, 
It shall be unclean. 


CHAPTER 2. 
Part lI. The temples. 


N the “seventh montA, in the one 
and twentieth day of the month, 
came the word of the LORD by the 
prophet Haggai, saying, 
2 Speak now to Zerubbabel the 
son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, 
and to Joshua the son of Josedech, 
the high priest, and to the residue 
of the people, saying, 

3 “Who is left among you that 
saw this thouse in her first glory? 
and how do ye see it now? is it not 
in ORAS hae in comparison of it as 
nothing: A 

4 Yet now be strong, O Zerub-|7*~ October: 
babel, saith the Lorp; and be/bCfEzra3. 14 Then answered Haggai, and 
strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech,} 2- said, So is this people, and so is this 
the high Bret hs Pe ae a ¢ Heb.12.26. neon before me, sith ae toe 
ye people of the land, sait e _ {and so zs every work of their hands; 
Lorpb, pd ee: for nee with|2 Chest eee and that which they offer there is 
you, sal e LORD of hosts: Zech.9.9.. unclean. 

5 According to the word that I} (Gen.3.15; 15 And now, I pray you, consider 
covenanted with you when ye came} Acts 1.9.) from this day and upward, from be- 
eur of Egypt, Pick puess gerizini: On the pe : ies a oe ee ae Bees a stone 
eth among you: fear ye not. ture glory of|in the temple o e : 

6 For thus saith the Lorp of ee 16 Since those days were, when 
hosts; “Yet once, it is a little while,| Greater thanjome came to an heap of twenty 
‘and I will shake the heavens, andthe] the former. |measures, there were but ten: 


earth, and the sea, and the dry land; when one came to the pressfat for 
7 And I will shake all nations, to draw out fifty vessels out of the 
and the 4desire of all nations shall press, there were but twenty. 
come: and I will fill this house with 17 I smote you with biasting and 
glory, saith the LorD of hosts. with mildew and with hail in all the 
8 The silver is mine, and the gold labours of your hands; yet ye 
is mine, saith the LORD of hosts. turned not to me, saith the 
9 The “glory of this latter house Lorp. 
shall be greater than of the former, 18 Consider now from this day and 
saith the LorD of hosts: and in this upward, from the four and twentieth 
place will I give peace, saith the day of the ninth month, even from 
Lorp of hosts. the day that the foundation of the 


Lorp’s temple was laid, consider /t. 


Part IV. The chastening of the 19 Is the seed yet in the barn? 


Lorp for the impurity of the i 

: yea, as yet the vine, and the fig 
P age ete, lay of the peo- tree, and the pomegranate, and the 
J EOP ME olive tree, hath not brought forth: 
10 In the four and twentieth day from this day will I bless you. 


1 The prophet calls the old men who remembered Solomon’s temple to witness to 
the new generation how greatly that structure exceeded the present in magnifi- 
cence; and he then utters a prophecy (vs. 7-9) which can only refer to the future 
kingdom temple described by Ezekiel. It is certain that the restoration temple and 
all subsequent structures, including Herod’s, were far inferior in costliness and 
splendour to Solomon’s. The present period is described in Hos. 3. 4, 5. Verse 6 
is quoted in Heb. 12. 26, 27. Verse 7: “I will shake all nations,”’ refers to the great 
tribulation and is followed by the coming of Christ in glory, as in Mt. 24. 29, 30. 
“The desire of all nations” is Christ. See Mal. 3.1, nate. ; 4 

2In a sense all the temples (i.e. Solomon’s; Ezra’s; Herod’s; that which will be 
used by the unbelieving Jews under covenant with the Beast [Dan. 9. 27; Mt. 24. 
15: 2 Thes. 2. 3, 4]; and Ezekiel’s future kingdom temple [Ezk. 40.—47.]), are treated 
as one “house”—the “‘house of the Lorp,” since they all profess to be that. For 
that’ reason Christ purified the temple of His day, erected though it was by an 
Idumean usurper to please the Jews (Mt. 21. 12, 13). 

963 


“ 


2 20] HAGGAIL. 


* [2° & 


B.C. 520. 


Part V. The future destruction 
of Gentile power. 
Ezra 5.1-3; 


20 And again the word of the| 72ch.2'6-10. 
LorD came unto Haggai in the four), pan.234, 


a Hag.1.1; 


and twentieth day of the month,| 35,44,45; 
saying, Rev.19.11-21. 
21 Speak to Zerubbabel, @gover-|¢i-e- nations. 
nor of Judah, saying, I will shake/¢ Song 8.6; 
the heavens and the earth; ‘lech ae 
22 And 1 will Yoverthrow the) $3627! 


throne of kingdoms, and I will de- 


stroy the strength ofthe kingdoms 
of the ‘heathen; and I will over- 
throw the chariots, and those that 
tide in them; and the horses and 


\their riders shall come down, every 


one by the sword of his brother. 
23 In that day, saith the Lorp of 
hosts, will I take thee, O Zerub- 
babel, my servant, the son of Sheal- 
tiel, saith the Lorb, ¢and will make 


thee as a signet: for ‘I have chosen 
thee, saith the LorpD of hosts. 


te 


2 ZECHARIAH. 8 


ZECHARIAH, like Haggai, was a prophet to the remnant which return 

70 years. There is much of symbol in Zechariah, but these difficult abe ve 
readily interpreted in the light of the whole body of related prophecy. The great 
Messianic passages are, upon comparison with the other prophecies of the kingdom 
perfectly clear. Both advents of Christ are in Zechariah’s prophecy (Zech. 9. 9 
with Mt. 21. 1-11 and Zech. 14. 3, 4). More than Haggai or Malachi, Zechariah 
gives the mind of God about the Gentile world-powers surrounding the restored 
See, ee aS ae their ay (Dan. 2. 37-40), and will hold therm to 
account; the test, as always, being their treatment o s 

4 cause panei e ai: g t of Israel. See Gen. 15. 18, note 

echariah, therefore, falls into three broad divisions: I. Symbolic visi i 

the light of the Messianic hope, 1. 1-6. 15. II. The mission bean BAS Monee 3. 
III. Messiah in rejection and afterwards in power, 9.-14. oy oth 


CHAPTER 1. B.C. 520.05 | oe ae prophets, do they live for 

Part I. Symbolic visions in the 6 But my words and m 
: ons 4 y statutes, 
light of the Messianic hope| _ $3 which I commanded my servants 
(Zech. 1. 1-6. 15): the people seid the prophets, did they not take 
warned. ; hold is uae ere and they re- 
T the teighth month, in the sec. Dy7y : turned and said, Like as the LorD 
ond year of 8Darius, came the ae of ee s thought to do unto us, 
word of the LorD unto “Zechariah,| §-15- SES Ch cT ade ten ane yb eco use 
the son of Berechiah, the son of|-gora 5.1. rie our doings, so hath he dealt 

@Iddo the prophet, saying, WIT Us, 
ig-|d Neh.12.4. ore : 

eae cay be ES PR sore dis ar The ten pore 2 (1) the rider on 

4 eal 5 - 

3 Therefore say thou unto them, ° 9 Chr.24.19. eee ore 
Thus saith the LorD of hosts; Turn] .. a) 7 Upon the four and twentieth 
ye unto me, saith the LorD of hosts, Treweoruary \day of the eleventh month, which 
and I will turn unto you, saith the} ¢ Cf.Rev.6.4. lis the month /Sebat, in the second 


R’ f A The whole ) i 
Lorp of hosts Gee lyear of Darius, came the word of 


4 Be ye not as your fathers, unto) $s4 is char- |the Lorp unto Zechariah, the son 
whom the “former prophets have} acterized by lof Berechiah, the son of Iddo the 


cried, saying, Thus saith the Lorp| the red prophet, saying, 

of hosts; Turn ye now from your En 8 I lsaw by night, and behold a 

evil ways, and from your evil do-| Dan.9.26; man riding upon a £red horse, and 

ings: but they did not hear, nor] Mt.24.6,7. |he stood among the myrtle trees 

hearken unto me, saith the ithat were in the bottom; and be- 

Lorp. hind him were there red horses, 
5 Your fathers, where are they? speckled, and white. 


1 The “man” (v. 8) is the “my lord,” “the angel that talked with me” (v. 9), and 
“the angel of the LORD” (vs. 10,11). The “man” “stood among the myrtle trees” 
(v. 8). The prophet addresses him as “my lord”? (cf. Gen. 19. 2), but when the 
“man’’ answers he perceives that he has addressed an angel—‘“‘the angel that talked 
with me” (v. 9). In verse 10 the being of the vision is again “‘the man that stood 
among the myrtle trees.” In verse 11 he is called ‘‘the angel of the LorD,” and 
to him the (riders on the) “red horses, speckled and white” say: ‘“‘We have walked 
to and fro,” etc. Then (v. 12) “the angel of the LorD”’ (i.e. the “man,”’ “my lord,” 
“the angel that talked with me’’) intercedes for the land against a world at ease. 
The date of the intercession was at the end of the 70 years’ captivity of Judah. 

Taken as a whole (vs. 8-17), Zechatiah’s first vision reveals Judah in disper- 
sion; Jerusalem under adverse possession; and the Gentile nations at rest about it. 
This condition still continues, and Jehovah’s answer to the intercession of the angel 
sweeps on to the end-time of Gentile domination, when “‘the LorpD shall yet comfort 
Zion,” etc. (vs. 16, 17; Isa, 40, 1-5). See “Kingdom (O.T.)” (Gen. 1. 26; Zech. 


12. 8, note). 
965 


» ts al i ee oe a | af | . a oe LY ae 


19] ZECHARIAH. 


rae . B.c. 519. |LORD of hosts; My cities through 
The BL iar a praaas ) et CIEE! prosperity sh all yet be, spread 
» Wala ; e 

Sylncer And ge dvenneel aia eaitare Zion, and shall yet choose 
talked with me i oe me, I will Jerusalem. 
hew thee what these be. ts 
10 And the man that stood among The ten visions: (2) the four 
the myrtle trees answered and said, horns. 

Beer’ Hew nom tHe Pee 18 1Then lifted I up mine eyes, 
pa Boat at OeaL ro and ve and behels oe hoe i 
rou : 19 said unto the ¢angel tha 
We AUN SMG AI RU Caal fallsect with une: Wiat soe cies: 


of the LORD that stood among the 
myrtle trees, and said, We have 
walked to and fro through the 


And he answered me, These are the 
horns which have scattered Judah, 


earth, and, behold, all the earth sit- Tgrach: and Teriaaleus. 
teth still, and is at rest. The ten visions: (3) the four 
¢ ; carpenters. 
h displ d with the 
ies mations ig 20 2And the Lorp shewed me 
four “carpenters. 
eee in cea 3 Poesy a Heb.1.4, 21 Then said I, What come these 


note. to do? And he spake, saying, 


hosts, how long wilt thou not have PHidsavere chheu hoansivwisch’ hee 


mercy on Jerusalem and on the|bic. nations. 


Sie = ray scattered Judah,. so that no man 
ee oe Pesete ean AE Nae le cOr, carvers, |did lift up his head: but these are 
ast had indigna ign Hiese LAFEE-| or smiths. |come to fray them, to cast out the 
ae rer a ses ed a bos Dees horns of the Gentiles, which lifted 
eangel that talked with me with Pu ie eetpeh to seat ie 
good words and comfortable words. ; 
14 So the “angel that communed 4 
with ae cad pe me, ay ago CHAPTER 2. 
saying, us saith the Lorp o o> t 
hosts; I am jealous for Jerusalem ane eh fie oda Rah 
and for Zion with a great jealousy. : vas 
15 And I am very sore displeased I LIFTED up mine eyes 3again, 
with the heathen that are at ease: and looked, and behold a man 
for I was but a little displeased, and with a measuring line in his hand. 
they helped forward the affliction. 2 Then said I, Whither goest 
16 Therefore thus saith the Lorp; thou? And he said unto me, To 
I am returned to Jerusalem with measure Jerusalem, to see what is 
gnctries: By pose a be ule in the preach theveot, and what is 
it, saith the LorpD of hosts, and a the length thereof, 
line shall be stretched forth upon Sie pebold, the. dense aa 
Jerusalem. talked with me went forth, and an- 
17 Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the other angel went out to meet him, 


1A “horn” is the symbol of a Gentile king (Dan. 7. 24: Rev. 17. 12), and the 
vision is of the four world-empires (Dan. 2. 36-44: 7. 3-7) which have “scattered 
Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem’ (v. 19). 

2 The word charash, trans. “carpenter,” is lit. carver, engraver. Verse 21 
makes it plain that, whatever the four carvers may be, they are used to “fray,” or 
carve away (Heb. charad) in the sense of diminishing, enfeebling, the great Gentile 
world-powers. They may stand for Jehovah’s “four sore judgments,” the sword, 
famine, evil beasts, and pestilence (Ezk. 14, 21), the four horses of Rev. 6. 

3 As in Zech. 1. 8-11, the “man’”’ of verse 1 is “the angel that talked with me” of 
verse 3. The measuring-line (or reed) is used by Ezekiel (Ezk. 40. 3, 5) as a symbol 
of preparation for rebuilding the city and temple in the kingdom-age. Here also it 
has that meaning, as the context (vs. 4-13) shows. ‘The subject of the vision is 
the restoration of nation and city. In no sense has this prophecy been fulfilled. 
The order is: (1) The Lorn in glory in Jerusalem, v.5 (cf. Mt. 24. 29, 30); (2) the 
restoration of Israel, v. 6; (3) the judgment of Jehovah upon the nations, v. 8, “after 
the glory” (Mt. 25. 31, 32); (4) the full blessing of the earth in the kingdom, vs. 10-13. 
pee Svan (O.T.)” (Gen. 1. 26; Zech. 12. 8, note. “Israel,’? Gen. 12. 2; Rom, 

+ 26). 


966 


; 


ae oa es ee oT LA 4S | a 
ey, went 4 
by 


ria] ZECHARIAH. | [3 10 
Jerusalem in the kingdom-aége.|_ B.C. 519. ered at his right hand to resist 


4 And said unto him, Run, ote 
o him, Run, speak 2 And the LorD said unto Satan, 


to this young man, saying, Jerusa- The Lorp rebuke thee, O Satan; 


lem shall be inhabited t 
without walls for the multitude of even the LorD that hath chosen 
Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this 


men and cattle therein: 

5 For I, saith the Lorp, will be a brand plucked out of the fire? 
unto her a wall of fire round about, .3 Now Joshua was ‘clothed with 
cil sail herthe, Slory’ i thet indst filthy garments, and stood before 
Pe hee: the langel. 

6 Ho, ho, come forth, and flee 4 And he answered and spake 
Mena fend of the north anith unto those that stood before him, 


he Corp: for Th. saying, Take away the filthy gar- 
OF ave spread you ments from him. And unto him he 


abroad as the four winds of the p : 
eaten fenith the LORD. a Gee G said, Behold, I have caused thine 
7 Deliver thyself, O Zion, that| Advent). iniquity to pass from thee, and I 


dwellest with the daughter of foeue303; sal or pe ss abet beer ta Sa 


Babylon. 9-11. A 

RE rad aaa eRe opal Pr | so a, a. | Ss Anidelmeaid Liet:thenn set) anigee 
hosts; After the glory hath he sent oH ey a his en aa thes ts 
me unto the nations which spoiled dlothed apes en gherichts : ont 


you: for he that touch ¢ Satan. vs.1, 
y ucheth you)">*i04’ |the bangel of the LORD stood by. 


toucheth the apple of his eye. 8,10,11. 6 And the Yangel of the LorD pro- 


9 For, behold, i 4 i 33.15 : 
r, behold, I will shake mine| (Gen 31). ‘tested unto Joshua, saying, 


hand upon them, and they shall be : 
a spoil to their servants: and yelg job 1.6; r Z hus iy Po Lorp of hosts; 
shall know that the LORD of hosts| Rev.12.10. |i- bake ath walk in my ways, and 
hath sent me. Bard. = ne x 4 poe pe ee then 
10 Sing and rejoice, O daughter Vesntrar Rial: edt ie a SOME Se ye. sna i and 
a Oe for, is I come, and I will] 3.1-9. ee ee oe cast rege sae ti 
well in the midst of thee, saith the 
Lorn. FGen3.21, these that stand by. 
11 And ti hal , 
joined +a de Les eatEne et g Isa.4.2, The ten visions: (6) Jehovah’s 
shall be my people: and I will dwell Base Servant the BRANCH. 
a the eae — poe gas oe piel h See 1 Pet.2. SineHear sidwriO! Joshunothe timeh 
ow that the LORD of hosts hat » note. 4 ? : 
y priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit 
Po ar anpheoiaoetd emai ainenel re ee my pefore then: for they are anes Meee 
Judah his portion in the holy land Rev.5.6. dered at: for, behold, I will bring 
and shall choose “Jerusalem again. | ji forth my servant the ‘BRANCH. 
. :|j Mic.4.1-6. For behold the “stone that I 
13 Besilent, O all flesh, before the 9 For. t stone that 
Lorp: for he is raised up out of his have laid before Joshua; upon one 
"Holy habitation stone shall be ‘seven eyes: behold, 
. 4 I coe cnepeyS a cronies raged 
saith the Lorp of hosts, and I wi 
The ten Ns ers ih Piel fis ramoye the iniquity of that land in 
‘ Cty one day. 
high priest. ; 10 In 2that day, saith the LorD 
ANP he shewed me !Joshua the of hosts, shall ye call every man his 
high priest standing before the neighbour under the vine and 
bangel of the Lorp, and Satan under the fig tree. 


1 The fifth vision discloses: (1) The change from self-righteousness to the right- 
eousness of God (Rom. 3. 22, note), of which Paul’s experience, Phil. 3. 1-9, is the 
illustration, as it is also the foreshadowing of the conversion of Israel. (2) In type, 
the preparation of Israel for receiving Jehovah’s “BRANCH” (Isa. 4. 2, note). 
The refusal of the Jews to abandon self-righteousness for the righteousness of God 
blinded them to the presence of the BRANCH in their midst at His first advent 
(Rom. 10. 1-43 11. 7, 8)... Cf. Zech. 6. 12-15, which speaks of the manifestation of 
the BRANCH in glory (v. 13) as the Priest-King, when Israel will receive Him. 
See Heb. 5. 6, note. 

2 Verse 10 marks the time of fulfilment as in the future kingdom. It speaks of a 
security which Israel has never known since the captivity, nor will know till the 


kingdom comes. (Cf. Isa. 11. 1-9.) 
967 


‘ 
y 


43] | ZECHARIAH. “oie oo 


B.c. 519. _|thou shalt know that the LorpD of 
CHAPTER 4. hosts Bee Sen me: unto Piers " 
The ten visions: (7) the golden! 10 For who ha espise e day 
Z Ii of small things? for they shall re- 
teaectent, BR choy jay soe joice, and shall see the plummet in 
i the hand of Zerubbabel with those 
ND the 2angel that felkodna seven: they, = the err 
me came again, and waked me, 'LorD, which run 
as a man that is wakened out of his through the whole earth. 
sleep, 4 R 
2 And said unto me, What seest The one £5 at bec et 
thou? !And I said, I have looked, |, Heb.1.4, (Cf. Rev. 11. 3, 4. : 
and behold a candlestick all of gold,| note. 11 Then answered I, and said 
with a bowl upon the top of it, and b Zech.1.8, unto him, What are these two olive 
his seven lamps thereon, and ‘seven| nore. trees upon the right side of the 
pipes to the seven lamps, which are candlestick and upon the left side 
upon the top thereof: cCf.v.12. thereof? , P 
3 And two olive trees By at me d Rev.11.3,4. on Agee I SIE ful: eee 
upon the right sde of the bowl, an .., junto him, What be these 
the other upon the left side thereof.|° Hol Spitit. branches which through the ‘two 
4 Sol nee ey ae spake to the (Geo ae pe amply the golden o// 
angel that talked with me, saying, al.2.15. out o emselves? : 
What are these, my lord? «| f Crist (as 13 And he RoR EENS me wed Soe 
5 Then the angel that talked with Stone). Mt. |Knowest thou not w at these be? 
me answered and said unto me, pie And I said, No, ay, Bok is 
x. 05 
fod UaeidsNaray oe | eee ege Bet one ee a 
6-Then he answered and spakelz sees the Lord of the whole earth. 
unto me, saying, This is the word] ‘efs- 
of the Lorp cat poeshbere. Say-|h Cfy.2. nae Saeed) a ayite 
ing, Not by might, nor by power,]| | : e ten visions: e flyin 
but by my ‘spirit, saith the Lorp # One cals roll, 
of hosts. ve | DEEN I tumed, and lifted up 
7 Who art thou, O great moun-]j Lit. fang, i. mine eyes, and looked, and be- 
tain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt} Palestine. 


hold a 2flying roll. 

2, And he said unto me, What 
seest thou? And I answered, I see 
a flying roll; the length thereof is 
twenty ‘cubits, and the breadth 
thereof ten cubits. 

3 Then said he unto me, This is 
the curse that goeth forth over the 
face of the whole Jearth: for every 
one that stealeth shall be cut off as 
on this side according to it: and 
every one that sweareth shall be cut 
off as on that side according to it. 


become a plain: and he shall bring 
forth the Sheadstone thereof with 
shoutings, crying, Grace, grace 
unto it. 


Zerubbabel to finish the restora- 
tion temple. 


8 Moreover the word of the Lorp 
came unto me, saying, 

9 The hands of Zerubbabel have 
laid the foundation of this house; 
his hands shall also finish it; and 


(Cf. Zech. 4. 6.) In measure this power would rest upon Zerubbabel, who 
begun the restoration temple of Zechariah’s time, would finish it (v. 9) laying the 
“headstone’’ amid the shoutings of the people. The w 
fulfilment of the ministry of the two witnesses of Rev. 


true “headstone,” Prince Messiah, of whom prince Zerubbabel is a type. Oil is a 
uniform symbol of the Spirit (Acts 2. 4, note), 


is to set aside God’s claim to Teverence. As always the law can o: 
Gal. 3. 10-14). 
968 


5 4] ZECHARIAH. (6 6 


4 I will bring it forth, saith the! B.c. 519, |talked with me, Whither do these 


Lorp of hosts, and it shall enter bear the ephah? 

into the house of the thief, and into 11 And he said unto me, To build 
the house of him that sweareth \ it an house in the land of ¢Shinar: 
falsely by my name: and it shall and it shall be established, and set 
remain in the midst of his house, there upon her own base. 

and shall consume it with the tim- 

ber thereof and the stones thereof. CHAPTER 6. 


The ten visions: (9) the ephah. 


5 Then the angel that talked with 
me went forth, and said unto me, ions 
ae up are ine bea ae SEE} also vs.7-10. POS I ae cae ee ~ ane 
at rs this that goeth f \ : ’ eyes, and looked, and, behold, 
6 And TI said, ‘What sit? And he|? Kit /and, ie. |/there came 2four chariots out from 
said, This 7s an “ephah that goeth between two mountains; and the 


The ten visions: (10) the 
four chariots. 


forth. He said moreover, This ss} Heb.1.4, mountains were mountains of 
their resemblance through all the] 7°f¢ brass. 
bearth. ia euRbye 2 In the first chariot were red 

7 And, behold, there was lifted up} lonia.Dan. |horses; and in the second chariot 
a talent of lead: and this is aj 1? black horses; 
woman that sitteth in the midst of 3 And in the third chariot white 
the ephah. horses; and in the fourth chariot 

8 And he said, This 7s wickedness. grisled and bay horses. 

And he cast it into the midst of the 4 Then I answered and said unto 
ephah; and he cast the weight of the ‘angel that talked with me, 
lead upon the mouth thereof. What are these, my lord? 

9 Then lifted I up mine eyes, and 5 And the ‘angel answered and 
Tooked, and, behold, there came out said unto me, These are the four 
fwo women, and the wind was in spirits of the heavens, which go 
their wings; for they had wings forth from standing before the Lord 
like the wings of a stork: and they of all the earth. 
lifted up the ephah between the 6 The black horses which are 
earth and the heaven. therein go forth into the north 

10 Then said I to the ‘angel that country; and the white go forth 


1 In the vision of the ephah local and prophetic elements are to be distinguished. 
The elements are: an ephah or measure; a woman in the ephah; a sealing weight 
upon the mouth of the ephah confining the woman, and the stork-winged women 
whose only function is to bear the ephah and woman away into Babylonia (Shinar). 
The thing thus symbolized was “through all the land” (v. 6). 

Symbolically, a ‘‘measure”’ (or ‘‘cup’’) stands for something which has come to 
the full, so that God must judge it (2 Sam. 8. 2; Jer. 51. 13; Hab. 3.6, 7; Mt. 7. 2; 
23. 32), A woman, in the bad ethical sense, is always a symbol of that which, 
religiously, is out of its place. The “woman” in Mt. 13. 33-is dealing with doc- 
trine, a sphere forbidden to her (1 Tim. 2. 12). In Thyatira a woman is suffered 
to teach (Rev. 2. 20). The Babylon phase of the apostate church is symbolized by 
an unchaste ere sodden with the greed and luxury of commercialism (Rev. 17.. 
1-6; 18. 3, 11-20). 

The local application of Zechariah’s ninth vision is, therefore, evident. The 
Jews then in the land had been in captivity in Babylon. Outwardly they had put 
away idolatry, but they had learned in Babylon that insatiate greed of gain (Neh. 
5. 1-9; Mal. 3. 8), that intense commercial spirit which had been foreign to Israel as 
a pastoral people, but which was thenceforward to characterize them through the 
ages. These things were out of place in God’s people and land. Symbolically He 
judged them as belonging to Babylon and sent them there to build a temple—they 
could have no part in His. The “woman” was to be “‘set there upon her own 
base” (v. 11). It was Jehovah’s moral judgment upon Babylonism in His own 
land and people. 

Prophetically, the application to the Babylon of the Revelation is obvious. The 
professing Gentile church at that time condoning every iniquity of the rich, doc- 
trinally a mere “confusion,” as the name indicates, and corrupted to the core by 
commercialism, wealth, and luxury, falls under the judgment of God (Rev. 18.). 

_2The interpretation of the tenth vision must be governed by the authoritative 
declaration of verse 5. That which is symbolized by the four chariots with their 


969 


6 7] ZECHARIAH. [7 3 


his ‘throne; and he shall be a 
priest upon his “throne: and the 
counsel of peace shall be between 
them both. 

14 And the crowns shall be to 
Helem; and to Tobijah, and to Je- 
through the earth. So they walked daiah, and to Hen the son of Zepha- 
to and fro through the earth. pes rae a memorial in the temple 

8 Then cried he upon me, and/¢ Parables fe) e LoRD. 
spake unto me, ra Behold,| {2-7..59 | 15 And they that are far off shall 
these that go toward the north] 7-14. (Jua.9. |come and build in the temple of the 
country have quieted my spirit in| 7-15; Zech. |LorpD, and ye shall know that the 


after them; and the grisled-go forth} _B.c. 519. 
toward the south country. 

7 And the bay went forth, and 
sought to go that they might walk 
to and fro through the earth: and he 
said, Get you hence, walk to and fro 


the north country. SRD, LoRD of hosts hath sent me unto 
Th boli 5 f |b Tsa.4.2, you. And this shall come to pass, 
GEYER OG, CLOW IB sO note. if ye will diligently obey the voice 


Joshua. ; of the LorpD your God. 
9 And the word of the LorD came|* to rg, 


unto me, “saying, _ 13; Zech.14. CHAPTER 7. 
ye Fars CF bhem of the saptruity,|| 1621 (Ge Ipace IT. (Zech. Yio" 1 Ree 


even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of oes f i 
Jedaiah, which are come from “i mussion ‘from Babylon ‘the 


Babylon, and come thou the same|d Christ A eeoueod of the vies 
day, and go into the house of Josiah peenst ANY it came to pass in the fourth 
the son of Zephaniah; Zech.12.10, year of king Darius, that the 


11 Then take silver and gold, and} (Deut.30.3; |word of the LorD came unto Zech- 
make !crowns, and set them upon| Acts 1-9-11.) Jarijah in the fourth day of the ninth 
the head of Joshua the son of}cie. Decem. |month, even in ¢Chisleu f 


Josedech, the high priest; ber. 2 When ?they had sent unto the 
12 And speak unto him, saying, fie. August, |Ouse of God Sherezer and Regem- 
Thus speaketh the Lorp of hosts,|7 “~ * Imelech, and their men, to pray be- 
saying, Behold the man whose name fore the Lorp, 
is The "BRANCH; and he shall 3 And to speak unto the priests 
grow up out of his place, and he which were in the house of the 
shall build the temple of the Lorp: Lorp of hosts, and to the prophets, 
13. Even he shall build the temple saying, Should I weep in the /fifth 
of the Lorp; and he shall bear the month, separating myself, as I have 
glory, and shall sit and rule upon done these so many years? 


horses is not the four world-empires of Daniel, but “the four spirits of heaven which 
go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth” (v. 5). These “spirits” are 
angels (Lk. 1. 19; Heb. 1. 14), and are most naturally interpreted of the four angels 
of Rev. 7. 1-3; 9. 14, 15. These have also a ministry earthward, and of like nature 
with the “spirits” of Zech. 6. 1-8, viz. judgment. ‘The symbol (chariots and horses) 
is in perfect harmony with this. Always in Scripture symbolism they stand for 
the power of God earthward in judgment (Jer. 46. 9, 10; Joel.2. 3-11; Nah. 3, 1-7). 
The vision, then, speaks of the LoRD’s judgments upon the Gentile nations north 
and south in the day of the Lorp (Isa. 2. 10-22: Rey. 19. 11-21). 

__1 Following the earth-judgments symbolized in the horsed chariots (Zech. 6. 1-8) 
comes the manifestation of Christ in His kingdom glory (vs. 9-15). This is the in- 
variable prophetic order: first the judgments of the day of the Lorp (Isa. 2. 10-22 . 
Rev. 19. 11-21), then the kingdom (cf. Psa. 2.5 with Psa. 2. 63 Isa. 3. 24-26 with 4. 2-6: 
10, 33, 34 with 11. 1-10; Rev. 19. 19-21 with 20. 4-6). This is set forth symbolically 
by the crowning of Joshua, which was not a vision, but actually done (cf. Isa. 8. 
3, 4; Ezk. 37. 16-22). The fulfilment in the BRANCH will infinitely transcend the 
symbol. He “shall bear the glory” (v. 13; Mt. 16. 27; 24. 30; 25. 31) as the Priest- 
King on His own throne (vs. 12, 13; Heb. 7. 1-3). Christ is now a Priest, but still 
in the holiest within the veil (Lev. 16. 15; Heb. 9. 11-14, 24), and seated on the Father’s 
throne (Rey. 3. 21). He has not yet come out to take His own throne (Heb. 9. 28). 
The crowns made for the symbolical crowning of Joshua were to be laid up in the 
temple as a memorial to keep alive this larger hope of Israel. 

_ 2 “They,” i.e. of the captivity in Babylon. The mission of these Jews of the cap- 
tivity concerned a fast day instituted by the Jews in commemoration of the de- 
struction of Jerusalem, wholly of their own will, and without warrant from the 
word of God. In the beginning there was doubtless sincere contrition in the ob- 
servance of the day; now it had become a mere ceremonial. The Jews of the dis- 


970 


: 
: 


7 4] ZECHARIAH. [8 5 


The answer of Jehovah: (1) ‘their 


an adamant stone, lest they should 


fast was a mere form; they hear the law, and the words which 
should have heeded the proph- the Lorp of hosts hath sent in his 
ets. spirit by the former prophets: there- 
4 Then) came the wort of the fore came a great wrath from the 


Lorp of host ayin Lorp of hosts. 
Sider aa vest ms 13 Therefore it is come to pass, 


5 Speak unto all the le of é 
find, and to the eonnag Soune that as he cried, and they would 
When ye fasted and mourned in the not hear; so they cried, and I 
rth and seventh | moati even pee not hear, saith the LorD of 
those seventy years, did osts : : 
Bist nto ae! Reo ee at all 14 But I scattered them with a 


6 And when ye did eat, and when whom they knew not. Thus the 


ye did drink, did not ye “eat for 

Yourselves, and dik for your ied eacieea on eas 

selves! : 3 
7 Should ye not hear the words|*$$.20°"* oe 2 em laid the pleasant 

which the Lorp hath cried by thé ; acta 

former prophets, when Jerusalem eS ea hie 

was inhabited and in prosperity,| My442"° CHAPTER 8. 

and the cities thereof round about] Rev.22-19.) 5 

her, when men inhabited the south (3) Jehovah’s unchanged pur- 


< c Sanctify, r 
and the plain? holy Or». rach aes Israel in the 
2) W. heir prayer, cht. 
oh a heady ee ethene Aco the word of the Lorp of 
hosts came to me, saying, 
8 And the word of the LoRD came 2 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
unto Zechariah, saying, I was jealous for Zion with great 
9 Thus speaketh the Lorp of jealousy, and I was jealous for her 
hosts, saying, Execute true judg- with great fury. 
ment, and shew mercy and com- 3 Thus saith the Lorp; I am re- 
passions every man to his brother: turned unto Zion, and will dwell in 
10 And oppress not the widow, the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusa- 
nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor lem shall be called a city of truth; 
the poor; and let none of you and the mountain of the LorD of 
imagine evil against his brother hosts the !¢holy mountain. 
in your heart. 4 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
11 But they refused to hearken, There shall yet old men and old 
and pulled away the shoulder, and women dwell in the streets of Jeru- 
stopped their ears, that they should salem, and every man with his staff 
not hear. in his hand for very age. 
12 Yea, they made their hearts as 5 And the streets of the city shall 


persion would be rid of it, but seek authority from the priests. The whole matter, 
like much in modern pseudo-Christianity, was ‘extra-Biblical, formal, and futile. 
Jehovah takes the occasion to send a divine message to the dispersion. That mes- 
sage is in five parts: (1) Their fast was a mere religious form; they should rather 
have given heed to the “former prophets” (vs. 4-7; cf. Isa. 1. 12; Mt. 15. 1-10); 
(2) they are told why their 70 years’ prayer has not been answered (vs. 8-14; cf. 
Psa. 66. 18; Isa. 1. 14-17); (3) the unchanged purpose of Jehovah, and the blessing 
of Israel in the kingdom (Zech. 8. 1-8; cf. a like order in Isa. 1. 24-31 with 2. 1-4); 
(4) the messengers of the captivity are exhorted to hear the prophets of “these 
days,” i.e. Haggai; Zechariah, and Malachi, and to do justly; then all their fasts 
and feasts will become gladness and joy (8. 9-19); (5) they are assured that Jeru- 
salem ao to be the religious centre of the earth (8. 20-23; cf. Isa. 2. 1-3; Zech. 
14. 16-21). 

1 Holiness, Sanctification, Summary: In the O.T. the words consecration, dedi- 
cation, sanctification, and holiness are various renderings of one Hebrew word, are 
used of persons and of things, and have an identical meaning, i.e. set apart for 
God. Only when used of God himself (e.g. Lev. 11. 45), or of the holy angels (e.g. 
Dan. 4. 13), is any inward moral quality necessarily implied. Doubtless a priest 
or other person set apart to the service of God, whose whole will and desire went 
with his setting apart, experienced progressively an inner detachment from evil; 
but that aspect is distinctively of the N.T., not of the O.T. See Mt. 4. 5. 

971 


8 6] ZECHARIAH. [8 23 


» be full of boys and girls playing in} B.C. 518: 14 For thus saith the Lorp of 
the streets thereof. hosts; As I thought to. punish you, 
6 Thus saith the LorD of hosts; when your fathers provoked me to 
If it be marvellous im the eyes of wrath, saith the Lorp of hosts, 
the ¢remnant of this people in these and I repented not: 7 
days, should it also be marvellous 15 So again have I thought in 
in mine eyes? saith the Lorp of these days to do well unto Jerusa- 
hosts. lem and to the house of Judah: fear 
7 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; ye not. 
Behold, I will save my people from 16 These are the things that ye 
the east country, and from the west shall do; ‘Speak ye every man the 
country; truth to his neighbour: execute the 
8 And I will bring them, and they|, remnant. |judgment of truth and peace in 
shall dwell in the midst of Jerusa-| vs.6-8,11,12; |your gates: 
lem: Sand they shall be my people, meio 17 And Iet none of you imagine 
and I will be their God, in truth) Romii's. |evil in your hearts against his 
and in righteousness. eee neighbour; and love no false oath: 
ech.13.9; 


(4) The people to heed the resto- EE ean oe i ser eed es that I hate, 
Beg ron besa hs, Madsen ig 18 And the word of the Lor of 
and Zechariah. Ezra 51,2. hosts came unto me, saying, 

9 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts;|¢0;,remnant.| 19 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; 

Let your hands be strong, ye that| _ The fast of the "fourth month, and 

hear in these days these words by|¢* nations. |the fast of the ‘fifth, and the fast of 

the mouth of ‘the prophets, which f Gen.12.2; the Jseventh, and the fast of the 
were in the day that thefoundation| Ruth 4.11, *tenth, shall be to the house of Ju- 
of the house of the LorD of hosts. was| 12: Jse-19 |dah joy and gladness, and cheerful 


laid, that the temple might be built. Bo snes feasts; therefore love the truth and 

10 For perere these days there] Hag.2.19. peace. 
was no hire for man, nor any hire d : 
for beast; neither was there any BEph ta. (5) jerusalem eae une Ene Fete 
peace to him that went out or camel|h i.e. July. HOUS. COOGEE G OSes te 
im because of the affliction: for I set XEON , |_20 Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
all men every one against his|*** 44€4S* |7¢ shall’ yet come to pass, that 
neighbour. : jie. October. |there shall come people, and the 

Y1 But now I will not be unto the Pie jamasty: inhabitants of many cities: 
dresidue of this people as in the for- 21 And the inhabitants of one 
mer days, saith the Lorp of hosts. city shall go to another, saying, 

12 ae the seen stad sie Pe ee us go eet! 4 ed pease 
ous; € vine shall give her fruit, ORD, an Oo seek the LORD o 
and the ground shall give her in- hosts: IT will go also. ° 
crease, and the heavens shail give 22 Yea, many people and strong 
their dew; and I will cause the nations shall come to seek the 
rennet of this people to possess LorpD of hosts in Jerusalem, and 
ali these things. to pray before the Lorp. 

13 And it shall come to pass, that 23. Thus saith the Lorp of hosts; 
as ye were a curse among the In those days it shail come. to 
*heathen, O' house of Judah, and Pass, that ten men shall take hold 
Bees of Israel; so will IT save you, out of all languages of the nations, 
and fye shall be a blessing: fear even shall take hold of the skirt of 
not, but let your hands be strong. him that is a Jew, Saying, We will 


!' The “remnant” in verses 6, 11, 12 refers to the remnant of Judah which re- 

ws ree Babylon, and among whom Zechariah was prophesying. -See Rom. 
. 5, note. 

2 Repentance (0.T.), Summary: In the O.T., repentance is the English word 
used to translate the Heb. nacham, to be “‘eased”’ or “comforted.’”? It is used of 
both God and man. Notwithstanding the literal meaning of nacham, it is evident, 
from a study of ali the passages, that the sacred writers use it in the sense of me. 
tanoiza in the N.T.—a change of mind. See Mt. 3. 2; Acts 17. 30, note. As. in the 


9 1] 


go with you: for we have heard 
that God is with you. 


CHAPTER 9. 


Part III. (Zech. 9. 1-14. 21.) Bur- 
den upon cities surrounding 
Palestine. (See v. 8, note.) 


HE “burden of the word of the 

LorpD in the land of Hadrach, 

and Damascus shall be the rest 

thereof: when the eyes of man, as 

of all the tribes of Israel, shall be 
toward the Lorp. 

2 And Hamath also shall border 
thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though 
it be very wise. 

3 And Tyrus did build herself a 
strong hold, and heaped up silver 
as the dust, and fine gold as the 
mire of the streets. 

4 Behold, the Lord will cast her 
out, and he will smite her power in 
the sea; and she shall be devoured 
with fire. 

5 Ashkelon shall see zt, and fear; 
Gaza also shall see it, and be very 
sorrowful, and Ekron; for her ex- 
pectation shall be ashamed; and the 
king shall perish from Gaza, and 
Ashkelon shall not be inhabited. 

6 And a bastard shall dwell 4in 
Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride 
of the Philistines. 

7 And I will take away his blood 
out of his mouth, and his abomina- 
tions from between his teeth: but 
he that remaineth, even he, shall 
be for our God, and he shall be as a 
governor in Judah, and Ekron as 
a Jebusite. 

8 And I will encamp about mine 
house because of the army, ‘be- 

“cause of him that passeth by, and 
because of him that returneth: and 
ho oppressor shall pass through 
them any more: for now have I 
seen with mine eyes. 


B.C. 487. 


ZECHARIAH. 


a Isa.13.1, 
note, 


b Isa.23.1. 
c Amos 1.8. 


d Mt.21.1-10; 
Mk.11.1-10; 
Lk.19.40; 
John 12.12- 
15. 


e Christ (First 
Advent). 
Zech.11.11- 
13. (Gen.3 
15; Acts 1.9.) 


fi.e. nations. 


g Cf.Isa.24. 
17-23. vs.21, 
23 fix the 
time as the 
day of the 
LORD. Rev. 
19.11-21. 


h Jer.16.19. 
See context 
from v.14. 


i Or, For I 
have, etc. 


j Or, I will 
raise up, etc. 


k Or, the, not 
with, 


Presentation of Christ as King 


at His first advent. 


unto thee: ‘he is just, and having 
salvation; lowly, and riding upon 
an ass, and upon a colt the foal of 
an ass. 


The future deliverance of Judah 
and Ephraim, and the world- 
wide kingdom.. 

10 2And I will cut off the chariot 
from Ephraim, and the horse from 
Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall 
be cut off: and he shall speak peace 
unto the fheathen: and his domin- 
ion shall be from sea even to sea, 
and from the river even to the 
ends of the earth. 

11 As for thee also, by the blood 
of thy covenant I have sent forth 
thy prisoners out of the pit wherein 
is no water. 

12 Turn you to the “strong hold, 
ye prisoners of hope: even to day 
do I declare that I will render 
double unto thee; 

13 *When I have bent Judah for 
me, filled the bow with Ephraim, 
Jand raised up thy sons, O Zion, 
against thy sons, O Greece, and 
made thee as the sword of a mighty 
man. 

14 And the Lorp shall be seen 
over them, and his arrow shall go 
forth as the lightning: and the Lord 
Gop shall blow the trumpet, and 
shall go with whirlwinds of the 
south. 

15 The Lorp of hosts shall defend 
them; and they shail devour, and 
subdue “with sling stones; and they 
shall drink, and make a noise as 
through wine; and they shall be 
filled like bowls, and as the corners 
of the altar. 


Verse 23 explains: the Jew (see “Remnant,” Isa. 1. 9; Rom. 11. 5) will then be the 


missionary, and to the very ‘‘nations” now called “Christian 


Cee | 


1 There seems to be a reference here to the advance and return of Alexander 
(v. 13) after the battle of Issus, who subdued the cities mentioned in verses 1-6, 
and afterward returned to Greece without harming Jerusalem. But the greater 
meaning converges on the yet future last days (Acts 2. 17, note), as the last clause 
of verse 8 shows, for many oppressors have passed through Jerusalem since the 


days of Alexander. 


2 The events following this manifestation of Christ as King are recorded in the 


Gospels. 


The real faith of the multitude who cried, ‘“Hosanna” is given in Mt. 


21. 11; and so little was Jesus deceived by His apparent reception as King, that He 
wept over Jerusalem and announced its impending destruction (fulfilled A.D. 70; 
Lk. 19. 38-44). The same multitude soon cried, “Crucify Him.” : 

3 Having introduced the King in verse 9, verse 10 and the verses which follow 
look forward to the end-time and kingdom. Except in verse 9, this present age is 


not seen in Zechariah. 


973 


, 


9 16} 


* .) Vg Maven © wie we! ®t 
r ieee + Fy he 


ZECHARIAH. 


~ 


[113 


16 And the Lorp their God shall] B.c. 487. | 7 And they of Ephraim shall be 


save them in that day as the flock 
of his people: for they shall be as 
the stones of a crown, lifted up as 
an ensign upon his land. 

17 For how great is his goodness, 
and how great 1s his beauty! corn 
shall make the young men cheerful, 
and new wine the maids. 


CHAPTER 10. 


The future strengthening of 
Judah and Ephraim. 


BS ye of the LorD rain in the 
time of the Matter rain; so the 
Lorb shall make bright clouds, and 
give them showers of rain, to every 
one grass in the field. 

2 For the idols have spoken van- 
ity, and the diviners have seen a 
lie, and have told false dreams: 
they comfort in vain: therefore they 
went their way as a flock, they 
were troubled, because there was 
no shepherd. 

3 Mine anger was kindled against 
the shepherds, and I punished the 
goats: for the Lorp of hosts hath 
visited his flock the house of J udah, 
and hath made then as his goodly 
horse in the “battle. 

4 Out of him 2came forth the cor- 
ner, out of him the nail, out of him 
the battle bow, out of him every 
oppressor together. 

5 And they shall be as mighty 
men, which tread down their ene- 
mues in the mire of the streets in 
the battle: and they shall fight, be- 
cause the LORD is with them, and 
the riders on horses shall be con- 
founded. 

6 And I will strengthen the house 
of Judah, and I will save the house 
of Joseph, and I will bring them 
again to place them: for I have 
mercy upon them: and they shall 
be as though I had not cast them 
off: for I am the Lorp their God, 
and will hear them. 


1 Cf. Hos. 6, 3; Joel 2. 23-32; Zech. 12. 10. 
meaning: Rain as of old will be restored to Pal 


a See Arma- 


geddon. 
(Rev.16.14; 
19.17.) 


b Israel (pro- 


phecies). 


vs.6-12. Mt. 
(Gen, 
12.2,3; Rom. 


24.31. 
11.26.) 


¢ Ex.14.30, 
note; Isa.59, 


20, note. 


effusion of the Spirit upon restored Israel. 
2 The tense is future: “From him [Judah] 


1 Pet. 2. 8, note), from him the nail 


etc. The whole scene is of the 


Jews in Palestine in the time of the aorthern 
7. 8; Rev. 19. 20, and “Armageddon,” 
wholly effected by the return of the 
Strengthens the hard-pressed Israelites 
14.14). That there may have been a 
tories can neither be affirmed nor denie 


974 


(Isa. 22 
events which group about the deliverance of the 
invasion under the 
Rev. 16. 14; 19. 17). 
LorD (Rev. 19. 11-21), but previously He 
(Mic. 4. 13; Zech. 9, 13-15: 10, 5-7; 12, 2-6: 
precursive fulfilment in 
d from Scripture. 


ine, but, also, there will bea mighty 


like a mighty man, and their heart 
shall rejoice as through wine: yea, 
their children shall see it, and be 
glad; their heart shall rejoice in the 
Lorp. 

8 I will hiss for them, and gather 
them; for I have ‘redeemed them: 
and they shall increase as they 
have increased. 


The dispersion and regathering 
of Israel in one view. 


9 And I will sow them among the 
people: and they shall remember 
me in far countries; and they shall 
live with their children, and turn 
again. 

10 Iwill bring them again also out 
of the land of Egypt, and gather 
them out of Assyria; and I will 
bring them into the land of Gilead 
and Lebanon; and place shall not 
be found for them. 

11 And he shall pass through the 
sea with affliction, and shall smite 
the waves in the sea, and all the 
deeps of the river shall dry up: and 
the pride of Assyria shall be brought 
down, and the sceptre of Egypt 
shall depart away. 

12 And I will strengthen them in 
the LorpD; and they shall walk up 
and down in his name, saith the 
LORD. 


CHAPTER 11. 


The first advent and rejection of 
Messiah, and the result: the 
wrath. 


@FEN thy doors, O Lebanon, that 
the fire may devour thy cedars. 

2 Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is 
fallen; because the mighty are 
spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan : 
for the forest of the vintage is come 
down. 

3 There is a voice of the howling 
of the shepherds: for their glory is 
spoiled: a voice of the roaring of 


There is both a physical and spiritual 
est: 


shall be the cornerstone (Ex. 17. 6; 


23, 24), from him the battle-bow,” 


“Beast” (Dan. 
The final deliverance is 


the Maccabean yic- 


2 hie Der Peas J 
ie ‘ Ps 


1147 ZECHARIAH. [11 17 


young lions; for the pride of Jordan|__B.C. 487. might break my covenant which I 
is spoiled. | had made with all the people. 
4 Thus saith the LorD my God; 11 And it was broken in that day: 
Feed the flock of the slaughter; and so the 3poor of the flock that 
5 Whose possessors slay them, waited upon me knew that it was 
and hold themselves not guilty: and the word of the LORD. 


12 And I said unto them, If ye 


they that sell them say, Blessed be 
a Remnant. 5 si : 
think good, give me my price; and 


the Lorp; for I am rich: and their] ys.7,11 


own shepherds pity them not. Mal.3.16-18. lif not, forbear. ‘So they weighed 
6 For I will no more pity the in- Geunsig for my price thirty pieces of sil- 

habitants of the land, saith the) “°™"~ ) Iver, 

Lorpb: but, lo, I will deliver the|+ Parables 13 And the LorpD said unto me, 

men every one into his neighbour’s| (0:7.)- Cast it unto the potter: a goodly 


a. eae ve Rit eho mits oie 7-15) ery ashen ase via at of yin 
: hey shall smite the f n 00) e thirty pieces of sil- 
land, and out of their hand I will Srrer i: ver, and cast them to the potter in 
not deliver them. BE the house of the LorD. 

d Christ (First} 14 Then I cut asunder mine other 


The ee me yet ane Te-) Advent). staff, even Bands, that I might 
Fei PE OTR AACE TST yeiss.  |break the brotherhood between 


é ae I will feeciithe flock of Coxe Judah and Israel. 

slaughter, even you, O “poor of the ae 2 ae 

flock. And I took unto me !two}¢ r2x.34.2-4. The Beast and his judgment. 
15 4And the LorD said unto me, 


bstaves; 2the one I called Beauty, : 
and the other I called Bands; and| fOr Ridden. |eTake unto thee yet the instruments 


I fed the flock. g Jer.23.1; of a foolish shepherd. 

8 Three shepherds also I cut off} Ezk.34.2; 16 For, io, I will raise up a shep- 
in one month; and my soul lothed See 10.12, |herd in the land, which shall not 
them, and their soul also abhorred ‘ visit those that be fcut off, neither 
me. shall seek the young one, nor heal 

9 Then said I, I will not feed you: that that is broken, nor. feed that 
that that dieth, let it die; and that _ |that standeth still: but he shall eat 
that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; the flesh of the fat, and tear their 
and let the rest eat every one the claws in pieces. 
flesh of another. 17. Woe to the idol shepherd that 

10 And I took my staff, even leaveth the flock! the sword shall 
Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I) |be upon his arm, and upon his right 


1 The scene belongs to the first advent. Beauty and Bands—literally “gracious- 
ness and union’; the first signifying God’s attitude toward His people Israel, in 
sending His Son (Mt. 21. 37); the second, His purpose to reunite J udah and Ephraim 
(Ezk. 37. 15-22). Christ, at His first advent, came with grace (John 1. 17) to offer 
union (Mt. 4. 17), and was sold for thirty pieces of silver (Zech. 11. 12, 13). “Beauty” 

_(i.e. raciousness) was “cut in sunder” (vs. 10, 11), signifying that Judah was 
abandoned to the destruction foretold in verses 1-6, and fulfilled A.D. 70. After 
the betrayal of the Lord for thirty pieces of silver (vs. 12, 13) “Bands” (i.e. union) 
was broken (v. 14), signifying the abandonment, for the time, of the purpose to 
reunite Judah and Israel. The order of Zech, 11. is, (1) the wrath against the land 
(vs. 1-6), fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem after the rejection of Christ (Lk. 
19. 41-44); (2) the cause of that wrath in the sale and rejection of Christ (vs. 7-14); 
(3) the rise of the “idol shepherd,” the Beast (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19. 20), and his de- 
struction (vs. 15-17). 

2 The O.T. Parables: Summary. A parable is a similitude used to teach or en- 
force a truth, The O.T. parables fall into three classes: (1) The story-parable, of 
which Jud. 9. 7-15 is an instance; (2) parabolic discourses; e.g. Isa. 5. 1-75 (3) para- 
bolic actions; e.g. Ezk. 37. 16-22. ‘ 

3 The “poor of the flock”: i.e. the “remnant according to the election of grace” 
(Rom. 11. 5); those Jews who did not wait for the manifestation of Christ in glory, 
but believed on Him at His first coming, and since. Of them it is said that they 
“waited upon Me,” and “knew.” Neither the Gentiles nor the Gentile church, 
corporately, are in view: only the believers out of Israel during this age. The 
church, corporately, is not in O.T. prophecy (Eph. 3. 8-10). ; 

4 The reference to the Beast is obvious; no other personage of prophecy in any 
sense meets the description. He who came in His Father’s name was rejected; the 
alternative is one who comes in his own name (John 5. 43; Rev. 13. 4-8), 

975 


12 1] ZECHARIAH. [12 ad 


ishment, and his rider with mad- 
ness: and I will open mine eyes. 
upon the house of Judah, and will 
smite every horse of the people 
with blindness. 

5 And the governors of Judah 
shall say in their heart, The inhab- 
itants of Jerusalem shall be my 
strength in the Lorp of hosts their 
God. 

6 ‘In that day will I make the 


eye: his arm shall be clean dried] Bic. 487. 
up, and his right eye shall be ut- 
terly darkened. 


CHAPTER 12. 
a Day (of 


The siege of Jerusalem by the Jehovah: 
Beast Hie his armies. (Cf. Rev. ysd-l4: | 
19, 19-21. Bei 

(Isa.2.10-22; 

THE Iburden of the word of the} fy291 

Lorp for Israel, saith the 

LorD, which stretcheth forth the baer: 

heavens, and layeth the foundation] (p2¢46 ay. 

of the earth, and formeth the spirit] vs.1-9: 


Vee ep Zech.14.1-5. 
of man within him. , (Rev i614, 
2 %Behold, I will make Jerusalem] 19.11.21.) 


a cup of trembling unto all the peo- Crzecho 
ple round about, when they shall] © y3:7s"49's. 
be in the 'siege both against Judah] 7; 12.2-6: 
and against Jerusalem. 14.14. 

3 And in that day will I makeld Kingdom 
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for LEE ae 
all people: all that burden them-| 93',,GenJ- 
selves with it shall be cut in pieces, 
though all the people of the earth Poe 
be gathered together against it. ite 


7 The Lorp also shall save the 
tents of Judah first, that the glory 
of the house of David and the glory 
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do: 
not magnify themselves against 
Judah. 

8 In that day shall the Lorp de- 
fend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 
and he that is feeble among them 
at that day shall be as David; and 
the house of 2David shall be as 
God, as the “angel of the Lorp 
before them. 

9 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that I will seek to destroy 


The siege: Judah strengthened; 
the Lord’s deliverance. 


4 In that day, saith the Lorp, I 
will smite every horse with aston- 


1 Zech. 12.-14. form one prophecy the general theme of which is the return of 
the Lord and the establishment of the kingdom. The order is: (1) The siege of 
Jerusalem preceding the battle of Armageddon (vs. 1-3); (2) the battle itself (vs. 
4-9); (3) the “latter rain” in the pouring out of the Spirit and the personal revela- 


cleansing fountain (Zech. 13. 1) then to be effectually “opened” to Israel. 
? Kingdom in O.T., Summary: 

I, Dominion over the earth before the call of Abraham. 

(1) Dominion over creation was given to the first man and woman (Gen. 1. 26, 
28). Through the fall this dominion was lost, Satan becoming “prince of this world” 
(Mt. 4. 8-10; John 14. 30). 

(2) After the flood, the principle of human government was established under 
the covenant with Noah (Gen. 9, 1, note). Biblically this is still the charter of all 
Gentile government, 

II. The Theocracy in Israel. The call of Abraham involved, with much else, 
the creation of a distinctive people through whom great purposes of God toward the 
race might be worked out (see “Israel” Gen. 12. 1-3; Rom. 11. 26, summary). 
Among these purposes is the establishment of a universal kingdom. The order 
of the development of the Divine rule in Israel is: 

(1) The mediatorship of Moses (Ex. 3. 1-10; 19. 9; 24, 12). = 

(2) The {eadership of Joshua (Josh. 1, 1-5). 

33 The institution of Judges (Jud. 2. 16-18), 

P e cont out rejection of the Theocracy, and choice of a king—Saul (1 Sam. 
» 1-7; 9. 12-17), 

III. The Davidic kingdom. 
fi) The divine choice of David (1 Sam. 16. 1-13). 

(2) The giving of the Davidic Covenant (2 Sam. 7. 8-16; Psa. 89, 3, 4, 20, 28, 


28-37). 
976 


12 10) ZECHARIAH. [13 3 


all the nations that come against 
Jerusalem. 


The Spirit poured out: the 
pierced One revealed to the 
delivered remnant. 


apart, and their wives apart; the 
family of Shimei apart, and their 
wives apart; ‘ 

14 All the families that remain, 
every family apart, and their wives 
apart. 


25 eo I —_ pour eer Mae house]a Holy Spirit. ’ 

of David, and upon the inhabitants il.2-15. 

of Jerusalem, the ¢spirit of grace See CHAPTER 13. 

and of supplications: and they shall "3s The repentant remnant pointed 

look upon me whom they have}? John 19.37. to the cross 

‘pierced, and they shall mourn for] , cp,;<¢ : 

him, as one mourneth for his only| (Second N that ¢day there shall be a foun- 

son, and shall be in bitterness for| Advent). tain opened to the house of David 

him, as one that is in bitterness for Fees: and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem 

his firstborn. Acts 19-11.) |for sin and for uncleanness. 

The repentance of the remnant. ODay, (of Idols and false prophets cease 
11 In that day shall there be a cist 3 $414 (isa. 2.185 10. 11). 

great mourning in Jerusalem, as Ceasink: 2 Andit shall come to pass in that 

the mourning of Hadadrimmon in] p2y71933.' |day, saith the Lorp of hosts, that 

the valley of Megiddon. 21.) I will cut off the names of the 
12 And the land shall mourn, idols out of the land, and they shall 


no more be remembered: and also 
I will cause the prophets and the 
unclean spirit to pass out of the 
land. 

3 And it shall come to pass, that 
when any shall yet prophesy, then 


every family apart; the family of 
the house of David apart, and their 
wives apart; the family of the 
house of Nathan apart, and their 
wives apart; 

13 The family of the house of Levi 


(3) The exposition of the Davidic Covenant by the prophets (Isa. 1. 25, 26 to 
Zech. 12. 6-8. See marg. Isa. 1. 26, “‘Kingdom”’ and refs.). The kingdom as de- 
scribed by the prophets is: 

(a) Davidic, to be established under an heir of David, who is to be born of 
a virgin, therefore truly man, but also “Immanuel,” ‘‘the mighty God, the everlast- 
ing Father, the Prince of Peace” (Isa. 7. 13, 14; 9. 6, 7; 11. 1; Jer. 23.5; Ezk. 34. 23; 
37. 24; Hos. 3. 4,5). ; 

' (b) A kingdom heavenly in origin, principle, and authority (Dan. 2. 34, 35, 
44, 45), but set up on the earth, with Jerusalem as the capital (Isa. 2. 2-4; 4. 3, 5; 
24. 23; 33. 20; 62. 1-7; Jer. 23. 5; 31. 38-40; Joel 3. 1, 16, 17). 

(c) The kingdom is to be established first over regathered, restored, and con- 
verted Israel, and is then to become universal (Psa. 2. 6-8; 24.; 22.; Isa. 1. 2, 3; 
11. 1, 10-13; 60. 12;. Jer. 23. 5-8; 30, 7-11;° Ezk.,20. 33-40; 37. 21-25; Zech. 9. 105 

_14. 16-19), ; 

(d) The moral characteristics of the kingdom are to be righteousness and 
peace. The meek, not the proud, will inherit the earth; longevity will be greatly 
increased; the knowledge of the LoRD will be universal; beast ferocity will be re-~ 
moved; absolute equity will be enforced; and outbreaking sin visited with instant 
judgment; while the enormous majority of earth’s inhabitants will be saved (Isa. 
11. 4, 6-9; 65. 20; Psa. 2.9; Isa. 26.9; Zech. 14. 16-21). The N.T. (Rev. 20. 1-5) 
adds a detail of immense significance—the removal of Satan from the scene. It 
is impossible to conceive to what heights of spiritual, intellectual, and physical per- 

fection humanity will attain in this, its coming age of righteousness and peace 

(Isa. 11. 4-9; Psa. 72. 1-10). 

(e) The kingdom is to be established by power, not persuasion, and is to fol- 

Jow divine judgment upon the Gentile world-powers (Psa._2. 4-9; Isa. 9. 7; Dan. 2. 

35, 44, 45: 7. 26, 27; Zech. 14. 1-19). See Zech. '\6. 11, note. 

(f) The restoration of Israel and the establishment of the kingdom are con- 
nected with an advent of the Lord, wet future (Deut. 30. 3-5; Psa. 2, 1-9; Zech. 


14, 4). e: 
(g) The chastisement reserved for disobedience in the house of David (2 Sam. 
7. 14; Psa. 89. 30-33) fell in the captivities and world-wide dispersiori, since which 
time, though a remnant returned under prince Zerubbabel, Jerusalem has been 
under the overlordship of Gentiles. But the Davidic Covenant has not been abro- 
gated (Psa. 89. 33-37), but is yet to be fulfilled (Acts 15, 14-17). 
977 


13 4] ZECHARIAH. [14 7 


his father and his mother that be-|__B.c. 487. CHAPTER 14. 

gat him shall say unto him, Thou 

shalt not live; for thou speakest Summary of events at the re- 
lies in the name of the LoRD: and turn of the LoRDin glory: (1) 
his father and his aie) pie cas ce Armageddon. 

gat him shall thrust him ‘ough;2 fee ee EHOLD, the /day of the Lorp 
when he prophesieth. ene ’ Yeon 

4 And it-shall come to pass in Zech iad. B cometh, and thy spoil shall be 


(Deut.30.3; |divided in the midst of thee. : 
ey ace Ob as viaOd, Acts 1.9-11.) | 2 For I will gather all nations 
when he hath prophesied; neither|s Psa.22.16. |@8ainst Jerusalem to battle; and 


the city shall be taken, and the 
sreusthe V. Were a.sough senment tp ¢ Sacrifice houses rifled, and the women rav- 


5 But he shall say, I am no Migene.” lished; and half of the city shall 


sfor| (Gen.4.4; go forth into captivity, and the 
Fan Lae ee eae Heb.10.18.) {residue of the people shall not be 


5 - {cut off from the city. 
pmevouth, 4 eae 3 Then shall the eve go forth, 
The preaching to Israel after| Mal.3.1,2. and ‘fight against those nations, 
the return of the Lorp. earn es when he fought in the day of 
attle. 


6 And one shall say unto ¢him,]|¢ mt.26.31, site B 
What are these ’wounds in thine] 67;Mk.14. |(2) The visible return in glory: 
Shands? Then he_ shall answer,| 27:65: 15-19- |” physical changes in Palestine 
Those with which I was wounded] ¢ Day (of Je- (vs. 4, 10). 
17 ‘Awake, 0 sword, agsinst_my| fiat” |,¢ And ‘is Mect ‘shall stand in 
shepherd, and against the man that Pe Nace Lhe = Sefer é Sr ecuskt fess a she 
ie my, fellow, Ach fis LORD of i) Jeast, 2and the mount of Olives shall 
osts;, *smite -the-¢shepherd, an cleave in the midst thereof toward 
the sheep shall be scattered: and I}, Armaged- 


: : z the east and toward the west, and 
wail fuse mine hand upon the little gon tiertte there shall be a very great valley; 


Mt.24.27,28. |and half of the mountain shall re- 
Résumé: Result of the Gentile| {5$7355* |move toward the north, and half of 
invasion under the Beast. eae it toward the south. 
; : h Ysa.52.7. S And ye shall flee to the valley 
teal the eawi, oattn ho omy titolé Geicrulodene teens Seatac nnn 
> ’ econ 
parts therein shall be cut off and| Advent). Azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye 
die; but the third shall be left) Mt19-28. fled from before the Jearthquake in 


ae Pb reer et pe rout) the days of Uzziah king of Judah: 
9 An will bring the third part 


and the LoRD my God shall come, 
through the fire, and will refine)#Amos11. [and all the saints with thee. 


them as silver is refined, and will 6 And it shall come to pass in that 
try them as gold is tried: they shall day, that the light shall not be 
call on my name, and I will hear clear, nor dark: 

them: I will say, It 7s my people: 7 But it shall be one day which 
and they shall say, The Lorp is shall be known to the Lorp, not 
my God. day, nor night: but it shall come 


1 Zech. 13. now returns to the subject of Zech. 12. 10. Verses 8, 9 refer to the 
sufferings of the remnant (Isa. 1. 9; Rom. 11. 5) preceding the great battle. Zech. 
14. is a recapitulation of the whole matter. ‘The order is: (1) The gathering of the 
nations, v. 2 (see “Armageddon,” Rev. 16. 14; 19. 11, note); (2) the deliverance, ” 
v. 3; (3) the return of Christ to the Mount of Olives, and the physical change of the 
scene, vs. 4-8; (4) the setting up of the kingdom, and full earthly blessing, vs. 
9-21. 


2 Verse 5 implies that the cleavage of the Mount of Olives is due to an earth- 
quake, and this is confirmed by Isa. 29. 6; Rev. 16.19. In both passages the context, 
as in Zech. 14, (see vs. 1-3) associates the earthquake with the Gentile invasion 
under the Beast (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19. 20). Surely, in a land seamed by seismic 
disturbances it should not be difficult to believe that another earthquake might 
cleave the little hill called the Mount of Olives. Not one of the associated events 
of Zech. 14. occurred at the first coming of Christ, closely associated though Hé 
then was with the Mount of Olives. 

978 


to pass, that at evening time it 
shall be light. 


(3) The river of the sanctuary. 
(Cf. Ezk. 47. 1-12; Rev. 22. 1, 2.) 


§ And it shall bein that day, that 
living waters.shall go out from Je- 
rusalem; half of them toward the 
former sea, and half of them toward 
the hinder sea: in summer and in 
winter shall it be. 


(4) The kingdom set up on the 
earth. 
9 And the Lorp shail be king 


over all the learth: in that day 
shall there be one LORD, and his 


name one. 

10 Ali the land shall be turned as 
a plain from Geba to Rimmon south 
of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted 
up, and inhabited in her place, from 
Benjamin’s gate unto the place of 
the first gate, unto the corner gate, 
and from the tower of Hananeel 
unto the king’s winepresses. 

11 And men shall dwell in it, and 
there shall be no more utter de- 
struction; but Jerusalern shall be 
safely inhabited. 

12 And this shall be the plague 
wherewith the LorpD will smite all 
the people that have fought against 
Jerusalem; Their flesh shall con- 
sume away while they stand upon 
their feet, and their eyes shall con- 
sume away in their holes, and their 
tongue shall consume away in their 


mouth. 

13 And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that a great tumult from 
the Lorp shall be among them; 
and they shail lay hold every one 
on the hand of his neighbour, and 
his hand shall rise up against the 
hand of his neighbour. 

14 And Judah also shall fight at 


ZECHARIAH. 


ai.e. nations. 


b Kingdom 
(0. T.).vs.16- 
; Zech.12. 


c Or, bridies. 

d Isa.23.18. 

e Isa.35.8; 
Joel 3.17; 
Rev.21.27; 
22.15. 


f Eph.2.19-22. 


Jerusalem; and the wealth of all 


[14 21 


the “heathen round about shall be 
gathered together, gold, and silver, 
and apparel, in great abundance. 

15 And so shall be the plague of 
the horse, of the mule, of the camel, 
and of the ass, and of ail the beasts 
that shali be in these tents, as this 
plague. 


(5) The worship and spirituality 
of the kingdom. 


16 And it shall come to pass, that 
every one that is left of all the na- 
tions which came against Jerusalem 
shall even go up from year to year 
to. worship the King, the LorD of 
hosts, and to keep the feast of tab- 
ernacles. 

i7 And it shall be, that whoso 
will not come up of a// the families 
of the earth unto Jerusalem to wor- 
ship the King, the Lorp of hosts, 
even upon them shall be no rain. 

18 And if the family of Egypt go 
not up, and come not, that have no 
rain; there shall be the plague, 
wherewith the Lorp will smite the 
heathen that come not up to keep 
the feast of tabernacles. 

19 This shall be the punishment 
of Egypt, and the punishment of all 
nations that come not up to keep 
the feast of tabernacles. 

20 In that day shall there be upon 
the ‘bells of the horses, “HOLI- 
NESS UNTO THE LORD; and 
the pots in the Lorp’s house shall 
be like the bowls before the altar. 

21 Yea, every pot in Jerusalem 
and in Judah shall be holiness unto 
the LorpD of hosts: and all they 
that sacrifice shall come and take 
of them, and seethe therein: and in 
that day there shall be no more the 
eCanaanite in Jthe house of the 
LorpD of hosts. 


1 The final answer to the prayer of Mt. 6. 10, 
(Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15, 28). 


“Kingdom (N.T.) 


979 


Cf. Dan. 2. 44, 45; 7. 24-27. See 


pes MALACHI ees 


MaLacui, “my messenger,” the last of the prophets to the restored remnant after 
the 70. years’ captivity, probably prophesied in the time of confusion during Nehe- 
miah’s absence (Neh. 13.6). The burden of his message is, the love of Jehovah, 
the sins of the priests and of the people, and the day of the LorD. Malachi, like 
Zechariah, sees both advents, and predicts two forerunners (Mal. 3. 1 and 4. 5, 6). 
As a whole, Malachi gives the moral judgment of God on the remnant restored 
by His grace under Ezra and Nehemiah. He had established His house among 
them, but their worship was formal and insincere. 

The book is in four natural divisions: I. The love of God for Israel, 1. 1-5. HH. 
The sins of the priests. rebuked, 1. 6-2. 9. III. The sins of the people rebuked, 
2. 10-3. 18. IV. The day of the Lorn, 4. 1-6. 


say, The table of the LorD is con- 


B.C. 397. 
CHAPTER 1. ———— | temptible, 
Part I. The love of God for 8 And if ye offer the blind for 
Israel (vs. 1-5). a Deut.4.37; | |Sacrifice, zs it not evil? and if ye 
8. offer the lame and sick, is it not 


HE burden of the word of the 
Lorp to Israel by Malachi. |? Rom-9-13. 

2 I have loved you, saith the} -ic. Esau’s 
Lorp. Yet ye say, Wherein hast] descendants. 
thou loved us? Was not Esau ace Gen.25. 
Jacob’s brother? saith the Lorpb: : 
yet I loved 5Jacob, d Mic.5.4. 

3 And I hated Esau, and laid: his SSAITeE 
mountains and his heritage waste] © wt15.4-8; 
for the dragons of the wilderness. Eph.6.2. 

4 Whereas “Edom saith, We are f1sa.63.16: 
impoverished, but we will return|’ 648: jer. 
and build the desolate places; thus} 31.9. 
saith the Lorp of hosts, They shall Ore eaita 
build, but I will throw down; and|® yA; os 
they shall call them, The border of| among you 


evil? offer it now unto thy gover- 
nor; will he be pleased with thee, 
or accept thy person? saith the 
Lorp of hosts. 

9 And now, I pray you, beseech 
God that he will be gracious unto 
us: this hath been by your means: 
will he regard your persons? saith 
the Lorp of hosts. 4 

10 sWho is there even among 
you that would shut the doors for 
nought? neither do ye kindle fre 
on mine altar for nought. I have 
no pleasure in you, saith the Lorp: 
of hosts, neither will I accept an 
offering at your hand. 


cee : t : a 
wickedness, and, The people against edged ie, 1)“ or from the rising of the sun 
bygen the Lorp hath indignation fofthe at (even Unto the going down of the 
or ever. temple) tha 

5 end your eyes shall see, and ye} 7° more ree ai ‘Gentil cagg rh be great 

‘ aA See, SoTtAtS among the Gentiles; and in every 

shall say, 4{he Lorp will be mag-| {Aouzg lplace incense shall be offered unto 
nified from the border of Israel.: kindle on | 


my name, and a pure offering: for 
my name shalf be great among the 
theathen, saith the LorpD of hosts. 


mine altar. 
Part If. The sins of the restora-| Cobalt 


tion priests (Mal. Ag 2.9), hie. Sit 12 But ye have profaned it, in 
6 A son ¢honoureth his father,| would have that ye say, The table of the Lorp 
and a servant his master: lif then I reno Bed Is- {7s polluted 3 and the fruit thereof, 
bea father, where is mine honour? ee Tonase even his meat, is contemptible. 
and if I be a master, where is my Aan ate 13 Ye said also, Behold, what a 
fear? saith the Lorp of hosts unto] _ shall be de- {weariness is it! and ye have snuffed 
you, O priests, that despise my a Neer aah at it, saith the Lorn of hosts; and 
name. And ye say, Wherein have : ye brought that which was torn 


we despised thy name? fie. nations. jand the lame, and the sick; thus 

7 Ye offer polluted bread upon ye brought an offering: should I 
mine altar; and ye say, Wherein accept this of your hand? saith the 
have we polluted thee? In that ye LorpD. 


1Cf. Isa. 63. 16, note. The relationship here is national, not personal (Jer. 3. 
18, 19); here, apparently, the Jews were calling Jehovah “Father,” but yielding 
Him no filial obedience. See John 8. 37-39; Rom, 9. 1-8. 


980 


1 4j MALACHI. [2 16 


14 But cursed be the deceiver,] B.c. 397 9 Therefore have I also made 
t cursed i sc. 397. “ef you 
ee ee 
; 5 f o the ae people, according as ye have 
Sa a era Sat eiah. ties lies a Sea a 
6 | artial in aw. 
and my name is dreadful among a i. 
ae heathen: Part III, (Mal. 2. 10-3. 18.) The 
sins of the people: (1) sins 
CHAPTER 2. against brotherhood. 
UT he snes . 10 ¢Have we not all one father? 
lS See a priests, hath not one God created us? why, 
i : do we deal treacherously every man 
AND now, O ye priests, this com- against his brother, by profaning 
Zi seepomeDe ts for or ei a Peis the covenant of our fathers? : 
ye will not hear, and if ye wi : A x 2 
not lay it to heart, to give glory|s cCf.Deut.28. (2) Sins against God in the 
unto my name, saith the Lorp of pre py vs. family. 
hosts, I will even send acurse upon| }5:33- Js 11 Judah hath dealt treacher- 
you, and I will “curse your bless- tinctive ously, and an abomination is com- 
ings: yea, I have cursed them al- eae mitted in Israel and in Jerusalem; 
ready, because ye do not lay it to] (g°8S i" |for Judah hath profaned the holi- 
heart. P ness of the LoRD which he loved, 
ee enold, eal corrupt Deut sec c eats and hath meused the daughter of a 
and sprea ung upon your faces, an strange god. 
even the dung of your solemn|¢cr.Acts 17. 12 The Lorp will cut off the man 
feasts; and one shall take you rt In |that doeth this, the master and the 
away with it. acai ie scholar, out of the tabernacles of 


4 And ye shall know that I have} feference is |Jacob, and him that offereth an 
sent this commandment unto you,| tocreation, offering unto the LorpD of hosts. 
that my covenant might be with Ea new | 13 And this have ye done again, 
Levi, saith the LorpD of hosts. rh covering the altar of the LorD with 


» My ‘covenant was with him of|e Deity tears, with weeping, and with cry- 
life and peace; and I gave them to rer. ). ling out, insomuch that he regardeth 
him for the fear wherewith he (Geni: not the offering any more, or receiv- 
feared me, and was afraid before} Mal.3.18.) |eth zt with good will at your hand. 


my name. 14 Yet ye say, Wherefore? Be- 


“6 The law of truth was in his|’/Z0!” Spr | cause the LoRD hath been witness 
mouth, and iniquity was not found between thee and the wife of thy 
in his lips: he walked with me in youth, against whom thou hast 
peace and Gouri _and did turn dealt ares ge yet ie ars by 
Many away from iniquity. companion, and the wife of thy 
7 For the priest’s lips should keep covenant. 
knowledge, and they should seek 15 And did not he make one? Yet 
the law at his mouth: for he is the had he the residue of the spirit. 
Messenger of the LORD of hosts. And wherefore one? That he might 
8 But ye are departed out of the seek a godly seed. Therefore take 
ey: ve eave caused paaiy to heed to vpis spits and iS none 
stumble at e law; ye have cor- eal treacherously against the wife 
tupted the covenant of Levi, saith of his youth. 
the Lorp of hosts. 16 For the Lorp, the God of Is- 


1 Summary of the O.T. doctrine of the Holy Spirit: (1) The personality and 
Deity of the Holy Spirit appear from the attributes ascribed to Him, and from 
His works. (2) He is revealed as sharing the work of creation and therefore om- 
nipotent (Gen. 1. 2; Job 26. 13; 33. 4; Psa. 104. 30); as omnipresent (Psa. 139. 7); 
as striving with men (Gen. 6. 3); as enlightening (Job 32.8); enduing with con- 
structive skill (Ex. 28. 3; 31. 3); giving physical strength (Jud. 14. 6, 19); execu- 
tive ability and wisdom (Jud. 3. 10; 6. 34; 11. 29; 13. 25); enabling men to receive 
and utter divine revelations (Num. 11. 25; 2 Sam. 23. 2); and, generally, as em- 
powering the servants of God (Psa. 51. 12; Joel 2. 28; Mic. 3. 8; Zech. 4.6). (3) He 
is called holy (Psa. 51.11); good (Psa. 143.10) ; the Spirit of judgment and burning 
(Isa. 4. 4); of Jehovah, of wisdom, understanding, counsel, might, good, 
knowledge, the fear of the Lord (Isa. 11. 2), and of grace and supplications 
(Zech. 12. 10). (4) In the O.T. the Spirit acts in free sovereignty, coming upon 
men and even upon a dumb beast as He will, nor are conditions set forth (as in the 

983 


‘J ‘a pl ae FL eee oe an YY he 
% ae 


2 17] MALACHI. eS 18 


rael, saith that he hateth putting 
away: for one covereth violence 
with his garment, saith the LoRD of 
hosts: therefore take heed to your 
spirit, that ye deal not treacher- 
ously. 


(3) The sin of insincere religious 
profession. a Mt.11.10; 


17 Ye have wearied the Lorp| MEA) 
with your words. Yet ye say, 


4 . (mm?|6 Christ (First 
Wherein have we wearied him: Vere 


against the adulterers, “and against 
false swearers, and against those 
that oppress the hireling in Ayzs 
wages, the widow, and the father- 
less, and that turn aside the stran- 
ger from his right, and fear not 
me, saith the LorpD of hosts. 

6 For I am the Lorp, ‘I change 
not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are 
not consumed. 


Part III. resumed: The people 


When ye say, Every one that doeth) ye11,93. have robbed God. 
evil is good in the sight of the] (Gen.3.15; 
Lorpb, and he delighteth in them;}| Acts 1.9.) 7 Even from the days of your 
or, Where is the God of judgment?) . yya14.3. fathers ye are gone away from mine 
ordinances, and have not kept 
CHAPTER 3. d Rev.6.17. them. jReturn nahi rae I is 
4th e1sa.4.4; Mt. |return unto you, sait e LORD o 
Parenthesis:, The mission of|° 379147. hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall 
John the Baptist and coming ? 
f the Lord foretold (vs, 1-6).|fsaa.2s; [We Seer 
AOE 28) ORC OF EL OIG Sea ea eee aaah 8 Will a man rob God? Yet ye 
EHOLD, I will send ¢my mes- have robbed me. But ye say, 
senger, and *he shall prepare|*1Pet?5- Wherein have we robbed thee? 
the way before me: and the !Lord,|h Zech.5.4: *In tithes and offerings. 
whom ye seek, shall suddenly come} Jas.5.4,12. 9 Ye are cursed with a curse: for 


to his temple, even the messenger] - . |ye have robbed me, even this whole 
of the covenant, whom ye delight gba 3 nation : 
) » WE om.11.29; mm a - 

in: behold, he shall come, saith the} Jes-1-17. 10 ‘Bring ye all the tithes into the 
PEt aie nage. abide “the day of poe ee oebrens Wotce und Shoes hie Ha 
his coming? oe athe shall stand geen se OD saith the rane of Se 
when he appeareth? for ¢he 7s like a 2 will not open you the windows 
refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap:| 7 Prov.3.9,10; |Of heaven, and pour you out a bless- 

3 And ‘She shall sit as arefiner and} 1 Chr.26.20; jing, that there shail not be room 
purifier of silver: and he shall pu- frenae sant enough to receive it. 


rify the sons of Levi, and purge! 13.12. 11 And I will rebuke the devourer’ 
them as gold and silver, that they for your sakes, and he shail not de- 
may Soffer unto the Lorp an offer- stroy the fruits of your ground; 
ing in righteousness. neither shall your vine cast her 
4 Then shall the offering of Judah fruit before the time in the field, 
and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the saith the LorD of hosts. 
LorD, as in the days of old, and as 12 And all nations shall call you 
in former years. blessed: for ye shall be a delight- 
5 And I will come near to you to some tand, saith the Lorp of hosts. 
judgment; and I will be a swift 13 Your words have been stout 
witness against the sorcerers, and against me, saith the LorD. Yet 


N.T.) by complying with which any one may receive the Spirit. The indwelling of 
every believer by the abiding Spirit is a N.T. blessing consequent upon the death and 
resurrection of Christ (John 7. 39; 16. 7; Acts 2. 33; Gal. 3. 1-6). (5) The O.T. 
contains predictions of a future pouring out of the Spirit upon Israel (Ezk. 37. 14: 
39. 29), and upon “all flesh” (Joel 2. 28, 29). The expectation of Israel, therefore, 
was twofold—of the coming of Messiah-Immanuel, and of such an effusion of the 
Spirit as the prophets described. See Mt. 1. 18, refs. 

1 The f.c. of verse 1 is quoted of John the Baptist (Mt. 11. 10; Mk. 1. 2: Lk. 7, 27), 
but the second clause, ‘‘the Lord whom ye seek,” etc., is nowhere quoted in the 
N.T. The reason is obvious: in everything save the fact of Christ’s first advent, 
the latter clause awaits fulfilment (Hab. 2.20). Verses 2-5 speak of judgment, not 
of grace. Malachi, in common with other O.T. prophets, saw both advents of 
Messiah blended in one horizon, but did not see the separating interval described in 
Mt. 13. consequent upon the rejection of the King (Mt. 13. 16, 17). Still less was 
the Church-age in his vision (Eph. 3. 3-6; Col. 1. 25-27). “My messenger” (v. 1) is 
John the Baptist; the “messenger of the covenant” is Christ in both of His advents, 
but with especial reference to the events which are to follow His return, 


982 


: Py US + : | 2 SS —we = wre 
Ps lg ee 
: 14) MALACHI. [4 2 
ye say, What have we spoken so| B.C. 397. _|spare them, as a man spareth his 
much against thee? , é 2 Tamptation.|OWH Son that serveth him. 
14 Ye have said, It is vain to} mt41,3,7.| 18 Then shall ye return, and dis- 
we ped — bees sees =. it ak seas Se the aie e and the 
re hav e s ordinance, Btn ‘ , 
and that we jaca walked mourn- peer leGod at hiod that pe Lae 
ENS te os ae 
prou sa.1.9; 
happy; yea, they that a wicked- Saree CHAPTER 4. 
ness are set up; yea, they that) F4-19-% 
“tempt God are even delivered. note. Part IV. The day of the Lorp. 
T ; era OR, behold, the day fcometh 
SS. 1.6. ’ , 5 
"- ns are = unoreras “ rye Ptnat shall burn as an oven; 
nen %the at ‘feared th Sele th 
LorpD spake often one to puiotiies: e re ae 5 a6 Sepia) Sey as Se bs 
and the LORD hearkened, and heard (Geni) * |the day that cometh shall burn 
it, and a book of remembrance was] ¢ Day of Jeho- them up, saith the Lorp of hosts, 
| eebatns ee oe oe anor vat vas F that if shell leave them neither roo 
eared the % at thoug -24.29-31.. nor branch. : 
upon his name. : ; Reval The second coming of Christ 
17 And they shall be mine, saith| 21.) ‘ pote SE. 
the Lorp of hosts, in that day when|gSee Gen.1. | 2 But unto you that “fear my 
I make up my jewels; and I will| 16 70fe. name shall the 8Sun of righteous- 


1 Summary of the O.T. revelation of Deity: God is revealed in the O.T. (1) 


through His names, as follows: 


CLASS. | ENGLISH FORM. HEBREW EQUIVALENT. 
God El, Elah, or Elohim (Gen. 1.1, note) 
Primary LORD Jehovah (Gen. 2. 4, note) 
Lord Adon or Adonai (Gen. 15. 2, note) 
a 4 faith Saar oe pe El Shaddai (Gen. 17. 1, note) 
ompound (wi ost High, or 
va El— God) Mhost higitGodl'¥ El Elyon (Gen. 14. 18, note) 
everlasting God El Olam (Gen. 21. 33, note) 
c rear netc i Lorp God Jehovah Elohim (Gen. 2. 4, note) 
Sukie fe ) Lord Gop Adonai Jehovah. (Gen. 15. 2, note) 
Jehovah = LoRD ( [Lorp of hosts Jehovah Sabaoth (1 Sam. 1.3, note) 


; The Trinity is suggested by the three times repeated groups of threes. This 
‘4s not an arbitrary arrangement, but inheres in the O.T. itself. _ $ : 
This revelation of God by His names is invariably made in connection with 


some particular need of His people, and th 


names do not answer as showing that man n | 
d fuller revelations of the divine fulness. 


failure and sin but evoke new an 


’s tru 


(2) The O.T. Scriptures reveal the existen : ‘ 
of the universe and of man, the Source of all life and of all intelligence, who is to 


be worshipped and served by men and angels. 


jn some sense not fully revealed in 


by the plural name, Elohim, by the use o 
of Deity as evidenced in Gen. 1. 26; 3. 22; Psa. 110. 1; and Isa. 6. 8. 
rality is really a Trinity is intimated in t 
threefold ascription of the Seraphim in Isa. 6. 3. 


the O:t.; 
if 


js that of Father and Son is directly asserted in 


Spirit is distinctly recognized in His personality, 
divine attributes (e.g. Gen. 1. 2; Num. 11. 25; 24. 2; Jud. 3. 
14. 6, 19; 15. 14; 2 Sam. 23. 2; Job 26. 13; 33. 4; Psa, 106. 3 
(3) The future incarna 


63. 10. See Mal. 2. 15, note). 


theophanies, or appearances of God in human form (e. 
24-30), and distinctly predicted in the promises connec 
Gen. 3. 15) and with the Davidic Covenant (e.g. Isa. 7. 13, 145 


983 


is a uni 5 1 N 
the plural pronoun in the interrelation 


he three primary names of Deity, 


ere can be no need of man to which these 


e resource is in God. Even human 
ce of a Supreme Being, the Creator 


This Supreme Being is One, but, 
ty in plurality. This is shown 


That this plu- 
and in the 
That the interrelation of Deity 
Psa. 2. 7 (with Heb. 1. 5); and the 
and to Him are ascribed all the 
10; 6, 642 11er29 lo. os 
3: 139. 7; Isa. 40. 7; 59. 195 
tion is intimated in the 
g. Gen. 18. 1, 13, 17-22; 32. 
ted with redemption (e.g. 
9. 6, 7; Jer. 23. 5, 6)» 


4 3] MALACHI. [4 6 


ness arise with healing in his wings; 
and ye shall go forth, and grow up 
as calves of the stall. 

3 And ye shall tread down the 
wicked; for they shall be ashes un- 
der the soles of your feet in the day 
that I shall do this, saith the Lorp 
of hosts. 

4 Remember ye the law of Moses 
my servant, which I commanded 
unto him in Horeb for all Israel, 
with the statutes and judgments. 


B.C. 397. 


Elijah to come again before the 
day of the Lorp. (Cf. Rev.11.3-6.) 


5 Behold, I will send you Elijah 
the prophet before the coming of 
the great and dreadful day of the 
LorbD: 

6 And he “shall turn the heart of 
the fathers to the children, and the 
heart of the children to their 
fathers, lest I come and smite the 
earth with a curse. 


a Lk.1.17. 


The revelation of Deity in the N.T. so illuminates that of the O.T. that the latter 
is seen to be, from Genesis to Malachi, the foreshadowing of the coming incar- 
nation of God in Jesus the Christ. In promise, covenant, type, and prophecy, 
the O.T. points forward to Him. (4) The revelation of God to man is one of 
authority and of redemption. He requires righteousness from man, but saves 
the unrighteous through sacrifice; and in His redemptive dealings with man all 
the divine persons and attributes are brought into manifestation. ‘The O.T.. re- 
veals the justice of God equally with His mercy, but never in opposition to His 
mercy. The flood, e.g., was an unspeakable mercy to unborn generations. From 
Genesis to Malachi He is revealed as the seeking God who has no pleasure in the 
death of the wicked, and who heaps up before the sinner every possible motive 
to persuade to faith and obedience. (5) In the experience of the O:T. men of 
faith their God inspires reverence but never slavish fear; and they exhaust the 
resources of language to express their love and adoration in view of His loving- 
kindness and tender mercy. ‘This adoring love of His saints is the triumphant 
answer to those who pretend to find the O.T. revelation of God cruel and repel- 
lent. It is in harmony, not contrast, with the N.T. revelation of God in Christ. 
(6) Those passages which attribute to God bodily parts and human emotions 
(e.g. Ex. 33. 11, 20; Deut. 29. 20; 2 Chr. 16. 9; Gen. 6.6, 7; Jer. 15. 6) are metaphorical 
and mean that in the infinite being of God exists that which answers to these things 
—eyes, a hand, feet, etc.; and the jealousy and anger attributed to Him are the 
emotions of perfect Love in view of the havoc of sin. (7) In the O.T. revelation 
there is a true sense in which, wholly apart from sin or infirmity, God is like His 
creature man (Gen. 1. 27), and the supreme and perfect revelation of God, toward 
which the O.T. points, is a revelation in and through a perfect Man. 


FROM MALACHI TO MATTHEW. 


THE close of the Old Testament canon left Israel in two great divisions. The mass 
of the nation were dispersed throughout the Persian Empire, more as colonists 
than captives. A remnant, chiefly of the tribe of Judah, with Zerubbabel, a prince 
of the Davidic family, and the survivors of the priests and Levites, had returned to 
the land under the permissive decrees of Cyrus and his successors (Dan. 5. 31, note; 
9. 25, note), and had established again the temple worship. Upon this remnant 
the interest of the student of Scripture centres; and this interest concerns both their 
political and religious history. 

I. Politically, the fortunes of the Palestinian Jews followed, with one exception 
ow eo ei revolt—the history of the Gentile world-empires foretold by Daniel 

an2%, ‘7:.). 

(1) The Persian rule continued about one hundred years after the close of the 
O.T. canon, and seems to have been mild and tolerant, allowing to the high priest, 
along with his religious functions, a measure of civil power, but under the overlord- 
ship of the governors of Syria. The sources of the history of the Jewish remnant 
during the Persian period were purely legendary when Josephus wrote. During 
this period the rival worship of Samaria (John 4. 19, 20) was established. 

Palestine suffered much from the constant wars between Persia and Egypt, 
lying as it did ‘‘between the anvil and the hammer.”’ 

(2) In 333 B.c. Syria fell under the power of the third of the world-empires, the 
Grzco-Macedonian of Alexander. That conqueror, as Josephus relates, was in- 
duced to treat the Jews with much favour; but, upon the breaking up of his empire, 
Judza again fell between the hammer and the anvil of Syria and Egypt, falling first 
under the power of Syria, but later under Egypt as ruled by the Ptolemaic kings. 
During this period (B.c. 320-198) great numbers of Jews were established in Egypt, 
and the Septuagint translation of the O.T. was made (B.c. 285). 

(3) In B.c. 198 Judea was conquered by Antiochus the Great, and annexed to 
Syria. At this time the division of the land into the five provinces familiar to read- 
ers of the Gospels, Galilee, Samaria, Judzea (often collectively called Judza), Tra- 

~chonitis and Perea, was made. The Jews at first were permitted to live under 
their own laws under the high priest and a council. About B.c. 180 the land be- 
came the dowry of Cleopatra, a Syrian princess married to Ptolemy Philometor, 
king of Egypt, but on the death of Cleopatra was reclaimed by Antiochus Epiphanes 
(the “‘little horn” of Dan. 8. 9, note), after a bloody battle. In 170 B.c., Antiochus, 
after repeated interferences with the temple and priesthood, plundered Jerusalem, 
profaned the temple, and enslaved great numbers of the inhabitants. December 25, 
B.c. 168, Antiochus offered a sow upon the great altar, and erected an altar to 
Jupiter. This is the “desolation” of Dan. 8. 13, type of the final ‘“‘abomination 
of desolation” of Mt. 24. 15. The temple worship was forbidden, and the people 
compelled to eat swine’s flesh. 

(4) The excesses of Antiochus provoked the revolt of the Maccabees, one of the 
most heroic pages of history. Mattathias, the first of the Maccabees, a priest of 
great sanctity and energy of character, began the revolt. He did little more than 
to gather a band of godly and determined Jews pledged to free the nation and re- 
store the ancient worship, and was succeeded by his son Judas, known in history 
as Maccabzus, from the Hebrew word forhammer. He was assisted by four brothers 
of whom Simon is best known. f : 

In B.c. 165 Judas regained possession of Jerusalem, purified and rededicated the 
temple, an event celebrated in the Jewish Feast of the Dedication. The struggle 
with Antiochus and his successor continued. Judas was slain in battle, his brother 
Jonathan succeeding. In him the civil and priestly authority w2re united (B.c. 
143). Under Jonathan, his brother Simon, and his nephew John Hyrcanus, the 
Hasmonean line of priest-rulers was established, under sufferance of other powers. 
They possessed none of the Maccabean virtues. 

(5) A civil war followed, which was terminated by the Roman conquest of Judza 
and Jerusalem by. Pompey (B.c. 63), who left Hyrcanus, the last of the Hasmoneans, 
a nominal sovereignty, Antipater, an Idumean, wielding the actual power. B.C. 47 
Antipater was made procurator of Juda by Julius Cesar, and appointed his son, 


985 


=) 


v r } Z 
Herod, governor of Galilee. After the murder of Czsar disorder ensued in Judza, | 
and Herod fled to Rome. There he was appointed (B.c. 40) king of the Jews, and 
returning, he conciliated the people by his marriage (B.c. 38) with Mariamne, the 
beautiful grand-daughter of Hyrcanus, and appointed her brother, the Maccabean 
Aristobulus III., high priest. Herod was king when jesus Christ was born. — 

II. The religious history of the Jews during the long period from Malachi (B.c. 
397) to Christ followed, as fo outer ceremonial, the high-priestly office, and the temple 
worship, the course of the troublous political history, and is of scant interest. 

Of greater moment are the efforts and means by which the real faith of Israel 
was kept alive and nurtured. . 

(1) The tendency to idolatry seems to have been destroyed by the Jews expe- 
rience and observation of it during the captivity. Deprived of temple and priest, 
and of the possibility of continuing a ceremonial worship, the Jewish people were 
thrown back upon that which was fundamental in their faith, the revelation of God 
as One, the Creator, to be conceived of as having made man in His own image, and 
therefore as having such analogies to the nature and life of man as to be compre- 
hensible by man, while remaining the Eternal Spirit, God. This conception of God, 
enforced by the-mighty ministries of the pre-exilic and exilic prophets, finally pre- 
vailed over all idolatrous conceptions, and this ministry was continued amongst the 
returned remnant by Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. The high ethics of the older 
prophets, their stern rebuke of mere formalism, and their glowing prophecies of the 
ultimate restoration of Israel in national and religious supremacy under Messiah, 
were all repeated by the three prophets of the restoration. 

The problem was to keep alive this exalted ideal in the midst of outward persecu- 
tions and sordid and disgraceful divisions within. 

2) The organic means to this end was the synagogue, an institution which 
formed no part of the biblical order of the national life. Its origin is obscure. Prob- 
ably, during the captivity, the Jews, deprived of the temple and its rites, met on 
the Sabbath day for prayer. This would give opportunity for the reading of the 
Scriptures. Such meetings would require some order of procedure, and some au- 
thority for the restraint of disorder. The synagogue doubtless grew out of the 
necessities of the situation in which the Jews were placed, but it served the purpose 
of maintaining familiarity with the inspired writings, and upon these the spiritual 
life of the true Israel (see Rom. 9. 6, note) was nourished. 

(3) But during this period, also, was created that mass of tradition, comment 
and interpretation, known as Mishna, Gemara (forming the Talmud) Halachoth, 
Midrashim and Kabbala, so superposed upon the Law that obedience was trans- 
ferred from the Law itself to the traditional interpretation. 

_ (4) During this period also rose the two great sects known to the Gospel narra- 
tives as Pharisees and Sadducees. (See Mt. 3.7, notes 2,3.) . The Herodians 
were a party rather than a sect. 

Amongst such a people, governed, under the suzerainty of Rome, by an Idumean 
usurper, rent by bitter and unspiritual religious controversies, and maintaining an 
elaborate religious ritual, appeared Jesus, the Son and Christ of God. 


986 


The Hrofield Reference Bible 


THE NEW TESTAMENT 


AUTHORIZED VERSION 


WITH A NEW SYSTEM OF CONNECTED TOPICAL REFER- 
ENCES TO ALL THE GREATER THEMES OF SCRIPTURE, 
WITH ANNOTATIONS, REVISED MARGINAL RENDERINGS, 
SUMMARIES, DEFINITIONS, CHRONOLOGY, AND INDEX 


TO WHICH ARE ADDED 


HELPS AT HARD PLACES, EXPLANATIONS OF SEEMING DISCREPANCIES, 
y AND A NEW SYSTEM OF PARAGRAPHS 


EDITED BY 


REV. C. I. SCOFIELD, D.D. 


CONSULTING EDITORS: 


REV. HENRY G. WESTON, D.D., LL.D., REV. PROF. W. G. MOOREHEAD, D.D., 
President Crozer Theological Seminary. Prof. in Xenia (U. TP.) Theological Seminary. 
REV. JAMES M. GRAY, D.D., REV. ELMORE HARRIS, D.D., 
Dean of Moody Bible Institute. President Toronto Bible Institute, 
REV. WILLIAM J. ERDMAN, D._D., ARNO C. GAEBELEIN, 
Author “The Gospel of John,” etc., etc. Author ““Harmony of Prophetic Word,” etc., eta 
REY. ARTHUR T. PIERSON, D.D., REV. WILLIAM L. PETTINGILL, D.D., 
uthor, Editor, Teacher. Author, Editor, Teacher. 


NEW AND IMPROVED EDITION 


NEW YORK 


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON, TORONTO, MELBOURNE AND BOMBAY 


i en  noTaaaY casibodttea mo ‘rior aa pei 
i tee iat Sie se ih ba 


at "shay seven tomengtl 
rm STS JAMO? astaannos 86 aateye wast: ABM wa 


e* MAOTURI IO CEMENT gATARAp SET uA OF ay 
COWIE AR LANES, CHAVAR ZACITATORNA 
xe: sian wie LOOsoRe OzH> OTT ala 


Lou <s-h he's 
sg Powe hae, 


aoa “cn oe 


. ae AG eth bervesa 
 EEDMAana@ onrmaae 40 emoiTAtadenns BuOAT AIAE. Th Bt 
eae + te watery War 4 i es 


vy ib wigs® j “4 Naw © > | aa? OA 5.9 
omy se ; P ce ‘ at i ee 


ae #4 ¥ ‘ ' 


w 


: ova CATH =<. oA eae 
“ie “ans wifey arn 
Aaeeie o, Cd aay HOE, 2 a vat pewter 
Fi ies trad "ie Loci’ 
% Tidreel) Maleene oy 
ere ALE at : . f (ie Oboe? ei. ca ‘i 
wer ron ty Vary MOTH Do Paton r “ 
ibe, CK CARH BAOOM  N FON Yous MELA eee, eer OTRAS x os! 
> aooare ter guia (it Ape ® nh te r4 ‘athease: Poe WIND Instmer® 1g 
ADE OTRAS See LO A ME DAL OSD, 
Sry vit mae GA owsdt Am otienn a ATS Ye We yet 9 ‘a 
russe rns Mee Seay terete ft Sear orw - 
we oko “ee atiotqoast to ented ies” got re? ae a “esol Yo laqaed ect wie 
ALS AOMITIAL 2 MALLIW VAM ALG OLAS .T AUNTRA Nae 
Aetoast .2e1\bO voll wees? cot 0 Ae 
% ' 
ay a 
elles ee : Le 
vi r , 
, iiGS GSVOSLWE Ge wan 
+ 
aaOY Wan ; 


cHAY YTLes viv a@n04x9 i 
LEMOS GBA SHE0O810M OTRO MOGF OF: ; Per" 


THE FOUR GOSPELS. 


THE four Gospels record the eternal_bemg, human ancestry, birth, death, resur- 
tection, and ascension of Jesus the Christ, Son of God, and Son of Man. They 
tecord also a selection from the incidents of His life, and from His words and works. 
Taken together, they set forth, not a biography but a Personality. 

These two facts, that we have in the four Gospels a complete Personality, but 
not a complete biography, indicate the spirit and intent in which we should approach 
them. What is important is that through these narratives we should come to see 
and know Him whom they reveal. It is of relatively small importance that we 
should be able to piece together out of these confessedly incomplete records (John 
21. 25) a connected story of His life. For some adequate reason—perhaps lest we 
should be too much occupied with “Christ after the flesh’”—it did not please God to 
cause to be written a biography of His Son. The twenty-nine formative years are 
passed over in a silence which is broken but once, and that in but twelve brief verses 
of Luke’s Gospel. It may be well to respect the divine reticencies. 

But the four Gospels, though designedly incomplete as a story, are divinely per- 
fect as a revelation. We may not through them know everything that He did, but 
we may know the Doer. In four great characters, each of which completes the 
other three, we have Jesus Christ Himself. The Evangelists never describe Christ 
—they set Him forth. They tell us almost nothing of what they thought about 
Him, they let Him speak and act for Himself. 

This is the essential respect in which these narratives differ from mere biogra- 
phy or portraiture. “The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they 
Be: life,” The student in whom dwells an ungrieved Spirit finds here the living 

st. 
_ The distinctive part which each Evangelist bears in this presentation of the liv- 
ing Christ is briefly noted in separate Introductions, but it may be profitable to 
add certain general suggestions. 

I. The Old Testament is a divinely provided Introduction to the New; and who- 
ever comes to the study of the four Gospels with a mind saturated with the Old 
Testament foreview of the Christ, His person, work, and kingdom, will find them 
open books. 

For the Gospels are woven of Old Testament quotation, allusion, and type. 
The very first verse of the New Testament drives the thoughtful reader back to 
the Old; and the risen Christ sent His disciples to the ancient oracles for an explana- 
tion of His sufferings and glory (Lk. 24. 27, 44, 45). One of His last min- 
istries was the opening of their understandings to understand the Old Testa- 
ment. 

Therefore, in approaching the study of the Gospels the mind should be freed, so 
far as possible, from mere theological concepts and presuppositions. Especially 
is it necessary to exclude the notion—a legacy in Protestant thought from post- 
apostolic and Roman Catholic theology—that the Church is the true Israel, and 
that the Old Testament foreview of the kingdom is fulfilled in the Church. 

Do not, therefore, assume interpretations to be true because familiar. Do not 
assume that “the throne of David” (Lk. 1. 32) is synonymous with “My Father’s 
throne” (Rev. 3. 21), or that “the house of Jacob” (Lk. 1. 33) is the Church com- 
posed both of Jew and Gentile. 

II. The mission of Jesus was, primarily, to the Jews (Mt. 10. 5, 6; 15. 23-25; 
John 1. 11). He was ‘‘made under the law” (Gal. 4. 4), and was “‘a minister of the 
circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers’ 
(Rom. 15. 8), and to fulfil the law that grace might flow out. 

Expect, therefore, a strong legal and Jewish colouring up to the cross (e.g. Mt. 5. 
17-19; 6. 12; cf. Eph. 4. 32; Mt. 10. 5, 6; 15. 22-28; Mk. 1. 44; Mt. 23. 2, etc.). The 
Sermon on the Mount is law, not grace, for it demands as the condition of bless- 
ore: as 3) that perfect character which grace, through divine power, creates 

ye. 225, 23)) 

III. The doctrines of grace are to be sought in the Epistles, not in the Gospels; 
but those doctrines rest back upon the death and resurrection of Christ, and upon 
the great germ-truths to which He gave utterance, and of which the Epistles are 
the unfolding. Furthermore, the only perfect example of perfect grace is the Christ 
of the Gospels. 

989 


ee eee ee ee 
1 ey 


IV. The Gospels do not unfold the doctrine of the Church. The word occurs 
in Matthew only. After His rejection as King and Saviour by the Jews, our Lord, 
announcing a mystery until that moment “hid in God” (Eph. 3. 3-10), said, “I will 
build my church” (Mt. 16. 16, 18). It was, therefore, yet future; but His personal 
ministry had gathered out the believers who were, on the day of Pentecost, by the 
baptism with the Spirit, made the first members of “‘the church which is his body 
(1 Cor. 12. 12, 13; Eph. 1. 23). : Aye : : 

The Gospels present a group of Jewish disciples, associated on earth with a 
Messiah in humiliation; the Epistles a Church which is the body of Christ in glory, 
associated with Him in the heavenlies, co-heirs with Him of the Father, co-rulers 
with Him over the coming kingdom, and, as to the earth, pilgrims and strangers 
(1 Cor, 12. 12, 13; Eph. 1. 3-14, 20-23; 2. 4-6; 1 Pet. 2. 11). : : 

V. The Gospels present Christ in His three offices of Prophet, Priest, and King. 

As Prophet His ministry does not differ in kind from that of the Old Testament 
prophets. It is the dignity of His Person which makes Him the unique Prophet. 
Of old, God spoke through the prophets; now He speaks in the Son (Heb. 1. 1, ane 
The old prophet was a voice from God; the Son is God Himself (Deut. 18. 18, 19 

The prophet in any dispensation is God’s messenger to His people, first to estab- 
lish truth, and, secondly, when they are in declension and apostasy to call them 
back to truth. His message, therefore, is, usually, one of rebuke and appeal. Only 
when these fall on deaf ears does he become a foreteller of things to come. In 
this, too, Christ is at one with the other prophets. His predictive ministry fol- 
lows His rejection as King. . i i? 

The sphere and character of Christ’s Kingly office are defined in the Davidic 
Covenant (2 Sam. 7. s-16, and refs.), as interpreted by the prophets, and confirmed 
by the New Testament. The latter in no way abrogates or modifies either the 
Davidic Covenant or its prophetic interpretation. It adds details which were not 
in the prophet’s vision. The Sermon on the Mount is an elaboration of the idea of 
“righteousness” as the predominant characteristic of the Messianic kingdom (Isa. 11. 
2-5; Jer. 23. 5, 6; 33. 14-16). The Old Testament prophet was perplexed by see- 
ing in one horizon, so to speak, the suffering and the glory of Messiah (1 Pet. 1-10; 
11). The New Testament shows that these are separated by the present church- 
age, and points forward to the Lord’s return as the time when the Davidic Covenant 
of blessing through power will be fulfilled (Lk. 1. 30-33; Acts 2. 29-36; 15. 14-17); 
just as the Abrahamic Covenant of blessing through suffering was fulfilled at His 
first coming (Acts 3. 25; Gal. 3. 6-14). 

Christ is never called King of the Church. “The King” is indeed one of the 
divine titles, and the Church in her worship joins Israel in exalting ‘‘the king, eternal, 
immortal, invisible’ (Psa. 10. 16; 1 Tim. 1.17). But the Church is to reign with 
Him. The Holy Spirit is now calling out, not the subjects, but the co-heirs and 
co-rulers of the kingdom (2 Tim. 2. 11, 12; Rev. 1.6;3. 21:5. 10; Rom. 8. is-18; 1 Cor 6. 
2, 


3), 

Christ’s Priestly office is the complement of His prophetic office. The prophet 
is God’s representative with the people; the priest is the people’s representative 
with God. Because they are sinful he must be a sacrificer: because they are needy 
he must be a compassionate intercessor (Heb. 5. 1, 2: 8. 1-3). So Christ, on the 
cross, entered upon His high-priestly work, offering Himself without spot unto God 
(Heb. 9. Hy as now He compassionates His people in an ever-living intercession 
(Heb, 7. 25 ). Of that intercession John 17. is the pattern, 

. Distinguish, in the Gospels, interpretation from moral application. 
Much in the Gospels which belongs in strictness of interpretation to the Jew or the 
kingdom, is yet such a revelation of the mind of God, and so based on eternal prin- 
ciples, as to have a moral application to the people of God whatever their position 
dispensationally. It is always true that the “pure in heart” are happy because 
they “‘see God,” and that “‘woe”’ is the portion of religious formalists whether under 
law or grace. 

VII. Especial emphasis rests upon that to which all four Gospels bear a united 
testimony. ‘That united testimony is sevenfold: 

1. In all alike is revealed the one unique Personality. The one Jesus is King in 
Matthew, Servant in Mark, Man in Luke, and God in John. But not only so: for 
Matthew’s King is also Servant, Man, and God; and Mark’s Servant is also King, 
and Man, and God; Luke’s Man is also King, and Servant, and God; and John’s 
eternal Son is also King, and Servant, and Man. 

The pen is a different pen; the incidents in which He is seen are sometimes dif- 
ferent incidents; the distinctive character in which He is presented is a different 
character; but He is always the same Christ. That fact alone would mark these 
books as inspired. 

990 


Say o ae eet Ly . I 
‘4 2. All the Evangelists record the ministry of John the Baptist. 

3. All record the feeding of the five thousand. 

4. All record Christ’s offer of Himself as King, according to Micah. 

5. All record the betrayal by Judas; the denial by Peter; the trial, crucifixion, 
and literal resurrection of Christ. And this record is so made as to testify that 
the death of Christ was the supreme business which brought Him into the world; 
that all which precedes that death is but preparation for it; and that from it flow 
all the blessings which God ever has or ever will bestow upon man. 

6. All record the resurrection ministry of Christ; a ministry which reveals Him 
as unchanged by the tremendous event of His passion, but a ministry keyed to a 
new note of universality, and of power. _ 

7. All point forward to His second coming. 


got 


HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


. THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 


to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 
so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference 
and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 


ILLUSTRATION 
(at Mark 1. 1.) 


6 Gospel. vs. 
1,14,15; Mk. 
8.35. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 


Here Gospel is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place; 
Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the Teferences in parenthesis are 
the first and last. 


992 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


11) 


WRITER. 


ST. MATTHEW. 


The writer of the first Gospel, as all agree, was Matthew, called also 


{1 12 


Levi, a Jew of Galilee who had taken service as a tax-gatherer under the Roman 


oppressor. 


He was, therefore, one of the hated and ill-reputed publicans. 


The date of Matthew has been much discussed, but no convincing reason has 
been given for discrediting the traditional daté of A.D. 37. 


Theme. 


The scope and purpose of the book are indicated in the first verse. 


Matthew is the “book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son 


of Abraham” (Mt. 1. 1). 


This connects Him at once with two of the most im- 


nortant of the Old Testament covenants: the Davidic Covenant of kingship, and the 
Abrahamic Covenant of promise (2 Sam. 7. 8-16; Gen. 15. 18). 


Of Jesus Christ in that twofold character, then, Matthew writes. 


Following the 


order indicated in the first verse, he writes first of the King, the Son of David; then 
of the Son of Abraham, obedient unto death, according to the Isaac type (Gen. 22. 


1-18; Heb. 11. 17-19). 


But the prominent character of Christ in Matthew is that of the covenanted King, 
David’s “righteous Branch” (Jer. 23. 5; 33. 15). Matthew records His genealogy; 


His birth in Bethlehem the city of David, according to Micah (5 


. 2); the minis- 


try of His forerunner according to Malachi (3. i); the ministry of the King Him- 
self; His rejection by Israel; and His predictions of His second coming in power 


and great glory. 


Only then (Mt. 26.-28.) does Matthew turn to the earlier covenant, and record 


the sacrificial death of the Son of Abraham. 
This determines the purpose and structure of Matthew. It is peculiarly the 


Gospel for Israel; and, as flowing from the death of Christ, a Gospel for the 


world. 
Matthew falls 


into three principal divisions: 


whole 


I. The manifestation to Israel and rejection of Jesus Christ the Sort of David, 
born King of the Jew8, 1. 1-25. 46- The subdivisions of this part are: (1) The official 
genealogy and birth of the King, 1. 1-25; (2) the infancy and obscurity of the King, 
2, 1-23; (3) the kingdom “at hand,” 3. 1-12. 50 (the order of events of this sub- 
division is indicated in the text); (4) the mysteries of the kingdom, 13. 1-52; (5) the 
ministry of the rejected King, 13. 53-23. 39; (6) the promise of the King to return 


in power and glory, 24. 1-25. 46. 


Il. The sacrifice and resurrection of Jesus Christ, the Son of Abraham, 26 


1-28. 8. 


III, The risen Lord in ministry to His own, 28. 9-20. 
The events recorded in Matthew cover a period of 38 years (Ussher). 


CHAPTER 1. 


S eee book of the generation of 
Jesus Christ, the son of David, 
the son of Abraham, 

2 Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac 
begat Jacob; and Jacob begat #Ju- 
das and his brethren, 

3 And Judas begat 'Phares and 
Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat 
Esrom, and Esrom begat Aram; 

4 And Aram begat Aminadab; 
and Aminadab begat Naasson, and 
‘Naasson begat Salmon; 

5 And Salmon begat “Booz of Ra- 
chab; and Booz begat Obed of 
Rath, and Obed begat Jesse; _ 

6 And Jesse begat David the king; 
and David the king begat Solomon 


a Judah, Gen. 
29.35. 

b Pharez, Gen. 
38.27 


¢ Boaz, 1 Chr. 


¢ Rehoboam, 
1 Ki.11.43. 

f Abijah, 
2 Chr.11.20. 

g Jehosha- 
phat, 1 Chr. 
3.10. 

h Uzziah, 2 Ki. 
15.13. Called 
also Azariah, 


2 Chr.22.6. 
é Ahaz, 2 Ki 
38. 


j Josiah, 1 Ki. 
13.2. 


993 


of her that had been the wife of 
@Urias; 

7 And Solomon begat “Roboam; 
and Roboam begat fAbia, and Abia 
begat Asa; 

8 And Asa begat *Josaphat, and 
Josaphat begat Joram, and Joram 
begat “Ozias; 

9 And Ozias begat Joatham; and 
Joatham begat *Achaz; and Achaz 
begat Ezekias; . 

10 And Ezekias begat Manasses, 
and Manasses begat Amon; and 
Amon begat JJosias; 

And Josias begat Jechonias 
and his brethren, about the time 
ney were cafried away -to Baby- 
ion: 

| 12 And after they were brought to 


1 13] St. MATTHEW. (2% 


Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; 20 But while he thought on these 


and Salathiel begat ¢Zorobabel; 
13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud;|¢ Zerubbabel, 


» and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eli-| 1°'*34%  |saying, Joseph, thou son of David, 


akim begat Azor; b Christ (First|fear not to take unto thee Mary thy 
14 And Azor begat Sadoc; and} Advent). wife: for that which is conceived in 

Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim be- pee her is of the Holy Ghost. 

gat Eliud; Acts 1.9.) 21 And she shall bring forth a son, 
15 And Eliud begat Eleazar; and and thou shalt call his name 


Eleazar begat Matthan; and Mat- ee coer JESUS: for he shall “save his peo- 


than begat Jacob; 20; Mt.3.11- |ple from their Jsins. 
16 And Jacob begat Joseph the| 16. piel. 22 Now all this was done, that 
husband of 1Mary, 20f whom was| 7% 4cts 24) lit micht be fulfilled which was 


born Jesus, who is called 3Christ. |¢Gr. an spoken 8of the Lord by the prophet, 
17 So all the generations from| @néel. saying, Me ‘ 
Abraham to David are fourteen), Rom.1.16, 23 Behold, “a virgin shall be with 
rd ii bela and from Dar aa note. ie ccrmie an bree forth a ah, 
the carrying away into Babylon an ey shall ca is name Em- 
are fourteen senesations: pag aa es manuel widen being interpreted is, 
the carrying away into Babylon od with us. 
unto Christ are fourteen genera- bf ae creas! 24 Then Joseph being raised from 
tions, through the|SiceP did as the ‘angel of the Lord 
prophet. had bidden him, and took unto him 


Conception and birth of Jesus ae a 

(Lk. ‘ Renee a aed s Poh Aa, a} oie ee ea 25 And knew her not till she had 
18 °Now the birth of Jesus Christ HeeeR brought forth her firstborn son: and 

Wart 98 es ee es = is oe he called his name JJESUS. 

seph, before they came together,| j The Gr. 

she was found with child of the| form of the 

“Holy Ghost. erp 
19 Then Joseph her husband, be-| meaning 

ing a just man, and not willing to| Saviour. 

make her a publick example, was}, 14 94-7, 

minded to put her away privily. 


CHAPTER 2. 
Visit of the Magi. 


5 Now when Jesus was “born in 
-% Bethlehem of Judza inthe days 
of 4Herod the king, behold, there 


1 Six Marys are to be distinguished in the N.T.: (1) Mary the mother of Jesus; 
always clearly identified by the context. (2) Mary Magdalene, a woman of Mag- 
dala, “‘out of whom went seven demons” (Lk. 8.2). She is never mentioned apart 
from the identifying word “Magdalene.” (3) The mother of James (called “the 
less,” Mk. 15. 40) and Joses, the apostles. A comparison of John 19, 25, Mt. 27. 56, 
and Mk. 15. 40 establishes the inference that this Mary, the mother of James the 
less, and of Joses, was the wife of Alpheus (called also Cleophas, John 19. 25), and 
a sister of Mary the mother of Jesus. Except in Mt. 27. 61, and 28. 1, where she 
is called “the other Mary” (i.e. “other” than her sister, Mary the Virgin); and 
John 19. 25, where she is called “of Cleophas,” she is mentioned only in connec- 
tion with one or both of her sons. (4) Mary of Bethany, sister of Martha and 
Lazarus, mentioned by name only in Lk. 10. 39, 42; John 11, 1, 2, 19, 20, 28, 31, 32, 45; 
12. 3, but referred to in Mt. 26. 7; Mk. 14. 3-9. (5) The mother of John Mark 
and sister of Barnabas (Acts 12, 12). (6) A helper of Paul in Rome (Rom. 16. 6). 
k 2 The changed expression here is important. It is no longer, “who begat,” but 

Mary, of whom was born J esus.” Jesus was not “begotten” of natural generation. 

3 Christ (Christos =anointed), the Greek form of the Hebrew “Messiah” 
(Dan, 9. 25, 26), is the official name of our Lord, as Jesus is His human name (Lk. 
Lesh ae 21). The name, or title, “Christ,” connects Him with the entire O.T. 
foreview (Zech. 12. 8, note) of a coming Prophet (Deut. 18, 15-19), Priest (Psa. 
110. 4), and King (2 Sam. 7. 7-10). As these were typically anointed with oil (1 Ki. 
19. 16; Ex. 29. 7; 1 Sam. 16 13), so Jesus was anointed with the Holy Spirit (Mt. 
isi 16; Mk. 1. 10, 11; Lk. 3. 21, 22; John 1. 32, 33), thus becoming Officially ‘the Christ,? 

Called Herod the Great, son of Antipater, an Idumean (see Gen. 36. 1, note) 
and _ Cypros, an Arabian woman, Antipater was appointed Procurator of Judea 
by Julius Cesar, B.c.47. At the age of fifteen Herod was appointed to the govern- 
ment of Galilee. B.C. 40 the Roman senate made him king of Judea. An able 
strong, and cruel man, he increased greatly the splendour of Jerusalem erecting the 
temple which was the centre of Jewish worship in the time of our Lord. 

994 


things, behold, ¢the angel of the\_ 
Lord appeared unto him in a dream,\ vo 


; 


>* 


it 


a 


22] Sr. MATTHEW. [2 17 


came wise men from the east to 
Jerusalem, 

2 Saying, Where is he that is born 
1eKing of the Jews? for we have 
seen his star in the east, and are 
come to worship him. 

3 When Herod the king had heard 
these things, he was troubled, and 
all Jerusalem with him. < 

4 And when he had gathered all]? Nags", 
the chief priests and “scribes of the! 2.6. “(Lk.1. 
people together, he demanded of| 31-33; 1 Cor. 
them where oChrist should be born.| 15-24) 

5 And they said unto him, In|pLit. the 
Bethlehem of Juda: ‘for thus it is} Christ 
written by the prophet, ¢ Christ (First 

6 And thou Bethlehem, in the] Advent). Mt.;and be thou there until I bring thee 
land of Juda, art not the least) 4.15,16. word: for Herod will seek the young 
amos > oro for ae eee sigid ito glestany, him. 2 
of thee shall come a Governor, that 1 en he arose, he took the 
shall ¢rule my people Israel. d Kingdom |young child and his mother by 
_7 Then Herod, when he had priv- wer night, and departed into Egypt: 
ily called the wise men, enquired) (1131-33; | 15 And was there until the death 
of them diligently what time the] 1 Cor.15.28.) jof Herod: that it might be fulfilled 
Se eda them to Bethle x pac a Hip cule cartier pe 
hem, and said, Go and cord pac f Lit.an angel.|have I called my son. 
gently for the young child; an : : 
when ye have found him, bring me 5 pee oe Herod ‘ PGA bas of the 
word again, that I may come and] through the . 


child with Mary his mother, and 
fell down, and worshipped him: and 
when they had opened their treas- 
ures, they presented unto him gifts; © 
gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. 

12 And being warned of God in a 
dream that they should not return 
to Herod, they departed into their 
own country another way. 


The flight into Egypt. 


13. And when they were departed, } , 
behold, fthe angel of the Lord ap-."” 
peareth to Joseph in a dream, say- 
ing, Arise, and take the young chiid 
and his mother, and flee into Egypt, 


worship him also. prophet. 16 Then Herod, when he saw that 
9 When they had heard the king,| », #403.11.1. he was mocked of the wise men, was 
they departed; and, lo, the star, exceeding wroth, and sent forth, 
which they saw in the east, went and slew all the children that were 
before them, till it came and stood in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts 
over where the young child was. thereof, from two years old and 
10 When they saw the star, they under, according to the time which 
rejoiced with exceeding great joy. he had diligently enquired of the 
11 And when they were come in- wise men. 
to the house, they saw the young 17 Then was fulfilled that which 


1 “The King” is one of the divine titles (Psa. 10. 16), and so used in the worship 
of the Church (1 Tim 1. 17), but Christ is never called ‘““King of the Church.” He 
is “King of the Jews” (Mt. 2. 2) and Lord and “Head of the Church” (Eph. 1. 22, 
93). See “Church” (Mt. 16. 18; Heb. 12. #3) A 1's ; ’ 

2Gr. grammateis, “writer.” Heb. sopherim, “to write,” “set in order,” 
‘count.’ The scribes were so called because it was their office to make copies of the 
Scriptures; to classify and teach the precepts of the oral law (see “Pharisees,” Mt. 
3. 7, note), and to keep careful count of every letter in the O.T. writings. Such an 
office was necessary in a religion of law and precept, and was an O.T. function 
(2 Sam, 8.17; 20. 25; 1 Ki.4. 3; Jer. 8.8; 36.10,12,26). To this legitimate work the 
scribes added a record of rabbinical decisions on questions of ritual (Halachoth); 
the new code resulting from those decisions (Mishna); the Hebrew sacred legends 
(Gemara, forming with the Mishna the Talmud); commentaries on the O.T. (Mid- 
tashim); reasonings upon these ( Hagada); and, finally, mystical interpretations 
which found in Scripture meanings other than the grammatical, lexical, and obvious 
ones (the Kabbala); not unlike the allegorical method of Origen, or the modern 
Protestant “spiritualizing” interpretation. In our Lord’s time, to receive this 
mass of writing superposed upon the Scriptures was fo be orthodox; to return to the 
Scriptures themselves was heterodoxy—our Lord’s most serious offence. 

3 The words quoted are in Hos. 11. 1, and the passage illustrates the truth that 
prophetic utterances often have a latent and deeper meaning than at first appears. 
Israel, nationally, was a ‘‘son” (Ex. 4. 22), but Christ was the greater “Son.” see 
Rom. 9. 4, 5; Isa. 41. 8, with Isa. 42. 1-4; 52. 13, 14, where the servant-nation and the 
Servant-Son are both in view. 0 


2 18] St. MATTHEW. [37 


a ei i ee 

was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, B.C. 3. be fulfilled which was spoken by 

saying, |——....—|the prophets, ¢He shall be called a 
18 *In Rama was there a voice es Nazarene. 

heard, lamentation, and weeping,|’ jor.” 

and great mourning, Rachel weep-|c Son of Herod CHAPTER 3. 


ing for her children, and would not pe Great(Mt.) ee 
-1) and Mal-) Ministry of John the Baptist 
be comforted, because they are not.| thace, a Sa. (Mie 1 Be? Be PG oot 8. 


maritan 
The return from Egypt to Naza-| woman, | De- 6-8, 19-28). 
reth. (Cf. Lk. 2. 39, 40.) a Pe obably re- | IN ‘those days came John the Bap- 
19 But when Herod was dead, be- wens © tist, preaching in the wilderness 
ae «ly, 


~ hold, an angel of the Lord appéar-| Where Christ |Of Judea, 


eth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,| is spokenofas| 2 And ‘saying, ‘Repent ye: for 
20 Saying, Arise, and take the) (4 7etzer | sthe “kingdom of heaven is ‘at hand. 
young child and his mother, and] {,,°¢)08"| 3 For this is he that was spoken 
go into the land of Israel: for they of. Jesse." pa the prophet Esaias, faving, 
i cts 17. bs 
Gates We, e* lsu Losses Sion] 2, wOIML > \dermesed Pune ion wate 
21 And he arose, and took the]’ vs.2,8,11; Mt.| ‘Lord, make his paths straight. 
young child and his mother, and 4.17. (Mt.3.2;| 4 And the same John had his rai- 
came into the land of Israel. ¢inadions ON. ment of camel’s hair, and a leathern 
22 But when he heard that “Ar-|" 7). "Mt.4.17.| gitdle about his loins; and his meat 
chelaus did reign in Judza in the| (k.1.31-33; | was locusts and wild honey. 
room of his father Herod, he was RESET oe, 5 Then went out to him Jerusa- 
afraid to go thither: notwithstand-| 2; Mt.4.23. '|lem, and ail Judea, and all the re- 


ing, being warned of God in aj (Gen.12.1-3; | gion round about Jordan, 


dream, he turned aside into the]; ¥syi4¢) 6 And were baptized of him in 
parts of Galilee: Isa.40.3. Jordan, confessing their /sins. 

23 And he came and dwelt in ali Sin. Rom.3.| 7 But when he saw many of the 
city called Nazareth: that it might] 23 ote- *Pharisees and 3Sadducees come to 


1 (1) The phrase, kingdom of heaven (lit. of the heavens), is peculiar to Matthew 
and signifies the Messianic earth rule of Jesus Christ, the Son of David. It is called 
the kingdom of the heavens because it is the rule of the heavens over the earth 
(Mt. 6.10). The phrase is derived from Daniel, where it is defined (Dan, 2. 34-36, 
44; 7. 23-27) as the kingdom which ‘‘the God of heaven’’ will set up after the de- 
struction by ‘‘the stone cut out without hands’’ of the Gentile world-system, It is 
the kingdom: covenanted to David’s seed (2 Sam. 7. 7-10, refs.); described in the 
prophets (Zech. 12. 8, note); and confirmed to Jesus the Christ, the Son of Mary, 
through the angel Gabriel (Lk. 1. 32, 33). 

(2) The kingdom of heaven has three aspects in Matthew: (a) “at hand” 
from the beginning of the ministry of John the Baptist (Mt. 3. 2) to the virtual 
rejection of the King, and the announcement of the new brotherhood (Mt. 12. 46- 
50); (b) in seven “mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,” to be fulfilled during the 
present age (Mt. 13. 1-52), to which are to be added the parables of the kingdom 
of heaven which were spoken after those of Mt. 13., and which have to do with the 
sphere of Christian profession during this age; (c) the prophetic aspect—the king- 
dom to be set up after the return of the King in glory (Mt. 24. 29-25. 46; Lk. 19. 
12-19; Acts 15. 14-17). See “Kingdom (N.T.)” (Lk. 1. 33; 1 Cor. 15. 28). Cf. “King- 
dom of God,’ Mt. 6. 33, note. 

2 So called from a Heb. word meaning “separate.’”’ After the ministry of the post- 
exilic prophets ceased, godly men called ‘“‘Chasidim” (saints) arose who sought to 
keep alive reverence for the law amongst the descendants of the Jews who returned 
from the Babylonian captivity. This movement degenerated into the Pharisaism 
of our Lord’s day—a letter-strictness which overlaid the law with traditional inter- 
pretations held to have been communicated by Jehovah to Moses as oral explana- 
tions of equal authority with the law itself (cf. Mt. 15. 2, 3; Mk. 7. 8-13: Gal. 1. 14), 

The Pharisees were strictly a sect. A member was “chaber” (i.e. “knit to- 
gether,” Jud. 20. 11), and took an obligation to remain true to the principles of 
Pharisaism, They were correct, moral, zealous, and self-denying, but self-righteous 
(Lk. 18. 9), and destitute of the sense of sin and need (Lk. 7. 39). They were the 
foremost persecutors of Jesus Christ and the objects of His unsparing denunciation 
(e.g. Mt. 23, 13-29; Lk. 11. 42, 43). 

3 Not strictly a sect, but rather those amongst the Jews who denied the existence 
of angels or other spirits, and all miracles, especially the resurrection, They were 


996 


Sr. 


his baptism, he said unto them, O 
“generation of vipers, who hath 
warned you to flee from the wrath 
to come? 


3 8] 


MATTHEW. 


A.D. 27 


a Lit. progeny. 


6 Repentance. 


[4 4 


15 And Jesus answering said unto 
him, 1Suffer it to be so now: for 
thus it becometh us to fulfil all 
Then he suffered 


2 2,8,11; ‘righteousness. 
Bring forth therefore fruits meet Me 4.17 im. 
or “repentance: £.3.25 16 And 2Jesus, when he was bap- 
5 5 5 A 30. . zi 5 Pp 
9 And think not to say within ool Soiek. tized, went up straightway out of 
yourselves, We have Abraham to reaps the water: and, lo, the heavens 
our father: for I say unfo you, that my ane -18;/were opened unto him, and he saw 


God is able of these stones to raise 
up children unto Abraham‘ 


d would have 


hindered. 


the Spirit of God descending like a 
dove, and lighting upon him: 


10 And now also the axe is laid - Rare 3.7, 17 And lo a voice from heaven, 
unto the root of the trees; therefore! -Tit “rnis is |Saving, /This is my beloved Son, in 
every tree which bringeth not forth|’ my Son— |whom I am well pleased. 
good aes hewn down, and cast Se Pelaved: 
into the fire. Mk9.7:. 

11 I indeed baptize you with] Lk.9.3s. CHAPTER 4. 
water unto repentance: but he that) CfIsa.42.1 
cometh after me is mightier than I,|, Holy Spirit, |The temptation of Jesus (Mk.1. 
whose shoes I am not worthy to] Mt.10.20. 12, 13; Lk. 4. 1-13; cf. Gen. 3. 6). 
bear: he shall baptize you with the yey es 
“Holy Ghost, and with fite: h Temptation.|*/ | HEN was Jesus led up of the 

12 Whose fan is in his hand, and) vs.1,3,7; Mt. &spirit into the wilderness to 
he will throughly purge his-floor,, °.13. eRe be *tempted of the ‘devil. 
and gather his wheat into the gar-| ; ie 4) | 9 And when he had fasted forty 
ner; but he wii burn up the chaff| Gr.diabolos, |days.and forty nights, he was after- 
with unquenchable fire. pres Pare * epee 

> ee ais METOS when the tempter came to 

panceay of: agua (ME. San U5! 96. (Gen 3.1; him, he said, If thou be the Son of 

es pe NG es, : é wet © i Se ea God, command that these stones be 
en cometh Jesus from -|k Inspiration. |made bread. 

lee to Jordan unto John, to be| vs.4,7,10; 4 But he answered and said, It is 

baptized of him. ) : KP ETE written, JMan shall not live by 

14 But John 4forbad him, saying,| Rey2219,.) |bread alone, but by “every word 
I have need to be baptized of thee,|! Jehovah. {that proceedeth out of the mouth of 

‘and comest thou to me? Deut.8.3. ‘God. 


the religious rationalists of the time (Mk. 12. 18-23; Acts 5. 15-17; 23. 8), and strongly 


entrenched in the Sanhedrin and priesthood (Acts 4. 1; 5. 17). 


They are identified 


with no affirmative doctrine, but were mere deniers of the supernatural. _ 
1 Why one who needed no repentance should insist upon receiving a rite which 


signified confession ~(v. 6) and repentance (v. 11) is nowhere directly explained. 
It may be suggested: (1) That Jesus was now to receive His anointing with the 

-Holy Spirit (v. 16) unto His threefold office of Prophet, Priest, and King. In the 
Levitical order (Ex. 29. 4-7) the high priest was first washed, then anointed. While 
Christ’s priestly work did not begin till He ‘‘offered Himself without spot to God’’ 
(Heb. 9. 14), and His full manifestation as the King-Priest after the order of Mel- 
chisedek awaits the kingdom (Gen. 14. 18, note), yet He was then anointed, once 
for all. (2) But John’s baptism was the voice of God to Israel, and the believing 
remnant responded (v. 5). It was an act of righteousness on the part of Him 
who had become, as to the flesh, an Israelite, to take His place with this believing 
remnant. 

2 For the first time the Trinity, foreshadowed in many ways in the O.T., is fully 
manifested. .The Spirit descends upon the Son, and at the same moment the Father’s 
voice is heard from heaven. 

3 The temptation of Christ, the “last Adam” (1 Cor. 15. 45), is best understood 
when contrasted with that of ‘‘the first man Adam.” Adam was tempted in his 
place of lord of creation, a lordship with but one reservation, the knowledge of 
good and evil (Gen. 1. 26; 2. 16, 17). Through the woman he was tempted to add 
that also to his dominion. Falling, he lost all. But Christ had taken the place of 
a lowly Servant, acting only from and in obedience to the Father (Phil. 2. 5-8; 
John 5. 19; 6. 57; 8. 28, 54. Cf. Isa. 41. 8, note), that He might redeem a. fallen 
race and a creation under the curse (Gen. 3. 17-19; Rom. 8. 19-23), Satan’s one 
object in the threefold temptation was to induce Christ to act from Himself, in 
independency of His Father. The first two temptations were a challenge to Christ 

997 


4 5] 


St. MATTHEW. 


eee 


5. Then the devil taketh him up| A.D. 27. 13 And leaving Nazareth, he came 
into the /¢holy city, and setteth him and dwelt in Capernaum, which is 
on a pinnacle of the temple, anctif upon the sea coast, in the borders 

Bp c 2 as. ‘y, : 

6 And saith unto him, If thou be} hAoly(¢hings)|of Zabulon and Nephthalim: __ 
the Son of God, cast thyself down: DRS 3 ro 14 That it might be fulfilled which 
for ie pitts Heschel ae Be ee Aa ae ae by Esaias the prophet, 

angels charge e E b.1.4, ; 
eek in their hands they shall bear : 78 ; 15 The land of Zabulon, and the 
thee up, lest at any time thou dash} Psa.91.12, and of garg ew oe Hay of 
thy foot against a stone. ¥ 2. e sea, beyond Jordan, ee 0 

7 Jesus said unto him, It is writ-)¢ qenesek, the /Gentiles; , ' ‘ 
ten again, Thou shalt not tempt the 16 The people which sat in dark 
dLord thy God. e pepor ae ness saw great élight; Kees $a: them 

8 Again, the devil taketh him up} 10.20. ’. |which sat in the region and shadow 
into an exceeding high mountain,|¢ Carist (First|0f death light is sprung up. 
and sheweth him ail the kingdoms} Advent). 17 From that time Jesus began to 
of the 2world, and the glory of pene SR pre Speke say, pu in ee 
them; Acts 1.9.) |/kingdom of heaven “is ?at hand. 

9 And saith unto him, All these] ¢1sa.42.6,7. | The call of Peter and Andrew to 
things will I give thee, if thou wilt]; tsa.9.1,2. . = Fog sett Tit 
fall ow ee a my i Repentance. nario (Mk. 1. 16-20; cf. ae 

i to him, £.9.13. : 
oa enlace for it is ts. raed 18 And Jesus, walking by the sea 
Thou shalt worship the ‘Lord thy j Kind dom \o! Galilee, saw /two brethren, 
God, and him only shalt thou)” at). mt.s.|Simon called Peter, and Andrew 
serve. 2,35, and his brother, casting a net into the 

11 Then the devil leaveth him,| 7°‘ Cea sea: for they were fishers. 


and, behold, ’angels came and min- 


19 And he saith unto them, Fol- 


istered unto him. kMt.3 2, low me, and I will make you fishers 

toc ;| note of men. 

Jesus comes to Capernaum and) jp... and 20 And they straightway left 
Begins > dis) publio Vansste ye john were their nets, and followed him 
(Mk. 1. 14; Lk. 4. 14, 15). aoe ae is , . 

ciples je} 
12 Now when Jesus had heard} 1.35-42). The col gf Shatre John, 
that John was cast into prison, he eee : 


departed into Galilee; 


21 And going on from thence, he 


from the god of this world to prove Himself indeed the Son of God (vs. 3, 6). 


The 


* 
x 


[421 


third was the offer of the usurping prince of this world to divest himself of that 
which rightfully belonged to Christ as Son of man and Son of David, on the con- 
dition that He accept the sceptre on Satan’s world+principles (cf. John 18. 36; Rev. 
13.8, note). Christ defeated Satan by a means open to His humblest follower, the 
intelligent use of the word of God (vs. 4, 7). In his second temptation Satan also 
used Scripture, but a promise available only to one in the path of obedience. The . 
scene gives apness to the vital importance of “rightly dividing the word of truth” 
2 Tim, 2. 15). 

1 In the N.T. one Greek word, hagios, in its various forms, is rendered, “holy,” 
“holiness,” “sanctify,” “sanctified,” “sanctification.” Like the Heb. qodesh, it 
signifies “set apart for God.” The important references follow Mt. 4.5, mars. 

The Greek word kosmos means “order,”’ “arrangement,” and so, with the 
Greeks, “‘beauty”; for order and arrangement in the sense of system are at the 
bottom of the Greek conception of beauty. ; 

When used in the N.T. of humanity, the “world” of men, it is organized 
humanity—humanity in families, tribes, nations—which is meant. The word for 
chaotic, unorganized humanity—the mere mass of men—is thalassa, the “‘sea’”’ of 
men (e.g. Rev. 13.1). For “world” (kosmos) in the bad ethical sense, see John 
7.7, refs. 

3 “At hand” is never a positive affirmation that the person or thing said to be 
“at hand” will immediately appear, but only that no known or predicted event 
must intervene. When Christ appeared to the Jewish people, the next thing, in the 
order of revelation as it then stood, should have been the setting up of the Davidic 
kingdom. In the knowledge of God, not yet disclosed, lay the rejection of the 
kingdom (and King), the long period of the mystery-form of the kingdom, the 
world-wide preaching of the cross, and the out-calling of the Church. But this was’ 
as yet locked up in the secret counsels of God (Mt. 13. 11, 17; Eph. 3. 3-10). 


998 


- 
42 


St. MATTHEW. 


[5 15 


saw other two brethren, James the} A.D.31. 4 Blessed are they that mourn: 


son of Zebedee, and John his 


for they shall be comforted. 


brother, in a “ship with Zebedee|? 2°2* 5 Blessed are the meek: for the 
their father, mending their nets;|° Goss! shall inherit the earth. — r “4 
Potties, miner eal Sone |e ie 
’ ; y e -14.6. ger an Ss er righteousness: 
ship and their father, and followed Met for they shall be flied = 
oe AGE Fenlis Srontiawen? ait Cus ae ; t Blessed are the merciful: for 
-|" 33; Lik.4-40. ey shall obtain mercy. 


ilee, teaching in their synagogues, 
and preaching the “gospel of the 


e Gr. daimoni- 
zomal, de- 


8 Blessed are the pure in heart: 
for they shall see God. 


‘kingdom, and healing all manner eae 9 Blessed are the peacemakers: 
of sickness and all manner of dis-| Mt&2? for they shall be called the children 
ease among the people. fMtsA: of God. 

24 And his fame went throughout)” mx.3.7'8; 10 Blessed are they which are 
all Syria: and they “brought unto] Mt.8.1,18. [persecuted for righteousness’ sake: 


him all sick people that were: taken 
with divers diseases and torments, 
and those which were &possessed 
with devils, and those which were 
lunatick, and those that had the 
palsy; and he healed them. 


g C£Mt.17. 
1; 8.1. 


h The beatific 
character, 
unattainable 
by effort, is 
wrought in 
the believer 


for their’s is the *kingdom of 
heaven. 

11 Blessed are ye, when men 
shall revile you, and persecute 
you, and shall say all manner of 


evil against you falsely, for my 


25 And there followed him great! by the Spirit |Sake. y 
IRATE of a8 ad eee Suerte ae Rejoice, ene be exceeding glad: 
an rom Decapolis, and from! **)- or great 1s your ‘reward in heaven: 
Jerusalem, and from Judza, and 3 Peete 82. for so persecuted they the prophets 
from beyond Jordan. jIsa.55.1. which were before you. 
vac ope ye! ari oases Sten facies oF Ene Peteren: eee 
The sermon on the mount. (Cf. |* Mt3.2, BLS Oa, tig ASS 
Tie 6. 20-49.) ( pee i ae rere ae diay ae earth: 
4 ewards. ut if the salt have lost his savour, 
The bea ieee. (Cf. LS. 6. 20-23.) REAR EER wherewith shall it be salted? it is 
ACP seeing the multitudes, he} 1 Cor.3.14.) |thenceforth good for nothing, but to 
swent up into a mountain:/™ eee ad be cast out, and to be trodden undet 
“and when he was set, his disciples) y¢"ya¢.794. |foot of men, 
came unto him: : 27. (Mts. | 14 Ye are the light of the "world. 
2 2And he opened his mouth, and pa) aa i we that is set on an hill cannot 
taught them, “saying, Bee e hid. 
3 ‘Blessed are the poor in spirit:|” ery = | 15 Neither do men light a candle, 
for their’s is the kingdom of heaven.} mankind. land put it under a bushel, but on a 


1 Two persons are called by this name in the N.T.: (1) James the son of Zebedee, 


an apostle (Mt. 10. 2), and the brother of the Apostle John, apart from whom he is 


never mentioned, and with whom, together with Peter, he was admitted to the es- 
pecial intimacy of our Lord (Mt. 17. 1; Mk. 5, 37; 9. 2; 14. 33). He was martyred 
by Herod (Acts 12.2). (2) A son of Alpheus (or Cleopas) and of Mary the sister 
of Mary the mother of Jesus (see Mt. 1. 16, note), and brother of Joses (Mk. 15. 
40). He was, therefore, a cousin of the Lord Jesus. He is called James “the less” 
(Mk. 15. 40; lit. ttle, i.e. of shorter stature than James the son of Zebedee). He 
was an apostle (Mt. 10.3). It has been conjectured that ““Lebbzus, whose surname 
was Thaddeus” (Mt. 10. 3) was identical with the Judas of Lk. 6. 16, who is there 
called “of fi.e. ‘son’ or ‘brother’ as it has been variously translated] James.” A 
Juda is mentioned with a James and Joses and Simon in Mk. 6. 3 as “brother’’ of 
our Lord (see Mt. 13. 55, marg.).. The Gospels mention no other James who could 
be called the brother of the Lord Jesus, but James the less was certainly the son 
of Alpheus and Mary the sister of our Lord’s mother. The conclusion seems, 
therefore, most probable that Mt. 10. 3; 13. 55; Mk. 3.18; 6. 3; Lk. 6. 15; Acts 1. 
13; 12. 17; 15. 13; 21. 18; Gal. 1. 19; 2. 9, 12; and Jas. 1. 1 refer to James the less, son 
of Alphzeus and Mary, and cousin, or, according to Jewish usage, “brother” of the 
Lord Jesus. He was the author of the Epistle of James. 

2 Having announced the kingdom of heaven as “‘at hand,” the King, in Mt. 
5.-7., declares the principles of the kingdom. ‘The Sermon on the Mount has 
a twofold application: (1) Literally to the kingdom. In this sense it gives the 
divine constitution for the righteous government of the earth. Whenever the 

999 


75 id] St. MATTHEW. [5 24 


candlestick; and it giveth light unto 
all that are in the house. 

16 Let your light so shine before 
men, that they may see your good 
works, and glorify your Father 
which is in heaven. 


Relation of Christ to the law. 


17 Think not that I am come to 
destroy the law, or the prophets: 
1] am not come to destroy, but ta 
fulfil. : 

18 For verily I say unto you, Till 
heaven and earth pass, “one jot or 


20 ForI say unto you, That except 
your righteousness shall “exceed 
the Sn i lee pater et the scribes 
--ation, |and Pharisees, ye s in no case 
Mee enter into the kingdom of hea- 
Mt.10.14. an 
Rev22.10, ) |221 Ye have heard that it was said 
: by them of old time, ¢Thou shalt not 


be in danger of the judgment: 
(nto = 22 But I say unto you, That who- 
Gal.3.1-29.) |soever is angry with his brother 
cCfLkig, |Without a cause shall be in danger 
11,12; of the judgment: and whosoever 
one tittle shall in no wise pass from} Rom-.3.20; |shall say to his brother, Raca, shall 
bthe law, till all be fulfilled. ~“ ibe in danger of the council: but 
19 Whosoever therefore  shall|d Righteous- |whosoever shall say, Thou fool, 
break one of these least command- eine shall be in danger of “hell fire. 
ments, and shall teach men so, he] pémio.10, | 23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift 
shall be called the least in the king-| nofe. to the altar, and there rememberest 
dom of heaven: but whosoever shall esate. that thy brother hath ought against 
do and teach them, the same shall] © ***" thee; ' 
be called great in the kingdom of 24 Leave there thy gift before the 
heaven. altar, and go thy way; first be rec- 


kingdom of heaven is established on earth it’ will be according to that constitu- 
tion, which may be regarded as an explanation of the word “righteousness” as 
used by the prophets in describing the kingdom (e. g. Isa. 1]. 4, 5;.32. 1; Dan. 9. 
24). In this sense the Sermon on the Mount is pure law, and transfers the offence 
from the overt act to the motive (Mt. 5. 21, 22, 27, 28). Here lies the deeper reason 
why the Jews rejected the kingdom. They had reduced “righteousness”? to mere 
eeremonialism, and the Old Testament idea of the kingdom to a mere affair of 
outward splendour and power. They were never rebuked for expecting a visible 
and powerful kingdom, but the words of the prophets should have prepared them 
to expect also that only the poor in spirit and the meek could share in it (e.g. Isa. 
11. 4). The seventy-second Psalm, which was universally received by them as 
a description of the kingdom, was full of this. For these reasons the Sermon on 
the Mount in its primary application gives neither the privilege nor the duty of 
the Church. These are found in the Epistles. Under the law of the kingdom, 
for example, no one may hope for forgiveness who has not first forgiven (Mt. 6. 
12, 14, 15). Under grace the Christian is exhorted to forgive because he is already 
forgiven (Eph. 4. 30-32). 

(2) But there is a beautiful moral application to the Christian. It always 
remains true that the poor in spirit, rather than the proud, are blessed, and those 
who mourn because of their sins, and who are meek in the consciousness of them, 
will hunger and thirst after righteousness, and hungering will be filled. The mer. 
ciful are “blessed,” the pure in heart do “see God.” These principles fundamentally 
reappear in the teaching of the Epistles. 

'Christ’s relation to the law of Moses may be thus summarized: (1) He was 
made under the law (Gal. 4. 4); (2) He lived in perfect obedience to the law (John 
Sido; Mt l7as; 1 Pet. 2. 21-23); (3) He was a minister of the law to the Jews, clearing 
it from rabbinical sophistries, enforcing it in all its pitiless severity upon those 
who professed to obey it (e.g. Lk. 10. 25-37), but confirming the promises made 
to the fathers under the Mosaic Covenant (Rom. 15. 8); (4) He fulfilled the types 
of the law by His holy life and sacrificial death (Heb. 9. 11-26); (5) He bore, vicari- 
ously, the curse of the law that the Abrahamic Covenant might avail all who be- 
lieve (Gal. 3. 13, 14); (6) He brought out by His redemption all who believe from 
the place of servants under the law into the place of sons (Gal. 4. 1-7); (7) He 
mediated by His blood the New Covenant of assurance and grace in which all 
believers stand (Rom. 5. 2; Heb. 8. 6-13), so establishing the “law of Christ” (Gal. 
8 Bs por with its precepts of higher exaltation made possible by the indwelling 

pirit. 

2Gr Geenna = Gehenna, the place in the valley of Hinnom where, anciently, 
human sacrifices were offered (2, Chr:"33! 6°" Jer. 7: 31). The word occurs, Mt. 
5. 22, 29, 30; 10. 28, 18. 9, 23. 15, 33; Mk. 9. 43, 45, 47; Lk. 12. 5; Jas. 3.6. In every 


1000 


b Law of kill; and whosoever shall kill shall _ 


a 


5 25} \ 


onciled to thy brother, and then 
come and offer thy gift. 


25 Agree with thine ¢adversary|a.Lk.12.58,59. 
quickly, whiles thou art in the way| Cf-Prov. 
with him; lest at any time the ad-| 35:3: b@™-?- 
versary deliver thee to the judge,|5 CfIsa.40.2 
and the judge deliver thee to the} with Ruth 
officer, and thou be cast into prison.| , seg ee 

26 Verily I say unto thee, Thou] of a cent. 
shalt by no means come out thence, }? Ex-20.14. 
ae oe hast ‘paid the uttermost| ‘ J°2 31313 
farthing. 2-5; Jas.1 

27 Ye have heard that it was said} 14,15; Mt. 
by them of old time, ¢Thou shalt foe Ghai 
not commit adultery: ing thee to 

28 But I say unto you, That who-| offend. 
soever ‘looketh on a woman to lust|* Phin card 
after her hath committed adultery 24'1; Jer.3.1. 
with her already in his heart. hMt.19.3-9; 

29 And if thy right eye offend) M03)? 
thee, pluck it out, and cast ft from} 1 Cor.7.’ 
thee: for it is profitable for thee} . 10.11; 8.12. 


that one of thy members should| } jepovan. 
perish, and not that thy _ whole] Deut.23.23. 
body should be cast into hell. & CE.Mt.26.63; 
30 And if thy right hand foffend| 7? €?523% 
thee, cut it off, and cast ft from|! Kingdom 


thee: for it is profitable for thee} (N-T-)- 


perish, and not that thy whole} 15.24.) 
body should be cast into’ hell. m Psa.48.2. 
n Or, the evil 
Jesus and divorce. (Cf. Mt. 19. 3- spoon 
11; Mk. 10. 2-12; 1 Cor. 7. 10-15.) |" Ley.24.20: 
31 It hath been said, Whosoever|, Beutas. 
_ shall put away his wife, let him give] 7-11, Lk.6. 
her a writing of divorcement: ree $43 
32 But I say unto you, That who-|, pev.19.18: 
soever shall put away his wife, sav-; Deut.23.3-6. 
ing fot the cause of fornication,|” 9ray for 
fcauseth her to commit adultery:|” psa.65.9-13; 
and whosoever shall marry her) Lk.12.16,17. 
that is divorced committeth adul-|‘ tax: 
atherers. 
_tery. . .. | Or, right- 
33 Again, ye have heard that it| eous acts. 
hath been said by them of old time,| The word 
*Thou shalt not forswear thyself,| tetigious ex- 
but shalt perform unto the /Lord) ternalities. 
thine oaths: Papeete f 
< seen O! 


34 ButI say unto you, ‘Swear not 
at all; neither by heaven; for it is 
God’s throne: Ry, 

35 Nor by the earth; for it is his 
footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for 
it is the city ‘of the “great King. 

36 Neither shalt thou swear by 


must not be 
the motive. 


1-4; Mt.10. 
41,42. 
12.3; 1 Cor. 
3.14.) 


warning of the consequences of sin, 
worm never dies and of fire never to 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D: 31. 


men, but that 


v Rewards. vs. 


(Dan. 


[61 


thy head, because thou canst not 
make one hair white or black. 

37 But let your communication 
be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for what- 
soever is more than these cometh of 
nevil. 

38 Ye have heard that it hath 

been said, An °eye for an eye, and 
a tooth for a tooth: 
! 39 But I say unto you, That ye 
lresist not evil: but whosoever shall 
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn 
to him the other also. 

40 And if any man will sue thee 
at the law, and take away thy coat, 
let him have thy cloke also. 

41 And whosoever shall compel 
thee to go a mile, go with him 
twain. 

42 Give to him that asketh thee, 
and from him that would borrow of 
thee turn not thou away. 

43 Ye have heard that it hath 
been said, ?Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour, and hate thine enemy 

44 But I say unto you, Love your 
enemies, "bless them that curse you, 


Mt.|do good to chem that hate you, and 


that one of thy members should| $;'33. aie pray for them which despitefully 


use you, and persecute you; 

45 That ye may be the children of 
your Father which is in heaven: for 
he ‘maketh his sun to rise on the 
evil and on the good, and sendeth 
rain on the just and on the un- 
just. 

46 For if ye love them which love 
you, what reward have ye? do not 
even the ‘publicans the same? 

47 And if ye salute your brethren 
only, what do ye more than others? 
do not even the publicans so? 

48 Be ye therefore !perfect, even 
as your Father which is in heaven 
is perfect. 


CHAPTER 6, 


Sermon on the mount, contin- 
ued: mere externalism in re- 
ligion condemned. 


oe heed that ye do not your 
“alms before men, to be seen of 
them: otherwise ye have no "re- 
ward of your Father which is in 
heaven. 


instance except the last the word comes from the lips of Jesus Christ in most solemn 
i He describes it as the place where “their’ 
be quenched, The expression is identical 


in meaning with “lake of fire” (Rev. 19. 20; 20. 10, 14, 15). See “Death, the second” 


(John 8. 24; Rev. 21. 8); also Lk. 16. 23, note. 


1 The word implies full development, growth into Y sinle 
In this passage the Father’s kindness, not His sin- 


perfection. See Eph, 4. 12, 13. 
lessness, is the point in question. Cf. Lk. 6. 35, 


i001 


rs 


maturity of godliness, not sinless 


36, 


6 2] 


2 Therefore when thou doest 
thine alms, do not sound a trum- 
pet before thee, as the hypocrites do 
in the synagogues and in the streets, 
that they may have glory of men. 
Verily I say unto you, They have 
their “reward. 

3 But when thou doest alms, let 
not thy “left hand know what thy 
right hand doeth: 

4 That thine alms may be in se- 
cret: and thy ‘Father which seeth 
in secret himself shall reward thee 
openly. 

5 And when thou prayest, thou 
shalt not be as the hypocrites are: 
for they love to pray standing in 
the synagogues and in the corners 
of the streets, that they may be 
seen of men. Verily I say unto 
you, They have their “reward. 

6 But thou, when thou ¢prayest, 
enter into thy closet, and when 


thou hast shut thy door, pray to} 


thy Father which is in secret; and 
thy Father which seeth in secret 
shall reward thee openly. 

7 But when ye pray, use not /vain 
repetitions, as the Sheathen do: for 
they think that they shall be heard 
for their much speaking. 


The new revelation concerning 
prayer. (Sce Lk. 11. 1-13, note.) 


8 Be not ye therefore like unto 
them: for your Father *knoweth 
what things ye have need of, before 
ye ask him. . 

9 After this ‘manner therefore 
Jpray ye: ‘Our Father which art in 
heaven, Hallowed be thy /name. 

10 Thy *”kingdom “come. Thy 
will be done in earth, as it is in 
heaven. 

11 Giveus this day our daily bread. 

12 And forgive us our ?debts, as 
lwe forgive our debtors. 

13 And lead us not into %tempta- 
tion, but deliver us from evil: For 
thine is the kingdom, and the power, 
and the glory, for ever. Amen. 

14 For if ye forgive men their 


trespasses, your heavenly Father]; 


will also forgive you: 

15 But if ye forgive not men their 
trespasses, neither ‘will your Fa- 
ther forgive your trespasses. 


Externalism again rebuked. 


16 Moreover when ye ‘fast, be 
not, as the hypocrites, of a sad 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D. 31, 


@i.e. the re- 
ward they 
have sought. 

b Mt.8.4. 

c¢Lk.14.12- 

14; Phil.4. 
17-19; 2 Tim. 
1.16-18. 

di.e. the 
praise of 
men. 

e Mt.23.5-7, 
14; Mk.12. 
38-40; Lk. 
18.10-12; 20. 
46,47. 

fCf.i Ki.1g. 
26-39; Mt. 
26.39-44; 

2 Cor.12.8,9. 
gi.e. Gentiles 


m Kingdom 
(N.T.). 
Mt.11.27-30. 
(LE.1.31-333 
1 Cor.15.24.) 

n Mt.3.2, 
note. 

o Forgiveness. 
vs.12,14,15; 
Mt.9.2,5,6. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 

~p Sin. Rom, 
3.23, note. 

q Temptation. 
Mt.16.1. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 

r Cf.Mt.18. 
21-35; Jas. 
2.13. 


s Cf.Isa.58. 
3-7; 


16. Cf.Prov. 
14.10; 2 Cor. 
6.10. 

u Proy.23.4, 
1 Tim.6. 


19; 4.6,7. 
y About 18 in. 


[6 28 


countenance: for they disfigure 
their faces, that they may appear 
unto men to fast. Verily I say 
unto you, They have their ¢reward, 

17 But thou, when thou fastest, 
fanoint thine head, and wash thy 
face; 

18 That thou appear not unto 
men to fast, but unto thy Father 
which is in secret: and thy Father, 
which seeth in secret, shall reward 
thee openly. 


The kingdom Iaw of riches. 


i9 Lay not up for yourselves 
“treasures upon earth, where 
moth and rust doth corrupt, and 
where thieves break through and 
steal: 

20 But lay up for yourselves trea- 
sures in heaven, where neither moth 
nor rust doth corrupt, and where 
ee do not break through nor 
steal: 


; 21 For where your treasure is, 
);|there will your heart be also. 


22 The *light of the body is the 
eye: if therefore thine eye be single, 
thy whole body shall be full of 


‘light. 

23 But if thine eye be evil, thy 
whole body shall be full of dark- 
ness. If therefore the light that is 
in thee be darkness, how great is 
that darkness! 

24 No man can serve “two mas- 
ters: for either he will hate the one, 
and love the other; or else he will 
hold to the one, and despise the 
other. Ye cannot serve God and 
mammon. 


The cure of anxiety: trust in the 
Father’s care. 


25 Therefore I say unto you, 
*Take no thought for your life, 
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall 
drink; nor yet for your body, what 
ye shall puton. Is not the life more 
than meat, and the body than 
raiment? 

26 Behold the fowls of the air: 
for they sow not, neither do they 
reap, nor gather into barns: yet 
your heavenly Father feedeth them. 
Are ye not much better than they? 

27 Which of you by taking 
thought can add one Ycubit unto 
his stature? 

28 And why take ye thought for 
raiment? Consider the lilies of the 


! This is legal ground. Cf. Eph. 4. 32, which is grace. 


Under law forgiveness 


is conditioned upon a like spirit in us; under grace we are forgiven for Christ’s sake, 


and exhorted to forgive because we have been forgiven. 


1002 


See Mt. 18. 32; 26. 28, note, 


field, how they grow; they toil not, 
neither do they spin: 

29 And yet I say unto you, That 
even Solomon in all his glory was 


a Or, have no 


not arrayed like one of these. baal 
30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the] “°* 
grass of the field, which to day is,|® v-8; Fx3. 
and to morrow is cast into the| 2 Peut3,7s 
oven, shall he not much more] mx.6.33; | 
clothe you, O ye of little faith? Lk.12.29,30: 
31 Therefore “take no thought, eae Ta 
saying, What shall we eat? or, ¢ TS tee 
What shall we drink? or, Where-|d In the sense 
withal shall we be clothed? Se coodemas- 


32 (For after all these things do 


the Gentiles seek:) for ®your hea-| e Lr.6.37; 
venly Father knoweth that ye have} Rom44, 
need of all these things. | 4.3-5:5.12, 

33 But seek ye first the kingdom 
of ‘God, and his righteousness; and|/L-6.41.42; | 
all these things shall be added unto| 7 Co;i012: | 
you. Gal.6.1. 

34 Take therefore no thought for crete ee 
the ‘morrow: for the morrow shall] * qo: yie.5.23, 
take thought for the things of itself.) 24; John 8.7. 
Sufficient unto the day is the evil i SEAR LIEY 
thereof. holy (things) 

CHAPTER 7. 2317.19. 
£.4.53 
Sermononthe mount,continued:; Rev-22-11.) 
judgment of others forbidden. | ; mt.21.22; 
Lk.11.9-13; 


GE ¢not, that ye “be not 
judged. 
2 For with what judgment ye 


18.1; John 
15.7. 


judge, ye shall be judged: and with he 9, 8 
what measure ye mete, it shall be} Jas.i.17. 


measured to you again. 
3 And why beholdest thou the 


St. MATTHEW. 


| AsDest. 


[7 1 


fmote that is in thy brother’s eye, 
but considerest not the beam that 
is in thine own eye? 

4 Or how wilt thou say to thy 
brother, Let me pull out the mote 
out of thine eye; and, behold, a 
beam is in thine own eye? 

5 Thou hypocrite, @first cast out 
the beam out of thine own eye; and 
then shalt thou see clearly to cast 
out the mote out of thy brother’s 
eye. 

6 Give not that which is “holy 
unto the dogs, neither cast ye your 
pearls before swine, lest they tram- 
ple them under their feet, and turn 
again and rend you. 


Encouragements to pray. 
(See Lk. 11. 1-13, note.) 


7 Ask, and it shall be ‘given you; 
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and 
it shall be opened unto you: 

8 For every one that asketh re- 
ceiveth; and he that seeketh find- 
eth; and to him that knocketh it 
shall be opened. 

9 Or what man is there of you, 
whom if his son ask bread, will he 
give him a stone? 

10 Or if he ask a fish, will he give 
him a serpent? 

11 If ye then, being evil, know 
how to give good gifts unto your 
children, how Jmuch more shall 


your Father, which is in heaven 
give good things to them that ask 


|him? 


1 The kingdom of God is to be distinguished from the kingdom of heaven (Mt. 


3. 2, note) in five respects: 


(1) The kingdom of God is universal, including all 


moral intelligences willingly subject to the will of God, whether angels, the Church, 
_or saints of past or future dispensations (Lk. 13. 28, 29; Heb. 12. 22, 23); while the 


kingdom of heaven is Messianic, 


mediatorial, and Davidic, and has for its object the 


establishment of the kingdom of God in the earth (Mt. 3. 2, note; 1 Cor. 15. 24, 


2s). (2) The kingdom of God is entered only 
the kingdom of heaven, during this age, is 


real or false (Mt. 13. 3, note; 25. 1, 11, 12). 


by the new birth (John 3. 3, 5-7); 


the sphere of a profession which may be 
(3) Since the kingdom of heaven ts the 


earthly sphere of the universal kingdom of God, the two have almost all things 


in common, 
kingdom of heaven in Matthew, and o 
is the omissions which are significant 
of the net (Mt. 13. 24-30, 


For this reason many parables and other teachings are spoken of the 
the kingdom of God in Mark and Luke. 
The parables of the wheat and tares, and 
36-43, 47-50), are not spoken of the kingdom of God. In 


It 


that kingdom there are neither tares nor bad fish. But the parable of the leaven 


(Mt. 13. 33) is spoken of the 


_of the kingdorn are leavened with the errors of which 


and the Herodians were the representatives. 
kingdom of God 


kingdom of God also, for, alas, even the true doctrines 


the Pharisees, Sadducees, 


(See Mt. 13. 33, note.) (4) The 


“comes not with outward show” (Lk. 17. 20), but is chiefly that 


which is inward and spiritual (Rom. 14. 17); while the kingdom of heaven is organic, . 


and is to be manifested in glory on the earth. 


8, note; (N.T.), Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15, 24, note; t 
God when Christ, having “‘put all enemies 
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father” 


dom of heaven merges into the kingdom of 
under His feet,’’ “shall have 
(1 Cor. 15. 24-28). Cf, Mt. 3. 2, note. 


1003 


(See “Kingdom (O.T.),” Zech. 12. 
Mt. 17.2, note.) (5) The king- 


shall know them, 


| 1 Pet.2.8.) 


7 12} St. MATTHEW. [7 27 
Summary of O.T. righteousness.| A.D.31. |The danger a ee ‘with< 

= ; out faith. 

12 Therefore all things *whatso- hy 
ever ye would that men should dojo Mt.s.7; 18. | 21 Not every one that saith unto 
to you, do ye even so to them: for} 23-25; L&.6, |me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
this is the law and the prophets. ; ee genedoe ae nedvetl, Pus he eee 

‘ Mk.10.23-27; | doe ® of my Father whic 

The two ways. (Cf. Psa. 1.) Lk,13.24; is in heaven. 
John 10.7,9. 3 F 

: dstrai she Lif “| 22 Many will say to me in that 
4 ree eet hake a ee nad. Meas. day, Lord, Lord, have we not 
the wa “that leadeth to destruc-| $?° ,™57- |prophesied in thy name? and in 
fin, end many there be whichwee| i-0 (ehy mame Rave cast Gy Uidevils? 
satpro sut.13.1-5; in thy name done ‘many won- 
in thereat: d Deut.13.1-5; |and in 

14 Because strait is the gate, and] T“jg5, jderful works? 
narrow is the way, which leadeth}e Mt.3.10; 23 And then will I profess unto 
unto ‘life, and few there be that) 25,4146; |them, I never knew you: ‘depart 
andaicee figois,” \from me, ye that Jwork Ainiquity. 

; : Ezk.33.31; Sotadh teas 
Warning against false teachers:| Lk.6.46; The two foun ° 
2 Tim.3.5. Cf. Lk. 6. 4749. 
the test. Mead ( ) 

15 Beware of “false prophets, which a sa ee os 24 Therefore whosoever heareth 
come to you in sheep’s clothing, but!" 49.17.29, |these sayings of mine, and doeth 
inwardly they are ravening wolves. | i Mt.25.41; them, I will Hiken him unto a wise 
ries Seal tom them by their! Ee, (faa, wich bolt hie oure uponia 

‘ f thi ? jSin. Rom.3.} 25 And the rain descended, and 
Seige peptide Beet bring- i 23, note. the floods came, and the winds blew, 
eth forth good fruit; but a corrupt|] Parables |and beat upon that house; and it 
tree bringeth forth evil fruit. (N.T.). vs. {fell not: for it was founded upon a 

18 A good tree cannot bring forth fet freee rock, 

\ evil rt pelt Sly corrupt tree 13-16; Lic21. R 2 And ane one ae eee 
ring forth good fruit. 29-31. ese sayings of mine, 
19 Every tree that bringeth not)™ [Arist (as /them not, shall be likened unto a 

forth good fruit is hewn down,} 2495:m. |foolish man, which built his house 
and cast into the fire. 21.42-44. upon the sand; — 3 
20 Wherefore by their fruits ye! (Ex-17.6; 27 And the rain descended, and 


the floods came, and the winds blew, 


ee 


! Devils, lit. demons. 


To the reality and personality of demons the N.T. Scrip- 


tures bear abundant testimony. As to their origin nothing is clearly revealed, 
but they are not to be confounded with the angels mentioned in 2 Pet. 2. 4; Jude 
6. Summary: Demons are spirits (Mt. 12. 43, 45); are Satan’s emissaries (Mt. 
12. 26, 27; 25. 41); and so numerous as to make Satan’s power practically ubiquitous 
(Mk. 5. 9). They are capable of entering and controlling both men and beasts 
(Mk. 5. 8, 11-13), and earnestly seek embodiment, without which, apparently, they 
are powerless for evil (Mt. 12. 43, 44; Mk. 5. 10-12). Demon influence and demon 
possession are discriminated in the N.T. Instances of the latter are Mt. 4. 24: 
8. 16, 28, 33; 9. 32; 12. 22; Mk. 1. 32; 5. 15, 16, 18; Lk. 8. 36; Acts 8. 7: 16. 16. They 
are unclean, sullen, violent, and malicious (Mt. 8. 28; 9. 33; 10, 1; 12. 43: Mk. 1, 
23; 5. 3-5; 9. 17, 20; Lk. 6. 18; 9. 39). They know Jesus Christ as Most High 
God, and recognize His supreme authority (Mt. 8. 31, 32; Mk. 1. 24; Acts 19. 
15; Jas. 2. 19). They know their eternal fate to be one of torment (Mt. 
8. 29; Lk. 8. 31). They inflict physical maladies (Mt. 12. 22; 17. 15-18; Lk. 13. 16), 
but mental disease is to be distinguished from the disorder of mind due 
to demoniacal control. Demon influence may manifest itself in religious ascet- 
icism and formalism (1 Tim. 4. 1-3), degenerating into uncleanness (2 Pet. 2. 
10-12), The sign of demon influence in religion is departing from the faith, ie. the 
body of revealed truth in the Scriptures (1 Tim. 4. 1). The demons maintain 
especially a conflict with believers who would be spiritual (Eph. 6. 12; 1 Tim, 4. 
’ 1-3), All unbelievers are open to demon possession (Eph, 2. 2). The believer’s 

resources are, prayer and bodily control (Mt, 17. 21), “the whole armour of God” 
(Eph. 6. 13-18), Exorcism in the name of Jesus Christ (Acts 16. 18) was practised 
for demon possession. One of the awful features of the apocalyptic judgments 
in which this age will end is an irruption of demons out of the abyss (Rev. 


9, 1-11). 
1004 


7 28) 


St. MATTHEW. 


[8 19 


Sa ee ee OE ANT 


and beat upon that house; and it 
fell: and great was the fall of it. 

28 And it came to pass, when|c Mt.13.54; 
Jesus had ended these sayings, the| Mk.1.22; 


A.D. 31. 


people were “astonished at his| “432. 
édoctrine: b Or, teach- 
29 For he taught them as one| 778 
having authority, and not as the See caat 
scribes, Mk.1.40-45; 
CHAPTER 8. Lk.5.12-15, 
Jesus heals a leper (Mk, 1. 403 |¢ oboe 
Lk. 5. 12-14). NT). Mts. 
HEN he was come down from| 3199555! 
the mountain, great multi- La 
tudes followed him. e Miracles 
2 And, behold, there came al S¥T).vs. 
deper and worshipped him, 4say-| 27,28-32; 
ing, ?Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst] Mt-9.2-8. 
make me clean. Kets 28.8.9.) 
3 And Jesus put forth Ais hand ms 
and touched him, saying, I will; be|/ La etae 
thou clean. And immediately his| Rom3.21’ 
‘leprosy was cleansed. with Mt.5.17. 


4 And Jesus saith unto him, See], a Roman 
thou tell no man; but go thy way,| commander 
shew thyself to the priest, and offer| of 100 men. 
the /gift that Moses commanded, |; Cf.Mk.1.27; 
for a testimony unto them. Lk.9.1. 


Jesus heals the centurion’s 2, (Gen.3.20; 
servant (Lk, 7. 1-10). Heb.11.39.) 


5 And when Jesus was entered )/ Mt.3.2, note. 
into Capernaum, there came unto ears 4 
him a centurion, beseeching him, | 8.48.50.” ’ 
_»6 And saying, Lord, my servant} 7y.3. 
lieth at home ‘sick of the palsy,|m1x8.23. 
grievously tormented. yg, |) unto him, 
7 And Jesus saith unto him, I will], Gr. daimo- 
come and heal nizomai, 


i Faith. Mt.9. 


him, i 
8 The centurion answered and| demonized. 
said, Lord, I am not’ worthy that , 


note. 


and to another, Come, and he 
cometh; and to my servant, Do this, 
and he doeth it. 
‘10 When Jesus heard it, he mar- 
velled, and said to them that fol- 
lowed, Verily I say unto you, I have 
not found so great “faith, no, not in 
Israel. 

11 And I say unto you, That 


j/many shall come from the east and 
|west, and shall sit down with Abra- 
jham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the 


kingdom of Jheaven. 

12 But the children of the king- 
dom shall be cast out into outer 
darkness: there shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth. 

13 And Jesus said unto the centu- 
tion, Go thy way; and “as thou hast 
believed, so be it done unto thee. 
And his servant was healed in the 
selfsame hour. 


Jesus heais Peter’s wife’s moth- 
er (Mk. 1. 29-34; Lk. 4. 38-41). 


14 And when Jesus was come into 
Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s 
mother laid, and sick of a fever. 

15 And he !touched her hand, and 
the fever left her: and she arose, 
and “ministered unto “them. 

16 When the even was come, they 
brought unto him many that were 
°possessed with devils: and he cast 
out the spirits with ?Ais word, and 
healed. all that were sick: 

17 That it might be 4@fulfilled 
which was spoken by Esaias the 
prophet, “saying, Himself ‘took our 


infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. 
18 Now when Jesus saw great 
multitudes about him, he gave com- 


thou shouldest come under my roof:|» rit. 2 word, |mandment to depart unto the other 


but speak the word only, and my], mt.1.22; 
servant shall be healed. 1sa.53.4. 
9 For I am a man under “author-|r Isa.53.4. 
ity, having soldiers under me: and I|s 2 Cor.5.21; 
say to this man, Go, and he goeth;]} 1 Pet-2.24. 


side. 


Professed disciples tested 
(Lk. 9. 57-62). 


19 And acertain scribe came, and 


1 The King, having-in Chapters 5.-7. declared the principles of the kingdom, 


makes proof, in Chapters 8., 9., of His power to banish from the earth the conse- 
quences of sin, and to control the elements of nature. 4 ‘ 

2Gr. kurios. The first occurrence of the word as applied to Jesus with His 
evident sanction. In itself the word means “master,” and is so used of mere human 
relationships in, ¢.g., Mt. 6. 24; 15. 27; Mk. 13. 35; Eph. 6. 9. _ Both uses, divine 
and human, are brought together in Col. 4.1. It is the Gr. equivalent of the Heb. 
Adonai (see Gen. 15. 2, note), and is so used by Jesus Christ in Mt. 22. 4345. In 
the N.T. the distinctive uses of kKurios (Lord) are: (1) As the N.T. .translation 
of the Heb. Jehovah (Lorp), e.g. Mt. 1. 20, 22; 2. 15; 3. 3; 4. 7, 10; 11. 25; 21. 9; Mk. 
12. 29, 30; Lk. 1. 68; 2. 9. (2) Jesus Himself so uses Kurios, e.g. Mt. 4. 7, 10; 11. 25; 
Mk. 12.11, etc. (3) But the great use of kurios is as the divine title of Jesus, the 
Christ. In this sense it occurs in the N.T. 663 times, That the intent is to identify 
Jesus Christ with the O.T. Deity is evident from Mt. 3. 3; 12. 8; 21. 9 (Psa, 118. 
26); 22. 43-45; Lk.-1.43; John 8. 58; 14. 8-10; 20. 28; Acts 9. 5; 13. 33 (Psa. 2.). See 
John 20. 28, note. 

1005 


said unto him, Master, I will follow 
thee whithersoever thou goest. 

20 And Jesus “saith unto him, 
The foxes have holes, and the birds 
of the air have nests; but the !Son 
of man hath not where to lay his 
head. 

21 And another of his disciples 
said unto him, Lord, suffer me first 
to go and bury my father. 

22 But Jesus said unto him, Fol- 
low me; and %et the “dead bury 
their dead. 


Jesus stills the waves (Mk, 4. 
36-41; Lk. 8. 22-25). 


23 And when he was entered into 
a ship, his disciples followed him. 

24 And, behold, there arose a 
great tempest in the sea, insomuch 
that the ship was covered with the 
waves: but he was asleep. 


25 And his disciples came to him,| i 


and awoke him, ¢saying, Lord, save 
us: we perish. 

26 And he saith unto them, Why 
are ye fearful, O ye of ‘little faith? 
Then he arose, and rebuked the 
winds and the sea; and there was 
a great calm. 

27 But the men marvelled, say- 
ing, What manner of man is this, 
that even the winds and the sea 
obey him! 


Jesus casts out demons at Ga- 
dara (Mk. 5. 1-21; Lk. 8. 26-40). 


28 And when he was come to the 
other side into the country of the 
fGergesenes, there met him two 
&possessed with devils, coming out 
of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so 
that no man might pass by that 


way. 

29 And, behold, they cried out, 
saying, *What have we to do with 
thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art 
thou come hither to Jtorment us 
before the time? 


1Cf. Ezk. 2. 1, note. 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D. 31. 


a Cf.vs.21,22; 
Mt.10.36; 
John 6.68,69. 

6 Or, jeave the 
dead to bury 
their own 
dead. 

¢ Death (spir- 
itual). Lk.15. 
24, (Gen.2. 
17; Eph.2.5.) 

d Bible 
prayers 


Mk.16.17,18. 
f Gadarenes. 
g Gr. daimo- 


Mt.7.22, 
note. 
h demons. 
#Lk.5.8; Acts 


-7 65 
Lk.15.15,16. 


Heb.11.39.) 
q Forgiveness. 


Rom. 
3.23, note. 

iSee Mt.8. 
20, note. 

u Mt.21.23- 
27; John 3. 
353°5.275 
Acts 2.36; 
4.7-12. 


30 And there was a good way off 
from them an herd of many swine 
feeding. 

31 So the #devils besought him, 
saying, If thou cast us out, suffer — 
us to go away into the “herd of 
swine. 

32 And he said unto them, Go. 
And when they were come out, 
they went into the herd of swine: 
and, behold, the whole herd of 
swine ran violently down a steep 


-|place into the sea, and perished in 


the waters. 

33 And they that kept them fled, 
and went their ways into the city, 
and told every thing, and what was 
befallen to the possessed of the 
devils. 

34 And, behold, the whole city 
came out to meet Jesus: and when 
they saw him, they besought Aim 
that he would “depart out of their 


. |coasts. 


CHAPTER 9, 


Jesus returns to Capernaum: 
heals the palsied man (Mk. 2. 
3-12; Lk. 5. 18-26). 


| AND he entered into a ship, and 


passed over, and came into his 
“own city. 

2 And, behold, they “brought to 
him a man sick of the palsy, lying 
on a bed: and Jesus seeing their 
?faith said unto the sick of the 
palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy 
sins be @forgiven thee. 

3 And, behold, certain of the 
scribes said within themselves, 
This man blasphemeth. 

And Jesus knowing their 
thoughts said, Wherefore think ye 
evil in your hearts? 

For whether is easier, to "say, 
Thy ‘sins be forgiven thee; or to 
say, Arise, and walk? 

6 But that ye may know that the 
‘Son of man hath “power on earth 


Our Lord thus designates Himself about eighty times. 
It is His racial name as the representative Man, 
as Son of David is distinctively His Jewish name, 
Our Lord constantly uses this term as implying 


in the sense of 1 Cor. 15. 45-47; 
and Son of God His divine name. 
that His mission (e.g. Mt. 11. 19; 


Lk. 19. 10), His death and resurrection (e.g. Mt. 12. 40; 20. 18; 26. 2), and His second 
coming (e.g. Mt. 24. 37-44; Lk. 12. 40), transcended in scope and result all merely 
Jewish limitations. When Nathanael confesses Him as “King of Israel,” our Lord’s 


answer is, “Thou shalt see greater 
scending upon the Son of man.” 

His thought leaps forward to the 
to Israel only but to the race (Mt. 
universal judgment is 
cating that in Him is 
(Gen. 1. 26, mote; 3. 15; 12. 3; Psa. 


things . . 


. the angels of God ascending and de- 


When His messengers are cast out by the Jews, 


8. 4; 
1006 


time when the Son of man shall come; not then 
10. 5, 6 with y. 23). 2 
committed to Him (John 5. 22, 
fulfilled the O.T. foreview of blessing 


It is in this name, also, that 
27). It is also a name indi- 
through a coming man 


80. 17; Isa. 7. 14; 9. 6, 7; 32. 2; Zech. 13, 7), 


to forgive “sins, (then saith he to 
the sick of the palsy,) Arise, take 
_ up thy bed, and go unto thine house. 
7 >And he arose, and departed to 
his house. 
8 But when the multitude saw it, 
they ‘marvelled, and glorified God, 
which had given such power unto 
men. 


The call of Matthew (Mk. 2. 14; 
Lk. 5. 27-29). 


9 And as Jesus passed forth from) , 


thence, he saw a man, named Mat- 
thew, sitting at the receipt of cus- 


tom: and he saith unto him, 
¢Follow me. And he arose, and 
followed him. 


Jesus answers the Pharisees 
(Mk. 2. 15-20; Lk. 5. 29-35). 


{10 And it came to pass, as Jesus 
sat at meat in the house, behold, 
many publicans and sinners ‘came 
and sat down with him and his 
disciples. 

i1 And when the fPharisees saw 
it, they said unto his disciples, 
gWhy eateth your Master with 
publicans and ¢sinners? 

12 But when Jesus heard that, 
he said unto them, They that be 
hywhole need not a physician, but 
they that are sick. 

13 But go ye and learn what that 


meaneth, ‘I will have mercy, and) 


not sacrifice: for I am not come to 
call the Jrighteous, but sinners to 
krepentance. 

14 Then came to him the disciples 
of John, saying, Why do we and 
the Pharisees fast oft, but thy dis- 
ciples fast not? 

15 And Jesus said unto them, Can 
the children of the bridechamber 
mourn, as long as the ’bridegroom 
is with them? but the days will 
come, when the bridegroom ‘shall 
be taken from them, and then shall 
they fast. 


Parables of the garment and 
bottles (Mk. 2. 21, 22; Lk. 5. 36-39). 


16 Noman putteth a piece of new 
mcloth unto an old garment, for 

at which is put in to fill it up 
aketh from the garment, and the 
rent is made worse. 

17 Neither do men put new wine 


into old “bottles: else the bottles) 


break, and the wine runneth out, 

and the bottles perish: but they 

ut new wine into new bottles, and 
th are preserved. 


St. MATTHEW. 


b Miracles 
(N.T.). 


23-25,27-30, 

32-35; Mt. 

12.10-13. 

(Mt.8.2,3; 

Acts 28.8,9.) 
c Acts 2.43; 


vs. 


5.11. 
d Mt.4.18-22. 


g Mt.11.19. 

hk L&.18.9-14; 
John 9.39-41. 

i Hos.6.6. 

j Rom.10.10, 
note. 

k Repentance. 
Mt.11.20. 


(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 
n wine-skins, 
o MKE.5.22- 
43; Lk.8. 
41-56. 
Bible 
prayers 
(N.T.). 
Mt.9.27. 
(Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 
qMt.8.3. 
r Faith. Mt.9. 
29. (Gen.3. 
20; Heb.11. 


39.) 
s John 11.11- 
14; 1 Thes.4. 
1 


d 


u Resurrec- 
tion. vs.23- 
25; Mt.10.8. 
(Job 19.25; 
1 Cor.15.52.) 

v Bible 
prayers 
(N.T.). 
Mt.11.25, 


w Mt.15.22; 
Lk.18.38,39. 
x Faith. 
17.20-22. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 
y Gr. dar- 
monizomel, 
demonized. 
Mt.7.22, 
note, 
zdemon, See 
Mt.7.22, 


| note. 


1007 


‘lruler’s house, and 


[9 33 


Jesus heals the woman with an 
issue of blood, and raises the 
daughter of a ruler (Jairus) 
(Mk. 5. 22-43; Lk. 8. 41-56). 


18 While he spake these things 
unto them, behold, there came a 
certain ruler, and worshipped him, 
saying, My daughter is even now 
dead: but come and lay thy hand 
upon her, and she shall live. 

19 And Jesus arose, and followed 
him, and so did his disciples. 

20 And, behold, a woman, which 
was diseased with an issue of blood 
twelve years, came behind Arm, and 
%touched the hem of his garment: 

21 For she said within herself, If 
I may but touch his garment, I 
shall be whole. 

22 But Jesus turned him about, 
and when he saw her, he said, 
Daughter, be of good comfort; thy 
‘faith hath made thee whole. And 
the woman was made whole from 
that hour. 

23 And when Jesus came into the 
saw the min- 
strels and the people making a 
noise, 

24 Hesaid unto them, Give place: 
for the maid is not dead, but Ssleep- 
eth. And they laughed him to scorn. 

25 But when the people were put 
forth, he went in, and ‘took her by 
the hand, and the maid “arose. 

26 And the fame hereof went 
abroad into all that land. 


Two blind men healed: a demon 
cast out. 


27 And when Jesus departed 
thence, two blind men followed him, 
crying, and "saying, “Thou son of 
David, have mercy on us. 

28 And when he was come into 
the house, the blind men came to 
him: and Jesus saith unto them, 
Believe ye that I am able to do 
this? They said. unto him, Yea, 
Lord. 

29 Then touched he their eyes, 
saying, According to your *faith be 


* lit unto you. 


30 And their eyes were opened; 
and Jesus straitly charged them, 


Mt. | saying, See that no man know it. 


31 But they, when they were de- 
parted, spread abroad his fame in 
all that country. 

32 As they went out, behold, they 
brought to him a dumb man “pos- 
sessed with a 2devil. 

33 And when the “devil was cast 
out, the dumb spake: and the mul- 


9 34] 


St. MATTHEW. 


titudes marvelled, saying, It was 
never so seen in Israel. 

34 But the Pharisees said, He 
casteth out @devils through the 
prince of the devils. 


Jesus preaches and heals in Gal- 
ilee (Mk. 6. 5, 6). 


35 And Jesus went about all the 
cities and villages, teaching in their 
synagogues, and preaching the °gos- 
pel of the kingdom, and healing 
every sickness and every disease 
among the people. 

36 But when he saw, the multi- 
tudes, he was moved with compas- 
sion on them, because they fainted, 
and were scattered abroad, as sheep 
having no shepherd. 

37 Then saith he unto his disci- 
ples, The harvest truly is plenteous, 
but the labourers are few; 

38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of 
the harvest, that he will send forth 
labourers into his harvest. 


CHAPTER 10. 
The twelve instructed and sent 
forth (Mk. 6. 7-13; Lk. 9. 1-6), 


Abe when he had called unto 
him his ‘twelve disciples, he 
gave them “power against unclean 


A.D. 31. 


a demons. See 


Mt.7.22, 
note. 

b Gospel. Mt. 
11.5. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev. 


14.6.) 
c Mk.3.13-19; 
Lk.6.12-16. 


19; Lk.6.12- 
16; Acts 1.13. 

f Mt.4.21, 
note. 

g The king- 
dom was 
promised to 
the Jews. 
Gentiles 
could be 
blessed only 
through 
Christ cruci- 
fied and 
Tisen. Cf. 
John 12.20-2 4. 

h Gr. apollu- 

i. John 3. 


15.24,26; 
Acts 13.46. 

i Mt.3.2; 4.17. 

jv.1; 2 Cor. 
12.12. 

k Resurrec- 
tion. Mt.17. 
3. (Job 19.25; 
1 Cor.15.52.) 

1 Lk.10.7; 

1 Cor.9.4-15; 
1 Tim.5.18. 


spirits, to cast them out, and to heal 
all manner of sickness and all man- 
ner of disease. 

2 Now the “names of the twelve 


Japostles are these; The first, 
Simon, who is called Peter, and An- 
drew his brother; James the son of 
Zebedee, and John his brother; 

3) Philip; “and Bartholomew; 
Thomas, and Matthew the publi- 
can; James the son of Alphzus, 
and Lebbzeus, whose surname was 
Thaddzus; 

4 Simon the Canaanite, and Judas 
Iscariot, who also betrayed him. 

5 These twelve Jesus sent forth, 
and commanded them, saying, Go 
not into the way of the @&Gentiles, 
and into any city of the Samaritans 
enter ye not: 

6 But go rather to the “lost sheep 
of the house of Israel. 

7 And as ye go, preach, saying, 
The ‘kingdom of heaven is at hand. 

8 JHeal the sick, cleanse the lep- 


‘Jers, Fraise the dead, cast out ¢dev- 


ils: freely ye have received, freely 
give. 

9 2Provide neither gold, nor sil- 
ver, nor brass in your purses. 

10 Nor scrip for your journey, 
neither two coats, neither shoes, 
nor yet staves: for the workman is 
worthy of his meat. 


1 The word apostle, = “one sent forth,” is used of our Lord (Heb. 3. 1). Else- 
where it is used of the twelve who were called to that office by our Lord during His 


eatth ministry; of Paul, called to the a 


postleship by the risen and ascended Lord, 


and of Barnabas (Acts 14. 14), specially designated by the Holy Spirit (Acts 13. 


2). 


Of Matthias, chosen by lot by the eleven to take the place of Judas Iscariot 


(Acts 1. 16-26), it.is said: “And he was numbered with the eleven” (Acts 1. 26).. See 


Acts 1. 26. 


The “signs of an apostle” were: (1) They were chosen directly by. the Lord 


Himself, or, as in the case of Barnabas, 
14; Lk. 6. 13; Acts 9. 6, 15; 13. 2; 22. 10, 


with sign gifts, miraculous 
(Mt. 10. 1; Acts 5. 15, 16; 


as at hand (Mt. 4. 17, note), and ma 
one of them, Peter, the keys of th 
Christian profession, as in Mt. 13., 
relation to the kingdom will be that 
(6) Consequent upon the rejection o 
tery hid in God (Mt. 16. 18; Eph. 3. 
vested with a new enduement, the b 


new power, that of imparting the 


lation, that of foundation stones of the 


that of preaching the glad tidings 
to Jew and Gentile alike, 
shat he should have been 
40h 
_ * Cf. Mk. 6. 8, 9; Lk. 9. 3. 
mind, The emphasis is upon 
additional staves or shoes, 


such staff as they might have. or with none. 


“provide.” 


by the Holy Spirit (Mt. 10. 1, 2; Mk. 3. 13, 
14, 153) Rom... 4). 
powers which were the divine credentials of their office 
16. 16-18; 28. 8, 9). 
was that of heralds, announcing, 


(2) They were endued 
(3) Their relation to the kingdom 


to Israel only (Mt. 10. 5, 6), the kingdom 


1-12), the 


nifesting kingdom powers (Mt. 10. 7, 8). 
e kingdom of heaven, viewed as the sphere of 
were given (Mt. 16. 19). 
of judges over the twelve tribes (Mt. 19. 28). 
f the kingdom, and the revelation of the mys- 


(4) To 
(5) Their future 


Church, the apostolic office was in- 


aptism with the Holy Spirit (Acts 2. 14); a 


Spirit to Jewish-Christian believers; a new re- 


of salvation 


1008 


new temple (Eph. 2, 20-22); and a new function, 


through a crucified and risen Lord 


(7) The indispensable qualification of an apostle was 
an eye-witness of the resurrection (Acts 1. 22; 1 Cor. 


The central thought here, urgency, must be kept in 
Time is not to be taken to search for 
The disciples were to go in their ordinary sandals, with 
Cf. Paul, Rom. 1, 15. 


10 11] 


St. MATTHEW. 


(10 35 


_—_ CN Or — — eee 


11 And into whatsoever city or 


A.D. 31. 


23 But when they persecute you 


1 The scope of verses 16-23 reaches beyond the personal ministry of the twelve, 


covering in a general sense the sphere of service during the present age. 


Verse 23 


has in view the preaching of the remnant (Isa. 1. 9; Rom. 11. 5, note) in the tribu- 
lation (Psa. 2.5; Rev. 7. 14, note), and immediately preceding the return of Christ 


in glory (Deut. 30. 3; Acts 1. 9-11, 


note). 


over the cities of Israel till the Lord comes. 


2Cf. John 14. 27. 


Peace is spoken of in Scripture in three ways: 


The remnant then will not have gone 


(1) ‘Peace 


with God’? (Rom. 5. 1); this is the work of Christ into which the individual enters 
by faith (Eph. 2. 14-17; Rom. 5.1). (2) “The peace of God” (Phil. 4. 7); inward 
peace, the state of soul of that believer who, having entered into peace with God 
through faith in Christ, has also committed to God through prayer and supplication 
with thanksgiving all his anxieties (Lk. 7. 50; Phil. 4. 6). (3) Peace ‘“‘on earth” 
(Lk. 2. 14; Psa. 72. 7; 85. 10; Isa. 9. 6, 7; 11. 1-12); the universal prevalency of peace 
in the earth under the kingdom. Mt. 10. 34 was Christ’s warning that the truth 
which He was proclaiming would not bring in the kingdom-age of peace, but conflict 
rather. (Cf. John 14. 27.) 
1009 


town ye shall enter, enquire who in . _.. jin this city, flee ye into another: 
it is worthy; and there abide till ye|* ae ma for verily I say unto you, Ye shall 
go thence. (Ex.4.15; not have “gone over the cities of 

12 And when ye come into an Bearers Israel, till the *Son of man be come. 
house, salute it. Re igei, | 24 °The disciple is not above Ais 
a if the house rd stage rat e Mt.11.22. raked nor the servant above his 

péace come upon it: but if it jay of sudg-|lord, 
pot worthy, let your peace return to Fete eas: 25 It is enough for the disciple 
you. Rev.20.11.) |that he be as his master, and the 

14 And whosoever shall not re-|¢ Mt.7.15; servant as his lord. If they have - 
Geive mh, no hear oy ears, Ck 12, |called the *master of the house 
when ye depart out of that house|” 16; coi4.5.. |?Beelzebub, how much more shall 
or city, “shake off the dust of your pre they call them of his household? 
ect ning - nee ? Mk.13.11-13, | 20 Fear them not therefore: for 
Be ciras, Cole teeth Mcatoet! Siieino fact beverenicesce rea Ga Ge 

I _ 21.14-19, not be revealed; an , that s 
socom que Gomes hs oo the day|/ #2 instruc: inot be known. ! 
ie ehddedtatadiyiie coratrrud! Lee. inedeupeepoie meneotns Oet 
! ¢ ‘ fo) as] preachers. — at ‘speak ye in light: and what 
“sheep in the midst of wolves: be bee ye hear in the ear, that preach ye 
ye therefore wise as serpents, and| 28,32. (mt.1./upon the housetops. 
harmless as &doves. ie pened) 28 And fear not them which kill 

ES tees beware of sa for they|, NioReaD, [eae body, but are not able to kill the 
will deliver you up to the councils,|» See Mt.8.20, |Soul: but rather fear ‘him which is 
and they will scourge you in their aoe able to destroy both soul and body 
synagogues; One E in “hell. 

18 And ye shall be brought before nee 8.48 29 Are not two "sparrows sold for 
governors and kings for my sake, ? ae Acts a “farthing? and one of them shall 
~a A aenteeey against them and], aethoes z, {not fall on the ground without your 

e Gentiles. ; title ofa Father. , 
e. But oe sage deliver ou pire au Bub oe ee, pee of your 
e no thoug ow or what ye}, Sie % oo ead are all numbered. 
shall speak: Jfor it shall be given|” tr12.23 31 Fear ye not therefore, ye are of 
elite nee same hour what ye yea more value than many sparrows. 
s speak. CEtsn ; 32 Whosoever therefore shall 

20 For it is not ye that speak, but peat Yconfess me before men, him will I 

the “Spirit of your Father which # M522, confess also before my Father 
4 note. ; ig j 
Pe aca “tiie cotton’ shall deliver ilar side ae Bat Tee shall deny me 

“ w 1-4 penny, 
up the brother to death, and the 1-2 cent. |before men, him will I also 2 

P aA Secleteaiter Ue ae Leena 
father the child: and the children|* ;' Sites before my Father which is in 
shall rise up against their parents,|y Psa.119.46; |heaven. 
and cause them to be put to death.| Lk.12.8; 34 Think not that I am come to 
22 And ye shall be hated of all] Rev-3.8. isend 2peace on earth: I came not to 

Li a Mt.7.23; 
men for my name’s sake: but he| [419.9 send peace, but a sword. 
that ’endureth to the end shall be}e Mic.7.6; 35 For I am come to set a man at 
saved. John 9.18 4yariance against his father, and 


10 36] 


Sr. MATTHEW. 


the daughter against her mother, 
and theedaughter in law against 
her mother in law. 

36 And aman’s foes shall be they 
of his own household. 

37 He that loveth father or 
mother more than me is not worthy 
of me: and he that loveth son or 
daughter more than me is not 
¢worthy of me. ‘ 

38 And he that taketh not his 
cross, and followeth after me, is not 
worthy of me. 

39 He that findeth his life shall 
lose it: and he that loseth his life 
for my sake shall find it. 

40 He that receiveth you re- 
ceiveth me, and he that receiveth 
me receiveth him that sent me. 

41 He that receiveth a prophet in 
the name of a prophet shall receive 
a prophet’s ‘reward; and he that 
receiveth a ¢righteous man in the 
name of a righteous man shall re- 
ceive a righteous man’s reward. 

42 And whosoever shall give to 
drink unto one of these little ones a 
‘cup of cold water only in the name 
of a disciple, verily I say unto you, 
he shall in no wise lose his reward. 


CHAPTER 11. 


ANP it came to pass, when Jesus 

had made an end of command- 

ing his twelve disciples, he departed 
thence to teach and to preach in 
their cities. 

John the Baptist sends disciples 
to question Jesus (Lk. 7, 18-35). 
2 Now when ‘John had heard in 

the prison the works of Christ, he 

sent two of his disciples, 

3 And said unto him, Art thou he 
that should come, or do we look for 
another? 

4 Jesus answered and said unto 
them, Go and shew John again 
those things which ye do hear and 
see: 

5S The %blind “receive their sight, 


a Deut.33.9; 
Lk.14.26; 
2 Cor.5.16. 
b Mt.25.40, 
45; Acts 9.4. 


¢ Rewards, vs. 


41,42; Mt. 
16.27. 
12.3; 1 Cor. 
3.14.) 

d Righteous- 
ness. Rom. 
10.10, note. 

e1 Ki.18.4; 
Lk,21,1-4. 


f Mt.4.12; 14.3. 


g Mt.9.27. 

h Isa.53.4. 

i Gospel. 
Mt.24.14. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 

j In prison, 
the King re- 
jected, 
John’s faith 


servant. Cf, 
John 15.20; 
Isa.42.3. 

k find cause 
of offence. 

1 LK.7.24-30. 

m 1sa.40.3; 
Mal.3.1. 

n Eph.3.4-10; 
Heb.11.40; 
1 Pet.1.10-12. 

o Mt.3.2, 
note, 

b Lk.5.19,20; 
16.16. 


q Inspiration. 
Mt.12,3-5, 
40. (Ex.4. 
15; Rev. 
22.19.) 

y See Mt.17. 
10, note. 

s Mt.17.12; 
Mal.4.5. 

? demon. 
Mt.7.22, 
note, 

u See Mt.8. 
20, note. 
v Lk.5.29-32; 
7.36; John 

2.1-11. 


(Dan. 


See 


[11 » 


ink | Mei REO era 
AD.31.  |and the lame walk, the lepers are 


cleansed, and the deaf hear, the 
dead are raised up, and the poor 
have the ‘gospel preached to them. 

6 And Jblessed is he, whosoever 
shall not “be offended in me. 

7 And as they departed, Jesus be- 
gan to say unto the multitudes con- 
cerning John, What went ye out 
into the wilderness to see? A reed 
shaken with the wind? 

8 But what went ye out for to 
see? A man clothed in soft rai- 
ment? behold, they that wear soft 
clothing are in kings’ houses. 

9.But what went ye out for to 
see? A prophet? yea, I say unto 
you, and more than a prophet. 

10 Wor this is he, of whom it is 
written, *Behold, I send my mes- 
senger before thy face, which shall 
prepare thy way before thee. 

11 Verily I say unto you, Among 
them that are born of women there 
hath not risen a greater than John 
the Baptist: notwithstanding he 
that is “least in the °kingdom of 
heaven is !greater than he. 

12 And from the days cf John the 
Baptist until now the kingdom of 
heaven ?suffereth 2violence, and 
the violent take it by force. 

13 9For all the prophets and the 
law prophesied until John. 

14 And if ye will receive it, ’this 
is ‘Elias, which was for to come. 

15 He that hath ears to hear, let 
him hear. 

16 But whereunto shall I liken 
this generation? It is like unto 
children sitting in the markets, and 
calling unto their fellows, 

17 And saying, We have piped 
unto you, and ye have not danced; 
we have mourned unto you, and ye 
have not lamented. 

18 For John came neither eating 
nor drinking, and they say, He 
hath a ‘devil. 

19 The “Son of man came "eating 
and drinking, and they. say, Behold 


1 Positionally greater, not morally. 


man “born of woman,” 
kingdom did not then come, 


It is not heaven which 
6. 323, note.) 
2 Tt has 


into it. Both things are true. 
this is the primary and greater 
disciples. (Cf. Lk. 16. 16.) 


f been much disputed whether the “violence” 
the kingdom in the persons of John the Baptist and 
the opposition of the scribes and Ph 


1010 


_John Baptist was as great, morally, 
but as to the kingdom he but announced it at hand. The 


g but was rejected, and John was martyred, and the 
presently crucified. The least in the kingdom when it is se 


dom (N.T.),” Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor, 15. 24) will be in the fut 


is in question, but Messiah’s kingdom, 


arisees, only the violently 
The King and His herald suffered violence, and 
meaning, but also, 


as any 


King 
t up in glory (see ‘‘King- 
Iness of power and glory. 
(See Mt. 3. 2, note; 


here is external, as against 
Jesus; or that, considering 
resolute would press 


some were resolutely becoming 


ae 


’ 


11 20] 


St. MATTHEW. 


[121 


a man gluttonous, and a wine- 
bibber, a friend of publicans and 


A.D. 31. 


thou hast ‘hid these things from 
the wise and prudent, and hast re- 


“sinners. But wisdom is justified|* $33 .R°™ |vealed them unto babes. 
of her children. Protaras. 26 Even so, Father: for so it 
Jesus, rejected, predicts | Sgaie"" seamed send in thy Sight 
: 12.43, 
judgment. P (Mt.3.2; me of my Father: and no man know: 
es began ie ee Acts 17.30.) oe et Son, but the eee neither 
cities wherein most of his mighty]. pay of oweth any man the Father, save 
works were done, because they °re- 4 paiement, the Son, and he to whomsoever the 
Pented, not: ia Sprranite Son will reveal Aim. sa? 
21 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe] 40’is: Rey. Th 
unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the] 2011.) e new message of Jesus: not 
mighty works, which were done in| ,,. |, ee cere but personal 
‘pi had been done in Tyre and Si-|? 5E29-23, 52753 yet 
on, they would have repented long c 28 2Come unto /me, all ye that 
ago in sackcloth and ashes. e Bible labour and are heavy laden, and I 
22 But I say unto you, It shall be} 47-75. 'me, |Will give you rest. 
more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon| i5.22. (mt. 29 Take my yoke upon you, and 
at the ‘day of judgment, than for $30)” learn of me; for ‘I am meek and 
you. ae lowly in heart: and ye shall find 
23 And thou, Capernaum, which fPea8.2; rest unto your souls. 
ee area etnies) earaen | stg E Roo Senriand a 
ny Wiis en nave been & Fapedars | cenee 
one in thee, ha een done in .T.). Mt. ER 12. 
Sodom,.it would have remained| 12;3,70%e._ : 
until this day. Leases (Verde sdeclanee Fimecit. Lord of 
24 But I say unto you, That it|, 40138 6 fk a caAotlas poaaaune 
shall be more plesable ie the land] 39. 6.35,37 eae 
of Sodom in the day of judgment,|..,. ; As that time Jesus went on the 
than for thee. ; bigot 3igabbath day through the 
25 At that time Jesus answered ries 3.2. |corn; and his disciples were an 
and ‘said, I thank thee, O Father,|; sappath. |hungred, and began to pluck the 
Lord of heaven and earth, because} (Gen.2.3.) ears of corn, and to eat. 


1 The kingdom of heaven announced as “at hand’? by John the Baptist, by the 


King Himself, and by the twelve, and attested by mighty works, has been morally 
rejected. The places chosen for the testing of the nation, Chorazin, Bethsaida, etc., 
having rejected both John and Jesus, the rejected King now speaks of judgment. 
The final official rejection is later (Mt. 27. 31-37). 

2 The new message of Jesus. The rejected King now turns from the rejecting 
nation and offers, not the kingdom, but rest and service to such in the nation as 
are conscious of need. It is a pivotal point in the ministry of Jesus. 

3 (1) The sabbath (‘cessation’) appears in Scripture as the day of God’s rest in 
the finished work of creation (Gen. 2. 2,3). For 2500 years of human life absolutely 
no mention is made of it. Then the sabbath was revealed (Ex, 16.23; Neh. 9. 13, 14); 
made a part of the law (Ex. 20. 8-11); and invested with the character of a “‘sign’”’ be- 
tween Jehovah and Israel, and a perpetual reminder to Israel of their separation to God 
(Ex. 31. 13-17). It was observed by complete rest (Ex. 35.2,3), and by Jehovah’s ex- 
press order a man was put to death for gathering sticks on the sabbath day (Num. 15. 
32-36). Apart from maintaining the continued burnt-offering (Num. 28.9), and its con- 
nection with the annual feasts (Ex. 12.16; Lev. 23. 3,8; Num. 28. 25), the seventh-day 
sabbath was never made a day of sacrifice, worship, or any manner of religious service. 
It was simply and only a day of complete rest for man and beast, a humane pro- 
vision for man’s needs. In Christ’s words, ‘““The sabbath was made for man, and 
not man for the sabbath” (Mk. 2. 27). (2) Our Lord found the observance of 
the day encrusted with rabbinical evasions (Mt. 12. 2) and restrictions, wholly 
unknown to the law, so that He was Himself held to be a sabbath-breaker by the 
religious authorities of the time. The sabbath will be again observed during the 
kingdom-age (Isa. 66. 23). (3) The Christian first day perpetuates in the dis- 
pensation of grace the principle that one-seventh of the time is especially sacred, 
but in all other respects is in contrast with the sabbath. One is the seventh day, 
the other the first. The sabbath commemorates God’s creation rest, the first day 
Christ’s resurrection. On the seventh day God rested, on the first day Christ 


1011 


; q 
12 2] St. MATTHEW. [12.25 


A.D.31. _|stretched ## forth; and “it was re- 
stored whole, like as the other. 
vite 14 Then the Pharisees went out, 
eg sro See and held a council against him, 
Mt.19-4-6. how they might ‘destroy him. 
x.4.15; 


2 But when the Pharisees saw it, 
they said unto him, Behold, thy dis- 
ciples do that which is not lawful to 
do upon the sabbath day. 

3 But he said unto them, Have ye 


not Sread }what *David did, when Rev.22.19.) |Jesusand the multitudes (at the 


he was an hungred, and they that : : z o 
crete hems b Kingdom sea of Tiberias) (Mk. 3. 7-i2). 


4 How he entered into the house toe 15 But when Jesus knew it, he 
of God, and did eat the “shewbread,| (Lk-1-31-33; | withdrew himself from thence: and 


which was not lawful for him to eeacaner great multitudes followed him, and 
eat, neither for them which were|° 77/27" he healed them all; 


with him, but only for the priests?| 7 num.28.9 16 And charged them that they 
5 Or have ye not read in the law,} 10. *|should not make hirn known: 

how that on the sabbath days the|c2 chr.6.18; | 17 Thatit might be fulfilled which 

dpriests in the temple profane the} Is2.66.1,2. |was spoken by Esaias the prophet, 


sabbath, and are blameless? f1 Sam.15.22; |saying, : : 
6 ButI say unto you, That in this ea! 18 Behold my Jservant, whom f 


place is one ‘greater than the have chosen; my beloved, in whom 


g See Mt.8, 5 
temple. 20. my soul is well pleased: I will put 
7 But if ye had known what this|; Miracies my 4spirit upon him, and he shall 
meaneth, I will have ‘mercy, and| (.T.). shew judgment to the 2/Gentiles. 
not sacrifice, ye would not have| ¥7701322) | 19 He shall not strive, nor cry; 
condemned the guiltless. (Mt.8.2,3;.. |neither shall any man hear his 
8 For the ¢Son of man is Lord] Acts 28.8,9.) |voice in the streets. 
even of the sabbath day. i Psa.2.2. 20 A bruised reed shall he not 


: i 4 j vs.18-21; k, and smoking flax -shall he 
The healing of the withered|’ }s Piya break, ; : 
hand on the sabbath (Mk. 3.|, Holy Spirit. ree cue Net aang Ua, Bs 
1-6; Lk. 6. 6-11). vs.18,28,32; | | Ene unto victory, 
. Mt.22.43. 21 And in his name shall the Gen- 
9 And when he was departed! (Mt.1.18; tiles “trust. 


: = _| Acts 2.4.) : ; 
thence, he went into their syna 1 Christ (First| A demoniac healed: the Phari- 


gogue: ven ; 
10 And, behold, there was a man seen). peor, Piaspibeme (MK. 3. 22-30; 

which had Ars hand withered. And} (Gen.3.15; « 11, 14-23). 

they asked him, saying, Is it lawful) 4cts19) | 22 Then was brought unto him 

im heal ai of cigs days? that S sa, Si aes eeeheds ee . ae blind, 
ey might acéuse him. so aimont-land dumb: and he healed him, inso- 
11 aed a wee unto them, Hai ionized. ue that the blind and dumb both 

sad hove Cie sheet anak fall note. i “03 ere “al” the people were 

- So a as ear ar be @ cree pl eee be Is not this the 
e not lay hold on it, and lift 7 cz °son of David? 

out? eae 24 But when the Pharisees heard 
12 How much then is a man better nore ; it, they said, This fellow doth not 

than a sheep? Wherefore it is law-!¢ Mt.9.34; cast out ?devils, but by "Beelzebub 


ful to do well on the sabbath days. PES phy the prince of the devils. 

13 Then saith he to the man, A420. 5h 195 And Jesus knew their thoughts, 

tretch forth thine hand. And he and said unto them, Every kingdom 
was ceaselessly active. The sabbath commemorates a finished creation, the first 
day a finished redemption. The sabbath was a day of legal obligation, the first 
day one of voluntary worship and service. The sabbath is mentioned in the Acts 
only in connection with the Jews, and in the rest of the N.T. but twice (Col. 2. 163 
Heb. 4. 4), In these passages the seventh-day sabbath is explained to be to’ the 
Christian not a day to be observed, but a type of the present rest into which he 
enters when “he also ceases from his own works” and trusts Christ. 

1 Jesus’ action (Mt. 12. 1-7) is highly significant. ‘What David did’ refers 
to the time of his rejection and persecution by Saul (1 Sam. 21.6). Jesus here is 
ae 7 much the rejected Saviour as the rejected King; hence the reference to 

avid. 

2 This too is most significant. The rejected King of Israel will turn to the Gen- 
tiles (cf. Mt. 10.5,6). In fulfilment this awaited the official rejection, crucifixion, 
and resurrection of Christ, and the final rejection of the risen Christ (Lk, 24. 46, 473 
Acts 9. 15; 13. 46; 28. 25-28; Rom. 11. 11). 


1012 


12 26] 


St. MATTHEW. 


divided against itself is brought to 
desolation; and every city or house 
divided against itself shall not 
stand: 

26 And if *Satan cast out Satan, 
he is divided against himself; how 
shall then his kingdom stand? 

27 And if I by Beelzebub cast out 
devils, by whom do your &children 
cast them out? therefore they shall 
be your judges. 

28 But if I cast out devils by the 

Spirit of God, then the kingdom of 
God is come unto you. 
. 29 Or else how can one enter into 
a strong man’s house, and spoil his 
goods, except he first bind the 
strong man? and then he will spoil 
his house. 

30 He that is not with me is 
against me; and he that gathereth 
not with me scattereth abroad. 


The unpardonable sin: ascrib- 
ing to Satan the works of the 
.. Spirit (Mk. 3. 29, 30). 


31 Wherefore I say unto you All 
manner of ‘sin and blasphemy shall 
pe 4forgiven unto men: but the 
blasphemy against the Holy 
Ghost shall not be forgiven unto 
men, 

32 And whosoever speaketh a 
word against the Son of man, it 
shall be ¢forgiven him: but whoso- 
“ever speaketh against the Holy 
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, 
neither in this fworld, neither in 
the world to come. 


Destiny in words. 


33 Either make the ‘tree good, 
and his fruit good; or else make the 
tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: 
for the tree is known by his fruit. 

34 O ‘generation of vipers, how 
can ye, being evil, speak good 
things? for out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speaketh. 

35 A good man out of the good 
treasure of the heart bringeth forth 
good things: and an evil man out of 
the evil treasure bringeth forth evil 
things. 

36 ButI say unto you, That every 
idle word that men shall speak, they 
shall give account thereof in the 
jday of judgment. 


A.D. 31. 


a Satan. 
vs.26,27; 
Mt.13.39. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


6 Lk.9.49,50; 
10.17; Acts 
19.13-16. 


¢ Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


d Forgiveness. 
vs.31,32; 
Mt.18.21,27, 
32,35. (Lev.4. 


20; Mt.26. 
28.) 


e Ascribing 
to Satan the 
work of the 
Holy Spirit. 
Cf.vs.24,32, 
40. 


fie. age. 
g Mt.7.17,18, 
h Jas.3.12. 


i Progeny. 
Mt.3.7; 


j Day of judg- 
ment. vs.36, 
41,42; Mk. 
6.11. (Mt. 
10.15; Rev. 
20.11.) 


k Mt.16.1-4; 
Mk.8.11; 


7 


cf.John 2. 
18-22. 


1 Kingdom 
(N.T.). Mt. 
12.46-50. 
(Lk.1.31-33;' 
1 Cor.15.24. 


m Jon.1.17. 


n Jon.3.5-9; 
Lk.11.32; 
see Nah.1. 
1, note. 


o Repentance. 
ME.1.4. (Mt. 
3.2; Acts ~ 
17.30.) 


p@ Chr.9. 
1-12. 


q Lk.11.24-26. 


r CE.Mt.24, 
34, note. 


_37 For by thy words thou shalt be 
justified, and by thy words thou 
shalt be condemned. 


The sign of the prophet Jonas: 
Jesus foretells his death and 
resurrection (Lk. 11. 29-44). 


38 Then certain of the scribes and 
of the Pharisees answered, saying, 
Master, we would see a “sign from 
thee, 

39 But he answered and said unto 
them, An evil and adulterous ‘gene- 
Tation seeketh after a sign; and 
there shall no sign be given to it, but 
the sign of the prophet Jonas: 

40 For as “Jonas was three days 
and three nights in the whale’s 
belly; so shall the Son of man be 
three days and three nights in the 
heart of the earth. 

41 1The men of “Nineveh shall 
rise in judgment with this genera- 
tion, and shall condemn it: because 
they °"repented at the preaching of 
Jonas; and, behold, a greater than 
Jonas is here. 

42 The queen of the south shall 
rise up in the judgment with this 
generation, and shall condemn it: 
for she came from the uttermost 
parts of the earth to hear the wis- 
dom of Solomon; and, behold, a 
greater than Solomon is here. 


The worthlessness of self-refor- 
mation (Lk. 11. 24-26). 


43 @When the unclean spirit i¢ 
gone out of a man, he walketh 
‘through dry places, seeking rest, 
and findeth none. 

44 Then he saith, I will return 
into my house from whence I came 
out; and when he is come, he findeth 
it empty, swept, and garnished. 

45 Then goeth he, and taketh 
with himself seven other spirits 
more wicked than himself, and they 
enter in and dwell there: and the 
last state of that man is worse than 
the first. Even so shall it be also 
unto this wicked “generation. 


The. new relationships (Mk. 3. 
31-35; Lk. 8. 19-21). 


46 2While he yet talked to the 
people, behold, his mother and his 


1 Again the rejected King announces judgment (cf. Mt. 10. 20-24). Israel, in the 


midst of the Pharisaic revival of outward religious strictness, was like a man out of 


whom a demon had “gone,” i.e. of his own volition. i 
‘The personal application is to a mere self-cleansed moralist. 


an empty house, etc. 


He would come back and find 


2 Rejected by Israel, His “kinsmen according to the flesh” (cf. Rom. 9, 3), our 


1013 


12 47] St. MATTHEW. | [3 8 


brethren stood without, desiring’to] A.D. 31.__|fell by the Wiese side, and the fowls 


speak with him. came and devoured them up: } 
47 Then one said unto him, Be- 3 Some fell upon stony places, 

hold, ¢thy mother and thy brethren where they had not much earth: 

stand without, desiring to speak and forthwith they sprung up, be- 

with thee. ; cause they had no deepness of 
48 But he answered and said unto earth: 

him that told him, Who is my 6 And when the sun was up, they 


mother? and who are my brethren?|¢ ME3.31-35; |were scorched; and because they 
49 And he stretched forth his) “©8191: [had no root, they withered away. 

hand toward his disciples, and said,|b Kingdom 7 And some fell among thorns; 

Behoid my mother and my breth-| (NT). Mt. jand the thorns sprung up, and 


ren! (LE.1.31-33; choked them: i - 
50 For ‘whosoever shall do the} 1 Cor.15.24.) | 8 But other fell into good ground, 
will of my Father which is in Parabl and brought forth fruit, some an 
heaven, the same is my brother,|°qq't). vs, |hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some 
and sister, and mother, 3-9,18-23, thirtyfold. oa 
ee Aeettrn 9 Who hath ears to hear, let him 

CHAPTER 13. 45,46,47-50; hear. 


Mt.18.12-14. | 10 And the disciples came, and 
The mysteries of the kingdom eye aerd said unto him, Why speakest thou 


: 5 unto them in parables? x! 
gf hi as Lk lens somes ME $1) 11 He answered and said unto 
5 i evi rs d eRe, & them, Because it is given unto you 
(THE same day went Jesus out of| 39°“? |to know the vyumesieties of the | 
the house, and sat by the sea |‘kingdom of heaven, put to them it, 
side. e Mt.3.2, is not given. 4 
2 And great multitudes were] "f° 12 For whosoever hath, to him 
gathered together unto him, solfJohn 7.16, shall be given, and he shall have 
that he went into a ship, and sat;] 17; 8.43. more abundance: but whosoever 
and the whole multitude stood on hath not, from him shall be taken 
the shore. away even that he hath. 5 
3 And he !spake many things un- 13 Therefore speak I to them in 
to them in “parables, saying, Be- parables: fbecause they seeing see 
hold, a 2sower went forth to sow; not; and hearing they hear not, 
4 And when he sowed, some seeds} neither do they understand. 


Lord intimates the formation of the new family of faith which, overstepping mere ra- 
cial claims, receives “whosoever” will be His disciple (vs. 49, 50. Cf. John 6. 28, 29), 

1 The seven parables of Mt. 13., called by our Lord “mysteries of the kingdom 
of heaven” (v, 11), taken together, describe the result of the presence of the Gospel 
in the world during the present age, that is, the time of seed-sowing which began 
with our Lord’s personal ministry, and ends with the “harvest” (vs. 40-43). Briefly, 
that result is the mingled tares and wheat, good fish and bad, in the sphere of Chris- 
tian profession. It is Christendom. 

? The figure marks a new beginning. To labour in God’s vineyard (israel, Isa. 5. 
1-7) is one thing, to go forth sowing the seed of the word in a field which is the world, 
quite another (cf. Mt. 10. 5). One-fourth of the seed takes permanent root, but 
the result is “wheat” (v. 25; 1 Pet. 1. 23), or “children of the kingdom” (v. 38). 
This parable (vs. 3-9, 18-23) is treated throughout as foundational to the mysteries 
of the kingdom of heaven. 3t is interpreted by our Lord Himself. 

3 A “mystery” in Scripture is a previously hidden truth, now divinely revealed, 
but in which a supernatural element still remains despite the revelation. The 
greater mysteries are: (1) The mysteries of the kingdom of heaven (Mt. 13. 3-50 
3) the mystery of Israel’s blindness during this age (Rom. 11. 25, with context): 
(3) the mystery of the translation of living saints at the end of this age (1 Cor. 15. 
51, 52; 1 Thes. 4. 14-17); (4) the mystery of the N.T. church as one body composed 
of Jew and Gentile (Eph. 3. 1-11; Rom. 16. 25; Eph. 6. 19; Col. 4. 3); (S) the mystety 
of the church as the bride of Christ (Eph. 5. 28-32); (6) the mystery of the inliving 
Christ (Gal. 2. 20; Col. 1. 26, 27): (7) the “mystery of God even Christ,” i.e. Christ 
as the incarnate fullness of the Godhead embodied, in whom all the divine wisdom 
for man subsists (Col. 2. 2, 9; 1 Cor. 2. 7)3 fe the mystery of the processes by which 
godlikeness is restored to man (1 Tim. 3. 16); (9) the mystery of iniquity (2 Thes. 
2.7; Mt. 13. 33); (10) the mystery of the seven stars (Rev, 1. 20); (11) the mystery 
of Babylon (Rev. 17. 5, 7). 

1014 


. 
’ 


2. am) 
o 


1314 


St. MATTHEW. 


[13 28 


14 And in them is fulfilled the} Awv.31. |self, but dureth f ile: 
Sprophecy of Esaias, which saith, when cteibolation folate secon: 
ae aoe wi Se and a neta pees of the word, by and 

3; and seeing yes y he is offended. 
see, and shall not perceive: 3 

15 For this peenie's heart is waxed |¢ Isa.6.9,10; Seales neti peel eee 
gross, and their ears are dull of eaipe the word; and the care of this 
Hey ae their eyes ay John 12.39. |/world, and the deceitfulness of 
peeneniiahoielercacamdiaret ihc. Pee ieereatiilat aces, Gaia 

bie. turn me rurtiul, 
their ears, and should understand! again. 23 But the that received seed into 
Mocneeted cond t atiohid healthend TESUIO® [the Ceca” end ‘unmerstandeietes 
16 But blessed are your eyes, for gies ehichyalsd pearctn dae ey ni 
2. i 2 ring= 
ce. see: and your ears, for they|? Righteous- leth forth, some bi hundredfold, 

17 For verily I say unto you, That Pl ied ada ldiona ae 

any od hee sees eMt.3.2, Second mystery, the tares 
“ga TERROR elon ecard ET amoné the wheat (ys. 24-30, 
ee ye ree ~ have not} fat once. 36-43). 
seen them; and to hear those 24 2Another parable put he forth 
things which ye hear, and have|*f£ 3%, unto them, saying, ‘The kingdom of 
23 Seah Sia oia ee a S45 Acts 14. Bearer ie Sp ee a ae which 

ye therefore the parable| 2?- sowed *good seed in his field: 
of the sower. hie. age 25 But while men slept, his enemy 

19 When any one heareth the! ~ _ L z 
word of the aeedoue and cue +Lk.8.15. seheats me gartes Mien) Sei 
standeth it not, then cometh the) ; ppit1.11; 26 But when the blade was sprung 
wicked one, and catcheth away} Col.1.6. up, and brought forth fruit, then 
that which was sown in his heart.|, , 5.4193. appeared the tares also. 

This is he which received seed by|"1 Jom 3.9. 27 So the servants of the house- 


the way side. 

20 But he that received the seed 
into stony places, the same is he 
that heareth the word, and ‘anon 

with joy receiveth it; 

21 Yet hath he not root in him- 


1 Acts 20.29, 
30. 


holder came and said unto him, Sir, 
didst not thou sow good seed in thy 
field? from whence then hath it 
tares? 

28 He said unto them, An enemy 
hath done this. The servants said 


1 The O.T. prophets saw in one blended vision the rejection and crucifixion of 


the King (see “Christ, sacrifice,” Gen. 4. 4; Heb. 10. 18, note), and also His glory 
as David’s Son (Zech. 12. 8, note), but “what manner of time the Spirit of Christ 
which was in them did signify when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ 
and the glory chat should follow,” was not revealed to them—only that the vision 
_-was not for themselves (1 Pet. 1. 10-12). That revelation Christ makes in these 
parables. A period of time is to intervene between His sufferings and His glory. 
That interval is occupied with the “mysteries of the kingdom of heaven” here 
described. 

2 This parable (vs. 24-30) is also interpreted by our Lord (vs. 36-43). Here the 
“good seed’ is not the “word,” as in the first parable (vs. 19, 23), but rather that 
which the word has produced (1 Pet. 1. 23), viz.: the children of the kingdom, These 
are, providentially (v. 37), “sown,” i.e. scattered, here and-there in the ‘‘field’’ 
of the “world” (v. 38). The “world” here is both geographical and ethnic—the 
earth-world, and also the world of men. The wheat of God at once becomes the 
scene of Satan’s activity. Where children of the kingdom are gathered, there, 
“among the wheat” (vs. 25, 38, 39), Satan ‘‘sows” “children of the wicked one,” 
who profess to be children of the kingdom, and in outward ways are so like the 
true children that only the angels may, in the end, be trusted to separate them 
(vs. 28-30, 40-43). So great is Satan’s power of deception that the tares often 
really suppose themselves to be children of the kingdom (Mt. 7. 21-23). Many 
other parables and exhortations have this mingled condition in view (e.g. Mt. 22. 
11-14; 25. 1-13, 14-30; Lik. 18. 10-14; Heb. 6. 4-9). Indeed, it characterizes Matthew 
from Chapter 13. to the end. The parable of the wheat and tares is not a descrip- 
tion of the world, but of that which professes to be the kingdom. Mere unbe- 
fievers are never called ‘children of the devil, but only religious unbelievers are so 
called (cf. v.38; John 8. 8-44; Mt. 23. 15). 

1015 


_“ 


St. 


unto him, Wilt thou then that we 
go and gather them up? f 

29 But he said, Nay; lest while 
ye gather up the tares, ye root up 
also the wheat with them. : 

30 Let *both grow together until 
the harvest: and in the time of har- 
vest I will say to the reapers, 
LGather ye together first the tares, 
and bind them in bundles to burn 
them: but gather the wheat into 
my barn. 


13 29] 


Third mystery, the grain of 
mustard seed (Mk. 4. 30-32). 


31 Another parable put he forth 
unto them, saying, The “kingdom 
of heaven is like to a grain of ‘mus- 
tard seed, which a man took, and 
sowed in his field: 

32 Which indeed is the least of all 


MATTHEW. 


A.D. 31. 


a Phil.3.18, 
19; 2: Thes.3. 
6; 2 Tim.2. 
19. 


b Mt.3.2, 
note. 

c M&.4.30- 
32; Lk.13.18, 


195 Acts 1.15. 


d Ezk.17.22- 
24; 31.3-9; 
cf.Dan.4. 
20-22. 

e Leaven. 
(Gen.19.3.) 

f v.25; Gal.2. 
431. 


g Num.15.8, 
9; John 6.32- 
35. 


h 1 Cor.5.6; 
15.33; Gal. 
5.6-9. 


i Psa.78.2. 


seeds: but when it is grown, it is 
the greatest among herbs, and be- 
cometh a “tree, so that the birds of 
the air come and lodge in the 
branches thereof. 


Fourth mystery, the leaven 
Lk. 13. 20, 21). 


33 Another parable spake he un- 
to them; The kingdom of heaven is 
like unto “4leaven, which a woman 
took, and fhid in &three measures 
of meal, till the ‘*’whole was 
leavened. 

34 All these things spake Jesus 
unto the multitude in parables; and 
without a parable spake he not unto 
them: f ; 

35 That it might be ‘fulfilled 
which was spoken by the prophet, 
saying, I will open my mouth in 


1 The gathering of the tares into bundles for burning does not imply immediate 
judgment. At the end of this age (v. 40) the tares are set apart for burning, but. 
first the wheat is gathered into the barn (John 14. 3; 1 Thes. 4. 14-17). 

2 The parable of the Mustard Seed prefigures the rapid but unsubstantial growth 
of the mystery form of the kingdom from an insignificant beginning (Acts 1. 153 2. 413. 
1 Cor. 1, 26) to a great place in the earth. The figure of the fowls finding shelter in 


the branches is drawn from Dan. 
context in Daniel shows. 
3 That interpretation of the 


4. 20-22. 


How insecure was such a refuge the 


parable of the Leaven (v. 33) which makes (with 


variation as to details) the leaven to be the Gospel, introduced into the world (“three 
measures of meal’) by the church, and working subtly until the world is converted 
(‘till the whole was leavened”) is open to fatal objection: (1) It does violence to 
the unvarying symbolical meaning of leaveén, 


by our Lord Himself (Mt. 16. 6-12; 


33, note), 3 
was leavened’), 
ables of the Wheat 


ME. 8. 15. 


and especially to the meaning fixed 


See ‘‘Leaven,’’ Gen. 19. 3; Mt. 13. 


The implication of a converted world in this age (“till the whole 
is explicitly contradicted by our Lord’s interpretation of the par- 
and Tares, and of the Net. 


Our Lord presents a picture of 


a partly converted kingdom in an unconverted world; of good fish and bad in the 


very kingdom-net itself. 
in the first parable. 


_ (3) The method of the extension of the kingdom is given 
; } It is by sowing seed, not by mingling leaven. 
have, in Scripture, a meaning fixed by inspired usage. 


. The symbols 
Leaven is the principle 


of corruption working subtly; is invariably used in a bad sense (see “Leaven,” 
Gen, 19. 3, refs.), and is defined by our Lord as evil doctrine (Mt. 16. 11, 12; Mk, © 


8.15). Meal, on the a a 


1-3), and was food for the friests (Lev. 6. 15-17). 


always symbolizes something out of place, religiously (see Zech. 5. 6, note). 
Thyatira it was a woman teaching (cf. Rev. 2. 20 with Rev. 17. 1-6). 


was used in one of the sweet-savour offerings (Lev. 2. 


A woman, in the bad ethical sense, 
In 
Interpreting 


the parable by these familiar symbols, it constitutes a warning that the true doc- 


trine, given for the nourishment of the childr. 
4. 6; 1 Pet. 2. 2), would be mingled with co 
that officially, by the apostate church itsel 


ZEPCts y2%e1-3)): 


en of the kingdom (Mt. 4. 4; 1 Tim. 
trupt and corrupting false doctrine, and 
f (1 Tim. 4. 1-3; 2 Tim. 2. 17, 18; 4. 3, 43 


+ Summary: (1) Leaven, as a symbolic or typical substance, is always mentioned 


in the O.T. in an evil sense (Gen. 19. 3, refs.). 


N.T. explains its symbolic meaning. 
with “‘sincerity and truth” (1 Cor. 5. 6-8). 

fold form of Pharisaism, Sadduceeism, a 
The leaven of the Pharisees was extern 
the Sadducees, scepticism as to the sup 
23, 29); of the Herodians, worldliness-— 


16-21; Mk. 3. 6). 
versal meaning. 


1016 


(2) The use of the word in the 


It is “malice and wickedness,” as contrasted 

It is evil doctrine (Mt. 16. 12) in its three- 
nd Herodianism (Mt. 16. 6; Mk. 8. 15). 
alism in religion (Mt. 23. 14, 16, 23-28); of 
ernatural and as to the Scriptures (Mt. 22. 
a Herod party amongst the Jews (Mt. 22. 
(3) The use of the word in Mt. 13. 33 is congruous with its uni- 


a 


13 36] St. MATTHEW. [13 48 
caer F eel 
parables; I will utter things which] a.D.31. _|nace of fire: there shall be wailing 


: and /gnashing of teeth. 

foundation of the ¢world. Sree 43 1Then shall the *righteous 
: 33,34. *|shine forth as the sun in the king- 
The second mystery explained.|¢ kosmos (Mt.|\dom of their Father. “Who hath 


4.8), = man- ; @ 

36 Jeg caus sent the multitude 1 Mis, note. pope tea a 
away, and went int :)@Satan. Gr. 3 H 
and his disciples oe east cara Ser ar gins tier tle 3 yes 
saying, Declare unto us the parable 53 (Gen dds, x 
of the tares of the field. Rev.20.10.) | 44 Again, the ¢kingdom of heaven 

37 He answered and said untol’ cee: 1 like unto treasure “hid in a field; 
them, He that soweth the good seed| age. Mt.24.3./the which when a man hath found, 
is the Son of man; g Heb.1.4,note.|he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth 


38 The field is the cworld: the|” See Mt’ and ?selleth all that he hath, and 


good seed are the children of the ji.iy2e37, |buyeth that field. 
¢kingdom; but the tares are the|/Sim. Rom. 


children of the wicked one; Beeecten aan! Sixth mystery, the pearl. 
39 The enemy that sowed them is| ness. 45° Again, the ¢kingdom of heaven 


the ‘devil; the harvest is the fend}! Judgments |. *). 
: (the seven). |is like unto a merchant man, seek- 
of the world; and the reapers are] jyt36.27. ing goodly 2pearls: 


the angels. (2 Sam.7.14; 
40 As therefore the tares are Remaay | MeoW/bo.aitien be rhad found done 
gathered and burned in the fire;|"Rom2019 pearl of ereat price wens anckispid 
2} note. Col.3.4;/all that he had, and bought it. 


so shall it be in the fend of this| 2 Thes.1.5-10: 


world. "veka? |\Seventh mystery, the drag-net. 


41 The “Son of man shall send|, 5319.5: 
forth his fangels, and they shall] Deut.4.20. 47 Again, ‘the kingdom of 
igather out of his “kingdom all|? 2534-10; /dheaven is like unto a net, that 
Bere offend, and Jthem which| 5 Go.¢.. ih cast ee the sea, and gathered 

o Finiquity ; q Eph.5.25-27; |of every kind: 

42 And shall cast thern into a fur-| Rev-21-21. 48 Which, when it was full, they 


_ 1 The kingdom does not become the kingdom of the “Father” until Christ, hav- 
ing “put all enemies under His feet,’’ including the last enemy, death, has “‘delivered 
up the kingdom to God, even the Father” (1 Cor. 15. 24-28; Rev. 20. 2). There 
is triumph over death at the first resurrection (1 Cor. 15. 54, 55), but death, “‘the 
last enemy,” is not destroyed till the end of the millennium (Rev. 20. 14). 

2 The interpretation of the parable of the treasure, which makes the buyer of 
the field to be a sinner who is seeking Christ, has no warrant in the parable itself. 
The field is defined (v. 38) to be the world. The seeking sinner does not buy, but 
forsakes, the world to win Christ. Furthermore, the sinner has nothing to sell, 
nor is Christ for sale, nor is He hidden in a field, nor, having found Christ, does 
‘the sinner hide Him again (cf. Mk. 7. 24; Acts 4. 20). At every point the inter- 
pretation breaks down. 

Our Lord is the buyer at the awful cost of His blood (1 Pet. 1. 18), and Israel, 
especially Ephraim (Jer. 31. 5-12, 18-20), the lost tribes hidden in “the field,” the 
world (v. 38), is the treasure (Ex. 19. 5; Psa. 135.4). Again, as in the separation 
of tares and wheat, the angels are used (Mt. 24. 31; Jer. 16.16). The divine Mer- 


-chantman buys the field (world) for the sake of the treasure (v. 44; Rom. il. 28), 


beloved for the fathers’ sakes, and yet to be restored and saved. The note of joy 
(v. 44) is also that of the prophets in view of Israel’s restoration (Deut. 30. 9; Isa. = 
49. 13: 52. 1-3; 62. 4-7: 65. 18, 19). (See “Israel,” Gen. 11. 10; Rom. 11. 26.) 

3 The true Church, ‘‘one body” formed by the Holy Spirit (1 Cor. 12.12,13). As 
Israel is the hid treasure, so the Church is the pearl of great cost. Covering the 
same period of time as the mysteries of the kingdom, is thé mystery of the Church 
(Rom. 16. 25, 26; Eph. 3. 3-10; 5. 32). Of the true Church a pearl is a perfect sym- 
bol: (1) A pearl is one, a perfect symbol of unity (1 Cor. 10. 17; 12. 12, 13; Eph. 4, 
4-6). (2) A pearl is formed by accretion, and that not mechanically, but vitally, 
through a living one, as Christ adds to the Church (Acts 2. 41, 47; 5.14; 11. 24; Eph. 


2. 21; Col. 2. 19). (3) Christ, having given Himself for the pearl, is now preparing 


it for presentation to Himself (Eph. 5. 25-27). The kingdom is not the Church, but 

the true children of the kingdom during the fulfilment of these mysteries, baptized 

by one Spirit into one body (1 Cor. 12. 12, 13), compose the true Church, the pear, 

4 The parable of the Net (Gr. drag-net) presents another view from that of the 
1017 


“ 


13 49] 


St. MATTHEW. 


[14 12 ’ 


drew to shore, and sat down, and| A.D. 32. 58 And he did not many mighty 


@gathered the good into vessels, but 
cast the bad away. PRES IR. 

49 So shall it be at the %end of|5 consumma- 
the world: the angels shall come) ‘07 ye 
forth, and sever the wicked from) 3/3 “* 
among the just, 


50 And shall cast them into the|*v42;, 9) 


‘furnace of fire: there shall be wail- 
ing and gnashing of “teeth. d Kingdom 
51 Jesus saith unto them, Have ye] (.T:). 


understood all these things? They 
say unto him, Yea, Lord. 

52 Then said he unto them, 
Therefore every scribe which is 
instructed unto the kingdom of 
heaven is like unto a man that is 
an householder, which bringeth 
forth out of his treasure things new 
and old, 


Jesus returns to Nazareth: 
again rejected (Mk. 6. 1-6; cf. 
Lk. 4. 16-32). 


53 And it came to pass, that 
when Jesus had finished these par- 
ables, he departed thence. 

54 And when he was come into 
his own country, he taught them in 
their synagogue, insomuch that 
they were “astonished, and said, 
Whence hath this man this wis- 
dom, and these mighty works? 

55 Is not this the ‘carpenter’s 
son? is not his mother called Mary? 
and his brethren, ‘James, and Joses, 
and Simon, and Judas? 

56 And his sisters, ‘are they not 
all with us? Whence then hath 
this man all these things? p 

57 And they were offended in 
him. But Jesus said unto them, A 
prophet is not without honour, save 
in his own country, and in his own 
house. 


vs.1-50; 

Mt.15.21-28. 
(Lk.1.31-33; 
1 Cor.15.24.) 


e John 7.15. 


f John 6.42; 
7.41,48,52. 


g Son of Al- 
phzeus, Mt. 
4.21, note. 


# Called Anti- 
pas; son of 
Herod the 
Great (Mt.2. 
1, note) and 
Malthace, a 
Samaritan 


woman; 
brother of 
Archelaus 
(Mt.2.22). 
Mar. (1) a 
daughter of 
King Aretas; 
(2) Herodias, 
wife of his 
half-brother, 
Philip. 


j vs.1,6. 


k See Lk.3. 
1, refs, 


1 Prov.29.25; 
Lk.18.23; 
| Acts 7.52. 


works there “because of their un- 


belief: 
CHAPTER 14. 


Herod’s troubled conscience. 
Murder of John the Baptist 
(ME. 6. 14-29; Lk. 9. 7-9). 


A T that time ‘Herod the tetrarch 
heard of the fame of Jesus, 

2 And said unto his servants, This 
is John the Baptist; he is risen 
from the dead; and_ therefore 
mighty works do shew forth them- 
selves in him. 

3 For JHerod had laid hold on 
John, and bound him, and put him 
in prison for *Herodias’ sake, his 
brother Philip’s wife. 

4 For John said unto him, Itis not 
lawful for thee to have her. 

5 And when he would have put 
him to death, he feared the multi- 
tude, because they counted him as 
a prophet. 

6 But when Herod’s birthday was 
kept, the daughter of Herodias 
danced before them, and pleased 
Herod. 

7 Whereupen he promised with 
an oath to give her whatsoever she 
would ask. 

8 And she, being before instructed 
of her mother, said, Give me here 
John Baptist’s head in a charger. 

9 And the king was sorry: nev- 
ertheless for the oath’s sake, and 
them which sat with him at meat, 
he commanded i¢ to be given her. 

10 And he sent, and beheaded 
John in the prison. 

ii And his head was bought in 
a charger, and given to the damsel: 
and she brought it to her mother. 

12 And his disciples came, and 


wheat and tares of the mysteries of the kingdom as the sphere of profession, but 
with this difference: there Satan was the active agent; here the admixture is more 
the result of the tendency of a movement to gather to itself that which is not really 
of it. The kingdom of heaven is like a net which, cast into the sea of humanity, 
gathers of every kind, good and bad. And these remain together in the net (v. 49), 
and not merely in the sea, until the end of the age. It is not even a converted 
net, much less a converted sea. Infinite violence has been done to sound exegesis 
by the notion that the world is to be converted zn this age. Against that notion 
stands our Lord’s own interpretation of the parables of the Sower, the Wheat and 
Tares, and the Net. 

Such, then, is the mystery form of the kingdom (see Mt. 3. 2, note; 6. 33, 
note). It is the sphere of Christian profession during this age. It is a mingled 
body of true and false, wheat and tares, good and bad. It is defiled by formalism 
doubt, and worldliness. But within it Christ sees the true children of the true 
kingdom who, at the end, are to “shine forth as the sun.” In the great field, the 
world, He sees the redeemed of all ages, but especially His hidden Israel yet to 
be restored and blessed. Also, in this form of the kingdom, so unlike that which 
is to be, He sees the Church, His body and bride, and for joy He sells all that He 
has (2 Cor. 8.9) and buys the field, the treasure, and the pearl. 


1018 


14 13] St. MATTHEW. [15 6 


took up the body, and buried it, and|__ 4-D- 32.__|him walking on the sea, they were 

went and “told Jesus. mtroubled, saying, It is a spirit; 
13 When Jesus heard of it, he °de- and they cried out for fear. 

parted thence by “ship into a desert|2 seth 27 But straightway Jesus spake 

place apart: and when the people| °7' 11-21. lunto them, saying, "Be of good 

had heard thereof, they followed|é Met 153 cheer; it is I; be not afraid. 


hin: on foot out of the cities. %.6.32-46. | 98 And Peter answered him and 


14 And Jesus went forth, and saw|¢ boat. said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me 
a great multitude, and was movedla mt.9.36. come unto thee on the water. 
with ¢compassion toward them, and], yg. 108: 29 And he said, Come. And 
he healed their sick. | 2 Cor.4.5,6. [when Peter was come down out of 


The five thousand fed (Mk. 6.|f Mt28.18. BE eee aine walked on the water, to 
30-44; Lk. 9. 10-17; John 6. 1-14). |g John 6.1-14. 30 “But Ronen he saw the wind 


$ ; «_|h John 6.23; i afraid; . 

15 And when it was evening, his eae Se San ete ete wae pe 

isci i ing is] 1 Cor 11.24, , ? ’ 
disciples came to him, saying, This or Para. cave aie 


is a desert place, and the time is|; miracles : ; i 
now past; send the multitude away,] (N.T.) vs. beget reais 
that they may go into the villages, ao eaeeERS's a natch ite hice Oth aa f dlittle 
and buy themselves victuals. ee eal eet eae EE oat 

: ‘faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? 


16 But Jesus said unto them,] 8.2,3; Acts 3 
hesn 28.8,9.) 32 And when they were come into 
They need not depart; ‘give ye the chip -tHeMvIne: ceased: 


them to eat. j 2 Ki.4.1-7, S i 
: Wel 42-44; Mt. 33 Then they that were in the ship 
17 And they say unto him, We 15.27. came and worshipped him, saying, 


sake Bete xPusL Ave lonuss) and two k Mk.6.46,  |Of a truth thou art the ’Son of God. 


2 : : LE.5.16 34 And when they were gone 
18 He said, {Bring them hither to}, ear. lover, they came into the land of 


me 
. ; | 52; John6 |Gennesaret. 
19 And he commanded the multi-} 36791. 33 UAnd when #he amen “ot thee 


tude to sit down on the grass, and : 

: mLk.24.36. |place had knowledge of him, they 
tog the ive loaves and the to)" hit, lato nfl gt county found 
he "blessed, and ae and gavel, a ee sok Saperky deep unto him all 
the loaves to his disciples, and the] 16.33. 36 And besousht him that:they 
aigerpls fo the Blea: ere oHe8aAS. fight only touch the hetn of hs 
filled: and they took up of the frag-|» Mt.8.25. gal ope pee eel ale touched 
ments that Jremained twelve bas- Ree ee Reet Oral Fse: 


kets full. q Mt.8.26. 
zh ord they. that ied eaten wee 7 Mey CHAPTER 15. 
t t , besi 54; Psa. j ; 
: Boe baa chives spring cas Pie John | Jesus rebukes scribes and Phari- 


‘ sees (Mk. 7. 1-23). 
sus walks on the water: Pe-|' M&-5-24.34. 3 
Je "s little faith Mic —ce:|t Mt.23.16-18; HEN came to Jesus scribes and 
ter’s little fatth (Mk. 6. 45-56; ; } , 
John 6. 15-21). Mk.7.1-23. Pharisees, which wer of Jeru- 
u Mt.23.23; |Salem, saying, van 
22 And straightway Jesus con-| John 18.28; | 2 Why do thy disciples transgress 
strained his disciples to get into a Seer y a Den: the tei avi of fhe, erat Pie 
i fe i ee they wash not their hands when 
Sine alae: guile Re he theauies Gee iei9 they eat bread. Meadicdhcees 
des a i ~*~") 3° But he answered and said unto 
Eee ant vies he had sent the mul-|¥ =*-2117,  |them, Why do ye also transgress 
titudes away, he went up ra alx surely ey the spose Ss of God by your 
mountain apart to pray: and when| %°¢“ev-<0. |tradition: 
the evening was come, he was there Bi rity ab! 4 For God commanded, saying, 


alone. 17.Cf.1Tim.|/"Honour thy father and mother: 
24 But the ship was now in the] 4-8: and, “He that curseth father or 
midst of the sea, ‘tossed withly ie. dedi- mother, let him “die the death. 


waves: for the wind was con- peed See 5 But ye say, Whosoever shall 
toto, lsay to his father or his mother, It 


trary. See Mk.7.11, |S 3 

25 And in the fourth watch of the Bs is a gift, by whatsoever thou 
night Jesus went unto them, walk- mightest be profited by me; ‘ 
ing on the sea. 6 And honour not his father or his 


26 And when the disciples saw 019 mother, he shall be free. Thus 


15 7] 


have ye made the commandment of 
God of none effect by your tradi- 
tion. Y ; Ezek.33.31. 
7 Ye hypocrites, well did ?Esaias Pe 
prophesy of you,saying, _ Isa.29.13. 
8 This people draweth nigh unto] , pon 14.14- 


a Isa.29.13; 


mae with their “mouth, and honour-} 23; Gol.2. 
eth me with their lips; but their| 20,23. 
heart is far from me.., _ |d Jer.17.9,10; 
ne hip] Tes 
pee - STORED mapa e Mt.5.20; 
“10 Hass Be eiied the multitude,| ‘cts 15-10: 


and said unto them, Hear, and|/fOr. even yet. 
understand: g Gen.6.5; 

11 “Not that which goeth into the| Jer-17.9,10; 
mouth defileth a man; but that| Jas-3-10-12. 
which ¢cometh out of the mouth,|* Gal.5.19-21. 
this defileth a man. 4 Ss AP) 

12 Then came his disciples, and} prayers 
said unto him, Knowest thou that Bs tues 
the Pharisees were offended, after] 9: Re, 0 
they heard this saying? jMe13: 

13 But he answered and said,|7 99 4r4b- 
Every plant, which my heavenly] ” Psa.132.11. 
Father hath not planted, shall be}z¢,. apol= 
‘rooted up. ; lumi, John 3. 


14 Let them alone: they be blind} 16, note. 
leaders of the blind. And if the] 7Psa.145.18. 
blind lead the blind, both shall fall], w1.7.6: 
into the ditch. : John 4.22, 

15 Then answeréd Peter and said), rit. 1e¢10 
unto him, Declare unto us this par-| dogs. 
able. ms 

16 And Jesus said, Are ye also oN - 
fyet without understanding? ver Moto 

17 Donot ye yet understand, that} .2924: Mes 
whatsoever entereth in at the] 15.24.) 
mouth goeth into the belly, and is}, 11.779. 
cast out into the draught? . cf. Mi.0.6. 

18_E e thing r ed ‘ail on- 
out OF the MoU come forth trom) oo Sed, 
the sheart;.and they defile the man.| that he's 
Pes ein ean R tossed Sa 
Jevil thoughts, mur \duiteries, aC 
pe thou ae false witness, | 7 Mt.9.27-29; 
blasphemies*" aie sa NA SOL ) 2¥-3% 20% 

20 These are the things which|r Miracles 
defile a man: but to eat with’ un- Coe 
washen. hands “defileth nota” man.} Meisaaig. 

The Syrophenician woman’s Pras 

daughter healed (Mk. 7. 24-30). 5 Mk.7.25; 

21 Then Jesus went thence, and roa 
Ideparted into the coasts of Tyre| 71+ 1059 
and Sidon. ¢ Mt.11.20- 

22 And, behold, a woman of Ca- an eK 
naan came out of the same coasts, Mo.seeg! 
and ‘cried unto him, saying, Havel“ wicsio. 


1¥For the first time the rejected Son 


precursive fulfilment of Mt. 12. 18. Addressed 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D. 32. 


9; Rev.22.20.)|thou wilt. 


of David ministers to a Gentile. 


[15 34 


mercy on me, O Lord, thou Json of © 
David; my daughter is grievously 
vexed with.a devil. 

23 But he answered her not a 
word. And his disciples came and 
besought him, saying, Send her 
away; for she crieth after us. , 

24 ‘But he answered and said, I 
am not sent but unto the Alost sheep 
of the house of Israel. y 

25 Then came she and worshipped 
him, saying, Lord, “help me. 

26 But he answered and said, It 
is not meet to take the children’s 
bread, and cast if to “dogs. 

27 And she said, ‘Truth, Lord: yet 
the "dogs eat of the crumbs which 
fall from their masters’ table. 

28 °Then Jesus answered and 
said unto her, O woman, great is 
thy faith: be it unto thee even fas 
And her daughter was 
made "whole from that very hour. 


The multitudes healed. 
(Cf. Mk. 7. 31-37:) 


29 And Jesus departed from 
thence, and came nigh unto, the sea 
of Galilee; and went up into a 
mountain, and sat down there. 

30 And great multitudes came 
unto him, having with them those 
that were lame, blind, dumb, 
maimed, and many others, and Scast 
them down at Jesus’ feet: and he 
healed them: 

31 Inscmuch that the multitude 
wondered, when they saw the dumb 
to speak, the maimed to be whole, 
the lame to walk, and the blind to 
oe ed they ‘glorified the God of 

stael. 


The four thousand fed 
k. 8. 1-9). 


32 Then Jesus called his disciples 
unto him, and said, I have “com- 
passion on the multitude, because 
they continue with me now three 
days, and have nothing to eat: and 
I will not send them away fasting, 
lest they faint in the way. 

33 And his disciples say unto him, 
Whence should we have sc much 
bread in the wilderness, as to fill so 
great a multitude? 

34 And Jesus saith unto them, 
How many loaves have ye? And 


It isa 
by a Gentile as Son of David, He 


makes no reply, for a Gentile has no claim upon Him in that character (sce Mt. 2. 2, 


note; Eph. 2. 12).; 


Addressing Him as 
See Rom. 10, 12, 13, 


1020 


“Lord,” 


she obtained an immediate answer. 


15 35] Sr. MATTHEW. > [16 18 


they said, “Seven, and a few little 


A.D. 32. _|themselves, saying, It is because 
es. i we have taken no bread. 
35 And he commanded the multi-|c v.37; Mt.14. | 8 Which when Jesus perceived 
tude to sit down on the ground. 17. he said unto them, O ye of little 
36 And he took the seven loaves!) Mt.14.20.. |faith, why reason ye among your- 
and the fishes, and gave thanks,|-y+44.91, _|selves, because ye have brought nao 


and brake them, and gave to his a Tested bread? 
Series, and the disciples to the|* (eips"°"| 9 Do ye not ‘yet understand, 
multitude. *| Gen3.1; neither remember the five loaves 


37 And they did all eat, and were} Jas-1-14.) ie thodive Ghoidsndl amity 
filled: and they took up of the|eMt12.38- {baskets ye took a Biba 


broken meaé that was left Sseven| 41; Mk.8. 10 Neither the seven loaves of th 
baskets full. ES {four thousand, and ho’ ee 2 z 
38 And they that did eat were| fLk.12.54-57. kets ye took up? ee 
‘four thousand men, beside women| g Mt.21.23- 11 Howisit that ye do not under- 
and children. 27. stand that I spake it not to you 


39 And he sent away the multi-], reavert. vs. [Concerning bread, that ye should 


tude, and took ship, and came into! 6,11,12; beware of the “leaven of the Phari- 
the coasts of Magdala. roma 3, {Sees and of the Sadducees? 

Mt.13.33.) 12 Then understood they how 

CHAPTER 16. i John 12.37. ee 5s bade er RCE. beware of 

wy he aes e leaven of bread, but of the 

oat te rebar rg ‘ani (ciel Ges doctrine of the Pharisees and of the 

+ ee “4 Fes Soni that Sadducees. 
ai daeses dare) aba ecsiag ae. “packets” Peter's po aierion. Cans 2 
sired him that he would shew them| “*‘*- mi Bobi hndtral sad Ae, Doce, 
€a sign from heaven. k Gal.1.6-9; : 


_2 Heanswered and said unto them, CHa 13 When Jesus came into the 
When it is fevening, ye say, It will ete ae coasts of Czsarea Philippi, he asked 
be fair weather: for the sky is red. pe * This disciples, saying, Whom do men 
eae a the ne: It will be|™ Se say that I the "Son of man am? 

‘oul weather to day: for the sky is! 20, note. 14 And they said, Some say that 
red arid lowring. O ye hypocrites,| , John 6.67. thou art John the Baptist: some, 


ye can discern the face of the sky; Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one 


but can ye not discern the signs of|° pie of the prophets. 

matte pee 11.27; Acts 15 we san ate them, But whom 
A Swi and adulterous gen-| 9.20. say “ye that I am: 

eration seeketh after a sign; and|» mt.11.27; 16 And Simon Peter answered 


there shall no sign be given unto it,|} 1 John 4.15; |and said, Thou art the °Christ, the 
ren the = ‘ed the prophet bi pee John |Son of the living God. 

- POSE LE Ra pet were|7 Son of First mention of the church. 
come to the other side, they had ‘ 17 And Jesus answered and said 
forgotten to take bread. r John 6.63. {ynto him, Blessed art thou, Simon 


i 5 Church (the|@Bar-jona: for “flesh and blood hath 
Jesus interprets the symbol of | true). Acts |not revealed it unto thee, but my 


leaven (Mk. 8. 13-21). rCaEN ear Father which is in heaven. 
6 Then Jesus said unto them,| 12.23.) 18 And I say also unto thee, That 
Take heed and beware of thel;ar. pades, |thou art !Peter, and upon this rock 
heaven of the Pharisees and of| Lk.16.23, I will build my 2Schurch; and the 
the Sadducees. note. gates of ‘hell shall not prevail 
7 And they reasoned among against it. 


1 There is in the Greek a play upon the words, “‘thou art Peter [petros—literally, 
‘a little rock’], and upon this rock [Petra] I will build my church.” He does not 
promise to build His church upon Peter, but upon Himself, as Peter himself is care- 
ful to tell us (1 Pet. 2. 4-9). 

2 Gr. ecclesia (ek = “out of,” kaleo = “to call”), an assembly of called-out ones. 
The word is used of any assembly; the word itself implies no more, as, e.g., the 
town-meeting at Ephesus (Acts 19, 39), and Israel, called out of Egypt and assem- 
bled in the wilderness (Acts 7. 38). Israel was a true “church,” but not in any 
sense the N.T. church—the only point of similarity being that both were ‘‘called 
out” and by the same God. All else is contrast. See Acts 7, 38, note; Heb. 12. 


23, note. 
1021 


he 


16 19] 


19 And I will give unto thee the 
ikeys of the *kingdom of heaven: 
and whatsoever thou shalt bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven: 
and whatsoever thou shalt loose on 
earth shall be loosed in heaven. 

20 Then 2ocharged he his disciples 
that they should tell no man that 
he was “Jesus the Christ. 


Christ foretells his death and 
resurrection (Mk. 8. 31-38; Lk. 
9, 22-27). 


21 From that time forth .began 
Jesus to shew unto his disciples, 
how that he must go unto Jerusa- 
lem, and ¢suffer many things of the 
elders and chief priests and scribes, 
and be killed, and be raised again 
the third day. 

22 Then Peter took him, and be- 
gan to ‘rebuke him, saying, Be it 
far from thee, Lord: this shall not 
‘be unto thee. 

23 But he turned, and said unto 
Peter, Get thee behind me, fSatan: 
thou art an 8offence unto me: for 
thou savourest not the things that 
be of God, but those that be of men. 

24 Then said Jesus unto his dis- 
ciples, If any man will come after 
me, let him deny himself, and take 
up his cross, and follow me. 

25 For whosoever will save his life 
shall lose it: and whosoever will 
lose his life for my sake shall 
find it. ) 

26 For what is a man ‘profited, if 
he shall gain the whole “world, and 
lose his own soul? or what shall a 
man give in exchange for his soul? 

27 For the Son of man shall come 


De? ? a 
et 


St. MATTHEW. | 
in the glory of his Father with is 


A.D. 32. 


a Mt.3.2, note. 
b Kingdom (N. 
T.). vs.20,21; 

Mt.16.28. 
(Lk.1.31-33; 


25.41. (Gen.3. 
1; Rev.20.10.) 

g Gal.1.8; 

John 18.10,11. 

h ME.8.34-38; 
Lk.9.23-26; 

2 Cor.4.10,11, 

t Mk.8.36,37;° 
LkK.12.20,21; 
Jas.5.¥-6, 

jie. kosmos = 
world-system. 

k Rewards.Mk. 
9.41. (Dan.12. 
3; 1 Cor.3.14.) 

lt Judgments 
(the seven). 
Mt.25.31-46. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20.12.) 

mKingdom(N. 
T.). Mt.17.1- 
3.(Uk.1.31-33; 
1 Cor.15.24.) 

n Mx.9.2-10; 
LkE.9.27-36. 

o See Mt.4. 

21, note. 

P Rev.1.13- 

16; Heb.2.9; 
2 Cor.4.6. 

q Resurrec- 
tion. Mt. 
22.23,28-31, 
(Job 19.25; 

1 Cor.15.52.) 


r Kingdom (N. 


T.). vs.1-3; 

Mt.19.27,28. 

(Lk.1.31-33; 

1 Cor.15.28.) 
Ss Mt.3.17; 

1 Pet.1.21. 


angels; and then he shall “reward 


[1774 


. | 


every man ‘according to his works, _ 


The transfiguration: a picture 
of the future kingdom (Mk, 
9. 2-13; Lk. 9. 28-36). 

28 Verily I say unto you, There be 


jsome standing here, which shall not 
. |taste of death, till they see the Son 


of man coming in “his “kingdom. 
CHAPTER 17. 


AX? tafter six days Jesus taketh 
Peter, °-James, and John his 
brother, and bringeth them up into 
an high mountain apart, 

2 And ®*was ?transfigured before 
them: and his face did shine as the 
sun, and his raiment was white as 
the light. 

3 And, behold, there appeared 
unto them Moses and Elias talking 
with *him, 

4 Then answered Peter, and said 
unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to 
be here: if thou wilt, let us make 
here three tabernacles; one for 
thee, and one for Moses, and one 
for Elias. 

5, While he yet spake, behold, a 
bright cloud overshadowed them: 
and behold a voice out of the cloud, 
which said, This is my belovey 
SSon, in whom I am well pleased; 
hear ye him. 

6 And when the disciples heard 
it, they fell on their face, and were 
sore afraid. 

7 And Jesus came and touched 
them, and said, Arise, and be not 
afraid. 


1 Not the keys of the church, but of the kingdom of heaven 
13., i.e. the sphere of Christian profession. 


(cf. Isa. 22. 22; Rev. 3. 7). 


34-46). 


11-15). 


the other disciples. 


tiny of souls is clear from Rev. 1. 18. 


spirits are held by Christ alone. 


The apostolic h 
for it was Peter who opened the door of Chri 
of Pentecost (Acts 2. 38-42), and to Gentile 
There was no assumption by Peter of 
In the council James, not Peter, seems to ha 
Peter claimed no more for himself tha 
and an elder by office (1 Pet. 5. 1). 
he power of binding and loosin 


2 The disciples had been proclaiming Jesus 


King of a kingdom promised to the Jews, and “ 


trary, must be built 
cended, and made 
testimony 


death and resurrection (v, 21). 


g was shared 
That it did not involve the determination of the eternal des- 
The keys of death and the place of departed 


at hand.” 
upon testimony to Him as crucified, 
“Head over all things to the church” 
was ended, the new testimony was not yet ready, because the blood 
of the new covenant had not yet been shed, but our 


in the sense of Mt. 


A key is a badge of power or authority 
istory explains and limits this trust, 
stian opportunity to Israel on the day 
$ in the house of Cornelius (Acts 10. 
any other authority 
ve presided (Acts 15. 19; cf. Gal. 2. 
n to be an apostle by gift (1 Pet. 1, 


(Acts 15, 7-11). 


1), 
(Mt. 18. 18; John 20, 23) by 


as the Christ, ie. the covenanted 
The church, on the con- 
Tisen from the dead, as- 
(Eph. 1. 20-23). The former 


Lord begins to speak of His 


It is a turning-point of immense significance. 


3 The transfiguration scene contains, in miniature, all the elements of the future 


kingdom in manifestation: (1) 


The Lord, not 


1022 


in humiliation, but in glory (v. 2) 


| 


eer DS ae 


, 7. S, 
PERS ~ t ¥ 


178] 


8 And when they had lifted up 
their eyes, they saw no man, save 
Jesus only. 

9 And as they came down from 
the mountain, Jesus charged them, 
saying, Tell the vision to no man, 
until the ¢Son of man be risen again 
from the dead. 

10 And his disciples asked him, 
saying, 1!Why then say the scribes 
that Elias must first come? 

11 And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, Elias truly shall first 
come, and restore all things. 

12 But I say unto you, That Elias 
is come already, and they knew him) 
not, but have done unto him what- 
soever they listed. Likewise shall 
also the Son of man suffer of them. 

13 Then the disciples understood 
that he spake unto them of John 
the Baptist. 


The powerless disciples: the 
mighty Christ (Mk. 9. 14-29; 
Lk. 9, 37-43). 


14 And ‘when they were come to 
the multitude, there came to him a 
certain man, kneeling down to him, 
and saying, 

15 Lord, have mercy on my son: 
for he is lunatick, and sore vexed: 
for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, 
and oft into the water. \ 

16 And I brought him to thy dis- 
ciples, and they could not cure 
him. 

17 Then Jesus answered and said, 
O faithless.and perverse generation, 
"how long shall I be with you? how 
long shall I suffer you? bring him 
hither to ¢me. 

18 And Jesus rebuked the ¢devil; 
and he departed out of him: and 
tthe child was cured frora that very 
hour. 

19 Then came the disciples to| 


x 


t Si > 


A.D.32. | 


8.20, note. 


6 Mt.11.14; 
Lk.1.17; 
Mal.4.5; 
Mk.9.11-13. 


c¢ Mk.9.14-29; 
Lk.9.37-42; 
Psa.72.4-6. 


d Mt.14.18; 
John 15.5; 
Phil.4.13. 


edemon. Mt. 
7.22, note, 


f Miracles 
(N.T.). vs. 
14-18,24-27; 
Mt.20.30-34. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 


g Lit. little 
faith. Mt. 
16.8; 21.21; 
Lk.17.6. 


h Faith, Mk. 


t The two 
best MSS. 
omit v.21. 


j Acts 13.2,3; 
2 Cor.12.9. 


k Mt.16.21; 
MkE.9.30-32; 
Lk,9.43-45. 


l anticipated. 
nt Isa.60, 


10-17; 
49.22,23. 


pe). ) ok ae 3 a i. vPY hae! ee Se as 


St. MATTHEW. ~ p 


[17 27 
Jesus apart, and said, Why could 
not we cast him out? 

20 And Jesus said unto them, Be- 


cause of your unbelief: for verily 
I say unto you, If ye nave “faith as 


. {a grain of mustard seed, ye shall 


say unto this mountain, Remove 
hence to yonder place; and it shall 
remove; and iothing shall be im- 
possible unto you. 

21 *Howbeit this kind goeth not 
out but by /prayer and fasting. 


Jesus again foretells his death 
and resurrection (Mk. 9. 30- 
32; Lk. 9. 43-45). 


22 And while they abode in Gali- 
lee, Jesus said unto them, The Son 
of man shall be “betrayed into the 
hands of men: 

23 And they shall kill him, and 
the third day he shall be raised 
again. And they were exceeding 
sorry.’ 


The muracle of the tribute 
money. (Cf, Mk. 12. 13.) 


24 And when they were come to 


_|Capernaum, they that received trib- 


ute money came to Peter, and said, 
Doth not your master pay tribute? 

25 He saith, Yes. And when he 
was come into the house, Jesus /pre- 
vented him, saying, What thinkest 
thou, Simon? of whom do the kings 
of the earth take custom or trib- 
ute? of their own children, or of 
mstrangers? 

26 Peter saith unto him, Of stran- 
gers. Jesus saith unto him, Then 
are the children free. 

27 Notwithstanding, lest we 
should offend them, go thou to the 
sea, and cast an hook, and take up 
the fish that first cometh up; and 
when thou hast opened his mouth, 


(2) Moses, 


into the kinzdom, (Mt. 13. 43; cf. Lk. 9. 30, 31). 


glorified, representative of the redeemed who have passed through death 


(3) Elijah, glorified, representa- 


tive of the redeemed who have entered the kingdom by translation (1 Cor. 15. 


50-53; 1 Thes. 4. 14-17). 


(fot the moment) of Israel in the flesh in the future kingdom (Ezk. 37. 21-27). 


(4) Peter, James, and John, not glorified, representatives 


(5) 


The multitude at the foot of the mountain (v. 14), representative of the nations 
who are to be brought into the kingdom after it is established over Israel (isa. 11. 


10-12, etc.). 


1Cf, Mt,.11. 14; Mk. 9. 11, 12, 13; Lk. 1. 17; Mal. 3. 1; 4. 5, 6. j 
(1) Christ confirms the specific and still 
“Elias shall truly first come and restore all things.” 
din John the Baptist, and that yet to be ful- 
(2) But John the Baptist_had come already, 


must be construed together. 
prophecy of Mal. 4. 5, 6: 


as in Malachi, the prediction fulfille 


filled in Elijah, are kept distinct. 
and with a ministry so completely 


is come already.” 


fication, while yet presérving personal distinction, occurs (cf. John 1. 


All the passages 
unfulfilled 
Here, 


in the spirit and power of Elijah’s future min- 
istry (Lk. 1. 17) that in an adumbrative and typical sense it could be said: “Elias 


1023 


Cf. Mt. 10. 40: Phm. 12, 17, where the same thought of identi- 


27). 


St. 


18 1] 


thou shalt find a piece of money: 
that take, and give unto them for 
me and thee. 


CHAPTER 18. 


The sermon on the child-text 
(ME: 9. 33-37; Lk. 9. 46-48). 


T the same time came the dis- 

ciples unto Jesus, saying, 7>Who 
is the greatest in the “kingdom of 
heaven? ; 

2 And Jesus called a little ‘child 
unto him, and set him in the midst 
of them, 

3 And said, Verily I say unto you, 
Except ye be converted, and be- 
come as little children, ye shall not 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

4 Whoscever therefore shall hum- 
ble himself as this little child, the 
same is greatest in the kingdom of 
heaven. 

5 And whoso shall receive one 
such little child in my name 
receiveth me. 

6 But whoso shall ¢offend one of 
these little ones which believe in 
Me, it were better for him that a 
millstone were hanged about his 
neck, and that he were drowned in 
the depth of the sea. 

7 Woe unto the ‘world because of 
offences! for it must needs be that 
offences come; but woe to that man 
by whom the offence cometh! 

8 Wherefore Sif thy hand or thy 
foot offend thee, cut them off, and 
cast them from thee: it is better for 
thee to enter into 4life halt or 
maimed, rather than having two 
hands or two feet to be cast into 
heverlasting fire. 

9 And if thine eye offend thee, 
pluck it out, and cast it from thee: 
it is better for thee to enter into 
life with one eye, rather than hav- 
ing two eyes to be cast into ‘hell 


e. 

10 Take heed that ye despise not 
one of these little ones; for I say 
unto you, That in heaven their 
Jangels do always behold the face 
of my Father which is in heaven. 


The lost sheep: the seeking 
Lord. (Cf. Lk. 15. 3-7.) 


11 For the “Son of man is come to 
‘save that which was “lost. 
12 .How think ye? “if a man have 


an °hundred sheep, and one of them| 22 


be gone astray, doth he not leave 
the ninety and nine, and goeth into 
the mountains, and seeketh that 
which is gone astray? 


MATTHEW. 


A.D. 32. 


a Lk.9.46-48. 
b Mt.3.2, note. 


d cause to 
stumble, 
ME.9.42; Lk. 
17.1,2. 

ekosmos = 
mankind. 


Mt.4.8, note. 


f Mt.5.29,30; 
Mk.9.43-48. 

g Life (eter- 
nal). vs.8,9. 
He 

.7.14; 

Rev.22.19.) 

h The Greek 
has the be- 
fore ‘“‘ever- 
lasting.’’ 


t Gr. gehenna. 


Mt.5.22, 
note. 

j Heb.1.4, 
note. 

k See Mt.8. 
20, note. 

2 Rom.1.16, 
note. 

m Gr. apol- 


Tumi. John 3. 


16, note. 

n Parables 
(N.T.). vs. 
12-14,23-35; 


> Lk.17.3,4; 
Gai.6.1,2; 
Eph,4.30-32. 

q Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

ry Mt.18.19, 


s Or,assembly. 


1 Cor.5.3-5; 
6.1,5. 

t the Gentile 
and the tax 
gatherer. 

u Mt.16.19; 
John 20.22, 
23. 


v1 Pet.3.7. 
w Acts 20.7; 
1 Cor.14.26. 
# Cf.v.153, 
17.4. 
y.Rom.3.23, 
note. 


2 Forgiveness. 


10. (Lev.4. 

20; Mt.26. 

28.) 

aa Psa.78.40. 

Or, make . 

settlement | 
with, 

cc Rom.3.19, 
20; 5.8. 


1024 


[18 26 


13 And if so be that he find it, 
verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth 
more of that sheep, than of the 
ninety and nine which went not 
astray. A 

14 Evenso itis not the will of your 
Father which is in heaven, that one 
of these little ones should perish. 


Discipline in the future church. 


15 Moreover if thy *brother shall 
“trespass against thee, go and tell 
him his fault between thee and him 
alone: if he shall hear thee, thou 
hast gained thy brother. 

16 But if he will not hear thee, 
then take with thee one or two 
more, that in the mouth of ’two or 
three witnesses every word may be 
established. 

17 And if he shall neglect to hear 
them, tell 7 unto the Schurch: but if 
he neglect.to hear the church, let 
him be unto thee as an ‘heathen 


man and a publican. 

18 Verily I say unto you, Whatso- 
ever ye shall “bind on earth shall 
be bound in heaven: and whatso- 
ever ye shall loose on earth shall be 
loosed in heaven. L 

19 Again I say unto you, That if 
two of you shall “agree on earth as 
touching any thing that they shall 
ask, it shall be done for them of 


my Father which is in heaven. 


The simplest form of a local 
church. 


20 For “where two or three are 
gathered together in my name, 
there am I in the midst of them. 


Thelaw of forgiveness(Lk.17.3,4). 


21 Then came Peter to him, and 
said, Lord, how oft shall my 
brother Ysin against me, and I #for- 
give him? till seven times? 

22 Jesus saith unto him, I say not 
unto thee, Until seven times: but, 
Until ®¢seventy times seven. 

23 Therefore is the “kingdom of 
heaven likened unto a certain king, 
which would take account of his 
servants. 

24 And when he had begun to 
reckon, one was brought unto him, 
which owed him ten thousand tal- 
ents. ° 

25 But forasmuch as he had not 
to pay, his lord commanded him to 
be sold, and his wife, and children, 
and all that he had, and payment 


to be made. 
26 The servant therefore fell 
down, and worshipped him, saying, 


18 27] 


Sr. 


MATTHEW. [19 16 


Lord, have patience with me, and I 
éwill pay thee all. 

27 Then the lord of that servant 
was moved with compassion, and 
loosed him, and forgave him the 
debt. 

28 But the same servant went 
out, and found one of his fellowser- 
vants, which owed him an hundred 
“pence: and he laid hands on kim, 
and took him by the throat, say- 
ing, Pay me that thou owest. 

29 And his fellowservant fell 
down at his feet, and besought him, 
saying, Have patience with me, and 
I will pay thee all. 

30 And he 4would not: but went 
and cast him into prison, till he 
should pay the debt. 

31 So when his fellowservants 
saw what was done, they were very 
sorry, and came and told unto their 
lord all that was done. 

32 Then his lord, after that he 
had called him, said unto him, O 
thou wicked servant, ¢I forgave thee 
all that debt, because thou desiredst 


me: 

33 Shouldest not thou also have 
had compassion on thy fellowser- 
vant, even as I had pity on thee? 

34 And his lord was wroth, and 
delivered him to the /tormentors, 
till he should pay all that was due 
unto him. . 

35 So likewise shal: my heavenly 
Father do also unto you, if ye from 


your hearts forgive not every one) 


his brother their trespasses. 


CHAPTER 19. 
Jesus again in Juda. 


ae it came to pass, that when 
Jesus had finished these say- 
ings, he &departed from Galilee, and 
came into the coasts of Judza be- 
yond Jordan; 

2 And great multitudes followed 
him; and he “healed them there. 


Christ and divorce. (Cf. Mt. 5. 
31, 22; Mk. 10. 1-12; Lk. 16. 18; 
1 Cor. 7. 10-15.) 


3 The Pharisees also came unto 
him, ‘tempting him, and saying 
unto him, JIs it lawful for a man to 
put away his wife for every cause? 

4 And he answered and said unto 
them, *Have ye not read, ‘that he 
which made them at the beginning 
made them male and female, 

5 And said, For this cause shall a 
man leave father and mother, and 


A.D. 33.__|shall cleave to his wife: and they 
|twain shall be one flesh? 

Jee Bet 6 Wherefore they are no more 

b Eph. ye + |twain, but one flesh. What there- 

cdenarius = |fore God hath joined together, let 

7 4-2 pence; not man put asunder. ‘ 
Brice ue They say unto him, Why did 

Col.3.12,13. loses then command to give a 
: Le ate pane _ divorcement, and to put 

ct _ |her away? 

get justices 8 He ees oO. how Hue be- 

“grace, cause Oo (S ardness of your 
are hearts suffered you to put away 

30: also John |YOUF Wives: but from the beginning 

1.17, note. it was not so. 
ee ie 9 And I say unto you, ?Whoso- 

40. “See also |¢Ver shall put away his wife, ex- 

Mt.7.28. cept 1t be for fornication, and shall 
hMt425; |marry another, committeth’ adul- 

7.93.35, |tery: and whoso marrieth her 
i Temptation. Rane is put away doth commit 

a -18. adultery. 

fers 10 His disciples say unto him, If 
7 Mt5.31: the case of the man be so with his 
pa wife, itisnot good tomarry, __ 

rrnty ae 14 But he said unto ae TAll 

The passage |Men cannot receive this saying, 

is significant |save they to whom it is given. : 

as Jesus’ | 12 For there are some eunuchs, 
of the Gene- |which were so born from their 
sis narrative {mother’s womb: and there are some 
ees eunuchs, which were made eunuchs 
vs.4-8; Mt, |Of men: and there be eunuchs, 

22.31,32. which have smade themselves eu- 

eet Pk nuchs for the ‘kingdom of heaven’s 
mGen.2.23; |sake. He that is able to receive it, 

Eph 5.29: let him receive st. 

6.16. Jesus receives and blesses little 
a Daeat children (Mk. 10. 13-16; Lk. 18. 
o Thus con- 15-17). 

firming the | 13 Then were there brought unto 

authorship j|him little children, that he should 
eee: put Ais hands on them, and pray: 

Heb.3.15; |and the disciples rebuked them. 

7.18,19._ 14 But Jesus said, Suffer little 
BP ees children, and forbid them not, to 

1 Cor.7.10, |Come unto me: for “of such is the 

11. But see |‘kingdom of heaven. 

Yale aac 15 And he laid his hands on them, 

John 16.12. and departed thence. 

51 Coe. a, The nial vaund ed ae 10. 
- C£.4 Tim., | » 917-303 . 18. 18-30; cf. . 

tees 2 25-30), 

pron 16 And, behold, one came and 

1 Pet.2.2 said unto him, Good Master, what 
v Life (eter- |good. thing shall I do, that I may 

nel). vel |have Yeternal life? x 

as46. (Mt. | 17 And he said unto him, Why 

7:14;Rev.  |callest thou me good? there is none 
eyo ae tes good but one, that 1s, God: but if 

PRonn thou wilt enter into life, “keep the 
19; 10.1-4 commandments, 


18 He saith unto him, Which?. 


19 19] 


Jesus said, ¢Thou shalt do no mur- 
der, Thou shalt not commit adul- 
tery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou 
shalt not bear false witness, 

19 Honour thy father and thy 
mother: and, “Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself. 

20 The young man saith unto 
him, All these things have I ¢kept 
from my youth up: what lack I 
yet? 

21 Jesus said unto him, If thou 
wilt be ¢perfect, go and sell that 
thou hast, and give to the poor, and 
thou shalt have treasure in heaven: 
and come and follow me. 

22 But when the young man heard 
that saying, he went away sorrow- 
ful: for he had great possessions. Jer.32.17; 

23 Then said Jesus unto his disci-| wi10.27. 
ples, Verily I say unto you, That a|i Christ (Sec- 


a Ex.20.13. 

6 Ex.20.12; 
Eph.6.1,2. 

c Lev.19.18; 
Lk.10.29- 
37; Rom.13.9 

d Phil.3.6,7; 
contra vs. 


eSee Mt.s. 
48, note. 


Ex.14.13; 


Jrich_ man shall hardly enter into| 9rd Advent). 
the kingdom of heaven. (Deut.30.3; 


24 And again I say unto you, It Moar 
is easier for a camel to go through|* See Mt-25. 


the eye of a needle, than for a rich a Stik. 
man to enter into the kingdom of|_1.31-33. 
God. ee ee 
25 When his disciples heard it,] 37,28.” Mt 
they were exceedingly amazed, say-| 211-11. (Lk 
ing, Who then can be “saved? are aa 
26 But Jesus beheld them, and] m mic.10.20: 
said unto them, With men this is} Lk.18.29. 
‘impossible; but with God all things aon Tak. 
are possible. 1.3-5.. 
The apostles’ future place in the|> PoLens 
kingdom. (N.T.). vs. 
1-16; Mt.21. 
27 Then answered Peter and said| 28-32. (Mt. 
unto him, Behold, we have forsaken] 3;13-16: she 
all, and followed thee; what shall p 1sa.5.7;_ 
we have therefore? Mt.21.28-33; 
28 And Jesus said unto them,| Joho 151-5 
Verily I say unto you, That ye 16) More 
which have followed me, in the Ire-|¢ Lk.14.21; 
generation Jwhen the Son of man Sate isee 
‘shall sit in the ¥/throne of his glory,|” John 94:° 
ye also. shall sit upon twelve| 1 Cor.12 
thrones, 2judging the twelve tribes ee a 
‘or.5.10, 
of Israel. 11 Cor.3.14, 
29 And “every one that hath for-| note; 9.24; 
saken houses, or brethren, or sis- o tae 
ters, or father, or mother, or wife, or]" yy” 
children, or lands, for my name’s)vLt.17.7- 
sake, shall receive an hundredfold, oieusen 
and shall inherit everlasting life. capa aaht? 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D. 33, 


pes 


30 "But many that are first shall _ 
be last; and the last shall be first. 


CHAPTER 20. 


Parable of the labourers in the 
vineyard. 


FoR the kingdom of heaven is 
ike unto a man that is an 
householder, which went out early 
in the morning to hire labourers 
into his ?vineyard. 

2 And when he had agreed with 
the labourers for a penny a day, he 
sent them into his vineyard. 

3 And he went out about the third 
hour, and saw Yothers standing 
idle in the marketplace, 

4 And said unto them; Go ye also 
into the vineyard, and whatsoever 
is right I will give you. And they 
went their way. 

5 Again he went out about the 
sixth and ninth hour, and did like- 
wise. 

6 And about the eleventh hour he 
went out, and found others standing 
idle, and saith unto them, 7Why 


-|stand ye here all the day idle? 


7 They say unto him, Because no 
man hath hired us. He saith unto 
them, Go ye also into the vineyard; 
and whatsoever is right, that shall 
ye receive, 

8 So when Seven was come, the 
lord of the vineyard saith unto his 
steward, Call the labourers, and 
give them their hire, beginning 
from the last unto the first. 

9 And when they came that were 
hired about the eleventh hour, they 
‘received every man a penny. 

10 But when the first came, they 
supposed that they should have re- 
ceived more; and they likewise 
received every man a penny, 

11 And when they had received 
it, they “murmured against the 
goodman of the house, 

12 Saying, These last have 
wrought but one hour, and thou 
hast made them *equal unto us, 
which have borne the burden and 
heat of the day. 

; 13 But he answered one of them, 


Sie palingenesia = 
again, in Tit. 3. 5, 


19-23) when the kingdom shall come. 
1 Cor. 15. 24, note.) 

2 Disclosing how the 
set up. The kingdom 


(See 


1026 


“re-creation,” “making new.” 
x There it refers to the new birth of a believing person: here to 
the re-creation of the social order, and renewal of the earth (Isa. 11. 6-9; 


The word occurs once 


Rom. 8. 


“Kingdom (0.T.),”? Zech, 12. 8, note; 


promise (Isa. 1. 26) will be fulfilled when the kingdom is 
D will be administered over 
cording to the ancient theocratic judgeship (Jud. 


Israel through the apostles, ac- 
218). 


maviwer ee . bs ‘ i A oid y Oa cuir etn ‘ ce) oie Gone 
20 14] _ St. MATTHEW. (211 


and said, Friend, I do thee no| A.»D.33. |given to them for whom it is pre- 


wrong: didst not thou agree with 
me for a penny? 
14 Take that thine fs, and go thy 


a Rom.9.20,21. 
b Mt.19.20; 


pared of my Father. 
24 And when the ten heard i¢, 
they were moved with “indignation 


way: I will give unto this last, even cMiieol against the two brethren. 

as unto thee. d Mt.26.47-57. | 25 But Jesus called them unto 
15 Is it not lawful for me to do §Mt26.67 6g. |nim, and said, Ye know that the 

4what I will with mine own? Is/2Mt.27.26. princes of the Gentiles exercise do- 

thine eye evil, because I am good? pee ee minion over them, and they that 
16 So the last shall be first, and|’ Cfinc vo are great exercise authority upon 

the first last: for many be called,| 35-37. them. 

but few chosen. pian 26 But it shall °not be so among 


Jesus again foretells his death 


1Mt.3.2, note. 


you: but whosoever will be great 


and resurrection (Mk. 10. 32- Mets Fr fect you, let lumijoe yours saa 
ig) pe ay Aelatets Peacied te Fein 48113 27 And whosoever will be chief 
ER ‘dj heen a j 159,53.4-6- ones you, let him be your Sser- 
nd Jesus going up to Jerusa- or.5.21; | vant: 
lem took the twelve disciples apart] S#3-13;,, | 28 Even as the ’Son of man came 
s f 1 Pet.2.24; ais 
in the way, and said unto them, 3.18. not to be ministered unto, but to 
18 “Behold, we go up to Jerusa-|” Lk.22.23-27. |minister, and to give his life a Sran- 
lem; and the ¢Son of man shall be/? M@52323}  jsom for many. 
betrayed unto the chief priests and)» servant. . . 
unto the scribes, and they shall} 1 Cor.9.19-22. a od OF Ee Pee pice 
condemn him to death q pene ser- ( . LO. 46-52. ° . 18. 35-43). 
< 2 . ant, 
19 And shall deliver him to the|, mts.20, 29 And as they ‘departed from 
¢Gentiles to fmock, and to Sscourge, a 5 Jericho, a great multitude followed 
U.cele 


and to “crucify him: and the third 
day he shall ‘rise again. 


$ Isa.53.10,11: 
Mt.20.22, 


him. 
30 And, behold, 1two blind men 


OT vegas ieecee. (aiees ; 
James and John, through their Ex14.30, ee Ree Pipidingia pias pale 
mother, make an ambitious} note; Isa.59. |. * H ; O 
20, note; out, saying, Have mercy on us, 
request (Mk. 10. 35-45). Rom.3.24, |Lord, thou “son of David. 

20 Then came to him the smother] , 2? Mx.10. 31 And the multitude rebuked 
of Zebedee’s children with her sons,| 46'52;Lk. |them, because they should hold 
worshipping Aim, and desiring a} 18.35-43. their peace: but they cried the 
certain thing of him. 4a ee more, saying, Have mercy on us, 

21 And he said unto her, What] 3.s,19-37; O Lord, thou son of David. 
wilt thou? She saith unto him,| Isa-11.10-12; | 32 And Jesus stood still, and 
Grant that these my “two sons may| E2*37-2h  |called them, and said, ‘What will 
sit, the one on thy right hand, and dee ay ye that I shall do unto you? 
the other on the ieft, in thy /king- arene) rah 33 They say unto him, Lord, that 
cen ‘But Jesus answered and said, “ John 8.6. °34 reoliresas bed. bite ra on 
Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye} 14.14; 15.32; them, and touched their eyes: and 
able to drink of the "cup that I PAST “immediately their eyes received 
shall drink of, and to be hiagenee (N.T.). vs.30-|Sight, and they followed him, 
with the baptism that Iam baptized| 34; Mt.22. 

: : 17-22. (Mt. Y 
“igh They say unto him, We are) 3/73: heeeaa. aE Caen ‘ok a 
able. . 9. 1 bli er of hime 

23 And he saith unto them, Yel» vs.1-9; © ae kK, ve (7 cH 9. 9: Mk 

satiegs Zech.9.9 self as King (Zech, 9. 9; 
shall drink indeed of my cup, and) fcc 14. 11. 1-10; Lk. 19, 29-38). 
be baptized with the baptism that 4-9. ‘The two a 
I am baptized with: but to sit on| advents are 5 wipes when they drew ‘nigh unto 
my right hand, and on my left, is ae Jerusalem, and were come to 


not mine to give, but it shall be 


Bethphage, unto the mount of 


— 


1 A discrepancy has been imagine 


Lk. 18. 35. 
parted from Jericho. 
*‘Tesus, thou Son of David,” 
of the “two,’”’ we know nothing. 
before Jesus entered Jericho. 


As to the form of appeal, 


d between this account and those in Mk. 10. 46; 
Matthew and Mark obviously refer to a work of healing as Jesus de- 
Bartimzus, the active one of the two, the one who cried, 
is specifically mentioned by Mark. 
The healing described by Luke (18. 35) occurred 


Of the other one 
“Son of David’ (cf. Mt. 9, 


27; 15. 22; 21. 9), Jesus must have been so addressed constantly. The narratives 


therefore supplement, but in no wise contra 


1027 


dict each other. 


21 2] 


Olives, then sent jesus two dis- AD. 33. 


ciples, 

2 Saying unto them, Go into the|} Gyre oot 
village over against you, and] Advent). Mt. 
straightway ye shall find an ass SSS ray 
tied, and a colt with her: loose} 77) ggom(N. 
them, and bring them unto me. T.). vs.1-11; 

3 And if any man say ought unto bear 
you, ye shall say, The Lord hath} j Co-15.03) 
“need of them; and straightway he 4 CEMt 27.22; 
will send them. Psa,118.26. 

4 All this was done. that it might ceed shovels 
be 1fulfilled which was spoken by|2Li.19.45; 


the prophet. saying, Mk.11.15-18. 

5 Tell ye the daughter of Sion, ete 
>Behold, thy ‘King cometh unto] introduced, 
thee, meek, and’sitting upon an ass,} as this oat 
and a colt the foal of an ass. pa eb 

6 And the disciples went, and did] to Israel as 
as Jesus commanded them, King. 

7 And brought the ass, and the peat 
ee and put on ae their clothes, |; CeLic 14.21; 
and they set him thereon. cts 3.1-10. 

8 And a very great multitude|* Seer MAE 28-90, 
spread their garments in the way;|;Pes3.2. . 
others cut down branches from the} John 11.54. 
trees, and strawed them in the way. |” jee 

9 And the multitudes that went] Cf wiqi 
before, and that followed, cried,| 1-11; Lk.19. 
saying, ¢Hosanna to the son of ee 


David: Blessed is he that comet 
in the name of the ‘Lord: Ho- 
sanna in the highest. 

10 And when he was come into 
Jerusalem, all the city was moved, 


no other place 
is the human 
Christ so ten- 
derly associ- 
ated, while it 
also was the 


saying, Who is this? place of mani- 
11 And the /multitude said, This| {s*#tion of 

is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of| power (John 

Galilee. F i as 44) 


Jesus’ second purification of the ete ee 
temple (Mk. 11. 15-18: Lk. 19. tary fig tree. 
45-47. Cf. John 2. 13-16), ) 


Lk.13.6-9. F 
e€ wither 
12 And Jesus went into the tem-| fig tree isa. 
ple of God, and écast out all them parsbobs ray 
that sold and bought in the temple, ing Yorael (Li. 
and Lote acl —_ le of = eee 
moneychangers, an e€ seats o Se pene 
them that sold doves, pate id 

13 And said unto them, It is writ-| again bud. 
ten, ‘My house shall be called the ores 
house of prayer; but ‘ye have made| Mic 1S35e"" 
it a den of thieves. (Mt.8.2,3; 

14 And the Jblind and the lame rie eel 
came to him in the temple; and hel” t1'53-74M* 
healed them. 6; 1 Cor.13.2. 

15 And when the chief priests and 
scribes saw the wonderful things 
that he did, and the children crying 
in the temple, and saying, fHosanna 
to the “son of David; they were 


S Mt.7.7-11; 
John 15.7; 
sore displeased, - 


1John5.14,15. 
¢ Mk.11.27-33; 
Lk.20.1-8. 
u John 1.19-28. 
v Cf.v.46. See 
Prov.29.25. 


St. MATTHEW. 


[2i 27 


16 And said unto him, Hearest 
thou what thesé say? And Jesus 
saith unto them, Yea; have ye 
never read, ‘Out of the mouth of 
babes and sucklings thou hast per- 
fected praise? 

17 And he “left them, and went 
out of the city into "Bethany; and 
he lodged there. 


The barren fig tree cursed (Mk. 
: 11. 12-14, 20-24). 


18 Now in the morning as he re- 
turned into the city, he °hungered. 

19 And when he saw a ?fig tree in 
the way, he came to it, and found 
nothing thereon, but leaves only, 
and said unto it, Let no fruit grow 
on thee henceforward for ever. 
And presently the fig tree 4withered 
away. 

20 And when the disciples saw it, 
they marvelled, saying, How soon- 
is the fig tree withered away! 

21 Jesus answered and said unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, If ye 
have ‘faith, and doubt not, ye shall 
not only do this which is done to 
the fig tree, but also if ye shall say 
unto this mountain, Be thou re- 
moved, and be thou cast into the 
sea; it shall be done. 

22 And ‘all things, whatsoever ye 
shall ask in prayer, believing, ye 
shall receive. 


Jesus’ autherity questioned 
(Mk. 11. 27-33; Lk. 20. 1-8). 


23 And when he was come into 
the temple, the chief priests and the 
elders of the people came unto him 
as he was teaching, and said, By 
what ‘authority doest thou these 
things? and who gave thee this 
authority? 

24 And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, I also will ask you one 
thing, which if ye tell me, I in like 
wise will tell you by what authority 
I do these things. 

25 The “baptism of John, whence 
was it? from heaven, or of men? 
And they reasoned with themselves, 
saying, If we shall say, From 
heaven; he will say unto us, Why 
did ye not then believe him? 

26 But if we shall say, Of men; 
we "fear the people; for all hold 
John as a prophet. 

27 And they answered Jesus, and 
said, We cannot tell. And he said 


1 The King’s final and official offer of Himself according to Zech. 9.9. Acclaimed by 
an unthinking multitude whose real belief is expressed in verse 11, but with no welcome 
1028 


21 28] 


unto them, @Neither tell I you by 
what authority I do these things. 


Parable of the two sons. 


28 But what think ye? °A cer- 
tain man had two sons; and he 
came to the first, and said, Son, go 
work to day in my ‘vineyard. 

29 He answered and said, I will 
not: but afterward he repented, 
and went. 

30 And he came to the second, 
and said likewise. And he answered 
and said, I go, sir: and went not. 

31 Whether of them twain did the 
will of Ais father? They say unto 
him, The first. Jesus saith unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, That 
the publicans and the harlots go 
into the kingdom of God before you. 

32 For John came unto you in the 
way of frighteousness, and ye be- 
lieved him not: but the publicans 
and the harlots believed him: and 
ye, when ye had seen it, repented 
not afterward, that ye might be- 
lieve him. 

Parable of the householder de- 
manding fruit from his vine- 
yard (Mk. 12. 1-9; Lk. 20. 9-19. 
Cf. Isa.’5. 1-7). 


33 Hear another parable: There 
was a certain householder, which 
planted oe and hedged it 
round about, and digged a wine- 
press in it, and built a tower, and 
let it out to *husbandmen, and went 
into afar country: _ 

34 And when the ‘time of the 
fruit drew near, he sent his servants 
to the husbandmen, that they might 
receive the fruits of it. 

35 And the husbandmen took his 
servants, and beat one, and killed 
another, and stoned another. 

36 Again, he sent other servants 
more than the first: and they did 
unto them likewise. 

37 But last of ail he sent unto 
them his Json, saying, They will 
reverence my son. 

38 But when the husbandmen 
saw the son, they said among them- 
selves, This is the *heir; come, let 
us kill him, and let us seize on his 
inheritance. 


St. MATTHEW. 


AD. 33. 


@ Cf.v.32. See 
Mt.3.3. 


> Parables (N. AN os 
; Mt. 


Lk.21.29- “31. ) 
¢See Mt.20. 

ge “vine- 

yard,’’ refs. 
4@Cf.Lk.15.20, the 

other perfect 

illustration of re- 

pentance. See 

Acts 17.30, note, 


* 6 Mt.7.21-23; 15.8, 


FSee Roz. 10, 
10, “‘right- 
eousness,’’ 


9 Lk.3.12,13. 


* Mt.23.2; poueb. 
1; Jas.5.7,8, 


¢Mk.11.13. 
J John 3.16; 
Heb.1.2. 


note, 


& Heb. 1.2; 
Rom,8.16,17. 

' Cf.2 Sam.12.5-9.. 

™ Psa.118.22,23. 

” Christ (as 
Stone). vs.42-44; 
Acts 4.11, (Ex.17. 
6; 1 Pet.2.8.) 

° Christ (First Ad- 
vent). mite 26.31. 
(eee 3.1) 


DP Jzhovah. 
Psa.118.23. 


gi.e, national 
Israel, the barren 
ne Qs. 33-41.) 
Cf.Isa.5.1-7. 


r Kingdom 
(N.T.).vs.33-43; 


+39. 
(Lk. 1.31 33; 
1Cor.15. 24.) 
Or, Whosoever 
fails on this 
stone shall be 
crushed together 
il.e. theJews, Isa, 
8.14; Rom.9.32, 
33; 1 Cor.1.233; 
but on whomso- 
ever it may fall, 
he will be scat- 
tered as dust 
(Gr. “win- 
nowed,"’ i.e. the 
Gentile nations, 
Dan.2.34,35,45, 
note). 


t Mt.14.5; 21.26, 
46; Mk.11.18,32. 


u Mt.13.13,14. 
v Mt.3.2,. note. 


w Parables 
(N.T.9. vs.2-14; 


Mt.24,32,33. 
(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 


[22° 


39 And they caught him, and cast 
him out of the vineyard, and slew 


him. 

40 When the lord therefore of the 
vineyard cometh, what will he do 
unto those husbandmen? 

41 /They say unto him, He will 
miserably destroy those wicked 
men, and will let out Ais vineyard 
unto other husbandmen, which shall 
render him the fruits in their sea- 
sons. 

42 Jesus saith unto them, Did ye 
never “read in the scriptures, The 
stone which the builders °rejected, 
the same is become the head of the 
corner: this is the Lord’s doing, 
and it is marvellous in our eyes? 

43 Therefore say I unto ¢you, The 
Irkingdom of God shall be taken 
from you, and given to a nation 
bringing forth the fruits thereof. 

44 sAnd whosoever shall fall on 
this 2stone shall be broken: but on 
whomsoever it shall fall, it will 
grind him to powder. i 

45 And when the chief priests 
and Pharisees had heard his para- 
bles, they perceived that he spake 

of them. 


46 But when they sought to lay 
hands on him, they ‘feared the 
multitude, because they took him 
for a prophet. 


CHAPTER 22. 


Parable of the marriage feast 
Lk. 14. 16-24). 


AN Jesus answered and spake 
unto them again by “parables, 
and said; 

2 The “kingdom of heaven is 
Wike unto a certain king, which 
made a marriage for his son, 

3 And sent forth his servants to 
call them that were bidden to the 
wedding: and they would not come. 

4 Again, he sent forth other ser- 
vants, saying, Tell them which are 
bidden, Behold, I have prepared my 
dinner: my oxen and, my fatlings 
are killed, and all things are ready: 
come unto the marriage. 

5 But they made light of 7¢, and 
went their ways, one to his farm, 
another to his merchandise: 


from the official representatives of the nation, He was soon to hear the multitude 


shout: “Crucify Him.’’ 


1 Note that’ Matthew here as in verse 31 uses the larger word, kingdom of God. 


(Cf. Mt. 6. 33, note.) 


The kingdom of heaven {Mt. 3. 2, note; 1 Cor. 15. 24, sum- 


mary) will yet be set up. Meantime the kingdom of God ge His righteousness is, 


taken from Israel nationally and given to the Gentiles (Rom, 9 


30-33), 


2 Christ as the “Stone” is revealed in a threefold way: (1) To Israel Christ, 


1029 


Ah 


22 6] 


' 6 And the remnant took his ser- 


vants, and entreated them spite- 
fully, and slew them. 

7 But when the king heard there- 
of, he was wroth: and he sent forth 
his armies, and destroyed those 
murderers, and “burned up their 
city. 

8 Then saith he to his servants, 
The wedding is ready, but they 
which were bidden were not worthy. 

9 Go ye therefore into the high- 


bid to the marriage. 


| 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D, 33. 


@ Fulfilled as to 
Jerusalem A.D. 
70. Lk.21.20-24, 


5 The world-wide’ 
call. Mt.28.16-20; 
Rev.22.17. 

¢ Acts 28.28, 

4 Mt. 13.47. 


¢Rom.10.1-3; 
contra, Phil. 
3.7-9. 


ways, and as many as ye shall ssl bee 
g 


10 Sothose servants went out into 
the ‘highways, and gathered to- 
gether all as many as they found, 
“both bad and good: and the wed- 
ding was furnished with guests. 

11 And when the king came in to 
see the guests, he saw there a man 
which had not on a wedding gar- 
ment: 

12 And he saith unto him, Friend, 
how camest thou in hither not hav- 
ing a ‘wedding garment? And he 
was ‘speechless. 

13 Then said the king to the ser- 
vants, Bind him hand and foot, and 
take him away, and cast Aim into 
Souter darkness; there shall be 
weeping and gnashing of teeth. 

14 For ‘many are called, but few 
are chosen. 


Jesus answers the Herodians 
(Mk. 12, 13-17; Lk. 20. 20-26), 


1S *Then went the Pharisees, and 
took counsel how they might en- 
tangle him in his talk. 

16 And they sent out unto him 
their disciples with the /Herodians, 
saying, Master, we know that thou 
art true, and teachest the way of 
God in truth, neither carest thou for 
any man: for thou regardest not 
the person of men. 

17 Tell us therefore. What think- 
est thou? Is it lawful to give ‘trib- 
ute unto Cesar, or not? 

18 But Jesus perceived their wick- 
edness, and said, Why ‘tempt ye 
me, ye hypocrites? 

19 Shew me the tribute money. 
And they brought unto him a penny. 

20 And he said unto them, Whose 


coming not as a splendid monarch but in the form of a servant 
and rock of offence (Isa. 8. 14, 15; Rom. 9. 32, 


the church, Christ is the foundati 


Mt.13.40-43, 
49,50. 


A Mt.20.16; Isa.65, 
2; Mt.23.37; 
Rom.8.30. 


‘In the different 
classes, vs.15-40, 
Jesus meets rep- 
resentatives of all 
Israel, Pharisees, 
Sadducees, Hero- 
dians (Mt.3.7, 
note). For them, 
silenced but un- 
repentant, no 
message Is left 
but “‘woe"’ 

(Mt. 23). 


lj C#.M&.8.15. 


& Cf. Mt.17.24-27. 


' Temptation. 
Mt.26.41. (Gen. 
3.1; Jas.1.14.) 


m1 Pet.2,.13-17, 

"1 Cor.3.23; 12.27; 
2 Cor.6.15. 

© Resurrection. 
vs.23.28-31; Mt 


27.52,53. Gob 19. 
25; 1 Cor.15.52.) 


P Deut.25.5. 


@1 Tim.1.4;4.736.4; 
2 Tim.2.24-26, 


ir Or, ye deceive 
yourselves, etc, 
Jesus’ answer 
gives the three 
incapacities of 
the rationalist: 
self-deception 
(Rom. 1.21,22); 
ignorance of the 
spiritua content 
of Scripture 
(Acts 13,27); dis- 
belief in the in- 
tervention of 
divine power 
(2 Pet.3.5-9), 


5 Mt.27.52,53. 

¢Heb.1.4, note, 

& Inspiration. 
vs. 31,32; Mt.24; 
15,37-39. (Ex.4, 
15; Rev.22,19.) 


vEx.3.6. 


on-stone an 


1030 


en 


superscrip- 


image and 


is this 
tion? 

21 They say unto him, Cesar’s. 
Then saith he unto them, Render 
therefore unto Czsar the things 
which are Cesar’s; and unto "God 
the things that are God’s. 

22 When they had heard these 
words, they marvelled, and left 
him, and went their way. 


Jesus answers the Sadducees 
(Mk. 12, 18-27; Lk. 20. 27-38). 


23 Yhne same day came to him the 
Sadducees, which say that there is 
no °resurrection, and asked him, 

24 Saying, Master, Moses said, ?If 
a man die, having no children, his 
brother shall marry his wife, and 
raise up seed unto his brother. 

25 9%Now there were with us seven 
brethren: and the first, when he. 
had married a wife, deceased, and, 
having no issue, left his wife unto 
his brother: 

26 Likewise the second also, and 
the third, unto the seventh, 

di And last of all the woman died 
also. 

28 Therefore in the resurrection 
whose wife shall she be of the 
seven? for they all had her. 

29 Jesus answered and said unto 
them, "Ye do err, not knowing the 
Scriptures, nor the power of God. 

30 For in the ‘resurrection they 
neither marry, nor are given in 
marriage, but are ‘as the angels of 
Godin heaven. _ 

31 But as touching the resurrec- 
tion of the dead, have ye not read 
“that which was spoken unto you 
by God, saying, 

32 "Iam the God of Abraham, and 
the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob? God is not the God of the 
dead, but of the living. 

33 And when the multitude heard 
this, they were astonished at his 
doctrine, 


Jesus answers the Pharisees 
(Mk. 12, 28-34. Cf. Lk. 10. 25-28), 
34 But when the Pharisees had 
heard that he had put the Saddu- 


cees to silence, they were gathered 
together. 


33; 1 Cor. 1. 23; 1 Pet. 2. 8 5 (2pet 
id the head of the corner @ coe 3. 
ile world-powers (see “Gentiles,” Lk. 


(Sn ei rv 
2 AAS Se UF ne 
7 . 4 


Z 


22 35] St. MATTHEW. 
35 Then one of them, which was} A.D. 33. 
a lelawyer, asked him a question, 
tempting him, and saying, 
36 Master, ‘which is the %great|, crt 10.05 
commandment in the law? Nereis 
37 Jesus said unto him, OW tun wh 
shalt ¢love the Tord thy. God 11h) MA ea 

» a eart, an Ew y soul, CEO Gal.3, 
ay Wi : 

ae firstand great com.|'Pst8sh™ 
Sala like unto tie 

eut.0.9. 

/ fThou shalt love we thy neighbour as|rtev.t9.18. ct. 
rt epee ee eres 
40" On. these.two.c andments |, ar 19: Rom.’ 
hang £all the law and the prophets. 13.3-10. 


4 


, 


. for they say, and do not. 


4 


[23 21 


ACE. Mt.21.24; 
John 19.7. Jesus 
question is not 
personal but doc- 


Jesus questions the Rivarteres 
(Mk, 12. 35-37; Lk. 20. 41-44). 


41 While the Pharisees were gath-| tinal: Whose” 
ered together, Jesus “asked them, | siah?’’ Cf.Acts 


42 Saying, What think ye of 2.25-36; Rom.1. 


Christ? whose son is he? They say|itit. in the spirit. 
unto him, The son of David. Cf. Mk. 12.36; 


43 He saith unto them, How then}. ““*?? 
doth David ‘in Jspirit call him Lord, Bein. | 
saying, 18; Acts 2.4.) 

44 *The Lorp said unto my Lord, | Psa.110.1. 


Sit thou on my right hand, till I 
make thine enemies thy footstool? 

45 If David then call him Lord, 
how is he his son? 

46 And no man was able'to answer 
him a word, neither durst any man 
from that day forth ask him any 
more questions. 


CHAPTER 23. . 


The marks of a Pharisee (Mk. 12. 
38-40; Lk. 20. 45-47). 


SHEN spake Jesus to the multi- 
tude, and to his disciples, 

2 Saying, The scribes and the 
Pharisees ‘sit in Moses’ seat: 

3 All therefore whatsoever they 
bid you observe, that observe and 
do; but do not ye after their works: 


'Cf. Ezra 7.6,25,26. 
Jesus’ disciples 
were to honour 
the law, but not 
the hypocriticat 
teachers of it. 


m™ Cf, Mt.11.29,30; 
Acts 15.10; Gal. 
5.1; Col.2.16, 


” Mt.6.1,2,5,16. 


° Passages of 
Scripture en+ 
closed in a small 
case, bound upon 
arm or forehead, 
Deut.6.8. 


?Gr. teacher, 


@i.e. authoritative 
teacher. 


rLit. Neither may 
ye be called 
leaders, because 
your leader is 
Christ. 


* The best MSS, 
omit v.14. 


t condemnation. 
% Acts 2.10. 


v Gehenna, 
Mt.5.22, note, 


w Mt.15.14; Mal. 
2.8. 


4 For “they bind heavy burdens 
and grievous to be borne, and lay 
them on men’s shoulders; but they 
themselves will not move them 
with one of their fingers. 

5 But all their works they do for 
to "be seen of men: they make 
broad their °phylacteries, and en- 
large the borders of their garments, 

6 And love the uppermost rooms 
at feasts, and the chief seats in the 
synagogues, f f 


xOr, bound; also 
v.18, “‘guilty.”” 


vSanctify, holy 
(things). 
vs.17-19; Mt.27, 
53. (Mt.4.5; Rev. 
22.11.) 


7 And greetings.in the markets, 
and to be called of men, Rabbi, 
Rabbi. 

8 But be not ye called Rabbi: for 
one is your #Master, even Christ; 
and all ye are brethren, 

9 And call no man your ¢father 
upon the earth: for one is your 
Father, which is in heaven. 

10 *Neither be ye called masters: 
for one is your Master, even Christ. 

11 But he that is greatest among 
you shall be your servant. 

12 And whosoever shall exalt him- 
self shall be abased; and he that 
seal humble himself shall be ex- 

ted. 


Jesus denounces woe upon the 
Pharisees (Mk. 12. 38-40; Lk. 
20. 47). 


13 But woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut 
up the kingdom of heaven against 
men: for ye neither go in your- 
selves, neither suffer ye them that 
are entering to go in. 

14 SWoe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye de- 
vour widows’ houses, and for a pre- 
tence make long prayer: therefore 
ye shall receive the greater ‘dam- 
nation. 

15 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye “com- 
pass sea and land to make one 
proselyte, and when he is made, ye 
make him twofold more the child of 
vhell than yourselves. 

16 Woe unto you, ye “blind 
guides, which say, Whosoever shall 
swear by the temple, it is nothing; 
but whosoever shall swear by the 
gold of the temple, he is a *debt- 


r! 

17 Ye fools and blind: for whether 
is greater, the gold, or the temple 
that Ysanctifieth the gold? 

18 And, Whosoever shall swear by 
the altar, it is nothing; but who- 
soever sweareth by the gift that is 
upon it, he is guilty. 

19 Ye fools and blind: for whether 
is greater, the gift, or the altar that 
sanctifieth the gift? 

20 Whoso therefore shall swear by 
the altar, sweareth by it. and by all 
things thereon. 

21 And whoso shall swear by the 
temple, sweareth by it, and by him 
that dwelleth therein. 


1Gr. nomikos, ‘‘of the law’’; occurs also, Lk. 7. 30; 10. 25; 11. 45, 46, 52; 14. 3; 


Except in the last instance, 
In Tit. 3. 13 the term has the 
1031 


Tit; (3.013. 
(Mt. 2. 4, note). 


‘lawyer’ is another name for “scribe” 


modern meaning. 


‘gogues, and persecute them from 


23 22] 


St. MATTHEW. 


- ~ 


a 
[24 4 


22 And he that shall swear by| A.D. 33. 35 That upon you may come “all 
heaven, sweareth by the throne of the righteous blood shed upon the 
God, and by him that sitteth there-|¢ Lk.11.42;18.12. jearth, from the blood of righteous 


n. 
23 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay 
“tithe of mint and anise and 
cummin, and have omitted the 
bweightier matters of the law, 


judgment, mercy, and faith: these; 


ought ye to have done, and not to 
leave the other undone. a 

24 Ye blind guides, which strain 
fat a gnat, and swallow a camel. 

25 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make 
clean the 4outside of the cup and of 
the platter, but within they are full 
of extortion and excess. 

26 Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse 
first that wAich is within the cup 


and platter, that the outside of 
them may be clean also. 

27 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are 
like unto ¢whited sepulchres, which 
indeed appear beautiful outward, 
bat are within full of dead 
men’s bones, and of all unclednness. 

28 Even so ye also outwardly ap- 
pear righteous unto men, but with- 
in ye are full of hypocrisy and 
Siniquity. 

29 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye 
ébuild the tombs of the prophets, 
and garnish the sepulchres of the 
righteous, 

30 And say, If we had been in the 
days of our fathers, we would not 
have been partakers with’ them in 
the blood of the prophets. 

31 Wherefore ye be witnesses un- 
to yourselves, that ye are the 
4children of thern which killed the 
prophets. 

32 Fill ye up then the measure of 
your fathers. 

33 Ye serpents, ye generation of 
vipers, how can ye escape the ‘dam- 
nation of jhell? 

34 Wherefore, behold, I *send un- 
to you prophets, and wise men, and 
scribes: and some of thein ye shall 
4cill and crucify; and some of them 

ye scourge in your syna- 


city to city: 


1 The three “untils” of uae 
2 


(Mt. 23. 39; cf. Rom. 10. 3, 4). 
21. 24; Dan. 2. 34,. 35), 


b1Sam.15,22; Isa. 
1.11-17. 


¢ strain out. 

@ Mk.7.4,8,9; Lk. 
11.39,40. 

é Lk.11.44; Acts 23. 
3; Phil.3.4-6. 

F Lit. Lawless- 
ness. Rom.3.23, 
note. 


9 Dan.9.5-8; Lk.11. 
47,48. 


A Acts 7.51,52. 

+ condemnation. 

Jj v.15, ref. 

& The Jews’ treat- 
ment of the 
apostles is 
proved, vs.31-33. 

lJohn 16.2; Acts 5. 
40; 7.54-60. 
m Rev.18.24, 


n Jesus’ confirma- 
tion of Gen.4.8- 


nAbel unto the blood of °Zacha- 
Trias son of Barachias, whom ye 
slew between the temple and the 
altar. 

36 Verily I say unto you, All 
these things shall ?come upon this 
/generation. 


The lament over Jerusalem 
(Lk. 13. 34, 35). 


37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou 
that killest the prophets, and ston-. 
est them which are sent unto thee, 
how often would ‘I have gathered 
thy children together, even as a: 
hen gathereth her chickens under 
her wings, and ye would not! 

38 Behold, your house is left unto 
you desolate. 

39 For I say unto you, Ye shall 
not see me henceforth, 1still ye 


10. Cf,Heb-12.24.| shall say, ‘Blessed is he that com- 


0 2 Chr.24.20-£2, 
P Rev.18.21-24. It 


is the way also of 


history: judg- 
ment falls upon 
one generation 
for the sins of 
centuries. T! 
prediction was 
fulfilled in the 
destruction of 
Jerusalem, 


A.D. 70. 
@ Lk.13.34,35; 19. 
41,42. 


r Mt.11.28-30; 
John 10.30. 


8 Kingdom(N.T.). 
vs.37-39. Mt.24, 
29-51. (Lk,1.31- 
33; 1 Cor.15.24.) 


t Christ (Second 
Advent). Mt.24. 
27-30. (Deut,30. 
3; Acts 1.9-11. 


& Jesus-leaves that 
which He aban- 
dons to judg- 
ment. See Mk. 
8.21,23, note, in 
the light of Mt. 
11.21,22. Cf.Rev. 
18.4. 


0 1Ki.9.8 Psa.79. 
1; Isa.64,.11; Lk. 
19.44. 


w Mk.13.3-37; Lk. 
21.7-37. 
2 Lk.17.20-37. 


¥ v.30; 2 Pet.3.4, 


2 consummation 
of the age. 


1032 


eth in the name of the Lord. 


| 
CHAPTER 24. 


The Olivet discourse: (1) de- 
struction of the temple fore- 
told (Mk. 13. 1, 2; Lk. 21. 5, 6). 


ys see Jesus went out, and 4de- 
parted from the temple: and his 
disciples came to him for to shew 
him the buildings of the temple. 

2 And Jesus said unto them, See 
ye not all these things? verily I say 
unto you; *There shall not be left 
here one stone upon another, that 
shall not be thrown down. 


The Olivet discourse: (2) the 
threefold question (Mk. 13. 
3, 4; Lk. 21.7). 


3 And “as he sat upon the mount 
of Olives, the disciples came unto 
him. privately, saying, ?Tell us, 
*when shall these things be? and 
what shall be the sign of thy Ycom- 
ing, and of the *end of the world? 


The Olivet discourse: (3) the 
course of this age (Mk. 13. 
5-13; Lk. 21. 8-19). 


4 And Jesus answered and said 


lessing: (1) Israel must say, “Blessed is He” 
entile world-power must run its course (Lk. 


(3) The elect number of the Gentiles must be brought in. 
Then “the Deliverer shall come out of Zion;” etc. ; 


?Mt. 24. with Lk. 21. 20-24 answers the threefold question. 
follows: ‘When shall these things be?”— 


(Rom. 11. 25-27). 
The order is as 


i.e. destruction of the temple and city. 


24 5] 


unto them, Take heed that no man| 
deceive you. 

5 For “many shall come in my 
name, saying, I am Chirist; and shall 
deceive many. 

6 And ye shall hear of wars and 
rumours of wars: see that ye be not 
troubled: for all these things must 
come to pass, but the end is not yet. 

7 For ‘nation shall rise against 
nation, and kingdom against king- 
dom; and there shall be “famines, 
and pestilences, and ‘earthquakes, 
in divers ‘places. 

8 All these are the beginning of 
sorrows. 

9 Then shall they /deliver you up 
to be afflicted, and shall kill you: 
and ye shall be hated of-all nations 
for my name’s sake. 

10 And then shall &many be of- 
fended, and shall betray one an- 
other, and shall hate one another. 

11 And many “false prophets shalt 
rise, and shall deceive many. 

12 And because “iniquity shall 
abound, the love of many shall 
wax Acold. 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D. 33. 


a@y.24; John 5.43; 
1 John 2.18. 

6 Rev.6.2-4, 
Hag.2.22. 

d Rev.6,5,6. 


e 
fee 12. 
Mt.10.17,18. 


9 Dan.12.10. 

h2 Pet.2.1; Rev, 
13.11; 19.20. 

ii.e. lawlessness, 

i Sin. Rom.3.23; 
note. 


k2 Thes.2.3,4; 
2 Tim.3.1. 


Gospel. Mt.26. ~ 
13. (Gen. 12.1-3; 
° 


Rev.14.6.) 
mMt.3.2, note, 
n otkoumene= 


inhabited earth, 


(Lk.2:1.) 
° The Beast. 


John 5.43. (Dan. 


7.8; Rev.19.20.) 


p Inspiration, 
vs.15,37-39; Mt. 
26.54. (Ex.4,15; 
Rev.22.19) 


@Dan.9.27; 11.31; 
12211. 


r Tribulation 


(24 24 


The Olivet discourse: (4) the 


Sreat tribulation (Mk. 13. 14-23). 


15 When ye therefore shall see the 
°abomination rg esolation, *spoken 
of By qDaniel the prophet, stand in 
the holy place, (whoso readeth, let _ 
him understand: 

16 !Then let them which be in Ju- 
dea flee into the mountains: 

17 Let him which is on the house- 
top not come down to take any 
thing out of his house: 

18 Neither let him which is in the 


\field return back to take his clothes. 


19 And woe unto them that are 
with child, and to them that give 
suck in those days! 

20 But pray ye that your flight be 
not in the winter, neither on the 
sabbath day: 

21 For then shall be "great tribu- 
lation, such as was not since the 
beginning of the ‘world to this 
time, no, nor ever shall be. 

22 And except those days should 
be ‘shortened, there should no flesh 
be saved: but for the elect’s sake 


13. But he that shall endure unto vezi ga: Rev.3. those days shall be shortened. 
the end, the same shall be saved. | }9.,°3%° pe ie mi any Loa le ree un- 
4 And this ‘gospel of the “king-jore. earth. o you, Lo, here 1s st, or there; 
ope shall be Sernahed in all the in. 65,895 Dan. believe it not. L 
mworld for a witness unto all na-| $Wo%s17, | 24 For there shall arise false 


tions; and then shall the end come. 


Christs, and false prophets, and 


camiele. dele pose re re ee Eee eee 
‘Answer, Lk. 21. 20-24. Second and third questions: “And what shall be the sign of 
thy coming, and of the end of the age?” Answer, Mt. 24. 4-33. Verses 4 to 14 
have a-double interpretation: They give (1) the character of the age—wars, inter- 
national conflicts, famines, pestilences, persecutions, and false Christs (cf. Dan. 9. 
26). This is not the description of 4 converted world. (2) But the same answer 
(vs. 4-14) applies in a specific way to the end of the age, viz. Daniel’s seventieth 
week (Dan. 9. 24-27, note 2). All that has characterized the age gathers into awful 
intensity at the end. Verse 14 has specific reference to the proclamation of the good 
news that the kingdom is again “at hand’”’ by the Jewish remnant (Isa. 1. 9; Rev.” 
14. 6, 7; Rom. 11.5, note). Verse 15 gives the sign of the abomination (Dan. 9, 27, 
note)—the “man of sin,” or “Beast” (2 Thes. 2. 3-8; Dan, 9. 27; 12, 11; Rev. 13. 
wee This introduces the great tribulation (Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 7. 14, note), which runs. 
its awful course of three and a half years, culminating in the battle of Rev. 19. 
19-21, note, at which time Christ becomes the smiting Stone of Dan. 2. 34. The 
detail of this period (vs. 15-28) is: (1) The abomination in the holy place (v. 15); 
(2) the warning (vs. 16-20) to believing Jews who will then be in Jerusalem; (3) the 
great tribulation, with renewed warning as to false Christs (vs. 21-26); (4) the sud- 
den smiting of the Gentile world-power (vs. 27, 28); (5) the glorious appearing of 
the Lord, visible to all nations, and the regathering of Israel (vs. 29-31); (6) the 
sign of the fig-tree (vs. 32, 33); (7) warnings, applicable to this present age over 
which these events are ever impending (vs. 34-51; Phil. 4. 5). Careful study of 
Dan. 2., 7., 9., and Rev. 13. will’ make the interpretation clear. See, also, “Rem. 
nant”? (Isa. 1. 9; Rom. 11. 5). f “a : 

L Cf, Lk. 21. 20-24. The passage in Luke refers in express terms to a destruction 
of Jerusalem which was fulfilled by Titus, a.D. 70; the passage in Matthew to a future 
crisis in Jerusalem after the manifestation of the “‘abomination.”’ See “Beast” 
(Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19. 20); and “Armageddon” (Rev. 16, 14; 19. 17). As the cir- 
cumstances in both cases will be similar, so are the warnings. In the former case 
Jerusalem was destroyed; in the latter it will be delivered by divine interposition. 


1033 


24 25] 


f 


St. MATTHEW. 


a ES Ia cA I OSES See REE EE NYE RR Se ee 


shall shew great signs and won- 
ders; insomuch that, if it were pos- 
sible, they shall deceive the very 


elect. 

25 Behold, I have told you be- 
fore. 

26 Wherefore if they shall say 
unto you, Behold, he is in the des- 
ert; go not forth: behold, he is in 
the secret chambers; believe it 
not. 


The Olivet discourse: (5) the re- 
turn of the King in glory (Mk. 
13. 24-37; Lk. 21. 25-36). 


27 For as the lightning cometh 
out of the east, and shineth even 
unto the west; 'so shall also the 
coming of the ‘Son of man be. 

28 For wheresoever the 2carcase 
is, there will the eagles be gathered 
together. 

29 Immediately after the tribula- 
tion of ‘those days shall the sun be 
darkened, and the moon shall not 
give her light, and the stars shall 
fall from heaven, and the powers of 
the heavens shall be shaken; 

30 And then shall appear the sign 
of the Son of man in heaven: and 
then shall all the tribes of the earth 
mourn, and they shall see /the Son 
of man coming in the clouds of hea- 
ven with power and great glory. 

31 And he shall ésend his “angels 
with a great sound of a trumpet, 
and they ‘shall gather together his 
elect from the four winds, from one 
end of heaven to the other. 


Parable of the fig tree (Mk. 13. 
28, 29; Lk. 21. 29-31). 


32 Now learn a Jparable of the fig 
tree; When his branch is yet ten- 
der, and putteth forth leaves, ye 
know that summer is nigh: 

33 So likewise ye, when ye shall 
Xsee all these things, know that Jit 
is near, even at the doors. 

34 Verily I say unto you, 1”This 
generation shall not pass, till ail 
these things be fulfilled. 

35 Heaven and earth shall pass 
away, but my words shall not pass 
away. 

36 But of that day and hour 


A.D. 33. 


@ Tsa.30.30; 1 Thes. 
5.1-3. 


+ Gen.7.11; Lk.17. 
26,27; 1Thes.5.3; 
2 Pet.2.5; 3.6. 

¢ Also ys.37,39,44. 
See Mt.8.20, 
note. 

@ Armageddon 
(battle of), Rev. 
19.17. (Rev, 16.14; 
19.21.) 

€ Day of Jehovah. 
vs.29-31; Mt.25. 
31-46. (Isa.2.10- 
22; Rev.19.11-21.) 

F Christ (Second 
Advent). Mt.24. 
36-50. (Deut.30,3; 

« Acts 1.9-11.) 


9 Psa.50.4,5; Mt. 
13.41, 


A Heb. 1.4, note, 

t Israel (prophe- 
cies). Lk.1.31-33, 
(Gen. 12,2,3; 
Rom. 11,26.) 

3 Parables(N.T.). 
vs.32,33; Mt.25. 


& v.15; 1 Thes.5.1-5. 

lOr, he. 

m Mt.12.45; 23.35, 
36. 


m Psa.119.89,160; 
138.2; Isa.51.6; 
Mt.5.18; 1 Pet.1. 
23.25, 


© vs.42,44; Acts1.7. 
P Gen.6.5-3; 1 Pet. 
3.20. 


@ Christ (Second 
Advent). vs.36- 
50; Mt.25.31-46, 
(Deut.30.3; Acts 
1.9-11.) 


7 Mt.25.13; Rev. 
3.3. 


son what day. 


t Mt.25.10; Lk.12. 
35-40,43; 21.34-36. 
u Lk. 12.42-46; 
1 Cor.4.2. It is 
faithfulness, not 
ability, in the 
Lord's service 
that is first ap- 
proved by Him. 
v John 21.15; 
1 Pet.5.2. 
w Heb, 10.37; 2 Pet. 
3.4,9; Rev.22.7, 
12,20. 


= Kingdom 
(N.T.). 


31-46. (Lk.1. 
31-33; 1 Cor,15. 
24.) 


v Mt.7.21-23; 25. 
3,11,12; 2 Pet.2. 
20-22, 


loknoweth no man, no, not the /an- 
gels of heaven, but my Father 
only. 

37 But as the ?days of Noe were, 
so shall also the coming of the Son 
\of man be. 

38 For as in the days that were 
before the flood they were eating 
and drinking, marrying and giving 
in marriage, until the day that Noe 
entered into the ark, 

39 And knew not until the flood 
came, and took them all away; %so 
shall also the coming of the Son of 
man be. ; 

40 Then shall two be in the field; 
the one shall be taken, and the 
other left. 

41 Two women shall be grind- 
ing at the mill; the one shall be 
taken, and the other left. 

42 *Watch therefore: for ye know 
not ‘what hour your Lord doth 


5. .|COMe. 


43 But know this, that if the good- 
man of the house had known in 
what watch the thief would come, 
he would have watched, and would 
not have suffered his house to be 
broken up. 

44 Therefore be ye also ‘ready: 
for in such an hour as ye think not 
the Son of man cometh. 

45 Who then is a “faithful and 
wise servant, whom his lord hath 
made ruler over his household, “to 
give them meat in due season? 

46 Blessed is that servant, whom 
his lord when he cometh shall find 
so doing. 

47 Verily I say unto you; That he 
shall make him ruler over all his 
goods. ; 

48 But and if that evil servant 
shall say in his heart, “My lord de- 
layeth his coming; 

49 And shall begin to smite his 
fellowservants, and to eat and drink 
with the drunken; 

50 The lord of that servant shall 
*come in a day when he looketh 
not for Airn, and in an hour that he 
is not aware of, 

51 And shall cut him asunder, and 
appoint him his portion with the 
Yhypocrites: there shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth. 


1 Gr. genea, the primary definition of which is, 
(So all lexicons.) That the word is used in this 


“these things,’’ i.e. the world-wide 


the return of the Lord in visible glory, 
the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, 
generation—nation, or family of Israel—will be 


“race, kind, family, stock, breed.” 
sense here is sure because none of 


preaching of the kingdom, the great tribulation, 


‘A.D. 70. 


Promise wonderfully fulfilled to this day. 


1034 


and the regathering of the elect, occurred at 


The promise is, therefore, that the 
preserved unto “these things”; a 


CHAPTER 25. 


Sr. MATTHEW. 


The Olivet discourse: (6) the|aMt.3.2, note. 


Lord’s return tests the real 


state of the kingdom in mys- 
tery. 


?[HEN Ishall the kingdom of 
Sheaven be “likened unto ten 
2virgins, which took their lamps, 
and went forth to: meet the bride- 
groom. 

2 And five of them were ‘wise, 
and five were “foolish. 

3 They that were foolish took 
their lamps, and took no oil with 
them: 

4 But the wise took oil in their 
vessels with their lamps. 

5 While the bridegroom tarried, 
they all slumbered and slept. 

6 And at midnight there was a 
cry made, Behold, the bridegroom 
cometh; go ye out to meet him. 

7.Then all those virgins arose, 
and trimmed their lamps. 

8 And the foolish said unto the 
wise, Give us of your oil; for our 
lamps are “gone out. 

9 But the wise answered, saying, 
Not so; lest there be not enough for 
us and you: but goye rather to them 
that sell, and buy for yourselves. 


b Parables 
(N.T.). vs. 
1-13,14-30; 
ME.2.21. 
(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 

¢ Mt.7.24,25; 
Deut.32.29. 

d Mt.7.26,27; 

22.11; Lk.12. 

e o1ng out. 

ft Mt.24.44; 
Col.1.12-14, 

g Lk.13.25-30. 

h Mt.24.36,42, 

4 Also v.31; 
Mt.8.20, 
note, 

j Omit the itali- 
cised words. 

k Lk.19.12-27; 
1 Tim.6.20. 

2 Lk.12.48; 
Rom.12.6-8; 
1 Cor.12.7. 

m Eph.5.16; 

1 Tim.4.13; 
2 Pet.1.5-8. 

n Prov.26.15; 
1 Pet.4.10; 
2 Pet.1.9-12, 


p The Lorxd’s 
commenda- 
tion mezy be 
earned by the 


10 And while they went to buy, 
the bridegroom came; and they 
that were /ready went in with him 
to the marriage: and the door was 
shut. 

11 Afterward came also the other 
virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, Sopen 
to us. 

12 But he answered and said, 
Verily I say unto you, I know you 
not. 

13 Watch therefore, for ye "know 
neither the day nor the hour where- 
in the ‘Son of man cometh. 


The Olivet discourse: (7) the 
Lord’s return tests the ser- 
vants. 


14 For /the kingdom of heaven 
is'as a man travelling into a far 


weakest of 
His servants; 
it is given 
for faithful 
service. 
Lk.16.10-12; 
1 Cor.4.2; 
2 Tim.4.7,8. 
r The same 
commenda- 
tion is gained 
by the ser- 
vant with two 


q 


talents as by 
him with five: 
he was equal- 
ly faithful 
though his 
gift was less. 

s Psa.16.11; 
Zeph.3.17; 
Jonn15.10,11; 
Heb.12.1,2. 

t Mt.20,11,12; 
Mal.1.13. 
Cf.1 John 5.3. 

|u Mt.22.12, 
| 13; 24.48-50. 


[25 26 


vants, and delivered unto them his 
kgoods. 

15 And unto one he gave five tal- 
ents, to another two, and to an- 
other one; to every man ‘according 
to his several ability; and straight- 
way took his journey. 

16 Then he that had received the 
five talents went and traded with 
the same, and made them other 
five talents. . 

17 And likewise he that had re- 
‘ceived two, he also gained other 
two. 

18 But he that had received one 
went and digged in the earth, and 
nhid his lord’s money. 

19 After a long time the lord of 
those servants cometh, and °reck-. 
oneth with them. 

20 And so he that had received 
five talents came and brought other 
five talents, saying, Lord, thou 
deliveredst unto me five talents: 
behold, I have gained beside them 
five talents more. 

21 His lord said unto him, ?Well 
done, thou good and faithful ser- 
vant: thou hast been ¢faithful over 
a few things, I will make 
over many things: enter thou into 
the joy of thy lord. 

22 He also that had received two 
talents came and said, Lord, thou 


deliveredst unto me two talents: 
behold, I have gained two other 
talents beside them. 

23 His lord said unto him, ”Well 
done, good and faithful servant; 
thou hast been faithfy] over a few 
things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things: enter thou into the 
Sjoy of thy lord. 

24 Then he which had received 
the one talent came and said, Lord, 
I knew thee that thou art an ‘hard 
man, reaping where thou -hast not 
sown, and gathering where thou 
hast not strawed: 

25 And I was afraid, and went 
and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, 
there thou hast that is thine. 

26 His lord answered and said 
unto him, Thou “wicked and sloth- 


country, who called: his own ser- 


1 This part of the Olivet discourse goes beyond the 
ples (Mt. 24. 3), and presents our Lord’s return in three aspects: 


profession, vs. 1-13; (2) as testing service, vs. 


nations, vs. 31-46. 


(1) As testing 
14-30; (3) as testing the Gentile 


2 The kingdom of heaven here is the sphere of profession, as in Mt. 13. All 


alike have lamps, but two 


no oil,” and the Lord said, “I know you not.” i y fol; 
spirit of Christ, he is none of his” (Rom. 


and “If any man have not the 
Nor could the Lord say to 


any 


1035 


facts fix the real status of the foolish virgins: They “took 
Oil is the symbol of the Holy Spirit, 


believer, however unspiritual, “I know you 


ee ruler — 


‘sign’? questions of the disci- 


se: 


‘shall be given, and he shall have 


25 27] 


ful servant, thou knewest that I 
reap where I sowed not, and gather 
where. I have not strawed: 

27 Thou oughtest therefore to 
have put my money to the ex- 
changers, and then at my_ coming 
I should have received mine own 
with usury. ‘ 

28 Take therefore the talent from 
him, and give it unto him which 
hath ten talents. 

29 For unto “every one that hath 


abundance: but from him that hath 
not shall be taken away even “that 
which he hath. : 

30 And ‘cast ye the unprofitable 
servant into Youter darkness: there 
shall be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. 


The Olivet discourse: (8) the 
Lord’s return tests the Gen- 
tile nations. (Cf. Joel 3. 11-16.) 


31 When the Son of man shall 
“come in his glory, and all the fholy 
Sangels with him, “then shall he sit 
upon the throne of his glory: 

32 And before him shall be ‘gath- 
ered all nations: and he shall 
separate them one from another, 
as a shepherd divideth Ais sheep 
from the goats: y 

33 And he shall set the jsheep on 
his right hand, but the *goats on 
the left. 

34 Then shall the King say unto 
them on his right hand, Come, ye 
blessed of my Father, inherit the 
‘kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the ™world: 

35 For I was an “hungred, and 
ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me drink: I was a 
stranger, and ye took me in: 

36 Naked, and ye clothed me: I 
was sick; and ye visited me: I was 
in prison, and ye came unto me. 

37 Then shall the °righteous an- 
swer him, saying, Lord, when saw 
we thee an hungred, and fed thee? 
or thirsty, and gave thee drink? 

38 When saw we thee a ‘stranger, 


1 This judgment is to be distin 
throne. 


11. 5). The 


20. 37, 


Here there is no resurrection; the 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D. 33. 


a@Mt.13.12; Lk.19. 
26; John 15.2, 


6 Lk.8.18, last 
clause, 


¢Mt.7.21-23. 


d the outer 


darkness. 

¢ Christ (Second 
Advent). Mk. 
13.24-27. (Deut. 
30.3; Acts 1.9-11.) 


Ff Sanctify, holy 


(persons) 
(N.T.). Mk.6.20. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev.22. 
11.) 

9 Heb.1.4, nofe. 

h Day of Jehovah. 
vs.31-46; Acts 
2.19,20. (Isa.2. 
10-22; Rev. 19. 

1-21.) 


7 Psa.96.13; John 
5.28,29; Rev.20. * 
11-15. 

J Psa.79.13; 100.3; 
Ezk.20,38; 34.17, 
22,31; John 10.11. 


k Zech. 10.3. 


1 Mt.3.2, note. 


™mi.e. earth. 

nm Mt.10.40; Heb, 
11.37,38. 

© Rom.10.10, nofe. 

P Mt.10.40-42; Acts 
*$.2,4,5. 


@ Mt.7.23, 


r Satan. Gr. 
diabolos, ac- 
cuser, Mk.1,13. 
(Gen.3.1; Rev. 
20.10.) 

8 vs.35,40,45, refs. 

t Prov.14.31; 
Zech.2.8. 


u Kingdom 


(N.T.). vs.31-46; 
Acts 1.6,7. (Lk. 
1.31-33; 1 Cor.15, 
24.) 


v Judgments (the 


seven). Lk.14. 
14. (2 Sam.7. 
14; Rev.20.12.) 
“Eternal ‘and 
“everlasting’’ 
are the same 
word, 


w Day of destruc- 


tion, 2 Thes.1. 
7-10. Gob 21. 
30; Rev.20.11-15.) 


« Life (eternal). 
Li 


k.10,25. (Mt.7. 
14; Rev.22.19,) 


guished 


. +e test in Rev. 20. 11-15, is the possession of eternal life. 
other six judgments, John 12. 31, note; 1C 


- 12, note, 


1036 


from the judgment of 
persons 


or. 11. 31, note; 2 Cor, 


and took thee in? or naked, and 
clothed thee? 

39 Or when saw we thee sick, or 
in prison, and came unto thee? 

40 And the King shall answer 
and say unto them, Verily I say 
unto you, Inasmuch as ye have 
done zt unto one of the fleast of 
these my brethren, ye have done it 
unto =e. ,’ 

41 Then shall he say also unto 
them on the left hand, 7Depart from 
me,. ye cursed, into everlasting fire, 
prepared for the ‘devil and his 
8angels: 

42 For I was an Shungred, and ye 
gave me no meat: I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me no drink: 

43 I was a stranger, and ye took 
me not in: naked, and ye clothed 
me not: sick, and in prison, and ye 
visited me not. 

44 Then shall they also answer 
him, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee an hungred, or athirst, or a 
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in 
prison, and did not minister unto 
thee? 

45 Then shall he answer them, 
saying, Verily I say unto you, ‘In- 
asmuch as ye did it not to one of 
the least of these, ye did /¢ not to me. 

46 “And these shall go away *into 
everlasting “punishment: but the 
righteous into “life eternal, 


CHAPTER 26. 


The Jewish authorities consult 
to put Jesus to death (Mk. 14. 
BQ sic 2.1012), 


AN Dit came to pass, when Jesus 
had finished all these sayings, 
he said unto his disciples, 

2 Ye know that after two days is 
the feast of the passover, and the 
Son of man is betrayed to be cru- 
cified. 

3 Then assembled together the 
chief priests, and the scribes, and 
the elders of the people, unto the 
palace of the high priest, who was 
called Caiaphas, 


the treatment 
“my brethren.” These 
have preached the Gospel of the 
See “Remnant” (Isa. 1, 9; Rom. 
See, for the 
5. 10, note; Ezk, 


26 4] 


4 And “consulted that they might 
take Jesus by subtilty, and _ kill 
him. 

5 But they said, Not on the feast 
day, lest there be an “uproar among 
the people. 


a John 11.47; 
b Mt.21.26; 
Mk.14.2. 


c Mk.14.3; 
John 12.1-8. 


d Mk.16.9; 
Lk.15.. 


Jesus anointed by Mary of Beth- 
any (Mk. 14. 3-9; John 12. 1-8). 


6 Now when Jesus was in “Beth- 
any, in the house of Simon the 
dleper, 

7 There came unto him a ¢woman 
having an alabaster box of very 
precious ointment, and poured it on 
his head, as he sat at meat., FLK.5.34,35; 

8 But when his disciples saw it,| Job" 1©-28- 
they had indignation, saying, To] Supply to 
what purpose is this waste? 

9 For this ointment might have 


ei.e. Mary of 
Bethany. 


h Mt.16.21- 


been sold for much, and given to| 23; Mk.16.1. 
the poor. : 

10 When Jesus understood it, he|* #2sg°,M™ 
said unto them, Why trouble ye! (Gen.i2.1-3; 
the woman? for she hath wrought] Rev-14.6.) 

a good work upon me. O eneartns 


11 For ye have the poor always 
with you; but ‘me ye have not 


k Zech.11,12, 
13. 
always. 


12 For in that she hath poured|/Lk.9.51; 
this ointment on my body, she did rer 8.20; 
it &for my “burial. er 

13 Verily I say unto you, Where-|m John 6.70, 
soever this ‘gospel shall be preached} 71: 13-21. 
in the whole Jworld, there shall|,, psa.41.9; 
also this, that this woman hath] 55.12-14; 
done, be told for a memorial of her. ee 13.18, 


Judas Iscariot sells the Lord |, mx9.12: 
(Mk. 14. 10, 11; Lk. 22. 3-6). Lk.24.25-27, 


44-46; John 

14 Then one of the twelve, called| 19-28. 
Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief], john 17.12; 
priests, Acts 1.25. 

15 And said unto them, What 
will ye give me, and I will deliver 
‘him unto you? And they covenanted 
with him for ‘thirty pieces of silver. 


1 No contradiction of John 12. 3 is implied. 


ity and honour was of the feet (Lk. 7. 38) and head (Lk. 7. 46). 


St. MATTHEW. 


A.D. 33. 


Acts 4.25-28. 


prepare me. 


[26 26 


16 And from that time he sought 
opportunity to betray him. 


The preparation of the passover 
(Mk. 14. 12-16; Lk. 22. 7-13). 


17 Now the first day of the feast 
of unleavened bread the disciples 
came to Jesus, saying unto him, 
Where wilt thou that we prepare 
for thee to eat the passover? ‘ 

18 And he said, Go into the city to 
such a man, and say unto him, The 
Master saith, ‘My time is at hand; 
I will keep the passover at thy 
house with my disciples. 

19 And the disciples did as Jesus 
had appointed them; and they 
made ready the passover. 


The last passover (Mk. 14. 17-21; 
Lk. 22. 14-20, 24-30). : 


20 Now when the even was come, 
he 2sat down with the twelve. 


(Here read John 13: 2-30.) 


21 And as they did eat, he said, 
Verily I say unto you, that one of 
you shall “betray me. 

22 And they were exceeding sor- 
rowful, and began every one of 
them to say unto him, Lord, is it I? 

23 And he answered and said, He 
that “dippeth Ais hand with me in 
the dish, the same shall betray me. 

24 The Son of man goeth as it is 
°owritten of him: but woe unto that 
man by whom the Son of man is 
betrayed! ?it had been good for 
that man if he had not been born. 

25 Then Judas, which betrayed 
him, answered and said, Master, is 
it i He said unto him, Thou hast 
said. 


Jesus institutes the Lord’s Sup- 
per (Mk. 14. 22-25; Lk, 22. 17-20; 
InGorie 115 123-25)) 


| 26 And as they were eating, Je- 


The ordinary anointing of hospital- 
But Mary of 


Bethany, who alone of our Lord’s disciples had comprehended His thrice repeated 
announcement of His coming death and resurrection, invested the anointing with 


the deeper meaning of the preparation of His body for burying. 


Mary of Bethany 


was not among the women who went to the sepulchre with intent to embalm the 


body of Jesus. 


2 The order of events on the night of the Passover supper appears to have been: 


(1) The taking by our Lord and the disciples of their places at the-table; (2) the 
contention who should be greatest; (3) the feet-washing; (4) the identification of 
Judas as the traitor; (5) the withdrawal of Judas; (6) the institution of the supper; 
(7) the words of Jesus while still in the room (Mt. 26. 26-29; Lk. 22. 35-38; John 
13. 31-35; 14. 1-31); (8) the words of Jesus between the room and the garden (Mt. 
26. 31-35; Mk. 14. 26-31; John 15., 16., 17.); it-seems probable that the high-priestly 
prayer (John 17.) was uttered after they reached the garden; (9) the agony in the 
garden; (10) the betrayal and arrest; (11) Jesus before Caiaphas; Peter’s denial. 
, 1037 


26 27] 


sus “took bread, and blessed it, 


' and brake it, and gave it to the dis- 


ciples, and said, Take, eat; this is 
my “body. 

27 And he took the cup, and gave 
thanks, and gave it to them, say- 
ing, Drink ye all of it; 

28 For this is my ¢2blood of the 
‘new /testament, w. Tr 
many for the 14remission of “sins. 

29 But I say unto you, I will not 
drink henceforth of this fruit of the 
vine, until that day when I drink 
it new with you in my Father’s 
*kingdom. 


(Here read John 14, 1-31.) 


Jesus foretells Peter’s denial 
Mk. 14. 26-31; Lk, 22. 31-34; John 
13. 36-38). 


_30 And when they had sung an 
Jhymn, they went out into. the 
mount of Olives. 


(Here read John 15., 16., 17.) 


31 Then saith Jesus unto them, 
RAI ye shall be offended because of 
me this night: for it is written, I 
will ‘smite the *shepherd, and the 
sheep of the flock shall be scattered 
abroad. 

32 But after I am risen again, I 
will go before you into Galilee. 

33 Peter answered and said unto 
him, Though “all men shall be of- 
fended because of thee, yet will I 
never be offended. 

34 Jesus said unto him, Verily I 


say unto thee, That this night, be-|» 


fore the °cock crow, thou shalt deny 
me thrice. 


Sr. 


Ll md | >) oe 


MATTHEW. 


A.D. 33. 35 Peter said unto him, ThoughI © 

a Mk.14.22-25; |Should die with thee, yet will I not 

5 Li: 22.19,20." deny thee. Likewise also said all 

21 Conil23. |the disciples. 

d aoosmonn Jesus’ agony in the Garden (Mk. 
(of Christ). 14. 32-42; Lk. 22. 39-46; John 
John 1.29, 18. 1). 

(Gen.4.4; 

e Bed t018) 36 Then ?cometh Jesus with them 
(new). Mk. | untoa place called Gethsemane, and 
ae Sy saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, 

feovenant. | While I go and pray yonder. 

g Forgiveness.| 37 And he took with him Peter 

; Se and the two sons of Zebedee, and 
3.23, note. |began to be Ysorrowful and very 

iMt.3.2, note.|heavy. 

eae 38 Then saith he unto them, My 
Mk.14.27. : ; 

1Zech.13.7,  |SOul is exceeding sorrowful, even 

m  Christ(Piret unto death: tarry ye here, and 

ve. ° e 
279.10. (Gen: watch with me. 

nMbi49s 31,| The first prayer (Mk. 14. 353 
122.3134; Lk. 22., 41,42). 

oMnis ae, ‘| 39 And he went a little farther, 
rare and fell on his face, and "prayed, 

? 22 40-46 \Savying, O my Father, if it be possi- 
John 18.1. |ble, let this 2Scup pass from me: 

CE ober . |mevertheless not as I will, ‘but as 

am.1.12; > 
poss 12.27. thou wilt. 
1O1e prayers 

; Gut) Mat 27. The sleeping disciples (Mk. 14. 
crag 37, 38, 40; Lk. 22. 45,46). 

$Ges22:638; 40 And he cometh unto the dis- 

NBeag st ciples, and findeth them asleep, and 

u Temptation.|saith unto Peter, What, could ye 
oe not watch with me one hour? 
Jas.1.14.) 41 Watch and pray, that ye enter 

v Psa.103. not into “temptation: 2the spirit 
ast ra indeed is willing, but the flesh is 
Gai.5.17..  |weak. 


1 Forgiveness. Summary: The Greek word translated “remission” in Mt. 26. 


28; Acts 10. 43; Heb, 9. 22, is elsewhere rendered “forgiveness.” 


off, or away. And this, 
forgiveness—to separate 


It means, to send 


throughout Scripture, is the one fundamental meaning of 
the sin from the sinner. 


Distinction must be made be- 


tween divine and human forgiveness: (1) Human forgiveness means the remission 


of penalty. In the Old Testament 


forgiveness follows the execution of the penalty. 


atonement for his sin that he hath 


and the New, in type and fulfilment, the divine 


. “The priest shall make an 
committed, and it shall be forgiven him” (Lev. 


4.35). “This is my blood of the new covenant, which is shed for many for the 


remission [sending away, forgiveness] of sins” (v. 28). 


blood there is no remission” (Heb. 
note). 


“Without shedding of 


9. 22). See ‘Sacrifice’ (Gen. 4. 4; Heb. 10. 18, 


The sin of the justified believer interrupts his fellowship, and is forgiven 


upon confession, but always on the ground of Christ’s propitiating sacrifice (1 John 


1, 6-9; 2. 2). 
giveness, 


(2) Human forgiveness rests upon 
In many passages this is assumed rather than stated, but the principle 


and results. from the divine for- 


is declared in Eph. 4. 32; Mt. 18. 32, 33. 
The “cup” must be interpreted by our Lord’s own use of that symbol in speak- 


ing of His approaching sacrificial death (Mt. 20. 
10. 17, 18, He could have been in no fear of an unwilling death. 


22; John 18.11). In view of John 


The value of the 


account of the agony in the Garden is in the evidence it affords that He knew fully 
what the agony of the cross would mean when His soul was made an offering for 


sin (Isa. 53. 10) in the hiding of the Father’s face. 


He voluntarily paid it, 


Knowing the cost to the utmost, 
1038 


26 42] . St. MATTHEW. | [26 64 


The second prayer (Mk. 14, 39; | 4D: 33.__/for all they that take the sword 
Lk. 22. 44). shall perish with the sword. 

42 He went away ean the sec- soe ieee ul rece ‘ Re Nie 

; : ¢ y Father, and he 

IE Pe gr sol ane, (flare Syme cite tn 
t 3 x : SS! Sin. Rom.3. |"twelve legions of ‘angels? __ 

away from me, except I drink it, 257-sots:) 34 But how then shall the Jscrip- 

ya ae Be et a ren ‘Teaoare ti be “fulfilled, that thus it must 

- A ohn 18.3; =, DEF 

asleep again: for their eyes were Bets 116. 55 In that same hour said Jesus 

heavy. 1. A rica to the multitudes, ‘Are ye come out 

Lk.22.48. as against a thief with swords and 


The third prayer (Mk. 14. 41). |. 2Sam.20.9; |staves for to take me? I sat daily 


Psa.55.13. with you teaching in the templ. 
44 ‘ ds ec, 
And he left them, and went|/Gr. Hetaire, |_ 14 ye laid ‘no hold e 


away again, and prayed th i comrade. : ; 
peed waving the Lnsne: wdnds val mse ane | 2 is me eae ee ae viene Be 
2 Sas ey, touch- scriptures of the prophets might be 
y th A 
45 Then cometh he to his disci-/ ing thingin [fusiied. Then all the disciples 


ples, and saith unto them, @Sleep : 
on now, and take your rest: be- id "forsook him, and fled, 
hold, the hour is at hand, and the} own Judas. | Jesus brought before Caiaphas 


Se ee eee tg th | 20d ths Senhodelis (eas 
x . hn 18. -65. Cf, Jo - 12, 19-24), 
46 Rise, let us be going: behold, 2 10,11, s 57. And they that had laid hold o 

+ 1.6.17; ° nm 
he is at hand that doth betray me. iazaaiar \lJesus Med Birk away 16 eCaiaghed 


The betrayal and arrest of Jesus|‘ S*>* the high priest, where the scribes 


(Mk. 14. 43-50; Lk. 22. 47-53;|jv. 24; John |and the elders were assembled. 
John 18. 3-11). beipeseogi 58 But °Peter followed him. afar 
bps maw bine tp Pa pee off unto the high priest’s Ppalace, 

nd ‘while he yet spake, lo,| wt.8.19,20. jand went in, and sat with the ¢ser- 
Judas, one of the twelve, came, and a ee i ; vants, to see the end. 

a : ena 10: A A 

with him a great multitude with iMeia 59 Now the chief priests, and 
swords and staves, from the chief| 48.49: Lk.22. jelders, and all the council, sought 
priests and elders of the people. 52,53. ‘false witness against Jesus, to put 
48 Now he that betrayed him|”Mk-i4.50.  |him to death: 


gave them a sign, saying, Whom- Bs cre 60 But found none: yea, though 
soever I shali ¢kiss, that same is|n Mk.14.53; [many false witnesses came, yet 
he: hold him fast. Teak found they none. At the last came 
ee ee gana he Set ee 12-14, — bed pe seen y 

esus, and said, » Master; and|o Mk.14.54; 6 said, i i 
kissed him. F : “John 18, am able to Sdestgae icieaat ce 
at And Jesus said unto him,|, curt. God, and to build it in three days. 
Friend, wherefore art thou come?|q officers. 62 And the high priest arose, and 
Ta gee cee fay laid hands on|” Hee rae said unto him, Answerest thou 
esus, and took him. sMt.27.40: | \nothing? what is it which these 
51 And, behold, one of them| John 2.19-22. |wit i 
which were with Jesus stretched out if Teas i, “63 But. 5 Eames peace. And 
his hand, and édrew his sword, and!" ,¢92.69-71. |the high priest answered and said 
struck a servant of the high priest’s, junto him, I “adjure thee by the liv- 
and smote off his ear. jing God, that thou tell us whether 


52 Then said Jesus unto him, Put thou be the Christ, the Son of God. 
up again thy sword into his place: 64 Jesus saith unto him, Thou 


1 A comparison of the narratives gives the following order of events on the cruci- 
fixion day: (1) Early in the morning Jesus is brought before Caiaphas and the 
Sanhedrin. He is condemned and mocked (Mt. 26. 57-08; Mk. 14, 55-65; Lk. 22. 
63-71; John 18. 19-24). (2) The Sanhedrin lead Jesus to Pilate (Mt. 27. 1, 2, 11-14; 
Mk. 15. 1-5; Lk.-23. 1-5; John 18. 28-38). (3) Pilate sends Jesus to Herod (Lk. 23. 
6-12; John 19.4). (4) Jesus is again brought before Pilate, who releases Barabbas 
and delivers Jesus to be crucified (Mt. 27, 15-26; Mk, 15. 6-15; Lk. 23. 13-25; John 
18. 39, 40; 19. 4-16). (5) Jesus is crowned with,thorns, and mocked (Mt. 27. 26-30; 
Mk. 15. 15-20; John 19. 1-3). (6) Suicide of Judas (Mt. 27. 3-10). (7) Led forth 
to be crucified, the cross is laid upon Simon: Jesus discourses to the women (Mt. 
27. 31, 32; Mk. 15. 20-23; Lk. 23. 26-33; John 19. 16,17). For the order of events at 


the crucifixion see Mt. 27. 33, note. 
«4039 


26 65} 


hast said: neverthéless I say unto 
you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son 
of man 4sitting on the right hand of 
power, and coming in the clouds of 
heaven. f 

65 Then the high priest rent his 
clothes, saying, He hath spoken 
blasphemy; what further need have 
we of witnesses? , behold, now ye 
have heard his “blasphemy. 

66 What think ye? They answered 
and said, He is guilty of death. 

67 Then did they spit in his face, 
and buffeted him; and _ others 
ésmote him with the palms of their 
hands, 

68 Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou 
Christ, Who is he that smote thee? 


Peter denies the Lord (Mk. 14. 
66-72; Lk. 22. 55-62; John 18. 
15-18, 25-27). 


69 Now Peter /sat without in the 
palace: and a damsel came unto 
him, saying, Thou also wast with 
Jesus of Galilee. 

70 But he denied before them all, 
saying, I know not what thou 
sayest. 

71 And when he was gone out into 
the porch, another !maid saw him, 
and said unto them that were 
there, This fellow was also with 
Jesus of Nazareth. 

72 And again he denied with an 
oath, I do not know the man. 

73 And after a while came unto 
him they that stood by, and said to 
Peter, Surely thou also art one of 
them; for thy Sspeech bewrayeth 
thee. 

74 Then began he to ‘curse and to 
swear, saying, I know not the man. 
And immediately the ‘cock crew. 

75 And Peter remembered the 
word of Jesus, which said unto him, 
Before the cock crow, thou shalt 
deny me thrice. And he went out, 
and wept bitterly. 


CHAPTER 27, 


The Sanhedrin deliver Jesus to 
Pilate (Mk. 15. 1; Lk. 23. 1; 
John 18, 28), 


WEEN the morning was come, 
all the chief priests and elders 


St. MATTHEW. 


a Psa.110.1: 
Mk.14.62; 
Acts 7.55,56. 


b Dan.7.13,14; 
Mt.24.30; 
Rev.1.7. 


c John 10. 
31-36. 


d Isa.50.6; 52. 
14; Mk.14. 
65; Lk.22.63- 
65; John 18. 

Se 


2,2 


e Mic.5.1; 
John 19.3. 


f Mk.14.66-72; 
Lk.22.55-62; 
John 18. 
15-18,25-27. 


g Acts 2.7. 


k Contra, Mt. 
16.16,17. 


t v.34. 


j Mk.15.1; 
Lk.23.1; 
John 18.28. 


k Zech.11.12, 
13. 


1 Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


m 1 Sam.31.4; 
2 Sam.17.23. 


m1 Lk.24.27,44. 


o Christ (First 
Advent). Mt. 
27.34,35. 
(Gen.3.15; 
Acts 1.9.) 


bp Jehovah. 
Zech.11.12, 
13. 

q ME.15.2-5; 
Lk.23.3. 

r John 18.33- 
37; 1 Tim, 
6.13. 


s Isa.53.7. 


' Cf. v. 69; Mk. 14, 69; Lk. 22. s8; John 18. 25. 


in these accounts. 
and that Peter was 


Let it be remembered that an excited crowd 
interrogated in two places: ‘With the servants”’ (Mt. 26. ss) 
where the first charge was made (v. 69); “the porch” 
people would be gathered, and where the second and 
made by “another maid” and by’the crowd, i.e. 

* The allusion is to Jeremiah 18. 1-4; 19. 1 


1040 


[27 14 
of the people took counsel against 
Jesus to put him to death: . 

2 And when they had bound him, 


they led Aim away, and /delivered 
him to Pontius Pilate the governor. 


Judas’ unavailing remorse. 
(€f. Acts 1. 16-19.) 


3 Then Judas, which had be- 
trayed him, when he saw that he 
was condemned, repented himself, 
and brought again the “thirty pieces 
of silver to the chief priests and 
elders, 

4 Saying, I have /sinned in that 
I have betrayed the innocent blood. 
And they said, What is that to us? 
see thou to that. 

5 And he cast down the pieces of 
silver in the temple, and departed, 
and went and “hanged himself. 

6 And the chief priests took the 
silver pieces, and said, It is not law- 
ful for to put them into the trea- 
sury, because it is the price of blood. 

7 And they took counsel, and 
bought with them the potter’s field, 
to bury strangers in. 

8 Wherefore that field was called, 
The field of blood, unto this day. 

9 Then was “fulfilled that which 
was spoken by 2Jeremy the prophet, 
saying, And they took the °thirty 
pieces of silver, the price of him that 
was valued, whom they of the chil- 
dren of Israel did value; 

10 And gave them for the potter’s 
field, as the Lord appointed me. 


Jesus interrogated by Pilate 
(Mk. 15. 2-5; Lk. 23. 2, 3; John 
18. 29-38). . 


11 And Jesus. stood before the 
governor: and the governor Zasked 
him, saying, Art thou the King of 
the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, 
rThou sayest. 

12 And when he was accused of 
the chief priests and elders, he an- 
swered ‘nothing. 

13 Then said Pilate unto him, 
Hearest thou not how many things 
they witness against thee? 

14 And he answered him to never 
a word; insomuch that the governor 
marvelled greatly. 


A discrepancy has*been imagined 
had gathered, 


where a great number of ~ 


of third interrogations were 
they” (vs. 71, 73; John 18. 2s). 


~3, but more distinctly to Zech, 11, 12,13. 


{ 


27 15] Sr. MATTHEW. [27 30 


Jesus or Barabbas? (Mk. 15.6-15;|__4-D. 33.__|*scourged Jesus, he delivered Aim 


Lk. 23. 13-25; cf. John 18. 38-40). ee to be crucified. 
15.6-15; 

15 Nowat that feast the governor| Lk23 37-83; The King crowned with thorns 
was 4wont to release unto the peo-| John 18. and led away to crucifixion 
ple a prisoner, whom they would. | 224° (Mk. 15. 16-23; Lk, "23, peck 

16 And they had then a notable/’Mt2138; | John 19. 16, 17). : ; 
prisoner, called Barabbas. 28. Cf. Gen. | 27 Then the soldiers of the gov- 


17 Therefore when the elt : 
gathered together, Pilate anid vaiite s ae enor *took Jesus into the common 
them, Whom will’ ye that I release|“°"""- [hall and gathered unto him the 
unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus|? Jobp 5.43: whole band of soldiers. 
which is called Christ? Acts 3.14, | 28 And they stripped him, and 
18 For he knew that for tenvy|¢b«-23-21- put on him a “scarlet robe. 
they had delivered him. f Deut.21.6 Sag ecu her they had platted a 
19 When he was set down on the ”.  |crown of ‘thorns, they put i¢ upon 
judgement seat, his wife sent unto|*Sen¢10; his head, and a ™zeed in his right 
him, saying, Have thou nothing to pect pond: pad they bowed the knee 
do with that just man: for I have|/ John 191. | °%R iit pea hia say- 
suffered many things this day in al ; tsa.53.8 30 Aud Teeaye _the Jews! 
‘dream because of him. in nd they "spit upon him, and 


20. ie Spd chief aoe and elders ? aoe soi 18. oat ee Se Loner serge 
persuaded the multitude that they] 2,3. 31 And after that they had 


should ask Barabbas, and destroy) 1.23.11. cf. [mocked him, they took the robe off 
Jesus. Psa.69.19. from him, and put his own raiment 


21 The governor answered and] Gen.3.18: hi i 
said unto them, Whether of the Gal. 3.13. city See Sedat PRO aie 
twain will ye that I release unto} 1sa.36.6. 32 And as they came out, they 
you? They said, “Barabbas. it vs.30,31; found a man of Cyrene, Simon by 
22 Pilate saith unto them, What Psa.22.6; name: him they compelled to bear 


shall I do then with Jesus which is} 1sa.50.6; 53. [nig cross, 
called Christ? They all say untoj 3: Zech.13.7. /US 


him, Let him be “crucified. o Mt.26.67. The crucifixion (Mk. 15. 22-32; 
23 And the governor said, Why, |» mc.15.21; Lk. 23. 33-43; John 19. 17-24). 
what evil hath he done? But they} Lk.23.26; 33 1And when th 
cried out the more, saying, Let him} 7°41 | into a place called Goluotha, that 
be crucified. q@ the place, lis to say, 9a “place of a skull, 
24 When Pilate saw that he could! * 34 They gave him ‘vinegar to 


prevail nothing, but that rather a 7 Mi-1s22; |drink mingled with gall: and when 
tumult was made, he took /water,| Jii°i¢j7, |he had tasted thereof, he would 


and washed Ars panes before ine pinks te not drink. 
multitude, saying, I am innocent of| 5 *$2-02-21; ; . 5 
_-the bloed of this just person: see ye eae a The law fulfilled in Christ (Mt. 
toraé: ; ate 5. 17, 18; Gal. 3. 11-14). 
t Christ (First 


25 Then answered all the people,|  Adven+). Mt.| 35 And they crucified him, and 
and said, His blood be on us, and 27-80. (Gen. |parted his garments, casting lots: 
on our children. Acts 1.9.), |that it ea be ‘fulfilled which was 
: _ _ |spoken by the prophet,“They parted 
Barabbas released (Mk, 15. 15;|u Ame my garments among them, and 


Lk. 23. 24, 25). Lk.23.34; upon my vesture did they cast lots. 
26 Then released he Barabbas oe 19.23, | 36 And sitting down they watched 
unto them: and when he. had i him there; 


1 The order of events at the crucifixion: (1) The arrival at Golgotha (Mt. 27., 
33; Mk, 15. 22; Lk. 23. 33; John 19. 17). (2) The offer of the stupefying drink re- 
fused (Mt. 27. 34; Mk. 15. 23). (3) Jesus is crucified between two thieves (Mt. 
27. 35-38; Mk. 15. 24-28; Lk. 23. 33-38; John 19. 18-24). (4) He utters the first cry 
from the cross, “‘Father, forgive,” etc. (Lk. 23. 34). (5) The soldiers part His gar- 
ments (Mt. 27. 35; Mk. 15. 24; Lk. 23. 34; John 19. 23). (6) The Jews mock Jesus 
(Mt. 27. 30-44; Mk. 15. 20-32; Lk. 23. 35-38). (7) The thieves rail on Him, but 
one repents and believes (Mt. 27. 44; Mk. 15. 32; Lk. 23. 39-43). (8) The second 
ery from the cross, ‘To-day shalt thou be with me,” etc. (Lk. 23.,43). (9) The 
third cry, “Woman, behold thy son’? (John 19. 26, 27). (10) The darkness (Mt. 
27. 45; Mk. 15, 33; Lk. 23. 44). (11) The fourth cry, “My God,” etc. (Mt. 27. 46, 
47; Mk. 15, 34-36). (12) The fifth cry, “I thirst” (John 19. 28). (13) The sixth cry, 

«~ 1041 


Sr. 


37. And set up over his head his 
accusation written, THIS IS JE- 
SUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. 

38 Then were there two thieves 
@crucified with him, one on the right 
haud, and another on the left. 

39 And they that passed by re- 
viled him, “wagging their heads, 

40 And saying, Fhou that de- 
stroyest the temple, and buildest i¢ 
in three days, save thyself. Ifthou 
be the Son of God, come down from 
the cross. 

41 Likewise also the chief priests 
mocking Aim, with the scribes and 
elders, said, 

42 He ‘saved others; himself he 
cannot save. If he be the King of 
Israel, let him now come down 
pom the cross, and we will ¢believe 

im. 

43 He ‘trusted in /God; let him 
deliver him now, if he will have 
him: for he said, I am the Son of 
God, 

44 The thieves also, which were 
crucified with him, cast the same 
in his teeth. 


The death of Jesus Christ (Mk. 
15. 33-41; Lk. 23. 44-49; John 19. 
30-37). 

45 Now from the sixth hour there 
was darkness over all the land 


A.D. 33. _| Jesus cried with,a loud voice. ‘say- 
ing, Eli, Eli, lama_sabachthani? 
that is to say, My JGod, my God, 

a 1sa.53.12. kwhy hast thou forsaken me? 


5 Psa.22.7,8,11-13; | 47 Some of them that'stood there, 
dag Johng, (When they heard that, said, This 


14,15; Heb.9.22. |mman calleth for Elias. 
2 believe on. 48 And straightway one of them 
@ Psa. 22.8, 


ran, and took a spunge, and filled it 


J Jehovah. with ‘vinegar, and put it on a reed, 


Ree and gave him to drink. 

Lk.23.39-43. 49 The rest said, Let be, let us.see 
fe Mic io 3 whether Elias will come to save 
i Bible prayers him. 


(N.T-}. Mk.10. | 50 Jesus, when he had cried again 


‘|with a loud voice, ?”yielded up the 
"ghost. 


The Dispensation of Law ends. 
(See John 1. 16, note; Heb. 9. 3- 
8; 10. 19, 20.) 


51 And, behold, the 2°veil of the 
30: cor 133. {temple was rent in twain from the 
” Christ (First Ad-\tep to the bottom; and the earth 
vent, Mt.28-5.6.|did quake, and the rocks rent; 
ec 52 And the +graves were opened; 
and many bodies of the saints 
which slept ?arose, 
53 And came out of the graves 
P Resurrection... |after his resurrection, and went into 
16. (ob 19.25;the ¢holy city, and appeared unto 
many. 
94 Now when the centurion, and 
they that were with him, watching 


J God. Psa.22.1; 
88.14. 


k Psa.22.3 gives 
the answer-to 
this significant 
and terrible cry. 

1 Psa.69.21. 


m Mk.15.37; Lk.23, 


o Lev.16.2,11-14; 
Mk.15.38; Lk.23. 
45; Heb.9.7,8,11, 
12; 10.19,20. 


$ 1 Cor,15,52.) 


@Sanctify, holy 
(things) (N.T,). 
Acts 6.13, (Mt.4, 
5; Rev.22.11.) 


unto the ninth hour. 
46 And about the ninth hour 


Jesus, saw the earthquake, and 
those things that were done, they 


“It is finished” (John 19. 30). 
etc. (Lk. 23. 46). 
23. 46; John 19. 30). 

MCh Mk. 15.°26;" Lk. 23:38: 
do not contradict each other. No 
tion. All have “The King of the 


“This is’; Matthew quotes the name, 


words “of Nazareth.” 


{all]. 
2 Literally, “dismissed His spirit 


pression, taken with Mk. 15. 37; Lk. 


of Christ from all other 
could say of His redemptive work, 


but I lay it down of myself” (John 10. 18), 
3 The veil which was rent was the veil 


(14) The seventh cry, 
(15) Our Lord dismisses His spirit (Mt. 27. 50; Mk. 15. 37; Lk. 


The narratives combined 
is [Matthew, Luke] Jesus [Matthew, John] 


“Father, into thy hands,’ 


John 19, 19. 

one of the Evangelists quotes the entire inscrip- 
Jews.” Luke adds to this the further words, 
“Jesus”; whilst John gives the additional 
give the entire inscription: ‘‘This 
of Nazareth [John] the King of the Jews’’ 


These accounts supplement, but 


” 


The Gr. implies an act of the will. This ex- 
23. 46; John 19. 30, differentiates the death 


physical death. He died by His own volition when He 


“Tt is finished.” “No man taketh it from me, 


which divided the holy place into which 


the priests entered from the holy of holies into which only the high priest might 


enter on the day of atonement (Ex. 26. 31, note; Lev. 
of that veil, which was a type of the human body of Christ (Heb. 10. 


that a ‘new and living way” 
God with no other sacrifice or prie 


4 That these bodies returned to their graves is not 


The wave-sheaf (Lev. 23. 
implies plurality. 
crucifixion and entombment of Chri 
in resurrection. 
made perfect” (Heb. 12. 23) from 
heaven. 


16, 1-30). The rending 


20) signified 


was opened for all believers into the very presence of 


sthood save Christ’s (cf. Heb. 9. 1-8: 10. 19-22). 


said and may not be inferred. 


10-12) typifies the resurrection of Christ, but a sheaf 
It was a single ‘‘corn of wheat” 


that fell into the ground in the 


st (John 12. 24); it was a sheaf which came forth 


The inference is that these saints, with the spirits of “just men 


Paradise, went with Jesus (Eph, 4. 8-10) into 


1042 


e7ssyoo 


was the Son of God. 

55 And many women were there 
beholdixg afar off, which followed 
J esus from Galilee, ministering unto 

im: 

56 Among which was Mary Mag- 
dalene, and Mary the mother of 
bJames and Joses, and the mother 
of Zebedee’s children. 


The entombment of Christ (Mk: 
15. 42-47; Lk. 23. 50-56; John 19. 
38-42). 

57 When the even was come, 
there came a rich man of Arima- 
thea, named Joseph, who also him- 
self was Jesus’ disciple: 

58 He went to Pilate, and begged 
the body of Jesus. Then Pilate com- 
manded the body to be delivered. 

59 And when Joseph had taken 
the body, he wrapped it in a clean 
linen cloth, 

60 And laid it in chis own new 
tomb, which he had hewn out in the 
rock:and herolleda great stonetothe 
door of the sepulchre, and departed. 

61 And there was Mary Magda- 
lene, and the ¢other: Mary, sitting 
over against the sepulchre. 


The sepulchre sealed and 
guarded. 


62 Now the next day, that fol- 
lowed the day of the preparation, 
the chief priests and Pharisees came 
together unto Pilate, 

63 Saying, Sir, we remember that 
that deceiver said, while he was yet 
alive, «After three days I will rise 
again 

64 Command therefore that the 
sepulchre be made sure until the 
third day, lest his disciples come 
by night, and steal him away, and 
say unto the people, He is risen 
from the dead: so the last error 
shall be worse than the first. 


65 Pilate said unto them, Ye have; 


St. MATTHEW. 


feared greatly, saying, Truly this] 


a MK.15.39-41; 
Lk.23.47-49. 


6 Son of Al- 
pheus. Mt. 
4.21, note. 


¢ Isa.53.9, 


d Supposed to 
be Mary the 
mother of 
James and 
Joses. 


eMt.16.21; 
17.23; 20.19; 
26.61; Mk.8. 
31; 10.34; 
LE.9.22; 18. 
33; 24.6,7; 
John 2.19. 


f Lit. end of 
the sab- 
baths. The 
sabbaths end, 
the first day 
comes. Mt.12. 
1, note; John 
20.19; Acts 
20.7; 1 Cor. 
16.2; Rev.1. 
10. 


gananégel, etc, 


h Heb.1.4, 
note, 


#Cf.Dan.10. 
6; Rev.10.1. 


j Acts 17.31; 
Rev.1.17. 


k MKk.16.6; 


| 2 Tim.1.7; 


Rom.8.15, 


| Christ (First 
Advent). 
Acts 1.9. 
(Gen.3.15; 
Acts 1.9). 


m Resurrec- 
tion. vs. 1-6; 
Mk. 5.41. 
(Job 19.25; 

1 Cor. 15.52.) 


nLit. O joy! 


[28 10 


a watch: go your way, make it as 
sure as ye can. 

66 So they went, and made the 
sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, 
and setting a watch. 


CHAPTER 28. 


The resurrection of Jesus Christ, 
and events of that day (Mk. 
16.1-14; Lk. 24. 1-49; John 20. 1-23.) 


BN the fend of the sabbath, as it 
began to dawn toward the first 
day of the week, came Mary Mag- 
dalene and the 4other Mary to see 
the sepulchre. 

2 And, behold, there was a great 
earthquake: for the “angel of the 
Lord descended from heaven, and 
came and rolled back the stone 
from the door, and sat upon it. 

3 *His countenance was like light- 
ning, and his raiment white as 
snow: 

4 And for fear of him the keepers 
did shake, and became as Jdead 
men. ; 

5 And the “angel answered and 
said unto the women, “Fear not ye: 
for I know that ye seek Jesus, 
which was crucified. 
| 6 He is not here: for ‘he is “risen, 
las he said. Come, see the place 
where the Lord lay. 

7 And go quickly, and tell his dis- 
ciples that he is risen from the 
dead; and. behold, he goeth before 
you into Galilee; there shall ye see 
him: lo, I have told you. 

& And they departed quickly from 
the sepulchre with fear and great 
joy; and did run to bring his disci- 
ples word. ; 

9 And as they went to tell his 
disciples, behold, 2Jesus met them, 
saying, “All hail. And they came 
and held him by the feet, and wor- 
shipped him. 

10 Then said Jesus unto them, Be 


1 The order of events, combining the four narratives, is as follows: Three women, 
Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, start for the sepul- 


chre, followed by other women bearing spices. 


The three find the stone rolled 


away, and Mary Magdalene goes to tell the disciples (Lk. 23. 55-24. 9; John 20. 


D2). 
angel of the Lord (Mt. 28. 2). 
with the spices. 


look in, and go away (John 20. 3-10). 


Mary, the mother of James and Joses, draws nearer the tomb and sees the 
She goes back to meet the other women following 
Meanwhile Peter and John, warned by Mary Magdalene, arrive, 
Mary Magdalene returns weeping, sees the 


two angels and then Jesus (John 20. 11-18), and goes as He bade her to tell the dis- 


ciples. 


Mary (mother of James and Joses), meanwhile, has met the women with 


the spices and, returning with them, they see the two angels (Lk. 24. 4, 5; Mk. 16. 


5). 
by Jesus (Mt. 28. 8-10). 


They also receive the angelic message, and, going to seek the disciples, are met 


> The order of our Lord’s appearances would seem to be: On the day of His res- 


urrection: (1) To Mary Magdalene (John 20. 14-18). 


+ 


1043 


(2) To the women returning 


28 11] St. MATTHEW. [28 20 


not afraid: go tell my %brethren| A.D.35.__| Jesus in Galilee: the great com- 
that they go into Galilee, and there mission (Mk. 16. 15-18). 


shall they see me. a@ John 20.17; vt 
il Now when they were going, shearer 16 Then the eleven disciples went 


behold, some of the watch came] ¢Cf.Acts12.19.|away into Galilee, into a moun- 
into the city, and shewed unto the|? Cpe ert ee tain where Jesus had appointed 
chief priests all the things that]. john 5.22;17.|them. ; 
were done. 2; Eph.1.22. | 17 And when they saw him, they 
12 And when they were assem-|f Or reciee worshipped him: but “some doubt- 
bled with the elders, and had taken} y494.47,48;’ |ed. 
counsel, they gave large money] Acts 1.8. 18 And Jesus cameand spake unto 
unto the soldiers, g Acts 2.38,41. |them, saying, “All power is given 


; PEE , unto. 4 > 
13 Saying, Say ye, His disciples 1 ee ete ie, unto me in heaven and in earth. 


came by night, and stole him away| Mk.1.8,10, 19 1Go ye therefore, and Steach 
while we slept. peer a ey all nations, ‘baptizing them “in the 


14 And if this come to the gov-| ;75s5;ra¢ion, \7name of the Father, and of the Son, 
‘ernor’s ears, we will “persuade him, qi vs.19,20; Mik. and of the ‘Holy Ghost: 


cure you. 1.44.(Ex.4.15;| 20 Teaching ther to observe all 
aS ‘So they took the money, and eee things “whatsoever I have com- 
did as they were taught: and this| 23.11. manded you: and, lo, I am “with 
saying is commonly reported among conse ea you alway, even unto the ‘end of 
the Jews until this day. ;, ages the world. Amen. 


from the tomb with the angelic message (Mt. 28. 8-10). (3) To Peter, probably 
in the afternoon (Lk. 24. 34; 1 Cor. 15.5). (4) To the Emmaus disciples toward 
evening (Lk. 24. 13-31). (5) To the apostles, except Thomas (Lk. 24. 36-43; John 
20. 19-24). Eight days afterward: (1) To the apostles, Thomas being present 
(John 20. 24-29). In Galilee: (1) To the seven by the Lake of Tiberias (John 
21, 1-23). (2) On a mountain, to the apostles and five hundred brethren (1 Cor. 
15.6). At Jerusalem and Bethany again: (1) To James (1 Cor. 15.7). (2) To the 
eleven (Mt, 28. 16-20; Mk. 16. 14-20; Lk, 24, 33-53; Acts 1.3-12). To Paul: (1) Near 
Damascus (Acts 9. 3-6; 1 Cor. 15.8). (2) In the temple (Acts 22. 17-21; 23. 11). 
To Stephen, outside Jerusalem (Acts 7.55). To John on Patmos (Rev. 1. 10-19), 

‘ With the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ begins the ‘dispensation of the 
grace of God” (Eph. 3. 2), which is defined as “‘his kindness toward us through 
Christ Jesus”; and, “the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast” 
(Eph. 2. 7-9). Under grace God freely gives to the believing sinner eternal life 
(Rom. 6. 23); accounts to him a perfect righteousness (Rom. 3. 21, 22: 4, 4, 5); and 
accords to him a perfect position (Eph. 1. 6). The predicted results of this sixth 
testing of man are: (1) The salvation of all who believe (Acts 16. 31); (2) judgment 
upon an unbelieving world and an apostate church (Mt. 25. 31-46; 2 Thes. 1. 7-103 
1 Pet. 4. 17, 18; Rev. 3. 15, 16). 

(1) Man’s state at the beginning of the dispensation of grace (Rom. 3. 19; Gal. 
3. 22; Eph. 2. 11, 12). (2) Man’s responsibility under grace (John 1. 11, 12; 3. 36; 
6. 28, 29). (3) His predicted failure (Mt. 24. 37-39; Lk. 18. 8; 19. 12-14). (4) The 
judgment (2 Thes. 2. 7-12). 

Be. The word is in the singular, the “name,” not namies, Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit is the final name of the one true God. It affirms: (1) That God is one. 
2) That He subsists in a personality which is threefold, indicated by relationship 
as Father and Son; by a mode of being as Spirit; and by the different parts 
taken by the Godhead in manifestation and in the work of redemption, e.g. John 3. 
5, 6 (Spirit), 16, 17 (Father and Son). In Mt. 3. 16, 17: Mk. 1. 10, 11; Lk. 3. 21, 22, 
the three persons are in manifestation together. (3) The conjunction in one name 
of the Three affirms equality and oneness of substance. See O.T. Names of God: 
en. 1. 1, note; 2. 4, note; 14. 18, note; 15. 2, note; 17. 1, note; 21. 33, note; 
1 Sam. 1. 3, note; Mal. 3. 18, Summary. See “Lord,” Mt. 8. 2, note; ‘Word” 


(Logos), John 1.1, note; “Holy Spirit,” Acts 2.4, Summary. See “Christ, Deity 
of,” John 20. 28, note. 


1044 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


ST. MARK. 


WRITER. The writer of the second Gospel, Mark, called also John, was the son of 
one of the New Testament Marys, and nephew of Barnabas. He was an associate 
of the apostles, and is mentioned in the writings of Paul and of Luke (Acts 12. 12, 25: 
15. 37, 39; Col. 4. 10; 2 Tim. 4. 11; Phm. 24), 

The date of Mark has been variously placed between A.D. 57 and 63. 

Theme. The scope and purpose of the book are evident from its contents. In 
it Jesus is seen as the mighty Worker, rather than as the unique Teacher. It is the 
Gospel of Jehovah’s “Servant the Branch” (Zéch. 3. 8), as Matthew is the Gos- 
pel of the “Branch... unto David” (Jer. 33.15). 

Everywhere the servant character of the incarnate Son is manifest. The key- 
verse is 10. 45, “For even the Son of. man came not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister.” The characteristic word is “straightway,” a servant’s word. There is 
no genealogy, for who gives the genealogy of a servant? The distinctive character 
of Christ in Mark is that set forth in Phil. 2. 6-8. 

But this lowly Servant, who emptied Himseif of the “form of God,” “‘and was 
found in fashion as a man,”’ was, nevertheless, “the mighty God’’ (Isa. 9. 6), as 
Mark distinctly declares (1.1), and therefore mighty works accompanied and authen- 
ticated His ministry. As befits a Servant-Gospel, Mark is characteristically a 


11] (1 13 


Gospel of deeds, rather than of words. 
The best preparation of heart for the study of Mark is the prayerful reading of 
Isa. 42. 1-21; 50. 4-11; 52. 13-53. 12; Zech. 3. 8; Phil. 2. 5-8. 
Mark is in five principal divisions: I. The manifestation of the Servant-Son, 1. 


1-11. 
at work, 1. 14-13. 37. 


II. The Servant-Son tested as to His fidelity, 1. 12, 13. 
IV. The Servant-Son ‘‘obedient unto death,”’ 14. 1-15. 47. 


III. The ieee | 


The ministry of the risen Servant-Son, now exalted to all authority, 16. 1-20. 
The events recorded in this book cover a period of 7 years. 


CHAPTER 1. 


The ministry of John the Bap- 
tist (Mt. 3. 1-11; Lk. 3. 1-16; John 
1. 6-8, 19-28). 


HE “beginning of the °gospel of 

Jesus Christ, the Son of God; 
2 As it is written in the prophets, 
_~Behold, I send my messenger be- 
fore thy face, which shall prepare 
thy way before thee. 

3 The 4voice of one crying in the 
wilderness, Prepare ye the way 
of the “Lord, make his paths 
straight. 

4 John did baptize in the wilder- 
ness, and preach the baptism of /re- 
pentance for the remission of 
&sins. 

5 And there went out unto him 
all the land of Judea, and they of 
Jerusalem, and were all baptized of 
him in the river of Jordan, confess- 
ing their 4sins. : 

6 And John was “clothed with 
camel’s hair, and with a girdle of a 
skin about his loins; and he did eat 


locusts and wild honey; 
7 And preached, saying, There 
‘cometh one mightier than I after! 


A.D. 26. 


@ Mt.1.1; Lk,1.1,5; 
John 1.1. 


4 Gospel. vs.1,14, 
15; Mk.8.35. 
(Gen.12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 


[A.D. 27. 
¢ Mal.3.1; Mt.11. 
10; Lk.1.76; 7.27. 
@Ysa.40.3; Mt.3.3; 
Lk.3.4; John 1.23. 
e Jehovah. 
Isa.40.3. 


f Repentance. 
Mk.2.17. (Mt.3. 
2; Acts 17.30.) 


9 Sins. Rom.3-23, 
note. 


h Mt.3.4; 11.8,9. 


iMt.3.11; Lk.3.16; 
John 1,.15,26,33. 


J Holy Spirit. vs. 


8,10,12; Mk.3.29." 


(Mt.1.18; Acts 2, 
4.) 


k Mt.3.13. 

l Lev.8.12; Psa:89. 
20; Mt.3.16,17; 
Lk.3.21,22; Acts 
10.38. 

™m Straightway. 

nm Mt.4.1; Lk.4.1. 

oSatan, Mk.3. 

_ 23,26. (Gen.3.1; 
Rev. 20.10.) 


1045 


Dak 
me, the latchet of whose shoes I am 


not worthy to stoop down and un- 
loose. 
8 Iindeed have baptized you with 


lwater: but he shall baptize you 


with the JHoly Ghost, 


The baptism of Jesus (Mt. 3. 13- 
177 LK..35 21, 22); 


9 And it *came to pass in those 
days, that Jesus came from Naza- 
reth of Galilee, and was baptized of 
John in Jordan. 

10 And straightway coming up 
out of the water, he saw the 
"heavens opened, and the Spirit like 
a dove descending upon him: 

11 And there came a voice from 
heaven, saying, Thou art my be- 
loved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased. 


The temptation of Jesus (Mt. 4. 
1-11; Lk. 4. 1-13). 


12 And “immediately the spirit 
ndriveth him into the wilderness. 

13 And he was there in the wilder- 
ness forty days, tempted of °Satan; 
and was with the wild beasts; and 
the angels ministered unto him. 


144 


Sr. MARK. 


[3] 


The first Galilean ministry 
(Mt. 4. 12-17; Lk. 4. 14). 


14 Now after that John was put 
in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, 
preaching the gospel of the ¢king- 
dom of God, 

15 And saying, The time is ful- 
filled, and the kingdom of God is 
at hand: repent ye, and believe the 
gospel. 


The call of Peter and Andrew 
(Met.. 4. 182927’ Lk. 5. 10, 11. CF. 
John 1. 35-42). 


16 Now as he walked by the sea of 
Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew 
his brother casting a net into the 
sea: for they were fishers. 

17 And Jesus said unto them, 
Come ye after me, and I will make 
you to become “fishers of men. 

18 And straightway they forsook 
their nets, and followed him. 

19 And when he had gone a little 
farther thence, he saw ‘James the 
son of Zebedee, and John his bro- 
ther, who also were in the ¢ship 
mending their nets. 

20 And straightway he called 
them: and they left their father 
Zebedee in the ship with the hired 
servants, and went after him. 


Jesus casts out demons in Ca- 
pernaum (Uk. 4. 31-37). 


2i And they went into Caper- 
naum; and straightway on the sab- 
bath day he entered into the ¢syn- 
agogue, and taught. 

22 And they were fastonished at 
his doctrine: for he taught them as 
one that had authority, and not as 
the scribes. 

23 And there was in their syna- 
gogue a man with an “unclean 
spirit; and he cried out, 

24 Saying, Let us alone; what 
have we to do with thee, “thou Jesus 
of Nazareth? art thou come to de- 
stroy us? I ‘know thee who thou 
art, the Holy One of God. 

25 And Jesus rebuked him, say- 
ing, Hold thy peace, and come out 
of him. 

26 And when the unclean spirit 
had torn him, and cried with a loud 
voice, Jhe came out of him. 

27 And they were all amazed, in- 
somuch that they questioned among 
themselves, saying, What thing is 
this? what new doctrine is this? 
for with authority commandeth he 
even the unclean spirits, and they 
do obey him. 


A.D. 31.. 


28 And "immediately his fame 
spread abroad throughout all the 
region round about Galilee. 


Simon’s wife’s mother healed of 
a fever (Mt. 8. 14, 15; Lk. 4. 38, 39). 


29 And “forthwith, when they 
a See Mt.6.33, |Were come out of the synagogue, 


note. they entered into the house of Simon 
ey and Andrew, with James and John. 
Lk5.10,11,. | 30 But Simon’s wife’s ‘mother lay 
: sick of a fever, and anon they tell 
eMt.4.21,22. lhim of her. 
d boet. 31 And he came and took her by 
the hand, and lifted her up: and 
pt a3 a8 kimmediately the fever left her, and 
= San. she “ministered unto them. 
FMt.7.28,29. | Demons cast out: many healed 
g Lk.4.33-37; (Mt. 8. 16, 17; Lk. 4. 40, 41). 
Rev.16.13- | 39 And at "even, when the sun 
hLit. Jesus, |did set, they brought unto him @all 
Nazarene! |that were diseased, and them that 
i v.34; Jas.2, |were possessed with ?devils. 
19, 33 And all the city was gathered 
Lee together at the door. 
cs (N.T.). vs.23- 34 And he healed many that were 
26,30,31,32- |sick of divers diseases, and cast out 
$3948? |many ?devils; and ‘suffered not the 
(Mt8.2,3;  |devils to speak, because they knew 
Acts 28.8,9.) |him. 


kstraightway.| Jesus prays: a preaching tour in 
Galilee (Lk. 4. 42-44). 


Mt.8.14,15; 
"Tka3ea0° | 35 And in thé morning, trising up 
m Mt.27.55; | Steat while before day, he went 
Phm.ii, out, and departed into a solitary 
place, and there prayed. 
pete AG 473 36 And Simon and they that were 
John 8.12... |With him followed after him. 


37 And when they had found him, 


Heewnnia they said unto him, All men seek 
rrr for thee. 
p demons. 38 And he said unto them, Let us 
Bat fas go into the next towns, that I may 
° preach there also: for ‘therefore 
@ vs.24,25; came I forth. 
Mk.3.12; 


39 And he preached in their syn- 
agogues throughout all Galilee, and 
cast out Pdevils. 


A leper healed (Mt. 8. 2-4; 
Ik. 5, 12-14), 


40 And there came a ‘leper to him, 
beseeching him, and kneeling down 


Acts 16.17,18. 

r Lk.4.42-44; 
5.16. 

s Isa.61.1,2; 
Mt.10.5,6. 

t Lev.13.44- 


46; Isa.1.5,6; * . 1s 

Mtg.24:" |to him, and saying unto him, If 

Lk.5.12-14.  |thou wilt, thou canst make me clean, 
abe Gare 41 And Jesus, moved with com- 


passion, put forth Ais hand, and 
touched him, and saith unto him, 
“I will; be thou clean. 

42 And as soon as he had spoken, 
kimmediately the leprosy departed 
from him, and he was cleansed. 

43 And he straitly charged him, 
‘and forthwith sent him away; 


1046 


2s ON ad Me ei A 
lee ae 
pst) 


| ar eT raius re 


St. MARK. 


[2 22 


44 And saith unto him, “See shoal AD. 31. _|were all amazed, and glorified God, 


say nothing to any man: but go 
thy way, shew thyself to the priest, 
and offer for thy cleansing those 
things which “Moses commanded, 
for a testimony unto them. 

45 But he went out, and began to 
publish it much, and to blaze 
abroad the matter, insomuch that 
Jesus could no more openly enter 
into the city, but was without in 
ddesert places: and they came to 
him from every quarter. 


CHAPTER 2. 


The palsied man healed (Mt. 9. 
1-8; Lk. 5. 1826): 


HAND again he entered: into Ca- 
pernaum after some days; and 
it was noised that he was in the 
house. 

2 And straightway many were 
gathered together, insomuch that 
there was no room to receive them, 
no, not so much as about the door: 
and he preached the word unto 
them. 

3 And they come unto him, bring- 
ing one sick of the ‘palsy, which 
was borne of four. 

4 And when they could not come 
nigh unto him for the press, they 
uncovered the roof where he was: 
and when they had ‘broken it up, 
they let down the bed wherein the 
sick of the palsy lay. 

5 When Jesus saw their faith, he 
said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, 
thy sins be “forgiven thee. , 

6 But there were certain of the 
scribes sitting there, and reasoning 
in their hearts, 

7 Why doth this man thus speak 
blasphemies? who can forgive sins 
but ‘God only? 

8 And immediately when Jesus 
Rperceived in his spirit that they so 
reasoned within themselves, he 
said unto them, Why reason ye 
these things in your hearts? 

9 Whether is it easier ‘to say to 
the sick of the palsy, Thy ‘sins be 
forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, an 
take up thy bed, and walk? 

10 But that ye may know that the 
mSon of saan hath power on earth 
to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick 
of the palsy,) 2 

11 Isay unto thee, Arise, and take 
up thy bed, and go thy way into 
thine house. 

12 “And Jimmediately he arose, 
took up the bed, and went forth be- 
Gore them all; insomuch that they 


a MK.5.43. 


b Inspiration. 
MKE.7.8-13, 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


c Lev.14.2-20. 


d Jsa.35.1; 
Mk.6.31,32. 


e Isa.40.29; 
Mt.9.2-8: 
Lk.5.18-26. 


f Mt.15.23-28; 
Lk.18.39. 


g Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


h Forgiveness. 
Lk.7.47-49. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 


t Isa.43.25; 
John 1.1,14 
wee John 8. 


j straightway. 


kMt.9.4; 
John 2.25. 


1 Psa.33.6,9; 
ME.1.27; 
Lk.4.32. 

m Mt.8.20, 
note. 


n Miracles 
(N.T.). vs.3, 
12; Mk.3.1-5. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 


o Mt.15.31; 
Phil.2.11. 


b Mt.9.9-13; 
Lk.5.27-32. 

gq Mt.18.11; 
Lk.19.7,10; 
1 Tim.1.15. 

ry Repentance. 
Mk.6.12. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 

s Mt.6.16-18; 
9.14-17; Lk. 
5.33-39. 

t John 3.29. 


4 John 16.6, 
=2 A 


0,2 


v Parables 


3-20. (Mt.5. 
13-16; Lk.21. 
29-31.) 


w Gal.3.1-3. 
x wine-skins. 


y Gr. apol- 
Jumu. John 3. 
16, note. 


1047 


saying, We never saw it on this 
fashion. 


The call of Levi (Matthew) 
(Mt. 9. 9-13; Lk. 5. 27-32). 


13 And he went forth again by 
the sea side; and all the multitude 
resorted unto him, and he taught 
them. 

14 And as he ?passed by, he saw 
Levi the son of Alpheus sitting at 
the receipt of custom, and said unto 
him, Follow me. And he arose and 
followed him. 

15 And it came to pass, that, as 
Jesus sat at meat in his house, many 
publicans and &sinners sat also to- 
gether with Jesus and his disciples: 
for there were many, and they fol- 
lowed him. 

16 And when the scribes and 
Pharisees saw him eat with pub- 
licans and sinners, they said unto 
his disciples, How is it that he eat- 
eth and drinketh with publicans 
and sinners? 

17 When Jesus heard it, he saith 
unto them, They that are 2whole 
have no need of the physician, but 
they that are sick: I came not to 
call the righteous, but sinners to 
‘repentance. 

18 And the disciples of John and 
of the Pharisees Sused to fast: and 
they come and say unto him, Why 
do the disciples of John and of the 
YHeriess fast, but thy disciples fast 
not 

19 And Jesus said unto them, Can 
the children of the bridechamber 
fast, while the “bridegroom is with 
them? as long as they have the 
Peiss eyo with them, they cannot 
ast. 

20 But the days will come, when 
the bridegroom shall be “taken 
away from them, and then shall 
they fast in those days. 


Parables of the cloth and the 
bottles. (Cf. Mt. 9. 16, 17; Lk. 5. 
36-39.) 


21 No man also ’seweth a piece of 


“4. |new cloth on an old garment: else 


the new piece that filled it up tak- 
eth away from the old, and the rent 
is made worse. 

22 And “no man, putteth new 
wine into old *bottles: else the new 
wine doth burst the bottles, and the 
wine is spilled, and the bottles will 
be Ymarred: but new wine must be 
put into new bottles. 


2 23] 


(Mt. 12. 1-8; Lk. 6. 1-5). 


23 And it came to pass, that he 
¢went through the corn fields on 
the sabbath day; and his disciples 
began, as they went, to pluck the 
ears of corn. : 

24 And the Pharisees said unto 
him, Behold, why do they on the 
sabbath day that which is not law- 
ful? 

25 And he said unto them, Have 
ye never read what %David did, 
when he had need, and was an 
hungred, he, and they that were 
with him? 

26 How he went into the house of 
God in the days of Abiathar the 
high priest, and did eat the ‘shew- 
bread, which is not lawful to eat 
but for the 2priests, and gave also 
to them which were with him? 

27 And he said unto them, The 
‘sabbath was made for man, and 
not man for the sabbath: 

28 Therefore the Son of man is 
Lord also of the sabbath. 


CHAPTER 3. 
Jesus heals the withered hand 


on the sabbath (Mt. 12. 10-14;| © 


Lk. 6. 6-11). 


72 he entered again into the 
synagogue; and there was a 
man there which had a withered 
hand. 

2 And they watched him, whether 
he would heal him on the sabbath 
day; that they might accuse him. 

3 And he saith unto the man 
which had the withered hand, 
Stand forth. 

4 And he saith unto them, Is it 
lawful to do #good on the sabbath 
days, or to do evil? to save life, or 
to kill? But they held their peace. 

5 And when he had looked round 
about on them with ‘anger, being 
grieved for the hardness of their 
hearts, he saith unto the man, 
JStretch forth thine hand. And he 
stretched it out: and his hand was 
Zrestored whole as the other. 


The multitudes healed (Mt. 12, 
Bb G 5 Lc Oude 1o)\e 


6 And the Pharisees went forth, 
and straightway took /counsel with 
the Herodians against him, how 
they might destroy him. 

7 But Jesus withdrew himself 
with his disciples to the sea: and a 


St. MARK. 


Jesus Lord of the sabbath | A.D.31. |great “multitude from Galilee fol- 


a Mt,.12.1-8; 
LE.6.1-5. 


61 Sam.21.1-6; 
Mt.12.9-13; 
Lk.6.6-10. 


c Ex.25.30, 
note. 


d Lev.24.5-9. 
e Lk.14.5. 


fMt.12.8; 
John 5.16-18. 


g Mt.12.9-13; 
Lk.6.6-10. 


hLk.14.3. 
t Mt.23.13. 


j John 4.50; 
Rom.4.19-25. 


Rk Miracles 


m Mt.12.15; 
LK.6.17-19. 


n Mt.14.36; 
Lk.6.19. 


o Mt.12.16; 
Mk,1.25,34; 
Lk.4.41. 


p Mt.10.1-4; 
Lk.6.13-16; 


9.1; John 15. | 


16. Cf.Rev. 
21.14 with 
Eph.2.20. 


q See Mt.4. 
21, note. 


r v.31; John 
7.5; 8.48; 
Acts 26,24. 


5S Mt.9.34;.10. 
25; 12.24; 
Lk.11.14,15; 
John 10.20. 


t demons. 
u Satan. vs.22, 
23,26; Mk.4. 


15. (Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


1048 


uke, 


[3 24 


lowed him, and from Judza, 

8 And from Jerusalem, and from 
Idumza, and from beyond Jordan; 
and they about Tyre and Sidon, a 
great multitude, when they had 
heard what great things he did, 
came unto him. 

9 And he spake to his disciples, 
that a small ship should wait on 
him because of the multitude, lest 
they should throng him. 

10 For he had healed many; inso- 
much that they pressed upon him 
for to “touch him, as many as had 
plagues. 

11 And unclean spirits, when they 
saw him, fell.down before him, and 
stad saying, Thou art the Son of 

od 


12 And he straitly “charged them 
that they should not make him 
known. 


The twelve chosen (Mt. 10. 1-4; 
Lk. 6. 12-16). 


13 And he goeth up into a moun- 


- tain, and 2calleth unto him whom 
* |he would: and they came unto him. 


14 And he ordained twelve, that 
they should be with him, and that 
he might send them forth to preach, 

15 And to have power to heal 
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 

16 And Simon he surnamed Peter; 

17 And 2James the son of Zebe- 
dee, and John the brother of James; 
and he surnamed them Boanerges, 
which is, The sons of thunder: 


| 18 And Andrew, and Philip, and 
|Bartholomew, and Matthew, and 


Thomas, and James the son of 
Alpheus, and Thaddzeus, and Si- 


jmon the Canaanite, 


19 And Judas Iscariot, which also 
betrayed him: and they went into 
an house. 

20 And the multitude cometh to- 
gether again, so that they could not 
so much as eat bread. 

21 And when his "friends heard 
of it, they went out to lay hold on 
him: for they said, He is beside 
himself. 


The unpardonable sin (Mt. 12, 
24-29; Lik. 11. 14-20), 


22 And the scribes which came 
down from Jerusalem said, He hath 
SBeelzebub; and by the prince of 
the devils casteth he out ‘devils. 

23 And he called them unto him, 
and said unto them in parables, 
UHow can Satan cast out Satan? 

24 And if a kingdom be divided 


3 25] . St. MARK. [4 20 
against itself, that kingdom cannot|__a.D.31.__|immediately it sprang up, because 


stand. 
25 And if a house be divided 
against itself, that house cannot 
stand. 


26 And if ¢Satan rise up against! 


himself, and be divided, he cannot 
stand, but hath an end. 

27 Ne man can enter into a 
‘strong man’s house, and spoil his 
goods, except he will first “bind the 
strong man; and then he will spoil 
his house. 

28 Verily I say unto you, All 4sins 
shall be forgiven unto the sons of 
men, and blasphemies wherewith 
soever they shall blaspheme: 

29 But he that shall “blaspheme 


against the Holy Ghost hath never} 


forgiveness, but is fin danger of 
eternal damnation: 

30 “Because they said, He hath 
an unclean spirit. 


The new relationships (Mt. 12. 
46-50; Lk. 8. 19-21), 


31 There came then his ‘brethren 
and his mother, and, standing with- 
out, sent unto him, calling him. 

32 And the multitude sat about 
chim, and they said unto him, Be- 
hold, thy mother and thy brethren 
without seek for thee. 

23 And he answered them, saying, 
Who is my mother, or my brethren? 

34 And he looked round about on 
them which sat about him, and said, 
age my mother and my breth- 
ren 

35 For whosoever shall do the 
dwill of God, the same is my brother, 
and my sister, and mother. 


CHAPTER 4. 


The parable of the sower (Mt. 
13. 1-23; Lk. 8. 4-15) 


Faw he began again to teach by 
the “sea side: and there was 
gathered unto him a great multt- 
tude, so that he entered into a ship, 
and sat in the sea; and the whole 
multitude was by the sea on the 
Tand. 

2 And he taught them many 
things by parables, and said unto 
them in his doctrine, 

3 Hearken; Behold, there went 
out a ‘sower to sow: 

4 And it came to pass, as_he 
sowed, some fell by the way side, 
and the “fowls of the air came and 
devoured it up. 


5 And some fell on stony ground,} 
where it had. not much earth; and! 


a Mt.12.25-28; 
Lk.11.16-20. 


6 Psa.35.10; 
Mt.12.29; 
Lk.11.21,22; 
13.16. 


¢ Heb.2.14,15; 
1 John 3.8. 


d Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


e Mt.12.31,32; 
Lk.12.10; 
1 John 1.7. 
Cf.Eph.4.30 
with Eph.1. 
13,14. 


f Holy Spirit. 
Mk.12.36. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


gis bound by 
an eternal 
sin. 


h Isa.5.20; 
1 Cor.12.3; 
1 Pet.4.4,5. 


i Mt.12.46-50; 
ME.6.3; 
Lk.8.19-21. 


j Psa.16.2,3; 
John 20,17; 
Rom.8.17; 
Heb.2.11,12, 


k Isa.60.5; 
Mt.13.1,2; 
LE.8.4. 


1 Parables 
(N.T.). vs.3- 
20,21-23,26- 
29,30-32; Mk. 
12.1-11. (Mt. 
5.13-16; Lk. 
21.29-31.) 


mv.15. 


n Mt.11.15; 
Rev.2.7. 


o Mt.13.11, 
note, 


~ Isa.6.9,10; 
Rom.8.5-7; 
1 Cor.2.14 


gi.e. furn 
again. 


v Satan. 
Mk.8.33, 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


5 vs.5,6 with 
Prov.28.14; 
Psa.51.17. 


t Cf.v.7 with 
Prov.22.5; 
1 Tim.6, 
9,10. 


ju age. 

|v v.8 “with 

| Jer.4.3,45 
Hos.10.123 


1 Thes.2.13. 
1049 


it had no depth of earth: 

6 But when the sun was up, it 
was scorched; and because it had 
no root, it withered away. 

7 And some fell among thorns, 
and the thorns grew up, and 
choked it, and it yielded no fruit. 

8 And other fell on good grouna, 
and did yield fruit that sprang up 
and increased; and brought forth, 
some thirty, and some sixty, and 
some an hundred. 

9 And he said unto them, He that 
hath “ears to hear, let him hear. 

10 And when he was alone, they 
that were about him with the 
twelve asked of him the parable. 

11 And he said unto them, Unto 
you it is given to know the °mys- 
tery of the kingdom of God: but 
unto them that are without, all 
these things are done in parables: 

12 That ?seeing they may see, and 
not perceive; and hearing they may 
hear, and not understand; lest at 
any time they should %be converted, 


jand their ¢sins should be forgiven 


them. 


The parable of the sower ex- 
epee (Mt. 13. 18-23; Lk. 8. 
11-15). 


13 And he said unto them, Know 
ye not this parable? and how then 
will ye know all parables? 

14 The sower soweth the word. 

15 And these are they by the way 
side, where the word is sown; but 
when they have heard, *Satan com- 
eth immediately, and taketh away 
the word that was sown in their 
hearts. 

16 And these are they likewise 
which are sown on stony ground; 
who, when they have heard the 
word, immediately receive it with 
gladness; 

17 And have no root in them- 
selves, and so endure but for a 
time: afterward, when ‘affliction or 
persecution ariseth for the word’s 
sake, immediately they are of- 
fended. 

18 And these are they which are 
sown among thorns; such as hear 
the word, 

19 And the ‘cares of this “world, 
and the deceitfulness of riches, and 
the lusts of other things entering 
lin, choke the word, and it becometh 
unfeuitful, 

20 And these are they which are 
sown on good ground; such as hear 
Ithe word, and "receive it, and bring 


4 21] 


forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some 
sixty, and some an hundred. 


Parable of the candle. (Cf. Mt. 
5. 15, 16; Lk, 8. 16; 11. 33.) 


21 And he said unto them, Is a 
candle brought to be put under a 
“bushel, or under a “bed? and not 
to be set on a candlestick? 

22 ‘For there is nothing hid, which 
shall not be ¢manifested; neither 
was any thing kept secret, but that 
it should come abroad. 

23 If any man have ears to hear, 
let him hear. 

24 And he said unto them, Take 
eheed what ye hear: with what 
measure ye mete, it shall be mea- 
sured to you: and unto you that 
hear shall more be given. 

25 For he that hath, to him shall 
be given: and he that hath not, 
from him shall be taken even that 
which he hath. 


The unconscious growth. 


26 And he said, So is the Sking- 
dom of God, as if a man should 
cast 8seed into the ground; 

27 And should sleep, and rise 
night and day, and the seed should 
spring and grow up, he knoweth not 


ow. 

28 For the “earth bringeth forth 
fruit of herself; first the blade, then 
the ear, after that the full corn in 
the ear. 

29 But when the fruit is brought 
forth, immediately he putteth in the 
sickle, because the ‘harvest is come, 


Parable of the mustard seed 
(Mt. 13.31, 32, note; Lk. 13. 18,19). 


30 And he said, Whereunto skall 
we liken the kingdom of God? or 
with what comparison shail we 
compare it? 

31 Jt rs like a grain of Jmustard 
seed, which, when it is sown in the 
earth, is less than all the seeds that 
be in the earth: 

32 But when it is sown, it grow- 
eth up, and becometh greater than 
all herbs, and shooteth out great 
branches; so that the “fowls of the 
air may lodge under the shadow of 
shi 

33. And with /many such parables 
spake he the word unto them, as 
they were able to hear it. 

34 But without a parable spake 
he not unto them: and when they 
were alone, he expounded all things 
to his disciples. 


St. MARK. 


oe 


AD. 31. _lJesus stills the storm (Mt. 8. 


@ Mt.5.15; 
Lk.8.16; 
11.33. 


b Prov.19.15; 
Eph.5.14. 


¢ For nothing 
is hidden 
except unto 
manifesta- 
tion, nora 
secret thing 
done that 
shall not be 
exposed. Cf. 
Rev.20.12; 


contra, Rom. 


4.6; Heb. 
J0.16,17. 


d Mt.10.26; 
Phil.2.15,16. 


e Jas.1.19; 
Acts 16.14. 


f See Mt.6. 
33, note. 


g Mt.13.24- 
30,36-43. 


h 1 Cor.3.6,7- 


a Rev.14. 
14-16. 


j Mt.13.31, 
32; Lk.13. 
18,19; Acts 
1.15 with 
Acts 2.41; 
Ex.12.38. 


kv.4 with 
Dan.4.20-22. 


7 Mt.13.34,35. 


m Mt.8.18; 
Lk.8.22. 


n being filled, 


o Mt.8.23-27; 
Lk.6.12; 8. 
23-25. 


‘bp Psa.44.23; 
Lk.i0.40. 


q Psa.65.7; 
89.9; 107.29, 


ry Miracles 
(N.T.). vs. 
37-41; Mik.5, 
1-13. (Mt.8. 
2,3; Acts 28. 

s Mt.14.31,32; 
Mk.16.14. 

t Mt.14.33. 

u Mt.8.28-34; 
LK.8.26-36. 

v Mk.7.25; 
Rev.16.13,14. 

w v.26; Mk.3. 
27. Cf.Rom. 
3.20 with 
Rom.8.7. 

x Jer.13.16. 

y Prov.21.16, 

2 Mk.1.24, 


1050 


23-27; Lk, 8. 22-25). 


35 And the same day, when the 
even was come, he saith unto them, 
Let us pass over unto the “other 
side. 

36 And when they had sent away 
the multitude, they took him even 
as he was in the ship. And there 
were also with him other little 
ships. 

37 And there arose a great storm 
of wind, and the waves beat into 
the ship, so that it was now “full. 

38 And he was in the hinder part 
of the ship, °asleep on 2 pillow: and 
they awake him, and say unto him, 
Master, ?carest thou not that we 
perish? 

39 And he arose, and rebuked the 
wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, 
be still. And the wind ’ceased, and 
there was a great calm. 

40 And he said unto them, Why 
are ye so fearful? how is it that ye 
have no ‘faith? 

41 And they feared exceedingly, 
and said one to another, ‘What 
manner of man is this, that even 
the wind and the sea obey him? 


CHAPTER 5. 


The maniac of Gadara (Mt. 8. 
28-34; Lk. 8. 26-37). 


AP they “came over unto the 
other side of the sea, into the 
country of the Gadarenes. 

2 And when he was come out of 
the ship, immediately there met 
him out of the tombs a man with an 
Yunclean spirit, 

3 Who had his dwelling among 
the tombs; and no man could bind 
him, no, not with chains: 

4 Because that he had been “often 
bound with fetters and chains, and 
the chains had been plucked asun- 
der by him, and the fetters broken 
in pieces: neither could any man 
tame him, 

5 And always, night and day, he 
was in the *mountains, and in the 
*tombs, crying, and cutting himself 
with stones, 

6 But when he saw Jesus afar off, 
he ran and worshipped him, 

7 And cried with a loud voice, and 
said, 7?What have I to-do with thee, 
Jesus, thou Son of the most high 
God? I adjure thee by God, that 
thou torment me not. 

8 For he said unto him, Come out 
of the man, thou unclean spirit, 


- 


39] 


9 And he asked him, What is thy 


name? And he answered, saying, 
My name is Legion: for we are 
many. 

10 And he besought him much 
that he would not send them away 
out of the country. 

11 Now there was there nigh unto 
the mountains a great herd of swine 
feeding. 

12 And all the devils besought 
him, saying, Send us into the swine, 
that we may enter into them. 

13 And forthwith Jesus gave them 
leave. And the unclean spirits 
went out, and entered into the 
swine: and the herd ran violently 
down a steep place into the sea, 
(they were about two thousand;) 
and were choked in the sea. 

14 And they that fed the swine 
fled, and told it in the city, and in 
the country. And they went out to 
see what it was that was done. 

15 And they come ta Jesus, and 
see him that was possessed with 
the devil, and had the legion, 4sit- 
ting, and clothed, and in his right 
mind: and they were afraid. 

16 And they that saw i¢ told them 
how it befell to him that was pos- 
sessed with the devil, and also con- 
cerning the swine. 

17 And they began to pray him to 
edepart out of their coasts. 

18 And when he was come into 
the ship, he that had been possessed 
with the devil prayed him that he 
might be with him. 

19 Howbeit Jesus suffered him 
not, but saith unto him, Go home to 
thy friends, and /tell them how 
great things the Lord hath done for 
thee, and hath had compassion on 
thee. 

20 And he departed, and began 
to publish in Decapolis how great 
things Jesus had done for him: and 
all men did marvel. 


Jesus heals the woman with an 
issue of blood, and raises the 
daughter of Jairus (Mt. 9. 18- 
26; Lk. 8. 41-56). 


21 And when Jesus was passed 
over again by ship unto the other 
side, much people gathered unto 
him: and he was nigh unto the sea. 

22 And, behold, there cometh one 
of the rulers of the synagogue, 
iJairus by name; and when he saw 

_ him, he fell at his feet, 

23 And besought him greatly, say- 
ing, My little daughter lieth at the 
point of death: J pray thee, come 


a Mk.16.9. 
See Mt.7.22, 
note. 

b Miracles 
(N.T.). vs.1- 
13; 22-24,35- 
42,25-34; 
ME.6.13. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 

c Lk.15.15. 


d Mt.11.28-30; 
Lk.10.39. 


e Ex.20.18; 
Mt.8.34; 
Lk.8.37; 
Acts 16.39. 

f borders. 

g L&K.3.38; 
Rom.5.2. 

h Lk.8.39; Acts 
26.19,20; Mk. 
1.44 with 
John 1.11. 

i Mt.9.1,18,19, 
23-26; Lk.8. 
41,42,49-56. 

j Mt.9.20-223 
Lk.8.43-48. 
Cf.Lev.15. 
25-31 with 
Mt.15.19. 

kv.42. 

1 Lk.10.31,32; 
Rom.5.6; 10. 
2,3: 

m Mt.14.35, 
36; Rom.4.5. 

n John 2.25. 


o Gr. dyna- 
min, powet. 
Cf£.Lk.6.19; 
8.46. 

p Lk.13.26, 

27 with 
Rom.9.6; 
10.16-18. 


q Rom.10.9,10. 
C£.Lk.17. 
14-19, 

ry Mk.10.52; 
Gal.2.16 


s But Jesus, 
overhearing 
that word, 
said to the 
synagogue- 
ruler, Fear 
not, simply 
have faith. 
Cf.Lk.7.50, 

7 Mt.14.27. 
Cf.Isa.43.1. 
u See Mt.4.21, 

note, 


v John 11.11- 
14,25; 1 Cor. 
15.55-57. 

w Acts 9.40; 1 


26.56; 27.46. 


1051 


Ki.17.19; Mt. 


[5 40 


and lay thy hands on her, that she 
may be healed; and she shall live. 

24 And Jesus went with him; and 
much people followed him, and 
thronged him. i 

25 And a certain jwoman, which 
had an issue of blood “twelve years, 

26 And had suffered many things 
of many physicians, and had ‘spent 
all that she had, and was nothing 
bettered, but rather grew worse, 

27 When she had heard of Jesus, 
came in the press behind, and 
mtouched his garment. 

28 For she said, If I may touch 
but his clothes, I shall be whole. 

29 And straightway the fountain 
of her blood was dried up; and she 
felt in her body that she was healed 
of that plague. 

30 And Jesus, immediately “know- 
ing in himself that °virtue had gone 
out of him, turned him about in the 
press, and said, Who touched my 
clothes? 

31 And his disciples said unto 
him, Thou seest the multitude 
’thronging thee, and sayest thou, 
Who touched me? 

32 And he looked round about to 
see her that had done this thing. 

33 But the woman fearing and 
trembling, knowing what was done 
in her, came and ?fell down before 
him, and told him all the truth. 

34 And he said unto her, Daugh- 
ter, thy “faith hath made thee 
whole; go in peace, and be whole 
of thy plague. 

35 While he yet spake, there came 
from the ruler of the synagogue’s 
house certain which said, Thy 
daughter is dead: why troublest 
thou the Master any further? 

36 SAs soon as Jesus heard the 
word that was spoken, he saith unto 
the ruler of the synagogue, ‘Be not 
afraid, only believe. 

37 And he suffered no man to fol- 
low him, save Peter, and “James, 
and John the brother of James. 

38 And he cometh to the house of 
the ruler of the synagogue, and 
seeth the tumult, and them that 
wept and wailed greatly. 

39 And when he was come in, he 
saith unto them, Why make ye this 
ado, and weep? the damsel is not 
dead, but “sleepeth. 

40 And they laughed him to scorn. 
But when he had “put them all out, 
he taketh the father and the mother 
of the damsel, and them that were 
with him, and entereth in where 
the damsel was lying. 


5 41] 


41 And he took the damsel by the 
*hand, and said unto her, Talitha 
cumi; which is, being interpreted, 
Damsel, I say unto thee, “arise. 

42 And straightway the damsel 
arose, and ‘walked; for she was of 
the age of twelve years. And they 
were “astonished with a great as- 
tonishment. 

43 And he ‘charged them straitly 
that no man should know it; and 
commanded that something should 
be given her to feat. 


CHAPTER 6. 


Jesus again at Nazareth (Mt. i3. 
51-58. See Lk. 4. 16, note). 


ND he went out from thence, 
and came into his own coun- 
try; and his disciples follow him. 

2 And when the sabbath day was 
come, he began to teach in the syna- 
gogue: and many hearing him were 
astonished, saying, From &whence 
hath this man these things? and 
what wisdom is this which is given 
unto him, that even such mighty 
works are wrought by his hands? 

3 Is not this the “carpenter, the 

.son of Mary, the brother of James, 
and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? 
and are not his sisters here with us? 
And they were ‘offended at him. 

4 But Jesus said unto them, 7A 
prophet is not without honour, but 
in his own country, and among his 
own kin, and in his own house. 

5 And he could there do no 
mighty work, save that he laid his 
hands upon a few sick folk, and 
"healed them. 

6 And he ”marvelled because of 
their unbelief. And he went round 
about the villages, teaching. 


The twelve .sent out to preach 
and heal (Mt. 10. 1-42; Lk. 9. 1-6). 


7 And he called unto him the 
twelve, and began to *send them 
forth by two and two; and gave 
them power over unclean spirits: 

8 And commanded them that they 
should °take nothing for their jour- 
ney, save a staff only; no ’scrip, no 
bread, no money in their Ypurse: 

9 But be *shod with sandals; and 
not put on two coats. 

10 And he said unto them, In 
what place soever ye enter into an 
house, there abide till ye depart 
‘rom that place. 

11 And whosoever shall not re- 
ceive you, nor hear you, when ye 
depart thence, ‘shake off the dust 


St. MARK. 


A.D. 31. 


@ Acts 3.6,7; Rev. 
1.17,18. 

& Resurrection. 
us.41; Mk.16.1-6. 
Qob 19.25; 1 Cor. 
15.52.) 

¢ Rom.6.4, 

d Mk. 1.27; cf.John 
12.12, 13, 17,18. 

e Mk.3.12. 


F\ Pet.2.2; cf. 
Col.3.1; Heb.5, 
14. 


9 John 6.42; 7.15; 
Acts 2.7-11; 4.13. 


* Lk.2.51,52 with 


Phil.2.7,8; Acts 
18.3 with John 
13.16. 


=Mt.11.6; 1 Pet.2. 
7,8. 


J John 7.5; 4.44; 
Acts 22.17-23. 

k Mk.9.23; 5,17: 
Lk, 13.34. 

0 Mk.7.24,25. 

m Mt.8.10-12; Isa. 
59.16. 


7 Mt.10.1; Mk.3. 
13,14; Lk.9.1-6; 
Mt.28, 19,20. 

© Cf.Mt.10,9, note. 

P provision-bhag. 

g belt. 3 

7 Eph.6.15. 

$s Lk.10.10,11; 

Acts 13,51; 18.6; 
28.24-29. 

t Day of judg- 
ment. Lk.10.14. 
(Mt.10,15; Rev. 
20.11.) 

u Repentance. 


Lk.3.3,8. (Mt.3. 
2; Acts 17.30.) 


v Miracles 


8.2.3; Acts 28. 
8,9. 


wJas.5.14. 


= Son of the Herod 
of our Lord's 
nativity; also vs. 
16,17,18,20,21,22, 
See Mt.14.1, 
refs. 


v Acts 17.31. 
= Mt.16.14; Mk.8, 
28. 


@ Lk.3.19,20. 

5 kept saying, 

¢ Lev. 18.16. 

d Acts 24.24,25; 
2 Cor.7.10. 

e Sanctify, holy 
(persons) 

N.T.). Mk.8. 

38. (Mt.4.5; 
Rey.22.11.) 


Sf kept him safely, 
and, hearing 
him, did many 
things, hearing 
him gladly. 

9 Mt.13.5,20; cf. 
Acts 2.41, 

h principal 
Persons. 


1052 


under your feet for a testimony 
against them. Verily I say unto 
you, It shall be more tolerable for 
Sodom and Gomorrha in ‘the day 
of judgment, than for that city. 

12 And they went out, and 
preached that men should “repent. 

13 And they "cast out many dev- 
ils, and “anointed with oil many 
that were sick, and healed them. 


Herod’s troubled conscience: 
murder of John the Baptist 
(Mt. 14. 1-14; Lk. 9. 7-9). 


14 And king *Herod heard of 
him; (for his name was spread 
abroad:) and he said, That John 
the Baptist was risen from the 
dead, and therefore mighty works 
do shew forth themselves in him. 

15 Others said, That it is Elias. 
And others said, That it is a 
prophet, or as one of the prophets. 

16 But when Herod heard there- 
of, he said, It is John, whom I be- 
headed: he is risen from the dead. 

17 For Herod himself had sent 
forth and 4laid hold upon John, 
and bound him in prison for Hero- 
dias’ sake, his brother Philip’s wife: 
for he had married her. 

18 For John “had said unto 
Herod, It is not ‘lawful for thee to 
have thy brother’s wife. 

19 Therefore Herodias had a 
quarrel against him, and would 
have killed him; but she could not: 


‘| 20 For Herod 4feared John, know- 


ing that he was a just man and an 
tholy, fand observed him; and when 
he heard him, he did many things, 
and heard him égladly. 

21 And when a convenient day 
was come, that Herod on his birth- 
day made .8 supper to his lords, 
high captains, and chief estates 
of Galilee; 

22 And when the daughter of the 
said Herodias came in, and danced, 
and pleased Herod and them that 
sat with him, the king said unto the 
damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou 
wilt, and I will give 7# thee. 

23 And he sware unto her, What- 
soever thou shalt ask of me, I will 
give it thee, unto the half of my 
kingdom. 

24 And she went forth, and said 
unto her mother, What shall I ask? 
And she said, The head of John the 
Baptist. 

25 And she came in straightway 
with haste unto the king, and 
asked, saying, I will that thou give 


me @by and by in a charger the head 
of John the Baptist. 

26 And the king was exceeding 
dsorry; yet for his oath’s sake, and 
for their sakes which sat with him, 
he would not reject her. 

27 And immediately the king sent 
fan executioner, and commanded 
his head to be brought: and he went 
and beheaded him in the prison, 

28 And brought his head in a 
charger, and gave it to the damsel: 
and the damsel gave it to her 
mother. 

29 And when his disciples “heard 
of it, «they came and took up his 
corpse, and laid it in a tomb. 


Return of the apostles from 
a first preaching tour (Lk. 
9. 10). 


30 And the apostles fgathered 
themselves together unto Jesus, and 
told him all things, both what they 
had done, and what they had 
taught. 

31 And he said unto them, Come 
ye yourselves Sapart into a desert 
place, and rest a while: for there 
were many coming and going, and 
they had noleisure so much as to eat. 


The five thousand fed (Mt° 14. 
13-21; Lk. 9. 10-17; John 6. 5-13). 


32 And they departed into a 
desert place “by ship privately. 

33 And the people saw them de- 
parting, and many knew him, and 
ran afoot thither out of all cities, 
and outwent them, and came to- 
gether unto him. 

34 And Jesus, when he came out, 
saw much people, and was moved 
with ‘compassion toward them, be- 
cause they were as sheep not hav- 
ing a shepherd: and he began to 
Jteach them many things. 

35 And when the day was now 
far spent, his disciples came unto 
him, and said, This is a desert place, 
and now the time is far passed: 

36 *Send them away, that they 
may go into the country round 
about, and into the villages, and 
buy themselves bread: for they 
have nothing to eat. 

37 He answered and said unto 
them, /Give ye them to eat. And 
they say unto him, Shall we go and 
buy two hundred pennyworth of 
bread, and give them to eat? 


38 He saith unto them, “How 
many loaves have ye? go and see. 
And when they knew, they say, 
Five, and two fishes. 


St. MARK. 


a straightway. 


6 Mt.27.3,4. 

Ca guard. 

d John i. 
35-37; 3. 
29,30. 


e Cf.Mt. 
14.12. 


f Mt.14.13,14; 
Lk.9.10. 
g Mt.12.15. 


h by boat se- 
cretly. 


i Mt.9.36-38. 

j Lk.9.11. 

k Mt.14,15-21; 
Lk.9.12-17; 
John 6.5-17. 


1Mt.10.8; 
John 6.5-17. 


m 2 Ki.4.2; 
1 Cor.14,19, 


n Mk.8.6. 
o Psa.1€ 2 


? 


p 2 Chr.31.10; 
Mal.3.10; 
cf.Psa. 
132.15. 


q 2 Ki.4.42-44; 
Eph.3.20. 

r Mt.14. 
22-27; John 
6.15-21. 


§ Mk.1.35; 
Rom.8.34. 


1 Mt.24.7,9; 
John 16.5,6, 
20,33. 

u Psa.77.19; 
Mt.24.30; 
Jas.5.8. 

v Lk.24.37. 

w Isa.25.9; 

2 Thes.1.7. 

x Psa.46. 
9,11; 107.29; 
Mt.8.26. 

y Mk.8.17-21. 


2 Lk.8.40; 
John 4.45. 


1053 


with John 11. 
41,42. 


[6 54 


39 And he commanded them to 
make all “sit down by companies 
upon the green grass. 

40 And they sat down in ranks, 
by hundreds, and by fifties. 

41 And when he had taken the 
five loaves and the two fishes, he 
looked up to heaven, and °blessed, 
and brake the loaves, and gave 
them to his disciples to set before 
them; and the two fishes divided 
he among them all. 

42 And they did all eat, and were 
Phlled. 

43 And they took up %’twelve bas- 
kets full of the fragments, and of 
the fishes. 

44 And they that did eat of the 
loaves were about five thousand 
men. 


Jesus walks on the sea (Mt. 14. 
22-32; John 6. 15-21). 


45 And straightway he “‘con- 
strained his disciples to get into 
the ship, and to go to the other 
side before unto Bethsaida, while 
he sent away the people. 

46 And when he had sent them 
away, he ‘departed into a mountain 


-|to pray. 


47 And when even was come, the 
ship was in the midst of the sea, 
and he alone on the land. 

48 And he saw them ‘toiling in 
rowing; for the wind was contrary 
unto them: and about the fourth 
watch of the night he cometh unto 
them, “walking upon the sea, and 
would have passed by them. 

49 But when they saw him walk- 
ing upon the sea, they “supposed it 
had been a spirit, and cried out: 

50 For they all saw him, and were 
troubled. And immediately he 
talked with them, and saith unto 
them, “Be of good cheer: it is I; be 
not afraid. 

51 And he went up unto them 
into the ship; and the *wind 
ceased: and they were sore amazed 
in themselves beyond measure, and 
wondered. 

52 For they *considered not the 
muracle of the loaves: for their 
heart was hardened. 


Jesus heals at Gennesaret 
(Mt. 14. 34-36). 


53 And when they had passed 
over, they came into the land of 
Gennesaret, and drew to the shore. 

54 And when they were come out 
a the ship, straightway they “knew 

im, 


cre 


Sr. MARK. 


55 And ran through that whole| AD.32. |soever thou mightest be profited by 


6 55] 
region round about, and began to 
carry about in beds those that were] a Mk.5.27,28. 
sick, where they heard he was. ‘3 pre aee 
56 And whithersoever he entered,| “Gar114; 
into villages, or cities, or country, 1 Pet.1.18;cf. 
they laid the sick in the streets, and Ppp gle: 
besought him that they might} catied “oral 
“touch if it were but the border of| law” alleged 
his garment: and as many as bade dirt Seal 
touched him were made whole. from Moses; 
really a tra- 
ditional in- 
CHAPTER Ts terpretation 
of the written 
The Pharisees rebuked pb DN fe 
(Mt. 15. 1-20). | ¢ Isa.29.13; 
Ezk.33.31; 
Amos 4.4,5. 


*PHEN came together unto him 
the Pharisees, and certain of|/ 
the scribes, which came from Jeru- 
salem. 

2 And when they saw some of his 
disciples Seat bread with defiled, 
that is to say, with unwashen, 
hands, they found fault. 

3 For the Pharisees, and all the 
Jews, except they wash their hands 
oft, eat not, holding the ‘tradition 
of the elders. 

4 And when they come from the 
market, except they wash, they eat 
not. And many other things there 
be, which they have received to 
hold, as the washing of cups, and 
pots, brasen vessels, and of tables. 

5 Then the Pharisees and scribes 
asked him, Why walk not thy dis- 
ciples according to the ¢tradition of 
the elders, but eat bread wi‘ un- 
washen hands? 

6 He answered and said unto 
them, Well hath ¢Esaias prophesied 
of you hypocrites, as it is written, 
This people honoureth me with 
their lips, but their heart is far|# 
from me, 1 

7. Howbeit in vain do they wor- 
ship me, teaching ‘for doctrines the 
commandments of men. 

8 For laying aside sthe command- 
ment of God, ye hold the tradition 
of men, as the washing of pots and 
cups: and many other such like 
things ye do. 

9 And he said unto them, Full], 
well ye reject the commandment of 
God, that ye may keep your own 
tradition. ° 

10 For *Moses said, Honour thy]? 
father and thy mother; and, Whoso 
curseth father or mother, ‘let him 
die the death: 

11 But ye say, If a man shall say 
to his father or mother, It is Cor- 
ban, that is to say, fa gift, by what- 


& 


h 


¢ 


3 


qg 


Yr 
s 


as authori- 
tative the 
precepts of 
men. Cf.v.5. 


inspiration. 
vs.8-13. 
MK.10.4-9, 
19, (Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 
Ex.20.12; 22, 
17; Lev.20.9; 
Deut.21.18- 
1 


21. 

shal! surely 
die. Ex.21. 
17; Lev.20.9; 
Deut.21.18- 
21. 


Or, I have 
dedicated to 
God that 
whichwould 
relieve your 
need; [12] 
No longer dco 
you permit 
him to use it 
forhisfather 
or mother. 
Cf.Mt.15.5,6. 
1Tim.5.8; * 
Eph.4.28. 
Mt.15.10-20; 
Rom.14.14; 

1 Tim.4.4. 


m Because it 


does not en- 
ter into the 
heart of him, 
but into the 
bowels is 
Ppassed— pu- 
rifying all 
the food. 
Mt.12.34,35; 
cf.Gen.6.5; 
Psa.45.1; 
Jas.3.10-12. 
Mt.15.21-28, 
MK.2.1,2; 
John 4.4-7, 
See Mt.15. 
21, note. 
demon, 
Mt.8,11,12; 
10.5,6; John 
4.22. 


1054 


me; he shall be free. 

12 And ye “suffer him no more to 
do ought for his father or his 
mother; 

13 Making the word of God of 
none effect through your tradition, 
which ye have delivered: and many 
such like things do ye. 

14 And when he had called all the 
people unto him, he said unto 
them, Hearken unto me every one 
of you, and understand: 

15 There is ‘nothing from without 
a man, that entering into him can 
defile him: but the things which 
come out of him, those are they that 
defile the man. 

16 If any man have ears'to hear, 
let him hear. 

17 And when he was entered into 
the house from the people, his dis- 
ciples asked him concerning the 
parable, 

18 And he saith unto them, Are 
ye so without understanding also? 
Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever 
thing from without entereth into 
the man, it cannot defile him; 

19 ™Because it entereth not into 
his heart, but into the belly, and 
goeth out into the draught, purging 
all meats? 

20 And he said, That which 
cometh out of the man, that defileth 
the man. 

21 For from within, “out of the 
heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, 
adulteries, fornications, murders, 

22 Thefts, covetousness, wicked- 
ness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil 
eye, blasphemy, pride, foolish- 
ness: : 

23 All these evil things come 
from within, and defile the man, 


Jesus and the Syrophenician 
woman (Mt. 15. 21-28). 


24 And from thence he arose, and 
went into the °borders of Tyre and 
Sidon, and entered into an house, 
and would have no man know if: 
but he ?could not be hid. 

25 For a certain woman, whose 
young daughter had an unclean 
spirit, heard of him, and came and 
fell at his feet: 

26 The woman was a 9Greek, a 
Syrophenician by nation; and she 
besought him that he would cast 
forth the ‘devil out of her daugh- 
ter. 

27 But Jesus said unto her, Let 
the ‘children first be filled: for it 


Ree) 


is not meet to take the children’s} A.D. 32. 
bread, and to ¢cast zt unto the dogs. 
28 5And she answered and said spd Res 
unto him, Yes, Lord: yet the dogs a 
under the table eat of the children’s|° She, how- 
crumbs. ee redeky = 
29 And he said unto nee abe ind, | True, 
this saying go thy way; the devi ord! anc 
is gone out of thy daughter. eae 
30 And when she was come to her| the table eat 
house, ¢she found the devil gone] ‘70m the 


out, and her daughter ‘laid upon| chi/czen's 
the bed. Rom aizt, 
pn.2.11-22. 
A deaf and dumb man healed cLke18.14 
(Mt. 15. 29-31). aoe ats 
5 : d Miracl 
31 And again, departing from the (NT). ve. 
coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he fcame} 24-30,31-37; 


unto the sea of Galilee, through the retioal 33° 
midst of the coasts of Decapolis. Acts 28.8,9.) 

32 And they bring unto him one} , ysis 
that was ‘deaf, and had an impedi- ars 
ment in his speech; and they be-| fMt-15.29. 
seech him to put his hand upon him.) g Isa.29.18; 

33 And he took him “aside from| 5-5 
the multitude, and put his fingers|h Mk.s.37. 
into his ears, and he ‘spit, and] ;mx8.23; 
touched his tongue; John 9.6. 
34 And looking up to heaven, he} ; Lx.19.41; 
jsighed, and saith unto him, Eph-| John 11.33, 
phatha, that is, Be opened. 35,38. 

35 And straightway his “ears were| & Job 33.16; 
opened, and the string of his tongue} 36-10.15,16. 
was loosed, and he spake plain. 1 Mk.1.43, 

36 And he charged them that} 44: 5-43- 
they should tell no man: but the] mLk.5.26. 
more he ‘charged them, so much|,, mt.15.32- 
the more a great deal they pub-| 38; Mk.6. 
lished it; 34-44. 

37 And were beyond measure as-| 0 Psa.107.4,5; 
tonished, saying, He hath done ail! Mt-9.36. 
things well: he maketh both the|» 2 Ki.7.1,2; 
deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.| Psa-78-19,20. 


q Jud.7.3,4; 
CHAPTER 8. 2 Chr.14.11. 
The four thousand fed |" WT5."%s, 
(Mt. 15. 32-39). 1-9,22-25; 
Mk.9.17-29, 


N those days the multitude being] cmts.2,3; 
very great, and having “nothing} Acts 28.8,9.) 
to eat, Jesus called his disciples! s Psa.132.15. 
unto him, and saith unto them, — | ; mt.1s.39. 

2 I have compassion on the mul- “ag hien 
titude, because they have now been|" 49: 161-4; 
with me three days, and have} John 6.30,31. 
nothing to eat: v Mt.21.23-27; 

3 And if I send them awaycfasting| Lk-16.30,31. 
to their own houses, they will faint ve Mets: 
by the way: for divers of them came}, 5. ar ia 
from far. pala ia aoe 

4 And his disciples answered him,|, p.a.115,5, 
From whence can a man satisfy|’ 6,8. 
these mer with bread here in the| z Mk.6.35-44. 
wilderness? a vs.1-9. 

5 And he asked them, How many! ne 


ae ail Sr. MARK. | [8 20 
“8 pelle al a palate 2 2 So 


loaves have ye? And they said, 
Seven. 

6 And he commanded the people 
to sit down on the ground: and he 
took the seven loaves, and gave 
thanks, and brake, and gave to his 
disciples to set before them; and 
they did set them before the peo- 


le. 

7 And they had a %few small 
fishes: and he blessed, and com- 
manded to set them also before 
them. 

8 So they did eat, and "were 
Sfilled: and they took up of the 
broken meat that was left seven 
baskets. 

9 And they that had eaten were 
about four thousand: and he sent 
them away. 


The Pharisees ask a sign: the 
meaning of leaven explained 
(Mt. 16, 1-12). 


10 And straightway he ‘entered 
into a ship with his disciples, and 
came into the parts of Dalmanutha. 

11 And the Pharisees came forth, 
and began to question with him, 
seeking of him a “sign from heaven, 
tempting him. , 

12 And he sighed deeply in his 
spirit, and saith, Why doth this 
generation seek after a sign? verily 
I say unto you, There shall ’no 
sign be given unto this generation. 

13 And he left them, and entering 
into the ship again departed to the 
other side. 

14 Now the disciples had for- 
gotten to take bread, neither had 
they in the ship with them more 
than one loaf. 

15 And he charged thern, saying, 
Take heed, beware of the “leaven 
of the Pharisees, and of the leaven 
of *Herod. 

16 And they reasoned among 
themselves, saying, Jt is because 
we have no bread. 

17 And when Jesus knew it, he 
saith unto them, Why reason ye, 
because ye have no bread? per- 
ceive ye not yet, neither under- 
stand? have ye your heart yet 
hardened? 

18 Having Yeyes, see ye not? and 
having ears, hear ye not? and do ye 
not remember? 

19 When I brake the “five loaves 
among five thousand, how many 
baskets full of fragments took ye 
up? They say unto him, Twelve. 

20 And when the “seven among 
four thousand, how many baskets 


8 21] 


full of fragments took ye up? And 
they said, Seven. 

21 And he said unto them, How 
is it that ye do not understand? 


The blind man healed outside 
Bethsaida. 


22 And he cometh to Bethsaida; 
and they bring a “blind man unto 
him, and besought him to touch 


im. ; 

23 1And he took the blind man by 
the hand, and led him “out of the 
town; and when he had spit on his 
eyes, and put his hands upon him, 
he asked him if he saw ought. 

24 And he looked up, and said, I 
see men as ‘trees, walking. 

25 After that he put Ais hands 
again upon his eyes, and made him 
look up: and he was restored, and 
saw every man 4clearly. 

26 And he sent him away to. his 
house, saying, ‘Neither go into the 
town, nor tell 1¢ to any in the town. 


Peter’s confession of faith (Mt. 
16. 13-16; Lk. 9. 18-20). 


27 And Jesus fwent out, and his 
disciples, into the towns of Czsarea 
Philippi: and by the way he asked 
his disciples, saying unto them, 
&Whom do men say that I am? 

28 And they answered, John the 
Baptist: but some say, Elias; and 
others, One of the prophets. 

29 And he saith unto them, But 
whom say ye that I am? And 
Peter answereth and saith unto 
him, #Thou art the Christ. 

30 And he charged them that they 
should tell no man of him. 

31 And he began to teach them, 
that the ‘Son of man must suffer 
many things, and be rejected of the 
elders, and of the chief priests, and 
scribes, and be killed, and after 
three days rise again. 

32 And he spake that saying 
openly. And Peter took him, and 
began to Jrebuke him. 

33 But when he had turned about 
and looked on his disciples, he 
rebuked Peter, saying, *Get thee 
behind me, ‘Satan: for ™thou sa- 
vourest not the things that be of 
God, but the things that be of 
men, 


St. MARK. 


eT 


A.D. 32. 


@ Tsa.42.16,18. 

6 Mk.7.33; John 9. 
35-38. 

¢ Acts 18.24-28; 
Phil.1.10. 


@1 Pet.2.9; 1 John 
2.27; Rev.3.18. 


e v.30; Mk.7.36. 

f Mt.16.13-20; Lk. 
9.18-21. 

9 Mt.22.42-46, 


h 1 Cor. 12.3; 

1 John 1.2.3; 5.1; 
cf.John 1.49. 

i Mt.8.20, note; 
16.21-28; Mk. 9. 
31; Lk.9.22-27; 
cf. Ek.24.6. 

J v.29; John 21.18, 
19; 2 Pei.1.14,15. 

k Mt.4.10; Gal.1. 
8,9. 

'Satan. Lk.4.8. 
(Gen.3.1; Rev. 
20.10.) 


mi.e. thou art 


7 Mt. 16.24-28; 
Lk.9.23-27; 14.27; 
Phil.3.7-10. 


© Lk, 17.33; John 
EAN Rom.6. 
-7. 


P Gospel, Mk.10. 
29. (Gen, 12.1-3: 
Rev. 14.6.) 


@ Psa.49.6-8; Jas.5. 
1-3. 


Tie. earth, 
$ Mt.10.32,33; John 
5.44; 12.42, 43; 
Rom. 1.16; 2 Tim. 
gren Phil. 1.20, 
1. 


t Sin. Rom.3-23, 
note. 


% Sanctify, holy 
(persons) 


» Heb.1.4, note. 

w Cf. Mt.17, 2, 
note; 2 Pet.1, 
16-18. 

= See Mt.6.33, 
note. 

uv See Mt.4.21, 
note, 

2 Phil.2.9,10; Heb. 
2.9; Rev.1.13-16, 


@ Mk.8.28,29; 
Phil.2.9; Heb.3. 
5,6. 

5 Mt.20.20-23; 


Acts 4.11,12. 


¢ Ex.40.34; Acts 1. 
9; Rev.1.7, 


. Pa 


The true use of life: value of a 
soul (Mt. 16. 24-27; Lk. 9. 23-26). 


34 And when he had called the 
people unto him with his disciples 
also, he said unto them, "Whoso- 
ever will come after-me, let him 
deny himself, and take up his cross, 
and follow me. 3 

35 For °whosoever will save his 
life shall lose it; but whosoever 
shall lose his life for my sake and 
the ?gospel’s, the same shall save it. 

36 For ¢what shall it profit a man, 
if he shall gain the whole ‘world, 
and lose his own soul? 

37 Or what shall a man give in 
ao for his wel Sigs 

38 hosoever therefore sha e 
Sash whosoever theret my words 
inthe adulterens and ‘sinful gen- 
eration; of him also shall the Son 
of man be 3 
cometh in 
with the “holy ’angels. 


CHAPTER 9. 


The transfiguration (Mt. 17. 1-8; 
Lk. 9. 28-36). 


fs yee he said unto them, Verily 
I say unto you, That there be 
some of them that stand here, 
which shall not taste of death, till 
they have “seen the *kingdom of 
God come with power. 

2 And after six days Jesus taketh 
with him Peter, and James, and 
John, and leadeth them up into an 
high mountain apart by them- 
selves: and he was “transfigured 
before them. . 

3 And his raiment became shin- 
ing, exceeding white as snow; so 
as no fuller on earth can white 
them. 

4 And there appeared unto them 
Elias with Moses: and they were 
talking with Jesus. 

5 And Peter answered and said to 
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to 
be here: and let us make “three 
tabernacles; one for thee, and one 
for Moses, and one for Elias. 

6 For he ’wist not what to say; 
for they were sore afraid. 


7 And there was a “cloud that 
overshadowed them: and a voice 


a 


7 


? 


ashamed when he 
e glory of his Fathede 


_ .} Our Lord’s action here is most significant. 
judgment (Mt. 11. 21-24), He would neither heal in that village, nor permit further 
testimony to be borne there (v. 26). The probation of Bethsaida as a community 
was ended, but He would still show mercy to individuals. Cf. Rev. 3. 20. Christ 
1s outside the door of that church, but “If any man hear My voice,” etc, 


1056 


Having abandoned Bethsaida to 


9 8] 


came out of the cloud, saying, ¢This 
is my beloved Son: hear him. 

8 And suddenly, when they had 
looked round about, they saw @no 
man any more, save Jesus only 
with themselves. 

9 And as they came down from 
the mountain, he ‘charged them 
that they should tell no man what 
things they had seen, till the Son 
of man were risen from the dead. 

10 And they kept that saying 
with themselves, questioning orie 
with another what the rising from 
the dead should mean. 

11 And they asked him, saying, 
Why say the scribes that ‘Elias 
must first come? 

12 And he answered and told 
them, Elias verily cometh first, and 
restoreth all things; and how it is 


written of the Son of man, that he| - 


must suffer many things, and be 
set at nought. 

13 ButI say unto you, /That Elias 
is indeed come, and they have done 
unto him whatsoever they listed, as 
it is written of him. 


The impotent disciples: the 
mighty Christ (Mt. 17. 14-21; 
Lk. 9. 37-42). 


14 And when he came to hArs dis- 
ciples, he saw a great multitude 
about them, and the scribes ques- 
tioning with them. 

15 And straightway all the peo- 
ple, when they beheld him, were 
greatly “amazed, and running to 
him saluted him. ; 

16 And ‘he asked the scribes, 
What question ye with them? 

17 And one of the multitude an- 
swered and said, Master, I have 
brought unto thee my son, which 
hath a #dumb spirit; 

18 And wheresoever he taketh 
him, he teareth him: and he foam- 
eth, and gnasheth with his teeth, 
and pineth away:_and I spake to 
thy disciples that they should cast 
him out; and they Ycould not. — 

19 He answereth him, and saith, 
O “faithless generation, how long 
shall I be with you? how long shall 
I suffer you? bring him unto me. 

20 And they brought him unto 
him: and ‘when he saw him, 
straightway the spirit tare him; 
and he fell on the ground, and wal- 
lowed foaming. 

21 And he asked his father, How 
long is it ago since this came unto 
him? And he said, Of a child. — 

22 And ofttimes it hath cast him 


St. MARK. 


A.D. 32. 


a Mk.1.11. 

5 John 3.30; 
6.68; Col. 
3.11. 

c Mt.17.9-13; 
MK.8.30. 

d Mt.20.19; 
26.61;27.63; 
Mk.8.31; 
Acts 2.32. 

e Mal.4.5,6. 


See Mt.17. 
10, note. 


f Mt.11.14; 
Lk.1.17. 

g Mt.17.14-18; 
Lk.9.37-42; 
Rev.19.11-21, 

h Mk.10.32; 
cf.Ex.34. 
29,30. 

i Mt.12.22. 


j Mk.6.7; 
cf.vs.28,29. 

k John 4.48; 
14.12. 


7 Rev.12.12. 

m Mk.1.40. 

n Faith. 
Mk.10.46-52. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 

o Mt.9.28,29; 
Mk.11.22,23. 

bp Cf.Eph.2.8 
with John 
6.44. 

gq Mk.1.25-27. 

r Mt.12.43-45. 

s But Jesus, 
grasping his 
hand, raised 
him, and he 
stood erect. 
Cf.Acts 3.7. 

t Miracles 


vs.17-29; 
ME.10.46-52. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 
1 1 Ki.18.42- 
45; Acts 13. 
2. The two 
best MSS. 
omit “‘and 


fasting.’’ 
Cf.Mt.17. 21, 

v Mk.7.24. 

w Mk.8.31; 
Mt.8.20, 
note. 

x Cf.John 16. 
12,13 with 
John 1.5. 

y Mt.18.1-5; 
Lk.9.46-48; 
22.24-27. 

2 Phil.2.3. 

a1 Cor.15.9. 


6 Mk.10.13-16; 
1 Cor.3.18,19. 


1057 


[9 56 


into the fire, and into the waters, to 
destroy him: but “if thou canst do 
any thing, have compassion on us, 
and help us. 

23 Jesus said unto him, If thou 
canst “believe, °all things are pos- 
sible to him that believeth. 

24 And straightway the father of 
\the child cried out, and said with 
tears, Lord, I believe; *help thou 
mine unbelief. 

25 When Jesus saw that the peo- 
ple came running together, he re- 
buked the foul spirit, saying unto 
him, F‘Aou dumb and deaf spirit, 91 
charge thee, come out of him, and 
enter “no more into him. 

26 And the spirit cried, and rent 
him sore, and came out of him: and 
he was as one dead; insomuch that 
many said, He is dead. 

27 sBut Jesus took him by the 
hand, ‘and lifted him up; and he 
arose. 

28 And when he was come into 
the house, his disciples asked him 
privately, Why could not we cast 
him out? 

29 And he said unto them, #“This 
kind can come forth by nothing, but 
by prayer and fasting. 


Jesus foretells his death and 
resurrection (Mt. 17. 22, 23; Lk. 
9. 43-45). 


30 And they departed thence, and 
passed through Galilee; and he 
would not that any man should 
*know it. 

31 For he taught his disciples, and 
said unto them, “The Son of man 
is delivered into the hands of men, 
and they shall kill him; and after 
that he is killed, he shall rise the 
third day. 

32 But they «understood not that 
saying, and were afraid to ask him. 


The dispute who should be 
Sreatest (Mt. 18. 1-6; Lk. 9. 46-48). 


33 And he Ycame to Capernaum: 
and being in the house he asked 
them, What was it that ye disputed 
among yourselves by the way? 

34 But they held their peace: for 
by the way they had disputed 
among themselves, who should be 
the greatest. 

35 And he sat down, and called 
the twelve, and saith unto them, 
If any man desire to be first, the 
same shall be last of all, and ser- 
vant of all. 

36 And he took a child, and set 
him in the midst of them: and 


= ee a Y 
5 37] St. MARK. [10 16. 
when he had voge him in his| A.D. 32-33. CHAPTER 10. 
arms, he said unto them, ; 

37 Whosoever shall “receive one}aMt.10.40; |Jesus’ Jaw of divorce. (Cf. Mt. 
of such children in my name, re- Viasat 5. 31, 32; 19, 1-9; Lk. 16. 18; 1 Cor, 
ceiveth me: and whosoever shall]” ¢Nomi1° 7. 10-15.) 
receive me, receiveth not me, but Se ND he arose from thence, and 
him that sent'me. power upon cometh into the ane of 

* r= 

The rebuke of sectarianism who wil Bnd Judza by the farther side of Jo 


(Lk. 9. 49, 50). 


_38 And John answered him, say- See ee gens 2 And the Pharisees came to him, 
ing, Master, we saw one Mcasting| jJohn 2.18, | Oa asked him, Is it lawful for a 
out devils in thy name, and he fol-|, yi'i0.42; 2s. man to put away Ais wife? tempt- 
loweth not us: and we forbad him, pre AS ing him. 
because he satowel ng ae ahi fRewards. | 3 And he auswered and sai@ unto 
39 put dees said, chi - shall yee them, What did Moses command 
not: for there is no man which shall) (Dan.12.3; > 
; . — lyou: 
do a ‘miracle anny. name, that can Peary tin 4 And they said, Moses "suffered 
lightly speak evil of me. i stumble.  |to write a bill of divorcement, and 
40 For he that is not ¢against us Mt-18.6; Lk. lto put her away. 
ops ek Bert Seal otrei ott a 5 And Jesus answered and said 
s or whosoev Gai oe y' 1Cor.8.7-13. [unto them, For the hardness of 
a ‘cup of water to drink in my|; Mt.s.29,30; your heart She wrote you this pre- 
name, because ye belong to Christ, peers oa cept. 
verily I say unto you, he shall not Sli. 1 6 But from the beginning of the 
lose his /reward. sas te, [creation ‘God made them male and 
Jesus’ solemn warning of hell. iFthe ds, fone this cause shall a man 
3 ey 1929 |eave his father and mother, and 
.10,14,15. fees 
42 And whosoever shall Soffend ipa a. cleave to his wife: : 
f th littl that believe ® 
one or these little ones th cf.Jer.8.20. 8 And *they twain shall be one 
in me, it is bead ocr ae ™icsii; |flesh: so then they are no more 
millstone were hanged about his}. Mt.3.11; oe 
1 : ; Lk.12.49. twain, but one flesh. 
neck, and he were cast into the m Me oi135 9 What therefore God hath joined 
ea. 'im.3.5; + 
43 And if thy *hand offend thee, Rev 3.1. cee: Act a Roe Arb eerie 
cut it off: it is better for thee to]? Go-t-6; esked.itiim again GP the ee 
enter into life maimed, than having|» Mt-19.1,2; ae 
c i 40. : f 
Ag gaat Cree amen Mes 17-20; ae Soe ate Se wate cae : 
‘ jue ‘ -10.26. Whosoever shall put away his 
44 Where their worm Sdieth not,|, Deut.24.1-4; | : 
and the fire is not quenched. Mt.5.31. Waa sin acl ee se hey egy 
MPegang it thy foot attend theo cuts as io." logan And if a heieeca ch fs 
it off: it is better for thee to enter Mk.12.26,36. het husband, and ee tte! it Rebhet 
halt into life, than having two feet| (Ex.4.15; h ihoet sepia tes Shi Soke Fok 
to be cast into ‘hell, into the fire] , Rev;?219.) other, she committeth adultery, 
u od, aen. 
ae oe on ade bead neigh Se 2 dosue plcbips hohe children (Mt. 
ere their w Deas BG Bh - 13-15; Lk. 18. 15-17), 
and the fire is not quenched. i aerede ) mee 
47 And if thine eye offend thee,| Eph.s.31,32, | 13 And they brought *young chil- 
pluck it out: it is better for thee to|» Gen.2.24. dren to him, that he should touch 
enter into the kingdom of God with be weooae yh them: and his disciples rebuked 


one eye, than having two eyes to be 
cast into ‘hell fire: 

48 Where ‘their ‘worm dieth not, 
and the fire is not quenched. 

49 For every one shall be “salted 
with fire, and every sacrifice shall 
be salted with salt. 

50 Salt is good: but if the salt 
have “lost his saltness, wherewith 
will ye season it? Have salt in 
yourselves, end have peace one 
with another. 


it possible 
soon [after] 
to revile me. 


x little.Cf.v.14. 

4 moved with 
indignation 

2 to becoming 
unto me; be 
not hinder- 
ing them. 

a Lit.and, fold- 
ing them in 
his arms, he 


dan: and the people resort unto him 
again; and, as he was wont, he 
taught them again. 


those that brought them. 

14 But when Jesus saw it, he was 
Yrauch displeased, and said unto 
them, Suffer the little children 2to 
come unto me, and forbid them not: 
fore of such is the kingdom of 

(e) 


15 ‘Verily I say unto you, Whoso- 


was blessing|ever shall not receive the kingdom 


[them], put- 
ting hands 


of God as a little child, he shall not 


upon them. enter therein. 


1058 


16 “And he took them up in his 


SS ew i ee ee y” 


10 17] 


St. MARK. 


[10 41 


arms, put Ais hands upon them, 
and ‘blessed them. 


The rich young ruler (Mt. 19. 
it Lk, 18. 18-30. Cf. Lk. 10. 
25). 


A.D. 33. 


a Mt.19.16; 
Lk.18.18. 
b Teacher. 


17 2And when he was gone forth); Par., Betiey- 


into the way, there came one run- 
ning, and kneeled to him, and asked 
him, Good ’Master, what shall I do 
that I may inherit eternal life? 

18 And Jesus said unto him, “Why 
callest thou me good? there is none 
good but one, that is, God. 

19 Thou knowest the 2ceommand- 
ments, Do not commit adultery, Do 
not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear 
false witness, Defraud not, Honour 
thy father and mother. 

20 And he answered and said unto 
him, Master, all these have I ob- 
served from my youth. 

21 Then Jesus beholding him 
loved him, and said unto him, One 
thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell 
whatsoever thou hast, and give to 
the poor, and thou shalt have 
*treasure in heaven: and come, take 
up the cross, and follow me. 

22 -And he was sad at that saying, 
and went away grieved: for he had 
great possessions. 


The warning against riches. 


23 fAnd Jesus looked round about, 
and saith unto his disciples, How 
hardly shall they that have riches 
enter into the kingdom of God! 

24 And the disciples were %aston- 
ished at his words. But Jesus an- 
swereth again, and saith unto them, 
Children, how hard is it for them 
that “trust in riches to enter into 
the kingdom of God! 

25 It is easier for a camel to go 
through the ‘eye of a needle, than 
for a rich man to enter into the 
kingdom of God. 

26 And they were astonished out 
of measure, saying among them- 
selves, Who then can be saved? 

27 And Jesus looking upon them 


saith, With men it is impossible,|« 


but not with God: for with God all 
things are possible. 

28 jThen Peter began to say unto 
him, Lo, we have left all, and have 
followed thee. - 

29 And Jesus answered and said, 
Verily I say unto you, There is no 
man that hath left house, or breth- 


ren, or sisters, or father, or mother, | 


ing Me to be 
but a human 
teacher, why 
callest thou 
Me ‘‘good,”” 


etc. 
d Ex.20,12-16; 
Deut.5.16-20, 
e Mt.6.19,20; 
19.21; Lk.12. 
33; 


g Or, amazed, 
i.e. as Jews: 
knowing that 
temporal 
prosperity 
was, to the 
Jew as such, a 
token of di- 
vine favour. 
oé, Deut.28. 


1-12. 
h Psa.52.73 
62.10; 
1 Tim.6.17. 
ziIt has been 
thought the 
reference 
here was to a 
postern door 
set in a gate 
of Jerusalem. 
j Cf.Mt.19. 
27-30, note. 
k Gospel. 
Mk.13.10. 
(Gen,12.1-3; 


John 14.2. 
m’Mt.12.48-50. 


27.30; Mk.14, 
€5; cf.Mt.16. 
20-22; Mk.9. 
30-32. 
s Cf.Mt.19.28. 
¢ Cf.Mt.20.22. 


w Cf.Mt. 
13.11; 20.23. 

x Cf.Lk.22. 
25-27. 


or wife, or children, or lands, for my 
sake, and the *gospel’s, 

30 But he shall receive an hun- 
dredfold now in this time, ‘houses, 
and brethren, and sisters, and 
mothers, and children, and lands, 
with persecutions; and in the “world 
to come eternal life. 

31 But many that are first shall 
be last; and the last first, 


Jesus again foretells his death 
and resurrection (Mt. 20. 17-19; 
Lk. 18. 31-33). 


_32° And they were in the way go- 
ing up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went 
before them: and they were amazed; 
and_as they followed, they were 
afraid. °And he took again the 
twelve, and began to tell them what 
things should happen unto him, 

33 Saying, Behold, we go up to 
Jerusalem; ?and the 9Son of man 
shall be delivered unto the chief 
priests, and unto the scribes; and 
they shall condemn him to death, 
fae shall deliver him to the Gen- 
tiles: 

34 And they “shall mock him, and 
shall scourge him, and shall spit 
upon him, and shall kill him: and 
the third day he shall rise again. 


The desire of James and John to 
be first (Mt. 20. 20-28). 


35 And James and John, the sons 
of Zebedee, come unto him, saying, 
Master, we would that thou should- 
est do for us whatsoever we shall 
desire. 

36 And he said unto them, What 
would ye that I should do for you? 

37 They said unto him, ‘Grant 
unto us that we may sit, one on thy 
right hand, and the other on thy 
left hand, in thy glory. 

38 But Jesus said unto them, Ye 
know not what ye ask: ‘can ye 
drink of the cup that I drink of? 
and be baptized with the baptism 
that I am baptized with? 

39 And they said unto him, We 
can. “And Jesus said unto them, 
Ye shall indeed drink of the cup 
that I drink of; and with the *bap- 
tism that I am baptized withkal 
shall ye be baptized: 

40 But to sit on my right hand 
and on my left hand is not mine to 
give; “but it shall be given to 
them for whom it is prepared. 

41 *And when the ten heard it, 


1 In Hebrew custom, a father’s act. (Cf. Gen. 27.38.) “He had no children that 
He might adopt all children.’’—Benégel. 


1059 


10 42] 


they began to be much displeased 
with James and John. ; 

42 But Jesus called them to him, 
and saith unto them, Ye know that 
they which are accounted to rule 
over the Gentiles exercise lordship 
over them; and their great ones 
exercise authority upon them. 

43 But so shall it not be among 
you: “but whosoever will be great 
among you, shall be your minister: 
~44 And whosoever of you will be 
the chiefest, shall be servant of all. 

45 For even the Son of man came 
not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give his 4life a ran- 
som for many. 


Bartimzeus receives his sight 
(Mt. 20. 29-34. Cf. Lk. 18. 35-43). 


46 <And they came to Jericho: 


and as he went out of Jericho with! 


his disciples and a great number 
of people, blind Bartimzus, the son 
of Timzus, sat by the highway side 
begging. ; 

47 ¢And when he heard that it 
was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to 
cry out, and say, Jesus, thou son of 
David, have mercy on me. 

48 And many charged him that he 
should hold his peace: but he cried 
the more a great deal, Thou son of 
David, have mercy on me. 

49 “And Jesus stood still, and 
commanded him to be called. And 
they call the blind man, saying 
unto him, /Be of good comfort, rise; 
he calleth thee. 

50 And he, casting away his gar- 
ment, rose, and came to Jesus. 

51 And Jesus answered and said 
unto him, What wilt thou that I 
should do unto thee? The blind 
man said unto him, sLord, that I 
might. receive my sight. 

52 And Jesus said unto him, Go 
thy way: thy /faith hath made thee 
whole. And ‘immediately he re- 
ceived his sight, and followed Jesus 
in the way. 


CHAPTER 11. 


The officiai presentation of Je- 
sus as King (Zech. 9. 9; Mt. 21. 
1-9; Lk. 19. 29-38). 


mon when they came nigh to 
Jerusalem, unto /jBethphage 
and ‘Bethany, at the mount of 
Olives, he sendeth forth two of his 
disciples, 
2 And saith unto them, Go your 
way into the village over against 
you: and as soon as ye be entered 


St. MARK. 


oe 


“fn 16” 


A.D. 32: 


a Mk.9.35; 
Mt.20.26. 

b Or, soul. (Cf. 
Tsa.53.10,12.) 
Gr. psuche, 
the soul, or 
the essential 
life, not, as 
commonly, 
zoe, the ac- 
tive life. 

c Cf£.Mt.20. 

30, note, 

d Bible 
prayers 
(N.T.). 
Lk.11.2. 
(Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 

e And, com- 
ing toa 
stand, Jesus 
said, Call 
him! 

f Cf.Mt.9.2. 

g Gr. Rabboni, 
my Master, 
a term of 
reverent 
love. Cf. 
John 20.16, 

h Faith, Lk. 


11.39.) 


(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 
j Meaning, 
house of un- 
ripe figs (see 
vs.12,20), 
probably so 
called after 
the fig tree 
was cursed. 
bk See Mt.21.17. 
1 Mt.3.2, note. 
m Mk.11.19, 
Sf, 


ref, 
n Mt.21.18-22. 
o Cf.Lk.13.6- 
11; Jer.24. 
1-6. 


pb Fig trees 
which have 
retained 
their leaves 
through the 
winter usu- 
ally have figs 
also. It was 
still too early 
for new 
leaves or 
fruit. 

q Miracles 


33-36.. (Mt.8. 
2,3; Acts 28. 
8,9.) 

r See vs.20-25; 
Mt.23.37-39. 


1060 


linto it, ye shall find a colt tied, 
whereon never man sat; loose him, 
and bring him. 

3 And if any man say unto you, 
Why do ye this? say ye that the 
Lord hath need of him; and straight- 
way he will send him hither. 

4 And they went their way, and 
found the colt tied by* the door 
without in a place where two ways 
met; and they loose him. 

5 And certain of them that stood 
there said unto them, What do ye, 
loosing the colt? 

6 And they said unto them even 
as Jesus had commanded: and they 
let them go. 

7 And they brought the colt to 
Jesus, and cast their garments on 
him; and he sat upon him. 

8 And many spread their gar- 
ments in the way: and others cut 
down branches off the trees, and 
strawed them in the way. 

9 And they that went before, and 
they that followed, cried, saying, 
Hosanna; Blessed is he that cometh 
in the name of the Lord: 

10 Blessed be the ‘kingdom of our 
father David, that cometh in the 
name of the Lord: Hosanna in the 
highest. 

11 And Jesus entered into Jerusa- 
lem, and into the temple: and when 
he had looked round about upon all 
things, and now the “eventide was 
come, he went out unto Bethany 
with the twelve. 


The barren fig tvee (Mt. 21. 19-21). 


12 And on the morrow, when 
they were come from Bethany, he 
was hungry: 

13 And seeing a fig tree afar off 
having *leaves, he came, if haply 
he might find any thing thereon: 
and when he came to it, he found 
nothing but leaves; for the time of 
figs was not yet. 

14 ¢And Jesus answered and said 
unto it, "No man eat fruit of thee 
hereafter for ever. And his dis- 
ciples heard it, 


Jesus purifies the temple (Mt. 
21, 12-16; Lk, 19. 45-47, Cf. John 
2. 13-16). 


15 And they come to Jerusalem: 
and Jesus went into the temple, 
and began to cast out them that 
sold and bought in the temple, and 
overthrew the tables of the money- 
changers, and the seats of them that 
pas doves; 

16 And would not suffer that any 


a 


11 17] 


St. MARK. 


[12 12 


man should carry any vessel 
through the temple. 

i7 And he taught, saying unto 
them, Is it not written, 7My house 
shall be called of all nations the 
house of prayer? “but ye have made 
it a den of thieves. 

18 And the scribes and chief 
priests heard zt, and “sought how 
they might destroy “him: for they 
feared him, because all the people 
was “astonished at his doctrine. 

19 And Jwhen even was come, he 
went out of the city. 

20 And in the morning, as they 
passed by, they saw the fig tree 
dried up from the roots. 

21 And Peter calling to remem- 
brance saith unto him, Master, 
behold, the fig tree which thou 
cursedst is withered away. 


The prayer of faith. (Cf. Jas.5.15.) 


22 And Jesus answering saith 
unto them, @Have faith in God. 

23 For verily I say unto you, That 
ftwhosoever shall say unto this 
mountain, Be thou removed, and 
be thou cast into the sea; and shall 
not doubt in his heart, but shall be- 
lieve that those things which he 
saith shall come to pass; he shall 
have whatsoever he saith. 

24 Therefore I say unto you,What 
things soever ye desire, when ye 
pray, believe that ye receive them, 
and ye shall have them. 

25 And when ye stand praying, 
forgive, if ye have ought against 
any: that your Father also which 
is in heaven may forgive you your 
trespasses. 

26 But ‘if ye do not forgive, nei- 
ther will your Father which is in 
heaven forgive your trespasses. 


Jesus’ authority questioned 
(Mt. 21 23-27; Lk. 20 1-8) 


A.D. 33. 


a Isa.56.7. 
6 Jer.7.11. 


c Mt.21.45, 
46; Lk.19.47, 
48. 


d Psa.2.2. 
e Mk.1.22. 


Jf whenever, 
ie. every 
day when 
evening 
came. 


g Have the 
faith of God; 
i.e. the faith 
which God 
gives. Cf. 

1 Cor.12.9; 
Eph.2.8. 


h Mt.17.20; 
Lk.11.1, 
note; 17.6; 
John 14.13, 
14. 


i Mt.6.12, 
note. Verse 
26 is omitted 
from the best 
Mi 


j Lk.7.24-35. 


k Cf.Mt.13. 
10-15. 


| Parables 


23/29. (Mt.5. 
1316; Lk.21. 
29-31.) 


mTsrael. Isa. 
5.1-7, Israel 
was not 
fruitless, but 
brought 
forth only 
wild grapes. 
Cf. John 3. 
6; Hos.10.1; 
contra, Hos. 
14.8. 


n vs.2-5, the 


27. And they come again to Jeru-| prophets and 


salem: and as he was walking in 
the temple, there come to him the 
chief priests, and the scribes, and 
the elders, 

28 And say unto him, By what 
authority doest thou these things? 
and who gave thee this authority 
to do these things? 

29 And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, I will also ask of you 
one question, and answer me, and 
I will tell you by what authority I 
do these things. 

30 jThe baptism of John, was it 
from heaven, or of men? answer 
me. 


John the 
Baptist. 


oJesus Him- 
sel.) Ct. 
Heb.1.1-3 


p Fulfilled in 
the destruc- 
tion of Jeru- 
salem, A.D. 
70. Cf.Lk. 
21.20-24. 


gq Psa.118.22, 
23; cf. 1 Pet. 
2.8, note. 


r Jehovah. vs. 
10,11; Psa. 
118.22,23. 


5 John.-7.30. 
1061 


31 And they reasoned with them- 
selves, saying, If we shall say, From 
heaven; he will say, Why then did 
ye not believe him? 

32 But if we shall say, Of men: 
they feared the people: for all men 
counted John, that he was a prophet 
indeed. 

33 And they answered and said 
unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And 
Jesus answering saith unto them, 
Neither do I tell you by what au- 
thority I do these things. 


CHAPTER 12. 


Parable of the householder de- 
manding fruit from his vine- 
yard (Mt. 21. 33-46; Lk. 20. 9-19. 
CfAsa’ 521-7). 


Aw he began to speak unto 
&them by parables. A certain 
man planted a “vineyard, and set 
an hedge about it, and digged a 
place for the winefat, and built a 
tower, and let it out to husbandmen, 
and went into a far country. 

2 And at the season he “sent to 
the husbandmen a servant, that he 
might receive from the husbandmen 
of the fruit of the vineyard. 

3 And they caught him, and beat 
him, and sent him away empty. 

4 And again he sent unto them 
another servant; and at him they 
cast stones, and wounded him in 
the head, and sent Aim away 
lshamefully handled. 

5 And again he sent another; and 
him they killed, and many others; 
beating some, and killing some. 

6 Having yet therefore one °son, 
his wellbeloved, he sent him also 
last unto them, saying, They. will 
reverence my son. 

7 But .those husbandmen said 
among themselves, This is the heir, 
come, let us kill him, and the inher- 
itance shall be our’s. 


8 And they took him, and killed 
him, and cast Aim out of the vine- 


yard. 

9 What shall therefore the lord of 
the vineyard do? he will come and 
édestroy the husbandmen, and will 
give the vineyard unto others. 

10 And have ye not read this 
scripture; 9The stone which the 
builders rejected is become the head 
of the corner: 

11 This was the *Lord’s doing, 
and it is marvellous in our eyes? 

12 And they ‘sought to lay hold 
on him, but feared the people: for 


they knew that he had spoken the 


12 13] St. MARK. [12 ssf 


book of Moses, how in the bush 
God °spake unto him, saying, I am 
the God of Abraham, and the *God 
of Isaac, and the ?God of Jacob? 

27 He is not the God of the dead, 
but the God of the living: ye there- 
fore do greatly err. ; 


parable against them: and they left 
him, and went their way. 


The question of tribute (Mt. 22. 
15-22; Lk. 20. 19-26). 


13 And they ¢send unto him cer- 
tain of the Pharisees andof the Hero- 


a Mt.22.15. 
b Deut.7.2,6. 
c Lk.23.2. 

d denarius. 


a eens ; CEMt.22.19, 

dians, to catch him in Ais words. ay3 2 mandments (Mt. 
14 And when they were come, e Mt.17.25; The SAeSt LOH Lies: ents 

they say unto him, Master, we Rorel3 nea iets 


know that thou art true, and carest 28 And one of the scribes came, 
for no man: for thou regardest not and having heard them reasoning 
the person of men, but teachest the] ee wig together, and perceiving that he 
way of God in truth: [Is it lawful to], pettoss, _ |had answered them well, asked him, 
give tribute tc Cesar, ‘or not? i Ruth 1.11,12.|Which is the first commandment 

15 Shall we give, or shall we not} 7Mt.22.23, of all? i 
give? But he, knowing their_hy- ae 29 And Jesus answered him, The 
pocrisy, said. unto them, Why|iLit from — |first of all the commandments 1s, 
tempt ye me? bring me a 4penny, ey cez.| Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is 
that I may see it. : Hueit SS the(one 2Lord: 

16 And they brought it. ae he] Grst resurrec- | 30 mu vite Sw ae the — 
saith unto them, Whose is this im-| tion,1 Cor. |thy God wit thy heart, an 
age and superscription? And they BO ae ma all ui on aap lle all a 
said unto him, Cesar’s. Pe mind, and with all thy strength: 

17 And Jesus answering said unto|» Jesus effingns this is the first commandment, 
them, ‘Render to Cesar the things sai rb 31. And the second Js like, name- 
that are Czesar’s, and to /God the! spiration of |Jy this, "Thou shalt love thy neigh- 


f Eccl.5.4,53 
Mal.1.6. 


things that are God’s. And they| Ex3. | |bour as thyself. There is none 
marvelled at him, Caen: aw commandment greater than 
j Mk.12.36. |these. 
tanh aL pears (ex4is; | 32 And the scribe said unto him, 
. . ut > . . or . Vv. 7 . 


: pElehsiie ties Well, Master, thou hast said the 
18 Then come unto him the ¢Sad-|"36. ~~ |truth: for there is one God; and 
ducees, which say there is no res-|¢ Jehovah. there is none other but he: 


urrection; and they asked him, je saat 33 And to love him with all the 
aL “bt s with intelli- |heart, ee beri ies understand- 
19 ter, oses wrote u us, i ing, and with a e 1, i 
If a han’ brother evacd-tete fer not far in all he eboney enim oe 
his wife behind him, and leave no aR neighbour as himself, is more than 
Sita it He *brother snouts Sod oe all whole burnt-offerings and sacri- 
ake his wife, and raise up seed unto} © 3a fices. 
his brother. pet i dem 34 And when Jesus saw that he 
20 Now there were seven breth-| best man— answered ‘discreetly, he said unto 
Ten: and the first took a wife, and] its true office.|him Thou art not ‘far from the 


dying left no seed. os ae Ga. \kingdom of God. And no man after 
21 And the second took her, and 3.10,22-24. |that durst ask him any question. 
died, neither left he any seed: and| ie- David’s 


the third likewise, Son only. CF. Jesus questions the Pharisees 
22 And the seven had her, and ionaeeaten, (Mt. 22. 41-46; Lk, 20, 41-44), 

ase seed: last of all the woman cn She 35 And Jesus answered and said, 
ied also. 


inspiration |While he taught in the temple, How 

4 PD: ° . 

23 In the resurrection therefore,| and Davidie |say the scribes that Christ is the 

when they shall rise, whose wife Paes of |uson of David? 

shall she be of them? for the seven] 36°~ii3” | 36 %For David himself said by the 

had her to wife. ’ (Ex.4.15; *Holy Ghost, The *LorD said to 
24 And Jesus answering Jsaid| Rev.22.19.) Imy Lord, Sit thou on my right 


unto them, Do ye not therefore err,| “yre93 $2""*-|hand, till I make thine enemies thy 


because ye know not the scriptures,| (Mt.1.18: footstool. 

neither the power of God? bay a2 37 David therefore himself calleth 
25 For ‘when they shall rise|}4ccov2? |him Lord; and whence is he then 

“from the dead, they neither marry,| Psa.110.1, his son? And the common people 

nor are given in marriage; but are heard him gladly. 

as the "angels which are in heaven. 38 And he said unto them in his 
26 And as touching the dead, that doctrine, Beware of the scribes, 

they rise: have ye not "read in the which love to go in long clothing, 


1062 


at 


re 


St. MARK. 


| [13 20 


and Jove salutations in the market- 
places, 


A.D. 33. 


39 And the chief seats in the syna-/}i.e. condemna- 


gogues, and the uppermost rooms 
at feasts: 

40 Which devour widows’ houses, 
and for a pretence make long 
prayers: these shall receive greater 
¢damnation. 


Jesus and the widow’s mite 
(Lk. 21. 1-4). 


41 And Jesus sat over against the 
treasury, and beheld how the people 
cast money into the treasury: and 
many that were rich cast in 
much. 

42 And there came a certain poor 
widow, and she threw in two mites, 
which make a “farthing. 

43 And he called unto him his 
disciples, and saith unto them, 
Verily I say unto you, That this 
poor widow hath cast more_in,| 
than all they which have cast into 
the treasury: 

44 For all they did cast in of their 
abundance; but she of her want 
did cast in all that she had, even 
all her living. 


CHAPTER 13. 


The Olivet discourse: the disct- 
ples’ questions. (Cf. Mt. 24., 
25a sik. 21.) 


ANP as he went out of the tem- 
ple, one of his disciples saith 
unto him, Master, see what manner 
of stones and what buildings are 
here! 

2 4¢And Jesus answering said unto 
him, Seest thou these great build- 
ings? there shall not. be left one 
stone upon another, that shall not 
be thrown down. 

3 And as he sat upon the mount 
of Olives over against the temple, 
Peter and James and John and An- 
drew asked him privately, 

4 Tell us, when shall these things 
be? and what shall be the sign 
when all these things shall be ful- 
filled? 


The Olivet discourse: the course 
of this age. 


5 And Jesus answering them be- 
gan to say, Take heed lest any man 
¢deceive you: 

6 For many shall come in my 
name, saying, I am Christ; and 
shall deceive many. 


tion, 


6 One mite= 
1-4 farthing, 
or 1-8 cent. 


¢ One farthing 
here = 1-2 cent, 


@ See Mt.24.3, note 
on the Olivet 
discourse. 


¢Cf,.2 Thes.2.1-3. 


fbe ye not sur- 
prised, for it must 
so be, but not 
then is the end; 
i.e. vs.7,8 de- 
scribe the age, 
not the end only. 


9 birthpangs. 
Answering to the 
“‘seals.’" (Rev. 
6.) The death- 
agony of this age 
is the birth-agony 
of the next. 


hk Mt.10.17; Acts 5. 
18; 12.1-4; 25.15. 


4 Cf.Mt.24.14. 


J Gospel. Mk.14.9. 
(Gen. 12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 


k be not anxious. 
‘Acts 4.8,31. 


m Holy Spirit. 
Lk.1.15,17,35,41, 
67,80. (Mt.1, 
18; Acts 2.4.) 


” Cf.Mic,7.6. 


© Not the end of 
the believer's 
life, but the end 
of the great 
tribulatior.. 


p In the sense of 
Rev,13.8; 20.4. 


@ See ‘‘Beast.’” 
(Dan.7.8; 
Rev. 19.20.) 


r Or, he. Cf,2 
Thes.2.4; Rev.13. 
6,14,16; Dan.11. 
36; 12.41. 


8 Cf. Lk, 21.20-24, 
which is a proph- 
ecy fulfilled in the 
destruction of 
Jerusalem, 

70, when the 
Christians es- 
caped, and which 
foreshadowed 
the more terrible 
day here de- 
scribed. See 
“Great Tribula- 
tion,’’ Psa.2.5; 
Rev.7.14, 


t tribulation. Cf. 
Mt.24.21, See 
“Tribulation.’’ 


7 And when ye shali hear of wars 
and rumours of wars, ‘be ye not 


(Psa.2.12; Rev. 
7.14.) 


1063 


troubled: for such things must 
pe be; but the end shal/ not be 
yet. 

8 For nation shall rise against 
nation, and kingdom against king- 
dom: and there shall be earth- 
quakes in divers places, and there 
shall be famines and troubles: these 
are the beginnings of Ssorrows. 

9 But take heed to yourselves: 
for they shall “deliver you up to 
councils; and in the synagogues 
ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be 
brought before rulers and kings for 
my sake, for a testimony against 
them. ; 

10 *And the /gospel must first be 
published among all nations. 

11 But when they shall lead you, 
and deliver you up, “take no 
thought beforehand what ye shall 
speak, neither do ye premeditate: 
but whatsoever shall be given you 
in that hour, that speak ye: for it 
is not ye that speak, ‘but the “Holy 
Ghost. 

12 Now the *brother shall betray 
the brother to death, and the father 
the son; and children shall rise up 
against their parents, and shall 
cause them to be put to death. 

13 And ye shall be hated of all 
men for my name’s sake: but he 
that shall endure unto the °end, the 
same shall be ?saved. 


The great tribulation (Mt. 24. 
15). See “Tribulation” (Psa. 2. 
5; Rev. 7. 14). . 


14 But ®when ye shall see the 
abomination of desolation, spoken 
of by Deniel the prophet, standing 
where “it ought not, (let him that 
readeth understand, ) ‘then let them 
that be in Judza flee to the moun- 
tains: 

15 And let him that is on the 
housetop not go down into the 
house, neither enter therein, to 
take any thing out of his house: 

16 And let him that is in the field 
not turn back again for to take up 
his garment. 

17 But woe to them that are with 
child, and to them that give suck in 
those days! 

18 And pray ye that your flight be 
not in the winter. 

19 Yor in those days shall be ‘af- 
fliction, such as was not from the 
beginning of the creation which 
God created unto this time, neither 
shall be. 

20 And except that the Lord had 
shortened those days, no flesh 


should be saved: but for the “elect’s 
sake, whom he hath chosen, he 
hath shortened the days. 

21 And then if any man shall say 
to you, Lo, here is Christ; or, lo, he 
1s there; believe Aim not: 

22 For false Christs and false 
prophets shall rise, and shall shew 
signs and wonders, to seduce, if it 

_ were possible, even the elect. 

23 But take ye heed: behold, I 

have foretold you all things. 


The Lord’s return in glory 
(Mt. 24. 27-31). 


24 But in those days, after that 
tribulation, the sun shall be dark- 
ened, and the moon shall not give 
her light, 

25 And the stars of heaven shall 
fall, and the powers that are in 
heaven shall be shaken. 

26 And then shall they see the 
’Son of man coming in the clouds 
with great power and glory. 

27 And then shall he send his 
‘angels, and shall gather together 
his elect from the four winds, from 
the uttermost part of the earth to 
the uttermost part of heaven. 


Parable of the fig tree. (Cf. }"t. 
24. 32, 33; Lk. 21, 29-31.) 


28 Now learn a 4parable of the 
fig tree; When her branch is yet ten- 
der, and putteth forth leaves, ye 
know that summer is near: 

29 So ye in like manner, when ye 
shall see these things come to pass, 
know that it is nigh, even at the 
doors, 

30 Verily I say unto you, that this 
generation shall not pass, till all 
these things be done. 

31 Heaven and earth shall pass 
away: but my words shall not pass 
away. 

32 But of that day and that hour 
knoweth no man, no, not the <an- 
gels which are in heaven, neither 
the Son, but the Father. 

33 Take ye heed, watch and pray: 
for ye know not when the time is. 


Watchfulness in view of the re- 
turn of the Lord. 


34 For the Son of man is as a 
man taking a far journey, who left 
his house, and gave authority to 
his servants, and to “every man his 
work, and commanded the porter 
to watch. 

35 Watch ye therefore: for ye 
know not when the master of the 
house cometh, at even, or at mid- 


St. MARK. 


a Election 
Acts 13.17. 


(Deut.7.6; 
1 Pet.1.2.) 


(Deut.30.3; 


note. 


c Heb.1.4, 


note, 

d Parables 
(N.T.). vs. 
28,29,34-37; 
Lk.5.36,37. 


e Mt.25.14. 
F Mt.24.42; 


25.13; 1 Pet. 
L13- 


g Mt.21.17; 
26.6; Lk.7. 


37; John 12.1. 


h Mary of 
Bethany. 


t See Mt.26. 
7, note, 


j Gr. de- 
marion. A 


denarius wes 


=81-2d., 
17 cents, 

k Deut.15.11; 
Mt.26.11; 
John 12.8. 


1 Cf.John 
19.40. 


m Mt.26.13. 


Rev.14.6.) 
Oi.e. earth. 
> Psa.41.9; 


55.12-14; 
Mt.10.2-4. 


1064 


A.D. 33. 


(corporate). | 


b Christ (Sec- 


Acts 1.9-11.) 
See Mt.8.20, 


(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 


[14 at 


night, or at the cockcrowing, or in 
the morning: 

36 Lest coming suddenly he find 
you sleeping. 

37 And what I say unto you I say 
unto all, /Watch. 


CHAPTER 14. 


|The plot to put Jesus to death 
(Mt. 26. 2-5; Lk. 22.1, 2). 


A stEs two days was the feast 
of the passover, and of unleav- 
ened bread: and the chief priests 
land the scribes sought how they 
\might take him by craft, and put 
him to death. 

2 But they said, Not on the feast 
day, lest there be an uproar of the 
people. 


Jesus anointed by Mary of Beth- 
any (Mt. 26. 6-13; John 12. 1-8). 


3 &And being in Bethany in the 
house of Simon the leper, as he sat 
at meat, there came a #woman hav- 
ing an alabaster box of ointment of 
spikenard very precious; and she 
brake the box, and poured it on his 
thead. 

4 And there were some that had 
indignation within themselves, and 
said, Why was this waste of the 
ointment made? 

5 For it might have been sold for 
more than Jthree hundred pence, 
and have been given to the poor. 
And they murmured against her. 

6 And Jesus said, Let her alone; 
why trouble ye her? she hath 
wrought a good work on me. 

7 For ye have the poor with you 
always, and whensoever ye will ye 
may do them good: but me ye have 
not always. 

8 She hath done what she could: 
she is come aforehand to ‘anoint 
my body to the burying. 

9 Verily I say unto you, ™Where- 
soever this “gospel shall be preached 
throughout the whole world, this 
also that she hath done shall be 
spoken of for a memorial of her. 


Judas covenants to betray Jesus 
(Mt. 26. 14-16; Lk. 22. 3-6). 


10 And *Judas Iscariot, one of the 
twelve, went unto the chief priests, 
to betray him unto them. 

11 And when they heard it, they 
were glad, and promised to give 
[Base money. And he sought how 
he might conveniently betray him. 


be 


} 


14 12] 


The preparation of the passover 
(Mt. 26. 17-19; Lk. 22. 7-13). 


12 And the @first day of unleav- 
ened bread, when they “killed the 
passover, his disciples said unto 
him, Where wilt thou that we go 
and prepare that thou mayest eat 
the passover? 

13 And he sendeth forth two of 
his disciples, and saith unto them, 
Go ye into the city, and there shall 
meet you a man bearing a pitcher 
of water: follow him. 

14 And wheresoever he shall go 
in, say ye to the goodman of the 
house, The “Master saith, Where is 
the guest-chamber, where I shall 
eat the passover with my dis- 
ciples? 

15 And he will shew you a large 
upper room furnished and pre- 
pared: there make ready for us. 

16 And his disciples went forth, 
and came into the city, and ¢found 
as he had said unto them: and they 
made ready the passover. 


The last passover (Mt. 26. 20-24; 
Lk. 22. 14, 21-23; John 13. 18, 19). 


17 ¢And in the evening he cometh 
with the twelve. 

18 And as they sat and did eat, 
Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, 
One of you which feateth with me 
shall betray me. 

19 And they began to be sorrow- 
ful, and to say unto him one by one, 
Zs it I? and another said, Is it I? 

20 And he answered and said unto 
them, It. is one of the twelve, that 
dippeth with me in the dish. 

21 &The Son of man indeed goeth, 
as it is written of him: but woe to 
that man by whom the Son of man 
is betrayed! “good were it for that 
man if he had never been born. 


Jesus institutes the Lord’s Sup- 
per (Mt. 26. 26-29; Lk. 22. 17-20; 
1 Cor. 11. 23-26). 


22 And as they did eat, Jesus took 
bread, and blessed, and *brake it, 
and gave to them, and said, Take, 
jeat: this is my body. 

23 And he took the cup, and 
kwhen he had given thanks, he gave 
it to them: and they all drank of it. 

24 And he said unto them, /This 
is my blood of the "new “testa- 
“ment, Which is shed for many. | 

25 Verily I say unto you, I will 
drink no more of the fruit of the 
vine, until “that day that I drink it 
new in the kingdom of God. 


St. MARK. 


a Ex.12.8. 

b sacrificed. 
¢ John 13.13. 
d John 16.4. 


e For the order 
of events on 
the night of 
the last pass- 
over, see Mt. 
26.20, note. 


f Psa.41.9. 


g Cf.Acts 2.23; 
Rom.9.19-23. 


h Mt.18.6. 
t Lk.24.30. 


j 1 Cor.10.15, 
16; 11.23,24; 
1 Pet.2.24. 


k1 Cor.11. 
24,25. 


T Lev.17.11; 
1 Cor.10.10; 
Heb.9.14-22. 


m Covenant 
Lk. 


Heb.8.8-12.) 
n covenant. 


o Isa.25.6-9; 
Ezh.34.23, 
24; 37.21-28; 
Joel 5.17-20; 


p Or, psalm 
Cf.Neh.8. 
10; Psa.47 
6,7; 150.1-6. 


q Zech.13.7. 
r Mk.16.7. 


s Mt.26.33; 
Lk.22.31, 
John 13.36. 


t Cf.v.50. 


u Mt.17.1; 
26.37; Mk.5. 
37; 9.2; 13 
3; Lk.8.51; 
9.28; 22.8; 
John 18.15, 


v Isa.53.4-6; 
Mt.27.46; 
John 12.27. 


w Mt.26.39, 
note on the 
meaning of 
the cup. 


x John 4.34. 


y Lk.21.36; 
Eph.5.18. 


z Rom.7.18, 
21-24; Jude 
23, note, 


1065 


A.D. 33. 


[14 39 


Peter’s denial foretold (Mt. 26. 
31-35; Lk. 22. a3-34;: John 13. 
36-38). 


26 And when they had sung an 
Phymn,. they went out into the 
mount of Olives. 

27 And Jesus saith unto them, 
All ye shall be offended because of 
me this night: for it is written, I will 
smite the shepherd, and the sheep 
shall be scattered. 

28 ‘But after that I am risen, I 
will go before you into Galilee. 

29 But ‘Peter said unto him, Al- 
though all shall be offended, yet 
will not I. 

30 And Jesus saith unto him, 
Verily I say unto thee, That this 
day, even in this night, before the 
cock crow twice, thou shalt deny 
me thrice. 

31 But he spake the more vehe- 
mently, If I should die with thee, 
I will not deny thee in any wise. 
‘Likewise also said they all. 


The agony in the garden. (Cf. 
Mt. 26. 36-46; Lk. 22. 39-46; 
John 18. 1.) 


32 And they came to a place 
which was named Gethsemane: and 
he saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, 
while I shall pray. 

33 And he “taketh with him Peter 
and James and John, and began to 
be sore amazed, and to be very 
heavy; 

34 And saith unto them, My ’soul 
js exceeding sorrowful unto death: 
tarry ye here, and watch. 


The first prayer. (Cf. Mt. 26. 
39; Lk. 22. 41, 42.) 

35 And he went forward a little, 
and fell on the ground, and prayed 
that, if it were possible, the hour 
might pass from him. 

36 And he said, Abba, Father, all 
things are possible unto thee; take 
away this “cup from me: “neverthe- 
less not what I will, but what thov 
wilt. 

37 And he cometh, and findeth 
them sleeping, and saith unto Peter, 
Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not 
thou watch one hour? z 

38 YWatch ye and pray, lest ye 
enter into temptation. The spirit 
truly is ready, but the “flesh is 
weak. 


The second prayer. (Cf. Mt. 26. 
42; Lk. 22. 44.) 

39 And again he went away, and 

prayed, and spake the same words. 


14 40] 


40 And when he returned, he 
found them asleep again, (for their 
eyes were heavy,) neither wist they 
what to answer him, 


The third prayer. (Cf. Mt. 26. 44.) 


41 And he cometh the third time, 
and saith unto them, Sleep on now, 
and take your rest: it is enough, 
the “hour is come; behold, the Son 
of. man is betrayed into the hands 
of sinners. 

42 Rise up, let us go; lo, he that 
betrayeth me is at hand. 


The betrayal and arrest of Jesus 
Mt. 26. 47-56; Lk. 22. 47-53: 
John 18. 3-11). 

43 And immediately, while he yet 
spake, cometh “Judas, one of the 
twelve, and with him a great ¢mul- 
titude with swords and staves, from 
the chief priests and the scribes and 
the elders. 

44 And he that betrayed him had 
given them a token, saying, Whom- 
soever I shall kiss, that same is 

~he; take him, and lead Aim away 
safely. 

45 And as soon as he was come, 
he goeth straightway to him, and 
caith, fMaster, master; and kissed 

im. 

46 And they laid their hands on 
him, and took him. 


Peter smites with the sword and 
follows afar off. Jesus for- 
saken by all (Mt. 26. 51-56). 


47 And one of them that stood by 
drew a sword, and smote a servant 
of the high priest, and cut off his 
ear. 

48 And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, Are ye come out, as 
against a thief, with swords and 
with staves to take me? 

49 I was daily with you in the 
temple teaching, and ye took me 
not: but the scriptures must be ful- 
filled. 
ao And they all forsook him, and 

e 


51 And there followed him a cer- 
tain young man, having a linen 
cloth cast about his naked body; 
and the young men laid hold on 
him: 

52 And he left the linen cloth, and 
fled from them naked. 


Jesus is brought before tne high 
Priest and Sanhedrin (Mt. 26. 
57-68; John 18. 12-14, 19-24), 

53 And they ‘led Jesus away to 
the high priest: and with him were! 


St. MARK. 


A.D. 33. 


assembled all the chief priests and 
the elders and the scribes. 

54 And Peter followed him afar 
off, Jeven into the “palace of the 


a John 17.1. 


b Sin. Rom.3. /high priest: and he sat with the 
cvio. | |Sefvants, and warmed himself at 
d Psa.3.1. the fire. 3 , 

eAnd,coming,| 9» And the chief priests and all 
instantly |the council sought for witness 
stepping for-|against Jesus to put him to death; 
Yard to him. /and found none. ’ 
bi, rabbi! 56 For many bare false witness 
and eagerly |against him, but their witness 
kissed him. |asreed not together. 

J Never Gospel|, 97 And there arose certain, and 
record does {bare false witness against him, 
Judas Iscar- saying, 
ee cal ord. | 98 We heard him ‘say, I will de- 
Hewasthe |stroy this temple that is made with 
first Arian |hands, and within three days I 


amongst the 


professed fal- will build another made without 


lowers of ands. : E : ; 

Jesus. No 59 But neither so did their witness 
one can ™ ~~ Jagree together. 

et Jeon fa _60 And the high priest stood up 
Lord, but by |in the midst, and asked Jesus, say- 
cua Cor,/ing, Answerest thou nothing? what 


12.3), but it |18 2 which these witness against 
is possible to |thee? 


use the term | 61 ™But he held his peace, and 


raakepr ae "answered nothing. Again the 
without be- /high priest asked him, and said unto 
pln Rae him, Art thou the Christ, the Son ~ 
arene et, lof the Blessed? 
21; 25.11,12. | 62 And Jesus said, I am: and ye 

g Cf.v.31. shall see the Son of man °sitting on 

h Mt.26.57, 


the right hand of power, and coming 


note on order/in the clouds of heaven. 


of events on 


thaldagvok 63 Then the high priest ?rent his 
the crucifix. jclothes, and saith, What need we 
sons any further witnesses? 
i John 18-13. | 64 Ye have heard the tblasphemy: 
2) ee Nee jwhat think ye? And they all con- 
Pp | demned him to be guilty of death. 
1 Jahhs'9.19; 65 And some began to ‘spit on 
Mt.26.61;, |him, and to cover his face, and to 
Mk.15.29. |buffet him, and to say unto him, 
m Mt.26.63; |SProphesy: and the servants ‘did 
Lk.22.67. strike him with the palms of their 
n Isa.53.7. hands, 
* Meat 30,31; Peter denies his Lord (Mt. 26. 
Beet Saad i Aa 22, 56-62; John 18. 16- 
p Num.14.6, < 
7 ae 14. 66 And as Peter was beneath in 
ee the palace, there cometh one of the 
@ John 10.33. | aids of the high priest: 
r 192-90.6; 52, | 67 And when she saw Peter warm- 
Rev.20.11. |ing himself, she looked upon him, 
sMt.26.68; {and said, And thou also wast with 
Lk. 22.64. Jesus of Nazareth. 
tLit. with 68 But he denied, saying, I know 
heavy blows | not, neither understand I what thou 


jsayest. And he went out into the 
‘porch; and the cock crew. 
1066 


St. MARK. 


[15 28 


69 And a maid saw him again, 
and began to say to them that stood 
by, This is one of them. . 

70 And he denied it again. And 
a little after, they that stood by bas ae 
said again to Peter, Surely thou art 27.1; Lik. 23 1: call the "King of the Jews? 


one of them: for thou art a Gali- 
lean, and thy 
thereto. 


A.D. 33. 
a Lit. having 


thought 
thereon was 


John. 18.28; 


speech agreeth a 2.23; 


cM. 27.27-32. 


71 But he began to curse and to aCe. John 19. 


swear, saying, I know not this man| , 
of whom ye speak. 

72 And the second time the cock|” 
crew. And Peter called to mind the 
word that Jesus said unto him, Be- 
fore the cock crow twice, thou shalt 
deny me thrice. *And when he 
thought thereon, he wept. 


CHAPTER 15. 


Jesus sent before Pilate (Mt. 27. 
1, 2, 11-15; Lk. 23. 1-7, 13-18; John 
18. 28-40; 19. 1-16). 


PAND straightway in the morning 
the chief priests held a °con- 
sultation with the elders and scribes 
and the whole council, and bound 
Jesus, and carried him away, and 
delivered him to Pilate. 

2 And Pilate ‘asked him, Art thou 
the King of the Jews? And he 
answering said unto him, Thou 
sayest it. 

3 And the chief priests accused 
him of many things: but he an- 
swered nothing. 

4 And Pilate asked him again, 
saying, ¢Answerest thou nothing? 
behold how many things they 
witness against thee. 

5 «But Jesus yet answered noth- 
ing; so that Pilate marvelled. 

6 Now at that feast he released 
unto them one prisoner, whomso-| ¢ 
ever they desired. 


Not Jesus but Barabbas (Mt. 27. 
16-26; Lk. 23. 16-25; John 18. 40). 


7 And there was one named Ba- 
rabbas, which Jay bound with 
them that had made insurrection 
with him, who had committed 
murder in the insurrection. 

8 And the multitude crying aloud 
began to desire him to do as he had 
ever done unto them. 

9 But Pilate answered them, say- 
ing, Will ye that I release unto you 
the King of the Jews? 

10 For he knew that the chief 

riests had delivered him for 


envy. r ¥ 
11 But the chief priests moved 


22; 21. 38; 
John 12.19, 

g Acts 3.14, 

h Psa.2.6; 
jenna sacks 
Lk.1,31-. et 
Acts 5.3 
15.14- a 

t Isa.53.9. 

j 1sa.53.8. 

k Or, the court 
which ts the 
judgment- 
hall. 

l piaited. 

m Gen.3.17, 
18; cf. 

2 Cor.5.21; 
Gal.3.21. 

n Joy to thee! 
King of the 
Jews! 

o And they 
were strik- 
ing himon 
the head 
with a reed, 
and spitting 
on fF 

b Isa.50.6; 
Zech.13.7. 

q Mt.27.32; 
Lk.23.26. 

r It is possible 
that this may 
be the same 
Rufus men- 
tioned in 
Rom.16.13. 

5s Mt.27.33-44; 
Lk.23.33-43; 
John 19, 
17-24. 

t The stupe- 
fying drink 
usually 
given to 
those cruci- 


v For order of 


events at the | 


crucifixion, 

see Mt.27. 

33, note. 
w Psa.22.18. 
x Cf.John 19. 


24. 

y Cf.John 1%. 
14. John uses 
the Roman, 
Mark the 
Hebrew 
computation 
of time. 


122.37.” 
1067 


the people, that he should rather 
8release Barabbas unto them. 

12 And Pilate answered and said 
again unto them, What will ye then 
that I shall do unto him whom ye 


13 And they cried out again, Cru- 
cify him. 

14 Then Pilate said unto them, 
Why, ‘what evil hath he done? 
And they cried out the more eX- 
ceedingly, Crucify him. 

15 And so Pilate, willing to con- 
tent the people, released Barabbas 
unto them, and delivered Jesus, 
when he had scourged Aim, to be 
Jcrucified. 


Jesus crowned with thorns 
(Mt. 27. 27-31). 


16 And the soldiers led him away 
into "the hall, called Pretorium; 
and they call together the whole 
band. 

17 And they clothed him with 
purple, and “platted a crown of 
mthorns, and put it about his head, 

18 And began to salute him, 
"Hail, King of the Jews! 

19 °And they ?smote him on the 
head with a reed, and did spit upon 
him, and bowing their knees wor- 
shipped him. 

20 And when they had mocked 
him, they took off the purple from 
him, and put his own clothes on 
him, and led him out to crucify him. 

21 And they compel one Simon a 
Cyrenian, who passed by, coming 
out of the country, the father of 
Alexander and *Rufus, to bear his 
cross. 

22 sAnd they bring him unto the 
\place Golgotha, which is, being in- 


‘terpreted, The place of a skull. 


23 And they gave him to ‘drink 
wine mingled with myrrh: “but he 
received rt not. 


Jesus crucified (Mt. 27. 33-56; Lk. 
23. 33-49; John 19. 17-37). 


| 24 *And when they had crucified 
|hirn, they “parted his garments, 
casting lots upon them, what every 
man should take. 

25 And it was the %third hour, 
and they crucified him. 

6 And the 2superscription of his 
accusation was written over, THE 
KING OF THE JEWS. 

27 And with him they crucify two 
thieves; the one on his right hand, 
and the other on his left. 

28 ¢And the scripture was ful- 


‘15 29] 


filled, which saith, And he was 
numbered with the transgressors. 

29 4And they that passed by 
railed on him, wagging their heads, 
and saying, ’Ah, thou that de- 
stroyest the temple, and buildest 
it in three days, 

30 Save thyself, and come down 
from the cross. : 

31 Likewise also the chief priests 
‘mocking said among themselves 
with the scribes, “He saved others; 
himself he cannot save. 

32 Let Christ the King of Israel 
descend now from the cross, that 
we may ‘see and believe, fAnd 
they that were crucified with him 
reviled him. 

33 And when the sixth hour was 
come, there was darkness over the 
whole land until the ninth hour. 

34 And at the ninth hour Jesus 
cried with a loud voice, Ssaying, 
Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which 
is, being interpreted, My God, my 
God, why hast thou forsaken me? 

35 And some of them that stood 
by, when they heard it, said, Be- 
hold, he calleth Elias. 

36 And one ran and filled a 
spunge full of vinegar, and put jt on 
a reed, and gave him to drink, say- 
ing, Let alone; let us see whether 
Elias will come to take him down. 

37 And Jesus cried with a loud 
voice, and ‘gave up the ghost. 

38 And the /veil of the temple 
was rent in twain from the ‘top to 
the bottom. 

39 And when the centurion, which 
stood over against him, saw that he 
so cried out, and gave up the ghost, 
he said, Truly this man was the 
Son of God. 

40 There were also women look- 
ing on afar off: among whom was 
Mary Magdalene, and Mary the 
mother of James the less and of 
Joses, and Salome; 

41 (Who also, when he was in 
Galilee, followed him, and min- 
istered unto him;) and many other 
women which came up with him 
unto Jerusalem. 


The entombment (Mt. 27. 57-61: 
Lk. 23. 50-56; John 19, 38-42). 


42 And now when the even was 
come, because it was the prepara- 
tion, that is, the day before the sab- 
bath, 

43 'Joseph of Arimathza, an hon- 


! For the order of events on the day of the r 
Lord’s appearances after His resurrection, see 


St. MARK. 


A.D. 33. 


a Psa.22.6,7, 
109.25. 

6 John 2-19, 
20,21. 

c Psa.35,16; 
Tsa.28.22; 
Jer.23.1-6; 
Mt.3.7; 23. 
33; Lk.18.32. 

d Lk.7 14; 
John 11.43 
Cf. John 3. 
14,15 with 
Heb 9.22- 


e Cf.John 20. 
29. Also Lk 
16.31; Acts 6 
7; Rom.3.3; 
2 Tim.2.13; 

1 Pet.1.8. 

f Cf.Mt.27.44; 
Lk.23.39,40- 

g Psa.22.1 
Cf.Psa. 
88.14. 

h Psa.69.21 
7 See Mt.27 
50, note 
j Ex.26.31-33, 
Lev 16.1,2: 
Heb.9.6,8; 

10.14-22. 

k God rent it 
down; it was 
rent from the 
top. Christ 
having made 
atonement 


and glorified 
God, the way 
into the holi- 
est was now 
mad¢ mani- 
festz (Ck: 
Heb.9.8,24; 
10.19-22. 

1 Mt.27.57-59; 
Lk.23.50; 
John 19.38. 


m Isa.53.9. 


n See Mt.1. 
16, note. 


o Mt.28.1; 


q Jesus ye 
seek—the 
Nazarene, 
the cruci- 
fied: He 
arose! He 
is not here! 
The tone is 
of triumph. 
Cf.Psa.2.4, 

r LK.7.11-15; 
Psa.16.8-11; 
22.24, 71.20; 
Isa. 26.19, 


Ss Mk.14.28. 


1068 


ourable counsellor, which also 
waited for the kingdom of God, 
came, and went in boidly unto 
Pilate, and craved the body of 
Jesus. 

44 And Pilate marvelled if he were 
already dead: andcalling unto him 
the centurion, he asked him whether 
he had been any while dead. 

45 And when he knew it of the 
centurion, he gave the body to 
Joseph. 

46 And he bought fine linen, and 
took him down, and wrapped him 
in the linen, and ™laid him in a 
sepulchre which was hewn out of a 
rock, and rolled a stone unto the 
door of the sepulchre. 

47 And Mary Magdalene and 
"Mary the mother of Joses beheld 
where he was laid. 


CHAPTER 16. 


The resurrection of Jesus Christ 
and the events of that day. 
(Mt. 28. 1-15; Lk. 24. 1-49; John 
207 12033), 


Se °when the sabbath was 
past, Mary Magdalene, and 
"Mary the mother of James, and 
Salome, had bought sweet spices, 
that they might come and anoint 

im. 

2 1And very early in the morning 
the first day of the week, they 
came unto the sepulchre at the 
rising of the sun. 

3 And they said among them- 
selves, Who shall roll us away 
the stone from the door of the 
sepulchre? 

4 And when they looked, they 
saw that the stone was rolled away: 
for it was very great. 

5 And entering into the sepulchre, 
they saw a young man sitting on 
the right side, clothed in a long 
white garment; and they were 
affrighted. 

6 And he saith unto them, Be not 
affrighted: 7Ye seek Jesus of Naza- 
reth, which was crucified: he is 
‘risen; he is not here: behold the 
place where they laid him. 

7 But go your way, tell his disci- 
ples and Peter that he goeth before 
you into Galilee: there shall ye see 
him, Sas he said unto you. 

8 And they went out quickly, and 
fled from the sepulchre; for they 


esurrection, and for the order of our 
Mt. 28 1, 9, notes 1 and 2. 


16 9] 


_trembled and were amazed: neither 
said they any thing to any man; 
for they were afraid. 

9 I1Now when Jesus was risen 
early the first day of the week, he 
“appeared first to Mary Magdalene, 
out of whom he had cast seven 
devils. 

10 And she went and told them 
that had been with him, as they 
mourned and wept. 

11 And they, when they had 
heard that he was alive, and had 
been seen of her, believed not. 

12 After that he appeared in an- 
other form unto two of them, as 
they walked, and went into the 
country. 

13 And they went and told rt unto 
the residue: neither believed they 
them. 

14 Afterward he appeared unto 
the Zeleven as they sat at meat, and 
upbraided them with their unbelief} 53; Eph.4 
and hardness of heart, because they| 810- 
believed not them which ‘had seen|» Acts 3.13; 
him after he was risen. Heb.2.4. 


A.D. 33. 
a See Mt.28, 
9, note. 
b Lk.24.13-35. 
ci.e. earth. 


d Gospel. Lk. 
2.10,11. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


e Rom.1.16, 
note. 


fie. con- 
demned. 


g Acts 4.29- 
31; 5.12. 


h Acts 16.18. 

i Acts 2.4. 

j Acts 28.3-6. 
k2 Ki.4.39-41, 
1 Acts 9.32-35, 
m Lk,24.50- 


St. MARK. 


[16 20 


15 And he said unto them, Go ye 
into all the ‘world, and preach the 
dgospel to every creature. 

16 He that believeth and is bap- 
tized shall be ‘saved; but he that 
believeth not shall be fdamned. 

17 And these ‘signs shall follow 
them that believe; In my name 
shall they cast out ‘devils; they 
shall speak with ‘new tongues; 

18 They shall take up Jserpents; 
and if they drink any “deadly thing, 
it shall not hurt them; they shall 
lay hands on the /sick, and they 
shall recover. 


The ascension (Lk. 24. 50-53: 
Acts 1. 6-11). 


19 So then after the Lord had 
spoken unto them, he was “received 
up into heaven, and sat on the 
right hand of God. 

20 And they went forth, and 
preached every where, the Lord- 
nworking with them, and confirm- 
ing the word with signs following. 
Amen. 


1 The passage from verse 9 to the end is not found in the two most ancient man- 
uscripts, the Sinaitic and Vatican, and others have it with partial omissions and 


variations. 


century. j t 
2A collective term, equivalent to 


necessarily implying that eleven persons were present. 


But it is quoted by Ireneus and Hippolytus in the second or third 


“The Sanhedrin,” ‘The Commons,” not 


See Lk. 24. 33; 1 Cor. 


’ 15. 5: and cf. Mt. 28. 16, where “eleven disciples” implies a definite number of 


persons. 


1069 


Pepe 


7 wrijeve. | 
{ Sess 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


11] 


He was of Jewish ancestry, 
sion. Tradition says that 
Date. 
Theme. 
human One. 


how entirely human He was. 
tailed account is given of His 


is careful to guard the Deity and 


ST. LUKE. 


WRITER. The writer of the third Gos 
cian’’ (Col. 4. 14); and, as we learn fro 


Name 1s 


(1 12, 


pei is called by Paul “the beloved physi- 
m the Acts, was Paul’s frequent companion. 
but his correct Greek marks him as a Jew of the disper- 
he was a Jew of Antioch, as Paul was of Tarsus. 

The date of Luke falls between A.D. 63 and 68. ’ eat 
Luke is the Gospel of the human-divine One, as John is of the divine- 
The key-phrase is “Son of man,” 
the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.” 
with this intent, Luke relates those things co 


and the key-verse (19. 10), ‘For 
In harmony 


meerning Jesus which demonstrate 

His genealogy is traced to Adam, and the most de- 
mother, and of His infancy and boyhood. The para- 
bles peculiar to Luke have distinctively the human and the seeking note. 
Kingship of Jesus Christ (Lk. 1. 32-35), 
then, is the Gospel of “the man whose q 


But Luke 
Luke, 
The BRANCH” (Zech. 6. 12). 


Luke has seven chief divisions: I. The Evangelist’s Introduction, 1.1-4. If, The 


human relationships of Jesus, 1. 5-2. 52. 
IV. The ministry of 


of Jesus, 3. 1-4. 13. 
ilee, 4. 14-9. 50. 
9. 51-19. 44, 
and sacrifice, 19. 45-23. se, 


V. The journey 


VI. The final offer of the So 
VII. The 


of the 


ascension of the Son of man, 24, 1-53. ; 
The events recorded in this book cover a period of 39 years. 


CHAPTER 1. 
Introduction. 


FrORASMUCH as many have 
taken in hand to set forth in 
order a declaration of those things 
which are most surely believed 
among us, 

2 Even as they delivered them 
unto us, which from the beginning 
“were eyewitnesses, and ministers 
of ‘the word; 

3 It seemed good to me also, chav- 
ing had perfect 4understanding of 
all things 1from the very first, to 
write unto thee ¢in order, most ex- 
cellent Theophilus, 

4 That thou mightest know the 
certainty of those things, wherein 
thou hast been instructed. 


Birth of John the Baptist fore- 
told. 
SPHERE was in the days of 


&Herod, the king of Judea, 
a certain priest named Zacharias, 


15.27; Acts 
3; 10.39; Heb. 
3; 1 Pet.5.1; 
Pet.1.16; lJohn 
1 


Epb.3.7,8. 

¢ Inspiration. Lk. 
4.17-21,27. (Ex.4, 
15; Rev.22.19,) 

¢ Gr.parakolou- 
thekoti, lit. fol- 
lowed alongside 
of; or, closely 
traced. 

¢ The words “‘in 
order’’ are em- 
phatic, indicating 
Luke's purpose 
to reduce to or- 
der the Gospel 
story. 

f Acts 1.1. 

9 Herod the Great. 
Cf. Mt.2.1, note. 

AY Chr.24.1,10. 

i Righteousness 
Lk.2.25. (Gen. 
6.9; Lk.2.25.) 


J Law (of Moses). 
Lk.10.25-37, 
(Ex.19 1; Gal.3. 


III. The baptism, ancestry, 
the Son of man as Prophet-King in Gal- 
Son of man from Galilee to Jerusalem, 
n of man as King to Israel, His rejection 
resurrection, resurrection ministry, and 


and testing 


of the course of Abia: and his ‘wife 
was of the daughters of Aaron, and 
her name was Elisabeth. 

6 And they were both ‘righteous 
before God, walking in all the Jcora- 
mandments and ordinances of the 
Lord blameless. 

7 And they had no child, because 
that Elisabeth was barren, and they 
both were now well stricken in 
years. , 

8 And it came to pass, that while 
he executed the priest’s office before 
God in the order of his course, 

9 According to the custom of the 
priest’s office, his lot was to burn 
incense when he went into the tem- 
ple of the Lord. 

10 And the whole multitude of 
the people were praying without at 
the time of incense. 

11 And there appeared unto him 
an angel of the Lord standing on 
the right side of the altar of in- 
cense. 


1-29.) 


1 “From the 
31; 19. 11; Jas. 1.17; 3. 15, 17. 
very first.” 


12 And when Zacharias saw him > 


these things, derived from those who had been eye-witnesses from the beginning 


(Lk. 1. 2), 


: 4 was troubled, and fear fell upon 

im. 

13 But the angel said unto him, 
Fear not, Zacharias: for thy $prayer 
is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth 
shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt 
call his name John. 

14 And thou shalt have joy and 
gladness; and many shall rejoice at 
his birth. 

15 For he shall be “great in the 
sight of the Lord, and shall drink 
neither wine nor strong drink; and 
he shall be filled with the “Holy 
Ghost, “even from his mother’s 
womb. 

16 And many of the children of 
Israel shall he turn to the Lord their 
God. 

17 And he /shall go before him in 


. the spirit and power of Elias, to; 


turn the hearts of the fathers to 
the children, and the disobedient 
to the wisdom of the just; to make 
ready a people prepared for the 
Lord. 

18 And Zacharias said unto the 
angel, Whereby shali I know this? 
for I am an old man, and my wife 
well stricken in years. 

19 And the @angel answering said 

unto him, I am ‘Gabriel, that stand 
in the presence of God; and am 
jsent to speak unto thee, and to 
shew thee these glad tidings. 

20 And, behold, thou shalt be 
dumb, and not able to speak, until 
the day that these things shall be 
performed, because thou believest 
not my words, which shall be ful- 
filled in their season. 

21 And the people waited for 
Zacharias, and marvelled that he 

--tarried so long in the temple. 

22 And when he came out, he 
could not speak unto them: and 
they perceived that he had seen a 
vision in the temple: for he beck- 
oned unto them, and remained 
speechless. 

23 And it came to pass, that, as 
soon as the days of his ministration 
were accomplished, he departed to 
his own house. Fg 

24 And after those days his wife 
Elisabeth conceived, and hid her- 
self five months, saying, : 

25 Thus hath the Lord dealt with 
me in the days wherein he looked 
on me, to *take away my reproach 
among men. 


The annunciation. 


26 And in the ‘sixth month the 
Zangel Gabriel was sent from God 


} Str. LUKE. 


B.C. 


iB 


a Heb.1.4, 
note. 

6 Gen.25.21; 

1 Sam.1.20. 

c Lk.7.28. 

d Holy Spirit. 
vs.15,17,35, 
41,67,80; Lk. 
2.25,26,27,40. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

e Jer.1.5. 

f Mal.4.5. 

See Mt.17. 
10, note. 

g1 Ki.21.20; 

2 Ki.1.8; Mt. 
3.4; 7.12. 

hi Pet.2.9, 

fice. Man of 
God Cf. 
Psa.103.20; 
Dan.8.16. 

j Lk.7.27. 

k Gen.30.23; 

1 Sam.1.6. 

lalso v. 

36. 

m Mt.1.18, 

n Or. gra- 
ciously 
accepted, 
or, much 
&raced. 

o Isa.7.14; 
Mt.1.21. 

p Phil.2.9,11. 

q v.35. 

r Isa.9.6,7. 

$ Lk.3.23,31; 
Mt.1.1. 

t Israel 
(prophe- 
cies). vs. 
31-33; Lk.21. 
20-24. (Gen. 
12.2,3; Rom. 
11.26.) 

u Dan.7.14,27; 
Rev.11.15. 

v Kingdom 


( 4 
31-33; Mt.2.2. 


(Lk.1.31-33; 
1 Cor.15.24.) 


w vs.26-35; 
Isa.7.14. 


x Sanctify, 
holy (per- 
sons) (N,T.). 
vs.35-49,70; 
Lk.2.23, 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


z Mt.19.26; 
Rom.4.21. 


1071 


ithe angel departed from her. 


[1 2 


unto a city of Galilee, named Naza- 
reth, 

27 Toa™virgin espoused to a man 
whose name was Joseph, of the 
house of David; and the virgin’s 
name was Mary. 


28 And the “angel came in unto/>-== 


her, and said, Hail, thou that art nh 
nhighly favoured, the Lord is with 
thee: blessed art thou among 
women. 

29 And when she saw Aim, she 
was troubled at his saying, and 
cast in her mind what manner of 
salutation this should be. 


30 And the 2angel said unto her, () — 
|Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found” 


favour with God. 

31 And, behold, °thou shalt con- 
ceive in thy womb, and bring forth 
a son, and shalt call his name 


| JESUS.’ 


32 He shall be *great, and shall 
be called the 9Son of the Highest: 
and the Lord God shall give unto 
him the ‘throne of his ‘father 
David: 

33 And ‘he shall reign over the 
house of Jacob for ever; and “of his 
"kingdom there shall be no end. 

34 Then said Mary unto the an- 
gel, How shall this be, seeing I 
know not a man? 

35 And the angel answered and 


said unto her, The Holy ee) ai 


shall come upon thee, “and the 
power of the Highest shall over- 
shadow thee: therefore also that 
xholy thing which shall be born of 
thee shall be called the »Son of 
God, 

36 And, behold, thy cousin Elisa- 
beth, she hath also conceived a son 
in her old age: and this is the sixth 
month with her, who was called 
barren. 

37 For 2with God nothing shall 
be impossible. 

38 And Mary said, Behold the 
handmaid of the Lord; be it unto 
me according to thy word. And/_. 

y / 


Mary visits Elisabeth. 


39 And Mary arose in those days, 
and went into the hill country with 
haste, into a city of Juda; 

40 And entered into the house of 
Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth. 

41 And it came to pass, that, 
when Elisabeth heard the saluta- 
tion of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled 
with the Holy Ghost: 

42 And she spake out with a loud 


1 43} 


voice, and said, Blessed art thou 
among women, and blessed is the 
fruit of thy womb. 

43 And whence is this to me, that 
the mother of my Lord should 
come to me? , 

44 For, lo, as soon as the voice of 
thy salutation sounded in mine 
ears, the babe leaped in my womb 
for joy. 

45 And blessed is she “that be- 
lieved: for there shall be a perform- 
ance of those things which were 
told her from the Lord. 


The maégnificat. (Cf. 1 Sam. 
Ze A-10:) 


46 And Mary said, “My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, 

47 And my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my 4Saviour, 

48 For he hath regarded the low 
estate of his handmaiden: for, be- 
hold, from henceforth all genera- 
tions shall call me blessed. 

49 For he that is mighty hath 
done to me great things; and ¢holy 
is his name. _ 

50 And his ‘mercy 1s on them 
that fear him from generation to 
generation. 

51 He hath shewed strength with 
his arm; he hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their 
hearts. 

52 He hath put down the mighty 
from their seats, and exalted them|” Gen-3.15; 


a John 13.13. 
6 v.38. 


¢1 Sam.2.1; 
Psa.34.2,3. 


d Rom.1.16, 
note. 


e Psa.111.9; 
Rev.4.8. 


f Gen.17.7; 
Ex.20.5,6; 
Psa.103.17. 

g Gen.17.19. 

h Gen.17.12. 

z v.13. 

j v.20. 


k Jehovah. 
Psa.106.48. 


1 Rom.3.24, 
note, 


in LkK.3.23,31; 


of low degree. jense : 
53 He hath filled the hungry with} Dan.9.24. 
good things; and the rich he hath 6 Geno's 


sent empty away. 
54 He hath holpen his servant Is-|» Rom.6.22. 

rael, in remembrance of his mercy; 
55 As he spake to our fathers, to 

Abraham, and to his seed for ever. 
56 And Mary abode with her 


q Sin. 
3.23, note. 


r Or, sun- 


about three months, and returned rising, Yas 
to her own house. Isa.11.1; 
‘ a Zech.3.8; 
Birth of John the Baptist. 6.12. 


597 Now Elisabeth’s full time came|B.c. 6] 
that she should be delivered; and] ‘ 
she brought forth a son. heeke 
58 And her neighbours and her igs 
cousins heard how the Lord had 
shewed great mercy upon her; and 
they rejoiced with her. 
59 And it came to pass, that on 
the eighth day they came to ‘cir- 
cumcise the child; and they called 
him Zacharias, after the name of 
his father. 
60 And his mother answered and 


said, Not so; but he shall be called 
John, 


1072 


Mt.1.1,6,16. 


Rom. 


61 And they said unto her, There 
is none of thy kindred that is called 
by this name. . 

62 And they made signs to his 
father, how he would have him 
called. lin 

63 And he asked for a writing 
table, and wrote, saying, His name 
is 7John. And they marvelled 
all. 

64 And his jmouth was opened 
immediately, and his tongue loosed, 
and he spake, and praised God. 

65 And fear came on all that 
dwelt round about them: and all 
these sayings were noised abroad 
throughout all the hill country of 
Judea 

66 And all they that heard them 
laid them up. in their hearts, say- 
ing, What manner of child shall this _ 
be! And the hand of the Lord was 
with him. 

67 And his father Zacharias was 
filled with the Holy Ghost, and 
prophesied, saying, 

68 Blessed be the *Lord God of 
Israel; for he hath visited and /re- 
deemed his people, 

69 And hath raised up an ¢horn 
of salvation for us in the “house of 
his servant David: 

70 As he spake “by the mouth of 
his holy prophets, which have been 
since the world began: 

71 That we should be ¢saved from 
our enemies, and from the hand of 
all that hate us: 

72 To perform the mercy prom- 
ised to our fathers, and to remem- 
ber his holy covenant; 

73 The °oath which he sware to 
our father Abraham, ( 

74 That he would grant unto us, 
that we being delivered out of the 
hand of our enemies might ?serve 
him without fear, 

75 In holiness and righteousness 
before him, all the days of our 
ife. 

76 And thou, child, shalt be called 
the prophet of the Highest: for 
thou shalt go before the face of the 
Lord to prepare his ways; 

77 To give knowledge of salvation 
unto his people by the remission of 
their ¢sins, 

78 Through the tender mercy of 

our God; whereby the ‘dayspring 
from on high hath visited us, 
_79 To give light to them that sit 
in darkness and in the shadow of 
Sdeath, to guide our feet into the 
way of peace. 

80 And the child grew, and waxed 


aa 


2 y ‘ 


St. LUKE. 


[2 26 


_strong in spirit, and was in the 
deserts till the day of his shewing 
unto Israel. 


CHAPTER 2. 


The birth of Jesus (Mt. 1. 18-25; 
2.1; cf. John 1. 14). 


Poe it came to pass in those 
days, that there went out a 
decree from Cesar Augustus, that 
all the 1¢world should be taxed. 

2 (And this taxing was first made 


when Cyrenius was governor of| 


Syria.) 

3 And all went to be taxed, every 
one into his own city. | 

4 And Joseph also went up from 
Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, 
into Judza, unto the city of David, 
which is called Bethlehem; (be- 
cause he wag’ of the house and lin- 
eage of David:) 

5 To be taxed with Mary his 
espoused wife, being great with 
child. 

6 And so it was, that, while they 
were there, the days were accom- 
plished that she should be deliv- 
ered. 

7 And ‘she brought forth her 
firstborn son, and wrapped him in 
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a 
manger; because there was no room 
for them in the inn. 


Adoration of the shepherds. 


8 And there were in the same 
country shepherds abiding in the 
field, keeping watch over their 
flock by night. 

9 And, lo, the ¢angel of the Lord 
came upon them, and the glory of 
_the Lord shone round about them: 
“and they were sore afraid. i 

10 And the angel said unto them, 
Fear not: for, behold, I bring you 
good ¢tidings of great joy, which 
shall be to all people. 

11 For unto you is born this day 
in the city of David a fSaviour, 
which is Christ the Lord. 

12 And this shall be a sign unto 
you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped 
jn swaddling clothes, lying in a 
manger. : 

13 And suddenly there was with 
the “angel a multitude of the hea- 
venly host praising God, and saying, 


BiCos: 


a oikou- 
mene = in- 
habited 
earth (Lk. 
2:3). 


b Mic.5.2; 
1 Sam.17.12. 


c Mt.1.25; 
Tsa.7.14. 


d Heb.1.4, 
note. 


e Gospel. vs. 
10.11; Lk.4. 
18. (Gen.12. 
1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 


f Rom.1.16, 
note. 


eg CEMt.10. 
34, note. 


h 2 Cor.5. 
18,20; 
Eph.2.14,18. 


t Lev.12.3; 
Gal.4.4,5; 
5.3. 


j Lk.1.31; 
Mt.1.21. 


k Sanctify, 
holy (per- 
sons). Lk.9. 
26. (Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


1 Jehovah. Ex. 
13.2,12. 


m Ex.13.12, 
16; Num.8.17. 


n Ley.12.8. 


o Righteous- 
ness. (Gen. 
6.9.) 


p Holy Spirit. 
vs.25,26,27, 
40; Lk.3.16, 
22. (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


1 Gr. oikoumene = “inhabited 


earth.” 


14 Glory to God in the highest, 
and on earth peace, “good will 
toward men. 

15 And it came to pass, as the 
dangels were gone away from them 
into heaven, the shepherds said one 
to another, Let us now go even unto 
Bethlehem, and see this thing which 
is come to pass, which the Lord 
hath made known unto us. 

16 And they came with haste, and 
found Mary, and Joseph, and the 
babe lying in a manger. 

17 And when they had seen it, 
they made known abroad the say- 


‘img which was told them concerning 


this child. 

18 And all they that heard it won- 
dered at those things which were 
told them by the shepherds. 

19 But Mary kept all these things, 
and pondered them in her heart. 

20 And the shepherds returned, 
glorifying and praising God for all 
the things that they had heard and 
seen, as it was told unto them. 


Circumcision of Jesus. 
(Ch Lies Iss») 


21 And when eight days were ac- 
complished ‘for the circumcising of 
the child, his name was called 
JJESUS, which was so named of 
the “angel before he was conceived 
in the womb. 

22 And when the “days of her 
purification according to the law of 
Moses. were accomplished, they 
brought him to Jerusalem, to pre- 
sent him to the Lord; 

23 (As it is written in the law of 
the ‘Lord, "Every male that open- 
eth the womb shall be called holy 
to the Lord;) 

24 And to offer a sacrifice accord- 
ing to that which is said in the law 
of the Lord, A “pair of turtledoves, 
or two young pigeons. 


Adoration and prophecy of 
Simeon. 


25 And, behold, there was a man 
in Jerusalem, whose name was 
Simeon; and the same man was 
2ojust and devout, waiting for the 
consolation of Israel: and the ?Holy 
Ghost was upon him. 

26 And it was revealed unto him 
by the Holy Ghost, that he should 


This passage is noteworthy as defining 


the usual N.T. use of oikoumene as the sphere of Roman rule at its greatest extent, 
that is, of the great Gentile world-monarchies (Dan. 2.,7.). That part of the earth 
is therefore peculiarly the sphere of prophecy. 


2 The O.T. righteousness. 


1073 


e 


Summary: In the O.T. “righteous” and “just” are 


2 27] | St. LUKE. } [2 se 
4a 40 And the child grew, and waxed 


not see death, before he had seen B.C 


the Lord’s Christ. strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: 

27 And he came by the Spirit into and the grace of God was upon 
the temple: and when the parents him. 
brought in the child Jesus, to do for \ 
him after the custom of the law, Jesus and his parents at the 

28 Then took he him up in his passover. 
arms, and blessed God, and said, 

29 Lord, now lettest thou thy ser- 41 Now his parents went to Jeru- 
vant depart “in peace, according to salem Jevery year at the feast of the 
thy word: passover. 

30 For mine eyes have seen thy 42 And when he was twelve years 
bsalvation, old, they went up to Jerusalem after 

31 Which thou hast prepared be- the custom of the feast. 
fore the face of all people; 43 And when they had fulfilled 


32 A light to lighten the ‘Gen-),3...57.1,2; |the days, as they returned, the 
tiles, and the glory of thy people| Rev.14.13. |child Jesus tarried behind in Jeru- 


Israel. eee salem; and Joseph and his mother 
33 And Joseph and his mother|’ 97"-*° |knew not of it. 

marvelled at those things which 44 But they, supposing him to 
were spoken of him. clsa.42.6,7- jhave been in the company, went a 
34 And Simeon blessed them, and), y.,.8.14: day’s journey; and they sought 


said unto Mary his mother, Behold,| Rom9.32, |him among their kinsfolk and ac- 
this child is set for the @fall and 33:,1 Seal. |quaintance. 

rising again of many in Israel; and rere pet. | 45 And when they found him not, 
for a sign which shall be spoken] 2.7, they turned back again to Jerusa- 
against; ee lem, seeking him. 

35 (Yea, a ‘sword shall pierce|’ Jom" 19-25. | 46’ And it came to pass, that after 
through thy own soul also,) ‘that! 1 Cor.11.19; [three days they found him in the 
the thoughts of many hearts may| 1 John 2.19. |temple, sitting in the midst of the 


be revealed. giTims.s, |@octors, both hearing them, and 
. asking them questions. 

Adoration of Anna. hRom.3.24, | 47 And all that heard him were 
36 And there was one Anna, aj 7°%° astonished at his understanding 
prophetess, the daughter of Phan-| i Mt.2.23. and answers. 
uel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of] . e 48 And when they saw him, they 
a great age, and had lived with an|/ eae SD were amazed: and his mother said 
husband seven years from her vir- “" junto him, Son, why hast thou 
ginity; k John 9.4. thus dealt with us? behold, thy 


37 And she was a widow of about} ; ;54.31.2,3; [father and I have sought thee sor- 


fourscore and four years, which de-| Coi.2.2,3. rowing. 

parted not from the temple, but 49 And he said unto them, How 

served God with fastings and is it that ye sought me? wist ye 

€prayers night and day. not that I must be “about my Fa- 

38 And she coming in that instant ther’s business? 

gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, 50 And they understood not the 

and spake of him to all them that saying which he spake unto 

looked for ‘redemption in Jeru- them. 

salem. 51 And he went down with them, 
Return towNerateths the and came to Nazareth, and was 


subject unto them: but his mother 


silent years. kept all these sayings in her 


39 And when they had performed heart. 
all things according to the law of 52 And Jesus increased in !wis- 
the Lord, they returned into Gali- dom and stature, and in favour with 
lee, to their own city ‘Nazareth. God and man. 


English words used to translate the Hebrew words yasher, “upright”; tsadiq 
“just”; tsidkah, “righteous.” In all of these words but one idea inheres: the 
Tighteous, or just, man is so called, because he is right with God ; and he is right 
with God because he has walked ‘‘in all the commandments and ordinances of the 
Lord blameless’? (Lk. 1. 6; Rom. 10. 5; Phil. 3.6). The O.T. righteous man was 
not sinless (Eccl, 7. 20), but one who, for his sins, resorted to the ordinances and 
offered in faith the required sacrifice (e.g. Lev. 4. 27-35). Cf. “Righteousness (N.T.),” 
Rom. 10. 10, mote, and Paul’s contrast, Phil. 3. 4-9. ; 


1074 


: 4% 


St. LUKE. 


[3 28 


“CHAPTER 3. 


The ministry of John the Bap- 
tist (Mt. 3. 1-12; Mk. 1. 1-8; 
John 1. 6-8, 15-36). 


Now in the fifteenth year of the 
reign of Tiberius Cesar, Pon- 
tius Pilate being governor of Judea, 
and ¢Herod being tetrarch of Gal- 
ilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch 
of Iturea and of the region of 
Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tet- 
rarch of Abilene, 

2 Annas and Caiaphas being the 
high priests, the word of God came 
unto John the son of Zacharias in 
the wilderness. 

3 ©And he came into all the coun- 
try about Jordan, preaching the 
baptism of “repentance for the re- 
Mission of ‘sins; 


4 As it is written in the book of|; 


the words of Esaias the ‘prophet, 
saying, The voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way 
of the Lord, make his paths 
straight. 

5 Every valley shall be filled, and 
every mountain and hill shall be 
brought low; and the crooked shall 
be made straight, and the rough 
ways shall be made smooth; | 

6 And all fiesh shall see the ‘sal- 
vation of God. 

7 Then said he to the multitude 
that came forth to be baptized of 
him, O /generation of vipers, who 
hath warned you to flee from the 
wrath to come? 

8 Bring forth therefore fruits wor- 
thy of #repentance, and begin not 
to say within yourselves, ‘We have 
Abraham to our father: for I say 
unto you, That God is able of these 
stones to raise up children unto 
Abraham. 

9 And now also the axe is laid 
unto the root of the trees: “every 
tree therefore which bringeth not 
forth good fruit is hewn down, and 
cast into the fire. 

10 And the people asked him, say- 
ing, *What shall we do then? 

11 He answereth and saith unto 
them, °He that hath two “coats, let 
him impart to him that hath none; 
and he that hath meat, let him do 
likewise. 

12 Then came also %publicans to 


A.D. 26. 


a Also v.19. 
Bee Mt.14.1, 


ref. 

6 John 11.49; 
18.13; Acts 
4.6. 


c¢Mt.3.1; 
Mk.1.4, 

d Repentance. 
vs.3,8. (Mt. 
3.2; Acts 17. 


30.) 
2 Sia: Rom. | 
23, note. 


f Isa.40.3-5. 
g Jehovah. vs. 
4-6. See Isa 


j Mt.12.34. 

k Repentance. 
vs.3,8; Lk.5. 
32. (Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 

1 Rom.9.6,8; 
Gal.3.29; 6. 


15. 

m Lk.13.5-9; 
Rev.21.8. 

n Acts 2.37,38; 
16.30. 


01 John 3.17. 
p Jas.2.15,17. 
q Lk.7.29; 
Mt.21.32. 
y Phil.4.11; 
1 Tim.6.8. 
s Or, allow- 
ance. 5 
t Or, in sus- 
ense. 


“1 Pet.3.21, 

v Holy Spirit. 
vs.16,22; 
Lk.4.1. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

w Mt.13.30. 

x Mt.14.1, ref, 

v Mt.11.2. 

z Mt.3.13-15. 

a Holy Spirit. 
Lk.4.1,14,18. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

bLit. This is 
my Son, the 
beloved, in 
whom I de- 
lighted. Cf, 
John 1.1,2; 
8.29; Mt. 
17.5. 


be baptized. and said unto him, 
Master, what shall we do? 

13 And he said unto them, Exact 
no more than that which is ap- 
pointed you. 

14 And the soldiers likewise de- 
manded of him, saying, And what 
shall we do? And he said unto 
them, Do violence to no man, nei- 
ther accuse any falsely; and be 
‘content with your ‘wages. 

15 And as the people were ‘in ex- 
pectation, and all men mused in 
their hearts of John, whether he 
were the Christ, or not; 

16 John answered, saying unto 
them all, I indeed “baptize you 


‘\with water; but one mightier than 
.|{I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes 


I am not worthy to unloose: he 
shall baptize you with the "Holy 
Ghost and with fire: 

17 Whose fan zs in his hand, and 
he will throughly: purge his fleor, 
and will “gather the wheat into his 
garner; but the chaff he will burn 
with fire unquenchable. 

18 And many other things in his 
exhortation preached he unto the 
people. 

19 But *Herod the tetrarch, being 
reproved by him for Herodias his 
brother Philip’s wife, and for all 
the evils which Herod had done, 

20 Added yet this above all, that 
he shut up 2John in prison. 


The baptism of Jesus (Mt. 3. 
13-17; Mk. 1. 9-11). 


21 Now when all the people were 
baptized, it came to pass, that 
zJesus also being baptized, and 
praying, the heaven was opened, 

22 And the *Holy Ghost de- 
scended in a bodily shape like a 
dove upon him, and a voice came 
from heaven, which said, "Thou art 
my beloved Son; in thee I am well 
pleased. 


The genealogy of Mary, mother 
of Jesus, 


23 And Jesus himself began to be 
about thirty years of age, being (as 
was supposed) the son of Joseph, 
which was the 1son of Heli, 


| 24 Which was the son of Mat- 


that, which was the son of Levi, 


which was the son of Melchi, 


1 In Matthew, where unquestionably we have the genealogy of Joseph, we are 
told (1. 16) that Joseph was the son of Jacob. 


called in Luke ‘“‘the son of Heli 
both of Jacob and of Heli. B 
that the natural explanation is 


1075 


In what sense, then, could he be 


2 He could notbe by natural generation the son 
But in Luke it is not said that Heli begat Joseph, so 
that Joseph was the son-in-law of Heli, who was, 


3 25] 


which was the son of Janna, which 
was the son of Joseph, 

25 Which was the son of Matta- 
thias, which was the son of Amos, 
which was the son of Naum, which 
was the son of Esli, which was the 
son of Nagge, 

26 Which was the son of Maath, 
which was the son of Mattathias, 
which was the son of Semei, which 
was the son of Joseph, which was 
the son of Juda, 

27 Which was the son of Joanna, 
which was the son of Rhesa, which 
was the son of Zorobabel, which 
was the son of Salathiel, which 
was the son of Neri, 

28 Which was the son of Melchi, 
which was the son of Addi, which 
was the son of Cosam, which was 
the son of Elmodam, which was 
the son of Er, 

29 Which was the son of Jose, 
which was the son of Eliezer, 
which was the son of Jorim, which 
was the son of Matthat, which 
was the son of Levi, 

30 Which was the son of Simeon, 
which was the son of Juda, which 
was the son of Joseph, which was 
the son of Jonan, which was the 
sor of Eliakim, 

31 Which was the son of Melea, 
which was the son of Menan, which 
was the son of Mattatha, which 
was the son of Nathan, which was 
the son of David, 

32 Which was the son of Jesse, 
which was the son of Obed, which 
was the son of Booz, which was 
the son of Salmon, which was the 
son of Naasson, 

33 Which was the son of Amina- 
dab, which was the son of Aram, 
which was the son of Esrom, which 
was the son of Phares, which was 
the son of Juda, 

34 Which was the son of Jacob, 
which was the son of Isaac, which 
was the son of Abraham, which 
was the son of Thara, which was 
the son of Nachor, 

35 Which was the son of Saruch, 
which was the son of Ragau, which 
was the son of Phalec, which was 
the son of Heber, which was the 
son of Sala, 

36 Which was the son of Cainan, 


Str. LUKE. 


a Arphaxad. 
Gen.10.22. 


6 Holy Spirit. 
vs.1,14,18; 
Lk.11.13. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


c See Mt.4.1, 
note. 


d Lk.9.12-17. 


e Jehovah. 
Deut.8.3. 


f Oikoumene 
= inhabited 
earth (Lk. 
22): 


g John 12.31; 
14.30; 2 Cor. 
4.4. 


h Satan, Lk. 
8.12. (Gen. 
3.1; Rev. 
20.10.) 


? Deut.6.13; 
10.20. 


j Jehovah, 
Deut.6.13. 


k Psa.91. 
11,12. 


( Heb.1.4, 
note. 


m After Sa. 
tan’s failure 
to tempt the 
Lord away 
from the 
Word, he 
seeks to 
tempt Him 
by it. He 
however mis- 
quotes by 
the omission 
of ‘in all thy 
ways” (Psa. 
91.11). The 
Lord’s 


were those 
marked out 
for Him in 
perfect de- 


[40 


which ‘was the son of *Arphaxad, 
which was the son of Sem, which 
was the son of Noe, which was the 
son of Lamech, 

37 Which was the son of Mathu- 
sala, which was the son of Enoch, 
which was the son of Jared, which 
was the son of Maleleel, which was 
the son of Cainan, 

38 Which was the son of Enos, 
which was the son of Seth, which 
was the son of Adam, which was 
the son of God. 


CHAPTER 4, 


The temptation of Christ (Mt. 4, 
1-11; Mk. 1. 12, 13). 


fe Jesus being full of the Holy 
Ghost returned from Jordan, 
and was led by the Spirit into the 
wilderness, 

2 Being forty. days ‘tempted of 
the devil. And in those days he did 
eat nothing: and when they were 
ended, he afterward hungered. 

3 And the devil said unto him, If 
thou be the Son of God, ¢command 
this stone that it be made bread. 

4 And Jesus answered him, say- 
ing, It is written, That man shall 
not live by bread alone, but by 
every word of “God. 

5 And the devil, taking him up 
into an high mountain, shewed unto 
him all the kingdoms of the world 
in a moment of time. 

6 And the devil said unto him, 
All this power will I give thee, and 
the glory of them: for that is 
&delivered unto me; and to whom- 
soever I will I give it. 

7 If thou therefore wilt worship 
me, all shall be thine. ; 

8 And Jesus answered and said 
unto him, Get thee behind me, /Sa- 
tan: for it is written, ‘Thou shalt 
worship the /Lord thy God, and 
him only shalt thou serve. 

9 And he brought him to Jerusa- 
lem, and set him ona pinnacle of the 
temple, and said unto him, If thou 
be the Son of God, cast thyself 
down} from hence: 

10 For itis written, *He shall give 
his ‘angels charge over thee, mto, 
keep thee: 

11 And in their hands they shall 


like himself, a descendant of David. 
Heli’’ (“‘son” is not in the Greek, but 


in accord with Jewish usage (cf. 1 


1076 


That he should in that case be called “son of 
rightly supplied by the translators) would be 
Sam. 24 16). 
evitable that in Luke we have Mary’s genealogy; 
because espoused to Heli’s daughter, 
father, Heli, was descended from David. 


The conclusion is therefore in- 
and Joseph was ‘“‘son of Heli” 


The genealogy in Luke is Mary’s, whose 


4 12] 


~ bear thee up, lest at any time thou 
dash thy foot against a stone. 

12 And Jesus answering said unto 
him, It is said, ¢Thou shalt not 
tempt the Lord thy God. 

13- And when the devil had ended 
all the temptation, he departed 
from him for a season. 


Jesus returns to Galilee (Mt. 4. 
12-16; Mk. 1. 14). 


14 And Jesus returned in the 
“power of the Spirit into Galilee: 
and there went out a “fame of him 
through all the region round about. 

15 And he taught in their syna- 
gogues, being glorified of all. 


Jesus in the synagogue at 
Nazareth. 


16 And he lcame to ¢Nazareth, 
where he had been brought up: and, 
as his custom was, ‘he went into 
the synagogue on the sabbath day, 
and stood up for to read. 

17 And there was delivered unto 
him the book of the prophet Esaias. 
And when he had opened the book, he 
found the place whereit waswritten, 

18 The Spirit of the “Lord is upon 
me, because he hath anointed me 
to preach the ‘gospel to the poor; 
he hath sent me to heal the broken- 
hearted, to preach deliverance to 
the captives, and recovering of 
sight to the blind, to set at liberty 
them that are bruised, 

19 To preach the 2acceptable year 
of the JLord. 

20 And he closed the book, and he 
gave it again to the minister, and 
sat down. And the eyes of all 
them that were in the synagogue 

were fastened on him. 
~ 21 And he began to say unto 
them, This day is this scripture ful- 
filled in your ears. 

22 And all bare him witness, and 
wondered at the “gracious words 
which proceeded out of his mouth. 
And they said, /Is not this Joseph’s 
son? 

23 And he said unto them, Ye will 
surely say unto me this proverb, 
Physician, heal thyself: whatso- 
ever we have heard done in Caper- 
naum, do also here in thy country. 


St. LUKE. 


A.D. 27. 


a Deut.6.16. 


b Jehovah. 
Deut.6.16. 


cv.1; Mt.4.12. 
d Mt.4.24. 
e Mt.13.54. 


f v.15; Mk. 
1.21; John 
18.20. 


g Inspiration. 
vs.17-21,27; 


(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


hk Adonai Je- 
hovah, Isa. 
61.1. 


1 Gospel. Lk.7. 
22. (Gen.12.1- 
3; Rev.14.6.) 


j Jehovah. 
Isa.61.1,2; 
58.6. 


k Psa.45.23 ) 
John 7.46. 


1 Mt.13.55. 
m John 4.44. 


n 1 Ki.17.9; 
18.1. 


o 2 Ki.5.1,14. 
> John 8.37,59; 
10.31,39. 


q John 8.26,28, 
38,47; 12.49; 
cf.Lk.8.25; 
v.36. 


r Mk.1.23. 
s Cf.v.34, Lc. 


¢ Miracles 
(N.T.). vs. 
33-36,38-40, 
41; Lk.5.3-8. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 


u V.32; Lk.8. 
25; John 8.26. 


v vs.14,15; 
ME.1.28,45. 


[4 3? 


24 And he said, Verily I say unto 
you, “No prophet is accepted in his 
own country. 

25 But I tell you of a truth, many 
widows were in Israel in the ”days 
of Elias, when the heaven was shut 
up three years and six months, 
when great famine was throughout 
all the land; 

26 But unto none of them was 
Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city 


_|of Sidon, unto a woman that was 


a widow. 

_27_And many lepers were in Israel 
in the time of Eliseus the prophet; 
and none of them was cleansed, 
°saving Naaman the Syrian. 

28 And all they in the synagogue, 
when they heard these things, were 
filled with wrath, 

29 And rose up, and thrust him 
out of the city, and led him unto 
the brow of the hill whereon their 
city was built, that they might cast 
him down headlong. 

30 But he passing through the 
midst of them went his way, 


Jesus goes to Capernaum, and 
casts out demons (Mk. 1. 23-26). 


31 And came down to Capernaum, 
a city of Galilee, and taught them 
on the sabbath days. 

32 And they were astonished at 
his doctrine: for ¢his word was 
with power. 

33 And in the *synagogue there 
was a man, which had a spirit of an 
Sunclean devil, and cried out with 
a loud voice, 

34 Saying, Let us alone; what 
have we to do with thee, thou Jesus 
of Nazareth? art thou come to 
destroy us? I know thee who thon 
art; the Holy One of God. 

35 And Jesus rebuked him, say- 
ing, Hold thy peace, and come out 
of him. And when the devil had 
thrown him in the midst, ‘he came 
out of him, and hurt him not. 

36 And they were all amazed, and 
spake among themselves, saying, 
“What a word is this! for with au- 
thority and power he commandeth 
the unclean spirits, and they come 
out. 


37 And the *fame of him went out 


1 Our Lord visited Nazareth twice after beginning His public ministry. See Mt. 


13. 54-58; Mk. 6. 1-6. 


2 A comparison with the passage quoted, Isa. 61. 1, 2, affords an instance of the 


exquisite accuracy of Scripture. 


Jesus stopped at, ‘‘the acceptable year of the 


Lord,” which is connected with the first advent and the dispensation of grace (Gen. 


3. 15; Acts 1. 11, note) 


: “the day of vengeance of our God” belongs to the secand 


advent (Deut. 30. 3; Acts 1. 11, note) and judgment. 


1077 


4 38] 


into every place of the country 
round about. 


Jesus heals Peter’s  wife’s 
mother, and many others 
(Mt. 8. 14-17; Mk. 1. 29-38). 


38 And he arose out of the syna- 
gogue, and entered into Simon’s 
house. And ¢Simon’s wife’s mother 
was taken with a great fever; and 
they besought him for her. 

39 And he stood over her, and re- 
buked the fever; and it left her: 
and immediately she arose and 
‘ministered unto them. 

40 Now when the ‘sun was set- 
ting, all they that had any sick 
with divers diseases brought them 
unto him; and he laid his hands on 
every one of them, and healed 
them. 

41 And devils also came out of 
many, crying out, and saying, Thou 
art Christ the Son of God. ¢And| Mt.8.8. 
he rebuking them suffered them), yy;-sctes 
not to speak: for they knew that] a.T.) 


a Mt.8.14; 
Mx.1.29. 


5 L&.8.2,3. 


c Mt.8.16,17; 
ME.1.32-34. 


d Mxk.1.34. 


e Mt.10.7; 
Mk.1.38. 


f Mt.4.18. 
g Mt.13.2. 
hk John 21.6. 
¢ John 21.3, 
j Psa.33.9; 


. vs. 

he was Christ. 3-8,12-15, 

42 And when it was day, he de- Pitihe rs 
parted and went into a desert place:| 8.2,3; Acts 
and the people sought him, andj 28.8,9.) 
came unto him, and stayed him,))\_ 
that he should not depart from 
them. m John 21.7. 


43 And he said unto them, I must}, >... Rom3 
preach the kingdom of God to other|" $i"nese > 
Cities also: ‘for therefore am I sent. 


44 And he preached in the syna-|° ME4-195 
gogues of Galilee. 
p Mt.4.22; 19. 
CHAPTER 5. 35; 10:28:31, 
The miraculous draught of 59-62; John 
fishes. (Cf. John 21. 6-8.) 12.265 14143 
A 13.14; 
/aNbs it came to pass, that, as the SARE 
people pressed upon him to] Mk.1.40-45. 
hear the word of God, he stood by 7 Tielenke 
‘the lake of Gennesaret, Tiowing the 


2 And saw two ships standing by 
the lake: but the fishermen were 
gone out of them, and were wash- 
ing their nets. 

3 And he entered into one of the 
ships, which was Simon’s, and 
prayed him that he would thrust 
out a little from the land. And he 
sat down, and Staught the people 
out of the ship. 

4 Now when he had left speaking, 
he said unto Simon, Launch out 
into the deep, and “let down your 
nets for a draught. 

5S And Simon answering said unto 
him, Master, we have ‘toiled all the 
night, and have taken nothing: 


to heal, 
seems to 


willingness. 
s Lev.14.4. 
¢ Mt.14.23; 


_—— 


St. LUKE. 


question His 


[5 18 
nevertheless Jat thy word I will 
let down the net. y 

6 And when they: had this done, 
they “inclosed a great multitude of” 
fishes: and their net brake. : 

7 And they beckoned unto their 
partners, which were in the other 
ship, that they should come and 
help them. And they came, and 
filled both the ships, so that they 
‘began to sink. 

8 When Simon Peter saw it, “he 
feli down at Jesus’ knees, saying, 
Depart from me; for I am a “sinful 
man, O Lord. 

9 For he was astonished, and all 
that were with him, at the draught 
of the fishes which they had taken: 

10 And so was also James, and 
John, the sons of Zebedee, which 
were partners with Simon. And 
Jesus said unto Simon, °Fear not; 
from henceforth thou shalt catch 
men. 

11 And when they had brought 
their ships to land, they ?forsook 
all, and followed him. 


| Jesus heals a Ieper (Mt. 8. 2-4; 
Mk, 1. 40-44). 


12 And it came to pass, when he 
was in a certain city, behold a man 
full of “leprosy: who seeing Jesus 
fell on his face, and besought him, 
saying, Lord, “if thou wilt, thou 
canst make me clean. 

13. And he put forth Ais hand, and 
touched him, saying, I will; be thou 
clean. And immediately the lep- 


27; Mk.8.34, |rosy departed from him. 


14 And he charged him to tell no 
man: but go, and shew thyself to the 
priest, and offer for thy ‘cleansing, 
according as Moses commanded, 
for a testimony unto them. 

15 But so much the more went 
there a fame abroad of him: and 
great multitudes came together to 


Lord's power |hear, and to be healed by him of 


their infirmities. 
16 And he withdrew himself into 
the wilderness, ‘and prayed. 


A paralytic healed (Mt. 9. 2-8: 
Mk. 2. 1-12). 


17 And it came to pass on a cer- 
tain day, as he was teaching, that 
there were Pharisees and doctors of 
the law sitting by, which were come 
out of every town of Galilee, and 
Judea, and Jerusalem: and the 
power.of the Lord was present to 
heal them. 

18 And, behold, men brought in a 
bed a man which was taken witha 


i 


m1. ~ 


5 19] 


Sr. LUKE. 


[6 § 


palsy: and they sought means to] _ A.D. 31. 32 I came not to call the right- 
bring him in, and to lay him before eous, but °sinners to ’repentance. 


him, 

19 And when they could not find 
by what way they might bring him 
in “because of the multitude, they 
went upon the housetop, and let 
him down through the tiling with 
his couch into the midst before 
Jesus. 

20 And when he saw “their faith, 
he said unto him, Man, thy ¢sins 
are forgiven thee. 

21 And the scribes and the Phari- 
sees began to reason, saying, Who 
is this which speaketh “blasphe- 
mies? JWho can forgive sins, but 
God alone? 

22 Butwhen Jesus perceived their 


thoughts, he answering said unto 


them, What reason ye in your 
hearts? 

23 Whether is easier, to say, Thy 
sins be forgiven thee; or to say, 
Rise up and walk? 

24 But that ye may &know that 
the Son of man hath power upon 
earth to forgive sins, (he said unto 
the sick of the palsy,) “I say unto 
thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, 
and go into thine house. 

25 And immediately he rose up 
before them, and took up that 
whereon he lay, and departed to 
his own house, ‘glorifying God. 

26 And they were all amazed, and 
they ‘glorified God, and were filled 
with fear, saying, We have seen 
strange things to day. 


The call of Matthew (Mt. 9. 9; 
Mk, 2. 13, 14). 


27 And after these things he went 
forth, and saw a publican, named 
Levi, sitting at the receipt of cus- 
tom: and he said unto him, *Follow 


me. 

28 And he left all, rose up, and 
followed him. 

29 And Levi made him a ’great 
feast in his own house: and there 
was a great company of publicans 
and of others that sat down with 
them. 


Jesus answers the scribes and 
Pharisees (Mt. 9. 10-17; Mk. 2. 
16-22). 


30 But their scribes and Pharisees 
murmured against his disciples, 
saying, “Why do ye eat and drink 
with publicans and *sinners? 

31 And Jesus answering said unto 
them, They that are whole need not 
a physician; but they that are sick. 


av.15; Mt. 
13.2. 


6 Mt.15.30; 
17.17. 


c MK.2.5. 


d Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


e John 10.33; 
Mt.26.65. 


f Lk.7.49; 
John 9.31. 


g Acts 2.22. 


h Psa.33.9; 
Mt.28.18, 


7 Lk.17.15,18; 
Acts 3.8. 


7 Lk.7.16. 


11; 9.23,59- 
62; John 12. 
26; 14.15; 21. 
19,22. 

21 Mt.9.10; 
Mk.2.15. 

m Lk.7.34; 
15.2. 

n Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


o Rom.5.6,8; 
1 Tim.1.15. 


p Repentance. 
Lk.10.13 
(Mt.3.2; 

Acts 17.30.) 

gq Lk.7.33. 

ry Lk.7.34. 

s John 3.29. 


t John 16.6, 
20,22. 


u Parables 


(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 


vi.e. wine- 
skins. 


w Lk.14.1-6. 
x 1 Sam.21.6. 


y Ex.25.30, 
note. 


z Mt.12.8; 
28 


1079 


33 And they said unto him, Why 
do the disciples of John fast often, 
and make prayers, and likewise 
the disciples of the Pharisees; but 
‘thine eat and drink? 

34 And he said unto them, Can 
ye make the children of the bride- 
chamber fast, while ‘the bride- 
groom is with them? 

35 But the days will come, when 
the ‘bridegroom shall be taken 
away from them, and then shall 
they fast in those days. 


Parables of the garment and 
bottles (Mt. 9.16, 17; Mk. 2.21, 22). 


36 And he spake also a “parable 
unto them; No man putteth a piece 
of a new garment upon an old; if 
otherwise, then both the new mak- 
eth a rent, and the piece that was 
taken out of the new agreeth not 
with the old. 

37 And no man putteth new wine 
into old "bottles; else the new wine 
will burst the bottles, and be spilled, 
and the bottles shall perish. 

38 But new wine must be put into 
new bottles; and both are pre- 
served. 

39 Noman also having drunk old 
wine straightway desireth new: for 
he saith, The old is better. 


CHAPTER 6. 


Jesus and the sabbath (Mt. 12. 
1-8; Mk. 2. 24-28). 


Age it came to pass on the sec- 
ond sabbath after the first, 
that he went through the corn 
fields; and his disciples plucked the 
ears of corn. and did eat, rubbing 
them in their hands. 

2 And certain of the Pharisees 
said unto them, Why do ye that 
which is not “lawful to do on the 
sabbath days? 

3 And Jesus answering them said, 
Have ye not read so much as this, 
what *David did, when himself was 
an hungred, and they which were 
with him; 

4 How he wert into the house of 
God, and did take and eat the 
yshewbread, and gave also to them 
that were with him; which it is not 
lawful to eat but for the priests 
alone? 

5 And he said unto them, *That 
the Son of man is Lord also of the 


sabbath. 


6 6] 


The withered hand healed (Mt.|- 
12. 9-14; Mk. 3. 1-6). 


fp And it came to pass also on an- 
other sabbath, that he “entered into 
the synagogue and taught: and 
there was a man whose right hand 
was withered. 

And the scribes and Pharisees 
watched him, whether he would 
heal on the sabbath day; that they 
might find an “accusation against 
him. 

8 But he ‘knew their thoughts, 
and said to the man which had the 
withered hand, Rise up, and stand 
forth in the midst. And he arose 
and stood forth. 

9 Then said Jesus unto them, I 
will ask you one thing; 2Is it law- 


a Mk.1.21; 
Lk.4.15,16; 
John 18.20. 


b Lk.20.20. 
¢ John 2.25, 
d Mk.3.4. 


e Miracles 


ful on the sabbath days to do good, aN. aes oe 6 
or to do evil? to save life, or to de-| 39° Games. 
stroy it? Acts 28.8,9.) 
10 And looking round about upon 
them all, he said unto the man,|/Ps2-2-2- 
Stretch forth thy hand. And hel, mr3.6. 
did so: “and his hand was restored : 
whole as the other. B tea 
11 And they were filled with fmad- 
ness; Sand communed one with an-| i E%ction ‘ 
other what they might do to Jesus. Jota 15.16. 
Beut.7.6; 
The twelve chosen (Mt. 10. 2-4;} 1 Pet.1.2.) 
Mk. 3. 13-19). jMt4.25; 
MK.3.7,8. 


12 And it came to pass in those 
days, that he went out into al’ Bea ee 
‘mountain to pray, and continued! Lig.44.47." 
all night in prayer to God. 

13 And when it was day, he called] ’ L«-8.46. 
unto him his disciples: and of} m Lx.16.25. 
them he ‘chose twelve, whom also 
he named apostles; 

14 Simon, (whom he also named 
Peter,) and Andrew his brother, 
James and John, Philip and Bar- 
tholomew, 

15 Matthew and Thomas, James 
the son of Alpheus, and Simon 
called Zelotes, 

16 And Judas the brother of 
James, and Judas Iscariot, which 
also was the traitor. 

17 And he came down with them, 
and stood in the plain, and the 
company of his disciples, and a 
great Jmultitude of people out of all 
Judea and Jerusalem, and from the 
sea coast of Tyre ahd Sidon, which 
came to hear him, and to be healed 
of their diseases; 

18 And they that were vexed with 
unclean spirits: and they were 
healed. 

19 And the 


n Rom.12.20. 
o Rom,12.14. 


b Lk.23.34; 
Acts 7.60. 


qRom.13.10. 
r 1 John 3.17. 


s Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


tMt.5.46,47. 


whole multitude 
1080 


Sr. LUKE. 


sought to *touch him: for there 
went ‘virtue out of him, and healed 
them all. 


The beatitudes. 
(Mt. 5. 3-12.) 


20 And he lifted up his eyes on his 
disciples, and said, Blessed be ye 
poor: for your’s is the kingdom of 
God. 

21 Blessed are ye that hunger 
now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed 
are ye that weep now: for ye shall 
laugh. 

22 Blessed are ye, when men shall 
hate you, and when they shall sep- 
arate you from their company, 
and shall reproach you, and cast 
out your name as evil, for the Son. 
of man’s sake. 

23 Rejoice ye in that day, and 
leap for joy: for, behold, your re- 
ward is great in heaven: for in the 
like manner did their fathers unto 
the prophets. 

24 But woe unto you that are 
ich! for “ye have received your 
consolation. 

25 Woe unto you that are full! 
for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you 
that laugh now! for ye shall mourn 
and weep. 

26 Woe unto you, when all men 
shall speak well of you! for so did 
their fathers to the false prophets. 

27 But I say unto you which hear, 
"Love your enemies, do good to 
them which hate you, 

28 °Bless them that curse you, 
and ?pray for them which despite- 
fully vse you. 

29 And unto him that smiteth 
thee on the one cheek offer also the 
other; and him that ¢taketh away 
thy cloke forbid not #o take thy 
coat also. 

30 Give to eyery man that asketh 
of thee; and of him that taketh 
away thy goods ask them not again. 

31 And as ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye also to 
them likewise. 

32 For if ye love them which love 
you, what thank have ye? for Ssin- 
ners also ‘love those that love 
them. 

33 And if ye do good to them 
which do good to you, what thank 
have ye? for sinners also do even 
the same. j 

34 And if ye lend to them of 
whom ye hope to receive, what 
thank have ye? for sinners also lend 
to sinners, to receive as much again. 

35 But love ye your enemies, and 


6 36} 


Sr. LUKE. 


[7 12 


Dibel aupeik (ochenmahes eer Gracey tae Strode 


®do good, and lend, hoping for noth- 
ing again; and your reward shall be 
great, and ye shall be the children 
of the Highest: ‘for he is kind unto 
the unthankful and fo the evil. 

36 ¢Be ye therefore merciful, as 
your Father also is merciful. 

37 ¢Judge not, and ye shall not be 
judged: condemn not, and ye shall 
not be condemned: fforgive, and ye 
shall be forgiven: 

38 &Give, and it shall be given 
unto you; good measure, pressed 
down, and shaken together, and 
Tunning over, shall men give into 
your bosom. “For with the same 
measure that ye mete withal it shall 
be measured to you again. 

39 And he spake a ‘parable unto 
them, JCan the blind lead the blind? 
shall they not both fall into the 
ditch? 

40 *#The disciple is not above his 
master: but every one that is per- 
fect shall be as his master. 

41 And why /beholdest thou the 
mote that is in thy brother’s eye, 
but perceivest not the beam that 
is in thine own eye? 

42 Either how canst thou say to 
thy brother, Brother, let me pull 
out the mote that is in thine eye, 
when thou thyself beholdest not the 
beam that is in thine own eye? 
Thou hypocrite, cast out “first the 
beam out of thine own eye, and then 
shalt thou see clearly to pull out the 
mote that is in thy brother’s eye. 

43 For a “good tree bringeth not 
forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a 
rorrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 

44 For every tree is known by 
his own fruit. For of thorns men 
do not gather figs, nor of a bramble 
bush gather,they grapes. 

45 A good man out of the good 
treasure of his heart bringeth forth 
that which is good; and an evil 
man out of the evil treasure of his 
heart bringeth forth that which is 
evil: for of the abundance of the 
heart 2his mouth speaketh. 

46 And why call ye me, %Lord, 
Lord, and do not the things which 
I say? 


Parable of the house built on 
the rock (Mt. 7. 24-27). 


47 Whosoever cometh to me, and 
heareth my sayings, and ‘doeth 
them, I will shew you to whom he 
is like: 

48 ‘He is like a man which built 
an house, and digged ‘deep, and laid 
the foundation on a “rock: and 


a Heb.13.16. 

6 Rewards. 
1-Cor.3.8. 
(Dan.12.3; 
1 Cor.3.14.) 

c Mt.5.45. 

d Eph.4.32; 

1 Pet.3.9. 

e Rom.14.4, 
1 Cor.4.5. 
f Mt.18.21,22, 
g Prov.28.27; 
2 Cor.8.1, 

note. 

h Law (of 
Christ). 
vs.27-38; 
John 13.34 


i Parables 
(N.7.)- 
vs.39,47-49. 
(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 

j Mt.15.14; 
23.16. 

k Mt.10.24; 
John 15.20. 

1Mt.7.3. 

m Gal.6.4. 


n Mt.7.17,18; 
12.33; Jas.3. 
12. 


o Mt.12.33,34. 

p Prov.15.2,28; 
16.23; 18.21; 
Jas.3.10. 

q Mt.25.11,12; 
Lk.13.25; 
cf. 1 Cor.12.3. 

r Mt.7.24-27; 
John 14.21; 
Jas.1.22-25. 

s Parables 
(N.T.). vs.47- 
49; Lk.7. 
41-48. (Mt.5. 
13-16; Lk.21. 
29-31.) 

tMt.13.5. 

u 1 Cor.3.11. 

v Psa.32.6. 

w1 John 2.17. 

x Prov.1.29-31. 

y Mt.8.5-13. 

z Acts 10.22. 

a Psa.33.9; 107. 
20; Lk.4.36; 
John 5.24; 
11.43. 

b Mt.15.28. 

\c Miracles 

(N.T.). 


(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9:) 


1081 


when the *flood arose, the stream 
beat vehemently upon that house, 
and “could not shake it: for it was 
founded upon a rock. 

49 But he that heareth, and doeth 
not, is like a man that without a 
foundation built an house upon the 
earth; against which the stream did 
beat vehemently, and immediately 
it fell; and the *ruin of that house 
was great 


CHAPTER 7. 


The centurion’s servant healed 
Mt. 8. 5-13). 


OW when he had ended all his | 
sayings in the audience of the 
people, he entered into Capernaum. 

2 And a certain Ycenturion’s ser- 
vant, who was dear unto him, was 
sick, and ready to die. 

3) And when he heard of Jesus, he 
sent unto him the elders of the Jews, 
beseeching him that he would come 
and heal his servant. 

4 And when they came to Jesus, 

they besought him instantly, say- 
ing, That he was “worthy for whom 
he should do this: 

5 For he loveth our nation, and 
he hath built us a synagogue. 

6 Then Jesus went with them. 
And when he was now not far from 
the house, the centurion sent friends 
to him, saying unto him, Lord, trou- 
ble not thyself: for I am not worthy 
bea thou shouldest enter under my 
roof: . 

7 Wherefore neither thought I 
myself worthy to come unto thee. 
but ¢say in a word, and my servant 
shall be healed. 

8 For I also am a man set under 
authority, having under me soldiers, 
and I say unto one, Go, and he go- 
eth; and to another, Come, and he 
cometh; and to my servant, Do 
this, and he doeth 7¢. 

9 When Jesus heard these things, 
he Smarvelled at him, and turned 
him about, and said unto the people , 
that followed him, I say unto you, 
I have not found so great faith, no, 
not in Israel. 

10 And they that were sent, re- 
turning to the house, found the ser- 
vant ‘whole that had been sick, 


The widow’s son raised. 


11 And it came to pass the day 
after, that he went into a city called 
Nain; and many of his disciples 


went ‘with him, and much people. 
12 Now when he came nigh to the 


7 13] 


gate of the city, behold, there was 
a dead man carried out, the only 
son of his mother, and she was a 
widow: and much people of the 
city was with her. 

13 And when the Lord saw her, he 
had compassion on her, and said 
unto her, “Weep not. 

14. And he came and touched the 
bier: and they that bare Aim stood 
still. And he said, Young man, I 
say unto thee, Arise. 

15 And ¢he that was dead ‘sat up, 
and began to speak. And he deliv- 
ered him to his mother. 

16 And there came a fear on all: 
and they “glorified God, saying, 
That a great prophet is risen up 
among us; and, “That God hath 
visited his people. 

17 And this rumour of him went 
forth throughout all Judea, and 
throughout al! the region round 
about. 

18 And the disciples of John 
fshewed him of all these things. 


John the Baptist sends disciples 
to question Jesus (Mt. 11. 2-6). 


19 And John calling unto him 
two of his disciples sent them to 
Jesus, saying, Art thou he that 
should come? or look we for 
another? 

20 When the men were come unto 
him, they said, John Baptist hath 
sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou 
he that should come? or look we 
for another? 

21 And in that. same hour he 
cured many oftheir infirmities and 
plagues, and of evil spirits; and 
unto many that were blind he 
gave sight. 

22 Then Jesus answering said unto 
them, Go your way, and &tell John 
what things ye have seen and 
heard; how that the blind see, the 
lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, 
the deaf hear, the "dead are raised, 
to the poor the ‘gospel is preached, 

23 And Jblessed is he, whosoever 
shall not be offended in me. 


Jesus’ testimony to John the 
Baptist (Mt. 11. 7-15). 


24 And when the messengers of 
John were departed, he began to 
speak unto the people concerning 
John, What went ye out into 
the ‘wilderness for to see? ™A reed 
shaken with the wind? 

25 But what went ye out for to 
see? A man ciothed in “soft rai- 
ment? Behold, they which are 


St. LUKE. 


A.D. 31. ° 


a Lk.8.52; 
John 11.35, 


b Mt.11.5; 
Lk.8.54,55; 
John 11.44. 


c Resurrec- 
tion. vs.11- 
15; Lk.14.13, 
14. (Job 19. 

on 1 Cor.15. 


d LK.5.26. 
e Lk.1.68. 


f Mt.11.2. 


g v.21; 
Isa.61.1-3, 
h vs.14,15. 


4 Gospel. 
Lk.9.6. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


j Mt.16.17; 
1 Pet.2.8. 


k Having gent- 
ly removed 
His servant’s 
doubt, the 
Lord bears 
witness to 
him before 
others: He 
knows when 
to reprove, 
and where, 
and when, to 
praise. 


7Mt.3.1. 
m Mt.11.7-11. 


n Mt.3.4; 
ME.1.6. 


o Mal.3.1, 
p See Mt.11.11. 


q Mt.3.6,11; 21. 
32; Lk.3.12. 


r Mt.21.23-25. 
sLk.1.15. 


t v.36; 
Lk.15.2. 


u Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


v 1 Cor.1.21-24. 

w Lk.14.1, 

xi.e. in the 
sense of 
unchaste. 

y Mk.14,3. 

2 Isa.52.7. 


@1 Cor.11.15. 
1082 


: oa 


gorgeously apparelled, and live deli- 


* 


‘\cately, are in kings’ courts. i 


26 But what went ye out for to 
see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto 
you, and much more than a prophet. 

27 This is he, of whom it is writ- 
ten, °Behold, I send my messenger 
before thy face, which shall prepare 
thy way before thee. 

28 For I say unto you, Among 
those that are born of women there 
is not a greater prophet than John 
the Baptist: but ?he that is least in 
the kingdom of God is greater 
than he. 

29 And all the people that heard 
him, and the publicans, justified 
God, being %baptized with the bap- 
tism of John. 


Jesus exposes the unreason of 
unbelief (Mt. 11. 16-19). 


30 But the *Pharisees and law- 
yers rejected the counsel of God 
against themselves, being not bap- 
tized of him. 

31 And the Lord said, Whereunto 
then shall I liken the men of this 
Banon: and to what are they 

e 

32 They are like unto children sit- 
ting in the marketplace, and calling 
one to another, and saying, We 
have piped unto you, and ye have 
not danced: we have mourned to 
you, and ye have not wept. 

33 For Johr the Baptist came 
Sneither eating bread nor drinking 
wine; and ye gay, He hath a devil. 
_34 The Son of man is come ‘eat- 
ing and drinking; and ye say, 
Behold a gluttonous man, and a 
winebibber, a friend of publicans 
and “sinners! 

35 But *wisdom is justified of all 
her children. 


Jesus in the Pharisee’s house. 


36 And one of the “Pharisees de- 
sired him that he would eat with 
him. And he went into the Phari- 
see’s house, and sat down to meat. 

37 And, behold, a woman in the 
city, which was a “sinner, when 
she knew that Jesus sat at meat in 
the Pharisee’s house, brought an 
yalabaster box of ointment, 

38 And stood at his “feet behind 
him weeping, and began to wash 
his feet with tears, and did wipe 
them with the hairs of her head, 
and kissed his feet, and anointed 
them with the ointment. 

39 Now when the Pharisee which 
had bidden him saw it, he spake 


ah Fo 
“ue 


7 40] 
within himself, saying, ?This man, 
if he were a prophet, would have 
known who and what manner of 
woman this 1s that toucheth him: 
for she is a sinner. 

40 And Jesus answering said unto 
him, Simon, I have somewhat to 
say unto thee. And he saith, Mas- 
ter, say on. 


Parable of the creditor and two 
debtors, 


41 >There was a certain creditor 
which had two debtors: the one 
owed five hundred pence, and the 
other fifty. 

42 And when they had nothing to 
pay, he ‘frankly forgave them both. 
Tell me therefore, which of them 
will love him most? 

43 Simon answered and said, I 
suppose that’ he, to whom he for- 
gave most. And he said unto him, 
Thou hast rightly judged. 

44 And he turned to the woman, 
and said unto !Simon, Seest thou 
this woman? I entered into thine 
house, thou gavest me no water for 
my feet: but she hath washed my 
feet with tears, and wiped them 
with the hairs of her head. 

45 Thou gavest me no kiss: but 
this woman since the time I came 
in hath not ceased to kiss my feet. 

46 2My head with oil thou didst 
not anoint: but this woman hath 
anointed my feet with ointment. 

47 Wherefore I say unto thee, 
Her sins, which are many, are “for- 
given; for she loved much: but to 
whom little is forgiven, the same 
loveth little. 

48 And he said unto her, Thy sins 
are forgiven. 

49 And they that sat at meat 
with him began to say within them- 
selves, {Who is this that forgiveth 
sins also? 

50 And he said to the woman, 
Thy faith hath saved thee; go in 
peace. 


CHAPTER 8. 


Jesus preaches and heals in 
Galilee. 


A it came to pass afterward, 
that he went ‘throughout 


1 See Jas. 2. 14-26. 
He points to her works, for only 


her faith; but when He would send the wo 
See Tit. 2. 14; 3. 4-8. 


faith, not her works. 


liever his own ground of assurance, 
(Isa..32. 


Mt. 7. 22, 23). See “Assurance” 


St. LUKE. 


A.D. 31. 


a Lk.15.2; 
19.7. 


b Parables 
(N.T.). vs.41- 
48; Lk.8.4-15. 
(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 


c Rom.5.15,16; 
Eph.1.7. 


d Psa.23,5. 


e Forgiveness. 
vs.47-49; Lk. 
17.3,4. (Lev. 
4.20; Mt.26. 
28.) 


f Mt.9.3-6. 


g Faith. Lk.8. 
50. (Gen.3. 
20; Heb.11, 
39.) 


h Mk.1.38. 
i Mt.27.55. 
j Mt.14.1, refs. 


k Parables 
(N.T.). vs. 
4-15,16-18; 
Lk.10,30-37. 
(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 


1 Mt.13.3-8; 
M«.4.3-8. 


m Mt.11.15; 
13.9; Mk.4. 
9; Rev.2.7. 


n Mt.13.11, 
note, 


o Isa.6.9,30; 
Acts 28,.26,27. 


p 1 Pet.1.23. 


qSatan. Lk. 
10.18. (Gen.3. 
1; Rev.20.10.) 


7 Cf.v.15. 


s Rom.1,16, 
note. 


t Temptation. 
Lk.10.25, 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 


[8 13 


every city and village, preaching 
and shewing the glad tidings of the 
kingdom of God: and the twelve 
were with him, 

2 And ‘certain women, which had 

been healed of evil spirits and in- 
firmities, Mary called Magdalene, 
out of whom went seven devils, 
3 And Joanna the wife of Chuza 
jJHerod’s steward, and Susanna, and 
many others, which ministered unto 
him of their substance. 


Parable of the sower (Mt. 13. 
1-23; Mk. 4. 1-20). 


4 And when much people were 
gathered together, and were come 
to him out of every city, he spake 
by a parable: 

5 A /sower went out to sow his 
seed: and as he sowed, some fell by 
the way side; and it was trodden 
down, and the fowls of the air de- 
voured it, 

6 And some fell upon a rock; and 
as soon as it was sprung up, it 
withered away, because it lacked 
moisture, 

7 And some fell among thorns; 
and the thorns sprang up with it, 
and choked it. 

8 And other fell on good ground, 
and sprang up, and bare fruit an 
hundredfold. And when he had 
said these things, he cried, "He 
that hath ears to hear, let him 
hear. 

9 And his disciples asked him, 
see, What might this parable 

e 


b 

10 And he said, Unto you it is 
given to know the "mysteries of the 
kingdom of God: but to others in 
parables; that °seeing they might 
not see, and hearing they might 
not understand. 

11 Now the parable is this: The 
seed is the word of God. 

12 Those by the way side are they 
that hear; then cometh the ¢@devil, 
and taketh away the word out of 
their “hearts, lest they should be- 
lieve and be ‘saved. 

13 They on the rock are they, 
which, when they hear, receive the 
word with joy; and these have no 
root, which for a while believe, and 
in time of ‘temptation fall away. 


1083 


When Jesus would justify the woman in the eyes of Simon, 
through her works could Simon see the proof of 
man away in peace, He points to her 
His own works can never be to the be- 
which must rest upon the work of Christ (cf. 
17; Jude 1). 


§ 14] 


St. LUKE. 


14 And that which fell among 
thorns are they, which, when they : 
have heard, go forth, and are|¢ eee x 
choked with cares and “riches and| jo’ 3 
pleasures of this life, and bring no], p.a.32.2,5. 
fruit to perfection. ¢ Jas.1.22. 

15 But that on the good ground); Rom.27; 
are they, which in an honest and| Heb.10.36; 
good heart, having cheard the word,} Jas.5.7,8. 
keep it, and bring forth fruit with Cpeetteg 


A.D. 31. 


dpatience. Lieil.33, 
G Cor.3.2; 
Parable of the lighted candle |f Puioas ae 


(Mt. 5.15, 16; Mik. 421-23; Lie. 11.33).| ont 19-267 


16 No man, when he hath lighted ee 
a ‘candle, covereth it with a vessel,| 9 Gor's76. 
‘or putteth it under a bed; but set-},, y4¢.13.12: 
teth it on a candlestick, that they] 25.29; Mk. 
which enter in may Jsee the light.| 4-24,25. 

17 For &énothing is secret, that Bre eee 
shall not be made manifest; neither] . eat eee 
any thing hid, that shall not bel? 7 y3pn°9.5. 
known and come abroad. k Mt.8; 23. 

18 “Take heed therefore how ye] Mk.4.35-41. 
hear: for whosoever hath, to him] 7 mt.s.24; 
shall be given; and whosoever hath] Mk.4.38. 
not, from him shall be taken even] Miracles 
that which he seemeth to have. QT’). vs. 


22-25,26-33, 
The new relationships (Mt. 12. 
46-50; Mk. 3. 31-35). 


19 Then came to him Ais ‘mother 
and his brethren, and could not 
come at him for the press. 

20 And it was told him by cer- 
tain which said, Thy mother and 
thy brethren stand without, de- 
siring to see thee. 

21 And he answered and said unto 
them, My mother and my brethren 
are these which shear the word of 
God, and do it. 


Jesus stills the waves (Mt. 8. 
23-27; Mk. 4. 36-41). 


22 Now it came to pass.on a cer- 
tain day, that *he went into a ship 
with his disciples: and he said unto 
them, Let us go over unto the other 
side of the lake. And they launched 
forth. b 

23 But as they sailed he /fell 
asleep: and there came down a 
storm of wind on the lake; and they 
were filled with water, and were in 
jeopardy. 

24 And they came to him, and 
awoke him, saying, Master, master, 
we perish. Then he arose, and re- 
buked the wind and the raging of 
the water: and they ceased, and 
there was a calm. 

25 And he said unto them, 
"Where is your faith? And they 
being afraid wondered, saying one 


gq Gen.3.7-11. 
r Prov.21.16. 


s Mk.1.23,24; 
Jas.2.19. 


t Gen.14.19, 

u Rom.8.7. 

v Gen.32.27; 
1 John 1.9, 

w Rev.20.1-3. 


x Lk.15.15; 
2 Pet. 2.22. 


y Mt.11.28; 
see v.41, refs. 


2 Phil.3.9. 
a2 Tim-1.7. 


demns them; 


¢ Acts 16.39. 


1084 


to another, “What manner of man is 
this! for he commandeth even the 
winds and water, and they obey him. 


Demons cast out of the maniac 
of gece (Mt. 8. 28-34;. Mk. 
5. 1-17). 


26 And they arrived at the coun- 
try of the Gadarenes, which is over 
against Galilee. 

27 And when he went forth to 
land, there met him out of the city 
a certain man, which had devils 


jlong time, and 2%ware no clothes, 


neither abode in any house, but in 
the *tombs. 

28 When he saw Jesus, he cried 
out, and fell down before him, and 
with a loud voice said, SWhat have 
I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son 
of God ‘most high? I beseech thee, 
torment me not, 

29 (For he had commanded the 
unctean spirit to come out of the 
man. For oftentimes it had caught 
him: and he was kept bound with 
chains and in fetters; and he “brake 
the bands, and was driven of the 
devil into the wilderness.) 

30 And Jesus asked him, saying, 
’What is thy name? And he said, 
Legion: because many devils were 
encered into him. 

31 And they besought him that he 
would not command them to go out 
into the “deep, 

32 And there was there an herd 
of many swine feeding on'the moun- 
tain: and they besought him that 
he would suffer them to enter into 
them. And he suffered them. 

33 Then went the devils out of 
the man, and entered into the 
*swine: and the herd ran violently 
down a steep place into the lake, 
and were choked. 

34 When they that fed them saw 
what was done, they fled, and went 
and told zt in the city and in the 
country. 

35 Then they went out to see what 
was done; and came to Jesus, and 
found the man, out of whom the 
devils were departed, »sitting at the 
feet of Jesus, “clothed, and 4in his 
right mind: and they were afraid. 

36 They also which saw it told 
them by what means he that was 
possessed of the devils was healed. 

37 Then the whole multitude of 
the country of the Gadarenes round 
about %besought him to ‘depart 


.|from them; for they were taken 


with great fear: and he went up into 
the ship, and returned back again. 


~ 8 38} 


38 Now the man out of whom the 
devils were departed °besought 
him that he might be with him: but 
Jesus sent him away, saying, 

39 Return to thine own house, 
and shew how great things God 


St. LUKE. 


__AD.31. _|house, he ‘suffered no man to go in, 
save Peter, and James, and John, 


a LE.18.43; 


hath done unto thee. And he went|, Persian” 
his way, and published throughout| Mt.11.20 
the whole city how great things| with John 
Jesus had done unto him. vie At 
A woman healed: Jairus’ daugh-|° its. a oe 
ter raised (Mt. 9. 18-26; Mk. 5.|d John 7.48 
22-43). 2 Mt.28.9; 
Mk.7.25; 
40 And it came to pass, that,| L&-7-38; 8. 
when Jesus was returned, the peo- fe et BAL 
ple gladly received him: for they] 32: 
were all waiting for him. iL 10.37.22; 


41 And, behold, there came a man Fe 


named ‘Jairus, and he was a “ruler 


of the synagogue: and he @fell down! 
at Jesus’ feet, and besought him) 


that he would come into his house: 

42 For he had one only /daughter,, 
about twelve years of age, and she 
Slay a dying. But as he went the 
people thronged him. 

43 And awoman having an “issue 
of blood twelve years, which had 
tspent all her living upon physi- 
cians, neither could be healed of 


any, 

44 Came behind Aim, and 
Jtouched the border of his garment: 
and immediately her issue of blood 
stanched. 

45 And Jesus said, Who touched 
me? When all denied, Peter and’ 
they that were with him said, Mas- 


ter, the multitude “throng thee and| , 


press. thee, and sayest thou, Who 
touched me? 

46 And Jesus said, Somebody 
hath touched me: for I perceive 
that ‘virtue is gone out of me. 

47 And when the woman saw that 


she was not hid, she came trem-| 


bling, and falling down before him, 
she “declared unto him before all 
the people for what cause she had 
touched him, and how she was 
healed immediately. 

48 And he said unto her, Daugh- 
ter, be of good comfort: "thy faith 
hath made thee whole; °go in peace. 

49 While he yet spake, there com- 
eth one from the ruler of the syna- 
gogue’s house, saying to him, Thy 
daughter is ¢dead; trouble not the 
Master. , 

50 But when Jesus heard it, he 
answered him, saying, 2Fear not: 
rbelieve only, and she shall be made 
whole. 


51 And when he came into the 


& Lev.15.19. 
t Rom.10.3; 
Gal.3.21. 

j Lk.5.13; 
Rom.4.4,5. 

k Mt.11.20; 
Lk.13.25. 

7 Mt.15.28; 
Lk.5.17. 

m Rom.10.10. 
rn Lk.7.50. 

o John 8.11. 
p John 11.21; 
cf.Ezk.37 

ab ae 
q John 11.39, 
0. 


40. 

r Faith. Lk. 
17.5,6.. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 

s Mt.26.37; 
ME.13.3; 
Lk.9.28. 

t John 11.11- 


John 11.43;, 
cf.John 5. 
25,28. 

© 1 Peti22% 

y Mt.8.4; 9. 
30; Mk.5.43. 

2 Mt.10.1; 
Mk.6.7 


6.7. 

a Cf.Mt.10.9, 
note. 

b Lk.10.4; 22. 
35; 3 John 5- 

3; 1 Cor 
9.7,14. 

c John 13.20; 
Acts 13.51. 

d Gospel. Lk. 
20.1. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 

é Also v.9. See 
Mt.14.1, ref. 

f Lk.23.8. 

g MK.6.30. 


1085 


[9 10 


and the father and the mother of 
the maiden. 

52 And all wept, and bewailed 
her: but. he. said, Weep. not; she is 
not dead, but ‘sleepeth. 

53 And ‘they laughed him to'scorn, 
knowing that she was dead. 

54 And he put them all out, and 
took her by the “hand, and called, 
saying, ’Maid, “arise. 

55 And her spirit carne again, and 
she arose straightway: and he com- 
manded to *give her meat. 

5@ And her parents were aston- 
ished: but Yhe charged them that 
Seed should tell no man what was 

lone. 


CHAPTER 9. 


The twelve sent forth to preach 
(Mt. 10. 1-42. Cf. Mk. 6. 7-13). 


HEN he called his 2twelve dis- 

ciples together, and gave them 

power and authority over all devils, 
and to cure diseases. 

2 And he sent them to preach the 
corm of God, and to heal the 
sic 

3 And he said unto them, *Take 
bnothing for your journey, neither 
staves, nor scrip, neither bread, 
neither money; neither have two 
coats. apiece. 

4 And whatsoever house ye enter 
into, there abide, and thence 
depart. 

5 And whosoever will not ‘receive 
you, when ye go out of that city, 
shake off the very dust from your 
feet for a testimony against them. 

6 And they departed, and went 
through the towns, preaching the 
dgospel, and healing every where. 

7 Now ‘Herod the tetrarch heard 
of all that was done by him: and he 
was perplexed, because that it was 
said of some, that John was risen 
from the dead; 

8 And of some, that Elias had ap- 
peared; and of others, that one of 
the old prophets was risen again. 
9 And Herod said, John have i 
beheaded: but who is this, of whom 
I hear such things? fAnd he de- 
sired to see him. 


The apostles return: the five 
thousand fed (Mt. 14. 13-21; 
Mk. 6. 30-44; John 6, 1-14). 


10 And the apostles, when they 


were returned, told him all that 
they had-done. And he took them, 


} 


and ¢went aside privately into a 
desert place belonging to the city 
called Bethsaida. 

11 And the people, when they 
knew it, followed him: and he re- 
ceived them, and “spake unto them 
of the kingdom of God, and healed 
them that had ‘need of healing. 

12 And when the day began to 
wear away, then came the twelve, 
and said unto him, @Send the mul- 
titude away, that they may go into 
the towns and country round about, 
and lodge, and get victuals: for we 
are here in a desert place. 

13 But he said unto them, Give ye 
them to eat. And they said, We 
have no more but é¢five loaves and 
two fishes; except we should go 
and buy meat for all this people. 

14 For they were about five thou- 
sand men. And he said to his dis- 
ciples, Make them ‘sit down by 
fifties in a company. 

15 And they did so, and made 
them all sit down. 

16 Then he took the five loaves 
and the two fishes, and looking up 
to heaven, he blessed them, and 
brake, and gave to the disciples to 
set before the multitude. 

17 And they did eat, and 4were all 
filled: and there was taken up of 
‘fragments that remained to them 
twelve baskets. 


Peter’s confession of Christ (Mt. 
16. 13-20; Mk. 8. 27-30). 


18 And it came to pass, as he was 
alone Jpraying, his disciples were 
with him: and he asked them, say- 
ing, ‘Whom say the people that 
I am? 

19 They answering said, John the 
Baptist; but some say, Elias; and 
others say, that one of the old 
prophets is risen again. 

20 He said unto them, But whom 
say ye that I am? /Peter answering 
said, The Christ of God. 

21 And he straitly charged them, 
and commanded them to tell no 
man that thing; 


Jesus foretells his death and res- 
urrection (Mt. 16. 21; Mk. 8. 31). 


22 Saying, The Son of man must 
suffer many things, and be rejected 
of the elders and chief priests and 
scribes, and be slain, and be ”raised 
the third day. 


The test of discipleship (Mt. 
16. 22-28; Mk. 8. 32-38). 


23 And he said to them all, “If 


9 11 


@ Mt.12.15; 14.13, 
14. 


5 Lk. 4,43. 

¢ Lk.4.40; Rom.5. 
20. Wherever 
there is need 
acknowledged 
the Lord is ready 
to meet it. Men 
might have put 
the bodily need 
of healing first, 
since that is 
keenly felt. 
Spiritual need Is 
often the greatest 
where there is 
the least con- 
sciousness of it; 
cf.Rev.3.17. 

d Mt.14.15-21; 
Mk.6.35-44; 

John 6.5-13. 

€1 Cor.1.27,28. 

Ff Rom.4.5. 

9 Prov.10.22; Lk. 
22.19; 24.30. 

h Miracles 
(N.T,). vs.12-17, 
37-42; Lk.11.14, 
(Mt.8.2,3; 

Acts 28.8,9.) 

42 Ki,4.42-44; 
Eph.3.18,19. 

3 vs.28,29; Lk.3. 
21; 5,16; 6.12; 
11.1; 22.40-46; 
23.34. 


k Mt.16.13-20; 
Mk.8.27-30. 
UJohn 6.68. 


m Lk.24.6,7,46. 


n Mt.10.38; 16. 
24-28; Mk.8. 
34-38; cf.Phil.3. 
10. 

© John 12.25,26; 
Acts 20.24. 

P Lk.12.15-21; 
16.19-31. 

@i.e. earth. 


7 Mt.10.32,33; 
Rom.1.16. 


8 Heb.11.16. 

¢ Mt.25.31. 

u Sanctify, holy 
(persons) 
(N.T.). John 10. 
36, (Mt.4.5; Rev. 
22.11.) 

v Heb.1.4, note. 

w2 Pet.1.16-18, 


z See Mt.17.2, 
note on the 
transfiguration. 


vv.18. 
z2 Cor.4.6; Heb.2. 
9. 


@ Mt.18.16. 

6 Or, departure. 
"Lk. 22.45,46. 

d Contra, vs.19,20. 


¢ Mt.20.21,22; 
John 14.8-11, 


Ff Ex.13.21; 
Acts 1.9. 

9 Mt.3.17; Lk.3,22; 
John 5.36,37; 
12.28-30. 


hy.21; Mt.17.9, 


1086 


St. LUKE. 


any man will come after me, let 
him deny himself, and take up his 
cross daily, and follow me. 

24 For whosoever will °save his 
life shall lose it: but whosoever 
will lose his life for my sake, the 
same shall save it. 

25 For what is a man ?advan- 
taged, if he gain the whole ¢%world, 
and lose himself, or be cast 
6 ve h hall be. 

or whosoever sha a= 
shamed of me and of my Bane a 
of him shall the Son of man be 
Sa when he shall ‘come in fl 

s own glory, and in hrs Father’s, 
and of the “holy “angels. 


The transfiguration (Mt. 17. 1-8; 
Mk. 9. 2-8). 


27 But I tell you of a truth, there 
be “some standing here, which shall 
not taste of death, till they see the 
kingdom of God. 

28 And it came to pass about an 
eight days after these sayings, he 
took Peter and John and James, 
and went up into a mountain to 
pray. 

29 And as he prayed, the #fash- 
ion of his countenance was altered, 
and his raiment was white and glis- 
tering. 

30 And, behold, there talked with 
him @two men, which were Moses 
and Elias: 

31 Who appeared in glory, and 
spake of his decease which he 
should accomplish at Jerusalem. 

32 But Peter and they that were 
with him were heavy with ‘sleep: 
and when they were awake, they 
saw his glory, and the two men 
that stood with him. 

33 And it came to pass, as 
they departed from him, Peter 
said unto Jesus, Master, it is 
good for usto be here: and let us 
make ¢three tabernacles; one for 
thee, and one for Moses, and one 
for Elias: ‘not knowing what he 
said. 

34 While he thus spake, there 
came a ‘cloud, and overshadowed 
them: and they feared as they en- 
tered into the cloud. 

35 And there came a voice out of 
the cloud, saying, This is my be- 
loved Son: hear him. 

36 And when the voice was past, 
Jesus was found alone. And they 
hkept it close, and told no man in 
those days any of those things 
which they had seen. 


"5 


% r 


9:37] 


St. LUKE. 
The powerless disciples. De-|__4-D-32-__ 
mon cast out of a child (Mt. 
17. 14-21; Mk. 9. 14-29). aivastaysie 
Mk.9.14." 


37 And it came to pass, that on 
the next day, when they were ?come 
down from the hill, much people 
met him. 

38 And, behold, a man of the 
company cried out, saying, Master, 
I beseech thee, look upon my son: 
for he is mine “only child. 

39 And, lo, a ‘spirit taketh him, 
and he suddenly crieth out; and it 
teareth him that he foameth again, 
and bruising him hardly departeth 
from him. 

40 And I besought thy ¢disciples 
to cast him out; and they could 
not. 

41 And Jesus answering said, O 
faithless and perverse generation, 
how long shail I be with you, 
and suffer you? Bring thy son 
hither. 

42 And as he was ‘yet a coming, 
the devil threw him down, and tare 
him. And Jesus rebuked the un- 
clean spirit, and healed the child, 
and delivered him again to his 
father. 

43 And they were all amazed at 
&the mighty power of God. But 
while they wondered every one at 
all things which Jesus did, he said 
unto his disciples, 


Jesus again foretells his death 
(Mt. 17. 22, 23; Mk. 9. 30-32). 


44 Let these sayings “sink down 
into your ears: for the Son of man 
shall be delivered into the hands of 
men. 

45 But they understood not this 
saying, and it was hid from them, 
that they perceived it not: and 
they feared to ask him of that 
saying. 


The sermon on the child (Mt. 
18. 1-5; Mk. 9. 33-37). 


46 Then there arose a ‘reasoning 
among them, which of them should 
be greatest. ; 

47 And Jesus, ‘perceiving the 
thought of their heart, took a 
kchild, and set him by him, 

48 And said unto them, ‘Whoso- 
ever shall receive this child in my 
mame receiveth me: and whoso- 
ever shall receive me _ receiveth 
him that sent me: for he that is 
mleast among you all, the same 
shall be great. 


[9 62 


6 Gen.22.2; 
Lk.7.12; cf. 
John 3.16. 


c Mt.15.22; 
Lk.8.27. 


dv.1. 

e John 14.12. 

f Lk.8.49, 

g Or, the 
majesty of 
God. 

h v.31;Mt. 
digeaes 

+ Mt.18.1-6; 
Mx.9.33-37; 
Lk.22.24-27. 

j John 2.24,25. 


k little child. 
Lk.18.17. 


1 Mt.10.40; 
18.5; Mk.9. 
37; John 12, 
44; 13.20. 


m 1 Cor.15.9; 
Phil.2.3-11; 
Eph.3.8. 

n Num.11.26- 
30; Mk.9.38- 
40; 1 Cor.3.5. 

o Mt.10.42; 
Lk.11.23; 
Phil.1.15-18. 

p 1sa.50.7; 
Mt.26.53,54; 
Heb.12.2. 

q John 4.5,9. 

ry.30; 2 Ki. 
1.10,12. 

s Lk.19,10; 
John 12.47. 


tv.23; Mt.8. 
19,20. 


u Or, roosting- 
places. 


v Lk.2.7; 8.23; 
1 Cor.4.11. 


w Mt.8.22. 


x Mt.8.21; 
Lk.18.28-30. 


y 1 Ki.19.20,21. 
z Acts 15.37, 


38; 2 Tim.4. 
10,11. 


1087 


The rebuke of sectarianism 
_ (Mk. 9. 38-40). 


49 And John answered and said, 
Master, we saw one casting out 
devils in thy name; and we forbad 
him, because he “followeth not 
with us. 

50 And Jesus said unto him, For- 
bid Arm not: for °he that is not 
against us is for us. 


The new spirit of grace: final 
departure from Galilee. (Cf. 
John 7, 2-10.) 


51 And it came to pass, when the 
time was come that he should be 
received up, he %stedfastly set his 
face to go to Jerusalem, 

52 And sent messengers before 
his face: and they went, and entered 
into a village of the Samaritans, to 
make ready for him. 

53 And ¢they did not receive him, 
because his face was as though he 
would go to Jerusalem. 

54 And when his disciples James 
and John saw this, they said, Lord, 
wilt thou that we command “fire to 
come down from heaven, and con- 
sume them, even as Elias did? 

55 But he turned, and rebuked 
them, and said, Ye know not what 
manner of spirit ye are of. 

56 For the ‘Son of man is not 
come to destroy men’s lives, but to 
save them. And they went to an- 
other village. 


Another test of discipleship 
(Mt. 8, 18-22). 


57 And it came to pass, that, as 
they went in the way, a ‘certain 
man said unto him, Lord, I will 
follow thee whithersoever thou 
goest. 

58 And Jesus said unto him, 
Foxes have holes, and birds of the 
air have “nests; but the Son of man 
*hath not where to lay his head. 

59 And he said unto another, 
~Follow me. But he said, Lord, 
suffer me first to go and *bury my 
father. 

60 Jesus said unto him, Let the 
dead bury their dead: but go thou 
and preach the kingdom of God. 

61 And another also said, Lord, I 
will follow thee; but let me first go 
Ybid them farewell, which are at 
home at my house. 

62 And Jesus said unto him, No 
man, having put his hand to the 
plough, and looking back, is fit for 
the kingdom of God. 


bs ; a 


10 1] Sr. LUKE. 


A.D. 32. 15 And thou, Capernaum, “which | 
CHAPTER 10. att exalted to heaven, shalt be 


The seventy sent before him. 
(Cf. Mt. 10. 1-42.) 


a these things the Lord ap- 

pointed other seventy also, and 
sent them two and two before his 
face into every city and place, 
whither he himself would come. 

2 Therefore said he unto ¢them, 
The harvest truly is great, but othe 
labourers are few: pray ye therefore 
the Lord of the harvest, that he 
would send forth labourers into his 
harvest. 


3 ‘Go your ways: behold, I send! ; 


you forth as lambs among wolves. 

4 4Carry neither purse, nor scrip, 
nor shoes: and “salute no man by 
the way. 

5 And into whatsoever house ye 
enter, first say, Peace be to this 
house. 

6 And if the fson of peace be there, 
your peace shall rest upon it: -f not, 
it shall sturn to you again. 

7 And in the same house remain, 
eating and drinking such things as 
they give: “for the labourer is wor- 
thy of his hire. Go not from house 
to house. 

8 And into whatsoever city ye 
enter, and they receive you, eat 
such things as are set before you: 

9 And heal the sick that are 
therein, and say unto them, ‘The 
kingdom of God is come nigh unto 
you. 

10 But into whatsoever city ye 
enter, and they receive you not, go 
your ways out into the streets of 
the same, and say, 

11 Even the very dust of your 
city, which cleaveth on us, we do 
wipe off against you: notwithstand- 
ing be ye sure of this, that the king- 
dom of God is come nigh unto 
you. : 

12 But-I say unto you, that Jit 
shall be more tolerable in that day 
for Sodom, than for that city. 


Jesus denounces judgment on 
the cities (Mt. 11. 20-24). 


13 *Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe 
unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the 
mighty works had been done in 
Tyre and Sidon, which have been 
done in you, they had a great while 
ago ‘repented, sitting in sackcloth 
and ashes. 

14 But it shall be more tolerable 


fo: Tyre and Sidon at the jude-| 


ment, than for you. 


a John 4.35 

6 1 Cor.3.9. 

c See Mt.10. 
16, note. The 
same remark 
is applicable 
here. 

d Lk.9.3; 22.35; 
1 Cor.9.7. 

e Gen.24.33, 
56; 2 Ki.4.29. 

f Isa.57.21. 

g Psa.35.13. 

h 1 Cor.9.4,14. 

i Mt.3.2. 


20, note; Mk. 
8.23, note. 

1 Repentance. 
Lk.11.32. 


Judgment. 
Lk.11.31,32. 
(Mt.10.15; 
Rev.20.11.) 

n Isa.14.13,15. 

o John 13.20. 

pb Inspiration. 
Lk.11.49-51. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

qSatan. Lk. 
11.18,19. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

r Isa.14.12-19; 
Rev.12.8,9. 

s Gen.3.15; 
Mt.13.39; 
Mk.16.18; 
Acts 28.5; 
Rom.16.20. 

t the spirit. 
Many have, 
Spirit. 

u Mt.28.18; 
John 3.35; 
Eph.1.20,23; 
Heb.2.8. 

v Mt.13.16. 

w John 8.56. 

x Temptation. 
Lk.11.16. 


(eternal). 
Lk.12.15. 
(Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

z Law (of 
Moses). vs. 
25-37; John 
1.17. (Ex.19. 
1; Gal.3.1- 

9.) 


29. 

a Jehovah, 
Deut.6.5; 
Lev.19.18. 


| 
[10 28 | 


thrust down to hell. 

16 He that °heareth you ?heareth 
me; and he that despiseth you de- 
spiseth me; and he that despiseth 
me despiseth him that sent me. 

17 And the seventy returned 
again with joy, saying, Lord, even 
the devils are subject unto us 
through thy name. 

18 And he said unto them, I be- 
held 9Satan as “lightning fall from 
heaven. 

19 Behold, I give unto you power 
to tread on Sserpents and scorpions, 
and over all the power of the en- 
emy: and nothing shall by any 
means hurt you. 

20 Notwithstanding in this rejoice 
not, that the spirits are subject unto 
you; but rather rejoice, because 
your names are written in heaven. 


er, Lord of hé 
that thou “hast 


even so, Father; for so it seemed 
good in thy sight. 

22 All things “are delivered to me 
of my Father: and no man knoweth 
who the Son is, but the Father; and 
who the Father is, but the Son, and 
he to whom the Son will reveal Aim. 

23 And he turned him unto 
his disciples, and said privately, 
*Blessed are the eyes which see the 
things that ye see: 

24 For I tell you, that “many 
prophets and kings have desired to 
see those things which ye see, and 
have not seen them; and to hear 
those things which ye hear, and 
have not heard them. 


A lawyer questions Jesus. (Cf. 
Mt. 22. 3440; Mk. 12. 28-34. 


25 And, behold, a certain lawyer 
stood up, and *tempted him, say- 
ing, Master, what shall I do to in- 
herit eternal life? 

26 He said unto him, What is 
written in the “law? how readest 
thou? 

27 And he answering said, Thou 
shalt love the ¢Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy strength, and with 
all thy mind; and thy neighbour as 
thyself.; 

28 And he said unto him, Thou 


1088 


hast answered right: this do, and 
thou shalt live. 


10 29] 

29 But he, willing to *justify him- 
self, said unto Jesus, And who. is 
my °neighbour? 


Parable of the g00d Samaritan. 


30 And Jesus answering said, “A 
certain man went down from Jeru- 
salem to Jericho, and fell among 

ieves, Which stripped him of his 
raiment, and wounded him, and de- 
parted, leaving him half dead. 

31 And by chance there came 
down a certain priest that way: and 
when he saw him, he passed by on 
the other side. 

32 And likewise a Levite, when he 
was at the place, came and looked 
on him, and passed by on the other 
side. 

33. But a certain ¢Samaritan, as 
he journeyed, came where he was: 
and when he saw him, he had com- 
passion on him, 

34 And went to Aim, and bound 
up his wounds, pouring in oil and 
wine, and set him on his own beast, 
and brought him to an inn, and 
took care of him. 

35 And on the morrow when he 
departed, he took out two “pence, 
and gave them to the host, and 
said unto him, Take care of him; 
and whatsoever thou spendest 
more, when I come again, I will re- 
pay thee. 

36 Which now of these three, 
thinkest thou, was neighbour unto 
him that fell among the thieves? 

37 And he said, He that shewed 
fmercy on him. Then said Jesus 
unto him, Go, and do thou likewise. 


St. LUKE. 


A.D. 32. 


a Rom.4.2; 
Gal.3.11. 


b Mt.5.43. 


c Parables 
(N.T.). vs. 
30-37; Lk.11. 
5-10. (Mt.5. 
13-16; Lk.21 
29-31.) 


d John 4.9. 


e The Roman 
penny is the’ 
eighth part 
of an ounce, 
which at five 
shillings the 
ounce is 
seven pence 
half penny, 
or 15 cents. 


f Prov.14.21, 
Mic.6.8. 


g John 11.1; 
12.2,3. 

h LkK.8.35; 
Acts; 22.3. 

i Lk.21.34; 
Mk.4.19; 
1 Cor.7.32,35. 


j Lk.18.22; 
Psa.27.4; 
73.25; Mk. 
8.36. 

k Bible pray- 
ers (N.T.). 
Lk.15.18,19. 
(Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 

1 Mt.6.9, 

m Mt.3.2, note. 


n Or, for the 
day. 


(11 3 


Martha and Mary in contrast. 


38 Now it came to pass, as they 
went, that he: entered into a certain 
village: and a certain woman 
named Martha éreceived him into 
her house. 

39 And she had a sister called 
Mary, which also “sat at Jesus’ 
feet, and heard his word. 

40 But Martha was cumbered 
about much serving, and came to 
him, and said, Lord, dost thou not 
care that my sister hath left me to 
serve alone? bid her therefore that 
she help me. 

41 And Jesus answered and said 
unto her, Martha, Martha, thou 
tart careful and troubled about 
many things: 

42 But one /thing is needful: and 
Mary hath chosen that good part, 
eke shall not be taken away from 

er. 


CHAPTER 11. 
Jesus’ doctrine of prayer. 


y Nees it came to pass, that, as he 
was praying in a certain 
place, when he ceased, one of his 
disciples said unto him, Lord, !teach 
us to pray, as John also taught his 
disciples. 

2 And he said unto them, When 
ye ¥pray, say, ‘Our Father which 
art in heaven, Hallowed be thy 
name. ”™Thy kingdom come. Thy 
willbe done, asin heaven, so in earth. 

3 Give us “day by day our daily 
bread. 


1 This is the central N.T. passag 
had announced the new basis 


of prayer, viz.: 


e€ on prayer 


z.: relationship (Mt. 6. 9, 28-32). 
believer is a child of God through the new birth (John 3. 3, note). 


In the Sermon on the Mount Christ 
The 
The clear reve- 


lation of this fact at once establishes the reasonableness of prayer; a reasonableness 
against which the argument from the apparent uniformity of natural law shatters 


itself. God is more than a 


Creator, bringing a universe into being, and establishing 


laws for it; more than a decree-maker determining future events by an eternal fiat. 
Above all this is the divine family for whom the universe with its laws exists (Col. 


1. 16-20; Heb. 1. 2; 2. 10, 11; Rom. 8, 17): “When ye pray, 
God habitually does in the material universe concerns 1 
do in His own family concerns Him, and them, 


of that universe. What He may 


and is matter for divine promise and revelation. 


say, Our Father.”” What 
the reverent investigator 


Science, which deals only with 


natural phenomena, cannot intrude there (1 Cor. 2. 9). 


Christ’s law of prayer may 
relationship, and reveals God as 


be thus summarized: (1) He grounds prayer upon 
freely charging Himself with all the responsibili- 


ties, as His heart glows with all the affections of a Father toward all who believe 


on Jesus Christ (Mt. 6. 25-32; 7. 9-11). 
an ail-wise, all-loving, and all-powerful, Father- 
prayer Christ gives an incomparable model for all prayer. 
puts the interest of the kingdom before merely per- 


prayer begins with worship; 


Prayer, therefore, is a child’s petition to 


God. (2) In the so-called Lord’s 


It teaches that right 


sonal interest; accepts beforehand the Father’s will, whether to grant or withhold; 
and petitions for present need, leaving the future to the Father’s care and love. 


Used as a form, the Lord’s prayer is, 


re 


1089 


dispensationally, upon legal, not church 


11 4] 


we also forgive every one that is 
indebted to us. And lead us not 
into temptation; but deliver us from 
evil. 


Parable of the importunate 
friend. 


§ And he said unto them, ‘Which 
of you shall have a friend, and shall 
go unto him at midnight, and say 
unto him, Friend, lend me three 
loaves; 

6 For a friend of mine in his jour- 
ney is come to me, and I have noth- 
ing to set before him? 

7 And he from within shall answer 
and say, Trouble me not: the door 
is now shut, and my children are 
with me in bed; I cannot rise and 
give thee. ; 

8 I say unto you, Though he will 
not rise and give him, because he 
is his friend, yet because of his 4im- 
portunity he will rise and give him 
as many as he needeth. 

9 And I say unto you, “Ask, and 
it shall be given you; /seek, and ye 
shall find; 8knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you. 

10 For every one that asketh re- 
ceiveth; and he that seeketh find- 
eth; and to him that knocketh it 
shall be opened. 


Parable of the fatherhood. 


11 Ifa son shall ask bread of any 
of you that is a father, will he give 
him a stone? or if he ask a fish, 
will he for a fish give him a ser- 
pent? 

12 Or if he shall ask an egg, will 
he offer him a scorpion? 

13 If ye then, being evil, know 
how to give good gifts unto your 
children: how much more shall 
your heavenly Father !give the 
ise Spirit to them that ask 

im: 


St. LUKE. 


a Mt.6.12, 
note, 


6 Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


¢ Parables 
(N.T.). vs.5- 
10,11-13,33- 
36; Lk.12.16- 
21. (Mt.5.13- 
16; Lk.21. 
29-31.) 


d Lk.18.1-8. 


e Mt.7.7; 21. 
22; John 15. 
7; Jas.1.5; 
1 John 3.22. 


f 1sa.55.6. 
g Lk.13.25. 


h Holy Spirit. 
Lk.12.10,12. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


it demon. 


j Miracles 
(N.T.). Lk. 
13.11-13. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 


k Beelzebul; 
so vs.18,19. 


| Temptation. 
Lk.22.28. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 


m Satan. 
Lk.13.16. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


n Mt.3.2. 

o Isa.53.12; 
Col.2.15; 
Heb.2.14,15; 
Rev.20.2,3. 

p Mt.6.24, 


qSee Mt.12.43. 


4° 


] 


[11 24 


4 And @forgive us our Ysins; for| A.D. 33. Jesus charged with casting out 


demons by Beelzebub (Mt. 12. 
22-37). 


14 And he was casting out a 
idevil, and it was ‘dumb. And it 
came to pass, when the devil was 
gone out, the dumb Jspake; and the 
people wondered. 

15 But some of them said, He 
casteth out devils through *Beelze- 
bub the chief of the devils. 

16 And others, ‘tempting him, 
sought of him a sign from heaven. 

17 But he, knowing | their 
thoughts, said unto them, Every 
kingdom divided against itself is 
brought to desolation; and a house 
divided against a house falleth. 

18 If Satan also be divided 
against himself, how shall his king- 
dom stand? because ye say that I 
cast out devils through Beelzebub. 

19 And if I by Beelzebub cast out 
devils, by whom do your sons cast 
them out? therefore shall they be 
your judges, 

20 But if I with the finger of 
God cast out devils, no doubt “the 
kingdom of God is come upon 
you. 

21 When a strong man armed 
keepeth his palace, his goods are in 
peace: 

22 But when a stronger than he 
shall come upon him, and overcome 
him, he taketh from him all his ar- 
mour wherein He trusted, and di- 
videth his spoils. 

23 He that is not with me is 
Pagainst me: and he that gathereth 
not with me scattereth. 


Worthlessness of self-reforma- 
tion (Mt. 12. 43-45). 


24 %When the unclean spirit -is 
gone out of a man, he walketh 
through dry places, seeking rest; 
and finding none, he saith, I will 


ground; it is not a prayer in the name of Christ (cf. John 14. 13, 14; 16. 24); and 


it makes human forgiveness, as under the law it must, 
giveness; an order which grace exactly reverses (cf. Eph. 4. 32). 
definite (vs. 5, 6); and, (4) importunate, 

1It is evident that none of the discip 
Bethany, asked for the Spirit in the fait 
gering thing to a Jew that, in advance of the fulfilment of 
Mary alone of the disciples understood 
tation concerning His own death and resurrection (John 12, 3-7). 


receive the Spirit. 


the condition of divine for- 
(3) Prayer is to be 


that is, undiscouraged by delayed answers, 
les, with the possible exception of Mary of 
h of this promise. 


It was a new and stag- 
Joel 2. 28, 29, all might 
Christ’s repeated decla- 
Save Mary, not 


one of the disciples but Peter, and he only in the great confession (Mt. 16. 17), mani- 
fested a spark of spiritual intelligence till after the resurrection of Christ and the 


impartation of the Spirit (John 20, 22; Acts 2. 1-4), 
13, 1s to forget Pentecost, and to ignore the 
has the indwelling Spirit (Rom. 8. 9, 15; 1 Cor. 6. 


Lk. 11, 


Acts 2. 4, note. 


1090 


To go back to the promise of 
truth that now every believer 
19; Gal. 4. 6; 1 John 2, 20, 27). See 


11 25] 


came out. 

25 And when he cometh, he find- 
eth it ¢swept and garnished. 

26 Then goeth he, and taketh to 
him seven other spirits more wicked 
than himself; and they enter in, and 
dwell there: and the last state of 
that man is “worse than the first. 

27 And it came to pass, as he 
spake these things, a certain woman 
of the company lifted up her voice, 
and said unto him, “Blessed is the 
womb that bare thee, and the paps 
which thou hast sucked. 

28 But he said, Yea rather, 
¢blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it. 


The sign of Jonas 
(Mt. 12. 39-42). 


29 And when the people were 
gathered thick together, he began 
to say, This is an evil generation: 
they seek a sign; and “there shall 
no sign be given it, but the sign of 
Jonas the prophet. 

30 For as JJonas was a sign unto 
the Ninevites, so shall also &the Son 
of man be to this generation. 

31 The queen of the south shall 
rise up in the judgment with the 
men of this generation, and con- 
demn them: for she came from the 
utmost parts of the earth to hear 
the wisdom of Solomon; and, be- 
hold, a greater than Solomen is 
here. 

32 The men of Nineve shall rise 
up “in the judgment with this gen- 
eration, and shall condemn it: for 
they ‘repented at the preaching of 
Jonas; and, behold, a greater than 
Jonas is here, 


Parable of the lighted candle 
(Mt. 5. 15, 16; Mk. 4. 21, 22. Cf. 
Lk. 8. 16). 


33 Noman, when he hath lighted 
a Jcandle, putteth it in a secret 
place, neither under a bushel, but 
on a candlestick, that they which 
come in may see the light. | 

34 The #light of the body is the 
eye: therefore when thine eye is 
single, thy whole body also is full 
of light; but when thine eye is evil, 
thy body also is full of darkness. 

35 Take heed therefore that the 
light which is in thee be not dark- 


ness. 

36 If thy whole body therefore be 
full of light, having no part dark, 
the whole shall be full of light, as 


St. LUKE. 


a 1 Cor.3.16; 
Eph.3.16,17; 
5.18. 


b Heb.6.4,8; 
10.26,29; 
2 Pet.2.20. 


c Lk.1,28,48. 


d LK.8.21; 
Psa.119.1,2; 
Mt.7.21. 


e M¢.12.40; 
Mk.8.11. 


Ff Jon.1.17. 


g Mt.8.20, 
note, 


h Day of Judg- 
ment. vs.31, 
32; John 5S. 
22,27,30. 
(Mt.10.15; 
Rev.20,11.) 


it Repentance. 
PEs, 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 

j Cf.Lk.8.16; 
Mt.5.15; 
Mk.4.21. 

k Mt.6.22,23, 


1 Prov.4.18; 
20.27. 


m Mk.7.3. 
n Mt.23.23. 
o Mic.6.7,8. 


p Mt.23.6; 
Mk.12.38. 


q Psa.5.9. 
r Mt.22.35, 


note. 
s Mk.7.7,8. 
t Heb.11.35. 
uie. earth, 


v Ex.20.5; 
Jer.51.56. 


1091 


return unto my house whence I| A.D. 33. 


(11 50 


when the bright ‘shining of a can- 
dle doth give thee light. 

37 And as he spake, a certain 
Pharisee besought him to dine with 


‘him: and he went in, and sat down 


to meat. 

38 And “when the Pharisee saw 
it, he marvelled that he had not 
first washed before dinner, 


Jesus denounces woes upon the 
Pharisees, (Cf. Mt. 23. 13-35.) 


39 And the Lord said unto him, 
Now do ye Pharisees make clean 
the outside of the cup and the plat- 
ter; but your inward part is full of 
ravening and wickedness. 

40 Ye fools, did not he that made 
that which is without make that 
which is within also? 

41 But rather give alms of such 
things as ye have; and, behold, alt 
things are clean unto you. 

42 But “woe unto you, Pharisees! 
for ye tithe mint and rue and all 
manner of herbs, and °pass over 
judgment and the love of God: 
these ought ye to have done, and 
not to leave the other undone. 

43 Woe unto you, Pharisees! ?for 
ye love the uppermost seats in the 
synagogues, and greetings in the 
markets. 

44 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as 
dgraves which appear not, and the 
men that walk over them are not 
aware of them. 


Jesus denounces woes upon the 
lawyers. 


45 Then answered one of the "law- 
yers, and said unto him, Master, 
thus saying thou reproachest us 
also. 

46 And he said, Woe unto you 
also, ye lawyers! for ye ‘lade men 
with burdens grievous to be borne, 
and ye yourselves touch not the 
burdens with one of your fingers. 

47 Woe unto you! for ye build the 
sepulchres of the prophets, and your 
fathers killed them. 

48 Truly ye bear witness that ye 
allow the deeds of your fathers: for 
they indeed killed ‘them, and ye 
build their sepulchres. 

49 Therefore also said the wisdom 
of God, I will send them prophets 
and apostles, and some of them 


they shall slay and persecute: 

50 That the blood of all the 
prophets, which was shed from the 
foundation of the “world, may be 
"required of this generation: 


11 51] 


St. LUKE. 


[12 26 


51 From the blood of “Abel unto 
the blood of Zacharias which 
perished between the altar and the 
‘temple: verily I say unto you, It 
shall be required of this generation. 

52 Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye 
have taken away the key of know- 
ledge: ¢ye entered not in yourselves, 
and them that were entering in ye 
hindered. 

53 And as he said these things 
unto them, the scribes and the 
Pharisees began to urge him vehe- 
mently, and to “provoke him to 
speak of many things: 

54 Laying wait for him, and seek- 
ing to catch something out of his 
mouth, that they might accuse him. 


CHAPTER 12. 


Jesus warns of the leaven of the 
Pharisees. (Cf. Mk. 8. 14-21.) 


N fthe mean time, when there 

were gathered together an in 
numerable multitude of people, in- 
somuch that they trode one upon 
another, he began to say unto his 
disciples first of all, Beware ye of 
the Sleaven of the Pharisees. which 
is ‘hypocrisy. y 

2 For ‘there is nothing covered, 
that shall not be revealed; neither 
hid, that shall not be known. 

3 Therefore whatsoever ye have 
spoken in darkness shall be heard 
in the light; and that which ye 
have spoken in the ear in closets 
shall be proclaimed upon the house- 
tops. 

4 And I say unto Zyou my friends, 
Be not afraid of them that kill the 
body, and after that have no more 
that they can do. 

5 But I will forewarn you whom 
ye shall fear: Fear him, which after 
he hath killed hath power to cast 
into *hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear 
him. 

6 Are not five sparrows sold for 
two ‘farthings, and not one of them 
is forgotten before God? 

7 But even the very hairs of your 
head are all numbered. Fear not 
therefore; ye are of more value than 
Many sparrows. 

8 Also I say unto you, Whosoever 
shall confess me before men, him 
shall the “Son of man also confess 
before the "angels of God: 

9 But he that denieth me before 
men shall be denied before the an- 
gels of God. 

10 And whosoever shall speak a 
word against the “Son of man, it 


A.D. 33 
a Gen.4.8. 
b 2 Chr.24.20, 
p (es 


c Inspiration, 
vs.49-51; Lk. 
16.29-31. (Ex. 
4.15; Rev.22. 
19.) 


d Mal.2.7; 
MkE.7.13. 


fe 1 Cor.13.5, 
i Mt.16.6. 


gLeaven. Lk. 

13.21. (Gen. 
19.3; Mt.13. 
33.) 


th Lk.11.39. 


¢ Mt.10.26; 
1 Cor.4.5. 


j Psa.49.16,. 
ik Mt.5.22,note. 


Two farthings 
here=1 cent. 


mMt.8.20,note. 
n Heb.1.4,nofe. 


o Holy Spirit. 
vs.10,12;. 
John 1.32,33. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


 LK.21.14,15; 
Mt.10.19, 


q John 18.36. 


r Life (eter- 
nal). John1. 
4. (Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 


s Parables 
(N.T.) .vs.16- 
21,35-40,42- 
48; Lk.13.6- 
9. Mt.5.13- 
16; Lk.21, 
29-31.) 


t Jas.4.15. 
u Psa.49.15,16, 


vEccl.11.9; 
Jas.5.1,5. 


wPsa.52.5,7; 
Jas. 4.14, 


x Hab,2.9, 


y Cf.Mt.6.25- 
33. 

2Mt.6.25; 
Phil.4.6. 

a Psa.139.14, 


bOne cubit= 
about 18 in. 


1092 


shall be forgiven him: but unto him: 
that blasphemeth against the “Holy 
Ghost it shall not be forgiven. 

11 And when they bring you'unto 
the synagogues, and unto magis- 
trates, and powers, ?take ye no 
thought how or what thing ye 
shall answer, or what ye shall say: 

12 For the °Holy Ghost ‘shall 
teach you in the same hour what ye 
ought to say. 

13 And.one of the company said. 
unto him, Master, speak to my 
brother, that he divide the inheri- 
tance with me. 

14 And he said unto him, @Man, 
who made me a judge or a divider 
over you? 

15 And he said unto them, Take 
heed, and beware of covetousness: 
for a man’s “life consisteth not in 
the abundance of the things which 
he possesseth. 


Parable of the rich fool. 


16 And he spake a ‘parable unto 
them, ‘saying, The ground of a-cer- 
tain rich man brought forth plenti- 
fully: 

17 And he thought within ‘him- 
self, saying, What shall I do, be- 
cause I have no room where to 
bestow my fruits? 

18 And he said, This will ‘I do: I 
will pull down my barns, and build 
greater; and there will I bestow all 
my fruits and my goods. 

19 And I will say to my soul, 
“Soul, thou hast much goods laid 
up for many years; take thine ease, 
Yeat, drink, and be merry. 

20 But God said unto him, Thou 
fool, this night “thy soul shall be 
required of thee: then whose shall 
‘those things be, which thou hast 
provided? 

21 So is he that layeth up treas- 
ure for himself, and is not rich 
toward God. 

22 »And he said unto his disciples, 
Therefore, I say unto you, *Take no 
thought for your life, what ye shall 
eat; neither for the body, what ye 
shall put on. 

23 The life is more than meat, and 
the “body is more than raiment. 

24 Consider the ravens: for they 
neither sow nor reap; which nei- 
ther have storehouse nor barn; 
and God feedeth them: how much 
more are ye better than the fowls? 

25 And which of you with taking 
thought can add to his stature one 


beubit? 
26 If ye then be not able to do 


St. LUKE. 


[12 54 


that thing which is least, why take 
ye thought for the rest? 

27 Consider the lilies how they 
grow: they toil not, they spin not; 
and yet I say unto you, that Solo- 
mon in all his glory was not arrayed 
like one of these. 

28 If then God so clothe the grass, 
which is to day in the field, and to 
morrow is cast into the oven; how 
much more will he clothe you, O 
ye of little faith? 

29 And seek not ye what ye shall 
eat, or what ye shall drink, neither 
be ye of doubtful mind. 

30 For all these things do the na- 
tions of the “world seek after: and 
your Father knoweth that ye have 
need of these “things. 

31 But ‘rather seek ye the king- 
dom of God; and all these things 
shall be added unto you. 

32 Fear not, little flock; for it is 
your Father’s good pleasure to give 
you the “kingdom. 

33 Sell that ye have, and give 
alms, provide yourselves bags 
which wax not old, a treasure in 
the heavens that faileth not, where 
no thief approacheth, neither moth 
corrupteth. 

34 fFor where your treasure is, 
there will your heart be also. 


Parable and warnings connected 
with the second coming (Mt. 
24 37-25 30). 


35 Let your loins be girded 
about, and your lights burning; 

36 And ye yourselves like unto 
men that wait fof their lord, when 
he will return from the wedding; 

_that when he cometh and knock- 
eth, they may open unto him im- 
mediately. 

37 Blessed are those servants, 
whor the lord when he cometh 
shall find watching: verily I say 
unto you, that he shall gird him- 
self, and ‘make them to sit down to} 
meat, and will come forth and serve 
them. 

38 And if he shall come in the 
second watch, or come in the third 
watch, and find them so, blessed 
are those servants. 

39 And ‘this know, that if the 
goodman of the house had known 
what hour the /thief would come, 
he would have watched, and not 
have suffered his house to be broken 
through. 

40 Be ye therefore’ ready also: 
for the *Son of man ‘cometh at an 
hour when ye think not 


A.D. 33. 


a i.e. earth. 

b Psa.23.1. 

c Mt.6.33. 

d Mt.3.2, note. 

e Mt.19.21; 
Acts 2.45; 
4.34,35. 

f Col.3.1,3. 

g Eph.6.14. 


h v.33; 1 Tim. 
6.18; Jas.2.5. 


i Mt.24.43. 
j 1 Thes.5.2. 


k Mt.8.20, 
note. 


l Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
vs.35-40; 
Lk.17.24-36. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 

m 1 Cor.4.2. 

n Rev.3.21. 


o Eccl.8.11; 
2 Pet.3:3,4. 


p 1 Thes.5.3. 
q Or, cut him 
off. 


r Jas.4.17 

s Acts 17.30. 

t Lev.5.17; 
John 15.22; 
1 Tim.1.13. 

u v.51. 


v Mt.20.18,22; 
Mk.10.38,39. 


w Mt.10.34. 
x Mic.7.6. 
y Mt.16.2 


1093 


41 Then Peter said unto him, 
Lord, speakest thou this parable 
unto us, or even to all? 


Parable of the steward and his 
servants. 


42 And the Lord said, Who then 
is that faithful and wise Siva 
whom his lord shall make ruler over 
his household, to give them their 
portion of meat in due: season? 

43 Blessed is that servant, whom 
his lord when he cometh shall find 
so doing. 

44 Ofa truth I say unto you, that 
he will make him “ruler over all 
that he hath. 
| 45 But and if that servant say in 
his heart, My lord °delayeth his 
coming; and shall begin to beat the 
menservants and maidens, and to 
eat and drink, and to be drunken, 

46 The lord of that servant will 
come in a day when he looketh not 
for him, and at an hour when he is 
not aware, and will ¢cut him in sun- 
der, and will appoint him his por 
tion with the unbelievers. 

47 And that servant, “which knew 
his lord’s will, and prepared not 
himself, neither did according to 
his will, shall be beaten with many 
stripes: 

48 But ‘he that knew not, and did 
commit things worthy of stripes, 
shall be beaten with few stripes, 
‘For unto whomsoever much is 
given, of him shall be much re- 
quired: and to whom men have 
committed much, of him they will 
ask the more. 


Christ a divider of men, 


49 I am come to send “fire on the 
earth; and what will I, if it be 
already kindled? 

50 But I have a "baptism to be 
baptized with; and how am I 
straitened till it be accomplished! 

51 “Suppose ye that I am come 
to give peace on earth? I tell you, 
Nay; but rather division: 

52 For from henceforth there shall 
be five in one house divided, three 
against two, and two against three. 

53 The “father shall be divided 
against the son, and the son against 
the father; the mother against the 
daughter, and the daughter against 
the mother; the mother in law 
against her daughter in law, and 
the daughter in law against her 
mother in law. 

54 And he said also to the people, 
yWhen ye see a cloud rise out of 


12 55] 


the west, straightway ye say, There 
cometh a shower; and so it is. 

55 And when ye see the south 
wind blow, ye say, There will be 
heat; and it cometh to pass. 

56 Ye hypocrites, ye can discern 
the face of the sky and of the earth; 
“but how is it that ye do not dis- 
cern this time? 

57 Yea, and why even of your- 
selves judge ye not what is right? 

58 When thou goest with thine 
adversary to the magistrate, ‘as 
thou art in the way, give diligence 
that thou mayest be delivered from 
him; lest he hale thee to the judge, 
and the judge deliver thee to the 
officer, and the officer cast thee iato 
prison. 

59 I tell thee, thou shalt not de- 
part thence, till thou hast paid the 
very last ¢mite. 


CHAPTER 13. 


Men are not to judge, but 
repent. 


GpHERs were present at that 
season some that told him of 
the ¢Galileans, whose blood Pilate 
had mingled with their sacrifices. 

2 And Jesus answering said unto 
them, Suppose ye that these Gali- 
leans were Jsinners above all the 
Galileans, because they suffered 
such things? 

3 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye 
&repent, ye shall all likewise perish. 

4 Or those eighteen, upon whom 
the tower in Siloam fell, and slew 
them, think ye that they were /sin- 
ners above all men that dwelt in 
Jerusalem? 

5 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye 
&repent, ye shall all likewise perish. 


Parable of the barren fig tree. 
(Cf. Isa. 5. 1-7; Mt. 21. 18-20.) 


6 He spake also this “parable; A 
certain man had a fig tree planted 
in his vineyard; and he came and 
sought fruit thereon, and found 
none. 

7 Then said he unto the dresser 
of his vineyard, Behold, these three 
years I come seeking fruit on this 
fig tree, and find none: cut it ‘down; 
why cumbereth it the ground? 

8 And he answering said unto him, 
Lord, let it alone this year also, till 
I shall dig about it, and dung it: 

9 And if it bear fruit, we//: and if 


not, then after that Jthou shalt cut 


it down. 


Sr. LUKE. 


A.D. 33. 


a Mt.16.3. 
b Mt.5.25, 
c 1sa.55.6. 


d One mite = 
1-4 farthing 
or 1-8 cent. 


e Acts 5.37. 


fSin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


g Repentance. 
Lk.15.7. (Mt. 
3.2; Acts 17. 
30.) 


h Parables 
(N.T.). vs.6- 
9,18,19,20, 
21; Lk.14.16- 


j John 15.2. 


k Miracles 
(N.T.). vs.11- 
13; Lk.14.1- 
4. (Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 


1 LK.6.7,9; 
14.3,6; Mt. 


n Prov.11.9; 
Mt.7.5; 
23.13,28. 


o Lk.19.9; 
om.4. 
11,12. 


pSatan. Lk. 
22.3.31. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


q Isa.45.24; 
1 Pet.3.16. 


r Mt.13.31; 
Mk.4.30. 


s Isa.2.2,4. 
t Leaven. 
1 Cor.5.6-8. 


(Gen.19.3; 
Mt.13.33.) 


1094 


ae | 
[13 22 


The woman loon from her 
infirmity. 


10 And he was teaching in one of 
the synagogues on the sabbath. 

1! And, behold, there was a 
woman which had a spirit of in- 
firmity eighteen years, and was 
bowed together, and could in no 
wise lift up herself. 

12 And when Jesus saw her, he 
called her to him, and said unto 
her, Woman, thou art loosed from 
thine infirmity. : 

13 And he laid Ais hands on her: 
and ‘Aimmediately she was made 
straight, and glorified God. 

14 And the ruler of the synagogue 
answered with indignation, because 
that Jesus had “healed on the sab- 
bath day, and said unto the people, 
mThere are six days in which men 
ought to work: in them therefore 
come and be healed, and not on 
the sabbath day. 

15 The Lord then answered him, 
and said, Thou hypocrite, "doth 
not each one of you on the sabbath 
loose his ox or Ais ass from the stall, 
and lead him away to watering? 

16 And ought not this woman, be- 
ing a “daughter of Abraham, whom 
/Satan hath bound, lo, these eigh- 
teen years, be loosed from this 
bond on the sabbath day? 

17 And when he had said these 
things, all his adversaries were 
gashamed: and all the people re- 
joiced for all the glorious things 
that were done by him. 


Parable of the mustard seed 
(Mt. 13. 31,32, note; Mk. 4. 30-32). 


18 Then said he, "Unto what is 
the kingdom of God like? and 
whereunto shall I resemble it? 

19 It is like a grain of mustard 
seed, which a man took, and cast 
into his garden; and it grew, and 
Swaxed a great tree: and the fowls 


of the air lodged in the branches 
of it. 


Parable of the leaven 
(Mt. 13. 33, note). 


20 And again he said, Whereunto 
shall I liken the kingdom of God? 

21 It is like 4leaven, which a 
woman took and hid in three mea- 
sures of meal, till the whole was 
leavened. 


Teachings on the way to 
Jerusalem. 


22 And he went through the cities 


» ae Rw 


13 23] 


St. LUKE. 


[14 14 


and villages, teaching, and journey-| A.D. 33. lagen come when ye shall say, 


ing toward Jerusalem. 

23. Then said one unto him, Lord, 
are there “few that be “saved? And 
he said unto them, 

24 ‘Strive to enter in at the 
4strait gate: for many, I say unto 
you, will seek to enter in, and shall 
not be able. 

25 When once the master of the 
house is risen up, and hath ‘shut 
to the door, and ye begin to stand 
without, and to knock at the door, 
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; 
and he shall answer and say unto 
you, I know you not whence ye 


are: 
26 Then shall ye begin to say, We 
have eaten and drunk in thy pres- 


ence, and thou hast taught in our a 


streets. 

27 But She shall say, I tell you, I 
know you not whence ye are; de- 
part from me, all ye “workers of 
iniquity. i 

28 There shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth, when ye shall 
see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, 
and all the prophets, in the king- 
dom of God, and you yourselves 
thrust out. 

29 And ‘they shall come froin the 
east, and from the west, and from 
the north, and from the south, and 
shall sit down in the kingdom of 


God. 

30 And, behold, %there are last 
which shall be first, and there, are 
first which shall be last. 

31 The same day there came cer- 
tain of the Pharisees, saying unto 
him, Get thee out, and depart 

hence: for *Herod will kill thee. 

32 And he said unto them, Go ye, 
and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out 
devils, and I do cures to day and 
to morrow, and the third day I 
shall be “perfected. 

33 Nevertheless I must walk to 
day, and to morrow, and the day 
following: for it cannot be that a 
prophet perish out of Jerusalem. 


Jesus’ Iament over Jerusalem 
(Mt. 23. 37-39. Cf. Lk. 19. 41-44). 


34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalera, 
which killest the prophets, and 
stonest them that are sent unto 
thee; how often would ”I have 
gathered thy children together, as 
a hen doth gather her brood under 
her wings, and ye would not! 

35 Behold, your house is left unto 
you desolate: and verily I say unto 
you, Ye shall not see me, until the 


a Mt.7.14; 
20.16; Rev. 
7.9. 


b Rom.1.16, 
note. 


c Mt.7.13,14. 


d Mt.16.24; 
Lk.9.23; 14. 
33; 1 Pet. 
3.20. 


e Psa.32.6; 
Isa.55.6. 


J Mt.25.10; 
Rev.22.11. 


Psa.5.4,5; 
Mt.7.21,23; 
25.12,41. 


h Psa.101. 


i Rev.7.9,10. 

7 Mt.19.30; 
21.31,32; 

k See Mt.14.1, 
ref. 


l John 17. 
4,5; 19.30; 
Heb.2.10; 
5.8,9. 


m Mt.23.37. 

n John 10.30. 

fo) Deut.32. 
11,12; Psa. 
91.4. 


p See Mt. 
23.39, note. 


q Jehovah. 
Psa.118.26. 


r Miracles 


5 Prov.15.33; 
Jas.4.6. 


¢ Isa.57.15; 
Mt.5.3. 


« Neh.8. 
10,12. 


v Mt.25. 
34,40. 


1095 


Rom.9.30,33. 


Biessed is he that cometh in the 
name of the %Lord. 


CHAPTER 14. 
Jesus heals on the sabbath. 


fasta! D it came to pass, as he went 
into the house of one of the 
chief Pharisees to eat bread on the 
sabbath day, that they watched 


him. 

2 And, behold, there was a certain 
man before him which had the 
dropsy. 

3 And Jesus answering spake 
unto the lawyers and Pharisees, 
saying, Is it lawful to heal on the 
sabbath day? 

4 And they held their peace. And 
he took Aim, and ‘healed him, and 
let him go; 

5 And answered them, saying, 
Which of you shall have an ass or 
an ox fallen into a pit, and will not 
straightway pull him out on the 
sabbath day? 

6 And they could not answer him 
again to these things. 


Parable of the ambitious guest. 


7 And he put forth a parable to 
those which were bidden, when he 
marked how they chose out the 
chief rooms; saying unto them, 

8 When thou art bidden of any 
man to a wedding, sit not down in 
the highest room; lest a more hon- 
ourable man than thou be bidden 
of him; 

9 And he that bade thee and him 
come and say to thee, Give this 
man place; and thou begin with 
shame to take the lowest room. 

10 But when thou art bidden, go 
and sit down in the lowest room; 
that when he that bade thee com- 
eth, he may say unto thee, Friend, 


. |g0 up higher: then shalt thou have 


worship in the presence of them 
that sit at meat with thee. 

11 For whosoever ‘Sexalteth him- 
self shall be abased; and he that 
"thumbleth himself shall be exalted. 

12 Then said he also to him that 
bade him, When thou makest a din- 
ner or a supper, call not thy friends, 
nor thy brethren, neither thy kins- 
men, nor thy rich neighbours; lest 
they also bid thee again, and a 
recompence be made thee. 


13 But when thou makest a feast, 
call the “poor, the maimed, the 
lame, the blind: 

14 And ’thou shalt be blessed; for 


14 15] 


St. LUKE. 


[15 4 


the: AD. 33. 27 And “whosoever doth not bear 


Yy cannot recompense thee: for 
thou shalt be “recompensed at the 
bresurrection of the just. 

15 And when one of them that sat 
at meat with him heard these 
things, he said unto him, Blessed is 
he that shall eat bread in the ‘king- 
dom of God. 


Parable of the great supper. 
(Cf. Mt. 22..1-14.) 


16 Then said he unto him, 2A) 
certain man made a great supper, 
and bade many: 

17 And ¢sent his servant at sup- 
per time to say to them that were 
bidden, Come; for all things are 
now ready. 

18 fAnd they all with one con- 
sent began to make excuse. The 
first said unto him, I have bought a 
piece of ground, and I must needs 
go and see it: I pray thee have me 
excused. 

19 Andanother said, I havebought 
five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove 
them: I pray thee have me excused. 

20 And another said, I have mar- 
ried a wife, and therefore’ I cannot 
come. 

21 So that servant came, and 
shewed his lord these things. Then 
the master of the house being angry 
said to his servant, Go out quickly 
into the &streets and lanes of the 
city, and bring in hither the “poor, 
and the maimed, and the “halt, and 
the blind. 

22 And the servant said, Lord, it 
is done as thou hast commanded, 
and Jyet there is room. 

23 And the lord said unto the ser- 
vant, Go out into the highways and 
hedges, and *compel them to come 
in, that my house may be filled. 

24 For I say unto you, That ‘none 
of those men which were bidden 
shall taste of my supper. 


Discipleship again tested. 
Cf. Mt. 10. 37-39.) 


25 And there went great multi- 
tudes with him: and he turned, and 
said unto them, 

26 If any man come to me, and 
Imhate not his father, and mother, 


and wife, and children, and breth- 


a Judgments 
(the seven). 


Rev.20.12.) 
b Resurrec- 


tion. John 2. 


19-23. (Job 


d Parables 
(N.T.). 
16-24, 28-30, 
31-33; Lk. 
15.3-7. 
(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 


e Lk.10.1,6; 
Mt.3.1,3; 
10.1-15. 


F Isa.30.15; 
Mt.23.37; 
13.14,15; 
John 5.40. 


g Rev.22.17. 


h 1 Sam.2.8; 
Mt.5.3; 
Mk.12.37; 
Jas.2.5. 


i Isa.35.6. 
j Psa.130.7. 


vs. 


kk Psa.110.3. 


1 Prov.1.24, 


m Mt.10.37; 
Acts.14.22. 


n Lk.9.23; 
Mt.16.24; 
MKE.8.34,35; 
2 Tim.3.12. 


o Heb.6.11. 
Pp Prov.20.18. 
g Phil.3.7,8. 


r Mt.5.13; 
Mk.9.50. 


s John 15.6. 
¢ Mt.9.10,11. 


u Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


v Parables 


(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 


life also, he cannot be my disciple. | w Mt.18-12. 


ren, and sisters, yea, and his sic 


his cross, and come after me, can- 
not be my disciple. 


Parable of the tower. 


28 For which of you, intending to 
build a tower, sitteth not down first, 
and counteth the cost, whether he 
have sufficient to finish it? 

29 Lest haply, after he hath laid 


* |the foundation, and is not able to 


finish zt, all that behold it begin 
to mock him, 

30 Saying, This man began to 
build, and was not able to °finish. 


Parable of the king going to war. 


31 Or what king, going to make 
war against another king, sitteth 
not down first, and *consulteth 
whether he be able with ten thou- 
sand to meet him that cometh 
against him with twenty thousand? 

32 Or else, while the other is yet 
a great way off, he sendeth an am- 
bassage, and desireth conditions of 
peace. 

33 So likewise, whosoever he be 
of you that forsaketh not Zall that 
he hath, he cannot be my disciple. 


Parable of the savourless salt. 
(Cf. Mt. 5. 13; Mk. 9. 50.) 


34 "Salt is good: but if the salt 
have lost his savour, wherewith 


‘shall it be seasoned? 


35 It is neither fit for the land, 
nor yet for the dunghill; but smen 
cast it out. He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear. 


CHAPTER 15. 
The murmuring Pharisees. 


4 Patel drew ‘near unto him all 
the publicans and “sinners for 
to hear him. 

2 And the Pharisees and scribes 
murmured, saying, This man re- 
pea “sinners, and eateth with 

em. 


Parable of the lost sheep. 
(Cf. Mt. 18. 12-14.) 


3 And he spake this "parable unto 


“|them, saying, 


4 What “man of you, having an 
hundred sheep, if he lose one of 
them, doth not leave the ninety 
and nine in the wilderness, and go 


1 All terms which 
affection is to be, as 
were hate. 
person. 


define the emotions or affections are comparative. 
compared with the believer’s devotedness to Christ, as if it 
See Mt. 12. 47-50, where Christ illustrates this principle in His own 


But in the Lord the natural affections are sanctified and lifted to the level 


of the divine love (cf John 19, 26, 27; Eph. 5 2 


1096 


Natural 


5-28). 


155] 


St. LUKE. 


[15 32 


after that which is lost, until he 
find it? 

5 And when-he hath found it, he 
layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. 

6 And when he cometh home, he 
calleth together Ais friends and 
neighbours, saying unto them, Re- 
joice with me; for I have found my 
6sheep which was lost. 

7 I say unto you, that likewise 
joy shall be in heaven over one sin- 
ner that ‘repenteth, more than over 
ninety and nine just persons, which 
need no “repentance. 


Parable of the lost coin. 


8 Either what woman having ten 
@pieces of silver, if she lose one 
piece, doth not light a candle, and 
sweep the house, and seek diligently 
till she find 1t? 

9 And when she hath found it, 
she calleth her friends and her'| 
neighbours together, saying, Re- 
joice with me; for I have found the’! 


piece which I had lost. 

10 Likewise, I say unto you, 
ethere is joy in the presence of the! 
fangels of God over one sinner that) 
repenteth. 

Parable of the lost son. 


11 And he said, A ,certain man 

had two sons: 

(The departure.) 
_12 And the younger of them said 
to Ars father, Father, give me the 
portion of goods that falleth fo me. 
And he divided unto them his 
living. 

13 And not many days after the 
younger son gathered all together, 
and took his journey into a far 
country, and there wasted his sub- 
stance with riotous: living. 


(The misery of the far country.) 

14 And when he had spent all, 
there arose a mighty famine in that 
land; and he began to. be in want. 

15 And he went and joined him- 
self to a citizen of that country; and 
he sent him into. his fields. to feed 
swine. 


16 And he would fain have filled 
his belly with the husks that the 
swine did eat: and no man gave 
unto him. 

(The repentance.) 

17 And when he came to himself, 
he said, How many hired servants 
of my father’s have bread enough 
and to spare, and I perish with hun- 


ger: 4 
18 I 4will arise and go to my 


A.D. 33. 


a Gr. apol- 
Iumi. John 
3.16, note. 


b Psa.119: 
176; 1 Pet.2- 
25. 


c Repentance. 
Lk.16.30. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 


d drachma, 
here trans- 
lated a-piece 
of silver, is 
the eighth 
part of an 
ounce, and is 
equal to the 
Roman 
penny. See 
Mt.18.28. 


e¢ Bzk.18.23; 
Acts 11.18. 


f Heb.1.4, 
note. 


g Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


h Lk.18.11_ 


+ Bible 
prayers 
(N.T.). 
Lk.17.5. 
(Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 


j Psa.51.4- 

k Zech.3.3-5. 

| Death (spir- 
itual). John 
5.24. (Gen.2, 
17; Eph.2.5.) 


mLk.18,11, 


1097 


father, and will ‘say unto him, 
Father, I have sinned against 
heaven, and before thee, 

19 And am no more worthy to be 
called thy son: make me as one of 
thy hired servants. 


(The return and the father.) 


20° And he afose, and came to his 
father. But when he was yet a 
great way off, his father saw him, 
and had compassion, and ran, and 
fell on his neck, and kissed him. 

21 And the son said unto him, 
Father, I have ésinned against 
Jheaven, and in thy sight, and am 
no. more worthy to be called thy son. 

22 But the father saidi to his ser- 
vants, *Bring forth the best robe. 
and put ft on him; and put a ring 
on his hand, and’ shoes on: his feet: 


(The rejoicing.) 


23 And. bring hither the fatted 
calf, and kill 7¢; and let us eat, and 
be merry: . 

24 For this my son was ‘dead, 
and is alive again; he was lost, and 
is found. And they began to be 
merry. 


(The Pharisee.) 


25 Now his elder son was. in the 
field: and as he came and drew nigh 
to the house, he heard musick and 
dancing. 

26 And he called one of the ser- 
vants, and asked what these things 
meant. 

27 And he said unto him, Thy 
brother is come; and thy father 
hath killed the fatted calf, because 
he hath received him safe and 
sound. 

28 And he was angry, and would 
not go in: therefore came his father 
out, and intreated, him. 

29 And he answering said to his 
father, Lo, these many years.do I 
serve thee, neither transgressed I 
at any time thy commandment: 
and yet thou never gavest me a 
kid, that I might make merry with 
my friends. 

30 But as soon as this thy son 
was come, which hath devoured 
thy living with harlots, thou hast 
killed for him the fatted calf. 

31 And he said unto him, Son, 
thou art ever with me, and all that 
I have is thine 

82 It was meet that we should 
rnake merry, and be glad: for this 
thy brother was dead, and is alive 
again; and was lost, and is found. 


(- j 


16 1] 


“CHAPTER 16. 
Parable of the unjust steward. 


ND he said also unto his disci- 
ples, *There was a certain rich 
man, which had a steward; and 
the same was accused unto him 
that he had wasted his goods. | 

2 And he called him, and said 
unto him, How is it that I hear this 
of thee? give ai account of thy 
stewardship; for thou mayest be no 
longer steward. a Hs 

3 Then the steward said within 
himself, What shall I do? for my 
lord taketh away from me the 
stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg 
I am ashamed. 

4 I am resolved what to do, that, 
when I am put out of the steward- 
ship, they may receive me into 
their houses. 


5 So he called every one of his|? 


lord’s debtors unto Arm, and said 
unto the first, How much owest 
thou unto my lord? 

6 And he said, An hundred 'mea- 
sures of oil, And he said unto him, 
Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, 
and write fifty. 


Pp 
7 Then said he to another, And 


-how much owest thou? And he 
said, An hundred ‘measures of 
wheat. And he said unto him, 
Take thy bill, and write fourscore, 
8 And the lord commended the 
unjust steward, because he had 
done -wisely: for the children of 
this world are in their generation 
wiser than the ¢children of light. 
9 And I say unto you, ‘Make to 
yourselves friends of the /mammon 
of £unrighteousness; that, when ye 
fail, they may receive you into 
everlasting habitations. 
yy) 10 He that is faithful in that 
‘(which is least is faith ful 1 also in 

much: and he that is unjust in the 
least is unjust also in much. 

11 If therefore ye have not been 
faithful in the unrighteous mam- 
mon, who will commit to your trust 
‘the true riches? 

12 And if ye have not been faith- 
ful in that which is Janother man’s, 
who shall give you that which is 
kyour own? 


St. LUKE. 


A.D. 33. 


a Parables 


(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21.29-31.) 
6 One measure 
= about 8 1-2 
gals. See 
Ezk.45.10,14. 

c One measure 
=about 10bu. 

d John 12.36; 
Eph.5.8. 

e1Tim.6.18,19. 

f Or, riches. 

g Lk.12.15; 
Prov.22.16; 
Jer.17.11; 
Mk.10.24; 
Jas.5.1,4. 

h Psa.73.26. 

42 Cor.6.10; 


Tit.1.16. 
gSee Mt.11. 
12, note. 

r Mt.5.32. 

s vs. 19-31 are 
not said to be 
a parable. 
Rich men 
and beggars 
are common; 
there is no 
reason why 
Jesus may 
not have had 
in mind a 
particular 
case. Inno 
parable ts an 
individual 
named. 

? Heb.1.4, 
note, 

u Mt.8.11. 

v Prov.14.32. 

w Death 
(physical). 
vs.22,23; 
John 11.11- 
14. (Gen.3. 
19; Heb.9.27.) 

x Rev.14.10,11. 


[16-24 


13 ’No servant can serve two' 
masters: for either he will hate the 
one, and love the other; or else he 
will hold to the one, and despise the 
other. ™Ye cannot serve God and 
mammon. 


Jesus answers the Pharisees. 


14 And the Pharisees also, who 
were covetous, heard all these 
things: and they derided him. 

15 And he said unto them, Ye are 
they which justify “yourselves be- 
fore men; but °God knoweth your 
hearts: for that which is highly 
esteemed ?among men is abomina- 
tion in the sight of God. 

16 The law and the prophets 
were until John: since that time 
tthe kingdom of God is preached, 
and every man presseth into it. 

17 And it is easier for heaven and 
earth to pass, than one tittle of the 
law to fail. 


Jesus and divorce. (Cf. Mt. 5. 
31, 32; 19. 3-11; Mk. 10. 2-12; 1 Cor. 
7. 10-15.) 


18 Whosoever ‘putteth away his 
wife, and marrieth another, com- 
mitteth adultery: and whosoever 
marrieth her that is put away from 
her husband committeth adultery, 


The rich man and Lazarus. 


19 ‘There was a certain rich man, 
which was clothed in purple and 
fine linen, and fared sumptuously 
every day: ‘ 

20 And there was a certain beggar 
named Lazarus, which was laid at 
his gate, full of sores, 

21 And desiring to be fed with the 
crumbs which fell from the rich 
man’s table: moreover the dogs 
came and licked his sores. 

22 And it came to pass, that the 
beggar died, and was carried by the 
fangels into “Abraham’s bosom: > 
the "rich man also “died, and was 
buried; 

23 *And in ‘hell he lift up his 
eyes, being in torments, and seeth 
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in 
his besom. 

24 And he cried and said, Father 
Abraham, have mercy on me, and 


_1Gr. hades, “the unseen world,” is revealed as the 
Spirits between death and resurrection. 
10. 15; Acts 2. 27, 31; Rev. 1. 18; 6. 8; 20. 13, 1 


(Hab. 2. 5, note), 
_ Summary: (1) 

which the word occurs make it cle 

abodes respectively of the saved an 


place of departed human 


The word occurs, Mt. 11. 23; 16. 18; Lk 
3; 20. 4, and is the equivalent of 
The Septuagint invariably renders sheo! by hades. 
Hades before the ascension of Christ. 


the O.T. sheol 


The passages in 


ar that hades was formerly in two divisions, the 


d of the lost. 


1098 


The former was called “paradise’’ 


16 25] St. LUKE. : [17 11 


send Lazarus, that he may dip the}__a.D.33.__|neck, and he cast into the sea, than 


tip of his finger in water, and cool that he should offend one of these 
vite Setar for I am tormented in|! little ones. 

is “flame. ‘ a Mk.9.43. 3 Take heed to yourselves: If 

25 But Abraham said, Son, re-| 5 1ic6.24; brother /trespass against eee 


member that thou in thy 4lifetime| Job 21.13; im. ; 

receivedst thy good things; and like. Bs. 73.12 age and if he 9repent, “for- 

wise Lazarus evil things: but now Gee siak 4 And if he/trespass against thee 

ee is Og is and thou art Lea esd fseven times. in a day, and seven 
ormented. — : x.4.15; times in a day turn again to thee, 
26 And beside all this, between us| , °Y-??%)_| saying, I 9repent; thou shalt ‘for 


d Repentance 


and you there is a great gulf fixed:|"714734. "| give him. 

so that they which would pass from| (mt.3.2; 5 And the apostles /said unto the 
hence to you cannot; neither can| sts 17-30) | Lord, Increase our faith. 

they pass to us, that would come Me tR TE 6 And the Lord said, If ye had 
from thence. Gai.s.19.21. |*faith asa grain of mustard seed, ye 


27 Then he said, I pray thee|;sin. Rom3. |might say unto this sycamine tree, 
therefore, father, that thou would-} 23, note. Be thou plucked up by the root, and 
est send him to my father’s house:|¢ Repentance. |be thou planted in the sea; and it 

28 For { have five brethren; that| 7/33’ [should obey you. 


he may testify unto them, lest they} Acts 17.30.) A parable of service 

also come into this place of tor-|; Rom.12.21; 3 ‘1 

Fiene: 1cor.6.68. | 7 But ‘which of you, having a 
29 Abraham saith unto him, They] ‘ Forgive- servant plowing or feeding cattle, 


A ness. vs.3,4; |will say unto him by and by, when 
“nahn sea i prophets; let ee he is come from the field, Go and 
30 And he said, Nay, father Abra-|_Mt.20.28.) [sit down to meat? 


ham: but if one went unto them|/ ible 8 And will not rather say unto 
from the dead, they will repent. INCL). Lk. hin cane anol praise I may 
31 And he said unto him, “If they] 17.13. (Mt. IL gt ise etc’ Sete nace 
hear not Moses and the prophets,} 69; Rev-22- I have eaten and drunken; and 
Beaithendwally thevebeuperstadied 20.) . afterward thou shalt eat and drink? 
though one rose from the dead. |" Tait" gobs | 9 Doth he thank that servant be- 
i 20: Hebil. |cause he did the things that were 

CHAPTER 17 39") commanded him? I trow not. 
Z do 3 ve | Parables 10 So likewise ye, when ye shall 
An instruction in forgiveness. ee have done all those things which 
Cf. Mt. 18. 7, 15.) iMtsizie. [are commanded you, say, Weare 


: Geen Lk.21.29-31.) j|unprofitable servants: we have done 
“| Repeal caeateabecaog sees gee? bel m 1 Chr.29.14; that which was our duty to do. 
fences will come: but woe unto] 1sa.64.6: Ten lepers healed. 
him, through whom they come! 1 Cor.9.16.17.| 17 And it came to pass, as he went 
2 It were better for him that a to Jerusalem, that he passed through 
millstone were hanged about his ; ‘the midst of Samaria and Galilee. 


and ‘‘Abraham’s bosom.” Both designations were Talmudic, but adopted by Christ 
in Lk. 16. 22; 23.43. The blessed dead were with Abraham, they were conscious and 
were “comforted” (Lk. 16. 25). The believing malefactor was to be, that day, 
with Christ in “paradise.”” The lost were separated from the saved by a “great 
gulf fixed’? (Lk. 16. 26). The representative man of the lost who are now in hades 
is the rich man of Lk. 16. 19-31. He was alive, conscious, in the full exercise of his 
faculties, memory, etc., and in torment. 

(2) Hades since the ascension of Christ. So far as the unsaved dead are 
concerned, no change of their place or condition is revealed in Scripture. At the 
judgment of the great white throne, hades will give them up, they will be judged, 
and will pass into the lake of fire (Rev. 20. 13, 14). But a change has taken place 
which affects paradise. Paul was ‘‘caught up to the third heaven . . . into paradise” 
(2 Cor. 12. 1-4). Paradise, therefore, is now in the immediate presence of God. It 
is believed that Eph. 4. 8-10 indicates the time of the change. ‘When he ascended 
up on high he led a multitude of captives.”” It is immediately added that He had 
previously “descended first into the lower parts of the earth,” i.e. the paradise 
division of hades. During the present church-age the saved who died are “absent 
from the body, at home with theLord.” The wicked dead in hades, and the righteous 
dead “at home with the Lord,” alike await the resurrection (Job 19, 25; 1 Cor. 15. 52). 


See Mt. 5. 22, note, 
% 1099 


17 12} 


ps1 


12 And as he entered into a cer- 
tain village, there met him ten men 
that werelepers, which stood.:afar off: 

13 And they lifted up their 
voices, and said, Jesus, Master, 
have mercy on us. 

14 And when he saw them, he 
said unto them, Go-shew yourselves’ 
unto: the priests. And it. came to) 
pass, that, as they went, they were’ 
cleansed. 

15 And one of them, when he saw! 
that he was. healed, turned back, 
and with a loud voice glorified God, 

16 And fell down om Ais face at 
his feet, giving him thanks: and. he 
was a Samaritan. 

17 And Jesus answering said, 
Were there not ten cleansed? but 
where are the nine? 

18 There are not found that re- 
turned to give glory to God, save 


21 Neither shall they say, Lo 


here! or, lo there! for, behold, ¢the||j Inspiration. 


kingdom of God is !¢within you. Mee eat 
Jesus foretells his second com-| ©*-4-15; 
ing(Deut.30,3; Acts. 9-11, note), | R221) 
22 And he said unto the disciples, |* M*-2#-49- 
The days will come, when ye shall 12: Ki.21.14; 
desire to see one of the days of the pee ee 
JSon of man, and ye shail not see it. Jer4.6,7: 
23 And they shall say to you, See] Mt.24.28. 
here; or, see there: go not after Patan 
them, nor follow ther. ONT). ve 
24 Foras the lightning, that light-|  1-8,9-14; 
eneth out of the one part under) Lk-19-11-27. 


heaven, shineth unto the other part 
under heavens, so shall also: the Son 
of man be in his day. 

25 But first must he suffer many. 


1 Gr. entos = “‘in the midst,” 


him. Our Lord’s whole answer, designedly enigmatic to the 
13. 10-13), has a dispensational meaning. 


d Rom.14.17. 


6 Miracles 
(N.T.). vs. 
11-19; Lk.18. 
35-43. (Mt. 
8.2,3; Acts 28. 
8,9.) 


c Or, with out- 
ward show. 


ein the midst 
of. 


things, and be rejected of this gen- 
eration. 

| 26 And as it was in the days. of 
Noe, “so shall it be also im the days 
of the Som of man. 

27 They did eat, they drank, they 
married wives, they were given in 
marriage, until the day that Noe 
entered into the ark, and the flood 
came, and destroyed them all. 

28 Likewise also: as it was in the 
days of Lot; they did eat, they 
drank, they bought, they sold, they 
planted, they builded: 

29 But the same day that Lot 
went out of Sodom it rained: fire 
and: brimstone from heaven, and 
destroyed them all. 

30 Even‘thus shall it be in:theday 


f Mt.8.20, 
note. 


g LK.21.8; 


‘this s ger. Mt.24.23; 
19 And he said’ unto him, Arise,| Mk.13.21. 
go thy way: thy faith 5hath made Renate. 
thee whole. Gen.7.11; 
The kingdom in its spirituai ce raers 3: 
aspect. (Cf. Lk. 19. 11, 12.) 2 Pet.2.5; 
20 And when he was demanded| 
of the Pharisees, when the kingdom| Greresisee- 
of God should come, he answered} 3251). “vs.24- 
them and said, The kingdom of God} 36; Lk.18.8. 
cometh not with “observation: Re ee 


-(Mt.5.13-16; 
Lk.21,29-31.) 


when: the /Son of man is revealed. 

31 In that day, he which shall be 
upon the housetop, and his stuff in 
the house, let him not come down 
te take it away: and: he that is in 
the field, let him likewise not return 
back. 

32 iRemember Lot’s wife: 

33. Whosoever shalk seek to save 
his life shall lose it: and whosoever 
shall lose his life shall preserve it. 

34. I tell you, *in that night there 
shall be two men in one bed; the 
one shall be taken, and the other 
shall be left. 

35 Two women shall be grinding 
together; the one shall bé taken, 
and the other left. 
| 36 Two men shall be in the field; 
the one shall be taken, and the 
other left. 
| 37 And they answered and said 
unto him, Where, Lord? And he 
said unto them, 2Wheresoever the 
body is, ‘thither will the eagles be 
gathered together. 


CHAPTER 18, 

' Parable of the unjust judge 

| A ND he spake a parable unto 
f them to this end, that men. 
erik always to pray, and not to 


It could not be said of a self-righteous, Christ- 
rejecting Pharisee, that the kingdom of God, as to its spiritual content, was within 


The kingdom in its 


Pharisees (cf. Mt. 
outward form, as 


covenanted to David (2 Sam. 7. 8-17) and described by the prophets (Zech. 12. 8, 


note), had been rejected by the 


Jews; so that, during this present age. it would 


not “come with observation” (lit. “outward show”) but in the hearts of men (cf. 


Lk. 19. 11, 12; Acts 1. 6-8, note 


; Rom. 14. 17). 


Meantime, the kingdom was ac- 


tually “in the: midst” of the Pharisees in the persons of the King and His disciples. 


kingdom of heaven 


Ultimately the 
2 “Armageddon” (Rev. 16. 


See 


will come, 
14; 19, 17, n 
1100 


with outward’ show. (See v. 24.) 


ote), 


18 2] 


2 Saying, There was in a city a 
judge, which feared not God, 
neither regarded man: 

3 And there was a widow in that 
city; and she came unto him, say- 
ing, Avenge me of mine adversary. 

4 And he would not for a while: 
but afterward he said within him- 
self, Though I fear not God, nor 
Tegard man; 

5 Yet because this widow trou- 
bleth me, I will avenge her, lest by 
her continual coming she weary me. 

6 And the Lord said, Hear what 
the unjust judge saith. 

7 And shall not God ¢avenge his 
own elect, which cry day and night 
unto him, though he bear long with 
them? 

8 I tell you that he will avenge 
them speedily. Nevertheless when 
the 8Son of man “cometh, shall he 
find 14faith on the earth? 


Parable of the Pharisee and 
the publican. 


9 And he spake this parable unto 
certain which trusted in themselves 
that they were ‘righteous, and de- 
spised others: 

10 Two men went up into the 
temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, 
and the other @ publican. 

11 The Pharisee stood and 
Sprayed thus with himself, God, I 
thank thee, that I am not as other 
men are, extortioners, unjust, adul- 


terers, or even as this publican. 


12 I fast twice in the week, I give 
tithes of all that I possess. i 

13 And the publican, standing 
afar off, would not lift up so much 
as his eyes unto heaven, but smote 


~ upon his breast, %saying, God be 


2hmerciful to me a ‘sinner. 

14 I tell you, this man went down 
to his house justified rather than 
the other: for every one that exalt- 
eth himself shall be abased; and he 
that humbleth himself shall be ex- 
alted. 


Jesus blesses little children (Mt. 
19. 13-15, Mk. 10 13-16) 


St. LUKE. 


[18 29 


A.D. 33. H 


also infants, that he would touch 
them: but when his disciples saw 


it, they rebuked them. 


a Rev.6.10. 

6 Mt.8.20, 
note. 

c Christ 
(Second 
Advent). 
Lk.21.25-28> 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11,) 

d Apostasy. 

2 Thes.2.1-12. 


(Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 
g Bible 


(Mt.6.9; 
Rey.22.20.) 
hi.e. propiti- 
ated. 
i Sin. Rom.3. 


23, note. 

j Justifica- 
tion. vs.10- | 
14; Acts 13. 
39. (Lk.18. 
14; Rom.3. 
28.) 


k Mt.19.13; 
Mk.10.13. 
7 Mt.18.3; 
1 Pet.2.2. 
m Psa.131.2. 
n Lk.10.25,37; 


Mt.19.16; 


r Rev.6.10. 

s Ezk.33.31; 
Mt.6.24; 13. 
22; Eph.5.5. 

t Psa.62.10; 
Mk.10.24; 

1 Tim.6.9,10 

u Rom.1.16, 


| 16 But Jesus called them unto 


him, and said, Suffer little children 


ito come unto me, and forbid them 


not: for of ‘such is the kingdom of 
God. 

17 Verily I say unto you, Whoso- 
ever shall not receive the kingdom 
of God as a little child “shall in no 
wise enter therein. 


The rich young ruler (Mt. 19. 
16-30; Mk. 10. 17-31). 


18 “And acertain ruler asked him, 
saying. Good Master, what shall I 
do to inherit eternal life? 

19 And Jesus said unto him, Why 
callest thou me good? none is good, 
save “one, that is, God. 

20 Thou knowest the ?command- 
ments, Do not commit adultery, Do 
not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear 
false witness, Honour thy father 
and thy mother, 

21 And he said, All %’these have I 
kept from my youth up. 

22 Now when Jesus heard these 
things, he said unto him, ‘Yet lack- 
est thou one thing: sell all that 
thou hast, and distribute unto the 
poor, and thou shalt have treasure 
in heaven: and come, follow me. 

23 And when he heard this, She 


was very sorrowful: for he was 
very rich. 

24 And when Jesus saw that he 
was very sorrowful, he said, ‘How 
hardly shall they that have riches 
enter into the kingdom of God! 

25 For it 1s easier for a camel to 
go through a needle’s eye, than for 
a rich man to enter into the king- 
dom of God. 

26 And they that heard i¢ said, 
Who then can be “saved? 

27 And he said, The things 
which are impossible with men are 
possible with God. 

28 Then Peter said, Lo, we have 
weft all, and followed thee. 

29 And he said unto them, Verily 
I say unto you, There is no man 


15 And they brought unto him that hath “left house, or parents, or 


1 The reference is not to personal faith, but to belief in the whole body of re- 


vealed truth. 


(Cf. Rom. 1.5; 1 Cor. 16. 13; 2 Cor. 13. 5; Col. 1. 23; 2. 7; Tit. 1. 13; 


ude 3. See “Apostasy,” above, in marg. of Lk. 18. 8; 2 Tim. 3. 1, note.) 
z 2Gr. hilaskomai, used in the Septuagint and N.T. in connection with the 


mercy-seat (Ex. 25. 17, 18, 21; Heb. 9. 5) 


As 


an instructed Jew the publican is 


thinking, not of mere mercy, but of the blood-sprinkled mercy-seat (Lev. 16. 5, 


note; ‘‘Propitiation,” Rom. 3 25, note), iF 
toward me as thou art when thou lookest upon the atoning blood. 


His prayer might be paraphrased, “Be 


The Bible 


knows nothing of divine forgiveness apart from sacrifice (see Mt. 26. 28, note) 


* 


. 1101 


18 30] 


brethren, or wife, or children, for 
the kingdom of God’s sake, { 

30 Who shall not receive ¢mani- 
fold more in this present time, and 
in the “world to come life ever- 
lasting. 


Jesus again foretells his death 
and resurrection (Mt. 20. 17-19; 
Mk. 10. 32-34). 


31 Then he took unto him the 
twelve, and said unto them, Behold, 
we go up to Jerusalem, and <ail 
things that are written by the 
prophets concerning the ¢Son of 
man shall be accomplished. 

32 For he shall be “delivered unto 
the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, 
and spitefully entreated, and spit- 
ted on: 

33 And they shall scourge him, 
and put him to death: and the third 
day he shall rise again. 

' 34 And they understood none of 
these things: and this saying was 


hid from them, neither knew they 
the things which were spoken. 


A blind man healed near Jeri- 
‘cho. ee Mt. 20. 29-34; Mk. 10. 
46-52. 


35 And it fcame to pass, that as 

€ was come nigh unto Jericho, a 
certain ¢blind man sat by the way 
side begging: 

36 And hearing the multitude 
pass by, he asked what it meant. 

37_And they told him, that Jesus 
of Nazareth passeth by. 

38 And he cried, saying, Jesus, 
thou son of David, have mercy on 
me. 

39 And they which went before 
rebuked him, that he should hold: 
his peace: but he cried 4so much 
the more, Thou son of David, have 
mercy on me. 

40 And Jesus stood, and com- 
manded him to be brought unto 
him: and when he was come near, 
he asked him, 

41 Saying, What wilt thou that I 
shall do unto thee? And he said, 
Lord, that I may receive my 
sight. 

42 And Jesus said unto him, Re- 
ceive thy sight: thy faith hath 
*saved thee. 

43 And immediately he Jreceived 
his sight, and followed him, glorify- 


ing God: and all the people, 
when they saw it, gave praise 
unto God, | 


St. LUKE. 


a John 16.33; 
Phil.4.7. 


bi.e. age. 


c Psa.22.; 
Isa.53. 


d Mt.8.20, 
note. 


éeLk.23.1; 
Mt.17.22. 


fMt.20.29; 
Mk.10.46. 


g Mt.20.30, 
note. 

h Jer.29.13; 
Lk.18.1; 
Col.4.2. 

# Rom.1.16, 


note. 


j Miracles 
(N.T.)._ vs. 


k John 14.23. 
7 Mt.9.11,13. 
m Psa.41.1. 
n Ex.22.1. 


o Rom.1.16, 
note, 


pb Mt.8.20, 
note. 


q Parables 
9-18. (Mts. 
13-16; Lk.21. 
29-31.) 

r Acts 1.6. 


s Mt.25.14; 
Mk.13.34. 


! mina, here 
translated a 


pound, is 12 
ounces and a 
half. 


u 1 Pet.4.9,11, 


1102 


CHAPTER 19. 
Conversion of Zacchzus. 


AN Jesus entered and passed 
through Jericho. 

2 And, behold, there was a man 
named Zacchzus, which was the 
chief among the publicans, and he 
was rich. 

3 And he sought to see Jesus who 
he was; and could not for the 
press, because he was little of stat- 


ure. 

4 And he ran before, and climbed 
up into a sycomore tree to see him: 
for he was to pass that way. 

5 And when Jesus came to the 
place, he looked up, and saw him, 
and said unto him, Zaccheus, make 
haste, and come down; for to day I 
must “abide at thy house. 

6 And he made haste, and came 
down, and received him joyfully. 

7 And when they saw it, they all 
murmured, saying, ’That he was 
gone to be guest with a man that 
is a sinner. 

8 And Zaccheus stood, and said 


-8./unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the 


half of my goods I give to the 
™poor; and if I have taken any 
thing from any man by false accusa- 
tion, I “restore Aim fourfold. 

9 And Jesus said unto him, This 
day is “salvation come to this house, 
forsomuch as he also is a son of 
Abraham. 

10 For the *Son of man is come to 
Sons and to save that which was 
ost. 


Parable of the ten pounds: the 
postponed kingdom. (See Lk. 
17. 21, note; Acts 1. 6-8, note.) 


li And as they heard these 
things, he added and spake a Ipar- 
able, because he was nigh to Jeru- 
salem, and “because they thought 
that the kingdom of God should 
immediately appear. 

12 He said therefore, 5A certain 
nobleman went into a far country 
to receive for himself kingdom, 
and to return. 

13 And he called his ten servants, 
and delivered them ten ‘pounds, 
and said unto them, “Occupy till I 
come. 

14 But his citizens hated him, and 
sent a message after him, saying, 
We will not have this man to reign 
over us. 

15 And it came to pass, that when 
he was returned, having received 


“ 


J 


19 16] 


St. LUKE. 


[19 45 


the kingdom, then he commanded 
these servants to be called unto 
him, to whom he had given the 
“money, that he might know how 
much every man had gained by 
trading. 

16 Then came the first, saying, 
Lord, thy pound hath gained ten 
pounds. 

17 And he said unto him, Well, 
, thou good servant: because thou 
)hast been faithful in a very little, 

have thou authority over ten cities. 

18 And the second came, saying, 
Lord, thy pound hath gained ‘five 
pounds. 

19 And he said likewise to him, 
Be thou also over five cities. 

20 And another came, saying, 
Lord, behold, here is thy pound, 
which I have kept laid up in a 
napkin: 

21 For I %feared thee, because 
thou art an austere man: thou tak- 
est up that thou layedst not down, 
and reapest that thou didst not sow. 

22 And he saith unto him, ‘Out of 
thine own mouth will I judge thee, 
thou wicked servant. Thou knew- 
est that I was an austere man, 
taking up that I laid not down, and 
reaping that I did not sow: 

23 Wherefore then gavest not 
thou my money into the bank, that 
at my coming I might have required 
mine own with usury? 

24 And he said unto them that 
stood by, Take from him the pound, 
and give it to him that hath ten 
pounds. 

25 (And they said unto him, 
Lord, he hath ten pounds.) 

26 For I say unto you, ?That unto 
every one which hath shall be 
given; and from him that hath not, 
even that he hath shall be taken 
away from him. 3 

27 But those mine ‘enemies, 
which would not that I should reign 
over them, bring hither, and slay 
them before me. 


fThe triumphal entry (Mt. 21. 
1-9; Mk. 11. 1-10). 


28 And when he had thus spoken, 
he went before, ascending up to 
Jerusalem. 

29 And %it came to pass, when he 
was come nigh to Bethphage and 
Bethany, at the mount called the 
mount of Olives, he sent two of his 
disciples, ; 

30 Saying, Go ye into the village 
over against you; in the which at 
your entering ye shall find a colt 


A.D. 33. 


a silver; also 
v.23. 


b Rom.8.15; 
2 Tim.1.6,7. 


c 2 Sam.1.16; 
Job 15.6; 
Mt.12.37; 
Rom.3.19. 


d Lk.8.18; 
Mt.13.12; 
Mk.4.25. 


é€1 Cor.15.25; 
Heb.10.13; 


f See Mt.21.4, 
note. 


g Mt.21.1; 
Mk.11.1; 
John 12.14. 


h Zech.9.9. 
4 Psa.118.26. 


j Lk.2.14; 
Rom.5.1}., 
Eph.2.14. 


k Lk.2.14. 
1 John 11.35. 
m Lk.13.34. 


n Deut.5.29; 
Psa.95.7,8; 
Heb.3.13. 


o Lk.1.77,79; 
Isa.48.18; 
Acts 10.36; 
Rom.5.1, 


p Mic.3.12;. 
Mt.23.37. 


q Lk.1.68; 
Tsa.55.6; 
John 12.35; 
2 Cor.6.1,2. 


r Mt.21.12; 
Mk.11.15. 


1103 


Rev.19.11,21. 


tied, whereon yet never man sat: 
loose him, and bring Aim hither. 

31 And if any man ask you, Why 
do ye loose him? thus shall ye say 
unto him, Because the Lord hath 
need of him. 

32 And they that were sent went 
their way, and found even as he 
had said unto them. 

33 And as they were loosing the 
colt, the owners thereof said unto 
them, Why loose ye the colt? 

34 And they said, The Lord hath 
need of him. 

35 And they brought him to Jesus: 
and they cast their garments upon 
the colt, and they “set Jesus thereon. 
36 And as he went, they spread 
their clothes in the way. 

37 And when he was come nigh, 
even now at the descent of the 
mount of Olives, the whole multi- 
tude of the disciples began to re- 
joice and praise God with a loud 
voice for all the mighty works that 
they had seen; 

38 Saying, ‘Blessed be the King 
that cometh in the name /of the 
Lord: peace in heaven, and “glory 
in the highest. 

39 And some of the Pharisees 
from among the multitude said unto 
him, Master, rebuke thy disciples. 

40 And he answered and said unto 
them, I tell you that, if these should 
hold their peace, the stones would 


immediately cry out. 


Jesus weeps over Jerusalem. 
(Cf. Lk. 13. 34, 35.) 


41 And when he was come near, 
he beheld the city, and wept /over it, 

42 Saying, “If thou hadst known, 
even thou, at least in this “thy day, 
the things which °belong unto thy 
peace! but now they are hid from 
thine eyes. 

43 For the days shall come upon 
thee, that thine enemies shall cast 
a trench about thee, and compass 
thee round, and keep thee in on 
every side, 

44 And shall lay thee even with 
the ground, and thy children within 
thee; and they shall not leave jin 
thee one stone upon another; be- 
cause thou knewest not %the time 


lof thy visitation. 


Second purification of the tem- 
ple (Mt. 21. 12-16; Mk. 11. 15-18. 
Cf. John 2. 13-17). 


45 And ‘he went into the temple, 
and began to cast out them that 
sold therein, and them that bought: 


19 46] 


46 Saying unto them, It is writ- 
ten, My house is the “house of 
prayer: but ye have made it a $den| 
of thieves. 

47 And he taught daily in the 
temple. But the chief priests and 
the scribes and the chief of the peo- 
ple sought to destroy him, : 

48 And could not find what they 
tight do: for all-the people ‘were 
very attentive to hear him, 


CHAPTER 20. 


Jesus’ authority questioned 
(Mt. 21. 23-27; Mk, 11. 27-33). 


ANP dit came to pass, that on 
one of those days, as he taught 
the people in the temple, and 
preached the ‘gospel, the chief 
priests and the seribes came upon 
him with the elders, 

2 And spake unto him, saying, 
Tell us, by what authority doest 
thou these things? or who is he 
that gave thee this authority? 

3 And he answered and said unto 
them, I will also ask you one thing; 
and answer me: 

4 The baptism of John, was it 
from heaven, or of men? 

5 And they reasoned with them- 
selves, saying, If we shall say, 
From heaven; he will say, Why 
then believed ye him not? 

6 But and if we say, Of men; all 
the people will stone us: for they 
8be persuaded that John was a 
prophet. 

7 And they answered, that they 
could not tell whence it was. 

8 And Jesus said unto them, Nei- 
ther tell I you by what authority I 
do these things. 


Parable of the vineyard (Mt. 21. 
33-46; Mk. 12. 1-12. Cf. Isa. 5. 1-7). 


9 Then began he to. speak to the 
people this *parable; A ‘certain man 
planted a Jvineyard, and let it forth 
to husbandmen, and went into a 
far country for a long time. 

10 And at the season he “sent a 
servant to the husbandmen, that 
they should give him of the /fruit 
of the vineyard: but the husband- 
men beat him, and sent him away 
empty, 

1] And again he sent another ser- 
vant: and they beat him also, and 
entreated him shamefully, and sent 
him away empty. 

12 And again he sent a third: and 
they wounded him also, and cast 
him, out, 


Str. LUKE. 


a Isa.56.7. 
b Jer.7.11. 


cOr, hanged 
on him. 


d Mt.21.23; 
MkE.11.27. 


e Gospel. 
Lk.24.47. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 

f Acts 4.7,10. 


g Mt.3.5,6; 
ME.6.20. 


h Parables 


i Mt.21.33; 
Mk.12.1. 


j Isa.5.1,7. 

k 2 Ki.17.13. 
t John 15.1,8. 
m Heb.1.1,2. 
n Heb.1.2. 


o Mt.27. 
21,25, 


pb Acts 2.23; 
4.25,27. 


q Prov.1. 
24.31; Dan. 
9.26. 


r Rom.11.11, 


u John 7.30. 
v Mt.18.28. 


w Mt.17.25,27; 
Rom.13.7. 


x1 Pet.2. 
13,17. 


y Col.4.6, 


1104 


[20 26 


13. Then said the lord of the vine- 
yard, What shall I do? I will “send 
my beloved son: it may be they 
will reverence him when they see 
him 


14 But when the husbandmen 
saw him, they reasoned among 
themselves, saying, “This is the 
heir: come, “let us kill him, that the 
inheritance may be our’s. 

15 So they *cast him out of the 
vineyard, and killed him. What 
therefore shall the lord of the 
vineyard do unto them? 

16 He shall come and destroy 
these husbandmen, and shall give 
the vineyard to. “others. And when 
aN heard it, they said, God for. 


id. 

17 And he beheld them, and said, 
What is this then that is written, 
The Sstone which the builders re- 


.| jected, the same is become the head 


of the corner? 

18 Whosoever shall fall upon that 
stone shall be broken; ‘but on 
whomsoever it shall fall; it will 
gtind him to powder. 


Question of the tribute-money 
(Mt. 22. 15-22; Mk. 12. 13-17). 


19 And the chief priests and the 
scribes the same hour “sought to 
lay hands on. him; and they feared 
the people: for they perceived that 
he had spoken this. parable against 
them. 

20 And they watched him, and 

sent forth spies, which should. feign 
themselves just men, that they 
might take hold. of his: words, that 
so they might deliver him unto. the 
power and authority of the gover- 
nor. 
21 And they asked him, saying, 
Master, we know that thou sayest 
and teachest rightly, neither ac- 
ceptest thou the person of arty, but 
teachest the way of God truly: 

22 Is it lawful for us to give 
tribute unto Cesar, or no? 

23 But he perceived their crafti- 
ness, and said unto them, Why 
tempt ye me? 

_24 Shew me a "penny. Whose 
image and superscription hath it? 
They answered and said, Cesar’s. 

25 And he said unto them, “Ren- 
der therefore unto Cesar the things 
which be Czsar’s, and unto *God 
the things which be God’s, 

26 And they could not take hold 
of his words before the people: and 
they Ymarvelled at his answer, and 
held their peace. 


20 27| 


Jesus answers the Sadducees 
about the resurrection (Mt. 
22. 23-33; Mk. 12. 18-27). 


27 *Then came to him certain of 
the °Sadducees, which deny that 
there is any resurrection; and they 
asked him, 

28 Saying, Master, “Moses wrote 
unto us, If.any man’s brother die, 
having a wife, and he die without 
children, that his brother should 
take his wife, and raise up seed un- 
to his brother. 

29 There were therefore seven’ 
brethren: and the first took a wife, 
and died without children. 

30 And the second took her to 
wife, and he died childless. 

31 And the third took her; and in 
like manner the seven also: and 
they left no children, and died. 
nee Last of all the woman died 

sO. 

33 Therefore in the resurrection 
whose wife of them is she? for 359.8 
seven had her to wife. MES * 

34 And Jesus answering said unto] pi24.’ 
them, The children of this ¢world|, 1411.43. 
marry, and are given in marriage:|5 1.14.7. 

35 But they which shall be ac-|, mt:23.14. 
counted ‘worthy to obtain that} nx10.12-14. 
4world, and the resurrection from]; ic. condem- 
the dead, neither marry, nor are| nation. 
given in marriage: sMk.12.41-44; 

36 Neither can they die any more:| 1,024; 12. 
for they are equal unto the fangels;| 19-31: 18.23- 
and are the children of God, being] 27; 19.2-10. 
the children of the resurrection. | ¢Lk.18.3; 

37 Now that the dead are raised,| 2 'Cor-0-10. 
Seven Moses shewed at the ‘bush,|" Que mite= 
when he calleth the Lord the “God 
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, 

and the God of Jacob. 
~ 38 For he is not a God of the 
dead, but of the living: for all 
live unto him. 


Jesus questions the scribes (Mt. 
22. 41-46; Mk. 12. 35-37). 
3, note on 


39 Then certain of the scribes] the Olivet 
answering said, Master, thou hast| discourse. 
well said. a 2 Cor.11.13- 


AD. 33. 


a Mt.22.23; 
Mk.12.18. 


6 Acts 23.6,8. 
c Deut.25.5,8. 
di.e. age. 


e Lk.21.36; 
Rev.3.4. 


f Heb‘.4, 


note. 


g Inspiration. 
Lk.24.25-27, 
Gx. 


1 Mt.22.42,45; 
Wik.12.35. 

j 842,43; 
Psa.110.1 


110.1. 


y Lk.19.44. 
4 Bee Mt.24. 


40 And. after that they durst not ape 
ask him any question at all. 313. 


41 *And he said unto*them, How! 9 chr.15.5,6; 
say they that Christ is David’s son?) Mt.24.6,7; 
42 And David himself saith in the} M*-13- 7. 


book of Psalms, ’The Lorp said] ¢i¢- comeyet. 


unto my ‘Lord, Sit thou on my Jag 2 3 Lv es 
tight hand 7 Roa. i 
43 Till I make thine enemies thy 
footstool. } 

44 David therefore calleth him 
Lord, “how is he then his son? Aes 


Sr. LUKE. 


kh Elohim. Ex. 
3.6. 


k Adonai. Psa. 


l Acts 2.34; 13. 
22,23; Rom.1. 


[21 10 


45 Then in the audience of all the 
people he said unto his disciples, 

46 ™Beware of the scribes, which 
desire to walk in long robes, and 
"love greetings in the markets, and 
the °highest seats in the syna- 
gogues, and the chief rooms at 
feasts; 

47 Which ?devour widows’ houses, 
‘and for a shew make long prayers: 
the same shall receive ‘greater 
damnation. 


CHAPTER 21. 


The widow’s mite: Jesus’ esti- 
mate of Ziving (Mk. 12. 41-44). 


ARP he looked up, and saw the 
Stich men casting their gifts 
into the treasury. 

2 And he saw also a certain poor 
twidow casting in thither two 
“mites. 

3 And he said, Of a truth I say 
unto you, that "this poor widow 
hath cast in more than they all: 

4 For all these have of their abun- 
dance cast in unto the offerings of 
God: but she of her penury hath 
cast in “all the living that she had. 


The Olivet discourse. (Cf. Mt. 


24., 25.; Mk. 13.) 


5. And as some spake of the *tem- 
iple, how it was adorned with 
goodly stones and gifts, he said, 

6 As for these things which ye 
behold, the days will come, in the 
which there shall not be left one 
Ystone upon another, that-shall not 
be thrown down. 


The disciples’ question. 
(Cf. Mt. 24. 3.) 


7 And they asked him, saying, 
Master, but when shall these things 


-|be? and what sign will there be 


when these things shall come to 
pass? 


The course of this age. 
(Cf. Mt. 24. 4-14.) 


8 *And he said, Take heed that ye 
be not 4¢deceived: for many shall 
come in my name, saying, I am 
\Christ; and the time draweth 
near: go ye mot therefore after 
them. 

9 But when ye:shall hear of wars 
and commotions, be not terrified: 
for these things must first come to 
‘pass; but the end rs not “by and 


by. 
10 Then said he unto them, ¢Na- 


21 11] 


tion shall rise against nation, and 
kingdom against kingdom: 

11 And great earthquakes shall 
be in divers places, and famines, 
and pestilences; and fearful sights 
and great signs shall there be from 
heaven. 

12 But before all these, they shall 
‘lay their hands on you, and per- 
secute you, delivering you up to 
the synagogues, and into “prisons, 
being brought before kings and 
tulers ¢for my name’s sake. 

13 And it shall turn to you for 
a testimony. 

14 Settle it therefore in your 
hearts, not to meditate before what 
ye shall answer: 

15 For I will give you a mouth 
and wisdom, &which all your adver- 
saries shall not be able to gainsay 
nor resist. 

16 And “ye shall be betrayed both 
by parents, and brethren, and kins- 
folks, and friends; and ‘some of 
you shall they cause to be put to 


eath. 
17 And ye shall be Zhated of all 
men for my name’s sake. 


St. LUKE. 


a 


@ Rev.6.5,6,12. 
} Mt.10.16-22; John 
16.2; 1 Pet.4. 


© Acts 4.3; 5.18; 12. 
4; 16.24. 


d | Pet.2.13. 


e Phil.1,12,13, 
2 Thes.1.4,5. 


F Mt.10.19; Mk.13. 
11; Lk.12.11. 


9 Acts 6.10. 


h Mic.7.6; 
Mk.13.12. 


i Acts 7.59; 12.2. 


J Mt.10.22; 
John 7.7. 

& Mt.10.30. 

1 Heb. 10.36. 

m Israel (prophe- 
cies). Acts 2. 
29-32. (Gen.12. 
2,3; Rom.11.26.) 

7% Hos.9.7; 
Isa.65.12-15. 

© Times of the 
Gentiles. vs. 
20-24; Deut.28. 
28-68. (Lk.21. 
24; Rev.16.19.) 

P Isa.13.9,10,13; 
Mt.24.29; Mk.13. 
24; 2 Pet.3.10,12. 


28; 


[21 33 


with child, and to them that give 
suck, in those days! for there shall 
be great distress in the land, and 
wrath upon this people. 

24 And they shall fall by the edge 
of the sword, and shall be led away 
captive into all nations: and Jeru- 
salem shall be ?trodden down of 
the Gentiles, until the °times of the 
Gentiles be fulfilled. 


The return of the Lord in glory. 
(Cf. Mt. 24. 29-31.) 


25 And there shall be #signs in 
the sun, and in the moon, and in the 
stars; and upon the earth distress 
of nations, with perplexity; the 
sea and the waves roaring; 

26. {Men’s hearts failing them for 
fear, and for looking after those 
things which are coming on the 
7earth: for the Spowers of heaven 
shall be shaken. 

27 And then shall they see the 
‘Son of man “coming “in a cloud 
with power and great glory. 

28 And when these things begin 
to come to pass, then look up, and 
lift up your heads; for your re- 


18 But there shall not an *hair of |? L.23.30; : : 
your head SersH! peer ih demption draweth nigh. 

19 In your ‘patience possess ye}, inhabited earth. | Parable of the fig tree (Mt. 24. 
your souls. signe 32, 33; Mk. 13. 28, 29). 

The destruction of Jerusalem |" ust fSe" | 299 And he spake to them a 

foretold. ae 38 “Seut, |*Parable; Behold the fig tree, and 
30.3; Acts1.9-11.)/all the trees; 

20 And when ye shall see ™Jeru- koto 30 When they now shoot forth, 
salem compassed with armies, then 2 Thes.1.7-10; |ye see and know of your own 
Bey that the desolation thereof is Stee a3 eae that summer is now nigh at 
nigh, : . |aiaa3,  " |hand. 

21 Then let them which are in|: po;anies(n.T.).| 31 So Jikewise ye, when ye see 
juidea fies. te the movgteins ‘i on ee bia Naat a cone to Pipe eo ve 
e em which are in the midst of} Lk.21’29-31') at the %kingdom of God is ni 
it depart out; and let not them AOE at hand. 
that are in the countries enter zteetos; 51.6, | 32 Werily I say unto you, This 
thereinto. Mt.24.35; Heb, |generation shall not pass away, 

22 For these be the days of ven-| };1:1 Pett. [till all be fulfilled. 
geance, that “all things which are : 33 *Heaven and earth shall pass 
written may be fulfilled. away: but my. words shall not 

23 But woe unto them that are Pass away. 

1 Verses 20, 24 are not included in the report of the Olivet discourse as given by 


Matthew and Mark. Two sieges of Jerus 
21. 20-24 refers to the siege by Titus, A.D 


24 literally fulfilled. But that sie 


alem are in view in that discourse. 
. 70, when the city was taken, and verse 
ge and its horrors but adumbrate the final 


Luke 


l 1 2 i S siege 
at the end of this age, in which the “great tribulation” culminates. At that time 
the city will be taken, but delivered by the glorious appearing of the Lord (Rev. 19. 


11-21). The refer 
siege; Lk. 21. 20- 
1s the compassin 
Mark (13. 14) t 

2 The “times of the Gentiles’ 
nezzar (2 Chr. 36. 1-21), since 
lordship. 


he sign is the abomi 


ences in Mt. 24. 15-28, Mk. 13. 14-26 
24 to the destruction of Jerusalem by 
g of Jerusalem by armies (Lk. 21. 20); in Matthew (24. 15) and 
nation in the holy place (2 
” began with the captivity of Judah under Nebuchad- 
which time Jerusalem has been under Gentile over- 


1106 


are to the final tribulation 
Titus. In Luke the sign 


Thes. 2. 4). 


21 34] 


Warnings in view of the Lord’s 
return. (Cf. Mt. 24. 34-51; Mk. 
13. 30-37.) 


34 And “take heed to yourselves, 
lest at any time your hearts be 
overcharged with surfeiting, and 
drunkenness, and “cares of this 
life, and so that day come upon 
you unawares. 

35 For ‘as a snare shall it come 
on all them that dwell on the face 
of the whole earth. 

36 ¢Watch ye therefore, and ‘pray 
always, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things 
that shall come to pass, and to 
&stand before the Son of man. 

37 And in ‘the day time he was 
teaching in the temple; and ‘at 
night he went out, and abode in 
the mount that 
mount of Olives. 

38 And all the people came early 
in the morning to him in the tem- 
ple, for to hear him. 


CHAPTER 22. 


Judas covenants to betray Jesus 
ane, 2, 14, 15; Mk. 14. 1, 2, 
10, 11). 


OW the feast of unleavened 
bread drew nigh, which is 
called the Passover. 

2 And the Jchief priests and 
scribes sought how they might kill 
him; for they “feared the people. 

3 Then entered ‘Satan into Judas 
surnamed Iscariot, being of the 
number of the twelve. 

4 And he went his way, and com- 
muned with the chief priests and 
captains, how he might betray him 
unto them. 

5 And they were glad, and ”cove- 
nanted to give him money. 

6 Andhe promised, and sought op- 
portunity to betray him unto them 
in the absence of the multitude. 


Preparation of the passover 
(Mt. 26. 17-19; Mk. 14. 12-16). 


7 Then came the day of unleav- 
ened bread, when the °passover 
must be killed. 

8 And he sent Peter and John, 
saying, Go and prepare us the pass- 
over, that we may eat. 

9 And they said unto him, Where 
wilt thou that we prepare? 


is called the|/ 


Sr. LUKE. 


A.D. 33. 


a Rom.13.13; 
1 Thes.5.6; 
1 Pet.4.7. 


6 Lk.14.18- 
20; 17.28. 


ci Thes.5.2; 
2 Pet.3.10; 
Rev.3.3; 16.5. 


d Mt.24.42; 
25.13; Mk. 
13.33. 


e Lk.18.1. 


f L&.17.33-37; 
Rev.7.3. 


g Psa.1.5; 
Eph.6.13. 


h John 8.1,2. 
+ Lk.22.39, 


j Psa.2.25 
John 11.47; 
Acts 4.27. 


k Lk. 19 ‘gh 
20.1 


eats 
Mic.14.10; 
John 13.2,27. 


m Zech.11.12: 
John 12.6. 


” V8.3-6,21- 
23,47,48; 
Psa.41.9. 

o Ex.12.6. 


p1 Sam.10.3; 
John 2.6-10. 


q Heb.9.11, 
12,26 with 
Heb.10.1 -9; 
1 Cor.5.7. 


r v.30; Mt.8.11. 
s v.20. 


¢ Mt.26.29; 
Mk.14.25. 


u 1 Cor.11,24. 
v 1 Cor.10.16. 


w Covenant 


x i.e. covenant. 


y Psa.41.9; 
John 13.21. 


2 Mt.8.20, 
note. 


a Acts 2.23; 
4.28. 


5 Mt.26.22; 
John 13.22, 
25. 


c¢ Mk.9.34; 


10 And he said unto them, Behold, 
when ye are entered into the city, 


LK.9.46. 


(22 24 


there shall a man meet you, bearing 
a ?pitcher of water; follow him into 
the house where he entereth in. 

il And ye shall say unto the 
goodman of the house, The Master 
saith unto thee, Where is the guest- 
chamber, where I shall eat the 
passover with my disciples? 

12 And he shall shew you a large 
upper room furnished: there make 
ready. 

13. And they went, and found as 
he had eee unto them: and they 
made ready the passover. 


The last passover. (Cf. Mt. 26. 
20; Mk. 14. 17; John 13.) 


14 1And when the hour was 
come, he sat down, and the twelve 
apostles with him. 

15 And he said unto them, {With 
desire I have desired to eat this 
passover with you before I suffer: 


| 16 For I say unto you, I *will not 


any more eat thereof, until it be 
fulfilled in the kingdom of God. 

17 And he took the ‘cup, and gave 
thanks, and said, Take this, and 
divide it among yourselves: 

18 For I say unto you, I will not 
drink of the fruit of the vine, ‘until 
the kingdom of God shall come. 


The Lord’s supper instituted 
(Mt. 26. 26-29; Mk. 14. 22-25). 


19 And he took bread, and gave 
thanks, and brake it, and gave unto 
them, saying, This is my body 
which is given for you: “this do in 
remembrance of me. 

20 Likewise also the cup after 
supper, saying, ’This cup is the 
new *testament in_my blood, 
which is shed for you. 


Jesus announces his betrayal 
(Mt. 26. 21-25; Mk. 14. 18-21; 
John 13. 18-30). 


21 But, behold, the hand of him 
that betrayeth me zs with me on 
the table. 

22 And truly the *Son of man 
goeth, 2as it was determined: but 
woe unto that man by whom he is 
betrayed! 

23 And they “began to enquire 
among themselves, which of them 
it was that should do this thing. 


The strife which should be 
&reatest. (Cf, Mt. 20. 25-28; 


ME. 10. 42-45.) 
24 And there was also a ‘strife 


1 For order of events on the night of the last passover, see Mt. 26. 20, note. 


1107 


22 25] 


St. LUKE. 


4 
[22 53 


g them, which of them should And he said 


amon; 
be accounted the greatest. 

25. And he said unto them, The 
kings of the Gentiles exercise lord- 
ship over them; and they that ex- 
ercise authority upon them are 
called benefactors. 

26 *But ye shall not be so: “but 
he that is greatest among you, let 
him be as the younger; and he that 
is chief, as he that doth serve. 

27 For ‘whether is greater, he that 
sitteth at meat, or he that serveth?’ 
1s not he that sitteth at meat? but I 
am among you as he that 4serveth. 


The apostles’ place in the future 
kingdom (Mt. 19.28. Cf. Rev.3.21). 


28 Ye are they which have con- 
tinued with me in my “temptations. 

29 fAnd I appoint unto you a 
kingdom, as my Father hath ap- 
pointed unto me; 

30 That ye ‘may eat and drink at 
my table in my %kingdom, and ‘sit 
on thrones judging, the twelve 
tribes of Israel. 


Jesus predicts Peter’s denial 
(Mt. 26. 33-35; Mk. 14. 29-31). 


31 And the Lord said, Simon, Si- 


mon, behold, JSatan *hath desired} 


to have you, that he may sift you 
as ‘wheat: 

32 ™But I have prayed for thee, 
that thy faith fail not: and when 
thou “art converted, °strengthen 
thy brethren. 

33 And he said unto him, Lord, 
TI am ready to go with thee, both 
into prison, and to death. 

34 And he said, I tell thee, Peter, 
the cock shall not crow this day, 
before that thou shalt thrice deny 
that thou knowest me. 


The disciples warned of coming’ 
contlcts. 


35 And he said’ unto them, *When 
I sent you without purse, and scrip, 
and shoes, lacked ye any thing? 
And they said, Nothing. 

36 Then said he unto them, But 
now, he that hath a purse, let him 
take it, and likewise Ars scrip: and 
he that hath no sword, let him. sell 
his garment, and buy one. 

37 For I say unto you, that this 
that is written must yet be accom- 
plished in me, And he was ¢reck- 
oned ‘among the transgressors: for 
he things concerning me have an 
end. 


38 And they said, Lord, behold, 


A.D. 33. 


@ Mt.20.26; 
1 Pet.5.3, 

6 Lk.9.48. 

¢ Lk.12.37. 

@ John 13.13-17; 

1 Cor.9.19; 
Phil.2.7. 

@ Temptation. 
Acts 5.9. (Gen. 
3.1; Jas.1.14.) 

F Mt.24.473 Lk. 
12.32; 2 Cor.1.7; 
2 Tim-2.12. 

g Mt.3.2, note: 

A Mt.8.11; Lk: 
14.15; Rev.19.9. 

¢ Mt.19.28; 
cf.1 Cor.6.2; 
Rev.3,21. 

3 Satan. vs.3,31; 
John 8.44. (Gen. 
3:1; Rev.20.10.) 

£1 Pet.5.8, 

? Peter was the 
wheat, his self- 
confidence the 
chaff. Cf.Mt. 
13.30; John 5.24; 
10.28; Rom.6.1,2; 
1 John 1.8; 2.1. 

m John 17.9,11,15; 
Rom.8.27; Heb. 
7 25; | John 2.1. 

7 hast turned 
back again. 

9 John 21.15-17; 

1 Pet.5.12; 
2 Pet.1.10-15. 

P Mt.10.9; Lk.9.3; 
10.4. 


@Imputation. 
vs.24,37; Rom.4 | 
24, CLev.25.50; 
Jas.2.23.) 


T Isa.53.12; Mk.15. 
28. 


 Lk.21.37. 


t See Mt.26.39, 
note. 

w Heb.1.4, note. 

v Peter was sleep- 
ing while his 
Master was 
praying (v.45); 
resisting while 
his Master was 
submitting (vs. 
49-51);. he fol- 
lowed afar off; 
sat down 
amor gst his 
Lord's enemies; 
and denied his 
Lord, the faith, 
and the brother- 
hood. 


wMt.8.20, note. 


= Mt.26.51; Mk.14,, 
47; John 18.10, 


¥ Miracles (N.T.). 
1-10. (Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.), 

2.37; Lk.23.32. 

@ John 12,27; 14.30. 


1108 


here are two swords.. 
unto. them, It is enough. 


Jesus in the garden (Mt. 26. 36- 
46; Mk. 14. 32-42; John 18. 1). 


39 And he came out, and ‘went, 
as he was wont, to the mount of 
Olives; and his disciples also fol- 
lowed him. 

40 And when he was at the place, 
he said unto them, Pray that ye 
enter not into temptation. 

41 And he was withdrawn from 
them about a stone’s cast, and 
kneeled down, and prayed, 

42 Saying, Father, if thou be will- 
ing, remove this cup from me: 
nevertheless not my will, but thine, 
be done. h 

43 And there appeared an “angel\)» 
unto him from heaven, strengthen- 
ing him. 

44 And being in an agony he 
prayed more earnestly: pe his 
sweat was as it were great.drops of 
blood falling down to the ground. 

And when he rose up from 
prayer, and was come to his. dis- 
ciples, he found them “sleeping for 
sorrow, 

46 And said unto them, Why 
sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye — 
enter into temptation. 7 


Jesus betrayed by Judas; re- 
stores a severed ear (Mt. 26. 
47-56; Mk.14, 43-50; John 18. 3-11). 


47 And while he yet spake, be- 
hold a multitude, and he that was 
called Judas, one of the twelve, 
went before them, and drew near 
unto Jesus to kiss him. 

48 But Jesus said unto him, 
Judas, betrayest thou the “Son of 
man with a kiss? 

49 When they which were about 
him saw what would follow, they 
said unto him, Lord, shall we smite 
with the sword? 

50 And *one of them smote the 
Servant of the high priest, and cut 
off his right ear. 

51 And Jesus answered and said, 
Suffer ye thus far. And he touched 


> his ear, and Yhealed him. 


52 Then Jesus said unto the chief 
priests, and captains of the temple, 
and the elders, which were come to 
him, Be ye come out, as against a 
thief, with swords and staves? 

53 When I was daily with you in 
the temple, ye stretched forth no 
hands against me: but ¢this is your 
hour, and the power of darkness. 


Jesus arrested: Peter’s denial 
(Mt. 26. 57, 69-75; Mk. 14. 53, 54, 
66-72; John 18. 12, 15-48, 25-27) 


54 Then took they him, and led 
him, and brought him into the high 
priest’s house. And Peter followed 
“afar off. 

55 And when they had kindled a 
fire in the midst of the hall, and 
were set down together, Peter sat 
down 4among them. 

56 But a certain maid beheld him 
as he sat by the fire, and earnestly 
looked upon him, and said, This 
man was also with him. 

57 And he ‘denied him, saying, 
Woman, I know him not. 

58 And after a little while another 
saw him, and said, Thou art also of 
them. And Peter said, Man, I am 
not. 

59 And about the space of one 
hour after another confidently af- 
firmed, saying, Of a truth this 
fellow also was with him: for he 
is a 4Galilean. 

60 And Peter said, Man, I know 
not what thou sayest. And imme- 
diately, while he yet spake, the 
cock crew. 

61 And the Lord turned, and 
(Pans upon Peter. And Peter re- 

Themibered the word of the Lord, 
thow he had said unto him, Before 
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me 
thrice. 

62 And Peter went out, and 
&wept bitterly. 


Jesus buffeted (Mt. 26. 67,68; Mk. 
14. 65; John 18. 22, 23). 


63 And the men that held Jesus 
“kynocked him, and ‘smote him. 

64 And when they had blind- 
folded him, they Jstruck him on the 
face, and asked him, saying, Proph- 
esy, who is it that smote thee? 

65 And many other things blas- 
phemously spake they against him. 


Jesus before the Sanhedrin (Mt. 
26. 59-68; Mk. 14. 55-65; John 18. 
19-24). 

66 #And as soon as it was day, 
the /eiders of the people and the 
chief priests and the scribes came 
together, and led him into their 
council, saying, 

67 Art thou the Christ? tell us. 
And he said unto them, If I tell 
you, ye will not believe: ) 
| 68 And if I also ask you, ye will 
not answer me, nor let me go. 

\69 Hereafter shall the “Son of 


St. LUKE. 


A.D. 33. 


a Cf.John 13. 
23; 21.19. 


6 Gen.12.11, 
Jas.4.4. 


¢ v.34. 

d Acts 1.11; 2.7. 
e Cf.Psa.32.8. 
f v.34. 

g 2 Cor.7.10,11-. 
h Psa.69.12. 

i Isa.50.6, 

j Zech.13.7. 


k For order of 
events on the 


57, note. 
[fl Acts 4.26; 
22.5. 
m Acts 7.55,56 
with Rev.1.7; 
Heb.1.3. 


n Mt.8.20, 
note. 


o John 10.30. 

p Mk.14.55-59. 

gq Mt.17.27; 
22.21; 
Mk.12.17. 


ry vs.1-5; 
Psa.27.12. 


| s John 18.33- 
36; 19.12. 


t vs.14,22; 
1 Pet.2.22. 


iu Cf.John 6.15; 
Lk.14.25-27. 


v Lk.4.14. 

w Also vs.8, 
T11215-0 wee 
Mt.14.1, ref. ; 
Lk.3.1. 

x Lk.9.9, 


y Mt.14.1; 
ME.6.14. 


z John 19.9. 
a Isa.53.3. 
6 Acts 4.27; 


cf.Prov.1. 
10-16, 


1109 
-— @ 


(23 13 


man sit on the right hand of the 
power of God. 

70 Then said they all, Art thou 
then the Son of God? And he said 
unto them, Ye say that °I am. 

71 And they said, What *need we 
any further witness? for we our 
‘selves have heard of his own mouth. 


CHAPTER 23. 


Jesus before Pilate (Mt. 27. 2, 11- 
14; Mk. 15. 1-5; John 18. 28-38) 


ND the whole multitude of them 
arose, and led him unto Pilate. 

2 And they began to accuse him, 
saying, We found this fellow per- 
verting the nation, and forbidding 
to give %tribute to Cesar, saying 
that he himself is “Christ a ‘King. 

3 And Pilate asked him, saying, 
Art thou the King of the Jews? 
And he answered him and said, 
Thou sayest it. 

4 Then said Pilate to the chief 
priests and to the people, ‘I find no 
fault in this man. 

5 And they were the more fierce, 
saying, “He stirreth up the people, 
teaching throughout all Jewry, be- 
ginning from ’Galilee to this place. 


Jesus sent before Herod. 


6 When Pilate heard of Galilee, 
‘he asked whether the man were a 
‘Galilean, 

7 And as soon as he knew that he 
/belonged unto “Herod’s jurisdiction, 
he sent him to Herod, who himself 
also was at Jerusalem at that time. 

8 And when Herod saw Jesus, he 
was exceeding glad: for he was *de- 
sirous to see him of a long season, 
because he had “heard many things 
of him; and he hoped to have seen 
some miracle done by him. 

9 Then he questioned with him in 
many words; but he answered him 
2nothing. 

10 And the chief priests and scribes 
‘stood and vehemently accused him. 

11 *And Herod with his men of 
war set him at nought, and mocked 
him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous 
robe, and sent him again to Pilate. 

12 And the same day Pilate and 
Herod were made friends together: 
for before they were at enmity be- 
tween themselves. 


Jesus again before Pilate: Bar- 
abbas released, Jesus con- 
demned (Mt. 27. 15-26; Mk. 15. 
6-15; John 18, 39, 40). 


13. And Pilate, when he had called 


23 14) 


together the chief priests and the 
rulers and the people, 

14 Said unto them, *Ye have 
brought this man unto me, as one 
that perverteth the people: and, be- 
hold, I, having examined Aim be- 
fore you, have found no 4fault in 
this man touching those things 
whereof ye accuse him: d Mt.27.15; 

15 No, nor yet Herod: for I serit} Mxk.15.6; 
you to him; and, lo, nothing worthy] John 18.39. 
of death is done unto him. e Acts 3.14, 

16 <I will therefore chastise him, | f John 19.8,12. 
and release him. Gina eau 

17 (For of necessity he must re- , =e ae 
lease one unto them at the feast.) |? E™702 

18 And ¢they cried out all at once,|* 33°? ““* 
saying, Away with this man, and] ; acts 4.27,28. 
telease unto us Barabbas:  CEMt.27. 

19 (Who for a certain sedition] 31/32; Mk. 
made in the city, and for murder, 
was cast into prison.) 

20 Pilate therefore, Jwilling to re- 
lease Jesus, spake again to them. 


avs.1,2. 
bv.4. 


c Mt.27.263 
John 19.1. 


m Lk.19.41. 
n Mt.24.19; 


21 But they cried, saying, ¢Cru- eo Ty . 
cify him, crucify him. ° Rev.6.16,17. 


22 And he said unto them the], p33; 
third time, Why, what evil hath he!” 1 Pet.4/17. 
done? I have found no cause of|gMt.21.19; 
death in him: I will therefore chas-| Jude 12. 
tise him, and let Aim go. 

23 And they were instant with 
loud voices, requiring that he might 
be crucified. And the “voices of 
them and of the chief priests pre- 
vailed. : 

24 And Pilate gave sentence that 

it should be as they required. 
25 *And he released unto them 
him that for sedition and murder 
was cast into prison, whom they 
had desired; but he Jdelivered Jesus 
to their will. 

26 Andasthey led him away, they 
laid hold upon one “Simon, a Cyre- 
nian, coming out of the country, 
and on him they laid the cross, that 
he might bear it after Jesus. 


9; Rev.22.20.) 
u Isa.53.12. 
v Forgive- 


13.28,39. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 
w Psa.22.18. 


x Psa.22.17; 
Zech.12.10. 

y Psa.22.6-8; 
69.12,21; Mt. 
27.39-43; 
Mk.15.29-32. 

2 Mt.27.37; 
Mk.15.26; 
John 19.19, 


@ Lk.18.13. 


6 2 Cor.5.21; 
Heb.7.26; 
1 Pet.2.22. 


The crucifixion (Mt. 27. 33-38; 
Mk. 15. 22-28; John 19. 17-19). 


27 And there “followed him a 
great company of people, and of 
women, which also bewailed and 
lamented him. 

28 But Jesus turning unto them 


Sr. LUKE. 


23.42. (Mt.6. 


x o | 
ti? 


[23 41 


said, Daughters of Jerusalem, “weep 
not for me, but weep for yourselves, 
and for your children. 

29 For, behold, the days are com- 
ing, in the which they shall say, 
Blessed are the barren, and the 
wombs that never bare, and the 
paps which never gave suck. 

30 Then shall they begin to say to 
the mountains, °Fall on us; and to 
the hills, Cover us. 2 

31 For if they do these things in 
a ?green tree, what shall be done in 
the ¢dry? 

32 And there were also two other, 
*malefactors, led with him to be put 
to death. 

33 1And when they were come to 
the place, which is called sCalvary, 
there they crucified him, and the 
malefactors, one on the right hand, 
and the other on the left. 

34 Then ‘said Jesus, “Father, 
‘forgive them; for they know not 
what they do. And “they parted 
his raiment, and cast lots. 

_35 And the 2*people stood behold. | 
ing. And the rulers also with 
them ‘derided him, saying, He 
saved others; let him save him- 
ne if he be Christ, the chosen of 

od. 

36 And the soldiers also mocked 
him, coming to him, and offering 

vinegar, 

37 And saying, If thou be the king 
of the Jews, save thyself. 

38 And 2 “superscription also was 
written over him in letters of Greek, 
and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS 
THE KING OF THE JEWS. 


The repentant thief. (Cf. Mt. 
27. 44; Mk, 15. 32.) 


39 And one of the malefactors 
which were hanged railed on him, 
saying, If thou be Christ, save thy- 
self and us. 

40 But the other answering re- 
buked him, saying, Dost not thou 
fear God, seeing thou art in the 
same condemnation? 

41 And we indeed @justly; for we 
receive the due reward of our deeds: 
but this man ¢hath done nothing 
amiss. 


1 For order of events at the crucifixion, see 


Mt. 27. 33, note. 


2 Jesus crucified is the true touchstone revealing what the world is: “The people 
stood beholding” in stolid indifference; the rulers, who wanted religion, but without 
a divine Christ crucified for their sins, “reviled’’; the brutal amongst them mocked 


or railed; 
cross and played their sordid game. 
(John 12. 21). 


1110 


the conscious sinner prayed; the 


covetous sat down before the 


The cross is the judgment of this world 


23 42) 


42 And he 2said unto Jesus, Lord, 
remember me when thou comest 
into thy “kingdom. 

43 And Jesus said unto him, ‘Ver- 


prayers (N. 


ily I say unto thee, To day shalt Gees St: 
thou be with me in paradise. Rev.22.20.) 
44 And it was about the sixth)? At 37, note 
hour, and there was a darkness] dise,” cfLk. 
over all the earth until the ninth pata dae ; 
hour. saved. chat 
45 And the sun was darkened,} none need 
and the ¢veil of the temple was pes ae : 
rent in the midst. Be 
Jesus dismisses his spirit (Mt. dg Mt27.51: 
27. 50; Mk. 15. 37; John 19. 30). ae 
46 And when Jesus had cried with] , 37410-1972 
a loud voice, “he said, Father, finto| prayers (N. 
thy hands I commend my spirit:] T:). John 4. 
and having said thus, he Igave up| #9950)" 
the ghost. f Psa.31.5; 
47 Now when the &centurion saw] cf-Acts 7.59; 


what was done, he glorified God, pba 


saying, Certainly this was a “right-|” John 7.45,46. 
eous man. Rom.10.10, 

48 And all the people that came| ; 725°1.10: 
together to that sight, beholding} Rev.1.7. 
the things which were done, ‘smote}7 
their breasts, and returned. b Yea 53.9. 

49 And all his acquaintance, and) 7 Acts 2.24-31. 
the women that followed him from 
Galilee, stood afar off, beholding/ 
these things. 


The entombment (Mt. 27. 57-61; : 
Mk. 15. 42-47; John 19. 38-42). 


50 And, behold, there wasaman|] 11.38,39. 
named Joseph, a counsellor; and he] v.23; Mk. 
was a good man, and a just: t Joba 20.123 

51 (The same had not consented] Acts 1.10. 
to the counsel and deed of them;)|# Or, him that 
he was of Arimathea, a city of the] vet”, 


Jews: Jwho also himself waited for » Meis2is 
the kingdom of God. 17.23; Mk.8. 
52 This man went unto Pilate,| }io3° 
and begged the body of Jesus. w Mt.8.20, 
53 And he took it down, and] note... 
wrapped it in linen, and Alaid it in|* 33" G76. 


a sepulchre that was hewn in stone,|y Resurrec- 
lwherein never man before was laid.| tion. vs.1-7; 
54 And that day was the ™prep-| Gos jo2s” 
aration, and the sabbath drew on.} 1 Cor.15.52.) 
55 And the “women also, which| 2 John 2.22. 


came with him from Galilee, fol- aes pais 


lowed after, and beheld the sepul-| 16.11. 
chre, and how his body was laid. |¢ yee ee 
56 And they returned, and °pre-) 3¢ °° ; 


pared spices and ointments; and|¢ Mx.16.12,13. 
rested the sabbath day *according ee nee 
to the commandment. 7. 


pie wD ee ee 


1See Mt. 27. 50, note. 


St. LUKE. 


[24 15 


CHAPTER 24. 


The resurrection of Jesus Christ 
(Mt. 28. 1-6; Mk. 16. 1-8; John 
208 1-17)¢ 


Now 2upon the first day of the 
: week, very early in the morn- 
ing, they came unto the sepuichre, 
%bringing the spices which they had 
prepared, and certain others with 
them. 

2 And they found the ‘stone rolled 
away from the sepulchre. 

3 And they entered in, and ‘found 
not the body of the Lord Jesus. 

4 And it came to pass, as they 
were much perplexed thereabout, 
behold, ‘two men stood by them in 
shining garments: 

5 And as they were afraid, and 
bowed down their faces to the 
earth, they said unto them, Why 
seek ye the “living among the dead? 

6 He is not here, but is risen: re- 
member how he spake unto you 
when he was yet in Galilee, 

7 Saying, The “Son of man must 
be delivered into the hands of *sin- 
ful men, and be crucified, and the 
third day %rise again. 

8 And they “remembered his 
words, 

9 And returned from the sepul- 
chre, and told all these things unto 
the eleven, and to all the rest. 

10 It was Mary Magdalene, and 
¢Joanna, and Mary the mother of 
James, and other women that 
were with them, which told these 
things unto the apostles. 

11 And “their words seemed to 
them as idle tales, and they believed 
them not. 

12 Then arose ‘Peter, and ran 
unto the sepulchre; and stooping 
down, he beheld the linen clothes 
laid by themselves, and departed, 
wondering in himself at that which 
was come to pass. 


Ministry of the risen Christ: 
(1) to the Emmaus disciples. 


13 3And, behold, “two of them 
wentthat same day toa village called 
Emmaus, which was from Jerusa- 
lem about threescore ‘furlongs. _, 

14 And they talked together of all 
these things which had happened. 

15 And it came to pass, that, while 
they communed together and rea- 


2 For order of events at the resurrection, see Mt. 28. 1, note. 
2 For order of our Lord’s appearances after His resurrection, see Mt. 28. 9, note. 


1111 


24 16] 


soned, Jesus himself drew near, and 
went with them. 

16 But their “eyes were holden 
that they should not know him. 

17 And he said unto them, What 
manner of communications are 
these that ye have one to another, 
as ye walk, and are sad? 

18 And the one of them, whose 
name was Cleopas, answering said 
unto him, Art thou only a stranger 
in Jerusalem, and hast not known 
the things which are come to pass 
there in these days? 

19 And he said unto them, What 
things? And they said unto him, 
Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, 
which was a “prophet mighty in 
deed and word before God and all 
the people: 

20 4¢And how the chief priests and 
our rulers delivered him to be con- 
denned to death, and have crucified 

im. 

21 But we ¢trusted that it had 
been he which should have /re- 
deemed Israel: and beside all this, 
to day is the third day since these 
things were done. 

22 Yea, and certain women also 
of our company made us astonished, 
which were early at the sepulchre; 

23 And when they found not his 
body, they came, saying, that they 
had also seen a vision of “angels 
which said he was alive. 

24 And ‘certain of them which 
were with us went to the sepulchre, 
and found. 7t even so as the women 
had said: but him they saw not. 

25 Then he said unto them, O 
fools, and slow of heart to be- 
lieve Jall that the *prophets have 
spoken: 

26 ‘Ought not Christ to have suf- 
fered these things, and to enter 
into his glory? 

27 And "beginning at Moses and 
all the prophets, he expounded unto 
them in all the scriptures the things 
concerning °himself. 

28 And they drew nigh unto. the 
village, whither they went: and he 
made as though he would have 
gone further. 

29 But they constrained him, 
saying, Abide with us: for it is 
toward evening, and the day is far 
spent. And he went in to tarry 
with them. 

30 And it came to pass, as he sat 
at meat with them, he %took bread, 
and blessed it, and brake, and gave 
to them. cs 

31 And their eyes were opened, 


2 


St. LUKE. 


A.D. 33. 


@ John 20.14; | 
21.4; cf. 

2 Cor.3.18. 

b John 19.25. 

eMt.21.11; ~ 
Lk.9.19; 
Acts 2.22; 
7.22.» 

@ Lk.23:1; 

Acts 13.27,28. 

e Mt.3.2, note. 

f Rom.3.24, 
note. 

g vs.9,10; 
Mt.26.8; 
Mk.16.10; 
John 20.18. 

h Heb.1.4, 
note. 

# v.12. 

j Inspiration. 
vs.25,27,44, 
45; John 3.14. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Revy.22.19.) 

k Acts 3,24. 

1 Heb.2.9,10; 

1 Pet.1.10-12. 

m Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
vs.25,26; 
John 14.2,3. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 

nv.45. 

o Rom.1.3; 
Rev.19.10, 

p Gen.18.1-8; 
John 14.23, 

q Lk.9.16; 
22.19, 

Psa.119.18; 

Gal.1.16; 

1 John 3.2. 
$1 Pet.1.8; 
John 20. 

29-31. 
t See Mk.16. 


Le 


w Mkk.6.49, 

x Cf.Zech.13.6; 
1 John 1.1. 

y jenn 20.20, 


21 Cor:15.20, 

a Gen.45.26; 
Acts 12.14. 

b Acts 10.40,41. 

c See Psa. 
118.29, Sum- 


mary; 

d John 16.13; 
Acts 16.14. 

e Repentance. 
Acts 2.38, 

ASP 

Acts 17.30.) 

f Gospel. 
Acts 8.25. 
(Gen.12.1-3;. 
Rev.14.6.) 

2g Sin, Rom. 
3.23, note. 


M12 


and they knew him; and he van- 
ished out of their sight. 


| 32 And they said one to another, 


Did not our Sheart burn within us, 
while he talked with us by the way, 
and while he opened to us the 
scriptures? 

33 And they rose up the same 
hour, and returned to Jerusalem, 
and found the “eleven gathered 
be al and them that were with 
them, 


| 34 Saying, The Lord is risén in- 


deed, and “hath appeared to Simon. 

35 Andthey told what things were 
done in the way, and how he was 
known of them in breaking of bread. 


(2) To the ten. (Cf. Mt. 28. 16, 17; 
Mk. 16. 14; John 20. 19-23.) 


36 And as they thus spake, Jesus 
himself “stood in the midst of them, 
and saith unto them, Peace be unto 
you. 

37 But they were terrified and 
affrighted, and supposed that they 
had seen “a spirit. 

38 And he said unto them, Why 
are ye troubled? and why do 
thoughts arise in your hearts?’ 

39 Behold my “hands and my 
feet, that it is I myself: “handle 
me, and see; for a “spirit hath not 
flesh and bones, as ye see me have. 

40 And when he had thus spoken, 
4G shewed them Ais hands and his 

eet. 

41 And while they yet “believed 
not for joy, and wondered, he said 
unto them, Have ye here any 
meat? 

42 And they gave him a piece of a 
broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. 

43 And he took it, and did eat be- 
fore them. 

44 And he said unto them, These 
are the words which I spake unto 
you, while I was yet with you, that 
all things must be fulfilled, which 
were written in the law of Moses, 
and in the prophets, and in the 
‘psalms, concerning me. 

45 Then openéd he their under- 
standing, that they might under- 
stand the ¢scriptures, 


The commission to evangelize 
(Mt. 28. 18-20; Mk, 16, 15-183 
Acts 1., 8). 


46 And said unto them, Thus it is 
written, and thus it behoved Christ 
to suffer, and to rise from the dead 
the third day: 

47 And that ‘repentance and /re- 
mission of Ssins should be preached 


> 


24 48) Sr. LUKE. | [24 53 


in his name among all nations, be-|__A.D. 33. 50_And he led them out 4as far as 

ginning at Jerusalem. @ Acts 1.21,22: 9,37.{L0 Bethany, and he lifted up his 
48 And “ye are witnesses of these] i Cor.i5/4-9.~’|hands, and blessed them. 

things. b John 14.16.17: 51 And it came to pass, !while he 


; ‘Acts 1.8, blessed them, he was ¢parted from 
The ascension of Jesus Chrrst |. Acts 2:4, note. th em, and carried up into 2heaven, 


(Mk. 16. 19, 20; Acts1 9-11). [anu they 52 And they worshipped him, and 
49 And, behold, I send the *prom-| Bean returned to Jerusalem with great 
ise of my Father “upon you: but|e2Ki.2.u, joy: : 
tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem,} Ravs2. °°" | 53 And were continually in the 
until ye be endued with power] <fActs1101. |ftemple, praising and blessing God. 
from on high. Ff Acts 2.46, 5.42, | Amen, 


1 The attitude of our.Lord here characterizes this age. It is one of grace; an 
ascended Lord is blessing a believing people with spiritual blessings. The Jewish 
age was marked by temporal blessings as the reward of an obedient people (Deut. 
28. 1-15) In the kingdom-age spiritual and temporal biessings unite. 

2The Scriptures distinguish three heavens: first, the lower heavens, or the 
region of the clouds; secondly, the second or planetary heavens: and, thirdly. 
the heaven of heavens, the abode of God. 


1113 


/ PY MOLAR AT eS 
4 ad 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


se St. JOHN. Sei 


WRITER. The fourth Gospel was written by the Apostle John (John 21. 24). This 
has been questioned on critical grounds, but on the same grounds and with equal 
scholarship, the early date and Johanean authorship have been maintained. 

: Date. The date of John’s Gospel falls between A.D. 85 and 90. Probably the 
atter. 

Theme. This is indicated both in the Prologue (1. 1-14), and in the last verse of 
the Gospel proper (20. 31), and is: The incarnation of the eternal Word, and Son of 
God, Himself God, in Jesus the Christ, (1) to reveal God in the terms of a human 
life; (2) that as many as believe on Him as “the Christ, the Son of God” (20. 31) 
may have eternal life. The prominent words are, “‘believed” and “life.” 

The book is in seven. natural divisions: I. Prologue: The eternal Word incar- 
nate in Jesus the Christ, 1. 1-14. II. The witness of John the Baptist 1. 15-34. 
III. The public ministry of Christ, 1. 35-12. 50. IV. The private ministry of Christ 
to His own, 13. 1-17, 26. V. The sacrifice of Christ, 18. 1-19. 42. VI. The man- 
ifestation of Christ in resurrection, 20. 1-31. VII. Epilogue: Christ the Master 
of life and service, 21. 1-25. 

The events recorded in this book cover a period of 7 years. 


re sent to bear witness of that 
ight. 


Jesus Christ the true Light. 
(Cf. John 8. 12; 9.5; 12.46.) 


9 That was the true JLight, which 


CHAPTER 1. 


The deity of Jesus Christ. 
(Cf. Heb. 1. 5-13.) 


[* the beginning was the !¢Word, 
and the Word was with ¢God,|? ris (eier- 


and the Word was “God. nal). ohn 3. a man that cometh into 
cage Hpk date emg ik i et ees 10. He was in the *world, and the 
ee ea. Ferre world was made by him, and the 
His pre-incarnation work. hended; lit. |WOrld knew him not. 
A Jaid not hold 
Cf. Heb. 1. 2.) of it. The two classes: sons and unbe- 
3 4All things were made by him; eee lievers. (Cf. 1 John 3. 1, 2; 5. 
and without him was not any thing]; Join 3'26.36.| 21> 12-) 
made that was made. i Acts 19.4. 


E bell 11 A i i 
4 In him was ‘life; and the life] 7 1sa.49.6. cmt,|Own Pa ie an puter Soe 
was the light of men. : 4.8)= man- | 12 But as many as received him, 
5 And the light shineth in dark- Aga om to them gave he “power to become 
se ead ie darkness ‘compre- uaro his own |the sons of God, even to them that 
ended it not. things, and "believe on his name: 

Ministry of John Baptist. (Sec ple recaved | 23 Which were born, not of blood, 
vss 29-34. CE. Mt. gis-g7- Wile]. hin not: nor of the will of the flesh, nor of 
iy Livan e es ° =o author- |the will of man, but of God. 

6} There ‘wasratenen cane ee » Faith. an The incarnation. (Cf. Mt. 1. 18-23; 

Goat wh can Sores: Lk. 1. 30-35; Rom. 1. 3, 4.) 

‘The amie canie faa Aree. Beet) 14 And the *Word was made 
to bear witness of the Light, that| 3.6. (John 1.|flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we 
all men through him might be-! 13; Jude 23.)'|beheld his glory, the glory as of the 


lieve. ?1Tim3.16. /only begotten of the Father.) full f 
8 ‘He was not that Light, but grace and truth. ) fille 


a ee ee eee 

1 Gr. Logos (Aram. Memra, used in the Targums, or Heb. paraphrases, for God). 
The Greek term means, (1) a thought or concept; (2) the expression or utterance of 
that thought. Asa designation of Christ, therefore, Logos is peculiarly felicitous 
because, (1) in Him are embodied all the treasures of the divine wisdom, the col- 
lective “thought” of God (1 Cor. 1. 24; Eph. 3. 11; Col. 2. 2,3); and, (2) He is, from 
eternity, but especially in His incarnation, the utterance or expression of the Per- 
son, and “thought” of Deity (John 1. 3-5, 9, 14-18: 14, 9-11; Col. 2.9). In the Be- 
ing, Person, and work of Christ, Deity is told out. 


1114 


a Ae 
Sara ty 


1 


oy fears Area Ht vey 


The witness of John Baptist. 
(Cf. Mt. 3. 1-17; Mk. 1. 1-11; Lk. 
3. 1-18.) 


15 John bare ¢witness of him, and 
cried, saying, This was he-of whom 
I spake, He that cometh after me is 

‘preferred before me: for he was be- 
fore me. 

16 And of his fulness have all we 
received, and grace for grace. 

17 For the Slaw was given by 
Moses, but !¢grace and truth came 
by Jesus Christ. 

18 Noman hath 2seen God at any 
time; the only begotten Son, which 
is in the bosom of the Father, he 
hath ¢declared him. 

19 And ¢this is the record of John, 
when the Jews sent priests and 
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, 
Who art thou? 

20 And he confessed, and denied 
not; but confessed, I am not the 
Christ. 

21 And they asked him, What 
then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, 
Iam not. Art thou that fprophet? 
And he answered, No. 

22 Then said they unto him, Who 


art thou? that we may give an an-| 


swer to them that sent us. What 
sayest thou of thyself? 

23 &8He said, I am the voice of one 
crying in the wilderness, Make 
straight the way of the “Lord, as 
said the ‘prophet Esaias. 

24 And they which were sent were 
of the Pharisees. 

25 And they asked him, and said 


1 Grace. 


Pit A ? WR het A 


Sz. JOHN. 


jl 34 
A.D. 26. junto him, Why baptizest thou 
then, if thou be not that Christ, nor 

Elias, neither that prophet? 
vnb-8.15: 26 John answered them, saying, I 
Mal.3.1. baptize with water: but there stand- 
5 Law lot eth one among you, whom ye know 


ohn |BOts 


Moses). J ere 4 5 
7.19. (Ex.19. | 27 Heitis, who coming after meis 
wce preferred before me, whose shoe’s 


latchet I am not worthy to un- 
¢Grace (in _ |loose. 
salvation). | 28 These things were done in 
Rom.3.24.) |7Bethabara beyond Jordan, where 
d Lit. led him |John was baptizing. 
forth, i.e. 29 The next day John seeth Je- 
orca ats sus coming unto him, and saith, 
14.9." Behold the *Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the Jsin of the 


eLk,3.15, world, 
fDeut.1g.i5, | 30 This is he of whom T said, 
: After me cometh a man which is 
g Mt.3.3, preferred before me: for he was 
hJehovah. |before me. ¥ 
Isa.40.3. 31 And I knew him not: but that 
180.403 he should be made manifest to 
at ite Israel, therefore am I come baptiz- 
j Bethany. ing Nie water. 
‘ 32 And John bare record, saying, 
Fe or I saw the “Spirit descending from 
6.33-35. (Gen.|heaven like a dove, and it abode 
Pea Heb.10. |ypon him. 


33 And I knew him not: but he 
1 Sin, Rom.3. |that sent me to baptize with water, 
23, note. the same said unto me, Upon whom 
m Holy Spirit.|thou shalt see the Spirit descend- 
vs.32,33; ing, and remaining on him, the 
joe vito same is he which baptizeth with 

18; Acts 2.4.) |the Holy Ghost. 
34 And I saw, and bare record 


that this is the Son of God. 


Summary: (1) Grace is “the kindness and love of God our Saviour 


toward man... not by works of righteousness which we have done” (Tit. 3. 4, 5). 
It is, therefore, constantly set in contrast to law, under which God demands right- 
eousness from man, as, under grace, he gives righteousness to man (Rom. 3. 21, 22; 
8. 4; Phil. 3. 9). Law is connected with Moses and works; grace with Christ and 
faith (John-1. 17; Rom. 10. 4-10). Law blesses the good; grace saves the bad (Ex. 
19. 5; Eph. 2. 1-9). Law demands that blessings be earned; grace is a free gift 
(Deut. 28. 1-6; Eph. 2. 8; Rom. 4. 4, 5). 

(2) As a dispensation, grace begins with the death and resurrection of Christ 
(Rom. 3. 24-26; 4. 24, 25). The point of testing is no longer legal obedience as the 
condition of salvation, but acceptance or rejection of Christ, with good works 
as a fruit of salvation (John 1. 22, 13; 3. 36; Mt. 21. 37; 22. 42; John 15. 22, 25; Heb. 1. 2; 
1 John 5. 10-12). The immediate result of this testing was the rejection of Christ 
by the Jews, and His crucifixion by Jew and Gentile (Acts 4. 27). The predicted 
end of the testing of man under grace is the apostasy of the professing church (see 
“Apostasy,” 2 Tim. 3. 1-8, note), and the resultant apocalyptic judgments. 

(3) Grace has a twofold manifestation: in salvation (Rom. 3. 24, refs.), and in 
the walk and service of the saved (Rom. 6. 15, refs.). See, for the other six dis- 
pensations: Innocence, Gen. 1. 28; Conscience, Gen. 3. 23; Human Government, 
Gen. 8. 21; Promise, Gen. 12. 1; Law, Ex. 19. 8; Kingdom, Eph. 1. 10. 4: 

2 Cf. Gen. 32. 30; Ex. 24. 10; 33. 18; Jud. 6. 22; 13. 22; Rev. 22.4. The divine 
essence, God, in His own triune Person, no human being in the flesh has seen. But 
God, veiled in angelic form, and especially as incarnate in Jesus Christ, has been 
seen of men (Gen. 18. 2. 22; John 14. s, a 

1115, 


- 
wo 


est thou? thou shalt see greater 
things than these. 

51 And he saith unto him, Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Hereafter 
ye shall see heaven open, and the 
kangels of God ascending and de- 
scending upon the Son of man. 


The public ministry of Jesus 
Christ (John 1. 35-12. 50). 


35 Again the next day after John 
stood, and two of his disciples; 

36 And looking upon Jesus as he 
walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb 
of God! 


37 And the two disciples heard CHAPTER 2. 
him speak, and “they followed The marriage at Cana: the first 
Jesus. , miracle, 


38 Then Jesus turned, and saw}, crm. Y 
them following, and saith unto] 16-20; Lk.s. Ae the third day there was a 
them, What seek ye? They said} 1-11. marriage in Cana of Galilee; 
unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say,|; The callto |and the mother of Jesus was there: 
being interpreted, Master,) where] discipleship. | 2 And both Jesus was called, and 


dwellest thou? Cf.Mt.4.18- |his disciples, to the ‘marriage. : 
39 He saith unto them, woame a2, ne cae? ° aes Nae they theses wie 
7) The ame and saw the mother of Jesus saith unto him, 
Fae auele oad abode with|¢ Phot wes, They have no wine. 
ree per day: for it was about ‘the} before night, be - pee eae 
en ur. 
40 One of the two which heard|¢ One a mine °hour is not = come. 
John speak, and followed him, was P 5 His mother saith unto the ser- 
Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. | ¢ Lk.24.27. vants, Whatsoever he saith unto 
41 He first findeth his own brother you, do it. 


Simon, and saith unto him, We|??™t!815- [6 ‘and there were set there six 
have found the Messias, which is,|g Rom.2.28,29. |waterpots of stone, after the man- 
being interpreted, ¢the Christ. eee ner of the ?purifying of the Jews, 
42 And he brought him to Jesus.|” **?°*°?"*" containing two or three firkins 
And when Jesus beheld him, he|iJohns5.17. /apiece. 


said, Thou art Simon the son of aL 7 Jesus saith unto them, Fill the 
HEME cere mea ood GL NS a ASE Rake eee 
. em up to the brim. 

43 The day following Jesus would|* Heb.1.4, 8 And he saith unto them, Draw 
go forth into Galilee, and findeth| 7°%* out now, and bear unto the governor 
Philip, and saith unto him, Follow] 1 Heb.13.4. of the feast. And they bare it. 
44 Now Philip was of Bethsaida,|"Jot 1926 |tasted thers rae ieee 
the city of Adieu and Peter ips Wine meatal ce seh ta invade 

45 Philip findeth Nathanael, and] Lk.2.49. (but the servants which drew the 


saith unto him, We have found|,ysa.39.1g. {water knew;) the governor of the 

him, of whom ¢Moses in the law, feast called the bridegroom, 

and the prophets, did write, ‘Jesus eee 10 And saith unto him, Every 

of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. SUES man at the beginning doth set forth 
46 And Nathanael said unto him,|q One firkin= |good wine; and when men have 
Can there any good thing come out| about 9 gals. |well drunk, then that which is 
of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him,], ayiractes worse: but thou hast kept the good 


oe and see. ae ; : wey a, wine no now. 
vesus saw, Nathanael coming} 1-10; John 4. | 11 This beginning of miracles did 
to pe and. saith of him, sBehold ne oA Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and mani- 
anaes ite indeed, in whom is no] - 8/9:) fested forth his glory; and his dis- 
"48 Nathanael saith unto him, | ° 2-22-14. Seenpo fe a tat down to 
Whence knowest thou me? Jesus Capernaum, he, and his mother 
epev ered and said unto him, Before and his brethren, and his disciples: 
wast under the fie cee oie Ame 
49 Nathanael answered and saith . 
unto him, Rabbi, ‘thou art the Son The first passover (vs. 13, 23; cf. 
of God: thou art the JKing of ret Sea wig epee 
Beal: i0n oO e temple. f. Mt. 
50 Jesus answered and said unto 21. 12,13; Mk. 11, 13-17; Lk, 19. 
him, Because I said unto thee, I pi 


saw thee under the fig treé, beliey- 13 And the Jews’ spassover was 


1116 


2 14] 


at hand, and ¢Jesus went up to Je- 


rusalem, 

14 And found in the ‘temple 
those that sold ¢oxen and sheep and 
doves, and the changers of ‘money 
sitting: 

15 And when he had made a 
scourge of small cords, he drove 
them all out of the temple, and the 
sheep, and the oxen; and poured 
out the changers’ money, and over- 
threw the- tables; 

16 And said unto them that sold 
doves, Take these things hence; 
make not my Father’s house an 
house of merchandise. 

17 And his disciples remembered 


that it was written, The /zeal of 


thine house hath eaten me up. 
18 Then answered the Jews and 


said unto him, What ‘sign shewest 
thou unto us, seeing that thou doest 


these things? 

19 Jesus answered and said anto 
them, “Destroy this temple, and in 
three days I will raise it up. 

20 Then said the Jews, Forty and 
six years was this temple in build- 
ing, and wilt thou rear it up in 
three days? 


21 But he spake of the ‘temple of 


his body. ; 

22 When therefore he was risen 
from the dead, his disciples remem- 
bered that he had said this unto 
them; and they believed the scrip- 
ture, and the word which Jesus 
had said. 

23 Now when he was in Jerusa- 
lem at the passover, in the feast 
day, many believed in his name, 
when they saw the miracles which 
he did. i ' 

24 But Jesus did not commit him- 
self unto them, because he *knew all 


men 

25 And needed not that any 
should testify of man: for he knew 
what was in man, 


CHAPTER 3. 


Jesus and Nicodemus: the new 
birth. (Cf. v. 3, note.) 


ene was a man of the Phari- 
sees, named ‘Nicodemus, a 
ruler of the Jews: 

2 The same came to Jesus by 


St. JOHN. 


A.D. 30. 


a John 5.1; 
6.4; 11.55, 


[3 16 


night, and said unto him, Rabbi, 
we know that thou art a teacher 
come from God: for no man can do 
these miracles that thou doest, ex- 
cept “God be with him. 

3 Jesus answered and said unto 
him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
"Except a man be !born °again, he 


b Mt.21.12; 
Mk.11.15; 
Lk.19.45. 

c Rev:11.2. 

d Lev.22.19. 

e Ex.30.12. 

f Psa.69.9. 

g John 6.30; 
Mt.12.38; 
21.23. 

h Mt.26.61; 
27.40. 

4 Eph.2.21,22; 
Col.2.9. 

j Resurrec- 
tion. vs.19- 
23; John 5. 
25-29. (Job 
19.25; 1 Cor. 
15.52.) 

k 1 Sam.16.7; 
Rev.2.23. 

Z John 7. 
50,51; 19.39. 

m Acts 10.38. 

n John 1.13; 
Gal.6.15; 
Eph.2.10; 
Tit.3.53 
Jas.1.18; 

1 Pet.1.23. 

o Or, from 
above. 

p Ezk.36.25; 
Mk.16.16; 


cannot see the kingdom of God. 

4 Nicodemus saith unto him, 
How can a man be born when he is 
old? can he enter the second time 
into his mother’s womb, and be 
born? 

5 Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I 
say unto thee, Except a man be 
born of water and of the Spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of 
God. 

6 That which is born of the Mesh 
is %flesh; and that which is born of 
the Spirit is spirit. i 

7 Marvel not that I said unto 
thee, Ye must be born again. 

8 The wind bloweth where it 
listeth, and thou hearest the sound 
thereof, but canst not tell whence it 
cometh, and whither it goeth: "so 
is every one that is born of the 
Spirit. 

9 Nicodemus answered and said 
pene him, How can these things 

e 

10 Jesus answered and said unto 
him, Art thou ‘a master of Israel, 


+r Rom.9.15,18. 

s Lit, Art thou 
the teacher 
of Israel, etc. 

t vs.3,5,85 
Heb.5.11,12. 

u1 Tim.3.16; 
1 John S.7. 

uv See Mt.8. 
20, note. 

w Inspiration, 
John 5.46,47. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

x kosmas (Mt. 
4.8) = man- 
kind. 

y Isa.9.6, 


and knowest not these things? 

11 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
We speak that we do know, and 
testify that we have seen; and ye 
receive not our witness. 

12 If I have told you ‘earthly 
things, and ye believe not, how 
shall ye believe, if I tell you of 
uheavenly things? 

13. And no man hath ascended up 
to heaven, but he that came down 
from heaven, even the ’Son of man 
which is in heaven. 

14 And “as Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of man be lifted 
up: ; 

15 That whosoever believeth in 
him should not perish, but have 
eternal life. 

16 For God so loved the “world, 
that he gave his only begotten 
ySon, that whosoever believeth in 


1 Regeneration: (1) The necessity of the new birth grows out of the incapacity 
of the natural man to “see” or ‘‘enter into” the kingdom of God. However gifted, 
moral, or refined, the natural man is absolutely blind to spiritual truth, and impo- 
tent to enter the kingdom; for he can neither obey, understand, nor please God 


(John 3. 3, 5, 6; Psa. 51. 5; Jer. 17. 9; Mk. 7. 21-23; 1 Cor. 2. 14; Rom. 8. 7, 8; 


2.3. See Mt. 6. 33,.-note). 


1117 


a 


Eph. 


(2) The new birth is not a reformation of 


rs 


3 17] 


17 For God sent not his Son into 
the ¢world to “condemn the world; 
but that the world through him 
might be ‘saved. ; 

18 ¢He that believeth on him is 
not condemned: but he that believ- 
eth not is condemned already, be- 
cause he hath not believed in the 


name of the only begotten Son of 


God. 

19 And this is the condemnation, 
that light is come into the ¢world, 
and men loved darkness rather 
Sai light, because their deeds were 
evil. 

20 For every one that doeth evil 
hateth the light, neither cometh to 
the light, lest his deeds should be 
€reproved. 

21. But he that Jdoeth truth 
cometh to the light, that his deeds 
may be made manifest, that they 
are €wrought in God. 


Last testimony of John Faptist. 


22 After these things came Jesus 
and his disciples into the land of 
Judea; and there he tarried with 
them, and “baptized. 

23 And John also was baptizing 
in 4£non near to Salim, because 
there was much water there: and 
they ‘came, and were baptized. 

24 For John jwas not yet cast 
into prison. 

25 Then there arose a question 
between some of John’s disciples 
and the Jews about “purifying. 

26 And they came unto John, and 
said unto him, Rabbi, he that was 
with thee beyond Jordan, to whom 
thou barest witness, behold, the 
same baptizeth, and all men come 
to him. 

27 John answered and said, A 
‘man can receive nothing, except it 
be given him from heaven. 

28 Ye yourselves bear me witness, 
that I said, I am not the Christ, 
but that “I am sent before him. 

29 He that hath the bride is the 
“bridegroom: but the friend of the 
bridegroom, which standeth and 


| , 


Sr. JOHN. 


SSS 
him should not !perish, but have| A.D. 30. _j|heareth him, rejoiceth greatly be- 
everlasting life. cause of the bridegroom’s voice: 


a kosmos 


c Rom.1.16, 
note. 


é John 6.40,47; 
orn.8.1. 


e Or, discov- 
ered. 


f Psa.119.105; 
139.23. 


g John 15.4,5; 
1 Cor.15.10. 


h John 4.2. 
i Mt.3.5,6. 
jMt.4.3. 


& Num.19.7; 
Heb.9.9,14;- 
1 Pet.3.21. 

1 Rom.12.5,8; 
1 Cor.3.6; 
Heb.5.4; 


1 Pet.4.10,11. 


m Mal.3.1. 

n Bride (of 
Christ).~ 
Rom.7.4. + 


(John 3.29; . 


Rev.19.6-8.) 
o Isa.9.7. 
b John 15.15. 


q Isa.55.4,11; 
1 John 5.10. 


r John 7.16. 
s Holy Spirit. 
vs.5,6,8,34; 
hn 4 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


t Faith vs. 
15,16,18,36; 
hn 


(Gen.3.20; - 
Heb.11.39.) 


u Life (Eter- 
nal). vs.15, 
16,36; John 
4.14,36. 
(Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

v Gal.3.10; 

1 Thes.1.10. 

w Gen.33.19. 


this my joy therefore is fulfilled. 
30 °He must increase, but I musé 
decrease.. 


Declarative statement concern- 
ing Jesus Christ. 


31 He that cometh from above is 
above all: he that is of the earth is 
earthly, and speaketh of the earth: 
he that cometh from heaven is 
above all. 

32 And what *he hath seen and 
heard, that he testifieth; and no 
man receiveth his testimony. 

33 He that hath received his tes-. 
timony hath ¢set to his seal that 
God is true. 

34 For "he whom God hath sent 
speaketh the words of God: for 
God giveth not the ‘Spirit by mea- 
sure unto him. 

35.The Father loveth the Son, 
and hath given all things into his 
hand. 

36 He that “believeth on the Son 
“hath everlasting life: and he that 
believeth not the Son shall not see 
life; but the *wrath of God abideth 
on him. 


CHAPTER 4. 
Jesus departs into Galilee. 


WEEN therefore the Lord knew 
how the Pharisees had heard 
that Jesus made and baptized more 
disciples than John, 

2 (Though Jesus himself baptized 
not, but his disciples, ) 

3 He left Judea, and departed 
again into Galilee. 

4 And he must needs go through 
Samaria. ; 

5: Then cometh he to a city of Sa- 
maria, which is called Sychar, near 
to the parcel of ground that Jacob 
wgave to his son Joseph. 


Jesusand theSamaritanwoman. 


6 Now Jacob’s well was there. 
Jesus therefore, being wearied with 
his journey, sat thus on the well: 
and it was about the sixth hour, 


the old nature (Rom. 6. 6, nofe), but a creative act of the Holy Spirit (John 3. 5; 


1. 12, 13; 2 Cor. 5. 17; Eph. 2. 10; 4. 


24). 


i (3) The condition of 
in Christ crucified (John 3. 14, 15; I. 12, 13; Gal. 3. 24). 


the new birth is faith 
(4) Through the new birth 


the believer becomes a partaker of the divine nature and of the life of Christ Him- 


self (Gal. 2: 
1 John 5. 10-12). 

1Gr.. apollumi, trans. 
Lk. 15. 4, 6, 32. 
consciousness. 


20; Eph. 2. 10; 4. 24; Col. 1. 27; 1 Pet. 1. 


1118 


23-25; 2 Pet. 1. 4; 


“marred,” Mk. 2. 22; “lost,” Mt. 10. 6; 15. 24; 18. 11; 
In no N.T. instance does it signify cessation of existence or of 
It is the condition of every non-believer. 


7 There cometh a woman of Sa- 
maria to draw water: Jesus saith 
unto her, Give me to dri 

8 (For his disciples were gone 
away unto the city to buy meat.) 

9 Then saith the woman of Sa- 
maria unto him, How is it that 
thou, being a Jew, askest drink of 
me, which am a woman of Samaria? 
for the Jews have no @dealings with 
the Samaritans. 

10 Jesus answered and said unto 
her, If thou knewest the gift of 
God, and who it is that saith to 
thee, Give me to drink; thou would- 
est have asked of him, and he 
would have given thee living 
water. 

11 The woman saith unto him, Sir, 
thou hast nothing to draw with, 
and the well is deep: from whence 
then hast thou that living water? 

12 Art thou greater than our 


as, .* ( er sty AP 


St. JOHN. 


AD.30.__| 23 But the hour cometh, and now 
is, when the ‘true worshippers shall 
worship the Father in Jspirit and in 
truth: for the Father seeketh such 
to worship him. 

a Acts 10.28. } 24 *God is a ‘Spirit: and they 
5 Chleiee that worship him must. worship 
Stone). vs. |fim in spirit and in truth. 
13,14; John 7.| 25 The woman saith unto him, I 
37-39. (Ex. |Iknow that Messias cometh, which 


er 1 Pet. Jis called Christ: when he is come, 
he will “tell us all things. 
26 Jesus saith unto her, I that 


speak unto thee am he. 


c Or, become. 


d Life 
ieee | 27 And upon this came his disci- 
pee alts ples, and marvelled "that he talked 
eer ige — [with the woman: yet no man said, 
Rev.22.19.). |What seekest thou? or, Why talk- 


est thou with her? 

28 The woman then left her 
waterpot, and went her way into 
the city. and saith to the men, 

29 Come, see a man, which told 


e Bible pray- 
ers. John 4. 
49. (Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 


f Gen.12.6,7; 


father Jacob, which gave us the 
well, and drank thereof himself, and 
his children, and his cattle? 

13 Jesus answered and said unto 
her, Whosoever drinketh of this 
bwater shall thirst again: 


The indwelling Spirit. 
(Cf. John 7. 37-39.) 


14 But whosoever drinketh of the 
water that. I shall give him shail 
never thirst; but the water that I 
shall give him shall “be in him a 
well of water springing up into 
deverlasting life. 

15 The woman saith unto him, 
Sir, give me this water, that I thirst 
not, neither come hither to draw. 

16 Jesus saith unto her, Go, call 
_thy husband, and come hither. 
“17 The woman answered and said, 
I have no husband. Jesus said un- 
to her, Thou hast well said, I have 
no husband: 

18 For thou hast had five hus- 
bands; and he whom thou now hast 
is not thy husband: in that saidst 
thou truly. . . 

19 The woman saith unto him, Sir, 
I perceive that thou art a prophet. 

20 Our fathers worshipped in this 
fmountain; and ye say, that in 8Je- 
rusalem is the place where men 
ought to worship. 

21 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, 
believe me, the hour cometh, when 
ye shall neither in this mountain, 
nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the 
Father. 

22 Ye worship ye know not what: 
we know what we worship: for 
’salvation is of the Jews. 


me all things that ever I did: is not 
this the Christ? 

30 Then they went out of the 
city, and came unto him. 

31 Inthe mean while his disciples 


33.18; Jud. 
9.7. 


g Deut.12.5; 
1 Ki.9.3. 


ia es prayed him, saying, Master, eat. 

: 32 But he said unto them, I have 
4Or, real. meat to eat that ye know not of. 

j That the 33 Therefore said the disciples 
Holy Spirit |One to another, Hath any man 
ismeantis |brought him ought to eat? 
clear fromv. | 34 Jesus saith unto them, My 

x meat is to do the will of him that 
kCf£Johni. |sent me, and to finish his work. 
18, note. 35 Say not ye, There are yet four 

1 Holy Spirit. months, and then cometh harvest? 
John 6.63. |behold, I say unto you, Lift up your 
heneg eyes, and look on the fields; for 

4 they are white already to harvest. 
mDeut.18.15. | 36 And he that reapeth receiveth 


wages, and gathereth ‘fruit unto 
life eternal: that both he that sow- 
Jeth and he that reapeth may rejoice 
together. 

37 And herein is that saying true, 
One Ssoweth, and another reapeth. 


n that he was 
talking with 
a woman, 

o Psa.40.8. 


p complete. 


Cf.John 17.4. | 38 I sent you to reap that whereon 
qRom.6.22, |Ye bestowed no labour: ‘other men 
laboured, and ye are entered into 

r 1 Cor.8.5,95 their labours. ‘ 
3.2.19. | 39 And ‘many of the Samaritans 
s Mic.6.15. of that city believed on him for the 
A saying of the woman, which testi- 
# Jer 44-4i»,. |fied, He told me all that ever I did. 


Jesus and the Samaritans. 


cause of his own word; 
_-1119 


4 42] 


Sr. J OHN. 


a 


[5 18 


42 And said unto the woman, 
Now we believe, not because of thy 
saying: for we have heard him our- 
selves, and know that this is indeed 
the Christ, the “Saviour of the 
bworld. 

43 Now after two days he de- 
parted thence, and went into 
Galilee. ; 

44 For Jesus himself testified, 
‘that a prophet hath no honour in 
his own country. J 

45 Then when he was come into 
Galilee, the Galilezans received him, 
having 4seen all the things that he 
did at Jerusalem at the feast: ¢for 
they also went unto the feast. 


The nobleman’s son healed. 


46 So Jesus came again into Cana 
of Galilee, where he ‘made the 
water wine. And there was a cer- 
tain £nobleman, whose son was sick 
at Capernaum. 

47 When he heard that Jesus was 
come out of Judza into Galilee, he 
went unto him, and besought him 
that he would come down, and heal 
his son: for he was at the point 
of death. 

48 Then said Jesus unto him, Ex- 
cept ye see signs and wonders, ye 
will not believe. 

49 The nobleman “saith unto him,, 
Sir, come down ere my child die. 

50 Jesus saith unto him, ‘Go thy 
way; thy son liveth. And the man 
believed the word that Jesus had 
spoken unto him, and he went his 
way. 

51 And as he was now going 
down, his servants met him, and 
told him, saying, Thy son liveth. 

52 Then enquired he of them the 
hour when he began to amend. 
And they said unto him, Yesterday 
a the seventh hour the “fever left 

im. 

53 So the father knew that it was 
at the same hour, in the which Jesus 
said unto him, Thy son liveth: and 
himself believed, and his whole 
house. 

94 This is again the second mira- 
cle that Jesus did, when he was 
come out of Judea into Galilee, 


CHAPTER 5, 


The feast (Pentecost?) : the pool 
of Bethesda, and healing. 


FTER this there was a *feast of, 


the Jews; and Jesus went up 
to Jerusalem. 


2 Now there is at Jerusalem by 


A.D. 30. 


a Rom.1.16, 
note. 


b kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


¢ Mt.13.57; 
ME.6.4; 
LK.4.24. 

d John 2.13,23. | 

e Deut.16.16. 

f John 2.1,11. 


g Or, courtier, 
or, ruler. 


h Bible pray- 
ers (N.T.). 
John 11.41, 
42. (Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 


t Mt.8.13; Mk. 
J.29,30. 


j Miracles 
(N.T.).. vs. 
46-54; John 
5.1-9. (Mt. 
8.2,3; Acts 
28.8,9.) 


k John 2.13; 
Lev.23.2; 
Deut.16.16. 


n Heb.1.4,note. 
o Psa.142.3. 

D v.40. 

q Miracles 


( 2,35 

Acts 28.8,9.) 
ry Jer.17.21; 

Mt.12.2. 


s LK.4.30. 


t Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


u Psa.2.2, 


v Gr. patera 
idion, his 
own Father, 
The Jews 
understood 
perfectly 
that Jesus 
was claiming 
to be God. Cf. 
John 10.33. 


w John 10.30, 
33; Phil.2.6. 


the sheep ’market a pool, which is 
called in the Hebrew tongue 
Bethesda, having five porches. 

3 In these lay a great multitude 
of impotent folk, of blind, halt, 
withered, “waiting for the moving 
of the water. 

4 For an “angel went down at a 
certain season into the pool, and 
troubled the water: whosoever then 
first after the troubling of the water 
stepped in was made whole of what- 
soever disease he had. 

5 And a certain man was there, 
which had an infirmity thirty and 
eight years. 

6 When Jesus saw him lie, “and 
knew that he had been now a long 
time in that case, he saith unto 
him, ?Wilt thou be made whole? 

7 The impotent man answered 
him, Sir, I have no man, when the 
water is troubled, to put me into the 
pool: but while I am coming, an- 
other steppeth down before me. 

8 Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take 
up thy bed, and walk. 

9 And immediately the man was _ 
made ¢whole, and tcok up his bed, 
and walked: and on the same day 
was the sabbath. 

10 The Jews therefore said unto 
him that was cured, It is the "sab- 
bath day: it.is not lawful for thee 
to carry thy bed. 

11 He answered them, He that 
made me whole, the same said unto 
me, Take up thy bed, and walk. 

12 Then asked they him, What 


‘|man is that which said unto thee, 


Take up thy bed, and walk? 

13 And he that was healed wist 
not who it was: for Jesus had ‘con- 
veyed himself away, a multitude 
being in that place. 

14 Afterward Jesus findeth him in 
the temple, and said unto him, Be- 
hold, thou art made whole: ‘sin no 
mee lest a worse thing come unto 

ee. 

15 The man departed, and told 
the Jews that it was Jesus, which 
had made him whole, 

16 And therefore did the Jews 
persecute Jesus, and sought to 
Uslay him, because he had done 
these things on the sabbath day. 

17 But Jesus answered them, My 
Father worketh hitherto, and I 
work. ‘ 

18 Therefore the Jews sought the 
more to “kill him, because he not 
only had broken the sabbath, but 
said also that God was “his Father, 


1120 


“making himself equal with God. 


5 19} 

19 Then answered Jesus and said 
unto them, Verily, verily, I say 
unto you, The Son can do nothing 
of himself, but what he seeth the 
Father ¢do: for what things soever 
he doeth, these also doeth the Son 
likewise. 

20 For the Father loveth the 
Son, and sheweth him all things 
that himself doeth: and he will 
shew him greater works than these, 
that ye may marvel. 

21 For¢asthe Father raiseth up the 
dead, and quickeneth them; ¢even 
so the Son quickeneth whom he will. 

22 For the Father judgeth no 
man, but hath committed all ‘judg- 
ment unto the Son: 

23 That ali men should honour 


rv 


St. JOHN. 


A.D. 31. 


a Lit.doing. 
b Mt.3.17. 
¢1 Ki.17.21; 
Rom.8.11. 
d John 11.25; 
Lk.8.54. 


ment. vs. 
22,27,30; 
Acts 17.31. 
(Mt.10.15; 
Rev.20.11.) 
f Life (eter- 
nal). vs.24- 


7.14; Rev. 
22.19.) 

g Judgments 
(the seven). 


the Son, even as they honour the 
Father. He that honoureth not 
the Son honoureth not the Father 
which hath sent him. 

24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
He that heareth my word, and be- 
lieveth on him that sent me, ‘hath 


everlasting life, and shall not come : 
jnto &condemnation; but is passed| ; 


from “death unto life. : 

25 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
The hour is coming, and now is, 
when the ‘dead shall hear the voice 
of the Son of God: and they that 
hear shall live. 

26 For jas the Father hath life in 
himself; so hath he given to the 
Son to have Alife in himself; 

27. And hath given him authority 
to execute judgment also, because 
he is the Son of man. 


The two resurrections. 
(See v. 29, marg.) 


28 Marvel not at this: for the hour 
is coming, in the which all that are 
jn the graves shall hear his voice, 

29 And shall come forth; they 
that have done good, unto the ‘res- 
urrection of life; and they that have 
done evil, unto the resurrection of 
mdamnation. 

30 I can of mine own self do noth- 
ing: as I hear, I ¢judge: and my 
judgment is just; because I seek 
not mine own will, but the will of 
the Father which hath sent me. 

31 If I bear Jwitness of myself, 
my witness is not true. 


20.12. 
h Death (spir- 
itual). Eph. 


nation, 


n v.37; 

Acts 10.43. 

o Rom.1.16, 
note. 

p Mt.5.16; 
Phil.2.15,16. 

q complete. 

r Cf.John 1. 
18, note. 

s Or, Ye 
search. 

1 The Beast. 
2 Thes.2.3-8. 
(Dan.7.8; 
Rev.19.20.) 

u i.e. hope. 

v Inspiration. 
vs.46,47; 


(Ex.4.15; 

Rev.22.19.) 
w Faith. vs. 

24,44,46; 

John 6.29,35, 
. (Gen.3. 


32 There is “another that bear- 


e Day of judg- 


"|(4) The Scriptures. 


m i.e. condent- 


[5 46 


eth witness of me; and I know that 
ithe witness which he witnesseth 
lof me is true. 


The fourfold witness to Jesus: 
(1) John Baptist. 


33 Yesent unto John, and he bare 
witness unto the truth. 
34 But I receive not testimony 
from man: but these things I say, 
that ye might be °saved. 
_35 He was a burning and a shin- 
ing /light: and ye were willing for 
a season to rejoice in his light.” 
(2) The works. 

36 But I have greater witness 

than that of John: for the works 


which the Father hath given me to 
finish, the same works, that I do, 


- |bear witness of me, that the Father 


hath sent me. 
(3) The Father (Mt. 3. 17). 


37 And the Father himself, which 
hath sent me, hath borne witness 
of me. Ye have neither heard his 
voice at any time, nor seen his 


. |shape. 


-| 38 And ye have not his word 
abiding in you: for whom he hath 
sent, him ye believe not. 


(Cf. Lk. 24. 
27, 44-46.) 


39 sSearch the scriptures; for in 
them ye think ye have eternal life: 
and they are they which testify of 


me. 

40 And ye will not come to me, 
that ye might have /life. 

41 I receive not honour from men. 

42 But I know you, that ye have 
not the love of God in you. 

43 I am come in my Father’s 
name, and ye receive me not: if 
ee ; : 
name, him ye will receive. 

44 How can ye believe, which re- 
ceive honour one of another, and 
seek not the honour that cometh 
from God only? 

45 Do not think that I will accuse 
you to the Father: there is one that 
accuseth you, even Moses, in whom 
ye “trust. 

46 For had ye believed Moses, ye 
would have believed me: “for he 
wrote “of me. 


1Cf, John 8. 14. 


before Jews who denied those claims, 


required “two witnesses” (John 8. 


of verse 31 would be: “If I bear witness ©: 


true,” Cf. John 8. 14. 


17; 


1121 


In John 5. 31 our Lord,. defending His Messianic claims 
accepts the biblical rule of evidence, which 
Num. 35. 30; Deut. 17. 6). ) 
f myself [ye will say] my witness is not 


A paraphrase 


A 


47 But if ye believe not his writ- 
ings, how shall ye believe my 
words? 


CHAPTER 6. 


Feeding the five thousand (Mt. 
14. 13-21; Mk. 6. 324; Lk. 9. 
0-17). 


2 And a great multitude followed 
him, because they saw his miracles 
which he did on them that were 
diseased. , 

3 And Jesus went up into a moun- 
tain, and there he sat with his 
disciples. 

4 And the 4passover, a feast of 
the Jews, was nigh. F F 

5 When Jesus then lifted up Ais 
eyes, and saw a great company 
come unto him, he saith unto 
Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, 
that these may eat? : 

6 And this he said to prove him: 
for he himself knew what he would 


Oo. 

7 Philip answered him, Two hun- 
dred pennyworth of bread is not 
sufficient for them, that every one 
of them may take a little. 

8 One of his disciples, Andrew, 
Simon Peter’s brother, saith unto 
him, 

9 There is a lad here, which hath 
five barley loaves, and two small 
fishes: but what are they among so 
many? 

10 And Jesus said, Make the men 
sit down. Now there was much 
grass in the place. So the men sat 
down, in number about five thou- 
sand, 

11 And Jesus took the loaves; and 
when he had ‘given thanks, he dis- 
tributed to the disciples, and the 
disciples to them that were set 
down; and likewise of the fishes as 
much as they would. 

12 When they were filled, he said 
unto his disciples, Gather up the 
fragments that remain, that noth- 
ing be lost. 

13 Therefore they gathered them 
together, and filled twelve baskets 
with the fragments of the five barley 
loaves, which remained over and 
above unto them that had eaten. 

14 Then those men, when they 
had seen the ¢miracle that Jesus 
did, said, This is of a truth «that 


peopiict that should come into the| 


Jworld. 


St. JOHN. 


@ Cf.John 
2.13; 11.55. 


6 Num.11. 
21,22. 

¢ 1 Sam.9.13; 
Mt.26.26; 
1 Cor.10.31; 
1 Tim.4.4,5. 


d Miracles 


Acts 28.8,9.) 

e Gen.49.10; 
Deut.18. 
15,18. 

fn 

t.4.8) = 
mankind. 

g John 18.36. 

hk Mt.14.23; 
MkK.6.47. 

# One furlong 
= 582 ft. 

9 Isa.43.1,2. 

kvl, 

l boats. 

m 1sa.55.2; 
Mt.6.19,34; 
Phil.2.13; 
Col.3.1,2. 


n vs.54,58; 
Jer.15.16, 


o Mt.8.20, 
note, 


p Eph.2.8,9., 
g Psa.2.7; 
Isa.42.1; 


Acts 2.22; 
2 Pet.1.17. 


1122 


Jesus walks upon the sea (Mt.14. 
22-36; Mk. 6. 45-56). 


15 When Jesus therefore per- 
ceived that they would come and 
take him by force, to make him a 
&king, he departed again into a 
mountain himself alone. 

16 #And when even was now 
come, his disciples went down unto 
the sea, 

17 And entered into a ship, and 
went over the sea toward Caper- 
naum. And it was now dark, and 
Jesus was not come to them. 

18 And the sea arose by reason of 
a great wind that blew. 

19 So when they had rowed about 
five and twenty or thirty ‘furlongs, 
they see Jesus walking on the sea, 
and drawing nigh unto the ship: 
and they were afraid. : 

20 But he saith unto them, JIt is 
I; be not afraid. 

21 Then they willingly received 
him into the ship: and immediately 
the ship was at the land whither 
they went. 


The great discourse on the 
bread of Iife. 


22 The day following, when the 
people which stood on the other 
side of the sea saw that there was 
none other boat there, save that 
one whereinto his disciples were 
entered, and that Jesus went not 
with his disciples into the boat, but 
that his disciples were gone away 
alone; 

23 (Howbeit there came other 
boats from Tiberias nigh unto #the 
place where they did eat bread, after 
that the Lord had given thanks:) 

24 When the people therefore saw 
that Jesus was not there, neither 
his disciples, they also took ‘ship- 
ping, and came to Capernaum, 
seeking for Jesus. 

25 And when they had found him 
on the other side of the sea, they 
said unto him, Rabbi, when camest 
thou hither? 

26 Jesus answered them and said, 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye 
seek me, not because ye saw the 
miracles, but because ye did eat of 
the loaves, and were filled. 

27°™Labour not for the meat 
which perisheth, but for "that meat 
which endureth unto everlasting 
life, which the “Son of man shall 
’give unto you: %for him hath God 
the Father sealed, 

28 Then said they unto him, What 


+ 


shall we do, that we might work 
the works of God? ; 

29 Jesus answered and said. unto 
them, This is the work of God, that 
ye “believe on him whom he ‘hath 
sent. 

30 They said therefore unto him, 
What “sign shewest thou then, that 
we may see, and believe thee? what 
dost thou work? 

31 Our fathers did eat manna in 
the desert; ‘as it is written, He 
gave them ¢bread from heaven to 
eat. 

32 Then Jesus said unto them, 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Mo- 
ses gave you not that bread from 
heaven; but ‘my Father giveth you 
the true bread from heaven. 

33 For the bread of God fis he 
which cometh down from heaven, 
and égiveth life unto the ‘world. 

34 Then said they unto him, Lord, 
evermore give us this bread. 


35 And Jesus said unto them, Ij 


am the bread of life: he that cometh 
to me shall never hunger; and the 
that “believeth on me shall never 
thirst. : 

36 But I said unto you, That Jye 
also have seen me, and believe not. 

37 All that the Father giveth me 
shall come to me; and ‘him that 
cometh to me I will in no wise cast 
out. 

38 For I came down from heaven, 
not to do mine own will, “but the 
will of him that sent me. 

39 And this is the Father’s will 
which hath sent me, that of all 
which he hath given me I should 
lose nothing, but should raise it up 
again at the last day. 

40 And this is the will of him that 
sent me, “that every one which 
seeth the Son, and believeth on him, 
may have everlasting life: and I 
will Sraise him up at the last day. 

41 The Jews then murmured at 
him, because he said, I am the bread 
which came down from heaven. 

42 And they -said, ?Is not this 
Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose 
father and mother we know? how 
is it then that he saith, I came down 
from heaven? 

43 Jesus therefore answered and 
said unto them, Murmur not among 
yourselves. 

44 Wo man can Icome to me, ex- 
cept the Father which hath sent me 
rdraw him: and [ will raise him up 
at the last day. : 

45 It is written in the prophets, 
And they shall be all taught of 


| if 


St. JOHN 


a Faith. vs.29, 


Heb.11.39.) 

6 Mt.12.38. 

c Inspiration. 
vs.31,32,45, 
49,63; John 7. 


ef. Psa.78.24; 


105.40. 
e John 3.13,16. 
F ¥3.48,58. 
g Sacrifice 
(of Christ). 
John 12.24. 


Rev.7.16. 
j John 10.26. 
R v.45; 


Mt.11.28; 
Lk.23.42,43; 
1 Tim.1.15; 
Heb.4.15,16; 
7.25; 


Rev.22.17. 

m John 4.34; 
5.30; 6.38; 
Psa.40.7,8; 
Mt.26.39, 

n vs.47,54; 
John 3.15,16. 

o Resurrec- 
tion.vs.39,40; 
John 11.11- 
14,23-25,42- 


Phil.1.29; 
2.12,13. 

s Jehovah, 
Isa.54.13. 

t Lk.10.22:; 

u v.40, 

v VS.33,35; 
Gal.2.20; 
Col.3.3,4. 

w John 3.16; 
Lk.19.10. 

x kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


y v.40. 
2Mk.16.19. 


1123 


a 


diy AR Cala 


sGod. Every man therefore that’ 
hath heard, and hath learned of 
the Father, cometh unto me. 

46 Not that any man hath seen, 
the Father, save he which is of 
‘God, he hath seen the Father. 

47 Verily, verily, I say unto “you, 
He that believeth on me hath ever- 
lasting life. 

48 I am that bread of life. 

49 Your fathers did eat manna in 
the wilderness, and are dead. 

50 This is the bread which cometh 
down from heaven, that a man may 
eat thereof, and not die. 

51 I am the living bread which 
came down from heaven: if any 
man eat of this bread, he shall live ~ 
for ever: and the bread that I will 
give is my flesh, which I will give 


for the “life of the *world. 

52 The Jews therefore strove 
among themselves, saying, How 
can this man give us his flesh to 
eat? 

53 Then Jesus said unto them, 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ex- 
cept ye eat the flesh of the Son of 
man, and drink his blood, ye have 
no life in you. 

54 »Whoso eateth my flesh, and _ 

i od, hath eternal ts 
ife; ani raise him up at the 
last day. 

55 For my flesh is meat indeed, | 
and my blood is drink indeed. é 

é that eateth my flesh, and 
od, dwelleth in me, i 


and I in him. 

57 As the living Father hath sent 
me, and I live by the Father: so he 
that eateth me, even he shall live 
by me. 

58 This is that bread which came 
down from heaven: not as your 
fathers did eat manna, and are 


Au 


dead: he that eateth of this bread 
shall live for ever. 

59 These things said he in the 
synagogue, as he taught in Caper- 
naum. 


Discipleship tested by doctrine. 
(Cf. Mt. 8. 19-22; 10. 36.) 


60 Many therefore of his dis- 
ciples, when they had heard this, 
said, This is an hard saying; who 
can hear it? 

61 When Jesus knew in himself 
that his disciples murmured at it, 
he said unto them, Doth this offend 


your. 
62 What and if ye shall see the 


Son of man “ascend up where he 
was before? 


6 63] 


St. JOHN. 


=) 


[7 25 


63 It is the “spirit that quicken-| A.D. 32. |not up yet unto this feast; for my 


eth; the %flesh profiteth nothing: 
the words that I speak unto you, 
‘they are spirit, and they are life. 

64 But there are some of you that 
believe not. For Jesus knew from 
the beginning who they were that 
believed not, and who should be- 
tray him. ; 

65 And he said, Therefore said I 
unto you, that no man can come 
unto me, except it were given unto 
him of my Father. 

66 From that time many of his 
disciples went “back, and walked 
no more with him. 


- Peter’s confession of faith. (Cf. 
Mt. ra 13-20; Mk. 8. 27-30; Lk. 9. 
18-21. 


67 Then said Jesus unto the 
twelve, Will ye also go away? 

68 Then Simon Peter answered 
him, Lord, to whom shall we go? 
thou hast the words of 4eternal life. 

69 And ‘we believe and are sure 
that thou art that Christ, the Son 
of the living God. 

70 Jesus answered them, Have 
not I chosen you twelve, and one of 
you is a fdevil? 

71 He spake of Judas Iscariot the 
son of Simon: for he it was that 
should betray him, being one of the 
twelve. 


CHAPTER 7. 


Jesus urged to go to the feast of 
tabernacles. (Cf. Lk. 9, 51-62.) 


FTER these things Jesus 

walked in Galilee: for he would 

not walk in Jewry, because the 
Jews sought to kill him. 

2 Now the Jews’ &feast of taber- 
nacles was at hand. 

3 His brethren therefore said unto 
him, Depart hence, and go into Ju- 
dzea, that thy disciples also may see 
the works that thou doest. 

4 For there is no man that doeth 
any thing in secret, and he himself 
seeketh to be known openly. If 
thou do these things, shew thyself 
to the ‘world. 

5 For ‘neither did his brethren 
believe in him. 

6 Then Jesus said unto them, 
JMy time is not yet come: but your 
time is alway ready. 

7 The world cannot hate you; 
but me it hateth, because I testify 
of ne that the works thereof are 
evil. 


& Go ye up unto this feast: I go 


a Holy Spirit. 
John 7.39. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


6 Flesh. 
John 8.15. 
(John 1.13; 
Jude 23.) 

¢1 John 2.19. 

d Life (eter- 
nal 


al). vs.27- 


e Or, we have 
believed and 
come to un- 
derstand 
that thou 
art the Holy 
One of God. 


f Gr. diabolos, 
adversary, 
usually trans. 
Satan. Cf. 
Rev.20.10, 
note; see 
John 13.27. 


g Lev.23.34; 
Neh.8.14,18. 


h kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


¢ vs.8-5; 
Psa.69.8. 


j John 17.1; 
Lk.9.51. 


k kosmos = 
world-system. 
John 8.23. 
(John 7.7; 
Rev.13.3.) 


1 John 9.16. 
m John 9.22. 


n Deut.18.15, 
18,19. 


o willeth to 
do. 


> John 8.50; 
Phil.2.3,8. ° 


Moses). 
Acts 13.39, 
(Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 


r demon. Mt. 
7.22, note, 


s Gen.17.10; 
Mt.12.1, note. 


t Inspiration. 
vs.21-23; 
John 8.40,47, 
56. (Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


%1 Joha 3.7, 
note. 


1124 


time is not yet full come. 
9 When he had said these words 
unto them, he abode s¢i// in Galilee. 


Final departure from Galilee. 


10 But when his brethren were 
gone up; then went he also up unto 
the feast, not openly, but as it 
were in secret. 

11 Then the Jews sought him at 
the feast, and said, Where is he? 

12 And /there was much murmur- 


‘ling among the people concerning 


him: for some said, He is a good 
man: others said, Nay; but he de- 
ceiveth the people. 

13 Howbeit no man spake openly 
of him for ™fear of the Jews. 


Jesus at the feast of tabernacles. 


14 Now about the midst of the 
feast Jesus went up into the tem- 
ple, and taught. 

15 And the Jews,marvelled, say-: 
ing, How knoweth this man letters, 
having never learned? 

16 Jesus answered them, and said, 
My doctrine is not mine, but “his 
that sent me. 

17 If any man will do his will, he 
shall know of the doctrine, whether 
it be of God, or whether I speak of 
myself. 

18 He *that speaketh of himself 
seeketh his own glory: but he that 
seeketh his glory that sent him, the 
same is true, and no unrighteous- 
ness is in him. 

19 Didnot Moses give youthe law, 
and yet none of you keepeth the 
law? Why go ye about to kill me? 

20 The people answered and said, 
Thou hast a ‘devil: who goeth 
about to kill thee? 

21 Jesus answered and said unto 
them, I have done one work, and ye 
all marvel. 

22. Moses therefore gave unto you 
circumcision; (not because it is of 
Moses, ‘but of the fathers;) and ye 
on the sabbath day circumcise a 
man. 

23 If a man on the sabbath day 
receive circumcision, ‘that the law 
of Moses should not be broken; are 
ye angry at me, because I have 
made a man every whit whole on 
the sabbath day? 

24 Judge not according to the 
appearance, but judge “righteous 
judgment. 

25 Then said some of them of 
Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom 
they seek to kill? 


26 But, lo, he speaketh beldly, 
and they say nothing unto him. 
¢Do the rulers know indeed that 
this is the very Christ? 

27 *Howbeit we know this man 
whence he is: but when Christ 
cometh, no man knoweth whence 
he is. 

28 Then cried Jesus in the temple 
as he taught, saying, Ye both know 
me, and ye know whence I am: and 
‘I am not come of myself, but he 
that sent me is true, whom ye 
know not. 

29 But I know him: for I am from 
him, and he hath sent me. 

30 Then they sought to take him: 
but no man laid hands on him, be- 
cause his hour was not yet come. 

31 And many of the people be- 
lieved on him, and said, When 
Christ cometh, will he do more 
miracles than these which this man 
hath done? 

32 The Pharisees heard that the 
people murmured such things con- 
cerning him; and the Pharisees and 
the chief priests sent officers to 
take him. . ' 

33 Then said Jesus unto them, 
Yet a little while am I with you, 
and then I go unto him that sent 


me. 

34 Ye shall seek me, and shall not 
find me: and where I am, thither 
ye cannot come. 

35 Then said the Jews among 
themselves, Whither will he go, 
that we shall not find him? will he 
go unto the ¢dispersed among the 
Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles? 

36 What manner of saying is this 
that he said, Ye shall seek me, and 
shall not find me: and where I am, 
thither ye cannot come? 


The great prophecy concerning 
the Holy Spirit for power 
(Acts 2. 2-4. Cf. John 4. 14). 


37 Inthe last day, that great day 
of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, 
saying, If any man /thirst, let him 
come unto me, and drink. 

38 He that Sbelieveth on me, as 
the scripture hath said, out of his 
belly shall flow rivers of living 
water. 


a v.48; 
John 12.42, 
b Mt.13.55. 


c John 6.38; 
Ex.23.21. 


d Jas.1.1. 
e Lev.23.36. 


f Christ (as 
Stone). vs. 
37-39; Psa. 
118.22. 
(Ex.17.6; 

1 Pet.2.8.) 


g Faith. vs. 
38,39; John 
8.24. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 


h Holy Spirit. 


26, (Mt.1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 
See Acts 2.4, 
Summary. 


# John 13.31; 
17.5; Acts 
Salss 


j John 6.14; 
Deut.18. 
15,18. 


k John 4.42; 
6.69. 


1 v.52; John 
1.46. 


m 2 Sam.7.12; 
Psa.132.11; 
Jer.23.5. 


n Mic. 5.2; 
LE.2.4. 


o Lk.4.22. 
? John 3.2, 


[8 3 


39 (But this spake he of the 
hSpirit, which they that believe on 
him should receive. for the Holy 
Ghost was not yet given; because 
that Jesus was not yet ‘glorified.) 


The people divided in opinion. 


40, Many of the people therefore, 
when they heard this saying, said, 
Of a truth this is the /Prophet. 

41 Others said,This is *the Christ. 
But some said, ‘Shall Christ come 
out of Galilee? 

42 Hath not the scripture said, 
mThat Christ cometh of the seed of 
David, and out of the town of 
“Bethlehem, where David was? 

43 So there was a division among 
the people because of him. 

44 And some of them would have 
taken him; but no man laid hands 
on him. 

45 Then came the officers to the 
chief priests and Pharisees; and 
they said unto them, Why have ye 
not brought him? 


46 The officers answered, °>Never 
man spake like this man. 

47 Then answered them the Phar- 
isees, Are ye also deceived? 

48 Have any of the rulers or of 
the Pharisees believed on him? 

49 But this people who knoweth 
not the law are cursed. 

50 Nicodemus saith unto them, 
(?he that came to Jesus by night, 
being one of them,) 

51 Doth our law judge any man, 
before it hear him, and know what 
he doeth? 

52 They answered and said unto. 
him, Art thou also of Galilee? 
Search, and look: for out of Galilee, 
ariseth no prophet. 

53 And every man went unto his 
own house. 


CHAPTER 8. 
The woman taken in adultery. 


ESUS went unto the mount of 
Olives. 
2 1And early in the morning he 
came again into the temple, and 
all the people came unto him; and 


he sat down, and taught them. 


3 And the scribes and Pharisees 


1 John 8. 1-11 is not found in some of 


tine declares that it was stricken 


of a prudish fear that it might. teach immorality! 
(vs. 12-46), beginning with Christ’s 


seems clearly to have its occasion 
Pharisees as recorded in verse 9; 
Pharisees’ words (v. 41). 


the most ancient manuscripts. Augus- 


from many copies of the sacred story because 


in 


1125 


declaration, l 
the conviction wrought in the hearts of the 
as, also, it explains the peculiar virulence of the 


But the immediate context 
“T am the light of the world,” 


Sr. JOHN. 


8 4] 


brought unto him a woman taken 
in adultery; and when they had 
set her in the midst, 

4 They say unto him, Master, 
this woman was taken in adultery, 
in the very act. 

5 Now “Moses in the law com- 
manded us, that such should, be 
stoned: but what sayest thou? 

6 This they said, tempting him,!.s:, Rom. 
that they Ymight have to accuse]! 3.23, note. 
him. But Jesus stooped down, and Barat 
«with Ais finger wrote on the ground, aa tee 
as though he heard them not. |¢L.12.14. 

7 So when they continued asking aoe 
him, he lifted up himself, and said|* John 5-14- 
unto them, oe rie is bes sin| ¢ Tae 9.25 
among you, 4let him first cast a 1.4.25 
stone at her. Bice AG: 

8 And again he stooped down, 
and wrote on the ground. 

9 And they which heard it, being 
convicted by their own conscience, 
went out one by one, beginning at 
the eldest, even unto the last: and 
Jesus was left alone, and the wo- 
man standing in the midst. : 

10 When Jesus had lifted up him-|? Lane 5- 
self, and saw none but the woman,) ~~ 
he said unto her, Woman, where 
are those thine accusers? hath no 
man ‘condemned thee? , 

11 She said, No man, Lord. And 
Jesus said unto her, Neither do I 
condemn thee: go, and /sin no 
more. 


Discourse after the feast: Jesus 
the light of the world. (Cf. 
John 1, 9.) 


12 Then spake Jesus again unto 
them, saying, SI am the light of the 
4world: he that followeth me shall rcege 
not walk in darkness, but shall have] 91.24; Rev. 
the light of ‘life. 2.11. (John 

13 The Pharisees therefore said arti 
unto him, Thou bearest record of SAM 
thyself; thy record is not true. q Faith. John 

14 Jesus answered and said unto 
them, /Though I bear record of my- 
self, yet my record is true: for I 
know whence I came, and whither Ors iy 
I go; but ye cannot tell whence I ane 
come, and whither I go. 

15 Ye judge after the #flesh; I} 5 Mt.8.20, 
judge no man. more. 

16 And yet if I judge, my judg-| 1 Deut.18.15, 
ment is true: for I am not alone,| 18,19. 
but I and the Father that sent me.|,, Rom,8.15,17 

17 It is also ‘written in your law, boa 
that the testimony of two men is 
true. ; 

18 I am one that bear witness of 
myself, and the Father that sent 
me beareth witness of me. 


@ Lev.20.10; 
Deut.22.22. 


b John 18.31. 


hk kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


t Life (eter- 


(John 1.13; 
Jude 23.) 


1 Deut.19.15. 

m John 17.25. 

n Jobn 14.7,9. 

o kosmos = 
world-system. 
John 12.25, 
31. (John 7.7; 
Rev.13.3.) 


p Death (the 


1126 


(8 sae 


19 Then said they unto him, 
Where is thy Father? Jesus an- 
swered, “Ye neither know me, nor 
my Father: "if ye had known me, 
ye should have known my Father 


so. 

20 These words spake Jesus in the 
treasury, as he taught in the tem- 
ple: and no man laid hands on 
him; for his hour was not yet come. 

21 Then said Jesus again unto 
them, I go my way, and ye shall 
seek me, and shall die in your 
‘sins: whither I go, ye cannot come, 

22 Then said the Jews, Will he 
kill himself? because he saith, 
Whither I go, ye cannot come. 

23 And he said unto them, Ye are 
from beneath; I am from'above: ye 
are of this world; I am not of this 
oworld. 

24 I said therefore unto you, that 
ye shall ?die in your ‘sins: for if ye 


-|{believe not that I am he, ye shall 


die in your sins. 

25 Then said they unto him, Who 
art thou? And Jesus saith unto 
them, Even the same that I said 
unto you from the beginning. 

26 I have many things to say and 
to judge of you: but he that sent me 
is true; and I speak to the "world 
ore things which I have heard of 

im 


27 They understood not that he 
spake to them of the Father. 

28 Then said Jesus unto them, 
When ye have lifted up the ‘Son of 
man, then shall ye know that I am 
he, and that ‘I do nothing of my- 
self; but as my Father hath taught 
me, I speak these things. 

29 And he that sent me is with 
me: the Father hath not left me 
alone; for I do always those things 
that please him. : 

30 As he spake these words, 
many believed on him. 

31 Then said Jesus to those Jews 
which believed on him, If ye con- 
tinue in my word, then are ye my 
disciples indeed; 

32 And ye shall know the truth, 
and the truth shall make you free, 

33 They answered him, We be 
Abraham’s seed, and were never in 
bondage to any man: how sayest 
thou, Ye shall be made free? 

34 Jesus answered them, Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Whosoever 
committeth ‘sin is the servant of 
sin. 


35 And theservant abideth not in 


the house for ever: but the Son 
Yabideth ever. 


, fh te A Na Pe ee ee, CRY op 


a A 
8 36] 

36 If the Son therefore shall make 
you free, ye shall be free indeed. 

37 I know that ye are !Abraham’s 
seed; but ye seek to kill me, because 
my. word hath no place in you. 

38 I speak that which I have 
seen with my Father: and ye do 
that which ye have seen with your 
father. 

39 They answered and said unto 
him, Abraham is our father. Jesus 
saith unto them, If ye were Abra- 
ham’s children, ye would do the 
works of Abraham. 


40 But now ye seek to kill me, al- 


man that hath told you the truth, 
bwhich I have heard of God: -this 
did not Abraham. 

41 Yedo the deeds of your father. 
Then said they to him, We be not 
born of fornication; wé have one 
Father, even God. 

42 Jesus said unto them, If God 
were your Father, ye would love 
me: for.I proceeded forth and came 
from God; neither came I of myself, 
but che sent me. 

43 4Why do ye not understand 
my speech? even because ye cannot 
hear my word. 

44 Ye are of your father ‘the 
devil, and the lusts of your father 
ye will do. He was a murderer 
from the beginning, and %abode 
not in the truth, because there 
is no truth in him. When he 
speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his 
own: for he isa “liar, and the fa- 
ther of it. ; 

45 And because ‘I tell you the 
truth, ye believe me not. 

46 Which of you convinceth me 
of Jsin? And if I say the truth, why 

“do ye not believe me? 

47 He that is of God *“heareth 
God’s words: ye therefore hear 
them not, because ye are not of 
God. 

48 Then answered the Jews, and 
said unto him, Say we not well that 
thou art a ‘Samaritan, and “hast a 
devil? 

49 Jesus answered, I have not a 
ndevil; “but I honour my Father, 
and ye do dishonour me. 

50 And I ?seek not mine own 
glory: there is one that seeketh 
and judgeth. 

51 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 


@ John 14.10,24, 


5 Inspiration. 
vs.40, . 


¢ Gal.4.4, 


ediabolos. Rev. 
20.10, nofe. 


F Satan. 
2,27. (Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


g Ezk.28.12-17; 
1 John 3.8;, 
Jude 5, 


h Gen.3.4,13; 
2 Cor.11.3; 
Rev.12.9. 


42 Thes.2.11,12. 


7 Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 


% John 6.37,44; 10. 
26; 1 John 4.6, 


Zohn 4.9; 
Lk. 10.33. 


my.52; John 7.20; 
10.20. 


ndemon. Mt.7. 


22, note. 

o John 5,41; 12.28. 

P v.54; John 7.18; 
Phil.2.6-8. 

@ John 5.24; 11.26; 
14.23,24, 

Ir Zech.1.5; 

Heb, 11.13. 


8 John 4.12; 
Heb,3.3. 


t John 5.31. 

u y,50; John 5.31, 
41; 16.14; 17.1; 
Acts 3,13. 

2» v.19; John 7.28, 
29. 


wy.29; John 15.10. 
2 Lk. 10.24. 
y Heb. 11.13. 


z Ex.3.14; Isa.43. 
13; John 17.5,24; 
eae Rey.1. 


@ John 10.31,39; 
11.8. 


b Lk.4.30, 

ev. 34. 

@John 11.4, 

¢ John 4,34; 5.19, 
36; 11.9; 12.35; 
17.4. 

F John 11,9,10. 

og kosmos (Mt,4, 
8)=mankind. 

A John 1.5,9; 3.19; 
8.12; 12.35,46. 

i Mk.7.33; 8.23. 


4 John 7.17; 1 Cor. 
2.14. 


John 13. 


19 6 


lolf a man keep my saying, he shall 


never see death. 

52 Then said the Jews unto him, 
Now we know that thou hast a 
ndevil. *Abraham is dead, and the 
prophets; and thou sayest, If a man 
keep my saying, he shall never 


_|taste of death. 


53 Art thou ‘greater than our 
father Abraham, which is dead? 
and the prophets are dead: whom 
makest thou thyseif? 

54 Jesus answered, ‘If I honour 
myself, my honour is nothing: “it 
is my Father that honoureth me; of 
whom ye say, that he is your God: 

55 Yet “ye have not known him; 
but I know him: and if I should 
say, I know him:not,-I shall be a 
liar like unto you: but I know him, 
and “keep his saying. 

56 Your father Abraham “rejoiced 
to see my day: and Yhe saw it, and 
was glad. 

57 Then said the Jews unto him, 
Thou art not yet fifty years old, and 
hast thou seen Abraham? 

58 Jesus.said unto them, Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Before Abra- 
ham was, 7I am. 

59 Then “took they up stones to 
cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, 
and went out of the temple, °going 
through the midst of them, and so 
passed by. 


CHAPTER 9, 
The man born blind is healed. 


AND as Jesus passed by, he saw 
a man which was blind from 
his birth. 

2 And his disciples asked him, 
saying, Master, “who did Jsin, this 
man, or his parents, that he was 
born blind? 

3 Jesus answered; Neither hath 
this man Jsinned, nor his parents: 
but “that the works of God should 
be made manifest in him. 

4 et must work the works of him 
that sent me, while it is ‘day: the 
night cometh, when no man can 
work. 

5 As long as I am in the &world, 
IT am “the light of the world. 

6 When he had thus spoken, *he 
spat on the ground, and made clay 
of the spittle, and he anointed the 


1 Cf. v. 39. 
Abraham’s children,” 
Abraham. The Israelitish people 
jike precious faith with 
9. 6-8; Gal. 3..6-14. See 


The contrast, “I know th 
is that between th 


at ye are Abraham’s seed” —“Tf ye were 
e natural and the spiritual posterity of 


and Ishmaelites are the former; all who are ‘“‘of 


1127 


” 


Abraham,” whether Jews or Gentiles, are the latter (Rom. 
“Abrahamic Covenant,” Gen. 15. 18; note). 


97] 


eyes of the blind man with the 
clay, . 

7 And said unto him, Go, wash in 
the pool of Siloam, (which is by 
interpretation, Sent.) %He went his 
way therefore, and washed, and 
‘came seeing. 

8 The neighbours therefore, and 
they which before had seen him 
that he was blind, said, Is not this 
he that sat and begged? 

9 Some said, This is he: others 
said, He is like him: but he said, I 
am he. 

10 Therefore said they unto him, 
¢How were thine eyes opened? 

11 He answered and said, A man 
that is called Jesus made clay, and 


anointed mine eyes, and said unto|” 


me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and 
wash: and I went and washed, and 
I received sight. 

12 Then said they unto him, 
Where is he? He said, I know not. 

13 They brought to the Pharisees 
him that aforetime was blind. 

14 And it was the ‘sabbath day 
when Jesus made the clay, and 
opened his eyes. 

15 Then again the Pharisees also 
asked him, how he had received his 
sight. He said unto them, He put 
clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, 
and do see. 

16 Therefore said some of the 
Pharisees, This man is not of God, 
because he keepeth not the sabbath 
day. Others said, fHow can a man 
that is a sinner do such miracles? 
And there was a /division among 
them. 

17 They say unto the blind man 
again, What sayest thou of him, 
that he hath opened thine eyes? He 
said, ‘He is a prophet. 

18 But the Jews did not believe 
concerning him, that he had been 
blind, and received his sight, until 
they called the parents of him that 
had received his sight. 

19 And they asked them, saying, 
Is this your son, who ye say was 
mor blind? how then doth he now 
see? 

20 His parents answered them 
and said, We know that this is our 
son, and that he was born blind: 

21 But by what means he now 
seeth, we know not; or who hath 
opened his eyes, we know not: he 
is of age; ask him: he shall speak 
for himself. 

22 These words spake his parents, 
because Jthey feared the Jews: for 
the Jews had agreed already, that 


St. JOHN. 


A.D. 32. 
a Neh.3.15. 
b 2 Ki.5.14. 


¢ Miracles 


d John 3.4. 
eé John 5.9. 


f v.33; John 
Sane 


g Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


John 7. 

12,43; 10.19. 

i John 4.19; 
6.14. 


j John 7.13; 
12.42; 19.38; 
Acts 5.13. 


k v.34; 
John 16.2. 


1 Josh.7.19; 
1 Sam.6.5. 


m v.16. 


n John 5.45-47; 
Acts 13.27. 


o John 7.27, 
28; 8.14. 


Pp John 3.10. 

gq Job 27.9; 35. 
12; Psa.18. 
41; 34.15; 66. 
18; Prov.15. 
29; 28.9; Mic. 
3.4; Zech.7. 


13; Acts 19, 
13-16. 


ri.e. ages. 


s John 5.19; 
14.10,11. 


tv.2; Psa.51. 
5; Lk.18. 
11,12. 


tt v.22. 


v Mt.14.33; 16. 
16; Mk.1.1; 
John 10.36; 
1 John 5.13. 

w John 4.26. 


x John 14.9; 
20.16,17,28. 


y kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


2 Mt.13.13; 
Acts 7.51-53. 


@ Rom.2.19. 


1128 


: |him, 


| 
[9 40 
if any man did confess that he was 
Christ, *he should be put out of the 


synagogue. i ng: 
23 Therefore said his parents, He 


jis of age; ask him. 


24 Then again called they the 
man that was blind, and said unto 
‘Give God the praise: we 
m™know that this man is a &sinner. 

25 Heanswered and said, Whether 
he be a sinner or no, I know not: 
one thing I know, that, whereas I 
was blind, now I see, 7 

26 Then said they to him again, 
What did he to thee? how opened 
he thine eyes? 

27 He answered them, I have told 
you already, and ye did not hear: 
wherefore would ye hear it again? 
will ye also be his disciples? 

28 Then they reviled him, and 
said, Thou art his disciple; but we 
are “Moses’ disciples. 

29 We know that God spake unto 
Moses: as for this fellow, we know 
not from °whence he is. 

30 The man answered and said 
unto them, Why herein is a mar- 
vellous thing, that ye know not 
from whence he is, and yet he hath 
opened mine eyes. 

31 Now we know that 9%God 
heareth not 8sinners: but if any man 
be a worshipper of God, and doeth 
his will, him he heareth. 

32 Since the “world began was 
it not heard that any man opened 
the eyes of one that was born blind. 

33 Ifthis man were not of God, he 
could do Snothing. } 

34 They answered and said unto 
him,-Thou wast altogether ‘born in 
sins, and dost thou teach us? And 
they “cast him out. 

35 Jesus heard that they had cast 
him out; and when he had found 
him, he said unto him, Dost thou 
believe on the Son of God? 

36 He answered and said, Who is 
he, Lord, that I might believe on 
him? 

37 And Jesus said unto him,Thou 
hast both seen him, and “it is he 
that talketh with thee. 

38 And he said, Lord, I believe. 
And he *worshipped him. 

39 And Jesus said, For judgment . 
IT am come into this world, 2that 
they which see not might see; and 
that they which see might be made 
blind. 

40 And some of the Pharisees 
which were with him heard these 
words, and said unto him, ¢Are we 
blind also? 


ee 
9 41] 


41 Jesus said unto them, If ye 
were blind, ye should have no ?sin: 
but now ye say, We see; therefore 
your sin remaineth. 


CHAPTER 10. 


Discourse on the Good Shep- 
herd. (Cf. Psa. 23.; Heb. 13. 20; 
1 Pet. 5. 4.) 


(Wasa verily, I say unto you, 

He that entereth not by the 
door into the sheepfold, but climb- 
eth up some other way, the same is 
a ‘thief and a robber. 

2 But he that entereth in by the 
door is the shepherd of the sheep. 

3 To him ¢the porter openeth; 
and the sheep ‘hear his voice: and 
he calleth his own sheep by ‘name, 
and Sleadeth them out. 

4 And when he putteth forth his 
own sheep, he goeth “before them, 
and the sheep follow him: for they 
know his voice. 

5 And a ‘stranger will they not 
follow, but will flee from him: for 
they know not the voice of strang- 
ers. 

6 This parable spake Jesus unto 
them: but they Junderstood not 
what things they were which he 
spake unto them. 

7 Then said Jesus unto them 
again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, 

- 1] am the door of the sheep. 

8 All that ever came before me 
are thieves and robbers: but the 
sheep did not hear them. 

9 I am the door: by me if any 
man enter in, he shall be “saved, 
and shall go in and out, and find 
pasture. 

“10 The thief cometh not, but for 
to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: 
I am come that they might have 
Yife, and that they might have i¢ 
more “abundantly. 

11 I am the “good shepherd: the 
good shepherd giveth his life for the 
sheep. 

12 But he that is an hireling, and 
not the shepherd, whose own the 
sheep are not, seeth the wolf com- 
ing, and leaveth the sheep, and 
flecth: and the wolf catcheth them, 
and scattereth the sheep. 


St. JOHN. 


A.D. 32. 


@ John 15:22,24. 


6 Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 


ev.8, 


d Isa.42.1-4; 
Mt.3.13-17. 


ev.27; John 6.44. 
ee ee 


9 John 9.34-38; 
Heb.13.13. 


Ah John 17.19; 
Col.2.11-15. 

tvs.12,13; Gal.1.8; 
2 Cor.11.13-15. 

J John 8.43. 

k Rom.1.16; note. 


i Life (eternal). 
vs.10,28; John 
11.25. CMt.7.14; 


mJohn 6.33; 
7.37-39. 

nm Isa.40.11; Ezk. 
34.11-13,22-25; 
Heb.13.20; 
1 Pet.2.25; 5.4. 

0 v.27; Nah.1.7; 


pvy.4; 2 Tim.1.12. 

@ vs.17,18; John 15. 
13; 1 John 3.16. 

r i.e. not of the 
Jewish fold, but 
Gentiles. 
See v.4. refs.; 
Is: F 


8 flock. John 11. 
52; Eph.2.13-16; 
3.1-6; Col.3. 

0,11. 

t Gen.49.24; 
Isa.40.11; 
Ezk.34.23. 


u John 5.20; Eph. 
5.2; Phil.2.9. 

v Mt.26.53; 
Jobn 18.6. 


w John 2.19; 
Heb.10.5-9. 


# John 14.31; 17.4. 
v John 9.16. ~ 


zdemon. Mt, 
7.22, note. 


@ is demonized. 
5 Mt.21.23-27, 


¢ Faitk, John 11. 
25,26. (Gen.3. 
20; Heb.11.39.) 


d John 6.44; 8.47; 
1 John 4.6. 

evs.14,15. 

f John 8.12. 

9 John 3.16; 17.3; 
Rom.6.23. 


4 Or, in no wise 
ever perish. 
Cf. John 6.37. 


[10 28 


_13 The hireling fleeth, because he 
is an hireling, and careth not for 
the sheep. 

14 I am the good shepherd, and 
°know my sheep, and ?am known 
of mine. 

-15 As the Father knoweth me, 
even so know I the Father: and 
lay down my life for the sheep. 

16 And ‘other sheep I have, 
which are not of this fold: them 
also I must bring, and they shall 
hear my voice; and there shall be 
one ‘fold, and ‘one shepherd. 

17 Therefore doth my “Father 
love me, because I lay down my 
life, that I might take it again. 

18 Noman taketh it from me, but 
I lay it down of *myself. I have 
*power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again. *This com- 
mandment have I received of my 
Father. 

19 There was a %division there- 
fore again among the Jews for 
these sayings: 

20 And many of them said, He 
hath a 2devil, and is mad; why 
hear ye him? 

21 Others said, These are not the 


words of him that “hath a devil. 
Can a “devil open the eyes of the 
blind? 


Jesus asserts his deity. 
(Cf. John 14. 9; 20. 28, 29.) 


22 And it was at Jerusalem the 
feast of the dedication, and it was 
winter. 

23 And Jesus walked in the tem- 
ple in Solomon’s porch. 

24 Then came the Jews round 
about him, and said unto him, How 
long dost thou make us to doubt? 
If thou be the Christ, tell us “plainly. 

25 Jesus answered them, I told 
you, and ye believed not: the works 
that I doin my Father’s name, they 
bear witness of me. 

26 But ye “believe not, “because 
ye are not of my sheep, as I said 


unto you. 

27 My sheep hear my voice, and 
eJ know them, and they /follow 
me: 

28 And I give unto them ‘eter- 
nal life; and they shall “never per- 


1 The shepherd work of our Lord has three aspects: (1) As the ““Good” Shepherd 


He gives His life for the sheep (John 1 
‘Gf any man enter in he shall be save : n 
“Great”? Shepherd, “brought again from the dead 


(2) He is the 


care for and make perfect the sheep. This answers to Psa. 


0. 11), and is, 
d” (John 10. 9). 


therefore, “the door” by which 
This answers to Psa. 22, 
(Heb. 13. 20), to 


23. (3) Heis the “Chief” 


Shepherd who is coming in glory to give crowns of reward to the faithful shepherds 


(1 Pet, 5. 4). 


This answers to Psa. 24. 


1129 


10 29] 


} 


St. JOHN. 


{11 22, 


ish, neither shall any man 4pluck 
them out of my hand. 

29 My Father, which gave them 
me, is greater than all; and no man 
is able to pluck them %out of my 
Father’s hand. 

30 I and my Father “are one. 

31 Then the Jews took up stones 
again to 2stone him. 

32 Jesus answered them, Many 
good works have I shewed you 
from my Father; for which of those 
works do ye stone me? ; 

33 The Jews answered him, say- 
ing, For a good work we stone thee 
not; but for “blasphemy; and be- 
cause that thou, being a man, mak- 
est thyself God. ; 

34 Jesus answered theni, Is it not 
written in your law, I said, fYe are 
gods? 

35 If he called them gods, unto 
whom the word of God came, and 
the scripture gcannot be broken: 

36 Say ye of him, whom the Fa- 
ther hath “sanctified, and sent into 
the ‘world, Thou blasphemest; be- 
cause I said, I am the Son of God? 

37 If I do not the works of my 
Father, believe me not. 

38 But if I do, though ye believe 
not me, believe the works: that ye 
may know, and believe, that the 
Father is jin me, and I in him. 

39 Therefore they sought again 
to take him: but he escaped out of 
their hand, 


Jesus goes to the place where 
he was baptized. (Cf. Mt. 3. 
1, 13, 17.) 


40 And went away again beyond 
Jordan into the place where John 
at ‘first baptized; and there he 
abode. 

41 And many resorted unto him, 
and said, John did no miracle: but 
all things that John spake of this 
man were true, 

42 And many believed on him 
there. 


CHAPTER 11. 


The raising of Lazarus. 


Now a certain man was sick, 

named Lazarus, of Bethany, 
the town of /Mary and her sister 
Martha. 

2 ("It was that Mary which 
anointed the Lord with ointment, 
and wiped his feet with her hair, 
whose brother Lazarus was sick.) 

3 Therefore his-sisters "sent unto 


A.D. 33. 


@ John 6.39; 
Rom.8.35-39; 
1 Pet.1.5, 

b Assurance. 
vs. 10,14,28, 
29; John 11, 
26. (Isa,32. 
17; Jude 1.) 

¢ John 14.9; 15, 
23,24; 17, 


f Psa.82.6. 

g Mt.5.17-19; 
Acts 13,29, 

h Sanctify, 
holy (per-~ 
sons) (N.T.). 
John 17.11, 
17,19. Mt. 
4.5; Rev. 
22.11.) 

i kosmos 
(Mi.4.8) = 
mankind. 

j John 14.10; 
17.22,23. 

k Or, went 
forth out of 
their hand. 
Lk.4.30; 
John 8.59, 

1Lk.10.38, 
39; 24.50. 

m Mt.26.7; 
Mk.14.3; 


# Lk.7.3; 
John 4.46,47. 
ov.11; Mt.9. 
24; John 9.3, 


q John 10.31, 
yr John 7.30; 
9.4. 


s John 12,35, 

t Mt.9.24; 27. 
52; Acts 7.60; 
1 Cor.15.51. 

ui Thes.4.13- 
Ags 


v Death (phy- 
sical). vs.11- 
14; Rom.5. 
12-14. (Gen.3. 
19; Heb.9.27.) 

w John 9.3; 

2 Cor.12.9,10. 

x John 14.5; 
20.24-29. 

y One furlong 
=\%ofa 
mile. 

% v3.31,33,45. 

a John 9.31. 


1130 


[AG ag 


him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom 
thou lovest is sick. E 

4 When Jesus heard that, he said, 
This sickness is °not unto death, 
but for the glory of God, that the 
Son of God might be glorified 
thereby. 

5 Now Jesus loved Martha, and 
her sister, and Lazarus. ; 

6 When he had heard therefore 
that he was sick, he abode two days 
still in the same place where he was. 

7 Then after that saith he to his 
disciples, Let us go into Judza 
again. 

8 His disciples say unto him, Mas- 
ter, the Jews of late sought to Ystone 
thee; and goest thou thither again? 

9 Jesus answered, Are there not 
twelve hours in the day? If any 
man walk in the day, he stumbleth 
not, "because he seeth the light of 
this world. 

10 But Sif a man walk in the night, 
he stumbleth, because there is no 
light in him. 

11 These things said he: and after 
that he saith unto them, Our friend 
Lazarus ‘sleepeth; but I go, that 
I may “awake him out of sleep. 

12 Then said his disciples, Lord, 
if he sleep, he shall do well. ! 

13 Howbeit Jesus spake of his 
death: but they thought that he 
had spoken of taking of rest in 
sleep. 

14 Then said Jesus unto them 
plainly, Lazarus is *dead. 

15 And I am “glad for your sakes 
that I was not there, to the intent 
ye may believe; nevertheless let us 
go unto him. 

16 Then said *Thomas, which is 
called Didymus, unto his fellowdis- 
ciples, Let us also go, that we may 
die with him. 

17 Then when Jesus came, he 
found that he had Jain in the grave 
four days already. 

18 Now Bethany was nigh unto 
Jerusalem, about fifteen »furlongs 
off: 

19 And many of the Jews came to 
Martha and Mary, to comfort 
them concerning their brother, 

hen Martha, as soon.as she 
heard that Jesus was coming, went 
and met him: but Mary sat still in 
the house. 

21 Then said Martha unto Jesus, 
Lord, if thou hadst been here, my 
brother had not died. 

22 But I know, that even now, 
whatsoever thou ¢wilt ask of God, 
God will give it thee, 


11 23] 


23 Jesus saith unto her, Thy 
brother shall rise again. 

24 Martha saith unto him, I know 
that heshall rise again in the 2resur- 
rection at the last day. 

25 Jesus said unto her, 2I am the 
resurrection, and the life: he that 
dbelieveth in me, ‘though he were 
Sdead, yet shall he live: 

26 And whosoever liveth and be- 
lieveth in me éshall "never die. Be- 
lievest thou this? 

27 She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: 
I believe that ‘thou art the Christ, 
the Son of God, which should come 
into the Jworld. 

28 And when she had so said, she 
went her way, and called Mary Her 
sister secretly, saying, The Master 
is come, and calleth for thee, 

29 As soon as she heard that, she 
arose quickly, and came unto him. 

30 Now Jesus was not yet come 
into the town, but was in that place 
where Martha met him. 

31 The Jews then which were 
with her in the house, and com- 
forted her, when they saw Mary, 
that she rose up hastily and went 
out, followed her, saying, She goeth 
unto the grave to weep there. 

32 Then when Mary was come 
where Jesus was, and saw him, she 
fell down at his feet, saying unto 
him, *Lord, if thou hadst been here, 
my brother had not died. 

33 When Jesus therefore saw her 
lweeping, and the Jews also weep- 
ing which came with her, he 
groaned in the spirit, and was 
troubled, 

34 And said, Where have ye laid 
him? ‘They said unto him, Lord, 
come and see, 

35 Jesus “wept. 

36 Then said the Jews, Behold 
how he loved him! 

37 And some of them said, Could 
not this man, which “opened the 
eyes of the blind, have caused that 
even this man should not have died? 


Jesus at the grave of Lazarus. 


38 Jesus therefore again groaning 
in himself cometh to the grave. It 
was a cave, and a °stone lay upon it. 

39 Jesus said, Take ye away the 
Stone. Martha, the sister of him 
that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, 
by this time *he stinketh: for he 
hath been dead four days. 

40 Jesus saith unto her, Said I not 
unto thee, that, if thou wouldest be- 
lieve, thou shouldest see the %glory 
of God? 


St. JOHN. 


A.D. 33. 


@ Lk.14.14; 
Acts 23.8 

6 John 5.21; 6.39, 
40; Rev.1.18. 

¢ Life (eternal), 


John 12.25,50. 
(Mt.7.14; Rev.22, 
19.) 


d Faith. vs.25,26; 
John 14.1. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb.11.39.) 


€ even though he 
die, shall live 
again. 

F John 5.28; 1 Cor. 
15.22,23. 


9 Assurance, 
John 17.11. (Isa, 
32.17; Jude 1.) 


hj.e. the “‘second 
death.’’ Cf. 
Rev.2.11; 20.6. 

7 Mt.16.16; John 6, 
68,69. 


J kosmos (Mt.4, 
8) =mankind. 

ky.21. 

+ Acts 8.2. 

mLk.19.41; Heb.4. 
1. 


n John 9.6,7. 

© Mt.27.60,66. 

P Contra, Acts 13. 
36,37. 

av.4; John 17.4. 

r Bible prayers 
(N.T.). John 12. 
27,28. (Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 

8 v.22; John 8.29. 

t John 12.29,30. 

u Mt.8.8; John 5. 
25. 


v Resurrection. 
vs. 11-14,23-25, 
42-44; Lk, 24.1-7. 
Gob 19.25; 

1 Cor.15.52.) 

w Miracles 
(N.T.). vs.38-44; 
John 20.19, 
(M1.3.2,3; 

Acts 28.8,9.} 

z John 20.5-7; cf. 
Gal.4.10. 

y Rom.8.2; Acts 
18.25,26; 
Gal.5.1. 

z John 8.30,31; 
Acts 9.42. 


@ John 5.15. 


6 vs.47-53; Psa.2. 
2; Mt.25.3. 


¢ John 3.19; 12.19; 
Acts 4.16. 


d John 6.15; 18. 
36,37. 

¢ Acts 
21,28. 

SF Mt.26.3. 


9 Isa.53.8; 
John 18.14. 


h Num.27.21. 
7 Isa.49.6; 1 John 
2.2 


J Psa. 22.27; John 
10.16; Rora.1,16; 
16.26; Eph.2. 
14-17. 


‘John 7.1. 


1131 


[il 54 


41 Then they took away the stone 
from the place where the dead 
was laid. And Jesus lifted up Ais 
eyes, and ‘said, Father, I thank thee 
that thou hast heard me. : 

42 And I knew that ‘thou hearest 
me always: but because of the peo- 
ple which ‘stand by I said it, that 
they may believe that thou hast 
sent me. " 

43 And when he thus had spoken, 
he “cried with a loud voice, Lazarus. 
come forth. i ; 

44 And the that was dead “came 
forth, bound hand and foot with 
*graveclothes: and his face was 
bound about with a napkin. Jesus 
saith unto them, %Loose him, and 
let him go. 


The friends of Mary of Bethany 
are converted. (Cf. Lk, 10. 38-42; 
John 12. 1-7.) ; 


45 ‘Then many of the Jows which 
came to Mary, and had seen the 
things which Jesus did, “believed 
on him. 

46 But some of them went their 
ways to the Pharisees, and “told 
them what things Jesus had done. 


The Pharisees plot to put Jésus 
to death. 


47 Then gathered the chief priests 
and the Pharisees a Ycouncil, and 
said, What do we? for this man 
doeth many miracles. 

48 If we let him thus alone, @all 
men will believe on him: and the 
€Romans shall come and take away 
both our place and nation. 

49 And one of them, named 
fCaiaphas, being the high priest 
that same year, said unto them, Ye 
know nothing at all, 

50 Nor consider that it is expedi- 
ent for us, that Sone man should 
die for the people, and that the 
whole nation perish not. 

51 And this spake he not of him- 
self: but being high priest that year, 
he prophesied: that Jesus should 
die for that nation; 

52 And ‘not for that nation only, 
but that also he should /gather to- 
gether in one the children of God 
that were scattered abroad. 

53 Then from that day forth they 
took counsel together for to put him 
to death. 

54 Jesus therefore walked *no 
more openly among the Jews; but 


went thence unto a country near to 
the wilderness, into a city called 


11 55] 


St. JOHN. 


[12 24 


Ephraim, and there continued with 
his disciples. 

55 And the Jews’ “passover was 
nigh at hand: and many went out 
of the country up to Jerusalem be- 
fore the passover, to “purify them- 
selves. 

56 Then ‘sought they for Jesus, 
and spake among themselves, as 
they stood in the temple, What 
think ye, that he will not come to 
the feast? : 

57 Now both the chief priests and 
the Pharisees had given a com- 
mandment, that, if any man knew 
where he were, he should shew it, 
that. ?they might take him. 


CHAPTER 12. 


The supper at Bethany Mt. 26. 
6-13; Mk. 14. 3-9. Cf. Lk. 7. 
37, 38). 


a Pas Jesus six days before the 
passover came to ‘Bethany, 
where Lazarus was which had been 
dead, whom he raised from the dead. 

2 There they made him a supper; 
and ‘Martha served: but Lazarus 
was one of them that Ssat at the 
table with him. _ ; 

3 4Then took ‘Mary a Jpound of 
ointment of spikenard, very costly, 
and anointed the “feet of Jesus, and 
wiped his feet with her hair: and 
the house was filled with the odour 
of the ointment. 

4 Then saith one of his disciples, 
‘Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, which 
should betray him, 

5 Why was not this ointment sold 
for three hundred pence, and given 
“ to the poor? 

6 This he said, not that he cared 
for the poor; but because he was a 
thief, and had the bag, and bare 
what was put therein. 

7 Then said Jesus, Let her alone: 
against the day of my burying hath 
she kept this. 

8 For the poor always ye have 
with you; but *me ye have not 
always. 

9 Much people of the Jews there- 
fore knew that he was there: and 
they came not for Jesus’ sake only, 
but that they might see Lazarus 


also, whom he had raised from the 
dead. 


— 


1 He does not receive these Gentiles. 
could be no proper object of faith to the 


@ Cf.John 2.13; 6.4. 

6 Num.9.10-13; 
Isa.29.13; 

John 18.28; 

¢ John 7.11. 

id Mt.26.14-16; 
John 18.2,3. 

¢ John 11.1. 

f Lk.10.40,41; 

cf. Mt.11.29,30. 

o Mk.5.43; 

Lk. 15.23,24. 

A Lk.7.37,38; 

John 11.2. 

* As Martha 
stands for 
service, and 
Lazarus for 
communion, so 
Mary shows us 
the worship of 
a grateful heart. 
Others before 
her had come 
to his feet to 
have their need 
met; she came 
to give Him His 
due. Though two 
of the evangelists 
record her act, 
John alone gives 
her name. 

J Song 4.16. 

k See'note on 
Mt.26.7. 

¢ Mt.26.8. 


mJohn 6.70,71; 
13,29. 


v.35; Mk. 14.7. 

© v.12; Mk.12.37. 

P John 9.34; 15.20. 

q@John 11.45, 

r See Mt.21.4, 
note, 


* Psa.118.25,26. 


¢ Jehovah. 
Psa.118.26. 


uw Mt.21.7. 


v Zech.9.9. 
Mt.21.1-7, 


w Lk.18.34; 
John 2.22; 
13.7; 14.26. 
= v.11; Lk.19.37. 
¥ kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 
= John 11.47,48, 
@ Psa.72.9-11; 
Mk. 7.26; 
John 10,16: 
Acts 10.34,38, 
6 John 1.43,44, 
14.8-i1. 
¢ John 13.32; 17.1. 
2 Mt.8.20, note, 


lieved on Him as such. For Gentiles the corn 


and die; Christ must be lifted up on th 


as Seed of Abraham, not David (v: 


Ss. 
1132 


A.D. 33. 


10 But the chief priests consulted 
that they might put Lazarus also 
to death; 

11 Because that by reason of him 
Imany of the Jews wert away, and 
‘believed on Jesus. 


The triumphal entry (Mt. 21. 4- 
9; Mk. 11. 7-10; Lk, 19. 35-38). 


12 On the next day much people 
that were come to the feast, "when 
they heard that Jesus was coming 
to Jerusalem, 

13 Took branches of palm trees, 
and went forth to meet him, and 
cried, ‘Hosanna: Blessed is the 
King of Israel that cometh in the 
name of the ‘Lord. 

14 “And Jesus, when he had found 
a young ass, sat thereon; as “it is 
written, 

15 Fear not, daughter of Sion: be- 
hold, thy King cometh, sitting on 
an ass’s colt. 

16 These things “understood not 
his disciples at the first: but when 
Jesus was glorified, then remem- 
bered they that these things were 
written of him, and that they had 
done these things unto him. 

17 The people therefore that was 
with him when he called Lazarus 
out of his grave, and raised him 
from the dead, *bare record. 

18 For this cause tHe people also 
met him, for that they heard that 
he had done this miracle. 

19 The Pharisees therefore said 
among themselves, Perceive ye how 
ye prevail nothing? behold, the 
Yworld is gone after him. 


Certain Greeks would see Jesus. 


20 And there were certain *Greeks 
among them that came up to wor- 
ship at the feast: 

21 The same came therefore to 
’Philip, which was of Bethsaida of 
Galilee, and desired him, saying, 
Sir, we would see Jesus. 

22 Philip cometh and telleth An- 


e€ cross and believed in as 
24, 32; Gal. 3. 7-14; Eph. 2. 


drew: and again Andrew and Philip 
tell Jesus. 


Jesus’ answer. 


23. And Jesus lanswered them, 
saying,.“The hour is come, that the 
4Son of man should be glorified. 

24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 


A Christ in the flesh, King of the Jews 
Gentiles, though the Jews should have be- 


of wheat must fall into the ground 
a sacrifice for sin, 
11-13), 


we 


& 2 25] 


/ 


(12 48 


1Except a corn of wheat fall into 
the ground and die, it abideth alone: 
but if it ¢die, it bringeth forth much 
fruit. 

25 ‘He that loveth his life shall 
lose it; and he that hateth his life 
in this world shall keep it unto life 
eternal. 

26 If any man serve me, let him 


follow me; and ‘where I am, there}, 


shall also my servant be: if any 
man serve me, him will my Father 
shonour. 

27 Now is my soul troubled; and 
what shall I say? “Father, save me 
from this hour: ‘but for this cause 
came I unto this hour. 

28 Father, ‘glorify thy name. 
kThen came there a voice from 
heaven, saying, I have both glori- 
fied it, and will glorify it again. 

29 The people therefore, 
stood by, and heard /f, said that it 
thundered: others said, An /angel 
spake to him. 

30 Jesus answered and said, “This 
voice came not because of me, but 
for your sakes. 

31 Now is the 2judgment of this 
dworld: now shall the “prince of 
this world be cast out. 

32 And I, if I be lifted up from 
the earth, will draw all men unto 
me. 

33 This he said, signifying what 
death he should die. 

34 The people answered him, We 
have heard out of the law that 
Christ abideth for ever: and how 
sayest thou, The Son of man must 
be lifted up? who is this Son of 
man? 

35 Then Jesus said unto them, 


_9Yet a little while is the light with 


you. ° Walk while ye have the light, 
lest darkness come upon you: for 
the that walketh in darkness know- 
eth not whither he goeth. 


that|* 


@ Sacrifice (of 
Christ). John 
19.34. (Gen. 
4.4; Heb, 10.18.) 

6 Gen.3.3. 

© Mt.10. 39; 16.25; 
Mk.8.35, 

Lk.9.24; 17.33. 

kosmos = 

world-system, 

John 14.17,19, 

22,27,30. Qohn 

7.7; Rev.13.3.) 
t.16.24; 


John 13.36-38. 

J John 14.3; 17.24. 
9 John 14.21,23; 16, 
27; 2 Tim.4.7,8. 

h Bible prayers 
CN.T.). John 
17. (Mt.6.9; 

. Rev.22.20.) 

+ Lk. 22.53; 
John 18.37. 


J Lk.22.42; 


m John 11.42, 

m Mt. 12.29; 
Lk.10.18; 
John 14.30; 


eb.2.14. 
° John 3.14; 8.28; 
Rom 5.8. 
P Psa.72.17; 102. 
23-27; Isa.9.7. 
@ John 7.33. 
r John 11.10; 
1 John 2.11. 
s Lk.16.8. 
t John 8.59; 11.54. 
u John 11.47-53. 
v Jehovah, 


¥ Psa.69.23, 
z\.e. should turn. 
@ Isa.6.1, 
’ Mk.9.37; 
John 5.24. 
¢ John 14.9, 
d vs.35,36; 
John 1.4,5; 8.12. 
€ kosmos (Mt. 
4,8)=mankind. 
F John 5.45; 8.15,26. 
9 John 3.17. 
h Inspiration. 
John 13.18. (Ex. 
4.15; Rev.22.19.) 


36 While ve have light, believe in 
the light, that ye may be ‘the chil- 
dren of light. These things spake 
Jesus, and departed, and ‘did hide 
himself from them. 

37 But “though he had done so 


‘many miracles before them, yet 


they believed not on him: 

38 That the saying of Esaias the 
prophet might be fulfilled, which he 
spake, “Lord, “who hath believed 
our report? and to whom hath the 
arm of the Lord been revealed? 

39 Therefore they could not be- 
lieve, because that *Esaias said 
again, 

40 He hath blinded their eyes, 
and hardened their heart; that 
they should not see with their eyes, 
nor understand with their ‘heart, 
and *be converted, and I should 
heal them. 

41 °These things said Esaias, when 
he saw his glory, and spake of him. 

42 Nevertheless among the chief 
rulers also many believed on him; 
but because of the Pharisees they 
did not confess him, lest they 
should be put out of the synagogue: 

43 For they loved the praise of 
men more than the praise of God. 

44. Jesus cried and said, He that 
believeth on me, believeth not on 
me, but on “him that sent me. 

45 And ‘he that seeth me seeth 
him that sent me. 

46 4I am come a light into the 
éworld, that whosoever believeth on 
me should not abide in darkness, 

47 Andif any man hear my words, 
and believe not, SI judge him not: 
for £I came not to judge the ¢world, 
but to save the world. 

48 He that rejecteth me, and re- 
ceiveth not my words, hath one 
that judgeth him: the word that I 


have spoken, the same shall judge 
him in the last day. 


1 Chapters 12-17. are a progression according to the order of approach to God 
in the tabernacle types: Chapter 12., in which Christ speaks of His death, answers 


to the brazen altar of burnt-offering, type of the cross. 


Passing from the altar 


toward the holy of holies, the laver is next reached (Ex. 30. 17-21), answering to 
Chapter 13. With His associate priests, now purified, the High Priest approaches 
and enters the holy place, in the high communion of Chapters 14.-16. Entering 


alone the holy of holies (17. 1), the High Priest intercedes. 


(Cf. Heb. 7. 24-28.) 


That intercession is not for the salvation, but the keeping and blessing of those for 
whom He prays. His death (assumed as accomplished, 17. +) has saved them. 


2 The Seven Judgments. 


(1) Of Jesus Christ as bearing the believer’s sins. 


The sins of believers have been judged in the person of Jesus Christ “lifted up” 


on the cross. 


The result was death for Christ, and justification for the believer, 


who can never again be put in jeopardy (John 5. 24; Rom..5, 9; 8. 1; 2 Cor. 5. 21; 
Gal. 3. 13; Heb. 9. 26-28; 10. 10, 14-17; 1 Pet. 2. 24: 3. 18). See other judgments, 
1 Cor. 11. 31, note; 2’Cor. 5. 10, note; Mt. 25. 32, note: Ezk. 20. 37, note; Jude 6, 


note; Rev. 20. 12, note. 


1133 


ee 


12 49] 


49 For I have not spoken of my- 
self; but the Father which sent me, 
he gave me a commandment, what 
I should say, and what I should 
speak. 

50 And I know that his command- 
ment is Ylife everlasting: whatso- 
ever I speak therefore, even as the 
Father said unto me, so I speak. 


CHAPTER 13. 


The last passover. (Cf. Mt. 26. 7- 
30; Mk. 14. 17-26; Lk. 22. 14-39.) 


OW 'before the feast of the 

passover, when Jesus knew 
that his ‘hour was come that he 
should depart out of this ¢world 
unto the Father, having loved his 
own which were in the world, he 
loved them ‘unto the end. 


Jesus washes the disciples’ feet. 


2 And supper being ended, the 
‘devil having now put into the 
heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s 
son, to betray him; 

3 Jesus knowing that the Father 
had ‘given all things into his hands, 
and that he was Jcome from God, 
“and went to God; 

4 Heriseth from supper, and laid 
aside his garments; and took a 
towel, and girded himself. 

5 Afterthat he poureth ™waterinto 
a bason, and began to wash the dis- 
ciples’ feet, and to wipe them with 
the towel wherewith he was girded. 

6 Then cometh he to Simon Peter: 
and Peter saith unto him, Lord, 
"dost thou wash my feet? 

7 Jesus answered and said unto 
him, What I do thou °knowest not 
now; but thou shalt know hereafter. 

8 Peter saith unto him, Thou 
shalt never wash my feet. Jesus an- 


_swered him, If I wash thee not, 


thou hast no part with me. 

9 Simon Peter saith unto him, 
Lord, not my feet only, but also 
my hands and my head. 


-$r. JOHN. 


AD 33. 


@ John 8.38; 14.10, 
31. 


6 Life (eternal). 
vs.25,50; John 14. 
6. (Mt.7,14; 
Rev.22.19.) 


¢ John 7.8; 12,23; 
Ti. 


di.e. earth. 


@¥v.34; John 10.11, 
28-30; Rom.s. 
35-39. 


Ff Or, fo the 
uttermost. 

9 Gr. during 
supper. 


h diabolos 
20.10, note 


2 John5, 20-23. 17.2. 

2 John 8.42; 16.28. 

k John 17,11, 20.17. 

¢Lk.22-27; Phil.2. 
7,8. 


Rev. 


mEph.5.26. 

” See Mt.3.14. 

© ys,12,36; John 12. 
16; Heb,12.11. 

P Ex,30.17-21. 

@Gen.35.2,3; 
Eph,4.30; 1 John 
2172. 


r Lit. bathed. 
The Gr. word 
signifies a com- 
plete ablution. 
“Wash” is 
another word. 

$1 Cor.1.30; 6.11; 
1 John 3.9. 

t John 6.54. 

u Mt.23.8,10; Lk.6. 
46; Eph.6.9. 

v Rom.12.10; Gal. 
6.1.2; 1 Pet.5.5. 
vw Mt.11.29; Phil.2. 

5; 1 Pet.2.21; 
1 John 2.6. 

= John 15.20. 

y Jas.1.25, 

2 Inspiration, 
John 14.10. (Ex. 
4.15; Rev.22.19.) 

@ Psa.41.9, 

b Mt.11.3. 

¢ 2 Cor.5.20. 

@ Mt.26.21; Mk.14. 
18; Lk.22.21. 

€ Psa.41.9, 


10 Jesus saith to him, He that is © 
‘washed 2needeth not save to wash 
his feet, but is clean Severy whit: 
and ye are clean, but not all. 

11 For ‘he knew who should be- 
tray hirh; therefore said he, Ye are 
not ali clean. 

12 So after he had washed their 
feet, and had taken his garments, 
and was set down again, he said 
unto them, Know yé what I have 
done to you? 

13. “Ye call me Master and Lord: 
and ye say well; for so I am. . 

14 if I then, your Lord and Mas- 
ter, have washed your feet; “ye also 
ought to wash one another’s feet. 

15 For I “have given you an ex- 
ample, that ye should do as I have 
done to you. 

16 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
*The servant is not greater than 
his lord; neither_he that is sent 
greater than he that sent him. 

17 %If ye know these things, 
happy are ye if ye do them. 

18 I speak not of you all: I know 
whom I have chosen: but that the 
2scripture may be fulfilled, “He that 
eateth bread with me hath lifted 
up his heel against me. 

19 Now I tell you °before it come, 
that, when it is come to pass, ye 
may believe that I am he. 

20 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
He that receiveth whomsoever I 
send receiveth me; and ‘he that 
receiveth me receiveth him that 
sent me. 


Jesus foretells his betrayal (Mt. 


26. 20-25; Mk. 14. 17-21; Lk. 22. 
21, 22). 


21 ¢When Jesus had thus said, he 
was troubled in spirit, and testified, 
and said, Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, that ‘one of you shall betray 
me, 

22 Then the disciples looked one 
on another, doubting of whom he 
spake. 

23 Now there was leaning on 


1 For order of events during the night of the last passover, see Mt. 26. 20, note. 
2 The underlying imagery is of an oriental returning from the public baths to 


his house. 


His feet would contract defilem 
body. So the believer is cleansed as before t 
10. 1-12), but needs ever to bring his daily s 


ent and require cleansing, but not his 
he law from all sin ‘“‘once for all” (Heb. 
ins to the Father in 


confession, that he 


may abide in unbroken fellowship with the Father and with the Son (1 John 1, 


1-10). 
liever’s guilt, but he needs 
Eph. 5. 25-27; 1 John 5. 6. 


God was, first, the brazen altar of sacrifice, and 


6,7). See, also, the order in Ex. 


30. 17-21. 


1134 


The blood of Christ answers forever to all the law could say as to the be- 


constant cleansing from the defilement of sin, 
Typically, 


See 


the order of approach to the presence of 


then the laver of cleansing (Ex. 40, 


Christ cannot have communion with 


a defiled saint, but He can and will cleanse him. 


Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples, 
whom Jesus loved. 

24 Simon Peter therefore beck- 
oned to him, that he should ask who 
it should be of whom he spake. 

25 He then lying on Jesus’ breast 
saith unto him, Lord, who is it? 

26 Jesus answered, He it is, to 
whom I shall give a sop, when I/} Satan. vs.2, 
have dipped it. And when he had| 72) Acts 5-3- 


@ John 21. 
20,24. 


é : (Gen.3.1; 
dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Rev.20.10.) 
Iscariot, the son: of Simon. mae ene 

27 And after the sop 4Satan en-|° Sie” 


tered into him. Then said Jesus 
unto him, That thou doest, do/¢ John 7.34; 
quickly. 8.21. 

20 Now no man at the table knew] e Law (of 


i Christ). 
ae what intent he spake this unto John yy 13, 
29 For some of them thought, 64:2 Jonas.) 


because Judas had the bag, that 

Jesus had said unto him, Buy those|/Jbn 21:18: 
things that we have need of against oa 
the feast; or, that he should give}¢ Mt.26.33; 
something to the poor. bec 

30 He then having received the aes | 
sop went immediately out: and it h v.27; Isa. 
was night. 3-1,2. 

31 Therefore, when he was gone]; Faith. John 
out, Jesus said, Now is the “Son of] 16.9. (Gen. 
man glorified, and God is glorified fee 
in him. Ste 

32 If God be glorified in him, God|j Christ (Sec- 
shall also glorify: him in himself, and| ondédvent). 
shall straightway glorify him. 11.25,26. 

33 Little children, yet a little} (Deut.30.3; 
while I am with you. Ye shail seek 


Acts 1.9-11.) 


me: and 4as I said unto the Jews,!k rite (eter- 
Whither I go, ye cannot come; so} nal). John 
now I say to you. Cie 4. 
34 A ‘new commandment I give! Rey.22.19.) 
unto you, That ye love one another; 
as I have loved you, that ye also}? Col.1.15. 
love one another. m v.20; John 
~ 35 By this shall all men know} 10.38; 17. 
that ye are my disciples, if ye have} 21,25- 
love one to another. 


n Inspiration. 


Jesus foretells Peter’s denial reper 
(Mt. 26. 33-35; Mk. 14. 29-31; Lk.} Rev.22.19.) 
22. 33, 34). L somsunteos 

36 Simon Peter said unto him, Lp tt 


Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus 
answered him, Whither I go, thou]) John 5.36; 
canst not follow me now; fbut thou Nie Acts 
shalt follow me afterwards. ao 

37 Peter said unto him, Lord, why 
cannot I follow thee now? I will 
Slay down my life for thy sake. 

38 Jesus answered him, Wilt 


—— 


thou lay down thy life for my sake? 
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The 


cock shall not crow, till thou hast. 


denied me thrice. 


CHAPTER 14. 


Spoken in the passover cham- 
ber: Jesus foretells his coming 
for his own. (Cf.1 Thes.4. 14-17.) 


"TET not your heart be trou- 
bled: ye ‘believe in God, be- 
lieve also in me. 

2 In my Father’s house are many 
mansions. if it were not so, I would 
have told you. I go to prepare a 
place for you. 

3 And if I go and prepare a place 
for you, JI will come again, and re- 
ceive !you unto myself, that where 
I am, there ye may be also. 

4 And whither I go ye know, and 
the way ye know, ‘ 

5 Thomas saith unto him, Lord, 
we know not whither thou goest; 
and how can we know the way? 

6 Jesus saith unto him, I am the 
way, the truth, and the “life: no 
man cometh unto the Father, but 
by me. 


Jesus and the Father are one. 


7 If ye had known me, ye should 
have known my Father also: and 
from henceforth ye know him, and 
have seen him. 

8 Philip saith unto him, Lord, 
shew us the Father, and it sufficeth 
us. 

9 Jesus saith unto him, Have I 
been so long time with yon, and 
yet hast thou not known me, Philip? 
"he that hath seen me hath seen 
the Father; and how sayest thou 
then, Shew us the Father? 

10 Believest thou not that “I am 
in the Father, and the Father in 
me? the “words that I speak unto 
you °I speak not of myself: but the 
Father that dwelleth in me, he 
doeth the works. 

11 Believe me that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in me: 
or else believe me for the /very 
works’ sake. 

12 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
He that believeth on me, the works 
that I do shall he do also; and 
greater works than these shall he 
do; because I go unto my Father. 


1This promise of a second advent of Christ is to be distinguished from His 
return in glory to the earth; it is the first intimation in Scripture of ‘“‘the day of 


Christ” (1 Cor. 1. 8, note). 


Here He comes for His saints (1 Thes. 4. 14-17), there 


(e.g. Mt. 24. 29, 30) He comes to judge the nations, etc. 


1135 


ae: 


14 13] 


The new promise and privilege 
in prayer. 


13 And whatsoever ye shall ask 
in ¢my name, that will I do, that 
the Father may be °glorified in the 
Son. 

14 If ye shall ask any thing in my 
name, I will do it. 

15 ‘If ye love me, keep my com- 
mandments. 


The promise of the Spirit. 


16 ¢And I will pray the Father, 
and he shall give you another 
leComforter, that he may abide 
with you for ever; 

1? Even the fSpirit of truth; 
whom the 4world “cannot receive, 
because it seeth him not, neither 
knoweth him: but ye know him; for 
he dwelleth with you, and ‘shall be 
in you. Y 

18 I will not leave you Jcomfort- 
less: I will come to you. 

19 Yet a little while, and the 
&world seeth me no more; but ye 
see me: *because I live, ye shall 
live also. 

20 At that day ye shall know that 
"I. arm in my Father, and ye in me, 
and I in you. 

21 ™He that hath my command- 
ments, and keepeth them, he it is 
that loveth me: and he that loveth 
me shall be loved of my Father, 
and I will love him, and will mani- 
fest myself to him. 

22 Judas saith unto him, not 
Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou 
wilt manifest thyself unto us, and 
not unto the 8world? 

23 Jesus answered and said unto 


| 15.26: (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2,4.) 


Sr. JOHN. 


A.D. 33. 


2 John 15.16; 16. 
23,24. 


6 John 13.31; 15.9. 
€ vs.21-23; John 15. 
10; 1 John 5.3. 

@ See Lk.11.13, 
note. 

¢ Advocacy. 
John 16.7. 
Qohn 14.16,26; 
1 John 2.1,2.) 

F John 15.26; 16.13; 
Rom.8.15,26; 

1 John 4.6. 

9 kosmos =world- 
system, John 15, 
18,19. (John 7,7; 
Rev.13.8, nofe.) 

AA Cor.2.14, 

4 John 7:37; 1 Cor. 
6.19; 2 Cor.6.16; 
1 John 3.24. 

J Or, orphans. 

& Rom.5.10; 2 Cor. 
4.10,11; Heb.7. 


v.10; John 10.38. 

mvs.15,23; 

1 John 2.5, 

n John 7.4; 2 Cor. 
3.18; Heb.2.9, 

o Law (of Christ). 
vs.15,21,23; John 
15.12,17. (Gal. 
6.2; 2 John 5.) 

P Cf.vs.15,21. 

@ Gal.5.6; 
Jas.2.14-17. 

r Deut.18.15. 

&Holy Spirit. 
vs.17,26; John 


t John 2.22. 

«% Cf. Mt.10.34, 
note, 

vJohn 16.33; 
Col.3.15. 

wy). 

= kosmos (Mt. 
4.8) = mankind. 

v John 10.18; 
Phil.2.8, 


him, °If a man love me, he will keep 
my words: and my Father will love 
him, and we will come unto him, 
and make our abode with him. 

24 He that “loveth me not keep- 
eth not my sayings: and the *word 
which ye hear is not mine, but the 
Father’s which sent me. 

25 These things have I spoken 


z“'True’’ in con- 
trast with Israel. 
Isa.5.1-7. 

@ Mt.13.12; 
John 17.17; 
Rom.5.3,4; 
Heb.12.5-11, 

b Lev. 13.6; 
John 13.10; 
Eph.5.26, 

¢ vs.5-7; John 
17.23; Eph.3.17; 
1 John 2.28, 


unto you, being yet present with 
you. 


[15 5 


26 But the Comforter, which is 


the ‘Holy Ghost, whom the Father 
will send in my name, he shall 
teach you all things, and “bring all 
things to your remembrance, what- 
soever I have said unto you. 


The bequest of peace. 


27 “Peace I leave with you, *my 
peace I give unto you: not as the 
gworld giveth, give I unto you. Let 
not your heart be “troubled, neither 
let it be afraid. 

28 Ye have heard how I said unto 
you, I go away, and come again 
unto you. If ye loved me, ye would 
rejoice, because I said, I go unto 
the Father: for my Father is 
greater than I. 

29 And now I have told you be- 
fore it come to pass, that, when it 
is come to pass, ye might believe. 

30 Hereafter I will not talk much 
with you: for the prince of this 
world cometh, and hath nothing in 
me. 

31 But that the *world may know 
that I love the Father; and Yas the 
Father gave me commandment, 
even so I do. Arise, let us go 
hence. 


CHAPTER 15. 


Spoken on the way to the gar- 
den: the vine and branches. 


AM the “true vine, and my Fa- 
ther is the husbandman. 

2 Every branch in me that bear- 
eth not fruit he taketh away: and 
every branch that “beareth fruit, 
he “purgeth it, that it may bring 
forth more fruit. 

3 Now ye are ’clean through the 
word which I have spoken unto 


you. 

4 3cAbide in me, and I in you. 
As the branch cannot bear fruit of 
itself, except it abide in the vine; no 


more can ye, except ye abide in 
me, 


Translated ‘‘advocate,” 
Father when he sins: the 


te to help his ignorance and infirmity, 


and to make intercession (Rom. 8 Boy Vib) riglense i 
Mt, Ie Perm roe ( ). (See “Holy Spirit,” N.T, doctrine, 
.. three conditions of the fruitful life: Cleansing, vs. 2, 3: John 13 te; 
ae 4, note; obedience, vs. 10, 12, (See ‘Law of ees Gal, 6. es 3 John 
» note. 4 


3 To abide in 


confessed, no inter 


1136 


Christ is, on the one hand, to have no known sin unjudged and un- 
est into which He is not brought, no life which He cannot share, 


¥ 


15 6] Sr. JOHN. - [16 2 
forth much 4fruit: for 'without me| a.p.33. |that it hated me before it hated 


ye can do nothing. you. 

6 If a man abide not in me, he is 19 If ye ‘were of the *world, the 
cast forth ‘as a branch, and is Rkworld would love his own: but be- 
withered; and men gather them, cause ye are not of the “world, but I 


and cast them into the fire, and 


: have “chosen you out of the *world, 
they are burned. a The fruit. 


Gal.5.22,3, |therefore the world hateth you. 


-7_ If ye abide in me, and ¢my words] Phii.1.11; 20 Remember the word that I 
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye nme ho said unto you, The servant is not 


will, and it shall be done unto you.) oun 14.13, ||Sreater than his lord. If they have 
8 Herein is my Father glorified,| Col.3.16; persecuted me, they will also perse- 

that ye bear 4much fruit; so shall p pate ane . cute you; if they have kept my say- 

ye be my disciples. 14,15; 17.26. |ing, they will keep your’s also. 

9 As the Father hath ‘loved me,| Jobn 14.21, | 21 But all these things will they 


so have I loved you: continue ye in Boe rey do unto you for my name’s sake, be- 


my love. i Election cause they know not him that sent 
10 Iffye keep my commandments,| (personal). |me. 

ye shall abide in my love; even as I| Acts 9.15. 22 If I had not come and spoken 

have kept my Father’s. command- essere unto them, they had not had °sin: 

ments, and abide in his love. i John 14.13; |but now they have no cloke for 


11 These things have I spoken| _16.23,24. their sin. 
unto you, that my joy might remain| / ure ys. |.23. He that hateth me hateth my 
in you, and that your joy might| 12,17; Rom/s.|Father also. 


be full. 5. (Gal.6.2; 24 If I had not done among them 
12 @This is my commandment,), ?Job=5) ithe works which none other man 
That ye love one another, as I have] worid-system.|did, they had pee had °sin: but now 
hn16.11,33. 
sre rcatcs love hath no man than (Jona ;Rev Be oe Father. ae ene 
this, that a man lay down his life] ; Separation. | 25 But this cometh to pass, 
for his friends. John 17.6,  |that the word might be fulfilled 
, 14 Ye are my friends, if ye do oF een that is written in their law, They 
whatsoever I command you. 6.14-17.) hated me ?without a cause. 
The new intimacy. pizeatiar The believer and the Spirit. " 
Rom.8.33. 26 But when the Comforter is 
15 Henceforth I call you not ser-| (Deut.7.6; |come, whom I will send unto you 
ants; for the servant knoweth not} 1 Pet.1.2.) : af 
vants; from the Father, even the @Spirit of 


s % k Mt. 
what his lord doeth: but I have SPECS aes |truth, which proceedeth from the 


called you friends; for all things! tina. Father, he shall testify of me: 
rele ne hes sae? ather Ijo Sno | 27 And ye also shall bear witness, 


|p Psa.35.19; Yrbecause ye have been with me 
69:4. * 


16 Ye have not “chosen me, but I Peony thie benuihiog: 


have chosen you, and a a Holy Spirit. 
that ye should go and bring fort So -AS. 
_-fruit, and that your fruit should re- peers CHAPTER 16. 


main: that whatsoever ye shall ask|r Inspiration. |The disciples warned of persecu- 


of the Father in imy name, he may Ieee is: tions. (Cf, Mt. 24, 9, 10; Lk. 2h. 


ive it you. Rev.22.19. 16-19.) ‘ 
th These things I Jcommand you, : HESE things have I spoken 
that ye love one another. unto you, that ye should not 
, Id be offended. 
The believer and the world. 2 They shall put you out of the 
18 Ifthe *world hate you, ye know |synagogues: yea, the time cometh, | 


On the other hand, the abiding one takes all burdens to Him, and draws all wisdom, 
life and strength from Him. It is not unceasing consciousnéss of these things, 
and of Him, but that nothing is allowed in the life which separates from Him. See 
“Fellowship,” 1 John 1. 3; “Communion,” 1 Cor. 10. 16. Hs une 

1 Three degrees in fruit-bearing: “‘Fruit,” v. 2; “more fruit,” v. 2; “much 
fruit,” vs. 5, 8. As we bear “much fruit” the Father is glorified in us. The minor 
moralities and graces of Christianity are often imitated, but never the ninefold 
“fruit” of Gal. 5. 22, 23. Where such fruit is the Father is glorified. The Phar- 
isees were moral and intensely “religious,” but not one of them could say with 
Christ, “I have glorified thee on the earth” (John 17. 4). ; 

2 Progressive intimacy in John: Servants, John 13. 13; Friends, John 15. 15; 


Brethren, John 20. 17. 
rethren, J i 


16 3] 
that whosoever kifleth you will 
think that he doeth God service. 

3 And these things will they do 
unto you, because they have not 
known the Father, nor me. 

4 But these things have I told 
you, that when the time shall come, 
ye may remember that I told you of 
them. And these things I said not 
unto you at the beginning, because 
I was with you. 2 

5 But now I go my way to him 
that sent me; and none of you ask- 
eth me, Whither goest thou? 

6 But because I have said these 
things unto you, sorrow hath filled 
your heart. 


Threefold work of the Spirit 
toward the world. 


7 Nevertheless I tell you the 
truth; It is expedient for you that I 
go away: for if I go not away, “the 
Comforter will not come unto you; 
but if I depart, I will send him unto 
you. 

8 And when he is come, he will 
reprove the 4world of ‘sin, and of 
righteousness, and of judements 

9 i ‘ eli 


@ 


4 


> 
10 Of righteousness, because I go 
to my Father, and ye see me no 
more; 
11 Of judgment, because the 
prince of this ‘world is judged. 


New truth to be revealed by the 
Spirit. 

12 1I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but ye cannot bear them 
now. 

13 Howbeit when he, the /Spirit 
of truth, is come, he will guide you 
into all truth: for he shall not speak 
8of himself; “but whatsoever he shall 
hear, that shall he speak: and he 
will shew you things to come. 

14 He shall glorify me: for he 
shall receive of mine, and shall 
shew it unto you. 

15 All things that the Father hath 
are mine: therefore said I, that he 
shall take of mine, and shall shew 
it unto you. 


a Advocacy. 


b kosmos (Mt. 
4.8) = man- 
kind. 

cSin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


d Faith. John 
20.31. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb.11. 
39.) 


e kosmos = 
world-system. 
John 17.14. 
(John 7.7;Rev. 
13.8, note.) 


f Holy Spirit. 
John 20.22. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


g from him- 
self. Cf.mext 
clause. 


h Inspiration. 
John 17.8,17, 
20. (Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


i John 14.19, 

j Lk.24.17. 

k kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 

[John 20.20; 
Lk.24.41. 

m1 Pet.1.8. 


n Mt.7.7,8; 
Jas.4.2,3; 
1 John 3.22; 
5.14. 


o John 14. 
21,23. 


Jesus speaks of his death, resur- 
rection, and second advent. 


16 A little while, and ye shall not 
see me: and again, a little while, 
and ye shall see me, because I go 


to the Father. 


17 Then said some of his disciples 


. among themselves, What is this 


that he saith unto us, A little while, 
and ye shall not see me: and again, 
a little while, and ye shall see me: 
and, Because I go to the Father? 

18 They said therefore, What is 
this that he saith, A little while? 
we cannot tell what he saith. 

19 Now Jesus knew that they 
were desirqus to ask him, and said 
unto them, Do ye enquire among 
yourselves of that I said, A ‘little 
while, and ye shall not see me: and 
again, a little while, and ye shall 
see me? 

20 Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
That Jye shall weep and lament, 
but the world shall rejoice: and ye 
shall ke sorrowful, but your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy. 

21 A woman when she is in travail 
hath sorrow, because her hour is 
come: but as soon as she is deliv- 
ered of the child, she remembereth 
no more the anguish, for joy that a 
man is born into the #world. 

22 And ye now therefore have sor- 
row: but I will see you again, and 
‘your heart shall rejoice, and your 
™joy no man taketh from you. 

23 And in that day ye shall ask 
me nothing. Verily, verily, I say 
unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask- 
the Father in my name, he will 
give it you. 

_24 Hitherto have ye asked noth- 
ing In my name: “ask, and ye shall 
Teceive, that your joy may be full. 

25 These things have I spoken 
unto you in proverbs: but the time 
cometh, when I shall no more speak 
unto you in proverbs, but I shall 
shew you plainly of the Father, 

26 At that day ye shall ask in my 
name: and I say not unto you, that 
I will pray the Father for you: 
‘27 For the (Father himself loveth 


1 Christ’s pre-auithentication of the New Testament: 
that He would leave “many things” 
this revelation should be completed (‘all things 
that such additional revelation should includ 
chose certain persons to receive such additional 


to them (Mt. 28.19; John 15. 27; 16. 13; Acts 1 


words when speaking for Him in the S 
(Mt. 10. 14, 15; Lk. 10. 16; John 13. 20; 1 


Ex, 4. 15; Rev. 22. 19), 


1138 


unrevealed (v. 12), (2) Hi 


pirit precisely the same 
7. 20; see e.g., 1 Cor. 14.37, and “Inspiration,” 


(1) He expressly declared 
€ promised that 


”) after the Spirit should come, and 
€ new prophecies (v.. 13). 


E (3) He 
revelations, and to be His witnesses 
- 8; 9. 15-17). (4) He gave to their 
authority as His own 


7 


ap eA Oy! - ni €, 


ies : i 
he oO 
a6 28] Sr. JOHN. [17 17 
you, because ye have loved me, and|__a.p.33.__|glory which “I had with thee be- 
have believed that I came out from fore the ‘world was. 
God. 6 I have manifested thy name 

28 I came forth from the Father, unto the men which thou gavest me 
and am come into the ¢world: again,|¢ kosmos (Mt. lout of the ¢world: thine they were, 
I leave the world, and go to the pes mes land thou gavest them me; and 
Father. 3's bZech.13.7;  |they have kept thy word. 

29 His disciples said unto him,| Mt.26.31. 7 Now they have known that all 
Lo, now speakest thou plainly, andj ¢ Kosmos = things whatsoever thou hast given 
speakest no proverb. part paw me are of thee. at 

Now are we sure that thou} 17.14,16. .& For'I have given unto them the 
knowest all things, and needest not Jpn is Jwords which thou gavest me; and 
that any man should ask thee: by note.) ’ — \theyhave received them, and have 
this we believe that thou camest!d Bible known surely that I came out from 
forth from God. PER SES thee, and they have believed that 

31 Jesus answered them, Do ye ‘2 i’24,25, |*thou didst send me. 
now believe? (Mt.6.9; 9 {i pray for them: I pray not for 

32 Behold, the hour cometh, yea,| Rev-22.20.) |the ‘world, but for them which thou 


is now come, that ye shall be scat-|¢ en aa hast given me; for they are thine. 


tered, every man to his own, and] John 20.31. 10 And all mine are thine, and 


shall leave me alone: and yet I am| (Mt.7.14; thine are mine; and I am glorified 
not alone, because the Father is reese!) in them. 
with me. z John 19.30; | 11 And now I am no more in the 


33 These things I have spoken] Dan.9.24. 4world, but these are in the world, 
unto you, that in me ye might have|" John 11,2; land I come to thee. Holy Father, 
peace. In the ‘world ye shall have] Yep13'10. |/keep through thine own name 
tribulation: but be of good cheer;|:ie. earth. |those whom thou hast given me, 


I have overcome the world. 3 eer ricer that they may be one, as we are. 
Acts 1.8,16. | 12 While I was with them in the 
CHAPTER i7. (Ex.4.15; world, I kept them in thy name: 


Rev.22-19-) Ithose that thou gavést me I have 


3 ion. k Deut.18.15 i 
The prayer of intercession 18.19. ’ Ikept, and none of them is lost, but 


ESE words spake Jesus, and]! Assurance. |the son of perdition; that the scrip- 
lifted up his eyes to heaven, seit ete ture might be fulfilled. 

and ¢said, Father, the hour is come; 37: Gas 1.) | 13 And now come I to thee; and 

Iglorify thy Son, that thy Son also|m Psa.119.42, |these things I speak in the ®world, 


may glorify thee: Sti en that they might have my joy ful- 
2 As thou hast given him power] 4.39.’ filled in themselves. 
over all flesh, that he should *giye|n kosmos = 14 I have given them “thy word: 
eternal ‘life to as many as thou pi hr a 1g,,and the “world hath hated them, 
hast given him. _ 36. (John7. |because they are not of the world, 
3 And this is ‘life eternal, that] 7;Rev.13.8, leven as I am not of the world. 
they might know /thee the only Bese ton |. 19 I pray not that thou shouldest 
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom oaig\ 14-116: take them out of the “world, but 
thou hast sent. Rom.12.2. |that thou shouldest keep them from 


4 I have glorified thee on the papcrns the evil. 
earth. SI have finished the work] 17) °°” 16 They are °not of the “world, 


which thou gavest me to do. even as I am not of the world. 
5 And now, O Father, glorify thou 17 Sanctify them through thy 
me with thine own self with the truth: thy word is truth. 


1 Seven petitions: (1) That Jesus may be glorified as the Son who has glorified 
the Father (v. 1; Phil. 2. 9-11); (2) for restoration to the eternal glory (v_ 5); (3) for 
the safety of believers from (a) the world (v. 11), (6) the evil one (v. 15); (4) for 
the sanctification of believers (v. 17); (5) for the spiritual unity of believers (v. 21), 
(6) that the world may believe (v. 21); (7) that believers may be with Him in heaven 
to behold and share His glory (v. 24). ; ; 

2 Christ’s gifts to those whom the Father gave Him: Eternal life (v. 2); the 
Father’s name (vs. 6, 26; John 20. 17); the Father’s words (vs. 8, 14); His own joy 
(vy. 13); His own glory (v. 22). : 

3 Seven times Jesus speaks of believers as given to Him by the Father (vs. 2, 6 
[twice], 9, 11, 12, 24). Jesus Christ is God’s love-gift to the world (John 3. 16), 
and believers are the Father’s love-gift to Jesus Christ. It is Christ who commits 
the believer to the Father for safe-keeping, so that the believer’s security rests upon 
the Father’s faithfulness to His Son Jesus Christ. 

1139 


“ 


¥ 


17 18] Sr. JOHN. [18 18 


s thou hast sent me into the| A.D. 33. 5 They answered him, Jesus of 
ceria even so have I also sent Nazareth. Jesus saith — see 
them into the world. I am he. And Judas : em, c 

19 And for their sakes I ‘sanctify ‘betrayed him, stood fem — _ 
myself, that they also might be 6 As soon then as se ad sai 
sanctified through the truth. unto them, I am he, they tr 

20 Neither pray I for these alone, backward, and fell to the ground. 
but for them also which shall be- 7 Then asked he them See 
lieve on me through their word; Whom seek ye? And they said, 


: y ay be one; “as Jesus of Nazareth. 
U tice That they ales eae I in| (wed) = 8 Jesus answered, I have told you 
thee, that th so may be one in} mankind. that I am he: if therefore ye "seek 
us; that “the ¢world may Believe}, Sanctify, |me, let these go their way: 


that thou hast sent me. holy (per- 9 That the saying might be ful- 
22 And the ¢glory which thou sop ebe& filled, which he “spake, Of them 


gavest me Roh given them; that 21. ait.4.5: ie thou gavest me have I lost 
they may be one, even as we are| Rev.22.11. ; 3 : 

: 10 Then Simon Peter having a 
one: ) : 
sepa testa ar don Spe oy Eko el ipa eae aertoreee 

may be made “perfect in one; ) i 
peace @world may know that|¢2Cor.3.18. |right ear. The servant’s name was 
thou hast sent me, and hast loved), n¢s.4g, Malchus. ; 
them, as thou hast loved me. note. ae See said Joes ee Aa 
i oO sheath: 

24 Father, I will that they also, fiTEen447. oe up thy fet in 2 “5 ae 
whom thou hast given me, /be with he cup which my Father ha 
me where I am; that they may be-|gie. earth. |given me, shall I not drink it? 


hold my glory, which thou hast F b ht bef ety: 
given me: for thou lovedst me be-|" =*345:7- Ji ne “a CMe. nn ore aoe a 


fore the foundation of the world. | ; Eph.3.16,19. ate 

25 O righteous Father, the ¢world| . x $3-653*LK. 22, 66-71). i 
hath not known thee: but I have|’/Mt2547: | 12 Then the band and the captain 
known thee, and these have known] Lr.22.47..__|and officers of the Jews took Jesus, 
that thou hast sent me. and bound him, 


26 And I have declared unto them|* Jeh2 13-13: | 13 And led him away to °Annas 
thy ‘name, and will declare it:| Acts 20/22; |first; for he was father in law to 
‘that the love wherewith thou hast} Heb.12.2. Caiaphas, which was the high priest 


loved me may be in them, and I in that same year. i 
them. Piva are 14 Now Caiaphas was he, which 
CHAPTER 18. eee gave *counsel to the Jews, that it 


f was expedient that one man should 
Jesus arrives at Gethsemane. n John 17.12; die for the people. 


(Cf. Mt. 26. 36-46; Mk. 14. 32-42:]" 7 Cor.16.13. 


ts Gperws Peter’s denial (also vs. 25-27) 
\ ,' JHEN Bt had spoken these arr pee 20 - ae Mk. 14. 66-725 
words, he went forth with!|p John 11.49, be PRs 

his disciples over the brook Cedron,| 30 sec 15 And %Simon Peter followed Je- 
where was a garden, into the which ae sus, and so did another disciple: 
he entered, and his disciples. ESS ee disciple a8 known on the 
14.545 igh priest, and went in wi esus 

ite potrayal ang aricota iggy) 2) Tete dherpcloce aiichelval tae 
rae} on pete : ; ee 16 But Peter stood at the door 


2 Tim.2.12, without. Then went out that other 


2 And /Judas also, which betrayed disciple, which was known unto the 


him, knew the place: for Jesus oft- high priest, and spake unto her that 
times resorted thither with his kept the door, and brought in Peter. 
disciples. 17 Then saith the damsel that — 
3 Judas then, having received a kept the door unto Peter, Art not 
band of men and officers from the thou also one of this man’s disci- 
chief priests and Pharisees, cometh ples? He saith, I am ‘not. 
thither with lanterns and torches 18 And the servants and officers 
and weapons. stood there, who had made a fire 
4 Jesus therefore, ‘knowing all of coals; for it was cold: and 
things that should come upon him, they warmed themselves: and Peter 
went forth, and said unto them, stood with them, and warmed him- | 
Whom seek ye? self, | 


1140 


as 


18 19] St. JOHN 


[19 6 


Se 


(Jesus before the high priest, A.D. 33. 


continued. ) 


19 °The high priest then asked 
Jesus of his disciples, and of his 
doctrine. 

20 Jesus answered him, I spake 
openly to the world; I ever taught 
in the synagogue, and in the tem- 
ple, whither the Jews always resort; 
and in secret have I said nothing. 

21 Why askest thou me? ask them 
which heard me, what I have said 
unto them: behold, they know what 
T said. 

22 And when he had thus spoken, 
one of the officers which stood by 
struck Jesus with the palm of his 
hand, saying, Answerest thou the 
high priest so? 

23 Jesus answered him, If I have 
spoken evil, bear witness of the 
evil: “but if well, why smitest thou 
me? 

24 Now Annas had sent him bound 
unto Caiaphas the high priest. 

25 And Simon Peter stood and 
warmed himself. They said there- 
fore unto him, Art not thou also 
one of his disciples? He denied it, 
and said, I am not. 

26 One of the servants of the high epee Bers 
priest, being his kinsman whose ear| ““Y""""~ 
Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see|s1 Tim.6.13. 
thee in the garden with him? 


a For order of 
events on the 
day of the 
crucifixion, 
see Mt.26.57, 
note. 


6 kosmos (Mt. 
4.8.) = man- 
kiad. 


¢1 Pet.2.19,23. 


¢@ John 13.38; 
Mt.26.34,74; 
ME.14.68; 
Lk.22.60,61. 


f Mt.23.23; 
Acts 10.28. 


g John 19.7; 
Lev.24.16; 


27 Peter then denied again: and|' PS#o'23:' 
dimmediately the cock crew. Dea ihe 
Jesus brought before Pilate (Mt. Rom.i4.17: 

27. 1-14; Mk. 15. 1-5; Lk. 23. 1-7,| ©ol-1-13. 
13, 16). j Gk. ek, out 

28 ¢Then led they Jesus from Caia-| of, or accord- 
phas unto the hall of judgment: and] '* ‘*® 
it was early; and they themselves|* Kosmos = 
went not into the judgment hall, world eyes, 
flest they should be defiled; but] 20. ohn 7.7: 
that they might eat the passover. | Rev-13.8, 

29 Pilate then went out unto] 7°%¢? 
them, and said, What accusation|! Isa.55.4. 
bring ye against this man? m Isa.53.9; 

30 They answered and said unto] 1 Pet.-2.22. 
him, If he were not a malefactor, we}, met.27.26; 
would not have delivered him up| Mk.15.15. 
unto thee. a A 

31 Then said Pilate unto them,|°™M@*?77% 
Take ye him, and judge him accord-|p John 18.38. 
ing to your law. The Jews there- aes 


fore said unto him, It is not lawful 
for us to put any man to death: 
32 That the saying of Jesus might 
be fulfilled, which he ¢spake, signi- 
fying what death he should die. 
33 Then Pilate entered into the 
judgment hall again, and called 
Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou 
the King of the Jews? 
1141 


34 Jesus answered him, Sayest 
thou this thing of thyself, or did 
others tell it thee of me? 

35 Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? 

Thine own nation and the chief 
priests have delivered thee unto 
me: what hast thou done? 
_36 Jesus answered, ‘My kingdom 
is not Jof this *world: if my king- 
dom were of this world, then would 
my servants fight, that I should not 
be delivered to the Jews: but now 
is my kingdom. not from hence. 

37 Pilate therefore said unto him, 
Art thou a king then? Jesus an- 
swered, Thou sayest that I am a 
king. To this end was I born, and 
for this cause came I into the 
‘world, that I should bear ‘witness 
unto the truth. Every one that is 
of the truth heareth my voice. 

38 Pilate saith unto him, What is 
truth? And when he had said this, 
he went out again unto the Jews, 
and saith unto them, I find in him 
™no fault at all. ; 


Jesus condemned: Barabbas re- 
leased (Mt. 27. 15-26; Mk. 15. 6- 
15; Lk. 23. 18-25), 

39 But ye have a custom, that I 
should release unto you one at the 

passover: will ye therefore that I 

release unto you the King of the 

Jews? 

40 Then cried they all again, say- 
ing, Not this man, but Barabbes. 

‘Now Barabbas was a robber. 


CHAPTER 19, 


Jesus crowned with thorns (Mt. 
27. 27-30; Mk. 15. 16-20). 


HEN "Pilate therefore took 
Jesus, and scourged him. 

2 And the soldiers platted a crown 
of thorns, and put it on his head, 
and they put on him a “purple robe, 

3 And said, Hail, King of the 
Jews! and they smote him with 
their hands. 


Pilate brings Jesus before 
the multitude. 

4 Pilate therefore went forth 
again, and saith unto them, Behold, 
I bring him forth to you, that ye may 
know that I find no fault in him. 

5 Then came Jesus forth, wearing 
the crown of thorns, and the purple 
robe. And Pilate saith unto them, 
Behold the.man! 

6 When the chief priests therefore 
and officers saw him, they cried out, 
saying, Crucify him, crucify him. 


19 7] 


Pilate saith unto them, Take ye 
him, and crucify him: for I find 
no fault in him. i 

7 The Jews answered him, “We 
have a law, and by our law he ought 
to die, because he made himself the 
Son of God. 

8 When Pilate therefore heard 
that saying, he was the more afraid; 

9 And went again into the judg- 
ment hall, and saith unto Jesus, 
Whence art thou? But Jesus gave 
him no answer. 

10 Then saith Pilate unto him, 
Speakest thou not unto me? know- 
est thou not that I have power to 
crucify thee, and have power to 
release thee? 

11 Jesus answered, “Thou could- 
est have no power at al] against me, 
except it were given thee from 


St. JOHN. 


A.D. 33. 


a Lev.24.16. 


6 Isa.53.7. 

¢ John 7.30; 
Lk.22.53; 
Acts 4.27,28. 


d John 18.3,28; 
Mk.14.44. 


eSin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


f Lk.23.2. 


g Prov.29.25; 
Acts 4.19. 


hk C£.Mxk.15, 
25, note. 


4 Hos.3.4. 


j¥or order of 


above: “therefore he that delivered 
me unto thee hath the greater ¢sin. 

12 And from thenceforth Pilate 
sought to release him: but the Jews 
cried out, saying, If thou let this 
man go, thou art not Cesar’s friend: 
fwhosoever maketh himself a king 
speaketh against Cesar. 

13 When Pilate therefore heard 
that saying, he brought Jesus forth, 
and sat down in the judgment seat 
in a place that is called the Pave- 
ment, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. 


The final rejection of the King 
' by the Jewish authorities and 
people. 


14 And it was the preparation of 
the passover, and about the “sixth 
hour: and he saith unto the Jews, 
Behold your King! 

15 But they cried out, Away with 
him, away with him, crucify him. 
Pilate saith unto them, Shall I cru- 
cify your King? The chief priests 
answered, ‘We have no king but 
Ceesar. 


The crucifixion of Jesus Christ 
(Mt. 27, 33-54; Mk. 15. 22-39; 
Lk. 23. 33-47) 


16 JThen delivered he him there- 
fore unto them to be crucified. And 
they took Jesus, and led him away. 

17. And he bearing his cross ‘went 
forth into a place called the place 
of a skull, which is called in the 
Hebrew Golgotha: 

18 Where they ‘crucified him, and 
two other with him, on either 
side one. and Jesus in the midst. 

i9 And Pilate wrote a title, and 


2 Num.15.36; 
Heb.13.12. 


| Judgments 
(the seven). 
vs.16-18; 
Acts 17.31. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev. 20.12.) 


m Isa.53.12. 
n Psa.22.18. 


o Lk.5.36; 
2 Cor.5.17. 


pb Psa.22.18. 

gq Mt.27.55; 
Mk.15.40; 
Lk.23.49. 

y Johri 18.15. 


S John 2.4; 
21.15-17. 


t vs.24,36,37. 

u Psa.69.21. 

v It is the Vic- 
tor’s cry 
John 4.34; 
17.4; Rom. 


10.4; Gal.3. 
13; Heb.10. 
5-10. 


w See Mt.27. 
50, note. 


x delivered up 
Aus spirit. 


V v.42. 


z Ex.12.16; 
John 16.20. 


a Deut.21.23. 


put zt on the cross. And the writ- 


1142 


ing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH 
THE KING OF THE JEWS. 

20 This title then read many of 
the Jews: for the place where Jesus 
was crucified was nigh to the city: 
and it was written in Hebrew, and. 
Greek, and Latin. 

21 Then said the chief priests of 
the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The 
King of the Jews; but that he said, 
I am King of the Jews. 

22 Pilate answered, What.I have 
written I have written. 

23 Then the soldiers, when they 
had crucified Jesus, "took his gar- 
ments, and made four parts, to every 
soldier a part; and also Ais coat: 
now the coat was without seam, 
woven from the top throughout. 

24 They said therefore among 
themselves, °Let us not rend it, but 
cast lots for it, whose it shall. be: 
that the scripture might be fulfilled, 
which saith, *They parted my rai- 
ment among them, and for my ves- 
ture they did cast lots. These 
things therefore the soldiers did. 

25 Now there stood by the cross 
of Jesus his mother, and_ his 
mother’s sister, Mary the wife of 
Cieophas, and Mary Magdalene. 

26 When Jesus therefore saw his 
mother, and the “disciple standing 
by, whom he loved, he saith unto 
his smother, Woman, ‘behold thy 
son! 

27 Then saith he to the disciple, 
Behold thy mother! And from that 
hour that disciple took her unto his 
own home. 

28 After this, Jesus knowing that 
all things were now accomplished, 
‘that the scripture might be ful- 
filled, saith, I thirst. 

29 Now there was set a vessel full 
of “vinegar: and they filled a spunge 
with vinegar, and put 7¢ upon hys- 
sop, and put it to his mouth. 

30 When Jesus therefore had re- 
ceived the vinegar, he said, "It is 
finished: and he bowed his head, 
wand *gave up the ghost. 


“Not a bone of him broken.” 


31 The Jews therefore, because it 
was the preparation, that the 
bodies should not remain upon the 
cross on the sabbath day, (for that 
sabbath day was an “high day,) be- 
sought Pilate that “their legs 
might be broken, and that they 
might be taken away. 


32 Then came the soldiers, and 
brake the legs of the first, and of 


‘ 
aa 


€ 


; iy * 


an AN 
BFI9¢33] 


Sr. JOHN. 


rat 
; 7 
' 


[20 17 


“the other which was crucified with 
him. 


33 But when they camie to Jesus, 
and saw that he was ¢dead already, 
they brake not his legs: 

34 But one of the soldiers with a 
spear “pierced his side, and forthwith 
‘came there out ¢blood and water. 
_35 And he that saw st bare 
record, and his record is true: and 
he knoweth that he saith true, 
that ye might believe. 

36 For these things were done, 
that the scripture should be fulfilled, 
€A bone of him shall not be broken. 

37 And again another scripture 
saith, /They shall look on him 
whom they pierced. 


The entombment (Mt. 27. 57-60; 
Mk. 15. 43-47; Lk. 23. 50-56). 


38 And after this Joseph of Ari- 
mathea, being a disciple of Jesus, 
_ but ésecretly for fear of the Jews, 
~ besought Pilate that he might take 
“away the body of Jesus: and Pilate 
“gave him leave. He came there- 
fore, and took the body of Jesus. 

39 And there came also “Nicode- 

mus, which at the first came to 
Jesus by night, and brought a mix- 
ture of ‘myrrh and aloes, about an 
hundred Jpound weight. 
-40 Then took they the body of 
Jesus, and wound it in “linen 
clothes with the spices, as the man- 
ner of the Jews is to bury. 

41 Now in the place where-he was 
crucified there was a garden; and in 
the garden a new sepulchre, where- 
in was /never man yet laid. 

42 There laid they Jesus therefore| % 
because of the “Jews” preparation 
day ; for the sepulchre was nigh at 


hand. 
CHAPTER 20. 


The resurrection of Jesus Christ 
(Mt. 28. 1-10; Mk. 16. 1-14; Lk. 
24. 1-43). 


HE first day of the week cometh 

uMary Magdalene early, when 

it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, 

and seeth the stone taken away 
from the sepuichre. 

2 Then she runneth, and cometh 
to Simon Peter, and to the °other 
disciple, whom Jesus loved, and 
saith unto them, They have ?taken 


A.D. 33. 


a John 10.18. 
6 John 20.25- 
27. 


c Sacrifice (of 
Christ). Acts 
20.28. (Gen. 
4.4; Heb.i0. 
18.) 


d@ 1 John 1.7; 
5.6,8; Tit.3. 
5; Eph.5.26. 


e Ex.12.46; 
Num.9.12; 
Psa.34.20. 


f Zech.12.10; 
Rev.1.7. 


g John 7.13; 
12.42. 


k John 3.2; 
7.50. 


t Psa.45.8; 
Song 4.14. 


JEx.16.16, 


k John 11.44; 
20.7; Acts 5. 


1 Isa.53.9; 
M«E.11.2. 


m v.31. 


n For order of 
events on the 
resurrection 
day, see Mt. 
28. 1, note. 


o John 13.23; 
19.26; 21.7, 
20,24. 


P vs.11-13; 
Lk.24.21. 


g John 21.20. 
y John 21.7, 
s John 11.44. 


t Psa.16.10; 
Lk.24.24-26; 
Acts 2.25, 3, 


22.34,505 
u Cf.John 21.3. 
v v.13. 
w Lk.24.4. 


x Lk.24.16; 
John 21.4. 


y John 1.38; 
18.4. | 
2 John 10.3. 


a Or, do not 
detain me. 


away the Lord out of the sepulchre, 
and we know not where they have 
laid him. 

3 Peter therefore went forth, and 
that other disciple, and came to 
the sepulchre. 

4 So they ran both together: and 
the fother disciple did outrun Peter, 
and came first to the sepulchre. 

5 And he stooping down, and 
looking in, saw the linen clothes 
lying; yet went he not in. 

6 Then cometh Simon Peter fol- 
lowing him, and “went into the 
sepulchre, and seeth the linen 
clothes lie, 

7 And the ‘napkin, that was 
about his head, not lying with the 
linen clothes, but wrapped together 
in a place by itself. 

8 Then went in also that other 
disciple, which came first to the sep- 
ulchre, and he saw, and believed. 

9 ‘For as yet they knew not the 
scripture, that he must rise again 
from the dead. 

10 Then the disciples “went away 
again unto their own home. 


Jesus appears to Mary 
Maégdalene. 


11, But Mary stood without at the 
sepulchre *weeping:. and as she 
wept, she stooped down, and 
looked into the sepulchre, 

12 And seeth “two angels in white 
sitting, the one at the head, and 
the other at the feet, where the 
body of Jesus had lain. 

13 And they say unto her,Woman, 
why weepest thou? She saith unto 
them, Because they have taken 
away my Lord, and I know not 
where they have laid him. 

14 And when she had thus said, 
she turned herself back, and saw 
Jesus standing, and *knew not that 

it was Jesus. 

15 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, 
why weepest thou? ”whom seekest 
thou? She, supposing him to be 
the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, 
\if thou have borne him hence, tell 
lme where thou hast laid him, and I 
lwill take him away. 

16 Jesus saithunto her, *Mary. She 
turned herself, and saith unto him, 
Rabboni; which is to say, Master 

17 Jesus saith unto her, 1¢Touch 


1 Cf. Mt. 28. 9; ‘and they came and held him by the feet.” 


A contradiction 


has been supposed. Three views are held: (1) That- Jesus speaks to Mary as the 


High Priest fulfilling the day of atonement (Lev. 16). 


Having accomplished the 


sacrifice, He was on His way to present the sacred blood in heaven, and that, be- 
‘tween the meeting with Mary in the garden and the meeting of Mt. 28. 9, He had 


1143 


20 184 Sr. JOHN. (ve 
A.D.33. |with them: then came Jesus, the | 


me not; for I am not yet “ascended 


to my Father: but go to my “breth- doors being shut, and stood in the 
ren, and say unto them, I ascend midst, and said, 7Peace be unto you. 
unto ‘my Father, and ¢your Father; 27 Then saith he to Thomas, | 
and to my God, and your God. Reach hither thy finger, and behold 
18 ‘Mary Magdalene came and my hands; and reach hither thy 


told the disciples that she had seen ee hand, and thrust it into my side: 

the Lord, and that he had spoken!; gep/5'13’ ". |and be not faithless, but believing. 

these things unto her. jc John 17.11; | 28 And Thomas answered and 
3. 


. bats Eph.1 said unto him, “My !Lord and my | 
Jesus appears to the disciples:|¢G2-46. God. 7 
Thomas not present (LK. 24.) °t1 94.10. 29 Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, 
36-49). f John 19.38; |because thou hast seen me, thou 


oMeseiat hast believed: Sblessed are they 


19 ‘Then the same day at evening, 
being the first day of the week, ech. ny Oe a ae 


when the doors were shut where] (™t.8.2,3; 3 
the disciples were assembled for|, Acts 28.8,9.) | Conclusion: why John’s Gospel 


ffear of the Jews, See Jens and|” axe herips was written. 
éstood in the midst, and saith unto] i Lk.24.40; : 
Sa a a Rtn ares 6 Col.1.20. 30 And many other signs truly 


SO Aud when be Bad edesd re j John 16.22. |did Jesus in the presence of his dis- 


' : ke Mt.28.18-20; : ae SS : 

‘shewed unto them his hands and : Jobn 17.18. Coles which are not written in this 
is si Jj isci 2.73 z r 

glad when they sow the Lord | certs, | 31, But these are written, that ye 

ot id J *_.  |m Holy Spirit.\might ‘believe that Jesus is they’ 

21 Then said Jesus to them again,| Acts 1.2;5, Christ the: & epee | 

Peace be unto you: as my Father) 816. (Mt.1. tist, the Son of God; an a 


hath sent me, even so send I you. j, Meet believing ye might have “life 


; 22 snd when he had sad ite he} 18.18. through his name. 
‘breathed on therm, and saith unto}o John 11.16. 
them, Receive ye the "Holy Ghost:|? 7fh-22;00% CHAPTER 21. 
23 Whose soever “sins ye remit,},¥.19. Epilogue: “If I will.’ The risen 


they are remitted unto them; and/7 John 1.1,49; | Christ is Mastér of our service. 


ROS BGOVET SHAS oe PEEMi ge aa0d0- | A FTER these. things, Jest 

4 eae “4% shewed himself again to the 

Jesus appears to the disciples: |i Faith. Acts |disciples at the “sea of Tiberias; and 
Thomas present. Praeaed on this wise shewed he himself. 

1139.) | 2 There were together Simon 


24 But Thomas, one of thely rife (eter [Peter, and Thomas called Didy- 
twelve, called °“Didymus, was not} nal). Acts 2. |mus, and “Nathanael of Cana in 


with them when Jesus came. on eee Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, 
25 The other disciples therefore], john61. |and two other of his disciples, 


said unto him, We have seen the} w John 1.45; 


Lord. But ‘he said unto. them, (1) Service in self-will, under 


’E xcept I shall see in his hands the|* ea human leadership. 

print of the nails, and put my fin-|y Lkr.5.3-7. 3 Simon Peter saith unto them, #*I 

ger into the print of the nails, and go a fishing. They say unto him, 

thrust my hand into his side, I will We also go with thee. They went 

not believe. 5 ad forth, and entered into a ship im- 
26 And after eight days again his ‘mediately; and that night they 

disciples were within, and Thomas} caught nothing. 


so ascended and returned: a view in harmony with types, (2) That Mary: - 
lene, knowing as yet only Christ after the flesh.(2 Cor. 5. le and foe ere 
her Beloved, sought only to hold Him so; while He, about to assume a new relation 
to His disciples in ascension, gently teaches Mary that now she must not seek to 
hold Him to the earth, but rather become His messenger of the nev joy. (3) That 
He merely meant: ‘Do not detain me now; I am not yet ascended; you will see 
me ice : oe oe to my eerie ere: ‘ 

_ The deity of Jesus Christ is.declared in Scripture: (1) In the intimati 
explicit predictions of the O.T. (a) The theophanies ee the pier on He eng 
in human form, and His ministry thus to man (Gen. 16. 7-13; 18, 2-23, especially v. 17; 
32. 28 with Hos. 12. 3-5; Ex. 3. 2-14). (b) The Messiah is expressly declared to 
be the Son of God (Psa. 2. 2-9), and God (Psa. 45. 6, 7 with Heb. 1. s, 9; Psa. 110. 
iwith Mt. 22. 44; Acts 2, 34 and Heb. 1. 13; Psa. 110. 4 with Heb. 5. 63,6. 203°7. 17-01% 


1144 


‘21 4] St. JOHN. {2i; 1h. 


_ 4 But when the morning was now 
come, Jesus stood on the shore: but 
the disciples ¢knew not that it was bread. 

Jesus. ns Fohsi'd0hv4s 10 Jesus saith unto them, Bring of 
(2) Service in self-will tested:|)L«5.4,6,7;  |the fish which ye have now caught. 
fhoibarrentesnic: John 9.7. 11 Simon Peter went up, and drew 

¢ Miracles the net to land full of great fishes 

5 Then Jesus saith unto them, i 


(N.T.). Acts 
E 1-10. (Mt.g.|an hundred and fifty and three: 
Children, have ye any meat? They 2 Sor eo. ea tire 
answered him, No. 


2,35 Acts 28. |for all there were so many, yet 
(3) Christ-directed service, and e John 13-37; |(4) The Master enough for the 


A.D. 33.__|to land, they saw a fire of coals 


there, and fish laid thereon, and 


29.) h 
d Le-24.30,31, | WS not the net broken. 


the result, f One cubit = need of his servants. (Cf. Lk. 
6 And he said unto them, ’Cast| , rn isis ; 22-355, 2 RIL. 4.19-) 


the net on the right side of the ship,|h Contra, Lk. | 12 Jesus saith unto them, ‘Come 
and ye shall find. They cast there- i jonn ae and Jjdine. And none of the dis- 
fore, and now ‘they were not able| ‘fit. sreak {ciples durst ask him, Who art thou? 
Sagi it for the multitude of Pee cee knowing that it was the Lord. 
shes. +a" -24-30,31. | 13 Jesus then cometh, and *taketh 
we? Therefore that disciple whom 19,76. bread, and giveth them, and fish 
Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is|m Lit. break- |likewise. 
the 4Lord. Now when Simon Peter peated: 14 This is now the /third time that 
heard that it was the Lord, he girt|" Goas$"fac. |Jesus shewed himself to his dis- 
his fisher’s coat unto him, (for he| used of divine|ciples, after that he was risen from 
was naked,) and did ‘cast himself pit erg the dead. 
caer Risotties disciples came in Giich the |(S) The only acceptable motive 
a little ship; (for they were not far| law demands R Soha) (Cf. 2 Cor. 5. 19; 
from land, but as it were two hun- ae reid tr EMpatet ade 
dred ‘cubits,) dragging the net 15 Sowhen they had “dined, Jesus 
with fishes. saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of 
9 As soon then as they were come} | Fomiass lovest thou me more than 


and Zech. 6. 13). (c) His virgin birth was foretold as the means through 
which God could be “Immanuel,” God with us (Isa. 7. 13, 14 with Mt. 1. 
22, 23). (d) The Messiah is expressly invested with the divine names (Isa. 9. 
6,7). (e) In a prophecy of His death He is called Jehovah’s “fellow”? (Zech. 13. 
7 with Mt. 26. 31). (f) His eternal being is declared (Mic. 5. 2 with Mt. 
2. 6; John 7. 42). 

(2) Christ Himself affirmed His deity. (a) He applied to Himself the Jeho- 
vistic I AM. (The pronoun “he” is not in the Greek; cf. John 8. 24; John 8. 56-58. 
The Jews correctly understood this to be our Lord’s claim to full deity [v. 59]. See, 
also, John 10. 33; 18. 4-6, where, also, “the” is not in the original.) (6) He claimed 
to be the Adonai of the O.T. (Mt. 22. 42-45. See Gen. 15. 2, note). (c) He as- 
‘serted His identity with the Father (Mt. 28. 19; Mk. 14. 62; John 10. 30; that the 
Jews so understood Him is shown by vs. 31, 32; John 14. 8,9; 17.5). (d) He exer- 
cised the chief prerogative of God (Mk. 2. 5-7; Lk.°7. 48-50). (e) He asserted 
omnipresence (Mt. 18. 20; John 3. 13); omniscience (John 11. 11-14, when Jesus 
was fifty miles away; Mk. 11. 6-8); omnipotence (Mt. 28. 18; Lk. 7. 14; John 5. 21-23; 
6. 19); mastery over nature, and creative power (Lk. 9. 16, 17; John 2. 9; 10. 28). 
(f) © received and approved human worship (Mt. 14. 33; 28. 9; John 20. 
28, 29). 

(3) The N.T. writers ascribe divine titles to Christ (John 1. 1; 20. 28; 
Acts 20. 28; Rom. 1. 4; 9. 5; 2 Thes. 1. 12; 1 Tim, 3. 16; Tit. 2. 13; Heb. 1. 83; 1 John 


0). 
(4) The N.T. writers ascribe divine perfections and attributes to Christ 
(e.g. Mt. 11. 28; 18. 20; 28. 20; John 1. 2; 2. 23-25; 3. 13; 5. 17; 21. 17; Heb. 1. 3, 11, 12 
with Heb. 13. a;-Rev. 1. 8, 17, 18; 2. 23; 11.17; 22.13). 
: (5) The N.T. writers ascribe divine works to Christ (John 1. 3, 10; Col. 1. 
BG e275) FACD. 1253) mtne, : . : 
; (6) The N.T. writers teach that supreme worship should be paid to Christ 
a Re 60; 1 Cor. 1. 2; 2 Cor. 13. 14; Phil. 2. 9, 10; Heb. 1. 6; Rev. 1. 5, 6; 
EY ee oan 
(7) The holiness and resurrection of Christ prove His deity (John 8. 46; 
Rom. 1. 4). 
(145 


ame 


21 16} 


SS ORE 


these? He saith unto him, Yea, 
Lord; thou knowest that I love 
thee. He saith unto him, Feed 
my lambs. 

16 He saith to him again the 
second time, Simon, son of Jonas, 
‘lovest thou me? He saith unto 
him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that 
I love thee. He saith unto him, 
¢Feed my sheep. 

17 He saith unto him the third 
time, Simon, son of Jonas, ‘lovest 
thou me? Peter was /grieved be- 
cause he said unto him the third 
time, Lovest thou me? And he 
said unto him, Lord, thou knowest 
all things; thou knowest that I “love 
thee. Jesus saith unto him, ¢Feed 
my sheep. 


(6) The Master appoints the 
time and manner of the ser- 
vant’s death. 


18 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
When thou wast young, thou gird- 
edst thyself, and walkedst whither 

’thou wouldest: but when thou 
shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth 
thy hands, and another shall gird}; 
thee, and carry thee whither thou!” 
wouldest not. : 

19 This spake he, signifying ‘by 
what death he should glorify God. 


Gr. phileo, am 
fond of. Itisa 
lesser degree of 
love than @gapas, 


b1 Pet.5.2. 


¢ Gr. agapas, 
deeply love, 
used of divine 
love (John 14.21) 
and of that love 
which the law 
demands (Lk.10. 
27). 


d tend; 1 Pet.5. 
1-3, 


€ Our Lord here 
takes Peter’s 
word, phileis. 


F John 13.38. 

9 v.15; John 10.9. 
hvs.3,7, 

22 Pet.1.14. 

2 Mt.4.19; 16.24, 
& John 13.23. 

t Gal.2.7-9, 

m John 14.3; 

1 Thes. 1.10; 5,23, 


m1 Cor 15.51, 
1 Thes.4.15,17. 


© John 15.27; 19.35, 
P John 20.30, 
@i.e. earth, 


Eph.3.19; cf. 
2 2 Gor. 3.3 with 
1,22,23. 


1146 


~|saith unto him, JFollow me. : | 


(7) If the Lord returns the ser- 
vants will not die. (Cf. 1 Cor. 
15. 51, 52; 1 Thes. 4. 14-18.) 


20 Then Peter, turning about, 
seeth the Rdisciple whom Jesus 
loved following; which also leaned 
on his breast at supper, and said, 
Lord, which is he that betrayeth 
thee? :~* 

21 Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, 
Lord, and ‘what shall this man do? 

22 Jesus saith unto him, If I will 
that he tarry “till I come, what is 
that to thee? follow thou me. 

23 Then went this saying abroad 
among the brethren, that that dis- 
ciple “should not die: yet Jesus said 
not unto him, He shall not die; but, 
If I will that he tarry till I come, 
what is that to thee? 

24 This is the disciple which °tes- 
tifieth of these things, and wrote 
these things: and we know that his 
testimony is true. 

25 And there are also *many other 
things which Jesus did, the which, 
if they should be written every one, 
I suppose that even the ¢@world 
itself “could not contain the books 
that should be written. Amen. 


11 7 


dane 
THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. | 


WRITER. In the Acts of the Apostles Luke continues the account of Christianity 
begun in the Gospel which bears his name. In the “former treatise’? he tells what 
Jesus ‘‘began both to do and teach”; in the Acts, what Jesus continued to do and 
teach through His Holy Spirit sent down. 

Date. The Acts concludes with the account of Paul’s earliest ministry in Rome, 
A.D. 65, and appears to have been written at or near that time. 

Theme. This book records the ascension arid promised return of the Lord 
Jesus, the descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, Peter’s use of the keys, opening 
the kingdom (considered as the sphere of profession, as in Mt. 13.) to the Jews at 
Pentecost, and to the Gentiles in the house of Cornelius; the beginning of the Chris- 
tian church and the conversion and ministry of Paul. 

The Holy Spirit fills the scene. As the presence of the Son, exalting and reveal- 
ing the Father, is the great fact of the Gospels, so the presence of the Spirit, exalt- 
ing and revealing the Son, is the great fact of the Acts. 

Acts is in two chief parts: In the first section, i, 1-9. 43, Peter is the prominent 
personage, Jerusalem is the centre, and the ministry is to Jews. Already in cov- 
enant relations with Jehovah, they had sinned in rejecting Jesus as the Christ. 
The preaching, therefore, was directed to that point, and repentance (i.e. “a changed 
mind”) was demanded. The apparent failure of the Old Testament promises 
concerning the Davidic kingdom was explained by the promise that the kingdom 
would be set up at the return of Christ (Acts 2. 25-31; 15. 14-16). This ministry 
to Israel fulfilled Lk. 19. i2-14. In the persecutions of the apostles and finally 
in the martyrdom of Stephen, the Jews sent after the king the message, “We will 
not have this man to reign over us.” In the second division (10. 1-28.31) Paul 
is prominent, a new centre is established at Antioch, and the ministry is chiefly 
to Gentiles who, as “strangers from the covenants of promise” (Eph. 2. 12), had 


but to “‘believe on the Lord Jesus Christ”? to be saved. Chapters 11., 12., and 15. . 


of this section are transitional, establishing finally the distinction, doctrinally, be- 
tween law and grace. Galatians should be read in this connection. 


The events recorded in The Acts cover a period of 32 years. 


CHAPTER 1. __A-D. 33. _| 4 And, “being assembled together 
Introduction (vs. 1, 2). Eb reine with them, commanded them that 
HE former treatise have Ij, to Luke. they should not depart from Jeru- 


made, O ’Theophilus, of allthat 


b Lk.1.3. 
c Lit. received 


salem, but wait for the promise of 
the Father, which, saith he, ‘ye 


Jesus began both to do and teach, | up. 

“2 Until the day in which he was|@bk aaa; [have Heard of Me aptized fwith 

taken up, after that he through the} 9697; Giateas but iewehall’ bahpanuces 

Holy Ghost had given command-| Acts 2.33. |e ith ’the Holy Ghost not man 

he apostles whom he|¢0r, eating |*1 y y 

Beate, unto t with them. |days hence. 

had chosen: tO%s rears d 6 When they therefore were come 
The resurrection-minisiry of |,0; in. |together, they asked of him, say- 


Christ. 


h Mt.3.2, note. 


ing, Lord, wilt thou at this time 


«|i Kingd. h ; lik 

3 !To (ae So he sa tee him-]* eS re, a (A again the kingdom to 
self alive after his passion by many] 7; Acts 2.29- : f mie 
infallible proofs, being seen of them) 32. (Lk.1.31- | 7 And he said unto them, /It ic 
forty days, and speaking of the| ?3',4C°% |not for you to know the times or the 
things pertaining to the kingdom|jMt.24.36; | |Seasons, which the Father hath 

God: Mk.13.32; put in his own power, 
g . 1 Thes.5.1. 


1 Forty days the risen Lord had been instructing the apostles “of the things 


pertaining to the kingdom of God,” doubtless, according to His custom (Lk. 24. 8%, 
32, 44, 45), teaching them out of the Scriptures. One point was left untouched, viz., 
the time when He would restore the kingdom to Israel; hence the apostles ques- 
tion. The answer was according to His repeated teaching; the time was God's 
‘secret (Mt. 24. 36, 42, 44: 25. 13; cf. 1 Leng 1 


1 8] 


The apostolic commission. (Cf.|__A.D.33.__|salem from the mount called Olivet 
Mt, 28. 18-20; Mk. 16. 15-18; Lk. ene pret gS a sabbath 
; . 21-23. ay’s Sjourney. ; 
OE a ie ey fey a v.22: Lk.24. | 13 And when they were come in, 
8 But ye shall receive power, after 48; Jobo As. they went up into “an upper room, 
en nS et eS ie hcee b Christ (First where on ee Fee aed J amen 
yous : dvent). ew, ip, an 
unto me both in Jerusalem, and in Gen.3.15. Ae Paeecaioner nts See ite 
all Judea, and in serpee aera . they, ah thew, James the son of Alphzus, 
the uttermost part al t ae he looking. and Simon ‘Zelotes, and Judas the 
9 And when he ha od in these! 0 Cor.14.2. |brother of James. : : 
things, while they beheld, 4 fia e Or, was re- 14 These all continued with one 
taken up; and a cloud received him ceived up. laccord in prayer and supplication, 
out of their sight. f seit es with the women, and, Mary the 
The promise of the return of| (eut.30.3.) |mother of Jesus, and wit is 
Jesus to the earth. g fo 4854 |brethren. 
a9, And ak gp eno lead Shee Pie oe The choice of Matthias. 
we : -19. ‘ 
io, behold. two men stood by them| {2% Zealot. | 15 And in those days Peter stood 
in white apparel; Jen. ~—« up in the midst of the Jdisciples, and 
j GE Sig f|& Inspiration. |said, (the number of names together 
Seca cient che beater were about an hundred andtwenty,) 
Sto heaven? this “same Jeous| A&2 22° |"16 Men and brethren, this scrip- 
ich 4is : i Rev.22.19.) |ture must needs have been fulfilled, 
fi t 
which ¢is taken up from you into Pens Wo: he Hole Gh eg 
heaven, /shall so !come in like man-}° 7075346." which the ‘Holy ost by the 
ner as ye have seen him go into} Acts 2.i7,18, |MOuth of David spake before con- 
heaven. 33,38. (Mt.1. |cerning “Judas, which was guide to 
: shes cS Tu tat them that took Jesus. f 
The ten days’ waiting for the |mosa41®. | 17 For he was numbered with us, _ 
Spirit. and had “obtained part of this — 


12 Then returned they unto Jeru- 


THE ACTS. 


ministry. 


1 The two Advents—Summary: (1) The O.T. foreview,of the coming Messiah 


is in two aspects—that of rejection and suffering (as, e.g. in Isa. 53), and that of 
earthly glory and power (as, e.g. in Isa. 11; Jer. 23; Ezk. 37). Often these two 
aspects blend in one passage (e.g. Psa. 2). The prophets themselves were per- 
plexed by this seeming contradiction (1 Pet. 1. 10, 11). It was solved by partial 
fulfilment. In due time the Messiah, born of a virgin according to Isaiah, ap- 
peared among men and began His ministry by announcing the predicted kingdom 
as “at hand” (Mt. 4. 17, note). The rejection of King and kingdom followed. 
(2) Thereupon the rejected King announced His approaching crucifixion, resurrec- 
tion, departure, and return (Mt. 12. 38-40; 16. 1-4, 27; Lk. 12. 35-46; 17. 20-36; 18. 
31-34; 19, 12-27; Mt. 24., 25.). (3) He uttered predictions concerning the course 
of events between His departure and return (Mt. 13. 1-so; 16.18; 24.4-26). (4) This 
promised return of Christ becomes a prominent theme in the Acts, Epistles, and 
Revelation. 

Taken together, the N.T. teachings concerning the return of Jesus Christ 
may be summarized as follows: (1) That return is an event, not a process, and is 
personal and corporeal (Mt. 23. 30; 24. 30; 25. 31; Mk. 14. 62; Lk. 17. 24; John 14. 3; 
Acts 1. 11; Phil. 3. 20, 21; 1 Thes. 4. 14-17)._ (2) His coming has a threefold re- 
lation: to the church, to Israel, to the nations, 

(a) To the church the descent of the Lord into the air to raise the sleeping 
and change the living saints is set forth as a constant expectation and hope (Mt. 24, 
36, 44, 48-51; 25. 13; 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52; Phil. 3. 20; 1 Thes. 1. 10; 4. 14-17; 1 Tim. 6. 14; 
Tit. 2. 13; Rev. 22. 20). 3 

(b) To Israel, the return of the Lord is predicted to accomplish the yet un- _ 
fulfilled prophecies of her national regathering, conversion, and establishment in 
peace and power under the Dayidic Covenant (Acts 15. 14-17 with Zech. 14. 1-9). 
See Easados (O.T.),” 2 Sam. 7. 8-17; Zech. 13. 8, note; Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15. 
24, note. 

2 (c) To the Gentile nations the return of Christ is predicted to bring the destruc- 
tion of the present political world-system (Dan. 2. 34, 35; Rev. 19. 11, note); the | 
Judgment of Mt. 25. 31-46, followed by world-wide Gentile conversion and partici- 
Eagion in the blessings of the kingdom (Isa. 2. 2-4; 11. 10; 60. 3; Zech: 8. 3, 20, 23; 

. 16-21), sal 


1148 


1 18] 
i 

18 Now this man purchased a 
field with the ¢reward of iniquity; 
and falling headlong, he burst asun- 
der in the midst, and all his bowels 
gushed out. 

19 And it was known unto all the 
dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as 
that field is called in their proper 
tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, 
The field of blood. 

20 For it is written in the book of 
Psalms, 'Let his habitation be deso- 
late, and let no man dwell therein: 
and his ‘bishoprick let another 
ttake. 

21 Wherefore of these men which 
have companied with us all the 
time that the Lord Jesus went in 
and out among us, 

22 Beginning from the baptism of 
John, unto that same day that he 
was ‘taken up from us, must one ‘be 
ordained to be a witness with us of 
his resurrection. 

23 And they appointed two, 
Joseph called Barsabas, who was 
surnamed Justus, and Matthias. 

24 And they “prayed, and said, 
Thou, Lord, which knowest the 
hearts of all men, shew whether of 
these two thou hast chosen, 

25 That he may take ‘part of this 
ministry and apostleship, from 
which Judas by /’transgression fell, 
that he might go tohis own place. 
_ 26 And they gave forth their lots; 


THE ACTS. 


AD. 33. 


@ Zech.11.12, 
13 


6 Psa.69.25. 

c Gr. episko- 
pen, over- 
seership. 
See Tit.1.5-9, 
note. 

d Psa.109.8. 

e Lit. received 


up. 

f Lit. become 
a witness, 

z Lit. made 
two stand 
up. 

h Bible 
prayers 

N.T.). 

Acts 4.24-30. 
(Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 


i the place in. 
Rom.3. 


j Sin. 
23, note. 

k Lev.23 15,16, 
note; Deut. 
16.9; Acts 
20.16. 

l tongues, as 
of fire, part. 
ing and sit- 
ting upon 
each of 
them, 

m Psa.68.18. 

n Holy Spirit, 
(Mt 1.18.) 


(27 


and the lot fell upon Matthias; and 
he was numbered with the eleven 
apostles. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Pentecost: Peter’s first use af 
the keys (Mt. 16. 18, 19); the 
Gospel given to the Jews. 
(Cf. Acts 10. 1-48.) 


ANP when the day of Pentecost 
was fully come, they were all 


with one accord in one place. 
Fan suddenly eheteeame a 
sound from heaven as of a rushing 
mighty wind, and it filled all the 
house where they were sitting. 

3 And there appeared unto them 
‘cloven tongues like as of fire, and 
it sat upon each of them. : 

4 And they were all filled with the 
Holy Ghost, and began to speak 
with “other tongues, as the "Spirit 
gave them utterance. 

5 And there were dwelling at 
Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out 
of every nation under heaven. ; 

6 Now when this was noised 
abroad, the multitude came to- 
gether, and were confounded, be- 
cause that every man heard them 
speak in his own language. 

7 And they were all amazed and 
marvelled, saying one to another, 
Behold, are not all these which 


jspeak Galiizans? 


1 The Holy Spirit, N.T. Summary (see Mal. 2. 15, note): 


(1) The Holy Spirit is revealed as a divine Person. 


This is expressly de- 


elared (e.g. John 14. 16, 17, 26; 15. 26; 16. 7-15; Mi. 28. 19), and everywhere im- 


plied. 
(2 


15, ata 
in them. 


‘they might receive the Spirit through prayer to the Father. 


The revelation concerning Him is progressive: (a) In the O.T. (see Mal. 2. 
, He comes upon whom He will, apparently without reference to conditions 
(b) During His earth-life, Christ taught His disciples (Lk. 11. 13) that 


(c) At the close of 


His ministry He promised that He would Himself pray the Father, and that in 


answer to His prayer the Comforter would come to abide (John 14. 16, 17). 


(d) On 


the evening of His resurrection He came _to the disciples in the upper room, and 
breathed on them saying, “Receive ye the Holy Ghost’’ (John 20. 22), but instructed 
them to wait before beginning their ministry till the Spirtt’should come upon them 


(Lk. 24. 49; Acts 1. 8). 


whole body of believers (Acts 2. 1-4). 


(e) On the day of Pentecost the Spirit came upon the 
(f) After Pentecost, so long as the Gospel 


was preached to Jews only, the Spirit was imparted to such as believed by the lay- 


ing on of hands (Acts 8. 17; 9. 17, etc.). 


(g) When Peter opened the door of the 


kingdom to the Gentiles (Acts-10.), the Holy Spirit, without delay, or other condi- 


‘tion than faith, was given to those who believed (Acts 10. 44; 11. 15-18). 3 i 
Every believer is born of the Spirit 


the permanent fact for the entire church-age, f 
(John 3. 3, 6; 1 John 5. 1), indwelt by the Spirit, whose presence makes the believer’s 
body a temple (1 Cor. 6. 19; Rom. 8. 9-15; 1 John 2. 27; Gal. 4. 6), and baptized by the 


Spirit. (1, Cor. 12. 12, 13;-1 John 
1. 13; 4. 30) 
(3) 


all believers, and 


20205 827). 


This is 


thus sealing him for God (Eph. 


0). 
The N.T. distinguishes between having the Spirit, which is true of 
being filled with the Spirit, which is the believer’s priv- 


ilege and duty (cf. Acts 2. 4 with 4. 29-31; Eph. 1. 13, 14 with 5. 18)—‘‘One baptism, 


many fillings,’ 


1149 


7 


. 


et A 
8 And how hear we every man in 
our own “tongue, wherein we were 


born?’ 
9 Parthians, and Medes, and 
Elamites, and the dwellers in 


Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and 
Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, |¢ /anéuage. 
10 Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in|, som. 
Egypt, and in the parts of Libya 
about Cyrene, and strangers Yof|¢ anéuages. 
Rome, Jews and proselytes, ‘ 
11 Cretes and Arabians, we do 
hear them speak in our “tongues|é¢ through. 
the wonderful works of God. 
12 And they were all amazed, and 
were 4in doubt, saying one to an- 
other, What meaneth this? 
13 Others mocking said, These 
men. are full of new wine. 


d perplexed. 


THE ACTS. 


A [2 7 ; 


Peter’s sermon. Theme: Jesus 
is Lord and Christ (v. 36). 


14 But Peter, standing up with 
the eleven, lifted up his voice, and 
lsaid unto them, Ye men of Judza, 
and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, 
be this known unto you, and 
hearken to my words: 


(1) Introductory. Joel’s proph- 
ecy fulfilled. 


15 For these are not drunken, as 
ye suppose, seeing it is but the 
third hour of the day. 

16 But this is that which was 
spoken “by the prophet Joel; 

17 And it shall come to pass in the 


(4) The Holy Spirit is related to Christ in His conception (Mt. 1. 18-20; Lk. 1. 


35), baptism (Mt. 3. 16; Mk. 1. 10; Lk. 3. 22; John 1. 32, 33), walk and service (Lk, 4. 
1, 14), pers (Rom. 8. 11), and as His witness throughout this age (John 15. 
26; 16. 8-11, 13, 14). 

(5) The Spirit forms the church (Mt. 16. 18; Heb. 12. 23, nofe) by baptizing 
all believers into the body of Christ (1 Cor. 12. 12, 13), imparts gifts for service 
to every member of that body (1 Cor. 12. 7-11, 27, 30), guides the members in their 
service (Lk. 2. 27; 4. 1; Acts 16. 6, 7), and is Himself the power of that service (Acts 
Use; 2.4311 Cor.2%4). : 

(6) The Spirit abides in the company of believers who constitute a local 
church, making of them, corporately, a temple (1 Cor. 3. 16, 17). 

(7) Christ indicates a threefold personal relationship’ of the Spirit to the be- 
liever: “With,” “in,” “upon” (John 14. 17;’Lk. 24. 49; Acts 1. 8). “With”? indi- 
cates the approach of God to the soul, convicting of sin (John 16. 9), presenting 
Christ as the object of faith (John 16. 14), imparting faith (Eph. 2. 8), and regener- 
ating (John 3. 3-16). ‘In’ describes the abiding presence of the Spirit in the be- 
liever’s body (1 Cor. 6.19) to give victory over the flesh (Rom. 8. 2-4; Gal. 5. 16, 17 
to create the Christian character (Gal. 5. 22, 23), to help infirmities (Rom. 8. 26), 
to inspire prayer (Eph. 6. 18), to give conscious access to God (Eph. 2. 18), to actual- 
ize to the believer his sonship (Gal. 4. 6), to apply the Scriptures in cleansing and 
sanctification (Eph, 5. 26; 2 Thes. 2. 13; 1 Pet. 1. 2), to comfort and intercede (Acts 
9. 31; Rom. 8. 26), and to reveal Christ (John 16. 14), 

(8) Sins against the Spirit committed by unbelievers are: To blaspheme 
(Mt. 12. 31), resist (Acts 7. 51), insult (Heb. 10. 29, “despite,” lit. insult). Believers’ 
sins against the Spirit are: To grieve Him by allowing evil in heart or life (Eph. 4. 
30, 31), and to auench Him by disobedience (1 Thes. 5. 19). The right attitude 
toward the Spirit is yieldedness to His sway in walk and service, and in constant 
oe ae wil He shall “put away” whatever grieves Him or hinders His power 

ph. 4. 31). 

(9) The symbols of the Spirit are: (a) oil (John 3. 34; Heb. 1. 9); (b) water 
(John 7. 38, 39); (c) wind (Acts 2. 2; John 3. 8); (d) fire (Acts 2. 3); (e) a dove (Mt. 
Ge 16); (f) a seal (Eph. 1. 13; 4. 30); (g) 


&) an earnest or pledge (Eph. 1. 14). : 

jf he theme of Peter’s sermon at Pentecost is stated in verse 35, It is, that Jesus 
is the Messiah. No message could have been more unwelcome to the Jews who 
had rejected His Messianic claims, and crucified Him. Peter; therefore, does not 
announce his theme until he has covered every possible Jewish objection. The 
point of difficulty with the Jews was the apparent failure of the clear and repeated 
prophetic promise of a regathered Israel established in their own land under their 
covenanted King (e.g. Isa. 11. 10-12; Jer. 23: 5-8: Ezk. 37. 21-28). Instead of ex- 
plaining, as Rome first taught, followed by some Protestant commentators, that | 
the covenant and promises were to be fulfilled in the church in a so-called “spiritual” 
sense, Peter shows (vs. 25-32) from Psa. 16. that David himself understood that 
the Narn oe Cone would or the ee ise and sit on his throne (Lk. 1. 
32, 33). in precisely the same way James (Acts 15. 14-17) met the same di 

See “Kingdom (O.T.),”? Zech. 12. 8: (N.T.),; Lk. 1. 33; 1 Ge 15. 24. as 


1150 


JJast days, saith God, I will ¢pour 
out of my Spirit upon all flesh: 
and your sons and your daughters 
shall prophesy, and your young 
men shall see visions, and your old 
men shall dream dreams: 

18 And-on my ‘servants and on 
my handmaidens I will pour out in 
those days of my ¢Spirit; and they 
shall prophesy: 

19 And I will shew wonders in 
heaven above, and signs. in the 
earth beneath; blood, and fire, and 
vapour of smoke: 

20 The sun shall be turned into 
darkness, and the moon into blood, 
before that ‘great and notable day 
of the fLord come: 

21 And it shall come to pass, that 
whosoever shall call on the name 
of the “Lord shall be “saved. 


{2) The works of Jesus prove 
that he is Lord and Christ. 


22 Ye men of Israel, hear these 
words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man 
approved of God among you by 
miracles and wonders and signs, 
which God did by him in the midst 
of you, as ye yourselves also know: 

23 Him, being delivered by the 
determinate counsel and ‘foreknow- 
ledge of God, ye have taken, and 
by wicked hands have crucified and 
slain: 

24 Whom God hath raised up, 
having loosed the pains of death: 
because it was not possible that he 
should be holden of it. 


(3) David foretold Messiah’s 
kingship after resurrection. 


~25 For jJDavid speaketh concern- 
ing him, I foresaw the “Lord always 
before my face, for he is on my 
right hand, that I should not be 
moved: 

26 Therefore did my heart rejoice, 
and my tongue was glad; moreover 
also my flesh shall rest in hope: 

27 Because thou wilt not leave my 
soul in “hell, neither wilt thou 


al * A 


THE ACTS. 


A.D. 33. 


@ vs.17-21; 
Joel 2.28-32. 

b Holy Spirit. 
vs.17,18,33, 
38; Acts 4.8, 
31. (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

c bondmen. 

d Joel 2.29. 

e Day (of Je- 
hovah). vs. 
19,20; 1 Thes. 
5.1-3. (Isa.2. 
10-22; Rev. 
19.11-21.) 

f Jehovah, 
Joel 2.31. 

g Jehovah, 
Joel 2.32. 

h Rom.1.16, 
note. 

i Foreknow- 


ledge. Acts 
26.5. (Acts 2. 
23;1Pet.1.20.) 

j Psa.16.8-11. 

kJehovah. 
Psa.16.8. 

1 Hades. Lk. 
16.23, note. 

m Holy One. 
Psa.16.10. 

n Life (eter- 
nal). Acts 3. 
15. (Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

o1 Ki.2.10; 
Acts 13.36. 

p Israel (pro- 
phecies). vs. 
29-32; Acts 
15.14-17. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 

* Rom.11.26.) 

q Kingdom (N. 
T.). vs.29-32; 
Acts 15.14-17 
(Lk.1.31-33; 
1 Cor.15.24.) 

7 the Christ. 

s Hades. Lk. 
16.23, note. 

? Resurrec- 
tion. Acts4.2, 
33. (Job19.25; 
1 Cor.i5.52.) 

u Adonai. 
Psa.110.1. 

v Repentance. 
Acts 3.19. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 

w_unto. 

x Mt.26.28, 
note. 

y Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


suffer thine “Holy One to see 
corruption. — 

28 Thou hast made known to me 
the ways of “life; thou shalt make 
me full of joy with thy countenance. 

29 Men and brethren, let me 
freely speak unto you of the pa- 
triarch °David, that he is both dead 
and buried, and his sepulchre is 
with us unto this day. 

30. Therefore being a prophet, and 


_|knowing that God had sworn with 


an oath to him, that of the fruit 
of his loins, according to the flesh, 
?he would raise up Christ to sit on 
his %throne; 

31 He seeing this before spake of 
the resurrection of ”’Christ, that his 
soul was not left in ‘hell, neither 
his flesh did see corruption. 


(4) His resurrection proves that 
he is Lord and Christ. 


32 This ‘Jesus’ hath God ‘raised 
up, whereof we all are witnesses. 

33 Therefore being by the right, 
hand of God exalted, and having 
received of the Father the promise 
of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed 
forth this, which ye now see and 
hear. 

34 For David is.not ascended into 
the heavens: but he saith himself, 
The Lord said unto my “Lord, Sit 
thou on my right hand, 

35 Until I make thy foes thy 
footstool. 

36 Therefore let all the house of Is- 
rael know assuredly, that God hath 
madethatsame Jesus, whom ye have 
crucified, both Lord and Christ. 


(5) What Israel must do. 


37. Now when they heard this, 
they were pricked in their heart, 
and said unto Peter and to the rest 
of the apostles, Men and brethren, 
what shall we do? 

38 Then Peter said unto them, 
YRepent, and be baptized every one 
of you in the name of Jesus Christ 
\*for the *remission of ‘sins, and ye 


14 distinction must be observed between ‘‘the last days” when the prediction 
relates to Israel, and the “Jast days” when the prediction relates to the church 
1. 1, 2; 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5; 2 Pet. 3. 1-9; 1 John 2. 18, 


(1 Tim, 4. 1-3; 2: Tim. 3. 1-8; Heb. 
19; Jude 17-19). 


“the last day” (singular); the latter expression referri 
Jast judgment (John 6. 39, 40, 44, 54; 11. 24; 12. 48). 


Also distinguish the expression the “last days” (plural) from 


ng to the resurrections and 
The “last days” as related 


to the church began with the advent of Christ (Heb. i. 2), but have especial refer- 
ence to the time of declension and apostasy at the end of this age (2 Tim. 3.1; 4. 4). 


The “last days” 
ing, 


are “last” not with reference to this dispensation, 


of Israel’s history. 


and are synonymous with the kingdom-age (Isa. 2. 2 


1151 


as related to Israel are the days of Israel’s exaltation and bless- 


-4; Mic. 4. 1-7). They 
but with reference to the whole 


2 39] 


shall receive the. gift of the Holy 
Ghost. ; 

39 For the promise is unto you, 
and to your children, and to all 
that are afar off, even as many as 
the *Lord our God shall call. 

40 And with many other words 
did he testify and exhort, saying, 
Save yourselves from this unto: 
ward generation. 

41 Then they “that gladly re- 
ceived his word were baptized: and 
the same day there were ‘added 


a 
6 


c 


d 
€ 


unto them about three-thousand|* 

souls. ! 

The first church. (Cf. Acts 4. 
32-37.) 

42 And they continued stedfastly 
in the apostles’ ¢doctrine and fel- h 
lowship, and in breaking of bread, 
and in prayers. 


43 And fear came upon every 


ft partake of 


¥ | 


THE ACTS. > [3 19 
A.D. 33. |have I none; but such as I have 
give I thee: “In the name of Jesus 
Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk. 
Jehovah. 7 And he took him by the right 
We ee re. hand, and lifted Aim up: and ¢im- 
ceived. mediately his feet and ankle bones 
Churches received strength. 
ear 8 And he leaping up stood, and 
(Acts 2.41; |%walked, and entered with them 
Phil.1.1.) into the temple, walking, and leap- 
reat) ing, and praising God. 


9 And ‘all the people saw him 
walking and praising God: 

10 And they knew that it was he 
which sat for alms at the Beautiful 
gate of the temple: and they were 
filled with wonder and amazement 
ae that which had happened unto 

im. 

11 And as the lame man which 
was healed held Peter and John, ail 
jthe people ran together unto them 


their food. 
Moreover 
the Lord was 
adding to 
the church 
day by day 
those being 
saved. Cf.1 
Cor.12.12,13; 
Eph.1.22,23. 
Church, 
true. 1 Cor. 
12.12-28. 
(Mt.16.18; 


in the ‘porch that is called Solo- 


v Heb.12.23.) : : 
soul: and many wonders and signs|;Rom.1.16, |mon’s, greatly wondering. 
e te, 
"44 : ei renseat oc eet of to- j were Soiné. cs Ag "s second ser. es: ‘ iene 
Bether, & adcall things com Sp eeaer ee e covenants will be fulfilled. 
45 And so €ir possessions and} John 9.8. 12 And when Peter saw it; he an- 
goods, and parted them to all men,. Se ee swered unto the people, Ye men of 


as every man had need. 

46 And they, continuing daily 
juith one_accor in the temple, and 
breaking bread from house to house, |» 
did feat their meat with gladness)¢ 
and singleness of heart, 

47 Praising God, and having fa- 
vour with all the people. sAnd the 
Lord added to the ‘church daily 
such as should be ‘saved. 


CHAPTER 3. 


The first apostolic miracle: the 
lame man healed. 


Now Peter and John Jwent up|, 
together into the temple at the 

hour of ‘prayer, berng the ninth 
our. 

2 And a /certain man lame from 
his mother’s womb was carried,|@ 
whom they laid daily at the gate of 
the temple which is called Beauti- 
ful, ”to ask alms of them that/? 
entered into the temple; 

3 Who secing Peter and John 
about to go into the temple asked|¢ 
an alms. 

4 And Peter, fastening his eyes up- 
on him with John, said, Look on us. 

5S And he gave heed unto them, 
expecting to receive something of 
them. 

6 Then Peter said, Silver and gold 


Yr 
Ss 


t 
u 


v 


AY 


¢ 


1 “Namely, seasons in which, through the appearance of the 


w Life (eter- 


(N.T.). vs.1- |Israel, why marvel ye at this? or 
305 Aes SAX why look ye so earnestly on us, as 
(Mt.8.2,3; though by our own power or ‘holiness 


Acts 28.8,9.) é 
Isa.35.6. we had made this man to walk? 


hogan to 13 The God of Abraham, and of 
ear Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our 


Acts 4.16,21. |fathers, hath glorified his Son Jesus; 
Jobe 0s whom ye delivered up, and denied 
os diese, |Him in the presence of Pilate, when 
Or, Holy and}he was determined to let him go. 


Righteous i4 But ye denied the “Holy One 
Onde thor. {2nd the Just, and desired a mur- 


derer to be granted unto you: 


malls gic S.| 15 And killed the »Prince of Wife, 
eh tae whom God hath raised from the 


Faith. Acts |dead; whereof we are witnesses. 


13.39. (Gen.3. _16 And his name through “faith 
1139)" in his name hath made this man 
through. © |Strong, whom ye see and know: 
his Christ. |yea, the faith which is »by him hath 


Repen tance. 


Acts 5.31 given him this perfect soundness in 


(Mt.3.2; the presence of you all. 

Acts 17.30.) | 17 And now, brethren, I wot that 
ue pa through ignorance ye did it, as did 
Sin, Rom.3. {also your rulers. 

23, note. 18 But those things, which God 
hat so may 


before had shewed by the mouth of 


t 
come times 


of refreshing|@ll his prophets, that *Christ should 
from the suffer, he hath so fulfilled, 
tant’ | 19 @Repent ye therefore, and be 
|that] he may|COnverted, that your ‘sins may be 
send... {blotted out, ¢when the times of Ire. 
Jesus Christ. 


freshing shall come from the pres- 
ence of the Lord; ioe 


Messiah in His 
1152 


3 20) 


THE ACTS. 


[4 13 


OO Ok 7 


20 1And he shali send Jesus 
Christ, which before was preached 
unto you: 

21 Whom th® heaven must re- 
ceive until the times of 2restitution 
of all things, which God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all his “holy pro- 
phets °since the world began. 

22 For Moses ‘truly said unto the 
fathers, “A prophet shall the Lord 
your God raise up unto you “of your 
brethren, like unto me; “him shail 
ye hear in ali things whatsoever he 
shall say unto you. 

23 And it shall come to pass, that 
every soul, which will not hear that 
prophet, shall be ‘destroyed from 
among the people. 

24 Yea, and all the prophets from 
Samuel and those that follow after, 
as many as have spoken, have like- 
wise foretold of these days. 


- 25 Ye are the @children of the]’ 


prophets, and of the covenant which 
God made with “our fathers, saying 
unto Abraham, And in thy seed 
shall all the kindreds of the earth 
be blessed. 

26 Unto you first God, having 
taised up his Son Jesus, sent him 
to bless you, in turning away every 
one of you from “his iniquities. 


CHAPTER 4. 
‘The first persecution. 


Stone). 
mA as they spake unto the peo- Eph 2. dy 


ple, the priests, and the captain 
of the temple, and the ‘Sadducees, 
came upon them. 


2 Being Jgrieved that they taught| ; Rom.1.16, 


the people, and preached through 


_Jesus the resurrection from the|, wherein. 


dead. 

3 And they laid hands on them, 
and put them in hold unto the next 
day: for it was now eventide. 


A.D. 33._| 4 Howbeit many of them which 
Beara eae wore believed; and the 
: number of the men “was about five 
© hore oa thousand. 
aay oa rane: Petér’s address to the 
$35 Rev.22. Sanhedrin. 
; nae is 5 And it came to pass on the mor. 
tne tow, that their rulers, and elders, 


and scribes, 

6 And /Annas the high priest, and 
Caiaphas, and John, and Alexan- 
der, and as many as were of the 
kindred of the high priest, were 
gathered together at Jerusalem. 

7 And when they had set them in 


5 Lee iene 


” 


d from 
among. 


e Acts 7.37. 
jf utterly de- 


stroyed. the midst, they asked, *"By what 
gGr. huioi, |power, or by what name, have ye 
sons. done this? 
h your. 8 Then “Peter, filled with the 


: Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rul- 
# SS herioke lers of the people, and elders of Israel, 

9 If we this day be examined of 
the good deed done to the impotent 
man, by what means he is made 


j sore 
troubled, 


k came to be. 


1Lk.3.2; John |whole; 

11-49; 18.13. | 10 Be it known unto you ail, and 
m Ex.2.14; to all the people of Israel, that °by 
ree the ’name of Jesus Christ of Naz- 
ra areth, whom ye crucified, 7whom 
nLk-12.11,12. |God raised from the dead, even °by 
oin. him doth this man stand here be- 

'» Acts 3.6,16. |fore you whole. ‘ 
h fcteneg 11 This is the ‘stone which was 


set Sat nought of you builders, which 
is become the head of the corner. 
12 Neither is there ‘salvation in 
any other: for there is none other 
name under heaven given among 
men, “whereby we must be saved. 


Preaching in the name of Jesus 
forbidden. 


13 Now when they saw the bold- 
ness of Peter and John, and per- 
ceived that they were *unlearned 
and ignorant men, they marvelled; © 


r Christ (as 
(Ex.17.6; 
1 Pet.2.8.) 
s Psa.118.22. 


note. 


v Mt.11.25; 
3 Cor.1.27, 


kingdom, there shall occur blessed rest and refreshment for the people of God.” 


—Heinrich A. W. Meyer. 


1 The appeal here is national to the Jewish people as such, not individual as in 


Peter’s first sermon (Acts 2. 38, 39). 


There those who were pricked in heart were 


exhorted to save themselves from: (among) the untoward nation; here the whole 
people is addressed, and the promise to national repentance is national deliverance: 
“and he shall send Jesus Christ”’ to bring in the times-which the prophets had fore- 
told (see Acts 2, 14, note). The official answer was the imprisonment of the apos- 
tles, and the inhibition to preach, so fulfilling Lk. 19. 14. 

2Gr. apokatastaseos = restoration, occurring here and Acts 1. 6 only. The 
meaning is limited by the words: ‘“‘Which God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets.” The prophets speak of the restoration of Israel to the land 
(see “Israel,” Gen 12. 2, 3; Rom. 11. 26; also “Palestinian Covenant,” Deut. 30. 
1-9, note); and of the restoration of the theocracy under David’s Son. (See “Da- 
vidic Covenant,” 2 Sam. 7. 8-17, note; “Kingdom,” Gen. 1. 26-28; Zech. 12. 8, note.) 
No prediction of the conversion and restoration of the wicked dead is found in 
the prophets, or elsewhere. Cf. Rev. ne 11-15, 

tlds 


4 14] 


14 And beholding the man which 
was healed standing with them, 
they could say nothing against it. 

15 But when they had commanded 
them to go aside out of the council, 
they conferred among themselves, 

16 Saying, *What shall we do to 
these men? for that indeed a nota- 
ble “miracle hath been done by them 
is manifest to all them that dwell in 
Jerusalem; and we cannot deny if. 

17 But that it spread no further 
among the people, let us straitly 
threaten them, that they speak 
henceforth to no man in this name. 

18 And they called them, and 
commanded them not to speak at all 
nor teach in the name of Jesus. 

19 But Peter and John answered 
and said unto them, Whether it be 
right in the sight of God to chear- 
ken unto you more than unto God, 
judge ye. 

20 For we 4cannot but speak the 
things which we ‘have seen and 
heard. 

21 So when they had further 
threatened them, they let them go, 
finding nothing how they might 
punish them, because of the people: 
for all men glorified God for that 
which was done. 

22 For the man was above forty 
years old, on whom this miracle of 
healing was shewed. 


The Christians again filled with 
the Spirit. (Cf. Acts 2. 1-4.) 


23 And being let go, ‘they went 
to their own company, and reported 
all that the chief priests and elders 
had said unto them. 

24 And when they heard that, 


THe 8lifted up their yore oe 
ne ac » and said, Lord, 
AE AGene which hast made 


heaven, and earth, and the sea, and 
all that in them is: 

25 Who by the mouth of thy ser- 
vant David hast ‘said, Why did 
the Jheathen “rage, and the people 
imagine vain things? 

26 The kings of the earth stood 
up, and the rulers were gathered 
together against the ‘Lord, and 
against his Christ. 

27 For of a truth against thy 
"holy child Jesus, whom thou hast 
anointed, both °Herod, and Pontius 
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the 
people of Israel, were gathered to- 
gether, 

28 For to do whatsoever thy hand 


THE ACTS. 


and they took knowledge of them,} A.D.33. |and thy counsel determined before 
that they had been with Jesus. to be done. 


@ John 11.47. 


b Gr. semeion, 
sign. 


¢ Acts 5.29; 
Mt.28.19; 
1 Cor.9.16; 
Gal.1.10. 


d Jer.20.9. 
fe 1 John 1.1,3. 
f Acts 2.44,46. 


g Bible 
prayers. 
Acts 7.59,60. 
(Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.) 


hk Isa.51.12,13. 


? Psa.2.1-3, 
note. 


jie. Geritiles. 


Rk vs.25,26; 
Psa.2.1,2. 


l Jehovah. 
Psa.2.2. 


m Anointed. 
Psa.2.2. 


n Sanctifty, 
holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
vs.27,30; 
Acts 20.32. 
(Mt.4,5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


o See Mt.14.1, 
ref. 


bp Predestina- 
tion, 
trans. pre- 
destinated. 
Rom.8.29. 
(Acts 4.28; 
Eph.1.11.) 


q Holy Spirit. 
vs.8,31; Acts 
5.3,9,32. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


ry Resurrec- 
tion. vs.2,33; 
Acts 9.36-42. 
(Job 19.25; 
1 Cor.15.52.) 


s Or, exhorta: 
tion. 


t Josh.7.11,12; 
Mal.3.8,9; 


1 Tim.6.10. 
u Acts 4.34-37. 


v1 Chr.21.1; 
Mt.13.19; 
John 13.2,27; 
Eph.6.11,16; 
1 Pet.5.8. 


w Satan. Acts 
10.38. (Gen. 
3.1; Rev. 
20.10.) 


| 
1154 


zs ; 


29 And now, Lord, behold their 
threatenings: and grant unto thy 
servants, that with all boldness they 
may speak thy word, 

30 By stretching forth thine hand 
to heal; and that signs and wonders 
may be done by the name of thy 
holy child Jesus. 

31 And when they had prayed, 
the place was shaken where they 
were assembled together; and they 
were all filled with the 7Holy Ghost, 
and they spake the word of God 
with boldness. 


\State of the church at Jerusa- 


lem. (Cf, Acts 2. 42-47.) 


32 And the multitude of them 
that believed were of one heart and 
of one soul: neither said any of 
them that ought of the things” 
which he possessed was his own; but 
they had all things common. 

33 And with great power gave the 
apostles witness of the ’resurrection 
of the Lord Jesus: and great grace 
was upon them all. 

34 Neither was there any among 
them that lacked: for as many as 
were possessors of lands or houses 
sold them, and brought the prices 
of the things that were sold, 

35 And laid them down at the 
apostles’ feet: and distribution was 
made unto every man according as 
he had need. 

36 And Joses, who by the apos- 
tles was surnamed Barnabas, (which 
is, being interpreted, The son of 
Sconsolation,) a Levite, and of the 
country of Cyprus, 

37 Having land, sold jt, and 
brought the money, and laid it at 
the apostles’ feet. 


CHAPTER 5. 


The sin and death of Ananias 
and Sapphira. 


But a certain man named Ana- 
Nias, with Sapphira his wife, 

sold a possession, 

2 And ‘kept back part of the 

price, his wife also being privy to it, 


land brought “a certain part, and 


laid it at the apostles’ feet. 

3 But Peter said, Ananias, *why 
hath “Satan filled thine heart to 
he to the Holy Ghost, and to keep 
back part of the price of the land? 

4 Whiles it remained, was it not 
thine own? and after it was sold, 
was it not in thine own power? why 


5 5] 


THE ACTS. 


[5 33 


hast thou conceived this thing in 
thine heart? thou hast not lied unto 
men, ¢but unto God. 

5 And Ananias “hearing these 
words fell down, and gave up the 
ghost: and great fear came on ail 
them that heard these things. 

6 And the ‘young men arose, 
wound him up, and carried him 
out, and buried him. 

7 And it was about the space of 
three hours after, when his wife, 
not knowing what was done, 
came in. 

8 And Peter answered unto her, 
Tell me whether ye sold the land 
for so much? And she said, Yea, 
for so much. 

9 Then Peter said unto her, How 
is it that ye have agreed together 
to “terapt the Spirit of the Lord? 
behold, the feet of them which have 
buried thy husband are at the door, 
and shall carry thee out. 

10 Then fell she down straightway 
at his feet, and yielded up the ghost: 
and the young men came in, and 
found her dead, and, carrying her 
forth, buried her by her husband. 

11 And great fear came upon all 

~ the church, and upon as many as 
heard these things. 


The power of a holy church, 
‘See 1 Thes. 1. 1-i0.) 


12 And by the hands of the apos- 
tles were ‘many signs and wonders 
fwrought among the people; (and 


hey w: ere all wich one ‘accord in 
ofomon’s porch: 


13 And of the rest durst no man 
join himself to them: but the people 
“magnified them. 

14 And believers were the more 
added to the Lord, multitudes both 
of men and women. 

15 Insomuch that they brought 
forth the sick Sinto the streets, and 
laid them on beds and couches, 
that at the least the shadow of 
Peter passing by might overshadow 
some of them. 

16 There came also a multitude 
out of the cities round about unto 
Jerusalem, “bringing sick folks, and 
them which were vexed with un- 
clean spirits: and they were healed 
every one. 


The second persecution. 


17 Then the high priest rose up, 
and’ all they that were with him, 
(which is the ‘sect of the Saddu- 


cees,) and were filled with /in-] 


dignation, 


A.D. 33. 


e Num.16.11; 
1 Sam.8.7; 
2 Ki.5.25,27; 
Lk.10.16; 

1 Thes.4.8. 


b Num.16.26, 
33; 2 Ki.1.10, |i 
14; 2.24; 2 
Cor.13.2,10. 


c Gr. younger. 
d Temptation. 
Acts 15.10. 


(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 

e Acts 4.29,30. 

jf Miracles 
(N.T.). vs. 
12.15,16,19, 
20; Acts’ 6.8. 
(Mt.8.2,3; ° 
Acts 28.8,9.) 


g Or, in every 
street. 


h Mk.16.17. 
i Gr. heresy. 


j Lit. jeal- 
ousy. 


kan angel. 


1 Heb.1.4, 
note. 


m Life (eter- 
nal). Acts 


n teaching. 


o Rom.1.16, 
note, 


pb Repentance. 


Acts 8. 22. 
(Mt.3.2 
Acts 17. 30. ) 


qSee Mt.26.28, 


note. 


ry Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


s Holy Spirit. 
vs.3,9,32; 
Acts 6.3,5, 
10. (Mt.1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 


1155 


18 And laid their hands on the 
apostles, and put them in the com- 
mon prison. .. 

19 But the ‘angel of the Lord by /’ 
night opened the prison doors, and ° ¥ 
brought them forth, and ‘said, 

20 Go, stand and speak in the 
temple to the people all the words 
of this “life. 

21 And when they heard that, 
they entered into the temple early 

mn the morning, and taught. But 
the high priest came, and they that 
were with him, and called the coun- 
cil together, and all the senate of 
the children of Israel, and sent to 
the prison to have them brought. 

22 But when the officers came, 
and found them not in the prison, 
they returned, and told, 

23 Saying, The prison truly found 
we shut with all safety, and the 
keepers standing without before the 
doors: but when we had opened, 
we found no man within. 

24° Now when the high priest and 
the captain of the temple and the 
chief priests heard these things, 
they doubted of them whereunto 
this would grow. 


/ 25 Then came one and told them, 


saying, Behold, the men whom ye 
put in prison are standing in the 
temple, and teaching the people. 

26 Then went the captain with 
the officers, and brought them 
without violence: for they feared 
the people, lest they should have 
been stoned. 

27 And when they had brought 
them, they set them before the coun- 
cil: and the high priest asked them, 

28 Saying, Did not we straitly 
command you that ye should not 
teach in this name? and, behold, 
ye have filled Jerusalem with your 
"doctrine, and intend to bring this 
man’s blood upon us. 


The answer of the apostles. 


29 Then Peter and the other 
apostles answered and said, We 
ought to obey God rather than men. 

30 The God of our fathers raised 
up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged 
on a tree. 

31 Him hath God exalted with his 
right hand to be a Prince and a 
Saviour, for to give ’repentance to 
Israel, and %forgiveness of "sins. 
32 And we are his witnesses of 
these things; and so is also the 
sHoly Ghost, whom God hath given 
to them that obey him. 

33 When they heard that, they 


5 34] 


were cut to the heart, and took 
council to slay them. 
The warning of Gamaliel. 

34 Then stood there up one in the 
council, a Pharisee, named Gama- 
liel, a doctor of the law, had in 
reputation among all the people, 
and commanded to put the apostles 
forth a little space; 

35 And said unto them, Ye men of 
Israel, take heed to yourselves what 
ye intend to do as touching these 
men. 

36 For before these days rose up 
Theudas, boasting himself to be 
somebody; to whom a number of 
men, about four hundred, joined 
themselves: who was slain; and 
all, as many as “obeyed him, were 
scattered, and brought to nought. 

37 After this man rose up Judas 
of Galilee ‘in the days of the tax- 
ing, and drew away much people 
after him: “he also perished; and 
all, even as many as obeyed him, 
were dispersed. 

38 And now I say unto you, Re- 
frain from these men, and let them 
alone: ¢forif this counsel or this work 
be of men, it will come to nought: 

39 But /if it be of God, ye cannot 
overthrow it; lest haply ye be found 
even to fight against God. 


The apostles beaten. 


40 And to him they agreed: and 
when they had called the apostles, 
and £beaten them, they command- 
ed that they should not speak in the 
name of Jesus, and let them go. 

41 And they departed from the 
presence of the council, rejoicing 
that they were counted worthy to 
suffer ‘shame for his name. 

42 And daily in the temple, and in 
every house, they ceased not to 
teach and preach Jesus Christ. 


CHAPTER 6. 
The first deacons. 


AND in those days, when the 
number of the disciples was 
multiplied, there arose a murmuring 
of the ‘Grecians against the He- 
brews, because their widows were 
neglected in the daily ministration. 
2 Then the twelve called the mul- 
titude of the disciples unto them, 
and said, It is not reason that we 
should leave the word of God, and 
serve tables. 

3 Wherefore, brethren, look ye 
out among you seven men of honest 
report, full of the Holy Ghost and 


THE ACTS. 


a Cf.Acts 2.37. 
The Gos- 


pel when 
preached in 
the power of 
the Spirit 
convicts or 
enrages. 


b Or, believed. 
c Lk.2.1. 
d Lk.13.1,2. 


e Isa.8.10; 
Mt.15.13. 


f Isa.46.9,10; 
1-Cor.1.25. 


g Mt.10.17. 


h Or, dishon- 
our for the 
Name. 


i Hellenists, 
i.e. Grecian 
Jews. 


j Tt is beauti- 
ful to see 
that these 
were all 
Hellenists, 
as the Gre- 
cian names 
show. 


k Acts 8.5; 21.8. 


| Miracles 
(N.T.). 
Acts 8.6. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 


m Holy Spirit. 
vs.3,5,10; 
Acts 7.51,55. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


n 1 Ki.21.10,13; 
Mt.26.59,60. 


o Sanctify, 
hol, 


(N.T.). Acts 


21.28. (Mt.4. | u: 


5; Rev.22.11.) 
P Acts 25.8. 
q Ex.34.29,30; 
Acts 4.13; 
2 Cor.3.18; 
1 John 3.2. 


r Heb.1.4, 
note, 


s Acts 22.1. 


115€ 


[72 


wisdom, whom we may appoint 
over this business. 

4 But we will give ourselves con- 
tinually to prayer, and to the min- 
istry of the word. 

5 And the saying pleased the 
whole multitude: and they Jchose 
Stephen, a man full of faith and of 
the Holy Ghost, and *Philip, and 
Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Ti- 
mon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a 
proselyte of Antioch: 

6 Whom they set before the apos- 
tles: and when they had prayed, 
they laid their hands on them. 

7 And the word of God increased; 
and the number of the disciples 
multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; 
and a great company of the priests 
were obedient to the faith. , 


The third persecution: Stephen 
brought before the council. 


8 And Stephen, full of faith and 
power, did great wonders and /mir- 
acles among the people. 

9 Then there arose certain of 
the synagogue, which is called the 
synagogue of the Libertines, and 
Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and 
of them of Cilicia and of Asia, dis- 
puting with Stephen. 

10 And they were not able to re- 
sist the wisdom and the “spirit by 
which he spake. 

11 *Then they suborned men, 
which said, We have heard him 
speak blasphemous words against 
Moses, and against God. 

12 stirred up the people, © 
and the elders, and the scribes, and 
came upon Aim, and caught him, 
and brought him to the council, 

13 And set up false witnesses, 
which said, This man ceaseth not to 
speak blasphemous words against 
this °holy place, and the law: 

14. For we have heard him say, 
that this Jesus of Nazareth shall 
destroy this place, and shall change 
the customs which Moses delivered 


Ss. 
15 And all that sat in the council, 
looking stedfastly on him, %saw his 
face as it had been the face of an 
Tangel., 


CHAPTER 7. 
‘THEN said the high priest, Are 
these things so? 


Address of Stephen before the 
council. Theme; The unbelief 
of Israel. 


2 And he said, ‘Men, brethren, 


~~ 


7 3] 


and fathers, hearken; The °God of 
glory appeared unto our father 
Abraham, when he was in Mesopo- 
tamia, before he dwelt in ?Charran, 

3 And said unto him, “Get thee 
out of thy country, and from thy 
kindred, and come into the land 
which I shall shew thee. 

4 Then came he out of the land of 
the Chaldeans, and dwelt in 
‘6Charran: and from thence, when 
this father was dead, “he removed 
him into this land, wherein ye now 
dwell. 

5 And he gave him ‘none inher- 
itance in it, no, not so much as to 
set his foot on: yet he %promised 
that he would give it to him for a 
‘possession, and to his seed after 
him, when as yet he had no child. 

6 And God spake on this wise, 
That his “seed should sojourn in 
a strange land; and that they 
should bring them into ‘bondage, 
and entreat them evil four hun- 
dred years. 

7 And the nation to whom they 
shall be in bondage will I judge, 
said God: and after that shall they 
jcome forth, and serve me in this 
— place. 

8 And he gave him the covenant 
of circumcision: and so Abraham 
begat Isaac, and circumcised him 
the eighth day; and Isaac begat 
Jacob; and Jacob begat the twelve 
patriarchs. 

9 And the patriarchs, moved with 
lenvy, ™sold Joseph into Egypt: 
but “God was with him, 

10 And delivered him out of all 
his. afflictions. and gave him favour 
_-and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh 
king of Egypt; andhe madehim gov- 
ernor over Egypt and all his house. 

11 °Now there came a dearth over 
all the land of Egypt and ?Cha- 
naan, and great affliction: and our 
fathers found no sustenance. 

12 But when 2Jacob heard that 
there was corn in Egypt, he sent 
‘out our fathers first. 

13 And at the ‘second time 
Joseph was made known to his 
brethren; and Joseph’s kindred was 
made known unto Pharaoh. 

14 Then sent Joseph, and called 
his father Jacob to him, and all his 
lkindred, threescore and fifteen 
souls, ‘ 

15 So Jacob went down into 
Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers, 


1 Cf. Gen. 46. 26, note. 


THE ACTS. 


A.D. 33. 


a God (of 
&lory). Psa. 
29.3. 

6 Or, Haran. 
Gen.11.31,32. 


c Gen.12.1; 
Heb.11.8-10. 


d Gen.12.5. 
e Or, God. 
f Heb.11.9,10. 


g Gen.15.7; 17. 
8; 18.10; Heb. 
11.11,12. 


h Gen.15.13, 
14; 47.11,12. 

i Ex.1.8-14; 
12.40,41. 

j Ex.14.29,30. 

k Gen.17.9-14. 

1 Or, jealousy. 

m Gen.37.11. 


n Jehovah. 
Gen.39.2. 


o Gen.41.54. 
p Canaan. 

q Gen.42.1. 

vr Gen.45.4,16. 


s unto She- 
chem. 


tSee Gen.23.4, 
note. 


u Or, in She- 
chem. 

v vs.6,7; Ex.2. 
23-25. 

w Ex.1.7-9; 
Psa.105.24, 
25. 


x Or; 
Go 
y Ex.2.5-10. 
z Lk.24.19. 
a Ex.2.11,12. 


b Lk.24.49; 
contra, 
John 2.4, 


c Ex.2.13. 


d Ex.2.14; 
Lk.12.14, 


e Ex.2.15; 
Heb.11.27, 


f Heb.1.4, 
note. 


g Ex.3.2. 


fair unto 
id. 


There is no real contradiction. 


{73 


16 And were carried over ‘into 
Sychem, and laid in the ‘sepulchre 
that Abraham bought for a sum of 
money of the sons of Emmor “the 
father of ‘Sychem. 

17 But when the "time of the 
promise drew nigh, which God had 
sworn to Abraham, the “people 
grew and multiplied in Egypt, 

18 Till another king arose, which 
knew not Joseph. 

19 The same dealt subtilly with 
our kindred, and evil entreated our 
fathers, so that they cast out their 
young cnildren, to the end they 
might not live. 

20 In which time Moses was born, 
and was “exceeding fair, and nour- 
ished up in his father’s house three 
months: 

21 And when he was cast out, 
yPharaoh’s daughter took him up, 
and nourished him for her own son. 

22 And Moses was learned in all 
the wisdom of the Egyptians, and 
was *mighty in words and in deeds. 

23 And “when he was full forty 
years old, it came into his heart to 
visit his brethren the children of 
Israel. 

24 And seeing one of them suffer 
wrong, he defended him, and 
avenged him that was oppressed, 
and smote the Egyptian: 

25 For he supposed his brethren 
would have understood how that 
God by his hand would deliver 
them: but they understood not. 

26 And the ‘next day he shewed: 
himself unto them as they strove, 
and would have set them at one 
again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren; 
why do ye wrong one to another? 

27. But he that did his neighbour 
wrong thrust him away, saving, 
dWho made thee a ruler and a judge 
over us? : 

28 Wilt thou kill me, as thou did- 
dest the Egyptian yesterday? 

29 Then fled Moses at this say- 
ing, and was a stranger in the land 
of Madian, where -he begat two 
sons. 

30 And when forty years were ex- 

ired, there appeared to him in the 
wilderness of mount Sina an ‘angel 


of the Lord in a Sflame of fire in a 
bush. 

31 When Moses saw it, he won- 
dered at the sight: and as he drew 
near to behold it, the voice of the 
Lord came unto him, 


The “house of Jacob’’ 


numbered seventy, but the “kindred”? would include the wives of Jacob’s sons. 


oe M57 


7 32] 


THE ACTS. 


32 Saying, I am the *God of thy 
fathers, the God of Abraham, and 
the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob. Then Moses trembled, and 
durst not behold. , 

33 Then said the Lord to him,\ogog Ex3.6. 


>Put off thy shoes from thy feet:|sFx.3.4,5; Josh.s. 


for the place where thou standest 
is holy ground. 

34 «I have seen, I have seen the 
affliction of my people which is in 
Egypt, and I have heard their 
groaning, and am come down to 
deliver them. And now come, 4I 
will send thee into Egypt. 

35 This Moses whom they re- 
fused, saying, Who made thee a 
tuler and a judge? the same did God 
send to be a ruler and a deliverer 
by the hand of the ‘angel which 
appeared to him in the bush. 

36 He brought them out, after 
that he had shewed wonders and 
signs in the land of Egypt, and in 
the Red sea, and in the wilderness 
forty years. : 

37 This is that Moses, which said 
unto the children of Israel, 7A 
prophet shall the *‘Lord your God 
raise up unto you of your brethren, 
like unto me; him shall ye hear. 

38 This is he, that was in the 
\church in the wilderness with the 
fangel which spake to him in the 
mount Sina, and witA our fathers: 
who received the “lively oracles to 
give unto us: J 

39 To whom our fathers ‘would 
not obey, but thrust Aim from 
them, and in their hearts turned 
back again into Egypt, . 

40 Saying unto Aaron, J7Make us 
gods to go before us: for as for this 
Moses, which brought us out of the 
land of Egypt, we wot not what is 
become of him. 

41 And they made a calf in those 
days, and offered sacrifice unto the 
idol, and “rejoiced in the works of 
their own hands. | 
42 Then God turned, and ‘gave 
them up to worship the host of 
heaven; as it is written in the book 
of the prophets, “O ye house of 
Israel, have ye offered to me 
slain beasts and sacrifices by the 
space of forty years in the wilder- 
ness? 

43 Yea, ye took up the tabernacle 
of Moloch, and the star of your god 
*Remphan, figures which ye made 


+ Holy Spirit. 


15 
¢ Ex.2.24,25; 3.7. 
d Psa.105.26, 
¢ Heb.1.4, nofe. 
F Deut.18,15, 18,19. 


9 Jehovah. 
Deut. 18.15. 


k Or, living. 
Rom.3.1,2; 9.4,5. 

7 Psa.95.8-11. 

J Ex.32.1, 

& Ex.32.6,18; 
Psa.66.6. 

TJud.2.11-14; 
Rom.1.24,28. 

m Amos 5,25-27. 

n Or, Rephan. 


02 Chr.36.11-21; 
Jer.25.9-12, 

P Or, tent of 
testimony. 

@ Ex.25.40; 26,30; 
Heb.8.5. 


r i.e. Joshua. 
nations, whom 
God drave out. 
#1 Ki.8.17; 1 Chr, 
22.7; Psa.132.4,5, 
u 2 Sam.7.1-13; 
1 Ki.8.20. 
v Isa.66.1,2; 
cf.1 Ki.8.27; 
Acts 17,24, 
w Jehovah. 
Isa.66.1,2. 
@ Psa.102.25-27. 
y Jer.2.30; Mt.23. 
34-36; Lk.20,9-15. 
z Righteous One. 
@ They had 
brought false 
witnesses against 
Stephen; he 


to worship them: and °I will carry 
you away beyond Babylon. 

44 Our fathers had the *taber- 
nacle of witness in the wilderness, 
as he had appointed, speaking unto 
Moses, that he should make it fac- 
cording to the fashion that he had 
seen. 

45 Which also our fathers that 
came after brought in with “Jesus 
into the possession of the SGentiles, 
whom God drave out before the 
face of our fathers, unto the days of 
David; 

-46 Who found favour before God, 
and ‘desired to find a*tabernacle for 
the God of Jacob. 

47 “But Solomon built him an 
house. 

48 Howbeit the most High dwell- 
eth not in temples made with hands; 
as saith the prophet, 

49 *Heaven is my throne, and 
earth 7s my footstool: what house 
will ye build me? saitH the “Lord: 
or what is the place of my rest? 

50 Hath not my hand *made all 
these things? 

51 Ye stiffnecked and uncircum- 
cised in heart and ears, ye do al- 
ways resist the Holy Ghost: as 
your fathers did, so do ye. 

52 Which of the “prophets have 
not your fathers persecuted? and 
they have slain them which shewed 
before of the coming of the 2Just 
One; of whom ye have been now 
the betrayers and murderers: 

593 Who have received the law by 
the disposition of ¢angels, and have 


bears true wit- /not kept 2% 

ness Sh : 

them, quotin, wee > 
trem quoting |, |The first martyr: first mention 
writers they of Paul, 


owned to be 
inspired. He 
speaks of the 
persistent rejec- 
tion of God and 
His servants by 
the nation till 
at last it is 
brought home 
to themselves, 
and arouses the 
maddened en- - 
mity of their 
hearts. It was 
the final trial of 
the nation. 


Acts 2.4.) 
¢ Mt.3.16; Acts 9.3; 
Heb.2.9. 


54 ?When they heard these things, 
they were cut to the heart, and they 
gnashed on him with their teeth. 

55 But he, being full of the ‘Holy 
Ghost, looked up stedfastly into 
heaven, and saw the glory of God, 
and Jesus standing on the right 
hand of God, 

56 And said, Behold, I see the 
‘heavens opened, and the Son of 


. |Man standing on the right hand of 


God. 
57 Then they cried out with a 


loud voice; and stopped their ears, 
and ran upon him with one accord, 

58 And cast him out of the city, 
and stoned him: and the witnesses 


lTsrael in the Jand is never 


called a church. In the wilderness Israel was a 


true church (Gr. ecclesia = called-out assembly), but in striking contrast with 


the N.T. ecclesia (Mt. 16, 18, 


note). 


< 


laid down their clothes at a young 
man’s feet, whose name was Saul 
59 And they stoned Stephen, 
fcalling upon °God, and saying, 
Lord Jesus, ‘receive my spirit. 
60 And he kneeled down, and 
cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay 


not this ¢sin to their charge. And 
when he had said this, ¢he fell asleep. 


CHAPTER 8. 


The fourth persecution: Saul 
chief persecutor. 


f A ND Saul was consenting unto 
his death. And at that time 
there was a great persecution against 
the church which was at Jerusalem; 
and they were all scattered abroad 
throughout the regions of Judea 
and Samaria, except the apostles. 
2 And devout men carried Ste- 
phen to his burial, and made 
great lamentation over him. 
3 As for Saul, he made havock of: 
the ‘church, entering into every 
house, and haling men and women 
committed them to prison. 


The first missionaries. 


4 Therefore ‘they that were scat- 
tered abroad went every where 
preaching the word. 


The ministry of Philip. 
Acts 6, 5; 21. 8.) 


5 Then JPhilip went down to the 
keity of Samaria. and preached 
Christ unto them. 

6 ‘And the ‘people with one accord 
gave heed unto thoce things which 


(See 


Philip spake, hearing and seeing the 


“ mmiracles which he did. 


7 For "unclean spirits, crying with 
loud voice, came out of many that 
were possessed with them:. and 
many taken with palsies, and that 
were lame, were healed. 

g And there was great joy in that 
city. 


(The case of Simon the sor- 
cerer.) 


9 But there was a certain man, 
called Simon, which beforetime in 
the same city °used sorcery, and 
bewitched the people of Samaria, 
giving out that himself was some 
great one: 

10 To whom they all gave heed, 
from the least tothe greatest, saying, 
This man is the great power of God. 


11 And to him they had regard,|/ 


because that of long time he had 
bewitched them with sorceries. 


THE ACTS. 


A.D_34. 


a Bible pray- 
ers. Acts 9.6, 
11. (Mt.6.9; 
Rev.22.20.)°— 

b Omit God. 
Lit. Andwere 
stoning Ste- 
phen as he 
wasinvoking 
and saying, 
Lord Jesus, 
give wel- 
come unto 
my spirit. 

¢ Lkk.23.46; 


f Acts 7.58. 
g Acts 11.19. 
hk Churches 


i Mt.10.23; 
Acts 11.19. 

j Acts 6.5. 

k The Jews hav- 
ing’ rejected 


Stephen’s wit- 
ness to, and of, 
them, theGos- 
pel now begins 
to go out to 
“all nations.” 
Cf.v.1; Lk.24. 


47.° 
| multitude. 
m Gr. signs. 
Miracles 


(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9.) 

n Mk.16.17. 

o Acts 13.6. 

p Acts 13.38,39. 

qv.1; John 4.22. 

r Holy Spirit. 
vs.15,17,18, 
19,29,39; Acts 
9.17,31.. (Mt. 
1.18; Acts2.4.) 

s Acts 2.38. 

t Acts 19.6; 
Deut.34.95 

u 2 Ki.5.16,26, 
27; Heb.13. 
5,6. 

v Gr. word. 

w Mt.15.8,19. 

x Repentance. 
Acts 11.18. 
(Mt.3.25 
Acts 17.30.) 

y the Lord. 

z wilt become. 

a Ex.9.28. 

b Gospel. Acts 
14.7,21. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 

c Acts 1.8. 

'd Heb.1.4, note. 

e Contra, Vs. 

6-8. 

Psa.68.31; 

Jer.38.7; 

Acts 28.28. 


1159 


[8 27 
12 But when they ?believed Philip 
preaching the things concerning 
the kingdom of God, and the name- 
of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, 
both men and women. . 

13 Then Simon himself believed 
also: and when he was baptized, he 
continued with Philip, and won- 
dered, beholding the miracles and 
signs which were done. 

14 Now when the Yapostles which 
were at Jerusalem heard that Sa- 
maria had received the word of God, 
they sent unto them Peter and John: 

15 Who, when they were come 
down, prayed for them, that they 
might receive the "Holy Ghost: 

76 (For as yet She was fallen upon 
none of them: only they were bap- 
tized in the name of the Lord 


Jesus.) 
17 Then 4aid they their hands 


‘lon them, and they received the 


Holy Ghost. 

18 And when Simon saw that 
through laying on of the apostles’ 
hands the Holy Ghost was given, 
he offered them: money, 

19 Saying, Give me also this 
power, that on whomsoever I lay 
hands, he may receive the Holy 
Ghost. 

20 But Peter said unto him, Thy 
money “perish with thee, because 
thou hast thought that the gift of 
God may be purchased with money. 

21 Thou hast neither part nor lot 
in this *matter: for thy “heart is 
not right in the sight of God. 

22 *Repent therefore of this thy 
wickedness, and pray God, if per- 
haps the thought of thine heart 
may be forgiven thee. 

23 For I perceive that thou Zart in 
the gall of bitterness, and in the 
bond of iniquity. 

94 Then answered Simon, and 
said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, 
éthat none of these things which ye 
have spoken come upon me, 

25 And they, when they had tes- 
tified and preached the word of the 
Lord, returned to jerusalem, and 
preached the ‘gospel in many ‘vil- 
lages of the Samaritans. 


Philip and the Ethiopian. 


26 And the Zangel of the Lord 
spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, 
and go toward the south unto the 
way that goeth down from Jerusa- 
lem unto Gaza, which is ‘desert. 

27 And he arose and went: and, 
behold, a man of ‘Ethiopia, an 
eunuch of great authority under 


8 28] 


Candace queen of the Ethiopians, 
who had the charge of all her trea- 
sure, and had come to “Jerusalem 
for to worship, am 

28 Was returning, and sitting 
in his chariot read Esaias the 
prophet. . 

29 Then the “Spirit said unto 
Philip, Go near, and join thyself 
to this chariot. 

30 And Philip ran thither to him, 
and heard him read the prophet 
Esaias, and said, ‘Understandest 
thou what thou readest? 

31 And he said, How can I, 
except some man should guide 
me? And he @4desired Philip that 
he would come up and sit with 
him, 

32 The place of the scripture 
which he read was this, “He 
was led as a_ sheep to the 
slaughter; and like a lamb dumb 
before his shearer, so opened he not 
his mouth: 

33 In his humiliation his judg- 
ment was taken away: and who 
shall declare his generation? for his 
life is taken from the earth. 

34 And the eunuch answered 
Philip, and said, I pray thee, 
Jof whom speaketh the prophet 
this? of himself, or of some other 
man? 

35 Then Philip opened his mouth, 
and %began at the same scripture, 
and preached unto him Jesus. 

36 And as they went on their 
way, they came unto a certain 
water: and the eunuch said, See, 
here is water; what doth hinder 
me to be baptized? 

37 *And Philip said, If thou be- 
lievest with all thine heart, thou 
mayest. And he answered and 
said, I believe that Jesus Christ is 
the Son of God. 

38 And he commanded the cha- 
Tiot to stand still: and they went 
down both into the water, both 
Philip and the eunuch; and he 
*baptized him. 

39 And when they were come up 
out of the water, the JSpirit of the 
‘Lord eaught away Philip, that the 
eunuch saw him no more: and he 
went on his way ‘rejoicing. 

40 But Philip was found at Azo- 
tus: and passing through he 
preached “in all the Cities, till he 
came to Cesarea, 


| 


1Cf. Acts 22. 9: 26. 14. A 
ments should be taken together. 
but did not hear the “ 


contradiction ha 
: The men heard 
voice” as articulating th 


“THE ACTS. 


A.D. 34. 


a1 Ki.8.41,42; 
John 12.20. 


b Acts 10.19; 
13.2; 20.23. 


¢ Lk.24.45; 
Rom.10.14, 
15;2 Cor.3.15. 

d besought. 

e Isa.53.7,8. 

f Acts 2.30,31; 
1 Pet.1.10,11; 
Rev.19.10. 

g Lk.24.27; 
Acts 10.43; 
17-2;3. 

h The best 
authorities 
omit v. 37. 

# Acts 16.33. 


Jj 1 Ki.18.12; 
Ezk.8.3. 


k Jehovah. 


lv.8. 


m Or, the gos- 
pel to all the 
cities. 


n Acts 8.1,3; 
26.10,11. 


o Acts 22.5. 


? that were of 
the Way, i.e. 
Christ. John 
14.6. 


q 2 Cor.4.6; 
1 John 1.5. 


r Zech.2.8; 
John 15.20,21; 
Eph.5.29,30. 


Ss The Lord 
identifies 
Himself with 
His people. 


t Acts 2.33-36; 
Heb.2.9, 


« Bible pray- 
ers (N.T.). 
Eph.1.17-20. 
(Mt.6.9; Rev. 
22.20.) 

v the voice. 

w Or, nothing. 

x Acts 22.12. 


y Lk.15.7; 
18.13. 


1160 


€ words, “Saul, Saul,” 


? 


[9 13 


CHAPTER 9. 


The conversion of Saul. (Cf. 
Acts 22. 1-16; 26. 9-18.) 


ND Saul, “yet breathing out 

threatenings and _ slaughter 
against the disciples of the Lord, 
went unto the high priest, 

2 And desired of him letters 
to Damascus to the synagogues, 
that if he found any ?of this way, 
whether they were men or women, 
he might bring them bound unto 
Jerusalem, 

3 And as he journeyed, he came 
near Damascus: and suddenly there 
shined round about him a Might 
from heaven: 

4 And he fell to the earth, and 
heard a voice saying unto him, 
Saul, Saul, "why persecutest thou 
Sme? 

5 And he said, Who art thou, 
Lord? And the Lord said, I am 
‘Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is 
hard for thee to kick against the 
pricks. 

6 And he trembling and aston- 
ished “said, Lord, what wilt thou 
have me to do? And the Lord said 
unto him, Arise, and go into the 
city, and it shall be told thee what 
thou must do. 

7 And the men which journeyed 
with him stood speechless, hearing 
"a lvoice, but seeing no man. 

8 And Saul arose from the earth; 
and when his eyes were opened, he 
saw “no man: but they led him by 
the hand, and brought him into 
Damascus. 

9 And he was three days without 
sight, and neither did eat nor 
drink. 

10 And there was a certain dis- 
ciple at Damascus, named “Ana- 
nias; and to him said the Lord in a 
vision, Ananias. And he said, Be- 
hold, I am here, Lord, 

11 And the Lord said unto him, 
Arise, and go into the street which 
is called Straight, and enquire in 
the house of Judas for one called 
Saul, of Tarsus: for, behold, he 
Yprayeth, 

12 And hath seen in a vision a 
man named Ananias coming in, 
and putting Ais hand on him, that 
he might receive his sight, 

13. Then Ananias answered, Lord, 


s been imagined. The three state- 


the “voice” as a sound (Gr, Phone), 


etc. 


9 14} 


I have “heard by many of this 
man, how much evil he hath done 
to thy saints at Jerusalem: 

14 And here he ‘hath authority 
from the chief priests to bind all 
that call on thy name. 

15 But the Lord said unto him, 
Go thy way: °for he is a ‘chosen 
vessel unto me, to bear my name 
before the ¢Gentiles, and ¢kings, 
.and the ‘children of Israel: 

16 For 4I will shew him how great 
things he must suffer for my name’s 


THE ACTS. 


A.D. 35. 


@ys,1,2; Gal.1.23. 

> Inspiration. 
Acts 28.25, 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

¢ Gr. vessel 
elected. Elec- 
tion (personal). 
Acts 10.41, 
(Deut.7.6; 
1 Pet.1.2.) 

d@ Rom.1.5; 11,13; 
Eph.3.7,8. 


¢ Acts 26.1,2;._' 


[9 31 


22 2But Saul increased the more 
in strength, and confounded the 
Jews which dwelt at Damascus, 
proving that this is "very Christ. 

23 And after that many days 
were fulfilled, the Jews took coun- 
sel to kill him: 

24 But their laying await was 
known of Saul. And they watched 
ee gates day and night to kill 

im. 

25 Then the disciples took him by 


night, and ‘let him down by the 


2 Tim.4.16,17. 2 
sake. by actwaL ate wall in a basket. 
rs of’ Rom.1.16; 9.1-5, 
Paul filled with the Spirit. 2 Acts 20.23; Paul visits Jerusalem. 
3 - ‘or.11.23-28; 
oe tae Aasias rims his aa ce 26 And when Saul was 3come to 
and entered into the house; and}, 770), soi Jerusalem, he assayed to join him- 
putting his hands on him said, (Nt es 


31;|self to the disciples: but they were 


Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, areca 18; |all “afraid of him, and believed not 
that appeared unto thee in the way] Acts 2.4.) that he was a disciple. 
as thou camest, hath —— that} # Miracles (N.T).| 27 But "Barnabas took him, and 
z 2 cts 13.6-12. ' 
thou mightest receive thy sight Acts 12-6-12 brought Arm to the apostles, and 
and be filled with the "Holy Ghost.| Gi$23,) — |declared unto them how he had 
Puts Baptived 5 Lit. And seen the Lord in the way, and that 
Ne Ae hs srsightway, in |he had spoken to him, and how he 
18 And immediately there fell was he pro- had preached °boldly at Damascus 
from his eyes as ae ee: ore that hes the a Bie ae of hae o ; 
i tsi i ‘on of God. nd he was wi’ em comin 
se mah ephnoaig amet ~ je Koes Christ. in and ue out 32g fe as 4 
19 And when he had received} 1Sam.19. 29 And he spake y in the 
meat, he was strengthened. Then 2 Gori. 32,39 name of the Lord Jesus, and dis- 
was Saul certain days with, the dis-|"¥513.4-_ puted against the ?Grecians: but 
ciples which were at Damascus. "m2 they went about to slay him. 
o vs.20,22. 
Paul preaches. P Hellen, Le. Paul returns to Tarsus. 
~ 3 recian jews, ; . 
20 JAnd straightway he preached |q churches 30 Which when the brethren 


Christ in the synagogues, Ithat he 


(local). Acts 11. 


knew, they brought him down to 


is the Son of God. Pritt)" |Czesarea, and sent him forth to 
21 But all that heard Aim were|r Eph.4.16. Tarsus. 


amazed, and said; Is not this he 
that destroyed them which called 
en this name in Jerusalem, and 
came hither for that intent, that he 
might bring them bound unto the 
chief priests? 


8 eee Heb.12. 


t John 14.16; 
Phil.2.1,2. 


% v.42; Acts 16.5. 


31 Then had the %churches rest 
throughout all Judza and Galilee 
and Samaria, and were ‘edified} 
and walking in the ‘fear of the 
Lord, and in the ‘comfort of the 
Holy Ghost, were “multiplied. 


1Cf, Acts 2. 36. 


Peter, while maintaining the deity of Jesus—‘‘God hath made 


that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ’”’—gives especial 
prominence to His Messiahship. Paul, fresh from the vision of the glory, puts the 
emphasis on His Deity. Peter’s charge was that the Jews had crucified the Son of 
David (Acts 2. 25-30); Paul’s that they had crucified the Lord of glory (1 Cor. 2. 
8). In the A.V. the sense is largely lost. The point was, not that the Christ was 
God, a truth plainly taught by Isaiah (7. 14; 9. 6, 7), but that Jesus, the crucified 
Nazarene, was the Christ and therefore God the Son. . 

2J%t seems probable that verses 22-25 refer to Paul’s labours in Damascus after 
his return from Arabia (Gal. 1.17). The “many days’ of verse 23 may represent 
the “three years” of Gal. 1. 18, which intervened between Paul’s return to Damascus 

his visit to Peter. ; ; 
and, The Acts records four visits of Paul to Jerusalem after his conversion: (1) Acts 
9, 23-30. This seems identical with the visit of Gal. 1. 18, 19. The “apostles” of 
verse 27 were Peter, and James, the Lord’s brother. (2) Acts 11. 30. Paul may 
have been in Jerusalem during the events of Acts 12. 1-24. (See v. 25.) (3) Acts 
15, 1-30; Gal. 2. 2-10. (4) Acts 21. TORN 
a 


The healing of Zneas. 


32 And it came to pass, as Peter 
passed throughout all quarters, he 
came down also to the saints which 
dwelt at Lydda. E 

33 And there he found a certain 
man named 4®neas, which had 
kept his bed eight years, and was 
“sick of the palsy. : 

34 And Peter said unto him, 
ZEneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee}c Sharon. 
whole: arise, and make thy bed. AUN ey 
And he arose immediately. nats 

35 And all that dwelt at Lydda|cie. gazelle. 
and ‘Saron saw him, and ¢turned 


aMt.9.2. 
b Acts 3.6,16; 
4.10. 


to the Lord |f1 Tim.2.10. 
Tabitha raised from the dead. |§ Contes, 


36 Now there was at Joppa a cer- 
tain disciple named Tabitha, which}? Mt.9.25. 
by interpretation is called “Dorcas:!| ; Resurrec- 
this woman was /full of good works] tion. 
and almsdeeds which she did. wees 

37 And it came to pass in those} (job 19.25; 
days, that she nes rigs ead pos 1 Cor.35.52.) 
whom when they had washed, they] . 
laid her in an upper chamber. HRS CL TO) OS, 
: 38 And forasmuch as Lydda was|é John 11.45; 
nigh to Joppa, and the disciples} 12-11. 
had heard that Peter was there, 
they sent unto him two men, de- 
siring him that he would not delay|™ Lk-7.2-10. 
to come to them. 

39 Then Peter arose and went 
with thenr. When he was come, 
they brought him into the upper 
chamber: and all the «widows stood 
by him weeping, and shewing the 
coats and garments which Dorcas 
made, while she was with them. 

40 But Peter put them all forth, 
and kneeled down, and prayed;and 
turning him to the body said, Tabi- 
tha, arise. And she opened her eyes: 
and when she saw Peter, she sat up. 

41 And he gave her Ais hand, and 
lified her up, and when he had/|¥# a v ee 
called the saints and widows, pre-| “P?*"?'> 


1 Acts 10.6,28, 


n Or, cohort. 
0 v.35; 
Acts 16.14. 
pb Cf. vs.10-17; 
Acts 9.10. 


r Mt.26.13; 
Heb.6.9,10. 


s Acts X1.13, 
14. 


t Acts 8.26-39. 


sented her ‘alive. v Lev.11.1; 
42 And it Jwas known throughout peo ua 
all! Joppa; kand many believed in cha 
the Lord. w v.28; Mt.15. 
43 Anditcame to pass, that hetar-| 11; Rom.14. 
. ; ; 14,17,20; 
tied many days in Joppa with one} Cor.10.25; 
‘Simon a tanner. 1 Tim.4.4; 
Tit.1.15, 


CHAPTER 10. 

Peter’s second use of the keys: 
the gospel given to Gentiles. 
(Cf. Mt. 16. 19; Acts 2. 14-41.) 

Cornelius’ vision. 

"[PHERE was a certain man in 

“ Cesarea called Cornelius, a 
™centurion of the “band called the 

Italian band 


1162 


THE ACTS. 


qHeb.1.4, note. 


2 A devout man, and one that ~ 
feared God with all his house, © 
which gave much alms to the peo- 
ple, and prayed to God alway. 

3 He saw in a ?vision evidently 
about the ninth hour of the day 
an fgangel of God coming in to 
him, and saying unto him, Corne- 
lius. 

4 And when he looked. on him, 
he was afraid, and said, What 
is it, Lord? And he said unto 
him, Thy prayers and thine alms 
are come up for a “memorial be- 
fore God. 

5 And now ‘send men to Joppa, 
and call for one Simon, whose sur- 
name is Peter: 

6 He lodgeth with one Simon a 
tanner, whose house is by the sea 
side: he shall tell thee what thou 
oughtest to do. 


Cornelius sends for Peter. 


7 And when the ‘angel which 
spake unto Cornelius was departed, 
he called two of his household 
servants, and a devout soldier 
of them that waited on him con- 
tinually; 

8 And when he had declared all 
these things unto them, he sent 


jthem to Joppa. 


Peter’s vision of the great sheet. 


9 On the morrow, as they ‘went 
on their journey, and drew nigh 
unto the city, Peter went up upon 
the housetop to pray about the 
sixth hour: 

10 And he became very hungry, 
and would have eaten: but while 
they made ready, he fell into a 
trance, 

11 And saw “heaven opened, and 
a_ certain vessel descending unto 
him, as it had been a great sheet 
knit at the four corners, and let 
down to the earth: 

12 Wherein were all manner of 
fourfooted beasts of the earth, and 
wild beasts, and creeping things, 
and fowls of the air. 

13 And there came a voice to him, 
Rise, Peter; kill, and eat, 

14 But Peter said, Not so, Lord; 
for I have never eaten any thing 
that is “common or unclean. 

15. And the voice spake unto him 
again the second time, “What God 
hath cleansed, that call not thou 
common. 

16 This was done thrice: and the 
vessel was received up again into 
heaven, 


Peter and the messengers of 
Cornelius. 


17 Now while Peter ¢doubted in 
himself what this vision which he 
had seen should mean, behold, the 
men which were sent from Corne- 
lius had made enquiry for Simon’s 
house, and stood before the gate, 

18 And called, and asked whether 
Simon, which was surnamed Peter, 
were lodged there. 

19 While Peter thought on the 
vision, the Spirit said unto him, 
Behold, three men seek thee. 

20 Arise therefore, and get thee 
down, and go with them, °doubting 
nothing: for I have sent them. 


21 Then Peter went down to the 4 


men which were sent unto him from 
Cornelius; and said, Behold, I am 
he whom ye seek: ‘what is the cause 
wherefore ye are come? 

22 And they said, @Cornelius the 
centurion, a just man, and one that 
feareth God, and of “good report 
among all the nations of the Jews, 
was warned from God by an holy 
angel to send for thee into his 
house, and to hear words of thee. 


Peter goes to Cx#esarea. 


93 Then called he them in, and 
lodged them. And on the morrow 
Peter went away with them, and 
fcertain brethren from Joppa ac- 
companied him. 

24 And the morrow after they en- 
tered into Czsarea. And Cornelius 
gwaited for them, and had called 
together his kinsmen and near 
friends. 

25 And as Peter was coming in, 
Cornelius met him, and /fell down 
at his feet, and worshipped him. 

26 But Peter took him up, saying, 
iStand up; I. myself also am a 


man. 

27 And as he talked with him, he 
went in, and found many that were 
come together. 

28 And he said unto them, Ye 
know how that it is an Junlawful 
thing for a man that is a Jew to 
keep company, or come unto one 
of another nation; but *God hath 
shewed me that I should not call 
any man common or unclean. 

29 Therefore came I unto you 
without gainsaying, as soon as I 
was sent for: I ask therefore for 
lwhat intent ve have sent for 


me? 
30 And Cornelius said, Four days 
ago I was fasting until this hour; 


os 


THE ACTS. 


a was much 
perplexed. 
5 Acts 16.9,10. 
c v.29; Lk.18. 


J 29. 

hk Acts 16.29. 

¢ Acts 14.14,15; 
Rev.19.10; 


k v.15; Acts 
15.8,9; Eph. 
3.6. 


qg pe the sight 


or. 
r the Lord. 
s Deut.10.17; 


t Psa.i5.1,2; 
Acts 15.7-11; 
Rom.2.27-29. 

u Rom.10.10, 
note. 

v Lk.2.14; 
Eph.2.17; 
Col.1.20. 

w Jehovah. 
Isa.61.11. 

x Holy Spirit 


13.10. (Gen.3. 
1; Rev.20.10.) 


b Acts 2.23; 
13.27,28. 

c Acts 2.24. 

d Election 
(personal). 
Acts 15.7. 
(Deut.7.6; 

1 Pet.1.2.) 

e Lk.24.30,41- 
43; John 21.9- 
13; 1 John1.1. 

fon him. 

g Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


1163 


and at the ninth hour I prayed in 
my house, and, behold, a man stood 
before me in “bright clothing, 

31 And _ said, Cornelius, thy 
prayer is heard, and °thine alms 
are had in remembrance in the 
sight of God. 

32 Send therefore to Joppa, and 
call hither Simon, whose surname 
is Peter; he is lodged in the house 
of one Simon a tanner by the sea 
side: who, when he cometh, shall 
speak unto thee. 

33 Immediately therefore I sent 
to thee; and thou hast well done 
that thou art come. Now therefore 
are ?we all here %present before 


. |God, to hear all things that are 
commanded thee of 7God. 


Peter’s sermon to Gentiles in 
the house of Cornelius. 
Theme: Salvation through 
faith. (Cf. Acts 2. 1441.) 


34 Then Peter opened his mouth, 
and said, Of a truth I perceive that 
God is no Srespecter of persons: 

35 But in ‘every nation he that 
feareth him, and worketh “right- 
eousness, is accepted with him. 

36 The word which God sent unto 
the children of Israel, preaching 
*peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord 
of all:) 

37 That word, I say, ye know, 
which was published throughout all 
Judza, and began from Galilee, after 
the baptism which John preached; 

38 How “God anointed Jesus of 
Nazareth with the *Holy Ghost and 
with power: who went about doing 
good, and healing all that were 
oppressed of the devil; for *God 
was with him. 

39 And we are 4witnesses of all 
things which he did both in the land 
of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; 
whom they ¥slew and hanged on a 


tree: 

40 Him God ‘raised up the third 
day, and shewed him openly; 

41 Not to all the people, but unto 
witnesses ¢chosen before of God, 
even to us, who did “eat and drink 
with him after he rose from the 
dead. 

42 And he commanded us to 
preach unto the people, and to tes- 
tify that it is he which was ordained 
of God to be the Judge of quick 
and dead. 

43 To him give all the prophets 
witness, that through his name 
whosoever believeth fin him shall 
receive remission of 4sins. 


10 44] 


The Holy Spirit given to Gentile 
believers. 

44 lWhile Peter yet spake these 
words, the ?Holy Ghost fell on all 
them which heard the word. 

45 And they of the circumcision 
which believed were astonished, as 
many as. came with Peter, because 
that on the Gentiles also was poured 
out the gift of the Holy Ghost. 

46 For they heard them speak 
with “tongues, and magnify God. 
Then answered Peter, 

47 Can any man forbid water, 
that these should not be baptized, 
which have received the Holy 
Ghost as well.as we? 

48 And he commanded them to be 
baptized in the name of ‘the Lord. 
Then prayed they him to tarry 
certain days. 


CHAPTER 11. 


Peter vindicates his ministry to 
Gentiles. 


ABP the apostles and brethren 
that were in Judea heard that 
the Gentiles had also received the 
word of God. 

2 And when Peter was come up 
to Jerusalem, they that were of the 
circumcision contended with him, 

3 Saying, Thou wentest in to men 
uncircumcised, and didst eat with 
them. 

4 But Peter rehearsed the matter 
from the. beginning, end expounded 
it “by order unto them, saying, 

5 I was in the city of ¢Joppa 
praying: and in a trance I saw a 
vision, A certain vessel descend, as 
it had been a great sheet, let down 
from heaven by four corners; and it 
came even to me: 

6 Upon the which when I had 
fastened mirie eyes, I considered, 
and saw fourfooted beasts of the 
earth, and wild beasts, and creeping 
things, and fowls of the fair. 

7 And I heard a voice saying unto 
me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat. 

8 But I said, Not so, Lord: for 
nothing common or unclean hath at 
any time entered into my mouth. 

9 But the voice answered me again 
from heaven, What God hath 
cleansed, thatcallnot thoucommon. 


10 And this was done three times:| 


THE ACTS. 


@ Acts 15.8; 26. 
18; Rom.10. 
11; Gal.3.22. 


6 Psa.68.18. 

c Jesus Christ. 
din. 

e Acts 10.9, 

f heaven. 

g John 16.13. 


h making no 
distinction. 


i Heb.1.4, 
note. 


j Rom.1.16, 
note. 


k even as on 
us. Cf. Acts 
2.1-4; 15.7-9. 


1 John 14.26. 


m used to de 
saying. 


n Or, If there- 
fore the 
equal free 
gift God 
gave to 
them hav- 
ing believed, 
evenastous. 


o Repentance. 
Acts 13.24, 


(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 
p Life (eter- 


nal). A 


(Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 


q Lit.tribula- 
tion. 


r Phoenicia. 
s Hellenists, 


i.e. Grecian 
Jews. 


{il ae 


and all were drawn up again into 
heaven. 

11 And, behold, immediately 
there were three-tnen already come 
unto the house where I was, sent 
from Cesarea unto me. 

12 And the &Spirit bade me go 
with them, “nothing doubting. 
Moreover these six brethren accom- 
panied me, and we entered into the 
man’s house: 

13. And he shewed us how he had 
seen an ‘angel in his house, which 
stood and said unto him, Send men 
to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose 
surname is Peter; 

14 Who shall tell thee -words, 
whereby thou and all thy house 
shall be Jsaved. 

15 And as I began to speak, the 
Holy Ghost fell on them, “as on us 
at the beginning. ~ 

16 Then ‘remembered I the word 
of the Lord, how that he “said, 
John indeed baptized with water; 
but ye shall be baptized with the 
Holy Ghost. 

17 *"Forasmuch then as God gave 
them the like gift as he did unto 
us, who believed on the Lord Jesus 
Christ; what was I, that I could 
withstand God? 

18 When they heard these things, 
they held their peace, and glorified 
God, saying, Then hath God also to 
the Gentiles granted °repentance 
unto life. 


The church at Antioch: the 
new name, 


19 Now they which were scat- 
tered abroad upon the %persecution 
that arose about Stephen travelled 
as far as "Phenice, and Cyprus, and 
Antioch, preaching the word to 
none but unto the Jews only. 

20 And some of them were men 
of Cyprus and Cyrene, which, when 
they were come to Antioch, spake 
unto the ‘Grecians, preaching the 
Lord Jesus. 

21 And the hand of the Lord was 
with them: and a great number be- 
lieved, and turned unto the Lord. 

22 Then tidings of these things 
came unto the ears of the church 
which was in Jerusalem: and they 
sent forth Barnabas, that he should 
go as far as Antioch. 


1 Verse 44 is one of the pivotal points of Scripture. 


been offered to Jews only, 
apostolic mediation. 
Spirit is given without delay, 
Jesus Christ. Cf, Acts 2, 4, 


1164 


Heretofore the Gospel has 


and the Holy Spirit bestowed upon believing Jews through 
But now the normal order for this age is reached: the Holy 
mediation, or other condition than simple faith in 
note; 1 Cor. 6. 19. 


i1 23] 


23 Who, when he came, and had 
seen the grace of God, was glad, 
and exhorted them all, that with 
purpose of heart they would cleave 
unto the Lord. 

24 For he was a good man, and 
full of the *Holy Ghost and of 
faith: and much people was added 
unto the Lord. - 

25 Then departed Barnabas to 
Tarsus, for to seek Saul: 

26 And when he had found him, 
he brought him unto Antioch. And 
it came to pass, that a whole year 
they assembled themselves with the 
bchurch, and taught much people. 
And the disciples were called 
Christians first in Antioch. 


The church at Antioch sends 
relief to Jerusalem. 


27 And in these days came proph- 
ets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. 

28 And there stood up one of 
them named Agabus, and signified 
by the Spirit that there should be 
great dearth throughout all the 
cworld: which came to pass in the 
days of Claudius Cesar. 

29 Then the disciples, every man 
according to his ability, determined 
to send relief unto the brethren 
which dwelt in Judea: 

30 Which also they did, and sent 
it to the Zelders by the hands of 
Barnabas and Saul. 


’ CHAPTER 12. 


The fifth persecution: arrest of 
Peter. 


dt Mead about that time ‘Herod the 
king stretched forth his hands 
to vex certain of the church. 

2 And he killed James the brother 
of John with the sword. 

3 And because he saw it pleased 
the Jews, he proceeded further to 
take fPeter also. (Then were the 
days of unleavened bread.) 

4 And when he had apprehended 
him, he put Aim in prison, and de- 
livered him to four quaternions of 
soldiers to keep him; intending 
after Easter to bring him forth to 
the people. 


Prayer for Peter’s deliverance: 
an angel sent. 


5 Peter therefore was kept in 
prison: but “prayer was made with- 
out ceasing of the church unto God 
for him. 

6 And when Herod would have 
brought him forth, the same night 


4 


THE ACTS. 


. A.D. 42. 


a Holy Spirit. 
vs.12,15,16, 
24,28; Acts 


(Mt. 
Acts 2.4.) 


6 Churches 
(local).vs.12, 
15,16,24,26; 
Acts 13.1-3. 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1.1.) 


¢ oikoumene 
= inhabited 
earth (Lk. 
2.1). 


d Elders. 
Acts 14.23. 
(Acts 11.30; 
Tit.1.5-9.) 


server of the 
law, and 
popular with 
the Jews (see 
v.21). Herod 
Agrippa I1., 
Paul’s 
Agrippa, 


was his son. 


f John 21.18. 


{8 the passover. 


h Or, instant 
and earnest 
prayer was 
made. 2 Cor, 
1.11; Eph.6. 
18. 


i an angel, etc. 


j awakened 
him. 


k Heb.1.4, 
note. 


12 Chr.16.9; 
Psa.34.7; 
Dan.3.28; 6. 
22; Heb.1.14. 


mv.5; Isa.65. 
24; Dan.9.21. 


n answer. 
o Mt.18.10. 
pb Psa.66.16. 


1165 


[12 19 


Peter was sleeping between two 
soldiers, bound with two chains: 
and the keepers before the door 
kept the prison. 


Lord came upon him, and a light” 
shined in the prison: and he smote. 
Peter on the side, and Jraised him 
up, saying, Arise up quickly. And 
his chains fell off from Ais hands. 


Gird thyself, and bind on thy san- 
dals. And so he did. And he saith 
unto him, Cast thy garment about 
thee, and follow me. 

9 And he went out, and followed 
him; and wist not that it was true \ 


thought he saw a vision. 

10 When they were past the first 
and the second ward, they came un- 
to the iron gate that leadeth unto 
the city; which opened to them of 
his own accord: and they went out, 
and passed on through one street; 
and forthwith the “angel departed 


_ |from him. 


11 And when Peter was come to 
himself, he said, Now I know of a 
surety, that the Lord hath sent “his 
Rangel, and hath delivered me out 
of the hand of Herod, and from all 
the expectation of the people of the 
Jews. 

12 And when he had considered 
the thing, he came to the house of 
Mary the mother of John, whose 
surname was Mark; “where many 
were gathered together praying. 

13 And as Peter knocked at the 
door of the gate, a damsel came to 
nhearken, named Rhoda. 

14 And when she knew Peter’s 
voice, she opened not the gate for 
gladness, but ran in, and told how 


Peter stood before the gate. 

15 And they said unto her, .Thou 
art mad. But she constantly af- 
firmed that it was even so. Then 
said they, It is his °angel. 

16 But Peter continued knocking: 
and when they had opened the door, 
and saw him, they were astonished. 

17 But he, beckoning unto them 
with the hand to hold their peace, 
Pdeclared unto them how the Lord 
had brought him out of the prison. 
And he said, Go shew these things 
unto James, and to the brethren. 
And he departed, and went into 
another place. 

18 Now as soon as it was day, 
there was no small stir among the 
soldiers, what was become of Peter. 
19 And when Herod had sought 


7 And, behold, ‘the angel of the “vy 


8 And the ‘angel said unto him, \ 5 


which was done by the “angel; but). 


12 20] 


for him, and found him not, he ex- 
amined the keepers, and com- 
manded that they should be “put to 
death. And he went down from Ju- 
dea to Czsarea, and there abode. 


Death of Herod. 


20 And Herod was highly dis- 
pleased with them of Tyre and 
Sidon: but they came with one ac- 
cord to him, and, having made 
Blastus the %king’s chamberlain 
their friend, desired peace; because 
their country was nourished by the 
king’s country. 

21 And upon a set day Herod, 
arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon 
his throne, and made an oration 
unto them. 

22 And the people gave a shout, 

saying, It 1s the voice of a god, and 
not of a man. 
‘23 And “immediately ¢the angel 
of the Lord smote him, because he 
gave not God the glory: and he was 
eaten of worms, and gave up the 
ghost. i 

24 But the word of God grew and 
multiplied. 

25 And Barnabas and Saul re- 
turned ‘from Jerusalem, when they 
had fulfilled their ministry, and 
took with them John, whose sur- 
name was Mark. : 


CHAPTER 13. 


Paul and Barnabas called by 
the Holy Spirit. 


Now there were in the church 
that was at Antioch certain 
prophets and teachers; as Barna- 
bas, and Simeon that was called 
Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and 
Manaen, &which had been brought 
up with "Herod the tetrarch, and 
Saul. 

2 As they ministered to the Lord, 
and fasted, the ‘Holy Ghost said, 
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for 
ne work whereunto I have called 
them. 


Paul’s first missionary journey. 


3 And when they had fasted and 
prayed, and laid their hands on 
them, they sent them away. 

4 So they, being sent forth by the 
Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleu- 
cia; and from thence they sailed to 
Cyprus. 

5 And when they were at Salamis, 
they preached the word of God in 
the synagogues of the Jews: and they 
had also John /to their minister. 


+ 7 


THE ACTS. 


a led away to 
death. 


6 that was 
over the 
king’s bed- 
chamber. 


¢ Dan.4.37. 
dan. 
e Cf.Acts 12.1, 


f Churches 
(i . vs. 
1-3; Acts 14, 
19-23,26-28. 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1.1.) 


g the foster- 
brother of. 


h See Mt.14. 
1, ref. 


t Holy Spirit. 
vs.2,4,9,52; 
Acts 15.8,28. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


jas their 
attendant. 


k Gr. magos. 


used fora 
vulgar ma- 
gician, and 
for a true 
wise man of 
the East. 


I proconsul 
QRoman). 


m son. 

n Satan. Acts 
26.18. - 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


o Miracles 


Acts 28.8,9.) 
pb teaching. 


q Election 
(corporate). 
Rom.9.11. 
(Deut.7.6; 

1 Pet.1.2.) 


1166 


Opposition from Satan. 
(Cf. vs. 44, 50.) 


6 And when they had gone 
through the isle unto Paphos, they 
found a certain sorcerer, a false 
prophet, a Jew, whose name was 
Bar-jesus: 

7 Which was with the ‘deputy of 
the country, Sergius Paulus, a pru- 
dent man; who called for Barnabas 
and Saul, and desired to hear the 
word of God. 

8 But Elymas the sorcerer (for so 
is his name by interpretation) with- 
stood them, seeking to turn away 
the deputy from the faith. 

9 Then Saul, (who also fs called 
Paul,) filled with the Holy Ghost, 
set his eyes on him, 

10 And said, O full of all subtilty 
and all mischief, thou “child of the 
devil, thou enemy of all righteous- 
ness, wilt thou not) cease to pervert 
the right ways of the Lord? 

11 And now, behold, the hand of 
the Lord zs upon thee, and thou 
shalt be blind, not seeing the sun 
for a season. And immediately 
there °fell on him a mist and a dark- 
ness; and he went about seeking 
some to lead him by the hand. 

12 Then the ‘deputy, when he saw 
what was done, believed, being as- 
tonished at the ?doctrine of the 
Lord. 

13 Now when Paul and his com- 
pany loosed from Paphos, they 
came to Perga in Pamphylia: and 
John departing from them returned 
to Jerusalem. 


Paul’s sermon in the synagogue 
at Antioch in Pisidia. Theme: 
Justification by faith, vs. 38, 39. 


14 But when they departed from 
Perga, they came to Antioch in 
Pisidia, and went into the syna-. 
gogue on the sabbath day, and sat 
down. 

15 And after the reading of the 
law and the prophets the rulers of 
the synagogue sent unto them, say- 
ing, Ye men and brethren, if ye 
have any word of exhortation for 
the people, say on. 

16 Then Paul stood up, and beck- 


oning with Ais hand said, Men of 
Israel, and ye that fear God, give 
audience. 

17 The God of this people of Israel 
Ichose our fathers, and exalted the 
people when they dwelt as strangers 
in the land of Egypt, and with an 
high arm brought he them out of it. 

18 And about the time of forty 


13 19) 


THE ACTS. 


[13 46 


years suffered he their manners in 
the wilderness. 

19 And when he had destroyed 
seven nations in the land of @Cha- 
naan, “he divided their land to 
them by lot. 

20 And after that he gave unto 
them judges about the space of 
four hundred and fifty years, until 
Samuel the prophet. 

21 And afterward they desired a 
king: and God gave unto them 
Saul the son of ‘Cis, a man of the 
tribe of Benjamin, by the space of 
forty years. 

22 And when he had removed 
him, he raised up unto them David 
to be their king; to whom also he 
gave testimony, and 4said, I have 
found David the son of Jesse, a 
man after mine own heart, which 
shall fulfil all my will. 

23 Of this man’s seed hath God 
according to his promise raised 
unto Israel a ‘Saviour, Jesus: 

24 When John had first preached 
before his coming the baptism of 
frepentance to all the people of 
Israel. 

25 And as John fulfilled his course, 
he said, Whom think ye that I 
am? Iam not he. But, behold, 
there cometh one after me, whose 
shoes of Ais feet I am not worthy 
to loose. 

26 Men and brethren, children of 
the stock of Abraham, and &whoso- 
ever among you feareth God, “to 
you is the word of this isalvation 
sent. 

27 For they that dwell at Jerusa- 
lem, and their rulers, because they 
knew him not, nor yet the voices of 
the prophets which are read every 
sabbath day, they have fulfilled 
them in condemning Aim. 

28 And though they found no 
cause of death in him, yet desired 
they Pilate that he should be slain. 

29 And when they had fulfilled all 
that was written of him, they took 
him down from the tree, and laid 
Aim in a sepuichre. 

30 But God raised him from the 
dead: ; 

31 And he was Jseen many days 
of them which came up with him 
from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are 
his witnesses unto the people. 

32 And we declare unto you ‘glad 
tidings, how that the promise which 
was made unto the fathers, 

33 God hath fulfilled the same 
unto us their children, in that he 
hath raised up Jesus again; as it is 


A.D. 45. 


a Canaan. 

6 He gave 
them their 
land. 

c Kish, 


d1Sam.13,14; 
Psa.89.20 


15.28); also 
2 Sam.7.8- 
17, note. 


e Rom.1.16, 
note. 

f Repentance. 
Acts 19.4. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 

g Isa.55.1. 

h Mt.10.6. 


i Rom.1.16, 
note, 

j Acts 1.3;11. 

 Lk.2.10,11. 

1 Psa.2.7. 

m Isa.55.3. 

n Psa.16.10. See 
Lk.1.31,32; 
Acts 2.30,31. 

o Psa.16.8-11. 

Dd Psa.16.10. 

q Forgiveness. 
vs.38,39; 
Rom.4.7. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 

r Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

s Faith. Acts 


t Assurance. 
vs.38,39; 
Acts 17.31. 
(Isa.32.17; 
Jude 1.) 

u Rom.1.16, 
note, 

v Justifica- 
tion. Rom.4. 
2,5. (Lk.18. 
14; Rom.3. 
28.) 

w Law (of 
Moses). Acts 
15.5,10,11,28, 
29. (Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 


x See Hab.1.5. 


yas they went 
out. 

z lacté 11.23; 
14.22; Rom. 
5.2; Heb.6. 
11,12; 12.15. 


a Lit. thrust. 


1167 


also written in the second psalm, 

'Thou art my Son, this day have I 
begotten thee. 

34 And as concerning that he 
raised hira up from the dead, now 
no more to return to corruption, he 
said on this wise, “I will give you 
the sure mercies of David. 

35 Wherefore he saith also in *an- 
other psalm, Thou shalt not suffer 


‘|thine °Holy One to see corruption. 


36 For David, after he had served 
his own generation by the will of 
God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto 
his fathers, and saw corruption: 

37 But he, whom God ?raised 
again, saw no corruption. 

38 Be it known unto you there- 
fore, men and brethren, that 
through this man is preached unto 
you the @forgiveness of “sins: 

39 And by him all that ‘believe 
are ‘justified from “all things, from 
which ye could not be “justified by 
wthe law of Moses. 

40 Beware therefore, lest that 
come upon you, which is spoken of 
in the prophets; 

41 Behold, ye despisers, and won- 
der, and perish: for I *work a work 
in your days, a work which ye shall 
in no wise believe, though a man 
declare it unto you. 

42 And %when the Jews were 
gone out of the synagogue, the Gen- 
tiles besought that these words 


might be preached to them the 
next sabbath. 

43 Now when the congregation 
was broken up, many of the Jews 
and religious proselytes followed 
Paul and Barnabas: who, speaking 
to them, persuaded them to “con- 
tinue in the grace of God. 


Opposition from the Jews. 
(Cf. vs. 6, 50.) 


44 And the next sabbath day 
came almost the whole city to- 
gether to hear the word of God. 

45 But when the Jews saw the 
multitudes, they were filled with 
envy, and spake against those 
things which were spoken by Paul, 
contradicting and blaspheming. 


Paul and Barnabas turn to the 
Gentiles. (Cf. Acts 18. 6; 28. 
25-29.) 

46 Then Paul and Barnabas 
waxed bold, and said, It was neces- 
sary that the word of God should 
first have been spoken to you: but 


seeing ye “put it from you, and 
judge yourselves unworthy of ever- 


13 47] 


lasting life, lo, we turn to the 
Gentiles. 

47-For so hath the Lord com- 
manded us, saying, “I have set thee 
to be a light of the Gentiles, that 
thou shouldest be for salvation unto 
the ends of the earth. _ 

48 And when the Gentiles heard 
this, they were glad, and glorified 
the word of the Lord: and as many 
as were ordained to “eternal life 
believed. 

49 And the word of the Lord was 
published throughout all the region. 


Opposition from devout and\?° Fy aaa 
honourabie women, and chief 
citizens. (Cf. vs. 6, 45.) 


50 But the Jews stirred up the de- 
vout and honourable women, and at (Gen.3. 
the chief men of the city, and raised 20; Heb.11. 
persecution against Pau! and Bar-| 39.) 
nabas, and expelled them out of dMt.5.12: 
their coasts. 1 Thes.1.6. 
51 But they shook off the dust of 
their feet against them, and came] ¢ Mt-10.23. 
unto Iconium, {'Faithe Acts 
52 And the disciples were filled| 16.31. (Gen. 
with ¢joy, and with the Holy Ghost, ee sek 


CHAPTER 14. 
The work in Iconium. 


ANP it came to pass in Iconium, 
that they went both together 
into the synagogue of the Jews, 
and so spake, that a great multitude 
both of the Jews and also of the 
Greeks believed. 

2 But the unbelieving Jews 
stirred up the Gentiles, and made 
their minds evil affected against the 
brethren. « 

3 Long time therefore abode they 
speaking boldly in the Lord, which 
gave testimony unto the word of 
his grace, and granted signs and 
wonders to be done by their hands. 

4 But the multitude of the city 
was divided: and part held with 
ae Jews, and part with the apos- 
tles. 

S And when there was an assault 
made both of the Gentiles, and also 
of the Jews with their rulers, to use 
pom despitefully, and to stone 
them, 


The work in Derbe and Lystra. 


6 They were ware of it, and fled 
unto ‘Lystra and Derbe, cities of 
Lycaonia, and unto the region that 
lieth round about: 

7 And there they preached the 
gospel, 


@ vs.47,48; 
Isa.42.6,Z. 


Rev.22.19.) 
Faith. Acts 


g Miracles 


16-18,25,26. 
(Mt.8.2,3; 
Acts 28.8,9,) 


h Latin for 
Gr. Zeus, the 
national god 
of the Greeks. 

i Gr. Hermes. 

j Lit. sprang 
forth 
among. 

k Acts 10.26; 
Jas.5.17; 
Rev.22.9, 


1 1sa.44.9,10; 
1 Cor.8.4, 


m Lit.dragged. 


1168 


THE ACTS. 


(N.T.). vs. 
8-10; Acts 16.} 


The impotent man at Lystra 
healed. 


8 And there sat a certain man at 
Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a 
cripple from his mother’s womb, 
who never had walked: 

9 The same heard Paul speak: 
who stedfastly beholding him, and 
perceiving that he had Jfaith to be 
healed, A 

10 Said with a loud voice, Stand 
upright on thy feet. And he 
8leaped and walked. 

11 And when the people saw what 
Paul had done, they lifted up their 


_|voices, saying in the speech of 


Lycaonia, The gods are come down 
to us in the likeness of men. 

12 And they called Barnabas, 
‘Jupiter; and Paul, ‘Mercurius, be- 
cause he was the chief speaker, 

13 Then the priest of Jupiter, 
which was before their city, brought 


.}oxen and garlands unto the gates, 


and would have done sacrifice with 
the people. 
14 Which when the apostles, Bar- 


Inabas and Paul, heard of, they rent 


their clothes, and Jran in among 
the people, crying out, 

15 And saying, Sirs, why do ye 
these things? We also are men of 
like passions with you, and preach 
unto you that ye should turn frem 
these vanities ‘unto the living God, 
which made heaven, and earth, and 
the sea, and all things that are 
therein: 

16 Who in times past suffered all 
nations to walk in their own Ways. 

17 Nevertheless he left not himself 
without witness, in that he did 
good, and gave us rain from 
heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling 
our hearts with food and gladness. 

18 And with these sayings scarce 
restrained they the people, that 
fhey had not done sacrifice unto 
them. 


Paul stoned at Lystra. 


19 And there came thither cer- 
tain Jews from Antioch and 
Iconium, who persuaded the people, 
and, having stoned Paul, drew 
him out of the city, supposing he 
had been dead. 


F urther ministry of the first 
mussionary journey, 


20 Howbeit, as the disciples stood 
round about him, he rose up, and 
came into the city: and the next 
ome departed with Barnabas to 

erbe, 


14 23] 


THE ACTS. 


[15 14 


21 And when they had preached 
the ¢gospel to that city, and had 


A.D. 46. |the conversion of the Gentiles: and 


they.caused great joy unto all the 


‘taught many, they returned again], Gospel, vs.7, |brethren. 


to Lystra, and to Iconium, and 
Antioch, 

22 Confirming the souls of the dis- 
ciples, and exhorting them to con- 
tinue in the faith, and that we must 
through ‘much tribulation enter 
into the kingdom of God. 


Elders appointed in _ every 
church: the return to’ An- 
tioch. 


23 And when they had ordained 
them ‘elders in every ‘church, and 
had prayed with fasting, they com- 
mended them to the Lord, on whom 
they believed. 

24 And after they had passed 
throughout Pisidia, they came to 
Pamphylia. 

25 And when they had preached 
the word in Perga, they went down 
into Attalia: 

26 And thence sailed to Antioch, 
from whence they had been retom- 
mended to the grace of God for the 
work which they fulfilled. 

27 And when they were come, and 
had gathered the ‘church together, 
they rehearsed all that God had 
done with them, and how he had 
opened the door of faith unto the 
Gentiles. 

98 And there they abode long 
time with the disciples. 


CHAPTER 15. 


Council at Jerusalem: the ques- 
tion of circumcision. 


The legalizers from Judza. 


: AND hcertain men which came 

down from Judea taught the 
brethren, and said, *Except Ye be 
circumcised Jafter the manner of 
Moses, ye cannot be saved. 


Paul, Barnabas, and others go 
to Jerusalem. 


2 When therefore Paul and Bar- 
nabas had no small dissension and 
disputation with them, they deter- 
mined that Paul and Barnabas, and 
certain other of them, should go up 
to Jerusalem unto the apostles and 
elders about this question. | 

3 And being brought on their way 
by the church, they passed through 
kPhenice and Samaria, declaring 


1 Dispensationally, this is the most important passage in the N.T. 


21; Acts 15.7. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


b made many 
disciples. 

¢ many trib- 
ulations. 

d Gr. cheiro- 
tonesantes, - 


to designate 
by stretching 


4 And when they were come to 
Jerusalem, they were received of 
the church, and of the apostles and 
elders, and they declared all things 
that God had done with them. 


The questions at issue. 


5 But there rose up certain of the 
sect of the Pharisees which believed, 
saying, That it was needful to cir- 


out (cr point-jcumcise them, and to command 
ing with) the |them to keep ‘the law of Moses. 


hand. 


6 And the apostles and elders 


e Elders. Acts [came together for to consider of 


15.2,4,6,22, 
23. (Acts 11. 


this matter. 


30; Tit-1.5-9.)| Peter's argument for Christian 


f Churches 
(local). vs. 
19-23,26-28; 
Acts 15.1,32, 
36-41.(Acts2. 
41; Phil.1.1.) 


g committed. 
h Gal.2.12. 

# Col.2.11;24. 
j Lev.12.3. 

k Phoenicia. 


l Law (of 
Moses). vs.5,, 
10,11,28,29; 
Rom.2.12-27. 
(Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 


m question- 
ing. 


n Election 
(personal). 
Acts 22.14. 
(Deut.7.6; 
1 Pet.1.2.) 


o Mt.16.19. 
Peter used 
the keys first 
for the Jews 
on the day of 
Pentecost; 
secondly; in 
the house of 
Cornelius for 
the Gentiles. 
But Paul was 
distinctively 
the apostle to 
the Gentiles. 
Gal.2.7,8. 


p Gospel. Acts 
16.10. (Gen. 
12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


q Temptation. 
Acts 20.19, 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 


liberty: why put under law 
those to whom God has given 
the Spirit? 

7 _And'when there had been much 
mdisputing, Peter rose up, and said 
unto them, Men and brethren, ye 
know how that a good while ago 
God made “choice among us, that 
the Gentiles by °my mouth should 
hear the word of the gospel, and 


did unto us; 

9 And put no difference between 
us and them, purifying their hearts 
by faith. 

10 Now therefore why %tempt ye’ 
God, to put a yoke upon the neck 
of the disciples, which neither our 
fathers nor we were able to bear? 

11 But we kelieve that through 
the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ 
we shall be saved, even as they. 


Paul and Barnabas testify. 
12 Then all the multitude kept 
silence, and gave audience to Bar- 
nabas and Paul, declaring what 
miracles and wonders God had 
wrought among the Gentiles by 


them. 


James declares the result: (1) 
the outcalling of the Gentiles 
agrees with the promises to 
Israel. 

13 And after they had held their 
peace, Jamesanswered, saying, !Men 
and brethren, hearken unto me: 

14 Simeon hath declared how God 


It gives the 


divine purpose for this age, and for the beginning of the next. (1) The taking out 
from among the Gentiles of a people for His name, the distinctive work of the pres- 


1169 


pre d i . bey + 
8 And God, which knoweth the, ' 
heats are eich nowt the Ao, 


them the Holy Ghost, even as he \ ~*'| 


i 


@at the first did visit the Gentiles, to 


THE ACTS. 


15 15] 


take out of them a people for his 
name. 

15 And to this agree the words of 
the prophets; as it is written, 


a Lit. for the 
firstitime, i.e. 
in the house 
of Cornelius. 


16 After this I will return, and| ysS4t 
will build again the tabernacle of| 43-41 13-18. 


‘David, which is fallen down; and I|b Kingdom 


will build again the ruins thereof, eS at 
and I will set it up: y (Lk.1.31.33;. 
17 That the residue of men might} 1 Cor.15.24.) 


seek after the “Lord, and all the 6 fehovals, vs. 
Gentiles, upon whom my name is} 94;72.° 
called, saith the Lord, 4who doethld /srae! (pro- 


all these things. peed. 
18 Known unto God are all his} Bon91'8 
«works from “the ‘beginning of the) (Gen.12.2.3; 
Worlds wereapene, tl 8 Rom.11.26.) 
J > €1.¢. ages. 
Fs fyudgment. 
(2) The Gentiles are not under); Elders. vs.2, 
' A - 4,6,22,23; 
the law Acts 16.4. 
is (Acts 11.30; 
19 !Wherefore my ‘sentence is,| Tit.1.5,9.) 


that we trouble not them, which|/ Spee a ; 
from among the Gentiles are turned] * Mt-317.20; 
to God: eb.10.1. 


20 But that we write unto them,|J Acts 13.50; 


that they abstain from pollutions| }$39:} Gor 
of idols, and from fornication, and] 13.23/26. 


from things strangled, and from Eo Spirit 


blood. : __| dey Acts 16.6 
21 For Moses of old time hath in} 7. (t.1.18; ' 


every city them that preach him,| Acts 2.4.) 
being read in the synagogues every] ? t#inds sac- 


ificed. 
sabbath day. ‘ mi Con 8; 
22 Then pleased it the apostles| 10.19-22 


and elders with the whole church, |" S<>-9:43 

to send chosen men of their own|o1 Cor.s.1,13; 
company to Antioch with Paul and} 7.2; 1 Thes. 
Barnabas; mamely, Judas sur- 5% nie 
named Barsabas, and Silas, chief|? Seq sith 
men among the brethren: you. 

23 And they wrote Jetters by|% pss 
them after this manner; The apos-|’ defines the 
tles and Selders and brethren send] N.T. gift of 
greeting unto the brethren which 


prophecy. 


A.D. 52. 


are of the Gentiles in Antioch and 
Syria and Cilicia: 

24 Forasmuch as we have heard, 
that certain which went out from 
us have troubled you with words, 
hAsubverting your souls, saying, Ye 
must be circumcised, and keep the 
law: ‘to whom we gave no such 
commandment: 

25 It seemed good unto us, being 
assembled with one accord, to send 
'chosen men unto you with our be- 
loved Barnabas and Paul, 

26 JMen that have hazarded their 
lives for the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

27 We have sent therefore Judas 
and Silas, who shall also tell you 
the same things by mouth. 


But Gentile believers must not 
give offence to godly Jews. 


28 For it seemed good to the 
Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon 
you no greater burden than these 
necessary things; 

29 That ye abstain from /meats 
offered to idols, and’ from blood, 
and from “things strangled, and 
from °fornication: from which if ye 
keep yourselves, ?ye shall do well. 
Fare ye well. 

30 So when they were dismissed, 
they came to Antioch: and when 
they had gathered the multitude to- 
gether, they delivered the epistle: 

31 Which when they had read, 
Sthey rejoiced for the consola- 
tion. 

32 And Judas and Silas, being 
*prophets also themselves, exhorted 
the brethren with many words, 
and confirmed them. 

33 And after they had tarried 
ithere a space, they were let go in 


ent, or church-age. The church is the ecclesia—the ‘“‘called-out assembly.” Pre- 


cisely this has been in progress since Pentecost. 
converted all, but everywhere has called out some. 


calling] I will return.” 


James quotes from Amos 9. 11, 12. 


The Gospel has never anywhere 
(2) “After this [viz. the out- 
The verses which 


follow. im Amos describe the final regathering of Israel, which the other prophets 
invariably connect with the fulfilment of the Davidic Covenant (e.g. Isa.11. 1, 10-12; 


Jer. 23. 5-8). (3) 


“And will build again the tabernacle of 
lish the Davidic rule over Israel (2 Sam. 7. 8-17; Lk. 1. 31-33). 


David,” i.e. re-estab- 
(4) “That the resi- 


due of men [Israelites] may seek after the Lord” (cf. Zech. 12. 7, 8: 13. 12) SE (Sy 


“And all the Gentiles,” etc. (cf. Mic. 4. 2; Zech. 8. 21, 22). 


of Rom. 11. 24-27. 


This is also the order 


1 The scope of the decision goes far beyond the mere question of circumcision. 
The whole question of the relation of the law to Gentile believers had been put 


in issue (v, 5), and their exemption is declared in the decision (vs. 19, 24). 
decision might be otherwise stated in the terms of Rom. 6. 14: 


the law, but under grace.” Gentile believers 


The 
“Ye are not under 
were to show grace by abstaining 


fiom the practices offensive to godly Jews (vs. 20, 21, 28, 29; cf. Rom. 14. 12-17; 


1 Cor. 8. 1-13). 
4170 


peace frem the brethren unto the 
apostles. 

34 Notwithstanding 
Silas to abide there still. 
35 Paul also and Barnabas con- 
tinued in Antioch, teaching and 
preaching the word of the Lord, 
with many others also. 


it pleased 


Paul’s second missionary jour- 
ney: Silas chosen. 


36 And some days after "Paul said 
unto Barnabas, Let us go again and 
visit our brethren in every city 
where we have preached the word 
of the Lord, and see how they do. 

37° And Barnabas ‘determined to 
take with them ¢John. whose st | 
name was Mark. 

38 But Paul thought not good to 
take him with them, who ¢departed 
from them from Pamphylia, and 
went not with them to the work. 

39 And the contention was so 
sharp between them, that they de- 
parted asunder one from the other: 
and so fBarnabas took Mark, and 
sailed unto &Cyprus; 

40 And Paul chose Silas, and de- 
parted, "being recommended by the 
brethren unto the grace of God. 

41 And he went through Syria 
and Cilicia, ‘confirming. the 
churches. 


CHAPTER 16. 
Paul finds Timothy. 


HEN came he to 7Derbe and 

Lystra: and, behold, a certain 
disciple was there, named Timo- 
theus, the son of a certain woman, 
which was a Jewess, and believed; 
but his father was a Greek: 

2 Which was ‘weil reported of by 
the brethren that were at Lystra 
and Iconium, 

.3 Him would Paul have to go 
forth with him; and took and “cir- 
cumcised him because of the Jews 
which were in those quarters: for 
they knew all that his father was a 
Greek. 

4 And as they went through the 
cities, they delivered them the de- 
crees for to keep, that were ordained 
of the apostles and “elders which 
were at Jerusalem. 

5 And so were the churches 
*established in the faith, and in- 
creased in number daily. 


1 The change here from “they,” as in the preceding verses, to 


£ 


THE ACTS. 


A.D. 52. 


3 Acts 11.26. 

6 Acts 13.2. 
Cc was munded. 
d Acts 12.12,25; 


11; Phm.24. 

e withdrew. 

f And is heard 
of no more in 
the Bible 
story. 

g aes 4. 36; 
13.4. 


h Cf. Acts 13.3 
with 14.26. 

it Churches 
(local). vs.1- 
32,36-41: Acts |j 
18.22. (Acts 2. 
41; Phil.1.1.) 

j Acts 14.6. 

k 1 Cor.7.14; 
Eph.6.4; 2 
Tim.1.5; 3.15. 

11 Tim.3.7; 

3 John 12. 


|m 1 Cor.9.19, 


20; Gal.2.3; 
5.6; 6.15. 

n Elders. Acts 
20.17.(Acts 
11.505 Fit. 
1.5-9.) 

o strength- 
ened. 

p Holy Spirit 
(N.T.). vs. 
6,7; Acts 18. 
25.(Mt.1.18; 
Acts.2.4.) 

qR.V. adds of 
Jesus, as in 
the best 
authorities. 

r beseeching 
him. Here 
the Gospel 
turns toward 
Europe. 

5 2 Cor.2.13. 

t Gospel. Acts 
20.24. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 

wu Phil.1.1. 

vice. a Roman 
colony. 

w might le- 
Bally, ie. a 
legal meet- 
ing-place for 
Jews where 
there was no 
synagogue. 

x John 6.44; 
Acts 11,18; 

2 Cor.4.6. 

y by Paul. 

z 2 Sam.20.16- 
22: Phil.4.3; 
2 John 4-11. 

a Gen.19.3; 33. 
11; Jud.i19.21; 
Lk.24.29; 
Heb.13.2. 

6 Gr. a spirit, 
a Python. 

¢ Acts 19.24. 


[16 17 


The Spirit guides: the Mace- 
donian vision. 


6 Now when they had gone 
throughout Phrygia and the region 
of Galatia, and were forbidden of 
the ’Holy Ghost to preach the word 
in Asia, 

7 After they were come to Mysia, 
they assayed to go into Bithynia: 
but the Spirit %suffered them not. 

8 And they passing by Mysia 
came down to Troas. 

9 And a vision appeared to Paul 
in the night; There stood a man of 
Macedonia, and ’prayed him, say- 
ing, SIE Over into Macedonia, and 


thelp u 


10 And after he had seen the vision, 
immediately !we endeavoured to 
go ‘into Macedonia, assuredly gath- 
ering that the Lord had called us 
for to preach the ‘gospel unto them. 

11 Therefore loosing from Troas, 
we came with a straight course to 
Samothracia, and the next day to 
Neapolis; 


Paul and Silas at Philippi. 


12 And from thence to “Philippi, 
which is the chief city of that part 
of Macedonia, and a ‘colony: and 
we were in that city abiding certain 
days. 

13 And on the sabbath we went 
out of the city by a river side, where 
prayer “was wont to be made; and 
we sat down, and spake unto the 
women which resorted thither. 


The first convert in Europe. 


14 And a certain woman named 
Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city 
of Thyatira, which worshipped God, 
heard us: whose “heart the Lord 
opened, that she attended unto the 
things which were spoken Yof Paul. 

15 And when she was baptized, 
and her household, she besought 
us, saying, If ye have judged me 
to be faithful to the Lord, come 
into my house, and abide there. 
And 4she constrained us. 


A demon cast out: Paul and 
Silas beaten. 


16 And it came to pass, as we 
went to prayer, a certain damsel 
possessed with a &spirit of divina- 
tion met us, which brought her mas- 
ters “much gain by soothsaying: 

17 The same followed Paul and 


“ 


we’”’ indicates 


that at Troas Luke, the narrator. joined Paul’s company. 


lt 


16 18} 


us, and cried, saying, These men are 
the servants of the ¢most high God, 
which shew unto us the way of 
bsalvation. 

18 And this did she many days. 
But Paul, being grieved, turned and 
said to the spirit, “I command thee 
in the name of Jesus Christ to come 
out of her. And he ¢came out the 
same hour. 

19 And when her masters ‘saw 
that the hope of their gains was 
gone, they caught Paul and Silas, 
and ‘drew them into the market- 
place unto the rulers, 

20 And brought them to the 
magistrates, saying, These men, 
being Jews, *do exceedingly trouble 
our city, 

21 And teach customs, which are 
not lawful for us to receive, neither 
to observe, being Romans. 

22 And the multitude rose up to- 
gether against them: and the mag- 
istrates rent off their clothes, and 
‘commanded to beat them. 

23 And when they had laid many 
stripes upon them, they cast them 
into Jprison, charging the jailor to 
keep them safely: 

24 Who, having received such a 
charge, thrust them into the inner 
prison, and made their feet fast in 
the stocks. 


Conversion of the Philippian 
jailor. 


@ Cf.Mt.7.22, note. 
This marks the 
“spirit’’ (v.18) 
as being a 


> Rom.1.16, note. 
© Mk.5.8. 
d Miracles 


. (Mt.8.2,35, 
Acts 28.8,9.) 

6 Acts 19.25,26. 

S Gr. dragged 
probably by the 
deers Cf.Acts 14. 


9 Gr. praefors, 
Roman. magis- 
trates. 

A 1 KL18.17; 

Acts 17.6. 

12 Cor.6.5; 11.23, 
25; 1 Thes.2.2. 

J Acts 8.3. 

k Lit. were 
Praying and 
singing hymns. 

l were listening. 

m Acts 4,31; Rev.6. 
12-17. 


nm Acts 5.19; 12.4-7. 
© Acts 12.19. 


? Acts 2.37; 
2 Cor.7.10. 

@ Faith. Acts 27, 
25. (Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 

7 John 3.16; 6.28, 
29; Acts 13.38,39; 

Rom.10.6-11; 

1 Pet.L21. 

# Tsa.54.13; Acts 2. 
39; 11.14. 


25 And at midnight Paul and): acts 2.46; 
Silas ‘prayed, and sang praises unto| Rom.15.13. 


God: and the prisoners ‘heard them. 

26 And suddenly there was a 
great earthquake, so that the 
foundations of the prison were 
shaken; and immediately all the 
"doors were opened, and every 
one’s bands were loosed. 

27 And the keeper of the prison 
awaking out of his sleep, and see- 
ing the prison doors open, he drew 
out his sword, and would have 
“killed himself, supposing that the 
prisoners had been fled. 

28 But Paul cried with a ioud 
voice, saying, Do thyself no harm: 
for we are all here. 

29 Then he called for a light, and 
sprang in, and came trembling, and 
fell down before Paul and Silas, 


The only condition of salvation. 


30 And brought them out, and 
said, Sirs, "what must I do to be 
bsaved? 


31 And they said, 7Believe on the 


t 


u having believed 
God, 


Gr. lictors. 

wy.21; Acts 22. 
25-29; 23.6; 25, 

1,12. 

2 Lk.8.37. 

¥ Acts 14,22; 
Phil.2.1,2. 

2 v.10; Lk.4.16; 
Acts 9.20; 13.5,14; 
14.1; 16.13; 19.8. 

@ the Christ, i.e. 
that, according 
to the Scriptures, 
the Messiah 
must die and 
rise again, 
That Jesus was 
the Messiah was 
the second part 
of his argument. 


5 Cf.Lk.24.26, 46. 


¢ Resurrection. 
vs.3,31; Acts 20. 
9,12. Gob 19.25; 
1 Cor, 15.52.) 


4 Acts 18.5,28, 
® were persuaded. 


1172 


THE ACTS. 


[17 4 


Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt 
be ’saved, and thy Shouse. _ 

32 And they spake unto him the 
word of the Lord, and to all that 
were in his house. 

33 And he took them the same 
hour of the night, and washed their 
stripes; and was baptized, he and 
all his, straightway. 

34 And when he had brought 
them into his house, he set meat 
before them, and ‘rejoiced, “believ- 
ing in God with all his house. 


Paul refuses to depart privily. 


35 And when it was day, the mag- 
istrates sent the "serjeants, saying, 
Let those men go. 

36 And the keeper of the prison 
told this saying to Paul, The mag- 
istrates have sent to let you go: 
now therefore depart, and go in 
peace. 

37 But Paul said unto them, They 
have beaten us openly uncon- 
demned, being “Romans, and have 
cast us into prison; and now do 
they thrust us out privily? nay 
verily; but let them come them- 
selves and fetch us out. 


| 38 And the serjeants told these 


words unto the magistrates: and 
they feared, when they heard that 
they were Romans. 

39 And they came and besought 
them, and brought them out, and 
*desired them to depart out of the 


city. 

40 And they went out of the 
prison, and entered into the house 
of Lydia: and when they had seen 
the brethren, they Ycomforted them, 
and departed. 


CHAPTER 17. 


Founding of the church at Thes- 
salonica. (Cf. 1 and 2 Thes.) 


OW when they had passed 

1 through Amphipolis and Apol- 
lonia, they came to Thessalonica, 
where was a synagogue of the 
Jews: 

2 And Paul, ‘as his manner was, 
went in unto them, and three sab- 
bath days reasoned with them out 
of the scriptures, 

3 Opening and alleging, that 
¢Christ must needs have suffered, 
and ‘risen again from the dead; and 
that this ¢Jesus, whom I preach 
unto you, is Christ. 

4 And some of them believed, 
and consorted with Paul and Silas: 
and of the devout Greeks a great 


ft 
17 5} 


multitude, and of the “chief women 
not a few. 


Jewish opposition at 
Thessalonica. 


5 But the Jews which believed 
not, moved with envy, took unto 
them certain “lewd fellows ‘of the 
baser sort, and gathered a company, 
and set all the city on an uproar, 
and assaulted the house of ¢Jason, 
and soaght to bring them out to the 
people. 

6 And when they found them not, 
they ‘drew Jason and certain breth- 
ren unto the rulers of the city, cry- 
ing, These that have turned the 
world upside down are come hither! 


SO; 

7 Whom Jason hath received: and 
these all do contrary to the decrees 
of Cesar, saying that there is /an- 
other king, one Jesus. 

8 And they troubled the people 
and the rulers of the city, when they 
heard these things. 

9 And when they had taken secu- 
rity of Jason, and of the other, they 
let them go. 


Paul and Silas at Berea, 


10 And the brethren immediately 
sent away Paul and Silas by night 
unto Berea: who coming thither 
went into the synagogue of the 
Jews. 

11 These were more noble than 

those in Thessalonica, in that they 
received the word with all éreadi- 
ness of mind, and “searched the 
scriptures daily, whether those 
things were so. 
“12 ‘Therefore many of them be- 
lieved; also of Jhonourable women 
which were Greeks, and of men, 
not a few. 

13 But when the Jews of Thessa- 
lonica had knowledge that the word 
of God was preached of Paul at 
Berea, they came thither also, and 
stirred up the people. _ 

14 And then immediately the 
brethren sent away Paul to go as it 
were to the sea: but Silas and Tim-| 
otheus abode there still. 


Paul at Athens. 


15 And they that conducted Paul 
brought him unto Athens: and “‘re- 
ceiving a commandment unto Silas 
and Timotheus for to come to him 
with all speed, they departed. 

16 Now while Paul waited for 
them at Athens, his spirit was’ 


THE ACTS. 


A.D. 53. 


@ Acts 13.50; 
Phil.4.3, 


b vile. 
¢ of the rabble. 
2 Rom. 16.21, 


© dragged. 
Acts 16.19, ref. 


F Lk.23.2; John 19. 
12; 1 Pet.2.13. 


9 Acts 16.14, 
A Lk.16.29; John 5. 


‘ 39; Acts 26,22,23, 


7 Illustrates 
John 5.46. 
Believing the 
O. T. thi 
believed the 
Gospel. 

3 Greek women 


of honourable 
estate. 


k Acts 18.5. 

l provoked within 
-him as he 
beheld the city 
full of idols. 

™ reasoned. 


” Disciples of 

Epicurus, 

B.C. 342-271 
who abandoned 
as hopeless the 
search by reason 
for pure truth 
(cf, John 18.38), 
seeking instead 
true pleasure 
through expe- 
rience. 


Disciples of 
Zeno, B.C. 280, 
and Chrysippus, 
B.C. 240. This 
philosophy was 
founded on 
human self- 
sufficiency, 
inculcated stern 
self-repression, 
the solidarity of 


the race, and the 


unity of Deity. 
Epicureans and 
Stoics divided 
the apostolic 
world. 

P 1 Cor.2.2; 15.12. 

@ Mars’ hill. 

¥ the objects of 
your worship 

8 Rom.1,19-21; 

1 Cor,1.21; 
1 Thes,4.5. 

t The God who 
made, etc. 

ui.e. earth. 

» Acts 7.48-50. 

whe served by. 
Psa.50.8. 

% Gen.2.7; 
22; Isa.42.5; 
Dan.5.23. 

v “blood '’ is not 
in the best 
manuscripts? 
R.V. omits. 

z Deut, 32.8. 

@ God, if Aaply. 
etc. 


Num.16. 
2.55 


6 Psa.139.7-10; 
Jer.23.23,24; 
Acts 14.17. 


© Found in the 
writings of 
Aratus and 
Cleanthes, 


1173 


[17 29 


‘stirred in him, when he saw the 
city wholly given to idolatry. 

17 Therefore “disputed he in the 
synagogue with the Jews, and with 
the devout persons, and in the mar- 
ket daily with them that met with 


him, 

18 Then certain philosophers of 
the “Epicureans, and of the °Sto- 
icks, encountered him. And some 
said, What will this babbler say? 
other some, He seemeth to be a 
setter forth of strange gods: be- 
cause he preached unto them /Jesus, 
and the resurrection. 

19 And they tcok him, and 
brought him unto ’Areopagus, say- 
ing, May we know what this new 
doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? 

20 For thou bringest certain 
strange things to our ears: we 
would know therefore what these 
things mean. 

21 (For all the Athenians and 
strangers which were there spent 
their time in nothing else, but either 
to tell, or to hear some new thing.) 


The sermon from Mars’-~ hill. 
Theme: God will judge the 
world by Jesus Christ. 


22 Then Paulstood in the midst 
of Mars’ hill, and said, Ye men of 
Athens, I perceive that in all things 
ye are too superstitious. 

23 For asI passed by, and beheld 
ryour devotions, I found an altar 
with this inscription, “TO THE 
UNKNOWN GOD. Whom there- 
fore ye ignorantly worship, him de- 
See I unto you. 


al 
lord of heaven and earth, ‘dwelleth 
not in témples made with hands; 

95 “Neither is” worshipped with 
men’s hands, as though he needed 
any thing, seeing he “giveth to all 
life, and breath, and all things; 

26 And hath made of one blood 
all nations of men for to dwell on 
all the face of the earth, and hath 
determined the times before ap- 
jpointed, and the “bounds of their 
habitation; 

27 That they should seek “the 
Lord, if haply they might feel after 
him, and find him, though he be 
bnot far from every one of us: 

28 For in him we live, and move, 
and have our being; as certain also 
iof your own poets have said, ‘For 
lwe are also his offspring. 

‘ 29 Forasmuch then as we are the 


‘God that made the “world and A! 
1 rites Tre acne Vie hes 


1G b 


17 30] 


THE ACTS. 


A.D. 54. 


5 And when Silas and Timotheus- 


laoffspring of God, we ought not to 

think that the Godhead is like unto were come from Macedonia, Paul 
bgold or silver, or stone, graven by} x. 46.22. [Was °pressed in the spirit, and tes- 
art and man’s device. 3B Lk.3.38.  |tified to the Jews that Jesus was 

30 And the times of this igno-]5 Psa.115.4-7; |Christ. 

rance God ‘winked at; but now {ea.40. 18.48% 6 And ?when they opposed them- 
commandeth all men every where]. Gvericokeg. |Selves, and blasphemed, he shook 
sto 2¢repent: Cf. Rom.3.25.|his raiment, and said unto them, 


31 Because he hath appointed a 
eday, in the which he will Sjudge 
the world in righteousness by that 


d Repentance. 
(Mt.3.2.) 

e Day of judg- 
ment. Heb.9. 


Your blood be upon your own 
heads: I am clean: from ¢hence- 
forth I will go unto the Gentiles. 


man whom he hath ordained; OE ee 7 And he departed thence, and en- 
whereof he hath given “assurance ffadenisnis tered into a certain man’s house, 
unto all men, in that he hath] “(the seven). named 7Justus, one that worship- 
ced ne ca pga We Pape oe pest God, whose house joined hard 

nd when they heard o: €| Rey.2012.)' |to the synagogue. 

resurrection of the dead, some|goikoumene | 8 And ‘Crispus, the chief ruler of 
Jmocked: and others said, We will Siero the synagogue, believed on the Lord 
hear thee “again of this matter. 1) |With all his house; and many of the 

33 So Paul departed from among}h Assurance. |Corinthians hearing believed, and 
them. ; : eee were baptized. ; 

34 Howbeit certain men clave] juge1) ' |.9 Then spake the Lord to Paul 
unto him, and believed: among the} i v.18; Rom.1. |in the night by a vision, Be not 
which was Dionysius the Areopa-| 4: Rev-1.18. |afraid, but speak, and hold not thy 


gite, and a woman named Damaris, 
and others with them. 


j 1 Cor.1.18; 
TSiL2e 

k Acts 5.38,39; 
24.25. 

1 Rom.16.3; 


peace: 
10 For I am with thee, and no 
man shall set on thee to hurt 


CHAPTER 18. 1 Cor.16.19; |thee: for I have ‘much people in 
; 2 Tim.4.19. |this city. 
Paul at Corinth. m Acts 20-34; | 11 And he continued there a year 
FTER these things Paul de-| 1 Thes.2.9; oe = months, teaching the word 
f A parted from Athens, and camel], 6705838) 40|° pte ee: Bins 
fo} onntn; ' persuade e€@ careless allio. 
2. And found a certain Jew named) Or, con- : 
‘Aquila, born of Pontus, lately come| $f/2ined by ate an nba ge was the “dep- 
from Italy, with his wife Priscilla;) cf2 Cor.5.14.|0°¥ “ c aan e Jews made in- 
(because that Claudius had com-|p Cf. Acts 13. surrection with one accord against 
manded all Jews to depart from|, $6: 28.25.29. |Paul, and brought him to the judg- 
< cts = > 
Rome:) and came unto them. 4 98.24.28. aes ee, This fell. 
3 And because he was of the same] Rom.11.11 ying, This fellow persuad- 


craft, he abode with them, and 
wrought: for by their occupation 


15. 
r Titus Jus- 
tus. 


eth men to worship God contrary 
to the law. 


m 1 Cor.1.14. 14 And when Paul was now about 
they were ™tentmakers. SS: 11.24; |to open Ais mouth, Gallio said unto 
Founding of the church at Cor-| }348,con- |the Jews, If it were a matter of 
inth., (Cf. the Corinthian Epistles.)|x proconsuf. |W™Ong or “wicked lewdness, O ye 

» wicked Jews, reason would that I should 
4 And he reasoned in the syna- mar Set bear with you: 
Bogue every sabbath, and “per-|"Js99 7°?! | 15 But if it be a question of 


suaded the Jews and the Greeks. 


*words and names, and of your law, 


1Gr. genos = “race.” 


The reference is to the creation-work of God in which 


He made man (i.e. mankind, the race in Adam) in His own likeness, Gen. 1. 26, 27, 
thus rebuking the thought that ‘‘the Godhead is like unto gold,” etc. The word 
“Father” is not used, nor does the passage affirm anything concerning fatherhood 
or sonship, which are relationships based upon faith, and the new birth. Cf. John 
1. 12,.13; Gal. 3. 26; 4. 1-7; I, John’5. 1. 

? Repentance is the trans. of a Gr. word (metanoia—metanoeo) meaning 
“to have another mind,” “‘to change the mind,” and is used in the N.T. to indicate 
a change of mind in respect of sin, of God, and of self. This change of mind may 
especially in the case of Christians who have fallen into sin, be preceded by sorrow 
(2 Cor. 7. 8-11), but sorrow for sin, though it may ‘‘work’’ repentance. ig not re= 
pentance. The son in Mt. 21. 28, 29 illustrates true repentance. Saving faith 
(Heb. 11. 39, note) includes and implies that change of mind which is called re- 
pentance. 

1174 


_ lin aa la 


“18 16) 


look ye to it; for I will be no judge 
of such matters. 4 

16 And he drave them from the 
judgment seat. 

17 Then all the Greeks took ¢Sos- 
thenes, the chief ruler of the syna- 
gogue, and beat Aim before the 
judgment seat. And Gallio cared 
for none of those things. 


The author of Rom. 6. 14; 2 Cor. 
3. 7-14; and Gal. 3. 23-28 takes 
a Jewish vow. 


18 And Paul after this~ tarried 
there yet a good while, and then 
took his leave of the brethren, and 
sailed thence into Syria, and with 
him Priscilla and Aquila; having 
‘shorn Ais head in Cenchrea: for 
he had a vow. 

19 And he came to Ephesus, and 
left them there: but he himself en- 
tered into the synagogue, and 4¢rea- 
soned with the Jews. 

20 When they desired him to 
tarry longer time with them, he con- 
sented not; 

21 But bade them farewell, say- 
ing, I must by all means keep this 
feast that cometh in “Jerusalem: but 
I will return again unto you, if God 
will. And he sailed from Ephesus. 

22 And when he had landed at 
Ceesarea, and gone up, and /saluted 


the church, he went downto Antioch. 

23 And after he had spent some 
time there, he departed, and went 
over al] the country of Galatia and 
Phrygia in order, éstrengthening 
all the disciples. 


Apollos at Ephesus. 


24 And a2 certain Jew named 
Apollos, born at Alexandria, an 
eloquent man, and mighty in the 
scriptures, came to Ephesus. 

25 This man was ‘instructed in the 
way of the Lord; and being fervent 
in-the Jspirit, he spake and taught 
diligently the things of the Lord, 
knowing “only the baptism of 


John. 

26 And he began to speak boldly 
in the synagogue: whom when 
Aquila and Priscilla had heard, 
they took him unto them, and ex- 


pounded unto him the way of God 


THE ACTS. 


@1 Cor.1.1. 


6 Contra, John 19. 
13-16; Acts 24. 
26,27. 


© Acts 21.24; 
Num.6.18. 


4 Acts 17.2,3. 


e Rom.1.10; 
1 Cor.4.19; 
Phil.2.19, 24; 
Heb.6.3; Jas.4.15. 


F Churches 
ocal}. Acts 20. 
7,17-32. (Acts 2. 
41; Phil.i.1.) 


91 Thes.3.2,13. 
A Col.3.16. 


i taught by word 
of mouth, or, 
hearsay, |.e. not 
by revelation. 
Cf.Gal.1.11,12. 
The N.T. Scrip- 
tures were not 
then written, 

J Holy Spirit. 
Acts 19.2,6. 
(Mt.1.18; 


k Acts 19.4. 
lOr, thoroughly. 


™ encouraged him 
and wrote. 


n powerfully 
confuted,. 


© Apollos’ ministry 
seems to have 
gone no further; 
jesus was Sen 

ong e te: 
Messiah Of 
Paul's doctrine 
of justification 
through the 
blood, and 
sanctification 
through the 
Spirit, he seems 
at that time to 
have known 
nothing. See 
Acts 19.3-6, 

P the. 

@said unto them, 
Did ye receive 
the Holy Sptrit 
when ye 
believed? 

r Holy Spirit. 
vs.2,6; Acts 20. 
23,28. (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

# Lit. received ye 
the Holy Spirit 
when ye be- 
lieved? 

t Repentance, 
Acts 20.21. 

“(CMt.3. 2; 
Acts 17.50.) 


u Acts 8.16. 


pLone 
27 And when he was disposed to 
pass into Achaia, the brethren 
™wrote, exhorting the disciples to 
receive him: who, when he was 
come, helped them much which had 
believed through grace: 
28 For he “mightily convinced 
the Jews, and that publickly, 
shewing by the scriptures °that 
Jesus was #Christ. 


CHAPTER 19, 


Paul at Ephesus: the disciples 
of John become Christians. 


Ate it came to pass, that, while 
Apollos was at Corinth, Paul 
having passed through the upper 
coasts came to Ephesus: and find- 
ing certain disciples, 

2 He said unto them, tHave ye 
received the "Holy Ghost “since ye 
believed? And they said unto him, 
We have not so much as _ heard 
whether there be any Holy Ghost. 

3 And he said unto them, Unto 
what then were ye baptized? And 
they said, Unto John’s baptism. 

4 Then said Paul, John verily 
baptized with the baptism of ‘re- 
pentance, saying unto the people, 
that they should believe on him 
which should come after him, that 
is, on Christ Jesus. 

5 When they heard this, they 
were baptized in the “name of the 
Lord Jesus: 

6 And when Paul had laid his 
hands upon them, the “Holy Ghost 
came on them; and they spake with 
tongues, and prophesied. 

7 And all the men were about 
twelve. 


Paul in the synagogue at Ephe- 
sus; and in the school of Ty- 
rannus. 


8 And he went into the syna- 
gogue, and spake boldly for the 
space of three months, disputing 
and persuading the things concern- 
ing the kingdom of God, 

9 But when divers were hard- 
ened, and believed not, but spake 
evil of that way before the multi- 
tude, he departed from them, and 
separated the disciples, disputing 


more ‘perfectly. | daily in the school of one Tyrannus. 


1 Not as in A.V., “since ye believed,’ but as in R.V. and marg.: “Did ye receive 


the Holy Spirit when: ye believed?” “ev 
of spirituality and power in these so-called disciples. 


Paul was 


evidently impressed by the absence 
Their answer brought out 


the fact that they were Jewish proselytes, disciples of John the Baptist, looking 
forward to a coming King, not Christians looking backward to an accomplished 


redemption. 


M75 


e 


See Rom. 8.9; 1 Cor. 6. 19; Eph. 1. 13, marg. 


19 10] 


THE ACTS. 


[19 a 


10 And this continued by the 
space of two years; so that al! they 
which dwelt in Asia heard the word 
of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and 
Greeks. 


Miracles by Paul. 


11 And God wrought special 
*rnjracles by the hands of Paul: 

12 So that from his body were 
brought unto the sick handkerchiefs 
or aprons, and the diseases departed 
from them, and the evil spirits went 

‘out of them. 

13. Then certain of the vagabond 
' Jews, exorcists, took upon them to 
call over them which had evil spir- 
its the name of the Lord Jesus, 
saying, We adjure you by Jesus 
whom Paul preacheth. 

14 And there were seven sons of 
one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the 
priests, which did so. 

15 And the evil spirit answered 
and said, ’Jesus I know, and Paul 
I know; but who are ye? 

16 And the man in whom the evil 
spirit was leaped on them, and 
‘overcame them, and 4prevailed 


against them, so that they fled out 


of that house naked and wounded. 

17 And this was known to all the 
Jews and Greeks also dwelling at 
Ephesus; and ‘fear fell on them all, 
and the name of the Lord Jesus was 
magnified. 

18 And many that believed came, 
a Jconfessed, and shewed their 

eeds. 


19 Many of them also which used] » 


Scurious arts brought their books 
together, and burned them before 
all men: and they counted the price 
of them, and found it fifty thousand 
pieces of silver. 

20 So “mightily grew the word of 
God and prevailed. 

21 After these things were ended, 
Paul purposed in the ‘spirit, when 
he had passed through Macedonia 
and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, 
saying, After I have been there, I 
must also see JRome. 

22 So he sent into Macedonia two 
of them that ministered unto him, 
kTimotheus and ‘Erastus; but he 
himself stayed in Asia for a season. 


The uproar of the silversmiths 
at Ephesus. 


23 And the same time there arose 
no small stir “about that way. 

24 For a certain man named De- 
metrius, a silversmith, which made 


A.D. 56. 


a Miracles 


Acts 16.16- 
18; Jas.2.19. 

¢ The sons of 
Sceva sought 
to imitate a 
power to 
which they 
were strang- 
ers, only to 
their own con- 
fusion. This 
striking wit- 
ness from an- 
other side 
caused fear to 
fall on all. 

d Lk.11.21,223 
contra, 
1 John 4.4. 
e Lk.1.65; 7.16; 
Acts 5.5,11. 
fMt.3.6; 1 Cor. 
14.24,25. 

g magical. 

h Acts 6.7; 12. 
24; 1 Cor.16. 


1 Oe 


1 Rom16.23; 
2 Tim.4.20. 
m concerning 


14.6, 

n Acts 16.16,19. 

o Acts 17.29; 

Rev.13.14, 15. 

otkoumene 

inhabited 
earth, (Lk. 
2.1.) 

q Gr. Artemis. 
Not anciently 
of the Greek 
pantheon; but 
an Eastern 
goddess. Cf. 
Jud.2.13, 
note. But 
“Diana of the 
Ephesians” 
was rather a 
particular 
image of Arte- 
mis, reputed 
to have failen 
from heaven; 
v.35. 

r Acts 20.4. 

s Acts 20.4; 27. 


2; Coi.4.10. 

#1 Tim.1.20; 

2 Tim.4.14. 

u Acts 17.21, 

v Rom.2.22; cf. 
1 Thes.1.9 
with 1 Cor.1. 
23, 24. 


1176 


silver shrines for Diana, brought no 
small gain unto the craftsmen; 

25 Whom he called together with 
the workmen of like occupation, 
and said, Sirs, ye know that by this 
"craft we have our wealth. 

26 Moreover ye see and hear, that 
not alone at Ephesus, but almost 
throughout all Asia, this Paul hath 
persuaded and turned away much 
people, saying that they be °no 
gods, which are made with hands: 

27 So that not only this our craft 
is in danger to be set at nought; 
but also that the temple of the great 
zoddess Diana should be despised, 
and her magnificence should be de- 
stroyed, whom all Asia and the 
world worshippeth. 

28 And when they heard these 
Sayings, they were full of wrath, 
and cried out, saying, Great is 
@Diana of the Ephesians. - 

29 And the whole city was filled 
with confusion: and having caught 
rGaius and SAristarchus, men of 
Macedonia, Paul’s companions in 
travel, they rushed with one accord 
into the theatre. 

30 And when Paul would have 
entered in unto the people, the dis-- 
ciples suffered him not. 

31 And certain of the chief of 
Asia, which were his friends, sent 
unto him, desiring Aim that he 
would not adventure himself into 
the theatre. 

3Z Some therefore cried one thing, 
and some another: for the assembly 
was confused; and the more part 
knew not wherefore they were come 
together. 

33 And they drew ‘Alexander out 
of the multitude, the Jews putting 
him forward. And Alexander beck- 
oned with the hand, and would 
have made his defence unto the 
people, 

34 But when they knew that he 
was a Jew, all with one voice about 
the space of two hours cried out, 
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. 

35 And when the townclerk had — 
appeased the people, he said, Ye 
men of Ephesus, what man is there: 
that knoweth not how that the “city 
of the Ephesians is a worshipper of 
the great goddess Diana, and of the 
image which fell down from Ju- 
piter? 

36 Seeing then that these things 
cannot be spoken against, ye ought 
to be quiet, and todo nothing rashly. 

37 For ye have brought hither 
these men, which are “neither rob- 


eed! 


THE ACTS. 


(20 22 


bers of churches, nor yet blasphem- 
ers of your goddess. J 

38 Wherefore if Demetrius, and 
the craftsmen which are with him, 
have a matter against any man, the 
law is open, and there are deputies: 
let them implead one another. 

39 But if ye enquire any thing 
concerning other matters, it shall 
8 determined in a lawful assem- 

y. 

40 For we are in danger to be 
“called in question for this day’s 
uproar, there being no cause where- 
by we may give an account of this 
concourse. 

41 And when he had thus spoken, 
he dismissed the assembiy 


CHAPTER, 20. 


Paul’s last visit to Jerusalem: 
(1) he goes into Macedonia 
and Greece. 


AND after the uproar was ceased, 
Paul called unto him the disci- 
ples, and embraced them, and de- 
parted for to go into “Macedonia. 

2 And when he had gone over 
those parts, and had given them 
much exhortation, he came into 
“Greece, 

3 And there abode three months. 
And when ¢the Jews ‘laid wait for 
him, as he was about to sail into 
Syria, he purposed to return 
through Macedonia. 

4 And there accompanied him 
into Asia /Sopater of Berea; and of 
the Thessalonians, *Aristarchus and 
Secundus; and "Gaius of Derbe, 
and ‘Timotheus; and of Asia, 
jTychicus and »Trophimus. 

“5 These going before tarried for 
us at Troas. 


(2) Paul at Troas. 


6 And we sailed away from Phi- 
lippi after the “days of unleavened 
bread, and came unto them to Troas 
in five days; where we abode seven 
days. 

7 And upon “the first day of the 
week, when the disciples came 
together to break bread, Paul 
preached unto them, ready to de- 
part on the morrow; and continued 
his speech until midnight. 

8 And there were many lights in 
tthe upper chamber, where they 
were gathered together. 

9 And there sat in a window a 
certain young man named Euty- 
chus, being fallen into.a deep sleep: 


A.D. 59. 


a Acts 21.31,32. 
6 1 Cor.16.5; 

1 Tim.1.3. 
¢ Acts 17.15; 


18.1. 

d Or, a plot 
was formed 
against him 
by the Jews. 

e Acts 9.23; 
23.12; 25.3; 

2 Cor.11.26. 

F Rom.16.21. 

g Acts 19.29, 

h Rom.16.23; 

3 John 1. 

i Acts 19.22. 

j Eph.6.21; 
Col.4.7,8; 

2 Tim.4.12; 
Tit.3.12. 

k Acts 21.29; 
2 Tim.4.20. 

1 From the use 
of the pro- 
noun, Luke 
here rejoins 
the apostle. 

m Acts 12.3; 
18.18. 

n It was the 
breaking of 
bread for 
which the dis- 
ciples were as- 
sembled. The 
passage indi- 
cates the use 
by the apos- 
tolic churches 
of the first 
day, not the 
seventh. Cf. 

1 Cor.16.2. 

o Mt.26.26-28; 
Acts 2.42; 1 
Cor.11.23-33. 

> Acts 1.13. 

q 1 Ki.17.21,22; 
2 Ki.4.34,35; 
Acts 9.40,41. 

r Make ye no 
ado. 

s Resurrec- 
tion, vs-9-12; 
Acts 24.14,15, 
21. (Job 19. 


might not 
havé to. 
u Acts 2.1; 19. 
al.4, 


; 


w Tempta- 
tion. 1 Cor. 
7.5. (Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14,) 

x shrank not 
from de- 
claring. 

y Repentance. 
Acts 26.20. 
(Mt.3.2; 

Acts 17.30.) 


1177 


all 


and as Paul was long preaching, he 
sunk down with sleep, and fell 
down from the third loft, and was 
taken up dead. 

10 And Paul went down, and ¢feil 
on him, and embracing him said, 
rTrouble not yourselves; for his 
life is in him. 

11 When he therefore was come 
up again, and had broken bread, 
and eaten, and talked a long while, 
even till break of day, so he de- 
parted. 

12 And they brought the young 
man Salive, and were not a little 
comforted. 


(3) From Troas to Miletus. 


13 And we went before to ship, 
and sailed unto Assos, there intend- 
ing to take in Paul: for so had he 
appointed, minding himself to go 
afoot. 

14 And when he met with us at 
Assos, we took him in, and came to 
Mitylene. 

15 And we sailed thence, and 
came the next day over against 
Chios; and the next day we arrived 
at Samos, and tarried at Trogyl- 
lium; and the next day we came to 
Miletus. 

16 For Paul had determined to 
sail by Ephesus, ‘because he would 
not spend the time in Asia: for he 
hasted, if it were possible for him, 
to be at Jerusalem the day of 
“Pentecost. 


(4) Paul and the Ephesian 
elders. 


17 And from Miletus he sent to 
Ephesus, and called the *elders of 
the church. 

18 And when they were come to 
him, he said unto them, Ye know, 
from the first day that I came into 
Asia, after what manner I have 
been with you at all seasons, 

19 Serving the Lord with ali hu- 
mility of mind, and with many 
tears, and “temptations, which be- 
fell me by the lying in wait of the 


ews: 

20 And how I *kept back nothing 
that was profitable unto you, but 
have shewed you, and have taught 
you publickly, and from house to 
house, p 

21 Testifying both to the Jews, 
and also to the Greeks, 2repentance 
toward God, and faith toward our 


Lord Jesus Christ. 


' 22 And now, behold, I go bound 


a 7 ve ’ . NEE give 


20 23] THE ‘ACTS. 


36 And when he eae thus spoken # 
he kneeled down, and prayed with 
them ail. : 
37 And they all wept sore, and 
nesseth in every city, saying that fell on Paul’s neck, and kissed him, 
bonds and afflictions abide me. 38 Sorrowing most of all for phe 

24 But none of these things move] ,o, 7 honor |WOTdS which he spake, that they 
me, “neither count I my life dear my life of any ; should see his Sane ne rponet Aus 

t self, so that I might finish] f6Coueh es oe ’lthey accompanied him unto e 
petals with joy, and the minis- parison youth ac. ship. 
try, which I have received of the Zghos See, 
lord J eas. £0) oe the ’gospel of 0 Btn. CHAPTER 21, 
Rates ee a Miletus to Tyre. 

25 And now, behold, I know that] Gospel. Rom. (5) F ee GB | 2A 
ye all, among whom I have gone} 12.1-3; Rev.14.6.) PEND it came to pass, that after 
preaching the kingdom of God,}¢Ezk.3.17. - we were gotten from them, 
shall see my face no more. a 2 Cor-4s2)'Gale1- and had launched, NE EaIaS wate 

26 Wherefore I take you to record] ,,- ‘ straight course unto °Coos, an e 
this day, that I am “pure from the Aan | Tima16. day following unto Rhodes, and 
blood of ail men. #Jsa.40.11; Lk.12. |from thence unto Pataraz 

27 4For I have not shunned to de- fins nel 2 And finding a ship sailing over 

oly Spirit. vs. ore 

clare unto you all the counsel of| 23,28; Acts21.4, junto Phenicia, we went aboard, 


in the ‘spirit unto Jerusalem, not 

knowing the things that shall befall 

me there: i 
23 Save that the Holy Ghost wit- 


God. He Ottis jandeset forth: : 
28 ‘Take heed therefore unto} h sacrifice (of 3 Now when we had discovered 


- yourselves, and to all the fflock,| (470. Rom.3. Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, 
over the which the *Holy Ghost] Hep.i018.)’ |and sailed into Syria, and landed 
hath made you overseers, to feed| ‘The twosources |at Tyre: for there the ship was to 


~~ the church of God, which he hath| $i [2523s Junlade her burden. 


2 h i ; from without ; 
purchased own blood. wR aie 
29 For I know — that after my| {pet b1d. on- (6) The Holy Spirit forbids Paul 


departing shall grievous ‘wolves| DPitious leaders Fe >. Se Jerusalonn, : 
enter in among you, not sparing Gtohn 9,10; 4 And finding disciples, we tarried 
the flock: Also, 1 Tim.1.20;| there seven days: who said to Paul 


30 Also Jof your own selves shall} 1John2.19. ‘through the Spirit, that he should 
men arise, speaking perverse things,}7} 7/19" Inot ¢g0 up to Jerusalem. 


to draw away disciples after them.| 1 John 2.19. 5 And when we had accomplished 
31 Therefore watch, and remem-|*Churshes those days, we departed and went 


ber, that by the space of three years} 2: Rom.16.1:5, |OUr way; and they all brought us 
I ceased not to warn every one] }3.(¢9'5* jon our way, with wives and chil- 
night and day with tears. tsanctify, holy |Aten, till we were out of the city: 
mend you to God ahd te the werd! ae: nd roe To ae ee 
: 4.5; Rev.22. . 
of his grace, which is able to build be on 6 And when we had taken our 
you up, and to give you an inheri-|"7}.dve given you|leave one of another, we took ship; 
tance Lae: all them which are ca Hips aot ee bala home again. 
sanctified. nLk.14, nd when we had finished our 
33 I have coveted no man’s silver,| °@* course from Tyre, we came to Ptole- 


P in sight of. : 
or gold, or apparel. @Lit, set foot in, (Mais, and saluted the brethren, and 


34 Yea, ye yourselves know, that] Not, as in Acts abode with them one day. 
these hands have ministered unto] oyaneet"bar® | 8 And the next day we that were. 
my necessities, and to them that now an impera- lof Paui’s company departed, and 
were with me. See Acts 22.17, |Came unto Czsarea: and we en- 
35 I have shewed you all things,| 3° tered into the house of ’Philip the 


how that so labouring ye ought to| "4° ®5 levangelist, which was one of the 


support the weak, and to remember seven; and abode with him, 

the words of the Lord Jesus, how he 9 And the same man had four 
said, "It is more blessed to give daughters, virgins, which did 
than to receive. prophesy. 


_ Cf Acts 21.4. ‘In Acts 20. 22 Paul’s own spirit (1 Thes. 5.23, rote) is meant; 
in Acts 21. 4 the Holy Spirit. Paul’s motive in going to Jerusalem seems to have 
been his great affection for the Jews (Rom. 9. 1-5), and his hope that the gifts of 
the Gentile churches, sent by him to poor saints at Jerusalem (Rom. 15. 25-28), 


would open the hearts of the law-bound Jewish believers to the ‘“‘gospel of th a 
of God” (Acts 20. 24). aa 
1178 


"THE ACTS. 


5 e W ‘4 \ 
‘ 


(21 32 


¢ (7) The Holy Spirit again 
warns Paul. 


10 And as we tarried there many 
days, there came down from Judza 
a certain prophet, named Agabus. 

11 And ¢when he was come unto 
us, he took Paul’s girdle, and bound 
his own hands and feet, and said, 
Thus saith the “Holy Ghost, So 
shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind 
the man that owneth this girdie, 
and shall deliver Him into the 
hands of the Gentiles. 

12 And when we heard these 
things, botn we, and they of that 
place, besought him not to go up to 
Jerusalem. 

13 Then Paul answered, What 
mean ye to weep and to break mine 
heart? for I am ‘ready not to be 
bound only, but also to die at Je- 
rusalem for the name of the Lord 
Jesus. 


(8) Paul at Jerusalem. 


14 And when he would not be per- 
suaded, we ceased, saying, The 4will 
of the Lord be done. 

15 And after those days we took 
up our ‘carriages, and went up to 
Jerusalem. 

16 There went with us also cer- 
tain of the disciples of Cesarea, 
and brought with them one Mnason 
of Cyprus, an ‘old disciple, with 
whom we should lodge. 

17 And when we were come to 
Jerusalem, the brethren received us 


gladly. 


Paul takes a Jewish vow involv- 
ing a Jewish sacrifice. (Cf.Heb. 
2710. 2, 9-12.) 


18 And the day following Paul 
went in with us unto James; and 
all the %elders were present. 

19 And when he had saluted 
them, he “declared particularly 
what things God had wrought 
among the Gentiles by his min- 
istry. 

20 And when they heard 7t, they 
glorified the Lord, and said unto 
him, Thou seest, brother, how many 
ithousands wf Jews there are which 
believe; and they are all zealous of 
the law: 

21 And they are informed of thee, 
that thou teachest all the Jews 
which are among the Gentiles to 
forsake Moses, saying that they 
ought not to circumcise their chil- 
dren, neither to walk afver the 
customs. 


A.D. 60. 


a coming to 
us and tak- 
ing Paul's 
&irdie he 
bound his 
own feet 
and hands, 


6 Holy Spirit. 
vs.4,11; Acts 
28.25. (Mt. 1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 


¢ Rom.1.15; 
2 Tim.4.6. 


d Mt.6.10; 
26.42. 


e baggage. 


f early 


g Elders. Phil. 
1.1. (Acts 11. 
30; Tit.1.5-9.) 


h rehearsed 
one by one. 


3 Gr. myriads. 


j Cf.Rom.10. 
2-4; Gal.1.14. 


k Probably ac- 
cording to 
Num.6.1-7. 
Cf,Col.2. 
14-17. 


1 Lit. spend 
something 
on them. 


m Lit. art 
keeping in 
the ranks, 
guarding 
the law. Cf. 
Rom.10.1-12. 


n Contra, 

Acts 21.4 (cf. 
Gal.2.2-6). 
See Rom.3.9, 
10,19,20,28; 
4.3-5; 5.1,2; 6. 
14; 7.1-4,6; 8. 
3,4; Gal.2.15, 
16,18,19; 3. 
10,24,25; 4. 
9-11,21-31; 
Phil.3.7-9; 
Heb.9.14,15, 
28; 10.1-4,17, 
18; 13.11-14. 


o Sanctity, 
holy 
(things) 
(N.T.). Rom. 


1.2. (Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


> dragged. 
Acts 14.19; 
16.19. 


q 2 Cor.11.23. 


r Acts 23.27; 
24.7. 


1179 


all 


22 What is it therefore? the mul- 
titude must needs come together: 
for they will hear that thou art 
come. 

23 Do therefore this that we say 
to thee: We have four men which 
have a vow on them; 

24 Them take, and purify thyself 
with them, and be at ‘charges with 
them, that they may shave their 
heads: and all may know that those 
things, whereof they were. informed 
concerning thee, are nothing; but 
that thou thyself also ”walkest 
orderly, and keepest the law. 

25 As touching the Gentiles which 
believe, we have written and con- 
cluded that they observe no such 
thing, save only that they keep 
themselves from things offered 
to idols, and from blood, and 
from strangled, and from fornica- 
tion. 

26 Then “Paul took the men, and 
the next day purifying himself with 
them entered into the temple, to 
signify the accomplishment of the 
days of purification, until that an 
"offering should be offered for every 
one of them. 


Paul seized in the temple by 
the Jews. 


27. And when the seven days were 
almost ended, the Jews which were 
of Asia, when they saw him in the 
temple, stirred up all the people, 
and laid hands on him, 

28 Crying out,’ Men of Israel, 
help: This is the man, that teacheth 
all men every where against the 
people, and the law, and this place: 
and further brought Greeks also 
into the temple, and hath polluted 
this °holy place. 

29 (For they had seen before 
with him in the city Trophimus an 
Ephesian, whom they supposed 
that Paul had brought into the 
temple.) 

30 And all the city was moved, 
and the people ran together: and 
they took Paul, and #drew him out 
of the temple: and forthwith the 
doors were shut. 

31 Andasthey went about to kill 


him, tidings came unto the chief 
captain of the band, that all Jeru- 
salem was in an uproar. 

32 *Who immediately took sol. 
diers and centurions, and ran dow: 
unto them: and when they saw the 
chief captain and the soldiers, they 
left beating of Paul. 


21 33] 


THE ACT S. 


<4 


Paul bound with chains. 
33 Then the chief captain came 


near, and took him, and com- 
manded Aim to be bound with two 
chains; and demanded who he was, 
and what he had done. 

34 And some cried one thing, 
some another, among the multi- 
tude: and when he could not know 
the certainty for the tumult, he 
commanded him to be carried into 
the castle. 

35 And when he came upon the 
stairs, so it was, that he was borne 
of the soldiers for the violence of 
the people. 

36 For the multitude of the peo- 
ple followed after, crying, “Away 
with him 

37 And as Paul was to be led into 
the castle, he said unto the &chief 
captain, May I speak unto thee? 
Who said, Canst thou speak Greek? 

38 Aft not thou ‘that Egyptian, 
which before these days madest an 
uproar, and leddest out into the 
wilderness four thousand men that 
were murderers? 

39 But Paul said, I am a man 
which ama Jew of Tarsus, a city 
in Cilicia, a 4citizen of no mean city: 
and, I beseech thee, suffer me to 
speak unto the people. 

40 And when he had given him 
licence, Paul stood on the stairs, 
and beckoned with the hand unto 
the people. And when there was 
made a great silence, he spake unto 
them inthe Hebrew tongue saving, 


CHAPTER 22. 


Paul’s defence before the multt- 
tude: recounts his conversion. 
(Cf. Acts 9. 1-18; 26. 9-18.) 


MEN: brethren, and fathers, hear 
ye my defence ‘which I make 
now unto you. 

2 (And when they heard that he 
spake in the Hebrew tongue to 
them, they kept the more silence: 
and he saith,) 

3 Iam verily aman which ama 
Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in Cili- 
cia, yet brought up in this city at 
the feet of éGamaliel, and "taught 
according to the perfect manner of 
the law of the fathers, and was 
zealous toward God, as ye all are 
this day. 

4 And I ‘persecuted this way unto 
the death, binding and delivering 
into prisons both men and women. 

5 As also the high priest doth bear 


A.D. 60. 


@ Acts 22.22; 
Lk.23.18. 


6 Gr.chiliarch, 
the Roman 
tribune. 
There were 
six such 
“chief cap- 
tains’”’ in each 
legion of 6000 
men. 


c Acts 5.36. 
d Acts 22.25. 


eLk.12.11; 
1 Pet.3.15. 


paueorela.Les 
Phil.3-5,6. 


g Acts 5.34. 


h instructed 
according to 
the strict 
manner. 


i Acts 8.3; 
26.9,13; 
1 Tim.1.13. 


j Acts 9.2. 


k 1sa.63.9; 
Zech.2.8; 
Mt.25.45; 

1 Cor.12.26. 


1 Dan.10.7. 


m Cf.Acts 9.7, 
note. 


n Acts 2.37,38. 
o1 Tim.3.7. 


p Election 
(personal). 
Rom.16.13. 
(Deut.7.6; 

1 Pet.1.2.) 


92 Cor.11.22. 


r Acts 2.38. 


s Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


ti.e. probably 
on his first 
visit to Jeru- 
salem after 
his conver- 
sion. 


u v.21; so also 
Acts 21.4. 


v Acts 8.3. 


1180 


me witness, and all the estate of 
the elders: from whom also I re- 
ceived letters unto the brethren, and 
went to Damascus, /to bring them 
which were there bound unto Jeru- 
salem, for to be punished. 

6 And it came to pass, that, as I 
made my journey, and was come 
nigh unto Damascus about noon, 
suddenly there shone from heaven 
a great light round about me. 

7 And I fell unto the ground, and 
heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, 
Saul, why persecutest «thou me? 

8 AndT answered, Who art thou, 
Lord? And he said unto me, I am 
Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou per- 
secutest. 

9 And they that were with me 
‘saw indeed the light, and were 
afraid; but they heard not the 
myoice of him that spake to me. 

10 And I said, What shall I "do, 
Lord? And the Lord said unto me; 
Arise, and go into Damascus; and 
there it shall be told thee of all 
things which are appointed for thee 
to do. 

11 And when I could not see for 
the glory of that light, being led by 
the hand of them that were with 
me, I came into Damascus. 

12 And one Ananias, a devout 
man according to the law, having 
°a good report of all the Jews 
which dwelt there, 

13 Came unto me, and stood, and 
said unto me, Brother Saul, receive 
thy sight. And the same hour I 
looked up upon him. 


| 14 And he said, The God of our 


fathers hath ?chosen thee, that thou 
shouldest know his will, and see 
that Just One, and shouldest hear 
the voice of his mouth. 

15 For %thou shalt be his witness. 
unto all men of what thou hast seen 
and heard. 

16 And now why tarriest thou? 
arise, and be baptized, and "wash 
away thy ‘sins, calling on the name 
of the Lord. 


The Lord had warned Paul to 
keep away from Jerusalem. 


17 And it came to pass, that, 
‘when I was come again to Jeru- 
salem, even while I prayed in the 
temple, I was in‘a trance; 

18 And saw him saying unto me, 
Make haste, and get thee quickly 
4out of J erusalem: for they will not 
Beebive thy testimony concerning 


"19 And I said, Lord, *they know 


- 22 20] 


that I imprisoned and beat in every 
synagogue them that believed on 
thee: 

20 And when the blood of thy 
martyr Stephen was shed, 4I also 
was standing by, and consenting 
unto his death, and kept the rai- 
ment of them that slew him. 

21 And he said unto me, Depart: 
‘for I will send thee far hence unto 
the Gentiles. 

22 And they gave him audience 
unto this word, and then lifted up 
their voices, and said, Away with 
such a fellow from the earth: for it 
is not fit that he should live. 

23 And as they cried out, and cast 
off their clothes, and threw dust 
into the air, 

24 The chief captain commanded 
him to be brought into the castle, 
and bade that he should be ex- 
amined by scourging; that he might 
know 4wherefore they cried so 
against him. 


Paul a Roman citizen. 


25 And “as they bound him with 
thongs, Paul said unto the centu- 
tion that stood by, Is it lawful for 
you to scourge a man that is a 
fRoman, and uncondemned? 

26 When the centurion heard 
that, he went ‘and told the chief 
captain, saying, Take heed what 
thou doest: for this man is a Roman. 

27 Then the chief captain came, 
and said unto him, Tell me, art 
thou a Roman? He said, Yea. 

28 And the chief captain an- 
swered, With a great sum obtained 
I this 8freedom. And Paul said, 
But I “was free born. 

29 Then straightway they de- 
parted from him which should have 
texamined him: and the chief cap- 
tain also was afraid, after he knew 
that he was a Roman, and because 
he had bound him. 

30 On the morrow, because he 
would have known the certainty 
wherefore he was accused of the 
Jews, he loosed him from Ais bands, 
and commanded the chief priests 
and all their council to appear, and 
brought Paul down, and set him 
before them. 


CHAPTER 23. 
_Paul before the Sanhedrin. 


ND Paul, earnestly beholding 
the council, said, Men and 
brethren, JI have lived in all good 


THE ACTS. 


[23 12 


eompbirace before God until this 
ay. 

2 And the high priest Ananias 
commanded them that stood by 
him to smite him on the mouth. 

3 Then said Paul unto him, God 
shall smite thee, thou whited wall. 
for sittest thou to judge me after 
the law, and commandest me to be 
smitten contrary to the law? 

4 And they that stood by said, 
Revilest thou God’s high. priest? 


A.D. 60. 


a Acts 7.58; 8.1. 


betes aes 5 Then said Paul, I wist not, 
Gal.2.7,8; |brethren, that he was the high 
Eph.3.7,8. priest: a it a vem eEs ’Thou shalt 
not speak evil o e ruler of thy 
c1 Thes.2.16. people. 
d for what 


Paul appeals to the Pharisees 


6 But when Paul perceived that 
ewhen they |the one part were ™Sadducees, and 
ee Jie the other Pharisees, he cried out in 
with thongs.|the council, Men and brethren, I 
am a Pharisee, the son of a Phari- 
f Acts 25.16. |see: of the hope and resurrection 
of the dead I am called in ques- 
tion. 
hama ds 7 And when he had so said, there 
peal iho jarose a dissension between the 
had obtained |Pharisees and the Sadducees: and 
citizenship. |the multitude was divided. 
a| 8 For the Sadducees say that 
there is no resurrection, neither 
angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisees 
confess both, 


cause they 
so shouted. 


g citizenship. 


i Or, torture 
him. 


j Acts 24.16; 


2 Cor.1.12; 

2 Tim.1.3; 9 And there arose a great “cry: 
eet ac and the scribes that were of the 
i join3.2i..'|Pharisees’ part arose, and strove, 


saying, We find no evil in this man: 
Ibut if a spirit or an angel hath 


k Cf.John 18. 
Bh. spoken to him, let us not fight 


1 Ex.22.28. against God. 
10 And when there arose a great 
m See Mt.3.7, |dissension, the chief captain, fear- 


ing lest Paul should have been 
pulled in pieces ‘of them, com- 
manded the soldiers to go down 
and to take him by force from 


»n clamour. 


o See Mt.2.4, 


note. 
OEE ee mg. pas them, and to bring him into 
s 18.9; 
27.23,245 the castle. 
Psa.46.1,7. PSL SS pRB" Put 
q John 16.2,3. | 11 And the night following the 


Lord ?stood by him, and said, Be 
of good cheer, Paul: for as thou 
hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so 
must thou bear witness also at 
Rome. 


The conspiracy to kill Paul. 


12 And when it was day, %certain 
of the Jews banded together, and 
‘bound themselves under a curse, 
saying that they would neither eat 
nor drink till they had killed Paul. 


_.1181 


2 
23 13] THE ACTS. [24 4 


13 And they were more than forty 
which had made this conspiracy. 

14 And they came to the chief 
priests and elders, and said, We 
have bound ourselves under a great 
curse, that we will eat nothing un- 
til we have slain Paul. 

15 Now therefore ye with the 
council signify to the chief captain 
that he bring him down unto you 
to morrow, as though ye would en- 
quire something more perfectly con- 
cerning him: and we, or ever he 
come near, are “ready to kill him. 

16 And when Paul’s sister’s son 
heard of their lying in wait, he 


26 Claudius Lysias unto the most 
excellent governor Felix sendeth 
greeting. 

27 This man was ¢taken of the 
Jews, and should have been killed 
of them: then ‘came I with an 
army, and rescued him, having un- 
derstood that he was a Roman. 

28 fAnd when I would have 
known the cause wherefore they 
accused him, I brought him forth 
into their council: 

29 Whom I perceived to be ac- 
cused of questions of their law, but 
to have £nothing laid to his charge 
worthy of death or of bonds. 


went and entered into the castle, 30 And when it was told me how 
and told Paul. that the Jews laid wait for the man, 
17 *Then Paul called one of the I sent straightway to thee, and 


centurions unto Aim, and said,|,psa.37.32, |gave commandment to his accusers 
Bring this young man unto the) 33. also to say before thee what they 
chief captain: for he hath a certain had against him. Farewell. 


thing to tell him. b Acts 27.24, |'31 Then the soldiers, as it was 

18 So he took him, and brought commanded them, took Paul, and 
him to the chief captain, and said,|¢ Eph-3.1. brought Aim by night to Antipatris. 
Paul the prisoner ‘called me untolg seized by. 32 On the morrow they left the 


him, and prayed me to bring this] Acts 21.33. [horsemen to go with him, and re- 
young man unto thee, who hath I turned to the castle: 

something to say unto thee. cham with | 33 Who, when they came to 
19 Then the chief captain took] thesoldiers. |Czesarea, and delivered the epistle 
him by the hand, and went with f Acts 22.30 to the governor, presented Paul also 


himaside privately, and asked him, before him. 
What is that thou hast to tell me?|¢ Acts 26.31. 34 And when the governor had 
20 And he said, The Jews have T Asati aa. read the letter, he asked of what 
agreed to desire thee that thou . {province he was. And when he 
wouldest bring down Paul to mor-|i palace. understood that he was of “Cilicia: 
row into the council, as though). Ao heaie 35 I will hear thee, said he, when 
they would enquire somewhat of|’ 357959.” ’ |thine accusers are also come. And 
him more perfectly. he commanded him to be kept in 
21 But do not thou yield unto Herod’s ‘judgment hall. 
pea for oe lie an wait for him of 
em more than forty men, which 
have bound themselves with an CHAPTER 24. 
oath, that they will neither eat nor Paul before Felix. 
drink till they have killed him: and A 
now are they ready, looking for a ANS after five days JAnanias the 
promise from thee. high priest descended with the 
22 So the chief captain then let elders, and with a certain orator 
the young man depart, and charged named Tertullus, who informed 
him, See thou tell no man that the governor against Paul. 
thou hast shewed these things to : 
nie. (The accusation.) 
z 2 And when he was called forth, 
Paul sent to Felix at Coeatee: Tertullus began to accuse him, say- 
23 And he called unto him two ing, Seeing that by thee we enjoy 
centurions, saying, Make ready two great quietness, and that very wor- 
hundred soldiers to go to Czsarea, thy deeds are done unto this na- 
and horsemen threescore and ten, tion by thy providence, 
and spearmen two hundred, at the 3 We accept it always, and in all 
third hour of the night; places, most noble Felix, with all 
ad And Behl: tiem eerie thankfulness. 
ley may set Paul on, and bring 4 Notwithstanding, that I be not 
him safe unto Felix the governor. further tedious unto thee, I pre 
25 And he wrote a letter after thee that thou wouldest hear'us of 
this manner: thy clemency a few words. 


1182 


i a aes ih te 
5 For we have found this man a 
pestilent *fellow, and a mover of 
sedition among the Jews 
throughout the 8world, and a ring- 
leader of the sect of the Nazarenes: 
6 Who also hath gone about to 
‘profane the temple: whom we took, 
and would have ¢judged according 
to our law. 

7 But the chief ‘captain Lysias 
came upon us, and with great vio- 
lence took him away out of our 
hands, 

8 Commanding his accusers ‘to 
come unto thee: by examining of 
whom thyself mayest take know- 
ledge of all these things, whereof 
we accuse him. 

9 And the Jews also assented, 
saying that these things were so. 


(Paul’s defence before Felix.) 


10 Then Paul, after that 2the gov- 
ernor had beckoned unto him to 
speak, answered, Forasmuch as I 
know that thou hast been of many 
years a judge unto this nation, I do 
the more cheerfully answer “for 
myself: 

11 Because that thou mayest un- 
derstand, that there are yet but 
twelve days since I went up ‘to 
Jerusalem for to worship. 

12- And they neither found me in 

the temple disputing with any man, 
neither raising up the people, 
neither in the synagogues, nor in 
the city: : 

13 Neither can they Jprove the 
things whereof they now accuse 


me. 

14 But this I confess unto thee, 
that after the way which they call 
heresy, so worship I the God “of 
my fathers, believing all things 
lwhich are written in the law and 
in the prophets: 

15 And have “hope toward God, 
which they themselves also allow, 
that there shall be a resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and 
unjust. 

16 And herein do I exercise my- 
self, *to have always a conscience 
void of offence toward God, and to- 
ward men. 

17 Now after many years °I came 
to bring alms to my nation, and 
offerings. 

18 *Whereupon certain Jews from 
Asia found me purified in the tem- 
ple, neither with multitude, nor 
with tumult. 

19 Who ought to have been here 


THE ACTS. 


A.D. 62. 


@ 1 Pet.2.12,19. 


b oikoumene 


f25 3 


before thee, and object, if they had 
ought against me. 

20 Or else let thése same here 
say, if they have found any evil 
doing in me, while I stood before 


= inhabited|the council, 


earth (LE. 
PAB IS 


c Acts 21.28. 
d John 18.31. 
e Acts 21.33. 
f Acts 23.30. 


g Felix made 
procurator 
over Judza, 
A.D. 53. 


AA Pet.3.15. 
# Acts 21.15. 
j1 Pet.3.16. 
k 2 Tim.1.3. 


l Acts 26.22,23; 
Lk.24.27. 


m Acts 23.6; 
26.6,7; 28.20. 


n Acts 23.1. 
o Acts 11.29,30. 
p Acts 21.26. 


q Resurrec- 
tion. vs.14, 
15,21; Rom.8. 
10,11. (Job 
19.25; 1 Cor. 
15:52.); 


r concerning 
the Way. 
See John 14.6. 


s Rom.10.10, 
note. 


t becoming 
afraid; 
Gr. empho- 
bos, afraid. 


u But when 
two years 
were ful- 
filled, Felix 
was suc- 
ceeded by 
Porcius Fes- 
tus; and de- 
siring to 
fain fayour 
with the 
Jews, Felix 
Jeft Paul in 
bonds. 


v Mk.15.15. 


w Lk. 23. 
14,15. 


1183. 


eo 


21 Except it be for this one voice, 
that I cried standing among them, 
Touching the %resurrection of the 
dead I am called in question by 
you this day. 

22 And when Felix’ heard these 
things, having more perfect know- 
ledge of that way, he deferred them, 
and said, When Lysias the chief 
captain shall come down, I will 
know the uttermost of your matter. 

23 And he commanded a cen- 
turion to keep Paul, and to let him 
have liberty, and that he should 
forbid none of his acquaintance to 
minister or come unto him. 


(Paul before Felix the 
second time.) 


24 And after certain days, when 
Felix came with his wife Drusilla, 
which was a Jewess, he sent for 
Paul, and heard him concerning 
the faith in Christ. 

25 And as he reasoned of Sright- 
eousness, temperance, and judg- 
ment to come, Felix ‘trembled, and 
answered, Go thy way for this 
time; when I have a convenient 
season, I will call for thee. 

26 He hoped also that money 
should have been given him of 
Paul, that he might loose him: 
wherefore he sent for him the 
oftener, and communed with him. 


The silent two years at 
Cesarea. 


27 “But after two years Porcius 
Festus came into Felix’ room: and 
Felix, willing to ’shew the Jews a 
pleasure, left Paul bound. 


CHAPTER 25. 
Paul before Festus. 


OW when Festus was come into 

the province, after three days 

he ascended from Cesarea to 
Jerusalem, 

2 Then the high priest and the 
chief of the Jews informed him 
against Paul, and besought him, 

3. And desired favour against him, 
that, he would send for him to 
Jerusalem, “laying wait in the way 
to kill him. 

4 But Festus answered, that Paul 


25 5] 


THE ACTS. 


. “— 
[26 1 


17 Therefore, when they were 


should be kept at Cesarea, and 
that he himself would depart 
shortly thither. 

5 Let them therefore, said he, 
which among you are able, go down 
with me, and accuse this man, if 
there be any wickedness in him. 

6 And when he had tarried among 
them “more than ten days, he went 
down unto Czsarea; and the next 
day sitting on the judgment seat 
commanded Paul to be brought. 

7 And when he was come, the 
Jews which came down from Jeru- 
salem stood round about, and laid 
many and grievous complaints 
against Paul, which they could 
not prove, 

8 While he answered for himself. 
Neither against the law of the 
Jews, neither against the temple, 
nor ‘yet against Cesar, have I 
offended any thing at all. 

9 But Festus, willing to do the 
Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, 


and said, Wilt thou go up to Jeru- 
salem, and there be judged of these 
things before me? 


Paul appeals to Czsar. 


10 Then said Paul, I stand at 
Cesar’s judgment seat, where I 
ought to be judged: to the Jews 
have I done no wrong, as thou very 
well knowest. 

11 For if I be an offender, or have 
committed any thing worthy of 
death, I refuse not to die: but if 
there be none of these things 
whereof these accuse me, no man 
may deliver me unto them. 4I ap- 
peal unto Cesar. 

12 Then Festus, when he had con- 
ferred with the council, answered, 
Hast thou appealed unto Cesar? 
unto Cesar shalt thou go. 

13 And after certain days king 
‘Agrippa and Bernice came unto 
Cesarea to salute Festus. 

14 And when they had been there 
many days, Festus declared Paul’s 
cause unto the king, saying, There 
is a certain man left in bonds by 
Felix: 

15 About whom, when I was at 
Jerusalem, the chief priests ‘and the 
elders of the Jews informed me, de- 
siting to havejudgment against him, 

16 To whom I answered, It is not 
the manner of the Romans to de- 
liver any man to die, before that he 
which is accused have the accusers 
face to face, and have licence to 
answer for himself concerning the 
crime laid against him. 


A.D. 62. 


a Or, as some 
copies read, 
no more 
than eight 
or ten days. 


6 Acts 24.5,13; 
Mt.5.11,12; 
1 Pet.4.12,16. 


c Rom.13.1,5. 


d Acts 23.11; 
26.32; 27.24. 


é This (v.13) 
was Herod 


Agrippa I. of 
Acts 12.1, and 
great-grand- 
son of Herod 
the Great. 
Mt.2.1, note. 
Bernice, or 
Berenice, 
was the sis- 
ter of Herod 
Agrippa II. 
(v.13). 


f Lit. their pe- 
culiar de- 
mon-wor- 
ship. 


g kept for the 
decision of 
the em- 
peror. 

h Acts.9.15. 

i Acts 23.9,29; 
26.31. 


j See Acts 26. 
2,3. 


u184 


come hither, without any delay 
on the morrow I sat on the judg- 
ment seat, and commanded the man 
to be brought forth. 

18 Against whom when the ac- 
cusers stood up, they brought none 
accusation of such things as I 
supposed: 

19 But had certain questions 
against him of their fown supersti- 
tion, and of one Jesus, which was 
dead, whom Paul affirmed to be 
alive. 

20 And because I doubted of such 
manner of questions, I asked him 
whether he would go to Jerusalem, 
and there be judged of these 
matters. 

21 But when Paul had appealed to 
be 4reserved unto the hearing of 
Augustus, I commanded him to be 
kept till I might send him to Cesar. 

22 Then Agrippa said unto Fes- 
tus, I would also hear the man 
myself. To morrow, said he, thou 
shalt hear him. 

23 And on the morrow, when 
Agrippa was come, and Bernice, 
with great pomp, and was entered, 
into the place of hearing, with the 
chief captains, and principal men 
of the city, at Festus’ sommand- 
ment “Paul was brought forth. 

24 And Festus said, King Agrippa, 
and all men which are here present 
with us, ye see this man, about 
whom all the multitude of the Jews 
have dealt with me, both at Jerusa- 
lem, and also here, crying that he 
ought not to live any longer. 

25 But when I found that he had 
committed ‘nothing worthy of 
death, and that he himself hath 
appealed to Augustus, I have de- 


termined to send him. 

26 Of whom I have no certain 
thing to write unto my _ lord. 
Wherefore I have brought him 
forth before you, and specially be- 
fore Jthee,,O king Agrippa, that, 
after examination had, I -mighti 
have somewhat to write. 

27 For it seemeth to me unreason- 
able to send a prisoner, and not 
withal to signify the ctimes Jaid 
against him. 


CHAPTER 26. 


Paul’s defence before Agrippa. 
(Cf. Acts 9.' 1-18; 22. 1-16.) 


“i Paes: Agrippa said unto Paul, 
Thou art permitted to speak 
for thyself. Then Paul stretched 


x i 


THE ACTS. 


[26 30 


forth the hand, and answered for 
himself: 

2 % think myself happy, king 
Agrippa, because I shall answer for 
myself this day before thee touch- 
ing all the things whereof I am 
accused of the Jews: 

3 Especially because I know 
thee to be expert in all customs and 
questions which are among the 


Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to 
hear me patiently. 

4 My manner of life from my 
youth, which was at the first among 
mine own nation at Jerusalem, 
know all the Jews; 

5 Which ¢knew me from the be- 
ginning, if they would testify, that 
after the most straitest sect of our 
religion I lived a *Pharisee. 

6 And now 41 stand and am 
judged for the hope of the ¢prom- 
ise made of God unto our fathers: 

7 Unto which promise our twelve 
tribes, instantly serving God day 
and night, hope to come. For 
which hope’s sake, king Agrippa, 
I am accused of the Jews. 

8 Why ¢should it be thought a 
thing incredible with you, that God 
should raise the dead? 

9 I fverily thought with myself, 
that I ought to do many things con- 
trary to the name of Jesus of 
Nazareth. 

10 Which thing I also did 4in 
Jerusalem: and many of the saints 
did I shut up in prison, having re- 
ceived ‘authority from the chief 
priests; and when they were put to 
death, I gave my ‘voice against 
them. 

11 And I punished them oft in 

“every synagogue, and compelled 
them to blaspheme; and being ex- 
ceedingly mad against them, I per- 
secuted them even unto strange 
cities. ; 

12 Whereupon as I jwent to Da- 
mascus with authority and commis- 
sion from the chief priests, 

' 43 At midday, Oking, I saw in the 

way a light from heaven, above the 
brightness of the sun, shining round 
about me and them which jour- 
neyed with me. 

14 And when we were ull fallen to 
the earth, I “heard a voice speak- 


A.D. 62. 


a Foreknow- 
ledge, trans. 
foreknow. 
Rom.8.29. 
(Acts 2.23; 

1 Pet.1.20.) 

6 Acts 22.3. 

c Acts 23.6. 

d Acts 13.32,33; 
Gen.3.15; 22. 
18; 49.10. 

e judged a 
thing in- 
credible 
with you, if 
God doth 
raise the 
dead? 

f John 16.2; 

1 Tim.1.13. 

g Acts 8.1,3; 
Gal.1.13. 

h Acts 9.14. 

i vote. 

j Acts 9,3. 

k Cf.Acts 9. 

7, note. 

1 goads. 

m Satan. 
Rom.16.20. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

n Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

o Sanctify, 
holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
Rom.12.1. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev. 
22.11.) 

> Repentance. 
Rom.2.4. 
(Mt.3.2; 

Acts 17.30.) 

q the Christ 

_ must suffer. 
See Acts 3. 
18, ref.; 17.3, 
ref. 

r Lit. Thou art 
raving,Paul! 
thy great 
learning is 
turning thee 
round into 
raving mad- 
ness. 

s Jas.2.19. 

tR.V. With 
but little 
persuasion 
thou would- 
est fain 
make mea 
Christian. 
The answer 
might be 
paraphrased: 
“It will re- 
quire more 
than this,’’ 
etc., or, “A 
little more 
and you will 


ing unto ime, and saying in the He- 
brew tongue, Saul, Saul, why 
persecutest thou me? it is hard for 
thee to kick against the ‘pricks. 

15 And I said, Who art thou, 
Lord? And he said, I am Jesus 
whom thou persecutest. 


make,” etc. 
u Lit. both in 

a little and 

in much, 


1185 


all 


16 But rise, and stand upon thy 
feet: for I have.appeared unto thee 
for this purpose, to make thee a 
minister and a witness both of these 
things which thou hast seen, and of 
those things in the which I will 
appear unto thee; 

17 Delivering thee from the peo- 
ple, and from the Gentiles, unto 
whom now I send thee, 

18 To open their eyes, and to 
turn them from darkness to light, 
and from the power of “Satan 
unto God, that they may receive 
forgiveness of “sins, and inheritance 
among them which are °sanctified 
by faith that is in me. 

19 Whereupon, O king Agrippa, 
I was not disobedient unto the 
heavenly vision: 

20 But shewed first unto them of 
Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and 
throughout all the coasts of Judea; 
and then to the Gentiles, that they 
should repent and turn to God, and 
do works meet for repentance. 

21 For these causes the Jews 
caught me in the temple, and went 
about to kill me. 

22 Having therefore obtained 
help of God, I continue unto this 
day, witnessing both to small and 
great, saying none other things than 
those which the prophets and 
Moses did say should come: 

23 That ¢@Christ should suffer, 
and that he should be the first that 
should rise from the dead, and 
should shew light unto the people, 
and to the Gentiles. 

24 And as he thus spake for him- 
self, Festus said with a loud voice, 
Paul, thou art ”beside thyself; much 
learning doth make thee mad. 

25 But he said, I am not mad, 
most noble Festus; but speak forth 
the words of truth and soberness. 

26 For the king knoweth of these 
things, before whom also I speak 
freely: for I am persuaded that 
none of these things are hidden 
from him; for this thing was not 
done in a corner. 

27 King Agrippa, believest thou 
the prophets? I know that thou 
Shelievest. 

28 Then Agrippa said unto Paul, 
‘Almost thou persuadest me to be 
a Christian. 

29 And Paul said, I would to God, 
that not only thou, but also all that 
hear me this day, were “both al- 
most, and altogether such as I am, 
except these bonds. 


| 30 And when he had thus spoken, 


26 31] 


the king rose up, and the governor,| _A-D. 62. 
and Bernice, and they that sat with 
them: 

31 And when they were gone 
aside, they talked between them- 
selves, saying, This man doeth 
nothing worthy of death or of 
bonds. 

32 Then said Agrippa unto Fes- 
tus, This man might have been set 
at liberty, “if he had not appealed 
unto Cesar. 


CHAPTER 27. 
Paul is sent to Rome. 


AXP when it was determined that] , commander 
we should sail into Italy, they| of 100 
delivered Paul and certain other| %ldiers. 
prisoners unto one named Julius, aly acts 19.29. 
‘centurion of Augustus’ band. 

2 And entering into a ship of Ad-|¢ i ke 
ramyttium, we launched, meaning Ss 
to sail by the coasts of Asia; one} Tit.1.5,12. 
dAristarchus, a Macedonian of 
Thessalonica, being with us. 

3 And the next day we touched at 
Sidon. And ¢Julius courteously 
entreated Paul, and gave Aim lib- 
erty to go unto his friends to refresh 
himself. 

4 And when we had launched 
from thence, we sailed under Cy- 
prus, because the winds were con- 
trary. 

5 And when we had sailed over 
the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, 
we came to Myra, a city of Lycia. 

6 And there the centurion found a 
ship of Alexandria sailing into 
Italy; and he put us therein. 

7 And when we had sailed slowly 
many days, and scarce were come 
over against Cnidus, the wind not 
suffering us, we sailed under /Crete, 


@ Acts 23.11; 
25.11. 


} Acts 25.12, 
25. 


g The fast was 
on the tenth 
day of the 
seventh 
month. Lev. 
23-27,29. 


hk Amos 3.7; 
# Or, beat. 
j Psa.107.25. 


k be cast upon 
the Syrtis. 


1 vs.9,10. 
m 1 Sam.30.6; 


Psa.112.7; 
2 Cor.1.4; 4. 
8,9. 


nan angel of 
the God 
whose I am, 
whom also I 


over against Salmone; serve. Heb. 
8 And, hardly passing it, came| 3+ note. 

unto a place which is called Thelo Faith. Rom. 
fair havens; nigh whereunto was} 1-16. (Gen.3 


the city of Lasea. a in 

9 Now when much time was spent,| ~~ 
and when sailing was now danger- 
ous, because the “fast was now al- 
ready past, Paul admonished them, 

10 And said unto them, Sirs, I 
‘perceive that this voyage will be 
with hurt and much damage, not 
only of the lading and ship, but also 
of our lives. 

11 Nevertheless the centurion be- 
lieved the master and the owner of 
the ship, more than those things 
which were spoken by Paul. 

12 And because the haven was not 
commodious to winter in, the more 


1186 


THE ACTS. 


Ms 


(27 27 


part advised-to depart thence also, 
if by any means they might attain 
to Phenice, and there to winter; 
which is an haven of Crete, and 
lieth toward the south west and 
north west. 

13 And when the south wind blew 
softly, supposing that they had ob- 
tained their purpose, loosing 
thence, they sailed close by Crete. 


' The storm. 


14 But not long after there ‘arose 
against it a Jtempestuous wind, 
called Euroclydon. 

15 And when the ship was caught, 
and could not bear up into the wind, 
we let her drive. 

16 And running under a certain 
island which is called Clauda, we 
had much work to come by the 
boat: 

17 Which when they had taken 
up, they used helps, undergirding 
the ship; and, fearing lest they 
should “fall into the quicksands, 
strake sail, and so were driven. 

18 And we being exceedingly 
tossed with a tempest, the next day 
they lightened the ship; 

19 And the third day we cast out 
with our own hands the tackling of 
the ship. 

20 And when neither sun nor 
stars in many days appeared, and 
no small tempest lay on us, all hope 
that we should be saved was then 
taken away. 


The moral ascendency of Paul. 


21 But after long abstinence Paul 
stood forth in the midst of them, 
and said, Sirs, ye should have 
'hearkened unto me, and not have 
loosed from Crete, and to have 
gained this harm and loss. 

22 And now “I exhort you to be 
of good cheer: for there shall be no 


-3-\loss of any man’s life among you, 


but of the ship. 

23 For there stood by me this 
night “the angel of God, whose I 
am, and whom I serve, 

24 Saying, Fear not, Paul; thou 
must be brought before Cesar: and, 
lo, God hath given thee all them 
that sail with thee. 

25 Wherefore, sirs, be of good 
cheer: for I °believe God, that it 
shall be even as it was told me. 

26 Howbeit we must be cast upon 
a certain island. 

27 But when the fourteenth night 
was come, as we were driven up 
and down in Adria, about midnight 


a 


27 28] 


THE ACTS. 


[28 10 


the shipmen deemed that they drew 
hear to some country; 

28 And sounded, and found it 
twenty “fathoms: and when they 
had gone a little further, they) 
sounded again, and found i¢ fifteen 
fathoms. 

29 Then fearing lest we should! 
have fallen upon rocks, they cast 
four anchors out of the stern, and 
wished for the day. 
- 30 And as the %shipmen were 
about to flee out of the ship, when 
they had let down the boat into the 
sea, under colour as though they 
would have cast anchors out of the 
foreship, 

31 Paul said to the centurion and 
to the soldiers, “Except these abide 
in the ship, ye cannot be saved. 

32 Then the soldiers cut off the 
eae of the boat, and let her fall 


°33 And while the day was coming! 
on, Paul besought them all to take, 
meat, saying, This day is the four- 
teenth day that ye have tarried and 
continued fasting, having taken 
nothing. 

34 Wherefore I pray you to take 
some meat: “for this is for your 
health: ‘for there shall not an hair 
fall from the head of any of you. 

35 And when he had thus spoken, 
he took bread, and gave thanks to 
God in presence of thera all: and 
when. he had broken it, he began 
to eat. 

36 Then were they all of good 
cheer, and they also took some 
meat. 

37 And we were in all in the 


ship ftwo hundred’ threescore and) 


sixteen souls. 

38 And when they had eaten 
enough, they lightened the ship,| 
and cast out the wheat into the sea. 

39 And when it was day, they 
knew not the land: but they dis- 
covered a certain creek with a shore, 
into the which they were minded, 


AD. 62. 


a Gne fathom 


|e satlors were 


seeking to 
Ales out of 
the ship and 
had lowered 
the boat. 


€ v.22; Eizk.36. 
36,37; Lk.4. 
9,12. 


d Mt.15.32. 


e Mt.10,30; 
L&.21.18. 


f Some ancient 
authorities 
read, about 
threescore 
and sixteen 
souls. 


g Or, cut the 
anchors, 
they left 
them in the 


sea, etc. 


h Began to 
break up. 


t Prov.16.7. 
j v.22; Psa. 
107.28,30; 2 
Cor.1.8,10. 
k Heb.13.2. 


1 Miracles 


m justice. 


n Jas.5.14,15. 


if it were possible, to thrust in the 


ship. 

40 “And when they had étaken up 
the anchors, they committed them- 
selves unto the sea, and loosed the 
rudder bands, and psec up the 
mainsail to the wind , and made 
toward shore. 

41 And falling into a place where 
two seas met, they ran the ship 
aground; and the forepart stuck 
fast, and remained unmoveable, but} 
the hinder part “was broken with 
the violence of the waves. 


cts 19.11; 
° ME 16. 18; 
1 Cor,12.! 9, 


1187 


42 And the soldiers’ counsel was 
to kill the prisoners, lest any of 
them should swim out, and escape. 

43 But the centurion, willing to 


lsave ‘Paul, kept them from their 


purpose; and commanded that they 
which could swim should cast 
themselves first into the sea, and 
get to land: 

44 And the rest, some on boards, 
and some on broken pieces of the 
ship. And Jso it came to pass, that 
they escaped all safe to land. 


CHAPTER 28. 


The landing on Melita: miracle 
ge ae, viper’s bite. (Cf. Mk. 


ANP when they were escaped, 
then they knew that the is- 
land was called Melita. 

2 And the barbarous people 
shewed us no little kindness: for 
they kindled a fire, and “received us 
every one, because of the present 
rain, and because of the cold. 

3 And when Paul had gathered a 
bundle of sticks, and laid them on 
the fire, there came a viper out of 
the heat, and ‘fastened on his hand. 

4 And when the barbarians saw 
the venomous beast hang on his 
hand, they said among themselves, 
No doubt this man is a murderer, 
whom, though he hath escaped the 
i yet “vengeance suffereth not to 

ve. 

5 And he shook off the beast into 
the fire, and felt no harm. 

6 Howbeit they looked when he 
should have swollen, or fallen down 
dead suddenly: but after they had 
looked a great while, and saw no 
harm come to him, they changed 
been minds, and said that he was a 
ZO 


Miracle of the healing of 
Publixzs’ father. 


7 In the same quarters were pos 
sessions of the chief man of the 
island, whose name was Publius; 
who received us, and lodged us 
three days courteously. 

8 And it came to pass, that the 
father of Publius lay sick of a fever 
and of a bloody flux: to “whom Paul 
entered in, and prayed, and laid 
hands on him, and ‘healed him. 

9 So when this was done, others 
also, which had diseases in the 
island, came, and were healed: 

10 Who also honoured us with 
many honours; and when we de- 


28 11] 


parted, they laded us with such 
things as were necessary. 

11 And after three months we de- 
parted in a ship of Alexandria, 
which had wintered in the isle, 
whose sign was Castor and Pollux. 

12 And landing at Syracuse, we 
tarried there three days. 

13 And from thence we fetched a 
compass, and came to Rhegium: 
and after one day the south wind 
blew, and we came the next day to 
Puteoli: 

14 Where we found brethren, and 
were desired to tarry with them 
seven days: and so we went toward 
Rome. 

15 And from thence, when ¢the 
brethren heard of us, they came to 
meet us as far as “Appii forum, and 
The three taverns: whom when 
Paul saw, he thanked God, and took 
‘courage. 


Paul arrives at Rome. 


16 And when we came to Rome, 
the centurion delivered the prison- 
ers to the captain of the guard: but 
Paul was suffered to dwell by him- 
self with ¢a soldier that kept him. 


Paul in Rome: his ministry 
there to the Jews. 


17 And it came to pass, that after 
three days Paul called the chief of 
the Jews together: and when they 
were come together, he said unto 
them, Men and brethren, though J 
have committed nothing against the 
people, or customs of our fathers, 
yet was I delivered prisoner from 
Jerusalem into the hands of the 
Romans. < 

18 Who,fwhen they had examined 
me, would have let me go, because 
there was no cause of death in me. 

19 But when the Jews spake 
against rt, I was constrained to gap- 
peal unto Cesar; not that I had 
ought to accuse my natiou of. 

20 For this cause therefore "have 
I called for you, to see you, and to 
speak with you: because that for 
the thope of Israel I am bound with 
this chain. 


THE ACTS. 


2 Rom.1.8,12. 


6 the market 
of Appius. 


¢ Josh.1.6,7,9; 
1 Sam.30.6; 
Psa.27.14. 


d the soldier 
that 
guarded 
him. Acts 
24.23; 27.3. 


e Acts 21.33. 
f Acts 26.31. 
g Acts 25.11. 


h did I entreat 
you to see 
and speak 
with me. 


# Acts 26.6,7. 


1.10,12. 


k Lk.2.34; 
a Pet2.t2; 
4.14. 


1 Acts 17.3; 
Gen.49.10; 
Num.24.17; 


John 1.45; 5. 
39; Rev.19. 
10. 


m Cf.Acts 13. | 


46; 18.6. 


un Holy Spirit. 
Rom.1.4. 
(Mt.1.18, 
Acts 2.4.) 


o Inspiration. 
Rom.16.25, 
26. (Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


p 2 Cor.4.4,6. 


q vs.26,27, 
Tsa.6.9,10. 


rice. turn 
again, 


s Rom.1.16, 
note. 


t Acts 20.25; 
Eph.6.19; 
Phil.1.13,14. 


[28 31° 
91 And they said unto him, We 


neither received letters out of Ju- 
dzea concerning thee, neither any of 


ithe brethren that came shewed or 


spake any harm of thee. 


| 22 But we desire to hear of thee 


what thou thinkest: for as concern- 
ing this sect, we know that “every 
where it is spoken against. 

23 And when they had appointed 
him a day, there came many to him 
into his lodging; to whom he ‘ex- 
pounded and testified the kingdom 
of God, persuading them concerning 
Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, 
and out of the prophets, from 
morning till evening. ; 

24 And some believed the things 
which were spoken,-and some be- 
lieved not. 


Paul turns to the Gentiles. 


25 And when they agreed not 
among themselves, they departed, 
after that Paul had spoken one 
word, Well spake the "Holy Ghost 
°by Esaias the prophet unto our 
fathers, 

26 Saying, Go unto this people, 
and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and 


> |Pshall not understand; and seeing 


ye shall see, and not perceive: 

27 For the heart of this people is 
waxed gross, and their ears are dull 
of hearing, and their eyes have they 
jclosed; lest they should see with 
their eyes, and hear with their 
ears, and understand with %their 
heart, and should be “converted, 
and I should heal them. 

28 Be it known therefore unto 
you, that the ‘salvation of God is 
sent unto the Gentiles, and that 
they will hear it. 

29 And when he had said these 
words, the Jews departed, and had 
great reasoning among themselves. 

30 And Paul dwelt two whole 
years in ‘his own hired house, and 
received all that came in unto him, 

31 Preaching the kingdom of God, 
and teaching those things which 
concern the Lord Jesus Christ, 
‘with all confidence, no man for- 
bidding him. 


1 It has been much disputed whether Paul endured two Roman imprisonments, 


from A.D. 62 to 68, or one 


imprisonments with a year of liberty between. 
that the leaving of Trophimus sick at Miletus, mentioned in 2 Tim. 4. 20, could not 
have been an occurrence of Paul’s last journey to Jerusalem, for then Trophimus 
was not left (Acts 20. 4; 21. 29), nor of the journey to Rome to appear before Cesar, 


for then he did not touch at Miletus. 


have been a release from the first imprisonment, and an interval of ministry and 


travel]. 


1188 


The tradition from Clement to Eusebius favours two 


Erdman (W.J.) has pointed out 


To make this incident possible there must 


THE EPISTLES OF PAUL. 


THE Epistles of the Apostle Paul have a very distinctive character. All Scripture, 
up to the Gospel accounts of the crucifixion, looks forward to the cross, and has 
primarily in view Israel, and the blessing of the earth through the Messianic king- 
dom. But “hid in God” (Eph. 3. 9) was an unrevealed fact—the interval of time 
between the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ and His return in glory; and an 
unrevealed purpose—the outcalling of the ecclesia, the church which ig Christ’s 
body. In Mt. 16. our Lord announced that purpose, but wholly without explana- 
tion as to how, when, or of what materials, that church should be built, or what 
should be_its position, relationships, privileges, or duties. 

All this constitutes precisely the scope of the Epistles of Paul. They develop 

the doctrine of the church. In his letters to seven Gentile churches (in Rome, 
Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, and Thessalonica), the church, the 
“mystery which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God” (Eph. 3. 9), 
is fully revealed, and fully instructed as to her unique place in the counsels and 
purposes of God. 
_ _ Through Paul alone we know that the church is not an organization, but an organ- 
ism, the body of Christ; instinct with His life, and heavenly in calling, promise, 
and destiny. Through him alone we know the nature, purpose, and form of organ- 
ization of local churches, and the right conduct,of such gatherings. T hrough him 
alone do we know that “we shall not all sleep,” that “the dead in Christ shall rise 
first,”. and that living saints shall be “changed” and caught up to meet the Lord in. 
the air at His return. 

But to Paul was also committed the unfolding of the doctrines of grace which 
were latent in the teachings of Jesus Christ. Paul originates nothing, but unfolds 
everything, concerning the nature and purpose of the law; the ground and means 
of the believer’s justification, sanctification, and glory; the meanings of the death 
of Christ, and the position, walk, expectation, and service of the Christian. 

_ Paul, converted by the personal ministry of the Lord in glory, is distinctively the 
witness to a glorified Christ, Head over all things to the church which is His body, 
as the Eleven were to Christ in the flesh, the Son of Abraham and of David. ; 

The chronological order of Paul’s Epistles is believed to be as follows: 1 and 2 
Thessalonians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Romans, Philemon, Colossians, Ephe- 
sians, Philippians, 1 Timothy, Titus, 2 Timothy. Hebrews has a distinctive place, 
nor can the order of that book amongst the writings of Paul be definitely fixed. 


THE TWO SILENCES 


Two periods in the life of Paul after his conversion are passed over in a silence 
which is itself significant—the journey into Arabia, from which the Apostle returned 
in full possession of the Gospel explanation as set forth in Galatians and Romans; 
and the two silent years in prison in Caesarea, between his arrest in the temple at 
-Jerusalem and his deportation to Rome. 

It was inevitable that a trained intellect like that of Paul, a convinced believer 
in Mosaism and, until his conversion on the Damascus road, an eager opposer of 
Christianity, must seek the underlying principles of the Gospel. Immediately after 
his conversion he preached Jesus as the Messiah; but the relation of the Gospel to 
the Law, and, in a lesser degree, to the great Jewish promises, needed clear adjust- 
ment if Christianity was to be a reasonable faith, and not a mere dogma. In Arabia 
Paul sought and found that adjustment through revelation by the Spirit. Out of it 
came the doctrinal explanation of salvation by grace through faith, wholly apart from 
the law, embodied in Galatians and Romans. ; 

But the Gospel brings the believer into great relationships—to the Father, to 
other believers, to Christ,.and to the future purposes of God. It is not only a 
salvation from sin and the consequences of sin, but into an amazing place in the 
Divine counsels. Furthermore, the new thing, the church in its various aspects 
and functions, demanded clear revelation. And these are the chief themes of the 
Epistles written by Paul from Rome. and commonly called the Prison Epistles— 
Ephesians, Philippians, sColossians. It is contrary to the method of inspiration, 
as explained by Paul himself, to suppose that these crowning revelations were made 
apart from deep meditation, demanding quietness, and earnest seeking. It seems 

‘most congruous with the events of Paul’s life to suppose that these great revela- 
tions came during the silent years at Czesarea—often spoken of as wasted. 
1189 


HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 
to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 
so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference 
and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 


ILLUSTRATION 


(at Mark 1. 1.) 


b Gospel. vs. 

1,14,15; Mk. 
| 8.35. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 


Here Gospel is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place; 
Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the references in parenthesis are 
the first and last. 


1190 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


ROMANS. 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). Date. Romans, the sixth in chronological 
order of Paul’s Epistles, was written from Corinth during the apostle’s third visit to 
that city (2 Cor. 13,1), in AD. 60. The Epistle has its occasion in the intention 
of the apostle soon to visit Rome. Naturally, he would wish to announce before 
his coming the distinctive truths which had been revealed to and through him. 

_ He would desire the Christians in Rome to have his own statement: of the great 
doctrines of grace so bitterly assailed everywhere by legalistic teachers. 

Theme. The theme of Romans is ‘‘the Gospel of God” (1. 1), the very widest 
possible designation of the whole body of redemption truth, for it is He with whom 
is ‘‘no respect of persons”; and who is not “the God of the Jews only,” but “of 
the Gentiles also” (2. 11; 3. 29). Accordingly, “all the world” is found guilty (3. 19), 
and a redemption is revealed as wide as the need, upon the alone condition of 
faith. Not only does Romans embody in the fullest way the doctrines of grace 
in relation to salvation, but in three remarkable chapters (9.—11.) the great promises 
to Israel are reconciled with the promises concerning the Gentiles, and the fulfil- 
ment of the former shown to await the completion of the church and coming of 


11] [1 1s 


the Deliverer out of Zion (11. 25-27). 


God”? (1.917334 21,, 22): 


The key-phrase is “the righteousness of 


The Epistle, exclusive of the introduction (1. 1-17), is in seven parts: I. The 


whole world guilty before God, 1. 
eousness of God by faith, the Gospel remedy for guilt, 3. 21-5. 11. 


18-3. 20. 


I 


I. Justification through the right- 
Iii. Crucifixion 


with Christ, the resurrection life of Christ, and the walk in the Spirit, the Gospel 


provision for inherent sin, 5. 12-8. 13. 


8. 14-39. 
Israel, 9. 1-11. 36. 
of Christian love, 16. 1-27. 


CHAPTER 1. 


Introduction (vs. 1-15); theme 
(vs. 16, 17 


part, a ¢servant of Jesus Christ, 
called to be an apostle, sepa- 
tated unto the gospel of God, 

2 (Which he had promised afore 
bby his prophets in the holy scrip- 
tures,) ; 

3 Concerning his Son Jesus Christ 
our Lord, “which was made of the 
éseed of David according to the 


flesh; 

4 And declared to be the fSon of} 
God with power, according to the 
€spirit of holiness, by the resurrec- 
tion “from the dead: . 

5 ‘By whom we have received 
grace and apostleship, /for obedi- 
ence to the faith among all nations, 
for his name: 

6 Among whom are ye also the 
called of Jesus Christ: 

7 To all that be in Rome, beloved! 


A.D. 60. 


& bondman. 
cts 7.587 
1Tim.1.12, 


[9 through. 


¢ Sanctify, holy 
(things) (N.T.). 
Rom.7.12, (Mt.4. 
5; Rey.22.11.) 

d who was born. 

6 See, on the 
Davidic descent 
of Christ, Lk.3. 
23,. note. 

SF ee 20; Heb. 

225 


@ Holy Spirit. 
Rom.5.5. (Mt.1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 

4 Or, of such as 
were dead. 

i through, 

J unto obedience to 
faith, i.e. faithas 
a principle, or 
method of divine 
dealing. Cf. 
Rom.10.1-11. 

k because. 

tkosmos (Mt.4.3) 
=m 

™ in. 

n hindered. 


of God, called to be saints: Grace 
to you and peace from God our 
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 


_Ayt 


ee 


IV. The full result in blessing of the Gospel, 
V. Parenthesis: the Gospel does not abolish the covenant promises to 
VI. Christian life and service, 12. 1-15. 33. 


VII. The outflow 


8 First, I thank my God through 
Jesus Christ for you all, *that your 
faith is spoken of throughout the 
whole ‘world. 

9 For God is my witness, whom I 
serve with my spirit in the gospel 
of his Son, that without ceasing I 
make mention of you always in my 
prayers; 

10 Making request, if by any 
means now at length I might have 
a prosperous journey “by the will 
of God to come unto you. 

11 ForI long to see you, that I may 
impart unto you some spiritual gift, 
to the end ye may be established; 

12 That is, that I may be com- 
forted together with you by the 
mutual faith both of you and me. 

13 Now I would not have you 
ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes 
I purposed to come unto you, (but 
was “let hitherto,) that I might 
have some fruit among you also, 
even as among other Gentiles. 

14 Iam debtor both to the Greeks, 
and to the Barbarians; both to the 
wise, anda to the unwise. 

15 So, as much as in me is, I am 


1 16] 


ROMANS. 


4 


(2% 


ready to preach the gospel to you 
that are at Rome also. 

16 For of the 
“gospel c st: for it is the power 
of God unto !salvation to every one 
that believeth; to the Jew first, 
and also to the Greek. 

17 For therein is ‘the righteous- 
ness of God revealed from faith to 
¢faith: as it is written, “The just 
shall live by faith. 


Part I. The guilty world. 
(1) The wrath of God revealed. 


18 For ‘the wrath of God is re- 
vealed from heaven against all un- 
godliness and unrighteousness of 
men, who £hold the “truth in un- 
righteousness; 


(2) The universe a revelation of 
the power and deity of God. 


19 Because that which may be 
known of God is manifest in 
them; for God hath shewed it unto 
them. f: 
| 20 For the invisible things of him 
from the creation of the Jworld 
are clearly seen, being understood 
by the things that are made, even 
his eternal power and *Godhead; 
so that they are ‘without excuse: 


(3) The seven stages of Gentile 
world apostasy. 


21 Because that, when they knew 
God, they glorified him not as God, 


A.D. 60. 


a Gospel. vs.1, 
9,15,16; Rom. 
2.16. (Gen.12. 
1-3;Rev.14.6.) 

6 Faith. Rom. 
1.17. (Gen.3. 
20; Heb. 
11.39.) s 

Ca righteous- 
mess, etc. 

d Faith. 
Rom.3.22. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 

e Hab.2.4; 
Gal.3.11; 
Heb.10.38. 

fa wrath, etc. 

2g hold down. 
hv.25. 

i since. 

Ji.e. earth. 

k Deity. 

1 Rom.2.14,15. 

m reasonings, 
and their 
senseless 
heart was 
darkened. 

n Isa.19.11,12; 
Acts 7.22. 

01 Tim.1.17; 
6.15,16. 

D vs.26,28; 

Psa.81.12; 

Acts 7.42; 

Eph.4.18,19;2 

Thes.2.11,12. 

q For that 
they ex- 
changed the 
truth of God 
for a lie, and 
worshipped 
and served 
the creature 
more than, 


4 Cc. 
neither were thankful; but became}r refused to 
vain in their “imaginations, and] Aave. Lit. 


their foolish heart was darkened. 


22 Professing themselves to be]; 


Nwise, they became fools, 
23 And changed the glory of the 


did not ap- 

prove God. 

Eph.5.4. 

t insolent, 
haughty, 
boastful. 


°uncorruptible God into an image|u Rom.2.2. 
made like to corruptible man, and|v also consent 


to birds, and fourfooted beasts, 
creeping things. 


(4) The result of the Gentile 
world apostasy. 
24 Wherefore ?God also gave them 


and with them 


that prac- 
tise them. 
w Rom.1.20; 
3.19. 
x% 2Sam.12.5-7; 
Mt.7.1,2; 
John 8.9. 


up to uncleanness through the lusts 
of their own hearts, to dishonour 
their own bodies between them- 
selves: : 

25 @¢Who changed the truth of 
God into a lie, and worshipped and 
served the creature more than the 
Creator, who is blessed for ever. 
Amen. 

26 For this cause God gave them 
up unto vile affections: for even 
their women did change the natural 
use into that which is against na- 
ture: 

27 And likewise also the men, 
leaving the natural use of the wo- 
man, burned in their lust one toward 
another; men with men working 
that which is unseemly, and receiv- 
ing in themselves that recompence 
of their error which was meet. 

28 And even as they ‘did not like 
to retain God in their knowledge, 
God gave them over to a reprobate 
mind, to do those things Swhich are 
not convenient; 

29 Being filled with all unright- 
eousness, fornication, wickedness, 
covetousness, maliciousness; full of 
envy, murder, debate, deceit, ma- 
lignity; whisperers, 

30 Backbiters, haters of God, 
‘despiteful, proud, boasters, inven- 
tors of evil things, disobedient to 
parents, 

31 Without understanding, cove- 
nantbreakers, without natural af- 
fection, implacable, unmerciful: 

32 Who “knowing the judgment 
of God, that they which commit 
such things are worthy of death, 
not only do the same, but *have 
pleasure in them that do them. 


CHAPTER 2. 


(5) The Gentile pagan moralizers 
no better than other pagans. 


‘THEREFORE thou art “inexcu- 
sable, O man, whosoever thou 
art that judgest: *for wherein thou 


1 The Heb. and Gr. words for salvation imply the ideas of deliverance, safety, 


preservation, healing, and soundness. 


Salvation is the great inclusive word 


of the Gospel, gathering into itself all the redemptive acts and processes: as jus- 


tification, redemption, grace, propitiation, imputation, forgiveness, sanc- 


tification, and glorification. 


Salvation is in three tenses: (1) The believer has 


been saved from the guilt and penalty of sin (Lk. 7. 50; 1 Cor. 1. 18; 2 Cor. 2. 15: 


83 (2) The believer is being saved from the habit 
and dominion of sin (Rom. 6. 14; Phil. 1. 19; 2. 12, 13; 2 Thes. 2. 13: Rom. 8. - Gal. 


Eph. 2.5, 8; 2 Tim. 1. 9) and is safe. 


2.19, 20; 2 Cor. 3. 18). 


(3) The believer is to be saved in the sense of entire con- 


formity to Christ (Rom. 13. 11; Heb. 10. 36; 1 Pet. 1. 5; 1 John 3. 2). Salvation is 
by grace through faith, is a free gift, and wholiy without works (Rom. 3. 27, 28; 4. 


1-8; 6. 23; Eph, 2.:8). 
Tit. 3. 5-8). ° 


1192 


The divine order is: first salvation, then works (Eph. 2. 9, 10; 


22] 


1 


ROMANS. [3 2 


judgest another, thou condemnest 
thyself; for thou that judgest doest 
the same things. 

2 But we are sure that the *judg- 
ment of God is according to truth 
against them which commit such 
things. 

3 And thinkest thou this, O man, 
that judgest them which do such 
things, and doest the same, that 


thou shalt escape the judgment of 2 


God? 

4 Or despisest thou the “riches of 
his goodness and ‘forbearance and 
4ongsuffering; not knowing that 
the goodness of God leadeth thee to 
erepentance? 

5 But after thy hardness and im- 
penitent heart treasurest up unto 


thyself wrath fagainst the day of|j 


wrath and revelation of the right- 
eous judgment of God; 

6 Who will érender to every man 
according to his deeds: 

7 To them who by patient con- 
tinuance in well doing seek for 
glory and honour and ‘immortal- 
ity, ‘eternal life: ¥ 

8 But unto them that are Jcon- 
tentious, and do not obey the truth, 
but obey unrighteousness, indigna- 
tion and wrath, 

9 Tribulation and anguish, upon 
every soul of man that doeth evil, 
of the Jew first, and also of the 
Gentile; 

10 But glory, honour, and peace, 
to every man that worketh good, 
to the Jew first, and also to the 
Gentile: 

11 For “there is no respect of per- 

sons with God. 
12 For as many as have “sinned 
without “law shall also perish with- 
out law: and as many as have 
sinned °in the law shall be judged 
by the law; 

13 (For not the hearers of *the 
law are just before God, but the 
doers of the law shall be justi- 


ed. 

14 For when the Gentiles, which 
have not the law, do by nature the 
things contained in the law, these, 
having not the law, are a law unto 
themselves: - 

15 Which shew the *work of the 
law written in their hearts, their 
Sconscience also bearing witness, 
and their ‘thoughts the mean while 
accusing or else excusing one an- 
other;) 

16 In the day when God shall 
‘judge the secrets of men by Jesus 
Christ according to my “gospel. 


A.D. 60. 


@ Rom.3.6,19; 
1 Cor.6.9,10. 

b Rom.9.23; 
Eph.1.7; 2. 
4,7. 

c Rom.3.25. 

d Ex.34.6. 

e Repentance. 
Rom.11.29. 


Jer.17.10; 
Rev.20.12,13. 
h incorrup- 
tion. See 1 
Cor.15.42. 
i Life (eter- 


Acts 10.34. 
m Sin. Rom.3. 


p a law. The 
statement is 


any law. 

qin that they. 

71 Cor.5.1. 

s Acts 24.25; 

1 Cor.5.1. 

t their rea- 
sonings one 
with an- 
other accus- 
ing or else 
excusing 
them. 

u Gospel.Rom. 


v v.23; John 5. 
45; 9.28,29. 

w Rom.3.2; 
Lk.12.47,48. 

x Or, rob tem- 
ples. 

y Sin, Rom.3. 
23, note. 

z Isa.52.5. 

a because of. 

b 2 Sam.12.14; 
Tsa.52.5. 

¢ Rom.10.3, 
note. 

d the uncir- 
cumcision, 
i.e. the Gen- 
tiles. 

e Law (of Mo- 
ses). vs.12- 
27; Rom.3.19, 
20,21,27,28, 
31; 4.13-16. 


f See Rom.9. 
6, note. 

g See Rom.7. 
6, note. 


1193 


. Rom.5. 


(6): The Jew, knowing the law, is 
condemned by the law. 


17 Behold, thou art called a Jew, 
and *restest in the law, and makest 
thy boast of God, 

18 And “knowest his will, and ap- 
provest the things that are more 
excellent, being instructed out of 
the law; 

_19 And art confident that thou 
thyself art a guide of the blind, a 
light of them which are in darkness, 

20 An instructor of the foolish, a 
teacher of babes, which hast the 
form of knowledge and of the truth 
in the law. 

21 Thou therefore which teachest 
another, teachest thou not thyself? 
thou that preachest a man should 
not steal, dost thou steal? 

22 Thou that sayest a man should 
not commit adultery, dost thou com- 
mit adultery? thou that abhorrest 
idols, dost thou *commit sacrilege? 

23 Thou that makest thy boast of 
the law, through “breaking the law 
dishonourest thou God? 

24 For “the name of God is 
blasphemed among the Gentiles 
“through you, as it is >written. 

25 For circumcision verily profit- 
eth, if thou keep the law: but if 
thou be a *breaker of the law, thy 
circumcision is made uncircum- 
cision. 

26 Therefore if the uncircumcision 
keep the “righteousness of the law, 
shall not his uncircumcision be 
counted for circumcision? 

27 And shall not ¢uncircumcision 
which is by nature, if it fulfil the 
law, iudge thee, who by the letter 
and circumcision dost %transgress 
the law? 

28 fFor he is not a Jew, which is 
one outwardly; neither is that cir- 
cumcision, which is outward in the 
flesh: 

29 But he is a Jew, which is one 
inwardly; and circumcision is that 
of the heart, Sin the spirit, and not 
in the lettez; whose praise is not of 
men but of God. 


CHAPTER 3. 


(7) The advantage of the Jew 
works his greater condemnation. 


Ve= advantage then hath the 
Jew? or what profit 1s there 
of circumcision? 

2 Much every way: chiefly, be- 
cause that unto them were commit- 
ted the oracles of God. 


3 3] 


ROMANS. 


a, Ga 


Tal 
bg 


[3.24 


3 For what if some did not be- 
lieve? shall their unbelief make the 
“faith of God without effect? 

4 God forbid: yea, let God be 
btrue, but every man a liar; as it is 
written, ‘That thou mightest be 
justified in thy sayings, and might- 
est overcome when thou art 
judged. 

5 But if our unrighteousness com- 
mend the ¢rightequsness of God, 

what shall we say? Js God un: 
righteous who taketh vengeance? 
(I speak as a man) 

6 God forbid: for then how shall 
God judge the ¢world? 

7 For if the truth of God Rath 
more abounded through my lie unto 
his glory; why yet am I also judged 
as a fsinner? 

8 And not rather, (as we be slan- 
derously reported, and as some 
affirm that we say.) Let us do evil, 
that good may come? whose £dam- 
nation is just. 


(8) The final verdict: the whole 
world guilty before God. 


9 What then? are we better than 
they? No, in no wise: for we have 
before proved both Jews and Gen- 


tiles, that,.they.are,all under_fsin;. 
10 As itis. written, There is none 
‘righteous,..no,.not.one: 


11 There is none that Junder- 
standeth, there is none that seeketh 
after ‘God. 

12 They are all gone out of the 
‘way, they are together become un- 
profitable; there is none that doeth 
good, no, not one, 


A.D. 60. 


@ faithfulness. 
‘found true. 
¢ Psa.51.4. 
dy.21, note. 


¢kosmos (Mt.4.8) 
=mankind. 


\f Sin, v.23, note, 


Vi.e. condemna- 
tion. 


A Psa.14.1,3. 
iRom.10.10, note. 
J Psa.14.2. 

k God, Psa.14.2. 
'Psa.14.3. 

m Psa.5.9; 140.3. 

” Psa.10.7. 


oIsa.59.7. 
PIsa.59,7,8. 
9God. Psa.36.1. 

r Psa.36.1. 

* Law (of Moses). 


13 Their throat fs an open “sepul- 
chre; with their tongues they have 
used deceit; the poison of asps is 
under their lips: : 

14 Whose mouth ss full of cursing 
and “bitterness: 

15 Their feet are swift to shed 
°blood: : : 

16 Destruction and misery are in 
their ways: 

17 And the way of peace have 
they not known: 

18 There is no fear of {God before 
their "eyes. 

79 Now we know that what things 
soever the ‘Slaw saith, it saith to 
them who are under the law: that 
every mouth may be stopped, and 
all the world may ‘become guilty 
before God. 

20 Therefore by the deeds of the 
lamtthere..shall_no flesh be.%justi- 


Hom tivie 4fied in his sight: for by the law is | 
t 


(S».19.1; Gal.3. 
1-29.) 


tbe brought under] 
the judgment of 
God. 

u Psa.143.2. 

Cf. Gal. 2.16, 

v Justification. vs. 
20-28. (Lk.18, 14.) 

w Sin, v.23, note. 

*apart from the 
law a righteous- 
ness of God hath 
been manifested, 


'v Righteousness 


z through faith in. 


@ Faith. vs.22,25, 
26,28,31; Rom.3. 
25,26. (Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 


ne knowledge of *sin. 


Part IJ. Justification by faith in 
Christ crucified, the alone rem- 
edy for sins (Rom, 3. 21-5. 11). 


(1) Justification defined. 


21 But now *the !righteousness 
of God without the law is mani- 
fested, being witnessed by the law 


|and the prophets; 
| 22 Even the Yrighteousness of God 


which is “by @faith of Jesus Christ 
unto all and upon all them that 


believe: for... erence: 
nd.come 


23 For.all have.?sinned, 
of,.God; 
24 Being justified freely by his 


1 The righteousness of God is neither an attribute of God, nor the changed char- 
acter of the believer, but Christ Himself, who 


every demand of the law, and who is, b 
25. 50; Jas. 2. 23), ““made unto us. . 


fully met in our stead and behalf 


y the act of God called imputation (Lev. 
. righteousness’”’ (1 Cor. 1. 30). 


“The be- 


liever in Christ is now, by grace, shrouded under so complete and blessed a right- 
cousness that the law from Mt. Sinai can find neither fault nor diminution therein. 


This is that which is called the righteousness of God by faith.”—Bunyan. 
or. 5. 21; Rom. 4. 6; 10. 4; Phil. 3. 9. 
2 Sin, Summary: The literal meanings of the Heb. and 


236 


rendered “‘sin,’’ “sinner,” 
festations. 


See Rom. 3. 26. 


ing of the 
between good and evil (Psa. 51. 1; Lk. 15. 29); iniquity, 
whether expressly forbidden or not; error, a departure from 


See 


Gr. words variously 


ir etc., disclose the true nature of sin in its manifold mani- 
Sin is transgression, an overstepp 


law, the divine boundary 
an act inherently wrong, 
right (Psa. 51.9; Rom. 3. 


23); missing the mark, a failure to meet the divine standard; trespass, the intrusion 


of self-will into the sphere of divine authority (Eph. 2. 1); 
anarchy (1 Tim, 1. 9); unbelief, or an insult to the divine 
Sin originated with Satan (Isa. 14. 12-14); entered the world 


lawlessness, or spiritual 
veracity (John 16. 9). 
through Adam (Rom, 


5. 12); was, and is, universal; Christ alone excepted (Rom. 3. 23>) IsBet. 25/22) sian: 
curs the penalties of spiritual and physical death (Gen. 2. 17; 3. 19; Ezk. 18, 4,20, 


Rom. 6. 23); and has 


; no remedy but in the sacrificial death 
Acts 4, 12) availed of by faith (Acts 13. 38, 39). 
An act, the violation of, or want of obedience 
absence of righteousness: a nature. 


1194 


of Christ (Heb. 9, 26; 


Sin may be summarized as threefold: 
i to the revealed will of 
enmity toward God. 


God; a state, 


\ 


et 


3:25) ROMANS. [3 31 


“i ckagal ha el a lredemption| A.D. 60. sachs PF hapiy ae Py faith fwithout 
ist Jesus: me e deeds of the law. 
25 Whom God hath set forth to be| “Romauie (2) Justificati ; 1 
..a @propitiation through $faith inhis| ¢Rem.37A) Joh UA PESRTOCI IS el aaa 
~ blood, to declare his righteousness ® Faith, Rom. 90) Fecthe at Chal ofl the “aus 
for th Seay = . (Gen.3.20; 
or the “remission of sins that are}. Hebi.) only? is he not also of the Gentiles? 


ast, ough : 

p : through the forbearance of “Chris Ror. ves - the — a diet 
26 To declare, J say, at this time] Heb.t0.18)) = Soh ag Rel it pr eed “Ty Bs 
his righteousness: that he might “passing pane sores ustthy te \ Clscunicitva Tee, 
be just, and the justifier of him| fmetesne’ |feith, and) uncircumcision through 

’ at aith. 


which believeth in Jesus. Be es i : f 

27 Where is boasting then?) ¢faith. Rom.3. (3) Justification by faith 

It is excluded. By what law?] He\io3 7” honours the law. ‘ 

of works? Nay: but by the law |/apart from. 31 5Do we then make void the 

ee faith. Rt Oa: law through faith? God forbid: 
8 Therefore we conclude that a} Heb.11.39.) yea, we establish the law. 


1 Redemption, “‘to deliver by paying a price.”” The N.T. doctrine. The N.T. 
records the fulfilment of the O.T. types and prophecies of redemption through the 
sacrifice of Christ. The completed truth is set forth in the three words which are 
translated redemption: (1) agorazo, “to purchase in the market.” The underlying 
thought is of a slave-market. The subjects of redemption_are “scold under sin” 
(Rom. 7. 14), but are, moreover, under sentence of death (Ezk. 18. 4; John 3. 18, 
19; Rom. 3. i9; Gel. 3. 10), and the purchase price is the blood of the Redeemer 
who dies in their stead (Gal. 3. 13; 2 Cor. 5. 21; Mt. 20. 28; Mk. 10. 45; 1 Tim. 2. 6; 
I Pet. 1. 18); (2) exagorazo, “to buy out of the market.”” The redeemed are never 
again to be exposed to sale; (3) [utroo, “to loose,” “to set free by paying a price” 
(John 8. 32; Gal. 4. 4, 5, 31; 5. 13: Rom. 8. 21). Redemption is by sacrifice and by 
power (Ex. 14. 30, note); Christ paid the price, the Holy Spirit makes deliverance 
actual in experience (Rom. 8.2). See also Ex. 14, 36, note ~Isa. 59. 20, note; Rom.. 
1. 16, note. 

2'Lit. a propitiatory [sacrifice], through faith by his blood; Gr. hilasterion, 
“place of propitiation.” The word occurs, 1 John 2. 2; 4. 10, as the trans. of hilasmos, 
“that which propitiates,” “a propitiatory sacrifice.” Hilasterion is used by the 
Septuagint, and in Heb. 9. 5 for “mercy-seat.” The mercy-seat was sprinkled 
with atoning blood on the day of atonement (Lev. 16. 14), in token that the right- 
eous sentence of the law had been (typically) carried out, so that what must else 
have been a judgment-seat could righteously be a mercy-seat (Heb. 9. 11-15; 4. 14- 
16), a place of communion (Ex. 25. 21, 22). In fulfilment of the type, Christ is 
Himself the hilasmos, “that which propitiates,” and the hilasterion, “‘the place of 
propitiation”—the mercy-seat sprinkled with His own blood—the token that in our 
stead He so honoured the law by enduring its righteous sentence that God, who 
ever foresaw the cross, is vindicated in having “passed over” sins from Adam to 
Moses (Rom. 5. 13) and the sins of believers under the old covenant (Ex. 29. 33, 
note), and just in justifying sinners under the new covenant. There is no thought 
in propitiation of placating a vengeful God, but of doing right by His holy law and 
so making it possible for Him righteously to show mercy. 

3 “His righteousness” here is God’s consistency with His own law and holiness 
in freely justifying a sinner who believes in Christ; that is, one in whose behalf 
Christ has met every demand of the law (Rom. 10. 4). 

4 Justification, Summary: Justification and righteousness are inseparably 
united in Scripture by the fact that the same word (dikaios, “righteous”; dikaioo, 
“to justify”) is used for both. The believing sinner is justified because Christ, 
having borne his sins on the cross, has been “made unto him righteousness’”- (1 Cor. 
1, 30). Justification originates in grace (Rom, 3. 24; Tit. 3. 4, 5); is through the 
redemptive and propitiatory work of Christ, who has vindicated the law (Rom. 3. 
24, 25; 5. 9); is by faith, not works (Rom, 3. 28-30; 4. 5; 5. 1; Gal. 2. 16; 3. 8, 24); 
and may be defined as the judicial act of God whereby He justly declares right- 
eous one who believes on Jesus Christ. It is the Judge Himself (Rom, 8. 31-34) 
who thus declares. The justified believer has been in court, only to learn that 
nothing is laid to his charge (Rom. 8. 1, 33, 34). ‘ ‘ 

5 The sinner establishes the law in its right use and honour by confessing his 
guilt, and acknowledging that by it he is justly condemned. _ Christ, on the sinner’s 
behalf, establishes the law by enduring its penalty, death. Cf. Mt. 5. 17, 18. 

1195 


ll 


41] ROMANS. [4 asf 


A.D. 60. |the steps of that faith of our father ~ 
CHAPTER 4. Abraham, which he had being yet 
(4) Justification by faith |a Justifica- _|UnCircumcised. 

illustrated. ae | (7) Justification is apart from 

KA en eng we Le then that He Rom.3. the law. 

raham our father, as per- 7 = 
taining to the flesh, hath found? |» Faith. Rom.|, 13 For the trea that he should 
2 For if Abraham were 4justified| 5-1,2._ (Gen. |be the heir of the *world, was not 
by lworks, he hath whereof to| 32° Heb-11.,to Abraham, or to his seed, through 
glory; but not before God. oe the law, but through the righteous- 
3 For what saith the scripture?|¢ Jehovah, ness of faith. 


Abraham believed ‘God, and it| G¢"-15-6- 14 For if they which are of the 
was 4counted unto him for ‘right-|¢or, reck- _|!aw e heirs, faith is made void, and 
eousness. oned, or im-|the promise made of none effect: 

4 Now to him that worketh is the) 2ufed,ic | 15 Because the law worketh 
reward not reckoned of /grace. but| Puicror *~|wrath: for where no law is, there 
of debt. See Phm.i8, |S no ‘transgression. 


; same word. 16 Therefore it is of faith, that rt 
(5) Justifying faith defined. (See|, ,- might be by grace; te the end the 
e Righteous- az = 
also'vs. 18-21.) ness. v5.5.6, oe ene “ nove nd ou oa 
5 But to him that worketh not,| steRom3, |5°°S Rot tos That eresOwnlen Ie j 
but believeth on him that justifieth| 22, nore” | the ‘law, but to that also which is 7 
the ungodly, his ¢faith is ¢counted iG Gi - eae of Bbeabare Ronis 
. race (in r 3 
for righteousness. : saly-)_.NS4,2; 17 {As it is eaten mJ] have made 
6 Even as David also describeth 16; Kom:S, thecle fathesor cane nations, ). be- 
whom God Amputeth Sigheccusnes| ansat [fare him whom he eliewed, even 
5 i enn 2-k/-) |God, who quickenet e dead, an 
without works, ¢ Faith. Rom.|Ccalleth those things which be not as 
7 Saying, Blessed are they whose 
hiniauiti Fe ah 5.1,2. (Gen.3.| though they were. 
niquities are ‘forgiven, and whose] 30-’Heb. 18 Wh - h elievedai 
Gis areiciy shed ° 11:39.) 8 o against hope believed in 
8 Blessed is the man to whom the hope, that he might become og 
: PAE ah h Sin. Rom.3. |father of many nations; according 
JLord will not ¢impute sin : 
N 23, note. © that which was spoken, “So shall 
(6) Justification is apart from |i Forgiveness.| thy seed be. Bs 4 
ordinances: 2 Cor.2.7-10.| 19 And being not weak in faith, 
, aes he considered not his own body now 
9 Cometh this blessedness then tani dead, when he was about an hun- 
upon the circumcision only, or upon|j Jehovah. vs.| dred years old, neither yet the dead- 
the uncircumcision also? for we say} 7:8: Psa-32.2-|ness of Sarah’s womb: 
that faith was reckoned to Abra-|pie. Anh 20 He staggered not at the prom- 
ham for righteousness. ise of God through unbelief; but 


10 How was it then reckoned? pts (of was strong in faith, giving glory to 
when he was in circumcision, or in| 73%¢°2"% |God; 
uncircumcision? Not in circumei-| 5.13,20. 21 And being fully persuaded 
sion, but in uncircumcision. : ee that, what he had promised, he was 
11 And he received the sign of cir- Bae able also to perform. 


cumcision, a seal of the righteous-|m Gen.17.5. 22 And therefore it was ¢imputed 
ness of the faith which he had yet Geeis to him for righteousness. 

being uncircumcised: that he might|” &e™-!5-5- 23 Now it was not written for his 
be the father of all them that be-|oie.reckoned.|sake alone, that it was °imputed ‘to 
lieve, though they be not circum- him; 


cised; that righteousness might be|’ 77? Sia" | 24 But for us also, to whom it 


4imputed unto them also: Ce 11,23,24; shall be ?imputed, if we believe on 
12 And the father of circumcision} Rom.5.13. |him that raised up Jesus our Lord 


to them who are not of the circum- ae Ayia from the dead; 
ctsion only, but who also walk in 25 Who was delivered for our 
Ra SS PEs ith ee Pa 29 ROP WAS A GCN VET COs Or OUs 


. _\Cf. Jas. 2. 24. These are two aspects of one.truth. Paul speaks of that which 
justifies man before God, viz.: faith alone, wholly apart from works; James of the 
proof before men, that he who professes to have justifying faith really has it. Paul 
speaks of what God sees—faith; James of what men see—works, as the visible evi- 
dence of faith. Paul draws his illustration from Gen. 15. 6; James from Gen. 22. 


1-19, James’ key-phrase is “ye see” Jas. 2. 24), for men cannot see fai 
manifested through works. ‘ ) Scions baa ates 
1196 


Si 


~ ROMANS. 


[5 16 


offences, and was !raised again for 
our justification. 


CHAPTER 5. 


The seven results of 
justification. 


Re Se being justified by 
“faith, we have peace with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ: 

2 By whom also we ‘have access 
by faith into this grace wherein we 
stand, and rejoice in hope of the 
glory of God. 

3 And not only so, but we glory 
in tribulations also: knowing that 
tribulation worketh patience; 

4 And patience, experience; and 
Se And ioe maketh 

ope make amed; 

pe And the 4Joveo is Shed 

abroad in our hearts by the ‘Holy 
Ghost which is given unto us. 

6 For when we were yet without 
strength, in due time Christ died 
for the ungodly. 

7 For_scarcely for a ‘righteous 
man will one die: yet peradven- 
ture for a good man some would 
even dare to die. 

8 But God commendeth his ¢love 
toward us, in that, while we were 
yet sinners, Christ died for us. 
er os ey POk t 

~ “justified Db s blood, we “shall be 
saved from wra ough him. 

10 For if, when we were enemies, 
we were Jreconciled to God by the 


. AD. 60. 


@ Faith. Rom.10.4, 
6,8,9,10,17. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb.11.39.) 


through. 


¢ have had our 
access. 


@ Law (of Christ). 
Rom. 13.8,10. 
(Gal.6.2; 

2 John5.) 


e Holy Spirit. 
Rom.8.1-27. (Mt. 
1.18; Acts2.4.) 


FS Righteousness. 
vs.1,19. See Rom. 
10.10, note. 


gown. 


A Justification. vs. 
1,9; Rom.8.30,33. 
(Lk.18.14; Rom. 
3.28.) 


t Sacrifice (of 
Christ). vs.1,9; 1 
Cor.5.7. (Gen.4. 
4; Heb.10.18.) 


3 Reconciliation. 
vs.10,11. 
Cor.5.18,19,20; 
Col.1.21. 


kin his life. John 
14.19; Col.3.3,4. 


! reconciliation. 
See v.10, refs. 


m Imputation. 
om.6.11. 
25.50; Jas.2.23.) 


n Death (physi- 
cal), 1Cor.15.22, 
23. (Gen.3.19; 
Heb.9.27.) 


° the one the 
many died. 


‘death of his Son, much more, being 


-\reconciled, we shall be saved “by 


his life. 

_11 And not only so, but we also 
joy in God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom we have now re- 
ceived the ‘atonement. 


Part Ill. Sanctification: in- 
dwelling sin, and the Gospel 
remedy (to 8. 13). 


(1) Through Adam, sin and 
death. 


12 2Wherefore, as by one man sin 
entered into the world, and death 
by sin; and so death passed upon 
all men, for that all $have sinned: 

13 (For until the law sin was in 
the world: but sin is not “imputed 
when there is no law. 

14 Nevertheless “death reigned 
from 4Adam to Moses, even over 


them that had not sinned after the 
similitude of Adam’s transgression, 
who is the figure of him that was 
to come. 


(2) Through Christ, righteous- 
ness and life. 


15 But not as the offence, so also is 


- the free gift. For if through the of- 


fence of °one many be dead, much 
more the grace of God, and the gift 
by grace, whichisby one man, Jesus 
Christ, hath abounded unto many. 

16 And not as it was by one that 
‘sinned, so is the gift: for the judg- 


ment was by one to condemnation, 


1 Christ died under our sins (1 Pet. 2. 24; 2 Cor. 5. 21); that He was raised and 
exalted to God’s right hand, ‘now to appear in the presence of God for us” (Heb. 9. 
24), is the token that our sins are gone, that His work for us has the divine appro- 
bation and that we, for whom He suffered, are completely justified. 

2 The “wherefore” relates back to Rom. 3. 19-23, and may be regarded as a con- 
tinuation of the discussion of the universality of sin, interrupted (Rom. 3. 24-5. 11) 


by the passage on justification and its results. 
3 The first sin wrought the moral ruin of the ra 3 

(1) Death is universal (vs. 12, 14), all die: sinless infants, moral people, re- 
equally with the depraved. For a universal effect there must be a 


ple. 
ligious people, 


universal cause; that cause is a state of universal sin (v. 12). 
versal state must have had a cause. 


the race. The demonstration is sim- 


(2) But this uni- 


It did. The consequence of Adam’s sin was 


that “the many were made sinners” (v. 19)—‘‘By the offence of one judgment 


came upon all men unto condemnation” (v. 18). ; 
From Adam to Moses death reigned (v. 14), although, there being no law, 
Accordingly, from Gen. 4. 7 to Ex. 29. 14 
tioned. Then, since physical death from Adam. 


here. 


personal guilt was not imputed (v. 


the sin-offering is not once men 


13). 


(3) Personal sins are not meant 


to Moses was not due to the sinful acts of those who die (v. 13), it follows that it 
was due to a universal sinful state, or nature, and that state is declared to be our 


inheritance from Adam. 
ture (Gen. 6. 5; 1 Ki. 8. 46; 
Rom. 1, 21; 2.; 3. 9-19; 
19-21; Eph. 2. 1-3, 11, 12; 4. 18-22; 


7. 24; 8. 7; John 3. 6; 
Col. 1. 21; Heb. 3. 13; Jas. 4. 14). ( 

4 Broadly, the contrast is: Adam: sin, death; Christ: righteousness, life. 
- drew down into his ruin the old creation (Rom. 8. 19-22) of 


ee 1197 


(4) The moral state of fallen man is described in Scrip- 
Psa. 14. 1-3; 39. 5; Jer. 17. 9; Mt. 18. 11; Mk. 7. 20, 23; 
1 Cor. 2. 14; 2 Cor. 3. 14; 4. 4; Gal. 5. 


See 1 Cor. 15. 22. 
Adam 
which he was lord and 


5 17] 


ROMANS. 


Le 


[6 16 


but the free gift is of many 
2offences unto justification. 

17 For if by one man’s “offence 
death reigned by one; much more 
they which receive. abundance of 
grace and of the gift’ of Srighteous- 
ness shall reign in life by one, Jesus 
Christ. ) 

18 Therefore as by the “offence of 
one judgment came upon all men 
to condemnation; even so by the 
righteousness of one the free é1ft 
came upon all men unto ‘justifica- 
tion of life, 

19 ’3 di i- 

‘© enc ay were. I ¢ TS, SO 
by the — — of one 
be made righteous. 

20 Moreover the ¢law “entered, 
that the offence might abound. 
But where sin abounded, grace did 
much more abound: 

21 That as !sin hath reigned unto 
death, even so might ‘grace reign 
through righteousness unto éeternal 
life by Jesus Christ our Lord. 


CHAPTER 6. 


(3) Deliverance from the power 
of indwelling sin. 
(a) By union with Christ in 
death and resurrection. 


Na shall we say then? Shall 
we continue in 4sin, that 
hgrace may abound? 

2 God forbid. How shall we that 
are dead to 4sin, live any longer 
therein? ; 

3 Know ye not, that ‘so many of 
us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ were baptized into his 
death? 

4 Therefore we are buried with 
him by baptism into death: that 
like as Christ was raised up from 
the dead by the glory of the Father, 
even so we also should walk in 
newness of life. 


A.D. 60. 


a Sin. Rom.3. 


23, note. 

b Righteous- 
ness, vs.17, 
18,21. See 
Rom.3.22, 
note. 

¢ vs.i5-18; 
Isa.53.11. 

d.Law (of Mo- 
ses). Rom.6. 
14,15. (Ex.8. 
1; Gal.3.1-29. 

¢came in by 
the way. 
Gal.3.19-25, 

if Grace (in 
salv.). vs.2, 
15-21; Rom. 
11.5,6. (Rom. 
3.24; John 
1.16, note.) 

g Life (eter- 
nal). vs.10- 
21. Rom.6.4, 
22,23. (Mt.7. 
14; Rev. 
22.19.) 

h Grace (im- 
parted). 
vs.1,14,15; 
Rom.12.3,6. 
(Rom.§.1-15; 
2 Pet.3.18, 
note.) 

tall we who 
were bap- 
tized. 

j Or, become 
united with 


him by, ete. 

k was. 

| done away. 

m hath died. 

n Lit. once for 
all. Heb.10. 
10-12,14, 

o the life that 
Jesus liveth. 

p even so. 

qgImputation. 
Rom.8.18. 
(Lev.25.50; 
Jas.2.23.) 

r Righteous- 
ness. vs.13, 
16,18,19,20. 
See Rom.10. 
10, note. 

s Law (of Mo- 
ses). Rom.7. 
4-9,12-14,16, 
25. (Bx.19.1; 
Gal.3,1-29.) 


5 For if we have been Jplanted to- 
gether in the likeness of his death, 
we shall be also 1n the likeness of 
his resurrection: 

6 Knowing this, that our old man 
kis crucified with him,that the body 
of sin might be ‘destroyed, that 
henceforth we should not serve sin. 

7 For he that ™is dead is freed 
from sin. 

8 Now if we be dead with Christ, 
we believe that we shall also live 
with him: 

9 Knowing that Christ being 
raised from the dead dieth no 
more; death hath no more domin- 
ion over him. 

10 For in that he died, he died 
unto @sin “once: but °in that he 
liveth, he liveth unto God. / 


(b) By counting the old life to 
be dead, and by yielding the 
new life to God. 


11 ?Likewise_¢reckon ye also 
yourselves to be dead indeed unto 
sin, but alive unto God through 
Jesus, Christ our Lord. 

12 Let not @sin therefore reign in 
your mortal body, that ye should 
obey it in the lusts thereof. 

13. Neither yield ye your members 
as instruments of “unrighteousness 
unto 4sin: but yield yourselves unto 
God, as those that are alive from 
the dead, and your members as 
nen of righteousness unto 


(c) By deliverance from the law 
through death, and by the 
Spirit (i.e. as in Rom. 8. 2). 


_14 For sin shall not have domin- 
ion over you: for ye are not under 
the Slaw, but under grace, 

15 3What then? shall we ¢sin, be- 
cause we are not under the law, but 
under ‘grace? God forbid. 

16 Know ye not, that to whom ye 


head. Christ brings into moral unity with God, and into eternal life, the new 


creation of which He is Lord and Head (Eph. 1. 22, 23). 


Even the animal and 


material creation, cursed for man’s sake (Gen. 3. 17), will be delivered by Christ 


(Isa. 11. 6-9; Rom. 8. 19-22). 


1 “Sin” in Rom, 6., 7, is the nature in distinction from “‘sins,” which are mani- 


festations of that nature. 
also appears. 


Cf. 1 John 1. 8 with 1 John 1. 10, where this distiriction 


2 The expression occurs elsewhere, in Eph. 4. 22 and Col. 3. 9, and always means 


the man of old, corrupt human nature, the inborn tendency to evil in all men. 
Rom, 6, 6 it is the natural man himself; in Eph. 4. 22; Col. 3. 9 his ways. 


In 
Posi- 


tionally, in the reckoning of God, the old man is crucified, and the believer is 
exhorted to make this good in experience, reckoning it to be so by definitely “put 


ting off” the old man and “putting on” the new (Col. 3. 8-14. 


note 3). 


See Eph, 4. 24, 


3 The old relation to the law and sin, and the new relation to Christ and life are 


1198 


_ 


6 17} . ROMANS. [7 10 
yield yourselves servants to obey,| A.D. 60. husband so long as he liveth;, but 
his “servants ye are to whom ye if the husband be dead, she is loosed 
pbey: whether of bsin a crash, or from the law of Sher husband. 
of obedience unto righteousness 3 So then if, while ¢her husb 

17 But God be thanked, that ye|*2or@ ser liveth, she be vienna cities 
were the servants of 4sin, but ye| man, she shall be called an adul- 
have obeyed from the heart that/? Sim. Rom.3. |teress: but if Sher husband be dead, 


form of doctrine which was deliv-| "°° {she is free from that law; so that 
ered you. 4 ¢ lawlessness, |She is no adulteress, though she be 
18 Being then made free from at eaneaee married to another man. 


bsin, ye became the servants of|" sion. Rev. 4 Wherefore, my brethren, ye also 
Sarhieaeetes oe Z 22.11, note. “er a. dead Be the law *by the 
Is ‘ter the manner o : body o rist; that ye should be 
mien because of the infirmity of your e Life (etet- limarried to another, even to him 
flesh: for as ye have yielded your! 22,23; Rom. |who is raised from the dead, that 
members servants to uncieanness| 876,10,  |we should bring forth fruit unto 
and to “iniquity unto iniquity; even| 217.19, {God. 
so now yield. your members. ser- 5 For when we were in the flesh, 
vants te righteousness unto ¢holi-|f in. the motions of'sins, which were by 
“aS regi a ce the law, did work in our members 
: ye were the servants to bring forth fruit unto death. 
of sin, ye were free from right-|s were made 6 But now we “are delivered from 
eousness. i fel ceogs the law, ‘that being dead wherein 
21 What fruit had ye then ini;through. |we were held; that we should serve 


those things whereof ye are now] . . ‘in Inewness of spirit, and not in 
ame eh the end of those i oes the oldness of the letter. 
ngs 1s death. Greek . : 
422 et eee being made free from word, Bride (d) ibs Nevin lle ted made 
sin, and become’ servants to God,| (of Christ).  ) 
ye have your. fruit unto ¢holiness, (ohn 30 7 What shall we say then? Is the 
and the end everlasting life. Rev.19.6-8.) \law Ssin? God forbid. Nay, I had 


23 For the wages of sin is death;|, p26 been |20t known sin, but by the law: for 
but the gift of God is ‘eternal life|” cischarged. I had not known “lust, except the 
fehrough Jesus Christ our Lord. __.__ |law had said, *Thou shalt not covet. 

Thaving died) 8 But sin, taking occasion by the 
CHAPTER 7. Ce eee ee coniriwcrnces ated 
D) nce. 
Now ye not, brethren, (for I|"coveting- |without the law sin was dead. 
speak to them that know the), £x20.17. 9 For I was alive without the law 


law,) how that the law hath do-| _. once: but 2when the commandment 
minion over a man as long as he ee Bees came, °sin revived, and I died. 
liveth? : 2 HOPE: 10 And the commandment, which 

2 For the woman which hath an was ordained to life, I found to be 
husband is bound by the law to £her unto death. 


illustrated by the effect of death upon servitude (6. 16-23), and marriage (7. 1-6). 
(1) The old servitude was nominally to the law, but, since the law had no deliver- 
ing power, the real master continued to be sin in the nature. The end was death. 
The law could not give life, and “sin” (here personified as the old self) is in itself 
deathful. But death in another form, i.e. crucifixion with Christ, has intervened 
ee 5) to free the servant from his double bondage to sin (v. 6, 7), and to the law 

7. 4, 6). (2) This effect of death is further illustrated by. widowhood. Death 
dissolves the marriage relation (7. 1-3). As natural death frees a wife from the 
law of her husband, so crucifixion with Christ sets the believer free from the law, 
See Gal. 3. 24, note. 

1 Cf. Rom. 2. 29; 2 Cor. 3.6. ‘The letter” is a Paulinism for the law, as “‘spirit’” 
in these passages is his word for the relationships and powers of new life in Christ 
Jesus. In 2 Cor. 3. a series is presented of contrasts of law with “spirit,” of the 
old covenant and the new. ‘The contrast is not between two methods of inter- 
pretation, literal and spiritual, but between two methods of divine dealing: one 
through the law, the other through the Holy Spirit. 

2 The passage (vs. 7-25) is autobiographical. Paul’s religious experience was in 
three strongly marked phases: (1) He was a godly Jew under the law. That the 
passage does not refer to that period is clear from his own explicit statements else- 
where. At that time he held himself to be ‘blameless’ as concerned the law (Phil. 

1199 


7 11] ROMANS. [7 25 


11 For 4sin, taking occasion by| A.D. 60. _18 For I know that in me (that is, 
the commandment, deceived me, in my_flesh,) dwelleth no good 
and by it slew me. ‘ . |thing: for to will is present with me; 

12 Wherefore the law is *holy,|?2'7-F0™-5- Ibut how to perform that which is 


21, note. 
mm: t holy, and be 1 good I find not. 
bas ea todd: rar thee ae Ot ‘} 19 For the good that I would I 
13 Was then that which is good| (things): |do not: but the evil which I would 


made death unto me? God forbid. arse not, that I do. 


But ‘sin, ‘that it might appear| 5;Rev.22.11.)| 20 Now if I do that I would not, 
4sin, working death in me by that! ¢ tha¢ it it is no more I that do it, but ¢sin 
which is good; that sin by the com-| might be that dwelleth in me. 
mandment might become exceeding dene ish ca 21 I find then a 4law, that, when I 
sinful. : ing death, |would do good, evil is present with 
14 For we know that the law is} etc. me. i : 
spiritual: but I am 1dcarnal, sold/die. feshly. | 22 For I delight in the law of God 


‘under 4sin, eOr, outof {after the inward man: I 
the Beever | 93's Bak ik see another law in my 
(e) The strife of the two natures 8.11; 1 Cor. |Mmembers, warring against the law 
under thé law. 15.51,52;1 lof my mind, and bringing me into 


Thes.4.14-17. | captivity to the law of @sin which is 


15 For that which 2I do I allow|fLaw (of Mo-|in my members. 
not: for what I would, that doI not;| $%3,7°°R:= | 24 O wretched man that I am! 


but what I hate, that do I. 19-1; Gal.3._ |who shall deliver me ‘from the body 
16 If then I do that which I} 1-29.) of this death? 

would not, I consent unto the law ae 25_I thank God through Jesus 

that it is good. Rom.8.13, {Christ our Lord. So then with the 


17 Now then it is no more I that] 4-11. (John 1.|mind I myself serve the flaw of 
do it, but ¢sin that dwelleth in|, 13; Jude 23.) God; but with the éflesh the law of 
me. ¢sin. 


So ee SS | EN ‘ 
3.6). He had “‘lived in all good conscience” (Acts 23. 1). (2) With his conver- 
sion came new light upon the law itself. He now perceived it to be “spiritual”: 
(v. 14). He now saw that, so far from having kept it, he was condemned by it. He 
had supposed himself to be “alive,’? but now the commandment really “‘came’’ 
(v. 9) and he “died.” Just when the apostle passed through the experience of 
Rom. 7. 7-25 we are not told. Perhaps during the days of physical blindness at 
Damascus (Acts 9. 9); perhaps in Arabia (Gal. 1. 17). It is the experience of a. 
renewed man, under the law, and still ignorant of the delivering power of the Holy 
Spirit (cf. Rom. 8. 2). (3) With the great revelations afterward embodied in 
Galatians and Romans, the apostle’s experience entered its third phase. He now 
knew himself to be ‘dead to the law by the body of Christ,” and, in the power of 
the indwelling Spirit, “free from the law of sin and death” (8. 2); while “‘the right- 
eousness of the law’? was wrought in him (not by him) while he walked after the 
Spirit (8.4). Romans 7. is the record of past conflicts and defeats experienced as a 
renewed man under law. 

1Cf, 1 Cor. 3.1,4. “Carnal” = “fleshly” is Paul’s word for the Adamic nature, 
and for the believer who “walks,” ice. lives, under the power of it. “Natural” is 
his characteristic word for the unrenewed man (1 Cor. 2. 14), as “spiritual” desig- 
nates the renewed man who walks in the Spirit (1 Cor. 3. 1; Gal. 6.1). 

2.The apostle personifies the strife of the two natures in the believer, the old or 
Adamic nature, and the divine nature received through the new birth (1 Pet. 1. 23:. 
2 Pet. 1. 4; Gal. 2. 20; Col. 1. 27). The “I” which is Saul of Tarsus, and the “I” 
which is Paul the apostle are at strife, and “Paul” is in defeat. In Chapter 8. this 
strife is effectually taken up on the believer’s behalf by the Holy Spirit (8. 2; Gal. 


3 Six “laws” are to be distinguished in Romans: The law of Moses, which con- 
demns (3. 19); “law” as a Principle (3. 21); the law of faith, which excludes self- 


“aw of the Spirit,” having power to deliver the believer from the law of sin which 
is in his members, and his conscience from condemnation by the Mosaic law. More- 
ore the Spirit works in the yielded believer the very righteousness which Moses’ 


1200 


Are 


CHAPTER 8. 
‘HERE is therefore now no ¢con- 
demnation to them which are 
in Christ Jesus, "who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit. 


(f) The new law of the Spirit 
delivers (v. 2), makes right- 
eous (v. 4). 

2 For the law of the !Spirit of life 
in Christ Jesus hath made me free 
from the law of ‘sin and death. 

3 For what the law could not do, 
in that it was weak through the 
flesh, God sending his own Son in 
the likeness of sinful flesh, and ¢for 
sin, condemned sin in the flesh: 

4 That the righteousness of the 
Jaw might be fulfilled in -us, who 
walk not after the flesh, but after 
the Spirit. 


(g) Conflict of the Spirit with 
the flesh. (Cf. Gal. 5. 16-18.) 

5 For they that are after the flesh 
do mind the things of the flesh; but 
they that are after the Spirit the 
things of the Spirit. 

6 For to be écarnally minded is 
death; but to be spiritually minded 
is life and peace. 

7 Because the “carnal mind ss en- 
mity against God: for it is not sub- 
ject to the flaw of God, neither 
indeed can be. 

8 So then they that are in the 

‘flesh cannot please God. 


ROMANS. 


A.D. 60. 


a Judgments 
(the seven). 
Rom.14.10. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20,12.) 

b The state- 
ment ends 
with “Christ 
Jesus”; the 
last ten 
words are in- 
terpolated. 

c Sin. Rom.5. 
21, note. 

d as an offer 
ing. 

ei.e. feshly. 

f Law (of Mo- 
ses). vs.2,3,4, 
7; Rom.9.31, 
32., (Ex.19:1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 

g Life (eter- 
nal). vs.2,6, 
10; 2 Cor.2. 
16. (Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

h Resurrec- 
tion. Phil.3. 
20,21. (Job 
19.25; 1 Cor. 
15.52.) 

i 2. because 


of, 

j Flesh. vs.1,3, 
4-9,12,13; 
Rom.13.14. 
(John 1.13; 
Jude 23.) 

k make to die 
the doings 
of the body. 

1 Adoption. 
vs.15,23; 
Rom.9.4. 


9 But ye-are not in the flesh, but). 


in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit 
of God dwell in you. Now if any 
man have not the Spirit of Christ, 


(Rom.8.15, 
23; Eph.1.5.) 


[8 25 


Spirit do *mortify the deeds of the 


body, ye Shall live. 


Part IV. Fuliresult of the Gospel, 
(1) The believer a son:and heir. 
(Cf. Gal. 4. 4.) 

14 For as many as are led by the 
Spirit.of God, they are the sons of 
God. 

15 For ye have not received the 
spirit of bondage. again to fear; 
but ye have received the Spirit of 
‘adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, 
Father. 

16 The Spirit itself beareth wit- 
ness with our spirit, that we are the 
2children of God: 

17 And if children, then heirs; 
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with 
Christ; if so be that we suffer with 
him, that we may be also glorified 
together. 


(2) The creation, delivered from 
suffering and death, kept for 
the sons of God. (Cf. Gen. 3. 
18, 19.) 

18 For I “reckon that the suffer- 
ings of this present time are not 
worthy to be compared with the 
glory which shall be revealed in us. 

19 For the earnest expectation of 
the "creature waiteth for the °mani- 
festation of the sons of God. 

20 For the “creature was made 
subject to vanity, not willingly, but 
by reason of him who hath sub- 
jected the same in hope. 

21 Because the “creature itself 
also shall be delivered from the 


m Imputa- 
tion, 2 Cor.5. 
19. (Lev.25. 


he is none of his. 

10 And if Christ be in you, the 
body is dead because of ‘sin; but 
the Spirit is life because of right- 
eousness. 

11 But if the Spirit of him that 
hraised up Jesus from the dead 
dwell in you, he that raised up 
Christ from the dead shall also 
quicken your mortal bodies ‘by his 
Spirit that dwelleth in you. 

12 Therefore, brethren, we are 
debtors, not to the flesh, to live 
after the flesh. : 

13 For if ye live after the Jflesh, 
ye shall die: but if ye through the 


50; Jas.2.23.) 
n creation. 
vs.30,33; cf. 
Gen.3.17-19. 
o Lit. unverl- 
ing. Mt.13. 
40-43; 1 John 
2. 


3:2. 

p Lit. placing 
as sons, See 
Adoption, 
v.15, ref. 

@ Eph.1.14; 4. 
30; Phil.3. 

ry Or, in that 
hope were 
we saved. 


bondage of corruption into the glori- 
ous liberty of the children of God. 

22 For we know that the whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in» 
pain together until now. 

23 And not only they, but our- 
selves. also, which have the first- 
fruits of the Spirit, even we our- 
selves groan within ourselves, wait- 
ing for the adoption, to wit, 
the %redemption of our body. 

24 For "we are saved by hope: 
but hope that is seen is not hope: 
for what a man seeth, why doth.he 
yet hope for? 

25 But if we hope for that we see 
nek then do we with patience wait 
or it. 


1 Hitherto in Romans the Holy Spirit has been mentioned but once (Rom. 5. 5); 
in this chapter He is mentioned nineteen times. 


power (Ex. 14. 30, note). 
8. of redemptive power. 
2Gr. teknon, ‘‘one 

“sons’”’ (Gr. huios). 


Also “Adoption” (Rom. 8. 15, 23; Eph. 1. 5). 


1201 


a 


Redemption is by blood and by 


Rom, 3. 21-5. 11 speaks of the redemptive price; Rom. 


born,” a child (and so in vs. 17, 21); not, as in verse 14, 
See Gal. 4. 1, 7, where babyhood and sonhood are. contrasted. 


8 26] 


ROMANS. 


7 er 


[9 8 


(3) The Spirit an indwelling In- 
tercessor. (Cf. Heb. 7. 25.) 


26 Likewise the Spirit also help- 
eth our infirmities: for we know not 
¢what we should pray for as we 
ought: but the Spirit itself maketh 
intercession for us with groanings 
which cannot be uttered. 

27. And he that searcheth the 
hearts knoweth what is the mind 
of the ‘Spirit, because he maketh 
intercession for the saints accord- 
ing to the will of God. 


(4) The unfailing purpose of 
God through the Gospel. 


28 And we know that all things 
work together for good to them that 
love God, to them who are the 
called according to Ais purpose. 

29 For whom he did ¢foreknow, 
he also did predestinate to be con- 
formed to the image of his Son, 
that he might be the firstborn 
among many brethren. 

30 Moreover whom he did “pre- 
destinate, them he also called: and 
whom he called, them he also Jjus- 
tified: and whom he justified, them 
he also glorified. 

31 What shall we then say -to 
these things? If God be for us, who 
can be against us? 

32 He that spared not his own 
Son, but delivered him up for us 
all, how shall he not with him also 
freely give us ali things? 

33 Who shall lay anything to the 

charge of God’s 8elect? #It zis God 
that ‘justifieth, 
_34 Who is he that condemneth? 
jIé 1s Christ that died, yea rather, 
that is risen again, who is even at 
the right hand of God, who also 
maketh intercession for us. 


(5). The believer secure. 


35. Who shall separate us from the 
love of Christ? sha// tribulation, or 


distress, or persecution, or famine, |¢ Also v.8; 


or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 
36 As it is written, *For thy sake 


we are killed all the day long; we! note. 
ere accounted as sheep for the|7 Gen.21.12. 


slaughter, 
37 Nay, in all these things we are 


—— 


dren. 
apostle is not considering the 
and the spiritual Israel (Rom. 
1, note. 


more than conquerors through him > 
that loved us. . 
38 For I am persuaded, that nei- 
ther death, nor life, nor /angels, 
nor principalities, nor powers, nor 


a how to pray 


oo Ge things present, nor things to come, 
vs.1,2,5,9,10, | 39 Nor height, nor depth, nor any 
13,13,14,15, jother “creature, shall be able to 
39:23:26,275 |separate us from the love of God, 
(Mt.1.18; which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Acts 2.4.) 

a Tdse Rock CHAPTER 9. 

23, i beri, |Part V._Parenthetic (Rom. 9.- 

20.) 11). The Gospel does not set 
¢Predestina~ | aside the covenants with fs- 

sr Gat, |rael 

reer \(1) The apostolic solicitude for 

Sueiaday. | Israel. 

A etad ] SAY the truth in Christ, I lie 
17; Jude 1.) not, my conscience also bear- 

g Election ing me witness in the *Holy Ghost, 
(corporate). | 2 That I have great heaviness and 
coves continual sorrow in my heart. 
1 Pet.1.2.3 3 For I could wish that myself 

hOr, Shall |were accursed from Christ for my 
God that jbrethrer, my kinsmen according te 
Justifieth? the flesh: 

i Justifica- 
due vs.30, | (2) The sevenfold privilege of 
Tiassa | Israel. . 

_Rom.3.28.) | 4 Who are Israelites: Sto whom 

4 Oe ener sus| Pertaineth the Padoption, and the 
who died? |glory, and the covenants, and the 

k Psa.44.22,  |8iving of the law, and the service 

LHeb.1.4, of God, and the promises; 
note. 5 Whose are the fathers, and of 

m Or, created |whom as concerning the flesh-Christ 
thing. |came, who is over all, God blessed 

of etal id for ever. Amen. 
pene (3) The distinction between 

oversea! Jews who are mere natural 
(prophe- descendants from Abraham, 
giss) e3.U8; | and Jews who are also of his 
(Gen.12.2.3; Spiritual seed. 
Rom.11-28.) | 6 Not as though the word of God 

» Qcooton- hath taken none effect. 1For they 
(Rom.8.15, |are not ali Israeli, which are of 
23; Eph.i.5.) |Tsrael: 


7 Neither, because they are the 
seed of Abraham, are they all 
Wchildren: but, 7In Isaac shall thy 
seed be called. 


(The distinction illustrated.) 
| 8 That is, They which are the 


Gr. teknon, 
child, See 
Rom.8.16, 


i The distinction is Betileed Tseuel after the flesh, the mere natural i 
of Abraham, and Israelites who, through faith, are al posterity 


also Abraham’s spiritual chil- 


Gentiles who believe are also of Abraham’s spitituai seed; but here the 
, but only the two kinds of Israelites, the natural 
4. 1-3; Gal. 3.6, 7, Cf. John 8. 37-39). See Rom. 11. 


1202 


99) ROMANS. [10 3 


children of the flesh, these are not 
the children of God: but the chil- 
dren of the promise are counted for 
the seed. 

9 For this is the word of promise, 
2At this time will I come, and Sarah 
shall have a son. 

10 And not only this; but when 
Rebecca also had conceived by one, 
even by our father Isaac; 

11 (For the children being not 
yet born, neither having done any 
good or evil, that the purpose of God 
according to %election might stand, 
not of works, but of him that calleth;) 

12 It was said unto her, ‘The elder 
shall serve the younger. 

13 As it is written, ¢Jacob have I 
loved, but Esau have I hated. 


(4) God’s mercy is under his 
sovereign will. 


14 What shall we say then? Js 
there unrighteousness with God? 
God forbid. 

15 For he saith to Moses, ¢I will 
have mercy on whom I will have 
mercy, and I will have compassion 
on whom I will have compassion. 

16 So then i¢ is not of him that 
willeth, nor of him that runneth, 
but of God that sheweth mercy. 

17 For the scripture saith unto 
Pharaoh, fEven for this same pur- 
pose have I raised thee up, that I 
might shew my power in thee, and 
that my name might be declared 
throughout all the earth. 

18 Therefore hath he mercy on 
whom he will have mercy, and 
whom he will he hardeneth. 

19 Thou wilt say then unto me, 
Why doth he yet find fault? For 
-who hath resisted his will? 

20 Nay but, O man, who art thou 
that repliest against God? Shall the 
thing formed say to him that formed 
it, Why hast thou made me thus? 

21 Hath not the potter power 
over the clay, of the same lump to 
make one vessel unto honour, and 
another unto dishonour? 

22 What if God, willing to shew 
his wrath, and to make his power 
known, endured with much long- 
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted 


to destruction: 

23 And that he might make 
kn e Ticheés ¢ iS glory on the 
véssels of mércy, which he had afore 
preparéd unto glory, 


A.D. 60. 


a Gen.18.10. 

5 Election 
(corporate). 
Rom.11.5,7, 
28. (Deut.7.6; 
VPet-1.2:) 

c Gen.25.23. 

d Mal.1.2,3. 

e Ex.33.19. 

fEx.9.16. 

g vs.24-30; 
Isa.42.6,7. 

h from 
among. Cf. 
Acts 15.14. 

t Hos.2.23. 

j Hos.1.10. 


k Gr. huios, 
sons. Eph.1. 
5, note. 

! Hos.1.10. 


m vs.27,28; 
Isa.10.22,23. 

n Rom.1.16, 
note. 

o Adonai 
Jehovah. 
Isa.10.23. 

b LORD of 
hosts. Isa. 
1.9. 

qg Remnant. 
vs.25-29; 
Rev.6.9-11. 
(Isa.1.9; 
Rom.11.5.) 

r Rom.10.10, 
note. 

s Rom.10.3, 
note. 

t Law (of Mo- 
ses) .vs.31,32; 
Rom,10.4,5. 
(Ex,19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 

u Christ (as 
Stone). vs. 
32,33; 1 Cor. 
1.23. (Ex.17. 
6; 1 Pet.2.8.) 

v Psa.118.22; 
Isa.8.14; 28. 
16; Mt.21.42; 
1 Pet.2.6, 

w Israel 
(prophe- 
cies). vs.1-4; 
Rev.7.4. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 

x Rom.1.16, 
note. 

y Cf.Rom.3.21, 
rote, 


24 Even us, whom he hath called, 
&not of the Jews only, but also “of 
the Gentiles? 


(5) The prophets foretold the 
blinding of Israel, and mercy 
to Gentiles. 


25 As he saith also in Osee, ‘I 

will call them my people, which 
were not my people; and her be- 
loved, which was not beloved. 
_26 And it shall come to pass, that 
in. the place where it was said unto 
them, 7Ye are not my people; there 
shall they be called the “children 
of the living /God. 

27 Esaias also crieth concerning 
Israel, “Though the number of the 
children of Israel be as the sand of 
the sea, a remnant shall be “saved: 

28 For he will finish the work, and 
cut it short in righteousness: be- 
cause a short work will the °Lord 
make upon the earth. 

29 And as Esaias said before, Ex- 
cept the Lord of Sabaoth had left us 
a %seed, we had been as Sodoma, and 
been made like unto Gomorrha. 

30 What shall we say then? That 
the Gentiles, which followed not 
after “righteousness, have attained 
to righteousness, even the right- 
eousness which is of faith. 

31 But Israel, which followed 
after the law of Srighteousness, hath 
not attained to the law of righteous- 
ness. 

32 Wherefore? Because rhey 
sought it not by faith, but as it 
were by the works of the ‘law. 
For they stumbled at that “stum- 
blingstone; 

33 As it is written, *Behold, I lay 
in Sion a “stumblingstone and rock 
of offence: and whosoever believeth ‘A 


on him shall not be ashamed, 
CHAPTER 10, 


(6) The apparent failure of the 
promises to Israel explained 
by their unbelief. 


PRRETBEEM my heart’s desire 
and prayer to God “for Israel. 
is, that they might be *saved. 

2 For I bear them record that 
they have a zeal of God, but not 
according to knowledge. 

3 For they being ignorant of God’s 
righteousness, and going about to 
establish their own 1%righteousness, 


1 The word “‘righteousness’’ here, and in the passages having marginal references 
to this, means legal, or self-righteousneéss; the futile effort of man to work out under 
law a character which God can approve (Rev. 19. 8, note). 


1203 


1 ie 
‘ 


10 4] 3 ROMANS. [11 4 


0 i Ives} A.D.60. |that preach the “gospel of peace, 
have not submitted themselve: pear oleae et ch tant ee 


unto the shatahd ae es of oe yr Ginest 
4 For Christ is the end o e | ! 
2law for righteousness to every one|* pond iy ee 16 But they have not Pes here 
that believeth. Rom.13.8,10. |the gospel. For Esaias saith, “Lord,. 
ibeth the right-) (&x-19-1; who hath believed our report? 
5 For Moses describe e rig eee aa , ae 
eousness which is of the law, pune Penta {bxldens° hen Lip a le mee eae, 
i th th things| c See v.10. ing, an 
ultvety thane mou ha Ulta |Geds 
“6 But the righteousness which is eDeut30.14, | 18 But _I say, Have they not 
of faith speaketh on this wise, Say] f Mt.10.32; heard? Yes verily, ?their sound 
not in thine heart, ¢Who shall as-| Lk-12.8; went into all the earth, and their 
c i eaven? (that is, to bring|, 48 837, |words unto the ends of the %world. 
cend into h ( : Sgjecteae 
Christ down from above:) Lord. Cf. 19 But_I say, Did not Israe’ 
7 Or, Who shall descend into the i Reo teye know? First Moses saith, "I will 
deep? (that is, to bring up Christ|” 7S7o provoke you to Leg re st en 
again from the dead.) i Faith. vs4, |that are no people, and by a foo 
8 But what saith it? eThe word 6,8,9;10/175 ish a ere will anger ior > 2 
is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and (Gen.3.20; 20 But Esaias is very id, an 
in thy heart: that is, the word of| Heb.i1.39.) |saith, SI was found of them that 
faith, which we preach; j Tsa.28.16; sought me not; I was made mani- 
9 fThat if thou shalt confess bie bio, _ |fest unto ‘them that asked not after 
thy mouth the *Lord Jesus, and|° Gai3.2g.’ |me. Z 
shalt believe in! thine ‘Heart thst] ¢pesoran,” | 245 Butte Larael he qaith, Pall day 
God hath raised him from the dead,|__ Joe! 2.32- long have I stretched forth my 


thou shalt recite ‘ "Nab.Li5. hands unto a disobedient and gain- 
10 For with the heart man ‘*be-|» Gospel. saying people. 

lieveth unto righteousness; and) ¥3515:16; 

with the mouth confession is made (Genta 3; CHAPTER 11. 

unto salvation.” ; Rev.14.6. + p ion 
11 For the scripture saith, 7Who- oe oa (7) But spir. fe Beet is finding 

soever believeth on him shall not be} ¢ oikoumene d 

ashamed. = inhabited SAY then, *Hath “God ?cast 
12 "F or ‘there is no difference be- Tee away, *his pean ce Behe 

tween the Jew and the Greek: for], peut.32.21. |For so am an Israelite, o e 

the same Lord over all is rich unto] Isa.65.1. seed of Abraham, of the tribe of 

all that call upon him. Saag ese Benjamin. 7 
13 For whosoever shall call upon}, jea’6s_2" 2 ’God hath not cast away his 

the name of the ‘Lord shall be|vOr, Did God |people which he %foreknew. Wot 

‘saved. cast off, ye not what the scripture saith of 


14 How then shall they call ee whores pe he Seek intercession 

im i t be-|xR t. |to God against Israel, saying, 
Teved? Re aball ther takers Yeisen. =) sRonch they have ikilled thy 
in him of whom they have not indice 2 Pet.|;Prophets, and digged down thine 
heard? and how shall they hear oo (Acts 2 etek and I am left alone, and they 
without a preacher? ‘ 11 Pet.l. |seek my life. 

15 And how shall they preach, ex- oe ete as 4 But what saith the answer of 
cept they be sent? as it is written,|21 Ki19.18. |Goduntohim? I have reserved to 
™How beautiful are the feet of them Imyself seven thousand men, who 


! Righteousness here, and in the passages which refer to Rom. 10. 10, means that 
righteousness of God which is judicially reckoned to all who believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ; believers are the righteous. See Rom. 3. 21, note. 

? That Israel has not been forever set aside is the theme of this chapter. (1) The 
salvation of Paul proves that there is still a remnant (v.1). (2) The doctrine of the 
remnant proves it (vs. 2-6). (3) The present national unbelief was foreseen (vs. 7- 
10). (4) Israel’s unbelief is the Gentile opportunity (vs. 11-25). (5) Israel is judi- 
cially broken off from the good olive tree, Christ (vs. 17-22). (6) They are to be 
grafted in again (vs. 23, 24). (7) The promised Deliverer will come out of Zion and 
the nation will be saved (vs. 25-29). That the Christian now inherits the distinc- 
tive Jewish promises is not taught in Scripture. The Christian is of the heavenly 
seed of Abraham (Gen. 15. 5, 6; Gal. 3. 29), and partakes of the spiritual blessings 
of the Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 15. 18, note); but Israel as a nation always has 
its own place, and is yet to have its greatest exaltation as the earthly people of God. 
See “Israel” (Gen. 12. 2; Rom. 11. 26); “Kingdom” (Gen. 1. 26-28; Zech. 12. 8). 

1204 


Ss 


Ii 5] ROMANS. [11 25 


feet a a ee Se ee es ee ON, 
have not bowed the knee to the im-| A.D. 60. 15 For if the casting away of them 
age of Baal. ; , be the reconciling of the Jworld, 
5 Even so then at this present / |what shall the receiving of them 
time also there is a 1¢remnant ac- 6 Remaeat. be, ™but life from the dead? 

cording to the %election of grace. Ses note. 16 For if the firstfruit be holy, the 


6 And if “by grace, then 1s it no|, Grace i lump is also holy: and if the roo 
more of works: otherwise grace is Pee 2 Cor. |be holy, so are the branches. i 
no more grace. But if it be of} 8-9. (Rom.3. 17 And if some of the branches be 
works, then is it no more grace:| 34: John ‘: broken off, and thou, being a wild 
otherwise work is no more work. : BS ; me olive tree, wert graffed in among 

(8) National Israel is judicially | Gal.5.4."” Remand wath them partakest ofthe 
E Plisidéd: be eee root and fatness of the olive tree; 

Rese ak 18 Boast not against the branches. 

7 What then? 4Israel hath not ; But if thou boast, thou bearest not 
obtained that which heseeketh for;|¢ ee te), |the root, but the root thee. 
but the ¢election hath obtained it, pera piel 19 Thou wilt say then, The 


and the rest were blinded (Deut.7.6; |branches were broken off, that I 
8 (According as it is written, God} 1 Pet-1.2.) |might be graffed in. 

hath given them the spirit of slum-| / Jehovah. 20 Well; because of “unbelief they 

ber, eyes that they should not see,| 14.29.10. were broken off, and thou °standest 

and ears that they should not hear;)|¢ vs.9,10; by faith. Be not ?highminded, but 

unto this day. Psa.69.22. fear: 


9 And David saith, ¢Let their|h Isa.42.6,7; 21 For if God spared not the nat- 
table be made a snare, and a trap,| 4ts 28.24,28./ural branches, take heed lest he. 
and a stumblingblock, and a recom-| i Deut.32.21. |also spare not thee. 


pence unto them: j kosmos (Mt.| 22 Behold therefore the goodness 

10 Let their eyes be darkened,|° 4.8) = man- |and severity of God: on them which 
that they may not see, and bow| Kind. fell, severity; but toward thee, 
down their back alway. k Psa.72.8-11; |goodness, if thou continue in his 


11 Isay then, Have they stumbled] 1sa.49.6; 60.3.|g0odness: otherwise thou also shalt 
that they should fall? God forbid:|:Rom.1.16, be cut off. 
but rather through their fall salva-} note. 23 And they also, if they Zabide 
tion is come unto the /Gentiles,|m Isa.26.16-19; |not still in unbelief, shall be graffed 
for to provoke them to “jealousy. | Ezk.37.1-14; |in: for God is able to graff them in 
12 Now if the fall of them be the} 4°%613- — /again. 
riches of the Jworld, and the dimin-|” Heb.3.19. 24 For if thou wert cut out of the 
ishing of them the riches of the}lo1Cor.10.1-13;/Olive tree which is wild by nature, 
Gentiles; *how much more their| 2 Cor.1.24. |and wert graffed contrary to nature 


fulness? pb Prov.28.14; |into a peace ian ae much 
‘i Heb.4.1-13. |more shall these, whic. e the nat- 
(9) The Gentiles warned. qJer.3.21-25; |urtal branches, be graffed into their 
13 For Ispeak to you Gentiles, in-| 50.4,5; own olive tree 

asmuch as I am the apostle of the} ? ©or-3-16- 25 For I would not, brethren, that |. 
Gentiles, I magnify mine office: y Mt.13.11, ye should be ignorant of this ” s: OA" 
~14 If by any means I may pro-| 7°#e- tery, lest ye should be wise in your | 
voke to emulation them which are|s Lk.21.24; own conceits ; that blindness in part 


my flesh, and might /save some of| 2 Pet-3.9- {is happened to Israel, until the ?5ful- 
them. | ness of the Gentiles be come in. 


1 Remnant, Summary: In the history of Israel a “remnant’’? may be discerned, 
a@ spiritual Israel within the national Israel. In Elijah’s time 7,000 had not bowed 
the knee to Baal (1 Ki. 19. 18). In Isaiah’s time it was the “very small remnant”’ 
for whose sake God still forbore to destroy the nation (Isa. 1.9), During the cap- 
tivities the remnant appears in Jews like Ezekiel, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, Esther and Mordecai. At the end of the 70 years of Babylonian cap- 
tivity it was the remnant which returned under Ezra and Nehemiah. At the advent 
of our Lord, John the Baptist, Simeon, Anna, and ‘‘them that looked for redemption 
in Jerusalem” (Lk. 2. 38), were the remnant. . During the church-age the remnant 
is composed of believing Jews (Rom. 11. 4,5). But the chief interest in the remnant 
is prophetic. During the great tribulation a remnant out of all Israel will turn to 
Jesus as Messiah, and will become His witnesses after the removal of the church 
(Rev. 7. 3-8). Some of these will undergo martyrdom (Rev. 6. 9-11), some will 
be spared to enter the millennial kingdom (Zech. 12. 6-13. 9). Many of the Psalms 
express, prophetically, the joys and sorrows ot the tribulation remnant. ; : 

2 The “fulness of the Gentiles” is the completion of the purpose of God in this 


1205 


a 


y= ~ <* 


A 


ral 
lye 
oe 


f 


iy 


” put 


[12 raf 


11 26] ROMANS. 
(10) Israel is yet to be saved A.D. 60. _ ing ?sacrifice, tholy, acceptable unto 


nationally. 


26 And so all Israel shall be 
saved: as it is written, ¢There shall 
come out of Sion the °Deliverer, 
and shall turn away ungodliness 
from lJacob: 

27 For this is my “covenant unto 
4them, when I shall take away 
their sins. 

28 As concerning the ‘gospel, they 


@ Christ (Second 
Advent). vs.25, 
26: Phil.3.20,21. 
(Deut.30.3; Acts 
1.9-11.) 


6 Redeemer. 
Isq.59.20,21. 

¢ Isa.27.9; Jer.31. 
31-37; Heb.8.8;. 
10.16. 


@ Israel (prophe- 
cies). vs.1-27; 


are enemies for your sakes: but as| Gen-12.2,3. 


touching the election, they are be- 

loved for the fathers’ sakes. 

29 For the gifts and calling of 
God are without “repentance. 

30 For as ye in times past have 
not /believed God, yet have now 
obtained mercy through their ‘un- 
belief: 

31 Even so have these also now 
not “believed, that through your 
mercy they also may obtain mercy. 
_32 For God hath concluded them 
Jall in unbelief, that he might have 

~. Mercy upon all. 

) 33 O the depth of the riches both 
of the wisdom and “knowledge. of 
God! “how unsearchable are  hi8 
judgments, and his ways past find- 
Ming out” »* : ; 
34 For who hath known the 
Rkmind of the Lord? or who hath 
been his counsellor? 

35 Or ‘who hath first given to 
him, and it shall be recompensed 
unto him again? 

36 For “of him, and through him, 
and to him, are all things: to whom 
be glory for ever. Amen. 


CHAPTER 12. 
.. Part VI. Christian life and ser- 
vice (Rom, 12. 1-15. 33). * 
(1) Consecration... 
I BESEECH you therefore, breth- 
ren, by the "mercies of God, 
that ye °present your bodies a liv- 


age, viz. the outcalling from amon 


é¢ Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 

Gospel. Rom.15. 
16,19,20,29. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev.14.6.) 


f 


9 Repentance. 
2 Cor.7.9,10. (Mt. 
3.2; Acts 17.30.) 

A Or, obeyed. 

i Or,disobedience. 

J Rom,3.9,19; Gal. 
3.22. 

k Spirit of the 
coiee Tsa.40. 


¢1 Chr.29.11-14; 
Job 41.11; Psa.50. 
9-12. 


m™m 1Cor.11.3; 15.28; 
Heb.2.10, 
m1.e. The ‘‘mer- 


cies’’ described 
in Rom.3.22; 8.39. 

° Or, yield. 

P Sacrifice (the be- 
liever-priest’s). 
Phil.4.18. (Gen.4. 
4; Heb.10.18.) 

@ Sanctify, holy 
(persons) (N. 
T.), Rom.15.16. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev.22. 
11.) 

r Gr. latreian, 
trans. “‘divine 
service,’’ Heb. 

8 Separation. 

1 Cor.5.1,2,5-13. 
(Gen.12.1; 2 Cor. 
6.14-17.) 


tage. 

u Trans. trans- 
figured, Mt.17.2. 

v Grace (impart- 
ed). vs.3,6; Rom. 
15.15, (Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 


w hypocrisy. 


God, which is your reasonable 
Tgervice. 

2 sAnd be not conformed to this 
tworld: but be ye “transformed by 
the renewing of your mind, that ye 
may prove what is that good, and 
acceptable, and perfect, will of God. 


(2) Service. 


3 For I say, through the "grace 
given unto me, to every man that is 
among you, not to think of himself 
more highly than he ought to think; 
but to think soberly, according as 
God hath dealt to every man the 
measure of faith. 

4 For as we have many mem- 
bers in one: body, and all members 
have not the same office: 

5 So we, berng many, are one 
body in Christ, and every one 
members one of another. 

6 Having then gifts differing ac- 
cording to the grace that is given 
to us, whether prophecy, Jet us 
prophesy according to the propor- 
tion of faith; 

7 Or ministry, Jet uswart on our 
ministering: or he that teacheth, 
on teaching; 

8 Or he that exhorteth, on exhor- 
tation: he that giveth, Jet him do 
it with simplicity; he that ruleth, 
with diligence; he that sheweth 
mercy, with cheerfulness. 


(3) The Christian and those 


within. 


9 Let love be without “dissimula- 
tion. Abhor that which is evil; 
cleave to that which is good. 

10 Be kindly affectioned one to 
another with brotherly love; in 
honour preferring one another; 

‘11 Not slothful in business; fer- 
vent in spirit; serving the Lord; 

12 Rejoicing in hope; patient in 
tribulation; continuing instant in 
prayer; 


g the Gentiles of a people for Christ’s name, 


“the church which is His body” (Eph. 1. 22, 23). Cf. Acts 15. 14; Eph. 4. 11-13; 1 Cor. 


12.) 19,13. 


fourfold mission: 
atry (Deut. 6. 4, 


It must be distinguished from “the times of the Gentiles?’ 
1 Summary: Israel, so named from the grandson of Abraham, was 


(Lk. 21. 24). 
chosen for a 


(1) To witness to the unity of God in the midst of universal idol- 
with Isa. 43. 10, 12); (2) to illustrate to the nations the blessed- 


ness of serving the true God (Deut. 33. 26-29; 1 Chr. 17. 20, 21; Psa. 144, 15); (3) to 


receive, preserve, and transmit 
produce, as to His humanity, 
2 Sam. 7. 12-16; Isa. 7. 14; 9. 


the Scriptures (Deut. 4. 5-8; Rom. 3. 1, als 
the Messiah (Gen. 3. 15; 12. 3; 22, 
6; Mt, 1.1; Rom. 1. 3). 


(4) to 
, 18; 28. 10-14; 49. 10; 
According to the prophets, 


Israel, regathered from all nations, restored to her own land and converted, is yet 


to have her greatest earthly exaltation and glory. 
1, 26; Zech, 12. 8; N.T., Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 15. 24); 


7. 8-17, note), 


1206. 


See “Kingdom (O.T.)” (Gen, 
“Davidic Covenant” (2 Sam. 


“12 13] 


A 


ROMANS. 


[14 6 


13 ¢Distributing to the necessity 
of saints; given to hospitality. 

14 Bless them which persecute 
you: bless, and curse not. 

15 Rejoice with them that do 
Tejoice, and weep with them that 
weep. 

16 Be of the same mind one to- 
ward another. Mind not high 
things, but condescend to ‘men of 
low estate. Be not wise in your 
own conceits. 


(4) The Christian and those 
without. 


17 Recompense to no man evil for 
evil. ¢Provide things honest in the 
sight of all men. 

18 If it be possible, as much as 
lieth in you, live peaceably with all 


men. 

19 Dearly beloved, avenge not 
yourselves, but rather give place 
unto wrath: for itis written, “Venge- 
ance is mine; I will repay, saith the 
Lord. 

20 Therefore fif thine enemy hun- 
ger, feed him; if he thirst, give him 
drink: for in so doing thou shalt 
heap coals of fire on his head. 

21 Be not overcome of evil, but 
overcome evil with good. 


CHAPTER 13. 


| Es every soul be ¢subject unto 
the higher powers. For there 
is no power but of God: the powers 
that be are ordained of God. 

2 Whosoever therefore resisteth 
the power, “resisteth the ordinance 
of God: and they that resist shall 
receive to themselves ‘damnation. 


power? Jdo that which is good, and 
thou shalt have praise of the same: 

4 For he is the minister of God to 
thee for good. But if thou do that 
which is evil, be afraid; for he bear- 
eth not the sword in vain: for he 
is the minister of God, a *revenger 
to execute wrath upon him that 
doeth evil. 

5 Wherefore ye must needs_ be 
subject, not only for wrath, but 
also for conscience sake. ; 

6 For for this cause pay ye ‘trib- 
ute also: for they are God’s minis- 
ters, attending continually upon 
this very thing. ' 

7 Render therefore to “all their 
dues: tribute to whom tribute is 
due; custom to whom custom; fear 


A.D. 60. 


a Heb.13.16; 
1 Pet.4.9. 

6 v.20; Mt.5. 
44; Lk.6.28. 

¢ them that 
are lowly. 

d Take 
thought for 
things hon- 
ourable, etc. 

e Deut.32.35. 

f Prov.25.21, 
22. 

g Prov.24.21; 

1 Pet.2.13. 

kh Acts 23.2-5; 
2 Pet.2.10,11. 

1 Condemna- 
tion, i.e. in 
the sense of 
judgment by 
the magis- 
trate. 

j 1 Pet.2.14; 
3.13; 4.15. 

k 2 Chr.19.6; 

1 Tim.1,8-10. 


n Lev.19.13; 
Prov.22.7 

o Col.1.4; 

1 Pet.1.22. 

pb Ex.20,13-17; 
Lev.19.18. 

q Law (of 
Christ). vs. 
8-10; 1 Cor.8. 
9-13. (Gal.6. 
2; 2 John 5.) 

r Law (of Mo- 
ses). vs.9,10; 
1 Cor.15.56. 
(Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 

s “Nearer” in 
the sense of 
the full result 
of salvation in 
glory. Rom.1. 


1 Thes.5.8. 
v revelling. 

w Or, jealousy. 
x Flesh, 1 Cor. 
34. (John 1. 
13; Jude 23.) 
y for decisions 
of doubts, 

i.e. doubts 
about meats, 

etc. The 
church has no 
authority to 
decide ques- 
tions of per- 
sonal liberty 
in things not 
expressly for- 
bidden in 
Scripture. 
vs.2-6. 

z Jas.4.11,12. 

@ vs.14,23: 


1207 


call 


to whom fear; honour te whom 
honour. 


(5) The law of love toward the 
neighbour. (Cf. Lk. 10. 29-37.) 


8 Owe no man any thing, but to 
“love one another: for he that 
iene another hath fulfilled the 
aw. 

9 For this, ?Thou shalt not com- 
mit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, 
Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt 


not bear false witness, Thou shalt — 


not covet; and if there be any other 
commandment, it is briefly compre- 
hended in this saying, namely, 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself. 

10 Love worketh no ill to his 
neighbour: therefore Ylove rs the 
fulfilling of the “law. 

11 And that, knowing the time, 
that now it zs high time to awake 
out of sleep: for now is our salva- 
tion Snearer than when we believed. 

12 The night is far spent, the day 
is at hand: ‘let us therefore cast 
off the works of darkness, and “Jet 
us put on the armour of light. 

13 Let us walk honestly, as in the 
day; not in *rioting and drunken- 
ness, not in chambering and wan- 
tonness, not in strife and “envy- 
ing. 

14 But put ye on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and make not provision for 
the *flesh,to fu/fAl the lusts thereof. 


CHAPTER 14. 


(6) The law of love concerning 
doubtful things. (Cf. 1 Cor. 8. 
1-10. 33.) 


IM that is weak in the faith re- 
ceive ye, but not *to doubtful 
disputations. 

2 For one believeth that he may 
eat all things: another, who is 
weak, eateth herbs. 

3 Let not him that eateth despise 
him that eateth not; and let not 
him which eateth not judge him 
that eateth: for God hath received 


im. 

4 Who art thou that judgest 2an- 
other man’s servant? to his own 
master he standeth or falleth. Yea, 
he shall be holden up: for God is 
able to make him stand. 

5 One man esteemeth one day 
above another: another esteemeth 
every day alike. “Let every man 
be fully persuaded in his own mind. 

6 He that regardeth’the day, re- 
gardeth st unto the Lord; and he 


14 7] 


that regardeth not the day, to the 
Lord he doth not regard it. He 
that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for 
he giveth God thanks; and he that 
eateth not, to the Lord he eateth 
not, and giveth God thanks. 

7 For “none of us liveth to him- 
self, and no man dieth to himself. 

8 For whether we “live, we live 
unto the Lord; and whether we die, 
we ‘die unto the Lord: whether we 
live therefore, or die, we are the 
Lord’s. 

9 For to this end Christ both died, 

- and rose, and revived, that he might 
be ¢Lord both of the dead and 
living. 

10 But why dost thou judge thy 
brother? or why dost thou set at 
nought thy brother? for we shall 
all stand before the ‘judgment seat 
of Christ. 

11 ‘For it is written, fAs I live, 
saith the Lord, every knee shall 
bow to me, and every tongue shall 
confess to God. 

12 So then every one of us shall 
give account of himself to God. 

13 Let us not therefore judge one 
another any more: but judge this 
rather, that no man put a éstum- 
blingblock or an occasion to fall in 
his brother’s way. 

14 I know, and am persuaded by 
the Lord Jesus, that there is *noth- 
ing unclean of itself: but ‘to him 
that esteemeth any thing to be un- 
clean, to him it is unclean, 

i5 But if thy brother be Jgrieved 
with thy meat, now walkest thou 
not charitably. Destroy not him 
with thy meat, for whom Christ 
died. 

16 Let not then your “good be evil 
spoken of: 

17 For the ‘kingdom of God is not 
meat and drink; but ”righteous- 
ness, and peace, and joy in the 
"Holy Ghost. 

18 For he that in these things 
serveth Christ zs °acceptable to 
God, and approved of men. 

19 Let us therefore follow after 
the things which make for peace, 
and things wherewith one may 
Yedify another. 

20 7For meat destroy not the 
work of God. All things indeed 
are pure; but it is evil for that man 
who eateth with offence. 

21 It is good neither to eat ‘flesh; 
nor to drink wine, nor any thing 
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or 
is offended,*or is made weak. 


22 Hast thou faith? have it to 


ROMANS. 


A.D. 60. 


a 1 Cor.6.19,20. 

b 2 Cor.5.13-15; 
Gal.2.20. 

c Acts 20.24; 
24:33; -VS 


Phil.1.20,21. 
d Rev.1.17,18; 
1 Thes.4.13- 


18. 

e Judgments 
(the seven). 
1 Cor.3.11-15. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev. 20.12.) 

f Isa.45.23; 
Phil.2.10,11. 

g Lk.17.1,2; 1 
Cor.8.7-13;10. 
23; Rev.2.14. 

h vs.2,20; Tit. 
1.15. 


4 v.23; 1 Cor. 
10.24-33. 

j 1 -Cor.8.11. 

k Rom.3.8. 

1 Gal.4.9-11; 
Col.2.20-23. 
See Mt.6.33, 
note. 

m Rom.10.10, 
note. 

n Holy Spirit. 
Rom.}5.13,16, 
19,30. (Mt.1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 

o 2 Cor.5.9, 

p Lk.2.52; 

Acts 2.47. 

gq Rom.15.2; 

1 Thes.5.11. 

r Overthrow 
not for 
meat’ssakea 
work which 
God is doing. 

$1 Cor.8.13;10. 
33; 2 Cor.6.3. 

¢2 Tim.1.3; 
1 John 3.21. 

u condemned, 
i.e. as in v.22. 

v John 7.17. 

w Faith. 1 Cor. 
12.9. (Gen.3. 
20;Heb.11.39) 

x Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

y Mt.17.27; Lk. 
9.51;Phil.2.5-8 

2 Psa.69.9; 

1 Pet.2.23. 

a Rom.4.23,24; 
1 Cor.9.9,10; 
10.11; 2 Tim. 

, 3-16,17; 2 Pet. 
1.19 


6 1 Cor.1.10; 
Phil.1.27. 

¢ 1 Cor.10.31; 
1 Pet.4.11. 

d Rom.14.1,3. 
e Mt.2.2; John 
19.15,19-22; 

Rom.1.3. 
f Psa.18.49. 
g Isa.42.6,7. 
h Deut.32.43. 
i Jehovah. 
Psa.117.1. 
j Isa.11.1,10. 
k hope. 
1 v,5;Heb.13.20 
m Rom.12.12; 
14.17. 


1208 


158 


thyself before God. Happy is he 
that ‘condemneth not himself in 
that thing which he alloweth. 

23 And he that doubteth is 
“damned if he eat, because he eat- 
eth not of faith: *fonsybatsoeverys . 
nohof cfaith js “sir 


is “sin. 


CHAPTER i5. 


(The law of love conéerning 
doubtful things, continued.) 


WE then that are strong ought 
to bear the infirmities of the 
weak, and not to please ourselves. 

2 Let every one of us please his 
neighbour for his good to edifica- 
tion. 

3 For Yeven Christ pleased not 
himself; but, as it is written, The 
reproaches of them that reproached 
thee fell on me. 


(7) Jewish and Gentile believers 
are one in salvation. 


4 For “whatsoever things were 
written aforetime were written for 
our learning, that we through pa- 
tience and comfort of the scriptures 
might have hope. 

5 Now the God of patience and 
consolation grant you to be ®%like- 
minded one toward another accord- 
ing to Christ Jesus: 

6 That ye may with one mind 
and one mouth “glorify God, even 
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

7 Wherefore “receive ye one an- 
other, as Christ also received us to 
the glory of God. 

8 Now I say that Jesus Christ 
was a ‘minister of the circumcision 
for the truth of God, to confirm the 
promises made unto the fathers: 

9 And that the Gentiles might 
glorify God for Ais mercy; as it is 
written, fFor this cause I will con- 
fess to thee among the &Gentiles, 
and sing unto thy name. 

10_And again he saith, “Rejoice, 
ye Gentiles, with his people. 

11 And again, Praise the ‘Lord, all 
ye Gentiles; and laud him, all ye 
people. 

12: And again, Esaias saith, /There 
shall be a root of Jesse, and he that 
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; 
in him shall the Gentiles “trust. 

13 Now the ’God of hope fill you — 
with all “joy and peace in believ- 
ing, that ye may abound in hope, — 
through the power of the Holy — 
Ghost. 


lls 


(15 14] 


ROMANS. 


(8) The apostle speaks of his 
ministry and coming journey. 


14 And I myself also am per- 
suaded of you, my brethren, that ye 
also are full of goodness, filled with 
ail knowledge, able also to admon- 
ish one another. 

15 Nevertheless, brethren, I have 
written the more boldly unto you 
in some sort, as putting you in 
mind, because of 4the grace that is 
given to me of God, 

16 That I should be the ¢minister 
of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, 
ministering the gospel of God, that 
the ‘offering up of the Gentiles 


A.D. 60. 


a Grace (1m- 
parted). 
1 Cor.1.4. 
(Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 
6 Rom.11.13; 


d Sanctity, 
holy (per- 


1 Cor.1.2. 
(Mt.4.5; 


might be acceptable, being ¢sancti- 
fied by the Holy Ghost. 

17 I have therefore whereof I may 
glory through Jesus Christ in those 
things which pertain to God. 

~ 18 For I will not dare to speak of 
any of those things which Christ 
hath not wrought by me, to make 
the Gentiles obedient, by word and 
deed, 

19 Through mighty signs and 
wonders, by the power of the Spirit 
of God; so that from Jerusalem, and 
round about unto Illyricum, I have 
fully preached the gospel of Christ. 

20 Yea, “so have I strived to 
preach the fgospel, not where 
Christ was named, lest I should 
€build upon another man’s founda- 
tion: 

21 But as itis written, To whom 

he was not spoken of, they shall 
see: and they that have not heard 
shall understand. 

22 For which cause also I have 
been much hindered from coming 
to you. 

/-23 But now having no more place 
in these parts, and having a ‘great 
desire these many years to come 
unto you; 

! 24 Whensoever I take my journey 
into Spain, I will come to you: for I 
Jtrust to see you in my journey, 
and to be brought on my way 
thitherward by you, if first I be 
somewhat filled with your com- 
pany. 

“25 But now I go unto Jerusalem 
to minister unto the saints. 

26 For it hath pleased them of 
Macedonia and Achaia to make a 


Rev.22.11) 

e being ambi- 
tious to 
preach, etc. 

f Gospel. vs. 
16,19,20,29; 
Rom.16.25. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 

g 1 Cor.3.10; 2 
Cor.10.13-18. 

kt ¥sa.52.15. 

z Acts 19.21, 
225 2ackks 
Rom.1.10,11. 

j hope. 

k Acts 24.17. 

l things for 
the body. 

m Rom.1.11; 
Eph.3.8,19. 
n Holy Spirit. 
vs.13,16,19, 
30; 1 Cor.2. 
4,10,11,12,14. 

(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

o munistra- 
tion. 

p 2 John 4; 

3 John 4; 
Phm.20. 

q Rom.16.20; 
1 Cor.14.33; 
2 Cor.13.11; 
Phil.4.9; 

1 Thes.5.23; 
2 Thes.3.16; 
Heb.13.20. 

r Acts 18.27; 

2 Cor.3.1-3; 
Phil.2.29,30. 
s Lit. deacon- 


u helper. 

v Acts 18.2,18, 
26; 1 Cor.16. 
19; 2 Tim.4. 
19. 

w Or, Asia. 


y vs.11,21. 
= 1 Cor.15.8; 
Gal.1.22. 


certain contribution for the poor 
saints which are at Jerusalem. 

27: It hath pleased them verily; 
and their debtors they are. For if 
the Gentiles have been made par- 
takers .of their spiritual things, 


@ vs.7,21. 


1209 


sons) (N.T.). 


(16 11 


their duty is also to minister unto 
them in ‘carnal things. 

28 When therefore I have per- 
formed this, and have sealed to 
them this fruit, I will come by you 
into Spain. 

29 And I am sure that, when I 
come unto you, I shall come in the 
™fulness of the blessing of the gos- 
pel of Christ. 

30 Now I beseech you, brethren, 
for the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, 
and for the love of the “Spirit, that 
ye strive together with me in your 
prayers to God for me; 

31 That I may be delivered from 
them that do not believe in Judea; 
and that my °service which I have 
for Jerusalem may be accepted of 


x v.12; Phil.4.3. 


the saints; 

32 That I may come unto you 
with ?joy by the will of God, and 
may with you be refreshed. 

33 Now the God of peace be with 
you all. Amen. 


CHAPTER 16. 


Part VU. The outflow of 
Christian love. 


* rTCOMMEND unto you Phebe 
our sister, which is a ‘servant of 
the church which is at Cenchrea: 

2 That ye receive her in the Lord, 
tas becometh saints, and that ye 
assist her in whatsoever business 
she hath need of you: for she hath 
been a “succourer of many, and of . 
myself also. 

3 Greet ’Priscilla and Aquila my 
helpers in Christ Jesus: 

4 Who have for my life laid down 
their own necks: unto whom not 
only I give thanks, but also all the 
churches of the Gentiles. 

5 Likewise greet the church that 
is in their house. Salute my well- 
beloved Epznetus, who is the first- 
fruits of “Achaia unto Christ. 

6 Greet: Mary, who bestowed 
*much labour on us. j 

7 Salute Andronicus and Junia, \ 
my Ykinsmen, and my fellowpris- 
oners, who are of note among the 
apostles, who also were “in Christ 
before me. 

8 Greet Amplias my beloved in 
the Lord. 

9 Salute Urbane, our helper in 
Christ, and Stachys my beloved. | 

10 Salute Apelles approved in 
Christ. Salute them which are of 
Aristobulus’ household. 

11 Salute Herodion my “kinsman. 
‘Greet them that be of the house- 


hold of Narcissus, which are in the 
Lord. i : 
12 Salute Tryphena and Try- 
phosa, who labour in the Lord. 
Salute the beloved Persis, which 
laboured much in the Lord. 

13 Salute Rufus ¢chosen in the 
Lord, and his mother and mine. 
14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, 
Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the 
brethren which are with them. _ 
15 Salute Philologus, and Julia, 
Nereus, and his sister, and Olym- 
pas, and all the saints which are 
with them. 


16 Salute one another with an 
bholy kiss. The churches of Christ 
salute you. 


_ 17 Now I beseech you, brethren, 
mark them which cause divisions 
and offences contrary to the doc- 
trine which ye have learned; and 
avoid them. 

18 For they that are such serve 
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their 
own belly; and by good words and 
fair speeches deceive the hearts of 
the simple. 

19 For your obedience is come 
abroad unto all men. I am glad 
therefore on your behalf: but yet 
I would have you wise unto that 


ROMANS. 


A.D. 60. 


@ Election (per- 
sonal). 1 Pet.2.9. 
EN 1Pet. 


b Sanctify, holy 
(things) (N.T.). 
1 Cor.9.13. (Mt. 
4.5; Rev.22.11.) 


¢ Saten. 1 Cor.5.5. 
page Rev.20, 


d Churches 
(local). ¥s.1-5, 
16,23; 1 Cor.1.2, 
10-17,26-31. (Acts 
2.41; Phil.1.1.) 


€ Gospel. 1Cor.1. 
17. (Gen. 12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


Ff Mt.13,11, note, 
The ‘‘mystery” 
here is the 
Charcks Eph.3, 


9 Lit. hath been 
kept in silence 
through times 
eternal. 


Abe. ages. 


i inspiration. vs. 
25,26; 1 Cor.2.7- 
16. (Ex.4.15; Rev. 
22.19.) 


J Rom.1.5, marg. 
Faithas asystem, 
in contrast with 
law as a system. 


1210 


S.-i 
{16 27 
{ 
which is good, and simple concern- 
ing evil. 

20 And the God of peace shall 
bruise ‘Satan under your feet 
shortly. The grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 

21 Timotheus my workfellow, and 
Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, 
my kinsmen, salute you. 

22 I Tertius, who wrote this epis- 
tle, salute you in the Lord. 

23 Gaius mine host, and of the 
whole ¢church, saluteth you. Eras- 
tus the chamberlain of the city sa- 
luteth you, and Quartus a brother. 

24 The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you all. Amen. 

25 Now to him that is of power to 
stablish you according to my ¢gos- 
pel, and the preaching of Jesus 
Chrsts Lact nttang “9 oe acielecey 
of the mustery, which éwas kept 
secret. sinc e fworld began, - 
_26 But now is made manifest, and 
*by the scriptures of the prophets, 
according to the commandment of 
the everlasting God, made known to 
all nations for the jobedience of 
faith: 

27 To God only wise, be glory 
through Jesus Christ for ever. 
Amen. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


11j 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul. 


CORINTHIANS. 


17 


His relation to the church at Corinth is set forth in 


Acts 18. 1-18, and in the Epistles to the Corinthians. 
Date. First Corinthians was written in a.p. 5S, at the close of Paul’s three 
years’ residence in Ephesus (Acts 20. 31; 1 Cor. 16. 5-8). 
Theme. The subjects treated are various, but may all be classified under the 
Even the tremendous revelation of the truth 
concerning resurrection is made to bear upon that theme (1 Cor. 15. $8). The occa- 
sion of the Epistle was a letter of inquiry from @orinth concerning marriage, and 
the use of meats offered to idols (1 Cor. 7. 1; 8. 1-13)but the apostle was much more 
exercised by reports of the deepening divisions“and” increasing contentions in the 
church, and of a case of incest which had not been judged» (1. 10-12; 5. 2 
The factions were not due to heresies, but to the carnality of the restless Corin- 
* thians, and to their Greek admiration of “wisdom” and eloquence. The abomina- 
tion of human leadership in the things of God is here rebuked. Minor disorders 
were due to vanity, yielding to a childish delight in tongues and the sign gifts, rather 


general theme, Christian conduct. 


than to sober instruction (1 Cor. 14. 1-28). 


Paul defends his apostleship because 


it involved the authority of the doctrine revéaled through him. 


A rigid analysis of First Corinthians is not possible. 


The Epistle is not a trea- 


tise, but came from the Spirit through the apostle’s grief, solicitude, and holy indig- 


nation. atlov, 
believer’s standing in grace, 1, 1-9. 
Vy ro—4. 21. 


sanctity of the body, and Christian marriage, 6. 9-7. 40. 


The following analysis may, however, be helpful. 


I. Introduction: The 


II. The contrast of their present factious state, 


III. immorality rebuked; discipline enjoined, 5. 1-6. 8. 


IV. The 
V. Meats, and the lim- 


itations of Christian liberty, 8. 1-11. 1. VI. Christian order and the Lord’s Supper, 


11. 2-34. 
ministry, 12. 1-14. 40. 
directions and greetings, 16. 1-24, 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. The believer’s position in 
grace. (Cf. Rom. 5. 1, 2; Eph. 
1, 3-14.) 
prt. “called to be an apostle of 
& Jesus Christ through “the will 
‘of God, 
brother, ; 

2 Unto the ¢church of God which 
is at Corinth, to Ithem that are 
sanctified in Christ Jesus, fcalled 
to be saints, with all that in every 
place call upon the name of Jesus 


and ‘Sosthenes our 


A.D. 59. 


a@Lit. @ called 
apostle, 

62 Cor.1.1; Eph.1. 
1; Col.1.1. 

¢ Acts 18.17, 

4 Churches (local). 
vs.2,10-17,26-31. 
1 Cor.6.4,5. (Acts 
2.41; Phil.t.1.) 

¢Sanctify, holy 
(persons)(N.T.)- 
1 Cor.3.17. (Mt.4. 
5; Rev.22.11.) 

fealled saints. 

9 Grace (impart- 
ed). 1 Cor.3.10, 
(Rom.6.1; 2 Pet. 


3,18.) 
41 Cor. 12.8; 2 Cor. 
8.7. 


VII. Spiritual gifts in relation to the body, the church, and Christian 
VIII. The resurrection of the dead, 15. 1-58. 


IX. Special 


Christ our Lord, both their’s and 
our’s: 

3 Grace be unto you, and peace, 
from God our Father, and from the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

4 I thank my God always on your 
behalf, ‘for the grace of God which ° 
is given you by Jesus Christ; 

5 That in every thing ye are en- 
riched by him, “in all utterance, and 
in all knowledge; 

6 Even as the testimony of Christ 
was confirmed in you: 

7 So that ye come behind in no 


1 Verses 2-9, in contrast with vs. 10-13, illustrate a distinction constantly made 
in the Epistles between the believer’s position in Christ Jesus, in the family of God, 


and his walk, or actual state. 


Christian position in grace is the result of the work 


of Christ, and is fully entered the moment that Christ is received by faith (John 1, 
12, 13; Rom. 8. 1, 15-17; 1 Cor. 1. 2, 30; 12. 12, 13; Gal. 3. 26; Eph. 1. 3-14; 2. 4-9; 1 Pet. 


2.9; Rev. 1. 6; 5. 9, 10). 


cisely the same relationships in grace as the most illustrious saint. 


The weakest, most ignorant, and fallible believer has pre- 


All the after 


work of God in his behalf, the application of the word to walk and conscience (John 
17. 17; Eph. 5. 26), the divine chastenings (1 Cor. 11. 32; Heb. 12. 10), the ministry 
of the Spirit (Eph. 4. 11, 12), the difficulties and trials of the path (1 Pet. 4. 12, 13), 
and the final transformation at the appearing of Christ (1 John 3. 2), have for their 
‘object to make the believer’s character conform to his exalted position in Christ. 


He grows in grace, not into grace, 


Gi 


1211, 


alll 


é 


aw f 
\ 


1 8] 


gift; waiting for the !*coming of 
our Lord Jesus Christ: 

8 Who shall also confirm you unto 
the end, that ye may be “blame- 
less in the 2day of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

“9 God is faithful, by whom ye 
y were called e fellowship of 
~ his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. 


Part II. The contrast of the 
unspiritual state of the Cor- 
inthian saints with their ex- 
alted standing in Christ. 

10 Now I beseech you, brethren, 
by the name of our Lord Jesus 

Christ, that ye all 


(1) They were following human 
leaders, thus dividing the 
body of Christ. 


11 For it hath been declared unto 
me of you, my brethren, by them 
which are of the house of Chloe, 
that there are contentions among 
you. 

12 Now this I say, that every one 
of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of 
¢Apollos; and I of fCephas; and I 
of Christ. 

13 8Is Christ divided? was Pauli 
crucified for you? or were ye bap- 
tized in the name of Paul? 

14 I thank God that I baptized 
none of you, but Crispus and Gaius; 

15 Lest any should say that “I 
had baptized in mine own name. 

16 And I baptized also the house- 
hold of Stephanas: besides, I know 
not whether I baptized any other. 

17 For Christ sent me not to bap- 
tize, but to preach the ‘gospel: not 


I CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 59. 


a Gr. apoka- 
Jupsin, reve- 
Jation, un- 
veiling. 

b Col.1.22; 

1 Thes.5.23. 


c Isa.49.7; 
1 Cor.10.13; 
1 Thes.5.24. 


d Gr. schism, a 
cleft, or rent. 


e Acts 19.1. 
f John 1.42. 
g Or, Christ 
is divided. 
h ye were bap- 


tized into 
my name. 


t Gospel. 
1 Cor.4.15. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


j Rom.1.16, 
note. 


k Isa.29.14. 
l age. 


m kosmos = 
world-system. 
1 Cor.2.12. 
(John 7.7, 
Rev.13.3-8, 
note.) 

n of the thing 
preached. 


o Gentiles, and 
so in vs.23,24. 


p Or, aMessiah 
crucified. 


q Christ (as 
Stone). 1 Pet. 
2.8.(x.17.6; 
1 Pet.2.4-8.) 


r Psa.8.2; 
Mt.11.25. 


s kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


[1 27 


with wisdom of words, lest the 
cross of Christ should be made of 
none effect. : 


(2) They were exulting in Au- 
man wisdom, which is foolish- 
ness in the things of God. 


18 For the preaching of the cross 
is to them that perish foolishness; 
but unto us which are Jsaved it is 
the power of God. 

19 For itis written, *I will destroy 
the wisdom of the wise, and will 
bring to nothing the understanding 
of the prudent. 

20 Where is the wise? where is 
the scribe? where is the disputer of 
this ‘world? hath not God made 
foolish the wisdom of this “world? 

21 For after that in the wisdom of 
God the world by wisdom knew not 
God, it pleased God by the foolish- 
ness of “preaching to Jsave them 
that believe. 4 

22 For the Jews require a sign, 
and the °Greeks seek after wisdom: 

23 Butwepreach ?Christcrucified, 
unto the Jews>a %stumblingblock, 
and unto the Greeks foolishness; 

24 But unto them which are 
called, both Jews and Greeks, 
Christ the power of God, and the 
wisdom of God. 

25 Because the foolishness of God 
is wiser than men; and the weak- 
ness of God is stronger than men. 


(3) Any way the Corinthian be- 
lzevers were not of the wise. 


26 For ye see your calling, breth- 
tren, how that not many wise men > 
after the flesh, not many mighty, 
not many noble, are called: 

27 But God hath "chosen the fool- 
ish things of the Sworld to confound 
the wise; and God hath chosen the 


1 Three words are used in connection with the return of the Lord: (1) Parousia. 


“personal presence,” also used by Paul of the “coming” 


17), of Titus (2 Cor. 7, 6, 7), and of 


his own “ 


coming” to Philippi (Phil. 1. 26). 


of Stephanas (1 Cor. 16, 
The 


word means simply personal presence, and is used of the return of the Lord as that. 


event relates to the blessing of saints (1 Cor. 15. 23; 1 Thes. 4. 14, 
destruction of the man of sin (2 Thes. 2. 8). 


The use of this word emphasizes 


elation.” 


17), and to the 


(2) Apokalupsis, “unveiling,” “rev-_ 
the visibility of the Lord’s return. 


It is used of the Lord (2 Thes. 1. 7; 1 Pet. 1. 7, 13; 4. 13), of the sons of God in con- 


nection with the Lord’s return 
6, 8), and always implies visibility. 
ness” (2 Thes. 2. 8, A.V 


itsa2. 13) 


2 The expression, “day of Christ,” 
5,5; 2. Cor. 1. 14; Phil. Ws 6. 103.9% 36, 
correctly, for ‘‘day of the LorpD” (Isa. 2. 12; Rev. 1 


relates wholly to the reward and 
Lorb” 


(Rom. 8. 19), and of the man of sin (2 Thes, 2. 3, | 


(3) Epiphaneia, “appearing,” trans. “bright- 


.; “manifestation,” R.V.) 
It is used of both advents (2 Tim. 1. 10; 2 Thes, 


occurs in 


\ rewa blessing of saints at His coming, as 
is connected with judgment. 


1212 


, and means simply an appearing. 
2.83 1, Tim. 65145.2. Tim; 4a 


the following passages: 1 Cor. 1. 8; | 


A.V. has “day of Christ,” 2 Thes. 2. 2, in- 


9. 11-21). The “day of Christ” 


“day of the 


} 


22) 


‘ 


found the things which are mighty; 

28 And base things of the world, 
and things which are despised, hath 
God 4chosen, yea, and things which 
are not, to bring to nought things 
that are: 

29 That no flesh should glory in 
his presence. 

30 But of him are ye in Christ 
Jesus, who of God is made unto us 
wisdom, and righteousness, and 
sanctification, and éredemption: 

31 That, according as itis written, 


He that glorieth, let him glory in| 


the fLord. 


CHAPTER 2. 


(4) They are reminded that the 
Christian revelation owes 
nothing to human wisdom. 


(a) Paul did not use it. 


NDI, brethren, when I came to 

you, came not with excellency 

of speech or of wisdom, declaring 
unto you the testimony of God. 

2 For I determined not to know 
any thing among you, save Jesus 
Christ, and him crucified. 

3 And I was with you in weak- 
ness, and in fear, and in much 
trembling. 

4 And my speech and my preach- 
ing was not with “enticing words 
of man’s wisdom, but in demonstra- 

~ tion of the Spirit and of power: 

5 That your faith should not 
stand in the wisdom of men, but in 
the power of God. 

6 Hewbeit we speak wisdom 
among them that are “perfect: yet 
not the wisdom of this ‘world, nor 
of the Jprinces of this ‘world, that 

“come to nought: 

7 FBut we speak the eres 

odina mystery, even the hidden 


I CORINTHIANS. 


b Election 
(corporate). 


c from God, 
or, wisdom 
from God, 
even right- 
eousness and 
sanctifica- 
tion, and re- 
demption. 

d Rom.3.21, 
note. 

e Rom.3.24, 
note, 

f Jehovah. 
Jer.9.24. 

g Or, persua- 
sive. 

h i.e. full grown. 
Mt.5.48,note. 

1 age. 

j rulers of 
this age 

k Inspiration. 
vs.7,16; 

1 Cor.14.37. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

1 Mt.13.11, 
note. 

m Predestina- 
tion, trans. 
predesti- 
nated, Rom. 
8.29,30; 
Eph.1.5,11, 
(Acts 4.28; 
Eph.1.11.) 

n foreordained 
before the 
ages. s 
Rom.16.25 
marg. 

o Holy Spirit. 
vs.4,10,11, 
12,13,14; 

1 Cor.3.16. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

p kosmos = 
world-system. 
1 Cor.7.31,33, 
(John7.7;Rev. 
13.3-8, note.) 


[2 14 


fore the "world unto our glory: 

8 Which none of the princes of 
this ‘world knew: for had they 
known it, they would not have cru- 
cified the Lord of glory. 


(b) Spiritual verities are not dis- 
coverable by human wisdom. 
9 But as it is written, Eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man. 
the things which God hath pre- 
pared for them that love him. 


(c) But God has revealed them 
to prepared men. 


10 But God hath revealed thern 
unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit 
searcheth all things, yea, the deep 
things of God. 

11 For what man knoweth the 
things of a man, save the spirit of 
man which is in him? even so the 
things of God knoweth no man, but 
the °Spirit of God. 

12 Now we have received, not the 
spirit of the ?world, but the spirit 
which is of God; that we might 
know the things that are freely 
given to us of God. 


(d) The revealed things are 
taught in words given by the 
Spirit. 

13 Which things also we speak, 
not in the !words which man’s wis- 
dom teacheth, but which the Holy 
Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual 
things with spiritual. 


(e) The revealed things are spir- 
itually discerned. 

14 But the 2natural man receiveth 
not the things of the °Spirit of God: 
for they are foolishness unto him: 
neither can he know them, because 


[they are spiritually discerned. 


1 (1) The writers of Scripture invariably affirm, where the subject i 
the words of their writings are divinely taught. — 
o translations and versions; but the 


by them at all, that 
cessity, 


’ perfection so remarkable t 
(2) 1 Cor. 2. 9-14 gives the process 
the minds of His people. (a) The 
natural man (v. 9). 
(vs. 10-12). 
(v. 13). This implies neith 
personality, but only that the 
writer’s own vocabulary (v. 13). 
revelation has been expressed, are 


by the spiritual among believers (1 Cor. 2. 15; 16). 

2 Paul divides men into three classes: psuchikos, 
“natural,” i.e. the Adamic man, unrenewed 
“spiritual,” i.e. th 


Jude 19), or E 
3, 3, 5); pneumatikos, 


refers to the original documents, not t 
Jabours of competent scholars have brought our English version gree 
hat we may confidently rest upon them as authoritative. 
by which a truth passes from the mind of God to 


(b) These unse 
(c) The revealed things 
er mechanica 


s mentioned 
This, of ne- 


s to a degree of 


unseen things of God are undiscoverable by the 


(d) These 


1213 


er 


en things God has revealed to chosen men 
are communicated in Spirit-taught words 
1 dictation nor the effacement of the writer’s 
Spirit infallibly guides in the choice of words from the 


Spirit-taught words, in which the 


discerned, as to their true spiritual content, only 


See also Rev. 22. 19, note. 
“of the senses’ (Jas. 3. 15; 
through the new birth (John 


e renewed man as Spirit-filled and walk- 


2 15] 


15 But he that is spiritual ¢judg- 
‘eth all things, yet he himself is 
judged of no man. 

16 For who hath known the mind 
of the Lord, that he may instruct 
him? But we have the mind of 
Christ. 


CHAPTER 3. 


(5) A carnal state prevents spif- 
itual growth. 


yaote I, brethren, could not speak 
unto you as unto spiritual, but 
as unto “carnal, even as unto babes 
in Christ. 

2 I have fed you with milk, and 
not with meat: for hitherto ye were 
not able to hear it, neither yet now 
are ye able. 

3 For ye are yet 4carnal: for 
whereas there is among you envy- 
ing, and strife, and divisions, are ye 
not carnal, and walk eas men? 

4 For while one saith, I am of 


Paui; and another, I aim of Apollos;| 1 


are ye not /carnal? 


(6) God only is any thing in 
Christian service. (Cf. vs. 7.) 


5 Who then is Paul, and who is 
Apollos, but ministers ¢by whom 
ye believed, even as-the Lord gave 
to every man? 

6 Ihave planted, Apollos watered; 
but “God gave the increase. 

7 So then ‘neither is he that 
planteth any thing, neither he that 
watereth; but God that giveth the 
increase. 

8 Now he that planteth and he 
that watereth are lone: and every 
man shall receive his own Jreward 
according to his own labour. 


(7) Christian service and its re- 
ward. 


9 For we are “labourers together 


ht he Ee 


* 


i CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 59. 


a discerneth 
all things, 
yet he him- 
self is dis- 
cerned of 
.mo man. 

b Spirit of the 
LORD. Isa. 
40.13. 

¢See Rom.7. 
14, note. 

di.e. Aeshly, 

eafter the 
manner of 


men. 
f Flesh.vs.1-3; 


2Cor.1.12,47. | 


(John 1.13; 
Jude 23.) 

¢ through. 

hi Cor.15.10; 
Acts 16.14. 

t John 15.5. 

j Rewards. 
¥ Cor.9.17. 
(Dan.12.3;. 
1.Cor.3.14.) 

God's fellow- 

workers. 

‘l Grace (im- 
parted). 

1 Cor.15.10, 
(Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 

m Rom.1.16, 
nete. 

n Judgments 
(the seven). 
1 Cor.4.5. 

(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20.12.) 

o through. 

? Holy Spirit. 
1 Cor.6.11,19. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4:) 

‘@ Sanctify, 
Acly (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
1 Cor.6.11. 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 

rt age. 

Ss Job 5.13. 

t Jehovah, 
Psa.94.11,. 

u reasonings. 


i 


Stee 1 ee 
[3 

with God: ye are God’s husbandry, 
ye are God’s building. ‘ 
10 According to the ‘grace of God 
which is given unto me, as a wise 
masterbuilder, I have laid the foun- 
dation, and another buildeth there- 


on. But let every man take heed 
how he buildeth thereupon. 


(a) The only foundation. 


11 For other foundation can no 
man lay than that is laid, which is 
Jesus Christ. 


(b) Two kinds of ministry and 
} their result. 

12 Now if any man build upon 
‘this foundation gold, silver, pre- 
cious stones, wood, hay,.stubble; 

13. Every man’s work shall be 
made manifest: for the day shall: 
declare it, because it shall be re- 
vealed by fire; and the fire shall try 
every man’s work of what sort it is. 

14 If any man’s work abide which 
he hath built thereupon, he shall re- 
ceive a reward. 

15 If any man’s work shall be 
burned, he shall suffer loss: but he 
himself shall be “saved; yet "so as 
oby fire. | 

16 Know ye not that ye.are the 
temple of God, and that the ?Spirit 
of God dwelleth in you? 

17_ If any man defile the temple of 
God, him shali God destroy; for the 
temple of God is ¢holy, which tem- 
ple ye are. 

18 Letnornan deceive himself. If 

any man among you seemeth to be 
wise in this "world, let him become 
a fool, that he may be wise. 
_19 For the wisdom of this world 
is foolishness with God. For it is 
written, ‘He taketh the wise in 
their own craftiness. 

20 And again,-The Lord knoweth 


are vain. 


the “thoughts of the yice. that they __ 


ing in the Spirit in full communion with God 
nal,” “‘fleshly,”’ i.e. the renewed man who, 
The natural m 


in Christ (1 Cor, 3. 1-4). 

cinating, but the spiritual 
the fleshly, 
(1 Cor. 3. 2). 


1 Paul refutes the notion that he and Cephas 
theologians and rival founders of sects: they are “one.” 


2 God, in the N.T. Scriptures, offers to the J 


service of the saved, rewards. 


(Eph. 5. 18-20); and sarkikos, ‘‘car- 
walking “‘after the flesh,” remains a babe 
nan may be learned, gentle, 
al content of Scripture is absolutely hidden from him; and 
or carnal Christian is able to comprehend only its simplest truths, “mill” 


eloquent, fas- 


and Apollos are at variance, mere 
See v. 22, and 1 Cor. 16, 12. 


ost, salvation, and, for the faithful 
The passages are easily distinguished by remem- 


bering that salvation is invariably spoken of as a free gift (e.g. John 4. 10; Rom. 6. 
earned by works (Mt. 10. 42; Lk. 19. 175.1). Con 


23; Eph, 2. 8, 9); while rewards are 
9. 24, 25; 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8; Rev. 2. 10; 


is a present possession (Lk. 7. 503 John 3- 36; 
attainment, to he given at the coming of th 


2212), 


22. 12). 


1214 


A further distinction is that salvation 
5. 24; 6. 47), while rewards are a future 
e Lord (Mt. 16. 27; 2 Tim, 4. 8: Rev. 


ER ee a ae Ta 


et? 


(3 21] 


eve ela WA 


 e. 


IL CORINTHIANS. 


[52 


21 Therefore let no man glory in 
men, . For all things are your’s; 

22 Whether Paul, or Apollos, or 
Cephas, or the 4world, or life, or 
death, or things present, or things 
to come; all are your’s; 

23 And ye are Christ’s; and Christ 
is God’s. ; 


CHAPTER 4. 


{c) Judgment of Christ’s ser- 
’ vants is not committed to men. 


ET aman so account of us, as of 

the ministers of Christ, and 
stewards of the mysteries of God. 

2 Moreover it is required in stew- 


\\ards, that a man be found faithful. 


s 


.3 But with me it is a very small 
thing that I should be judged of 
you, or of man’s judgment: yea, I 
judge not mine own self. 

4 For I know nothing “by myself; 
yet am I not hereby ‘justified: but 
he that judgeth me is the Lord. 

5 Therefore judge nothing before 
the time, until the Lord come, who 
both will bring to light the hidden 
things of darkness, and 4will make 
manifest the counsels of the hearts: 
and then shall every man have 
praise of God, 

6 And these things, brethren, I 
have in a figure transferred to my- 
self and to Apollos for your sakes; 
that ye might learn in us not to 
think of men above that which is 
written, that no one of you be 
puffed up for one against another. 

7 ¥or who maketh thee to differ 
from another? and ¢what hast 
thou that thou didst not receive? 
now if thou didst receive it, why 

“dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not 
received it? 

8 fNow ye are full, now ye are 
rich, ye have reigned as kings with- 
out us: and I would to God ye did 
reign, &that we also might reign 
with you, 


(8) The apostolic example of 
humility and patience. 


9 For I think that God hath set 
forth us the apostles last, as it were} 
appointed to death: for we are] 
made a spectacle unto the “world,| 
and to angels, and to men, 

10 Weare ‘fools for Christ’s sake, 


a kosmos = 
earth. Rom. 
8.19-21. 


b against. 


c Justifica- 
tion. 
1 Cor.6.11, 
(Lk.18.14; 
Rom.3.28.). 


d Judgments 
(the seven). 
1 Cor.5.5. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rey.20.12.) 


Jas.1.17. 


f Already are 
ye filled; al- 
ready are ye 


Contra,vs.9- 
12; 1 Pet.1.4. 


g Cf.Rev.3.21; 
5.10. 


h kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


j Acts 20.34. 


k Mt.5.44; 
Acts 7.60. 


1 kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


m Acts 22.22. 


n Gr. teknon, 
child, 
“born one.” 


o Gospel. 
1 Cor.9.12, 
14,16-18,23. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


b were not 
coming. 


q actually 
reported. 


but ye are wise in Christ; we are 


1 What contempt this pours upon the divisi 
lonians,” and “Paulinians,” and ‘‘Cephasites,’ 


of gross sin! 


? 


1215 


A.D. 59. 


e1 Cor.12.4,11; 


become rich. 


i Acts 26.24,25. 


r of you hath. 


weak, but ye are strong; ye are 
honourable, but we are despised. 

11 Even unto this present hour 
we both hunger, and thirst, and are 
naked, and are buffeted, and have 
no certain dwellingplace; 

12 And Jlabour, working with our 
own hands: being “reviled, we 
bless; being persecuted, we suffer 
tts 


13 Being defamed, we intreat: we 
are made as the filth of the ‘world, 
and are the ™offscouring of all 
things unto this day. 5 ; 

14 I write not these things to 
shame you, but as my beloved “sons 
I warn you. 

15 For though ye have ten thou- 
sand instructers in Christ, yet have 
ye not many fathers: for in Christ 
Jesus I have begotten you through 
the °gospel. 

16 Wherefore I beseech you, be ye 
followers of me, 

17 For this cause have I sent 
unto you Timotheus, who is my 
beloved “son, and faithful in the 
Lord, who shall bring you into re- 
membrance of my ways which be 
in Christ, as I teach every where 
in every church. 


(9) But there is such a thing as 
apostolic authority. 


18 Now some are puffed up, as 
though I would not come to you. 

19 But I will come to you shortly, 
if the Lord will, and will know, not 
the speech of them which are puffed 
up, but the power. 

20 For the kingdom of God is not 
in word, but in power. 

21 What will ye? shall I come 
unto you with a rod, or in love, and 
in the spirit of meekness? 


CHAPTER 5. 


Part III. Immorality rebuked, 
discipline enjoined (1 Cor. 5, 
16.8) 

yt is %reported commonly that 
there is fornication among you, 

and such fornication as is not so 

much as named among the Gentiles, 
that one ‘should have his father’s 
wife. 

Indifference to evilin the church 

the result of divisions. 


2 1And ye are puffed up, and have 


ons among the Corinthians: “‘Apol- 
all alike indifferent to this instance 


5 3] 


not rather mourned, that he that 
hath done this deed might be taken 
away from among you. 

3 For I verily, as absent in body, 
but present in spirit, have judged 
already, as though I were present, 
concerning him that hath so done 
this deed, 

4 In the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, when ye are gathered to- 
gether, and my spirit, with the 
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 

5 #To deliver such an one unto 
‘Satan for the Idestruction of the 
flesh, that the spirit may be “saved 
in the day of the Lord ¢Jesus. 

6 Your glorying is not good. 
Know ye not that a little leaven 
leaveneth the whole lump? 

7 Purge out therefore the old 
leaven, that ye may be a new lump, 
as ye are unleavened. For even 
Christ our passover is ¢sacrificed 
for us: 

8 Therefore let us keep the feast, 
not with old fleaven, neither with 
the leaven of malice and wicked- 
ness; but with the unleavened 
bread of sincerity and truth. 

9 I wrote unto you in an epistle 
not to company with fornicators: 

10 Yet not altogether with the 
fornicators of this gworld, or with 
the covetous, or extortioners, or 
with idolaters; for then must ye 
needs go out of the Sworld. 

11 But now I have written unto 
you not to keep company, if any 
man that is called a brother be a 
fornicator, or covetous, or an idola- 
ter, or a railer, or a drunkard, or 
an extortioner; with such an one no 
not to eat. 

12 For what have I to do to judge 
them also that are “without? do not 
ye judge them that are within? 

13 But them that are without 
God judgeth. Therefore put away 
from among ‘yourselves that wicked 
person. 


CHAPTER 6. 

Saints forbidden to go to law 
with each other. 
DARE any of you, having a mat- 

ter against another, go to law 
before the unjust, and not before 
the saints? 

Do ye not know that the saints 


shall judge the jworld? and if the 
world shall be judged by you, are 


— 


I CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 59 


a Judgments 
(the seven). 
1 Cor.6.2,3. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20.12.) 

b Satan. 
1 Cor.7.5. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

c¢ Rom.1.16, 
note. 


d Some ancient 
authorities 
omit Jesus. 

e Sacrifice 
(of Christ). 
1 Cor.11.25. 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

f Leaven. vs.6, 
7,8; Gal.5.9. 
(Gen.19.3; 
Mt.13.33.) 

g kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 

h Mk.4.11. 

i Separation. 
vs.1,2,9-13; 1 
Cor.10.20,21. 
(Gen.12.1; 2 
Cor.6.14-17.) 

j kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


k Judgments 
(the seven). 
vs.2,3; 1 Cor. 
11.31,32. 

(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20.12.) 


1 Heb.1.4,note. 


m Churches 
(local). 1Cor. 
7.17. i 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1.1.) 

n were, and so 
throughout 
the verse. 


° revere 
ol er- 
sora) (N.T.). 
1 Cor.7.14,34. 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


> Justifica- 
tion. Gal.2. 
16. (Lk.18.14; 
Rom.3.28.) 


q Paul does not 
invoke the 
authority of 
the seventh 
command- 
ment, but ap- 
peals to the 
believer’s sa- 
credness as a 
member of 
Christ. 


is 


[6 18 


ye unworthy to judge the smallest _ 
matters? 

3 Know ye not that we shall 
Rjudge ‘angels? how much more 
things that pertain to this life? 

4 If then ye have judgments of 
things pertaining to this life, set 
them to judge “who are least es- 
teemed in the church. 

5 Ispeaktoyourshame. Isit so, 
that there is not a wise man among 
you? no, not one that shall be able 
to judge between his brethren? 

6 But brother goeth to law with 
brother, and that before the unbe- 
lievers. 

7 Now therefore there is utterly a 
fault among you, because ye go to 
law one with another. Why do ye 
not rather take wrong? why do 
ye not rather suffer yourselves to 
be defrauded? 

8 Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, 
and that your brethren. 


Part IV. The sanctity of the| 
body, and marriage (1 Cor. 
6. 9-7. 40). 


(1) The body is holy: because 
washed and justified. 


9 Know ye not that the unright- 
eous shall not inherit the kingdom 
of God? Be not deceived: neither 
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adul- 
terers, nor effeminate, nor abusers 
of themselves with mankind, 

10 Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor 
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extor- 
tioners, shall inherit the kingdom 
of God. 

11 And such were some of you: 
but ye “are washed, but ye are 
sanctified, but ye are justified in 
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by 
the Spirit of our God. 

12 All things are lawful unto me, 
but all things are not expedient: all 
things are lawful for me, but I will 
not be brought under the power of 
any. 


(2) Because the body is the Lord’s. 


13 Meats for the belly, and the 
belly for meats: but God shall de- 
stroy both it and them. Now the 
body zs not for fornication, but for 
the Lord; and the Lord for the body. 

14 And God hath both raised up 
the Lord, and will also raise up us 
by his own power. 

15 Know ye not that your bodies 
are the members of Christ? ¢shall I 


1 Gr. olethros, used elsewhere, 1 Thes. 5. 3; 2 Thes. 1. 9; 1 Tim. 6. 9, never means 


annihilation. 


16 


6 16) 


I CORINTHIANS. 


[7 22 


then take the members of Christ, 
and make them the members of an 
harlot? God forbid. 

16 What? know ye not that he 
which is joined to an harlot is one 
body? for “two, saith he, shall be 
one flesh. 

17 But he that is joined unto the 
Lord is one spirit. 

18 Fiee fornication, Every sin 
that a man doeth is without the 
body: but he that committeth forni- 
cation sinneth against his own body. 


(3) Because the body is a temple. 


19 What? know ye not that your 
body is the temple of the “Holy 
Ghost which is in you, which ye 
have dof God, and ye are not your 
own? 

20 For ye “are bought with a price: 
therefore glorify God in your body, 
fand in your spirit, which are God’s. 


CHAPTER 7. 
(4) Because God has established 
marriage. 
TOW concerning the things 


whereof ye wrote unto me: It 

is good for a man not to touch a 
woman. 

2 Nevertheless, to avoid fornica- 

tion, let every man have his own 

wife, and let every woman have 


-her own husband. 


settlement, and only the inspired wor 


3 Let the husband render unto the 
wife due benevolence: and likewise 
also the wife unto the husband. 

4 The wife hath not ¢power of her 
own body, but the husband: and 
likewise also the husband hath not 
power of his own body, but the 


wife. 
¥5 Defraud ye not one the other, 


except it be with consent for a time, 
that ye may give yourselves to fast- 
ing and prayer; and come together 
again, that “Satan ‘tempt you not 
jfor your incontinency. 

6 But I speak this by *permission, 
and not of commandment. 

7 For I would that all men were 
even as I myself. ‘But every man 
hath his proper- gift of God, one 
after this’ manner, and another 
after that. ‘ 

8 Isay therefore to the unmarried 


1 So far from disclaiming inspiration, 


Lord’s, Cases‘had arisen (e.g. vs. 


A.D. 59. 


a Gen.2.24. 

ba temple. 

c Holy Spirit. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

d from. 


& were. 


f Some author- 


1é authority 
over,’ 


hk Satan. 
2 Cor.2.11. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

it Temptation. 
1 Cor.10.9,13. 
Gen.3.1; 


Soh 5 
Jas.1.14.) 


j because of 
your lack of 
self-control 


k concession, 


| Howbett, 
each man 
hath his 
own gift 
from God, 
etc. 


m John 2.1,2; 
1 Tim.5.14. 


n leave. 
o leave her. 


pb Sanotify, 
holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
vs.14,34;. 
Eph.1.4. 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev,22.11.) 


q Gy. tekna, 
born ones. 


ry Rom.1.16, 
note, 


s each, 


t Churches* 
(loéal). vs.17, 
18;.1 Cor.10. 
32.. (Acts 2. 
41; Phil.1.1.) 


u the 
’ churches. 


v Lk.3-10,14-. 


12-1 


tions, not comprehended in the words of Jesus 


an. instruction, primarily; to Israel. 


These new 


1217 


and widows, It is good for them if 
they abide even as I. 

_9 But if they cannot contain, “let 
them marry: for it is better to marry 
than to burn. 


The regulation of marriage 
among Gentile believers. 


10 And unto the married I com- 
mand, yet not I, but the Lord, Let 
not the wife depart from Aer hus- 
band: 

11 But and if she depart, let her 
remain unmarried, or be reconciled 
to her husband: and let not the 
husband “put. away his wife. 

12 But to the rest 1speak I, not 
the Lord; If any brother hath a wife 
that believeth not, and she be 
pleased to dwell with him, let him 
not °put her away. 

13. And the woman which hath an 
husband that believeth not, and if 
he be pleased to dwell with her, let 
her not leave him. 

14 For the unbelieving husband is 
Psanctified by the wife, and the un-. 
believing wife is sanctified by the 
husband: else were your ¢children 
unclean; but now are they holy. 

15 But if the unbelieving depart, 
let him depart. A brother or a sis- 
ter is not under bondage in such 


‘cases: but God hath called us to 


peace. 

16 For what knowest thou, O 
wife, whether thou shalt save thy 
husband? or how knowest thou, O 
man, whether thou shalt ’save thy 
wife? 

17 But as God hath distributed to 
Severy man, as the Lord hath called 
Severy one, so let him walk. And 
so ordain I 4in all *churches. 

18 Is any man called being cir- 
cumcised? let him not become un- 
circumcised. Is any called in un- 
circumcision? let him not be cir- 
cumcised. 

19 Circumcision is nothing, and 
uncircumcision is nothing, but the 
keeping of the commandments of 
God. 

20 Let every man abide in the 
same calling wherein he was called. 

21 Art thou called being a ser- 
vant? care not for it: but if thou 
mayest be made free, use it rather. 

22 For he that is called in the 


the apostle associates his teaching with the 
6), as the: Gospel overflowed Jewish limita- 


(Mt. 5.31, 32; 19. 5-9) which were 
conditions demanded authoritative 


ds of an.apostle could give that. See v. 40. 


7 23] 
Lord, being a servant, “is the 
Lord’s “freeman: likewise also he 
that is called, being free, is Christ’s 
servant. 

23 Ye are ‘bought with a price; be 
not ye the servants of men. 

24 Brethren, let every man, 
wherein he is called, therein abide 
with ¢God. 

25 Now concerning virgins I have 
no commandment of the Lord: yet 
I give my judgment, as one that 
hath obtained mercy of the Lord 
to be faithful. 

26 I suppose therefore that this is 
good for the present distress, I say, 
that zt is good for a man so to be. 

27 .Art thou bound unto a wife? 
seek not to be loosed. Art thou 
loosed from a wife? seek not a wife. 

28 But and if thou marry, thou 
hast not “sinned; and if a virgin 
marry, she hath not sinned. Never- 
theless such ‘shall have trouble in 
the flesh: fbut I spare you. 

29 But this I say, brethren, the 
8time is short: it remaineth, that 
both they that have wives be as 
though they had none; 

30 And they that weep, as though 
they wept not; and they that re- 
joice, as though they rejoiced not; 
and they that buy; as though they 
possessed not; 

31 And they that use this “world, 
as not abusing it: for the fashion 
of this world passeth away. 


32 But I would have you ‘without! 


carefulness. He that is unmarried 
careth for the things that belong to 
the. Lord, how he may please the 
Lord: 

"33 But he that is married careth 
for the things that are of the ‘world, 
how he may please Ars wife. 

34 There is difference also be- 
tween a wife and a virgin. The 
unmarried woman careth for the 
things of the Lord, that she may be 
holy both in. body and in spirit: but 
she that is married careth for the 
things of the Jjworld, how she may 
please her husband. 

35 And this I speak for your own 
profit; not that I may “cast a snare 
upon you, but for that which is 
comely, and that ye may attend 
upon the Lord without distraction. 

36 But if any man think that he 
behaveth himself uncomely toward 
his virgin, if she pass the flower of 
her age, and need so require, let 
him do what he will, he /sinneth 
not: let them marry. 

37 Nevertheless he that standeth 


rite, ati 


I CORINTHIANS. 


aA en ie le See 


A.D. 59. 


@ John 8.36; 
Rom.6.18,22. 
b made free. 


¢ 1 Cor.6.20; 
1 Pet.1.18,19. 


d Eph.6.5,8; 
Col.3.22,24. 


e Sin, Rom.3. 
23, note. 


f and I would 
spare you. 


g1 Pet.4.7; 
2 Pet.3.8. 


h kosmos = 
world-system. 
2 Cor.7.10. 
(John 7.7; 
Rev.13.3-8, 
note.) 


i free from 
cares. 

j kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 


k put con- 
Straint upon 
you. 


1 Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


m 2 Cor.6.14. 


n that I also 
have the 
Spirit of 
God. 


o Holy Spirit. 
1 Cor.12.3,4, 
7,8;9,11,13. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


p concerning 
things sacri- 
ficed to. 


q love 
buildeth up. 


rie. earth. 


s Mal.2.10; 
Eph.4.6. 


t John 1.3}, 
Heb.1.2. 


u Rom.5.11; 
Rev.4.11; 
5.9,10. 


v Law (of 
Christ). vs.9- 
13; 1 Cor.9, 
21. (Gal.6.2; 
2 John 5.) 


w will not his 
conscience 
if he is weak 


be builded 


up, etc, 


1218 


stedfast in his heart, having no ne- 


cessity, but hath power over his 


own will, and hath so decreed in his . 


heart that he will keep his virgin, 
doeth well. 

38 So then he that giveth her in 
marriage doeth well; but he that 
giveth her not in marriage doeth 
better. 

39 The wife is bound -by the law 
as long as her husband liveth; but 
if her husband be dead, she is at 
liberty to be married to whom she 
will; “only in the Lord. 

40 But she is happier if she so 
abide, after my judgment: and I 
think “also that I have the °Spirit 
of God. 


CHAPTER 8. 


Part V. Meats, and the limita: 
tions of Christian liberty 
(1 Cor. 8. 1-11. 1). 


INCY Pas touching things offered 
unto idols, we know that we 
all have knowledge. Knowledge 
puffeth up, but %charity edifieth. 

2 And if any man think that he 
knoweth any thing, he knoweth 
nothing yet as he ought to know. 

3 But if any man love God, the 
same is known of him. 

4 As concerning therefore the eat- 
ing of those things that are offered 
in sacrifice unto idols, we know that 
an idol zs nothing in the “world, and 
that there is none other God but 
one. 

5 For though there be that are 
called gods, whether in heaven or 
in. earth, (as there be gods many, 
and lords many, ) 

6 But ‘to us there is but one 
God, the Father, of whom are all 
things, and we in him; and one Lord 
Jesus Christ, by ‘whom are all 
things, and “we by him. 

7 Howbeit there is not in every 
man that knowledge: for some with 
conscience of the idol unto this hour 
eat it as a thing offered unto an 
idol; and their conscience being 
weak is defiled. 


| 8 But meat commendeth us not to 


God: for neither, if we eat, are we 
the better; neither, if we eat not, 
are we the’worse. 

9 But take heed lest by any means 
this ‘liberty of your’s become a 
stumblingblock to them that are 
weak. 

10 For if any man see thee which 
hast knowledge sit at meat in the 


idol’s temple, “shall not the con- — 


DENRA NS Retep ee 
8 11) 

tae er 
science of him which is weak be 
emboldened to eat those things 
which are offered to idols; 

11 And through thy knowledge 
shall the weak brother perish, for 
ewhom Christ died? 

12 But when ye %sin so against 
the brethren, and wound their weak 
conscience, ye sin against Christ. 

13 Wherefore, if meat make my 
brother to ‘offend, I will eat no 
flesh while the ¢world standeth, 
lest I make my brother to offend. 


CHAPTER 9. 
Paul vindicates his apostieship. 
(Cf. Gal. 1, 11-2. 14.) 


ba I not an apostle? am [I not 
free? have I not seen Jesus 
Christ our Lord? are not ye my 
work in the Lord? 

2 If I be not an apostle unto 
others, yet doubtless I am to you: 
for the seal of mine apostleship are 
ye in the Lord. 

3 Mine answer to them that do 
examine me is this, 

4 Have we ‘not power to eat and 
to drink? 

5 Have we ‘not power to leac 
about a Ssister, a wife, as well as 
other apostles, and as the brethren 
of the Lord, and Cephas? 


6 Or I only and Barnabas, have 
‘not we “power to forbear working? 


They who preach the Gospel are 
to live of the Gospel. 


7 Who goeth a warfare any time 
at his own charges? who planteth 
a vineyard, and eateth not of the 
fruit thereof? or who feedeth a 
flock, and eateth not of the milk of 
the flock? 

8 Say I these things as a man? 
or saith not the law the same also? 

9 For ‘it is written in the law of 
Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the 
mouth of the ox that treadeth out 
the corn. Doth God take care for 
oxen? 

10 Or saith he it altogether for 
our sakes? For our sakes, no 
doubt, this is written: that he that 
ploweth should plow in hope; and 
that he that thresheth 4in hope 
should be partaker of his hope. | 

11 If we have sown unto you spir- 


7 ¢* 6 


1 CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 59. 


awhose sake. 


6 Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


c stumble. 


d the age 
Jasteth. 


e1 Cor.9.22. 
fno right. 


g awite whois 
a sister. 


h 2 Thes.3.8,9. 


i Deut.25.4; 
1 Tim.5.18. 


j2 Tim.3.16. 


k Or, in hope 
of partaking 
of tt. 


li.e. things for 
the body. 


m 2 Cor.11.7, 
9,12,14. 


n Sanctify, 
holy (things) 
N.T. 


1 Cor.16.20. 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


0 Or, eat. 


pb Rewards. 
Phil.4.1. 
(Dan.12.3; 
1 Cor.3.14.) 


q Law (of 
Christ). 
1 Cor.13.1-13. 
(Gal.6.2; 
2 John 5.) 


r Rom.1.16, 
note. 


s Gospel. vs. 
12,14,16-18, 
23; 1.Cor.195- 
1-4. (Gen.12. 
1-3; Rev.14. 
6.) 


t race-course, 


a? 


itual things, fs 7# a great thing if we 
shall reap your ‘carnal things? 

12 If others be partakers of this 
power over you, are not we rather? 
mNevertheless we have not used this 
power; but suffer all things, lest we 
should hinder the gospel of Christ. 

13 Do ye not know that they 
which minister about “holy things 
Clive of the things of the temple? 
and they which wait at the altar 
are partakers with the altar? 

14 Even so hath the Lord or- 
dained that they which preach the 
gospel should live of the gospel. 

15 But I have used none of these 

things: neither have I written these 
things, that it should be so done 
unto me: for i+ were better for me 
to die, than that any man should 
make my glorying void. 
16 For though I preach the gospel, 
I have nothing to glory of: for ne- 
cessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is 
unto me, if I preach not the gospel! 
17 For if I do this thing willingly, 
I have a “reward: but if against 
my will, a dispensation of the gos- 
pel is committed unto me. 

18 What is my reward then? 
Verily that, when I preach the gos- 
pel, I may make the gospel of Christ 
without charge, that I abuse not 
my power in the gospel. 


The method and reward of 
true ministry. 


19 For though I be free from all 
men, yet have I made myself ser- 
vant unto all, that I might gain 
the more. 

20 And unto the Jews I became as 
a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; 
to them that are under the law, as 
under the law, that I might gain 
them that are under the law; 

21 To them that are without law, 
as without law, (being not !without 
law to God, but under the law to 
Christ,) that I-might gain them 
that are without law. 

22 To the weak became I as weak, 
that I might gain the weak: I am 
made ali things to all men, that I 
might by all means ”save some. 

23 And this I do for the ‘gospel’s 
sake, that I might be partaker 
thereof with you. 

24 Know ye not that they which 
run in a ‘race run all, but one re- 


1 The expression is peculiar and 
God, but inlawed to Christ.”’ See 


might be lit 


“Law (of Christ),” Gal. 6. 2; 2 John 5. 


erally rendered, “not lawless toward 
t is 


another way of saying, “not under the law, but under [the rule of] giace’’ (Rom. 


6. 14). 


1219 


(9 24 


ceiveth the prize? So run, that 
ye may obtain. 

25 And every man that striveth 
for the mastery is temperate in all 
things. Now they do it to obtain a 
corruptible crown; but we an Jin- 
corruptible. 

26 I therefore so run, “not as un- 
certainly; so fight I, ¢not as one 
that beateth the air: 

27 But I ¢keep under my body, 
and bring it into subjection: lest 
that by any means, when I have 
preached to others, I myself should 
be fa lcastaway. 


CHAPTER 10. 


Israel in the wilderness a 
warning example. 


MOREOVER, brethren, I would 
not that ye should be ignorant, 
how that all our fathers were under 
the cloud, and all passed through 
the sea; 

2 And were all baptized unto Mo- 
ses in the cloud and in the sea; 

3 And did all eat the same spir- 
itual meat; 

4 And did all drink the same spir- 
itual drink: for they drank of éthat 
spiritual “Rock that followed them: 
and that Rock was Christ. 

5 But with many of them God 
was not well pleased: for they were 
overthrown in the wilderness. 

6 Now these things ‘were our ex- 
amples, to the intent we should not 
lust after evil things, as they also 
lusted. 

7 Neither be ye idolaters, as were 
some of them; as it is written, 7The 
people sat down to eat and drink, 
and rose up to plav. 

8 Neither let us commit fornica- 
tion, as *some of them committed, 


and “fell in one day three and 
twenty thousand. 


1 Gr. adokimos, “disapproved.” 
f Rom. 14. 18; 16. 10; 1 Cor. 
and in Jas. 1. 12 by the word “tried.” 


lated “approved’’ in 


’ 


Hebrew numbers thus becomes easy, 


I CORINTHIANS. 


@ Phil.3.14; 

1 Tim.6.12. 

62 Tim.4.8; 
Jas.1.12; 1 
Pet.5.4; Rev. 
2.10; 3.11. 

cas not un- 
certainly. 

d as not beat- 
ing the air. 

e buffet my 
body, and 
Jead it 
captive. 

fi.e. disap- 
proved. 

ga spiritual 
reck. 

h Christ (as 
Stone). John 
4.13,14. 
(Ex.17.6; 

1 Pet.2.8.) 

it happened as 
types for us. 

j Ex.32.6. 

k Num.25.1,9. 

2 Ex.17.2,7. 

m Num.2i1.6. 

n Num.14.2, 
29; 26.63,65. 

0 as types. 

pie. ages. 

q Temptation. 
vs.9,13; 2Cor, 
11.3,4. (Gen. 
3.1; Jas.1.14.) 

r make the 
issue also. 

s Or, loaf. Cf. 
1 Cor.11.23- 
26; 12.12,13. 

t1 Cor.8.4. 

u Gr. demon; 
also v.71. See 
Mt.7.22, 
note. 

v Deut.32.17. 

w See v.16, 
trans. com- 
munion. 

x Separation, 
2 Thes.3.6,14. 
(Gen.12.1; 2 
Cor.6.14-17.) 


A.D. 59. 


Dokimos 


[10 


; t 

9 Neither let us ‘tempt Christ, as 
some of them also tempted, and 
were destroyed of serpents. 7 

10 Neither murmur ye, as some of 
them also “murmured, and were de- 
stroyed of the destroyer. 

11 Now all these things happened 
unto them °for ensamples: and they 
are written for our admonition, 
upon whom the ends of the “world 
are come. 


12 Wherefore let him thatthinketh | 


he standeth take heed lest he fall. 
13 There hath no ’temptation ta- 
ken you but such as is common to 


man: but God is faithful, who will 


not suffer you to be teripted abov 
that ye are able; but will with the 


temptation “also make a way to es- _ 


cape, that ye may be able to bear if. 
14 Wherefore, my dearly beloved, 
flee from idolatry. 


15 I speak as to wise men; judge | 


ye what I say. 


Fellowship at the Lord’s table 
demands separation. 


16 The cup of blessing which we 


bless, is it not the communion of 


the blood of Christ? 
which we break, is it not the com- 
munion of the body of Christ? 


17 For we being many are one | 


Sbread, and one body: for we are 
all partakers of that one bread. 

18 Behold Israel after the flesh: 
are not they which eat of the sacri- 
fices’ partakers of the altar? 

_19 What say I then? that the 4idol 
is any thing, or that which is offered 
in sacrifice to idols is any thing? 

20 But I say, that the things 
which the Gentiles sacrifice, they 
sacrifice to “devils, and not to "God: 
and I would not that ye should 
have “fellowship with devils. 

21 “Ye cannot drink the cup of the 
Lord, and the cup of devils: ye can- 


4 


The bread | 


| 
i 


_ 


“AO 22] 


not be partakers of the Lord’s table, 
and of the table of devils. 

22 Do we provoke the Lord to 
jealousy? are we stronger than he? 


The law of love in relation to 
eating and drinking. (Cf. 
Rom. 14, 1-23.) 


23 All things are lawful for me, 
but all things are not expedient: 
all things are lawful for me, but 
all things edify not. 

24 Let no man seek his Zown, but 


every man another’s wealth. 

25 Whatsoever is sold in the 
shambles, that eat, asking no ques- 
tion for conscience sake: 

26 For the earth is the 5Lord’s, 
and the fulness thereof. 

27 If any of them that believe not 
bid you to a feast, and ye be dis- 
posed to go; whatsoever is set be- 
fore you, eat, asking no question 
for conscience sake. 

28 But if any man say unto you, 
This is offered in sacrifice unto 
idols, ‘eat not for his sake that 
shewed it, and for conscience sake: 
for the earth is the Lord’s, and the 
fulness thereof: 

29 Conscience, I say, not thine 
own, but of the other: for why is 
my liberty judged of another man’s 

“conscience? 

30 For if I “by grace be a par- 

taker, why am I evil spoken of for 
’ that for which I give thanks? 

31 Whether therefore ye eat, or 
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all 
to the glory of God. 

32 Give none offence, neither to 
the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to 
éthe fchurch of God: 

_.33 Even as I please all men in all 
; things, not seeking mine own 
profit, but the profit of many, that 
they may be ésaved. 


CHAPTER 11. 


BE ye /followers of me, even as 
I also am of Christ. 


Part VI. Christian order and the 
Lord’s supper (vs. 2-34). 


2 Now I praise you, brethren, 
that ye remember me in all things, 
and keep the ‘ordinances, as I de- 
livered them to you. 

3 But I would have you know, that 
the head of every man is Christ; and 
the head of the Jwoman is the man; 
and the head of Christ is God. 


I CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 59. 


¢ own advan- 
tage, but 
that of the 
other. 


b Jehovah. 
Psa.24.1. 


¢1 Cor.8.10,12. 


d partake 
with 
thanksgiv- 
ing. 


e Churches 
(local). 1 Cor. 
11.16-34. 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1.1.) 


f Church (vis- 
ible). 1 Cor. 
12.28. (1 Cor. 
10.32; 1 Tim. 
3.15.) 


g Rom.1.16, 
note. 


h imitators. 


t things de- 
livered; 
often trans. 
traditions. 


j Cf.Gen.3.16. 
‘The woman’s 
veil, or head- 
covering, is a 
symbol of this 
subordina- 
tion. 


k Acts 21.9. 

1 Gen.5.1. 

m Gen,1.27. 

n authority, 
i.e. the sign 
of the 
husband’s 
authority. 

0 i.e, of the 
presence of 
the angels. 

fp Or, seemly. 

q Or, veil. 

ri Cor.1.11,12. 

s Or, schisms. 

t Or, sects. 


u Or, ye can- 
not eat. 


v Jude 12. 


4 Every man praying or proph- 


1221 


[11 21 


esying, having his head covered, 
dishonoureth his head. 

5 But ¥every woman that prayeth 
or prophesieth with her head un- 
covered dishonoureth her head: for 
that is even all one as if she were 
shaven, 

6 For if the woman be not cov- 
ered, let her also be shorn: but if it 
be a shame for a woman to be shorn 
or shaven, let her be covered. 

7 For a man indeed ought not to 
cover Ais head, forasmuch as he is 
the 4mage and glory of "God: but 
the woman is the glory of the man. 

8 For the man is not of the 
woman; but the woman of the man. 

9 Neither was the man created for 
the woman; but the woman for the 
man. 

10 For this cause ought the 
woman to have “power on her head 
because of the “angels. 

11 Nevertheless neither is the 
man without the woman, neither 
the woman without the man, in the 
Lord. 

12 For as the woman is of the 
man, even so is the man also by the 
woman; but all things of God. 

13 Judge in yourselves: is it 
écomely that a woman pray unto 
God uncovered? 

14 Doth not even nature itself 
teach you, that, if a man have long 
hair, it is a shame unto him? 

15 But if a woman have long hair, 
it is a glory to her: for her hair is 
given her for a %covering. 

16 Butif any man seem to be con- 
tentious, we have no such custom, 
neither the churches of God. 


Disorders at the Lord’s table 
rebuked. 


17 Now in this that I declare 
unto you I praise you not, that ye 
come together not’ for the better, 
but for the worse. 

18 For first of all, when ye come 
together in the church, "I hear that 
there be ‘divisions among you; anc 
I partly believe it. 

19 For there must be also ther 
esies among you, that they whic! 
are approved may be made mani 
fest among you. 

20 When ye come together there- 
fore into one place, “this is not tc 
eat the Lord’s supper. 

21 For in eating every one taketh 
before other his own supper: anc 
one is *hungry, and another is 


drunken. 


a 
: B> 


= 
7 


he hoy F 


11 22] 


22 What? have ye not houses to 
eat and to drink in? or despise ye 
the church of God, and shame them 
that have not? What shall I say to 
you? shall I prais€é you in this? I 
praise you not. 


The order and meaning of the 
Lord’s table. 


23 For I have réceived of the Lord 
that which also I delivered unto 
you, That the Lord Jesus the same 
night in which he was betrayed took 
bread: 

24 And when he had given thanks, 
he brake it, and said, Take, eat: 
this is my body, which 4is broken 
for you: this do in remembrance of 
me. 

25 After the same manner also he 
took the cup, when he had supped, 
saying, This cup is the new “testa- 
ment ‘in my blood: this do ye, as 
oft as yé drink a, in remembrance 
of me. 

26 For as often as ye eat this 
bread, and drink this cup, ye ¢do 
shew the Lord’s death till he come. 

27 Wherefore whosoever shail eat 
this bread, and drink this cup of the 
Lord, ‘unworthily, shall be guilty 
of the body and blood of the Lord. 

28 But let aman examine himself, 
and so let him eat of that bread, 
and drink of that cup. - 

29 For he that eatethand drink- 
eth unworthily, eateth and drink- 
eth /damnation to himself, not dis- 
cerning the Lord’s body. 

30 For this cause many are weak 
and sickly among you, and many 
sleep. 

31 For if we would l¢judge our- 
selves, we should not be “judged. 

32 But when we are judged. we 


—— 


I CORINTHIANS. 


, =a.’ ts we r 2. eer. ee 
. ess / , Co ae 


A.D. 59. 


are chastened of the Lord, that we 
ishould not be condemned with the 
jworld. 

33 Wherefore, my brethren, when 
ye come together to eat, tarry one 


ais for you. 
b-covenant. 
¢ Sacrifice (of 


Christ). for another. , 
2 Cor.514, | 34 And if any man hungef, let 
(Gon aon him eat at home; that ye come not 
Heb.10.18.)  |together ‘unto condemnation. Arid 
d declare. the rest will I set in order when I> 
e i.e. in an un- come. 
worthy man- 
ner; cf. vs. 
tec 3 CHAPTER 12. 
ent, 2 = 
inthesenwe of Part VII. Spiritual gifts in the 
pagan ae body of Christ for ministry _ 
h Judgments | @nd worship (1 Cor. 12. 1-14. 40). 
vesiane Now concerning 2spiritual gifts, 
ae brethren, I would not have you 
7012) \wgnorant. s 
fae dD Ye know that ™ye were-Gen- 
j Kosmos tiles, carried away unto these dumb 
(Mt4.8)= idols, even as ye were led. 
Ry Snape 3 Wherefore I give you to under- 
i bape hee stand, that no man speaking by 
12.28-31. the Spirit of God calleth Jesus ac-_ 
(cts 2-413 icursed: and that no man can say 
iis eee that Jesus is the Lord, but “by the 
ane Holy Ghost. 

A the f s 
Tuan eae True ministry is the exercise of 
Gentiles. spiritual gift (Cf. Eph. 4. 7-16.) 

nin. 
° Ee oh -4 Now there are diversities of 
Spine gives |CGifts, but the same Spirit. 


5 And there are differences of ad- 
ministrations, but the same Lord. 


gifts for ser- 
vice to men, 


theamea® | 6 And there are diversities of 
men tothe |?operations, but it is the same God 
churches. which worketh all in all. 


b workings. 


7 But the manifestation of the 
g to each the 


Spirit is given to every man to 


manifesta- the} 
tion is given | Profit withal. con ne) 
for profit. 8 For to one is given by the Spirit 


the word of wisdom; to another the 


1 Self-judgment is not so much 


ways or habits, as of himself, for allowing such ways. 


tisement. 


2 The word Pneumatika, lit. 
Spirit, 
relation to the body of Christ. 
the Spirit forms the body by 
Head, and to each other 
natural, 


If neglected, the Lord judges, and the result is 
condemnation (v. 32; 2 Sam. 7. 14, 455) 12.3135143 1 ‘Cor: 5.5; 1cT 
See other judgments, John 12. 31, note; 2 Cor. 5. 10, note; 
20. 37, note; Jude 6, note; Rev. 20. 12, note. 


gives the key to Chapters 1 


the believer’s moral condemnation of his own 
Self-judgment avoids chas- 
chastisement, but never 
im. 1. 20; Heb. 12. 7). 
Mt. 25. 32, note; Ezk. 


“spirituals,” i.e. matters of or from the Holy 
2., 13., 14. ‘Chapter 12. concerns the Spirit in 


This relation is twofold: (1) The baptism with 
uniting believers to Christ. i 
(vs212 13); 
human body (vy. 12), and all the analogies are 
(2) To-each believer is given a spiritual enablement and capacity 


the risen and glorified 
body thus formed is the 
freely used (vs. 14-26). 
for specific service. 


The symbol of the 


0 believer is destitute of such gift (vs. 7, 11, 27), but in their distribution the 


Spirit acts in free sovereignty (v. 
Christian service is simply 


11). There is no room for ‘self-choosing, and 


the ministry of such gift as the individual may have 


received (cf. Rom. 12. 4-8). 2) The gifts are diverse (vs. 6, 8-10, 28-30), but 


all are equally honourable because bestowed by. the same 
fo) 


the same Lord, and energized by 


Spirit, administered under 
the same God. 


1222 


| 


i 


129) 


I CORINTHIANS. 


[13 3 


word of knowledge by the same 
Spirit; 

9 To another “faith by the same 
Spirit; to another the gifts of heal- 
ing by the same Spirit; 

10 To another the working of 
miracles; to another !prophecy; to 
another °discerning of spirits; to 
another divers, kinds of °tongues; 
to another the interpretation of 
tongues: 

11 But all these worketh that one 
and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to 
every man severally as he will. 


Every believer is a member of 
Christ’s body and as such has 
a definite ministry. 


12 For as the body is one, and 
hath many- members, and all the 
members of that one body, being 
many, are one body: so also is 
Christ. 

13 For by one 4Spirit are we all 
baptized into one body, whether we 
be Jews or “Gentiles, whether we 
be bond or free; fand have been all 
made to drink into one Spirit. 

14 For the body is not one mem- 
ber, but many, ’ 

15 If the foot shall say, Because I 
am not the hand, I am not of the 
body; is it therefore not of the 


body? 

16 And if the ear shall say, Be- 
cause I am not the eye, I am not of 
the body; is it therefore not of the 


17 Ifthe whole body were an eye, 
where were the hearing? If the 
whole were hearing, where were 
the smelling? 

18 But now hath God set the 
members every one of them in the 
body, as it hath pleased him. 

19 And if they were all one mem- 
ber, where were the body? 

20 But now are they many mem- 
bers, yet but one body. 

21 And the eye cannot say unto 
the hand, I have no need of thee: 
nor again the head to the feet, I 
have no need of you. 

22 Nay, much more those mem- 
bers of the body, which seem to be 
more feeble, are necessary: 


A.D. 59. 
@ Faith. 1 Cor, 
15.14,17. 


(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 


61 John 4.1. 
c Acts 2.4,7,11. 


d Holy Spirit. 
vs.3,4,7,8,9, 
11,13; 

1 Cor.14.16. 


f Assurance. 
vs.12,13; 
2 Cor.1.10. 
(Isa.32.17; 
Jude 1.) 


g given to 
drink of. 


h Or, put on, 
4 Or, division. 
j Eph.5.30. 


kvs.8,11; 
Acts 5.4. 


1 Churches 
(local). vs. 
28-31; 1 Cor. 
14.1-5. (Acts 


m Church 
(true). vs.12- 
28,31; 2 Cor. 
11.2,3.- (Mt. 


16.18; 
Heb.12.23.) 


n Church 
(visible). 
1 Cor.15.9. 
(1 Cor.10.32; 
1 Tim.3.15.) 


o Heb.1.4, 
note. 


pie. love; and 
so in vs.2,3, 
4,8,13. 


g clanging. 


ry Law (of 
Christ). vs.1- 
13; 2 Cor.5. 
13,14. (Gal.6. 
23-2 John 5.) 


23 And those members of the 
body, which we think to be less 
honourable, upon these we “bestow 
more abundant honour; and our 
uncomely parts have more abun- 
dant comeliness. 

24 For our comely parts have no 
need; but God hath tempered the 
body together, having given more 
abundant honour to that part 
which lacked: 

25 That there should be no 
tgschisrm in the body; but that the 
members should have the same care 
one for another. 

26 And whether one member suf- 
fer, all the members suffer with it; 
or one member be honoured, all the 
members rejoice with it. . 

27 Now ye are the body of-Christ, 
and Jjmembers in particular. 

28 And God hath /set some in 
mthe "church, first apostles, second- 
arily prophets, thirdly teachers, 
after that miracles, then gifts of 
healings, helps, governments, diver- 
sities of tongues. 

29 Are all apostles? are all proph- 
ets? are all teachers? are all work- 
ers of miracles? 

30 Have all the gifts of healing? 
do all speak with tongues? do all 
interpret? 

31 But covet earnestly the best 
gifts: and yet shew I unto you a 
2more excellent way. 


CHAPTER 13. 


The ministry gifts must be gov- 
erned by love. 


HOUGH I speak with the 
tongues of men and of °angels, 
and have not ?charity, I am become 
as sounding brass, or a %tinkling 
cymbal, 

2 And though I have the gift of 
prophecy, and understand all mys- 
teries, and all knowledge; and 
though I have all faith, so that I 
could remove mountains, and have 
not “charity, I am nothing. 

3 And though I bestow all my 
goods to feed the poor, and though 
I give my body to be burned, and 
have not @charity, it profiteth me 
nothing. 


1 The N.T. prophet is not ordinarily a foreteller, but rather a forth-teller, one 
whose gift enabled him to speak “‘to edification, and exhortation, and comfort” 


(1 Cor. 14. 3). 

2 Chapter 1 
but only if ministered in love (13. 
love (13.3). Love is described (13. 
knowledge (13. 8- 


3. continues the pneumatika begun in Chapter 12. 
Benevolence is good, but not apart from 
). Love is better than our present incomplete 


12), and greater than even faith and hope (v. 13). 


2). 


i) 
4-7 


1223 


Gifts are good, 


13 4] 


4 Charity suffereth long, and is 
kind; charity envieth not; charity 
yaunteth not itself, is not puffed 
up, 

5 Doth not behave itself unseem- 
ly, seeketh not her own, is not easily 
provoked, thinketh no evil; 

6 Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but 
rejoiceth %in the truth; 

7 Beareth all things, believeth all 
things, hopeth all things, endureth 
all things. 

8 °Charity ‘never faileth: but 
whether there be prophecies, they 
shall fail; whether there be tongues, 
they shall cease; whether there be 
knowledge, it shall vanish away. 

9 For we know 4in part, and we 
prophesy in part. 

10 «But when that which is per- 
fect is come, then that which is in 
part shall be done away. 

11 When I was a child, I spake as 
a child, I understood as a child, I 
Yhought as a child: but when I 
became a man, I put away childish 
things. 

12 For now we see &through a 
glass, darkly; but then face to face: 
now I know in part; but then shall 
I know even as also I am known. 

13 And now abideth faith, hope, 
“charity, these three; but the great- 
est of these is charity. 


CHAPTER 14. 
Prophecy is the greatest of the 


gifts, 

FrotLow after ‘charity, and de- 

sire spiritual gifts, but lrather 
that_ye may prophesy. ; 

2 For he that speaketh in ‘an un- 
known tongue speaketh not unto 
men, but unto God: for no man 
Junderstandeth Aim; howbeit in 
the spirit he speaketh mysteries. 

3 But he that prophesieth speak- 
eth unto men fo edification, and ex- 
hortation, and comfort. 


14. regulates the ministry of gift 
(1) The important gift is that of pro 
a preacher, but an inspired preacher 
revelations suited to the new dis 
and the sign gifts are to ceas 
only if an inter 
there was liber 
prophecy more es 
whole church” ca 
(vs. 34, 35; cf. 1 
to be “the comm 


I CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 59. 


adi.e. love; and 
so in vs.2,3, 
4,8,13. 

6 with. 

¢ Eph.3.17,19. 

d 1 Cor.8.2. 


é1 John 3.2. 


f reasoned. 


gin a murror 
inan 
enigma. 

h love. 

¢ Or, a tongue; 
and so in vs. 
4,13,14,19, 27. 

j Gr. heareth. 

k Churches 
(local). vs.1- 
S. 1 Cor.14. 
35. (Acts 2. 
41; Phil.1.1.) 

lice. earth. 


m Rom.14.19; 
Eph.4.29. 


n John 4.24. | 


Cha 


primi 
We LE 


in the 
phecy ( 
, throu 


1224 


ves ministry of 


] gh whom, until the N.T 
pensation were given (1 Cor. 14. 29, 
e, and meantime mu 
preter be present (vs. 1-19, 27, 28) 
ty for the ministry of all the gifts whic 
pecially (vs. 23-26, 31, 39). 
me together “‘in one place,”’ 
Cor. 11. 3-16; 1 Tim. 2. 11-14). 

andments of the Lord” (vs. 36, 


women were re 


a 
4 He that speaketh in an un- 
known tongue edifieth himself; but | 
he that prophesieth edifieth the — 
church. 

5 I would that ye all spake with © 
tongues, but rather that ye proph- 
esied: for greater is he that proph- | 
esieth than he that speaketh with | 
tongues, except he interpret, that | 
the #church may receive edifying. | | 

6 Now, brethren, if I come unto 
you speaking with tongues, what — 
shall I profit you, except I shall 
speak to you either by revelation, 
or by knowledge, or by prophesying, | 
or by doctrine? 

7 And even things without life 
giving sound, whether pipe or harp, 
except they give a distinction in the 
sounds, how shall it be known what 
is piped or harped? 

8 For if the trumpet give an un- 
certain sound, who shall prepare 
himself to the battle? ; 

9 So likewise ye, except ye utter 
by the tongue words easy to be un-. 
derstood, how shall it be known 
what is spoken? for ye shall speak 
into the air, | 

10 There are, it may be, so many 
kinds of voices in the ‘world, and | 
none of them is without signifi- 
cation. 7 | 

li Therefore if I know not the 
meaning of the voice, I shall be unto. 
him that speaketh a barbarian, and 
he that speaketh shall be a barba- 
Tian unto me. 

12 Even so ye, forasmuch as ye) 
are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek 
that ye may excel to the edifying | 
of the church. 

13 Wherefore let him that speak- 
eth in an unknown tongue pray 
that he may interpret. 

14 For if I pray in an unknown | 
tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my 
understanding is unfruitful. 

15 What is it then? I will pray 


with the spirit, and I will pray 
“with the understanding also: I 

1 The subject is still the pneumatika. 
Body; Chapter 13. the love which alone gi 


pter 12. described the gifts and the 
i gift any value; Chapter — 
tive, apostolic assembly of saints. 
The N.T. prophet was not merely — 
- Was written, new 
30). (2) Tongues 
st be used with restraint, and — 
(3) In the primitive church 
h might be present, but for _ 
(4) In such meetings, when ‘the | 
quired to keep silence | 


Os sen injunctions are declared | 


14 16] 


I CORINTHIANS. 


[15 6 


ee ae Se OE ee ee 


will ¢sing with the spirit, and I will 
sing with the understanding also. 

16 Else when thou shalt bless with 
the spirit, how shall he that occu- 
pieth the room of the unlearned say 
Amen at thy giving of thanks, see- 
ing he understandeth not what thou 
sayest? 

17 For thou verily givest thanks 
well, but the other is not edified. 

18 I thank my God, I speak with 
tongues more than ye all: 

19 Yet in the church I had rather 
speak five words with my under- 
standing, that by my voice I might 
teach others also, than ten thousand 
words in an unknown tongue. 

20 Brethren, be not ‘children in 
understanding: howbeit in malice 
be ye 4children, but in understand- 
ing be men. 

21 In the law it is written, «With 
men of other tongues and other 
lips will I speak unto this people; 
and yet for all that will they not 
hear me, saith the Lord. 

22 Wherefore tongues are for a 
fsign, not to them that believe, 
but to them that believe not: but 
prophesying serveth not for them 
that believe not, but for them 
which believe. 


The order of the ministry of 
gift in the local church. 


- 23 If therefore the whole church 
come together into one place, 
and all speak with tongues, and 
there come in those that are un- 
learned, or unbelievers, will they 
not say that £ye are mad? 

24 But if all prophesy, and there 
come in one that believeth not, or 
“one unlearned, he is convinced of 
all, he is judged of all: 

25 And thus are the secrets of his 
heart made manifest; and so falling 
down on his face he will worship 
hGod, and report that God is in you 
of a truth. 

26 How isit then, brethren? when 
ye come together, every one of you 
hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath 
a tongue, hath a revelation, hath 
an interpretation. ‘Let all things 
be done unto edifying. 

27 If any man speak in an un- 
known tongue, Jet it be by two, or 
at the most dy three, and that iby 
course; and let one interpret. 

28 But if there be no interpreter, 
let him keep silence in the church; 
and let him speak to himself, and 
‘to God. 


\ 


A.D. 59. 


a Eph.5. Ag 
Col.3.1 


6 Holy Spirit. 
vs.2,15,16; 
2 Cor.1.22. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


c Gr. paidon, 
youths. 


d babes. . 


e Isa.28.11,12; 
Deut.28.49. 


f Mk.16.17; 
Acts 2.6, 


g Acts 2.13. 
h 1sa.45.14. 


# v.40; also 
vs.26,33. 


j Or, in turn. 
k 1 Thes.5.19, 
20. 


1 Psa.39.2,3. 
m Cf.Gen.3.16. 


n their own 
husbands. 


o Churches 
(local). 1 Cor. 
15.9. (Acts 2. 
41; Phil.1.1.) 


Rom.15.19. 
q1 John 4.6. 


vr Inspiration. 
Gal.1.11,12. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


(Gen.12.1 -3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


¢tRom.1.16, 
note. 


u hold fast the 
word which 
Iannounced 
unto you as 
the glad 
tidings. 


v Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


w See Mk.16. 
14, note. 


1225 


29 Let the prophets speak two or 
three, and let the other judge. 

30 If any thing be revealed to 
another that sitteth by, let the first 
hold his peace. 

31 For ye may all prophesy one 
by one, that all may learn, and all 
may be comforted. 

32 And the spirits of the prophets 
are ‘subject to the prophets. 

33 For God is not the author of 
confusion, but of peace, as in all 
churches of the saints. 

34 Let your women keep silence 
in the churches: for it is not per- 
mitted unto them to speak; but 
they are commanded to be under 
mobedience, as also saith the law. 

35 And if they will learn any 
thing, let them ask “their husbands 
at home: for it is a shame for 
women to speak in the °church. 

36 What? ?came the word of God 
out from you? or came it unto you 
only? 

37 If any man “%think himself to 
be a prophet, or spiritual, let him 
acknowledge that the things that I 
write unto you ’are the command- 
ments of the Lord. 

38 But if any man be ignorant, 
let him be ignorant. 

39 Wherefore, brethren, covet to 
prophesy, and forbid not to speak 
with tongues. 

40 Let all things be done decently 
and in order. 


CHAPTER 15. 


Part VIIi. The coming of the 
Lord and the first resurrec- 
tion. (Cf, Rev. 20. 5, 11-15.) 


(1) The fact of Christ’s 
resurrection. 


OREOVER, brethren, I declare 
unto you the Sgospel which I 
preached unto you, which also ye 
have received, and wherein ye 
stand; 

2 By which also ye are ‘saved, if 
ye “keep in memory what I 
preached unto you, unless ye have 
believed in vain. 

3 For I delivered unto you first of 
all that which I also received, how 
that Christ died for our “sins ac- 
cording to the scriptures; 

4 And that he was buried, and 
that he rose again the third day 
according to the scriptures: 

5 And that he was seen of Cephas, 
wthen of the twelve: 

6 After that, he was seen of above 


15 7] 


five hundred brethren at once; of 
whom the greater part remain unto 
this present, but some are fallen 


@ Church (visible). 
asleep. 


Gal.1.13. €1 Cor. 


10.32; 1Tim.3.15. 
7 After that, he was seen of|,¢7 times) 
James; then of all the apostles. 1 Cor.16.1,19. 


8 And last of all he was seen of 
me also, as of one !born out of due} Grace ¢impart- 
time. ed). 2 Cor.1.12. 


(Rom.6.1; 2 Pet. 

9 For I am the least of the apos-| 3.1.) 
tles, that am not meet to be called|¢ ae nf Seeds 
an apostle, because I persecuted the}* 69/45 Sor5-7- 
“church %of God. 11.39. 

10 But by the ‘grace of God I am// $i, Rom.3.23. 
what I am: and his grace which|s pisiasie. 
was bestowed upon me was not in|h Dean (physi. 
vain; but I laboured more abun-| @2:,¥521.22 2. 
dantly than they all: yet not I, but] 5.19; Heb.9.27.) 
the grace of God which was with|'John eS 
me. ie J Christ (Second 

11 Therefore whether it were I or! Advent). vs.23, 


(Acts 2.41; Phil. 
1.1) 


51,52; 2 Thes. 1. 
they, so we preach, and so ye be-| 7-j0.' (Deut 30.3; 
lieved Acts 1.9-1.) 

; & Then, finally, 
(2) The importance of Christ’s| hen he delivers 


up *he kingdom 
to God, even the 
Father; when he 
has done away 
with every rule, 
and every au- 
thority and power 
(for he must reign 
till he has put all 
enemies under 


resurrection. 


12 Now if Christ be preached that 
he rose from the dead, “how say 
some among you that there is no 
resurrection of the dead? : 

13 But if there be no resurrection 
of the dead, then is Christ not 


his feet), the last 
enemy, death, is 


destroyed. 
risen: 1 Kingdom (N.T.) 
14 And if Christ be not risen, then} 778 4, ) 
is our preaching vain, and your|» psai0.1: 
faith is also vain. Mt. 22.44. 


15 Yea, and’we are found false 


I CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 59. 


if 

witnesses of God; because we have 
testified of God that he raised up 
Christ: whom he raised not up, if 
so be that the dead rise not. : 

16 For if the dead rise not, then | 
is not Christ raised: oe | 

17 And if Christ be not raised, — 
your ‘faith fs vain; ye are yet in 
your Jsins. 

18 Then they also which are fallen | 
asleep in Christ are perished. 

19 If in this life only we have 
hope in Christ, we are of all men 
most £miserable. 


(3) The order of the resurrec- 
tions, 


20 But now is Christ risen from 
the dead, and become the first- 
fruits of them that slept. 

21 For since by man came 
kdeath, by man came also the 
resurrection of the dead. 

22 For as in ?Adam all die, even _ 
so in Christ shall all ‘be made alive, 

23 But every man in his own or- 
der: JChrist the firstfruits; after- | 
ward they that are Christ’s at his | 
coming. 

24 *Then cometh the end, when | 
he shall have delivered up ‘the 
3lkingdom to God, even the Father: 
when he shall have put down all 
rule and all authority and power. 

25 For he must reign, “till he hath 


put all enemies under his feet. 


1Gr. to ektromati, “before the due time.” 


Paul thinks of himself here as an 


Israelité whose time to be born again had not come, nationally (cf. Mt. 23. 39), | 
so that his conversion by the appearing of the Lord in glory (Acts 9. 3-6) was an 
illustration, or instance before the time, of the future national conversion of Israel. 
See Ezek. 20. 35-38; Hos. 2; 14-17; Zech. 12. 10-13. 6; Rom. 11. 25-27. 

2 Adam was a contrasting type of Christ (vs. 45-47: cf. Rom. 5. 14-19). (1) “The | 
first man Adam was made a living soul”’ (Gen. 2. 7), i.e. he derived life from another, 
that is, God. “The last Adam was a life-giving spirit.” So far from deriving life, 
He was Himself the fountain of life, and He gave that life to others (John 1. 43.5. 21; 
10. 10; 12. 24; 1 John 5.12). (2) In origin the first man was of the earth, earthy: 
the Second Man is the Lord from heaven. (3) Each is the head of a creation, and 
these also are in contrast: in Adam all die; in Christ all will be made alive ; the Adamic 
creation is “flesh”; the new creation, “spirit” (John 3. 6). 

3 Kingdom (N.T.), Summary: See “Kingdom (0.T.)” (Gen. 1. 26-28; Zech. 12. 
8, note). Kingdom truth is developed in the N.T. in the following order:-(1) The | 
promise of the kingdom to David and his seed, and described in the prophets (2 Sam. 
7, 8-17, refs.; Zech. 12. 8), enters the N.T. absolutely unchanged (Lk, 1. 31-33). The 
King was born in Bethlehem (Mt. 2. 1; Mic. 5. 2), of a virgin (Mt. 1. 18-25; Isa, 7. 14). 
(2) The kingdom announced as “‘at hand” (Mt. 4. 17, note) by John the Baptist, by 
the King, and by the Twelve, was rejected by the Jews, first morally (Mt. 11. 20, 
note), and afterward officially (Mt. 21. 42, 43), and the King, crowned with thorns, 
was crucified. (3) In anticipation of His official rejection and crucifixion, the King 
revealed the “mysteries” of the kingdom of heaven (Mt. 13. 11, note) to be fulfilled 
in the interval between His rejection and His return in glory (Mt. 13. 1-50). (4) After- 
ward He announced His purpose to “build”? His church (Mt. 16. 18, refs.), another 
“Mystery” revealed through Paul which is being fulfilled contemporaneously with | 


the mysteries of the kingdom. The “mysteries of the kingdom of heaven” and | 


1226 4 | 


oe Wao re 
jan ai 


“15 26] I CORINTHIANS. [15 52 


26 The last enemy that shall be} A.D. 59.__|men, another flesh of beasts, an- 
destroyed is death. other of fishes, and another of birds. 

2 Forhe hath put all things un- 40 There are also celestial bodies, 
der his. feet. But when he saith and bodies terrestrial: but the glory 
all things are put under him. it is |* 59-8 of the celestial is one, and the glory 
manifest that he is excepted, which] vs. 24. of the terrestrial is another. 
did put all things under him. 41 Thereisoneglory of thesun,and 

28 And when all things shall be} ci-e. who, janother glory of the moon, and an- 
subdued unto him, then shall the bade bac other glory of the stars: for one star 
Son also himself be subject unto} fite ef bap. |differeth from anotherstar in glory. 
him that put all things under him,) tism, are 42 So also is the resurrection of 
that God may be all in all. taking the |the dead. It is sown in corruption; 


29 Else what shall they do which pies eis raised in incorruption: 
are baptized for the ‘dead, if the| vacant by 43 It is ‘sown in dishonour; it is 
dead rise not at all? why are they| Christians [raised in glory: it is sown in weak- 


then baptized for the dead? Who have —_iness; it is raised in power: 

30 And why stand we in jeopardy : 44 It is sown a natural body; it is 
every hour? pepoesie Phil.3.3. raised a spiritual body. There is a 
‘ee Pos Nage Re ee e Rom.8.36,37. pan body, and there is a spirit- 

st Jesus our ual bedy. 
vei : td Baty: 2 if fe secee | 45 And so it is wee "The first 
ter the manner of men I ; lman Adam °was made a living soul; 
have fought with beasts at Ephesus,|¢1sa.22.13. ithe last Adam ’was made a %quick- 


what advantageth it me, AAG Stall ee ening spirit. 
rise not? Slet us eat and drink; for)" pph4.29;3 | 46 Howbeit that was not frst 


to morrow we die. ; ¥im.2.16,17. |which is spiritual, but that which is 
33 Be not deceived: “evil commu- Rasen natural; and afterward that which 
Nications corrupt good manners. “=> “Nis spiritual, 


_34 ‘Awake to righteousness, and|j Sin. Rom. 47 The first man is of the earth, 
jsin not; for some have not the| °23 0%. Jearthy: the second man ss the Lord 
knowledge of God: I speak this to), rzt.37.3. from heaven. 


your shame. route = a is the eons pre are ey 
: en.J5-29- also that are earthy: and as is the 

(4) The method of resurrection. mLk.0.35,36. [eavenly, such are they also that 
35 But some man will say, *How are heavenly. 

are the dead raised up? and with)” Gen-2.7. 49 And as we have borne the im- 

what body do they come? 5 bahores age of the earthy, we shall ‘also 
36 Thou fool, that which thou God bear the image of the heavenly. 

sowest is not quickened, except it|? Castes 50 Now this I say, brethren, that 

die: czed words. |fesh and blood cannot inherit the 
37 And that which thou sowest,/jq Or, life- kingdom of God; neither doth cor- 

thou sowest not that body that shall] 4#viné- ruption inherit incorruption. 

be, but bare grain, it may chance of], Rom.g.29. (5) All believers will not die. 


wheat, or of some other grain: } - 
38 But God giveth it a body as it! s ted/- | (Cf. 1 Thes. 4. 14-17.) 

hath pleased him, and to every seed] ; m.13.11, 51 Behold, I ‘shew you a ‘mys- 

his own body. note. eae We shall not all sleep, but “we 
39 All flesh is not the same flesh: |shall all be changed, 

but there is one kind of fiesh of | 52 In a moment, in the twinkling 


the “mystery” of the church (Eph. 3. 9-11) occupy, historically, the same period, 
ie. this present age. (5) The mysteries of the kingdom will be brought to an end 
by the “harvest” (Mt. 13. 39-43, 49, 50) at the return of the King in glory, the church 
having previously been caught up to meet Him in the air (1 Thes. 4. 14-17). (6) Upon 
His return the King will restore the Davidic monarchy in His own person, re-gather 
dispersed Israel, establish His power over all the earth, and reign one thousand 
years (Mt. 24. 27-30; Lk. 1. 31-33; Acts 15, 14-17; Rev. 20. 1-10). (7) The king- 
dom of heaven (Mt. 3. 2, note), thus established under David's divine Son, has 
for its object the restoration of the divine authority in the earth, which may be 
regarded as a revolted province of the great kingdom of God (Mt. 6.33, note). When 
this is done (vs. 24, 25) the Son will deliver up the kingdom (of heaven, Mt. 3. 2) 
to “God, even the Father,” that “God” (i.e. the triune God, Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit) “may be all in all” (v. 28), The eternal throne is that “of God, and of the 


Lamb” (Rev. 22.1), The kingdom-age constitutes the seventh Dispensation (Eph. 


1, 10, note). 


\ 1227 


15 $3] I CORINTHIANS. [16 12 


of an eye, at the last trump: for the; A.D.59._/let every one of you lay by him in 
tquninee shall sound, and the dead| |store, “as God hath prospered him, 
shall be }4raised incorruptible, and|, resurrec- |that there be no ‘gatherings when — 
we shall be changed. tion. vs.1-52.|I come. \ 

53 For this corruptible’ must put}. Job 19-25.) ] 3 And when I come, whomsoever 
on 4incorruption, and this mortal], incorrupti- |YE shall approve /by_ your letters, 
must put on immortality. bility. Cf. |them will I send to bring your liber- 


2 Tim.1.10.-- | Jj ; 
(6) The final victory over death. bee % * auty ante, decusalent that Feo let 
54 So when this corruptible shall este ; 


: : : they shall go with me. 
have put on Yincorruption, and this |¢ Hos.13.14. ‘ 


1 5 Now I will come unto ‘you, 
mortal shall have put on immortal- when I shali pass through Macedo- 


ity, then shali be brought to pass ae nia: for I do pass through Mace: 
the saying that is written, “Death is|fSin. Rom.3. donia. I 
swallowed up in victory. 2S .Uhe, -6 And it may be that I will abide, 


55 4O death, where is thy sting? |, raw (of yea, and winter with you, that ye 
O grave, where is thy victory? Moses). Gal. | may bring me on my journey whith- 
56 The sting of death is fsin; and| 2-15,16,19, 


arse 21. (Ex.19.1; | ersoever I go. 
the strength of sin is the slaw. | Ga13.1.90)'| 7 For I will not see you now by 
57 But thanks be to Ged, which 


; the way; but I “trust to tarry a 
giveth us the victory through our} v8.1.2: 2 Cor. | White with you, ™if the Lord permit. 
Lord Jesus Christ. 3 8 But I will tarry at Ephesus until 
; . nee myo. |) collections |Pentecost, ; 

(7) The ike peeve @ m™70-) made. 9 For a great door and effectual 
58 Therefore, my beloved breth-|/ them willl |is opened unto me, and there are 


send with |many “adversaries. 
ren, be’ ye stedfast, unmoveable,| letters. 10 Now if °Timotheus come, see 


ee ord. teak pce coe nGariassiiythat he: wiay, be wane a eae 


Mi me ad : 5) 
Ces labour is not in vain-in|1Aope. far ns ce Jas work er 
EN eee m Jas.4.15. 11 Let no man therefore, 7despise 
CHAPTER 16. rere him: but conduct him forth in peace, 


that he may come unto me: for I 

o Acts 19.22. |look for him with the brethren. 
FRED. 10 99 12 As touching our brother "Apol- 

Ugh los, I greatly desired him to come 


Part IX. Closing instructions 
and greetings. 


Nw concerning the collection 


for the saints, as I have given|qLk.10.16; unto you with the brethren: but his 

order to the churches of Galatia,| 1 Thes4.8. | will was not at all to come at this 

even so do ye. rActs19.1, |time; but he will come when he 
2 Upon the first day of the week shall have convenient time. © 


! Resurrection, Summary: (1) The resurrection of the dead was believed by the 
patriarchs (Gen. 22. 5 with Heb, 11. 19; Job 19. 25-27), and revealed through the 
prophets (Isa. 26. 19; Dan, 12. 2, 13; Hos. 13, 14), and miracles of the dead restored 
to life are recorded in the O.T. (2 Ki. 4. 32-35: 13. 21). (2) Jesus Christ restored 
life to the dead (Mt, 9, 25; Lk. 7. 12-15; John 11. 43, 44), and predicted His own resur- 
rection (John 10. 18; Lk. 24. 1-8). (3) A resurrection of bodies followed the resur- 
rection of Christ (Mt. 27. 52, 53); and the apostles raised the dead (Acts 9. 36-41; 
20. 9, 10). (4) Two resurrections are yet future, which are inclusive of “all that 
are in the graves” (John 5. 28). .These are distinguished as “‘of life’ (1 Cor. 15. 
22, 23; 1 Thes. 4, 14-17; Rev, 20. 4), and “‘of judgment” (John 5S. 28, 29; Rev. 20. 11-13), 
‘They are separated by a period of one thousand years (Rev. 20. 5s). The “first 
resurrection,” that “unto life,” will occur at the second coming of Christ (1 Cor. 
15. 23), the saints of the O.T. and church: ages meeting Him in the air (1 Thes. 4. 
16, 17); while the martyrs of the tribulation, who also have part in the first resur- 
rection (Rev. 20. 4), are raised at the end of the great tribulation. (5) The mor- 
tal body will be related to the resurrection body as grain sown is related to the 
harvest (1 Cor. 15. 37, 38); that body will be incorruptible, glorious, powerful, and 
spiritual (1 Cor, 15. 42-44, 49). (6) The bodies of living believers will, at the same 
time, be instantaneously changed (1 Cor. 15. 50-53; Phil. 3. 20, 21). This “change” 
of the living, and resurrection of the dead in Christ, is called the “redemption of 
the body” (Rom. 8. 23; Eph. 1. 13, 14), (7) After the thousand years the “‘resur- 
rection unto judgment” (John 5. 29) occurs. The resurrection-body of the wicked 
dead is not described. They are judged according to their works, and cast into 
the lake of fire (Rev. 20. 7-15). 


1228 


+38 
*16 13] 


I CORINTHIANS. 


[16 24 


13 4Watch ye, stand fast in the} AD 59. 
faith, quit you like men, be strong.|7 7 p.i5.¢ 
ue iS all ‘your things be done], 2 thes.2.15. 
wi charity. 
15 I beseech you, brethren, (ye] Sy you in love. 
know the house of Stephanas, that a WORE 
it is the @firstfruits of Achaia, and pe ia oe! 
that they have addicted themselves)’ perso : 


personal 
to the ministry of the saints, ) so Wee 
e 7 2.30. 

Ag That Be submit yourselves hk Churches (iocal}. 


unto such, and to every one that 
helpeth with us, and laboureth. 

17 I am glad of the ‘coming of 
Stephanas and Fortunatus and 
Achaicus: for that which was &lack- 
ing on your part they have sup- 
plied. 

18 For they have refreshed my 


vs.1,19; 2 Cor.1.1. 
(Acts 2.41; Phil. 
11.) 


t Sanctify, holy 
(things) (N.T.) 
Col.2.16. (Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


J Accursed; our 
Lord cometh. 
Christ is God’s 


final test. 


spirit and your’s: therefore ac- 
knowledge ye them that are such. 
19 The churches of Asia salute 


callthingsbedone|you. Aquila and Priscilla salute 


you much in the Lord, with the 
hchurch that is in their house. 

20 All the brethren greet you. 
Greet ye one another with an ‘holy 


ss. 

21 The salutation of me Paul 
with mine own hand. 

22 If any man love not the Lord 
Jesus Christ, let him be 7Anathema 
Maran-atha. 

23 The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you. 

24 My love be with you all in 
Christ Jesus. Amen. 


ney 


y 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


ane CORINTHIANS. ee 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 


Date. 
20. 1-3. 
Theme. 


were greater 


The Epistle discloses the touchin 
It was one of physical weakness, weariness, 


A.D. 60; probably from Philippi, after the events of Acts 19 23- 


g state of the great apostle at this time. 
and pain. 
These were of two kinds—solicitude for 


But his spiritual burdens 
the maintenance of the 


churches in grace as against the law-teachers, and anguish of heart over the dis- 


trust felt toward him by Jews and Jewish Christians. 


The chilling doctrines of 


the legalizers were accompanied by detraction, and by denial of his apostleship. 
It is evident that the really dangerous sect in Corinth was that which said, ‘‘and 


I of Christ” (1 Cor. 1. 12). 


They rejected the new revelation through Paul of the 
doctrines of grace; grounding themselves, probably, 


on the kingdom teachings of 


our Lord as “a minister of the circumcision” (Rom. 15. 8); seemingly oblivious that 


a new dispensation had been introduced by 
defence of the origin and extent of Paul’s 

The Epistle is in three parts: I. 
collection for the poor saints at Jerusalem 


apostolic authority, 10. 1-13. 14. 


Christ’s death. This made necessary a 
apostolic authority. 

Paul’s principles of action, 1. 1-7 16. 
ratshye) Tie 


t II. The 
TII. Paul’s defence of his 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. Paul’s principles of ac- 


tion (2 Cor. 1. 1-7. 16). 


__ AD. 60. 


a the brother 


8 For we would not, brethren, 
have you ignorant of jour trouble 
which came to us in Asia, that we 
were pressed out of measure, above 


: zemothy.. ‘strength, saneonneh 
Ri Church : , uch that we de- 

(1) The explanation. BP icc anu lspnitedicten of life: 
part, an apostle of Jesus Christ Sees 9 But we had the sentence of 
by the will of God, and ¢Timo- ai; Paria) death in ourselves, that we should 


thy our brother, unto the church of 
God which is at Corinth, with all 
the saints which are in all Achaia: 

2 Grace be to you and peace from 
God our Father, and from the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

3 Blessed be ‘God, even the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 


c the God and 
Father. 

d compas- 
sions. 

€ encourage- 
ment. 

J encourages; 
and so also 
where ‘“‘com- 
fort,” etc., oc- 


not ‘trust in ourselves, but in God 
which raiseth the dead: 

10 Who delivered us from so great 
a ‘death, and doth deliver: in whom 
we “trust that he will yet "deliver 
us; 

11 Ye also helping together by 
prayer for us, that for the gift be- 


Father of ¢mercies, and the Ged of foun fol. 2s.\Stowed upon us by the Taeans of 
all “comfort; gRom.1.16, |Many persons thanks may be given 
4 Who /comfgrteth us in all our] note. by many on our behalf. 
tribulation, that we may be able to Fee aaueht| 12) For our rejoicing is this, the 
comfort them which are in any | 7 Acts 19.23. | testimony of our conscience, that in 
trouble, by the comfort wherewith)é Jer.17.5.7. simplicity and godly sincerity, not 
we ourselves are comforted of God. Leama with fleshly wisdom, but by ?the 
S For as the sufferings of Christ), Assurance. |grace of God, we have had our con- 
abound in us, so our consolation! Eph.1.13. versation in the ¢world, and more 
also aboundeth by Christ. | Juicer)” [abundantly to you-ward. 
_6 And whether we be afflicted, it], Acts 24-16. 13 For we write none other things 
is for your consolation and ésalva-|p Grace im- |unto you, than what ye read or 
Epa, whtely is effectual in the en- nCoeiae acknowledge; and I trust ye shall 
uring of the same sufferings which (Rom.6.1;_ |acknowledge even to the end; 
we also suffer: or whether we be] 2 Pet.3.18.) 14 As also ye have acknowledged 
comforted, it 1s for your consolation|4% (Meas = {usin part, that we are your rejoic- 
one prey euler ' Pa et mania ae rye ee i cy are our’s in the 
nd our hope of you is stedfast,|r 1 Cor.1.8, ay of the Lord Jesus. 
knowing, that ‘as ye are partakers| note. 15 And in this confidence I was 
of the sufferings, so shall ye be also minded tocomeunto you before, that 
of the consolation. ye might have a second benefit; 
1230 


| 


go es Bie lie Pes Laeais 3 


ba 16] 


v aya 


II CORINTHI 


, . " é ay ey 


ANS. [34 


— 


16 And to pass by you into Mace- 
donia, and to come again out of 
Macedonia unto you, and of you to 
be brought “on my way toward 
Judza. 

17 When I therefore was thus 
minded, did I use lightness? or the 
things that I purpose, do I purpose 
according to the flesh, that with 
me there should be yea yea, and nay 
nay? 

18 But as God is true, our word 
toward you was not yea and nay. 

19 For the ‘Son of God, Jesus 
Christ, who was preached among 
you by us, even by me and Silvanus 
and Timotheus, was not yea and 
ney, but in him was yea. 

20 For all the promises of God 4in 
him are yea, and in him Amen, un- 
to the glory of God by us. 

21 Now he which stablisheth us 
with you in Christ, and hath 
éanointed us, is God; 

22 Who hath also sealed us, and 
given the earnest of the ‘Spirit in 
our hearts. 

23 Moreover I cali God for a rec-| 
ord upon my soul, that to spare you 
J came not as yet unto Corinth. 

24 Not for that we have dominion 
over your faith, but are helpers of 
your joy: for by faith ye stand. 


CHAPTER 2. 
The explanation, continued. 


Bu I determined this with my- 
self, that I would not come 
again to you in 8heaviness. 

2 For if I make you sorry, who is 
he then that maketh me glad, but 
“i same which is made sorry by 
me: 


3 And I wrote this same unto you, ¢ 


lest, when I came, I should have 
sorrow from them of whom I ought 
to rejoice; having confidence in you 
el, that my joy is the joy of you 


4 For out of much affliction and 
anguish of heart I wrote unto you 
with many tears; not that ye should 
be grieved, but that ye might know 
the love which I have more abun- 
dantly unto you. 

5 But if any have caused grief, he 
hath not grieved me, but in part: 
that I may not overcharge you all. 

6 Sufficient to such a man is this 
kpunishment, which was ‘inflicted 
of many. 

7 So that contrariwise ye ought 
rather to forgive him, and comfort 


him, lest perhaps such a one should 


¢ 


A.D. 60. 


a Acts 21.5. 

b Flesh. vs.12, 
173, 2 Cor.5. 
16. (John 1, 
13; Jude 23.) 

c Acts 8.37. 

d Rom.15.8,9. 

€1 John 2.20. 

f Holy Spirit. 
2 Cor.3.3,6, 
8,17,18. (Mt. 
1.18; Acts 
2.4.) 

g 2 Cor.13.10. 

h Or, censure. 

41 Cor.5.4,5. 

j show grace 


and en- 
courage. 


k Forgiveness. 


vs.7-10; 
Eph.4.32. 
(Lev.4.20;, 
Mt.26.28.) 


1 Satan. 
2 Cori1i.3; 
14. (Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


m Gospel. 
2 Cor.4.3,4. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


n leadeth us 
in triumph. 


o Rom.i.16, 
note. 


are perish- 
ing. 


q Life (eter- 


nal). 2 Cor.4. 
10-12. (Mt.7. 


r make a 
trade of. 


s Holy Spirtt. 
vs.3,6,8,17, 
18; 2 Cor.4. 
13. (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


t Ex.24.12. 

ui.e. the ten 
command- 
ments. 


v Jer.31.33; 
Ezk.i1.19% 


123] 


ibe swallowed up with overmuch 
sorrow. 

8 Wherefore I beseech you that 
9 would confirm your love toward 

im. 

9 For to this end also did I write, 
that I might know the proof of 
you, whether ye be obedient in all 
things. 

10 To whom ye forgive any thing, 
I forgive also: for if I forgave any 
thing, to whom “I forgave it, for 
your sakes forgave I it in the per- 
son of Christ; ; 

11 Lest ‘Satan should get an ad- 
vantage of us: for we are not igno- 
rant of his devices. 

12 Furthermore, when I came to 
Troas to preach Christ’s “gospel, 
and a door was opened unto me of 
the Lord, 

13 I had no rest in my spirit, be- 
cause I found not Titus my brother: 
but taking my leave of them, I went 
from thence into Macedonia. 


(2) The ministry (to 6. 10): 
(a) triumphant. 


14 Now thanks be unto God, 
which always ”causeth us to tri- 
umph in Christ, and maketh mani- 
fest the savour of his knowledge by 
us in every place. 

15 For we are unto God a sweet 
savour of Christ, in them that are 
osaved, and in them that ?perish: 

16 To the one we are the savour 


. lof death unto death; and to the 


other the savour of life unto “ife. 
And who 1s sufficient for these 
things? 

17 For we are not as many, which 
‘corrupt the word of God: but as of 
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight 
of God speak we in Christ. 


CHAPTER 3. 
The ministry: (b) accredited. 


DPD? we begin again to commend 
ourselves? or need we, as some 
others, epistles of commendation 
to you, or Jetters of commendation 
from you? 

2 Ye are our epistle written in 
our hearts, known and read of all 
men: 

3 Forasmuch as ye are mani- 
festly declared to be the epistle of 
Christ ministered by us, written not 
with ink, but with the ‘Spirit of the 
living God; not ‘in “tables of stone, 
but in “fleshy tables of the heart. 

4 And such trust have we through 
Christ to God-ward: 


35] 


5 Not that we are sufficient of 
ourselves to think any thing as of 
ourselves; but our sufficiency is of|a 


> 


A.D. 60. 


sufficient as 
munisters 
of the new 


The ministry: (c) spiritual and| covenant. 
glorious—not legal. b See Rom.7. 


6 Who also hath made us @able| % 7°'* ‘ 
ministers of ‘the new testament; ore with 
not of the letter, but of the spirit: 
éfor the letter killeth, but the spirit |? Seay oe 
giveth life. Py 

7 But if the ministration of death, |¢ py 
written and engrayen in stones; sdb 
¢was glorious, so that the children|fOr, boldness. 
of Israel could not stedfastly be-|e Ex.34.33. 
hold the face of Moses for the glory}; annulled. 
of his countenance; which glory ; Ont tha ital 
was to be done away: ares 


AD 5 icized word. 
8 How shall not the ministration eae 
of the spirit be rather glorious? aS; laa 62) 
9 For if the ministration of con-| io: 


demnation be glory, much morel,:. tne heart. 
doth the ministration of ¢righteous- een 
ness exceed in glory. eee 

10 For even that which was made 2 
glorious had no glory in this re-|’ Unveiled. 
spect, by reason of the ‘glory that agehorahs 
excelleth. BD 

11 For if that which is done away|o trans- 
was glorious, much more that which ce ie 
remaineth is glorious. Gresko 

12 Seeing then that we have such 
hope, we use great ‘plainness of 
speech. 

13 And not as ¢<Moses, which put 
a vail over his face, that the children 
of Israel could not stedfastly look to 
the end of that which is “abolished: 

14 But their minds were blinded: 
for until this day remaineth the 
same vail untaken away in the 
reading of the old testament; which 
tvail is done away in Christ. 

15 But even unto this day, -when 
Moses is read, Jthe vail is 'upon their 
heart. 

16 Nevertheless when Fit shall 
turn to the ‘Lord, the vail shall be 


is rendered 
transfig- 
ured in Mt. 
17.2 and 
Mk.9.2. 


b Gospel. v3.3, 
4; 2 Cor.8.18 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


g veiled. 
r John 12.31. 
Si.e. age. 


t radiance of 
the gospel of 
the glory. 


«u bondmen. 


v Lit. putting 
to death, i.e. 


taken away. i _ ,. | Stucifixion. 
17 Now the Lord is that Spirit: ate Cor. 
and where the Spirit of the Lord is,) ~~ 
there is liberty. _ u Cans ete 
18 But we all, with ™open face be-| 1: 3 Gor6.4. 
holding as in a glass the glory of] (it.7.14; 
the "Lord, are “changed into the] Rev.22.19.) 
same image from glory to glory,|x Holy Spirit. 
even as by the Spirit of the Lord. | 2 Cor.5.5. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 
CHAPTER 4. y.Psa.116.10. 
The ministry: (d) honest. # Grace (im- 
[THEREFORE secing we have| fori. 
- this ministry, as we have re-| (Rom.6.i; 
ceived mercy, we faint not; 2 Pet:3.18.) 
1232 


II CORINTHIANS. 


[4 15 


(Because the truth taught is : 
commended by the life.) 


2 But have renounced the hidden 
things of dishonesty, not walking 
in craftiness, nor handling the word 
of God deceitfully; but by mani- 
festation of the truth commending 
ourselves to every man’s conscience 
in the sight of God. 


(Because not self but Christ 
Jesus as Lord is preached.) 


3 But if our gospel be hid, it is 
hid to them that are lost: 

4 In whom ’the god of this Sworld 
hath blinded the minds of them 
which believe not, lest the ‘light 
of the glorious gospel of Christ, 
who is the image of God, should 
shine unto them. 

5 For we preach not ourselves, 
but Christ Jesus the Lord; and our- 
selves your “servants for Jesus’ 
sake. : 

6 For God, who ccmmanded the 
light to shine out of darkness, hath 
shined in our hearts, to give the 
light of the knowledge of the glory 
of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 


(Because the power is of God 
alone. Cf. 1 Cor, 2. 1-5.) 


7 But we have this treasure in 
earthen vessels, that the excellency 
of the power may be of God, and 
not of us. 


The ministry: (e) suffering. 


8 We are troubled on every side, 
yet not distressed: we are per- 
plexed, but not in despair; 

9 Persecuted, but not forsaken: 
cast down, Dut not destroyed; 

10 Always bearing about in the 
body the "dying of the Lord Jesus, 
that the “life also of Jesus might be 
made manifest in our body. 

11 For we which live are alway 
delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, 
that the life also of Jesus might be 
made manifest in our mortal flesh. 

12 So then death worketh in us, 
but life in you. 

13 We having the same “spirit of 
faith, according as it is written, 
9I believed, and therefore have I 
spoken; we also believe, and there- 
fore speak; 

14 Knowing that he which raised 
up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us 
also by Jesus, and shall present us 
with you. 

15 For all things are for your 
sakes, that the “abundant grace | 


% 


if 


* ~ 


Il CORINTHIANS. 


[5 21 


might through the thanksgiving of 

' many redound to the glory of God. 
16 For which cause we faint not;}a Psa.84.7. 

but though our outward man per-|$ Rom.8.18. 


ish, yet the “inward man is renewed 
day by day. 


A.D. 60. 


c Heb.11.1. 


d Or, tent- 


house. 


17 For our light affliction, which] ¢ Life (eter- 


is but for a moment, worketh for us 
a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory; 

18 While we look not at the 
things which are seen, but at the 
things which are ‘not seen: for 
the things which are seen are tem- 
poral; but the things which are not 
seen are eternal. 


CHAPTER 5. 


(Why death itself has no terrors 
for the servant of the Lord.) 


OR we know that if our earthly 
Zhouse of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of 
God, an house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens. 

2 For in this we groan, earnestly 
desiring to be clothed upon with 
our house which is from heaven: 

3 If so be that being clothed we 
shall not be found naked. 

4 For we that are in this taber- 
nacle do groan, being burdened: 
not for that we would be unclothed, 
but clothed upon, that mortality 
might be swallowed up of ‘life. 

5 Now he that hath wrought us 
for the selfsame thing is God, who 
also hath given unto us the earnest 
of the /Spirit. 

6 Therefore we are always confi- 
dent, knowing that, whilst we are 

“at home in the body, we are absent 
from the Lord: 

7 (For we walk by faith, not by 
sight:) 

8 We are confident, I say, and 
willing rather to be “absent from 
the body, and to be present with 
the Lord. ; 

9 Wherefore we ‘labour, that, 
whether present or absent, we may 
be Jaccepted of him. 

10 1For we must all ‘appear be- 
fore the 4judgment seat of Christ; 


nal). Gal.2. 
20. (Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 
Holy Spirit. 
2 Cor.6.6. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

g Faith. Gal. 
2.16,20. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 

h Death 
(physical). 
vs.1-8; Phil. 
1.21-23. 
(Gen.3.19; 
Heb.9.27.) 

1 Gr. are am- 
bitious. 

j well pleas- 
ing to. 

k be mani- 
fested. 

| Judgments 
(the seven). 
vs.8-10; 
Gal.3.13. 

(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rey. 20.12.) 


2 John 5.) 
ono longer. 
p Flesh. 

2 Cor.7.1. 

(John 1.13; 

Jude 23.) 

g know we 
him so no 
more. 

+ creation. 

s Reconcilia- 
tion. vs.18, 


t kosmes (Mt. 
4.8) = man- 
kind. 

u Imputation. 
Gal.3.6. _, 
(Lev.25.50; 
Jas.2.23.) 

v Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

w Sacrifice (of 
Christ). vs. 
14,18,19,21, 
Gal.3.10-14. 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 


1 The judgment of the believer’s works, 


that every one may receive the 
things done in his body, according 
to that he hath done, whether it be 
good or bad. 

11 Knowing therefore the terror 
of the Lord, we persuade men; but 
we are made manifest unto God; 
and I trust also are made manifest 
in your consciences. 

12 For we commend not ourselves 
again unto you, but give you occa- 
sion to glory on our behalf, that ye 
may have somewhat to answer 
them which glory in appearance, 
and not in heart. 

13 For whether we be beside our- 
selves, it is to God: or whether we 
be sober, zt 1s for your cause. 


The ministry: (f) motive and 
object. 


14 For the “love of Christ con- 
straineth us; because we thus 
judge, that if one died for all, then 
were all dead: 

15 And that he died for all, that 
they which live should °not hence- 
forth live unto themselves, but unto 
him which died for them, and rose 
again. 

16 Wherefore henceforth know 
we no man after the ?flesh: yea, 
though we have known Christ after 
the flesh, yet now henceforth know 
we him no more. 

17 Therefore if any man be in 
Christ, he is a new ‘creature: old 
things are passed away; behold, 
all things are become new. 

18 And all things are of God, who 
hath reconciled us to himself by 
Jesus Christ, and hath given to us 
the ministry of ‘reconciliation; 

19 To wit, that God was in Christ, 
reconciling the ‘world unto him- 
self, not “imputing their ’trespasses 
unto them; and hath committed 
unto us the word of ‘reconcilia- 
tion. 

20 Now then we are ambassadors 
for Christ, as though God did be- 


seech you by us: we pray you in 
Christ’s stead, be ye ‘reconciled to 
God. 

21 For he hath made “him to be 


not sins, is in question here. These have 


been atoned for, and are “remembered no more forever’ (Heb. 10. 17); but every 
work must come into judgment (Mt. 12. 36; Rom. 14. 10; Gal. 6. 7; Eph. 6. 8; Col. 3. 


24, 25). 
be saved”’ (1 Cor. 3. 11-15). 
27: Lk. 14. 14; 1 Cor. 4. 5; 2 Tim. 


The result is “reward” or “loss” (of the reward), “but he himself shall 
This judgment occurs at the return of Christ. (Mt. 16. 
4, 8; Rev. 22. 12). 


See other judgments, John 12. 


31, note; 1 Cor. 11. 31, note; Mt. 25. 32, note; Ezk. 20. 37, note; Jude 6, note; 


_Rev. 20. 12, note. 


_ 1233 


ry 


22. 10). 


61] 


“sin for us, who knew no sin; that 
we might ’be made the ‘righteous- 
ness of God in him. 


CHAPTER 6. 
The ministry: (g) summary. 


E then as ¢workers together 

with him, beseech you also 

that ye receive not the ¢grace of 
God in vain. 

2 (For he saith, I have heard thee 

in a time accepted, and in the day 


_ of salvation have I succoured thee: 
behold, now is the accepted time;}|: 


behold, now zs the day of salva- 
tion. 

3 Giving no offence in any thing, 
that the ministry be not blamed: 

4 But in all things ‘approving 
ourselves as the ‘ministers of God, 


_ in much patience, in afflictions, in 


necessities, in distresses, 

5 In stripes, in imprisonments, in 
tumults, in labours, in -watchings, 
in fastings; 

6 By pureness, by knowledge, by 
longsuffering, by kindness, by the 
JHoly Ghost, by love unfeigned, 

7 By the word of truth, by the 


' power of God, by the armour of 


righteousness on the right hand 
and on the left, 
8 By honour and dishonour, by 


evil report and good report: /as de-| 


ceivers, and yet true; 

9 As unknown, and yet well 
known; as dying, and, behold, 
we live; as chastened, and not 
killed; 5 i 

10 As sorrowful, yet alway rejoic- 
ing; as poor, yet making many 
rich; as having nothing, and yet 
mpossessing all things. 


wee. Fe eta ee ee A ‘= 


(3) The appeal toseparationand ~ 


A.D. 60. 
cleansing (2 Cor. 6. 11-7. 1). 

'aSin. Rom.3.| 11 Oye Corinthians, our mouth is 

23, note. —_| open unto.you, our heart is enlarged. 
eet 5 12 Ye are not straitened in us, 

note.’ |but ye are straitened in your own 
d fellow- bowels. 

workmen, 13 Now for a recompence in the 
alae get same, (I speak as unto my chil-- 

3 Cor.8.i,6, dren,) be ye also enlarged. 

7,19.(Rom.6.§ 14 Be‘ye not “unequally yoked 
ha. ee) together with unbelievers: for what 
zRom.1.16 fellowship hath °righteousness with 

note. ' unrighteousness? and what com- 
h commend- union hath light with darkness? 
lg fe 15 And what concord hath Christ 
«Holy Sorit, With Belial? or what part hath he 
73Cor.12.18, fthat believeth with an infidel? 

(Mt.1.18; 16 And what agreement hath the 
EP paeee temple of SGod with idols? for ye 

note, _~—o fare the temple of the living God; 
LJohn 7.12. §as God hath said, I will dwell in 
m Psa.84.11. ¢them, and walk in them; and I will 
nDeut.7.2,3; |be their God, and they shall be my 

1Cor.7.39. | Heople. 
oRom-10.10, 1°17 !Wherefore Icome out from 
pSin. Rom.3. (among them, and' be ye “separate, 

23, note. saith the Lord, and touch not the 
qunbeliever. tyinclean thing; and I will receive 
7rGr. naos, ou, 

= renina 18 And will *be a Father unto you, 
sLev.26.11,12. jand ye shall be my sons and daugh- 
#Isa.52.11. — |ters, saith the Lord Almighty. 
u Separation, 

home 1) 

(Gen.12, 
A Jer2i.9 CHAPTER 7. 
eke FTAAVING therefore these prom- 

10.2,3,4. ises, dearly beloved, let us 

yeae cay cleanse ourselves from all filthiness 
Meas of the “flesh and spirit, *perfecting 

moten holiness in the fear of God. 
¥ Open your 

hearts to 


(4) The heart of Paul (vs. 2-16.) 
2 YReceive us; we have wronged 


us. 


1 Separation, Summary: (1) Separation in Scripture is twofold: “from” what- 


ever is contrary to the mind of God; and “unto”? God Himself. 


The underlying 


principle is that in a moral universe it is impossible for God to fully bless and use 


His children who are in compromise or complicity with evil. 
anything which unites a child of God and an unbeliever in a common 
(2) Separation from evil implies (a) separation in desire, 


The unequal yoke is 
purpose (Deut. 
motive, and act, 


from the world, in the ethically bad sense of this present world-system (see Rev. 
13. 8, note); and (6) separation from believers, especially false teachers, who are 
“vessels unto dishonour” (2 Tim. 2. 20, 21; 2 John 9-11). (3) Separation is not 
from contact with evil in the world or the church, but from complicity with and 
conformity to it (John 17. 15; 2 Cor. 6. 14-18; Gal. 6. 1). (4) The reward of sep- 
aration is the full manifestation of the divine fatherhood (2 Cor. 6. 17, 18); unhin- 
dered communion and worship. (see Heb. 13. 13-15), and fruitful service (2 Tim. 
2. 21), as world-conformity involves the loss of these, though not of salvation. Here, 
as in all else, Christ is the model. He was “holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate 
from sinners” (Heb. 7. 26), and yet in such contact with them for their salvation 
that the Pharisees, who illustrate the mechanical and ascetic conception of separa- 
tion (Mt. 3. 7, note), judged Him as having lost His Nazarite character (Lk. 7. 39). 
Cf. 1 Cor. 9. 19-23; 10. 27. i 
1234 


me 


“no man, we have corrupted no man, 
we have defrauded no man. 

3 I speak not this to condemn 
you: for I have said before, that ye 
are in our hearts to die and live 
with you. - 

4 Great ts my boldness of speech 
toward you, great is my glorying of 
you: I am filled with comfort, I am 
exceeding joyful in all our tribula- 
tion 


5 For, when we-were come into 
Macedonia, our Hesh had no rest, 
but we were troubled on every side; 
without were fightings, within were 
fears. 

6 Nevertheless God, that %com- 
forteth those that are cast down, 
comforted us by the coming of Titus: 

7 And not by his coming only, but 
by the consolation wherewith he 
was comforted in you, when he told 
us your earnest desire, your mourn- 
ing, your fervent mind toward me; 
so that I rejoiced the more. 

8 For though I made you sorry 
with a letter, I do not “repent, 
though I did repent: for I perceive 
that the same epistle hath made 
you sorry, though zt were but fora 
season. 

9 _Now I rejoice, not that ye were 
made sorry, but that ye sorrowed 
to ‘repentance: for ye were made 
sorry after a godly manner, that ye 
might receive damage by us in 
nothing. 

10 For godly ¢sorrow worketh re- 
pentance to “salvation ‘not ‘to be 
repented of: but the sorrow of the 
éworld worketh death. 

Jil For behold this seifsame thing, 
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, 
what carefulness it wrought in you, 
yea, what “clearing of yourselves, 
yea, what indignation, yea. what 
fear, yea, what vehement desire, 
yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! 
In ali things yé have approved 


Il CORINTHIANS. 


a encourag- 
eth; so in v.7. 


b regret. 


c Repentance. 
vs.9,10; 
2 Cor.12.21. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 


d Psa.32.10. 


e Rom.1.16, 
note. 


f never to be 
regretted. 

'@ kosmos = 
world-sys- 
tem. Gal.6. 
14. (John 7.7; 
Rev.13.3-8, 
note.) 


h Eph.5.11. 
¢ Neh.8.10,12. 


j {to give ef- 
fect to] the 
@race and 
fellowship 
of the ser- 
vice to the 
saints, 


k Rom.12.1. 
21 Cor.15.10. 


yourselves to be clear in this matter. 

12 Wherefore, though I wrote unto 
you, I did it not for his cause that 
had done the wrong, nor for his 


[87 


cause that suffered wrong, but that 
our care for you in the sight of God 
might appear unto you. 

_13 Therefore we were comforted 
in your comfort: yea, and exceed- 
ingly the more joyed we for the joy 
of Titus, because his spirit was re- 
freshed by you all. 

14 For if I have boasted any thing 
to him of you, I am not ashamed; 
but as we spake all things to you in 
truth, even so our boasting, which 
I made before Titus, is found a 
truth. 

15 And his inward affection is 
more abundant toward you, whilst 
he remembereth the obedience of 
you all, how with fear and trem- 
bling ye received him. 

16 I rejoice therefore that I have 
confidence in you in all things. 


CHAPTER 8. 


Part II. The collection for the 
poor (2 Cor. 8. 1-9. 15). 


(1) The example of Macedonia. 


1 OREOVER, brethren, we do 

you to wit of the grace of 
God bestowed on the churches of 
Macedonia; 

2 How that in a great trial of af- 
fliction the ‘abundance of their joy 
and their deep poverty abounded 
unto the riches of their liberality. 

3 For to their power, I bear rec- 
ord, yea, and beyond their power 
they were willing of themselves; 
4 Praying us with much intreaty 
ithat we would receive the gift, and 
take upon us the fellowship of the 
ministering to the saints. 

5 And this they did, not as we 
hoped, *but first gave their own 
selves to the Lord, and unto us by 
the will of God. 

6 Insomuch that we desired Titus, 
that as he had begun, so he would 
a finish in you the same ‘grace 
also. 


(2) The exhortation. 
7 Therefore as ye abound in 


1In 2 Cor. 8., 9., the apostle sums up the Christian doctrine of giving. 


It may 


be thus summarized: (1) It is a “grace,” i.e. a disposition created by the Spirit 


(8.7).. (2) Inco 
Christian giving is 


(2) In contrast with the law, which imposed giving as a divine requirement, 
voluntary, and a test of sincerity and love (8. 8-12; 9. 1, 2, 5, 7). 


(3) The privilege is universal, belonging, according to ability, to rich and poor 


(8. 1-3, 12-15. 
(8. 12-14. Cf. 1 Cor. 16. 2). 


which antedates the law (Gen, 14. 


(a) joy (8. 2 
already given (9. 7-11); (c) 
Gospel glorified (9. 13, 14). 


GhashGore!16.51;92))- 


20). 


1235 


¢ 


(4) Giving is to be proportioned to income 
The O.T. proportion was the tithe, a proportion 
(5) The rewards of Christian giving are 
); (b) increased ability to give in proportion to that which has been 
increased thankfulness to God (9. 12); (d) God and the 


every thing, tn faith, and utter- 
ance, and knowledge, and in all.dil- 
igence, and in your love to us, see 
that ye abound in this grace also. 

8 I 4speak not by commandment, 
but by occasion of the forwardness 
of others, and to prove the sincerity 
of your love. 

9 For ye know the 5grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he be- 
came ‘poor, that ye through his 
poverty might be ¢rich. 

10 And herein I give my advice: 
for this is expedient for you, who 
have begun before, not only to do, 
but also to be forward a year. ago. 

11 Now therefore ‘perform the 
doing of it; that as there was a 
Teadiness to wiil, so there may bea 
Fperformance also out of that which 
ye have. 


12 For if there be first a ‘willing 
mind, it is accepted according to 
that a man hath, and not according 
to that he hath not. 

13 For I mean not that other 
men be eased, and ye burdened: 

14 But by an equality, that now 
at this time your abundance may 
be a supply for their want, that 
their abundance also may be a 
supply for your want: that ‘there 
may be equality: 

15 As it is written, "He that had 
gathered much had nothing over: 
and he that had sathered little 
had no lack. 


(3) The messengers. 


16 But thanks be to God, which 
put the same earnest care into the 
heart of Titus for you. 

17 For indeed he accepted the ex- 
hortation; but being ‘more forward, 
Jof his own accord he went. unto 
you. 

18 And we have sent with him the 
brother, whose praise is in the *gos- 
pel throughout ail the churches; 

19 And not that only, but who 
was also chosen of the churches to 
travel with us with, ‘this grace, 
which is administered by us to the 
glory of the same Lord, and ™decla- 
ration of your ready mind: 

20 Avoiding this, that no man 
should blame us in this abundance 
which is administered by us: 

21 "Providing for honest things, 
hot only in the sight of the Lord, 
but also in the sight of men. 

22 And we have sent with them 
our brother, whom we have often- 
times proved diligent in many 


II CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 60. 


a2 Cor.9.7. 


6 Grace (in 
Salv.). Gal.1. 
3-15. (Rom. 
3.24; John 1. 
16, note.) 


cLk.9.58; 
Phil.2.6,7. 


d Rev.3.18. 
e complete. 
f completion. 


g vs.10-12; 
2 Cor.8.1, 
note. 


h Ex.16.18. 
i full of zeal. 
j Phil.2.26. 


& Gospel. 
2 Cor.9.13. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


I Grace (im- 
parted). vs. 
1,6,7,19; 

2 Cor.9.8,14. 
(Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 


m for a wit- 
ness of our 
readiness. 


n Prov.3.4; 
1 Pet.2,12. 


o Churches 
(Uocal). vs.1, 
18,19,23,24; 

2 Cor.21.8,28. 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1.1.) 


b 2 Cor.8.4. 
qg1 Thes.4.9,10. 


r Or, which 
hath been 
so much 
spoken of 
before. 


s with bless- 
ings. 


t Gk. hila- 
rious. 


u Psa.112.9, 
v vs.9,10. 


See 1 John 3. 
7, note, 


1236 


things,, but now much more dili- 
gent, upon the great confidence 
which 7 have in you. g 

23 Whether any do enquire of 
Titus, he-1s my partner and fellow- 
helper concerning you: or our breth- 
ren be enquired of, they are the 
messengers of the churches, and 
the glory of Christ. 

24 Wherefore shew ye to them, 
and before the °churches, the proof 
of your love, and of our boasting on 
your behalf. 


CHAPTER 9. 


For as touching the *ministering 
to the saints, it is %superfluous 
for me to write to you: 

2 For I know the forwardness of 
your mind, for which I boast of you 
to them of Macedonia, that Achaia 
was ready a year ago;-and your 
zeal hath provoked very: many. 

3 Yet have.I sent the brethren, 
lest our. boasting of you should be 
in vain in.this behalf; that, as I 
said, ye may be ready: 

4 Lest haply if they of Macedonia 
come with me, and find you unpre- 
pared, we (that we say not, ye) 
should be ashamed in this same 
confident boasting. 

5 Therefore I thought it necessary 
to exhort the ‘brethren, that they 
would-go before unto you, and 
make up beforehand your bounty, 
7whereof ye had notice before, that 
the same might be ready, as a mat- 


|ter of bounty, and not.as of covet- 


ousness. 


(4). The encouragement: God 
loves a cheerful giver; if we 
ive, he will give. 


6 But this J say, He which soweth 
sparingly shall reap also sparingly; 
and he which ‘soweth sbountifully 
shall reap also bountifully. 

very man according as he pur- 
poseth in his heart, so let him give; 
not grudgingly, or of necessity: for 
God loveth a ‘cheerful giver. 

8 And God is able°to make all 
grace abound toward you; that ye, 
always having all sufficiency in all 
things, may abound to every good 
work: 

9 (As it is written, “He hath dis- 
persed abroad; he hath given to the 
poor: his "righteousness remaineth 
for ever. ; 

10 Now he that ministereth seed 
to the sower both minister bread 
for your food, and multiply your 


| 


seed sown, and increase the fruits 
of your righteousness;) 


11 Being enriched in every thing|¢ 


to all bountifulness, which causeth 
through us thanksgiving to God. 
12 For the administration of this 
service not only supplieth the want 
of the saints, but is abundant also 
by many thanksgivings unto God; 
13 Whiles by the experiment of 
this ministration they glorify God 
for your professed subjection unto 


II CORINTHIANS. 


A.D. 60. 


Gospel. 

2 Cor.10.14, 
16. (Gen.12. 
1-3; Rev.14. 
6.) 


b Grace (im- 
parted). vs.8, 
14; 2 Cor.12. 
9. (Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 


c Rom.12.1. 


the “gospel of Christ, and for your}, y 10, 


liberal distribution unto them, and 
unto all men; 

14 And by their prayer for you, 
which long after you for the exceed- 
ing grace of God in you. 

15 Thanks be unto God for his 
unspeakable gift. 


CHAPTER 10. 


Part III. The vindication of 
Paul’s apostleship (2 Cor. 10. 
1-13.14). (Cf. Gal. 1. 11-2. 14.) 


(1) The divine authentication. 


aIOW I Paul myself “beseech you 
by the meekness and gentle- 
ness of Christ, who in ¢presence am 
base among you, but being absent 
am boid toward you: 

2 But I beseech you, that I may 
not be bold when I am present with 


e 1 Cor.4.21. 

f Flesh. vs.3,4; 
2 Cor.11.18, 
(John 1.13; 
Jude 23.) 

g fleshly. 

h Overthrow- 
ing reason- 
ings. 

i leading cap- 


tive every 
thought. 


6.2; 2 John 5.) 


k John 7.24; 
1 Cor.2.3,4. 


V2, Corit3.2:4, 
m building up. 


that confidence, ‘wherewith I think|” overt#row. 


to be bold against some, which 
think of us as if we walked accord- 
ing to the flesh. 

3 For though we walk in the /flesh, 

e do not war after the flesh: 

4 (For the weapons of our war- 

are are not Scarnal, but mighty 
through God to the pulling down of 
strong holds; 

5 Casting down imdéginations, 
and every high thing that exalteth 
itself against the knowledge of God, 


02 Conga: 


p Gospel. 
vs.14,16; 
2 Cor.11.4,7. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


q Rom.15.20. 
r Jehovah. 
Jer.9.24; 
1 Cor.1.31, 


s Bride (of 
Christ). 


and ‘bringing into captivity every} Eph.5.25-32. 


thought /to the obedience of Christ; 
6 And having in a readiness to 


(John 3,29; - 
Rev.19.6-8.) 


revenge all disobedience, when your]! Church 


obedience is fulfilled. 

7 Do ye look on things after the 
Rkoutward appearance? If any man 
trust to himself that he is Christ’s, 
let him of himself think this again, 
that, as he is Christ’s, even so are 
we Christ’s. 

8 For though I should boast some- 
what more of our ‘authority, which 
the Lord hath given us for ‘edifica- 
tion, and not for your “destruction, 
I should not be ashamed: 


(true). vs.2, 
3; Eph.1.22, 
23.(Mt.16.18; 
Heb.12.23.) 


« Temptation. 
vs.3,4; Gal.4. 
14. (Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 


v Gospel. vs. 


fil 4 


9 That I may not seem as if I 
would terrify you by letters. 

10 For Ais letters, say they, are 
weighty and powerful; but his 
bodily presence is weak, and his 
speech contemptible. 

1i Let such an one think this, 
that, such as we are in word by 
letters when we are absent, such 
will we be also in deed when we 
are present. 

12 For °we dare not make our- 
selves of the number, or compare 
ourselves with some that commend 
themselves: but they measuring 
themselves by themselves, and com- 
paring themselves among them- 
selves, are not wise. 

13 But we will not boast of things 
without our measure, but according 
to the measure of the rule which 
God hath distributed to us, a mea- 
sure to reach even unto you. 

14 For we stretch not ourselves 
beyond our measure, as though we 
reached not unto you: for we are 
come as far as to you also in 
preaching the ?gospel of Christ: 

15 Not boasting of things without 
our measure, that is, %of other 
men’s labours; but having hope, 
when your faith is increased, that 
we shall be enlarged by you accord- 
ing to our rule abundantly, 

16 To preach the gospel in the 
regions beyond you, and not to 
boast in another man’s line of 
things made ready to our hand. 

17 But he that glorieth, let him 
glory in the *Lord. 

18 For not he that commendeth 
himself is approved, but whom the 
Lord commendeth. 


CHAPTER 11. 
(2) The godly jealousy. 


weourp to God ye could bear 
with me a little in my folly: 
and indeed bear with me. 

2 For I am jealous over you with 
godly jealousy: for I have Sespoused 
you to one husband, that I may 
present you ‘as a chaste virgin to 
Christ. 

3 ButlI fear, lest by any means, as 
the serpent “beguiled Eve through 
his subtilty, so your minds should 
be corrupted from the simplicity 
that is in Christ. 

4 For if he that cometh preacheth 
another Jesus, whom we have not 


|preached, or if ye receive another 


spirit, which ye have not received, 
or Yanother gospel, which ye have 


11 5] 
with him. 

5 For I suppose I was not a whit 
behind the very chiefest apostles. 

6 But though J be ¢rude in speech, 
yet not in knowledge; but we have 
been throughly made manifest 
among you in all things. 

' 7 Have I committed an “offence in 
abasing myself that ye might be 
exalted, because I have preached to 
you the ‘gospel of God freely? 

8 I robbed other churches, taking 
wages of them, to do you service. 

9 And when I was present with 
you, and wanted, I was chargeable 
to no man: for that which .was 
lacking to me the brethren which 
came from Macedonia supplied: and 
in all things I have kept myself 
from being burdensome unto you, 
and so will I keep myself. 

10 As the truth of Christ is in me, 
no man shall stop me of this boast- 
ing in the regions of Achaia. 

11 Wherefore? because I love you 
mot? God knoweth. 

12 But what I do, ¢that I will do, 
that I may cut off occasion from 


Loe 


II CORINTHIANS. 


not -accepted, ye might well bear) A.D. 60. 


aasimple 
person in 
speech. 


6 Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


c Gospel. vs.4, 
7; Gal.1.6-12. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


d Gal.6.14. 


e Mt.7.15; 
Gal.2.4; 
1 John 4.1. 


f Satan. 
2 Cor.12.7. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 


g transform- 
eth himself. 


h transform 
themselves. 


#1 John 3.7, 
note. 


j Flesh. 
Gal.3.3. 
(John 1.13; 
Jude 23.) 


them which desire occasion; that 
wherein they glory, they may be 
found even as we. 


(3) The warning against false 
teachers. 


13 For such are ¢false apostles, 
deceitful workers, transforming 
themselves into the apostles of 
Christ. 

14 And no marvel; for fSatan him- 
self Sis transformed into an angel 
of light. 

15 Therefore rt is no great thing! 
if his ministers also “be transformed 
as the ministers of ‘righteousness; 
whose end shall be according to 
their works. 


(4) The enforced boasting 
(to 12. 18). 


16 I say again, Let no man think 
me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a 
fool receive me, that I may boast 
myself a little. 

17 That which I speak, I speak 
it not after the Lord, but as it 
were foolishly, in this confidence 
of boasting. 

18 Seeing that many glory after 
the Jflesh, I will glory also. 

_19 For ye suffer fools gladly, see- 
ing ye yourselves are wise. 

20 For ye suffer, *if a man bring 


you into bondage, ‘if a man devour 
you, “if a man take of you, "if a 


k Gal.2.4; 4.9. 
1 Mt.23.14. 

m Rom.16.18. 
n1 Pet.5.3. 
o2 Cor.10.10. 
pv.5. 

q Deut.25.3. 

r Acts 16.22. 
s Acts 14.19. 
t Acts 27. 

u Acts 14.5. 

v Gentiles. 

w Acts 20.31. 
x Acts 15.36. 


y Churches 
(local) 
2 Cor.12.13. 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1.1.) 


3 2 Cor.12.5, 
9,10. 


a Rom.9.5. 
b Acts 9.24,25. 
¢ know. 


d First heaven, 
of clouds; 
second, of 
stars; third, 
God's abode. 


1238 


man exalt himself, if a man smite | 
you on the face. ’ 

21 I speak as concerning °re- 
proach, as though we had been 
weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any 
is bold, (1 speak foolishly,) I am 
bold also. 

22 Are they Hebrews? so am I. 
Are they Israelites? so am I. Are 

hey the seed of Abraham? so am I. 

23 Are they ministers of Christ? 
(I speak as a fool) I am more; in 
labours more abundant, in stripes 
above measure, in prisons more fre- 
quent, in deaths oft. 

24 Of the Jews five times received 
I forty %stripes save one. 

25 Thrice was I *beaten with rods, 
once was I sstoned, thrice I suffered 
shipwreck, a ‘night and a day I 
have been in the deep; 

26 In journeyings often, in perils 
of waters, in “perils of robbers, in 
perils by mine own countrymen, 
in perils by the "heathen, in perils 
in the city, zn perils in the wilder- 
ness, in perils in the sea, in perils 
among false brethren; ; 

27 In weariness and painfulness, 
in “watchings often, in hunger and 
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and 
nakedness. 

28 Beside those things that are 
without, that which cometh upon 
me daily, the *care of all the 
Ychurches. 

29 Who is weak, and I am not 
weak? who is offended, and I burn 
not? 

30 If I must needs glory, 2I will 
glory of the things which concern 
mine infirmities. 

31 The God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, ¢which is blessed 
for evermore, knoweth that I lie 
not. 

32 In ’Damascus the governor 
under Aretas the king kept the 
icity of the Damascenes with a gar- 
irison, desirous to apprehend me: 

33. And through a window in a 
basket was I let down by the wall, 
and escaped his hands. 


% 


CHAPTER -12. 


1c is not expedient for me doubt- 
~ less to glory. I will come to 
|visions and revelations of the Lord. 

2 I ‘knew a man in Christ above 
fourteen years ago, (whether in the 
body, T cannot tell; or whether out 
of the body, I cannot tell: God 
knoweth;) such an one caught up 
to the ¢third heaven, 

| 


5 D5 Ti eh Pat 


‘a = 


. + el 


HIANS. 


ay II CORINT {13 5 
3 And I knew such a man,|}_avD.60._ | 15 And I will very gladly spend 
(whether in the body, or out of the ‘jand be spent for “you; though the 
body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) more abundantly I love you, the 
4 How that he was caught up into!cSeeLk.16. {less I be loved. 
®paradise, and heard unspeakable penEete on | 16 But be it so, I did not burden 


words, which it is not lawful for a 
man to utter. 

5 Of such an one will I glory: 
‘yet of myself I will not glory, but 
in mine infirmities. 

6 For though I would desire to 
glory, I shall not be a fool; for I 
will say the truth: but now I for- 
bear, lest any man should think of 
me above that which he seeth me 
to be, or that he heareth of me. 

7 And lest I should be exalted 
above measure through the abun- 
dance of the revelations, there was 
given to me a !4thorn in the flesh, 
the messenger of ‘Satan to buffet 
me, lest I should be exalted above 
measure. 

8 For this thing I besought the 
Lord thrice, that it might depart 
from me. 

9 And he said unto me, fMy grace 
is sufficient for thee: for my strength 
is made Sperfect in weakness. Most 
gladly therefore will I rather glory 
in my “infirmities, that the power 
of Christ may rest upon me. 

10 Therefore I take pleasure in 
‘infirmities, in reproaches, in neces- 
sities, in persecutions, in ‘distresses 
for Christ’s sake: for when I am 
weak, then am I strong. 

11 Iam become a fool in glorying; 
ye have compelled me: for I ought 
to have been commended of you: 
for in nothing am I behind the 
very chiefest aposties, /though I be 
nothing. 

12 Truly the *signs of an apostle 
were wrought among you in all 
patience, in signs, and wonders, 
and mighty deeds. 

13 For what is it wherein ye were 
inferior to other ‘churches, except 
it be that I myself was not burden- 
some to you? forgive me _ this 


wrong. 

14 Behold, the third time I am 
ready to come to you; and I will 
not be burdensome to- you: for I 
seek not your’s, but you: for the 
children ought not to lay up for 
the parents, but the parents for the 
children. 


b allowed to 
man. 


¢ 2 Cor.11.30: 


d Ezk.28.24; 
Gal.4.14. 


Rev.20.10.) 


f Grace (im- 


2 Pet-3-18-) 


|g Mt.5.48, 
note. 


h Or, weak- 
nesses. 


t straits. 


gj Lk.17.10; 
1 Cor-3-7;, 
Eph.3.8. 


k1 Cor.9.2. 


1 Churcher 
(local). 
Gal.1.2,13, 
22. (Acts 2. 
41; Phil.1.).) 


m1 Cor.10.33; 
1 Thes.2.3. 


n your souls. 


o Holy Spirit. 
2 Cor.13.14. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


p 2 Cor.5.12. 


q 2 Cor.13.2,10; 
1 Cor.4.21 


r Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note 


s Repentance. 
2 Tim.2.25. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 


t Deut.19.15. 


u Phil.2.7,8. 
1 Pet.3.18. 


v1 Cor.11.28; 
1 John 3.20. 


you: nevertheless, being crafty, I 
caught you with guile. 

17 Did I make a gain of you by 
any of them whom I sent unto you? 

18 I desired Titus, and with him 
Isent a brother. Did Titus make a 
gain of you? walked we not in the 
same °spirit? walked we not in the 
same steps? 


(5) The warning. 


19 Again, think ye that we excuse 
Pourselves unto you? we speak be- 
fore God in Christ: but we do all 
things, dearly beloved, for your 
edifying. 

20 For I fear, lest, when I come, 
I shall not find you such as I would, 
and that I shall be found unto you 
such as ye would not: lest there be 
debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, 
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, 
tumults: 

21 And lest, when I come again, 
my God will humble me among you, 
and that I shall bewail many which 
have “sinned already, and have not 
Srepented of the uncleanness and 
fornication and lasciviousness which 
they have committed. 


CHAPTER 13. 


HIS is the third time I am 

coming to you. ‘In the mouth 

of two or three witnesses shall every 
word be established. 

2 I told you before, and foretell 
you, as if I were present, the second 
time; and being absent now I write 
to them which heretofore have 
rsinned, and to all other, that, if I 
come again, I will not spare: 

3 Since ye seek a proof of Christ 
speaking in me, which to you-ward 
is not weak, but is mighty in you. 

4 For “though he was crucified 
through weakness, yet he liveth by 
the power of God. For we also are 
weak in him, but we shall live with 
him by the’ power of God toward 
you. 

5 *Examine yourselves, whether 


1 Tt has been conjectured that Paul’s “thorn in the flesh” was chronic ophthalmia, 
inducing bodily weakness, and a repulsive appearance (Gal. 4. 15; 1 Cor 2) 3543 


2 Cor. 10. 10) 


sure a mark of inspiration as its revelations. 


This cannot be positively known, and the reserve of Scripture is as 
Paul’s particular ‘‘thorn” is not de: 


scribed that his consolations may avail for all to whom any thorn is given, 


1239 


13 6] II CORINTHIANS. 


should use sharpness, according to 
the power which the Lord hath 
given me to edification, and not to. 
destruction. 4 


ye be in the faith; prove your own 
selves. °Know ye not your own 
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in|a Do ye not 
you, except ye be reprobates? TeLeaNZS 

§ But I °trust that ye shall know} Yperse'ves 
that we are not reprobates. Peeone: 

7 Now I pray to God that ye do}. 5.5.91 30. 
no evil; not that we should appear] 4 perfecting. 
approved, but that ye should do; Mi.s.48, 
that which is honest, though we be] 7ofe. 


(6) Conclusion. 


11 Finally, brethren, ‘farewell. 
Be /perfect, be of good comfort, be 
of one mind, live in peace; and the 


as reprobates. 2 rejoice. God of love and peace shall be 
8 “For we can do nothing against|f perfected; |with you. : 
the truth, but for the truth. cortege 12 &Greet one another with an 


holy kiss. 
13 All the saints salute you. ; 
14 The grace of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the love of God, and 
the communion of the *Holy Ghost, 
be with you all. Amen. E 


9 For we are glad, when we are}, pom 16.16. 
weak, and ye are strong: and this}; por spirit. 
also we wish, even your 4perfec-} Gal-3.2,3,5, 
tion. 14. (Mt.1:18; 

10 Therefore I write these things} ‘cts 2-4.) 
being absent, lest being present I 


1240 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


GALATIANS. 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 

Date. Galatians was probably written A.D. 60, during Paul’s third visit to Cor- 
inth. The occasion of the Epistle is evident. It had come to Paul’s knowledge 
that the fickle Galatians, who were not Greeks, but Gauls, “‘a stream from the tor- 
trent of barbarians which poured into Greece in the third century before Christ,” 
had become the prey of the legalizers, the Judaizing missionaries from Palestine. 

Theme. The theme of Galatians is the vindication of the Gospel of the grace of 
God from any admixture of law-conditions, which qualify or destroy its character 
of pure grace. 

The Galatian error had two forms, both of which are refuted. The first is the 
teaching that obedience to the law is mingled with faith as the ground of the sin- 
ner’s justification; the second, that the justified believer is made perfect by keeping 
the law. Paul meets the first form of the error by a demonstration that justifica- 
tion is through the Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 15. 18), and that the law, which was 
four hundred and thirty years after the confirmation of that covenant, and the true 
purpose of which was condemination, not justification, cannot disannul a salvation 


11] [1 10 


which rests upon the earlier covenant. 


Paul 


meets the second and more subtle 


form by vindicating the office of the Holy Spirit as Sanctifier. 


The book is in seven parts: I. Salutation, 1. 1-5. 


Gospel is a revelation, 1. 10-2. 14. 
3. 24. 


clusion, 5. 25-6. 18. 


CHAPTER 1. 
Part I. Salutation (vs. 1-5). 


pA, an apostle, (not of men, 
neither by man, but by Jesus 
Christ, and God the Father, who 
raised him from the dead;) 

2 And all the brethren which are 


II. Theme, 1. 6-9. III. Paul’s 


IV. Justification is by faith without law, 2. 15- 


V. The rule of the believer’s life is gracious, not legal, 3. 25-5. 15. 
fication is through the Spirit, not the law, 5. 16-24. 


A.D. 58. 


a Churches 
(local). vs.2, 
13,22; Col.4. 
15,16. (Acts 2. 
41; Phil.1.1.) 

b 1 Cor.16.1; 
Acts 16.6. 

¢ Grace (in 
salv.). vs.6, 
15; Gal.2.21. 


VI. Sancti- 
VII. Exhortations and con- 


moved from him that called you 
into the 1grace of Christ unto an- 
other gospel: 

7 Which is not ‘another; but 
there be some that Jtrouble you, 
and would “pervert the gospel of 
Christ. 

8 But though we, or an /angel 
from heaven, preach any other gos- 


with me, unto the ¢churches of Eee cid pel unto you than that which we 
aris: | teat ote tO 0% Gal u0-bee have preached unto you, let him be 
‘ a 1 Cor.15.3; |”accursed. 

“from God the Father, and from our eee Ao As we said before, so say I now 


Lord Jesus Christ, 2 
4 Who 2gave himself for our sins, 


23, note. 


again, If any man preach any other 


fGal.6.14; Rom gospel unto you than that ye have 


that he might Hache us gem lee ‘ 12.25 Sy tee received, let him be accursed. 
g d rding to}%i¢- aée. k 
present oF God and ous Bather: | 4Jom2.15-17| Part III. Paul's gospel is a reve- 
5 To whom be glory for ever and| j Gal.s.10,12; Jation, nota tradition from the 
Even «Amen: ,, Acts 15.24. other apostles (Gal. 1.10-2. 14). 
Oor.2. r} 

: 11,13,14. 10 2For do I now persuade men, 
Part II. pene and G9). of|11ii3.is. lor God? or do I seek to "please men? 
the Epistle (vs. 6-9). mt or 10,22. |for if I yet pleased men, I should 

6 I marvel that ye are so soon re-|o Phil.1.1. not be the °servant of Christ. 


1 The test of the Gospel is grace. If the message excludes grace, or mingles law 


with grace as the means either of justification or sanctification (Gal. 2. 21; 3. 1-3), 

or denies the fact or guilt of sin which alone gives grace its occasion and oppor- 

tunity, it is “another” gospel, and the preacher of it is under the anathema of God , 
. 8, 9). 

Ws, demonstration is as follows: (1) The Galatians know Paul, that he is no 

seeker after popularity (v.10). (2) He puts his known character back, of the asser- 

tion that his Gospel of grace was a revelation from God (vs. 11,12). (3) As for the 


_ 1243 


a 


Teh - bd sis 


oe Le 


GALATIANS. 


11 But I certify you, brethren, 
that the ¢gospel which was preached 
of me is not after man. 

12 For I neither received it of 
man, neither was I taught it, but by 
the ‘revelation of Jesus Christ. 

13 For ye have heard of my con- 
versation in time past in the !4Jews’ 
religion, how that beyond measure 
I persecuted ‘the church of God, 
and wasted it: 

14. And profited in the Jews’ 2reli- 
gion above many my equals in mine 
own nation, being more exceedingly 
zealous of the traditions of my 
fathers. 

15 But when it pleased God, who 
fseparated me from my mother’s 
womb, and écalled me by his grace, 

16 To reveal his Son “in me, that 
I might preach him among the 
theathen; immediately I Jconferred 
not with flesh and blood: 

17 Neither went I up to Jerusalem 
to them which were apostles before 
me; but I went into Arabia, and re- 
turned again unto Damascus. 

, 18 Then after three years I -went 
up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and 
abode with him fifteen days. 

19 But other of the apostles saw 
I none, save James the Lord’s 
‘brother. 

20 Now the things which I write 
unto you, behold, before God, I lie 
not. 

21 Afterwards I came into the re- 
gions of Syria and Cilicia; 

22 And was unknown by face 
unto the churches of Judza which 
were in Christ: 

23 But they had "heard only, 
That he which persecuted us in 
times past now preacheth the faith 
which once he destroyed. 

24 And they "glorified God in me. 


CHAPTER 2. 
PDHEN fourteen years after I 
went up again to Jerusalem 
with Barnabas, 
with me also. 


A.D. 58. 


a Gospel. vs.6- 
12; Gal.2.2,5, 
7,14. (Gen.12. 
1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 

6 Inspiration. 
vs.11,12; 
Eph.3.3,5. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

c Acts 9.3,5, 
17-20; Gal.1. 
16; Eph.3.3,5. 

d Acts 9.1-3. 

e Church (vis- 
idle). Phil.3. 
6. (1 Cor.10. 
32; 1 Tim.3. 


h 2 Cor.4.6. 

t Gentiles. 

lj v1. 

k Acts 9.26. 

7 Mt.12.46; 
13.55, 

m Acts 9.21, 
27,28. 

nm Acts 11.18. 

o Acts 15.1,2. 

p 2 Cor.8.16,23. 

qg Acts 16.9. 

r Acts 15.4. 

5 Phil.2.16. 

12 Cor.11.26; 
Jude 4. 

u Gal.5.1,13. 

v Cf.v.11. 

w v.14; Gal.3.1. 
x Acts 10.34; 
Rom.2.11. 

y Acts 22.21; 
Rom.1?.13. 

21 Pet.1.1. 

a Acts 15.13. 

b Grace (im- 


Eph.3.2- 
(Rom.6.3, 
2 Pet.3.18.) 
¢ Acts 13.3. 
d Gentiles. 
e Acts 11.19- 
20152: 
A.D 52.] 
f Acts 11.3. 


and took /Titus ect 


wha Dales oe eet 2 


2 And I went up by “revelation, 
and communicated unto them that 


gospel which I preach among the — 


Gentiles, but ‘privately to them 
which were of reputation, lest by 
any means I should run, or had 
run, in ‘vain. 

3 But neither Titus, who was 
with me, being a Greek, was com- 
pelled to be circumcised: 

4 And that because of ‘false breth- 
ren unawares brought in, who 
came in privily to spy out our “lib- 
erty which we have in Christ Jesus, 
that they might bring us into bond- 
age: 

5 To whom we ’gave place by 
subjection, no, not for an hour; that 
the “truth of the gospel might con- 
tinue with you. 

6. But of these who seemed to be 
somewhat, (whatsoever they were> 
it maketh no matter to me: God 
*accepteth no man’s person:) for 
they who seemed to be somewhat 
in conference added nothing to me: 

7 But contrariwise, when they 
saw that the gospel of the Yuncir- 
cumcision was committed unto me, 
as the gospel of the “circumcision 
was unto Peter; 

8 (For he that wrought effectually 
in Peter to the apostleship of the 
circumcision, the same was mighty 
in me toward the Gentiles:) 

9 And when ¢James, Cephas, and 
John, who seemed to be pillars, per- 
ceived the grace that was given 
unto me, they gave to me and Bar- 
nabas the “right hands of fellowship; 
that we should go unto the ¢hea- 
then, and they untothe circumcision. 

10 Only they would that we 
should remember the poor; the same 
which I also was forward to do. 


11 But when Peter was come to ~ 


‘Antioch, I withstood him to the 
face, because he was to be blamed. 

12 For before that certain came 
from James, he did feat with the 
Gentiles: but when they were come, 
he withdrew and éseparated him- 


Judaizers, Paul himself had been 
something better (vs. 13, 14). 
of the other aposties (vs. 15-24). 


nized Paul’s apostleship (2. 7-10). 


the answer was that he himself had cla 
1 The new dispensation of grace havi 


sisted in, becomes a mere ‘Jews’ r 


2 The word “religion,” Gr. threskeia = 


times in the N.T.: 
(“‘worshipping’’); ( 


a foremost 


Jew, and had forsaken Judaism for 
(4) He had preached grace years before he saw any 


I (5) When he did meet the other apostles they 
had nothing to add to his revelations (2. 1-6) 


(7) 


eligion.”’ 


1242 


(6) The other apostles fully recog- 


If the legalizers pleaded Peter’s authority, 
imed none when rebuked (2. 11-14). 
ng come in, the Mosaic system, if still per- 


“religious service,” is used but five 
(1) In a bad sense, Acts 26. 5; Gal. 1. 14; Jas. 1. 26; Col. 2. 18 
2) in the sense of a believer’s good works, Jas. 1. 27. 
used as synonymous with salvation or spirituality, 


It is never 


self, fearing them which were of the 
circumcision. 

13 And the other Jews dissembled 
likewise with him; insomuch that 
“Barnabas also was carried: away 
with their dissimulation. 

14 But when I saw that they 
walked not uprightly according to 
the truth of the gospel, I said unto 
Peter before them all, If thou, be- 
ing a Jew, livest after the manner of 
Gentiles, and not as do the. Jews, 


why compellest thou the Gentiles 
to live as do the Jews? 


Part IV. Justification is by faith 
without law (Gal. 2. 15-3. 24), 


(1) Even Jews must be so 
justified. 

15 1We who are “Jews by nature, 
and not 4sinners of the Gentiles, 

16 Knowing that a man is not 
justified by the works of the law, 
but by the ‘faith of Jesus Christ, 
even we have believed in &Jesus 
Christ, that we might be “justified 
by the faith of Christ, and ‘not by 
the works of the law: for by the 
works of the law shall no flesh be 
justified. 

17 But if, while 2we seek to be jus- 
tified Jby Christ, we ourselves also 
are found 4sinners, is therefore 
Christ the “minister of sin? God 
forbid. 

18 For if I ’build again the things 
which I destroyed, I make myself a 
4transgressor. . 


(2) The law has already executed 
its sentence upon the believer. 


19 For I .through the law am 
mdead to the law, that I might live 
unto God. 


(3) The Christian life is the out- 
living of the inliving Christ. 
(Cf. Gal. 5. 15-23.) 


20 I am “crucified with Christ: 
evertheless °I live; yet ?not I, but 
Christ liveth in me: and the “life 
which I now live in the flesh I live 
by the faith of the Son of God, who 


loved me, and gave himself for me.| 


GALATIANS. 


2 Acts 15,37-39. 


6 Gospel. Gal.3.2. 
(Gouda Rest 


¢ Phil.3.5. 


4d Sin. Rom,3,23, 
note. 


€ Justification, 
Gal.3.8, 11,24. 
(Lk.18.14; Rom. 
3.28.) 


Ff Faith: Gal.3.6, 
7,9,11,12,22-26. 
(Gen.3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 


9 Christ Jesus. 
& Psa. 143.2; Rom. 
3.20.28. 


4 Law (of Moses). 
vs.15,16, 19,21; 


z DES Gal.5. 


kt Rom.6.1. 

1 Gal.5.2-4. 

m Rom.7.4. 

m Gal.6.14; Col.2. 
11,12,20. 

° Rom.6.8-11; Col. 
3.1; Eph.2.5,6. 

P Eph.4.24, note. 

@ Life (eternal. 
Gal.6.8. (Mt.7. 
14; Rev.22.19.) 

¥ Grace (in salv.). 
Gal.5.4. (Rom,3. 
24; John 1.16, 
note.) 

s Rom.10.10, note. 


t Gal.3.4; 5.2; cf. 
1 Cor-.15.17, 


%Rom.10.17. 
» Mt.5.48, note. 


w Flesh. Gal.4.23, 
29. (John 1.13; 
Jude 23.) 


2 Acts 9.17; 10.44. 


¥ Faith. vs.7,9,11, 
12,22,26; Eph.2. 


Jehovah. Gen, 
15.6. 

4 Imputation. Jas. 
2.23. (Lev.25. 
Jas.?..23.) 

5 sons. 


¢ Gentiles. 


@Gospel. Gal.4. 
13. (Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev. 14.6.3 


@ Gen. 12.3, 
Ff believing. 
9 Deut. 27.26, 


[3 10 


(4) To mingle law-works with 
grace in justification frus- 
trates grace. 


21 Ido not frustrate the "grace of 
God: for if srighteousness come by 


the law, then Christ is dead ‘in vain.. 


CHAPTER 3. 
(5S) The gift of the Spirit is by 
faith, not by law-works. 
O FOOLISH Galatians, who hath 
bewitched you, that ye should 
not obey the truth, before whose eyes 
Jesus Christ hath been evidently set 
forth, crucified among you? 


2 This only would I learn of you, 
Received ye the Spirit by the works 


295,01 the law, or by the “hearing of 


faith? : 

_3 Are ye so foolish? having begun 
in the Spirit, are ye now made ”per- 
fect by the “flesh? 

_4 Have ye suffered so many things 
in vain? if 1¢ be yet in vain. 

5 He therefore that *ministereth 
to you the Spirit, and worketh mira- 
cles among you, doeth he it by the 
works of the law, or by the hearing 
of faith? 


(6) The Abrahamic Covenant is 
aby-faithcovenant. (Cf.Rom. 
4. 1-22.) 

6 Even as Abraham believed 
2God, and it was ¢accounted to him 
for righteousness. 

7 Know ye therefore that they 
which are of faith, the same are "the 
children of Abraham. 

8 And the scripture, foreseeing 
that God would justify the ‘heathen 
through faith, preached before the 
@gospel unto Abraham, saying, “In 


50;/thee shall all nations be blessed. 


9 So then they which be of faith 
are blessed with ffaithful Abraham. 


(7) The man under law-works is 
under the curse of the law. 


10 For as many as are of the 
works of the law are under the 
curse: for it is written, ¢Cursed is 
every one that continueth not in all 


1 Paul here quotes from his words to Peter when he withstood him at Antioch to 
show the Galatians that, whatever the legalists may have pretended, Peter and 
he were in perfect accord doctrinally. Paul appealed to the common belief of 
Peter and himself as a rebuke of Peter’s inconsistent practice. 


2. That is, ‘‘we’”’ Jews. 


(See Rom. 3. 19-23.) 


The passage might be thus para- 


phrased: If we Jews, in seeking to be justified by faith in Christ, take our places as 
mere sinners, like the Gentiles, is it therefore Christ who makes us sinners? By 


no means. 


It is by putting ourselves again under law after seeking justification 


through Christ, that we act as if we were still unjustified sinners, seeking to become 


righteous through law-works, 


1243 


1 


(Cf. Gal. 5. 1-4.)’ 


= py 


3 11] 


things which are written in the 
book of the law todothem. _ 
11 But that no man is %justified|, Peete 
by the law in the sight of God, it is | 811,24; Gal.5.4. 
evident: for, The just shall live by 
faith. ; 
¥2 And the law is ‘not of faith: 


A.D. 58. 


> Hab.2.4. 


¢ Rom.9.31,32. 
but, ¢The man that doeth them|etev.1s.s. 
shall live in them. 'e Gal.4.5; Eph.1.7. 


r ¥ Sacrifice (of 
(8) Christ has borne our law-) Christ). Gal.4.4, 


curse that we might have the| 3) $§5°*" #*- 
faith-blessing. 


13-Christ hath ‘redeemed us from/| 20: GSam7.14; 
the curse of the law, being ‘made aly, pout 01.23. 
scurse for us: for it is written,|iv.s; Rom.4.2-5. 
hCursed is every one that hangeth|¥s rom.3.29,20. 
on. a tree: 


seven). 1 Tim.t. 


k& Christ Jesus. 
14 That the *blessing of Abraham "Help Spiel, vio, 
might come on the JGentiles| (Midis, 
through *Jesus Christ; that wel] Acts?-4) 
might receive the promise of the page: 
‘Spirit through faith. Pe ae 
15 Brethren, I speak after the}, pom.4o,10,13, 
manner of men; Though rt he but a] 14. 
man’s covenant, yet if it be con-}%=Ex-12.40,41. 
firmed, no man disannulleth, or Gackt ag 
addeth thereto. b ha the anette 
16 Now to “Abraham and his in order that sin 
seed were the promises made. He] misht be made 
saith not, And to “seeds, as of| gression. See 
many; but. as of “one, And to thy} #3734! 5:2% 
seed, which is Christ. ™ Gal.4.4; Heb.10. 


(9) The law does not add a new|» Rom.10.10, note. 
condition to the Abrahamic|v Omit “to bring 
covenant of faith. PR plgeeer. 


17 And this I say, that the cove- 


GALATIANS. 


1 (Lk.18.14; Rom, |; 
} 3.28.) i 


9 Judgments (the |) 


manifestas trans~ 


nant, that was confirmed before of 
’God in Christ, the law, which was. 
four hundred and thirty years af- 
iter, cannot disannul, that it should 
make the promise of none effect. 
| 18 For 7if the inheritance be of 
ithe law, rt is no more of promise: 
but God ‘gave it to Abraham by 
‘promise. 
(10) The true intent of the law 
is condemnation, and as’ a 
preparatory discipline. 


| 19 lWherefore then serveth the 
law? It was added “because of 
transgressions, till the “seed should 
come to whom the promise was 
made; and 1t was ordained by an- 
gels in the hand of a mediator. 

20 Now a mediator is not a me- 
diator of one, but God is one. 

21 Is the law then against the 
promises of God? God. forbid: for 
if there had been a law given. which 
could have given life, verily *right- 
PouNaen should. have been. by. the 
aw. 


ch 
promise by faith of Jesus Christ 
might be given to them: that be- 
lieve. 

23 But before faith came, we were 
kept under the law, shut up unto. 
the faith which should afterwards 
be revealed. 

24 Wherefore the 2law was: our 
schoolmaster “to bring us *unto 


1 The answer is sixfold: (1) The law was added because of transgressions, ice., 


to give to sin the character of transgression. 


(a) Men had been sinning before 


Moses, but in the absence of law their sins were not put to their account (Rom. 


5. 12); the law gave to sin the character of 


“transgression,” 


> 


i.e. of personal guilt. 


(b) Also, since men not only continued to transgress after the law was given, but, 
were provoked to transgress by. the very law which forbade it (Rom. 7. 8), the law 


conclusively proved the inveterate sinfulness 


(2) The law, therefore, ‘concluded all under sin” 


law was an ad interim dealing, 


“till the seed should come” (v. 19). 
shut sinful man up to faith as the only avenue of escape (v. 23) 
to the Jews what the pedagogue was in a Greek household, 
their minority, and it had this character “unto” (i.e. until 


of man’s nature (Rom. 7. 11-13). 
(cf. Rom. 3. 19, 20, 23). (3) The. 
(4) The law 


(5) The law was 
a ruler of children. in. 


having come, the believer is no longer under the pedagogue (v. 25) 


21. The law of Moses, Summary: (1) The Mosaic Covenant was given to Israel | 


in three parts: the commandments, expressing 
1-26); the “judgments,” 
the “‘ordinances,” governing the religious life of 


commandments and ordinances were one complete and inseparable whole. 


an Israelite sinned, he was-held “blameless” 
(Lk. 1. 6; Phil. 3.6). (3) Law, 
acterized the dispensation extending from the 
Jesus Christ (Gal. 3. 13, 14, 23, 24). 
15. 1-31; Gal. 2. 1-5) to mingle law 
ent dispensation of grace, brought out the 
Christian, viz. 


the righteous will of God (Ex. 20. 


Israel (Ex. 24. 12-31. 18). (2) The 


When 


if he brought the required offering 
as a method of the divine dealing with man, char- 


giving of the law to the death of 


is. pres- 


true relation of the law to the 


II. The Christian doctrine of the law: (1) Law is in contrast with grace. Under, 


1244 


[3 24 


) Christ (v. a (6) Christ™: 


governing the social life of Israel (Ex. 21. 1-24. 11), and | 


(4) The attempt of legalistic teachers (e.g. Acts 
with grace as the divine method for thi 


3 25] GALATIANS. [4 10 


Christ, that we might be ¢justified 
by faith. 


Part V. The rule of the believer’s " ore! = 
life is 8racious, not legal (Gal.| Eph.1.5, 


3. 25-5. 15). epecest 


. 25 But after that faith is come,|? 22%° 


children, were in bondage under 
the ‘elements of the world: 


(2) The believer is redeemed 
from under the law. 


4 But when the “fulness of the 
time was come, °God sent forth his 


om. 10.12; 
we are no longer under a Ischool-|°Cci3.11..'. |SOM, made of a ?*woman, made 
master. f1Cor.7.20-24.;under the law, 

g Acts 1.14. 5 To %redeem them that were "un- 


(1) The justified believer is a.son Eph-2-1516; |der the law, that we might receive 


in the family of God, not a|iRom4.1i.  |the Sadoption of sons. 


‘Gal.4.7; 
servant under the law. : Heb.9.15. (3) The Spirit actualizes the be- 
26. For ye are all *the children of |/j¥$Gsizg, | ‘#ever’s sonship. (See Eph. 1. 
20. 


God by faith in Christ Jesus. 5, note.) 

or as many of you as have|” Xosmos 6 And because ye are sons, God 
been ‘baptized 4into Christ have| '#®.- |nath sent forth the ‘Spirit of his 
put on Christ. ; nGen.18.10; | Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, 
28 There is ‘neither Jew nor casey nam | Father. 
Greek, there is neither bond nor Pf ’ | 7 Wherefore thou art no more a 


free, there is neither Smale nor fe-|q Sacrifice (of |servant, but a son; and if a son, 
male: for ye are all “one in Christ| CArist).vs4,/then an “heir of God through 
Christ. 


Jesus. 5; Eph.1.7 hrist 
29 And if ye be Christ’s, then are] feri0.18,) : us E 
ye *Abraham’s seed, and sheirs ac-|7 Gal.3.13. (4) To lapse into legality is to go 
cording to the promise. s pe back to an elementary religion. 
(roe 81. 8 ators shes, when ye knew 
> Eph.l.5-) Inot God, ye *did service unto them 
CHAPTER 4. ; be |which by nature are no gods. 

WOW I say, That the heir, as| 5.5,16,17-25. | 9 But now, after that ye have 
aa as he is-a child, differeth| (Mt:18; |known God, or rather are known of 
nothing from a servant, though he}, eph.1.14; God, how turn ye again to the 
be lord of ail; ) 1 Pet.1.4. wweak and beggarly elements, 


|whereunto ye “desire again to be 
jin bondage? 

| 10 Ye%observe days, and months, 
jand times, and years. 


2 But is under tutors and gover-| A Maer | 
nors until the time appointed of the! “yep. 7.1819. 
father. |x Gal.3.1-3. 

3 Even so #we, when we were] Col-2.16. 


the latter God bestows the righteousness which, under law, He demanded (Ex. 19. 
5; John 1. 17; Rom. 3. 21, note; 10. 3-10; 1 Cor. 1.30). (2) The law is, in itself, holy, 
just, good, and spiritual (Rom. 7. 12-14). (3) Before the law the whole world is 
guilty, and the law is therefore of necessity a ministry of condemnation, death, and 

divine curse (Rom. 3. 19; 2 Cor. 3. 7-9; Gal. 3. 10). (4) Christ bore the curse 
of the law, and redeemed the believer both from the curse and from the dominion of 
the law (Gal. 3. 13; 4. 5-7). (5) Law neither justifies a sinner nor sanctifies a be- 
liever (Gal. 2. 16; 3. 2, 3, 11, 12). (6) The believer is both dead to the law and re- 
deemed from it, so that he is “not under the law, but under grace’? (Rom. 6. 14; 
7.4; Gal. 2. 19; 4. 4-7; 1 Tim. 1. 8, 9). (7) Under the new covenant ‘of grace the 
principle of 6bedience to the divine will is inwrought (Heb. 10.16). So far is the 
life of the believer from the anarchy of self-will that he is “‘inlawed to Christ”’ (1 Cor. 
9. 21), and the new “law of Christ’”’ (Gal. 6. 2; 2 John 5) is his delight; while, through 
the indwelling Spirit, the righteousness of the law ts fulfilled in him (Rom. 8. 24; 
Gal. 5. 16-18). The commandments are used in the distinctively Christian Scrip- 
ae as an pete leae in righteousness (2 Tim. 3. 16; Rom. 13. 8-10; Eph. 6, 1-3; 
1 Cor. 9. 8, 9). 

1Gr. paidagogos, ‘‘child-conductor.” ‘‘Among the Greeks and Romans, 
persons, for the most part slaves, who had it in charge to educate and give constant 
attendance upon boys till they came of age.”—H. A. W. Meyer. The argument 
does not turn upon the extent or nature of the pedagogue’s authority, but upon 
the fact that it wholly ceased when the “child” (4. 1) became a “son” (4. 1-6), when 
the minor became an adult. The adult “son” does voluntarily that which formerly 
he did in fear of the pedagogue. But even if he does not, it is no longer a question 
between the son and the pedagogue (the law), but between the son and his Father— 
God. (Cf. Heb. 12. 5-10; 1 John 2. 1, 2.) 

1245 


4 11] 


11 I am afraid of you, lest I have 
bestowed upon you labour in vain. 

12 Brethren, I “beseech you, be as 
I am; for I am as ye are: ye have 
not %injured me at all. 

13 Ye know how through infirm- 
ity of the flesh I preached the “gos- 
pel unto you at the first. 

14 And my 4temptation which was 
in my flesh ye despised not, nor re- 
jected; but received me as an angel 
of God, even as Christ Jesus. 


(5) In legality the Galatians 
have lost their blessing. 


15 Where is then the blessedness 
ye spake of? for I bear you record, 
that, if zt had been possible, ye 
would have “plucked out your own 
eyes, and have given them to me. 

16 Am I therefore become your 
fJenemy, because I tell you the 
truth? 

17 They zealously affect you, but 
not well; yea, they would gexclude 
you, that ye might affect them. 

18 But 1¢# is good to be zealously 
affected always in a good thing, 
and “not only when I am present 
with you. 


(6) The two systems, law and 
Srace, cannot co-exist. 


19 My Hittle children, of whom I 
travail in birth: again until Christ 
be formed in you, _ 

20 I desire to be ‘present with you 
now, and to change my voice; for I 
stand in Jdoubt of you. 

21 Tell me, ye that desire to be 
under the “law, do ye not ‘hear the 
law? 

22 For it is written, “that Abra- 
ham had two sons, the one by a 
bondmaid, the other by a free- 
woman. 

23 But he who was of the bond- 
woman was- born after the “flesh; 


but he of the freewoman was by ‘ 


°promise. 

24 Which things are an allegory: 
for these are the ?two covenants; 
the one from the mount 4Sinai, 
which gendereth to “bondage, 
which is SAgar. 

25 For this SAgar is mount Sinai 


GALATIANS. 


A.D. 58. 


@ 2Cor.6.11-13, 
5 2Cor.2.5. 


¢ Gospel. Eph.1. 
13. (Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev. 14.6.) 


2 Temptation. 
Gal.6.1. (Gen.3. 
1; Jas.1.14.) 


e Acts 20.37,38. 

£2 Cor.12.15. 

9 2Tim.1.15. 

h Phil.2.12. 

71Cor.4.21; 2Cor. 
13.1,2: 

Jv. 


k Law (of Moses). 
vs.21-30. Eph.2. 
15. (Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 


2 Rom.3.19,20. 
m Gen.16.15; 21.2. 


% Flesh. vs.23-29; 
Gal.5.13,16-21,24. 
Qohn 1.13; 

Jude 23.) 


o v.28; Gen.17. 
15-17. 

P Heb.8.6,7; 9.15. 

@ Ex.24.6-8. 

r Gal.5.1. 

8 Hagar. 

t John 8.32-36. 

u Heb. 11.10;12.22; 
Rev.21.2. 

v Phil.3.20. 

w Tsa.54,1, 


% Gal.3.29; 
Rom.9.8. 


v Gen.21.9. 

2 Gen.21.10. 

@ Rom.6.14. 

6 freewoman. 

¢ Phil.4.1; Gal.2.5, 


@ Acts 15.10; 
Col.2.8. 


¢ Acts 15.1. 
f Rom.2.25. 


9 i.e, of no experi- 
mental effect: the 
sense of liberty 
is lost. Gal.2.21; 
Col.1.23. 


h Justification. 
Titus 3.7. (Lk.18. 
14; Rom.3.28.) 


7 fallen away. 


43 Grace (in salv.) 


1 Rom.10.10, note. 
m Christ Jesus. 


P 1 Thes.1.3; 
Jas.2.20-26. 


@ Gal.3.3., 


in Arabia, and answereth to Jeru-|r reaven. Mti3, 


salem -which now is, and 
‘bondage with her children. 


i 1 33. (Gen.19.3; 
XS TN) Mt.13.33.) 


ak 


26 But Jerusalem which is “above 


ae free, which is the *mother of us 


27 For it is written, “Rejoice, 
thou barren that bearest not; break 
forth and cry, thou that travailest 
not: for the desolate hath many 
more children than she which hath 
an husband. i 

28 Now “we, brethren, as Isaac 
was, are the children of promise. 

29 But as then he that was born 
after the flesh persecuted him that 
was born aiter the Spirit, even se 
it is now. 

30 Nevertheless what saith the 
scripture? 2Cast out the bondwo- 
man and her son: for the son of 
the bondwoman shall not be heir 
with the son of the freewoman. 

31 So then, brethren, we are ¢not 
children of the bondwoman, but of 
the free. 

CHAPTER 5. 


Application of the allegory. 


‘STAND fast therefore in the lib- 
erty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free, and be not entangled 
again with the ¢yoke of bondage. 

2 Behold, I Paul say unto you, 
that «if ye be circumcised, Christ 
shall profit you-nothing. 

3 For I testify again to every man 
that is circumcised, that he is a 
fdebtor todo the whole law. 

4 Christ is become of &no effect 
unto you, whosoever of you are 
hjustified by the law; ye-are ‘fallen 
from Jgrace. 

> For we through the Spirit wait 
for the hope of righteousness /by 
faith 

6 For in Jesus Christ neither 
"circumcision availeth any thing, 
nor uncircumcision; but faith 
which ?worketh by love. 

7 Ye @%did run well; who did hin- 
der you that ye should not obey the 
truth? 


8 This persuasion cometh not of 
him that calleth you. 

9 A little ‘leaven leaveneth the 
Hero Spiel 

10 ave confidence in you 
through the Lord, that ye will be 
none otherwise minded: but he 
that troubleth you shall bear his 
judgment, whosoever he be. 


1 The allegory (vs. 22-31) is addressed to justifi 
Cor. 3. 1, 2), who, under the influence of legalis 
the law,” and has, therefore, no application to 


raises and answers, for the fifth ti 
under the law? (Gal. 2. 19-21; 3. 1- 


me in thi 
3; 3. 25, 
1246 


s Epistle, the question, 
26; 4. 


ied but immature believers (cf. 1 
tic teachers, “desire to be under 
a sinner seeking justification. It 


Is the believer 
4-6; 4. 9-31), 


Mey. 

5 11) 

11 And I, brethren, if I yet preach 
circumcision, why do I yet suffer 
@persecution? then is the offence of 
the cross ceased. 

12 I would they were even cut off 
which trouble you. 

13 For, brethren, ye have been 
‘called unto liberty; only use not 
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, 
but by ‘love serve one another. 

14 For all the law is fulfilled in one 
word, even in this; fThou shalt love 
thy neighbour as thyself. 

15 But if ye &bite and devour one 
another, take heed that ye be not 
hkconsumed one of another. 


PartVI.Sanctificationisthrough 
the Spirit, not the law (vs. 16-24). 

16 This I say then, ‘Walk in the 
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the 
lust of the flesh. 

(1) The Spirit gives victory over 
sin. (Cf. Rom. 8.2. See Rom. 
7. 15, note.) 

17 For the flesh Jlusteth against 
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the 
flesh: and these are contrary the 
one to the other: so that ye “cannot 
do the things that ye would. 

18 But if ye be Aled of the Spirit, 
ye are not “under the law. 

19 Now the “works of the flesh are 
manifest, which are these; Adul- 
tery, fornication, uncleanness, las- 
civiousness, 

20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, 
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, 
seditions, heresies, 

21 Envyings, murders, drunken- 
ness, revellings, and such like: of 
the which I tell you before, as I 
have also told you in time past, 
that they which do such things shall 
not inherit the kingdom of God. 


(2) Christian character is pro- 
duced by the Holy Spirit, not 
by self-effort. (Cf. John 15. 1-5; 
Gal. 2. 20.) 

22 1But the fruit of the Spirit is 
love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gen- 
tleness, goodness, ?faith, , 

23 Meekness, temperance: against 
gsuch there is no law. 


GALATIANS. 


A.D. 58. 


@ Gal.6.12. 

5 1 Cor.1.23;2 Tim. 
3.11, 12. 

¢v.1; Rom.8.2. 

@ Rom.6.1, 15-22; 
1 Pet.2.16. 

e 1 Pet.1.22; 1 John 
3.16-18. 

F Lev.19.18. 

g Jas.3.13-16. 

A Isa.9.18-21. 

7.25; Rom.8.12, 
13. 


J Rom.7.22,23. 
& should not. 
t Rom.8.14. 


mie, not under 
bondage of effort 
to please God by 
law-works, 

2 Cor.3.17. 

” Rom.1.26-31; 
Eph.5.11,12; 

2 Tim.3.1-4. 

© 1 Cor.6.9, 10; 
Rev. 21.8. 

P faithfulness. 

a such things. 

7 Flesh. vs.13,16- 
21,24;.Gal.6.8,13. 
GUohn 1.13; Jude 
23.) 


8 Holy Spirit. vs.5, 
16,17,18,22,25; 
Gal.6.8. (Mt. 1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

t Phil. 2.3. 

uwi.e. sin, Rom.3. 
23, note. 

v Rom.15.1; 
Gal.5.25. 

w John 13.12-15. 

= John 21,15-17. 

v Temptation. 

1 Thes.3,5. (Gen. 
3.1; Jas.1.14,) 

2 Acts 20.35; 
1Thes.5.14. 

@ Law (of Christ). 
Lk.6.27-38._ (Gal. 
6.2; 2john 5.) 

6 Rom.12.3 

© Jas. 1.22. 

4 Rom. 12.2; 

_ 1Cor.11.28. 

2 2 Cor. 10, 12-18, 

f Rom.14.12. 

19 Or, share with 

| him, 1 Cor.9. 
7-15; 1 Tim.5.13, 

4 Jas.1.16, 

41 Cor,3.10-13. 

t Holy Spirit. 
Eph. £.13, 17. 
(ML1,18; Acts 
2.4.) 


Eph.4.18. (Mt.7. 
14; Rev.22.19.) 
41 Cor.15.58; 
2 Thes.3.13. 
m Jas.5.7,8. 


Life (efernal). 


[6 9 


24 And they that are Christ’s 
have crucified the “flesh with the 
affections and lusts. 


Part VIL. The outworking of the 
new life in Christ Jesus (Gal. 
5. 25-6. 18). 


25 If we live in the ‘Spirit, let us 
also walk in the Spirit. 

26 Let us not be desirous of ‘vain 
glory, provoking one another, envy- 
ing one another. 


CHAPTER 6. 


(1) The new life as a brother- 
hood: (a) the case of a sinning 
brother. 


RETHREN, if a man be over- 
taken in a “fault, ye which are 
‘spiritual, “restore such an one in 
the spirit of *meekness; considering 
thyself, lest thou also be *tempted. 


(b) The case of a burdened 
brother. 


2 *Bear ye one another’s burdens, 
and so fulfil the “law of Christ. 
| 3 For if a man °think himself to 
be something, when he is nothing, 
he ‘deceiveth himself. 

4 But let every man ¢2prove his 
own work, and then shall he have 
rejoicing in ¢himself alone, and not 
in another. 

5 For every man shall fbear his 


own burden. 


(c) The case of a teaching 
brother. 


6 Let him that is taught in the 
word communicate unto him that 
teacheth in all good things. 

(2) The new life as a husbandry. 

7 Be not deceived; God is not 
mocked: for ‘whatsoever a man 
soweth, that shall he also reap. 

8 For he that soweth to his flesh 
shall of the flesh reap corrup- 


|tion; but he that soweth to the 


jSpirit shall of the Spirit reap “life 
everlasting. 

9 And let us not be ‘weary in well 
doing: for in due season we shall 
mreap, if we faint not. 


—e 


1 Christian character is not mere moral or legal correctness, but the possession 
and manifestation of nine graces: love, joy, peace—character as an inward state; 
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness—character in expression toward man; faith, 
meekness, temperance—character in expression toward God. Taken together they 
present a moral portrait of Christ, and may be taken as the apostle’s explanation 


of Gal. 2. 20, “Not I, but Christ,” 
character is possible because of 
fe Cor, 12512; ") 
yielded to Him (Gal. 5. 22, 23). 


1247 


and as a definition of “fruit” in John 15. 1-8. This 
the believer’s vital union to Christ (John 15. 5; 
, and is wholly the fruit of the Spirit in those: believers who are 


6 10) | 


(3) The new life as a beneficence. 
(Cf. Acts 10. 38.) 

10 As we have therefore opportu- 
nity, let us do good unto all men, 
“especially unto them who are of 
the household of faith. 

(4) The new life in sacrificial 
love. 


11 Ye see how 4large a letter I 
have written unto you with mine 
own hand. 


12 As many as desire to make a| 
fair "shew in the flesh, they ‘con- I 


strain you to be circumcised; only 
lest they should suffer persecution 
for the cross of Christ. 

!13 For neither they themselves 
who are circumcised keep the law; 
but desire to have you circumcised, 
that they may glory in your 4flesh. 


(5) The new exultation of the 
new lite. 


GALATIANS. 


14 But ¢God forbid that I should 


a 
es 


A.D. 58. |glory, save in the Scross of our Lord 
? Jesus Christ, by whom the é¢world 
@Rom.12.13; jis crucified unto me, and “I unto 
bPros6 [the ‘world. 4 ; 
nlereGias 15 For jin Christ Jesus neither 


cision” stands|circumcision availeth any thing, 


hace ines nor uncircumcision, but. a new 
religion — kcreature. 
orm rather 
ene (6) The peace of the new Iife. 
Pies _16 And as many as walk accord- 
(John 1.13; {ing to this rule, peace be on them, 
waaay and mercy, and upon the ‘Israel of 
FL Corts. God. 
g -1.4; 2.20. 
h Col.2.20; The new fellowship of 
_John 17.9,15. (7) The eanecne P 
t kosmos = ° 
world-sys- 
tem. Eph.2.2.| 17 From henceforth let no man 
ote i 'g, [trouble me: for I bear in my body 
mate) ’ |the marks of the Lord Jesus. 
j Gal.5.6. 18 Brethren, the grace of our 
ee Lord Jesus Christ be with your 
om.4.12; ars 
9.6-8. spirit. Amen. 


Re 


1Gr. “with how large letters . 


; Mine own hand.” The apostle was, it ap- 


pears from many considerations, afflicted with ophthalmia, a common disease in 


the East, to the point almost of total 


therefore, he dictated his letters. 


blindness (e.g. Gal. 4. 13-15). Ordinarily, 
But now, having no amanuensis at hand, but 


urged by the spiritual danger of his dear Galatians, he writes, we cannot know 
with what pain and difficulty, with his own hand, in the “large letters” his darkened 


vision compelled him to use. 


1248 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


‘y EPHESIANS. [i 4 


WriTER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 

Date. Ephesians was written from Rome in A.D. 64. It is the first in order 
of the Prison Epistles (Acts 20.—27.; see Acts 28. 30, note), and was sent by Tychicus, 
concurrently with Colossians and Philemon. It is probable that the two greater 
letters had their occasion in the return of Onesimus to Philemon. Ephesians is 
the most impersonal of Paul’s letters. Indeed the words, “to the Ephesians,” 
are not in the best manuscripts. Colossians (4. 16) mentions an epistle to the 
Laodiceans. It has been conjectured that the letter known to us as Ephesians is 
really the Laodicean letter. Probably it was sent to Ephesus and Laodicea with- 
out being addressed to any church. The letter would then be “to the saints and 
the faithful in Christ Jesus” anywhere. 

Theme. The doctrine of the Epistle confirms this view. It contains the 
highest church truth, but has nothing about church order. The church here is the 
true church, “His body,’’ not the local church, as in Philippians, Corinthians, etc, 
Essentially, three‘ lines of truth make up this Epistle: the believer’s exalted posi- 
tion through grace; the truth concerning the body of Christ; and a walk in accord- 
ance with that position. 

There is a close spiritual affinity between Ephesians and Joshua, the “heaven- 
lies” answering in Christian position to Canaan in Israel’s experience. In both 
there is conflict, often failure, but also victory, rest, and possession (Josh. 21. 43-45; 
Eph. 1. 3; 3. 14-19; 6. 16, 23). As befits a complete revelation, the number seven 
is conspicuous in the structure. of Ephesians. , 

The divisions are, broadly, four: I. The apostolic greeting, 1. 1, 2. II. Posi- 
tional; the beliéver’s standing “in Christ” and “‘in the heavenlies” through pure 
grace, 1. 3-3. 21, III. Walk and service, 4. 1-5. 17. IV. The walk and warfare 
of the Spirit-filled believer, 5. 18-6. 24. 


A.D. 64. 


Part II. The believer’s position 


CHAPTER 1. a Acts. in grace (Eph. 1. 3-3. 21). 
Part I, The apostolic salutation)? Acts; (1) The seven elements of the 
¥ (vst, 1/2). ¢ Rev.2-11 believer’s position. 


Bh i 
@Rom-Lf:1Tim. | 3° eBlessed be the God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who 
fhath blessed us with all spiritual 
blessings 2in sheavenly places’ in 
Christ: 

4 According as he hath ‘chosen 
us in him before the foundation 


UL, an apostle of Jesus Christ} (12, 515 
by the ¢will of God, to the|sRom.s.29.32; ” 
saints which are at “Ephesus, and] LCor-3.21-25; 
to the faithful lin Christ Jesus: — |ov.20; Eph.2.6; 
2 4Grace be to you, and peace,|;, 31 or corpo- 
from God our Father, and from the] ate). Col.3.12. 


: Deut.7.6; 1 Pet. 
Lord Jesus Christ. Oy ‘ 


1 The believer’s place as a member of the body of Christ, vitally united to Him 
by the baptism with the Holy Spirit (1 Cor. 12. 12, 13). 5 

2 Literally, the heaveniies. The same Greek word is used in John 3. 12, where 
“things” is added. In both places the word signifies that which is heavenly in 
contradistinction to that which is earthly. In Ephesians “places” is especially 
misleading. “The heavenlies’? may be defined as the sphere of the believer’s spir- 
itual experience as identified with Christ in nature (2 Pet. 1. 4); life (Col. 3.4; 1 John 
5, 12); relationships (John 20. 17; Heb. 2. 11:); service (John 17. 18; Mt. 28. 20); suf- 
fering (Phil. 1. 29; 3. 10; Col. 1. 24); inheritance (Rom. 8. 16, 17); and future glory 
in the kingdom (Rom. 8. 18-21; 1 Pet. 2. 9; Rev. 1. 6; 5. 10). dhe) be- 
liever is a heavenly man, and a stranger and pilgrim on the earth (Heb. 
3,1: 1 Pet. 2. 11). 

1249 


UG 


» 4through his blood, the forgiveness) Sin,Rom.3.23, 
- of ins, according to the riches of 


1 5] EPHESIANS. [1 2 


that ye heard the word of truth, the 
‘gospel of your salvation: in whom 
also “after that ye believed, “ye 
were “sealed with that °holy Spirit 
of promise, 

14 Which is the earnest of our 
inheritance until the redemption of 

6 To the praise of the glory of|° 449249" “*°™-|the purchased possession, unto the 
his grace, wherein he hath made}d sacrifice or | Praise of his glory. 


:;|(2) The prayer for knowledge 
and power. 


15 Wherefore I also, after I heard 
of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and 


of the ¢world, that we should be 
bholy and without blame before 
him in love: : Peer 

5 Having !predestinated us unto|s sanctify, holy 
the 2adoption of children by Jesus inosine 
Christ to himself, according to the (Mia.s; Rev.22. 


te. 
= paras (in salv.). 
his grace; V5.6,7; Eph.2.5, I 
8 Wherein he hath abounded] 7.5, {fom32s |love unto all the saints, 
toward us in all wisdom and|gRomie.25,26; 16 Cease not to give thanks for 
ieagence : sds . ed Pe SEE: making mention of you in my 
9 Having made known unto us}; 5); _ |Pprayers; 
the &mystery ‘of his will, according gt by eae 17 That the God of our Lord 
to his good pleasure which he hath punts us: 46.10: JeSUS Christ, the Father of glory, 
purposed in himself: oe Dandics ples aay give Pea ies the apie of 
10 That in the 3dispensation of the] vs.6,14; Eph.3.21. |}wisdom and revelation in the know- 
fulness of times he might gather to-|* Aoped. ledge of him: 
gether in one all things in Christ,|' Gospe!,_ Fph.3. hata: eves of ei maderser aay 
both which are in heaven, and] 1-3; Rev.14.6.) [ing being enlightened; that ye may 
which are on earth; even in him: | having believed.|know what is the hope of his call- 
11 In whom also we have ob-|"@ssurance., jing, and what the riches of the 
tained an inheritance, being /pre-| 32.17; jude1.)" |glory of his inheritance in the 
destinated according to the purpose oHoly Spirit, vs.|saints, 1 : 
of him who worketh all things after| 22’ ‘(meris;’ | 19 And what is the exceeding 
the ‘counsel of his own will: Acts 2.4.) greatness of his power to us-ward 
12 That we should be to the/? AES vss, |who believe, according to the work- 
Jpraise of his glory, who first trusted ; jing of his mighty power, _ ; 
in Christ. 20 Which he wrought in Christ, 
13. In whom ye also trusted, after when he raised him from the dead, 


1 Predestination is that effective exercise of the will of God by which things 
before determined by Him are brought to pass. See Election, 1 Pet. 1. 2, note; 
Foreknowledége, 1 Pet. 1. 20, note. : 

2 Adoption (Auiothesia, ‘placing as a son’”’) is not so much a word of relation- 
ship as of position. The believer’s relation to God as a child results from the 
new birth (John 1. 12, 13), whereas adoption is the act of God whereby one already 
a child is, through redemption from the law, placed in the position of an adult son 
(Gal. 4. 1-5). The indwelling Spirit gives the realization of this in the believer’s 
present experience (Gal. 4. 6); but the full manifestation of the believer’s 
sonship awaits the resurrection, change, and translation of saints, which is called 
iat redemption of the body” (Rom. 8. 23; 1 Thes. 4. 14-17; Eph. 1. 14; 1 John 

#3)) 

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. ‘This, the seventh and last of the 
ordered ages which condition human life on the earth, is identical with the king- 
dom covenanted to David (2 Sam. 7. 8-17; Zech. 12. 8, Summary; Lk. 1. 31-33; 1 Cor. 
15. 24, Summary), and gathers into itself under Christ all past “times”: (1) The 
time of oppression and misrule ends by Christ taking His kingdom (Isa.-14.-3,-4)< 
(2) The time of testimony and divine forbearance ends in judgment (Mt. 25. 31-46; 
Acts 17. 30, 31; Rev. 20. 7-15). (3) The time of toil ends in rest and reward (2 Thes. 
1.6, 7). (4) The time of suffering ends in glory (Rom. 8. 17, 18). (5) The time 
of Israel’s blindness and chastisement ends in restoration and conversion (Rom. 
11. 25-27; Ezk. 39. 25-29). (6) The times of the Gentiles end in the smiting of 
the image and the setting up of the kingdom of the heavens (Dan. 2. 34, 35; Rev. 
19. 15-21). (7) The time of creation’s thraldom ends in deliverance at the mani- 
festation of the sons of God (Gen. 3. 17; Isa. 11. 6-8: Rom. 8. 19-21). 

_ +The Holy Spirit is Himself the seal. In the symbolism of Scripture a seal 
signifies: (1) A finished transaction (Jer. 32. 9, 10; John 17. 4; 19, 30). (2) 
Ownership (Jer. 32. 11, 12; 2 Tim, 2. 19). (3) Security (Esth, 8. 8; Dan. 6. 17; Eph. 


4. 30). 
1250 


Lia at 
Lal] 


and set him at his own right hand 


EPHESIANS. 


(2 21 


*created in Christ Jesus unto good 


in the heavenly places, __ ee ‘works, which God. hath before or- 
21 Far above all principality, and dained that: we should walk in 

power, and might, and dominion, |e ie. age. them. 

and every name that is named, not}? Psa.s.¢; 110.1; 


only in this ¢world, but also in 
that which is to come: 


(3) Christ exaltsd to be the Head 
of his body, the church. 


22 And hath put all things under 
his feet, and gave him to be the 
head over all things to the church, 
23. Which is his ‘body, the ¢ful- 
ness of him that filleth all in all. 


Qohn 1.13; Judé 
oe eae ee pet2, |i the *world: , a 
(4) The method of Gentile | 4 *°°°"| 13 But now in Christ Jesus ye ~~ 
salvation. 5 Col.2.8, who sometimes were far off are _ 
& Rom.1.18; i i i> 
et you hath he quickened, | =ph.5.6. ere pes : re ey De 
who were dead in trespasses|’£p4.1.7:27; |(6) Jew and Gentile one body in 


and sins: 
2 Wherein in time past.ye walked 
according to the course of this 


I Cor. 15.273, 
Heb.2.8. 
¢ Church (true). 


12.23. 

4 Or, complement. 
Gen.2.18; Eph,5. 
28-30,32. . 


¢ kosmos = world- 
system. Col.2.20. 
Qohn7 7, Rev. 13. 
3-8, note.) 


f John 12.31; 1 John 
5.19. 


9 sons. 
h Flesh. Eph.6.12. 


Psa.103.8-11. 
m John 3.16; 1 John 
4.9,10. 


n Death (spirit- 
ual), vs.1-5. 


(5) The Gentile position by 
nature, 


11 Wherefore remember, that ye 


’| being in time past Gentiles in the 


flesh,, who are called Uncircum- 
cision by that which is called the 
Circumcision in the flesh made by 
hands; 

12 That at that time ye were with- 
out Christ, being aliens from the 
commonwealth of Israel, and stran- 
gers from the covenants of promise, 


having no hope, and without God ' 


‘hrist. 


14 For he is our peace, who hath 
made both one, and hath broken 


éworld, according to the fprince of | (Gen.2.17.) down the middle wall of partition 
the power of the air, the spirit that Get od between us; 

now worketh in the échildren of}, °2...116 nore, | 15 Having abolished in his flesh 
disobedience: a Eph.1.21; 3.21; |the enmity, even the 4law of com-' 
3 Among whom also we all had fi is rpg 2. mandments contained in: ordi- 


our conversation in times past in 
the lusts of our “flesh, fulfilling the 
desires of the ‘flesh and of the 
jmind; and were by nature the chil- 
dren of #wrath, even as. others. 

4 But God, who is ‘rich in mercy, 
for his “great love wherewith he 
joved us, 

-5 Even when we were !"dead ‘in 
sins, hath °quickened us together 


® Grace (in salv.). 
vs.5,7,8; Col.1.6. 
(Rom.3-24; John 
1.16, note.) 


¢ Faith. Eph.3.17. 
(Gen.3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 


% John 1.12,13. 


» Rom.4:4,5; 11.6, 
“ Rom.3,27; 1 Cor. 
1.26-31. 


© Eph.4.24, note. 


nances; for to make in himself of 
twain one ?new man, so making 
peace; 

16 And that he might reconcile 
both unto God in one body by the 
cross, having slain the enmity 
thereby: 

17 And came and preached peace 
to you which were afar off, and ta 
them that were nigh. 


with Christ, (by “grace ye are|"S37%S\ing | 18 For through him we both have 
$saved;) 2 Law {of Moses).| access by one Spirit unto the Father. 
6 And hath raised us up together, | Phil-3.4-9. (Ex. : 


and made us sit together in heav- 
enly places in Christ Jesus: 

7 That in the gages to come he 
might shew the exceeding riches of 
his grace in Ars *kindness toward 
us through Christ Jesus. 

8 For by ‘grace are ye ?saved 
through ‘faith; and that not of 
yourselves: it is the “gift of God: 

9 Not of *works, lest any man 
should “boast. r 

10 For we are his workmanship, 


1 Death (spiritual), 


19.1; Gal.3.1-29.) 
2 Reconciliction. 
See Col.1,20,21. 
» Holy Spirit. vs. 
18,22; Eph, 3.5,16. 
(Mt, 1,18; Acts 
2.4.) 


2 Church (true).vs. 
19-22;Epb.3.1-10. 
(Mt. 16.18; Heb. 
12.23.) 

7 Christ(as stone). 


Rom.9.32,33. 
(Ex.17.6; 1 Pet. 
2.8.) 


(7) The church a temple for the 
habitation of God through 
the Spirit. 

19 Now therefore ye are no more 
strangers and nee but fel- 
lowcitizens with the saints, and of 
the household of -God; 

20 And are built upon the founda- 
tion of the apostles and prophets, 
Jesus Christ himself being the chief 
corner 4stone; 

21 In whom all the building fitly 


Summary: Spiritual death is the state of the natural or 


unregenerate man as still in his sins (Eph. 2. 1), alienated from the life of God 


J 


cD 


? 


(Eph. 4. 18, 19), and destitute of the Spirit. Prolonged ‘beyond the death of the 
body, spiritual death is a state of eternal separation from God in conscious suffer- 
ing. ‘This is called “‘the second death” (Rev. 2. 11; 20. 6, 14; 21. 8). . 

2 Were the “new man” is not the individual believer but the church, considered 
as the body of Christ in the sense of Eph. 1. 22, 23; 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13; Col. 3. 10, 11. 
(See Heb. 12. 23, note.) i oe 


made known unto me the 4%: 


: is the fellowship. of the smystery. 
Lr, which ?from: the beginning SP eRe 


2 22] 


framed together “groweth unto an 
holy temple in the Lord: : 

22 In whom ye also are- builded |a1cor.3.16,17. 
together for an ‘habitation of God! Holy, sanctify 


atta N.T.). 
through the Spirit. Oras 


(Mt.4.5; Rev.22. 
11.) 


¢ Ex.25.8; 1KI.5.3, 
5; John 2.19-21; 


CHAPTER 3. 
2 Cor.6.16. 


The church a mystery hidden)a christ jesus. 


0: St ages. € Grace (impart- 
fs ilo é é ed). vs. 2-8 Eph. 


Gal.1,12,15,16. 

g Mt.13.11, note. 

h Eph.1.9,10,18-22. 

i generations. 

J Inspiration. vs. 
3-5; Eph.6.17, 
CEx.4.15; 
Rev.22,19.) 

® Sanctify, holy 

(persons) (N. 


Gentiles, ! 

2 If ye have heard of the dispen- 
sation of the ‘grace of God which is 
given me to you-ward: 4 

3 How that by /frevelation he 


‘(as I ‘wrote afore in few ie 


4 Whereby, when ye read, ye may 
understand my knowledge in the 
‘ cry of Christ) _ 
Pee Re in other ‘ages was not 
made known unto the sons of men, 
as it is Inow revealed unto his “holy 
apostles and prophets by the Spirit; 

6 1That the Gentiles should be 
fellowheirs, and of the same body, 
and partakers of his promise in 
Christ by the ‘gospel: 

7 Whereof I was made a minister, 
according to the gift of the grace of 
God given unto me by the effectual 
working of his power. 

8 Unto me, who am less than the 
mleast of all saints, is this grace 
given, that I should preach among 
the Gentiles the °unsearchable 
riches of Christ; 

9 And to make all men see what 


2 Gospel. vs.1-10; 
Eph.6.15-19, 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14,6.) 


m 1 Cor. 15.9; 
1Tim.1.15, 


» Rom.11.13, 
® vs.18,19; Col.2. 
pix Te 


P throughout the 
ages. 


@v.5; Col.1.26, 


8 Eph.1.21; 1Pet. 
1.12. 


t Church (true), 


u Eph. l.4,11. 

v Heb.10.19; 
lJohn 4.18. 

w Bible prayers 
(N.T.), Phill. 
9-11. CMt.6.9; 
Rev. 22.20,). 

2 Eph.1.3. 

u every family. 

2 Eph,1.7; 2.4; 
Phil.4,19, 

@ Col.1.11. 


world hath been ¢hid in God, who 
‘created all things by Jesus Christ: 

10 To the intent that now unto 
the ‘principalities and powers in 
heavenly places might be known 
by the ‘church the manifold wis- 
dom of God, 

11 “According to the eternal pur- 
pose which he purposed in Christ|¢ Fait. phit.3.9. 
Jesus our Lord: Se TTL 

12 In whom we have *boldness|eEph.1.18. 
and access, with confidence by the|/Rom.10.3,11,12, 
faith of him. 


Acts 2.4.) 
¢ John 14:23; 
Col.1.27. 


EPHESIANS. 


7 John 1.3; Heb,1.2. } 


(Parenthetic: the prayer for in- 
ner fulness and knowledge.) 


13 Wherefore I desire. that ye 
faint not at my tribulations for you, 
which is your glory. 

14 For this cause I “bow my 
knees. unto the *Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, xt 

15 Of whom *the whole family in 
heaven and earth is named, 

16 That he would grant you, ac- 
cording to the riches of his glory, 
to be ¢strengthened with might by 
his SSpirit in the inner man; 

17 That “Christ may dwellin your 
hearts by faith; that ye, being 
rooted and grounded in love, 

18 May be “able to comprehend 
with all saints fwhat is the breadth, 
and length, and depth, and height; 

19 And to know the love of Christ, 
which passeth knowledge, that. ye 
might be filled with all the fulness 
of God. 

20: Now unto him that is, able to 
do exceeding abundantly above all 
that we ask or think, according to 
the power that worketh in us, 

21 Unto him be glory in the church 
by Christ Jesus, throughout all 
ages. world without end. Amen. 


CHAPTER 4. 


Part II. The walk and service of 
the believer as in Christ, and 
wa the Spirit (Eph. 4. 
1-5. 17). 


(1) The walk to be worthy 
the position. 


I THEREFORE, the prisoner of 
the Lord, beseech you that ye 
walk worthy of the vocation where- 
with ye are called, 

2 With all lowliness and meek- 
ness, with longsuffering, forbearing 
one another in love; 


3 deavouring to keep the uni 
of eR ing Ropecen the unity 1 
(2) The seven unities to be kept.. 


4 There is one body. and one 
Spirit, even as ye are called in one 
hope of your g; 


: 
1 That the Gentiles were to be saved was no mystery (Rom, 9. 24-33; 10. 19-21),’ 


The mystery “hid in God” 


was the divine purpose to make of Jew and Gentile a 


wholly new. thing—“‘the church, which is his [Christ’s] body,” formed by the bap- 


tism with the Holy 


Jew and Gentile disappears (Eph. 2. 14, 
mystery, which was 
mitted to Paul. In his writings alone 
destiny of the church. 


1252 


Spirit (1 Cor. 12. 12, 13) and in 
15; Col. 3. 10, 14). 
foretold but not explained by Christ (Mt. 16. 18), was com- 

we find the doctrine, Position. walk, and 


which the earthly distinction of 
The revelation. of this 


4 5] 
5 @One Lord, %one faith, cone 


sbaptism, 
i\s One ¢God and Father of all, who 4 
above “all, and through all, and|*4S¢0"* 
ou all. b Gal.1.23; 


(3) The ministry gifts of Christ|.{ ies = 


to his body. 13; Eph.5.30, 


7 But unto every one of us is le 
given grace according to the mea-|e Psa.68.18, 
sure of the gift of Christ. f Mt.5.48, 

8 Wherefore he saith, “When he| 7%. 
ascended up on high, he led captiv-|* Yate fh? 
ity captive, and gave gifts unto 


men. 
_9 (Now that he ascended, what is 
it but that he also descended first} % hold: 
into the lower parts of the earth? |? RoVt7é 
10 He that descended is the same] ;&ph.1.22; 
also that ascended up far above al! 


1 mevery joint 


A.D. 64. 


service. 

# Eph.1,23; 
2.15. 

i Mt.11.7, 


heavens, that he might fill all| of supply. 
things. nv.12. 

1 2 .|0 Col.2.19., 
11 And he !gave 2some, apostles; DP Eph.22. 


and some, prophets; and some, 


1 Deathi(spir. 
evangelists; and some, pastors and|? af (Ait 


itual).vs.18, 


teachers; = Col 2 3. 
en.4. 4 
(4) The purpose of the min- Eph.2.5.) ” 
istry gifts. ? Life (eter- 

nal), Phil.2, 

12 Forthe ‘perfecting of the saints,| 16.(Mt.7.14; 
&for the work of the ministry, for eh Sd 
the edifying of the body of Christ:|* Acts ah 


13 Till we all come i e unity of 
Fee faith ened OF Ce Be ST of have auton 
the Son of God, unto a “*perfect| note. 
man, unto the measure of the|™ being. 
stature of the fulness of Christ: * 2aveputon. 
14 That we henceforth be no)” ®0m-1010, 
more children, tossed to and fro,|zZech.8.16. 
and carried about with every ‘wind | Psa.4.4. 
of doctrine, by the sleight of men,|b Sin. Rom.3. 
and cunning craftiness, whereby| 23, 7°te- 
they lie in wait to deceive; einer 
15 But speaking the truth in love,|* ph.6.11. 
may grow up “into him jn all things, 
which is the “head, even Christ: 
16 From whom the whole body 


Rev.20.10.) 


EPHESIANS. 


[4.28 


fitly joined together and compacted 
by that which every joint sup- 
plieth, according to the effectual 
working in the “measure of every 
part, maketh “increase of the body 
unto the edifying of itself in love. 


(5) The walk of the believer as a 
new man in Christ Jesus. 


17 This I say therefore, and tes- 
tify in the Lord, that ye henceforth 
walk not as other Gentiles walk, 
in the vanity of their mind, 

18 Having the understanding 
darkened, being @alienated from the 
"life of God through the ignerance 
that is in them, because of the 
blindness of their heart: 

19 ‘Who being past feeling have 
given themselves over unto lascivi- 
ousness, to work all uncleanness 
with greediness. 

20 But ye have not so “learned 
Christ; 

21 If so be that ye have heard 
him, and have been taught by him, 
as the truth is in Jesus: 

22 That ye “put off concerning 
the former conversation the "old 
man, which is corrupt according to 
the deceitful lusts; 

23 “And be renewed in the spirit 
of your mind; 

24 And that ye “put on the *new 
man, which after God is created in 
Yrighteousness and true holiness. 

25 Wherefore putting away lying, 
“speak every man truth with his 
neighbour: for we are members one 
of another. 

26 “Be ye angry, and sin not: let 
not the sun go down upon your 
wrath: 

27 Neither give place to the 
ddevil. 

28 Let him that stole steal no 
more: but rather let him labour, 


1 In 1 Cor. 12. 8-28 the Spirit is seen as enduing the members of the body of Christ 
with spiritual gifts, or enablements for a varied service; here certain Spirit-endued 


men, 


the gifts whom the glorified Christ bestows upon His body the church. 
rinthians the gifts are spiritual enablements fo: 


gifts are men who have such enablements. 


viz. apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers, are themselves 


In Co- 


r specific service; in Ephesians the 


2 The Lord, in bestowing the gifted men, determines, providentially (e.g. Acts 11. 


22-26), OF 
service. 


(churches or places) need rather a pastor or teacher. _ 
service is left to mere human judgment or self-choosing. 
service (Acts 16. 7, 8). 


permitted to choose his place of 


directly through the Spirit (e.g. Acts 13. 1, 2; 16. 6, 7), the places of their 
“Some” (churches or places) need one gift, as, e.g. evangelist; 


“some” 
Absolutely nothing in Christ’s 
Even an apostle was not 


3 The new man is the regenerate man as distinguished from the old man (Rom. 6. 


6, note), and is 


life (2 Pet. 1. 4; Col. 3. 3, 4), and in no sense th 


(2 Cor. 5. 17; Gal. 6. 15; Eph. 2.10; Col. 3. 10). 
in the believer (Gal. 2, 20; 4. 19; Col. 1. 27; 
1253 


a new man as having become a partaker of the divine nature and 


e old man made over, or improved 
The new man is Christ, “formed” 


1 John 4. 12). 


q 


working with his hands the thing 
which is good, that he may have to 
“give to him that needeth. 

29 Let no corrupt communication 
proceed out of your mouth, but that 
which is good to the use of ledify- 
ing, that it may minister ‘grace 
unto the hearers. 


(6) The walk of the believer as 
indwelt by the Spirit. 


30 And grieve not the 4holy 
Spirit of God, whereby ye “are 
sealed unto the day of redemption. 

31 Let all bitterness, and wrath, 
and anger, and clamour, and evil 
speaking, be put away from you, 
with all malice: 

32 And be ye kind one to another, 
tenderhearted, ‘forgiving one an- 
other, even as God for Christ’s 
sake hath “forgiven you. 


CHAPTER 5. 


(7) The walk of the believer as 
God’s dear child. 


E ye therefore ‘followers of God, 
as dear children; 

2 And Jwalk in love, as Christ 
also hath loved us, and hath given 
himself for us an offering and a sac- 
rifice to God for a *sweetsmelling 
savour. 

3 But fornication, and all unclean- 
ness, or covetousness, let it not be 
once named among you, as be- 
cometh saints; 

4 Neither filthiness, nor ‘foolish 
talking, nor jesting, which are not 
mconvenient: but rather “giving of 
thanks. 

5 For this ye know, that no whore- 
monger, nor unclean person, nor 
covetous man, who is an “idolater, 
hath any inheritance in the king- 
dom of Christ and of God. 

6 Let no man deceive you with 
vain words: for because of these 
things cometh the wrath of God 
upon the ?children of disobedience. 

7 Be not ye therefore ¢partakers 
with them. 

8 For ye were sometimes dark- 
ness, but now are ye “light in the 
Lord: walk as children of light: 

9 (For the ‘fruit of the ‘Spirit is 
in all goodness and “righteousness 
and truth;) 


1 Christ’s love-work for the church is threefold: 
love He gave Himself to redeem the church (v, 25); 
church (v. 26); (3) for the reward of Hi 


EPHESIANS. 


A.D. 64. 


@ Lk.3.i1. 

b Rom.15.2. 

c Grace (im- 
parted). Phil. 
7.7. (Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 

d@ Holy Spirit. 
vs.4,23,30; 
Eph.5.9,18. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

e Assurance 
Eph.5.29.30. 
(Isa.32.17; 
Jude 1.) 

f Lk.6.33-37. 

gin Christ. 

h Forgiveness. 
Col.2.13. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 

i imitators. 


Cf.1 Cor.11.1. 

j Law (of 
Christ) .1 Pet. 
1.8,22. (Gal.6. 
2; 2 John 5.) 

& Lev.1.9,13, 
17; 2.2. 

12 TVim.2,23; 
Tite3:9; 

m Rom.1.28. 

nv.20; 1 Thes. 
5.18 


-18. 

o 1 Cor.5.i1. 

p sons. 

q1 Tim.5.22. 

71 Thes.5.5. 

s1 John 2.9. 

t light. 

u See 1 John 3. 
7, note. 

0 2 Cor.6.14. 

w v.3. 

x John 3.20,21; 
Heb.4.13. 

y Isa.60:1,2. 

2 Col.4.5. 

a Rom.12.2; 
Col.1.9. 

b Holy Spirit. 
Eph.6.17,18. 
(Mit.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


. 


é Psa.101.1. 

d Psa.34.1, Isa. 
63.7; Phil.4.6; 
Col.3.17; 

1 Thes.5.18. 

e Phil, 2.3; 
iebers:s5: 

f Cf.Gen,3.16. 

g Col.1.18. 

h Church 
(true). vs.23, 
25-27,29-32; 
Col.1.18,24. 
(Mt.16.18; 
Heb.12.23.) 

t Ron..i.16, 
note. 

j Col.3.18; 

1 Pet.3.1,5, 

k Col.3.19. 


Uv.2; cf.Gal. 
2.20. 


10 Proving what is acceptabl 
unto the Lord. 3 

11 And have ’no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, 
but rather reprove them. 5 

12 For it is a “shame even to 
speak of those things which are done 
of them in secret. 

13 But all things that are re- 
proved are *made manifest by the 
light: for whatsoever doth make 
manifest is light. 

14 Wherefore he saith, »Awake 
thou that sleepest, and arise from 
the dead, and Christ shall give thee 
light. 

15 See then that ye walk circum- 
spectly, not as fools, but as wise, 
16 #Redeeming the time, because 
the days are evil. 3 
17 Wherefore be ye not unwise, 
*but understanding what the will. 

of the Lord is. 


Part IV. The walk and warfare 
of the believer as filled with 
the Spirit (Eph. 5. 18-6. 24). 

18 And be not drunk with wine, 
wherein is excess; but be filled with 
the Spirit; 

(i) The inner life af the Spirit- 

filled believer. 

Iganbealking to yourselves in® 
psalms and hymns and _ spiritual 
songs, Singing and making ‘melody 
in your heart to the Lord; ; 

20 4Giving thanks always for all 
things unto God and the Father in 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; 


(2) The married life of Spirit- 
filled believers as illustrating 
Christ and the church. 


21 ‘Submitting yourselves one to 
another in the fear of God. ; 

22 Wives, submit yourselves unto 
your own husbands, as unto the 
Lord. 

23 For the husband is sthe head 

of the wife, even as Christ is the 
head of the ’church: and he is the 
‘saviour of the body. 
_24 Therefore as the church isfsub- 
ject unto Christ, so let the wives be 
to. their own husbands in every 
thing. 

25 *Husbands, love your wives, 
leven as Christ also loved the 
‘church, and gave himself for it; 


(1) For 


past, present, future: 
in love he is sanctifying the 


(2) 


is sacrifice and labaur of love He will present 


the church to Himself in flawless perfection, “‘one pearl of great price” (v. 27; Mt. 


13. 46). 


1254 


iy 


rt 


wr ys 
76) 


EPHESIANS. 


[6 18 


26 That he might ¢sanctify and 
cleanse it with the washing of 
water by the word, 

27 That he might present it to 
himself a glorious church, ‘not hav- 
ing spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing; but that it should be holy. 
and without blemish. 

28 So ought men to love their 
wives as their own bodies. He that 
loveth his wife loveth himself. 

29 For no man ever yet hated his 
own flesh; but nourisheth and cher- 
isheth it, even as ¢the Lord the 
church: 

30 For we are ‘members of his 
body, of his flesh, and of his bones. 


31 /For this cause shall a man]; 
leave his father and mother, andj; 


shall be joined unto his wife, and 
they two shail be one flesh. | 
gd 2 This is a great &mys : but 


"I speak concerning Chris? and the “ pl 


lkchurch. 

33 Nevertheless let every one of 
you in particular so love his wife; 
even as himself; and the wife see 
that she ‘reverence her husband. 


CHAPTER 6. 


(3) The domestic life of Spirit- 
filled believers as children and| 
servants. 


HILDREN, “obey your parents 
in the Lord: for this is right. 

2 *Honour thy father and mother; 
which is the first commandment 
with promise; 

3 That it may be well with thee, 
and thou mayest live long on the 
earth. 

4 And, ye fathers, “provoke not 
your children to wrath: but bring 
them up in the "nurture and ad- 
monition of the Lord. 

5 Servants, be obedient to them 
that are your masters according to 
the flesh, with fear and trembling, 
in singleness of your heart, as unto 
Christ; : 

6 Not with °eyeservice, as men- 
pleasers; but as the servants of 
Christ, doing the will of God from 
the heart; 


A.D. 64. 


a Senctify, 


holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 


c Song 4.7. 

d Christ. 

e Assurance. 
vs.29,30; Phil. 
1.6. (Isa.32. 
17; Jude 1.) 

f Gen.2.24. 

gMt.13.11,note 

h Bride (of 

Christ). Rev. 

19.6-8. (John 

3.29; Rev.19. 

6-3.) 


1 Col.3.21. 


o ; 
pb Col.3.24,25. 
q1 Pet.2.23. 

r Col.4.1. 

5 Col.3.25. 

t Josh.1.5,6,9. 

u Rom.13.12; 

2 Cor.6.7. 

v Satan. 

1 Thes.2.18. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

w Flesh. Phil. 
3.3,4. (John 
1.13; Jude 23.) 

x world-rulers 
of this dark- 
ness. 

y the heaven- 


lies. 
2v.11;2Cor.10.4,; 


a 1sa.11.5; Lk. 
12.35; 1 Pet, 


213. 
b Isa.59.17; 
2 Cor.6.7; 
1 Thes.5.8. 
c1sa.52.7; 
Rom.10.15. 
d1 John 5.4. 
e wicked one. 
f Rom.1.16, 
note. f 
g Inspiration. 
1 Tim.4.1. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 
hk Col.4.2; 1 
Thes,5.17,18. 
+ Holy Spirit. 
vs.17,18; Phil. 
1.19, (Mt.1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 


7 With good will doing service, as 
to the Lord, and not to men: 

8 Knowing that whatsoever good 
thing any man doeth, the same shall. 


- |he ?receive of the Lord, whether he 
be bond or free. : 


9 And, ye masters, do the same 

things unto them, /¢forbearing 
threatening: knowing that ‘your 
Master also is in heaven; neither 
is there Srespect of persons with 
im. 


(4) The warfare of Spirit-filled 
believers. 


(a) The warrior’s power. 
10 Finally, my brethren, ‘be 
strong in the Lord, and in the power 
of his might. 
(b) The warrior’s armour. 
11 Put on the whole “armour. o 


against the wiles of the ‘devil. 


(c) The warrior’s foes. 


12 For we wrestle not against 
wflesh and blood, but against princi- 
palities, against powers, against 
the “rulers of the darkness of this 
world, against spiritual wickedness 
in Yhigh places. 


zwhole armour of God, that ye may 
be able to withstand in the evil day, 
and having done ail, to stand. 
‘14 Stand therefore, having “your 
loins girt about with truth, and 
having on the “breastplate of right- 
eousness; 
15 And your feet shod with the 
preparation of the gospel of peace; 
16 Above all, taking the ¢shield 


13 Wherefore take unto you the CF 


of faith, wherewith ye shall be able {~ 
to quench all the fiery darts of the aft 


ewicked. 

17. And take the helmet of fsalva- 
tion, and the sword of the Spirit, 
which is the ¢word of God: 


(d) The warrior’s resource. 
18 'Praying always with all 
prayer and supplication in the 
Spirit, and watching thereunto 
with all perseverance and supplica- 
tion for all saints; 


1 Verses 30, 31 are quoted from Gen. 2. 23, 24, I 
that the reference is to the church merely as the body of Christ. 
“bone of his bones, an 1 
she was also his wife, united to him in a relation which makes of “‘twain . 


Adam’s body, was truly 


and exclude the interpretation 
Eve, taken from 
and flesh of his flesh,” but 
. one 


flesh” (Mt. 19. 5, 6), and so a clear type of the church as bride of Christ (see 2 Cor. 


i1.2, 3). 


The bride types are Eve (Gen. 2. 23, 24); Rebecca (Gen. 24, 1-7, note); 


Asenath (Gen. 41. 45; note-under ‘Gen. 37. 2); Zipporah (Ex. 2.21). See Hos. 2. 


1-23, note. 


1255 


- 


f Riacteas' 2 


God, that ye may be able to sand ; 


if 


EPHESIANS. 


6 19] 
A.D.64. ter in the Lord, shall make known 


19 And for me, “that utterance 
may be given unto me, that I may|; ads4.20: _|to you all things: 
oye, ODEN Re, egg E cane) to make ‘ Cols 2. ; ae ieee I have ee unto — 
( own the 4mystery the “gos-|.2Mt.13.11,note|for the same purpase, that ye might 
Loe 1, eee © Pospet fl | now our affairs, and that he might 
20 For which I am an ambas-} Gen.12.1-3; |fcomfort your hearts. 
sador in bonds: that therein I) , Rev-14-6.) 23 Peace be to the brethren, and 
may speak boldly, as I ought to|“3%in4ai2; |Slove with faith, from God the 
cere : . Tit:3.12. : Father and the Lord Jesus: Christ. 
aifiire; anc how ¥ do, Pty ebicus, ot STs, Hlove cue Lostodemna Chast chanel 
beloved brother and ¢faithful minis-|2 1 Cor.16.24. icerity. Amen. 


1256 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


ve) PHILIPPIANS: 80.02 


Writer. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 

_Date. The date of Philippians cannot be positively fixed. It is one of the 
prison letters. Whether Paul was twice imprisoned, and if so, whether. Philippians 
was written during the first or second imprisonment, affects in no way the message 
of the Epistle. A.D. 64 is the commonly received date. The immediate occasion 
of pre Epistle ne Ce ee gales 4. 10-18. 

_ Theme. he theme ¢ ilippians is Christian experience. Soundness of doc- 
trine is assumed. There is nothing in church order to set right. Philippi is a bes 
mal New Testament assembly—‘‘saints in Christ Jesus, with the bishops (elders) 
and deacons.” — The circumstances of the apostle are in striking contrast with his 
Christian experience. As to the former, he was Nero’s prisoner. - As to the latter, 
there was the shout of victory, the pean of joy. Christian experience, he would 
teach us, is not something which is going on around the believer, but something 
which is going on within him. 

The key-verse is, ‘‘For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain” (1. 21). Right 

Christian experience, then, is the outworking, whatever one’s circumstances may 
be, of the life, nature, and mind of Christ living in us (1. 6, 11; 2. 5, 13). 
“gh The divisions are indicated by the chapters: I. Christ, the believer’s life, re- 
joicing in suffering, 1. 1-30. II. Christ, the believer’s pattern, rejoicing in lowly 
service, 2. 1-30. III. Christ, the believer’s object, rejoicing despite imperfections, 
3. 1-21. IV. Christ, the believer’s strength, rejoicing over anxiety, 4. 1-23. 


A.D. 64 me 
: 7 Even as it is meet for me to 
CHAPTER 1. a Churches |think this of you all, because I have 
Part I. Christ, the believer’s life. (omnes 41) |vou in my heart; inasmuch as both 
rejoicing in spite of suffering)» Or, over- |i my bonds, and in the defence and 
(Phil. 1. 1-30). — See |confirmation of the gospel, ye all 
(1) Salutation. ‘ Tian 3.1,2. are partakers of ’my grace. 
AUL and Timotheus, the ser- Titt55) ley ieee ae er 
vants of Jesus Christ, to @all|¢=ph-1.2. suffering. 
the saints in Christ Jesus !which oot ie: | 8 For God is my record, how 
are at Philippi, with the “bishops a THe greatly I long after you all in the 
and deacons: esigence:_|bowels of Jesus Christ. 

2 Grace be unto you, ‘and peace,| (1sa.32.17; 9 And this I ‘pray, that your love 
from God our Father, and fromthe] Jude 1.). may abound yet more and more in 
Lord Jesus Christ. g i Cer hd knowledge and in all judgment; 

3 I thank my God upon every]; Grace (im- | 10 That ye may approve things 
drer-embrance of you, parted). |that are excellent; that ye may be 

4 Always in every “prayer of mine GoneR |sincere and without offence till the 
for you all making request with joy,| 2 Pet.3.18.) | sday of Christ; | ? 

5 For your fellowship in the gos-| i Bible 11 Being filled with the fruits of 
pel from the first day until now; IN). jrighteousness, which are by Jesus 

6 Being confident of this very] Goi.1.9-11, |Christ, unto the glory and praise of 
thing, that he which hath /begun a| (Mt.6.9; God. 
good work in you will perform it Rev.22.20.) 12 But I would ye should under- 


note. 


until the day of Jesus Christ: ji john 3.7, |tand, brethren, that the things 


1 Churches (local), Summary: A local church is an assembly of professed believ- 
ers on the Lord Jesus Christ, living for the most part in one locality, who assemble 
themselves together in His name for the breaking of bread, worship, praise, prayer, 
testimony, the ministry of the word, discipline, and the furtherance of the Gospel 
(Heb. 10. 25; Acts 20. 7; 1 Cor. 14. 26; 1 Cor. 5.4, 5; Phil. 4. 14-18; 1 Thes. 1. 8; Acts 
13.,1-4). Such a church exists where two or three are thus fathered (Mt. 18. 20). 
Every such local church has Christ in the midst, is a temple of God, and indwelt 
by the Holy Spirit (1 Cor. 3. 16, 17). When perfected in organization a local church 
consists of “saints, with the bishops [elders] and deacons.” 

1257 


1 13) 


which happened unto me have 
fallen out rather unto the further- 
ance of the gospel; ’ 

13 So that my bonds 4in Christ 
are manifest in all “the palace, ‘and 
in all other places; 7 

14 And many of the brethren in 
the Lord, waxing confident by my 
bonds, are much more bold to 
speak the word without fear. | 

15 Some indeed preach Christ 
even of envy and strife; and some 
also of good will: : 

16 The one preach Christ of con- 
tention, not sincerely, supposing to 
add affliction to my bonds: ; 

17 But the other of love, knowing 
that I am set for the defence of the 
gospel. ; “ 

18 What then? notwithstanding, 
every way, whether in pretence, or 
in truth, Christ is preached; and I 
therein do rejoice, yea, and will 
joice. 

19 ForI know that ¢4this shall turn 
to my salvation through your 
ean and the supply of the 

Spirit of Jesus Christ, 

20 According to my earnest ex- 
pectation and my hope, that in 
nothing I shall be ashamed, but 
that with all Sboldness, as always, 
so now also Christ shall be magni- 
fied in my body, whether it be by 
life, or by death. 

21 For to me to live is Christ, 
and to /die is gain. 

22 But if I live in the flesh, this 
is the fruit of my labour: yet what 
I shall choose I wot not. 

23 For I am in a strait betwixt 
two, having a ‘desire to depart, and 
to be with Christ; which is /far 
better: 

24 Nevertheless to abide in the 
flesh is more needful for you, 

25 And having this confidence, I 
know that I shall abide and con- 
tinue with you all for your further- 
ance and joy of faith; 

26 That your rejoicing may be 
more abundant in * Jesus Christ for 
me by my coming to you again. 

27 Only let your ‘conversation 
be as it becometh the gospel of 
Christ: that whether I come and 
see you, or else be absent, I may 


Te-|7 


PHILIPPIANS. 


A.D. 64. 


a Or, for. 


b Or, Cesar's 
court. Phil. 
4.22. 


cOr, to all 
others. 

d Job 13.16, 
Septuagint. 

e Rom.1.16, 
note. 

f Holy Spirit. 
Phil.2.1. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

g Eph.6.19,20. 

hk Death 
(physical). 
vs.21-23; 

2 Pet.1.13,14. 


j Psa.16.11. 


k Christ 
Jesus. 


l manner 
of life. 


m Gospel. vs.5, 


7,12,17,27; 
Phil.2.22. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


n Acts 5.41. 


o Acts 16.19; 
1 Thes.2.2. 


? Holy Spirit. 
Phil.3.3. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

q Col.3.12. 


r Gal.5.26; 
Jas.3.14. 


s faction. 


t ostentation. 


u 1 Cor.13.5. 
v John 13.14; 
1 Pet.2:21. 
wa thing to 
be grasped 
after. See 
Gen.3.5-6. 

x Or, emptied 
himself. 

4 Psa.8.4-6. 

z Psa.40.6-8. 

a Heb.2.9; 
Rev.3.21. 


S| 


' 
hear of your affairs, that ye stand 
fast in one spirit, with one mind 
striving together for the faith of 
the gospel; > 

28 And in nothing terrified by 
your adversaries: which is to them 
an evident token of perdition, but 
to you of “salvation, and that of 
God. 

29 For unto you it is “given in the 
behalf of Christ, not only to believe 
on him, but also to suffer for his 
sake; 

30 Having the same conflict which 
ye Osaw in me, and now hear to be 
in me. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Part IT. Christ the believer’s pat- 
tern, rejoicing in lowly service 
(Phil. 2. 1-30). 

(1) Exhortation to unity and 
meekness. 


yF there be therefore any consola- 
tion in Christ, if any comfort of 
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, 
if any bowels and mercies, 

2 Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like- 
minded, having the same love, be- 
ing of one accord, of one mind. 

3 Let nothing be done through 
Sstrife or ‘vainglory; but in lowli- 
ness of mind let each esteem other 
better than themselves. 

4 Look not every man on “his own 
things, but every man also on the 
things of others. 


(2) The sevenfold self-humbling 
of Christ. 

5 Let *this mind be in you, which 
was also in Christ Jesus: 

6 Who, being in the !form of God, 
thought it not “robbery to be equal 
with God: 

7 But *made himself of no reputa- 
tion, and took upon him the form 
of a servant, and Ywas made in the 
likeness of men: 

8 And being found in fashion as a 
man, 2he humbled himself, and be- 
came obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross. 


(3) The exaltation of Jesus. 
§ “Wherefore God also hath high- 


1 “Form,” etc., Gr. en morphe, “the form by which a person or thing strikes the 


vision, the external appearance.’’—Thayer. 


Cf. John 17.5: “The glory which I had 


with Thee before the world was.” Nothing in this passage teaches that the Eternal 


Word (John 1. 1) emptied Himself of either His divine nature, 
only of the outward and visible manifestation of the Godhead. 
Himself of the insignia of Majesty.” —Lightfoot. 
exercised His divine attributes.”—Moorehead. Cf. 


1258 


or His attributes, but 
“He emptied, stripped 
“When occasion demanded He 
John 1. 1, note; 20. 28, note 


a ‘ 


3 


2 10) 


PHILIPPIANS. 


[39 


ly exalted him, and given him a 
name which is above every name: 

10 That at the name of Jesus 
@every knee should bow, of things 
in heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth; 

11 And that every tongue should 
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father. 


(4) The outworking of the in- 
worked salvation. 


12 Wherefore, my beloved, as ye 
have always obeyed, not as in my 
presence only, but now much more 
in my absence, ‘work out your own 
dsalyation with fear and trembling. 

13 Foritis God which worketh in 
you both to will and to do of his 
good pleasure. : 

14 Do all things without /mur- 
murings and disputings: 

15 That ye may be blameless and 
harmless, the &sons of God, without 


rebuke, in the midst of a crooked|”” 


and perverse ‘nation, among whom 
ye shine as lights in the ‘world; 

16 Holding forth the word of ‘life; 
that I may rejoice in *the day of 
Christ, that I have not run in vain, 
neither laboured in vain. 


(5) The apostolic example. 


17 Yea, and if I be /offered upon 
the sacrifice and service of your 
faith, I joy, and rejoice with you 


18 For the same cause also do ye 
joy, and rejoice with me. 

19 But I “trust in the Lord Jesus 
to send *Timotheus shortly unto 
you, that I also may be of good com- 
fort, when I know your state. 

20 ForIhavenoman “likeminded, 
whowill naturally care for your state. 

21 For all seek their own, not the 
things which are Jesus Christ’s. 

22 But ye know the proof of him, 
that, as a son with the father, he 
hath served with me in the gospel. 

23 Him therefore I hope to send 
presently, so soon as I shall see how 
it will go with me. 

24 But I trust in the Lord that I 
also myself shall come shortly. 

25 Yet I supposed it necessary to 
send to you %Epaphroditus, my 
brother, and companion in labour, 
and fellowsoldier, but your messen- 
ger, and he that ministered to my 
wants. 

26 For he longed after you all, and 
was full of heaviness, because that 
ye had heard that he had been sick. 

27 For indeed he was sick nigh 


A.D. 64. 


unto death: but God had mercy on 
him; and not on him only, but on 


.|me also, lest I should have sorrow 


a Tsa.45.23; 
Rey.5.13. 

b John 13.13;' 
Rom.14.9. 

c John 6.27,29; 
Heb.4.11; 
2 Pet.1.5,10. 

d Rom.1.16, 
note. 

e Heb.13.21. 

J 1 Cor.10.10. 

g children. 

h generation. 
Deut.32.5. 

i kosmos (Mt. 

4.8) = man- 

kind. 

Life (eter- 

nal). Phil.4. 

3. (Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

k1 Cor.1.8, 
note. 

1 poured out 
as a drink- 


J 


unto me. 

p Gospel. Phil. 
4.3,15. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 

q Phil.4.18. 

r Mt.10.40. 

s1 Thes.5.16. 

12 Pet.1.12,15. 

u Isa.56.10,11. 

v Psa.119.115. 

w Gal.5.1,3. 

x Holy Spirit. 
Col.1.8. (Mt. 
1.18; Acts 2. 


4. 

y Flesh. vs.3, 
4; Col.2.11, 
23. (John 1. 
13; Jude 23.) 

z Acts 23.6. 

a Church (vis- 
ible). 1 Tim. 
3.15. (1 Cor. 
10.32; 1 Tim. 
3.15.) 

6 Rom.10.3, 
note. 

c Isa.53.11; 
Jer.9.23,24; 
John 17.3; 

1 Cor.2.2. 
d@ 2 Cor.11.25, 


1 Tim.1.8,9. 
(Ex.19.1; 
9.) 


(Gen.3.20; 

Heb.11.39.) 
g Kom.3.21, 

note. 


1259 


upon sorrow. 

28 I sent him therefore the more 
carefully, that, when ye see him 
again, ye may rejoice, and that I 
may be the less sorrowful. 

29 *Receive him therefore in the 
Lord with all gladness; and hold 
such in reputation: 

30 Because for the work of Christ 
he was nigh unto death, not regard- 
ing his life, to supply your lack of 
service toward me. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part HI. Christ, object of the 
believer’s faith, desire, and 
expectation (Phil. 3. 1-21). 


(1) Warning against Judaizers. 


ease ee my brethren, ‘rejoice 
inthe Lord. To write the ‘same 
things to you, to me indeed is not 
grievous, but for you it rs safe. 

2 Beware of “dogs, beware of "evil 
workers, beware of the “concision. 
3 For we are the circumcision, 
which worship God in the “spirit, 
and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have 
no confidence in the flesh. 


(2) Warning against trusting in 
legal righteousness. 


4 Though I might also have con- 
fidence in the flesh. If any other 
man thinketh that he hath whereof 
he might trust in the flesh, I more: 

5 Circumcised the eighth day, of 
the stock of Israel, of the tribe of 
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the He- 


brews; as touching the law, a 
2Pharisee; * , 
6 Concerning zeal, persecuting 


4the church; touching the bright- 
eousness which is in the law, blame- 
less. 


(3) Christ, object of the believ- 
er’s faith for righteousness. 


7 But what things were gain to 
me, those I counted loss for Christ. 

8 Yea doubtless, and I count all 
things but loss for the excellency of 
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my 
Lord: for whom I have 4suffered the 
loss of all things, and do count them 
but dung, that I may win Christ, 

9 And be found in him, not hav- 
ing mine own righteousness, which is 
of the law, but that which isthrough 
the ‘faith of Christ, ¢the righteous- 
ness which is of God by faith: 


3 10) 


(4) Christ, object of the believ- 
ers desire for fellowship in 
resurrection power. 


10 That I may know him, and the 
power of his resurrection, and the 
“fellowship of his sufferings, be- 
ing made conformable unto his 
death; 

11 If by any means I might at- 
tain unto the resurrection °of the 
dead. _ 

12 Not as though I had already 
attained, either were already “per- 
fect: but I follow after, if that I may 
apprehend that for which also I 
am apprehended of Christ Jesus. 

13 Brethren, I count not myself to 
have apprehended: but this one 
thing I do, forgetting those things 
which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things-which are 
before, 

14 I 4press toward the ¢mark for 
the prize of the thigh calling of God 
in Christ Jesus. 


(5) The appeal for unity in the 
walk. 


15 Let us therefore, as many as be 
“perfect, be thus minded: and if in 
ary thing ye be otherwise minded, 
4God shall reveal even this unto 
you. 

16. Nevertheless, whereto we have 
already attained, let us walk by the 
same rule, let us mind the same 
thing. 

(6) But truth is not to ‘be com- 
promised for the sake of unity. 


17 Brethren, be followers together 
of me, and mark them which walk 
so as ye have us “for an ensample. 

18 (For many walk, of whom I 
have told you often, and now tell 
you even weeping, that they are| 
the enemies of the cross of ‘Christ: 

19 Whose end is destruction,| 
whose God is their belly, and 
whose glory is in their shame, who 
mind earthly things.) | 


(7) Christ, object of the believ- 
er’s expectation. 


20 For our *conversation is in 
heaven; ‘from whence also we look 
for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus 
Christ: 


21 Who shall "change our vile 
body, that it may be fashioned like 
unto his glorious body, according 
to the working whereby he is able 


8 


PHILIPPIANS. 


eee to subdue all things unto ay) 


CHAPTER 4. 
Part IV. Christ, the believer's 


strength, rejoicing over anx- 
tety (Phil. 4. 1-23). 


A.D. 64. 


a1 Pet.4.13. 
6 from 


among. (1)Exhortation to unity and joy. 
¢ Be ante HEREFORE, my _ brethren 
d1 pee aa dearly beloved and longed for, 

Heb.12.1.' |my joy and %crown, so stand fast in 

1 the Lord, my dearly beloved. 

ae 2 I beseech Euodias, and beseech 
f upward. Syntyche, that they be of the same 
g Gal.5.10. mind in the Lord. 
h Hos.6.3; 3 And I intreat thee also, true 

Jas.1.5. yokefellow, help those women 
¢1Pet.5.3. |Which laboured with me in the gos- 
fzPeed pel, with Clement also, and with 


ie . |other my fellowlabourers, whose 
k citizenship. |names are in the book ‘of life, 
1 Christ (Sec-| 4 Rejoice in the Lord alway: and 


ond Aaron). again I say, Rejoice. 
1 Thes.1.9,10. 
(eeiee (2) The secret of the peace of 
Acts 1.9-11.) God. 

m Rom.1.16, 5 Let your ‘moderation be known 
note, 


unto all men. ‘The Lord js at hand. 
6 “Be careful for nothing; but in 


n Resurrec- 


pony was every thing by prayer and suppli- 
19.25; 1 Cor. {cation with thanksgiving let your 
15.52.) requests be made known unto God. 
o body of hu-| 7 And the *peace of God, which 
miliation. |passeth all understanding, shall 
pbody of  |Keep your hearts and minds through 
&lory Christ Jesus. 
g gh a: (3) The presence of the God of 
(Dan-12.3; peace. 
1 Cor3.14.) | 8 Finally, brethren, whatsoever 
r Life (eter- |things are “true, whatsoever things 
ral ee 4,|are *honest, whatsoever things are 
Rev.22,19.) '|*just, whatsoever things are “pure, 
Pectesnie whatsoever things are lovely, 
* |whatsoever things are of good re- 
om lay go, |Port; if there be any virtue, and if 
~~” |there be any praise, think on these 
“DBeisy, _|things. 
Bade 9 Those things, which ye have 
2 Cee tes, \both learned, and received, and 
; heard, and seen in me, do: and *the 
wEph.4.25. |God of peace shall be with you. 
‘ sane (4) The victory over anxiouscare. 
iSeb.t7. 10 But I rejoiced in the Lord 
r greatly, that now at the last your 
@1 Cor.13. care of me hath flourished again: 
> Heb.13.20. {wherein ye were also careful, but ye 
cGr,isre- |lacked opportunity. 
vived, 11 Not that I speak in respect of 
d Omit want: for I have learned, in what- 
“there. soever state Iam, ¢therewith to be 
with. content. 
e Heb.13.5. 12 I know both how-to be abased, 


and I know how to abound: every 
where and in all things I am in- 


1260 


4 13] PHILIPPIANS. [4 23 


structed both to be full and to be 
hungry, both to abound and to suffer 
Beed: a John 15.5; 

13 I can do alt things through} ? 12-9 
Christ which strengtheneth me. 

14. Notwithstanding ye-have well 
done, that ye did communicate with 
my affliction. 

15 Now ye Philippians know also, 


18 But I chave ali, and abound: I 
am full, having received of Epaph- 
roditus the things which were sent 
‘from you, an odour of a sweet smell, 
b Gospel. vs.3,)a 4sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing 

15; Col.1.5, to ¢ V 1 
19 But my God shall ¢supply all 
your need according to his riches in 
glory by Christ Jesus. 


that in the beginnioe of the gospel, | ° OF, have re- ray Nom unto God and our Father 
when I departed from Macedonia, e glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
no church communicated with me gioacn ice 21 Salute every saint in Christ 
as concerning giving and receiving,| {{"2>*- |Jesus. The brethren which are 


but ye only. | priest’s). _ |with me greet you. 

16 Forevenin Thessalonicaye sent ena, 22 All the saints salute you, 
Cy Ens SER Re A 0 Sell heap teen eae 
but I desire fruit that may abound] ¢ Psa.23.1. 23 The grace of our Lord Jesus 
to your account. Christ be with you all. Amen. 


1261 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


COLOSSIANS. 


WriTtER. The Apostle Paul (1.1). P 

Date. Colossians was sent by the same messenger who bore Ephesians and 
Philemon, and was probably written at the same time. 

Theme. Epaphras, who laboured in the Word in the assembly at Colosse, was 
Paul’s fellow-prisoner at Rome. Doubtless from him Paul learned the state of that 
church. As to fundamentals that state was excellent (1. 3-8), but ina subtle way 
two forms of error were at work: The first was legality in its Alexandrian form 
of asceticism, “‘touch not, taste not,” with a trace of the Judaic observance of ‘‘days”: 
the object of which was the mortification of the body (cf. Rom. 8. 13). The sec- 
ond form of error was false mysticism, “intruding into those things which he hath 
not seen’’—the result of philosophic speculation. Because these are ever present 
perils, Colossians was written, not for that day only, but for the warning of the 
church in all days. } ; 

The Epistle is in seven divisions: I. Introduction, 1. 1-8. II. The apostolic 
prayer, 1. 9-14. III. The exaltation of Christ, Creator, Redeemer, Indweller, 1. 
15-29. IV. The Godhead incarnate in Christ, in whom the believer is complete, 
2. 1-23, V. The believer’s union with Christ in resurrection life and glory, 3. 1-4. 


11] [1 16 


VI. Christian living, the fruit of 
fellowship, 4. 7-18. 


CHAPTER 1, 


Part I, Introduction: the apos- 
tolic greeting (vs. 1-8). 


pat. an apostle of Jesus Christ 
by the will of God, and Timo- 
theus our brother, , 

2 To the saints and faithful 
brethren in Christ which are at 
Colosse: Grace be unto you, and 
peace, from God our Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

3 We give thanks to God and the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
praying always for you, 

4 Since we heard of your faith in 
Christ Jesus, and of the love which 
ye have to all the saints, 

5S For the hope which is laid up 
for you in heaven, whereof ye 
heard before in the word of the 
truth of the gospel; 

6 Which is come unto you, as it 
is in all the *world; and %bringeth 
forth fruit, as it doth also in you, 
Since the day ye heard of it, and 
knew the “grace of God in truth: 

7 As ye also learned of 4Epaphras 
our dear fellowservant, who is for 
you a ‘faithful minister of Christ; 

8 Who also declared unto us your 
love in the Spirit. 


Part II. The apostle’s seven- 


fold prayer (vs. 9-14), 
9 For this cause we also, since 


union with 


A.D. 64. 


@i.e. earth, 


6 Mk.4.8; John 15. 
46; Phil.1.11. 


2 Th 
(Rom.3.24; John 
1.16, nole.) 


4 Col.4.12; Phm. 
B35 


© Grace (in salv.). 
es.2.16. 


¢1 Cor.4.1,2; Eph. 
6.21. 


F Holy Spirit. 
1 Thes.1.5,6. 


(Mt.1.18; Acts 2. 
4.) 


9 Bible prayers 
(N.T.). 
Rev.22.20.) 

A Rom.12.2; Eph. 
5.10,17. 

i Eph.1.8. 


J Eph.4.1; Phil.1. 
27; 1 Thes.2.12. 


® Rom.15.2; 1 Cor. 
10.33; 1 Thes.4.1. 


1 John 15.16; 2 Cor. 
9.8; Phil.1.11; 


m 2 Pet.3.18, 

m Eph.3.16; 6.10. 

© 2Cor,6.4; 12.12; 
Eph.4.2. 

P 2 Cor.8.2; Heb. 
10.34. 

9 the Son of his 
love, 

r Rom.3.24, note, 


8 Eph.1.7. 


£2 Cor.4.4; 
Heb. 1.3. 


u Rev,3.14, 
vohn1.3;Heb.1.3, 


1262. 


1 Thes. 
3.10-13. (Mt.6.9; 


Christ, 3. s-4. 6. VII. Christian 


the day we heard it, do not cease to 
Spray for you, and to desire that ye 
might be filled with the “knowledge 
of his will in ‘all wisdom and spirit- 
ual understanding; 

10 JThat ye might walk worthy of 
the Lord unto all *pleasing, being 
‘fruitful in every good work, and in- 
creasing in the “knowledge of God; 

il Strengthened with all might, 
according to his glorious power, 
unto all °patience and longsuffering 
with joyfulness; 

12 Giving thanks unto the Father, 
which hath made us meet to be 
partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light: 

13 Who hath delivered us from 
the power of darkness, and hath 
translated us into the kingdom of 
this dear Son: 

14 In whom we have ’redemption ~ 


through his blood, even the for- 
giveness of sins: 


Part III. The exaltation of 
Christ (vs. 15-29), 


(1) The seven superiorities of 
Christ. 


15 Who is the ‘image of the in- 
visible God, the “firstborn of every - 
creature: 

16 For *by him were all things 
created, that are in heaven, and 
that are in earth, visible and invisi- 
ble, whether they be thrones, or 


COLOSSIANS. 


[2 8 


Pel 17] 
dominions, or principalities, or pow- 
ers: 4all things were created by 
him, and for him: 

17 And %he is before all things, 
and by him <all things consist. 

18 And he is the ¢head of the 
body, the church: who is the begin- 
ning, the firstborn ‘from the dead; 
that in all things he might have the 
preeminence. 

19 fFor it pleased the Father 
that in him should all fulness dwell; 


(2) The reconciling work of 
Christ. 


20 And, having made — peace 

. st of his cross, by 
* him to reconcile ail things unto him- 
self; by him, J say, whether they be 
things in earth, or things in heaven. 

21 And you, that were sometime 
alienated and enemies in your mind 
by wicked works, yet now hath he 
reconciled 

22 *In the body of his flesh 
through death, to present you fholy 
and unblameable and unreprove- 
able “in his sight: 

23 If ye continue in the faith 
grounded and settled, and be not 
moved away from the hope of the 
?gospel, which ye have heard, and 
which was “preached to every crea- 
ture which is under heaven; 
whereof I Paul “am made a min- 
ister; 


(3) The mystery of the indwell- 
ing Christ. 


24 Who now rejoice in my suffer- 
ings for you, and fill up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ 
in my flesh for his body’s sake, 
which is the °church: : 

25 Whereof I am made a min- 
ister, according to the dispensation 
of God which is given to me for you, 
to ey “ word of Coe esta 

26 Even the ¢mys which hat 

been hid from aes aca from gen- 
erations, but now is made manifest 
to his saints: 

27 To whom God would make 
known what is the riches of the 

welory of this Smystery among the 


, 1 Reconciliation. 


occurs, Rom. 5. 10; 11. 15; 1 Cor. 7. 11; 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. 


A.D. 64. 


@ Rom. 11.36; 
Heb.2.10. 


> John 17.5. 

¢ Heb,1.3. 

@ Eph.1.22. 

6 Rey.1.5. 

JS For in himall the 
fulness of the 
Godhead was 
pleased to dwell, 

@ Sacrifice (of 
Christ). Heb.7. 
27. (Gen.4.4; 
Heb, 10.18.) 

h Reconciliation. _ 
vs.20,21; see 
Rom.5.10. 

7 Eph.2.15,16. 

J Sanctify, holy 
(persons) (N. 
T.). Col.3.12. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev.22. 
ll.) 


k Eph.5.27. , 


1 Gospel. vs.5,6, 
23; 1 Thes.1.5, 
(Gen. 12,1-3; 
Rey. 14.6.) 


m Col,1.6. 
% 1 Cor.1.17; Gal. 
2.2. 


© Church (true). 
vs.18-24; Heb.2. 
12, (Mt.16.18; 
Heb. 12.23.) 


P complete. 
@Mt.13.11, nofe. 
7 Eph.3.2-6,. 
8 Mt.13.11, nofe. 
t Eph.4.24, note. 


u Life (eternal). 
Col.3.3,4. (Mt. 
7.14; Rev.22.19.) 


v Acts 20.20,27. 

w Mt.5.48, note. 

# Phil.1.30; Col.1. 
29; 1 Thes.2.2. 

v2 Cor.1.6. 

2 Col.3.14. 

@ Assurance. 

1 Thes.1.5. (Isa. 
32.17; Jude 1.) 

b The best author- 
ities ornit ‘‘and 
of the Father, 
and of Christ.’? 

¢ Eph.1.9; 3.9. 

d ys.8,18; Rom.16. 
18; 2 Cor.11.13; 
Eph.,4.14; 5.6. 

@1 Cor.14.40, 

£1, Pet.5.9. 


9 kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) =man- 
kind, * 


Gentiles; which is ‘Christ “in you, 
the hope of glory: 


28 Whom we preach, *warning_ 


every man, and teaching every man 


in all wisdom; that we may present © 


every man “perfect in Christ Jesus: 

29 Whereunto I also labour, striv- 
ing according to his working, which 
worketh in me mightily. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Part IV. The Godhead incarnate 
in Christ, in whom the be- 
liever is complete (Col.2.1-23). 


FoR I would that ye knew what 
*great conflict I have for you, 
and for them at Laodicea, and for 
as many as have not seen my face 
in the flesh; 

2 2That their hearts might be 
comforted, being *knit together in 
love, and unto all riches of the ¢full 
assurance of understanding, to the 
acknowledgement of the SEY 
of Gods band of the Father, fe) 

ist; 

3 In whom are hid all the trea- 
sures of wisdom and knowledge. 


(1) The danger from enticing 
words. (Cf. Rom. 16. 17, 18; 1 
Cor. 2. 4; 2 Pet. 2.3.) 


4 And this I say, “lest any man 
should beguile you with enticing 
words. 

5 For though I be absent in the 
flesh, yet am I with you in. the 
spirit, joying and “beholding your 
order, and the /stedfastness of 
your faith in Christ. 

6 As ye have therefore received 
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye 
in him: 

7 Rooted and built up in him, and 
stablished in the faith, as ye have 
been taught, abounding therein 
with thanksgiving. 

(2) The twofold warning against 

(a) philosophy, (b) legality. 

8 Beware lest any man spoil you 
through philosophy and vain deceit, 
after the tradition of men, after the 
rudiments of the &world, and not 
after Christ. 


The Greek word signifies ‘‘to change thoroughly from,” and 


Reconciliation looks 


toward the effect of the death of Christ upon man, as propitiation (Rom. 3, 25, note) 
is the Godward aspect, and is that effect of the death of Christ upon the beliey- 
ing sinner which, through divine power, works in him a ‘“‘thorough change” towara 


God from enmity and aversion to love and trust. 


It is never said that God is rccon- 


ciled. God is propitiated, the sinner reconciled (cf. 2 Cor. 5. 18-21). 
2 The “mystery of God” is Christ, as incarnating the fulness of the Godhead, and 
all the divine wisdom and knowledge for the redemption and reconciliation of man. 


1263 


2 9 


(3) Nothing can be added to 
completeness. 


ry 9 For in him ¢dwelleth all the ful- 
* ness of the Godhead bodily. 


10 And ye are complete in him, 
which is the “head of all princi- 
pality and power: ‘ 

11 In whom also ye are “circum- 
cised with the circumcision made 
without hands, in putting off the 
body of “the sins of the flesh by the 
circumcision of Christ: 

12 ‘Buried with him in baptism,| 


COLOSSIANS. 


wherein also ye are risen with Aim 
through the faith of the foperation 
of God, whojhath raised him from 
the dead. 

13 And you, being édead in your 
sins and the uncircumcision of your 
flesh, hath he quickened together 
with him, having “forgiven you all 
trespasses; 


(4) Law observances were abol- 
ished in Christ. (Cf. Mt. 5. 17.) 


14 *Blotting out the handwriting 
of ordinances that was against us, 
which was contrary to us, and took 
it out of the way, nailing it to his 
cross; é 

15 And having spoiled principal- 
ities and powers, he made a shew of 
them openly, ‘triumphing over them 
in it. 

16 Let no man therefore *judge 
you in meat, or in drink, or in re- 
spect of an holyday, or of the new, 
moon, or of the sabbath days: 

17 Which are a shadow of things 
to come; but the body is of Christ. 


(5) Warning against false 
mysticism. 

18 Let no man beguile you of 
your reward in a voluntary humil- 
ity and worshipping of “angels, lin- 
truding into those things which he 
hath not seen, vainly puffed up by’ 
his fleshly mind, 

19 And not cholding the *Head, 
from which all the body by joints 
and bands having nourishment min- 
istered, and knit together, increas- 
eth with the increase of God. 


1 The errorists against whom Paul warns the Colossians, 


Principle, the warning 
&nosis, “knowledge.” 


The 


and to all ascetic practices. 


(6) Warning against asceticism. 


20 Wherefore if ye be dead with 
@Jopn 1.14; Col. |Christ from the rudiments of the 
5 Eph.1.20; 1 Pet. |2world, why, as though living in 
3.22. the world, are ye subject to ordi- 
© Deut.10.16; Jer. nances, 
Phisa | 21 (Touch not; taste not; handle 
one “the sins not; 


22 Which all are to perish with 


ie ie the using;) after the command- 
9 Death (spirit. |Ments and doctrines of men? 
(ee ealao WW nICu things have indeed a 
Eph.2.5.)  ' |Shew of wisdom in will worship, 
h Forgiveness. land humility, and neglecting of the 
5: Me26.285 "body; ‘not in any honour to the 
i Eph.2.15,16. satisfying of the ‘flesh. 


Ee Se ei CHAPTER 3. 

Part V. The believer’s union 
with Christ, now and here-~ 
after (vs. 1-4). 


a ey ye then be ‘risen with Christ, 
seek those things which are 
above, where “Christ sitteth on the 
pEph.t.15,16. [tight hand of God. — ete 
@kosmos=world-| 2 Set your affection on things 
system. Jas.127,,above, not on things on the earth. 
38, notes | 3. For ye are dead, and your life 


3.3-8, note.) i C A A 5 
rOr, “which do lis hid with Christ in God. 


& Rom.14.3. 


! Sanctify, ho. 
(things) (N.T.). 
2 Tim.3.15. (Mt. 
4.5; Rev.22.11.) 


m Heb.8.5; 9.9; 
10.L 


® Heb.1.4, note. 
° holding fast. 


Ged bur only "| 4 When Christ, who is our “life, 
satisfy the flesh’’ 


*shall appear, then shall ye also ap- 


S reputation for (pear with him in glory. 

uy). |Part VI. Christian living, the 
* Flesh. ye 23: fruit of union with Christ 
1.13; Jude 23.) (Col. 3. 5-4. 6). 

*Fom6.5; Eph. | S ¥Mortify therefore your mem- 


uRom.8.34; Eph, |bers which are upon the earth; for- 
1.20. nication, uncleanness, inordinate 
"D: CoLz2~ |affection, evil concupiscence, and 
w Life (eterna. |COVetousness, which is ‘idolatry: 
Yer 8A tim | 6 For which things’ sake the 
Rev.22.19.) | |?wrath of God cometh on the 8chil- 
dren of disobedience: 

7 In the which ‘ye also walked 
some time, when ye lived in them. 


= Phil.3:21; 1 John} 
3.2. 


v Rom.8.13; Gal. 
5.24, 


2 Eph.5.5. 8 ¢But now ye also put off all 
“Feet (these; anger, wrath, malice, blas- 
bsons. ~+|Phemy, filthy communication out 


¢ Eph.2.2; 71.3.3. Of your mouth. \ 
cipher etbe 9 Lie not one to another, seeing 
pe 2817 that ye have put off the <old man 
*Rom.6.6, note, [With his deeds; 
10 And have put on the new man, 


(1. 9, 10; 3 
warnings apply 


1264 


3:0] COLOSSIANS. [4 3s 


which is renewed in knowledge AD. 64. |} 
after the image of him that «created | 
mn: 6 Eph.4.24, 


11 Where there i is neither Greek asses E235 vants that which is just. and 
nor Jew, circumcision nor uncir-|¢ ection lequal; knowing that ye also have a 


cumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Corpere et. Master in heaven. 
bond nor free: but Christ is all, oe 6; 2 *Continue in prayer, and watch 
and in all. dSanctify) {in the same with thanksgiving; 


12 Put on therefore, as the ‘elect 
of God, “holy and beloved, “bowels 
of mercies, kindness, humbleness of 
mind, meekness, longsuffering; 

13 Forbearing one another, and bonds: 
forgiving one another, if any man 4 That I may make it manifest, as 
have a quarrel against any: even as|° Heb.9.22..._ |I ought to speak. 

Christ /forgave you, so also do ye. (Lev 4.20; 5 Walk in wisdom toward them 

14 And éabove all these things} , ee. ,|that are without, redeeming the 
put on "charity, which is the bond|” Cor.13.; Eph.|time. 


holy (per- 3 Withal praying also for us, that 
eon?) Orcas God would open unto us a door of 

cs utterance, to speak the » of 
Christ, for which I am 4lso in 


of ‘perfectness. ’ 5.2; 1 Pet.4.8.} 6 Let your speech be alway with 

_15 And let the peace of JGod krule ‘ie 48,note.|"2Face, seasoned with salt, that ye 

in your hearts, to the which also ye} j Christ. may know how ye ought to answer 

are called in one body; and ’be ye|x John 14.27; |every man. 

thankful. riulsy | |Pare Vil. 4 Christian followene 
16 Let the word of Christ dwell in| 7.17; Puit.4.6;|- “7 ae i z 7-18). ellowship 

you richly in all wisdom; “teaching| Col.2.7; wee 5 


and admonishing one another in|,,-1pSigso, | 7 All my state shall ¢Tychicus 


psalms and hymns and spiritual): Grace (im- |declare unto you, who is a beloved 
songs, singing with “grace in your parte). Col.|brother, and a faithful minister and 
a to the Lord. i eR fellowservant i in the Lord: 

I pnd het etep had ye doin wore ; 1 Cor.10.31. ie Whom I have scat uate you for 
or deed, do in the name of the -Gen.3.16. e€ same purpose, that he mig 
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God|? F572: —_|know your estate, and comfort your 


and the Father by him. ry Eph.5.25. earts; 

18 Wives, ?submit yourselves un-| 5 Eph.6.1. 9 With ‘Onesimus, a faithful and 
to your own husbands, as it is fit in inteee: 1 eloved brother, who is one of you. 
the Lord. Tim.6.1; Tit. |They shall make known unto you 

19 Husbands, “love your wives,| 2-9;1Pet.2.18.all things which are done here. 
and be not bitter against them. |7%Ph.66-8. | 10 ¢Aristarchus my fellowprisoner 


20 Children, obey your parents]. 1 Thes.2.19. |saluteth you, and ‘Marcus, sister’s 
in all things: for this is Swell pleas-| (Dan.123;_ |son to Barnabas, (touching whom 


ing unto the Lord. xEpheis, |ve Teceived commandments: if he 
21 ‘Fathers, provoke not your| 1 Thes.5.17. |come unto you, receive him;) 
pelicren. to anger, lest they be dis- yee nee aus Jesus, ane is called Jus- 
couraged. ; pipes. Pan E s, who are o e circumcision. 
22 “Servants, obey in all things pee These only are my fellowworkers 
your masters according to the flesh;} 2 et Le unto the kingdom of God, which 
not with eyeservice, as menpleas- ps peta 18) have been a comfort unto me. 
ers; but in singleness of heart, fear-|a Acts 20.4; 12 WEpaphras, who is one of you, 
ing God: aoe _ ja servant of Christ, saluteth you, 
23 And *whatsoever ye do, do it} 4,23 4-125 |always labouring fervently for you 
heartily, as to the Lord, and not b Eph.6.22. ra ee Coe re fay nad oe 
unto men; c -10. ect and complete in a e will o: 
@ Acts 19.29; 
24 Knowing that of the Lord yel* 35%. aya \God. f 
shall receive the “reward of the in-| Phm.24. 13 For I bear him record, that he 
heritance: for ye serve the Lord|e¢ na 15. ey hath a great zeal for you, and them 
Christ. pee that are in Laodicea, and them in 
25 But he that doeth wrong shall ei 23. Hierapolis. 


receive for the wrong which he/zMt.5.48,note.) 14 /Luke, the beloved physician, 
hath done: and there is no respect|"? 7i™-4-1}: {and *Demas, greet you. __ 
of persons. Phm.24. 15 Salute the brethren which are 


1 A touching illustration of priestly service (see 1 Pet. 2.9, note) as distinguished 
from ministry of gift. Shut up im prison, no longer able to preach, Epaphras was 
still, equally with all believers, a priest. No prison could keep him from the throne 
of grace, so he gave himself wholly to the priestly work of intercession. 

1265. 


4 16] COLOSSIANS. [4 al 


in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the} _A.D. 64. 17 And say to ’Archippus, Take 
“church which is in his house 


: a Churches. |heed to the ministry which thou. 
16 And when this epistle is read! (Joca/). vs.15,|hast received in the Lord, that thou 
among you, cause that it be read| 16; 1 Thes.1- 


fulfil it. 
also in the church of the Laodiceans; 1a 6 ui 18 The salutation by the hand of 
pag oes ve kowiee read the epis- Maen 42 me Paul. ‘Remember my bonds. 
tle from Laodicea. 


Grace be with you. Amen. 


1260 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


1 THESSALONIANS. ie 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 

Date. The Epistle was written from Corinth, aD. 54, shortly after Paul’s de- 
parture from Thessalonica (Acts 16., 17.), and is the earliest of his letters. 

Theme. The theme of the Epistle is threefold: (1) To confirm young disciples in 
the foundational truths already taught them; (2) to exhort them to go on to holi- 
ness; (3) to comfort them concerning those who had fallen asleep. The second 
coming of Christ is prominent throughout. The Epistle is incidentally most inter- 
esting as showing the richness in doctrine of the primitive evangelism. During a 
mission of about one month the apostle had taught all the great Idoctrines of the 
Christian faith. 

The divisions of the Epistle are sufficiently indicated by the chapters: I. The 
model church, and the three tenses of the Christian life, 1. 1-10. II. The model 
servant and his reward, 2. 1-20. III. The model brother, and the believer’s sancti- 
fication, 3. 1-13. IV. The model walk, and the believer’s hope. 4. 1-18. V. The 


model walk, and the day of Jehovah, 5. 1-28. 


A.D. 54. 6 And ye became followers of us, 
CHAPTER 1. and of the Lord, having received 
Part I. The model church, and 6 Chars es, the word in much affliction, with 


the three tenses of the Chris-| 2.14. (Acts 2. sjoy of the "Holy Ghost: 
tian life. ante a So feet ye were ensamples to 
AUL, and Silvanus, and Timo-] “/awnand labori rene Poot tered tie eae 
2 > 5 faith, and laborit- . 
P theus, unto the ¢church of the| jusJvi.g7d. | 8 For from you tsounded out the 
Thessalonians which is in God the} _ tience. word of the Lord not only in Mace- 
Father and in the Lord Jesus|¢#lection (cor |donia and Achaia, but also /in 


Christ: Grace be unto you, and| 27%“¢paut16 |every place your faith to God-ward 


peace, from God our Father, and} 1 Fet-1.2) is spread abroad; so that we need 
the Lord Jesus Christ. «Gospel. 1 Thes. not to speak any thing. 

2 We give thanks to God always] 13; Rev.14.6.) | 9 For they themselves shew of us 
for you all, making mention of you| “Assurance. |. |what manner of entering in we had 
in our prayers; : 32.17; Jude 1.) |unto you, and 2how ye turned to 

3 Remembering without ceasing} @ Acts 13.52. God from idols to serve the living 


your ‘work of faith, and labour of Mey Seen and true God; 
Jove, and patience of hope in our| 4.8. (Mt.1.18; 10 And ‘to wait for his Son from 


Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of eee heaven, whom he raised "from the 
God and our Father; Gama dead, even Jesus, which delivered 


4 Knowing, brethren beloved,| xj cor.12.2: cai. |\US from the "wrath to come. 
your 4election of God. 4.8. 

5 For our “gospel came not unto} ! Christ (Second CHAPTER 2, 
you in word only, but also in| 10; 1 Thes.2.19. Part II. The.model servant, 
power, and in the Holy Ghost, and} {sj Acs and his reward. 
in much fassurance; as ye know|mfrom among. FoR yourselves, brethren, know 
what manner of men we were * MEGr Rom. our entrance in unto you, that ° 
among you for your sake. oe it was not in vain: 


gsi tin EE AALS ras igen ED ee 

«(See Introductory notes). That is: election, 1. 4; Holy Spirit, 1.5, 6; 4.8; 
5. 19; assurance, 1. 5; Trinity, 1. 1, 5, 6; conversion, 1. 9; second advent of 
Christ, 1. 10; 2. 19; 3. 13; 4. 14-17; 5. 23; walk, 2. 12; 4.13 sanctification, 4. 3; 5. 23; 
day of Jehovah, 5. 1-3; resurrection, 4. 14-18; the tripartite nature of man, 5.23. 

2The tenses of the believer’s life here indicated are logical and give the true 
order, They occur also in v. 3. The “work of faith” is to “turn to God from 
idols” (cf. John 6. 28, 29); the “labour of love”’ is to “‘serve the living and true God”; 
and the “patience of hope” is to “wait for his Son from heaven”’ (cf. Mt. 24. 42; 
95. 13; Lk. 12. 36-48; Acts 1. 11; Phil. 3. 20, 21). Paul repeats this threefold sequence 


in Tit. 2. 11-13. 
1267 


22 


2 But even after that we had suf- 
fered before, and were shamefully 
-entreated, as ye know, at ¢Philippi, 
.we were “bold in our God to speak], acts 16.12. 
unto you the gospel of God with}sActs 17.2,3. 


;much contention. _ peor 

3 For our exhortation was not of|€ John 5.41,44; 
‘deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in| Gal.1-10. 
-guile: poe ee 

4 But as we were allowed of God]? acts 20.34,35: 


to be put in trust with the gospel, 
even so we speak; not as pleasing 
men, but God, which trieth our 
hearts. i 

5 For 4neither at any time used 

we flattering words, as ye know, 
nor a cloke of covetousness; God is 
witness: 
6 Nor of men ‘sought we glory, 
neither of you, nor yet of others, 
when we might have been burden- 
some, as the apostles of Christ. 

7 But we were gentle among you, 
even as a nurse cherisheth Sher 
children: 

8 So being affectionately desirous 
of you, we were willing to shave 
imparted unto you, not the gospel 
of God only, but also our own souls, 
because ye were dear unto us. 

9 For ye remember, brethren, our 

abour and travail: for labouring 
night and day, because we would 
not be chargeable unto any of you, 
we preached unto you the ‘gospel 
of God. 

10 Ye are witnesses, and God 
also, how holily and justly and un- 
blameably we behaved ourselves 
among you that believe: 

11 As ye know how we exhorted 
and comforted and charged every 
one of you, as,a father doth his 

ildren, : 

12 That ye would walk jworthy 
of God, *who hath called you unto 
his kingdom and glory. 

13 For this cause also thank we 
God without ceasing, because, when 
ye received the word of God which 
ye heard of us, ye received rt not 
as the word of men, but as it is in 
truth, the word of God, which 
effectually ‘worketh also in you|f love. 
that believe. ee DinLs. 

14 For ye, brethren, became fol-| i 
lowers of the *churches of God] .Ph 
which in Judea are in Christ Jesus:|7 BiB/2,5 wn. 
for ye also have suffered like things 
of your own countrymen, even as 
they have of the Jews: 

15 Who both killed the Lord J esus, 
and their own prophets, and have 
persecuted us; and they please not 
God, and:are contrary to all men: 


# Gospel. vs.4, 
8,9; 1 Thes.3. 


3; Rev. 
j Eph. 


4.6.) 
4.1. 


m imitators. 
n Churches 


'O% . 
2 Thes.1.1,4. 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1.1.) 
o Acts 7.52. 
p Acts 17.5,13; 
18.12. 


(Gen.3.4; 
Rev.20.10.) 
t Rewards. 
2 Tim.4.8. 
(Dan.12.3; 
1 Cor.3.14.) 
u 2: Cor.1.14; 
Phil.4.1. 
v Jude 24. 
w Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
1 Thes.3.13. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1,.9-11.) 
x Acts 17.15. 
y Gospel. 
2 Thes.1.8. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 
z Eph.3.13. 
a John 16.2; 


aie 
€2 Cor.11.2,3. 
@ Temptation. 
1 Tim.6.9, 


Jas.1.14.5 
e Gal.4.14, 


11,12. (Mt.6. 
9;Rev.22.20.) 

kMt.5.48, 
note, 


1268 


I THESSALONIANS. 


2 Thes.3.7,8. | 


2. (Gen.12.1- 


(3 11 


Gentiles that they might be Ysaved, 
to fill up their ‘sins alway: for the 
wrath is come upon them to the 
uttermost. 

17 But we, brethren, being taken 
from you for a short time in pres- 
ence, not in heart, endeavoured the 
more abundantly to see your face 


.|with great desire. 


18 Wherefore we would have 
come unto you, even I Paul, once 
and again; but sSatan hindered us. 

19 For what is our hope, or joy, 


or ‘crown of rejoicing? Are not 


even ye “in the presence ‘of our 
Lord Jesus Christ “at his coming? 
20 For ye are our glory and joy. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part ITI. The model brother, and 
the believer’s sanctification. 


VU HEREFORE when we could 
no longer forbear, we thought 
it good to be left at Athens alone; 
2 And sent *Timotheus, our bro- 


*jther, and minister of God, and our 


fellowlabourer in the ‘gospel of 
Christ, to establish you, and to 
comfort you concerning your faith: 

3 #That no man should be moved 
by these afflictions: for yourselves 
know that ¢we are appointed there- 
unto. 

4 For verily, when we were with 
you, we told you before that we 
should suffer tribulation; even as 
it came 'to pass, and ye know. 

5 For this cause, when I could 
no longer forbear, I sent to know 
your faith, ‘est by some means the 
tempter have ¢tempted you, and 
our labour “be in vain. 

6 But now when Timotheus came 
from you unto us, and brought us 


good tidings of your faith andJchar- 


ity, and that ye have good remem- 
brance of us always, édesiring 
greatly to see us, as we also to see 
you: 

7 Therefore, brethren, we were 
heomforted over you in all our afflic- 
tion_and distress by your faith: 

8 For now we live, if ye stand 
‘fast in the Lord. 

9 For what thanks can we render 

to God again for you, for all the joy 


‘|wherewith we joy for your sakes 


before our God; 

10 Night and day Jpraying ex- 
ceedingly that we might see your 
face, and might ‘perfect that which 


jis lacking in your faith? 


11 Now God himself and our 


16 *Forbidding us to speak to the | 


3 12] 


I THESSALONIANS. 


[5 


Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Sdirect our way unto you. 

12 And the Lord make you to 
increase and abound 4in love one 
toward another, and toward all 
men, even as we do toward you: 

13 To the end he may stablish 
¢your hearts unblameable in holi-| 4.19.11) 
ness before God, even our Father,|¢ 0x, request. 
dat the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ with all his saints. Pr conaese 


Ms _—* i 1 Cor.6.15,18. 


j Eph.4.17,18. 
Part IV. The model walk, and 
the believer’s hope. 


URTHERMORE then we “be- 
seech you, brethren, and fex- 
hort you by the Lord Jesus, that as 
ye have received of us how ye ought 
8to walk and to please God, so ye} 
would 4abound more and more. | 
2 For ye know what command-| 12. 
ments we gave you by the Lord|s fallenasleep. 
Jesus. - t Faith. 
3 For this is the will of God, even 
your ification, ‘that ye should 
abstain from fornication: 


ond Advent). 
I Thes.4.14- 
17. (Deut.30.3; 


n Or, reyecteth. 


o Holy Spirit. 
| Thes. 


4 That every one of you should) (27 7323 
know how to possess his vessel in} 18. (Job19.25; 
sanctification and honour; ae. ) 

5 Notin the lust of concupiscence,| 1, precede. 
Bes the JGentiles which know)x Cheist o 
not - on ven 

6 That no man go beyond and} ¥$335/52°" 
k@efraud his brother in any mat- ut.30.3; 
ter: because that the Lord is the ay b Casa 
avenger of all such, as we also have|? 7 Cor.13’51- 
forewarned you and testified. a Church 

7 For God hath not called us unto Cu) ‘ate 4 
uncleanness, “but unto: holiness. 18: Heb. 

8 He therefore that “despiseth,| 12.23.) 
despiseth not man, but God, who b jos aa 
ae also given unto us his °holy|° pévan). vs. 

pirit. 1-3; 2 Thes 

9 But as touching brotherly love| 218. fie 2 
ye need not that I write unto you:| 4911221.) © 
for ye yourselves are ?taught of|dLk.12.39,40; 
God to love one another. oe ners’ 

10 And indeed ye do it toward all) . Gen’7.11; Mt. 
the brethren which are in all Mace-| 24.27; Lic.17. 
donia: but we beseech you, breth- Pe ses et.2. 
ren, that ye increase more and more;} ¢ xph.s5.8; 

11 And that ye study to be quiet,| 1 John 2.8. 


and %to do your own business, and]£ sons... 

to work with your own hands, as|"Isipis 

we commanded you; i1 Pet.5.8. 
412 That ye may walk ‘honestly ge as 

toward them that are without, and], Rom.1.16, 

that ye may have lack of nothing. 


note. 


_13 But I would not have you ta‘be 
ignorant, brethren, concerning them 


.|which are ‘sasleep, that ye sorrow 


a even as others which have no. 
ope. 
14 For if we ‘believe that Jesus 


died and “rose again, even so "them ° 


also which sleep in Jesus will God 
bring with him. 

I5 For this we say unto you by 
the word of the Lord, that we which 
are alive and remain unto the com- 
ing of the Lord shall not “prevent 
‘them which are asleep. 

16 *For the Lord himself shall de- 
scend from heaven with a shout,, 


with the voice of the archangel, and! »"~ 


‘with the trump 
dead in Christ *shall rise first: 

17 #Then we which are alive and 
iremain shall be leaught up together 


of God: and the 


-|¢with them in the clouds, to meet. 


the Lord in the air: and so shall we 
ever be with the Lord. 
18 Wherefore comfort one another 


»,.|with these words. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Part V, The model walk, and the 
day of Jehovah. (Cf. Rev. 19. 
11-21, note.) 


But of the times and the seasons, 
brethren, ye have no need that 
I write unto you. 

2 For yourselves know perfectly 
that the ‘day of the Lord ¢so com- 
eth as a thief in the night. 

3 For when they shall say, Peace 
and. safety; then ‘sudden destruc- 


‘Ition cometh upon them, as travail 


upon a woman with child; and they 
shall not escape. 

4 But fye, brethren, are not in 
darkness, that that day should 


2. |overtake you as a thief. 


5 Ye are all sthe children of light, 
and the children of the day: we are 
not of the night, nor of darkness. 

6 Therefore let us not sleep, as 
do others; but let us watch and be 
tgober. 

7 For they that sleep sleep in the 
night; and they that be drunken 
are drunken in the night. 

8 But let us, who are of the day, 
be sober, putting on the /breast- 


~~ 


sy 


plate of faith and love; and for an 


helmet, the hope of “salvation. 


9 For God hath not appointed us 


1 Not church saints only, but all bodies of the saved, of whatever dispensation, 
are included in the first resurrection (see 1 Cor. 15. 52, note), as here described, but 


it is peculiarly the ‘‘blessed hope” of the Church 
Acts 1. 11; Phil. 3. 20, 21; Tit. 2. 11-13). 
1269 


(cf. Mt. 24. 42; 25.13; Lk. 12. 36-48; 


~ 


ane 


to wrath, but to obtain 4salvation 
by our Lord Jesus Christ. 

10 Who died for us, that, whether 
we wake or sleep, we should live 
together with him. 

1i Wherefore comfort yourselves 


I THESSALONIANS. | 


a Rom.1.16, 
note. 

6 Rom.14.8,9; 
2 Cor.5.15. 
¢ Heb.13.7,17. 

9.50. 


together, and edify one another,|4 yn, 


even as also ye do. 

12 And we beseech you, brethren, 
to know ‘them which labour among 
you, and are over you in the Lord, 
and admonish you; 

13 Andto esteem them very highly 
in love for their work’s sake. And 
¢be at peace among yourselves. 

14 Now we “exhort you, brethren, 
warn them that are unruly, comfort 
the feebleminded, support the 
tweak, be &patient toward all men. 

15 See that none “render evil for 
evil unto any man; but ever follow 
that which is good, both among 
yourselves, and to all men. 

16 Rejoice evermore. 

17 Pray without ceasing. 


1 Man a trinity. 


the facts that they are divisible (Heb. 4. 12), 
distinguished in the burial. and resurrection of 


(soma psuchikon = “‘soul-body’’) 
matikon), 1 Cor. 15. 44. 
soul and spirit is to assert 
the resurrection body. 

may be traced. Briefly, 
“knows” (1 Cor. 2. 11), 


sorrowful” 
“soul” 
(Gr. psuche), and the use of “sou 
word in the N.T. 
22; Psa. 42. 6; 84. 2). 
is trans. “air,” “breath,” “wind,” 
(e.g. Gen. 1. 2; Mt. 3. 16) or of man 


e beseech. 

f Rom.15.1. 

g Eph.4.2. 

h Proy.20.22; 
24.29; Mt.5. 
39,44 


4 Holy Spirit. 
2 Thes.2.13. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

j ore form 


of. 

k Sanctify, 
holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
1 Tim.4.5. 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 

11 Cor.1.8,9. 

m 1 Cor.10.13; 
2 Thes.3.3. 

n adjure. 


** / 
[5 
18 In every thing give thanks: for 
this is the will of God in Christ 
Jesus concerning you. 
19 Quench not the ‘Spirit. : 
20 Despise not prophesyings. q 
21 Prove all things; hold fast that 
which is good. i | 
22 Abstain from Jall appearance 
of evil. 
23 And the very God of peace | 
-sanctify you wholly; and J pray | 
God your 1twhole spirit and soul 
and body be preserved ‘blameless 
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus 


rie nig he th lleth 
24 Fai is ™he that callet! 
you, a also will do it. 

25 Brethren, pray for us. 

26 Greet all the brethren with an 
holy kiss. 

27 I *charge you by the Lord 
that this epistle be read unto all 
the holy brethren. = ; 

28 The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you. Amen 


That the human soul and spirit are not identical is proved by 
and that soul and spirit are sharply 
the body. 


It is sown a natural body | 


, it is raised a spiritual body (soma pneu- 


12? 


To assert, therefore, that there is no difference between 
that there is no difference between the mortal body and 
In Scripture use, the distinction between spirit and soul 
that distinction is that the spirit is that part of man which 
his mind; the soul is the seat of 
and so of the emotions, and of the active will, the self. 
(Mt. 26. 38; see also Mt. 11. 29; and John 12. 27) 
in.the O.T. (nmephesh) is the exact equivalent of the 


the affections, desires, 
“My soul is exceeding 
. The word translated 
N.T. word for soul 


in the O.T. is identical with the use of that 
(see, e.g. Deut. 6. 5; 14. 26; 1 Sam. 18. 1; 20. 4 
The N.T. word for 


, 17; Job 7. 11, 15; 14. 


spirit (pneuma), like the O.T. ruach, 


but predominantly “spirit,”? whether of God 


(Gen. 41. 8; 1 Cor. 5, 5). 


Because man is “spirit”? 


he is capable of God-consciousness, and of communication with God (Job 32. 8: 


Psa. 18. 28; Prov. 20. 27); because h 


42. 5, 6, 11); because he is “body” he has, 


See Gen, 1. 26, note. 


e is ‘‘soul” 


1270 


“he has self-consciousness (Psa. 13. 2: 
through his senses, world-consciousness. 


i male 2 ee 
a: 
1\ 


Do Y 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


: te THESSALONIANS. 2? 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). ; 

Date. Second Thessalonians was evidently written very soon after Paul’s first 
letter to that church. The occasion may well have been the return of the bearer 
of the former Epistle, and his report. : 

Theme. The theme of Second Thessalonians is, unfortunately, obscured by a 
mistranslation in the A.V. of 2. 2, where “day of Christ is at hand” (1 Cor. 1. a, 
note) should be, ‘day of the LorD is now present”’ (Isa. 2. 12, refs.). The Thes- 
salonian converts were “shaken in mind” and “troubled,” supposing, perhaps 
on the authority of a forged letter as from Paul, that the persecutions from which 
they were suffering were those of the “great and terrible day of the Lorp,” from 
which they had been taught to expect deliverance by “‘the day of Christ, and our 
gathering together unto him” (2. 1). 

The present letter, then, was written to instruct the Thessalonians concerning 
the day of Christ, “and our gathering together unto him” (1 Thes. 4. 14-17) and 
the relation of the “day of Christ” to the “day of the Lorp.” First Thessalonians 
‘had more in view the ‘day of Christ”; the present Epistle the “day of the LORD.” 

The Epistle is in five divisions: I. Salutation, 1. 14. II. Comfort, 1. 5-12. 
III. Instruction concerning thé day of the LorpD and the man of sin, 2. 1-12. IV. Ex- 
hortations and apostolic commands, 2. 13-3. 15. V. Benediction and authentica- 


tion, 3. 16-18. 


CHAPTER 1. 
Part I. Salutation. 


AUL, and Silvanus, and Timo- 

theus, “unto the church of the 
Thessalonians in God our Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ: 

2 Grace unto you, and peace, 
from God our Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ. : 

3 We are bound to thank God 
always for you, brethren, as it is 
meet, because that your faith grow- 
eth exceedingly, and the charity of 
‘every one of you all toward each 
other aboundeth; 

4 So that we ourselves ‘glory in 
you in the ¢churches of God for 
your patience and faith in all your 
persecutions and tribulations that 
ye ‘endure: 


Part II. Comfort in persecution. 


5 fWhich is a manifest token of 
the righteous judgment of God, 
that ye may be counted worthy of 
the kingdom of God, for which ye 
also Ssuffer: 

6 Seeing it is a righteous thing 
with God to recompense tribulation 
to them that trouble you; 

7 And to you who are troubled 
rest with us, when the Lord Jesus 


ishall be revealed from heaven ween 


Shis mighty “angels, 


A.D. 54. 


@] Thes.1.1. 

6 love. 

¢ 2 Cor.9.2. 

d Churches 
(local). vs.1,4; 
1 Tim.3.5, 15,16. 
(Acts 2.41; Phil. 
1.1.) 


¢ Jas.5.11. 

F Phil.1.28. 

91 Thes.2.14; 
Heb. 10.32,33. 

h Rev. 6.10. 

t Christ (Second 
Advent). vs.7-10; 
2 Thes.2.8. 
(Deut.30.3; Acts 
1.9-11.) 

3 the angels of 
his might. 

k Heb.1.4, note. 

t Day (of destruc- 
tion). vs.7-10; 
Rev, 19.19,20. 
(Gob 21.30; Rev. 

_20.11-15.) 

m Gospel. 2 Thes. 
2.14. (Gen.12. 
1-3; Rev.14.6.) 

n Phil.3.19; 2 Pet. 
EEA 


oIsa.2.19. 

P Mt.25.31. 

@ Bible prayers 
(N.T.). 2 Thes. 
2.16,17, (Mt.6.9; 
Rev. 22.20.) 


7 Col,1.12; Rev. 
3.4. 


#1 Pet.1.7. 

t Grace (im- 
parted). 2:'Tim. 
2.1. (Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3,18.) 


1271 


8 In flaming fire taking 'venge- 
ance on thém that know not God, 
and that obey not the “gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ: 

9 Who shall be punished with 
everlasting "destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from °the 
glory of his power; 

10 When he shall come ?to be 
glorified in his saints, and to be 
admired in all them that believe 
(because our testimony among you 
was believed) in that day. ' 

11 Wherefore also we pray al- 
ways for you, that our God would 
Ycount you worthy of this calling, 
and fulfil all the good pleasure of 
his goodness, and the work of 
faith with power: 

12 ‘That the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ may be glorified in 
you, and ye in him, according to 
the ‘grace of our God and the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Part II. The day of the LorD 
and the man of sin. 


New we beseech you, brethren, 
by the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and by our gathering 
together unto him, 

2 That ye be not soon shaken in 
mind, or be troubled, neither by 


2 3] 


II THESSALONIANS. 


[3 10 


spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as 
from us, as that the ¢day of Christ 
is Sat hand. 

3 Let no man deceive you by any 
means: !for that day shall not 
come, fared a Bale come pact 
away first, and that ¢man of sin be 


revealed, the son of perdition; 

$ wipe oopogeth and emalteth 

himself above all that is called God, 
e as 


Soba Gs 


@ Day of the 
LORD. 


6 now present. 


restrains. 


9 lawlessness. 


Rev. 19.20.) 
& Lawless one. 
1 Day (of 


in his time. ER 
: 7 For the ‘m of siniquity 
“doth already Work: only he who 


11-21.) 
now #letteth will ‘let, until he be|m 


A.D. 54. 


See 
Isa.2.12, refs. 


¢ the apostasy. 
d Or, lawless one. 
¢ Or, that which 


£Mt.13.11, note. 


Jehovah). vs.1-8; 
2 Pet.3.10. (Isa.2. 
10-22; Rev.19. 


15 Therefore, brethren, stand fast, 
and hold the “traditions which ye 
have been taught, whether by word, 
or our epistle. ’ 

16 YNow our Lord Jesus Christ 
himself, and God, even our Father, 
which hath loved us, and hath 
given us everlasting consolation 
and good hope *through grace, ; 

17 Comfort your hearts, and stab- 
Skee in every good word and 
work, 


CHAPTER 3. 


FPNeé_ty, brethren, pray for us, 
that the word of the Lord may 
have free course, and be glorified, 
even as it is with you: 

2 And that we may be delivered 
from unreasonable and wicked men: 
for all men have not faith. 


Christ (Second 
taken out of the way. faend., | 3 But the Lord is faithful, whol 
8 And then shall ’that *Wicked be} (Deut‘20.3: shall stablish you, €eD yo 
revealed, shall con-| 1°" from evil 


sume with the spirit of his mouth,|" 372: 
and shall destroy “with the bright- 
ness of his coming: 

9 Even him, whose coming is 
after 


©1 Cor.16.22. 
¢ @ judged. 
Y Faith. vs.11 


PRom.1.16, note. 


2 Tim.1.12. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb.11.39.) 


4 And we have confidence in the 
Lord touching you, that ye both do 
and will do the things which we 
command you. 

5 And the ¢Lord direct your 


Sen hearts into the love of God, and into 


10° And wi I deceivableness of}, 170 s/acy, 1 Tim.|the patient waiting for Christ. 
unrighteousness in them that per-| 413. k.13.8 _6 Nowwecommand you, brethren, 


(corporate). 
11 And for this cause God shall] {paty's 
send them strong delusion, that 
they should believe a lie: 
12 That they all might be ¢damned 
who “believed not the truth, but 
had pleasure in ‘unrighteousness. 


w Gospel. 


« Rom.1.16, note. 


1 Tim. 
1.11. (Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 


in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves 
from every brother that walketh 
disorderly, and not after the tra- 
dition which he. received of us. 

7 For yourselves know how ye 
ought to follow us: for we behaved 
not ourselves. disorderly among 
you; 


. in- |? Rom-6.17;Jude3.| 8 Neither did we eat any man’s 

Part otruchion (eo 31). Reepmee. \bread. for nought: “but wrought 

ae 3s. (Mtg; |with labour and travail night and 

13 Butwe are bound to give thanks Rev.22.20.) day, that we might not be charge- 
alway to God for you, brethren be- * Grgce Gin salv.)./able to any of you: 


loved of the Lord, because God hath 


(Rom.3.24; John 


9 Not because we have not power, 


from the beginning ‘chosen you to|_ 1-16 note.) but to make ourselves an ensample 
“salvation through sanctification of|"(Wr5;“Hieb.3,{unto you to follow us. 
the *Spirit and belief of the truth: Revwans | 10 For even when we were with 


14 Whereunto he called you by 
our “gospel, to the obtaining of the 
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 


Ree che order of events is: 
divine restraint which had already begun in 
sing church (v. 3; Lk. 18. 


(1) The workin 


you, this we commanded you, that 
if any would not work, neither 
should he. eat. 


out of the way” (v. 7; 1 Thes. 4, 14-17); (4) the manifestation of the lawless one 


(vs. 8-10; Dan. 7. 8; 9. 27; Mt. 24: 15;~Rev. 13. 2-10); (5) the coming of Christ in 
glory and the destruction of the lawless one (v. 8; Re « 19, 11-21); ; 
Jehovah (vs. 9-12: Isa. 2. 12, refs.) ( ga a eaae ieee 


“7 
4 


1272 


3°11) II THESSALONIANS. [3 18 


11 For we hear that there are 
some which walk among you dis- 


orderly, working not at all, but are}a1 Tim.5.13; 


“busy bodies. 
12 Now them that are such we 


¢1 Cor.15.58. 
command and exhort by our Lord|d Separation. 


Jesus Christ, that with quietness} vs-6,14; 


they work, and eat their own bread. 


1 Tim.6.3-11. 


13 But ye, brethren, “be not vos aey 


weary in well doing. 


14-17.) 


14 And if any man obey not our a Lev.19.17. 


John 14.27. 


word by this epistle, note that man, |¢ 1 Cor.16.21. 
and ¢have no company with him,|# Rem.16.24. 


that he may be ashamed. 


1273 


15 Yet count him not as an 
enemy, but admonish him “as a 
brother. 


Part V. Benediction and sub- 

scription. 

16 Now the fLord of peace him- 
self give you peace always by all 
means. The Lord be with you all. 

17 The &salutation of Paul with 
mine own hand, which is the token 
in every epistle: so I write. 

18 The “grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you all. Amen. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO 


11] 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 
Date. 
ments of Paul. 


Timothy was written during the interval. f 
prisonment, the Epistle was written shortly before Paul’s last journey to Jeru- 


salem. 
Theme. 


order, of soundness in the faith, and of discipline became important. 


TIMOTHY. 


[1.17 


The date of this Epistle turns upon the question of the two imprison- 
If there were two (see Acts 28. 30, note), then it is clear that First 
If Paul endured but one Roman im- 


As the churches of Christ increased in number, the questions of church 


At first the 


apostles regulated these things directly, but the approaching end of the apostolic 
period made it necessary that a clear revelation should be made for the guidance 


of the churches. 


Such a revelation is in First Timothy, and in Titus. 


The key- 


phrase of this Epistle is, “That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave 


thyself in the house of God.”’ 


added to nor taken from the divine order. 


The divisions are five: I. Legality and unsound doctrine rebuked, 1. 1-20. 
Prayer and the divine order of the sexes enjoined, 2. 1-15. 


of elders and deacons, 3. 1-16. 
The work of the “good minister,” 


5. 1-6. 21. 


Well had it been with the churches if they had neither 


ibe 
III. The qualifications 
IV. The walk of the “‘good minister,” 4. 1-16. V. 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. Legalism and unsound 
teaching rebuked. 


part, an apostle of Jesus Christ 
by the commandment of God 
our “Saviour, and Lord Jesus 
Christ, which is our hope; 

2 Unto Timothy, my ‘own son in 
the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, 
from God our Father and ¢Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

3 AsI besought thee to abide still 
at Ephesus, when I «went into Mac- 
edonia, that thou mightest charge 
some that they teach no other doc- 
trine, 

4 Neither give Sheed to fables and 
endless genealogies, which minister 
questions, rather than godly edify- 
ing which is in faith: so do. 

5 Now &the end of the command- 
ment is /charity out of a ‘pure 
heart, and of a good conscience, 
and of faith unfeigned: : 

6 From which some /J/having 
swerved have turned aside unto 
vain jangling; 

7 Desiring to be teachers of 
the law; understanding neither 
what they say, nor whereof they 
affirm. 

8 But we know that the law is 
kgood, if a man use it lawfully; 

9 Knowing this, that the Jaw is 


not made for a righteous man, but 
for the lawless and disobedient, for 


A.D.65. _|the ungodly and for sinners, for 


@ Rom.1.16, nofe. 

> Christ Jesus our 
hope. 

¢ true child. 

@ Christ Jesus. 

¢ Acts 20.1,3. 

F1 Tim.6.3,4,20. 

9 Rom.13.8, 10; 
Gal.5.14. 

h love. 

7 Eph. 6.23. 

32 Tim.4.10. 

* Rom.7.12. 

l Law (of Moses). 
vs.8,9; Heb.7.19. 
(Ex.19.1; Gal.3, 
1-29.) 

msmiters. 

m 2 Cor.2.17. 

° gospel of the 
glory. 

P Gospel. 2 Tim. 
1.8,10. (Gen.12. 
1-3; Rev.14,6.) 

@1 Tim.6.15, 

r1 Cor.9.17. 

81 Cor.15.10. 

£1 Cor.7.25. 

& Col.1.25. 

» Acts 8.3; 1 Cor. 
15.9, 


w Lk. 23.34. 

% John 3.16,17. 

yu kosmos (Mt.4.8) 
=mankind. 

2 Rom.1.16, note. 
@ Grace (in salv.). 
v5.14,15; 2 Tim. 

1.9. (Rom.3.24; 
John 1.16, note.) 
&Rom.15.4.° 
¢ Life, (eternal). 
1 Tim.4.8. (Mt. 
7.14; Rev.22.19.) 
¢ incorruptible. 
¢ Cf.John 1.18, 
note. 


1274. 


unholy and profane, for “murderers 
of fathers and murderers of moth- 
ers, for manslayers, 

10 For whoremongers, for them 
that defile themselves with man- 
kind, for menstealers, for liars, for 
perjured persons, and if there be 
any other thing that is contrary to 
"sound doctrine; 

11 According to the glorious 
?gospel of the ¢blessed God, which 
was 7committed to my trust. 

12 And I thank Christ Jesus our 
Lord, who hath senabled me, for 
that he counted me “faithful, “put- 
ting me into the ministry; 

13 Who was before a_ blas- 
phemer, and a persecutor, and in- 
jurious: but I obtained mercy, be- 
ue I did it “ignorantly in unbe- 
ief. 

14 And the grace of our Lord was 
exceeding abundant with faith and 
love which is in Christ Jesus. 

15 This is a “faithful saying, and 
worthy of all acceptation, that 
Christ Jesus came into the »world 
to #save “sinners; of whom I am 
chief. 

16 Howbeit for this cause I ob- 
tained mercy, that in me first Jesus 
Christ might shew forth all long- 
suffering, for a ‘pattern to them 


which should hereafter: believe on. 


him to life everlasting. 


17 Now unto the King eternal 
‘4immortal, tinvisiblé, the only wise 


ie 


we 
’ 


41 18] 


I TIMOTHY., 


Ie be honour and glory forever) A.D. 65. 


ever, ~ Amen. 

snd “This charge I commit unto 
hee; ¢son Timothy, according to 
he prophecies which went before 
on thee, that thou by them might- 
est war ¥a good warfare; 
_ 19 Holding faith, and a good con- 
science; which some having put 
away concerning faith have made 
shipwreck: 

20 Of whom is !¢Hymenzus and 


as 


Alexander; whom I have 4delivered| ” 


unto “Satan, that they may learn 
not to blaspheme. 
CHAPTER 2. 


Part if. Prayer, and the divine 
order of the sexes. 


EXHORT therefore, that, first 


of all, supplications, prayers, in-| 


tercessions, and giving of thanks, 
be made for all men; 

2 For ‘kings, and for all that are 
in authority; that we may lead a 
quiet and peaceable life in all godli- 
ness and Shonesty. 

3 For this is good and acceptable 
in the sight of God our /Saviour; 
_4 *Who will have all men to be 
Jsaved, and to come unto the know- 
ledge of the truth. 

5 For there is one God, and one 
mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus; 

6 Who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time. 

7 Whereunto I°am ordained a 
preacher, and an apostle, (I speak 
the truth in Christ and lie not;) a 
teacher of the Gentiles in faith and 
verity. 

8 I will therefore that ‘men pray 
every where, lifting up holy hands, 
without wrath and doubting. 

9 In like manner also, that 
women adorn themselves in modest 
apparel, with shamefacedness and 


sobriety; not with “broided hair, 
or gold, or pearls, or costly 
array; 


10 But (which becometh women 
professing godliness) with good 
works. : 

11 Let the “woman learn in °si- 
lence with all subjection. 

12 But I suffer not a woman to 
teach, nor to usurp authority over 
the man, but to be in silence. 


{ 


a child, 

6 the. 

¢2 Tim.2.17, 
18. 

d Judgments 
(the seven). 
2 Tim.4.1. 


(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20.12.) 


f Rom.13.1. 
& &ravity. 


h Rom.1.16, 
note. 


z John 3.15,16; 
2 Pet-3:9: 

7 Rom.1.16, 
note. 

& Mt.20.28. 

1 the men. 


m Or, plaited. 
1 Pet.3.3. 


n 1 Cor.14.34. . 
o quietness. 

b Cf.Gen.3.16. 
qg quietness. 


r Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


S preserved, 
t love. 
u an overseer. 
v an overseer. 
wElders, 
1 Tim.5.1,17, 
19. (Acts 11. 
30; Tit.1.5-9.) 
x discreet. 
y 2 Tim.2.24. 
2 Psa.101.2. 
a Prov.16.18. 
b Jude 6. 
c Acts 22.12. 
d1 Tim.6.9; 
2 Tim.2.26. 
e Satan. 
1 Tim.5.15. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10,) 
f Acts 6.3. 
g v.16; Mt.13. 
11, note. 
h Or, Women 
gan like man- 
mer must 
iv.4. 
j Or, minis- 
tered. 
kMt.25.21. 


[3 14 


13 For Adam was first formed, 
then Eve. 

14 And Adam was not deceived, 
but the woman being deceived was 
in the ‘transgression. 

15 Notwithstanding she shall be 
ssaved in childbearing, if they con- 
tinue in faith and ‘charity and holi- 
ness with sobriety. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part II. The qualifications of 
elders and deacons. 


Aare is a true saying, If a man 
desire the office of a “bishop, 
he desireth a good work. 

2 %A ’bishop then must be blame- 
less, the husband of one wife, *vigi- 
lant, sober, of good behaviour, given 
to hospitality, apt to teach; 

3 Not given to wine, no striker, 
not greedy of filthy lucre; but 
Ypatient, not a brawler, not covet- 
ous; 

4 One that ruleth «well his own 
house, having his children in sub- 
jection with all gravity; 

5 (For if a man know not how to 
tule his own house, how shall he 
take care of the church of Gad?) 

6 Not a novice, lest being lifted 
up with pride he fall into the con- 
demnation of the devil. . 

7 Moreover he must have a good 
report of ‘them which are without; 
lest he fall into reproach and the 
dsnare of the ¢devil. 

8 Likewise must the fdeacons be 
grave, not doubletongued, not given 
to much wine, not greedy of filthy 
lucre; 

9 Holding the Smystery of the 
faith in a pure conscience. 

10 And let these also first be 
proved; then 1::t them use the office 
of a deacon, being found blameless. 

11 “Even so must their wives he 
grave, not slanderers, sober, faith- 
ful in all things. 

12 Let the deacons: be the hus- 
bands of one wife, ‘ruling their chil- 
dren and their own houses well. 

13 For they that have /used the 
office of a deacon “well purchase to 
themselves a good degree, and great 
boldness in the faith which is in 
Christ Jesus. 

14 These things write I unto thee, 
hoping to come unto thee shortly: 


1 It is significant as bearing upon the seriousness of all false teaching, and partic- 
ularly as related to resurrection, that Paul calls it blasphemy to teach that ‘‘the 


resurrection is past already” (2 Tim. 2. 17, 18), 


1275 


“Seis the ¢m r ( 
$T was Cantee in the flesh, justified 


4 ae nourished up in the words 


3 15] 


15 But if I tarry long, that thou 
mayest Know how thou oughtest to 
behave thyself ¢in the house of 
‘God, which is the !¥church ‘of the 
living God, the pillar and ground of 
the truth. 

16 And without controversy great 
of godliness: God 


in the ¢Spirit, seen of /fangels, 
preached unto the -Gentiles, be- 
lieved on in the world, received up 
into glory. 


CHAPTER 4. 


Part IV. The walk of a “good 
minister of Jesus Christ.” 


WTOW the “Spirit ‘speaketh ex- 
AN pressly, that inthe latter:times 
some ‘shall Jdepart from the faith, 
giving heed to seducing spirits, and 
doctrines of “devils; 

2 Speaking lies in hypocrisy; hay- 
ing their conscience seared with a 
hot iron; 

3 Forbidding to:marry,.andcom- 
manding to abstain from meats, 
which God hath created to be re- 
ceived with thanksgiving of them 
which believe and know the truth. 
4 For every creature of God 
is good, and nothing to ‘be re- 
fused, if it be received with thanks- 
giving: 

5 For itsis /sanctified by the word 
of 'God .and prayer. 

6 If thou put the brethren in re- 
membrance of these things, thou 
shalt bea good minister of ™Jesus 


of _*fai and of good doctrine, 
whereunto thou hast attained. 

7 But refuse profane and old 
wives’ fables, and exercise thyself 
rather unto godliness. 

8 For bodily exercise profiteth 
little: but godliness is profitable 
unto all things, having promise of 
the life that now is, and of ?that 
which is to come. 

9 This is a faithful saying and 
worthy of all acceptation. 

10 For therefore we both labour 


I TIMOTHY. 


a Heb.3.6. 

6 Churches 
(local). vs.5, 
15,16; Phm.2. 
(Acts 2.41; 
Phil.1-1.) 

¢ Church 
(visible). 

(1 Cor.10.32.) 

d Mt.13.11, 
note. 

e Holy Spirit 
1 Tim.4.1. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

f Heb.1.4, 
note. 

g kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 

h Holy Spirit. 
2 Tim.1.7,14. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

i Insptration. 
2 Tim,3.16. 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

j Apostasy. 


| wvs.1-3; 2 Tim. 


4.3,4. (Lk.18. 
8; 2 Tim.3. 
1-8.) 


k demons. 
| Sanctify, 


sons) (N.T.) 
Tit.1.8. 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 

m Christ 
Jesus. 

n the faith. 

o for a little. 

p Life (eter- 
nal). 1 Tim. 
6.12,19. 
(Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

q hope. 

r Preserver. 

SiL1b.2.7,15. 

t Jove. 

u 2 Tim.1.6. 

v Deut.34.9. 

w Rom.1.16, 
note, 

x vs.5,16. 

y descend- 
ants. 

3 hopeth. 

a Rev.3.1. 

b 2 Cor.12.14. 

c unbeliever. 


and suffer reproach, because we — 
%trust in the living God, who is the © 
Saviour of all men, specially of © 
those that believe. 

11 These things command and 
teach. 
12 sLet no man despise thy youth; — 


‘but be thou an example of the be-— 


: 


lievers, in word, in conversation, in 
‘charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. 

13 Till I come, give attendance to 
reading, to exhortation, to doc- 
trine. f 

14 “Neglect not the gift that is in 
thee. which was given thee by 
prophecy, with the “laying on of the 
hands of the presbytery. 

15 Meditate upon these things; 
give thyself wholly to them; that 
thy profiting may appear to all. 

16 Take heed unto thyself, and 
unto the doctrine; continue in them: 
for in doing this thou.shalt both 
save thyself, and them that shear 
thee. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Part V. The work of a “good 
minister of Jesus Christ.** 


EBUKE not an elder, but in- 
treat Aim as a father; and the 
younger men as brethren; 

2 The elder women as mothers; 
the younger as sisters, with ‘all 
purity. 

3 Honour widows that are “wid- 
ows indeed. 

4 But if any widow have children 
or Ynephews, let’ them learn first to 
shew piety at home, and to requite 
their parents: for that is good and 
acceptable before God. 

5S Now she that is a widow indeed, 
and desolate, =trusteth in God, and 
continueth in supplications and 
prayers night and day. ‘ 

6 But she that liveth in pleasure 
is ¢dead while ‘she liveth. 

7 And these things givein:charge, 
that they may be blameless. 

8 But if any provide not for his 
own, and specially for those of his 
own house, he hath denied the faith, 
and is worse than an “infidel. 


1 Church (visible), Summary: The passages under this head (1 Cor. 10. 32; 1 Tim. 
3. 15) refer to that visible body of professed believers calied, collectively, ‘the 
Church,” of which history takes account as such, though it exists under many names 


and divisions ‘based upon differences in doctrine or in government. 


most part, this historical ‘“Church” 
the fulness of him that filleth all in 


believing Remnant within Israel (Rom. 
visible Church is apostasy (Lk. 18.8: 2 
13, 36-43; Rom. 8. 18-23; 1 Thes. 4. 14-17). 


has 
all” 


Tim, 3 
1276 


Within, for the 


existed the true Church, “which is his body,, 
(Eph. 1. 22, 23; Heb. 12. 23, note), like the 
11. 5, note). 


The predicted future of the 


. 1-8); of the true Church, glory (Mt. 


I 


9 Let not a widow be taken into 
the number under threescore years 
old, having been the wife of one 


man, 

10 Well reported of for good 
works; if she have brought up chil- 
dren, if she have @lodged strangers, 
if she have washed the saints’ feet, 
if she have relieved the afflicted, if 
she have diligently followed every 
good work. 

11 But the younger widows re- 
fuse: for when they have begun to 
wax wanton against Christ, they 
will marry; 

12 ‘Having damnation, because 
they have cast off their first faith. 

13 And withal they learn to be 
idle, wandering about from house to 
house; “and not only idle, but tat- 
tlers also and busybodies, speaking 
things which they ought not. 

14 I will therefore that the younger 
women marry, bear children, guide 
the house, give none occasion to the 
adversary to speak reproachfully. 

15 For some are already turned 
aside after ¢Satan. 

16 If any man or woman that be- 
lieveth have widows, let them re- 
lieve them, and let not the church 
be charged; that it may relieve 
them that are widows indeed. 

17 «Let the elders that rule well be 
counted worthy of double honour, 
especially they who labour in the 
word and doctrine. 

18 For the scripture saith, fThou 
shalt not muzzle the ox that tread- 
eth out the corn. ¢And, The la- 
bourer is worthy of his reward. 

19 Against an “elder receive not 
-an accusation, but ‘before two or 
three witnesses. 

20 Them that Jsin rebuke before 
all, that others also may fear. 

_ 21 +I charge thee before God, and 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect 
angels, that thou observe these 
things without “preferring “one be- 
fore another, doing nothing by par- 
tiality. 

22 °Lay hands suddenly on no 
man, neither be partaker of other 
men’s Jsins: keep thyself pure. 

23 Drink no longer /water, but 
use a little wine for thy stomach’s 
sake and thine often infirmities. 

24 Some men’s %sins are “open be-|} . 
forehand, going before to judgment; 
and some men they follow after. 

25 Likewise also the good works 
of some are manifest beforehand; 
and they that are otherwise cannot 
be hid. 


TIMOTHY. 


{6 14 


a SO CHAPTER 6. 


Part V. continued. 


.] ET as many ‘servants as are 
: peat sa 7 L under the yoke count their own 
¥-\masters worthy of all honour, that 


ee ‘3-11. the name of God and his doctrine 

2 Tim.2.26, |be not blasphemed. 

(Gen.3.1; ' | 2 And they that have believing 

Rev.20.10.) /masters, let them not despise them, 
e ietbessle, because they are brethren; but 
eee wet rather do them service, because 

1 Cor.9.7,11. |they are faithful and beloved, par- 
g Lk.10.7. takers of the benefit. These things 
h Elders. vs.1, |teach and exhort. 

17,19; Jas.5. | 3 If any man teach otherwise, and 

He Seg 11. |consent not to ‘wholesome words. 

Say a even the words of our Lord Jesus 
i Deut.19.15, |Christ, and to the doctrine which is 
j Sin. Rom.3, |“according to godliness; 

23, note. 4 He is proud, *knowing nothing, 
k2Tim4.1. |but doting about questions and 
1 Heb.1:4,note.|strifes of words, whereof cometh 
m On, preju- jenvy, strife, railings, evil surmis- 

dice. ing jg 
n Deut.1.17. 5 Perverse disputings of men Of 
o Acts 13.3. corrupt minds, and destitute of the 


) water only. |truth, supposing that gain is godli- 
q Sin. Rom.3. |ness: from “such withdraw thy- 


23, note. self, 

psn 6 But *godliness with Ycontent- 

te et te ment is great gain. sue 
Pen 7 For we brought nothing into 

pea this 2world, and it is ¢certain we 

?1Cor8.2. lean carry nothing out. 

CRs ee sh), 8 And having food and raiment 

*Prov-15-16. let us be therewith Scontent. 

p ebal3'9: 9 But they that <will be rich fall 

BOIL: ‘linto ¢temptation and a snare, and 

a Psa.49.17. | +n¢o many foolish and hurtful lusts, 

bGen.28.20. | hich drown men in destruction 

epill to.be. land perdition. 
aD Tanotanon 10 For the love of money is 
Heb.2.18. ethe root of fall evil: which while 
(Gen,3.1; some coveted after, they have 
Jas.1.14.) erred from the faith, and pierced 

GENRE themselves through with many 

feverye sorrows. 

\f Separation. | 11 But thou, O man of God, éflee 
21. (Gen.l2, {these things; and follow after “right- 
1;2Cor.6.. |eousness, godliness, faith, love, pa- 
14-17.) tience, meekness. 

hl John 3.7, 12 Fight the good fight of faith, 
Hore: lay hold on ‘eternal life, whereunto 

or Caer thou art also called, and hast Jpro- 
19; 2 Tim.?.1,/fessed a good profession before 


10. (Mt.7.14; |many witnesses. 

Rev.22.19.) | 13 [ give thee «charge in the sight 
jHeb.10.23- of God, who quickeneth all things, 
k1Tim.5.21. |and before Christ Jesus, ‘who be- 
U vere 18,36, |fore Pontius Pilate witnessed a good 
: confession; 

14 That thou keep this com- 
mandment without spot, unre- 


1277 


6 15] 


bukeable, until “the appearing of 
our Lord Jesus Christ: 

15 Which in his times he shall 
shew, who is "the blessed and only 
Potentate, the “King of kings, and 
Lord of lords; 

16 Who only hath immortality, 
dwelling in the light which no man 
can approach unto; 4whom no man 
hath seen, nor can see: to whom be 
honour and power everlasting. 
Amen. 

17 Charge them that are rich in 
this ‘world, that they be not high- 
minded, nor /trust in uncertain 
riches, but in the living God, who 


I TIMOTHY. 


A.D. 65. 


a Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
Tit.2.13. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 

61 Tim.1.17. 

c Rev.17.14. 

d Cf.John 1. 
18, note. 

e€ age. 


hope. 
g Eccl.5.18,19. 
h Phil.3.14. 
ion what is 
really life. 
j Tit.1.14. 
k the know- 


roe 


ledge which 


4s. 


be rich in good works, ready to dis- 
tribute, willing to communicate; 

19 Laying up in store for them- 
selves a good foundation against 
the time to come, that they may 
‘lay hold ‘on eternal life. 

20 O Timothy, keep that which is 
committed to thy trust, javoiding 
profane and vain babblings, and op- 
positions of “science falsely so called: 

21 Which some professing have 
erred concerning the faith. 
be with thee. Amen. 


[6 21 

giveth us richly all things &to } 

enjoy; ; 
18 That they do good, that they 


Grace ¢ 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO 


11 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 
Date. 


TIMOTHY. 


[1 1s 


This touching letter was written by Paul to his “dearly beloved son’”’ 


shortly before his martyrdom (4. 6-8), and contains the last words of the great 
apostle which inspiration has preserved. 


Theme. 


Second Timothy (in common with Second Peter, Jude, and Second and. 


Third John) has to do with the personal walk and testimony of a true servant of 


Christ in a day of apostasy and declension. 


The key-phrases are, ‘‘All they which 


are in Asia be turned away from me” (1. 15); and, ‘‘A good soldier of Jesus Christ” 


(2. 3). 


The Asian churches had not disbanded, nor ceased to call themselves Chris- 


tian, but they had turned away from the doctrines of grace distinctively revealed 
through the Apostle Paul (see Introduction, p. 1189). ‘This was the proof that 
already the apostasy had set in in its first form, legalism. 


The natural divisions are four: I. The Apostle’s greeting, 1. 1-18. 
way of an approved servant in a day of apostasy, 2. 1-26. 
IV. A faithful servant and his faithful Lord, 4. 1-22. 


Word, 3. 1-17. 


CHAPTER 1. 
Part I. The apostolic greeting. 


prt. an apostle of Jesus Christ 

by the will of God, according 
to the “promise of life which is in 
Christ Jesus, 

2 ToTimothy, my dearly “beloved 
‘son: Grace, mercy, and peace, 
from God the Father and Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 

3 I thank God, whom I 4serve 
from my forefathers with pure ¢con- 
science, that without ceasing I have 
remembrance of thee in my prayers 
night and day; 

4 Greatly Jdesiring to see thee, 
being mindful of thy tears, that I 
may be filled with joy; 

5S When I call to remembrance the 

“unfeigned ¢faith that is in thee, 

-which dwelt first in thy grand- 
mother Lois, and thy *mother Eu- 
nice; and I am persuaded that in 
thee also. 

6 Wherefore I put thee in remem- 
brance that thou stir up ‘the gift of 
God, which is in thee by the putting 
on of my hands. 


7 For God hath not given us the} 


spirit of 7fear; but of “power, and 
of love, and Hs a pe uae 

8 Be.not t erefore as 

of the testimony of our Lord, nor 


II. The path- 
III. Apostasy and the 


aa 


A.D. 66. 


@ Tit.1.2. 

61 Tim.1.2, 

¢ child. 

4 Acts 23.1. 

¢ Heb.13.18. 

£2 Tim.4.9,21. 

91 Tim.4.6. 

h Acts 16.1. 

41 Tim.4.14. 

J Rom.8.15; 1 John 
4.18. 


k Lk.24.49. 

1 Col.1.24. 

m Rom.1.16, nofe. 

n Grace (in salv.). 
Tit.2.11. CRom. 
3.24; ee 1.16, 


ole. ages. 

>» Rom.1,16, nofe. 

@ Life (eternal). 
Tit.1.2. (Mt.7. 
14; Rev.22.19.) 

r incorruptibility. 

8 Gospel. vs.8,1); 
2 Tim.2.8. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev.14.6.) 

t Rom.1.16, 

u Assurance. 
2 Tim.4.8,18. 
EOE Jude 


v Faith. Heb.4.2, 
3;10.22. (Gen.3. 
20; Heb.11.39.) 


w pattern, or, out- 
line. 


21 Tim.6.3, 


uw Holy Spirit. 
vs.7,14; Tit.3.5. 
(Mt.1.18; Acts 
2.4.) 


2 Acts 19.10. 
@ 2 Tim.4.10,16. 


of me his prisoner: but be thou ’par- 
taker of the afflictions of the gospel 
according to the power of God; 

9 Who hath “saved us, and called 
us with an holy calling, not accord- 
ing to our works, but according to 
his own purpose and “grace, which 
was given us in Christ Jesus be- 
fore the °world began, —~ 

10 But is now made manifest by 
the appearing of our ?Saviour Jesus 
Christ, who hath abolished death, 
and hath brought life and 7immor- 
tality to light through the ‘gospel: 

11 Whereunto I am appointed a 
preacher, and an apostle, and a 
teacher of the Gentiles. 

12 Forthe which cause IJ also !suf- 
fer these things: ‘nevertheless I am 
not ashamed: for 1 “ktiow WHONTT 
hav , and am persuaded 
that he is able to keep that which I 
have committed unto him against 
that day. 

13 Hold fast the “form *of sound 
words, which thou hast heard of 
me, in faith and love which is in 
Christ Jesus. 

14 That good thing which was 
committed unto thee keep by the 
YHoly Ghost which dwelleth in us. 

15 This thou knowest, that Zall 
they which are in Asia be “turned 
away from me; of whom are Phy- 
gellus and Hermogenes. 


1 The believer’s resources in a day of general declension and apostasy are: 


{3} 
20, 21); 
(2. 13, 19 


the grace of Christ (2. 1); (5 


1279 


Faith (1. 5); (2) the Spirit (1. 6, 7); (3) the word of God (1. 13; 3. 1-17; 4. 3, 4); 
) separation from vessels unto dishonour (2. 4, 
©) the Lord’s sure reward (4. 7, 8); (7) the Lord’s faithfulness and power 


1 16] 


II TIMOTHY. 


[32 


16 The Lord give mercy unto the] A.D.66. _|remembrance, charging them be- 
house of Onesiphorus; “for he oft!;> Tim.4.19, |fore the Lord that they “strive not 


refreshed me, and was not ashamed 
of my ®chain: ’ 

17 But, when he was in Rome, he 
sought me out very diligently, and 
found me. 

18 The Lord grant unto him that 
he may find mercy of the Lord 4in 
that day: and in how many things 
he ¢ministered unto me at Ephesus, 
thou knowest very well. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Part II. The path of a “‘good sol- 
dier” in the time of apostasy. 
HOU therefore, my ¢son, be 
strong in the /grace that is in 
Christ Jesus. 

2 And the things that thou hast 
heard of me among many witnesses, 
the same &commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach 
others also. 

3 Thou therefore “endure hard- 
ness, as a good soldier of Jesus 
Christ. j 

4 No man that ‘warreth entan- 
gleth himself with the affairs of this 
life; that he may please him who 
hath Jchosen him to be a soldier. 

5 And if a man also strive for 
masteries, yet is he not crowned, 
except he strive lawfully. 

6 The husbandman “that labour- 
eth must be first partaker of the 
fruits. 

7 Consider what I say; and ‘the 
Lord give thee understanding in all 
things. 

8 Remember that “Jesus Christ 
of the seed of David was raised 
from the dead according to my 
"gospel: 

9 Wherein I suffer trouble, as an 
evil doer, even unto “bonds; but the 
word of God is not bound. 

10 Therefore I endure all things 
for the ?elect’s sakes, that they may 
also obtain the salvation which 
is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. 

Al Teas a faithful saying: For if 
we "be dead wi 1m, we shall also 
live with him: 

12 If we suffer, we shall also reign 
with him: if we Sdeny him, he also 
will deny us: ; 

Le mh we sf aes not, yet he 
abidetl i : he “cannot deny 
himself. faithful: 

14 Of these things "put them in 


6 Acts 28.20. 

c Mt.25.34. 

d Heb.6.10. 

e child. 

f Grace (im- 
parted). 
Heb.4.16. 
(Rom.6.1; 

2) Pet:3.18:) 
g1 Tim.1.18. 

h 2 Tim.4.5. 

t oethasa 
soldier.1 Cor. 
9.25,26. 

j enlisted. 

k must la- 
bour, before 
Partaking of 
the fruits. 

1 Prov.2.6. 

m Rom.1.3,4. 

n Gospel. 
Phm.13. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 

o Eph.6.20. 

bp Election 
(corporate) 

iTS | 


@g Rom.1,16, 
note. 

v have died. 

sMt.10.33. | 

t are unfaith- 


ul. 
u Num.23.19, 
v 2 Pet.1.13. 
w Tit.3.9,10. 
x 2 Pet.1.10. 
y Mt.13.52. 
21 Tim.6.21. 
a1 Cor.15.12. 
b Resurrec- 
tion. Heb. 
11 


(Job 19.25; 
1 Cor.15.52.) 
¢ Prov.10.25. 

d Jehovah. 
Num.16.5. 

e the Lord. 

f Rom.9.21. 

g Separation. 
vs.19,21; 
Heb.11.24, 
25. (Gen.12. 
15) 2) Cori6: 
14-17.) 

h 2 Tim.3.17. 

11 John 3.7, 
note, 

j love. 

k v.16. 

lOr, forbear- 


ing. 

m Gal.6.1. 

n Repentance, 
Heb.6.1,6. 
(Mt:3.2; 

Acts 17.30.) 

o Satan. Heb. 
2.14, (Gen.3. 
1; Rev.20.10.) 

p 1 Tim.4.1; 
BePet-3:3* 

1 John 2.18; 
Jude 17,18. 


, 1 Apostasy, Summary: Apostasy, 
tians who deliberately reject revealed 
(2) redemption through His atoning 


1280 


“falling away,” 
truth (1) as to 
and redeeming 


about words to no profit, but to the 


tsubverting of the hearers. 


15 *Study to shew thyself ap- 
proved unto God, a workman — 
needeth not to be asharasd, srightly 
dividing the word of truth. 

16 But shun profane and vain 
babblings: for they will increase 
unto more ungodliness. 

17 And their word will eat.as doth 
a canker: of whom is Hymenzus 
and Philetus; 

18 Who concerning the truth 
have erred, “saying that the oresur- 
rection is past already; and over- 
throw the faith of some. 

19 Nevertheless the ‘foundation 
of God standeth sure, having this 
seal, The ¢Lord knoweth them that 
are his. And, Let-every one that 
nameth the name of «Christ depart 
from iniquity. 

20 But in a great house there are 
not only fvessels of gold and of sil- 
ver, but also of wood and of earth; 
and some to honour, and some to 
dishonour, 

21 Ifaman therefore Spurge him- 
self from these, he shall be a vessel 
unto honour, sanctified, and meet 
for the master’s use, and prepared 
unto every good work. 

22 Flee also youthful lusts: but 
follow ‘righteousness, faith, ‘char- 
ity, peace, with them that call on 
the Lord out of a pure heart. 

23 But foolish and unlearned 
Fquestions avoid, knowing that 
they do gender strifes. 

24 And the servant of the Lord 
must not strive; but be gentle unto 
all men, apt to teach, /patient, 

25 In ™meekness instructing 
those that oppose themselves; if 
God peradventure will give them 
"repentance to the acknowledging 
of the truth; 

26 And that they may recover 
themselves out of the snare of the 
devil, who are taken captive by 
him at his will. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part III. The apostasy predicted: 
the hbeliever’s resource—the 
Scriptures. 


[sus lknow also, *that in the last 
days perilous times shall come. 


ph, 


is the act of professed Chris- 
the deity of Jesus Christ, and 
sacrifice (1 John 4. 1-3; Phil. 


> 


3 2] 


2 2For men shall be lovers of their’ 
own selves, covetous, boasters, 
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to 
parents, unthankful, unholy, 

3 Without natural affection, 
trucebreakers, false accusers, incon- 
tinent, fierce, despisers of those that 
are good, 

4 Traitors, heady, highminded, 
lovers of pleasures more than lovers 
of God; 

5 ‘Having a form of godliness, but 
denying the power thereof: from 
such turn away. 

6 For of this sort Zare they which 
creep into houses, and lead captive 
silly women laden with <sins, led 
away with divers lusts, 

7 Ever learning, and never able to 
come to the knowledge of the truth. 

8 Now as Jannes and /Jambres 
withstood Moses, so do these also 
resist the truth: men of corrupt 
minds, ‘reprobate concerning the 
faith. 

9 But they shall proceed no fur- 
ther: for their folly shall be mani- 
fest unto all men, as their’s also 
was. 

10 But thou hast fully known my 
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, 
faith, longsuffering, ‘charity, pa- 
tience, 

11 Persecutions, afflictions, which 
came unto me at JAntioch, at *Ico- 
nium, at Lystra; what persecutions 
I endured: but out of them. all the 
Lord delivered me. 

12 Yea, and all that will live godly 
in Christ Jesus shall suffer perse- 
cution. 

13 But evil men and /seducers 
shall wax worse and worse, deceiv- 
ing, and being deceived. 

14 But continue thou in the things 
which thou hast learned and hast 
been assured of, knowing of whom 
thou hast learned them; 

15 And that from a child thou 
hast known the “holy “scriptures, 
which are able to make thee wise 
unto salvation through faith which 
is in Christ Jesus. 

16 °All scripture is given by in- 
spiration of God, and is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correc- 


II TIMOTHY. 


A.D. 66. 


a Rom.1.29,31. 

b2 Pet2.103 

c Tit.1.16. 

d Tit.1.11. 

e Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

f Ex.7.11,12, 
ORR ORG 

g1 Tim.6.5. 

h Apostasy. 
vs.1-8. kk. 
18.8.) 

ti love. 

j Acts 13.45,50. 

k Acts 14.5,6, 


19. 

l juggling 
ampostors. 

m Sanctify, 
holy (things) 
(N.T.). Heb 
9.12. 

(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 

n Rom.1.16, 
note, 

o Inspiration. 
1 Pet.1.10-12, 
25. (Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

~ 1 John 3.7, 
note. 

q complete. 
See Mt.5. 

48, note. 

ry Judgments 
(the seven). 
Heb.9.27. 

(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20,12.) 

5 Tit.2.15. 

t Apostasy. 
vs.3,45; 
Heb.6.4-8. 


w Phil.1.23; 
PPesie14: 
x1 Tim.6.12. 

y the. 

z Assurance. 
vs.8,18; 
Heb.6.11. 
(Isa.32.17; 
Jude 1.) 

a Rewards. 
Heb.11.6. 
(Dan.12.3; 
1 Cor.3.14.) 

61 John 3.7, 
note. 

¢1 Cor.2.9. 

d Cf.Col.4.14; 
Phm.24. 


e age. 
f Tit.3.12. 


[4 12 


tion, for instruction in ?righteous- 
ness: 

17 That the man of God. may be 
@perfect, throughly furnished unto 
all good. works. 


CHAPTER 4. 


Part IV. A faithful servant and 
his faithful Lord. 


CHARGE thee therefore before 
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 
who shall "judge the quick and the 
dead at his appearing, and his king- 
om; 

2 Preach the word; be instant in 
season, out of season; Sreprove, re- 
buke, exhort with all longsuffering 
and doctrine. 

3 For the time will come when 
they will not endure sound doc- 
trine; but after their own lusts shall 
they heap to themselves teachers, 
having ce ears; 

4 ‘And they shall turn away 
their ears from the truth, and shall 
be turned unto fables. 

5 But watch thou in all things, 
“endure afflictions, do the work of 
an evangelist, make “full proof of 
thy ministry. 

6 For I am now ready to be of- 
fered, and the time of my “depar- 
ture is at hand. 

7 I have *fought a good fight, I 
have finished my course, I have 
kept the faith: 

8 Henceforth there is laid up for 
me a “crown of “righteousness, 


which the Lord, the righteous judge, 
shall give me at that day: and not 
to me only, but unto all ‘them also 
that love his appearing. 

9 Do thy diligence to come short- 
ly unto me: 

10 For ¢2Demas hath forsaken me, 
having loved this present ¢world, 
and is departed unto Thessalonica; 
Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto 
Dalmatia. 

11 Only Luke is with me. Take 
Mark, and bring him with thee: 
for he is profitable to me for the 
ministry. 

12 And fTychicus have I sent to 


Ephesus. 


3. 18; 2 Pet. 2. 1). 


may be the result of ignorance (Acts 19. 
snare of Satan (2 Tim. 2. 25, 26), both of 
apostate is perfectly described in 2 Tim. 4. 3, 4. _ 
but not from the outward profession of Christianity (855). 
described in 2 Tim. 4. 3; 2 Pet. 2. 1-19; Jude 4, 8, 11-13, 16. 
, is irremediable, and awaits 


as in Israel (Isa. 1. 5, 6; 5. 5-7) 


Apostasy differs therefore from error concerning truth, which 
1-6), or heresy, which may be due to the 
which may consist with true faith. The 


Apostates depart from the faith, 

Apostate teachers are 
Apostasy in the church, 
judgment (2 Thes. 2. 


10-12; 2 Pet. 2. 17, 21; Jude 11-15; Rev. 3. 14-16). 


1281 


4 13] 


II TIMOTHY 


13 The cloke that I left at Troas} A.D. 66. 


with Carpus, when thou comest, 
bring with thee, and the books, 
but especially the parchments. 

14 Alexander the coppersmith did 
me much evil: the “Lord reward 
him according to his works: 

15 Of whom be thou ware also; 
for he hath greatly withstood our 
words. 

16 At my first answer no man 
stood with me, but Yall men for- 
sook me: I pray God that it may 
not be laid to their charge. 

17 Notwithstanding ‘the Lord 
stood with me, and strengthened 
me; that by me the preaching might 
be fully known, and that all the 
Gentiles might hear: and I was de- 


a Jehovah. 
2 Sam.3.39. 


6 2 Fim.1.15. 


c Mt.10.19; 


Acts 23.11. 
d Psa.22.21. 


1282 


[4 22 


livered out of the ¢mouth of the 5 
lion. 
18 And the Lord shall deliver me 


from every evil work, and will pre- 
serve me unto his heavenly king- 
dom: to whom be glory for ever 
and ever. Amen. 

19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and 
the household of Onesiphorus. 

20 Erastus abode at Corinth: but 
dors have I left at Miletum 
sick. 

21 Do thy diligence to come be- 
fore winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, 
and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, 
and all the brethren. 

22 The Lord Jesus Christ be with 
thy spirit. Grace be with you. | 
Amen. 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO 


11] 


WRITER. The Apostle Paul (1. 1). 
Date. 
Theme. 


concerned with the due order of the churches. 


TITUS. 


(lu 


Practically the same with First Timothy. 
Titus has much in common with First Fimothy. 


nothy. Both Epistles are 
The distinction is that in First 


Timothy sound doctrine is more prominent (1 Tim. 1. 3-10), in Titus the divine order 


for the local churches (Tit. 1. 5). 


The permanent use of these Epistles lies in this 


twofold application, on the one hand to churches grown careless as to the truth of 


God, on the other, to churches careless as to the order of God’s house. 


The im- 


portance of this order is made solemnly emphatic in that the tests by which true 
elders and deacons may be known are repeated (1 Tim. 3. 1-7; Tit. 1. 6-9). 

There are two divisions: I. The qualifications and functions of elders, 1. 1-16. 
II. The pastoral work of the true elder, 2. 1-3. 15. 


CHAPTER 1. 


Part I. The divine order for the 
Iocal churches. 


AUL, a “servant of God, and an 

apostle of Jesus Christ, accord- 

ing to the faith of God’s Yelect, and 

the acknowledging of the truth 
which is after godliness; 

2 In hope of “eternal life, which 
God, that cannot lie, promised be- 
fore the ¢world began; 

3 But hath in «due times mani- 
fested his word through preaching, 
which is committed unto me accord - 
ing to the commandment of God 
our &Saviour; 

4 To Titus, mine own son after 
the common faith: Grace, mercy, 
and peace, from God the Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ our 
eSaviour. 

5 For this cause left I thee in 


A.D. 65. 


a bondman. 

b Election 
(corporate). 
1 Pet.5.13. 
(Deut.7.6; 

1 Pet.1.2.) 

c Life (eter- 
nal). Tit.3.7. 
(Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

d age-times. 

eits own due 
season. 

Four Sarseer~ 


od. 

g Rom.1.16, 
note. 

hl Tim.1,1,2. 

i Elders. vs.5- 
9, (Acts 11. 
30.) 


jno seeker of 
base gain. 

k Sanctify, 
holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
Heb.2.11. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev. 
22.11.) 

12 Thes.2.15. 

m Jas.1.26. 


Crete, that thou shouldest set in 
order the things that are !wanting, 
and ordain #‘elders in every city, as 
I had appointed thee: 

6 If any be blameless, the hus- 
band of one wife, having faithful 
children not accused of riot or un- 
ruly. 

7 For a*bishop must be blameless, 
as the steward of God; not self- 
willed, not soon angry, not given to 
wine, no striker, Jnot given to filthy 
lucre; 

8 But a lover of hospitality, a 
lover of good men, sober, just, 
holy, temperate; 

9 ‘Holding fast the faithful word 
as he hath been taught, that he may 
be able by sound doctrine both 
to exhort and to convince the gain- 
sayers. 

10 For there are many unruly and 
vain talkers and deceivers, spe- 
cially they of the circumcision: 

11 Whose mouthsmustbestopped, 


1 It is not at all a question of the presence in the assembly of persons having the 
qualifications of elders, made overseers by the Holy Spirit (Acts 20. 28); that such 
‘persons were in the churches of Crete is assumed; the question is altogether one of 
3 These assemblies were not destitute of elders; 
but were “wanting,” in that they were not duly appointed. There is a progress of 
doctrine in respect of the appointing of elders. 


the appointment of such persons. 


2Elder (presbuteros) and 
same office (cf. v. 7; Acts 20. 
to a function of the office. 
plural. 
elders are: to rule (1 Tim. 3. 4, 
perversion and error (Tit. 1. 9), 
(Acts 20. 28; John 21. 16; L 
the churches by the Holy Spirit 


appointment (Acts 14. 23; Tit. 1. 5). 
*t9 elect,” “to designate with the hand, : 
and 1 Timothy the qualifications of an elder become part of the Scriptures 


toneo, 
in Titus 


bishop (episcopos = 
17; cf. v. 28), the former referring to the man, the latter 
The eldership in the apostolic local churches was always 
There is no instance of one elder in a local church. The 
5; 5. 17), to guard the body of revealed truth from 
to “oversee” the church as a shepherd his flock 
Heb. 13. 17; 1 Pet. 5. 2). : 
(Acts 20. 28), but great stress is laid upon their due 
At first they were ordained (Gr. cheiro- 
”) by an apostle; e.g. Acts 14. 23, but 


Cf. v. 5, note. 


“overseer’’) designate the 
functions of the 


Elders are made or “‘set”’ in 


for the guidance of the churches in such appointment (1 Tim. 3. 1-7). 


1283 


112] 


TITUS.) 


[3 12 


who ¢subvert whole houses, teach-|_ A.D. 65. 12 Teaching us that, denying un- 


ing things which they ought not, 
for “filthy lucre’s sake. 

12 One of themselves, even a 
prophet of their own, said, The 
Cretians are alway liars, evil beasts, 
¢slow bellies. 

13 This witness is true. Where- 
fore ¢rebuke them sharply, that 
they may be sound in the faith; 

14 Not giving heed to Jewish fa- 
bles, and commandments of mien, 
that turn from the truth. 

15 Unto the pure all things are 
pure: but unto them that are de- 
filed and unbelieving zs nothing 
pure; but even ‘their mind and con- 
science is defiled. 

16 They ‘profess that they ¢know 
God; but in works they deny Aim, 
being abominable, and “disobedi- 
ent, and unto every good work rep- 
rebate. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Part II. The pastoral work of a 
true minister (Tit. 2. 1-3. 15). 


Bu speak thou the things which 
become sound doctrine: 

2 That the aged men be sober, 
grave, temperate, sound in faith, 
in ‘charity, in patience. 

3 The aged women likewise, that 
they be in behaviour as becometh 
holiness, not false accusers, not 
given to much wine, teachers of 
good things; 

4 That they may teach the young 
women to be sober, to love their 
husbands, to love their children, 

5 To be discreet, chaste, Jkeepers 
at home, good, “obedient to their 
own husbands, that the word of 
God be not blasphemed. 

6 Young men likewise exhort to 
be sober minded. 

7 In all things shewing thyself a 
‘pattern of good works: in doctrine 
shewing uncorruptness, gravity, 
sincerity, 

8 Sound speech, that cannot be 
condemned; that he that is of the 
contrary part m hamed, 
having no evil thing to say Of you. 

9 Exhort servants to be obedient 
unto their own masters, arid to 
please them well in all things; not 
answering again; 

10 Not purloining, but shewing 
all good fidelity;:that they may 
adorn -the doctrine of "God our 
Saviour in all things. 

11 For the °grace of God that 
bringeth salvation hath appeared 
to all men, : 


a Mt.23.14. 

b the sake of 
base gain. 

c lazy glut- 
tons. 

d 2 Tim.4.2. 

e Rom.14.14, 


20. 

f 2 Tim.3.5,7. 

g Mt.7.20,21, 
Boe 25.02 
1 John 2.4. 

h Or, void of 
Judgment, 

t love. 

j Or, diligent 
at home. 

k Cf.Gen.3.16. 

21 Tim.4.12. 

m1 Tim.6.3. 

n our Saviour- 
God. 

o Grace (in 
salv.). Tit.3.7, 
(Rom.3.24; 
John 1.16,, 
note.) 

b lusts of this 
age. 

q Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
Jas.5.7,8. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 

ry Rom.1.16, 
note, 

s Rom.3.24, 
note. 

t lawlessness. 

u Deut.7.6; 

1 Pet.2.9. 

v1 Tim.4.12. 

w Rom.13.1. 

x Eph.4.2. 

y1 Cor.6.11; 

1 Pet.4.3. 
z our Saviour- 


od. 
a Eph.2.4,8,9. 
6 Rom.10.3, 


note, 

d Holy Spirit. 
Heb.2.4. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2,4.) 

e Rom.1.16, 
note, 

f having been, 

g Justifica- 
tion. Rom.3, 
20-28. (Lk. 
18.14; 
Rom.,3.28.) 

h Grace (in 
salv.). 
Heb.2.9. 
(Rom.3.24; 
John 1.16, 
note.) 

# Life (eter- 
nal). Heb.7. 
3,16." 


(Mt.7.14; 
_Rev.22.19.) 
j vs.1,14, 
k 2 Tim.2.23, 
¢Mt.18,17. 
m Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note, 


1284 


godliness and ?worldly lusts, we 
should live soberly, righteously, 
and godly, in this present world; 

13 Looking for that blessed 
hope, and the glorious appearing of 
the great God and our “Saviour 
Jesus Christ; 

14 Who gave himself for us, that 
he might Sredeem us from all 4ini- 


quity, and purify unto himself a 


“peculiar people, zealous of good 
works. 

15 These things speak, and ex- 
hort, and rebuke with all authority. 
?Let no man despise thee. 


CHAPTER 3. 
Part IT. continued. 


pur them in mind to be “subject 
to principalities and powers, to 
obey magistrates, to be ready to 
every good work, 

2 To speak evil of no man, tobe 
no brawlers, but gentle, shewing 
all *meekness unto all men. 

3 For we ourselves also were 
sometimes foolish, disobedient, de- 
ceived, serving divers lusts and 
pleasures, living in malice and 
envy, hateful, and hating one an- — 
other. : 

4 But after that the kindness and 
love of God our Saviour toward 
man appeared, 

5 @Not by works -of 4righteous- 
ness which we have done, ‘but ac- 
cording to his mercy he ‘saved us, 
by the washing of regeneration, and 
renewing of the ¢Holy Ghost; 

6 Which he shed on us abundantly © 
through Jesus Christ our «Saviour: 

7 That fbeing &justified *by his 


Jgrace,, we should be made heirs 


pomane to the hope of ‘eternal 
ife, 

8 This is a faithful saying, and 
these things I will that thou affirm 
constantly, that they which shave 
believed in God might be Jcareful 
to maintain good works. These 
things are good and profitable unto 
men. 

9 But ‘avoid foolish questions, 
and genealogies, and contentions, 
and strivings about the law: for 
they are unprofitable and vain. 

10 A man that is an heretick after 
the first and second admonition 
‘reject; 

11 Knowing 'that he that is such is 
subverted, and “sinneth, being con- 
demned of himself, 

12 When I shall send Artemas f 


TITUS. [3 15 


3 13] 

unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent| A.D. 65. 14 And let our’s also learn to 

to come unto me to Nicopolis: for I'| maintain “good works for necessary 

have determined there to winter. i ; uses, that they be not unfruitful. 
13 Bring Zenas the lawyer and/? Phil-1.11. 15 All that are with me salute 

Apollos on their journey diligently, thee. Greet them that love us in the 

that nothing be wanting unto them, faith. Grace be with you all. Amen. 


1285 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO 


VER. 1] PHILEMON. [Ver. 21 


RITER. The Apostle Paul (1.1). ‘ x : 
Y Date. Probably A.D. wes It is one of the Prison Epistles. See Introductions 

Ephesians and Colossians. ie 
" Thane: Onesimus (‘‘profitable’’), a slave of Philemon, a Christian of Colosse, 
had robbed his master and fled to Rome. There he became a convert through 
Paul, who sent him back to Philemon with this letter. It is of priceless value as a 
teaching (1) in practical righteousness; (2) in Christian brotherhood; (3) in Chris- 
tian courtesy; (4) in the law of love. : 

The divisions are four: I. Greeting, 1-3. II. The character of Philemon, 4-7. 
III. Intercession for Onesimus, 8-21. IV. Salutations and conclusion, 22—25. 


AD. 64. 11 ‘Which in time past was to 


Part I. The apostolic greeting. thee unprofitable, but now profit- 


AUL, a 2prisoner of Jesus Christ, able to thee and to me: 
and Timothy our brother, unto 12 Whom I have sent again: thou 
pepe our dearly beloved, and Hees svcelvs him, that is, mine 
ellowlabourer, own bowels: 

2 And to our beloved Apphia, and ores 13 Whom I would have retained 
bArchippus our fellowsoldier, and] Col.4.17. with me, that in thy stead he might 
Ss ee ey Fares Fi aod ¢ Churches havé ministered unto me in the 
God our Father and the Lord Jesus| Jas.5.14. bonds of the “gospel: — 

Christ. (Acts a But ce fon Bates 
, 1.1. o nothing; that thy benefit shou 
Part II. The character of — |g Eph.1.2. not be as it were of necessity, but 
Philemon. Sagas willingly. 

4 ¢ thank my God, making men-|° >” 15 For perhaps he therefore de- 
tion of thee always in my prayers, |/Jas.2.14,17. |parted for a season, that thou 

5 Hearing of thy love and faith,|¢ pnit4.s: shouldest receive him for ever; 
which thou hast toward the Lord| 2 Pet.1.5,8. 16 Not now as a “servant, but 
Jesus, and toward all saints; reat above a servant, a brother beloved, 

6 That the communication of thy|" ~~ specially to me, but how much more 
faith may become /effectual by the] i fitting. unto thee, both in the flesh, and in 
acknowledging of Severy good thing jCol4.9. the Lord? 


which is in you in Christ Jesus. 
7 For we have great joy and con-|k 1 Cor.4.15. 
solation in thy love, because the 


17 If thou count me therefore a 
°partner, receive him as myself. 


: 11 Pet.2.10. 18 If he hath wronged thee, or 
powels noe ex eats are refreshed e Chapel oweth thee ought, put that on mine 
Boner Heb.4.2.. _ |!Paccount; ° 
Part III. Intercession for Sia 19 I Paul have written it with 
Onesimus. Seek mine own hand, I will repay it: 


8 Wherefore, though I might bel” bondman. |albeit I do not say to thee how thou 
much bold in Christ to dnionk thee|o 2 Cor.8.23. Sel unto me even thine own self 
that ‘which is ‘convenient, retas RSices- . 

9 Yet for love’s sake I rather be-|? “-14-1*- 20 Yea, brother, let me have joy 
seech thee, being such an one as|@in Christ. [of thee in the Lord: refresh my 
Paul the aged, and now also a pris- bowels %in the Lord. 


oner of Jesus Christ. RCE L1G. 21 Having ‘confidence in thy 
.10 I beseech thee for my son obedience I wrote unto thee, know- 
JOnesimus, whom I have “begotten ing that thou wilt also do more than 
in my bonds: I say. 


pen NS ee | ee a 
! Verses 17, 18 perfectly illustrate imputation: “Receive him as myself’”’—reckon 
to him my merit; “If he hath wronged thee or oweth thee ought, put that on mine 


ene reckon to me his demerit. See ‘“Imputation,” Lev. 25. $03: Jas, 204235 
note, 


1286 


Ver. 22] PHILEMON. [VeER. 25 
Part IV. Salutations and’ |__ A.D. 64. 23 There salute thee “Epaphras, 
conclusion. my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus; 


22 But withal prepare me also al: » Acie 125,112 | 24 ¢dMarcus, ¢Aristarchus, /De- 
lodging: for I trust that through a Acts tS 12,25. |mas, Lucas, my fellowlabourers. 


your prayers I shall be given unto $2 tim. ne 25 The grace of our Lord Jesus 
you. FOE Christ be with your spirit. Amen. 


1267 


HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 
to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 
so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference | 
and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. : 


ILLUSTRATION 
(at Mark 1. 1.) 


b Gospel. vs. 
1,14,15; Mk. 
8.35. (Gen. 
12.1-3; Rev. 
14.6.) 


Here Gospel is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place; 
Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the references in parenthesis are 
the first and last. 


1288 


THE JEWISH-CHRISTIAN EPISTLES. 


In Hebrews, James, First and Second Peter, and Jude we have a group of inspired 
writings differing in important respects from Paul’s Epistles. But this difference is 
in no sense one of conflict. All present the same Christ, the same salvation, the 
same morality. The difference is one of extension, of development. The Jewish- 
Christian writings deal with the elementary and foundational things of the Gospel, 
while to Paul were given the revelations concerning the church, her place in the 
counsels of God, and the calling and hope of the believer as vitally united to Christ 
jn the one body. 

The other characteristic difference is that while Paul has in view the body of 
true believers, who are therefore assuredly saved, the Judeo-Christian writers view 
the church as a professing body in which, during this age, the wheat and tares are 
mingled (Mt. 13. 24-30). Their writings, therefore, abound in warnings calculated 
to arouse and alarm the mere professor. A word of caution is, however, needful at 
this point. The persons warned are neither mere hypocrites, nor mere formalists. 
So far as it has gone their experiences are perfectly genuine. It is said of the sup- 
posed persons in Heb. 6. 4-9 that they had been “‘enlightened,” and the same word 
is used in Heb. 10. 32, translated “illuminated.” They are said, too, to have 
“tasted” of the heavenly gift, and again a word importing reality is used, for it 
occurs in Heb. 2. 9 of the death of Christ. The true point of the divine solicitude is 
expressed in verses 1 and 2. It is that they shall go on. They have made a real 
beginning, but it is not said of them that they have faith, and it is said (verse 9) 
that “things that accompany salvation” are “better.” This fear lest beginners will 
“come short” is the theme of Heb. 3. 7-4..3. The memin Mt, 7, 21-23 are not 
conscious hypocrites—they are utterly surprised at their exclusion. Characteristic 
contrasts are, Heb. 6. 4-6 with Rom. 8. 29-39; 2 Pet. 1.10 with Phil. 1.6. In this 
respect these Epistles group with Mt. 13.-23.; Acts 2.-9. The two Epistles of 
Peter, however, are less Jewish and more truly catholic than the other Jewish- 
Christian writings. He addresses, in his first Epistle, neither Jews as such, nor 
even Christian Jews of Jerusalem, or Judea, but of the dispersion; while Second 
Peter is not distinctively Jewish at all. 


1289 


HOW TO USE THE SUBJECT REFERENCES. 


THE subject references lead the reader from the first clear mention of a great truth 
to the last. The first and last references (in parenthesis) are repeated each time, 
so that wherever a reader comes upon a subject he may recur to the first reference 
and follow the subject, or turn at once to the Summary at the last reference. 


ILLUSTRATION 


(at Mark 1. 1.) 


b Gospel. vs.1, 
14,15; Mk. 


Here Gospel is the subject; vs. 1, 14, 15 show where it is at that particular place; 
Mk. 8. 35 is the next reference in the chain, and the references in parenthesis are 
the first and last, 


1290 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE 


a HEBREWS. irs 


WRITER. The authorship of Hebrews has been in controversy from the earliest 
times. The book is anonymous, but the reference in 2 Pet. 3. 15 seems conclusive that 
Paul was the writer. See also Heb. 13 23. All agree that, whether by Paul or 
another, the point of view is Pauline. We undoubtedly have here the method of 
Paul’s synagogue addresses. No book of Scripture more fully authenticates itself 
as inspired. 

Date. From internal evidence it is clear that Hebrews was written before the 
destruction of the Temple, A.D. 70 (cf. 10. 11) 

Theme. ‘The doctrinal passages reveal the purpose of the book. It was written 
with a twofold intent: (1) To confirm Jewish Christians by showing that Judaism 
had come to an end through the fulfilment by Christ of the whole purpose of the 
law; and (2) the hortatory passages show that the writer had in view the danger 
ever present to Jewish professed believers of either lapsing back into Judaism, or 
of pausing short of true faith in Jesus Christ. It is clear from the Acts that 
even the strongest of the believers in Palestine were held to a strange mingling of 
Judaism and Christianity (e.g. Acts 21. 18-24), and that snare would be especially 
apt to entangle professed Christians amongst the Jews of the dispersion. 

The key-word is “better.” Hebrews is a series of contrasts between the good 
things of Judaism and the better things of Christ. Christ is “better” than angels, 
than Moses, than Joshua. than Aaron, and the New Covenant than the Mosaic 
Covenant. Church truth does not appear, the ground of gathering only being stated 
(43 13). The whole sphere of Christian profession is before the writer; hence 
exhortations necessary to warn and alarm a mere professor. 

Hebrews is in six divisions, but these include five parenthetic passages of exhor- 
tation. I. The great salvation, 1. 1-2. 18 (2. 1-4, parenthetic). iI. The rest of God, 
3. 1-4. 16 (all parenthetic). II{. Our great High Priest, 5. 1-8. 6 (5. 11-6. 12, 
parenthetic). IV. The new covenant and the heavenly sanctuary, 8. 7-10. 39 
(10. 26-39, parenthetic). WV. The superiority of the faith-way, 11. 10. VI. The 
worship and walk of the believer-priest, 12. 1-13. 25 (12. 3-17, parenthetic) 


AD. 64. 3 Who being the ¢brightness of 


CHAPTER 1. his glory, and the “express image of 
Part I. The great salvation : his person, and upholding all things 
(Heb. 1. 1-2. 18). ain many by the word of his power, when he 


parts and in) had by himself purged our sins, ‘sat 
(1) The Son better than the | many ways. | ao gon the right hand of the 


blit. in Son. 5 : 
prophets. Majesty on high;: 


F ges. 
OD, who ¢at sundry times and Seta Sree 
in divers manners spake in a he: (2) The Son Beret than the 
time past unto the fathers by the] of his anges. 
prophets, substance. | 4 Being made so much better than 
2 Hath in these last days spoken| sat himself |the langels, as he hath by inheri- 


unto us “by Ais Son, whom he hath ee 20.21, |tance obtained a more excellent 


appointed heir of all things, by name than they. 
whom also he made the ‘worlds; 5 For unto which of the angels 


1 Angel, Summary: Angel, “messenger,” is used of God, of men, and of an order 
of created spiritual beings whose chief attributes are strength and wisdom (2 Sam. 
14. 20; Psa. 103. 20; 104. 4). In the O.T. the expression “‘the angel of the LORD” 
(sometimes “of God’’) usually implies the presence of Deity in angelic form (Gen.16. 
1-13: 21. 17-19; 22. 11-16; 31. 11-13; Ex. 3. 24; Jud. 2. 1; 6. 12-16; 13. 3-22). See Mal. 3. 
1, note. The word angel is used of men in Lk. 7. 24; Jas. 2. 25; Rev. 1. 20; 2. 1, 8, 12, 
18: 3.1, 7,14. In Rev. 8. 3-5 Christ is evidently meant. Sometimes angel is used of 
the spirit of man (Mt. 18. 10; Acts 12. 15). Though angels are spirits (Psa. 104. 4; 
Heb. 1. 14), power is given them to become visible in the semblance of human form 
(Gen. 19. 1, cf. v. 5; Ex. 3. 2; Num. 22. 22-31; Jud. 2. 1; 6. 11, 22; 13. 3, 6; 1 Chr. 21. 
16, 20; Mt. 1. 20; Lk. 1. 26; John 20. 12; Acts 7. 30; 12. 7, 8, etc.). The word is always 

1291 


1 6] 


said he at any time, Thou art my 
*Son, this day have I begotten thee? 
And again, %I will be to him a 
Father, and he shall be to me a 
Son? 

6 And again, when he “bringeth 
in the firstbegotten into the ¢world, 
he saith, ‘And let ail the angels of 
God worship him. 

7 And of the angels he saith, 
fWho maketh his angels spir- 
its, and his ministers a flame of 
fire. 

8 But unto the Son he saith, Thy 
throne, O &God, is for ever and 
ever: a sceptre of “righteousness is 
the sceptre of thy kingdom. 

9 Thou hast loved ‘righteousness, 
and hated Jiniquity; therefore God, 
even thy God, hath anointed thee 
with the oil of gladness above thy 
fellows. 

10 And, *Thou, Lord, in the be- 
ginning hast laid-the foundation of 
the earth; and the heavens are the 
works of thine hands: 

11 They -shall perish; but thou 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. 


a Psa.2.7. 

6 2 Sam.7.14. 

cOr, bringeth 
back. . 


d oikoumene 

inhabited 
earth. 

é Deut.32.43, 
Septuagint. 

f Psa.104.4, 

8 v8:8;9; 
Psa.45.6,7- 

h uprightness. 

¢.1 John 3.7, 
note. 

j lawlessness. 

Rom.3. 

23, note. 


& vs.10-12; 
Psa.102. 
25-27. 

1 Psa.110.1. 

m Rom.1.16, 
note, 

n slip away 
from them. 


o Sin. Rom. 


remainest; and they all shall wax! 3.23, note. 
old as doth a garment;, p Holy Spirit. 
12 And as a vesture shalt thou near 
fold them up, and they shall be! Acts 2.4} 
changed: but thou art the same,|7 oikoumene 
and thy years shall not fail. fe inhabited 
r . 


13 But to which of the angels said 
he at any time, ‘Sit on my right 


[26% 
hand, until I make thine enemies — 
thy footstool? ; 
14 Are they not all. ministering /\_, 
spirits, sent forth to minister for|/~. 
them who shall be heirs of ™salya- 
tion: 


CHAPTER 2. 
(Parenthesis: hearers warned.) 


‘THEREFORE we ought to give 
the more earnest heed to the 
things which we have heard, lest at 
any time we should “let them slip. 

2 For if the word spoken by an- 
gels was stedfast, and every °trans- 
gression. and °disobedience received 
a just recompence of reward; 

3 How shall we escape, if we neg- 
lect so great “salvation; which at 
the first began to be spoken by the _ 
Lord, and was confirmed unto us 
by them that heard Aim; = 

4 God also bearing them witness, 
both with signs and wonders, and 
with divers miracles, and gifts of the 
ely Ghost, according to his own 
will? 


(3) The earth to be put under | 
the man Christ Jesus. 


5 For unto the angels hath he 4 
not put in subjection the ¢world to | 
come, whereof we speak. 

6 But one in a certain place tes- 


used in the masculine gender, though sex, in the human sense, is never ascribed to 
angels (Mt. 22. 30; Mk. 12. 25). They are exceedingly numerous (Mt. 26. 53; Heb. 


12. 22; Rev. 5. 11; Psa. 68.17). Their 
place is about the throne of God (Rev 


Sy 


power is inconceivable (2 Ki. 19.35). Their 
Hs) fe 


i1). Their relation to the believer 


is that of ‘‘ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of 
salvation,” and this ministry has reference largely to the physical safety and well- 
being of believers (1 Ki. 19. 5; Psa. 34. 7; 91. 11; Dan. 6. 22; Mt. 2. 13, 19; 4. 11; Lk. 
22. 43; Acts 5. 19; 12. 7-10). From Heb. 1. 14, with Mt. 18. 10; Psa. 91. 11, it would 
seem that this.care for the heirs of salvation begins in infancy and continues through 


life. The angels observe us (1 Cor. 4. 9; Eph. 3. 10: Eccl. 5 
They receive departing saints (Lk. 16 


influence conduct. 
little lower than the angels,” 


and in incarnation Christ took “for a little’ 


- 6), a fact which should, 
. 22). Man is made “a 
(time) 


this lower place (Psa. 8. 4, 5; Heb. 2. 6, 9) that He might lift the believer into His 


own sphere: above angels (Heb. 2. 9, 10). 


His second advent (Mt. 25. 31). 
the judgment of the nations (see 
age is not to be subject to angels, 


a little lower than the angels (Heb, 2. Sis 


as having a particular relation to Israel and 


. The angels are to accompany Christ in 

To them will be committed the preparation. of 
Mt. 13. 30, 39, 41, 42; 25. 32, note). The kingdom- 
but'to Christ and those for whom He was made 
An archangel, Michael, is mentioned. 


12. 1, 2; Jude 9; 1 Thes. 4. 16). 
Gabriel, was employed im the most 
19, 26), 

Fallen angels. 


Two classes of these 


to the resurrections (Dan.-10. 13, 21; 


The only other angel whose name is revealed, 


distinguished services (Dan. 8, 16; 9. 21; Lk. 1. 


are mentioned: (1) “The angels which 


kept not their first estate [place], but left their own habitation,” are ‘chained under 


darkness,” awaiting judgment (2 Pet; 
(2) The angels who 


é The origin of these is nowhere explicitly revealed. They may be identical 
with the demons (Mt. 7. 22, note). Y 


Gen. 6. 4, note. 
leader. 


prepared (Mt. 25. 41; Rev. 20. 10), 


2.4; Jude 6; 1 Cor. 6. 3; John 5. 22). See 
have Satan (Gen. 3. 1; Rev. 20. 10, note) as 


For Satan and his angels everlasting fire is 


1292 


27) 


tified, saying, *What is man, that 
thou art mindful of him? or the son 
of man, that thou visitest him? 

7 Thou madest him a little lower 
than the angels; thou crownedst 
him with glory and honour, and 
didst set him over the works of thy 
hands: 

8 Thou hast put all things in sub- 
jection under his feet. For in that 
he put all in subjection under him, 


he left nothing ‘that is not put) 


under him. But now we see not 
yet all things put under him. 


(4) Jesus, made for a little time 
jower than the angels, dies for 
man that he may lift men 
above angels into the family 
of God. 


9 But we see Jesus, who was 
“made a little lower than the angels 
for the suffering of death, erowned 
with glory and honour; that he by 
the ‘grace of God should taste 
death for every man. 

10 For it became him, for whom 
are all things, and by whom are all 
things, in bringing many sons unto 
glory, to make the ¢captain of their 
salvation perfect through sufferings. 

11 For both he that ¢sanctifieth 
and they who are sanctified are all 
of one: for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren, 

12 Saying, 4I will declare thy 

name unto my ‘brethren, in the 
midst of the &church will I sing 
praise unto thee. 
13 And.again, ‘I will put my trust 
in him. And again, Behold I and 
the children which ‘God hath given 
me. 

14 Forasmuch then as the children 
are partakers of flesh and blood, he 
aiso himself likewise Jtook part of 
the same; that through death he 
might ‘destroy him that had the 
power of death, that is, ‘the devil; 

15 And deliver them who through 
fear of death were all their lifetime 
subject to bondage. 

16 For verily “he took not on him 
the nature of angels; but he tock 
on him the seed of Abraham. 

17 Wherefore in all things it be- 
hoved him to be made like unto his 
brethren, that he might be a metci- 
® ful and Jaithtubhies priest in things 
- pertainin o God, to make 
nreconciliation for the sins of the 
people. 

18 Forin that he himself hath suf- 
fered being °tempted, he is able to 
-succour them that are tempted. 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. 


@ vs.6-8; Psa.8.4-6. 


6 Or, for a little, 
i.e. little time. 


l¢ Grace (in salv.). 
Heb.10.29. 
(Rom.3.24; 
John 1.16, nofe.) 

@ leader, or origi- 
nator, i.e. one 
who initiates and 
carries through. 
Trans. author in 
Heb.12,2. 


€ Sanctify, holy 
(persons) 
(N. T.). Heb.3.1. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev.22. 
11.) 


F Psa.22.22. 


9 Church (true) 
1 Thes.4.16, 17. 
(Mt. 16.18; 
Heb. 12.23.) 


h Isa.8.17. 
Septuagint. 

t Jehovah. 
Isa. 8.18. 
Septuagint, 


J The word trans. 
took part is not 
the same as that 
trans. partakers, 
but implies 
taking part in 
something out- 
side one’s self. 

k bring to naugAt. 


'Satan. Jas.4.7. 
(Gen.3.1; Rev. 
20.10.) 

|m not of angels 
doth he take 
hold, but he 
taketh hold of. 
Cf.Isa.41.9, 
Septuagint. 

n Gr. hilaskomai, 
propitiation. 
See Rom.3.25, 
note. 


\9 Temptation. 
Heb.3.8,9. (Gen. 
3.1; Jas.1.14.) 


P Sanctify, holy 
(persons) 
(N.T.). Heb.10, 
10,14,29, (Mt.4. 
5; Rev.22.11.) 

@ companions; the 


same word trans. 
fellows in Heb. 
19 


r confession. 

* Num.12.7. 

t Zech,6,12,13. 
% Num.12,7. 

» Deut.18,15,19. 


w Holy Spirit. 
Heb.6.4. (Mt.1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 


= vs.7-11; Psa.95. 
7-11. 


y Temptation. 
vs.8.9; Heb.4.15. 
(Gen 3.1; Jas.1. 
14.) 


z Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 


@ Psa.95.7,8. 


1293 


[3 15 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part IT. Parenthetic: The rest of 
God (Heb. 3. 1-4. 16). 


(1) Christ the Son better‘than 
Moses the Servant. 


HEREFORE, ?holy brethren, 
Ypartakers of the heavenly 
calling, consider the Apestle and 
High Priest of our ‘profession, 
Christ Jesus; 
2 Who was 
appointed him, as also ‘Moses wa 
faithful in all his house. 

3 For this man was counted 
worthy of more glory than Moses, 
imasmuch as he who hath ‘builded 
the house hath more honour than 
the house. 

4 For every house is builded by 
some man; but he that built all 
things is God. 

5 And “Moses verily was faithful 
in all his house, as a servant, for a 
‘testimony of those things which 
were to be spoken after; 

6 But Christ as a son over his 
own house; whose house are we, if 
we hold fast the confidence and the 
vie of the hope firm unto the 
end. 


(2) Exhortation: the generation 
that came out of Egypt did 
not enter the Canaan-rest be- 
cause of unbelief. 


7 Wherefore (as the “Holy Ghost 
saith, *To day if ye will hear his 
voice, : 

8 Harden not your hearts, as in 
the provocation, in the day of 
temptation in the wilderness: 

9 When your fathers tempted 
me, proved me, and saw my works 
forty years. 

10 Wherefore 1 was grieved with 
that generation, and said, They do 
alway err in their heart; and they 
have not known my ways. 

11 So I sware in my wrath, They 
shall not enter into my rest.) 

12 Take heed, brethren, lest there 
be in any of you an evil heart 
of unbelief, in departing from the 
living God. 

13 But exhort one another daily, 
while it is called To day; lest any 
of you be hardened through the 
deceitfulness of 2sin. 

14 For we are made 2partakers of 
Christ, if we hold the beginning of 
our confidence stedfast unto the 


end; 
15 While it is said, *7To day if ye 


1 to him that {= ¢ 


3 16] 


will hear his voice, harden not your 
hearts, as in the provocation. 

16 Forsome, when they had heard, 
did provoke: howbeit “not all that 
came out of Egypt by Moses. 

17 But with whom was he grieved 
forty years? was it not with them 
that had ¢sinned, whosé carcases 
fell in the wilderness? 


they should not enter into his rest, 
but to them that believed not? 

19 So we see.that they could not 
enter in because of unbelief. 


CHAPTER 4. 


(3) But there is a better rest for 
the believer, ef which God’s 
creation-rest is the type. 


ET us therefore fear, lest, a 

promise being left us of enter- 

ing into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it. 

2 For unto us was the %gospel 
preached, as well as unto them: but 
the word preached did not profit 
them, not being mixed with faith 
in them that heard it. 

3 For we which have believed do 
enter into rest, as he said, ¢As I 
have sworn in my wrath, if they 
shall enter into my rest: although 
the works were finished from the 
foundation of the ¢world. 


4 For he spake in a certain place 
of the seventh day on this wise, 
And /God did rest the seventh day 
from all his works. 

5 And in this place again, If they 
shall enter into my rest. 

6 Seeing therefore it remaineth 
that some must enter therein, and 
they to whom 4it was first preached 
entered not in because of un- 
belief: 

7 Again, he limiteth a certain day, 
saying in David, To day, after so 
long a time; as it is 4said, To day 
if ye will hear his voice, harden nat 
your hearts. 

8 For if ‘Jesus had given them 
rest, then would he not afterward 
have spoken of another day, 


(4) The believer rests ina perfect 
work of redemption, as God 
rested from a perfect work of 
creation. 


.9 There remaineth therefore a 
Jrest to the people of God. 

10 For he that is entered into his 
rest, he also hath ceased from his 


own works, as God did from his. 


HEBREWS. 


@ Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


h Psa.95.7. 
# Joshua. 


j Or, keeping 
of asabbath. 


k 2 Pet.1.10. 
1 Heb.10.38. 


m Or, disobe- 
dience. 


n Isa.49.2. 


o living and 
operative. 


b Prov.15.11. 

gq Heb.9.12,24. 

r Heb.10.23. 

Ss confession. 

t Hos.11.8. 

u Temptation. 
Heb.11.37. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 


v apart from 
sin. 


w Sin. Rom, 
3.23, note. 


x Grace 
(imparted). 
Heb.12.15, 
28. (Rom. 
6.1; 2 Pet. 
3.18.) 


y for season- 
able help. 


z clothed 
with. 


a Ex.28.1; 
Num.16.40. 


b Psa.2.7. 


1294 


[56 


il *Let us labour therefore to — 
enter into that rest, lest any man 
fall after the same example of 
™munbelief. 

12 “For the word of God is °quick, 
and powerful, and sharper than any 


-|twoedged sword, piercing even to 


the dividing asunder of soul and 
pirit, and of the joints and marrow, 
and is a discerner of the thoughts 
and intents of the heart. 

13 Neither is there any creature 
that is not manifest in his sight: 
but all things are ?naked and 
opened unto the eyes of him with 
whom we have todé. & } : 


(5) The believer is kept in per- 
fect rest by mercy and grace, 
through the Son of God. 


14 Seeing then that we have a 
great high priest, that is passed 
into the heavens, Jesus the Son of 
God, "let us hold fast our ‘profes- 
sion. 

15 For we have not an high priest 
which cannot be ‘touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities; but was 
in all points “tempted like as we 
are, "yet without “sin, 

16 Let us therefore come boldly 
unto the *throne of grace, that we 
may obtain mercy, and find grace 
Yto help in time of need. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Part III. Our great High Priest 
Heb. 5. 1-8. 6). 


(1) The office of high priest. 


OR every high priest taken 

from among men is ordained 

for men in things pertaining to 

God, that he may offer both gifts 
and sacrifices for “sins: 

2 Who can have compassion on 
the ignorant, and on them that are 
out of the way; for that ‘he himself 
also is “compassed with infirmity. 

3 And by reason hereof he ought, 
as for the people, so also for him- 
self, to offer for “sins. : 

4 And no man taketh this honour 
unto himself, but he that is called 
of God, as was “Aaron. 


(2) Christ a high priest after the ~ 


order of Melchisedec. 


5 So also Christ glorified not him- 
self to be made an high priest; but 


the that said unto him, Thou art my 
Son. to day have I begotten thee. : 
6 As he saith also in another 


<7 


SS 


5 7] 


place, *Thou art a priest for ever 
after the order of !Melchisedec. 

7 Who in the days of his flesh, 
when he had offered up °prayers 
and supplications with strong cry- 
ing and tears unto him that was 
fable to save him ¢from death, and 
was heard ¢in that he /feared; 

8 Though he were a Son, yet 
learned he Sobedience by the things 
which he suffered; 

9 And “being made perfect, he be- 
came the author of eternal ‘salva- 
tion unto all them that obey him; 

10 JCalled of God an high priest 
after the order of Melchisedec. 


(Parenthetic: appeal and warn- 
ing, to 6. 12.) 


11 Of whom we have many things 
to say, and hard to be uttered, see- 
ing ye are dull of hearing. 

12 For when for the time ye ought 
to be teachers, ye have need that 
one teach you again which be the 
first principles of the oracles of God; 
and are become such as have 
need of “milk, and not of strong 
meat. 

13 For every one that useth milk 
gs 4unskilful in the word of right- 
eousness: for he is a babe. 

14 But strong meat belongeth to 
them that are of full age, even those 
who by reason of use have their 
senses exercised to discern both 
good and evil. 


CHAPTER 6. 


‘THEREFORE leaving the ”prin- 
& ciples of the doctrine of Christ, 
let us go on unto “perfection; not 
laying again °the foundation of /re- 
pentance from gdead works, and of 
faith toward God, 

2 Of the doctrine of "baptisms, 
and of: laying on of hands, and of 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. 


a vs.5,6; Psa. 
110.4 


b Mt.26.39,44. 

c Mt.26.53. 

d out of. 

e because of 
his piety. 

F Psa.19.9, 
note. 

g Phil.2.8. 

h Heb.2.10. 

7 Rom.1.16, 
note. 

j saluted. 

k 1 Cor.3.1-3. 

| hath no 
experience. 

m word of the 
beginning of 
the Carist. 

nm Mt.5.48, 
note. 

oa. 

p Repentance. 
vs.1,6; Heb. 


r Acts 19.4,5. 

s Acts 17.31. 

t Apostasy. 
vs.1,65 
Heb.10.26- 


u Gr. meto- 
chous, going 
along with. 

»v Holy Spirit. 
Heb.9.14. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

w i.e. age. 

x Repentance, 
Heb.12.17. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 

y Psa.65.10. 

z Rom.1.16, 
note. 

a Mt.25.40. 

b Assurance. 
Heb.7.25. 
(Isa.32.17; 
Jude 1.) 

¢ umitators. 


[6 13 
Sresurrection of the dead, and of 
eternal judgment. 

3 And this will we do, if God per- 
mit, 

4 ‘For it is 2impossible for thase 
who were once enlightened, and 
have tasted of the heavenly gift, 
and were made “partakers of the 
*Holy Ghost, 

5 And have tasted the good word 
of God, and the powers of the 
wworld to come, 

6 If they shall fall away, to renew 
them again unto “repentance; see- 
ing they crucify to themselves the 
Son of God afresh, and put him to 
an open shame. 

7 For the earth which drinketh in 
the rain that cometh oft upon it, 
and bringeth forth herbs meet for 
them by whom it is dressed, receiv- 
eth *blessing from God: 

8 But that which beareth thorns 
and briers is rejected, and 1s nigh un- 
tocursing; whoseend zsto be burned. 

9 But, beloved, we are persuaded 
better things of you, and things 
that accompany “salvation, though 
we thus speak. 

10 4For God is not unrighteous to 
forget your work and labour of love, 
which ye have shewed toward his 
name, in that ye have ministered 
to the saints, and do minister. 

11 And we desire that every one 
of you do shew the same diligence 
to the full “assurance of hope unto 
the end: 

12 That ye be not slothful, but 
followers of them who through 
faith and patience inherit the 
promises. 


Part III Resumed. (3) Our High 
Priest within the veil assures 
our coming there too. 


13 For when God made promise 
to Abraham, because he could 


1 See Gen. 14. 18, note. Melchisedec was a suitable type of Christ as High Priest, 
because: (1) he was a king-priest (Gen. 14. 18 with Zech. 6. 12, 13); (2) his name 


means, “my king is righteous” (cf. Isa. 11. 5), and he was king of Salem (i.e. 
“beginning of days” (cf. John 1. 1), nor 
); nor (4) was he made a high priest by 
But the contrast between the high priest- 


cf. Isa. 11. 6-9 
“end of life’’ 


human appointment (Psa. 110. 4). 
hood of Melchisedec and Aaron is only as to person, | 
In His work Sheet fellows the Aaronic pattern, the ‘‘shadow” of 

. 8. 1-6; 9. 
f Jewish professed believers who halt short of 
threshold of salvation, even “going along 
lightenment and conviction (John 16. 8~ 


and duration. 


which Christ was the substance (He 

2 Heb. 6. 4-8 presents the case 0 
faith in Christ after advancing to the very 
with” the Holy Spirit in His work of enligh { 
It is not said that they had faith. This supposed person is 


10). 


; (3) he had no (recorded) 
cf. Rom. 6. 9; Heb. 7. 23-25 


“peace,” 


“order” (or appointment), 


1-28). 


like the spies at 


Kadesh-barnea (Deut. 1. 19-26) who saw the land and had the very fruit of it in 


their hands, and yet turned back. 


1295 


6 14] 


HEBREWS. 


Nee 


swear by no greater, he sware by| a.D.64. |their brethren, though they come 


himself, : ; 

14 Saying, ¢Surely blessing I will 
bless thee, and multiplying I wili 
multiply thee. : 

15 And so, after he had patiently 
endured, he obtained the promise. 

16 For men verily swear by the 
greater: and an oath for confirma- 
tion is to them an end of all strife. 
‘17 Wherein God, willing more 
abundantly to shew unto the “heirs 
of promise the immutability of his 
counsel, ‘confirmed it by an oath: 

18 That by two immutable things, 
in which 7t was impossible for God 
to lie, we might have-a strong 4con- 
solation, who have fled for refuge 
to lay hold upon the hope set be- 
fore us: 

19 Which hope we have as an 
anchor of the soul, both sure and 
stedfast, and which entereth into 
that ‘within the veil; 

20 fWhither the forerunner is for 
us entered, even Jesus, made an 
high priest for ever after the order 
of ¢Melchisedec. 


CHAPTER 7. 


The Melchisedec high priest- 
hood resumed. 


(4) The historic Meichisedec a 
ty pe of Christ. 


For this Melchisedec, king of 
Salem, priest of the most high 
hGod,. who met Abraham returning 
from the slaughter of the kings, and 
blessed him; 

2 To whom also Abraham gave a 
tenth part of all; first being by in- 
terpretation King of righteousness, 
and after that also King of Salem, 
which is, King of peace; 

3 Without father, without mother, 
without ‘descent, having neither 
beginning of days, nor end of life; 
but made like unto the Son of God; 
abideth a priest continually. 


(5) Melchisedec high priesthood 
8reater than the Aaronic. 


(a) Because Aaron in Abraham 
paid Melchisedec tithes, 


4 Now consider how great this 
man was, unto whom even the 
patriarch Abraham gave the tenth 
of the spoils. 

_» And verily they that are of the 
sons of Levi, who receive the office 
of the priesthood, have a command- 
ment to take tithes of the people 
according to the law, that is, of 


a Gen.22.16, 
17. 


b Heb.11.9; 
Rom.8.17. 

c intervened 
by, or, inter- 
posed him- 
self. 

d encourage- 
ment. 


e Lev.16.15. 
f Heb.4.14. 
g Psa.110.4. 


h Most high 
God. Gen.14, 
18. 


t Senealogy. 
j Num.18.21, 
26. 


k pedigree. 
2 Gen.14.20. 


m Heb.5.6; 
Rev.1.18. 

n vs.18,19; 
Heb.8.7; 
Gal.2.21. 

o hath been 
attached to 
the service 
of. 

b Gen.49,8,10. 

q fleshly, i.e. 
addressed to 
the carnal or 
natural man. 
Cf.Heb.9.10. 


r of indissoliz- 
ble life. 

s Life (eter- 
nal). vs.3,16; 
Jas:1.12. 
(Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

t Psa.110.4, 

u setting 
aside, 

v For the law 
perfected 
nothing, 
but it was 
the bringer 
in ofa 
better hope. 

w Law (of 
Moses). 
Heb.8.10. 
(Ex.19.1; 
Gal.3.1-29.) 

x Mt.5.48, 
note. 


y Rom.5.2. 
z Psa.110.4, 


out of the loins of Abraham: _ 

6 But he whose “descent is not 
counted from them ‘received tithes 
of Abraham, and blessed him that 
had the promises. 4 

7 And without all contradiction 
the less is blessed of the better. 

8 And here men that die receive 
tithes; but there he receiveth 
them, of ™whom it is witnessed 
that he liveth. 

9 And as I may so say, Levi also, 
who receiveth tithes, payed tithes 
in Abraham. 

10 For he was yet in the loins of 
his father, when Melchisedec met 
him. 


(b) Because the Aaronic priest- 
hood made nothing perfect. 


11 ~Iftherefore perfection were by 
the Levitical priesthood, (for under 
it the people received the law,) what 
further need was there that an- 
other priest should rise after the 
order of Melchisedec, and not be 
called after the order of Aaron? 

12 For the priesthood being: 
changed, there is made of necessity 
a change also of the law. 

13 For he of whom these things 
are spoken perteineth to another 
tribe, of which no man gave at- 
tendance at the altar. 

14. For it fs evident that our 
Lord sprang out of Juda: of which 
tribe Moses spake nothing concern- 
ing priesthood. 

15 And it is yet far more evident: 
for that after the similitude of Mel- 
chisedec there ariseth another 
priest, 

16 Whois made, not after the law 
of a %carnal commandment, but. 
after the power ‘of an ‘endless life. 

17 For he testifieth, Thou art a 
priest for ever after the order of 
‘Melchisedec. 

18. For there is verily a “disannul- 
ling of the commandment going 
before for the weakness and un- 
profitableness thereof. 

19 *For the “law made nothing 
*perfect, but the bringing in of a 
better hope did; by the »which we 
draw nigh unto God. 

20 And inasmuch as not without 
an oath he was made priest: 

21 (for those priests were made 
without an oath; but this with an 
oath by him that said unto him, 
*The Lord sware and will not re- 
pent, Thou art a priest for ever 
after the order of Melchisedec:) 


7 2) 


22 By'so much was Jesus made a 


surety of a better “testament. 


({c) Because the Aaronic priests 
died: Christ ever liveth. 

23 And they truly were many 
priests, because they were not 
suffered to continue by reason of 
death: 

24 But this man, because he con- 
tinueth ever, hath an unchangeable 
priesthood. 

25 Wherefore he is 2able also to 
‘save them “to the éuttermost ‘that 
come unto God by him, seeing he 
ever liveth to make intercession for 
them. 

26 For ‘such an ‘high -priest be- 
came ‘us, who 7s ‘holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from Jsinners, 
and ‘made ‘higher than the heavens; 

27 Who needeth not daily, as 
those high priests, to offer up sacri- 
fice, first forthis own¥sins, and then 
for the people’s: for this he -did 
once, when he offered up ‘himself. 

28 For the law maketh men high 
priests which have infirmity; ‘but 
the word of the oath, which was 
since the law,. maketh the Son, who 
is “consecrated for evermore. 


CHAPTER 8. 

(d) Because the Aaronic priests 
served the shadows of which 
Christ ‘serves ‘the realities. 

WOW of the things which we have 

spoken this is the sum: We 
have such an ‘high priest, who is 
set on the right hand of the throne 
of the Majesty in the heavens; 
2 Aminister of the ‘sanctuary,and 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. 


a covenant. 
b Jude 24. 


c Rom.1.16, 
note. 


d completely. 


e Assurance. 
Heb.8.10-13. 
(fsa.32:17; 
Jude 1.) 


f Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 


g Sacrifice (of 
Christ). Heb. 
9.11-15,22, 
26. (Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 


h perfected. 

4.Or, holy 
things. 

j Heb.10.21; 
1 Tim.3.15. 


k serve the 
representa- 
tion and. 


1 oracularly 
told. 


m Ex.25.40, 


n Or, testa- 
ment. 


o Ex.3.8; 19.5. 

p Jehovah. vs. 
8-12; Jer. 
31.31-34. 

g consum- 
mate, or, 
pertect. 


yr Covenant 
(new). (Isa. 
61.8.) 


s The Eight 
Covenants. 
(Gen.1.28.) 


[8.9 


of the Jtrue tabernacle, which ‘the 
Lord pitched, and not man. 

3 For every high priest is ordained 
to offer gifts and ‘sacrifices: where- 
fore it 1s of necessity that this man 
have somewhat also to offer. 

4 For if he were on earth, he 
should not be a priest, seeing that 
there are priests that offer gifts -ac- 
cording to the law: 

5 Who *serve unto the exampie 
and shadow of heavenly things, as 
Moses was “admonished of ‘God 
when he -was about to make the 
tabernacle: for, See, saith he, 
that thou make all things accord- 
ing to the pattern shewed to thee 
in the mount. 


(e) Because Christ mediates a 
better covenant. 


6 But now hath he obtained a 
more excellent ministry, by how 
much also ‘he is the mediator of a 
better “covenant, which was-estab- 
lished upon better promises, 


Part IV. The new covenant bet- 
ter than the old (Heb. 8.7-10.39). 


7 For if that first covenant had 
been faultless, then should no place 
have been sought ‘for the second. 

8 For ‘finding fault with them, ‘he 
saith, Behold, the days come, saith 
the *Lord, when 1 will gmake a 
Irnew 25covenant with the house of 
Israel and with the ‘house of Judah: 

9 Not according to the covenant 
that I made with their fathers in 
the day when I took them by the 


hand to lead them out of the land 


of Egypt; because they continued 


1 The New Covenant, Summary: (1) “Better” than the Mosaic Covenant, not 


morally, but efficaciously (Heb. 7. 19; Rom. 8. 3, 4). ! € 
In the Mosaic Covenant God said, “If ye will” 


G.e. pec easy eeu 
(Ex. 19. 5); in the 


Mosaic ‘Covenant obedience sprang from fear (Heb. 2. 2; 12. 25-27 
from a willing heart and mind (v. 10). 


ew Covenant He says, “I will’? (Heb. 8. ‘io, 6 


(2) Established on “‘better”’ 


(3) Under the 
3 ‘under the New 


(4) The New Covenant secures the personal 


revelation of the Lord to every believer (v. 11); (5) the complete oblivion of sins 


(v. 12; Heb. 10. 17; cf. Heb. 10.3); ( 


26, 27, 28; 1 Cor. 11. 25; Heb.<9. ‘11, 
conversion, and blessing of Israel 
2 Sam. 7. 8-17). 
and of eternal completeness. 


(Jer. 


12, 


6) rests upon an accomplished redemption (Mt. 
18-23); (7) and secures the perpetuity 
31. 31-40; see also “‘Kingdom (O:T.); and 
The New Covenant is the eighth, thus speaking of resurrection 


future 


21, The Eight Covenants, Summary: (1) The Edenic Covenant (Gen. 1. 26-28, 
note) conditioned the life of man in innocency. 


3. 14-19, note) conditions the life of 


(3) The Noahic Covenant (Gen. 9. 
ernment, C 
Israel, and confirms, with specific 
(5) The 
sinned.” 


restoration and conversion of Israel. 


Mosaic Covenant (Ex. 19. 
(6) The Palestinian ‘Covenant (Deut. 28.30. 3, 
(7) The Davidic ‘Covenant (2 Sam. 7. 8-27, 


1, 


(4) The Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 15. 18, m : 2 
the Adamic promise of redemption. 


additions, 
25, 


note) condemns all men, 


(2) The Adamic Covenant (Gen. 


fallen man and gives promise of a Redeemer. 
note) establishes the principle of human gov- 


note) founds the nation of 


“for that all have 
note) secures the final 


note) establishes the perpetuity of the Davidic family (fulfilled in Christ, Mt. 1. 1; 


_~ 1297 


8 10] HEBREWS. [9 13 


A.D. 64. |budded, and the "tables of the cove- ‘ 
nant; } 
aJehovah Jer. | 5 And over it the cherubims of - 
will make with the house of Israel] + paw (or Moses). |@!ory. shadowing the Smercyseat; 
after those days, saith the spate: OOS a of pee Fite cannot now speak 
will put my “laws into their mind,| 4." jcc. | ‘particularly. ; 
and write them in their hearts: and gerl0-1d; Heb9. 6 Now when these things were 
I will be to them a ¢God, and they| ji,.5°"'" [thus ordained, the priests went al- 
shall be to me a people: d Jer.31.33. ways into the first tabernacle, ac- 
11 And they shall not teach every ¢ Jehovah, Jer. |complishing are pr aa Gone 
man his neighbour, and every man te. ey: of ees oe . e second wen e 
this brother, saying, Know the!’ pitious. See igh priest alone once every year, 
Editon eth aba bcey mice oe) Leta a eee DN oa wai eee 
€ 1€as' € : ._|9Sin. Rom.3.23, , 
12 For I will be ‘merciful to their} no‘. the people: rity ary 
funrighteousness, and their Ssins|*/ewlessnesses. | 8 The Holy Ghost this signifying, 
and their “iniquities will I remem-) *972%59'22"¢ |that the way into the holiest of all 


aged ts near to 


not in my covenant, and I regarded 
them not, saith the Lord. 
10 For this 7s the covenant that I 


ber no more. disappearing. |was not yet made manifest, while as 
13 In that he saith, A new cove- i earthly. thefirst tabernacle*was yet standing: 
« Ex.25.30, note. bf : 

Now :hitahcH MiceeGeth endl hin"? \ eee eeeaene eetwrinel pence tage 
Ow AS, AWE v % m Holy of holies. oy Ea : 

waxeth old is ready to vanish!,.7 2.7615 both gifts and sacrifices, that could 

away. oEx.25.10.. not make him that did the service 

CHAPTER 9. p Ex.16.33: perfect, as pertaining to the con- 


5 @Num.17.1b. science; 
é1) ab palspicht erties a and pap ea 7 Ex.34.29; Deut. | 10 Which stood only in meats 
CMY COLINAS NENA RACES ERS, GS and drinks, and divers washings, and 


8 Gr. Ailasterion, 3 - 
mere types. place of pro. |*carnal ordinances, imposed on 


HEN verily the first covenant] ?iittor, See. | them until the time of »reformation. 
had also ordinances of divine} 3.25, nove. : 
service, and a Jworldly sanctuary. | ‘i ¢etat. (2) The sanctuary, and sacrifice 

; D 


ui.e. sins of igno-| Of the new covenant are reali- 
2 For there was a_tabernacle|*?°.5"°% 


made; the first, wherein was the| vas yet had its Be é i ¥ 

candlestick, and the table, and) sending. 11 But Christ being come an high 

the *shewbread; which is called) \*'8 wie | priest sof good things to come, by a, 

the /sanctuary. ‘ Heb.716. greater and more perfect taber- 
3 And after the second veil, the u setting things nacle, not made with hands, that is 

by + ri os 5 7 7 . ‘ 

tabernacle which is called the ™Ho- ‘ A ary to say, not of this “building; 

liest of all; 13,11. i2 Neither by the blood of goats 
4 Which had the “golden censer,} «creation. and calves, but Sby his own blood 


and the “ark of the covenant over-| $1 Pet.1.13,19. {he entered in once into the ‘holy 
laid round about with gold, wherein} ° CM place, having obtained eternal re-— 
was the golden pot that had! vs.12:21,25;°° |demption for us. 


manna, and /7Aaron’s rod that ERS he i 13 For if the blood of bulls and of 


Lk. 1. 31-33; Rom. 1. 3), and of the Davidic kingdom, over Israel and over the whole 
earth; to be fulfilled in and by Christ (2 Sam. 7. 8-17; Zech. 12. 8; Lk. 1. 31-33; Acts 
15. 14-17; 1 Cor. 15. 24). (8) The New Covenant rests upon the sacrifice of Christ, 
and secures the eternal blessedness, under the Abrahamic Covenant (Gal. 3. 13-29), 
of all who believe. It is absolutely unconditional, and, since no responsibility is 
by it committed to man, it is final and irreversible. 

II. The relation of Christ to the eight covenants is as follows: (1) To the Edenic 
Covenant, Christ, as the ‘‘second Man,” the “last Adam” (1 Cor. 15. 45-47), takes 
the place over all things which the first Adam lost (Col, 2. 10; Heb. 2. 7-8). (2) He 
is the “Seed of the woman” of the Adamic Covenant (Gen. 3. 15: John 12. 31: 1 John 
3. 8; Gal. 4. 4; Rev. 20. 10), and fulfilled its conditions of toil (Mk. 6. 3) and obedi- 
ence. (3) As the greatest son of Shem, in Him was fulfilled supremely the promise 
to Shem in the Noahic Covenant (Gen. 9.1, note; Col. 2.9). (4) He is the “Seed 
to whom the promises were made” in the Abrahamic Covenant; the son of Abraham ; 
obedient unto death (Gen. 22. 18; Gal. 3. 16; Phil. 2.8). (5) He lived sinlessly 
under the Mosaic Covenant and bore for us its curse (Gal. 3. 10-13). (6) He lived 
obediently as a Jew in the land under the Palestinian Covenant, and will yet per- 
form its gracious promises (Deut. 28.-30. 1-9). (7) He is the “Seed,” “Heir,” 
and “King” under the Davidic Covenant (Mt. 1. 1; Lk. 1. 31-33). (8) His sacrifice 
is the foundation of the New Covenant (Mt. 26. 28; 1 Cor. 11. 25). 


1298 


ie, - 
9 14] 


goats, and the ashes of an heifer 
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth 
to the purifying of the flesh: 
» 14 How much more shall the blood 
_of Christ, who throug e Sefernal 
Spirit offered himself without spot 
to God, purge your conscience from 
dead works to “serve the living God? 
15 And for this cause he is the me- 
diator of the new ‘testament, that 
éby means of death, for the ‘re- 
demption of the transgressions that 
were under the first testament,they 
which are called might receive the 
promise of eternal inheritance. 


(3) The new covenant ts also the 
Jast will and testament of 
Christ, sealed by his blood. 


16 For where a testament zs, there 
must also of necessity Sbe the death 
of the testator. 

17 For a testament is of force 
after men are dead: otherwise it is 
of no strength at all while the 
testator liveth. 

18 Whereupon neither the first 
testament was "dedicated without 
blood. ‘ 

19 ‘For when Moses had spoken 
every precept to all the people ac- 
cording to the law, he took the 
blood of calves and of goats, with 
water, and scarlet wool, and hys- 
sop, and sprinkled both the book, 
and all the people, ; 

- 20 Saying, This i Jof 
the testament which *God hath en- 
joined unto you. 

21 ‘Moreover he sprinkled with 
blood both the tabernacle, and all 
the vessels of the ministry. 

i 22 And eeos an Pes areby the 

aw pureed with blood; and. without 

shedding of blood is no “remission. 

(4) The heavenly sanctuary 
purged with a better sacrifice 
(Lev 16. 33). 


23 It was therefore necessary 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. 


a Holy Spirit. 
Heb.10.15, 
29. (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

b worship. 

¢ covenant. 

d Sacrifice (of 
Christ). vs. 
11-15,22,26; 
Heb.11.4. 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

e Rom.3.24, 
note. 

f Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

g Or, be 


[10 3 


that the “patterns of things in the 
heavens should be purified with 
these; but the heavenly things 
themselves with better sacrifices 
than these. 

24 For Christ is not entered into 
the holy places made with hands, 
which are the figures of the true; 
but into heaven itself, now to °ap- 
pear in the presence of God for us: 


(5) The one sacrifice of the new 
covenant is better than the 
many sacrifices of the old. 


25 Nor yet that he should offer 


brought in. |himself often, as the high priest 


h tnaugu- 
rated. 

i Lev.14.16. 

j Mt.26.28. 

k Jehovah. 
Ex.24.8. 

1 Ex.29.12,36. 


entereth into the holy place every 


year with blood *of others; 


26 For then must he often have 
suffered since the foundation of the 
world: but now once in the Zend 


m Forgiveness.|of the world hath he appeared 7to 


Mt.26.28. 
(Lev.4.20; 
Mt.26.28.) 

n representa- 
tions. 

o Rom.8.34. 

p not his own. 
g consumma- 
tion of the 

ages. 

y Assurance. 
Heb.10.16- 
18,22. (Isa.32. 
17; Jude 1.) 

s Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

t Death 
(physical). 
(Gen.3.19.) 


u Judgments | 


(the seven). 
Heb.12-,5-11. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev. 20.12.) 

v Day of judg- 
ment. 2 Pet. 


2.9. -(Mt.10 
15; Rev.20 
11.) 


w Or, apart 
from. 

x Rom.1.16, 
note. 

y Mt.5.48, 
note. 


put away ‘sin by the sacrifice of 
himself. 

27 And as it is appointed unto 
men once to !die, but “after this 
%he judgment: 

28 So Christ was once offered to 
bear the ‘sins of many; and unto 
them that look for him shall he ap- 
pear the second time “without sin 
unto “salvation. 


CHAPTER 10. 


FoR the law having a shadow of 
good things to come, and not 
the very image of the things, can 
never with those sacrifices which 
they offered year by year continu- 
ally make the comers thereunto 


. |Yperfect. 


2 For then would they not have 
ceased to be offered? because that 
the worshippers once purged should 
have had nomoreconscience of Ssins. 

3 But in those sacrifices there is 
a remembrance again made of ‘sins 
every year. 


1 Death, physical, Summary: (1) Physical death is a consequence of sin (Gen: 3. 


19), and the universality of death 


(2) Physical death affects the body only, an 
sciousness (Hab. 2. 5, note; Lk. 16. 23, note; Rev. 6..9, 10). 
ends in the resurrection of the body See “‘Resurrection’’ (Job 19. 25; 1 Cor. 
(4) Because physical death is a consequence of sin, it is not inevitable to 
15. 51, 52; 1 Thes. 4. 15-17). ! 
It is called “‘sleep,’’ because his body 


note) 
the redeemed (Gen. 5. 24; 1 Cor. 


has for the believer a peculiar qualification. 
may be “awakened” at any moment 


proves 


and spirit live, independently of the death of 


“tabernacle” (tent), in which the 


1-8; cf. 1 Cor. 15. 42-44; 2 Pet. 1. 13-15). ¢ : 
upon” with a “house from heaven’’ pending the resurrection of the 


and is at once “‘with the Lord” (2 Cor 5. 1-8; 
death of Christ, see Mt. 27. 50, note. 


1299 


(Phil. 3. 20, 


the universality of sin (Rom, 5. 12-14). 
d is neither cessation of life nor of con- 


(3) All physical death 
Lone aes 


(5) Physical death 


21; 1 Thes. 4. 14-18). (6) The soul 


the body, which is described as a 
“J? dwells, and which may be put off (2 Cor. 5. 
(7) At the believer’s death he is “clothed 


‘earthly house,” 


Phil. 1. 33; Lk. 23. 43). As to the 


10 4] 


4 For it is not possible that the 
blood of bulls and of goats should 
take away 4sins. hs 

5 Wherefore when he cometh into 
the world, he saith, ‘Sacrifice and 
offering thou wouldest not, but a 
1body hast thou prepared me: 

‘6 In burnt-offerings and sacrifices 
for ¢sin thou hast had no pleasure. 

7. Then said’ I, Lo, I come (in the 
volume of the book it is written of 
me,) to do thy will, O ¢God. | 

8 Above when he said, Sacrifice 
and offering and burnt-offerings 
and offering for “sin thou wouldest 
not, neither hadst pleasure therein ; 
which are offered by the law; 

9 Then said he, Lo, I come to do 
thy will, O God. He taketh away 
the first, that he may establish the 
second. 

10 By the which will ¢we are fsanc- 
tified through the offering of the 
body of Jesus Christ once for all. 

11 And every priest standeth daily 
ministering and offering oftentimes 
the same sacrifices, which can never 
take away 4sins: 


12 But this man, after he had of- : 


fered one Jsacrifice for sins &for 
ever, sat down “on the right hand 
of God; ‘ 

13 From henceforth expecting till 
his enemies be made his footstool. 

14 For by one offering he hath 
‘perfected for ever Jthem that are 
sanctified. 

15 Whereof the *Holy Ghost also 
is a witness to us: for after that he 
had said before, 

16 This is the covenant that I 
will make with them after those 
days, saith the ‘Lord, I will put my 
laws into their hearts, and in their 
minds will I write them; 


HEBREWS. 


AD. 64. 


@ Sin. Rom.3, 
23, note. 
6 kosmos 


(Mt.4.8) 
mankind. 


¢ vs.5,7; 
Psa.40.6-8. 

d Psa.40.8. 

ev.14. 

f Sacrifice 
(of Christ). 
(Gen.4.4.) 

g sat down in 
perpetuity. 

h vs.12,13; 
Psa.110.1. 

i Mt.S.48, 
note. 

j v.10. 

k Holy Spirit. 


=. 


Acts 2.4.) 

1 Jehovah. vs. 
16,17; Jer. 
31.33,34 

m Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

n Heb.9.8,12. 

o John 14.6; 
Heb.7.24. 

pb dedicated. 

Assurance, 

vs.16-18,22; 

1.Pet.3.18. 

(Isa.32.17; 

Jude 1.) 

r Faith. vs.22, 
38; Heb.12.2. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 

5s confession 
of the hope. 

#1 Thes.5.24. 

u Mt.10.32. 

v encourag- 
ing. 

w Mt.24, 


% 2 Pet.2.20,21. 


will I remember no more. ; 
18 Now where remission of these 


is, there is no more “offering for — 


™msin, 
(6) The believer worships.in the 
holiest 

19 Having therefore, brethren, 
boldness to enter into the “holiest 
by the blood of Jesus,, 
“20° By" a Tew and living way, 
which he hath consecrated. for us, 
pesca the: veil, that is to say, his 

esh;. 

21 And having an high priest 
over the house of God; 

22 Let us draw near with a true 
heart in full Yassurance of 7faith, 
having our hearts sprinkled from an 
evil conscience, and our bodies 
washed with pure water. ; 

23 Let us hold fast the Sprofession 
= oe iter Males gl : (for 

e is fait that promised; 

24 esas us consider one 
other to provoke unto love and ta 
good works: 

25 Not forsaking the assembling 
of ourselves together, “as the man- 
ner of some is; but Yexhorting one 
another: and so: much the more, 
was ye see the day approaching. 


(Parenthetic: The wavering 
warned: the Jewish sacrifices 
had lost their efficacy; it is 
Christ or judgment.) 

26 For if we ™sin *wilfully after 
that we have received the know- 
ledge of the truth, there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sins, 

27 Butacertain fearfullookingfor 
of judgment and fiery indignation; 
which shall devour the adversaries. 
| 28 He that despised »Moses’ law 


. 


! Cf. Psa. 40. 6; the rule, applicable to al/ modifications of the form of quotations 
inthe N.T. from O.T. writings, is that the divine Author of both Testaments is per- 
fectly free, in using an earlier statement, to recast the mere literary form of it. 
The variant form will be found invariably to give the deeper meaning of the earlier 


statement. 


2 Sacrifice, Summary: (1) The first intimation of sacrifice is Gen. 3. 21, the “coats 


of skins” having obviously come from slain animals. 


The first clear instance 


of sacrifice is Gen. 4. 4, explained in Heb. 11.4. Atbel’s righteousness was the result 


of his sacrifice; not of his character. 


of the family was the family priest. 
who alone could offer sacrifices. 
ing variously the guilt and need’ of 
to Christ and fulfilled in Him. 

the N.T., the sacrifice of Christ 
(Lev. 1. 4; Isa: 53. 5, 6; 2 Cor. 5. 


(2) Before the giving of the law the head 


By the law an order of priests was established 


the offerer 


Those sacrifices were: ‘‘shadows,” types, express- 
in reference to God, and all. pointing 
(3) As foreshadowed by the types and explained by 
is penal (Gal. 3. 13; 2 Cor. 5, 21); substitutional 
: 21; ) Pet. 2. 24); voluntary (Gen. 22. 9; John 10. 
18); redemptive (Gal. 3. 13; Eph. 1. 7; 1 Cor. 6. 20) 
reconciling (2 Cor. 5. 18, 19; Col. 1. 21, 22); efficacio 


; propitiatory (Rom, 3. 25); 
us (John 12, 32, 33; Rom. 5. 95 


10; 2 Cor: 5. 21; Eph. 2. 13; Heb. 9. 11, 12, 26; 10: 10-173 1 John 1, 7; Rev, 1. 5)s and 


revelatory (John 3. 16; 1 John 4. 9, 


10). 
1300 


| 


| 


( 


10 29) 


died without mercy under two or 
three witnesses: 

29 2Qf how much sorer punish- 
‘ment, suppose ye, shall he be 
thought worthy, “who hath trod- 
-den under foot the Son of God, and 
hath counted the blood of the cove- 
‘Nant, wherewi € was ‘sanctified, 
dan unholy thing, and hath done 
despite unto the “Spirit of grace? 
30 For we know him that hath 
said, Vengeance belongeth unto 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. 


@ Heb.2.3. 


b Apostasy. 
2 Pet.2.1-3. 
(Lk.18.8; 
2 Tim.3.1-8.) 


c Sanctify, 
‘holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
vs.10,14,29; 
Heb.13.12. 
(Mt.4.5; 
Rev.22.11.) 


me, I will recompense, saith the 
fLord. And again, The Lord shall 
judge his people. 

31 Jé is a fearful thing to fall into 
the hands of the living God. 

32 But call to remembrance the 
former days, in which, after ye were 


dGr, a com- 
mon.thing. 
e Grace (in 


illuminated, ye endured a great|f Jehovah. 


fight of afflictions; 


Deut.32.35, 


a : 36. 

33 Partiy, whilst ye were made al, shat ye have 
gazingstock both by reproaches and) for your- 
afflictions; and partly, whilst ye be-| selves. 


‘came companions of them that 
so used. 

34 For ye had compassion of me 
in my bonds, and took joyfully the 
spoiling of your goods, knowing 4in 
yourselves that ye have ‘in heaven 
a better and an enduring substance. 

35 Cast not away therefore your 
confidence, which hath great rec- 
ompence of reward. 

36 For ye have need of patience, 
fhat, ‘after ye have done the will of 
God, ye might receive the promise. 

37 For yet a little while, and he 
that shall come Jwill come, and will 
not tarry. 

38 Now the “just shall live by 
faith: but if any man draw back, 
my soul shall ‘have no pleasure in 
him. _ 

39 But we are not of them who 
draw back unto perdition; but of 
them that believe to the saving of 
‘the soul. 


CHAPTER 11. 


Part V. The superiority of the 
faith way (Heb. 11, 1-40). 


(1) The sphere of faith. 
OW faith is the ‘substance of 
things hoped for, the “evi- 
dence of things not seen. 
2 For by it the elders obtained a 
good report. 
3 Through faith we understand 
that thé “worlds were framed by the 
word of God, so that things which 


were|/ Lk.12.33. 


¢Lk.21.19. 

j Christ (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
2 Pet.3.3,4. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9-11.) 

k Hab.2.3,4. 

| substanti- 
ating. 

m conviction, 

n ages were 
planned. 

o Sacrifice (of 
hrist). 
Heb.13.11, 
12. (Gen.4.4; 

Heb.10.18.) 

b vs.4,7. See 
Rom.10.10, 
note. 

q Gen.5.22,24. 

r had pleased. 

s Rewards. 
Jas-:1.12. 
(Dan.12.3; 

1 Cor.3.14.) 

t Gen.6.14,22, 

u Rom.1.16, 
note. 

v kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 

w Gen.12.1,4. 

x Gen.13.3,18. 

y tents. 

z waited for. 

a architect 
and builder. 

6.Gen.21.1,2. 

c Gen.22.17,. 

d Gen.3.15; 
12.7. 

ei.e. acted 
upon them. 


are seen were not made of things 
which do appear. 


1301 


« 


{11 14 


(2) Instances of faith: Abel. 


4 By faith Abel offered unto God 
a more excellent °sacrifice than 
Cain, by which he obtained witness 
that he was “righteous, God testify- 
ing of his gifts: and by it he being 
dead yet speaketh. 


Enoch, 

5 By faith ¢Enoch was translated 
that he should not see death; and 
was not found, because God had 
translated him: for before his trans- 
lation he had this testimony, that 


he “pleased God. 


6 But without faith it 1s impossi- 
ble to please Aim: for he that 
cometh to God must believe that he 
is, and that he is a Srewarder of 
them that diligently seek him. 


Noah. 


7 By faith ‘Noah, being warned 
of God of things not seen as yet, 
moved with fear, prepared an ark 
to the “saving of his house; by the 
which he condemned the “world, 
and became heir of the righteous- 
ness which is by faith. 


Abraham and Sara. 

8 By faith “Abraham, when he 
was called to go out into a place 
which he should after receive for an 
inheritance, obeyed; and he went 
out, not knowing whither he went. 

9 By faith ‘he sojourned in the 
land of promise, as in a strange 
country, *dwelling in *tabernacles 


|with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs 


with him of the same promise: 

10 For he 4looked for a city which 
hath foundations, whose “builder 
and maker is God. 

11 Through faith also ’Sara her- 
self received strength to conceive 
seed, and was delivered of a child 
when she was past- age, because 


she judged him faithful who had 4 i 


promised. 

12 Therefore sprang there even of 
one, and him as good as dead, so 
many as the ‘stars of the sky in 
multitude, and as the sand which 
is by the sea shore innumerable. 

13 These all died in faith, not hav- 
ing received the ¢promises, ‘but 
having seen them afar off, and 
were persuaded of them, and em- 
braced them, and -¢confessed that 


they were strangers and pilggms $ 


on the earth. if 

14 For they that say such things 
declare plainly that they seek a 
country. 


11 15] 


15 And truly, if they had been 
mindful of ¢that country from 
whence they came out, they might 
have had opportunity to have re- 
turned. : 

16 But now they desire a better 
country, that is, an heavenly: 
wherefore God ig not ashayed to be 
called their God: for he hath pre- 
pared for them a city. 

17 By faith Abraham, when he 
was "tried, offered up Isaac: and he 
that had received the promises of- 
fered up his only begotten son. 

18 ‘Of whom it was said, ¢That 
in Isaac shall thy seed be called: 

19 Accounting that God was able 
to raise him up, “even from the 
dead; from whence also he received 
him Jin a figure. 


Isaac and Jacob. 

20 By faith 8Isaac blessed Jacob 
and Esau concerning things to come. 

21 By faith Jacob, when he was a 
dying, blessed both the sons _of 
Joseph; and worshipped, “Jeaning 
upon the top of his staff. 

Joseph. 

22 By faith ‘Joseph, when he died, 
made mention of the departing of 
the children of Israel; and gave com- 
mandment concerning his bones. 


Moses and his parents. 


23 .By faith Moses, when he was 
born, was hid three months of his 
parents, because they saw Jhe was 
a proper child; and they were not 
afraid of the king’s *commandment. 

24 By faith Moses, when he was 
come to years, refused to be called 
the son of Pharaoh’s daughter; 

25 Choosing rather to suffer afflic- 
tion with the people of God, than 
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a 
season; 

26 Esteeming the reproach of 
Christ greater riches than the trea- 
sures in Egypt: for he had respect 
unto the recompence “of the reward. 

27 By faith he forsook Egypt, not 
fearing the wrath of the king: for 
he endured, as seeing him who is 
invisible. 

28 Through faith he kept the 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. 


a Gen.11.31. 

6 Gen.22.1; 
Jas.2.21. 

c Or, to. 

d Gen.21.12. 
eResurrection. 
Rev.20.4,5. 
(Job 19.25; 

1 Cor.15.52.) 

f Gen.22.4; 
Mt.20.19. 

g Gen.27.27. 

h Gen.47.31. 

¢ Gen.50.24,25. 

j the child 
was beauti- 
ful. 

k Ex.1.16; 2:2. 

1 Separation. 
Heb.13.10-14. 
(Gen.12.1; 

2 Cor.6.14- 
17.) 

m Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. ~ 

n Omit of the 
reward. 

o Ex.12.21. 

pb Ex.14.13; 
Jas.5.15,16; 
Jude 5. 

q Josh.6.12,20. 

r Josh.6.23; 
Jas.2.25. 

s Jud.6.11. 

t Jud.4.6. 

u Jud.15.16. 

v Jud.11.32. 

w 1 Sam.7.9. 

x1 John 3.7, 
note, 

y¥ 1 Ki.17.22; 

2 Ki.4.35. 

2 vs.24,26. 

a Temptation. 
1 Pet.1.6. 
(Gen.3.1; 
Jas.1.14.) 

b evil treated. 

c¢ kosmos 
(Mt.4.8) = 
mankind. 

d Faith. 
(Gen.3.20.) 


= 

°passover, and the sprinkling of 
blood, lest he that destroyed the 
firstborn should touch them. | 
29 ?By faith they passed through 
the Red sea as by dry land: which 


the Egyptians 
drowned. 
Joshua and Israel. 
30 By faith the walls of 2Jericho 


fell down, after they were com- 
passed about seven days. 


Rahab. 

31 By faith the harlot *Rahab per- 
ished not with them that believed 
not, when she had received the 
spies with peace. 


The many heroes of faith. 

32 And what shall I more say? 
for the time would fail me to tell of 
SGedeon, and of ‘Barak, and of 
“Samson, and of *Jephthae; of Da- 
vid also, and “Samuel, and of the 


assaying to do were 


‘prophets: 


33 Who through faith subdued 
kingdoms, wrought *righteousness, 
obtained promises, stopped the 
mouths of lions, 

34 Quenched the violence of fire, 
escaped the edge of the sword, out 
of weakness were made strong, 
waxed valiant in fight, turned to 
flight the armies ‘of the aliens. 

35 Women %recéived their dead 
raised to life again: and others 
were tortured, not Zaccepting deliv- 
erance; that they might obtain a 
better resurrection: 

36 And others had trial of cruel 
mockings and _ scourgings, yea, 
moreover of bonds and imprison- 
ment: 

37 They were stoned, they were 
sawn asunder, were “tempted, were 
slain with the sword: they wan- 
dered about in sheepskins and goat- 
skins; being destitute, afflicted, 
‘tormented; 

38 (Of whom the ‘world was not 
worthy:) they wandered in deserts, 
and in mountains, and in dens and 
caves of the earth. 

39 And these all, having obtained 
a good report through !4faith, re- 
ceived not the promise: 


1 The essence of faith consists in receiving what God has revealed, and may be 


defined as that trust 


good works (John 1. 12; 
its secoridary definitions: 


again for our justification 


in the God of the Seri 
sent, which receives Him as Saviour and 
Jas. 2. 14-26). 

‘ (1) For salvatio 
torious works, in the Lord Jesus Christ 


Lord, 


ptures and in Jesus Christ whom He hath 


and impels to loving obedience and 


The Particular uses of faith give rise to 
n, faith is personal trust, apart from meri- 


» as delivered for our offences and raised 
(Rom. 4. 5, 23-25). 


(2) 


As used in prayer, faith is the 


“confidence that we have in him, that if we ask anything according to his will, he 


1302 


4 


11 40] 


HEBREWS. 


[12 21 


40 God having provided some 
better thing for us, that they with- 
“ail us should not be made 4per- 
ect. 


CHAPTER 12. 


Part VI. The walk and worship 
of the believer-priest (Heb. 12. 
1-13. 25). 


(1) Jesus the example. 


i REE seeing we also 
are compassed about with so 
great a cloud of witnesses, let us “lay 
aside every weight, and ‘the sin 
which doth so easily beset us, and 
let us run with patience the race 
that is set before us, 

2 Looking unto Jesus the ¢author 
and ¢finisher of our /faith; who for 
the joy that was set before him 
endured the cross, despising the 
shame, and is set down at the right 
hand of the throne of God. 


(Parenthetic (to v. 17): (a) The 
Father’s chastening. 


3 For consider him that endured 
such contradiction of “sinners 
against himself, lest ye be wearied 
and faint in your minds. 

4 Ye have not yet resisted unto 
blood, striving against “sin. 

5 And ye have forgotten the ex- 
hortation which speaketh unto you 
as unto ‘children, My son, despise 
not thou the chastening of the 
jLord, nor faint when thou art re- 
buked of him: 

6 For whom the “Lord loveth he 
chasteneth, and scourgeth every 
son whom he receiveth. 

7 If ye endure chastening, God 
dealeth with you as with sons; for 
what ‘son is he whom the father 
chasteneth not? 

8 But if ye be without chastise- 
ment, whereof all are partakers, 
then are ye bastards, and not 
sons. 

9 Furthermore we have had fa- 
thers of our flesh which corrected 
us, and we gave them reverence: 
shall we not much rather be in sub- 
jection unto the Father of spirits, 
and live? 

10 For they verily for .a few days 
chastened us “after their own 


A.D. 64. 


a Mt.5.48, 
note. 


61 Pet.5.7. 
c Omit the. 


d leader, or, 
originator. 
See Heb.2. 
10, ref. 


e perfecter. 


f Faith. Jas.2. 
17,18,20. 
(Gen.3.20; 
Heb.11.39.) 


g consider 
well, i.e. 
weigh so as 
to judge its 
value. 

hk Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 


7 sons. 


j Jehovah. 
Prov.3.11,12. 


k Jehovah. 
Prov.3.12. 


1 Prov.13.24. 


m Or, as 
seemed 
&ood or 
meet to 
them. 


n Judgments 
(the seven). 
1 Pet.2.24. 
(2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20.12.) 


o1 John 3.7, 


note. 
p Isa.35.3. 
q failing. 
r Or, even. 
s Gal.6.1. 
t Psa.34.14. 


u watching 
lest there be 
any one who 
Jacks the 
&race of God. 


v 1 Cor.6.13,18. 
w Gen.25.33. 


x Repentance. 
2 Pet.3.9. 
(Mt.3.2; 
Acts 17.30.) 

y i.e. the 
blessing. 


2 Ex.19.12. 
a Ex.20.18,19. 


pleasure; but he for our profit, that 
we might be partakers of his holi- 
ness. 

11 Now no "chastening for the 
present seemeth to be joyous, but 
grievous: nevertheless afterward it 
yieldeth the peaceable fruit of 
°righteousness unto them which 
are exercised thereby. 

12 Wherefore “lift up the hands 
which hang down, and the %feeble 
knees; 

13 And make ‘straight paths for 
your feet, lest that which is lame 
be turned out of the way; but ‘let 
it rather be healed. 

14 Follow ‘peace with all men, 
and holiness, without which no man 
shall see the Lord: 

15 “Looking diligently lest any 
man fail of the grace of God; lest 
any root of bitterness springing up 
trouble you, and thereby many be 
defiled; 


(b) Esau a warniné to professors 
lest they miss the priesthood. 
(Cf. Gen. 25. 31, note.) 


16 Lest there be any “fornicator, 
or profane person, as Esau, “who 
for one morsel of meat sold his 
birthright. 

17 For ye know how that after- 
ward, when he would have inherited 
the blessing, he was rejected: for he 
found no place of *repentance, 
though he sought it carefully with 
tears. 


(2) The believer-priest does not 
come to Mount Sinai. 


18 For ye are not come unto the 
2mount that might be touched, and 
that burned with fire, nor unto 
blackness, and darkness, and tem- 
pest, 

19 And the sound of a trumpet, 
and the voice of words; which 
2vyoice they that heard intreated 
that the word should not be spoken 
to them any more: 

20 (For they could not endure 
that which was commanded, And if 
so much as a beast touch the moun- 
tain, it shall be stoned, or thrust 
through with a dart: 

21 And so terrible was the sight, 
that Moses said, I exceedingly fear 
and quake:) 


heareth us” (1 John 5. 14, 15). 


(3) As used in reference to unseen things of which 


Scripture speaks, faith “gives substance” to them, so that we act upon the con- 


viction of their reality (Heb. 11. 1-3). 


faith are illustrated in Heb. 11. 1-39. 


1303 


“ 


(4) As a working principle in life, the uses of 


12 22] 


22 But ye are 2come unto mount 
Sion, and unto the city of the living 
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and 
to °an innumerable company of 
‘angels, 

23 To the general assembly ¢and 
\church of the firstborn, which are 
written in heaven, and to God the 
Judge of all, and to the spirits of 
just men made “perfect, 

24 And to Jesus the ‘mediator of 
ry re new ea and to &the blood 
. of sprinkling, that speaketh better 
things than that of Abel. 


(3) Warnings and instructions. 


25 See that ye refuse not him 
that speaketh. 
not who refused him that spake on 
earth, much more shall not we 
escape, if we turn away from him 
that speaketh from heaven: 

26 Whose voice then shook the 
earth: but now he hath promised, 
saying, ‘Yet once more I shake not 
the earth only, but also heaven. 

27 And this word, Yet once more, 
signifieth the removing of those 
things that are shaken, as of things 
that are made, that those things 
which cannot be shaken may 
remain, 

28 Wherefore we receiving a king- 
dom which cannot be jmoved, let 
us Fhave 'grace, whereby we may 
serve God acceptably with rever- 
ence and’ godly fear: 

Me For our God is a consuming 
re. 


CHAPTER 13, 


Ee brotherly love continue: 

2 Be not forgetful to enter- 
tain. strangers: for thereby some 
have entertained ‘angels. un- 
awares, 

3 Remember them that are in 
™bonds, as bound with them; and 
them. which suffer adversity, as be- 
ing yourselves: also in the body. 

4, "Marriage is honourable in all, 
and the bed undefiled: but whore- 
mongers and adulterers God will 
judge. 

5S Let your conversation be with: 
out °covetousness; and’ be content 
with ‘such. things as ye have: for 


For if they escaped \0 love of 


HEBREWS. 


A.D. 64. _|Phe hath said, aI will never leave 
@ Phil.3.20. 


6 myriads of 
angels, the 
universal 
gathering. 

¢ Heb.1.4,note. 

d@ Church 
(true). 
(Mt.16.18.) 

e Mt.5.48,note. 

f Heb.8.6. 

g Ex.24.8. 

A Acts 13.46, 

i Hag.2.6. 

j shaken. 

k hold fast. 

| Grace (im- 
Parted). vs. 
15,28; Heb.13. 
9. (Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 

m Mt.25.36. 

n Prov.5.18-23. 


money. 

bD himself, 

q Deut.31.6. 

r Psa.118.6. 

S your guides. 

t Lit.consider- 
ing the issue 
of the con- 
versation of 
whom, imi- 
tate the 
faith, 

u to the ages 
{to come]. 

v Grace (im- 
parted). Jas. 
4.6. (Rom.6.1; 
2 Pet.3.18.) 

w Sanctify, 
holy (per- 
sons) (N.T.). 
1. Pet.1.15,16. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev. 
22.11.) 

x Sacrifice (of 
Christ). 

1 Pet.1.18,19. 
(Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

y Acts. 5.41, 

2 abiding. 

@ Separation. 
vs.10-14; 1 
John 2.15-17. 
(Gen.12.1; 2 
Cor.6.14-17.) 

b the coming 


one. 
¢ Sacrifice(the 
believer- 


priest's). vs. 
15,16; 1 Pet. 


2.5. (Gen.4.4; 


Heb.10.18.) 

d Or, share 
what you 
have with 
others. Cf. 
Rom.12.13; 
Gal.6.6. 

e Phil.4.18,. 

f guide you. 

¢ Ezk.3.17. 


[13 17 


thee, nor forsake thee. : 

6 So that wé may boldly say, The 
Lord zs my helper, and I will 
not fear what man shall do unto 
me. 

7 Remember ‘them which have 
the rule over you, who have spoken 
unto you the word of God: ‘whose 
faith follow, considering the end of 
their conversation. 

8 Jesus Christ the same yester- 
day, and to day, and “for ever. 

9 Be not carried about with divers 
and strange doctrines. For it is a 
good thing that the heart be estab- 
lished *with grace; not with meats, 
which have not profited them that 
have been occupied therein. 


(4) Christian separation and 
worship. 


10 We have an altar, whereof they | 
have no right to eat which serve 
the tabernacle. 

11 For the bodies of those beasts, 
whose blood is brought into the 
sanctuary by the high priest for sin, 
are burned without the camp. 

12 Wherefore Jesus also, that he 
might “sanctify the people *with 
his own blood, suffered without the’ 
gate. 

13 Let us go forth therefore unto 
him without the camp, bearing his 
reproach. 

14 For here have we no “continu- 
ing city, but ¢we seek Sone to come, 


(S$) The believer-pries?’s sacri- 
ce. 


153 By him therefore let us offer 
the ‘sacrifice of praise to God con- 
tinually, that is, the fruit of our 
lips giving thanks to his: name. 

16 But to do good and to ¢com- 
municate forget not: for with such 
‘sacrifices God is well pleased: 


(6)' The believer-priest’s obedi- 
ence. 


17 Obey them that ‘have the rule 
Over you, and submit yourselves: 
for they £watch for your souls, as 
they that must give account, that 
they may do it with joy, and not 
with grief: for that is unprofitable 
for you. 


13 13] 


Conclusion: the apostolic bene- 
diction. 


18 Pray for us: for we trust we 
have a good 4conscience, in all 
things willing to live honestly. 

19 But I beseech you the rather 
to do this, that I may be restored 
to you the sooner. 

20 “Now the “Ged of peace, that 
brought again “from the dead our 
Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of 
the sheep, through the blood of the 
“everlasting covenant, 

21 fMake you &perfect in every 
good work to do his will, working 


HEBREWS. 


[13 25 


in you that which is wellpleasing in 
his sight, through Jesus Christ; to 
whom be glory for ever and ever. 


A.D. 64. 


a Acts 24.16. 


b Bible Amen. 
prayers 22 And I beseech you, brethren 
DO REE: suffer the word of exhortation: for 


9; Rev.22.20.)|I have written a letter unto you in 
c Rom:5.1,2,10./few words. 

23 Know ye that our brother 
Timothy is set at liberty; with 


d fromamong. 


e eternal. whom, if he come shortly, I will see 

f perfect you. |YOu. 

2 Mt.s.48 24 Salute all them that “have the 
note. ” rule over you, and all the saints. 

h guide you. |They of Italy salute you. 


25 Grace be with youall. Amen. 


1805 


THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF 


e JAMES. ba 


WRITER. James (Mt. 4. 21, note), called “the Just,’ mentioned by Paul with 
Cephas and John as “pillars” in the church at Jerusalem (Gal. 2. 9). He seems 
to have been, as a religious man, austere, legal, ceremonial (Acts 21. 18-24). 


Date. Tradition fixes the martyrdom of James in the year 62, but his Epistle — 
shows no trace of the larger revelations concerning the church and the distinctive 


doctrines of grace made through the Apostle Paul, nor even of the discussions con- 
cerning the relation of Gentile converts to the law of Moses, which culminated in 
the first council (Acts 15.), over which James presided. This presumes the very 
early date of James, which may confidently be set down as “the first Epistle to 
Christians.”—Weston. 

Theme. By “the twelve tribes scattered abroad” we are to understand, not 
Jews, but Christian Jews of the Dispersion. The church began with such (Acts 2. 
5-11), and James, who seems not to have left Jerusalem, would feel a particular 


pastoral responsibility for these scattered sheep. They still resorted to the syna-_ 


gogues, or called their own assemblies by that name (Jas. 2. 2, where “assembly” 
is “synagogue” in the Gr.). It appears from Jas. 2. 1-8 that they still held the syna- 


gogue courts for the trial of causes arising amongst themselves. The Epistle, then, — 


is elementary in the extreme. To suppose that Jas. 2. 14-26 is a_polemic against 
Paul’s doctrine of justification is absurd. Neither Galatians nor Romans was yet 
written. 

James’ theme, then, is “religion” (Gr. threskeia, “outward religious service’) 
as the expression and proof of faith. He does not exalt works as against faith, 
eae faith as producing works. His style is that of the Wisdom-books of the 
O. 


The divisions are five: I. The testing of faith, 1. 1-2. 26. II. The reality of 
faith tested by the tongue, 3. 1-18. III. The rebuke of worldliness, 4. 1-17. IV. 
The rich warned, 5. 1-6. V. Hortatory, 5. 7-20. 


A.D. 60. 7 For let not that man think that 
ue ieee Wray pe Sell receive any thing of the 
art I. e testings of fai ord. 
(Jas. 1. 1-2. 26). 4 eee a A cubic minded man is unsta- 
; . persion. e in all his ways. 
(1) The purpose of testings. ci. testings.| 9 JLet the brother of low degree 
AMES, a 4servant of God and of|¢ Rom.s.3. rejoice in that he is exalted: 


the Lord Jesus Christ, to the|- mature and| 10 But the rich, “in that: he is 
twelve tribes which are scattered ride! made low: because as the flower of 
Lies ee oe ere aria te aad he shall pass away. ; 
y brethren, count it all joy Peis 1 or the sun is no sooner risen 
when ye fall into divers ‘tempta- Peer ae. with a burning heat, but it wither- 


tions; jy Miie.11 24. eth the grass, and the flower thereof 


3 Knowing this, that the trying 1 Provas falleth, and the grace of the fash- 
ys ha rate 4worketh patience. Boi 3 ion of it perisheth: so also shall 
ut let patience have her per- Drees the rich man fade away in his 


fect work, that ye may be “perfect Te eee ways. 

and /entife, wanting nothing. vs.2121314,| 12 Blessed is the man that endur- 
5 If any of you lack wisdom,| (Gen.3/1.) eth ‘temptation: for when he is 

let him ask of God, &that giveth|m Rewards. tried, he shall receive the ”crown 

to all men liberally, and upbraid-| 1 Pet-5.4. of "life, which the Lord hath prom- 


eth not; and it shall be given Waser ised to them that love him. 


him. aah . S00 5 Gis 

_6 But let him ask in faith, noth- ‘ aes (2) Solicitation to do evil is 
ing wavering. For he that waver- es es not of God. 

eth is like a wave of the sea driven} “®Y??) | 13 Let no man say when he 


with the wind and tossed. is tempted, I am tempted of God: 
1306 


te. 


me 2 Pas, - 2” Ge > ae. ee. 
Pej weg? a ’ 


1) 


JAMES. 


[2 13 


for God cannot be tempted ath! A.D. 60. /in their affliction, and to keep “him- 


evil, neither tempteth he any 
man: 

14 But every man is !tempted, 
when he is drawn away of his own 
lust, and enticed. 

15 Then when lust hath con- 
ceived, it bringeth forth ¢sin: and 
sin, when it is finished, bringeth 
forth death. 

16 Do not err, my beloved breth- 
ren. 

17 Every good gift and every 
perfect gift is from above, and com- 
eth down from the Father of lights, 
with whom is no ‘variableness, 
neither shadow of turning. 

18 4Of his own will begat he us 
with the word of truth, that we 
should be a kind of firstfruits of his 
creatures. 

19 Wherefore, my beloved breth- 
ren, let every man be swift to hear, 
slow to speak, slow to wrath: 

20 For the wrath of man worketh 
not the “righteousness of God. 

21 Wherefore lay apart all filthi- 
ness and /fsuperfluity of naughti- 
ness, and receive with meekness 
the engrafted word, which is able 
to saye your souls. 


(3) The test of obedience. 


22 But be ye “doers of the word, 
and not hearers only, deceiving 
your own selves. 

23 For if any be a hearer of the 
word, and not a doer, he is like 
unto a man beholding his natural 
face in a glass: 

24 For he beholdeth himself, and 
goeth his way, and straightway 
forgetteth what manner of man he 


was. 

25 But whoso ‘looketh into the 
jperfect law of liberty, and con- 
tinueth therein, he being not a for- 
getful hearer, but a doer of the 
work, this man shall’ be blessed in 
his deed. 


(4) The test of true religion. 


26 If any man among you seem 
to be “religious, and bridleth not 
his ‘tongue, but deceiveth his own 
heart, this man’s religion ys vain. 

27 ™Pure religion and undefiled 
before God and the Father is this, 
To visit the fatherless and widows 


a Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 

b Two words 
are used in 
the original 
for “‘gift,’’ the 
first meaning 
the act of 
&iving; the 
second, the 
thing given, 

¢ variation. 

d John 1.13; 

1 Pet.1.23. 

e Rom.3.21,note. 

f overflowing 
-of wicked- 
ness. 

gRom.1,16, 
note, 

hMt.7.21. 

22 Cor.3.18, 

j Law (of 
Christ). 

1 John 2.7,8, 
15. (Gal.6.2; 
2 John 5.) 
kGr. threskos 
= outwardly 
religious. 

1 Psa.34.13. 

m Mt.25.34-36, 

n oneself. 

o kosmos = 
world-system. 
Jas.4.4. (John 
7.7; Rev.13. 
3-8, note.) 

p the Glory, 
i.e. in the 
sense of Heb. 
1.3, as taking 
the place of 
the shekinah. 

q In the pres- 
ence of Christ 
the Glory, 
earthly dis- 
tinctions 
disappear. 

ry Have ye not 
made a dif- 
ference 
among 
yourselves. 

swith. 

t John 7.48; 

1 Cor.1.26,28. 

u kosmos - 


w excellent, 
or, beautiful. 

x Lev.19.18. 

yv.l. 

z Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 

a Law (of 
Moses). Rev. 
12.17. (Ex.19. 
1;Gal.3.1-29.) 

b Mt.5.19; 
Gal.3.10. 

c Ex.20.13,14. 

d Jas.1.25; 

1 Pet.2.16. 


self unspotted from the °world. 


CHAPTER 2. 
(5) The test of brotherly love. 


Y brethren, have not the faith 

of our Lord Jesus Christ, *the 

Lord of glory, %with respect of 
persons. 

2 For if there come unto your 
assembly a man with. a gold ring, 
in goodly apparel, and there come 
in also a poor man in vile rai- 
ment; 

3 And ye have respect to him 
that weareth the gay clothing, and 
say unto him, Sit thou here in a 
good place; and say to the poor, 
Stand thou there, or sit here under 
my footstool: 

4 rAre ye not then partial in your- 
selves; and are become judges ‘Sof 
evil thoughts? 

5 Hearken, my beloved brethren, 
‘Hath not God chosen the poor of 
this “world *rich in faith, and 
heirs of the kingdom which he 


jhath promised to them that love 


him? 

6 But ye have despised the poor. 
Do not rich men oppress you, and 
draw you before the judgment 
seats? 

7 Do not they blaspheme that 
wworthy name by the which ye 
are called? 

8 If ye fulfil the royal law accord- 
ing to the scripture, *Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself, ye 
do well: 

9 But if ye have respect to 
persons, ye commit “sin, and are 
convinced of the law as trans- 
gressors. 

10 For whosoever shall keep the 
whole @law, and yet %offend in one 
point, he is guilty of all. f 

11 For he that said, “Do not com- 
mit adultery, said also, Do not kill. 
Now if thou commit no adultery, 
yet if thou kill, thou art become a 
2transgressor of the law. 

12 Sospeak ye, and so do, as they 
that shall be judged by the law of 
liberty. 

13 For he shall have judgment 
without mercy, that hath shewed 


1 “Temptation” is used in two senses: (1) Solicitation to evil (e.g. Gen. 3. 1-6; 


Mt. 4. 1; 1 Cor. 10. 13; 2 Cor. 11. 3, 4; Jas. 1. 14). k c 
Cf. Mt. 6. 13 (solicitation to evil) and 1 Pet. 1. 4 


22.1; Lk. 22. 28; cf. Lk. 4. 2). 
(testing under trial). 


1307 


(2) Testing under trial (e.g. Gen. 


2 14] 


JAMES. 


sm 


no mercy; and ¢mercy 4rejoiceth 
against judgment. 


(6) The test of good works. 


14 What dothit profit, my breth-| _ 
ren, though a man say he hath/¢Mic.7.18. 
faith, and have not works? can|?’ oe ieth 
faith ¢save him? ecarnlthatl 

15 Ifa brother or sister be naked,| faith save 
and destitute of daily food, _ | him? 

16 And one of you say unto them, |? Rom-1.16, 
Depart in peace, be ye warmed) ,; john3.18. 
and filled; notwithstanding ye givel ¢ Faith. vs.17, 
them not those things which are} 18,20; Jas.5.— 
eats to the body; what doth it ina 

rohit: v.26; cf. 
7 Even so /faith, if it hath not * John 15.2. 
works, is &dead, being alone. ROT SG» ’ 

18 Yea, a man may say, Thou| }72¢;;33 
hast faith, and I have works: /shew 
me thy faith without thy works, 
and I will shew thee my faith by 
my works. 

19 Thou believest that ‘there is 
one God; thou doest well: the Jdev- 
ils also believe, and tremble. 

20 But wilt thou know, O vain 
man, that “faith without works is 
dead? 


(7) The illustration of Abraham. 
(Cf. Rom. 4. 1-25.) 


21 Was not Abraham our father 
‘justified by works, when he had 
offered Isaac his son upon the 
altar? 

22 Seest thou how faith wrought 
with his works, and by works was 
faith made perfect? 

23 And the scripture was fulfilled 
which saith, Abraham believed 
"God, and it was !%mputed unto 
him for righteousness: and he 
was called the ¢Friend of God. 

24 Yesee then how that by works 
a man is justified, and not by faith 
only. 

25 Likewise also was not *Rahab 
the harlot justified by works, when 
she had received the messengers, 
and had sent them out another 
way? 

26 For as the sbody without the 
spirit is dead, so faith without 
works is dead also. 

5.1; 9.6. 


CHAPTER 3. eMt.7.16-20. 


Part IJ. A true faith. will con-|/>eh2aviour- 
trol the tongue. 


Y brethren, be not many 
‘masters, knowing that we 


kvs.17,26. 

1Rom.4.2, 
note. 

mMt.5.48, 
note. 

n Jehovah, 
Gen.15.6. 

oImputation. 
(Lev.25.50.) 

~ Rom.3.21, 
note. 

q2 Chr.20.7; 
Isa.41.8. 

r Josh.2.1; 
Heb.11.31. 

$vs.17,20. 

t teachers, 
knowing 


have the 
more severe 
judgment. 
Cf.Mk.12.40. 
uwe all 
offend. 


v Psa.32.9, 
w Prov.12.18; 
15.2. 


x Prov.16.27 

yMt.15.18. 

2 Mt.5.22, 
note, 

@creeping 
things. 

6 Psa.140.3; 
Rom.3.13. 

¢ God. Gen.1. 
27. 


dGen.1.26; 


A.D. 60. 


that we shall 


shall receive the greater condem- 
nation. ‘ 

2 For in many things “we offend 
all. If any man offend not in word, 
the same is a ™perfect man, and 
able also to bridle the whole 
body. 

3 Behold, we put "bits in the 
horses’ mouths, that they may obey 
us; and we turn about their whole 
body. 

4 Behold also the ships, which 
though they be so great, and are 
driven of fierce winds, yet are 
they turned about with a very 
small helm, whithersoever the gov- 
ernor listeth. 

5 Even so “the tongue is a little 
member, and boasteth great things. 
Behold, how great a matter a little 
fire kindleth! 

6 *And the tongue zs a fire, a 
world of iniquity: so is the tongue 
among our members, that it %de 
fileth the whole body, and set- 
teth on fire the course of na- 
ture; and it is set on fire of 
hell. 

7 For every kind of beasts, and 
of birds, and of 4serpents, and 
of things in the sea, is tamed, 
and hath been tamed of man- 
kind: 

8 But the tongue can no man 
tame; rf is an unruly evil, "full of 
deadly poison. 

9 Therewith biess we “God, even 
the Father; and therewith curse we 
men, which are made 4/after the 
similitude of God. 

10 Out of the same mouth. pro. 
ceedeth blessing and cursing. My 
brethren, these things ought not so 
tobe. 

11 Doth a fountain, send forth at 
the same place sweet water and 
bitter? 

12 Can the é¢fig tree, my brethren, 
bear olive berries? either a vine; 
figs? so can no fountain both yield 
salt water and fresh. 

13 Who is a wise man and endued 
with knowledge among you? let 
him shew out of a good fconversa- 
tion his works with meekness of 
wisdom. 

14 But if ye have bitter en- 
vying and strife in your hearts, 
glory not, and lie not against the 
truth. 


1 Imputation is the act of God whereby He accounts righteousness to the believer 


in Christ, who has borne the believer’s 
17, 18, note. 


1308 


sins in vindication of the law. 


See Phm: 


anil 


3 15] 


15 @This wisdom descendeth not 
from above, but is earthly, °sensual, 
devilish. : 

16 For where envying and strife 
is, there zs confusion and every evil 
work. 

17 But the ‘wisdom that is from 
above is first pure, then peaceable, 
gentle, and easy to be intreated, 
full of mercy and good fruits, 
without partiality, and ¢without 
hypocrisy. 

_18 And the fruit of ‘righteousness 
is sown in peace fof them that make 
peace. 


CHAPTER 4. 


Part III. The rebuke of 
worldliness. 


7ROM whence come wars and 

fightings among you? come 

they not hence, even of your lusts 
&that war in your members? 

2 Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, 
and desire to have, and cannot ob- 
tain: ye fight and war, yet ye have 
not, because ye ask not. 

3 Ye ask, and receive not, /be- 
cause ye ask ‘amiss, that ye may 
consume it upon your lusts. 

4 Ye adulterers and adulteresses, 
know ye not that the Jfriendship of 
the “world is enmity with God? 
4whosoever therefore will be a 
friend of the world is the enemy 
of God. 

5 Do ye think that the scripture 
msaith in vain, “The °spirit that 
dwelleth in us lusteth to envy? 

6 But he giveth more grace. 
Wherefore he saith, 7God resisteth 
the proud, but giveth grace unto 
the humble. 

7 Submit yourselves therefore to 

God. Resist the “devil, and he will 
flee from you. 
' 8 sDraw nigh to God, and he will 
draw nigh to you. Cleanse your 
hands, ye ‘sinners; and _ purify 
your hearts, ye double minded. 

9 Be afflicted, and mourn, and 
weep: let your laughter be turned 
to mourning, and your joy to 
heaviness. 

10 “Humble yourselves in the 
sight of the Lord, and he shall lift 
you up. 

11 Speak not evil one of another, 
brethren. He that speaketh evil 
of his brother, and judgeth his 
brother, speaketh evil of the law, 
and judgeth the law: but if thou 
judge the law, thou art not a doer 
of the law, but a judge. 


JAMES. 


A.D. 60. 


a Phil.3.19; 
Jas.1.17. 

6 Or, natural. 

¢ 1 Cor.2.6,7. 

d Rom.12.9; 

1 Pet.1.22. 
e1 John 3.7, 

note. 

f for them. 

g Rom.7.23; 
Gal.5.17; 

1 Pet.2.11. 
h1 John 5.14. 
a evilly. 
j1 John 2.15. 
k kosmos = 

world-system. 

2 Pet.1.4. 

(John 7.7;Rev. 

13.3-8, note.) 
1 John 15.19;17. 

14; Gal. 1.4. 
m speaketh 

in vain? 

n Doth the 
Spirit... 
desire en- 
viously? 

o Holy Spirit. 
1 Pet.1.2,11, 


p Grace (im- 
parted).1Pet. 
2.19.(Rom.6.1 
2 Pet.3.18.) 

q Prov.3.34. 

+r Satan 1 Pet. 
5.8.(Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

s-2 Chr.15.2; 
Mal.3.7; Heb. 
10.19-22. 

t Sin. Rom.3. 


14; 1 Pet.5.6. 

v Eph.4.31; 

1 Pet.2.1. 

w Mt.10.28. 

x Rom.1.16, 
note. 

y Prov.27.1, 
Lk.12.18 

2 Job 7.7; 
Psa.102.3; 

1 Pet.1.24 

a Acts 18.21; 
1 Cor.4.19. 

b Lk.12.47; 

2. et.2 5210 

c Prov.11.28, 
Lk.6.24. 

d Jer.17.11. 

ein the last 
days. 

fi.e.Jehovah 
of hosts, 

g luxuriously. 

h indulged 
yourselves. 

i Mt.5.39. 

j Or, be long 
patient, or, 
suffer with 
long 
patience. 

k Carist (Sec- 
ond Advent). 
Heb.10.37, 38. 
(Deut.30.3; 
Acts 1.9,11.) 

U complain. 


«1309 


[5 9 

12 There is one lawgiver, “who is 
able to *save and to destroy: who 
art thou that judgest another? 

13 %Go to now, ye that say, To 
day or to morrow we will go into 
such a city, and continue there a 
year, and buy and sell, and get gain: 

14 Whereas ye know not what 
shall be on the morrow. For what 
is your life? It is even a vapour, 
that appeareth for a little time, and 
then vanisheth away. 

15 For that ye ought to say, “If 
the Lord will, we shall live, and do 
this, or that. : 

16 But now ye rejoice in your 
boastings: all such rejoicing is evil. 

17 There i b 


wortes 


ft not, to 


CHAPTER 5. 
Part IV. The rich warned. 


O to now, ye ‘rich men, weep 
and howl for your miseries that 
shall come upon you. 

2 Your 4riches are corrupted, and 
your garments are motheaten. 

3 Your gold and silver is can- 
kered; and the rust of them shall 
be a witness against you, and shall 
eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye 
have heaped treasure ‘together for 
the last days. 

4 Behold, the hire of the labour- 


./ers who have reaped down your 


fields, which is of you kept back 
by fraud, crieth: and the cries of 
them which have reaped are en- 
tered into the ears of /the Lord of 
sabaoth. 

5 Ye have lived 4in pleasure on 
the earth, and /“beén wanton; ye 
have nourished your hearts, as in 
a day of slaughter. 

6 Ye have condemned and killed 
the just; and he doth not ‘resist 
you. 


Part V. Exhortations in view of 
the coming of the Lord. 


7 jBe patient therefore, brethren, 
unto the coming of the Lord. Be- 
hold, the husbandman waiteth for 
the precious fruit of the earth, and 
hath long patience for it, until he 
receive the early and latter rain. 

8 Beye also patient; stablish your 
hearts: for *the coming of the Lord 
draweth nigh. 

9 ‘Grudge not one against an- 
other, brethren, lest ye be con- 
demned: behold, the judge standeth 
before the door. 


10 Take, my brethren, the proph- 
ets, who have spoken in the 
name of the Lord, for an example 
of suffering. ¢affliction, and of pa- 
tience. 

11 Behold, we count them “happy 
which endure. Ye have heard 
of the ‘patience of Job, and have 
seen the ¢end of the Lord; that the 
Lord is very pitiful, and of tender 
mercy. 

12 But above all things, my 
brethren, ¢swear not, neither by 
heaven, neither by the earth, nei- 
ther by any other oath: but let 
your yea be yea; and your nay, 
nay; lest ye fall into condemnation. 

13 Is any among you afflicted? let 
him pray. Is any merry? let him 
sing ‘psalms. 

14 Is any sick among you? Slet 
him call for the “elders of the 
church; and let them pray over him, 


A.D. 60. 


a Heb.11.35. 
b Psa.94.12; 
Mt.5.10. 

c Job 1.21. 
d Job 42.10. 
e Mt.5.34. 
f Eph.5.19. 
g Churches 
(local). 
3 John 6, 9, 10. 


h Elders. 1 Pet. 
5.1. (Acts 11. 
30; Tit.1.5-9.) 

i Faith. 1 Pet. 
1.5,9. (Gen. 
3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 

j Sin. Rom.3. 
23, note. 

k Or, fervent 
supplica- 


1Rom, 10.10, 
note. 

m1 Ki.17.1. 

n1 Ki.18.42. 


anointing him with oil in the name 
of the Lord: : 
15 And the prayer of ‘faith shall 


o Prov.10.12. 


save the sick, and the Lord. shall 
mitted jsins, they shall be forgiven 
other, and pray one for another, 
that ye may be healed. The “effec- 
man availeth much. 

passions as.we are, and “he prayed 
earnestly that it might not rain: 


and it rained not on the earth by 


months. 
18 And he prayed “again, and the 


brought forth her fruit. 
19 Brethren, if any of you do err 


raise him up; and if he have com- 


16 Confess your “faults one to an- | 
tual fervent prayer of a ‘righteous — 
17 Elias was a man subject to like | 
the space of three years and six 


heaven gave rain, and the earth 


eo the truth, and one convert — 
20 Let him know, that he which | 


converteth the sinner from the 
error of his way shall save a soul 
from death, and shall °hide a mul- 
titude of Jsins. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF 


Re PETER. Le: 


WRITER. The Apostle Peter (1. 1). 

Date. Probably aD. 60. That “Babylon” refers to the former city on the 
Euphrates, or to Rome, cannot be inferred from 5. 13. The text is obscure. 

Theme. While Peter undoubtedly has scattered Jewish believers in mind, his 
Epistles comprehend Gentile believers also (1 Pet. 2. 10). The present Epistle, 
written from a church on Gentile ground (5. 13), presents all. the foundationat 
truths of the Christian faith, with special emphasis on the atonement. The dis- 
tinctive note of First Peter is preparation for victory over suffering. The last-named 
word occurs about fifteen times, and is the key-word of the Epistle. 

The Epistle is in three parts: I. Christian suffering and conduct in the light of 
full salvation, 1. 1-2. s. II. The believer’s life in view of his sevenfold position, 
and of the vicarious suffering of Christ, 2. 9-4. 19. HII. Christian service in the 
light of the coming of the Chief Shepherd, 5. 1-14. 


CHAPTER 1 A.D. 60. _|not away, reserved in heaven for 
‘ you, 
Part I. Christian suffering and\? svourners | _5 Who are /kept by the power of 


conduct in the light of full bald God through ‘faith unto salvation 


salvation (1 Pet. 1. 1-2. 3). Poe read to be revealed in the last 
yn, \time. 4 be 

PETER, an apostle of Jesus Perr es 6 Wherein ye greatly rejoice, 

Christ, to the strangers scat-| - 9 phes.2.13. though now for a season, if need be, 


tered throughout Pontus, Galatia, ve are in heaviness through mani- 


Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, |[¢ “”"é- fold ‘temptations: 
2 ibflect according to the fore-|¢ foe é _7 That the trial of your faith, be- 
knowledge of God the Father, my ing much more precious than of gold 


through ‘sanctification of the Spirit, f guarded. that perisheth, though it be tried 
unto obedience and sprinkling of the] ¢ Faith. 1 Pet.|with fire, 2might be found unto 
blood of: Jesus Christ: Grace: unto] 2-6,7-_ (Gen. |praise and honour and glory at the 


you, and peace, be multiplied. Fhe ‘appearing of Jesus Christ: 
3 Blessed be the God and Father|, 7. otation 8 Whom having not seen, ye 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which ac-|" 2 pet2.9.. |love; in whom, though now ye see 


cording to his abundant mercy hath} (Gen.3.1; him not, yet believing, ye rejoice 
begotten us again unto a 4lively| Jas-1-14.) with joy unspeakable and full of 
hope by the resurrection of Jesus] # Or, revela- glory: 


Christ ¢from the dead, tion. 9 Receiving the end of your 
4 To an inheritance incorrupt-|jRom.i.16, |faith, even the /salvation of your 
ible, and undefiled, and that fadeth| 7°**- souls. 


1 Blection, Summary: In both’ Testaments the Hebrew and Greek words are 
rendered “elect,” “election,” ‘“choose,’”’ “chosen.” In all cases they mean, simply, 
“chosen,” or “to choose”; and are used of both human and divine choices. (1) In 
the latter use election is: (a) corporate, as of the nation of Israel, or the church (Isa. 
45. 4: Eph. 1. 4); and (b) individual (1 Pet. 1.2). (2) Election is according to the 
foreknowledge of God (1 Pet. 1. 2), and wholly of grace, apart from human merit 
(Rom. 9. 11; 11.5, 6). (3) Election proceeds from the divine volition (John 15. 16). 

Election is, therefore: (1) The sovereign act of God in grace whereby certain 
are chosen from among mankind for Himself (John 15. 19). (2) The sovereign act 
of God whereby certain elect persons are chosen for distinctive service for Him 
(Lk. 6. 13; Acts 9. 15; 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28). f 

2 Suffering, in First Peter, is set in the light of: (1) assured salyation, i, 2-5; (2) 
the greater glory at Christ’s appearing, 1.7; (3). Christ’s sufferings and coming 
glories, 1. 11; (4) the believer’s association with Him in both, 2. 20, 21; 3. 17, 185 4. 
12, 13; (5) the purifying effect of suffering, 1. 7; 4. 1, 25 5. 10; (6) that Christ is now 
glorified in the believer’s patient suffering, 4. 16; (7) that suffering is disciplinary, 
4. 17-19. (1 Cor. 11. 31, 32; Heb. 12. 5-13.) 

131i 


1 10] 


10 Of which “salvation the proph- 
ets have inquired and searched 
diligently, who prophesied of 
the grace that should come unto 


ou: 

11 Searching what, or what man- 
ner of time the ‘Spirit of Christ 
which was in them did signify, 
when it testified beforehand the 
sufferings of Christ, and the glory 
that should follow. 

12 Unto whom it was revealed, 
that not unto themselves, but unto 
us they did minister the things, 
which are now reported unto you 
by them that have preached the 
gospel unto you with the ¢Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven; 
which things the angels desire to 
look into. . 

13. Wherefore gird up the loins of 
your mind, be sober, and hope to 
the end ¢for the grace that is to be 
brought unto you at the revelation 
of Jesus Christ; 

14 As obedient children, not /fash- 
ioning yourselves according to the 
former lusts in your ignorance: 

15 But as he which hath called 
you is holy, so be ye holy in all 
manner of conversation; 

16 Because it is written, sBe ye 
hholy; for I am holy. 

17 And if ye call on the Father, 
who without respect of persons 
judgeth according to every man’s 
work, pass the time of your so- 
journing Aere in fear: 

18 Forasmuch as ye know that ye 
were not ‘redeemed with corrupti- 
ble things, as silver and gold, from 
your vain conversation received 
by tradition from your fathers; 


I PETER. 


A.D. 60. 


@ Rom.1.16, notfe. 
6 Inspiration. 


1.21. (Ex. 
4.15; Rev.22.19.) 

¢2 Pet.1.21. 

@ Holy Spirit. 
vs.2,11,12,22; 

1 Pet.3.18. (Mt. 
1.18; Acts 2.4.) 

€ Grace (in salv.). 
1 Pet.5.12. 
(Rom.3.24; John 
1.16, nofe.) 

f Rom.12.2. 

9 Lev.11.44, 

h Sanctify, holy 
(persons) (N. 
T.). vs.15,16; 

1 Pet.2.5,9. (Mt. 
4.5; Rev.22.11.) 

+ Rom.3.24, note. 

4 Sacrifice (of 
Christ). 1 Pet.2. 
24. (Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

k foreknown. 
Foreknowledge. 

SER (Acts 2. 


23 
ages. 
mat this end of 
times. 
n Law (of Chris), 


vs.8,22; Jas.1.25, 
peas 2 John 


° vs.24,25; Isa.40. 
6-8. 


P Lit. saying. 

@God. Isa.40.8. 

Tr Gospel. vs.12, 
25; 1 Pet.4.6,17. 
(Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6.) 

® Psa.34.8, 

#1 Cor.3.11. 


™ rejected. 
Psa.118.22. 


vare being built 
up. 


w Sacrifice(the 

believer- 
Priest’s). Heb, 
10.1-18. (Gen.4. 


19 But with the precious blood of} 4: Heb-10.18.) ” 


Christ, as of a Tamb without blem-|2)2076 
ish and without spot: 1 John 5.1,4,5,20 
20 Who verily was !*foreordained| (G¢p-}.2% Heb 


before the foundation of the ‘world, 
but was manifest in these last 
times for you. 

21 Who by him do believe in God, 
that raised him up from the dead, 


1 The divine order is foreknowledge, election, 
edge determines the election or choice is 


the bringing to pass of the election. 
tination forward to the destiny.” 


divine foreknowledge which deter 
The foreknown are elected, and the elect are predestinated, and this 
fact that he believes (1 Thes. 1, 4, 


tain to every believer by the mere 
destination,” Eph. 1. 11. 

_ 2 Christ crucified is the Rock: 
Him to all who 


will drink (Ex. 17. 
the church the 


= Js the precious- 
ness. 


@ Christ (as 
Stone). vs.4,8, 
(Ex.17.6.) 


; 28 


and gave him glory; that your 
faith and hope might be in God. 

22 Seeing ye have purified your 
souls in obeying the truth through > 
the Spirit “unto unfeigned love of | 
the brethren, see that ye love one 
another with a pure heart fervently: 

23 Being born again, not of cor 
ruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 
by the word of God, which liveth 
and abideth for ever. 

24 For °all flesh is as grass, and all 
the glory of man as the flower of 
grass. The grass withereth, and 
the flower thereof falleth away: 

25 But the “word of the ¢Lord en- 
dureth for ever. And this is the 
word which by the “gospel is 


preached unto you. 


CHAPTER 2. 
Part I. continued. : 


\ a JHEREFORE laying aside all 

malice, and all guile, and 
hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil 
speakings, 

2 As newborn babes, desire the. 
sincere milk of the word, that ye 
may grow thereby: 

3. Ifso be ye have Stasted that the 
Lord is gracious. 

4 To whom coming, ‘as unto a 
living stone, “disallowed indeed 
of men, but chosen of God, and 
precious, 

5. Ye also, as lively stones, "are 
built up a spiritual house; an holy 
priesthood, to offer up “spiritual 
sacrifices, acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ. 

_6 Wherefore also it is contained 
in the “scripture, Behold, I lay in 
Sion a chief corner stone, elect, 
precious: and he that believeth on 


0. him shall not be confounded. 


7 Unto you therefore which »be- 


jlieve “he is precious: but unto them 


which be disobedient, the stone 


clear from 1 Pet. 1. 2, and 


which the builders “disallowed, the 
same is made the head of the corner, 
8 And a 2¢stone of stumbling, and 


predestination. That foreknowl- 
predestination is 


“Election looks back to foreknowledge; predes- 


But Scripture nowhere declares 
mines the divine election and: 


6; 1 


1312 


(Rom. 9. 3z, 33; 1 Cor. 1, 23) 


what it is in the 
predestination. 
election is cer- 
5). See “Pre- 


(1) eee that the Spirit of life may flow from 

or. 10. 
S > foundation and chief corner Stone 
at His first coming a “stumbling stone” 


4; John 4. 13, 14; 7. 37-39). 


27 
(Eph. 2. 20). oo 


(3) To the Jews 
- (4) To Israel 


29) 


I PETER. [2 25 


a tock of offence, even to them 
which stumble at the word, being 
disobedient: whereunto also they 
were appointed. 


Part II. The believer’s life in 
view of his sevenfold position, 
and of the vicarious suffering 
of Christ. 


9 But ye area “chosen generation, 
a royal Ipriesthood, an “holy na- 
tion, a “peculiar people; that ye 
should shew forth the ¢praises of 
him who hath called you out of 
darkness into his marvellous light: 

10 Which in time past were nota 
people, but are now the people of 
eGod: which had not obtained 
‘mercy, but now have obtained 
mercy. 

11 Dearly beloved, I beseech you 
vas sstgages and pilgrims, abstain 
from “fieshly lusts; which war 
against the soul; 

12 Having your conversation hon- 
est among the Gentiles: that, where- 
as they speak against you as evil- 
doers, they may by your ‘good 
works, which they shall behold, 
glorify God in the day of visitation. 

13 Submit ‘yourselves to every or- 
dinance of man for the Lord’s sake: 
whether it be to the king, as su- 
preme; 

14 Or unto governors, as unto 
them that are sent by him for the 
punishment of evildoers, and for the 
praise of them that do well. 

15 For so is the will of God, that 
with well doing ye may put to si- 
lence the ignorance of foolish 
men: 


AD. 60. 16 JAs free, and not using your 


liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, 


a Election 
(personal). |but as the “servants of God. 
2 John 1,13 
(een 17 Honour all men. Love the 
1 Pet.i.2.) |brotherhood. Fear ‘God. Honour 
b Sanctify, the king. 
sie aT) 18 Servants, be subject to your 
vs.5,0; 1 Pet. |Inasters with all fear; not only to 
3.5,15. (Mt.4./the good and gentle, but also to the 
¢ poaple for #' ne nee 
19 For “this is “thankworthy, if 
possession. y,ita 
d.virtues, ot, ae for conscience toward God en- 
excellencies.!qure grief, suffering wrongfull 
e God. Hos.1. 4 3 pul 
10. | 20 For what glory is it, if, when 
fPsa.119.19. |ye be buffeted for your Pfaults, ye 
Rom.8.13. i i i te 
SNe shall take it patiently? but if, when 
i Mt.22.21; |v do well, and suffer for it, ye take 
Rom-13-1,7. 3 epee this 1s acceptable with 
Jj #<om.0.14, od. 
20,22. 
k bondmen. (The vicarious suffering of 
l Jehovah. . 
Prov.24.21, Christ.) 
ap pees ioe a : eo. even anaes ee ye 
parted). called: because ist also suffered 
Rone: for BS, epad us an example, that 
9 Pet.3.18.) |ve shou ollow his steps: 
o grace. 22 Who did no ?sin, neither was 
p Sin. Rom.3. |guile found in his mouth: 
23, note Q 
q Mt.16.24; 23 Who, ‘when he was reviled, re- 
1 Thes.3.3,4. |viled not again; when he suffered, 
: lea he threatened not; but committed 
t Sacrifice (of himself to him that judgeth right- 
Christ). eously: 
laaas 24 ‘Who his own self “bare our 
Hebio1s.) |?Sins in his own body on the tree, 


that we, being dead to sins, should 
live unto *righteousness: by whose 


u Judgments 
(the seven). 


Fgeivaa: stripes ye were healed. 

Rev.20.12.) 25 For ye were as sheep going 
ai fre Aa astray; but are now returned unto 
whee 34.11. |the “Shepherd and *Bishop of your 


x overseer. souls. 


at His second coming the ‘“‘headstone of the corner” (Zech. 4. 7). _(5) To the Gen: 
6 


tile world-power the smiting 
In the divine purpose the Stone 
power, is to grow and fill the earth. 
ment (Mt. 21. 44). 


“stone cut out without hands” 


is” (Dan. 2. 34). 
which, after the destruction of Gentile world- 
(7) To unbelievers the crushing Stone of judg- 


1 The New Testament priesthood, Summary: (1) Until the law was given the head 


of each family was the family priest 


(Gen. 8. 20; 26. 25; 31. 54). (2) When the 


law was proposed, thé promise to perfect obedience was that Israel should be unto 
God “a kingdom of priests” (Ex. 19. 6); but Israel violated the law, and God shut 


up the priestly office to the Aaronic family, 
to them, thus constituting the typical priesthood (Ex. 28. aN) 
tion of grace, all believers are unconditionally constituted a 
the distinction which Israel failed to achieve by works. The 
therefore, a birthright; just as every descendant of 


(i Pet. 2. 9; Rev. 1. 6), 
priesthood of the believer is, 


Aaron was born to the priesthood (Heb. 5. 1). 


appointing the tribe of Levi to minister 
(3) In the dispensa- 
‘kingdom of priests’’ 


(4) The chief privilege of a priest is 


access to God. Under law the high priest only could enter “‘the holiest of all,” and 


that but once a year (Heb. 9. 7). 
human body (Heb. 10. 20), 


But when Christ died, the veil, type of Christ’s 


was rent, so that now the believer-priests, equally with 


Christ the High Priest, have access to God in the holiest (Heb. 10. 19-22). The 


High Priest is corporeally there (4. 14-16; Heb. 9. 24; 
cise of his office the New Testament believer-priest 1s (1) 
threefold sacrifice: (a) his own living. 


10. 19-22). (5) In the exer- 
a sacrificer who offers a 
body (Rom. 12. 1; Phil. 2. 17; 2 Tim. 4. 6; 


1313 


1T 


31] 


CHAPTER 3. 
Part II. continued. 


| Pte ee ye wives, be in 4sub- 
jection to your own husbands; 
that, if any obey not the word, they 
also may without the word be won 
by the conversation of the wives; 

2 While they behold your chaste 
bconversation coupled with fear. 

3 Whose ‘adorning let it not be 
that outward adorning of plaiting 
the hair, and of wearing of gold, or 
of putting on of apparel: 

4 But let it be the hidden man 
dof the heart, in «that which is not 
corruptible, even the ornament of 
a meek and quiet spirit, which is in 
the sight of God of great price. 

5 For after this manner in the old 
time the holy women -also, who 
Strusted in God, adorned them- 
selves, being in subjection unto 
their own husbands: 

6 Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, 
Scalling him lord: whose daughters 
ye are, as long as ye do well, and 
‘are not afraid with any amaze- 
ment. 

7 Likewise, ye husbands, dwell 
with them according to knowledge, 
giving honour unto the wife, as unto 
the weaker vessel, and as being 
heirs together of the ‘grace of /life; 
at 3 yous prayers besos hindered. 

8 Finally, be ve all o i 
having compassion oné Of acd 
Move as brethren, be pitiful, be 
courteous: 

9 Not ‘rendering evil for evil, or 
railing for railing: but contrariwise 
blessing; ™knowing that ye are 
thereunto called, that ye should in- 
herit a blessing. 

10 For “he that will love life, and 
see good days, let him refrain his 
tongue from evil, and his lips that 
they speak no guile: 

11 Let him eschew evil, and do 
good; let him seek peace, and °en- 


sue it. 
12 Fo eyes.of. the ’Lord are 


“ overthé *fightedus*and his ears are 


open unto their prayers: but the 
face of the *Lord is Sagainst them 
that do evil. 

13 And who is he that will harm 


you, if ye be followers of that 
which is good? 


I PETER. 


A.D. 60. 
@ vs.1,5,6; cf.Gen 
3.16. 


6 behaviour. 

¢1 Tim.2.9,10. 

@ Rom.2.29. 

€ the incorruptible 
(ornament) of a 
meek, etc, 


S hoped. 

9 Gen.18.12. 
h Prov.29.25. 
* Grace (im- 


J Life (eternal). 
2 Pet.1.3. (Mt. 
7.14; Rev.22.19.) 

&1 John 3.18. 

TMt.5.44. 

m™ because ye have 
been hereunto 
called, 

” Psa.34.12. 

° pursue. 

PJehovah, Psa. 
34.12-16. 

@Rom.10.10, nofe. 

r Jehovah. Psa. 
34.16. 


® upon. 

t 1 John 3.7, note. 

% Sanctify, holy 
(persons). (N- 

'-). VS.5,15; 
2 Pet.1.21. (Mt. 
4.5; Rev.22.11.) 

v Psa.119.46. 

w Tit.3.4,7. 

21 Pet.2.21. 

vu Sacrifice (of 
Christ). 1 Pet. 
4.1. Gen.4.4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

2 Judgments (the 
seven}. 1 Pet.4. 
17. (2 Sam.7. 
14; Rev.20,12.) 

@Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 

> Assurance. 

1 John 2.2. (Isa. 
32.17; Jude 1.) 

¢ Holy Spirit. 

1 Pet.4.6,14. 
(Mt.1.18; Acts 
2.4.) 


4 Heb.11.7; 2 Pet, 
1.21} 2.5. 
¢ Omit ‘‘once.”” 


F Rom.8.1. 


9 Mk.16.16; Acts 
18.8; Eph.5.26, 

h Flesh. 1 Pet. 
4.6. (Qohn 1.13; 
Jude 23,) 
idemand as 
before God of a 
good conscience. 

J Heb.1.4, note. 

& Sacrifice (of 
Christ). 1 John 
1.7. (Gen.4,4; 
Heb.10.18.) 

2 Cor.5.15, 


1314 


14 But and if ye suffer for ‘right. 
eousness’ sake, happy are ye: and 
be not afraid of their terror, neither 
be troubled; 

15 But “sanctify the Lord God in 
your hearts: and be *ready always 
to give an answer to every man 
that asketh you a reason of the 
whope that is in you with meekness 
and fear: d 

16 Having a good conscience; 
that, whereas they speak evil of you, 


; |as of evildoers, they may be ashamed. 


that falsely accuse your good con- 
versation in Christ. 

17 For it is better, if the will of 
God be so, that ye suffer for well 
doing, than for evil doing. \ 


(The vicarious suffering of 
Christ, preached by Christ 
through the Spirit in Noah.) © 


18 *For Christ also Yhath zonce 
suffered for 4sins, the just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to 
God, being put to death in the flesh, 
but quickened by the <Spirit: : 

19 ¢By which also he went and 
preached unto the spirits in prison; 

20 Which sometime were disobe- 
dient, when “once the longsuffering 
of God waited in the days of Noah, 
while the ark was a preparing, 
wherein few, that is, eight souls 
were saved by water. 

21 fThe like figure whereunto 
even &baptism doth also now save 
us (not the putting away of the filth 
of the “flesh, but the ‘answer of a 
good conscience toward God,) by 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ: 
_22 Who is gone into heaven, and 
1s on the right hand of God; jangels 
and authorities and powers being 


made subject unto him. 


CHAPTER 4. 
Part II. continued. 


PrORASMUCH then as Christ 
hath ‘suffered for us in the 
fiesh, arm yourselves likewise with 
the same mind: for he that hath 
suffered in the flesh hath ceased 
from 4sin; 

2 /That he no longer should live 
the rest of his time in the flesh to 


eds of men, but to the will of 
od, 


“the fruit of the lips that make men: 
ntinually” (Heb. 13. 15; Ex, 25. 222005 
mercy seat’’); 


» SES 
ee na i 


’ 


43) 


I PETER. 


[5 12 


3 For the time past of our life 
may suffice us to have wrought the 
will of the Gentiles, when we walked 
in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of 
wine, revellings, banquetings, and 
abominable idolatries: 

4 Wherein they think it strange 
that ye run not with them to the 
same excess of riot, speaking evil 
of you: 

5 Who shall give account to him 
that.is ready to judge the quick and 
the dead. 

6 °For for this cause was the gos- 
pel preached also to them °that 
are dead, that they might be 
¢judged according to men in the 
dflesh, but ‘live according to God 
in the spirit. 

7 But the fend of all things is ¢at 
hand: be ye therefore sober, and 
watch unto prayer. 

8 And above all things have fer- 
vent ‘charity among yourselves: 
for charity shall cover the multi- 
tude of ‘sins. 

9 Use hospitality one to another 
without grudging. 

10 As every man hath /received 
the gift, even so minister the same 
one to another, as “good stewards 
of the manifold /grace of Ged. 

11 ™If any man speak, let him 
speak as the oracles of God; if any 

“man minister, Jet him do it as of 
the ability which God giveth: that 
God in “all things may be glorified 
through Jesus Christ, to whom be 
praise and dominion for ever and 
ever. Amen. ° 

12 Beloved, think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial which is 

“to try you, as though some strange 
thing happened unto you: 

13 But rejoice, “inasmuch as ye 
are partakers of Christ’s sufferings: 
that, @when his glory shall be re- 
vealed, ye may be glad also with 
exceeding joy. 

’ 14 4If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye; for 
the “spirit of glory and of God rest- 
eth upon you: on their part he is 
evil spoken of, ‘but on your part he 
is glorified. 

15 But let none of you suffer as a 
murderer, or as a thief, or as an 
evildoer, or as a busybody in other 
men’s matters. 

16 Yet if any man suffer as a 
Christian, let bin enaipe aqamee 

ut let him glorify God on this be- 
half. 

17 For the time is come that 
tjudgment must “begin at the house 


A.D. 60. 


@ Acts 2,38,41; 
8.1; 9.1. 

bL.e. it was 
preached to 
them that are 
now dead. 


© Mt.24.9; 1 Cor. 
4.3,5. 
d Flesh. 2 Pet.2. 


10,11,18. (ohn 
1.13; Jude 23.) 


© Rom.8.9,13; Gal. 
5.22. 


F Jas.5.8,9. 


9 2 Thes.2.2; 
2 Pet.3.8. 


h love. 
t Sin. 
note. 
J Rom.12.6,8. 
1 Tim.6.17,18. 


' Grace (im- 
1 Pet. 


Rom.3.23, 


m2 Cor.4.2; Eph. 
4.29. 


1 Cor.10.31. 
© Jas.1.2. 


P2 Tim.2.12. 
@Mt.5.11. 


r Holy Spirit. 
vs.6,14; 2 Pet.1. 
21. (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


s Mt.5.16. 


t Judgments (thi 
seven). 2 Pet. 
2.4. (2 Sam.7. 
14; Rev. 20,12.) 


u Lk.12.47,48. 


v Gospel. vs.6,17; 
Jude 3. (Gen,.12. 
1-3; Rev.14.6.) 


w Rom.10.10, nofe. 
= with difficulty. 

uv Rom.1.16, note. 
2 Psa.37.5,7. 


a Elders. 2 John 
1. (Acts 11.30; 
Tit.1.5-9.) 


& Mt.26.37. 

¢ Rom.8.17,18. 

dtend. Cf.John 
21.15-17. 

¢ lording it over 


your posses- 
sions, 


F Isa.40.11. 


9 Rewards. 
2 John 8. (Dan. 
12.3; 1 Cor.3.14.) 


h Eph.5.21. 
i Prov.3.34; 18,12; 
Jas.4.6. 


J ¥sa.57.15, 

& Psa.55.22. 

4Satan. 1 John 
3.8,10. (Gen.3. 
4; Rev.20,10.) 

om Yas.4.7. 

” kosmos (Mt.4. 
8)=mankind. 

© Grace (im- 
parted). vs.5,10; 
2 Pet.1.2. (Rom. 
6.1; 2 Pet.3.18.) 

P when ye have 
suffered a little 
while, himself 
shall perfect, etc. 


@ Mt.5.48, note. 


1935 


of God: and if it first begin at us, 
what shall the end be of them that 
obey not the ’gospel of God? 

18 And if the “righteous “scarcely 
be Ysaved, where shall the ungodly 
and the ‘sinner appear? 

19 Wherefore let them that suffer 
according to the will of God *com- 
mit the keeping of their souls to 
him in well doing, 
Creator. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Part III. Christian service in 
view of the coming again of 
the Chief Shepherd. 


i Disa Gelders which are among 
you I exhort, who am also an 
elder, and a $witness of the suffer- 
ings of Christ, and also a partaker 
of the ‘glory that shall be re- 
vealed: 

2 4Beed the flock of God which is 
among you, taking the oversight 
thereof, not by constraint, but will- 
ingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a 
ready mind; 

3 Neither as “being lords over 
God’s heritage, but being ensam- 
ples to the flock. 

4 And when the chief ‘Shepherd 
shall appear, ye shall receive a 
8crown of glory that fadeth not 
away. 

5 Likewise, ye younger, submit 
yourselves unto the elder. Yea, “all 
of you be subject one to another, 
and be clothed with humility: for 
iGod resisteth the proud, and 
giveth grace to the humble. 

6 JHumble yourselves therefore 
under the mighty hand of God, that 
he may exalt you in due time: 

7 kCasting all your care upon 
him; for he careth for you. 

8 Be sober, be vigilant; because 
your adversary the ‘devil, as a roar- 
ing lion, walketh about, seeking 
whom he may devour: 

9 Whom “resist stedfast in the 
faith, knowing that the same afflic- 
tions are accomplished in your 
brethren that are in the "world. 

10 But the God of °all grace, who 
hath called us unto his eternal glory 
by Christ Jesus, ?after that ye 
have suffered a while, make you 
aperfect, stablish, strengthen, settle 


ou. 
11 To him be glory and dominion 
for ever and ever. Amen, 
12 By Silvanus, a faithful brother 
unto you, as I suppose, I have writ- 


as unto a faithf 4) 
vie fu © GC 


513) I PETER. ) [514m 


ten briefly, exhorting, and testifying| A.D.60. _|saluteth you; and so doth Marcus 


that this is the ¢true grace of God my son. = : 
wherein ye stand. ¢ Grace 4 14 Greet ye one another with a 
13 °The church that is at Baby-| $617. irom. |Kiss of charity. Peace be with you 
lon, ‘elected together with you,| 3.34: Johni, {all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen. 
16, note.) 
a Sa that is elected with you in Babylon. Ct. 2 : B peclon @ersonal), Lk.6.13. (Deut.7.6; 1 Pet. 
John 1. 


1316 


THE SECOND EPISTLE GENERAL OF 


Lad PETER. a 
WRITER. The Apostle Peter (1. 1). 
3 Date. Probably a.p. 66. 
Theme. Second Peter and Second Timothy have much in common. In both, 


the writers are aware that martyrdom is near (2 Tim. 4. 6; 2 Pet. 1. 14 with John 21. 
18, 19); both are singularly sustained and joyful; both foresee the apostasy in which 
the history of the professing church will end. Paul finds that apostasy in its last 
stage when the so-called laity (Rev. 2.6, note) have become infected (2 Timers. 55 
4. 3, 4); Peter traces the origin of the apostasy to false teachers (2 Pet. 2. 1-3, 15-19). 
In Peter the false teachers deny redemption truth (2. 1); we shall find in First 
John a deeper depth—denial of the truth concerning Christ’s person (1 John 4. 
1-5). -In Jude all phases of the apostasy are seen. But in none of these Epistles 
is the tone one of dejection or pessimism. God and His promises are still the 


resource of the believer. 


The Epistle is in four divisions: I. The great Christian virtues, 1. 1-14. 


Scriptures exalted, 1. 15-21. III. 


II. The 


l Warnings concerning apostate teachers, 2. 1-22. 
IV. The second coming of Christ and the day of Jehovah, 3. 1-18. 


_4n7 


CHAPTER 1. a 66. raat ane yan smomleder of a 
Part I. The great Christian |} Rom321, |,9 But he that lacketh these things 
virtues. note. is °blind, and cannot see afar off, 
¢ RemE sey and hath forgotten that he was 
IMON Peter, a “servant and an|j Grace (im- |Purged from his old ?sins. 
apostle of Jesus Christ, to them] parted). 10 Wherefore the rather, brethren, 
that have obtained like precious Cea give diligence to make your calling 
faith with us through the @right-| > 2¢31g. |and election sure: ¢for if ye do these 
eousness of God and our Saviour] Life (eter- |things, ye shall never fall: 
Jesus Christ: mi). ae 11 For so an PDGTARCE shall De 
2 4Grace and peace be multiplied! 34’R.,, ’ |ministered unto you abundantly 
unto you through the knowledge of 22:19.) into the everlasting kingdom of 
God, and of Jesus our Lord, f Be 20, jou Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
3 According as his divine power]; feb12.10. | 12. Wherefore I will not be negli- 
hath given unto us all things that| i 2 Pet.2.18,20. |gent to put you always in remem- 
“pertain unto ‘life and godliness, eee 4 brance of these things; though ye 
through the knowledge of him} 3pet220. |know them, and be established in 
that hath called us /to glory and (obng 7; Rev, the peesent pce fo i : 
virtue: 13.3-8, note. ea, I think it meet, as long 
4 B wuereby ‘aangee unto us ex- ® ee daa a - ae He Low ftaberaacle, ie) atar 
ceeding great and precious prom-| virtue. y - 
ane : land in. ° 
as “et thee Giciaie® pena m Jove. ane aie that shortly I must 
having ‘escaped the corruption that}o1 John 2. Sput off this my tabernacle, even as 
is in the Jworld through lust. 4 ea Rom, |Our Lord Jesus Christ hath ‘shewed 
> oe ae this, oe all a 3.23, note: me. 
ence, “a to your faith virtue;}q1 John 3.19. p 
ad to virtue knowledge; / Bese iit Part IJ. The Scriptures exalted. 
len So eR aaleinag aos fied aris 15 Moreover I will endeavour 
and to temperance patience; and] vs.13,14; Rev. 
to patience s arrraces Gono: (Gan: that ye may be able after my de- 
7 And to godliness eee’ Side “© |cease to ee these things always 
i ss; and to brotherly kindness} ¢ John 21 in remembrance. 
pickin Bert? at 16 For we have not followed cun-. 
8 For if these things be in you,|/me2s.18.  |mingly devised “fables, when we 
and abound, they make you that| Eph.1.20-22. |made known unto you the “power 
ye shall neither be "barren nor un-!” Jude 14. and “coming of our Lord Jesus 


4 


1 17] II PETER. [2 1s 


. P, i 
Christ, but were “eyewitnesses of| A.D. 66. 4 For if God ‘spared not the 


i j angels that sinned, but cast them 
on ee he eeived from God the down to hell, and delivered them 
Father honour and glory, when into chains of darkness, to be re- 
there came such a voice to him|emt.z.15. served unto hs = gett 4 a 
from the excellent glory, This is|#mk.1-n. 5 And spared not the old world, 


: 
% 
t 


my beloved Son, in whom I am © Sanctify, holy |but saved Noah the eighth person, — 


(things? (N.T.) 
t. 


well pleased i Mtzs3i, (Mea. |a@ preacher of righteousness, bring- — 


18 And this voice which came! 5 Rev.22.N.) ling in the flood upon the Sworld of 


a Or, ‘the word of he ungodly; 
from heaven we heard, when wel" pophecy made | ; oF: 
were with him in the !choly mount. more sure. 6 And turning the cities of Sodom 
19 We have also 4a more sure|*9%, squalid | |and Gomorrha into ashes con- 
*; ce. je a . 
word of prophecy; *whereunto ye Tos: John 1.4.9. demned them with an overthrow, 
do well that ye take heed, as unto|/Prov.4.18; Eph. |Making therm an ensample unto 
alight that shineth in a ‘dark place,|, ales. those ee ne ae waged: 
funtil the day dawn, and the Sday|, i, juin inter- 7 And delivered just Lot, vex 
star arise in your hearts: pretation; i.e. with the filthy conversation of the 

20 Knowing this first, that no} F7inS the wora| Wicked. } 
prophecy of the scripture is of “any has given else- | § (For ocean ke ae ak 
rivate interpretation. Lodges ing among them, in 

Pot For the prophecy came not in} j sanctify, holy |hearing, vexed his righteous soul 
fold time by the will of man: but &persons)(N- |from day to day with their unlaw- 
dholy men of God *spake as they] (tus Re, |ful deeds;) 
were moved by the ‘Holy Ghost. | ™) 9 The Lord knoweth how ‘to de- 

‘Inspiration. | \liver the godly out of “temptations, 

4.15; Rev.22.19.) |and' to reserve the unjust unto the 
CHAPTER 2. 'Holy Spirit... |?day of judgment to be punished: 


Part III. Warnings concerning) 1.18; Acis2.4) | 10 But chiefly them that walk — 


apostate teachers. mMt.24.5,24; Acts |after the flesh in the lust of unclean- 


20.29,30; 1 Tim. : 
: . Al Ge: ness, and despise government. 
i anew anilidens redempe a by nie. destructive. | Presumptuous are they, selfwilled, 


Bu there were false prophets]? Master. dignities. 


1 i.e. destruction. C} 
ereas angels, which are 
also among the people, even as Mar ast 2 11 Where gels, 


© Mt.20.28. they are not afraid to speak evil of 


there shall be “false teachers among)” stig). jude 6, greater in power and might, bring © 
you, who privily shall bring in| 14.15. @Sem. |not railing accusation against them ; 


: : 7.14; Rev. 20.12.) 
"damnable heresies, even °denying| .jocnos cma, |before the Lord. 


the ?Lord that bought them and] 8)=mankind. 12 But these, as “natural brute 
bring upon themselves swift de-! ‘Psa.31.15,18  |beasts, made to .be taken and de- 
struction. remote, |Stroyed, speak evil of the things that 
2 And many shall follow their) 3.1; as.i14.) |they understand not; and shall ut- 
pernicious ways; by reason of|*Day (cfjudg-_ |terly perish in their own corruption; 


whom the way of truth shall be me tMit 105; 13 ay shall receive the sadtbes. 

; ev.20.11. 4 
Usand Gnongh hall| "Je, natural Count Hee plessare bo tot se ehe aet 
h anh cian ceoveeriaine nie? reason ihe Spots tie? lire sid bien 
they wi eigned words m - . t E ; ‘m- 
chandise of you: whose judgment ishes, sporting : themselves with 
now of a long time lingereth not, and their own deceivings while they 
their ?damnation slumbereth not. feast with you; 


1 Where the reference is to things, the meaning of “holy” or “sanctified”? is, 
simply, set apart for the use of God, or rendered sacred by the divine presence.’ 

* That is, made more sure by fulfilment in part. Fulfilled prophecy is a proof 
of inspiration because the Scripture predictions of future events were uttered so 
long before the events transpired that no merely human sagacity or foresight could 
have anticipated them, and these predictions are so detailed, minute, and specific, 
as to exclude the possibility that they were mere fortunate guesses. Hundreds of 
predictions concerning Israel, the land of Canaan, Babylon, Assyria, Egypt, and 
numerous personages—so ancient, so singular, so seemingly improbable, as well 
as so detailed and definite that no mortal could have anticipated them—have been 
fulfilled by the elements, and by men, who were ignorant of them, or who utterly 
disbelieved them, or who struggled with frantic desperation to avoid their fulfil- 
ment. It is certain, therefore, that the Scriptures which contain them are inspired. 
“Prophecy came not in olden time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake 
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost” (2 Pet. 1. 21) 


1318 


: ¥ 


my eee | 


id “ ‘h 


24] 


Il PETER. 


{3 Lh 


14 Having eyes full of adultery, 
and that cannot cease from ¢sin; 
beguiling unstable souls: an heart 
they have exercised with covetous 
practices; cursed children: 


(2) The marks of the false teach- 
ers. (a) They are like Balaam. 


15. Which have forsaken the right 
way, and are gone astray, following 
the way of 14Balaam the son of 
Bosor, who loved the wages of un- 
righteousness; 

16 But was rebuked for his ini- 
quity: the dumb ass speaking with 
man’s voice forbad the madness of 
the prophet. 


(b) They are destifute of the 
Spirit. (Cf. John 4. 14; 7. 37-39; 
Rom. 8. 9.) 


17 These are wells without water, 
“clouds that are carried with a tem- 
pest; to whom the mist of darkness 
is reserved for ever. 


(c) Their words are learned and 
pretentious. (Cf. 1 Cor. 2.1-5.) 


18 ¢For when they speak great 
swelling words of vanity, they al- 
lure through the lusts of the ¢flesh, 
through much wantonness, those 
that were clean escaped from them 
who live in error. 


(d) They affect liberality. 


19 While they promise them lib- 
erty, they themselves are the ser- 
vants of corruption: /for of whom a 
man is overcome, of the same is he 
brought in bondage. 

20 For if after they have escaped 
the pollutions of the ¢world through 

“the knowledge of the Lord and /Sa- 
viour Jesus Christ, they are ‘again 
entangled therein, and overcome, 
the latter end is worse with them 
than the beginning. 

21 For it had been Jbetter for them 
not to have known the way of right- 
eousness, than, “after they have 
known if, to turn from the holy 
commandment delivered unto them. 


(e) Unsaved professors run after 
them. 


A.D. 66. 


2 Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 

6 Num.22.5. 

¢ Jude 12. 

d Apostasy. vs.1-3, 
12-18; 1 John 4. 
1-5. (Lk.18.8; 

2 Tim.3.1-8.) 

é Flesh. vs.10,11, 
18. 1 John 2.16. 
Qohn 1.13; Jude 
23.) 


J John 8.34; Rom. 
6.16. 


9 kosmos=world- 
system. 1 John 
2.15,16,17.. Gohn 
77. Rev.13.3-8, 
note.) 

+ Rom. 116, note. 
1Lk.11 26, Heb. 

6 4-6 


7Mt.11.23; Lk 12, 
7,48. 


k knowing it, to 
turn backs 

? Prov.26.11, 

m2 Cor.1.12, 

m2 Pet.1.21. 

° of the Lord and 
Saviour by your 
apostles. 

P Rom.1.16, note. 

@Isa.5.20; Jude 10. 

r Christ (Second 
Advent). vs.3,4; 
I John 3.2. 
(Deut. 30.3; Acts 
1.9-11.) 

8 is hidden from 
them through 
their own wilful- 
ness. 

¢ Gen.1.6,9. 

u kosmos (Mt.4.8) 
=mankind. 

v Gen.7.21-23; Mt. 
24.37,39; Lk.17. 
26,27; 2 Pet.2.5, 

w Day (of judg- 
ment). 1John 4, 
17. (Mt.10.15; 
Rev.20.11.) 

= destruction, 

y Psa.90.4, 

2 Hab.2.3. 

@ Psa.86.15; Isa.30. 
18. 


6 not wishing. 
Cf. Ezk.33.i1, 

o Mt.20.28; 1 Tim. 
2.4. 


d Repenfance. 
Rev.2.5,16,21,22. 
(Mt.3.2; Acts 
17.30.) 

e Day (of Jeho- 
vah). Jude 6. 
(Isa.2. 10-22; 
Rev.19.11-21.) 


FS Mt.24.42; 1 Thes, 


22 But it is happened unto them| 5.2; Rev.16.15. 


according to the true /proverb, The|’ 


Gen.1.6,8; Psa. 
102.26;, 1sa.51.6; 


dog is turned to his own vomit; Rev.20.11. 


again; and the sow that was washed 
to her wallowing in the mire. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Part IV. The return of the Lord 
and the day of the Lord (Isa. 2. 
12, refs.). 


ABS second epistle, beloved, I 
now write unto you; in both 
which I stir up your “pure minds 
by way of remembrance: 

2 That ye may be mindful of the 
words *which were spoken before 
by the holy prophets, and of the 
commandment °of us the apostles 
of the Lord and ?Saviour: 

3 Knowing this first, that there 
shall come in the last days 9%scoffers, 
walking after their own lusts, 


(1) The return of the Lord to be 
Senerally disbelieved. 


4 And saying, “Where is the 
promise of his coming? for since 
the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the be- 
ginning of the creation. 

5 For this ‘they willingly are ig- 
norant of, that ‘by the word of God 
the heavens were of old, and the 
earth standing out of the water and 
in the water: 

6 Whereby the “world that then 
was, being overflowed with water, 
*’perished: 

7 But the heavens and the earth, 
which are now, by the same word 
are kept in store, reserved unto fire 
against the “day of judgment and 
*perdition of ungodly men. 

8 But, beloved, be not ignorant of 
this one thing, that one day ss with 
the Lord as a thousand years, and 
Ya thousand years as one day. 

9 The Lord is not “slack concern- 
ing his promise, as some men count 
slackness; but is “longsuffering to 
us-ward, not willing that any 
should perish, but that all ‘should 
come to 4repentarice. 


(2) The day of the Lord 
(Isa. 2. 12, refs.). 


10 But the ¢day of the Lord will 
come fas a thief in the night; in the 
which the ¢heavens shall pass away 
with a great noise, and the elements 
shall melt. with fervent heat, the 
earth also and the works that are 
|therein shall be burned up. 

11 Seeing then that all these 
things shall be dissolved, what 


a 


1 Balaam (see Num: 22.5, 
to make a market of his gift. 


Balaam, Jude 11, note; and the “doctrine 


refs.) was th 
This is the ‘“‘way’”’ of Balaam. 
””? of Balaam. Rev. 2. 14, note. 


1319 


e typical hireling prophet, anxious only 


See the ‘“‘error” of 


— 


3 12] 


manner of persons ought ye to be 
in all holy conversation and ,godli- 
ness, 

12 Looking for and ¢hasting unto 
the coming of the day of God, 
wherein the heavens being on fire 
shall be dissolved, and the elements 
shall melt with fervent heat? 

13 Nevertheless we, according to 
his promise, “look for ‘new heavens 
and a new earth, wherein dwelleth 
4righteousness. 

14 Wherefore, beloved, seeing that 
ye look for such things, ¢be diligent 
that ye may be found of him in 
Perce, without spot, and blame- 
less. 

15 And account that the long- 
suffering of our Lord is fsalvation; 


—————————— eee 


_ 1Grace (im 
dispensationall 
also the meth 


parted), Summary 


liever into the hi 
through 
Gal. 5. 22, 23). 

16; 1 Cor. 1. 327 
2 Tim, 2.1, 2; 1 
16; 4. 6; 
2 Pet. 3 


3:35) 1080154 103 2° Cor, 


II PETER. 


9 Rom.8.19; 1 Cor. 
15.24; 1 Thes, 


A2 Tim.3.16. 


ly a method of divine dealing in salvation ( 
od of God in the believer’s life and servic 
under the law, but under grace” (Rom: 6. 14). 

ghest conceivable position (E 
grace, to impart to, and perfect in him, c 
Grace, therefore, stands connecte 


Pet. 4. 10); with Christian gro 
2 Thes. 1. 12; Heb. 4. 16; 12. 28, 29: 13. 
- 18; Jude 4); and with giving (2 Cor. 4. 


[31 


even as our beloved brother Paul 
also according to the wisdom given 
unto him hath written unto you; 

16 As also in all Azs epistles, 
speaking in them of these things; 
in which are some things hard te 
be understood, which they that are 
unlearned and unstable wrest, as 
they do ‘also the other scriptures, 
unto their own destruction. 

17 Ye therefore, beloved, seeing 
ye ‘know these things before, be- 
ware lest ye also, being led away 
with the error of the wicked, fall 
from your own. stedfastness. 

18 But grow in grace, and in the 
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. To him be glory 
both now and for ever. Amen. 


a hastening the 
coming. 
6 wait. 
¢ Rev.21.1,27. 
21 John 3.7, note. 
¢2 Pet.1.10,11; 
1 Cor.1.8; 


r.1.5; 
1 Thes.5.23. 
f Rom:1.16, note. 


4.5; 2 Thes.1. 
5,10. 


i Foreknowledge 
{trans. fore- 
know, Rom.8. 
29); 1 Pet.1.2,20. 
(Acts 2.23; 1 Pet. 
1.20.) 


J Grace (im- 
parted). (Rom. 
6.1-) 


(see “Grace,” John 1. 16): Grace is not only 
John 1. 16, note), but is 
e. As saved, he is “not 
Having by grace brought the be- 
ph. 1. 6), God ceaselessly works 
orresponding graces (John 15. 4, 5; 
d with service (Rom. 12. 6; 15. 15, 
al. 2. 9; Eph. 3. 7, 8; 4. 7; Phil. 1. 7; 
wth (2 Cor. 1. 12; Eph. 4. 29; Col. 3. 
9; Jas. 4. 6;.1 Pet. 1. 233.73 5.5, 10; 
15; 8. 1,6, 7, 19: 9. 14). 


- 12.9, 10: G 


THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF 


Ba JOHN. ch 


WRITER. The Apostle John, as unbroken tradition affirms, and as internal evi- 
dence and comparison with the Gospel of John prove. 

Date. Probably a. 90. 

Theme. First John is a family letter from the Father to His “little children” 
who are in the world. With the possible exception of the Song of Solomon, it is 
the most intimate of the inspired writings. The world is viewed as without. The 
sin of a believer is treated as a child’s offence against his Father, and is deait with 
as a family matter (1. 9; 2. 1). The moral government of the universe is not in 
question. The child’s sin as an offence against the law has been met in the Cross, 
and “‘Jesus Christ the righteous” is now his “Advocate with the Father.” John’s 
Gospel leads across the threshold of the Father’s house; his first Epistle makes 
us at home there. A tender word is used for ‘‘children,” teknia, ‘born ones,” 
or “bairns.”? Paul is occupied with our public position as sons; John with our 
nearness as born-ones of the Father. 

First John is in two principal divisions: I. The family with the Father, 1.1- 
3. 24. Il. The family and the world, 4. 1-5. 21. There is a secondary analysis, 
in each division of which occurs the phrase, ‘My little children,” as follows: (I.) 
Introductory, the incarnation, 1. 1, 2. (II.) The little children and fellowship, 
1. 3-2. 11. (III.) The little children and the secular and “religious” world, 2. 15- 
28. (IV.) How the little children may know each other, 2. 29-3. 10. (V.) How 
the little children must live together, 3. 11-24. (VI.) Parenthetic: How the little 
speseiec may know false teachers, 4. 1-6. (VII.) The little children assured and 
warned, 4. 7-5. 21. 


: After and truly our fellowship is /with 
CHAPTER 1. — __A.D.90-__ithe Father, and with his Son Jesus 
Part I. The family with the |cjohn1.1; 1 John | Christ. 

Father: fellowship. eee 4 \And these things write: we unto 


: ; ® John 5.24; Acts 1 
(1) The incarnation makes fel- 4.20. “ |you, that your joy may be full. 


Jowship possible. a 2 Pet-i16,17. (3) The conditions of fellowship. 
HAT which was ¢from the be-|¢Lk,24.39; John (a) The walk in the light. 


ginning, which we have "heard, ¢joinn'1.1,14. F : ; 
_which we have ‘seen with our eyes, 2 Rom.16.25 of phe Shen dee) message wich 
which we have looked upon, and), 7", (WE ave hat (God isliont anda 
our hands have ¢handled, of the] vei2;1jonn2, [Unto you, that “God is lent, and in 
fWord of life; 25. (Mt.7.14;  |him is no darkness at all. 


Rev.22.19.) 
eli ifested,| Tiss 1s. | 6, If we ™say that we have fellow- 
2 (For the ‘life was manifested John 1.1,18; 16 Seen ban aad ane mde 


= ee ae ise pid wet FJohn 17.31. ya{ness, we lie, and "do not the truth: 
heternal life, which was ‘with the], 72 7 But if we walk in the ‘light, as 
Father, and was manifested unto] \pets °""|he is in the light, we have fellow- 
us:) < 1ohn 320,21, |Ship ?one with another, and ‘@the 

3 1 Tim.6.16. Jesus Christ his Son 
(2) Fellowship iswith the Father m1 John 2.9-11. cleanseth us from all sin. 


2 practise not 


and with the Son. © Ex.27.20, note. : ; : 
‘ -o Tin f. ye 11 sin ad- 
3 That which we have seen and) er ince tor (B) The fart Oto tl iietaetel 


heard declare we unto you, that ye] Christ). Rev. 


also may have fellowship with us:| 15, (Se | 8 If_we say that we have no sin, 


1 What it is to “walk in the light” is explained by vs. 8-10. “All things . . . are 
made manifest by the light” (Eph. 5. 13). The presence of God brings the con- 
sciousness of sin in the nature (v. 8), and sins in the life (vs. 9, 10). The blood 
of Christ is the divine provision for both. To walk in the light is to live in fellow- 
ship with the Father and the Son. Sin interrupts, but confession restores that 
fellowship. Immediate confession keeps the fellowship unbroken. 

1321 


is 


£ ( 
| 


oT 
we,deceiye.ourselves, and the truth 
1s not in us. 
(c) Sins confessed, forgiven, 
and oleansed. 


9 If we confess our sins, he is 
{ ¢faithful and 4just to forgive us our 


| sins, and to cleanse us from all un- 
righteousness. 


CHAPTER 2. 


(d) Fellowship maintained by 
Christ’s advocacy. ; 


MY: little children, these things 
write I unto you, that ye 4sin 
not. And if any man sin, ¢we have 
an Vadvocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous: 

2 And he is the £propitiation for 
our sins: and not for our’s only, *but 
also for ‘the sins of the whole 
Jworld, 


(e) The tests of fellowship: obe- 
dience and love. 


3 And hereby we do know that 
we know him, if we keep his 2com- 
mandments. 

4 He that saith, I know him, 
and keepeth not his command- 
ments, is a liar, and the truth is 
mot in him. 

5 But whoso *keepeth his word, 
in him verily is the love of God 
‘perfected: hereby know we that we 
are in him. 

6 He that saith he abideth in him 
mought himself also so to walk, 
even as he walked. 

7 Brethren, “I write no new com- 
mandment unto you, but an oid 
commandment which ye had °from 
the beginning. The old command- 
ment is the word which ye have 
heard from the beginning. 

8 Again, a new commandment I 
write unto you, which thing is true 
in him and in you: because the 
darkness is past, and the "true light 
now shineth. ; 

9 He that ‘saith he is in the light, 


e he! 


I JOHN. 


After 
A.D 


@ Rom.3.25,26; 
2 Cor.5.21. 

» righteous. 

¢1 John 5.10; John 
3.33; Rom.3.4. 

2Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 

e Advocacy. Gohn 
14.16,26.) 

f Paraclete; trans. 
Comforter in 
John 14.16. 

9 Gr. hilasmos, 
that which propi- 
tiafes. Rom. 
3.25, note. 

h Assurance. 

1 John 3.1,2. 
(Isa.32.17; 
Jude 1.) 

t Omit italicized 
words. 

j kosmos (Mt.4.8) 
=mankind. 

k John 14.23; 
Col.3.16. 

2Mt.5.48, note. 

mJohn 13.15; 

] Pet.2.21, 

n 2 John 5. 

ot John 3.11. 

P John 15.10. 

@ john 15.12. 

Tr John 1.9; 8.12, 
12.35. 


sv.4: 1 John 3, 
14,15. 


t1 John 3.15: 4.20. 

u Jonn 12.35. 

v Acts 10.43, 
Col.2.13. 

wi John 1,1, 
Rev.22.13. 

= 1John 4.4; Heb.2. 
4; Eph.6.11 

y The little ones of 
the family; see 
v.28, marg. 

z Rom.8.15-17, 
Gal.4.6. 


@ Rom.12.2; Gal.1. 
4; Jas.4.4. 

6 kosmos=world- 
system. 1jJohn 3. 
33. (ohn 7.7;Rev. 
13.3-8. note.) 

¢ Mt.6.24; Gal.1.10. 

@ Law (of Christ). 
vs.7,8,15; 1 John 
3.23,24. (Gal.6.2; 
2 John 5.) 

e Flesh. Jude 23. 
Qohn 1.13; 

Jude 23.) 

F Separation. vs. 

15-17, 1 John 5, 

21, (Gen.12.1; 

2 Cor.6,14-17.) 


Typnyew 


vee eee } 


and hateth his brother, is in dark- 
ness even until now. 

i0 He that 4oveth his brother 
|abideth in the light, and there is 
none occasion of stumbling in 
him. 
| 11 But he that hateth his brother 
is in darkness, and “walketh -in — 
darkness, and knoweth not whither — 
he goeth, because that darkness 
hath blinded his eyes. ; 
12 I write unto you, little chil- — 
dren, because your 4sins are *for-— 
given you for his name’s sake. ; 
13 I write unto you, fathers, be- 


_jcause ye have “known him that is 


from the beginning. I write unto — 
{you, young men, because ve have 
overcome the wicked one. I write — 
junto you, little children, because ~ 
lye have known the Father. ; 
! 14 I have written unto you, fath- 
ers, because ye have known him 1 
that is from the beginning. I have : 
jwritten unto you, young men, be- — 
cause ye are strong, and the word of — 
God abideth in you, and ye have 
overcome the wicked one. 


The children must not love the — 
present world (Rev. 13.8, note). 


| 15 sLove not the world, neither 
the things that are in the world. © 
‘If any man love the world, ¢the 
love of the Father is not in him. ’ 

16 For all that fs in the world, © 
the lust of the «flesh, and the lust — 
of the eyes, and the pride of life, — 
is not of the Father, but is of the — 
world. 

17 And the world passeth away, 
land the lust thereof: /but he that 
doeth the will of God abideth for 
ever. 5 


The children warned against 
apostates who deny the true 
deity of Christ. 


18 Little children, it is the jast 
time: a e have heard that — 
anti come, even now are 
there many antichrists; whereby 
we know that it is the last time. 

19 They 3went out from us, but 
they were not of us; for if they 
had been of us, they would no 


1 Advocacy is that work of Jesus Christ for sinning saints which He carries on 
of the eternal efficacy of His own sacrifice, He 


with the Father whereby, because 


restores them to fellowship (cf. Psa. 23. 3; Jo 


John uses. ‘‘commandments” 


revealed, 

5). See, also, John 15. 10-12. 
3 “Went out from 

of the Son (vs. 22, 


us,” that is, doctrinally. 
23) still called themselves C 


1322 


hristians, - Cf. 2 Tim. 1. 15. 


i hn 13. 10, note). 
us (1) in the general sense of the divine will, however 
his word” (v. 5); and (2) especially of the law of Christ (Gal. 6. 2; 2 John 


Doubtless then, as now, the deniers 


“2 20 


doubt have continued with us: 
but they went out, “that they 
might be made manifest that ‘they 
were not all of us. @1Cor,11.19. 

20 But ye have an ‘unction from)? John 10.28. 
the Holy One, and ye know all|¢2Cor.1.21. 
things. @2 Pet.3.1. 

21 I have not written unto you pags res 4 
because ye know not the truth, but]; pt any as 
dbecause ye know it, and that no lie} 22; 1 John'.3. ” 
is of the truth. ie RRR 

22 Who is £a liar but he that de- 
nieth that ‘Jesus is.the Christ? He 


4 John 14.9-11. 
is Santichrist h th the 
F age 
n0soever denieth the Son, 


Ces 15.5; Col.1. 
the same hath not the Father: [ 
he that acknowledgeth the 
hath the Father also. 

24 Let that therefore abide in you} 

which: ye have heard from the be-|” phe general term 
ginning. If that which ye havelot jonn3.2; 4.17. 
heard from the beginning shall|r1 jonns.7. 
remain in you, ye also shall ‘con-|¢practiseth. 
tinue in the Son, and in the Fa-|"!}John4.10; Eph. 


ther. * Assurance. 


25 And this is the Jpromise that) vs.1,2/Judet, 
he hath promised us, even eternal} Rig: 98317 


I JOHN. 


After 
A.D. 90. 


3 John 3.16; 17.2,3. 
k Life (eternal). 
1 John 3.14,15. 
(Mt.7.14; Rev. 


me . 22.19.) 


Ulead you astray. 


mvy.20; John 14.26; 
16.13, 


life. 4 t children. 
26 These things have I written w kosmos (Mt.4.8) 
. = nkind, 
unto you concerning them that /se-| , (rr coc ona 
duce you. dvent), Jude 
14,15. (Deut.30. 


27 But the “anointing which ye 
have received of him abideth in 
you, and ye need not that any man 
teach you: but as the same anoint- 
ing teacheth you of all things, and 
is truth, and is no lie, and even as 
it hath taught you, ye shall abide 
in him. 

28 And. now, “little children, 
abide in him; that, when che shall 
ee we ae ee oe 
and not _be ashamed before him at 
his ibis ash oe 

How the little children may 

know each other. 


3; Acts 1.9-11.} 


w Rom.8.29; 1 Cor. 
15.49; Phil.3.21. 


# practiseth sin 
practiseth also 
lawlessness; and 
sin is lawless- 
ness. 


¥ Sin. Rom.3.23, 
note. 

zJohn 1.29; Heb. 
9.26. 

@ 2 Cor.5.21; Heb. 


7.26; 1 Pet.1.19. 


b Satan. vs.8,10; 
Jude 9. (Gen.3, 
1; Rev.20.10.) 


© Heb.2.14. 

d undo, 

@1 John 5.18; Jahn 
3.6. 


; A Bs tise. 
-29 If ye know that he is *right- Si oe prac 
eous, ye know that every one that} “e- 


* : = a h See v.7, note. 
@doeth righteousness is born of him. bleh a-a 


J v.23; John 13.34; 
15.12; 1 John 4.7, 
21; 2 John 5. 


kosmos=world- 


CHAPTER 3. 
system. 1 John 


k 
EHOLD, *what manner of love) sstem, i John 
the Father hath bestowed upon! giv773.3'8 nosed 


(3 15 


knoweth us not 
him not. 

2 Beloved, now are we the ‘sons 
of God, and it doth not yet appear 
what we shall be: but we know 
that, *when he shail appear, “we 
shall be like him; for we shall see 
him as he is. 

3 And every man that hath this 
hope in him purifieth himself, even 
as he is pure. 

4 Whosoever *committeth sin 
transgresseth also the law: for_sin 


is the transgression of the law. 
“RAE be EROW CHAE He Ws mani- 


fested to *take away our sins; and 
2in him is no sin. 

6 Whosoever abideth in him sin- 
‘meth not: whosoever sinneth hath 
not seen him, neither known him. 

7 Little children, let no man de- 
ceive you: he that doeth !righteous- 
ness is righteous, even as he is 
righteous. 

8 He that committeth sin is of 
the Sdevil; for the devil sinneth 
from the beginning. For this pur- 
pose the Son of God was manifested, 
‘that he might destroy the works of 
the devil. 

9 Whosoever is ‘born of God doth 
not fcommit sin; for his seed re- 
maineth in him: and he cannot sin, 
because he is born of God. 

10 In this the children of God are 
manifest, and the children of the 
devil: whosoever @doeth not “right- 
eousness is not of God, neither he 
that loveth not his brother. 


How the little children must 
live together, 


, because it knew 


11 For this is the ‘message that 
ye heard from the beginning, that 
jwe should love one another, 

12 Not as Cain, who was of that 
wicked one, and slew his brother. 
And wherefore slew he him? Be- 
cause his own works were evil, and 
|his brother’s righteous. 

13 Marvel not, my brethren, if 
the ‘world “hate you. 

14 We know that we have passed 
from death unto life, because we 
love the brethren. He that lov- 
eth not Ais brother abideth in 
death. 


us, ‘that we should be called the} ‘John 15.18 20. 2 
tsons of God: therefore the “world 15 Whosoever hateth his brother 


1 “Righteousness” here, and in the passages 
means the righteous life which is the result 
righteous man under law became righteous by 


having marginal references to this, 
of salvation through Christ. The 
doing righteously; under grace he 


does righteously because he has been made righteous (Rom. 3. 22; Rem. 10. 3, 


note). in 
fe} 


“3 16] 


iis a murderer: and ye know that no 


I JOHN. 


[4 18 : 


+ z 
and even. now already is it in the — 


murderer hath eternal life abiding 
in him. 2 

16 Hereby ‘perceive we the love 
of God, “because he laid down his 
life for us: and we ought to 4lay 
down our lives for the brethren. 

17 But whoso hath this world’s 
good, and seeth his brother. have 
need, and shutteth up his bowels of 
compassion from him, how ¢dwell- 
eth the love of God in him? 

18 fMy little children, let us not 
love in word, neither in tongue; 
but in deed and in truth. 

19 And hereby we know that we 
are of the truth, and shall assure 
our hearts before him. 

20 For if our heart condemn us, 
God is greater than our heart, and 
knoweth ail things. 

21 Beloved, if our heart condemn 
us not, “then have we confidence 
toward God. © 

22 And ‘whatsoever we ask, we 
receive of him, because we keep his 
commandments, and do those things 
that are pleasing in his sight. 

23 And Jthis is his command- 
ment, That we should “believe on 
the name of his Son Jesus Christ, 


and ‘love one another, as he gave us 
commandment. t 

24 And he that keepeth his com- 
mandments ™dwelleth in him, and 
he in him. And hereby we know 
that he abideth in us, by the "Spirit 
which he hath given.us. 


CHAPTER 4. 


Part II, The family and the 
world. 


Parenthetic: Thechildren warn- 
ed against false teachers. 


BELOVED, believe not, every 
spirit, but try the ‘spirits 
whether they are of God: because 
many false prophets are gone out 
into the ¢world. 


The marks of false teachers. 


(a) The false doctrine of Christ’s 
person, 


2 Hereby know ye the @Spirit of 
God: Every spirit that confesseth 
that "Jesus Christ is come in the 
flesh is of God: 

3 And every spirit that confesseth 
not that Jesus Christ is come in the 
flesh is not of God: and this is that 
spirit of Santichrist, whereof ye 
have heard that it should come; 


@ Life (eternal). 


(Mt.7.14; Rev.22. 
19.) 


+ we know love. 
e John 15.13; Gal.2. 


@ Rom.16.4. 
€1 John 4.20. 


f Rom. 12.9; Jas.2. 
15,16; 1 Pet.1.22. 


71 Cor.4.4. 


h 2 Cor, 1.12; 
Heb. 10.19. 

¢ John’ 15.7. 

3 Law (of Christ). 
.Vs.23,24; 1 John 
4.12. (Gal.6.2; 

2 John 5.) 


k John 6.29. 

‘John, 13.34, 

mJohn 14.21, 

n Holy Spirit. 1 
John-4.2,13. (Mt. 
1.18; Acts 2.4.) 

° prove. 

? earth, 

@ Holy Spirit. vs. 
2,13; 1 John 5.6, 
7. (Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

7 Rom.10.9, 10; 

1 John 5.1. 

8 Antichrist. 2 
John 7. (1 John 2. 
18; Rev.13.11-17.) 

t kosmos=wor)d- 
system. 1 John 5. 
4,5.19. (John 7.7; 
Rev-13.3-8.note.) 

u Rom.8.31. 

v John 14.30; 16-11; 
1 Cor.2.12, 

w Apostasy. vs. 
1-5; Jude 3-19. _ 
(Lk.18.8; 2 Tim. 
3,1-8.) 

* John 15,19; 17.14, 

¥ 1 Cor.2.12,16. 

21 John 3.10,11,23, 

41 John 3.14; 

1 Thes.4.9, 
by.16; 1 John 14. 
¢ Rom.5.8. 

@ Isa.9.6; Jghn 3.16. 


* kosmos (Mt.4.8) 
=mankind. 

F Tit.3.5. 

9 Gr. hilasmos. 
See 1 John.2.2. 

h Law (of Christ). 
2 John 5. (Gal.6. 
2; 2 John 5.) 

i Mt.5.48, nofe. 

J Rom. 1.16, note. 

k kosmos (Mt.4.8) 
=mankind. 

! hath love been 
perfected with 
us. 

m Day of judg- 
ment. Rev.20. 
il. (Mt.10.15; 
Rev.20,11.) 


1324 


tworld. : 4 

4 Ye are of God, little chiidren, © 
and have overcome them: because — 
“greater is he that is in you, than 


|*he that is in the world, 


(b) The world-marks of false 
teachers. 


5 They are of the world: there- 
fore speak they of the world, and 
*the world heareth them. 

6 We are of God: he that know- 
eth God heareth us; he that is not 
of God heareth not us. Hereby 
know we the spirit of truth, and the 
spirit of error. 


The true children are born of 
God through faith in the pro- 
pitiation of the.Son of God. 


7 *Beloved, let us love one an- 
other: for love is of God; and every 
one that @loveth is born of God, and 
knoweth God. 

8 He that loveth not knoweth not 
God; for God is love. 

9 In this was ‘manifested the love 
of God toward us, because that God 
sent his only begotten 4Son into the 
ond) that we might live through 

im, 

10 Herein is love, fnot that we 
loved God, ‘but that he loved us, 
and sent his Son to be the &propi; 
tiation for our sins. 


The love-life is shown by the life 
of Jove, 


11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we 
ought also to love one another, 

12 No man hath seen God at any 
time. ‘If we love one another, | 
God dwelleth in us, and his love is 
‘perfected in us. 

_13 Hereby know we that we dwell 
in him, and he in us, because he 
hath given us of his Spirit. 

14 And we have seen and do tes- 
tify that the Father sent the Son 
to be the JSaviour of the world. 

15 Whosoever shall confess that 
Jesus is the Son of God, God dwell- 
eth in him, and he in God. 

16 And we have known and be- 
lieved the love that God hath to us. 
God is love; and he that dwelleth 
in love dwelleth in God, and God in 
him, 

17 Herein 4s our love made per- 
fect, that we may have boldness in 
the. "day of judgment: ‘because as 
he is, so are -we in this world. 

18 There is no fear in love; but 
perfect love casteth out fear: be- 


“a 


4 19] 


I JOHN. 


cause fear hath torment. He that 
feareth is not made “perfect in 
love. 


After 


a Mt.5.48, nole. 


15 21 
for this is the witness of God which 
he hath testified of his S 

10 He that believeth ste Son 


19 >We love him, because he first} ’ys!%?or5.4.|of God “hath the witness in him- 


loved us. 


Bie 3.17. 


20 ‘If aman say, I love God, and|¢ John 13.34; 15.12; 
hateth his brother, he is a liar: for! 1 John 3.23. 
he that loveth not his brother whom KA ake 
he hath seen, how can he love God|7}3°R" 7723: 
whom he hath not seen? ee " 13. 

21 And ¢this commandment have} Jobn 15.23. 
we from him, That he who loveth| *?,John & Rev.s. 


God love his brother also. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Faith is the overcoming princi- 
ple in the world-confiict. 


HOSOEVER ‘believeth that 

fJesus is the Christ is ¢born 
of God: and “every one that loveth 
him that begat loveth him also that 
is begotten of him. 

2 By this we know that we love 
the children of God, when we love 
God, and ‘keep his command- 
ments. 

3 For this is the love of God, that 
we keep his commandments: and 
his commandments /are not. griev- 
ous. 

4 For whatsoever is born of God 
overcometh the “world: and this: is 
the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith. 

5 Who is he that overcometh the 
world, but he that ‘believeth that 
Jesus is the Son of God? 

6 This is he that came by “water 
and blood, even Jesus Christ; not 
by water only, but by water and 
blood. And it is the "Spirit that 
beareth witness, because the Spirit 
is truth. 

7 °For there are three that bear 
record in heaven, the Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and 
these three are one. 

8 ?And there are three that bear 
witness Zin earth, the "Spirit, and 
the water, and the blood: and these 
three ‘agree in one. 


baat 11.30. 


k kosmos=world- 
system, Rev.11. 
15. (ohn 7.7; 
Rev-13.3-8, note. 

l Faith. vs.1,4,5, 
10; Heb. 12.1-39, 
(Gen.3.20; Heb. 
11.39.) 

m John 19.34,35; 
Heb. 10.5-7 

nm Heb.2.4. 

o lt is generally 
agreed that v.7 
has no real au- 
thority, and has 
been inserted. 

P for, 


@ Omit ‘‘in earth."' 


r Holy Spirit. 
vs.6-8; Jude 19, 
20. (Mt.1. 18; 
Acts 2.4.) 


s Or, are to one 


point or purpose. 


t John 8.17,18. 
u Rom.8.16; Gal. 
4.6. 


v1 John 1.10. 
w John 3.36; 6.47, 
48; 17.2,3. 


z= ye may know 


that ye heve eter- 


nal life who be- 
lieve the name 
of. 

w1 Jobn 3.22. 

z Rom.3.23, note. 

@1 John 3.4. 

61 John 3.9. 

¢ Lk.4.6; 2 Cor. 
4.4, 


din the wicked 
one. 

€1 John 4.2. 

F1 John 2.20,27. 

9 Life (eternal). 
vs.11,12,13,16,20; 
Jude 21. (Mt.7. 
14; Rev.22.19.) 

h Dear children, 
guard yourselves. 

i See am 
2 John 10,11. 


9 If we receive the twitness of| (Gen.12.1; 2 Cor. 


men, the witness of God is greater: 


self: he that believeth not God 
"hath made him a Har; because he 
believeth not the record that God 
gave of his Son. 

11 And this is the Ais. that 
God hath given to us eternal life, 
and this life is in his Son. 

12 He that “hath the Son hath 
life; and he that hath not the Son 
of God hath not life. 

13 These things have I written 
siunto you that “believe on the name 
of the Son of God; that ye may 
know that ye have eternal life, and 
that ye may believe on the name 
of the Son of God. 

14 And this is the confidence that 
we have in him, that, *if we ask 
any thing according to his will, he 
heareth us: 

15 And if we know that he hear 
us, whatsoever we ask, we know 
that we have the petitions that we 
desired of him. 

16 If any man see his brother 
2sin a sin which 1s not unto death, 
he shall ask, and he shall give him 
life for them that sin not unto 
death. There is a sin unto death: 
I do not say that he shall pray 
for it. 

Wh 8G ighteousness is sin: 
and there is a sin not unto death. 

18 We know that whosoever is ‘ 
bborn of God sinneth not; but he 
that is begotten of God’ keepeth 
himself, and that wicked one touch- 
eth him not. 
| 19 And we know that we are of 
God, and ‘the whole world lieth 4in 
wickedness. 

20 And we know that the “Son of 
God is come, and hath given us an 
understanding, that we may ‘know 
him that is true, and we are in him 
that is true, even in his Son Jesus 
Christ. This is the true God, and 

eternal life. : 

21 Little children, ‘keep your- 
selves from idols. Amen. 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF 


JOHN. wee 13 


he Apostle John. 
Obably a.p. 90. 


any deceivers are entered into the world” (vy. 7). The key-phrase 
by which John means the body of revealed truth, the Scriptures. 
e only authority for doctrine and life, is the believer’s resource in 


is in three divisions: I. The pathway of truth and love, vs. 1-6. 
scriptural ways, vs. 7-11. III. Superscription, vs. PA I 


After Part If. Doctrine the final test of 
__ A.D. 90. __ |} reality. (Cf. John 6. 60-66.) 


7 For many deceivers are “entered 
° Exders., Sfohn-linto the ‘world, who confess not 
1.5-9.) Jthat Jesus Christ is come in the 
8 Election (per- is i i 
onan Rev 17. flesh. 


in the truth; a 


14. (Deut.7.6;, ° 
also all they ; known the Sea 8 ons to yourselves, that we 
aa rte ehutti’e) lees amnion el mies lose not those things which we have 


dwelleth in us, and dehhll be with wel °2 Thes2.19,20, wrought, but that we receive a full 


S Law (of Christ).| “Teward. 
for ever. ; (Gal.6.2.) 9 Whosoever *transgresseth, and 
Bas Grace be ths ne es “pa eevee abideth not in the doctrine of 
? bans , 


from the Lord Jesus eh 
Son of the Father, in 


love. 


th and] 8)=mankind. 
J Jesus Christ 


hath both the Father and the Son. 


Second John gives the essentials of the personal walk of the believer _ 


4 
‘ 
; 


- 
: 
} 


ee ee 


ee 


A gone forth. Christ; hath not God. He that — 
ikosmos (Mt. |abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he 


4 I ‘rejoiced greatly that I found] ,<7"7 "| 10 Tf there come any unto you, — 


C ly tha k the. and bring not this doctrine, receive 
of thy children walking in\truth, as ‘Antichrist. Rev. him °not into your house, neither 
RAS ae a commandment) ify foes oes ae speed: 

; ‘ : @g i 
5 And now I beseech thee, lady, "io. (ban es Siero ee eee 


HOU as though. Uccocejainermencek tone speed is partaker of his evil deeds, 


mandment unto thee, but that Paaa ana Part TH, Superscription, 
ve we had from the beginning, cee 12 Having many things to write 
A a me pu oe oe iL W215 2 Cor.6.14- unto you, I would not write with 
ni is is love, that we wa p 


of rT 
after his commandments. This is|?972et i. Spices ae be x Ss oe face! 
the commandment, That Soreslethimteet ty ot our | : be fi I. ear 
oes ent, at, AS Yelp hove. ithat our joy may be full. ) 
ave heard from the beginning, ye 13. The children of thy elect sister 
should walk in it, greet thee. Amen, 


‘Law (of Christ), Summary: The new “law of Christ” is the divine love, as 
wrought into. the renewed heart by the Holy Spirit (Rom. 5.5; Heb. 10. 16), and 
outflowing in the energy of the Spirit, unforced and spontaneous, toward the objects 
of the divine love (2 Cor. 5. 14-20: 1 hes, 2.7, &)) eles: therefore, “the law of 
liberty” (Jas. 1. 25; 2. 12), in contrast with the external law of Moses. Moses’ law 


demands love (Lev. 19. 18; Deut. 6. 5; Lk. 10. 27); Christ’s law is love (Rom. 5. 5; 


1 John 4. 7, 19, 20), and so takes the place of the external law by fulfilling it (Rom. 


13. 10; Gal. 5.14). It is the “law written in the heart” under the New Covenant 
(Heb. 8. 8, note). 


1326 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF 


VER Ver. 14 
JOHN. 
WRITE) 
De Probably ‘about A.p. 90. 

h 2 The aged Apostle had written to a church which allowed one Diotrephes 
to e xer ise ae authority\common enough in later ages, but wholly new in the prim- 
itive churche -Diotrephes had rejected the apostolic letters and authority. It 
appea S that he had refused the ministry of visiting brethren (v. 10), and cast 
out ¢1 : ho received them. Historically, this letter marks the ee of that 
clerica priestly assumption over the churches in which the primitive church 
order) disappeared. This Epistle reveals, as well, the believer’s resource in such a 
day. No longer ween as an\apostle, but as an elder, John addresses this letter, 
not to o a faithful man in the church for the comfort and 
encour standing fast in the primitive simplicity. Sec- 
on ditions the personal walk of a Christian in a day of apostasy; Third 
Jo sonal responsibility in uch a day of the believer as a member of the 
iocal '¢ e truth” (see 2 John, Introduction). 


ot greetings, vs. 1-4. II. Instructions con- 


i 
Par I, Personal greetings. Afte: Part llf, The domineering 
al BS Diotrephes 
T (E Zelder unto the wellbeloved : 
Gaius, whom I love in the 9 I nots ia beet as pat 
truth a Elders. Rev.|Diotrephes, who loveth to have the 
2 Beloved, I wish above all) 4:45. (Acts |/preeminence among them, receiv- 
things ‘that thou mayest prosper! 5.9)’ ~~ jeth us not. : i 
and b be det health, even as thy soul|, that inau | 1 Wher are, a dCs L a 
prospere things. remember his deeds which he doe 
3 or I rejoiced greatly, when the! ¢ Mt.6.33. mprating against us with malicious 
brethren came and testified of the|/d1 Thes.2. words:\and not content therewith, 
truth that is in thee, even as thou] 19.20. neither doth he himself receive the 
walkest in the truth. ei Cor.4.15. !brethren, and forbiddeth them that 
4 Ihave no greater 4joy than to| be truth. would, Ae steth them out of the 
hear ‘that ‘my children walk in|s ‘ove. "churc: 
f a. h Acts 15.3. 11 Beloved;efollow not that which 
a pest 7Mt.25.40; lis evil, but th: which is good. He 
Part rh Conc ain’ ErILOS ipaiin that doeth good is of God: but he 
ering Brethren. dt Sos3. that doeth evil Hath not seen God 
5,18. r . 
5 Beloveds ae doers seth b Mt.10.40. The good: Demeitias 
whatsoever fo) oest to e] 1 Mt.23.8. 
brethren, and to strangers; ee: 10. 1} pe pare on re of 
6 Which have borne witness of] 8,10. all men, and of the truth itself: yea, 
thy ‘charity before the church:|n Churches. |and we also bear record; and ye 
aon. if thou bring “forward on Soanbe know that our record is true. _ 
their journey Zafter a godly sort,| Rey''4.’ 13° I had many things to write, 
thou ehait do well 11,20. '(Acts|but I will not with ink and pen 
7 Because that for his name’s sake ry Phil. ‘write unto thee: 
they went forth, /taking nothing of wana 27 14 But I %rust I shall shortly see 
the Gentiles. 0 Psa.37.27- |+hee, and we shall speak face to 
8 We therefore ought to Freceive|? 7"°s* face. Peace be to thee. Our 
such, that we’ might be fellow-|?"°* 'friends salute thee. Greet the 


helpers to the truth, \friends by name, 


1327 


THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF 


Ver. 1} 


JUDE. | 


WRITER. Jude, the brother of James (1. 1). 


Date. 
Theme. 


Probably A.D. 66. 


and the theme ‘is, ““Contending for the faith’ (Lk. 18. 8, refs.). 


Irv. 11 


4 ’ 


; 


i 


It is not so much Jude who speaks, as the constraining Spirit (v. 3), 
brief letter — 


In this 


the apostasy (2 Thes. 2. 3, note) of the professing church is predicted, and the — 
eentetind me described. As in Second Timothy and Second Peter the apostasy 


is treated as having already set in. 
The Epistle is in five divisions: 
Epistle, vs. 3, 4. 


scribed, vs. 8-19. V. The saints 


Part I. Introduction. 


UDE, the servant of Jesus Christ, 
and brother of James, to 4them 
that are sanctified by God the 
Father, 2and !preserved in Jesus 
Christ, and “called: 
2. Mercy unto you, and peace, and 
love, be multiplied. 


Part II. Occasion of the Epistle: 
the apostasy. 


3 Beloved, when I gave all dili- 
gence to write unto you of the 
common 4salvation, ‘it was needful 
for me to write unto you, and 
exhort you that ye should ear- 
ri estly contend for the Jfaith which 
j; — was once delivered *Yinto the 
i saints. 

4 For there are certain men crept 
in unawares, "who were before of 
old ordained to this condemnation, 
ungodly men, turning the grace of 
our God into lasciviqusness, and 
denying ‘the only Lord God, and 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 


Part III. Historical instances of 
apostasy. 


5 I will therefore put you in re- 
membrance, though ye once knew 
this, how that the Lord, having 
dsaved the people out of the land of 


I. Introduction, vs. 1, 2. 


III. Apostasy is possible, vs. 5-7. IV. Apostate teachers de-7 : 


assured and 


II. Occasion of the 


comforted, vs. 20-25. 


A.D. 66. 


@ the called ones, 
beloved in God 
the Father, and 
Preserved in 
Jesus Christ. 

6 Or, kept for 
Jesus Christ 

¢ Assurance. 
(Isa.32.17.) 

@ Rom. 1.16, note. 

€ Lit. constraint 
was upon me, 
i.e. of the Spirit. 

S Gospel. Rev.14. 
6. (Gen.12.1-3; 
Rev.14.6,) 

9 once for all. 


A vs.14,15; Jas.1. 
13,15. 
tour only Master 


and Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


J Heb.1.4, note. 
& Day (of Je- 
hovah). Rev.2. 


26,27. (Isa.2.10- 
22; Rev.19,11-21.) 


l judgment. 
m2 Pet.2.10. 


nm Satan. Rev.2.9, 
10,13,24. (Gen. 
3.1; Rev.20.10.) 


° judgment. 
P Jehovah. Zech, 
3.2. 


@Apostasy. Rev. 
3.14-16. (Lk.18. 
8; 2 Tim.3,1-8.) 


Egypt, afterward destroyed them 
that believed not. : 
6 And the Yangels which kept not 
their first estate, but left their 
own habitation, he hath reserved 


in everlasting chains under dark- © 


ness unto the judgment of ‘the 
“great day. 


7 Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, ~ 


and the cities about them in like 

manner, giving themselves over to 

fornication, and going after strange 

flesh, are set forth for an example, 

sulong the ‘vengeance of eternal 
re. 


Part IV. Apostate teachers 
described. 


8 Likewise also these Althy dream- 
ers "defile the flesh, despise domin- 
ion, and speak evil of dignities. 

9 Yet Michael the archangel 
when contending with the "devil he 
disputed about the body of Moses, 
durst not bring against him a railing 
°accusation, but said, The ?Lord re- 
buke thee. 
| 10 But these speak evil of those 
things which they know not: but 
what they know naturally, as brute 
beasts, in those things they corrupt 
themselves. 


| 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


| 


11 Woe unto them! ¢for they have © 


gone in the way of $Cain, and ran 


1 Assurance is the believer’s full conviction that, through the work of Christ alone, 


<eceived by faith, he is in possession of a salvation in which he 


will be eternally kept. 


And this assurance rests only upon the Scripture promises to him who believes. 


2 The judgment of the 
(Isa. 2. 9-22, refs.). 
years, and preceding 


fallen a 


judgments, Rev. 20. 12, note. 


3 Cain (cf Gen. 4. 1), type of the religious natural man, who believes in a God 


As the final judgme 
[ the final judgment ( 
as to the time, that other fallen angels are 
Christians are associated with Christ in this judgment (1 


ngels. 


1328 


The “‘great day” is the day of the Lord 
nt upon Satan occurs after the thousand 
Rev. 20. 10), it is congruous to conclude, 
judged ‘with him (2 Pet. 2. 4; Rev. 


20. 10). 


Cor. 6. 3). See other 


“Ver. 12] 


JUDE. 


[VeER. 25 


greedily after the lerror of Balaam| A.D. 66. a the apostles of our Lord Jesus 
| ri 


for reward, and perished in the 
®gainsaying of 2Core. 

12 These are spots in your feasts 
of charity, when they feast with 
you, ‘feeding themselves without 
fear: clouds they are without water, 
carried about of winds; ¢trees whose 
fruit withereth, without fruit, twice 
dead, plucked up by the roots; 

13 Raging waves of the sea, foam- 
ing out their own shame; wander- 
ing stars, to whom is reserved the 
blackness of darkness for ever. 

14 And Enoch also, the seventh 
from Adam, prophesied of these, 
saying, Behold, ‘the Lord fcom- 
eth with ten thousands of his 
saints, 

15 To execute Sjudgment upon 
all, and to “convince all that are 
ungodly among them of all their 
ungodly deeds which they have un- 
godly committed, and of all their 
hard ‘speeches which ungodly Jsin- 
ners have spoken against him. 

16 These are murmurers, com- 
plainers, walking after their own 
lusts; and their mouth speaketh 
great swelling words, having men’s 
persons in admiration because of 
advantage. 

17 But, beloved, remember ye the 
words which were spoken before 


@ antilogia = 

against the 
‘ord. 

® love feasts. 

¢ shepherds that 
without fear feed 
themselves. 

d autumn trees 
without fruit. 

¢ Jehovah. Deut. 
33.2. 

F Christ (Second 

dvent). vs.14, 
15; Rev.1.7,8. 
(Deut.30.3; Acts 
1.9-11.) 

9 Judgments (the 
seven). vs.6,14, 
15; Rev. 22,12, 
@ Sam.T.14; 
Rev.20,12.) 

h convict. 

i things. 

J Sin.. Rom.3.23, 
note. 

k natural. 

' See Rom.8.8,9. 

™ Sanctify, holy 
(persons) (N. 
T.). Rev.22.11. 
(Mt.4.5; Rev. 22, 
11.) 


n Holy Spirit. 
vs.19,20; Rev.1.4, 
Mt. 1.18; 


0 Life (eternal). 
Rev.2.7,10. (Mt. 
7.14; Rev.22.19.) 

P snatching. 

@Flesh. (John 1. 
13.) 


T stumbling. 

8 Rom.1.16. 

t through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 


Tist; 

18 How that they told you there 
should be mockers in the last time, 
who should walk after their own 
ungodly lusts. 

19 These be they who separate 
themselves, sensual, having ‘not 
the Spirit. 


Part V. True believers assured 
and comforted: their seven- 
fold duty. 


20 But ye, beloved, building up 
yourselves on your most “holy 
faith, praying in the "Holy Ghost, 

21 Keep yourselves in the love 
of God, looking for the mercy of our 
Lord Jesus Christ unto °eternal life. 

22 And of some have compassion,. 
making a difference: 

23 And others save with fear, 
?pulling them out of the fire; hat- 
ing even the garment spotted by the 
3affesh. 

24 Now unto him that is able to 
keep you from ‘falling, and to pre- 
sent you faultless before the pres- 
ence of his glory with exceeding 


joy, / 
25.. To the only wise God our sSa-) 
Kon Spe iow and tajéstyy do: 


men. 


-and in “religion,” but after his own will, and who rejects redemption by blood. Com- 
pelled as a teacher of religion to explain the atonement, the apostate teacher ex- 


plains it away. 
1Balaam. The 


“error” of Balaam must bédistinguished from his “way” (2 Pet. 


2. 15, note), and his “doctrine” (Rev. 2.14, note). The “‘error’”’ of Balaam was that, 
reasoning from natural morality, and seeing the evil in Israel, he supposed a right- 


cous 


God must curse them. He was blind to the higher morality of the Cross, 


through which God maintains and enforces the authority and awful sanctions of His 


~law, so that He can be just and the justifier of a believing sinner. 


The “‘reward”’ of 


v. 11 may not be money, but popularity, or applause. Lath 

2See Num. 16. The sin of Korah was denial of. the authority of Moses as God’s | 
chosen spokesman, and intrusion into the priest’s office. 

3 Flesh, Summary: “Flesh,” in the ethical sense, is the whole natural or unre- 
generate man, spirit, soul, and body, as centered upon self, prone to sin, and opposed 


to God (Rom. 7. 18). 


The regenerate man is not “‘in [the sphere of] the flesh, but 


in [the sphere of] the Spirit” (Rom. 8. 9); but the flesh is still in him, and he may, 
aS to his choice, “‘walk after the flesh” or “‘in the Spirit” (1 Cor. 3. 1-4; Gal: 5. 


16, 17). 


In the first case he is a “carnal,” in the second a “spiritual,’’ Christian. 


Victory over the flesh will be the habitual experience of the believer who walks 


in the Spirit (Rom. 8. 2, 4; Gal..5. 


16, 17). 


1329 


M 


id power, both now and) — 


aA 


5 


11) THE REVELATION ~~ /#3 


OF 


ST. JOHN THE DIVINE. 


WRITER. The Apostle John (1. 1). 


Date. A.D. 96. 


Theme. The theme of the Revelation is Jesus Christ (1.°1), presented in a 


‘threefold way: (1) As to time: ‘which 


is, and which was, and which is to come” 


1. 4); (2) as to relationships—to the churches (1. 9-3. 22), to the tribulation (4. 
1-19. 21), to the kingdom (20. 1-22. 21); (3) in His offices—High Priest (8. 3-6), 


Bridegroom (19. 7-9), King-Judge 


(20. 1-15). 


But while Christ is thus the central theme of the book, all of the events move 
toward one consummation, the bringing in of the covenanted kingdom. The key- 
phrase is the prophetic declaration of the “‘great voices in heaven”? (11. 15), lit. “The 
world kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ has come.” The book is, therefore, 


a prophecy (1. 3). 


The three major divisions of Revelation must be clearly held if the interpreta- 
tion is to be sane and coherent. John was commanded to “write” concerning three 
classes of “things” (1. 19): I. Things past, “‘the things which thou hast seen,” i.e. the 
Patmos vision, 1. 1-20. II. ‘Things present, “the things which are,” i.e. things then 
The temple had been destroyed, the Jews dis- 
persed: the testimony of God had been committed to the churches (1 Tim. 3. 15). 
Accordingly we have seven messages to seven representative churches, 2. te ee 
It is noteworthy that the church is not mentioned in chapters 5-18. III. Things 
future, “things which shall be hereafter,” lit. “after these,” i.e. after the church 
period ends, 4. 1-22. 21. The third major division, as Erdman (W. J.) has pointed 
out, falls into a series of six sevens, with five parenthetical passages, making, with 
The six sevens are: i. The seven seals, 4. 1-8. 1. 

3. The seven personages, 12. 1-14. 20. 4. The 
seven vials (bowls), 15. 1-16. 21.. 5. The seven dooms, 17. 1-20.15. 6. The seven 


existing—obviously the churches. 


the church division, seven sevens. 
2. The seven trumpets, 8. 2-11. 19. 


new things, 21. 1-22. 21. 


The parenthetical passages are: (I) The Jewish remnant and the tribulation 


saints, 7.1-17. (II) The angel, the li 


book, the two witnesses, 10. i-11.14. (IIT) 


The Lamb, the Remnant, and the everlasting Gospel, 14. 1-13. (IV) The gathering 


-of the kings at Armageddon, 16. 13-16. 
These passages do not advance the pro 


(V) The four alleluias in heaven, 19. 1-6. 
phetic narrative. Looking backward and 


forward they sum up results accomplished, and speak of results yet to come as 
if they had already come. In 14. 1, for example, the Lamb and Remnant are seen 


prophetically on Mount Sion, though th 
The end of the church period (2. 


ey are not actually there till 20. 4-6, 
-3.) is left indeterminate. It will end by the 


fulfilment of 1 Thes. 4. 14-17. Chapters 4.-19. are believed to synchronize with 


Daniel’s Seventieth Week (Dan. 9. 24, note). 


The great tribulation begins at 


the middle of the ‘“‘week,’’ and continues three and a half years (Rev. 11. 3-19. 21), 


The tribulation is brought 


to an end by the appearing of the Lord and the battle 


of Armageddon (Mt. 24. 29, 30; Rev. 19. 11-21). The kingdom follows (Rev. 20. 
(Rev. 20. 7-15), and then eternity. 

nterpreters of the Revelation should bear in mind two important passages: 
1 Pet. 1. 12; 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. Doubtless much which is designedly obscure to us 
will be clear to those for whom it was written as the time approaches. 


4, 5}; after this the “‘little season” 


CHAPTER 1. 


A.D. 96. 


Part I. “The things which thoul\a Inspiration. 


hast seen” (Rev. 1. 1-20). 
(1) Introduction. 
HE ¢Revelation of Jesus Christ 


vs.1,19; Rey. 
2.1,8,12,18, 
(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 


which God gave unto him, to 6 Heb.1.4, 


shew unto his servants things which 
must shortly come to pass; and he 


note, 


1330. 


sent and signified it by his bangel 
unto his servant John: 

2 Who bare record of the word of 
God, and of the testimony of Jesus 
Christ, and of all things that :he saw. 

3 Biessed is he that readeth, and 
they that hear the words of this 
prophecy, and keep those things 
which are written therein: for the 
time is at hand, 


REVELATION. [1 20 


(2) Salutation. AD. 96. _|\nto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and 

4¥OHN to the seven 4¢churches Beg Philadelphia, and unto Lao- 
which are in Asia: Grace be Cea: 

See 4 : 12 And I turned to see the voice 

you, and peace, from him) ev.u. that spake with me. And being 


which is, and which was, and which] 6 cz.) Cor.12.4,13; 
: ; keine’ |turned, I saw seven golden “candle- 


is to come; and from the seven : 
¢ Isa.55.4 sticks; 


Spirits which are before his throne; . : 
5 And from Jesus Christ, who is|* stom from ise pee premarin nie 


he faithful ‘wi and the 4first| ¢ ruer. : 
begotten of thed , and the ¢prince| £ oveth. of man, clothed with a garment 
of the kings of the earth. Unto)? Sacrifice of down to the foot, and girt about the 
him that floved us, and washed us| 121 ‘teens; [PPS with a golden girdle. | 
14 His head and his hairs were 


— from our “sins in his o lo Heb.10.18.) _ tus : 
- 6 And hath made us plod Bimal Sin. Rom.3.23, |Swhite like wool, as white as snow; 
priests unto God and his Father; to} <a kingdom, jand his eyes were as a flame of fire; 
him be glory and dominion for ever] 775 15 And his feet like unto fine 
and ever. Amen. i Christ (Second ‘brass, as if they burned in a furnace; 

Advent). Rev.2.| and his voice as the sound of many 


“ 2 +| 25-28, (Deut.30. 
7 Behold, he cometh with clouds;| 2-28, Peut-$ | waters. 


and Jevery eye shall see him, and), nev.20.12,1.. | 16 And he had in his right hand 


they also which pierced him: and all! z}.3.9.¢ P : : 
Risdaedacch the carth:sball. wallibe-|= ae rauiainn’ eevee eee Ope ot his OUR 
cause of him. Even so, Amen. MS TOY fe Eales: ¥ ore pane 
k _ | of Jesus. 8 : ki was as e sun 
8 Iam*Alpha and Omega, the be-| ooo oone, shineth in his strength. 


ginning and the ending, saith the), 501, spirit. v : 
Lord, which is, and which was, and eg Soa td ped pediwhenct pa ties 


eras 1 : 29. (MeL.i8;""|hh 
which is to come, the ‘Almighty. Acts 2.4.) right hand upon me, sayingunto me, 


(3) The Patmos vision. \° 25.20. (Gen.a2.|Fear not; Iam the first and the last: 
7.) 18 I am he that liveth, 4nd was 


9 I John, who also am your|”“@mpstands. | |dead; and, behold, I am alive for 


brother, and companion in mtribu-| “2s white wook |evermore, Amen; and have the 
lation, and in the kingdom and pa-| ‘v2. keys of “*hell and of death. 
tience "of Jesus Christ, was in the)" Lk 16 23, note. 
peat ia called Patmos, for the] "hades. (4) The command to write. 
word of God, and for the testimony |" /7'3."5 jer ihose,| 19 Write the things whi 
of Jesus Christ. le after the i ae 
s xy palieiaten hast seen, and the things which are, 
Bld abe ae sede! Le the|. sit 13 11, note, [and the things which shall be “here- 
ord’s day, and heard be ME Al, iampstands jatters 
great Zvoice, as of a trumpet, | z messengers. 20 The * of the seven j if 
11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, ja Churches(local),|stars which ey sawest in myright™ % 
the first and the last: and, What) %',';"5.0."/hand, and the seven golden candle- 
thou seest, write in a book, and send} cacts 2.41; tick Th th 
t (Aats/2i83 sticks. e seven stars are the 
_.if unto the seven churches which, *"” 2zangels of the seven ¢churches: and 


are in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto, the seven candlesticks which thou 
Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and sawest are the seven ®churches. 


1 From 1.1 to 1. 20 the Seer is on the earth, looking at the vision of Christ. From 
2. 1 to 3. 22 he is on the earth looking forward through the church-age. From 4, 1 
to 11. 1 he is “in the Spirit” (4. 2; cf. Ezk. 3. 12-14) observing things in heaven 
and onearth. From 11.1 to 11. 12 he is in Jerusalem with the two witnesses. From 
11. 13 to the end he is in heaven observing and recording things in heaven and f 
upoa the earth. 

2 The natural explanation of the “messengers” is that they were men sent by the 
seven churches to ascertain the state of the aged apostie, now an exile in Patmos 
(cf. Phil. 4. 18); but they figure any who bear God’s messages to a church, 

_ 3 The messages to the seven churches have a fourfold application: (1) Local, 
to the churches actually addressed; (2) admonitory, to all churches in all time as 
tests by which they may discern their true spiritual state in the sight of God; (3) per- 
sonal, in the exhortations to him “that hath an ear,” and in the promises “to him 
that overcometh”; (4) prophetic, as disclosing seven phases of the spiritual! his- 
tory of the church from, say, A.D. 96 to the end. It is incredible that in a prophecy 
covering the church period there should be no such foreview. These messages 
must contain that foreview if it is in the book at all, for the church does not appear 
after 3. 22. Again, these messages by their very terms go beyond the local assemblies 
mentioned. Most conclusively of all, these messages do present an exact foreview 


1331 


2 1) 


CHAPTER 2. 


Part I. ‘The things which are”: 
the seven churches. 


(1) The message to Ephesus. 
The church at the end of the 
apostolic age; first love left. 


NTO the ¢angel of the church 

bof Ephesus write; These things 
saith he ‘that holdeth the seven 
stars in his right hand, who 
walketh in the midst of the seven 
golden ¢candlesticks; 

2 I know thy works, and thy la- 
bour, and thy patience, and how 
thou canst not bear them which are 
evil: and thou hast ¢tried them 
which say they are apostles, and 
are not, and hast found them liars: 

3 And hast borne, and hast pa- 
tience, and for my name’s sake hast 
laboured, and hast not /fainted. 

4 Nevertheless I have somewhat 
against thee, &because thou hast 
left thy first love. 

5S Remember therefore from 
whence thou art fallen, and “repent, 
and do the first works; or else I will 
come unto thee quickly, and will 
remove thy ‘candlestick out of his 
place. except thou repent. 

6 But this thou hast, that thou 
hatest the deeds of the 1Nicolai- 
tanes, which I also “hate. 

7 He that hath an ear, let him 


hear what the Spirit saith unto the}, 


churches; To him that overcometh 


~»will I give to eat ofthe tree of life, 


REVELATION. 


A.D. 96. 


& messenger. 

bin. 

© Rev.1.16,20- 

d lampstands. 

¢1 John 4.1, 

| F Gal.6.9, 

9 that thou. 

h Repentance. 
vs.5,16,21,22; 
Rev.3.3,19. (Mt. 
3.2; Acts 17.30.) 

i lampstand. 

J v.15; contra, 

1 Pet.5.2,3; 
cf.Mt.24.49, 

& Cf.Mt.18.1-11; 
Mt.20.25-28. 

! Life (eternal). 
vs.7,10; Rev.3.5. 
(Mt.7.14; Rev. 
22,19.) 

min the paradise. 

” Heb.1 4, note. 

© Rev.1.17,18. 

P 1 Thes.4.14. 

@1 Cor.15.20. 

Tr tribulation and 
poverty. 

8 Rev.3.9; cf.Gal.6. 
12,13; John 16,33. 

# Cf.2 Cor.11.14, 
15; Mt.16.22,23; 
Gal.1.8. 

% Cf.Co].1.23; Mk. 
13.13. 


v the. 


w Rewards. Rev 
3.11. (Dan.12.3; 
1 Cor.3.14.) 


= Death (the 


second). Rev.20, 
6-14. Gohn 8.21; 
Rev.21.8.} 


Satan. vs.9,10, 


13,24; Rev.3.9. 
(Gen.3.1. Rev 
20.10.) 


which is “in the midst of the para-|: throne. 


dise of God. 
(2) The message to Smyrna. 


{@2 Tim.2.12 


> witness. 
¢ snare, 


Period of the great persecu-|dsons. 


tions, to A.D. 316. 


8 And unto the “angel of the 
church in Smyrna write, These 


of the spiritual history of the church, and in this precise order. 
general state at the date of the writing; 
tions; Pergamos, the church settled down 
after the conversion of Constantine, say, 
veloped out of the Pergamos state: Bala 
(priestly assumption) having conquered. 

so Romanism weds Christian doctrine to pa 
Reformation, whose works were not “fulfilled.” 

clear testimony to the Word and the Name in the 


represented by Laodicea. 
' From nikao, ‘‘to conquer,” 
ancient authority 


was ‘‘deeds 
2 The 
Balak to 


” (2.6) had become 1n 


ev 6 
f in like manner. 


A.D. 


and laos, “the people,” or “laity.” 
i for a sect of the Nicolaitanes. 

to the earliest form of the notion of a priestly order 
an equal brotherhood (Mt. 23 8), 


intom. 
Pergamos a 


“doctrine” of Balaam (cf 2 Pet, 2. 15, note; Jude 
corrupt the people who could not be cursed (Num. 31. 15, 16; 22. 5; 23. 8), 


1332 


priests” and “‘laity.’’ 


things saith the first and the last, 
which was dead, and is /alive; 


tion, and poverty, (but thou art 


them which ‘say they are Jews, and 
are not, but are the ‘synagogue of 
Satan. 

10 Fear none of those things 
which thou shalt'suffer: behold, the 
devil shall cast some of you into 
prison, that ye may be tried; and ye 


[2 16 


9 I know thy ’works, and tribula- ; 


rich) and J know the blasphemy of © 


1 


shall have tribulation ten days: be _ 


thou “faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee "a “crown of life. 

11 He that hath an ear, let him 
hear what the Spirit saith unto the 
churches; He that overcometh shall 
not be hurt of the *second death. 


'\(5) The message to Pergamos. 
The church under imperial 
favour, settled in the world, 
A.D. 316 to the end. 


12 And to the "angel of the church 
in Pergamos write; These things 
saith he which hath the sharp 
sword with two edges; 

13 I know thy works, and where 
thou dwellest, even where »Satan’s 
2seat 7s: and thou holdest fast my 
name, and hast not ¢denied my 
faith, even in those days wherein 
Antipas was my faithful *martyr, 
who was slain among you, where 
Satan dwelleth. 

14 But I havea few things against 
thee, because thou hast there them 
that hold the doctrine of 2Balaam, 
jwho taught Balac to cast a “stum- 
jblingblock before the ¢children of 
‘Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto 
idols, and to commit fornication. 

15 So hast thou also them that 
hold the doctrine of the ¢Nicolai- 
tanes, fwhich thing I hate. 

16 Repent; or else I will come 


Ephesus gives the 


Smyrna, the period of the great persecu- 
in the world, ‘“‘where Satan’s throne is,” 


316. Thyatira is the Papacy, de- 


amism (worldliness) and Nicolaitanism 
As Jezebel brought idolatry into Israel, 
gan ceremonies. 


: Sardis is the Protestant 
Philadelphia is whatever bears 
time of self-satisfied profession 


There is no 
If the word is symbolic it refers 
, or “‘clergy,” which later divided 
What in Ephesus 
“doctrine” (Rev. 2. 1s). 

11, note) was his teaching 


2 17) 


unto thee quickly, and will fight 
against them with the sword of 
my mouth. 

17 He that hath an @ear, let him 
hear what the Spirit saith unto the 
churches; To him that overcometh 
will I give to eat of the “hidden 
manna, and will give him ‘a white 
stone, and in the stone 2a new name 
written, which no man knoweth 
saving he that ‘receiveth it. 


(4) The message to Thyatira. 
A.D. 500-1500: the triumph of 
Balaamism and WNicolaitan- 
ism; a believing remnant (vs. 
24-28). 


18 And unto the ‘angel of the 
church in Thyatira write; &These 
things saith the Son of Gud, who 
hath his eyes like unto a flame of 
fire, and his feet are like fine brass; 

19 I know thy works, and “char- 
ity, and service, and faith, and thy 
patience, and thy ‘works; and the 
last to be more than the first. 

20. Notwithstanding I have Ja few 
things against thee, because thou 
sufferest that woman “Jezebel, 
which calleth herself a prophetess, 
to teach and to seduce my servants 
to commit fornication, and to eat 
things sacrificed unto idols. 

21 And I gave her space to repent 
of her fornication; and she repented 
not. 

22 Behold, I will cast her into a 
bed, and them. that commit adul- 
tery with her into great tribulation, 
except they repent of ‘their deeds. 

23 And I will kill her children 
with death; and all the churches 
shall know that I am he which 
mgearcheth the reins and hearts: 
and I will give unto every one of 
you according to your works. 

24 But unto you I say, “and unto 
the rest in Thyatira, as many as 
have not this doctrine, and which 
have not known the °depths of 
Satan, as they speak; I will put 
upon you none other burden. 

25 But that which ye have al- 
ready hold fast *till I come. 

26 And he that overcometh, and 
keepeth my works unto the end, to 
him will I give Ypower over the 
nations: 

27 And he shall rule them with a 


by tempting them to marry wo 
abandon their pilgrim character. 
church which is spiritual unchastity (Jas. 4. 4). 


REVELATION. 


AD. 96. 


a y.29. 
6 Ex.16.33,34; Heb. 
9.4; cf. Phil.3.10, 


¢Signifies 
\approval. 


@ John 1.42; cf. Rev. 
32. 


e Rev.14.3; 
cf.Song 6.3. 

f Heb.1.4, note. 

go Inspiration. vs.1, 


+ last works to be. 
3 against thee that. 
#1 Ki.16.31,32; 

cf. Prov.6.24. 

Ther. 

™ Jer.17.10. 

” the rest. 

2 Tim.371-8; 
ef.2 Tim.2.17,18. 

® Christ (Second 
Advent). Rev. 
16.15. (Deut.30. 
3; Acts 1.9-11.) 

@ authority. 

r are broken.to 
shivers. 

8 Day (of Je- 
hovah). vs.26,27; 
Rey.6.12-17, 
(isa.2.10-22; 
Rev.19.11-21.) 

t Rev.22.16; 2 Pet. 
1.19; cf.1 Thes.4. 
13-18. 


% Holy Spirit. vs.7, 
11,17,29; Rev.3.1, 
6,13,22. (Mt.1. 
18; Acts 2.4.) 

Churches 
Cocal). vs.1,7,8, 
11,12-29; Rev.3.1, 
6,7,13,22. (Acts 
2.41; Phil.1.1.) 

wHeb.1.4, note, 

= Rev.1.4,16; 
cf. Acts 2.33. 

y Cf. Mt.13.24-26. 

z See Mt.5.48, 
note. 

@ Rev.2.5; 

cf.2 Tim.1.13. 

b Rev.16.15; cf. Mt. 
24.43; 1 Thes.5. 
2-5. 

eo Mt.7.14; 2 Tim. 
4.9-11; cf.Jas.1. 
27, 

é¢ Rev.6.11. 

Life (eternal. 
Rev.13.8. (Mt.7. 
14; Rev.22.19.) 

F Lk. 12.8. 

g Cf.Lk.1,35, 

John 13.20, 

h John 14.6; 19.11. 
 Isa.22.22. 

J Cf.Rev.2.9. 


[3 8 


rod of iron; as the vessels of a pot- 
ter ‘shall they be broken to shivers: 
even as ‘I received of my Father. 
_28 And I will give him the morn- 
ing ‘star. 

29 He that hath an ear, let him 
hear what the “Spirit saith unto the 
*churches. 


CHAPTER 3. 


(5) The message to Sardis. The 
period of the Reformations; 
a believing remnant (vs. 4, 5). 


ND unto the “angel of the 
church in Sardis write; These 
things saith he that *hath the seven 
Spirits of God, and the seven stars; 
I know thy works, that thou hast 4%a 
name that thou livest, and art 
dead. 

2 Be watchful, and strengthen the 
things which remain, that are ready 
to die: for I have not found thy 
works 2perfect before God. 

3 *Remember therefore how thou 
hast received and heard, and hold 
fast, and repent. If therefore thou 
shalt not watch, I will come on thee 
bas a thief, and thou shalt not know 
what hour I will come upon thee. 

4 Thou hast ‘a few names even 
in Sardis which have not defiled 
their garments; and “they shall 
walk with me in white: for they 
are worthy. 

5 He that overcometh, the same 


shall be clothed in white raiment; 
and I will not blot out his name out 
of the book of ‘life, but I will fcon- 
fess his name before my Father, and 
before his “angels. 

6 He that hath an ear, let him 
hear what the Spirit saith unto the 
churches. 


(6) The message to Philadelphia. 
The true church in the pro- 
fessing church. 


7 And to the “angel of the church 
in Philadelphia write; These things 
saith he that is sholy, he that is 
ktrue, he that hath ‘the key of Da- 
vid, he that openeth, and no man 
shutteth; and shutteth, and no 


man openeth; 
8 I Jknow thy works: behold, I 
have set before thee an open door, 


men of Moab, defile their separation, and 
It is that union of the world and the 


Pergamos had lost the pilgrim 


character and was “dwelling” (v. 13) “where Satan’s throne is,” in the world (John 


12. 31; 14. 30; 16. 11). 


1333 


FC 


and no man can shut it: for thou 
hast a little strength, and hast kept 
my word, and hast not denied my 


name. 

9 Behold, I will make them of the 
synagogue of ¢Satan, which say 
they are Jews, and are not, but do 
lie; behold, I will make them to 
come and worship before thy feet, 
and to know that I have loved thee. 

10 Because thou hast kept the 
word of my patience, I also will 
keep thee from the ‘hour of ¢temp- 
tation, which shall come upon all 
the ‘world, to try them that dwell 
upon the earth. 

11 Behold, I come quickly: hold 
that fast which thou hast, that no 
man take thy fcrown. 

12 Him that govercometh will I 
make a pillar in the temple of my 
God, and he shall “go no more out: 
and I will ‘write upon him the 
name of my God, and the name of 
the city of my God, which is new 
Jerusalem, which cometh down cut 
of heaven from my God: and I will 
write upon him jmy new name. 

13 He that “hath an ear, let him 
hear what the Spirit saith unto the 
churches. 


(7) The. message to Laodicea. 
The final state of apostasy. 


14 And unto the angel of the 
church ‘of the Laodiceans “write; 
These things saith the "Amen, the 
faithful and true witness, the be- 
ginning of the creation of God; 

15 I know thy works, that thou 
art neither cold nor hot: I would 
thou wert cold or hot. 

16 So then because thou art luke- 
warm, and neither cold nor hot, oI 
will spue thee out of my mouth. 

17 Because thou sayest, I am 
rich, and increased with goods, and 
have need of nothing; and ?knowest 
not’that thou art wretched, and 
miserable, and poor, and blind, and 
naked: 

18 I counsel thee to buy of me 


gold tried in the fire, that thou|® 


mayest be rich; and white raiment, 
that thou mayest be clothed, and 
that the shame of thy nakedness 
do not appear; and ¢anoint thine 


est see. 
19 As many as I love, I rebuke 
and chasten: be zealous therefore, 


@Satan. Rev.l2. |and ‘repent. 


9,14,15. (Gen.3. 


inne Place and attitude of Christ at 
a vibulatn n (ihe the end of the church-age. 
great). Rev.7. 


20 Behold, I stand at the door, 
and knock: if any man hear my 
voice, and open the door, I will 
come in to him, and will sup with 
hith, and he with me. 

21 To him that overcometh will I 
aa grant to sit with me in my “throne, 
it toan'e3:|even as I also overcame, and am set 


4 Temptation. 
Jas.1.2,12,13,14. 
(Gen.3.1; Jas.1. 
14.) 

¢ otkoumene= 
inhabited earth. 


1Coz.3.14.) | down with my !Father in his throne. 
Ive, fGai23; | 22 He that hath an ear, let him 
h Psa.23.6; contre, hear what the ‘Spirit saith unto 
Heb.13.14, : 


the “churches. 


CHAPTER 4. 


Part III. “Things which shall be 
hereafter” (Rev. 4. 1-22. 21). 


28.36, 
3 Rev.2.17; 19.12. 


4 Rev.22.4; cf. Ex. 


tin Laodicea, 
m Inspiration. 


-1,7,14; Rev. 14, 
13 Cxs.15; The seven seals (Rev. 4. 1-8. 1). 
ev.22.19, 
2 Cor.1.20. (4) Introduction (to Rev. 5. 14). 
PApastese. The throne in heaven. 


? Cf Hos.9.7; John AFIER this I looked, and, be- 
Sea hold, a “door was opened in 
heaven: and the first voice which 


@eyesalve to 
anoint thine, 


+ Resentance. \L heard was as it were of a v’trum- 

vs.3,19; Rev.9.20,|Det talking with me; which said, 
Aastra0)°  |"Come up hither, and I will shew 
* Kingdom (N. ee things which must be *here- 
T.). Rev.5.1-10. after, 


Cina 1-33. 2 And immediately I Ywas in the 


spirit: and, behold, a 2throne was 
set in heaven, and one sat on the 
throne. 

3 And he that sat was to look 
upon like a jasper and a sardine 


1 Cor. 15,24). 


t Holy Spirit. 
ys.1,6,13-22; Rev. 
4.2,5. CMt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

u Churches (local). 
Rev.22.16.'(Acts 
2.41; Phil.1.1.) 


ees ig 09, Stone: and there was a ‘rainbow 
E eetheol “* |round about the throne, in sight 


like unto an emerald, 
The enthroned elders, 


4 And round about the throne 
were four and twenty ‘seats: and 
upon the seats I saw four and 
twenty elders sitting, clothed in 
dwhite raiment; and they had on 
their heads ¢crowns:of gold. 

5 And out of the throne pro- 
ceeded lightnings and thunderings 
and voices: and there were seven 


@ after these, 

u became. 

2 Rev.3,21; cf.Rev. 
2 


24 Se 


@ Rev.21,11; 
cf.Ezk,1.26,27. 


6 Ezk.1.28; cf.Gen. 
9.13-17, 
¢ thrones. 
Rev.3.4,5; 
cf.Rev.19.8,14. 
¢ Rev.2.10; 
cf,2 Tim.4.3, 


lamps of fire burning before the 


1 This passage. in harmony 


‘Covenant, and the promises 
concerning the Messianic kingdom 


This call seems clearly to indicate the fulfilment of 1 Thes. 4. 14-17, 
does not again occur in the Revelation till all is fulfilled. 


“church” 


[ I with Lk. 1. 32, 33: Mt. 19, 28; 
14-16, is conclusive that Christ is not now seated upon His own 
of God through 


Acts 2. 30, 34, 35; 15. 
throne. The Davidic 


1 the prophets and the Angel Gabriel 
await fulfilment. 
‘The word 


1334 


ar " 5 


eyes with eyesalve, that thou may- 


ari a 


' el 


4 6) 


REVELATION. 


[5 13 


throne, which are the seven “Spirits 
of God 


The four living creatures. 


6 And before the throne there 
was °a sea of glass like unto crys- 
tal: and in the midst of the throne, 
and round about the throne, were 
four “beasts full of eyes before and 
behind. 

7 And the first “beast was like a 
lion, and the second beast like a 
calf, and the third beast hada face 
as a man, and the fourth beast was 
like a flying eagle. 

8 And the four “beasts had each 
of them six wings about him; and 
they were full of eyes ¢within: and 
they rest not day and night, say- 
ing, Holy, holy, holy, Lord ¢God 
Almighty, which was, and is, and 
is to come. 


The living creatures and elders 
worship because of creation. 
(Cf. Rev. 5. 8-10.) 


9 And when those “beasts give 
glory and honour and thanks to 
him that fsat on the throne, who 
liveth for ever and ever, 

10 The four and twenty elders 
fall down before him that sat on the 
throne, and worship him that liv- 
eth for ever and ever, and cast 
their crowns before the throne, 


saying, 

11 Thou art worthy, “O Lord, to 
Teceive glory and honour and 
power: for thou hast ‘created all 
things, and for Jthy pleasure they 
are and were created. 


CHAPTER 5, 
The seven-sealed book. 


HAND I saw *in the right hand of 
him that sat on the throne 
a. 'book written within and on 
the backside, sealed with seven 
seals. 

2 And I saw a strong “angel pro- 
claiming with a loud voice, “Who is 
worthy to open the book, and to 
Joose the seals thereof? 

3 And °no man in heaven, nor in 
earth, neither under the earth, was 
able to open the-book, neither to} 
look thereon. 

4 And I wept much, because no 
man was found worthy to open and 
to read the book, neither to —— 


thereon. 


1Cf. Dan. 7. 13, 14. 


A.D. 96. 


a Holy Spirit. 


c living crea- 
tures. See 
Ezk.1.5,note. 

d around and 
within. 

e Jehovah of 
hosts. Isa. 


6.3. 

Sf sitteth, 

g Elders. vs. 
4,5,9-11: 
Rev.5.5,6,8, 
11,14, (Acts 
11.30; Tit.1. 


J 3 
j Cf.Col.1.16;, 
cf.Psa.19,1. 


on. 
/ Ezk.2.9,10; 
cf.Dan.12.4. 
m Heb.1.4, 
note. 
n Psa.15.1, 
with Rom.3. 
10-12. 


o Cf.Isa.63.5, 

p Isa.11.1,10; 

Reyv.22. 16; 
ale 


r John m2 29. 

s Cf.Zech.3. 
8,9; 4.10. 

t Rev.4.8,10; 


“u incense. 


1 Pet.1. 18, 19. 

y Jehovah. 
Isa.61.6. 

z parece. 
(N.T.). 

vs.1-10; Rev. 
19.11-21. (Lk. 
1.31-33; 

1 Cor.15.24.) 

a over. 

h living crea- 
tures. 
Ezk.1.5, 
note. 
cv.9; cf. 
Phil.2.9-11, 

d upon. 

€ Rev. 4.2,35 
6.16. 


Christ in his kingly character 
(Isa. 11. 1; Jer. 23. 5; Lk. 1. 32, 
33) opens the book. 

5 And one of the elders saith unto 
me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of 
the tribe of Juda, the *Root of 
David, hath %prevailed to open the 
book, ‘and to loose the seven seals 
thereof. 

6 And I beheld, and, lo, in the 
midst of the throne and of the four 
“beasts, and in the midst of the el- 
ders, stood a "Lamb as it had been 
slain, having seven horns and seven 
Seyes, which are the seven Spirits 
of God sent forth into all the earth. 

7 And he !came and took the book 
out of the right hand of him that 
sat upon the throne. 


The living creatures and elders 
worship because of redemp- 
tion. (Cf. Rev. 4. 9-11.) 

8 And when he had taken the 
book, the four “beasts and four and 
twenty elders ‘fell down before the 
Lamb, having every one of them 
harps, and golden vials full of 
“odours, which are the prayers of 
saints. 

9 And they sung “a new song, 
saying, Thou art worthy to take 
the book, and to open the seals 
thereof: for thou wast slain, and 
hast “redeemed us to God “by thy 
blood out of every kindred, and 
tongue, and people, and nation; 

10 And hast made us unto our 
¥God kings and priests: and we shall 
Zreign %on the earth. 

The angels exalt the Lamb. 


11 And I beheld, and I heard the 


|voice of many angels round about 


the throne and the “beasts and the 
elders: and the number of them was 
ten thousand times ten thousand, 
and thousands of thousands; | 

12 Saying with a loud voice, 
¢Worthy is the Lamb that was slain 
to receive power, and riches, and 
wisdom, and strength, and honour, 
and glory, and blessing. 

Universal adoration of the 
Lamb who is King. 

13 And every creature which is in 
*yeaven, and on the earth, and un- 
der the earth, and such as are din, 
the sea, and all that are in them, 
heard I saying, Blessing, and hon- 
our, and glory, and power, be unto 
him that ¢sitteth upon the throne, 


The two visions are identical; the Revelation adding that 


which was hidden from Daniel, that the kings and priests of the church-age are to 


1335 


Sis] REVELATION. 
and unto the “Lamb for ever and} A.D. 96. 
ever. ; 
14 And the four beasts said, 
Amen. And the four and twenty 
‘elders fell down and worshipped) | ede 


him that liveth for ever and ever. 


CHAPTER 6. 
(b) The seals (to Rev. 8. 1). 


b living creatures. 
See Ezk.1.5, 
note. 

¢ Elders. Rev.7. 
11,13. (Acts 11, 

> Tit.1.5-9.) 


30; T 
(1) The first seal. 4 ys.3,5. 
A®» I saw when the Lamb|*fome! Omit. | 
opened ¢one of the Seals, and Ij vs.3,5,7. 
heard, as it were the noise of thun-|*Zech.6.3; 


der, one of the four “beasts saying, 
eCome and see. 

2 And I saw, and behold fa white 
horse: and he that sat on him had 
a 8bow; and a crown was given 
unto him: and he went forth /icon- 
quering, and to conquer. 


(2) The second seal: peace taken 
from earth. 


3 And when he had opened the 
second seal, I heard the second 
‘beast say, ‘Come and see, 

4 And there went out another 
horse that was fred: and power 
was given to him that sat thereon 
to ‘take peace from the earth, and 
that they should kill one another: 
and there was given unto him a 
great sword. 


(3) The third seal: famine. 


5S And when he had opened the 
third seal, I heard the third beast 
say, ‘Come and see. And I beheld, 
and lo a “black horse; and he that 
sat on him had a pair of “balances 
in his hand. 

6 And I heard a voice in the 
midst of the four Sbeasts say, A 
°measure of wheat for a penny, 
and three measures of barley for a 
penny; and see thou hurt not the 
oil and the wine. 


(4) The fourth seal: death, 


7 And when he had opened the 
fourth seal, I heard the voice of 
the fourth beast say, ¢Come and 
see. 

8 And I looked, and behold a pale 
horse: and his name that sat on 
him was "Death, and SHell followed 
with him. And power was given 
unto ‘them.over the “fourth part of 
the earth, to kill with sword, and 
with hunger, and with death, and 
with the beasts of the earth. 


be associated with the 


reign “‘on the earth” (vs. 9, 10). 


“Son of Man,” the 


cf.Christ in 19. 
11, whom the 
Beast imitates. 


9 isa.66.19. 


A Dan.7.7,8. 


7 Come. 
J Zech.6.2; 
h. 2.3; 


& Jud.7.22; 


¢f.2 Chr.20.23. 
2 Come. 


m Zech.6.2; cf.Isa. 
60.3. 


n Ezk.4.9,10,16,17. 


° One measure = 
nearly 1 qt. 


P Or, shilling; lit. 


@ denarius, 
@ Come. 


r Cf. Acts 3.15; 
cf.Rom.6, 23, 


8 hades; Lk.16.23, 
note, 


t him. 


# Cf.Ezk.14.21, 


v Death (physi- 
cal). Heb.9.27. 
(Gen.3.19; Heb. 
9.27.) 


w Psa.13.1. 


x Remnant. vs.9- 
11; Rev.7.4-8, 


Cisa.1.9; Rom.11. 
5.) 


Vi.e. their number 


filled up. 
= Mt.24.7. 


@ Cf.Joel 2.10,31. 
6 1sa.34.4. 


¢ Jer.3.23; Rev.16, 
20. 


@ Psa,2.2; cf. Dan; 
2.21. 


¢ Isa,2.19. 


Ff Rev.20.11, 

9 Rev.5.6,9, 12. 

* Cf.Isa.13.6; Mt 
24.8. 


t Day (of Je- 


hovah). vs.15-17; 


Rev. 16. 12-17. 


(Isa.2.10-22; Rey. 
19.11-21.) 


9 Heb.1.4, note 
& Cf.Dan.7.2; 


cf. Eph,2.2. 
' Contra, Eph.1. 
13, 


1336 


PF 


remnant, 


[7 2 
(5) The fifth seal: the martyred 4 


9 And when he had opened the © 


fifth seal, I saw under the altar 
the souls of them that were “slain 


for the word of God, and for the 


testimony which they held:- 

10 And they cried with a loud 
voice, saying, “How long, O Lord, 
holy and true, dost thou not judge 
and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell on the earth? 

11 And white robes were given 
unto *every one of them; and it 
was said unto them, that they 
should rest yet for a little season, 


until their fellowservants also and © 


their brethren, that should be killed 
as they were, should be fulfilled. 


(6) The sixth seal: anarchy. 
12 And I beheld when he had 


|opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there 


was a great “earthquake; and the 
sun became “black as sackcloth of 
hair, and the moon became as blood; 

13 And the stars of heaven fell 
unto the earth, even as a fig tree 
casteth her untimely figs, when she 
is shaken of a mighty wind. 

14 And the *heaven departed as a 
scroll when it is rolled together: 
and every ‘mountain and island 
were moved out of their places. 

15 And the ¢kings of the earth, 
and the great men, and the rich 
men, and the chief captains, and the 
mighty men, and every bondman, 
and every free man, ‘hid themselves 
in the dens and in the rocks of the 
mountains; 

16 And said to the mountains 
and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us 
from the face of him that Jsitteth 
on the throne, and from the éwrath 
of the Lamb: 

17 "For the great ‘day of his 
wrath is come; and who shall be 
able to stand? 


CHAPTER 7. 


(c) (Parenthetical: the saved of 
the tribulation period.) 


AN after these things I saw four 
Jangels standing on the four 
corners of the earth, holding the 
four winds of the earth, that the 
wind should not blow on the earth, 
nor on the sea, nor on any tree 
2 And I saw another Jangel as- 
cending from the east, having the 
‘seal of the living God: and he cried 


“Lamb as it had been slain,” in His 


eee 


7 3] 


REVELATION. 


[7 17 


with a loud voice tothe four angels,| A-D.96. |could number, of all nations, and 
to whom it was given to hurt the) —_—————jkindreds, and people, and tongues, 
vor bettas at pF - oA ere pices before the throne, and before 
; i no e earth, s the Lamb, cloth i i 
neither the sea, nor the trees, till eh, and Salta enc eee ee se 
we have sealed the servants of our 22 eas 10 And cried with a loud voice, 
God in their foreheads. 26.) ~* |saying, ‘Salvation to our God which 
(1) The Respect out of Israel |¢ Gen.49.3,273 ae eee the throne, and unto 
sealed, 6-5 yee Beket | ashore ae 
4 And I heard the number of them 48.1-7,23-28, | 11 And all the /angels stood round 
which were sealed: band there were|* Sf Rom-11- about the throne, and about the 
sealed an hundred and forty and REE Pe GS ah te deine Ie 
Secrithoisands at cllithe. triocs, Of |¢Rontt6, fell before the throne on their faces, 
the children of Israel ede and worshipped God, 
: f Heb.1.4, 12 Saying, Amen: Blessing, and 


5 Of the tribe of Juda were sealed 
twelve thousand. Of the tribe of 
Reuben were sealed twelve thou- 
sand. Of the tribe of Gad were 
sealed twelve thousand. 


note. 

g living crea- 
tures. 

h Elders. vs. 
11,13,14; 
Rev.11.16. 


glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiv- 
ing, and honour, and power, and 
might, be unto our God for ever 
and ever. Amen. 


: (Acts 11.30; | 13 And one of the “elders an- 
twelve thousand, OF the thbe of |; rai)  |swered, saying unto me, ‘What are 
Weethalune mere scaled.) taclvel|{ My Lord: these which are arrayed in white 
thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses|* Remnant, |robes? and whence came they? 
were sealed twelve thousand. Kevlar 14 And I said unto him, JSir, thou 

7 Of the tribe of Simeon were} (Isa.1.9;__ knowest, Ards he, said. too me 
sealed twelve thousand. Of the|,Rom115.) |*These are they which came ‘out 
tribe of Levi were sealed twelve pera of, mereat) tribulation... and. have: 

& washed their robes, and made them 


thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar 
were sealed twelve thousand. 


tribulation. 
m Tribulation 
(the great). 


white in the blood of the Lamb. 
15 Therefore are they “before the 


8 Of the tribe of Zabulon were} vs.13,14. D 
P throne of God, and serve him day 
Psa.2.5. dates), hs 
sealed twelve thousand. Of the gery and night in his temple: and he 


tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve 
thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin 
were sealed twelve thousand. 


cf.Zech.3.3-5. 
ov.9. 
p strike upon, 


that sitteth .on the throne shall 
dwell among them. 
16 They shall hunger no more, nei- 


rer é q burning 
_ (2) Vision of the Gentiles who} heat. ther thirst any more; neither shall 
are to be saved during the|’ Shepherd. | the sun light on them, nor any heat. 
&reat tribulation. s fountains of| 17 For the "Lamb which is in 
9 After this I beheld, and, lo, ¢a rae of |the midst of the throne shall feed 


great multitude, which no man 


them, and shall lead them unto ‘liv- 


1 The great tribulation is the period of unexampled trouble predicted in the 


passages cited under that head from Psa. 2. 5 to Rev. 7. 14 and described in Rev, 
11.-18. Involving in a measure the whole earth (Rev. 3. 10), it is yet distinctively 
“the time of Jacob’s trouble” (Jer. 30. 7), and its vortex Jerusalem and the Holy 
Land. It involves the people of God who will have returned to Palestine in un- 
belief. Its duration is three and a half years, or the last half of the seventieth 
week of Daniel (Dan. 9. 24-27, note; Rev. 11. 2, 3). The elements of the 
tribulation are: (1) The cruel reign of the “beast out of the sea” (Rev. 13. 1), who, 
at the beginning of the three and a half years, will break his covenant with the 
Jews (by virtue of which they will have re-established the temple worship, Dan. 
9. 27), and show himself in the temple, demanding that he be worshipped as God 
(Mt. 24. 15; 2 Thes. 2. 4). (2) The active interposition of Satan “having great 
wrath” (Rev. 12. 12), who gives his power to the Beast (Rev. 13. 4,5). (3) The 
unprecedented activity of demons (Rev. 9. 2, 11); and (4) the terrible “bowl” judg- 
ments of Rev. 16. ’ ¥ 
The great tribulation will be,. however, a period of salvation. An election 
out of Israel is seen as sealed for God (Rev. 7. 4-8), and, with an innumerable mul- 
titude of Gentiles (Rev. 7. 9), are said to have come “out of the great tribulation” 
(Rev. 7. 14). They are not of the priesthood, the church, to which they seem to 
stand somewhat in the relation of the Levites to the priests under the Mosaic Cove- 
nant. The great tribulation is immediately followed by the return of Christ in 
glory, and the events associated therewith (Mt. 24. 29, 30). See “Remnant” (Isa. 
1. 9; Rom. 11. s, note); “Beast” (Dan. 7. 8; Rev. 19, 20, note); “Armageddon” 
{Rev. 16. 14; 19. 17, note). 


1337 


8 1] 


ing fountains of waters: and ¢God 
shall wipe away all tears from their 
hovah. 


eyes. 
CHAPTER 8. 1sa.25.8. 
The seals resumed: the seventh| } Heb.1.4, 


a Adonai Je- 


seal, out of which the trum-| ‘rote. 
pets come. oe oe 
. ND when he had opened the} angels; con- 
seventh seal, there was silence art | ethe 
in heaven about the space of half God" (1 Thes. 


an hour, 


4.16; 
15.52). 
The seven trumpets ey 


Cf. Joel 2.1; 
(Rev. 8. 2-11. 19). mos 3.6. 

(a) Introduction: Christ as a3; Joka 
High Priest. 14.13. 

2 And I saw the seven langels| “BO 7h, o 
which stood before God; and to} fCf.Lev.16 
them were given seven ‘trumpets, ee 
3 And another 4angel came and] pg uson. 
stood at the altar, having a golden|hRev.4.5 
censer; and there was given- unto te ete 
him much incense, that he should} {¢ 19. 
doffer it with the prayers of all] sBx.9.23,24; 
saints upon the golden altar which areas 

-Ezk.38. 
was before the throne. 92; cf Job" 

4 And the ‘smoke of the incense,| 38.22,23. 
which came with the prayers of ea ges 
the saints, ascended up before God)" 95:‘contra, 
out of the bangel’s hand. Tsa.2.2. 

2x.7.19,20; 


5 And the ’angel took the censer, Rees 
and /filled it with fire of the altar,|,cf2 Chr. 
and cast rt Sinto the earth: and} 20.23; Rev. 
there were voices, and thunderings, p Osa Be OY 
and lightnings, and an earthquake.|" ¢fisa.13.13; 

6 And the seven “angels which) contra, 
had the seven trumpets prepared} ,Dan.123. | 
themselves to sound. p Cf.Rev.16.4; 

(b) The trumpet judgments. 

(1) The first trumpet. 

7 The first Sangel sounded, and 
there followed ‘hail and fire min- 
gled with blood, and they were cast 
upon the earth: and /Jthe third 
part of trees was burnt up, and all 
green grass was burnt up. 

(2) The second trumpet. 

8 And the second Yangel sounded, 
and as it were *a great mountain 
burning with fire was cast into the 
sea: and the third part of the sea 
became ‘blood; 
~9 And the third part of the *crea- 
tures which were in the sea, and 
had life, died; and the third 
the ships were destroyed. 


qCf.Deut.29. 
18; cf.Jer. 
23.15. 

¥ Cf. Joel 2.31; 
Isa.13,10; 
cf.Ex.10. 
21-23; John 
V2535), 

Sin mid- 
heaven. 

t Rev.9.12. 

u about. 

v Isa.14,12-19; 
Heb.2.14, 

w fallen. 

x pit of the 
abyss, 

y Contra, 
Rev.21.24; 
cf. Joel 2.10. 

2Ex.10.12-15, 

aCf.Num. 


21.6. 
part of b Rev.7.2,3° 


(3) The third trumpet. Ror ies 
10 And the third ’angel sounded,| 28/67. ~ 


and there fell a great "star from EC iden B33 
heaven, burning °as it were a larap,| ¢/kenesses. 


€ f Cf.Nah.3.17; 
and it fell upon the third part of 4 Seer ier: 


the rivers. and upon the ?fountains| #Cf.Rev.13.18. 


of waters: 
1338 


REVELATION. 


cf.2 Cor.2.17, 


contra, Rev. 


11 And the name of the star is 
called Wormwood: and the third 
part of the waters became ?worm- 
wood; and many men died of the 
waters, because they were made 
bitter. 


(4) The fourth trumpet. 


12 And the fourth 2angel sounded, 

and the third part ”of the sun was 
smitten, and the third part of the 
moon, and the third part of the 
stars; so as the third part of them 
was darkened, and the day shone 
not for a third part of it, and the 
night likewise. 
_13 And I beheld, and heard an 
*angel flying sthrough the midst of 
heaven, saying with a ioud voice, 
‘Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters 
of the earth by reason of the other 
voices of the trumpet of the three 
angels, which are “yet to sound! 


CHAPTER 9. 


(5) The fifth trumpet: the 
first woe. 


ND the fifth ‘angel sounded, 
and I saw a “star “fall from 
heaven unto the earth: and to him 
was given the key of the *bottom- 
less pit. 

2 And he opened the “bottomless 
pit; and there arose a Ysmoke out 
of the pit, as the smoke of a great 
furnace; and the sun and the air 
were darkened by reason of the © 
smoke of the pit. : 

3 And there came out of the © 
smoke #locusts upon the earth: and 
unto them was given power, as the © 
“scorpions of the earth have power. — 

4 And it was commanded them 
that they should not hurt the grass 
of the earth, neither any green — 
thing, neither any tree; but only — 
those men ’which have not the seal — 
of God in their foreheads. - 

5 And to them it was given that — 
they should not kill them, but that 
they should be ‘tormented five 
months: and their torment was as 
the torment of a scorpion, when he 
striketh a man. 

6 And in those days shall men. 
4seek death, and shall not find it; 
and shall desire to die, and death 
shall flee from them. 

7 And the ¢shapes of the locusts 
were like unto. horses prepared 
unto battle; and on their heads 
were as it were /crowns like gold, 
and their faces were as the faces 
of men. 

8 And they had hair as the hair 


ee ee ae ee 


a 


a a amet a ip a a 


a 


—— 


ms 


it 


-horns of the /golden altar which is 
~ before God, 


3? 


part of men. Acts 11.90.) 
16 And the number of the army|»cz.rey.21.8. 
of the horsemen were two hundred] < ct.Rev.13.9. 
thousand thousand: and I heard} Rev.8.3. 
the number of them. > coming. 
¢ Cf.Rev.1.7; 


\ 


- 


9 9] 


of women, and their ¢teeth were as 
the teeth of lions. 

9 And they had °breastplates, as 
it were breastplates of iron; and 
the sound of their wings was as the) 
sound of ‘chariots of many horses 
running to battle. 

10 And they had tails like unto 
scorpions, and “there were stings 
in their tails: and their power was 
to hurt men five months. 

11 And they had ¢a king over 
them, which is the fangel of the 
bottomless pit, whose name in 
the Hebrew tongue is “Abaddon, 
but in the Greek tongue hath his 
name /Apollyon. 

12 One woe is past; and, behold, 
there come two woes more ‘here- 
after. 


(6) The sixth trumpet. MPa ogy 
13 And the sixth fangel sounded, |e v-. 


and [ heard a voice from the four| 


14 Saying to the sixth J/angel 
which had the trumpet, Loose the 
four angels which are bound in 
the great river Euphrates. 

15 And the four fangels were 
loosed, which were “prepared for 
‘an hour, and a day, and a month, 
and a year, for to slay the “third 


1 


17 And thus I saw the horses in 
the vision, and them that sat on 
them, having °breastplates of fire, 
and of jacinth, and brimstone: and 
the heads of the horses were as the 
Pheads of lions; and out of their 
mouths 4issued fire and smoke and 
brimstone. 

18 By these ’three was the third 
part of men killed, by tHe fire, and 
by the smoke, and by the brimstone, 


which issued out of their mouths. | |* delay. 
19 For ‘their power is in their}! agp 


mouth, and in their tails: for their 
ttails were like unto serpents, and 
had heads, and with them they do 


urt. 

20 And the rest of the men which 
were not killed by these plagues yet 
repented not of the works of their 
hands, that they should not “wor- 
ship tdevils, and-idols of gold, and 
silver, and brass, and stone, and of 
wood: which neither can “see, nor 
hear, nor walk: 


21 Neither “repented they of their! - 


J Cf. Rev.8.3. 
| Ct.Jon.1.17. 


P Cf. Isa.5.29,30. 


v demons. 
w Psa.115. 4-7. 
% Repentance. 


4 Rev.4.3; Ezk.1. 
28. 


f Contra, ae 501; 


9 Psa.95.5; cf.Hag. 
2.6. 


h Psa.29.3-9. 
7 Cf.Dan.8.26; 12. 
4,9. 


J Rev.4.11; Gen. 
1.1. 


m Mt.13.11, note. 
n also shall be 


o by. 

p Cf.Rev.4.1. 

@ Cf. Ezk.2.8,9; 
3.1-3, 


rCf.Jer.15.10; 20. 
14-18, 


REVELATION. 


A.D. 96. 


@ Joel 1.6. 


|b v.17; fee 


Eph.6 
© Joel 2. 3 


d@ stings; and thelr 


authority was in 
their tails to 
Aurt. 


¢ Cf.Eph.2.2; 


ef.John 14.30. 


F Heb.1.4, nole. 
9 abyss. 
h i.e. Hestroyer, 


Cf.Job 26.6; 
cf.1 Pet.5.8. 


t after these 
things. 


! the hour and day! 
and month and 
year. 


@Cf.Acts 9.1; 
cf, Psa.27.2, 12, 


T three plagues. 

8 the power of the 
horses. 

* Cf. Isa.9.15; Mic. 
315. 


* 1 Cor.10.20; 
Deut.32.17, 


vs.20,21; Rev.16, 


cf.Acts 1.9, 


¢ Cf.Rev.1.16. 


cf. Psa. 
cf.2 Pet.1.19-21. 


completed. 


8 Cf.Psa.19.10; 
119.103. 


tit was sald, 


[10 11 


-|murders, nor of their Ysorceries, 


nor of their 2fornication, nor of their 


thefts, 
CHAPTER 10. 
(c) Parenthetical (to Rev.11. 14). 


(1) The mighty angel and the 
“little book.” 

way abe I ,saw another mighty 

@angel 2come down from hea- 

ven, ‘clothed with a cloud: and a 

drainbow was upon his head, and 

his ¢face was as it were the sun, and 
his feet as pillars of fire: 

2 And he had in his hand Ja little 
book open: and he set his ¢right 
foot upon the sea, and Ais left foot 
on the earth, 

3 And cried with a loud voice, as 
when a lion roareth: and when he 
had cried, seven 4thunders uttered 
their voices. 

4 And when the seven thunders 
had uttered their voices, I was 
about to write: and I heard a voice 
from heaven saying unto me, ‘Seal 
up those things which the seven 
thunders uttered, and write them 
not. 

5 And the ‘angel which I saw 
stand upon the sea and upon the 
earth lifted up his hand to heaven, 

6 And sware by him that liveth 
for ever and ever,: who Jcreated 
heaven, and the things that therein 
are, and the earth, and the things 
that therein are, and the sea, and 
the things which are therein, that 
there should be “time no longer: 

7 But in the days of the voice 
of the seventh fangel, when he 
‘shall begin to sound, the “mystery 
of God *should be finished, as he 
hath declared °to his servants the 
prophets. 

(2) The “Iittle book’’ eaten. 

8 And the *voice which I heard 
from. heaven spake unto. me again, 
and said, Go and take the little 
book which is open in the hand of 
the fangel which standeth upon the 
sea and upon the earth, 

9 And I went unto the /angel, and 
said unto him, Give me the little 
book. And he said unto me, ¢Take 
it, and eat it up; and it shall make 
thy belly “bitter, but it shall be in 
thy mouth ‘sweet as honey. 

10 And I took the little book out 
of the fangel’s hand, and ate it up; 
and it was in°‘my mouth sweet as 
honey: and as soon as I had eaten 


1339 


it, my belly was bitter. 
11 And the said unto me, Thou 


11] 


REVELATION. 


must ¢prophesy again ‘before many 
peoples, and nations, and tongues, 
and ‘kings. 


CHAPTER 11. 


A.D. 96. 


a Cf. Jer.25. 
15-26. 
b of peoples. 


(3) The “times of the Gentiles’’|¢ many kings. 


to end in forty-two months. 


about 10 ft. 


ND there was given me a ¢reed|¢ # was said, 
like unto a rod: and ‘the angel] ;crEzx.s. 


stood, saying, Rise, and measure 
the temple of God, and the altar, 
and them that worship therein. 

2 But the fcourt which is without 
the temple leave out, and measure 
it not; for it is given unto the Gen- 
tiles: and the holy city shall they 
étread under foot forty and two 
months. 

(4) The two witnesses to proph- 
esy forty-two months. 


3 And I will give power unto 
my two witnesses, and they shall 
prophesy a thousand two hundred 
and threescore days, clothed in) 
sackcloth. 

4 ‘These are the two olive trees, 
and the two Jcandlesticks standing 
before the *God of the earth. 

5 And if any man will hurt them, 
‘fire proceedeth out of their mouth, 
and devoureth their enemies: and 
if any man will hurt them, he must 
in this manner be killed. 

6 These have power to shut 
heaven, that it rain not in the days 
of their prophecy: and have power 
over waters "to turn them to blood, 
and to °smite the earth with all 
plagues, as often as they will. 

7 And when they shall have fin- 
ished their testimony, the beast that 
ascendeth out of the ¢bottomless pit 
shall make "war against them, and 
shall overcome them, and kill them. 

8 Arid their dead bodies shall lie 
in the street of the great ‘city, 
which spiritually is called Sodom 
and Egypt, where also ‘our Lord 
was crucified. 

9 And they of the people and kin- 
dreds and tongues and nations shall 
“see their dead bodies three days 
and an half, and shall not suffer 
their dead bodies to be put in 
graves. 

10 And they that dwell upon the 
earth shall "rejoice over them, and 
make merry, and shall send gifts 
one to another; because these two 
prophets tormented them that 
dwelt on the earth. 

11 And after three days and an 
half the “spirit of life from God en- 


5-9; 40.17. 
See Times 

of the Gen- 
tiles. Lk.21. 
24; Rev.16.14. 
Cf.Isa.43. 
10,12. 

# Zech.4.2,3. 

j lampstands. 
k Adonai. 


& 


14; contra, 
Lk.9.54,55. 

m Cf£.1 Ki.17.1; 
cf.Jas.5.17. 

n Cf.Ex.7.19. 

o Cf.Ex.7.-10. 

p Cf.Rev.13.1; 
17.8. 

abyss. 

Cf.Dan.7.21, 


S i.e. Joru- 
salem. 


q 
r 


t therr. 
u Contra, Isa. 
66.24 


v Cf.Psa.79. 
2-4; cf. John 
16.20; cf. 

1 Ki.21.16. 

w Holy Spirit. 
Rev.14.13. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

x Cf.Acts 5.11. 

y Cf.Rev.20. 
4-6. 

z Contra, v.9. 

a Dan.2.18. 

b Heb.1.4, 
note. 

¢ The worid- 
kingdom of 
our Lordand 
of his Christ 
has come, 

d kosmos = 
world-system. 
Rev.13.3-8, 
note. 

(John 7.7; 
Rev.13.3-8, 
note.) 

e Elders. Rev, 
14.3. (Acts 11, 
30; Tit.1.5-9.) 

f thrones, 

g that thou 
hast taken, 

h Rev.20.11, 

i Rewards, 
Rev.22.12, 
(Dan.12.3; 

1 Cor.3.14.) 
jNV.19 properly 
belongs with 
Chapter 12, 

k covenant. 
Heb.9.4; 


tered into them, and they stood 


Ex.37.1, ete. 
l sign. : 


1340 


upon them which saw them. _ 

12 And they heard a great voice 
from heaven saying unto them, 
yCome up hither. And they as- 
cended up to heaven in a cloud; and 
their enemies “beheld them. 


The second woe. 


13 And the same hour was there 
a great earthquake, and the tenth 
part of the city fell, and in the 
earthquake were slain of men seven 
thousand: and the remnant were 
affrighted, and gave glory to the 
6God of heaven. 

14 The second woe is past: and, 
behold, the third woe cometh 
quickly. 

End of the second parenthetical 
Passage. 


The trumpet judgments re- 
sumed. 


(7) The seventh trumpet. 


15 And the seventh ‘angel sound- 
ed; and there were great voices in 
heaven, saying, ‘The kingdoms of 
this ¢world are become fhe king- 
doms of cur Lord, and of his Christ; 
and he shall reign for ever and ever, 

16 And the four and twenty <el- 
ders, which sat before God on their 
Jseats, fell upon their faces, and wor- 
shipped God, 

17 Saying, We give thee thanks, 
O Lord God Almighty, which art, 
and wast, and art to come: Sbecause 
thou hast taken to thee thy great 
power, and hast reigned. 

18 And the nations were angry, 
and thy wrath is come, and the 
time of the 4dead, that they should 
be judged, and that thou shouldest 
give ‘reward unto thy servants the 
prophets, and to the saints, and 
them that fear thy name, small and 
great; and shouldest destroy them 
which destroy the earth. 

19 JAnd the temple of God was 
opened in heaven, and there was 
seen in his temple the ark of his 
‘testament: and there were light- 
nings, and voices, and thunderings, 
and an earthquake, and great hail. 


CHAPTER 12. 
The seven personages. 
(1) The woman: Israel. 


The woman clothed with the 


sun, and the man-child. 


ANP there appeared a great /won- 
2 der in heaven; a woman clothed 
with the sun, and the moon under 


iat 


upon their feet; and great *fear fell 


- 


12 2] 


REVELATION. 


[13 2 


her feet, and upon her head a 
“crown of twelve stars: 

2 And she being with child cried, 
‘travailing in birth, and pained to 
be delivered. 


(2) Satan. 


3 And there appeared another 
‘wonder in heaven; and behold 2a 
great red dragon, having seven 
heads and ten horns, and seven 
crowns upon his heads. 

4 And his tail drew the third part 
of the fstars of heaven, and did cast 
them to the earth: and the dragon 
stood before the woman which was 
ready to be delivered, for to devour 
her child as soon as it was born. 


(3) The Child: Christ. 


5 And she brought forth a man 
child, “who was to rule all nations 
with a rod of iron: and her child 
was ‘caught up unto God, and to 
his throne. 

6 And the woman fled into the 
Jwilderness, where she hath a place 
prepared of God, that they should 
feed her there “a thousand two hun- 
dred and threescore days. 


(4) The archanéel. 


7 And there was ‘war in heaven: 
mMichael and his “angels °fought 
against the dragon; and the dragon 

fought and his angels, 
“8 And prevailed not; neither was 
their place found any more in 
heaven. 

9 And the great ?dragon was cast 
out, %that old serpent, called the 
Devil, and sSatan, which ‘deceiv- 
eth the whole “world: he was cast 
out into the earth, and his “angels 
* were cast out with him. 

10 And I heard a loud voice say- 
ing in heaven, Now is come “salva- 
tion, and “strength, and the !king- 
dom of our God, and the ”power of 
his Christ: for the accuser of our 
brethren is cast dot#n, which ac- 
cused them before our God day and 
night. | 


A.D. 96. 


a Cf. Rev.7.4-8. 

6 Cf.1sa.66.7-10; 
Mic.4.10. 

© sign. 

d See v.9. 

e diadems. 

F Rev.8.12. 

9 Cf. Mt.2.16. 

hk Christ. Psa.2.9; 
Rev.2.27; 19.15. 

i Lk.24.51; Acts 1. 
9-11; 7.55,56; 
Rev.3.21. 

J v.14. 

& Rev.11.2,3; 13.5; 
Dan.9.27; 7.14, 
nole. 

' Contra, Lk.19.38. 

mCt.Jude 9; 
ef,Dan. 10,21. 

n Heb.1.4, nole. 

© went fo war with. 

p Satan. vs.3,4, 
7-17; Rev.20.2,7, 
10, (Gen.3.1; 
Rev.20.10.) 

@ the ancient ser- 
pent. Gen.3.1; 
Tsa.14.12-19, 

r Cf.1 Pet.5.8. 

8 Cf.1 Cor.5.5. 

¢ Cf.2 Cor.4.4. 

u oikoumene= 
inhabited earth, 
(Lk.2.1.) 

v Heb.1.4, nole, 

w the salvation. 
Rom. 1.16, no/e. 

x the power. 

uv authority. 

2 because of 

@ Heb.2.14. 

b v.17; cf.1 Pet.5.8. 


¢ Contra, John9.4; |, 
cf.Lk.9.42. 


d Cf. Mt.24.9. 

¢ Cf.Ex.19.4; 
cf.Isa.40.31. 

ae cf. Hos.2.14, 


9 Cf.{sa.8.7,8; 
cf.Jer.46.8; . 
cf. Isa.17.12,13. 

ACE£.2 Chr.20.23, 24. 

i Remnant. Rev. 


J Law (of Moses). 
Rev.14.12. (Ex. 
19,1; Gal.3.1-29.) 

k Jesus. 

’ The Beast. vs.1- 
8; Rev.19.19,20. 
(Dan.7.8; Rev. 
19.20.) 

m diadems. 

n names. 


11 And they overcame him “by 
the “blood of the Lamb, and “by the 
word of their testimony; and they 
loved not their lives unto the death. 

12 Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, 
and ye that dwell in them. Woe to 
the inhabiters of the earth and of 
the sea! for the devil is come down 
unto you, having great >wrath, be- 
cause he knoweth that he hath ‘but 
a short time. 


Satan and Israel in the 
tribulation. 

13 And when the dragon saw that 
he was cast unto the earth, he ¢per- 
secuted the woman which brought 
forth the man child. 


/ 14 And to the woman were given 


two ‘wings of a great eagle, that 
she might fly into the wilderness, 
into her ‘place, where she is nour- 
ished for a time, and times, and 
half a time, from the face of the 
serpent 

15 And the serpent 8cast out of 
his mouth water as a flood after the 
woman, that he might cause her to 
be carried away of the flood. ; 

16 And the earth helped the 
woman, and the earth opened her 
mouth, and “swallowed up the flood 
which the dragon cast out of his 
mouth. 


(5) The Jewish remnant. 

17 And the dragon was wroth 
with the woman, and went to make 
war with the ‘remnant of her seed, 
which keep the Jcommandments of 
God, and have the testimony of 
kJesus Christ. 

CHAPTER 13. 

(6) The Beast out of the sea. 

yore I stood upon the sand of the 


sea, and saw a ‘beast rise up 
out of the sea, having seven heads 
and ten horns, and upon his horns © 
ten crowns, and upon his heads 


the “name of blasphemy. 
2 And the beast which I saw was 
3like unto a leopard, and his feet 


1 The Dispensation of the Kingdom (2 Sam. 7. 16, refs.) begins with the return 
of Christ to the earth, runs through the ‘‘thousand years” of His earth-rule, and 
ends when He has delivered up the kingdom to the Father (1 Cor. 15. 24, note). 

2 Daniel’s fourth beast (Dan. 7. 26, note). n_ hor: 
Dan. 7. 24, Rev. 17. 12, to be ten kings, and the whole vision is of the last form of 
Gentile world-power, a confederated ten-kingdom empire covering the sphere of 


authority of ancient Rome. 


The ‘‘ten horns” are explained in 


Rev. 13. 1-3 refers to the ten-kingdom empire; vs. 4-10 


to the emperor, who is emphatically “the Beast’? (Rev. 19. 20, note). 

3 The three animals, leopard, bear, and lion, are found in Dan. 7. 4-6 as symbols 
of the empires which preceded Rome, and whose characteristics all entered into 
the qualities of the Roman empire: Macedonian swiftness of conquest, Persian 
tenacity of purpose, Babylonish voracity. : 


1341 


oe 


ly 


13 3] 


were ps the feet of a bea r, and his 
mouth as the mouth of a lion: and 
the @dragon gave him his power, 
and his ’seat, and great authority. 
3 And I saw ‘one of his heads as 
(eomamat sit 
deadly wound wai ed: and a 
the «world /wondered after the beast. 


4 And they worshipped the dragon 
whi ve & into th fe: 
and they 1 east, Say- 
ing, Who is. like. un east? 


who is able to make war with him? 
5 there was given unto him 

a mouth speaking great things and 

blasphemies; and ‘power was given 
unto him to continue forty and two 

months. 5! 

6 And he opened his mouth in 

blasphemy against God, to blas- 

pheme his name, and his taberna- 
cle, and them that dwell in heaven. 
7 And it was given unto him to 
3 it saints, and to 
overcome them: and é&power was 
given him over ali kindreds, and 
tongues, and nations. 
8 hat dwell 
ear ip him, 
names are not written “in the book 
‘of life of the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the 2world. | 

9 If any man have an ear, let him 
hear. 

10 He that leadeth into captivity 
shall go into captivity: he that 
killeth with the sword must be 
killed with the sword. Here is the! 
™patience and the faith of the 
saints. 


(7) The Beast out of the earth. 


11 And I beheld another beas 
coming up out of the earth; and he 
{,had two horns "like a lamb, and 


on the 


Jwhose|? 


he spake as a dragon, 


REVELATION. 


a Rev.12.3. 

6 throne. 

¢ Cf.Rev.6.2 
with Rev.9. 


1-11. 

d Cf.Dan,7.8. 

e€ ge. =earth, 
vs.8, note. | 
(John 7 7.) 

{Cf.Acts & 
10,11. 

g authority. 

kh Cf Rev.12.12. 

? Rev.11.7,12; 
ef, Dan.7. 
21,22. 

Jj Rev.3.5; cf. 
Phil.4.3; cf. 
Rev. 20.12,15. 

k& from the 
foundation 
of the world 
in the book 
of life of the 
Lamb slain. 

! Life (eter- 
nal). Rev.17. 
8. (Mt.7.14; 
Rev.22.19.) 

m Rev.14.12;- 
cf.Rev.1.9. 

n Contra, 

John 1.29, 

v.8. 


P signs. 

q Cf.2 Ki.1.10. 

r Cf. John 4. 
1-3. 


sit wes given 
him to do. 

tIt was fiven 
to him to 
Give breath 
unto. 

“u Contra, 
Rev.7.2,3; 
cf.Rev.14.9. 

v Cf.Dan.12.10; 
ef.1 Cor.2.15. 

w Cf.Psa.9.20; 
cf.Psa.10.18. 

x Cf.Dan.3.1; 
ef.i Sam.17.4. 

y the. 


causeth the earth and the 
the fist beast, erein o 
e first beast, w. 


was _ healed. 
13 Ans eeorinwnens sg 
sot ne maketh Shire come down 
from heaven ceiegt earth in the 
sight of men, _ 

14 And ‘deceiveth them that 
1eans of 
nad power 
beast; say- 


the 


to 


dwell. on the earth by the 
those miracles which s cha 


a_sword, and did live. ae 
| 15 And the had power to give life 
junto. EDR ATA Rall eae aint 
the 1 

|\speak, and cause that as many as 


ha 


would not worship the image of the 
east should be killed, 


sell, save .h Sy 


tno.man might i 

e that had the mark, o: 
e of the beast, or the num- 
bern ne name. “Sct tae 


18 is wisdom. Let him that 
hath 2 ing count the num- 
: tor it is the num- 


ant *man sand tee ee 
Six hundred three score and six. 
CHAPTER 14. 


Parenthetical: vision of the 
Lamb and the one hundred 
and forty and four thousand. 


ANP T looked, and lo, 2a Lamb 
> stood on the mount Sion, and 
iwith him an hundred forty and four 


; 1 Fragments of the ancient Rom 
kingdoms. 


ized the world of unbelieving manki 
fishness, ambition, and pleasure (Mt. 
1 John 2. 15-17). 


It was the imperial form of 
wounded to death. What we have pron 
of the imperial form as such, though ove 
“head” is ‘“thealed,” i.e. restored; there i 

2 Kosmos, Summary: In the sense of 
sense of the word, refers to the ‘‘order,’”’ “ 


y This world-system is i 
fleets; is often outwardly religious, scientific, 


an empire have never ceased to exist as separate 


nd 
4.8.9; John 


government which ceased; the one head 
hetically in Rev. 13. 3 is the restoration 
r a federated empire of ten kingdoms; the 
S an emperor again—the Beast. 

the present world-system. the ethically bad 
arrangement,”’ under which Satan has organ- 
upon his cosmic principles of force, greed, sel- 


12. 31; 14.30; 18.36; Eph. 2. 2° 6.123 


is imposing and powerful with armies and 
cultured, and elegant; but, seething 


a, 


t 


with national and commercial rivalries and ambitions, is upheld in any real crisis 


only by armed force, and is dominated by 
3 Antichrist the person is to be distinguishe 
(1 John 2. 18), and the “spirit of antichrist” 


The supreme mark 


of the Logos, the eternal Son in J 
The “tnany antichrists’” precede and prepare the way for 


of all is the 


Satanic principles. 
from the “many antichrists” 
(1 John 4. 3) which characterizes all, 


denial of the Christian truth of the incarnation 
esus as the Christ (John 1. 1, 14; Mt. 1. 16, note). 


the Antichrist, wha is 


1342 © 


- 


O wors. ip : 
hose deadly wound © 


: 


14 2] 


REVELATION. 


[147 


thousand, having “his Father’s} A.D. 96. 


name written in their foreheads. é 

2 And I heard a voice from| ms famers, 
heaven as the voice of ‘many waters, | ° Rey.7.3: cf-Rev. 
and as the voice of a great thunder:| Revis16.” 
and I heard the voice of ¢harpers| « Rev.19.6. 
harping with their harps: 4 Cf.Rey.15.2. 

3 And they sung as it were a new] © “ving creatures. 
song before the throne, and before|/ F’exs;, Rey). 
the four “beasts, and the /elders:} Tit.1.5-9.) 
and no man could learn that song}? Rom-3.24, nove. 
but the hundred and forty and|"’? 


I Peer ves1 2 
four thousand, which were 4re-| 5; Rev20.4. ( 
1.9; Rom.11.5.) 


5; Rev.20.4. (Isa. 


low the Lamb whithersoever he 
goeth. These were éredeemed from 
among men, “being the firstfruits 
unto God and to the Lamb. 

5 And in their mouth was found 
no guile: for ‘they are without 
fault before the throne of God. 


Vision of the angel with the 
everlasting Gospel. 


6 And I saw another Jangel fly in 
kthe midst of heaven, having the 
everlasting !/gospel to preach unto 
them that dwell on the earth, and 


deemed from the earth. y 

4 These are they which were not|? Heb-14 nove. 
defiled with women; for they are), 72"aven. | 
virgins. These are they which fol-| 213) 7°” 


to every nation, and kindred, and 
tongue, and people, 


| 7 Saying with a loud voice, Fear 


“the Beast out of the earth’ of Rev. 13. 11-17, and the “false prophet’’ of Rev. 
16. 13; 19. 20; 20. 10, He is the last ecclesiastical head, as the Beast of Rev. 13. 1-8 
is the last civil head. For purposes of persecution he is permitted to exercise the 
autocratic power of the emperor-Beast (Rev. 19. 20, note). 

1 Gospel. This great theme may be summarized as follows: 

I. In itself the word Gospel means good news. 

II. Four forms of the Gospel are to be distinguished: 

(1) The Gospel of the kingdom. This is the good news that God purposes to 
set up on the earth, in fulfilment of the Davidic Covenant (2 Sam. 7. 16, and refs.), 
a kingdom, political, spiritual, Israelitish, universal. over which God’s Son, David’s 
heir, shall be King, and which shall be, for one thousand years, the manifestation 
of the righteousness of God in human affairs. See Mt. 3. 2, note. 

Two preachings of this Gospel are mentioned, one past, beginning with the 
ministry of John the Baptist, continued by our Lord and His disciples, and ending with 
the Jewish rejection of the King. The other is yet future (Mt. 24. 14), during the 
great tribulation, and immediately preceding the coming of the King in glory. 

(2) The Gospel of the grace of God. This is the good news that Jesus Christ, 
the rejected King, has died on the cross for the sins of the world, that,He was raised 
from the dead for our justification, and that by Him all that believe are justified 
from all things. This form of the Gospel is described in many ways. It is the 
Gospel ‘“‘of God” (Rom. 1. 1) because it originates in His love; “of Christ” (2 Cor. 
10. 14) because it flows from His sacrifice, and because He is the alone Object of 
Gospel faith; of “the grace of God” (Acts 20. 24) because it saves those whom the 
law curses; of “the glory” (1 Tim. 1. 11; 2 Cor. 4. 4) because it concerns Him who 
is in the glory, and who is bringing the many sons to glory (Heb. 2. 10); of “our 
salvation” (Eph. 1. 13) because it is the “power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth” (Rom. 1. 16); of ‘the uncircumcision” (Gal. 2. 7) because it 
saves wholly apart from forms and ordinances; of ‘‘peace’”’ (Eph. 6. 15) be- 
cause through Christ it makes peace between the sinner and God, and imparts 
inward peace. Z Blo 

(3) The everlasting Gospel (Rev. 14.6). This is to be preached to,.the earth- 
dwellers at the very end of the great tribulation and immediately preceding the 
judgment of the nations (Mt. 25. 31, refs.). It is neither the Gospel of the king- 
dom, nor of grace. Though its burden is judgment, not salvation, it is good news 
to Israel and to those who, during the tribulation, have been saved (Rev. 7. 9-14; 
Lk 21. 28; Psa. 96. 11-13; Isa, 35. 4-10). dong tak 

(4) That which Paul calls, “my Gospel” (Rom. 2. 16, refs.). This is the 
Gospel of the grace of God in its fullest development, but includes the revelation 
of the result of that Gospel in the outcalling of the church, her relationships, posi- 
tion, privileges, and responsibility. It is the distinctive truth of Ephesians and 
Colossians, but interpenetrates all of Paul’s writings. ais 

III. There is “another Gospel’” (Gal. 1. 6; 2 Cor. 11. 4) “which is not another,” 
but a perversion of the Gospel of the grace of God, against which we are warned. 
It has had many seductive forms, but the test is one—it invariably denies the suffi- 
ciency of grace alone to save, keep, and perfect, and mingles with grace some kind 
of human merit. In Galatia it was law, in Colosse fanaticism (Col, 2. 18, etc.). 
In any form its teachers le under the awful anathema of God. 


1343 


14 8] REVELATION. 

c al hich had °¢ 

God, and give glory to him; for the! A.D. 96.  |from the altar, which had ‘power 

hour of his judgment is come: and over fire; and cried with a loud cry te 

worship hina that made heaven, and|* Hebel him that had thesharpsickle, saying, 
earth, and the sea, and the foun-|} which made. Thrustin thy sharp sickle, and gather 

tains of waters. é hort the clusters of the vine of the earth; 

Chee ig. |for her grapes are “fully ripe. oo 

The fall of Babylon announced. e Cf.Isa.66. 19 And the angel thrust in his 
8 And there followed another aera me sickle into the earth, and gathered 
Sangel, saying, Babyion is fallen, es f Gekenie: the vine of the earth, and cast it 

dae ee great Sans eee aed € cf Mk.9.48. ee cee winepress of the 

made all nations drin te) 1€ W1Ne) g Contra, wrath of God. 

of the wrath of her fornication. |, Rev#8, ~ | 99 And the *winepress was trod- 


The doom of the Beast-worship-| .* 


pers announced. 


9 And the third ¢angel followed 
them, saying with a loud voice, If 
any man worship the beast and his 
image, and receive his mark in his 
forehead, or in his hand, 

10 The same shall ‘drink of the 
wine of the wrath of God, which is 
poured out without mixture into the 
cupof his indignation;and heshallbe 
¢tormented with fire and brimstone 
in the ‘presence of the holy ¢angels, 
and in the presence of the Lamb: 

11 And the smoke of their tor- 
tment ascendeth up /ffor ever and 
ever; and they have £no rest day 
nor night, who worship the beast 
and his image, and whosoever re- 
ceiveth the mark of his name. 

12 Here is the patience of the 
saints: *here are they that keep 
the ‘commandments of God, and 
the faith of Jesus. 


The blessedness of the holy dead. 


13 And I heard a voice from 
heaven saying unto me, JWrite, 
kBlessed are the dead which die in 
the Lord from henceforth: Yea, 
saith the ‘Spirit, that they may 
test from their labours; and their 
works do follow them, 


Vision of Armageddon. 


14 And I looked, and behold a 
white cloud, and upon the cloud 
one sat "like unto the Son of man, 
having on his head a °golden crown, 
and in his hand a Psharp sickle. 

15 And another ¢angel came out 
of the temple, crying with a loud 
voice to him that sat on the cloud, 
Thrust in thy sickle, and reap: %for 
the time is come for thee to reap; 
for the harvest of the earth is Tipe. 

16 And he-that sat on the cloud 
thrust in his sickle on the earth; 
and the Searth was reaped. 

17 And another ¢angel came out 
of the temple which is in heaven, he 
also having a sharp sickle. 

18 And another @angel came out 


Moses). Gal. 
3.1-29. (Ex. 
19.1; Gal.3. 
1-24.) 

j Inspiration. 

‘ev.19.9. 

(Ex.4.15; 
Rev.22.19.) 

& Contra, 
1 Cor.15.51; 
cf.Phil.1.23. 

l Holy Spirit. 
Rev.17.3. 
(Mt.1.18; 
Acts 2.4.) 

m with them. 
n Cf.Mt.26.64; 
Contra, 1 

Thes.4.16,17. 
o Cf.Rev.19.12. 

> Cf.Mk.4.29, 
q Cf. Jer.51.33. 
r dried. 


2.7-12. 

v Cf.Rev.19. 
15; cf.Isa. 
63.1-6. 

w One furlong 
= 582 ft. 

x Heb.1.4, 
note. 

»¥ plagues, the 
fast. 

2 completed. 

a Cf.Rev.4.6. 

6 Cf.1 Pet.1.7. 

c Cf.Rev.12.11. 

d and over the 
number of 
his name. 

e Cf.Rev.5.8; 
ef.Psa.150.3. 

f Cf.Ex.15.1. 

g Cf.Psa.22.22. 

h Deut.32.3,4; 
Psa.92.5; 
Rom.11.33. 

i Rev.16.7. 

j Or, ages. 

k Rev.4.8. 

! righteous 
acts. 

m Cf.Rev.11.19 

n Cf.Rev 19, 
8,14. 

o Cf.Rev.1.13, 

p living 
creatures. 

q Cf.Rev.14.10; 
ef, Jer.25.15. 

r Ex.40 34, 

35; Isa.6,4; 
1 Ki.8.10,11, 


1344 


den without the city, and blood 
came out of the winepress, even 
unto the horse bridles, by the space 
of a thousand and six hundred “fur- 


longs. 
CHAPTER 15. 
The seven vials (to Rev. 16. 21). 


(1) Vision of the angels of the 
seven last plagues: the bowls 
of the wrath of God. 


foes I saw another sign in hea- 
ven, great and marvellous, 
seven *angels having the seven 
Ylast plagues; for in them is 2filled 
up the wrath of God. 

2 And I saw as it were a “sea of 
glass mingled with ‘fre: and them 
that had gotten the ‘victory over 
the beast, and over his image, ¢and 
over his mark, and over the num- 
ber of hisname, stand on the sea of 


-|glass, having the ¢harps of God. 


3 And they sing the fsong of 
Moses the servant of God, and the 
song of the ’Lamb, saying, “Great 
and marvellous are thy works, 
Lord God Almighty; ‘just and true 
are thy ways, thou King of Jsaints. 

4 Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, 
and glorify thy name? for thou 
only art ‘holy: for all nations shall 
come and worship before thee; for 
thy ‘judgments are made manifest. 

5 And after that I looked, and, 
behold, the “temple of the taber- 
nacle of the testimony in heaven 
was opened: 

6 And the seven *angels came out 
of the temple, having the seven 
plagues, “clothed in pure and white 
linen, and having their breasts 
°girded with golden girdles. 

7 And one of the four beasts gave 
unto the seven “angels seven golden 
vials full of the ¢wrath of God, who 
liveth for ever and ever, 

8 And the temple was “filled with 
smoke from the glory of God, and 
from his power; and no man was 
able to enter into the temple, till 
the seven plagues’ of the seven 
*angels were fulfilled. 


[158 


| 


- 
- 


16 1] 


REVELATION. 


[16 21 


CHAPTER 16. 


(2) The vials of the wrath of God 
upon the earth. 


ND I heard a great voice out of 
the temple saying to the seven 
@angels, Go your ways, and pour 
out the °vials of the wrath of God 

_upon the earth. 


The first vial. 

2 And the ‘first went, and poured 
out his vial upon the earth; and 
there fell a noisome and grievous 
dsore upon the men which had the 
mark of the beast, and upon them 

-which worshipped his image. 


The second vial. 

3 And the ¢second @angel poured 
out his vial upon the ‘sea; and it 
became as the blood of a dead 
man: and every living soul died in 
the sea. 

The third vial. 

4 And the /third ¢angel poured 
out his vial upon the ‘rivers and 
fountains of waters; and they be- 
came blood. 

5 And I héard the angel of the 
waters say, Thou art Jrighteous, O 
Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt 
be, because thou hast judged thus. 

6 For they have “shed the blood 
of saints and prophets, and thou 
hast given them blood to drink; for 
they are ‘worthy. 

7 And I heard “another out of the 
altar say, Even so, Lord God Al- 
mighty, true and righteous are thy 
judgments. 

The fourth vial. 

8 And the “fourth ¢angel poured| 
out his vial upon the °sun; and 
?Ppower was given unto him to 
scorch men with fire. 

9 And men were scorched with 
great heat, and blasphemed the 
name of God,“whith hath power 
over these plagues: and they re- 
pented not to give him glory. 

The fifth vial. 

10 And the “fifth “angel poured 
out his vial upon the ‘seat of the 
beast; and his kingdom ‘was full of 
darkness; and they gnawed their 
tongues for pain, 


A.D. 96. 


11 And blasphemed the “God of 


-|heaven because of their pains and 


@ Heb.1.4, note. 
® Lit. bowls. 
¢ Cf.Rev.6.1; 8.7. 


¢ Cf.Ex.9.9-i1; 
ef.isa.1.6. 


e Cf, Rev.6.3,4; 
cf.Rev.8.8,9. 


F Cf. Rev.17.15. 
9 blood as of 2. 


A Cf. Rev.6.5,6; 
ci.Rev.8.10,11. 


+ Cf.Ex.7.17-21. 
3 Cf.Rom.3.3-6. 


k Cf. Rev. 18.24; 
cf.Mt.23,35. 


! Contra, Rev.5.12. 
m the altar say. 


n Cf. Rev.6.7,8; 
cf.Rev.8.12, 


© Contra, Mal.4.2. 
P it was given to it. 


@who had author- 


ily. 

7 Cf.Rev.6.9-11; 
91-11. 

® throne. 


t became dark- 
ened. 


u Dan.2.18. 


v Repentance. 
vs 9.11; (Mt.3, 
2; Acts 17.30.) 


w Heb.1.4, nole. 

z Rev,9.14. 

v Isa.41.2,25; 44.27. 

z Ex.8.1-6; 1 Tim. 
4.1; 1 John 4.1-3. 

@ Antichrist, Rev. 
19.20. (1 John 2. 


18; Rev.13,11-17.) 


b demons. 

¢ signs. 

d Times of the 
Gentiles. Rev. 
16.19. (Lk.21.24; 
Rev.16.19.) 

eoikoumene_ in- 
habited earth. 
(Lk.2.1.) 

Ft Armageddon 
(battle of). Isa. 
10.27-34. (Rev. 
16.14; 19.11-21.) 

9 Christ (Second 
Advent). Rev. 
19.11-21. (Deut. 
30.3; Acts 1.9-11.) 

hi.e. Mount of 
Slaughter. 

4 upon. 

9 Day (of Je- 
hovah). vs.\2-17; 
Rev.19.11-21. 
(Isa.2.10-22; Rev. 
19.11-21.) 


& Rev.11.19. 

¢Rev,6.12; 11.13, 

m Times of the 
Gentiles. (Lk. 
21,24.) 

nSee Isa.13.1,nofe. 

0 Isa.51.21-23; 
Rev.14.10; 18.5. 

P Rev 6.14, 


‘their sores, and "repented not of 


their deeds. 
The sixth vial. 


12 And the sixth Yangel poured 
out his vial “upon the great river 
Euphrates; and the water thereof 
was dried up, that the ‘way of the 
kings of the east might be prepared. 


(Parent hetical, vs. 13-16.) 


13 And I saw three unclean 
Zspirits like frogs come out of the 
mouth of the dragon, and out of 
the mouth. of the beast, and out of 


the mouth of the @false prophet. 

14 For they are the spirits of° 
bdevils, working ‘miracles, which 
go forth unto the ¢kings of the 
earth and of the whole ¢world, to 
gather them to the Sbattle of that 
great day of God Almighty. 

15 Behold, 81 come as a thief. 
Blessed is he that watcheth, and 
keepeth his garments, lest.he walk 
naked, and they see his shame. 

16 And he gathered them together 
into a place called in the Hebrew 
tongue “Armageddon. 


The seventh vial. 


17 And the seventh “angel poured 
out his vial ‘into the air; and there 


came a great voice out of the temple 
of heaven, from the throne, saying, 
JIt is done. 

18 And there were voices, and 
thunders, and lightnings; and there 
was a great ‘earthquake, such as 
was not since men were upon the 
earth, so mighty an earthquake, 
and so great. 

19 And the great city was divided 
into three parts, and the cities of 
the nations fell: and great !"Baby- 
lon came in remembrance before 
God, to give unto her °the cup of 
the wine of the fierceness of his 
wrath. 

20 And every ?island fled away, 
and the mountains were not found. 

21 And there fell upon men a 
great hail out of heaven, every stone 
about the weight of a talent: and 
men blasphemed God because of 
the plague of the hail; for the plague 
thereof was exceeding great. 


iSummary: The Times of the Gentiles is that long period beginning with the 


Babylonian captivity of 


end by the destruction of Gentile worl 
(Dan. 2. 34, 35, 44), i.e. the coming of the 


which time Jerusalem is politically 


Judah, under Nebuchadnezzar, ) 
d-power by the “‘stone cut out without hands” 
Lord in glory (Rev. 19. 11, 
Gentile rule (Lk. 21. 24). 


subject to 
1345 


and to be brought to an 


21), until 


171] 


REVELATION. 


[18 2 


CHAPTER 17. 

The seven dooms: (1) The doom 

of “Babylon.” 

The divine view of “‘Babylon.” 

(Cf. Rev. 18. 1-8.) 

ND there came one of the seven 

Zangels which had the seven 

vials, and talked with me, saying 

unto me, Come hither; I will shew 

unto thee the judgment of the 

‘great whore that. sitteth upon 
many waters: 

2 With whom the ‘kings of the 
earth have committed fornication, 
and the inhabitants of the earth 
have been made drunk with the 
wine of her fornication. 

3 So he carried me away in the 
dspiritinto the wilderness: andI saw 
a woman sit upon a éscarlet coloured 
beast, full of ‘names of blasphemy, 
having seven heads and ten horns. 

4 And thé woman was “arrayed 
in purple and scarlet colour, and 
decked with gold and precious 
stones and pearls, having a “golden 
cup in her hand full of abominations 
and filthiness of her fornication: 


5 And upon her forehead was a 
BAC PaIRE written, MYSPERY “BABY. 
*\ LON THE GREAT, THE MOTH- 


ER OF HARLOTS AND ABOM- 
INATIONS OF THE EARTH. 

6 And J saw the woman drunken 
Rwith the blood of the saints, and 
with the blood of the martyrs of 
Jesus: and when I saw her, I won- 
dered with great ‘admiration. 

7 And the angel said unto me, 
Wherefore didst thou marvel? I 


* «woman, and of the beast that car- 


Bis ie tell thee the “aysters of the 


rieth her, which hath the seven 
heads and ten horns. 

The last form of Gentile world- 
power. 

8 The beast that thou sawest was, 

and is not; and shall ascend out 

of the “bottomless pit, and go into 


perdition: and they that dwell on|i 


the earth °shall wonder, whose 
names were not written in the book 
of ?life from the foundation of the 
%world, when they behold the beast 
*that was, and is not, and ‘yet is. 


A.D. 96. _ 


a Heb.1.4, 
note. 

6 Nah.3.4; 
Rev.19.2. 

c Rev.18.3,9. 

@ Holy Spirit. 
Rev.21.10. 


g Rev.18.16. 

hk Rev.18.6. 

#4 Mt.13.11, 
note. 

j See Isa.13.1, 


m is about to. 
nm abyss. 

o Rev.13.3. 

Db Life (eter- 


r that if was. 

Ss shall be, 

¢ Rev.13.18. 

# Rev.i3.1. 

v Rey.13.5. 

w Rev.13.1,3. 

x authority. 

y Rev.19.19; 
16.14. 


z Rev.19.20; cf. 
2 Thes.2.8,9. 
a@ Rev.19.16; 
ef.1 Tim.6,15. 
6 Election 
(personal). 
2 Petil.2. 
(Deut.7.6; 
1 Pet.1.2.) 
¢ Cf.Rev.13.1; 
cf.Dan.7.2 
with F'sa.2.1. 


| Ki.9.30-37. 


f Cf.Lev.21.9 
with Jas.4.4. 
g Cf.Rev.18. 


9 And there is the mind which 
hath wisdom. “The seven heads 
are seven mountains, on which the 
woman sitteth. 

10 And there are seven kings: five 
are fallen, and one is, and the other 
is not yet come; and when he com- 
eth, he must "continue a short space. 

11 And the “beast that was, and is 
not, even he is the eighth, and is of 
the seven, and goeth into perdition, 

12 And the ten horns which thou 
sawest are ten kings, which have 
received no kingdom as yet; but 
receive *power as kings one hour 
with the beast. 

13 These have one mind, and 
shall give their power and “strength 
unto the beast. 

14 These shall make war with 
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall 
Zovercome them: for he is *Lord of 


_jlords, and King of kings: and they 


that are with him are called, and 
’chosen, and. faithful. 

1S And he saith unto me, The 
“waters which thou sawest, where 
the whore sitteth, are peoples, and 
multitudes, and nations, and 
tongues. 

16 And the ten horns which thou 
sawest “upon the beast, these shall 
ehate the whore, and shall make her 
desolate and naked, and shall eat 
her flesh, and Sburn her with fire. 

17 For God hath put in their 
hearts to fulfil shis will, and to 
agree, and git ir kingdom unto 
the beast, until the words of God 
shall be fulfilled. 

18 And the woman which thou 
sawest is /that great city, which 
reigneth over the kings of the earth. 


CHAPTER 18. 


| The last form of apostate Chris- 
| \tendom: the warning to God’s 
people, ‘ 


: AND after these things I saw 


another ‘angel come down 
from heaven, having great *power: 
and the earth was lightened with 
his glory. 
2 And he cried: mightily with a 
strong voice, saying, 1Babylon the 


1 Babylon, “confusion,” is repeatedly used by the prophets in a symbolic sense 


(see Isa. 13. 1, note), 


and political Babylon, 
Gentile world-dominion. 


sa. | Two “Babylons”’ 
ecclesiastical Babylon, which is apostate 


are to 


_be distinguished in the Revelation: 


ch is Christendom, headed up under the Papacy; 
which is the Beast’s confederated empire, the last form of 
Ecclesiastical Babylon is ‘‘the great whore’? 


(Rev. 17. 1), 


and is destroyed by political Babylon (Rev. 17. 15-18), that the beast may be the 


alone object of worship (2 Thes. 2. 3, 4; Rev. 13. 15). 
is destroyed by the return of the Lord in glory. 


1346 


The power of political Babylon 
(See: “Armageddon,” Rev. 16, 


18 3] 


REVELATION. 


[18 23 


great is fallen, is fallen, and is be- 
come the habitation of ¢devils, and 
thehold of every foulspirit,andacage 
of every unclean and hateful bird. 


3 For all nations have ’drunk of| 


the wine of the wrath of her forni- 
cation, and the kings of the earth 
have committed fornication with 
her, and the ‘merchants of the earth 
are waxed rich through the ¢abun- 
dance of her delicacies. 

4 And I heard ¢another voice from 
heaven, saying, fCome out of her, 
my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and that ye receive not 
of her plagues. 

5 For her Ssins have reached unto 
heaven, and. God hath remembered 
her iniquities. i 

6 *Reward her even as she ‘re- 
warded you, and double unto her 


A.D. 96. 


a demons 

6 Rev.17.4. 

c vs.11,12. 

d power of her 
fuxury. 

e Cf.Rev.16.7. 

f Separation. 
2 Cor.6.14-17, 
(Gen.12.1; 2 
Cor.6.14-17.) 

g Sin. Rom. 
3.23, note. 

h Render fo. 

i hath ren- 
dered. 

j luxuriously. 

k Cf.1sa.47.7,8. 

1 Cf. Jer.50.34; 
cf.Heb.10.31 


13 And cinnamon, and odours, 
and ointments, and frankincense, 
and wine, and oil, and fine flour, 
and wheat, and "beasts, and sheep, 
and horses, and chariots, and 
Sslaves, and sculs of men. 

14 And the fruits that thy soul 
lusteth after are ‘departed from thee, 
and all things which were dainty and 
goodly are departed from thee, and 
“thou shalt find them no more at ail. 

1S The merchants of these things, 
which were made rich by her, shall 
"stand afar off for the fear of her 
torment, weeping and wailing, 

16 And saying, *Alas, alas *that 
great city, that was clothed in fine 
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and 
decked with gold, and precious 
stones, and pearls! 

17 For in Yone hour so grcat riches 


double according to her_works: in| m c¢.Jer.so.46. |is come to nought. And every ship- 


the cup which she hath filled fill to 
her double. 

7 How muchshe hath glorified her- 
self, and lived /deliciously, so much 
torment and sorrow give her: for she 
saith in her heart. I sit a “queen, and 
am no widow, and shallseeno sorrow. 

8 Therefore shall her plagues 
come in one day, death, and mourn- 
ing, and famine; and she shall be 
utterly burned with fire: for ‘strong 


is the Lord God who judgeth her. 


The Auman view of “‘Babylon.” 
(Cf. Rev. 17. 1-7.) 


9 And the kings of the earth, who 
have committed fornication and 
lived Jdeliciously with her, “shall be- 
wail her, and lament for her, when 
they shall see the smoke of her 
burning, 

10 Standingafar off for the fear of 
her torment, saying, “Alas, alas, that 
great city°Babylon,that mighty city! 
forinonehouristhy judgmentcome. 


n Woe, woe. | 


o See Isa.13, 
1, note. 


P v3.3,15. 


master, and Zall the company in 
ships, and sailors, and as many as 
trade by sea, stood afar off, E 

18 And cried when they saw the 


q every article.|smoke of her burning, saying, What 


r cattle. 
5 bodies. 


icity 18 like unto this great city! 


19 And they cast ¢dust on their 


t Cf.Rev.17.16,|heads, and cried, weeping and wail- 


uw they shall. 

v vs.10,17. 

w Wee, woe. 

x the. Rev.17. 
18, 


y vs.10,19. 


Zz every voy- 
ager. 


a Cf.1 Sam.4, 
125 


b Woe, woe. 

c Cf. Jer.51.48; 
cf.Isa.44.23; 
Rev,.12.12. 

d saints and 
apostles. 

e judged your 
judgment 
upon her. 


11 And the *merchants of the] /Rev.10.1. 
earth shall weep and mourn over}¢Cf.Jer.51. 


her; for no man buyeth their mer- 
chandise any more: 

12 The merchandise of gold, and 
silver, an: 
pearls, and fine linen, and pur- 
ple, and silk, and scarlet, and all 
thyine wood, and ¢all manner ves- 
sels of ivory, and all manner vessels 
of most precious wood, and of brass, 
and iron, and marble, 


h Cf.Isa.24.8; 
contra, Rev. 
14.1-3. 


precicus stones, and of) ; efri.17.28. 


j Cf. Jer,.25,10. 
k lamp. 
LCF Jer.16.9. 


144; 19. 17.) The notion of a literal Bab 
Babylon is in conflict with Isa. 13. 19-22. 
16, 18) seems beyond question to identify “Babylon,” the ‘ 
traffic, with “Babylon” the ecclesiastical centre, viz. 


ing, saying, Alas, alas that great 
city, wherein were made rich all 
that had ships in the sea by reason 
of her costliness! for in one hour 
is she made desolate. 


The angelic view of Babylon.” 
(Cf. Rev. 17. 1-7; 18. 1-8.) 


20 “Rejoice over her,thou heaven, 
and ye “holy apostles and prophets; 
for God hath “avenged you on her. 

21 And a/mighty angel took up a 
stone like a great &millstone, and 


‘cast it into the sea, saying, Thus 


with violence shall that great city 
Babylon be thrown down, and shall 
be found no more at all. 

22 And the “voice of harpers, and 
musicians, and of pipers, and 
trumpeters, shali be heard no more 
at all in thee; and no ‘craftsman, of 
whatsoever craft he be, shall be 
found any more in thee; and the 
jsound of a millstone shall be heard 
no more at all in thee; 

23 And the light of a *candle shall 
shine no more at allin thee; and the 
voice of the bridegroom and of the 
bride shali be heard no more at all 


ylon to be rebuilt on the site of ancient 
But the language of Rev. 18. (e.g. vs. 10, 


‘city’’ of luxury and 


Rome. The very kings who 


hate ecclesiastical Babylon deplore the destruction of commercial Babylon. 


1347 


18 24] 


REVELATION. 


[19 17 


in thee: for thy merchants were the 
great men of the earth; for by thy 
Ssorceries were all nations deceived. 

24 And in her was found the 
bblood of prophets, and of saints, and 
of all that were slain upon the earth. 


CHAPTER 19. 


(Parenthetical: the four allelu- 
ias of the Slorified saints. Cf. 
Rev. 17. 1-7; 18. 1-8.) 

AY. after these things I heard a 

great “voice of much people in 
heaven, saying, Alleluia; ¢Salva- 
tion, and glory, and ¢honour, and 
power, unto the Lord our God: 

2 For true and righteous are his 
judgments: for he hath judged the 
great fwhore, which did corrupt the 
earth with her fornication, and hath 
gavenged the blood of his servants 
at her hand. 

3 And again they said, *Alleluia. 
And her ‘smoke rose up for ever 
and ever. F 

4 And the four and twenty Jelders 
and the four *beasts fell down and 
worshipped God that sat on the 
throne, saying, Amen; Alleluia. 

5 And a ‘voice came out of the 
throne, saying, ™Praise our God, all 
ye his servants, and ye that fear 
him, both small and great. 

6 And I heard as it were the voice 
of a great multitude, and as the 
voice of many waters, and as the 
voice of mighty “thunderings, say- 
‘ing, Alleluia: for the Lord God 
omnipotent reigneth. 


The marriage of the Lamb. 


7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and 
give honour to him: for the mar- 
riage of the Lamb is come, and his 
lowife hath made herself ready. 

8 And to her was granted that 
she should be arrayed in fine linen, 
clean and white: for the fine linen 
is the 24righteousness of saints. 


A.D. 96. 


@ Cf.Nah.3.4. 
 Rev.17.6. 
¢ Rev.18.20; 11.15. 


d the salvation. 
See Rom.1.16, 
note. 


€ power of our 
God. 


F Rev.17.1. 


9 Cf.Rev.6.10; 
cf.Lk.18.7,8. 


v.1, 
#Cf. Rev. 18.9, 19; 
cf.Mk.9.48, 
J Elders. Tit.1.5-9. 
k living creatures. 
' Cf. Rev.18.4. 
m Ct.Psa.134.1. 
nm Cfi.Ex.20.18. 


© Bride (of Christ). 
vs.6-8; Rev.21.9. 
Qohn 3.28; Rev. 
19.6-8.) 


D Cf.1 Cor.15.10. 


@ righteousnesses. 
Righteousness 


r Cf.Lk. 14.15. 


8 Inspiration. 
Rev.21.5. (Ex.4, 
15; Rev.22.19.) 


t Cf.Heb.1.14. 


« Cf.Eph.1.9,10; 
cf.1 Pet.1.10-12. 


» Contre, Rev.6.2; 
cf.Psa.45.4; con- 
tra, Mt.21.2-5. 


w Christ (Second 
Advent). vs,11- 
21; Rev.20.4-6, 
(Deut.30,3; Acts 
1.9-11.) 

= Cf.Rev.3.7. 

v Rev.1.14, 

2 diadems. 


@ Cf.vs.13,16; 
cf, Mt.11.27; 
ef.1 Tim.6.16, 


6 C£.Isa.63.2,3. 


¢ev.21; cf.Rev.1. 
16; cf.2 Thes.2.8. 


¢ Rev,14.20; Isa.63. 
3,6; cf. Mt.21.44, 


¢ Rev. 17.14; 1.5, 
¥ mid-heaven. 


‘ 


. 9 And he saith unto me, Write, 
rBlessed are they which are called 
unto the marriage supper of the 
Lamb. And he saith unto me, 
sThese are the true sayings of God. 
10 And I fell at his feet to worship 
him. And he said unto me, See 
thou do it not: I am thy 4fellow- 
servant, and of thy brethren that 
have the testimony of Jesus: wor- 
ship God: for the “testimony of 
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. 


The second coming of Christ in 
Slory. (Cf. Mt. 24. 16-30.) 


11 And I 8saw heaven opened, and 
behold a “white horse; and whe 
that sat upon him was called *Faith- 
ful and True, and in righteousness 

e doth judge and make war. 

12 His Yeyes were as a flame of 
fire, and on his head were many 


crowns; and he had aname written, 


*that no man knew, but he himself, 

13 And he was clothed with a ves- 
ture °dipped in blood: and his name 
is called The Word of God. 

14 And the armies which were in 
heaven followed him upon white 
horses, clothed in fine linen, white 
and clean. 

15 And out of his mouth goeth 
a ‘sharp sword, that with it he 
should smite the nations: and he 
shall rule them with a rod of iron: 
and ¢he treadeth the winepress of 
the fierceness and wrath of Al- 
mighty God. 

16 And he hath on his vesture 
and on his thigh a name written, 
‘KING OF KINGS, AND LORD 
OF LORDS. 


The battle of Armageddon (Rev. 
16. 14; 19. 17, note). 


17 And I saw an angel standing in 
the sun; and he cried with a loud 
voice, saying to all the fowls that fly 
in ‘the midst of heaven, #Come and 


1 The “Lamb’s wife” here is the “bride” 

“heavenly Jerusalem’ (Heb. 12. 22, 
adulterous and repudiated ‘“‘wife”’ 
1-10; Hos. 2. 1-17), who is identified with the earth ( 
restored wife could not be called either a 


with the 
Israel, the 


2 The garment in Scripture is a symbol of 


sense it symbolizes self-righteousness (e.g. 


a moral and religious man under 


See Rom. 3. 21, note. 


virgin (2 Cor. 11. 2, 3), 


(Rev. 21. 9), the Church, identified 


23), and to be distinguished from 


of Jehovah, yet to be restored (Isa. 54. 


Hos. 2. 23). A forgiven and 


or a bride. 


righteousness. In the bad ethical 


Isa. 64. 6; see Phil. 3. 6-8, the best that 
law could do). 
garment symbolizes ‘‘the righteousness of God . 


In the good ethical sense the 
+ « upon all them that believe.” 


3 The vision is of the departure from heaven of Christ and the saints and angels 
preparatory to the catastrophe in which Gentile world-power, headed up in the 


Beast, is smitten by the “stone cut out without hands” 
4 Armageddon (the ancient hill and valley of Megiddo, 


(Dan. 2. 34, 35). 
west of Jordan in the plain 


of Jezreel) is the appointed place for the beginning of the great battle in which the 


1348 


: 


: 


19 18] 


‘REVELATION. 


[20 4 


gather yourselves together unto the 
2supper of the great God; 

18 That ye may “eat the flesh of 
kings, and the flesh of captains, 
and the flesh of mighty men, and 
the flesh of horses, and of them 
that sit on them, and the flesh of 
all men, both free and bond, both 
small and great. 

19 t yeast, and the 
kings of the earth, and their armies, 
gathered together to !¢make war 
against him that sat on the horse, 
and against his army. 


(2) Doom of the Beast, (3) and 
of the False Prophet. 


which he decei : d 


a 
r he mark of the beast, and 
I t sisepoes S image. 
iebese bot! were cast alive into ‘a 
€ 0 with brim 


lak burning stone. 


A.D. 96. 


@ great supper of 
God. 


6 Cf. Dan.7.5; 
ef. Ezk.32.21-31, 

¢ The Beast. vs.19, 
20. (Dan.7.8.) 

@ Armageddon 
(battle of). Rev. 
16.14; 19.17, note. 

e Antichrist. Rev. 
13,11-17. G John 
2.18; Rev.13.11- 
17.) 


f signs. 

g Rev, 13.12,15. 

h Day (of destruc- 
tion). vs.19,20; 
Rev.20.11-15. 
Qob 21.30; Rev. 
20.11-15.) 

i the. 

3 Kingdom. 
(N.T.). vs.11-21; 
Rev.20.1-15. (Lk. 
ert 1 Cor. 15. 


k Day (of Je- 
hovah). vs.11-21. 
(Isa.2.10-22.) 


(4) Doom of the kings, 


21 And the remnant were slain 
with the sword of Jhim that sat 


l Satan. vs.2,7,10. 
Gen.3.1.) 


my.8; 2 Cor.4.4. 


upon the horse, which swwrd pro- 
ceeded out of his mouth: “and all 
the fowls were filled with their flesh. 


CHAPTER 20. 


Satan bound in the abyss during 
the kingdom-aége. 
PAehD I saw an angel come down 

from heaven, having the key 
of the bottomless pit and a great 
chain in his hand. 

2 And he laid hold on the dragon, 
that old serpent, which is the 
Devil, and ‘Satan, and bound him 
a %thousand years, 

3 And cast him into the bottom- 
less pit, and shut him up, and set 
a seal upon him, that he should 
mdeceive the nations no more, till 
the thousand years should be ful- 
filled: and after that he must be 
loosed a little season. 


The first resurrection (1 Cor. 15. 
52, note), and the kingdom-aége. 


4 And I saw thrones, and they sat 
upon them, and judgment was given 
unto them: and J saw the souls of 


Lord, at His coming in glory, will deliver the Jewish remnant besieged by the Gen- 
tile world-powers under the Beast and False Prophet (Rev. 16. 13-16; Zech. 12. 
1-9). Apparently the besieging hosts, whose approach to Jerusalem is described in 
Isa. 10. 28-32, alarmed by the signs which precede the Lord’s coming (Mt. 24. 29, 
30), have fallen back to Megiddo, after the events of Zech. 14. 2, where their de- 
struction begins; a destruction consummated in Moab and the plains of Idumea 
(Isa. 63. 1-6). This battle is the first event in “the day of Jehovah” (Isa. 2. 12, 
refs.), and is the fulfilment of the smiting-stone prophecy of Dan. 2. 35. 

1 The day of Jehovah (called, also, “that day,” and “the great day’’) is that 
lengthened period of time beginning with the return of the Lord in glory, and ending 
with the purgation of the heavens and the earth by fire preparatory to the new 
heavens and the new earth (Isa. 65. 17-19; 66. 22; 2 Pet. 3. 13; Rev. 21.1). The 
order of events appears to be: (1) The return of the Lord in glory (Mt. 24. 29, 30); 
(2) the destruction of the Beast and his host, “the kings of the earth and their 
armies,’’ and the false prophet, which is the “great and terrible” aspect of the day 
(Rev. 19. 11-21); (3) the judgment of the nations (Zech. 14. 1-9; Mt. 25. 31-46); 
(4) the thousand years, i.e. the kingdom-age (Rev. 20. 4-6); (5) the Satanic revolt 
and its end (Rev. 20. 7-10); (6) the second resurrection and final judgment (Rev. 
20. 11-15); and (7) the “day of God,” earth purged by fire (2 Pet. 3. 10-13). 

The day of the LorpD is preceded by seven signs: (1) The sending of Elijah 
(Mal. 4. 5; Rey. 11. 3-6); (2) cosmical disturbances (Joel 2. 1-12; Mt. 24. 29; Acts 
2. 19, 20; Rev. 6. 12-17); (3) the insensibility of the professing church (1 Thes. 5. 1-3); 
4) the apostasy of the professing church, then become “‘Laodicea”’ (2 Thes. 2. 3); 
5) the rapture of the true church (1 Thes. 4. 17); (6) the manifestation of the “man 
of sin,” the Beast (2 Thes. 2. 1-8); (7) the apocalyptic judgments (Rev. 11.-18.). 

2 The Beast, Summary: This ‘“‘Beast” is the “little horn” of Dan. 7. 24-26, and 
“desolator’” of Dan. 9. 27; the “abomination of desolation” of Mt. 24. 15; the “man 
of sin” of 2 Thes. 2. 4-8; earth’s last and most awful tyrant, Satan’s fell instrument of 
wrath and hatred against God and the Jewish saints. He is, perhaps, identical with 
the rider on the white horse of Rev. 6. 2, who begins by the peaceful conquest of 
three of the ten kingdoms into which the former Roman empire will then be di- 
vided, but who soon establishes the ecclesiastical and governmental tyranny de- 
scribed in Dan. 7., 9., 11.; Rey. 13. To‘him Satan gives the power which he offered 
to Christ (Mt. 4. 8, 9; Rev. 13. 4). See “The great tribulation,” Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 
7. 14, note, ’ 

3 The duration of the kingdom of heaven in its mediatorial form (1 Cor.15. 24, note). 


1349 


all 


20 3] “REVELATION. {20 11 
“them that were beheaded for the| A.D. 96. |ters of the earth, ‘Gog and Magog, 


witness of Jesus, and for the word ~~|to gather them together to Jbattie: 
of God, and which had not !wor- the number of whom 1s as the sand 
shipped the beast, neither his im-|«Remnan:. Rom.|of the sea. 

age, neither had received his mark] Ro23{'3) | 9 And they went up on the 


upon their foreheads, or in their)» rev.13.15-17; 14, |breadth of the earth, and compassed 
hands; and they lived and ‘reigned| %™: the camp of the saints about, and 
with Christ a thousand years. © Cnrist (Second. Ithe beloved city: and fire came 

5 But the he = os aed lived) BOE ERDAS ae ects out of heaven, and 
not again until the thousand years), pécinocion, | |devour em. 
were finished. This is the lfirst| ¥s.4.5; 1 Cor.15, (6) The di f Sat 
Gem trection. 1-52. ob 19.25: (6) e doom of Satan. 

6 Blessed and holy zs he that hath}e Rev.14.13. 10 And the #4devil that deeeived 
part in the first resurrection: on|/Rev.1.6. them was-cast into the lake of fire 
such the second death hath no|?Jehovar. Isa.61. |and brimstone, ‘where the beast 
power, but they shali be ‘priests of}, ,'3, and the false ,prophet are, and 
’God and of Christ, and shall reign] : £2%.38,2, nore. |shall be tormented day and night 


with him a thousand years. J the war. for ever and ever. 
& Satan. vs.2,7,10. iS 7 
Satan loosed: (5) the doom of} tG3i3"”"”'| (7) Doom of the unbelieving 
Gog and Magog. Sua, dead: the last judgment. 
mthey shall. 

7 And when the thousand years nour HB il “And I saw a 3ogreat white 
are expired, Satan ‘shall be loosed|+ Day of judg. throne, and him that sat on it, from 
out of his prison, ; Tyr (MEI whose face the earth and the 

8 And shall go out to deceive the heaven fled away; and 4there was 
nations which are in the four quar- found no place for them. 


cast into the lake of fire, his final doom. The notion that he reigns j i i 
t Jal BM : gns in hell is Mil- 
tonic, not biblical. He is prince of this pr - But oa 
Oted eter ree 5) present world-system; but will be tor- 
~ The: expressions, “the judgment,” or “day of judgment,” as the passage. 
. 2 i) ’ > . Ss 
their rate pre meee, to the Haire. judgment of Rev. 20..11-15. . SALESS 
ay Of destruction’ is that aspect of the day of Jehovah Isa. 2. 12; Rev. 
19. 19, Summary) which visits final and eternal judgment upon oe ee Three 
1350 


An 


20 12] 

12 And I saw the @dead, small and 
great, stand before God; ‘and the 
books were opened: and another 
¢book was opened, which is the 
book of life: and the dead were 
ljudged out of those things which 
were written in the books, according, 
to their works. | 

13 And the sea gave up the dead 
which were in it; and death and 
thell delivered up the dead which 
were in them: and they were judged 
every man according to their works. 
_14 And death and Shell were cast 
into the lake of fire. &This is the 
2hsecond death. 

15 And ‘whosoever was not found! 
written in the book of ‘life was *cast| 
into the lake of fire. 


CHAPTER 21. 


The seven new things: (1)thenew 
heaven, and (2) the new earth. 
ND I saw a /new heaven and a 
new earth: for the “first heaven 

and the first earth were «passed 
away; and there was no more sea. 

2 And I John saw “the holy city, 
new Jerusalem, coming down from 
God out of heaven, prepared °as a 
bride adorned for her husband. 

(3) The new peoples. 

3 And I heard a great voice out of 
heaven saying, Behold, the taber- 
nacle of God is with men, and he 
will dwell with them, and they shall 
be his people, and God himself shal! 
be with them, and be their God. 


REVELATION. 


[2i 1 


A.D. 96. 


@ Judgments (th 
seven). 2 Sam. 
7.14. 


b the throne, 
¢ Dan.7.10; Mt,12. 
36. 


4k. 10.20; Phil.4.3. 

€ Lk.16.23, note. 

f hades. 

9 Death (the 
second). vs.6,14, 
15; Rev.21,8. 
Qohn 8.21,24; 

ev.21.8.) 

4 second death, 
the lake of fire. 

i Kingdom (N. 
T.). vs.1-15; Rev. 
21.1-6. (Lk.1.31- 
33; 1 Cor.15,24.) 

J Life (eternal). 


Rev.22.19.) 

k Day (of destruc- 
tion). (Job 21. 
3u.) 


12 Pet.3.13; Isa. 
65.17; 66.22. 

m Heb. 12.26,27; 

#2 Pet.3.10-12. 


7 Rev.22.19; vs.10, 
27. 


o Rey. 19.7,8; 
cf. Eph.5.25-27; 
cf.Psa.45,13-15. 

Pp Kingdom(N.T.). 
vs.1-6; 1 Cor.15. 
28. (Lk.1.31-33; 
1 Cor.15,24.) 

@ Inspiration. 
Rev.22.17-19. 
(Ex.4.15; Rev.22. 
19.) 


r Death {the 
second). (John 
8.21.) 

8 Bride (of Christ). 
Rev.19.6-8. 

t Holy Spirit. 
Rev.22.17 (Mt, 
1.18; Acts 2.4.) 


4 And God shall wipe away all 


tears from their eyes; and there 
shall be no more death, neither sor- 
row, nor crying, neither shall there 
be any more pain: for the former 
things are passed away. 

5, And he that sat upon the throne 
said, Behold, I make all things new. 
And he said unto me, Write: ¢for 
these words are true and faithful. 

6 And he said unto me, It is done. 
I am Alpha and Omega, the begin- 
ning and the end. I will give unto 
him that is athirst of the fountain 
of the water of life freely. 

7 He that overcometh shall in- 
herit all things; and I will be his 
God, and he shall be my son. 

'8 But the fearful, and unbeliev-_ 
ing, and the abominable, and mur- 
derers, and whoremongers, and 
sorcerers, and idolaters, and. all 
liars, shall have their part in the 
lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone: which is ‘the “second 
death. 


(4) The Lamb’s wife: the new 
Jerusalem. 


9 And there came unto me one of 
the seven angels which had the 
seven vials full of the seven last 
plagues, and talked with me, say- 
ing, Come hither, I will shew thee 
sthe bride, the Lamb’s wife. 

10 And he carried me away in the 
‘spirit to a great and high moun- 
tain, and shewed me that great 
city, the holy Jerusalem, descending 
out of heaven from God, 

11 Having the glory of God: and 


such ‘“‘days’”’ are included in the ‘‘day”’ of Jehovah, and are described in the refer- 
(See Mt. 25. 32, note; Rev. 20. 11, refs.) 


ences beginning with Isa. 34. 1-9. 
1 The final judgment. 


The subjects are the ‘‘dead.”’ 


As the redeemed were 


raised from among the dead one thousand years before (v. 5), and have been in 
glory with Christ during that period, the ‘‘dead’” can only be the wicked dead, from 


the beginning to the setting up of the great white throne in space. 


As there are 


degrees in punishment (Lk. 12. 47, 48), the dead are judged according to their works. 

The book of life is there to answer such as plead their works for justification, e.g. 

Mt. 7. 22, 23; an awful blank where the name might have been. 4 
The Judgments, Summary: Among the many judgments mentioned in Scrip- 


ture, seven are invested with especial significance. 


These are: (1) The judgment 


of the believers’ sins in the cross of Christ (John 12. 31, note); (2) the believers’ 
self-judgment (1 Cor, 11. 31, note); (3) the judgment of the believers’ works 
(2 Cor. 5. 10, note); (4) the judgment of the nations at the return of Christ (Mt. 
95. 32, note); (5) the judgment of Israel at the return of Christ (Ezk. 20. 37, note); 
(6) the judgment of angels after the one thousand years (Jude 6, note); and (7) the 
judgment of the wicked dead with which the history of the present earth ends. 

2 Second death, Summary: ‘‘The second death” and the ‘“‘lake of fire” are iden- 
tical terms (Rev. 20. 14) and are used of the eternal state of the wicked. It is “‘sec- 
ond” relatively to the preceding physical death of the wicked in unbelief and re- 
jection of God; their eternal state is one of eternal ‘“‘death” (i.e. separation from 
God) in sins (John 8. 21, 24). That the second death is not annihilation is shown 
by a comparison of Rev. 19. 20 with Rev. 20. 10. After one thousand years in the 
lake of fire the Beast and False Prophet are still there, undestroyed. The words 


1351 


21 12] 


her “light was like unto a stone 
most precious, even like a jasper 
stone, clear as crystal; 

12 And had a wall great and 
high, and had twelve gates, and at 
the gates twelve ‘angels, and 
names written thereon, which are 
‘the names of the “twelve tribes of 
the ‘children of Israel: 

13 On the east three gates; on the 
north three gates; on the south three 
gates; and on the west three gates. 

14 And the wall of the city had 
twelve ‘foundations, and in them 
éthe names of the twelve “apostles 
of the Lamb. 

15 And he that talked with me had 
agolden‘reed to measurethecity,and 
the gatesthereof,andthe wallthereof. 

16 And the city lieth Jfoursquare, 
and the length is as large as the 
breadth: and he measured the city 
with the reed, twelve thousand fur- 
longs. The length and the breadth 
and the height of it are equal. 

17 And he measured the wall 
thereof, an hundred and forty and 
four cubits, according to the meas- 
ure of a man, that is, of the “angel. 

18 And the building of the wall of 
it was of jasper: and the city was 
‘pure gold, like unto clear glass. 

19 And the foundations of the 
wall of the city were garnished with 
all manner of precious stones. The 
first foundation was jasper; the sec- 


REVELATION. 


(22 11 


A.D. 96. 


a brightress. 

6 Heb.1.4,n0te. 

c Israel 
(prophecies). 
Rom.11.1-27. 
(Gen.12.2,3; 
Rom.11.26.) 

d Cf.Ezk.48. 
31-34. 


é sons. 

f Cf.Heb.11.10. 

g twelve 
names. 

h Cf£.Eph.2. 

20, cf.Lk.22. 
29,30. 

+A reed= 
about 10 ft.; 
also v.16. 

j Cf.1 Ki.6.20. 

k One furlong 

= 582 ft. 
1 Cf.2 Chr.3.8. 

m Cf£.Mt.13. 
45,46 with 
Eph.5.25. 

n Rev.22.2; 
cf.Rev.3.4. 

o is the tem- 
ple of it and 
the Lamb. 

p Isa.60.19. 

g lamp. 

r Rom, 1.16, 
note. th 

5 shall walk by 
the light of 
ee 

t unto. 

u Cf.Rev.22.15. 

v he that. 

w they only, 
which. 

x Life (eter- 
nal). vs.6,27; 


ond, sapphire; the third, a chalced-| ¢y723)? 
ceny; the fourth, an emerald; (Mt.7.14; 
20 The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, pee Bae) 
sardius; the seventh, chrysolyte; the|” Rly 5015, 
eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the] = Rev.4.2,3. 
tenth, a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, Geen -Bb.2Y. 
a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.|" Gen3.6'7. 
21 And the twelve gates were|cCf.Zech.14. 
twelve pearls; every several gate} 11; contra, 


was of one pearl: and the "street of|4 


the city was pure gold, as it were 
transparent glass. 
(5) The new temple. 

22 And I saw no temple therein: 
for the Lord God Almighty °and 
the Lamb are the temple of it, 

(6) The new light. 

23 And the city had no need of the 
sun, neither of the moon, to shine in 
it: for the glory of *God did lighten 
it, and the Lamb is the “light thereof, 

24 And the nations of them which 
are ‘saved ‘shall walk in the light 
of it: and the kings of the earth do 
bring their glory and honour 4into it. 


Gen.3.17. 


Isa.60.19. 
# spirits of the 
prophets. 
j Rev.1.1. 
k Heb.10.37. 
1 Heb.1.4, 
note. 
m Cf.Heb.1.14. 
n Contra, Rev. 
10.4; 5.9. 
o Rev.1.3; cf. 
1 Cor.7,29. 
> doeth un- 
| righteously. 
\q do un- 


‘ righteously. 


25 And the gates of it shall not 
be shut at all by day: for there shall 
be no night there. 

26 And they shall bring the glory 
and honour of the nations into it. 

27 And there shall in no wise 
“enter into it any thing that defil- 
eth, neither *whatsoever worketh 
abomination, or maketh a lie: but 
wthey which are written in the 
Lamb’s *book of life. 


CHAPTER 22. 


(7) The new Paradise and its 
river of the water of Iife. 


AND he shewed me %a pure river 
of water of life, clear as crystal, 
proceeding out of the “throne of 
God and of the Lamb. 

2 In the midst of the 4street of it, 
and on either side of the river, was 
there the tree of life, which bare 
twelve manner of fruits, and 
yielded her fruit every month: and 
the leaves of the tree were for the 
thealing of the nations. 

3 And there shall be ‘no more 
curse: but ¢the throne of God and 
of the Lamb shall be in it; and his 
‘servants shall serve him: 

4 And they shall see his face; and 
his name shall be ir. their foreheads. 

5 And there shall be fno night 
there; and they need no &candle, 
neither light of the sun; for the 
hkLord God giveth them light: and 
they shall reign for ever and ever. 

6 And he said unto me, These 
sayings are faithful and true: and 
the Lord God of the ‘holy prophets 
Jsent his angel to shew unto his 
servants the things which must 
kshortly be done. 

7 Behold, I come quickly: blessed 
is he that keepeth the sayings of 
the prophecy of this book. 


The last message of the Bible. 


8 And I John saw these things, 
and heard them. And when I had 
heard and seen, I fell down to wor- 
ship before the feet of the /angel 
which shewed me these things. 

9 Then saith he unto me, See thou 
do it not: for I am thy fellowser- 
vant, and of thy brethren the proph- 
ets, and of them which keep the 
sayings of this book: worship God. 

10 And he saith unto me, ”Seal 
not the sayings of the prophecy of 
this book: for “the time is at hand. 
11 He that is unjust, let him be 


“forever and forever” (“to the ages of the ages 
tion of the throne of God, eternal in the sense 


1352 


”) are used in Heb. 1. 8 for the dura- 


of unendirg. 


22 12] 


REVELATION. 


(22 21 


‘unjust still: and he which is filthy, 
let him be filthy still: and he that 
is righteous, let him be !righteous 
still: and he that is 2¢holy, let him 
be holy still. 

12 And, behold, I ’come quickly; 
and my ‘reward is with me, to give 
every man “according as his work 
shall be. 

13 I am Alpha and Omega, the 
beginning and the end, the first and 
the last. 

14 Blessed are they that «do his 
commandments, thatthey may have 
right to the tree of life, and may en- 
ter in through the gates into the city. 

15 For without are dogs, and 
sorcerers, and whoremongers, and 
murderers, and idolaters, and who- 
soever loveth and maketh a lie. 

16 I Jesus have sent mine angel 
to testify unto you these things in 
‘the churches. I am the root and 
the offspring of David, and the 
bright and morning star. 

17 And the sSpirit and the bride 


A.D. 96. 


@ Sanctify, holy 
(persons) (N. 
T.). (Mt.4.5.) 


b See v.20. 


¢ Rewards. | Cor, 
(Dan. 12.3; 


3.14. 
1 Cor.3.14.) 

d@ Judgments (the 
seven). Revy.20. 
12. (2 Sam.7.14; 
Rev.20.12.) 


¢ wash their robes. 


F Churches (local). 
Phil.1.1. (Acts2, 


41; Phil.1.1.) 
@ Holy Spirit. 


Acts 2.4. or 


18; Acts 2.4. 

4 Inspiration, 
(Ex.4.15.) 

t Life (eternal). 


vs.1,2,14,17,19. 
(Mt.7.14.) 


5 Christ (Second | 
Advent). vs.7,20. 


(Acts 1.10,11.) 

k Bible prayers 
(NT). cMt. 
6.9.9 


say, Come. And let him that hear-. 
eth say, Come. And let him that is 
athirst come. And whosoever will, 
let him take the water of life freely. _ 

18 ‘For I testify unto every man 
that heareth the words of the proph- 
ecy of this book, If any man shall 
add unto these things, God shall 
add unto him the plagues that are 
written in this book: 

19 And if any man shall take 
away from the ?words of the book 
of this prophecy, God shall take 
laway his part out of the ‘book of 
4life, and out of the holy city, and 
from the things which are written 
in this book. 


The ijast promise and the last 
prayer of the Bible. 


20 He which testifieth these 
things saith, Surely 7I come quickly. 
kAmen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus. 

21 The grace of our Lord Jesus 
|Christ be with you all. Amen. 


1See definitions O.T. righteousness (Lk. 2. 
note; 10. 10); righteous living (1 John 3. 7); self-righteousness (Rom. 10. 3). 
2 Sanctification, holiness, Summary: (1) In both Testaments the same Hebrew 


2s); N.T. righteousness (Rom. 3. 21. 


and Greek words are rendered by the English words “‘sanctify’”’ and “holy,” in their 
various grammatical forms. The one uniform meaning is, “to set apart for God.” 
(2) In both Testaments the words are used of things and of persons. (3) When 
used of things no moral quality is implied; they are sanctified or made holy because 
set apart for Gdd. 

(4) Sanctification when used of persons has a threefold meaning. (a) In posi- 
tion, believers are eternally set apart for God by redemption, “‘through the offering 
of the bedy of Jesus Christ once’ (Heb. 10.9, 10). Positionally, therefore, believers 
are “saints” and ‘“‘holy” from the moment of believing (Phil. 1.1; Heb. 3.1). (6) In 
experience, the believer is being sanctified by the work of the Holy Spirit through 
the Scriptures (John 17. 17; 2 Cor. 3. 18; Eph. 5. 25, 26; 1 Thes. 5, 23,24). (c) Incon- 
sumunation, the believer’s complete sanctification awaits the appearing of the 
Lord (Eph. 5. 27; 1 John 3. 2). See “Salvation,” Rom. 1. 16, note. 

3 Inspiration: Summary. The testimony of the Bible to itself. 

(1) The writers affirm, where they speak of the subject at all, that they speak 
by direct divine authority. (2) They invariably testify that the words, and not 
the ideas merely, are inspired. The most important passage is 1 Cor. 2. 7-15, which 
see. (3) The whole attitude of Jesus Christ toward the Old Testament, as dis- 
closed in His words, both before His death and after His resurrection, confirms its 
truth and divine origin, and He explicitly ascribes the Pentateuch to Moses. (4) In 
promising subsequent revelations after the predicted advent of the Spirit. (John 
16. 12-15), our Lord prepared the way for the New Testament. (5) The writers of 
the New Testament invariably treat the Old Testament as authoritative and in- 
spired. See 2 Pet. 1. 19, note; 1 Cor. 2. 13, note. 

4 Eternal life, Summary of the teaching: ; jude 

(1) The life is called “eternal” because it was from the eternity which is past 
unto the eternity which is to come—it is the life of God revealed in Jesus Christ, 
who is God (John 1.4; 5. 26; 1 John 1.1,2). (2) This life of God, which was revealed 
in Christ, is imparted in a new birth by the Holy Spirit, acting upon the word of 
God, to every believer on the Lord Jesus Christ (John 3. 3-15). (3) The life thus 
imparted is not a new life except in the sense of human possession; it is still “that 
which was from the beginning.” But the recipient is a “new creation” (2 Cor. 5. 17; 
Gal. 6.15). (4) The life of God which is in the believer is an unsevered part of the 
life which eternally was, and eternally is, in Christ Jesus—one life, in Him and in 
the believer—Vine and branches; Head and members (1 Cor. 6. 17; Gal. 2. 20; Col. 
1. 27: 3. 3, 4; 1 John 5. 11, 12; John 15, 1-5; 1 Cor. (2. 12-14), 

25-29 f THE END 


THE USE OF THE INDEX; 


Its Value to the 
Preacher, Sunday School Teacher, Evangelist, Christian Worker. 


THE Index covers all of the editorial matter in the Scofield Reference Bible except 
the Introductions to the Books and the running Analysis which constitutes the new 


system of paragraphing, and which has been one of the most acceptable features of 
this Bible. 


In arranging the Index the Editor, who is himself a preacher, ‘has had largely in 
view the helping of preachers to sermonic material. Experience had taught him the 
need and the best way to meet the need. 


These main features are prominent:— 

(1) The suggestion of a theme. The demands upon the time of the modern 
minister are so various as to leave the mind, often, in some measure of distraction 
when the time comes for preparing the two inevitable sermons for the Lord’s day, 
now so near. 

It will be found that simply to go over the Index thoughtfully. will afford a wealth 
of suggestion for topical, expository, and thematic sermons, from which the preacher 
may choose. 

(2) The editorial notation to which the Index gives reference will often be 
found to suggest at once the logical and biblical outline which a sermon on that 
theme should follow, while the passages referred to in the note or summary will give 
both the background and a wealth of biblical illustration. 

(3) But perhaps*the best service of the Index to the Bible preacher is in-the 
Suggestion of series of sermons on the great themes of Scripture. 

The experience of the great constructive ministers is conclusive that no other 
form of teaching so permanently interests congregations. They soon come to feel 
that they are “‘getting somewhere.”’ 

‘Take, for example, the central theme of the Bible—Christ. The Index will be 
found to refer to one hundred and thirty-four distinct lines of truth concerning 
Christ. From these may be selected series of sermon subjects which will enable the 
preacher to give connected studies of that supreme Person once a year through many 
years without repetition. And this is true of the Holy Spirit, as also of all the great 
words of the Bible. 

And not the preacher only, but the Sunday School teacher, or Evangelist—indeed 


any Christian worker, will find the Index the open door to the mighty riches of the 
Bible. 


4354 


ee ey eee 


INDEX 


TO THE 


INTRODUCTION, ANALYSES, NOTES, DEFINITIONS, SUMMARIES, AND 
SUBJECT REFERENCES 


IN THE 


SCOFIELD REFERENCE BIBLE. 


(Subject-references are indicated hy italics.) 


Aaron, type of Christ, Ex. 28. 1; Lev. 8. 12. 
Aaron’s rod, typical meaning, Ex. 7. 12; Num.17. 8, 
Abel, a type, Gen. Bs 2. 
Abiding in Christ, defined, John ts. 4. 
Abomination of desolation, Dan. 9. 27; Mt. 24. 3. 
Abraham, Covenant with, Gen. 15. 18. 
Le and Lot, types, Gen. 19. 36. 
sf the two ‘‘seeds”’ of, John 8. 37; Rom.9. 6. 
a spiritual crisis of, Gen. 22. I. 
Brin’ de type of the Father, Gen. 22. 9. 
Absalom, David's harshness toward, 2 Sam. 14, 24. 
* mother of, 2 Sam. 13. 37- 
a sons of, 2 Sam. 18. 18. 
Acacia wood, typical meaning, Ex. 26. 15. 
Access to God, Ex. 27. 20. 
Achan, sin of, meaning, Josh. 7. II. 
Acts, the, Book of, introduction, p. 1147. 
Adam and Christ contrasted, Rom. 5. 14- 

‘a type of Christ, Gen. 5. 1; 1 Cor. 15. 22. 
Adonai, a name of God, Gen. Is. 2. 
Adonai-Jehoyah, name of God, Gen. 15, 2. 
Adoption defined, Eph. 1. 5. 

Advocacy of Christ defined, John 14. 16; 1 John 2. 1. 
_Afflictions' of the godly, Job 42. 6. 
Age, the present, course of, Mt. 24. 3. 
Aijeleth-Shahar, meaning of, Psa. 22, title. 
Alamoth, meaning of, Psa. 46, title. 
Almighty God defined, Gen. 17. 1. 
Amalek, type of the flesh, Ex. 17. 8. 
Amos, Book of, Introduction, p. 934. 
Angels, fallen, Heb. 1. 4; Jude 6. 
“ "of the seven churches, Rev. 1. 20. 
Angels, Summary, Heb. 1. 4. 
“Anointed,"’ used of Gentile, Isa. 45. 1. 
_ Antichrist, the, the False Prophet, Rev. 13. 16. 
ae the many, Rev. 13. 16. 
spirit of, Rev. 13. 16. 
Antichrist, the, Summary (1 John. 2. 18; Rev. 13. 16). 
Antiochus Epiphanes, King of Syria, p. 985. 
a prophecy concerning, Dan, 
WEEN 2s 
es symbol of, Dan, 8. 9. 
Antipater, father of Herod, Mt. 2. 1. 
Apostasy, believer's resource in, 2 Tim. I. 12. 
e described, xr John 2. ro. 
S$ illustrated, Jud. 17. 13. 
oi irremediable, Heb. 6. 4. 
Apostasy, Summary (Lk. 18. 8; 2 Tim. 3. 1). 
Apostle defined, qualifications, Mt. 10. 2. 
Apostles to rule Israel, Mt. 19. 28. 
Aramaic in Daniel, Dan. 2. 4. 
Ark, Noah's, type of Christ, Gen. 6. 14. 
Armageddon, armies described, Joel 2. 11. 
ef battle of, Isa. 10. 28; 29. 3; Mic. 


1. 6; Joel 3. 9. 

Armageddon (battle of), Summary (Rev. 

19. 17). 
Asceticism not Christian, Col. 2, 18. 
Asenath,-type of the church, Gen. 41. 45. 
Asherah explained, Jud. 3. 7. 
Ashtaroth, worship of, Jud. 2. 13. 
Ashtoreth, worship of, Jud. 2, 13. 
Assurance, true ground of, Lk. 7. 44. 
Assurance, Summary (Isa. 32. 17; Jude 1), 


16. 14; 


At hand, meaning of phrase, Mt. 4. 17. 
Atonement, biblical meaning of, Lev. 16. 6, 

“ burnt-offering type, Lev. I. 3. 

Py of Christ, Lev. 16. 5; Heb. ro. 18. 


Je day of, the two goats, Lev. 16. 5. 

“% day of, typical meaning, Lev. 23. 27. 
ee Hebrew word for, Ex. 29. 33. 

Ss in type, Ex. 29. 33. 

the Isaac type, Gen. 22, 9, note. 

eS more than saves, Ex. 27. I. 

" peace-offering type, Lev. 3. I. 

Pe sin-offering type, Lev. 4. 3. 

st trespass-offering type, Lev. 5. 6. 


Babel, a type, Gen. If. I. 

Babylon, the last, Zech. 5. 6. 

“ not to be rebuilt, Isa. 13. 19. 
b symbolic meaning, Isa, 13. I. 
e symbolic meaning, Rev. 18. 2. 

Babylons, the two, Rey. 18. 2. 

Balaam, doctrine of, Num. 22. 5; Rev. 2. 14. 
“error of, Num. 22. 5; Jude 11, 
“prophecies of, Num. 23. 7. 

“typical meaning, Num. 22. 5; 2 Pet, 2. 15. 
“way of, Num. 22, 5. 
Beast, the, and Antiochus, Dan. 8. ro. 
i? an apostate; Dan. 11. 35. 


4s Daniel’s' fourth world-empire, Rev, 
536 Ti 
4 his career, Dan, If. 35. 


oa his judgment, Zech. 11. 15. 

o prophecies concerning, Dan. II. 35. 

ts symbol of, Dan. 7. 8. 
Beast, the, Summary (Dan. % 8; Rev. 19. 20), 
Beasts, symbols of empires, Dan. 7 ser 
Beauty and Bands, meaning of, Zech. 11. 7. 
Believers, a gift to Christ, John 17. 2. 

i identified with Christ, Eph. r. 3. 

et neither lawless nor under the law, Gal. 


3- 2A. 
Belshazzar, lineage of, Dan, 5. 31. 
Benjamin, type of Christ, Gen. 35. 18. 
Bethel, meaning of, Gen. 12. 8; 28. 10. 

- schismatic altar at, Amos 4. 4. 
Bethsaida, abandoned to judgment, Mk. 8. 23. 
Betrayal of\Christ, Psalm of, Psa. 41. 9. 

Bible, inspiration of, Rev. 22. 19. 

Bildad, characteristics of, Job 8. 1. 

Binding and loosing, note concerning, Mt. 16. 19. 
Birds, the two, typical meaning, Levy. 14. 4. 
Birth, the new, defined, John 3. 3. 

Birthright, meaning of, Gen. 25. 31, note. 
Bishops in local church, Phil. 1. 1; Titus 1. 5, 
Blood, sacrificial, meaning of, Lev. 17. 11. 

Blue, typical meaning, Ex. 25. I. 

Bodies of saints which rose after Christ, Mt. 27. 52 
Branch, a name of Christ, meaning, Isa. 4. 2. 
Brass; typical meaning, Px. 25. 1; 27. 17. 

Bride of Christ, types of, Eph. 5. 32. 

Burden of Moab explained, Isa. 15. 2. 

3 meaning of, in prophecy, Isa. 13. I. 
Burnt-offering, typical meahing, Lev. 1. 3. 


Cain as a type, Gen. 4. 1, note; Jude 11. 


_ 1355 


INDEX. 


Christ, second advent, Greek words for, 1 Cor. 1. 7. 


Camp, the meaning of, Lev. 4. 12. 
Canaan given to Abraham, Gen. 15. 18. 
Candlestick, golden, type of Christ, Ex. 25. 31. 

Os Zechariah's vision of, Zech. 4. 2. 
Carnal defined, Rom. 7. 14. 
Carpenters, the four, Zech. I. 20. 
Castaway, term explained, 1 Cor. 9. 27. | 
Character, Christian, work of Holy Spirit, Gal. 5. 


aay 
Chariots and horses, symbolic meaning, Zech. 6. 5. 
Cherubim defined, Ezk. r. 5. 
s and Seraphims, Isa. 6, 2. 
Children of God, definition, Rom. 8. 16. 
Christ and Adam contrasted, Rom. 5. 14. 
Christ, advents of, Summary, Acts I. II. , 
Christ, advocacy of, r John 2.1. : 
‘appearances of, after resurrection, Mt. 
28.9. 
* atonement of, Lev. 16. 5, 6. 
“attitude toward this age, Lk. 24. 51. 
baptism of, meaning, Mt. 3. £5. 
“* and believer identified, Eph. 1, 3. 
“birth of, predicted, Mic. 5, 1. 
** both advents of, Zeph. 3. 15. 
‘“* as the Branch, Isa. 4. 2. 
“* and the bride, Song 2. 2; 5. 2; Eph. 5. 32. 
“church, the body of, Eph: BE25. 
Covenants, His relation to, Heb. 8. 8. 
‘“* crucified, the true test, Lk. 23. 35. 
“« day of, defined, r Cor. 1. 8. 
death of, voluntary, Mt. 27. so. 
deity of, Psa. 110. 1; John 20. 28. 
erson of, errors concerning, Col. 2. 18. 
$ ace of, when crucified, Isa. 52. r4. 
Christ, first advent of (Gen. 3. 15; Acts I. 11). 
“day of, first intirnation of, John 14. 3. 
Christ, genealogy of, in Luke, Lk. 3. 23. 
“" and Gentiles, John 12. 23. 
gifts of, John 17. 2. 
High Priesthood, Aaron a type, Ex. 28. 1. 
‘“‘ High Priesthood, Melchizedek a type, Gen. 
14. 18; Zech. 6. 11; Heb. 5. 6. 
humanity of, Lev. 14. 5. 
Immanuel, Isa. 7. 14. 
and Jewish remnant, Isa. 49., p. 757. : 
in His kingdom, prophecy of, Zech. 6. I1. 
‘  Kingship of, Mt. 2. 2. 
Kingship of, offer to Isrfel, Mt. 21. 4. 
eee ae of, His investiture, Dan. 7. 13; 
ev. 5. 7. 
Kingship of, His power, Mt. 8. 2. 
Kingship of, His rejection, Mt. 12. 3. 
Christ, Kinsman-Redeemer, Summary, Isa. 59. 20. 
Christ, law of, t Cor. 9. 21; 5 John 2. 3. 
Christ (law of), Summary (Gal. 6, 2; 2 John 5). 
Christ, as the Word (Logos), meaning John 1. 1. 
““ "as Lord (Kurios), Mt. 8. 2. 
“love of, for bride, Song r., title, 
Master of our service, Eph. 4. rr. 


Sa ete priesthood of, Zech. 6, 11; 
eb, 5.0. 

the ‘mystery of God,” Col. 2. 2, 

“and Nazareth, Lk. 4. 16. 

and the new family of faith, Mt. 12. 46. 

new message of, Mt. 11. 28, 

and the New Testament, John 16, 12. 

now on Father's throne, Rev. 3. 21. 

offer of, to Israel as King, Zech. 9. 9. 

second advent predicted, Zech. 14. 4. 

proof of His power as King, Mt. 8. 2. 

prophecy of the first, Gen. 3. 14, 15, notes. 

redemptive work, the three tenses of, Eph. 


“a 


es 

apie forbids disciples to preach, Mt. 
16. 20, 

the sire y King, and the Gentiles, Mt. 
12. 18, 


ch the. rejected King judges Israel, Mt. 12. 41. 
relation to the Holy Spirit, Acts 2. 4. 

relation of, to law of Moses, Mt. ORY 0 

relation to Israel, Acts 1. 11. 

resurrection of, order of events, Mt. 28. 5. 

ieee. of, our justification, Rom. 

“return of, prophecies require, Isa. 42 

Christ (as Rock), Summary (Ex, 17. 6; 1 Peete 8). 


1356 


Christ, sacrifice of, Summary, Heb. 10, 18.~ 
Christ, His self-emptying. Phil. 2. 6. 


Christ, types of 


Chronicles, First Book of, Introduction, p. 456. 


second advent predicted, Mal. 3. 1; Zech. 
12.5. 
“second advent, time of, Isa. 59. 20. 
«*« second advent described, Mt. 24. 3. 
** second advent, three aspects. Mt. 25. I. 
“and the sabbath, Mt. £2. 1, note 3. 


Servant of Jehovah, Isa. 41. 8; 42. I. 

“shepherd work of, John ro. 7. 
as Son of man, Mt. 8. 20. 
«* as Stone, note concerning, Mt. 21. 44. 
“sufferings and glory foretold, Isa. 40. 1; 

Mt. 43-1722... 
“and the Ssmpphepisiag, Mt. 15. 21. 
temptation of, Mt. aoa 
“threefold relation to Gentiles, Isa. 42.6, ~ 
“throne of, not yet upon, Rev. 3. 21. 
“* title defined, Mt. 1. 16, 
“ transfiguration of, Mt. 17. 2. 


Aaron, Ex. 28. 1; Ley. 8. 12. 
s Abel, Gen. 4. 2. 


oa acacia wood, Ex. 26. 15. 

w Adam, Gen. 5. 1; Rom. 5. 14; 1 Cor. 
I5. 22. 

# altar, brazen, Ex, 27. 5. 

4 altar of incense, Ex. 30. r. 

. ark of Covenant, Ex. 25. 10. 

‘ ark, Noah's, Gen. 6. 14. 

= Beauty and Bands, Zech. rr. 7. 

Benjamin, Gen. 35. 18; 43. 34. 

ey birds, the two, Lev. 14. 4. 


blood, sacrificial, Lev. 17. rr. 
burnt-offering, Lev. 1. 3. 
candlestick, golden, Ex. 25. 31. 
corn of land, Josh. 5. rr. 
David, King, r Chr. 17. 7. 
Feasts of the Lord, Lev. 23. 2. 
gate, or door, Ex. 27. 16; John 10. 7. 
goat for sacrifice, Lev. 1. 3. 
goats, the two, Lev. 16. 5. 
Isaac, Gen. 21. 3; 22. 9; 24. I. 
Joseph, Gen. 37. 2. 
Joshua, Josh. 1. 1. , 
s Kinsman-Redeemer, Lev..25. 49; Isa. 
59. 20. 
or lamb, Lev. 1. 3. 
laver, the, Ex. 30. 18. 
ie light, the, Gen. 1. 16. 
manna, Ex. 16. 35; Josh. 5. Ir. 
meat-offering, Lev. 2. 1. 
‘e Melchizedek, Gen. 14, 18. 
Moses, Ex. 2. 2._ 
Nazarite, Num. 6. 2. 
ox, Lev. 1.3 
Passover, Ex. 12, II. 
peace-offering, Lev. 3. I. 
priesthood, Aaronic, Lev. 8. 12. 
priesthood, Melchizedek, Gen. 14. 18. 
Tam, Gen. 22. 9. 
red heifer, Num. rg. 2. 
rock, Ex. 17, 6; Num. 20. 8; Mt. 21. 
443) 2, Pets 25.18% 
rod, Aaron’s, Num. 17. 8. 
serpent, brazen, Num. 21. 9. 
shewbread, Ex, 25. 30. 
sin-offering, Lev. 4. 3. 
sweet savour offerings, Lev. 1. 9. 
trespass-offering, Lev. 5. 6. 
turtle dove, Lev. 1. 3. 
_veil of tabernacle, Ex. 26, 31. 
virgin: birth foretold, Isa. 7. 13, 


Second Book of, Introduction, p. 490. 


Church, body of Christ, Eph. 2. 15 


F (the true), bride of Christ, Eph. 5. 32. 4 
(ecclesia), word defined, Mt. 16. 18. 

first mention of, Mt. 16. 18. 

(visible), history foretold, Rev. r. 20, 

(the true), hope of, 1 Thes. 4. 17, 

Lamb's wife, the, Rev. 19. 7. 

last mention of, Rev. 4. I. 

(the true), a miyeteena ane 35165 

the, a “new man,” Eph, 2, 15, 


Sittin me 


INDEX. 


Church age precedes kingdom, Acts 15. 13. 
a the, predicted by Christ, Mt. 16. 18. 
by relation to second advent, Acts I. 11. 
io revelation through Paul, Eph. 3. 6. 
Church (true), Summary (Mt. 16. 18; Heb. 12. 23). 
s (visible), Summary (zr Cor. Io. 32; 1 Tim, 


3. 15). 
Churches (local), Summary (Acts 2. 41; Phil. 1. 1). 
Churches, the seven, messages to, Rev. I. 20, 
Circumcision, importance of, Ex. 4. 24. 
rs meaning of, Josh. 5. 2. 
sign, a, Gen. 17. 14. 
Civilization, the antediluvian, Gen. 4. 17. 
Cleansing from sin, Psa. 51. 7. 
* from sin illustrated, John 13. ro. 
ey of leper, typical meaning, Lev. 14. 3. 

Coats of skins, a type, Gen. 3. 21. 
Colossians, Epistle, Introduction, p. 1262. 
Communion of Christ and bride, Song 2. 14. 

va restored, Psa. 51. I. 
Conscience, dispensation of, Gen. 3. 23. 

fe dispensation universal, Gen. TI. 10. 

ba the work of, Gen. II. 10. 
Consecration, the priest type, Ex. 29. 1; Lev. 8. 2. 

a the temple type, 1 Ki. 8. 1. 
Conversion, during the tribulation, Rev. 7. 14. 

ES illustrated, Zech. 3. 1. 

se of world, time of, Hab. 2. 14; Zeph. 


3092 
Corinthians, First Epistle, Introduction, p. 1211. 
a Second Epistle, Introduction, p. 1230. 
Corn of the land, old, Josh. 5. 11. 
Covenant, Edenic, Gen. 1. 28. 
ee Adamic, Gen. 3. 14. 


Ss Noahic, Gen. 9. I; II. 10. 
e Abrahamic, Gen. I2. 1; 15. 18. 
s Mosaic (see Law), Ex. 19. 25. 


a Mosaic, and Christ, Mt. 5. 17. 
Mosaic, Summary, Gal. 3. 24. 
ey Palestinian, Lev. 26., title; Deut. 28. 1; 


30. 3. 
a Davidic; 2¢Sam.°7, 26; 1’ Chr. 17. 73 
Psa. 89. 27. 


a the New, Heb. 8. 8. 
ae (the New), Summary (Isa. 61. 8; Heb, 
8. 8). 
eres (the eight), Summary (Gen. 1. 28; Heb. 
8. 8). : 
Covenants, relation of Christ to, Heb. 8. 8. 
Creation of man, Gen. I. 26. 
re the original, Gen. I. I. 
ae the original, destroyed, Gen. 1. 2. 
Creative acts in Genesis, Gen. I. I. 
Creatures, the living, Ezk. 1. 5. 
Cross, inscription over, Mt. 27. 37. 
Crucifixion described in Psa. 22, Psa. 22: 7. 
: ie of Christ foretold, Psa. 22. 7. 
he order of events, Mt. 27. 33. 
cs day of, order of events, Mt. 26. 57. 
Cup, the, and the prayer in Gethsemane, Mt. 26. 39. 
«a, symbolic meaning, Zech. 5. 6. 
Cyrus’ connection with Daniel, Dan. 5. 31. 
Cyrus, only Gentile type of Christ, Isa. 45. I. 
« " foretold by name, Isa. 44. 28. 
“predictions concerning, Isa. 41. 2. 


Daniel, Book of, Iftroduction, p. 898. 
# authorship of Book, Dan. 2. 4. 
‘© monarchs of his time, Dan. 5. 31. 
“_ seventieth week of, Dan. 9. 24. 
Parius, identification of, Dan.’5. 31. 
David, and Saul, 1 Sam. 16. 21. 
“ "throne of, meaning, Isa. 9. 7. 
“ a type, © Chr. 17.7. 
Davidic Covenant confirmed, Psa. 89. 27. 
ye Covenant established, 2.Sam. 7. 16, 
Day of Christ, meaning of, 1 Cor. 1. 8. 
“of destruction explained, Rev. 20. II. 
“of the Lord, or “that day,” Isa. 10. 20. 
“of the. Lorp, Isa. 10. 20. 
“of the Lorp and man of sin, 2 Thes, 2. 3. 


“ of the Lorp, order of events, 2 Thes. 2, 3; 


Rev. 19. 19. ate 9 
“of the Lorn, signs preceding, Rey. 10. 19. 
“of the Lord, in-Zephaniah, Zeph. 1.7. 


“of vengeance defined, Isa. 61. 2. 


Day, Bible use of word, Gen. 1. 5. 
Ed ihe LORD, Summary (Isa. 2. 12; Rev. 19. 
I9). 
Days, the, in Daniel 12., Dan. 12. 12, 
“the last, defined, Acts 2. 17. 
“the last, described, Mic. 5. 1. 
pA Judgment, Sammary (Mt. 10. 15; Rev. 20. 
II). 
Dead, the, conscious in Sheol, Hab. 2. 5. 
“the, state of, Eccl. 9. 10. 
Death (spiritual), Sammary (Gen. 2. 17; Eph. 2. 5). 
“ (physical), Summary (Gen. 3. 19; Heb. 9. 27). 
(the sere). Summary (Jokn 8. 24; Rev. 
21. 8). 
Decrees referred to in Daniel, Dan. 9. 25. 
Degrees, Psalms of, explained, Psa. 121, title. 
Demons, the, note concerning, Mt. 7. 22. 
Desolation of abomination in Daniel, Dan. 8. 13. 
Destruction, not annihilation, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 
Deuteronomy, Introduction, p. 216. 
Devils,.see Demons. 
Dietary regulations of Israel, Lev. 11. 2. 
Discipline in the church, Lev. 13. 3. 
Dispensation, definition of, Gen., p. 5, note. 
Ke the first, Gen. 1. 28, note. 
of grace, John 1. 16. 
of kingdom, duration, Rev. 12, 10- 
the second, Gen. 3. 23, note. 


eS the third, Gen. 8. 21, note. 
ie the fourth, Gen. 12. 1, note. 
3 the fifth, Ex. 19. 8. 

ee the sixth, John 1. 17. 

= the seventh, Eph. 1. 10. 


Doctrines of primitive evangelism, p. 1267. 
Dove, the, symbol of the Holy.Spirit, Acts 2. 4. 
Drink-offering first mentioned, Gen. 35. 14, note. 
Drought, significance of, Jer. 14. 1, 


Earth cursed, Gen. 3. 14, note. 
“« “new, prediction of, Isa. 65. 17. 
“without form and void, Gen. 1. 2; Jer. 4. 23. 
Ecclesiastes, Book of, Introduction, p. 696. 
Edom in history and prophecy, Gen. 36, 1. 
Egypt, reproach of, Josh. 5. 2. 
*« symbolic meaning, Isa. 13. I. 
type of world, Gen. 12. 10. 
Elders, functions and appointment of, Tit. 1. 5. 
El-beth-el, meaning of, Gen. 35. 7. 
Election, relation to foreknowledge, 1 Pet. 1. 20.. 
pee (personal), Summary (Deut. 7. 6; 1 Pet. 
he 
El Elyon, a name of God, Gen. 14. 18. 
Elihu, characteristics of, Job 32. 2. 
Elijah yet to come, Mt. 17. 10. 
Eliphaz, characteristics of, Job 4. I. 
Elohim, first name of Deity, Gen. 1.'1. 
El Olam, name of God, defined, Gen. 21. 33. 
El Shaddai, a name of God, Gen. 17. 1. 
End, time of, Dan. 8. 19; II. 35; 12. 4. 
Enoch, a type, Gen. 5. 22. 
Ephah, the, Zechariah's vision of, Zech. 5. 6. 
Ephesians, Epistle, Introduction, p. 1249. 
Ephraim, a name of the ten tribes, 2 Chr. 25: 73 
Isa. 7. 2. F 
ey name of ten tribe kingdom, Isa. 7. 2. 
Error, seriousness of all, 1 Tim. I. 20. 
Esau, a type, Gen. 25. 25. 
Esther, Book of, Introduction, p. 558. 
Elernal Life, Summary (Mt. 7. 14; Rev. 22. 19). 
Eve, type of church, Gen. 2. 23. 
Everlasting God defined, Gen’. 21. 33. 
Evil, sense in which God created, Isa. 45. 7. 
Expiation, see Sin-offering. 
Ezekiel, Book of, Introduction, p. 840. 
«“ " dumbness of, Ezk. 4. 1. ; 
Me preparation for service, p. 840. 
Ezra, Book of, Introduction, p. 529. 
“ “leads remnant to Palestine, Ezra‘2. I. 


“ 


Faith, new household of, Mt. 12. 46. 
“« " justification by, Rom. 3. 26, f 
“Justification by, illustrated, Lk. 7. 44. 
‘the, meaning of phrase, Lk. 18. 8. 
“uses of, Heb. 11. 39. 

Faith, Sammary (Gem 3. 20; Heb. 11, 39). 

False teaching, nature of, 1 Tim. 1. 20, 


1357 


ad 


significance of, Gen. 12. ro, 
of God and Israel, Isa. 63. 16; 64. 8. 
ae of God, reference to, Mal. 7. 6. 
Fear of the Lord, meaning of, Psa. 19. 9. 
Feasts of Jehovah, Lev. 23. 2. 
“of Jehovah, order of, Deut. 16. 1. 
Fellowship, progress in, John Is. 15. 
Fire, strange, typical meaning, Lev. 10. I. 
“typical meaning, Lev. 1. 8; 6. 13. 
First day and the sabbath, Mt. r2. 1. 
First fruits, meaning of, Lev. 23. 10. 
Plesh, the, definition of, Rom. 7. 14. 
“victory over, Jude 23. 
Flesh, Sammary (John 1. 13; Jude 23). 
Fool, biblical meaning of, Prov. ro. I. 
Foreknowledge, relation to election, 1 Pet. 1. 20. 
Forgiveness (Lev. 4, 20; Mt. 26. 28). 
Forgiveness, human and divine, Mt. 26. 28. 
by human, legal ground of, Mt. 6. 12. 
se of sins, O. T. doctrine, Psa. 103. 12. 
Frankincense, typical meaning, Ex. 30. 34. 
Fruitbearing, conditions of, John 15. 2. 
“3 degrees in, John 15. 8. 


Goel, see Redeemer. 4 

alatians, Epistle, Introduction, p. 1241. 
Garment, symbol of righteousness, Rev. 19. 8. 
Gehenna, see Hell. 

Generation, meaning of, in Mt. 24., Mt. 24. 34. 
Gentile believers and the law, Acts 15. I9. _, 
“nations to be judged, Isa. 30. 27; Jer. 25. 

29; 40. 1; Mt. 25. 32. 

nations and second advent, Acts I. Ir. 
** — world-powers to be judged, Ezk. 25. 8. 
Gentiles, fulness of, defined, Rom. 11. 25. 
St and Israel, Gen. 11. 10. 
their origin, Gen. Io. 2, note. 
st threefold relation to Christ, Isa. 42. 6. 
outcalling of, work of this age, Acts 15, 

13. 
times of, Dan. 2. 31. 
times of, begin, Jer. 30. 7. 
times of, the end of, Joel 1. 4. 
times of, events at end of, Joel 1. 4. 
times of, sign of, Lk. 21. 24. 
aeoeg times of, Summary (Lk. 21. 24; Rev. 16. 

19). 

Gentiles, world-power of, Isa. 10. 20; Dan. 2. 31; 

7. 26; Amos I. 2. 

Gifts of Christ to the church, Eph. 4. 11. 

“spiritual, r Cor. 12. 1 
spiritual, ministry of, 1 Cor. 14. 1. 

Giving, Summary, 2 Cor. 8. 1. 
Gittith, meaning of word, Psa. 8, title. 
Glory of the Lord departs from temple, Ezk. 9. 3. 

“ Shekinah type of Spirit, Ex. go. 34. 
Gnosticism defined, Col, 2. 18. 

God, All-creator, Acts 17. 20. 

“character of, in Nahum, Nah. 1. 2 

‘“ kingdom of, defined, Mt. 6. 33. 
or Elohim, Gen. 1. 1. 

“fatherhood of, to Israel, Mal. r. 6, 
N. T. name of, Mt. 28, ro. 

‘** names of, in O. T., Mal, 3. 18. 

a Trinity, Mt. 28. 19. 

visible in Christ, John 1. 18. 

God (O. T.), Gen. r. 1; Mal. 3. 18. 

“the Spirit in O. T., Summary, Mal. 2. 15. 
Gog and Magog, prophecy concerning, Ezk, 38. 2. 
Gold, typical meaning, Ex. 25, 1. 

omer, progenitor of Celts, Gen. 10. 2. 

Gospel, the four forms of, Rev. 14. 6. 

Gs of grace defined, Rev. 14. 6, 
mark of the true, Gal. r 6, 
“another,’’ preachers of, Gal. 1. 6. 
the Pauling, a revelation, Gal. 1. 10. 
Gospel. Summary (Gen. 12. 1-3; Rev. I4. 6). 
Gospels, the Four, Introduction, Pp. 9890. 
Government, human, established, Gen. 8. 21. 
Grace and law contrast, Ex. 32. 10. 

“dispensation of, Mt. 28. 19; John 1. 16. 
test of the true Gospel, Gal. 1. 6. 

Grace ipa, Summary (Rom. 6, 1; 2 Pet. 
3. 18), 

Groves, places of idolatrous worship, Jud, 3. 7. 
Growth, spiritual, of Jacob, Gen. 49. 28. 


“ 


Habakkuk, Book of, Introduction, p. 955. 

ps quoted by Paul, Hab. 1. 5. 
vision of, explained. Hab. 2. 3. 
Hades, see Hell. 

Hagar, her history, Gen. 16. 3, note. 
Haggai, Book of, Introduction, p. 962. 

, declaration concerning, Gen. 9. 1, note. 
Hate and love in Christ's teaching, Lk. 14. 26. 
Heaven, kingdom of, see Kingdom. 
Heavenly places defined, Eph. r. 3. 
Heavens, new, prediction of, Isa. 65. 17. 

“s the three, Lk. 24. 51. 
Hebrews, Epistle, Introduction, p. 1291. 
Heifer, the red, typical meaning, Num. 19. 2. 
Hell (Gehenna) defined, Mt. 5. 22. 

“* see Sheol. - 
Hell (Hades), Summary, Lk. 16. 23. 
Herod the Great, ancestry, Mt. 2. I. 
Hid treasure, parable of, Mt. 13. 44. 
High places defiled, 1 Ki. rs. 14. 

<< note on, I Ki. 3. 2. 

High priest, garments.of, Ex. 29. 4. 
High priesthood, see Christ. 
Historical Books, Introduction, p. 257. 
Holy, see Sanctification. 

“Hebrew word for, Ex. 28. 3. 
Holy Spirit, the abiding, Psa. 51. 11. 

oi as comforter, John 14. 16: 
creates Christian character, Gal. 5. 

22. 
a divine Person, Acts 2. 4. 
and Ephesian disciples, Acts 19, 2. 
falls on Gentile believers, Acts 10. 44. 
progressive revelation concerning, 
Acts 2. 4. 
promise in Luke 11., Lk. rr, 13. 
prophecy in Joel, Joel 2. 28. 
poured out, Zech. ro. r, 
in relation to the believer, Acts 2. 4. 
in relation to Christ, Acts 2. 4. 
in relation to the Church, Acts 2. 4. 
in Romans, Rom. 8. 2. 
sins against, Acts 2. 4. 
gives victory over flesh, Jude 23. 
types of Eliezer, Gen. 24. 66. 

rae .. types of, enumerated, Acts 2. 4. 
Holy Spirit (N. T.), Summary, Acts 2. 4. 

ih (O. T.), Summary, Mal. 2. 15. 
Honey, typical meaning, Lev. 2. 11. 

Hope, the blessed, r Thes. 4. 17. 

Horn, symbolic meaning of, Zech. 1. 18, 
Hosea, Book of, Introduction, p. 921. 
Humanity, three classes of, r Cor. 2. 14. 
Hyssop, symbolic meaning, Psa. SIT 


Image, the, of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. 3r 

Immanuel, a name of Christ, Isa. 7. I3. 

Imputation illustrated, Phm. 18. 

Imputation, Summary, Jas. 2. 23. 

Incense, altar of, typical meaning, Ex, 30. 1. 
iS type of worship, Ex. 30. 9. 

“In Christ,” phrase defined, Eph. 1.j1. 


Inspiration, fulfilment of prophecy proves, 2 Pet 


TAT. 

o Paul's claim to, Cor. 7, 12. 
verbal, 1 Cor. 2. 13. e 
Inspiration, Summary (Ex. 4. 15; Rev. 22. 19). 
Isaac, type of Christ, Gen, 21. 3; 22. 9. 
Isaiah, Book of, Introduction, p. 713. 

““ second part of, key-verses, Isa. 40. I. 
Israel, Assyrian captivity of, 2 Ki. 1 i 

“* why chosen, Gen. 11. 10. 
in dispersion, Hab. 1. 5. 
centre of divine counsels, Isa. 10, 12. 
under divine protection, Gen. 15. 18. 
future conversion of, Lev. 16, 18.~ 
Jehovah's controversy with, Isa. x. as 

Amos 3. 2. 
Jehovaii's servant, Isa. 41.8. 
use.of name in Hosea, oS. I. 10. 
future judgment of, Ezk. 20. 37. 
in the land, not a church, Acts 7, 38, 
meaning of name, Gen. 32. 28. 
military strength of, 2 Sam. 24, 9. 
; natural and spiritual,.Ram. 9. 6. 
* not the N. T. church, Mt 16. 18. 


“ 


1358 


Israel, restoration and conversion, Ezk. 34. 28; 
: Mey eS 
“« restoration of, the order, Ezk. 36., title 
“* yet to be saved, Rom. 11. 1. 
“the two ‘‘travails’’ of, Mic. 5. 1. 
“a name of the ten-tribe kingdom, Isa. 7. 2. 
“wife of Jehovah, Hos. 2. 2. 
Israel, Summary (Gen. 12. 2; Rom. it. 26). 


Jacob, spiritual growth of, Gen. 49. 28. 

‘* type of Israel, Gen. 29- I. 
James, Epistle, Introduction, p. 1306. 

‘ “persons of that name in N. T., Mt. 4. 21. 
Japheth, ancestor of Gentiles, Gen. 9. 1. 
sere descendants of, Gen. Io. 2. 

eduthan, note-on, Psa. 39, title. 
Jehovah, definition of, Gen. 2, 4. 
os Sabaoth, meaning of, r Sam. 1. 3. 
7 seven compound names of, Geri. 2. 4. 
Jeremiah, Book of, Introduction, p. 772. 
S faith of, Jer. 32. 9. 


ss first message to Judah, Jer. 2. 7. 

eu imprisonments of, Jer. 37. II. 

sa message from the temple gate, Jer. 7. 1. 

ee message on the broken covenant, Jer. 
TT. 0s 

o order of ch. 30.-36., Jer. 30. I. 

Se second message to Judah, Jer. 3. 6. 

s ei of the unmarried prophet, Jer. 
16. I. 

a sign of the vessel marred, Jer. 18. I. 

is the three ‘‘writings’’ of, Jer. 30. 2. 


Jerusalem to be freed from oppressors, Zech. 9. 8. 

PH taken by Pompey, p. 985. 

Yo two sieges of, predicted, Lk. 21. 20. 

Me yet to be religious center, Zech. 8. 23. 
ewish-Christian Epistles, Introduction, p. 1289. 
ews in Babyion, mission from, Zech. 7. 2. 

“sinners equally with Gentiles, Gal. 2. 17. 
Job, Book of, Introduction, p. 569. 
«not a hypocrite, Job 32. 1. 
** and Jehovah, Job 38. 1. 
““ problem of the Book, Job 32. 1; 42. 6. 
‘oel, Book of, Introduction, p. 930. 
ohn the Baptist and Elias, Mt. 17. 10. 
Z greatness of, Mt. 11. 11. 
2 rophecy concerning, Mal. 3. I. 
- John, Gospel of, Introduction, p. 1114. 
“ — First Epistle, Introduction, p. 1321. 
“  Second_Epistle, Introduction, p. 1326. 
‘« Third Epistle, Introduction, p, 1327. 
** Apostle, view points in Rev., Rev. 1. 9. 
Jonah, Book of, Introduction, p. 943. 
“* and the great fish, Jon. 1. 17. 
“atypical servant, Jon. 4. 8. 
ordan, typical meaning, Josh. 2. I. 
oseph, type of Christ, Gen. 37. 2. 
foshua, type of Christ, Josh. I. r. 
foy a result of salvation, Num. 21. 17. 
udah, captivity of, first deportation, Jer. 29, I. 
udaising teachers refuted, Gal. 4. 19. 
ude, Epistle, Introduction, p, 1328. 
udges, Book of, Introduction, p. 287. 
e in Israel, office defined, Jud. 2. 18. 
i ¥y to ‘be eb 5 over Israel, Isa. 1. 26; 
—Mt. 19. 28. : 
Judgment of primitive creation, Gen. 1. 2. 
ie altar a pee of, Amos 9. I. 


“ day of, Rev. 20. 11. 
ee in family of God, 2 Sam. 7. 15. 
oe the last, Rev. 20. 12. 

Judgments, Apocalyptic, foretold, Isa. 13. 9. 
a of believer's sins, John 12. 31. 
“e of believer's works, 2 Cor. 5. 10. 
ye of self, r Cor. 11. 31. 


Gentile nations (see ‘‘Armaged- 
don,” ‘‘Babylon’’), Jer. 25. 20; Mt. 
25. 32. ‘ [ 

Judgments of Israel, Ezk. 20. 37; Amos 2. 4. 

ee of the wicked dead, Rev. 20. 12. 
a of fallen angels, Jude 6, ¥ 
Judgments (the seven), Summary (2 Sam. 7. 14; 
Rev. 20. 12). 
Justification by faith alone, Rom. 4. 2. 
i by faith illustrated, Lk. 7. 44. 
+ illustrated, Zech. 3. 1. 


“ Of 


INDEX. 


Justification produces works, Rom. 4. 2. 
Justification, Summary, Rom. 3. 28. 


Kadesh-barnea, typical significance, Num. 14, 23. 
Kenosis, the, defined, Phil. 2. 6. 
Keturah, a type, Gen. 25. 1, note. 
Keys of kingdom of heaven, Mt. 16, 19. 
Kingdom ot God defined, Mt. 6. 33. 
and heaven, contrasted, Mt. 6. 33. 
es given to Gentiles, Mt. 21.43. 
i ss in Psa. 22, Psa. 22. 28. 
Kingdom of heaven defined, Mt. 3. 2. 
“e Messianic, Dan. 7. 13. 
£ described, Psa. 72. i; Isa. 
TIS) Ts<B2 Ty! 65h T7seJer, 
33. I53 Mic. 4. +; Zeeh. 
9. 10; 12.1; 14.9. 


ei how set up, Psa. 2. 6; 24. 33 
Isa. 11., title. 

sd when set up, Psa. 16. 9; Dan. 
2. 44; Acts 15. 13. 

ts extent, Dan. 7. 14; Hab. 2, 
T4. 

ee duration, Rev. 20. 3. 

ee centre of Zech. 8. 23. 

st ieacl in, Zech. 3. 10; Acts 
TH63 

as at hand, Mt. 4. 17. 

¢ greatness of, Mt. Ir. rr. 

© suffering violence, Mt. 11. 12. 

as rejected, ee 204 

44 mysteries of, Mt. 13. 3; 13. 47. 

ty keys of, Mt. 16, I9. 4 

% in Mt. 25., Mt. 25. 1. 

s¢ future, Mt. 17. 2 

ee becomes kingdom of Father, 
Mt. 13. 43. 

is and of God contrasted, Mt. 6. 
33- 

fh dispensation of, Eph. 1. 10; 


Rev. 12. 10. 
Kingdom of Solomon divided, 2 Chr. 10. 16. 
Kingdom (O. T.), Summary (Gen. 1. 26; Zech. 


12. 8). 
Kingdom (N. T.), Summary, I Cor. 15. 24. 
Kings, First Book of, Introduction, p. 385. 

**” “Second Book of, Introduction, p. 421. 
Korah ‘‘gainsaying”’ explained, Num. 16. 10; Jud 11. 


Lamb, type of Christ, Gen. 4. 4, note. 
Lamentations, Book of, Introduction, p. 834. 
“ literary form of, p. 836. 

Laver, typical meaning, Ex. 30. 18. 
Law and grace in allegory, Gal. 4. 10.. 

“and grace in contrast, Ex. 32. 10; Gal. 3. 24. 

“believer dead to, Rom. 6. 15. 

“. Christian doctrine of, Gal. 3. 24. 

“divine purpose in, Gal. 3. 10. 

“dispensation of, Ex. ro. 8. 

“ the giving of, Jer. 7. 22. 

“ the giving of, ‘the Jew’s religion,'’ Gal. 

i. 13. 

“justification establishes, Rom, 3. 31. + 

“a pedagogue unto Christ, Gal. 3. 25. 

“proposed, not imposed, Ex. 19. 3. 

“of Moses in relation to Christ, Mt. 5. 17. 

“of Moses, threefold giving, Ex. 20. 4. 

“of Christ, rule of believer's life, Gal. 3. 24. 
Law (of Moses), Summary (Ex. 19. 1; Gal. 3. 24). 
Law, use of word in Romans, Rom, 7. 21. 
Lawyer, in four Gospels, meaning of, Mt, 22. 35. 
Laying on of hand, Ley. 1. 4. 

Leaven, parable of, Mt. 13. 33. 

ba use of, in peace-offering, Ley. 7. 13. 
Leaven, a symbol (Gen, 19. 3; Mt. 13. 33). 
Leprosy, cleansing, Lev. 14. 3. 

sf typical meaning, Ex. 4. 6; Lev. 13. 2. 
Leviticus, Book of, Introduction, p, 126. 
Light, type of Christ, Gen. I. 16. 
“walking in, 1 John 1. 7. 

Linen, fine, typical meaning, Ex. 27. 9 
Little horn, sce Beast. 

“ symbol of Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan, 


8.9. 
“ symbol of the beast, Dan. 7. 8. 
Living creatures, the, Ezk. 1. 5. 


1359 


“ 


INDEX. 


Logos, meaning of, John 1, 1. 
Lord (Adonai), definition, Gen, 15. 2. 
Lord Gop, a divine name, Gen. 15. 2. 
LORD (Jehovah), definition, Gen. 2. 4, 
LORD God (Jehovah-Elohim), definition, Gen, 2. 4. 
LORD of Hosts, definition, 1 Sam. 1. 3. 
Lord (Kurios), meaning of, Mt. 8. 2. 
LORD, day of, Summary, Rey. 19. 19, 
Love, in 1 Cor. 13., 1 Cor. 12, 31. 
Lucifer, name of Satan, explained, Isa. 14. 12, 
Luke, Book of, Introduction, p. 1070. 
‘“ " Book of, inspiration of, Lk. 1. 3. 
“* joins Paul, Acts 16, 10. 


Maccabees, wars of, p. 985. ¥ 
Macedonian world-empire predicted, Dan, 8. 1. 

a world-empire, end of, Dan. 8. 10. 
Madai, descendents of, Gen. 10. 2, 
Magog, descendants of, Gen, 10. 2. 
Maher-shalal-hash-baz; name explained, Isa. 8. 18. 
Malachi, Book of, Introduction, p. 980. 
Malachi to Matthew, p. 986. 
Man, the Carnal, 1 Cor. 2. 14. 

“creation of, Gen. 1, 26, 3 
tripartite nature of, Gen. 1. 26; 1 Thes. 5. 23. 
the natural, r Cor. 2. 14. 
the natural, his religion, Jude rr. 
the carnal, 1 Cor, 2, 14. 
the spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 14. 

p the new, defined, Eph. 4. 24. 

“the old, defined, Rom. 6.6. 

“never found in fossil state, Gen. x. rz, note. 
of sin, when manifested, 2 Thes. 2. 3. 
Manna, type of Christ, Ex. 16. 35; Josh. 5. 11. 
Marah, meaning of, Ex. 15. 25. 

Mark, Book of, Introduction, p. 1045. 
Mary (the Virgin), genealogy of, Lk. 3. 23. 

“ (Magdalene), Mt. 1. 16. 

‘“ women of that name in N. T., Mt. r. 16. 
Matthew, Book of, Introduction, p. 993. 
Medat-offering, a type, Lev. 2. 1. 

Media-Persia, prophecy concerning, Dan. 8.1; 11. 2. 
ids the second world-empire, Dan. 2. 31. 
symbolised, Dan. 5. 31. 
Melchizedek priesthood of Christ, Zech. 6. rr. 
a type of Christ, Gen. 14. 18; Heb. 5. 6. 
Mercy follows sacrifice, Lk. 18. 13. 
Mercy-seat, meaning of, Ex. 25. 10; Lk, 18. 13. 
ue see Propitiation, 

Meshech, descendants of, Gen, ro. 2. 

e and Tubal, modern names of, Ezk. 38. 2, 
Micah, Book of, Introduction, p. 046. 
Miracles in N. T. (Mt. 8. 2, 3; Acts 28, 8, 9). 
Miracles in O. T. (Gen. 5. 24; Jon. 2. 1-10). 
Moses, type of Christ, Ex. 2. 2. 
Most high, name of God, defined, Gen. 14. 18. 
Mountain, symbolic meaning, Isa. 2. 2. 
Mustard seed, parable of, Mt. 13. 31. 
Muth-labben, meaning of word, Psa. 9, title, 
Mysteries (N. T.), the ten, Mt. ESecis 

of: of the kingdom, Mt. 13. 3. 
Mystery in Scripture use, Mt. 13. Ir. 

en of God defined, Col. 2. 2. 
of iniquity, 2 Thes, 2. 3. 
C4 a, the N. T. church, Eph. 3. 6. 


Nahum, Book of, Introduction, p. 952. 
Nations, see Gentile. 

es Gentile, judgment of, Mt, 25. 32, 

Natural man, Cain a type of, Gen, Asi Bs 

se the, before spiritual, Gen, 36. 31. 
Natures, the two, strife of, Rom. 7. 15. 
Nazariteship, typical meaning, Num. 6. 2, 
Nebuchadnezzar, dream of, Dan. 2, 31. 

WARS knowledge of God, Dan, 4. 34. 
Neginoth, meaning of word, Psa. 4, title, 
Nehemiah, Book of, Introduction, p. 541. 

Net, the, parable of, Mt. 13. 47. 

New man, the, defined, Eph, 4. 24. 

Nicolaitanes, meaning of, Rey, 2. 6. 

Nihiloth, meaning of word, Psa. 5, title. 

Nineveh, symbolic meaning, Isa. 13. 1; Nah. 1. 3. 
Numbers, Book of, Introduction, p. 16s. 
Numerals, Hebrew, explained, 1 Cor, 10, 8. 


“ 


“ 


\ 
Obadiah, Book of, Introduction, p. 941, 


1360 


Acts 2, 4: 


14. 4. 
Olivet discourse, interpretation, Mt. 24. 3. 
Ornan, thréshing floor of, 1 Chr. 21. 25. 


Parables (N. T.), (Mt: 5. 13; Lk, 21. 29). 
Parables (O. T.), Summary (Jud, 9. 8; Zech. 11. 7). 
Parallelism, Hebrew, p. 567. 
Passover, feast of, Lev. 23. 5. 
ee type of Christ, Ex. 12. 11. 

the last, order of events, Mt. 26. 20. 
Paul, Apostle, Epistles of,-Introduction, p. 1180: 

“labours in Damascus, Acts 9. 22. 
last journey to Jerusalem, Acts 20. 22 
** partial blindness of, Gal. 6. ir. 
teligious experience of, Rom. 7. 9. 
Roman imprisonments. of, Acts 28. 30. 
his Gospel. a-revelation,' Gal. 1. 10. 
his thorm in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12. 7 
and Peter doctrinally one, Acts 0. 20; © 

Cor. 3.8; Gal. 2/357 
visits to Jerusalem in Acts, Acts 9. 26. 
Peace, use of word in Scripture, Mt. 10. 34. 
Peace-offering, typical meaning, Lev. 3.-t. 
Pearl of great price, parable of, Mt. 13. 45. 
Pentecost, feast of, Lev. 23. 16. 
Perfection, note on, Mt. 5. 48 
Perfection, see Sanctification. 
Perish (apollumi), meaning of, John 3. 16. 
Peter, accounts: of denial agree, Mt. 26, 71. 


- 

g { 

and the keys, Mt. 16. ro. | 
7 

- 

7 

1 

wl 


“a 


Offerings, law of, the order, Lev. 7. 11. 
Oil, symbol of the Holy Spirit, Ex. 27. 20; 30. 313 


his confession and the Rock, Mt. 16. 1& 
first use of keys, Acts 2. 4. 
second use of keys, Acts ro. 44. 
First Epistle, Introduction, p. 1311. 
sermon at Pentecost, Acts 2. 14. 
sermon at the Beautiful gate, Acts 3. 20, 
Pharaoh, his heart hardened, Ex. 4. 21, 
Pharisees, note concerming, Mt. 3. 7. 
Philemon, Epistle, Introductioa, p. 1286, 
Philippians, Epistle, Introduction, p. 1257, 
Poetical Books, the, Introduction, p. s6T< 
Possession, demoniacal, see Demon 
Potter, a symbol, Jer, 28: 1, 
Power vs. machinery, Num. 11. 25. 
Prayer (N.:T.), doctrine of, Lk. ri. 1. 
Prayer, Christ's: philosophy of, Lk. 11. 1. 4 
“of Christ in John 17., John 17. x. \ 
** of Micah, Mic. 7. 7. 3 
“ for the Spirit, Lk. 11. 13. | 
Prayer (O. T.), Summary, Hab. 3. 1. ; 
Prayer (N. T,), Summary, Lk. rr. 1. 
Preaching, of remnant, Mic. 5. 7. 
Predestination defined, Eph. 1. 5. t 
es relation to election, 1 Pet. 1. 20 7 
Priesthood of the Christian, Ex. 10. 4. 
Priesthood (N. T.), Summary, 1 Pet. 2. 9. 
Program, divine, for this age and the next, Acte. 
T5533 
Promise, dispensation of, Gen. 12. r, note. a 
Prophecy (N. T:), gift of, 1 Cor. 12, ro. ] 
is) interpretation of, Mt. 2. 15. a 
Prophetical Books, Introduction, pp. 711, 712. 
Propitiation, Summary, Rom. 3. 25. 
Proverbs, Book of,. Introduction, p: 672. 
Psalms, the Messianic. Psa. 40. 1; 45. £; 68. £3 
69. 1; 72. 1; 102. 1; 110. 13 118. 29. 
Psalms, Book of, Introduction, p. 590. 
Psalms, the Messianic, Summary, Psa. 113 29. 
Purple, typical meaning, Ex. 25. 1. 


is in the wilderness, Numi. 11. 31. ' 
uotations in N T, from O. T., Heb. 10 5. 


Rainbow, typical meaning, Gen. 9. 13, marg. 
Rebekah, type of church, Gen. 24. 1. 
Reconciliation, not an O, T. word, Dan. 9. 24: 

. word defined, ‘Col. 1. 21. yee 
Redemption, Exodus type, Ex. Intro., Pp. 78. 
Redemption, Exodus type, Summary, Ex. 14. 30. 

edemption, first promise of, Gen. 3. 14. 4 

“ kinsman type, Lev. 25. 49. 


INDEX. 


Redemption, kinsman type, Summary, Isa. 50. 20. 

‘“ (N. T.), Summary, Rom. 3. 24. 
Reed, measuring, meaning, Zech. 2. I. 

Refreshing, seasons of, Acts 3. 19. 
Refuge, cities of, typical meaning, Num. 35. 6. 
Regeneration defined, John 3. 3. 

s of the social order, Mt. 19. 28. 
Religion, biblical use of word, Gal. 1. 14. 
Remnant, in Israel, Jer. 15. 11. 

Sa Jewish, in this age, Zech. II. 11. 

Be Jewish, in great tribulation, Zech. 13. 8. 
Remnant, Jewish, Summary (Isa. 1. 0; Rom. 11. 5). 
Remnant, the, ministry im last days, Mic. 5. 7. 

“ restored to Palestine, Ezra 2, 1. 

rs typified, Dan. 3. 17. 

x in Zech., Zech. 8. 6. 

Repentance exemplified, Psa. 51. 1. 
Repentance, in O. T., Summary, Zech. 8. 14. 
- (N. ae Summary (Mt. 3. 2; Acts 
x7..30)a 
Restitution of ail things, Acts 3. 21. 
Restoration from Babylon, order of, Ezra 2. 1, 
ie of Israel, future, Jer. 23., title. 
Resurrection in O. T., Psa. 22. 22; Isa. 26. 19. 

ee of Christ, Psa. 16. 9. 

s of Christ, order of, Mt. 28. 1. 

ne the first, r Cor. 15. 52; 1 Thes. 4. 17. 
Resurrection, Summary (Job 19. 25; 1 Cor. 15. 52). 
Resurrections, the interval between, Rev. 20. 5. 
Revelation, method of, 1 Cor. 2. 13. 

os the, Book of, Introduction, p. 1330. 
Rewards and salvation discriminated, 1 Cor. 3. 14. 
Ribband of blue, typical meaning, Num. 15. 38. 
Righteousness of God defined, Rom. 3. 21. 

ss of God in justification, Rom. 3. 26. 
as a life, 1 John 3. 7. 

; self, Rom. 10. 3. 

Righteousness (garment), Summary (Gen. 3. 21; 

Rev. 19. 8). 

se (O. T.), Summary (Gen. 6. 9; Lk. 
‘ 2. 25). 

Rock, see Christ. 

“« “in Horeb, typical meaning, Num. 20, 8. 

Roll, flying, symbolic meaning, Zech. 5. 1. 

Roman empire restored, Rev. 13. I. 

Romans, Epistle, Introduction, p. I1oI. 

Rome, future last emperor, Rev. 13. 3. 

Russia, see Magog. 

Ruth, Book of, Introduction, p. 315. 


Sabbath and first day, Mt. 12. 1. 

v given to man, Neh. 9. 14. 
Sabbath, the, Summary (Gen. 2..3; Mt. ‘12. I). 
Sacrifice, animals acceptable for, Lev. 1. 3. 

& in future kingdom, Ezk. 43. 19. 

< typical, meaning of, Lev. 17. 11. 
es, (of Christ), Summary (Gen. 4. 4; Heb. 
~ 10, 18). 

“Sadducees, note concerning, Mt. 3. 7. 
Saints, Christ will come for, John 14. 3; 1 Thes. 
45275) Reve 4s) Ix. 
“of the tribulation, Rev. 7. 14. 

Salt, typical meaning, Lev. 2. 1. 
Salvation and rewards distinguished, 1 Cor. 3. 14. 

. the three tenses of, Rom. 1, 16, 
Salvation, Summary,¢Rom. 1. 16. , 
Samson, character and work, Jud. 16. 31. 
Samuel, First Book of, Introduction, p. 319. 

“ Second Book of, Introduction, p. 355. 
Sanctification, Greek word for, Mt. 4. 5. 

ss typical illustration, Lev, 21. 8. 

Sanctification sos T.), Summary (Gen. 2. 3; Zech. 


“ 
“ 


«1 3)le 
“ (N. T.), Summary (Mt. 4. 5; Rev. 
22.555) 
Sarah, type of grace, Gen. 21. 3. 
Satan as angel of light, Gen. 3. I. 
“ his first glory and fall, Ezk, 28. 12. 
“as Lucifer, meaning, Isa. 14. 12. 
“relation to demons, Mt. 7. 22. 
« world-kingdom of, Rev. 13. 8. 
Satan, Summary (Gen. 3. 1; Rev. 20. 10). 
Saul, death of, 1 Sam. 31. 3. 
Scarlet, typical meaning, Ex. 25. I. 
re line of Rahab, Josh. 2. 21. 
Schoolmaster, term defined, Gal. 3. 25. 


Scribes, the, note concerning, Mt, 2. 4. 
Scripture, accuracy of, Lk, 4. 19, 
Sea, symbolic meaning, Dan. 7. 2. 
Seal, a, symbol of Holy Spirit, Acts 2. 4; Eph. 1. 13. 
Second world-empire, prophecy of, Dan. 8. 1. 
Sennacherib, destruction of, predicted, Isa. 32. 2. 
Separation, compromises of, Ex. 8. 25. 
- preparation for service, Num. 6. 1. 
_ type of, Ex. 5. 3, marg. 
Separation, Summary (Gen, 12.1; 2 Cor. 6. 17). 
Seraphims, meaning of name, Isa. 6. 2. 
e and Cherubim, Ezk. 1. 5. 

Sermon on the Mount, note on the, Mt. 5. 2. 
Serpent before the curse, Gen. 3, 1. 

“f cursed, Gen. 3. 14. 
type, Num. 21.9. 
Servant of Jehovah, expression defined, Isa. 41. 8, 
Service, the apostolic evangelism, p. 1267. 

Be hindrances illustrated, Ezra 4. 2. 
illustrated, Jon. 4. 8. 
instructions concerning, Mt. ro. 16. 
Eliezer, model servant, Gen. 24. 66, note. 
exact obedience in, 2 Sam. 6. 3. 
preparation for, Ex. 4. 6. 
preparation for Ezekiel’s, p. 840. 
urgency of, Mt. 10. 9, 
wholly under His will, Eph. 4. rr. 
Seventieth week of Daniel, Dan. 9, 24. 
Seventy years of Judah’s captivity, Jer. 25. 11. 
Shear-jashub, name explained, Isa. 8. 18. 
Shem, declaration concerning, Gen. 9. I. 
Sheol, definition of, Hab. 2. 5. 
Shepherd, Christ as the, John ro. 7. 

a Christ, David a type, 1 Chr. 17. 7, 

Shewbread, type of Christ, Ex. 25. 30. 
Shittim wood, see Acacia. 
Shoshannim, meaning of, Psa. 45, title. 
Silver, type of redemption, Ex. 25. 1; 26. 19; 38. 


“ 


“a 


“ 


27. 
Sin, beginning of, in‘universe, Isa. 14. 12. 
“of believers already judged, John 12. 31. 
of believers interrupts communion, John 1%. 
10. 
leprosy a type of, Lev. 13. 2. 
in the nature, Rom. 5. 21. 
“first human, results of, Rom. 5. 12. 
“offering, Hebrew word, Gen. 4. 7. 
“offering, typical meaning, Lev. 4. 3. 
“* universality of, Rom, 5. 12. 
Sin, Summary, Rom, 3. 23. 
Sinai, significance of, Ex. 19. I. 
Sinim, land of, Isa. 49. 12. 
Son of Man, phrase defined, Ezk, 2. 1; Mt. 8. 20. 
Song of Solomon, Book of, Introduction, p. 705, 
Sons of God before the Flood, Gen. 6. 4. 
Sonship defined, Eph. 1. 5. 
Sorrow a result of sin, Gen. 3. 14. 
Soul and spirit, Gen. 1. 26, 
Soul and spirit not identical, 1 Thes. 5. 23. 
Sower, parable of, Mt. 13. 3. 
Spirit and soul not identical, 1 Thes. 5. 23. 
Spirit of man, Gen. I. 26. ~ 
Spirit of man, see Man, 
Spiritual man, Abel a type of, Gen. 4. 2. 
Standing and state, the believer's, 1 Cor. I. 2. 
Stone, see Christ. 
Stone, the smiting, Dan. 2. 31. 
Stones, memorial, at Jordan, Josh. 4. 3. 
Substitution, see Sin-offering. 
Suffering of believers, r Pet. I. 7. 
Summary, Angels, Heb, 1. 4. 
os Antichrist, the, Rev. 13. 16. 


“ 


“ 


is Apostasy, 2 Tim. 3. I. 
ef Armageddon, battle of, Rev. 19. It. 
“ Assurance, Jude I. 


ss The Beast, Rev. 19. 20. 

Ms Church, the true, Heb. 12. 23. 

tS Church (visible), 1 Tim. 3. 15. 

ae Churches (local), Phil. x. 1. 

a Covenants, the eight, Heb. 8. 8. 
ae Death, physical, Heb. 9. 27. 


¥ Death, the second, Rev. 21. 8. 
“ Death, spiritual, Eph. 2. 5. 

— Demons, Mt. 7. 22. 

ow Election personal, 1 Pet. I. 2. 


bid Eternal life, Rey. 22. 19. 


1361 


INDEX. 


Summary, Faith, Heb. rr. 39. 

ose Flesh, the, Jude 23. 

ee Forgiveness, Mt. 26. 28. 

i. Giving, 2 Cor. 8. 1. 

~ Gospel, the, Rev. 14. 6. 

i, Grace, John 1. 16. 

s Grace, imparted, 2 Pet. 3. 18. 

* Hell (Hades), Lk. 16. 23. 

“e Holy Spirit (O. T.), Mal. 2. 15. 

a Holy Spirit (N. T.); Acts 2. 4. 

es Imputation; Jas. 2. 23. 

Ke Inspiration of Bible, Rev. 22. 10. 

Israel specplecies): Rom. 11. 26. 

Day of judgment, Rev. 20. 11. 
Judgments, the seven, Rev. 20. 12. 
ustification, Rom. 3. 26. 
oa ingdom (N. T.), 1 Cor. 15. 24. 
re Kingdom (O. T.), Zech. 12. 8. 
‘S Law of Christ, 2:John 5. 
Law (of Moses), Gal. 3. 24. 
Leaven, Mt. 13. 335 
ae Day of the Lorn, Rev. 19. Io. 
The Messianic Psalms, Psa. 118. 29. 
Nature of man, 1 Thes. 5, 23. 
= The New Covenant, Heb. 8. 8. 
Sa Parables of O. T., Zech. 11. 7. 
s Prayer in the O. T., Hab. 3. 1. 
el Prayer in the N. T., Lk. rr. a. 
t* Priesthood (N_ T.), 1 Pet, 2.9 
Propitiation, Rom 3. 25 
Reconaihation, Col. 1. 21. 
“ Redemption (N. T.), Rom. 3. 24. 
Redemption, kinsman type, Isa. 59. 26. 
Me Remnant (VJewish), Rom. 11. 5. 
Repentance, Acts 17. 30. 
o Repentance (O. T.), Zech. 8. rg. 
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 52. 
B God (O. T.), revelation of, Mal. 3. r& 
a Righteousness (O, T.), Lk. 2. 25. 
Righteousness a garment, Rev. 10. 8. 
7, Rock, Christ as, 1 Pet. 2. 8, 
23 Sabbath, Mt. 12. 1, 
b Sacrifice of Christ, Heb. 10. 18 
Sanctification in O. T., Zech. 8, 3. 
ae Sanctification (N. T.), Rev 22. 11 
Satan, Rev. 20. to 
Separation, 2 Cor, 6. 17 
% Sin, Rom. 3. 23. 
Times of Gentiles, Rev. 16. 19. 
Tribulation, the great, Rev. 7. 14. 
World-system, Rev. 13. 8. 
Supper, the Lord's, institution of, Mt. 26. 20 
Sweet savour offerings, typical meaning, Lev 1 9. 


Tabernacle, divided, 1 Chr. 16. 37 
Tabernacles, feast of, observed, Neh. 8. 17 
st feast of, typical meaning, Ex. 25. 9; 
Lev. 23. 42. 

Tares in kingdom of heaven, Mt. 13. 24, 30 
Temple, in the kingdom-age, Hag. 2. 3. 

% profanations of, shown Ezekiel, Ezk. 8.3 
typical meaning, 1 Ki. 6. 1. 
Solomon's, windows in, 1 Ki. 6. 4 
Temples, all Jehovah's, Hag. 2. 9 
Temptation of Eve, Gen, 3. 1, 

se the two meanings of, Jas. 1 14 

Tenses of the new life, 1 Thes. 1. 9. 
Testing of faith, Jas. 1. 14. 
Theocracy not restored, Ezra 6. 24. 
Theophanies, Gen, 12. 7; Rey. 1. 10, 
Thessalonians, First Epistle, Introduction, p. 1267. 

Sy Second Epistle,Introduction, p. 1271 
Third world-empire, prophecy of, Dan. 8. 1 
Thorn in the flesh, Paul's, 2 Cor. 12. 7 
Times of the Gentiles, see Gentiles. 
Timothy, First Epistle, Introduction, p. 1274. 

pei Second Epistle, Introduction, p. 1279 

Titus, Epistle, Introduction, Pp. 1283. 
Tobiahs, the two, Neh. 2. 10. 
(Tongues, a sign gift, 1 Cor. 14,1 


oy 


oy 


1302 : 


“Touch me not,” explanation, John 20. 17. \ 
Transfiguration of Christ, picture of kingdom, Mt. 
Sede 

Treasure, the hid, parable of, Mt. 13. 44. 

Trespass-offering, typical meaning, Lev. 5. 6. 

Tribes, the ten, still in dispersion, Ezra 2. 1. é 

Tribulation, the great, Christ’s prophecy, Mt. 24. 3. 
C conversions ,; during, Rev. 


7. 4. 
duration of, Rev. 7. 14. 
in Daniel, Dan. 11. 35. 
and the remnant, Isa. 11, 

title. 

Tribulation, the great, Summary (Psa. 2. 5; Rev. 


“ 
“ 


J. 14). 
Trilogy, a, Psalms 22, 23, 24; Psa. 22. 1. 
Trinity, the, manifested together, Mt. 3. 16. 

oS Persons of, Mt. 28. 10, 

Trumpets, feast of, typical meaning, Lev. 23. 24. 
Trust, O. T. word for faith, Psa. 2. 12. 
Truth, discernment of, 1 Cor. 2. 13. 
Tubal, descendants of, Gen. 10. 2. 
Types of Exodus, authority for, Ex. 25. 1. 

. definition of, Gen. I. 16. 

“* interpretation of, Ex..25 1. 
Unbelievers, subject to demon possession, Mt. 7. 22. 
Unleavened bread, feast of, Lev. 23. 6. 
‘Until,’ the three of Israel, Mt. 23. 30. 
Urim and Thummim, Ex. 28. 30. 

Uz, land of, Job 1.1. ° 


Vanity, meaning of word, Eccl. r. 2. 
Veil of Tabernacle, type, Ex. 26. 31. 

“of temple rent, Mt. 27. 51. 
Vengeance, day of, defined, Isa. 61, 2. 
Victories, spiritual, secret of, Josh. 6. 5. 
Virgins, wise and foolish, parable, Mt. 25. £. 


Walking in the light, r John 1. 7. 
Water, symbol of Holy Spirit, Acts 2. 4. 
Wave-loaves, type of church, Lev. 23. 17, 
Weeks, of Daniel, Dan. 9. 24. 
# feast of, meaning, Deut. 16. 1. 
Wells of Genesis, names defined, Gen. 26. 20, 
Wheat and tares, Sara of, Mt. 13. 24. 
Wife of Jehovah, Hos. 2. 2. 
Wilderness, meaning of, Num. 15., p. 186. 
Will of God defined, Gen. 46. 3. 
“* of God, two kinds, Num. 22. 22. 
Wind, symbol of Holy Spirit, Acts 2. 4. 
isdom in O. T., meaning of, Prov. 8. 22. 
oman as created, Gen. 1. 26, 27. 
~ effect of sin, Gen. 3. 14. > 
in apostolic churches, 1 Cor. 14. 34-35 
Word (Lowes, name of Christ, John f. 1. 
World (Kosmos), meanings, Mt. 4. 8. 
World ie: Summary (John 7. 7; Rev. 13. 4 
Bae 
‘ 


“ 


World (oikoumene), word defined, Lk: 
World-borderers, type of, Num. 32. 1. 
World-empire, the fourth, to be restored, Rev. 13.1, 
es symbols of, Rev. 13. 2. 
World-empires, extent of, Dan. 4. 1. 
C the four, Dan. 2. 31, 41. 


World-system, future destruction of, Isa. 14. 26 
Worship, incense type, Ex, 30. 9. 

ke of Israel restored after 70 years, Ezra 6.14. 
not to be sensuous, Ex, 30. 38. 


Zechariah, Book of, Introduction, p. 96s. 
be first vision explained, Zech. | 
ES. : 
& symbols explained, Zech. 1. 8; 
“10. 4. ¢ 
symbols explained, Zech, 10, 4. _ 
Zephaniah, Book of, Introduction, Pp. 959. 
Zerubbabel leads remnant to Palestine, Ezra 2. 1, : 
Zion, meaning of, 1 Chr. 11. 5. i 
Zophar, characteristics of, Job 11. 1. 


“ 


Ge > 


THE 
INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE. 


doist of Gaps. 


MAP 
. Lanps ayp Nations OF THE BIBLE. 
9. Ecypr, Sinal PeNniNnstLa, AND SyRia. 
THE TABERNACLE. 
8. Tur Promisep Lanp, sHowING THE SETTLEMENT 
OF THE TWELVE TRIBES 
4. Tue Hesrew Kuincpom 
Sotoxon, 
4a, JERUSALEM oF DavID AND SoLomon, 
4b. Soromon’s TeMPLe. 
4c. Sotomon’s TEMPLE AND PALACE. 
5. Kinepoms oF Jupag AND IsrakL, 
5a. JERUSALEM IN 440 B.C. 
5b, Persian Province oF JUDAH UNDER NEHE- 
MIAH, 445 B.C, 


PLAN OF 


UNDER DaviD AND 


MAP 
6. ASSYRIAN AND BABYLONIAN EMpIREs, 
7. PERSIAN AND GREEK EMPIRES, 
8. Protemaic, Seveucip, anv Roman Ewprres, 
250-150 B. Cc. 
8a. PALESTINE UNDER THE MACCABEES, 
9. PALESTINE IN THE TIME OF CHRIST, 
9a, TempLE or HERop. 
9b, JERUSALEM BEFORE 70 A.D. 
10. MEpITERRANEAN LANDS ILLUSTRATING THE AcTS 
AND EpistTLes. 
11. Roman Empire IN THE First CEeNnrUrRY aFTER 
CBRIST. 
12a. GALILEE. 
12 b, Environs oF JERUSALEM. 


List of Biblical Names, 
WITH FIGURES AND LETTERS INDICATING THE SITUATION OF THE 
PLACES ON THE MAP. 


Nore.—The figure preceding a hyphen denotes the number of the map, and the letter and figure following the 


hyphen indicate the square tr which the name will be found ; thus Accho (3, 5 


- B38; 4- B5) will be found 


on Maps 8 und 5 wn the square B 3, und on Mup 4 in the square B 5. 


i=} 
~ 


Eira, i a Cie : 3 3 
Abdeh Sia 


Abdon 

Abel- beth-maacah - 
Abel-meholah . . . . 
MEE ee we 
Sere 
Abotu(Abydos). .  . 
mbuHammed .~  . «fe 
Abu Simbel Ee 
Abydos (Abotu) 

aeyaue fcths 


cad . Ci 
raron (Bkron : 
_Accho (bfolemais, Akka) 3,5- 
Achaia (Greece) fel = D125 
Achmetha (Eebatana, Hamad an)” 
peat (Ecdippa, ez an 3,5- Le 


“Aaiasa (Kh. ‘Adaseh) | 
i s ai Or 
Adora (Dura) 7 Pa es ' 5 
Adoraim . : cfety 
Adramyttium ‘ 
‘Adullam (Kh, Adel Ma) 
3,5-B5;4-B6; 8a-A5i 

aks CB) wo” . 

CO i ae 
48non co oS orate 
Africa 
Ai (Aija, Kh. Haiyun) A “5 bs 55-B5; 
Aija (Ai, Kh. Haiyum) . . ‘ 
AinelHadra .” . ae es 
Ain Hamul(Hammon): +... 
Ain Sha’in (Shihon) 2 Av AGO 
Ain Shems(Beth-shemesh) . . . 
Ain Tabighah (Bethsaida) . . 
Ainitha (Beth-anath) . 
Ajalon(Yalo) 2-03;3-A5; 4-A6 655-A55 
Akhet-Aton \Tell-el: ’Amarna) 3 
Akka (Accho, Ptolemais) . 2-C2; 
Akrabattine 2. 2. 6 + 

zabu sl. Ciel ae é 


NNww 


to 
aeae 
‘Hep 


aapdle 3B 
3,5-C2;4-B 


oe) a 
w 
CP ATHE POTN NNNDP ORE LR 


tore 
Kee 


B3; 4-B5;1 


a 
pet ee 
moO oie 
Peo = 
| Tie! Ween Soml Me act Fost Pat Way a Tes [> Yi DPE TRS Ps haf 


OPP POLE RUN rr Pron Pa 


re 
on 
ies sree 
TON AW OMI W NNR ORONO NORTH NPN WORN OE NORMED 


ero) 
HOMO 


a 
pet el i | 
HOP > POS rononWAh4bS> 


ee 
nw 
PTePwors 


Ses Se, le 
SEAS) 


a 
2b 


~ 


Alema 


Alexandria *. %-A3:7-B2:8- 04; 


Alexandria (Aria) .  .  ., 
Alexandria (Bactriana) . 2 
Alexandria (Sogdiana) . a 


Ti Me) er] 


BOM >POROd Porch ProNrOnMmOM> > Witney 


Alexandria Areion , . 
Alexandrium 
ergs (Almeth, Almit) | 


w 
wo 
Sop -tats1~1 


Alpi ° 

‘Altar (Tabernacle); : 
Amadeh . . aes 
Amalekites 4 = : 
Amastris . . ‘ 
Amathus . C 


Rive: “er Melia) @) p:e 0 


eS 


(oP ee 


Aunida 5 
Amisus 
Amnon. 
Ammon, Temple of: . 
Ammonites . . . . . 
Ammonium ° . 5 . . 
AMioribes Ws we es 
Amphipolis avis: . . 5 
Amwas Emmaus) OF mee 
Anab . ay Bike 
Ananiah (Beit Hannina) at. Bs 
Anata (Anathoth) . a 
Anathoth (Anata) . “Bb 5, 8a-B 5; 
Anchialus. . 

Ancyra Sop A “D2; 10- D3; 
‘Antacopolis (nica : fend 
Anthedon , Bi ca b 
Antinoe 
Antioch (in Pisidia) 
Antioch (in Syria) 
Antiochia Margiana F 
Antiochus, etned ots of. 5 . 
Antipatris . Z e . 
Antonia. . 5 . 
Apamea (in Asia) . 
Apamea. (in Bahylonia) - 
eet (in Syria) . 
Aphek(Fik)’ 2. . .« 
Apollinopolis _. . 
Apollonia (in Judea). 
Apollonia (in Macedonia) 
Aquileia. sees . 


a 
= 


eee are 
wa “UBER ee a 
MEN DEE OO TW TONsTwWOG 
(ro Tf TOR Pek AA fall Teel WMGL TA RPA Some SS at Peo et poe Yee eit jet VOW TR J I et bt Ws ee 


ee 


9°: 
“+ 

vs 
22) 


_ “D 
g- Es, 10-2 


= 


(ee) 
ON TMMnDToSo-3 


©, Sere @ 0 Ne 


22 


Arab... c es 
Arabah, The . O 5 


TAOS Co 0900 DD ee OT OT Oi 09 9 BD BO 09 OT O09 G0 1 2 ST ODO we DO DD 


wks MGiGe) eyo! eel cst 6 sg 
dO Oe Ne te 
+ © eo Wee 

Se Re eo Del Ba No a be! SI 


eons 


: 
TIE INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE. 


Arabah, Sea of ‘the ale i Feast 
oe : 1-F3;7- 
ee (Ary Vsti: Wi eli vee * 
Aral, Lake 5 
Aram (Syria) 1- E25 B- C2; 4- -B4;5- 
Aram Maacah . '. 
Ararat,Mount. . . Se 
Araxes, Fiver~ 5 
‘Arbela ( Assyria) 
‘Arbela (Irbid) (Galilee) 
Archelais . 
Archipelago, Bgean 
Arelate  . : pam oy 
Argob Jair & 


Aria e oor eee 


, 
Sor ee 


ie} 
no 
in ops fees saws 
IP WIAAMRONWAWUIRPAWHOMNOTWTEH Sop Gi oa een eh 


LAT re Tas! et Pat VERT Taser <a TT Yi Ye as gy Tei fim | fC Lik pec oe-T) AT a 


BeEDOQQ HOOFrW car 


Py i) a Or ee ary 


PIPBHOOCOUSWOPOU DE AMOrOnCOHOneHWOdeeOmrtwitd 


el 


Ark (Tabernacle) 
Armiyira : 
Armenia . She a 6-F1; 
Arnon “ . . 

Aroer (Judah) ; r ; 
Aroer (Reuben) ie . 
Arpad ae ke : Ayers 
Arsinoé ° . . 
‘Artacoana (Alexandria Areion) |. 
Arumah . . pt OF 
‘Arvad (Aradus) 

Aryada 
Ascalon . 
Ashdod. 
Asher . 3 
Ashkelon . 2-C3 
Ashkenaz (Ashkusa) 5 : 
Ashtaroth . « = . 
Ashteroth Karnaim) >? é 


Ashtarti . 5 
ve D2;8- C3; 10 - C231 


‘Asia. Rifas 
Asochis 

‘Asochis, Plain of (Sahel él Buttauf) 
Aspadana . a Ds * 
Asshur (country) 3 
Asshur (town) . . 
ASHOS. Set. 
Assyria 5 a 


i 


C= 
‘ 
er uw 


22083 8-a's A 
3-A5;4 


mh 
WON CD ROE WO OT OI DOA DWH UUW N RL ONE NW HA OO 


oe 
' 
1] 
mw 
a. 
t 
. wo 
Paar 
CHE weATISRAOp se 


Assyrian Empire 
Ataroth-adar 
Athens 2 

Atlas Mountains 
Atroth Sophan. . 
Attalia rae a ee 
Azotus . aa. 


5 ee | 
- 8a, 9-A5; 1 


so 


Baal-hermon 
Baal-meon . 
Baal-shalisha 
Babylon . w= 
Babylonia... 1-F 
Bactra (Zariaspa) é 
Bactriana . : * 
Baheiret el Huleh |: : 
Balamo(Ibleam) . , . ope é 
Baleares). =. 
Banias 6 6 - . 
Bashan Efe at 0 
Batanea , ‘ . 
Bath Zacharias - 5 
Hbeka (Bireh) 

er-sheba 2 * 
Beit Hannin . (Ananiah) a he 
Beit Jala (Gallim) . 5 
Beit-Lahm (Beth-lehem) Galilee . 
Beit-Lahm (Beth-lehem) Juda 
Beit Nettif (Netophah) . 
Beit’ Ur et-Tahta Ean er Beth-horon), 
Bene-Berak : 
Benjamin . F . 
Berea . 
Berenice Cyrenaica) ‘ : . . 
Berenice (Bgypt) . eee AMT 
Beroea, or Berea (Macedonial rpc 
Beroea (Syria) . 4 
Berytus f a 
Beth-abara (?Makhadet Hajlah) 
Beth-abara (? Makhadet Abarah)') ws 03 
Beth-anath (Ainitha) . 
Beth-anoth (Kh. Beit Aiman) 
Bethany (el Azariyeh)  , 5 
Beth-azmaveth (Hizmeh) 


. 
“0 
(oS) se 
= 
Lal | (sed (al a | 


WOOKR STOTT OUNP HEP T~IWmOU 


Widse ee CO 


S) 

1 

Q 

oe 
hchededtet creo 


Nwwwrns 


aT 


STD ooCODHOAISw 


=i 


w 
IQ UD UUW WWOTHOEH NN EIN OHMS WNL ON NN Eee OID CON OTN OF 


elelololloloptelleclebatatale-|alelosf oP ele @lol-lo ie] 


CA ee my cy hal a og Col ao ot Cott ce oat ated eM aie Tv ban al bed bell) 


| Bethsaida Julias (et 1 


.Calah . oi. 


Beth-el (Luz, Beitin) 


2-C3; 3,5, 8a, 9- BPs 4-B6;5b;12b- 
Beth-er (Bittir). . 3-B5; 12b- 
Bethesda, Poolof <4 os . «> 9 
Beth-haran 5 ip eh a5 ab. 
Beth-hoglah : Air 80 ches G 


Beth-horon 3,5,8a-B5; 
Beth-horon, Lower (Beit? Ur ét-Tahta) 12 
Beth-horon, Upper — Ur el Foka). 12 
Beth-jeshimoth . 3, 
Beth-lehem (Judah) 3, 5, 8 a, ‘9- Bs 531 
Beth-lehem (Zebulon) . 5 = 
Beth-nimrah . : BG 
Beth-peor . . 
Bethphage (Kefr-et Tor)” 4 
Beth-rehob (Hunin) pete 
Bethsaida (Ain Tabighah) . 


ell) 
Beth-san . 
Beth-shean (Seythopolis, Beisan) 


-€253-B3;4- 
Beth- tes Stems) 3, 5: A ag ACB 
Beth-sura . . 3 ° 


Poth nodbboobwObtino by 
UO te 00150 5 Fab ON ON iis ROS al is a EGA. noe 


Bubastis (Per Baste, Pibeseth) 

Burdigala (Bordeaux) . = 

Busiris (Dedu) . 

Byzantium (Constantinople) 
1-D1 -€2; 10-C1;3 11- 


Gabubis. |< A - 4-B5; 5- B3; 12 


1 


5-B5 


is7 Bay 


Beth-tappuah . ‘ . pe 
Beth-zacharias (Kh. Beit Sakaria). ‘See Bath 
Zacharias. 
Beth-zur(Bethsura),  . °.. 4.) 0.) 8= BBS Bb 
Bezek (Judg. 1. 4, 5) . ° sha CU SianeaTS - 8-ADSB 
Bezek (1 Sam. 11. 8) . 5 ° 5 «\ ». 3-B4 
ezer i SS Ser . ° oe OG 
ezetha =. ox AS SSeae ie eon 
Birehi(Beerothieg. ¢,! scene ame 12b-Bl 
Biruta . : ~ Se 5 eh . » -2-C2 
Bit Jarkin . . . ay he ~ thee CE KS 
Bithynia  . - « 1-E1;8-D2;1-K3 
Bithynia and Pontus : 5 = ci - 10-Dil¥ 
Bittir (Beth-er) . er A a oS 12b-A2 
Bordeaux (Burdigala) : { ; 3 - 11-C3 
Borsippa. ‘ 5 . vty ¥E «V6 Ee 
Borysthones: >is 5. ake ML Say eeu 
Bostra. . whee ye Oh VOM S SSIS 
Bozrah (Bashan) oF ee ie » 5-D83 
Bozrah (Edom) 5 5 “9 as A oo 6 = D5 
Brook Kidren 5 ore 3 12b-B2 
Britannia . . Q ; . 11-Cl 
Brundusium 11-G3 
2-A 
1-C 
2-A 
J 


Cabura . . . . . 5 . 
Cades . x 5 5 & : . ° 

Coesaraugusta . . 

Cxesarea (Judzea) io-A 3;10-D3; 

Caesarea (Mauretania) , 

Cwsarea Philippi . . 


a 
itt 


POR AO 


Calebites . . 3- 
Callirhoe . . 
Calneh (Calno) . 
aot i . 
Cana (Kafr Kenna) | 9- BS; 
Canaanites . 


3- 
Capernaum (Tell Hum, Khurbet Minieh) 


9-C33 12 
Caphar Salama... <, Oar eet Tees 
Caphtor . = ; 2 Des 
Cappadocia 5 1-E3;8-E3;10-B2;2 
Carana ae ‘ : 
Carchemish 
BRC eee ere ahi 
Garmianey seas Jaci! 
Carmania . 
Carmel . 
Carmel, Mount (J. Kurmul) 
3,9-B3; eg 6- mr B3; 12 
Carrhae . iy . 
Carthage. a's 
Carthago Nova . 
Casphor_. 5 : 
Caspian Sea 
Castra Regina (Regensburg) 
Caucasus. 
Cedron C . ° . 
Cerichrea” >. 


wo 
use 9 © Oe oe we 


Wo 
HPP wre 


DD Alig UAT STD eg ES Hi Meet toe 


. 


: 


= 


a 


Pia tions 


DUPINI Oe DR OD ae POTD NOLO OTOH 90D oo eC OD 


teh 
BHHOFSHE> oO wa Hartanhourv 


(ene ar led eed aa 


Soon 


see BIAS OT 
Le) ries 


reas TPs 


@ 
2 


on 
Ba 


1-F 


pa 
Be Orp som. 


of 67 1s (w) seme tet ie 
Ble tro Be te a had: 


ere ew . 
. oe 


. 
e 
i) 


THE INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE. 


Chalcedon . . 
Chaldea (Kaldi) 5 
MHA WOn Ee. = Ge 
Becaoboskion-(iined, Teatyx) 
noboskion (Enet, Ten = 
Chephirah . 3 
Chephirah (Kefireh) |. 
Chersonesus Taurica ; ‘ ‘ : 
Chesalon (Kesla)  . : ; $-B5;1 
-C 


. 


S ey = 
Bo gtatsaa m 
eat es 8G 


ow ,S) eee: mia! 
pit” 
a 


Chesulloth . f 
Chinnereth, Sea of 3-C3;4-B5:5 
ios . . . . 

Chittim (Kittim, Cyprus) Cuan VPC TY 
Choaspes payaaspee!, river. é 
Chorasmil . age 
Chorazin (Kerazch) . 

,Cilicia. 1-E2z -€2;8-D3; 10-D2; i 
Cilician Gates... 2 
Cimmerians - 
City of David (or Zion) ° 
ClaudalL . . : 


Puan Swe 


ey . 
tw 


RP ra pein eyed) Ee 


» 
ocr 


® 
bette tat eaten SOCROERCCERPA PO RrOSH 


e- 02; 10- C2; 


is oes 
nats 
NEES 


ean eh eee 


a 
i=] 
ie} 
n 
eI 
7) 
ee = 


. ais 
ee Agrippina ee ee 
Colo: ER he - ah 
eS 
Constantinople (Byzantium) - Se hie 
Corduba . ; He - 
Corinth . pees 
Corinth (Sicyon) 5 " : <i 
CornerGate  . Ss es a pe 
CORE SS 
Cortina . = ae 


Os 2 5 5 = 
Court of the Gentiles =. z : ; a 
Crete (Caphtor). . . Ar D233 Besse se 


Crocodilopolis ancet) te eee 
Ctesiphon .  . Ye ae ence 
Cusae(Gosu) . . a 
Cush (Ethiopia) . 
Cyamon™.. ° . 5 5 
Cynopolrs . Sh saryad Sc 
Bric (Chittim, Kittim) 

- B25; 6-337 g 
Brecht. ee eas So 
Cyrene hel Neer 7 
‘Cyzicus ook Oa ae 


eerneio i MUTE. 8 eS 
CER y ct we! gt 
Dalmatia . ee 
Damascus (city) ” 1-E% 
4-C4;6-E4,7-C: 
Damascus (country) . 
_ Dan (Tribe) 
Dan (Laish) (Tell el 1 Kady) 


CR RRR ROR RRO RP RRR OR ROR RIOTS CONN Ste 


CoP lOtw wtto precrorir 


ws 
1 
Pac. 
ra 
WNT WN BONO ROW ON mhibe. 


hie 
how sro 


ron 
aes 


met 


4-Bd4 


. 
. 
. 
. 


Decapolis * 


Dedu (Busiris) : 
Derbe . e 
Dertosa 
Dibon 
Dion . 
Dioscurias 
Dium . 
Docus . 
aa 


Fy oie) otigmasie ne) tee 


Deveie tats (eek hve MST 


G>ay Hor r>dovecss > rerrdY 
Cann WRAWUOO Re BOON WO OW Ute 


Bl grka, miei sorte Bi) 8) <a ©) 


Drangiana . 

2 Gate i 
ur Kurigalgu 

Dur Sharrukin: 

Dura (Adora) 

Dyrrhachium 


meeenlaMoant) 2st is. 6 6 -» 
Ehoracum (York) Liss 1 
Ecbatana ( Achmetha, Hamadan) 
-F2;6-K2;6-L3;7-E2;8- 


nls oie ele io eo ee “s/0) Suen) 4. 015) Ve 


* 
. 
. 
. 
° 


evans 
Qifolie'<6) eo, agit) abe. s. Se 
& 
Bu 
o 
Te 
@ aw 
Ro 


| Gaza 


Ecdrppa (Achzib, ez Zib). ; OPE B2;12 
essa : ~F2; a 

: Poet ee 2; 2-B4;4- BI; 5 

Rateryo yh ciate Sa vaca > Ret iat 


Ep 


rrr 


El Marineyen ei — y = 


SE 
= 
ae 
Ma ras 
aT 
es 
ee 
Eat 
PES 
ee 
i 

a 


Bl ibureibeh (tazor) . = 

El Kubeibeh (pana) 5 

Eiah, V. yeu of. 3 

Elam . eS : e 1- 

dblath . Ste cng a 1- 

BElealah 5 : 

Eleithyiaspolis (Nekheb). ob eae da d 
tlephantine .  . Sey akg re 

Lleutheropolis . 

Elim)s, 


betpa pas pate ea 
MNMNKRMCN Nese 


tr! 
Ben” 
TOP IEQAneowNwaPMyP THE CHE TAROURG 


boll 
ey 
nn 


Emesa 5 r 5 
Emmaus . Samed . a) gs 
Emmaus (Amwas) : - fae 
Emmaus (el Kubeibeb) . ae RA 
Emmaus(Kolonieh) —. 
En Hazor (Kh. Hazireh) Se sc 
En Nasirah (Nazareth). . fy as 
En Rogel . = 6 4 

3- B 3; 4- “Bo 5; 1: 


Enet (Tentyra, Chenoboskion) 
n-gannim : da hy 
En-gedi. 
En-rimmon 
Ephesus)... ake "LB?;10-C 25 ul 
Ephraim . S 3 4 
Ephraim (Tribe) ee kc ls “ 
EphraimGate. .  . uae se 5 
Ephraim, Mount... 5 2 e 
Ephron ‘ < 5 . A Fee 
Er Ram (Ramah?) . 1 0 2 
Er Rameh pRamah), a ae weed 
Erech . a is : spate 
Hpk tOrukiaewes xs eso ws pl ten 
Es Sur (Tyre} te, Mee 12 
Es Zib (Endi »pa, Achzib) 2 
Esdraelon, Vain of . 5 -B 
Eshtaol (Eshua) Ct oto 3-A5; 
Eshtemoa . edt et ten es 
Eshua (Eshtaol) : 9 :  . . 
Essebon (I1eshbon) . . 3 ° 
Et Tell (Bethsaida Julias) ap ha 
Etam . Le NA FAS FS 
Etam (Urtas) . 
Etham SOA 
Ethiopia (Cush) ” . : 
Euphrates, river 1-F2;4 


err 
KR Neo 
Om Viathy tay team RN 


we 


me 
Warne p pk & 


ra 


=e 


= 
1) Ue yeni oc |) 


DER eC SOW WHOOP WENO WCE PEP COCKE ECUUPPUCEP> Serr Rterr> 
ORO UR TR OS EB TR RR TR tS a TR BS TB BT OO DD 


STP EPS arp rpam wo 


a) 
to 


+ @ 
' 
a 


ao 


Buxine Sea . 
Enon’Geber’ . . 


os 
= 
NPENANDS ACH 
tht 
Pera conde 
mont Ge Oe 


Fair Havens . . 
Fifth Cataract. . . 


Yt. (ey 


Fik (Aphek) 

First Cataract . . 
Fish Gate . Er ee <i 
Fountain Gate.° . - +.) -« 
Wourth Gataract . .» «© «© 


an 


Gad 
Gadara (Mukes) . 
Galatia 5 Omes 
yalilee 3 . . 
Galilee, Sea fis, Bos 
Gallia . = 
Gallim (Beit Jala 4 
ter A eke 
Jangra a ee 
Gath . jg c 3 -A 
Gath-hepher : 5 ‘ . 8 5-B8, 
gen amela 5 . < * Pa O38 
yaulanitis . 
2-333, 9-A5; 4, eat -A6 


o 
' 

=] 

an 


Gaza wee 
Gels 1Gibexh; Jeba) (Judah) 5b: 5- 


[of do) 
Oe, 


Cita ss 6 . = ‘ i ‘ tee osiee, 
ne oT ban 
ay 
i THE INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE. p24 ; 
Geba (Pheenicia) 7 
or eee ayy) stk wh idee 4-B4 | Hiddekel (Tigris), river . ‘Wo. @-3na4 
clam nme: TE art gece rey 
oe Vedurineihs calc ee Bo 312 3 uy 3 He eae. Bury? eet i naa : ¢ 3 
Gehenna Wauies aPaatetolay § atte oc 7-F3 Hippicus per oat enna) . . 4a; ie 9b 
ch A c= Theo eee 
Pree eres Daze OF - 8a-C3;1l2a-D4 Sipaaia fs BP? EAB RER Tele ie 
Gerasenes (Kersa) 1 > > 5 { * ot | Be ee ial oe eee CoH 
tiepnogies (Hera) 7 nee teoareearg | Baittten (Katt) © > 1-H2e;3-Dire-83 
Getfaim, Mount eee CS fe M - f Higmeh fe emmarthy 2s i aes Lb gs ’ 
Geshu SS Gta ico ulate aes Eg 2 Holy Pisce crabarmaciey See ble OS BAR if 4 
en ee » + 3,5-C5;4-B5 or, Mount ot, ee eRe at 
G : C rie = . . : . ‘ € tn 2 niGes 
tihethon Sai a seg 2 OSes, OR 9 ds As eer EIR ; 
Gibeak Gaba, Toba) Cait iyo ie eae Hydaspes (Choaspes) river +. |, ie K 4 
i ape A reheat: 2b- inn’ (Caspian) Bea | a, de eee 
Gibeon erga) ays; 4 Re eRe oe (Caspian)Sea . . § peat 
Gi “Mon é Puan ee cea . dazyda Nae 7 . . © 
Gilboa, Mount (Jeb. Fuku’a) . 3,5 Baca b 5 | [bleam (Wady Belameh) te-ce San iH 4 
Se he es 3, 5,8a-C43;4-B5 Ibleam Belameh .  . |. eo BS 
Gilgal RPA : . 3,5-B4;3,5-B5 | Iconium 5 : 7-02; 10- 5 eens 
Gimso. a e : E ’ ’9-G3] Idumea . . . é SI _ TAS Re 
Giiden docs one «  hilsigo tie 2-C2 yricum . . . . 1-C€ 1310°B1;11-G 
Gischala (el Jish) 2 2 «2. Gia ek ff OGTR Ae Bink Meal” ee ais 0 ee 
Gischy Pegs ts .9-B2;12a-Cy| Indian Ocean . * eee 
Golan f cn eee 2 Raton 3- C3 | Tonians (Javan) Sal fname ' erste 
Pomaat hah.) Te Tene OPPS a bt TO a EEE, ieee Pf 
Ge ee oh eA elie ies. dee ENgd(Arbelay Se, 1028 = (eae ald 
Snip eco a ret FT -C1 — =, hs ang, ae aC) 5 i 
‘4 1 . : . . 7 ~E2;2-Adg ron (Y: : : i I Sie 
osu (Cusae) Pr iS oe emo x 3 ‘scuria = pone F245 “0 “ D 2 
‘| * . 2. . . . . -Gsz Sr 1 \d ; . : : 5 ‘ “ ; 
Great Sea, The (Mediterranean Bea) aah Issachar tie Pamted <b ee 3- BS 
Gea ouaia) +2 dy 4, 5, 6, %, 9, 10 ssus . A . . . . ° . -B3 
aiay ww. 1 D3; 7, 10'- BQ | Ister, ri S01. beaters 
Gale Bea iror 60 EP ell Wh bey pS Soh q #4 Italy Toso Ss Yes sai ae 
Gaba ‘ : : . : : : naOHNE | Tepes ; * ° . ° « 2-013 1- FS 
oO Me et oar ere, eer ye” zee | dalbok: Fiver a, ee a poe 
Habor , Jabesh-gilead i 4 B 2 - 3 Si hae 
ade save We Lr ed : sou 2Gg Javneclin oP 44s) Se Re arg 
BMG atcas <2 2 sh baRe Og | feeum gut 2 
Halicarnassus | 7, 2oa5 87 B5 | J ncob's Wen? :_.t opis ppteaee 
Einsh ct ince nies oy one + 7-B2,8-C3) Jamnia : : a 3 3 ef aa? eae, 
TL GE DUS ee pea his 4c Janoah (Yanuh) ; > 2 “5k Say Sg 
Fawentiver Meh a cote 16520 Dii7-0 1 bate i aie tee a i i ' 
amadan (E wea »10-D1;7- anhig ee eed Cees eg B's: ee 
famada t cbatana, Achmetha) Heed itis 16-L3 ST aeahneclites rod a x" bv i BS eae | 
Hamath . 5 2 0. 0. 47-025 6,8-E3 | Jarmuth (Yarmuk)" <> os ° + Sie Aq 
Hammon (Ain Hamul) : 3 F i eke | Vacant t sate eo BS 
Hanameck Ain Hamul). .  .3- BQ; 2 a-A 2 Javan Wpninns)/ 4 Sh, ae ‘ i he i! 
mes!) oe Royer ao axartes, river 2 ol Te 0 oy Nip Seah aes ie 
Haphraim LT eee aeNT Net eae Oks ager hieetemeidier 88,3405 
aphra: ag : 2a- eba (G ineah).. | ¢ Le Re 
Haran raat Farrujeh) 3 th RB ‘ - ‘ Jeb (thea spo at) ae aN i -Bl : 
arod,| Well of(AinJaludit. ¢2. s a.ahac bd ache et Tor (Mount Tabor 2, ot) Sn ea 
we ase AS ey : r(Mount Tabor) | ; 145 
Heresne th (el Haritheyeh) . 1 3-A3; 12 ae mr 4 Sebel at ie erodium) “ton sted Bia ah ; B 2 : 
fie se eae UM ss oe 
i a = Jebe ES . . e a a ~ Q- ‘ A 
Hlaaarmaveth oS STE deta i 
aon Tele La ecI Sore neal SALE ric TL VSke Sa) oR er een 
Hazor (el Kehureibet:) 2, 3,5, 8a-C2;4-B4yi2a- D2 Jerustlem (el Kuds! 1- Hoe Ogee ak Sa Bobb 
Hebron 2-C3; 4-B6; 5b; 6-5; 3,5,8a,9 yopem (el Kuds) 1. 2: 2203; 3,5,80,0= B55 9 
Hecatompylos 3 5b; 6- D5; 3,5,8a,9- BS Siete Te, 
elbon SES. read oh Inline ANS i ee a bana 
Heliopohs: . > | 7-03;8- 7Oeti ai Jae pia ooh: Beet 2 bia i 
siopes pea 20.3) 8= D'S: 11 Kis | deshimonis [is 2 ts ee Sanne Ae 
Henenaeten (Hands ilevasloopolis te meen teal tie TSN Stes. 3! Bees ; 
Heraclea (Asia Pigee T erleonelts) f > heres Jeareel yall : Pin us : 
ed ta gravieonel P24 Jorverah eyot) Vl ew. Se 
eo og 8) 250 ot DEE! Takk Nell Keimun), - °3-% -O4 
Hermon, Mount ey Ns a Rea 2.0 neaor a PCE RSLS UB) 9 ay are aan fea 4s j 
Hermonthis (Per-mont), | 3,5,9-C2;4-B4] Joppa. 5. (2-Ce:4-As:h ga ofa in : j 
lermopolis Magna (Shm i 5 3 J. uara eee sya Car io DeeL RE ; 
fermus, river un) . . - 2-A5 | Jordan, riv (Gee oes 1 K3 : 
Herod Antipas, Tetrarchy of" : Sentthene Hoes 138 mae er ret De 
Herod; Temple of oa . haat oo i sone (Kh. Jefat) i: er 
Herodi nace . hs te ate Or ‘9 Pe as 8x -B5;9-A6; | . tit r 
eroopolis (Pitta es) . .9- B55 12 , -B2 re wilderness of ‘i a ae =e ee ‘ £5 } 
eshbon (Essebon) a de Mhient, a eee 2-B3 Seda, kingdom Sia di sed 5 B65 6—D65 ; 
2-0 S18. 5OneY-BeesarGs | Juin he eee Lo pe 
DA Fs 5 . + 3-Bé” 


POW mo Sam 


THE INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE. 


DA BMW WN RWORRNDANWUHEUAOTATCEENNERQHWONWORUWRWLRODM WOW em hpwloang;d 


Kades (Kedesh Naphtali) - «+  « Wa-D 2] Lycopolis (Saut) RM te its? PAR ER ee a Ott AL 
PEASE lp ie) ol we he ewe) ee Se IE Lyttle & . Bia, 9- ASSO = D's; TK 
Kadesh Barnea 5 Po eae oe < » 2-C83 } Lydia . are 1-D2;7-B2;8-C3;10-C 
\ Kafr Kenna (Cana). . . +. . a-C4 Lyons(Lugdunum).  . . . . . WM-D 
Kaldi (Chaldza) aetet oS ws 16 = JB | Uysanias, Vetrarthy of, 2) 4% ie ae! ae TOUERGY 
Kanah Sef, +s 6 S-—B2s 12a BE | Lyetrae, ©. Oe cl vs | con voc ng Mane LOSE: 
BREMREE ei be ese je =e) ee OR SS 
Karyet el-'Enab (Kirjath-jearim) 4 Iba Manca 1 as ed SR aes 
PREUAD Uhl s | Uv wilsre i- os Re. U2 | Macedonia + » 1-D1;7,10-B1;0-H 
Kedesho . 2 2-C2; 4-B4; 5,8a-C 2] Machaerus ete ve | tre bt eet SOB stole 6) 
Kedesh Naphtali (Kades) > | «8 B2¢ WasD2] Machit (Manasseh). . af) ee LA 
Ketireh (Chephirah) .  , Ze J2b- A 2] Machmas(Michmash, Mukhmas) 8a-B5;12b-B 
PE eORORE Me. 4. Te ed 5b Je eB, Madani strc is sts, hey hale hot ecu Lemay 
Peiaish. Kila) 5+  j- . 5 bop bs IZb= AS |) Média! p48 oh es ks UU ey 
Menath ew Sw we |. S=C 5} Magdala(Mejdel) 2 . -) 0. SS BSS 22a 50) 
Sceeae eee, 2 ee 4g | Mardalim sy Xs. 4. jo le ie econo ee 
Kerak (Tarichaene) bias Re RSA) Ninenesiag 6. Fie Ps. ci) ira Vic tate ee 
Kerazeh (Chorazim) ak mee, -lJ2a-D3 | Mahanaim a 5 SP ot » 4-B5;5-C 
Kersa(Gerasenes) . . . . «© .12a-D4{ Makhadet Abarah (Deth-abara?).  . 9-C 
Kesla (Chesalon) . a ee 5 -12b-A2] Makhadet Hajlah (Beth-abara?) . 9-B 
Khatti(Hittites . . . . . » 6-E3] Malaca eth POF OO Re ame: FAS 
Khurbet Adaseh (Adasa) . 2° . 12b-B1] Mallus Sie 2 Maa eR ieee ge ee ee aed A isis PS 
_ Khurbet Aidel Ma(Adullam) .. 2b AY | Malto/(Melita). «.  . 6. «fs 1. TE 
Khurbet Beit Mizza (Mozah) ov, a2W=N'9 | Manasseh . pws a. 3s 68 RA BO 
Khburbet Beit Sakaria (Beth-zacharias 12 b- A 2 | Mannai (Minni) OL ROAM neGRo® pie’ (Aa) S Gyraie! 
Khburbet Warriyeh (Haphraim) . . TD a SvAets | MGON~ ire tht ws Watts PRM MN iy heal 2) 
Khurbet Haiyum (Ai, Aija). . 3 12)-B1| Marah oS (Bot Pee tt hia, (eee Feet 
Khurbet Hazireh (En Hazor) y 12a-C2] Marakanda oaks. Ws) Say MaDe ae 
Khurbet Jedur(Gedor). 2. 2. 32b-A3} Marathon . eh ins Teayl, Be ete ete Meares 
Khurbet Jefat (Jotapata) ek de Wa-B4} MareGermanicum, ..-.. .. « ‘>. fit) 
Khurbet Kila (Keilah) . . : 5 12b-A3 | Mare Internum r OP dral a5 J ly 
~ Khurbet Minieh (Capernaum) . ; j2a-1)3] Marcshah . RM aly ua ye il Pee. NSO 
Khurbet Tekua (Tekoa, Thecoe). 12b -B3 | Marisa panei kel gh. ee Rn Been 
Khurbet um Toba(Netophah) .  - 12] = (Bed POLGrIsse ss Lae, Pics Me, , Hoy MO ao ames 
Khurbet Ummel’Amud ., . ; Wa As | Masada igstia el ¥ si, ws. we» te. Mase sere 
aehurbet Zanua(Zanoah) . ., . i2b-A2|Maspha . . 2. 2. «© «0, - y8a-B 
Kidron, valleyof . . . ; ’ 4a;5a; 91) | Massagetae Ninh WAS 20 6) re er ae a tev 
Kidsha (Tripolis) ein ss Malte. Dae | Nensaiale Ot she PR Sie Chl rye) ig 2] 
Kingdom of AgrippalTI. . , . «. 10-E3|MationuslL .. . . 6. +. «! . %-D 
MenpdeimofAntiochus. . . > %~ 10-D2| Mauretania ;. 6 6. we ee IAC 
Mainedomoftsrnel . °. 5 5g 8 Maznet Gal SU alps fol te ols oe ep 
Rengdomofdudah, ; ; 5 *° 2.6 Muazaca Caesarea sno Mig Van Sa ET PonRes 
KingdomofPolemon ; ~{ ° %: «.| 10-H1)Medeba .. . . +. 3,5,8a-C5; 4B 
King’s Pool = ee 5 a Media iss eh ce a De i Des oo 
mir |. 4 c 4-B6]| Median Wall . tee 8a 3 6'=t 
Kirof Moab ¢ ! prank * > (3-6 | Mediolanium (Milan)... -. . 4 I=E 
Kirioth (Kiriathaim) : < z * 5-€5]| Mediterranean Sea (GreatSea) . 8-C4;10-C 
Kirjath-jearim (Karyet el-'Enab) Megiddo (Lejjun) 
3,3-B5;5b;12b-A2 2-C2;3,5-B3;4-B5;6-D4;12a-A 
Meine itso 3-6 | Medel (Magdala} 552. whee 
PRIBHOHEE Gs 5 8 5- BS; 12m ADd aon ees Shar rere armen vere fens tS 
Kittim (Chittim, Cyprus) ¢ '. 1- B2;6-C3| jelita (Malta). . . . . 1-02;11-G 
Kolonieh (Emmaus) . f°, yd) - A 2 | Memphis (Noph) , 
DED DEER NATO a Oe ea 1-D3;2-A4;6-B6;7-C3;8-D5;11-K 
Kummeh . : * 2-A2|Meroé. . z ahs S iy PGCE EME Vel 
Rapamimicnee et 6--F 1] | Merom, watersof . . . .8-C2;12a-D2 
Ractiae t mk * + "3 4 | Meshech (Mushki) 2 dete Pawo esna 
Ce ee 3 Mesopotamia rag Nr asety : 
Pmohishe tt. lj . 2-033 3,5- ASS 5 b 1- F2; 6-G2;7-D2;8-F3 
0 Coa 3,5, $a,9-B2;12a-A2| Michmash (Machmas Mukhmas) 
Seana) a ne art AD alee ae 3-A5 3,5-B5;4-B6;5b;12b-B1 
Resch te eM cite Sadan “es veesease, Tce bik poe) (gee iae ome Fadl SIs 
Laish (Dan) Meee is) =e 3-C2 | Migdal-el (Mujeidil) . . .3-B2;12a-C1 
Lampsacus . .«. . ch 8-C3| Milan (Mediolanium) . . . . , 11-E2 
Baodicea (Asia) 5 6k | et ie DOpeOr2) Wp Miletasy > ee Ta ae eto ae tO Old 
Laodicea (Syria) Tes 8-13 | Minni (Mannai) Ph ae ; > 1-F2:;6-H1 
Jlices, . i a Teaew, | Nitylenes .S.°) “ae olie. wa Po oe JOR 
Latopolis(Te-snet): . 2-A1]| Mizpah (Neby Samwil) . 3,5-B5;5b;12b-B2 
Laver (Tabernacle) . ‘ , f _ . 2-B1]| Mizraim (Egypt) . . Pelt E 35 2-A3 
Mebanciiw.| .. ... - 3,5-C2:4-B4;9-B2)] Moab. 9. «  - 220.35 4-36; pia Oana 
Sei cla s,s), vaminesganes WN 4 St=tBi4.,| Moabites.. nes ffi8 oe Bhs *) 3- Ki : 
meyabimn(tAbya) « 2 © «ss» ». 1-D2|Medin AS Agee st oe Po A OOS 8a- aa 
Dejan (Megiddo).. . .« . - 12 a a8 ye f bier t he ANN ae men eae 
eontes, river . 5 Ee eet 7 . '9-=Ba, H on ‘ F A i Meas d 
pone SOIR ese se at 31- £5 | Moreh, Hill of (Jebel Duhy). -3- 533 he i 5 
Mahe cd he le La. be AS | Mozah (Bih, Beit Mizza), (0-2 = * 22De ore 
Libya (Lubim, Lehabim) §-C4;11-H5;1-12]| Mujeidil(Migdal-el) i eae 
Bie ee.  VOCOin! MukealGadaral de yety ka = oc) gles 
Lp a 3,5-A5;5b Mukhmas (Michmash, Machmas) - 12. B~ Be 
Londinium Meera rae es stp e ce a5 ona ropes =26 
Lower Beth-horon (Beit’ Ur et-Tahta) heat WMivsiae ARS at. - alk Shanee nem OLS 
Lower City of Jerusalem . . a ~9b 
Saab (byANG ifs ey ks | se dD) Nabateoane, <2. pos ks hep 8b-Cs 
Lugdunum (Lyons) . 5 oti. ue E - 7-D2|Nain. . tao ‘ .9-B3; 12a-C5 
Maatetia (Paris). ..7 3 .  : et =a 'S NGI Cyl swat) ec s pies wirky (Osh 
Luz (Beth-el, Beitin) . . 5-B5;12h-Bl|Napata. ... . . Sy CR te 
1. ES NAGY CRN 5 ar em (0 ew 9 ee fo) S24 a - 3-B3 
Bycia. «8-0 8510-C2:17-5 4! Navoratis . wes ‘ 2-A2 


Nazareth (en Nasirah) 


- 9-B3;12a-B4 


Neéapolis (italia}in\A F-2 ch 8. le oe) Ee 
eenalis (Macedonia) . 5 -) ° - 10-Bi 
Neballat . bee 5 Aa artsy) Roem B 5 
NGDOME> hh Pata uis: wis tele ot Mae heh A C 5 
Nebo, Mount .  . 6 0+ 0 «6 2-€333-C5 
Neby Samwil (Mizpah). . . . .12b-B2 
Negeb : eh test yer Pa SARTISI5 cA 
Nekheb Gireithysasnay 5 oe tege Sa D 
Nekhen (Hieraconpolis) : ° e oat AE 
Net (No-Amon, Thebes) «|  efplingeppayretea 2ecAe 
Netophah (Beit Nettif) .  . . 5b; 12b-A2 
Netophah(Kh.um Toba) . . . 12b-B2 
Nezib (Beit Nusib) . A . . 3-A5;12b-A3 
Nicsea (Bithynia) . . . . 10-C1;-J3 
INGenean KGa Nay i. Wire ie, ats tae teats ie epkea ce E 3 
Niczea (Persia), . ° a ek is Bier ot 
Nicomedea Oboe sagem hs ot ee Siew 
Nicopolis (Emmaus, Amwas) .9-B5;12b-Al 
Nicopolis (Greece) 2. 5 . 10-B2;1-H4 
Nicopolis (Moesia) kG Tecate ge Semen 
Nile, river . 2 1-E3; 2-A4; 7-C3 
| OA a a orn eae oe 6-H2 
ING OUT ee bee oa ee - 6-3 4 
Dag, tue dt Hy 8-F3 
te ae (Net, Thebes). 5 1 oe a uy 
(e} 5 : Ss 3 . . . ~-bB2 
Wola. 3. 2 met eae Sn 4 oy penits Gis 
Noph (Memphis) . 5 1-D3;2-A4;6-B6 
Noricum . 5 : ‘ c - eo ome dd =F 
North Cloister (Temple of Herod) . . 9a 
NDGA ar ie, ip Ce ew! Ve) Neng ae 
Oceanus Atlanticus Se 8g a) Meet me eee 
ne river 4, <3 ' ato, S ie = - 2 
LUNG Go Rape geome tok oy Me - Ki 
Old/Gate Verusalem) 5992 7: |: warba: 
Olives, Mountof . 6 5 . .9b; 12b- B2 
Ombor(Komji 7.7. 262 - 2-Al 
On (Heliopolis). . . = = pb 22 AS 
ONTO NS 9 | in: Cee te 3,5-A4;5b 
Ophrah (et Taiyibeh) © Jv Qeateealy) LISS) 
Opis ( Upi ?) r) ? ti 5 ‘ - 6-J4 
Orchoe 1b S34 ts eh holy eee, Ree 
Qrontes, river . = » 2-D1;6-E3;10-E2 
Oxus, river Soe ee < 5 2 DUAR 
Oxyrhynchus . 5 . ated) a 2 - 2-Ad 
Palmyra (Tadmor) . « 62 F383 %- 02311 -L5 
amphylia . ; 4 - 8-D38,10-bD2; 1-K4 
RANG 50), sees "eae, Shel lh bio ee 
Panuonia .  . aes , «sg een Se RS G2 
RANOPOMS!. Cs ay ict fe SVE cebeatSTAIS 
Paphlagonia : F : paws post I0=iDa 
Paphos 5 - 6-C3;7-C2; 10-D3; 11-K5 
Paran, wilderness of . - 2-B33;4-A7 
Parthia, or. |. » 1-G2;7-H2;8-H4 
Patara : - fs 7 Sit LHD 
Pathros tet 23 . ° . 5 5 - 1-E3 
Pathrusin’s, 7. acti kernlachty tugs Es 
Patmos tye . me. vs - 10-C€2 
Pella (Macedonia) : R b ‘ - %7-Bl 
Pella (Palestine) 8a,9-C4;10-B3;11-L5 
Pelusium (Sin) . : 2-B3; 7=C.23:8- Ds 
entapolis . . a A «  « dh eelis 
Per Baste (Bubastis, Pibeseth) mipitvell (2> Ass 
Peraea F % A K 3 & e Oe Ot 
erga . : = = = E: - 10-D2 
Pergamos . 5 5 5 ; - 10-C2 
Pergamum , F ; - 7-B2;8-C3 
Per-mont (Hermonthis) . oie ARE 
ersepolis . 1-G2;7-E3,;,8-H4 
exrsiage: Gen os 1-G2;7-E2;8-H5 
Persian Empire ‘ ‘ j Peak 
Persian Gulf, 5 ; 6-K5;7-E3;8-G5 
Persian Proyince of Judah . .°.  . 8b 
Permsiigme de < ° wt pal eg uehe Dake oe 
Pessinins, aaah s: . 7-B2;10-D2;71-K4 
Petra (Sela) 4-B7;6-D5;7-C2;8-B4;11-L5 
Pharpar i fe 6 & ‘5 5- D1 
Phasielis (Jerusalem) ~! oeting 4 2 ASUD, 
Phasaelis (Judeea) F . 9-Ba4 
Phaselis (Lycia) c ke - %7-B23;8-D3 
hasis . ‘ r : ‘ . ‘ 7-D1 
Phenice (Pheenicia) - 5 - 8a-B2;120-A3 
Philadelphia (Ammon) | * B a,9-C5 
Philadelphia(Asiay. ~  {  [ 10- C2 
hilippi .  . . . 8=B2;10- Bis aH 


THE INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE, 


Philistia; .) -. sd, |eedie te eae ae 
PRUISEA he SOs Vela oc pte el nl eee 
Philistines Pim ce! ln 
Phoenicia (Phenice). 4-B4;5,8a-B2; 6-D4; 
9-B3; 105, gs Ba- Ag 
Phrygia’ 2.9 of, <)- 4s.) Movi = Beene 
Phrygians. ojo he” ne) er SO 
Phut (Punt?) . ative (eee ae ee 
Pibeseth (Bubastis, Per Baste) . . «o, SAS 
Pillars of Jachin and Boaz (Solomon’s Temple) 4b __ 
Pirathon p “<5 7. ).  MobCA Roe 
Pisgah a Seem fe 
Pisidia Se eee ee ee i sc 
Pithom (Heroopolis) 5 eh eet ee «| 22Bs 
Plain of Asochis (Sahel el Buttauf) . 12a-B4 
Plain of Ksdraelon . . .8a,9-B3;1l2a-B5 
Plain of Sharon «| el fallow 2. ts Redineue a e ceee 
Pontus Aye; - .« be Bs BSP 2s Sy 
Pontusand Bithynia . . . «. » 10-D1 
Pontus Euxinus re Per ee: 
Pool-of Bethesda... ,. |» »<lleatuag 
Pooliof Siloam..- 5 _. {jeblfel mjenteaaae : 
Prophthasia . . |enitiarh bole ee oem: 
Propontis:. . _ . jeauidh! oka gee aere om 
Prusas.i) » jada tarleinm-ehelte eit aw ee meet ee 
Rsephinus . .. . s m/atriail) |aiencraee re 
Ptolemaic Mmpire ; su Fell |. ssueeeseens 
Ptolemais (Acchc, Akka) -D4;8a,9-B33 
10-53; 0-L5;12a-A3 
Punt (Phut) ‘ A - : 5 FS . NaS 
Puteoli . o) Jw Preturs a) ATS ES 
Pyrenees . o° . -o /:S\e) Ue eehi ie) Meeeeeee peel ears 
Qu ie, ts 4 hs ee eee 6-D2 
Rabbah As . . or eye oa Se Ear bcaoeey 
Rabbah (Rabbath Ammon) . . 3,5-C5;4- B6 
Rabbith —. 4 7 - 4 ° = . 3-B4 
Rachels Tomb, , ai ger es 12b-B2 
Ragaba A ee eee RADIAL ile 
Ragau (Rages) e 8 te | eR Drees 
Rakka, os. 8 a Gi « RR ee) 
Ramah (ErRameh), .  . .3-B3;12a-C€3 
Ramah (Er Rams) 3, 5,9- B5; 4-B6;12b-Bl_ 
Ramah (Ramia) 5 sect = 12a-B2 
Ramathem. oe 8) 2, 5 TRS MS Sia Be 
Rameses 5 . he SERS, oh Fe) Daas 
Ramia (Ramah) oe FS. 5 oe ee 12a-B2 
Ramoth-gilead . 3,5-C 4;4-B5; 4-C5;5-D1 
Rapham (of a oe ee fe wi gel ne SO STRIDES 
| Raphia seh ve + » 2-C3;6-D5;8- D4 
Ravenna : : > ~ OTL ES AOI nS 
Red Sea . E 1-E3;2-C5,7-©C3;8-E6 
Regensburg (Castra Regina) . A a - 1-F 2) 
Rephaim, valley of . ees é 12b-B2 
euben eer ee ems ees ci i 
Rezeph js ot a, SS) Sern 
Rhaetia | wo) oa 6 © 58 en Se 
Rhegiam 5° 70.) 3) 4. - 2 .Wedosamed 
Rhenus .  « Bor eee oo, ee Sided 
Rhodes - 7-B2;8-C3; 10-02: 11-04 
Rhyndacus, river. . 6.) we. OOD 
Riblah a 8 Sn ef ep he td SENS REG mnie 
Rimmon (Rummuneh) .  » 5 , Wa-B4 
Rock Rimmon, .. .  . - VLU Sas 
Roman Empire. Mera! Gb il 
Romer... ee SS are eee eee 
Royal Cloister (Temple) . 4 & - 9a 
Rubutey eh a. lS ore 
Rummuneh (Rimmon) . . . 12a-B4_ 
Saba qimeeey his c's! tote ee 1-F4 : 
Sacoh . ay te 5 2 sea ede ciate 
Safed (Haifa) . ve aa . : 2a-C3 
Sahel el Buttauf (Plain of Asochis) 12a-Ba4 4 
SAisi(Sausin ne) ee mre + 2-A3;7-CQg 
Salamis (Cyprus) . . 8-D33;10- 2;11-K4_ 
Salamis (Greece) . 2), | las A fet ) Avian eee en | 
Saleah + "peur gen 9 rt loli sypeeeeanrenan acer 
Salim.  . Ee. eWeek ahs eee ene emnes tae 
Salmone, cape : J 5 a - 10-C2- 
Salonse Rea SOMME clue Ay stne to 
Salt Sea (Lake Asphaltitis, Sea of the 8 
Arabah) 3, 4,5,9-B6;5b_ 
Bemagain ye aie mre. Wee, ee wae . 8.a- Ole 
Samal sna: i. Usa yc ks, eh ie ee aE ; 


5-B4;5b; 6- pea yh Bane 5a -E3 
Samaria Coanirs) 5 .5,8a,9-B4;5b 
Samos ce Bos 8 C3;10-02;11-J 4 
Ramothracia © <6 «D6 ee Pe ei AOAC 
Sangarius, river . . . . - 10-Di 
Sarah (Zorah) . pap sine Sei, gee RLAVe 
BirdicaleRe Mary, eee Red oh kee ADEE 
eae Se oa : ate. agi bs 
. . T= D2; 7-B2;8-C3;10-C2 
Bareptal pephatb) Sanne Fo Pee elec 
Sarmatia . . oy Eee Scie 
Sau (Sais) . fe diisee oh ge eetet Me SrA 
Saut (Lycopolis) Fm St Stee? ts ‘ OR 
anew dy. spgliet,»< c 0 ftw ls Ja iG 
Scythians . . 5 eft aie 
- Scythopolis (Beth-shean, Beth-san) | § a, ¥ -B 
Sea of Chinneroth (Chinnereth; . 3,5-C3;4-B 
Mera: Galilee oo. P= C33 a -D 
Sea of Gennesaret . 8a-C3;12a-D 
Sea of the Aravah pai Seal. cr. wf” Sener 
Sebaste . tao ese fice dD 
Second Cataract as 4 S| Cisiviackey aston ces 
Seffurieh penphoris) Seis 1a-B 
Seir, meant 5 8 % C3;4-B 
Sela (Petra) . 56 2. 8)= 
Belbit (Shaalim)" A. Re a vie 0°) 
Belencia (Cilicia) 2 6s me 8H 
Seleucia (Gaulanitis) .  .- «.«  ._. 8a- 
Seleucia (Syria) es) es % 8 = B'3); 10'= 
Seleucid, Empire aoe 8 
Semachonitis, lake (B. el Kuleh) . 9-C2;12a 
Sepharvaim (Sippar) = 2 s&6 
Sepphoris . 2 Be ase 
popbete (Seffurieh) Fs s lla 
. ‘ 
b 


THE INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE. 


Samaria (city) 


esam 
Bhanibjm (Selbit) 
Shaaraim . . 


. 
. 


Shamir 3 wets 5 F a 
Sharon C 4-A5;8a, 
es, Plain of ecu 
SAGES se SU ae jy 2 ed 
Sheba . . s 

Shechem -©2; 3, 5, 8a- B4; 4- Bb; 5b; 


We AP te Be 


DHHS cUWobe Crip >rrromdith Hoth 


ined Gate Ajcraealess) Pi ie cr Oe 5 
Shephelah . Seat as 8a; 
Shetet (Crocodilopolis) ere 


SVOUCT OPO ROT RR a OT i Cr i PO OE Oy BL TE NO OO OS OT Ee OT 


IOS man P NOD Aap no eoe 


Shihon (Ain eee: Dali ‘ . ‘ , 12a - 
Shiloh 5 pis . 85-B4;4- 
SMieiceee. i. .  « = + I-F2;6- 
~ Shittim Cyes merce 
Shmun (Hermopolis Magna) ; eae , ~ 
Shocho SME Wire st. - 
Beaten 6 Op 2 eG 4, 12a - 5 
Shur, wilderness of |. -B3 
Shusan(Susa) . . . 1-F2; ; 6 K 43 -~D2 
POOtaen eh ee Ke 1 4 
Side ; ; -D3 
Sidon (Zidon, Siduna) 1-E2;4-B4;5-Bi; 
- 37-C2;8-E4;10-E3 
RGAE Reh ake Sh ee) cs 28 B2 
Siduna (Sidon). . . ery eee 
Siloam, poolof. . . « « -« .9b 
Simeon fs are ao of Feu Saa6 
Sin (Pelusium) | Mee csn IS oh (ice bio 
Sin, wilderness Of we 3 5 e 2-B4 
Sinai . om aC 1-13 
Sinai, Mount (Horeb) 5 o 2=Cu 
Sinai Peninsula 6-C6 
Sinope. 7-C1;8- “E2 10 - -B1; n-L3 
Sippar petharyaind Se aks 6-H4 
ittace 4 . : 5 7-D2 
Signa mie: lel ss oss: 
enh Ce tel ee ts SA 7/5. > BG 
Sogdiana__. en wee ces Ap tts . 2 
Solomon's Palace . ‘ - dade 
Solomon’s Porch (Temple) .  - 9a 
Solomon's Temple . b p . 48,4 b,/4'¢ 
Sorek . . 5-AB 
Sorek, valley of (Wady esSarar). . wb-A2 
South-west Hill (Jerusalem) aw Nee esta 
Spain . c . 5 . . . © a Boe 
Sparta Ga Be 0 is 2 
Speas Artemidos a Aes Mie, oe 2 ALS 
Straton’s Tower (Ceesarea) . . 8a-A3;9-A4 
Sumuri 3 : ° 5 é ae eC: 
Surri (Tyre) . . . 7 " E 2-C2 
Susa(Shushan). . . 1-F2;6-K4;7-D2 


Taurus, Mount. ° 
Tavyium 
Thot (Apollinopolis) 
Tekoa { 


Susiana . . canals 3 permed sh a7 DID, 
Sychar elas ae, hope oka ee, ay o> 
Sychem . » 24 Ts Sten hoi 9 = Bl 
syene . . 6 pute! HES . 2-A1;8-D6 
Byractise, F 0 sé, son 4 . 1-€C2;11-G4 
Syria (Aram) . 1-E2;9-B2;6-E4;7-C2; 
8-E4;10-E2;11-L5 
Syrian Desert . . : ec . 6-F5 
Syrians e ° - opens . . 3-C2 
Taanach A . . 8,5-B8; 4- 
Waanath Shiloh’ <<. oe Uwanee 
Tabernacle (Plan of) nee 
Tabor, Mount (Jeb. et Tor) <3, 5, hee B3; 3; 12a- 
Tadmor (Palmyra) a re 4-C3;6- 
Tahpanhes (Daphnae) , 4 s poe 
Tanis(Zoan) . . 2-A3;7-C2;8- 
enMMes= 6, lie ayee ce eee 0 bee 
Taphon 5 . Q . 8a- 
Parichaene (Kerak) mae 9-C3;12a- 
Tarshish . 1- 
Tarsus a “6, 10- D2;7-C2;8- E3; l- 
Taruana . . ° hic 


Tekoa, wilderness of 
Tell el Kady (Dan) . 


hecoe, Kh. Tekua) 
3,5, 8a — 


BS; 
Tell-el-Amarna (Akhet- Aton) 


Tell Hum (Capernaum) . 
Tell Keimun (Jokneam). 


Temple (Jerusalem) . 
Temple of Herod . 
Temple of Meah_ 


Tentyra (Enet, Chenoboskion) 
Tep-ye (Aphroditopolis) . 


Teredon_. C 
Te-seet (Latopolis)_ 


Tetrarchy of Herod Antipas. 


Tetrarchy of Lysanias 


Tetrarchy of Philip . 
Thamnatha 
Thapsacus (Tiphsab) 
Thebes (Net, 

Thebez 


Thecoe (Tekoa, J Kh. Tekua) 


Theodosia . 


Theodosiopolis (Carana) . 


Thessalonica . . 
Thessaly 

Third Cataract . 
Thospitis, Lae 8 
pleat 0 
Thra 


Sieune: Porch (Temple) 


Thyatira . 
Tiberias (Tubariya) . 
Tibua (Timnah) 


Tigris (Hiddekel), river 
1 = 


Timnah (Tibna) 
Timnath-serah . 
Tiphsah (Thapsacus) 
Tirzah . : . 
Tobi 9. ° ° 
Toletum . - 
Tolosa . 

Tower of Hananeel - 
Trapezus . 5 
Treveri = . . 
Tridentum . 

Tripolis (Kidsha) . 
Troas_. 5 
Lip rogyllium e a 


Tubal (Tahal) 
Tubariya (Tiberias) 
Puhieni 


Tu-Kaw (Antaeopolis) 


Tunip . 5 
Turuspa (Van) . 
Tyana 


Tyre te Sur) 1 “2:3, 5,8 
3; 9- B2; 10-E3; 11-L5; 13 


F=O25:8 = 
Tyropean Valley 


Ulatha 7 oA slay 


-Amon) 


. 


Pier 


iy CO oe 


Jobe" Bd; 10-83 


a 


-B2 


eas) 
Nese 


Sioa 
= 
Nog 


at 
ere) 


in) 
Pobrhh PUOnRr eres anhH 
THEM TWO HNN ROR ORR OOO ROT 


aootwy 
CRP COONINNMSMOPRPPNOO” 
Wet peat tel ont} 


WOOD, slo © o exe 210 10 0 bb ge 
yoy 
loleolcoe 


be a OT OD 
We wees © 


we oe 
NoraTH 


et 
PM De Set Feirentse ce Ee 
const HQ HopPriehrwweNeodery 
NO OR OREN DEN WHE NNNWHYNWUANRNINWH NOT 


Cpcoersa 


Ws 
Cite 


bt 

=y> 
' 
wi] 


ae 

0-C2 
‘ . 1. G2 
1-E2;6-D1 
y wa-D4 


_B4:6 
2 


4 
-~ 
= 


34 


can 
, 

ic} 

re 


— 


TILE INDEXED ATLAS TO THE HOLY BIBLE. 


POM WROWNDNW TD Meee BD WWM wWAIRe & 


Unki_ . : +4) 6 fey n e864 8)] Wellof Harod an ey Mel eh) aied Robe 
Upi (Opis?) 2 2. 6-5 4] West Cloister(Temple) 2 2 2 2 i 9a 

Upper Beth-horon (Beit? Ur el “Foka) cs 12b-Al} WildernessofJudwa . . . « « 9-B 
Punet Uity of Jerusalem o! lee oe Wilderness’of Judah 9... 3. 7... - . 8-B 
oes ee | sf | 0) oi tie et! Wilderness of Paran.% 0 3.1, 2 Oldemk nl 
Trane . Se 8 oe RAN OS TM Wilderness of Shur... ae 4 Beene 
Urmia jake © Mk he 5 wo) * o B= 2 ff) Wilderness of Sin US yt. elie eee ee 
{Etogmi se G6e eis Sa 12b-B2] WildernessoiTekoan . . .5-B5;12b-3B 
Uruk (Grech). \.; ee yer “e+ o> 0 * «| G=iK5 | Wildetnessiof Zim} 2. 3h) See Pe eieeG 

tica . . arte . . . . - 1-F4 
i Xanthus . . . PS enc Ns bis y 8) 

Valentias ioe fe yee Y . IDAs Pops 
Valley Gatonrliec’. Suv ieit we, eee a eee Valo {Ajalon}_ «> oo ‘ew ie Soy 
Valley of Cedrome) Ses) ee ea oe OTS B Yanuh /Janoah) Cae - : 4 lea-B 
Valley of Blah Piste sie aeek wil Parmui (JarMUtA) cop) cee oie eee wb-A 
Valley of Hinnom (Gehenna) oa eee ONE Martin (inom) hs oy. Oe comets Wa-C 
Valley of Jezreel =. og SS BS | Yemmn (Jabneel) oo GY deo Ta Ya-D 
Valleyiof\Kidrom's\.)*-. * . *-\.* . ) .efasisa | Sork(Bbotacum) <1 eye}. hog On rar € 

Valley of Rephaim . 4 is 12b-B2 
Valley of Sorek a adyesSarar): | I2b-A2|Zadracarta. . . . . ert NP 
Van, lake . AeA of oe | et Gala I ‘Zonoah . » B-A5:3-AGzUS 
Van (Tarispu) fo — Ol a! Pe eal Zanoal (Kh. Zanua)  <\ (. . 5 reales 
Verona. eee ww) ce! F- FQ | Zarephath (sarepta) «fe | SS BIS 
Vienna (Vienne) ee eben re ot Se Fer Fe re Atte: (Bactra) <<. « ee ny wie 
Vienna (Vindohona) eo!) tom Seis WGN Zebiion Oc 86 “owe ie ene 
Wienne: (Vienna) % (4... gs se yee at] 2) Zemaraim).  .° 1. coed AP eee 
Vindobona (Vienna) er sk lial ae ee iklag oe 5 0 6 6 ee Neil Athair eat 
Zin, wilderness of 4 1. 3) 2 (mage 

Wady en Nar oe 12b-B2 | Zion (City of David) ore tat PSRG REE Sate 

Wady es ei thas (Walley of Sorek) | 12b-A2}Ziph . X Sheen: Mice ok Ve ~45-B 
Wady Hal eels ss enue ACh if ORE (Tanis) APPS See Wi A 
‘Waters oF Merck e «© 6 6) 6 8= C2; 12a-D2 1 Zoha a: SS Pe rae 
awat a) a, Prcent lah Ose an Datee athe UATE tiZorahtidarah) © o= <a tare fe 5-A5;12b-A 


snr IO ree 


vu 


aS aNLX 


Ah 


(677279) 727. 


Y 


any. 


«« 009-0 “ae 
** 00%T-009 ** 
“« 0008-0081 ** 
722f 0008 4200 punT 
BuinojoD 0} souasajay 
nay WwndNA|[] 'WaVS "~~~ sny] sowpu 
1091880] BP JuUIUWDISAT, Many 
UDADH “AN. ‘WW 13°" 8" Yy? saul puamD}8aT PIC 
009 oor 00z 00T O 
SoU Us sug 
(qour T -sayit 09) 000'000 


“ 


Ob:T A129G 


AI veH . sae TH 


“dont AER 9 alee 
Gi 
weiagel Yo ach 
O-8 ae , 
mova 
” wend lh 
nate) 


2 TARAO sik 
biawdtobe goitsuniino 
aioe io brid 900 no 


> 9 dtenad idatsel tgefl wi 


% 
soma] orlengy 
, Ta ¥o'a 


he Wigqatieth.t nor Fe 


\ ‘ - : 
aM { arte 
PRM eta 


s. UW notoe-ng - 
wihogdylos te 


is 
> > 


pois Keweed ee 
he ahha Sets if site igpamees | 
risers j 
neg “phan . 
nat be dtd oh Vw LY eo enee: > wea) 


*elodove dive 


Plate A 


A lp gal 
(4 Yi 1 PES os 5 
Kandy Haifa 


ng i EGYPT, SINAI PENINSULA | | 
kasd | ANDSYRIA 


Scale: 1:7,000,000 (110 miles ={ inch) 
ee 
100 
ES of ak Empire s 
~~“ eirca.1270 B.C. under Rameses II |: 
Egyptain Names Henen-seten 
Hebrew » anes, Gath 
__Classical i» Heracleopolis 


ontinuation Southward 
__on one third of Scale _ 


% 


>’ Sea, 
Ei. ait 5 Tanis, 
yp: * . Ded ideuciy 


ww a Heliopola 


‘ me 
© 


‘THE LONDON GEOGRAPHI CALANSTITUIE 


Plate 3. 


THE 35° 30! 
PROMISED LAND — 


showing the pettlement 


THE TWELVE TRIBES 


Scale 1:1,750,000 (30-miles-«4 inch) 
English Miles 


5) 10 20 30 
Territory occupied by the 
j Twelve Tribes before 1,100.B.C.} 
Cities of Refuge i 
[For greater detail in Environs of Seaof 
Chinneroth & Jerusalem see Plate 12. 


One 


are htida re Pay 


: Cae abbah, 
¢ bbath Ammon 


Ashdod ms ebigp 


yp 
7 


/Mahkelon i 


GEORGE PHILIP & SON, LTD, 


wal _—_{Mouauntwaaaan aHT| 
AEN | MoMosoe & aIVAd 


8 : | onl aay steal fet aleve 


reat Ole 
‘hide’ 


| 
Pee, LP pee 


i Sha 
Batt 


DAVID & SOLOMON | 


Scale 1:4,500,000 (72'miles=1 inch) 
‘English Miles 


Ly Hebrew Territory 

PERRET] Pributary Districts 
4 Datreme limits of regions under 
dees npc ola iore: 2 political or commer 


al ci 
For Gneaten ‘detail in Cee Judah, 
see Plates.$ &1 


/THE HEBREW KINGDOM 
UNDER 4 


GEORGE PHILIP & SON. LTO, 


ayo 


i ‘' 


JERUSALEM 


J 
DAVID & SOLOMON 
[E53 City of David, or Zion 


Probable additional extent of 
5 the Jerusalem of Solomon 


Yards 


oS 
99) 


wk 


p ly, SZ = 
Ha) Alley of Hinnom 


0 10 20.30.40 50Cubits ‘9:10 2030.40.50 Feet 
1,2. Pillars of Jachin & Boaz 


hrpne Porch or 
Hallfof Judgement 


@ Outer or Great Court 

b Middteor'Other'Court 

€ Inner or Temple Court 
Harem 

2 Gate of Benjamin? 

3 Gate of the Guard? 
Kings Gate® 


——Modern Walts 


SOLOMON’S 
TEMPLE & PALACE 
050 160 150 Cubits 
050100150 Feet 
“THE LONDON GEOGRAPHICAL INSTITUTE 


“50 2MOGOMIA, 
JSAAaI & HACUL| 
| (lon Leesitor Piotenk ut ales2y 


ir aoa 


Apel. Ww sehr. 
2D .FL TAY sracaige Neen BS 


ST Lo Wyo wore mae 
Bat: 8 Gers ‘isa a 
1 yrotudry? eniey 
ol yrn! 3 ik 


. : 
os reps po - Sa hi 


» w nt, 
Bait e 


. \ 
c . 
pone os hilseos ie 
J fey 
} = why tim ny bee oe 4 


oe ' 


ee 4 
—- 


a 
high a 2 
ays ale : 


“Plate S, 


KINGDOMS OF 


JUDAH & ISRAEL 


Scale 1:1,750,000 (30 miles=inch) 
English Miles 
gl 15 20 
ou Boundaries of Judah 
& Israel before 745 B.C. 
[7 AssyrianProvinces after 
~~ fall of Samaria 772 B.C. 


- States Tributary to 
3 Assyria 


ED Wy yy 
: Bozraho 
UM 


(30! 


JERUSALEM 
IN 440 B.C. 


Half Mile _) 
1 Temple 
2 Kings Palace 
Yr ProbableAncient Wall 
” 


===Conjectural » 


i Atha. whee hs gp Nees choo 
SAigtin’ Mr a, deb | 
WP Kirjath=) eAnathoth bli 
Sap pledniam, « rusalet Pethsjes kino the SS 


20m (Geh 


= t 
PERSIAN PROVINCE or JUDAH 
UNDER NEHEMIAH 445 B.C, 


THE LONDON GEOGRAPHICAL INSTITUTE 


GEORGE PHILIP & SON, LTD, 


ve es. 3 
ee oN ; 


yu 


irate ak ie 


oe 


SLNLILSNI TVOIHdVY9O39 NOGNOT SHL 


“G17 "NOS ? dITIHd SDYOID 


H *G agD]q 998 avis] B yopne us [Djep 4970946 407 
saynoy upaDing Jsesaq yodiui4tg ~~~ 2 
spooy [pdrUrty —————~ 
“O- 98S Ut) masmesntes 
snzzoupoyongeany tapun piuojfiqng fo havpunog 
‘O° 969-899 jDdiunginyssp 4apun sucisuajry \Y } 
Og Let-944 TIL pad lhe a Fy 
opun (807078 hapyngi4) burpnj9ur) vi4hsey 
002. Oot. OS 0 
San Yst su 
(qoUuL F—SeTUt OZ) 000‘00S ‘ZF *F e1P9S 


SHUYId NA 
NVINOTAGVE 8 NVIYASSV 


Chllheds 


. Plate 6. 


Tipp DUD, | 
NY Ey ae 
Moura 


BLNLILSNI WOIHdVYDO3D NOGNOT 3HL *a17 ‘NOS ¥ dITIHd 3503 
g ay] q 998 YONG fo soUM0LY UDISLIT 9Y2 LOT OOS OOF OO€ O02 OOF O 
pooy jwhoy uvisiay SoA usisuqy 
(‘O° CE-9EE) PDILL) 9Y} LAPUDXI] Yo QO0E 0002 _000F O O00 OS: 9 
AOpun auidwumy 49th) ay fo vas j Bip, sBuebereg 
COE S8t-169) Smavg sapun 000°000"SE=1 PTR9S 
audug unisiag 242 fo hunpunognn” =— S W U I d TL H— 


bicictses) 


SugzTesnigpy 


“4 


Plate7 


PS 5 A AR a 


= i 


~~ 


« @, 


: ; 2 FR ce Atha bn Serr Bei ry 


BT TYE JAS RAN DIE MCONOL BHT 


————— —— a al — a 


BLNLISNI WO!IHavy9ORD NOGNOT JHL *G11*NOS ® dITIHd 3903 
OOS 00k OOF 002 O0TOS O dA Log osr4noqn anidug unwoy fo havpunog usayspq WHY 
So ysysuq “O° 9LT-LET AL 819N97°S) caresses 
(your sepiwi Og) 000'000‘0E:1 2122S tapun siidug pranajag fo havpunog ~~ 
. 3°8 0S1-0S z "O- W0se ynogn jy sronajag 4apun aiidug pronejag . 
SHUIdNA NVNOU ¥ ‘0°a 086 anogn 1 Ruiapone fo endueraeg 
dIONaATAS ‘OIVNATOLd FHL 


ee 


‘0, 
ha 


Diag 


ay J Me) ae yy woyesradl 
°7 Wh, ==, T 3 
ast \ 
wna @s1pu9703q- 
snoseure¢ apes Vv Ss 


lode NV ANV AN ALigay 


zi (pas0s905)_ 
_V) emoz 8, u0wwizg 


Pru PAN BE he 
? |. Bropedde 


ty osyeure]03. 


ge Uo vddipag 
Ua See 5 | eat, fo s9ppoy 


"O'd QL Snwuun, 
aapuncap fo 1072112 = 
“Oe SEVEPT 
SNDQVIIV| WOU LIP UTM sites 
pepny fo Aappunog 
Of 0% OLS 
SOUW USH2Ug 
(your [= Satur gy) 
000'000‘EsLaTB9g 
SHAAqGVIIVN 
aq} Japun 


ANILSATVd@) 


| [4 
* oA — en 
=) ff Gi0USJ82 DIAWG.LOTI AUT 
) eatiama KAMOR DS 
i .».8 0281-02 


J 1k Os 
DF Waele Vs ste 
y word 
*) & OES-SEL TY arte : 
D.8 02) toate suigeS ena Yo @enbows 4 oad x H 


Plate 9. 


= OF HEROD | 


Canis 


G0 iy | = 


1 Womens’ Court 
2 Israelites Cour: @a) H 
Priests’ Court 


Roman Miles 


5 10 20 
English Miles 
0 S 10 20 
Roman Province-under 
Pontius Pilate.. Brown tint 
© Cities ae the Decapolis = 
rincipal Roman Roads __} 


TIME OF CHRIST la 35° 


GEORGE PHILIP & SON, LTD, 


JERUSALEM 
before 70 A.D. 


neient Walls---Do.(Conjectured 
SAG Wall 


THE LONDON. GEQGRABHICALINGTITUTE 


air 


aS 
(3 


> a 
Cage a 


¢- A & 

“one pang nt 

: | a: Gt Ta ae 
— ie 2 Jin 3 te : 
(5 SRS, 

3 eon rr an ha 
Ee ee oe 


Le ee ee 


*OL7 ‘NOS PdITIHd 399039 


SINLILSNIMVO!IHd¥HY5035 NOONO7 SHL 


3] Rosy, unrzoppy ny {MAULNOL pigs Re amoy 07 hivyngrty $27D3S 

i 02 burp10990  YRIULNOL pys $,JNV ———— CTS IOS anduy UDpUuoy 

pivneaseccscensesesessess Rausnor pi “"sny? PISV f0 sayouny)D £ eyt 
OOF 


“ ROWLNOL pus 008. ) os 
Aausnor st Seq, 23N3"3S 


q sAoumof ATeuoIssIy $[U2GiS (YOUL T= Sap ZT) 000'000'ZTF B129S 
7-2. | SA'TLLSIdd 8 SLOV 
SS = AHL ONILVULSATIL 
qa ‘|SANVT NVANVUEALICAN 


Plate 10. 


: ioe * 2%, 


unt) 


od quit 
aed Hae 


IN, 4 


ywoarurel 
wietarol. 
dans ee 4 mctivol 
PON eotarol Pt e'luns) 
¥ a’) 


7 
bed. warouel & 


. im J 
2 * 
= = 
il 


ow 
col oh anoye” 


ITIGGM 
aur OV ITART AD Lit 

1BCTOA 
a) west ie 


c 
1s. oo 
& ‘ 
Lei 2 
2b3¢ 
2 he 
¥ 7 ¢ * 
xP 
oF be —— 


BANLILSNI WOIHdVY9O3SD NOGNO? AHL 


*017 ‘NOS P dITIKd 39u039 


“OL 27d] q eas Disp fo $2’ pany fo souDu Log 
[OT SO pua yo 87U9U21779G YSIMar YIM woke “ory Ut PapUNoT KBYDLNYD) UDIZSILYD @ 
“O[ UA papunoy sayoinyD uUDYys4YD @ “OT fo puar7zw aarduig udwoy fo hivpunogps 


00h O0€ _O0Z __OOT 0 


= SAT 2INIBIS 
£93 Mis (PUT TF =-SeTw Ost) 000 '000‘0E: FaTeS 
ea 201UaLa gy \ : LSIYHD YALAV AUDLNAD ssh 
*Su3, spo p std? Set GHL NI 


AaIdNaA NVNOY 
Jes A 


Plate ij 


Dub: 


PH PISDD 


( in, 


T2InH) AATIA YAUTWAO ™!) 
: | (teat shee < y- deen fey Be ialssc 


eS ie Ae dseee, Albom atom tert] ae 
oh wih cab tn Ly eet QUAD Vp meets 


SINLULINTIWVOIHAVYDO3D NOGNO7 3HL 


“a11 "ROS ¥ dMIHd 394839) 


= 
Pypsisn py wie) (yshoyr00 py 
SELEY Z WAL WP US° 


= eS 

oJ3u fe ‘ 
Weevoyy 
aU O {seuese.iecd Bea 
“alk he > if (221ten 39 wag Ag. 


\ aU FL; 
: eee ‘ie Fe 


Plate 12. 


A (nas) © 
gmuqqeeyg 


YD, -79 4) eq) 


SPNY Ja)" 8NYy) saUDN ULapOW anes Dag = 
spvoy upwoy 7pd29u14qg —— moped = sppoy uvwoy 
ae pet a as ** 009-0 = ypd20ur4 gy —— 
"tan qausugq “* 008T-009 5 ik : : We — 
M (YIU T-Sapiin $9) OOO'O0b:T 2122S] «* O008-00eT al nie 


Seen) é 
‘ ; = =| "soln Te : 
WATVSNUAL | 12/0008 +200 aye ak jouer ~ oN | 
(6) SNOUIANT @ Buysnojog 0} aouasayay) 


(your T= sou gy 
a 000°008 = F a7B3¢" 
108 oSE 


aod Tay =) 


z | ea Sas | 
>. > loot we 9 OH -5 A 
Win AT BY} | \etorA So) ard nore areobo Wl toutes. a ee 


