^^Cofpmce 


BX  6333  .S6  S4  v. 8 

Spurgeon,  C.  H.  1834-1892. 

Sermons  of  the  Rev.  C.H. 

Spurgeon  of  London 

I 


SPURGEON'S    SERMONS 


EIGHTH   SERIES. 


SERMONS 


or 


REV.    C.  H.^SPURGEON 

Of  London 


EIGHTH  SERIES 


FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY 

Toronto  London 

New  York 


CONTENTS. 


SERMON  L 

fMt 

BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION     ...•••«.      11 


SERMON  TL 
CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT        .     96 

SERi^iON  m. 

"THUS  SAITH  THE  LORP"       ..«••«••» 

SERMON  IV. 
A  HEARER  IN  DISGUISE ••..?» 

SERMON  V. 
EXPLA.TION ,      .      .      .     « 


Vin  CONTEXTS. 

SERMON  VL 
TUE  DAIiLEY-FIELD  ON  FIRE  ..,.•...    ua 

SERMON   Vn. 
CHRIST  IS  GLORIOUS:  LET  US  MAKE  EIM  KNOWN     .       .    131 

SERMON   Vm. 
ENDURING  TO  THE  END 150 

SERIMON  IX. 
NOTHING  BUT  LEAVES      ».*.,....    168 

SEmiON  X. 
THE  GREAT  LIBERATOR •       .       .    187 

SERMON   XL 
THE  SINNER'S  FRIEND 208 

SEmioN  xn. 

ELECTION  NO  DISCOURAGEMENT  TO  SEEKING  SOULS       .    228 

SERMON  Xm. 
THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTBA        ..•••«..   M] 


CONTENTS.  IK 

SERMON  XIV. 
A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH        ..,.>,,..    258 

SEPJMON  XV. 
THE  LAMB:  THE  LIGHT 278 

SERMON  XVI. 
GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE 897 

SERMON  XVn. 
WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO •       .    316 

SERMON  XVm. 
LABOR  IN  VilN .       .    835 

SERIVION  XIX. 
GOD  IS  WITH  US 354 


SERMON  I. 


BAFnSMAL  REGENERATION 

"  AID  B  B  BAID  UNTO  THEM,  GO  YE  INTO  ALL  THE  WORLD,  AND  PREACH  THB 
QOSPEi;.  TO  EVERY  CREATURE-  HE  THAT  BELIEVETH  AND  18  BAPTIZED  SHALL  BH 
BATED ;  BUT  HE  THAT  BELIEVETH  NOT  SHALL  BE  DAMNED."  —  Mark  XVi.  16,  16. 

In  the  preceding  verse  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  gives  us  some 
littlo  insight  into  the  natural  character  of  the  apostles  whom  he 
selected  to  be  the  first  ministers  of  the  Word.  They  were  evi- 
dently men  of  like  passions  with  us,  and  needed  to  be  rebuked 
even  as  we  do.  On  the  occasion  when  our  Lord  sent  forth  the 
eleven  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  he  "  appeared 
unto  them  as  they  sat  at  meat,  and  upbraided  them  with  their 
unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart,  because  they  believed  not  them 
which  had  seen  him  after  he  was  risen  ;  "  from  which  we  may 
surely  gather,  that,  to  preach  the  Word,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to 
choose  imperfect  men ;  men,  too,  who  of  themselves  were  very 
weak  in  the  grace  of  faith  in  which  it  was  most  important  that 
they  should  excel.  Faith  is  the  conquering  grace,  and  is  of  all 
things  the  main  requisite  in  the  preacher  of  the  Word  ;  and  yet 
the  honored  men  who  were  chosen  to  be  the  leaders  of  the  divine 
crusade  needed  a  rebuke  concerning  their  unbelief.  Why  was 
this  ?  Why,  my  brethren,  because  the  Lord  has  ordained  ever- 
more that  we  should  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels,  that 
the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God,  and  not  of  us.  If 
you  should  find  a  perfect  minister,  then  might  the  praise  and 
honor  of  his  usefulness  accrue  to  man ;  but  God  is  frequently 
jpleased  to  select  for  eminent  usefulness  men  evidently  honest 


12  BAPTIS:\IAL  REGENEIIATION. 

and  sincere,  but  who  have  some  manifest  infirmity  by  which  all 
the  glory  is  cast  off  from  them  and  laid  upon  himself,  and  upon 
himself  alone.  Let  it  never  be  supposed  that  we  wdio  are  God's 
ministers  either  excuse  our  faults  or  pretend  to  perfection.  We 
labor  to  walk  in  holiness,  but  we  cannot  claim  to  be  all  that  we 
wish  to  be.  We  do  not  base  the  claims  of  God's  truth  upon  the 
gpotlessness  of  our  characters,  but  upon  the  fact  that  it  cornea 
from  him.  You  have  believed  in  spite  of  our  infirmities,  and 
not  because  of  our  virtues.  If,  indeed,  you  had  believed  our  word 
because  of  our  supposed  perfection,  your  faith  would  stand  in 
the  excellency  of  man  and  not  in  the  power  of  God.  We  come 
unto  you  often  with  much  trembling,  sorrowing  over  our  follies 
and  weaknesses ;  but  we  deliver  to  you  God's  Word  as  God's 
Word,  and  we  beseech  you  to  receive  it,  not  as  coming  from  us, 
poor,  sinful  mortals,  but  as  proceeding  from  the  eternal  and  thrice- 
holy  God ;  and  if  you  so  receive  it,  and  by  its  OAvn  vital  force 
are  moved  and  stirred  up  towards  God  and  his  ways,  then  is  the 
work  of  the  Word  sure  work,  which  it  could  not  and  would  not 
be  if  it  rested  in  any  way  upon  man. 

Our  Lord  having  thus  given  us  an  insight  into  the  character 
of  the  persons  whom  he  has  chosen  to  proclaim  his  truth,  then 
goes  on  to  deliver  to  the  chosen  champions  their  commission  for 
the  holy  war.  I  pray  you  mark  the  words  with  solemn  care. 
He  sums  up  in  a  few  words  the  whole  of  their  work,  and  at  the 
same  time  foretells  the  result  of  it,  telling  them  that  some  would 
doubtless  believe  and  so  be  saved,  and  some  on  the  other  hand 
would  not  believe  and  would  most  certainly,  therefore,  be  damned ; 
that  is,  condemned  forever  to  the  penalties  of  God's  wrath. 
The  lines  containing  the  commission  of  our  ascended  Lord  are 
certainly  of  the  uimost  importance,  and  demand  devout  attention 
and  implicit  obedience,  not  only  from  all  who  aspire  to  the  work 
of  the  ministry,  but  also  from  all  who  hear  the  message  of  mercy. 
A  clear  understanding  of  these  words  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
our  success  in  the  Master's  work  ;  for  if  we  do  not  understand 
the  commission,  it  is  not  at  all  likely  that  we  shall  discharge  it 
aright.    To  alter  these  words  were  more  than  impertmence :  it 


BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION.  13 

•irould  involve  tlie  crime  of  treason  against  the  authority  of 
Chi'ist  and  the  best  interests  of  the  souls  of  men.  Oh  for  grace 
to  be  very  jealous  here ! 

Wherever  the  apostles  went  they  met  with  obstacles  to  the 
p^'eaching  of  the  gospel,  and  the  more  open  and  effectual  was  tho 
door  of  utterance,  the  more  numerous  were  the  adversaries. 
These  brave  men  so  wielded  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  as  to  put  to 
flight  all  their  foes  ;  and  this  they  did  not  by  craft  and  guile, 
but  by  making  a  direct  cut  at  the  error  which  impeded  them. 
Never  did  they  dream  for  a  moment  of  adapting  the  gospel  to 
the  unhallowed  tastes  or  prejudices  of  the  people,  but  at  once 
directly  and  boldly  they  brought  down  with  both  their  hands  the 
mighty  sword  of  the  Spirit  upon  the  crown  of  the  opposing  error. 
This  morning,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  my  helper  and 
defence,  I  shall  attempt  to  do  the  same ;  and  if  I  should  provoke 
some  hostility  —  if  I  should  through  speaking  what  I  believe  to 
be  the  truth  lose  the  friendship  of  some  and  stir  up  the  enmity  of 
more  —  I  cannot  help  it.  The  burden  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me, 
and  I  must  deliver  my  soul.  I  have  been  loath  enough  to  un- 
dertake the  work,  but  I  am  forced  to  it  by  an  awful  and  over- 
whelming sense  of  solemn  duty.  As  I  am  soon  to  appear  before 
my  Master's  bar,  I  will  this  day,  if  ever  in  my  life,  bear  my  tes- 
timony for  truth,  and  run  all  risks.  I  am  content  to  be  cast  out 
as  evil  if  it  must  be  so  ;  but  I  cannot,  I  dare  not,  hold  my  peace. 
The  Lord  knoweth  I  have  nothing  in  my  heart  but  the  purest 
love  to  the  souls  of  those  whom  I  feel  imperatively  called  to 
rebuke  sternly  in  the  Lord's  name.  Among  my  hearers  and 
readers,  a  considerable  number  will  censure  if  not  condemn  me  ; 
but  I  cannot  help  it.  If  I  forfeit  your  love  for  truth's  sake  I 
am  grieved  for  you;  but  I  cannot,  I  dare  not,  do  otherwise.  It 
is  as  much  as  my  soul  is  worth  to  hold  my  peace  any  longer ;  and, 
whethier  you  approve  or  not,  I  must  speak  out.  Did  I  ever  court 
your  approbation  ?  It  is  sweet  to  every  one  to  be  applauded ; 
but  if  for  the  sake  of  the  comforts  of  respectabihty  and  the  smiles 
of  men  any  Christian  minister  shall  keep  back  a  part  of  his  tes- 
timony, his  Master  at  the  last  shall  require  it  at  Lis  hands  Thij 
2 


14  bai'tis:mat,  i!i:generation. 

day,  standing  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  I  shall  speak 
honestly  what  I  feel,  as  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  enal  le  me  ;  and  I 
shall  leave  the  matter  with  you  to  judge  concerning  it,  as  you 
will  answer  for  that  judgment  at  the  last,  great  day. 

I  find  that  the  great  error  which  we  have  to  contend  wuth 
throughout  England  (and  it  is  growing  more  and  more),  is  ono 
in  direct  opposition  to  my  text,  well  known  to  you  as  the  doctrine 
of  baptismal  regeneration.  We  will  confront  this  dogma  with 
the  assertion  that  baptism  without  faith  saves  no  one.  The  text 
says,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ; "  but 
whether  a  man  be  baptized  or  no,  it  asserts  that  "  he  that  believ- 
eth not  shall  be  damned  : "  so  that  baptism  does  not  save  the 
unbeliever ;  nay,  it  does  not  in  any  degree  exempt  him  from  the 
common  doom  of  all  the  ungodly.  He  may  have  baptism,  or  he 
may  not  have  baptism  ;  but  if  he  believeth  not,  he  shall  be  in  any 
case  most  surely  damned.  Let  him  be  baptized  by  immersion 
or  sprinkling,  in  his  infancy  or  in  his  adult  age :  if  he  be  not  led 
to  put  his  trust  in  Jesus  Christ  —  if  he  remaineth  an  unbeliever 
—  then  this  terrible  doom  is  pronounced  upon  him,  "  He  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  I  am  not  aware  that  any  Prot- 
estant church  in  England  teaches  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  re- 
generation, except  one,  and  that  happens  to  be  the  corporation 
which  with  none  too  much  humility  calls  itself  the  Church  ot 
England.  This  very  powerful  sect  does  not  teach  this  doctrine 
merely  through  a  section  of  its  ministers,  who  might  charitably 
be  considered  as  evil  branches  of  the  vine,  but  it  openly,  boldly, 
and  plainly  declares  this  doctrine  in  her  own  appointed  standard, 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and  that  in  words  so  express,  that, 
while  language  is  the  channel  of  conveying  intelligible  sense,  no 
process  short  of  violent  wresting  from  their  plain  meaning  can 
ever  make  them  say  anything  else. 

Here  are  the  words  —  we  quote  them  from  the  Catechism 
which  is  intended  for  the  instruction  of  youth,  and  is  naturally 
very  plain  and  simple,  since  it  would  be  fooUsh  to  trouble  the 
youth  with  metaphysical  refinements.  The  child  is  asked  its 
name,  and  then  questioned,  "  Who  gave  you  this  name  ?  "    "  M^ 


BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION.  15 

godfathers  and  godmothers  in  my  baptism  ;  wherein  I  was  made  a 
member  of  Christ,  the  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  king* 
dom  ofheaven^  Is  not  this  definite  and  plain  enough  ?  I  prize 
the  words  for  their  candor :  they  could  not  speak  more  plainly. 
Three  times  over  the  thing  is  put,  lest  there  should  be  any  doubt 
in  it.  The  word  regeneration  may,  by  some  sort  of  juggling,  be 
made  to  mean  something  else  ;  but  here  there  can  be  no  misun- 
derstanding. The  child  is  not  only  made  "  a  member  of  Christ," 
-—union  to  Jesus  is  no  mean  spiritual  gift,  —  but  he  is  made  in 
baptism  "  the  child  of  God  "  also ;  and,  since  the  rule  is,  "  if 
children,  then  heirs,"  he  is  also  made  "  an  inheritor  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven."  Nothing  can  be  more  plain.  I  venture  to  say, 
that,  while  honesty  remains  on  earth  the  meaning  of  these  words 
will  not  admit  of  dispute.  It  is  clear  as  noonday  that,  as  the 
Rubric  hath  it,  "  Fathers,  mothers,  masters,  and  dames  are  to 
cause  their  children,  servants,  and  apprentices,"  no  matter  how 
idle,  giddy,  or  wicked  they  may  be,  to  learn  the  Catechism,  and 
to  say  that  in  baptism  they  were  made  members  of  Christ  and 
children  of  God.  The  form  for  the  administration  of  this  baptism 
is  scarcely  less  plain  and  outspoken,  seeing  that  thanks  are  ex- 
pressly returned  unto  Almighty  God  because  the  person  baptized 
is  regenerated :  "  Th.en  shall  the  priest  say,  '  Seeing,  now,  dearly 
beloved  brethren,  that  this  child  is  regenerate  and  grafted  into  the 
body  of  Christ's  church,  let  us  give  thanks  unto  Almighty  God 
for  these  benefits ;  and  with  one  accord  make  our  prayers  unto 
him,  that  this  child  may  lead  the  rest  of  his  life  according  to  this 
beginning' "  Nor  is  this  all ;  for,  to  leave  no  mistake,  we  have 
the  words  of  the  thanksgiving  prescribed  :  '''■Then  shall  the  priest 
say,  *  We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks,  most  merciful  Father,  that  it  hath 
pleased  thee  to  regenerate  this  infant  with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  to  re- 
ceive him  for  thine  own  child  by  adoption,  and  to  incorporate  him 
into  thy  holy  church.'  " 

This,  then,  is  the  clear  and  unmistakable  teaching  of  a  church 
calling  itself  Protestant.  I  am  not  now  dealing  at  all  with  the 
questic  c  of  infant  baptism  :  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  that  this 
morning.     I  am  now  considering  the  question  of  baptismal  re« 


16  BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION". 

generation,  whether  in  adults  or  infants,  or  ascribed  to  sprinkling, 
pouring,  or  immersion.  Here  is  a  church  which  teaches  every 
Lord's  Day  in  the  Sunday-school,  and  should,  according  to  the 
Rubric,  teach  openly  in  the  church,  all  children  that  they  were 
made  members  of  Christ,  children  of  God,  and  inheritors  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  when  they  were  baptized !  Here  is  a  pro- 
fessedly Protestant  church,  which,  every  time  its  minister  goes 
to  the  font,  declares  that  every  person  there  receiving  baptism 
is  there  and  then  "regenerated  and  grafted  into  the  body  of 
Christ's  church. " 

"  But,"  I  hear  many  good  people  exclaim,  "  there  are  many 
good  clergymen  in  the  church  who  do  not  believe  in  baptismal 
regeneration  !  "  To  this  my  answer  is  prompt,  —  Why,  then,  do 
they  belong  to  a  church  which  teaches  that  doctrine,  in  the 
plainest  terms  ?  I  am  told  that  many  in  the  Church  of  England 
preach  against  her  own  teaching.  I  know  they  do,  and  herein 
I  rejoice  in  their  enlightenment,  but  I  question,  gravely  question, 
their  morality.  To  take  oath  that  I  sincerely  assent  and  consent 
to  a  doctrine  which  I  do  not  believe,  would  to  my  conscience 
appear  little  short  of  perjury,  if  iiot  absolute,  downright  perjury  ; 
but  those  who  do  so  must  be  judged  by  their  Lord.  For  me  to 
take  money  for  defending  what  I  do  not  believe  —  for  me  to 
take  the  money  of  a  church,  and  then  to  preach  against  what 
are  most  evidently  its  doctrines  —  I  say /or  me  to  do  this  (I 
shall  not  judge  the  peculiar  views  of  other  men),  for  me  or  for 
any  other  simple,  honest  man  to  do  so,  were  an  atrocity  so  great 
that,  if  I  had  perpetrated  the  deed,  I  should  consider  myself  out 
of  the  pale  of  truthfulness,  honesty,  and  common  morality.  Sirs, 
when  I  accepted  the  office  of  minister  of  this  congregation,  I 
looked  to  see  what  were  your  articles  of  faith.  If  I  had  not  be- 
lieved them  I  should  not  have  accepted  your  call ;  and  when  I 
change  my  opinions,  rest  assured  that,  as  an  honest  man,  I  shall 
resign  the  office  ;  for  how  could  I  profess  one  thing  in  your  dec- 
laration of  faith,  and  quite  another  thing  in  my  own  preaching  ? 
Would  I  accept  your  pay,  and  then  stand  up  every  Sabbath-day 
and  talk  against  the  doctrines  of  your  standards  ?     For  clergy* 


BAPTISM  AX  REGENERATION.  17 

mrn  to  6 wear  or  saj  that  they  give  their  solemn  assent  and  con- 
sent to  what  they  do  not  believe,  is  one  of  the  grossest  pieces  of 
immorality  perpetrated  in  England,  and  is  most  pestilential  iu 
its  influence  since  it  directly  teaches  men  to  lie  whenever  it  seems 
necessary  to  do  so  in  order  to  get  a  living  or  increase  their  sup- 
posed usefulness :  it  is  in  fact  an  open  testimony  from  priestly 
lips  that,  at  least  in  ecclesiastical  matters,  falsehood  may  express 
truth,  and  truth  itself  is  a  mere  unimportant  nonentity.  I  know 
of  nothing  more  calculated  to  debauch  the  public  mind  than  a 
want  of  straightforwardness  in  ministers  ;  and  when  worldly  men 
hear  ministers  denouncing  the  very  things  which  their  own 
Prayer-Book  teaches,  they  imagine  that  words  have  no  meaning 
among  ecclesiastics,  and  that  vital  differences  in  religion  are 
merely  a  matter  of  tweedle-dee  and  tweedle-dum,  and  that  it 
does  not  much  matter  what  a  man  does  believe  so  long  as  he  is 
charitable  towards  other  people.  If  baptism  does  regenerate 
people,  let  the  fact  be  preached  with  a  trumpet  tongue,  and  let 
no  man  be  ashamed  of  his  belief  in  it.  If  this  be  really  their 
creed,  by  all  means  let  them  have  full  liberty  for  its  propagation. 
My  brethren,  those  are  honest  Churchmen  in  this  matter  who, 
subscribing  to  the  Prayer-Book,  beUeve  in  baptismal  regenera- 
tion, and  preach  it  plainly.  God  forbid  that  we  should  censure 
those  who  believe  that  baptism  saves  the  soul,  because  they  ad- 
here to  a  church  which  teaches  the  same  doctrine.  So  far  they  are 
honest  men  ;  and  in  England,  wherever  else,  let  them  never  lack 
a  full  toleration.  Let  us  oppose  their  teaching  by  all  scriptural 
and  intelligent  means,  but  let  us  respect  their  courage  in  plainly 
giving  us  their  views.  I  hate  their  doctrine,  but  I  love  their 
honesty ;  and  as  they  speak  but  what  they  believe  to  be  true, 
let  them  speak  it  out,  and  the  more  clearly  the  better.  Out  with 
it,  sirs,  be  it  what  it  may,  but  do  let  us  know  what  you  mean. 
For  my  part,  I  love  to  stand  foot  to  foot  with  an  honest  foeman. 
To  open  warfare,  bold  and  true  hearts  raise  no  objections  but 
the  ground  of  quarrel ;  it  is  covert  enmity  which  we  have  most 
cause  to  fear  and  best  reason  to  loathe.  That  crafty  kindness 
winch  inveigles  me  to  sacrifice  principle,  is  the  serpent  iu  the 
2* 


18  BATTISM^lL  KEGENERATION. 

grass  —  deadly  to  the  incautious  wayfai'er.  Where  uuion  and 
friendship  are  not  cemented  by  truth,  they  are  an  unhallowed 
confederacy.  It  is  time  that  there  should  be  an  end  put  to  the 
flirtations  of  honest  men  with  those  who  believe  one  way  and 
swear  another.  If  men  believe  baptism  works  regeneration,  let 
them  say  so ;  but  if  they  do  not  so  believe  it  in  their  hearts,  and 
yet  subscribe,  and  yet  more,  get  their  livings  by  subscribing  to 
words  asserting  it,  let  them  find  congenial  associates  among  men 
who  can  equivocate  and  shufile,  for  honest  men  will  neither  ask 
nor  accept  their  friendship. 

We  ourselves  are  not  dubious  on  this  point :  we  protest  that 
persons  are  not  saved  by  being  baptized.  In  such  an  audience 
as  this,  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  go  into  the  matter,  because  yon 
surely  know  better  than  to  be  misled.  Nevertheless,  for  the 
good  of  others  we  will  drive  at  it.  We  hold  that  persons  are 
not  saved  by  baptism ;  for  we  think,  first  of  all,  that  it  seems  out 
of  character  with  the  spiritual  religion  which  Christ  came  to 
teach,  that  he  should  make  salvation  depend  upon  mere  cere- 
mony. Judaism  might  possibly  absorb  the  ceremony  by  way  of 
type  into  her  ordinances  essential  to  eternal  life ;  for  it  was  a 
religion  of  types  and  shadows.  The  false  religions  of  the  hea- 
then might  inculcate  salvation  by  a  physical  process ;  but  Jesus 
Christ  claims  for  his  faith  that  it  is  purely  spiritual,  and  how  could 
he  connect  regeneration  with  a  peculiar  application  of  aqueous 
fluid?  I  cannot  see  how  it  would  be  a  spiritual  gospel,  but  I  can  see 
how  it  would  be  mechanical,  if  I  were  sent  forth  to  teach  that 
tJb6  mere  dropping  of  so  many  drops  upon  the  brow,  or  even  the 
plunging  a  person  in  water,  could  save  the  soul.  This  seems  to 
me  to  be  the  most  mechanical  religion  now  existing,  and  to  be  on 
a  par  with  the  praying  windmills  of  Thibet,  or  the  climbing  up 
and  down  of  Pilate's  staircase  to  which  Luther  subjected  himself 
in  the  days  of  his  darkness.  The  operation  of  water  baptism 
does  not  appear  even  to  my  faith  to  touch  the  point  involved  in  the 
regeneration  of  the  soul.  What  is  the  necessary  connection  be- 
tween water  and  the  overcoming  of  sin  ?  I  cannot  see  any  connec- 
tion which  can  exist  between  sprinkling,  or  immersion,  and  regen* 


BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION.  19 

eration,  so  that  the  one  shall  necessarilj  be  tied  to  the  other  in  the 
absence  of  faith.  Used  by  faith,  had  God  commanded  it,  mira* 
cles  might  be  wrought ;  but  without  faith  or  even  consciousness, 
as  in  the  case  of  babes,  how  can  spiritual  benefits  be  connected 
necessarilj  with  the  sprinkling  of  water  ?  If  this  be  your  teach- 
ing, that  regeneration  goes  with  baptism,  I  say  that  it  looks  like 
the  teaching  of  a  spurious  church,  which  has  craftily  invenled  a 
mechanical  salvation  to  deceive  ignorant,  sensual,  and  grovelling 
minds,  rather  than  the  teaching  of  the  most  profoundly  spiritual 
of  all  teachers,  who  rebuked  Scribes  and  Pharisees  for  regarding 
outward  rites  as  more  important  than  inward  grace. 

But  it  strikes  me  that  a  more  forcible  argument  is,  that  the 
dogma  is  not  supported  hy  facts.  Are  all  persons  who  are  bap- 
tized children  of  God  ?  Well,  let  us  look  at  the  divine  family. 
Let  us  mark  their  resemblance  to  their  glorious  Parent !  Am  I 
untruthful  if  I  say  that  thousands  of  those  who  were  baptized  in 
their  infancy  are  now  in  our  gaols  ?  You  can  ascertain  the  fact, 
if  you  please,  by  application  to  prison  authorities.  Do  you  be- 
lieve that  these  men,  many  of  whom  have  been  living  by  plunder, 
felony,  burglary,  or  forgery,  are  regenerate  ?  If  so,  the  Lord 
deliver  us  from  such  regeneration.  Are  these  villains  members 
of  Christ  ?  If  so,  Christ  has  sadly  altered  since  the  day  when 
he  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners.  Has 
he  really  taken  baptized  drunkards  and  harlots  to  be  members 
of  his  body  ?  Do  you  not  revolt  at  the  supposition  ?  It  is  a 
well-known  fact  that  baptized  persons  have  been  hanged.  Surely 
it  can  hardly  be  right  to  hang  the  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  !  Our  sheriflfs  have  much  to  answer  for  when  they  offi- 
ciate at  the  execution  of  the  children  of  God,  and  suspend  the 
members  of  Christ  on  the  gallows  !  "What  a  detestable  farce  is 
that  which  is  transacted  at  the  open  grave,  when  "  a  dear 
brother  "  who  has  died  drunk  is  buried  in  a  "  sure  and  certain 
hope  of  the  resurrection  to  eternal  life,"  and  the  prayer  that 
"  when  we  shall  depart  this  life  we  may  rest  in  Christ,  as  our 
hope  is  that  this  our  brother  dotli."  He  is  a  regenerate  brother, 
who,  having  defiled  the  village  by  constant  uacleannesg  wid  bes* 


20  BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION. 

lial  drunkenness,  died  without  a  sign  of  repentance ;  and  yet  tlio 
professed  minister  of  God  solemnly  accords  him  funeral  rites 
which  are  denied  to  unbaptized  innocents,  and  puts  the  repro- 
bate into  the  earth  in  "  sure  and  certain  hope  of  the  resurrection 
to  eternal  life."  If  old  Rome  in  her  worst  days  ever  perpetrated 
a  grosser  piece  of  imposture  than  this,  I  do  not  read  things 
aright ;  if  it  does  not  require  a  Luther  to  cry  down  this  hypoc* 
risy  as  much  as  Popery  ever  did,  then  I  do  not  even  know  that 
twice  two  make  four.  Do  we  find  —  we  who  baptize  on  profes- 
sion of  faith,  and  baptize  by  immersion  in  a  way  which  is  con- 
fessed to  be  correct,  though  not  allowed  by  some  to  be  absolutely 
necessary  to  its  validity  —  do  we,  who  baptize  in  the  name  of 
the  Sacred  Trinity  as  others  do,  do  we  fmd  that  baptism  regen- 
erates ?  Jfe  do  not.  Neither  in  the  righteous  nor  the  wicked 
do  we  find  regeneration  wrought  by  baptism.  We  have  never 
met  with  one  believer,  however  instructed  in  divine  things,  who 
could  trace  his  regeneration  to  his  baptism ;  and  on  the  other 
hand,  we  confess  it  with  sorrow,  but  still  witli  no  surprise,  that 
we  have  seen  those  whom  we  have  ourselves  baptized,  according 
to  a^wstolic  precedent,  go  back  into  the  world  and  wander  into 
the  foulest  sin,  and  their  baptism  has  scarcely  been  so  much  as  a 
restraint  to  them,  because  they  have  not  believed  in  tlie  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Facts  all  show  that  whatever  good  there  may  be  in 
baptism,  it  certainly  does  not  make  a  man  "  a  member  of  Christ, 
the  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven," 
or  else  many  thieves,  whoremongers,  drunkards,  fornicators,  and 
murderers  are  members  of  Christ,  the  children  of  God,  and  in- 
heritors of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Facts,  brethren,  are  dead 
against  this  popish  doctrine  ;  and  facts  are  stubborn  things. 

Yet  further,  I  am  persuaded  that  the  perfonnance  styled  hap" 
tism  hj  the  Prayer-Booh  is  not  at  all  likely  to  regenerate  and  save. 
How  is  the  thing  done  ?  One  is  very  curious  to  know  when  one 
hears  of  an  operation  wdiich  makes  men  members  of  Christ, 
children  of  God,  and  inheritors  of  the  Idngdom  of  heaven,  how 
the  thing  is  done.  It  must  in  itself  be  a  holy  thing,  trutliTul  in 
all  its  details,  and  edifying  in   every  portion.     Now,  we  will 


BATTIS^IAL  REGENERATION.  21 

suppose  we  have  a  company  gathered  round  the  water,  be  it 
more  or  less,  and  the  process  of  regeneration  is  about  to  be  per- 
rormed.  We  will  suppose  tlicm  all  to  be  godly  people.  The 
clergyman  officiating  is  a  profound  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  the  father  and  mother  are  cxerai)lary  Christians,  and  the 
godfathers  and  godmothers  are  all  gracious  i)ersons.  We  vill 
suppose  this :  it  is  a  supposition  fraught  with  charity,  but  it 
may  be  correct.  What  are  these  godly  people  supposed  to  say  ? 
Let  us  look  to  the  Prayer-Book.  The  clergyman  is  supposed 
to  tell  these  people,  "  Te  have  heard  also  that  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  hath  promised  in  his  gospel  to  grant  all  these  things  that 
ye  have  prayed  for :  which  promise  he,  for  his  part,  ivill  most 
surely  keep  and  perform.  Wherefore,  after  this  promise  made  by 
Christ,  this  infant  must  also  faithf  idly,  for  his  part,  promise  by 
you  that  are  his  sureties  (until  he  come  of  age  to  take  it  upon 
himself)  that  he  will  renounce  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  and 
constantly  believe  God^s  Holy  Word,  and  obediently  keep  his 
commandments."  This  small  child  is  to  promise  to  do  this  ;  or, 
more  truly,  others  are  to  be  taken  upon  themselves  to  promise, 
and  even  vow  that  he  shall  do  so.  But  we  must  not  break  the 
quotation,  and  therefore  let  us  return  to  the  Book  :  "  I  demand, 
therefore,  dost  thou,  in  the  name  of  this  child,  renounce  the  devil 
and  all  his  works,  the  vain  pomp  and  glory  of  the  world,  with  all 
covetous  desires  of  the  same,  and  the  carnal  desires  of  the 
flesh,  so  that  thou  wilt  not  follow,  nor  be  led  by  them  ?  "  An- 
swer :  "  I  renounce  them  all."  That  is  to  say,  on  the  name 
and  behalf  of  this  tender  infant  about  to  be  baptized,  these 
godly  people,  these  enlightened  Christian  people,  these  who 
know  better,  who  are  not  dupes,  who  know  all  the  while  that 
they  are  promising  impossibihties,  renounce  on  behalf  of  this 
child  what  they  find  it  very  hard  to  renounce  for  themselves, — 
"  all  covetous  desires  of  the  world  and  the  carnal  desires  of  the 
desh,  so  that  they  will  not  follow  nor  be  led  by  them."  How 
can  they  harden  their  faces  to  utter  such  a  false  promise,  such  a 
mockery  of  renunciation,  before  the  presence  of  the  Father  Al- 
mighty ?     Might  not  angels  weep  as  they  hear  the  av/fu!  proni' 


f2  BAPTIS:MAL  r.r.GENERATIOlf. 

ise  uttered?  Then  in  the  presence  of  High  Heaven  theyproiefis 
on  behalf  of  this  child  that  he  steadtastly  believes  the  creed, 
when  they  know,  or  might  pretty  shrewdly  judge,  that  the  little 
creature  is  not  yet  a  steadfast  believer  in  anything,  much  less  in 
Christ's  going  down  into  hell.  Mark,  they  do  not  say  merely 
that  the  babe  shall  believe  the  creed,  but  they  affirm  that  he 
does ;  for  th'^y  answer  in  the  child's  name,  "  All  this  we  stead- 
fJistly  believe. '  Not  we  steadfastly  believe,  but  I,  the  little  baby 
there,  unconscious  of  all  their  professions  and  confessions  of 
faith.  In  answer  to  the  question,  "  Wilt  thou  be  baptized  in  this 
faith  ?  "  they  reply  for  the  infant,  "  That  is  my  desire."  Surely 
the  infant  has  no  desire  in  the  matter,  or  at  the  least  no  one  has 
been  authorized  to  declare  any  desires  on  his  behalf.  But  this 
is  not  all ;  for  then  these  godly,  intelligent  people  next  promise 
on  behalf  of  the  infant  that  "  he  shall  obediently  keep  all  God's 
holy  will  and  commandments,  and  walk  in  the  same  all  the  days 
of  his  life."  Now,  I  ask  you,  dear  friends,  you  who  know  what 
true  religion  means,  can  you  walk  in  all  God's  holy  commandments 
yourselves  ?  Dare  you  make  this  day  a  vow  on  your  own  part, 
that  you  would  renounce  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  the  ponips 
and  vanities  of  this  wicked  world,  and  all  the  sinful  lusts  of  the 
flesh  ?  Dare  you,  before  God,  make  such  a  promise  as  that  ? 
You  desire  such  holiness ;  you  earnestly  strive  after  it ;  but  you 
look  for  it  from  God's  promise,  not  from  your  own.  If  you  dare 
make  such  vows,  I  doubt  your  knowledge  of  your  own  hearts  and 
of  the  spirituality  of  God's  law.  But  even  if  you  could  do  this 
for  yourself,  would  you  venture  to  make  such  a  promise  for  any 
other  person  ?  —  for  the  best-bom  infant  on  earth  ?  Come, 
brethren,  what  say  you  ?  Is  not  your  reply  ready  and  plain  ? 
There  is  not  room  for  two  opinions  among  men  determined  to 
observe  truth  in  all  their  ways  and  words.  I  can  understand  a 
simple,  ignorant  rustic,  who  has  never  learned  to  read,  doing  all 
this  at  the  command  of  a  priest  and  under  the  eye  of  a  squire. 
I  can  even  understand  persons  doing  this  when  the  Reformation 
was  in  its  dawn,  and  men  had  newly  crept  out  of  the  darkness 
of  Popery ;    but  I  cannot  understand,  gracious,  godly  people 


BAPTISMAL  REGE:JfERATION.  23 

Btandlijg  A  llie  font  to  insult  the  AU-grticious  Father  with  vows 
and  proiiiis^s  framed  upon  a  fiction,  and  involving  practical 
falsehood.  How  dare  intelligent  believers  in  Christ  to  utter 
words  which  they  know  in  their  conscience  to  be  wickedly  aside 
from  truth  ?  When  I  shall  be  able  to  understand  the  process  by 
which  gracious  men  so  accommodate  their  consciences,  even  then 
I  shall  have  a  confirmed  belief  that  the  God  of  truth  never  did 
and  never  will  confirm  a  spiritual  blessing  of  the  highest  order 
in  connection  with  the  utterance  of  such  false  promises  and  un- 
truthful vows.  My  brethren,  does  it  not  strike  you  that  declara- 
tions so  fictitious  are  not  likely  to  be  connected  with  a  new  birth 
wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  truth  ? 

I  have  not  done  with  this  point :  I  must  take  another  case,  and 
suppose  the  sponsors  and  others  to  be  ungodly  ;  and  that  is  no  hard 
supposition,  for  many  cases  we  know  that  godfathers  and  parents 
have  no  more  thought  of  religion  than  that  idolatrous  hallowed 
stone  around  which  they  gather.  When  these  sinners  have 
taken  their  places,  what  are  they  about  to  say  ?  Why,  they  are 
about  to  make  the  solemn  vows  I  have  already  recounted  in  your 
hearing  ?  Totally  irreligious  they  are,  but  yet  they  promise  for 
the  baby  what  they  never  did,  and  never  thought  of  doing,  for 
themselves,  —  they  promise  on  behalf  of  this  child,  "  that  he  will 
renounce  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  and  constantly  believe  God's 
Holy  Word,  and  obediently  keep  his  commandments."  My 
brethren,  do  not  think  I  speak  severely  here.  Really,  I  think 
there  is  something  here  to  make  mockery  for  devils.  Let  every 
honest  man  lament  that  ever  God's  church  should  tolerate  such 
a  thing  as  this,  and  that  there  should  be  found  gracious  people 
who  will  feel  grieved  because  I,  in  all  kindness  of  heart,  re- 
buked the  atrocity.  Unregenerate  sinners  promising  for  a  poor 
babe  that  he  shall  keep  all  God's  holy  commandments,  which  they 
themselves  wantonly  break  every  day !  How  can  anything  but  the 
longsuSering  of  God  endure  this  ?  What !  not  speak  against  it? 
The  very  stones  in  the  street  might  cry  out  against  the  infamy  of 
wicked  men  and  women  promising  that  another  should  renounce 
the  devil  and  all  his  works,  while  they  themselves  serve  the  devil 


24  BAPTISMAT.  REGEXERATION. 

and  Jo  Lis  works  with  greediness!  As  a  climax  io  all  ih'is,  1 
am  asked  to  believe  that  God  accepts  that  wicked  promi.sc,  ami 
as  the  result  of  it,  regenerates  that  child.  You  cannot  believe  in 
regeneration  by  this  operation,  whether  saints  or  sinners  arc  the 
performers.  Take  them  to  be  godly,  then  they  are  wrong  fcT 
doing  what  their  conscience  must  condemn ;  view  them  as  un- 
godly, and  they  are  wrong  for  promising  what  they  know  they 
cannot  perform  ;  and  in  neither  case  can  God  accept  such  worsliip, 
much  less  infallibly  append  regeneration  to  such  a  baptism  as  this. 
But  you  will  say,  "Why  do  you  cry  out  against  it?"  I  cry 
out  against  it  because  I  believe  that  baptism  does  not  save  the 
soul,  and  that  ihe  preaching  of  it  has  a  wrong  and  evil  infiuf.nce 
upon  men.  We  meet  with  persons  who,  when  we  tell  them  that 
they  must  be  born  again,  assure  us  that  they  were  bom  again 
when  they  w^ere  baptized.  The  number  of  these  persons  is  in- 
creasing, fearfully  increasing,  until  all  grades  of  society  are  mis- 
led by  this  belief.  How  can  any  man  stand  up  in  his  pulpit  and 
say  "  Ye  must  be  born  again  "  to  his  congregation,  when  he  has 
already  assured  them,  by  his  own  "  unfeigned  assent  and  consent  '* 
to  it,  that  they  are  themselves,  every  one  of  them,  born  again  in 
baptism.  What  has  he  to  do  with  them  ?  Why,  my  dear  friends, 
the  gospel  then  has  no  voice  ;  they  have  rammed  this  ceremony 
down  its  throat,  and  it  cannot  speak  to  rebuke  sin.  The  man 
who  has  been  baptized  or  sprinkled,  says,  "  I  am  saved  ;  I  am  s 
member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  Who  are  you,  that  you  should  rebuke  me'f 
Call  me  to  repentance  ?  —  call  me  to  a  new  life  ?  What  better 
life  can  I  have  ?  for  I  am  a  member  of  Christ  —  a  part  of  Christ's 
body.  What !  rebuke  me  ?  I  am  a  child  of  God.  Cannot  you 
see  it  in  my  face?  No  matter  what  my  walk  and  conversation 
is,  I  am  a  child  of  God.  Moreover,  I  am  an  inheritor  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  true  I  drink  and  swear,  and  all  that, 
but  you  know  I  am  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  for 
when  I  die,  though  I  live  in  constant  sin,  you  will  put  me  in  the 
grave,  and  tell  everybody  that  I  died  "  in  sure  and  certain  hepe 
of'  the  resurrection  to  eternal  life." 


BAPTISJiAL  IJli  GENERATION.  26 

Now,  what  can  be  tb'^.  influence  of  such  preaching  as  this  upon 
our  beloTcd  England  ?  —  upon  my  dear  and  blessed  country  ? 
What  but  the  worst  of  ills  ?  If  I  loved  her  not,  but  loved  my- 
self most,  I  might  be  silent  here  ;  but,  loving  England,  I  cannot 
and  dare  not ;  and  having  soon  to  render  an  account  before  my 
God,  whose  servant  I  hope  I  am,  I  must  free  myself  from  this 
evil,  as  well  as  from  every  other,  or  else  on  my  head  may  be  the 
doom  of  souls. 

Here  let  me  bring  in  another  point.  It  is  a  most  fearful  fact, 
that,  in  no  oge  since  the  Reformation^  has  Popery  made  suchfear* 
ful  strides  in  England  as  during  the  last  few  years.  I  had  com- 
fortably believed  that  Popery  was  only  feeding  itself  upon  foreiom 
subscriptions,  upon  a  few  titled  perverts,  and  imported  monks 
and  nuns.  I  dreamed  that  its  progress  was  not  real.  In  fact,  I 
have  often  smiled  at  the  alarm  of  many  of  my  brethren  at  the 
progress  of  Popery.  But,  my  dear  friends,  we  have  been  mis- 
taken, grievously  mistaken.  If  you  will  read  a  valuable  paper 
in  the  magazine  called  "  Christian  "Work,"  those  of  you  who  are 
acquainted  with  it  will  be  perfectly  startled  at  its  revelations. 
This  great  city  is  now  covered  with  a  network  of  monks  and 
priests  and  sisters  of  mercy,  and  the  conversions  made  are  not 
by  ones  or  twos,  but  by  scores,  till  England  is  being  regarded  as 
the  most  hopeful  spot  for  Romish  missionary  enterprise  in  the 
whole  world ;  and  at  the  present  moment  there  is  not  a  mission 
which  is  succeeding  to  anything  like  the  extent  which  the  Eng- 
lish mission  is.  I  covet  not  their  money,  I  despise  their  soph- 
istries, but  I  marvel  at  the  way  in  which  they  gain  their  funds 
for  the  erection  of  their  ecclesiastical  buildings.  It  really  is  an 
alarming  matter  to  see  so  many  of  our  countrymen  going  off  to 
that  superstition  which  as  a  nation  we  once  rejected,  and  which 
it  was  supposed  we  should  never  again  receive.  Popery  is  mak- 
ing advances  such  as  you  would  never  believe,  though  a  spectator 
should  tell  it  to  you.  Close  to  your  very  doors,  perhaps  even  in 
your  own  houses,  you  may  have  evidence  ere  long  of  what  a 
inarch  Romanism  is  making.  And  lo  what  is  it  to  be  ascribed  ? 
I  say,  with  every  ground  of  probability,  that  there  is  no  marvel 
3 


26  BAPTISMAL  REGE^^:IUT10X. 

that  Popery  sliould  increase  when  you  have  two  things  to  make 
it  grow :  first  of  all,  the  falsehood  of  those  who  profess  a  faith 
which  they  do  not  believe,  which  is  quite  contrary  to  the  hon- 
esty of  the  Romanist,  w^ho  does  through  evil  report  and  good 
reporl  liold  his  faith  ;  and  then  you  have,  secondly,  this  form  of 
error  known  as  baptismal  regeneration,  and  commonly  calleJ 
Pi.seyism,  which  is  not  only  Puseyism,  but  Church-of-Eng- 
landism.  because  it  is  in  the  Prayer- Cook,  as  plainly  as  words 
can  express  it,  —  you  have  this  baptismal  regeneration,  preparing 
stepping-stones  to  make  it  easy  for  men  to  go  to  Rome.  I  have 
but  to  open  my  eyes  a  little  to  foresee  Romanism  rampant  every- 
where  in  the  future,  since  its  germs  are  spreading  everywhere 
in  the  present.  In  one  of  our  courts  of  legislature,  but  last  Tues- 
day, the  Lord  Chief  Justice  showed  his  superstition,  by  speaking 
of  "  the  risk  of  the  calamity  of  children  dying  unbaptized ! " 
Among  Dissenters  you  see  a  veneration  for  structures,  a  modified 
belief  in  the  sacredness  of  places,  which  is  ail  idolatry ;  for  to 
believe  in  the  sacrednciss  of  anything  but  of  God  and  of  his  own 
Word,  is  to  idoUze,  whether  it  is  to  believe  in  the  sacredness  of 
the  men,  the  priests,  or  in  the  sacredness  of  the  bricks  and  mor- 
tar, or  of  the  fine  linen,  or  what  not,  which  you  may  use  in  the 
worship  of  God.  I  see  this  coming  up  everywhere  —  a  belief 
in  ceremony,  a  resting  in  ceremony,  a  veneration  for  altars,  fonts, 
and  churches,  —  a  veneration  so  profound  that  we  must  not  ven- 
ture upon  a  remark,  or  straightway  of  sinners  we  are  chief. 
Here  is  the  essence  and  soul  of  Popery,  peeping  up  under  the 
garb  of  a  decent  respect  for  sacred  things.  It  is  impossible  but 
that  the  Church  of  Rome  must  spread,  when  we  who  are  the 
watchdogs  of  the  fold  are  silent,  and  others  are  gently  and 
smoothly  turfing  the  road,  and  making  it  as  soft  and  smooth  as 
possible,  that  converts  may  travel  down  to  the  nethermost  hell 
of  Popery.  We  want  John  Knox  back  again.  Do  not  talk  to 
me  of  mild  and  gentle  men,  of  soft  manners  and  squeamish  words : 
we  want  the  fiery  Knox  ;  and  even  though  his  vehemence  should 
**  ding  our  pulpits  into  blads,"  it  were  well  if  he  did  but  rouse 
our  hearts  to  at^tion.     We  want  Luther,  to  tell  men  the  truth 


BATTISMAL  RrCEXEnATION.  27 

onmiatakably,  in  liomely  phrase.  The  velvet  has  got  into  ouf 
ministers'  mouths  of  late,  but  we  must  unrobe  ourselves  of  soft 
raiment,  and  truth  must  be  spoken,  and  nothing  but  truth ;  for 
of  all  lies  which  have  dragged  millions  down  to  hell,  I  look  upon 
this  as  being  one  of  the  most  atrocious,  —  that  in  a  ProtestanJ 
church  there  should  be  found  those  who  swear  that  baptisnj 
saves  the  soul.  Call  a  man  a  Baptist,  or  a  Presbyterian,  or  a 
Dissenter,  or  a  Churchman,  —  that  is  nothing  to  me  :  if  he  says 
that  baptism  saves  the  soul,  out  upon  him,  out  upon  him :  he 
states  what  God  never  taught,  what  the  Bible  never  laid  down, 
and  what  ought  never  to  be  maintained  by  men  who  profess  that 
the  Bible,  and  the  whole  Bible,  is  the  religion  of  Protestants. 

I  have  spoken  thus  much,  and  there  will  be  some  who  will 
say,  spoken  thus  much  bitterly.  Very  well ;  be  it  so.  Physic 
is  often  bitter,  but  it  shall  work  well,  and  the  physician  is  not 
bitter  because  his  medicine  is  so ;  or  if  he  be  accounted  so,  it 
will  not  matter,  so  long  as  the  patient  is  cured  ;  at  all  events,  it 
'iS  no  business  of  the  patient  whether  the  physician  is  bitter  or 
not:  his  business  is  with  his  own  soul's  health.  There  is  the 
truth,  and  I  have  told  it  to  you  ;  and  if  there  should  be  one 
among  you,  or  if  there  should  be  one  among  the  readers  of  this 
sermon  when  it  is  printed,  who  is  resting  on  baptism,  or  resting 
upon  ceremonies  of  any  sort,  I  do  beseech  you,  shake  off  this 
venomous  faith  into  the  fire  as  Paul  did  the  viper  which  fastened 
on  his  hand.     I  pray  you  do  not  rest  on  baptism. 

"  No  outward  forms  can  make  you  clean : 
The  leprosy  lies  deep  within." 

I  do  beseech  you  to  remember  that  you  must  have  a  new  heart 
and  a  right  spirit,  and  baptism  cannot  give  you  these.  You 
must  turn  from  your  sins  and  follow  after  Christ ;  you  must 
have  such  a  faith  as  shall  make  your  life  holy  and  your  speech 
devout,  or  else  you  have  not  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  and  into 
God's  kingdom  you  shall  never  come.  I  pray  you  never  rest 
upon  this  wretched  and  rotten  foundation,  thi's  deceitful  invention 
of  antichrist.  Oh  !  may  God  save  you  from  it,  and  bring  you  t« 
seek  the  true  rock  of  refuge  for  weary  souls. 


28  BAPTISMAL  HEGEXERATION. 

I  come  TN'itli  much  brevity,  and  I  hope  with  mucli  earnestness^ 
in  the  second  place,  to  say  that  faith  is  the  indispensable 
REQUISITE  TO  SALVATION.  "lie  that  heUevetJi  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved  ;  he  that  hdieveth  not  shall  be  damned."  Faith 
is  the  one  indispensable  requisite  for  salvation.  Ti.ls  faith  is 
the  gift  of  God.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Some  men 
believe  not  on  Jesus  ;  they  believe  not,  because  they  are  not  of 
Christ's  sheep^  as  he  himself  said  unto  them ;  but  his  sheep  hear 
his  voice :  he  knows  them  and  they  follow  him  ;  he  gives  to 
them  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 
pluck  them  out  of  his  hand.  What  is  this  believing  ?  Believing 
consists  in  two  things.  First  there  is  an  accrediting  of  the  testimony 
of  God  concerning  his  Son.  God  tells  you  that  his  Son  came 
into  the  world  and  was  made  flesh ;  that  he  lived  on  earth  for 
men's  sake ;  that  after  having  spent  his  life  in  holiness  he  was 
oflfered  up  a  propitiation  for  sin ;  that  upon  the  cross  he  there 
and  then  made  expiation  —  so  made  expiation  for  the  sins  of  the 
world  that  "whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life."  If  you  would  be  saved,  you  must  accredit 
this  testimony  which  God  gives  concerning  his  own  Son.  Hav- 
tng  received  this  testimony,  the  next  thing  is  to  confide  in  it, 
indeed,  here  lies,  I  think,  the  essence  of  saving  faith,  to  rest  your- 
self for  eternal  salvation  upon  the  atonement  and  the  righteous- 
ness of  Jesus  Christ,  to  have  done  once  for  all  with  all  reliance 
upon  feelings  or  upon  doings,  and  to  trust  in  Jesus  Christ  and  in 
what  he  did  for  your  salvation. 

This  is  faith,  receiving  of  the  truth  of  Christ :  first  knowing  it 
to  be  true,  and  then  acting  upon  that  belief.  Such  a  faith  as  this 
—  such  real  faith  as  this  —  makes  the  man  henceforth  hate  sin. 
How  can  he  love  the  thing  which  made  the  Saviour  bleed  ?  It 
makes  him  live  in  holiness.  How  can  he  but  seek  to  honor  that 
Crod  who  has  loved  him  so  much  as  to  give  his  Son  to  die  for  him  ? 
This  faith  is  spiritual  in  its  nature  and  eifects  ;  it  operates  upon 
the  entire  man ;  it  changes  his  heart,  enlightens  his  judgment, 
and  subdues  his  will ;  it  subjects  him  to  God's  supremacy,  and 
makes  him  receive  God's  Word  as  a  httle  child,  willing  to  receive 


BAPTISMAL  IIEGENEIIATION.  29 

the  Ivuth  upon  the  ipse  dixit  of  the  Diviue  One ;  it  sanctifies  hi3 
intellect,  and  makes  him  willing  to  be  taught  God's  Word  ;  it 
cleanses  within  ;  it  makes  clean  the  inside  of  the  cup  and  platter, 
and  it  beautifies  without ;  it  makes  clean  the  exterior  conduct  and 
the  inner  motive,  so  that  the  man,  if  his  faith  be  true  and  real, 
becomes  henceforth  another  man  to  what  he  ever  was  before. 

Now  that  such  a  faith  as  this  should  save  the  soul,  is,  I  believe, 
reasonable ;  yea,  more,  it  is  certain,  for  ive  have  seen  men  saved 
hy  it  in  this  very  house  ( f  prayer.  We  have  seen  the  harlot 
lifted  out  of  the  Stygian  ditch  of  her  sin,  and  made  an  konest 
woman ;  we  have  seen  tl>*,  thief  reclaimed ;  we  have  known  the 
drunkard,  in  hundreds  of  h  stances,  to  be  sobered ;  we  have  ob- 
served faith  to  work  such  2  change,  that  all  the  neighbors  who 
have  seen  it  have  gazed  auf^  admired,  even  though  they  hated  it ; 
we  have  seen  faith  delivei  m^n  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  and 
help  them  to  consecrate  the:Ta?v.Ives  and  their  substance  to  God; 
we  have  seen,  and  hope  still  t^i  see  yet  more  widely,  deeds  of 
heroic  consecration  to  God  and  di.  j-lays  of  witness-bearing  against 
the  common  current  of  the  times,  which  have  proved  to  us  that 
faith  does  afiect  the  man,  does  s^vd  the  soul.  My  hearers,  if  yoa 
would  be  saved,  you  must  believe  in  *;hc  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let 
me  urge  you  with  all  my  heart  to  look  nowhere  but  to  Christ 
crucified  for  your  salvation.  Oh  !  if  yo'i  rest  upon  any  ceremony, 
though  it  be  not  baptism  —  if  you  re^^t  upon  any  other  than 
Jesus  Christ  —  you  must  perish,  as  surel}  as  this  book  is  true.  I 
pray  you  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  though  I,  or  an  angel  from 
heaven,  preach  any  other  doctrine  than  this,  let  him  be  accursed ; 
for  this,  and  this  alone,  is  the  soul-saving  truth  which  shall  re- 
generate the  world  —  "  He  that  believeth  an^I  is  baptized  shall 
be  saved."  Away  from  all  the  tag-rags,  wax  c  andles,  and  mil- 
linery of  Puseyism  I  away  from  all  the  gorgeous  pomp  of  Foj-'ory  ! 
away  from  the  fonts  of  Churcli-of-Englandism  !  Wc  bid  you  turn 
your  eyes  to  that  naked  cross,  where  hangs  as  a  bleeding  r*an 
the  Son  of  God. 

"  None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good.*' 
3* 


hf)  BAPTIS5L\L  REGENERATION. 

Tlvre  13  Ufe  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  ;  there  is  life  at  this  mo- 
ment for  you.  Whoever  among  you  can  believe  in  the  great 
love  cf  God  toAvards  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  you  shall  be  saved. 
ir  you  can  believe  that  our  great  Father  desireth  us  to  come  to 
liim  —  that  he  panteth  for  us  —  that  he  calleth  us  every  day  with 
tli(!  loud  voice  of  his  Son's  wounds  ;  if  you  can  believe  now  that 
in  Christ  there  is  pardon  for  transgressions  past,  and  cleansing 
for  years  to  come ;  if  you  can  trust  him  to  save  you,  you  have 
y,lready  the  marks  of  regeneration.  The  work  of  salvation  is 
commenced  in  you,  so  far  as  the  Spirit's  work  is  concerned ;  it 
is  finished  in  you,  so  far  as  Christ's  work  is  concerned.  Oh ! 
I  would  plead  with  you,  lay  hold  on  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the 
foundation  :  build  on  it.  This  is  the  rock  of  refuge  :  fly  to  it.  I 
pray  you  fly  to  it  now.  Life  is  short :  time  speeds  with  eagle's 
wing.  Swift  as  the  dove  pursued  by  the  hawk,  fly,  fly,  poor  sin- 
ner, to  God's  dear  Son :  now  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment ; 
now  look  into  that  dear  face,  once  marred  with  sorrows  for  you ; 
look  into  those  eyes,  once  shedding  tears  for  you.  Trust  him, 
and  if  you  find  him  false,  then  you  must  perish ;  but  false  you 
never  will  find  him  while  this  word  standeth  true,  "  He  that  be- 
lieveth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned."  God  give  us  this  vital,  essential  faith,  with- 
out which  there  is  no  salvation.  Baptized,  re-baptized,  circum- 
cised, confirmed,  fed  upon  sacraments,  and  buried  in  consecrated 
ground  —  ye  shall  all  perish  except  ye  believe  in  him.  The 
"Word  is  express  and  plain  ;  he  that  believeth  not  may  plead  his 
baptism,  may  plead  anything  he  likes,  "  But  he  that  believeth 
not  shall  be  damned ; "  for  him  there  is  nothing  but  the  wrath 
of  God,  the  flames  of  hell,  eternal  perdition.  So  Christ  declares, 
and  so  must  it  be. 

But  now  to  close,  there  are  some  who  say,  "  Ah !  but  baptism 
is  in  the  test ;  where  do  you  put  that  ?  "  That  shall  be  another 
point,  and  then  we  have  done. 

The  baptism  in  the  text  is  one  evidently  connected 
WITH  faith.  "He  that  beUeveth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved."     It  strikes  me,  there  is  no  supposition  here  that  anybody 


BAPTISMAL'  liECiENERATION.  8* 

irould  be  baptized  wlio  did  not  believe ;  or  if  there  be  such  a 
supposition,  it  is  very  clearly  laid  down  that  his  baptism  will  be 
of  no  use  to  him,  for  he  will  be  damned,  baptized  or  not,  unless 
he  believes.  The  baptism  of  the  text  seems  to  me,  my  brethren, 
—  if  you  differ  from  me  I  am  sorry  for  it,  but  I  must  hold  my 
opinion,  and  out  with  it,  —  it  seems  to  me  that  baptism  is  con- 
nected with,  nay,  directly  follows  belief.  I  w^ould  not  insist  too 
much  upon  the  order  of  the  words ;  but,  for  other  reasons,  I  think 
that  baptism  should  follow  believing.  At  any  rate,  it  effectually 
avoids  the  error  we  have  been  combating.  A  man  who  knows 
that  he  is  saved  by  believing  in  Christ  does  not,  when  he  is  bap- 
tized, lift  his  baptism  into  a  saving  ordinance.  In  fact,  he  is  the 
very  best  protester  against  that  mistake,  because  he  holds  that 
he  has  no  right  to  be  baptized  until  he  is  saved.  He  bears  a 
testimony  against  baptismal  regeneration  in  his  being  baptized 
as  professedly  an  already  regenerate  person.  Brethren,  the 
baptism  here  meant  is  a  baptism  connected  with  faith,  and  to 
this  baptism  I  will  admit  there  is  very  much  ascribed  in  Scrip- 
ture. Into  that  question  I  am  not  going ;  but  I  do  find  some 
very  remarkable  passages  in  which  baptism  is  spoken  of  very 
strongly.  I  find  this  :  "  Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away 
thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord."  I  find  as  much  as 
this  elsewhere.  I  know  that  believer's  baptism  itself  does  not 
wash  away  sin,  yet  it  is  so  the  outward  sign  and  emblem  of  it  to 
the  believer,  that  the  thing  visible  maybe  described  as  the  thing 
signified.  Just  as  our  Saviour  said,  "This  is  my  body,"  when 
it  was  not  his  body,  but  bread ;  yet,  inasmuch  as  it  represented 
his  body,  it  was  fair  and  right  according  to  the  usage  of  language 
to  say,  "  Take,  eat,  this  is  my  body."  And  so,  inasmuch  as  bap- 
tism to  the  believer  representeth  the  washing  of  sin  —  it  may  be 
called  the  washing  of  sin ;  not  that  it  is  so,  but  that  it  is  to  saved 
Bouls  the  outward  symbol  and  representation  of  what  is  done 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  man  who  believes  in 
Christ, 

TVhat  connection  has  this  baptism  with  faith  ?     I  think  it  has 
just  this,  fyzptism  is  the  avotool  of  faxtJi. ;  the  man  was  Ciuist'i 


82  BAPTIS^rAL  KEGEXERATION. 

Boldier,  but  nuw  in  baptism  he  puts  on  bis  regimentals.  The 
man  believed  in  Christ,  but  his  faith  remained  between  God  and 
his  own  soul.  In  baptism  he  says  to  the  baptizer,  "I  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ ; "  he  says  to  the  church,  "  I  unite  with  you  as  a 
believer  in  the  common  truths  of  Christianity:*'  he  saith  to  the 
onlooker,  "  Whatever  you  may  do,  as  for  me,  1  will  serve  the 
Lord."     It  is  the  avowal  of  his  faith. 

Next,  we  think  baptism  is  also  to  the  believer  a  testimony  of 
his  faith ;  he  does  in  baptism  tell  the  world  what  he  believes. 
''  I  .im  about,"  saith  he,  "  to  be  buried  in  water.  I  believe  that 
the  Son  of  God  was  metaphorically  baptized  in  suffering  ;  I  be- 
lieve he  was  literally  dead  and  buried."  To  rise  again  out  of 
the  water  sets  forth  to  all  men  that  he  believes  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Clirist.  There  is  a  showing  forth  in  the  Lord's  Supper 
of  Christ's  death,  and  there  is  a  showing  forth  in  baptism  of 
Christ's  burial  and  resurrection.  It  is  a  type,  a  sign,  a  symbol, 
a  mirror  to  the  world,  —  a  looking-glass,  in  which  religion  is  as  it 
w^ere  reflected.  We  say  to  the  onlooker,  when  he  asks  what  is 
the  meaning  of  this  ordinance,  "  We  mean  to  set  forth  our  faith 
L]»at  Christ  was  buried,  and  that  he  rose  again  from  the  dead; 
and  we  avow  this  death  and  resurrection  to  be  the  ground  of  our 
trust." 

Again,  baptism  is  also  Faith's  talcing  her  iiroper  place.  It  is, 
or  should  be,  one  of  her  first  acts  of  obedience.  Reason  looks 
at  baptism,  and  says,  "  Perhaps  there  is  nothing  in  it ;  it  cannot 
do  me  any  good."  "  True,"  says  Faith,  "  and  therefore  I  will 
observe  it.  If  it  did  me  some  good,  my  selfishness  would  make 
me  do  it ;  but  inasmuch  as  to  my  sense  there  is  no  good  in  it, 
since  I  am  bidden  by  my  Lord  thus  to  fulfil  all  righteousness,  it 
is  my  first  public  declaration  that  a  thing  which  looks  to  be  un- 
reasonable and  seems  to  be  unprofitable,  being  commanded  by 
God,  is  law  to  me.  If  my  Master  had  told  me  to  pick  up  six 
Btones  and  lay  them  in  a  rov/  I  would  do  it,  without  demanding 
of  him,  *  What  good  will  it  do? '  Cui  bono?  is  no  fit  question 
for  soldiers  of  Jesus.  The  very  simplicity  and  apparent  use- 
leosuess  of  the  ordinance  should  make  the  beaever  say,  *  Thero- 


BAPTISMAr.  KEGEXEEATION.  3f 

fore  I  do  it  because  it  becomes  the  better  test  to  me  of  my 
obedience  to  my  Master.'  "  When  you  tell  your  servant  to  do 
something,  and  he  cannot  comprehend  it,  if  he  turns  round  and 
says,  "  Please,  sir,  what  for  ?  "  you  are  quite  clear  that  he  hardly 
understands  the  relation  between  master  and  servant.  So  when 
God  tells  me  to  do  a  thing,  if  I  say,  "  What  for  ?  "  I  cannot 
have  taken  the  place  which  Faith  ought  to  occupy,  which  is  that 
of  simple  obedience  to  whatever  the  Lord  hath  said.  Baj^ti-im 
is  commanded,  and  Faith  obeys  because  it  is  commanded,  and 
thus  takes  her  proper  place. 

Once  more,  baptism  is  a  refreshment  to  faith.  While  we  are 
made  up  of  body  and  soul  as  we  are,  we  shall  need  some  means 
by  which  the  body  shall  sometimes  be  stirred  up  to  co-work  with 
the  soul.  In  the  Lord's  Supper  my  faith  is  assisted  by  the  out- 
ward and  visible  sign.  In  the  bread  and  in  the  wine  I  see  no 
superstitious  mystery :  I  see  nothing  but  bread  and  wine ;  but  in 
that  bread  and  wine  I  do  see  to  my  faith  an  assistant.  Through 
the  sign  my  faith  sees  the  thing  signified.  So  in  baptism  there 
is  no  mysterious  efficacy  in  the  baptistry  or  in  the  water.  We 
attach  no  reverence  to  the  one  or  to  the  other ;  but  we  do  see  in 
the  water  and  in  the  baptism  such  an  assistance  as  brings  home 
to  our  faith  most  manifestly  our  being  buried  vvith  Christ,  and 
our  rising  again  in  newness  of  life  with  him.  Explain  baptism 
thus,  dear  friends,  and  there  is  no  fear  of  Popery  rising  out  of  it. 
Explain  it  thus,  and  we  cannot  suppose  any  soul  will  be  led  to 
trust  to  it ;  but  it  takes  its  proper  place  among  the  ordinances 
of  God's  house.  To  lift  it  up  in  the  other  way,  and  say  men  are 
saved  by  it  —  ah !  my  friends,  how  much  of  mischief  that  one  false- 
h  t>od  has  done  and  may  do,  eternity  alone  will  disclose.  Would 
to  God  another  George  Fox  would  spring  up,  in  all  his  quaint 
simplicity  and  rude  honesty,  to  rebuke  the  idol-worship  of  this 
age  ;  to  rail  at  their  holy  bricks  and  mortar,  holy  lecturns,  holy 
altars,  holy  surplices,  right  reverend  fathers,  and  I  know  not 
what.  These  things  are  not  holy.  God  is  holy ;  his  truth  is 
holy :  holiness  belongs  not  to  the  carnal  and  the  material,  but  to 
the  spiritual.     Oh  that  a  ti*umpct  tongue  would  cry  out  against 


34  BAPTISMAL   KEGE.NEnATIOX. 

thr  superstitioii  of  the  age !  I  cannot,  as  George  Fox  did,  give 
up  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper;  but  I  would  infinitely  sooner 
do  it,  counting  it  the  smaller  mistake  of  the  two, than  perpetrate 
wad  assist  in  perpretrating  the  uplifting  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  out  of  their  proper  place.  O  my  beloved  friends,  the 
comrades  of  my  struggles  and  witnessing?,  cling  to  the  salvatioi 
of  faith,  and  abhor  the  salvation  of  priests.  If  I  am  not  mistaken, 
the  day  will  come  when  we  shall  have  to  fight  for  a  simple  spirit- 
ual religion  far  more  than  we  do  novr.  We  have  been  cultivating 
friendship  with  those  who  are  either  unscriptural  in  creed  or  else 
dishonest ;  who  either  believe  baptismal  regeneration,  or  profess 
that  they  do,  and  swear  before  God  that  they  do  when  they  do 
not.  The  time  is  come  when  there  shall  be  no  more  truce  or 
parley  between  God's  servants  and  time-servers.  The  time  is 
come  when  those  who  follow  God  must  follow  God,  and  those 
who  try  to  trim  and  dress  themselves  and  find  out  a  way  which 
is  pleasing  to  the  flesh  and  gentle  to  carnal  desires,  must  go  their 
way.  A  great  winnowing-time  is  coming  to  God's  saints,  and 
we  shall  be  clearer  one  of  these  days  than  we  now  are  from  union 
with  those  who  are  upholding  Popery,  under  the  pretence  of 
teaching  Protestantism.  We  shall  be  clear,  I  say,  of  those  who 
teach  salvation  by  baptism,  instead  of  salvation  by  the  blood  )f 
Dur  blessed  Master,  Jesus  Christ.  Oh,  may  the  Lord  gird  up 
your  loins !  Believe  me,  it  i3  no  trifle.  It  may  be  that  on  this 
ground  Armageddon  shall  be  fought.  Here  shall  come  the  great 
battle  between  Christ  and  his  saints  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
w^orld  and  forms  and  ceremonies  on  the  other.  If  wo  are  over- 
tome  here,  there  may  be  years  of  blood  and  persecution,  and  toss* 
mg  to  and  fro  between  darkness  and  light;  but  if  we  are  brave 
and  bold,  and  flinch  not  here,  but  stand  to  God's  truth,  the  future 
of  England  may  be  bright  and  glorious.  Oh  for  a  truly  reformed 
Church  in  England,  and  a  godly  race  to  maintain  it !  The 
world's  future  depends  on  it  under  God;  for  in  proportion  as 
truth  is  marred  at  home,  truth  is  maimed  abroad.  Out  of  any 
system  which  teaches  salvation  by  baptism  must  spring  infidelity, 
aa  infidelity  which  the  false  chuixjh  already  secma  willing  to 


BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION".  35 

nourish  and  foster  beneath  her  wing.  God  save  this  favored  land 
from  the  brood  of  her  own  established  religion.  Brethren,  stand 
fast  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  you  free,  and  be 
not  afraid  of  any  sudden  fear  nor  calamity  when  it  cometh;  for 
he  who  trusteth  to  tlie  Lord,  mercy  .shall  compass  him  about, 
and  he  who  is  faithful  to  God  and  Christ  shall  hear  it  said  at  the 
last,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant :  enter  thou  into  the 
joy  of  the  Lord."  May  the  Lord  bless  this  word,  for  Christ's 
sake. 


Note.  —  Having  been  informed  that  the  whole  of  tho  burial  service  is  not 
ttsually  read  at  executions,  I  have,  for  the  sake  of  fairness,  altered  the  pas- 
sage upon  page  19,  altliough  it  strikes  mc  that  I  might  justly  have  retained 
it,  since  the  Rubric  of  the  Church,  and  not  the  practice  of  some  of  its  ministers, 
is  that  with  which  we  must  deal.  Tlic  Rubric  says,  "  The  office  ensuing  is 
not  to  be  used  for  any  that  die  unbaptized,  or  excommunicate,  or  have  laid 
violent  hands  upon  them.sclves."  The  victim  of  o'lr  capital  punishment  is 
not  by  this  Rubric  shut  out  from  the  privileges  (?)  of  the  Anglican  burial 
service,  unless  his  condemnation  may  be  viewed  as  tantamount  to  excom- 
munication, which  I  can  hardly  think  to  be  the  case,  sin-'C  ninny  cond^nmei 
persons  receive  the  sacraipent. 


SERMON  11. 


CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT. 

**AHD  THEY  BROUGHT  YOUNG  CHILDREN  UNTO  HIM,  THAT  HE  SHODID  TOUCH 
them:  and  HIS  DISCIPLES  REBUKED  THOSE  THAT  BROUGHT  TUEJI.  I.UT  WIIEH 
JESUS  SAW  IT,  HE  "WAS  MUCH  DISPLEASED,  AND  SAID  UNTO  THEM,  BUFFER  THB 
LITTLE  CHILDREN  TO  COME  UNTO  ME,  AND  FORBJD  THEM  NOT:  FOPv  OF  SUCH  IS 
THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.  VERILY  I  SAY  UNTO  YOU,  WHOSOEVER  SHALL  NOT  RE- 
CEIVE THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  AS  A  LITTLE  CHILD,  HE  SHALL  NOT  INTEU  THEREIN. 
AND  HE  TOOK  THEM  UP  IN  HIS  ARMS,  PUT  HIS  HANDS  UPON  THEM,  AND  BLESSED 

THEM."  —  MarK  X.  ia-16. 

My  attention  has  been  specially  directed  to  this  passage  hv 
the  fact  that  it  has  been  quoted  against  me  by  most  of  the 
authors  of  those  sermons  and  letters  which  are,  by  a  stretch  of 
imagination,  called  "  replies  "  to  my  sermon  upon  "  Baptismal 
Regeneration."  Replies  they  certainly  are  not,  except  to  one 
another.  I  marvel  that  a  Church  so  learned  as  the  Anglican 
cannot  produce  something  a  little  more  worthy  of  the  point  in 
hand.  The  various  authors  may  possibly  have  read  my  dis- 
course, but  by  reason  of  mental  absorption  in  other  meditations, 
or  perhaps  through  the  natural  disturbance  of  mind  caused  by 
guilty  consciences,  they  have  talked  with  confusion  of  words,  and 
have  only  been  successful  in  refuting  themselves  and  answering 
one  another.  They  must  have  been  aiming  at  something  far 
removed  from  my  sermon,  or  else  I  must  give  them  credit  for 
being  the  worst  shots  that  ever  practised  with  polemical  artillery. 
They  do  not  so  much  as  touch  the  target  in  its  extreme  corners, 
much  less  in  its  centre.    -The  whole  question  is.  Do  you  believe 


CHILDREN  BROUGHT  T(J  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT.  37 

that  baptism  regenerates  ?  If  so,  prove  that  your  belief  is 
scriptural !  Do  you  believe  that  baptism  does  not  regenerate  ? 
Then  justify  your  swearing  that  it  does?  Who  will  reply  to 
this  ?     He  shall  merit  and  bear  the  palm. 

The  scripture  before  us  is  by  several  of  the  champions  on  the 
other  side  exhibited  to  the  people  as  a  rebuke  to  me.  Their 
reasoning  is  rather  ingenious  than  forcible  :  forsooth,  because  iie 
disciples  incurred  the  displeasure  of  Jesus  Christ  by  xeeping  bock 
the  little  children  from  coming  to  him,  therefore  Jesus  Christ  is 
greatly  displeased  with  me,  and  -with  all  others  like  mc,  for 
keeping  children  from  the  font,  and  the  performance  there  en- 
acted ;  and  specially  displeased  w^ith  me  for  exposing  the  Angli- 
can doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration !  Observe  the  reasoning, 
—  because  Jesus  was  much  displeased  with  the  disciples  for 
hindering  parents  from  seeking  a  blessing  upon  their  children, 
therefore  he  is  much  displeased  with  us  who  do  not  believe  in 
godfathers  and  godmothers,  or  the  signing  of  the  cross  on  the 
infant  brow.  I  must  say  at  the  outset  that  this  is  rather  a  leap 
of  argumtnt,  and  would  not  ordinarily  be  thought  conclusive  ;  but 
this  we  may  readily  overlook,  since  we  have  long  ceased  to  hope 
for  reasonable  arguments  from  those  who  support  a  cause  based 
upon  absurdity.  My  brethren,  I  concluded  that  there  must  be 
something  forcible  in  such  a  text  as  this,  or  my  opponents  would 
not  be  so  eager  to  secure  it.  I  have  therefore  carefully  looked 
at  it,  and,  as  I  have  viewed  it,  it  has  opened  up  to  me  with  a 
sacred  splendor  of  grace.  In  this  incident  the  very  heart  of 
Christ  is  published  to  poor  sinners,  and  we  may  clearly  perceive 
the  freeness  and  the  fulness  of  the  mighty  grace  of  the  Redeemer 
of  men,  who  is  willing  to  receive  the  youngest  child  as  well  as 
the  oldest  man ;  and  is  greatly  displeased  with  any  who  would 
keep  back  seeking  souls  from  coming  to  him,  or  loving  hearts 
from  bringing  others  to  'receive  his  blessing. 

I.  In  handling  this  text,  in  what  I  believe  to  be  its  true  light, 
I  shall  commence,  first  of  all,  by  observing  that  this  text  oa3 

MOT  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  SHADE  OF  THE  GHOST  OF  A  CONNEC- 

4 


88    CHII.DKEN  BROUGHT  TO  CIIPJST,  NOT  TO  TIIE  FONT. 

TiON  WITH  BAPTISM.  There  is  no  line  of  connection  so  subston* 
tial  as  a  spider's  web  between  this  incident  and  baptism,  or  at 
least  my  imagination  is  not  vivid  enough  to  conceive  one.  Thia 
I  v\ill  prove  to  you,  if  you  will  follow  mc  for  a  moment. 

It  is  very  clear,  dear  friends,  that  these  young  children  were 
not  hroiigltt  to  Jesus  Christ  by  their  friends  to  he  baptized.  "  They 
brought  young  children  to  him,  that  he  should  touch  them,"  says 
Mark.  Matthew  describes  the  children  as  being  brought,  "  that 
he  would  put  his  hands  on  them  and  pray ; "  but  there  is  not  a 
hint  about  their  being  baptized :  no  godfathers  or  godmother:? 
had  been  provided,  and  no  sign  of  the  cross  was  requested 
Surely  the  parents  themselves  knew  tolerably  well  what  it  was? 
they  desired,  and  they  would  not  have  expressed  themselves  so 
dubiously  as  to  ask  him  to  touch  them,  when  they  meant  that  he 
should  baptize  them.  The  parents  evidently  had  no  thought  oi 
regeneration  by  baptism,  and  brought  the  children  for  quito 
another  end. 

In  the  next  place,  if  they  brought  the  children  to  Jesus  Christ 
to  be  baptized,  they  brought  them  to  the  wrong  person ;  for  the 
Evangelist  John,  in  the  fourth  chapter  and  the  second  verse, 
expressly  assures  us  that  Jesus  Christ  baptized  not,  but  his  dis- 
ciples. This  settles  the  question,  once  for  all,  and  proves  beyond 
all  dispute  that  there  is  no  connection  between  this  incident  and 
baptism. 

But  you  will  say,  '■'■Perhaps  they  brought  the  children  to  he 
baptized  by  the  disciples  ?  "  Brethren,  the  disciples  were  not  in 
the  habit  of  baptizing  infants,  and  this  is  clear  from  the  case  in 
hand.  If  they  had  been  in  the  habit  of  baptizing  infants,  would 
they  have  rebuked  the  parents  for  bringing  them?  If  it  had 
been  a  customary  thing  for  parents  to  bring  children  with  such 
an  object,  would  the  disciples,  who  had  been  in  the  constant  habit 
of  performing  the  ceremony,  have  rebuked  them  for  attending  to 
it?  Would  any  Church  clergyman  rebuke  parents  for  bringing 
their  children  to  be  baptized  ?  If  he  did  so,  he  would  act  ab- 
surdly contrary  to  his  own  views  and  practice ;  and  we  cannot 
therefore  imagine  that  if  infant  baptism  had  been  the  accepted 


CHILDKKN  BROUGHT  TO  CILRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT.     59 

practice,  the  disciples  could  have  acted  so  absurdly  as  to  rebuks 
the  parents  for  biiiuging  their  little  ones.  It  is  obvious  that 
?uch  could  not  have  been  the  practice  of  the  disciples  who  were 
rebuked. 

Moreover,  and  here  is  an  argument  wliich  seems  to  me  to 
have  great  force  in  it,  when  Jesus  Christ  rebu/c&xi  his  disciples, 
then  was  the  time,  if  ever  in  his  life,  to  have  openly  spoken  con- 
cerning infant  haptism,  godfathers  and  godmothers,  and  the  whole 
affair.  If  he  wished  to  rebuke  his  disciples  most  effectually, 
how  could  he  have  done  it  better  than  by  raying,  "  Wherefore 
keep  ye  these  children  back?  I  have  ordained  that  they  shall 
be  baptized  ;  I  have  expressly  commanded  that  they  shall  be 
regenerated  and  made  members  of  my  body  in  baptism  :  how 
dare  you,  then,  in  opposition  to  my  will,  keep  them  back  ?  "  But 
no,  dear  friends :  our  Saviour  never  said  a  word  about  "  the  laver 
of  regeneration,"  or,  "  the  quickening  dew,"  when  he  rebuked 
them  —  not  a  single  sentence.  Had  he  done  so,  the  season 
would  have  been  most  appropriate  if  it  had  been  his  intention  to' 
teach  the  practice ;  in  the  whole  of  his  life,  there  is  no  period  in 
which  a  discourse  upon  infant  regeneration  in  baptism  could 
have  been  more  appropriate  than  on  this  occasion ;  and  yet  not  a 
single  sentence  about  it  comes  from  the  Saviour's  lips 

To  close  all,  Jesus  Christ  did  not  baptize  the  children.  Our 
evangelist  does  not  inform  us  that  he  exclaimed,  "  Where  are 
the  godfathers  and  godmothers  ? "  it  is  not  recorded  that  he 
called  for  a  font,  or  a  Prayer-Book  ?  "  No ;  but  "  He  took  them 
up  in  his  arms,  put  his  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them,"  and 
dismissed  them  without  a  drop  of  the  purifying  element.  Now, 
if  thi:>  event  had  any  connection  with  baptism  whatever,  it  was 
the  most  appropriate  occasion  for  infant  baptism  to  have  been 
practised.  Why,  it  would  have  ended  forever  the  controversy. 
There  may  b3  some  men  in  the  world  who  would  have  raised 
tne  question  of  engrafting  infants  into  the  body  of  Christ's 
church  by  baptism  after  all  this,  but  I  am  certain  no  honest  man 
wouli  have  done  so  who  reverently  accepted  Christ  as  his  spir- 
itual leader.     I,  my  brethren,  would  sooner  be  dumb  than  speak 


40  CHILDREN  BnOLCnr  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT. 

a  sinf(le  Vvord  against  an  ordinance  which  Christ  himself  institn* 
ted  and  practised ;  and  if  on  this  occasion  he  had  but  sprinkled 
one  of  these  infants,  given  him  a  Christian  name,  signed  ^lim 
with  a  cross,  accepted  the  vows  of  his  godparents,  and  thanked 
God  for  his  regeneration,  then  the  question  would  have  been 
settled  forever,  and  some  of  us  would  have  been  Jiaved  a  world 
of  abuse,  besides  escaping  no  end  of  mistakes,  for  which  we  are 
condemned,  in  the  judgment  of  many  good  people,  for  whom  we 
have  some  affection,  though  for  their  judgment  we  have  no  re- 
spect. 

So  you  see  the  parents  did  not  ask  baptismal  regeneration ; 
Christ  did  not  personally  baptize  ;  the  disciples  were  not  in  the 
habit  of  baptizing  infants,  or  else  they  would  not  have  rebuked 
the  parents  ;  Christ  did  not  speak  about  baptism  on  the  occasion, 
and  he  did  not  baptize  the  little  ones. 

I  will  put  a  case  to  you  which  may  exhibit  the  weakness  of 
my  opponents'  position.  Suppose  a  denomination  should  rise  up 
which  should  teach  that  babes  should  be  allowed  to  partake  at 
the  Lord's  Table.  Such  teaching  could  plead  precedents  of 
great  antiquity,  for  you  are  aware  that  at  one  period  infant,  com- 
munion was  allowed,  and  logically  too ;  for  if  an  infant  has  a 
right  to  baptism,  it  has  a  right  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Table.  For 
years  children  were  brought  to  the  Lord's  Table,  but  rather  in- 
convenient accidents  occurred,  and  therefore  the  thing  was  dropped 
as  being  unseemly.  But  if  some  one  should  revive  the  error, 
and  try  to  prove  that  infants  are  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper, 
he  might  prove  it  from  this  passage  quite  as  clearly  as  our  friends 
can  prove  infant  baptism  from  it.  Moreover,  do  not  forget  that 
even  if  infant  baptism  could  be  proved  from  this  text,  the  cere- 
mony prescribed  in  the  Prayer-Book  is  quite  as  far  from  being 
established.  Whether  the  baptism  of  infants  may  or  may  not  be 
pioved  from  other  Scriptures  I  cannot  now  stay  to  inquire  ;  but 
even  if  it  can  be,  what  are  we  to  say  for  godfathers  or  god- 
mothers, or  the  assertion  that  in  bapti-sm  children  are  mado 
«  members  of  Christ,  children  of  God,  and  inheritors  of  the  king. 
dom  of  heaven  ?  "     Truly  I  migh\  as  well  prove  vaccination  from 


Cim.DnEN   BrOUGHT   TO  CHPJST,  NOT  TO  TIIF  FONT.     4  J 

the  text  before  me,  as  tlie  performance  which  the  Prayer- Bock 
calls  "  infant  bapiism."  1  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  I  could 
prove  any  earthly  thing,  if  I  might  but  have  such  reasonino 
granted  to  me  as  that  which  proves  infant  baptism  from  this 
passage.  There  is  no  possible  connection  between  the  two.  The 
teaching  of  the  passage  is  very  plain  and  very  clear,  and  bap- 
tism has  been  imported  into  it,  and  not  found  in  it.  As  a  quaint 
writer  has  well  said,  ''  These  doctrines  are  raised  from  the  text 
as  our  collectors  raise  a  tax  upon  indigent,  nonsolvent  people,  by 
coming  armed  with  the  law  and  a  constable  to  distrain  for  that 
which  is  not  to  be  had.  Certainly  never  was  text  so  strained  and 
distrained  to  pay  what  it  never  owed ;  never  man  so  racked  to 
confess  what  he  never  thought ;  never  was  a  pumice-stone  so 
squeezed  for  water  which  it  never  held."  Still  hundreds  will  catch 
at  this  straw,  and  cry,  "  Did  not  Jesus  say,  *  Suffer  the  little 
children  to  come  unto  me  ? '  "  To  these  we  give  this  one  word, 
See  that  ye  read  the  word  as  it  is  written,  and  you  will  find  no 
water  in  it,  but  Jesus  only.  Are  the  water  and  Christ  the  same 
thing  ?  Is  bringing  a  child  to  a  font  bringing  the  child  to  Christ? 
Nay,  here  is  a  wide  difference,  as  wide  as  between  Rome  and  Je- 
rusalem, as  wide  as  between  antichrist  and  Christ,  between  false 
doctrine  and  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

II.     Now  for  our  second,  and  much  more  pleasing  task,  why, 

THEN,  WAS  JeSL'S  ChRIST  DISPLEASED? 

Read  the  passage,  and  at  once  the  answer  comes  to  you.  He 
was  displeased  with  his  disciples  for  two  reasons :  first,  because  they 
dUcouraged  those  who  would  bring  others  to  him  ;  and,  secondly, 
because  they  discouraged  those  who  themselves  were  anxious  to 
eornd  to  Mm.  They  did  not  discourage  those  who  were  coming 
to  a  font,  they  discouraged  those  who  were  coming  to  Jesus. 
There  is  a  miglity  distinction  ever  to  be  held  between  the  fon| 
and  Christ,  between  the  sprinkling  of  the  priest  and  living  faith 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

First,  his  disciples  discouraged  those  who  would  h'ing  others  tQ 
kink.  This  is  a  great  sin,  and  wherever  it  is  committed  Jesui 
4» 


42    CHILDRKN   BUOUCIIT  TO   CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT 

Christ  is  greatly  displeased  ;  for  a  true  desire  to  see  others  saved 
is  wrought  in  the  believer  by  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  thus 
renders  one  of  the  chosen  the  means  of  bringing  wandering 
sheep  into  the  fold.  In  this  case  they  discouraged  those  who 
would  bring  children  to  him  to  be  blessed.  How  can  we  bring 
children  to  Jesus  Christ  to  be  blessed  ?  We  cannot  do  it  m  a 
corporeal  sense,  for  Jesus  is  not  here,  "  he  is  risen ;  '*  but  we  ca« 
bring  our  children  in  a  true,  real,  and  spiritual  sense.  We  take 
them  up  in  the  arms  of  our  'prayer.  I  hope  many  of  us,  so  soon 
as  our  children  saw  the  light,  if  not  before,  presented  them  to 
God  with  this  anxious  prayer,  that  they  might  sooner  die  than 
li\e  to  disgrace  their  father's  God.  We  only  desired  children 
that  we  might  in  them  live  over  again  another  life  of  service  to 
God ;  and  when  we  looked  into  their  young  faces,  we  never 
asked  wealth  for  them,  nor  fame,  nor  anything  else,  but  that  they 
might  be  dear  unto  God,  and  that  their  names  might  be  written 
in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life.  We  did  then  bring  our  children 
to  Christ,  as  far  as  we  could  do  it,  by  presenting  them  before  God, 
by  earnest  prayer  on  their  behalf.  And  have  we  ceased  to  bring 
them  to  Christ  ?  Nay,  I  hope  we  seldom  bow  the  knee  without 
praying  for  our  children.  Our  daily  cry  is,  "  Oh  that  they  might 
live  before  thee  !  "  God  knows  that  nothing  would  give  us  more 
joy  than  to  see  evidence  of  their  conversion ;  our  souls  m'ouM 
almost  leap  out  of  our  bodies  with  joy,  if  we  should  but  know 
that  they  were  the  children  of  the  living  God.  Nor  has  this 
privilege  been  denied  to  us,  for  there  are  some  here  who  can  re- 
joice in  a  converted  household.  Truly  we  can  say,  with  the 
Apostle  Paul,  "  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  this,  that  my  children 
walk  in  the  truth."  AVe  continue,  therefore,  to  bring  them  to 
Christ  by  daily,  constant,  earnest  prayer  on  their  behalf.  So 
Boon  as  they  become  of  years  capable  of  understanding  the  things 
of  God,  we  endeavor  to  bring  them  to  Christ  by  teaching  them 
the  truth.  Hence  our  Sabbath-schools,  hence  the  use  of  the 
Bible,  and  family  prayer,  and  catechising  at  home.  Any  person 
who  shall  forbid  us  to  pray  for  our  children,  will  incur  Christ'a 
high  displeasure ;  and  any  who  shall  say,  "  Do  not  teach  yott» 


CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST.  NC  T  TO  THE  FONT.  43 

children  ;  they  will  be  converted  in  God's  own  time,  if  it  be  hi3 
purpose  ;  therefore  leave  them  to  run  wild  in  the  streets  "  will 
certainly  both  "  sin  against  the  child  "  and  the  Lord  Jesus.  AVe 
might  as  well  say,  "  If  that  piece  of  ground  is  to  grow  a  harvest, 
it  will  do  so  if  it  be  God's  good  pleasure ;  therefore  leave  it,  and 
let  the  weeds  spring  up  and  cover  it:  do  not  endeavor  for  a 
moment  to  kill  the  weeds,  or  sow  the  good  seed."  Why,  such 
reasoning  as  this  would  be  not  only  cruel  to  our  children,  but 
grievously  displeasing  to  Christ.  Parents,  I  do  hope  you  are  all 
endeavoring  to  bring  your  children  to  Christ  by  teaching  liiem 
the  things  of  God.  Let  them  not  be  strangers  to  tlie  plan  of 
salvation.  Never  let  it  be  said  that  a  child  of  yours  reached 
years  in  which  his  conscience  could  act,  and  he  could  judge  be- 
tween good  and  evil,  without  knowing  the  doctrine  of  the  atone- 
ment, without  understanding  the  great  substitutionary  work  of 
Christ.  Set  before  your  child  life  and  death,  hell  and  heaven, 
judgment  and  mercy,  his  own  sin,  and  Christ's  most  precious 
blood ;  and  as  you  set  these  before  him,  labor  with  him^  persuade 
him,  as  the  apostle  did  his  congregation,  with  tears  and  weeping,  to 
turn  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  your  prayers  and  supplications  shall  be 
heard,  so  that  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  bring  them  to  Jesus.  How 
much  more  like  the  Scripture  will  such  labors  be  than  if  you 
were  to  sing  the  following  very  pretty  verse  which  disfigures 
Roundell  Palmer's  "  Book  of  Praise !  "— 

"  Though  thy  contcption  was  in  sin, 

A  sacred  bathing  thou  has  had; 
And  though  thy  birth  unclean  has  been, 

A  blameless  babe  thou  now  art  made. 
Sweet  baby,  then  forbear  to  weep; 
Be  stiU  my  dear,  sweet  baby,  sleep.'* 

I  cannot  tell  you  how  much  I  owe  to  the  solemn  words  of  my 
good  mother.  It  was  the  custom  on  Sunday  evenings,  while  we 
were  yet  little  children,  for  her  to  stay  at  home  with  us,  and 
then  we  sat  round  the  table  and  read  verse  by  verso,  and  she 
explained  the  Scripture  to  us.  After  that  was  done,  then  came 
Ihe  time  of  pleading ;  there  was  a  little  piece  of  "  Alleyn's  Alarm," 


44  CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT. 

or  of  '•  Baxter's  Call  to  the  Unconverted,"  and  this  was  read  witk 
poinfed  observations  made  to  each  of  us  as  we  sat  round  the 
table  ;  and  the  question  was  asked  how  long  it  would  be  before 
vre  would  think  about  our  state,  how  long  before  we  would  seek 
the  Lord.  Then  came  a  mother's  prayer,  and  some  of  the 
words  of  a  mother's  prayer  we  shall  never  forget,  even  when 
our  hair  is  gray.  I  remember  on  one  occasion  her  praying 
thus  :  "  Now,  Lord,  if  my  children  go  on  in  their  sins,  it  will  noi 
be  from  ignorance  tliat  they  perish,  and  my  soul  must  bear 
a  swift  witness  against  them  at  the  day  of  judgment,  if  they  lay 
not  hold  of  Christ."  That  thought  of  a  mother's  bearing  swift 
witness  against  me,  pierced  my  conscience  and  stirred  my  heart. 
This  pleading  with  them  for  God  and  with  God  for  them  is  the 
true  way  to  bring  children  to  Christ.  Sunday-school  teachers, 
you  have  a  high  and  noble  work ;  press  forward  in  it !  In  oar 
schools  you  do  not  try  to  bring  children  to  the  baptistry  for 
regeneration,  you  point  them  away  from  ceremonies  ;  if  I  know 
the  teachers  of  this  school  aright,  I  know  you  are  trying  to  bring 
your  classes  to  Christ.  Let  Christ  be  the  sum  and  substance 
of  your  teaching  in  the  school.  Young  men  and  young  women, 
in  your  classes  lift  up  Christ,  lift  him  up  on  high ;  and  if  any- 
body shall  say  to  you,  "Why  do  you  talk  thus  to  the  children?" 
you  can  say,  "  Because  my  soul  yearns  towards  them,  and  I  pant 
for  their  conversion  ;  "  and  if  any  should  afterward  object,  you 
remember  tliat  Jesus  is  greatly  displeased  with  them,  and  not 
you,  for  you  only  obey  the  injunction,  *'  Feed  my  lambs." 

The  case  in  our  text  is  that  of  children  ;  but  objectors  rise  up 
who  disapprove  of  endeavors  to  bring  any  sort  of  people  to  Christ 
by  faith  and  prayer.  There  are  some  who  spend  their  nights  in 
the  streets  seeking  after  the  poor  harlot,  and  I  have  heard  many 
harsh  observations  made  about  their  work  ;  some  will  say  it  is 
ridiculous  to  expect  that  any  of  those  who  spend  their  days  in 
debauchery  should  be  really  converted.  "NYe  are  told  that  the 
mos*  of  those  who  are  taken  into  the  refuges  go  back  and  be- 
come as  depraved  as  ever ;  I  believe  that  to  be  a  very  sad  and 
Bolemn  truth  ;  but  I  believ  ?,  if  I  or  any  one  else  shall  urge  \h»i  or 


CmiDKEN  DROUGHT  TO  CUmST,  NOT  TO  TII>'  FONT.     45 

Bnything  else  as  a  reason  why  my  brethren  should  not  seek  the 
harlot,  that  Jesus  would  be  greatly  displeased  ;  for  any  man  who 
stands  between  a  soul-seeker  and  the  divine  object  of  getting  a 
blessing  for  the  sinner's  soul,  excites  the  Avrath  of  Christ.  Some 
have  hopes  of  our  convicts  and  criminals ;  but  every  now 
and  then  there  is  an  outcry  against  tliosc  who  even  believe  it 
possible  for  a  transport  or  a  ticket-of-leave  man  to  be  converted. 
But  Jesus  is  greatly  displeased  with  any  who  shall  say  about 
the  work,  "  It  is  too  hard  ;  it  is  impossible."  My  brethren  in 
Christ,  labor  for  souls  of  all  sorts  ;  for  your  children,  and  for 
those  who  are  past  the  threescore  years  and  ten.  Seek  out  the 
drunkard ;  go  after  the  thief ;  despise  not  the  poor,  down-trod- 
den slave ;  let  every  race,  let  every  color,  let  every  age,  let 
every  profession,  let  every  nation,  be  the  object  of  your  soul's 
prayers.  You  live  in  this  world,  I  hope,  to  bring  souls  to  Jesus ; 
you  are  Christ's  magnets,  with  which,  through  his  Holy  Spirit,  he 
will  attract  hearts  of  steel :  you  are  his  heralds  ;  you  are  to  invite 
wanderers  to  come  to  the  banquet :  you  are  his  messengers  ;  you 
are  to  compel  them  to  come  in  that  his  house  may  be  filled ;  and 
if  the  devil  tells  you  you  will  not  succeed,  and  if  the  world  tells 
you  that  you  are  too  feeble  and  have  not  talent  enough,  never 
mind ;  Jesus  would  be  greatly  displeased  with  you  if  you  should 
take  any  heed  to  them ;  and  meanwhile  he  is  greatly  displeased 
with  your  adversaries  for  endeavoring  to  stop  }'ou.  Beloved, 
this  is  why  Jesus  Christ  was  greatly  displeased. 

A  second  ground  of  displeasure  must  be  noticed.  These  chil- 
dren, it  strikes  me,  and  I  think  there  is  good  reason  for  the  be- 
lief, themselves  desired  to  come  to  Christ  to  obtain  a  blessing. 
They'are  called  "  little  children,"  wdiich  term  does  not  necessarily 
involve  their  being  infants  of  six  months  or  a  year  ;  indeed,  it  is 
clear,  as  I  will  show  in  a  moment,  that  they  were  not  such  little 
children  as  to  be  unconscious  babes.  They  were  "  infants,"  ac- 
ccrding  to  our  version  of  Luke ;  but  then  you  know  the  English 
word  "  infant "  includes  a  considerable  range  of  age,  for  every 
person  in  his  minority  is  legally  considered  to  be  an  infant, 
though  he  may  be  able  to  talk  to  any  amount.     We  do  not,  how- 


46    CniLDPwEN  BKOrOHT  TO  CTIHIST,  NOT   TO  THE  FONT. 

ever,  desire  to  translate  the  text  Avitli  so  great  a  license.  There 
is  no  necessity  in  the  language  used  that  these  should  have  been 
anything  but  what  they  arc  said  to  be  —  "  little  children."  It 
is  evident  they  could  walk,  because  in  Luke  it  is  said,  "  Jesua 
called  them  ;  "  the  gender  of  the  Greek  pronoun  used  there  refers 
it  to  the  children,  not  to  the  persons,  nor  to  the  disciples.  Jesus 
called  them,  he  called  the  children,  which  he  would  liardly  have 
done  if  they  could  not  comprehend  his  call ;  and  he  said,  "  Suffer 
the  little  children  to  come,"  which  implies  that  they  could  come, 
and  doubtless  they  did  come,  with  cheerful  faces,  expecting  to 
get  the  blessing.  These  perhaps  may  have  been  some  of  those 
very  children  who,  a  short  time  after,  pulled  down  branches 
from  the  trees,  and  strewed  them  in  the  way,  and  cried,  "  IIo- 
sanna,"  when  the  Saviour  said,  "  Out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and 
suckhngs  hast  thou  ordained  strength."  Now  Christ  was  greatly 
displeased  with  his  disciples  for  pushing  back  these  boys  and 
girls.  They  did  as  some  old  folks  do  now-a-d;iys,  who  cry  out 
—  "  Stand  back,  you  boys  and  girls  !  we  do  not  want  you  here  ; 
we  do  not  want  children  to  liil  up  the  place  ;  we  only  want 
grown-up  people."  They  pushed  them  back  ;  they  thought  that 
Christ  would  have  too  much  to  do  if  he  attended  to  the  juveniles. 
Hr  re  comes  out  this  principle,  that  we  must  expect  Christ's  dis- 
pleasure if  we  attempt  to  keep  anybody  back  from  coming  to 
Christ,  even  though  it  be  the  youngest  child.  You  ask  how  per- 
sons can  come  to  Christ  now  ?  They  cannot  come  corporeally, 
but  they  can  come  by  simple  prayer  and  humble  faith.  Faith 
is  the  way  to  Jesus,  baptism  is  not.  When  Jesus  says,  "  Come 
unto  me  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,"  he  did  not  mean, 
"  be  baptized,"  did  he  ?  No  ;  and  so  when  he  said,  "  Suffer  the 
little  children  to  come  unto  me,"  he  did  not  mean,  "Baptize 
Ihem,"  did  he?  Coming  to  Jesus  Christ  is  quite  a  different 
thing  from  coming  to  a  font.  Coming  to  Christ  means  laying 
hold  upon  Christ  with  the  hand  of  faith ;  looking  to  him  for  my 
life,  my  pardon,  my  salvation,  my  everything.  If  there  be  a 
poor  httle  child  here  who  is  saying  in  her  little  heart,  or  his  little 
heart,  "I  would  like  to  come  to  Christ;  oh  that  I  might  be  par- 


CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT.     47 

doned  while  I  am  yet  a  little  one  !  "  —  come,  little  lamb  ;  come, 
and  welcome.     Did  I  hear  your  cry  ?     Was  it  this  ? 

**  Gentle  Jesus,  meek  and  mild, 
Look  upon  a  little  cMld; 
Pity  my  simplicity, 
Suffer  mc  to  come  to  thee." 

Dear  little  one,  Jesus  will  not  despise  your  lispings,  nor  will  his 
servant  keep  you  back.  Jesus  calls  you;  come  and  receive  his 
blessing.  If  any  of  you  say  a  word  to  keep  the  young  heart 
back,  Jesus  will  be  displeased  with  you.  Now  I  am  afraid  some 
do  that ;  those,  for  instance,  who  think  that  the  gospel  is  not  for 
little  children.  Many  of  my  brethren,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  preach 
in  such  a  way  that  there  is  no  hope  of  children  ever  getting  any 
good  by  their  preaching.  I  cannot  glory  in  learning  or  eloquence, 
but  in  this  one  thing  I  may  rejoice,  that  there  is  always  a  num- 
ber of  happy  children  here,  who  are  quite  as  attentive  as  any  of 
my  audience.  I  do  love  to  think  that  the  gospel  is  suitable  to 
little  children.  There  are  boys  and  girls  in  many  of  our  Sab- 
bt»;li-school  classes  down  below  stairs  who  are  as  truly  converted 
to  God  as  any  of  us.  Nay,  and  if  you  were  to  speak  with  them 
al-Dut  the  things  of  God,  though  you  should  get  to  the  knotty 
points  of  election  and  predestination,  you  would  find  those  boys 
and  girls  well  taught  in  the  things  of  the  kingdom  ;  th#y  know 
free  will  from  free  grace,  and  you  cannot  puzzle  them  when  you 
come  to  talk  about  the  work  of  Jesus  and  the  work  of  tJie  Spirit, 
for  they  can  discern  between  things  which  differ.  But  a  minis- 
ter who  preaches  as  though  he  never  wanted  to  bring  children 
to  Christ,  and  shoots  right  over  the  little  ones'  heads,  I  do  think 
Jesus  is  displeased  with  him. 

Then  there  are  others  who  doubt  whether  children  ever  will 
be  converted.  They  do  not  look  upon  it  as  a  thing  likely  to 
hai>pen ;  and  whenever  they  hear  of  a  believing  child,  they  hold 
up  their  hands  at  the  prodigy,  and  say,  "  What  a  wonder  of 
grace  ! "  It  ought  to  be,  and  in  those  churches  where  the  gospel 
is  simply  preached,  it  is  as  common  a  thing  for  children  to  be 
converted  as  for  grown-up  people  to  be  brought  to  Christ.     Oth* 


48    CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST.  NOT  TO  THE  FONT. 

ers  begin  to  doubt  the  truth  of  juvenile  conversions.  They  eay, 
"  They  are  very  young  —  can  they  understand  the  gospel  ?  Is  it 
not  merely  an  infantile  emotion,  a  mere  profession  ?  "  My 
brethren,  you  have  no  more  right  to  suspect  the  sincerity  of  the 
young  than  to  mistrust  the  gray-headed  ;  you  ought  to  receive 
them  with  the  same  open-breasted  confidence  with  which  }0n 
receive  others  when  they  profess  to  have  found  the  Saviour.  Do, 
I  pray  you,  whenever  you  see  the  faintest  desire  in  your  children, 
go  down  on  your  knees,  as  your  servant  does,  when  the  fire  is 
almost  out,  and  blow  the  spark  with  your  own  breath  ;  seek  by 
prayer  to  fan  that  spark  to  a  fiame.  Do  not  despise  any  godly 
remark  the  child  may  make.  Do  not  puff  thy  child  up  on  account 
of  the  goodness  of  the  remark,  lest  you  make  him  vain  and  eo 
injure  him,  but  do  encourage  him  ;  let  his  first  little  prayers  be 
noticed  by  you  ;  though  you  may  not  like  to  teach  him  a  form 
of  prayer,  —  I  shall  not  care  if  you  do  not,  —  yet  teach  him  what 
prayer  is  ;  tell  him  to  express  his  desires  in  his  own  words,  and 
when  he  does  so,  join  ye  in  it  and  plead  with  God  on  his  behalf 
that  your  little  one  may  speedily  find  true  peace  in  a  Saviour's 
blood.  You  must  not,  unless  you  would  displease  my  Master, 
keep  back  the  smallest  child  that  longs  to  come  to  Christ. 

Here  let  us  observe  that  the  principle  is  of  general  applications 
you  must  not  hinder  any  awakened  soul  from  seeking  the  Saviour. 
O  my  brethren  and  sisters,  I  hope  we  have  such  a  love  for  souls, 
such  an  instinct  within  us  to  desire  to  see  the  travail  of  Christ's 
soul,  that,  instead  of  putting  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way,  we 
would  do  the  best  we  could  to  gather  out  the  stones.  On  Sab- 
bath-days I  have  labored  to  clear  up  the  doubts  and  fears  which 
afilict  coming  sinners  ;  I  have  entreated  God  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
enable  me  so  to  speak,  that  those  things  which  hindered  you 
from  coming  to  the  Saviour  might  be  removed ;  but  how  sad 
must  be  the  case  of  those  who  delight  themselves  in  putting 
stumbling-blocks  in  men's  way.  The  doctrine  of  election,  for  in- 
Btance,  a  great  and  glorious  truth,  full  of  comfort  to  God's  people  — 
how  often  is  that  made  to  frighten  sinners  from  Jesus !  There 
is  a  way  of  preaching  that  doctrine,  in  which  you  make  it  put  OD 


CHILDREN  BROUGHl-  TO  CHRIST,  2sOT  TO  THE  FONT.     49 

a  black  and  ugly  face,  and  stand  with  a  drawn  sword,  ami  say, 
"You  must  not  come  unless  you  know  you  are  one  of  God's 
elect."  That  is  not  the  way  to  preach  the  doctrine.  The  true  way 
of  preaching  it  is,  "  God  has  a  chosen  people,  and  I  hope  you 
are  one  of  them ;  come,  lay  hold  on  Jesus,  put  your  trust,  in  him." 
Then  there  be  others  who  preach  up  frames  and  feelings  as  a 
prepp.ration  for  Christ.  They  do  in  effect  say,  "  Unless  yva 
have  felt  so  much  depression  of  spirit,  or  experienced  a  certain 
quantity  of  brokenness  of  heart,  you  must  not  come  to  Christ," 
instead  of  declaring  that  whosoever  will  is  permitted  to  come, 
and  that  the  true  way  of  coming  to  Christ  is  not  with  a  qualifica- 
tion of  frames  and  feelings  and  mental  depressions,  but  just  as 
you  are.  Oh  I  it  is  my  soul's  delight  to  preach  a  gospel  which 
has  ai).  open  door  to  it,  to  preach  a  mercy-seat  which  has  no  veil 
before  it ;  it  is  rent  in  twain,  and  now  the  biggest  sinner  out  of 
hell,  who  desires  to  come,  is  welcome.  You  who  are  eighty  years 
of  a^e,  and  have  hated  Christ  all  the  time,  if  now  the  Spirit  of 
God  makes  you  willing  to  come,  Christ  seems  to  say,  "  Suffer  the 
gray-headed  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not : "  while  to 
you  little  children  he  stretches  out  his  arms  in  the  same  manner, 
"  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  me."  O  my  beloved,  see  to 
it  that  your  heart  longs  to  come  to  Christ,  and  not  to  ceremonies  ! 
I  stand  here  this  day  to  cry,  "  Come  ye  to  the  cross,  not  to  the 
font."  When  I  forget  to  lift  up  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  to  cast 
down  the  forms  of  man's  devising,  "  let  my  right  hand  forget  her 
cunning,"  and  "  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth." 

"  None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus, 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

The  font  is  a  mockery  and  an  imposition  if  it  be  put  before  Christ. 
If  you  have  baptism  after  you  have  come  to  Christ,  well  and  good ; 
but  to  point  you  to  it  either  as  being  Christ,  or  as  being  inevi- 
tably connected  with  Christ,  or  as  being  the  place  to  find  Christ, 
is  nothing  better  than  to  go  back  to  the  beggarly  elements  of  the 
old  Romish  harlot,  instead  of  standing  in  the  "  liberty  wherewith 
Christ  hath  made  us  free,"  and  bidding  the  sinner  to  come  as  a 
sinner  to  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  Christ  Jesus  alone. 
5 


50    CHILDREN  BKOUGIIT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT. 

III.  In  the  third  and  last  place,  let  us  also  gather  from  oui 
text  that  wnEN  we  discourage  any,  we  always  go  upon 
WRONG  GROUNDS.  Here  was  the  case  of  children.  I  suppose 
that  the  grounds  upon  which  the  apostles  kept  back  the  children 
would  be  one  of  these,  —  either  that  the  children  could  not  re- 
ceive a  blessing,  or  else  that  they  could  not  receive  it  worthily. 

Did  they  imagine  that  these  little  children  could  not  receive 
the  blessing  ?  Perhaps  so,  for  they  thought  them  too  young. 
Now,  brethren,  that  was  a  wrong  ground  to  go  upon  ;  for  these 
children  could  receive  the  blessing,  and  they  did  receive  it,  for 
Jesus  took  them  in  his  arms  and  blessed  them.  If  I  keep  back 
a  child  from  coming  to  Christ  on  the  ground  that  he  is  too  young, 
I  do  it  in  the  face  of  facts ;  because  there  have  been  children 
brought  to  Christ  at  an  extremely  early  period.  You  who  are 
acquainted  with  Janeway's  "  Tokens  for  Children,"  have  noticed 
very  many  beautiful  instances  of  early  conversion.  Our  dear 
friend  Mrs.  Rogers,  in  that  book  of  hers,  "  The  Folded  Lamb," 
gave  a  sweet  picture  of  a  little  son  of  her?,  soon  folded  in  the 
Saviour's  bosom  above,  who,  as  early  as  two  or  three  years  of 
age,  rejoiced  and  knew  the  Saviour.  I  do  not  doubt  at  all,  I 
cannot  doubt  it,  because  one  has  seen  such  cases,  that  children  of 
two  or  three  years  of  age  may  have  a  precocity  of  knowledge 
and  of  grace,  a  forwardness  which  in  almost  every  case  has  be- 
tokened early  death,  but  which  has  been  perfectly  marvellous  to 
those  who  have  talked  with  them.  The  fact  is  that  we  do  not 
all  at  the  same  age  arrive  at  that  degree  of  mental  stature  which 
is  necessary  for  understanding  tlie  things  of  God.  Children 
have  been  reported  as  reading  Latin,  Greek,  and  other  languages, 
at  five  or  six  years  of  age.  I  do  not  know  that  such  early  schol- 
arship is  any  great  blessing :  it  is  better  not  to  reach  that  point 
60  soon  ;  but  some  children  are  all  that  their  minds  ever  will  be 
at  three  or  four,  and  then  they  go  home  to  heaven ;  and  so  long 
as  the  mind  has  been  brought  up  to  su-cli  a  condition  that  it  i3 
capable  of  understanding,  it  is  also  capable  of  faith,  if  the  Holy 
Spirit  shall  implant  it.  To  suppose  that  he  ever  did  give  faith 
to  an  unconscious  babe  is  ridiculous  ;  that  there   can   be  anj 


CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT.  51 

faith  in  a  child  that  knows  nothing  whatever  I  must  alway?  take 
gi'ound  to  doubt,  for  "  How  shall  they  believe  without  a  preacher  ? " 
And  yet  they  are  brought  up  to  make  a  profession  in  their  long- 
clothes,  when  they  have  never  heard  a  sermon  in  their  lives 
But  those  dear  children  to  whom  I  have  before  referred,  havt 
understood  the  preacher,  have  understood  the  truth,  have  re- 
joiced in  the  truth,  and  their  first  young  lispings  have  been  a? 
full  of  grace  as  those  glorious  expressions  of  aged  saints  in  theii 
triumphant  departures.  Children  are  capable,  then,  of  receiving 
the  grace  of  God.  Do  mark,  by  the  way,  that  all  those  cham- 
pions who  have  come  out  against  me  so  valiantly  have  made  a 
mistake ;  they  liave  said  that  we  deny  that  little  infants  may  be 
regenerated ;  we  do  not  deny  that  God  can  regenerate  them  if 
he  pleases ;  we  do  not  know  anything  about  what  may  or  may 
not  happen  to  unconscious  babes  ;  but  we  did  say  that  little  chil- 
dren were  not  regenerated  by  their  godparents  telling  lies  at  a 
font :  we  did  say  that,  and  we  say  it  again,  that  little  children 
are  not  regenerated,  nor  made  members  of  Christ,  nor  children 
of  God,  nor  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  by  a  solemn 
mockery,  in  which  godfathers  and  godmothers  promise  to  do  for 
them  what  they  cannot  do  for  themselves,  much  less  for  their 
children.  That  is  the  point ;  and  if  they  will  please  to  meet  it, 
we  will  answer  them  again  ;  but  till  such  time  as  that,  we  shall 
probably  let  them  talk  on  till  God  gives  them  grace  to  know 
better. 

The  other  ground  upon  which  the  apostles  put  back  the  chil- 
dren would  be,  that  although  the  children  might  receive  the 
blessing,  tJiey  might  not  be  able  to  receive  it  worthily.  The  Lord 
Jesus,  in  effect,  assures  them  that  so  far  from  the  way  in  which  a 
little  child  enters  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  being  exceptional, 
it  is  the  rule  ;  and  the  very  way  in  which  a  child  enters  the 
kingdom,  is  the  way  in  which  everybody  must  enter  it.  How 
does  a  child  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  Why,  its  faith  is 
very  simple :  it  does  not  understand  mysteries  and  controversies, 
but  it  believes  what  it  is  told,  upon  the  authority  of  God's  Word, 
and  it  comes  to  God's  Word  without  previous  prejudice.     It  haa 


52  CHILDREN  BROUGHT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT. 

Its  natural  sinfulness,  but  grace  overcomes  it,  and  the  child  re* 
ceives  the  Word  as  it  finds  it.  You  will  notice  in  boy'sh  and 
girlish  conversions,  a  peculiar  simpli;ity  of  belief:  they  believa 
just  what  Christ  says,  exactly  what  he  says.  If  they  pray,  they 
believe  Christ  will  hear  them :  if  they  talk  about  Jesus,  it  is  as 
of  a  person  near  at  hand.  They  do  not,  as  we  do,  get  into  the 
making  of  these  things  into  mysteries  and  shadows ;  but  little 
;)hildren  have  a  realizing  power.  Then  they  have  great  rejoic- 
ing. The  most  cheerful  Christians  we  have  arc  young  believers ; 
and  the  most  cheerful  old  Christians  are  those  who  were  con- 
verted when  they  were  young.  Why,  see  the  joy  of  a  child  that 
finds  a  Sayiour !  "  Mother,"  he  says,  "  I  have  sought  Jesus 
Christ,  and  I  have  trusted  him,  and  I  am  saved."  He  does  not 
say,  "  I  hope,"  and  "  I  trust,"  but  "  I  am  ;  "  and  then  he  is  ready 
to  leap  for  joy  because  he  is  saved.  Of  the  many  boys  and  girls 
whom  we  have  received  into  church-fellowship,  I  can  say  of 
them  all,  they  have  all  gladdened  my  heart,  and  I  have  never 
received  any  with  greater  confidence  than  I  have  these  :  this  I 
have  noticed  about  them,  they  have  greater  joy  and  rejoicing 
than  any  others ;  and  I  take  it,  it  is  because  they  do  not  ask  so 
many  questions  as  others  do,  but  take  Jesus  Christ's  word  as 
tliey  find  it,  and  believe  in  it.  Well,  now,  just  the  very  way  in 
which  a  child  receives  Christ,  is  the  way  in  which  you  must 
receive  Christ,  if  j'ou  would  be  saved.  You  who  know  so  much 
that  you  know  too  much  ;  you  who  have  big  brains  ;  you  who 
are  always  thinking,  and  have  a  tendency  to  criticism,  and  per- 
haps to  scepticism,  you  must  come  and  receive  the  gospel  as  a 
little  child.  You  will  never  get  a  hold  of  my  Lord  and  Master 
while  you  are  wearing  that  quizzing-cap ;  no,  you  must  take  it 
off,  and  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  you  must  come  trusting 
Jesus,  simply  trusting  him  ;  for  this  is  the  right  w\ay  to  receive 
the  kingdom. 

But  here,  let  me  say,  the  principle  which  holds  good  in  little 
children  holds  good  in  all  oth^^r  cases  as  well.  Take,  for  instance, 
the  case  of  very  great  sinners,  men  who  have  been  gross  offend- 
ers against  the  laws  of  their  country.     vSome  would  say  the^ 


CHILDREN  BROUGIir  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO    rilE  FONT.     53 

cannot  be  saved  ;  thej  can  be,  for  some  of  them  have  been. 
Others  would  say  they  never  receive  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesu3 
in  a  right  manner  ;  ay,  but  they  do.  How  do  great  sinners  re- 
ceive Christ  ?  There  are  some  here  who  have  been  reclaimed 
from  drunkenness,  and  I  know  not  what.  My  brethren,  how 
did  you  receive  Christ?  Why,  in  this  way :  You  said,  "All 
unholy,  all  unclean,  I  am  nothing  else  but  sin  ;  but  if  I  am 
saved,  it  will  be  grace,  grace,  grace."  Why,  when  you  and  I 
stood  up,  black  and  foul  and  filthy,  and  yet  dared  to  believe  in 
Christ,  we  said,  "  If  we  are  saved,  we  shall  be  prodigies  of  divine 
mercy,  and  we  will  sing  of  his  love  forever."  Well  but,  my 
dear  friends,  you  must  all  receive  Jesus  Christ  in  that  very  way. 
That  which  would  raise  an  objection  to  the  salvation  of  the  big 
smner  is  thrown  back  upon  you,  for  Christ  might  well  say,  "Ex- 
cept ye  receive  these  things  as  the  chief  of  sinners,  ye  cannot 
enter  the  kingdom."  I  will  prove  my  point  by  the  instance  of 
the  Apostle  Paul.  He  has  been  held  by  some  to  be  an  excep- 
tion to  the  rule  ;  but  Paul  did  not  think  so,  for  he  says  that  God 
in  him  showed  forth  all  longsuffering  for  a  pattern  to  them  that 
believe,  and  made  him  as  it  were  a  type  of  all  conversions ;  so 
that  instead  of  being  an  exception,  his  was  to  be  the  rule.  You 
see  what  I  am  driving  at.  The  case  of  the  children  looks  ex- 
ceptional, but  it  is  not ;  it  has,  on  the  contrary,  all  the  features 
about  it  which  must  be  found  in  every  true  conversion.  It  is  of 
such  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  composed,  and  if  we  are  not 
such  we  cannot  enter  it.  Let  this  induce  all  of  us  who  love  the 
Lord  to  pray  for  the  conversion  both  of  children  and  of  all  sorts 
of  men.  Let  our  compassion  expand,  let  us  shut  out  none  from 
the  plea  of  our  heart ;  in  prayer  and  in  faith  let  us  bring  all  who 
come  under  our  range,  hoping  and  believing  that  some  of  them 
will  be  found  in  the  election  of  grace,  that  some  of  them  will  be 
washed  in  the  Saviour's  blood,  and  that  some  of  them  will  shine 
as  stars  in  the  firmament  of  God  forever.  Let  us,  on  no  consid- 
eration, believe  that  the  salvation  of  any  man  or  child  is  beyond 
the  range  of  possibility,  for  the  Lord  saveth  whom  he  wills.  Let 
no  difficulties  which  seem  to  surround  the  case  hinder  our  efforts ; 
6* 


54    CHILDREN  KROUGHT  TO  CHRIST,  NOT  TO  THE  FONT. 

let  lis,  on  the  contrary,  push  with  greater  eageraess  forward, 
believing  that  where  there  seems  to  be  some  special  difficulty, 
there  will  be  manifested,  as  in  the  children's  case,  some  special 
privilege.  Oh,  labor  for  souls,  my  dear  friends  !  I  beseech  you, 
live  to  win  souls.  This  is  the  best  rampart  against  error,  a  ram- 
part built  of  living  stones  —  converted  men  and  women.  This 
is  the  way  to  push  back  the  advances  of  Popery,  by  imploring 
the  Lord  to  work  conversions.  I  do  not  think  that  mere  con- 
troversial preaching  will  do  much,  though  it  must  be  used  :  it  is 
grace-work  we  want ;  it  is  bringing  you  to  Christ,  it  is  getting 
you  to  lay  hold  of  him,  —  it  is  this  which  shall  put  the  devil  to  a 
noaplus  and  expand  the  kingdom  of  ChrisK  Oh  that  my  God 
would  bring  some  of  you  to  Jesus  !  If  he  is  displeased  with  those 
who  would  keep  you  back,  then  see  how  willing  he  is  to  receive 
you.  Is  there  in  your  soul  any  desire  towards  him?  Come 
and  welcome,  sinner,  come.  Do  you  feel  now  that  you  must 
have  Christ  or  die  ?  Come  and  have  him ;  he  is  to  be  had  for 
the  asking.  Has  the  Lord  taught  you  your  need  of  Jesus  ?  Ye 
thirsty  ones,  come  and  drink ;  ye  hungry  ones,  come  and  eat 
Yea,  this  is  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  to-day,  "  The  Spirit 
and  the  bride  say.  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come. 
And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."  I  do  trust  there  may  be  encour- 
agement in  this  to  some  of  you.  I  pray  my  Master  make  you 
feel  it.  If  he  be  angry  with  those  who  keep  you  back,  then  he 
must  be  willing  to  receive  you,  glad  to  receive  you  ;  and  if  you 
come  to  him  he  will  in  nowise  cast  you  out.  May  the  Lord  add 
his  blessing  on  these  words  for  Jesus'  sake.     Amen. 


SERMON  III 


"THUS   SAITII  THE  LORH;*' 

OBy  THE   BOOK  OF   COMMON   PRATER  WEIGHED  IN   THE  Bi  ,AHCE8   Of 

TKE   SANCTUARY 

"  THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD."  —  Ezek.  xl.  5. 

The  wise  man  saith,  "  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is,  there  u 
power."  What  power  must  there  be  where  there  is  the  word  of 
the  King  of  kings,  who  vulcth  over  all !  We  are  not  left  to  con- 
jecture as  to  the  power  of  the  divine  word,  for  we  know  that 
"  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made  ;  and  all  the 
host  of  them  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth."  Out  of  nothing- 
ness the  glorious  creation  leaped  at  the  bidding  of  the  Most  High, 
and  when  the  earth  was  without  form,  and  void,  and  darkness  was 
upon  the  face  of  the  deep,  there  was  nothing  wanted  but  that 
solemn  voice,  "  Light  be,"  and  straightway  light  was.  God's 
word  was  sufficient  in  itself  to  build  the  temple  of  the  universe, 
and  to  finish  it  from  its  foundations  to  its  pinnacles.  That 
same  word  upholdeth  by  its  power,  and  ruleth  all  things  by  its 
m^'glit.  The  pillars  of  heaven  stand  because  the  divine  word 
hath  fixed  them  upon  their  bases,  nor  shall  they  be  shaken  until 
that  same  almighty  word  shall  bid  them  remove ;  then  as  a  mo- 
ment's foam  dissolves  into  the  wave  which  bears  it  and  is  gone 
forever,  so  shall  the  whole  creation  melt  away.  His  word,  which 
created,  shall  also  destroy;  but  until  that  word  be  spoken  every 
atom  of  this  world  is  imperishable.  Consider,  my  brethren,  what 
ipower  is  concentrated  in  him  who  is  clothed  with  a  vestur© 


56  "THUS  SATTII  THE  LORD." 

dipped  in  blood,  and  whose  name  is  "  The  Word  of  God.** 
With  what  glorious  power  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  uplifted  the 
burden  of  our  sins,  carried  the  load  up  to  the  tree,  and  cast  it 
forever  into  the  Red  Sea  of  his  o\vn  atoning  blood  !  Ye  know 
how  he  burst  the  bars  of  death,  tore  away  the  gates  of  the  grave, 
overthrew  all  the  hosts  of  hell,  and  dragged  the  mightiest  princi- 
palities of  darkness  as  captives  at  his  chariot  wheels.  At  this 
day  the  government  is  upon  his  shoulders,  and  his  name  is  the 
]\Iighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father.  Heaven  and  earth  salute 
him  as  the  Omnipotent  Word.  He  sustains  the  spiritual  life  of 
all  his  people  by  feeding  them  upon  himself;  and  he  shall  in  due 
time  perfect  his  saints,  and  pres-cnt  them  vvdthout  spot  before  his 
Father's  throne.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  bow  with  reverence  to 
that  which  is  truly  the  word  of  God,  since  it  contains  within 
itself  the  highest  degree  of  power,  and  is  ever  the  way  in  which 
divine  omnipotence  manifests  itself. 

It  is  in  the  word  that  we  must  find  wisdom  and  power :  "  be- 
cause the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men ;  and  the  weak- 
ness of  God  is  stronger  than  men."  The  faintest  whisper  of  Je- 
hovah's voice  should  fill  us  with  a  solemn  awe,  and  command  the 
deepest  obedience  of  our  souls.  Brethren,  how  careful  should  we 
be  that  we  do  not  set  up  in  God's  temple  anything  in  opposition 
to  his  word,  that  we  do  not  permit  the  teachings  of  a  creature  to 
usurp  the  honor  due  to  the  Lord  alone  !  "  Thus  saith  antiquity, " 
"  thus  saith  authority,"  "  thus  saith  learning,"  "  thus  saith  expe- 
rience," —  these  be  but  idol-gods,  which  defile  the  temple  of  God : 
be  it  yours  and  mine,  as  bold  iconoclasts,  to  dash  them  in  pieces 
without  mercy,  seeing  that  they  usurp  the  place  of  the  word  of  God. 

"  Thus  saith  the  Lord''  —  this  is  the  motto  of  our  standard,  the 
war-cry  of  our  spiritual  conflict,  —  the  sword  with  which  we  hope 
yet  to  smite  through  the  loins  of  the  mighty  who  rise  up  against 
God's  truth.  Nothing  shall  stand  before  this  weapon  in  the  day 
when  God  cometli  out  of  his  hiding-place  ;  for  even  at  this  hour, 
when  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  sounds  from  the  trumpet  of  the 
Lord's  ministers,  the  hosts  of  Midian  begin  to  tremble ;  for  well 
tbey  know  the  might  of  that  terrible  watchword  in  days  of  jore. 


"  niUS   SAITII  THE  LORD.''  57 

Tliis  morning  I  shall  first  endeavor  to  show,  briefly,  the  value 
yfa"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  "  and  then,  secondly,  I  shall,  with  aa 
much  calmness  of  spirit  as  I  can  command,  request  a  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  "  for  certain  things  which  are  received  and  prac- 
tised in  the  State  Estahlishment  of  our  land,  and  close  with  a  word 
of  personal  application,  beseeching  you  to  seek  a  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  "  for  any  hopes  which  you  may  entertain  of  being  par- 
takers of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 

I.  Let  us  consider  the  value  of  a  "Thus  saith  the 
Lord." 

1.  Onv  first  observation  is  that  it  is  the  minister'' s  message.  If 
he  be  God's  minister,  he  does  not  found  his  teaching  upon  his 
own  authority,  for  then  his  message  would  be  only  that  of  him- 
self, and  not  to  be  esteemed ;  but  he  shows  the  authority  of  his 
Master,  and  none  can  gainsay  him.  He  claims  men's  attention 
on  the  ground  that  he  utters  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  No  mat- 
ter how  aged  he  may  be,  he  does  not  proclaim  the  truth  as 
merely  the  result  of  his  long  investigations  or  his  extraordinary 
experience,  but  he  grounds  it  upon  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  So 
spake  the  hoary-headed  Joshua  when  for  many  a  year  he  had 
known  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  was  about  to  die.  He  was 
singing  his  swan-song,  preaching  his  last  sermon  ;  but  he  did  not 
commence  it,  "  Thus  saith  my  age,"  "  Thus  say  I  upon  mine  own 
authority,"  but  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  A  God- 
sent  minister  is  the  ambassador  of  the  Most  High,  but  he  has  no 
right  to  go  beyond  his  commission ;  and  when  he  does  so,  his 
office  cannot  yield  him  support.  The  prophets  of  God  did  not 
say,  *'  Thus  I  speak  as  a  prophet,"  but,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord." 
When  the  prophet  came  in  Gideon's  days  and  spake  to  erring 
Israel,  he  opened  his  mouth  with,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God 
of  Israel."  Turn  to  the  pages  of  Isaiah,  and  mark  how  frequently 
he  quotes  the  divine  authority ;  study  the  plaintive  words  of 
Jeremiah,  and  observe  how  solemnly  his  prophetic  woes  are  pre* 
faced  with,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord;"  and  the  soaring  Ezekiel,  to 
whom  was  given,  as  it  were,  six  wings,  that  he  might  take  more 


(58  "THUS   SAITII  THE  LORD/' 

lofty  flights  Ihan  the  eagle  knoweth  —  even  he  relied  not  upon 
the  sublimity  of  his  language  or  the  glory  of  his  imagery,  but 
found  the  sinews  of  his  strength  in  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God." 
This  is  the  trowel  and  this  the  hammer  of  God's  builders,  —  this 
the  trumpet  of  his  watchmen  and  the  sword  of  his  warriors. 
Woe  to  the  man  who  comes  in  any  other  name  !  If  we,  or  an 
angel  from  heaven,  shall  preach  unto  you  anything  but  a  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,"  no  matter  what  our  character  or  standing,  give 
no  heed  to  us,  but  cleave  unto  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  To 
the  law  and  to  t)ie  testimony,  if  we  speak  not  according  to  this 
word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  us.  That  test  which  we 
demand  to  be  exercised  upon  others  we  cheerfully  consent  to  be 
exercised  upon  ourselves,  praying  that  we  may  have  grace  to 
forsake  our  errors  as  we  would  have  other  men  forsake  theirs. 

2.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  is  the  o)ihj  authority  in  Go(Cs  church. 
When  the  tabernacle  was  pitched  in  the  wilderness,  what  was  the 
authority  for  its  length  and  breadth  ?  Why  was  the  altar  of  in- 
cense to  be  placed  here,  and  the  brazen  laver  there  ?  Why  so 
many  lambs  or  bullocks  to  be  offered  on  a  certain  day  ?  Why 
must  the  passover  be  roasted  whole  and  not  sodden  ?  Simply 
and  only  because  God  had  shown  all  these  things  to  Moses  in 
the  holy  mount ;  and  thus  had  Jehovah  spoken,  "  Look  that  thou 
make  them  after  their  pattern,  which  was  showed  thee  in  the 
mount."  It  is  even  so  in  the  church  at  the  present  day ;  true 
servants  of  God  demand  to  see  for  all  church  ordinances  and 
doctrines  the  express  authority  of  the  church's  only  Teacher  and 
Lord.  They  remember  that  the  Lord  Jesus  bade  the  apostles  to 
teach  believers  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  he  had  com- 
manded them  ;  but  he  neither  gave  to  them  nor  to  any  man  power 
to  alter  his  own  commands.  The  Holy  Ghost  revealed  much  of 
precious  truth  and  holy  precept  by  the  apostles,  and  to  his  teach- 
ing we  would  give  earnest  heed ;  but  when  men  cite  the  author- 
ity of  fathers  and  councils  and  bishops,  we  give  place  for  sub- 
jection'—  no,  not  for  an  hour.  They  may  quote  Irena3us  or 
Cyprian,  Augustine  or  Chrysostom  ;  they  may  remind  us  of  thi 
dogmas  of  Luther  or  Calvin ;  they  may  find  authority  in  Simeon, 


-THUS    SAITII   THE  LORD."  59 

to..  Wesley,  or  Gill  —  we  will  listen  to  tlie  opinions  of  those  gicat 
men  with  the  respect  which  they  deserve  as  men  ;  but  litiving  so 
done,  we  deny  that  we  have  anytliing  to  do  with  these  men  as 
authorities  in  the  churcli  of  God :  for  there  nothing  has  any  au- 
thority but  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  Yea,  if  you  shall 
bring  us  the  concurrent  consent  of  all  tradition  —  if  you  shall 
quote  precedents  venerable  with  fifteen,  sixteen,  or  seventeen 
centuries  of  antiquity  —  we  burn  the  whole  as  so  much  worthless 
lumber,  unless  you  put  your  finger  upon  the  passage  of  Holy 
Writ  which  warrants  the  matter  to  be  of  God.  You  may  fur- 
ther plead,  in  addition  to  all  this  venerable  authority,  the  beauty 
of  the  ceremony,  and  its  usefulness  to  those  who  partake  therein, 
but  this  is  all  foreign  to  the  point ;  for  to  the  true  church  of  God 
the  only  question  is  this  :  Is  there  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  for 
it  ?  And  if  divine  authority  be  not  forthcoming,  faithful  men 
thrust  forth  the  intruder  as  the  cunning  craftiness  of  men. 

3.  *'  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  is  the  most  fitting  word  of  rebuke 
for  erring  saints.  God's  people  w^hen  they  err,  if  they  be  re- 
buked, even  though  it  should  be  in  the  gentlest  manner,  are  too 
apt  to  resent  the  rebuff;  but  when  we  can  come  to  them  with 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  if  there  be  a  spark  of  spiritual  life  left, 
it  is  sure  to  catch  at  this  flame.  When  the  man  of  God  came  to 
Eli,  how  Eli's  heart  trembled  when  he  began,  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,"  and  described  to  him  the  doom  of  his  house,  because  his 
sons  had  made  themselves  vile,  and  he  had  not  restrained  them. 
David  the  king  might  have  been  moved  to  anger  against  Na- 
than for  that  personal  parable  and  pungent  application  ;  but  his 
anger  was  stayed,  nay,  better  still,  his  heart  was  broken,  because 
the  prophet  could  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  My  dear  breth- 
nm  in  Christ,  you  and  I  have  often  risen  in  anger  at  the  intru- 
sive proofs  of  ignorant  men ;  but  I  hope  we  have  far  more  often 
felt  the  melting  power  of  a  "Thus  saith  the  Loid."  When  the 
heart  is  right,  the  word  of  God  sweetly  melts  us,  as  the  breath 
of  the  south  wind  melts  the  frozen  rivers. 

4.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  is  the  only  solid  ground  of  comfort 
to  God's  people.     Where  can  a  child  of  God  find  true  solac« 


60  "THUS  SAITII  THE  LORD" 

apart  from  that  which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Most  High? 
Truly,  ''  Man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone ;  but  by  eveiy  word 
that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God  doth  man  live  ;  "  "  Thy 
words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them  ;  "  "  How  sweet  arc  thy 
words  unto  my  taste  !  yea,  sweeter  than  honey  to  my  mouth  I  " 
When  Nathan  came  to  tell  David  of  the  covenant  which  the 
Lord  would  make  with  him  and  his  house,  David  would  scarcely 
have  believed  so  great  a  mercy  to  be  really  his  if  the  prophet 
had  not  began  with  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  It  was  not  "  Thus 
saitli  Nathan,"  or  "  Thus  do  the  ancients  say,"  but  *'  Thus  saith 
tlie  Lord  ;  "  and  David's  heart  was  full  of  holy  joy  when  he  saw 
the  covenant  to  be  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure.  When  Heze- 
kiah  lay  sick  unto  death,  he  turned  his  face  to  the  wall  and 
prayed ;  but  there  was  no  comfort  to  the  royal  suppliant  until 
the  prophet  came  with  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  "  and  when  Sen- 
nacherib was  about  to  besiege  Jerusalem,  and  Lachish  had  fallen, 
Hezekiah  prayed,  and  the  people  with  him  ;  but  oh !  they  could 
not  think  it  possible  that  there  should  be  a  hook  put  into  the  jaw  of 
the  mighty  Assyrian,  and  that  he  should  be  turned  back  by  the 
way  in  which  he  came,  till  the  prophet  reassured  their  hearts  with 
a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  Zion's  sons  and  daughters  feast  upon 
the  sure  word  of  their  faithful  God.  Brethren,  I  need  not  en- 
large here,  for  I  hope  most  of  you  know  the  preciousness  of  a 
divine  promise.  There  is  nothing  w^anted  to  stay  your  soul  in 
your  worst  troubles  but  the  Word  of  God  applied  with  power. 
God  may  not  send  you  a  friend ;  he  may  not  raise  up  a  deliverer ; 
but  if  he  shall  only  give  you  to  believe  his  Word,  that  shall  be 
enough  for  you.  Martin  Luther  said  :  "  I  have  covenanted  with 
my  Lord  that  he  should  not  send  me  visions,  or  dreams,  or  even 
angels.  I  am  content  wdth  this  one  gift  of  the  Scriptures,  which 
abundantly  teaches  and  supplies  all  that  is  necessary,  both  for 
this  life  and  that  which  is  to  come."  O  Lord,  only  feed  me  on 
thy  Word,  and  I  will  not  envy  kings  their  delicacies,  nor  even 
the  angels  around  thy  throne  the  bread  of  heaven  on  which  they 
live. 

5.  Yet  again :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord"  is  that  with  which  W9 


••Tims   SAITII    niE  LORD."  61 

mtist  confront  the  Lord's  enemies.  When  Moses  went  in  before 
Pliuraoli,  the  words  which  he  used  were  not,  "  The  elders  of 
Israel  have  consulted,  and  thus  have  they  bidden  me  say,"  not 
*'  Our  Father  Abraham  once  said,  and  his  words  have  been 
handed  to  us  by  long  tradition  "  —  such  talk  would  have  been 
readily  resisted;  but  he  confronted  the  haughty  monarch  with 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Let  my  people  go ; "  and  it  was  the  power 
of  this  divine  word  which  rained  plagues  upon  the  fields  of  Zoan, 
and  brought  forth  the  captives,  with  silver  and  gold.  Pharaot- 
might  boast,  "  Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  his  voice  ?  ^' 
but  ere  long  he  knew  that  Jehovah's  word  was  mightier  than  all 
the  horsemen  and  chariots  of  Mizraim,  and  was  not  to  be  resisted 
without  terrible  defeat.  To  this  day,  if  we  would  break  sinners' 
hearls,  our  hammer  must  be  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord ; "  and  if  we 
would  woo  them  to  obedience  to  King  Jesus,  our  reasons  must 
come  from  his  own  Word.  I  have  often  noticed  in  conversion, 
that,  though  sometimes  a  particular  passage  of  the  sermon  may 
be  quoted  by  the  converted  oerson  as  the  means  of  enlighten- 
ment, yet  in  the  majority  of  cases  it  is  the  text,  or  some  passage 
of  Scripture,  quoted  during  the  sermon,  which  is  blessed  to  do 
the  work.  McCheyne  says,  "  Depend  upon  it,  it  is  God's  Word, 
not  our  comment  upon  God's  Word,  that  saves  souls  ;  "  and  so 
it  is.  Let  us  use  much  of  Scripture,  much  of  the  pure  silver  of 
sacred  revelation,  and  no  human  alloy.  "  What  is  the  chaff  to 
the  wheat,  saith  the  Lord  ?  " 

6.  To  close  this  point :  Such  an  authority  has  a  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,"  that  it  is  not  to  be  despised  without  entailing  upon  the 
offender  the  severest  penalty.  Samuel  came  to  Saul  with  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,"  and  bade  him  destroy  the  Amalekites.  He  was 
utterly  to  cut  them  off,  and  not  to  spare  so  much  as  one  of  them. 
But  Saul  saved  the  best  of  the  cattle  and  the  sheep,  and  brought 
home  Agag  ;  and  what  was  the  result  ?  His  kingdom  was  taken 
from  him  and  given  to  a  neighbor  of  his  that  was  better  than  he ; 
and  because  he  exalted  himself  beyond  measure  to  do  otherwise 
than  according  to  the  letter  of  God's  command,  he  was  put  away 
forever  from  having  dominion  over  Israel.  And  mark  this  word : 
6 


62  "THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD." 

if  any  church  in  Christendom  shall  continue,  after  light  'u  ^ivo« 
and  after  plain  rebuke  is  uttered,  to  walk  contrary  to  the  word 
of  God,  and  to  teach  that  which  is  inconsistent  with  Holy  Scrij)- 
ture,  as  Saul  was  put  away  from  the  kingdom,  so  shall  that 
church  be  put  away  from  before  the  Lord  of  Hosts ;  and  if  any 
man,  be  he  who  he  may,  after  receiving  light  from  on  high,  con- 
tinues wilfully  to  shut  his  eyes,  he  shall  not,  if  an  heir  of  heaven, 
be  rejected  from  eternal  salvation,  but  he  shall  be  cast  off  from 
much  of  the  usefulness  and  comfort  which  he  might  otherwise 
have  enjoyed.  He  knew  his  Master's  will,  and  did  it  not :  he 
shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes.  He  has  been  as  the  horse 
or  the  mule  which  have  no  understanding,  and  his  mouth  shall 
be  held  in  with  bit  and  bridle.  Many  sorrows  shall  be  to  those 
who  dare  to  dash  themselves  agahist  the  thick  bosses  of  Jehovah's 
buckler  by  opposing  his  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  Upon  whom- 
soever this  stone  shall  fall,  it  shall  grind  him  to  powder ;  and 
whosoever  shall  fall  upon  it  shall  be  broken,  to  his  own  lasting 
damage.  0  my  brethren  !  I  would  that  we  trembled  and  stood 
more  in  awe  of  God's  word.  I  fear  me  that  many  treat  the 
things  of  God  as  though  they  were  merely  matters  of  opinion, 
but  remember  that  opinion  cannot  govern  in  God's  house.  God's 
word,  not  man's  opinion,  claims  your  allegiance.  Remember 
that  although  our  ignorant  conscience  may  not  accuse  us  of  error, 
yet  if  we  walk  contrary  to  God's  word,  our  conscicDtiousness 
does  not  screen  us  from  sin  ;  for  conscience  is  not  the  sovereign 
arbiter  of  right  and  wrong,  but  the  plain  word  of  God  is  the 
rule  of  equity.  I  do  not  sin  so  foully  as  if  I  sinned  against  my 
conscience,  but  I  still  sin,  if,  having  an  unenlightened  conscience, 
I  ignorantly  transgress.  But  if  I  wilfully  keep  my  conscience 
in  darkness,  and  continue  in  errors  which  I  might  easily  know 
to  be  such  by  a  little  thought  and  searching  of  God's  word,  then 
my  conscience  can  offer  me  no  excuse,  for  I  am  guilty  of  blind- 
folding the  guide  which  I  have  chosen,  and  then,  knowing  him 
to  be  blindfolded,  I  am  guilty  of  the  folly  of  letting  him  lead  me 
into  rebellion  against  God.  O  church  of  God!  hear  thou  the 
Toice  of  thy  great  Founder  and  Lord--  "  Whosoever,  therefore 


"THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD.''  63 

ihall  break  one  of  these  least  commandments,  and  shall  teach 
men  so,  he  shall  be  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
"  He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is 
that  loveth  me :  and  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my 
Father,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself  to  him." 
Oh  for  a  stern  integrity,  that  will  hold  the  word,  and  will  never 
depart  from  it,  come  what  may.  This  much  concerning  the  valur 
of  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord." 

II.  Dear  friends,  the  second  part  of  our  subject  may  be  very 
displeasing  to  some  who  have  strayed  in  here,  but  that  I  cannot 
help.  I  do  not  remember  ever  asking  any  one  to  come  and  hear 
me,  and  therefore,  as  you  come  of  your  own  wills,  when  I  have 
any  truth  to  speak,  I  shall  not  conceal  it  because  you  choose  to 
be  present.  At  the  present  crisis,  I  feel  that  it  is  woe  unto  me 
if  I  do  not  lift  up  my  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  urge  with  all  my 
might  the  necessity  of  reformation  in  our  State  Church.  I  have, 
moreover,  an  excellent  excuse  for  the  inquiry  I  am  about  to 
make  ;  for  as  I  am  publicly  charged  with  ignorance,  it  is  at  once 
my  duty  and  my  privilege  to  seek  instruction  of  those  who  claim 
authority  to  teach.  When  one  is  known  to  be  profoundly  igno- 
rant, and  there  are  certain  fathers  in  the  faith  who  have  the 
power  to  instruct,  the  least  thing  that  can  be  allowed  us  is  to 
ask  questions,  and  the  smallest  boon  we  can  expect  is  to  have 
them  answered  by  men  expressly  ordained  to  instruct  the  igno- 
rant. 

The  Rev.  W.  Goode,  the  Dean  of  Ripon,  appears  to  be  much 
better  acquainted  with  the  extent  of  my  reading  and  mental  ac- 
quirements than  I  am  myself.  He  speaks  with  all  the  positive- 
ness  of  a  personal  acquaintance  concerning  my  reputed  ignorance, 
and  for  my  own  part  I  am  not  at  all  anxious  to  question  so  very 
reverend  an  authority.  He  writes :  "  As  to  tliat  young  minister 
who  is  now  raving  against  the  Evangelical  clergy  on  this  point, 
it  is  ic  be  regretted  that  so  much  notice  has  been  taken  of  his 
railings.  He  is  to  be  pitied,  because  his  entire  want  of  acquaint- 
ance with  theological  literature  leaves  him  utterly  unfit  for  th^ 


64  "THUS   SAITII  THE  LORD/* 

determination  of  such  a  question  ;  which  is  a  questic  n,  not  of  mere 
doctrine,  but  of  what  may  be  called  historical  theology ;  and  his 
charges  are  just  a  parallel  to  those  which  the  Romanists  would 
bring  against  himself  as  well  as  others  for  the  interpretation  of 
the  words,  'This  is  my  body.'  But  were  he  a  wiser  man  thaa 
he  is,  he  would  know  better  what  his  qualifications  are  for  pass- 
ing judgment  on  such  a  point,  and  be  willing  to  learn  from  such 
facts,  among  others,  as  the  Gorham  Judgment  and  the  cases  of 
Mr.  Maskell  and  Mr.  Mozley,  what  ground  there  is  for  his 
charges  against  the  Evangelical  clergy.  Let  him  hold  and 
enforce  his  own  view  of  doctrine  as  he  pleases ;  but  when  he 
undertakes  to  determine  what  is  the  exclusive  meaning  of  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and  brings  a  charge  of  dishonesty 
against  those  who  take  a  different  view  of  that  meaning  from 
wdiat  he  does,  he  only  shows  the  presumptuous  self-confidence 
with  which  he  is  prepared  to  pronounce  judgment  upon  matters 
of  which  he  is  profoundly  ignorant.  To  hold  a  controversy  with 
him  upon  the  subject  would  be  to  as  little  purpose  as  to  attempt 
to  hold  a  logically-constructed  argument  with  a  child  unacquainted 
with  logical  terms." 

When  this  paragraph  caught  my  eye,  my  heart  leaped  with 
joy,  for  I  knew  that  the  sinners  in  Zion  were  afraid;  and  1 
thought  I  heard  a  voice  crying  from  the  Word,  "  Not  many 
wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are 
called ;  but  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to 
confound  the  wise  ;  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty ;  and  base  things 
of  the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen, 
yea,  and  things  which  are  not,  to  Oi'lng  to  naught  things  that 
are  ;  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence."  My  mind  flew 
back  to  the  valley  of  Elah,  and  I  remembered  the  words  of  the 
old  record :  "  And  when  the  Philistine  looked  about,  and  saw 
David,  he  disdained  him ;  for  he  was  but  a  youth,  and  ruddy, 
and  of  a  fair  countenance.  And  the  Philistine  said  unto  David, 
Am  I  a  dog  that  thou  comest  to  me  with  staves  ?  And  the  Plii- 
listiue  cursed  David  by  his  gods.     And  the  Philistine  said  to 


•*THUS  SAITII  THE  LORD."  65 

David,  Come  to  mc,  and  I  will  give  thy  flesh  unto  the  fowls  of 
the  air,  and  to  the  beasts  of  the  field."  My  spirit  kindled  at 
these  words  of  the  boastful  champion  of  yore,  and  at  their  modem 
reproduction  by  the  vainglorious  divine  of  Ripon,  and  the  answer 
of  David  was  in  my  heart  as  it  is  even  now  upon  my  tongue ; 
"Thou  comest  to  me  with  a  sword  and  with  a  spear  and  with 
a  shield  ;  but  I  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts, 
the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  defied.     This 

day  will  the  Lord  deliver  thee  into  mine  hand that  all  the 

earth  may- know  that  there  is  a  God  in  Israel.  And  all  this 
assembly  shall  know  that  the  Lord  saveth  not  with  sword  and 
spear  ;  for  the  battle  is  the  Lord's,  and  he  will  give  you  into  our 
hands."  Admitting  the  witness  of  the  venerable  dean  to  be  cor- 
rect, and  that  "  the  young  minister  "  is  inexpert  in  logic,  I  am 
not  therefore  ashamed  ;  far  otherwise,  I  will  the  rather  glory  ia 
mine  infirmities  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  me  ;  "  for 
when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong."  Take,  O  ye  great  ones 
of  the  earth,  every  profit  that  can  be  made  out  of  your  belief  in 
my  utter  total  ignorance,  and  your  own  profound  and  extensive 
learning,  and  then  go  your  ways,  and  learn  what  this  meaneth : 
"  Thy  wisdom  and  thy  knowledge,  it  hath  perverted  thee  ;  and 
tlx)u  hast  said  in  thine  heart,  I  am,  and  none  else  beside  me. 
Therefore  shall  evil  come  upon  thee  :  thou  sha^t  not  know  from 
whence  it  riseth."  And  now  at  this  hour,  having  been  con- 
demned as  intolerably  ignorant,  I  feel  I  have  the  liberty  to  ask 
just  a  few  explanations  of  those  reverend  divines  who  do  know 
or  ought  to  know  the  grounds  of  their  faith  and  practice. 

1.  I  open  this  little  book,  —  the  Prayer-Book,  of  whose  occa- 
sional services  the  more  I  know  the  less  I  approve,  —  and  I 
find  in  the  Baptismal  Service,that  when  little  children  are  brought 
to  be  sprinkled,  certain  godfathers  and  godmothers  promise  for 
them  that  they  shall  renounce  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  the 
vain  pomp  and  glory  of  the  world,  with  all  covetous  desires  of 
the  same,  etc.,  and  that  they  shall  obediently  keep  all  God's  holy 
will  and  commandments,  and  walk  in  the  same  all  the  days  of 
iheir  life.  To  me  it  seems  that  they  might  as  well  promise  that 
6* 


66  *  THUS   SAIXri  THE  LORD." 

the  infants  slioukl  grow  up  -with  Roman  noses,  auburn  hair,  and 
blue  eyes ;  for  they  are  just  as  able  to  make  them  do  the  one  as 
the  other.  I  shall  not  no^Yever  intrude  my  opinion  further,  but 
simply  ask  whether  there  is  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  for  any 
man's  standing  proxy  for  a  babe,  and  making  such  promises  in 
its  name  ?  —  in  other  words,  I  ask  for  apostolical,  prophetic,  or 
any  other  form  of  scriptural  precept,  or  precedent,  for  the  use 
of  proxies  in  baptism.  True  religion  is  a  personal  matter  —  is 
its  first  manifestation  in  regeneration  to  be  connected  with  the 
impossible  promises  of  others  ?  Plain  proof-texts  are  requested 
for  godfathers  and  godmothers ;  and  such  important  persons 
deserve  to  be  defended  by  the  clergy,  if  texts  of  Scripture  can  be 
discovered.  As  I  cannot  imagine  where  the  texts  will  be  found, 
I  must  pause  till  the  learned  shall  produce  them.  Further,  I 
find  that  these  children  enter  into  a  covenant  by  proxy,  of  which 
we  are  assured  that  the  promise  our  Lord  Jesus  will  for  his  part 
most  surely  keep  and  perform  ;  but  the  children  are  bound  to 
do  their  part  —  that  part  being  something  more  than  the  gigantic 
task  of  keeping  all  the  commandments  of  God.  Now  I  ask  for 
a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord "  for  such  a  covenant  as  this.  I  find 
two  covenants  in  the  Word  of  God  :  one  is  the  covenant  of  works, 
"This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live  ;  "  I  find  another,  the  covenant  of 
grace,  which  runs  only  in  this  wise,  "  I  will  be  their  God,  and 
they  shall  be  my  people."  I  find  it  expressly  declared  that 
there  cannot  be  a  mixture  of  works  and  grace  ;  for,  says  Paul, 
"  If  by  grace,  then  it  is  no  more  of  works  :  otherwise  grace  is 
no  more  grace  ;  but  if  it  be  of  works,  then  is  it  no  more  grace  : 
otherwise  work  is  no  more  work  ;  "  and  I  ask  a  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  "  for  this  baptismal  covenant,  which  is  nominally  of  grace, 
but  really  of  works,  or  at  best  an  unnatural  conglomerate  of 
grace  and  works.  I  ask  those  who  have  searched  Scripture 
through,  to  find  me  the  form  or  the  command  for  any  baptismal 
covenant  whatever.  It  is  idle  to  say  that  such  a  covenant  was 
allowed  among  the  early  Christians  ;  their  witness  is  not  early 
enough  for  us  :  we  want  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  and  nothing 
but  this  will  justify  this  pretended  covenant. 


"THUS  SAITII  THE  LORD."  67 

We  then  find  that  after  this  covenant  has  been  made,  and  the 
water  has  been  applied  in  a  manner  which  we  think  ncjeds  also 
a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  to  justify  it,  it  is  publicly  declared  that 
the  babe  is  regenerated,  —  "  Seeing  now,  dearly  beloved  brethren, 
that  this  child  is  regenerated  and  grafted  into  the  body  of  Christ's 
church,  let  us  give  thanks  unto  Almighty  God  for  these  benefits, 
and  with  one  accord  make  our  prayers  unto  him,  that  this  child 
may  lead  the  rest  of  his  life  according  to  this  beginning."  And, 
again,  "  We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks,  most  merciful  Father,  that 
it  hath  pleased  thee  to  regenerate  this  infant  with  thy  Holy 
Spirit,  to  receive  him  for  thine  own  child  by  adoption,  and  to 
incorporate  him  into  thy  holy  church,"  etc.  We  are  told  we  do 
not  understand  the  meaning  of  "  regeneration  "  as  it  is  used  in 
the  services  of  the  Anglican  Church.  The  meaning  of  this  pas- 
sage is  historical,  hypothetical,  ecclesiastical,  and  we  know  not 
what.  The  words  "  to  be  born  again "  did  not  formerly  seem 
to  us  to  be  so  very  difficult  to  understand,  nor  do  they  appear  so 
now  as  they  stand  in  Scripture ;  for  we  find  in  them  the  one  re- 
generation which  has  renewed  us  in  the  spirit  of  our  mind,  and 
we  cannot  consent  to  use  those  words  in  any  other  sense.  Well, 
whether  regeneration  be  or  be  not  a  very  equivocal  word,  we 
simply  ask.  Is  there  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  for  the  assertion 
that  a  sprinkled  infant  is  therefore  regenerate  in  any  sense  in 
the  world  ?  Will  any  person  find  us  a  text  of  Scripture  ?  —  he 
shall  have  large  rewards  from  clergymen  with  uneasy  con- 
sciences !  We  put  our  inquiry  again  in  plain  terms,  Will  some 
one  oblige  us  with  a  plain  ''  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  proving  that 
water  baptism  in  any  one  instance  makes  an  unoonscious  babe  a 
member  of  Christ  and  a  child  of  God,  in  any  sense  which  any 
sane  person  chooses  to  attach  to  those  words  ?  Where  is  the 
passage  —  where  ?  Echo  answers  "  where  ?  "  But  this  subject 
you  have  been  considering  for  some  time,  and  are  well  con%  inced 
that  the  process  of  regenerating  babies  by  occult  influences  con- 
veyed by  water  is  a  pure  —  no,  an  impure  —  invention  of  priest- 
craft. There  is  therefore  no  necessity  that  I  enlarge  upon  a 
point  so  well  understood. 


68  "THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD/* 

2.  I  have  a  second  question  to  ask.  There  is  prescribed  in 
<he  Book  of  Common  Prayer  a  peculiar  ceremony  called  cori' 
jirmation.  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  of  that  in  S'Tipture. 
I  would  like  to  have  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  for  that  rite.  As 
I  am  ready  to  yield  as  far  as  po.^siblc,  suppose  we  take  it  for 
granted  that  this  ceremony  is  defensible  from  Holy  Writ,  I  would 
like  to  know  whether  there  is  any  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  allow  ■ 
ing  a  person  called  a  bishop  to  give  to  the  assembled  3'ouths  an 
assurance  of  divine  favor  by  laying  his  hands  on  their  heads  ? 
The  bishop  having  laid  his  hands  on  every  head  presented  lo 
him,  whether  it  be  gracious  or  graceless,  talks  thus  in  the  Collect, 
"  Almighty  and  overliving  God,  who  makest  us  both  to  will  and 
to  do  those  things  that  be  good  and  acceptable  unto  thy  divine 
majesty,  we  make  our  humble  supplications  unto  thee  for 
these  tliy  servants  upon  whom  (^after  the  example  of  thy  holy  apos- 
tles) we  have  now  laid  our  hands,  to  certify  them  {by  this  sign) 
of  thy  favor  and  gracious  goodness  towards  them'^  Does  this 
mean  that  the  bishop's  hand  certifies  the  person  touched  thereby 
of  special  divine  favor?  So  it  seems  to  teach,  as  far  as  I  can  see. 
"We  want,  then,  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  authorizing  this  indi- 
vidual in  lavv'u  to  exercise  the  oilicc  of  an  apostle !  We  then 
desire  scriptural  warrant  permitting  him  to  certify  these  kneel- 
ing youths  of  the  enjoyment  or  possession  of  any  particular 
divine  favor  by  putting  his  hands  on  their  heads.  If  this  means 
the  common  goodness  of  God,  the  bishop's  hands  are  not  needed 
to  certify  them  of  that ;  but  as  he  has  already  declared  in  prayer 
that  they  were  regenerated  by  water  and  the  Spirit,  and  had 
been  forgiven  all  their  sins,  it  is  clear  that  special  favor  is  in- 
tended ;  we  inquire,  therefore,  for  his  authority  for  giving  these 
young  people  a  further  certificate  of  special  divine  favor  by  the 
imposition  of  his  hands.  "Why  his  hands  ?  Who  is  he  that  he 
can  certify  these  persons  of  God's  favor  more  than  any  other 
man  ?  Where  is  his  scriptural  warrant  to  confer  by  his  hands  a 
certificate  of  grace  upon  young  people  who  in  innumerable  cases 
ere  thoughtless  and  unconverted,  if  not  profane  ?  We  want  a 
**  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  for  the  whole  thing,  and  then  for  each 


"THUS  SAirn  TIIE  LORD."  69 

item  in  detail.     Endless  is  the  task  thus  proposed  to  the  hoxiest 
Church  man. 

3.  Another  matter  needs  a  little  clearing  up  ;  and,  as  this  Book 
was  set  forth  by  learned  divines  and  bishops,  I  would  like  a  lucid 
explanation.  The  priest  visits  a  sick  man,  sits  down  by  his  bed- 
side, reads  certain  prayers,  bids  the  patient  remember  his  baptism^ 
questions  him  as  to  his  creed,  gives  him  good  advice  about  for- 
giving his  enemies  and  making  his  will,  moves  him  to  make  a 
special  confession  of  his  sin  if  he  feels  his  conscience  troubled 
with  any  weighty  matter,  after  which  confession  the  Rubric  says, 
"  the  priest  shall  absolve  him  "  (if  he  humbly  and  heartily  desire 
it),  after  this  sort.  Here  is  the  absolution,  and  I  humbly  and 
heartily  desire  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  for  it :  "  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  left  power  to  his  church  to  absolve  all 
sinners  who  truly  repent  and  believe  in  him,  of  his  great  mercy 
forgive  thee  thine  offences;  and  by  his  authority  committed  to  me, 
I  absolve  thee  from  all  thy  sins,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Gliostr  Sir  Priest,  I  want  you  to  give 
me  a  plain  warrant  from  God's  Word  for  your  absolving  my 
dying  neighbor  at  this  rate.  Who  are  you  that  you  should  use 
such  words  ?  The  season  is  solemn  :  it  is  the  hour  of  death,  and 
the  matter  is  weighty,  for  it  concerns  the  eternal  interests  of  the 
dying  man,  and  may  —  nay,  will,  if  you  be  found  to  be  acting  pre- 
sumptuously in  this  matter  — involve  your  own  soul  in  eternal 
ruin.  tV"hence  did  you  derive  your  right  to  forgive  that  sick 
man  ?  Might  he  not  raise  his  withered  hands  and  return  the 
compliment  by  absolving  you  ?  Are  you  quite  sure  as  to  the 
committal  of  divine  authority  to  you  ?  Then  show  me  the  deed  of 
gift,  and  let  it  be  clearly  of  divine  origin.  The  apostles  were 
empowered  to  do  many  things ;  but  who  are  you  ?  Do  you 
claim  to  be  their  successors  ?  Then  work  miracles  similar  to 
theirs  ;  take  up  serpents,  and  drink  deadly  things  without  being 
harmed  thereby ;  prove  to  us  that  you  have  seen  the  Lord,  or 
even  that  cloven  tongues  of  fire  have  sat  upon  each  of  you.  You 
evangeli'^-al  clergy,  dare  you  claim  to  be  successors  of  the  apostles, 
and  to  have  power  to  forgive  sins  ?     Your  Puseyite  brethren  go 


70  "THUS   SAITII    THE  LORD." 

the  whole  length  of  superstitious  pretension ;  but  you  have  too 
much  light  to  be  so  superstitious  ;  and  yet  you  do  what  is  quite 
as  wicked,  —  you  solemnly  subscribe  that  tliis  absolution  is  not 
contrary  to  the  Word  of  God  when  you  know  it  is  ?  Gorham  case, 
say  }'ou.  I  care  nothing  for  your  Gorham  case  :  I  want  a  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  "  warranting  you  to  swear  to  what  you  know  to 
be  false  and  dangerous.  Mr.  Mozley  and  Mr.  Maskell  may 
give  you  all  the  comfort  which  they  can  afford ;  but  one  word  of 
Peter  or  of  Paul  would  be  of  more  weight  in  this  matter  than  a 
thousand  words  from  either  of  them. 

You  are  aware,  perhaps,  that  it  is  not  every  man  who  is  per- 
mitted by  the  Established  religion  to  pronounce  this  absolution. 
A  person  called  a  "  deacon  "  is,  I  am  informed,  allowed  to  preach 
and  do  a  great  many  things,  but  when  he  reads  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  in  the  daily  service  he  must  not  grant  absolution ; 
there  is  a  supernatural  something  which  the  man  has  not  yet 
received,  for  he  has  only  once  felt  the  episcopal  imposition  of 
hands.  We  shall  see,  by-and-by,  where  absolving  power  comes 
from.  The  deacon  has  attained  to  one  gra.de  of  priestcraft,  but 
the  full  vigor  of  mystic  influence  rests  not  upon  him.  Another 
touch,  another  subscription,  and  the  keys  of  St.  Peter  will  swing 
at  his  girdle ;  but  his  time  is  not  yet.  I  ask  him,  whether  he 
calls  himself  a  deacon  or  a  priest,  where  he  gets  a  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  "  for  this  absolution  ?  which,  if  it  be  not  of  God,  is  a 
piece  of  impertinence,  superstition,  blasphemy,  and  falsehood. 

4.  I  turn  on  and  find  that  when  the  sick  dies  he  is  buried  in 
consecrated  ground ;  and  though  he  may  have  cut  his  throat  while 
under  delirium  ti  emens,  if  the  jury  do  not  return  a  verdict  of 
suicide,  the  priest  shall  say,  as  he  casts  earth  upon  the  body, 
"  Forasmuch  as  it  hath  pleased  Almighty  God  of  his  great  mercy 
to  take  unto  himself  the  soul  of  our  dear  brother  here  departed, 
we  therefore  commit  his  body  to  the  ground,  —  earth  to  earth, 
ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust,  —  in  sure  and  certain  hope  of  the 
resurrection  to  eternal  life."  And  again,  "  We  give  thee  hearty 
thanks  for  that  it  hath  pleased  thee  to  deliver  this  our  brother 
out  of  the  miseries  of  this  sinful  world."     And  yet  again,  "  Wt 


*THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD."  71 

meekly  beseech  thee,  O  Father,  to  raise  us  from  he  deatl  )f  sin 
unto  the  life  of  righteousness ;  that  when  we  shall  depart  this 
life,  we  may  rest  in  him,  as  our  hope  is  this  our  brother  doth." 
We  beg  a  "Thus  saith  the  Lord"  for  burying  every  baptized 
thief,  harlot,  rogue,  drunkard,  and  liar  who  may  die  in  the  par- 
ish—  "in  sure  and  certain  hope  of  the  blessed  resurrection/' 
"  Oh  I  it  is  commanded  by  authority."  What  authority  ?  We 
challenge  it,  and  permit  none  to  pass  muster  but  a  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord."  Until  clergymen  will  bring  us  scriptuml  warrant 
for  uttering  falsehoods  over  a  grave,  we  dare  not  cea^e  our  testi- 
mony against  them.  How  long  will  the  many  godly  laymen  in 
that  Church  remain  quiet  ?  Why  do  they  not  bestir  themselves, 
and  demand  revision  or  disruption  ? 

5.  Turning  a  little  further  on,  into  a  part  of  the  Prayer-Book 
not  much  frequented  by  ordinary  readers,  we  come  to  the  "  Or- 
dering of  Priests^''  or  the  way  in  which  priests  are  made.  Why 
priests  f  Is  one  believer  more  a  priest  than  another,  when  all 
are  styled  a  royal  priesthood  ?  Let  that  pass.  Of  course,  breth- 
ren, the  priests  are  made  by  the  bishops,  as  the  bishops  are  made 
by  Lord  Palmerston,  or  Lord  Derby,  or  any  other  political 
leader  who  may  be  in  office.  The  Prime  Minister  of  England 
is  the  true  fountain  from  whom  all  bishops  flow,  and  the  priest? 
are  minor  emanations  branching  off  from  the  mitre  rather  than 
the  crown.  Here  is  the  way  of  ordering  priests.  Let  heaven 
and  earth  hear  this  and  be  astonished :  "  When  this  prayer  is 
Oone,  the  bishop  with  the  priests  present  shall  lay  their  hands 
severally  upon  the  head  of  every  one  that  receiveth  the  order  of 
priesthood;  the  receivers  humbly  kneeling  upon  their  knees,  and 
the  bishop  saying,  *  Receive  the  Holy  Ghost.'  "  liisten  to  it, 
a  w  I  Think  you  behold  the  scene :  a  man  of  God,  a  bishop 
whom  you  have  been  in  the  habit  of  considering  a  most  gracious, 
godly  man,  and  such  no  doubt  he  may  be,  in  a  sort,  — think  you 
see  him  putting  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  some  evangelical 
man  ■s>hom  you  will  go  and  hear,  or,  if  you  like,  upon  some  young 
rake  fresh  from  Oxford,  —  and  think  you  hear  him  say,  "  Receive 
the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  office  and  work  of  a  priest  in  the  church 


72  "Tlirs   S-MTTT  THE  LORD." 

of  God^  now  committed  unto  thee  hj  the  imposition  of  our  hands. 
Whose  sins  thou  dost  forgive^  they  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sivA 
thou  dost  retain,  they  are  retained.''  We  want  a  "  Thus  saitli  the 
Lord"  for  that ;  for  that  is  putting  it  rather  strongly  in  the  popish 
line,  one  A^'ould  think.  Is  the  way  of  ordering  priests  in  the 
Church  of  Rome  much  worse  than  this  ?  That  the  apostles  did 
confer  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  never  thought  of  denying ;  but  that 
Oxford,  Exeter,  or  any  other  occupants  of  the  bench  can  give 
the  Holy  Spirit,  needs  some  proof  other  than  their  silk  aprons 
or  lawn  sleeves  can  afford  us.  We  ask,  moreover,  for  one  in- 
stance in  which  an  apostle  conferred  upon  any  minister  the  power 
to  forgive  sins,  and  where  it  can  be  found  in  Scripture  that  any 
man  o^her  than  an  apostle  ever  received  authority  to  absolve 
sinners.  Sir.-,  let  us  say  the  truth  ;  however  much  yonder  priest 
may  pretend  at  his  parishioner's  bedside  to  forgive  sin,  the  man's 
sins  are  not  forgiven ;  and  the  troubled  conscience  of  the  sinner 
often  bears  witness  to  the  fact,  as  the  day  of  judgment  and  the 
fearful  hell  of  sinners  must  also  bear  witness.  And  what  think 
you,  sirs,  must  be  the  curse  that  fills  the  mouth  of  damned  souls, 
when  in  another  world  they  meet  the  priest  who  absolved  them 
with  this  sham  absolution !  With  what  reproaches  will  such  de- 
ceived ones  meet  the  priest  who  sent  them  down  to  perdition  with 
a  lie  in  their  right  hands !  Will  they  not  say  to  him,  "  Thou 
didst  forgive  me  all  my  sins  by  an  authority  committed  unto  thee, 
and  yet  here  am  I  cast  into  the  pit  of  hell  ?  "  Oh  !  if  I  do  not 
clear  my  soul  upon  this  infamous  business,  and  if  the  whole 
Christian  church  does  not  cleanse  herself  of  it,  what  guilt  will 
lay  upon  us  !  This  is  become  a  crying  evil,  and  a  sin  that  is 
not  to  be  spoken  of  behind  the  door,  nor  to  be  handled  in  gentle 
language.  I  have  been  severe,  it  is  said,  and  spoken  harshly. 
I  do  not  believe  it  possible  to  be  too  severe  in  this  matter  ;  but, 
sirs,  if  I  have  been  so,  let  that  be  set  down  as  my  sin  if  you  will ; 
but  is  there  any  comparison  between  my  fault  and  that  of  men 
who  know  this  to  be  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  yet  give 
it  their  unfeigned  ass-ent  and  consent?  or  the  sin  of  those  who 
can  lie  unto  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  pretending  to  confer  Him  ifha 


"THUS   SAITII  THE  LORD."  79 

bl'oweth  where  he  listeth  upon  men  who  as  likely  as  not  are  a& 
graceless  as  the  very  heathen  ?  Fresh  from  the  dissipations  of 
college-life,  the  sinner  bows  before  the  man  in  lawn,  and  rises  a 
full-blown  priest,  fully  able  to  remit  or  retain  sins.  After  this, 
hov/  can  the  priests  of  the  Church  of  England  denounce  the  Ro- 
man Catholics  ?  1 1  is  so  very  easy  to  fume  and  bluster  against 
Puseyites  and  Papists ;  but  the  moment  our  charity  begins  at 
home,  and  sse  give  our  Evangelical  brethren  the  same  benefit 
which  they  confer  upon  the  open  Romanists,  they  are  incensed 
beyond  measure.  Yet  will  we  tell  them  to  their  faces,  that  they, 
despite  their  fair  speeches,  are  as  guilty  as  those  whom  they  de- 
nounce ;  for  there  is  as  much  Popery  in  this  priest-malving  as  in 
any  passage  in  the  mass-book.  Protestant  England  !  wilt  thow 
long  tolerate  this  blasphemy?  Land  of  Wiclif,  birthplace  of 
the  martyrs  of  Smithfield,  is  this  long  to  be  borne  with  ?  I  am 
clear  of  this  matter  before  the  Most  High,  or  hope  to  be,  ere  I 
sleep  in  the  grave  ;  and  having  once  sounded  the  trumpet,  it 
shall  riuf]  till  my  lips  are  dumb.  Do  you  tell  me  it  is  no  business 
of  mine  ?  Is  it  not  the  National  Church  ?  —  does  not  its  sin  rest, 
tbareforc,  upon  every  man  and  woman  in  the  nation,  Dissenter 
and  Churchman,  who  does  not  shake  himself  from  it  by  open  dis» 
avo'/val  ?  I  am  not  meddling  with  anybody  else's  church  ;  but 
the  church  that  claims  me  as  a  parishioner  would  compel  me,  if 
it  could,  to  pay  its  church  rates,  and  that  does  take  from  me 
my  share  of  tithe  every  year.  I  ask  the  sturdy  Protestants  of 
England,  and  especially  the  laity  of  the  Church  of  England, 
T^hether  they  intend  forever  to  foster  such  abominations  ?  Ai'ise, 
Britannia  !  nation  of  the  free,  and  shake  thy  garments  from  the 
dust  of  this  hoary  superstition  ;  and  as  for  thee,  O  Church  of 
England  I  may  God  bless  thee  with  ministers  who  will  sooner 
come  forth  to  poverty  and  shame  than  pervert  or  assist  in  per- 
verting the  Word  of  God. 

6.  I  have  not  quite  done  :  I  have  another  question  to  ask. 
Look  at  the  thanksgiving  which  is  offered  on  the  twentieth  day  of 
June,  on  account  of  Her  Majesty's  accession  :  in  tliis  thanksgiv- 
ing we  very  heartily  join,  although  we  decline  to  pray  by  book 


74  "THUS  SATTH    HIE  LORD." 

on  the  twentieth  of  June  or  any  other  day;  look  at  the  cIosp  of 
that  thanksgiving,  and  you  see  the  naine  of  Lord  John  Russell 
as  a  sort  of  official  authority  for  the  prayer !  Is  Earl  Russell 
also  among  the  prophets  ?  And  on  the  other  side  of  the  page, 
in  order  that  the  Tories  may  edify  the  church  as  well  as  the 
Whigs,  I  see  the  hand  of  S.  H.  Walpole.  Is  he  also  a  governor 
in  Christ's  church  ?  Hath  the  Lord  given  these  men  power  to 
legislate  for  his  church,  or  sign  mandates  for  her  to  obey  ?  But 
what  is  it  all  about?  "  Victoria  Regina,  our  wiU  and  pleasure 
ts  that  these  four  forms  of  prayer^'  Qio,.  Do  you  see?  here  is 
royal  supremacy!  Further  on,  in  the  next  page  :  "  JVow,  there- 
fore, our  will  and  pleasure  is,"  etc.  See  the  Preface  to  the  Ar- 
ticles," Being  hy  God's  Ordinance,  according  to  our  just  Title, 
Defender  of  the  Faith,  and  Supreme  Governor  of  the  Clairchy 
within  these  our  Dominions  ;  "  and  again,  "  We  are  Supreme  Gov- 
ernor of  the  Church  of  England."  This  is  the  way  in  which 
your  Church  bows  herself  before  the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  I 
demand,  earnestly  demand,  a  "Thus  saith  the  Lord"  for  this 
royal  supremacy.  If  any  king,  or  queen,  or  emperor  shall  say, 
in  any  Christian  church,  "  Our  will  and  pleasure  is,"  we  reply, 
"  We  have  another  King,  —  one  Jesus.*'  As  to  the  Queen,  hon- 
ored and  beloved  as  she  is,  she  is  by  her  sex  incapacitated  for 
ruling  in  the  church.  Paul  decides  that  point  by  his  plain  pre- 
cept, "  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  usurp  authority  over 
the  man,  but  to  be  in  silence  ; "  and  if  a  king  were  in  the  case, 
we  should  say,  "  We  render  unto  Caesar  the  things  which  are 
Caesar's,  and  unto  God  the  things  which  are  God's."  In  civil 
matters,  we  cheerfully  obey  princes  and  magistrates  ;  but  if  any 
king,  queen,  emperor,  or  what  not,  usurps  power  in  the  church 
flf  God,  we  reply,  "  One  is  our  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  we 
are  brethren.  The  crown-rights  belong  to  King  Jesus :  he  alone 
1*3  King  in  Zion."  But  I  am  met  at  once  with  the  reply,  "  Well, 
but  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  EstabHshed  Church,  as  well  a3 
the  Queen."  I  remember  reading  about  a  three-headed  dog 
which  kept  the  gates  of  hell,  but  I  never  dreamed  of  a  two- 
headed  church  till  I  heard  of  the  Anglican  Etsablishment.     A 


**THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD,"  75 

twoheaded  church  is  a  monster !  The  Queen  the  Head  of  the 
Church,  and  King  Jesus  the  Head  of  the  Church,  too !  Never. 
Where  is  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  for  this  ?  Ko  man  living 
who  calls  himself  an  Englishman  has  a  word  to  say  of  Her 
Majesty  except  that  which  is  full  of  honor  and  esteem  and 
loyal  affection  ;  but  the  moment  we  come  to  talk  about  the  church 
of  Christ,  whoever  shall  say,  or  think,  or  believe,  that  there  is 
any  headship  to  the  church  of  Christ  except  the  person  of  Christ 
himself,  he  knoAveth  not  what  he  saith  nor  whereof  he  afhrm- 
eth.  Oar  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Head  over  ctM  things  to  hia 
church,  which  is  his  body  :  the  fulness  of  him  fiUeth  all  in  all. 
Here  stand  the  two  letters  "  V.  R."  at  the  top  of  certain  man- 
dates, and  they  mean  just  this  :  "  Our  royal  authority  commands 
that  you  shall  not  believe  this,  and  you  shall  believe  that ;  you 
shall  not  pray  this,  and  you  shall  pray  that ;  and  you  shall  pray 
on  such  a  day,"  and  so  on.  The  church  which  thus  bows  to 
authority  commits  fornication  with  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  vir- 
tually renounces  her  allegiance  to  Christ  to  gain  the  filthy  lucre 
of  state  endowments.  He  is  the  freeman  whom  the  truih  makes 
free,  and  who  wears  no  gilded  collar,  with  a  chain  hanging  there- 
from held  in  a  royal  hand.  Remember  how  the  Chancellor 
laughed  to  scorn  the  whole  bench  of  bishops,  and  rightly  so  ; 
for  he  who  voluntarily  makes  himself  a  bondman  deserves  to  feel 
the  lash.  May  the  little  finger  of  our  state  grow  heavier  than 
the  loins  of  James  or  Elizabeth,  until  all  good  men  flee  from  the 
house  of  bondage.  Servants  of  God,  will  ye  be  servants  of  man  ? 
Ye  who  profess  to  follovv  King  Jesus  and  see  him  crowned  with 
the  crown  wherewith  his  mother  crowned  him  in  the  day  of  his 
espousals,  do  you  take  off  his  diadem  to  put  it  upon  the  head  of 
another  ?  No,  it  shall  never  be.  Scotland  has  repelled  the  royal 
intrusion  right  bravely  by  her  sorn,  of  the  Free  Church,  who  have 
left  all  to  follow  King  Jesus.  Her  bush  burned  in  the  olden 
times,  but  was  not  consumed;  the  covenant  was  stained  with 
blood,  but  it  was  never  slain.  Let  us  revive  that  covenant,  and, 
if  need  be,  seal  it  with  our  blood.  Let  the  Church  of  England 
have  what  king  she  pleases,  or  what  prince  she  pleases  for  hei 


76  "THUS  SAITII  THE  LORD." 

bead  ;  but  this  I  know,  tliat  there  is  no  "  Thus  saith  the  Lcrd  " 
concerning  the  ecclesiastical  supremacy  of  Victoria  Regiua,  nor 
the  authority  of  Lord  John  Russell,  or  S.  II.  Walpole,  or  any  of 
that  company,  honorable  though  they  be. 

7.  Now  once  more :  one  other  question.  I  am  profoundly 
ignorant,  and  have  not  the  power  to  judge  of  these  things  (so  am 
I  informed),  and  therefore  I  would  like  to  ask  for  a  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  "  for  a  few  of  t!ie  canons  ;  —  no,  perhaps  I  had  better 
not  read  them  ;  they  are  too  bad,  —  they  are  full  of  all  malice 
and  uncharitableness,  and  everything  that  cometh  of  the  foul 
fiend.  I  will  ask  whether  there  can  be  found  any  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord"  for  this:  Canon  10.  ^^  3Iainfainers  of  Schismat- 
ics in  the  Church  of  Ejigland  to  he  censured.  Whoever  shall 
hereafter  affirm  that  such  ministers  as  refuse  to  subscribe  to  the 
form  and  manner  of  God's  worship  in  the  Church  of  England, 
prescribed  in  the  Communion-Book,  and  their  adherents,  may 
truly  take  unto  them  the  name  of  another  church  not  established 
by  law,  and  dare  presume  to  publish  it,  that  this  their  pretended 
church  hath  of  long  time  groaned  under  the  burden  of  certain 
grievances  imposed  upon  it,  and  upon  the  members  thereof  be- 
fore mentioned,  by  the  Church  of  England,  and  the  orders  and 
constitutions  therein  by  law  established,  let  them  be  excommu- 
nicated, and  not  restored  until  they  repent  and  publicly  revoke 
such  their  wicked  errors."  What  Scripture  warrants  one  church 
to  excommunicate  another  merely  for  being  a  church,  and  com- 
plaining of  undoubted  grievances  ? 

Canon  IL  '■'■  Maintainers  of  Conventicles  censured.  Whoso- 
ever shall  hereafter  affirm  or  maintain  that  there  are  within  this 
realm  other  meetings,  assemblies,  or  congregations  of  the  king's 
born  subjects,  than  such  as  by  the  laws  of  this  land  are  held  and 
allowed,  which  may  rightly  challenge  to  themselves  the  name  of 
true  and  lawful  churches,  let  him  be  excommunicated,  and  not 
restored  but  by  the  Archbishop,  after  his  repentance  and  public 
revocation  of  such  his  wicked  errors."  Where  doth  Holy  Scrip- 
ture authorize  the  excommunication  of  every  good  man  who  is 
charitable  enough  to  believe  that  there  are  other  churches  besid<« 
his  own  ?     Search  ye  out  of  the  Book  of  the  Lord,  and  read  I 


"THUS  SAITH  TlIE  LOKD."  77 

For  verj  mucli  in  this  Book  of  Canons  I  beg  tc>  be  iuformeJ 
of  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  For  matters  which  do  not  concern 
religion  and  have  only  to  do  with  the  mere  arrangement  of  ser- 
vice, we  neither  ask  nor  expect  a  divine  precept ;  but  upon  vital 
points  of  doctrine,  ceremony,  or  precept,  we  cannot  do  without  it. 
Scarcely  can  any  document  be  more  inconsistent  with  Scripture 
than  the  Book  of  Canons,  and  hence  it  is  ever  kept  in  the  back- 
ground, because  those  who  know  anything  about  it  must  be 
ashamed  of  it.  And  yet  these  are  Canons  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land, —  canons  which  are  inconsistent,  many  of  them,  with  even 
the  common  rules  of  our  own  present  enlightened  law,  let  alone 
the  Word  of  God.  We  ask  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord"  for  them, 
and  we  wait  until  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  "  shall  be  found  to 
defend  them. 

Now  some  will  say,  why  do  I  thus  take  this  matter  up  and  look 
into  it?  I  have  already  told  you  the  reason,  dear  friends. 
There  is  an  opportunity  for  pushing  another  Reformation  given 
to  us  just  now,  of  which  if  we  do  not  avail  ourselves  we  shall  be 
very  guilty.  Some  have  said,  "  Why  not  go  on  preaching  the 
gospel  to  sinners  ?  "  I  do  preach  the  gospel  to  sinners,  as  ear- 
nestly as  ever  I  did  in  my  life  ;  and  there  are  as  many  conver- 
sions to  God  as  at  any  tbrmer  period.  This  is  God's  work  :  and 
beware  lest  any  of  you  lift  a  finger  against  it.  The  hand  of  the 
liord  is  in  this  thing,  and  he  that  lives  shall  see  it.  Let  us  have 
Dur  prayers,  that  good  may  come  of  this  controversy,  even  though 
you  may  deplore  it.  As  for  anything  else  that  you  can  do,  it 
f^hall  not  turn  us  a  hair's-breadth  from  this  testimony  to  which  we 
feel  God  has  called  us,  though  it  bringeth  upon  us  every  evil 
that  flesh  would  shrink  from.  The  words  of  Dr.  Guthrie  are 
well  worth  quoting  here :  "  The  servant  is  no  better  than  his 
master  ;  and  I  do  believe,  were  we  more  true  to  God,  more  faith- 
ful and  honest  in  opposing  the  world  for  its  good,  we  should  get 
less  smoothly  along  the  path  of  life,  and  have  less  reason  to  read 
wi?th  apprehension  these  words  of  Jesus  :  *  Woe  unto  you  when 
all  men  shall  speak  well  of  you.'  Not  less  true  than  shrewd  wag 
the  rema/k  of  a  Scotch  woman  respecting  one  who,  just  settled  in 
7* 


^8  "THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD." 

the  ministry,  had  been  borne  to  his  pulpit  amid  the  plaudits  of 
all  the  people :  '  If  he  is  a  faithful  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesua 
Christ,  he  will  have  all  the  blackguards  in  the  parish  on  his  head 
before  a  month  is  gone.' " 

III.  Now,  to  close,  let  me  say  to  you,  my  hearers,  havie  any 
of  you  a  hope  of  heaven  which  will  not  stand  the  test  of  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  ?  "  What  are  j'ou  resting  upon  ?  Are  you  resting 
upon  something  which  you  felt  when  excited  at  a  prayer-meet- 
ing or  under  a  sermon  ?  Remember  you  will  not  have  that 
excitement  to  bear  you  up  in  death,  and  the  religion  of  excite- 
ment will  not  suffice  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Are  you  building 
upon  your  own  works  ?  Are  you  depending  upon  your  own 
feelings  ?  Do  you  rely  upon  sacraments  ?  Are  you  placing 
your  trust  upon  the  word  of  man  ?  If  so,  remember  that  when 
God  shakes  all  things  he  will  shake  these  false  foundations  ;  but 
oh!  build  upon  the  Word  of  my  Lord  and  Master;  trust  your 
soul  with  Jesus.  Hating  sin,  and  clinging  to  the  great  sin- 
bearer,  you  shall  find  in  him  a  rock  of  refuge  which  can  never, 
never  fail  you  ;  but  I  do  conjure  you,  as  the  Lord  liveth,  search 
and  try  yourselves  by  the  Word  of  God.  No  doubt  there  are 
many  among  us  who  are  not  built  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and 
we  may  any  of  us  be  deceived  by  a  mere  name  to  live.  Do, 
then,  since  the  test-day  must  come, — since  you  must  be  weighed  in 
the  balances,  —  weigh  yourselves  now,  my  hearers  ;  and  let  none 
of  us  go  down  to  the  chambers  of  destruction  believing  ourselves 
to  be  heirs  of  heaven,  being  all  the  while  enemies  to  the  Most 
High  God.  May  the  Lord  exalt  his  own  Word,  and  give  u?  a 
lure  inheritance  in  the  blessings  which  it  brings.     Ajnen. 


SERMON  IV. 


A  HEARER  IN  DISGUISE. 

•  AW  IT  ■«  AS  SO,  WHEN  AHIJAH  HEARD  THE  SOUKD  OP  HEB  FEET,  AS  ';HE  CAMI 
IW  AT  THE  DOOR,  THAT  HE  SAID,  COME  IN,  THOU  WIFE  OF  JEROBfAM;  WHY 
FEIGNEST  THOU  THYSELF  TO  BE  ANOTHER?  FOR  I  AM  SENT  TO  THEE  WITH  HEAVY 

TiDZJras."  —  1  Kings  xiv.  6. 

Ahijah  the  prophet  was  blind.  Did  I  not  tell  you  this  morn- 
ing that  God's  servants  could  be  happy  without  the  light  of  the 
sun  ?  If  God  should  be  pleased  to  deprive  their  natural  eyes  of 
the  pleasures  of  light,  their  souls  would  not  be  without  joy  ;  for, 
as  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  so  in  the  renewed  heart,  "  the  glory 
of  God  doth  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.'' 
Doubtless  this  was  the  case  with  that  venerable  prophet.  Pie 
was  not  like  Moses,  whose  eye  did  not  wax  dim,  and  whose  nat- 
ural strength  did  not  abate ;  but  his  eyes  were  set  with  age  ;  the 
(irgans  of  vision  had  so  decayed  through  the  multitude  of  his 
years,  that  he  could  not  see  so  much  as  a  ray  of  light.  Yet 
doubtless  when  he  could  not  look  out  of  the  windows,  God  looked 
in ;  and  when  there  was  no  beam  coming  in  from  the  sun,  much 
light  was  darted  in  from  heaven.  What  man  of  modern  times 
saw  more  than  blind  Milton  ?  It  were  well  for  us  to  feel  the 
influence  of  that  "  drop  serene,"  and  close  our  eyes  forever,  if 
we  could  but  see  such  visions  of  God  as  Milton  has  penned  in 
his  Paradise  Lost,  and  Paradise  Regained.  Here  is  a  fine  pic- 
ture for  you.  Behold  the  venerable  prophet  sitting  alone  in  his 
humble  cottage ;  and  yet  not  alone,  because  his  God  is  with  him. 
Blind,  but  yet  in  the  highest  sense  a  seer,  looking  into  the  invis- 


W  A  IIEAnER  IN  DISGUISE. 

ibie,  and  by  faith  beholding  things  wliich  we  Wind  men  who  have 
our  sight  can  never  sec ;  beholding  what  eye  hath  not  seen,  and 
hearing  what  car  hath  never  heard.  This,  then,  may  furnish  a 
word  of  comfort  at  the  outset  to  any  who  are  suffering  under 
infirmity :  Jesus  can  recompense  you.  You  are  not  the  only 
persons  who  have  been  called  so  to  suffer :  full  many  of  your 
humble  guild  —  the  company  of  the  blind  —  have  been  gifted 
with  spiritual  sight.  If  you  have  lost  hearing,  or  the  use  of  any 
of  the  members  of  your  body,  remember  that  no  strange  thing 
has  happened  to  you,  but  such  as  is  common  to  man.  There  is 
a  way  by  which,  in  proportion  as  your  tribulations  abound,  sc 
your  consolations  may  abound  through  Jesus  Christ.  Nay,  these 
very  privations  which  you  feel  so  sadly,  which  so  loudly  demand 
our  sympathy,  may  by  God's  love  be  transmuted  into  mercies,  by 
a  lioly  alchemy  which  really  turns  iron  into  gold.  He  can  turn 
your  losses  into  gains,  and  your  curses  into  blessings. 

Mark  well  this  venerable  prophet  —  a  man  so  old  as  to  have 
survived  the  senses  which  give  life  its  charm  :  is  it  not  time  for 
him  to  die  ?  Has  he  not  outlived  his  usefulness  when  he  is  made 
entirely  dependent  upon  his  fellow-creatures,  and  a  burden  tc 
himself?  Why  does  not  the  prophet's  Master  send  a  convoy  of 
angels  to  take  the  good  man  home  ?  There  he  sits,  without  any 
apparent  perception  of  the  scenes  transpiring  around  him  ;  surely, 
surely  it  is  time  for  the  Master  to  call  him  away  !  But  no,  he  does 
not.  Ahijah  must  not  die ;  he  has  another  message  to  deliver, 
and  he  is  immortal  till  his  work  is  done.  I  have  no  doubt  he 
sweetly  slept  after  he  had  delivered  his  last  message,  but  not  till 
then.  Brethren  and  sisters,  you  and  I  have  no  right  to  want  to 
go  to  heaven  till  our  work  is  done.  There  is  a  desire  to  be  with 
Christ  which  is  not  only  natural  but  spiritual ;  there  is  a  sighing 
to  behold  his  face,  which,  if  a  man  be  without,  I  shall  question  if 
he  be  a  Christian  at  all ;  but  to  wish  to  be  away  from  the  battle 
before  we  win  the  victory,  and  to  desire  to  leave  the  field  before 
the  day  is  over^  were  but  lazy  and  listless  ;  therefore  kit  us  pray 
God  to  save  us  ^^^om  it.  Whitefield  and  a  company  of  ministers 
were  talking  together  and  expressing  their  desire  to  go  to  heaven. 


A  HEADER  IN  DISGIISE.  81 

Good  Mr.  Tennant  was  the  only  man  Avbo  differed  from  tliem. 
lie  said  he  did  not  wish  to  die  ;  and  he  thought  that  if  his  brother 
Whitefield  would  but  consider  for  a  time,  he  would  not  wish  to  be 
gone  either ;  for,  he  said,  if  you  hire  a  man  to  do  a  day's  work, 
and  he  is  saying  all  the  day,  "  I  wish  it  were  evening  ;  I  wish  it 
wore  time  to  go  home,"  you  would  think,  "  What  a  lazy  fellow 
he  is  ;  "  and  you  would  wish  you  had  never  engaged  him.  ''  So," 
he  said,  "  I  am  afraid  it  is  nothing  but  our  idleness  that  often 
prompts  us  to  desire  to  be  away  from  our  work."  If  there  be  a 
soul  to  win,  let  me  stop  until  I  have  won  it.  Truly,  some  of  U4 
might  summon  up  courage  enough  to  say,  "  I  would  fain  barter 
heaven  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  not  only  wait  twenty  years 
out  of  heaven  if  I  may  have  twenty  years  of  glorifying  him  the 
better,  but  wait  out  altogether  if  I  may  outside  heaven  sing  to 
him  sweeter  songs,  and  honor  him  more  than  I  can  inside  its 
walls  ;  for  outside  heaven  shall  be  heaven  to  me  if  it  shall  help 
me  to  glorify  my  Lord  and  Master  the  better."  You  have  heard, 
I  dare  say,  that  anecdote  of  good  Mr.  Whitefield,  in  his  early 
ministry,  lying  down,  as  he  thought,  to  die,  in  a  high  fever,  and 
a  poor  negro  woman  sitting  by  his  side  and  tending  him.  In  his 
sad  moments,  Whitefield  thought  of  dying  ;  but  the  black  woman 
said,  "  No,  Master  Whitefield,  you  are  not  to  die  yet :  there  are 
thousands  of  souls  to  bring  to  Christ ;  so  keep  up  your  spirits,  for 
you  must  live,  and  not  die;  your  Master  has  yet  a  work  for 
you  to  do."  All  this  comes  to  my  mind  as  I  think  of  that  ven- 
erable old  prophet,  sitting  in  his  chair,  waiting  until  he  shall 
have  spoken  to  Jeroboam's  wife ;  and  then  after  that  ascending 
to  his  Father  and  his  God —  but  not  until  his  work  was  done. 

We  have  introduced  to  you  Ahijah,  the  venerable  prophet. 
We  must  now  address  you  upon  an  incident  connected  with  hig 
closing  ministry. 

In  our  text  we  have  before  us  an  occasional  hearer  ;  secondly, 
we  observe  a  useless  disguise ;  and  thirdly,  we  listen  tc  heavf 
iidinys. 

L     We  have  before  us,  first  of  all,  the  occasional  heabeb 


82  A  nEARER  IN  DISGUISE. 

Jeroboam  and  his  wife  did  not  often  go  to  hear  Ahijah.  They 
were  not  people  who  went  to  worship  Jehovah;  they  neithei 
feared  God  nor  regarded  his  prophet.  There  may  be  some  such 
here  to-night.  You  do  not  often  come  to  a  place  of  worship.  1 
am  glad  you  are  hear  now.  It  may  be  my  Master  has  sent  me 
Mviih  tidings  for  you.  Give  earnest  heed,  I  pray  you,  that  the 
tidings  may  be  received  and  blessed.  I  am  sometimes  tired  of 
preaching  to  those  who  hear  me  every  Sunday,  for  I  fear  some 
of  them  never  will  be  saved.  They  get  hardened  by  the  gospel ; 
all  the  blows  of  the  hammer  have  only  tended  to  weld  their 
hearts  to  their  sins,  and  make  them  harder,  instead  of  melting 
them.  May  God  grant,  however,  that  my  fears  may  be  removed, 
and  that  some  who  have  long  resisted  the  wooings  of  the  gospel 
may  yet  yield.  I  have  more  hope  of  you,  occasional  hearers ;  I 
know  that  when  my  Master  has  helped  me  to  cast  the  net  on  the 
right  side  of  the  ship,  I  have  taken  some  of  you.  There  are 
amongst  those  numbered  with  us  some  of  the  best  in  the  church, 
and  the  most  useful  men  in  our  society,  who  were  brought  in  by 
dropping  into  the  place  just  as  stray  hearers  —  passing  by,  per- 
haps, or  coming  out  of  curiosity  ;  but  God  kncAv  who  they  were, 
knew  how  to  adapt  the  sermon  to  the  ca?e,  and  affect  the  heart 
with  the  Word.  Now,  here  was  an  occasional  hearer;  and  wo 
make  tlie  observation  that  this  occasional  Jiearei^  teas  totally  dcs^ 
titute  of  all  true  piety.  Most  occasional  hearers  are.  Those  who 
have  true  religion  are  not  occasional  hearers.  You  will  find  that 
truly  gracious  persons  are  diligent  in  the  use  of  the  means.  In- 
stead of  thinking  it  a  toil  to  come  up  to  the  place  of  worship,  I 
know  there  are  some  of  you  who  wish  there  were  two  Sundays 
in  the  week ;  and  the  happiest  times  you  ever  have  are  when 
you  are  sitting  in  these  seats  and  joining  in  our  sacred  songs. 

"  Thine  earthly  Sabbaths,  Lord,  we  love." 

There  is  no  verse  which  gives  you  a  better  idea  of  heaven  as  • 
place  than  that  — 

"  Where  congregations  ne'er  break  np, 
And  Sabbaths  have  no  end." 


A  mLiRER  IN  DISGUISE.  83 

Gracious  souls  love  the  place  where  God's  honor  dwelleth,  and 
the  assembling  of  themselves  togerlier  is  always  a  blessed  thing 
to  them  ;  but  occasional  hearers  are  generally  graceless  persons. 
I  know  how  you  spend  your  Sunday.  There  is  the  morning : 
you  are  not  up  very  early ;  it  takes  a  long  time  to  dress  on  a 
Sunday  morning  ;  then  follows  the  Sunday  paper,  with  the  news 
of  the  week,  —  that  must  be  gone  through.  The  wife  has  been 
toiling  hard  all  the  morning  with  the  dinner  ;  what  do  you  care  ? 
Then  there  is  tlie  afternoon,  when  there  is  a  little  more  lolling 
about.  Then  in  the  evening,  there  is  the  walk.  But  the  day, 
after  all,  is  not  very  happy  and  comfortable  ;  and  sometimes  you 
have  wished  there  were  no  Sundays,  except  that  they  give  your 
body  a  little  rest.  You  do  not  fear  God,  nor  do  you  care  for  his 
service.  Nevertheless  I  am  glad  you  have  come  here  to-night ; 
for — who  can  tell?  —  my  Lord,  who  found  out  Jeroboam's  wife, 
can  find  you  out ;  and  though  it  is  many  a  day  since  you  dark- 
ened the  walls  of  God's  sanctuary,  this  shall  be  the  beginning 
of  many  such  days  to  you  ;  and  —  who  can  tell  ?  —  this  may  be 
your  new  birth  night,  when  you  shall  turn  over  a  new  leaf;  nay, 
not  turn  over  a  new  leaf,  but  get  a  new  book  altogether,  and 
find  your  name  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life. 

The  second  remark  about  these  occasional  hearers  is,  that 
when  they  do  come,  thetf  very  generally  come  because  they  are  in 
trouble.  When  Jeroboam's  wife  came  and  spoke  to  the  prophet, 
it  was  because  the  dear  child  was  ill  at  home.  I  know  some 
occasional  hearers  who  go  to  a  place  of  worship  as  people  go  lo 
a  chemist's  shop  ;  that  is,  when  they  want  something,  becaust 
they  do  not  feel  quite  right.  Yes,  your  child  is  very  sick.  You 
have  been  watching  all  day,  and  you  have  thought,  "  I  cannot 
fitand  it  any  longer  :  I  will  just  walk  out  and  go  to  a  place  of 
worship  to-night ;  I  want  something  to  cheer  me."  You  have 
had  such  trials  lately  that  your  wife  said  to  you,  "  John,  we  must 
not  keep  on  in  this  way  any  longer.  It  is  clear  all  we  do  endg 
without  any  prosperity.  We  put  our  money  into  a  bag  which 
is  full  of  holes.  We  spend  it  for  that  which  is  not  bread.  Wo 
labor  for  that  which  doth  not  profit."     So  you  have  come  here 


84  A  ITEAIJER    X  DISGUISE. 

to  see  if  the  Lord  may  have  a  word  of  comfort  through  his  ser» 
vant  wlio  speaks  to  you.  I  can  only  say  you  are  very  welcome 
(o  come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam.  We  are  as  glad  to  see  you 
as  though  you  always  came ;  and  w^e  do  hope  that  this  sorrowful 
aflliction  may  be  overruled  by  God  for  your  lasting  good.  There 
are  persons  who  profess  to  be  atheists ;  but  their  atheism  is  not 
very  deep.  Addison  tells  us  of  a  man  who,  on  board  ship  in  a 
storm,  knelt  down  to  pray,  and  expressed  his  firm  belief  in  a 
God.  When  he  got  ashore  some  one  laughed  at  him  for  it,  and 
he  challenged  the  man  to  a  duel.  They  fought  together,  and  the 
atheist  fell  wounded.  When  the  blood  was  flowing  he  believed 
there  was  a  God,  and  he  began  to  cry  to  God  with  all  his  might 
to  save  him.  The  physician  bound  up  the  wound.  The  man 
put  the  question  to  him,  "  Is  it  mortal  ?  '*  "  No,"  he  says ; 
"  it  is  only  a  Ilesh  wound."  Then  said  the  man,  "  There  is  no 
God  ;  I  am  a  thorough  atheist."  Pie  believed  in  God  when  he 
thought  he  was  going  to  die  ;  the  moment  he  felt  himself  better, 
he  returned  to  his  unbelief.  A  pretty  religion  that  to  live  in, 
and  a  pretty  religion  to  die  with  !  Your  absence  from  God's 
house  will  do  very  well  when  things  go  well  with  you  ;  you  can 
go  out  with  a  young  wife  to  dissipate  in  frivolity  hours  which 
should  be  sacred  to  worship  ;  but  when  sickness  shall  come,  — 
when  affliction  shall  fall  heavily  upon  you,  —  when  you  have  trial 
after  trial,  and  you  yourself  begin  to  get  gray  wath  many  cares, 
and  feeble  and  helpless  with  many  years  ;  and  death  comes  near 
and  casts  his  pale  shadow  across  your  cheek ;  and  strange 
thoughts,  oblivious  of  all  around,  come  over  you  by  day ;  and 
singular  dreams,  which  throw  you  into  the  company  of  the  long 
since  dead,  surprise  you  by  night ;  and  fears  and  frights,  and 
signs  and  calls,  and  bodings  of  imagination,  prove  the  wander- 
ings and  weakness  of  your  brain,  —  then,  but  possibly  not  till 
then,  you  think  of  going  to  the  house  of  God.  lam  glad,  there- 
fore, if  this  trouble  has  visited  you  early,  or  ever  "the  grindera 
cease  because  they  are  few,  and  those  that  look  oat  of  the  win- 
dows be  darkened  ;  "  and  I  am  very  glad  that  you  ha^e  come  to 


A  HEARER  IN  DISGUISE.  85 

the  house  of  God.  Come  in,  thou  -wife  of  Jeroboam ;  for  I  bear 
thee  tidings  from  the  God  of  heaven  to-night. 

There  is  a  third  point,  —  this  woman  would  not  have  cc  me  but 
that  her  husband  sent  her,  on  the  ground  that  he  lead  heard  Ahijah 
■preach  before.  It  was  this  prophet  who  took  Jeroboam's  mantle 
and  rent  it  in  pieces,  and  told  him  he  was  to  be  king  over  thf 
ten  tribes.  That  message  proved  true  ;  therefore  Jeroboam  had 
confidence  in  Ahijah.  There  are  some  of  you  who  at  times  used 
to  hear  the  gospel :  you  have  not  been  of  late ;  but  there  were 
seasons  when  you  did  come  up  to  God's  house  —  ay,  and  times 
when  you  used  to  tremble  under  God's  "Word.  If  I  am  not 
mistaken,  there  are  men  and  women  here  to-night  who  once 
were  conscience-stricken ;  the  Word  of  God  used  to  come  home 
to  you  with  exceeding  great  power,  and  make  you  tremble.  Did 
you  not  even  profess  faith  in  Christ  ?  Why !  some  of  you  were 
very  busy  at  revival  meetings,  trying  to  bring  others  to  the 
Saviour.  But  your  religion  was  like  smoke  out  of  the  chimney  : 
it  has  all  blown  away ;  like  early  mist  it  was  soon  scattered 
when  the  sun  had  risen.  Yet  the  remembrance  of  these  things 
sticks  by  you  now  :  you  cannot  help  it ;  you  feel  there  must  be 
something  in  religion.  The  old  stings  which  were  in  your  con- 
science have  not  been  quite  extracted ;  therefore  at  the  present 
moment  you  are  quite  willing  to  listen  to  the  Word ;  perhaps 
even  hoping  that  it  may  come  with  true  power  now,  and  that 
you  may  after  all  be  saved.  I  wish  I  could  wake  the  echoes  of 
the  slumbering  consciences  of  some  of  you !  Oh  that  I  could 
recall  the  days  of  your  youth,  the  times  of  your  boyhood  and 
girlhood,  when  you  went  up  to  the  assembly  of  the  saints  to 
keep  holy  day !  Those  things  you  cannot  quite  forget.  I  pray 
that  such  remembrances  may  often  turn  your  feet  towards  the 
place  of  worship. 

We  have  brought  out  three  points  of  character,  —  they  were 
persons  of  no  piety  ;  in  trouble  they  sought  the  prophet  ;  and  they 
had  confidence  in  him  because  they  had  heard  him  preach  before. 
But  there  is  one  more  point, —  they  had  one  godly  member  of  their 
family f  and  that  brought  them  to  see  the  prophet.  Their  child  wsw 
% 


86  A  HEARER  IN  DISGUISE. 

Bick  and  ill,  and  it  was  that  which  led  them  to  inquire  at  the 
hands  of  the  Lord.  I  hope  there  is  no  family  here  whi(  h  has 
the  misfortune  to  be  without  a  believer  in  it.  You,  man,  have 
no  fear  of  God  ;  but,  strange  to  say,  the  Lord  has  taken  one  out 
of  your  family  to  be  a  witness  for  him.  That  daughter  of  yours, 
—  vou  sometimes  jeer  at  her,  but  you  know  you  value  her.  You 
used  to  send  her  to  the  Sunday-school  just  to  get  rid  of  her ;  but 
the  Lord  met  with  her :  and  what  a  comfort  she  has  been  to 
you  I  how  glad  she  has  made  your  heart,  though  you  do  not  lcU 
her  so !  Perhaps  the  godly  one  in  the  family  is  like  this  young 
Aliijah  in  the  text:  he  is  sick,  and  near  to  die.  You  can  recollect, 
though  you  do  not  fear  God,  how  the  darling  boy  was  sick  ;  how 
you  sat  by  his  little  bed,  and  took  his  hand  in  yours,  when  it 
was  scai'cely  anything  but  skin  and  bone  ;  how  he  prayed  for 
you  at  night  that  God  would  save  father  and  mother,  and  take 
them  to  heaven  ;  and  how,  just  as  he  died,  he  looked  out  on  you 
with  those  bright  eyes,  so  soon  to  be  filmed  in  death,  and  said 
"  Father,  will  you  not  follow  me  ?  "  Since  that  time  you  have 
often  felt  that  something  is  beckoning  you  up  yonder ;  and  though 
you  have  gone  on  forsaking  God  and  despising  holy  things,  yet 
still  there  is  a  little  link  between  you  and  heaven  which  is  not 
snapped  yet,  and  you  sometimes  feel  it  tugging  at  your  heart. 
I  pray  God  it  may  tug  so  hard  to-night  that  your  heart  may  go 
up  to  God  and  lay  hold  of  Jesus  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  What 
joy  it  causes  me  to  think  that  God  does  call  one  out  of  a  godless 
household !  because  where  there  is  one  there  is  sure  to  be  another 
before  long.  It  is  like  putting  a  light  into  the  midst  of  stubble : 
there  will  soon  be  a  blaze.  I  have  hope  of  a  family  when  one 
child  is  converted;  for  grace  is  like  precious  ointment:  it  spreads 
a  perfume  all  around.  When  a  box  of  fragrant  spice  is  put  into 
a  room,  the  perfume  soon  fills  the  entire  chamber,  then  creeps 
silently  up  the  stairs  into  the  upper  rooms,  and  ceases  not  its 
work  until  it  has  filled  the  whole  house.  So  when  there  is  true 
gi'ace  in  a  house,  the  Holy  Spirit  blesses  its  hallowed  power,  till 
even  the  lodgers  and  family  acquaintances  begin  to  feel  the  in- 
fluence of  it.     Is  it  your  one  praying  child  that  has  brought  you 


A  ITEAllER  IN  DISGUISE.  87 

here  to-niglit?  May  God  grant  that  he  maybe  the  -iii^a  of 
bnnging  you  to  heaven  as  well. 

But  there  is  one  sad  reflection  which  should  alarm  the  occa* 
Fional  hearer.  Though  Jeroboam's  wife  did  come  to  the  prophet 
that  once,  and  heard  tidings,  yet  she  and  her  husband  perished^ 
after  all.  Oh  :  if  there  were  a  register  kept  of  the  many 
thousands  who  come  inside  the  Tabernacle  gates  and  listen  to 
our  voice,  I  am  afraid,  I  am  sadly  afraid  it  would  be  found 
that  there  were  many  who  did  hear  the  tidings,  and  did  tremble 
at  them,  too,  who  nevertheless  contemned  the  counsels  of  the 
Most  High,  turned  not  at  his  rebuke,  went  on  in  their  sin,  and 
perished  without  hope.  Shall  it  be  so  with  any  of  you  ?  Are 
you  to  be  fagots  in  hell  ?  Will  you  make  your  bed  among  the 
flames  ?  My  hearers,  w^ill  you  die  without  God  and  without 
hope  ?  Will  you  leap  into  the  black  unknown,  with  no  bright 
promise  of  the  Saviour  to  cheer  you  in  the  thick  darkness  ? 
May  God  prevent  it !  May  he  be  pleased  to  bring  you  to  Christ, 
the  rock  of  your  salvation,  that  you  may  depend  upon  him  with 
your  whole  heart. 

While  thus  speaking  about  the  occasional  hearer,  an  idea 
haunts  my  mind  that  I  have  been  drawing  somebody's  portrait. 
I  think  there  are  some  here  who  have  had  their  character  and 
conduct  sketched  out  quite  accurately  enough  for  them  to  know 
who  is  meant.  Do  remember  that  if  the  description  fits  you,  it 
is  meant  for  you ;  and  if  you  yourself  have  been  described,  do 
rot  look  about  among  your  neighbors,  and  say,  "  I  think  this  is 
like  somebody  else."  If  it  is  like  you,  take  it  home  to  yourself, 
and  God  send  it  into  the  centre  of  your  conscience,  so  that  you 
cannot  get  rid  of  it. 

TI.     Our  second  consideration  is  the  useless  disguise. 

Jeroboam's  wife  thought  to  herself,  "  If  I  go  to  see  Ahijah,  ag 
he  knows  me  to  be  the  wife  of  Jeroboam,  he  is  sure  to  speak 
angrily,  and  give  me  very  bad  news."  Strange  to  tell,  though 
the  poor  old  gentleman  was  blind,  she  thought  it  necessary  to 
put  on  a  disguise.     So  she  doffed  her  best  garment,  and  put  on 


88  A  IIEAKER  IN  DISGUISE. 

B  country-woman's  russet  gown,  and  away  she  went.  She  left 
tlie  sceptre  and  crown  behind,  and  took  a  basket,  as  though  she 
had  just  come  from  market.  In  this  basket  she  did  not  put  gold, 
jewels,  and  silvei^  but  a  present  such  as  a  fiirmer's  wife  might 
bring ;  there  were  loaves  and  cracknels  and  a  cruse  of  honcj. 
And  as  she  went  along,  she  thought,  "  The  old  gentleman  will 
not  know  me."  She  travelled  through  her  OAvn  dominions,  and 
nobody  knew  her  ;  she  went  into  the  neighboring  dominions  of 
Judah  as  far  as  Shiloh ;  and  she  pleased  her  imagination  with 
the  thought,  "  How  I  shall  deceive  him  !  I  will  ask  him  a  ques- 
tion, as  if  I  were  a  ploughman's  wife.  He  will  not  know  who  I 
am ;  be  will  be  pleased  with  my  present,  and  prophesy  soft  things 
concerning  my  child."  How  great  was  her  surprise !  No  sooner 
did  the  blind  prophet  hear  her  footsteps  than  he  said,  "  Come 
in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam.  Why  feignest  thou  thyself  to  be  an- 
other ?  for  I  am  sent  to  thee  with  heavy  tidings  ? "  How  she 
started  back  with  astonishment  I  She  had  deceived  hundreds 
who  were  blessed  with  eyes  ;  but  here  was  a  man  who  could  not 
be  deceived,  but  found  her  out  before  she  had  opened  her  lips, 
and  recognized  her  before  she  had  time  to  test  her  sorry  artifice, 
or  tell  her  subtle  tale  —  "  Come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam." 

I  do  not  suppose  there  is  anybody  comes  here  disguised  as  to 
dress  to-night,  though  such  things  may  happen.  The  working- 
man,  w^ho  is  afraid  he  shall  be  laughed  at  if  he  be  known,  may 
come  here  in  disguise.  Now  and  then  a  clergyman  may  come 
in,  who  would  not  be  very  comfortable  in  his  conscience  if  it 
were  known  he  did  such  a  thing,  and  so  he  does  not  show  him- 
self exactly  in  his  wonted  garb.  Notwithstanding,  whoever  you 
may  be,  disguised  or  not,  it  is  of  no  use  w^here  God's  gospel  is 
preached.  It  is  a  quick  discerner,  and  will  find  out  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart.  It  will  search  you  out  and  unmask 
your  true  character,  disguise  yourself  as  you  may.  Many  who 
come  to  God's  house  are  not  disguised  in  dress,  but  still  disguised 
in  manner  and  appearance.  How  good  you  all  look  !  "When  we 
sing,  and  you  take  your  books,  how  heavenly -minded !  and 
when  we  pray,  how  reverent  you  are  !     How  your  heads  are  all 


A  HEARER  IN  DISGUISE.  89 

bowed !  —  your  eyes  covered  with  your  hands  !  I  do  not  know 
what  you  all  say  in  your  hearts  when  you  come  in,  and  I  should  not 
like  to  know.  I  do  not  know  how  much  praying  there  is  when 
you  sit  in  a  devout  posture,  though  you  assume  the  attitude  and 
compose  your  countenance  as  those  who  draw  near  to  supplicate 
tlie  Lord.  I  am  afraid  there  are  many  of  you  who  do  not  pray 
a  word  or  present  a  petition,  though  you  assume  the  posture  of 
suppliants.  When  the  singing  is  going  on,  there  are  many  who 
never  sing  a  word  with  the  spirit  and  the  understanding.  In  the 
bouse  of  God  I  am  afraid  there  are  many  who  wear  a  mask : 
stand  as  God's  people  stand,  sit  as  they  sit,  pray  as  they  pray, 
and  sing  as  they  sing,  and  all  the  while  what  are  you  doing  ? 
Some  of  you  have  been  attending  to  your  children  while  we  have 
been  singing  to-night.  Some  of  you  have  been  casting  up  your 
ledger,  attending  to  your  farms,  scheming  about  your  carpenter- 
ing and  bricklaying ;  yet  all  the  while  if  we  had  looked  into 
your  faces  we  might  have  thought  you  were  reverently  worship- 
ping God.  Oh !  those  solemn  faces  and  those  reverent  looks  — 
they  do  not  deceive  the  Most  High  God.  He  knows  who  and 
what  you  are.  As  you  are  in  his  house,  he  sees  you  as  clearly 
as  men  see  through  glass.  As  for  hiding  from  the  Almighty, 
how  can  you  hide  yourself  from  him  ?  As  well  attempt  to  hide 
in  a  glass  case ;  for  all  the  world  is  a  glass  case  before  God. 
When  you  look  into  a  glass  beehive,  you  can  see  the  bees,  and 
everything  they  do  :  such  is  this  world,  a  sort  of  glass  beehive, 
in  which  God  can  see  everything.  The  eyes  of  God  are  on  you 
continually :  no  veil  of  hypocrisy  can  screen  you  from  him. 
There  may  be  some  among  you  who  occasionally  sit  here,  some 
members  of  this  church,  who  after  all  may  feign  to  be  other  than 
they  are.  It  is  a  melancholy  and  a  most  solemn  reflection  that 
there  are  many  who  profess  to  be  Christians  w^ho  are  not  Chris- 
tians. There  was  a  Judas  among  the  twelve  ;  there  was  a 
Demas  among  the  early  disciples  ;  and  we  must  always  expect 
to  find  chaff  on  God's  floor  mingled  with  the  wheat.  I  have 
tried,  the  Lord  knows,  to  preach  as  plainly  and  as  much  home 
to  the  mark  as  I  could,  to  sift  and  try  you  ;  but  for  all  that  tha 
8* 


90  A  HEARER  m  DISGUISE. 

hyix!>crite  will  come  in.  After  the  most  searching  ministry,  there 
are  still  some  who  will  wrap  themselves  about  with  a  mantle  of 
deception.  Though  we  cry  aloud  and  spare  not,  and  bid  you 
lay  hold  ou  eternal  life,  yet,  alas  !  how  many  arc  content  with  a 
mere  name  to  live,  and  are  dead  !  Many  come  here,  and  even 
bold  olHce  in  the  church,  yea,  the  minister  himself  may  even 
|;roach  the  Word,  and  after  all  be  hollow  and  empty.  How 
many,  who  dress  and  look  fair  outside,  arc,  as  Jolm  Bunyan  ?aid, 
only  fit  to  be  tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder-box  !  for  they  are  all 
dry  and  sere  within.  God  save  us  from  a  profession  if  it  be  not 
real.  I  pray  that  we  may  know  the  worst  of  our  case.  If  I 
must  be  damned,  I  would  sooner  go  to  hell  unholy  than  as  a 
liypocritc ;  that  back  door  to  the  pit  is  the  thing  I  dread  most  of 
all.  Oh  !  to  sit  at  the  Lord's  table,  and  to  drink  of  the  cup  of 
devils  !  to  be  recognized  among  God's  own  here,  and  then  to 
find  one's  own  name  left  out  when  he  reads  the  muster-roll  of 
his  servants  !  —  oh  !  what  a  portion  for  eternity !  I  bid  you  tear 
off  this  mask ;  and  if  the  grace  of  God  is  not  in  you,  I  pray  you 
go  into  the  world,  where  will  be  your  fitting  place,  and  abstain 
from  joining  the  church,  if  you  are  not  really  a  member  of  the 
body  of  Christ.  You  see  why  I  urge  this  :  because  no  dressing 
up,  however  neatly  it  may  be  done,  can  conceal  us  from  God. 
Oh !  how  some  who  have  been  fair  on  earth  have  been  startled 
when  they  thought  they  were  going  into  heaven !  They  had 
their  foot  almost  on  the  doorstep,  but  the  angel  came  and  said, 
"  Get  thee  gone,  thou  Avife  of  Jeroboam !  I  know  thee  whom 
thou  art.  Thou  couldst  deceive  the  minister ;  thou  couldst  deceive 
the  deacons ;  thou  couldst  get  baptized  and  join  the  church  ;  but 
thou  canst  not  enter  here.  Get  thee  gone !  thy  portion  is  with 
the  filthy  in  the  pit  of  hell."  Oh,  may  he  never  say  this  to  you 
and  me  !  but  may  we  all  be  so  real  here  that  he  may  say,  "  Come, 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  "  Thou,  God,  seest  me  !  " 
Write  that  on  the  palm  of  thy  hand,  and  look  at  it ;  wake  up  in 
the  morning  with  it ;  sleep  with  it  before  you  on  your  curtaiua. 
•*  Tbou,  God,  seest  me  1 " 


A  HEAREK  IX  DISCI -.SE.  04 

**  Oh  may  this  tliou^'ht  possess  my  jre^st, 
Wlicie'cr  I  rove,  where'er  I  rest; 
Nor  let  mv  weaker  passions  dare 
Consent  to  sin,  for  God  is  there!  " 

ni.     xS'ow  we  come  to  a  close  with  a  few  words  upon  Ibo 

HEAVl    TIDINGS. 

The  >7oman  stood  amazed  as  the  prophet  proceeded  to  expose 
the  iniquity  of  her  husband's  house,  the  certain  judgment  which 
God  would  execute,  and  the  terrible  disgrace  with  which  the 
rxime  of  Jeroboam  should  be  execrated,  because  thej  had  re- 
volted from  God  and  set  up  for  themselves  the  calves  of  Baal. 
As  for  the  child,  respecting  whom  she  had  come  to  inquire,  he 
should  die.  That  death  was  the  quenching  of  a  bright  spark  in 
the  heart  of  the  parents,  but  none  the  less  a  mercy  for  the  youth. 
"  All  Israel  shall  mourn  for  him  and  bury  him ;  for  he  only  of 
Jeroboam  shall  come  to  the  grave,  because  in  him  there  is  found 
some  2^ood  thini?  towards  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  in  the  house  of 
Jeroboam."  Let  me  linger  on  this  part  of  the  narrative  a  moment. 
In  that  wicked  house  there  was  one  bright  gem  upon  which  the 
Lord  put  a  high  value,  —  the  lad  was  taken  from  the  evil  to 
come.  The  kindness  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  his  death,  while 
all  the  judgments  were  reserved  for  his  Cither's  family  Do  I 
not  speak  to  some  of  j  ou,  ungodly  persons,  who  have  lost  your 
little  children,  and  while  you  wept  bitter  tears  as  you  carried 
them  to  the  grave,  you  said,  "  Well,  he  is  better  off;"  or,  "she 
sleeps  in  Jesus  "  ?  Did  you  never  think,  that,  as  for  you,  ye  are 
worse  off  ?  Ye  have  no  hope,  and  are  living  without  God  in  the 
world.  Let  us  picture  Jeroboam  and  his  wife  at  the  tent  of 
their  son  Ahijah.  There  was  everything  to  cheer  the  heart  as 
to  him  who  had  departed ;  but  everj  thing  to  fill  the  soul  with 
gloom  concerning  those  who  remained.  The  like  has  been  the 
case  at  the  funerals  of  your  gracious  little  ones.  We  need  shed 
no  tears  over  the  bier.  Let  us  keep  our  lamentations  for  the 
mourners  who  attend  the  funeral.  Ah  !  but  ye  may  make  the 
reflections  all  your  own.  You,  too,  have  been  without  the  gates 
of  the  city  to  carry  your  offspring  to  the  spot  in  God's  acre 


92  A  HEAKEK  IX  DISGUISE. 

wlienj  thej  now  slumber.  Did  yoa  think  in  that  mournful  houi 
that  the  first  fruits  of  your  household  was  holy  unto  the  Lord  ? 
We  never  cease  to  wonder  that  the  young  should  die.  Yet  it 
has  ever  been  so  ;  and  well  indeed  can  I  believe  that  mercy  jf 
a  sweet-smelling  savor  is  to  be  found  in  those  dispensations  of 
God's  providence  which  so  often  darken  the  windows  of  our 
heart,  and  wither  the  fairest  buds  in  our  garden.  AYhere  of  old 
did  death  strike  its  first  dart  ?  Did  it  pierce  the  heart  of  Adam 
the  sinner,  or  smite  down  the  relentless  Cain  ?  Nay,  but  right- 
eous J^bel  was  the  first  of  men  who  departed  from  earth,  to  be 
absent  from  the  body  and  present  with  the  Lord.  Even  so  have 
ye,  full  many  of  you,  committed  your  children  to  the  dust,  in  an 
assured  hope  for  them,  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  —  a 
hope  which  ye  cannot  cherish  for  yourselves.  O  sinners  I  be 
chary  of  your  tears,  your  sighs,  and  your  groans  ;  pour  them  not 
out  with  such  profuseness  as  a  libation  at  the  graves  of  those 
who  sleep  in  Jesus  and  are  blest  :  ye  will  need  them  all  for 
your  own  souls  presently.  Take  ye  up  a  lamentation  for  your 
own  doom.  Except  ye  repent,  your  funerals,  O  ungodly  ones  ! 
will  call  for  shrill  notes  of  endless  despair. 

Let  me  pause.  I  have  glad  tidings  to  preach  to  some  of  you 
before  I  yet  again  deliver  these  heavy  tidings  to  those  who 
despise  the  Word. 

Is  there  one  soul  here  that  desires  to  be  saved  ?  Sinner,  I 
have  glad  tidings  for  thee.  Here  are  the  words :  "  Whosoever 
will,  let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely."  Though 
thou  hast  been  a  drunkard  or  a  swearer,  though  thou  hast  been 
a  whoremonger  or  a  thief,  yet  there  is  salvation  for  any  man 
who  comes  to  Jesus  Christ  for  it.  And  if  the  Spirit  of  Gc4 
moves  the 3  to  come  now  — 


'  Let  not  conscience  make  you  linger; 

Xor  of  fitness  fondly  dream: 
All  the  fitness  he  requircth. 

Is  to  feci  your  need  of  him; 
This  he  j^ives  you; 

'Tis  his  Spirit's  rising  beam." 


A  nKAfn:ii  in  disguise.  93 

Thou  sajcst,  "  How  can  I  go  to  Christ?"  It  is  no  great  effort; 
it  is,  in  fact,  the  absence  of  all  effort.  Thou  hast  not  to  climb  to 
heaven  to  reach  him,  nor  to  travel  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  find 
him;  never  doubt,  if  the  Holy  Spirit  le  with  thee,  thou  mayst 
find  him  to-night.  The  way  to  be  saved  is  simply  to  trust  Chiist. 
Jesus  Christ  took  the  guilt  of  his  people,  and  carried  it  himself. 
If  thou  trustest  him,  thou  shalt  have  peace,  for  Jesus  took  tliy 
sin.  An  old  servant  was  once  carrying  a  large  bougli  of  a  tree 
to  have  it  cut  into  pieces  to  make  a  fire.  A  .ittle  boy,  one  of 
the  fiimily,  seeing  the  end  of  it  dragging  along  the  ground  and 
making  it  very  heavy,  came  and  took  hold  of  the  end,  and  tho 
burden  grev/  light.  Tlien  said  the  servant,  "  Ah  !  Master  Frank, 
I  wish  you  could  take  hold  of  one  end  of  the  greater  burden 
that  I  have  to  carry :  I  have  a  burden  of  sin  ;  the  more  I  drag 
it  about,  the  heavier  it  becomes.  I  wish  Jesus  Christ  would  take 
hold  of  one  end  of  it."  The  little  boy  said,  "My  mother  told 
me,  yesterday,  that  Jesus  Christ  carries  all  our  sins  ;  therefore 
you  do  not  want  Jesus  Christ  to  drag  one  end  of  it :  he  will  take 
the  whole  of  it."  The  poor  woman,  who  had  been  long  seeking 
rest,  found  it  by  that  remark  of  the  child.  Yes,  Jesus  does  take 
your  sins.  If  thou  trustest  Christ,  this  is  the  evidence  that  all 
thy  sins  are  laid  on  him. 

"  Sinner,  nothing  do, 
Either  p;reat  or  small; 
Jesus  did  it,  did  it  all, 
Long,  long  ago." 

Thy  salvation  is  finished  by  Christ  if  thou  believest.  Not 
only  the  first  strokes,  but  the  finishing  touch  Christ  has  given. 
The  bath  thou  shalt  wash  in,  he  has  filled  it ;  the  robe  thou  shalt 
wear,  he  has  woven  it ;  the  crown  thou  shalt  wear,  he  has  bought 
it ;  the  heaven  thou  shalt  inhabit,  he  has  prepared  it.  "  It  is 
finished  !  "  All  thou  hast  to  do  is  to  wear  it.  Take  it  and  wear 
it.  Accept  it  as  a  gift  of  his  free  grace.  May  God  bring  thee 
into  such  a  mind  that  thou  mayst  be  willing  to  receive  it.  And 
if  thou  art  willing  so  to  receive  it,  take  it,  take  it,  and  go  thy 
way  rejoicing.    Thus  you  see  I  bring  good  tidings  to  seekera. 


94  A  nEARER  IIT  DISGITSR. 

But  I  havL*  a  heavy  message  for  some  of  you.  Let  me  (U- 
liver  it  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  with  deep  solemnity  of  j^arpose. 
Sinner,  unrepenting  sinner,  I  have  heavy  tidings  for  thee.  Thcu 
urt  now  under  God's  wrath.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  thee. 
Ft  is  not  as  though  a  tempest  hovered  in  the  sky :  it  has  gathered 
round  thy  devoted  head !  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every 
day."  Sinner,  God  has  bent  his  bow  and  made  it  ready,  and 
fitted  his  arrow  to  the  string,  and  he  has  pointed  it  at  you.  He 
has  furbished  his  sword  and  made  it  sharp,  and  it  is  sharp  for 
you.  O  barren  fig-tree  !  the  axe  is  laid  at  thy  root !  God  even 
now  looks  upon  thee  with  anger  as  thou  dost  offend  against  him 
and  sin  with  a  high  hand.  Turn  thee  !  turn  thee !  for  it  is  either 
turn  or  burn !  and  God  give  thee  to  turn,  lest  thou  burn  forever. 
I  have  worse  tidings  still,  as  thou  w^ilt  think.  There  is  speedy 
death  for  thee.  I  know  not  how  long  you  may  live ;  but  out  of 
this  vast  assembly  there  is  every  probability  that  one  or  two  of 
us  will  be  in  eternity  before  next  Sunday.  You  can  calculate 
that  as  well  as  I  can.  There  is  a  certain  number  of  deaths  in 
the  population  every  week.  Here  are  several  thousands  gathered 
here  —  some  six  or  seven  thousand  immortal  souls  —  and  we  may 
die ;  but  there  are  some  of  us  who  miist  die.  It  is  rarely  a  week 
passes  without  a  death  of  some  one  in  this  church,  much  rjore 
in  the  congregation.  I  suppose  I  never  did  address  the  'ir.me 
assembly  twice,  and  never  shall ;  and  though  you  were  al?  v/ill- 
ing  to  come  next  Sunday,  yet  there  would  be  some  of  you  who 
could  not  come,  because  you  will  have  appeared  at  the  bar  of 
God.  Prepare  to  meet  your  God.  There  is  no  cholera  abroad ; 
but  death  has  other  weapons.  The  fever  sleeps  ;  but  the  gates 
to  the  grave  are  many,  and  you  may  pass  through  one  of  them 
before  ever  you  are  aware  of  it.  Prepare !  prepare !  because 
he  will  do  this.  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  O  Isn.el ! ''  1 
have  heavy  tidings  for  some  of  you.  I  give  you  warning  to  set 
your  house  in  order,  for  you  must  die  and  not  live.  I  speak  now 
prophetically  of  some  here  present.  Let  them  take  heed  unto 
tlieir  ways,  lest  the  day  of  grace  pass,  and  they  die  ere  lliey  Iktva 
thought  of  Christ. 


A  IIEAKEU  IN  DISGUISE.  96 

I  have  heavier  tidings  still.  After  death,  th^  judgment. 
First  comes  the  skeleton  king ;  and  then  hell  foUoweth  him. 
Oh  !  is  it  true  that  some  of  us  may  be  in  hell  before  another 
week  ?  True,  alas !  too  true  I  I  do  conjure  you,  then,  since 
there  is  this  possibility ;  nay,  since  there  is  an  absolute  certainty 
ihat  ere  long,  except  we  repent,  we  shall  all  likewise  perish,  — 
I  do  conjure  you  think  upon  your  eternal  state.  By  the  wrath 
of  God,  and  by  the  love  of  God  ;  by  your  own  soul,  and  by  the 
value  of  it ;  by  heaven  and  its  joys,  which  you  will  lose ;  by 
hell  and  its  torments,  which  you  must  endure  ;  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus  ;  by  the  groans  and  sweat  of  that  Redeemer  who  delights 
to  receive  sinners,  and  who  declares  that  any  who  come  to  him 
he  will  in  nowise  cast  out,  —  I  pray  you,  as  your  brother  and 
your  friend,  fly,  fly,  fly  to  Jesus  !  May  the  Lord  help  you  to 
trust  him  now.  There,  just  as  you  are,  flat  before  the  cross, 
sinner ;  no  stopping,  no  waiting,  no  preparing  ;  come  to  Jesus  all  in 
your  dishabilU  sill  black  and  filthy  — just  as  you  are.  "  Mercy's 
gate  is  never  shut,  Jesus'  heart  is  never  hard."  His  blood  shall 
never  lose  its  power.  Do  thou  trust  him,  trust  him,  trust  him, 
and  we  will  meei  in  heaven  to  praise  his  name,  world  witliout 
end.    Amea. 


SERMON  V. 


EXPIATION. 

"THOU  BHALT  MAKE  HIS  SOUL  AW  OFFERING  FOR  81N."  —Isaiah  liii.  10. 

Both  Jews  arid  Gentiles  knew  pretty  well  what  an  offering 
for  sin  meant.  The  Gentiles  had  been  in  the  habit  of  offering 
sacrifices.  The  Jews,  however,  had  by  far  the  clearer  idea  of 
it.  And  what  was  meant  by  a  sin-offering  ?  Undoubtedly,  it 
was  taken  for  granted  by  the  offerer,  that  without  shedding  blood 
there  was  no  remission  of  sin.  Conscious  of  guilt,  and  anxious 
for  pardon,  therefore  he  brought  a  sacrifice,  the  blood  of  which 
should  be  poured  out  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  —  feeling  persuaded 
that  without  sacrifice  there  was  no  satisfaction,  and  without 
satisfaction  there  was  no  pardon.  Then  the  victim  to  be  offered 
was,  on  all  occasions,  a  spotless  one.  The  most  scrupulous 
care  was  taken  that  it  sliould  be  altogether  without  blemish; 
for  this  idea  was  always  connected  with  a  sin-offering,  that  it 
must  be  sinless  in  itself ;  and  being  without  spot  or  wrinkle, 
or  any  such  thing,  it  was  held  to  be  a  competent  victim  to  take 
the  offender's  place.  That  done,  the  victim  being  selected,  the 
offerer  put  his  hand  upon  the  sin-offering  —  and  this  indeed  was 
the  essence  of  the  whole  transaction  —  putting  his  hand  on  the 
victim,  he  confessed  his  sin,  and  a  transferrence  took  place,  in 
type  at  least,  from  the  offender  to  the  victim.  He  did,  as  it  were, 
jjut  the  sin  from  off  his  own  shoulders  on  to  those  of  the  lamb, 
or  the  bullock,  or  the  he-goat  wliich  was  now  about  to  be  slaugh- 
tered. And,  to  complete  the  sin-offering,  the  priest  draws  his 
knife  and  kills  the  victim,  which  must  be  utterly  consumed  with 


EXPIATION.  f>7 

fire.  I  say  this  was  always  the  idea  of  a  sin-offering,  —  that  of  a 
perfect  victim  ;  witliout  offence  on  its  own  account,  taking  the 
place  of  the  offender;  the  transferrence  of  the  offender's  sia  to 
that  victim,  and  that  expiation  in  the  person  of  vhe  victim  for  the 
sin  done  by  another. 

Now  Jesus  Christ  has  been  made  by  God  an  offering  for  sin ; 
and  oh  that  to-night  we  may  be  able  to  do  in  reality  what  the 
Jew  did  in  metaphor !  May  we  put  our  hand  upon  the  head  of 
Christ  Jesus  ;  as  we  see  him  offered  up  upon  the  cross  for  piilty 
men,  may  we  know  that  our  sins  are  transferred  to  him,  and  may 
we  be  able  to  cry,  in  the  ecstasy  of  faith,  "  Great  God,  ]  am 
clean ;  through  Jesus*  blood  I  am  clean." 

I.  In  trying  now  to  expound  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  being  an 
offering  for  sin,  we  will  begin  by  laying  down  one  great  axiom ; 
which  is,  that  sin  deserves  and  demands  punishment. 

Certain  divines  have  demurred  to  this.  You  are  aware,  I 
suppose,  that  there  have  been  many  theories  of  atonement ;  and 
every  new  or  different  theory  of  atonement  involves  a  new  or 
different  theory  of  sin.  There  are  some  who  say  that  there  is  no 
reason  in  sin  itself  why  it  should  be  punished,  but  that  God  pun- 
ishes offences  for  the  sake  of  society  at  large.  This  is  what  is 
called  the  governmental  theory,  —  that  it  is  necessary  for  the 
maintenance  of  good  order  that  an  offender  should  be  punished, 
but  that  there  is  nothing  in  sin  itself  which  absolutely  requires 
a  penalty.  Now,  we  begin  by  opposing  all  this,  and  asserting, 
and  we  believe  we  have  God's  warrant  of  it,  that  sin  intrinsically 
and  in  itself  demands  and  deserves  the  just  anger  of  God,  and 
that  that  anger  should  be  displayed  in  the  form  of  a  punishmenl. 
To  establish  this,  let  me  appeal  to  the  conscience  —  I  will  not 
say  to  the  conscience  of  a  man  who  has,  by  years  of  sin,  dwindled 
it  down  to  the  very  lowest  degree,  but  let  me  appeal  to  the  con- 
science of  an  awakened  sinner,  —  a  sinner  under  the  influence  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  And  are  we  ever  in  our  right  senses,  brethren, 
till  the  Holy  Spirit  really  brings  us  into  them  ?  May  it  not  b© 
said  of  each  of  us  as  it  was  of  the  prodigal,  "  He  came  to  him- 
9 


98  EXriATlON. 

self?  "  Arc  wc  not  beside  ouselves  till  the  Holy  Spirit  begins  to 
enlighten  us  ?  "Well,  ask  this  man,  who  is  now  really  in  the 
possession  of  his  true  senses,  whether  he  believes  that  sin  de- 
serves punishment;  and  his  answer  will  be  quick,  sharp,  and 
decisive.  "  Deserve  it,"  saith  he,  "  ay,  indeed  ;  and  the  wonder 
is  that  I  have  not  suffered  it.  "Why,  sir,  it  seems  a  marvel  to  me 
that  I  am  out  of  hell,  and  Wesley's  hymn  is  often  on  my  lips,  — 

'Tell  it  unto  sinners,  tell, 
I  am,  I  am  out  of  hell.' " 

"  Yes,  sir,"  says  such  a  sinner,  "  I  feel  that  if  God  should  smite 
me  now,  without  hope  or  offer  of  mercy,  to  the  lowest  hell,  I 
should  only  have  what  I  justly  deserve  ;  and  I  feel  that  if  I  be 
not  punished  for  my  sins,  or  if  there  be  not  some  plan  found  by 
which  my  &in  can  be  punished  in  another,  I  cannot  understand 
how  God  can  be  just  at  all :  how  shall  he  be  Judge  of  all  the 
earth,  if  he  suff"er  offences  to  go  unpunished  ?  "  There  has  been 
a  dispute  whether  men  have  any  innate  ideas  ;  but  surely  this 
idea  is  in  us  as  early  as  anything,  that  virtue  deserves  reward,  and 
sin  deserves  punishment.  I  think  I  might  venture  to  assert  that 
il*  you  go  to  the  most  degraded  race  of  men,  you  would  still  find, 
at  least,  some  traces  of  this  —  shall  I  call  it  tradition  ?  or  is  it 
not  a  part  of  the  natural  light  which  never  was  altogether 
et;lipsed  in  man  ?  Man  may  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for 
bitter  ;  dai'kness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness  ;  but  this  follows 
him  as  a  dog  at  the  heels  of  its  master, — a  sense  that  virtue  should 
be  rewarded,  and  that  sin  must  be  punished.  You  may  stifle 
this  voice,  if  you  will,  but  tomctimes  you  will  hear  it ;  and  terri- 
bly and  decisively  will  it  speak  in  your  ears  to  say  to  you,  ''  Yes, 
man,  God  must  punish  you  ;  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  cannot 
suffer  you  to  go  scot  free."  Add  to  this  another  matter  ;  namely, 
viiat  God  has  absolutely  declared  his  displeasure  against  sin 
itself.  There  is  a  passage  in  Jeremiah,  the  forty-fourth  chapiter 
and  the  fourth  verse,  where  he  calls  it  "  That  abominable  thing 
*fhich  I  hate."  And  then,  in  Deuteronomy,  the  twenty-fifth 
chapter,  at  the  sixteenth  verse,  he  speaks  of  it  as  the  thing  which 


EXPIATION.  99 

is  an  abomination  to  lilm.  It  must  be  the  character  of  G^  d,  that 
he  has  a  desire  to  do  towards  his  creatures  that  which  is  equitable. 
"  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  If  there  is 
anything  in  them  which  deserves  reward,  rest  assured  he  will  not 
rob  them  of  it ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  will  do  the  right  thing 
with  those  who  have  offended,  and  if  they  deserve  punishment, 
it  is  according  to  the  nature  and  character  of  a  just  and  holy  (rod 
that  punishment  should  be  inflicted.  And  we  think  thervj  is  nr.lh- 
ing  more  f  .<iar  in  Scripture  than  the  truth  that  sin  is  in  itself 
BO  detestable  to  God  that  he  must  and  will  put  forth  all  the  vigor 
of  his  tremendous  strength  to  crush  it,  and  to  make  the  offender 
feel  that  it  is  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing  to  offend  against  the 
Most  High.  Beware,  ye  who  forget  God  in  this  matter,  lest  he 
tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver  you.  Sin  must 
be  punished. 

The  other  idea,  that  sin  is  only  to  be  punished  for  the  sake  of 
the  community,  involves  injustice.  If  I  am  to  be  damned  for  th« 
sake  of  other  people,  I  demur  to  it.  No,  sir:  if  I  am  to  be  pun 
ished,  Justice  says,  at  any  rate,  that  it  shall  be  for  my  own  sins 
but  if  I  am  to  be  eternally  a  castaway  from  God's  presence 
merely  as  a  sort  of  trick  of  government  to  maintain  the  dignity  ol 
his  law,  I  cannot  understand  the  justice  of  this.  If  I  am  to  be 
cast  into  hell  merely  that  I  am  to  teach  to  others  the  tremen 
dousness  of  the  divine  holiness,  I  shall  say  there  is  no  justice  ir 
this  ;  but  if  my  sin  intrinsically  and  of  itself  deserves  the  wratl: 
of  God,  and  I  am  sent  to  perdition  as  the  result  of  this  fact,  1 
close  my  lips,  and  have  nothing  to  say.  I  am  speechless ;  con 
science  binds  my  tongue.  But  if  I  am  told  that  I  am  only  sent 
there  as  a  part  of  a  scheme  of  moral  government ,  and  that  I  am 
Bent  into  torment  to  impress  others  with  a  sense  of  right,  I  ask 
that  some  one  else  should  have  the  place  of  preacher  to  the 
people,  and  that  I  may  be  one  of  those  whose  felicity  it  shall  \jQ 
to  be  preached  to;  for  I  see  no  reason  in  justice  why  I  should  be 
selected  as  the  victim.  Really,  when  men  run  away  from  the 
simplicities  of  the  gospel  in  order  to  make  Jehovah  more  kind. 
it  is  strange  how  unjust  and  unkind  they  make  him.     Sinner, 


i.O  Exr^ATioy. 

OkvI  will  never  destroy  you  merely  to  maintain  his  government, 
cribr  the  good  of  others.  If  you  be  destroyed,  it  shall  be  because 
you  would  not  come  to  him  that  you  might  have  life;  because 
jou  would  rebel  against  him  ;  because  sin  from  stern  necessity 
lid,  as  it  were,  compel  the  attribute  of  divine  justice  to  kindle 
into  vengeance,  and  to  drive  you  from  his  presence  forever. 
Sin  must  be  punished. 

The  reverse  of  this  doctrine,  that  sin  demands  punishnent, 
.Tiay  be  used  to  prove  it ;  for  it  is  highly  immoral,  dangerous,  and 
opens  the  floodgates  of  licentiousness  to  teach  that  sin  can  go 
unpunished.  O  sirs,  it  is  contrary  to  fact.  Look  ye  !  Oh  !  if 
your  eyes  could  see  to-night  the  terrible  justice  of  God  which 
s  being  exeouLcd  tmw,  —  if  these  ears  could  but  hear  it,  —  if  ye 
could  be  appalled  for  a  moment  with 

"  ITio  sullen  gi'oans  and  hollow  moans 
And  shrieks  of  tortured  j^hosts," 

you  would  soon  perceive  that  God  is  punishing  sin !  And  if  sin 
deserve  not  to  be  punished,  what  is  Tophet  but  injustice  on  a 
monstrous  scalu  ?  AYhat  is  it  but  an  infinite  outrage  against 
everything  which  is  honest  and  right,  if  these  creatures  are  pun- 
ished for  anything  short  of  their  own  deserts.  Go  and  preach 
this  in  hell,  and  you  will  have  quenched  the  fire  which  is  forever 
to  burn,  and  the  worm  of  conscience  will  die.  Tell  them  in  hell 
that  they  are  not  punished  for  sin,  and  you  have  taken  away  the 
very  sting  of  their  punishment  And  then  come  to  earth,  and 
go,  like  Jonah  went,  though  vith  another  message  than  Jonah 
carried,  through  the  highways  and  the  broadways,  the  streets 
and  thoroughfares  of  the  exceeding  great  city,  and  proclaim  that 
Bin  is  not  to  be  punished  for  its  own  intrinsic  desert  and  base- 
ness. But  if  you  expect  your  prophecy  to  be  believed,  enlarge 
the  number  of  your  jails,  and  seek  for  fresh  fields  for  transpor- 
tation in  the  interests  of  society ;  for  if  any  doctrine  can  breed 
villains,  this  will.  Say  that  sin  is  not  to  be  punished,  and  you 
have  unhinged  government ;  you  have  plucked  ip  the  very  gate 
of  our  commonweal ;  you  have  been  another  Samson  to  anoLhel 


EXrUTION.  101 

Gaza;  and  we  shall  soon  have  to  rue  the  day.  But,5.r?,  I  need 
not  stop  to  prove  it ;  it  is  written  clearly  upon  the  consciousness 
of  each  man,  and  upon  the  conscience  of  every  one  of  us,  that 
sin  must  be  punished.  Here  are  you  and  I  to-night  brought 
into  this  dilemma.  We  have  sinned;  we  all  like  sheep  have 
gone  astray ;  and  we  must  be  punished  for  it.  It  is  impossible, 
absolutely,  that  sin  can  be  forgiven  without  a  saci  Qce.  God 
must  be  just,  if  heaven  falls.  If  earth  should  past  away  anj 
every  creature  should  be  lost,  the  justice  of  God  muit  stand,  it 
cannot  by  any  possibility  be  suffered  to  be  impugned.  Let  this, 
then,  be  fully  established  in  our  minds. 

You  need  not  to  be  told,  as  for  the  first  time,  that  God  in  his 
infinite  mercy  has  devised  a  way  by  which  justice  (  m  be  satis- 
fied, and  yet  mercy  can  be  triumphant.  Jesus  Christ,  the  only- 
begotten  of  ihe  Father,  took  upon  himself  the  form  v/f  man,  and 
offered  unto  Divine  Justice  that  which  was  accepted  as  an  equiv- 
alent for  the  punishment  due  to  all  his  people. 

II.  Now,  the  second  matter  that  I  wish  to  brinj^'  under  your 
notice  is  this,  —  that  the  provision  and  acceptance  of  a 

SUBSTITUTE  FOR  SINNERS  IS  AN  ACT  OF  GRACE. 

It  is  no  act  of  grace  for  a  person  to  accept  a  pecuniary  debt 
on  my  behalf  of  another  person.  If  I  owe  a  man  twenty  pounds, 
it  is  no  matter  to  him  whatever  who  shall  pay  the  twenty  pounds 
so  long  as  it  is  duly  paid.  You  know  that  you  could  legally  and 
at  once  demand  a  receipt  and  an  acquittance  from  any  one  who 
is  your  creditor,  so  long  as  his  debt  is  discharged,  though  it  is 
discharged  by  another,  and  not  by  you.  It  is  so  in  pecuniary 
matters,  but  it  is  not  so  in  penal  matters.  If  a  man  be  condemned 
to  be  imprisoned,  there  is  no  law,  there  is  no  justice  which  can 
compel  the  lawgiver  to  accept  a  substitute  for  him.  If  the  sov- 
ereign should  permit  another  to  suffer  in  his  stead,  it  must  be 
the  sovereign's  own  act  and  deed.  He  must  use  his  OAvn  discre- 
tion as  to  whether  he  will  accept  the  substitute  or  not ;  and  if  he 
do  so,  it  is  an  act  of  grace.  In  God's  case,  if  he  had  said  in  the 
infinite  sovereignty  of  his  absolute  will,  "I  will  have  no  substi* 
9» 


102  KxriATioN. 

tute,  but  each  man  shall  i-iilFcr  ior  liimself,  he  who  siniieth  shall 
die,"  none  could  have  murmured.  It  was  grace,  and  only  gracd 
which  led  the  divine  mind  to  say,  '•  I  will  accept  of  a  subititute. 
There  shall  be  a  vicarious  suffering  ;  and  my  vengeance  sliall  be 
content,  and  my  mercy  shall  be  gratified." 

Now,  dear  friends,  this  grace  of  God  is  yet  further  magnified 
not  only  in  the  allowance  of  the  principle  of  substitution,  but  ir 
the  providing  of  such  a  substitute  as  Christ  —  on  Christ's  part 
that  he  should  give  up  himself,  the  Prince  of  Life  to  die  ;  the  King 
of  glory  to  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men;  the  Lord  of  angels 
to  be  a  servant  of  servants ;  and  the  Ancient  of  days  to  become 
an  infant  of  a  span  long.     Think  of  the  distance 

"  From  the  liighcst  ihvonc  in  ffloiy 
To  the  cross  of  deepest  woe," 

and  consider  the  unexampled  love  which  shines  in  Christ's  gift 
of  himself.  But  the  Father  gives  the  Son.  "  God  so  loved  the 
world  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  bc- 
lieveth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everla-ting  life."  To 
give  your  wealth  is  something,  if  you  make  3'ourself  poor  ;  but  to 
'^ive  your  child  is  something  more.  When  the  patriot  mother 
tears  her  son  from  her  bosom,  and  cries,  "  Go,  my  first-born,  to 
your  country's  wars  ;  there,  go  and  fight  until  your  country's  flag 
is  safe,  and  the  hearths  and  homes  of  your  native  land  are  secure," 
there  is  something  in  it ;  for  she  can  look  forward  to  the  bloody 
spectacle  of  her  son's  mangled  body,  and  yet  love  her  country 
more  than  her  own  child.  Here  is  heroism  indeed;  but  God 
spared  not  his  own  Son,  his  only-begotten  Son,  but  freely  deliv- 
ered him  up  for  us  all.  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us, 
in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  I  do 
implore  you,  do  not  look  upon  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  as  an  act  o.f 
mere  vengeance  on  the  Father's  part.  Never  imagine,  oh  !  never 
indulge  the  idea,  that  Jesus  died  to  make  the  Father  complacent 
towards  us.  Oh,  no,  dear  friends  :  Jesus'  death  is  tt  e  effect  of 
ovei'whelming  and  infinite  love  on  the  Father's  part ;  and  every 
blow  which  wounds,  everj  infliction  which  occasions  sorrow,  and 


EXPIATION.  103 

every  pang  which  rends  his  heart,  speaks  of  the  Fathcr*s  lovi  as 
much  as  the  joy,  the  everlasting  triumph,  which  now  surrounds 
his  head. 

Let  as  add,  however,  to  this,  that,  although  Jesus  Christ's  dying 
as  a  substitute  does  give  to  him  lawful  right  to  all  promised  priv- 
ileges, and  does  make  him,  as  the  covenant  liead  of  his  people 
a  claimant  of  the  divine  mercy,  yet  it  does  not  render  any  of  thi 
gifts  which  we  receive  from  God  the  less  gifts  from  God.  Christ 
has  died  ;  but  still  everything  that  we  receive  comes  to  us  entirely 
as  a  gratuitous  outflow  of  God's  great  heart  of  love.  Never  think 
you  have  any  claim  to  anything  because  Christ  purchased  it.  If 
you  use  the  word  claim  at  all,  let  it  always  be  in  so  humble  and 
modified  a  sense  that  you  understand  that  you  are  still  receivmg, 
not  of  debt,  but  of  grace.  Look  upon  the  whole  transaction  of  a 
substitute,  and  of  Christ  becoming  the  second  Adam,  as  being  a 
matter  of  pure,  rich,  free,  sovereign  grace,  and  never  indulge  the 
atrocious  thought,  I  pray  you,  that  there  was  justice,  and  justice 
only  here  ;  but  do  magnify  the  love  and  pity  of  God  in  that  he 
did  devise  and  accomplish  the  great  plan  of  salvation  by  an  aton- 
ing sacrifice. 

IIL  But  now  to  go  a  step  further,  and  with  as  much  brevity 
as  possible.  The  Lord  having  established  the  principle  of  sub- 
stitution, having  provided  a  substitute,  and  having  through  him 
bestowed  upon  us  gratuitously  innumerable  mercies,  let  us  observe 
THAT  Jesus  is  the  most  fitting  person  to  be  a  substitute, 

AND  that  his  work  IS  THE  MOST  FITTING  WORK  TO  BE  A  SAT- 
ISFACTION. 

Let  every  sinner  here  who  desires  something  stable  to  fix  his 
faith  upon,  listen  to  these  simple  truths,  which  I  am  trying  to  put 
as  j)lainly  as  possible.  You  do  understand  me,  I  trust,  that  God 
must  punish  sin  ;  that  he  must  punish  you  for  sin  unless  some  one 
else  will  suffer  in  your  stead  ;  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  person  who 
did  suffer  in  the  room  and  place  of  all  those  who  ever  have  be- 
lieved on  him  who  do  believe  in  him,  or  ever  shall  believe  in  him, 
—  making  for  those  who  believe  on  him  a  complete  atonemeBl 


104  ExriATioN 

by  his  substitution  in  their  place.  Now  we  sj  y  that  Clirist  wai 
the  best  person  to  be  a  substitute  :  for  just  consider  what  sort  of 
a  mediator  was  needed.  Most  absolutely  he  must  be  one  who 
had  no  d'  bt  of  his  own.  If  Christ  had  been  at  all  under  the  law 
naturally  if  it  had  been  his  duty  to  do  what  it  is  our  duty  to  do, 
it  is  plain  he  could  only  have  lived  for  himself;  and  if  he  had 
any  sin  of  his  own,  he  could  only  have  died  for  himself,  seeing 
his  obligations  to  do  and  to  suffer  would  have  been  his  just  due 
to  the  righteousness  and  the  vengeance  of  God.  But  on  Christ's 
part  there  was  no  natural  necessity  for  obedience,  much  less  for 
obedience  unto  death.  Who  shall  venture  to  say  that  the  Divine. 
Lord,  amidst  the  glories  of  heaven,  owed  to  his  father  anything/ 
Who  shall  say  it  was  due  to  the  Divine  Father  that  Christ  should 
be  nailed  to  the  accursed  tree,  to  suffer,  bleed,  and  die,  and  then 
be  cast  into  the  grave  ?  None  can  dare  to  say  such  a  thing.  He 
is  himself  perfectly  free,  and  therefore  can  he  undertake  for  others. 
One  man  who  is  drawn  for  the  militia  cannot  be  a  substitute  for 
another  person  so  drawn,  because  he  owes  for  himself  his  own 
personal  service.  I  must,  if  I  would  escape,  and  would  procure 
a  substitute,  find  a  man  who  is  not  drawn,  and  who  is  therefore 
exempt.  Such  is  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  perfectly  exempt  from 
service,  and  therefore  can  volunteer  to  undertake  it  for  our  sake. 
He  is  the  right  person. 

There  was  needed,  also,  one  of  the  same  nature  with  us.  Such 
is  Jesus  Christ.  For  this  purpose  he  became  man,  of  the  sub- 
stance of  his  mother,  very  man,  such  a  man  as  any  of  us.  Han- 
dle him,  and  see  if  he  be  not  flesh  and  bones.  Look  at  him,  and 
mark  if  he  be  not  man  in  soul  as  well  as  in  body.  He  hungers  ; 
lie  thirsts,  he  fears,  he  weeps,  he  rejoices,  he  loves,  he  dies. 
Made  in  all  points  and  like  unto  us,  being  a  man,  and  standing  ex- 
actly in  a  man's  place,  becoming  a  real  Adam,  —  as  true  an  Adam 
as  was  the  first  Adam,  standing  quite  in  the  first  Adam's  place,  — 
he  is  a  fit  person  to  become  a  substitute  for  us. 

Bui  please  to  observe  (see  if  you  cannot  throw  your  grap- 
pling-hooks  upon  this),  the  digrity  of  his  sacred  person  made 
him  the  most  proper  person  for  a  substitute.    A  mere  man  could 


EXriATION.  105 

at  most  only  be  a  substitute  for  one  other  man.  Crush  him  as 
you  will,  and  make  him  feel  in  his  life  every  pang  which  flesh 
is  heir  to,  but  he  can  only  suffer  what  one  man  would  have  suf- 
fered, lie  could  not,  I  will  venture  to  say,  even  then  have  suf« 
fered  an  erjuivalent  for  that  eternal  misery  which  the  ungodly 
deserve ;  and  if  he  were  a  mere  man,  he  must  suffer  precisely 
the  same.  A  difference  may  be  made  in  the  penalty,  w^hen  there 
is  a  difference  in  the  person ;  but  if  the  person  be  the  same,  the 
penalty  must  be  precisely  and  exactly  the  same  in  degee  and  in 
quality.  But  the  dignity  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  dignity  of  his 
nature,  changes  the  whole  matter.  A  God  bowing  his  head,  and 
suffering  and  dying,  in  the  person  of  manhood,  puts  such  a  singu- 
lar efficacy  into  every  groan  and  every  pang  that  it  needs  not  that 
his  pangs  should  be  eternal,  or  that  he  should  die  a  second  death. 
Remember  that  in  pecuniary  matters  you  must  give  a  quid  pro 
quo,  but  that  in  matters  of  penal  justice  no  such  thing  is  de- 
manded. The  dignity  of  the  person  adds  a  special  force  to  the 
substitution  ;  and  thus  one  bleeding  Saviour  can  make  atonement 
for  millions  of  sinful  men,  and  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  can 
bring  multitudes  unto  glory. 

It  needs  one  other  condition  to  be  fulfilled.  The  person  so 
free  from  personal  service,  and  so  truly  in  our  nature,  and  yet 
so  exalted  in  person,  should  also  he  accepted  and  ordained  of  God. 
Our  text  gives  this  a  full  solution,  in  that  it  says,  "j^  shall 
make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin."  Christ  did  not  make  him- 
self a  sin-offering  without  a  warrant  from  the  Most  High  :  God 
made  him  so.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  U3 
all"  It  was  the  sovereign  degree  of  heaven  which  constituted 
Christ  the  great  substitute  for  his  people.  No  man  taketh  this 
office  upon  himself.  Even  the  Son  of  God  stoopeth  not  to  this 
burden  uncalled.  He  was  chosen  as  the  covenant-head  in  elecr 
tion;  he  was  ordained  in  the  divine  decree  to  stand  for  hi? 
people.  God  the  Father  cannot  refuse  the  sacrifice  which  he 
has  himself  appointed.  "  My  son,"  said  good  old  Abraham, 
**  God  shall  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt-offerh»g,"     H|f 


106  EXPIATIOX. 

has  done  so  in  the  Saviour ;  and  what  God  provides,  God  must 
and  will  accept. 

I  wish  to-night  that  I  had  power  to  deal  with  this  doctrine  as 
I  would.  Poor  trembling  sinner,  look  up  a  moment.  Dost  thou 
jjce  him  there  —  him  whom  God  hath  set  forth  ?  Dost  thou  see 
1dm  in  proper  flesh  and  blood  fastened  to  that  tree  ?  See  how 
the  cruel  iron  drags  through  his  tender  hands  !  Mark  how  the 
rough  nails  are  making  the  blood  flow  profusely  from  his  feet ! 
See  how  fever  parches  his  tongue,  and  dries  his  whole  body  lik^, 
a  potsherd  !  Hearest  thou  the  cry  of  his  spirit,  which  is  suffer- 
ing more  than  his  body  suffers  —  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  ?"  This  is  none  other  than  God's  only-begot- 
ten Son ;  this  is  he  who  made  the  worlds ;  this  is  the  express 
image  of  his  Father's  person,  the  brightness  of  Jehovah's  glory  ! 
"What  thinkest  thou,  man  ?  Is  there  not  enough  there  to  satisfy 
God?  Truly  it  has  satisfied  God  :  is  there  not  enough  there  to 
satisfy  thee  ?  Cannot  thy  conscience  rest  on  that  ?  If  God's 
appointed  Christ  could  suffer  in  thy  stead,  is  it  not  enough  ? 
What  can  Justice  ask  more  ?  Wilt  thou  now  trust  Christ  with 
thy  soul  ?  Come,  now,  sir,  wilt  thou  now  fall  flat  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross,  and  rest  thy  soul's  eternal  destiny  in  the  pierced  hands 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ?  If  thou  wilt,  then  God  has  made  him 
to  be  a  sin-offering  for  thee  ;  but  if  thou  wilt  not,  beware,  lest  he 
whom  thou  wouldst  not  have  to  be  thy  Saviour  should  become 
thy  Judge,  and  say,  "  Depart,  thou  cursed  one,  into  everlasting 
6re  in  hell!" 

IV.     Wo  come  now  to  our  fourth  remark,  — that  Christ'3 

WORK,  AND  THE  EFFECTS  OF  THAT  WORK,  ARE  NOW  COMPLETE. 

Christ  becomes  a  substitute  for  us.  We  have  seen  how  fit 
and  proper  a  person  he  was  to  be  such.  We  hinted  that  from 
the  dignity  of  his  person  the  pains  he  suffered  were  a  good 
and  sufficient  equivalent  for  our  own  suffering  on  account  of  sin. 
But  now  the  joyous  truths  come  up  that  Christ's  work  is  fin- 
ished. Christ  has  made  an  atonement  so  complete  that  he  never 
need  suffer  again.     No  more  drops  of  blood ;  uo  more  pangs  (vf 


EXl»IAT10!f.  107 

jeart ;  no  more  bitterness  and  darkness,  ^\  itii  exceeding  heavi- 
ness, even  unto  death,  are  needed. 

"  'Tis  done  —  the  creat  transaction's  doi  e." 

The  death-knell  of  the  penalty  rings  in  the  dying  words  of 
the  Saviour,  —  "  It  is  finished."  Do  you  ask  for  a  proof  of  this  ? 
Remember  that  Jesus  Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead.  If  he 
had  not  completed  his  work  of  penalty-suffering,  he  would  have 
been  left  in  the  tomb  till  now ;  our  preaching  would  have  been 
in  vain,  and  your  faith  would  have  been  in  vain  ;  ye  would  have 
been  yet  in  your  sins.  But  Jesus  rose.  God's  sheriff's  officer 
let  him  out  of  "  durance  vile  "  because  the  account  had  been 
discharged,  and  God's  great  Court  of  King's  Bench  sent  down 
the  mittimus  to  let  the  captive  go  free.  More  than  that :  Christ 
has  ascended  up  on  high.  Think  you  he  would  have  returned 
thither  with  unexpiated  sin  red  upon  his  garments  ?  Do  you 
suppose  he  would  have  ascended  to  the  rest  and  to  the  reward 
of  an  accomplished  work  ?  What !  sit  at  his  Father's  right  hand 
to  be  crowned  for  doing  nothing,  and  rest  until  his  adversaries 
are  made  his  footstool,  when  he  has  not  performed  his  Father's 
will !  Absurd  !  Impossible  !  His  ascension  in  stately  pomp, 
amidst  the  acclamations  of  angels,  to  the  enjoyment  of  his 
Father's  continued  smile,  is  the  sure  proof  that  the  work  is 
complete. 

Complete  it  is,  dear  brethi^en,  not  only  in  itself,  but,  as  I  said, 
in  its  effects  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  there  is  now  complete  pardon 
for  every  soul  which  believeth  in  Christ.  You  need  not  do  any- 
thing to  make  the  atonement  of  Christ  sufficient  to  pardon  you. 
It  wants  no  eking  out.  It  is  not  as  if  Christ  had  put  so  much 
into  the  scale  and  it  was  quivering  in  the  balance  ;  but  your  sins, 
for  all  their  gravity,  utterly  ceased  their  pressure  through  the 
tremendous  \\  eight  of  his  atonement.  He  has  outweighed  the 
pf^naliy,  and  given  double  for  all  your  sins.  Pardon,  full  and 
free,  is  now  presented  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  proclaimed  to  every 
creature  under  heaven,  for  sins  past,  for  sins  present,  and  for 
Bins  to  come  ;  for  blasphemies  and  murders  ;  for  drunkenness  and 


108  EXPIATION. 

whoredom;  for  all  manner  of  sin  under  hea\cn.  Jesus  Christ 
hath  ascended  up  on  high,  and  exalted  he  is  that  he  ma/  give 
repentance  and  remission  of  sin.  Ye  have  no  need  of  shillings 
to  pay  the  priests  ;  nor  is  baptismal  water  wanted  to  effect  the 
pardon :  there  is  no  willing,  doing,  being,  or  suifering  of  yours 
required  to  complete  the  task.  The  blood  has  filled  the  foun- 
tain full :  tJiou  hast  but  to  wash  and  be  clean,  and  thy  sins  shaP 
be  gone  forever. 

!  Justification,  too,  is  finished.  You  know  the  difference.  Par- 
don takes  away  our  filth,  but  then  it  leaves  us  naked  ;  justifica- 
tion puts  a  royal  robe  upon  us.  Now  no  rags  of  yours  are 
wanted ;  not  a  stitch  of  yours  is  needed  to  perfect  what  Christ 
has  done.  He  whom  God  the  Father  hath  accepted  as  a  sin- 
offering  hath  perfected  forever  thosvj  who  are  set  apart.  Ye  are 
complete  in  Christ.  No  tears  of  yours,  no  penance,  no  personal 
mortifications,  nay,  no  good  works  of  yours,  are  wanted  to  make 
yourself  complete  and  perfect.  Take  it  as  it  is.  O  sirs !  may 
you  have  grace  to  take  it  as  it  is  freely  presented  to  you  in  the 
gospel.  "  He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned  ;  "  "  There 
is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ 
Jesus."  Trust  Christ  —  implicitly  trust  Christ  ;  and  all  that  he 
did  shall  cover  you,  while  all  that  he  suffered  shall  cleanse  you. 
Remember,  too,  that  acceptance  is  finished.  There  are  the 
Father's  arms,  and  here  are  you,  a  black  sinner  to-night.  I  do 
not  know  you,  but  it  may  be  you  have  trodden  the  pavements, 
or  you  have  gone  further  than  that,  and  added  drunkenness  to 
shame ;  you  have  gone  to  the  lowest  vice,  perhaps  to  robbery,  — 
who  knoweth  what  manner  of  person  may  step  into  this  place  ?  — 
but  the  great  arms  of  the  Eternal  Father  are  ready  to  save  you 
as  you  arc,  because  the  great  work  of  Christ  has  effected  all  that 
is  wanted  before  God  for  the  acceptance  of  the  vilest  sinner. 
How  is  it  that  the  Father  can  embrace  the  prodigal?  Why !  he 
is  fresh  from  the  swine-trough !  Look  at  him  :  look  at  his  rags  ; 
liow  foul  they  are  I  We  would  not  touch  them  with  a  pair  of 
tongs !  Take  him  to  the  fire  and  burn  the  filth  !  Take  him  to 
llie  bath  and  wash  him  !     That  lip  is  not  fit  to  kiss  ;  those  filthj 


EXPLiTION.  109 

lips  cannot  be  permitted  to  touch  that  holy  cheek  of  the  glorious 
Father!  Ah  !  but  it  is  not  so.  While  he  was  yet  a  great  way 
off.  his  iather  saw  him,  —  rags  and  poverty  and  sin  and  filth  and 
all,  —  and  Jie  did  not  wait  till  he  was  clean,  but  ran  and  fell  upoa 
his  neck  and  kissed  him,  just  as  he  was.  How  could  he  do  that  ? 
Why,  the  paral^le  does  not  tell  us  ;  for  it  did  not  run  on  with  the 
subject  to  introduce  the  atonement.  But  this  explains  it,  —  when 
God  accepts  a  sinner,  he  is,  in  fact,  only  accepting  Christ.  He 
looks  into  the  sinner's  eyes,  and  he  sees  his  own  dear  Son's  image 
there,  and  he  takes  him  in.  As  we  have  heard  of  a  good  woman, 
who,  whenever  a  poor  sailor  came  to  her  door,  whoever  he  might 
be,  would  always  make  him  welcome,  because,  she  said,  •'  I  think 
I  see  my  own  dear  son  who  has  been  these  many  years  away, 
and  I  have  never  heard  of  him  ;  but  whenever  I  see  a  sailor,  I 
think  of  him,  and  treat  the  stranger  kindly  for  my  son's  sake." 
So  my  God,  when  he  sees  a  sinner  long  for  pardon  and  desirous 
of  being  accepted,  thinks  he  sees  his  Son  in  him,  and  accepts 
him  for  his  Son's  sake.  Do  not  imagine  that  we  preach  a  gospel 
in  this  place  for  respectable,  godly  people.  No :  we  preach  a 
gospel  here  for  sinners.  I  heard,  the  other  day,  from  one  wha 
told  me  that  he  believed  we  were  saved  by  being  perfect,  that 
when  we  committed  sin  we  at  once  fell  out  of  God's  mercy. 
Well  now,  supposing  that  were  true,  it  would  not  be  worth  mak- 
ing a  large  splutter  about.  It  would  not  be  worth  angels  singing 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest "  about  it,  I  should  think.  Any 
fool  might  know  that  God  would  accept  a  perfect  man.  Cut 
this  is  the  thing  of  marvel,  for  which  heaven  and  earth  shall 
ring  with  the  praises  of  the  Mediator,  that  Jesus  Christ  died  for 
the  ungodly, — that  Jesus  Christ  gave  himself  for  their  sin ;  not  for 
their  righteousness,  not  for  their  good  deeds.  If  he  had  looked 
to  all  eternity,  he  could  not  have  seen  anything  in  us  worthy  of 
BO  great  a  suffering  as  that  which  he  endured  ;  but  he  did  it  for 
charity's  sake, — for  love's  sake. 

And  now,  in  his  name,  —  oh  that  I  could  do  it  with  his  voice 
Rnd  with  his  love  and  with  his  fer^'or !  —  I  do  beseech  you  to  lay 
hold  upon  him.     Nc  matter  who  you  may  be,  I  will  not  exclude 
10 


110  EXPIATION. 

you  from  tlie  invitation.  Hast  (liou  piled  thy  sins  together  tiU 
they  seem  to  provoke  lieaven  ?  Do  thy  sins  touch  the  clouds  ? 
Yet  come,  and  welcome ;  for  God  has  provided  a  sin-offering. 
Has  man  cast  thee  out?  Say,  poor  woman,  does  the  dreary 
river  seem  to  invite  thee  to  the  fatal  plunge  ?  God  has  not  cast 
thee  out.  O  thou  who  feelest  in  thine  own  body  the  effect  of  thy 
sin,  till  thou  art  loathing  thyself,  and  wishing  thou  hadst  never 
been  born  —  perhaps  thou  sayest,  like  John  Bunyan,  "  Oh  that  1 
had  been  a  frog,  or  a  toad,  or  a  snake,  sooner  than  have  been  a 
man,  to  have  fallen  into  such  sin,  and  to  have  become  so  foul '  " 
Have  courage,  sinner  ;  have  courage.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake 
his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts ;  and  let  him 
return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him  ;  and  to 
our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon."  Do  not  doubt  this 
message :  God  has  sent  it  to  you.  Do  not  reject  it :  you  will 
reject  your  own  life  if  you  do.  Turn  you  at  his  rebuke !  It  is 
a  loving  voice  which  speaks  to  you,  and  that  would  speak,  per- 
haps, better  and  more  forcibly  if  it  were  not  choked  with  love. 
I  do  implore  thee,  sinner,  come  to  Jesus  !  If  thou  art  damned, 
it  is  not  for  want  of  invitation.  If  thou  wilt  perish,  it  is  not  for 
want  of  earnest  pleading  with  thee.  I  tell  thee,  man,  there  is 
nothing  of  thine  own  wanted.  All  this  is  found  in  the  sin-offer- 
ing ;  for  thou  needest  not  find  it.  There  is  no  merit  of  thine 
needed ;  there  is  merit  enough  in  Christ.  Is  it  not  the  old 
proverb  that  you  are  not  to  take  coals  to  Newcastle  ?  Do  not 
take  anything  to  Christ.  Come  as  you  are — just  as  you  are. 
Nay,  tarry  not  till  you  go  out  of  this  house.  The  Lord  enable 
you  to  believe  in  Jesus  now,  to  take  him  now  as  a  complete  and 
finished  salvation  for  you,  though  you  may  be  the  most  sunken 
and  abandoned  and  hopeless  of  all  characters.  Why  did  God 
provide  a  sin-offering  but  for  sinners  ?  He  could  not  have  wanted 
to  provide  it  if  there  was  no  necessity.  You  have  a  great  neces- 
gity.  You  have,  shall  I  say  ?  compelled  him  to  it.  Your  sins 
have  nailed  Christ's  hands  to  the  cross,  —  your  sins  have  pierced 
his  heai-t ;  and  his  heart  is  not  pierced  in  vain,  nor  are  those 
hands  nailed  there  for  naught.     Christ  will  have  you,  sinner  i 


EXPIATION.  in 

Christ  will  ha\e  you.  There  are  some  of  God's  ekct  lere,  and 
he  will  have  you.  You  shall  not  stand  out  against  him.  Al- 
mighty love  will  have  you.  He  has  determined  that  you  shall 
not  do  what  you  have  vowed.  Your  league  with  hell  is  broken 
to-night,  and  your  covenant  with  death  is  disannulled.  The  pre;^ 
shall  not  be  taken  from  the  mighty  ;  the  lawful  captive  shall  ba 
delivered.  The  Lord  will  yet  fetch  you  up  from  the  depths  of 
the  sea.  Oh  I  what  a  debtor  to  grace  you  will  be !  Be  a  debtor 
to  that  grace  to-night.  Over  head  and  ears  in  debt,  plunge  your- 
self by  a  simple  act  of  trusting  in  Jesus,  and  you  are  saved. 

Pray,  ye  who  know  how  to  pray,  that  this  message  may  be  made 
effective  in  the  hand  of  God.  And  you  who  have  never  prayed 
before,  God  help  you  to  pray  now.  May  he  now  be  found  of 
them  who  sought  not  for  him,  and  he  shall  have  the  glory,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 


SERMON  VI. 


TIIE  BARLEY-FIELD   ON   FIUE. 

•ABSALOM  8EKT  FOR  JOAB,  TO  HAVE  SEIfT  HIM  TO  THE  KIKO;  BUT  HE  WOITLI 
WOT  COME  TO  him:  AKD  WHEN  UE  SEXT  AGAIIf,  THE  SECOND  TIME,  HK  WOULX 
NOT  COME.  THEKEFOr.E  HE  SAID  UNTO  HIS  SERVANTS,  SEE,  JOAB'S  FIEL:>  Ifi 
BEAR  MINE,  AND  UE  HATH  BARLEY  THERE  :  GO  AND  SET  IT  ON  FIRE.  AND 
ABSALOM'S  SERVANTS  SET  THE  FIELD  ON  FIRE.  THEN  JOAB  ABOSX,  AHB 
CAME  TO  ABSALOM  UNTO  HIS  HOUSE,  AND  SAID  UNTO  HIM,  WHEREFORE  HAVl 
THY  SERVANTS   SET  MY  FIELD  ON  FIRE?  "  —  2  Samuel  xiv     29-^1. 

You  remember  the  historical  narrative.  Absalom  had  fled 
from  Jerusalem  under  fear  of  David's  anger.  Pie  was  after  a 
time  permitted  to  return  ;  but  he  was  not  admitted  into  the  pres- 
ence of  the  king.  Earnestly  desiring  to  be  restored  to  his  former 
posts  of  honor  and  favor,  he  besought  Joab  to  come  to  him,  in- 
tending to  request  him  to  act  as  mediator.  Joab,  having  lost 
much  of  his  liking  for  the  young  prince,  refused  to  come  ;  and, 
though  he  was  sent  for  repeatedly,  he  declined  to  attend  at  his 
desire.  Absalom  therefore  thought  of  a  most  wicked,  bui  most 
effective  plan  of  bringing  Joab  into  his  company.  He  bade  his 
servants  set  Joab's  field  of  barley  on  fire.  This  brough*  Joal 
down  in  high  wrath  to  ask  the  question,  "  "Wherefore  have  thy 
servants  set  my  field  on  fire?"  Thiswas  all  that  Absalom 
wanted ;  he  wished  an  interview,  and  he  was  not  scrupulous  as 
to  the  method  by  which  he  obtained  it.  The  burning  of  the 
barley -field  brought  Joab  into  his  presence,  and  Absalom's  enda 
were  accomplished. 

Omitting  the  sin  of  the  deed,  we  have  here  a  picture  of  whal 


TIIE  BARLEY-FIELD  ON  IIKE.  113 

is  often  done  by  our  gracious  God,  w^itli  the  wisest  and  best  de 
sign.  Often  he  sendeth  for  us,  not  for  his  profit,  but  for  ours 
Pie  would  have  us  come  near  to  him  and  receive  a  blessing  at  hig 
hands ;  but  we  are  foolish  and  cold-hearted  and  wicked,  and  we 
will  not  come.  He,  knowing  that  we  will  not  come  by  any  other 
means,  sendeth  a  serious  trial :  he  sets  our  barley-field  on  fire ; 
which  he  has  a  right  to  do,  seeing  our  barley-fields  are  far  moro 
his  than  they  are  ours.  In  Absalom's  case  it  was  wrong ;  in 
God's  ca&3  he  has  a  right  to  do  as  he  wills  with  his  own.  He 
takes  away  from  us  our  most  choice  delight,  upon  which  we  have 
set  our  heart,  and  then  we  inquire  at  his  hands,  "Wherefore 
contendest  thou  with  me  ?  Why  am  I  thus  smitten  with  thy 
rod  ?  What  have  I  done  to  provoke  thee  to  anger  ?  "  And 
thus  we  are  brought  into  the  presence  of  God,  and  we  receive 
blessings  of  infinitely  more  value  than  those  temporary  mercies 
which  the  Lord  had  taken -from  us.  You  will  see,  then,  how  I 
intend  to  use  my  text  this  morning.  As  the  pastor  of  so  large 
a  church  as  this,  I  am  constantly  brought  into  contact  with  all 
sorts  of  human  sorrow.  Frequently  it  is  poverty,  —  poverty  too 
which  is  not  brought  on  by  idleness  or  vice,  but  real  poverty,  and 
most  distressing  and  afflicting  poverty  too,  because  it  visits  those 
who  have  fought  well  the  battle  of  life,  and  have  struggled  hard 
for  years,  and  yet  in  their  old  age  scarce  know  where  bread  shall 
come  from,  except  that  they  rest  upon  the  promise  — "  Thy  bread 
shall  be  given  thee,  and  thy  water  shall  be  sure."  Messengers 
come  to  me  sometimes  as  fast  as  they  came  to  Job,  bearing  sad 
tidings  concerning  one  and  another  of  you.  There  comes  one  — 
"I  entreat  your  piayers  for  me,  sir:  God  has  been  pleased  to 
take  away  my  wife  with  a  stroke  ;  she  now  lies  in  the  cold 
grave."  Another  cries,  "  O  sir,  my  wife  is  sore  sick,  and  the 
physician  saith  that  there  is  but  little  hope  :  pray  for  her,  that 
she  may  be  strengthened  in  the  hour  of  her  departure ;  and  for 
me,  that  I  may  be  enabled  to  kiss  the  Master's  rod."  Then 
comes  another  —  "  My  son  is  afflicted ;  he  is  to  undergo  a  pain- 
ful operation ;  pray  that  the  surgeon's  knife  may  not  be  his  death, 
but  that  he  may  be  enabled  to  bear  up  under  it."  And  when  I 
10* 


114  THE   DAKl.KY-riELD   ON   riRE. 

have  sympathized  with  a  company  of  sad  complaints  like  these, 
another  set  of  messengers  will  be  waiting  at  the  door.  ITow  few 
families  are  long  without  severe  trials !  hardly  a  person  escapes 
for  any  long  season  without  tribulation.  "With  impartial  hand 
sorrow  knocks  at  the  door  of  the  palace  and  the  cottage.  Why 
all  this  ?  The  Lord,  we  know,  "  Doth  not  afliiet  willingly,  nor 
grieve  the  children  of  men  "  for  naught ;  why  can  it  be  that  he 
employs  so  many  frowning  servants,  and  sendeth  out  so  often  hia 
usher  of  the  black  rod  ?  Wherefore  can  it  be  ?  Perhaps  I  may 
be  able  to  give  the  fitting  answer  to  this  very  proper  inquiry, 
and  it  may  be  that  I  may  be  as  serviceable  to  the  afflicted  as 
the  jailer  was  to  Paul  and  Silas  when  he  washed  their  stripes. 

I  shall  use  my  text,  first  of  all,  in.  reference  to  believers  ;  and 
then,  with  regard  to  the  uncojwerted.     Oh  for  help  from  above  ! 

I.  First  of  all,  brethren,  let  us  use  the  text  with  refer- 
ence  TO    BELIEVERS    IN  ChRIST. 

My  beloved  brethi-en  and  sisters  is  Jesus  Christ,  we  cannot 
expect  to  avoid  tribulation.  If  other  men's  barley-fields  are  not 
burned,  ours  will  be.  If  the  Father  uses  the  rod  nowhere  else, 
he  will  surely  make  his  true  children  smart.  As  Paul  saith, 
and  as  our  hymnster  hath  riiymed  it  — 

"Bastards  ma}''  escape  the  rod, 
Sunk  in  earthly  vain  dch'ght, 
But  the  true-born  child  of  God 

Must  not —  would  not  if  he  might." 

Your  Saviour  hath  left  you  a  double  legacy,  "  In  the  world  yo 
Bhall  have  tribulation  ;  but  in  me  ye  shall  have  peace."^  You 
enjoy  peace  ;  you  must  not  expect  that  you  shall  escape  without 
the  privilege  of  the  tribulation.  All  wheat  must  be  thre^lied  : 
and  God's  threshing-floor  witnesses  to  the  weight  of  the  flail  as 
much  as  any  other.  Gold  must  be  tried  in  the  fire  ;  and  truly 
the  Lord  hath  a  fire  in  Zion,  and  his  furnace  in  Jerusalem. 

But  you,  beloved,  have  four  very  special  comforts  in  all  you? 
trouble.     You  have,  first,  this  sweet  reflection,  that  there  is  n^ 


THE  BARLEY-FIELD  ON  FIRE.  115 

eurse  in  your  cross.  Christ  was  made  a  curse  for  us,  ami  we  call 
his  cross  the  accursed  tree  ;  but,  truly,  since  Jesus  hung  upon  it, 
it  is  most  blessed ;  and  I  may  now  say  concerning  the  cross  of 
affliction,  "  Blessed  is  every  man  who  hangeth  on  this  tree.*' 
The  cross  may  be  very  heavy,  especially  while  it  is  grecm,  and 
our  shoulders  unused  to  cai-rying  it ;  but  remember,  though  there 
may  be  a  ton-weight  of  sorrow  in  it,  there  is  not  a  single  ounce 
of  the  curse  in  it.  God  doth  never  punish  his  children  in  the 
sense  of  avenging  justice  :  he  chastens  as  a  father  does  his  child, 
but  he  doth  never  punish  his  redeemed  as  a  judge  doth  a  crimi- 
nal. It  were  unjust  to  exact  punishment  from  redeemed  souls, 
since  Christ  has  been  punished  in  their  place  and  stead.  How 
shall  the  Lord  punish  twice  for  one  offence  ?  If  Christ  took  my 
sins  and  stood  as  my  substitute,  then  there  is  no  wrath  of  Grod 
for  me ;  and  though  my  cup  may  be  bitter,  yet  there  cannot  be 
a  single  drop  of  the  wormwood  of  Almighty  wrath  in  it.  I  may 
have  to  smart,  but  it  will  never  be  beneath  the  lictor's  rods  of 
justice,  but  under  the  Parent's  rod  of  wisdom.  O  Christian !  how 
sweet  this  ought  to  be  to  you  !  There  was  a  time  when  you 
were  under  conviction  of  sin,  —  when  you  thought  you  would  rot 
in  a  dungeon  or  burn  at  the  stake  most  cheerfully,  if  you  could 
but  get  rid  of  the  sense  of  God's  wrath ;  and  will  you  now  be- 
come impatient  ?  The  wrath  of  God  is  the  thunderbolt  which 
scathes  the  soul ;  and  now  that  you  are  delivered  from  that  tre- 
mendous peril,  you  must  not  be  overwhelmed  with  the  few  show- 
ers and  gales  which  Providence  sends  you.  A  God  of  love 
inflicts  our  sorrows :  he  is  as  good  when  he  chastens  as  when  he 
caresses :  there  is  no  more  wrath  in  his  afflicting  providences 
than  in  his  deeds  of  bounty.  God  may  seem  unkind  to  unbelief, 
but  faith  can  always  see  love  in  his  heart.  Oh !  what  a  mercy 
that  Sinai  has  ceased  to  thunder  I  Lord,  let  Jesus  say  what  he 
will,  so  long  as  Moses  is  quieted  forever.  Strike,  Lord,  if  thou 
wilt,  now  that  thou  hast  heard  the  Saviour's  plea  and  justified 
our  souls. 

You  have,  secondly,  another  ground  of  comfort ;  namely,  thai 
your  trouilei  are  all  apportioned  to  you  by  divine  tmdom  and  lov^i 


116  THE   DARLEYTIELD   ON  FIR''.. 

A^  for  their  number,  if  He  appoint  tlem  ten,  they  never  can  }^ 
eleven.  As  for  their  weight,  He  who  weigheth  the  mountains  in 
scales  and  the  hills  in  a  balance,  takes  care  to  measure  your 
troubles,  and  you  shall  not  have  a  grain  more  than  his  infinite 
wisdom  sees  fit.  The  devil  may  seem  to  be  turned  loose  upon 
you,  but  remember  he  is  always  a  chained  enemy.  There  is  a 
tether  to  every  trouble,  and  beyond  that  tether  it  can  never  stray. 
Nebuchadnezzar  may  heat  the  furnace  seven  times  hotter  than 
usual,  but  God's  thermometer  measures  the  exact  degree  of  heat ; 
and  beyond  it  the  flame  cannot  rage,  even  though  a  thousand 
Nebuchadnezzars  should  swear  themselves  out  of  breath  in  their 
fury.  Consider  everything  that  you  have  to  suffer  as  the  appoint- 
ment of  wisdom,  ruled  by  love,  and  you  will  rejoice  in  all  your 
tribulation,  knowing  that  it  shall  reveal  to  you  the  loving-kind- 
ness and  wisdom  of  your  God. 

You  have  a  third  consolation  ;  namely,  that  under  your  cross 
1/ou  have  many  special  comforts.  There  are  cordials  which  God 
giveth  to  sick  saints  which  he  never  putteth  to  the  lips  of  those 
who  are  in  health.  Dark  caverns  keep  not  back  the  miners,  if 
they  know  that  diamonds  are  to  be  found  there :  you  need  not 
fear  suffering,  when  you  remember  what  riches  it  yields  to  your 
soul.  There  is  no  hearing  the  nightingale  without  night,  and 
the-e  are  some  promises  which  only  sing  to  us  in  trouble.  It  is 
in  the  cellar  of  affliction  that  the  good  old  wine  of  the  kingdom 
is  stored.  You  shall  never  see  Christ's  face  so  well  as  when  all 
-sthers  turn  their  backs  upon  you.  When  you  have  come  into 
such  confusion  that  human  wisdom  is  at  a  nonplus,  then  shall  you 
see  God's  wisdom  manifest  and  clear.  Oh  the  love-visits  which 
Christ  payeth  to  his  people  when  they  are  in  the  prison  of  their 
trouble  !  Then  he  layeth  bare  his  very  heart  to  them,  and  com- 
forts them  as  a  mother  doth  her  child.  They  sleep  daintily  who 
have  Jesus  to  make  their  beds.  Suffering  saints  are  generally 
the  most  flourishing  saints ;  and  well  they  may  be,  for  they  are 
Jesus'  special  care.  If  you  would  find  a  man  whose  lips  drop 
with  pearls,  look  t'or  one  who  has  been  in  the  deep  Avaters.  We 
seldom  learn  much  except  as  it  is  beaten  into  us  by  the  rod  is 


THE  bar:.ey-field  on  fire.  117 

Christ's  schoolhouse,  under  Madam  Troulle.  G(  id's  vines  owe 
more  to  the  pruning-knifc  than  to  any  other  tool  in  the  garden  ; 
superfluous  shoots  are  sad  spoilers  of  the  vines.  But  even  whila 
we  carry  it,  the  cross  brings  present  comfort :  it  is  a  dear,  dear 
cross,  all  hung  with  roses,  and  dripping  with  sweet-smelling 
myrrh.  Rutherford  seemed  at  times  in  doubt  which  he  loved 
best,  Christ  or  his  cross  ;  but  then,  good  man,  he  only  loved  the 
cross  for  his  Lord's  sake.  Humble  souls  count  it  a  high  honor 
to  be  thought  worthy  to  suffer  for  Christ's  sake.  If  ever  heaven 
be  opened  at  all  to  the  gaze  of  mortals,  the  vision  is  granted  to 
those  who  dwell  in  the  Patmos  of  want  and  trouble.  Furnace- 
joys  glow  quite  as  warmly  as  furnace-flames.  Sweet  are  the 
uses  of  adversity,  and  sweet  are  its  accompaniments  when  the 
Lord  is  with  his  people. 

"  'Mid  the  gloom  the  vivid  lightnings 
With  increasing  brightness  play; 
'Mid  the  thoi-n-brukc  beauteous  flowerets 
Look  more  beautiful  and  gay. 

**  So,  in  darkest  dispensations 
Doth  my  faithful  Lord  appear, 
With  his  richest  consolations 
To  reanimate  and  cheer." 

But  then,  —  and  this  is  the  point  to  which  my  text  brings  me, 
and  all  I  have  already  said  is  going  astray  from  it,  —  you  have 
this  comfort,  that  your  trials  work  your  lasting  good  by  bringing 
you  nearer  and  nearer  to  your  God.  This  point  wc  will  illus- 
trate by  the  narrative  before  us.  My  dear  friends  in  Christ 
Jesus,  our  heavenly  Father  often  sends  for  us  and  we  icill  not 
come.  He  sends  for  us  to  exercise  a  more  simple  faith  in  him. 
We  have  believed,  and  by  faith  we  have  passed  from  death  unto 
life,  but  our  faith  sometimes  staggers.  We  have  not  yet  reached  to 
Abraham's  confidence  in  God  ;  we  do  not  leave  our  worldly 
cares  with  him,  but,  like  Martha,  we  cumber  ourselves  with  much 
serving.  We  have  faith  to  lay  hold  upon  little  promises ;  but 
we  are  ofttimes  afraid  to  open  our  mouths  wide  though  God  h*? 


118  THE  BARLEY-FIELD  ON  FIRE 

promised  to  fill  tlicm.  He  therefore  sendeth  to  us.  *•'  Come,  my 
child,"  saith  he  ;  '•  come  and  trust  me.  The  ved  is  rent :  entc 
into  my  presence,  and  approach  boldly  to  the  throne  of  my  grace 
I  am  worthy  of  thy  fullest  confidence :  cast  thy  cares  on  me. 
Come  thou  into  the  sunlight,  and  read  thy  title  clear.  Shake 
thyself  from  the  dust  of  thy  cares,  and  put  on  thy  beautiful  gar- 
ment of  faith."  But,  alas !  though  culled  with  tones  of  love  to 
the  blessed  exercise  of  this  comforting  grace,  we  will  not  come. 
At  another  time  he  calls  us  to  closer  communion  with  himself. 
We  have  been  sitting  on  the  doorstep  of  God's  house,  and  he 
bids  us  advance  into  the  banqueting-hall  and  sup  with  him ;  but 
we  decline  the  honor.  He  has  admitted  us  into  the  inner  cham* 
bers,  but  there  are  secret  rooms  not  yet  opened  to  us ;  he  in- 
vites us  to  enter  them,  but  we  hold  back.  Jesus  longs  to  have 
near  communion  with  his  people.  This  is  that  which  gives  him 
"  to  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  to  be  satisfied."  It  must  be 
a  joy  to  a  Cliristian  to  be  with  Christ ;  but  it  is  also  a  joy  to  Jesus 
to  be  with  his  people,  for  it  is  written,  "  His  delights  were  with 
the  sons  of  men."  Now,  one  would  think  that  if  Christ  did  but 
beckon  with  his  finger  and  say  to  us,  "  Draw  nigh,  and  commune 
with  me,"  we  should  fly  as  though  we  had  wings  to  our  feet ; 
but,  instead  thereof,  we  are  cleaving  to  the  dust :  we  have  too 
much  business ;  we  have  too  many  carking  cares  ;  and  we  forget 
to  come,  though  it  is  our  Beloved's  voice  w^hich  calls  us  to  him- 
self. Frequently  the  call  is  to  more  fervent  prayer.  Do  you 
not  feel  in  yourself,  at  certain  seasons,  an  earnest  longing  for 
private  prayer  ?  You  have  felt  as  if  you  could  not  be  at  ease 
until  you  could  draw  near  unto  God  and  tell  him  your  wants ; 
and  yet,  may  be,  you  have  quenched  the  Spirit  m  that  respect, 
and  still  have  continued  without  nearness  of  access  to  God. 
Every  day  the  Lord  bids  his  people  come  to  him  and  ask  what 
they  will,  and  it  shall  be  done.  He  is  a  bounteous  God,  w^ho  sits 
upon  the  mercy-seat,  and  he  delights  so  give  to  his  people  the 
largest  desires  of  their  hearts  ;  and  yet,  shame  upon  us,  we  live 
without  exercising  this  power  of  prayer,  and  we  miss  the  pleni- 
tude of  blessing  which  would  come  cmt  of  that  cornucopia  of 


THE  BAKLEY-FIKLD  ON  Fn.E.  119 

grace,  —  prevailing  prayer  Avith  God.  Ah,  brethren,  we  are 
verily  guilty  here,  the  most  of  us.  The  Master  sendeth  to  us  to 
pray,  and  we  will  not  come.  Often,  too,  he  calls  us  to  a  higher 
state  of  piety.  From  this  pulpit  I  have  labored  to  stir  you  up  to 
nobler  attainments ;  I  have  besought  you  to  rest  no  longer  sat- 
isfied with  your  dwarfish  attainments,  but  to  press  forward  to 
things  more  sublime  and  heavenly.  Have  I  not  cried  unto  you, 
beloved,  and  bid  you 

"  Forget  the  steps  already  trod, 
And  onward  urge  your  wa>  "? 

I  am  persuaded  there  are  Christians  as  much  in  grace  beyond 
ordinary  Christians  as  ordinary  Christians  are  beyond  the  pro- 
fane. There  are  heights  which  common  eyes  have  never  seen, 
much  less  scaled.  Oh  !  there  are  nests  among  the  stars  where 
God's  own  saints  dwell,  and  yet  how  many  of  us  are  content  to 
go  creeping  along  like  worms  in  the  dust !  Would  that  we  had 
grace  to  cleave  the  clouds  and  mount  into  the  pure  blue  sky  of 
tellowship  with  Christ !  We  do  not  serve  God  as  we  should. 
\S  e  are  cold  as  ice,  when  we  should  be  like  molten  metal,  burn- 
ing oui  way  through  all  opposition.  We  are  like  the  barren 
Sahara,  when  we  iihould  be  blooming  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord. 
We  give  to  God  pence,  when  he  deserveth  pounds  ;  nay,  deserv- 
eth  our  heart's  blood  to  be  coined  in  the  service  of  his  church 
and  of  his  truth.  Oh  !  we  are  but  poor  lovers  of  our  sweet  Lord 
Jesus  ;  not  fit  to  be  his  servants,  much  less  to  be  his  brides.  If 
he  had  put  us  in  the  kitchen  to  be  scullions,  I  fear  we  are  scarce 
fit  for  the  service ;  and  yet  he  hath  exalted  us  to  be  bone  of  his 
bone  and  flesh  of  his  flesh,  married  to  him  by  a  glorious  marriage 
covenant.  O  brethren  !  God  often  calleth  us  to  higher  degrees 
of  piety,  and  yet  we  will  not  come. 

JSTow,  why  is  it  that  we  permit  our  Lord  to  send  for  U3  so 
often,  without  going  to  him  ?  Let  your  own  heart  give  the  rea- 
son, m  a  humble  confession  of  your  offences.  O  my  brethren, 
we  never  thought  we  should  have  been  so  bad  as  we  are.  If 
Ml  angel  had  told  us  that  we  should  be  so  indifferent  towards 


120  THE  BARLET-rrELD  ON  FIRE. 

Clirist,  we  should  have  said,  as  Ilazacl  did  to  EHsha,  "  Is  thy 
servant  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing  ?  "  If  any  of 
us  could  have  seen  our  own  history  written  out  by  a  prophet's 
pen,  we  should  have  said,  "  No ;  it  cannot  be.  If  Christ  forgivrq 
me,  I  must  love  him  ;  if  he  be  pleased  to  make  me  his  own 
brother,  I  must  serve  him  ;  if  I  am  the  recipient  of  such  splen- 
did mercies,  I  must  do  something  commensurate  with  his  bounty." 
And  yet,  hitherto,  here  we  have  been  ungrateful,  unbelieving, 
and  even  refusing  to  listen  to  his  call,  or  come  at  his  bidding. 
He  has  said,  "  Seek  ye  my  face ;  "  and  our  heart  did  not  say, 
"  Lord,  thy  face  will  I  seek."  Because  of  all  this,  because  we 
will  not  listen  to  the  gentle  call  of  God,  there  cometh  trouble, 
just  as  there  came  the  burning  of  the  barley-field  of  Joab  be- 
cause he  would  not  visit  the  young  prince.  Trouble  comes  in 
all  sorts  of  shapes.  Little  doth  it  matter  what  form  it  cometh 
in,  if  it  doth  but  answer  the  purpose  of  making  us  obey  the 
divine  calling. 

Some  Christians  have  their  trial  in  the  shape  of  sichiess :  they 
drag  about  with  them  a  diseased  body  all  their  lives  ;  or  they 
are  suddenly  cast  upon  a  bed  of  sickness,  and  they  toss  to  and 
fro,  by  night  and  by  day,  in  pain  and  weariness.  This  is  God's 
medicine  ;  and  when  God's  children  have  it,  let  them  not  think 
it  is  sent  to  kill  them,  but  to  heal  them.  Much  medicine  which 
the  physician  gives  makes  the  man  ill  for  a  time  :  he  is  worse 
with  it  than  he  would  have  been  without  it ;  but  if  he  be  a  clever 
physician,  he  knows  that  this  is  the  consequence  of  the  medicine  ; 
and  thus  he  is  not  at  all  alarmed-  by  the  pain  of  his  patient, 
but  he  expects  that  all  this  will  work  for  good,  and  hunt  out, 
as  it  were,  the  original  disease.  When  the  Lord  sends  us  sore 
eickness,  it  for  a  time  perhaps  makes  our  former  spiritual  infirm- 
ities grow  worse  ;  for  sickness  often  provoketh  impatience  and 
murmurings  against  God,  but  in  due  time  our  proud  spirits  will 
be  broken,  and  we  shall  cry  for  mercy.  As  a  file  takes  off  mst, 
£0  does  sickness  frequently  remove  our  deadness  of  heart.  The 
diamond  hath  much  cutting,  but  its  value  is  increased  thereby ; 
Hikd  so  with  the  belies  er  under  the  visitations  of  God.     I  have 


THE  BARLEY-FIELD  OX  FIRE.  121 

heard  say  of  many  ministers  that  they  preanh  best  after  sickness, 
till  their  people  have  scarce  regretted  all  the  pains  they  have 
felt  when  they  have  found  ho<v  savory  and  full  of  marrow  have 
been  their  words.  My  brother,  if  you  will  not  come  to  Grod 
without  it,  he  will  send  you  a  sick-bed  that  you  may  be  carried 
on  it  to  him.  If  you  will  not  come  running,  he  will  make  you 
come  limping.  If  yod  will  not  come  while  your  eyes  are  bright 
and  while  your  countenance  is  full  of  health,  he  will  make  you 
come  when  your  eyes  are  dull  and  heavy,  and  your  complexion  is 
sallow  and  sad  But  come  you  must ;  and  if  by  no  other  means, 
sickness  shall  be  the  black  chariot  in  which  you  shall  ride. 

Losses,  too,  are  frequently  the  means  God  uses  to  fetch  home 
his  wandering  sheep  ;  like  fierce  dogs,  they  worry  the  wanderers 
back  to  the  shepherd.  There  is  no  making  Hons  tame  if  they 
are  too  well  fed  ;  they  must  be  brought  down  from  their  great 
strength,  and  their  stomachs  must  be  lowered  a  bit,  and  then 
they  will  submit  to  the  tamer's  hand ;  and  often  have  we  seen 
the  Christian  rendered  obedient  to  his  Lord's  will  by  straitness 
of  bread  and  hard  labor.  When  rich  and  increased  in  goods, 
many  professors  carry  their  heads  much  too  loftily  and  speak 
much  too  boastfully.  Like  David,  they  boast,  "  My  mountain 
standeth  fast ;  it  shall  never  be  moved."  When  the  Christian 
groweth  wealthy,  is  in  good  repute,  hath  good  health,  and  a 
happy  family,  he  too  often  admits  Mr.  Carnal  Security  to  feast 
at  his  table.  If  he  be  a  true  child  of  God,  there  is  a  rod  pre- 
paring for  him.  Wait  awhile,  and  it  may  be  you  will  see  his 
substance  melt  away  as  a  dream.  There  goes  a  portion  of  his 
estate  —  how  soon  the  acres  change  hands!  There  goes  a  part 
of  his  business  —  no  profits  will  ever  come  to  him  again  in  that 
direction.  That  debt  yonder,  a  dishonored  bill  over  there  — 
how  fast  his  losses  come  !  where  will  they  end  ?  Now,  as  these 
embarrassments  come  in  one  after  another,  he  begins  to  be 
distressed  about  them,  and  betakes  himself  to  his  God.  O 
blessed  waves,  that  wash  the  man  on  the  rock  of  salvation  ! 
O  blessed  cords,  though  they  may  cut  the  flesh,  if  they  draw 
us  to  Jesus  I  Losses  in  business  are  often  sanctified  to  our 
11 


122  THE  BARLET-FIELD  ON  FIRE. 

Eoulo  enricliing.  If  you  will  not  come  to  the  Lord  full-handtd, 
you  shall  come  empty.  If  God  in  his  grace  findcth  no  other 
means  of  making  you  to  honor  him  among  men  —  if  you  cannot 
honor  him  on  the  pinnacle  of  riches  —  he  will  bring  you  down 
lo  the  valley  of  poverty. 

Bereavements,  too,  —  ah  !  what  sharp  cuts  of  the  rod  we  get 
with  these,  my  brethren !  "Ne.  know  how  the  Lord  sanctifies 
these  to  the  bringing  of  his  people  near  to  himself.  How  glad 
we  should  be  to  think  that  Christ  himself  once  suifered  bereave- 
ments as  we  have  done.  Tacitus  tells  us  that  an  amber  ring 
was  thought  to  be  of  no  value  among  the  Romans  till  the  em- 
peror took  to  wearing  one,  and  then  straightway  an  amber  ring 
was  held  in  high  esteem.  Bereavements  might  be  looked  upon 
as  very  sad  things  ;  but  when  we  recollect  that  Jesus  wept  over 
Ids  friend  Lazarus,  henceforth  they  are  choice  jewels,  and  special 
favors  from  God.  Christ  wore  this  ring  :  then  I  must  not  blush 
to  wear  it.  Many  a  mother  has  been  stirred  up  to  a  holier  life 
by  the  death  of  her  infant,  —  many  a  husband  has  been  led  to 
give  his  heart  more  to  Christ  by  the  death  of  his  wife.  Do  not 
departed  spirits,  like  angels,  beckon  us  up  to  heaven  ?  "  Come, 
come  away,"  they  say ;  "  this  is  not  your  rest.  I  once  could  build 
upon  the  same  tree,  and  sing  upon  the  same  bough ;  but  now  I 
am  taken  from  you,  —  now  I  rest  in  heaven.  Come  hither,  thou 
who  wast  once  my  fond  mate — come  hither,  for  all  the  trees  where 
thou  art  building  are  marked  for  the  axe  ;  therefore  come  now, 
and  dwell  with  me !  "  Yes,  we  must  look  upon  our  new-made 
graves  in  this  light,  and  pray  the  Lord  to  dig  our  hearts  with 
the  funeral  spade,  and  bury  our  sins  as  we  bury  our  departed 
ones.  Trials  in  your  family,  in  your  children,  are  another  form 
of  the  burning  barley-field.  I  do  not  know,  brethren,  but  I 
think  a  living  cross  is  much  heavier  to  carry  than  a  dead  one. 
I  know  some  among  you  who  have  not  lost  your  children  :  I 
could  have  wished  ye  had,  for  they  have  lived  to  be  your  grief 
and  sorrow.  Ah,  young  man !  better  that  your  mother  should 
have  seen  you  perish  in  the  birth  than  that  you  should  live  to 
disgrace  your  father's  name.     Ah,  man !  it  were  better  fur  yoa 


THE  BARLEY -FIEf.D  ON  FmK.  123 

that  the  procession  hatl  gone  winding  through  the  j-treets,  bear- 
ing your  corpse  clown  to  the  grave,  than  that  you  should  live  to 
blaspheme  your  mother's  God,  and  laugh  at  the  Book  which  is 
her  treasure.  It  were  better  foi  you  that  you  had  never  been 
bom,  and  better  for  your  parents  too.  Ah  !  but,  dear  friends, 
even  these  are  meant  to  draw  us  nearer  to  Christ.  We  must 
not  make  idols  of  our  children ;  and  we  dare  not  do  it,  when  we 
see  how  manifestly  God  shows  us  that,  like  ourselves,  they  are 
by  nature  children  of  wrath.  Sharper  than  an  adder's  tooth  is 
an  unthankful  child;  but  the  venom  is  turned  to  medicine  in 
God's  hand.  God's  birds  would  often  keep  down  in  the  grass 
in  their  nests ;  but  he  fills  their  nests  full  of  thorns,  and  then  up 
they  fly,  and  sing  as  a  lark  as  they  mount  towards  heaven.  You 
must  look  upon  these  family  trials  as  invitations  from  God  — 
sweet  compulsion  to  make  you  seek  his  face.  Many  are  afflicted 
in  another  way,  which  is  perhaps  as  bad  as  anything  else,  —  by 
a  deep  depression  of  spirit  They  are  always  melancholy ; 
they  know  not  why.  There  are  no  stars  in  the  night  for  them, 
and  the  sun  gives  no  light  by  day  :  melancholy  has  marked  them 
for  her  own  ;  but  even  this,  I  think,  is  often  the  means  of  keep- 
ing some  of  them  nearer  to  God  than  they  would  be.  You 
know  there  are  some  of  our  English  plants  which  greatly  affect 
damp,  moist  places  under  trees.  If  the  sun  were  to  shine  in  their 
faces  they  would  die.  Perhaps  some  minds  are  of  the  same 
order.  Too  many  sweets  make  children  sick,  and  bitters  are  a 
good  tonic.  A  veil  is  needed  for  some  delicate  complexions,  lest 
the  sun  look  too  fiercely  on  them :  it  may  be,  these  mourners 
need  the  veil  of  sorrow.  It  is  good  that  they  have  been  afflicted, 
even  with  this  heavy  depression  of  spirit,  because  it  keeps  them 
near  their  God.  Then  there  is  that  other  affliction,  the  hiding 
of  God's  countenance  —  how  hard  to  bear,  but  how  beneficial ! 
If  we  will  not  keep  near  to  our  Lord,  he  is  sure  to  hide  his  face. 
You  have  seen  a  mother  walking  out  with  her  little  child,  when 
it  has  just  learned  to  walk  ;  and  as  she  goes  through  the  street, 
the  little  one  is  for  running  sometimes  to  the  right,  and  some- 
times to  the  left,  and  so  the  mother  hides  herself  a  moment  | 


124  THE  BARLEY-FIELD  ON  FIRE. 

then  the  ch  Id  looketh  round  for  the  mother,  and  begins  to  cry, 
and  then  out  comes  the  mother.  "What  is  the  effect  ?  Why,  il 
will  not  run  away  from  mother  any  more  :  it  is  sure  'o  keep 
hold  of  her  hand  afterwards.  So,  when  we  get  wandering  from 
God,  he  hides  his  face,  and  then,  since  we  have  a  love  for  Llm, 
we  begin  crying  after  him ;  and  when  he  shows  his  face  once 
more,  we  cling  to  him  the  more  lovingly  ever  afterwards.  So 
the  Lord  is  pleased  to  bless  our  troubles  to  us. 

Now,  Christian,  what  about  all  this  ?  Why,  just  this.  Are 
you  under  any  sharp  trouble  now  ?  Then  I  pray  you  go  to  God 
as  Joab  went  to  Absalom.  "  "Wherefore  have  thy  servants  set 
my  field  on  fire  ?  "  "  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with 
me."  "  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  tiy  me,  and 
know  my  thoughts  ;  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me, 
and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting."  Make  this  a  special  sea- 
gon  of  humbling  and  heart-searching.  Now  let  every  besetting 
sin  be  driven  out.  When  God  sweeps,  do  you  search.  When 
you  arc  under  the  rod,  it  is  yours  to  make  a  full  confession  of 
past  offences,  and  pray  to  be  delivered  from  their  power  in  the 
future.  Or,  have  you  no  trial  to-day,  my  brother  ?  Then  see 
if  there  be  not  something  which  may  provoke  God  to  send  one, 
and  begin  now  to  purge  yourself  from  all  filthiuess  of  the  flesh 
and  of  the  spirit  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Prevention  is  better  than 
a  cure  ;  and  sometimes  a  timely  heart-searching  may  save  us  many 
a  heart-smanin^.  Let  us  see  to  that,  then.  Or  have  we  been 
afflicted,  and  is  the  affliction  over  now  ?  Then,  let  us  say  with 
David,  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray ;  but  now  have  I 
kept  thy  word."  Let  us  bless  God  for  all  that  he  has  done,  say- 
ing, "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted  ;  "  let  us  join 
together  in  one  common  hymn  of  praise  for  all  the  loving-kind- 
ness which  God  has  been  pleased  to  show  us  in  the  sharp  cuts 
of  his  rod.  I  have  said  enough,  I  think,  to  the  Christian,  to 
work  out  the  little  picture  before  us.  God  has  burned  your 
barley -field  dear  friends :  now  go  to  him,  and  the  closer  you  can 
»pproacl  to  him,  and  the  mere  firmly  you  cod  clmg  to  him,  the 


THE   DAKLKY-FIIXL)    OX  FIRE.  125 

better  for  jonr  soul's  heal  ill  and  comfort  all  your  life.      At  the 
last,  you  and  I  shall  sing  to  the  praise  of  our  afflicting  God. 

"  All  I  meet  I  find  assists  me 
In  my  path  to  heavenly  jo  ;■; 
Where,  though  trials  now  attend  me, 
Trials  never  more  annoy. 

"  Blest  there  with  a  weij::ht  of  glory, 
Still  the  path  I'll  ne'er  forget. 
But,  exulting,  cry,  It  led  me 
To  my  blessed  Saviour's  seat.*' 

II.  A  few  words  —  God  make  them  mighty  —  to  the  sin- 
ner shall  form  the  second  part  of  our  discourse.  God  also  has 
sent  for  you.  O  unconverted  man  !  God  has  often  sent  for  you. 
Early  in  your  childhood  your  mother's  prayers  sought  to  woo 
you  to  a  Saviour's  love,  and  your  godly  fathers  first  instructions 
were  as  so  many  meshes  of  the  net  in  which  it  was  desired  that 
you  should  be  taken ;  but  you  have  broken  through  all  these, 
and  lived  to  sin  away  early  impressions  and  youthful  promises. 
Since  that  }ou  have  often  been  called  under  the  ministry.  Our 
sermons  have  not  been  all  shots  wide  of  the  mark,  but  sometimes 
a  hot  shot  has  burnt  its  way  into  your  conscience  and  you  have 
been  made  to  tremble  ;  but,  alas  !  the  trembling  soon  gave  way 
before  your  old  sins.  Hitherto  you  have  been  called,  but  you 
refused.  The  hands  of  mercy  have  been  stretched  out,  and  you 
have  not  regarded  them.  You  have  had  calls,  too,  from  your 
Bible,  from  religious  books,  from  Christian  friends.  Holy  zeal 
is  not  altogether  dead,  and  it  shows  itself  by  looking  after  your 
welfare.  Young  man,  your  shopmate  has  sometimes  spoken  to 
you  ;  young  woman,  your  companion  has  wept  over  you.  There 
are  some  of  you  now  present  who  have  been  called  by  the  most 
loving  of  voices,  in  connection  with  our  classes.  Both  in  our 
Sunday-school  and  in  the  catechumenical  classes  there  are  men 
and  women  with  deep  love  to  the  souls  of  those  committed  to 
them,  —  tender  hearts,  weeping  eyes,  —  and  you  have  been  wept 
ovei  that  you  might  come  to  Christ ;  but  still  all  the  agency  Chat 
11* 


126  THE  BAPJ.FA'-FIELD  ON  FIRE. 

has  been  employed  has  been  up  to  this  moment  withojt  effect: 
you  are  a  stranger  to  the  God  who  made  you,  and  an  enemy  to 
Christ  the  Saviour. 

Well,  if  these  gentle  means  will  not  do,  God  will  employ 
other  agencies.  Perhaps  he  has  tried  them  already.  If  not, —  if 
he  intendcth  in  the  divine  decree  your  eternal  salvation,  —  he  will, 
as  sure  as  you  are  a  living  man,  use  stronger  ways  with  you ; 
an<l  if  a  word  will  not  do,  he  will  come  with  a  blow,  though  he 
lovetli  to  try  the  power  of  the  word  first.  You,  too,  my  hearer 
unconverted  and  unsaved,  have  had  your  trials.  You  weep  as 
well  as  Christians.  You  may  not  weep  for  sin,  but  sin  shall 
make  you  weep.  You  may  abhor  repentance  because  of  its 
sorrow,  but  you  shall  not  escape  sorrow,  even  if  you  escape  re- 
pentance. You  have  had  your  sickness.  Do  you  not  remember 
it,  when  in  the  silent  night  you  heard  the  watch  ticking  out,  as 
you  thought,  your  last  few  minutes,  and  foretelling  your  doom  ? 
Do  you  remember  those  weary  days,  when  you  tossed  from  side 
to  side,  and  did  but  shift  the  place  and  keep  the  pain  ?  Man, 
can  you  recollect  your  vows,  which  you  have  lived  to  break, 
and  your  promises  with  which  you  lied  unto  the  eternal  God  ? 
Then  the  Sabbath  would  be  your  delight,  you  said,  if  you  were 
spared,  and  the  house  of  God  and  the  people  of  God  should  be 
dear  to  you,  and  you  would  seek  his  face.  But  you  have  not 
done  so :  you  have  broken  your  covenant,  and  have  despised 
your  promise  made  to  God.  Or,  what  is  it,  have  you  had  losses 
in  business  ?  You  began  life  well  and  hopefully,  but  nothing  has 
prospered  with  you.  I  am  not  sorry  for  it ;  for  I  remember  it  is 
the  wicked  who  spreadeth  himself  like  a  green  bay  tree,  and  it 
is  concerning  the  reprobate  that  it  is  written,  "  There  are  no 
bands  in  their  death  ;  but  their  strength  is  firm.  They  are  not 
in  trouble  as  other  men  ;  neither  are  they  piagued  like  other 
men."  I  am  glad  that  you  are  plagued.  I  would  sooner  see 
you  whipped  to  heaven  than  coached  to  hell.  Doubtless  many 
go,  like  Agag,  delicately  to  their  hewing  in  pieces,  while  others 
go  sorrowing  to  eternal  glory.  You  have  liad  losses  :  what  are 
these  but  God's  rough  messengers  to  tell  you  that  there  is  noth- 


THE  BARLET-FIELD  ON  FIRE.  127 

ing  beneath  the  sky  worth  living  for,  to  wean  you  from  the  breasU 
of  earth  and  cause  you  to  look  for  something  more  substantial 
than  worldly  ri-ches  can  afford  you  ?  And  you,  too,  have  lost 
friends ;  may  I  recall  those  graves,  whose  turf  is  yet  so  newly 
laid  ?  May  I  remind  you  of  children  fair  and  beautiful  in  your 
eyes,  taken  away  from  you  despite  your  tears  ?  Shall  I  remind 
you  of  the  parent  who  sleeps  in  Jesus  ?  of  a  sweet  sister  who 
withered  like  a  lily  by  early  consumption  ?  Shall  I  bring  these 
thoughts  back  to  you  ?  I  would  not  wish  to  make  your  wounds 
bleed  afresh,  but  it  is  for  your  good  that  I  bid  you  hearken  to 
their  solemn  voice  ;  for  they  say  to  you,  "  Come  to  your  Go-*  * 
Be  reconciled  to  him  I  "  I  do  not  think  you  ever  will  come  to 
Jesus,  unless  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  employ  trials  to  bring  jcm 
I  find  that  the  woman  never  found  her  piece  of  money  till  sv^ 
swept  the  house.  The  prodigal  never  came  back  till  he  was 
hungry,  and  fain  would  have  filled  his  belly  with  the  husks 
which  the  swine  did  eat.  I  only  hope  that  these  troubles  may 
be  blessed  to  you.  Besides  this,  you  have  had  your  depression 
of  spirit.  If  I  mistake  not,  I  address  some  who  are  under  such 
depressions  now.  You  do  not  know  how  it  is,  but  nothing  is 
pleasant  to  you.  You  went  to  the  theatre  last  night.  You  wished 
you  had  not :  it  gave  you  no  joy ;  and  yet  you  have  been  as 
merry  there  as  any,  in  former  timej-.  You  go  among  your  com- 
panions, and  a  day's  pleasuring,  as  they  call  it,  has  become  to 
you  a  very  painful  waste  of  time.  You  have  lost  the  zest  of 
life ;  and  I  am  not  sorry  for  it,  if  it  should  make  you  look  for  a 
better  life,  and  trust  in  a  world  to  come.  My  friends,  again  I 
say,  this  is  the  burning  of  your  barley-fields.  God  has  sent  for 
you,  and  you  would  not  come ;  and  now  he  has  sent  messengers 
who  are  not  so  easily  refused.  He  has  sent  these  with  sterner 
and  rougher  words,  which  speak  to  your  flesh,  if  your  spmt  will 
not  hear. 

"Well,  now,  what  then  ?  If  God  is  sending  these,  are  you  lis- 
temng  to  them'^  My  hearer,  if  God  has  sent  these,  have  you 
listened  to  them  ?  There  are  some  of  you  of  whom  I  almost 
despair.    God  can  gave  you,  but  I  cannot  tell  you  how  he  wiU 


128  THE  BAELET-FIELD  ON  FTRE. 

do  it.  Certainly  the  "Word  does  not  seem  likely  to  be  blessed. 
You  have  been  called  and  entreated  ;  early  and  late  we  have 
entreated  you.  Our  bowels  have  yearned  Avith  tenderness  for 
you,  but  hitherto  in  vain.  God  knows  I  have  been  hammering 
away  at  the  granite,  and  it  has  not  yielded  yet ;  I  liave  sn^ittCM 
the  Hint,  and  it  is  not  broken.  Some  of  you  all  but  break  the 
ploughshare  :  you  are  such  rocks  that  it  seems  in  vain  to  plough 
upon  you.  As  for  trouble,  I  do  not  see  that  that  is  likely  to  do 
you  any  good  ;  for  if  you  are  smitten  again,  you  will  revolt  more 
and  more.  The  whole  head  is  sick  already,  and  the  whole  heart 
is  faint.  You  have  been  beaten,  till  from  the  crown  of  the  head 
to  the  sole  of  your  foot  there  is  nothing  but  wounds,  bruises,  and 
putrifying  sores.  You  are  poor  —  perhaps  your  drunkenness 
has  made  you  so ;  you  have  lost  your  wife  —  perhaps  your 
cruelty  helped  to  kill  her ;  you  have  lost  your  children,  and  you 
are  left  a  penniless,  friendless,  helpless  beggar,  and  yet  you  will 
not  turn  to  God !  What  now  is  to  be  done  unto  you  ?  O  Eph- 
raim !  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  Shall  I  give  thee  up  ?  How 
can  I  give  thee  up  ?  "  How  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?  how 
shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  ?  "  The  heart  of  mercy  still  yearns 
after  thee.  Return  thou  1  return  thou  1  God  help  thee  to  re- 
turn, even  now. 

Others  of  you  have  not  suffered  all  this  in  the  past,  but  are 
just  now  enduring  a  part  of  it.  Let  me  entreat  you,  by  the 
mercies  of  God  and  by  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
ye  despise  not  him  who  speaketh  unto  you.  God  doth  not  con- 
tinue to  send  his  messengers  forever.  After  he  hath  labored 
with  you  for  a  time,  he  will  leave  you  to  cursing.  Long-suffer- 
ing lasts  not  forever.  Mercy  hath  its  day.  Behold,  the  King 
runs  up  the  white  flag  of  comfort  to-day,  and  he  invites  you  to 
come  unto  him.  To-morrow  he  may  run  up  the  red  flag  of 
threatening ;  and  if  that  answereth  not,  if  that  red  flag  will  not 
make  you  turn,  he  will  run  up  the  black  flag  of  execution,  and 
then  there  will  be  no  hope.  Beware  !  The  black  flag  is  not  run 
up  yet:  the  rad  flag  is  there  no»v  in  trials  and  troubles,  which 


TIIE  BARLEY-FIELD  ON  FIEE.  129 

are  God's  threatenings  to  you,  bidding  you  open  wide  your  heart 
that  grace  may  enter ;  but  if  it  cometh  to  this  that  the  red  flag 
fail,  the  black  flag  must  come.  Perhaps  it  has  come  !  God 
help  you  with  broken  heart  to  cry  unto  him  that  you  may  be 
saved,  before  the  candle  is  blown  out  and  the  sun  is  set,  and  the 
night  of  the  dead  is  come  on  without  the  hope  of  another  sui* 
rising  on  a  blessed  resurrection. 

What  is  the  drift  of  all  this  ?  My  drift  is  this :  If,  now,  a 
word  of  mine  could  make  you  come  to  the  King  this  morning  — 
I  know  it  will  not  unless  God  the  Holy  Spirit  compels  you  to 
do  so  by  his  irresistible  power  ;  but  if  he  would  bless  it,  I  would 
rejoice  as  one  who  findeth  great  spoil.  Wherefore  do  you  stand 
out  against  God  ?  If  the  Lord  intendeth  your  eternal  salvation, 
your  resistance  will  be  in  vain  ;  and  how  will  you  vex  yourself 
in  after  years  to  think  that  you  should  have  stood  out  so  long ! 
Wherefore  dost  thou  resist  ?  God's  battering-ram  is  too  mighty 
for  the  walls  of  your  prejudice:  he  will  make  them  fall  yet. 
Why  dost  thou  stand  out  against  thy  God,  against  him  who 
loveth  thee,  who  hath  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,  and 
redeemed  thee  by  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  Why  standesi  thou  out 
against  him  who  intends  to  lead  thy  captivity  captive,  and  to 
make  thee  yet  his  rejoicing  child  ?  "  Oh !  "  saith  one,  "  if  I 
thought  there  were  such  mercy  as  that,  I  would  yield."  If  thou 
belie  vest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  this  shall  be  an  evidence  that 
such  mercy  is  ordained  for  thee.  Oh  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
would  enable  thee,  sinner,  to  come  just  as  thou  art  and  put  thy 
trust  in  Christ !  If  thou  dost  so,  then  it  is  certain  that  thy  nsuoai 
is  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life,  that  thou  wast  chosen  ol 
God  and  art  precious  to  him,  and  that  thy  head  is  one  on  whicli 
the  crown  of  immortality  is  to  glitter  forever.  Oh  that  thou 
wouldst  trust  Christ !  The  joy  and  peace  it  works  in  the  pres- 
ent is  worth  worlds  ;  but  oh  the  glory,  the  overwhelming  glory 
which  in  worlds  to  come  shall  belong  to  those  that  tru.'^t  in  Jesus  ! 
God  give  you  this  morning  to  cast  your  souls  upon  the  finished 
work  of  Jesus.     His  blood  can  cleanse ;  his  righ^erusness  can 


130  THE  BARLEY-FIELD  ON  FERE. 

cover ;  his  beauty  can  adorn  ;  his  prayer  can  preserve  ;  hi» 
advent  shall  glorify  ;  his  heaven  shall  make  you  blessed.  Tiu?l 
him !  God  help  you  to  trust  him  ;  and  he  shall  hare  all  the 
praise,  both  now  and  forever.    Amen  and  amen. 


SERMON  VII. 


CHRIST  IS  GLORIOUS  ;  LET  US  MAKE  HBI  KNOWN. 

'  AUD  HE  SHALL  STAITD  AND  ^EED  IN  THE  STRENGTH  OF  THE  LOUD,  IN  tHl 
MAJESTVOFTHE  NAME  OF  THE  LOUD  HIS  ODD;  AND  THEY  SHALL  ABIDE:  FOB 
NOW   SHALL  HEBE  OKEAT  UNTO  THE  ENDS  OF  THE  EAETH."  —  Micah  V.  4. 

You  have  a  very  vivid  idea  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  Your 
faith  has  seen  him  sweating  great  drops  of  blood  in  the  garden 
of  Gethsemane.  You  have  looked  on  Avith  amazement  while  he 
gave  his  back  to  the  smiters,  and  his  cheeks  to  them  who  plucked 
off  the  hair,  and  hid  not  his  face  from  shame  and  spitting.  With 
sorrowful  sympathy  you  have  followed  him  through  the  streets 
of  Jerusalem,  weeping  and  bewailing  him  with  the  womrn.  You 
have  sat  down  to  watch  him  when  he  was  fastened  to  the  tree : 
you  have  wept  at  his  bitter  complaint  — "  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  and  you  have  rejoiced  in  his  shout 
of  victory  -—  "  It  is  finished  I  "  With  Magdalene  and  Nicodemus, 
you  have  followed  his  dead  body  to  the  tomb,  and  seen  it  wrapped 
about  with  spices,  and  left  to  its  lonely  sleep.  Are  your  percep- 
tions quite  as  keen  concerning  the  glory  which  did  follow  and  in 
following  ?  Can  you  see  him  quite  as  distinctly  when  on  the 
third  morn  the  Conqueror  rises,  bursting  the  bonds  of  death  with 
w  hich  he  could  not  be  holden  ?  Can  you  as  clearly  view  hie? 
ascending  up  on  high,  leading  captivity  captive  ?  Can  you  hear 
Ihe  ring  of  angelic  clarions,  as  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah 
the  Victor  returns  from  the  battle,  dragging  death  and  hell  at  his 
chariot  wheels  ?  Do  you  plainly  perceive  him  as  he  takes  his 
scat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  henceforth  expecting  until 


132  CHRIST  IS  GLORIOUS  : 

Lis  enemies  be  made  his  footstool  ?  And  caL  you  be  as  cleaf 
this  morning  about  the  reigning  Christ  as  you  tave  been  about 
the  suffering  Christ  ?  Lo  !  my  brethren,  '*  the  Lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  the  Root  of  David,  kath  prevailed  to  open  the  book,  and 
to  loose  the  seven  seals  thereof!  "  At  this  hour  he  goeih  forth, 
riding  upon  his  white  horse,  conquering  and  to  conquer.  I<o ! 
at  his  girdle  swing  the  keys  of  heaven  and  death  and  hell ;  for 
"  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder  ;  and  his  name  shall 
be  called  AVonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,  The  ever- 
lasting Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace."  "  God  also  hath  highly 
exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name; 
that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow."  Behold  him, 
my  brethren,  in  his  present  plenitude  of  glory,  and  endeavor  to 
get  as  clear  a  perception  of  it  as  you  have  had  of  his  shame. 
Not  only  weep  at  his  burial,  but  rejoice  at  his  resurrection  ;  not 
only  sorrow  at  his  cross,  but  worship  at  his  throne.  Do  not 
merely  think  of  the  nails  and  of  the  spear,  but  behold  the  impe- 
rial purple  which  hangs  so  nobly  upon  his  royal  shoulders,  and 
of  the  divine  crown  which  he  wears  upon  his  majestic  brow. 

1  want  to  conduct  you  in  such  a  frame  of  mind  through  the 
glories  of  my  text.  First,  bidding  you  observe  the  jx^rpctucd 
reign  of  Christ:  "  He  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strength  of  the 
L^^d,  in  the  majesty  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God  ;"  then  1 
shall  beg  you  to  observe  that  flowing  from  this  is  tlie  perpetual 
continuance  of  hie  church :  "  and  they  shall  abide  ; "  and  then 
proceeding  both  from  his  continued  reign  and  from  the  church's 
WES^quent  perpetual  existence  comes  the  greatness  of  our  King: 
'*  for  now  shall  he  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

L  At  the  outset,  observe  carefully  the  perpetual  reign 
OF  Christ.     He  lives  ;  he  reigns  ;  he  is  king  over  his  people. 

Notice,  first,  that  his  reign  is  shepherd-like  in  its  nature.  The 
kings  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  lordship  over  them,  but  our  Mas- 
ter washed  his  disciples*  feet.  Earthly  monarchs  are  often 
tyrants  :  their  yoke  is  heavy,  and  their  language  domineering ; 
but  it  is  net  so  with  our  King  :  his  yoke  is  easy,  and  his  burden 


LET  US  MAKE  ITDI  KXOWX.  133 

IS  light,  for  lie  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.  He  is  a  shepherd- 
king.  He  has  supremacy,  hut  it  is  the  superiority  of  a  wise  and 
tender  shepherd  over  his  needy  and  loving  flock  ;  he  commands 
and  receives  obedience,  but  it  is  the  willing  obedience  of  the 
well-cared-for  sheep,  rendered  joyfully  to  their  beloved  Shep- 
herd, whose  voice  they  know  so  well.  He  rules  by  the  force  of 
love  and  the  energy  of  goodness.  His  power  lies  not  in  imperi- 
ous threatenings,  but  in  imperial  loving-kindness.  Let  the  chil- 
dren of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  King,  for  "  men  shall  be  blessed 
in  him :  all  nations  shall  call  him  blessed."  Never  people  had 
such  a  king  before.  His  service  is  perfect  freedom ;  to  be  his 
subject  is  to  be  a  king  ;  to  serve  him  is  to  reign.  Blessed  are 
the  people  who  are  the  sheep  of  his  pasture.  If  they  follow  in 
his  footsteps,  their  road  is  safe  ;  if  they  sleep  at  his  feet,  no  lion 
can  disturb  their  peace  ;  if  they  are  fed  from  his  hand,  they  shall 
lie  down  in  green  pastures,  and  know  no  lack ;  if  they  abide 
close  to  his  person,  they  shall  drink  of  rivers  of  delight.  Right- 
eousness and  peace  are  the  stability  of  his  throne  ;  joy  and  glad- 
ness are  the  ornaments  of  his  reign.  Oh !  how  happy  are  we 
who  belong  to  such  a  prince  !  Thou  King  in  Jeshurun,  we  paj 
thee  homage  with  loyal  hearts  ;  we  come  into  thy  presence  with 
thanksgiving,  and  into  thy  courts  with  praise  ;  for  thou  art  our 
God,  and  we  are  the  people  of  thy  pasture  and  the  sheep  of  thy 
hand. 

Notice  that  the  reign  of  Jesus  is  practical  in  its  character.  It 
is  said  "  he  shall  stand  and  feed.''  The  great  Head  of  the  church 
is  actively  engaged  in  providing  for  his  people.  He  does  not  sit 
down  upon  the  throne  in  empty  state,  or  hold  a  sceptre  without 
wielding  it  in  government.  No  :  he  stands  and  feeds.  The  ex- 
pression "I'eed,"  in  the  original,  is  like  an  analogous  one  in  the 
Greek,  which  means  to  shepherdize,  —  to  do  ev3rything  expected 
of  a  shepherd, —  to  guide,  to  watch,  to  preserve,  to  tend,  as  well 
as  to  feed.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  great  Head  of  the  church, 
is  always  actively  engaged  for  the  church's  good.  Through  him 
the  Spirit  of  God  constantly  descends  upon  the  members  of  the 
church ;  by  him  ministers  are  given  in  due  season,  and  all  churchi 
12 


I3i  CHRIST  IS   GLORIOUS  : 

officcrw*  in  their  proper  place.  When  he  ascended  up  on  high 
he  received  gifts  for  men ;  '  And  he  gave  some,  apostles  ;  and 
some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists  ;  and  some,  pastors  and 
teachers,  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the 
ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ."  Our  Lord  does 
not  close  his  eyes  to  the  state  of  his  church.  Beloved,  he  is  not 
a  listless  spectator  of  our  wants.  He  is  this  day  standing  and 
feeding  his  people.  They  are  scattered,  I  know,  wide  as  the 
poles  asunder ;  but  our  mighty  Shepherd  can  see  every  s\dtp 
and  lamb  of  his  flock,  and  he  gives  them  all  their  portion  of 
meat  in  due  season.  He  it  is  that,  like  a  mighty  breaker,  goes 
forth  at  the  head  of  his  flock,  and  they  follow  where  he  clears 
the  way :  "  He  shall  stand  and  feed."  Oh  blessed  carefulness 
and  divine  activity  of  our  gracious  King  !  always  fighting  against 
our  enemies,  and  at  the  same  time  shedding  his  benignant  influ- 
ences upon  his  friends. 

Consider,  again,  for  it  is  in  our  text,  that  this  active  reign  is 
continual  in  its  duration.  It  is  said,  '-^He  shall  stand  and  feed  ;  " 
hot,  "  he  shall  feed  now  and  then,  and  then  leave  his  position  ;  " 
not,  "  he  shall  one  day  grant  a  revival,  and  then  next  day  leave 
his  church  to  barrenness."  Beloved,  there  is  no  such  pastor  as 
Christ.  "  I  know  my  sheep,"  he  can  say,  in  a  very  high  and 
peculiar  sense.  He  knows  them  through  and  through ;  he  feels 
with  .hem;  in  all  their  afldictions  he  is  afflicted ;  he  is  one  with 
them  Jternally.  There  is  no  such  wakeful  watchman  as  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Is  it  not  written,  "  I  the  Lord  do  keep  it ;  I  will  wakjr 
it  eve^y  moment :  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day  "? 
Those  eyes  never  slumber,  and  those  hands  never  rest ;  that 
heart  never  ceases  to  beat  with  love,  and  those  shoulders  are 
never  weary  of  carrying  his  people's  burdens.  The  church  may 
go  through  her  dark  ages,  but  Christ  is  with  her  in  the  midnight : 
she  m?.y  pass  through  her  fiery  furnace,  but  Christ  is  in  the 
midst  cf  the  flame  with  her.  Her  whole  history  through,  wher- 
ever yo  J  find  the  church,  there  shall  you  find  the  church's  Lord. 
The  hcj.d  is  n(  ver  severed  from  the  body,  nor  is  the  watchful 
care  of  :his  gracious  husband  towards  his  spouse  suspended  foi 
an  in5ta;.t. 


LET  US  SIAKE  HIM  KNOWN.  135 

I  beseech  you,  labor  to  realize  the  noble  picture.  Here  are 
his  sheep  in  these  pastures  this  morning,  and  here  is  our  great 
Shepherd,  with  the  crown  upon  his  head,  standing  and  feeding 
us  all ;  nay,  not  us  all  alone,  but  dispensing  his  tender  mercies 
to  all  the  multitudes  of  his  elect  throughout  the  whole  world, 
lie  is  at  this  moment  King  in  Zion,  ruling  and  overruling,  pres- 
ent everywhere,  and  everywhere  showing  himself  strong  in  the 
defence  of  his  saints.  I  would  that  our  churches  could  be  more 
influenced  by  a  belief  in  the  abiding  power,  presence,  and  pre- 
eminence of  their  living  and  reigning  Lord.  He  is  no  dead  King, 
whose  memory  we  are  bidden  to  embalm,  but  a  living  Leader 
and  Commander,  whose  behests  we  must  obey,  whose  honor  we 
must  defend. 

Do  not  fail  to  discern  that  the  empire  of  Christ  in  his  church 
is  effectually  powerful  in  its  action :  "  He  shall  feed  in  the 
strength  of  Jehovah."  Wherever  Christ  is,  there  is  God ;  and 
whatever  Christ  docs  is  the  act  of  the  Most  High.  Oh  !  it  is  a 
joyful  truth  to  consider  that  he  who  redeemed  us  was  none  other 
than  God  himself,  he  who  led  our  captivity  captive  was  Jehovah- 
Jesus  ;  he  who  stands  to-day  representing  the  interests  of  his 
people  is  very  God  of  very  God ;  he  who  has  sworn  that  every 
one  of  his  people  whom  he  hath  redeemed  by  blood  shall  be 
brought  safe  to  his  Father's  right  hand,  is  himself  essential  Deity. 
O  my  brethren,  we  rest  upon  a  sure  foundation  when  we  build 
upon  the  Licarnate  God;  and  O  ye  saints  of  God,  the  interests 
•M  v.ach  one  of  you,  and  of  the  one  great  church,  must  be  safe, 
because  our  champion  is  God.  Jehovah  is  our  Judge,  Jehovah 
is  our  Lawgiver,  Jehovah  is  our  King :  he  will  save  us.  How 
can  he  fail  or  be  discouraged  ?  "When  he  maketh  bare  his  arm, 
who  shall  stand  against  him  ?  Let  us  rehearse  the  mighty  deeds 
of  the  Lord,  and  tell  of  his  wonders  of  old.  Remember  how  he 
got  him  victory  upon  Pharaoh  and  the  pride  of  Egypt !  Pharaoh 
said,  "  Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  liis  voice  to  let  Israel 
go?"  Ten  plagues  of  terrible  majesty  taught  the  boaster  that 
the  Lord  was  not  to  be  despised,  and  the  humbled  tyrant  bade 
the  people  go  their  way.     With  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretche(3 


136  CnrJST  IS  GLORIOUS  : 

anil  did  lie  Lord  bring  Ibrtli  his  people  from  the  house  of  bond* 
age.  When  the  proud  high  stomach  of  Egypt's  king  again  rose 
against  the  Most  High,  the  Lord  knew  how  to  lay  his  adversary 
lower  than  the  dust.  Methinks  I  see  the  hosts  of  Mizraim,  with 
their  horses  and  their  chariots,  hurrying  after  the  Lord's  fugi- 
livcs.  Their  mouths  are  foaming  with  rage.  "  The  enemy  said 
I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil:  my  lust 
shall  be  satisfied  upon  them."  See  how  they  ride,  in  all  tlielr 
pompous  glory,  swallowing  the  earth  in  their  fury !  O  Israel ' 
where  shall  be  thy  defence  ?  How  shalt  thou  escape  from  thy 
tvrannic  master  ?  Be  still,  O  ye  seed  of  Jacob  :  ye  sons  of 
Abraham,  rest  ye  patiently;  for  these  Egyptians,  whom  ye  see 
to-day,  ye  shall  see  no  more  forever.  With  their  horses  and 
their  chariots  the  fierce  foeraen  descended  into  the  depths  of  the 
sea,  but  the  Lord  looked  upon  them  and  troubled  them.  "  Thou 
didrt  blow  with  thy  wind  :  the  sea  covered  them ;  they  sank  as 
lead  in  the  mighty  waters."  The  depths  have  covered  them ; 
they  sank  into  the.  bottom  like  a  stone.  "  Let  us  sing  unto  the 
Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously.  The  horse  and  his  rider 
hath  he  throv/n  into  the  sea."  Surely  it  shall  be  so  at  the  last 
with  Jesus  our  King  and  all  his  saints ;  we  also  shall  sing  ''  the 
£ong  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb,"  in  that 
day  when  the  arch-enemy  shall  be  overthrown,  and  the  hosts  of 
evil  shall  be  consumed,  and  they  who  hate  the  Lord  shall  be- 
come as  the  fat  of  rams :  into  smoke  shall  they  consume,  yea,  into 
smoke  shall  they  consume  away. 

One  other  word  remains, — our  Lord's  kingdom  is  most  mnjestic 
in  its  aspect.  You  will  observe  it  is  written  by  the  prophet, 
*'  lie  shall  feed  in  the  majesty  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God." 
Jesus  Christ  is  greatly  to  be  reverenced.  The  familiarity  with 
which  we  approach  him  is  always  to  be  tempered  with  the  deep- 
est and  mo.:t  re^•erent  adoration.  He  is  our  brother,  bone  of  our 
bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  but  still  he  countcth  it  not  robbery 
to  be  equal  with  God.  I  know  he  made  himself  of  no  reputation, 
and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  he  calleth  himself 
lo-day  0  ir  husband,  and  maketh  us  to  be  members  of  his  body 


LET   i:S   MAKE  EiM   KNO^TN.  137 

of  Lis  llesli,  and  of  his  bones  ;  but  yet  we  must  never  forget  that 
it  is  written,  "  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him."  and  "  At 
the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow,  of  things  in  heaven, 
and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth  :  and  that  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  lathpT."  Yes,  Christ  is  majestic  in  his  church.  I 
would,  brethren,  we  always  thought  of  this.  There  is  a  glory 
and  a  majesty  about  all  the  laws  of  Christ  and  all  his  commands, 
so  that  whether  we  baptize  at  his  command,  or  break  bread  in 
remembrance  of  him,  or  lift  up  his  cross  in  ministry  —  in  what- 
ever we  do,  in  his  name,  whfeh  is,  in  fact,  what  he  does  through 
us,  there  in  an  attendant  majesty  w^iich  should  make  our  minds 
feel  perpetually  reverent  before  him.  Oh  that  the  world  could 
see  the  glory  of  Christ  in  the  church !  Oh  that  the  world  did 
but  know  who  it  is  that  is  in  the  midst  of  the  few,  the  feeble,  thi 
weak,  the  foolish,  as  they  call  them  !  O  Philistia  !  if  thou  didst 
but  know  who  is  our  champion,  thy  Goliath  of  Gath  would  soon 
hide  his  diminished  head.  O  Assyria !  if  thou  didst  but  know 
that  the  ancient  might  of  him  who  smote  Sennacherib  still  abid- 
eth  w^ith  us,  thy  hosts  would  turn  their  backs,  and  yield  us  an 
easy  victory.  There  is  a  true  and  mysterious  presence  of  Christ 
with  his  people,  according  to  the  promise  "  Lo  I  am  with  you 
alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  "  It  is  because  the  w^orld 
ignores  this  that  she  despises  and  sneers  at  the  church  of  God. 
'('herein  is  our  comfort  and  our  glory.  We  have  a  majesty 
aUou(  us,  if  we  be  the  people  o-f  God,  which  is  not  to  be  gain- 
.?ayed,  —  angels  see  it  and  w^(5nder, —  a  majesty  of  indwelling 
Godhead ;  for  the  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of  us  for  a  glory,  and 
around  us  for  a  defence. 

IL  "We  will  now  occupy  one  or  two  minutes  with  the  con- 
sequent PERPETUITY  OF  THE  CHURCH.  Becausc  of  the  unsccn 
but  most  certain  presence  of  Christ  as  King  in  the  midst  of  his 
people,  his  church  abides  :  so  says  the  text.  Here  reflect,  first, 
that  a  church  exists.  What  a  wonder  this  !  It  is  perhaps  the 
greatest  miracle  of  all  ages  that  God  has  a  church  in  the  world 
12* 


138  CHPJST  IS  Gl.OlilOUS: 

You  whc  are  conversant  with  liuniaa  history  will  bear  me  oul 
when  I  say  that  the  whole  history  of  the  church  is  a  series  ot 
miracle*  —a  long  stream  of  wonders.  A  little  spai'k  kindled  in 
the  midst  of  oceans,  and  yet  all  her  boisterous  waves  cau«ot 
quench  it.  Here  is  the  great  wonder  which  John  saw  in  vision, 
and  which  history  reveals  in  solemn,  sober  fact.  A  woman, 
"  being  with  child,  cried,  travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  be 
delivered.     And  there  appeared  another  wonder  in  heaven  ;  and 

behold  a  great  red  dragon stood  before  the  woman  which 

was  ready  to  be  delivered,  for  to  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it 
was  born."  The  man-child  who  is  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod 
of  iron,  was  brought  forth  and  caught  up  to  God  and  to  his 
throne.  As  for  the  woman,  the  church,  she  fled  as  on  eagles' 
wings  to  her  wilderness-shelter  prepared  of  God,  until,  in  great 
wrath,  the  dragon  pursued  and  persecuted  her.  Apt  enough  is 
that  metaphor,  "  The  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as  a 
flood  after  the  woman  that  he  might  cause  her  to  be  carried  away 

of  the  flood And  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman, 

and  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed,  which  keep 
the  commandments  of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
Chiist."  Yet,  my  brethren,  as  surely  as  that  glorious  man-child, 
the  Lord  Jesus,  lives  and  sits  upon  the  throne,  so  surely  shall 
the  woman,  the  poor  afflicted  church,  live  on  until  the  dragon's 
time  is  over,  and  the  King  shall  reign  upon  the  earth. 

To  what  trials,  my  brethren,  has  not  the  church  of  God  been 
subjected  !  What  new  invention  can  Satan  bring  forth  ?  The 
fire,  the  rack,  imprisonment,  banishment,  confiscation,  slander,  — 
tdl  these  have  been  tried ;  and  in  them  all  the  church  has  been 
more  than  conqueror,  through  Him  who  loved  her.  False  doc- 
trine without,  heresy  and  schism  within,  hypocrisy,  formalism,  fa« 
iiaticism,  pretences  of  high  spirituality,  worldliness, — these  have 
all  done  their  worst.  I  marvel  at  the  wondrous  ingenuity  of  the 
great  enemy  of  the  church ;  but  methinks  his  devices  must  nearly 
have  come  to  an  end.  Can  he  invent  anything  further  ?  We 
have  been  astounded  in  these  ages  by  the  prodigy  of  an  infidel 
bishop ;  we  have  been  struck  dumb  with  sorrow  and  amazemeni 


j.ET  US  MAKE  HBI  KNOWN.  139 

at  a  decree  which  declares  that  a  church  professing  to  be  a 
church  of  Christ  must  permit  men  to  be  her  ministers  who  deny 
the  inspiration  of  Holy  Scripture  !  This  is  a  new  thing  under 
the  sun.  Popery  and  infidelity  are  to  be  both  legalized  and 
fostered  in  a  church  professing  to  be  Christian  and  Protestant. 
What  next?  and  what  next?  But  what  of  all  this?  The 
church  —  I  mean  the  company  of  the  Lord's  called  and  faithful 
and  chosen  —  still  exists.  The  Lord  has  his  elect  people,  who  still 
bold  forth  the  "Word  of  truth ;  and  in  the  most  reprobate  church 
still  he  may  say,  "  I  have  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis  which 
have  not  defiled  their  garments ;  and  they  shall  walk  with  me 
in  white,  for  they  are  worthy." 

Observe,  the  text  says  "  she  abides  ;  "  which  means  not  that 
she  exists  now  and  then,  by  starts  and  spasms,  but  she  exists 
always.  This  is  wonderful.  Always  a  church !  When  the  full 
force  of  the  Pagan  emperors  came  like  a  thundering  avalanche 
upon  her,  she  shook  off  the  stupendous  load  as  a  man  shaketh 
the  flakes  of  snow  from  his  garment,  and  she  lived  on  uninjured. 
When  papal  Rome  vented  its  malice  yet  more  furiously  and 
ingeniously  ;  when  cruel  murderers  hunted  the  saints  among  the 
Alps,  or  worried  them  in  the  low  country  ;  when  Albigenses  and 
Waldenses  poured  out  their  blood  in  rivers,  and  dyed  the  snow 
with  crimson,  she  lived  still,  and  never  was  in  a  healther  state 
than  when  she  was  immersed  in  her  own  gore.  When,  after  a 
partial  reformation  in  this  country,  the  pretenders  to  religion 
delermined  that  the  truly  spiritual  should  be  harried  out  of  the 
land,  God's  church  did  not  sleep  or  suspend  her  career  of  life  or 
service.  Let  the  covenant  signed  in  blood  witness  to  the  vigor 
of  the  persecuted  saints.  Hearken  to  her  psalm  amidst  the 
brown  heath-clad  hills  of  Scotland,  and  her  prayer  in  the  secret 
conventicles  of  England  !  Hear  ye  the  voice  of  Cargil  and  Cam- 
eron thundering  among  the  mountains  against  a  false  king  and 
an  apostate  people  !  Hear  ye  the  testimony  of  Bunyan  and  hig 
compeers,  who  would  sooner  rot  in  dungeons  than  bow  the  knee 
to  Baal. !  Ask  me,  "  Where  is  the  church  ?  "  and  I  can  find  her 
at  any  and  every  period,  from  the  day  when  firs^  in  the  uppei 


J  40  CHRIST  IS  CLOrJOUS  : 

rooiD  the  Holy  Gliost  came  down,  even  until  now.  In  one  uii 
broken  line  our  apostolic  succession  runs  ;  not  through  the  Church 
of  Rome ;  not  from  the  superstitious  hands  of  priest-made  poped 
or  king- created  bishops  (what  a  varnished  lie  is  the  apostolic 
Fuccession  of  those  who  boast  so  proudly  of  it!),  but  through  the 
blood  of  good  men  and  true,  who  never  forsook  the  testimony  of 
Jesus  :  through  the  loins  of  true  pastors,  laborious  evangelists, 
faithful  martyrs,  and  honorable  men  of  God,  we  trace  our  pedi- 
gree, up  to  the  fishermen  of  Galilee  ;  and  glory  that  we  perpetu- 
ate by  God's  grace  that  true  and  faithful  church  of  the  living 
God,  in  whom  Christ  did  abide  and  will  abide  until  the  world's 
crash. 

Observe,  dear  friends,  that  in  the  use  of  the  term  "abide" 
we  have  not  only  existence,  and  continued  existence,  but  the 
idea  of  quiet,  calm,  uninjured  duration.  It  does  not  say  she 
lingers,  —  hunted,  tempted,  worried,  —  but  she  abides.  Oh  the 
calmness  of  the  church  of  God  under  the  attacks  of  her  most 
malicious  foes  !  Thou  cruel  adversary,  the  virgin  daughter  of 
Zion  hath  shaken  her  head  at  thee  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn ! 
She  abides  in  peace  when  the  world  rages  against  her.  It  is 
most  noteworthy  how  in  most  instances  the  church  of  God  still 
keeps  her  foothold  where  she  has  been  most  savagely  persecuted. 
In  modern  times  we  find  in  Madagascar,  after  years  of  extermi- 
nating persecution,  the  church  of  God  rises  from  her  ashes,  like 
the  phoenix  from  the  flames.  The  chief  wonder  is  that  she 
abides  perfect.  Not  one  of  God's  elect  has  gone  back  ;  not  one 
of  the  blood-bought  has  denied  the  faith.  Not  one  single  soul 
which  ever  was  effectually  called  can  be  made  to  deny  Christ, 
even  though  his  flesh  should  be  pulled  from  his  bones  by  hot 
pincers,  or  his  tormented  body  flung  to  the  jaws  of  wild  beasts. 
All  that  the  enemy  has  done  has  been  of  no  avail  against  the 
church.  The  old  rock  has  been  washed,  and  washed,  and  washed 
again  by  stormy  waves,  and  submerged  a  thousand  times  in  the 
floods  of  tempest,  but  even  her  angles  and  corners  abide  unaltered 
and  unalterable.  "We  ma}'  say  of  the  Lord's  tabernacle,  net  one 
»f  the  stakes  thereof  has  been  removed,  nor  one  of  her  eordi 


LET   US   MAKE  ilDI   KJsOVrN.  141 

been  broken.  The  house  of  the  Lord,  from  foundation  to  pin- 
nacle, is  perfect  stilL  "  The  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  came, 
and  the  winds  blew  and  beat  upon  that  house,  and  it  fell  not ; " 
nay,  nor  a  single  stone  of  it,  "  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  Rock." 
But  why  all  this,  dear  friends?  —  why  is  it  that  we  have  seen 
the  church  endure  to  this  day  ?  How  is  it  that  we  are  confident 
that  even  should  worse  times  arrive  the  church  would  weather 
the  storm,  and  abide  till  moons  shall  cease  to  wax  and  wane  ? 
Why  this  security  ?  Only  because  Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  her. 
You  do  not  believe,  I  hope,  in  the  preservation  of  orthodoxy 
by  legal  instruments  and  trust  deeds.  This  is  what  too  many 
Dissenters  have  relied  upon.  We  certainly  cannot  depend  upon 
creeds :  they  are  good  enough  in  their  way,  as  trust  deeds  are 
too,  but  they  are  as  broken  reeds  if  we  rely  upon  them.  We 
cannot  depend  upon  parliament,  nor  kings,  nor  queens.  We  may 
draw  up  the  most  express  and  distinct  form  of  doctrine,  but  we 
shall  find  that  the  next  generation  will  depart  from  the  truth 
unless  God  shall  be  pleased  to  give  it  renewed  grace  from  on 
high.  You  cannot,  by  Presbytery,  or  Independency,  or  Epis- 
copacy, secure  the  life  of  the  church.  I  find  the  church  of  God 
has  existed  under  an  Episcopacy  —  a  form  of  government  not 
without  its  virtues  and  its  faults.  I  find  the  church  of  God 
flourish  under  a  Presbytery,  and  decay  under  it  too.  I  know  it 
can  be  successful  under  an  Independent  form  of  church  govern- 
ment, and  can  decline  into  Arianism  quite  as  easily.  The  fact 
is  that  forms  of  government  have  very  little  to  do  with  the  vital 
principle  of  the  church.  The  reason  why  the  church  of  God 
exists,  is  not  her  ecclesiastical  regulations,  her  organization,  her 
foi'mularies,  her  ministers,  or  her  creeds,  but  the  presence  of  the 
Loi  d  in  the  midst  of  her ;  and  while  Christ  lives,  and  Christ 
reigus,  and  stands  and  feeds  his  church,  she  is  safe ;  but  if  he 
were  once  gone,  it  would  be  with  her  as  it  is  with  you  and  with 
mc  when  the  Spirit  of  God  has  departed  from  us,  —  w^e  are  weak 
as  other  men,  and  she  would  be  quite  as  powerless. 

Ill     But,  now,  thirdly,  flowing  fxom  both  these,  from  the  per- 


142  CHRIST  IS  GLORIOUS  : 

petnal  presence  of  Clil•i^t,  and  from  the  continued  existence  of 
bis  church,  is  the  greatness  of  our  King.  ^^Now  shad  hi 
be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.**  Christ  is  great  in  hia 
church  ;  oh !  how  great  in  our  hearts,  where  he  reigns  supreoie  I 
My  heart,  it  doth  leap  at  the  sound  of  his  name  — 

"  Jesus,  the  very  thought  of  theo 
With  rapture  fills  my  breast/* 

Oh  for  crowns !  for  golden  crowns !  Let  us  crown  him  King 
in  Zion !  Oh  for  a  well-tuned  "harp,  and  for  David's  feet  to 
dance  before  the  ark  at  the  very  mention  of  Jesus'  name ! 
Now  shall  he  be  great  indeed  in  our  hearts !  But  he  is  to  be 
great  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  That  is  a  promise  of  which  we  will 
say,  it  is  accomplished  in  a  measure  even  now.  Christ  is  made 
great  in  the  conversion  of  every  sinner.  "When  the  suppliant 
penitent  cries,  "  God  be  merciful  to  mc  a  sinner,"  and  the  peace-, 
speaking  blood  comes  dropping  upon  the  troubled  conscience, 
and  the  soul  bows  meekly  to  accept  the  finished  righteousness, 
then  is  Christ  great.  And  he  is  great  in  the  consecration  of 
every  one  of  his  blood-bought  saints.  When  they  live  for  him  ; 
when  in  their  prayers  they  make  mention  of  him ;  when  they 
give  him  their  heart's  music,  their  life's  light,  and  their  lips' 
testimony  ;  when  they  feel  that  tribulation  is  joyous  if  endured 
for  him,  and  the  sternest  toil  a  dear  delight  when  undertaken 
for  his  sake  —  then  Christ  is  great.  Think,  my  brethren,  this 
morning,  how  many  ships  are  now  furrowing  the  blue  sea  in 
which  there  are  hearts  which  love  the  name  of  Jesus.  Hark  ! 
Across  the  waves  of  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  I  hear  the 
sound  of  prayer  and  praise  from  many  a  vessel  bearing  the 
British  flag.  From  many  an  islet  of  the  sea  the  song  is  borne 
upon  the  breeze.  And  there  across  the  waters,  in  the  land  of  our 
Americai:  brethren,  now  so  sadly  chastened  with  war,  mulritudes 
of  hearts  beat  as  high  as  ours  at  the  mention  of  the  Saviour's 
name.  Here  across  yon  narrow  channel,  in  Holland,  in  Swe- 
den, in  Germany,  in  Switzerland,  and  even  in  France  and  Italy, 
how  many  own  his  name  and  praise  him  this  day  I     We  spealr 


LET   US  MAKE  IIDI  KNOWN.  148 

of  our  Queen's  dominions,  and  say  that  the  sun  never  sets  upon 
themr  We  may  in  truth  say  this  of  our  Lord  Jesus .  Men  of 
all  colors  trust  in  his  blood :  they  who  look  upward  to  the  south- 
ern cross,  and  they  who  follow  the  polar  star,  alike  worship  his 
dear  name  ;  and  when  England  ceases  her  strain  of  joy,  in  the 
hush  of  night,  Australia  takes  up  the  song ;  and  so  from  land 
to  land,  and  from  shore  to  shore,  a  sacrifice  of  a  pure  offering 
is  brought  to  his  shrine.  It  is  accomplished,  in  some  degree ; 
but  oh  how  small  the  degree  when  we  think  of  the  thick  dark- 
ness which  covers  the  multitude  of  the  people ! 

Again,  it  is  a  promise  which  is  guaranteed  as  to  its  fulfilment 
in  the  fullest  sense.  Courage,  brethren  !  courage  !  The  night  is 
not  forever :  the  morning  cometh !  "Watchman,  what  sajest  thou  ? 
Are  there  not  streaks  reddening  the  east  ?  Hath  not  the  God 
of  day,  the  Lord  Jesus,  begun  to  shoot  his  divine  arrows  of  light 
upwards  into  the  thick  darkness  ?  It  is  even  so.  As  I  think  of 
the  signs  of  the  times,  I  would  fondly  hope  that  we  shall  live  to 
see  brighter  and  better  days.  "iVbi^^,"  says  the  iexX,  "  shall  he  be 
great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Prophet,  I  would  that  thy 
"  now  "  were  true  this  day.  Now,  even  now,  let  him  reign ! 
Why  doth  he  tarry  ?  Why  arc  his  chariots  so  long  in  coming  ? 
Will  it  be,  my  brethren,  that  Christ  will  come  before  the  world 
is  converted  ?  If  so,  welcome,  Jesus.  Or  will  the  world  be 
converted  first  ?  If  so,  thrice  welcome  the  mercy.  But,  whether 
or  no,  this  we  do  know,  —  he  shall  have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea, 
and  from  the  river  even  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  They  who 
dwell  in  the  wilderness  shall  bow  before  him,  and  his  enemies 
shall  lick  the  dust.  The  day  shall  come  when  the  fifth  great 
monarchy  shall  be  co-extensive  with  the  world's  bounds,  and 
everywhere  the  Great  Shepherd  shall  reign. 

But  remember,  dear  friends,  that  while  this  promise  is  thus 
guaranteed  as  to  its  fulfilment,  it  is  to  be  prayed  for  as  to  its  ac' 
complishment.  "  I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired  of  by  the  house 
of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them."  The  mountain  of  the  Lord  shall 
rise  in  the  latter  days ;  but,  mark  you,  though  there  be  no  sound 
of  trowel  or  a  hammei}  there  will  be  heard  the  sound  of  prayer 


144  CIIPJST  IS   GLORIOUS  : 

and  praise,  as  upward  the  mountain  of  God's  bouse  ishall  asceod 
You  know  the  picture.  The  prophet  had  seen  the  Lord's  house 
standing,  as  it  were,  in  a  valley  ;  and  as  he  looked  upon  it,  pres- 
ently it  became  a  little  hill :  the  ground  began  to  heave  ;  by 
and  by  it  had  swollen  from  a  little  hill  into  a  lofty  mountain  ;  and 
op  it  rose,  and  grew  more  great  before  his  eyes,  till  Alps  were 
dwarfed  and  Himalayas  were  stunted ;  and  up  it  still  went,  not 
the  house  only,  but  the  mountain  too,  till,  infinitely  higher  than 
the  projected  tower  of  Babel,  which  man  meant  to  be  the  world's 
centre,  this  house  stood  out  clear  and  sharp  above  the  clouds, 
having  pinnacles  high  up  in  God's  heaven,  and  yet  deep  foun- 
dations in  man's  earth,  and  all  nations  began  to  flow  to  it  as  to 
the  great  centre.  What  a  dream !  What  a  vision  !  Yet  such 
shall  it  be.  The  church  is,  as  it  were,  in  a  plain  just  now  :  she 
begins  to  rise.  Oh  stupendous  movement !  she  begins  to  rise ; 
her  mountains  swell  and  grow  ;  she  attracts  observers  ;  she  can- 
not be  held  down.  Who  can  attempt  to  restrain  the  swelling 
mass  ?  Who  shall  prevent  the  gigantic  birth  ?  Up  rises  the 
mountain,  as  though  swollen  by  some  inward  fire,  and  up  it 
swells,  and  swells,  and  swells,  till  earth  touches  heaven,  and  God 
communes  with  men.  Then  shall  be  heard  the  great  hallelujah, 
•'  The  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with 
them." 

But  then,  —  and  this  is  the  conclusion,  and  I  hope  God  may 
help  me  to  press  it  on  your  hearts,  — all  this  is  to  be  labored  for 
as  well  as  prayed  after.  My  soul  pants  and  pines  to  see  Christ 
glorious  in  the  eyes  of  men.  Lives  there  a  Christian  here  with 
soul  so  dead  that  he  does  not  desire  the  extension  of  his  Mas- 
ter's kingdom  ?  Sirs,  is  there  one  among  you  who  counts  it  lit- 
tle to  see  Jesus  Christ  lifted  up  in  men's  hearts  ?  I  know  I 
s])eak  to  a  people  —  and  the  Lord  knoweth  it  —  to  many  of 
whom  Christ  is  the  dearest  of  all  which  is  beloved,  —  the  fairest 
among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely.  Now,  if  Christ 
is  to  be  glorified,  he  must  be  glorified  by  you  ;  if  his  kingdom  is 
to  come,  it  must  come  through  you.  God  works,  but  God  works 
by  means.     He  worketh  in  you  "  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own 


LET  US  »IAKE  JIIM  KNOWN.  145 

good  pleasure.'*  Souls  are  to  be  saved,  but  they  are  not  saved 
without  instruments.  The  feast  is  to  be  furnished  with  guests, 
bul  you  are  to  go  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and  compel 
them  to  come  in.  I  know  my  Master  is  to  have  many  crowns, 
but  they  are  to  be  crowns  for  which  you  have  fought,  which  you 
have  won  through  his  grace,  and  which  you  place  at  his  feet, 
that  he  may  honor  you  by  wearing  them  upon  his  brow.  Now 
we,  as  a  people,  have  been  greatly  blessed  and  helped  of  God, 
and  I  believe  the  Master  has  a  very  high  claim  upon  us.  AVe, 
above  all  the  churches  in  the  world,  are  indebted  to  the  grace 
and  mercy  of  God  ;  and  we  ought  to  be  doing  something  for  the 
extension  of  the  Saviour's  kingdom.  We  cannot  boast  of  wealth ; 
we  cannot  profess  to  build  all  over  London  a  multitude  of 
churches  as  the  bishop  hopes  to  do.  Any  scheme  of  raising 
three  millions  of  money  by  us  must  be  looked  upon  as  being  en- 
tirely a  dream.  We  cannot  attempt  such  a  thing.  If  London  is  to 
be  converted  by  money,  we  must  give  up  the  task.  We  have  no 
m^'titd  bishops,  no  queens  to  subscribe,  and  no  nobles  and  dukes 
an>.^  t  le  like  to  add  their  thousands  and  their  tens  of  thousands  of 
poui'  Is.  We  are  a  feeble  folk  ;  what  then  can  we  do  for  God  ? 
Why  do  as  much  as  the  strong !  What  can  we  do  for  God  ? 
Do  a  much  as  the  mighty  !  Nay,  my  brethren,  our  very  weak- 
ness J  nd  want  of  power  shall  be  our  adaptation  to  God's  work ; 
and  b  3  who  often  putteth  by  the  sword  of  Saul,  and  the  armor  of 
the  sea  of  Kish,  will  use  David,  and  his  sling  and  his  stcne,  and 
smite  Goliath's  brow  therewith. 

I  have  been  musing  all  this  week  upon  that  celebrated  scene 
in  ancient  history,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  so  much  like  the 
state  of  our  church  just  now,  —  the  story  of  Gideon,  the  son  of 
Joash,  threshing  wheat  in  the  winepress,  because  he  was  afraid 
to  be  seen ;  the  Midianites  having  spoiled  the  land.  Now  we, 
as  Baptists,  have  generally  been  too  much  afraid  to  be  seen.  We 
have  threshed  our  corn  somewhere  away  in  the  winepress  —  up 
a  back  court  —  down  a  narrow  street ;  any  dirty  hole  would  do 
to  build  a  chapel  in.  So  long  as  people  nould  not  find  it,  the  site 
was  thought  advantageous  ;  and  if  nobody  could  ever  see  it,  that 
13 


146  CHRIST  IS  GLORIOUS  : 

was  (be  place  for   our  fathers,  and  for  some  who  slill   linger 
among  us.     It  was  threshing  wheat  in  the  winepress,  to  hide  it 
from  the  enemy.     Well,  now,  I  think  the  time  has  come  that  wo 
should  not  be  afraid  of  these  Midianites  any  longer.     Long  has  . 
the  church  of  God  been  oppressed  and  kept  back  ;  she  has  been 
content  to  let  the  world  devour  her  increase.     There  have  been 
few  additions  to  the  churches  :  they  remain  very  much  what  they 
were  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago ;  but,  my  brethren,  some  of  us 
think  that  we  have  seen  our  fleece  "wct  with  dew,  while  all 
around  was  dry  ;  and  we  believe  the  Lord  has  said  to  us,  "The 
Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man  of  valor."     We  think  we 
have   had  the  Lord's  commission,    "  Go  in  this  thy  strength." 
We  do  not  expect  all  of  you  to  go  with  us,  for  the  people  are  too 
many.     We  expect  that  there  are  many  of  the  trembling  and 
faint-hearted  who  will  step  back  from  the  battle,  —  men  who  are 
looking  for  their  families,  and  must  provide  for  them  ;  men  who 
are  saving  u])  money,  and  grudge  their  sovereigns,  and  so  on. 
These  of  coarse  will  stand  back  ;  and  let  them  :  such  men  encum- 
ber our  march.     We  fear  that  you  are  not  all  men  who  lap ;  but 
we  have  a  few  who  care  very  little  for  the  ease  and  repose  of 
life,  but  who  snatch  a  hasty  draught  as  they  run,  and  with  heat 
and  zeal  and  passionate  earnestness  run  to  meet  the  ad  versa  .y. 
Now,  these  we  expect  to  go  with  us  to  the  fray.     In  the  naine 
of  the  Lord,  I  proclaim  a  new  crusade  against  the  sin  and  vice 
of  this  huge  city.     What  are  we  to  do  ?     The  hosts  of  Midian 
are  to  be  counted  by  millions.     Here  in  this  great  city  we  have 
three  millions  of  people  ;  and  what  if  I  were  to  say  two-and-half 
millions  of  them  do  not  know  their  right  hand  from  their  left  in 
matters  of  religion,  I  believe  I  should  speak  too  charitably ;  for 
if  I  could  believe  there  were  half  a  million  of  true  believers  in 
London,  I  should  have  vastly  greater  hopes  of  it  than  I  have 
now.     But,  alas !  that  is  not  the  case.     Millions,  millions  are 
gathered  in  the  valley  of  indecision  who  are  not  upon  the  Lord's 
side.     AVhat  can  you  and  I  do  ?     We  can  do  nothi-jg  of  our- 
Belves,  but  we  can  do  everything  by  the  help  of  our  God.  Where 
Christ  is  there  is  might,  and  where  God  is  there  is  strength    L«l 


LET  US  MAKE  HIM  KNOWN.  14^ 

03,  therefore,  in  God's  name,  determine  to  plant  new  churcliea 
wherevor  openings  occur.  Like  Gideon's  men,  let  us  rally  under 
our  church  officers,  and  follow  where  a  warm  heart  leads  the 
way.  Gideon  took  his  men,  and  bade  them  do  two  things,  — 
covering  up  a  torch  in  an  earthern  pitcher,  he  bade  them,  at  an 
appointed  signal,  break  the  pitcher  and  let  the  light  shine ;  and 
then  sound  with  their  trumpets,  crying,  "The  sword  of  the 
Lord  and  of  Gideon  !  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon  ! ' 
This  is  just  what  all  Christians  must  do.  First,  you  must  shine  ; 
break  the  pitcher  which  conceals  you  ;  throw  aside  the  bushel 
which  has  been  hiding  your  candle,  and  shine.  Let  your  light 
shine  before  men  ;  let  your  good  works  be  such,  that,  when  they 
look  upon  you,  they  shall  know  that  you  have  been  with  Jesus. 
There  is  much  good  done  by  the  shining.  Then  ihere  must  be 
the  sound  —  the  blowing  of  the  trumpet.  Oh,  dear  friends! 
the  great  mass  of  London  will  never  hear  the  gospel  unless 
you  go  and  blow  the  trumpet  in  their  ears.  Many  who  are 
members  of  this  church  never  heard  a  gospel  sermon  until 
they  heard  some  of  you  preaching  in  the  street.  "  Why,"  said 
one,  "  I  never  went  to  a  place  of  worship ;  but  I  went  down 
a  street,  and  there  stood  a  young  man  at  tlie  corner.  I  lis- 
tened to  him,  and  God  was  pleased  to  send  the  arrow  to  my 
conscience,  and  I  came  into  the  house  of  God  afterwards."  Take 
the  gospel  to  them  ;  carry  it  to  their  doors  ;  put  it  in  their  way  ; 
do  not  suffer  them  to  escape  it ;  blow  the  trumpet  right  against 
their  ears.  In  the  name  of  God,  I  pray  you  do  this.  Remem- 
ber that  the  true  war-cry  of  the  church  is  Gideon's  war-cry, 
"5%e  sword  of  the  Lord/  "  God  must  do  it:  it  is  God's  work. 
But  we  are  not  to  be  idle :  instrumentality  is  to  be  used,  "  The 
sword  of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon  I "  Mark  you,  if  we  only  cry 
"  The  sword  of  the  Lord !  "  we  shall  be  guilty  of  an  idle  pre- 
sumption, and  shall  be  tempting  God  to  depart  from  his  fixed 
rule  of  procedure.  This  is  the  cry  of  every  lazy  lie-a-bed.  What 
good  ever  *omes  of  saying,  "  The  Lord  will  do  his  own  work  : 
let  us  sit  still  ? "  Nor  must  it  be  "  The  sword  of  Gideon  " 
Aione,  for  that  were  idolatrous  reliance  on  an  arm  of  flesh  | 


148  CHRIST   IS    GLOniOUS  : 

we  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves.  Not  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord  " 
only  :  that  were  idleness ;  but  the  two  together,  "  The  sword  of 
the  Lord  and  of  Gideon."  Oh  ir>y  brethren  !  God  help  you  to 
learn  this  lesson  well ;  and  then  you  will  go  forth  shining  and 
sounding,  living  and  teaching,  testifying  and  living  out  the  truth. 
Ye  shall  most  assuredly  make  the  kingdom  of  Christ  to  come, 
and  his  name  shall  be  honored  if  you  will  do  this.  It  seems  to 
me  that  now  is  a  glorious  opportunity.  There  is  a  spirit  of 
hearing  upon  the  people.  Almost  any  one  may  get  a  hearing 
who  is  willing  to  preach  Christ.  Now  or  never  !  Sons  of  Ja- 
cob I  ye  are  to  be  like  a  lion  among  the  flock  of  sheep !  and 
will  ye  lie  down  and  slumber  ?  Up  !  and  every  man  to  the  prey ! 
Sons  of  Jacob  !  ye  are  to  be  as  dew  upon  the  grass  !  and  will  ye 
tarry  for  men  and  wait  for  the  sons  of  men  ?  No.  In  God's 
name,  go  forward,  and  let  something  be  done  for  ^od,  and  for 
his  Christ,  for  a  perishing  age,  for  a  dark  world,  for  heaven's 
glory,  and  for  hell's  defeat.  Up !  y3  who  know  the  Lord,  ye 
swordsmen  of  our  Israel,  —  up  and  at  them ;  and  God  give  you  a 
great  victory  and  deliverance  ! 

I  want  you  to  make  some  practical  point  of  these  things  to- 
day. God  has  been  pleased  to  put  a  sword  into  my  hand,  and 
to  give  me  ray  lamp  and  my  pitcher  ;  my  college  of  young  men 
is  now  become  in  the  Lord's  hands  a  marvellous  power  for  good. 
A  blessing  greater  than  I  could  have  expected  rests  on  this  work 
We  are  continually  sending  them  out,  and  God  owns  them  in  the 
conversion  of  souls.  I  have  never  seen  any  agency  more  blessed 
to  the  conversion  of  souls  than  the  agency  of  our  college.  With- 
out saying  anything  to  depreciate  other  efforts,  I  do  believe  God 
has  conferred  on  our  institution  a  crowning  and  special  blessing, 
and  will  continue  to  do  so  yet  more  and  more.  I  want  you  all, 
both  hearers  and  readers  of  my  sermons,  to  feel  that  this  is  your 
work,  and  to  help  me  in  it  while  I  continue  to  cry,  "  The  sword 
of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon  ! "  God  works,  and  therefore  we 
work  ;  God  is  with  us,  and  therefore  we  are  with  God,  and 
stand  on  his  side.  Inasmuch  as  many  o^  these  men  raise  cliurchos* 
we  want  you  to  help  to  build  the  places  where  the  new  congrei 


LET  US  MAKE  IIDI  KXO^VN.  149 

gallons  can  be  accommodated  afterwards ;  and  to  that  end  we 
have  striven  to  raise  a  fund  of  five  thousand  pounds,  to  be  lent 
out  to  these  new  churches  on  loan  to  be  repaid  by  instalments 
without  interest.  It  is  but  a  small  sum,  but  it  is  as  mui.  h  as  1 
think  we  can  do,  and  frugal  care  will  turn  it  to  good  account. 
Some  three  thousand  pounds  have  been  promised  by  our  seven 
shepherds  and  principal  men  ;  but  there  are  many  who  have  not 
promised  anything  yet,  and  we  shall  be  glad  if  they  will  come 
forward,  for  otherwise  this  useful  fund  cannot  be  raised.  When 
this  is  done  with,  once  for  all,  we  will  go  on  and  do  something 
else  for  Jesus.  Do  break  this  pitcher  ;  get  this  done,  and  let  the 
light  of  this  thing  shine.  We  must  be  doing  something  for  God. 
I  speak  to  you  now  upon  the  practical  point,  and  come  to  it  at 
once.  1^ you  are  content  to  live  without  serving  God,  /am  not ; 
and  if  you  are  willing  to  let  these  hours  roll  by  without  doing 
something  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  Jesus,  let  me  be  gone  from 
you  ;  let  me  be  gone  from  you  to  those  of  warmer  spirits  and  of 
holier  aspirations  ;  for  I  must  fight  for  God !  there  must  be  victo- 
ries won  for  him  !  We  must  extend  the  range  of  the  gospel ; 
we  must  find  places  where  souls  can  be  brought  to  hear  the  Word. 
Hell  shall  not  forever  laugh  at  our  inactivity,  and  heaven  shall  not 
eternally  weep  at  our  sloth  !  Let  us  be  up  and  doing,  and  let 
this  thing  be  done  by  the  many  :  the  few  have  already  done  their 
parts.  Promises  reaching  over  five  years  are  asked  of  you  ;  you 
can  all  do  something.  And  then,  every  one  of  you,  when  you 
liave  done  your  share  in  this,  go  out  personally  and  serve  with  your 
flaming  torch  of  holy  example,  and  with  your  trumpet-tones  of 
earnest  declaration  and  testimony,  serve  your  Lord ;  and  God 
shall  be  with  you,  and  Midian  shall  be  put  to  confusion,  and  the 
Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  "  He  that  believeth 
aiiil  is  baptized  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shalj 
be  damned."  Hear  ye  that  note,  oh  dead  souls,  and  live  I 
13» 


SERMON  VIII. 


ENDURING  TO  THE  END. 

*•■«  rUAT  EITDDHETH  TO  THE  END  SHALL  BE  SAVED."  —  Ma tthCW  X    8S. 

This  particular  text  was  originally  addressed  to  the  apostlet 
when  they  were  sent  to  teach  and  preach  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Perhaps  bright  visions  floated  before  their  minds, 
of  honor  and  esteem  among  men.  It  was  no  mean  dignity  to  be 
among  the  first  twelve  heralds  of  salvation  to  the  sons  of  Adam. 
"Was  a  check  needed  to  their  high  hopes  ?  Perhaps  so.  Lest 
they  should  enter  upon  their  work  without  having  counted  its 
cost,  Christ  gives  them  a  very  full  description  of  the  treatment 
which  they  might  expect  to  receive,  and  reminds  them  that  it 
was  not  the  commencement  of  their  ministry  which  would  win 
them  their  reward,  but  "  He  that  endureth  to  the  end,  the  same 
shall  be  saved."  It  would  be  well  if  every  youthful  aspirant  to 
the  gospel  ministry  would  remember  this.  If  merely  to  put  our 
hand  to  the  plough  proved  us  to  be  called  of  God,  how  many 
would  be  found  so ;  but,  alas !  too  many  look  back  and  prove 
unworthy  of  the  kingdom.  The  charge  of  Paul  to  Timothy  ia 
a  very  necessary  exhortation  to  every  young  minister :  "  Be 
thou  faithful  unto  death."  It  is  not  to  be  faithful  for  a  time,  but 
to  be  "  faithful  unto  death,''  which  will  enable  a  man  to  say,  "  I 
have  fought  a  good  fight."  How  many  dangers  surround  the 
Christian  minister  !  As  the  officers  in  an  army  are  the  chosen 
targets  of  the  sharpshooters,  so  are  the  ministers  of  Christ.  The 
Ling  of  Syria  said  to  his  servants,  "  Fight  neither  with  small 
Uor  great,  save  only  with  the  king  of  Israel ; "  even  io  the  arch- 


ENDUKIXG  IJ  THE  END  151 

fiend  malios  his  main  attack  upon  the  ministers  of  God.  From 
the  first  moment  of  his  call  to  the  work,  the  preacher  of  the 
"Word  will  be  familiar  with  temptation.  While  he  is  yet  in  his 
youth,  there  are  multitudes  of  the  softer  temptations  to  turn  the 
head  and  trip  the  feet  of  the  youthful  herald  of  the  cross ;  and 
when  the  blandishments  of  early  popularity  have  passed  away, 
as  soon  they  must,  the  harsh  croak  of  slander  and  the  adder's 
tongue  of  ingratitude  assail  him ;  he  finds  himself  stale  and  flat 
where  once  he  was  flattered  and  admired ;  nay,  the  venom  of 
malice  succeeds  to  the  honeyed  morsels  of  adulation.  Now,  let 
him  gird  his  loins  and  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith.  In  his  after 
days,  to  provide  fresh  matter  Sabbath  after  Sabbath,  to  rule  as 
in  the  sight  of  God,  to  watch  over  the  souls  of  men,  to  weep  with 
them  who  weep,  to  rejoice  with  those  who  do  rejoice,  to  be  a 
nursing  father  unto  young  converts,  sternly  to  rebuke  hypocrites, 
to  deal  faithfully  with  backsliders,  to  speak  with  solemn  authority 
and  paternal  pathos  to  those  who  are  in  the  first  stages  of  spir- 
itual decline,  to  carry  about  with  him  the  care  of  the  souls  of 
hundreds,  is  enough  to  make  him  grow  old  while  yet  he  is  young, 
and  to  mar  his  visage  with  the  lines  of  grief,  till,  like  the  Saviour, 
at  the  age  of  thirty  years,  men  shall  count  him  nearly  fifty. 
"  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast  thou  seen  Abraham  ?  '* 
said  the  adversaries  of  Christ  to  him  when  he  was  but  thirty-two. 
If  the  minister  should  fall,  my  brethren  ;  if,  set  upon  a  pinnacle, 
he  should  be  cast  down  ;  if,  standing  in  slippery  places,  he  should 
falter ;  if  the  standard-bearer  fall,  as  fall  full  well  he  may,  what 
mischief  is  done  to  the  church  !  —  what  shouts  are  heard  among 
the  adversaries!  —  what  dancings  are  seen  among  the  daughters 
Df  Philistia  !  How  hath  God's  banner  been  stained  in  the  dust, 
and  the  name  of  Jesus  cast  into  the  mire  !  When  the  minister 
of  Christ  turns  traitor,  it  is  as  if  the  pillars  of  the  house  did 
tremble ;  every  stone  in  tlie  structure  feels  the  shock.  If  Satan 
can  succeed  in  overturning  the  preachers  of  the  Word,  it  is  as  if 
yon  broad-spreading  tiee  should  suddenly  fall  beneath  the  axe. 
Prone  in  the  dust  it  lies  to  wither  and  to  rot ;  but  where  are  the 
birds  of  the  air  which  made  their  nests  among  its  boughs,  and 


152  ENDUiaXG   TO  THE  FJST). 

whither  fly  those  beasts  of  the  field  which  found  a  happy  shadow 
beneath  its  branches  ?  Dismay  hath  seized  them,  and  they  flt« 
in  affright.  All  who  were  comforted  by  the  preacher's  word, 
strengthened  by  his  example,  and  edified  by  his  teacliing,  are 
filled  with  humiliation  and  grief;  crying,  "  Alas  !  my  brother." 
By  these  our  manifold  dangers  and  weighty  responsibilities  wc 
may  very  justly  appeal  to  }'ou  who  feed  under  our  ministry,  and 
beseech  you,  "  Brethren,  pray  for  us."  Well,  we  know  that 
though  our  ministry  be  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  if  hitherto 
we  have  been  kept  faithful  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  yet 
it  is  only  he  who  endureth  to  the  end  who  shall  be  saved. 

But,  my  brethren,  how  glorious  is  the  sight  of  the  man  who 
does  endure  to  the  end  as  a  minister  of  Christ !     I  have  photo- 
graphed upon  my  heart  just  now  the  portrait  of  one  very,  very 
dear  to  me ;  and  I  think  I  may  venture  to  produce  a  rough  sketch 
of  him,  as  no  mean  example  of  how  honorable  it  is  to  endure  to 
the  end.     This  man  began  while  yet  a  youth  to  preach  the  Word. 
Sprung  of  ancestors  who  had  loved  the  Lord  and  served   his 
church,  he  felt  the  glow  of  holy  enthusiasm.     Having  proved  his 
capabilities,  he  entered  college,  and,  after  the  close  of  its  course, 
settled  in  a  spot  where  for  more  than  fifty  years  he  continued 
his  labors.     In  his  early  days,  his  sober  earnestness  and  sound 
doctrine  were  owned  of  God  in  many  conversions,  both  at  home 
and  abroad.     Assailed  by  slander  and  abuse,  it  was  his  privilege 
to  live  it  all  down.    He  outlived  his  enemies  ;  and  though  he  had 
buried  a  generation  of  his  friends,  yet  he  found  many  warm 
hearts   clustering   round    him   to  the  last.      Visiting   his  flock, 
preaching  in  his  own  pulpit,  and  making  very  many  journeys  to 
other  churches,  years  followed  one  another  so  rapidly  that  he 
found  himself  the  head  of  a  large  tribe  of  children  and  grand- 
children, most  of  them  walking  in  the  truth.     At  the  age  of 
fourscore  years  he  preached  on  still,  until,  laden  with  infirmities, 
but  yet  as  joyful  and  as  cheerful  as  in  the  heyday  of  his  youth,  his 
time  had  come  to  die.    He  was  able  to  say,  truthfully,  when  last 
he  spake  to  me,  "  I  do  not  know  that  my  testimony  for  God  haa 
ever  altered,  as  to  the  fundamental  doctrines.    I  have  grown  in 


ENDURING  TO  THE  END-  153 

experience,  but,  from  llie  first  day  until  now,  I  have  had  no  new 
doctrines  to  teach  my  hearers.  I  have  had  to  make  no  confes- 
sions of  error  on  vital  points,  but  have  been  hild  fast  to  the  doo 
trines  of  grace,  and  can  now  say  that  I  love  them  better  than 
ever."  Such  an  one  was  he,  as  Paul,  the  aged,  longing  to  preach 
so  long  as  his  tottering  knees  could  bear  him  to  the  pulpit.  I 
am  thankful  that  I  had  such  a  grandsire.  He  fell  asleep  in 
Christ  but  a  few  hours  ago,  and  on  his  dying-bed  talked  as  cheer- 
fully as  men  can  do  in  the  full  vigor  of  their  health.  Most 
sweetly  he  talked  of  the  preciousness  of  Christ,  and  chiefly  of 
the  security  of  the  believer ;  the  truthfulness  of  the  promise  ; 
the  immutability  of  the  covenant ;  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and 
the  infallibility  of  the  divine  decree.  Among  other  things  which 
he  said  at  the  last  was  this ;  which  is,  we  think,  worth  your 
treasuring  in  your  memories.     "  Dr.  "Watts  sings  — 

*  Firm  as  the  earth  thy  g:ospel  stands, 
My  Lord,  my  hope,  my  trust.' 

What,  Doctor  I  is  it  not  firmer  than  that  ?  Could  you  not  find  a 
better  comparison  ?  Why !  the  earth  will  give  way  beneath  our 
feet  one  day  or  another,  if  we  rest  on  it.  The  comparison  will 
not  do.    The  Doctor  was  much  nearer  the  mark  when  he  said  — 

*  Firm  a^  his  throne  his  promise  stands. 
And  he  can  well  secure 
What  I've  committed  to  his  hands, 
'Till  the  decisive  hour.'  " 

"  Firm  as  his  throne,"  said  he ;  "  he  must  cease  to  be  king  be- 
fore he  can  break  his  promise  or  lose  his  people.  Divine  sov- 
ereignty makes  us  all  secure.'*  He  fell  asleep  right  quietly  ;  for 
his  day  was  over,  and  the  night  was  come :  what  could  he  do 
better  than  go  to  rest  in  Jesus  ?  Would  God  it  may  be  our  lot 
to  preach  the  Word  so  long  as  we  breathe,  standing  fast  unto 
the  end  in  the  truth  of  God ;  and  if  we  see  not  our  sons  and 
grandsons  testifying  to  those  doctrines  which  are  so  dear  to  us, 
yet  may  we  see  oui  children  walking  in  the  truth.     I  know  of 


154  ENDURING  TO   TITE  END. 

notliin^,  dear  friends,  which  I  would  clioose  to  have,  as  the  sub- 
ject of  my  ambition  for  life,  than  to  be  kept  faithful  to  my  God 
to  death,  —  still  to  be  a  soul-winner,  still  to  be  a  true  herald  of 
tlie  cross,  and  testify  the  name  of  Jesus  to  the  last  hour.  It  is 
only  su::!i  wIid  ia  the  ministry  shall  be  saved. 

Our  text,  however,  occurs  again  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter 
of  Matthew,  at  the  fourteenth  verse,  upon  which  occasion  it  was 
not  addressed  to  the  apostles,  but  to  the  disciples.  The  disciples, 
looking  upon  the  huge  stones  which  were  used  in  the  construc- 
tion of  the  Temple,  admired  the  edifice  greatly,  and  expected 
their  Lord  to  utter  a  few  words  of  passing  encomium  ;  instead  of 
which,  he,  who  came  not  to  be  an  admirer  of  architecture,  but 
to  hew  living  stones  out  of  the  quarry  of  nature,  to  build  them 
up  into  a  spiritual  temple,  turned  their  remarks  to  practical  ac- 
count, by  warning  them  of  a  time  of  affliction,  in  which  there 
should  be  such  trouble  as  had  never  been  before  ;  and  he  added, 
"  No,  nor  ever  shall  be."  He  described  false  prophets  as 
abounding,  and  the  love  of  many  as  waxing  cold,  and  warned 
them  that  "  He  that  endureth  to  the  end,  the  same  shall  be 
saved."     So  that  this  solemn  truth  applies  to  every  one  of  you. 

The  Christian  aian,  though  not  called  to  the  post  of  danger 
in  witnessing  publicly  of  the  grace  of  God,  is  destined  in  his 
measure  to  testify  concerning  Jesus,  and  in  his  proper  sphere 
and  place  to  be  a  burning  and  a  shining  light.  Pie  may  not 
have  the  cares  of  a  church,  but  he  hath  far  more,  the  cares  of 
business  ;  he  is  mixed  up  with  the  world;  he  is  compelled  to  as- 
fiociate  with  the  ungodly.  To  a  great  degree,  he  must,  at  least 
six  days  in  the  week,  walk  in  an  atmosphere  uncongenial  with 
his  nature  ;  he  is  compelled  to  hear  words  which  will  never  pro- 
voke him  to  love  and  good  w^orks,  and  to  behold  actions  whose 
example  is  obnoxious.  He  is  exposed  to  temptations  of  every  sort 
and  size,  for  this  is  the  lot  of  the  followers  of  the  Lamb.  Satan 
knows  how  useful  is  a  consistent  follower  of  the  Saviour,  and 
how  much  damage  to  Christ's  cause  an  inconsistent  professor 
may  bring ;  and  therefore  he  emptieth  out  all  his  arrows  from 
his  quiver  that  he  may  wound,  even  unto  death,  the  ooldier  of 


FJ!a)riirNG  TO  THE  K>yD.  155 

the  cross.  My  brethi-en,  many  of  you  have  had  a  far  longer  ex* 
perience  than  myself.  You  know  how  stern  is  the  battle  of  ihc 
religious  life,  —  how  you  must  contend,  even  unto  blood,  striving 
against  sin.  Your  life  is  one  continued  scene  of  warfare,  both 
without  and  within.  Perhaps  even  now  you  are  crying  with  the 
apostle,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  I  who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  liody  of  this  death  ?  "  A  Christian's  career  is  always  fighting, 
neve"  ceasing  ;  always  ploughing  the  stormy  sea,  and  never  resting 
till  he  reaches  the  port  of  glory.  If  my  God  shall  preserve  you, 
as  preserve  you  he  must,  or  else  you  are  not  liis  — if  he  shall  keep 
you,  as  keep  you  he  will,  if  you  have  committed  your  souls  to 
his  faithful  guardianship,  what  an  honor  awaits  you !  I  have  in 
my  mind's  eye,  just  now,  one  who  has  been  for  about  sixty  years 
associated  witli  this  church,  and  who  this  week,  full  of  years,  and 
ripe  for  heaven,  was  carried  by  angels  into  the  Saviour's  bosom- 
Called  by  divine  grace,  while  yet  young,  he  was  united  with  the 
Christian  church  early  in  life.  By  divine  grace  he  was  enabled 
to  maintain  a  consistent  and  honorable  character  for  many  years  ; 
as  an  officer  of  this  church  he  was  acceptable  among  his  breth- 
ren, and  useful  both  by  his  godly  example  and  sound  judgment ; 
while  in  various  parts  of  the  church  of  Christ  he  earned  unto 
himself  a  good  degree.  He  went  last  Sabbath-day  twice  to  the 
house  of  God  where  he  was  accustomed  of  late  years  to  worship, 
enjoying  the  Word,  and  feasting  at  the  communion-table  with 
much  delight.  He  went  to  his  bed  without  having  any  very  se 
rious  illness  upon  him,  having  spent  his  last  evening  upon  earth 
in  cheerful  conversation  with  his  dau"rhter3.  Ere  the  mornins; 
light,  with  his  head  leaning  upon  his  hand,  he  had  fallen  asleep 
ai  Christ,  having  been  admitted  to  the  rest  which  remaineth  for 
the  people  of  God.  As  I  think  of  my  brother,  though  of  late 
years  I  have  seen  but  little  of  him,  I  can  but  rejoice  in  the  grace 
which  illuminated  his  pathway.  When  I  saw  him,  the  week  be- 
fore his  departure,  although  full  of  years,  there  was  little  or  no 
failure  in  mind.  He  was  just  the  picture  of  an  aged  saint  wait- 
ing for  his  Master,  and  willing  to  work  in  his  cause  while  life 
remained.     I  refer,  as  most  of  you  know,  to  Mr.  Samuel  Gale* 


156  ENDURING  TO  THE  END. 

Let  us  thank  God  and  take  courage  —  tliank  God  tliat  he  has 
prcspi-ved  in  this  case  a  Christian  so  many,  many  years  ;  and 
take  courage  to  hope  that  there  will  be  found  in  this  church 
many,  at  all  periods,  whose  gray  heads  shall  be  crowns  of  glory. 
"  He  that  cndureth  to  the  end,"  and  only  he,  "  shall  be  saved." 

But,  dear  friends,  perseverance  is  not  the  lot  of  the  few ;  it  is 
not  left  to  laborious  preachers  of  the  Word,  or  to  consistent 
church  officers :  it  is  the  common  lot  of  every  believer  in  the 
church.  It  must  be  so  ;  for  only  thus  can  they  prove  that  they 
are  believers.  It  must  be  so,  for  only  by  their  perseverance  can 
the  promise  be  fulfilled,  "  He  that  believcth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved."  Without  perseverance  they  cannot  be  saved ; 
and,  as  saved  they  must  be,  persevere  they  shall  through  divine 
grace. 

I  shall  now,  with  brevity  and  earnestness,  as  God  enables  me, 
«peak  upon  our  text  thus  :  Perseverance  is  the  badge  of  saints  — 
the  target  of  our  foes  —  the  glory  of  Christ  —  and  the  care  of  all 
believers. 

I.  First,  then,  perseverance  is  the  badge  of  true 
SAINTS.  It  is  their  scriptural  mark.  How  am  I  to  know  a 
Christian  ?  By  his  words  ?  Well,  to  some  degree  words  betray 
the  man  ;  but  a  man's  speech  is  not  always  the  copy  of  his  heart, 
for  with  smooth  language  many  are  able  to  deceive.  What  doth 
our  Lord  say  ?  "  Ye  shall  know  them  hy  their  fruits."  But 
how  am  I  to  know  a  man's  fruits  ?  By  watching  him  one  day  ? 
I  may,  perhaps,  form  a  guess  of  his  character  by  being  with  him 
for  a  single  hour ;  but  I  could  not  confidently  pronounce  upon  a 
man's  true  state  even  by  being  with  him  for  a  week.  George 
Whitefield  was  asked  what  he  thought  of  a  certain  person's  char- 
acter. "  I  have  never  lived  with  him,"  was  his  very  proper 
answer.  If  we  take  the  run  of  a  man's  life,  say  for  ten,  twenty, 
or  thirty  years,  and  if,  by  carefully  watching,  we  see  that  he 
brings  forth  the  fruits  of  grace  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  our  con- 
clusion may  be  drawn  very  safely.  As  the  truly  magnetized 
needle  in  the  compass,  with  many  deflections,  yet  does  really 


EXDURING   TC    THE  END.  157 

and  naturally  point  to  (lie  pole,  so,  if  I  can  see  that  despite 
infirmities,  my  friend  sincerely  and  constantly  aims  at  holiness, 
then  I  may  conclude,  with  something  like  certainty,  that  he  is  a 
child  of  God.  Although  works  dc  not  justify  a  man  before  God, 
they  do  justify  a  man's  profession  before  his  fellows.  I  cannot 
tell  whether  you  are  justified  in  calling  yourself  a  Christian 
exi^ept  by  your  works  ;  by  your  works,  therefore,  as  James  saith, 
shall  ye  be  justified.  You  cannot  by  your  words  convince  me 
that  you  are  a  Christian,  much  less  by  your  experience,  which 
I  cannot  see,  but  must  take  on  trust  from  you  ;  but  your  actions 
will,  unless  you  be  an  unmitigated  hypocrite,  speak  the  truth, 
and  speak  the  truth  loudly  too.  If  your  coui-se  is  as  the  shining 
light  which  shineth  more  unto  the  perfect  day,  I  know  that  yours 
is  the  path  of  the  just.  All  other  conclusions  are  only  the  judg- 
ment of  charity  such  as  we  are  bound  to  exercise  ;  but  this  is  as 
far  as  man  can  get  it,  the  judgment  of  certainty  when  a  man's 
life  has  been  consistent  throughout. 

Moreover,  analogy  shows  us  that  it  is  perseverance  which  must 
mark  the  Christian,  How  do  I  know  the  winner  at  the  foot- 
race ?  There  are  the  spectators,  and  there  are  the  runners. 
What  stronsr  men  !  what  masrnificent  muscles  !  what  thews  and 
sinews  !  Yonder  is  the  goal ;  and  there  it  is  that  I  must  judge 
who  is  the  winner :  not  here,  at  the  starting-point ;  for  "  They 
which  run  in  a  race  run  all,  but  one  receiveth  the  prize."  I  may 
select  this  one,  or  that  other  person,  as  likely  to  win,  but  I  cannot 
be  absolutely  sure  until  the  race  is  over.  There  they  fly  !  See 
how  they  press  forward,  with  straining  muscles  !  But  one  has 
tripped,  another  faints,  a  third  is  out  of  breath,  and  others  are 
far  behind.  One  only  wins  —  and  who  is  he  ?  Why,  he  who 
continued  to  the  end.  So  I  may  gather  from  the  analogy,  which 
Paul  constantly  allows  us,  from  the  ancient  games,  that  only  he 
who  continueth  till  he  reaches  the  goal  may  be  accounted  a 
Christian  at  all.  A  ship  starts  on  a  voyage  to  Australia:  if  it 
stops  at  Madeira,  or  returns  after  reaching  the  Cape,  would  you 
consider  that  it  ought  to  be  called  an  emigrant  ship  for  New 
bcuth  Wales?  It  must  go  the  whole  voyage,  or  it  <lo€3  not 
14 


158  ENDLTJNG  TO  THE  END. 

deserve  the  name.  A  man  lias  begun  to  build  a  houae,  and  haa 
erected  one  side  of  it :  do  you  consider  him  a  builder  if  he  stops 
there,  and  fails  to  cover  it  in  or  to  finish  the  other  walls  ?  Dc 
we  give  men  praise  for  being  warriors  because  they  know  how 
to  make  one  desperate  charge,  but  lose  the  campaign  ?  Have 
we  not,  of  late,  smiled  at  the  boasting  despatches  of  commanders, 
in  fights  where  both  combatants  fought  with  valor,  and  yet 
neither  of  them  had  the  common  sense  to  push  on  to  reap  the 
victory  ?  AYhat  was  the  very  strength  of  Wellington,  but  that, 
when  a  triumph  had  been  achieved,  he  knew  how  to  reap  the 
harvest  which  had  been  sown  in  blood  ?  And  he  only  is  a  true 
conqueror,  and  shall  be  crowned  at  the  last,  who  continueth  till 
war's  trumpet  is  blown  no  more.  It  is  with  a  Christian  as  it  was 
with  the  great  Napoleon  :  he  said,  "  Conquest  has  made  me 
what  I  am,  and  conquest  must  maintain  me."  So,  under  God, 
conquest  has  made  you  what  you  are,  and  conquest  must  sustain 
you.  Your  motto  must  be,  "  Excelsior  ; "  or,  if  it  be  not,  you 
know  not  the  noble  spirit  of  God's  princes.  But  why  do  I  mul- 
tiply illustrations,  when  all  the  world  rings  with  the  praise  of 
perseverance  ? 

Moreover,  the  common-sense  judgment  of  manhind  tells  us 
that  those  who  merely  begin,  and  do  not  hold  out,  will  not  be 
saved.  Why  !  if  every  man  would  be  saved  ivho  began  to  follow 
Christ,  who  would  be  damned  ?  In  such  a  country  as  this,  the 
most  of  men  have  at  least  one  religious  spasm  in  their  lives.  I 
suppose  that  there  is  not  a  person  before  me  who  at  some  time 
or  other  did  not  determine  to  be  a  pilgrim.  You,  Mr.  Pliable, 
were  induced  by  a  Christian  friend,  who  had  some  influence 
with  you,  to  go  with  him  some  short  way,  till  you  came  to  the 
Slough  of  Despond ;  and  you  thought  yourself  very  wise  when 
you  scrambled  out  on  that  side  which  was  nearest  to  your  own 
home.  And  even  you,  Mr.  Obstinate,  are  not  always  dogged : 
you  have  fits  of  thoughtfulness  and  intervals  of  tenderness.  My 
hearer,  how  impressed  you  were  at  the  j)rayer  meeting!  how 
excited  you  were  at  that  revival  service !  When  you  heard  a 
E3alous  brother  preach  at  the  theatre,  what  an  impression  wai 


EXDUKIXG  'lO   THE  END.  159 

produced  !  Ah,  yes !  the  shop  was  shut  up  for  a  Sunday  or  two ; 
you  did  not  swear  or  get  drunk  for  nearly  a  month ;  but  yon 
could  not  hold  on  any  longer.  Now,  if  those  who  were  to  beghi 
were  saved,  why  you  w'ould  be  secure,  though  you  are  at  the 
present  lime  as  far  from  anything  like  religion  as  the  darkness 
at  midnight  is  from  the  blazing  light  of  midday.  Besides,  com- 
mon sense  shows  us,  I  say,  that  a  man  must  hold  on,  or  else  he 
cannot  be  saved ;  because  the  very  ivorst  of  men  are  those  who 
begin  and  then  give  %ip.  If  you  w^ould  turn  over  all  the  black 
pages  of  villany  to  find  the  name  of  the  son  of  perdition,  whero 
would  you  find  it  ?  Why,  among  the  apostles.  The  man  Avho 
had  wrought  miracles  and  preached  the  gospel  sold  his  Master 
for  thirty  pieces  of  silver  —  Judas  Iscariot  betrays  the  Son  of 
Man  with  a  kiss !  Where  is  a  worse  name  than  that  of  Simon 
Magus  ?  Simon  "  believed  also,"  says  the  Scripture  ;  and  yet  he 
offered  the  apostles  money  if  they  would  sell  to  him  the  Holy 
Ghost.  What  an  infamous  notoriety  Demas  has  obtained,  who 
loved  the  present  evil  world !  IIow  much  damage  did  Alexander 
the  coppersmith  do  to  Paul  ?  "  He  did  me  much  evil,"  said  he ; 
"  the  Lord  reward  him  according  to  his  works."  And  yet  that 
Alexander  w^as  once  foremost  in  danger,  and  even  exposed  his 
own  person  in  the  theatre  at  Ephesus  that  he  might  rescue  the 
apostle.  There  are  none  so  bad  as  those  who  once  seemed  to 
be  good.  "  If  the  salt  has  lost  its  savor,  wherewith  shall  it  be 
seasoned  '^.  "  That  which  is  best  when  ripe,  is  worst  when  rotten  ; 
liquor  which  is  sweetest  in  one  stage,  becomes  sourest  in  another. 
"  Let  not  him  that  putteth  on  his  armor  boast  as  though  he  put- 
teth  it  off;"  for  even  common  sense  teaches  you  that  it  is  not 
to  begin,  but  to  continue  to  the  end,  which  marks  the  time  of  the 
child  of  God. 

But  we  need  not  look  to  analogy  and  to  mere  common  sense. 
Scripture  is  plain  enough.  What  says  John  ?  "  They  went 
out  from  us."  Why  ?  Were  they  ever  saints  ?  Oh  no !  "*They 
went  out  from  us,  because  they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had 
been  of  us,  doubtless  they  would  have  continued  wit><  us  ;  but  they 
went  out  from  us,  that  it  might  be  manifest  that  they  were  nol 


160  EXDCniXG   TO    fHb   END. 

of  us."  They  were  no  Christians,  or  else  they  had  not  thui 
apostatized.  Peter  saith,  "  It  hath  happened  unto  them  accord- 
ing to  the  proverb :  the  dog  hath  returned  to  its  vomit,  and  the 
sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire  ; "  indicating  at 
once  most  clearly  that  the  dog,  though  it  did  vomit,  always  was 
a  dog.  When  men  disgorge  their  sins  unwillingly,  not  giving 
them  up  because  they  dislike  them,  but  because  they  cannot 
retain  them,  if  a  favorable  time  comes,  they  will  return  to 
swallow  once  more  what  they  seemed  to  abandon.  The  sow  that 
was  washed  —  ay,  bring  it  into  the  parlor,  introduce  it  among 
society ;  it  was  washed^  and  well  washed  too ;  whoever  saw  so 
respectable  a  member  of  the  honorable  confraternity  of  swine 
before  ?  Bring  it  in !  Yes  ;  but  will  you  keep  it  there  ?  Wait 
and  see.  Because  you  have  not  transformed  it  into  a  man,  on 
the  first  occasion  it  will  be  found  wallowing  in  the  mire.  Why  ? 
Because  it  was  not  a  man,  but  a  sow.  And  so  we  think  we  may 
learn  from  multitudes  of  other  passages,  if  we  had  time  to  quote 
them,  that  those  who  go  back  into  perdition  are  not  saints  at  all ; 
for  perseverance  is  the  badge  of  the  righteous.  "  The  righteous 
shall  hold  on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  wax 
stronger  and  stronger."  We  not  only  get  life  by  faith,  but  faith 
sustains  it.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  "  But  if  any  man 
draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him." 

What  we  have  learned  from  Scripture,  dear  friends,  has  been 
abundantly  confirmed  hy  observation.  Every  day  would  I  bless 
God  that  in  so  numerous  a  church  we  have  comparatively  so 
few  who  have  proved  false ;  but  I  have  seen  enough,  and  the 
Lord  knoweth,  more  than  enough,  to  make  me  very  jealous 
over  you  with  a  godly  jealousy.  I  could  tell  of  many  an  instance 
of  men  and  women  who  did  run  well.  "What  did  hinder 
Ihem,  that  they  should  not  obey  the  truth?"  I  remember 
a  young  man  of  whom  I  thought  as  favorably  as  of  any  of 
you,  and  I  believe  he  did  at  that  time  deserve  our  favorab'e 
judgment.  He  walked  among  us,  one  of  the  most  hopeful  of  our 
sons,  and  we  hoped  that  God  would  make  him  serviceable  to  hia 
caiisc   lie  fell  into  bad  company.   There  was  enough  con^eiKie 


ENDUKING  TO   THE  END.  161 

left,  after  a  long  course  of  secret  sin,  to  make  him  feel  uncom- 
fortable in  his  wickedness,  though  he  did  not  give  it  up ;  and 
when  at  hast  his  sin  stared  him  in  the  face,  and  otliers  knew  it, 
so  ashamed  was  he,  that,  though  he  bore  the  Christian  name,  he 
took  poison,  that  he  might  escape  the  shame  which  he  had  brought 
upon  himself.  He  was  rescued  —  rescued  by  skill  and  the  good 
providence  of  God ;  but  where  he  is,  and  what  he  is,  God  only 
knoweth;  for  he  had  taken  another  poison,  more  deadly  still, 
which  made  him  the  slave  of  his  own  lusts. 

Do  not  think  it  is  the  young  alone,  however.  It  is  a  very  lamen- 
table fact  that  there  are,  in  proportion,  more  backslidings  among 
the  old  than  the  young ;  and  if  you  want  to  find  a  great  sinner 
in  that  respect,  you  will  find  him,  surely,  nine  times  out  of  tep 
with  gray  hairs  on  his  head.  Have  I  not  frequently  mentioned 
that  you  do  not  find  in  Scripture  many  cases  of  young  people 
going  astray.  You  do  find  believers  sinning,  but  they  were  all 
getting  old  men.  There  is  Noah  —  no  youth.  There  is  Lot,  when 
drunken  —  no  child.  There  is  David  with  Bathsheba — no 
young  man  in  the  heat  of  passion.  There  is  Peter  denying  his 
Lord  —  no  boy  at  the  time.  These  were  men  of  experience 
and  knowledge  and  wisdom.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  stand- 
eth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

With  sorrow  do  we  remember  one  whom,  years  ago,  we  h(;ard 
pray  among  us,  and  sweetly  too  ;  esteemed  and  trusted  by  us  alL 
I  remember  a  dear  brother  saying  very  kindly,  but  not  too 
wisely,  "  If  he  is  not  a  child  of  God,  I  am  not."  But  what  did 
he,  my  brethren,  to  our  shame  and  sorrow,  but  go  aside  to  the 
very  worst  and  foulest  of  sin  !  and  where  is  he  now  ?  Perhaps 
the  ale-house  may  tell,  or  worse  places  still.  So  we  have  seen 
that  earth's  sun  may  be  eclipsed,  earth's  stars  may  go  out,  and 
all  human  glory  melt  into  shame.  No  true  child  of  God  per- 
ishes —  hold  that  fast  ;  but  this  is  the  badge  of  a  true  child  of 
God,  —  that  a  man  endures  to  the  end  ,  and  if  a  man  does  not 
hold  on,  but  slinks  back  to  his  old  master,  and  once  again  fits  on 
the  old  collar,  and  wears  again  the  Satanic  yoke,  there  is  sure 
proof  that  lie  has  never  come  out  of  the  spiritual  Egypt  through 
14* 


162  ENDUIUNG  TO  THE  END. 

Jesus  Chrisf,  his  leader,  and  liatli  never  obtained  that  eternal 
life  which  cannot  die,  because  it  is  born  of  God.  I  have  thus, 
then,  dear  friends,  said  enough  to  prove,  I  think,  beyond  dispute, 
that  the  true  badge  of  the  Christian  is  perseverance,  and  thai 
without  it  no  man  has  proved  himself  to  be  a  child  of  God. 

II.     Secondly,  tekseverance  is,  therefore,  the  target 

OF  ALL  OUR  SPIRITUAL  ENEMIES. 

We  liavc  many  adversaries.  Look  at  the  world!  The  world 
does  not  object  to  our  being  Christians  for  a  time  ;  it  will  cheer- 
fully overlook  all  misdemeanors  in  that  way,  if  we  will  now  shake 
hands,  and  be  as  we  used  to  be.  Your  old  companions,  who 
used  to  call  you  such  good  fellows  when  you  were  bad  fellows, 
would  they  not  very  readily  forgive  you  for  having  been  Chris- 
tians if  you  would  just  go  back  and  be  as  in  days  gone  by?  Oh, 
certainly  !  they  would  look  upon  your  religion  as  a  freak  of 
folly,  but  they  would  very  easily  overlook  it  if  you  would  give  it 
up  for  the  future.  "  Oh !  "  saith  the  world,  "  come  back  —  come 
back  to  my  arms  once  more ;  be  enamored  of  me,  and  though 
thou  hast  spoken  some  hard  words  against  me,  and  done  some 
cruel  deeds  against  me,  I  will  cheerfully  forgive  thee."  The 
world  is  always  stabbing  at  the  believer's  perseverance.  Some- 
times she  will  bully  him  back ;  she  will  persecute  him  with  her 
tongue  —  cruel  mockings  shall  be  used  ;  and  at  another  time 
she  will  cozen  him,  "  Come  thou  back  to  me  ;  oh  !  come  thou 
back  !  Wherefore  should  we  disagree  ?  Thou  art  made  for  me, 
and  I  am  made  for  thee  !  "  And  she  beckons  so  gently  and  so 
sweetly,  even  as  Solomon's  harlot  of  old.  This  is  the  one  thing  with 
her,  that  thou  shouldst  cease  to  be  a  pilgrim,  and  settle  down  to 
buy  and  sell  with  her  in  Vanity  Fair. 

Your  second  enemy,  the  fiesh.  What  is  its  aim  ?  "  Oh  ! " 
cries  the  llesh,  "  we  have  had  enough  of  this ;  it  is  weary  work 
being  a  pilgrim :  come,  give  it  up."  Sloth  says,  "  Sit  still  where 
thou  art.  Enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast ;  at  least,  of  this  tedious 
t]  .h^g."  Then  Lust  crieth, "  Am  I  always  to  be  mortified  ?  Am 
I  De7er  to  be  indulged  ?     Give  me^  at  least,  a  furlough  from  tiiif 


ENDURING  10  THE  END.  163 

constant  warfare  ?  "  The  flesh  cares  not  how  soft  the  chain,  so 
that  it  does  but  hold  us  fast,  and  prevent  our  pressing  on  to 
glory. 

Then  come  i  in  the  devil ;  and  sometimes  he  beats  the  big  drum, 
and  cries,  wiih  a  thundering  voice,  "  There  is  no  heaven  ;  there 
is  no  God  :  you  arc  a  fool  to  persevere."  Or,  changing  his  tac- 
tics, he  cries,  "  Comeback  !  I  will  give  thee  a  better  treatment 
than  thou  hadst  before.  Thou  though  test  me  a  hard  master,  but 
that  was  misrepresentation.  Come  and  try  me  ;  I  am  a  different 
devil  from  what  I  was  ten  years  ago  ;  I  am  respectable  to  what 
I  was  then.  I  do  not  want  you  to  go  back  to  the  low  theatre  or 
the  casino.  Come  with  me,  and  be  a  respectable  lover  of 
pleasure.  I  tell  thee,  I  can  dress  in  broadcloth  as  well  as  in 
corduroy ;  and  I  can  walk  in  the  courts  of  kings,  as  well  as  in  the 
courts  and  alleys  of  the  beggar.  Oh  !  come  back  !  "  he  saith, "  and 
make  thyself  one  of  mine."  So  that  this  hellish  trinity  —  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil  —  all  stab  at  the  Christian's  perseverance, 

His  perseverance  in  service  they  will  frequently  attack :  "  What 
profit  is  there  in  serving  God  ? "  The  devil  will  say  to  me  some- 
times, as  he  did  to  Jonah,  "  Flee  thou  unto  Tarshish,  and  do  not 
stop  in  this  Nineveh  :  they  will  not  believe  thy  word,  though 
thou  speak  in  God's  name  !  "  To  you  he  will  say,  "  Why,  you 
are  so  busy  all  the  six  days  of  the  week,  what  is  the  good  of 
spending  your  Sunday  with  a  parcel  of  noisy  brats  in  a  Sunday- 
school  ?  Why  go  about  Avith  those  tracts  in  the  streets  ?  Much 
good  you  will  get  from  it.  Would  not  you  be  better  with  having 
a  little  rest  ?  "  Ah  !  that  word  rest.  Some  of  us  are  very  fond 
of  it ;  but  we  ought  to  recollect  that  we  spoil  it  if  we  try  to  get 
it  here,  for  rest  is  only  beyond  the  grave.  We  shall  have  rest 
enough  when  once  we  come  into  the  presence  of  our  Lord.  Per- 
reverance  in  service,  then,  the  de'sil  would  murder  OLtright. 

If  he  cannot  stay  us  in  service,  he  will  try  to  prevent  our  per- 
severance in  suffering.  "Why  be  patient  any  longer?"  saya 
he.  "  Why  sit  on  that  dunghill,  scraping  your  sores  with  a  pot* 
Bherd  ?  Curse  God,  and  die.  You  have  been  always  poor  since 
you  have  bec^n  a  Christian ;  your  busmess  dofe  not  prosper;  jou 


164  ENDURING  TO  TITE  EXD. 

gee,  you  cannot  make  money  unless  you  do  as  others  do.  Yon 
must  go  with  the  times,  or  else  you  will  not  get  on.  Give  it  all 
up.  Why  be  always  suffering  like  this  ?  "  Thus  the  foul  spirit 
tempts  us.  Or  you  may  have  espoused  some  good  cause,  and 
the  moment  you  open  your  mouth,  many  laugh  and  try  to  put 
you  down.  "  Well,"  says  the  devil,  "  be  put  down  —  what  is 
the  use  of  it  ?  Why  make  yourself  singularly  eccentric,  and 
expose  yourself  to  perpetual  martyrdom  '^  It  is  all  rery  nice," 
saith  ho,  "  if  you  will  be  a  martyr,  to  be  burnt  at  once,  and  have 
done  with  it ;  but  to  hang,  like  Lord  Cobham,  to  be  roasted  over 
a  slow  fire  for  days,  is  not  comfortable.  Why,"  saith  the  tempter, 
"why  be  always  suffering?  Give  it  up."  You  see,  then,  it  is 
also  perseverance  in  suffering  which  the  devil  shooteth  at. 

Or,  perhaps,  it  is  perseverance  in  steadfastness.  The  love  of 
many  has  waxed  cold,  but  you  remain  zealous.  "  Well,"  saith 
he,  "  what  is  the  good  of  your  being  so  zealous  ?  Other  people 
are  good  enough  people;  you  could  not  censure  them:  why  do 
you  want  to  be  more  righteous  than  they  are  ?  Why  should  you 
be  pushing  the  church  before  you,  and  dragging  the  world  behind 
you  ?  What  need  is  there  for  you  to  go  two  marches  in  one 
day  ?  Is  not  one  enough  ?  Do  as  the  rest  do  ;  loiter  as  they 
do.  Sleep  as  do  others,  and  let  your  lamp  go  out,  as  other  vir- 
gins do."  Thus  is  our  perseverance  in  steadfastness  frequentl} 
assailed. 

Or  else  it  will  be  our  doctrinal  sentiments.  "  Why,"  says 
Satan,  "  do  you  hold  to  these  denominational  creeds  ?  Sensible 
men  are  getting  more  liberal ;  they  are  giving  away  what  does 
not  belong  to  them  —  God's  truth ;  they  are  removing  the  old 
iandma'-ks,  Ac^s  of  uniformity  are  to  be  repealed ;  articles  and 
creeds  are  to  \j^  laid  aside  as  useless  lumber,  not  necessary  for 
this  very  enlightened  age.  Fall  in  with  this,  and  be  an  Anything- 
arian.  Believe  that  black  is  white  ;  hold  that  truth  and  a  lie 
are  very  much  akin  to  one  another,  and  that  it  does  not  matter 
which  we  do  believe,  for  we  are  all  of  us  right,  though  we  flatly 
conti-a/iict  each  other ;  that  the  Bible  is  a  nose  of  wax,  to  fit  any 
fece  ;  that  it  does  not  teach  anything  material,  b  U   you   maj? 


ENDURIXa  TO  THE  END.  165 

make  it  say  anything  you  like.     Do  that  "  saith  he,  "  and  be  no 
longer  firm  in  your  opinion." 

I  think  I  have  proved — and  need  not  waste  more  words 
about  it  —  that  perseverance  is  the  target  for  all  enemies.  AVear 
your  shield,  Christian,  therefore,  close  upon  your  armor,  and 
cry  mightily  unto  God,  that  by  his  Spirit  you  may  endure  to 
the  end. 


III.  Thirdly,  brethren,  perseverance  is  the  glory  of 
Christ. 

That  he  makes  all  his  people  persevere  to  the  end,  is  greatly 
to  his  honor.  If  they  should  fall  away  and  perish,  every  office 
and  work  and  attribute  of  Christ  would  be  stained  in  the  mire. 
If  any  one  child  of  God  should  perish,  where  were  Christ's  cove- 
nant engagements?  What  is  he  worth  as  a  mediator  of  the 
covenant  and  the  surety  of  it,  if  he  hath  not  made  the  promises 
sure  to  all  the  seed  ?  My  brethren,  Christ  is  made  a  leader  and 
commander  of  the  people,  to  bring  many  souls  into  glory ;  but 
if  he  doth  not  bring  them  into  glory,  where  is  the  Captain's  honor  ? 
Where  is  the  efficacy  of  the  precious  blood,  if  it  does  not  effi^ct- 
ually  redeem?  If  it  only  redeemeth  for  a  time,  and  then 
suffisreth  us  to  perish,  where  is  its  value  ?  If  it  only  blots  out 
sin  for  a  few  weeks,  and  then  permits  that  sin  to  return  and  to 
remain  upon  us,  where,  I  say,  is  the  glory  of  Calvary,  and  where 
is  the  lustre  of  the  wounds  of  Jesus  ?  He  lives  —  he  lives  to  in- 
tercede :  but  how  can  I  honor  his  intercession,  if  it  be  fruitless  ? 
Does  he  not  pray,  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thoa 
hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am  ; "  and  if  they  be  not 
finally  brought  to  be  with  him  where  he  is,  where  is  the  honor 
of  his  intercession  ?  Hath  not  the  Pleader  failed,  and  the  irreat 
Mediator  been  dismissed  without  success  ?  Is  he  not  at  this  day  in 
union  with  his  people  ?  But  what  is  the  value  of  union  to  Christ, 
if  that  union  does  not  insure  salvation  ?  Is  he  not  to-day  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  preparing  a  place  for  his  saints  ?  and  will  he 
prepare  a  place  for  them,  and  then  lose  them  on  the  road  ?  Oh ! 
can  it  be  that  he  procures  the  harp  and  the  crown,  and  will  no* 


166  ESTDURIXl  TO  THE  END. 

save  souls  to  us«  tb  jm  ?  My  brethren,  tbe  perishing  of  oi.e  true 
child  of  God  would  be  such  dishonor  to  Jesus,  that  I  cannot 
think  of  it  without  considering  it  as  blasphemj.  One  true  be- 
liever in  hell !  Oh  !  what  laughter  in  the  pit  —  what  defiance, 
what  unholy  mirth  !  "  Ah  !  Prince  of  life  and  glory,"  saith  the 
prince  of  the  pit,  "  I  have  defeated  thee.  I  have  snatched  the 
prey  from  the  mighty,  and  the  lawful  captive  I  have  delivered ; 
I  have  torn  a  jewel  from  thy  crown.  See  !  here  it  is  !  Thou 
didst  redeem  this  soul  with  blood,  and  yet  it  is  in  hell."  Hear 
what  Satan  cries  —  "  Christ  suffered  for  this  soul,  and  yet  God 
makes  it  suffer  for  itself.  Where  is  the  justice  of  God  ?  "  Christ 
came  from  heaven  to  earth  to  save  this  soul,  and  failed  in  itie 
attempt,  and  I  have  him  here ; "  and  as  he  plunges  that  soul 
into  deeper  waves  of  woe,  the  shout  of  triumph  goes  up  more  and 
more  blasphemously  —  "  We  have  conquered  heaven !  We  have 
rent  the  eternal  covenant ;  we  have  foiled  the  purposes  of  God ;  wo, 
have  defeated  his  decree ;  we  have  triumphed  over  the  power  of 
the  Mediator,  and  (;ast  his  blood  to  the  ground !  "  Shall  it  ever  be  ? 
Atrocious  question  !  It  can  never  be.  They  who  are  in  Christ 
are  saved.  They  whom  Jesus  Christ  hath  really  taken  into 
union  with  himself,  shall  be  with  him  where  he  is.  But  how 
are  you  to  know  whether  you  are  in  union  with  Christ  ?  My 
brethren,  you  can  only  know  it  by  obeying  the  apostle's  words, 
"  Give  all  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure." 

IV.  I  close,  therefore,  with  but  a  hint  on  the  last  point,  per- 
severance SHOULD  BE  THE  GREAT  CARE  OF  EVERT  CHRISTIAN 
—  his  daily  and  his  nightly  care.  Oh  beloved  I  I  conjure  you 
by  the  love  of  God,  and  by  the  love  of  your  own  souls,  be  faith- 
ful unto  death.  Have  you  difficulties?  You  must  conquer 
them.  Hannibal  crossed  the  Alps,  for  his  heart  was  full  of  fury 
against  Rome  ;  and  you  must  cross  the  Alps  of  difficulty,  for  I 
trust  your  heart  is  full  of  hatred  of  sin.  When  Mr.  Smeaton 
fiad  built  the  lighthouse  upon  the  Eddystone,  he  looked  out 
anxiously  after  a  storm  to  see  if  the  edifice  was  still  there,  and  \\ 
was  his  great  joy  wh^n  he  could  sf  e  it  still  standing ;  for  a  former 


ENDURING  TO  THE  END.  1G7 

builder  had  constructed  an  edifice  which  he  thought  to  be  inde« 
structible,  and  expressed  a  wish  that  he  might  be  n  it  in  the 
worst  storm  which  ever  blew ;  and  he  was  so,  and  neither  himself 
nor  his  lighthouse  were  ever  seen  afterwards.  Now  you  have 
to  be  exposed  to  raulhtudes  of  storms.  You  must  be  in  yoiiT 
lighthouse  in  the  worse  storm  which  ever  blew.  Build  firmly^ 
then,  on  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and  make  sure  work  for  eternity  ;  for 
if  you  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall.  For  this  church's 
sake,  I  pray  you  do  it ;  for  noLhing  can  dishonor  and  weaken  a 
church  so  much  as  the  falls  of  professors.  A  thousand  rivers 
flow  to  the  sea  and  make  rich  the  meadows,  but  no  man  heareth 
the  sound  thereof,  but  if  there  be  one  cataract,  its  roaring  will 
be  heard  for  miles,  and  every  traveller  will  mark  the  fall.  A 
thousand  Christians  can  scarcely  do  such  honor  to  their  Master 
as  one  hypocrite  can  do  dishonor  to  him.  If  you  have  ever 
tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  pray  that  your  foot  slip  not. 
It  would  be  infinitely  better  to  bury  you  in  the  earth  than  see 
you  buried  in  sin.  If  I  must  be  lost,  God  grant  it  may  not  be 
as  an  apostate.  If  I  must,  after  all,  perish,  were  it  not  better 
never  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness,  than,  after  hav- 
ing known  the  theory  of  it,  and  something  of  the  enjoyment  of 
it,  turn  again  to  the  beggarly  elements  of  the  world  ?  Let  your 
prayer  be  not  against  death,  but  against  sin.  For  your  own 
sake,  for  the  church's  sake,  for  the  name  of  Christ's  sake, 
I  pray  vou  do  this.  But  ye  cannot  persevere  except  by  much 
watchfulness  in  the  closet,  much  carefulness  over  every  action, 
much  dependence  upon  the  strong  hand  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who 
alone  can  make  you  stand.  Walk  and  live  as  in  the  sight  of 
God,  knowing  where  your  great  strength  lieth  ;  and  depend  upon 
it,  you  shall  yet  sing  that  sweet  doxology  in  Jude,  "  Now  unto 
him  that  is  able  to  keep  you  from  falling,  and  to  present  you 
faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  v/ith  exceeding  joy, 
to  the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour,  be  glory  and  majesty,  do- 
minion and  power,  both  now  and  ever.  Amen."  A  simple  faith 
brings  the  soul  to  Christ,  Christ  keeps  the  faith  alive.  That 
faith  enables  the  believer  to  persevere,  and  so  he  enters  heaven, 
May  that  be  your  lot  and  mine  for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


SERMON  IX, 


NOTHING  BUT  LEAVES. 

"HK  POUND  NoxniNQ  BUT  LEAVES."  —  Mark  xi.  13. 

Most  of  the  miracles  of  Moses  were  grand  displays  of  diviD€ 
j  jstice.  What  were  the  first  ten  wonders  but  ten  plagues  ?  The 
same  may  be  said  of  the  prophets,  especially  of  Elijah  and  Eiisha. 
Was  it  not  significant  botli  of  the  character  and  mission  of  Elias 
when  he  called  fire  from  heaven  upon  the  captains  of  fifties  ?  Nor 
was  he  upon  whom  his  mantle  descended  less  terrible  when  the 
she-bears  avenged  him  upon  the  mockers.  It  remained  for  our 
incarnate  Lord  to  reveal  the  heart  of  God.  The  only-begotten 
was  full  of  grace  and  truth,  and  in  his  miracles  pre-eminently  God 
is  set  forth  to  us  as  love.  With  the  exception  of  the  miracle 
before  us,  and,  perhaps,  a  part  of  another,  all  the  miracles  of 
Jesus  were  entirely  benevolent  in  their  character ;  indeed,  this 
one  is  no  exception  in  reality,  but  only  in  appearance.  The 
raising  of  the  dead,  the  feeding  of  the  multitude,  the  stilling  of 
the  tempest,  the  healing  of  diseases  —  what  were  all  these  but 
di:;plays  of  the  loving-kindness  of  God  ?  What  was  this  to  teach 
us  but  that  Jesus  Christ  came  forth  from  his  Father  on  un  errand 
of  pure  grace  ? 

"  Thine  hands,  dear  Jesus,  were  not  arm'd 

"With  an  avcnj2;in<?  rod, 
No  hard  commission  to  perform 

The  vengeance  of  a  God. 

**  But  all  was  mercy,  all  was  mild, 
And  wrath  forsook  the  throne, 
When  Christ  on  his  kind  errand  came 
And  bro  ight  salvation  down." 


KOTIIIN'G    HUT   LEAVES.  169 

liCt  us  rejoice  that  God  commendetli  Lis  love  towards  us,  because 

in  "  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly." 

Yet,  as  if  to  show  that  Jesus  th3  Saviour  is  also  Jesus  the 
Judge,  one  gleam  of  justice  must  dart  forth.  Where  shall  mercy 
direct  its  fall  ?  See,  my  brethren  !  it  glances  not  upon  a  man. 
but  lights  upon  an  unconscious,  unsuffering  thing  —  a  tree.  The 
curse,  if  we  may  call  it  a  curse  at  all,  did  not  fall  on  man  or 
beast,  or  even  the  smallest  insect :  its  bolt  falls  harmlessly  upon 
a  fig  tree  by  the  wayside.  It  bore  upon  itself  the  signs  of  bar- 
renness, and  perhaps  was  no  one's  property.  Little,  therefore, 
was  the  loss  which  any  man  sustained  by  the  withering  of  that 
verdant  mockery,  while  instruction  more  precious  than  a  thou- 
sand acres  of  lig  trees  has  been  left  for  the  benefit  of  all  ages. 
The  only  other  instance,  at  which  I  hinted  just  now,  was  the 
permission  given  to  the  devils  to  enter  into  the  swine,  and  the 
whole  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place  into  the  sea,  and 
perished  in  the  waters.  In  that  case,  again,  what  a  mercy  it  was 
that  the  Saviour  did  not  permit  a  band  of  men  to  become  the 
victims  of  the  evil  one !  It  was  infinitely  better  that  the  whole 
held  of  swine  should  perish  than  that  one  poor  man  should  be 
rendered  a  maniac  through  their  influence.  The  creatures  choked 
in  the  abyss  were  nothing  but  swine  —  swine  which  their  Jewish 
owners  had  no  right  to  keep  ;  and  even  then  they  did  not  perish 
through  Jesus  Christ's  agency,  but  through  the  malice  of  the 
devils,  —  for  needs  must  even  swine  run  when  the  devil  drives. 

Observe,  then,  with  attention,  this  solitary  instance  of  stern 
judgment  wrought  by  the  Saviour's  hand.  Consider  seriously 
(hat  if  only  once  in  his  whole  life  Christ  works  a  miracle  of  pure 
judgment,  the  lesson  so  unique  must  be  very  full  of  meaning. 
If  there  be  but  one  curse,  where  does  it  fall  ?  What  is  its  sym- 
bolic teaching  ?  I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  felt  more  solemnly 
the  need  of  true  faithfulness  before  God  than  when  I  was  look- 
ing over  this  miracle-parable  —  for  such  it  may  justly  be  called. 
The  curse,  you  at  once  perceive,  falls  in  its  metaphorical  and 
spiritual  meaning  upon  those  high  professors  who  are  destitute 
of  true  holiness  ;  upon  those  who  manifest  great  show  of  leaves^ 
15 


170  NOTHING  CUT  LEAVES. 

but  who  bring  forth  no  fruit  unto  God.  Only  one  thunderbolt, 
and  that  for  boasting  pretenders  ;  only  one  curse,  and  that  for 
hypocrites.  0  blessed  Spirit!  write  ih'in  heart ssearching  truth 
ui)on  our  hearts. 

1.     We  will  commence  our  exposition  with  the  remark  that 

THERE  WERE  MANY  TREES  WITH  LEAVES  OXLY  UPON  THEif, 
AND  YET  NONE  OF  THESE  WERE  CURSED  BY  THE  SAVIOUR, 

SAVE  ONLY  THIS  FIG  TREE.  It  is  tlic  nature  of  many  trees  to 
yield  to  man  nothing  but  their  shade.  The  hungering  Saviour 
did  not  resort  to  the  oak  or  to  the  elm  to  look  for  food,  nor  could 
the  fir  tree,  nor  the  pine,  nor  the  box  offer  him  any  hope  of 
refreshment ;  nor  did  he  breathe  one  hard  word  concerning  them, 
for  he  knew  what  was  in  them,  and  that  they  neither  v/ere,  nor 
pretended  to  be,  fruit-bearing  trees.  So,  dear  friends,  there  are 
many  men  whose  lives  bear  leaves,  but  no  fruit;  and  yet,  thankg 
be  unto  God,  almighty  patience  bears  with  them.  They  are 
allowed  to  live  out  their  time,  and  then,  it  is  true,  they  are  '.ut 
down  and  cast  into  the  fire  ;  but  while  they  are  permitted  to 
Btand,  no  curse  withers  them :  the  long-suffering  of  God  wa^v.th 
to  be  gracious  to  them.  Here  are  some  of  the  characteiv  (rho 
have  leaves  but  no  fruit. 

There  are  thousands  who  ignorantly  follow  the  sign,  and  hiow 
nothing  of  the  substance.  In  England,  we  think  ourselves  far  in 
advance  of  popish  countries ;  but  how  much  of  the  essence  of 
Popery  peeps  out  in  the  worship  of  very  many  !  They  go  to 
church  or  chapel,  and  they  think  that  the  mere  going  iuco  the 
place  and  sitting  a  certain  time  and  coming  out  again  is  an  ac- 
^eptable  act  to  God ;  mere  formality,  you  see,  is  mistfJ.en  for 
spiritual  worship.  They  are  careful  to  have  their  infants 
sprinkled,  but  what  the  ceremony  means  they  know  not ;  and 
without  looking  into  the  Bible  to  see  whether  the  L«;rd  com- 
mands any  such  an  ordinance,  they  offer  him  their  ignorant  will- 
worship,  either  in  obedience  to  custom,  or  in  the  superstition  of 
ignorance.  What  the  thing  is,  or  why  it  is,  they  do  not  in- 
quire, bat  go  through  a  performance  as  certain  parrots  say  theif 


NOTHING  LUT   LEAVES.  171 

prayers.  They  know  nothing  about  the  inward  and  spiritual  grace 
which  the  catechism  talks  about,  if,  indeed,  inward  spiritual  grace 
could  ever  be  connected  with  an  unscriptural  outward  and  visible 
sign.  When  these  poor  souls  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  their 
thoughts  go  no  further  than  the  bread  and  wine,  or  the  hands 
which  break  the  one  and  pour  out  the  other.  They  know  nothing 
whatever  of  communion  with  Jesus,  of  eating  his  liesh  and  drink- 
ing his  blood.  Their  souls  have  proceeded  as  far  as  the  shell,  but 
they  have  never  broken  into  the  kernel  to  taste  the  sweetness 
thereof.  They  have  a  name  to  live,  and  are  dead  ;  their  religion 
is  a  mere  show ;  a  signboard  without  an  inn ;  a  well-set  tabl^ 
without  meat ;  a  pretty  pageant  where  nothing  is  gold,  but 
everything  gilt,  —  nothing  real,  but  all  pasteboard,  paint,  plaster, 
and  pretence.  Nonconformists,  your  chisels  swarm  with  such, 
and  tJie  houses  of  the  Establishment  are  full  of  the  same.  Mul- 
titudes live  and  die  satisfied  with  the  outward  trappings  of  reli- 
gion, and  are  utter  strangers  to  internal  vital  godliness.  Yet 
such  persons  are  not  cursed  in  this  life.  No :  they  are  to  be 
pitied,  to  be  prayed  for,  to  be  sought  after,  with  vrords  of  love 
and  honest  truth  ;  they  are  to  be  hoped  for  yet,  for  who  know^eth 
but  that  God  may  call  them  to  repentance,  and  they  may  yet 
receive  the  life  of  God  into  their  souls  ? 

Another  very  numerous  class  have  opinion^  hut  not  faith  ; 
creed,  but  not  credence.  We  meet  them  everywhere.  How 
zealous  they  are  for  Protestantism  !  They  would  not  only  die 
for  orthodoxy,  but  kill  others  as  well.  Perhaps  it  is  the  Calvin- 
:stic  doctrine  which  they  have  received ;  and  then,  the  five  points 
are  as  dear  to  them  as  their  five  senses.  These  men  will  con- 
tend, not  to  say  earnestly,  but  savagely,  for  the  faith.  Tliey  very 
vehemently  denounce  all  those  who  differ  from  them  in  the 
smallest  degree,  and  deal  damnation  round  the  land  with  amazing 
liberality  to  all  who  arc  not  full  weight  according  to  the  balance 
of  their  little  Zoar,  Rehoboth,  or  Jireh ;  while  all  the  while  the 
spirit  of  Christ,  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  bowels  of  compassion,  and 
holiness  of  character  are  no  more  to  be  expected  from  them  than 
grapes  from  thorns,  or  figs  from  thistles.     Doctrine,  my  bretliren, 


172  NOTIITNO   r.UT    IXAVES. 

is  to  be  prized  above  all  price  I  AVoe  to  the  church  of  God  when 
error  shall  be  thought  a  trillc,  for  truth  will  be  lightly  esteemed ; 
and  when  truth  is  gone,  what  is  left?  But  at  the  same  time  we 
grossly  mistake  if  we  think  that  orthodoxy  of  creed  will  save  us. 
I  am  sick  of  those  cries  of  "the  truth,"  "  the  truth,"  "  the  truth,' 
from  men  of  rotten  lives  and  unholy  tempers.  There  is  an  or- 
thodox as  well  as  a  heterodox  road  to  hell,  and  the  devil  knows 
how  to  handle  Calvinists  quite  as  well  as  Arminians.  Ko  pale 
of  any  church  can  insure  salvation  ;  no  form  of  doctrine  can  guar- 
antee to  us  eternal  life.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  Ye  must 
bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance.  "  Every  tree  which 
bringeth  not  forth  fruit,  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  lire." 
Stopping  short  of  vital  union  to  the  Lord  Jesus  by  real  faith,  we 
miss  the  great  quaUScation  for  entering  heaven.  Yet  the  time 
is  not  come  when  these  mere  head-knowers  are  cursed.  These 
trees  have  leaves  only,  but  no  fatal  curse  has  withered  them 
hopelessly.  No  :  they  are  to  be  sought  after ;  they  may  yet 
know  the  Lord  in  their  hearts,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  may  yet  make 
them  humble  followers  of  the  Lamb.     Oh  that  it  may  be  so  ! 

A  third  class  have  talk  without  feeling.  Mr.  Talkative,  in 
"  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  is  the  representative  of  a  very  numerous 
host.  They  speak  very  glibly  concerning  divine  things.  Whether 
the  topic  be  doctrinal,  experimental,  or  practical,  they  talk  flu- 
ently upon  everything.  But,  evidently,  the  whole  thing  comes 
from  the  throat  and  the  lip :  there  is  no  welling  up  from  the 
heart.  If  the  thing  came  from  the  heart,  it  would  be  boiling ; 
but  now  it  hangs  like  an  icicle  from  their  lips.  You  know  them 
—  you  may  learn  something  from  them  ;  but  all  the  while  you  are 
yourself  aware  that  if  they  bless  others  by  their  words,  ihey 
themselves  remain  unblessed.  Ah !  let  us  be  very  anxious  lest 
this  should  be  our  own  case.  Let  the  preacher  feel  the  anxiety 
of  the  Apostle  Paul,  lest,  after  having  preached  to  others,  he 
himself  should  be  a  castaway ;  and  let  my  hearers  feel  the  same 
concern,  lest,  after  talking  about  the  things  of  God,  they  should 
prove  to  be  mere  lip-servers,  and  not  accepted  children  of  lh« 
Most  High. 


KOTHING  BUT  LEAVES.  173 

Another  tribe  springs  up  just  now  before  my  eye,  —  those  who 
have  regrets  without  repentance.  Many  of  you  under  a  heart- 
searching  sermon  feel  grieved  on  account  of  your  sins,  and  yet 
never  have  the  strength  of  mind  to  give  them  up.  You  say  you 
are  sorry,  but  yet  go  on  in  the  same  course.  You  do  really  feel, 
when  death  and  judgment  press  upon  you,  a  certain  sort  of  re- 
gret that  you  could  have  been  so  foolish  ;  but  the  nest  day  the 
strength  of  temptation  is  such  that  you  fall  a  prey  to  the  very 
same  infatuation.  It  is  easy  to  bring  a  man  to  the  river  of 
regret,  but  you  cannot  make  him  drink  the  water  of  repentance. 
If  Agag  would  be  killed  with  words,  no  Amalekite  would  live. 
If  men's  transient  sorrows  for  sin  w^ere  real  repentance  on  ac- 
count of  it,  there  is  not  a  man  living  who  would  not,  sometime  or 
other,  have  been  a  true  penitent.  Here,  however,  are  leaves 
only,  and  no  fruit. 

We  have  yet,  again,  another  class  of  persons  who  have  resolves 
without  action.  They  will!  Ah!  that  they  will/  but  it  is 
always  in  the  future  tense.  They  are  hearers,  and  they  are  even 
feelers,  but  they  are  not  doers  of  the  Word ;  it  never  comes  to 
that.  They  would  be  free,  but  they  have  not  patience  to  file 
their  fetters,  nor  grace  to  submit  their  manacles  to  the  hammer. 
They  see  the  right,  but  they  permit  the  wrong  to  rule  them. 
They  are  charmed  with  the  beauties  of  holiness,  and  yet  deluded 
with  the  wantonness  of  sin.  They  would  run  in  the  w^ays  of 
God's  commandments,  but  the  road  is  too  rough,  and  running  is 
weary  work.  They  would  fight  for  God,  but  victory  is  hardly 
won.  and  so  they  turn  back  almost  as  soon  as  they  have  set  out ; 
they  put  their  hand  to  the  plough,  and  then  prove  utterly  unwor- 
thy of  the  kingdom. 

The  great  majority  of  persons  who  have  any  sort  of  religion  al 
all,  bear  leaves  ;  but  they  produce  no  fruit.  I  know  there  are  some 
such  here,  and  I  solemnly  warn  you,  though  no  curse  falls  upon 
you,  though  we  do  not  think  that  the  miracle  now  under  consid- 
eration has  any  relation  to  you  whatever,  yet,  remember  there  is 
nothing  to  be  done  w^ith  trees  which  bring  forth  only  leaves,  l?ut 
in  due  time  to  use  the  axe  upon  them,  and  to  cast  thera  into  the 
15* 


174  KO'ilIIXG  DUT  LEAVES. 

Gre ;  and  this  must  be  your  doom.  As  sure  as  you  live  under 
the  sound  of  the  gospel,  and  yet  are  not  converted  by  it,  so  surely 
will  you  be  cast  into  outer  darkness.  As  certainly  as  Jesus  Christ 
invites  you  and  ye  will  not  come,  so  certainly  will  he  send  his 
angels  to  gather  tlie  dead  branches  together,  and  you  among 
them,  to  cast  them  into  the  fire.  Beware  !  beware,  thou  fruit- 
less tree  !  thou  shalt  not  stand  forever !  Mercy  waters  thee  with 
her  tears  now  ;  God's  loving-kindness  digs  about  thee  still,  —  still 
the  husbandman  comes,  seeking  fruit  upon  thee,  year  after  year. 
Beware !  The  edge  of  the  axe  is  sharp,  and  the  arm  which  wields 
it  is  nothing  less  than  almighty.  Beware  !  lest  thou  fall  into  the 
firel 

II.     Secondly,  there  were  other  trees  with  neither 

LEAVES  NOR  FRUIT,  AND  NONE    OF  THESE  WERE  CURSED. 

The  time  of  figs  was  not  yet  come.  Now,  as  the  fig  tree  either 
brings  forth  the  fig  before  the  leaf,  or  else  produces  figs  and 
leaves  at  the  same  time,  the  major  part  of  the  trees,  perhaps  all 
of  them,  w^Ithout  exception  of  this  one,  were  entirely  without 
figs  and  without  leaves  ;  and  yet  Jesus  did  not  curse  any  one  of 
them,  for  the  time  of  figs  was  not  yet  come. 

What  multitudes  are  destitute  of  anything  like  religion  !  They 
make  no  profession  of  it ;  they  not  only  have  no  fruits  of  godli- 
ness, but  they  have  no  leaves  even  of  outward  respect  to  it ;  they 
do  not  frequent  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house ;  they  use  no  form 
of  prayer;  they  never  attend  upon  ordinances.  The  great  out- 
lying mass  of  this  huge  city  —  how  does  religion  affect  it  ?  It  is 
a  very  sad  thing  to  think  that  there  are  people  living  in  total 
darkness  next  door  to  the  light ;  that  you  may  find  in  the  very 
street  where  the  gospel  is  preached,  persons  who  have  never 
heard  a  sermon.  Are  there  not,  throughout  this  city,  tens  and 
hundreds  of  thousands  who  know  not  their  right  hand  from  their 
left,  in  matters  of  godliness?  Their  children  go  to  Sabbath- 
schools,  but  they  themselves  spend  the  whole  Sabbath-day  in 
anything  except  the  worship  of  God.  In  our  country  parishes, 
very  often  neither  the  religion  of  the  Establishment  nor  of  Dis« 


NOTmXG  BUT  LEAVES.  175 

Bent  at  all  affects  the  population.  Take,  for  instance,  that  village 
wliich  will  be  disgracefully  remembered  as  long  as  Essex  endures, 
—  the  village  of  Iledingliam.  There  are  in  that  place  not  only 
parish  churches,  but  dissenting  meeting-houses  ;  and  yet  the  per- 
sons who  foully  murdered  the  poor  wretch  supposed  to  be  a 
wizard^  must  have  been  as  ignornnt  and  indifferent  to  common 
sense,  let  alone  religion,  as  even  Hottentots  or  Kaffirs,  to  whom 
the  light  of  religion  has  never  come.  Why  was  this  ?  Is  it  not 
because  there  is  not  enough  of  missionary  spirit  among  Chris- 
tian people  to  seek  out  those  who  are  in  the  lowest  strata  of 
society,  so  that  multitudes  escape  without  ever  coming  into  con- 
tact with  godliness  at  all  ?  In  London,  the  city  missionaries 
will  bear  witness  that  while  they  can  sometimes  get  at  the  wives, 
yet  there  are  thousands  of  husbands,  who  are  necessarily  away 
at  the  time  of  the  missionary's  visit,  who  have  not  a  word  of 
rebuke,  or  exhortation,  or  invitation,  or  encouragement  ever 
sounding  in  their  ears  at  all,  from  the  day  of  their  birth  to  the 
day  of  their  death ;  and  they  might,  for  all  practical  purposes,  as 
well  have  been  bom  in  the  centre  of  Africa  as  in  the  city  of 
London  ;  for  they  are  without  God,  without  hope,  —  aliens  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel ;  far  off,  not  by  wicked  works  only, 
but  by  dense  ignorance  of  God. 

These  persons  we  may  divide  into  two  classes,  upon  neither  of 
whom  does  the  withering  curse  fall  in  this  life.  The  first  we 
look  upon  with  hope.  Although  we  see  neither  leaves  nor  fruit, 
we  know  that  '^  the  time  of  Jigs  is  not  yet"  They  are  God's 
elect,  but  they  are  not  called.  Their  names  are  in  the  Lamb's 
Book  of  Life,  and  were  there  from  before  the  foundations  of  the 
world.  Though  they  be  dead  in  trespasses,  they  are  the  objects 
of  divine  love ;  and  they  must,  in  due  time,  be  called  by  irresisti- 
ble grace,  and  turned  from  darkness  to  light.  "  The  Lord  hath 
much  people  in  this  city,"  and  this  should  be  the  encouragement 
of  every  one  of  you  to  try  to  do  good,  that  God  has  among  the 
vilest  of  the  vile,  the  most  reprobate,  the  most  debauched  and 
drunken;  an  elect  people  who  must  be  saved.  When  you  take 
the  Word  to  them,  you  do  so  because  Grod  has  ordained  you  ta 


176  NOTHING  BUT  LEAVES. 

be  the  messenger  of  life  to  their  souls ;  and  they  m  ist  receive  it, 
for  so  the  decree  of  predestination  runs  :  thej  must  be  called  in 
the  fulness  of  time  to  be  the  brethren  of  Christ  and  children  of 
the  Most  High.  They  are  redeemed,  beloved  friends,  but  nol 
regenerated ;  as  much  redeemed  with  precious  blood  as  the 
saints  before  the  eternal  throne.  They  arc  Christ's  property; 
and  yet,  perhaps,  they  are  wailing  around  tlie  ale-house  at  Ihij 
very  moment,  until  the  door  shall  open  ;  —  bought  with  Jesus' 
precious  blood,  and  yet  spending  their  nights  in  a  brothel,  and 
their  days  in  sin.  But  if  Jesus  Christ  purchased  them  he  will 
have  them.  If  he  counted  down  the  precious  drops,  God  is  not 
unfaithful  to  forget  the  price  which  his  Son  has  paid.  He  will 
not  suffer  his  substitution  to  be  in  any  case  an  ineffectual,  dead 
thing.  Tens  of  thousands  of  redeemed  ones  are  not  regenerated 
yet,  but  regenerated  they  must  be  ;  and  this  is  your  comfort  and 
mine,  when  we  go  out  with  the  quickening  Word  of  God.  Nay, 
more ;  these  ungodly  ones  are  prayed  for  by  Christ  before  the 
throne.  "  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,"  saitli  the  great  Inter- 
cessor, "  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on  me  through  their 
word."  They  do  not  pray  for  themselves.  Poor  ignorant  souls, 
they  do  not  know  anything  about  prayer ;  but  Jesus  prays  for 
them.  Their  names  are  on  his  breast,  and  ere  long  they  must 
bow  their  stubborn  knee,  breathing  the  penitential  sigh  before 
the  throne  of  grace.  "  The  time  of  figs  is  not  yet."  The  pre- 
destinated moment  has  not  struck  ;  but,  when  it  comes,  they  shall, 
for  God  will  have  his  own ;  they  must,  for  the  Spirit  is  not  to  be 
withstood  when  he  cometh  forth  with  power  ;  they  must  become 
she  willing  servants  of  the  living  God.  "  My  people  shall  be 
rtuUing  in  the  day  of  my  power."  "  He  shall  justify  many." 
"  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul."  "  Ho  shall  divide  a 
portion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the 
strong." 

No  curse  falls  upon  these ;  they  deserve  it,  but  eternal  love 
prevents  it.  Their  sins  write  it,  but  the  finished  sacrifice  blots 
i*  out.  They  may  well  perish  because  they  seek  not  mercy,  bul 
Christ  intercedes  for  them,  and  live  they  shall. 


NOTHING   BUT  LE.S  /TS.  177 

Alas  !  however,  among  those  who  have  neither  leaves  noi 
fruit,  there  is  another  class  which  never  bring  forth  either  the 
one  or  the  other  ;  they  live  in  sin,  and  die  in  ignorance,  —  per- 
ishing without  hope.  As  these  liave  the  world,  can  they  upbraid 
us  for  neglecting  them  ?  Are  we  clear  of  their  blood  ?  May 
not  the  blood  of  many  of  them  cry  from  the  ground  against  us  ? 
As  they  are  condemned  on  account  of  sins,  may  they  not  accuse 
us  because  we  did  not  take  the  gospel  to  them,  but  left  them 
where  they  were  ?  Dread  thought !  But  let  it  not  be  shaken  off; 
there  are  tens  of  thousands  every  day  who  pass  into  the  world 
of  spirits  unsaved,  and  inherit  the  righteous  wrath  of  God.  Yet 
in  this  life,  you  see,  no  special  curse  falls  upon  them ;  and  this 
miracle  has  no  special  bearing  upon  them  :  it  bears  upon  a  totally 
different  class  of  people,  of  whom  we  will  now  speak. 

III.    We  have  before  us  a  special  case. 

I  have  already  said  that,  in  a  fig  tree,  the  fruit  takes  the  pre- 
cedence of  the  leaves,  or  the  leaves  and  the  fruit  come  at  the 
same  time  ;  so  that  it  is  laid  down  as  a  general  rule  that  if  there 
he  leaves  upon  a  fig  tree  you  may  rightly  expect  to  find  fruit 
upon  it. 

To  begin,  then,  with  the  explanation  of  this  special  case,  —  in 
a  Jig  tree  fruit  comes  before  leaves.  So  in  a  true  Christian,  fruit 
always  takes  the  precedence  of  profession.  Find  a  man  any- 
where who  is  a  true  servant  of  God,  and  before  he  united  him- 
self with  the  church,  or  attempted  to  engage  in  public  prayer, 
or  to  identify  himself  with  the  people  of  God,  he  searched  to 
see  whether  he  had  real  repentance  on  account  of  sin ;  he  de- 
sired to  know  whether  he  had  a  sincere  and  genuine  faith  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  he  perhaps  tarried  some  little  time  to  try 
himself,  to  see  whether  there  were  the  fruits  of  hohness  in  his 
daily  life.  Indeed,  I  may  say  that  there  are  some  who  wait  too 
long;  they  are  so  afraid  lest  they  should  make  a  profession 
before  they  have  grace  in  possession,  that  they  will  wait  year 
after  year  —  too  long;  become  unwise,  and  make  what  was  a 
virtue   become  a  vice.     Still  this  is  the  rule  with    Christians: 


l78  NOTHDsG  BUT  LEAVES. 

thej'  first  give  themselves  to  the  Lord  and  afterwards  to  tha 
Lord's  people,  according  to  his  will.  You  who  ai'e  the  servants 
of  God  —  do  you  not  scorn  to  vaunt  yourselves  beyond  your  line 
and  measure  ?  Would  you  not  think  it  disgraceful  on  your  part  to 
profess  anything  which  you  have  not  felt  ?  Do  you  not  feel  a 
holy  jealousy  when  you  are  teaching  others,  lest  you  should  teach 
more  than  God  has  taught  you  ?  and  are  you  not  afraid,  even  in 
your  prayers,  lest  you  should  use  expressions  which  are  beyond 
your  own  depth  of  meaning?  I  am  sure  the  true  Christian  is 
always  afraid  of  anything  like  having  the  leaves  before  he  has 
ihe  fruit. 

Another  remark  follows,  fi'om  this  —  where  we  see  the  leaves  we 
have  a  right  to  expect  the  fruit.  When  I  see  a  man  a  church  mem- 
ber, when  I  hear  him  engage  in  prayer,  I  expect  to  see  in  him  ho- 
liness, —  the  character  and  the  image  of  Christ.  I  have  a  right 
to  expect  it,  because  the  man  has  solemnly  avowed  that  he  is  the 
partaker  of  divine  grace.  You  cannot  join  a  church  without 
taking  upon  yourselves  very  solemn  responsibilities.  What  do 
you  declare  when  you  come  to  see  us,  and  ask  to  be  admitted 
into  fellowship  ?  You  tell  us  that  you  have  passed  from  death 
unto  life  ;  that  you  have  been  born  again ;  that  there  has  been  a 
change  in  you,  the  like  of  which  you  never  knew  before  ;  one 
which  only  God  could  have  wrought.  You  tell  us  you  are  in 
the  habit  of  private  prayer  ;  that  you  have  a  desire  for  the  con- 
version of  others.  If  you  did  not  so  profess,  we  dare  not  re- 
ceive you.  Well,  now,  having  made  these  professions,  it  would 
be  insincere  on  our  part  if  we  did  not  expect  to  see  your  char- 
acters holy,  and  your  conversation  correct ;  we  have  a.  right  to 
expect  it  from  your  own  professions.  We  have  a  right  to  expect 
it  from  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  which  you  claim  to  have  received. 
Shall  the  Holy  Spirit  work  in  man's  heart  to  produce  a  trifle  ? 
Do  you  think  that  the  Spirit  of  God  would  have  written  us  tliis 
Book,  and  that  Jesus  Christ  would  have  shed  his  precious  blood 
to  produce  a  hypocrite  ?  Is  an  inconsistent  Christian  the  high- 
est work  of  God  ?  I  suppose  God's  plan  of  salvation  to  be  tliat 
which  has  more  exercised  his  thoughts  and  wisdom  than  the 


NOTHING  BUT  LEAVES.  17§ 

making  of  all  worlds  and  the  sustenance  of  all  providence;  and 
Bhall  this  best,  this  highest,  this  darling  work  of  God  produce 
no  more  than  that  poor,  mean,  talking,  unacting,  fruitless  de- 
ceiver ?  Ye  have  no  love  for  souls,  no  care  for  the  spread  of 
the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  and  yet  think  that  the  Spirit  has  madv^ 
you  what  you  are  !  No  zeal,  no  melting  bowels  of  compassion, 
no  cries  of  earnest  entreaty,  no  wrestling  with  God,  no  holiness, 
no  self-denial ;  and  yet  say  that  you  are  a  vessel  made  by  the 
Master  and  fitted  for  his  use  !  How  can  this  be  ?  No ;  if  you 
profess  to  be  a  Christian,  from  the  necessity  of  the  Spirit's  work 
we  have  a  right  to  expect  fruit  from  you.  Besides,  in  genuine 
professors  we  do  get  the  fruit ;  we  see  a  faithful  attachment  to 
the  Redeemer's  cause,  an  endurance  to  the  end,  in  poverty,  in 
sickness,  in  shame,  in  persecution.  We  see  other  professors 
holding  fast  to  the  truth  ;  they  are  not  led  aside  by  temptation ; 
neither  do  they  disgrace  the  cause  they  have  espoused :  and,  if 
you  profess  to  be  one  of  the  same  order,  we  have  a  right  to  look 
for  the  same  blessed  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  you ;  and  if  we  see 
them  not,  you  have  belied  us. 

Observe,  further,  that  our  Lord  hungers  for  fruit.  A  hungry 
person  seeks  for  something  which  may  satisfy  him,  —  for  fruit,  not 
leaves.  Jesus  hungers  for  your  holiness.  A  strong  expression, 
you  will  say  ;  but  I  doubt  not  of  its  accuracy.  For  what  were 
we  elected  ?  We  were  predestinated  to  be  conformed  unto  the 
image  of  God's  Son  ;  we  were  chosen  to  good  works,  "  which 
God  hath  before  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them."  What 
is  the  end  of  our  redemption  ?  Wliy  did  Jesus  Christ  die  ? 
"  He  gave  himself  for  us  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  in- 
iquity, and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of 
good  works."  Why  have  we  been  called  but  that  we  should  be 
called  to  be  saints  ?  To  what  end  are  any  of  the  great  opera- 
tions of  the  covenant  of  grace  ?  Do  they  not  all  point  at  our 
holiness  ?  If  you  will  think  of  any  privilege  which  the  Lord 
confers  upon  his  people  through  Christ,  you  will  perceive  that 
they  all  aim  at  the  sanctification  of  the  ch'tsen  people  —  the 
making  of  them  to  bring  forth  fruit,  that  Gro^d  the  Father  m^ 


180  NOTHING  BLr  LEAVES. 

be  glorified  in  them.  0  Christian !  for  this  the  tears  of  the  Sa« 
viour ;  for  this  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat ;  for  this  the  live 
death-wounds  ;  for  this  the  burial  c:iid  the  resurrection,  that  he 
makes  you  holy,  even  perfectly  holy,  like  unto  himself!  And 
can  it  be,  when  he  hungers  after  fruit,  you  think  nothing  of 
fruit-bearing  ?  O  professor  !  how  base  art  thou,  to  call  thyself  a 
blood-bought  child  of  God,  and  yet  to  live  unto  thyself !  How 
darest  thou,  O  barren  tree !  professing  to  be  watered  by  the 
bloody  sweat,  and  digged  by  the  griefs  and  woes  of  the  wounded 
Saviour  —  how  darest  thou  bring  forth  leaves  and  no  fruit? 
Oh  sacrilegious  mockery  of  a  hungry  Saviour !  oh  blasphe- 
mous tantalizing  of  a  hungry  Lord  !  that  thou  shouldst  profess 
to  have  cost  him  all  this,  and  yet  yield  him  nothing !  When  I 
think  that  Jesus  hungers  after  fruit  in  me,  it  stirs  me  up  to  do 
more  for  him.  Does  it  not  have  the  same  effect  on  you  ?  He 
hungers  for  your  good  works ;  he  hungers  to  see  you  useful. 
Jesus,  the  King  of  kings,  hungers  after  your  prayers  —  hungers 
after  your  anxieties  for  the  souls  of  others ;  and  nothing  ever 
will  satisfy  him  for  the  travail  of  his  soul  but  seeing  you  wholly 
devoted  to  his  cause. 

This  brings  us  into  the  very  midst  and  meaning  of  the  mira- 
cle. There  are  some,  then,  who  make  unusual  profession,  and 
yet  disappoint  the  Saviour  in  Ms  just  expectations.  TJie  Jewg 
did  this.  When  Jesus  Christ  came  it  was  not  the  time  of  figs. 
The  time  for  great  holiness  was  after  the  coming  of  Christ  and 
the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit.  All  the  other  nations  were  with- 
out leaves.  Greece,  Rome,  —  all  these  showed  nC'  signs  of  prog- 
ress; but  there  was  the  Jewish  nation  covered  with  leaves.  They 
professed  already  to  have  obtained  the  blessings  which  he  came 
to  bring.  There  stood  the  Pharisee,  with  his  long  prayers; 
there  were  the  lawyers  and  the  Scribes,  with  their  deep  knowl- 
edge of  the  things  of  the  kingdom.  They  said  they  had  the 
light.  The  time  of  figs  was  not  come,  but  yet  they  had  the  leaves, 
though  not  a  single  fruit ;  and  you  know  w  hat  a  curse  fell  on 
Israel :  bow,  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem's  destruction,  the  tiee  w«fi 


NCTHING   BUT  LL-VVES.  181 

^'thered  altogether  from  its  root,  because  it  had  its  leaves,  but 
hod  no  fruit. 

The  same  will  he  true  of  any  church.  There  are  times  when 
all  the  churches  seem  sunken  alike  in  lethargy ;  such  a  tim** 
we  had,  say,  ten  jears  ago.  But  one  church,  perhaps,  seems  to 
be  all  alive.  The  congregations  are  large.  Much,  apparently, 
is  proposed  for  the  growth  of  the  Saviour's  kingdom.  A  deal 
of  noise  is  made  about  it.  There  is  much  talk,  and  the  people 
are  all  expectation  ;  and  if  there  be  no  fruit,  no  real  consecra* 
lion  to  Christ,  —  if  there  be  no  genuine  liberality,  no  earnest  vital 
godliness,  no  hallowed  consistency, —  other  churches  may  live  on  ; 
but  such  a  church  as  this,  making  so  high  a  profession,  and  being 
so  precocious  in  the  produce  of  leaves,  shall  have  a  curse  from 
God.  No  man  shall  eat  fruit  of  it  forever,  and  it  shall  wither 
away. 

In  the  case  of  individuals  the  moral  of  our  miracle  runs  thus. 
Some  are  looked  upon  as  young  believers,  who  early  join  the 
church.  "  The  time  of  figs  is  not  yet."  It  is  not  a  very  ordinary 
case  to  see  children  converted ;  but  we  do  see  some,  and  we  are 
very  grateful.  We  are  jealous,  however,  lest  we  should  see 
leaves  but  not  fruit.  These  juveniles  are  extraordinary  cases; 
and  on  that  account  we  look  for  higher  results.  When  we  are 
disappointed,  what  shall  come  upon  such  but  a  curse  upon  their 
precocity,  which  led  them  to  the  deception  ?  Some  of  us  were 
converted,  or  profess  to  have  been,  when  young  ;  and  if  we  haie 
lived  hitherto,  and  all  we  have  produced  has  been  merely  words, 
resolves,  professions,  but  not  fruit  unto  God,  we  must  expect  the 
curse. 

Again,  professors  eminent  in  station.  Tht.re  are  necessarily 
but  few  ministers,  but  few  church  officers ;  but  when  men  so 
distinguish  themselves  by  zeal,  or  by  louder  professions  than 
others,  as  to  gain  the  ear  of  the  Christian  public,  and  are  placed 
in  responsible  positions  —  if  they  bring  forth  no  fruit,  they  arc 
the  persons  upon  whom  the  curse  will  light.  It  may  be  with 
other  Christians  that  "  the  time  of  figs  is  not  yet :  "  they  havo 
not  made  the  advances  which  these  profess  to  have  made  ;  bui 
16 


182  NOTHING  BUT  LEAVES. 

hav'mfi  been,  upon  their  own  profession,  elected  to  un  office 
which  essentially  requires  fruit,  since  they  yield  it  not,  lei  them 
V  vare. 

To  those  who  make  professions  of  much  love  to  Christ  the 
'jSLxne  caution  may  be  given.  With  the  most  of  Christians,  I  am 
afraid,  I  must  say  that  "the  time  of  figs  is  not  yet,"  for  we  ar^i 
too  much  like  the  Laodicean  church.  But  you  meet  with  soiViC 
men  — how  much  they  are  in  love  with  Christ!  How  sweetly 
they  can  talk  about  him !  But  what  do  they  do  for  him  ?  Noth- 
ing —  nothing  !  Their  love  lies  just  in  the  wind  which  comes 
out  of  their  own  mouths,  and  that  is  all.  Now,  when  the  Lord 
has  a  curse,  he  will  deal  it  out  on  such.  They  went  beyond  all 
others  in  an  untimely  declaration  of  a  very  fervent  love,  and 
DOW  they  yield  him  no  fruit.  "  Yes,"  said  one,  "  I  love  God  so 
much  that  I  do  not  reckon  that  anything  I  have  is  my  own.  It 
is  all  the  Lord's  —  all  the  Lord's,  and  I  am  his  steward."  Well, 
this  dear  good  man,  of  course,  joined  the  church  ;  and  after  a 
time,  some  mission  work  wanted  a  little  help.  What  was  his 
reply  ?  "  When  I  pay  my  seat  rent,  I  have  done  all  I  intend 
to  do."  A  man  of  wealth  and  means  !  After  a  little  time,  this 
same  man  found  it  inconvenient  even  to  pay  for  his  seat,  and 
goes  now  to  a  place  not  quite  so  full,  where  he  can  get  a  seat 
and  do  nothing  to  support  the  ministry  !  If  there  is  a  special 
thunderbolt  anywhere,  it  is  these  unctions  hypocrites  who  whine 
about  love  to  Christ,  and  bow  down  at  the  shrine  of  mammon. 

Or,  take  another  case.  You  meet  with  others  whose  profes* 
sion  is  not  of  so  much  love,  but  it  is  of  much  experience.  Oh, 
what  experience  they  have  had  I  What  deep  experience  !  Ah! 
they  know  the  humblings  of  heart  and  the  plague  of  human 
nature  !  They  know  the  depths  of  corruption,  and  the  heights 
of  divine  fellowship,  and  so  on.  Yes ;  and  if  you  go  into  the 
shop,  you  find  the  corruption  is  carried  on  behind  the  counter, 
and  the  deceit  in  the  day-book.  If  they  do  not  know  the  plague 
of  their  own  hearts,  at  least  they  are  a  plague  to  their  own 
household.  Such  people  are  abhorrent  to  i^ll  men,  and  mucii 
more  to  God. 


NOTHING  BUT  LKAVE4  183 

Others  you  meet  with  who  have  a  censorious  tongue.  What 
good  pcoi)le  they  must  be  —  they  can  see  the  faults  of  other 
people  so  plainly !  This  church  is  not  right,  and  the  other  is  not 
right ;  and  3-onder  preacher  —  well,  some  people  think  him  a  very 
good  man,  but  they  do  not.  They  can  see  the  deficiencies  in  the 
various  denominations,  and  they  observe  that  very  few  really 
carry  out  Scripture  as  it  should  be  carried  out.  They  complain 
of  want  of  love,  and  are  the  very  people  wdio  create  that  want. 
Now,  if  you  will  watch  these  very  censorious  people,  the  very 
faults  they  indicate  in  others  they  are  indulging  in  themselves  ; 
and  while  they  are  seeking  to  find  out  the  mote  in  their  brother's 
eye,  they  have  a  beam  in  their  own.  These  are  the  people  who 
are  indicated  by  this  fig  tree ;  for  they  ought,  according  to  their 
own  showing,  taking  them  on  their  own  ground,  to  be  better  than 
other  people.  If  what  they  say  be  true,  they  are  bright  partic- 
ular stars,  and  they  ought  to  give  special  light  to  the  world. 
They  are  such  that  even  Jesus  Christ  himself  might  expect  to 
receive  fruit  from  them ;  but  they  are  nothing  but  deceivers,  with 
these  high  soarings  and  proud  boastings :  they  are  nothing  after 
all  but  pretenders.  Like  Jezebel  with  her  paint,  which  made 
her  all  the  uglier,  they  would  seem  to  be  what  they  are  not.  As 
old  Adam  says,  "  They  are  candles  with  big  wicks  and  no  tallow, 
and  when  they  go  out  they  make  a  foul  and  nauseous  smell." 
*'  They  have  summer  sweating  on  their  brow,  and  winter  freez- 
ing in  their  hearts."  You  would  think  them  the  land  of  Goshen, 
but  prove  them  the  wilderness  of  sin.  Let  us  search  ourselves, 
lest  such  be  the  case  with  us. 

IV.  And  now  to  close,  such  a  tree  might  well  be  with- 
ered. Deception  is  ahJiorred  of  God.  There  was  the  Jewish 
temple  ;  there  were  the  priests  standing  in  solemn  pomp  ;  there 
were  the  abundant  sacrifices  of  God's  altar.  But  was  God 
pleased  with  his  temple  ?  No  ;  because  in  the  temple  you  had 
all  the  leaves,  you  had  all  the  externals  wf  worship ;  but  there 
was  no  true  prayer,  no  belief  in  the  great  Lamb  of  God's  pass- 
over,  no  truth,  no  righteousness,  no  love  of  men,  no  care  fcT  the 


184  NOTHING   BUT   LHWES. 

glory  of  God :  and  so  the  tem})lc,  wliicli  had  been  a  house  of 
prayer,  had  become  a  den  of  thieves.  You  do  not  marvel  that 
the  temple  was  destroyed.  You  and  I  may  become  just  like  that 
temple.  We  may  go  on  with  all  the  externals  of  religions ;  no- 
body may  miss  us  out  of  our  seat  at  Tabernacle  :  nay,  we  may 
never  miss  ou**  Christian  engagements ;  we  may  be  in  all  ei:- 
ternal  matters  more  precise  than  we  used  to  be,  and  yet  for  all 
that  wo  may  have  become  in  our  hearts  a  den  of  thieves :  the 
heart  may  be  given  to  the  world  while  external  ceremonies  are 
Btill  kept  up  and  maintained.  Let  us  beware  of  this,  for  such  a 
place  cannot  be  long  without  a  curse.     It  is  abhorrent  to  God. 

Again,  it  is  deceptive  to  man.  Look  at  that  temple !  What 
do  men  go  there  for  ?  To  see  holiness  and  virtue.  Why  tread 
they  its  hallowed  courts  ?  To  get  nearer  to  God.  And  what 
do  they  find  there  ?  Instead  of  holiness,  covetousness ;  instead 
of  getting  nearer  to  God,  they  get  into  the  midst  of  a  mart  where 
men  are  haggling  about  the  price  of  doves,  and  bickering  with 
one  another  about  the  changing  of  shekels.  So  men  may  watch 
to  hear  some  seasonable  word  from  our  lips,  and  instead  of  that 
may  get  evil ;  and  as  that  temple  was  cursed  for  deluding  men, 
BO  may  we  be,  because  we  deceive  and  disappoint  the  wants  of 
mankind. 

More  than  this  :  this  barren  fig  tree  committed  sacrilege  upon 
Christy  did  it  not  ?  Might  it  not  have  exposed  him  to  ridicule  ? 
Some  might  have  said :  "  How  goest  thou  to  a  tree,  thou  prophet, 
whereon  there  is  no  fruit  ?  "  A  false  professor  exposes  Christ 
to  ridicule.  As  the  temple  of  old  dishonored  God,  so  does  a 
Christian  \\  hen  his  heart  is  not  right ;  he  does  dishonor  to  God, 
and  makes  the  holy  cause  to  be  trodden  under  foot  of  the 
adversary.     Such  men  indeed  have  reason  to  beware. 

Once  more  :  this  tree  might  well  be  cursed,  because  its  bring- 
ing forth  nothing  but  leaves  was  a  plain  evidence  of  its  sterility. 
It  had  force  and  vitality,  but  it  turned  it  to  ill  account,  and  would 
continue  to  do  so.  The  curse  of  Christ  was  but  a  confirmation 
of  what  it  already  was.  He  did  as  good  as  say,  "  He  that  is 
unfruitful,  let  him  be  unfruitful  still."     And  now,  what  if  Christ 


NOTHING  CUT  LEAVES.  185 

shonld  come  into  this  Tabernacle  this  morning,  and  should  look 
on  you  and  on  me,  and  see  in  any  of  us  great  profession  and 
great  pomp  of  leaves,  slvA  yet  no  fruit,  —  what  if  he  should  pro- 
nounce the  curse  on  us  ?  —  what  would  be  the  effect  ?  We  should 
wither  away  as  others  have  done.  What  mean  we  by  this? 
Why,  they  have  on  a  sudden  turned  to  the  world.  We  could 
not  understand  why  such  fair  saints  should  on  a  sudden  become 
gucli  black  devils  ;  the  fact  was,  Christ  had  pronounced  the  word, 
and  they  began  to  wither  away.  If  he  should  pronounce  the 
unmasking  word  on  any  mere  professor  here,  and  say,  "  Let  no 
man  eat  fruit  of  thee  forever,"  you  will  go  into  gross  outward 
sin  and  wither  to  your  shame.  This  will  take  place  probably  on 
a  sudden  ;  and,  taking  place,  your  case  will  be  irretrievable.  You 
never  afterwards  will  be  restored.  The  blast  which  shall  fall 
upon  you  will  be  eternal ;  you  will  live  as  a  lasting  monument 
of  the  terrible  justice  of  Christ,  as  the  great  Head  of  the  church; 
you  will  be  spared  to  let  it  be  seen  that  a  man  outside  the  church 
may  escape  with  impunity  in  this  life,  but  a  man  inside  the 
church  shall  have  a  present  curse,  and  be  made  to  stand  as  a  tree 
blasted  by  the  lightning  of  God  forever.  Now,  this  is  a  heart- 
searching  matter.  It  went  through  me  yesterday  when  I  thought, 
*'  Well,  here  am  I ;  I  have  professed  to  be  called  of  God  to  the 
ministry ;  I  have  forced  myself  into  a  leading  place  in  God's 
church  ;  I  have  voluntarily  put  myself  into  a  place  where  seven- 
fold damnation  is  my  inevitable  inheritance  if  I  be  not  true  and 
sincere."  I  could  almost  wish  myself  back  out  of  the  church,  or  at 
least  in  the  obscurest  place  in  her  ranks,  to  escape  the  perils  and 
responsibilities  of  my  position  ;  and  so  may  you,  if  you  have  not 
the  witness  of  the  Spirit  in  you  that  you  are  born  of  God  ;  —  you 
may  wish  that  you  never  thought  of  Christ,  and  never  dreamed 
of  taking  his  name  upon  you.  If  you  have  by  diligence  worked 
yourself  into  a  high  position  among  God's  people,  —  if  you  have 
mere  leaves  without  the  fruit,  —  the  more  sure  is  the  curse,  be- 
cause the  greater  the  disappointment  of  the  Saviour.  The  more 
you  profess,  the  more  is  expected  of  you :  and  if  you  do  not  yield 
it,  the  more  just  the  condemnation  when  you  shall  be  left  to  stand 
16* 


18C  NOTHING  BUT  LEAVES. 

forever  withered  by  the  curse  of  Christ.  O  men  and  brethren ! 
let  us  tremble  before  the  heart-searching  eye  of  God ;  but  let  us 
Btill  remember  that  grace  can  make  us  fruitful  yet.  The  way  of 
mercy  is  open  still  Let  us  apply  to  the  wounds  of  Christ  this 
morning.  U  we  have  never  begun,  let  us  begin  now.  Now  let 
us  throw  our  arms  about  the  Saviour,  and  take  him  to  be  ours  ; 
and,  having  done  this,  let  us  seek  divine  grace,  that  for  the  rest 
t)f  our  lives  we  may  work  for  God.  Oh  !  I  do  hope  to  do  more 
for  God,  and  I  hope  you  will.  O  Holy  Spirit !  work  ir.  U8 
mightily,  for  in  thee  is  our  fruit  found  !     Amen. 


SERMON  X. 


THE  GREAT  LIBERATOH. 

'     Ct  TJr*   80K  THEREFORE  BHALL  MAKE  TOU    FREE,   YB  SHALL    BE  FABB 

INDEED."  — John  viii.  36. 

Ble^ised  is  that  word  •'  free,"  and  blessed  is  lie  who  spends 
himself  to  make  men  so.  Ye  did  well  to  crowd  your  streets  and 
to  welcome  with  your  joyous  acclamations  the  man  who  has  bro« 
ken  the  yoke  from  off  the  neck  of  the  oppressed.  Many  sons  of 
Italy  have  done  valiantly  ;  but  he  excels  them  all,  and  deserves 
the  love  of  all  the  good  and  brave.  Political  slavery  is  an  in- 
tolerable evil.  To  live,  to  think,  to  act,  to  speak  at  the  permis- 
sion of  another !  Better  have  no  life  at  all !  To  depend  for 
my  existerco  upon  a  despot's  will,  is  death  itself.  Crave-',  spirits 
may  wear  the  dog-collar  which  their  master  puts  upon  tnem,  and 
fawn  at  his  feet  for  the  bones  of  his  table ;  but  men  who  are  wor* 
ihy  of  the  name  had  rather  feed  the  vultures  on  the  battle-field. 
The  burden  of  civil  bondage  is  too  heavy  for  bold  spirits  to  bear 
wdth  patience,  and  therefore  they  fret  and  murmur  beneath  it ; 
this  murmuring  the  tyrant  loves  not,  and  therefore  he  throws  the 
sufferers  into  his  dungeons,  and  bids  them  wear  out  their  days  in 
capti\'ity.  Blessed  is  he  who  hurls  down  the  despot,  bursts  the 
doors  of  his  dungeons,  and  gives  true  men  their  rights.  We 
have  never  felt,  and  therefore  w^e  know  not,  the  bitterness  of 
thraldom.  Our  emancipators  have  gone  to  the  world  of  spirits, 
bequeathing  us  an  heirloom  of  liberty,  for  which  we  should  love 
their  names  and  reverence  their  God.  If  they  could  have  lived 
OD  till  now,  how  we  should  honor  them  I  but  as  they  are  gonej 


188  THE  GREAT  LIBEBATOR. 

we  do  well  to  applaud  our  illustrious  guest  as  if  we  saw  in  him 
the  spirit  of  all  our  glorious  liberators  worthily  enshrined.  Polit- 
ical liberty  allows  scope  for  fo  much  of  all  that  is  good  and 
ennobling,  and  its  opposite  involves  so  much  that  is  debasing, 
that  tlic  mightiest  nation  destitute  of  it  is  poor  indeed,  and  the 
poorest  of  all  people,  if  they  be  but  free,  are  truly  rich. 

But,  my  brethren,  men  may  have  political  liberty  to  the  very 
fullest  extent,  and  yet  be  slaves ;  for  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
religious  ''bondage.  He  who  cringes  before  a  priest  — he  who 
dreads  his  anathema,  or  who  creeps  at  his  feet  to  receive  his 
blessing  —  is  an  abject  slave.  He  may  call  himself  a  freeman,  but 
bis  soul  is  in  bondage  vile  if  superstition  makes  him  wear  the 
chain.  To  be  afraid  of  the  mutterings  of  a  man  like  myself,  — 
to  bow  before  a  piece  of  wood  or  a  yard  of  painted  canvas,  —  to 
reverence  a  morsel  of  bread  or  a  rotten  bone  —  this  is  mental 
slavery  indeed.  They  call  the  negro  slave  in  the  Southern  Con- 
federacy, but  men  who  prostrate  their  reason  before  the  throne 
of  superstition  are  slaves  through  and  through.  To  yield  obe- 
dience to  our  Lord,  to  offer  prayer  to  God  Most  High,  is  pei-fect 
freedom ;  but  to  tell  my  heart  out  to  a  mortal  with  a  shaven 
crown,  —  to  trust  my  family  secrets  and  my  wife's  character  to 
the  commands  of  a  man  who  may  be  all  the  while  wallowing  in 
debauchery,  —  is  worse  than  the  worst  form  of  serfdom.  I  would 
sooner  serve  the  most  cruel  Sultan  who  ever  crushed  humanity 
beneath  his  iron  heel  than  bow  before  the  Pope  or  any  other 
priest  of  man's  making.  The  tyranny  of  priestcraft  is  the  worst 
of  ills.  Ye  may  cut  through  the  bonds  of  despots  with  a  swoH, 
but  the  sword  of  the  Lord  himself  is  needed  here.  Truth  must 
file  these  fetters,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  must  open  these  dungeons. 
Ye  may  escape  from  prison  ;  but  superstition  hangs  round  a  man, 
and  with  its  deadly  influence  keeps  him  ever  in  its  dark  and 
gloomy  cell.  Scepticism,  which  proposes  to  snap  the  chains  of 
superstition,  only  supplants  a  blind  belief  wdth  an  unhallowed 
credulity,  and  leaves  the  victim  as  oppressed  as  ever.  Jesus  the 
Son  alone  can  make  men  truly  free.  Happy  are  they  whom  he 
has  delivered  from  superstition.     Blessed  are  our  eyes  that  this 


THE  GREAT   LICERATOR.  189 

diij  we  see  the  light  of  gospel  liberty,  and  are  no  longer  immured 
in  popish  darkness.  Let  us  remember  our  privileges,  and  bless 
God  with  a  loud  voice  that  the  darkness  is  past  and  the  true 
light  shineth  ;  since  the  name  of  Jesus,  the  preaching  of  his  Word 
and  the  power  of  his  truth  have,  in  this  respect,  in  a  high  degree, 
made  our  nation  free. 

Yet  a  man  may  be  delivered  from  the  bond  of  superstition, 
and  be  still  a  serf;  for  he  who  is  not  ruled  by  a  priest  may  still 
be  controlled  by  the  devil  or  by  his  own  lusts,  which  is  much  the 
same.  Our  carnal  desires  and  inclinations  are  domineering  Icrdn 
enough,  as  those  know  who  follow  out  their  commands.  A  man 
may  s^ay,  "  I  feel  not  supernatural  terrors  ;  I  know  no  supersti- 
tious horrors  ;  "  and  then,  folding  his  arms,  he  may  boast  that  he 
is  free  ;  but  he  may  all  the  while  be  a  slave  to  his  own  evil  heart. 
He  may  be  grinding  at  the  mill  of  avarice,  rotting  in  the  reeking 
dungeon  of  sensuality,  dragged  along  by  the  chains  of  maddened 
anger,  or  borne  down  by  the  yoke  of  fashionable  custom.  He  is 
the  free  man  who  is  master  of  himself  through  the  grace  of  God. 
He  who  serves  his  own  passions  is  the  slave  of  the  worst  of  des- 
pots. Talk  to  me  not  of  dark  dungeons  beneath  the  sea  level ; 
speak  not  to  me  of  pits  in  which  men  have  been  immured  and 
forgotten  ;  tell  me  not  of  heavy  chains,  nor  even  of  racks  and  the 
consuming  fire  :  the  slave  of  sin  and  Satan,  sooner  or  later^ 
knows  greater  horrors  than  these  —  his  doom  more  terrible  be- 
cause eternal,  and  his  slavery  more  hopeless  because  it  is  one 
into  which  he  willingly  commits  himself. 

Perhaps  there  are  those  present  who  claim  liberty  for  them- 
selves, and  say  that  they  are  able  to  control  their  passions,  and 
have  never  given  way  to  impure  desires.  Ay,  a  man  may  get 
as  far  as  that  in  a  modified  sense,  and  yet  not  be  free.  Perliaps 
I  address  those  who,  knowing  the  right,  have  struggled  for  it 
against  the  wrong.  You  have  reformed  yourselves  from  follies 
into  which  you  had  fallen  ;  you  have  by  diligence  brought  the 
flesh  somewhat  under,  in  its  outward  manifestations  of  sin,  and 
now  your  life  is  moral,  your  conduct  is  respectable,  your  repu- 
tation high :  still,  for  all  that,  it  may  be  that  you  are  conscioua 


190  THE  GREAT  LIBERATOR- 

that  you  are  not  free.  Your  old  sins  haunt  you  ;  your  former 
corruptions  peqjlex  you  ;  you  have  not  found  peace,  for  you  have 
not  obtained  forgiveness.  You  have  buried  your  sins  beneath 
tlie  earth  of  years,  but  conscience  has  given  them  a  resurrection, 
and  the  ghosts  of  your  past  transgressions  haunt  you.  You  can 
scarce  sleep  at  night,  because  of  the  recollection  of  the  wrath  of 
God  which  you  deserve  ;  and  by  day  there  is  a  gall  put  into 
your  sweetest  draughts,  because  you  know  that  you  have  sinned 
against  heaven,  and  that  heaven  must  visit  with  vengeance  your 
transgression.  Ye  have  not  yet  come  to  the  full  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God,  as  you  will  do  if  you  cast  yourselves  into  the 
hands  of  Jesus  y^ho  looseth  the  captives.  "  If  the  Son  therefore 
shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed," —  free  as  the  mere 
political  liberator  cannot  make  you  ;  free  as  he  cannot  make  you 
who  merely  delivers  you  from  superstition  ;  free  as  reformation 
cannot  make  you  ;  free  as  God  alone  can  make  you  by  his  free 
Spirit.  "  If  the  Son  therefore  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be 
free  indeed." 

Now,  this  morning  may  the  Lord  give  his  servant  help  from 
on  high  while  I  try  to  talk  with  you.  To  those  who  feel  to-day 
their  slavery,  my  message  may  be  profitable.  Quvjiyst  point  is, 
that  to  those  who  are  the  bondslaves  of  Satan,  liberty  is  possible. 
The  text  would  not  mock  us  with  a  dream :  it  says,  "7/*  the  Son 
therefore  shall  make  you  free."  All  who  are  slaves  shall  not  be 
set  free  ;  but  there  is  the  possibility  of  liberty  implied  in  the  text. 
Blessed  "if;  "  it  is  like  the  prison  window,  —  through  the  stony 
wall  it  lets  in  enough  sunshine  for  us  to  read  the  word  "  hope  " 
with.  "  If  the  Son  therefore  shall  make  you  free."  Secondlyj 
there  is  a  false  freedom  ;  you  see  that  in  the  text  —  "Ye  shall 
be  free  indeed"  it  says.  There  were  some  who  professed  to  be 
free,  but  were  not  so.  The  Greek  is,  "  Ye  shall  be  free  really" 
for  there  be  some  who  are  free  only  in  the  name,  and  in  the 
shadow  of  freedom,  but  who  are  not  free  as  to  the  substance. 
Then,  tJiirdly,  real  freedom  must  come  to  us  from  the  Son,  that 
glorious  Son  of  God  who,  being  free,  and  giving  himself  to  us, 
gives  us  freedom.     And  then  we  shall  close  by  putting  a  few 


TOE  GREAT  LIBERATOR.  191 

personal  questions  as  to  whether  the  Son  hath  made  us  free,  oi 
wl^ether  we  still  remain  slaves. 

I.  First  then,  dear  friends,  our  text  rings  a  sweet  silver  bell 
of  Lope  in  the  ear  of  those  who  are  imprisoned  by  their  sin. 
Freedom  is  possible;  the  word  "if"  implies  it.  The  Son 
of  God  can  make  the  prisoner  free.  No  matter  who  you  are, 
nor  what  you  are,  nor  how  many  years  you  may  have  remained 
the  slaves  of  Satan,  the  Son,  the  glorious  Liberator,  can  make  you 
free.  "  He  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost,  who  come 
unto  God  by  him."  Perhaps  that  which  weighs  upon  you  most 
heavily  is  a  sense  of  your  past  guilt.  "  I  have  offended  God : 
I  have  offended  often,  wilfully,  atrociously,  with  many  aggrava- 
tions. On  such  and  such  a  day  I  offended  him  in  the  foulest 
manner,  and  with  deliberation.  On  other  days  I  have  run 
greedily  in  a  course  of  vice.  Nothing  has  restrained  me  from 
disobedience,  and  nothing  has  impelled  me  to  the  service  of  God. 
All  that  his  Word  says  against  me,  I  deserve  ;  and  every  threat- 
ening which  his  Book  utters,  is  justly  due  to  me,  and  may  well 
be  fulfilled.  Is  there  a  possibility  that  I  can  escape  from  guilt  ? 
Can  so  foul  a  sinner  as  I  am  be  made  clean  ?  I  know  that  the 
leopard  cannot  lose  its  spots,  nor  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin 
by  his  own  efforts.  Is  there  a  power  divine  which  can  take 
away  my  spots,  and  change  my  nature  ?  "  Sinner,  there  is.  No 
sin  which  you  have  committed  need  shut  you  out  of  heaven. 
However  damnable  your  iniquities  may  have  been,  there  is  for- 
giveness with  God  that  he  may  be  feared.  You  may  have  gone 
to  the  very  verge  of  perdition,  but  the  arm  of  God's  grace  is  long 
enough  to  reach  you.  You  may  sit  to-day  with  your  tongue 
padlocked  with  blasphemy,  your  hands  fast  bound  by  acts  of 
atrocious  violence,  your  heart  fettered  with  corruption,  your  feet 
chained  fast  to  the  satanic  blocks  of  unbelief,  your  whole  sell 
locked  up  in  the  bondage  of  corruption ;  but  there  is  one  so 
mighty  to  save  that  he  can  set  even  you  free.  "  All  manner  of 
gin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men."  "  The  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 


192  THE  OREJir  LIBERATOR. 

In  the  matter  of  guilt,  then,  there  is  the  possibility  of  freedom. 
"  But  can  I  be  freed  from  the  punishment  of  sin  ?  "  saith  another. 
"  God  is  just:  he  must  punish  sin.  It  is  not  possible  that  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  should  allow  such  a  rebel  as  I  am  to 
escape.  Shall  I  go  scot  free  ?  Shall  I  have  the  same  reward 
with  the  perfectly  righteous?  After  years  of  unbelief,  am  I  still 
to  be  treated  as  though  I  had  always  been  a  willing  and  loving 
child?  This  is  not  just:  I  must  be  punished."  Sinner,  there 
is  no  need  that  thou  shouldst  be  cast  into  hell ;  nay,  thou  shalt 
not  be,  if  thy  trust  is  placed  in  the  blood-shedding  upon  Calvary. 
There  is  an  imperative  need  that  sin  should  be  punished,  but 
there  is  no  need  that  it  should  be  punished  in  your  person.  The 
stern  laws  of  justice  demand  that  sin  should  meet  with  satisfac- 
tion ;  but  there  is  no  law  which  demands  that  it  should  receive 
satisfaction  from  you  ;  for  if  thou  bclievest,  Christ  has  given  sat- 
isfaction for  thee.  If  thou  dost  trust  Jesus-  Christ  to  save  thet^ 
be  assured  that  Christ  was  punished  in  thy  stead,  and  suffered 
the  whole  of  wrath  divine,  so  that  there  is  no  fear  of  thy  being 
cast  into  hell.  If  thou  believest,  thou  canst  not  be  punished  ;  for 
there  is  no  charge  against  thee,  —  thy  sin  having  been  laid  on 
Christ ;  and  there  can  be  no  punishment  exacted  from  thee,  for 
Christ  has  already  discharged  the  whole.  God's  justice  cannot 
demand  two  executions  for  the  same  offence.  Oh !  let  not  the 
flames  of  hell  alarm  thee,  sinner ;  let  not  Satan  provoke  thee  to 
despair  by  thoughts  of  the  worm  that  never  dies,  and  of  the  fire 
that  never  can  be  quenched.  Thou  needst  not  go  thither  ;  there 
is  a  possibility  of  deliverance  for  thee :  and  though  thy  heart 
says,  "  Never,  never  shall  I  escape,"  trust  not  thy  heart ;  "  God 
is  greater  than  thy  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things."  Believe 
thou  his  testimony,  and  fly  thou  to  the  great  Deliverer  for 
liberty.  Freedom,  then,  from  punishment  is  possible  through 
Christ. 

I  think  I  hear  one  say,  "  Ah  !  but  if  I  were  saved  from  past 
sin,  and  from  all  the  punishment  of  it,  yet  still  I  should  submit 
to  the  power  of  sin  again.  I  have  a  wolf  within  my  heart  hun- 
gering after  sin,  which  will  not  be  satisfied  though  it  be  glutted 


THE  GREAT  LIBERATOR.  193 

\»ith  evil.  The  insatiable  horse-leech  of  my  lust  ev(;r  oieth, 
*  Give,  give ! '  Can  I  be  delivered  from  it  ?  I  iiave  teen  bound 
with  many  resolutions,  but  sin,  like  Samson,  has  snapped  them 
as  though  they  were  but  green  withs.  I  have  been  shut  up 
in  many  professions,  as  though  I  was  now,  once  for  all,  a  prisoner 
to  raorahty  ;  but  I  have  taken  up  posts  and  bars,  and  every  other 
restraint  which  kept  me  in,  and  1  have  gone  back  to  my  old 
uncleannesses.  Can  I  —  can  I  be  saved  from  all  these  propensi- 
ties, and  all  this  inbred  corruption  ?"  My  dear  friend,  there  is  a 
hope  for  thee,  that  thou  mayst  be.  If  thou  believest  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  same  blood  by  which  sin  is  pardoned  en- 
ables man  to  overcome  sin.  They  in  heaven  washed  their  robes 
and  made  them  white  in  his  blood  ;  but  they  have  another  note 
in  their  song,  —  they  overcame  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
Not  only  were  they  delivered  from  guilt,  but  from  the  power  of 
sin.  I  do  not  tell  you  that  in  this  life  Christ  himself  will  make 
you  perfectly  free  from  indwelHng  sin  :  there  will  always  be  some 
corruption  left  in  you  to  struggle  with,  some  Canaanite  still  in 
the  land  to  exercise  your  faith  and  to  teach  you  the  value  of  a 
Saviour:  but  the  neck  of  sin  shall  be  under  your  foot ;  God  shall 
lead  captive  the  great  Adonibezek  of  your  lust,  and  you  shall 
cut  off  his  thumbs,  so  that  he  cannot  handle  weapons  of  war. 
If  the  enemy  cannot  be  destroyed,  at  least  his  head  shall  be  bro- 
ken, and  he  shall  never  have  reigning  power  over  thee  ;  you 
shall  be  free  from  sin,  to  live  no  longer  therein.  Oh !  that 
blessed  word  "  if !  "  How  it  sparkles  !  It  may  seem  but  a  lit- 
tle star:  may  it  herald  the  dawning  of  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness within  you !  —  "if  the  Son  therefore  shall  make  you  free." 
"  Oh,"  says  one, "  that  is  a  great  *  if '  indeed.  It  cannot  be,  surely  ! 
•—  wy  guilt  pardoned,  my  punishment  remitted,  and  my  nature 
changed !  How  can  it  be  ?  "  Dear  friend,  it  may  be,  and  I 
trust  it  will  be  this  morning ;  for  this  "  if  "  comforts  the  preacher 
with  a  hope  of  success  in  delivering  the  Word  ;  and  may  it  give 
8ome  hope  to  the  hearers,  that  perhaps  you  may  be  made  free 
yourselves. 
But  I  think  I  hear  another  exclaim,  "  Sir,  I  am  in  bondage 
17 


191  THE  GRE.VT  LIBERATOR. 

tlirougli  year  of  death.  Go  where  I  may,  enjoying  no  assuiafi^ 
of  acceptance  in  Christ,  I  am  afraid  to  die.  I  know  that  I  must 
one  of  these  days  close  these  eyes  in  the  slumbers  of  tlie  grave ; 
but  oh  !  it  is  a  dread  thought  to  me  that  I  must  stand  before  my 
God  and  pass  the  solemn  test.  I  cannot  look  into  the  sepulchre 
without  feeling  that  it  is  a  cold,  damp  place  ;  I  cannot  think  of 
eternity  without  remembering  the  terrors  which  cluster  round  it 
to  a  sinner,  *  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  where  tlieir  lire  is 
not  quenched/  "  Ah,  but,  my  dear  friend,  if  the  Son  make  you 
free,  he  will  deliver  you  from  the  fear  of  death.  When  sin  is 
pardoned,  then  the  law  is  satisfied  ;  and  when  the  law  is  satisfied, 
then  death  becomes  a  friend.  The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law : 
the  law  is  fulfilled,  the  strength  of  sin  is  broken.  The  sting  of 
death  is  sin :  sin  is  pardoned,  death  has  a  sting  no  longer.  If 
thou  believest  in  Christ  thou  shalt  never  die,  in  that  sense  in 
which  thou  dreadest  death :  thou  shalt  fall  asleep,  but  thou  shalt 
never  die.  That  death  of  which  thou  thinkest  is  not  the  Chris- 
tian's portion  :  it  belongs  to  the  ungodly.  In  it  thou  shalt  have 
no  share,  if  thou  trustest  the  Saviour.  Borne  on  angels'  wdngs 
to  heaven,  up  from  calamity,  imperfection,  temptation  and  trial 
shalt  thou  mount,  flitting  with  the  wings  of  a  dove  far  above  the 
clouds  of  sorrow  ;  leaving  this  dusky  globe  behind  thee,  thou 
shalt  enter  into  the  splendors  of  immortality.  Thou  shalt  not 
die,  but  wake  out  of  this  dying  world  into  a  life  of  glory. 
Come,  soul,  if  thou  trustest  in  Christ,  this  "  if"  shall  be  no  if, 
but  a  certainty  to-day  —  the  Son  shall  make  you  free  indeed.  I 
do  not  think  I  can  bring  out  the  full  value  of  this  liberty  by 
merely  speaking  of  the  evils  which  we  are  delivered  from ; 
you  know,  brethren,  freedom  consists  not  only  in  a  negative  but 
in  a  positive,  —  we  are  not  only  free  from,  but  we  are  free  to. 
We  hear  of  persons  receiving  the  freedom  of  a  city.  This  im- 
plies that  certain  privileges  are  bestowed.  Now  "  if  the  Son 
therefore  shall  make  you  free,  you  shall  be  free  indeed,"  in  the 
Bense  of  privilege  ;  you  shall  be  free  to  call  yourself  God's 
child ;  you  shall  be  free  to  say,  "Abba,  Father,"  without  re  buke  ; 
you  &liaii  be  free  to  ehiim  the  protection  of  tliat  Father's  bouse, 


THE  GREAT  LIBERATOR.  195 

•nd  the  provision  of  his  bounty  ;  you  shall  be  free  to  come  to 
his  knees  with  all  your  trials,  and  tell  him  all  your  griefs  ;  you 
shall  be  free  to  plead  his  promises  and  to  receive  the  fulfilment 
of  them  too ;  you  shall  be  free  to  sit  at  his  table,  not  as  a  ser- 
vant is  permitted  sometimes  to  sit  down  when  the  feast  is  ovrr 
to  eat  the  leavings,  but  you  shall  sit  there  as  a  well-beloved  son 
to  eat  the  fatted  calf,  while  your  Father  with  you  eats,  drinks, 
and  is  merry  ;  you  shall  be  free  to  enter  into  the  church  on  eartli, 
the  mother  of  us  all ;  free  to  all  her  ordinances  ;  free  to  share 
m  all  those  boons  which  Christ  hath  given  to  his  spouse  ;  and 
when  you  die,  you  shall  be  free  to  enter  into  the  rest  which  re- 
maineth  for  the  people  of  God  ;  free  of  the  New  Jerusalem  which 
is  above ;  free  to  her  harps  of  gold  and  to  her  streets  of  joy ; 
free  to  her  great  banquet  which  lasteth  forever ;  free  to  the 
heart  of  God,  to  the  throne  of  Christ,  and  to  the  blessedness  of 
eternity.  Oh  !  how,  how  good  it  is  to  think  that  there  is  a  pos- 
sibility of  a  freedom  to  such  privileges  as  these,  and  a  possibility 
of  it  to  the  vilest  of  the  vile !  for  some  who  were  grossly  guilty, 
r-ome  who  had  far  gone  astray,  have  nevertheless  enjoyed  the 
fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  peace.  Look  at  Paul ! 
Ko  man  enters  more  into  the  mystery  of  the  gospel  than  he.  He 
had  freedom  to  do  so  :  he  could  comprehend  with  all  saints  what 
are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  know  the  love  of  Christ  which 
passeth  knowledge  ;  and  yet  it  is  he  —  it  is  he  who  once  foamed 
out  threatenings,  v»'ho  sucked  the  blood  of  the  saints ;  it  is  he 
^'yho  dyed  his  hands  up  to  the  very  elbows  in  murderous  go/e ; 
it  is  he  who  hated  Christ,  and  was  a  persecutor,  and  injurioua  ; 
and  yet  is  he  free  from  evil,  and  he  is  free  to  all  the  privileges 
of  the  chosen  of  God.  And  why  not  you  ?  And  why  not  you  ? 
Woman,  tottering  and  trembling,  why  should  not  —  why  sho'ild 
not  the  Son  make  thee  free?  Man,  tossed  about  with  many 
doubts,  why  should  not  the  great  Liberator  appear  to  thee  r 
Can  there  be  a  reason  why  not  ?  Thou  hast  not  read  the  rnllj 
of  predestination  and  discovered  that  thy  name  has  been  left 
out.  It  has  not  been  revealed  that  for  thee  there  is  no  ato^ie- 
ment ;  but  it  is  revealed  to  thee  tnat  whosoever  believeth  on  Him 


19S  THE  GREAT  LIBEaATOR. 

is  not  condemned.  And  tliis  is  the  testimony  which  comes  to 
thee  —  oh  that  thou -uouldst  receive  it!  —  "He  that  believetb 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  hath  everlasting  life."  Oh  that  thou 
wouldst  be  bold  and  trust  Christ  this  morning,  and  the  "if" 
which  is  in  our  text  shall  become  a  blessed  certainty  to  thee. 
So,  then,  there  is  a  possibility  for  freedom.  We  will  pause  awhile, 
and  then  warn  you  against  false  freedom. 

II.  Bewake  of  false  liberty.  Every  good  thing  h  imi- 
tated by  Satan,  who  is  the  master  of  counterfc  its,  and  hence,  lib*- 
erty  —  a  word  fit  to  be  used  in  heaven,  and  almost  too  good  for 
fallen  earth  —  has  been  used  for  the  very  basest  of  purposes, 
and  men  have  misnamed  the  devil's  offspring  by  this  angelic 
title.  We  have  in  spiritual  matters  things  called  liberty  which 
are  no  liberty.  There  is  Antlnomian  liherty —  God  deliver  us 
from  that!  A  man  saith,  "I  am  not  under  the  law  of  God, 
therefore  I  avIU  live  as  I  like."  A  most  blessed  truth  followed 
by  a  most  atrocious  inference.  The  Christian  is  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace  —  that  is  a  very  precious  fact :  it  is  much 
better  to  serve  God  because  we  love  him,  than  because  we  are 
afraid  of  his  wrath.  To  be  under  the  law  is  to  give  God  the 
service  of  a  slave  who  fears  the  lash  ;  but  to  be  under  grace  is 
to  serve  God  out  of  pure  love  to  him.  Oh  to  be  a  child,  and 
to  give  the  obedience  of  a  child,  and  not  the  homage  of  a  serf! 
But  the  Antinomian  eaith,  "  I  am  not  under  the  law,  therefore 
"Hill  1  live  and  fulfil  my  .^wn  lust  and  pleasures."  Paul  says  of 
those  who  argue  thus,  their  damnation  is  just.  We  have  had 
the  pain  of  knowing  some  who  have  said,  "  I  am  God's  elect ; 
Christ  shed  his  blood  for  me ;  I  shall  never  perish  ;  "  and  then 
they  have  gone  to  the  ale-house,  they  have  sung  the  drunkard's 
song,  and  have  even  used  the  drunkard's  oath.  AYliat  is  this, 
dear  friends,  but  a  strong  delusion  to  believe  a  lie  ?  They  who 
can  do  this,  must  surely  have  been  some  time  in  Satan's  oven,  to 
be  baked  so  hard.  Why,  these  must  h.ave  had  their  consciences 
taken  out  of  them.  Ai'C  they  not  turned  to  something  v/orse  than 
brutes  ?     The  dog  doth  not  say,  "  My  master  feeds  me,  and  he 


THE  GREAT  LIBERATOR.  197 

will  Dot  destroy  rae,  but  is  fond  of  me,  therefore  will  I  snarl  at 
him  or  rend  him."  Even  the  ass  doth  not  say,  "  My  master 
gives  rae  fodder,  therefore  will  I  dash  my  heels  into  his  face." 
"  The  ox  knoweth  its  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;  "  but 
these  men  only  know  God  to  provoke  him,  and  they  profess  that 
his  love  to  them  gives  them  a  liberty  to  rebel  against  his  will. 
God  deliver  you  from  any  such  freedom  as  this ;  be  not  legalists, 
but  love  the  law  of  God,  and  in  it  make  your  delight.  Abhor 
all  idea  of  being  saved  by  good  works,  but  oh!  be  as  full  of  good 
works  as  if  you  were  to  be  saved  by  them.  Walk  in  holiness 
as  if  your  own  walking  would  make  you  enter  into  heaven,  and 
then  rest  on  Christ,  knowing  that  nothing  of  your  own  can  ever 
open  the  gate  of  the  Celestial  City.  Eschew  and  abhor  any- 
thing like  Antinomianism.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  high  doctrine. 
Men  sometimes  mis-label  good  sound  Calvinism  as  Antinomian- 
ism. Do  not  be  afraid  of  that ;  do  not  be  alarmed  at  the  ugly 
word  Antinomianism,  if  it  does  not  exist :  but  the  thing  itself— 
flee  from  it  as  from  a  serpent.  Shake  off  the  venomous  bea^t 
into  the  fire,  as  Paul  did  the  viper  which  he  found  amongst  the 
fagots.  When  you  are  gathering  up  the  doctrines  of  grace  to 
cheer  and  comfort  you,  this  deadly  viper  getteth  into  the  midst ; 
and  when  the  fire  begins  to  burn,  he  cometh  out  of  the  heat  and 
fasteneth  upon  you.  Shake  him  off  into  the  fire  of  divine  love, 
and  there  let  the  monster  be  consumed.  My  brethren,  if  we  are 
loved  of  God  with  an  everlasting  love,  and  are  no  more  under 
the  law,  but  free  from  its  curse,  let  us  serve  God  with  all  our 
heart's  gratitude  to  him  :  let  us  say,  "  I  am  thy  servant ;  I  am 
thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thine  handmaid :  thou  hast  loosed 
my  bonds."  Let  the  loosing  of  our  bonds  be  an  argument  for 
service. 

Then,  again,  beloved,  there  is  another  kind  of  freedom  of  which 
we  must  all  be  aware,  —  it  is  a  notional,  professional  freedom, 
"  Free  !  yes,  certainly  we  are  ;  we  are  the  people  of  God,"  say 
some.  Not  that  they  have  ever  passed  from  death  unto  life  ;  not 
that  vital  godliness  is  a  matter  they  understand.  No.  "We 
always  went  to  church,  oi-  chapel  j  we  have  never  stopped  awa/ 
17« 


198  THE   GREAT    LIBERATOR. 

in  out  lives  ;  we  are  the  most  regular  of  religious  people,  and 
we  were  baptized,  and  we  go  to  the  sacrament,  and  what  i.s  there 
that  we  do  not  do  ?  Who  convinccth  us  of  any  sin  ?  If  we  are 
not  frf-e  of  the  Celestial  City,  who  can  be  ?  Surely  —  surely  we 
enjoy  much  of  the  things  of  God ;  we  sit  in  God's  house,  and  we 
feel  a  pleasure  when  we  listen  to  the  truth.  Sacred  song  bears 
us  on  high  as  well  as  other  men.  We  sit  as  God's  people  sit, 
and  we  hear  as  God's  people  hear :  surely  we  are  free  ! "  Ah  ! 
but,  dear  friends,  a  man  may  think  himself  free,  and  be  a  slave 
still.  You  know  there  are  many  in  this  world  who  dream  them- 
selves to  be  what  they  are  not ;  and  you  have  a  faculty  of  dream- 
ing in  the  same  manner.  Christ  must  have  come  to  you  and 
shown  you  your  slavery,  and  broken  your  heart  on  account  of  it, 
or  else  you  are  not  free  ;  and  you  must  have  looked  to  the  wounds 
of  Jesus  as  the  only  gates  of  your  escape,  and  have  seen  in  his 
hand  the  only  power  which  could  snap  your  fetters,  or  else, 
though  you  have  professed  and  re-professed,  you  are  as  much 
slaves  of  Satan  as  though  you  were  in  the  pit  itself.  Beware,  I 
pray  you,  of  hereditary  religion.  A  man  cannot  hand  down  his 
godliness  as  he  doth  his  goods ;  and  I  cannot  receive  grace  as  I 
may  receive  lands,  or  gold,  or  silver.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again." 
There  must  be  the  going  up  out  of  Egypt,  the  leaving  the  flesh- 
pots  and  the  brick-kilns,  and  advancing  through  the  Red  Sea  of 
atonement  into  the  wilderness,  and  afterwards  into  the  promised 
rest.  Have  ye  passed  from  death  unto  life  ?  If  not,  beware  of 
having  a  mere  notional,  professional  liberty. 

There  are  many,  too,  who  have  the  liberty  of  natural  self 
righteousness  and  of  the  power  ofthejlesh.  They  have  fanciful, 
unfounded  hopes  of  heaven.  They  have  never  wronged  anybody  ; 
they  have  never  done  any  mischief  in  the  world ;  they  arc  ami- 
able ;  they  are  generous  to  the  poor  ;  they  are  this,  they  are 
that,  they  are  the  other ;  therefore  they  feel  themselves  to  be 
free.  They  never  feel  their  own  inability  ;  they  can  always 
pray  alike  and  always  sing  alike  ;  they  have  no  changes  ;  they 
are  not  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel;  their  confidence  never 
wavers  j  tliey  believe  themselves  all  right,  and  abide  ii\  tlieif 


THE  GREAT  LIBEL ATOR.  199 

confideJice.  They  do  not  stop  to  examine  :  their  delusion  is  too 
strong  and  their  comfort  is  much  too  precious  for  them  to  wish 
to  mar  it  by  looking  to  its  foundation  ;  so  they  go  on,  on,  on, 
sound  asleep,  till  one  of  these  days,  falling  over  the  awful  preci- 
pice of  ruin,  they  will  wake  up  where  waking  will  be  too  late. 
We  know  there  are  some  such ;  they  are  in  God's  house,  but 
they  are  not  God's  sons.  You  remember  the  case  of  Ishmael ; 
it  is  to  that  which  our  Lord  seems  to  allude  here.  Ishmael  was 
a  son  of  Abraham  according  to  the  flesh,  but  he  never  was  free. 
His  mother  being  a  bondwoman,  he  was  a  slave.  He  might  call 
himself  Abraham's  son  if  he  would,  but  being  only  after  the  flesh 
he  was  still  a  slave,  for  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  Abraham,  in 
the  power  of  the  flesh,  to  beget  anything  but  bondage  ;  and  Ish- 
mael at  his  best  was  still  the  son  of  the  bondwoman.  Yet  you 
see  he  sits  at  table,  —  he  eats  and  drinks  just  as  merrily  as  the 
child  of  the  promise.  Nay,  in  some  things  he  is  stronger  than 
Isaac ;  he  has  the  advantage  of  age,  and  I  dare  say  plumes  himself 
on  being  heir.  "  Ah  I  "  saith  he,  "  I  am  the  elder  one  of  the  family." 
At  last  he  mocked  Isaac.  When  the  boys  were  at  their  sports  he 
was  violent  towards  his  younger  brother,  even  as  many  Phari- 
sees are  very  cruel  to  true  believers.  What  came  of  it  ?  Wliy, 
"  the  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house  forever,  but  the  son  abideth 
ever ;"  and  so  the  day  came  in  which  Sarah  said,  "  Cast  out  the 
bondwoman  and  her  son,"  and  away  went  Ishmael.  He  might 
cling  to  his  father,  and  say,  "  I  am  thy  son."  "  You  must  go, 
sir ',  you  are  a  slave  ;  you  were  born  after  the  flesh,  and  there- 
fore 70U  take  from  your  mother  your  state  and  condition,  and 
not  from  your  father.  Your  mother  was  a  bondslave,  and  so  are 
you,  and  you  must  go.  The  privileges  of  the  children's  house 
are  not  for  you  ;  you  must  go  into  the  wilderness ;  you  cannot 
abide  here."  But  Isaac,  though  feeble  and  tempted,  and  tired 
and  vexed,  is  never  sent  out  of  his  father's  house  —  never ;  he 
abideth  ever.  This  is  the  position  of  many.  They  are  very 
good  people  in  their  way.  They  do  their  best ;  but  what  is  their 
best  ?  It  is  the  offspring  of  the  flesh ;  and  that  w^ich  is  born  of 
>he  f?.esh  is  flesh ;  consequently  their  best  endeavors  only  make 


200  THE  GREAT  LIRERATOR. 

them  slaves  in  tlie  house,  not  sons ;  only  he  who  Is  boni  by  faith 
according  to  the  promise  is  the  free  Isaac,  and  abides  in  the 
house.  The  day  will  come  when  God  will  say  to  every  member 
of  the  Christian  church,  and  all  who  profess  religion,  "  Are  ye 
children  by  faith  in  the  promise,  or  not?"  For  if  ye  are  only 
children  according  to  the  flesh,  he  will  send  you  back  again  into 
the  wilderness  ;  to  eternal  ruin  you  must  go,  except  the  Spirit  of 
God  hath  given  you  the  spirit  of  freedom.  There  was  a  custom 
observed  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  that  when  a  man  died, 
if  he  left  slaves,  they  went  as  a  heritage  to  the  elder  son  ;  and  if 
the  elder  son  said,  "  Some  of  these  are  my  own  brethren,  though 
they  be  slaves  ;  I  therefore  pronounce  them  fret,"  they  wou^  I 
be  free.  Emancipation  was  not  always  allowed  in  either  Greek 
or  Roman  states,  —  a  man  might  not  always  set  a  slave  free 
without  giving  a  good  reason  ;  but  it  was  always  held  to  be  a 
valid  reason  if  the  son,  coming  into  a  heritage  of  slaves,  chose  to 
set  them  free.  No  question  was  asked,  if  the  son  made  them 
free ;  the  law  did  not  step  in.  So,  dear  friends,  if  the  Son  shall 
make  us  free,  we  shall  be  free  indeed.  If  Jesus  Christ,  the  great 
heir  according  to  the  promise,  the  great  Mediator  whom  God 
hath  created  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds 
—  if  he  shall  say  to  us  who  are  as  Ishmael,  "I  make  you  free," 
then  are  we  free  indeed,  and  neither  law,  justice,  heaven  or  hell, 
can  bring  any  argument  against  us  why  we  should  not  be  free. 
But  do  beware  of  all  imaginary  freedoms,  and  shun  them  as  you 
would  poison,  and  God  give  you  to  enjoy  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God. 

III.  True  freedom  comes  to  us  through  him  who  is, 
IN  THE  highest  sense,  "the  Son."  No  man  getteth  free 
except  as  he  cometh  to  Christ  and  taketh  him  to  be  his  all  in  aU. 
Thou  mayst  rivet  on  thy  fetters  by  going  to  the  law,  to  thine 
own  good  works,  to  thy  willings  and  thy  prayiLgs  and  thy 
doings,  but  thou  wilt  never  be  free  until  thou  comest  to  Cln-ist. 
Mark  thee,  man  !  if  thou  wilt  come  to  Christ  thou  shalt  be  free 
this  moment  from  every  sort  of  bondage;  but  if  thou  wilt  go 


THE  GREAT  LIBERATOR.  201 

hither  and  thither,  anJ  try  this  and  that  and  the  otlier,  thou  shiilt 
find  all  thy  tryings  end  in  disappointment,  and  thou  shalt  lie 
d(»Av-n  in  sorrow  and  in  shame  ;  for  none  but  Jesus  —  none  but 
Jesus  can  make  us  free  indeed.  Real  liberty  cometh  from  hira 
only.  Let  us  think  awhile  of  this  real  liberty.  Remember  it  is 
a  liberty  righteously  bestowed.  Christ  has  a  right  to  make  men 
free.  If  I  should  set  a  slave  free  who  belonged  to  his  master, 
he  might  run  for  a  time  ;  but  since  I  had  not  the  power  Xo  giTC 
him  a  legal  emancipation,  he  would  be  dragged  back  again.  But 
the  Son,  who  is  heir  of  all  things,  has  a  right  to  make  him  free 
whom  he  wills  to  make  free.  The  law  is  on  Christ's  side. 
Christ  hath  such  power  in  heaven  and  earth  committed  to  him. 
that  if  he  saith  to  the  sinner,  "  Thou  art  free,"  free  he  is  before 
high  heaven.  Before  God's  great  bar  thou  canst  plead  the  word 
of  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  be  delivered. 

Bethink  thee,  too,  how  dearly  this  freedom  was  purchased. 
Christ  speaks  it  by  his  power,  but  he  still  bought  it  by  his  blood. 
He  makes  thee  free,  sinner,  but  it  is  by  his  own  bonds.  Thou 
goest  clear,  because  he  bare  thy  burden  for  thee.  See  him  bear 
his  agony  —  "  crushed  beneath  the  millstone  of  the  law,  till  alt 
his  head,  his  hair,  his  garments  bloody  be."  See  him  yonder, 
dragged  to  Pilate's  hall,  bound,  whipped  like  a  common  felon, 
scourged  like  a  murderer,  and  dragged  away  by  hell-hound? 
through  the  streets,  fastened  by  those  cruel  fetters  which 
went  through  his  flesh  to  the  accursed  wood!  See  him  yield- 
ing up  his  liberty  to  the  dungeon  of  death  !  There  the  Mighty 
One  sleeps  in  Joseph  of  Arimathea's  tomb.  Dearly  did  he 
purchase  with  his  own  bondage  the  liberty  which  he  so  freely 
gives.  But,  though  dearly  purchased,  let  us  take  up  that  key 
note  —  he  freely  gives  it.  Jesus  asks  nothing  of  us  as  a  prep- 
aration for  this  liberty.  He  finds  us  sitting  in  sackcloth  and 
ashes,  and  bids  us  put  on  4he  beautiful  array  of  freedom ; 
he  discovers  us  in  a  darkness  which  may  be  felt,  sitting  in  the 
valley  ot  the  shadow  of  death,  and  he  brings  the  true  light  in  his 
hand,  and  turns  our  midnight  into  blazing  noon,  —  and  all  without 
our  help,  without  our  m  3rit,  and  at  first  without  our  will.   Chrisf 


202  THE  GREAT  LIBERATOR. 

iSLVcih  sinners  just  as  they  are.  Christ  died  not  for  the  righttwia, 
but  for  the  ungodly  ;  and  his  message  is  grace,  pure  grace,  undi* 
luted  by  a  single  condition  or  requisition  wliich  God  might  make 
of  man.  Just  as  you  arc,  trust  your  soul  with  Christ,  and  though 
there  bo  in  thee  no  speck  of  aught  that  is  good,  he  will  save  thee, 
and  give  time  perfect  liberty.  Dearly  hath  he  bought  it,  but 
fiealy  doth  he  give  it,  even  the  faith  by  which  we  receive  is  the 
gift  of  God. 

It  is  a  liberty  which  may  be  instantaneously  received.  The 
captive  goes  first  through  one  door  and  then  another,  and  per- 
haps a  hundred  keys  must  grate  in  the  wards  of  the  lock  bcibie 
he  feels  the  cool  fresh  air  gladdening  his  brow.  But  it  is  not  so 
with  the  man  who  believeth.  The  moment  thou  believest,  ihou 
art  free.  Thou  mayst  have  been  chained  at  a  thousand  points, 
but  the  instant  thou  believest  in  Christ  thou  art  unfettered  and 
free  as  the  bird  of  the  air.  Not  more  free  is  the  eagle  which 
mounts  to  his  rocky  eyrie,  and  afterwards  outsoars  the  clouds  — 
even  he,  the  bird  of  God,  is  not  more  unfettered  than  the  soul 
which  Christ  hath  delivered.  Cut  are  the  cords,  and  in  an 
instant  you  are  clear  of  all,  and  upward  you  mount  to  God.  You 
may  have  come  in  here  a  slave,  and  you  may  go  out  free.  God's 
graie  can  in  a  moment  give  you  the  condition  of  freedom  and 
the  nature  of  it.  He  can  make  you  say,  "  Abba,  Father,"  with 
your  whole  heart,  though  up  to  this  day  you  may  have  been  of 
youi  father  the  deWl,  and  his  works  you  has'e  done.  In  an 
instunt  is  it  wrought.  We  are  told  in  tropical  lands  that  the 
sun  seems  to  leap  up  from  under  the  horizon,  and  the  dead  of 
night  is  suddenly  turned  into  the  lustre  of  day  :  so  on  a  sudden 
doth  God's  grace  often  dawn  upon  the  darkness  of  sinful  hearts. 
You  have  seen,  mayhap,  at  times,  after  showers  of  rain  have 
fallen  upon  ths  earth,  how  land  which  seemed  all  dry  and  barren 
was  suddenly  covered  with  green  grass,  with  here  and  there  a 
lilj!  full  in  bloom  ;  and  so  a  heart  which  has  been  like  a  desert, 
when  once  the  shower  of  Jesus'  grace  falls  on  it,  blossoms  like 
the  garden  of  the  Lord,  and  yieldeth  sweet  perfume  ;  and  that 
in  a  moment.     You  who  have  given  yourselves  up  in  despair ; 


THE  GREAT  LIBEKATOR.  203 

/ou  who  have  written  your  own  condemnation ;  you  who  have 
made  a  league  with  death  and  a  covenant  wi'.li  hell,  and  said, 
"  There  is  no  hope,  therefore  will  we  go  after  our  iniquities,"  — 
I  charge  you  hear  me  when  I  declare  that  my  Lord  and  Master, 
who  has  broken  my  chains  and  set  me  free,  can  break  yours  too, 
and  that  with  one  blow. 

Murk,  that  if  this  be  done,  it  is  done  forever.  When  Christ 
fiets  free,  no  chains  can  bind  again.  Let  the  IMaster  say  to  me. 
"  Captive,  I  have  delivered  tliee,"  and  it  is  done.  Come  on  — 
come  on  ye  fiends  of  the  pit !  Mightier  is  he  who  is  for  us  than 
all  they  who  be  against  us.  Come  on  —  come  on  temptations  of 
the  world  ;  but  if  the  Lord  be  on  our  side,  whom  shall  we  fear  ' 
If  he  be  our  defence,  who  shall  be  our  destruction  ?  Come  on  — 
come  on  ye  foul  corruptions !  Come  on  ye  machinations  and 
temptations  of  my  own  deceitful  heart!  But  he  who  hath  begun 
the  good  work  in  me  will  carry  it  on,  and  perfect  it  to  the  end. 
Gather  ye,  gather  ye  —  gather  ye  all  your  hosts  together,  ye  who 
are  the  foes  of  God  and  the  enemies  of  man,  and  come  at  once 
with  concentrated  fury  and  with  hellish  might  against  my  spirit ; 
but  if  God  acquitteth  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  Who  shall 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord?  Yon  black  stream  of  death  shall  never  wash  out  the 
mark  of  Christian  liberty.  That  skeleton  monarch  bears  no 
yoke  which  he  can  put  upon  a  believer's  neck.  We  will  shout 
victory  when  we  are  breast-deep  amidst  the  last  billows,  and 
grapple  with  the  king  upon  the  pale  horse :  we  v/ill  throw  the 
rider  and  win  the  victory  in  the  last  struggle,  according  as  it  is 
written,  "  Thanks  be  unto  God  which  giveth  us  the  victory 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Sparta  and  Greece  refused  to 
wear  the  yoke  of  Persia,  and  broke  the  proud  king's  pomp  ;  but 
we  are  free  in  a  nobler  sense.  We  refuse  the  yoke  of  Satan, 
and  will  overcome  his  power  as  Christ  overcame  it  in  the  day.3 
gone  by.  Let  those  who  will  bend  and  crouch  at  the  foot  of  the 
world's  monarch ;  but  as  for  those  whom  God  has  made  free, 
they  claim  to  think,  to  believe,  to  act,  and  to  be  as  their  divine 
instiniit  commands  them,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  enables  them  — 


204  TIIE  GKIllT  LIBERATOR 

«  Wiere  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty."     "  If  the  Son 
therefore  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed." 

IV.  And  now  we  put  round  the  question,  Are  we  free,  then, 
this  morning  ?  Are  we  free  ?  I  will  not  answer  it  for  you,  nor 
need  I  just  now  answer  for  myself;  but  I  would  beseech  you  to 
make  a  searching  inquiry  into  it.  If  you  are  free,  then  remem- 
j  ber  that  you  have  changed  your  lodging-place  ;  for  the  slave  and 
the  son  sleep  not  in  the  same  room  of  the  house.  The  things 
which  satisfied  you  when  a  slave  will  not  satisfy  you  now.  You 
wear  a  garment  which  a  slave  may  never  wear,  and  you  feel  au 
instinct  within  which  the  slave  can  never  feeL  There  is  an 
Abba,  Father,  cry  in  you,  which  was  not  there  once.  Is  it  so  ? 
Is  it  so  ?  If  you  are  free,  you  live  not  as  you  used  to  do.  You 
go  not  to  the  slave's  work ;  you  have  not  now  to  toil  and  sweat 
to  earn  the  wages  of  sin,  which  is  death  ;  but  now  as  a  son  serveth 
his  father,  you  do  a  son's  work,  and  you  expect  to  receive  a  son's 
reward ;  for  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  One  thing  I  know  :  if  you  are  free,  then  you  are  think- 
ing  about  setting  others  free ;  and  if  thou  hast  no  zeal  for  the 
emancipation  of  other  men,  thou  art  a  slave  thyself.  If  thou  art 
free,  thou  hatest  all  sorts  of  chains,  all  sorts  of  sin,  and  thou  wilt 
never  willingly  put  on  the  fetters  any  more.  Thou  livest  each 
day,  crying  unto  Him  who  made  thee  free  at  fii'st,  to  hold  thee 
up  that  thou  fall  not  into  the  snare.  If  thou  be  free,  this  is  not 
the  world  for  thee  :  this  is  the  land  of  slaves  ;  this  is  the  world 
of  bondage.  If  thou  be  free,  thy  heart  has  gone  to  heaven,  the 
land  of  the  free.  If  thou  be  free  to-day,  thy  spirit  is  longing 
for  the  time  when  thou  shalt  see  the  great  Liberator  face  to  face. 
If  thou  be  free,  thou  wilt  bide  thy  time  until  he  call  thee  ;  but 
when  he  saith,  "  Friend,  come  up  hither,"  thou  wilt  fearlessly 
mount  to  the  upper  spheres,  and  death  and  sin  shall  be  no 
hinderan-ce  to  thine  advent  to  his  glory. 

I  would  we  were  all  free ;  but  if  we  be  not,  the  next  best 
thing  I  would  is,  that  those  of  us  who  are  not  free  would  fiet 
under  the  fetter:   for  whei    the  fetters  are  felt,  they  sliall  be 


THE  GEKA.T  LIBERATOR.  205 

broken  ;  when  the  iron  enters  into  the  soul,  it  shall  be  snapped ; 
when  you  long  for  liberty,  you  shall  have  it ;  when  you  seek  for 
it  as  for  hid  treasure,  and  pant  for  it  as  the  stag  for  the  water- 
brook,  God  will  not  deny  you.  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock, 
and  it  shall  be  opened  ;  ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you."  God 
lead  you  to  seek,  and  knock,  and  ask  now,  for  Christ's  sake. 
Ami'Ti. 

IB 


SERMON  XI. 


THE  SINNER'S   FPJEND. 

^    A  ffBIElTD  OP  PUBLICANS  AND  SINNEU3."—  MatthCW  xi.  U 

Ma>i  *'  ^  v'rue  word  is  spoken  in  jest,  and  many  a  tribute  to 
virtue  lia^  Veen  unwittingly  paid  by  tlie  sinister  lips  of  malice. 
The  enemies  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thought  to  brand  him 
with  infamy,  hold  him  up  to  derision,  and  hand  his  name  down 
to  everlasting  scorn,  as  "  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners." 
Short-sighted  mortals  !  Their  scandal  published  his  reputation. 
To  this  day  the  Saviour  is  adored  by  the  title  which  was  minted 
as  a  slur.  It  was  designed  to  be  a  stigma,  that  every  good  man 
would  shudder  at  and  shrink  from  ;  it  lias  proved  to  be  a  fasci- 
nation which  wins  the  heart  and  enchants  the  soul  of  all  the 
godly.  Saints  in  heaven  and  saints  on  earth  delight  to  sing  of 
him  thus : 

"  Saviour  of  sinners  they  proclaim, 
Sinin>iij  of  whom  the  chief  I  am." 

What  the  invidious  jet»'s  said  in  bitter  spleen,  has  been  turned 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  most  gracious  account.  Where  they 
poured  out  vials  of  hate,  oJors  of  sacred  incense  arise.  Troubled 
consciences  have  found  a  &weet  balm  in  the  very  sound.  Jesus, 
"  the  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners,"  has  proved  himself  friendly 
to  them,  and  they  have  become  friends  with  him,  —  so  completely 
has  he  justified  the  very  n'jme  which  his  enemies  gave  him  in 
ribald  affront. 

We  shall  take  this  title  of  Jesus  to-night  as  an  oitSer  of  die* 


THE  SINNER'S  FRIEND.  207 

tinction  which  sets  forth  his  excellency,  and  as  God  helps  us, 
we  shall  try  to  exalt  his  name  and  proclaim  his  fame,  while  wc 
attempt  to  explain  how  he  was  the  friend  of  sinners  ;  and  how 
he  shows  that  he  is  still  the  same. 

I.     Our  Lord  proved  himself  in  his  own  time  to  be 

THE    FRIEND    OF    SINNERS. 

"What  better  proof  could  he  give  of  it  than  coming  from  the 
majesty  of  his  Father's  house  to  the  meanness  of  Bethlehem's 
manger  ?  What  better  proof  could  he  give  than  leaving  the 
society  of  cherubim  and  seraphim,  to  lie  in  the  manger  where 
the  horned  oxen  fed,  and  to  become  the  associate  of  ftiUen  men  ? 
The  incarnation  of  the  Saviour  in  the  very  form  of  sinners,  tak- 
ing upon  himself  the  flesh  of  sinners,  being  born  of  a  sinner, 
having  a  sinner  for  his  reputed  father,  —  his  very  being  a  man, 
which  is  tantamount  to  being  in  the  same  form  with  sinners,  -^ 
surely  this  were  enough  to  prove  that  he  is  the  sinner's  friend. 

When  you  take  up  the  roll  of  his  earthly  lineage  and  begin 
to  read  it  through,  you  will  be  struck  with  the  fact  that  there 
are  but  few  w^omen  mentioned  in  it ;  and  yet  three  out  of  those 
mentioned  were  harlots,  —  so  that  even  in  his  lineage  there  was 
the  taint  of  sin,  and  a  sinner's  blood  would  have  run  in  his  veins 
if  he  had  been  the  true  son  of  Joseph  ;  but  inasmuch  as  he  was 
begotten  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  overshadowed  the  Virgin,  in 
him  was  no  sin  :  yet  his  reputed  pedigree  ran  through  the  veins 
of  sinners.  Tamar,  and  Rahab,  and  Bathsheba,  are  three  names 
which  bring  to  remembrance  deeds  of  shame,  and  yet  these 
stand  in  the  recoids  as  the  ancestors  of  the  Son  of  IMary,  the 
smner's  friend  ! 

As  soon  as  Jesus  Christ,  being  born  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh,  has  come  to  years  of  maturity,  and  has  commenced  his  real 
life-work,  he  at  once  discloses  his  friendship  for  sinners  by  asso- 
cii»ting  with  them.  You  do  not  find  him  standing  at  a  distance, 
issuing  his  mandates  and  his  orders  to  sinners  to  make  them- 
selves better ;  but  you  find  him  coming  among  them  like  a  good 
workman  who  stands  over  his  work.     He  takes  his  place  where 


208  THE  SINNER'S  FRIEKT). 

the  sin  and  the  iniquity  are,  and  he  personally  comoS  lo  deal 
with  it.  He  does  not  write  out  a  prescription,  and  send  by  an- 
other hand  his  medicines  with  which  to  heal  the  sickness  of  sin  ; 
but  he  comes  right  into  the  lazar-house,  touches  the  wounded, 
looks  at  the  sick  :  and  there  is  healing  in  the  touch  ;  there  is 
life  in  the  look.  The  great  Physician  took  upon  himself  c:ir 
sicknesses  and  bare  our  infirmities,  and  so  proved  himself  to  be 
really  the  sinner's  friend.  Some  people  appear  to  like  to  have 
a  philanthropi-c  love  towards  the  fallen,  but  yet  they  would  not 
touch  them  with  a  pair  of  tongs.  They  would  lift  them  up  if 
they  could,  but  it  must  be  by  some  machinery  —  some  sort  of 
contrivance  by  which  they  would  not  degrade  themselves  or 
contaminate  their  own  hands.  Not  so  the  Saviour.  Up  to  the 
very  elbow  he  seems  to  thrust  that  gracious  arm  of  his  into  the 
mire,  to  pull  up  the  lost  one  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  out  of 
the  miry  clay.  He  takes  himself  the  mattock  and  the  spade, 
and  goes  to  work  in  the  great  quarry  that  he  may  get  out  the 
rough  stones,  which  afterwards  he  will  himself  polish  with  his 
own  bitter  tears  and  bloody  sweat,  that  he  may  make  them  lit 
to  shine  forever  in  the  glorious  temple  of  the  Lord  his  God. 
He  comes  himself  into  direct,  personal  contact  with  sin,  without 
being  contaminated  with  it.  He  comes  as  close  to  it  as  a  man 
can  come.  He  eats  and  drinks  with  sinners.  He  sits  at  the 
Pharisee's  table  one  day,  and  does  not  rise  because  there  is  a 
crowd  of  people  no  better  than  they  should  be  coming  near  him. 
Another  day  he  goes  to  the  publican's  house,  and  the  publican 
had,  no  doubt,  been  a  great  extortioner  in  his  time  ;  but  Jesua 
sitn  tliere,  and  that  day  does  salvation  come  to  that  publican's 
house.  Beloved,  this  is  a  sweet  trait  about  Christ,  and  proves 
how  real  and  how  true  was  his  love,  that  he  made  his  associa- 
tions with  sinners,  and  did  not  shun  even  the  chief  of  them. 

Nay,  he  not  only  came  among  them,  but  he  was  always  seek- 
mg  their  good  by  his  ministry.  If  there  was  anywhere  a  sinner,  a 
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,  Christ  was  after  that  sinner. 
Never  such  an  indefatigable  shepherd ;  he  sought  that  which 
was  lost  till  he  found  it.     One  of  his  earliest  works  of  meray  we 


THE  SINNER'S  FRIEND.  209 

will  tell  you  of  in  brief.  He  was  once  on  a  joume)'  and  Samaria 
was  a  little  out  of  his  way  ;  but  there  lived  in  a  city  of  that 
country  a  woman  —  ah!  the  less  said  of  her  the  better.  She 
had  had  five  husbands,  and  he  whom  she  then  had  was  not  her 
husband,  nor  were  any  of  the  others,  either.  She  was  a  disgrace 
to  that  city  of  Samaria.  But  Jesus,  who  has  a  keen  eye  for  sin- 
ners, and  a  heart  which  beats  high  for  them,  means  to  save  that 
woman,  and  he  must  and  he  will  have  her.  Being  weary,  he  >it3 
down  on  a  well  to  rest.  A  special  providence  brings  t'he  woman 
to  the  well.  The  conventionalists  of  society  forbid  him  to  talk 
with  her.  But  he  breaks  through  the  narrow  bigotry  of  caste. 
A  Samaritan  by  birth,  he  cares  not  for  that ;  but  will  that  most 
holy  being  condescend  to  have  familiar  conversation  with  her  — 
a  dishonor  to  her  sex  ?  He  will.  His  disciples  may  marvel 
when  they  come  back  and  find  him  talking  with  her,  but  he  will 
do  it.  He  begins  to  open  up  the  Word  of  life  to  her  understand- 
ing, and  that  woman  becomes  the  first  Christian  missionary  we 
ever  hear  of,  for  she  ran  back  to  the  city,  leaving  her  water-pot. 
and  crying,  "  Come,  see  a  man  which  told  me  all  things  that  ever 
I  did  :  is  not  this  the  Christ  ?  "  And  they  came  and  believed  ; 
and  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city  of  Samaria.  You  know,  too, 
that  there  was  another  sinner.  He  was  a  bad  fellow  —  I  fear 
him.  He  had  been  constantly  grinding  the  faces  of  the  poor, 
and  getting  more  out  of  them  by  way  of  taxation  than  he 
should  have  done ;  but  the  little  man  had  the  bump  of  curiosity, 
and  he  must  needs  see  the  preacher,  and  the  preacher  must 
needs  love  him ;  for  I  say  there  was  a  wonderful  attraction 
in  Jesus  to  a  sinner.  That  sinner's  heart  was  like  a  piece  of 
iron  :  Christ's  heart  was  like  a  loadstone  ;  and, wherever  there 
was  a  sinner  the  loadstone  began  to  feel  it,  and  soon  the  sinner 
began  to  feel  the  loadstone  too.  "  Zaccheus,"  said  Christ,  "  make 
haste,  and  come  down  ;  for  to-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house ; " 
and  down  comes  the  sinner,  and  salvation  has  come  to  his  house 
at  that  hour.  Oh !  Christ  never  seemed  to  preach  so  sweetly  as 
when  he  was  preaching  a  sinner's  sermon.  I  would  have  loved 
to  have  seen  that  dear  face  of  his  when  he  cried,  "  Come  unto 
18* 


210  THE  SINNER'S  ITJEND. 

me  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest ; "  or,  better  still,  to  have  seen  his  eyes  running  with  whole 
showers  of  tears  when  he  said,  "  O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  .... 
how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  as  a  hen 
gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not !  "  or 
CTeii  to  have  heard  him  preach  those  three  great  sermons  upon 
sinners,  when  he  described  the  woman  as  sweeping  the  house 
and  taking  away  the  dust  that  she  might  find  the  lost  piece  of  her 
money;  and  the  shepherd  going  from  hill  to  hill  after  the  wandering 
sheep  ;  and  the  father  running  to  meet  that  rag-clad  prodigal, — 
kissing  him  with  the  kisses  of  love,  clothing  him  with  the  best 
robe,  and  inviting  him  into  the  feast,  while  they  did  dance  and 
make  merry  because  the  lost  was  found,  and  he  who  was  dead 
was  alive  again.  Why,  he  was  the  mightiest  of  preachers  for 
einners,  beyond  a  doubt.  Oh,  how  he  loved  them  !  Never 
mind  the  Pharisees ;  he  has  thunderbolts  for  them.  "  Woe  unto 
you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees  !  "  But  when  publicans  and  harlots 
come,  he  always  has  the  gate  of  mercy  ajar  for  them.  For  them 
he  always  has  some  tender  v\-ord,  some  loving  saying,  such  as 
this  :  "  Iliin  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out." 
"  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men  ; " 
or  such-like  words  of  tender  wooing.  The  very  chief  of  sinners 
was  thus  drawn  into  the  circle  of  his  disciples. 

And  you  know,  dear  friends,  he  did  not  prove  his  love  merely 
by  preaching  to  them,  and  living  with  them,  and  by  his  patience 
in  enduring  tlieir  contradiction  against  himself,  and  all  their  evil 
words  and  deeds ;  but  he  proved  it  by  his  prayers  too.  lie  used 
his  mighty  infkience  with  the  Father  in  their  behalf.  lie  took 
their  polluted  names  on  his  holy  lips  ;  he  was  not  ashamed  to 
call  them  brethren.  Their  cause  became  his  own,  and  in  their 
interest  his  pulse  throbbed.  IIow  many  times  on  the  cold  moun- 
tains he  kept  his  heart  warm  with  love  to  them  !  IIow  often  the 
sweat  rolled  down  his  face  when  he  was  in  an  agony  of  spirit  for 
them  I  cannot  tell  you.  This  much  I  do  know,  that  on  that  self- 
s-Ame  night,  when  he  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling 
drwn    to   the   ground,  he    prayed  this   prayer,  —  after   having 


THE  SESn^R'S  FRIEND.  211 

piayed  for  his  saints,  he  went  on  to  say :  "  Neither  pray  I  for 
these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on  me  through 
their  word."  Here,  truly,  the  heart  of  the  Saviour  was  bubbling 
up  and  welling  over  towards  sinners.  And  you  never  can  for- 
get that  almost  his  last  words  were,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do."  Though  wilfully  and  wickedly  they 
pierced  his  hands  and  his  feet,  yet  were  there  no  angry  words, 
but  only  that  short,  loving,  hearty  prayer  :  "  Father,  forgive 
them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  tliey  do."  Ah,  friends  !  if  there 
ever  was  a  man  who  was  a  friend  to  others,  Jesus  was  a  friend 
to  sinners  his  whole  life  through. 

This,  however,  is  but  little.  As  for  the  river  of  the  Saviour's 
love  to  sinners,  I  have  only  brought  you  to  its  banks.  You  have 
but  stood  on  the  bank  and  dipped  your  feet  in  the  flood ;  but 
now  prepare  to  swim.  So  fond  was  he  of  sinners,  that  he  made 
his  grave  with  the  wicked.  He  was  numbered  with  the  trans- 
gressors. God's  fiery  sword  was  drawn  to  smite  a  world  of  sin- 
ners down  to  heU.  It  must  fall  on  those  sinners.  But  Christ 
loves  them.  His  prayers  stay  the  arm  of  God  a  little  while,  but 
still  the  sword  must  fall  indue  time.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  By 
what  means  can  they  be  rescued  ?  Swifter  than  the  lightning's 
flash,  I  see  that  sword  descending.  But  what  is  that  in  vision  I 
behold  ?  It  falls  —  but  where  ?  Not  on  the  neck  of  sinners.  It 
is  not  their  neck  which  is  broken  by  its  cruel  edge  ;  it  is  not  their 
heart  which  bleeds  beneath  its  awful  force.  No ;  the  "  friend  of 
sinners  "  has  put  himself  into  the  sinner's  place  !  and  then,  as  if 
he  had  been  the  sinner,  though  in  him  was  no  sin,  he  suffers, 
bleeds,  and  dies  ;  —  no  common  suffering,  no  ordinary  bleeding, 
no  death  such  as  mortals  know.  It  was  a  death  in  which  the 
second  death  was  comprehended,  —  a  bleeding  in  which  the  very 
veins  of  God  were  emptied.  The  God-man  divinely  sufiered. 
I  know  not  how  else  to  express  the  suffei'ing.  It  was  a  more 
than  mortal  agony  ;  for  the  divine  strengthened  the  human,  and 
the  man  was  made  vast  and  mighty  to  endure  through  his  being 
a  God.  Being  God  and  man,  he  endured  more  than  ten  thou* 
6and  millions  of  men  all  put  together  could  have  suffered.     H« 


212  THE  SIXXEU'S   rniEN'D. 

endured,  indeed,  the  hells  of  all  for  whom  he  died,  —  the  tor* 
ments,  or  the  equivalent  for  the  torments,  which  all  of  them  ought 
to  have  suffered,  —  the  eternal  wrath  of  God  condensed  and  put 
into  a  cup  too  bitter  for  mortal  tongue  to  know,  and  then  drained 
to  its  utmost  dregs  by  the  loving  lips  of  Jesus.  Beloved,  this 
was  love.  "  Herein  is  love,  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  ia 
due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  "  Greater  love  hath  no 
man  than  this,  that  he  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  Thi3 
Christ  has  done,  and  he  is,  therefore,  demonstrated  to  be  the 
friend  of  sinners. 

But  the  trial  is  over;  the  struggle  is  past;  the  Saviour  is 
dead  and  buried.  lie  rises  again,  and  after  he  has  spent  fort/ 
days  on  earth  —  in  that  forty  days  proving  still  his  love  for  sin- 
ners—  he  rose  ajiain  for  their  justification.  I  see  him  ascending 
up  on  high.     Angels  attend  him  as  the  clouds  receive  him. 

"  They  bring  his  chariot  from  on  high, 
To  bear  liim  to  his  throne; 
Clap  their  triumphant  wings,  and  cry, 
*  The  glorious  work  is  done ! '  " 

What  pomp !  What  a  procession  !  What  splendor !  He  will 
forget  his  poor  friends  the  sinners  now,  will  he  not  ?  Not  he  !  I 
think  I  hear  the  song,  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates ;  and  be  yc 
lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  that  the  King  of  Glory  may  come 
in."  The  bars  of  massy  light  are  all  unloosed  ;  the  pearly  gates 
are  all  wide  open  flung ;  and  as  he  passes  through,  mark  you,  the 
highest  joy  which  swells  his  soul  is  that  he  has  opened  those  gates, 
not  for  himself,  —  for  they  were  never  shut  on  him,  —  but  that 
he  has  opened  them  for  sinners.  It  was  for  this,  indeed,  he  died  ; 
and  it  is  for  this  that  he  ascends  on  high,  that  he  may  "  open  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  for  all  believers."  See  him  as  he  rides 
through  heaven's  streets !  "  Thou  hast  ascended  up  on  high ; 
thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  ;  thou  hast  received  gifts  of  man." 
Ah !  but  hear  the  refrain,  —  for  this  is  the  sweetest  note  of  all  the 
hymn,  —  "  Yea,  for  the  rebellious  also  —  yea,  for  the  rebellious 
also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them."    The  scat- 


THE  SINNER'S  FKIEND.  213 

tered  gifts  of  his  coronation,  the  lavish  bounties  of  his  ascension, 
are  still  lor  sinners.  He  is  exalted  on  high  —  for  what?  To 
give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  He  still  wears  upon  his 
brenstplate  the  names  of  sinners  ;  upon  his  hands  and  upon  hig 
heart  does  he  still  bear  the  remembrance  of  those  sinners ;  and 
every  day  for  the  sinner's  sake  he  doth  not  hold  his  peace,  and 
for  the  sinner's  sake  he  doth  not  rest,  but  cries  unto  God  until 
every  sinner  shall  be  brought  safely  home.  Every  sinner  who 
believeth,  every  sinner  who  was  given  to  him,  every  sinner 
whom  he  bought  with  blood — he  will  not  rest,  I  say,  till  all 
such  are  gathered  to  be  the  jewels  of  his  crown,  world  without 
end. 

Methinks  we  cannot  say  more  ;  and  I  think  you  will  say  we 
could  not  have  said  less  concerning  the  way  in  which  the  Saviour 
proved  himself  to  be  the  sinner's  friend.  If  there  are  any  of 
you  w-ho  dare  to  doubt  him  after  this,  I  know  not  what  further 
to  advance.  If  there  can  be  one  who  has  prov<^d  himself  your 
friend,  surely  Jesus  did  it ;  and  he  is  willing  to  receive  you  now. 
What  he  has  done  he  still  continues  to  do.  Oh  that  you  might 
have  grace  to  perceive  that  Jesus  is  the  lover  of  your  soul !  — 
that  you  might  find  the  blessedness  which  all  these  tokens  of 
friendship  of  which  we  have  been  speaking  have  brought  for 
believing  sinners ! 

11.  While  we  change  the  subject  a  little,  we  shall  still  keep 
to  the  text,  and  notice  what  Christ  is  doing  now  for  sin- 
ners. 

There  is  a  deep  princij^le  involved  here,  —  a  principle  the 
Pharisee  of  old  could  not  understand, — and  the  cold  heart  of 
humanity  is  slow  to  embrace  it  to-day.  I  have  two  explanations 
to  offer  of  the  way  in  which  Jesus  personally  discovers  himself 
to  be  the  friend  of  sinners,  and  I  will  just  mention  these  before 
I  come  to  the  application  of  the  subject  I  intend.  Once  upon  a 
time  a  w^oman  was  brought  to  Jesus  by  the  Scribes  and  Phari- 
Bees :  she  was  an  adulteress  ;  she  had  been  taken  in  the  very  act. 
They   tell   "the  sinner's  friend "   what  sentence  Moses  would 


214  THE  SINNER'S  FRIEND. 

pronounce  in  such  a  case,  and  they  ask  him,  How  sayest  thou  ? 
This  they  said  tempting  him.  They  were  not  much  concerned 
about  the  unhappy  creature  ;  the  accusation  they  were  intent  to 
lay  was  against  the  man  of  iXazareth.  You  know  how  he  dis- 
posed of  the  case,  and  put  her  accusers  out  of  countenance.  lie 
did  not  bring  the  sinner  up  before  the  magistrate  ;  nay,  he  would 
not  act  the  judge's  part,  and  pronounce  sentence  ;  rather  would 
he  act  the  neighbor's  part :  he  acquitted  himself  as  a  friend. 
There  is  a  proverb  among  a  certain  class  of  hard-dealing  trades- 
men, "  We  know  no  friendship  in  business ;  "  and  full  well  they 
carry  it  out,  while  they  grind  the  faces  of  the  poor  without  pity, 
and  strive  to  overreach  one  another  without  fairness.  And 
there  was,  in  like  manner,  no  friendship,  no  mercy  whatever, 
among  those  gentlemen  of  the  long  robe.  Righteousness,  to 
their  idea,  stood  in  exacting  justice  with  rigid  severity ;  and  as 
for  wickedness,  it  was  only  shameful  when  it  was  found  out. 
She  wno  was  taken  in  the  act  must  be  stoned.  They  who  had 
done  it  secretly  must  prosecute.  The  real  friendship  of  Jesus 
appears  in  his  singling  of  pity  ;  and  where  they  accused  him  of 
winking  at  crime,  and  harboring  the  criminal,  he  was  truly  lay- 
ing the  axe  at  the  root  of  the  tree,  and  sheltering  the  victims, 
while  he  upbraided  the  arrogant  rulers,  whose  secret  vices  were 
the  genuine  cause  of  the  wretchedness  which  had  fallen  upon 
the  dregs  of  the  nation.  I  commend  this  thought  to  your  con- 
sideration. When  it  is  said  of  him,  he  is  a  "  friend  of  publicans 
and  sinners,"  it  was  implied  that  he  was  not  a  friend  of  Scribes 
and  Pharisees.  Yet  again,  I  want  you  to  notice  that  the  office 
which  Christ  came  to  fulfil  towards  sinners  was  that  of  pure, 
unmingled  friendship.  Let  us  give  you  an  illustration.  There 
is  an  awful  story  abroad  :  a  murder  has  been  committed ;  and 
the  poor  wretch  who  committed  it  has  cut  his  own  throat.  The 
policeman  and  the  surgeon  are  quickly  on  the  spot.  The  one 
comes  there  in  the  'nterest  of  law,  the  other  attends  in  the  inter- 
est of  humanity.  Says  the  officer  of  police  :  "  Man,  you  aie  my 
prisoner ; "  says  the  doctor :  "  My  dear  fellow,  you  are  my 
patient."    And  now  he  lays  a  delicate  hand  upon  the  wound ;  he 


THE  SINNER'S  FRIENb.  215 

Blanches  the  blood,  applies  soft  liniments,  binds  i  up  with  plas 
teis,  and,  bending  down  his  ear,  listens  to  the  maa's  breathing; 
taking  hold  of  his  hand,  he  feels  his  pulse :  gently  raising  his 
head,  he  administers  to  him  some  wine  or  stimulant ;  takes  him 
to  the  hospital,  gives  the  nurse  instructions  to  watch  him,  and 
orders  that  he  shall  be  given  nutritious  diet  as  he  is  able  to  bear 
it.  Day  after  day  he  still  visits  him,  and  uses  all  his  skill  and 
all  his  diligence  to  heal  the  man's  wounds.  Is  that  the  way  to 
deal  with  criminals  ?  Certainly  it  is  not  the  manner  in  which 
the  police  deal.  Their  business  is  to  find  out  All  the  traces  and 
evidences  of  his  guilt.  But  the  medical  attendant  is  not  con- 
cerned with  the  man  as  an  evil-doer,  but  as  a  sufferer.  So  is  it 
with  the  sinner.  Moses  is  the  officer  of  justice  who  comes  to 
arrest  him.  Christ  is  the  good  Physician  who  comes  to  heal 
him.  He  says,  "  O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself ;  but  in  me 
is  thy  help."  He  deals  with  the  disease,  with  the  wounds,  with 
the  sufferings  of  sinners.  He  is  therefore  their  friend.  Of  course 
the  parallel  will  only  go  a  little  way.  In  the  instance  of  the 
murderer,  the  surgeon  would  hand  his  patient  over  to  the  officers 
as  soon  as  the  wound  was  recovered  ;  but  in  the  conduct  of  our 
Saviour,  he  redeems  the  soul  from  under  the  law,  and  delivers  it 
from  the  penalty  of  sin,  as  well  as  restores  it  from  the  self- 
inflicted  injuries.  But  oh  I  if  I  could  but  show  thee  that  Christ 
treats  the  sinner  with  pity  rather  than  with  iiidignation  ;  that 
the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save 
them  ;  that  his  visit  to  our  world  was  mediatorial  —  not  to  con- 
demn the  world,  but  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many  ;  surely 
then  thou  wouldst  see  reason  enough  why  the  sinner  should  look 
^jO  him  as  a  friend  indeed. 

Ah  !  then  I  would  go  further.  I  would  entreat  thee  to  make 
the  case  thine  own.  Thou  art  a  sinner;  can  I  not  convince 
thee  that  he  is  thy  friend  ? 

You  were  sick  the  other  d-ay.  The  physician  looked  very 
grave,  and  whicpered  something  to  your  wife.  She  did  not  tell 
you  what  it  was ;  but  your  own  life  trembled  in  the  scale,  and  it 
is  a  wonder  you  are  here  to-night.     Shall  I  tell  you  why  you 


216  THE  SINNER'S  FRIEND. 

are  here  ?  Do  you  see  that  tree  yonder  ?  It  has  been  standing 
in  its  plrice  for  many  year?,  but  it  has  never  yielded  any  fruit, 
and  several  times  tlie  master  of  the  garden  has  said,  "  Cut  it 
down."  The  other  day  the  woodman  came  with  his  axe  :  he  felt 
its  edge ;  it  was  sharp  and  keen  enough,  and  he  began  to  cut, 
and  the  chips  were  flying,  and  he  made  a  deep  gash.  But  the 
gardener  came  by,  —  one  who  had  watched  over  the  tree,  and  had 
hope  of  it  even  yet,  —  and  he  said,  "  Spare  it  —  spare  it  yet  a 
little  longer ;  the  wound  thou  hast  made  may  heal ;  and  I  will 
dig  about  it,  and  dung  it,  and  if  it  bring  forth  fruit,  well.  Spare 
it  another  year,  and  if  not,  then  cut  it  down."  That  tree  Is  your- 
self. The  woodman  is  Death.  That  chipping  at  the  trunk  of 
the  tree  was  your  sickness.  Jesus  is  he  who  spared  you.  You 
had  not  been  here  to-nipjht  —  you  had  been  there  in  hell  among 
damned  spirits,  howling  in  unutterable  woe  —  if  it  had  not  been 
that  the  friend  of  sinners  had  spared  your  life. 

And  where  are  you  to-night  ?  Perhaps,  my  hearers,  you  are 
in  an  unusual  place  for  you.  Your  Sunday  evenings  are  not 
often  spent  in  the  house  of  God.  There  are  other  places  which 
know  you,  but  your  seat  there  is  empty  to-night.  There  has 
been  much  persuasion  to  bring  you  here,  and  it  may  be  that  you 
have  come  against  your  will ;  but  some  friend  has  asked  you  to 
conduct  him  to  the  spot,  and  here  you  are.  Do  you  know  why 
you  are  here?  It  is  a  friendly  providence,  managed  by  the 
sinner's  friend,  which  has  brought  you  here,  that  you  may  hear 
the  sound  of  mercy,  and  have  a  loving  invitation  tendered  to 
you.  Be  grateful  to  the  Saviour  that  he  has  brought  you  to  the 
gospnl-pool.  May  you  —  oh,  may  you  this  night  be  made  to 
step  in  and  be  washed  from  sin  !  But  it  is  kind  of  him,  and 
pro  res  how  true  a  friend  he  is  of  sinners,  that  he  has  brought 
you  here.  I  will  leave  you  now  where  you  are,  and  I  will  tell 
you  how  he  has  dealt  with  other  sinners  ;  for  mayhap  this  may 
lead  you  to  ask  him  to  deal  the  same  with  you. 

I  know  a  sinner  —  while  I  live  I  must  know  liim.  Full  well 
do  I  remember  hiin  when  he  was  hard  of  heart  and  an  enemy 
to  Grod  by  a  multitude  of  wicked  works.     But  this  friend  o£ 


THE  SINNER'S  FRIEND.  217 

sinners  loved  him ;  and  passing  by  one  day,  he  looked  right  into 
his  soul  with  such  a  look  that  his  hard  heart  began  to  break. 
There  were  deep  throes,  as  though  a  birth  of  a  divine  sort  were 
coming  on.  Tliere  was  an  agony,  and  there  was  a  grief  unut- 
/•jrable ;  and  that  poor  soul  did  not  tliink  it  kind  of  Jesus  :  but 
indeed  it  was  kindness  too  intense  ever  fully  to  estimate  ;  for 
there  is  no  saving  a  soul  except  by  making  it  feel  its  need  of 
being  saved.  There  must  be  in  the  work  of  grace  an  emptying 
and  a  puUing  down  before  there  can  be  a  filling  and  a  building 
up.  That  soul  knew  no  peace  for  many  a  year,  and  the  sole  of 
its  foot  had  no  rest.     But  one  day  — 

"  I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say. 

Come  unto  me  and  rest; 
Lay  down,  thou  weary  one  —  lay  down 

Thy  head  upon  my  breast. 
I  came  to  Jesus  as  I  was. 

Weary,  and  worn,  and  sad ; 
I  found  in  him  a  resting-place. 

And  he  has  made  me  glad! 

"  I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say. 

Behold,  I  freely  give 
The  living  water  —  thirsty  one. 

Stoop  do^vll  and  drink,  and  live! 
I  came  to  Jesus,  and  I  drank 

Of  that  life-giving  stream; 
My  thirst  was  quenched,  my  soul  revived. 

And  now  I  live  in  him. 

"  I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say, 
•  I  am  this  dark  world's  light; 

Look  unto  me — thy  mom  shall  rise, 

And  all  thy  days  be  bright  I 
I  looked  to  Jesus,  and  I  found 

In  him  my  star,  ray  sun; 
And  in  that  light  of  light  I'll  walk. 
Till  travelling  days  are  done." 

Ay,  said  I,  Christ  is  the  friend  of  smners.      So  say  I,  and  so 
will  I  say  while  this  poor  lisping,  stammering  tongue  can  articu- 
late a  sound.     And  methinks  God  had  a  design  of  abundani 
19 


218  THE  siNXEirs  fkiend. 

mercy  when  he  saved  my  souh  I  had  not  the^i  believed  it, 
tlioiigh  a  mother's  loving  accents  might  have  whispered  it  in  my 
ears.  But  he  seems  to  remind  me  of  it  over  and  over  again, 
till  love  and  terror  mingle  in  my  breast,  saying,  "  Woe  is  me  if 
I  preacli  not  tlie  gospel."  O  my  blessed  Master  !  thou  dost  trnst 
niv  lips  when  ihou  dost  bear  witness  to  my  heart.  Thou  givest 
charge  to  my  tongue  when  thou  constrained  my  soul.  "Am  I 
a  chosen  vessel  ?  "  It  is  to  bear  his  name  to  sinners.  A?  a  full 
bottle  seeks  vent,  so  must  my  testimony  pant  for  utterance.  O 
sinner !  if  thou  trustest  Ilim,  he  will  be  such  a  friend  to  thee  ! 
and  if  thou  hast  now  a  broken  heart  and  a  contrite  spirit,  these 
are  his  work  ;  and  it  is  a  proof  of  his  great  love  to  thee  if  he 
has  made  thee  to  hunger  and  thirst  after  him. 

Let  me  impress  uj)on  you  that  Jesus  is  the  friend  of  the 
friendless.  She  who  had  spent  all  her  money  on  physicians 
without  getting  relief,  obtained  a  cure  gratis  when  she  came  to 
him.  He  who  hath  "  nothing  to  pay  "  gets  all  his  debts  cancelled 
by  this  friend.  And  he  who  was  ready  to  perish  with  hunger, 
finds  not  only  a  passing  meal,  but  a  constant  supply  at  his  hands. 

We  know  of  a  place  in  England,  still  existing,  where  there  is 
a  dole  of  bread  served  to  every  passer-by  who  chooses  to  ask  for 
it.  Whoever  he  may  be,  he  has  but  to  knock  at  the  door  of  St. 
Cross  Hospital,  and  there  is  the  dole  of  bread  for  him.  Jesus 
Christ  so  loveth  sinners  that  he  has  built  a  St.  Cross  Hospital, 
so  that,  whenever  a  sinner  is  hungry,  he  has  but  to  knock  and 
have  his  wants  supplied.  Nay,  he  has  done  better ;  he  has  at- 
tached to  this  hospital  of  the  cross  a  bath ;  and  whenever  a  soul 
is  black  and  filthy,  it  has  but  to  go  there  and  be  washed.  The 
fountain  is  always  full,  always  efficacious.  There  is  no  sinner 
who  ever  went  into  it  and  found  it,  could  not  wash  away  his 
stains.  Sins  which  were  scarlet  and  crimson  have  all  disap- 
peared, and  the  sinner  has  been  whiter  than  snow.  As  if  this 
were  not  enough,  there  is  attached  to  this  hospital  of  the  cross  a 
wardrobe ;  and  a  sinner,  making  application  simply  as  a  sinner, 
with  nothing  in  his  hand,  but  being  just  empty  and  naked,  he 
may  come  and  be  clothed  from  head  to  foot.     And  if  he  wishes 


THE  SIXXERS  I  RIEXT).  219 

to  be  a  soldier,  lie  may  not  merely  Lave  an  under-garmcnt,  but 
he  may  have  armor  Avhich  shall  cover  him  from  the  sole  of  his 
foot  to  the  crown  of  his  head.  Nay,  il  he  wants  a  sv^'ord  he 
shall  have  that  given  to  him,  and  a  shield  too.  There  is  noth- 
ing that  his  heart  can  desire,  that  is  good  for  him,  which  he  shall 
cot  receive.  He  shall  have  spending-money  so  long  as  he  lives, 
and  he  shall  have  an  eternal  heritage  of  glorious  treasure  when 
he  enters  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord. 

Beloved,  I  cannot  tell  you  all  that  Christ  has  done  for  sinners  ; 
but  this  I  know,  that  if  he  meets  with  you  to-night,  and  becomes 
your  friend,  he  will  stand  by  you  to  the  last.  He  will  go  home 
with  you  to-night.  No  matter  how  many  pairs  of  stairs  you 
have  to  go  up,  Jesus  will  go  witli^  you.  No  matter  if  there  be 
no  chair  to  sit  down  on,  he  will  i]ot  disdain  you.  You  shall  be 
hard  at  work  to-morrow,  but  as  you  wipe  the  sweat  from  your 
brow  he  shall  stand  by  you.  You  will,  perhaps,  be  despised  for 
his  sake  ;  but  he  will  not  forsake  Toa  You  will,  perhaps,  have 
days  of  sickness  ;  but  he  w^U  come  (\ixd  make  your  bed  in  your 
sickness  for  you.  You  will,  perhiNps,  be  poor  ;  but  your  bread 
shall  be  given  you,  and  your  water  shyll  be  sure  ;  for  he  will 
provide  for  you.  You  will  vex  him  rou^.h  and  grieve  his  Spirit. 
You  will  often  doubt  him  —  you  wiK  ^-o  i^vl'^r  other  lovers.  You 
will  provoke  him  to  jealousy,  but  he  viU  never  cease  to  love 
you.  You  will,  perhaps,  gYO^\■  cold  to  him,  '^nd  even  forget  his 
dear  name  for  a  time ;  but  he  will  never  fo.-get  you.  You  may, 
perhaps,  dishonor  his  cross,  and  damage  his  fsiv  fame  among  the 
sons  of  men  ;  but  he  will  never  cease  to  love  ^o'x :  nay,  he  will 
never  love  you  less —  he  cannot  love  you  more.  "Xhw  night  he 
doth  espouse  himself  unto  you.  Faith  shall  be  thr>  wedding- 
ring  which  he  will  put  upon  your  finger.     He  plight?  Mf  ti^^ih 

to  you. 

"  Though  3'ou  should  him  ofttlmcs  forget, 
His  loving-kindness  fast  is  set." 

His  heart  shall  be  so  true  to  you  that  he  will  never  leave  you  no/ 
forsake  you.  You  will  come  to  die  soon  ;  but  the  friend  of  sin 
ners,  who  loved  you  as  a  sinner  and  would  not  east  you  off 


220  THE  SIXXER'S  FRIEKD. 

when  your  sinnersliip  kept  breaking  up,  will  still  be  with  you 
when  you  come  to  the  sinner's  doom,  which  is  to  die.  I  see  you 
going  down  the  shelving  banks  of  Jordan,  but  the  sinner's  friend 
goes  with  you.  Ah,  dear  heart !  he  will  put  his  arm  beneath 
you,  and  bid  you  fear  not  ;  and  when  in  the  thick  shades  of  that 
grim  night  you  expect  to  see  a  fearful  visage,  —  the  grim  face  of 
Death,  —-you  shall  see,  instead  thereof —  you  shall  see  his  sweet 
and  smiling  face,  bright  as  an  evening  star,  by  your  soul,  and 
you  shall  hear  him  say,  "  Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee  ;  be  not  dis- 
mayed ;  I  am  thy  God."  You  will  land  in  the  world  of  spirits 
by-and-by  ;  but  will  the  sinner's  friend  forsake  you  then  ?  No ; 
he  will  be  pleased  to  own  you ;  he  will  meet  you  on  the  other 
side  the  Jordan,  and  he  will  say,  "  Come,  my  beloved,  I  have 
loved  thee  w^ith  an  everlasting  love,  and  have  bought  thee, 
though  thou  wast  a  sinner  vile,  and  now  I  am  not  ashamed  to 
confess  thee  before  my  holy  angels  ;  nay,  come  with  me,  and  I 
will  take  thee  to  my  Father's  face,  and  will  confess  thee  there.'' 
And  when  the  day  shall  come  in  which  the  world  shall  be  judged, 
he  will  be  thy  friend  then.  Thou  shalt  sit  on  the  bench  with 
him.  At  the  right  hand  of  the  Judge  shalt  thou  stand,  accepted 
in  him  who  was  thine  Advocate,  and  who  is  now  thy  Judge  to 
acquit  thee.  And  when  the  splendors  of  the  millennium  shall 
come,  thou  shalt  partake  of  them ;  and  when  the  end  shall  be, 
and  the  world  shall  be  rolled  up  like  a  worn-out  vesture,  and 
these  arching  skies  shall  have  passed  away  like  a  forgotten 
dream ;  when  eternity  with  its  deep-sounding  waves  shall  break 
upon  the  rocks  of  time  and  sweep  them  away  forever,  —  then, 
on  that  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  lire,  thou  shalt  stand  with 
Christ,  thy  friend  still,  owning  thee  notwithstanding  all  thy  mis- 
behavior in  the  w^orld  which  has  gone,  and  loving  thee  now  — 
loving  thee  on  as  long  as  eternity  shall  lust.  Oh  !  what  a  friend 
is  Christ  to  sinners  —  to  sinners  ! 

Now,  do  recollect  that  we  have  been  talking  about  sinners. 
There  is  a  notion  abroad  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to 
save  respectable  people,  and  that  he  will  save  decent  sort  of 
folks  ;  that  those  of  you  who  go  regularly  to  a  place  of  worship, 
and  are  good  sort  of  people,  will  be  saved.     Now,  Jesus  Christ 


THE   SINNERS   FRIEND.  221 

came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;  and  who  does  that  mean? 
"\Vc41,  it  includes  some  of  us  who  have  not  been  permitted  to  go 
in'.o  outward  sin  ;  but  it  also  includes  within  its  deep,  broad 
c.mpass  those  who  have  gone  to  the  utmost  extent  of  iniquity. 

Talk  of  sinners  !  Walk  the  streets  by  moonlight,  if  you  darr, 
and  you  will  see  sinners  then.  Watch  when  the  night  is  dark; 
and  tne  wind  is  howling,  and  the  picklock  is  grating  in  the  door, 
and  you  will  see  sinners  then.  Go  to  yon  jail,  and  walk  through 
the  wards,  and  see  the  men  with  heavy,  overhanging  brows,  — 
men  whom  you  would  not  like  to  meet  out  at  night,  —  and  there 
are  sinners  there.  Go  to  the  reformatories,  and  see  those  who 
have  betrayed  an  early  and  a  juvenile  depravity,  and  you  will 
see  sinners  there.  Go  across  the  seas  to  the  place  where  a  man 
will  gnaw  a  bone  upon  which  is  reeking  human  flesh,  and  there  is 
a  sinner  there.  Go  you  where  you  will,  and  ransack  earth  to 
find  sinners,  for  they  are  common  enough  :  you  may  find  them 
in  every  lane  and  street  of  every  city  and  town  and  village  and 
hamlet.  It  is  for  such  that  Jesus  died.  If  you  will  select  me 
the  grossest  specimen  of  humanity,  if  he  be  but  born  of  woman,  I 
will  have  hope  of  him  yet,  because  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  come 
to  sinners,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  sinners. 
Electing  love  has  selected  some  of  the  worst  to  be  made  the 
best.  Redeeming  love  has  bought,  specially  bought,  many  of 
the  worst  to  be  the  reward  of  the  Saviour's  passion.  Effectual 
grace  calls  out  and  compels  to  come  in  many  of  the  vilest  of  the 
vile  :  and  it  is  therefore  that  I  have  tried  to-night  to  preach  my 
Master's  love  to  sinners. 

Oh  !  by  that  love,  looking  out  of  those  eyes  in  tears ;  oh  !  by 
that  love,  streaming  from  those  wounds  flowing  with  blood  ;  by 
that  faithful  love,  that  strong  love,  that  pure,  disinterested,  and 
abiding  love ;  oh !  by  the  heart  and  by  the  bowels  of  the  Sa- 
viour's compassion,  I  do  conjure  you  turn  not  away  as  though  it 
were  nothing  to  you  :  but  believe  on  him  and  you  shall  be  saved  J 
Trust  your  souls  with  him,  and  he  will  bring  you  to  his  Father'i 
right  hand  in  glory  everlasting. 

May  'aod  '/pw  us  a  blessing  for  Jesus'  sake,    Ameiu 
19* 


SERMON  XII. 


f^LECTION  NO  DISCOURAGEMENT  TO  SEEKING  SOULS 


*  I    WILL    BE    GRACIOUS  UPON  WHOM    I    WILL    BE    GRACIOUS,    ATfTD    "WILL    BHCW 
MERCY  UPON  WllOil  I  WILL   SHOW  MERCY."  —  ExodUS  XXXiii.  19. 

Because  God  is  the  maker  and  creator  and  sustainer  of  all 
things,  he  has  a  right  to  do  as  he  wills  with  all  his  works.  "  Shall 
the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it,  Why  hast  thou  made 
me  thus  ?  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay  of  the  same 
lump  to  make  one  vessel  unto  honor,  and  another  unto  dishonor  ?  " 
God's  absolute  supremacy  and  Unlimited  sovereignty  naturally 
flow  from  his  omnipotence,  and  from  the  fact  that  he  is  the  source 
and  support  of  all  things.  Moreover,  if  it  were  not  so,  the  super- 
lative excellence  of  the  divine  character  would  entitle  him  to 
absolute  dominion.  He  should  be  chief  who  is  best.  He  who 
cannot  err,  being  perfect  in  wisdom  ;  he  who  will  not  err,  being 
as  perfect  in  holiness  ;  he  who  can  do  no  wrong,  being  supremely 
just ;  he  who  must  act  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  kind- 
ness, seeing  he  is  essentially  love,  is  the  most  fitting  person  to 
rule.  Tell  me  not  of  the  creatures  ruling  themselves  :  what  a 
chaos  were  this  !  Talk  not  of  a  supposed  republic  of  all  created 
existences,  controlling  and  guiding  themselves.  All  the  crea- 
tures put  together,  with  their  combined  wisdom  and  goodness,  — 
if,  indeed,  it  were  not  combined  folly  and  wickedness,  —  all  these^ 
I  say,  with  all  the  excellencies  of  knowledge,  judgment,  and  love, 
which  the  most  fervid  imagination  can  suppose  them  to  possess, 
could  not  make  the  equal  of  that  great  God  whose  name  is  holi- 
ness, whose  essence  is  love,  to  whom  all  power  belongeth,  and 


ELECTION  XO   DISCOUnAGEMEXT  TO   SEEKEN^G  SOULS.     223 

to  whom  alone  wisdom  is  to  be  a?cril)ed.    Let  him  reign  s  jpreme^ 
for  he  is  infinitely  superior  to  all  other  existences.     Even  if  hd 
did  not  actually  reign,  the  suffrages  of  all  wise  men  would  choose 
the  Lord  Jehovah  to  be  absolute  monarch  of  the  universe  ;  and 
if  he  were  not  already  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  doing 
as  he  wilU  among  the  armies  of  heaven  and  the  inhabitants  of 
this  lower  world,  it  were  the  path  of  wisdom  to  lift  him  up  to 
that  throne.     Since  men  have  sinned,  there  becomes  a  yet  fur- 
ther reason,  or  rather  a  wider  scope  for  the  display  of  sovereignty. 
The  creature,  as  a  creature,  may  be  supposed  to  have  some  claim 
upon  the  Creator ;  at  least,  it  may  expect  that  he  shall  not  make 
it  intentionally  and  despotically  to  put  it  to  pain  ;  that  he  shall 
not  arbitrarily,  and  without  cause  or  necessity,  cause  its  existence 
to  be  one  of  misery.     I  will  not  venture  to  judge  the  Lord,  but 
I  do  think  it  is  altogether  incompatible  with  his  goodness  that 
he  should  have  made  a  creature,  and,  as  a  creature,  have  con- 
demned it  to  misery.     Justice  seems  to  demand  that  there  shall 
be  no  punishment  where  there  is  no  sin.     But  man  has  lost  all 
his  rights  as  a  creature.     If  he  ever  had  any,  he  has  sinned  them 
away.     Our  first  parents  have  sinned,  and  we,  their  children, 
have  attainted  ourselves,  by  high  treason  against  our  liege  Lord 
and  Sovereign,     All  that  a  just  God  owes  to  any  one  of  us  on 
the  footing  of  our  own  claim,  is  wrath  and  displeasure.     If  he 
should  give  to  us  our  due,  we  should  no  longer  remain  on  pray- 
ing ground,  breathing  the  air  of  mercy.     The  creature,  before 
its  Creator,  must  now  be  silent  as  to  any  demands  upon  him ;  it 
cannot  require  anything  of  him  as  a  matter  of  right.     If  the  Lord 
willeth  to  show  mercy,  it  shall  be  so ;  but,  if  he  withholds  it, 
wlio  can  call  him  to  account  ?     "  Can  I  not  do  as  I  will  with 
mine  own?"  is  a  fit  reply  to  all  such  arrogant  inquiries;  for 
man  has  sinned  himself  out  of  court,  and  there  remains  no  right 
of  appeal  from  the  sentence  of  the  Most  High.     Man  is  now  in 
the  position  of  a  condemned  criminal,  whose  only  right  is  to  be 
taken  to  the  place  of  execution,  and  justly  to  suffer  the  due 
reward  cf  his  sins.     Whatever  difference  of  opinion,  then,  there 
might  have  been  about  the  sovereignty  of  God  as  exercised  upon 


224  ELECTION    N'O  DISCOUKAGOIENT 

creatures  in  the  pure  mass,  there  should  be  none,  and  there  will 
be  none,  except  in  rebellious  spirits,  concerning  the  sovereignty 
of  God  over  rebels  who  have  sinned  t_emselves  into  eternal  ruin, 
and  have  lost  all  their  claim  even  to  mercj,  much  more  the  love 
of  their  offended  Creator. 

However,  whether  we  all  of  us  agree  to  the  doctrine  that  God 
is  sovereign  or  not,  is  a  very  little  matter  to  him;  for  he  is  so. 
De  jure,  by  right,  he  should  be  so  ;  de  facto,  as  matter  of  fact, 
he  is  so.  It  is  a  fact,  concerning  which  you  have  only  to  open 
your  eyes  and  see  that  God  acts  as  a  sovereign  in  the  dispensa- 
tion of  his  grace.  Our  Saviour,  when  he  wished  to  quote  in- 
stances of  this,  spake  on  this  wise :  Many  widows  there  were  in 
Israel  in  the  time  of  Elias  tiie  prophet,  but  unto  none  of  these 
was  Elias  sent,  save  unto  Sarepta,  a  city  of  Sidon,  unto  a  woman 
who  was  a  widow.  Here  was  election.  Elias  is  not  sent  to  nourish 
and  to  be  nourished  by  an  Israelitish  widow  ;  but  to  a  poor  idola- 
tress across  the  border,  the  blessing  of  the  prophet's  company  is 
graciously  granted.  Again,  our  Saviour  says :  "  Many  lepers 
were  in  Israel  in  the  time  of  Eliseus  the  prophet ;  and  none  of 
them  were  cleansed,  save  only  Naaman  the  Syrian,"  —  not  an 
Israelite  at  all,  but  one  who  bowed  in  the  house  of  Rimmon. 
See  how  distinguishing  grace  finds  out  strange  objects !  Al- 
though our  Saviour  only  gave  these  two  instances,  and  no  more, 
because  they  sufficed  for  his  purpose,  there  are  thousands  of  such 
cases  on  record.  Look  at  man  and  the  flillen  angels.  How  is 
it  that  fallen  angels  are  condemned  to  endless  fire,  and  reserved 
in  chains  of  darkness  unto  the  great  day  ?  There  is  no  Saviour 
for  angels ;  no  precious  blood  was  ever  shed  for  Satan.  Lucifer 
falls,  and  falls  forever,  —  never  to  hope  again.  There  is  nc  dis- 
pensation of  mercy  to  those  nobler  spirits ;  but  man,  who  was 
made  lower  than  the  angels,  is  selected  to  be  the  object  of  divine 
redemption.  What  a  great  deep  is  here  !  This  is  a  most  illus- 
trious and  indisputable  instance  of  the  exercise  of  the  prerogatives 
of  divine  sovereignty.  Look,  again,  at  the  nations  of  the  earth. 
Why  is  the  gospel  preached  to-day  to  us,  Englishmen  ?  We 
have  oooimitted  as  many  offences  —  I  will  even  venture  to  say 


TO  SEEKING  SOULS.  225 

WO  have  perpetrated  as  many  political  crimes  —  as  other  nations. 
Our  eye  is  always  prejudiced  towards  everything  which  is  Eng- 
lish ;  but  if  we  read  our  history  fairly,  we  can  discover  in  tl  e 
past,  and  detect  in  the  present,  grave  and  serious  faults  which 
disgrace  our  national  banner.  To  pass  by  as  minor  offences  the 
late  barbarities  in  Japan,  and  ourfiequent  wars  of  extermination 
in  New  Zealand,  and  at  the  Cape,  let  it  crimson  the  cheek  of 
every  inhabitant  of  the  British  Isles  when  we  do  but  hint  at  the 
opium  traffic  with  China.  Yet  to  us  the  gospel  is  graciously 
sent,  so  that  few  nations  enjoy  it  so  fully  as  we  do.  It  is  true 
that  Prussia  and  Holland  hear  the  Word,  and  that  Sweden  and 
Denmark  are  comforted  by  the  truth  ;  but  their  candle  bums  but 
dimly  :  it  is  a  poor  flickering  lamp  which  cheers  their  darkness, 
while  in  our  own  dear  land,  partly  from  the  fact  of  our  religious 
liberty,  and  yet  more  graciously  through  the  late  revival,  the 
sun  of  the  gospel  shines  brightly,  and  men  rejoice  in  the  liglit  of 
day.  Why  this  ?  Why  no  grace  for  the  Japanese  ?  Why  no 
gospel  preached  to  the  inhabitants  of  Central  Africa?  Why 
w^as  not  the  truth  of  God  displayed  in  the  Cathedral  of  Santiago, 
instead  of  the  mummeries  and  follies  which  disgraced  both  dupes 
and  deceivers,  and  were  the  incidental  cause  of  the  horrible 
burnings  of  that  modern  Tophet  ?  Why  to-day  is  not  Rome, 
instead  of  being  the  seat  of  the  beast,  become  the  throne  of  Jesus 
Christ  ?  I  cannot  tell  you.  But  assuredly,  divine  sovereignty, 
passing  by  many  races  of  men,  has  been  pleased  to  pitch  upon 
the  Anglo-Saxon  family,  that  they  may  be  as  the  Jews  were 
aforetime,  the  custodians  of  divine  truth,  and  the  favorites  of 
mighty  grace. 

We  need  not  further  speak  upon  national  elections,  for  the 
principle  is  plainly  carried  out  in  individuals.  See  ye  anything, 
my  brethren,  in  that  rich  publican,  whose  coffers  are  gorged  with 
the  results  of  his  extortion,  when  he  climbs  the  sycamore  tree 
that  his  short  stature  may  not  prevent  his  seeing  the  Saviour  — 
Bee  ye  anything  in  him  why  the  Lord  of  glory  should  halt  be- 
neath that  sycamore  tree  and  say,  "  Zaccheus,  make  haste,  and 
come  down  ;  for  to-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house  "  ?     Can  ym 


226  "ELECTIOX  NO   DISCOURAGEMENT 

find  mc  fi  reason  why  yonder  adulterous  woman,  who  has  had 
live  hu.-bands,  and  who  is  now  living  with  a  man  who  is  not  her 
husband,  should  constrain  the  Saviour  to  journey  through  Sama- 
ria that  he  might  tell  her  of  the  water  of  life  ?  If  you  can  see 
anj^thing,  I  cannot.  Look  at  that  blood-thirsty  Pharisee,  hurry- 
ing to  Damascus  with  aulhority  to  hale  men  and  women  to  prison 
and  shed  their  blood.  The  heat  of  midday  cannot  stop  him,  for 
his  heart  is  hotter  with  religious  rage  than  the  sun  with  noontide 
i*ays.  But  see!  He  is  arrested  in  his  career!  A  brightness  shines 
round  about  him  !  Jesus  speaks  from  heaven  the  words  of  ten- 
der rebuke ;  and  Saul  of  Tai'sus  becomes  Paul,  the  apostle  of 
God.  Why  ?  Wherefore  ?  What  answer  can  we  give  but  this  ? 
"  Even  so.  Father ;  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight."  Read 
the  "  Life  of  John  Newton ;  "  had  he  not  ripened  into  the  gross- 
est of  all  villains  ?  Turn  to  the  history  of  John  Bunyan,  by  his 
own  confession  the  lowest  of  all  blackguards,  and  tell  me,  can 
you  find  in  either  of  these  offenders  any  sort  of  reason  why  the 
Lord  should  have  chosen  them  to  be  among  the  most  distin- 
guished heralds  of  the  cross  ?  No  man  in  his  senses  will  venture 
to  assert  that  there  was  anything  in  Newton  or  Bunyan  why 
they  should  engross  the  regard  of  the  Most  High.  It  was  sov- 
ereignty, and  nothing  but  sovereignty.  Take  your  own  case, 
dear  friends,  and  that  shall  be  the  most  convincing  of  all  to  you. 
If  you  know  anything  of  your  own  heart,  if  you  have  formed  a 
right  estimate  of  our  own  character,  if  you  have  seriously  con- 
sidered your  own  position  before  the  Most  High,  the  reflection 
that  God  loveth  you  with  an  everlasting  love,  and  that,  therefore, 
with  the  bands  of  his  kindness  he  has  drawn  you,  will  draw  forth 
from  you  at  once  the  exclamation,  "  Not  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not 
unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory,  for  thy  mercy  and  for 
truth's  sake."  Brethren !  the  whole  world  is  full  of  instances 
of  divine  sovereignty,  for  in  every  conversion  some  beam  of  the 
absolute  dominion  of  God  shines  forth  upon  mankind. 

When  a  sinner  is  anxi»  usly  disturbed  about  his  soul's  affairs, 
his  chief  and  main  thought  should  not  be  upon  this  subject ; 
when  a  mau  would  escape  from  wrath  and  attain  to  heaven,  his 


TO   SEEKING   SOULS.  227 

lirfit.  his  last,  his  middle  thought  should  be  the  cros,?  of  Christ. 
As  an  awakened  sinner,  I  have  vastly  less  to  do  with  the  secret 
purposes  of  God  than  with  his  revealed  commands.  For  a  man 
to  say,  "Thou  commandest  all  men  to  reoent.  yet  will  I  not 
repent,  because  I  do  not  know  that  I  am  chosen  to  eternal  life," 
is  not  only  unreasonable,  but  exceedingly  wicked.  That  it  is  un- 
reasonable you  will  clearly  see  on  a  moment's  reflection.  I 
know  that  bread  does  not  of  itself  nourish  my  body,  "  For  man 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  which  proceed- 
eth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  It  depends,  therefore,  upon  God's 
decree  whether  that  bread  shall  nourish  my  body  or  not ;  for  if 
he  has  not  purposed  that  it  shall,  it  may  even  choke  me,  and  so 
become  rather  the  cause  of  my  death  than  the  staff  of  my  life. 
Do  I  therefore,  when  I  am  hungry,  thrust  my  hands  into  my 
pockets,  and  stand  still,  and  refuse  to  help  myself  from  the  well- 
loaded  table,  because  I  do  not  know  whether  God  has  decreed 
that  the  bread  shall  nourish  me  or  not  ?  If  I  did,  I  should  be 
an  idiot  or  madman  ;  or  if,  in  my  senses,  I  should  starve  myself 
on  such  a  pretence,  I  should  richly  deserve  the  burial  of  a  sui- 
cide. I  am  not  absolutely  sure  that  there  will  be  a  harvest  upon 
my  field  next  year :  unless  God  has  ordained  that  the  corn  shall 
spring  up  and  shall  ripen,  all  my  husbandry  will  be  labor  lost. 
There  are  worms  in  the  earth,  frosts  in  the  air,  birds  in  the  sky, 
mildews  in  the  -winds,  —  all  of  Avhich  may  destroy  my  corn,  and 
I  may  lose  every  single  grain  of  the  handsful  which  I  throw  into 
my  furrows.  Shall  I,  therefore,  leave  my  farm  to  be  one  per- 
petual fallow,  because  I  do  not  know  whether  God  has  decreed 
that  there  shall  be  a  harvest  or  not  next  year  ?  If  I  become  a 
bankrupt,  if  I  am  unable  to  pay  my  rent,  if  the  thorn  and 
the  thistle  grow  taller  and  higher,  and  if  at  last  my  landlord 
thrusts  me  from  my  tenancy,  all  that  men  will  say  will  be,  "  It 
serves  him  right ! "  because  I  wsls  such  a  fool  as  to  make  the 
eecret  purposes  of  God  a  matter  of  paramount  consideration, 
instead  of  performing  my  known  duty.  I  am  ill  and  sick.  A 
physician  comes  to  me  with  medicine.  I  am  not  clear  that  his 
medicine  will  heal  me ;  it  has  healed  a  great  many  others :  but 


228  ELECnON  XO   DISCOURAGEMENT 

if  God  has  decreed  that  I  shall  die,  I  shall  die,  let  me  take  any 
quantity  of  physic,  or  take  none  at  all.  My  arm  mortifies,  but 
I  will  not  have  it  cut  off,  because  I  do  not  know  whether  God 
has  decreed  that  I  shall  die  of  mortification  or  not.  Who  but  a 
crazed  idiot,  or  raving  maniac,  would  talk  thus  ?  When  I  put 
the  case  in  that  light,  you  all  reply,  "  Nobody  ever  talks  in  that 
way ;  it  is  too  absurd."  Of  course  nobody  does.  And  the  fact 
is,  even  in  the  things  of  God,  nobody  really  does  argue  in  that 
way.  A  man  may  say,  "  I  will  not  believe  in  Christ,  because  I 
am  afraid  I  am  not  elected;"  but  the  thing  is  so  stupid,  so 
absurd,  that  I  do  not  believe  that  any  man,  not  absolutely  de- 
mented, can  be  so  grossly  foolish  as  to  believe  m  his  own  reason- 
ing. I  am  fai*  rather  inclined  to  think  that  is  a  wicked  and 
perverse  method  of  endeavoring  to  stultify  conscience,  on  the 
theory  that  a  bad  excuse  is  better  than  none,  and  that  even  a 
foolish  argument  is  better  than  having  one's  mouth  shut  in 
Bpeechless  confusion. 

But,  since  men  will  everlastingly  be  getting  to  this  point, 
and  there  are  so  many  who  are  always  giving  this  as  a  reason 
why  they  do  not  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  because  "  it 
is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God 
that  showeth  mercy,"  I  shall  try,  this  morning,  to  talk  with  these 
ppopk  on  their  own  ground  ;  and  I  shall  endeavor,  by  the  help 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  show  that  the  doctrine  of  the  sovereignty 
of  God,  so  fixr  from  di^ouraging  anybody,  has  not  in  it,  if  re- 
garded aright,  any  sort  of  discouragement  whatever  for  any 
souls  believing  in  Jesus  Christ. 

For  one  moment  let  me  detain  you  from  my  object,  while  I 
reply  to  a  very  common  method  of  misrepresenting  the  doctrine. 
It  may  be  as  well  to  start  with  a  clear  idea  of  what  the  doctrine 
really  is.  Our  opponents  put  the  case  tlTus  :  Suppose  a  father 
should  condemn  some  of  his  children  to  extreme  misery,  and 
make  others  supremely  happy,  out  of  his  own  arbitrary  will, 
would  it  be  right  and  just  ?  AYould  it  not  be  brutal  and  detesta- 
ble? My  answer  is,  of  course  it  ivould  ;  it  would  be  execrable 
in  the  highest  degree :  and  far,  very  far  be  it  fi'om  u:i  ^  impute 


TO  SEEKING  SOULS.  229 

such  a  course  of  action  to  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  Bui  the 
case  stated  is  not  at  all  the  one  under  consideration,  hut  one  as 
opposite  from  it  as  light  from  darkness.  Sinful  man  is  not  now 
in  the  position  of  a  well-deserving  or  innocent  child,  neither  does 
God  occupy  the  place  of  a  complacent  parent.  We  will  suppose 
another  case,  far  nearer  the  mark ;  indeed,  it  is  no  supposition,  but 
an  exact  description  of  the  whole  matter.  A  number  of  criminals, 
guilty  of  the  most  aggravated  and  detestable  crimes,  are  righteously 
condemned  to  die ;  and  die  they  must,  unless  the  king  shall  exer- 
cise the  prerogative  vested  in  him,  and  give  them  a  free  pardon. 
If,  for  good  and  sufficient  reasons,  known  only  to  himself,  the  king 
chooses  to  forgive  a  certain  number,  and  to  leave  the  rest  foi 
execution,  is  there  anything  cruel  or  unrighteous  here  ?  If,  by 
some  wise  means,  the  ends  of  justice  can  b'=!  even  better  an- 
swered by  the  sparing  of  the  pardoned  ones  than  by  their 
condemnation,  while  at  the  same  time  the  punishment  of  some 
tends  to  honor .  the  justice  of  the  lawgiver,  who  shall  dare  to 
find  fault  ?  None,  I  venture  to  say,  but  those  who  are  the 
enemies  of  the  state  and  of  the  king.  And  so  may  we  well  ask, 
"  Is  there  unrighteousness  with  God  ?  God  forb-d."  "  What 
if  God,  willing  to  show  his  wrath  and  to  make  his  power  known, 
endured  with  much  long-suffering  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to 
destruction ;  and  that  he  might  make  known  the  riches  of  his 
glory  on  the  vessels  of  mercy,  which  he  had  afore  prepared  unto 
glory,  even  us,  whom  he  hath  called,  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but 
also  of  the  Gentvles  ?  "  Who  is  he  that  shall  impugn  the  min- 
gled mercy  and  severity  of  Heaven,  or  make  the  eternal  God  an 
offer.der,  because  "  he  hath  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy  "  ? 
Let  us  now  proceed  to  our  proper  subject,  and  endeavor  to  clear 
this  truth  from  the  terrors  supposed  to  cluster  round  it. 

I.     Let  us  begin  with  this  assertion,  which  we  are  absolutely 
sure  is  correct:  This  doctrine  does  not  oppose  any  com* 

FORT  DERIVED  FROM  OTHER  SCRIPTURAL  TRUTHS. 

This  doctrine,  stern  as  it  may  seem  to  be,  does  not  oppose  the 
consolation  which  may  be  rightly  dei'ived  from  any  other  Irutb  of 
20 


230  ELECTION  NO  1)Iscol:ragi::\ient 

revelal-on .  Those  who  hold  the  free-will  theory,  say  that  our  doc- 
trine that  salvation  is  of  the  Lord  alone,  and  that  he  will  have  mercy 
on  whom  he  will  have  mercy,  takes  away  from  man  the  comfort 
deri\able  from  God's  goodness.  God  is  good,  infinitely  good  in  his 
nature.  God  is  love :  he  willeth  not  the  death  of  any,  but  had 
ratler  that  all  should  come  to  repentance.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the 
Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but  had 
rather  tliat  he  should  turn  unto  me  and  live."  Our  friends  very 
properly  insist  upon  it  that  God  is  good  to  all,  and  his  tender 
mercies  are  over  all  his  works ;  that  the  Lord  is  merciful  and 
gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in  mercy.  Let  me  assure 
them  that  we  shall  never  quarrel  on  these  points,  for  we  also 
rejoice  in  the  same  facts.  Some  of  you  have  listened  to  my 
voice  for  these  ten  years.  I  ask  you  whether  you  have  heard 
me  utter  a  single  sentence  which  at  all  contradicts  the  doctrine 
of  God's  great  goodness  ?  You  may  have  so  construed  it  by 
mistake,  but  no  such  teaching  has  passed  my  lip.  Do  I  not, 
again  and  again,  assert  the  universal  benevolence  of  God  —  the 
infinite  and  overflowing  goodness  of  the  heart  of  the  Most  High  ? 
If  any  man  can  preach  upon  the  great  text,  "  God  is  love," 
though  I  may  not  be  able  to  preach  with  the  same  eloquence,  I  will 
renture  to  vie  with  him  in  the  decision,  heartiness,  delight,  ear- 
nestness, and  plainness  with  which  he  may  expound  his  theme, 
be  he  who  he  may,  or  what  he  may.  There  is  not  the  slightest 
shadow  of  a  conflict  betw^een  God's  sovereignty  and  God's  good- 
ness. He  may  be  a  sovereign,  and  yet  it  may  b.  absolutely 
certain  that  he  will  always  act  in  the  way  of  goodness  and  love. 
It  is  true  that  he  will  do  as  he  wills  ;  and  yet  it  is  quite  certain 
that  he  always  wills  to  do  that  which,  in  the  widest  view  of  it,  is 
good  and  gracious.  If  the  sons  of  sorrow  fetch  any  comfort 
from  the  goodness  of  God,  the  doctrine  of  election  w^ill  never 
stand  in  their  way.  0  aly,  mark,  it  does  with  a  two-edged  sword 
cut  to  pieces  that  false  confidence  in  God's  goodness  which 
sends  so  many  souls  to  hell.  We  have  heard  dying  men  singing 
themselves  into  the  bottomless  pit  with  this  lullaby,  "  Yes,  sir, 
I  am  a  sinner ;  but  God  is  merciful ;  God  is  good."     Ah,  deaf 


TO  SEEKING  SOULS.  231 

friends!  let  such  remember  that  God  is  just  as  well  as  good, 
snd  that  he  will  by  no  means  spare  the  guilty,  except  through 
the  great  atonement  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  The  doctrine  of  elec- 
tion in  a  most  blessedly  honest  manner,  does  come  in,  and  breaks 
the  neck,  once  for  all,  of  all  this  false  and  groundless  confitlence 
in  the  uncovenanted  mercy  of  God.  Sinner,  you  have  no  right  la 
trust  to  the  goodness  of  God  out  of  Christ.  There  is  no  word 
in  the  whole  Book  of  inspiration  which  gives  the  shadow  of  a 
hope  to  the  man  who  will  not  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  says 
of  him,  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  It  declares 
of  you,  who  are  resting  upon  such  a  poor  confidence  as  the  un* 
promised  favor  of  Heaven,  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay 
than  that  which  is  laid,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  If  this  be 
an  evil  to  rob  you  of  a  false  refuge,  the  doctrine  of  election  cer- 
tainly does  this  ;  but  from  the  comfort  properly  derivable  from 
the  largest  view  of  God's  bounteous  goodness  and  unlimited  love, 
election  does  not  detract  a  single  grain. 

Much  comfort,  too,  flows  to  a  troubled  conscience  from  the 
m'omise  that  God  will  hear  prayer.  "  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given 
you  ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto 
you :  for  every  one  that  asketn  receiveth  ;  and  he  thatseeketh  find- 
eth  ;  and  to  him  that  knocketh  it  shall  be  opened."  If  you  ask 
anything  of  God  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  shall  receive 
it.  Now,  there  are  some  who  imagine  that  they  must  not  pray, 
because  they  do  not  know  whether  they  are  God's  chosen  peo- 
]d«^.  If  you  refuse  to  pray  on  the  ground  of  such  bad  reasoning 
as  l!us,  you  must  do  so  at  your  own  expense  ;  but  do  mark  our 
solemn  assurance,  for  which  we  have  God's  warrant,  that  there 
is  notiiing  in  the  sovereignty  of  God  which  at  all  militates 
against  the  great  truth,  that  every  sincerely  seeking  soul,  crav- 
ing divine  grace  by  Immble  prayer  through  Jesus  Christ,  shall 
be  a  finder.  There  may  be  an  Arminian  brother  here  who 
would  like  to  get  into  this  pulpit  and  preach  the  cheering  truth 
that  God  liath  not  said  to  the  seed  of  Jacub,  seek  ye  my  face  in 
vain.  We  not  only  accord  him  full  liberty  to  preach  this  doc- 
trine, but  we  will  go  as  far  as  he  can,  and  perhaps  a  little  fur* 


232  EJECTION  XO   DISCO URAGE:i[ENT 

ther,  ill  tlie  enunciation  of  tliat  tratli.  AVe  cannot  perceive  any 
discrepancy  between  personal  election  and  the  prevalence  of 
prayer.  Let  those  who  can,  vex  their  brains  with  the  task  of 
reconciling  them ;  to  us  the  wonder  is  how  a  man  can  believe 
the  one  without  the  other.  Firmly  must  I  believe  that  the  Lord 
God  will  show  mercy  to  whom  he  will  show  mercy,  and  have 
compassion  on  whom  he  will  have  compassion ;  but  I  know  a? 
assuredly  that  wherever  there  is  a  genuine  prayer,  God  gave  it ; 
that  wherever  there  is  a  seeker,  God  made  him  seek ;  conse- 
quently, if  God  has  made  the  man  seek  and  made  the  man  pray, 
there  is  evidence  at  once  of  divine  election ;  and  the  fact  stands 
true  that  none  seek  who  shall  not  find. 

Very  much  comfort,  also,  is  su})posed  to  be  derived,  and  nat- 
urally so,  from  the  free  invitations  of  the  gospel.  "  Ah !  "  cries 
one,  *•'  what  a  sweet  thing  it  is  that  the  Saviour  cried,  *  Come 
unto  me  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  w^ill  give 
you  rest ' !  How  delightful  to  read  such  a  word  as  this  :  '  Ho, 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath 
no  money ;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and 
milk  without  money  and  without  price ' !  Sir,  my  heart  is  en- 
couraged when  I  find  it  written,  '  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take 
the  water  of  life  freely.'  But,  sir,  I  dure  not  come  because  of 
the  doctrine  of  election."  My  dear  hearer,  I  vv^ould  not  say 
anything  harshly  to  you,  but  I  must  express  my  conviction  that 
this  is  nothing  but  an  idle  excuse  for  not  doing  what  you  have 
no  mind  to  do  ;  because  invitations  of  the  most  general  charac- 
ter, nay,  invitations  which  shall  be  universal  in  their  scope,  are 
perfectly  consistent  with  the  election  of  God.  I  have  preached 
here,  you  know  it,  invitations  as  free  as  those  which  proceeded 
from  the  lips  of  Master  John  Wesley.  Van  Armin  himself,  tlie 
founder  of  the  Arminian  school,  could  not  more  honestly  ha-e 
pleaded  with  the  very  vilest  of  the  vile  to  come  to  Jesus  thnn  1 
have  done.  Have  I  therefore  felt  in  my  mind  tliat  there  was  a 
contradiction  here  ?  No  ;  nothing  of  the  kind  :  Oecause  I  know 
it  to  be  my  duty  to  sow  beside  all  waters,  and,  like  the  sower  in 
the  paralde,  to  scatter  the  seed  upon  the  stony  ground,  as  well 


TO   SEEKING  SOULS.  •  233 

as  upon  tli<.  good  land,  knowing  that  election  does  not  narrow 
tlie  gospel-call,  which  is  universal,  but  only  affects  the  effectual 
call,  which  is  and  must  be  particular ;  which  effectual  call  is  no 
work  of  mine,  seeing  that  it  cometli  from  the  Spirit  of  God 
My  business  is  to  give  the  general  call, —  the  Holy  Spirit  will  see 
to  its  application  to  the  chosen.  Oh,  my  dear  hearers  !  God's  in- 
vitations are  honest  invitations  to  every  one  of  you.  He  invites 
you ;  in  the  words  of  the  parable,  he  addresses  you,  "  All  things 
are  ready ;  come  ye  to  the  supper,  my  oxen  and  my  fatlings  are 
killed."  Nay,  he  saith  to  his  ministers,  "  Go  out  into  the  high- 
ways and  hedges,  and  compel  them  to  come  in."  Though  he 
foreknows  who  will  come  in,  and  has  before  all  worlds  ordained 
who  shall  taste  of  that  supper,  yet  the  invitation,  in  its  widest 
possible  range,  is  a  true  and  honest  one  ;  and  if  you  accept  it 
you  shall  find  it  so. 

Furthermore,  if  we  understand  the  gospel  at  all,  the  gospel 
lies  in  a  nutshell.  It  is  this :  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Or,  to  use  Christ's  words, 
"  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  This  promise  is  the  gospel. 
Now,  the  gospel  is  true,  wdiatever  else  may  be  false.  Whatever 
doctrine  may  or  may  not  be  of  God,  the  gospel  certainly  is. 
The  doctrine  of  sovereign  grace  is  not  contrary  to  the  gospel, 
but  perfectly  consonant  therewith.  God  has  a  people  whom  no 
man  shall  number,  whom  he  hath  ordained  unto  eternal  life. 
This  is  by  no  means  in  conflict  with  the  great  declaration,  "He 
that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  If  any  man  who  ever 
lived,  or  ever  shall  live,  believes  in  Jesus  Christ,  he  hath  eternal 
life.  Election  or  no  election,  if  you  are  resting  upon  the  rock 
of  ages  you  are  saved.  If  3^ou,  as  a  guilty  sinner,  take  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  —  if,  all  black  and  foul  and  filthy,  you 
come  to  wash  in  the  fountain  filled  with  blood,  —  sovereignty  or 
no  sovereignty,  rest  assured  of  this,  that  you  are  redeemed  from 
the  wrath  to  come.  Oh,  my  dear  friends  !  when  you  say,  "  I  will 
not  believe  in  Christ  because  of  election,"  I  can  only  say,  as  Job 
did  to  his  wife,  "  Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  women 
20* 


234  ELECTION  NO  DISCOUKAGEiCENT 

gpeaketh."  How  dare  you,  because  God  reveals  to  you  two 
things,  which  two  things  you  cannot  make  square  with  one  an- 
other—  how  dare  you  charge  either  the  one  or  the  other  with 
being  false  ?  If  1  believe  God,  I  am  not  only  to  believe  what 
1  can  understand,  but  what  I  cannot  understand  ;  and  if  there 
were  a  revelation  which  I  could  comprehend  and  sum  up  as  I 
raay  count  five  upon  my  fingers,  I  should  be  sure  it  did  not  come 
Jrom  God.  But  if  it  has  some  depths  vastly  too  deep  for  me, 
—  some  knots  which  I  cannot  untie,  some  mysteries  which  1 
cannot  solve,  —  I  receive  it  with  the  greater  confidence,  be- 
cause it  now  gives  me  swimming-room  for  my  faith,  and  my  soul 
bathes  herself  in  the  great  sea  of  God's  wisdom,  praying,  "  Lord, 
I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief." 

Let  it  be  said,  over  and  over  again,  that  there  shall  be  no 
doubt  about  this  matter  ;  that  if  there  be  any  comfort  derivable 
from  the  gospel ;  if  there  be  any  sweet  consolation  flowing  from 
the  free  invitations  and  the  universal  commands  of  divine  truth, 
all  those  may  be  received  and  enjoyed  by  you,  while  you  hold 
this  doctrine  of  divine  sovereignty,  as  much  as  if  you  did  not 
hold  it,  and  received  some  wider  scheme.  Methinks  I  hear  one 
voice  say,  "  Sir,  the  only  comfort  I  can  ever  have  lies  in  the  in- 
finite value  of  the  precious  Hood  of  Christ ;  O,  sir  !  it  seems  to 
me  such  a  sweet  thing  that  there  is  no  sinner  so  black  that  Christ 
cannot  wash  away  liis  sins,  and  no  sinner  so  old  that  the  meri- 
torious virtue  of  that  atonement  cannot  meet  his  case  —  not  one 
in  any  rank  or  in  any  condition  whom  that  blood  cannot  cleanse 
from  all  sin.  Now,  sir,  if  that  be  true,  how  can  the  doctrine  of 
election  be  true  ?  "  My  dear  friend,  you  know  in  your  own 
heart  that  the  two  things  are  not  opposed  to  each  other  at  all 
For  what  does  the  doctrine  of  election  say  ?  It  says  that  God 
has  chosen  and  has  saved  some  of  the  greatest  sinners  whc 
ever  lived,  has  cleansed  some  of  the  foulest  sins  ever  committed 
and  that  he  is  doing  and  will  do  the  same  to  the  world's  end 
So  that  the  two  things  exactly  tally.  And  I  will  venture  to  sa^ 
that  if  in  the  fulness  of  a  man's  heart  he  shall  say,  "  There  is  nr 
sin,  except  the  one  <  xcepted  sin,  which  cannot  be  forgiven  ;  "  if 


TO  SEEKING  SOUI.S.  235 

he  boldlj  announce  that  "  All  manner  of  sin  sliall  be  forgiven 
unto  men ; "  and  if  he  shall  plead  with  power  and  earnestness  that 
souls  would  now  come  to  Christ  and  lay  hold  upon  eternal  life ; 
he  may  go  back  to  his  Bible,  and  he  may  read  every  text  teach- 
ing the  sovereignty  of  God,  and  every  passage  upholding  divine 
election  ;  and  he  may  feel  that  all  these  texts  look  him  in  the 
face,  and  say,  "  Well  done ;  our  spirit  and  your  spirit  are  pre- 
cisely the  same  :  we  have  no  conflict  together ;  we  are  two  great 
truths  which  came  from  the  same  God ;  we  are  alike  the  reve- 
lation of  the  Holy  Ghost."  But  we  leave  that  point.  If  there 
be  any  comfort,  sinner,  which  you  can  truthfully  and  rightly  get 
from  any  passage  of  Scripture,  from  any  promise  of  God,  from 
any  invitation,  from  any  open  door  of  mercy,  you  may  have  it ; 
for  the  doctrine  of  election  does  not  rob  you  of  one  atom  of  the 
consolation  which  the  truth  of  God  can  afford  30U. 

II.  But  now  we  will  take  another  point  for  a  moment.  Our 
second  head  is,  that  this  doctrine  has  a  most  salutary 
EFFECT  UPON  SINNERS.-  Thcsc  may  be  divided  into  two  classes : 
those  who  are  awahened,  and  those  who  are  hardened  and  incor- 
rigihle. 

To  the  awakened  sinner,  next  to  the  doctrine  of  the  cross,  the 
doctrine  of  distinguishing  grace  is  perhaps  the  most  fraught  with 
blessings  and  comfort.  In  the  first  place,  the  doctrine  of  election, 
applied  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  strikes  dead  forever  all  the  efforts  of 
the  flesh.  It  is  the  end  of  Arminian  preaching  to  make  raea 
active,  —  to  excite  them  to  do  what  they  can  ;  but  the  very  end 
and  object  of  gospel  preaching  is  to  make  men  feci  that  they 
have  no  power  of  their  own,  and  to  lay  them  as  dead  at  the  foot 
of  God's  throne.  We  seek,  under  God,  to  make  them  feel  that 
all  their  strength  must  lie  in  the  Strong  One  who  is  mighty  to 
save.  If  I  can  convince  a  man  that,  let  him  do  what  he  may,  he 
cannot  save  himself;  if  I  can  show  him  that  his  own  prayers 
and  tears  can  never  save  him  apart  from  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  if  I 
can  convince  him  that  he  must  be  born  again  from  above  ;  if  I 
lead  him  to  see  that  all  which  is  bora  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and 


236  ELECTION  KO  DISCOUKAGEMENT 

only  Ihat  wliich  i3  bora  of  the  Spirit  i.^  spirit,  —  brethren  !  three 
parts  of  the  great  battle  are  already  won.  "  I  kill  and  I  make 
alive,"  saith  God :  "  when  a  man  h  killed  the  work  is  half  done." 
I"  I  wound  and  I  heal ;  when  a  man  is  wounded  his  salvation  is 
[commenced."  What !  am  I  to  set  a  sinner  industriously  to  labor 
after  eternal  life  by  his  own  works  ?  Then,  indeed,  am  1  ai> 
ambassador  of  hell.  Am  I  to  teach  him  that  there  is  a  ^^oodness 
in  him  which  he  is  to  evolve,  to  polish  and  educate  and  perfect, 
and  so  to  save  himself?  Then  I  am  a  teacher  of  the  beggarly 
elements  of  the  law,  and  not  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Are  v*'e  to 
set  forth  man's  prayers,  repentings,  and  humbling?,  as  the  way 
of  salvation  ?  If  so,  let  us  renounce  the  righteousness  of  Christ  at 
once,  for  the  two  will  never  stand  together.  I  am  a  mischief- 
maker  if  I  excite  the  activities  of  the  flesh,  instead  of  pointing 
to  the  arms  of  the  Redeemer!  But  if  the  potent  hammer  of 
electing  sovereignty  dashes  out  the  brains  of  all  a  mi\n's  works, 
merits,  doings,  and  wiliings,  while  it  pronounces  over  the  dead 
carcass  this  sentence  :  "  It  is  not  of  him  that"willeth,  nor  of  him 
that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy ; "  then,  the  best 
thing  is  done  for  a  sinner  that  can  be  done  as  a  stepping-stone 
to  the  a(;t  of  faith.  When  a  man  is  weaned  from  self,  and  totally 
delivered  from  looking  to  the  flesh  for  help,  there  is  hope  for 
him ;  and  this  the  doctrine  of  divine  sovereignty  does,  through 
the  Holy  Spirit's  power. 

Again  :  this  doctrine  gives  the  greatest  hope  to  the  really  awalc^ 
ened  sinner.  You  know  how  the  case  stands.  We  are  all  pris- 
oners, condemned  to  die.  God,  as  sovereign,  has  a  right  to 
pardon  whom  he  pleases.  Now,  imagine  a  number  of  us  shut 
up  in  a  condemned  cell,  all  guilty.  One  of  the  murderers  says 
within  himself:  "  I  know  that  I  have  no  reason  to  expect  to  bo 
delivered.  I  am  not  rich :  if  I  had  some  rich  relations,  like 
George  Townley,  I  might  be  found  insane,  and  delivered.  But 
I  am  very  poor ;  I  am  not  educated.  If  I  had  the  education  of 
Bome  men  I  might  expect  some  consideration.  I  am  not  a  man 
of  rank  and  position ;  I  am  a  man  without  merit  or  influence, 
therefore  1  cannot  expect  that  I  should  be  selected  as  one  to  be 


TO  SEEKING  SOUI.S.  237 

saved."  No;  I  believe  that  if  the  present  authorities  of  our  land 
were  the  persons  to  be  taken  into  consideration,  a  man  who  was 
poor  might  have  a  very  poor  chance  of  expecting  any  gratuitous 
deliverance.  But  when  God  is  the  great  sovereign  the  case  is 
different.  For  then  we  argue  thus :  "  Here  am  I ;  my  salvation 
depends  entirely  upon  the  will  of  God  :  is  there  a  chance  for 
me  ?  "  We  take  down  a  list  of  those  whom  he  has  saved,  and  we 
find  that  he  saves  the  poor,  the  illiterate,  the  wicked,  the  godless, 
and  the  worst  of  the  worst,  the  base  things,  and  things  that  are 
despised.  Well,  what  do  we  say  ?  "  Then  why  may  he  not 
choose  me  ?  Why  not  save  me  ?  If  I  am  to  look  for  some 
reason  in  myself  why  I  should  be  saved,  I  shall  never  find  any, 
and  consequently  never  shall  have  a  hope.  But  if  I  am  to  be 
saved  for  no  reason  at  all  but  that  God  wills  to  save  me,  ah ! 
then  there  is  hope  for  me.  I  will  to  the  gracious  King  approach ; 
1  will  do  as  he  bids  me ;  I  will  trust  in  his  dear  Son,  and  I  shall 
be  saved."  So  that  this  doctrine  opens  the  door  of  hope  to  the 
worst  of  the  worst,  and  the  only  persons  it  discourages  are  the 
Pharisees,  who  say,  "  Lord,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other 
men  are,"  —  those  proud,  haughty  spirits  who  say,  "  No ;  if  I 
am  not  to  be  saved  for  something  good  in  myself,  then  I  will  be 
damned !  "  as  damned  they  will  be,  with  a  vengeance,  too. 

Moreover,  do  not  you  see,  dear  friends,  how  the  doctrine  of 
election  comforts  the  sinner  in  the  matter  of  power  ?  His  complaint 
is,  "  I  find  I  have  no  power  to  believe ;  I  have  no  spiritual 
power  of  any  kind."  Election  stoops  down  and  whispers  in  his 
ear,  "  But  if  God  wills  to  save  you,  he  gives  the  power,  gives 
the  life,  and  gives  the  grace ;  and  therefore,  since  he  has  given 
that  power  and  might  to  others  as  weak  as  you,  why  not  to  you  ? 
Have  courage  ;  look  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  live."  And  oh  ! 
what  emotions  of  gratitude^  what  throbbings  of  love  does  this 
doctrine  cause  in  human  hearts  !  "  Why,"  saith  the  man,  "  I  am 
saved  simply  because  God  would  save  me ;  not  because  I  deserved 
it,  but  because  his  loving  heart  would  save  me ;  then  I  will  love 
him,  I  will  live  to  him,  I  will  spend  and  be  spent  for  Iiim."  Such 
a  man  cannot  be  proud  —  I  mean  not  consistently  with  the  doc- 


238  ELECTION  NO  DISC0UEAGE5IENT 

trino.  He  lies  /nimbli/  at  God's  feet.  Other  men  may  boast  of 
what  tlitiv  arc,  and  how  they  have  won  eternal  life  by  their  own. 
goodness  ;  but  I  cannot.  If  God  had  left  me,  I  had  been  in  heli 
with  others  ;  and  if  I  go  to  heaven,  I  must  cast  my  ci*own  at  the 
feet  of  the  grace  which  brought  me  there.  Such  a  man  will 
become  kiiid  to  others.  He  will  hold  his  opinions,  but  he  will 
not  hold  them  savagely,  nor  tea^h  them  bitterly  ;  because  he  will 
say,  "  If  I  have  light,  and  others  have  noc,  my  light  was  given 
me  from  God ;  therefore  I  have  no  cause  lo  plume  myself  upon 
it.  I  will  try  to  spread  that  light,  but  not  by  anger  and  abuse. 
For  why  should  I  blame  those  who  cannot  see  ? —  for  could  I  hav(j 
seen  if  God  had  not  opened  my  bhnd  eyes  ? "  Every  virtue 
this  doctrine  fosters,  and  every  vice  it  kills,  v/hen  the  Holy  Spirit 
Eo  uses  it.  Pride  it  treads  under  foot ;  and  humble,  trustful  con- 
ddence  in  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  it  cherishes  as  a  darling 
child. 

My  time  is  gone  ;  but  I  wanted  to  have  said  a  word  as  to  the 
effect  of  this  gospel  upon  incorriglUe  sinners.  I  will  just  say 
this  :  I  know  what  the  effect  of  it  ought  to  be.  "Whut  do  you 
say  who  have  made  up  your  minds  not  to  repent-- -you  who  care 
not  for  God  ?  Why,  you  believe  that  any  day  you  like  you  can 
.  turn  to  God,  since  God  is  merciful,  and  will  save  you ;  and 
therefore  you  walk  about  the  world  as  con^foriably  as  possible, 
thinking  it  all  depends  upon  you,  and  thut  you  will  get  into 
heaven  just  at  the  eleventh  hour.  Ah,  man !  that  is  not  your 
case.  See  where  you  are.  Do  you  see  that  moth  fluttering  in 
my  hand?  Imagine  it  to  be  there.  VVjth  this  finger  of  mine  I 
can  crush  it  —  in  a  moment.  Whether  it  shall  live  or  not  de- 
pends absolutely  upon  whether  I  choose  to  crush  it  or  let  it  go. 
That  is  precisely  your  position  at  the  present  moment.  God 
can  damn  you  now.  Nay,  let  us  say  to  you,  "  Yours  is  a  worse 
position  than  that."  There  are  some  seven  persons  now  doomed 
(br  murder  and  piracy  on  the  high  seas.  You  can  clearly  say 
that  their  lives  depend  upon  Her  Majesty's  pleasure.  If  Her 
Majesty  chooses  to  pardon  them,  she  can.  If  not,  vrhen  the  fatal 
morning  comes,  the  bolt  will  be  drawn,  and  they  will  be  launched 


TO  SEEKTXG  SOULS.  239 

into  eternity.  That  is  your  case,  sinner.  Ton  are  condemned 
already.  This  world  is  but  one  huge  condemned  cell,  in  which 
you  are  kept  until  the  execution  morning  comes.  If  you  are 
ever  to  be  pardoned,  God  must  do  it.  You  cannot  escape  from 
Lim  by  flight ;  you  cannot  bribe  him  by  actions  of  your  own. 
You  are  absolutely  in  the  liand  of  God,  and  if  ho  leaves  you 
where  you  are  and  as  you  are,  your  eternal  ruin  is  as  certain  as 
your  existence.  Now,  does  not  this  make  some  sort  of  trembling 
come  upon  you  ?  Perhaps  not ;  it  makes  you  angry.  Well,  if 
it  does,  that  will  not  frighten  me,  because  there  are  some  of  you 
who  will  never  be  good  for  anything  until  you  are  angry.  I 
believe  it  is  no  ill  sign  when  some  persons  are  angry  with  the 
truth.  It  shows  that  the  truth  has  pierced  them.  If  an  arrow 
penetrates  my  flesh,  I  do  not  like  the  arrow,  and  if  you  kick  and 
struggle  against  this  truth,  it  will  not  alarm  me  ;  I  shall  have 
some  hope  that  a  wound  is  made.  If  this  truth  should  provoke 
you  to  thmk,  it  will  have  done  for  some  of  you  one  of  the  great- 
est things  in  the  world.  It  is  not  your  perverse  thinking  which 
frightens  me  ;  it  is  the  utterly  thoughtless  way  in  which  j'ou  go 
on.  If  you  had  sense  enough  to  consider  these  things,  and  fight 
against  them.  I  should  then  have  some  faint  hope  of  you.  But, 
alai  !  many  of  you  have  not  sense  enough  ;  you  say,  "  Yes,  yes, 
it  is  all  true."  You  accept  it,  but  then  it  has  no  effect  upon  you. 
The  gospel  rolls  over  you,  like  oil  adown  a  slab  of  marble,  and 
produces  no  effect. 

If  you  are  at  all  right  in  heart,  you  will  begin  to  see  what 
your  state  is,  and  the  next  thing  that  will  startle  your  mind  will 
be  the  reflection  :  "  Is  it  so  ?  Am  I  absolutely  in  God's  hands  ? 
Can  he  save  me  or  damn  me  as  he  will  ?  Then,  I  will  cry  to 
liim,  "  O  God  !  save  me  from  the  wrath  to  come  —  from  eternal 
torment  —  from  banishment  from  thy  presence  !  Save  me,  0 
God  !  What  wouldst  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  Oh  !  what  would^t 
ihou  have  me  to  do,  that  I  may  find  thy  favor  and  live  ?  "  Then 
comes  the  answer  to  you :  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  you  shall  be  saved;  "  for  "  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shalj 
never  perish,  but  shall  ha^  (  eternal  life." 


240    ELECTION  NO  DISCOURAGE^rENT  1  )  SEEKING  SOULS. 

Oh  that  GoJ  might  bless  this  divine  doctrine  to  you  !  I  hav4 
never  preached  this  doctrine  without  conversions,  and  I  believe 
I  never  shall.  At  this  moment  God  will  cause  his  truth  to  at- 
tract your  hearts  to  Jesus,  or  to  affright  you  to  him.  May  you 
be  drawn  as  the  bird  is  drawn  by  the  lure,  or  may  you  be  driven 
as  a  dove  is  hunted  by  the  hawk  into  the  clefts  of  the  rock. 
Only  may  you  be  sweetly  compelled  to  come.  May  my  Lord 
fuliil  this  desire  of  my  heart.  Oh  that  God  may  grant  me  your 
souls  for  my  hire !  and  to  him,  shall  be  the  glory,  world  without 
end.    Asaeo. 


SERMON  XIII. 


TIIE   CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA. 

*THE    SAMB    HEi.BD  PAUL  SPEAK :    WHO    STEADFASTLY    BEHOLDIKO    HIM      JWB 

PEBCEIVrWiJ  THAT  HE  HAD  FAITH  TO  BE  HEALED,  SAID  WITH  A  LOUD  TCICK, 
BTAITD  UPBIGHT  ON  THT  FEET.  AND  HE  LEAPED  AND  WALKED."  —  ActS  Xiv. 
9,  10. 

I  HAVE  read  in  your  hearing  tlie  story  of  the  preaching  of 
Paul  and  Barnabas  in  tlie  town  of  Lystra.  The  name  of  Christ 
was  there  totally  unknown.  They  were  a  sort  of  country  people, 
partly  pastoral  and  partly  agricultural,  wlio  seem  to  have  been 
deeply  sunken  in  superstition.  At  the  gates  of  their  city  there 
stood  a  great  temple,  dedicated  to  Jupiter,  and  they  appear  to 
have  been  his  zealous  votaries.  Coming  down  from  the  moun- 
tain-si^e,  Paul  and  Barnabas  enter  the  town  ;  and  when  a  fitting 
time  has  come,  they  stand  up  in  the  market-place,  or  the  street, 
and  begin  to  talk  concerning  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  who  had 
come  down  from  heaven,  had  suffered  and  died,  and  had  again 
ascended  up  on  high.  The  people  gather  round  them.  Among 
the  rest,  a  cripple  listens  with  very  marked  attention.  They 
preach  again.  The  crowds  are  still  greater ;  and  on  one  occasion, 
while  Paul  is  in  the  middle  of  a  sermon,  using  his  eyes  to  watch 
the  audience,  as  all  preachers  should  do,  and  not  looking  up  at 
the  ceiling  or  at  the  gallery-front,  as  some  preachers  are  wont  to 
do,  he  marks  this  cripple,  fixes  his  eyes  upon  him,  and  looks 
earnestly  in  his  face.  Either  by  the  exercise  of  his  judgment, 
or  by  the  proraptmgs  of  revelation,  the  apostle  gathers  that  this 
man  has  faith  —  faith  to  be  healed.  In  order  to  attract  the  »t- 
21 


242  THE  cKiri'LE  at  lystra. 

tontion  of  the  people,  to  glorify  the  name  of  Christ,  to  publish 
more  widely  his  glorious  fame,  and  to  make  the  miracle  well 
known,  Paul  stops  the  sermon,  and  with  a  loud  voice  cries, 
"  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet."  The  cripple  leaps  and  praises  God. 
The  population  are  all  amazed,  and  knowing  that  there  was  a 
tradition  that  Jupiter  and  Mercury  had  once  appeared  in  that 
very  town,  —  a  tradition  preserved  in  the  Metamorphoses  of  Ovid 
to  the  present  day,  —  they  at  once  conclude  that  surely  Jupiter  and 
Mercury  must  be  come  again.  They  fix  upon  Barnabas,  v/hc 
was  probably  the  elder  and  the  nobler  looking  man,  for  Jupiter ; 
and  as  Jupiter  was  always  attended  by  Mercurius,  as  a  messen- 
ger, and  Mercury  was  the  god  of  eloq'jcnce,  they  conclude  that 
Paul  must  be  Mercury.  They  rush  to  the  temple  ;  they  tell  the 
priests  that  the  gods  have  come  down.  The  priests,  only  too 
ready  to  foster  popular  credulity,  and  pander  to  it,  bring  forth 
the  sacred  bullocks  and  the  garlands,  and  are  about  to  offer  sac- 
rifice before  Paul  and  Barnabas.  Such  homage  these  men  of 
God  indignantly  refuse :  they  rend  their  clothes  ;  they  beseech 
them  to  do  no  such  tiling,  for  they  are  nothing  but  men  ;  yet 
hardly  with  earnest  words  can  they  stay  the  people.  But  tluj 
next  day  certain  Jews  came  thither  and  produced  a  counter  irri- 
tation in  the  simple  minds  of  the  people  :  no  very  difficult  task 
where  a  rude  fanaticism  rouses  the  wild  passions  of  the  mob. 
Such  an  assembly  must  rage,  whether  it  be  with  redundant  ap- 
plause or  with  derisive  jeers.  Accordingly,  Paul  finds  himself 
exposed  to  periL  He  is  stoned  through  the  streets ;  dragged  forth 
as  dead,  and  left  by  the  very  men  who  worshipped  him  but  yes- 
terday as  a  god  —  left  to  die  as  a  villain  outside  the  oity  gates. 
But  Paul's  preaching  had  not  been  in  vain.  There  were  some 
few  disciples  who  remained  faithful.  His  ministry  was  rewarded 
and  owned  of  God. 

There  are  two  or  three  points  in  this  narrative  t/3  which  I 
ehall  call  your  attention  to-night,  making,  however,  the  lame 
man  the  centre  of  the  picture.  We  shall  notice,  first  of  all,  what 
preceded  this  lame  man's  faith  ;  secondly,  loherein  lay  his  faith 
to  be  healed;  and  thirdly,  what  is  the  teaching  of  the  miracle 


THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA.  248 

itself,  and  the  blessing  which  the  lame  man  obtained  through 
faith, 

I.     What  was  it  which  pkeceded  his  faith  ? 

That  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of 
God,"  is  a  great  and  universal  rule ;  but  the  hearing  of  what  ? 
Doubtless  the  hearing  of  the  gospel  is  intended.  On  turning  to 
your  Bibles  you  will  find  it  is  written  — "  And  there  they 
preached  the  gospel."  What,  Paul!  dost  thou  not  change  thy 
voice  ?  Thou  hast  preached  the  gospel  in  the  cities  of  Iconium 
and  Antioch,  where  there  were  enlightened  and  intelligent  hear- 
ers ;  if  the  gospel  suited  them,  surely  it  will  not  do  for  these 
wolfish  boors  !  Why  go  and  preach  to  these  poor,  ignorant,  super- 
stitious fanatics  the  very  same  truths  which  you  spoke  to  your 
enlightened  Jewish  brethren?  But  he  does  do  so,  my  friends. 
Tlie  very  gospel  whicii  he  preached  at  Damascus  in  the  syna- 
gogue, he  preaches  here  at  Lystra  in  the  market-place.  He 
makes  no  difference  between  the  education  of  his  hearers  in  dif- 
ferent places ;  he  has  the  same  gospel  to  preach  to  them  both, 
You  recollect  that  Paul  went  to  Ephesus  ;  and  Ephesus,  as  a  city, 
was  besotted  with  a  belief  in  sorcery.  The  people  had  given 
themselves  up  to  practice  magical  arts.  What  is  the  right  way 
to  begin  to  preach  at  Ephesus  ?  —  deliver  a  course  of  lectures 
upon  the  impassibility  and  absurdity  of  such  superstition  ?  No, 
sir ;  nothing  of  the  kind.  Preach  Christ,  preach  the  gospel  j 
and  as  Jesus  Christ  is  lifted  up,  they  bring  their  magical  books 
and  make  a  bonfire  of  them  in  the  open  forum.  But  here  is  a 
polished  governor —  Sergius  Paulus  —  sitting  upon  the  judgment- 
seat.  What  shall  be  preached  to  him  ?  Would  it  not  be  well 
to  begin  with  a  dissertation  on  politics,  and  to  show  that  the 
Christian  religion  does  not  interfere  with  proper  government,  — 
that  it  does  not  stir  up  the  people  to  anarchy  ?  No,  sir  ;  nothing 
of  the  kind.  There  is  nothing  for  Sergius  Paulus,  any  more 
than  there  is  for  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  but  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Paul  goes  to  Athens.  Now,  the  Athe- 
niaas  are  the  most  learned  and  philosophical  of  the  whole  i*ace 


2i4  THE  CKIPrLE   AT  I.YSTRA. 

of  men.  What  will  Paul  preach  there  ?  The  gospel,  the  whole 
gospel,  and  nothing  but  the  gospel,  lie  may  change  his  tonei^ 
but  never  his  matter.  It  is  the  same  remedy  for  the  same  dis- 
ease, be  the  men  what  they  may.  He  comes  to  Corinth,  and 
here  you  have  not  only  polished  manners,  but  the  very  refine* 
ment  of  vice.  It  is  a  city,  an  emporium  of  trade,  and  a  sort  of 
central  depot  of  sin.  What  then  ?  Will  he  now,  to  please  the 
trader,  assume  a  dilFerent  dialect?  Not  he!  The  Christ  for 
Athens  is  the  Christ  for  Corinth  too.  And  now  see  him.  He 
lias  come  to  Lycaonia,  and  is  preaching  at  Lystra.  Here  is  an 
ignorant  set  of  people,  wlio  worship  an  iiDage.  Why  does  he  not 
begin  by  preaching  of  the  Deity  ?  Why  does  he  not  talk  to  them 
of  the  Trinity  in  unity  ?  Why  does  he  not  try  and  confute  their 
notions  about  their  gods  ?  No,  my  dear  sir ;  he  will  do  nothing 
of  the  kind  :  that  may  be  done  incidentally,  but  the  first  and  the 
last  thing  that  Paul  will  do  at  Lystra  is,  there  he  will  preach 
the  gospeh  O  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God !  Wherever 
we  take  thee  thou  art  suited  to  the  wants  of  men.  Take  thee  to 
Persia,  with  all  its  gems  and  jewels,  and  thou  dost  suit  the  mon- 
arch on  his  throne  ;  or  take  thee  to  the  naked  savage,  with  all  his 
poverty  and  squalid  filth,  and  thou  dost  suit  him  too.  Thou 
mayst  be  preached,  thrice  glorious  wisdom  of  God,  to  the  wisest 
of  men ;  but  thou  art  not  too  great  a  mystery  to  be  uu^erstood 
and  believed  even  by  the  fools  and  the  babes :  the  things  which 
arc  not  can  receive  thee  as  well  as  the  things  which  are.  Never, 
I  pray  you  brethren,  lose  heart  in  the  power  of  the  gospel.  Do 
not  believe  that  there  exists  any  man,  much  less  any  race  of  men, 
for  whom  the  gospel  is  not  fitted.  Wherever  you  go,  do  not  cut, 
and  trim,  and  shape,  and  alter;  but  just  bring  out  the  whole 
truth  as  God  has  taught  it  to  you,  and  rest  assured  that  you  will 
be  unto  God  a  sweet  savor  of  Christ  in  every  place,  both  in  them 
who  are  saved  and  in  them  who  perish. 

What,  then,  was  this  gospel  which  the  Apostle  Paul  did  preach 
everywhere  ?  Well,  it  was  a  gospel  which  had  in  it  three  things, 
—  certain  facts,  certain  doctrines,  and  cert. tin  commands. 

It  was  a  gospel  of  facts.     Every  time  Paul  stood  up  to  preach, 


THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LTSTRA.  245 

be  t)ld  the  following  unvarnished  fale :  God,  looking  upon  the 
race  of  men,  beheld  them  lost  and  ruined.  Out  of  love  to  them, 
he  sent  his  oulv-begotten  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was 
born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  lived  some  thirty-two  or  thirty-three 
years  a  life  of  spotless  innocenee  and  perfect  obedience  to  God. 
He  was  God  :  lie  was  man.  In  due  time  he  was  delivered  up 
by  the  traitor  Judas.  He  was  crucified,  and  actually  put  to  death. 
Though  he  was  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory,  who  only  hath  im- 
mortality, yet  he  bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  After 
three  days  he  rose  again,  and  showed  himself  to  many  of  his 
disciples,  so  that  they  were  well  assured  he  was  the  same 
person  who  had  been  put  into  the  grave ;  and  when  the  forty 
days  were  finished,  he  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  the  sight  of  them 
all,  where  he  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  shall  also 
come  ere  long  a  second  time  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the 
dead.  These  were  the  facts  Avhich  Paul  would  state.  God  was 
made  flesh  and  dwelt  amongst  us,  and  we  beheld  his  glory,  —  the 
glory  as  of  the  only-begotLen  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth. 
'^  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that 
Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;  of  whom  I  am 
chief"  Briefly,  these  were  the  facts  which  Paul  would  preach ; 
and  if  any  one  of  these  facts  be  preached  doubtfully,  or  be  left 
out  of  any  ministry,  then  the  gospel  is  not  preached ;  for  the 
foundations  upon  which  the  gospel  rests  have  been  removed,  and 
then  what  can  the  righteous  do  ? 

Following  upon  these  facts,  Paul  preached  certain  doctrines^  — 
the  doctrines  flowing  out  of  the  facts.  To  wit,  he  preached  that 
Jesus  Christ  had  offered  a  full  atonement  to  divine  wrath  for  the 
gin  of  his  people,  so  that  whosoever  would  believe  on  him.  and 
trust  him,  should  be  saved.  The  doctrine  of  the  atonement 
would  form  the  most  prominent  feature  in  the  gospel  of  the 
Apostle  Paul.  Christ  also  hath  suffered  for  us,  the  just  for  tlie 
unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  "  God  commendethhis  love  towards 
us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  the  un- 
godly." Then  would  come  the  doctrine  of  pardon.  Paul,  with 
glowing  tongue,  would  tell  how  God  could  be  just,  and  yet  the 
21* 


246  THE  CniPPLE  AT  LYSTRA. 

justifier  of  Lira  who  believcth  ;  how  all  manner  of  sin  and  in* 
iquity  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men,  the  simple  condition  being 
that  the  man  believes  in  Christ ;  and  this  not  so  much  the  man's 
own  work,  as  a  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Everywhere  Paul 
would  be  unmistakable  in  this ;  "  Ye  chief  of  sinners,  look  to  the 
wounds  of  Jesus,  and  your  sins  shall  be  forgiven  you."  Equally 
clear  would  he  be  upon  the  doctrine  of  justification.  "  Christ," 
he  would  say,  "  will  wash  you  ;  nay,  more,  he  will  clothe  you : 
the  perfect  holiness  of  his  character  shall  be  imputed  unto  you  ; 
and  being  justified,  you  shall  have  peace  with  God,  and  there 
shall  be  no  condemnation,  because  you  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  I 
think  I  see  the  flashing  eye  of  the  apostle.  Methinks  I  listen  to 
his  earnest  voice,  whilp.  he  pleads  with  men  to  lay  hold  upon 
eternal  life,  —  to  look  to  Jesus  Christ,  to  forsake  the  deeds  of  the 
law,  to  put  their  trust  in  nothing  which  cometh  from  man,  but  to 
look  to  Jesus,  and  to  Jesus  only.  These  great  truths,  —  atonement, 
pardon,  and  justification,  with  all  the  other  truths  connected  with 
them,  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly,  —  were  just 
the  gospel  which  the  Apostle  Paul  preached. 

And  out  of  these  we  said  there  sprung  certain  demands.  The 
commands  were  these :  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
thou  slialt  be  saved."  Nor  do  I  suppose  that  the  apostle  for  a 
moment  stammered  to  pre£.ch  that  other  command  :  "  Arise, 
and  be  baptized."  He  would  not  preach  half  the  gospel,  but  the 
whole  of  it.  "  He  that  believcth  and  is  baptized  shall  he  saved  ; 
but  he  that  believcth  not  shall  be  damned  ;  "  and  often,  after  liis 
hearers  had  cried,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  and  they 
had  believed  in  Christ,  they  would  say  to  him :  "  See,  here  is 
water  ;  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  ?  " 

The  apostle,  then,  preached  a  gospel  which  was  made  up  of 
certain  authenticated  facts,  out  of  which  there  flowed  certain  most 
gracious  evangelical  dociriues,  which  were  enforced  and  driven 
home  with  divine  authority  by  Christ's  own  commands.  *'  Well,'* 
Bays  one,  "  do  you  think  the  world  will  be  turned  upside  down 
by  tliis  ?  "  Sirs,  it  has  been,  and  it  will  be  again.  In  vain  do 
those  who  seek  after  human  learning,  and  who  aim  at  dreamy 


THE  CRiiPLE  AT  LYSTRA,  247 

fientiment  or  spurious  science  in  preference  to  tlie  standard  tcacli^ 
ing  which  is  from  above,  attempt  to  find  a  nobler  instrument. 
This  IS  the  great  battering-ram  which  shall  yet  shake  the  bas- 
tions of  error.  This  is  the  sword,  the  true  Escalabar,  which,  if 
any  man  knoweth  how  to  wield  it,  shall  cut  through  joints  and 
marrow,  and  make  him  more  than  a  conqueror.  He  who  gettcth 
a  hold  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  knoweth  how  to  use  it,  hath 
that  before  which  the  devils  tremble,  and  in  the  presence  of 
which  angels  adore,  —  which  cherubs  long  to  look  into,  and  which 
God  himself  smiles  upon  as  his  noblest  work.  The  truth  we 
proclaim  is  not  that  which  is  discovered  by  us,  but  that  which  has 
been  delivered  to  us.  Do  ye  ask,  then,  where  thi-s  man's  faith 
came  from  ?     It  came  from  Paul's  preaching  of  the  gospel. 

11.      Now,  WHEREIN  LAY  THIS  MAN'S  FAITH  ? 

Paul  looked  at  the  man,  we  are  told,  and  perceived  "  that  he 
had  faith  to  he  healed^  What  meaneth  this  "  faith  to  be  healed  ?  " 
In  this  man's  case  I  think  it  was  something  like  this  :  Poor  fel- 
low !  As  he  listened  to  Paul's  preaching,  he  thought,  perhaps, 
"  "Well,  that  looks  like  true ;  that  seems  to  be  the  truth ;  it  is 
the  truth ;  I  am  sure  it  is  true  ;  and  if  it  is  true  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  so  great  a  Saviour,  perhaps  I  may  be  healed.  These 
lame  legs  of  mine,  which  never  would  carry  me  anywhere,  may 
yet  come  straight.  I  —  I  —  I  think  they  may ;  I  hope  they  may ; 
I  believe  they  may.  I  know  it  can  be  done  if  Christ  wills  it.  I 
believe  that ;  and  from  what  Paul  says  of  Christ's  character,  I 
think  he  must  be  willing  to  do  it.  I  will  ask  the  apostle.  The 
first  convenient  season  that  I  have  I  will  lift  up  my  cry,  for  I 
believe  it  can  be  done ;  and  I  think  there  is  a  perfect  willingness, 
both  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle  and  of  the  Master,  that  it  should 
be  done.  I  believe  it  will  be  done,  and  that  I  shall  yet  stand 
upright."  Then  Paul  said  to  him,  "  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet,** 
and  he  did  so  in  a  moment,  for  "  he  had  faith  to  be  healed." 

Do  you  think  I  am  overstraining  the  probabilities  of  the  case? 
You  will  perhaps  say,  "  It  does  not  appear  that  Paul  had  any 
oommuni  nation  with  the  poor  cripple  before  the  miracle  was  per* 


248  TIIK  CKIlTI.r.  AT   l.YSTr.A. 

formed."  Now,  I  venture  to  draw  quite  an  opposite  inferenee 
I  know  from  my  own  experience  that  it  is  no  uncommon  thing 
for  some  one  individual  to  arrest  the  preacher's  attention.  The 
group  of  countenances  which  lay  before  him  in  a  large  assembly, 
like  the  present,  might  to  the  first  glance  of  a  stranger  look  con- 
fused and  inexplicable,  as  a  Chinese  grammar  does  to  those  who 
knofV  not  the  language.  But  you  need  not  doubt  that  a  prac- 
tised eye  can  learn  to  read  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.  The 
languor  and  indifference  of  some ;  the  curious,  inquiring  look  of 
others  ;  the  cold,  critical  attention  of  a  considerable  number ;  and 
the  countenances  of  those  who  are  rather  absorbed  in  a  train  of 
thought  just  awakened  in  their  own  minds,  —  these  have  all  a 
peculiar  impressiveness,  and  form  a  picture  which  often  reacts 
upon  us,  and  kindles  a  vehement  desire  in  our  breasts  to  reach 
the  souls  of  those  who,  for  a  brief  hour,  hang  upon  our  lips. 
But  there  will  sometimes  be  one  who  has  faith  dazzling  in  his 
very  eyes,  as  they  are  fixed  with  an  intentness  of  which  it  were 
vain  for  me  to  attempt  a  description  —  seeming  to  drink  in  every 
word  and  every  syllable  of  a  word,  till  the  preacher  becomes  as 
absorbed  in  that  man  as  the  man  had  been  in  the  preacher.  And 
while  he  pursues  the  discourse,  gaining  liberty  at  every  step, 
till  he  forgets  the  formality  of  the  pulpit  in  the  freedom  of  con- 
versation with  the  people,  he  perceives  that  at  last  this  man  has 
heard  the  very  truth  which  meets  his  case.  There  is  no  con- 
cealing it.  His  features  have  suddenly  relaxed.  He  listens 
still,  but  it  is  no  longer  with  painful  anxiety ;  a  calm  satisfaction 
is  palpable  on  his  face  now.  That  soul  of  communion  which  is 
in  the  eye  has  unravelled  the  secret.  Preacher  and  hearer, 
unknown  to  all  the  rest  of  the  audience,  have  secretly  saluted 
each  other,  and  met  on  the  common  ground  of  a  vital  faith.  The 
anxious  one  feels  that  it  can  be  done.  And  I  can  readily  con- 
clude that  the  apostle  perceived  that  feeling  with  greater  cer- 
tainty than  he  would  have  done  had  the  man  whispered  it  in 
his  ears.  So  have  I  sometimes  known  that  the  exhortation  to 
Relieve  has  become  from  these  lips  a  positive  command  to  the 
Btrugghng  conscience  of  some  one  who  has  been  brought  to  a 


THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA.  249 

point  where  the  remedy  is  instantly  applied,  and  the  cure  in« 
stantly  effected. 

Most  unquestionably  there  is  such  a  thing  as  faith  to  be  saved. 
I  do  not  know  how  many  here  may  possess  it ;  but,  thank  God  I 
there  are  hundreds  of  you  here  who  have  faith  that  you  are  saved. 
That  is  better ;  that  is  the  ripest  faith  —  the  faith  which  knows 
you  are  saved,  and  rejoices  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  Alas ! 
there  are  others  who  have  no  faith  at  all.  But  it  is  with  those 
who  have  faith,  and  that  only  faith  to  he  saved,  not  faith  that 
you  are  saved,  I  am  more  particularly  concerned  at  this  moment. 

Shall  I  describe  this  "  faith  to  be  saved  ?  "  for  I  believe  that 
there  may  be  some  here  who  may  just  now  stand  upright  on  their 
feet ;  some  who  may  at  this  time  leap  for  joy  of  heart  because 
they  are  saved,  and  did  not  know  it.  You  have  "  faith,"  but  you 
have  not  fully  exercised  it.  Now,  you  believe  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  God's  Son  ?  "  Yes."  That  he  has  made  a  full  atonement  for 
his  people  ?  "  Yes."  You  believe  that  they  are  his  people  who 
trust  him  ?  "  Yes."  You  believe  he  is  worthy  to  be  trusted  ? 
"  Yes."  You  have  nothing  else  to  trust  to  ?  "  No,  sir."  You 
depend  on  nothing  which  you  have  ever  felt,  or  thought,  or  done  ? 
"  No,  sir  ;  I  depend  on  nothing  but  Christ."  And  you  do,  after 
a  sort  of  fashion,  trust  Christ.  You  hope  that  one  of  these  days 
he  will  save  you ;  and  you  think,  and  sometimes  you  almost  know, 
he  will.  You  are  ready  to  trust  him.  You  do  believe  he  is 
able,  you  do  not  think  he  is  unwilling ;  you  have  got  faith  in  his 
abiHty,  and  you  have  almost  got  faith  in  his  wilhngness.  Some- 
times you  half  think  to  yourself,  "I  am  a  child  of  God."  But, 
then,  there  is  some  ugly  "but"  comes  in.  Those  lame  legs 
again,  —  those  lame  legs  again.  You  are  still  afraid.  You  have 
"faith  to  be  saved,"  but  you  have  not  the  full  assurance  of  faith 
which  can  utter  forth  this  joyous  psalm :  "  Behold,  God  is  my 
salvation  ;  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid  :  for  the  Lord  Jehovah 
is  my  strength  and  my  song;  he  also  is  become  my  salvation." 

Well,  now,  I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  picked  you  out  — 
whether  I  have  given  a  right  description  of  you  or  not.  I  rec- 
ollect the  time  when  I  was  in  that  state.     I  can  honestly  say  I 


250  THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA. 

did  not  doubt  Christ.  I  three  parts  believed  that  he  would  saTe 
me.  I  knew  he  was  worthy  of  my  trust ;  and  I  did  trust  him  ag 
far  as  this,  —  that  I  resolved,  if  I  did  perish,  I  would  perish  cry- 
ing to  him  ;  and  that,  if  I  was  cast  awaj',  it  should  be  clinging  to 
the  cro3s.  I.  believe  I  had  "  faith  to  be  saved,"  and  was  for  months 
in  bondage  when  there  was  no  necessity  that  I  should  have 
been  in  bondage  at  all ;  for  when  there  is  "  faith  to  be  saved," 
then  the  man  only  needs  that  gracious  command,  "  Stand  up- 
right on  thy  feet,"  and  forthwith  he  leaps  out  of  his  infirmity, 
and  walks  freely  in  the  integrity  of  his  heart. 

III.     I  shall  not  enlarge  further  upon  this,  because  I  want  to 

go  to  THE  SPIRITUAL  TEACHING  OF  THE  MIRACLE,  AND  OP 
THE    BLESSING    CONFERRED. 

Are  there  not  many  who,  though  they  have  "faith  to  be  saved," 
are  still  entirely  lame,  or  painfully  limping  ?  The  reasons  may 
be  different  in  different  cases.  Some  have  been  so  stunned  by 
the  grief  which  they  have  suffered  on  account  of  sin,  and  the 
frightful  convictions  through  which  they  have  passed,  that  while 
they  do  believe  that  Christ  is  able  and  willing  to  save,  they 
cannot  get  a  hold  of  the  fact  that  they  are  saved,  —  such  is  the 
faintness  of  spirit  and  the  languishing  of  soul  brought  on  by  long 
despair.  "  Stand  upright  on  thy  i'eet,"  thou  trembling  sinner. 
If  thou  believest  in  Jesus,  whatever  thy  fears  may  be,  there  is 
no  cause  for  them.  As  for  thy  sins,  they  were  laid  on  him,  every 
one  of  them,  and  though  thou  hast  been  sore  broken  in  the  land 
of  dragons,  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  thee :  "  I  have  put  away  thy 
sin ;  thou  shalt  not  die  :  I  have  blotted  out  like  a  cloud  thy  trans- 
gressions, and  like  a  thick  cloud  thy  sins."  Rejoice,  then,  and 
be  glad.  If  you  do  trust  Christ,  you  are  saved ;  though  as  yet 
it  only  looketh  like  faith  which  heralds  the  tidings  of  a  salvation 
which  has  not  yet  arrived.  Stili,  it  is  the  grace  of  God  wliich 
bringeth  salvation  which  has  enabled  thee  to  believe  ;  and  he 
who  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life.  Oh,  receive  the 
welcome  message ;  spring  up  at  the  sound  of  the  words ;  stand 
op  right  on  thy  feet,  and  rejoice. 


THE  cr.irrLE  at  lystra.  251 

Some  are  still  lame,  though  they  have  faith,  iJiroiigh  ignorance. 
They  do  not  know  -svliat  bein^  saved  is.  They  entertain  wrong 
expectations.  They  are  trustuig  in  Christ,  but  they  do  not  feel 
any  surprising  emotions ;  ihey  have  not  had  any  remarkable 
dreams,  or  visions,  or  striking  ebullitions  of  excited  joy  ;  and 
Iherefore,  though  they  have  "faith  to  be  saved,"  they  have  not 
the  faith  of  a  present  salvation.  They  are  waiting  for  something, 
they  hardly  know  what,  to  embellish  their  faith,  or  to  fortify  it 
with  signs  and  wonders.  Now,  poor  soul,  wherefore  do  you 
wait?  These  things  are  not  necessary  to  salvation.  In  fact, 
the  fewer  you  have  of  them,  methinks,  the  better,  especially  of 
things  which  are  visionary.  I  rather  tremble  for  those  who  talk 
much  about  sensible  evidences ;  they  are  too  often  the  frivolities 
of  unstable  hearts.  Beloved,  though  you  may  have  never  had 
any  ecstatic  joys^  or  suffered  any  deep  depression  of  your  spirits, 
if  you  are  resting  on  Christ,  it  does  not  matter  one  wdiit  what 
your  feelings  have  been  or  have  not  been.  Do  you  expect  to 
have  an  electric  shock,  or  to  go  through  some  mysterious  opera- 
tion ?  The  operation  is  mysterious,  too  mysterious  for  you  to 
discern  it ;  but  all  that  you  have  to  do  with  is  this  —  "  Do  I 
believe  in  Jesus  ?  Am  I  simply  depending  upon  him  for  every- 
thing ?  "  If  you  do,  you  are  saved ;  and  I  pray  you  to  believe 
this.  Stand  upright  on  your  feet,  and  leap  for  joy ;  for,  whether 
you  believe  it  or  not,  if  you  are  now  depending  upon  Christ, 
your  sins  are  forgiven  you  ;  you  are  a  child  of  God ;  you  are  an 
heir  of  heaven. 

How  many,  too,  are  kept  lame  because  of  a  fear  of  sclf-decep' 
tion.  "  I  dc  trust  Christ,  but  I  am  afraid  lest  I  should  deceive 
nij^elf.  Suppose  I  were  to  get  confidence,  and  it  shoJild  be  pre- 
sumption. Suppose  I  should  think  myself  saved,  and  I  am  not ! " 
Now,  sir,  if  thou  wert  dealing  with  thyself  there  would  be  reason 
to  be  afraid  of  presumption ;  but  thy  faith  hath  to  deal  with  God-, 
whr  cannot  deceive  thee,  and  with  Christ  who  will  never  tempt 
thee  to  be  a  deceiver.  Doth  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself 
tell  thee  that  if  thou  believest  in  him  thou  art  saved  ?  Thou 
belisvest  that,  dost  thou  not?     Then,  soul,  if  thou  beb'erest  on 


252  THE  CUIPPLK  AT  LYSTRA. 

him.  It  is  not  presum])tion  to  say,  "  I  am  saved."  Away  with 
all  that  affectation  of  modesty,  which  some  good  people  think  to 
be  so  pretty  —  saying,"!  hope,"  "I  trust;"  but  '•  I  feel  such 
doubts,  such  fears,  and  such  gloomy  misgivings."  My  dear  sir, 
that  is  not  liumility  ;  that  is  a  vain,  unseemly  questioning  of  God. 
The  God  and  Leather  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  tells  you  —  and  he 
gives  his  own  unequivocal  word  for  it  —  that  if  you  rest  upon 
Christ  you  rest  upon  a  rock  ;  that  if  you  believe  in  him  you  are 
not  condemned.  Is  it  an  evidence  of  the  lowliness  of  your  heart 
that  you  suspect  the  veracity  of  God,  or  the  faithfulness  of  his 
promise  ?  Surely  this  were  no  fruit  of  the  meekness  of  wisdom. 
No,  beloved  ;  it  may  seem  too  good  to  be  true,  but  it  is  not  too 
good  for  my  God  to  give,  though  it  is  too  good  for  you  to  re- 
ceive. You  have  his  word  for  it.  that,  if  you  trust  his  Son  to 
save  you,  and  simply  trust  him,  and  him  alone,  even  if  the  pillars 
of  the  heavens  should  shake,  yet  you  would  be  saved.  If  the 
foundations  of  the  earth  should  reel,  and  the  whole  earth  should 
like  a  vision  pass  away,  yet  this  eternal  promise  and  oath  of 
God  must  stand  fast. 

Others,  again,  cannot  stand  upright  on  their  feet,  because  they 
are  afraid  that  if  they  did  begin  they  would  go  hack  again,  and  so 
bring  dishonor  to  Christ.  This  would  be  a  very  proper  fear,  if 
you  had  anything  to  do  with  keeping  yourselves.  If  you  had  to 
carry  yourselves  to  heaven,  it  would  be  reasonable  enough  for 
you  to  despair  of  doing  it.  Of  your  own  impotence  it  is  impos- 
sible you  can  be  too  deeply  convinced.  You  cannot  do  anything 
"whatever,  but  Christ  gives  you  his  promise  to  preserve  you  even 
to  the  end.  If  you  believe  on  him  you  shall  bo  saved.  He  does 
not  say  you  shall  be  saved  for  a  year,  or  for  twenty  years,  and 
then,  perhaps,  be  lost  at  last.  No ;  but  "  he  that  believeth  and 
is  baptized,  shall  be  saved."  If  one  man  who  believes  in  Chribt 
is  cast  away,  that  promise  of  Christ  is  not  true.  Brethren,  it  is 
true,  and  it  must  be  true,  —  and  let  its  glorious  truth  be  sweetly 
familiar  with  j^ou  now,  — if  you  give  your  soul  to  Christ,  putting 
simple  faith  in  his  person  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  in  his  work  as 
the  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  you  shall  as  surely  see  liia 


TIIE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA.  253 

face  within  the  j)early  gates  of  heaven  as  your  eyes  see  me  to- 
night. There  may  be  a  question  about  your  seeing  me,  but  there 
can  be  no  question  about  Christ  fulfilling  his  promise  and  keep- 
ing his  word.  jS'ow,  sit  down  in  the  dust  no  longer,  thou  doubting, 
mourning,  trembling  sinner.  With  a  loud  voice  I  say  unto  thee, 
as  Paul  did,  "  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet"  Wherefore  dost  thou 
mourn  ?  There  is  nothing  to  mourn  about.  Thy  sin  is  forgiven ; 
thine  eternal  salvation  is  secure ;  a  crown  in  heaven  is  j:)rovidcd 
for  thee,  and  a  harp  of  gold  awaits  thee.  If  thou  believest  in 
Jesus,  none  can  lay  anything  to  thy  charge.  Not  even  the  prin- 
cipalities of  darkness  shall  be  able  to  prevail  against  thee.  Eter- 
nal love  secures  thee  against  the  malice  of  hell.  Stand  upright, 
then,  on  thy  feet ;  for  if  thou  believest,  thou  art  saved,  completely 
saved,  —  saved  in  time,  and  for  eternal  days,  —  saved  in  the  Lord 
with  an  everlasting  salvation. 

Then,  possibly,  there  is  one  here  who  cannot  stand  upright  he- 
cause  of  his  many  sins.  Ah!  while  I  have  been  talking  about 
Christ,  it  may  be  something  has  been  saying  in  your  heart,  "  Ah ! 
ah !  what  is  it  ?  Christ  taking  men's  sins,  suffering  in  their 
stead  ?  That  suits  me.  Is  God  doing  this  ?  Ah !  then  he 
must  be  able  to  save,  and  I  am  told  that  whosoever  trusteth  in 
him  shall  never  perish.  Is  it  so  ?  Why,  here  I  am ;  I,  who  have 
not  been  in  a  place  of  worship  for  months,  for  years,  —  I  have 
cstrayed  in  here  to-night ;  and  if  what  this  man  says  be  true,  well, 
then  I  will  even  venture  my  soul  upon  it.  I  have  got  nothing,  I 
know ;  but  he  says  there  is  nothing  wanted.  I  am  not  prepared 
to  trust  Christ,  but  he  says  there  is  no  preparation  required  ;  and 
if  I  trust  Jesus  Christ  just  as  I  am,  Christ  will  save  me.  Why. 
I  will  do  it ;  by  the  grace  of  God  I  will  do  it.  Can  he  save  me  ?  "' 
Then  comes  in  the  bitter  reflection  :  "  Look  what  a  sinner  1 
have  been  !  Why,  I  should  be  ashamed  to  say  how  foully  I  have 
ginned.  He  must  shut  me  out.  I  have  been  too  great  a  villain, 
too  gross  an  offender.  I  have  cursed  and  sworn  at  such  a  rate. 
Hj;  cannot  mean  that  if  I  trust  Christ  I  shall  be  saved.  I  believe 
he  can  save  me ;  I  see  the  fitness  of  the  plan,  and  the  excellency 
of  it.  1  believe  it ;  but  see  what  a  sinner  I  am  !  "  Smner,  stand 
22 


254  THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA. 

upright  on  thy  feet ;  lor  "  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall 
be  forgiven  unto  men."  Return,  thou  wanderer  ;  return  to  thy 
Father's  house  !  lie  comes  to  meet  thee.  On  thy  neck  he  will 
fall,  and  thou  shalt  be  his  child  forever.  Only  beheve  thou  in 
his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  though  this  be  the  first  time  "thou  hast 
ever  heard  his  Word,  I  would  settle  mine  eyes  upon  thee  ear- 
nestly, and  say,  "  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet." 

Oh  !  how  often  I  do  wish  that  somebody  had  come  to  me  when 
I  was  under  depression  of  mind,  and  had  told  me  about  the  sim- 
ple gospel  of  Jesus  Christ !  I  think  I  should  have  stood  upright 
on  my  feet  long  before  I  did ;  but,  alas  !  I  kept  hearing  about 
what  people  felt  before  they  believed  in  Christ,  —  very  proper 
preaching, — and  I  was  afraid  I  did  not  feel  it,  though  now  I 
know  I  did.  I  heard  a  great  deal  about  what  Christians  ought 
to  be,  and  a  great  deal  more  about  God's  elect —  what  they  are  in 
his  esteem  ;  but  I  did  not  know  whether  I  was  one  of  God's  eh;ct; 
and  I  knew  I  was  not  what  I  ought  to  be.  Oh  for  the  trumpet 
of  the  archangel,  to  sound  the  words,  "  Believe  and  live"  as 
loud  as  the  voice  which  shall  wake  the  dead  in  their  graves  ! 
And  oh  for  the  quickening  Spirit  to  go  with  voice,  as  it  shall  go 
with  the  ringing  of  the  archangel's  trump,  when  the  graves  shall 
open,  and  the  dead  shall  arise !  Go,  you  who  know  it,  and  tell 
it  everywhere  ;  for  there  are  multitudes,  I  doubt  not,  who  are 
really  seeking  Christ,  and  who  have  his  Spirit  in  them ;  but  it  is 
like  as  the  prophet  hath  it :  "  The  children  have  come  to  the 
birth  and  there  is  no  strength  to  bring  forth."  They  have  come 
to  the  very  edge  of  light,  and  they  only  want  one  helping  hand 
to  bring  them  into  noonday.  They  are  slipping  about  in  the 
Slough  of  Despond,  and  they  are  almost  out  of  it;  but  they  want 
just  a  helping  hand  to  pull  them  out.  This  hand  of  help  is 
stretched  out  by  thus  telling  them,  telling  them  plainly,  it  is  in 
Jesus  their  help  is  found,  and  that  trusting  him,  relying  upon 
him,  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out 
of  his  hand. 

I  would  to  God  that  some  of  you,  who  have  been  long  hear- 
ing me,  might  be  found  in  this  class.     I  have  been  bowed  down 


THE  cRirrLE  at  lvstra.  255 

in  spirit  at  some  sad  things  wliicli  liave  been  brought  to  my  hear- 
ing of  late.  I  know  that  there  are  some  here,  and  there  alwayii 
have  been  some  few  attending  my  ministry,  who  have  a  personal 
affection  for  me,  and  who  listen  to  the  Word  with  very  great  at- 
tention, and  who,  moreover,  are  very  greatly  moved  by  it,  but  who 
have  some  besetting  sin  which  they  either  cannot  or  will  not  give 
up.  They  do  renounce  it  for  a  time  ;  but  either  bad  associates,  or 
else  the  strength  of  t]ieir  passions,  take  them  away  again.  Oh, 
sirs  !  I  would  ye  would  take  warning.  There  was  one  of  whom 
we  had  some  sort  of  hope,  who  listened  to  our  ministry.  There 
came  a  turning-point  with  him.  It  was  this  :  either  that  he  must 
give  up  sin,  or  else  give  up  coming  to  the  Tabernacle.  And 
what,  oh !  what  became  of  him  ?  I  could  indicate  the  place 
where  he  sat.  He  died  of  delirium  tremens  I  And  I  do  not 
wonder.  When  you  have  heard  the  gospel  preached  Sabbath 
after  Sabbath,  —  when  your  response  to  the  solemn  appeals  you 
have  earnestly  listened  to  has  only  been  that  you  reject  Christ 
and  refuse  eternal  life,  —  is  it  any  marvel  that  in  making  the 
choice  of  your  own  damnation  reason  should  resign  its  seat  as 
director  of  your  actions,  and  cease  to  curb  your  headstrong  will, 
leaving  the  maddened  passions  to  dash  on  with  reckless  fury> 
and  precipitate  your  destruction  ?  Am  I  clear  of  their  blood  ? 
I  have  asked  myself  the  question.  I  may  not  be  in  some  things, 
but  I  know  I  am  as  far  as  my  ministry  is  concerned.  I  have 
not  shunned  to  declare  unto  any  of  you  the  whole  counsel  of 
God.  When  I  have  known  any  vice,  or  any  folly  —  which  of 
you  have  I  been  afraid  of,  or  before  whom  of  you  all  have  I 
trembled  ?  God  is  my  witness  ;  him  have  I  served  in  the  spirit. 
And  if  these  turn  aside  unto  their  crooked  ways,  they  have  not 
done  it  without  well  knowing  the  consequences  ;  nay,  they  have 
not  done  it  without  being  warned  and  entreated,  and  persuaded 
to  look  unto  Jesus  Christ.  And  I  do  conjure  some  of  you  — 
you  know  to  whom  I  refer  —  I  do  conjure  those  of  you  who 
have  a  conscience  which  is  not  seared,  but  who,  nevertheless, 
persevere  in  your  sins  —  I  conjure  you  by  the  love  of  God,  do 
me  this  one  favor  at  the  last ;  if  you  choose  your  own  ruin,  bear 


256  THE  CRIPrLE  AT  LYSTRA. 

witness  for  me  that  I  have  not  hesitated  to  warn  you  of  it.  1 
had  infinitely  rather,  however,  that  you  would  do  yourselves  this 
great  favor,  to  love  your  own  souls.  If  you  have  anything  to 
throw  into  the  fire,  throw  it  in ;  but  let  it  not  be  your  soul.  If 
you  have  anything  to  lose,  go  and  lose  it ;  but  do  not  lose  your 
soul.  Sirs,  if  you  must  play  the  fool,  indulge  your  sport  at  a 
chea])er  rate  than  this.  If  sin  be  worth  having,  then  I  pray 
you  pay  a  cheaper  price  than  your  own  souls  for  it ;  for  it  does 
seem  to  me  so  pitiful,  so  sorrowful  a  thing  that  you  who  have 
been  so  short  a  time  among  us,  and  are  passing  away  before  my 
very  eyes,  should  still  prefer  the  fleeting  joy  of  the  moment  to 
the  eternal  joy,  and  risk  everlasting  torment  for  temporary  mirth. 
By  the  tears  of  Jesus,  when  he  wept  over  Jerusalem ;  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus,  which  he  shed  for  guilty  men  ;  by  the  heart  of 
the  eternal  Father,  who  willetli  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but 
had  rather  that  he  should  turn  unto  him  and  live,  —  I  pray  you 
be  wise,  and  consider  your  ways.  Choose  ye  this  day  whom  ye 
will  serve,  and  may  the  Lord  guide  your  choice.  May  you  fall 
into  the  arms  of  Divine  Mercy,  and  say,  "  If  thou  wilt  help  me, 
Jesus,  here  I  am ;  I  give  myself  to  thee."  May  my  Master 
teach  me  how  to  address  you,  if  I  do  not  know  how  to  gasp 
the  words  of  simplicity,  tenderness,  —  of  terrible  apprehension, 
but  of  persuasive  powder.  If  there  were  any  words  in  any 
language  that  would  melt  you,  this  tongue  is  at  your  service  to 
utter  them.  If  there  is  any  form  of  speech,  though  it  should 
make  me  to  be  called  vulgar,  and  subject  me  to  the  shame  and 
hissing  which  once  I  endured,  —  if  the  furnace  could  be  heated 
seven  times  hotter  than  that,  I  would  but  laugh  at  it  if.  I  might 
but  win  your  souls.  Tell  me,  sirs,  how  shall  I  put  the  case  ? 
Would  you  have  argument  ?  I  wish  that  I  could  reason  with 
you.  Would  you  have  tears  ?  There,  let  them  flow  !  Ye  dry 
eyes,  why  do  ye  not  weep  more  for  these  perishing  souls? 
Would  you  have  God's  Word  without  my  word  ?  Sirs,  I  would 
read  it  and  let  my  tongue  be  dumb,  if  that  would  teach  you. 
Would  my  death  save  you?  That  God  who  seeth  in  secret 
knoweth  that  to-night  it  were  a  joy  to  me  to  enter  into  my  re.«it, 


THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA.  257 

•lid  so  it  were  little  for  me  to  talk  of  being  willing  to  give  a 
life  for  you  ;  and  it  were,  indeed,  but  a  trifle  to  me.  Oh  !  why 
will  ye  perish  ?  Why  should  I  plead  with  you,  and  you  not  care 
for  yourselves  ?  What  is  it  that  besets  you  ?  Poor  moths  ! 
Are  ye  dazzled  with  the  flames  ?  Are  ye  not  content  to  have 
singed  your  wings  ?  Must  they  also  consume  body  and  soul  ? 
How  can  ye  make  your  bed  in  hell  ?  How  can  ye  abide  with 
eternal  burnings  ?  In  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  I  com- 
mand you  —  for  I  can  do  no  less  —  I  command  you  to  turn 
into  him,  and  live.  Believe  on  him  and  you  shall  be  saved. 
But,  remember,  at  your  hazard  you  reject  the  message  to-night. 
It  maybe  the  last  message  that  shall  ever  come  to  your  soul  with 
power ;  if  ye  cast  this  away  — 


What  chains  of  vcnf^eancc  must  they  feel, 
Who  shsht  the  bonds  of  love?" 


I  would  have  you  saved  just  now.  I  cannot  talk  about  to-mor* 
row.  I  would  have  you  decide  it  at  once.  Oh  !  you  have  come 
as  far  as  this  twenty  times,  and  have  you  gone  back  again  ?  You 
have  been  aroused ;  you  have  made  vows,  and  you  have  broken 
them ;  resolutions,  and  you  have  belied  them.  Oh,  sirs,  for  God's 
sake  do  not  lie  to  the  Almighty  again  !  Now,  be  true  this  time. 
May  the  Spirit  of  God  make  you  speak  the  truth,  even  though 
you  should  be  compelled  to  say,  through  your  wickedness :  "  I 
will  not  submit  myself  unto  the  Son  of  God."  Do  speak  the 
truth.  Procrastinate  not.  As  Elijah  said,  "  How  long  halt  ye 
between  two  opinions  ? "  so  say  I.  If  God  be  God,  serve  him  ; 
but  if  Baal  be  God,  serve  him.  But  do  not  keep  on  coming  here 
and  then  going  to  the  pot-house.  Do  not  come  and  take  your 
seat  here  and  then  go  to  the  brothel.  Sirs,  do  not  this  fouJ 
scandal  for  God's  sake,  and  for  your  own  sake.  If  you  will  serve 
the  devil,  serve  him,  and  be  a  true  servant  to  him.  If  you  mean 
to  go  to  hell,  go  there  ;  but  if  you  seeJi  eternal  life  and  joys  to 
come,  give  up  these  things.  Renounce  them.  Why  drink  poi- 
wn  and  drink  medicine  too  ?  Have  done  with  one  or  the  other, 
22* 


258  THE  CRIPPLE  AT  LYSTRA. 

and  be  honest.  Be  honest  to  your  own  souls.  May  the  Lord 
grant  that  to-night  some  may  have  given  to  them  not  only  "  faith 
to  be  saved,"  but  the  faith  which  saves,  for  Lis  name's  sake. 
Ameu. 


SERMOff  xnr. 


A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH. 


"A  BUHDLE  OF   MYBUH    IS   MY   WELL-BELOVED    UNTO    ME;  HK  BHAIL    LIS    AlA 
NIGHT  BETWIXT  MY  BREASTS."— CanticIeS  1.  13. 

Certain  divines  have  doubted  the  inspiration  of  Solomon's 
Song  ;  others  have  conceived  it  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  speci- 
men of  ancient  love-songs ;  and  some  have  been  afraid  to  preach 
from  it  because  of  its  highly  poetical  character.  The  true  rea- 
son for  all  this  avoidance  of  one  of  the  most  heavenly  portions 
of  God's  Word  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  spirit  of  this  Song  is  not 
easily  attained.  Its  music  belongs  to  the  higher  spiritual  life, 
and  has  no  charm  for  unspiritual  ears.  The  Song  occupies  a 
sacred  enclosure,  into  which  none  may  enter  unprepared.  "  Put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest 
is  holy  ground,"  is  the  warning  voice  from  its  secret  tabernacles. 
The  historical  books  I  may  compare  to  the  outer  courts  of  the 
temple ;  the  Gospels,  the  Epistles,  and  the  Psalms,  bring  us 
into  the  holy  place,  or  the  court  of  the  priests  ;  but  the  Song  of 
Solomon  is  the  most  holy  -place  —  the  holy  of  holies,  before  which 
the  veil  still  hangs  to  many  an  untaught  believer.  It  is  not  all 
the  saints  who  can  enter  here,  for  they  have  not  yet  attained 
unto  the  holy  confidence  of  faith,  and  that  exceeding  familiarity 
of  love  which  will  permit  them  to  commune  in  conjugal  love 
with  the  great  Bridegroom.  AVe  are  told  that  the  Jews  did  not 
permit  the  young  student  to  read  the  Canticles,  —  that  years  of 
full  maturity  were  thought  necessary  before  the  man  could 
rightly  profit  by  this  mysterious  Song  of  loves.     Possibly  they 


260  A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH. 

were  wise ;  at  any  rate,  the  prohibition  foreshadowed  a  great 
truth.  The  Song  is,  in  truth,  a  book  for  full-grown  Christians. 
Babes  in  grace  may  find  their  carnal  and  sensuous  affeclions 
stirred  up  by  it  towards  Jesus,  whom  they  know  rather  "  after 
the  flesh  "  than  in  the  spirit ;  but  it  needs  a  man  of  fuller  growth, 
who  has  leaned  his  head  upon  the  bosom  of  his  Master,  and  been 
baptized  with  his  baptism,  to  ascend  the  lofty  mountains  of  love 
on  v.hich  the  spouse  standeth  wilh  her  beloved.  The  Song, 
from  the  first  verse  to  the  last,  will  be  clear  to  those  who  have 
received  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  know  all  things 
(1  John  ii.  20).  You  are  aware,  dear  friends,  that  there  are 
very  few  commentaries  upon  the  Epistles  of  John.  Where  we 
find  fifty  commentaries  upon  any  book  of  St.  Paul,  you  will 
hardly  find  one  upon  John.  Why  is  that  ?  Is  the  book  too 
difficult  ?  The  words  are  very  simple  ;  there  is  hardly  a  word 
of  four  syllables  anywhere  in  John's  Epistles.  Ah  I  but  they 
arc  £0  saturated  through  and  through  with  the  spirit  of  love, 
which  also  perfumes  this  Book  of  Solomon,  that  those  who  are 
not  taught  in  the  school  of  communion  cry  out,  "We  cannot 
read  it,  for  it  is  sealed."  The  Song  is  a  golden  casket,  of  which 
love  is  the  key  rather  than  learning.  Those  who  have  not  at- 
tained unto  heights  of  affection,  those  who  have  not  been  educated 
by  familiar  intercourse  with  Jesus,  cannot  come  near  to  this 
mine  of  treasure,  "  seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living, 
and  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  heaven."  Oh  for  the  soaring 
eagle-wing  of  John,  and  the  far-seeing  dove's  eyes  of  Solomon ! 
But  the  most  of  us  are  blind,  and  cannot  see  afar  off.  May  God 
be  pleased  to  make  us  grow  in  grace,  and  give  us  so  much  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  that,  with  feet  like  hind's  feet,  we  may  stand  upon 
the  high  places  of  Scripture,  and  this  morning  have  some  near 
and  dear  intercourse  with  Christ  Jesus. 

C(mcerning  our  text,  let  us  talk  very  simply;  remarking,  first, 
that  Christ  is  very  precious  to  believers  ;  secondly,  that  there  is 
good  reason  why  he  should  he  ;  thirdly,  that  mingled  with  this 
sense  of  preciousness  there  is  a  joyous  consciousness  of  possession 
of  him;  and  that  therefore,  fourthly,  Mere  is  an  earnest  desire 


A  BUNDLE   or  MYRUfl.  • 261 

for  perpetaal  fellowship  with  Jiim.    If  you  look  at  the  text  again 
you  will  see  all  these  matters  in  it. 

I.  First,  then,  Christ  Jesus  is  unutterably  precious 
TO  BELIEVERS.  The  words  manifestly  imply  this :  "  A  bundle 
of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me."  She  calls  him  her  "  well- 
beloved,'  and  so  expresses  her  love  most  emphatically  ;  it  is  not 
merely  beloved,  but  well-hQloYGdi.  Then  she  looks  abroad  about 
her  to  find  a  substance  which  shall  be  at  once  valuable  in  itself 
and  useful  in  its  properties,  and  lighting  upon  myrrh,  she  saith : 
"  A  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me."  Without 
looking  into  the  figure  just  now,  we  keep  to  the  statement  that 
Christ  is  precious  to  the  believer. 

Observe,  first,  that  nothing  gives  the  believer  so  much  joy  as 
fellowship  with  Christ.  Ask  yourselves,  you  who  have  eaten  at 
his  table  and  have  been  made  to  drink  of  his  cup,  where  can 
iuch  sweetness  be  found  as  you  have  tasted  in  communion  with 
Jesus  ?  The  Christian  has  joy,  as  other  men  have,  in  the  com- 
mon mercies  of  life.  For  him  there  are  charms  in  music,  excel- 
lence in  painting,  and  beauty  in  sculpture  ;  for  him  the  hills  have 
sermons  of  majesty,  the  rocks  hymns  of  sublimity,  and  the  valleys 
lessons  of  love.  He  can  look  upon  all  things  with  an  eye  as 
clear  and  joyous  as  another  man's ;  he  can  be  glad  both  in  God's 
gifts  and  God's  works.  He  is  not  dead  to  the  happiness  of  the 
household  :  around  his  hearth  he  finds  happy  associations,  with- 
out which  life  were  drear  indeed.  His  children  fill  his  home 
with  glee ;  his  wife  is  his  solace  and  delight ;  his  friends  are  his 
comfort  and  refreshment.  He  accepts  the  comforts  which  soul 
and  body  can  yield  him,  according  as  God  seeth  it  wise  to  afibrd 
them  unto  him  ;  but  he  will  tell  you  that  in  all  these  separately, 
yea,  and  in  all  of  them  added  together,  he  doth  not  find  such  sub- 
stantial delight  as  he  doth  in  the  person  of  his  Lord  Jesus. 
Brethren,  there  is  a  wine  which  no  vineyard  on  eartli  ever 
yielded  ;  there  is  a  bread  which  even  the  cornfields  of  Egypt 
could  never  bring  forth.  You  and  I  have  said,  when  we  have 
beheld  others  finding  their  god  in  earthly  comforts,  "  You  may 


262  A  BUXDLE  OF  SITRRn. 

boast  in  gold  and  silver  and  raiment,  but  I  will  rejoice  in  the 
God  of  my  sdvation."  In  our  esteem,  the  joys  of  earth  are  little 
better  than  husks  for  swine,  compared  with  Jesus  the  heavenly 
manna.  I  would  rather  have  one  mouthful  of  Chri^t's  love,  and 
a  sip  of  his  fellowship,  than  a  whole  world-full  of  carnal  delights. 
What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?  What  is  the  sparkling  paste 
to  the  true  diamond.'^  What  is  a  dream  to  the  glorious  reality? 
What  is  time's  mirth  in  its  best  trim  compared  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
in  his  most  despised  estate  ?  If  you  know  anything  of  the  inner 
life,  you  will  all  of  you  confess  that  our  highest,  purest,  and 
most  enduring  joys  must  be  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  which  is 
in  the  midst  of  the  Paradise  of  God.  No  spring  yields  such 
sweet  water  as  that  well  of  God  which  was  digged  with  the  sol- 
dier's spear.  As  for  the  house  of  feasting,  the  joy  of  harvest, 
the  mirth  of  marriage,  the  sports  of  youth,  the  recreations  of 
maturer  age  —  they  are  all  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance  com- 
pared with  the  joy  of  Immanuel  our  best  beloved.  As  the 
Preacher  said,  so  say  we :  "  I  said  of  laughter,  It  is  mad ;  and  of 
mirth,  What  doeth  it  ?  "  "  Vanity  of  vanities  ;  all  is  vanity." 
All  earthly  bliss  is  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  but  the  comforts  of 
Christ's  presence  are  like  himself,  heavenly.  We  can  review 
our  communion  with  Jesus,  and  find  no  regrets  of  emptiness 
therein ;  there  are  no  dregs  in  this  wine,  no  dead  flies  in  this 
ointment.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  solid  and  enduring.  Vanity 
hath  not  looked  upon  it,  but  discretion  and  prudence  testify  that 
it  abideth  the  test  of  years,  and  is  in  time  and  in  eternity  worthy 
to  be  called  "  the  only  true  delight.^* 

"What  is  the  world,  with  all  its  storo? 
'Tis  but  a  bitter  sweet; 
When  I  attempt  to  pluck  the  rose, 
A  pricking  thorn  I  meet. 

"Here  perfect  bliss  can  ne'er  be  found; 

The  honey's  mixed  with  gall; 
'Midst  changing  scenes  and  dying  friends. 
Be  thou  my  All  in  All." 

We  may  plainly  see  that  Christ  is  very  precious  to  the  belieTCTi 


A  BUNDLE  OF  ItfYRRH.  2G3 

because  to  him  there  is  nothing  good  without  Christ.  Believer, 
have  you  not  found  in  the  midst  of  plenty  a  dire  and  s^re  famine 
if  your  Lord  has  been  absent  ?  The  sun  was  shining,  but  Christ 
had  hidden  himself,  and  all  the  world  was  black  to  3'ou :  or  it 
was  a  night  of  tempest,  and  there  were  many  stars  ;  but  since  the 
brigiit  and  morning  star  was  gone,  on  that  dreary  main,  where 
you  were  tossed  with  doubts  and  fears,  no  other  star  could  shed 
£0  much  as  a  ray  of  light.  Oh,  what  a  howling  wilderness  is 
this  world  without  my  Lord  !  If  once  he  groweth  angry,  and 
doth,  though  it  be  for  a  moment,  hide  himself  from  me,  withered 
are  the  flowers  of  my  garden ;  my  pleasant  fruits  decay ;  the 
birds  suspend  their  songs,  and  black  night  lowers  over  all  my 
hopes.  Nothing  can  compensate  for  the  company  of  the  Saviour : 
all  earth's  candles  cannot  make  daylight  if  the  Sun  of  Kighteous- 
ness  be  gone. 

On  the  other  hand,  when  all  earthly  comforts  have  failed  you, 
have  you  not  found  quite  enough  in  your  Lord'?  Your  very 
worst  times  have  been  your  best  times.  You  must  almost  cry 
to  go  back  to  your  bed  of  sickness,  for  Jesus  made  it  as  a  royal 
throne,  whereon  you  reigned  with  him:  Those  dark  nights  —  ah  ! 
they  were  not  dark ;  your  bright  days,  since  then,  have  been 
darker  far.  Do  you  remember  when  you  were  poor  ?  Oh,  how 
near  Christ  was  lo  you,  and  how  rich  he  made  you  !  You  were 
despised  and  rejected  of  men,  and  no  man  gave  you  a  good  word. 
Ah  !  sweet  was  his  fellowship  then  ;  and  how  delightful  to  hear 
him  say,  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee  ;  be  not  dismayed, 
for  I  am  thy  God  "  I  As  afflictions  abound,  even  so  do  consola- 
tions abound  by  Christ  Jesus.  The  devil,  like  Nebuchadnezzar, 
heated  the  furnace  seven  times  hotter ;  but  who  would  have  it  less 
furiously  blazing  ?  No  wise  believer  ;  for,  the  more  terrible  the 
heat,  the  greater  the  glory  in  the  fact  that  we  were  made  to  tread 
those  glowing  coals,  and  not  a  hair  of  our  head  was  singed,  nor 
so  much  as  the  smell  of  fire  passed  upon  us,  because  the  Son  of 
God  walked  those  glowing  coals  in  our  company.  Yes,  we  caa 
look  with  resignation  upon  penury,  disease,  and  even  death  \ 


2C4  A  BUNDLE   OF   MTRRK 

for  if  all  comforts  be  taken  from  us,  we  should  still  be  blest,  90 
lon.5  as  we  enjoy  the  presence  of  the  Lord  our  Saviour. 

Nor  should  I  be  straining  the  truth  if  I  say  that  the  Christian 
would  sooner  give  up  anything  than  forsake  his  blaster,  I  have 
known  some  who  have  been  afraid  to  look  that  text  in  the  face 
which  saith,  "  He  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me  ia 
not  worthy  of  me,"  or  that,  "  Except  a  man  hate  (or  love  less) 
his  father  and  mother,  and  wife  and  children,  he  cannot  be  my 
disciple."  Yet  I  have  found  that  those  have  frequently  proved 
to  be  the  most  sincere  lovers  of  Jesus  who  have  been  most  afraid 
that  he  had  not  the  best  place  in  their  hearts.  Perhaps  the  best 
way  is  not  to  sit  down  calmly  to  weigh  our  love,  —  for  it  is  not  a 
thing  to  be  measured  with  cool  judgment,  —  but  put  your  love  to 
some  practical  test.  Now,  if  it  came  to  this,  that  you  must  deny 
Christ  or  give  up  the  dearest  thing  you  have,  would  you  delib- 
erate ?  The  Lord  knoweth  I  speak  what  I  feel  in  my  own  soul, 
—  when  it  comes  to  that,  I  could  not  hesitate  a  second.  If  there 
were  a  stake  and  burning  fagots,  I  might  flinch  from  the  fire ; 
bat  so  mighty  is  divine  love,  that  it  would  doubtless  drive  me  to 
the  flames  sooner  than  let  me  leave  Jesus.  But  if  it  comes  to 
this :  "  Wilt  thou  lose  thine  eyes  or  give  up  Christ  ?  "  I  would 
cheerfully  be  blind.  Or  if  it  were  asked,  "  Wilt  thou  have  thy 
right  arm  withered  from  its  socket  or  give  up  Christ  ?  "  Ay  ; 
let  both  aims  go  :  let  them  both  drop  from  the  shoulder-blades. 
Or  if  it  should  be,  "  Wilt  thou  be  from  this  day  dumb,  and  never 
speak  before  the  multitude  ?  "  Oh  !  better  to  be  dumb  than  lose 
Mim.  Indeed,  when  I  talk  of  this  it  seems  to  be  an  insult  to  my 
Master  to  put  hands  and  eyes  and  tongue  in  comparison  with 
him- 

"  Nor  to  my  eyes  is  light  so  dear, 
Nor  friendship  half  so  sweet." 

If  you  compare  life  itself  with  Jesus,  it  is  not  to  be  named  in 
the  sam(;  day.  If  it  should  be  said,  "Will  you  live  without 
Christ  or  die  with  Christ  ?  "  you  could  not  deliberate,  for  to  die 
u  ith  Christ  is  to  live  with  Christ  forever ;  but  to  live  without 
Christ  is  to  die  the  second  death,  the  terrible  death  of  the  soul's 


A  BUNDLE   OF  MYRRE.  265 

ete-nal  perdition.  No;  tljcre  is  no  choice  ihere.  I  tliink  we 
could  go  further,  dear  friends,  ?;nd  saj,  not  onlj  could  we  give  up 
everything,  but  I  think,  when  love  is  fervent,  and  the  flech  is 
ke[)t  under,  we  could  suffer  anything  with  Christ.  I  m-ct,  in  one 
of  Samuel  Rutherford's  letters,  an  extraordinary  expression, 
where  he  speaks  of  the  coals  of  divine  wrath  all  falling  upon  the 
Jiead  of  Christ,  so  that  not  one  might  fall  upon  his  people. 
"  And  )^et,"  saith  he,  "  if  one  of  those  coals  should  drop  from 
his  head  upon  mine,  and  did  utterly  consume  me,  yet  if  I  felt 
it  was  a  part  of  the  coals  that  fell  on  him,  and  I  was  bearing 
it  for  his  sake,  and  in  communion  with  him,  I  would  choose  it 
f.)r  my  heaven."  That  is  a  strong  thing  to  say,  that  to  suffer 
with  Christ  v^ould  be  his  heaven,  if  he  assuredly  knew  thai 
it  v/as  for  a'ld  with  Christ  that  he  was  suffering.  Oh !  there 
is  indeed  a  heavenliness  about  suffering  for  Jesus.  ^^5  cross 
hath  such  a  majesty  and  mystery  of  delight  in  it,  that,  the  more 
heavy  it  becometh,  the  more  lightly  doth  it  sit  upon  the  believer's 
shoulders. 

One  thing  I  know  proveth,  beloved,  that  you  esteem  Christ  to 
be  very  precious;  namely,  that  you  loant  others  to  know  him 
too.  Do  you  not  feel  a  pining  in  your  souls  till  others'  hearts  be 
filled  with  the  love  of  Christ  ?  My  eyes  could  weep  themselves 
out  of  their  sockets  for  some  of  you  who  are  ignorant  of  my  Mas- 
ter's love.  Poor  souls!  ye  are  sitting  outside  the  feast  when 
ihr  door  is  wide  open,  and  the  king  himself  is  within.  Ye 
chooso  to  be  out  in  the  highways  and  under  the  hedges  sooner 
than  como  to  this  wedding  feast,  where  the  oxen  and  fatlings 
are  killed,  and  all  things  are  ready.  Oh  !  did  you  know  him, 
did  you  know  him^  you  would  never  be  able  to  live  without  him. 
If  your  eyes  had  ever  seen  him  once,  or  if  your  heart  had  ever 
known  tl  e  charm  of  his  presence,  you  would  think  it  to  be  a  hell 
to  be  for  a  moment  without  Christ.  O  poor  blind  eyes  which 
cannot  see  him,  and  deaf  ears  which  cannot  hear  him,  and  hard, 
stony  he  irts  which  cannot  melt  before  him,  and  hell-besotted 
eouls  wl  ich  cannot  appreciate  the  majesty  of  his  love,  God  help 
you  !  Q  id  help  you  !  and  bring  you  yet  to  know  and  rejoice  ia 
23 


266  A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH. 

him.  The  more  your  love  grows,  beloved,  the  moie  insatiable 
will  be  your  desire  that  others  should  love  him,  till  H  will  come 
to  this,  that  you  will  be,  like  Paul,  "  in  labors  more  abundant," 
spending  and  being  spent  that  you  may  bring  the  rest  of  Christ's 
elect  body  into  union  with  their  glorious  head. 

II.  But,  secondly,  the  sodl  clingeth  to  Christ,  and 
SHE  HATH  GOOD  REASON  FOR  SO  DOING,  for  licr  own  words  are, 
"  A  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me."  We  will 
take  the  myrrh  first,  and  then  consider  the  bundle  next. 

1.  Jesus  Christ  is  like  myrrh.     Myrrh  may  be  well  the  type 
of  Christ  for  its  preciousness.     It  was  an  exceedingly  expensive 
drug.     We  know  that  Jacob  sent  some  of  it  down  into  Egypt,  as 
being  one  of   the  choice    products  of  the  land.      It  is  always 
spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  being  a  rich,  rare,  and  costly  substance. 
But  no  myrrh  could  ever  compare  with  him  ;  for  Jesus  Christ  is 
so  precious,  that  if  heaven  and  earth  were  put  together  they 
could  not  buy  another  Saviour.     When   God  gave  to  the  world 
his  Son,  he  gave  the  best  that  heaven  had.     Take  Christ  out  of 
heaven,  and  there  is  nothing  for  God  to  give.     Christ  was  God's 
all ;  for  is  it  not  written,  "  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily  "  ?     O  precious  gift  of  the  whole  of  deity  in 
the  person  of  Christ !     How  inestimably  precious  is  that  body 
of  his  which  he  took  of  the  substance   of  the  virgin !     Well 
might  angels   herald  the  coming   of   this  immaculate  Saviour, 
well  might  they  watch  over  his  holy  life  ;  for  he  is  precious  in 
his  birth,  and  precious  in  all  his  actions.     How  precious  is  he, 
dear  friends,  as  myrrh  in  the  offering  of  his  great  atonement ! 
What  a  costly  sacrifice  was  that !     At  what  a  price  were  ye  re- 
deemed !     Not  with  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ.     How  precious  is  he,  too,  in  his  resurrection  !     He  jus- 
tifies all  his  people  at  one  stroke ;  rising  from  the  dead,  that 
glorious  Sun  scatters  all  the  nights  of  all  his  people  by  one  rising. 
How  precious  is  he  in  his  ascension,  as  he  leads  captivity  cap- 
tive, and  scattereth  gifts  among  men  !     And  how  precious  to-day 
in  those  incessant  pleadings  of  his  through  which  the  mercies  of 


A  BUin)LE  OF  MYRRH.  267 

God  come  down  like  the  angels  upon  Jacob's  ladder  to  our 
needy  souls  1  Yes,  he  is  to  the  believer,  in  every  aspect,  like 
myrrh  for  rarity  and  excellence 

Myrrh,  again,  was  pleasant.  It  was  a  pleasant  thing  to  be  in 
a  chamber  perfumed  with  myrrh.  Through  the  nostrils  myrrh 
conveys  delight  to  the  human  mind ;  but  Christ  gives  delight  to 
liis  people,  not  through  one  channel,  but  through  every  avenue. 
It  is  true  that  all  his  garments  smell  of  myrrh  and  aloes  and  cas- 
sia; but  be  hath  not  spiritual  smell  alone  ;  the  taste  shall  be  grat- 
ified too ;  for  we  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood.  Nay,  our 
feelinGT  is  ravished  when  his  left  hand  is  under  us  and  his  ricrht 
hand  doth  embrace  us.  As  for  his  voice,  it  is  most  sweet,  and 
our  soul's  ear  is  charmed  with  its  melody.  Let  God  give  him 
to  our  sight,  and  what  can  our  eyes  want  more  ?  Yea,  he  is 
altogether  lovely.  Thus  every  gate  of  the  soul  hath  commerce 
with  Christ  Jesus  in  the  richest  and  rarest  commodities.  There 
is  no  way  by  which  a  human  spirit  can  have  communion  with 
Jesus  which  doth  not  yield  unto  that  spirit  fresh  and  varied 
delights.  O,  beloved,  we  cannot  compare  him  merely  to  myrrh. 
He  is  everything  which  is  good  to  look  upon,  or  to  taste,  or  to 
handle,  or  to  smell,  all  put  together  in  one,  —  the  quintessence 
of  all  delights.  As  all  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea,  so  all  delights 
centre  into  Christ.  The  sea  is  not  full,  but  Jesus  is  full  to  the 
very  brim. 

Moreover,  myrrh  is  perfuming.  It  is  used  to  give  a  sweet 
Finell  to  other  things.  It  was  mingled  with  the  sacrifice,  so  that 
it  was  not  only  the  smoke  of  the  fat  of  kidneys  of  rams,  and  the 
flesh  of  fat  beasts,  but  there  was  a  sweet  fragrance  of  myrrh, 
which  went  up  with  the  sacrifice  to  heaven.  And  surely,  be- 
loved, Jesus  Christ  is  very  perfuming  to  his  people.  Does  not 
he  perfume  their  prayers,  so  that  the  Lord  smelleth  a  sweet 
savor?  Doth  he  not  perfume  their  songs,  so  that  Ihey  become 
like  vials  full  of  odor  sweet  ?  Doth  he  not  perfume  our  minis- 
try ?  for  is  it  not  written,  "  He  causeth  us  to  triumph  in  Christ, 
and  raaketh  manifest  the  savor  of  his  knowledge  by  us  in  every 
place  ?     For  we  are  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ,  in  them 


268  A   BUNDLE   OF   MYRRH. 

that  arc  saved,  ind  in  them  tliat  perish  "  Oui  persons  are  per- 
fumed Avith  Christ.  Whence  gel  we  our  spikenard,  but  from 
him  ?  Whither  shall  we  go  to  gather  camphor,  which  shall  make 
our  persons  and  presence  acceptable  before  God,  but  to  him  ? 
['^  For  we  are  accepted  in  the  beloved."  "  Ye  are  complete  in 
hiim  "  ^—  "  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus  "  —  "  for  he  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  our  God,  and  we  shall  reign  for  ever  and 
ever." 

Myrrh  has  preserving  qualities.  The  Egyptians  used  it  in 
embalming  the  dead ;  and  we  find  Nicodemus  and  the  holy  wo- 
men bringing  myrrh  and  aloes  in  which  to  wrap  the  dead  body 
of  the  Saviour.  It  was  used  to  prevent  corruption.  What  is 
there  which  (!an  preserve  the  soul  but  Christ  Jesus  ?  What  is 
the  myrrh  which  keeps  our  works,  which  in  themselves  are  dead 
and  <;orrupt  and  rotten  —  what,  I  say,  keeps  them  from  becom- 
inix  a  foul  stench  in  the  nostrils  of  God,  but  that  Christ  is  in 
them  ?  What  we  have  done  out  of  love  to  Christ,  what  we  have 
offered  through  his  mediation,  what  has  been  perfumed  by  faith 
in  his  person,  becomes  acceptable.  God  looketh  upon  anything 
we  say,  or  anything  we  do,  and  if  he  seeth  Christ  in  it,  he  ac- 
cepteth  it ;  but  if  there  be  no  Christ,  he  putteth  it  away  as  a 
foul  thing.  See  to  it  then,  beloved,  that  you  never  pray  a 
prayer  which  is  not  sweetened  with  Christ.  I  would  never 
preach  a  sermon  —  the  Lord  forgive  me  if  I  do  !  —  which  is  not 
full  to  overflowing  with  my  Master.  I  know  one  v/ho  said  I 
was  always  oa  the  old  string,  and  he  would  come  and  hear  me 
no  more  ;  but  if  I  preached  a  sermon  without  Christ  in  it  he 
v/ould  come.  Ah  !  he  will  never  come  while  this  tongue  moves  ; 
for  a  sermon  without  Christ  in  it,  —  a  Christless  sermon ;  a 
brook  without  water  ;  a  cloud  without  rain ;  a  well  which  mocks 
the  traveller ;  a  tree  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  root ;  a  sky 
without  a  sun  ;  a  night  without  a  star  ;  —  it  were  a  realm  of  death 
—  a  place  of  mourning  for  angels  and  laughter  for  devils.  O 
Christian,  we  must  have  Christ  I  Do  see  to  it  that  every  day 
when  you  wake  you  give  a  fresh  savor  of  Christ  upon  you  by 
contemplating  his  person.     Live  all  the  day,  trying  as  much  as 


A  BUNDLE  OF  MYKUn.  209 

Ilelh  ij)  you  to  season  your  hearts  with  him,  and  then  at  night 
lie  down  with  him  upon  your  tongue.  It  is  said  of  Samuel 
Rutherford,  that  he  often  did  faH  asleep  talking  about  Christ, 
and  was  often  heard  in  his  dreams  saying  sweet  things  about 
his  Saviour.  There  is  nothing  v/hich  can  preserve  us,  and  keep 
us  from  sin,  and  make  our  works  holy  and  pure,  like  this  "  bun- 
dle of  myrrh." 

Myrrh,  again,  was  used  as  a  disinfectant.  When  the  fever  U 
abroad,  we  know  people  who  wear  little  bags  of  camphor  about 
their  necks.  They  may  be  very  good ;  I  do  not  know.  But 
the  Orientals  believed  that,  in  times  of  pest  and  plague,  a  little 
bag  of  myrrh  worn  between  the  breasts  would  be  of  essential 
service  to  whoever  might  carry  it.  And  there  doubtless  is  some 
power  in  myrrh  to  preserve  from  infectious  disease.  Well, 
brethren,  certain  1  am  it  is  so  with  Christ.  You  have  to  go 
into  the  world,  wliich  is  like  a  great  lazar-house  ;  but  if  you  carry 
Christ  with  you,  you  will  never  catch  the  world's  disease.  A 
man  may  be  worth  never  so  much  money  —  he  will  never  get 
worldly  if  he  kecpeth  Christ  on  his  heart.  A  man  may  have  to 
tug  and  toil  for  his  livelihood,  and  be  very  jxjor  —  he  will  never 
be  discontented  and  murmuring  if  he  lives  close  to  Christ.  Oh 
you  who  have  to  liandle  the  world,  see  to  it  that  you  handle  the 
Master  more  than  the  world.  Some  of  you  have  to  work  with 
d^-unken  and  swearing  men  ;  otliers  are  cast  into  the  midst  of 
frivoliti^.i ;  oh,  take  my  Master  with  you  !  and  sin's  plagues 
can  have  no  influence  upon  your  moral  nature. 

But  myrrh  was  believed  by  the  ancient  physicians  to  do  more 
than  this  ;  it  was  a  cure  :  it  did  not  merely  prevent,  but  it  healed. 
I  do  not  know  how  many  diseases  are  said  to  be  healed  by  the 
use  of  myrrh,  nor  do  I  altogether  suppose  that  these  Oriental 
physicians  spoke  from  facts,  for  they  were  too  much  given  to 
ascribe  qualities  to  drugs  which  those  drugs  did  not  possess  ; 
however,  even  modern  physicians  believe  myrrh  to  have  many 
valuable  medical  properties.  Certain  is  it  that  your  Christ  is  the 
best  medicine  for  the  soul.  His  name  is  Jehovah  Rophi  —  "I 
am  the  Lord  that  healeth  them."     When  we  see  Luke  called 


270  A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH. 

"  the  beloved  physician,"  we  ahiiost  grudge  him  the  name.  1 
will  talvc  it  from  him  and  give  it  to  my  Master,  for  he  deser/es 
it  far  more  than  Luke.  The  beloved  physician !  He  touched 
the  leper,  and  he  was  made  whole.  He  did  but  look  upon 
those  who  were  lame,  and  they  leaped  as  a  hart.  His  voice 
startled  the  silence  of  Hades,  and  brought  back  the  soul  to  the 
body.  What  cannot  Christ  do  ?  He  can  heal  anything.  You 
who  are  sick  this  morning  —  sick  with  doubts  and  fears;  you 
M  ho  are  sick  with  temptation  ;  you  who  struggle  with  an  angry 
temper,  or  with  the  death-like  sleep  of  sloth,  —  get  Christ  and  you 
are  healed.  Here  all  things  meet,  and  in  all  these  things  we 
may  say,  "  A  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me." 

I  have  not  done  yet ;  for  myrrh  was  used  in  the  East  as  a 
heaatijier.  We  read  of  Esther,  that,  before  she  was  introduced 
to  Ahasuerus,  she  and  the  virgins  were  bidden  to  prepare  them- 
selves ;  and,  among  other  things,  they  used  myrrh.  The  belief 
of  Oriental  women  was,  that  it  removed  wrinkles  and  stains  from 
the  face,  and  they  used  it  constantly  for  the  perfecting  of  their 
cl^arms.  I  do  not  know  how  that  may  be,  but  I  know  that  noth- 
ing makes  the  believer  so  beautiful  as  being  with  Christ.  He  is 
beautiful  in  the  eyes  of  God,  of  holy  angels,  and  of  his  fellow- 
men.  I  know  some  Christians  whom  it  is  a  great  mercy  to 
fcpeak  to:  if  they  come  into  your  cottage,  they  leave  behind 
them  tokens  of  remembrance  in  the  choice  words  they  utter. 
To  get  them  into  the  church  is  a  thousand  mercies  ;  and  if  they 
join  the  Sunday-school,  of  what  value  they  are !  Let  me  tell 
you  that  the  best  gauge  of  a  Christian's  usefulness  will  be  found 
in  the  degree  in  which  he  has  been  with  Jesus  and  learned  of 
him.  Do  not  tell  me  it  is  the  scholar,  do  not  say  to  me  it  is  the 
man  of  eloquence,  do  not  say  it  is  the  man  of  substance,  —  well 
we  would  have  all  these  consecrate  what  they  have  to  Christ,  — 
but  it  is  the  man  of  God  who  is  the  strong  man  ;  it  is  the  man 
who  has  been  with  Jesus  who  is  the  pillar  of  the  church  and  a 
light  to  the  world.  O  brethren,  may  the  beauty  of  the  Lord 
be  upon  us  through  being  much  with  Christ ! 

And  I  must  not  close  this  point  without  saying  that  myrrh 


A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH.  271 

might  well  be  used  as  an  emblem  of  our  Lord  from  its  connection 
with  sacrifice.  It  was  one  of  the  precious  drugs  usv»d  in  making 
the  holj  oil  with  which  the  priests  were  anointed,  and  the  frank- 
incense which  burned  perpetually  before  God.  It  is  this,  the 
sacrificial  character  of  Christ,  which  is  at  the  root  and  bottom  of 
all  that  Christ  is  most  precious  to  his  people.  O  Lamb  of  God, 
our  sacrifice,  we  must  remember  thee  1 

II.  Now  there  has  been  enough,  surely,  said  about  the  myrrh. 
Have  patience  while  we  just  notice  that  he  is  called  a  bundle 
of  myrrh,  or,  as  some  translate  it,  a  bag  of  myrrh,  or  a  box  of 
myrrh. 

There  were  three  sorts  of  myrrh  :  there  was  the  myrrh  in 
sprigs,  which,  being  burnt,  made  a  sweet  smell ;  then  there  wag 
myrrh,  a  dried  spice  ;  and  then,  thirdly,  there  was  myrrh,  a  flow- 
ing oil.  We  do  not  know  to  which  there  is  reference  here. 
But  why  is  it  said,  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  ?  "  First,  for  the  plenty 
of  it.  He  is  not  a  drop  of  it,  —  he  is  a  casket  full.  He  is  not  a 
sprig  or  flower  of  it,  but  a  whole  bundle  full.  There  is  enough 
in  Christ  for  my  necessities.  There  is  more  in  Christ  than  I 
shall  ever  know  —  perhaps  more  than  I  shall  understand,  even 
in  heaven. 

A  bundle,  again,  for  variety  ;  for  there  is  in  Christ  not  only 
the  one  thing  needful,  but  "  ye  are  complete  in  him."  There  is 
everything  needful.  Take  Christ  in  his  different  characters, 
and  you  will  see  a  marvellous  variety,  —  prophet,  priest,  king, 
husband,  friend,  shepherd.  Take  him  in  his  life,  death,  resur- 
rection, ascension,  second  advent;  take  him  in  his  virtue,  gentles, 
ness,  courage,  self-denial,  love,  faithfulness,  truth,  righteousness 
—  everywhere  it  is  a  bundle.  Some  of  God's  judgments  are 
manifold,  but  all  God's  mercies  are  manifold ;  and  Christ,  being 
the  sum  of  God's  mercies,  hath  in  fold  upon  fold  of  goodness. 
He  is  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  "  for  variety. 

He  is  a  bundle  of  myrrh,  again,  for  'preservation^  —  not  loose 
myrrh  to  be  dropped  on  the  floor  or  trodden  on,  but  myrrh  tied 
up,  as  though  God  bfvwnd  up  all  virtues  and  cxceUenciefi  in  liii 


272  A   BUNDLE  OF  IVITRRn. 

Son ;  not  mjrrli  spilt  on  the  ground,  but  myirh  in  a  box,  -* 
myrrh  kept  in  a  casket.  Such  is  Christ.  The  virtue  and  excel- 
lence which  goeth  out  of  Christ  is  quite  as  strong  to-day  as  in 
the  day  when  the  woman  touched  the  hem  of  his  garment  and 
was  healed.  "  Able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come 
unto  God  through  him,"  is  he  still  unto  this  hour. 

A  bundle  of  myrrh,  again,  to  show  how  diligently  we  should 
take  care  of  it.  We  must  bind  him  up  ;  we  must  keep  our 
thoughts  of  him  and  knowledge  of  him  as  under  lock  and  key, 
lesD  the  devil  should  steal  anything  from  us.  We  must  trea- 
sure up  his  words,  prize  his  ordinances,  obey  his  precepts  ;  tie  him 
up,  and  keep  him  ever  with  us  as  a  precious  bundle  of  myrrh. 

And  yet  again,  a  bundle  of  myrrh  for  speciality,  as  if  he  were 
not  common  myrrh  for  everybody.  No,  no,  no ;  there  is  distin- 
guishing, discriminating  grace,  —  a  bundle  tied  up  for  his  people, 
and  labelled  with  their  names,  from  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  No  doubt  there  is  an  allusion  here  to  the  scent-bottle 
used  in  every  land.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  bottle  of  myrrh,  and  ho 
doth  not  give  forth  his  smell  to  everybody,  but  to  those  who  know 
how  to  draw  forth  the  stopper  —  who  understand  how  to  get  into 
communion  with  him,  to  have  close  dealings  with  him.  He  i3 
not  myrrh  for  all  who  are  in  the  house,  but  for  those  who  know 
how  to  put  the  bottle  to  their  nostrils  and  receive  the  sweet 
p^vfmie.  O  blessed  people,  whom  the  Lord  hath  admitted 
iniv.  his  secrets  !  O  choice  and  happy  people,  who  are  thus 
made  to  say,  "  A  bottle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me." 

But  I  am  afraid  I  tire  you,  especially  those  of  you  who  do 
not  know  anything  about  my  subject.  There  are  some  such 
Lere  who  know  no  more  about  what  I  am  talking  of  than  if  they 
were  Mahometans.  They  are  listening  to  a  new  kind  of  religion 
now\  The  religion  of  Christ  is  as  high  above  them  as  is  the 
path  of  the  eagle  above  that  of  the  fish,  and  as  much  hidden 
from  them  as  the  way  of  the  serpent  on  the  rock  from  the  eye 
of  man.  This  is  a  path  which  the  eagle's  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  hath  the  lion's  whelp  trodden  it ;  but  I  trust  there  are  soma 
here  who  know  it. 


A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH.  •  273 

III.  Our  third  r3mark  was  to  be,  that  with  a  sense  of 
Christ's  preciousness  is  combined  A  coxsciousness  of  pos- 
session. It  is  "  my  well-beloved."  My  dear  hearer,  is  Christ 
your  well-beloved  ?  A  Saviour  —  that  is  well ;  but  my  Saviour 
—  that  is  the  best  of  the  best.  "What  is  the  use  of  bread,  if  it  is 
not  mine  ?  I  may  die  of  hunger.  Of  what  value  is  gold,  if  it 
be  not  mine  ?  I  may  yet  die  in  a  workhouse.  I  want  this  pre- 
ciousness to  be  mine.  "  My  well-beloved."  Have  you  ever 
laid  hold  on  Christ  by  the  hand  of  faith  ? 

Will  you  take  him  again  this  morning,  brethren  in  Jesus  ?  I 
know  you  will.  Would  that  those  who  never  did  take  him 
would  take  him  now,  and  say,  "  My  Saviour."  There  stands  his 
atonement,  freely  offered  to  you  ;  may  you  have  the  grace  to  take 
it,  and  say,  "  My  Saviour,  my  Saviour,"  this  morning.  Has 
your  heart  taken  liim  ?  It  is  well  for  us  to  use  both  hands  ;  not 
only  the  hand  of  fiiith,  but  the  hand  of  love,  for  this  is  the  true 
embrace  when  both  arras  meet  around  our  beloved.  Do  you 
love  him  ?  O  souls,  do  you  love  Christ,  with  an  emphasis  upon 
the  word  ?  Do  not  talk  to  me  about  a  religion  which  dwells  in 
the  head  and  never  gets  into  the  heart.  Get  rid  of  it  as  quickly 
as  you  can ;  it  will  never  bring  you  to  heaven.  It  is  not  "  I 
believe  this  and  that "  merely,  but  "  I  love."  Ah !  some  who 
have  been  great  fools  in  doctrine  have  been  very  wise  in  love. 
We  tell  our  children  to  learn  things  "  by  heart."  I  think  you  can ; 
you  love  Jesus ;  and  if  you  cannot,  you  must  confess,  as  I  do  — 

"A  very  wretch,  Lord,  I  should  prove. 
Had  I  no  love  to  thee; 
Sooner  than  not  my  Saviout  lore, 
Oh  may  I  cease  to  be." 

But  that  is  not  the  only  word.  "  A  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my 
well-beloved  unto  me."  That  is  not  a  redundant  expression, 
"  unto  me."  He  is  not  so  to  many.  Ah  !  my  Lord  is  a  root 
out  of  a  dry  ground  to  multitudes.  A  thret  volume  novel  suits 
them  better  than  his  Book.  They  would  sooner  go  to  a  play  or 
a  dance  than  they  would  have  any  fellowship  with  him.     Thej 


274  A  BUNDLE  OF  m'RRH. 

can  see  tlie  beauties  upon  the  cheeks  of  this  Jezebel  world,  but 
they  cannot  see  the  perfections  of  my  Lord  and  Master.  "Well! 
well !  well !  Let  them  say  what  they  will,  and  let  them  thinic 
as  they  please  ;  every  creature  hath  its  own  joy ;  but  "  a  bundle 
of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me  "  —  unto  me  —  unto  me  ; 
and  if  there  is  not  another  who  finds  him  so,  yet  "  a  bundle  of 
myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me."  I  would  it  were  not  with 
others  as  it  is ;  I  would  that  others  did  think  so  also  of  him : 
but  let  them  say  what  they  will,  they  shall  not  drive  me  out  of 
m.j  knowledge  of  this  —  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  ray  well-beloved 
unto  mer  The  infidel  saith,  "  There  is  no  God."  The  atheist 
would  altogether  laugh  me  to  scorn.  They  shall  say  what  they 
will,  but  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me."  Even 
bishops  have  been  found  who  will  take  away  a  part  of  his  Book, 
and  so  rend  his  garments,  and  rob  him;  and  there  be  some  -who 
say  his  religion  is  out  of  date,  and  grace  has  lost  his  power ;  and 
they  go  after  philosophy  and  vain  conceit,  and  I  know  not  what ; 
but  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me.''  They 
may  have  no  nostril  for  him,  they  may  have  no  desire  after  him ; 
so  let  it  be  ;  but  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me'' 
I  know  there  are  some  who  say  they  have  tried  him  and  not 
found  him  sweet,  and  who  have  turned  away  from  him  and  gone 
back  to  the  beggarly  elements  of  the  world,  because  they  see 
nothing  in  Christ  that  they  should  desire  him ;  but  "  a  bundle  of 
myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me."  Ah,  Christian  !  this  is 
what  you  want  —  a  personal  experience,  a  positive  experience  ; 
you  want  to  know  for  yourself,  for  there  is  no  religion  which  is 
worth  a  button  which  is  not  burnt  into  you  by  personal  experi- 
ence ;  and  there  is  no  religion  worth  a  straw  which  does  not 
spring  from  your  soul,  which  does  lay  not  hold  upon  the  very 
vitals  of  your  spirit.  Yes,  you  must  say  —  I  hope  you  can  say 
as  you  go  down  those  steps  this  morning,  and  enter  again  to-raor- 
row  into  that  busy,  giddy  world  — you  must  say,  "  Let  the  whole 
world  go  astray,  '  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  uuto 
me, '  ** 


A  BUNDLE  OF  RIYRRH  275 

IV.  Now  the  practical  point  closes  it.  A  sense  op  posses- 
sion  AND   A    SENSE    OF    ENJOYMENT   WILL  ALWAYS  LEAD  THE 

Christian  ro  desire  constant  fellowship.  "  He,"  or, 
rather,  "  it,  shall  lie  all  night  betwixt  my  breasts."  The  church 
does  not  say,  "  I  will  put  this  bundle  of  myrrh  on  my  shoulder?," 
—  Christ  is  no  burden  to  a  Christian.  She  does  not  say,  "  t 
will  put  this  bundle  of  myrrh  on  my  back,"  —  the  church  does 
not  want  to  have  Christ  concealed  from  her  face.  She  desires 
to  have  him  where  she  can  see  him,  and  near  to  her  heart. 
The  bundle  of  myrrh  shall  lie  all  night  upon  my  heart.  The 
words  "  all  night "  are  not  in  the  original ;  I  do  not  know  how 
they  got  into  the  translation.  He  is  to  be  always  there,  not  only 
all  night  but  all  day.  It  would  be  always  night  if  he  were  n'^ 
there,  and  it  cannot  be  night  when  he  is  there,  for  — 

"Midst  darkest  shade,  if  he  appear, 
My  dawning  has  begun." 

He  shall  always  be  upon  our  heart.  I  think  that  expression 
just  means  these  three  things  :  It  is  an  expression  of  desire,^ 
her  desire  that  she  may  have  the  consciousness  of  Christ's  love 
continually.  Do  not  you  feel  the  same  desire  ?  O  Christian  !  if 
thou  hast  ever  been  made  like  the  chariots  of  Aminadab,  it  will 
be  ill  for  thee  if  thou  canst  be  content  to  be  otherwise.  If  thou 
hast  but  once  tasted  Christ,  thou  wilt  want  to  feed  upon  him  all 
day  and  all  night,  and  as  long  as  thou  livest.  My  desire  is  that 
Jesus  may  abide  with  me  from  morn  till  even,  in  the  world  and 
in  the  churcli,  when  I  awake,  when  I  sleep,  when  I  go  abroad, 
and  when  I  come  home  into  the  bosom  of  my  family.  Is  not 
that  your  desire  that  he  may  be  always  with  you  ? 

But,  then,  it  is  not  only  her  desire,  but  it  is  also  her  confidence. 
She  seems  to  say,  "  He  will  be  with  me  thus."  You  may  have 
a  suspension  of  visible  fellowship  with  Christ,  but  Christ  never 
will  go  away  from  his  people  really.  He  will  be  all  night  be- 
twixt your  breasts ;  he  will  at  all  times  abide  faithful  to  you. 
He  may  close  his  eyes  and  hide  his  face  from  you,  but  his  heart 
never  can  depart  from  you.     He  has  set  you  as  a  seal  upon  his 


276  A   BUNDLE  OF  MYKRH. 

heart,  and  increasingly  will  make  you  sensible  of  it.  Recollect 
there  is  no  suspension  of  Christ's  union  with  his  people,  and  no 
suspension  of  those  saving  influences  which  always  make  his 
people  to  stand  complete  in  him. 

To  conclude :  this  is  also  a  resolve.  She  desires,  she  believes, 
and  she  resolves  it.  Lord,  thou  slialt  be  with  me  ;  thou  shalt 
be  with  me  always.  I  appeal  to  you,  brethren,  will  you  not 
make  this  resolve  in  God's  strensjth  this  morninf]r  to  clinj'  close 
to  Christ.  Do  not  go  talking,  as  you  go  home,  about  all  sorts  of 
nonsense  ;  do  not  spend  tliis  afternoon  in  communion  with  folly 
and  vanity,  but  throughout  this  day  let  your  soul  keep  to  Christ, 
to  nothing  but  Christ.  This  evening  we  shall  come  to  his  table, 
to  eat  bread  and  drink  wine,  in  remembrance  of  him ;  let  us 
try,  if  we  can,  that  nothing  shall  make  us  give  up  Christ  all 
this  day.  Have  you  got  him,  hold  him,  and  do  not  let  him  go 
till  you  bring  him  to  your  mother's  house,  to  the  chamber  of 
her  who  bare  you.  Then  there  will  be  the  family  prayer  at 
night.  Oh,  seek  to  keep  him  till  you  put  your  head  upon  the 
pillow.  And  then,  on  Monday  morning  some  of  you  havQ 
to  go  to  work,  and  as  soon  as  you  get  into  the  workshop  or  the 
factory,  you  say,  "  Now  I  must  lose  my  Master."  No,  do  not 
lose  him.  Hold  him  fast  when  your  hand  plies  the  hammer, 
and  when  your  fingers  hold  the  needle  still  cling  to  him;  in 
the  market  or  in  the  exchange,  on  board  ship  or  in  the  field,  do 
not  let  him  go.  You  may  have  him  with  you  all  day.  The 
Mahometan  usually  wears  a  piece  of  the  Koran  round  his  neck ; 
and  one,  when  converted  to  Christianity,  put  his  New  Testa- 
ment in  a  little  silken  bag,  and  always  wore  it  there.  We  need 
not  such  outward  signs,  but  let  us  always  have  the  Saviour  there  ; 
let  us  hang  him  about  our  neck  as  a  charm  against  all  evil ;  seek 
his  blessed  company  ;  place  him  as  a  star  upon  your  breast,  to  be 
your  honor  and  joy. 

Well,  I  have  done  ;  but  I  must  have  a  word  with  the  uncon- 
verted. There  are  some  who  can  say,  *'  I  will  have  Christ 
always  on  my  tonguey  Away  with  tongue  religion !  You  must 
have  him  on  3'our  heart.     Ah !  there  are  some  who  say,  "  I  hop^ 


A  BUNDLE  OF  MYRRH.  277 

1  shall  have  Christ  on  my  heart  ii.  all  eternirj.^*  Yo"  cannot 
have  Clirist  in  eternity  if  you  do  not  have  him  in  time.  If  you 
despise  him  to-day  in  this  life,  he  will  reject  you  to-m  /rrow  in 
the  world  to  come  ;  and  if  he  call  and  you  refuse,  on(  day  you 
will  call  and  he  refuse.  Do  not  put  up  with  desires  nu  rely,  dear 
/riends ;  some  of  you  have  desires,  and  nothing  more  Do  not 
only  desire  Christ,  but  get  him.  Do  not  stop  short  wi  li  saying, 
"  I  should  like  to  have  him  in  my  heart ;  "  give  no  sle  ip  to  your 
eyes  nor  slumber  to  your  eyelids  till  by  humble  faith  }  ou  Lave 
taken  Christ  to  be  your  all  in  all.  May  the  Lord  I  Idss  these 
poor  words,  for  Jjsus'  sake.  Amen. 
24 


SERMON  XV. 


THE  LAMB :  THE  LIGHT. 

"and  the  city  had  no  keed  or  the  sun,  neither  op  the  mo<)H,  to  SHim  in 

it:    »0R    the  glory    of  god  did   lighten   it,  and  the  LAJVIB   18    THE  LIQUr 

THKBKOF."—  Rev.  xxi.  23. 

To  the  lover  of  Jesus  it  is  very  pleasant  to  observe  how  the 
LorJ  Jesus  Christ  has  always  stood  foremost  in  glory  from  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  will  do  so  as  long  as  eter- 
nity shall  last.  If  we  look  back  by  faith  to  the  time  of  the  cre- 
ation, we  find  our  Lord  with  his  Father  as  one  brought  up  with 
him.  "  When  there  were  no  depths,  I  was  brought  forth  ;  when 
there  were  no  fountains  abounding  with  water.  While  as  yet 
he  had  not  made  the  earth,  nor  the  fields,  nor  the  highest  part  of 
the  dust  of  the  world.  When  he  prepared  the  heavens,  I  wag 
there :  when  he  set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of  the  depth :  when 
he  established  the  clouds  above :  when  he  strengthened  the  foun- 
tains of  the  deep."  He  was  that  wisdom  who  was  never  absent 
from  the  Father's  counsels  in  the  great  work  of  creation,  whether 
it  be  the  birth  of  angels  or  the  making  of  worlds  of  men.  One 
of  the  first  events  ever  recorded  in  Scripture  history  is,  "  When 
he  bringeth  in  the  first-begotten  into  the  world,  he  saith,  let  all 
the  angels  of  God  worship  him."  Such  words  were  never  spoken 
of  any  creatui'e,  but  only  of  him  who  is  co-equal  and  co-eternal 
with  the  Father,  glorious  forever  ;  the  first-born  of  every  crea- 
ture, the  head  of  the  household  of  God,  the  express  image  of  his 
person,  and  the  fulness  of  his  glory.  In  the  earliest  periods  of 
which  we  possess  any  knowledge,  Jesus  Christ  stood  exalted  far 


THE  LAMB:    TlIE  LIGHT.  279 

above  all  principalities  and  po\Acrs,  and  every  name  that  ig 
named.  When  human  history  dawns,  and  the  history  of  God'a 
church  commences,  you  still  find  Christ  pre-eminent.  All  the 
types  of  the  early  clmrch  ai-e  only  to  be  opened  up  by  him  as 
the  key.  It  would  have  been  nothing  to  be  of  the  seed  of 
[srael,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  promise  of  the  Shiloh  that  was 
to  come ;  it  would  have  been  in  vain  that  the  sacrifices  were 
offered  in  the  wilderness,  that  the  ark  abode  between  the  curtains, 
or  that  the  golden  pot  which  had  the  manna  was  covered  with 
the  mercy-seat,  if  there  had  not  been  a  real  signification  of 
Christ  in  all  these.  The  religion  of  the  Jew  would  have  been 
very  emptiness  if  it  had  not  been  for  Christ,  who  is  the  substance 
of  the  former  shadows.  Run  on  to  the  period  of  the  prophets, 
and  in  all  their  prophesy ings  do  you  not  see  additional  glimpses 
of  the  glory  of  Christ  ?  When  they  mount  to  the  greatest  heights 
of  eloquence  do  they  not  speak  of  him  ?  Whenever  their  soul  is 
carried  up,  as  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  is  not  the  mantle  left  behind 
them  a  word  telling  of  the  glory  of  Jesus  ?  They  could  never 
glow  with  fervent  heat,  except  concerning  him.  Even  when 
they  denounced  the  judgments  of  God,  they  paused  between  the 
crashes  of  God's  thunder  to  let  some  drops  of  mercy  fall  on  man 
in  words  of  promise  concerning  him  who  was  to  come.  It  is  al- 
ways Christ  from  the  opening  leaf  of  Genesis  to  the  closing  note 
of  Malachi,  —  Christ,  Christ,  Chi-ist,  and  nothing  but  Christ.  It 
is  very  delightful,  brethren,  when  we  come  to  such  a  text  as  this, 
to  observe  that  what  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall 
be,  world  without  end,  Amen.  In  that  millennial  state  of  which 
the  text  speaks,  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  the  light  thereof,  and  all 
its  glory  is  to  proceed  from  him  ;  and  if  the  text  speaketh  con- 
cerning heaven  and  the  blessedness  hereafter,  all  its  light  and 
blessings  and  glory  stream  from  him:  "The  Lamb  is  the  light 
thereof."  If  we  read  the  text,  and  think  of  its  connection  with 
us  to-day,  we  must  confess  that  all  our  joy  and  peace  flow  from 
the  same  fountain.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  to 
us  as  well  as  to  the  saints  above. 

I  shall  try,  then,  —  though  I  am  conscious  of  n\y  feebleness  to 


280  THE   LAMB  :   THE  LIGHT. 

handle  so  great  a  matter,  —  I  shall  try,  as  best  I  can,  to  extol  the 
Lord  Jesus,  first  of  all,  in  the  excellence  of  his  glory  in  the  mil- 
lennial  state  ;  next,  in  heaven  ;  and  then,  thirdly,  in  the  condition 
of  every  heavenly-minded  wan  who  is  on  his  way  to  pa-adise. 
In  all  these  cases  "  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof." 

I.     First,    then,  a  few   words   concerning  the  millfvnial 

PERIOD. 

We  are  not  given  to  prophesyings  in  this  place.  Thrre  are 
some  of  our  brethren  who  delight  much  in  them.  Perhap  i  it  is 
well  that  there  should  be  some  who  should  devote  their  time  and 
thoughts  to  that  portion  of  God's  Word  which  abounds  in  myste- 
ries ;  but,  for  our  part,  we  have  been  so  engaged  in  seeking  to 
win  souls,  and  in  endeavoring  to  contend  with  the  common  errors 
of  the  day,  that  we  have  scarcely  ventured  to  land  upon  th(>  rock 
of  Patmos,  or  to  peer  into  the  dark  recesses  of  Daniel  and  Eze- 
kicl.  Yet  this  much  we  have  ever  learned  most  clearly  —  that  on 
this  earth,  where  sin  and  Satan  gained  victory  over  God  through 
the  fall  of  man,  Christ  is  to  achieve  a  complete  triumph  over  all 
his  foes ;  not  on  another  battle-field,  but  on  this.  The  fight  is  not 
over.  It  commenced  by  Satan's  attack  upon  our  mother  Eve  ; 
and  Christ  has  never  left  the  field  from  that  day  until  now.  The 
fight  has  lasted  thousands,  of  years  ;  it  grows  sterner  every  day  ; 
it  is  not  over ;  and  it  n6<er  shall  be  stayed  until  the  serpent's 
head  is  effectually  bruised,  and  Christ  Jesus  shall  have  gotten 
unto  himself  a  perfect  victory.  Do  not  think  the  Lord  will 
allow  Satan  to  have  even  so  much  as  one  battle  to  call  his  own. 
In  the  great  campaign,  when  the  history  shall  be  written,  it  shall 
be  said  :  "  The  Lord  reigneth  ;  "  all  along  the  line  he  hath  gotten 
the  victory.  There  shall  be  victory  in  every  place  and  spot ; 
affd  the  conquest  of  Jesus  shall  be  complete  and  perfect.  We 
believe,  then,  that  in  this  very  earth,  where  superstition  has  set 
up  its  idols,  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  adored.  Here,  where  bias- 
phem.y  has  defiled  human  lips,  songs  of  praise  shall  rise  from 
islands  of  the  sea  and  from  the  dwellers  among  the  rocks.  In 
this  very  country,  among  those  very  men  who  became  the  tools 


THE  LAMB  .   THE  LIGHT.  281 

of  Satan,  and  whose  dwelling-places  were  dens  of  mischief,  there 
shall  be  found  instruments  of  righteousness,  lips  to  praise  God, 
and  occasions  of  eternal  glory  unto  the  Most  High.  O  Satan  I 
thou  mayst  boast  of  what  thou  hast  done,  and  thou  mayst  thinli 
thy  sceptre  still  secure  ;  but  he  cometh,  even  he  who  rides  upon 
the  white  horse  of  victory  ;  and  when  he  comes,  thou  shalt  not 
stand  against  him,  for  the  two-edged  sword  which  goeth  out  of 
his  mouth  shall  drive  thee  and  thy  hosts  back  to  the  place  from 
whence  thou  camest.  Let  us  rejoice  that  Scripture  is  so  clear 
and  so  explicit  upon  this  great  doctrine  of  the  future  triumph  of 
Christ  over  the  wdiole  world  ! 

We  are  not  bound  to  enter  into  any  particulars  concerning 
what  form  that  triumph  shall  assume.  We  believe  that  the  Jews 
will  be  converted,  and  that  they  will  be  restored  to  their  own 
land.  We  believe  that  Jerusalem  will  be  the  central  metropolis 
of  Christ's  kingdom ;  we  also  believe  that  all  the  nations  shall 
walk  in  the  light  of  the  glorious  city  which  shall  be  built  at  Je- 
rusalem. We  expect  that  the  glory  which  shall  have  its  centre 
there  shall  spread  over  the  whole  world,  covering  it  as  with  a 
sea  of  holiness,  happiness,  and  delight.  For  this  we  look  with 
joyful  expectation.  During  that  period  the  Lord  himself,  by  his 
glorious  presence,  shall  set  aside  the  outward  rites  of  his  sanctu- 
ary. "  The  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon, 
to  shine  in  it."  Perhaps  by  sun  and  moon  here  are  intended 
those  ordinary  means  of  enlightenment  which  the  church  now 
wants.  We  want  the  Lord's  Supper  to  remind  us  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ ;  but  when  Christ  comes  there  will  be  no 
Lord's  Suppers,  for  it  is  written,  "  Do  this  until  he  come ;  "  but 
when  he  comes,  then  will  be  the  final  period  of  the  remembrance- 
token,  because  the  person  of  Christ  will  be  in  our  midst.  Neither 
will  you  need  ministers  any  longer,  any  more  than  men  need 
candles  when  the  sun  ariseth.  They  shall  not  say  one  to  another, 
*'  Know  the  Lord  :  for  all  shall  know  him,  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest."  There  may  be  even  in  that  period  certain  solemn  as- 
semblies and  Sabbath-days,  but  they  will  not  be  of  the  same  kind 
as  we  have  now ;  for  the  whole  earth  will  be  a  temple :  everj 
24* 


282  THE  LAlVre  :  TITE  LIGIir. 

day  will  be  a  Sabbath  ;  the  avocations  of  men  will  all  be  priestly ; 
they  shall  be  a  nation  of  priests —distinctly  so;  and  they  shall 
day  without  night  serve  God  in  his  temple;  so  that  everything  to 
which  they  set  their  hand  shall  be  a  part  of  the  song  Avhich  shall 
go  up  to  the  Most  High.  O,  blessed  day  !  Would  God  it  had 
dawned,  when  these  temples  should  be  left,  because  the  whole 
world  should  be  a  temple  for  God.  But  whatever  may  be  the 
splendors  of  that  day,  —  and  truly  here  is  a  temptation  to  let  our 
imagination  revel,  —  however  bright  may  be  the  walls  set  with 
chalcedony  and  ametliyst,  however  splendid  the  gates  which  are 
of  one  pearl,  whatever  may  be  the  magnilicence  set  forth  by  the 
"  streets  of  gold,"  this  we  know,  that  the  sura  and  substance,  the 
light  and  glory  of  the  whole  will  be  the  person  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  "  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb 
is  the  light  thereof."  Now,  I  want  the  Christian  to  meditate 
over  this.  In  the  hightest,  holiest,  and  happiest  era  that  shall 
ever  dawn  upon  this  poor  earth,  Christ  is  to  be  her  light.  When 
she  puts  on  her  wedding  garments,  and  adorns  herself  as  a  bride 
is  adorned  with  jewels,  Christ  is  to  be  her  glory  and  her  beauty. 
There  shall  be  no  ear-rings  m  her  ears  made  with  other  gold 
than  that  which  comeih  from  his  mine  of  love ;  there  shall  be  no 
crown  set  upon  her  brow  fashioned  by  any  other  hand  than  his 
hands  of  wisdom  and  of  grace.  She  sits  to  reign,  but  it  shall 
be  upon  his  throne ;  she  feeds,  but  it  shall  be  upon  Ms  bread ; 
she  triumphs,  but  it  shall  be  because  of  the  might  wliich  ever 
belongs  to  him  who  is  the  Rock  of  Ages.  Come  then,  Chris- 
tian, contemplate  for  a  moment  thy  beloved  Lord.  Jesus,  in 
a  millennial  age,  shall  be  the  light  and  the  glory  of  the  city  of 
the  New  Jerusalem.  Observe,  then,  that  Jesus  makes  the  light 
of  the  rai[\ennium,heciiuse  his  presence  loill  he  that  which  distin- 
guishes that  age  from  the  present.  That  age  is  to  be  akin  to 
paradise.  Paradise  God  first  made  upon  earth,  and  paradise 
God  will  last  make.  Satan  destroyed  it ;  and  God  will  never 
have  defeated  his  enemy  until  he  has  re-established  paradise  — 
until  once  again  a  new  Eden  shall  bless  the  eyes  of  God's  crea- 
tures.    Now,  the  very  glory  and  privilege  of  Eden  I  take  to  be 


THE  LAMR  :   THE  TJOIIT.  2?i3 

nof  the  river  which  flowed  through  it  with  its  four  brand .es,  nor 
that  it  came  from  the  huid  of  Havilah  which  hath  dust  of  gold; 
I  do  not  think  the  glory  of  Eden  lay  in  its  grassy  walks,  or 
in  the  boughs  bending  with  luscious  fruit ;  but  its  glory  lay  i» 
this,  that  the  "  Lord  God  walked  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of 
the  day."  Here  was  Adam's  highest  privilege,  that  he  had  com. 
panionship  with  the  Most  High.  In  those  days  angels  sweetly 
sang  that  the  tabernacle  of  God  was  with  man,  and  that  he  did 
dwell  amongst  them.  Brethren,  the  paradise  which  is  to  be 
regained  for  us  will  have  this  for  its  essential  and  distinguishing 
mark,  that  the  Lord  shall  dwell  amongst  us.  This  is  the  name 
by  which  the  city  is  to  be  called  —  Jehovah  Shammah,  the  Lord 
is  there.  It  is  true  we  have  the  presence  of  Christ  in  the  church 
now  —  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world."  We  have  the  promise  of  his  constant  indwelling  — 
"  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there 
am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."  But  still  that  is  vicariously  by  his 
Spirit,  but  soon  he  is  to  be  personally  with  us.  That  very  man 
who  once  died  upon  Calvary  is  to  live  here.  He  —  that  same 
Jesus — who  was  taken  up  from  us,  shall  come  in  like  manner 
as  he  was  taken  up  from  the  gazers  of  Galilee.  Rejoice,  rejoice, 
beloved,  that  he  comes,  actually  and  really  comes ;  and  this  shall 
be  the  joy  of  that  age,  that  he  is  among  his  saints,  and  dwelleth 
in  them,  with  them,  and  talketh  and  waiketh  in  their  midst. 

The  presence  of  Christ  it  is  which  will  be  the  means  of  the 
peace  of  the  age.  In  that  sense  Christ  will  be  the  light  of  it,  for 
heh  our  peace.  It  will  be  through  his  presence  that  the  lion  shall 
eat  straw  like  an  ox,  that  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid. 
It  will  not  be  because  men  have  had  more  enhghtenment,  and 
have  learned  better,  through  advancing  civilization,  that  they  shall 
beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares.  It  is  notorious  that  the 
more  civilized  nations  become,  the  more  terrible  are  their  instru- 
ments of  destruction ;  and  when  they  do  go  to  war,  the  more 
bloody  and  protracted  their  wars  become.  I  venture  to  say  that 
if  in  a  thousand  years'  time  Christ  shall  not  come,  if  war  were 
to  break  out,  where  we  now  fight  for  ten  or  twenty  years,  we  shaU 


284  TIIE  LAIMB  :  THE  LIGHT. 

have  the  venomous  hatred  of  one  another,  and  the  means  of  car 
rying  on  a  war  for  a  century.  Instead  of  advancing  in  peace* 
fuhiess,  I  do  fear  me  the  world  has  gone  back.  We  certainly 
cannot  boast  now  of  living  in  halcyon  days  of  peace.  But 
Christ's  presence  shall  change  the  hearts  of  men.  Then,  spon- 
taneously, at  sight  of  the  great  Prince  of  Peace,  they  shall  cast 
away  their  armor  and  their  weapons  of  war,  and  shall  learn  war 
no  more.  In  that  sense,  then,  because  his  presence  will  be  the 
fiause  of  that  happy  period,  he  is  the  light  of  it. 

Again  :  Christ's  presence  is  to  that  period  its  special  instruc- 
tion. They  shall  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun,  nor  of 
the  moon.  AVhy  ?  Because  Christ's  presence  will  be  sufficiently 
instructive  to  the  sons  of  men.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
comes,  superstition  will  not  need  an  earnest  testimony  to  confute 
it ;  it  will  hide  its  head.  Idolatry  will  not  need  the  missionary 
to  preach  against  it ;  the  idols  he  shall  utterly  abolish,  and  shall 
cast  them  to  the  moles  and  to  the  bats.  Men  and  women,  at  the 
sight  of  Christ,  and  at  the  knowledge  that  he  is  reigning  glori- 
ously upon  earth,  will  give  up  their  unbelief.  The  Jew  will 
recognize  the  Son  of  David,  and  the  Gentile  will  rejoice  to  wor- 
ship him  who  was  once  slain  as  the  King  of  the  Jews.  The 
presence  of  Christ  shall  do  more  for  the  enlightenment  of  his 
church  than  the  teaching  of  all  her  officers  and  ministers  in 
all  ages.  She  shall  then  in  the  sight  of  her  Lord  come  to  a 
fulness  of  knowledge,  and  have  a  perfect  understanding  of  God's 
Word. 

Once  again :  Christ  will  be  the  light  of  that  period  i)i  the  sense 
of  being  its  glory.  Oh  !  it  is  the  glory  of  the  Christian  now  to 
think  that  Christ  reigns  in  heaven.  In  tliis  we  boast,  in  every 
season  of  depression  and  of  downcasting,  that  he  is  exalted  and 
sits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  But  the  glory  of  that  age 
shall  be  that  Christ  is  come  ;  that  he  sits  upon  the  throne  of 
David,  as  well  as  upon  the  throne  of  God  ;  that  his  enemies  bow 
before  him  and  lick  the  dust.  Think,  my  brethren,  of  the  splendor 
of  that  time,  when  from  every  nation  and  land  they  shall  bring 
him  tri])ute ;  when  praises  shall  ascend  from  every  land ;  when  the 


THE   LAMB  .   THE  LIGHT.  285 

Btivets  of  that  city  shall  be  thronged  every  day  witn  adoring 
worshippers  ;  Vv'hcn  he  shall  ride  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer, 
and  his  saints  shall  follow  him  upon  wliite  horses  !  We  some- 
times have  high  days  and  holidays,  when  kings  and  princes  go 
abroad,  and  the  streets  are  full,  and  people  crowd  even  to  the 
chimney-pots  to  see  them  as  they  ride  along ;  but  what  shall  it 
be  to  see  King  Jesus  crowned  with  the  crown  wherewith  his 
mother  crowned  him  in  the  day  of  his  espousals !  What  a  con- 
trast between  the  cavalcade  winding  its  way  along  the  streets  of 
Jei'usalem,  along  the  via  dolorosa  up  to  the  mount  of  execu- 
tion !  —  '.vhat  a  contrast,  I  say  !  Then  women  followed  him  and 
wept,  but  ROW  men  will  follow  him  and  shout  for  joy.  Then  he 
carried  his  cross,  but  now  he  shall  ride  in  state ;  then  his  ene- 
mies mocked  him,  and  gloated  their  eyes  with  his  sufferings  ;  but 
then  his  enemies  shall  be  put  to  confusion,  and  covered  with 
shame,  and  upon  himself  shall  his  crown  flourish ;  then  it  was 
the  hour  of  darkness,  and  the  time  of  the  prince  of  the  pit ;  but 
now  it  shall  be  the  day  of  light  and  the  victory  of  Emmanuel, 
and  the  sounding  of  his  praise  both  in  earth  and  heaven.  Con- 
template this  thought ;  and  though  I  speak  of  it  so  feebly,  yet  it 
may  ravish  your  hearts  with  transport  that  Christ  is  the  Sun  of 
that  long-expected,  that  blessed  day  ;  that  Christ  shall  be  the 
highest  mountain  of  all  the  hills  of  joy,  the  widest  river  of  all  the 
streams  of  deliglit ;  that  whatever  there  may  be  of  magnificence 
and  of  triumph,  Christ  sliall  be  the  centre  and  soul  of  it  all.  Oh 
to  be  present,  and  to  see  him  in  his  own  light,  the  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords  ! 

II.  And  now  we  will  turn  our  thoughts  another  way  from  the 
millennial  period  to  the  state  of  the  glorified  in  heaven 
ITSELF.  "  The  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon, 
to  rhine  in  it." 

The  inhabitants  of  the  better  world  are  independent  of  creature- 
comforts.  Let  us  think  that  over  for  a  minute.  We  have  no  reason 
to  believe  that  they  daily  pray,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 
bread.'^'     Their  bodies  sliall  dwell  in  perpetual  youth.     They 


r^G  THE  LAMB  :   THE  LIGHT. 

shall  have  no  need  of  raiment ;  their  white  robes  shall  never 
wear  oui,  neither  shall  they  ever  be  defiled.  Ilavini^  food 
and  raiment  on  earth,  therewith  we  are  content ;  but  in  heaven 
"  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin  ;  and  yet  I  say  unto  you, 
that  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of 
these  \  "  yet  the  fields  yield  them  neither  flax  nor  any  other  ma- 
terial for  clothing,  neither  do  the  acres  of  heaven  yield  them 
bread.  They  are  satisfied  by  leaning  upon  God,  needing  not 
the  creature  for  support.  They  need  no  medicine  to  heal  their 
disease,  "  for  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick."  They 
need  no  sleep  to  recruit  their  fatigue  ;  and  although  sleep  is  sweet 
and  balmy, —  God's  own  medicine,  —  yet  they  rest  not  day  nor 
night,  but  unweariedly  praise  him  in  his  temple. 

They  need  no  social  ties  in  heaven.  We  need  here  the  asso- 
ciations of  friendship  and  of  family  love  ;  but  they  are  neither 
married  nor  are  given  in  marriage  there.  Whatever  comfort 
they  may  derive  from  association  with  their  fellows  is  something 
extra  and  beyond ;  they  do  not  need  any :  their  God  is  enough. 
They  shall  need  no  teachers  there.  They  shall  doubtless  com- 
mune with  one  another  concerning  the  things  of  God,  and  tell  to 
one  another  the  strange  things  which  the  Lord  hath  wrought  for 
them ;  but  they  shall  not  need  this  by  way  of  instruction  :  they 
shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,  for  in  heaven  "  the  glory  of  God 
doth  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof."  There  is 
an  utter  independence  in  heaven,  then,  of  all  the  creatures. 
No  sun  and  no  moon  are  wanted ;  nay,  no  creatures  whatever. 
Here  we  lean  upon  the  friendly  arm  ;  but  there  they  lean  upon 
their  Beloved,  and  upon  him  alone.  Here  we  must  have  the 
help  of  our  companions ;  but  there  they  find  all  they  want  in 
Christ  alone.  Here  we  look  to  the  meat  which  perisheth,  and 
to  the  raiment  which  decays  before  the  moth ;  but  there  they  find 
everything  in  God.  We  have  to  use  the  bucket  to  get  water 
from  the  well ;  but  there  they  drink  from  the  well-head,  and  pul 
their  lips  down  to  the  living  water.  Here  the  angels  bring  ui 
blessings ;  but  we  shall  want  no  messenger  from  heaven  then 
They  shall  need  no  Gabriels  there  to  bring  their  love-notes  froa 


THE  LAMB  :   THE  LIGHT.  28? 

God,  for  there  tliey  shall  see  him  face  to  face.  Oh !  A^hat  9 
blessed  time  shall  that  be,  when  we  shall  have  mounted  above 
every  second  cause,  and  shall  hang  upon  the  bare  arm  of  God ! 
What  a  glorious  hour  when  God  and  not  his  creatures,  Gc-d  and 
not  his  works,  but  God  himself,  Christ  himself,  shall  be  our  daily 

joy! 

"  Plunged  in  the  Godhead's  deepest  sea, 
And  lost  in  His  immensity  " — 

Our  souls  shall  then  have  attained  the  perfection  of  bliss. 

While  in  heaven  it  is  clear  that  the  glorified  are  quite  inde- 
pendent of  creature  aid,  do  not  forget  that  they  are  entirely  de* 
pendent  for  their  joy  upon  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  their  sole  spiritual 
light.  They  have  nothing  else  in  heaven  to  give  them  perfect 
satisfaction  but  himself.  The  language  here  used,  "  The  Lamb 
is  the  light  thereof,"  may  be  read  in  two  or  three  ways.  Bj 
your  patience,  let  us  so  read  it. 

In  heaven  Jesus  is  the  light  in  the  sense  of  ^oy,  for  light  is 
ever  in  Scripture  the  emblem  of  joy.  Darkness  betokens  sor- 
row, but  the  rising  of  the  sun  indicates  the  return  of  holy  joy 
Christ  is  the  joy  of  heaven.  Do  they  rejoice  in  golden  harps, 
in  palm  branches  and  white  robes  ?  They  may  do  so,  but  they 
only  rejoice  in  these  things  as  love-gifts  from  him.  Their  joy  is 
compounded  of  this:  "Jesus  chose  us,  Jesus  loved  us,  Jesus 
bought  us,  Jesus  washed  us,  Jesus  robed  us,  Jesus  kept  us, 
Jesus  glorified  us  ;  here  we  are,  entirely  through  the  Lord  Jesus 
—  through  him  alone."  Each  one  of  these  thoughts  shall  be  to 
them  like  a  cluster  from  the  vines  of  EshcoL  Why,  methink^ 
there  is  an  eternal  source  of  joy  in  that  one  thought,  "  Jesus 
bought  me  with  his  blood."  Oh,  to  sit  on  the  mountains  of 
heaven  and  look  across  to  the  lowly  hill  of  Calvary,  and  see  the 
Saviour  bleed  !  What  emotions  of  joy  shall  stir  the  depths  of  our 
8oul  when  we  reflect  that  there  upon  the  bloody  tree  he  counted 
Dot  his  life  dear  unto  him  that  he  might  redeem  us  unto  God  I 

*•  Calvary's  summit  shall  I  trace, 
View  the  heights  and  depths  of  grace, 
Count  tht  purple  drops,  and  say, 
*  Thus  my  sins  were  washed  away.' " 


2S3  THE  LA:MB  :   TIIE  LIGHT. 

In  glorj  they  think  of  the  character  and  person  of  Je?us,  and 
these  are  wells  of  delight  to  them.  Thus  they  muse  :  Jesus  is 
eternal  God ;  his  enemies  reviled  him,  but  still  he  is  God.  Jesus 
became  the  virgin's  child  ;  Jesus  lived  a  life  of  holiness,  and 
Jesus  died ;  but  see  what  triumph  springs  from  his  condescen- 
sion and  his  shame !  He  rises,  he  ascends,  and  leads  captivity 
captive ;  he  scatters  gifts  amongst  men  ;  he  reigns  over  earth 
and  hell  and  heaven.  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  "  The 
government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder :  and  his  name  shall  be 
called  Wonderful,  The  Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,  The  ever- 
lasting Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace."  When  I  have  listened 
to  Handel's  music  in  "  The  Messiah,"  where  that  great  musician 
wakes  every  iu:strument  to  praise  the  name  of  Jesus,  I  have  felt 
ready  to  die  with  excess  of  delight  that  such  music  should  ever 
have  been  composed  by  mortal  man  to  the  honor  of  our  great 
Messiah  ;  but  what  will  be  the  music  of  celestial  choirs  ?  How 
would  such  hearts  as  ours  burst,  and  such  souls  as  ours  leap  out 
of  their  bodies,  if  they  could  but  know  while  here  such  joys  as 
celestials  know  above  !  But,  beloved,  our  faculties  shall  be 
strengthened,  our  capacities  shall  be  enlarged,  our  whole  being 
shall  be  expanded ;  and  thus  we  shall  be  able  to  bear  the  full 
5well  of  serapliic  music,  and  join  in  it  without  fliinting  from  de- 
light, while  they  sing  of  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  Man  —  the  Son 
of  God.  Christ  is  the  light  of  heaven,  then,  because  he  is  the 
substance  of  its  joy. 

Light  may  be  viewed  in  another  sense.  Light  is  the  cause 
of  beauty.  That  is  obvious  to  you  all.  Take  the  light  away, 
and  there  is  no  beauty  anywhere.  The  fairest  woman  charms 
the  eye  no  more  than  a  heap  of  ashes  when  the  sun  has  departed. 
Your  garden  may  be  gay  with  many-colored  flowers,  but  when 
the  sun  goeth  down  you  cannot  know  them  from  the  grass  which 
Dorders  them.  You  look  upon  the  trees,  all  fair  Avith  the  ver- 
dure of  summer ;  but  when  the  sun  goes  down  they  are  all  hung 
in  black.  Without  light  no  radiance  flashes  from  the  sapphire, 
no  peaceful  ray  proceedeth  from  the  pearl.  There  is  naught  of 
btauty  left  when  light  is  gone.     Light  is  the  mother  of  beautj. 


THE  LAMB  :  THE  ^IGHT.  289 

fn  (such  sense  the  Lord  God  jMmighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the 
light  of  heaven  ;  that  is  to  say,  all  the  beauty  of  the  saints  above 
comes  from  God  incarnate.  Their  excellence,  their  joy,  their 
triumph,  their  glory,  their  ecstatic  bliss,  all  spring  from  him. 
As  planets,  they  reflect  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 
They  live  as  beams  proceeding  from  the  central  orb  —  as  streams 
leaping  from  the  eternal  fountain.  If  he  withdrew,  they  must 
d'lo :  if  his  glory  were  veiled,  their  glory  must  expu-e.  Think 
of  this.  Christian,  and  I  am  sure  you  will  be  reminded  how  true 
this  is  beneath  the  sky,  as  well  as  above,  —  that  if  light  be  the 
mother  of  beauty,  Christ  is  the  light.  There  is  nothing  good,  nor 
comely,  nor  gracious  about  any  one  of  us,  except  as  we  get  it 
from  Christ,  and  from  Christ  Jesus  alone.  "  The  Lamb  is  the 
light  thereof." 

Another  meaning  of  light,  in  Scripture,  is  knowledfje.  Igno- 
rance is  darkness.  Now,  in  heaven  they  need  no  candle,  neither 
light  of  the  sun,  because  they  receive  light  enough  from  Christ, 
—  Christ  being  the  fountain  of  all  they  know.  I  think  it  is  Dr. 
Dick  who  speaks  about  the  enjoyments  of  heaven  consisting 
very  likely  in  going  from  star  to  star  and  viewing  the  works  of 
God  in  different  portions  of  his  universe,  admiring  the  anatomy 
of  living  creatures,  studying  geology,  ferrying  across  the  waving 
of  ether,  and  voyaging  from  world  to  world.  I  do  not  believe  in 
such  a  heaven  for  a  moment.  I  do  not  conceive  it  a  worthy 
employment  for  immortal  spirits ;  and  if  there  were  nothing  else 
to  make  me  think  so,  the  text  would  be  enough:  "And  the 
city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  (he  moon,  to  shine  in 
it."  There  is  no  need  of  the  works  of  God  to  give  instruction 
to  its  inhabitants,  "  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighter  it."  The 
?lory,  not  of  God's  works,  but  of  God's  Son,  is  th  iir  glorioua 
light. 

"  The  spacious  earth  and  spreading  flood 
Proclaim  the  wise  and  powerful  G/d; 
ADd  thy  rich  glories  from  afar 
Sparkle  in  every  rolling  star. 

"But  in  his  looks  a  glory  stands, 
I'he  noblest  labor  of  thy  hand-?  ; 
25 


290  THE  LA:\m  :  the  light. 

The  I  leasing  lustre  of  his  eyes 
Outshines  the  wonders  of  the  skies  ' 

Thej  need  no  light  of  the  sun  and  moon  wher^  Jesus  is.  Ho«r. 
ever  well  the  sun  and  moon  may  tell  of  God,  we  shall  not  want 
them  from  day  to  day  to  send  forth  their  line  throughout  all  th« 
eardi,  and  their  word  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  for  the  glory  of 
Christ  will  teach  us  all  we  wish  to  learn  ;  and  beholding  the 
unveilpd  glory  of  God  will  be  better  far  than  prying  into  the 
works  01  nature,  even  thougli  we  had  an  angel's  power  of  discov- 
ery. We  shall  know  more  of  Christ  in  five  minutes,  I  ween, 
when  we  get  to  heaven,  than  we  shall  know  in  all  our  years  on 
earth.  Dr.  Owen  was  a  master  of  theology ;  but  the  smallest 
child  who  goes  to  heaven  from  a  Sunday-school  knows  more 
of  Christ  after  being  in  heaven  five  minutes,  than  Dr.  Owen 
did.  John  Calvin  searched  very  deep,  and  Augustine  seemed 
to  come  to  the  very  door  of  the  great  secret ;  but  Augustine  and 
Calvin  would  be  but  children  on  the  first  form  there  —  I  mean 
if  they  knew  no  more  than  on  earth.  Oh  !  what  manifestations 
of  God  there  will  be  !  Dark  dealings  of  providence,  which  you 
never  understood  before,  will  then  be  seen  without  the  light  of  a 
candle  or  of  the  sun.  Many  doctrines  puzzled  you,  and  you 
could  not  find  the  clue  to  the  labyrinth  of  mystery  ;  but  there  all 
will  be  simple  and  plain,  so  that  the  wayfaring  man  may  run 
and  understand  it.  You  have  had  many  experiences  and  toss* 
ings  to  and  fro,  and  you  have  felt  your  ignorance,  your  corrup- 
tion and  weakness  ;  but  there  you  shall  see  to  the  very  bottom 
of  human  nature  :  you  shall  understand  the  virulence  of  man'a 
depravity,  and  the  heights  of  God's  sovereignty,  the  marvels  of 
r>m  electing  love,  and  the  magnificence  of  his  divine  power,  by 
rrfuch  he  has  made  us  to  be  partakers  of  the  divine  nature. 

"  There  you  shall  see  and  hear  and  know 
All  you  desired  or  wished  below, 
And  every  jiower  find  sweet  employ 
In  that  eternal  world  of  joy." 

*ind  this  knowledge,  I  say,  shall   not  come  from  any  inferioi 


TIIE  LAMB  ;  THE  LIGHT.  291 

Rg-nt,  but  from  the  Lord  God,  wlio  shall  be  your  glory,  and 
from  Jesus  Christ  himself,  who  shall  teach  you  all  truth. 

I  must  not  dwell  long  on  this  point,  except  to  say  this  one 
|thing,  —  that  light  also  means  manifestation.  "Every  one  that 
doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  liis 
deeds  should  be  reproved.  But  he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to 
the  light,  tliat  his  deeds  may  be  made  manifest,  that  they  are 
wrought  in  God."  Light  manifests.  In  this  world  it  doth  not 
yet  appear  how  great  we  must  be  made.  God's  people  are  a 
hidden  people  —  their  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  They 
possess  God's  secret,  and  that  secret  other  men  cannot  discover. 
Christ  in  heaven  is  the  great  revealer  of  God's  mind ;  and  when 
he  gets  his  people  there,  he  will  touch  them  with  the  wand  of 
his  own  love,  and  change  them  into  the  image  of  his  manifested 
glory.  They  were  poor  and  wretched  —  but,  what  a  transforma- 
tion !  Their  rags  drop  oif,  and  they  arc  acknowledged  as  princes. 
They  were  stained  with  sin  and  infirmity  —  but  one  touch  of  bis 
finger,  and  they  are  bright  as  the  sun  and  clear  as  crystal ;  trans- 
formed even  as  he  was  upon  Mount  Tabor ;  whiter  than  any  fuller 
can  make  them.  They  were  ignorant  and  weak  on  earth,  but 
when  lie  shall  teach  them  they  shall  know  even  as  they  are 
known.  They  were  buried  in  dishonor,  but  they  are  raised  ic 
glory ;  they  were  sown  in  the  grave  in  weakness,  but  they  are 
raised  in  power ;  they  were  carried  away  by  the  hands  of  re- 
morseless death,  but  they  arise  to  immortality  and  life.  Oh  ! 
what  a  manifestation!  Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and 
Christ  is  the  sacred  rain  that  brings  the  harvest  above  ground. 
The  righteous  are  always  pearls  ;  but  they  are  hidden,  as  it  were, 
in  the  oyster  now,  and  Christ  brings  them  forth.  They  were 
always  diamonds  ;  they  were  far  away  in  the  Golconda  of  sin  ; 
but  Christ  hath  fetched  them  up  from  the  deep  mines.  They 
were  alway  stars,  but  they  were  hidden  behind  the  clouds.  Christy 
like  a  swift  wind,  hath  blown  the  clouds  away,  and  now  they 
shine  like  stars  in  the  firmament  for  ever  and  ever.  In  this 
sense  Christ  is  the  light  of  heaven,  because  it  is  through  him  that 
the  true  and  real  character  of  all  the  saints  has  been  manifested, 


992  THE  LA^ro  :  THE  LTGriT. 

Come,  my  soul,  take  wing  a  moment  —  it  is  not  far  for  thet 
to  fly.  Mount  thee,  and  walk  the  golden  streets,  and  as  thou 
walkcst  thou  shalt  see  nothing  but  Jesus  glorified.  Come  up  to 
the  throne,  and  thou  shalt  see  Christ  on  it.  Sit  down  and  listen 
io  the  song,  Christ  is  the  theme  ;  go  to  the  banquet,  Christ  is  the 
meat ;  mingle  with  the  dancers,  Christ  is  their  joy  ;  make  thou 
one  in  their  great  assemblies,  and  Christ  is  the  God  they  wor- 
ship :  — 

" '  Worthy  the  Lamb  that  died/  they  cry, 
'  To  be  exalted  thus  • ' 
'  Worthy  the  Lamb/  our  lips  reply, 
'  For  he  was  slain  for  us.'  " 

III.  Let  us  turn  to  our  last  thought ;  and  here  I  hope  we  can 
speak  experimentally,  whereas  on  the  other  two  points  we  could 
only  speak  by  faith  in  the  promise  of  God.     The  heavenly 

man's    STAir  MAT  BE  SET  FORTH  IN  THESE  WORDS. 

First,  then,  even  on  earth  the  heavenly  mail's  joy  docs  not  de* 
fend  upon  the  creature.  Brethren,  in  a  certain  sense  we  can  say 
to-day  that  "  the  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the 
moon,  to  shine  in  it."  We  love  and  prize  the  happy  brightness 
which  the  sun  scatters  upon  us.  As  for  the  moon,  vviio  docs  not 
admire  the  fair  moonlight  when  the  waves  are  silvered,  and 
silent  nature  wears  the  plumage  of  the  dove.  But  we  do  not  need 
the  sun  or  the  moon ;  we  can  do  without  them  ;  for  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  has  risen  with  healing  beneath  his  wings.  There 
are  brothers  and  sisters  here  this  morning  who  are  very  Lappy, 
and  yet  it  is  long  since  they  saw  the  sun.  Shut  up  in  perpetual 
night,  through  blindness,  they  need  not  the  light  of  the  sun,  nor 
of  the  moon,  for  the  Lord  God  is  their  glory  —  Christ  is  their 
light.  If  our  eyes  should  be  put  out,  we  could  say,  "  Farewell, 
sweet  light ;  farewell,  bright  sun  and  moon  ;  we  prize  ye  welL 
but  we  can  do  without  ye,  —  Christ  Jesus  is  to  us  as  the  light  of 
seven  days." 

As  we  can  do  without  these  two  most  eminent  creatures,  so  we 
can  be  happy  without  other  earthly  blessings.  Our  dear  friends 
ai'e  very  precious  to  us  —  we  love  our  wife  and  children,  ouf 


THE  LAMB  :  TITi:  LIGHT.  29?^ 

parents  and  our  friends,  but  we  do  not  need  them.  May  G(^d 
spare  them  to  us !  But  if  thej  were  taken,  it  does  not  come  to  a 
matter  of  absolute  need,  for  jou  know,  beloved,  there  is  many  a 
Christian  who  has  been  bereft  of  all ;  and  he  thought,  as  the  props 
were  taken  away  one  after  another,  that  he  should  die  of  veiy 
grief.  But  he  did  not  die ;  his  faith  surmounted  every  wave,  sii.d 
he  still  rejoices  in  his  God.  I  know  that  at  the  thought  of  those 
dear  ones  who  are  taken  from  you  the  sluices  of  your  grief  are 
drawn  up  ;  but  still  I  hope  you  will  not  be  so  false  to  Christ  as 
to  deny  what  I  now  say,  —  that  his  presence  can  make  amends 
for  all  losses ;  that  the  smilings  of  his  face  will  make  a  paradise 
so  sweet  that  no  sorrow  or  sighing  shall  be  heard  in  it. 

"  Thee  at  all  times  will  I  bless; 
Having  thee,  I  all  possess; 
How  can  I  bereaved  be, 
Since  I  cannot  part  with  thee?  '* 

It  is  a  very  happy  thing  to  be  placed  in  circumstances  where 
one  knows  no  lack  of  bread,  —  to  have  a  house,  a  comfortable 
home,  and  sufficiency  for  our  family  is  very  pleasant.  But  O,  dear 
friends,  if  it  comes  to  actual  need,  the  Cliristian  do3S  not  want 
this  ;  he  needs  no  sun  nor  moon  even  here.  Look  at  the  chosen 
sons  of  poverty  —  they- toil  from  morning  to  night,  and  never  get 
a  single  inch  beyond  ;  just  living  from  hand  to  mouth  ;  but  they 
are  happy  ;  ah  !  some  of  them  infinitely  happier  than  the  rich  man 
with  all  his  sumptuous  faring,  and  the  fine  linen  with  which  he 
wraps  himself.  Why,  there  have  been  men,  reduced  all  but  to 
beggary,  who  have  rejoiced  far  more  in  their  poverty  than  others 
in  their  wealth.  We  have  seen  some  of  God's  saints  in  the  worli  • 
house,  or  lingering  in  a  dark,  ill-furnished  almsroom,  and  we 
have  heard  them  speak  as  joyously  about  God  and  their  state  as 
if  they  were  dwelling  in  mansions  or  palaces.  Yes,  many  a  poor 
child  of  God  has  learned  to  sing  — 

"  I  would  not  change  my  blessed  estate 
For  all  the  world  calls  f^ood  or  great; 
And  while  my  faith  can  keep  her  hoid, 
I  envy  not  the  sinner's  gold." 
25* 


294  TIIE  LAJrB  :  THE  LIGHT. 

For  "this  city  hath  no  need  of  the  san,  nor  of  the  moon,  to  shine 
in  it,  for  the  glory  of  God  doth  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the 
light  thereof."  Health,  too,  —  Avlio  can  prize  it  enough  ?  When 
stretched  upon  the  bed  of  sickness,  then  we  begin  to  know  how 
priceless  a  boon  was  a  sound  body  ;  but  ah  !  the  Christian,  though 
he  loves  health,  can  do  without  it.  I  have  heard  of  Christians 
who  have  been  blind,  and  who  have  been  bed- ridden  and  have 
not  stirred  from  their  bed  for  many  years,  who  could  scarcely 
lift  their  hands  through  paralysis,  and  who  never  had  stood  upon 
their  feet  for  years  through  some  stroke  of  God's  hand,  yet  have 
they  delighted  themselves  in  the  Lord.  They  have  laid  there 
ill-nursed,  ill-cared  for,  —  simply  living  to  illusirate  to  what  de- 
gree a  mortal  man  may  become  a  mass  of  suffering  and  a  prodigy 
of  grief ;  and  yet,  as  I  have  sometimes  stood  by  such  bedsides,  I 
have  heard  more  rapturous  expressions  concerning  present  joy 
and  future  prospects  than  from  God's  strongest  saints  in  their 
healthiest  hours.  The  dying  girl,  when  consumption  has  paled 
her  cheek  and  taken  the  flesh  from  off  her  poor  aching  bones, 
has  nevertheless  appeared  in  a  sacred  majesty  of  might,  which 
showed  me  that  she  needed  no  moon  nor  sun  to  lighten  her,  no 
health  nor  strength  to  give  her  spirits,  for  the  presence  of  Christ 
made  her  conqueror  in  the  extremity  of  weakness,  and  victorious 
in  the  grim  presence  of  Death  itself.  The  Christian  then,  dear 
friends,  leans  upon  the  arm  of  God ;  he  has  pressed  through 
the  crowd  of  creatures ;  he  has  bidden  them  all  retire  that  he 
might  live  nearer  to  his  all-sufficient  Lord ;  and  if,  when  he  has 
reached  his  Lord,  the  creatures  turn  their  backs  and  go  away,  he 
saith,  "  There,  ye  may  all  go  ;  I  have  him  now  ;  I  embrace  him 
now  ;  he  hath  kissed  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  lips  ;  ye  may  spit 
on  me,  and  ye  will ;  now  he  has  spoken  softly  to  me,  ye  may 
curse  me  if  ye  please  ;  now  that  he  has  told  me  I  am  his  and  lie 
is  mine,  even  my  father  and  mother  may  forsake  me,  for  the 
Lord  hath  taken  me  up."  Yes,  the  heavenly  man,  even  before 
be  gets  to  heaven,  hath  no  need  of  the  sun  nor  of  the  moon,  for 
the  glory  of  God  doth  lighten  him. 

We  finisli  by  observing,  that  such  a  man,  however,  has  great 


IHE  LAMB  :  THE  LIGHT  293 

heed  oi  Christ  —  he  cannot  get  on  without  Christ.  O  beloved  1 
if  the  sun  were  struck  from  the  spheres,  what  a  poor,  dark,  dreary 
world  tliis  would  be !  We  should  go  groping  about  it,  longing 
for  the  grave ;  but  that  would  be  nothing  compared  with  our 
misery  if  Christ  were  taken  away.  O  Christian  man  !  what 
would  you  do  without  a  Saviour?  We  should  be  of  all  men  the 
most  miserable  —  we  who  have  once  known  him.  Ah !  you 
who  do  not  know  Christ,  you  can  get  on  pretty  well  without  him  ; 
like  a  poor  slave  who  has  never  known  liberty,  and  rests  content 
in  bondage.  The  bird  in  its  cage,  which  never  did  fly  over  the 
fields,  which  has  been  born  in  the  cage,  can  be  pretty  easy ;  but 
after  w^e  have  once  stretched  our  wings,  and  once  know  what 
liberty  means,  we  cannot  be  shut  out  from  our  Lord.  As  the 
dove  mourns  itself  to  death  when  its  mate  is  taken  away,  so 
should  we  if  Christ  were  gone.  We  can  do  without  light,  with- 
out friendship,  without  life ;  but  we  cannot  live  without  our  Sa- 
viour. Oh !  to  be  without  Christ !  My  soul,  what  wouldst  thou 
do  in  the  world  without  him,  in  the  midst  of  its  temptations  and 
its  cares  ?  What  would.4  thou  do  in  the  morning  without  him, 
when  thou  wakest  up  and  lookest  forward  to  the  day's  battle  ? 
What  wouldst  thou  do  if  he  did  not  put  his  hand  upon  thee,  and 
lay,  "  Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee"  ?  And  what  wouldst  thou  do 
It  night,  when  thou  comest  home  jaded  and  weary,  if  there  were 
no  prayer,  no  door  of  access  between  thee  and  Christ  ?  What 
fhould  wf  do  without  Christ  in  our  trials,  our  sicknesses  ?  What 
should  we  do  when  we  come  to  die,  with  no  one  to  make  our  dying- 
bed  feel  soft  as  downy  pillows  are  ?  Oh !  if  the  infidel's  laugh 
has  truth  in  it,  it  may  well  ring  bitterly  in  our  ears,  for  it  were 
a  bitter  truth  to  us.  No  Christ !  Then  to  die  indeed  is  dread- 
ful. To  have  such  high  hopes,  and  to  have  them  all  blasted; 
such  high,  loud  boastings,  and  to  have  our  mouths  stopped  for- 
ever !  But,  beloved,  we  need  not  suppo-se  such  a  thing ;  for  we 
know  that  our  Redeemer  llveth,  and  we  know  that  he  never  for- 
sakes the  work  of  his  own  hand.  Married  as  he  is  to  our  souls, 
he  will  never  sue  out  a  divorce  against  any  one  of  his  dear  people  ; 
but  he  will  hold,  and  keep,  and  bless  us  till  we  die ;  and  we  on 


296  THE  T.A^ro  :  THE  I-IGIIT. 

our  purt  will  confess  of  our  spiritual  life  that  the  Lamb  is  the 
light  there<jf.  Of  every  day  and  every  night,  of  every  joy  and 
every  sorrow,  the  Lamb  has  been  until  now  our  light,  and  shall 
be  till  we  die. 

If  this  be  so,  how  dark  is  the  case  of  those  who  do  not  know 
the  Lamb !  In  what  misery  and  ignorance  do  you  grope  who 
io  not  know  the  Saviour !  Would  you  know  Christ,  would  you 
have  the  happiness  of  resting  upon  his  bosom  ?  Trust  him,  then  ; 
foi'  whosoever  trusteth  him  is  saved.  To  trust  Christ  is  that 
saving  faith  which  brings  the  soul  out  of  condemnation.  "  He 
that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  Trust  thou,  guilty  a? 
thou  art,  trust  thou  to  his  atonement,  and  it  shall  wash  thee ; 
trust  to  his  power,  it  shall  prevail  for  thee  ;  trust  to  his  wisdom, 
it  shall  protect  thee  ;  trust  to  his  heart,  it  shall  love  thee,  world 
without  end.     Ameii. 


SERMON  XVI. 


GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE. 

"  rOB  TS  3EE  TOUR  CALLIN  J,  BRETHREN^  HOW  THAT  KOT  MAST  WISE  UXTX  APTSS 
THE  FLWH,  NOT  UCANT  MIQUTV,  NOT  MANT  NOCLE,  ARE  CALLED;  BUT  GOD  HAT^^ 
CHOSEN  THE  FOOLISH  THINGS  OF  THE  WORLD  TO  CONFOUND  THE  WISE;  AND  GOD 
HATH  CHOSEN  THE  WEAK  THINGS  OF  THE  WORLD  TO  CONFOUND  THE  THINGS 
WHICH  AGE  MIGHTT;  AND  BASE  THINGS  OP  THE  Tv'ORLD,  AND  THINGS  WHICH 
ABE  DESPISED,  HATH  GOD  CHOSEN,  TEA,  AND  THINGS  WHICH  ARE  NOT,  TO  BRIUG 
TO  NOUGHT  THINGS  THAT  ARE:  THAT  NO  FLESH  SHOULD  QLORT  IN  HIS  PSEfi- 

BWCE."  — 1  Corinthians  i.  25-21). 

The  Apostle  Paul  had  been  led  to  make  the  confession  that 
Christ  Jesus  was  despised  both  by  Jew  and  Gentile.  He  con- 
fps=ed  that  this  was  no  cause  of  stumbling  to  him;  for  what 
others  counted  foolishness  he  believed  to  be  wisdom,  and  re- 
joiced that  the  foolishness  of  God  was  wiser  than  men,  and 
the  weakness  of  God  stronger  than  men.  Lest,  however,  any 
of  the  Corinthian  Church  should  be  stumbled  by  the  fact  that 
Christ  was  despised,  the  apostle  goes  on  to  show  that  it  was 
the  general  way  of  God's  proceeding,  to  select  means  which  men 
despised,  in  order  that  by  accomplishing  his  purpose  througli 
them,  he  might  have  all  the  glory  :  and  he  refers  them  for 
proof  of  this  to  the  one  instance  of  their  own  election  and  call- 
ing :  "  Ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,"  saith  he,  "  not  many  wis(j 
men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are 
called; "  but  you,  the  poor,  illiterate,  the  despised — you  have  been 
called  —  still  for  the  same  reason  —  that  God  may  be  all  in  all 
and  that  no  flesh  may  glory  in  his  presence.  It  is  clear  to  every 
one  who  will  observe  either  Scripture  or  fact,  that  Go(J  oeve^ 


298  GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE. 

did  intend  to  make  his  gospel  fashionable  ;  that  the  very  last 
thing  that  was  ever  in  his  thoughts  was  to  select  the  elite  of  man- 
kind, and  gather  dignity  for  his  truth  from  the  gaudy  trappings 
of  rank  and  station.  On  the  contrary,  God  has  thrown  down 
the  gauntlet  against  all  the  pride  of  manhood  ;  he  hath  dashed 
mire  into  the  face  of  all  human  excellency ;  and  with  the  battle- 
axe  of  his  strength  he  has  dashed  the  escutcheon  of  man's  glory 
in  twain.  "  Overturn  !  overturn !  overturn  !  "  seems  to  be  the 
very  motto  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  shall  be  so  "  until  He 
shall  come  whose  right  it  is  to  reign,  and  he  will  give  it  him,"  for 
his  IS  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and 
ever.  There  is  no  doctrine  more  truly  humbling  than  the  doc- 
trine of  election  ;  and  it  was  for  this  reason  that  the  Apostle  Paul 
refers  to  it,  —  that  the  disciples  at  Corinth  might  be  quite  con- 
tent to  follow  the  humble  and  despised  cross-bearing  Saviour, 
because  the  election  of  grace  consists  of  the  humble  and  despised, 
who  therefore  cannot  be  ashamed  to  follow  One  who,  like  them- 
selves, was  despised  and  rejected  of  men. 

Coming,  then,  at  once  to  our  text,  we  observe  in  it  very  clearly, 
first,  the  Elector  ;  secondly,  a  strange  election  ;  then,  the  elected  ; 
and  when  we  have  considered  all  these  a  little,  we  shall  pause 
over  the  reasons  lohich  God  has  given  for  his  election,  —  that  "  no 
flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence." 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  this  morning  soar  aloft  upon  the  wings 
>f  thought  to  consider  for  awhile  the  Elector. 

Some  men  are  saved,  and  some  are  not  saved ;  it  remains  as 
A  fact  never  to  be  questioned,  that  some  enter  into  eternal  life,  and 
some  pursue  the  evil  way  and  perish.  How  is  this  difference 
caused  ?  How  is  it  that  some  mount  to  heaven  ?  The  reason  why 
any  sink  to  hell  is  their  sin,  and  only  their  sin ;  they  will  not  repent, 
they  will  not  believe  in  Christ,  they  will  not  turn  to  God,  and 
therefore  they  perish  wilfully  b}^  theii'  own  act  and  deed.  But  how 
is  it  that  others  are  saved  ?  Whose  will  is  it  that  hath  made 
them  to  differ  ?  The  text  three  times  most  peremptorily  an- 
Bwers  the  question.    It  saith  not  "  man  hath  chosen,"  but  it  saith 


GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE.  299 

three  times,  '•  God  hath  chosen,  God  hath  chosen,  God  hath  cho- 
sen'* The  grace  which  is  found  in  any  man,  and  the  glory  and 
eternal  life  to  which  any  attain,  are  all  the  gifts  of  God's  elec« 
tion,  and  are  not  bestowed  according  to  the  will  of  man. 

This  will  be  clear  to  any  thoughtful  person,  if  we  first  of  all 
turn  to  facts.  Wherever  we  find  a  case  of  election  in  the  Old 
Testament,  it  is  manifestly  God  who  makes  it.  Go  back,  if  you 
will,  to  the  very  earliest  time.  Angels  fell :  a  multitude  of 
bright  spirits,  who  surrounded  the  throne  of  God  and  sang  his 
praises,  were  deceived  by  Satan,  and  fell  into  sin.  The  great 
serpent  drew  with  him  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven 
they  fell  from  their  obedience  ;  they  were  condemned  to  chains 
forever,  and  to  eternal  fire.  Man  sinned  also.  Adam  and  Eve 
broke  the  covenant  with  God,  and  ate  of  the  forbidden  fruit  — 
were  they  condemned  to  eternal  fire  ?  Nay,  but  God,  in  the 
plenitude  of  his  grace,  whispered  this  promise  in  the  woman's 
ear :  "  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head." 
Some  men  are  saved,  but  no  devils  are  saved.  Why  ?  Did 
man  make  the  difference  ?  Silence,  thou  vain  boaster,  who 
dreamest  of  such  a  thing !  It  is  God  himself  vrho  testifies  :  "  I 
will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy,  and  I  will  have 
compassion  on  whom  I  will  have  compassion."  It  was  from  such 
sovereignty  as  this  that  the  Lord  virtually  declared,  "  I  purpose 
and  decree,  that  of  the  race  of  man  I  will  save  a  multitude  that 
no  man  can  number,  who  shall  be  the  vessels  of  my  mercy ; 
while  yonder  angels,  once  my  servants,  but  now  traitors  to  their 
liege  lord,  shall,  without  hope  forever,  vindicate  the  terror  of  my 
righteousness,  the  majesty  of  my  justice."  Here  no  one  ever 
raises  a  question.  I  have  never  heard  the  most  ultra-Pelagian 
enter  a  plea  for  the  devil.  I  have  heard  of  Origcn,  who  did 
seem  to  plead  that  Satan  should  be  included  in  the  general  law 
of  mercy  ;  but  very  few  persons  now-a-days  talk  so.  Here  is  an 
instJMice  of  election,  —  some  of  the  human  race  saved,  and  the 
ang'ilic  race  left  forever  to  perish.  Who  could  have  made  tiiis 
distinction  but  Jehovah  himself?  And  we  must  say  there  of  our 
feF€«*ed  race,  "  God  hath  chosen."   We  are  nut  at  a  loss  to  see  tha 


800  UOD'S   STKANGK  (JlH.lUf>. 

same  discriminating  sovereignty  at  work  among  the  individuals 
of  our  own  race.     All  men  were  in  the  patriarchal  age  sunken 
in  heathenism,  with  but  a  few  exceptions ;  there  were  a  few  pa- 
^triarchs  who  still,  chosen  of  God,  held  fast  to  the  pure  worship 
of  the  Most  High.     The  Lord  determined  to  adopt  a  special 
people,  who  should  read  the  oracles  of  God,  preserve  and  main- 
tain the  truth.    He  selected  Abram  as  the  progenitor  of  the  cho- 
sen race.     Did  Abram  choose  God,  or  did  God  call  and  cLoose 
Abram?      Was  there  anything  naturally  in  Abram  to  entitle 
him  to  be  the  servant  of  the  Most  High  ?     "We  have  very  plain 
proof  in  Scripture  that  there  was  not.     He  was,  on  the  contrary, 
described  as  a  Syrian  ready  to  perish,  and  his  race  was,  like  the 
rest,  tainted,  to  say  the  least,  with  idolatry  ;  nevertheless  he  was 
called  out  of  the  east,  and  made  the  father  of  the  faithful  by  God's 
own  special  will.     What  was  there,  let  me  ask  you,  in  the  Jews, 
why  they  should  be  blessed  with  prophets,  and  the  sacrifices,  and 
the  rites  and  ordinances  of  true  worship,  while  all  the  nations 
were  left  to  bow  down  before  gods  of  wood  and  stone  ?  We  can 
only  say,  God  hath  done  it ;  his  will  lights  upon  the  race  of  Israel, 
and  leaves  the  rest  in  sin.     Take  any  particular  case  of  divine 
grace  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  as,  for  instance,  that  of 
David.      Do  we  find  that  David  chose  the  throne,  that  David 
lelected  and  set  himself  apart  to  be  the  chosen  messenger  of 
God  to  Israel  ?     Was  there  some  manifest  fitness  in  the  young- 
est son  of  Jesse  ?     Nay,  on  the  contrary,  men  had  chosen  his 
brethren  ;  even  Samuel  said,  "  Surely  the  Lord's  anointed  is  be- 
fore me,"  as  he  saw  Abinadab  go  forth.     But  God  seeth  not  as 
man  seeth,  and  he  had  chosen  the  ruddy  David  that  he  might 
be  king  in  Jeshurun.  So  might  we  multiply  cases  ;  but  your  own 
thoughts  will  spare  my  words.     All  the  facts  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment go  to  show  that  God  doeth  as  he  wills  in  the  armies  of 
heaven  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  this  lower  world..  He  puUeth 
down  and  he  raiseth  up  ;  he  lifteth  the  beggar  from  the  dung- 
hill that  he  may  set  him  among  the  princes  of  his  people.      God 
hath  chosen,  God  hath  chosen,  and  not  man.  "  It  is  not  of  him  that 
willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runnpth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  men^y.* 


GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE.  301 

liet  us  look  at  the  matter  ia  another  light.  Clearly  the  Lord's 
will  must  determine  the  matter,  if  we  consider  his  office  and  po- 
sition towards  men.  God's  office.  God  is  a  king.  Shall  not 
the  king  have  his  own  will  ?  Men  may  set  up  a  constitutional 
monarchy,  and  they  are  right  in  so  doing  ;  but  if  you  could  find  a 
being  who  was  perfection  itself,  an  absolute  form  of  government 
would  be  undeniably  the  best.  At  any  rate,  God's  government 
is  absolute,  and  though  he  never  violates  righteousness, — for  he  is 
holiness  and  truth  itself,  — yet  he  regards  this  jewel  of  his  crown 
as  being  the  dearest  that  he  has.  "  I  am,  and  there  is  none  be- 
side me."  He  giveth  no  account  of  his  matters.  Unto  all  ques- 
tions he  gives  this  answer :  "  Nay  but,  O  man,  who  art  thou  that 
repliest  against  God  ?  Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that 
formed  it.  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ?  Hath  not  the  potter 
power  over  the  clay,  of  the  same  lump  to  make  one  vessel  unto 
honor,  and  another  unto  dishonor  ?  "  The  absolute  position  of  God 
as  king  demands  that,  especially  in  the  work  of  salvation,  his  will 
should  be  the  great  determining  force.  Let  us  state  the  case, 
and  you  will  see  this.  A  number  of  criminals  are  shut  up  in 
prison,  all  deserving  to  die.  Their  guilt  is  the  same.  If  they 
are  all  taken  out  to  execution  to-morrow  morning,  no  one  can 
tay  a  word  against  justice.  Now,  if  some  of  these  persons  be 
spared,  to  whose  discretion  should  the  sparing  be  left  ?  To  their 
owji  ?  True,  it  will  be  most  gracious  to  send  a  messenger,  and 
bid  them  all  come  forth  and  receive  sparing  mercy,  if  they  will 
come.  But  suppose  they  all,  with  one  consent,  refuse  to  be  saved ; 
suppose  that,  having  been  invited  to  be  saved,  every  one  of  them 
reluses  to  accept  pardon.  If,  in  such  a  case,  superior  mercy  de- 
termines to  override  their  wicked  wills,  and  sets  itself  to  secure 
that  some  of  them  shall  effectually  be  saved,  with  whom  shall 
the  choice  be  left  ?  If  it  were  left  with  them,  they  would  all  of 
them  still  choose  death  rather  than  life ;  therefore  it  were  useless 
to  leave  it  with  them.  Besides,  to  leave  the  attribute  of  mercy 
in  the  hand  of  the  criminal  would  be  an  exceedingly  strange 
mode  of  procedure.  Nay,  let  it  be  the  king — let  it  be  the  king 
wto  ^all  say  who  it  is  that  shall  be  spared  in  mercy,  and  who 
26 


302  GOD'S  STIIANGE  CHOICE, 

shall  (lie  according  to  the  rule  of  justice.  The  position  of  God 
as  king,  and  the  position  of  men  as  criminals,  demands  that  sal- 
vation shall  depend  upon  the  will  of  God  ;  and  truly  we  may 
better  leave  it  with  his  will  than  with  our  own,  for  he  is  kinder 
to  us  than  we  are  to  ourselves  ;  he  is  more  full  of  love  to  man 
tlian  man  is  of  love  to  himself.  He  is  justice,  he  is  love  ;  jus- 
tice in  full-orbed  splendor,  love  in  unbounded  might.  Mei'cj  and 
truth  have  met  together  in  him,  and  kissed  each  other;  and  it  i? 
well,  it  is  well,  it  is  best  of  all,  that  the  rule  and  management  of 
salvation  should  be  left  with  him. 

We  will  now  introduce  to  you  a  few  figures  made  use  of  in 
Scripture  in  connection  with  the  work  of  salvation,  and  I  think 
you  will  then  see  that  the  will  must  be  left  wit!i  God.  Salva- 
tion consists,  in  pr.rt,  of  an  adoption.  God  adopts  sinners,  who 
were  heirs  of  wrath,  even  as  others,  into  his  family.  Who  is  to 
have  authority  in  the  matter  of  gracious  adoption  ?  The  chih 
dren  of  wrath  ?  Surely  not ;  and  yet  all  men  are  such.  No  ;  it 
stands  to  nature,  to  reason,  to  common  sen.-ze,  that  none  but  the 
parent  can  have  the  di:£cretion  to  adopt.  As  a  father,  I  have  a 
right,  if  any  desire  to  enter  my  fomily,  to  adopt  oi  to  retuse  to 
adopt  the  persons  in  question  ;  certainly  no  person  can  have  a  right 
to  force  himself  upon  me,  and  say  that  I  shall  be  considered  as 
his  reputed  parent.  The  riglit  must,  I  say,  according  to  reasoo 
and  common  sense,  lie  with  the  parent ;  and  in  adoption  it  :iiut.t 
oe  God  who  chooses  his  own  children. 

The  church,  again,  is  called  a  huilding.  With  whom  does  the 
architecture  of  the  building  rest  ?  With  the  building  ?  With 
th  stones  ?  Do  the  stones  select  themselves  ?  Did  that  stone 
just  yonder  in  the  corner  choose  its  place  ?  or  that  which  is 
buried  there  in  the  foundation,  did  it  select  its  proper  position  ? 
No ;  the  architect  alone  disposes  of  his  chosen  materials  accord- 
ing to  his  own  will ;  and  thu3,  in  building  the  church,  which  is  the 
great  house  of  God,  the  great  Master-Builder  reserves  to  himself 
the  choice  of  the  stones,  and  the  places  which  they  shall  occupy. 

Take  a  yet  more  apparent  case.  The  church  is  called  Christ  s 
hide.      Would  any  man  here  agree  to  have  any  person  forced 


GOD'S  STRAMGE  CHOICE.  303 

Dpon  him  as  his  bride  ?  There  is  not  a  man  among  ns  wlio  wmild 
for  a  single  moment  so  demean  Iiimself  as  to  give  up  his  right 
to  choose  his  own  spouse.  And  shall  Christ  leave  to  hap-hazard 
and  to  human  will  who  his  bride  shall  be  ?  Nay ;  but  my  Lord 
Jesus,  the  Husband  of  the  church,  exercises  the  sovereignij 
which  his  position  permits  him,  and  selecteth  his  own  bride. 

Again :  we  are  said  to  be  members  of  Christ^s  body.  We  are 
told  by  David  that  in  God's  book  "all  our  members  were  writ" 
ten,  which  in  continuance  were  fashioned,  when  as  yet  there  was 
none  of  them."  Thus  every  man's  body  had  its  members  written 
in  God's  book.  Is  Christ's  body  to  be  an  exception  to  this  rule  ? 
Is  that  great  body  of  divine  manhood,  Christ  Jesus,  the  mystical 
Saviour  —  is  that  to  be  fashioned  according  to  the  w^hims  and 
wishes  of  free-will,  while  other  bodies,  vastly  inferior,  have  their 
members  written  in  the  book  of  God  ?  Let  us  not  dream  thus  ; 
it  were  to  talk  idly,  and  not  to  know  the  meaning  of  the  meta- 
phors of  Scripture. 

It  seems  clear  to  me,  according  to  the  figures  and  illustrations 
of  Scripture,  that  the  final  choice  of  the  men  to  be  saved  must 
be  left  with  God.  Is  not  this,  dear  friends,  most  agreeable  to 
your  own  experience  ?  I  am  sure  it  is  to  mine.  There  may  be 
jome  who  hate  this  doctrine,  —  there  are  many  ;  there  may  be 
some  whose  very  mouths  foam  while  they  hear  us  talk  of  the 
sovereignty  of  God  ;  but  I  confess  it  touches  a  secret  spring  in 
my  nature,  which  can  compel  me  to  weep  when  nothing  else  can. 
There  is  a  something  in  my  consciousness  which  seems  to  say, 
**  He  must  have  chosen  me,  for  I  never  could  have  chosen  him.'* 
Determined  to  live  in  sin  was  I ;  prone  to  wander ;  fond  of  m- 
iquity,  dnnVing  down  evil  as  the  ox  drinketh  his  fill  of  water ; 
and  no^,  Aaved  by  grace,  dare  I  for  a  moment  impute  that  salva- 
tion to  my  own  choice  ?  I  do  choose  God  most  freely,  most  fully  : 
but  it  must  be  because  of  some  previous  work  upon  my  heart 
changing  that  heart,  for  my  unrenewed  heart  never  could  hav/^ 
chosen  him.  Beloved,  do  you  not  feel  at  this  very  time  tiiat  tne 
natural  bent  of  your  thoughts  is  away  from  God  ?  If  the  grace 
of  God  were  taken  off  from  you,  what  would  you  be  ?     Are  yor 


804  GOD'S   STRAXGE  CnOICE. 

not  just  like  tho  bow  which  is  bent  when  the  string  keeps  it  so  3 
but  cut  that  string,  and  it  flies  back  to  its  old  place  ?  "Would 
it  not  be  so  with  jou  ?  AVould  jou  not  at  once  return  tc  your 
former  ways  if  the  mighty  grace  of  God  wei-e  withdrawn  from 
you  ?  Well,  then,  you  clearly  see  that  if  even  now  that  you 
are  regenerate  your  corrupt  nature  does  not  choose  God,  much 
loss  could  it  have  chosen  him  when  there  was  no  new  nature  to 
keep  it  in  cheek  and  to  control  it.  My  Master  looks  into  your 
faces,  O  ye  his  people,  and  he  says  :  *'  Ye  have  not  chosen  me, 
but  I  have  chosen  you  ; "  and  we  each  feel  that  he  wakes  the* 
echo  of  our  hearts,  for  we  reply  :  "  Ay,  Lord,  we  have  not  chosen 
thee  in  our  natural  estate,  but  thou  hast  chosen  us,  and  unto  thy 
free  and  sovereign  choice  be  honor  for  ever  and  ever." 

II.  May  we  feel  the  present  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
while  we  dwell  upon  the  election  itself. 

The  Lord  is  about  to  choose  a  people  who  shall  give  honor  to 
the  cross  of  Christ.  They  are  to  be  redeemed  by  precious  blood, 
and  they  are  to  be  in  some  sense  a  worthy  reward  for  the  great 
sufferings  of  Jesus.  Now,  observe  how  strange  is  the  choice  he 
makes.  I  read  with  astonishment,  "  He  hath  not  chosen  many 
wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble."  If 
man  had  received  the  power  of  choosing,  these  are  just  the  per- 
sons who  would  have  been  selected  :  "  But  God  hath  chosen  the 
foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,  and  God  hath 
chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which 
are  mighty  ;  and  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things  which  are 
iespised."  If  man  had  governed  the  selection,  these  are  the 
\'^/y  persons  who  would  have  been  left  out.  The  choice  is  very 
strange  —  very  strange  ;  I  believe  even  in  heaven  it  will  be  the 
subject  of  eternal  wonder,  and,  except  for  the  reasons  given  in 
oar  text,  we  should  have  been  at  a  loss  to  know  why  it  was  that 
with  scorn  divine  he  passed  by  the  palaces  of  haughty  kings,  and 
looked  after  the  base-born  and  the  lowly  to  make  them  the  sub- 
jects  of  his  choice. 

Observe,  that  while  it  is  strange,  it  has  this  peculiarity  about  it, 


GOD'S   STRANGE  CHOICE.  305 

—  it  is  directly  contrary  to  human  choice.  Man  chooses  those  who 
would  be  most  helpful  to  him  :  God  chooses  those  to  whom  he  can 
be  the  most  helpful.  We  select  those  who  may  give  us  the  best 
return  ;  God  frequently  selects  those  who  most  need  his  aid.  If 
I  choose  a  friend,  the  tendency  is  to  him  because  of  a  certain  ser- 
vio^ableness  that  there  may  be  in  him  to  myself:  this  is  the  self- 
ishness of  man  ;  but  God  chooses  his  friend  according  '.o  the  ser- 
viceal)leness  which  he  himself  may  render  to  the  chosen  one.  It 
is  the  very  opposite  way  of  choosing.  We  select  those  who  are 
best  because  they  are  most  deserving ;  he  selects  those  who  are 
worst  because  they  are  least  deserving,  that  so  his  choice  may 
be  more  clearly  seen  to  be  an  act  of  grace  and  not  of  merit.  1 
say  it  is  clearly  contrary  to  man's  way  of  choosing.  Man  select- 
eth  the  most  beautiful,  the  most  lovely ;  God,  on  the  contrary, 
seeing  the  blackness  and  filthiness  of  everything  which  is  called 
lovely,  will  not  select  that  which  is  called  so,  but  takes  that  which 
even  men  discover  to  be  unlovely,  —  makes  it  comely  with  tht 
comeliness  which  he  putteth  upon  it.  Strange  choice  !  Is  this 
the  manner  of  men,  O  Lord  ? 

You  will  observe  that  the  choice  is  very  gracious  ;  oh,  how 
gracious  in  your  case  and  in  mine !  It  is  gracious  even  in  its 
exclusion.  It  does  not  say,  "  Not  any  wise  men,"  it  only  says 
"  Not  many  ; "  so  that  the  great  ones  are  not  altogether  shut  out. 
Grace  is  proclaimed  to  the  prince,  and  in  heaven  there  are  those 
who  on  earth  wore  coronets  and  prayed.  How  blessed  is  the 
condescending  grace  of  the  choice !  it  takes  the  weak  things,  the 
foolish  things.  One  would  have  thought  that  when  God  said 
"  Nay  "  to  the  prince,  he  must  have  said  it  in  order  that  he  might 
be  excused  from  giving  mercy  to  anybody  ;  for  we  are  in  the 
habit  of  saying,  "  Well,  we  have  refused  Mr.  So-and-so,  and  he 
is  a  much  more  important  person  than  you  are  ;  therefore  I  can- 
not give  the  favor  to  you.  Why  !  the  king  asked  me  such  a  fa- 
vor, and  I  would  not  do  it  for  him  ;  do  you  think  I  would  do  it 
for  you  ?  "  But  God  reasons  another  way :  he  passes  by  tlie 
king  on  purpose  that  he  may  meet  with  the  beggar  ;  he  leaves 
the  noble  that  ho  may  lay  hold  upon  the  base,  and  passes  ovei 
26* 


806  GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE. 

the  philosopher  that  he  may  receive  the  fooh  Oh,  this  is  strange^ 
it  is  passing  strange,  it  is  marvellous  ;  let  us  praise  him  for  thij 
wondrous  grace. 

Oh,  how  encouraging  is  this  for  us  this  morning  !  Some  of 
us  cannot  boast  of  any  pedigree  ;  we  have  no  great  learning ;  wo 
have  no  wealth  ;  our  names  are  all  unknown  to  fame  ;  but,  oh ! 
what  a  mercy  !  He  has  been  pleased  to  choose  just  such  foolish 
things  as  we  are,  such  despised  creatures  as  ourselves,  such 
things  that  arc  not  to  bring  to  naught  the  things  that  are. 

Not  to  spend  all  the  time  this  morning  in  simply  pointing  at 
this  strange  choice  and  wondering  at  it,  let  it  suffice  us  to  observe 
that  every  Christian  who  finds  himself  chosen  will  think  his  own 
election  to  be  the  strangest  choice  that  could  have  been  made. 

"  What  was  there  in  you  tliat  could  merit  esteem, 
Or  give  the  Creator  dcliglit? 
'T  was  *  Even  so,  Father! '  you  ever  must  sing, 
*  Because  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight.' " 

« 

III.  We  will  now  turn  to  the  elected.  The  chosen  ones 
are  described  negatively  and  positively. 

They  are  described  negatively.  "  Not  many  wise  men  after 
the  flesh."  Observe,  it  does  not  say,  "Not  many  wise  men  " 
merely,  but  "not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh;  "  because  God 
has  chosen  truly  wise  men,  since  all  his  people  are  made  truly 
wise,  but  it  is  the  "  wise  after  the  flesh  "  that  God  has  not  chosen. 
The  "  sophoi,"  as  the  Greek  calls  them,  the  philosophers,  the 
men  who  pretend  to  wisdom  or  to  love  wisdom,  the  cunning,  the 
metaphysical,  the  great  students,  the  keen  observers,  the  rabbis, 
the  doctors,  the  infallibles,  the  men  who  look  down  with  pro- 
found scorn  upon  the  illiterate  and  call  them  idiots,  treat  them 
as  if  they  were  the  dust  beneath  their  feet,  —  these  are  not  chosen 
in  any  great  number.  Strange,  is  it  not  ?  And  yet  a  good  reason 
is  given.  If  they  were  chosen,  why,  then  they  would  say  :  "  Ah  ! 
liow  much  the  gospel  owes  to  us !  How  our  wisdom  helps  it !  " 
If  the  first  twelve  apostles  had  all  been  twelve  doctors  or  sages, 
everybody  would  have  said:  "Why,  of  course  the  gospel  was 


GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE.  W7 

mighty ;  there  were  the  twelve  picked  wise  men  of  Judea,  or  of 

Greece,  to  support  it."  But,  instead  of  that,  God  looks  round 
the  creeks  and  bays  after  twelve  poor  fishermen,  who  are  as 
ignorant  as  any  he  can  find ;  he  takes  them,  and  they  become  the 
apostles  ;  they  spread  the  gospel,  and  the  gospel  has  the  glory,  and 
not  the  apostles.    The  wise  are  passed  by  in  the  wisdom  of  God. 

Observe  next,  he  says,  "  Not  many  mighty."  The  wise  might 
have  forced  their  way  to  heaven  by  their  wit,  one  would  think  ; 
but  tliere  they  are  with  their  blind  learning,  fumbling  for  the 
latch  of  heaven's  door,  while  the  illiterate  and  simple-minded 
have  already  entered  it.  Blind  wisdom  gropes  in  the  dark,  and, 
like  the  wise  men,  it  goes  to  Jerusalem  in  vain,  while  poor,  hum- 
ble shepherds  go  to  Bethlehem  and  find  Christ  at  once.  Here 
comes  another  order  of  great  men.  The  mighty  men,  the  valiant 
champions,  the  princes,  his  Imperial  Highness,  the  conquerors, 
the  Alexanders,  the  Napoleons,  —  are  not  these  chosen  ?  Surely 
when  the  king  becomes  a  Christian,  he  can  with  his  sword  compel 
others  to  receive  Christ :  why  not  choose  him  ?  "  No,"  says 
the  text,  "  not  many  mighty."  And  you  see  why ;  because,  if 
the  mighty  had  been  chosen,  we  should  all  say,  "  Oh,  yes,  we 
see  why  Christianity  spreads  so :  it  is  the  good  temper  of  its 
sword-blade,  and  the  strength  of  the  arm  that  wields  it."  We 
can  aU  understand  the  progress  of  Mahometanism  during  its 
first  three  centuries.  Men  like  Ali  and  Khaled  were  ready  to 
smite  whole  nations  ;  they  leaped  upon  their  steeds,  waved  their 
Ecymetars  over  their  heads,  and  dashed  against  hundreds,  fearless 
of  the  fight.  And  it  was  only  when  they  met  such  men  as  our 
Bichard  Coeur  de  Lion  that  Mahomtanism  was  put  back  for 
awhile  ;  when  the  sword  met  sword,  then  they  that  took  it  per- 
ished with  it.  Christ  chose  no  warriors :  one  of  his  diseiples 
used  a  sword,  but  it  was  to  very  poor  effect,  for  he  only  cut  off 
a  man's  ear ;  and  Christ  touched  that  and  healed  it,  and  there 
was  an  end  of  poor  Peter's  fighting.  So  that  the  glory  of  the 
Lord's  conquests  does  not  depend  upon  the  mighty ;  God  has 
Cot  chosen  them. 

Then  Le  says,  "  Not  many  noble,"  by  which  he  means  those 


308  GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE. 

with  a  long  pedigree,  descended,  through  a  line  of  prince?,  from 
the  loins  of  kings,  with  blue  blood  in  their  veins.  "  Not  many 
noble,"  for  nobility  might  have  been  thought  to  stamp  the  gospel 
with  its  prestige.  "  Oh,  yes  !  there  is  no  wonder  that  the  gospel 
spreads  when  my  lord  this,  and  the  duke  of  that  bends  to  it." 
Ay,  but  you  see  there  were  few  such  in  the  early  church.  The 
saints  in  the  catacombs  were  poor,  humble  men  and  women ; 
and  it  is  a  very  memorable  fact  that  out  of  all  the  inscriptions  ia 
the  catacombs  of  Rome,  written  by  the  early  Christians,  there  is 
scarcely  one  which  is  properly  spelt ;  but  nearly  all  of  them  are 
as  bad  in  grammar  as  they  are  in  spelling,  —  a  clear  proof  that  they 
were  scratched  there  by  poor,  illiterate,  ignorant  men,  who  were 
then  the  defenders  of  the  faith,  and  the  true  conservators  of  the 
grace  of  God. 

We  have  thus  the  negative  side  —  not  the  wise,  not  the  mighty, 
not  the  noble.  But  now  the  positive  side,  —  and  I  want  your  care- 
ful attention  to  the  expression  used  by  the  apostle.  "  God  hath 
chosen  the  foolish  men  ?  "  —  no,  it  does  not  say  so  —  "  the  foolish 
things  ;  "  as  if  the  Lord's  chosen  were  not  by  nature  good  enough 
to  be  called  men,  but  were  only  "  things  ;  "  as  if  the  world  looked 
down  on  them  with  such  scorn  that  they  did  not  say,  "  Who  are 
these  men  ?  "  but  "  Who  are  these  things  ?  "  Once  or  twice  in 
Luke  you  will  observe  Christ  called  a  "  fellow  ;  "  but  the  word 
"  fellow  *'  is  put  in  italics,  not  being  in  the  original ;  for  the  Greek 

runs,  "  As  for  this ,  we  know  not  whence  he  is."     They  did 

not  say  what  he  was,  did  not  even  call  him  a  "  fellow,"  though 
the  translation  is  very  good,  as  giving  a  correct  idea  to  the  ordi- 
nary reader.  They  seem  to  say  of  Christ,  "As  for  this —  well, 
call  him  a  beast  if  you  like,  a  thing  if  you  like  ;  "  and  so  Paul 
has  put  it  here,  "  the  foolish  things  ; "  not  simply  foolish  men 
whom  the  world  should  consider  to  be  unlearned,  ignorant,  stu- 
pid dolts,  led  by  the  nose  and  easily  deceived  into  beliving  this 
or  that,  but  "  foolish  things,"  which  are  nothing  but  stupidity, 
hath  God  chosen. 

Next,  God  hath  chosen  "  the  weak  things."  Do  observe  the 
word  "  things  "  with  care  ;  they  were  not  merely  weak  raen,  bul 


GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE.  309 

the  world  thought  them  weak  things.  "  Ah !  "  said  Cjesar  in  the 
hall,  if  he  said  anything  at  all  about  it,  "  who  is  King  Jesus  ? 
a  poor  wretch  who  was  hanged  upon  a  tree  !  Who  are  these 
men  that  are  setting  him  up  ?  twelve  poor  fishermen  who  could 
hardly  muster  one  single  talent  of  gold  between  them  !  Who  ia 
this  Paul  who  raves  lo  lustily  about  Christ?  a  tentmakerl 
Who  are  his  followers  ?  a  few  despised  women  who  meet  him  at 
the  water-side !  Is  Paul  a  philosopher  ?  no,  he  was  publicly 
laughed  at  upon  Mars'  Hill ;  they  ccinted  what  he  said  to  be  mere 
babbling."  No  doubt  Ccesar  thought  they  were  altogether  too 
inconsiderable  to  be  worthy  of  his  notice  ;  but  the  "  weak  things  " 
God  hath  chosen. 

Observe  the  next  description :  "  The  base  things."  The  word 
there  signifies  things  without  pedigree,  things  without  a  father, 
things  which  cannot  trace  their  descent ;  no  Sir  Harry,  no  Right 
Honorable  is  akin  to  them ;  their  father  was  a  nobody,  and  their 
mother  was  a  nothing.  Such  were  the  apostles  of  old ;  they 
were  the  base  things  of  this  world,  and  yet  God  chose  them. 

As  if  ihis  were  not  enough,  it  is  written :  "  Things  that  are 
despised,"  —  sneered  at,  persecuted,  hunted  about,  or  treated  with 
what  is  worse,  with  the  indifference  which  is  worse  than  scorn. 
"  They  are  not  worth  notice,  —  inconsiderable  fools,  pass  them 
by  and  let  them  alone,"  —  and  yet  these  had  God  chosen. 

Once  more,  as  if  to  outdo  all,  and  sum  it  up  in  one  word, 
"  things  that  are  not  "  hath  God  chosen.  Nothings,  nonentities. 
"Oh!"  says  the  man  of  the  world,  "yes,  I  did  just  hear  that 
there  were  a  parcel  of  fanatics  of  that  kind."  "  Oh ! "  says 
another,  "  I  never  even  heard  of  them.  I  never  mix  mys'^lf  up 
in  any  way  with  such  a  low-bred,  vulgar  set.  Did  they  ever 
have  a  bishop  among  them  ?  a  Right  Rev.  Father  in  God  ? " 
No,  nothing  of  the  kind,  sir  ;  they  are  foolish,  base,  mean,  de- 
spised ;  the  world,  therefore,  rejects  them.  "  Yet,"  saith  God. 
"  I  choose  them."  They  are  the  very  people  that  he  choo«?es. 
Now,  observe  that  what  was  true  in  Paul's  day  is  true  now,  for 
the  Bible  does  not  change  as  years  revolve  ;  and  in  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  sixty-four  God  chooses  the  things  which  arf 


310  GOD'S  STRA??GE  CHOICK 

despised  just  as  much  as  in  the  year  sixty-four ;  and  he  will  yet 
let  the  world  know  tliat  those  who  are  ridiculed,  styled  fanatics, 
thought  to  be  mad  and  wicked,  are  yet,  after  all,  his  chosen  ones 
destined  for  God  and  for  his  truth  to  rally  the  sacramental  host 
of  the  elect,  and  win  for  God  the  battle  of  the  last  day.  In  this 
we  arc  not  ashamed  to  glory,  that  God  chooseth  the  things  which 
are  despised;  and  we  can  take  our  place  with  the  despised 
people  of  God,  hopeful  to  partake  in  the  election  of  his  sov- 


IV.  To  conclude :  you  have  the  reasons  why  god  has 
CHOSEN  THESE  PEOPLE.  There  are  two  reasons  given:  the 
first  is  the  immediate  reason,  the  second  is  the  ultimate  reason. 

The  first,  or  immediate  reason,  is  contained  in  these  words : 
"  God  hath  chosen  the  fooHsh  things  of  the  world  to  confound 
the  wise  ;  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to 
confound  the  things  which  are  mighty  ;  and  base  things  of  the 
world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and 
things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are." 

Observe,  then,  the  immediate  reason  is,  first  to  confound  the 
wise.  For  one  wise  man  to  confound  another  wise  man  is  re- 
markable ;  for  a  wise  man  to  confound  a  foolish  man  is  very  easy  ; 
but  for  a  foolish  man  to  confound  a  wise  man,  ah  !  this  is  the 
finger  of  God.  You  know  how  it  was  with  the  first  apostles.  A 
philosopher  listened  to  Paul,  and  when  he  had  heard  it  he  said ; 
"  There  is  nothing  in  it !  perfect  foolishness  !  pack  of  stufi"  from 
beginning  to  end  !  No  need  for  us  to  take  the  trouble  to  answer 
it."  Years  rolled  on,  and  when  the  philosopher  was  getting  very 
gray,  that  pestilent  heresy  of  Christianity  was  spreading  every- 
where ;  his  own  daughter  was  converted ;  even  his  wife  used  to 
steal  out  of  a  night  to  the  secret  assembly.  The  philosopher 
could  not  mal^e  it  out.  "  There,"  l.'e  said,  "  I  proved  to  a  dem- 
onstration that  it  was  all  stupidity,  and  yet  these  people  stick  to 
it.  I  answered  all  their  argument?,  did  I  not?  I  not  only  an- 
Bwered  and  confuted,  but  I  clinched  my  arguments  in  such  a  way 
that  I  thought  I  had  put  an  end  to  the  folly  altogether.     Here  J 


GOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE.  3U 

see  it  in  my  own  liouselioU."  Sometimes  the  pliilosopher  had 
to  stand,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  sa:y  ;  "  I  feel  it  in  mj  own 
heart  it  has  beaten  me,  it  has  confounded  me ;  I  could  sjllo-ize 
and  rationalize,  and  beat  poor  Paul,  but  Paul  has  beaten  me. 
What  I  thought  was  folly  has  confounded  my  wisdom."  Within 
a  few  centuries  after  the  death  of  Chrijt,  the  Christian  religion 
had  spread  over  the  civilized  world,  while  Paganism,  which  had 
all  the  philosophy  of  the  east  and  of  the  west  to  back  it  up,  had 
fallen  into  disrepute  and  was  laughed  to  scorn. 

Again,  God  has  chosen  the  weak  things  to  confound  the  mighty. 
*  Oh !  "  said  C^sar, "  we  wdll  soon  root  up  this  Christianity ;  —  off 
with  their  heads  1  '*     Th^  different  governors  hastened  one  after 
another  of  the  disciples  to  death,  but  the  more  they  persecuted 
them  the  more  they  multiplied.     The  pro-'consuls  had  orders  to 
destroy  Christians ;  the  more  they  hunted  them  the  more  Chris- 
tians there  were,  until  at  last  men  pressed  to  the  judgment-seat 
and  asked  to  be  permitted  to  die  for  Christ.     They  invented  tor- 
ments  ;  they  dragged  the  saints  at  the  heels  of  wild  horses  ;  they 
laid  them  upon  red-hot  gridiix)ns ;  thy  pulled  off  the  skin  from 
their  flesh  piece  by  piece;  they  were  sawn  asunder;  they  were 
wrapped  up  in  skins  and  daubed  with  pitch,  and  set  in  Nero's 
gardens  at  night  to  burn  ;  they  were  left  to  rot  in  dun-eons  •  they 
were  made  a  spectacle  to  all  men  in  the  amphitheatre";  the  bears 
hugged  them  to  death,  the  lions  tore  them  to  pieces,  the  wild 
bulls  tossed  them  upon  their  horns  —  and  yet  Christianity  spread 
All  the  swords  of  the  legionaries  which  had  put  to  rout  the  armies 
of  all  nations,  and  had  overcome  the  invincible  Gaul  and  the 
savage  Briton,  could  not  withstand  the  feebleness  of  Christianity  • 
lor  the  w^eakness  of  God  is  mightier  than  men.     If  God  had 
chosen  the  mighty  men,  they  would  have  turned  round  and  .aid 
|-  God  is  beholden  to  us  ;  "  if  he  had  chosen  the  wise,  they  would 
have  said,  -  Our  wisdom  has  done  it ;  "  but  when  he  chooses  the 
taolish  and  weak,  where  art  thou  now,  philosopher  ?     Hath  not 
God  laughed  thee  to  scorn  .?     Where  are  ye  now,  O  sword  and 
Bpear?     O  mighty  man  who  wieldeth  them,  where  art   thou? 
trod  s  weakness  hath  routed  thee. 


812  GODS    STRANGE  CnOICE. 

It  is  said  that  he  cho.?e  the  things  that  are  not  to  bring  U 
naught  the  things  that  are.  This  is  even  more  than  conlounding 
them,  to  bring  them  to  naught.  "  The  things  that  ai'e."  AVhat 
were  thej  in  the  apostle's  days  ?  Jupiter,  seated  upon  his  lofty 
throne,  holds  the  thunderbolt  in  his  hand ;  Saturn  reclined  as  the 
father  of  gods ;  Venus  delighted  her  votaries  with  her  lustful 
pleasures  ;  the  chaste  Diana  sounded  her  horn.  Here  comes 
Paul  with  "  There  is  no  God  but  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom 
he  hath  sent ;  "  he  represents  "  the  things  that  are  not."  So  con- 
temptible is  the  heresy  of  Christianity,  that,  if  a  list  were  made 
out  of  the  religions  of  different  countries,  Christianity  would  have 
been  left  out  of  the  catalogue.  But  see  the  result !  "Where  is 
Jupiter  now?  where  Saturn  ?  where  Venus  and  Diana?  Except 
.as  classic  names  in  the  dictionaries  of  the  learned,  where  are 
they  ?  Who  bows  before  the  shrine  of  Cei-es  in  the  day  of  har- 
vest, or  who  lifts  up  his  prayers  to  Neptune  in  the  hour  of  storm  ? 
Ah  !  they  have  gone  ;  the  things  that  are  have  been  brought  to 
naught  by  the  things  that  are  not. 

Let  us  reflect  that  what  is  true  in  Paul's  day  is  true  to-day. 
One  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-four  shall  see  repeated  the 
miracles  of  the  olden  times  ;  the  things  that  are  shall  be  brought  to 
naught  by  the  things  that  are  not.  See  in  Wiclif 's  time ;  the 
things  that  are  were  the  holy  roods  in  every  church  ;  St.  Wini- 
fred, St.  Thomas  of  Canterbury  are  worshipped  by  all  the  mul- 
titudes of  Englishmen.  There  comes  my  lord  Archbishop  through 
the  street ;  yonder  is  the  Pope  worshipped  by  thousands,  and 
there  is  the  Virgin  adored  of  all.  What  do  I  see  ?  A  solitary 
monk  at  Lutterworth  begins  to  preach  against  the  begging  friars ; 
and  in  preaching  against  them  he  fmds  out  the  truth,  and  begins 
to  preach  that  Christ  is  the  only  ground  of  salvation,  and  that 
they  who  trust  in  him  are  saved.  Well,  it  was  such  a  contemp- 
tible thing,  that  at  first  they  did  not  care  to  persecute  him.  It 
is  true,  at  last  he  was  brought  up  before  his  grace  at  St.  Paul's ; 
but  there  was  a  strong  man,  one  John  o'  Gaunt,  who  came  up 
with  him,  and  said  a  word  or  two  in  his  rough  way,  and  Wic- 
lif was  allowed  to  sit  down ;  and  though  condemned,  he  returns 


UOD'S  STRANGE  CHOICE.  313 

to  his  parish  of  Lutterworth.  "The  thing  that  was  not!"  it 
was  not  worthy  to  be  put  down  by  blood ;  it  would  die  out  of 
itself.  Did  it  die  out  ?  Where  are  your  holy  roods  to-day  ? 
Where  is  St.  Thomas  of  Canterbury  ?  Where  are  St.  Agnes  and 
St.  Winifred  ?  Ask  our  Puseyite  friends,  for  they  alone  can  tell 
you.  True  consorts  of  the  moles  and  of  the  bats,  they  know 
where  the  idols  have  been  cast :  they  seek  to  restore  the  super- 
stitions of  the  past,  but  by  God's  grace  their  task  shall  be  no 
easy  one. 

The  present  system  of  English  superstition,  with  its  water  re- 
generation, its  baptismal  grace,  its  confirmations,  and  its  giving 
of  grace  through  bread  and  wine,  though  it  be  attacked  by  those 
who  are  things  that  are  not,  shall  yet  cease  to  be ;  and  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  the  pure  simple  faith  that  no  man  is  a  priest 
distinctively  above  his  fellows,  but  that  every  Christian  is  a  priest 
unto  God  ;  and  the  pure  truth  that  no  water  can  necessarily  bring 
the  Spirit  of  God  with  it,  and  that  no  outward  forms  and  rites 
have  any  virtue  in  them  apart  from  the  faith  of  those  who  do 
receive  them  ;  these  yet,  backed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  shall  bring 
to  naught  the  things  that  are.  Herein  we  fall  back  upon  the 
strength  of  God.  I  would  not  have  God's  champions  stronger. 
Brethi-en,  were  th^y  stronger  they  would  take  glory  to  them- 
selves. Let  them  be  weak,  and  let  them  be  few,  and  let  them  be 
despised  ;  their  fewness,  their  poverty,  their  weakness,  shall  make 
the  shout  of  praise  unto  the  eternal  Conqueror  yet  more  loud, 
and  the  music  shall  be  undivided ;  there  shall  only  be  this  refrain, 
"  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory  for 
thy  truth's  sake." 

This,  then,  is  God's  immediate  object  in  choosing  foolish 
things,  weak  things,  things  that  are  not,  to  confound  the  mighty. 
But  his  ultimate  reason  is,  "  that  no  Jlesh  may  glory  in  his  pres- 
ences I  want  you  to  notice  that  last  sentence,  and  I  have  done. 
He  does  not  say  "  that  no  man ; "  no,  the  text  is  in  no  humor 
to  please  anybody ;  it  says,  "  that  no  Jlesh."  What  a  word  !  what 
a  word,  I  say !  Here  are  Solon  and  Socrates,  the  wise  men, 
God  points  at  them  with  his  finger,  and  calls  them  "  flesh."  It 
27 


814  GOD'S   STRANGE  CHOICE. 

is  sold  in  tlie  shambles,  is  it  not  ?  Dogs  tear  it,  worms  eat  it,  — « 
nothing  but  flesh.  Tliere  is  Csesar,  with  his  imperial  purple  cast 
about  him ;  and  as  he  stands  erect,  the  mighty  Iraperator,  how 
the  Prajtorian  guards  unsheath  their  swords  and  shout,  "  Great 
is  the  Emperor  !  long  may  he  live  ! "  "  Fleshy''  saith  God's  Word 
—  ^^  flesh''  Here  they  come  tramping  on,  hundreds  in  a  line,  the 
strong  legionaries  of  Rome,  —  who  can  stand  against  the  bosses  of 
their  bucklers  ?  "  Flesh,"  saith  the  word  —  "  flesh."  Ifere  aro 
men  whose  sires  were  of  royal  lineage  and  grandsires  of  imperial 
rank,  and  they  can  trace  back  the  long  line  of  honor.  "  Flesh," 
says  God,  "  flesh  —  nothing  but  flesh ;  "  dogs*  meat,  worms'  meat, 
when  God  wills  it.  "  That  no  flesh  may  glory  in  his  presence." 
Do  you  see,  then,  God  puts  this  stamp  upon  us  all  that  we  are 
nothing  but  flesh  ;  and"  he  chooses  the  poorest  fleshy  aiid  the  most 
foolish  flesh,  and  the  weakest  flesh,  that  all  the  other  flesh  that  is 
only  flesh  and  only  grass  may  see  that  God  pours  contempt  on 
it,  and  will  have  no  flesh  glory  in  his  presence. 

Now,  what  is  your  spirit  this  morning  towards  this  subject? 
Do  you  kick  at  it  ?  Do  you  say  you  cannot  bear  it  ?  I  am 
afraid  you  want  to  glory  in  God's  presence.  Your  views  of 
things  and  God's  views  of  things  difiTer,  and  therefore  you  need 
to  have  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit. 

But,  on  the  contrary,  do  you  say  this  morning,  **  I  have  nothing 
to  boast  of ;  I  would  not  glory  in  thy  presence,  but  I  would  lie  in 
the  very  dust  and  say,  *  Do  with  me  as  thou  wilt.' "  Sinner,  do 
you  feel  that  you  are  nothing  but  flesh,  and  sinful  flesh  ?  Are  ye 
so  broken  before  God  that  you  feel,  let  him  do  as  he  will  with 
you,  he  will  be  just,  and  you  can  only  appeal  to  his  sovereign 
mercy  ?  Then  God  and  you  are  one  ;  you  are  reconciled.  I  can 
see  that  you  are  reconciled.  When  God  and  you  are  agreed  that 
God  should  reign,  then  God  is  agreed  that  you  should  live. 
Sinner,  touch  the  sceptre  of  his  gi'ace.  Jesus  crucifled  stands 
before  you  now,  and  bids  you  look  to  him  oud  live.  That  you 
are  bidden  to  look  is  an  instance  of  mighty  grace,  and  that  you 
are  enabled  to  look  this  morning  will  be  a  wonder  of  divii\e  love 


GOD'S   STIIANGK   CHOICE.  "  3 15 

for  which  you  will  have  to  bless  huii  ia  time  and  etei'Litj.  And 
now,  may  that  God  whose  name  we  have  sought  to  honor  this 
morning,  bless  these  stammering  words  of  ours  for  Jesus'  sake. 
Amen 


SERMON  XVII. 


WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

"  GOD,  THAT  CAITNOT  LIH."  —  TitUS  1.  2. 

TRUTii  Dn  le  reigned  supreme  upon  our  globe,  and  then  earth 
"^ds  Parat  Jse.  Man  knew  no  sorrow  while  he  was  ignorant  of 
falsehood.  The  Father  of  Lies  invaded  the  garden  of  bliss,  and 
with  one  foul  lie  he  blighted  Eden  into  a  wilderness,  and  made 
man  a  traitor  to  his  God.  Cunningly  he  handled  the  glittering 
falsehood,  and  made  it  dazzle  in  the  woman's  eyes  —  "  God  doth 
know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  then  your  eyes  shall  be 
opened,  and  yvj  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil."  Proud 
ambition  rode  upon  that  lie  as  a  conqueror  in  his  chariot,  and  the 
city  of  Mansoul  opened  its  gates  to  welcome  the  fascinating  enemy. 
As  it  was  a  lie  which  first  subjugated  the  world  to  Satan's  influ- 
ences, so  it  is  by  lies  that  he  secures  his  throne.  Among  tho 
heathen  his  kingdom  is  quiet  and  secure,  because  the  minds  of 
the  people  are  deluded  with  a  false  mythology.  The  domains 
of  Mahomet  and  the  Pope  are  equally  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  and 
his  reign  is  undisturbed  ;  for  human  merit,  priestly  efficacy,  and  a 
thousand  other  deceptions  buttress  his  throne.  The  darkness  of 
ignorance,  the  dungeons  of  falsehood,  and  the  chains  of  supersti- 
tion, are  the  main  reliance  of  that  monster  who  oppresses  all  the 
nations  with  his  infernal  tyranny. 

Since  by  the  lie  Satan  new  holds  the  world  and  maintains  his 
power,  he  everywhere  encourages  lies,  and  aidi  their  propaga 
tion.     Look  about  you,  and  see  what  a  prolific  family  falsehood 
has  I     The  children  of  the  untrue  are  as  many  as  the  frogs  of 


WIUT  GOD  CA>r>;OT  DO.  811 

Ejrypt,  and,  like  those  plagues,  they  intrude  into  every  chamber. 
The  slime  of  falsehood  may  be  seen  upon  most  things,  both  in 
secular  and  religious  life.  You  have  lying  news  and  garbled  re- 
j)orts  in  print ;  and  as  for  the  flying  gossip  of  the  tongue,  if  it 
touches  the  characters  of  good  men,  beware  of  believing  a  word 
it  utters.  If  you  would  not  have  complicity  with  those  who  make 
the  lie,  be  not  hasty  to  entertain  it.  From  the  high  places  of 
tlie  earth  falsehood  is  not  excluded.  The  untruth  glides  right 
royally  from  the  kingly  tongue,  but  is  as  much  a  lie  as  if  the 
ragged  mendicant  had  blurted  it  forth  with  low-lived  oaths  and 
curses.  What  is  diplomacy,  for  the  most  part  ?  Is  it  not  "  the 
art  of  lying  ?  "  Was  not  he  thought  to  be  the  best  politician  who 
used  language  to  conceal  his  thoughts  ?  In  how  many  a  confer- 
ence have  the  plenipotentiaries  labored  which  could  overreach, 
dissimulate,  and  intrigue  to  the  greatest  degree  ?  In  the  com- 
merce of  courts,  who  knows  not  that  flatteries  and  lies  are  the 
most  abundant  commodities  ?  The  art  of  king-craft,  as  practised 
by  the  most  high  and  mighty  Prince  James,  whose  name  dis- 
honors our  English  Bible,  was  only  and  simply  the  science  of 
lying  in  the  neatest  possible  manner.  In  these  modern  times, 
the  difference  between  the  promises  at  the  hustings  and  the  per- 
formances in  the  House  of  Commons,  joroves  that  the  lie  is  still 
commonly  patronized.  Falsehood  is  everywhere.  It  is  enter- 
tained both  by  the  lowest  and  the  highest ;  it  permeates  all  soci- 
ety ;  it  has  ruined  the  whole  of  our  race,  and  so  defiled  the 
entire  world,  that  upright  men  exclaim,  "  Woe  is  me,  that  I  so- 
journ in  Mesech,  that  I  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Kedar  !  "  In  the 
so-called  religious  w^orld,  which  should  be  as  the  holy  of  holies, 
here,  too,  the  lie  has  insinuated  itself.  Of  old  there  were  proph- 
ets who  prophesied  lies,  and  dreamers  of  false  dreams ;  and 
there  were  others  who  spoke  the  word  of  God  with  such  bated 
breath,  and  after  such  a  fashion,  that  it  was  no  longer  the  truth 
as  it  came  from  God,  but  truth  alloyed  with  human  falsehood.  It 
is  so  to-day.  There  are  those  wearing  the  vestments  of  God's 
priests  who  do  not  hesitate  to  profess  what  they  do  not  believe. 
Such  men  are  the  priests  of  hell.  To  wear  a  bishop's  mitre,  and 
27* 


318  WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

tea(^li  infidelity  —  how  shall  I  stigmatize  it?  —  it  is  notliing  \esji 
tlian  detestable  hypocrisy  and  robbery.  And  wliat  shall  1  say 
of  men  of  all  creeds,  all  subscribing  to  the  same  articles  and 
catechism,  when  all  the  world  knows  they  cannot  all  honestly 
believe  the  same  thing,  and  yet  differ  as  much  from  one  another 
C6  light  from  darkness  ?  What  shall  I  say  lut  that  shame  covers 
njy  face  that  there  should  be  so  many  ministers  of  God  who  are 
untrue  to  their  convictions,  and  continue  to  do  and  say  what  they 
feel  to  be  unscriptural  ?  In  other  quarters,  philosophy  is  believed 
and  Christianity  professed ;  the  traditions  of  men  are  put  in  the 
V^ace  of  God's  truth.  The  prophets  prophesy  lies,  and  the  peo- 
ple love  to  have  it  so.  Brethren,  we  have  everywhere  to  battle 
with  falsehood  ;  and  if  we  are  to  bless  the  world,  we  must  confront 
it  with  sturdy  face  and  zealous  spirit.  God's  purpose  is  to  drive 
tlie  lie  out  of  the  world,  and  be  this  i/our  purpose  and  mine. 
His  Holy  Spirit  has  undertaken  to  drive  falsehood  out  of  our 
hearts ;  be  this  our  determination,  in  his  strength,  that  it  shall  be 
cut  up  root  and  branch,  and  utterly  consumed.  Then  let  us  walk 
in  the  truth ;  "  buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not ; "  hold  fast  the 
truth,  speak  the  truth  in  love,  and  act  the  truth  in  all  our  deeds  ; 
for  so  shall  we  be  known  to  be  the  children  of  that  God  of  whom 
our  text  asserts  that  he  is  "  God,  that  cannot  lie."  After  wan- 
dering over  the  sandy  desert  of  deceit,  how  pleasant  is  it  to 
reach  our  text,  and  feel  that  one  spot  at  least  is  verdant  with 
eternal  truth  !     Blessed  be  thou,  O  God,  for  thou  canst  not  lie. 

We  will  use  our  text  in  the  following  manner  this  morning : 
First,  while  we  do  not  attempt  to  prove  it,  we  will  remind  you  of 
a  few  things  which  may  confirm  your  confidence  that  God  can- 
not  lie,  so  that  our  opening  remarks  shall  be  upon  the  truth  of 
the  text;  then,  secondly,  we  will  speak  upon  the  breadth  of  the 
text,  endeavoring  to  show  that  we  must  give  no  narrow  interpre- 
tation to  the  words  before  us,  but  must  receive  them  with  an 
extent  of  meaning  not  usual  to  the  expression  ;  and  then,  thirdly, 
we  will  try  to  use  the  text  for  our  own  imj^rovement,  arguing 
I'rom  it  that  if  God  cannot  lie  he  ought  to  receive  our  loving 
conlidence. 


WIIAT  GOD  CAKXOT  DO.  318 

T.  First,  (hcK,  let  us  commune  togetlier  awhile  conct^mlng 
THE  TRCTU  OF  THE  TEXT, — not,  as  we  liave  said,  to  prove  if, 
because  we  all  believe  it,,  but  to  confirm  our  confidence  thereon 

Methinks  we  shall  feel  assured  that  God  cannot  lie  when  we 
remember  that  he  is  not  subject  to  those  infirmities  which  lead  us 
into  falsehood.  Lord  Bacon  has  said:  "There  are  three  parts  in 
truth :  first,  the  inquiry,  which  is  the  wooing  of  it  ;  secondly, 
the  knowledge  of  it,  which  is  the  presence  of  it ;  and,  thirdly,  the 
belief,  which  is  the  enjoyment  of  it."  In  each  of  these  three 
points,  by  reason  of  infirmity,  men  fail  to  be  perfectly  true.  In 
the  search  after  truth,  our  moral  eye  is  not  altogether  clear,  and 
therefore  we  fail  to  see  what  we  love  not ;  we  do  not  follow  truth 
in  a  straight  line,  but  are  very  liable  to  turn  aside  to  the  right 
hand  or  to  the  left,  either  to  obey  our  prejudices  or  advance  our 
profit.  "  Truth  lies  in  a  well,"  said  the  old  philosopher.  Many 
go  down  into  that  well  to  find  truth,  but,  looking  into  the  water, 
they  see  their  own  faces,  and  become  so  desperately  enamored 
of  their  own  beauty  that  they  forget  poor  truth,  or  dream  that 
she  is  the  counterpart  of  themselves.  Now,  the  great  God  can- 
not be  liable  to  this  error,  because  there  is  no  discovery  of  truth 
with  him.  He  needeth  not  to  search  anything  out,  for  "all 
things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do."  When,  in  Scripture,  that  term  is  sometimes  used,  — 
"  Shall  not  God  search  this  out  ?  "  when  we  hear  him  spoken  of 
BS  "  searching  the  heart  and  trying  the  reins  of  the  children  of 
men," —  it  is  not  because  he  is  not  perfectly  acquainted  with  all 
things,  but  only  to  set  forth  the  certainty  and  accuracy  of  divine 
knowledge.  God  having  no  need  to  search,  or,  if  he  had,  having 
nothing  in  him  which  should  lead  him  to  make  a  dishonest  search, 
therefore  he  doth  not  lie.  When  we  have  searched  out  the 
truth,  there  is  the  knowing  of  it ;  and  here  the  falsehood  gets  a 
footing  m  the  form  of  a  sin  of  omission,  for  we  often  refuse  to 
know  all  that  we  might  know.  It  would  be  inconvenientc.  per- 
haps^ for  us  to  be  too  well  acquainted  with  certain  arguments,  for 
then  our  prejudices  must  be  given  up,  ahd  therefore  we  close 
our  ejjs  to  them  for  feai'  of  knowing  the  truth.     Do  not  man^ 


320  WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

men  leave  passages  of  Scripture  altogether  unread  because  they 
have  no  wish  to  receive  the  doctrines  which  are  taught  therein  ? 
Every  time  you  refuse  to  give  a  hearing  to  God's  truth,  you  do 
in  effect  lie ;  because  you  prefer  not  to  know  the  truth,  which  is 
really  to  prefer  to  hold  error.  Now,  nothing  of  this  kind  can  ever 
happen  with  our  only  wise  God.  He  knows  all  truth,  seeing  it  all 
at  a  glance,  and  retaining  it  ever  in  his  mind.  In  nothing  is  he 
ignorant,  either  wilfully  or  otherwise.  He  receives  truth  as  his 
own  beloved,  and  when  the  world  casts  her  out,  she  finds  a  happy 
shelter  beneath  his  shield.  We  are  quite  clear  that  we  fre- 
quently fall  into  the  lie  through  a  defect  in  our  helieving,  for  we 
sometimes  know  more  than  we  care  to  believe.  Truth  is  grasped 
by  the  understanding,  but  thrust  out  by  the  affections.  TVe  know 
iier  as  Peter  knew  his  Lord,  and  yet  deny  it  after  the  same  fash- 
ion &s  that  disciple  did  his  Master.  Moreover,  through  weak- 
ness, we  are  led  to  doubt  what  we  know  to  be  God's  truth,  an  i 
eveu  to  speak  unadvisedly  with  our  lips.  Now,  this  can  never 
occur  with  God,  since  God  is  one,  and  is  not  to  be  divided  into 
parts  and  passions,  and  his  tongue  can  never  be  diverse  from  his 
heart.  God's  tongue  is  his  heart,  and  -God's  heart  is  his  hand. 
God  is  one.  You  and  I  are  such  that  we  can  know  in  the  heart, 
and  yet  with  the  tongue  deny  ;  but  God  is  one  and  indivisible  ; 
God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all ;  with  him  is  no 
variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning. 

Then,  again,  the  scriptural  idea  of  God  forbids  that  he  should 
lie.  Just  review  your  thoughts  about  God,  if  you  can.  What 
idea  have  you  formed  of  him  ?  If  you  have  read  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, and  have  gotten  the  slightest  shadow  of  an  idea  of  God,  I 
think  you  will  see  that  it  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  thrice 
Holy  One,  whose  kingdom  is  over  all,  that  he  should  lie.  Admit 
the  very  possibility  of  his  speaking  an  untruth,  and  to  the  Chris- 
tian there  would  be  no  God  at  all.  The  depraved  mind  of  the 
heathen  may  imagine  a  monster  to  be  a  god  who  can  live  in 
adultery,  and  in  theft,  and  Sa  lying,  —  for  such  the  gods  of  the 
Hindoos  are  described  as  being,  —  but  the  enlightened  mind  of 
the  Christian  can  conceive  no   such   thing.     The  very  word 


WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO.  321 

"God''  comprehendeth  everything  which  is  good  and  srreat. 
Admit  the  lie,  and  to  us  at  once  there  would  bo  nothing  but  the 
black  darkness  of  Atheism  forever.  I  could  neither  love,  wor 
Bliip,  nor  obey  a  lying  God. 

Again :  we  all  know  that  God  is  too  wise  to  lie.  Falsehood  is 
the  expedient  of  a  fool.  It  is  only  a  short-sighted  man  who  lies. 
For  some  present  ad  van/ age,  the  poor  creature,  who  cannot  see 
the  end  as  well  as  the  beginning,  states  that  which  is  not ;  but  no 
wise  man  who  can  look  far  into  the  future  ever  thinks  a  lie  to  be 
profitable  ;  he  knows  that  truth  may  suffer  loss  at  first,  but  that 
ill  the  long  run  she  is  ahvays  successful.  He  endorses  that 
worldly-wise  proverb,  that  "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy  "  after 
all ;  and  the  man,  I  say,  who  has  anything  like  foresight,  or  judg- 
ment, or  wisdom,  prefers  always  the  straight  line  to  the  curve, 
and  goes  directly  to  the  mark,  believing  that  this  h  in  the  end  the 
best.  Do  you  suppose  that  God,  who  must  know  this  with  an 
intensity  of  knowledge  infinitely  greater  than  ours,  will  choose 
the  policy  of  the  witless  knave  ?  Shall  God,  only  wise,  who 
seeth  the  end  from  the  beginning,  act  as  only  brainless  fools  will 
choose  to  behave  themselves  ?  Oh  !  it  cannot  be,  my  brethren. 
God,  the  all-wise,  must  also  be  all-true. 

And  the  lie,  again,  is  the  method  of  the  little  and  the  htean. 
You  know  that  a  great  man  does  not  lie ;  a  good  man  can  never 
be  false.  Put  goodness  and  greatness  together,  and  a  lie  is  al- 
together incongruous  to  the  character.  Now,  God  is  too  great 
to  need  the  lie,  and  too  good  to  wish  to  do  such  a  thing  ;  both  liis 
greatness  and  his  goodness  repel  the  thought. 

My  dear  friends,  what  motive  could  God  have  for  lying  ? 
When  a  man  lies,  it  is  that  he  may  gain  something ;  but  '•  the 
cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  "  are  God's,  and  all  the  beasts  of  tlie 
forest,  and  all  the  flocks  of  the  meadows.  He  says,  "  If  I  were 
hungry  I  would  not  tell  thee."  Mines  of  inexhaustible  riches 
are  his,  anl  treasures  of  infinite  power  and  wisdom.  He  cannot 
gain  aught  by  untruth,  for  "the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  tlie 
fulness  thereof;"  wherefore,  then,  should  he  lie?  Men  are 
false  ofttimes  to  wm  applause.     See  how  the  sycophant  cringes 


352  WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

to  the  tyrant's  foot,  and  spawns  his  villanies!  But  God  needs  no 
honor  and  no  fame,  especially  from  the  wicked.  To  him  it  were 
the  greatest  disgust  of  his  righteous  soul  to  be  loved  by  unholy 
creatures.  His  glory  is  great  enough,  even  if  there  were  no 
creatures ;  his  own  self-contained  glory  is  such  that  if  there  were 
no  eye  to  see  it,  and  no  ear  to  hear  it,  he  would  be  infinitely 
glorious.  He  asketh  nothing  —  no  respect  and  no  honor  of  man, 
ap.d  therefore  hath  he  no  need  to  stoop  to  the  lie  to  gain  it. 
And  of  whom,  again,  could  he  be  afraid  ?  Men  will  sometimes, 
under  the  impulse  of  fear,  keep  back  or  even  contradict  the 
truth,  but  can  fear  ever  enter  into  the  heart  of  the  eternal  God  ? 
He  looketh  down  upon  all  nations  who  are  in  rebellion  against 
him,  and  he  doth  not  even  care  to  rise  to  put  them  down.  "  He 
that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  :  the  Lord  shall  have  them 
in  derision  ! "  Are  not  the  chariots  of  the  Lord  twenty  thou- 
sand, even  thousands  of  angels  ?  Even  these  arc  but  as  a  drop 
of  a  bucket,  when  compared  with  the  deep  and  infinite  sea  of 
his  own  power.  Who,  then,  shall  think  that  Jehovah  needs  to 
be  afraid  ?  "  Fear  "  and  "  Jehovah  "  are  two  words  which  can- 
not meet  together.  Therefore,  since  there  can  be  no  motive 
whatever  which  should  possibly  lead  God  to  lie,  we  feel  well 
assured  that  the  declaration  of  Paul  is  most  certainly  true  — 
"  God,  that  cannot  lie." 

Moreover,  dear  friends,  we  may  add  to  all  this  the  experience 
of  men  with  regard  to  God.  It  has  been  evident  enough  in  all 
ages  that  God  cannot  lie.  He  did  not  lie  when  Adam  fell.  It 
seemed  a  strange  thing  that,  after  all  the  skill  and  labor  which 
had  been  spent  in  making  such  a  world  as  this,  so  fair  and  beau* 
tiful,  God  should  resign  it  to  the  dominion  of  Satan,  and  drive 
the  man  whom  he  had  made  in  his  own  image  out  of  his  hoai(?, 
his  Eden,  to  labor  in  sweat  and  toil  and  suffering,  until  he  came 
to  his  grave.  But  God  did  it,  and  the  fiery  sword  at  the  gate 
of  Eden  was  proof  that  God  could  not  and  would  not  lie.  He 
might  come  to  Adam,  and  bemoan  himself,  crying,  "  Adam,  where 
ai-t  thou  ?  "  as  if  he  pitied  him,  and  would,  if  it  had  been  possible. 
ha^'c  spared  the  stroke ;  but  still  it  must  be  done,  and  Eden  \i 


WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO.  823 

blasted,  and  Adam  become?  a  wanderer  upon  the  fruitless  earth. 
Then,  afterwards,  —  to  quote  a  notable  instance  of  God's  faithful- 
ness, —  when  the  flood  swept  away  the  race  of  men,  and  Noah 
/came  forth  the  heritor  of  a  new  covenant,  we  have  clear  proof 
that  God  cannot  lie.  No  flood  has  ever  destroyed  the  earth 
since  then.  Partial  floods  there  have  been,  and  parts  of  prov- 
inces have  been  inundated  ;  but  no  flood  has  ever  come  upon  tlie 
earth  of  such  a  character  as  that  which  Noah  saw :  hence  the 
rainbow,  every  time  it  is  painted  upon  the  cloud,  is  an  assurance 
to  us  that  God  cannot  lie.  Then  he  made  an  oath  with  Abra- 
ham that  he  should  have  a  son,  and  that  his  seed  should  become 
possessors  of  all  the  land  in  which  the  patriarch  had  sojourned. 
Did  not  that  come  true  ?  They  waited  in  Egypt  two  hundred 
years ;  they  smarted  under  the  tyrant's  lash ;  they  lay  among 
the  pots  ;  and  yet,  after  all,  with  a  high  hand  and  with  an  out- 
stretched arm  he  brought  forth  his  people,  led  them  through  the 
wilderness,  and  divided  Canaan  by  lot  to  them,  having  driven 
out  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  before  them.  Since  that  time  he 
made  his  covenant  with  David ;  and  how  fast  has  that  stood  I 
All  the  threatenings  which  he  has  uttered  against  the  enemies 
of  Israel,  how  surely  have  they  been  fulfilled  !  Last  of  all,  and 
best  of  all,  wlien  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  did  not  God  send 
forth  his  own  Son,  born  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law  ?  Did 
he  not,  according  to  his  ancient  promise,  lay  upon  him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all?  Were  not  the  incarnation  and  death  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  the  grandest  proof  of  the  truthfulness  of  God  which  could 
be  afforded  ?  His  own  Son  must  leave  heaven  emptied  of  its 
glory,  must  be  given  up  to  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men, 
must  be  nailed  to  the  accursed  wood,  and  be  forsaken  in  the 
hour  of  his  bitterest  grief:  herein  is  truth  indeed.  I  say,  ifthia 
must  be  according  to  the  promise,  and  if  this  was  according  to 
the  fact,  then  we  have  the  clearest  and  the  surest  evidence  that 
God  cannot  by  any  possibility  be  false  to  his  own  word.  Rightly 
hath  he  earned  the  title  which  his  nature  claims,  "  God,  that 
cannot  lie."  May  I  not  add,  as  another  argument,  that  you  have 
found  him  true  ?     You  have  been  to  him,  dear  friends,  in  manj 


324  TVffAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

times  of  trial ;  you  have  taken  his  promise  and  laid  it  before  his 
mercy-seat :  what  say  you,  has  he  ever  broken  liis  promise  ? 
You  have  been  through  the  floods  —  did  he  leave  you  ?  Yon 
have  ])assed  through  the  fires  —  were  you  burned  ?  You  have 
cried  to  him  in  trouble  —  did  he  fail  to  deliver  you  ?  O  ye 
poor  and  needy  ones,  ye  have  been  brought  very  low,  but  has  he 
not  been  your  helper  ?  You  have  passed  hard  by  the  gates  of 
the  grave,  and  hell  has  opened  its  horrid  jaws  to  swallow  you 
uj>,  but  are  you  not  to-day  the  living  monuments  of  the  fidelity 
ot'  God  to  his  promise,  and  the  veracity  of  every  word  of  the 
Most  High  God  ?  Let  these  things,  then,  refresh  your  memories, 
that  you  may  the  more  confidently  know  that  he  is  "  God,  that 
cannot  lie." 

II.     Let  us  pass  on  to  look  at  the  breadth  of  meaning  in 

THE  TEXT. 

When  we  are  told  in  Scripture  that  God  cannot  lie,  there  ia 
usually  associated  with  the  idea  the  thought  of  immutahility. 
As,  for  instance :  "  He  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  lie,  nor  the 
son  of  man  that  he  should  repent."  The  word  "  lie  "  here  in- 
cludes, beyond  its  ordinary  meaning,  the  thought  of  change ;  so 
that  when  we  read  that  God  cannot  lie,  we  understand  by  it,  not 
only  that  he  cannot  say  what  is  untrue,  but  that,  having  said 
something  which  is  true,  he  never  changes  from  it,  and  does  not 
by  any  possibility  alter  his  purpose  or  retract  his  word.  This  is 
very  consolatory  to  the  Christian,  that  whatever  God  has  said 
in  the  divine  purpose  is  never  changed.  The  decrees  of  God 
were  not  written  upon  sand,  but  upon  the  eternal  brass  ol  liia 
unchangeable  nature.  We  may  truly  say  of  the  sealed  book  of 
the  decrees,  "  Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?  hath  he  pur- 
posed; and  shall  it  not  come  to  pass  ?  '*  We  read  in  Scripture 
of  several  instances  where  God  apparently  changed;  but  I  think 
the  observation  of  the  old  Puritan  explains  all  these.  He  says, 
"  God  may  will  a  change,  but  he  cannot  change  his  will."  Those 
changes  of  operation  which  we  sometimes  read  of  in  Scripture 
did  not  involve  any  change  in  the  divine  purpose.      God,  for 


WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO.  323 

instance,  sent  to  warn  Ilezekiah  that  according  to  the  common 
course  of  nature  he  must  die,  and  yet  afterwards  fifteen  years 
were  added  to  his  life,  God's  purpose  having  been  all  along  that 
Hezekiah  should  li  ze  till  the  end  of  the  fifteen  years  ;  but  still 
his  purpose  equally  included  that  he  should  be  brought  so  near 
to  the  gates  of  death,  that  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  he 
must  die  ;  and  then  that  the  miracle  should  come  in  as  still  in 
part  of  the  purpose,  that  Ilezekiah  might  be  cured  in  a  super- 
natural manner,  and  be  made  to  live  nearer  to  his  God  in  conse- 
quence. God  wills  a  change,  but  he  never  changes  his  will; 
and  when  the  last  great  day  shall  come,  you  and  I  shall  see  ho^ 
everything  happened  according  to  that  hidden  roll  wherein  God 
had  written  with  his  own  wise  finger  every  thought  which  man 
should  think,  every  word  which  he  should  utter,  and  every  deed 
which  he  should  do.  Just  as  it  was  in  the  book  of  decree,  so 
shall  it  transpire  m  the  roll  of  human  history. 

God  never  changes,  then,  as  to  his  purpose ;  and  here  is  our 
comfort.  If  he  has  determined  to  save  us,  —  and  we  know  he  has, 
for  all  who  believe  in  him  are  his  elect,  —  then  we  shall  be  saved. 
Heaven  shall  never  by  any  possibility  be  defeated  by  hell.  Hell 
and  earth  may  combine  together  to  destroy  a  soul  wliich  rests 
upon  Christ,  but  while  God's  decree  standeth  fast  and  firm,  that 
chosen  soul  is  safe  ;  and  since  that  decree  never  can  be  removed, 
let  us  take  confidence  and  rejoice.  No  promise  has  ever  been 
altered,  and  no  threatening  either.  Still  is  his  promise  sure. 
"  I  have  not  said  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  seek  ye  my  face  in 
vain."  No  new  decrees  have  been  passed,  repealing  the  past. 
We  can  never  say  of  God's  Book,  as  we  can  of  old  law-books,  that 
such  and  such  an  act  is  obsolete.  There  is  no  obsolete  statute  in 
God's  Book.  There  stand  promises,  as  fresh,  as  new,  as  vigor- 
ous, and  as  forceful  to-day,  as  when  they  first  dropped  from  the 
mouth  of  God.  The  words,  then,  "  God,  that  cannot  he,"  include 
the  very  gracious  and  precious  doctrine  that  he  cannot  by  any 
possibility  change. 

But  we  must  not,  while  talking  in  this  manner,  forget  the 
primary  meaning,  that  he  cannot  be  fake  in  his  thoughts,  words, 
28 


326  Tf  JAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

or  actions.  There  is  no  shadow  of  a  lie  upon  any  tiling  wbich 
God  thinks,  or  speaks,  or  does.  lie  cannot  lie  in  his  prophecies. 
How  solemnly  true  have  they  been  !  Ask  the  wastes  of  Nin- 
eveh ;  turn  to  the  mounds  of  Babylon ;  let  the  traveller  speak 
concerning  Idumea  and  Petra ;  turn  even  to  the  rock  of  Sidon, 
and  to  thy  land,  O  Immanuel.  We  may  boldly  ask  the  traveller, 
"  Hath  he  said,  and  hath  he  not  done  it  ?  Have  his  words  fallen 
to  the  ground  ?  Has  God's  curse  been  an  idle  word  ?  "  No,  not 
in  one  single  case.  All  the  words  of  the  Lord  are  sure.  The 
prophecies  will  be  as  true  as  they  have  been,  and  the  Book  of 
Eevelation,  though  we  may  not  comprehend  it  to-day,  will  doubt- 
less be  fulfilled  in  every  stroke  and  in  every  line,  and  we  shall 
marvel  how  it  was  that  we  did  not  know  its  meaning ;  but  at 
present  it  is  enough  for  us  to  know  its  truth  —  its  meaning  shall 
only  be  learned  as  the  events  explain  the  prophecy. 

As  God  is  true  in  his  prophecies,  so  is  he  faithful  to  his  prom.' 
ises.  Have  you  and  I,  dear  friends,  a  confidence  in  these  ?  If 
so,  let  us  try  them  this  morning.  Sinner,  weeping  and  bemoan- 
ing thyself,  God  will  forgive  thee  thy  sin  if  thou  believest  in 
Jesus.  If  thou  wilt  confess  that  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgivo 
then,  he  hath  promised  so  to  do,  and  he  cannot  lie.  Christian, 
if  you  have  a  promise  to-day  laid  upon  your  heart,  if  you  have 
been  pleading  it,  perhaps  for  months,  and  it  has  not  been  fullilled, 
I  pray  you  gather  fresli  courage  this  morning,  and  again  renew 
thy  wrestling.  Go  and  say,  "  Lord,  I  know  thou  canst  not  lie, 
therefore  fulfil  thy  word  unto  thy  servant."  If  the  promises  of 
God  were  not  kept,  God  would  lie  ;  they  must  therefore  be  ful- 
filled :  and  let  us  believe  that  they  will  be,  and  go  to  God,  not 
with  a  wavering  spirit,  which  half  hopes  that  the  word  may  be 
true,  but  with  the  full  assurance  that  they  cannot  fail.  As  cer- 
tainly as  we  know  that  day  and  night  shall  not  cease,  and  that 
Bummer  will  not  fail,  so  surely  let  us  be  convinced  that  everj 
word  of  the  Lord  shall  stand. 

His  threatenings  are  true  also.  Ah,  sinner !  thou  mayst  go  oi, 
in  thy  ways  for  many  a  day,  but  thy  sin  shall  find  thee  out  at 
the  last.    Seventy  years  God's  long-s;uffering  may  wait  over  ^hee, 


WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO.  327 

but  when  thou  shalt  come  into  another  world  thou  si  /ilt  find 
every  terrible  word  of  Scripture  fulfilled  ;  thou  shalt  then  know 
that  there  is  a  place  "  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire 
is  not  quenched ;  "  thou  shalt  then  experience  the  "  wailing  and 
gnashing  of  teeth,"  except  thou  repentest.  If  thou  wilt  believe 
in  Jesus,  thou  shalt  find  the  promise  true ;  but  if  thou  wilt  not, 
equally  sure  shall  be  the  threatening.  This  is  a  dreadful  part 
of  the  subject  to  those  who  are  out  of  Christ  —  who  have  never 
been  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  will  be  in  vain  for  you  to 
cry  to  him  then,  and  ask  him  then  to  change  his  mind.  No ; 
though  you  should  weep  oceans  of  tears,  hell's  flames  cannot  be 
quenched,  nor  can  your  soul  escape  from  the  place  to  which  it  ia 
finally  doomed.  To-day,  while  mercy  is  preached  to  you,  lay 
hold  upon  it ;  but  remember,  if  not,  as  God  cannot  lie,  he  cannot 
suffer  you  to  escape,  but  you  must  feel  the  weight  and  terror  of 
his  arm. 

We  might  thus  go  through  everything  which  concerns  God, 
from  prophecy  to  promises  and  threatenings,  and  onwards,  and 
multiply  observations ;  but  we  choose  to  close  this  point  by  observ- 
ing \\\2X  every  war  1  of  insirihcllon  from  Goi  is  most  certainly  true. 
It  is  astounding  how  much  sensation  is  caused  in  the  Christian 
Church  by  the  outbreak,  every  now  and  then,  of  fresh  phases  of 
infidelity.  I  do  not  think  that  these  alarms  are  at  all  warranted. 
It  is  what  we  must  expect  to  the  vcrj  end  of  this  dispensation. 
If  all  carnal  minds  believed  the  Bible,  I  think  the  spiritual  might 
almost  begin  to  doubt  it ;  but  as  there  are  always  some  who  will 
attack  it,  I  shall  feel  none  the  less  confidence  in  it.  Really,  the 
Book  of  God  has  stood  so  many  attacks  from  such  different 
qaarters,  that  to  be  at  all  alarmed  about  it  shows  a  very  childish 
fear.  When  a  rock  has  been  standing  all  our  lifetime,  and  has 
been  known  to  stand  firmly  throughout  all  the  ages  of  history, 
none  but  foolish  people  will  think  that  the  next  wave  will  sweep 
it  away  Within  our  own  phort  life  —  say  some  five-and-twenty 
years'  recollection  —  have  we  not  remembered,  I  was  about  to 
Bay,  almost  as  many  as  five-and-twenty  shapes  of  infidelity  ? 
You  know  it  must  change  about  every  twenty  years  at  least,  foi 


328  WHAT  GOD  CANXOT  DO. 

no  system  of  infulelity  cau  live  longer  tliiin  that.  There  ivaa  thi 
witty  system  of  objection  which  Voltaire  introduced  ;  and  lio^v 
short-lived  was  that !  Then  came  the  bullying,  low-lived,  black- 
guard system  of  Tom  Paine ;  and  how  short-lived  was  its  nee ! 
Then,  in  more  modern  times,  unbelief  took  the  shape  of  Secu- 
larism :  what  particular  shapes  it  takes  now  we  scarcely  know 
—  perliaps  Colensoism  is  the  most  fashionable  ;  but  that  is  dying 
out,  and  something  else  will  follow  it.  These  creations  of  an 
hour  just  live  their  little  day,  and  they  are  gone.  But  look  at 
belief  in  Scripture,  and  at  Scripture  itself.  The  Bible  is  better 
understood,  more  prized,  and  I  believe,  on  the  wliole,  more  prac- 
tised, than  ever  it  was  since  the  day  when  its  Author  sent  it 
abroad  into  the  world.  Its  course  is  still  onward  ;  and  after  all 
which  has  been  done  against  it,  no  visible  effect  has  been  pro- 
duced upon  the  granite-wall  of  scriptural  truth  by  all  the  pick- 
axes and  boring-rods  which  have  been  broken  upon  it.  Walking 
through  our  museums  now-a-days,  we  smile  at  those  who  think 
that  Scripture  is  not  true.  Every  block  of  stone  from  Nineveh, 
every  relic  Avlilch  has  been  brought  from  the  Holy  Land,  speaks 
with  a  tongue  which  must  be  heard  even  by  the  deaf  adder  of 
Secularism,  and  which  says,  "  Yes,  the  Bible  is  true,  and  the 
Word  of  God  is  no  fiction."  Beloved,  we  may  rest  assured  that 
we  have  not  a  word  in  the  Book  of  God  which  is  untrue.  There 
may  be  an  interpolation  or  two  of  man's  which  ought  to  be  revised 
and  taken  aw^y ;  but  the  Book  as  it  comes  from  God  is  truth, 
and  nothing  but  truth ;  not  only  containing  God's  Word,  but 
being  God's  Word  ;  being  not  like  a  lump  of  gold  inside  a  mass 
of  quartz,  but  all  gold,  and  nothing  but  gold ;  and  being  inspired 
to  the  highest  degree,  I  will  not  say  verbally  inspired,  but  more 
than  that,  having  a  fulness  more  than  that  which  the  letter  can 
convey  ;  having  in  it  a  profundity  of  meaning  such  as  words  never 
had  when  used  by  any  other  being,  —  God  having  the  power  to 
Bpeak  a  multitude  of  truths  at  once.  And  when  he  means  to 
I'^ach  us  one  thing  according  to  our  capabiaty  of  receiving  it,  he 
ol"ten  teaches  us  twenty  other  things,  which  for  the  time  we  da 
not  comprehend,  but  which  by-and-by,  as  our  senses  are  exer« 


\\TTAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO.  329 

cisea,  reveal  thumsclves  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Every  time  I  open 
my  Bible  I  wiJl  rca  I  it  m  tlie  Word  of  "  God,  that  cannot  lie ; " 
and  \\  hen  I  get  a  promise  or  a  threatening,  I  will  either  rejoice 
or  tremble,  because  I  know  that  these  stand  fast. 

Dear  friends,  this  leads  us,  in  closing  this  point,  to  say  that 
when  we  read  that  passage  —  "  God,  that  cannot  lie ''  —  we  un- 
derstand that  his  very  nature  cannot  lie,  for  he  hates  lies  ; 
wherever  there  is  a  lie  God  is  its  enemy.  It  was  to  overcome 
the  lie  of  sin  that  God  sent  his  Son  to  bleed,  and  every  day  the 
thoughts  of  God  arc  centred  upon  the  extermination  of  evil  and 
the  extension  of  his  own  truth.  Nothing  can  set  forth  in  words 
to  us  the  hatred  and  detestation  which  God  has  in  his  heart  of 
anything  which  is  untrue.  Oh  that  we  knew  and  felt  this,  and 
would  glow  with  the  same  anger,  seeking  to  exterminate  the 
false,  slaying  it  in  our  own  hearts,  and  giving  it  nothing  to  feed 
upon  in  our  temper,  our  conversation,  or  our  deeds  ! 

III.  But  I  shall  now  come  to  make  a  practical  use  of  the 
text,  in  the  third  place,  by  observing  now  we  ought  to  act 
TOWARDS  God  if  it  be  true  that  he  is  a  "  God  that  can- 

NOT  LIE." 

Brethren,  if  it  be  so  that  God  cannot  lie,  then  it  must  he  the 
natural  duty  of  all  his  creatures  to  believe  him,  I  cannot  resist 
that  conclusion.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  as  clear  as  noonday,  that 
•t  i*  every  man's  duty  to  believe  truth,  and  that  if  God  must 
spoak  and  act  truth,  and  truth  only,  it  is  the  duty  of  all  intelli- 
gent creatures  to  believe  him.  Here  is  "  duty-faith,"  again, 
which  some  are  railing  at ;  but  how  they  can  get  away  from  it,  anc^ 
yet  believe  that  God  cannot  lie,  I  cannot  understand.  If  it  be 
not  my  duty  to  believe  in  God,  then  it  is  no  sin  for  me  to  call 
God  a  liar.  Will  any  one  subscribe  to  that  —  that  God  is  f\  liar  ? 
I  think  not ;  and  if  to  think  God  to  be  a  liar  would  be  a  mo3|; 
atrocious  piece  of  blasphemy,  then  it  can  only  be  so  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  the  natural  and  incumbent  duty  of  every  creature  under- 
standing the  truthfulness  of  God  to  believe  in  God.  If  God  haa 
Bet  forth  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  propitiation  for  si^^  and 
28* 


380  WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

has  told  me  to  t  ust  Christ,  it  is  my  duty  to  trust  Ciirist,  because 
God  cannot  lie  ;  and  though  my  sinful  heart  will  never  believe 
in  Christ  as  a  matter  of  duty,  but  only  through  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  yet  faith  does  not  cease  to  be  a  duty ;  and  whenever 
I  am  unbelieving,  and  have  doubts  concerning  God,  however 
moral  my  outward  life  may  be,  I  am  living  in  daily  sin  ;  I  am 
perp(!trating  a  sin  against  the  first  principles  of  morality.  If  I 
doubt  God,  as  far  as  I  am  able  I  rob  him  of  his  honor,  and  stab 
him  in  the  vital  point  of  his  glory ;  I  am,  in  fact,  living  an  open 
traitor  and  a  sworn  rebel  against  God,  upon  whom  I  heap  the 
daily  insult  of  daring  to  doubt  him.  O  my  hearers !  there  are 
some  of  you  who  do  not  believe  in  Christ ;  I  wish  you  would 
ook  at  your  character  and  position  in  this  light.  You  are  not  trust- 
ing in  Christ  for  your  salvation.  Remember,  "  He  that  believeth 
not  God  hath  made  him  a  liar."  Those  are  John's  own  inspired 
words,  and  you  are,  every  day  that  you  are  not  a  believer  in 
Christ,  virtually  writing  upon  your  door-post,  and  saying  with  your 
mouth,  "  God  is  a  liar ;  Christ  is  not  able  to  save  me  ;  I  will  not 
trust  him  ;  I  do  not  believe  God's  promise  ;  I  do  not  think  he  is 
sincere  in  his  invitation  to  me  to  come  to  Christ ;  I  do  not  be- 
lieve what  God  says."  Remember  that  you  are  living  in  such  a 
state  as  this ;  and  may  God  the  Holy  Ghost  impress  you  with  a 
sense  of  the  sin  of  that  state  ;  and,  feeling  this  your  sin  and  mis- 
ery, I  pray  God  to  lead  you  to  cry,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou 
my  unbelief."  This,  then,  is  our  first  practical  conclusion  from 
th  3  fact  that  God  cannot  lie. 

Other  thoughts  suggest  themselves.  ^  we  were  absolutely 
sure  that  there  lived  on  earth  a  person  who  could  not  lie,  how 
ivf'idd  you  treat  him  f  You  know  there  cannot  be  such  a  man. 
There  may  be  a  man  who  will  not  lie,  but  there  cannot  be  a  man 
of  whom  it  may  be  said  that  he  cannot  lie  ;  for,  alas  !  we  have 
all  the  power  of  evil  in  us,  and  we  can  lie,  and  to  a  certain  de- 
gree it  is  quite  true  that  "  all  men  are  liars."  But  if  you  could 
be  certain  that  there  was  a  man  out  of  whose  heart  the  black 
drop  had  been  wrung,  and  that  he  could  not  lie,  how  would  you 
act  toward?  him  ?     Well,  I  think  you  woh  Id  cultivate  his  acquaint* 


WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO.  331 

aiice.  If  you  be  true  yourselves,  you  would  desire  his  friend- 
ship. You  would  say,  "  He  is  the  friend  for  nie  ;  I  have  trusted 
in  such  and  such  a  man,  and  he  has  played  the  Judas  ;  I  asked 
counsel  of  another,  and  he  was  an  Ahithophel ;  but  if  this  man 
cannot  lie,  he  shall  be  my  bosom  companion,  if  he  will  accept 
me  ;  and  he  shall  be  my  counsellor,  if  he  will  but  have  the  good- 
ness to  direct  me."  I  should  expect  to  see  a  levee  of  all  the  good 
in  the  world  waiting  at  the  man's  door.  You  know  how  the 
world,  with  all  its  sinfulness,  does  reverence  the  man  who  is  true. 
We  had  an  instance  in  our  streets  the  other  day,  of  the  good 
man  and  the  true,  who  received  homage  of  all,  and  yet  that  man 
could  lie ;  but  inasmuch  as  we  never  have  seen  that  he  did,  but 
his  life  has  been  straightforward,  therefore  we  have  paid  him 
honor,  and  deservedly  so.  Well,  now,  if  such  be  the  case,  should 
not  all  Christians  seek  more  and  more  the  friendship  of  God? 
*'  O  Lord,  be  thou  my  familiar  friend,  my  counsellor,  my  guide ; 
if  thou  canst  not  lie  I  will  lay  bare  my  heart  to  thee ;  I  will  tell 
thee  all  my  secrets ;  I  will  trust  tliea  with  all  the  desires  of  my 
heart:  I  know  thou  canst  never  betray  me,  or  be  unfaith- 
ful ;  let  there  be  p  anion  established  betwixt  my  soul  and  thine, 
and  let  it  be  broken  never."  Let  communion  with  God  be  the 
desires  of  your  hearts  on  the  ground  that  he  cannot  lie. 

If  we  knew  a  man  who  could  not  lie,  we  should  believe  him, 
methinhs,  without  an  oath.  I  cannot  suppose  that  when  he  came 
into  the  court  of  justice  they  would  pass  him  the  Bible  ;  no,  his 
word  would  be  better  than  the  oath  of  ordinary  men,  if  he  could 
not  lie.  You  would  not  want  any  sign  or  evidence  to  prove 
what  he  said ;  you  would  take  his  word  at  once.  So  should  it 
be  with  God.  Ah,  dear  freinds  !  God  has  given  us  more  than  his 
word  ;  he  has  given  us  his  oath  ;  and  yet,  strange  is  it  that  we, 
who  profess  to  be  his  children,  are  vile  enough  to  distrust  our  own 
Father ;  and  sometimes,  if  he  does  not  give  us  signs  and  evi- 
dences, we  begin  to  distrust  him  ;  so  that,  after  all,  I  am  afraid  we 
rather  trust  the  signs  than  trust  God,  and  put  more  confidence  in 
Irames  and  evidences  than  we  do  in  the  naked  promise  ;  which  is 
an  atrocious  sin  indeed.    Many  believers  cannot  be  comfortable 


332  WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

without  signs  and  evidences.  When  they  feel  in  a  good  framQ 
of  mind  —  ah  !  then  God's  promise  is  true.  "When  they  can  pray 
heartily,  when  they  can  feci  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in 
their  hearts,  then  they  say,  "  How  God  has  kept  his  promise !  " 
Ah !  but,  my  brother,  that  is  a  seeing-faith :  "  Blessed  are  they 
that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."  Faith  is  to  believe 
in  God  when  my  heart  is  as  hard  as  the  nether  millstone,  wl.eii 
my  frames  are  bad,  when  I  cannot  pray,  when  I  cannot  sing^ 
when  I  can  do  nothing  good.  To  say,  "  He  has  promised  and 
will  perform ;  he  has  said  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Christ  is 
not  condemned ;  I  do  believe  in  Christ,  and  therefore  I  am  not 
condemned,"  —  this  is  genuine  faith. 

Again :  if  we  knew  a  man  who  could  not  lie,  we  should  believe 
him  in  the  teeth  of  fifty  witnesses  the  other  way.  Why,  we 
should  say,  "  They  may  say  what  they  will,  but  they  can  lie.'* 
You  might  have  good  evidence  that  they  were  honest  men  usu- 
ally, but  you  would  say,  "  They  can  lie ;  they  have  the  power 
of  lying ;  but  here  is  a  man  who  stands  alone,  and  cannot  lie  ; 
then  his  w^ord  must  be  true."  This  shows  us,  beloved,  that  we 
ought  to  believe  God  in  the  teeth  of  every  contradiction.  Even 
if  outward  providence  should  come  to  you,  and  say  that  God  has 
forsaken  you,  that  is  only  one ;  and  even  if  another,  and  another, 
and  another  should  come,  and  fifty  trials  should  all  say  that  God 
lias  forsaken  you,  yet,  as  God  says,  '•  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee,"  which  will  you  take  —  the  one  promise  of  God 
who  cannot  lie,  or  the  fifty  outward  providences  which  you  can- 
not interpret  ?     I  know  what  the  devil  has  been  whispering  in 

your  ear: 

"  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  thee  quite, 
Thy  God  will  be  gracious  no  more." 

But  then,  recollect  who  hath  said,  "  Fear  thou  not;  fori  am  with 
thee :  be  not  dismayed  ;  for  I  am  thy  God."  Which  will  yoii 
believe  —  the  devil's  insinuation,  or  God's  own  testimony  ?  My 
dear  sister,  you  have  been  praying  for  a  certain  thing  for  years ; 
you  pray,  you  pray,  and  you  pray  again,  and  now  discouragement 
kriscs  ;  unbelief  says, "  God  will  not  hear  that  prayer ;  that  prayei 


WHAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO.  833 

of  youis  does  not  come  up  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  there 
will  be  no  answer."  But  the  Lord  has  said,  "  Ask,  and  it  shall  be 
given  you  ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened 
unto  you."  Which  will  you  believe  —  your  unbelief,  the  long 
months  of  weariness,  and  the  anxieties  which  prompted  you  to 
discouragement,  or  will  you  believe  in  the  naked  promise? 
Why,  if  God  cannot  lie,  let  us  give  him  what  we  would  give  to  a 
man  if  he  were  of  the  same  character  —  our  full  confidence, 
even  in  the  teeth  of  contradiction  ;  for  he  is  "  God,  that  can- 
not lie." 

If  a  man  were  introduced  to  us,  and  we  were  certain  that  he 
could  not  lie,  we  should  believe  everything  he  said,  however  in^ 
credible  it  might  appear  to  us  at  first  sight  to  be.  I  shall  have 
an  appeal  to  every  soul  here  present.  It  does  seem  very  incred- 
ible at  first  sight  that  God  should  take  a  sinner,  full  of  sin,  and 
forgive  all  his  iniquities  in  one  moment,  simply  and  only  upon 
the  ground  of  the  sinner  believing  in  Christ.  I  recollect  the 
cime  when  it  seemed  to  me  utterly  impossible  that  I  could  ever 
have  my  sins  forgiven.  I  had  a  clear  sense  of  the  value  of  par- 
don, and  this  thought  would  be  always  ringing  in  my  ears : 
"  It  is  too  good  to  be  true  iliai  you  should  be  pardoned  ;  that  you, 
an  enemy,  should  be  made  into  a  child ;  that  you,  who  have  gone 
on  sinning  against  light  and  against  knowledge,  should  yet  re- 
joice in  union  to  Christ;  the  thing  is  too  good  to  be  true."  But, 
beloved  friends,  supposing  it  should  seem  too  good  to  be  true, 
yet,  since  you  have  it  upon  the  testimony  of  one  who  "  cannot 
lie,"  I  pray  you  believe  it.  "  But,  sir,  — "  No,  none  of  your 
"  buts  ;  "  he  cannot  lie.  "^A  !  but,  —  "  Away  with  your  *'  ahs  " 
or  your  "  buts,"  for  Jehovah  cannot  lie.  He  has  said  it :  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  To  believe  is  to 
trust  Christ.  If,  therefore,  you  are  trusting  Christ,  you  must  be 
sa^  ed ;  and  whatever  you  may  be,  or  whatever  you  may  have 
done,  if  you  will  now  trust  Jesus  Christ,  you  have  God's  Word 
for  it  —  and  he  cannot  lie  —  that  you  shall  be  saved.  Come,  now, 
will  you  kick  against  the  promise  because  of  its  greatness  ? 
Do  not  so,  but  let  your  doubts  and  fears  be  hushed  to  sleep ;  an<] 


8.34  V/IIAT  GOD  CANNOT  DO. 

now,  with  the  promioO  of  God  as  your  pillow,  and  GoJ's  faith 
fulness  as  your  support,  lie  down  in  peace,  and  behold  in  faith'a 
open  vision  the  ladder,  the  top  whereof  leads  to  heaven.  Trust 
the  promise  of  God  in  Christ,  and  depend  upon  it  that  he  will 
be  as  good  to  you,  even  to  you,  as  his  own  Word,  and  in  heaven 
you  shall  have  to  sing  of  the  "  God  that  cannot  lie." 

I  would  that  these  weak  words  of  mine  —  for  I  am  very  con- 
scious of  their  feebleness  this  morning  —  may  nevertheless  have 
comfort  in  them  for  any  who  have  been  doubting  and  fearing, 
that  they  may  trust  my  Lord ;  and  sure  I  am  that  if  they  begin 
a  life  of  faith,  they  will  begin  a  life  of  happiness  and  of  security. 
"  The  just  shall  live  by  faith,"  and  well  may  they  do  so  when 
they  have  to  trust  in  a  "  God  that  cannot  lie." 


SERMON  XVIII, 


LABOR  IN  VAIN. 

"JOHAH  SAID  tJWTO  THEM,  TAKE  ME  UP,  AND  CAST  ME  FORTH  INTO  THE  BEA ;  BC 
SHALL  THE  SEA  BE  CALM  UNTO  YOU:  FOE  I  KNOW  THAT  FOR  MT  SAKE  THI6 
GREAT  TEMPEST  IS  UPON  YOU.  NEVERTHELESS  THE  MEN  ROWED  HARD  TO 
BRINO  IT  TO  THE  LAND ;  BUT  THEY  COULD  NOT,  FOR  THE  SKA  WROUOHT,  AND 
WAS  TEMPESTUOUS  AGAINST  THEM."  —  Jonall  i.  12,  13. 

These  mariners  manifested  most  commendable  humanity. 
They  were  not  willing,  even  though  it  were  to  preserve  their 
own  lives,  to  cast  overboard  an  innocent  man ;  therefore  they 
first  used  their  best  endeavors ;  and  when  these  failed,  they  made 
a  solemn  appeal  to  God,  entreating  him  not  to  lay  upon  them 
innocent  blood :  and  then,  since  necessity  hath  no  law,  Jonah,  as 
a  last  resource,  was  given  up  to  the  boisterous  element,  but  not 
till  every  effort  had  been  made  to  save  him.  We  should  be 
very  careful  of  human  life,  doing  nothing  which  even  indirectly 
may  destroy  or  injure  it.  And  if  we  should  be  jealous  over  life, 
how  much  more  anxious  should  we  be  concerning  men's  souls ! 
and  how  watchful  lest  we  should  do  anything  by  which  the  least 
of  the  human  family  may  have  his  eternal  interests  endangered 
by  our  example  or  teaching !  God  give  us,  like  these  mariners, 
to  row  hard,  that  if  possible  we  may  bring  the  ship  to  land ;  la- 
boring that  none  around  us  may  be  left  to  perish.  I  shall  not, 
however,  dwell  upon  that  aspect  of  the  text.  Our  Saviour 
selected  Jonah  as  one  of  his  peculiar  types :  "  There  shall  no 
sign  be  given,"  said  he,  "  to  the  men  of  this  generation  but  the 
sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas."    Wc  believe,  therefore,  that  we  ar« 


S3 6  LABOR  TX  YAIN. 

not  emng  if  we  translate  the  details  of  the  history  of  Jonas  into 
spiritual  illustrations  of  man's  experience  and  action  with  regard 
to  Christ  and  his  gospel. 

We  have  before  us  a  picture  of  what  most  men  do  before  they 
will  resort  to  God's  remedy  ;  that  remedy  is  here  most  fairly  im- 
aged in  the  deliverance  of  the  whole  ship's  company  by  the 
sacrifice  of  one  on  their  behalf. 

I.     Our  first  observation  is,  that  sinners,  when  tuey  are 

TOSSED  UPON  THE  SEA  OF  CONVICTION,  MAKE  DESPERATE  EF- 
FORTS TO  SAVE  THEMSELVES. 

The  men  rowed  hard  to  bring  the  ship  to  land.  Tlie  Hebrew 
is  they  "  digged  "  hard,  sending  the  oars  deep  into  the  water  with 
much  exertion  and  small  success.  The  tempest  so  tossed  the 
sea  about  that  they  could  not  row  in  good  and  orderly  manner; 
but  they  desperately  tugged  at  the  oars,  which  the  towering 
waves  rendered  useless  by  too  deep  a  digging.  Straining  every 
sinew,  they  labored  by  violence  to  get  the  ship  in  safety  to  the 
haven.  Brethren,  no  word  in  any  language  can  express  the 
violence  of  earnest  action  with  which  awakened  sinners  strive 
and  struggle  to  obtain  eternal  life.  Truly,  if  the  kingdom  of 
God  were  in  the  power  of  him  that  willeth  and  him  that  runneth, 
they  would  possess  it  at  once.  Since  they  struggle,  however,  in 
an  unlawful  manner,  the  crown  of  victory  will  never  be  awarded 
them  ;  they  may  kindle  the  fire,  and  rejoice  in  the  sparks  thereof, 
but  thus.saith  the  Lord,  "  This  shall  ye  have  of  mine  hand  ;  yd 
shall  lie  down  in  sorrow." 

Let  us  notice  some  forms  of  the  fleshy  energy  of  nien  strain- 
ing after  self-salvation.  The  mobt  usual  is,  moral  reformation. 
We  have  seen  the  drunkard,  when  conscience  has  been  awakened, 
renounce  his  cups  altogether ;  he  has  gone  further  than  temper- 
flncii,  and  has  espoused  total  abstinence  ;  and  proceeding  further 
still,  it  often  happens  that,  in  the  excess  of  zeal,  he  vomits  forth 
furious  words  against  all  who  go  not  the  same  length  of  absti- 
nence as  himself.  Yonder  man  was  given  up  to  blasphemy,  but 
now  an  ill  word  never  comes  from  his  tongue;  and  he  is  there- 


LABOR  IN  VAIN.  337 

fore  content  with  himself  because  he  no  longer  curves  God. 
Another  has  followed  an  ill  trade,  or  has  been  in  the  habit  of 
neglecting  the  Sabbath-day ;  conscience  has  mercifully  led  him 
to  give  up  his  ill  connections  and  attend  a  place  of  worsb'p.  I3 
not  this  well?  It  is  indeed  well;  but  it  is  not  enough.  J*.  'ui 
KiRryellous  how  far  men  will  push  their  reforms,  and  yet  h\)^f 
little  solid  peace  such  purgings  can  secure.  For  what  u  the 
sinner  after  his  reformation  but  the  blackamoor  washed  clean,  a 
blackamoor  still  ?  I  would  have  the  Ethiopian  clean,  by  all  man- 
ner of  means  ;  but  I  would  not  let  him  fancy  that  the  soap  and 
♦he  nitre  will  make  him  white.  I  would  have  the  leopard  tamed 
aiiu  caged,  but  this  will  not  remove  his  spots.  Moral  reforms 
are  excellent  in  themselves,  but  they  are  dangerous  if  we  rest  in 
them.  Let  even  a  corpse  be  washed,  but  let  no  man  dream  that 
the  most  careful  washing  will  restore  it  to  life.  "  Te  rmist  be 
horn  again,''  rings  out  the  death-knell  of  all  salvation  by  human 
effort.  Uuless  reforms  are  founded  in  regeneration,  they  are 
baseless  things,  which  fail  in  the  end  for  want  of  foundation ; 
they  are  deceptive  things,  affording  a  transient  hope,  which  soon, 
alas  !  must  melt  away.  Ah,  my  hearer !  thou  mayst  go  on  im- 
proving and  reforming,  but  all  thy  present  and  future  amend- 
ments can  never  wipe  out  the  old  score  of  sin.  There  stands  the 
black  catalogue  of  thy  sins,  engraved  as  in  eternal  brass  ;  the 
gloomy  record  remains  unaltered  and  unalterable  by  any  deeds 
of  thine.  Something  more  potent  than  thy  tears  and  change  of 
life  must  take  away  the  sins  of  thy  departed  years.  Beware, 
then,  of  thinking  that  you  are  getting  the  ship  to  land,  row  as 
hard  as  you  may  with  these  oars  of  human  resolution. 

Others  add  to  their  reformation  a  superstitious  regard  to  the 
outward  form  of  religion.  According  to  the  sect  with  which  they 
unite,  they  become  excessively  religious.  They  reverence  every 
nail  of  the  church  door,  and  every  panel  of  the  pulpit ;  there  is 
not  a  brick  in  the  aisle  which  is  not  sacred  to  them,  nor  even  a 
pantile  on  the  roof.  Every  rubric,  every  "  Amen,"  every  vest- 
ment and  candlestick,  has  to  them  a  world  of  sanctity  about  it. 
They  are  not  content  with  the  ordinary  days  of  worship,  but  tho 
29 


338  LABOR  IN  YAIX. 

church  bell  rings  every  mornhig ;  and  well  it  may,  for  if  mei, 
are  to  earn  salvation  in  God's  house,  they  had  need  be  there  all 
day  and  all  night  too.  Even  in  a  Protestant  Church,  men  row 
very  hard  with  multitudinous  observances  and  superstitious  per- 
formances ;  but  when  you  get  into  the  Romish  Church,  the  ^ahor 
in  vain  comes  to  a  climax.  What  with  vows  of  poverty,  cehbacy, 
silence,  passive  obedience,  and  a  thousand  other  tortures,  if  the 
Moloch  whom  they  worship  be  not  satisfied,  he  ought  to  be.  We 
heard  but  the  other  day  of  a  gentleman  giving  up  all  his  goodly 
heritage,  selling  his  broad  acres,  and  pouring  all  the  purchase- 
money  into  the  coffers  of  the  monks  and  priests,  in  order  that  at 
last,  by  rowing  hard  in  this  way,  he  might  get  the  ship  to  land. 
It  is  remarked  of  the  Hindoos,  that  they  give  vastly  more  to 
their  idols  than  we  bestow  upon  the  cause  of  God,  and  I  suppose 
it  is  true  :  but  then  they  also  are  rowing  hard  to  get  the  ship  to 
land.  All  they  do  is  for  themselves.  Self  is  always  a  mighty 
power  in  the  world.  Do  but  teach  men  that  they  can  gain  their 
own  salvation  by  their  own  doings  and  mortifications  and  offer- 
ings, and  I  would  expect  to  see  the  treasury  filled ;  I  would  ex- 
pect to  hear  the  whip  constantly  going  upon  the  shoulders ;  but 
I  should  despair  of  seeing  anything  like  holiness  surviving  in  the 
land.  Su2)erstition  is  hard  rowing  ;  the  ship  will  not  come  to  the 
land  thereby.  Men  invent  ceremony  after  ceremony ;  there  is 
this  pomp  and  that  show,  this  gaudy  ornament  and  that  proces- 
sion ;  but  the  whole  matter  ends  in  outward  display :  no  secret 
soul-blessing  results  flow  therefrom.  Priests  and  their  votaries 
may  go  on  piling  up  human  inventions  ad  injirdtum,  but  they 
will  forever  fail  to  ease  the  conscience,  or  give  rest  to  a  disturbed 
soul.  Man's  awful  necessities  crave  something  more  than  the 
husks  of  superstition. 

You  will  find  another  form  of  the  same  thincr  amouj?  ourselves 
Many  persons  row  hard  to  get  the  ship  to  land  by  a  notional  be- 
lief  in  orthodox  doctrine.  This  superstition  is  haider  to  deal 
with,  but  quite  as  dangerous  as  the  belief  in  good  works.  It 
is  quite  as  legal  an  idea  for  me  to  think  to  be  accepted  by  be- 
lieving good  doctrine,  as  to  expect  to  be  pardoned  for  doing  g(H)d 


LABOR  IN  VAIN.  339 

Works.  Yet  we  have  scores  of  people  who,  if  they  can  get  hold 
of  the  Calvinistic  creed  at  the  right  end ;  if  they  become  masters 
of  it,  and  know  how  to  argue  against  Arminianism  ;  if  they  be- 
come not  only  sound  Calvinists,  but  a  little  sounder  still,  having 
not  only  the  sixteen  ounces  to  the  pound,  but  two  or  three  ounces 
over  and  above,  so  as  to  make  them  ultra-Calvinistic,  —  why  then 
they  fancy  that  all  must  be  well.  "  I  never  can  hear  a  preacher,'' 
this  man  will  say,  "  who  is  not  sound.  I  can  tell  at  once  when 
there  is  a  grain  of  free  will  in  the  sermon."  This  is  all  very 
well ;  but  he  who  boasts  thus  may  be  no  better  than  the  devil : 
nay,  he  may  not  be  so  good  ;  for  the  devil  believes  and  trembles, 
but  these  men  believe  and  are  too  much  hardened  in  their  own 
conceit  to  think  of  trembling.  Away  with  the  idea  that  believ- 
ing sound  doctrine  and  chaining  ourselves  to  a  cast-iron  creed  is 
vital  godliness  and  eternal  life  !  Orthodox  sinners  will  find  that 
hell  is  hot,  and  that  their  knowledge  of  predestination  will  not 
yield  a  cooling  drop  to  their  parched  tongues.  Condemning 
other  people,  cutting  off  the  saints  of  God  right  and  left,  is  but 
poor  virtue,  and  to  have  these  blessed  doctrines  in  the  head 
while  neglecting  them  in  the  heart  is  anything  but  a  gracious 
eign.  If  ye  can  "  a  hair  divide  betwixt  the  west  and  north-west 
side,"  do  not  therefore  fancy  that  your  fine  gifts  and  profound 
orthodoxy  will  ensure  you  an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  Ah !  you  may  row  with  tho&e  oars,  but  you  will  not 
get  the  ship  to  land ;  ye  must  be  saved  by  sovereign  grace, 
through  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  heart,  or  you 
will  not  be  saved  at  all.  As  it  is  not  by  doing  that  we  are 
saved,  neither  is  it  by  subscribing  creeds ;  there  is  something 
moj-e  than  this  needed  ere  the  ship  reach  the  port. 

Perhaps,  in  this  congregation,  we  have  other  subtle  methods 
of  endeavoring  to  do  the  same  thing.  The  pastor  has  noticed 
that  many  are  resting  upon  their  own  incessant  prayers.  Ah, 
my  poor  hearer !  thou  knowest  thy  need  of  something,  thou  canst 
hardly  tell  what ;  thou  hast  heard  the  subject  of  salvation  ex- 
plained to  thee  a  hundred  times,  and  now,  when  it  comes  to  the 
pinch,  thou  dost  not  understand  it  after  all.     I  thank  God  that 


340  LABOR  IN  VAIN. 

thou  hast  learned  how  to  pray  ;  that  thy  sighs  and  cries  and 
groans  come  up  before  him  ;  but  I  sorrow  because  thou  trustest 
in  thy  prayers,  and  restctli  in  them.  Remember  that  thou  wilt  no 
more  be  saved  for  the  sake  of  thy  prayers  than  for  the  sake  of 
thy  good  works.  If  thy  knees  become  hard  as  the  knees  of  St. 
James  are  said  to  have  been,  —  hard,  like  the  camel's,  through  long 
kneeling,  —  and  if,  with  the  Psalmist,  thou  couldst  say, "  My  throat 
is  dried,  mine  eyes  fail,"  —  yet  all  this,  if  thou  lookest  to  it,  and 
dost  not  look  to  Christ,  will  never  avail  thee.  I  knew  what  it 
was  for  months  to  cry  out  to  God,  and  to  find  the  heavens  above 
me  as  brass,  because  I  had  not  understood  clearly  the  soul- 
quickening  words,  *'  Believe  and  live  ;  "  but  dreamed  that  by 
praying  1  could  get  myself  into  a  suitable  state  to  receive  mercy, 
or  perhaps  move  the  heart  of  God  towards  me  ;  whereas  that 
heart  needed  no  moving  towards  me :  it  was  full  of  love  from  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world.  Pray^  my  dear  brethren ;  let 
me  never  discourage  3'ou  in  that.  But  do  let  me  beg  you  not  to 
sit  still,  or  recline  upon  your  prayers  ;  for  if  you  get  no  further 
than  your  prayers,  you  will  never  get  to  heaven.  There  is  more 
wanted  than  crying  to  God  ;  more  wanted  than  earnest  desires, 
however  passionately  they  may  be  breathed.  There  must  be 
faith  in  Jesus,  or  else  you  will  row  hard  with  your  prayers,  and 
you  will  never  bring  the  ship  to  land. 

Then  there  are  others  who  are  toiling  by  —  I  scarcely  know 
how  to  describe  it  —  a  sort  of  mental  torture.  Oh  !  the  many 
who  say,  "  If  I  could  feel  as  I  ought  to  feel !  O,  sir,  my  heart  is 
as  hard  as  a  nether  millstone  ;  and  yet  I  do  not  feel  that  it  is  hard 
—  I  v>ish  I  did.  I  would  give  my  eyes  if  I  could  repent.  1 
would  give  my  right  arm  if  I  could  but  weep  for  sin.  I  would  be 
gatisfied  to  be  a  beggar,  or  to  lie  rotting  ir  a  dungeon,  if  I  could 
but  feel  that  I  was  fit  to  come  to  the  Saviour ;  but,  alas !  I  feel 
nothing.  If  I  did  but  feel  my  unfitness,  —  did  but  know  my  own 
undesert,  —  I  should  have  hope ;  but  I  am  made  of  such  hell- 
hardened  steel  that  neither  terrors  or  mercies  can  move  me.  Oh, 
that  I  could  repent !  Oh,  that  this  rock  could  give  forth  streams 
like  that  rock  which  Moses  smote  in  the  wilderness  of  old  !  Oh, 


LABOR  IX  VAnr.  341 

that  I  could  but  bring  my  heart  to  melt  into  something  like  desires 
after  God  and  Christ !  Oh,  I  am  everything  but  what  I  should 
be  !  "  No\v,  my  dear  hearer,  you  will  row  very  hard  in  this  way 
before  you  will  ever  come  to  land ;  for  self-righteousness  lies  at 
the  bottom  of  all  this.  You  want  to  save  your  heart  from  hard- 
ness, and  then  come  to  Jesus  ;  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  you 
wish  to  save  yourself,  and  then  come  to  him  to  put  the  finishing- 
stroke  upon  you.  You  have  a  secret  attachment  to  your  own 
goodness,  or  you  would  not  be  so  eager  to  compass  a  fitness  ;  other- 
wise you  would  at  once  do  as  you  are  bidden  and  rest  alone  on 
Jesus.  Your  business  is  not  with  self,  but  with  Jesus  ;  with  Jesus, 
just  as  you  are.  However  hard  your  heart  may  be,  —  however 
destitute  of  feeling  you  may  have  become,  —  this,  though  it  should 
be  subject  for  lamentation,  should  never  keep  you  from  resting 
in  liim  who  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto 
God  by  him.  I  tell  you,  your  trying  to  get  your  heart  into  a 
right  state,  your  trying  to  repent,  your  trying  to  be  humble,  is 
all  labor  in  vain.  It  is  all  going  the  wrong  way  to  work.  Your 
business  is  with  Christ ;  he  can  soften,  cleanse,  and  sanctify  ;  but 
you  can  do  none  of  these,  try  as  you  will.  Come  as  ye  are  to 
my  Lord  Jesus,  hard  heart  and  all,  and  the  sea  shall  soon  be 
calm  to  you ;  but  while  you  row  with  your  own  oars,  the  sea 
will  only  work  and  be  the  more  tempestuous. 

Various  are  the  shapes  which  this  carnal  energy  assumes.  I 
have  met  with  many  who  are  in  tliis  kind  of  case.  They  are 
constantly  starting  objections  to  their  own  salvation,  and  trying 
to  answer  them.  They  have  comfort  for  a  moment,  and  they 
say,  *'  Yes,  this  is  very  sweet,  hut  — ; "  and  then  they  will 
spend  a  week  or  two  in  trying  to  split  up  that  hut.  When  they 
are  rid  of  this  hut,  a  mercy  will  come  to  them  from  another 
quarter,  and  they  are  sure  to  meet  it  with,  "  Ah  !  blessed  be 
God  for  that,  hut  — "  They  are  always  pulling  away  at 
these  huts ;  these  big  waves  come  sweeping  up  to  the  side  of 
their  vessel,  and  they  try  to  dig  their  oars  into  them.  Friend, 
if  you  are  never  saved  until  you,  an  unpardoned  sinner,  have 
answered  all  objections,  you  will  never  be  saved  ;  because  there 
29* 


342  LABOR  IN  VAIN. 

are  a  ihousand  objections  to  the  salvation  of  any  man,  which  can 
only  be  met  by  one  argument,  and  that  is  the  blood  of  Jesus. 
If  thou  wilt  go  here  and  there  seeking  answers  to  tlie  devil'? 
suggestions  of  unbelief,  thou  mayst  travel  the  whole  round,  and 
end  thy  fruitless  task  in  despair.  But  if  thou  wilt  come  to  Jesus, 
—  if  thou  wilt  see  him  like  another  Jonah  thrown  out  of  the  ship 
for  thy  sake,  —  if  thou  wilt  but  see  him  lost  that  thou  mayst  be 
saved,  —  then  a  peace  M'hich  passeth  all  understanding  shall  keep 
thy  heart  and  mind  by  Christ  Jesus. 

II.     "We  will  now  take  the  second  point.    Like  these  mariners, 

THE  FLESHY  EFFORTS  OF  AWAKENED  SINNERS  MUST  INEVI- 
TABLY FAIL.  The  text  says,  "  The  men  rowed  hard  to  bring  it  to 
the  land,  hut  they  could  notr  With  all  man's  rowing  after  mercy 
and  salvation,  he  can  never  find  it  by  his  own  efforts. 

For  this  good  reason,  first  of  all,  that  it  is  contrary  to  God's 
law  for  a  sinner  to  get  comfort  hy  anything  he  can  do  for  and  by 
himself  Here  is  the  law :  "  By  the  works  of  the  law  there 
shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified."  That  rule,  then,  fixed  and 
fast  as  the  laws  of  nature,  shuts  out  forever  all  hope  of  the  attain- 
ment of  joy  and  peace  by  anything  that  we  can  do,  or  be,  or  feel ; 
for  all  these  the  law  already  claims  of  us.  How  mad,  then,  will 
it  be  on  our  part  if  we  run  counter  to  a  divine  law  !  Success  is 
impossible  in  so  perverse  a  course.  I  do  well,  therefore,  if  I 
discourage  all  the  efforts  of  awakened  consciences  to  find  peace 
anywhere  except  in  the  work  of  Christ.  Let  a  man  labor  never 
so  earnestly,  yet  if  he  goes  against  the  laws  of  nature,  you  know 
his  labor  is  lost.  Here  is  an  oven  to  be  warmed,  for  hungry 
persons  need  bread.  See  the  workers,  yonder,  how  they  toil, 
bringing  snow  with  all  their  might  to  heat  the  oven.  "  Well," 
you  say,  "  do  not  discourage  them  ;  do  not  discourage  their  ear- 
nest activity  1  It  is  a  pity,  wdien  you  see  people  really  deterriined 
to  do  anything,  to  discourage  their  efforts !  "  Ah  !  it  is  a  pity 
indeed,  except  when  these  efforts  are  foolish.  If  I  see  them 
bringing  snow  to  heat  an  oven,  I  know  they  will  nciver  do  it, 
work  as  hard  as  they  may  ;  and  when  sinners  bring  their  own 


LABOR  IN  VAIN.  313 

wrorks  to  yield  them  spiritual  comfort,  I  know  ilA  tliey  are 
Bpendinn;  their  labor  for  that  which  profitcth  not,  and  I  must  and 
will  discourage  them. 

Some  years  ago  certain  persons  engaged  in  a  speculation  to 
sink  a  coal-mine  in  a  part  of  England  where  coal  was  never'- 
found.  Prospectuses  were  issued,  directors  obtained,  and  share- 
holders duped,  and  the  workmen  began  to  sink  their  shaft.  Now, 
it  was  absolutely  certain  —  any  geologist  could  have  told  them 
so  —  that  they  would  not  find  coal,  let  them  dig  to  doomsday. 
Suppose  you  and  I  had  gone  there  and  seen  them  digging,  and 
had  laughed  at  them,  or  told  them  it  was  all  of  no  avail,  wiseacres 
might  have  replied,  "  You  ought  not  to  discourage  coal-mining ; 
you  ought  not  to  discourage  men  who  are  working  so  very  hard.'* 
I  would  say,  "  I  would  not  discourage  coal-mining  in  any  place 
where  there  is  coal  to  be  had ;  but  for  these  poor  souls  to  throw 
away  their  sweat  and  their  money  for  that  which  is  not  coal,  I 
will  discourage  them  in  that  insane  enterprise,  and  think  I  do 
them  good  service."  When  we  see  men  struggling  after  eternal 
life  through  their  own  efforts,  we  know  eternal  life  is  not  to  be 
had  there.  We  are  glad  that  they  are  awakened  to  anything 
like  effort,  for  anything  is  better  than  spiritual  sloth  :  but  we  are 
grieved  to  see  them  laboring  in  the  very  fire,  toiling  where  suc- 
cess can  never  crown  their  endeavors.  There  is  no  salvation  by 
the  works  of  the  law  ;  why,  then,  look  for  it  ?  If  you  dash  your 
head  against  the  law  of  nature,  the  law  of  nature  will  not  change 
for  you ;  and  if  you  labor  in  opposition  to  the  irreversible  law  of 
God,  you  will  pay  the  penalty  of  it  in  your  utter  failure.  The 
ancients  fabled  that  it  was  one  of  the  tortures  of  hell  to  which 
the  daughters  of  Danaus  were  condemned,  that  they  should  fill 
a  tub  without  a  bottom  with  buckets  full  of  holes.  Behold  the 
picture  of  the  self-righteous  man's  undertaking.  He  may  labor, 
he  may  toil ;  but  he  is  filling  a  bottomless  tub  with  leaky  buckets ; 
and  work  as  he  may,  though  he  di'op  down  dead  in  the  attempt, 
success  is  impossible.  Oh  that  he  knew  it  to  l:e  so,  and  would 
*rust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  ! 

Besides  this,  the  man  cannot  succeed  in  obtaining  salvation  by 


841  LABOR   IX   VATN. 

his  own  cfTorts,  because  in  wJiat  he  is  doing  he  is  insulting  Chdf 
he  is  casting  dirt  in  the  (iicc  or"  Chiist ;  he  is  denying  the  whole 
testimony  of  the  Holy  Gho.^t.  Ah,  ray  hearer !  if  thou  could-^t 
save  thyself,  why  was  it  necessary  that  Christ  should  die  for 
thee  ?  If  thy  prayers  could  avail,  why  did  he  sweat  great  drops 
of  blood  ^  ^hy,  man,  if  there  were  any  merit  in  thy  mortifica- 
tion, or  thy  refoimation,  what  need  that  the  Prince  of  life  and 
glory  6hould  veil  himself  in  ignominy  and  suffer  a  death  of  shame? 
Thou  dost  in  fact  say,  by  thy  fleshly  attempts,  I  want  no  Saviour ; 
I  can  save  myself.  Thou  dost  in  fact  scoff  at  the  great  atone- 
ment which  God  has  made  in  the  person  of  Christ.  This  insult 
wilt  ruin  thy  soul,  except  thou  turn  from  it.  Repent  of  it,  I  pray 
thee  ;  humble  thyself,  and  receive  Jesus'  finished  work.  If, 
scorning  the  Jordan,  Naaman  had  gone  to  Abana  and  Pharpar, 
he  might  have  waslied  not  only  seven  times,  but  seventy  times 
seven  ;  he  might  have  earnestly  persevered  in  the  constant  im- 
mersion, but  he  must  have  remained  a  leper  to  his  dying  day.  If 
you  scorn  the  atonement,  and  neglect  God's  great  command  to  he- 
licve  and  live,  —  if  you  go  about  to  try,  and  ^qqI^  or  be,  or  do,  — 
you  will  use  these  Abanas  and  Pharpars  to  your  own  damnation, 
but  to  your  own  salvation  never.  I  pray  you,  do  not  insult  God  by 
looking  for  balm  in  Gilead,  or  for  a  physician  there ;  for  there  is 
no  balm  in  Gilead  ;  there  never  was  any  :  there  is  no  physician 
there,  or  else  the  daughter  of  my  people  would  long  ago  have 
been  healed ;  men  would  long  ago  have  saved  themselves.  You 
must  look  higher  than  the  Gilead  of  human  energy ;  you  must 
look  higher  than  earth's  physicians ;  you  must  look  to  the  hills 
whence  cometh  our  help,  the  great  mountains  of  a  Saviour's 
work  and  merit. 

There  are  many  other  reasons  why  it  is  impossible  that  a  man 
can  ever  get  comfort  in  the  way  of  works  and  feelings.  The 
principal  I  will  mention  is,  because  that  is  the  way  of  the  curse. 
He  who  is  under  the  law  is  under  the  curse.  So  long  as  I  suck 
to  the  law,  do  what  I  may,  I  am  under  the  curse  of  the  law,  and 
consequently  under  the  curse  ;  and  how  can  I  expect  in  the  way 
of  the  curse  to  find  the  eternal  blessing?     Oh,  folly  !  to  choi/CC 


LABOR  IN   VATS.  845 

the  way  of  the  curse  as  the  way  of  blessing.  But  the  best  proof 
of  it  all  is  experience.  Ask  either  saint  or  sinner,  and  you  shall 
find  that  peace  was  never  obtained  in  the  way  of  the  flesh. 
Turn  to  the  Christian,  and  he  will  tell  you,  "  Therefore  being 
justified  BY  FAITH,  we  have  peace  with  God."  He  will  tell  you 
that  when  he  turns  away  from  faith,  and  looks  to  himself,  at  once 
his  darkness  begins.  He  will  assure  you  that  he  never  walks  iu 
periect  light  and  true  comfort  except  when  he  keeps  his  eye  fast 
fixed  upon  the  great  sacrifice  of  Calvary.  I  know,  brethren, 
whenever  I  am  dull  and  drooping  as  to  my  eternal  interests,  it  is 
always  because  I  have  thought  more  of  my  graces  than  of  Christ's 
grace,  or  more  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  me  than  of  the  finished 
work  of  Christ  on  my  behalf.  There  is  no  living  happily,  but 
by  depending  wholly  upon  Christ.  A  sinner,  resting  upon  hia 
Saviour  as  his  only  hope,  is  blest.  Now,  if  this  be  the  experi- 
ence of  all  saints,  and  if  no  sinner  living  will  dare  to  tell  yoa 
that  he  can  get  his  conscience  quiet  by  his  own  works,  why  do 
any  of  you  try  it  ?  Heaven  bears  witness  that  salvation  by  faith 
is  certain  :  hell  bears  witness  that  works  do  but  ruin  us.  Oh  ! 
hear  the  double  testimony,  and  lay  hold  upon  eternal  life  through 
the  person  of  Christ  Jesus.  O  my  dear  friend,  if  you  are  really 
panting  for  salvation,  go  not  round  and  round  these  dreary  per- 
formances of  your  own  doings  ;  it  must  all  end  in  misery,  disap- 
pointment, and  despair.  "  They  rowed  hard  to  bring  it  to  land, 
t)ut  they  could  notr  All  human  work  which  does  not  begin  and 
end  in  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be  a  non-success.  All  your  working 
has  been  a  non-success  with  you  up  to  the  present,  and  so  it  will 
be  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Give  it  up,  and  God  help  you  to 
try  his  method,  for  it  is  sure  and  efficacious. 

111.     Now,  with  very  great  brevity,  I  will  bring  you  to  the 
;hird  point  of  the  sermon,  which  is,  that  the  soul's  sorrow 

*nLL  CONTINUE  TO  INCREASE  SO  LONG  AS  IT  RELIES  UPON  ITS 
OWN  EFFORTS. 

What  is  the  effect  of  all  that  the  creature  doth  before  it  be* 
lieves  in  Christ  f     It  may  be  overruled  for  good,  but  much  of 


346  LABOR  IN  VAIN. 

its  effect  is  mischievous.  The  good  effect  which  flows  from  it 
lies  in  this  :  the  more  a  man  strives  to  save  himself y  the  mora 
coni'inccd  will  he  hecome  of  his  own  impotence  and  poiverless- 
ness.  J  tlioiight  that  I  could  turn  to  God  whenever  I  pleased 
till  I  tried  to  turn  to  him;  1  thought  repentance  a  very  easy 
thing  till  I  began  to  repent;  I  dreamed  that  faith  in  Christ  must 
be  a  mere  child's  play  till  I  had  to  groan,  "  Lord,  help  my  un- 
belief!  "  As  for  the  law,  when  we  attempt  to  keep  it,  we  groan 
under  a  heavy  burden,  wliich  we  have  no  strength  to  bear. 

"  IIow  lonj?  beneath  the  law  I  lay 
In  bonda;^c  and  distress! 
I  toiled  the  precept  to  obey, 
But  toiled  without  success." 

Oh !  it  is  hard  serving  the  law.  He  is  a  cruel  taskmaster  ; 
the  whip  is  always  going,  and  the  flesh  is  always  bleeding.  It 
is  hard  service.  Weary  and  faint,  we  fall  down  under  it,  and 
feel  it  to  be  a  load  intolerable  to  be  borne.  Well  is  Haggi  cho- 
sen as  the  type  of  the  law,  for  indeed  it  gendereth  unto  bondage  ; 
and  well  was  blazing  Sinai  chosen  as  its  representative,  for  even 
Moses  said,  when  standing  upon  that  mountain,  "  I  do  exceed- 
ingly fear  and  quake."  To  be  clean  divorced  from  all  legal  hope 
is  a  blessed  preparation  for  gospel  marriage  with  Christ.  It  was 
well  that  rowing  hard  made  the  mariners  feel  their  inability  to 
cope  wdth  the  tempest ;  and  it  is  best  of  all  when  creature  efforts 
produce  a  clear  discovery  of  creature  weakness. 

Another  good  result  will  sometimes  follow.  The  man  passion- 
ately striving  to  save  himself  by  keeping  the  \ii\7,Jinds  out  the 
spirituality  of  that  law^  a  spirituality  which  he  never  saw  before. 
He  has  given  up  outward  acts  of  sin,  but  on  a  sudden  he  is 
startled  to  find  that  though  he  has  given  them  all  up  in  open 
fact,  yet  that  he  is  condemned  for  allowing  the  thought  of  them 
in  his  heart.  Even  a  look  may  be  fornication,  though  no  act  of 
Bin  shall  follow  it.  He  remembers  that  even  the  wish  of  his 
heart  may  be  theft ;  and  that  covetousness  is  not  only  strahiing 
after  another  man's  goods,  but  envying  him  the  enjoyment  of 


LABOR  IN  VAIN.  847 

tbem.  Now,  he  finds  the  work  is  impossible  inQ,cd  ;  for  he  might 
Booner  hold  the  winds  in  liis  fist  than  control  his  passions,  or 
witli  his  breatli  blow  the  sea  into  a  calm,  sooner  than  he  could 
restrain  the  impetuous  propensities  of  his  nature.  O,  brethren, 
it  is  a  good  tiling  when  we  find  that  the  commandment  of  God 
is  exceeding  broad,  —  when  we  see  the  sharpness  of  this  great  axe 
of  the  law,  and  how  it  cuts  at  the  very  root  of  the  tree,  and 
leaves  us  no  green  thing  standing  wherein  we  can  boast  our- 
selves. So  far  so  good  ;  fleshly  effort,  overruled  by  divine 
grace,  has  helped  us  to  the  discovery  of  the  grandeur  and  dig- 
nity of  the  divine  law. 

But  I  am  afraid  that  much  of  this  toil  and  labor  is  very  mis- 
chievous, because  it  mahes  unbelief  talce  a  firmer  grip.  It  is 
easier  to  comfort  a  soul  who  has  been  a  short  time  in  darkness, 
than  it  is  to  comfort  one  who  has  given  way  a  long  time  to  an 
unbelieving  state  of  heart.  I  remember  one,  —  I  believe  she  is  in 
darkness  now,  and  if  I  remember  right,  it  is  ten  years  ago  since 
first  she  fell  into  these  doubts  and  fears,  —  and  I  am  sometimes 
afraid  she  will  never  see  the  light,  because  it  has  become  chronic 
with  her.  Giant  Despair's  prisoners  do  not  all  escape  ;  he  has  a 
yard  full  of  bones  ;  these  are  the  relics  of  willing  prisoners  who 
would  not  be  comforted,  and  put  out  their  own  eyes  to  avoid  the 
light.  I  believe  that  some  sinners  make  excuses  for  themselves 
out  of  their  despair,  and  that  they  let  their  doubts  and  fears 
grow  till  they  cast  a  thick  shadow,  like  Jonah's  gourd,  and  then 
they  sit  down  with  a  miserable  sort  of  comfort  beneath  the  leaves. 
"  There  is  no  hope,  therefore  will  I  go  on  in  my  sins  ;  there  is 
no  hope  for  me,  therefore  let  the  worst  come  to  me  ;  I  can  but 
be  damned  ;  I  will  fold  my  arms,  and  sit  still."  Oh,  it  is  a  dam- 
nable temptation  this  ;  it  is  one  which  ruins  multitudes,  I  am  sure. 
This  is  Satan's  man-trap  :  beware  of  it.  This  is  the  devil's 
stocks  in  the  inner  prison :  he  is  to  be  pitied  who  is  laid  by  the 
heels  in  them.  While  you  are  rowing  hard  to  get  your  vessel 
to  land,  and  standing  out  against  the  gracious  plan  which  God 
has  ordained,  you  are  letting  the  nightmare  of  unbelief  grow 
into  a  dread  reality ;   you  are  letting  this  deadly  incubus  rest 


848  LABOPw  IN  TAIX. 

more  terribly  upon  your  hearts.  O,  sinner,  1  pray  God  deliver 
you  from  this  work-moiigering,  this  horrible  trying  to  save  your- 
self by  something  home-grown  home-spun.  If  we  could  cut  o^ 
the  head  of  your  self-righteousness,  we  would  have  hope  of  you. 
If  you  would  give  up  all  attempts  to  deliver  yourselves,  and 
leave  the  case  in  Christ's  hands,  the  t!:ing  would  be  done.  But 
while  you  are  thus  doubting  and  fearing,  you  are  sinking  deeper 
in  the  mire  ;  and  it  is  harder  to  get  you  out  now  than  ever  it 
was.  Remember  this  one  thing,  —  that  while  the  sinner  is  thus 
straining  himself  to  get  to  heaven  by  his  own  righteousness,  his 
day  of  wrath  is  getting  nearer.  He  is  adding  sin  to  sin  ;  he  is 
accumulating  the  fuel  for  his  own  burning,  —  filling  the  sea  of 
wrath  in  which  he  must  be  drowned  forever.  What !  when  I 
am  praying,  groaning,  and  crying  to  God,  and  when  I  am  trying 
to  mend  my  ways  and  do  my  best,  do  you  say  I  am  only  doing 
mischief  ?  I  do  say  it.  I  say  these  things  are  good  in  them- 
selves ;  but  if  you  are  resting  in  them,  you  are  so  flying  in  the 
teeth  of  God's  great  gospel,  so  insulting  the  dignity  of  the  great 
Saviour,  that  you  are  adding  sin  to  sin  ;  and  among  the  fagots 
for  your  burning  there  shall  be  none  so  diy,  which  shall  bum  so 
terribly,  as  your  own  good  wicked  works,  your  own  rebellious 
virtues,  your  own  proud,  detestable  righteousness,  which  you  set 
up  in  opposition  to  the  merit,  blood,  and  righteousness  of  God's 
appointed  Mediator.  Gold  is  good  enough  ;  but  if  you  bow  down 
before  the  golden  calf,  I  will  hale  the  gold  because  you  worship 
it.  Your  morality  is  good  enough  ;  but  if  you  trust  to  it,  I  will 
hate  your  morality  because  it  is  your  destruction.  Sinner,  I 
pray  you  remember  that  your  life  is  being  shortened  all  the 
while  you  tarry  in  the  plains  of  self.  Time  flies,  and  you  fade 
like  a  leaf,  while  your  righteousness,  which  are  but  filthy  rag-, 
are  crying  out  against  you.  You  are  laboring  without  success  ; 
but  more,  you  are  losing  time  which  might  have  been  turned  to 
better  purpose.  While  you  are  spending  your  money  for  that 
which  is  not  bread,  you  are  getting  nearer  and  nearer  to  the 
dread  famine  when  there  shall  be  no  bread  to  buy.  While  you 
are  trying  to  get  this  fool's  oil,  with  which  to  keep  your  lamps 


LABOR  IX  VAIN.  349 

bui-ning,  the  bridegroom  is  coming  and  the  midniglit  is  hastening, 
when  you  shall  have  to  say,  "  Give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps 
are  gone  out."  Tliere  shall  be  no  time  then  for  you  to  buy ;  for 
^he  darkness  shall  have  come  upon  you,  and  the  door  shall  be 
shut,  and  the  bridegroom's  supper  shall  have  begun.  Oh  that  J 
could  have  some  power  to  induce  you  not  to  follow  any  longei 
these  fine  ways  of  yours,  these  proud,  deceptive  plans  !  Oh  thai 
you  would  receive  God's  plan  of  redemption,  and  enjoy  the 
peace  which  it  brings  ! 

IV.  We  will  try  to  explain  God's  plan,  and  then  we  have 
done.     That  is  our  fourth  point :  that  the  way  op  safety 

FOR  SINNERS  IS  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  THE  SACRIFICE  OP  ANOTHER 
ON  THEIR  BEHALF, 

Here  is  Jonah  ;  leave  out  the  fact  that  he  was  sinful,  and  he 
becomes  an  eminent  type  of  Christ.  "  Take  me  up  and  cast  me 
into  the  sea,  and  the  sea  shall  become  calm  under  me."  Sub- 
stitution saves  the  mariners  ;  substitution  saves  sinners.  This  is 
the  essential  oil  of  gospel  truth.  Jesus  Christ  saith  to  his  peo- 
ple, "  I  am  cast  into  the  sea ;  there  in  that  depth  I  sleep  for  a 
while,  like  Jonah,  to  rise  again  on  the  third  day :  but  my  being 
cast  into  the  sea  makes  a  deep  calm  to  you."  How  very  sim- 
ple this  process  was  !  They  take  Jonah,  —  he  himself  desires  it, 
—  he  is  thrown  overboard,  and  the  deeps  swallow  him  ap.  Ah, 
poor  Jonah  !  what  a  fall !  what  a  terrible  descent !  what  a  fright- 
ful end  to  his  prophetical  career  !  Down  he  goes.  Did  not  I 
see  huge  jaws  opening  amid  the  billows  ?  TVas  he  not  devoured 
by  some  terrible  monster  ?  Poor  fellow  !  he  must  have  our  i)ity. 
But,  how  strange  it  is  !  Why,  the  wind  has  ceased  ;  it  has  dropped 
dead  ;  and  the  waves  seem  to  be  playing  now  where  they  were 
battling  fien^ely  a  moment  ago !  Nay,  the  sea  is  glassy  ;  we  need 
not  the  oars  any  longer ;  up  with  the  sails  ;  we  shall  soon  be  safe 
in  port.  An  odd  thing  this,  the  drowning  of  one  becomes  the 
safety  of  all.     Mariners,  let  us  sacrifice  to  Jonah's  God. 

Ah  I  it  is  a  strange  and  marvellous  thing.  It  is  that  which  sets 
angels  singing,  and  makes  the  redeemed  spirits  woader  on  for- 
30 


850  LABOR  IN  VAIN. 

ever,  that  Jesus  came  down  into  this  ship  of  our  common  liuman- 
ity  to  delive  it  from  tempest.  The  vessel  had  been  tossed 
about  on  all  sides  by  tlie  waves  of  divine  wrath.  Men  had  been 
tugging  and  toiling  at  the  oar ;  year  after  year  philosopher  and 
teacher  had  been  seeking  to  establish  peace  with  God ;  victims 
had  been  offered,  and  rivers  of  blood  had  flowed,  and  even  the 
first-boi-n  of  man's  body  had  been  offered  up  :  but  the  deep  was 
still  tempestuous.  But  Jesus  came,  and  they  took  him  and  cast 
him  overboard.  Out  of  the  city  they  dragged  him.  "  Away  'A^ith 
him,  away  with  him  ;  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live."  Out  of 
all  comfort  they  had  cast  him  long  ago  :  now  from  society  they 
east  him  too.  From  pity  they  cast  him  ;  from  all  sympathy  they 
cast  him ;  and  at  last  from  life  itself  they  hurl  him,  whilo.  God 
stands  tliere  to  help  them  to  cast  him  into  a  sea  of  woes.  As  lie, 
Jesus,  dies,  there  is  a  calm.  Deep  was  the  peace  which  fell 
upon  the  earth  that  dreadful  day  ;  and  joyous  is  that  calm  which 
yet  shall  come  as  the  result  of  the  casting  out  of  that  representa- 
tive man  who  suffered  the  just  for  the  unjust  to  bring  us  to  God 
Brethren,  I  wish  I  had  meet  words  with  which  I  could  fitly 
describe  the  peace  which  comes  to  a  human  heart  when  we  learn 
to  see  Jesus  cast  into  the  sea  of  divine  wrath  on  our  account. 
Conscience  accuses  no  longer.  Judgment  now  decides  for  the 
sinner  instead  of  against  him.  Memory  can  look  back  upon  past 
sins,  with  sorrow  for  the  sin  it  is  true,  but  yet  with  no  dread  of 
any  penalty  to  come.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  a  man  to  know 
that  he  cannot  be  punished ;  that  heaven  and  earth  may  shake, 
but  he  cannot  be  punished  for  his  sin.  If  God  be  unjust  I  may 
be  damned  ;  but  if  God  be  just  I  never  can  be.  That  is  how 
the  saved  sinner  stands.  Christ  has  paid  the  debt  of  his  people 
to  the  last  jot  and  tittle,  and  received  the  divine  receipt ;  and 
unless  God  can  be  so  unjust  as  to  demand  twice  payment  for  one 
debt,  no  soul  for  whom  Jesus  died  can  ever  be  cast  into  helL 
Now,  it  seems  to  be  one  of  the  very  principles  of  our  nature  to 
believe  that  God  is  just.  W(^-  feel  it,  and  that  gives  us  our  ter- 
ror at  first.  But  is  it  not  marvellous  that  this  very  same  frst 
principle  —  the  belief  that  God  is  just  —  becomes  afterwards  th« 


LABOli  IN    VAIN.  351 

pillar  of  our  confidence  and  peace  ?  If  God  be  just,  T,  a  sinner, 
alone  and  without  a  substitute,  must  be  punished.  Christ  stands 
in  my  stead,  and  is  punished  for  me ;  and  now,  if  God  be  just,  I, 
a  sinner,  standing  in  Christ,  can  never  be  punished.  God  must 
change  his  nai'ire  before  one  soul  for  whom  Christ  was  a  substi- 
tute can  ever,  by  any  possibility,  suffer  the  lash  of  the  law. 

I  must  confess  I  do  not  understand  the  atonement  which  some 
preach.  An  atonement  which  does  not  atone,  —  a  redemption 
which  does  not  redeem,  —  a  redemption  which  intends  to  redeem 
all  men  of  Adam  born,  and  yet  leaves  the  major  part  in  slavery, 
—  an  atonement  which  makes  full  atonement  for  all  human  sin, 
and  leaves  men  to  be  condemned  afterwards,  —  I  cannot  under- 
stand that.  But  I  do  understand  a  substitution :  Christ  taking 
the  place  of  the  believer,  —  Christ  suffering  the  quid  pro  quo 
for  the  believer's  punishment,  —  Christ  rendering  an  equivalent 
to  divine  WTath  for  all  that  his  people  ought  to  have  suffered 
as  the  result  of  sin.  I  riglit  well  and  right  joyously  under- 
stand that  the  believer,  knowing  that  Christ  suffered  in  his 
stead,  can  shout  with  glorious  triumph,  "  Who  shall  lay  any- 
thing to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ? "  Not  God,  for  he  hath 
justified ;  not  Christ,  for  he  hath  died,  "  yea,  rather,  hath  risen 
again."  My  hope  is  not  because  I  am  not  a  sinner,  but  because 
I  am  a  sinner  for  whom  Christ  died.  My  trust  is  not  that  I  am 
holy,  but  that,  being  unholy,  Christ  died  for  me.  My  rest  is,  her' , 
not  in  what  I  am  or  shall  be,  or  feel,  or  know,  but  in  wdiat  Christ 
is  and  must  be,  —  in  what  Christ  did,  and  is  still  doing  as  he 
stands  before  yonder  throne  of  glory. 

O  beloved !  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  get  right  out  of  self.  But 
many  believers  seem  to  have  one  foot  on  self  and  one  on  Christ. 
They  are  like  the  angel  with  one  foot  on  the  sea  and  the  other 
5n  the  land  ;  only,  being  angels,  they  cannot  stand  on  such  a  foot- 
ing. Put  both  feet  on  the  rock,  beloved ;  stand  altogether  on 
Christ.  Arminianism  is  one  foot  on  Christ  and  tlie  other  foot  on 
eelf.  "  Christ  has  saved  me,"  says  the  Arminian  ;  there  is  his 
loot  on  the  land.  But  he  says,  "  I  must  hold  on  ;  it  depends  U])on 
me  whether  I  persevere  'o  tH  end;"  there  is  Ids  foot  on  the 


3-')2  LABOR  IN  VAIN. 

sea.  If  he  does  not  mind,  that  foot  will  give  way.  But  Low 
blessed  it  is  when  the  Christian  can  say,  "  I  am  saved  "  !  Tliere 
is  no  if,  no  hut  about  it.  There  is  nothing  lor  me  to  do  to  com- 
plete my  salvation.  It  is  all  done.  There  is  not  one  jot  or 
tittle  left  to  complete  the  covenant  of  my  salvation  ;  the  covenant 
of  effectual  grace  is  all  written  cut  in  the  fair  handwriting  of  my 
Saviour,  with  a  pen  dipped  in  his  own  blood,  and  it  guarantees 
all  spiritual  blessings  to  me  forever.  The  edifice  has  been  built, 
and  there  is  not  wanted  a  beam,  or  a  brick,  or  even  a  nail  or  a 
tin-tack  to  complete  it ;  from  its  foundation  to  its  toi>stone  it  is 
all  of  grace,  and  all  perfect.  My  garment  of  salvation  has  been 
woven  from  the  top  throughout;  there  is  not  a  rag  of  thread  or  stitch 
of  mine  wanted  to  complete  it.  "  It  is  finished,"  said  the  Sa- 
viour, as  he  dipped  it  for  the  last  time  in  the  glorious  carmine 
of  his  own  blood,  and  made  a  rich  royal  robe  for  his  people  to 
wear  forever.  O  brethren  !  if  there  were  one  stone  to  be  put  to 
the  walls  of  our  salvation,  one  single  trowel-full  of  mortar  to 
make  the  stones  set  firmly,  it  would  be  all  undone,  all  in  ruin  ; 
but  the  whole  of  it  has  been  completed.  Stone  and  mortar,  from 
basement  to  summit,  all  has  been  completed  by  sovereign  grace. 
And  what  shall  you  and  I  do  ?  Since  Jesus  has  been  cast 
overboard  for  us,  let  us  now  rest  in  perfect  quiet ;  let  us  enjoy  the 
peace  "  that  passeth  all  understanding,  which  shall  keep  our  hearts 
and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus."  And  then,  having  been  saved 
in  such  a  way  as  this,  let  us  now  go  to  our  work  for  God ;  not  to 
win  life,  not  to  win  heaven,  —  life  and  heaven  are  ours  already,  — 
but,  loved  by  him,  let  us  now  love  him  with  a  perfect  heart.  The 
man  who  has  not  attained  to  rest  in  Jesus  is  incapable  of  virtue. 
A  man  who  does  anything  for  his  own  salvation,  acts  from  a 
selfish  motive,  does  everything  for  himself,  and  has  no  virtue  in 
him  ;  but  the  man  who  is  saved,  who  knows  there  is  nothing  for 
him  to  do  either  to  put  himself  into  salvation  or  to  keep  himself 
in  it,  knowing  that  all  is  now  finished,  having  no  need  to  do  any- 
thing for  self,  —  he  does  everything  for  God,  and  is  holy  in  heart 
and  life.     Now,  he  can  sing  with  Toplady : 


LA  DOR  IN  VAIN.  353 

*' Loved  of  my  God,  for  him  a^a\n 

With  love  intense  I'd  burn; 

Chosen  of  him  ere  time  began, 

I'd  choose  him  in  return." 

Let  us  sliow  that  this  is  the  true  root  of  virtue.  Let  us  teach 
men  who  say  this  doctrine  is  licentious,  that  it  is  the  most 
heavenly  soil  in  which  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  can  grow.  Like 
a  genial  sunshine  is  this  doctrine  to  our  fruits  to  ripen  them ; 
like  a  heavenly  shower  to  bring  them  forth.  God  give  thee, 
sinner,  to  rest  in  my  Saviour ;  God  give  thee,  saint,  to  li/e  (o 
thy  Saviouj  ;  and  he  shall  have  the  praise  in  both  cases.  AiDen 
30* 


SERMON  XIX 


GOD  IS  WITH  us. 

"IF  GOD  3K  FOB  UB,  WHO  CAK  BE  AGAINST  UST  "  —  KomanB  ViU.  SI. 

The  truth  here  asserted  is  indisputable.  Even  heathens  hare 
taken  this  for  their  motto,  and  emblazoned  it  upon  their  stand- 
ards of  war.  "  God  is  for  us  !  "  has  been  the  war-cry  of  many  a 
warrior  as  he  has  dashed  to  the  fight.  However  out  of  place  it 
was  in  such  association,  its  force  was  clearly  perceived.  Our 
text,  however,  protects  itself  from  ill-usage,  for  you  observe  that 
the  text  is  guarded  with  the  little  word  "  if,"  as  a  sentinel.  No  man, 
therefore,  has  any  right  to  the  treasures  of  this  text  unless  he 
can  give  the  pass-word  and  answer  the  question.  It  is  not  every 
man  who  can  say  that  God  is  on  his  side ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
most  of  men  are  fighting  against  the  Lord.  By  nature  we  are 
the  friends  of  sin,  and  then  God  is  against  us ;  with  all  the  powers 
>of  justice  he  is  against  us  for  our  destruction,  unless  we  turn  and 
repent.  Is  God  for  us  ?  Remember  he  is  so  if  we  have  been 
reconciled  to  him  by  the  death  of  liis  Son  ;  but  an  absolute  God 
must  be  in  arms  against  us,  for  even  our  God  is  a  consuming 
fire.  It  is  only  when  we  behold  the  Lord  Jehovah  in  the  person 
of  Jesus  Christ  that  our  hope  and  joy  can  begin.  AVhen  we  seo 
Deity  incarnate,  —  when  we  see  God  surrendering  the  glories  o^ 
his  throne  to  become  man,  and  then  stoo}>ing  to  the  shameful 
death  of  the  cross,  —  it  is  then  that  we  perceive  Immanuel, 
"  God  with  us ;"  and,  perceiving  him,  we  feel  tha<  he  is  on  our 
eide.  Question  th3^self  then,  soul,  whether  thou  art  in  Christ, 
He  who  is  not  with  Christ  is  not  with  God.     If  thou  art  without 


GOD  IS  WITH  US  855 

Christ,  thou  art  without  God,  and  a  stranger  from  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel ;  but  if,  through  the  sprinkled  blood,  thou  canst 
say  that  thou  art  reconciled  unto  God,  then  take  the  full  mean 
ing  of  this  text,  and  feast  upon  it,  and  be  thou  blessed  ;  for  "  If 
God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  " 

We  shall  handle  the  text  thus, — and  may  the  Holy  Spirit  make 
it  profitable,  —  How  is  God  for  us  ?  secondly,  Who  are  againsi 
us  ?  and,  thirdly.  Who  are  not  against  us  ? 

I.     First,  How  IS  God  for  us  ? 

Augustine,  in  his  notes  upon  the  verses  preceding  our  text, 
has  very  beautifully  said  that  God  is  for  us,  according  to  the 
preceding  words  of  the  chapter,  in  four  senses.  Look  back  a 
verse  or  two,  and  you  will  find  it.  He  is  for  us,  for  he  hath  pre- 
destinated us ;  he  is  for  us,  for  he  hath  called  us  ;  he  is  for  us, 
for  he  hath  justified  us ;  he  is  for  us,  because  he  hath  virtually 
glorified  us,  and  will  actually  do  so.  To  the  people  of  God  here 
are  four  very  prolific  subjects  of  thought. 

1.  God  is  for  uSy  because,  according  to  the  words  of  the  apostle, 
he  hath  predestinated  his  people  to  he  conformed  to  the  image  of 
his  own  dear  Son.  Now,  if  God  hath  predestinated  us  to  eternal 
life,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  Must  not  the  predestinating  decree 
of  God  take  efiect  ?  If  God  hath  determined  it,  who  shall  dis- 
annul it  ?  If  God  hath  said  it  shall  be,  who  is  he  that  shall  stay 
his  hand,  or  resist  the  omnipotent  fiat  of  the  Most  High  ?  He 
said,  *'  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light ; "  he  bade  the 
world  spring  out  of  nothing,  and  forth  it  came.  All  things  obey 
him;  heaven  adores  him,  hell  trembles  at  him.  No  creature 
can  resist  him.  As  the  potter  moulds  the  clay  according  to  his 
own  will  while  it  revolves  upon  the  wheel,  even  so  the  infinite, 
the  omnipotent  Jehovah  doeth  according  to  his  good  pleasure  in 
the  armies  of  heaven  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  this  lower 
world.  "  It  is  he  that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of  the  earth,  and 
the  inhabitants  thereof  are  as  grasshoppers  ;  "  he  taketh  up  the 
isles  as  a  very  little  thing :  who  then,  out  of  these  little  things, 
cap  ^^six\{\  a/yainst  or  resist  him  ?     See,  my  brethren  the  fcrce  of 


856  GOT)  LS  WITH  us. 

God's  decree  of  old  in  the  casr  of  Ibrael.  The  Lord  had  j^rora- 
ised  to  Abraham  that  his  seed  should  inherit  the  whole  land  of 
Canaan,  from  the  river  of  Egypt  unto  the  great  river,  the  river 
Euphrates.  See,  amid  the  smoke  of  the  brick-kilns,  Israel  toils 
in  Egypt.  How  was  God's  decree  to  be  fulfilled  ?  When  God 
makes  bare  his  arm,  jou  shall  see  and  wonder.  Pharaoh  and 
all  his  hosts  cannot  hold  those  captives  whom  God  determines  to 
set  free.  There  they  go,  led  forth  like  sheep  by  the  hands  oi' 
Moses  and  Aaron.  They  cross  the  desert,  until  they  come  t(t 
the  sea,  even  to  the  Red  Sea.  See,  the  mighty  stream  rolls  be- 
fore them,  and  their  ferocious  enemies  are  behind  ;  but  the  Lord 
hath  determined  that  they  shall  inherit  the  land,  and  therefore 
neither  can. the  sea  refuse  to  divide,  nor  can  Pharaoh  save  him- 
self when  he  goeth  down  into  the  depths  thereof.  They  are  in 
the  wilderness  :  famine  shall  destroy  them.  No ;  the  heavens 
drop  with  manna.  Thirst  shall  scorch  thera.  No ;  the  rock 
follows  them  with  its  living  stream.  The  serpents  shall  surely 
bite  them.  Nay,  but  the  brazen  serpent  is  lifted  up,  and  who- 
soever looketh  shall  be  healed.  The  Amalekites  attack  them, 
but  while  Moses  holds  up  his  hands  Joshua  puts  the  foe  to  tlie 
route.  They  come  to  the  banks  of  the  Jordan  :  what  ailed  thee, 
O  Jordan,  that  thou  wast  driven  back  ?  The  priests  go  through 
dry-shod,  and  all  the  people  of  God  march  after  them.  Then  the 
Canaanites,  with  their  chariots  of  iron,  came  against  them  in 
battle ;  the  kings  of  mighty  cities  anointed  the  shield,  and  laid 
liold  on  sword  and  buckler ;  but  which  of  them  prevailed  ?  Did 
not  Jehovah  destroy  them  all  ?  As  he  had  given  them  Og,  king 
of  Bashan,  because  "  his  mercy  endured  forever,"  and  Sihon,  king 
of  the  Amorites,  "because  his  mercy  endured  forever  ;  "  so  not 
a  man  could  stand  against  them  until  they  possessed  the  land. 
The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  fulfilled  his  own  decree.  His  own 
right  hand  and  his  holy  arm  hath  gotten  him  the  victory.  As 
with  a  rod  of  iron  he  dasheth  his  enemies  in  pieces  like  a  pot- 
ter's vessel.  None  could  withstand  the  hosts  of  Israel ;  the  walled 
cities  were  cast  down,  and  the  people  of  God  dwelt  in  the  fat  of 
the  land.     See,  beloved,  the  result  of  God's  decree.     The  song 


GOD  IS  WITH  US.  357 

of  Jacob  were  feeble  and  weak,  but  yet  the  Lord  made  them 
strong  enough  to  drive  out  the  Anakim,  who  were  men  of  gigan- 
tic stature ;  for  his  purpose  shall  stand  ;  he  will  do  all  his  pleas- 
ure. Lot  us  beware  of  fighting  against  one  who  has  God  in 
league  with  him,  for  it  is  in  vain  to  fight  against  God.  It  was  a 
good  remark  of  the  soothsayers  to  Hainan  of  old ;  they  said,  "  If 
Mordecai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews,  before  whom  thou  hast  be- 
gun to  fall,  thou  shall  not  prevail  against  him,  but  shalt  surely 
fall  before  him ; "  and  so,  if  any  man  be  of  the  company  of  the 
elect,  —  if  he  be  one  of  those  whose  names  are  written  in  the  book 
of  life,  —  his  enemies  may  contend,  but  they  shall  never  prevail 
against  him.  He  must  stand  whom  the  Lord  ordains  to  hold ; 
and  if  God  determines  his  salvation,  neither  mortal  nor  infernal 
power  shall  prevail  to  destroy  him.  On  this  account  we  may 
boldly  say,  with  the  apostle,  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us  ?  "  You  cannot  believe  in  a  disappointed  God  ;  you 
cannot  imagine  the  imperial  decree  from  the  throne  of  heaven 
treated  as  waste  paper.  It  would  be  far  from  us  so  to  blaspheme 
God  as  to  think  that  any  power,  known  or  unknown,  can  ever 
overcome  him.  '**Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?  Hath 
he  commanded,  and  shall  it  not  come  to  pass  ?  "  If  thy  soul  be 
written  upon  the  palms  of  Jesus'  hands,  and  graven  on  his  heart, 
no  weapon  which  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper,  and  every 
tongue  which  riseth  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt  con- 
demn. 

2.  But,  in  looking  back,  you  observe  the  second  thing :  God 
is  on  our  side,  for  he  has  called  us.  In  the  Word  of  God  much 
stress  is  laid  upon  calling.  When  Abraham  left  the  land  of  his 
forefathers,  and  went  forth,  not  knowing  whither  he  went,  he  was 
quite  safe,  though  in  the  midst  of  implacable  enemies,  because 
God  had  called  him.  "  Who  raised  up  the  righteous  man  from 
the  east,  called  him  to  his  foot,  gave  the  nations  befcre  him,  and 
made  him  rule  over  kings  ?  "  Who  but  the  God  that  called  him  ? 
On  that  memorable  occasion,  when  Abraham  returned  from  the 
fslaughter  of  the  kings,  you  remember,  Melchizcdek  met  him. 
At  that  time  Abraham  was  in  great  peril,  for  there  was  everf 


858  GOD  IS   WITH  US. 

probability  that  the  defeated  kings  would  gather  again  theii 
troops,  would  form  alliances  with  other  kings,  and  would  cer- 
tainly come  up  to  cut  down  so  insignificant  a  person  as  that  wan- 
dering shepherd,  Abraham  ;  but  what  does  God  say  to  him  ?  -— 
"  Fear  not,  Abraham  ;  I  am  thy  shield,  and  thine  exceeding  great 
reward."  This  became  his  comfort  —  God  had  called  him.  He 
was  a  called  man  ;  and  where  God  calls,  he  will  not  desert  his 
chosen.  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance." 
He  does  not  reverse  the  call  which  he  has  given ;  but,  having 
once  called  his  children,  he  remaineth  faithful  to  the  call  he  has 
given.  To  use  the  illustration  we  have  had  before  :  when  God 
called  his  son  out  of  Egypt,  when  he  fetched  Israel  from  the 
furnace,  who  could  stand  against  the  called  Israelites  ?  Plague 
after  plague  ravaged  the  land.  The  cattle  died  ;  the  crops  were 
blasted ;  frogs  came  up  into  the  king's  chamber ;  lice  covered 
all  their  borders.  At  last  the  first-born  of  Egypt  died,  and  they 
besought  Israel  to  go  forth  ;  for  when  God  called  them  out,  who 
could  hold  them  in  ?  When  he  said  to  his  prisoners,  "  Go  forth," 
what  bolts  of  iron,  or  what  gates  of  brass  could  keep  them  cap- 
tives ?  Let  the  Lord  call  by  the  effectual  voice  —  who  is  he  that 
shall  stand  against  him  ?  Many  of  us,  I  trust,  have  heard  the 
sacred  call ;  w^e  have  made  our  calling  and  election  sure.  You 
know  how  you  were  called  from  darkness  to  light,  from  sin  to 
holiness,  from  self-righteousness  to  spiritual  faith  in  Jesus. 
Now,  he  who  hath  called  you  is  faithful,  and  he  will  not  forsake 
the  work  of  his  own  hands.  He  has  not  called  you  in  order  to 
put  you  to  shame  ;  he  has  not  quickened  you,  and  preserved  you, 
and  brought  you  thus  far  to  deliver  you  over  to  the  hands  of 
your  enemies.  "  Be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen 
thine  heart ; "  wait  upon  the  Lord  still,  for  his  call  will  give  thee 
comfort.     "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  " 

3.  But,  again :  God  proves  that  he  is  for  us  by  hsiving  justtjied 
us.  All  the  people  of  God  are  wrapped  about  with  the  right- 
eousness of  Christ,  and,  wearing  that  glorious  robe,  the  eye  of 
God  sees  no  fault  in  them;  Jehovah  sees  no  sin  in  Jacob, 
neither  iniquity  in  Israel.     Clnist  is  seen,  and  not  the  sinner; 


GOD  IS   WITH  US.  3j9 

Christ  being,  tlierefore,  perfection's  own  self,  the  believer  is  seen 
as  perfect  in  him.  God  regards  his  people  with  the  same  affec- 
tion as  that  wherewith  he  loves  his  only-begotten  Son.  He  hath 
pronounced  them  clean,  and  clean  they  are  ;  he  hath  proclaimed 
them  just,  covered  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  just 
they  are.  Come  on  thou  accusing  devil ;  come  on  ye  who  lay 
a  thousand  things  to  our  charge  :  but  if  our  Jesus  pronounces  our 
acquittal,  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  If  he  mounts  the  chariot 
of  salv^ation,  who  is  he  that  can  be  against  us  ?  Is  it  not  a  mys- 
teriously blessed  thing  to  wear  upon  one's  soul  the  mark  of  com- 
plete justification  ?  The  heathen  have  a  custom  of  marking 
themselves  upon  the  forehead  with  the  seal  of  their  god  ;  but, 
oh  !  what  a  seal  is  this  to  wear !  —  Avhat  a  mark  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
to  go  about  this  world  a  perfectly  justified  man  !  God  looketh 
upon  common  men  with  anger,  —  they  are  not  reconciled  unto 
him, — but  towards  his  people  he  looketh  always  with  eyes  of  love. 
No  anger  is  in  his  heart  to  them  ;  not  a  jot  of  wrath  :  aft  this  has 
been  put  away  through  the  great  sacrilice.  Towards  them  his 
whole  heart  goeth  out :  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  the 
righteous,  and  his  ears  are  open  to  their  cry."  Being  justified, 
they  have  peace  with  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  their  Lord.  O, 
dear  friends  !  if  God  be  at  peace  with  you,  it  matters  not  who  is 
at  war  with  you  ;  if  your  Master  acquits,  it  little  matters  who  con- 
demns ;  if  Jehovah  absolves,  your  name  may  be  cast  out  as  evil, 

—  you  may  be  ranked  among  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  —  your  came 
may  be  a  by- word  and  a  proverb,  only  fit  to  be  wrought  up  into 
the  drunkard's  song,  —  but  who  is  he  that  can  be  against  you  ? 
What  are  all  these  things,  if  put  into  the  balance,  but  lighter  than 
vanity,  if  Jehovah  himself  hath  justified  you? 

4.  And  yet,  again,  another  sweet  reflection  comes  here,  —  he 
hath  also  glorified  us.  Remember  the  four  golden  links  of  the  chain, 

-  - ''  Whom  he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called  ;  and  whom 
he  called,  them  he  also  justified ;  and  whom  he  justified,  them 
he  also  glorified."  Now,  in  one  sense,  God's  people  are  glorified 
even  now  ;  for  he  "  hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit 
together  in  heavenly  places  iu  Christ  Jesus."     Mark,  it  dotjs  nol 


300  GOD  IS  WITH  US. 

say,  "  He  bath  promised  tliiit  we  shall  sit  there,"  but  he  "  halh  ^ 
made  us  sit  there.  We  do  sit  there  at  this  hour,  for  Christ 
is  the  representative  of  QXQry  soul  ibr  whom  he  shed  his  blood  ; 
and  when  Christ  took  his  seat  in  heaven,  every  elect  soul  took 
his  seat  in  heaven  representatively.  Remember,  beloved,  that 
the  glorification  of  God's  people  is  a  certain  fact ;  it  is  not  a  thing 
which  may  be,  but  it  is  a  thing  which  must  be.  What  does  Jesus 
Christ  say  to  his  people  when  he  gathers  them  at  the  right  hand  ? 
"  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Do  observe  that. 
Do  you  think  God  has  prepared  a  kingdom,  and  that  he  will  not 
bring  his  people  there  ?  Moreover,  it  is  said,  "  prepared  for  you,'' 
—  for  you,  the  chosen  people  of  God  ;  and  do  you  imagine  thai 
the  covenant  wisdom  of  God  would  prepare  a  kingdom  for  men 
who  would  not  ultimately  get  there  ?  Would  he  plan  and  arrange 
how  to  make  them  eternally  blessed,  and  yet  suffer  them  to  per- 
ish by  the  way ?  " Prepared  yor  you''  remember,  " from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."  There  is  a  crown  in  heaven  which  no 
liead  can  fit  but  mine  ;  there  is  a  harp  there  which  no  fingers 
must  ever  touch  but  mine.  Child  of  God !  there  is  a  mansion  in 
heaven  which  will  never  be  rightly  tenanted  if  you  do  not  get 
there  ;  and  there  is  a  place  at  God's  right  hand  which  must  be 
empty :  it  will  be  said,  "  David's  seat  was  empty,"  unless  you 
shall  arrive  there.  Will  it  be  so  ?  Will  there  be  empty  man- 
sions in  heaven  ?  Will  there  be  crowns  without  heads  to  wear 
them  ?  Will  there  be  harps  without  hands  to  strike  them  ?  No ; 
the  muster-roll  of  the  redeemed  shall  be  read,  and  not  one  shall  be 
found  absent :  as  many  as  were  written  upon  the  breast-plate  of 
the  great  High  Priest  shall  be  securely  found  there. 

"  Not  death  nor  hell  shall  e'er  divido 
Ills  chosen  from  his  breast; 
In  the  dear  bosom  of  his  love 
They  must  forever  rest." 

This  gives  a  fourth  reason  why  God  is  for   us.     But,  O   mj 
brethren!   though  this  brings  in  the  context,  I  cannot  — it  ia 


GOD  IS  wrrn  cs.  a 61 

impossible  for  any  human  speech  to  bring  out  the  depth  of  the 
meaning  of  how  God  is  for  us.  He  was  for  us  before  the  worlds 
were  made ;  he  was  for  us,  or  else  he  never  would  have  given 
his  Son ;  he  was  for  us  even  when  he  smote  the  only-begotten, 
and  laid  the  full  weight  of  his  \\Tath  upon  him,  —  he  wa?  for  us, 
though  he  was  against  him ;  he  was  for  us  when  we  were  ruined 
in  the  fall,  —  he  loved  us  notwithstanding  all  ;  he  was  for  us 
when  we  were  against  him,  and  with  a  high  hand  were  bidding 
him  defiance  ;  he  was  for  us,  or  else  he  never  would  have  brought 
us  humbly  to  seek  his  face.  He  has  been  for  us  in  many  strug- 
gles. We  have  had  to  fight  through  multitudes  of  difliculties ;  we 
have  had  temptations  from  without  and  within :  how  could  we 
have  held  on  until  now  if  he  had  not  been  with  us  ?  He  is  for 
us,  let  me  say,  with  all  the  infinity  of  his  heart,  with  all  the  om- 
nipotence of  his  love,  —  for  us  with  all  his  boundless  wisdom ; 
arrayed  in  all  the  attributes  which  make  him  God,  he  is  for  us  — 
eternally  and  immutably  for  us  ;  for  us  when  yon  blue  skies  shall 
be  rolled  up  like  a  worn-out  vesture  ;  for  us  throughout  eternity. 
Here,  child  of  God,  is  matter  enough  for  thought,  even  though 
thou  hadst  ages  to  meditate  upon  it :  God  is  for  thee ;  and  if 
God  be  for  thee,  who  can  be  against  thee  ? 

II.    In  the  second  place.  Who  are  against  us  ? 

The  apostle  never  meant  to  say  that  Christians  have  no  ene- 
mies, for  he  knew  a  great  deal  better.  An  old  Latin  writer 
observes  upon  this  text,  that  the  succeeding  context  will  show  us 
the  enemies  we  have  who  are  against  us.  Very  briefly  let  us 
notice  that  there  are  four  main  enemies  who  conspire  against  the 
life  of  the  children  of  God ;  there  are  man,  the  world,  the  fiesh, 
and  the  devil.  These  always  will  be  against  us,  but  who  are 
they? 

1.  First,  there  is  man.  How  man  has  stiniggled  against  man  ! 
Man  is  the  wolf  of  mankind.  Not  the  elements  in  all  their  fury, 
nor  the  wild  beasts  of  prey  in  all  their  cruelty,  have  ever  been 
Buch  terrible  enemies  to  man  as  man  has  been  to  his  own  fellow. 
When  you  read  the  story  of  the  Marian  persecution  in  England, 
31 


862  GOD  IS  WITH  US. 

you  are  astounded  that  ever  creatures  wearing  a  bumau  form 
could  be  so  bloodlliirsty.  Call  these  Catholics  who  thus  perse- 
cuted the  Protestants  ?  Call  them  Catholics  ?  Much  better  call 
them  cannibals,  tor  they  behaved  more  like  savages  than  Clu'is- 
tians  in  their  bloody  martyrdoms  and  murders  of  the  saints 
of  God.  We  do  not  in  this  age  feel  the  cruelty  of  man  to  that 
extent,  but  this  is  only  because  the  custom  of  the  land  will  not 
allow  it ;  for  there  are  many  who  dare  not  smite  with  the  hand, 
v/ho  are  very  busy  in  laying  on  their  tongue,  and  this  not  by  ex- 
posing our  errors,  which  they  have  a  perfect  right  to  do,  but  in 
many  cases  the  children  of  God  are  misrepresented,  slandered, 
abused,  persecuted,  ridiculed  for  truth's  sake  ;  and  we  know 
many  instances  where  other  means  are  resorted  to,  —  anything 
to  drive  the  servants  of  God  away  from  their  integrity,  and  from 
their  simple  following  of  their  Master.  TVell  did  the  Lord  Jesus 
say,  "  Beware  of  men."  "  Behold  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in 
the  midst  of  wolves ;  be  ye  wise  as  serpents  and  harmless  as 
doves."  Do  not  expect  men  to  be  the  friends  of  your  piety  ;  or, 
if  they  are,  suspect  the  reality  of  that  piety  of  which  ungodly 
man  is  a  friend.  Thou  must  expect  to  be  sometimes  bullied  and 
sometimes  coerced,  to  be  sometimes  flattered,  and,  anon,  threat- 
ened ;  thou  must  expect  at  one  time  to  meet  with  the  oily  tongue 
which  hath  under  it  the  drawn  sword,  and  at  another  time  with 
the  drawn  sword  itself.  Look  out,  and  expect  that  men  will  be 
against  you.  But  what  are  they  all  ?  Suppose  every  living  man 
in  the  world  were  against  you,  and  that  you  had  to  stand  in  sol- 
itude like  Athanasius,  you  might  say,  as  Athanasius  did :  "  I, 
Athanasius,  against  the  whole  world ;  I  know  I  have  truth  on 
my  side,  and  therefore  against  the  world  I  stand."  Of  what  use 
was  the  malice  of  men  against  Martin  Luther  ?  They  thought  to 
bum  him,  but  he  died  in  his  bed  despite  them  all.  They  thought 
to  put  an  end  to  him,  but  his  little  tracts  went  everywhere,  and 
the  words  of  Luther  seemed  to  be  carried  on  the  wings  of  angels, 
until  in  the  most  distant  places  the  Pope  found  an  enemy  sud- 
denly springing  up,  where  he  thought  the  good  seed  had  all  been 
destroyed.  I  do  not  know  that  it  is  of  any  very  great  service  to  have 


GOD  IS  Win  I  us.  863 

numbers  witli  you.  I  question  wlicther  trulli  Las  not  generally 
to  be  with  the  minority,  and  whether  it  is  not  quite  as  honorable 
to  serve  God  with  two  or  three  as  it  would  be  with  two  or  three 
millions  ;  for  if  numbers  could  make  a  thing  right,  idolatry  ought 
to  be  the  right  religion ;  and  if  in  countries  across  the  sea 
numbers  made  the  thing  right,  why,  those  who  fear  the  Lord 
would  be  few  indeed,  and  idolatry  and  Romanism  would  be  the 
right  thing.  Never  judge  according  to  numbers  ;  say  they  are 
nothing  but  men  after  alL  If  they  be  good  men,  fight  on  their 
side ;  but  if  they  and  the  truth  fall  out,  fall  out  with  them.  Be  a 
friend  to  the  truth  ;  make  your  appeal  to  the  law,  and  to  the  tes- 
timony, and  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word  it  is  because 
there  is  no  light  in  them  ;  and  if  there  be  no  light  in  them,  do  not 
trust  your  soul  with  them  :  for  if  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  they 
shall  both  fall  into  the  ditch.  Who  then,  what  then,  are  men  ? 
Only  puppets  moved  by  God's  hand.  He  has  the  spring  to  puU 
them  all  which  way  he  wills,  and  if  they  will  not  serve  him  he 
can  soon  let  them  quietly  into  the  grave.  Therefore  be  not 
afraid  of  the  son  of  man,  who  is  but  a  worm,  a  little  heap  of  dust ; 
be  not  thou  dismayed  at  him ;  and  if  he  put  on  a  black  and  ter- 
rific face,  look  him  in  the  face  with  thine  own  truthfulness,  and 
put  him  to  the  blush.  That  was  grand  of  Latimer,  when  he 
preached  before  Henry  YIII.  He  had  greatly  displeased  his 
majesty  by  his  boldness  in  a  sermon  preached  before  the  king, 
and  was  ordered  to  preach  again  on  the  following  Sabbath,  and 
to  make  an  apology  for  the  offence  he  had  given.  After  read- 
ing his  text,  the  bishop  thus  began  his  sermon  :  "  Hugh  Lati- 
mer, dost  thou  know  before  whom  thou  art  this  day  to  speak  ? 
To  the  high  and  mighty  monarch,  the  king's  most  excellent  ma- 
Jesiyj  who  can  take  away  thy  life  if  thou  offendest ;  therefore, 
take  heed  that  thou  speakest  not  a  word  that  may  displease.  But 
then  consider  well,  Hugh,  dost  thou  not  know  from  whence  thou 
comest  —  upon  whose  message  thou  art  sent  ?  Even  by  the  great 
and  mighty  God,  who  is  all-present,  and  who  beholdeth  all  thy 
ways,  and  who  is  able  to  cast  thy  soul  into  hell !  Therefore., 
take  care  that  thou  deUverest  thy  message  faithfully."     He  then 


i364  GOD  IS  WITH  US. 

I)roceede<]  with  the  same  sernion  he  liad  preached  the  prei^dhig 
Sabbath,  but  "witli  considerably  more  energy.  Such  courage 
should  all  God's  children  show  when  they  have  to  do  with  man. 
Thou  art  thyseh^  nothing  but  a  worm ;  but  if  God  puts  his  truth  into 
thee,  do  not  play  the  coward,  or  stammer  out  his  message,  but 
stand  up  manfully  for  God  and  for  his  truth.  Some  people  are 
forever  crying  up  what  they  call  a  becoming  modesty.  Modesty 
is  very  becoming ;  but  an  ambassador  of  God  must  recollect  there 
are  other  virtues  besides  modesty.  If  Her  Majesty  sent  an  am- 
bassador to  a  country  with  whom  we  were  at  war,  and  the  little 
man  should  step  into  the  conference,  and  say,  "  I  humbly  hope 
you  will  excuse  my  being  here ;  I  wish  to  be  in  all  things  com- 
placent to  your  honors  and  lordships  the  plenipotentiaries  ;  I 
feel  I  am  a  young  man,  and  you  are  much  older  than  I  am,  and 
therefore  I  cheei-fully  submit  my  judgment  to  your  superior 
wisdom  and  experience,"  and  so  on, —  why,  I  am  sure  Her  Ma- 
jesty would  command  him  back  again,  and  then  command  him 
into  a  long  retirement.  What  business  has  he  to  humble  himself, 
when  he  is  an  ambassador  for  the  queen  ?  He  must  remember 
he  is  clothed  with  the  dignity  of  the  power  which  sent  him. 
And  even  so  is  God's  minister,  and  he  counts  it  foul  shame  to 
stoop  to  any  man  ;  he  takes  for  his  motto,  Gedo  nulli,  "  I  yield 
to  none  ;"  and,  preaching  God's  truth  in  love  and  honesty,  he  hopes 
to  be  able  to  render  a  fair  account  to  his  Master  at  last,  for  unto 
his  Master  only  doth  he  stand  or  fall. 

2.  The  second  adversary  is  tlie  world.  This  world  is  like  a 
great  field  covered  with  brambles  and  thorns  and  thistles,  and 
as  the  Christian  goes  through  it  he  is  continually  in  danger  of 
renduig  his  garments  or  cutting  his  feet.     Yet  — 

"  The  dear  path  to  thine  abode. 
Lies  through  this  barren  land." 

Every  citizen  of  heaven  must  be  taught  with  thorns  and  briers, 
as  were  the  men  of  Succoth.  Every  child  of  God  must  maich 
through  the  enemies'  land  ;  for  Christ  says,  "  I  pray  not  that  thou 
ehouldst  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldst  keep 


GOD  IS  wrrn  us.  3C5 

tlieiii  from  tho  evil."  Wheu  is  a  Cliristian  out  of  danger? 
Never.  If  lie  be  prosperous,  then  he  is  apt  to  grow  purse-proud 
or  carnally  secure ;  if  adversities  press  upon  him,  then  he  is  apt 
to  murmur  and  to  grow  unbelieving.  There  are  temptations  in 
the  higli  places  of  the  earth,  and  the  valleys  are  not  without 
them.  When  the  Christian  is  in  honor  he  is  in  great  peril.  Ah  I 
how  many  have  found  the  high  places  to  be  slippery  ones  1 
When  the  believer  is  in  shame  and  disrepute,  he  is  in  danger 
too,  for  many  professors  have  found  this  cross  too  heavy  for  their 
shoulders.  A  believer  ought  to  walk  through  this  world  expect- 
ing to  meet  with  an  enemy  behind  every  hedge,  reckoning  it  a 
wonder  if  he  shall  escape  for  a  single  day  without  a  bullet  from 
the  foe.  You  are  in  an  enemy's  country,  and  this  enemy  is  on 
^he  alert  continually.  You  may  sleep,  but  the  world  never  sleeps ; 
it?  customs  are  always  seeking  to  bind  you  with  their  chains  ; 
its  spirit  is  creeping  over  you  while  you  are  on  the  exchange,  or 
in  the  market,  or  even  in  the  family :  you  will  find  the  very  at- 
mosphere of  this  world  tends  to  make  you  sleep  as  do  others. 
You  will  have  much  ado  while  you  are  in  this  state  of  tempta- 
tion to  stand  your  ground,  and  unless  you  watch  and  pray,  the 
world  will  be  too  much  for  you.  O,  bretliren  !  I  would  that  we 
knew  the  world  to  be  more  our  enemy  than  we  do,  for  many 
walk  as  if  they  were  friends  with  this  world.  But  such  is  not 
the  Christian's  position;  he  can  say,  "The  world  is  crucified 
unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."  Luther  used  to  say  there  was 
no  love  lost  between  him  and  the  world  ;  for  the  world  hated  him, 
and  he  hated  it  no  less.  There  is  a  memorable  story  told  of  a 
good  old  minister,  when  some  young  minister  went  weeping  to 
him  because  he  had  been  slandered.  "  Ah,"  said  he,  "  that  is  a 
trouble  1  shall  never  have  again,  for  I  lost  my  character  the  first 
year  of  my  ministry,  and  slander  itself  can  say  no  more  than  she 
has  said."  God's  servants  must  expect  to  lose  their  characters  —  to 
have  every  virtue  denied  them,  and  every  vice  imputed  to  them ; 
but  under  all  this  they  can  face  the  world,  and  say  to  it,  "  Thou 
thinkest  badly  of  me,  dost  thou  ?  not  so  badly  as  I  think  of  thee. 
Thou  throw  esJ  this  and  that  in  my  teeth ;  I  throw  worse  thingg 
31* 


oG6  GOD  IS  WITH  US. 

in  tliine  ;  and  whereas  tliou  sayest  I  am  a  noisy  basy-body  and 
a  meddler,  I  will  tell  thee  I  purpose  to  be  viler  still,  and  to  be 
uoisier  still  against  thee,  and  to  meddle  yet  more  with  thy  vani- 
ties which  ruin  the  souls  of  men."  The  world  is  a  terrible  as- 
sailant if  we  are  left  alone  in  the  conflict ;  but  \vhat  is  the  world, 
afier  all,  if  God  be  for  us  ?  As  for  this  present  age,  where  will 
it  be  in  forty  years?  I  see  a  long  line  of  turf  mounds,  and 
many  a  "  Here  he  lies,"  and  this  generation  is  all  gone :  it  passeth 
away  in  the  fashion  thereof ;  it  is  like  a  candle-snuff,  and  he  that 
cares  for  it  is  like  a  man  worshipping  a  dying  taper.  Care  little 
for  this  world,  but  think  much  of  the  world  to  come.  This  poor 
quicksand  —  get  off  of  it,  lest  it  swallow  thee  up ;  but  yonder 
rock  of  ages  -^ build  thou  on  it,  and  thou  shalt  never  suffer  loss. 
3.  I  think  we  said  there  is  a  third  enemy,  and  that  is  the  flesh. 
It  is  the  worst  of  the  three.  We  should  never  need  to  fear  man 
nor  the  ^vorld  if  we  had  not  this  wicked,  flesh  to  carry  about  with 
us.  Inbred  corruption  is  the  worst  of  corruption.  "  Lord,"  said 
Augustine,  "  deliver  me  from  my  worst  enemy,  that  wicked  man 
myself."  If  a  Christian  could  lay  himself  down,  and  run  away 
from  himself,  and  never  see  himself  again,  he  would  be  delighted 
beyond  measure  ;  for  "  truly  in  me,  that  is  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth 
no  good  thing,"  is  the  experience  not  of  the  apostle  only,  but  of 
every  child  of  God.  When  you  would  do  good,  evil  is  present 
with  you ;  you  want  to  fly,  but,  like  the  hawk  which  hath  a 
chain  to  her  leg,  you  can  but  stretch  your  wings  and  flutter,  for 
you  cannot  mount  aloft.  You  long  to  feel  your  heart  as  hot  as 
an  oven,  but  there  is  a  mountain  of  ice  within  you  which  chills 
your  flaming  desires.  To  will  is  present  with  you  — oh !  if  you 
could  be  what  you  would  be  !  —  but  how  to  perform  that  which 
is  good  you  find  not,  by  reason  of  the  infirmity  and  weakness  of 
your  nature,  and  the  depravity  you  have  inherited  from  your 
parents.  Some  of  you  have  an  irritable  temper ;  it  will  be  your 
plague  until  you  die.  Others  find  that  though  you  desire  to  be 
liberal  to  the  cause  of  God,  yet  a  covetous  disposition  has  to  be 
struggled  with.  Some  have  to  fight  against  levity,  others  against 
pride ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  some  o^  us  whose  dailj^ 


GOD  IS  WTTH  IJ?.  367 

burden  is  to  fight  against  'le.^ptiiOericy  and  lowness  of  5piriU  r><2 
tliat  we  have  all  some  besetting  sin ;  lu-,  if  God  be  for  us.  w\\^. 
matters  the  flesh  ?  Ah,  poor  ^.esii. !  thtu  mayst  kick  and  strug 
gle  as  thou  wilt,  but  when  God  holds  tus  silver  sceptre  over  thee 
thou  shalt  surely  yield.  When  Jenovah  d^.crees  that  a  man 
shall  be  sanctified,  that  man's  flesh  may  cry  and  groan  but  th? 
furnace  shall  refine  him ,  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  purify  him,  and 
experience  shall  teach  him,  and  the  blood  of  Christ  shall  perfect 
him.  Despite  that  wicked  heart  of  ours,  we  shall  on  eagles 
wings  ascend,  and  be  found  without  fault  before  the  throne  ot 
God! 

4.  The  last  enemy  is  the  devil.  I  do  not  know  whether  he  is 
worse  than  the  flesh  or  not,  but  I  think  I  may  put  him  down  as 
being  about  on  a  par  with  it ;  for  when  the  devil  meets  our  flesh, 
the  two  shake  hands,  and  say,  "  How  dost  thou  do,  brother  ?  " 
Truly  the  two  are  brethren  —  for  our  flesh  was  originally  in  the 
family  of  wrath.  Ah !  that  arch-traitor  Satan  !  little  do  we  know 
what  temptations  he  is  plotting  and  planning  for  us  even  now. 
He  is  so  crafty,  that  he  understands  human  nature  better  thau 
human  nature  understands  itself.  He  has  been  playing  the  trade 
of  a  tempter  for  six  thousand  years,  —  he  ought  to  be  a  thorough 
master  of  the  business  ;  and  certainly  he  is.  He  who  made  us 
knows  more  of  us  than  Satan  does  ;  but,  next  to  God,  Satan  is 
the  best  student  of  humanity.  He  knows  our  weak  points,  too : 
he  understands  where  to  touch  us,  so  as  to  toucli  our  bone  and 
our  flesh ;  he  knows  how  to  cover  up  the  hook  with  the  bait ; 
for  evciy  soul  he  has  his  lure,  and  for  every  siuLer  he  has  his 
trap.  He  knoweth  how  to  take  one  this  way,  and  the  other  the 
opposite,  —  some  by  straining  after  pretended  spirituality,  and 
others  by  descending  into  the  grossest  sensuality.  Depend  on  it, 
my  brother,  thou  mayst  ttiink  thyself  to  be  safe  against  Satan, 
but  there  is  a  joint  in  thy  harness,  and  he  will  find  it  out ;  and 
remember,  as  one  leak  may  sink  a  ship,  so  one  weak  point  may 
be,  and  would  be,  thy  ruin,  if  God  did  not  prevent  it.  But  wliat 
matters  the  devil  when  we  have  this  text :  "  If  God  be  for  us, 
who  can  be  against  us  ?  "     The  devil   is  mighty,  but  God  ia 


368  GOD  IS  WITH  rs. 

almighty ;  Satan  is  strong,  but  all  strength  belongeih  unto  God. 
What  is  Satan,  after  all,  but  an  enemy  who  has  had  his  head 
broken  ?  He  is  n,  broken-headed  dragon.  The  Lord  has  a  hook 
in  his  nose,  and  a  bridle  in  his  jaws,  and  he  knows  how  to  pull 
him  back.  Sometimes  I  wish  he  would  take  him  up  a  link  or 
t\vo,  that  he  migi-t  not  be  so  busy  amongst  some  of  our  churches  : 
f)ut  he  is  a  chain;  d  enemy :  the  Lord  lets  him  go  just  so  far, 
but  never  any  fu/ther.  Oh  !  if  the  fiend  could  get  just  a  little 
further,  what  haT  3c  he  would  work !  You  know  how  it  was  with 
Job :  Satan  dareo  not  touch  his  flesh  at  first  —  he  could  only 
touch  his  childreu  and  cattle ;  he  had  to  get  permission  to  touch 
his  flesh,  and  even  then  he  dared  not  touch  his  life.  He  went 
as  far  as  his  fetLer,  and  vexed  poor  Job  with  sore  blains ;  he 
could  not  go  any  further,  for  God  restrained  him.  Rejaice, 
Christian,  whether  it  be  man,  or  the  whole  world,  or  thy  flesh, 
or  Satan,  if  God  hath  predestinated  thee,  called  thee,  justified 
thee,  and  in  the  j^erson  of  Jesus  Christ  glorified  thee,  thou  raayst 
put  the  whole  together,  and  then  say,  "  Who  can  be  against  us  ?  " 
"  As  chaff  is  driren  away,  so,  O  Lord,  thou  hast  driven  them 
away." 

III.  We  shall  close  our  meditation  this  morning  —  God  make 
it  profitable  to  hi.-  own  people  !  —  by  observing  who  are  those 
WHO  ARE  NOT  AGAINST  US  ;  for  there  are  some  who  cannot  be 
our  enemies.     Hi^re  is  a  very  pleasing  part  of  the  subject. 

God  the  Father  cannot  be  against  us.  He  is  our  Father ;  he 
cannot  be  against  his  own  children.  He  hath  chosen  us ;  he  will 
not  cast  us  away.  He  hath  adopted  us  into  his  family ;  he  will 
never  discard  us.  He  hath  been  pleased  to  ordain  us  unto  eternal 
life ;  he  will  nev;^r  reverse  the  decree.  He  was  for  us  in  the 
covenant  of  grace,  when  he  planned  the  way  to  save  rebellious 
man.  He  hath  been  for  us  in  the  great  ordering  of  providence ; 
all  things  have  workeu  together  for  good  for  us  until  now. 
We  wonder  how  vre  have  arrived  where  we  now  are  :  but  surely 
providence,  unde^  God,  has  wrought  wondrously  on  our  behalf. 
He  is  for  us  in  all  ^Se  decrees  which  are  yet  to  be  fulfilled 


GOD  IS  WITH  US.  365 

There  is  not  a  single  line  in  the  great  Book  which  is  againr^t  the 
Christian.  You  may  rest  assured  that  whetb«Br  earth  shall  rock 
and  reel,  or  the  moon  be  black  as  sackcl.th  of  hair,  or  the  earth 
be  licked  up  with  tongues  of  fire,  still  Jehovah  has  not  a  single 
thought,  nor  wish,  nor  word,  nor  look,  ..gainst  any  one  of  the 
blood-bought  ones  ;  they  ar*:  all  safe  in  him  God  ihe  Father 
cannot  be  against  us. 

Then  God  the  Son  is  not  against  us.  O,  beloved  !  how  sweetly 
he  has  been  for  us !  Methinks  I  see  him  now,  lifting  up  that 
face  all  covered  with  bloody  sweat,  and  saying  to  every  believer, 
"  I  am  for  thee  ;  these  gouts  of  gore  fall  to  :he  dust  for  you  ;  I 
sweat  gi-eat  drops  of  blood  that  I  might  redeem  you."  He  stands 
before  Pilate ;  and  when  he  is  brought  forth  with  the  "  Ecce 
homo"  I  think  I  hear  him  say,  "  Poor  sinner,  I  am  for  you/' 
I  see  him  carrying  the  cross  upon  his  bleeding  shoulders,  and 
every  step  he  takes  is  to  this  tune,  "  I  am  for  you."  I  behold 
him  bleeding  upon  the  tree,  with  outstretched  hands,  and  all  his 
wounds,  and  all  the  drops  of  blood  which  flo*v  from  his  side,  all 
say,  "  Christ  is  for  you."  To-day,  as  he  pleac^.s  before  the  eternal 
throne,  this  is  the  tenor  of  his  plea,  "I  am  f  t  you."  Wlien  he 
shall  come  a  second  time,  without  a  sin-offering,  unto  salvation, 
the  sound  of  the  mighty  trumpet  which  shall  herald  his  advent 
will  ring  out,  "  Christ  is  for  you,  O  ye  blood-bought  saints." 
When  he  shall  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  Father,  and  his  king- 
dom shall  come,  whereof  there  shall  be  no  cr/i,  this  shall  be  the 
tenor  of  that  kingdom,  "  I  am  for  my  peop'e ;  I  will  rule  my 
people  righteously,  and  bless  the  nations  uj-on  earth."  Christ 
cannot  be  against  you.  You  cannot  look  in(o  that  dear  face  of 
his  and  think  that  he  will  e^^er  leave  you.  Your  husband  is 
married  to  you,  and  he  has  proved  his  love  \  y  such  indisputable 
tokens,  that  you  must  not  —  oh  !  you  cannot  doubt  it.  Child  of 
God,  I  almost  defy  you  to  doubt  the  love  of  your  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  How  can  he  put  you  away?  Could  he  have  bought 
you  at  such  a  pri(;e  —  could  he  have  suffered  so  much  for  you, 
.and  yet  leave  you,  throw  you  away  upon  the  dunghill  ?  Impos- 
sible !  impossible  !  Those  wounds  forever  s(al  your  eveilastmg 
security. 


370  GOD  IS   WITH  US. 

Then  the  Hohj  Spirit  cannot  be  against  us.  He  must  always, 
as  the  comforter,  comfort  his  own  people  ;  as  the  illuminator,  he 
must  lead  us  into  the  truth  ;  as  the  great  givei  uf  life,  he  must 
always  quicken  us  from  our  death  of  sin.  Whatever  power  the 
Holy  Spirit  has,  it  is  all  engaged  for  us,  "  Lo !  I  am  with  you 
alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world." 

Then  the  holy  angels  —  these  cannot  be  against  us.  Wlien 
Elisha  opened  his  servant's  eyes,  the  servant  had  cried  before, 
"  Alas  !  master,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  when  he  saw  the  Syrians 
and  their  chariots  ;  but  now  he  sees  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of 
fire  round  about  Elisha.  It  is  so  with  you.  The  angels  are 
ministering  spirits,  who  minister  unto  the  heirs  of  salvation ;  they 
bear  you  up  in  their  hands,  lest  you  dash  your  foot  against  a 
stone.  Millions  of  spiritual  creatures  walk  this  earth,  both  when 
we  wake  and  when  we  sleep  ;  and  when  the  black  angels  come 
to  attack  us,  the  good  angels  contend  against  them,  and  many  a 
heavenly  duel  is  fought  where  none  but  spirit  eyes  can  see ; 
many  a  sacred  light  goes  on  for  the  defence  of  the  saints,  even 
as  Michael  fought  with  the  dragon  for  the  body  of  Moses.  The 
good  angels  are  all  for  us,  and  here  we  may  rejoice. 

Then  we  know  the  law  of  God  cannot  be  against  us.  It  was 
our  enemy  once  through  our  sins,  but  it  is  now  satisfied.  Christ 
has  made  it  honorable  ;  it  has  not  a  word  to  say  against  any  soul 
that  is  justified  in  Christ. 

The  justice  of  God  has  not  a  word  to  say  against  the  Chris- 
tian ;  on  the  contrary,  justice  is  well  content  to  confirm  the 
saving  decree ;  for,  says  Justice,  "  That  sinner  owes  me  nothing 
—  Christ  has  discharged  his  debts ;  I  will  not  put  that  sinner  in 
prison  —  I  have  no  right  to  do  so,  for  Christ  was  imprisoned 
instead  of  him ;  I  will  not  lay  my  whip  upon  his  shoulders,  for 
Christ  suffered,  with  his  much-ploughed  slioulders,  in  the  stead 
of  that  poor  believing  soul."  So,  Christian,  whoever  may  be 
against  you,  here  is  a  comfort  —  God  the  Father  God  the  Son, 
and  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  never  can  be  against  you :  the  angcds  of 
heaven,  the  law  and  justice  of  God,  must  alw.^ys  be  for  you  \ 
and  if  it  be  so,  who  can  be  against  you  ? 


GOD  IS  WITH  US.  371 

Two  remarks,  and  then  I  have  done  One  is,  there  is  an 
opposite  to  all  this,  and  it  belongs  to  some  who  are  present  liore 
this  morning.  If  God  be  against  you,  ^vho  can  be  for  jou  ?  If 
you  are  an  enemy  to  God  this  mornings  your  very  blessings  are 
curses  to  you  ;  your  pleasures  are  only  the  prelude  to  your  pains. 
Remember,  sinner,  that  whether  you  have  adversity  or  prosper- 
ity, so  long  as  God  is  against  you,  you  can  never  truly  prosper 
If  you  spread  yourself  like  a  green  bay  tree,  it  is  only  that  you 
may  be  ready  for  the  axe ;  you  may  be  fattened  with  wealth, 
but  you  are  only  prepared  as  the  bullock  for  the  slaugr^ter. 
Take  these  Avords  home,  I  pray  you,  and  let  them  ring  in  your 
ears  :  "  If  God  be  against  7ne,"  — just  that  supposition  —  a  sup- 
{(Ositlon  which  is  ftict,  because  you  have  not  believed  in  Christ, 
}-ou  have  not  given  your  heart  to  God.  "  If  God  be  against 
me  !"  Will  you  just  think  this  over  on  your  road  home  ;  take 
half  an  hour  this  afternoon  to  think  it  over.  "  If  God  be  against 
me,  what  then  9  —  what  will  become  of  me  in  time  and  eternity  ? 
If  God  be  against  me,  liow  shall  I  die  —  how  shaH  I  rise  again  ? 
How  shall  1  face  him  in  the  day  of  judgment,  if  God  be  against 
me?  "  It  is  not  an  impossible  "  if,"  but  an  "  if"  which  amounts 
to  a  certainty,  I  fear,  in  the  case  of  many  who  are  sitting  in 
tliis  house  to-day. 

Tlien,  Clu-istian,  liere  is  anotlier  thought,  and  I  have  done.  If 
God  be  for  you,  do  you  not  see  how  you  ought  to  be  for  God  ?  If 
God  has  espoused  your  cause,  ought  you  not  to  espouse  his  ?  I 
pleaded  with  you  last  Sabbath-day,  since  Christ  hath  pleaded  the 
causes  of  your  soul,  to  plead  the  cause  of  Christ.  There  is  a 
great  battle  which  has  only  just  begun.  The  trumpet  which  mus- 
ters the  warriors  soundeth  loud  and  long,  and  the  fight  will  be 
stern  and  desperate  between  Christ's  pure  truth  and  the  cere- 
monials of  the  world's  church  ;  and  ye  must  take  your  post,  every 
one  of  you,  on  one  side  or  the  other.  "  If  the  Lord  be  God, 
follow  him  ;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him."  One  side  or  the 
other  ye  must  be  on  ;  and  1  ask  you,  if  God  has  been  for  you  and 
defended  you,  stand  up  for  him.  Never  bate  a  jot  of  Christ's 
truth.     Not  a  hair  of  the  head  of  Christ's  truth  must  ever  be 


372  GOD  IS   WITH  US. 

euffered  to  be  tou^IieJ  with  the  smell  of  tlie  fire  of  compromise. 
Be  not  as  the  linrlots  were  who  stood  before  Solomon.  You 
remember  one  was  quite  content  to  have  hall'  the  living  child ; 
but  be  your  motto,  "  All  or  none  :  I  will  never  take  a  particle 
of  error.  Death  to  it  all !  "  No  amalgamation,  no  compromise, 
uo  peace  with  error.  The  men  of  this  generation  cry  to  rae, 
and  say,  "  Is  there  peace  ?  "  and  my  answer  is,  "  What  peace 
can  there  be  so  lo'ig  as  the  sins  of  Jezebel  are  so  many  ?  "  Then 
they  revile  me,  aDd  say,  "  Art  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel  ?  " 
"  I  have  not  troubled  Israel ;  but  thou,  and  thy  father's  house,  in 
that  ye  have  forsaken  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  and  thou 
hast  followed.  Bag  :im."  Stand  up  and  bear  witness  against  re- 
generation by  baptism,  and  against  those  who  use  popish  words, 
and  would  iiave  u  i  believe  that  it  is  rijht  to  attach  another  sense 
to  tli:m.  Take  your  part  with  Christ  and  his  despised  people, 
and  wh^'n  the  day  comes  when  he  shall  distribute  his  rewards, 
happy  shall  that  nan  be  who  never  flinched ;  and  blessed  shall 
he  be,  and  shall  s^  le  be,  who  stood  fast  in  the  evil  day,  and  stood 
still  in  the  integn'y  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  firmness  of  his  truth, 
firm  even  to  the  ^nd. 

The  Lord  blesL  you  in  this  thing  for  Christ's  sake.     Amco. 


TBS  SBTIK 


