The  Parables 
I        of  Our  Lord, 


s 

C\J 

i 


CD 


OUR    LORD'S    PARABLES. 


"Br 


SERMONS 


ON 


I     OUR  LORD'S  PARABLES. 


DELIVERED  AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  AND 
NEW  PARK  STREET  CHAPEL. 


BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON 

J1SUIT 

BIBL  MAJ. 

SEMINARY 


Pontoon  : 
PASSMORE     &     ALABASTER, 

PATERNOSTER   BUILDINGS,   E.G. 
1904. 

COPYRIGHT. 

48258 


LONDON : 

ALABAM'ER,    PASSMORK    AND    SONS,    PRINTERS, 
WHITKCROSS   STREET,    B.C. 


PARABLES    OF    OUR   LORD. 


The  figures  on  the  right  refer  to  the  order  in  which  the  Sermons  are  arranged. 


RECORDED    IN    ONE    GOSPEL    ONLY. 

The  Goodly  Pearl. 
Sormon 

No.                                               Title.  Text. 

1,121     A  Great  Bargain Matt.  xiii.  4  5,  46.          1 

The  Labourers  in  the   Vineyard. 

664     Early  and  Late  ;  OT,  Horro  Gratis       Matt.  xx.  1,  3,  5,  6.       2 
2,221     The  First  Last  and  the  Last  First  ,,       ,,10.  3 

The  Two  Sons. 

742     A  Sermon  to  Open  Neglecters  and 

Nominal  Followers  of  Eeligion  . .     Matt.  xxi.  28 — 32.        4 
1,838     Work  for  Jesus       ...  ,         „     28. 

The  Marriage  of  the  King's  Son. 

975     The  Parable  of  the  Wedding  Feast  Matt.  xxii.  2—4.  0 

1)8     Making  Light  of  Christ       .          ...  ,,        „      5.  7 
2,022     "  The  Wedding  was  Furnished  with 

Guests  ' ,  ,,        .,      10.  8 

2,024     What  is  the  Wedding  Garment?...  „        ,,       11  —  13.  9 

97G     The  Wedding  Garment     „        „      11—14.  10 

The   Ten  Talents. 

(  Matt.  xxv.  21,  30:  i 
1,541     Unprofitable  Servants        ...  and  11 

I  Luke  xvii.   1(). 
175     The  Two  Talents Matt.   xxv.   22,23.    12 

The  Sheep  and  the   Goats. 

071     The  Eeward  of  the  Eighteous     ...     Matt.  xxv.  31—36.     13 
1,234     The  Final  Separation  ,,        „     32.  14 

The  Seed  growing  Secretly. 

1,603     What  the  Farm  Labourers  can  do, 

and  what  they  cannot  do  ...     Mark  iv.  26 — 29         15 

The  Blind  Leading  the  Elitul. 
1,248     The  Choice  of  a  Leader Luke  vi.  39,  40.        16 

The  Two  Debtors. 

1,739     Bankrupt  Debtors  Discharged      ...     Luke  vii.  42.  17 

2,127     Love's  Competition  ,,       ,,     42,  43.          is 


VI  INDEX. 

The   Good  Samaritan* 
Sermon 

No.  Title.  Text. 

1,360     The  Good  Samaritan         Luke  x.  25— 37.         19 

473     Good  News  for  you  ,,     .,    33.  20 

The  Barren  Fig-Tree. 

650     Judgment  Threatening1,  but  Mercy 

Sparing  ., ..     Luke  xiii.  7,  8  21 

1,451     This  Year  also        ...          „       ,,     8.  22 

The  Great  Supper. 

1,354     All  Things  are  Ready — Come      ...  Luke  xiv.  17.  23 

578     A  Bad  Excuse  is  Worse  than  None  „        ,,      18.  24 

2,122     A  Straight  Talk     „        ,,     20.  25 

227     "  Compel  them  to  come  in "         ...  ,,       ,,     23.  26 

The  Man  Building  a  Tower. 

1,159     Counting  the  Cost Luke  xiv.  28— 30.     27 

The  King  going  to    War. 

632     Consider  before  you  Fight  ...     Luke  xiv.  31,  32.     28 

The  Lost  Piece  of  Silver. 

970     The  Lost  Silver  Piece        Luke  xv.  8 — 10.        29 

The  Prodigal  Son. 

„  f  Number  One  Thousand  :  or,  i  T    , 

i'000  \  "  Bread  enough  and  to  spai4  "    ...  }  Luke  xv'  17'  30 

113     Confession  of  Sin   ...  18.  31 


1,189  The  Turning  Point  

176  The  Prodigal's  Return      

588  The  Prodigal's  Reception 

2,236  Prodigal  Love  for  the  Prodigal  Son 

1,204  The  Reception  of  Sinners  ... 


20.  32 

20.  33 

20.  34 

20.  35 

22,  23.  86 


The   Unjust  Steward. 
192     The    Sunday-School    Teacher  — a 

Stewaid   ...  Luke  xvi.  2.  37 

The  Rich  Man  and  Lazarus. 

518     The  Bridgeless  Gulf          Luke  xvi.  26.  38 

143     A  Preacher  from  the  Dead  ...         „,     „     31.  39 

The   Unjust  Judge. 

850     The  Importunate  Widow  ...          ...     Luke  xviii.  1 — 8.       40 

1,963     The  Search  for  Faith         ,         „     8.  41 

The  Pharisee  and  the  Publican. 
1,949     A  Sermon  for  the  Worst  Man  on 

Earth       Luke  xviii.  13.  42 

216     Confession  and  Absolution  13.  43 


INDEX.  vii 

The  Ten  Pounds. 
Sermon 

No.                                              Title.  Text. 

1,960     The  Servants  and  the  Pounds       ...  Luke  xix.  12,  13.       44 

The   Good  Shepherd. 

1,877     Our  own  Dear  Shepherd John  x.   14,  15.         45 

1,713     Other  Sheep  and  One  Flock  .,     „    16.                 46 

995     The  Sheep  and  their  Shepherd     ...  ,,    '21.                  47 

2. 1  20     The  Security  of  Believers ;  or,  Sheep 

who  shall  Never  Perish  ...  n     n    27 30.         48 

7 '26     Life  Eternal            ...          .......  28.                  49 

The   True   Vine. 

774     A  Sharp  Knife  for  the  Vine  Branches  John  xv.  2.                  50 

1,625     Without  Christ— Nothing ,,       „     5.                  51 

2.002  The  Secret  of  Power  in  Prayer     ...  „       „    7.                  52 


RECORDED     IN     TWO     GOSPELS. 

The  Lighted  Candle. 

1,594     The  Candle Matt.    v.    15,16.        53 

2,109     The  Eye  and  the  Light     Luke  xi.  33— 36.        54 

The  Houses  on  the  Rock  and  on  the  Sand. 
918     The  Two  Builders  and  their  Two 

Houses Matt.  vii.  24— 27.       55 

1,702     On  Laying  Foundations  ...     Luke  vi.  46— 40.       56 

The  Lost   Sheep. 

2,083     One  Lost  Sheep       Matt,  xviii.  12, 13       57 

1,801     The  Parable  of  the  Lost  Sheep    ...     Luke   xv.    4  —  7.      58 
2,065     Our    Great    Shepherd   finding   the 

..-      ' „       „    4,  5,  6.         59 


RECORDED     IN    THREE     GOSPELS. 

The  Sower. 

2,040     Sown  among  Thorns         Matt.  xiii.  7.  22.  60 

1,132     The  Seed  upon  Stony  Ground       ...  Mark  iv.  5,  6.  61 

308     The  Parable  of  the  Sower  ...  Luke  viii.  4—8.  62 

1,459     Satan's    Punctuality,    Power,    and 

Purpose   ...  ...          .,        .,     12.  63 

The  Mustard  Seed. 
2,110     The  Mustard  Seed;  a  Sermon  for 

the  Sabbath-School  Teacher     ...     Luke  xiii.  18,  19.       64 

The    Wicked  Husbandmen. 
1,951     The  Pleading  of  the  Last  Messenger     Mark  xii.  6— 9.  65 


In  Limp  Cloth,  //-  eacn ;   Post  Free,  1/2, 

JHE   TWELVE   5ERMOJMS    SERIES. 

By    C.     H      SPURGEON. 

CHRISTMAS    SERMONS  I          MISSIONARY    SERMONS. 

NEW    YEAR'S    SERMONS.  POPULAR    SERMONS. 

SERMONS    FOR    THE    TROUBLED    AND    TRIED. 
SERMONS    ON    CONVERSION 
SERMONS    ON    FAITH. 
SERMONS    ON    PRAISE. 
SERMONS    ON    PRAYER. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    WORD    OF    GOD. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT 

SERMONS    ON    THE    PASSION    AND    DEATH    OF    CHRIST. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    PLAN    OF    SALVATION. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    PRODIGAL    SON,    ETC. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    RESURRECTION. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    SECOND    COMING    OF    CHRIST. 
SERMONS    ON    UNBELIEF. 

SERMONS    ON    VARIOUS    SUBJECTS   WITH  PORTRAIT  AND  VIEWS. 
SERMONS    ON    VITAL    QUESTIONS. 
SERMONS    TO    SEEKERS. 
SOUL-WINNING    SERMONS. 

STRIKING    SERMONS.  [OCCASIONS. 

MEMORABLE    SERMONS    PREACHED    ON    REMARKABLE 
SERMONS    WITH    STRANGE    TITLES. 
SERMONS    FOR    CHRISTIAN    WORKERS. 
SERMONS    ON    PEACE. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    LOVE    OF    CHRIST. 
SERMONS    ON    JOY. 
REVIVAL    SERMONS. 
SERMONS    ON    HOLINESS. 
SERMONS    ON    HOPE. 

SERMONS    ON    THE    GOSPEL    FOR    SINNERS. 
SERMONS    ON    RITUALISM. 
SERMONS    ON    THANKSGIVING. 

SERMONS    ON    OUR    LORD'S    CRIES    FROM    THE    CROSS. 
SERMONS    ON    FORGIVENESS. 
SERMONS    ON    REPENTANCE. 
SERMONS    ON    DEATH. 
SERMONS    ON    HEAVEN. 
SERMONS    ON    BACKSLIDING. 
SERMONS    ON    TEMPTATION. 
SERMONS    ON    CHRISTIAN    WARFARE. 
SERMONS    TO    YOUNG    MEN. 
SERMONS    ON    GRACE    ABOUNDING. 
SERMONS    ON    THE    ATONEMENT. 
SERMONS    ON    OBEDIENCE. 
SERMONS    ON    SANCTIFICATION. 
SERMONS    ON    DECISION. 

SERMONS    ON    THE    DOCTRINES    OF    GRACE. 
SERMONS    ON    PRECIOUS    PROMISES. 
SERMONS    ON    HUMILITY. 
JUST    PUBLISHED. 

MESSAGES    TO    THE    MULTITUDE. 


LONDON  :  PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings,  E.G. 


Jflettroptitau  SFabmtacle  pulpit 


A   GREAT   BARGAIN. 


e  r  m  0  q 

DELIVERED   BY 

C.    H.   SPURGE  ON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINfiTON. 


"Again,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  merchant  man,  seeking  goodly- 
pearls  :  Who,  when  he  had  found  one  pearl  of  great  price,  went  and  sold  all  that 
he  had,  and  bought  it." — Matthew  xiii.  45,  46. 

A  MERCHANTMAN  endeavours  to  trade  so  as  to  make  a  profit.  Whether 
he  deals  in  pearls  or  in  grain,  he  does  not  hope  to  obtain  riches  by 
labour.  He  leaves  that  to  those  who  eat  their  bread  in  the  sweat  of 
their  face.  He  tries  to  get  his  by  the  sweat  of  his  brain.  He  is  de 
pendent  not  so  much  upon  labour  as  upon  knowledge,  upon  skill,  upon 
the  advantage  which  superior  acquaintance  with  the  article  which  he 
deals  in  gives  to  him.  Now,  this  merchantman  is,  at  the  very  com 
mencement,  in  some  measure  a  picture  of  the  seeker  after  Christ. 
Christ  and  his  salvation  are  not  to  be  earned  ;  they  are  not  to  be  pro 
cured  as  the  result  of  labour.  But  Christ  is  to  be  had  by  knowledge. 
What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  "  By  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous 
servant  justify  many  ;"  that  is,  through  their  knowing  Christ  they  be 
come  justified.  This  is,  indeed,  another  way  of  putting  the  system 
of  salvation  which  is  stated  thus:  "How  shall  I  hear  without  a 
preacher  ?"  The  work  begins  with  hearing  the  preacher  ;  then  it  goes 
on  to  believing  what  they  hear,  and  through  believing  they  are  saved. 
This  is  virtually  knowledge — the  knowledge  communicated  by  God's 
messenger  or  by  God's  word — the  knowledge  heard,  the  knowledge  be 
lieved.  So  men  come  to  the  knowledge  of  him  whom  to  know  "is  life 
eternal,  for  when  a  man  knows  Christ  and  understands  him,  so  that  he 
gives  his  heart  to  him,  then  is  he  saved.  Inasmuch,  then,  as  the 
merchantman  seeks  his  advantage  by  superior  knowledge,  he  becomes  a 
type  of  the  man  who  gets  saved  through  obtaining  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ. 

I  shall  not,  however,  enlarge  upon  this  analogy,  but  proceed  at  once 

to  speak  of  the  merchantman  in  this  parable ;  for  here  we  have  a  fit 

emblem  of  many  who  lay  hold  on  Christ  and  find  him  to  be  their  all  in 

all.     Let  us  watch  this  merchantman  while  he  is  doing  four  things ; 

Xo.  1,424  j 


308  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT.  9 

first,  seeking ;  then,  finding  hen  selling  out ;  and,  fourthly,  Intyiny 
again. 

I.  First,  then,  we  shall  WATCH  HIM  WHILE  HE  is  SEEKING.  "  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  merchantman  seeking  goodly  pearls." 
It  is  different  from  the  man  we  read  of  just  now  who,  by  accident,  dis 
covered  a  treasure  while  he  was  in  the  field.  He  was  looking  for 
something  else,  and  came  upon  the  treasure.  That  is  the  man  whom 
God,  in  infinite  sovereignty,  saves,  'though  he  was  heretofore  indifferent 
and  careless.  This  is  a  person  of  a  nobler  sort.  He  is  of  a  higher 
grade  of  mind — of  altogether  different  mental  constitution.  He  is  seek 
ing  goodly  pearls — something  good,  not  exactly  seeking  th'e  one  pearl 
of  great  price,  for  at  first  he  docs  not  know  about  it ;  but,  still,  he  is 
seeking  pearls,  and  he  conies  upon  one  pearl  in  consequence  of  his 
seeking. 

Now,  notice  about  him,  as  a  seeker,  that  he  has  his  mind  aroused 
and  engaged.  He  is  thinking  about  something — thinking  about  pearls. 
His  heart  is  occupied  with  his  business.  His  energies  are  thrown  into 
it.  All  his  thoughts  are  in  the  direction  of  precious  stones.  Oh  that 
we  could  wake  men  up  to  exercise  the  faculty  of  thinking,  and  then  to 
direct,  to  regulate,  and  to  control  their  thoughts  !  But  thinking  is  an 
occupation  that  a  great  many  persons  altogether  dislike.  They  are 
frivolous.  We  cannot  get  them  to  think  about  anything.  Why  is  it 
that  people  are  so  passionately  fond  of  reading  novels,  and  so  seldom 
read  the  true  histories  which  are  quite  as  interesting,  and  far  more 
capable  of  affording  pleasure  and  pastime  ?  It  is  because  the  minds  of 
men  are  frivolous.  An  idle  tale — a  silly  story  of  a  love-sick  maid — will 
engross  them  by  the  hour  together  ;  but  anything  that  is  solid  and 
worth  the  knowing  seems  to  have  small  charm  for  their  shallow  brains. 
Many  minds  never  get  on  the  wing  at  all.  Not  a  few  men  work  so 
hard  with  their  hands,  and  suffer  such  fatigue  from,  bodily  labour,  that 
they  are  scarcely  able  to  think  much ;  while  there  are  others  who 
dissipate  their  time  and  consume  their  lives  in  idleness,  till  they  are 
utterly  disqualified  for  any  vigorous  thought.  They  are  lazy  and 
sluggish.  They  have  the  dry  rot  in  their  very  souls,  Their  brains  do 
not  work.  They  seem  to  live  in  one  everlasting  lethargy  and  day-dream. 
Oh  that  men  were  wise,  that  they  were  thoughtful !  Happy  were  the 
preacher  who  knew  that  he  was  addressing  himself  to  a  thoroughly 
intelligent,  thoughtful  congregation.  We  should  expect,  then,  that  the 
handfuls  of  good  seed  would  drop  into  the  furrows  readily,  and  bring 
forth  an  abundant  harvest.  This  merchantman's  mind  was  aroused. 
He  had  something  before  him. 

Equally  evident  is  it  that  he  had  a  fixed  definite  object.  He  had  given 
himself  to  pearl-hunting,  and  pearl-hunting  was  to  be  the  one  object  of 
his  life.  If  you  had  met  him,  and  said,  "  What  are  you  seeking  ?"  he 
would  have  answered  in  a  moment,  "  I  am  seeking  good  pearls  :  have 
you  any  to  sell  me  ? "  He  would  have  been  sure  to  have  the  answer 
ready  to  hand.  But  ask  many  a  man  whom  you  meet  with,  "  Sir,  what 
are  you  living  for  ?"  he  would,  perhaps,  tell  you  what  his  trade  or  what 
his  profession  might  be  ;  but  if  you  pressed  him  with  the  question, 
"What  is  the  main  object  of  life  ?"  he  would  not  like  to  say  that  he 
was  living  only  to  enjoy  himself — seeking  his  own  pleasure.  He  would 


A  GREAT   BARGAIN.  899 

hardly  like  to  say  that  he  was  living  to  grasp  and  grab  and  get  a 
fortune.  He  would  hardly  know  how  to  answer  you.  Many  young  men 
are  in  this  condition  :  they  have  not  a  definite  object.  Now,  you  will 
not  make  a  good  captain  if  you  do  not  know  the  port  you  are  sailing 
for.  You  will  make  a  poor  life  of  it,  young  man,  if  you  go  out  as  an 
apprentice,  and  then  afterwards  out  as  a  master,  with  no  definite  aim 
and  end.  Say  to  yourself,  "  I  can  omj  live  for  two  things.  I  can  live 
for  God,  or  I  can  live  for  the  devil ;  which  now  am  I  going  to  do  ?" 
Get  your  mind  well  fixed  and  firmly  resolved  as  to  which  it  shall  be.  I 
will  put  it  to  you  as  boldly  and  baldly  as  even  Elijah  did  when  he  said, 
"If  Baal  be  God,  serve  him;  and  if  Jehovah  be  God,  serve  him." 
If  the  world,  if  the  flesh,  if  the  devil  be  worth  serving,  go  follow  out 
the  career  of  a  sensualist  and  say  so.  Let  yourself  know  what  you  are 
at:  but  if  God  be  worth  serving,  and  your  soul  worth  the  saving,  go  in 
•for  that  ;  but  do  not  sneak  through  this  world  really  seeking  yourself, 
and  yet  not  having  the  courage  to  say  to  yourself,  "  Self,  you  are  living 
for  yourself."  Do  have  a  definite  and  distinct  object  or  else  your  vital 
energies  will  be  wasted  and  your  most  industrious  days  will  be  recklessly 
squandered. 

This  merchantman,  in  the  next  place,  had  an  object  which  was  not  at 
all  common-place.  Other  people  might  go  in  for  bricks  and  stones,  or  for 
:grain,  or  for  timber.  He  went  in  for  pearls.  He  was  a  merchantman 
seeking  pearls,  and  those  the  best  he  could  pick  up.  He  did  not  go  in 
for  common  sea  pearls,  or  pearls  such  as  you  may  get  in  a  Scotch  river, 
but  he  went  in  for  goodly  pearls.  He  took  a  high  aim,  as  far  as  that  line 
•of  action  was  concerned.  He  went  into  a  fine  business.  I  would  to 
God  that  many  who  have  not  found  Christ  nevertheless  had  sufficient 
of  common-sense,  sprinkled  over  with  grace,  to  say, "  I  will  go  in  for 
something  good.  My  life  shall  not  be  a  mean  one"— 

"  Lives  of  great  men  all  remind  us 
We  may  make  our  lives  sublime.'* 

It  augers  well  for  a  young  man  when  he  has  such  an  aspiration  as  this 
within  him,  "My  life,  too,  shall  be  sublime.  I  will  not  seek  mean  or 
menial  objects,  I  will  not  cultivate  any  depraved  or  grovelling  tastes. 
I  will  seek  something  that  I  can  commend  to  my  own  conscience — 
-something  that  will  bear  reflection  when  I  come  to  die — something  that 
will  carry  the  sterling  mark  when  I  have  to  value  it  in  another  world." 
0  young  merchantman,  if  thou  art  about  to  start  in  business,  I 
recommend  thee  this  business  of  seeking  goodly  pearls.  Seek  truth, 
seek  honour,  seek  temperance,  seek  peace,  seek  love,  seek  that  which 
will  make  thee  good  and  true  and  right.  I  will  tell  thee  anon  where 
thou  mayest  find  these,  but  for  the  present  it  may  suflice  me  to  inculcate 
a  laudable  ambition  for  everything  that  is  honest  and  of  good  repute, 
ind  an  eager  desire  with  thy  heart  for  that  which  thy  conscience  com 
mends. 

Pie  went  thus,  to  seek  pearls,  and  he  sought  them  with  diligence.  The 
merchantman  was  seeking  goodly  pearls.  He  did  not  open  a  shop,  and 
say,  "  Pearls  bought  here  if  anybody  likes  to  bring  them  ;"  but  he  went 
forth  in  quest  of  them.  How  far  he  travelled  I  do  not  know  ;  but  the 
•oriental  trader  frequently  goes  immense  distances.  You  may  meet  at 


400  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT, 

Nijni-Novgorod,  in  the  south  of  Russia,  with  traders  who  have  been  ail 
round  the  globe  seeking  what  they  want — men  who  do  not  always 
travel  by  railway,  but  who  will  walk  any  distance  to  obtain  the  very 
article  on  which  they  have  set  their  minds,  and  in  which  they  deal. 
Distance  seems  with  them  to  be  no  object.  Ah,  and  when  a  man  has 
got  a  noble  object  before  him,  and  says,  "  Before  I  die,  I  will  accomplish 
something  that  shall  be  right  and  true  and  beneficial  to  my  fellow 
men,"  he  will  face  hardships  that  would  baffle  his  fellows.  I  pray  God 
that  he  may  have  the  perseverance  to  carry  that  out,  and  that  he  may 
say,  "  Is  there  anything  right  to  be  learned ;  I  will  learn  it,  let  it  cost 
me  what  it  may  of  care  and  toil,  of  headaches  and  heartaches,  of  buying 
experience  and  burning  the  midnight  oil.  If  there  is  anything  to  be 
done  that  is  good  and  true,  I  will  do  it  at  any  hazard,  for  I  am  seeking 
goodly  pearls." 

And  as  the  man  was  seeking,  so  he  was  using  discrimination  at  the 
same  time.  When  we  are  very  diligent  and  full  of  desire  we  are  in 
imminent  danger  of  being  easily  deceived  ;  but  this  man  seeking  goodly 
pearls  was  not  like  a  lady  unacquainted  with  the  nature  of  pearls,  but 
he  was  a  merchantman  who  knew  a  pearl  when  he  saw  it.  He  knew 
the  character  of  pearls  and  the  value  of  pearls ;  he  could  tell  which  were 
cloudy,  and  which  had  a  soft  radianre,  and  which  were  ot  the  first 
water.  Indeed  he  could  tell  a  genuine  pearl  from  an  imitation  one. 
He  was  a  merchantman  seeking  goodly  pear!s.  Yes,  dear  friend,  and  I 
pray  God  that  if  h<*  put  into  the  heart  of  any  brother  here  to  live  f.-r 
the  right  and  for  the  true,  he  would  give  you  threat  discrimination,  for 
there  are  many  shams  in  the  world,  and  you  may  readily  grasp  that 
which  appears  to  be  substantial  goodness,  and  it  may  turn  out  to  be  a 
shadow.  Seek  not  pearls  alone,  but  seek  goodly  pearls.  Go  in  for  the 
good  ;  yea,  cast  your  soul  about  to  find  the  best. 

Evidently  this  merchant  went  into  the  business  with  comparatively 
moderate  expectations.  He  was  seeking  pearls,  i'hey  must  be  of  a 
tolerable  size,  and  pure.  He  evidently  expected  to  buy  a  good  many 
of  them.  It  was  what  he  was  seeking,  seeking  goodly  "  pearls  "  (in 
the  plural).  He  had  not  reckoned  that  he  should  be  fortunate  enough 
to  light  upon  one  huge  pearl  that  should  be  worth  an  emperor's 
ransom.  That  he  had  not  looked  for,  though  he  did  feel  a  desire 
that  way.  If  anybody  had  said,  "  Would  you  like  to  find  a  big 
pearl  ?"  he  would  have  said,  "  That  I  would,  infinitely  better  than  to 
find  a  number  of  little  ones."  He  hardly  hoped  for  it,  and  there 
fore  he  did  not  seek  it ;  but,  still,  he  was  ready  enough  to  have  it  if 
it  came  in  his  way.  And  so,  my  dear  friends,  I  am  speaking  of  a 
class  of  persons — and  I  hope  there  may  be  representatives  of  them 
here — who  want  everything  they  can  get  that  is  good  and  true.  You 
want  to  be  temperate  in  all  things ;  you  want  to  have  an  unsullied  cha 
racter.  I  recollect  that  was  my  own  desire,  when  first  I  thought  of  the 
life  that  lay  beyond  me.  Before  I  knew  the  Lord  I  used  to  think, 
"  0  that  I  might  lie  kept  from  dishonesty,  that  I  might  be  preserved  from 
falsehood,  that  I  might  be  kept  from  a  malicious  spirit,  that  I  might  be 
right-hearted  and  true."  Those  were  the  pearls  that  I  wanted.  I  did 
not  know  just  then  that  I  could  find  something  that  would  include  all 
those  minor  pearls  and  a  good  deal  more.  Still,  it  is  well  when  such  a 


A   GREAT    BARGAIN.  40! 

ilesire  as  that  is  in  the  heart  especially  of  any  young  man.  I  wish  it 
were  in  the  heart  of  the  old,  if  up  till  now  they  have  never  found  the 
pearl  of  great  price. 

Thus  have  I  shown  you  the  man  while  he  is  seeking.  [  wonder  whether 
he  has  come  in  here  to-night,  and  is  sitting  amongst  this  assembly. 
Perhaps  it  is  not  a  man  at  all,  but  a  woman,  a  merchant  woman.  They 
can  do  trading  well.  Lydia,  that  seller  of  purple,  was,  no  doubt,  an 
admirable  tradeswoman,  and  in  the  divine  trade  of  which  we  are  now 
speaking  there  is  no  difference.  Well,  you  do  not  know  the  Lord  yet, 
dear  friends,  but  you  do  want  to  seek  everything  that  is  excellent.  So 
far  so  good. 

II.  Let  us  go  a  stage  farther,  then,  and  look  afc  this  man's  FINDING. 
He  was  buying  pearls  everywhere.  AVhere  he  went  he  asked  people  if 
they  had  any  pearls.  He  went  down  back  streets,  into  the  slums  of 
big  cities,  and  found  out  the  Jews  in  those  old  days,  living  in  the  dirtiest 
corners  of  the  city.  He  wanted  to  know  whether  they  had  any  pearls. 
It  was  pearls  of  a  morning,  pearls  at  mid-day,  pearls  at  night.  If  under 
his  window  at  night  anybody  had  cried,  "Pearls!"  he  would  have  beei 
downstairs  in  a  trice  to  get  them.  He  was  hard  after  pearls ;  and  so  it 
came  to  pass  that  he  lit  upon  a  pearl  that  he  never  hoped  to  see.  It 
was  more  than  he  expected.  Ah,  I  pray  God  that  some  here,  whose 
hearts  are  honestly  seeking  after  that  which  is  right,  may  find  Christ, 
who  has  in  him  more  of  the  spirit  of  temperance,  uprightness,  truth, 
philanthropy  than  will  be  found  anywhere  else.  Oh,  that  they  might 
find  him  who  is  the  truth,  and  whose  doctrine  is  perfect  holiness  and 
everlasting  life.  It  will  be  more  than  they  ever  expected  to  find ;  but 
when  they  do  find  it,  how  glad  they  will  be. 

Certainly  this  man  was  in  the  way  of  finding  a  fine  pearl  if  anybody  was. 
He  was  seeking  goodly  pearls,  not  the  one  pearl ;  but  he  was  in  the  pearl 
line,  and  so  he  was  likely  to  discover  the  best  pearl  if  anybody  dis 
covered  it.  "  Being  in  the  way,  the  Lord  met  with  him,"  says  one  of 
old.  Oh,  if  thou  hast  desires  after  that  which  is  right  and  true  and 
good,  I  trust  that  the  Lord  Jesus  will  manifest  himself  to  you,  and 
that  you  will  say,  "  This  is  the  very  thing  I  sought  for ;  I  have  longed 
and  pined  after  it,  and  here  it  is." 

This  find  was  to  this  merchantman  a  remarkable  one.  He  did  not 
find  goodly  pearls :  he  found  what  was  much  better,  one  pearl ;  and  to 
him  that  one  pearl  contained  all  the  little  pearls  that  he  had  aforetime 
been  seeking  after.  Tell  it,  and  let  all  men  know  it,  that  all  that  is 
good  beneath  the  moon — all  that  is  true,  all  that  is  right,  all  that  is 
loving,  all  that  is  philanthropic,  all  that  is  of  good  report,  commendable 
before  God  and  praiseworthy  among  men,  is  to  be  found  in  the  teaching 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  will  be  given  to  us,  and  wrought  in  us 
when  we  submit  ourselves  to  him,  and  make  him  our  all  in  all.  He 
who  is  a  Christian,  if  he  be  perfectly  a  Christian,  has  all  good  things 
in  one.  If  there  be  aught  that  is  to  be  praised  and  extolled  by 
philosopher  or  sage,  you  shall  find  it  in  the  example  of  the  Master, 
and  he  will  give  us  grace  to  exhibit  it  in  ourselves. 

So  this  man  found  all  in  one.  What  the  value  of  that  pearl  was  I 
do  not  know.  The  estimate  of  its  value  is  not  given.  We  only  know 
that  he  thought  it  worth  all  that  he  had  ;  and  he  went  away  and 


402  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

sold  all  that  he  had  that  he  might  buy  it.  And  he  evidently  thought  it 
worth  all  the  other  pearls  he  had  ever  been  seeking  for,  because  if  be 
spent  his  all  upon  that  one  pearl  it  would  be  clear  that  he  must  have- 
abandoned  henceforth  the  searching  after  smaller  pearls,  since  he  had 
no  capital  left.  But  he  thought  the  one  pearl  of  more  account  than  all 
other  pearls,  and  worth  more  than  all  that  he  had.  Yes ;  I  warrant  you 
that  he  thought  it  worth  a  great  deal  more  than  all  that  he  possessed. 
He  would  not  have  sold  all  that  he  had  in  stock  to  buy  it  if  he  had  not 
the  notion  that  it  was  worth  ten  times  the  price  then,  and  that  when  he 
had  paid  it  all  he  should  have  made  his  fortune,  and  should  be  rich 
beyond  a  miser's  dream,  for  that  is  how  traders  in  such  things  are  sure 
to  fetch  their  bargains.  "Well,  when  a  man  finds  Christ  I  cannot  tell 
you  how  much  he  values  him,  but  this  I  know,  that  all  the  world 
besides  seems  nothing  to  a  Christian  when  he  has  onco  found  his  Lord 
and  Master.  "  Oh  what  a  Christ  have  I  ! "  saith  he.  But  he  cannot 
tell  how  dear — how  inconceivably  precious — the  Christ  of  God  is  to  his- 
soul. 

Concerning  this  find  we  must  mark  next  that  the  man  having  found 
it,  was  resolved  ihat  he  ivould  have  it.  Having  found  the  pearl  of 
great  price,  he  did  not  question  whether  he  should  buy  it  or  not.  If 
he  had  not  gone  out  honestly  to  seek  pearls  he  would  have  demurred  at 
the  price,  but  being  intent  upon  pearl  finding,  he  no  sooner  found  this 
than  he  said,  "  I  must  have  that.  I  can  let  the  little  pearls  go  if  you 
like,  but  I  must  have  that."  And  it  is  a  grand  thing  when  the  Lord 
brings  the  human  mind  to  this.  "I  see  that  in  Christ  there  is  every 
thing  I  want — pardon  for  my  sin,  cleansing  for  my  nature,  grace  to 
maintain  my  character  and  to  make  me  perfectly  fit  for  heaven.  There 
is  all  in  Christ  that  I  want,  and  I  must  have  him.  I  must  have  him. 
It  comes  to  this — at  any  price — whatever  it  may  cost  me,  I  must  and  I 
will  have  him." 

Now,  although  the  parable  does  not  say  it  in  so  many  words,  it  is 
perfectly  clear  that  the  person  with  whom  he  was  dealing  was  willing  to 
sell.  When  he  had  found  one  pearl  of  great  price  he  bought  it,  which 
he  could  not  have  done  if  the  other  had  not  been  ready  to  sell  it.  Albeit 
the  Lord  in  his  mercy  does  not  sell  his  grace,  but  gives  it  freely,  the 
manner  in  which  he  disposes  of  it  is  here  described  under  the  figure  of 
selling.  If  you  want  Christ,  you  may  have  him,  if  you  are  willing  to- 
come  to  the  terms  which  God  lays  down.  Of  this  I  shall  have  to  speak 
presently.  If  you  desire  this  pearl  of  great  price,  there  is  no  reason  in 
the  world  why  that  pearl  should  not  be  yours  to-night.  If  now  you  have- 
found  him,  who  is  "the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand"  and  " altogether 
lovely,"  and  you  value  him  so  that  you  cannot  be  happy  without  him, 
he  will  become  at  once  your  portion.  If,  having  heard  of  Christ,  your 
desire  is  toward  him  as  all  your  soul  can  need,  and  you  are  ready  to 
say,  "  I  will  not  leave  this  house  of  prayer  till  Christ  is  mine,"  there  ia 
no  obstacle  to  your  possessing  this  priceless  boon.  Yea,  God,  even  the 
Father,  is  willing  that  you  should  have  his  only  begotten  Son  to  be  your 
pearl  henceforth  and  for  evermore. 

III.  Having  thus  described  the  seeker,  and  described  the  finder, 
we  must  go  on  to  describe  him  SELLING  OUT.  He  sold  out  all  that 
he  had.  It  had  taken  him  a  long  time  to  get  it  together,  and  I 


A    GREAT   BARGAIN.  403 

have  no  doubt  he  had  much  pleasure  in  the  accumulation,  but  now 
he  has  great  pleasure  in  selling.  "  Buy  my  farm,"  he  says  to  one 
man.  "Come  buy  it."  "I  don't  know  that  I  want  to  buy  farm*," 
says  the  other.  "  It  is  nought :  it  is  nought."  "  Nevertheless,  let  as 
come  to  terms.  I  want  money,  and  I  must  have  money."  And  away 
went  the  furniture  down  in  the  house,  one  article  after  another.  They 
must  all  go,  clear  them  all  out.  There  was  a  rapid  sale.  Tie  must  have 
money.  They  must  go  ;  everything  must  go  for  that  pearl.  Though 
he  did  not  tell  anybody  his  motive,  that  pearl  was  on  his  brain  and  on 
his  heart,  and  all  must  go.  He  is  more  glad  to  get  rid  of  his  possessions 
than  ever  he  was  to  obtain  them.  Away  they  shall  go  at  the  best  price 
they  will  fetch,  but  go  they  must,  for  he  must  have  the  pearl.  Well 
now,  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  had,  but  there  is  a  great  deal  that  a  man 
must  give  up  if  he  is  ever  to  call  Christ  his  own. 

"What,  then,"  says  one,  "what  am  I  to  give  up?"  Well,  there 
must  be  a  selling  off  to-night  of  a  whole  mass  of  old  prejudices.  Some 
times  when  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  comes  to  a  man's  mind  he  repels 
it,  because  it  is  so  different  from  what  he  has  learnt  ever  since  he  was  a 
child  ;  and  the  notion  is  that  you  had  better  follow  the  religion  of  your 
parents.  If  you  had  been  a  Hottentot,  you  would  have  worshipped  a 
fetish.  If  you  had  been  born  in  Hindustan,  you  must  have  worshipped 
Juggernaut,  according  to  that  theory.  But  it  is  a  great  mercy  when  a 
man  says,  "Now,  I  understand  that  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  has  died 
in  the  room  and  place  and  stead  of  sinners  that  believe  in  him,  and  I 
am  simply  to  believe  in  him  and  I  shall  be  saved.  On  my  believing  I 
shall  receive  a  new  nature  and  be  born  again  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
henceforth  I  shall  become  the  disciple  and  the  servant  of  Christ. 
Now,"  says  the  man,  "  I  will  do  it.  It  is  contrary  to  what  I  have 
always  been  told.  I  have  been  led  to  think  that  it  was  my  good  works 
which  would  save  me.  I  have  heard  that  the  grace  was  in  the  sacra 
ments,  but  at  length  I  perceive  that  God  teaches  in  his  word  that 
salvation  is  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  I  will  have  it.  I  will  sell  my 
prejudices  off.  Away  they  shall  go." 

Next  to  that  you  must  sell  off  your  righteousness.  It  will  not  fetch 
much,  but  I  daresay  you  think  it  is  a  fine  thing.  Hitherto  you  have 
been  very  good,  and  your  own  esteem  of  yourself  is  that  as  touching 
the  commandments— "  all  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up." 
And  what  with  a  good  deal  of  church  going,  or  attendance  at  the  meeting 
house,  and  a  few  extra  prayers  on  a  Christmas-day  and  on  Good 
Friday,  and  just  a  little  dose  of  sacraments,  you  feel  yourself  in  toler 
ably  good  case.  Now,  friend,  tliat  old  moth-eaten  righteousness  of 
yours  that  you  are  so  proud  of  you  must  sell  off  and  get  rid  of  it,  for 
no  man  can  be  saved  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ  while  he  puts  any 
trust  in  his  own.  Sell  it  all  off,  every  rag  of  it.  And  suppose  nobody 
will  buy  it,  at  any  rate  you  must  part  with  it.  Assuredly  it  is  not 
worth  putting  amongst  the  filthiest  of  rags,  for  it  is  worse  than 
they  are. 

And  everything  else  that  you  have  heretofore  thought  fit  to  boast  of 
— come,  you  must  get  rid  of  it.  You  know  so  much.  Well,  you  had 
better  sell  off  what  you  know,  for  except  a  man  become  as  a  little  child 
he  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  You  are  somebody,  you  fancy 


404  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

you  are  not  cast  in  a  common  mould,  for  you  have  a  great  strength  of  will, 
and  can  force  your  own  way  to  heaven.  You  will  have  to  get  rid  of 
that  little  conceit,  for  that  strength  of  yours  will  be  your  weakness.  It 
is  only  when  we  are  weak  in  ourselves  that  we  can  ever  be  strong  in 
Christ.  Are  you  contented  so  to  do?  Will  you  sell  off  all  the  old 
prejudices  and  all  the  old  righteousnesses?  Going,  gone!  Will  you 
let  them  go,  or  have  you  got  a  reserve  price?  Let  them  go,  for  they 
are  dross  and  dung,  and  the  sooner  they  are  gone  the  better,  for  then 
you  can  buy  the  pearl,  but  not  till  then. 

Ay,  and  there  a^e  some  men  that  will  have  to  give  up  a  good  deal  of 
what  they  call  pleasure,  sinful  pleasure.     No  pleasure  which  is  honest, 
which  is  really  beneficial  to  us,  need  ever  be  denied  to  us. 
"  Religion  never  was  designed 
To  make  our  pleasures  less." 

It  makes  them  vastly  more.  But  any  pleasure  that  savours  of  sin  is  to 
be  done  away  with.  Come,  can  you  sell  all  that  off?  That  mixing  in 
loose  company,  anything  approaching  to  lewdness,  anything  that  has  to 
do  with  the  gratification  of  the  vile  passions  of  the  flesh — come,  for 
Christ's  sake,  can  you  give  it  up?  Well,  if  you  cannot,  of  course  you 
cannot  have  the  pearl.  If  you  must  have  the  world  you  cannot  have 
Christ ;  if  you  can  find  pleasure  in  the  haunts  of  sin,  you  are  of  your 
father  the  devil,  and  his  works  you  do.  But  come  out  from  it ;  give  it 
all  up ;  cast  it  behind  you.  These  things  must  be  sold  off  if  we  are  to 
have  the  pearl. 

And,  then,  sometimes,  in  some  cases,  men  have  to  give  up  a  good  deal 
of  the  honours  and  the  satisfaction  of  life  that  arise  from  the  esteem 
of  their  fellow-creatures.  Has  it  come  to  this,  "  If  I  become  a  Christian 
they  will  ridicule  me."  Well  now,  can  you  not  put  up  with  a  little 
obloquy  for  Christ  ?  '*  But  if  I  am  an  earnest  Christian  then  I  shall 
have  to  encounter  all  sorts  of  slander."  Be  it  so,  and  can  you  not  give 
up  the  applause  of  men  for  the  sake  of  Christ  ?  Come  and  let  the  dogs 
tear  your  character  to  shreds  so  long  as  you  are  right  before  him,  and 
your*  motive  is  pure.  "  Ay,  but  I  know  what  it  is.  I  shall  get  the 
cold  shoulder  in  society  if  I  become  a  thoroughly  earnest  Christian. 
There  is  Lady  So-and-so,  for  whom.  I  have  very  great  respect,  whose 
good  opinion  I  would  not  forfeit  on  any  account,  and  she  "will  not 
recognise  me  any  more."  Very  well,  can  you  put  the  whole  lot  of  it 
into  the  scale  and  say,  "  I  sell  it  all  off;  let  it  all  go,  that  I  may  have 
the  pearl."  That  man  is  not  worthy  of  Christ  who  would  be  ashamed 
to  stand  in  the  pillory  with  him,  or  go  with  him  to  prison  and  to 
death.  We  must  so  love  him  that  we  count  reproach  for  his  sake  to  be 
honour,  even  as  Moses  counted  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches 
than  all  the  treasures  ot'  Egy|jt. 

"  Well,  you  have  taken  enough  surely."  Yes,  but  this  pearl  hunter 
sold  all  that  he  had,  and  you  have  got  a  little  left.  You  have  got  some 
prospects.  If  you  become  a  Christian  your  old  uncle  will  cut  you  out 
of  his  will.  You  know  very  well  that  if  you  shall  go  to  hear  the  gospel 
at  such  and  such  a  place  you  are  very  likely  to  be  turned  out  of  your 
situation.  "But  we  must  live,"  says  somebody.  This  is  not  at  all  clear 
to  my  mind.  I  do  know  that  we  must  die,  but  as  to  ''  must  living  "  I 
do  not  feel  quite  so  certain  about  it.  Infinitely  better  to  die  than  ever 


A    GUEA1    UAIwQAlN'.  405 

M  do  a  dishonourable  thing.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  our  Master,  we  must 
be  content  to  let  the  fairest  prospect  go,  and  all  things  that  seem  to  tell 
for  onr  success  in  this  life  must  be  secondary  in  our  account.  We  must 
seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness.  Ay,  and  some 
times  love  that  has  been  longed  for  must  go  for  Christ's  sake.  Company 
that  has  been  delightful  must  be  forsaken  for  Christ's  sake,  and  if  all 
this  be  done,  yet  still  it  is  not  enough.  He  that  has  Christ  must  give 
to  Christ  himself  and  all  that  he  has.  I  should  doubt  whether  I  were 
a  follower  of  Christ  if  I  had  not  in  my  very  soul  given  up  to  him  all  that 
I  am  and  all  that  I  have,  to  be  for  ever  his.  He  has  bought  us  with  a 
price,  and  it  is  not  surely  meet  for  us  to  give  him  one  arm,  and  one 
eye,  and  one  foot,  and  half  a  heart.  He  that  is  a  true  Christian  is  a 
Christian  through  and  through.  Whatever  he  possesses  of  talent, 
whatever  of  substance  he  owns,  he  looks  upon  nothing  as  being  his  own, 
but  as  all  belonging  to  his  Master,  and  he  is  prepared  to  use  all  for  his 
Master's  glory,  and  to  part  with  all  if  so  it  were  needful  for  the  main 
tenance  of  his  Master's  kingdom.  The  merchantman  sold  all  that 
he  had. 

I  think  I  see  you  draw  back.  "  This — this  is  too  hard  a  line."  Very 
well,  if  you  do  not  want  to  buy  the  pearl,  you  see — that  is  to  say,  if  you 
do  not  want  to  make  your  fortune — for  that  buying  of  the  pearl  was 
the  making  of  the  man's  fortune — if  you  do  not  think  the  pearl  is  worth 
it,  pray  do  not  have  it.  It  is  not  possible  to  estimate  the  intrinsic 
value,  the  real  worth  of  Christ.  We  do  not  cast  pearls  beiore  swine.  If 
you  do  not  want  him  there  are  plenty  who  do.  He  need  not  come 
begging  of  you  that  you  will  be  his  customer.  God  forbid  you  should 
refuse,  but  if  you  do  not  want  him,  then  say  so.  Only  do  say  it,  and 
definitely  and  distinctly  say  it,  "  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  him." 

But  this  man  went  and  sold  all  that  he  had.  I  tell  you  he  was 
glad  to  sell  it.  He  counted  that  the  man  who  bought  his  farm  was 
doing  him  a  favour.  '•  Take  it,"  he  said,  "  there,  I  will  let  you  have  it 
under  price  if  you  will  only  let  me  have  the  money.  I  so  much  want 
to  get  money."  No,  but  he  did  not  dare  tell  him  so  much  for  fear  he 
should  go  and  raise  the  price,  but  in  his  heart,  "  I  do  so  much  want  to 
get  that  pearl  that  I  really  would  be  obliged  to  anybody  who  will  take 
of  me  that  stock  off  hand."  So  if  you  really  want  Christ,  instead  of 
needing  him  to  urge  you  to  dispose  of  these  poor  effects  which  I 
have  described,  you  will  be  eager  to  be  rid  of  them  that  Christ  may 
be  yours.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  work  in  you  such  a  high  resolve. 

IV.  Now,  the  last  thing  is  THE  BUYING.  He  had  sold  all  that  he 
had,  and  then  he  pays  the  shekels  over — pays  them  over  that  he  may 
have  the  pearl,  and  he  gets  the  pearl.  It  was  a  considerate  purchase 
— a  deliberate  bargain.  He  did  not  see  the  pearl  and  then  in  a 
hurry  go  and  sell  his  goods  and  guess  at  the  value  of  it.  No,  but 
he  had  looked  at  it,  for  he  was  a  seeker  of  pearls.  He  knew  a 
pearl  when  he  saw  it,  though  I  dare  say  he  did  not  tell  the  seller  all 
that  he  had  seen  in  it.  He  said  to  himself,  "  That  is  a  wonderful  pearl. 
If  I  can  get  the  money — my  little  stock  wont  fetch  above  five 
hundred  pounds — but  if  I  can  get  it  for  that,  I  am  a  made  man." 
And  so  he  thought  it  over.  It  did  not  want  much  thinking  over. 
Oh,  if  a  soul  did  but  know  Christ,  he  would  not  think  twice  before 


406  METROPOLITAN   TABKRNACLE   PULPIT. 

he  would  have  him.  If  men  were  not  such  fools — if  they  had  but  light 
from  heaven  to  see  the  value  of  my  Lord  and  Master,  instead  of  our 
standing  here  and  having  to  beg  and  persuade  and  find  out  new  words 
of  commendation,  methinks  they  would  only  say,  "  Tell  us  about  him. 
We  will  have  him.  What  does  he  ask  of  us  ?  What  can  we  do  for 
him  ?  What  can  we  submit  to  so  long  as  we  may  but  make  sure  of  him 
who  forgives  all  sin,  who  gives  immediate  and  perfect  salvation  to  all 
who  trust  him  ?  So  long  as  we  may  have  the  Christ  of  whom  it  is 
written,  *  He  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life,'  we  shall  be 
content."  It  was  a  well  considered  purchase. 

And  it  was  an  immediate  purchase.  He  did  not  go  home  and  sayy 
"  I  shall  think  about  this."  No,  but  he  knew  that  pearl  and  he  said* 
"  If  I  let  that  slip  through  my  fingers  I  shall  never  see  the  like  of  it 
again.  If  anybody  else  gets  that  bargain,  then  I  shall  have  lost  the  one 
opportunity  of  my  life."  And  so  he  does  but  take  time  enough  to  go 
and  sell  his  farm  off,  and  the  little  land  he  had,  and  the  little  property 
he  had.  He  was  back  quickly  with  his  money,  only  afraid  somebody 
might  have  slipped  in  between  and  offered  another  thousand  or  two  more 
than  he  was  able  to  raise,  and  that  thus  he  might  lose  the  pearl.  So, 
dear  friends,  he  that  cometh  to  Christ  aright  may  well  deliberate  about 
it,  but  the  end  of  his  deliberation  ought  to  be  very  speedy.  "  If  he  is 
to  be  had,  let  me  have  him.  Oh,  if  I  can  know  my  sins  forgiven,  let 
me  know  it.  Oh,  if  by  any  means  I  can  have  peace  with  God— if  I 
can  become  a  child  of  God  and  an  heir  of  heaven — if  my  eternal  happi 
ness  can  be  secured,  oh,  let  it  be  secured !  How  is  it  done  ?  Come, 
tell  me  at  once.  I  wish  not  to  leave  my  seat  till  I  have  found  that 
which  you  speak  of."  It  was  a  deliberate  bargain — an  immediate 
bargain. 

And  then  it  was  a  joyful  one.  I  am  sure  his  eyes  twinkled  as  he 
paid  over  his  money.  I  should  like  to  have  a  picture  of  his  face,  when 
at  last  he  had  got  his  pearl.  Now,  that  which  he  had  been  all  over  the 
world  for  he  had  got,  only  something  a  great  deal  better.  He  had  got 
his  pearl,  and  I  dare  say  he  was  ready  to  jump  for  joy  to  think  that  he 
had  got  ready  with  his  money.  Ah,  when  a  soul  gets  Christ  it  is — 
"  Happy  day,  happy  day, 

For  he  has  washed  my  sins  away." 

It  is  the  beginning  of  delight  to  a  soul  when  he  can  say,  "  Jesus  is 
mine ;  I  know  he  is.  Grace  has  enabled  me  to  Jay  hold  upon  him." 

And,  oh,  what  an  enriching  purcJiase  it  was  which  the  man  had  made. 
When  he  had  once  got  the  pearl  instead  of  his  property  he  thought  to 
himself,  "  Why,  I  have  got  a  hundred  times  more  property  now  than  I 
had.  Though  I  have  given  up  that  bit  of  land  I  can  buy  half  a 
province  now,  if  I  like,  with  this  pearl  which  I  have  obtained.  So. 
brothers  and  sisters,  if  you  have  ever  given  up  anything  for  Christ  I 
am  sure  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  made  you  very  ample  amends. 
Some  years  ago  a  person  rather  eccentrically  advertised  for  persons  who 
had  been  losers  by  obedience  to  the  divine  command — that  if  any 
one  who  had  lost  anything  through  love  to  Christ  would  apply  to  him 
he  would  make  it  up.  The  odd  advertisement  appeared  for  some 
months  in  one  of  our  religious  periodicals.  But  the  oddest  thing  ia 
that  nobody  ever  answered  it.  I  should  have  thought  that  somebody 


A   GREAT   BARGAIN.  407 

would  have  tried  and  made  out  a  case  ;  but  nobody  did.  They  cannot 
make  out  such  a  case  :  they  are  no  losers  by  Christ.  tf  But,"  say  some, 
"  the  martyrs  were,  were  they  not  ? "  Well,  they  are  up  there,  ask  them. 
They  will  tell  you  as  you  look  at  them  with  their  ruby  crowns,  all  bril 
liant  in  the  light  of  God,  as  they  stand — 

"  Fairest  of  the  sons  light, 
Midst  the  bright  ones,  doubly  bright," 

that  they  counted  it  their  honour  that  they  should  be  permitted  to  lay 
down  their  lives  for  Jesus'  sake.  Oh,  there  is  no  losing  when  you  deal 
with  him.  You  will  make  five  hundred  per  cent,  over  this  exchange  -r 
be  sure  of  that.  No,  it  shall  be  a  thousand. per  cent.,  for  "No  man," 
says  he,  "  shall  lose  house  and  lands  for  my  sake  that  shall  not  receive 
in  this  world  a  hundredfold,  and  in  the  world  to  come,  life  everlasting." 
This  was  a  final  purchase.  The  merchantman,  according  to  the 
parable,  never  went  buying  pearls  anymore.  "  No,"  said  he,  "  no :  I 
have  bought  a  pearl  of  great  price,  and  now  I  will  go  out  of  the  busi 
ness."  And  when  a  man  once  finds  Christ — ah,  then  he  seeks  nothing 
more.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  mine,  more  than  all  in  him  I  find.  He  does 
not  want  a  secondary  object.  His  desires  all  stay  at  home,  and  satisfy 
themselves  with  the  fulness  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  went  out  of 
the  pearl  hunting  line,  for  he  had  found  all  the  pearls  he  should  ever 
want.  And  it  was  a  purchase  he  never  regretted.  The  parable  does  not 
say  that  he  came  back  to  the  seller  and  said,  "There,  take  your  pearl, 
and  let  me  have  my  house  and  lands  again."  No,  it  was  done.  The 
great  transaction  was  done.  He  never  wished  to  have  it  undone.  With 
his  pearl  of  immense  worth  he  was  a  rich  man,  worthy  to  be  the  rival 
of  princes,  and  he  felt  that  it  was  enough.  Oh,  blessed  are  they  who- 
can  say  "  It  is  enough,"  and  can  rejoice  and  bless  and  magnify  the  Lord. 

"  Now  rest,  my  long-divided  heart ; 
Fix'd  on  this  blissful  centre,  rest : 
With  ashes  who  would  grudge  to  part, 
When  call'd  on  angels'  bread  to  feast?" 

Let  me,  however,  just  put  in  one  word  of  caveat.  Take  care, 
dear  merchant  brothers,  that  when  you  buy  a  pearl  you  buy  a  good 
one — that  it  is  the  pearl  of  great  price,  because  I  have  known  noble 
spirits  whom  I  have  admired  and  felt  ready  to  weep  over ;  men  that 
have  been  heroic  in  the  pursuit  of  that  which  seemed  to  them  per 
fectly  true,  and  have  made  a  sacrifice  of  all  that  they  have  for  it,  and 
yet  they  have  been  deceived.  They  have  grasped  antichrist  instead  of 
Christ,  and  welcomed  the  lie  of  hell  which  came  to  them  in  the  garb 
of  the  angel  of  light.  Mind,  mind  that  you  get  Christ  and  his  truth 
as  you  find  it  revealed  in  Scripture,  and  revealed  a  second  time  in  your 
own  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  whatever  is  short  of  Christ  will 
prove  a  cheat  and  deceive  you.  Some  years  ago  one  of  the  largest 
pearls  that  was  ever  found  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  Russian.  It  was 
a  very  large  pearl  indeed — as  large  as  an  egg,  and  of  a  pear  shape.  He 
purchased  it,  the  party  who  had  it  being  ignorant  of  its  value.  He 
was  a  man  of  substance,  and  he  kept  it,  and  prepared  a  house  which,, 
though  mean  on  the  exterior,  was  sumptuously  furnished  within  ;  and 
he  would  take  his  guests  into  an  inner  chamber  which  when  it  waa 


408  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

unlocked  contained  a  table  of  marble  in  the  centre  of  which  wag  a 
box  which  had  to  be  unlocked  with  divers  keys  and  the  reading  of  an 
alphabet,  and  so  forth,  and  at  last  he  produced  this  pearl,  and  he  was 
very  chary  of  ever  permitting  it  to  depart  from  his  hand,  for  it  was  of 
immense  value.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  bid  an  enormous  price  for 
it,  and  promised  him  hon<  ur  and  rank  besides?  but  he  would  not  part 
with  it.  It  happened,  however,  that  the  possessor  of  this  pearl  was 
implicated — whether  truthfully  or  not  I  cannot  tell — in  a  conspiracy, 
and  had  to  leave  his  home  at  St.  Petersburg.  He  took  with  him 
nothing  but  his  pearl,  and  came  to  Paris  sufficiently  rich  in  the  pos 
session  of  that  pearl.  On  a  certain  day  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  who 
was  his  only  rival  in  such  matters,  came  with  some  others  to  see 
the  pearl.  The  owner  unlocked  it  with  great  care  and  much  delibera 
tion,  and  when  he  had  opened  it  he  was  observed  to  turn  suddenly  pale. 
It  seemed  as  if  he  had  been  stricken  with  death.  Unhappy  man ! 
His  pearl  had  suddenly  become  clouded,  as  pearls  sometimes  do.  It 
had  been  taken  with  some  disease  which  happens  to  pearls,  if  I  may  so 
express  it.  In  a  short  time  it  would  turn  to  powder ;  it  had  ceased  to 
be  of  any  value  whatever,  and  he  had  come  down  from  a  millionaire 
to  a  pauper.  Yet  he  had  bought  a  good  pearl  notwithstanding.  There 
is  only  one  pearl  that  never  can  be  clouded,  and  will  last  right  on 
throughout  eternity,  and  that  is  the  Son  of  God,  "  who  only  hath 
immortality."  If  you  get  him,  you  have  a  hope  divine  which  never 
can  fail  you  ;  but  if  you  get  a  hope  in  priests  or  a  hope  connected  with 
sacramentarianism,  or  any  other  hope  but  that  of  which  Christ  is 
top  and  bottom,  beginning  and  end,  you  may  make  what  sacrifice  you 
will,  but  your  brightest  prospects  will  end  in  bitterest  disappointment. 
The  Lord  grant  that  none  of  us  may  ever  be  thus  balked  of  our  liie- 
confidence  ;  that  no  such  blank  bewilderment  may  ever  fall  on  out 
spirits. 

"  Hearken  to  me,  ye  that  follow  after  righteousness,  ye  that  seek  the 
Lord."  The  voice  of  Jesus  is  heard  in  this  parable  of  the  kingdom 
describing  and  directing  the  seekers.  Such  persons  comprise  no  small 
fraction  of  an  assembly  like  the  present.  It  would  indeed  be  strange 
if  seekers  were  not  always  largely  represented  here,  and  that  in  every 
stage  of  anxious  enquiry.  I  am  sure  some  of  you  have  seen  the  pearl 
you  want  sparkling  before  your  eyes.  I  wonder  how  many  of  you  have 
resolved  to  sell  all  you  have  to  buy  it.  But  who  among  you  ail  have 
actually  made  the  pearl  your  own,  and  rejoice  in  its  possession  ?  That 
such  of  you  \\ill  go  on  your  way  rejoicing  there  is  no  doubt ;  but  will 
you  not-  return  and  give  glory  to  God  ?  Shall  we  not  have  the  happiness 
of  greeting  you  here  in  the  fellowship  of  the  kingdom  of  his  grace  ? 
The  Lord  grant  it  may  be  so  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Matthew  xiii. 

24  to  end. 


HYMNS  FROM   "OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK  "—434,  657;  and    109, 
Charlesworth's  collection  ("  Art  thou  weary  "). 


EARLY  AND  LATE,  OR  HOR^!  GRATIS. 


DELIVERED  ON  SUNDAY  MORNING,  DECEMBER  IOTK,  1*65,  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man  that  is  an  householder,  which  went 
out  early  in  the  morning  to  hire  labourers  into  his  vineyard.  .  .  .  And  he  went  out 
fcbout  the  third  hour,  and  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  market-place.  .  .  .  Again 
he  went  out,  about  the  sixth  and  ninth  hour,  and  did  likewise.  And  about  the  eleventh 
hour  he  went  out,  and  found  others  standing  idle,  and  saith  unto  them,  Why  stand  ye 
here  all  the  day  idle  f—  Matthew  xx.  1,  3,  5,  6. 

WE  have  frequently  observed  that  we  do  not  think  it  right  to  neglect 
the  connection  of  Scripture.  We  have  no  right  to  tear  passages  of 
Scripture  from  their  context  and  make  them  to  mean  what  they  were 
not  intended  to  teach;  and  therefore  I  have  in  the  reading  given  you, 
according  to  my  ability,  what  I  think  to  be  the  immediate  design  of  the 
present  parable.  It  is  a  rebuke  to  those  who  fall  into  a  legal  spirit  and 
begin  calculating  as  to  what  their  reward  ought  to  be  in  a  kingdom 
where  the  legal  spirit  is  entirely  out  of  place,  since  its  reward  is  not  of 
debt  but  of  grace.  I  think  I  may  now,  without  any  violation  of  pro- 

?riety,  dwell  upon  one  very  distinct  fact  in  connection  with  the  parable, 
t  is  not  right  to  violate  the  drift  of  the  parable,  but  having  already 
observed  it  and  made  it  as  clear  as  we  can,  we  believe  that  we  are 
now  authorized  to  make  use  of  one  of  the  main  circumstances  mentioned 
in  it. 

This  morning  I  intend  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
labourers  were  hired  at  different  periods  of  the  day,  by  which  doubtless 
we  are  taught,  that  God  sends  his  servants  into  his  vineyard  at  different 
times  and  seasons;  that  some  are  called  in  early  youth,  and  others  are 
not  led  to  enter  into  the  service  of  the  Master  until  declining  years  have 
brought  them  almost  to  the  eventide  of  life. 

I  must,  however,  ask  you  to  remember  that  they  were  all  called:  by 
the  mention  of  which  the  Saviour  would  teach  us  that  no  man  comet 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  of  himself.  Without  exception,  every 
labourer  for  Jesus  has  been  called  in  one  sense  or  another,  and  he 
would  not  have  come  without  being  so  called.  They  are  all  called. 
Were  a  man  what  he  should  be  he  would  need  no  pressing  and  invitation 
to  come  to  the  gospel  of  Christ;  but  since  human  nature  is  perverted, 
and  men  put  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  for  bitter,  darkness  for  light 
and  light  for  darkness,  man  needs  to  be  caller?  by  the  outward  word- 
Xo.  664. 


402  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

he  needs  to  be  invited,  persuaded,  and  entreated;  he  needs,  to  use 
the  strong  expression  of  the  apostle  Paul,  that  as  though  God  did 
beseech  him  by  us  we  should  pray  him  in  Christ's  stead  to  be  reconciled 
to  God.  Nay,  further  than  this,  although  some  men  come  to  work 
in  a  legal  spirit  in  the  vineyard  through  this  common  call  of  the  gospel, 
yet  no  man  in  spirit  and  in  truth  comes  to  Christ  without  a  further  call, 
•namely,  the  effectual  call  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  The  general  call  is 
given  by  the  minister,  it  is  all  that  he  can  give.  If  the  preacher 
attempts  to  give  the  particular  call  as  some  of  my  hyper-calvinistic 
brethren  do,  confining  the  gospel  command  to  a  certain  character  and 
trying  to  be  themselves  the  discoverers  of  God's  elect,  and  to  make 
that  particular  which  is  always  universal;  if  the  preacher  acts  thus,  and 
virtually  endeavours  to  give  the  particular  call,  he  makes  a  sorry  mess 
•of  it,  and  usually  fails  altogether  to  preach  the  gospel  of  glad  tidings  to 
the  sons  of  men.  But  when  man  is  content  to  do  what  he  can  do, 
namely,  preach  the  commandment  "  that  we  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  that  "  God  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent," 
then  there  comes  with  the  general  call  to  the  chosen  of  God  a  particular 
and  special  call  which  none  but  the  Holy  Ghost  can  give,  but  which 
he  gives  so  effectually  that  all  who  hear  it  become  willing  in  the  day  of 
God's  power,  and  turn  with  full  purpose  of  heart  unto  the  Lord.  In 
what  sense  is  it  true  that  many  are  called  but  few  chosen,  if  none  are 
to  be  called  by  the  preaching  of  the  Word  but  those  who  are  chosen? 
There  are  two  callings,  the  one  is  general  to  all  who  hear  of  Jesus,  and 
many  who  are  thus  called  are  not  chosen;  the  other  is  personal  and 
peculiar  to  the  elect,  "  for  whom  he  did  predestinate  them  he  also 
called."  To  return  to  our  point;  all  in  the  vineyard  are  in  some  sense 
called.  There  is  not  a  solitary  exception  to  this  rule  in  the  entire 
1  Christian  Church.  The  doctrine  of  free-will  has  not  a  single  specimen 
to  show  to  prove  itself.  There  is  not  a  sheep  in  all  the  flock  that  came 
back  to  the  shepherd  unsought;  there  is  not  a  single  piece  of  money 
which  leaped  again  into  the  woman's  purse,  she  swept  the  house  to  find 
it:  nay,  I  will  go  further,  and  say  there  is  not  even  a  single  prodigal 
son  in  the  entire  family  who  did  ever  say, "  I  will  arise,  and  go  unto 
my  Father,"  till  first  the  Father's  grace,  veiling  itself  in  the  afflicting 
providence  of  a  mighty  famine,  had  taught  the  prodigal  the  miserable 
results  of  sin,  as  he  fed  the  swine,  and  fain  would  have  filled  his  belly 
with  the  husks  that  the  swine  did  eat,  but  could  not  do  so. 

I  want  you  to  notice  another  fact  before  I  come  to  the  subject  now 
in  hand,  and  that  is,  that  all  those  who  are  called  are  said  to  have  been 
hired.  Of  course  in  a  parable  no  word  is  to  be  construed  harshly;  we 
are  to  give  the  meaning  according  to  the  drift;  but  still  I  think  we 
may  say  that  there  is  this  likeness  between  hiring  a  servant  and  the 
engagement  of  a  soul  to  Christ,  that  henceforth  a  man  hired  has  no 
right  to  serve  another,  he  serves  the  master  who  has  hired  him.  When 
a  soul  is  called  by  grace  into  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
he  cries,  "  0  Lord,  other  lords  have  had  dominion  over  me,  but  now 
thee  only  will  I  serve."  He  plucks  off  the  yoke  of  sin,  its  pleasure,  its 
cnstom,  and  he  puts  upon  him  that  yoke  of  which  the  Master  says  it  is 
easy,  and  he  bears  that  burden  which  Jesus  tells  us  is  light.  A  hired 
servant  must  \.ot  work  for  another,  he  works  for  his  master;  and  so  a 


EARLY  AND  LATE,  OH  HOI^B  GRATLS.  403 

man  who  is  called  by  grace  lives  not  for  any  sinister  object  or  motive, 
but  to  his  Master  only.  A  hired  servant,  again,  does  not  work  on  his 
own  account,  he  is  not  his  own  master;  and  "ye  are  not  your  own,  ye 
are  bought  with  a  price."  Henceforth,  though  he  calls  no  man  "  Master" 
on  earth,  yet  he  remembers  that  one  is  his  Master  in  heaven,  to  whom 
all  his  service  is  due.  There  is  a  compact  between  the  hired  man  and 
his  master,  and  there  is  a  solemn  compact  of  spirit  between  the  true 
believer  and  his  Lord.  We  have  devoted  ourselves  to  his  service,  we 
have  given  up  all  liberty  of  self-will,  and  henceforth  our  will  is  at  the 
government  of  our  Lord,  and  all  our  powers  and  passions  are  to  be,  we 
hope  will  be,  through  God's  grace,  obedient  to  him  who  has  hired  U3 
into  the  vineyard.  Now  the  word  "  hired"  was  used  in  order  to  bring 
in  the  idea  of  reward.  It  was  used  to  suit  Peter's  view  of  the  case;  it 
was  used  in  order  that  his  legal  question  of  "What  shall  we  have 
therefore?"  might  be  clearly  brought  out,  and  its  folly  shown  in  the 
light  of  that  sovereign  grace  which  does  as  it  wills  with  his  own.  Yet 
for  all  that  believers  are  hired  in  an  evangelical  sense,  they  do  not  serve 
God  for  nought,  they  shall  not  work  without  a  reward.  "  The  wages  of 
sin  is  death,  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life."  We  shall  have  our 
reward  for  what  we  do  for  the  Master,  and  though  it  be  not  wages  in 
the  sense  of  debt,  yet  verily  I  say  unto  you,  there  shall  not  be  a  single 
true-hearted  worker  for  God  who  shall  not  receive  of  his  Master  most 
blessed  wages  of  grace  in  the  day  when  he  comes  to  take  account  of  his 
servants. 

Now  to  the  point,  the  master  calls  these  hired  servants  of  his  at 
different  hours  of  the  day;  and,  in  the  second  place,  distinguishing  grace 
shines  forth  in  each  case,  and  is  illustrated  and  made  more  manifest 
in  its  varieties  of  glorious  compassion  and  lovingkindness  by  the 
different  hours  at  which  the  chosen  ones  are  called. 

I.    ALL  ARE  NOT   CALLED    BY    GRACE  AT   THE   SAME    TIME.       Some, 

according  to  the  parable,  are  called  early  in  the  morning.  Thrice 
happy  are  these!  The  earliest  period  at  which  a  child  may  be  called 
by  grace  it  would  be  difficult  for  us  positively  to  define,  because 
children  are  not  all  of  the  same  age  mentally  when  they  are  of  the 
same  age  physically,  and  even  in  the  matter  of  mental  development  we 
-dare  not  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  as  to  the  chosen  period  of  opera 
tion.  As  far  as  our  observation  goes,  grace  works  upon  some  little  ones 
at  the  very  dawn  of  moral  consciousness.  There  are,  no  doubt,  pre 
cocious  children,  whose  intellect  and  affections  are  very  much  developed, 
and  very  deeply  sanctified  even  so  early  as  two  or  three  years  of  age. 
Such  children  usually  are  intended  by  the  Master  to  be  taken  home  at 
once.  There  are  interesting  biographies  extant,  which  prove  that  holi 
ness  may  bloom  and  ripen  in  the  youngest  heart,  and  many  anecdotes  are 
treasured  up  in  sui-h  collections  as  "  Janeway's  Token" for  Children," 
of  children  whom  I  might  call  infants  with  strict  propriety,  out  of 
whose  mouth  God  ordained  praise,  and  did,  through  them,  still  the 
enemy  and  the  avenger.  Little  prattlers,  whose  tongues  it  would  have 
been  supposed  could  only  have  talked  of  toys,  have  been  able  to  speak 
with  an  apparent  profundity  of  knowledge  of  spiritual,  and  especially 
of  heavenly  things.  It  is  certain  that  some  have  wrought  their  day's 
work  for  the  Master  in  their  mother's  arms;  they  have  spoken  of  the 


404  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Saviour  in  tones  which  have  melted  a  mother's  heart  and  erone  to  a 
father's  conscience,  and  then  they  have  been  taken  home.  "  Whom  the 
gods  love  die  young,"  said  the  heathen,  and  doubtless  it  is  no  small 
privilege  to  be  so  soon  admitted  into  glory.  Only  shown  on  earth,  and 
then  snatched  away  to  heaven,  too  precious  to  be  left  below.  Precious 
child,  how  dear  wer't  thou  to  the  good  God  who  sent  thee  here  and  then 
took  thee  home!  Fair  rose  bud!  yet  in  the  perfection  of  thy  young 
beauty  taken  to  be  worn  by  the  Saviour  on  his  bosom,  how  can  we 
mourn  thy  translation  to  the  skies? 

"No  bitter  tears  for  thee  be  shed, 

Blossom  of  being  seen  and  gone  ! 
With  flowers  alone  we  strew  thy  bed, 

0  blest  departed  one  ! 
Whose  all  of  life,  a  rosy  ray, 
Blush'd  into  dawn  and  pass'd  away." 

"Early  in  the  morning,"  would  also  include  those  who  have  passed 
the  first  hour  of  the  day,  but  who  have  not  yet  wasted  the  second 
opening  hour.  I  mean  those  hopeful  lads  and  girls  who  perhaps  would 
rather  I  should  call  them  youths; — those  who  have  reached  their  teens, 
have  overleaped  infancy  and  childhood,  and  are  growing  up  in  the 
heyday  and  vigour  of  youth.  Youngsters  still  more  at  home  in  the  play 
ground  than  in  the  work-field,  fitter,  as  Satan  tells  them,  to  be  sporting  in 
the  market-place  than  busy  in  the  vineyard;  such  as  these,  to  the  praise 
of  divine  love,  are  often  hired  by  the  householder.  It  is  worth  while  to 
warn  some  of  our  brethren  who  seem  to  be  exceedingly  dubious  of  boyish 
and  girlish  piety, — to  warn  them  against  indulging  harsh  and  suspicious 
doubts.  We  have  remarked,  and  I  think  those  who  have  watched  our 
membership  carefully  will  have  remarked  it  too.  that  among  all  the  slips  and 
falls  which  have  caused  us  sorrow,  we  have  had  but  little  sorrow  from 
those  who  were  added  to  us  as  boys  or  girls.  There  are  those  preaching 
the  gospel  this  day  with  acceptance  and  power  whom  these  hands  bap 
tized  into  Jesus  Christ  very  early  in  their  boyhood,  and  there  are  among 
us  honoured  servants  of  God  who  have  served  this  Cl.urch  well,  who, 
while  they  were  yet  at  school  were  joyful  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  With  our  earliest  gettings  some  of  us  got  an  understanding  of 
the  things  of  the  kingdom;  our  Bible  was  our  child's  primer,  our 
spelling-book,  the  guide  of  our  youth  and  the  joy  of  our  earliest  years. 
We  thank  God  that  there  are  Timothys  still  among  us,  and  those  not 
lew  and  far  between;  and  young  Samuels,  who,  being  brought  as  infants 
to  the  Lord's  house,  have  from  that  day  forth  worn  the  linen  ephod  and 
served  after  their  fashion  as  priests  unto  God,  serving  him  with  all  their 
hearts.  Happy  those  who  are  called  early  in  the  morning!  they  iiave 
peculiar  reasons  for  blessing  and  praising  God. 

"  Grace  is  a  plant,  where'er  it  grows, 

Of  pure  and  heavenly  root; 
But  fairest  in  the  youngest  shows, 
And  yields  the  sweetest  fruit." 

Let  us  spend  a  minute  in  thinking  of  their  happy  case  who  are 
saved  in  boyhood.  Early  in  the  morning  the  dew  still  twinkles  on 
the  leaves,  the  maiden  blush  of  dawn  remains  and  reveals  an  opening 


BARLY  AND  LATE,  OR  HOR^J  GRATLB.  405 

beauty,  which  is  lost  to  those  who  rise  not  to  see  the  birth  of  day. 
There  is  a  beauty  about  early  piety  which  is  indescribably  charming,  and 
unutterably  lovely  in  freshness  and  radiance.  We  remark  in  childhood  an 
artless  simplicity,  a  child-like  confidence,  which  is  seen  no  where  else.  There 
may  be  less  of  knowing  but  there  is  more  of  loving;  there  may  be  less  of 
reasoning,  but  there  is  more  of  simply  believing  upon  the  authority  of 
revelation;  there  may  be  less  of  deep-rootednesa,  but  there  is  certainly 
more  of  perfume,  beauty,  and  emerald  verdure.  If  I  must  choose  that 
part  of  the  Christian  life  in  which  there  is  the  most  joy,  next  to  the  land 
Beulah,  which  I  must  set  first  and  foremost  by  reason  of  its  lying  so 
near  to  Canaan,  I  think  I  would  prefer  that  tract  of  Christian  experience 
which  lieth  toward  the  sun-rising,  which  is  sown  with  orient  pearls  of 
love,  and  cheered  with  the  delicious  music  of  the  birds  of  hope. 

Early  in  the  morning,  when  we  have  just  risen  from  slumber,  work  is 
easy;  our  occupation  in  the  vineyard  is  a  cheerful  exercise  rather  than 
a  toil  such  as  those  find  ii  who  bear  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day. 
The  young  Christian  is  not  oppressed  with  the  cares  and  troubles  of  the 
world  as  others  are;  he  has  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  serve  his  God.  He  is 
free  from  the  embarrassments  which  surround  so  many  of  us,  and  prevent 
our  doing  good  when  we  would  consecrate  ourselves  wholly  to  it.  The  lad 
has  nought  to  think  of  but  his  Lord.  There  are  his  books  and  his 
lessons,  but  he  can  be  fervent  of  spirit  in  the  midst  of  them.  There 
are  the  companions  of  his  childhood,  but  in  guilelessness  and  simplicity 
he  may  be  of  service  to  them  and  to  God  through  them.  Give  me,  I 
say,  if  I  would  have  an  auspicious  time  to  work  for  Jesus,  give  me  the 
blessed  morning  hours,  when  my  heart  is  bounding  lightest  and  joy's  pure 
sunbeams  tremble  on  my  path;  when  my  glowing  breast  lacks  no  ardour, 
and  my  happy  spirit  wears  no  chain  of  care. 

One  would  prefer  early  conversion  because  such  persons  have  not 
learned  to  stand  idle  in  the  market-place.  A  fellow,  you  know,  who  has 
been  for  hours  standing  with  his  hands  in  his  pocket,  talking  with 
drunken  men  and  so  on,  is  not  worth  much  at  the  eleventh  hour,  nay 
even  by  the  middle  of  the  day  it  has  become  so  natural  to  him  to  prop 
the  walls,  that  he  is  not  likely  to  take  to  work  very  readily.  Begin 
early  with  your  souls,  break  in  the  colts  while  they  are  young,  and  they 
are  likely  to  take  well  to  the  collar.  There  are  no  workers  like  those 
who  commenced  work  while  they  were  yet  children.  What  a  promise  of 
a  long  day  there  is  for  young  believers;  the  sun  has  just  risen,  and  he  has 
to  travel  to  his  zenith  and  to  descend  again.  There  is  ample  room  and 
verge  enough  though  none  to  spare.  If  God  in  his  providence  permit  it 
so  to  happen,  that  youngster  yonder  has  twelve  hours'  work  before  him — 
what  may  he  not  accomplish?  For  a  grand  and  glorious  life  early  piety  if 
not  essential,  is  certainly  a  very  great  advantage.  To  give  those  first 
days  to  Jesus  will  spare  us  many  sad  regrets,  prevent  us  acquiring 
many  evil  habits,  and  enable  us  to  achieve  good  success  through  the 
Holy  Spirit's  blessing.  It  is  well  to  begin  to  fly  while  yet  the  wings  are 
strong,  for  if  we  live  long  in  sin  the  wins:  may  be  broken  and  then  they 
will  flap  wearily  through  the  rest  of  our  days,  even  when  grace  shall 
call  u •<.  Let  it  be  the  desire  of  parents  here  to  have  their  children 
converted  as  children!  And  oh!  may  God  cast  that  desire  into  the 
hearts  of  some  of  you  young  people  that  are  here  this  morning  that 


406  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

before  you  reach  one-and-twenty,  before  you  are  called  men,  you  may  be 
perfect  men  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  while  you  are  yet  children  you  may  be 
children  of  God.  May  you  as  "  newborn  babes  receive  the  sincere 
milk  of  the  Word,"  and  the  Lord  grant  that  you  may  "  grow  thereby." 
Happy,  happy,  happy  souls,  whom  the  Master  thus  by  distinguishing 
grace  brings  "  early  in  the  morning!" 

The  householder  went  out  again  at  the  third  hour.  This  may 
represent  the  period  in  which  we  have  mounted  above  being  children 
and  youths  and  are  entitled  to  be  called  men.  Suppose  we  settle  the 
first  hour  as  extending  over  the  earliest  seven  or  eight  years  of  age; 
then  the  second  hour  runs  on  from  that  to  twenty-one  or  thereabouts; 
and  then  we  have  a  good  length  of  time  between  twenty  and  thirty 
and  onwards  to  reckon  as  the  third,  and  fourth,  and  fifth  hours.  There 
are  some  whom  divine  grace  renews  at  the  third  hour.  This  is  late! 
pne-and-twenty  is  grievously  late,  when  you  consider  how  much  of  early 
joy  is  now  impossible,  how  much  of  sinful  habit  has  now  been  acquired, 
how  many  opportunities  for  usefulness  are  now  gone  past  recall.  A 
quarter  of  the  day  has  flown  away  for  ever  when  we  reach  the  third 
hour.  It  is  the  best  quarter  of  the  day,  too,  that  has  gone  past  re 
call.  The  first  meal  of  the  day  is  over,— that  blessed  breaking  of  the 
fast  with  Christ  is  no  more  possible.  A  very  precious  meal  is  that, 
when  the  Saviour  gives  us  the  morning  portion,  the  manna  which 
melteth  when  the  sun  is  up.  Blessed  is  the  child's  feeding  upon  Jesus: 
truly  I  remember  when  I  was  awakened  like  Elias  from  under  the  juniper 
tree,  and  fed  on  such  dainty  fare  that  to  this  day  the  flavour  abideth 
with  me.  The  man  of  one-and-twenty  has  lost  that  first  meal,  breakfast 
is  all  over;  Christ  will  say  to  him  as  he  will  to  some  others,  "  Come 
and  dine,"  and  that  is  precious;  but  the  daintiest  meal  is  over,  the  first 
early  enjoyment,  the  first  early  rapture  can  never  be  known. 

I  have  no  doubt  there  are  many  here  who  think  that  to  be  converted 
at  one-and-twenty  is  very  soon;  but  why  one-and-twenty  years  givei? 
to  Satan?  Why  a  fourth  of  man's  existence  devoted  to  evil?  Besides,, 
it  may  not  be  a  fourth,  it  may  be  one  half,  nay,  in  how  many  cases  it- 
is  the  whole  of  life.  The  sun  goes  down  ere  it  is  yet  noon,  and  the  idler  in 
the  market-place  has  no  hope  of  ever  being  a  worker  in  the  vineyard. 
Death  who  comes  when  God  wills,  and  gives  us  no  notice,  may  cut  down 
the  flower  before  it  has  fully  opened.  "  In  the  morning  it  is  like  grass- 
that  groweth  up,  in  the  evening  it  is  cut  down  and  withereth."  It  is 
late,  it  is  sadly  late  !  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  have  lost  those  bright  days  in 
which  the  mind  was  least  engaged,  in  which  it  was  the  most  susceptible 
of  forming  godly  habits.  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  have  learned  so  much 
of  sin  as  one  may  have  learned  by  one-and-twenty,  a  sad  thing  to  have 
seen  so  much  of  iniquity,  to  have  treasured  up  in  one's  memory  so  much 
of  defilement.  Twenty  years  with  God;  one  might  have  been  in  such  a 
time  a  good  scholar  in  the  kingdom;  but  twenty  years  in  the  world  one 
begins  to  be  like  scarlet  that  has  been  lying  in  the  dye  till  it  is  stained 
through  and  through.  It  is  late,  hit  we  thank  God  that  it  is  not  too  lute. 
Nay,  it  is  not  too  late  even  for  the  grandest  of  purposes.  Not  only  is 
this  period  of  life  not  too  late  for  salvation,  but  it  is  not  too  late  to  do 
much  for  Jesus  Christ.  Some  of  us  when  we  were  one-and-twenty,  tad 
finished  five  years  of  Christian  ministry,  and  had  been  the  means  of 


EARLY  AND  LATE,  OR  HOR.B  GRATIS.  407 

bringing  many  souls  to  the  cross  of  Christ;  but  if  others  are  led  by  grace 
to  begin  then,  why  there  is  a  good  period  still  remaining  if  God  in  provi 
dence  spares  our  lives.  The  young  man  is  now  in  all  his  strength  and 
vigour,  his  bones  are  full  of  marrow,  and  his  heart  is  full  of  fire.  He 
ought  to  have  acquired  a  good  degree  of  education,  and  be  prepared  to 
acquire  more. 

Now  he  is  just  in  the  time  when  he  should  work.  His  plans  of  life  are 
not  settled  as  yet;  he  is  not  married  yet,  probably;  as  yet  there  are  no 
children  about  him  to  have  been  injured  by  his  ill  example;  he  has  an 
opportunity  of  rearing  up  a  household  in  the  fear  of  God.  He  is  com 
mencing  business,  he  has  an  opportunity  of  so  conducting  that  business 
that  there  may  never  need  to  be  a  time  when  he  shall  have  to  tack  about 
and  steer  another  course.  He  may,  if  called  by  God's  grace  at  one-and- 
twenty,  begin  an  honourable  career,  in  which  there  need  not  be  an  angle 
or  a  curve,  but  straight  to  the  harbour's  mouth  he  may  steer  and  mark 
upon  the  sea  of  life  one  shining  furrow  which  shall  reach  in  a  direct 
line  from  the  present  moment  straight  to  the  lights  of  heaven,  which 
he  shall  reach  with  his  sail  full  and  a  priceless  cargo  on  board  to  the 
praise  of  the  glory  of  divine  grace.  It  is  late,  it  is  very  late  in  some 
respects,  but  oh!  it  is  not  too  late  to  serve  the  Master  w'ell,  and  to  win 
a  crown  of  great  reward,  the  gift  of  love  divine. 

There  is  abundance  of  work  to  do  for  us  who  are  in  this  third,  fourth, 
and  fifth  hour  of  the  day.  In  fact,  I  suppose  the  Church  must  look  to 
us  for  its  most  active  work.  After  this  period  and  the  next,  a  man 
frequently  becomes  rather  a  recipient  from  the  Church  than  a  donor  to 
it  in  the  matter  of  activity.  Its  fresh  blood,  its  energy,  its  warmth  of 
heart,  its  ready  action,  must  to  a  great  extent  come  from  the  young  men 
who  are  converted.  Oh,  you  of  one-and-twenty,  I  would  to  God  that 
you  were  all  born  from  heaven!  You  maidens,  in  your  early  beauty  may 
the  Master  in  his  infinite  mercy  bring  you  in!  Oh,  could  you  know 
the  sweetness  of  his  love,  you  would  not  need  persuading!  Could  you 
understand  the  joy  of  true  religion,  you  would  not  want  entreating! 
There  is  more  hallowed  mirth  enjoyed  in  secret  with  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  than  in  all  the  merriment  the  world  can  yield.  One  ounce  of 
Christ's  love  is  better  than  a  ton  of  the  world's  flatteries.  The  world 
offers  bubbles  with  fair  hues,  bright  to  look  upon,  but  vanishing  at  a 
breath ;  but  Christ  gives  real  treasure,  enduring  as  eternity.  The  world's 
gold  is  all  base  money;  it  glitters,  but  it  is  not  precious.  There  may  be 
less  glitter  about  the  things  of  God,  but  there  is  a  "  solid  joy  and  lasting 
pleasure,"  which  "  none  but  Zion's  children  know."  May  the  Master 
come  this  morning  to  your  hearts,  and  by  my  simple  words  may  he  call 
you  at  the  third  hour  of  the  day  into  the  vineyard. 

The  Master's  grace  was  not  exhausted,  and  therefore  he  went  out  at 
Ihe  sixth  hour.  We  find  him  going  into  the  market  at  high  noon. 
Half  the  day  was  over.  Who  is  going  to  employ  a  man,  and  give  him  a 
whole  day's  wages  when  twelve  o'clock  has  come?  He  will  not  do  too 
much  if  you  hire  him  at  six,  what  will  he  do  if  you  engage  him  at 
twelve?  Half  a  day's  work!  that  is  a  poor  thing  to  seek  or  to  offer. 
The  Master,  however,  seeks  and  accepts  it.  He  promises,  "  Whatsoever 
ie  right,  I  will  give  you;"  and  there  are  some  found  who  at  the  sixth 
hour  enter  into  the  vineyard  and,  being  saved  by  grace,  begin  their  work 


408  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

for  Jesus.  This  may  represent  the  period  of  life  in  which  man  is 
supposed  to  be  in  his  prime — when  he  is  past  forty  and  onward.  This 
is  sadly  late,  very  sadly  late.  Sadly  late  in  a  great  many  respects,  not 
only  because  there  is  so  little  time  left,  but  because  so  very  much 
of  energy,  and  zeal,  and  force,  which  should  have  been  given  to  God, 
has  been  wasted;  and  has  to  some  extent  been  used  to  fight  against 
God.  Forty  years  of  hardness  of  heart!  That  is  a  long  time  for 
divine  patience.  Forty  years  of  sin!  That  is  a  long  season  for  conscience 
to  mourn  over.  "  Forty  years  long  was  I  grieved  with  this  generation," 
said  God.  In  the  wilderness  they  hardened  their  hearts  all  that  time; 
and  he  sware  in  his  wrath  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest. 
What  a  blessing  for  you  of  forty  and  unconverted,  that  he  has  not  sworn 
so  terrible  an  oath  concerning  you,  that  still  his  longsuffering  lingers, 
etill  his  patience  bears  with  you,  still  does  he  say  to  yon,  "  Go,  work, 
my  son — go  work  this  day  in  rny  vineyard."  It  is  sadly  late,  because 
it  has  become  so  more  than  natural  to  you  to  walk  in  the  way  of  sin. 
You  will  have  so  much  to  contend  with  in  future,  as  the  result  of  the 
past.  Putting  the  ship  of  the  soul  about  is  not  such  easy  work  as  turning 
a  vessel  by  her  helm;  only  a  divine  hand  can  steer  a  soul  upon  the  tack 
of  grace.  You  will  need  much  grace  to  conquer  those  corruptions  which 
have  had  forty  years  to  take  root  in.  You  have  a  tenant  in  your  house 
who  is  in  possession,  and  you  will  find  that  possession  to  be  nine  points 
of  the  law;  it  will  be  a  hard  ejectment  for  you  to  effect,  so  hard  indeed,  that 
only  a  "  stronger  than  he  "  can  cast  him  out.  To  your  dying  day  the 
recollection  of  evil  things  which  you  heard  during  these  forty  years  of 
unregeneracy  will  stick  by  you;  you  will  hear  the  echoes  of  an  old  song 
just  when  you  are  trying  to  pray,  and  some  deed  which  you  regret  and 
monrn  over,  will  come  to  check  you  just  when  you  are  about  to  say, 
"  Abba  Father,"  with  an  unstammering  tongue.  It  is  late,  it  is  very, 
very  late,  this  sixth  hour,  but  it  is  not  too  late.  It  is  not  too  late  for 
some  of  the  richest  enjoyments;  you  can  yet  dine  with  Jesus;  he  can 
yet  manifest  himself  unto  you,  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world;  you  can 
have  yet  much  time  to  serve  him  in.  It  is  not  too  late  yet  to  be 
distinguished  among  his  servants.  Take  John  Newton's  life;  he  was 
called  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  but  John  Newton  left  his  mark  in 
God's  vineyard,  a  mark  that  will  never  be  forgotten.  I  suppose  Paul 
could  not  have  been  much  less  than  of  that  age'when  he  was  called  by 
sovereign  grace;  nay,  the  most  of  the  apostles  were  probably  very  little 
short  of  this  age  when  mercy  met  with  them;  still  they  did  a  glorious 
day's  work.  If  saved  by  grace  in  middle  life,  my  brother,  you  must 
work  harder,  you  must  let  the  time  past  suffice  you  to  have  wrought 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  and  now  you  must  redeem  the  time,  because  the 
days  are  evil.  Why,  a  man  converted  at  forty  should  go  double  quick 
march  to  heaven,  there  should  not  be  a  moment  lost  now.  Work  the  engine 
at  high  pressure,  and  give  two  strokes  for  every  one  that  might  be  given 
by  younger  men  and  younger  minds.  Seek  in  the  divine  strength 
to  do  twice  as  much  in  the  time,  since  you  have  only  half  the  time  to 
do  a  life's  workan.  Crowns  for  Christ,  I  know  you  wish  to  win  them; 
then  be  up  and  doing,  beloved.  You  are  saved  by  grace,  and  by  grace 
alone.  You  pant  to  honour  Christ,  because  of  his  free  love  to  you;  cannot 
you  endeavour  to  honour  him  as  much  in  the  remnant  which  remains 


EARLY  AND  LATE,  OR  HOR^B  GRATIS.  409 

as  others  do  in  the  whole  length  of  their  life  ?  You  may  by  zeal,  and 
prudence,  and  discretion,  and  perfect  consecration,  yet  serve  the  Master 
well. 

The  householder  went  out  at  the  ninth  hour,  at  three  o'clock  in  thr 
afternoon.  Nobody  thinks  of  engaging  day-labourers  at  three  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon.  A  day's  work  to  be  done  from  three  till  six !  It 
shows  you  that  this  gospel  hiring  is  nothing  like  a  legal  hiring;  it  must 
be  all  of  grace,  or  a  man  would  not  think  of  doing  such  a  thing.  Well 
now,  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  that  is  from  sixty  to  seventy.  The 
prime  of  life  has  gone.  It  is  late,  it  is  sadly  late,  very  sadly  late.  It 
is  late  because  all  the  powers  of  the  man  are  weak  now.  His  memory 
begins  to  fail;  he  thinks  his  judgment  better  than  ever  it  was,  but 
probably  that  is  only  his  own  opinion.  Most  of  the  faculties  lose  their 
edge  in  old  age.  He  has  acquired  experience,  but  still  there  is  no 
fool  like  an  old  fool;  and  a  man  who  has  not  been  taught  by  divine 
grace  learns  very  little  of  any  value  in  the  school  of  providence. 
Sixty  thousand  years  would  not  make  a  man  wise  if  grace  did  not 
teach  him.  Now  think  of  it,  is  it  not  late?  Here  is  the  man:  if  he 
be  converted  now,  what  is  there  left  of  him?  He  is  just  a  candle  end. 
He  may  give  a  little  light,  but  it  is  almost  like  a  snuff  burning  in  the 
socket.  All  those  sixty  years,  seventy  years,  have  been  spent,  where? 
Cover  it  all  up.  Let  us  go  backward  as  Noah's  sons  did,  and  cover  it 
all  up;  and  oh,  may  almighty  grace  cover  it  too!  The  fact  is  terribly 
appalling — sixty,  seventy  years  spent  in  the  service  of  Satan!  Oh  what 
good  the  man  might  have  done !  Had  he  but  served  his  God  as  he 
served  the  world,  what  good  he  might  have  done  !  He  has  made  a 
fortune,  has  he!  How  rich  he  might  have  been  in  faith  by  this  time. 
He  has  built  a  house!  Yes,  but  how  he  might  have  helped  to 
build  the  Church.  The  man  has  been  playing  at  card-houses;  he  has 
been  like  boys  by  the  sea-shore  building  castles  of  sand,  which  must 
all  come  down,  and  must  come  down  very  soon  too,  for  I  hear  the  surges 
of  the  dread  tide  of  death,  it  is  rolling  in  even  now.  Those  teeth  which 
have  fallen  out,  those  pains  and  rheumatics,  and  so  on,  all  show  that 
this  is  not  his  rest.  The  tabernacle  is  beginning  to  crumble  about  the 
man,  and  the  warning  is  loud  which  reminds  him  that  he  must  soon 
be  gone,  and  leave  his  wealth  and  his  house;  and  so  if  this  be  all,  in 
the  end  it  will  turn  out  that  he  has  done  nothing;  he  has  piled  up 
shadows,  heaped  together  thick  clay,  and  that  is  all  he  has  done;  when 
he  might,  if  he  had  believed  in  Jesus,  have  done  so  much  for  God  and 
for  the  souls  of  men.  What  evil  habits  he  has  acquired !  What  can 
you  ever  make  of  this  man?  If  he  be  saved,  it  will  be  so  as  by  fire. 
He  is  called,  and  he  shall  enter  heaven,  but  oh !  how  little  can  he 
do  for  the  Master,  and  what  strong  corruptions  will  he  have  to 
wrestle  with,  and  what  an  inward  conflict  even  till  he  gets  to 
heaven!  It  is  late,  it  is  very  late,  but  oh!  blessed  be  God!  it  is  not 
too  late.  We  have  had  within  these  walls  persons  who  have  long 
passed  the  prime  of  their  days,  who  have  come  forward  and  said,  "  We 
will  cast  in  our  lot  with  you  because  the  Lord  is  with  you."  We  have 
heard  their  joyous  story  of  how  the  old  man  has  become  a  babe,  and 
how  he  that  was  hoary  with  years  has  been  born  again  into  the  kingdom 
of  Christ.  It  is  not  too  late.  Did  the  devil  say  so?  The  gate  ig 


4:10  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

shutting;  I  can  hear  it  grating  on  the  hinges,  but  it  is  not  shut!  The 
sun  is  going  down,  but  he  is  not  lost  beneath  the  horizon  yet;  and  if 
the  Master  calls  thee,  only  run  thou  the  faster  because  it  is  so;  and 
when  thou  art  saved,  serve  him  with  all  thy  might  and  main,  because 
thou  hast  so  little  time  to  glorify  him  here  on  earth,  and  short  space 
in  which  to  show  thy  sense  of  deep  indebtedness  to  his  surpassing  love. 
The  day  is  nearly  over,  it  has  come  to  the  eleventh  hour,  five  o'clock! 
The  men  have  been  looking  at  their  watches  to  see  whether  it  will  not 
soon  be  six;  they  are  longing  to  hear  the  clock  strikes  they  hope  the 
day's  work  will  soon  close.  See;  the  Master  goes  out  into  the  market- 
place  among  those  hulking  fellows  who  are  still  loitering  there,  and  he 
pitches  upon  some  and  asks  them,  "  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle? 
Go  and  work!  and  whatsoever  is  right  I  will  give  you."  At  the  eleventh 
hour  they  come  in — half-ashamed  to  come  I  will  be  bound, — hardly 
liking  the  others  to  see  them;  ashamed  to  begin  work  so  late.  Still 
they  did  steal  in  somewhere;  and  there  were  generous  labourers  who 
looked  over  the  tops  of  the  vines,  and  said  to  them,  "  Glad  to  see  you, 
friends!  glad  to  see  you,  however  late."  There  were  a  few,  I  dare  say, 
among  the  labourers,  at  least  there  are  if  this  be  the  vineyard,  who 
would  even  stop  their  work  and  begin  to  sing  and  praise  God  to  think 
that  their  fellows  had  been  brought  in  at  the  eleventh  hour.  Now  the 
eleventh  hour  must  be  looked  upon  as  any  period  of  life  which  is  past 
threescore  years  and  ten;  how  late  it  may  extend  I  cannot  tell.  There  is 
an  authentic  instance  of  a  man  converted  to  God  at  the  age  of  a  hundred 
and  four,  during  the  last  Irish  revival,  who  walked  some  distance  to  make 
a  confession  of  his  faith  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  I  recollect  a  case  of -one 
converted  in  America  by  a  sermon  which  he  had  heard,  I  think,  eighty- 
one  years  previously.  He  was  fifteen  when  he  heard  Mr.  Flavell 
at  the  end  of  a  discourse,  instead  of  pronouncing  the  blessing,  say,  "  I 
cannot  bless  you.  How  can  I  bless  those  who  do  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?  *  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  let  him  be  Ana 
thema  Maranatha  ;' "  and  eighty-one  years  or  more  afterwards  that  solemn 
sentence  came  to  the  man's  recollection  when  he  was  living  in  America, 
and  God  blessed  it  to  his  conversion.  There  have  been  some  to  whom  the 
eleventh  hour  has  been  the  very  hour  of  death;  some,  I  say,  how  many  or 
how  few  is  not  for  me  to  know.  There  is  one  instance  we  know  in  Scrip 
ture,  it  was  the  dying  thief.  There  is  but  one;  God  however,  in  his 
abundant  mercy  can  do  as  he  wills  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace, 
and  at  the  eleventh  hour  he  can  call  his  chosen.  It  is  very  late,  it  is  very 
very,  very  late,  it  is  sorrowfully  late,  it  is  dolefully  late,  out  it  is  not  too 
late,  and  if  the  Master  call  thee,  come — though  an  hundred  years  of  sin 
should  make  thy  feet  heavy  to  thee,  so  that  thy  steps  are  painfully 
limping.  If  he  call  thee  it  is  late  but  not  too  late,  and  therefore  come, 
Have  you  ever  thought  of  how  the  thief  worked  for  his  Lord?  It  was 
not  a  fine  place  for  working,  hanging  on  a  cross  dying,  just  at  the 
eleventh  hour;  but  he  did  a  deal  of  work  in  the  few  minutes.  Observe 
what  he  did.  First  he  confessed  Christ — he  acknowledged  him  to  be 
Lord,  confessed  him  before  men.  In  the  second  place  he  justified 
Christ — "  This  man  has  done  nothing  amiss."  In  the  next  place  he 
worshipped  the  Lord  Jesus,  calling  him  "  Lord."  He  even  began  to 
preach,  for  he  rebuked  his  fellow  sinner;  he  told  him  that  he  should  not 


EARLY  AND  LATE,  OR  HOR2B  GRATIS.  411 

re  rile  one  who  was  so  unrighteously  condemned.  He  offered  a  petition 
which  has  become  a  very  model  of  prayer — "  Lord,  remember  me  when 
thou  comest  into  thy  kingdom."  At  any  rate  I  wish  I  could  say  of 
myself  what  I  can  say  of  the  thief,  he  did  all  he  could;  I  cannot  say  that 
of  myself,  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  say  it  of  any  of  you.  I  do  not  know  any 
thing  the  thief  could  have  done  on  the  cross  which  he  did  not  do.  As 
soon  as  ever  he  was  called,  he  seems  to  have  worked  in  the  vineyard  to 
the  utmost  extent  of  his  ability;  and  so  let  me  say  to  you,  if  you  should 
be  called  at  the  eleventh  hour,  my  dear  hearer,  though  thou  be  well 
stricken  in  years  and  aged,  yet  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake  out  of  great  love 
for  all  the  great  things  which  he  hath  done  for  thee,  go  thy  way  and 
praise  him  with  all  thy  might. 

II.  My  time  has  gone,  and  I  wanted  to  have  shown  that  DISTIN 
GUISHING  GRACE  SHONE  RESPLENDENTLY  IN  EVERY  INSTANCE.  Those 

called  in  the  early  morning  have  delightful  reason  for  admiring  sovereign 
grace,  for  they  are  spared  the  ills  and  sins  of  life.  I  must  content  myself, 
however,  by  repeating  concerning  them  the  lines  of  Ralph  Erskine. 

"  In  heavenly  choirs  a  question  rose, 
That  stirred  up  strife  will  never  close ; 
What  rank  of  all  the  ransomed  race, 
Owes  highest  praise  to  sovereign  grace. 

Babes  thither  caught  from  womb  and  breast, 
Claimed  right  to  sing  above  the  rest; 
Because  they  found  the  happy  shore, 
They  never  saw  nor  sought  before." 

What  distinguishing  grace  is  that  which  called  us  when  we  were  young! 
Herein  is  electing  love.  "  When  Ephraim  was  a  child  then  I  loved  him, 
and  called  my  son  out  of  Egypt."  Some  of  us  in  time  and  in  eternity 
will  have  to  utter  a  special  song  of  thankfulness  to  the  love  which  took 
us  in  our  days  of  folly  and  simplicity,  and  conducted  us  into  the  family 
of  God.  It  was  not  because  we  were  better  disposed  children  than 
others,  or  because  there  was  naturally  anything  good  about  us;  we  were 
wilful,  heady,  and  high-minded,  proud,  wayward,  and  disobedient  as 
other  children  are,  and  yet  mercy  separated  us  from  the  rest,  and  we 
shall  never  cease  to  adore  its  sovereignty. 

Look  at  the  grace  which  calls  the  man  at  the  age  of  twenty,  when  the 
passions  are  hot,  when  there  is  strong  temptation  to  plunge  into  the 
yices  arid  the  so-called  pleasures  of  life.  To  be  delivered  from  the 
charms  of  sin,  when  the  world's  cheek  is  ruddy,  when  it  wears  its  best 
attire,  and  to  be  taught  to  prefer  the  reproach  of  Christ  to  all  the  riches 
of  Egypt,  this  is  mighty  grace  for  which  God  shall  have  our  sweetest 
song. 

To  be  called  of  the  Lord  at  forty,  in  the  prime  of  life.  This  is  a  won 
derful  instance  of  divine  power,  for  worldliness  is  hard  to  overcome,  and 
worldliness  is  the  sin  of  middle  age.  With  a  family  about  you,  with  much 
business,  with  the  world  eating  into  you  as  doth  a  canker,  it  is  a  wonder 
that  God  should  in  his  mercy  have  visited  you  then,  and  made  you  a 
regenerate  soul.  You  are  a  miracle  of  grace,  and  you  will  have  to  ft*4 
»t  and  to  praise  God  for  it  in  time  and  eternity. 

Siity  again.     "  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  hii 


412  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

spots?  If  so,  then  ye  who  are  accustomed  to  do  evil  may  learn  to  do 
well."  Arid  yet  you  have  learned,  you  have  had  a  blessed  schoolmaster 
who  sweetly  taught  you.  and  you  have  learned  to  do  well.  Though  your 
vessel  had  begun  to  rot  in  the  waters  of  the  Black  Sea  of  sin,  you  have 
got  a  new  owner,  and  you  will  run  up  a  new  flag,  and  you  will  sail  round 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Islands  of  the  Blessed,  in  the  Land  of  the 
Hereafter. 

But  what  shall  I  say  of  you  that  are  called  when  you  are  aged?  Ah 
you  will  have  to  love  much,  for  you  have  had  much  forgiven.  I  do  not 
know  that  you  may  be  in  thankfulness  a  whit  behind  those  of  us  who 
are  called  in  our  early  youth;  we  have  much  to  bless  God  for,  and  so 
have  you.  We  are  at  one  extreme  and  you  are  at  the  other;  we  would 
love  much  because  we  have  been  spared  much  sinning,  and  you  must 
love  much  because  you  have  been  delivered  from  much  sinning.  Xot 
to  go  through  the  fire  is  a  theme  for  song;  but  to  traverse  the  flame  and 
not  be  burned,  to  walk  the  furnace  and  to  be  delivered  from  its  vehement 
fire,  oh!  how  should  you  find  words  with  which  to  express  your  gratitude! 
Called  early  or  called  late,  called  at  midday  or  called  at  early  noon,  let  us 
together,  since  we  have  been  called  by  grace  alone,  ascribe  it  all  to  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  moved  by  the  mighty  constraints  of  his  love,  let  us 
work  with  body,  soul,  and  spirit — work  for  him  till  we  can  work  no 
longer,  and  then  praise  him  in  the  rest  of  glory. 

I  pray  you,  brethren,  suffer  no  idleness  to  creep  over  you.  If  you 
have  sought  to  extend  the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  do  it  more.  Give  more, 
talk  more  of  Christ,  pray  more,  labour  more !  I  often  receive  the  kind 
advice,  "  Do  less."  I  cannot  do  less.  Do  less !  Why,  better  rot  alto 
gether  than  live  the  inglorious  life  of  doing  less  than  our  utmost  for 
God.  We  shall  none  of  us,  I  am  afraid,  kill  ourselves  with  working  too 
hard  for  Jesus.  It  were  such  a  blessed  act  of  suicide  that  if  there  be  a 
sin  that  is  venial,  it  would  certainly  be  that.  I  am  not  afraid  that  you 
are  likely  to  perpetrate  such  an  enormity.  Work  for  the  Master!  Labour 
for  the  Master!  We  must  spend  and  be  spent,  and  wear  ourselves  out 
for  him!  Make  no  reserve  for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  of  it!  And  oh, 
how  happy  shall  we  be,  if  we  may  be  privileged  to  finish  the  work,  and 
hear  him  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou  into  the 
joy  of  thy  Lord."  May  the  Lord  bless  you  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON— Matthew  xix.  27  to  end 
of  chapter;  xx.  to  end  of  verse  29. 


Sitfbrrnacle  f  itlpit 


THE  FIKST  LAST,  AND  THE  LAST  FIKST. 


INTENDED  FOR  READING  ON  LORD'S-DAY,  SEPTEMBER  IGTH,   1891, 
DELIVERED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Thursday  Evening,  March  12th,   1891. 


"But  many  that  are  first  shall  be  last ;  and  the  last  shall  be  first."— Matthew  xix.  30. 
"So  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last."— Matthew  xx.  16. 

WE  must  be  saved  if  we  would  serve  the  Lord.  We  cannot  serve 
God  in  an  unsaved  condition.  "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot 
please  God."  It  is  vain  for  them  to  attempt  service  while  they  are  still 
at  enmity  against  God.  The  Lord  wants  not  enemies  to  wait  upon  him, 
nor  slaves  to  grace  his  throne.  We  must  be  saved  first ;  and  salvation 
is  all  of  grace.  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith."  After  we  are 
saved,  and  as  the  result  of  salvation,  we  serve.  Saved — we  serve.  He 
that  is  saved  becomes  a  child  of  God,  and  then  he  renders  a  child-like 
service  in  his  Father's  house.  That  service  is  also  all  of  grace.  He 
serves  not  under  the  law  of  the  old  commandment,  "  This  do,  and  thou 
shalt  live ;  "  for  he  is  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace.  Therefore, 
sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  him,  but  grace  shall  have  dominion 
over  him  ;  and  he  shall  seek  to  serve  the  Lord  and  please  him  all  the 
days  of  his  life.  When  we  are  saved,  we  must  never  forget  that  we 
are  saved  that  we  may  serve ;  made  free  from  sin,  that  we  may  become 
servants  to  God.  David  says,  "0  Lord,  truly  I  am  thy  servant;  I 
am  thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thine  handmaid :  thou  hast  loosed  my 
bonds."  Because  our  bonds  are  loosed,  we  are  under  new  bonds, 
bonds  of  love,  which  bind  us  to  the  service  of  the  Most  High. 

Now,  when  we  come  thus  to  be  servants,  we  must  not  forget  that  we 
are  saved  men  and  women  ;  for  if  we  begin  to  fancy  that,  while  we 
serve,  we  are  working  to  win  life  by  our  merits,  we  shall  get  upon 
legal  ground ;  and  a  child  of  God  on  legal  ground  is  going  back,  he  is 
departing  from  his  true  standing  before  God.  Still  remember,  '•  Ye 
are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  But  if  you  begin  to  forget 
your  indebtedness  to  your  Saviour,  not  only  for  eternal  life,  but  for 
everything  you  are,  and  have,  and  do,  you  will  be  like  the  Galatians, 
who  began  in  the  Spirit,  but  sought  to  be  made  perfect  by  the  flesh. 
No.  2,221.  3 


470  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

You  will  be  like  the  young  man,  whose  question  we  have  just  read : 
"What  lack  I  yet?"  You  will  be  like  Peter,  who  puts  in  a  sort  of 
claim  for  reward:  "  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  followed  thee  ; 
what  shall  we  have  therefore?"  You  will  be  like  the  men  who  had 
worked  in  the  vineyard  from  early  morning,  and  who  murmured 
because  the  penny  was  given  to  those  who  had  only  worked  for  a 
single  hour.  Christ  will  not  have  his  servants  under  bondage  to  a 
legal  spirit.  Wherever  he  spies  it  out,  he  strikes  it  on  the  head  ;  for 
>both  the  service  and  the  reward  are  all  of  grace.  The  service  itself  is 
given  us  of  God,  and  God  rewards  the  service  which  he  himself  has 
given.  We  might  almost  speak  of  this  as  an  eccentricity  of  grace. 
God  gives  us  good  works,  and  then  rewards  us  for  the  works  which 
he  himself  has  given.  So  all  is  of  grace  from  first  to  last,  and  must 
never  be  viewed  with  a  legal  eye.  Into  this  subject  I  want  on  this 
occasion  to  conduct  you. 

I  dare  say  that  you  have  heard  sermons  from  this  text,  but  probably 
mot  preached  from  it  in  its  connection.  I  like  to  take  the  text  as  it 
stands,  and  get  from  it  a  bit  of  exposition  for  my  own  heart,  which  I 
may  pass  on  to  you ;  for,  remember,  although  the  text  away  from  its 
connection  may  be  true,  yet  it  is  not  the  truth  which  God  there  in 
tended  to  teach  us,  and  it  becomes  us  to  look  about  us  to  see  what 
conies  before  the  text,  and  what  comes  after,  in  order  that  we  may 
'Catch  the  exact  meaning  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  giving  the  words. 

I.  I  shall  begin  by  dwelling  upon  this  remark :  IN  THE  SERVICE 
•OF  OUR  LORD  FREE  GRACE  is  MANIFESTED.  It  may  not  strike  you  as 
being  upon  the  surface  of  the  text,  but  it  lies  on  the  very  surface  of 
the  whole  connection :  in  the  service  of  our  Lord  free  grace  is 
manifested.  Think  that  over. 

It  must  be  so,  in  the  first  place,  because,  although  it  is  rewarded, 
<all  our  service  is  already  due  to  God.  Under  the  law  we  are  bound  to 
love  the  Lord  with  all  our  heart,  and  with  all  our  soul,  and  with  all 
our  mind,  and  with  all  our  strength.  There  can  be  nothing  beyond 
that.  All  that  we  can  do  we  are  already  bound  to  do,  under  the  law. 
Works  of  supererogation  must  be  impossible,  since  the  law  compre 
hends  all  holiness,  and  condemns  every  form  of  sin.  When  we  have 
done  all,  we  are  unprofitable  servants,  we  have  done  no  more  than  it 
was  our  duty  to  do.  Hence,  brethren,  if  there  be  a  service  to  which 
we  are  called,  and  for  which  a  reward  is  promised,  it  must  be  a 
service  of  grace.  It  cannot  be  any  other.  Under  the  gospel,  the  same 
thing  is  true  ;  all  that  we  can  do  is  already  due.  "  Ye  are  not  your 
own  j  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  prioe."  There  is  no  faculty,  there 
is  no  capacity,  there  is  no  possibility  of  your  nature  which  is  not 
redeemed,  and  which  does  not  belong  to  Christ  by  virtue  of  the  ransom 
price  which  he  has  paid  for  it.  You  will  gladly  and  gratefully  own 
the  obligation  to  do  all  that  lieth  in  you,  for  him  who  loved  you,  and 
bought  you  with  his  precious  blood. 

"  Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 
Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow  ;  " 

surely  they  are  all  due  to  niy  Lord  already  in  repentance  and  gratitude. 
.All  the  zeal  of  missionaries,  all  the  patience  of  martyrs,  all  the  faith 


THE    FIRST    LAST,    AND    THE    LAST    FIRST.  471 

of  confessors,  all  the  holiness  of  godly  men,  is  Christ's  by  right,  and 
therefore  there  can  be  no  reward  for  them,  seeing  that  they  are  his 
due  already.  If  there  be  a  service  for  which  a  reward  is  given  to 
us,  it  is  a  service  granted  to  us  of  grace,  that  we  may  receive  grace 
thereby. 

But,  next,  there  is  this  reflection — all  our  service  is  in  itself  unacceptable. 
When  all  conies  to  all,  it  is  still,  in  and  of  itself,  a  thing  so  mean 
and  poor,  so  imperfect  and  defiled,  that  it  could  not  claim  any  reward. 
Job  was  made  to  feel  this  in  the  day  of  his  humiliation.  He  said 
"If  I  say,  I  am  perfect,  it  shall  also  prove  me  perverse.  Though  I 
•were  perfect,  yet  would  I  not  know  my  soul :  I  would  despise  my  life." 
If  it  were  possible  for  us  to  stand  before  God  in  any  merit  of  our 
own,  we  feel  so  certain  that  we  have  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God, 
and  that  in  many  things  we  have  offended,  that  we  would  tear  off  our 
righteousness  from  us,  and  throw  it  away  as  filthy  rags,  even  the 
best  of  it.  "I  count  all  things  but  loss,"  saith  Paul,  "that  I  may 
win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him,  not  having  mine  own  righteousness, 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ; 
the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  If  then  we  are  so 
conscious  of  our  failures,  and  shortcomings,  and  transgressions,  and 
if  we  have  to  cry  for  mercy  even  on  our  holy  things,  and  to  confess 
sin  in  them,  how  can  we  suppose  that  any  reward  that  may  be  given 
can  be  otherwise  than  of  grace,  seeing  that  the  whole  service  itself 
must  be  of  grace  ? 

Think  again.  The  ability  to  serve  God  is  the  gift  of  God's  grace.  I 
refer  not  only  to  mental  ability;  but  to  the  capacity  which  men  of 
substance  have  to  help  the  cause  of  God  by  their  generous  gifts.  It 
is  God  who  gives  the  power  to  get  wealth,  as  it  is  he  who  gives 
the  brain  to  think,  and  the  mouth  to  speak.  "  What  hast  thou  that 
thou  didst  not  receive?  "  If  any  here  present  are  serving  God  with 
gifts  and  graces,  I  am  sure  that  they  must  own  that  these  were  given 
to  them.  They  did  not  win  them  themselves.  Or,  if  some  of  them 
be  acquirements,  yet  the  power  to  acquire  was  given  them  of  him  from 
whom  cometh  every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift.  Thus  the  ability 
to  serve  God  is  the  gift  of  grace. 

Beloved,  the  call  to  serve  God  in  any  special  way  is  also  of  grace. 
If  we  are  called  to  the  ministry,  remember  how  Paul  puts  it :  "  Unto 
me,  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace  given,  that 
I  should  preach  among  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ." 
If  our  kings  put  upon  their  coins  "  Dei  gratia  " — kings,  by  the  grace 
of  God — well,  well,  let  them  say  so ;  but  we  can  put  it  on  our  lives. 
*' Sunday-school  teachers,  by  the  grace  of  God."  "Street-preachers, 
by  the  grace  of  God."  "Students  in  the  College,  by  the  grace  of  God." 
*'  Preachers  of  the  gospel,  by  the  grace  of  God."  It  is  God  who 
calls  us  to  our  several  sacred  employments.  Our  ordination,  if  it  be 
an  ordination  at  all,  is  from  that  great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls, 
who  went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  called  unto  him  whom  he  would, 
and  made  them  to  be  his  first  messengers.  Before  he  left  them,  he 
gave  them  that  great  commission  which  is  still  binding  upon  all  his 
followers,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature."  It  is  of  grace  that  we  are  put  into  any  sphere  of  service; 


472  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

and  what  a  grace  it  is  to  be  permitted  to  do  anything  for  him !  His 
shoes'  latchets  we  are  not  worthy  to  unloose ;  his  shoes  we  are  not 
worthy  to  bear.  Though  it  be  a  menial's  work,  it  is  a  monarch's  work 
to  do  anything  for  Christ.  Blessed  be  his  name,  if  he  will  let  me  be 
anywhere  in  his  service,  though  it  were  but  as  a  scullion  in  the 
kitchen!  The  kitchen  is  in  the  palace,  and  Christ's  kitchen-maids 
are  maids  of  honour.  He  that  serveth  God,  reigneth.  To  serve  him 
on  earth  is  to  be  glorified.  To  serve  him  in  heaven  will  be  a  part  of 
our  endless  glory.  Surely  this,  then,  is  by  grace. 

Still  further,  every  opportunity  of  serving  God  is  a  gift  of  grace.  ± 
am  sure  that  when  I  have  been  shut  out  from  the  pulpit  by  sickness, 
I  have  thought  it  a  great  grace  from  God  to  be  permitted  to  creep 
into  the  pulpit  once  more.  When  one's  hand  has  been  unable  to 
hold  a  pen,  we  count  it  a  grace  to  be  able  to  write  again  some  loving 
words  that  may  be  blessed  to  men.  I  think  that  it  is  God's  grace 
that  puts  in  your  way  people  to  whom  you  may  speak  privately.  It  is 
God's  grace  that  brings  those  children  to  the  Sunday-school  to  you, 
that  you  may  teach  them.  If  we  were  wide  awake,  we  should  see, 
all  day  long,  opportunities  of  usefulness,  and  we  should  be  saying, 
u  Blessed  be  God  who  puts  me  by  providence  where  I  can  be  of  some 
little  service  to  him,  and  bring  forth  some  fruit  to  his  praise  !"  It  is 
all  of  grace ;  these  providential  openings,  and  the  spirit  and  the  power 
to  avail  ourselves  of  them,  come  as  gifts  from  God. 

Another  thing  I  know :  when  you  have  the  call  to  a  work,  and  the 
opportunity,  still  it  is  a  gift  of  grace  to  be  in  a  right  state  of  mind  to 
do  your  Lord's  service.  Do  you  never  feel  sluggish  and  dull?  Would 
you  not  alicays  be  so  if  his  Spirit  did  not  quicken  you?  Are  you 
not  sometimes  frost-bitten,  so  that  your  soul  seems  like  a  great 
iceberg  ?  Would  the  waters  ever  flow  unless  the  Spirit  came  \vith 
melting-  power  ?  Do  you  not  thank  God,  dear  brother,  that  you  have 
had  gracious  occasions  in  which  the  Lord  has  made  you  like  Naphtali, 
"a  hind  let  loose''  ?  When  you  have  given  forth  goodly  words,  from 
whom  has  come  the  unction  ?  whence  the  power  ?  You  have  spoken  : 
ah,  that  is  a  poor  thing !  But  God  has  spoken  through  you  :  ah,  that 
is  a  grand  thing!  Is  not  that  wholly  the  work  of  grace?  Every 
tear  of  sympathy  that  the  preacher  sheds  when  he  is  wooing  men  to 
Christ,  every  heart-throb  and  all  the  anguish  of  his  soul  when  he 
would  fain  compel  them  to  come  in,  the  whole  bearing  and  carnage 
of  a  grace-taught  minister  or  teacher — all  this  is  of  grace,  and  unto 
God  must  be  the  glory  of  it.  It  is  not  under  law  that  we  are  working ; 
for  law  provides  no  strength,  no  tone,  no  savour.  It  is  grace  that 
makes  us  work ;  for  it  gives  us  the  strength  with  which  to  work. 
"  God  hath  spoken  once;  twice  have  I  heard  this,  that  power  be- 
longeth  unto  God.  Also  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  belongeth  mercy :  for  thou 
renderest  to  every  man  according  to  his  work."  Thou  givest  him 
strength  proportioned  to  his  need,  and  the  guidance  necessary  because 
of  the  difficulties  of  his  task.  Here  is  grace.  Is  it  not  so? 

You  will  be  sure  to  join  with  me  in  the  next  point  without  a  single 
demur  :  success  in  holy  service  is  wholly  of  the  Lord.  If  we  were  so  wicked 
as  to  attribute  to  ourselves  the  sowing,  and  to  ourselves  the  watering, 
apart  from  grace,  yet  we  dare  not  attribute  to  ourselves  the  increase. 


THE    FIRST    LAST,    AND    THE    LAST   FIRST  473 

"I  have  planted,"  said  Paul;  "Apollos  watered;  but  God  gave  the 
increase."  Would  a  single  persuasion  of  ours  prevail  with  man's  hard 
heart  if  the  Holy  Spirit  did  not  convince  him  of  sin,  and  make  him 
repent  ?  Would  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  our  poor  way  ever  en 
lighten  a  single  eye  if  Jesus  Christ  were  not  seen  in  his  own  light? 
Could  we  comfort  the  broken-hearted,  could  we  proclaim  liberty  to  the 
captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound,  if  the 
Spirit  of  God  were  not  upon  us?  Why,  if  we  did  make  the  proclamation, 
would  it  not  fall  flat  to  the  ground  apart  from  the  work  of  God,  who 
doeth  all  things  through  us  and  by  us?  We  are  labourers  together  with 
him.  We  lift  our  hand,  and  God  lifts  his.  We  speak,  and  he  speaks. 
We  would  fain  lay  hold  of  men's  hearts,  and  he  does  lay  hold  upon 
them.  We  would  weep  them  to  Christ,  and  he  brings  them  weeping  to 
Christ,  and  saves  them  to  eternal  life.  Blessed  be  his  name !  After 
many  years  of  prophesying  in  his  name,  dare  any  of  us  say  that  we 
have  made  the  dry  bones  to  live  ?  After  having  long  given  the  invita 
tion,  do  we  say  that  we  have  persuaded  one  to  come  to  the  wedding- 
feast  apart  from  the  Lord's  divine  working  ?  Do  we  take  any  of  the 
glory  of  a  saved  soul  to  ourselves  ?  It  were  treason ;  it  were  blasphemy. 
We  dare  not  commit  such  a  sin.  Our  work,  if  it  succeeds  at  all,  if  it 
is  worth  calling  good  work,  is  all  of  grace. 

And  if,  my  dear  friends,  any  of  you  are  called  to  suffer  for  Christ's 
sake,  the  honour  of  suffering  is  a  special  gift.  If  you  have  been  reviled, 
if  you  have  lost  position,  if  you  have  suffered  those  moderate  martyr 
doms  which  are  possible  in  a  free  country  like  this,  then  "  Unto  you  it 
is  given  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on  him,  but  also 
to  suffer  for  his  sake."  "Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad:  for  great 
is  your  reward  in  heaven  :  for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  which 
were  before  you."  But  take  no  credit  to  yourself.  You  are  elevated 
to  the  peerage  of  suffering :  it  is  your  King  who  brought  you  there. 
You  have  his  gracious  permission  to  pass  through  great  tribulation : 
that  were  nothing  to  you,  if  you  had  not  washed  3-0111*  robes,  and  made 
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  You  owe  your  patience,  your 
courage,  your  steadfastness,  all  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  You  had  long 
since  been  carried  away  by  the  fear  of  man,  which  bringeth  a  snare ; 
you  had  long  since  been  a  traitor  to  the  truth,  and  to  your  Lord,  if  he 
iiad  left  you.  It  is  your  duty  to  be  faithful.  When  you  are  faithful, 
it  is  not  in  yourself  that  you  are  so.  He  works  all  our  works  in  us, 
and  he  must  have  the  praise  of  them.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling."  Work  it  out  to  the  very  full.  Be  thorough 
with  it.  "  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to 
do  of  his  good  pleasure."  "Be  ye  stedfast,  unmoveable,  always 
abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord."  God  will  reward  you ;  but  your 
steadfastness,  your  diligence,  your  patience,  all  these  are  the  work  of 
the  grace  of  God,  and  you  know  it.  If  you,  indeed,  possess  them,  you 
ascribe  them  all  to  him. 

Now,  then,  we  have  established  this,  I  think,  beyond  all  contradic 
tion,  among  spiritual  men — that  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  free  grace 
is  magnified. 

II.     So  we  take  another  step,   and  we  say,   as  our  second  head, 

HENCE   THE    LORD  HAS    HIS  OWN  WAY  OF    MEASURING  WHAT  WE    DO.      YOU 


474  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

see  that  in  the  case  of  these  persons  who  had  toiled  in  the  vineyard ;. 
their  master  measured  their  work  after  his  own  fashion.  He  did  not 
go  by  the  regular  pay-way  of  so  much  an  hour ;  but,  inasmuch  as  it 
was  all  of  grace,  this  great  householder  made  the  reward  to  be  after 
his  own  measure,  a  penny  for  one  hour  and  a  penny  for  twelve  hours. 
He  made  the  last  equal  to  the  first.  So  shall  it  be  :  "  The  last  shall 
be  first,  and  the  first  last."  This  is  because  we  are  dealing  here,  not 
with  a  legal  paymaster,  but  with  a  God  of  grace,  who  measures  our 
service,  which  itself  is  all  of  grace,  by  his  own  measurement,  and  not 
by  ours. 

He  will  reward  every  worker,  but  not  as  we  judge.  He  will  do  no  man 
any  injustice,  even  in  the  omnipotence  of  his  grace.  He  will  be  able 
to  say  to  every  worker,  "  Friend,  I  do  thee  no  wrong."  He  will  da 
no  wrong  to  any  one  of  his  servants,  whoever  they  may  be  ;  rest  sure 
of  that ;  but  still  he  will  reply,  "  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I 
will  with  mine  own?"  and  he  will  reward  his  workers  in  his  own 
royal  yet  gracious  way. 

So,  then,  he  will  not  reivard-  us  according  to  the  time  spent,  or  surface- 
covered.  Some  may  be  Christians  for  thirty  or  forty  years,  and  may 
never  be  among  the  first.  It  is  not  the  length  of  your  service,  good  as 
that  is,  that  will  be  God's  gain.  There  may  be  some  who  shall  come 
to  Christ  and  go  home  to  heaven  in  a  single  year,  and  yet  shall  bring 
great  honour  to  their  Master.  It  is  not  the  length  of  time  in  which 
you  are  engaged  in  the  Lord's  service.  Neither  is  it  the  space  that  is 
apparently  covered.  Some  seem  to  do  a  great  deal,  skimming  over  a 
wide  surface  ;  but  it  is  not  so  that  the  Master  measures :  neither  by 
the  hour,  nor  yet  by  the  acre.  That  might  be  a  legal  way  of  measure 
ment,  but  his  gracious  way  of  measurement  is  not  so. 

And  he  will  not  measure  out  the  reward  according  to  our  ability,  whether 
it  be  mental  ability,  ability  of  substance,  or  ability  of  opportunity ;  for 
some  of  us  might  come  in  for  a  large  share,  and  others  might  come  in 
for  a  very  little,  if  this  were  the  rule.  But  this  is  not  the  way  the 
Master  measures.  If  to  one  man  he  gives  the  gift  of  speech,  to  another 
the  great  gift  of  diving  deeply  into  the  meaning  of  his  word,  and  to 
another  experience,  and  so  on,  yet  the  reward  to  the  persons  holding 
these  various  gifts  will  not  be  in  proportion  to  the  gifts  they  have,  but 
after  quite  another  rule. 

The  reward  will  not  be  according  to  the  judgment  of  men.  A.  brother 
has  served  God  in  his  way,  and  his  brethren  think  much  of  him,  and 
appoint  him  to  an  office.  He  is  a  deacon,  or  an  elder,  or,  peradven- 
ture,  he  becomes  a  pastor.  It  is  a  high  reward  to  be  allowed  thus 
to  increase  our  opportunities  of  usefulness ;  but  we  shall  not  at  last 
be  rewarded  according  to  the  height  of  office.  That  is  not  the  standard 
in  this  kingdom  where  Christ  rules. 

Above  all,  no  man  shall  be  measured  by  his  own  judgment ;  else  I  know 
some  friends  who  would  have  a  very  grand  reward.  They  are  free 
from  sin  ;  they  are  perfect,  they  say  :  their  Master  knows,  if  they  do 
not,  whether  that  is  true  or  not.  Another  says,  "I  have  done  this, 
and  I  have  done  that."  But  it  is  not  what  you  say  that  you  have 
done,  that  will  gauge  your  Master's  reward  to  you.  There  are  some 
that  speak  very  loudly  of  what  they  have  accomplished.  I  do  not. 


THE   FIRST   LAST,    AND    THE   LAST   FIRST.  475 

think  that  their  brethren,  for  the  most  part,  think  the  more  of  them 
for  thinking  so  much  of  themselves.  I  believe  that  those  who  have 
lower  opinions  of  their  own  capacity  and  usefulness  are  much  more 
honoured  in  the  presence  of  the  saints  of  God.  No,  our  self -judgment, 
our  tall  talk,  our  loud  profession,  and  so  forth,  will  not  be  the  measure 
with  which  we  shall  be  rewarded;  else  those  who  said,  "We  have 
borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,"  would  have  had  twopence,  at 
least,  if  not  threepence,  or,  perhaps,  even  a  shilling,  in  proportion  to 
those  poor  creatures,  whom  the  master  made  equal  to  them,  though 
they  had  only  come  in  at  the  eleventh  hour. 

Our  reward  will  not  be  according  to  the  impression  made  among  men.  "We 
may  have  made  our  mark  upon  our  age,  and  neighbourhood,  and 
surroundings.  Some  men's  names  will  go  down  to  posterity;  others 
have  no  fame  at  all.  It  will  be  found  of  some  men  that  their  lives  are 
•written  and  emblazoned  everywhere.  Others  will  live  in  the  little 
circle  of  their  family,  but  not  beyond  that  narrow  range.  But  God 
will  not  measure  so.  The  godly  housewife,  with  four  or  five  children 
trained  for  God  in  her  cottage,  may  be  reckoned  of  God  among  the 
first ;  and  the  able  speaker,  in  his  pulpit,  who  has  thousands  hanging 
on  his  lips,  may  be  reckoned  of  God  among  the  last.  God  has  his 
own  ways  of  measuring  up  men's  works. 

But  let  me  add  that  we  shall  not  be  rewarded  even  according  to  our 
success.  To  some  men  success  is  meted  out  in  large  measure ;  that 
success  which  really  is  not  their  own,  but  is  the  fruit  of  other  men's 
labours.  A  man  preaches  the  gospel  with  many  te"ars  for  years,  and 
sees  little  fruit.  He  dies  :  another  man,  of  earnest  spirit,  follows  him, 
and  gathers  in  the  old  man's  sheaves.  The  former  man  planted  ;  the 
other  man  entered  into  his  labours.  To  whom  shall  the  reward  be 
^iven  ?  The  success  is  not  due  to  him  who  seems  to  have  achieved  it. 
You  remember  the  old  Eomish  legend,  which  contains  a  great  truth. 
There  was  a  brother  who  preached  very  mightily,  and  who  had  won 
many  souls  to  Christ,  and  it  was  revealed  to  him  one  night,  in  a  dream, 
that  in  heaven  he  would  have  no  reward  for  all  that  he  had  done.  He 
asked  to  whom  the  reward  would  go ;  and  an  angel  told  him  that  it 
would  go  to  an  old  man  who  used  to  sit  on  the  pulpit  stairs,  and  pray 
for  him.  Well,  it  may  be  so,  though  it  is  more  likely  that  both  would 
share  their  Master's  praise.  We  shall  not  be  rewarded,  however, 
simply  according  to  our  apparent  success. 

Neither  shall  we  be  put  down  as  one  of  the  last  because  of  non- 
success.  God  intends  that  some  men  shall  never  succeed,  according 
to  the  rule  of  success  that  appertains  among  men  ;  for  he  sent  even  his 
servant  Isaiah  to  go  and  make  the  people's  hearts  hard,  and  their  ears 
<lull  of  hearing  ;  and  he  sent  Jeremiah  to  weep  over  a  nation  to  whom 
his  tears  brought  no  repentance  and  no  reformation.  He  may  send 
you,  like  Noah,  to  preach  for  one  hundred  and  twenty  years,  and  never 
get  a  soul  beside  your  own  family  into  the  ark.  But  if  you  are  faithful, 
that  is  well  pleasing  in  his  sight.  Here  lies  the  good  pleasure  of  God. 
I  do  not  suppose  that  it  will  happen  that  you  are  to  do  all  the  plough 
ing  and  all  the  sowing,  and  there  should  never  be  an  armful  of  sheaves 
for  you  in  all  your  life ;  though,  if  it  should  be  thus,  and  you  shall 
have  been  at  the  last  found  faithful  to  the  commission  that  your  God 


476  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

has  given  to  you,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  you  shall  have  your  reward ; 
but  the  reward  is  not  measured  out  according"  to  man's  rule  of  success. 

Let  me  tell  you  what  I  think  is  a  rule  with  God.  It  is  a  many- 
branched  kind  of  rule.  Some  men  stand  first  because  of  their  strong 
desire.  Oh,  they  would  have  saved  the  people  if  they  could ;  they 
would  have  persuaded  men  to  be  Christians  if  they  could ;  they  would 
have  laid  down  their  lives  to  do  it.  They  preached  their  very  hearts 
out  in  their  desire  for  their  hearers'  salvation.  Their  souls  ran  over  at 
their  lips  while  they  talked  with  men.  God  knows  their  desires,  and 
he  takes  the  will  for  the  deed,  and  "  so  the  last  shall  be  first." 

God  also  measures  proportions.  The  brother  never  had  more  than 
one  talent,  but  he  did  as  much  with  it  as  some  with  ten ;  yet  it  did  not 
seem  to  come  to  much  in  his  eye.  He  was  always  mourning  because 
he  was  so  little.  He  thought  that  he  was  like  one  of  those  coral 
insects  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  just  making  a  little  bit  of  coral  which 
never  came  above  the  waves ;  but  it  was  part  of  a  great  whole  that 
would  afterwards  rise  into  a  fairy  island  of  the  sea.  Our  Lord  will 
measure,  not  according  to  what  a  man  hath  not,  but  according  to  what 
a  man  hath. 

And  here  is  one  who  has  little  to  commend  him  except  his  spirit. 
He  waits  upon  God.  He  is  very  gracious.  He  trembles  at  God's 
word.  He  speaks  with  his  whole  heart  very  reverently,  very  tenderly, 
desiring  always  to  be  silent  if  God  would  have  him  silent,  and  only  to 
speak  when  God  would  move  him  to  speak.  His  delight  is  to  do  the 
Lord's  will,  and  nothing  but  the  Lord's  will,  and  he  is  quite  content 
to  be  nothing.  Indeed,  he  cries  for  that — 

"Oh,  to  be  nothing,  nothing, 
Only  to  lie  at  his  feet !  " 

Now,  God  may  put  that  man  among  the  first;  whereas  the  self- 
contained  man,  who  does  work  for  God  sincerely,  may,  nevertheless, 
have  to  go  into  the  back  rank,  and  be  among  the  last. 

Here  is  one,  again,  who,  whatever  he  does,  does  it  with  thoroughness. 
He  does  not  attempt  many  things,  but  he  does  one  thing.  It  is  all 
that  he  can  do,  and  he  throws  his  whole  soul  into  it,  and  works  at  it 
like  some  Eastern  artist  working  at  a  cameo  for  a  prince.  All  his  life 
is  put  into  that  little  bit  of  a  thing ;  and,  it  may  be,  that  our  great 
King  will  count  him  first ;  while  another  who  did  much  in  a  slovenly, 
slurring  style,  and  was  thought  to  have  done  a  great  deal,  will  have 
all  his  work  rejected,  for  it  is  not  up  to  the  Prince's  mark,  and  he 
will  not  adorn  his  palace  therewith. 

I  think,  dear  friends,  that  God  will  measure  our  work  very  much 
by  our  thought  of  him  in  it.  If  we  did  it  all  to  him  ;  if  we  did  it  all  for 
him  ;  if  he  was  always  in  our  mind  in  the  doing  of  it ;  and  we  did  not 
think  of  our  friends,  nor  of  our  own  reputation,  God  would  be  more 
likely  to  honour  us,  for  he  will  put  those  who  think  much  of  him 
among  the  first,  and  others  among  the  last.  "  Them  that  honour  me," 
saith  the  Lord,  "  I  will  honour." 

And  especially,  again,  if  all  that  we  do  is  baptized  with  love.  Why, 
see  that  woman  who  brought  her  alabaster  box,  and  broke  it,  and 
poured  the  precious  ointment  of  spikenard  upon  Christ's  head !  She 


THE    FIRST    LAST,    AND    THE    LAST    FIRST.  477 

is  put  among  the  first,  and  Christ  makes  honourable  mention  of  her 
wherever  the  gospel  is  preached.  Some  that  did  much  have  to  go 
among  the  last ;  for  they  had  not  such  love  as  she  had. 

Some  work  for  God  with  great  faith  ;  and  the  Lord  loves  to  see  us 
working  in  faith.  To  do  a  great  deal  of  work  with  a  great  deal  of 
unbelief,  is  to  do  very  little  after  all ;  for  if  a  prayer  that  is  unbe 
lieving  does  not  prosper,  preaching  or  teaching  that  is  unbelieving  is 
not  likely  to  do  so.  Put  faith  into  thy  work,  and,  may  be,  thou  wilt 
be  among  the  first. 

I  am  sure  that  God  measures  much  of  our  work  according  to  the 
prayer  we  expend  over  it.  Oh,  yes,  it  was  a  fine  sermon !  You  could 
tell  how  the  preacher  had  worked  at  it ;  you  could  see  how  he  had 
polished  up  that  phrase,  and  how  he  had  cut  that  sentence  into  dice- 
pieces  to  make  it  tell ;  but  you  could  also  see  that  he  had  never 
prayed  over  it.  A  sermon  that  is  prayed  over  is  worth  ten  thousand 
that  are  merely  prepared,  or  copied,  or  that  spring  out  of  a  man's 
mind  without  being  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  heart.  Oh,  to 
pray  down  the  sermon,  and  then  to  pray  up  the  sermon,  and  pray  it 
all  over,  resting  upon  God  alone  ! 

God  will  often  look  upon  our  work  in  giving,  not  according  to  how 
much  we  give,  but  I  think  that  the  Lord's  rule  is  to  take  notice  of 
how  much  we  have  left.  That  woman  who  gave  all  her  living,  gave 
more  than  all  the  rich  men  gave,  because  she  had  nothing  left.  It  was 
but  two  mites  that  make  a  farthing;  but  then  it  was  all  her  living ; 
and  so  she  goes  into  the  front  rank.  My  lord  has  given  a  thousand 
pounds,  and  we  are  very  much  obliged  to  him.  He  must  go  into  the 
back  rank,  for  all  that ;  for  he  has  so  much  left. 

And  then,  it  may  be,  that  they  will  take  the  first  place  who  did  not 
get  any  reward  for  what  they  did.  Our  Lord  tells  us  that  when  we 
are  making  a  feast  we  should  call  in  the  blind,  and  the  halt,  and  the 
lame.  Why?  "For,"  he  says,  "  they  cannot  recompense  thee."  He 
speaks  of  the  Pharisees  again,  and  says,  "Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
They  have  their  reward."  You  will  not  be  paid  twice.  If  you  have 
done  something  for  Christ — for  instance,  defended  the  faith — and  you 
are  denounced  for  it,  and  traduced  for  it,  very  well,  you  have  not  had 
your  pay  for  it.  There  remaineth  the  recompense  for  unrewarded 
services.  It  is  a  grand  thing  when,  by  the  grace  of  God,  you  have  some 
thing  standing  in  God's  book,  not  of  law,  but  of  grace.  You  helped 
a  poor  man,  and  he  was  not  grateful.  Oh,  be  so  thankful  that  he  was 
not  grateful,  because,  if  he  had  been  grateful,  you  would  have  had 
your  reward,  may  be  !  When  those  you  relieve  are  very  kind  after 
wards,  and  speak  well  of  you,  and  do  you  some  good  service  in  return, 
it  is  very  nice  ;  of  course  it  is.  Well,  but  you  are  paid.  But  those 
who  have  done  good  and  suffered  for  it ;  who,  for  the  best  thing  that 
they  did  have  had  the  worst  return ;  who  have  rendered  kindness,  and 
have  only  received  unkindness  as  the  result ;  it  may  be  that  the  Lord 
will  say  of  them,  " These  were  last,  but  they  shall  be  first; "  whereas 
many  that  stood  first  in  men's  esteem,  and  in  the  gratitude  they 
received,  will  have  to  go  last. 

III.  Now,  my  time  almost  fails  me,  but  you  must  bear  with  me  on 
my  third  head ;  for  here  is  the  practical  part  of  free  grace  in  our  service. 

3 


478  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Hence,  WE  HAVE  INSTRUCTION  AS  TO  OUR  SPIRIT  AS  WORKERS.  If  the 
work  is  all  of  grace,  and  if  God  has  a  way  of  measuring  up  that  work, 
which  is  not  at  all  according  to  the  law,  but  of  his  own  grace ;  then 
there  are  two  things  to  be  observed.  First,  do  not  be  proud ;  secondly, 
do  not  be  discouraged. 

Do  not  bu  proud,  for  many  that  are  first  shall  be  last.  Suppose, 
niy  dear  friend,  that  you  really  are  first,  and  are  doing  a  great  deal 
for  God,  will  you  be  proud  ?  Why,  you  are  only  a  greater  debtor. 
You  owe  all  the  more  to  that  grace,  which  has  enabled  you  to  be  of 
some  service  in  the  kingdom  of  your  Lord.  Lie  low  at  your  Lord's 
feet,  and  be  very  humble. 

Next,  remember  that  though  you  may  think  that  you  are  first,  you 
may,  even  now,  be  among  the  last.  Your  assessment  of  your  service 
may  not  be  the  divine  assessment  at  all.  You  may  think  that  you  are 
u  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing  "  ;  and,  in 
God's  repute,  you  may  be  "  Wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and 
blind,  and  naked."  Your  work  may  be  like  very  big  trusses  of  hay, 
and  loads  of  straw,  and  stacks  of  stubble  ;  and  yet,  when  God  conies 
to  try  it,  it  may  be  all  burned  down  to  a  handful  of  ashes ;  whereas 
the  friend,  of  whom  you  think  so  little,  may  only  have  built  a  small 
portion,  but  he  has  built  it  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones. 

Let  us  also  recollect  that,  even  if  it  is  true  that  we  are  among  the 
first,  we  may,  if  we  get  proud  of  it,  find  ourselves  among  the  last.  Oh, 
how  some  of  God's  greatest  servants  have  been  shrivelled  up  when 
they  began  to  swell  out  with  pride  and  vanity !  God  blessed  them  as 
long  as  they  were  feeble,  and  weak,  and  leaned  upon  his  strength ; 
but  when  they  were  strong,  and  relied  on  themselves,  there  came  a 
dreadful  failure. 

There  is  one  thing  which  is  absolutely  certain.  If  you  are  among  the 
first,  you  will  reckon  yourself  to  be  among  the  last.  He  that  is  best  thinks 
himself  worst.  What  a  description  Paul  gives  of  himself  in  the  seventh 
of  Romans !  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  heard  a  person  say  that  Paul  was  not 
a  converted  man  when  he  wrote  that !  "  Let  me  tell  you  that  he  had 
been  in  the  third  heaven  when  he  wrote  that  bit  of  deep  experience. 
He  had  so  much  likeness  to  his  Lord  that  he  excelled  every  other  man 
then  living,  except,  perhaps,  John;  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  his 
extraordinary  holiness  he  would  never  have  been  able  to  pen  those 
tremendous  groanings  wherein  he  says,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  ! 
who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  The  man  who 
thinks  that  he  is  holy  has  never  seen  the  holy  God.  If  he  had — if  he 
had  ever  beheld  him,  he  would  say  with  Job,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by 
the  hearing  of  the  ear:  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor 
myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  The  superlative  perfection  of 
the  Lord  God,  and  the  absolutely  perfect  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  are  such  that  if  a  man  has  ever  had  communion  with  these,  he 
shrinks  into  nothing  in  his  own  esteem.  He  that  is  really  first  is  always 
the  man  who  is  willing  to  be  accounted  last.  Paul,  though  he  is  not  a 
whit  behind  any  of  the  apostles,  yet  calls  himself  less  than  the  least  of 
all  saints,  and  describes  himself  as  having  been  the  chief  of  sinners. 
Ah,  beloved !  a  low  idea  of  self  is  one  of  the  labels  with  which  God 
marks  the  best  of  his  possessions;  therefore,  do  not  be  proud. 


THE    FIRST    LAST,    AND    THE    LAST    FIRST.  479 

In  the  next  place,  do  not  be  discouraged.  If  you  feel  that  you  are 
last,  God's  measure  is  not  yours.  Though  you  may  think  that  you  are 
last,  he  may  not  think  so  at  all.  Though  you  say,  "I  am  not  worthy 
to  be  an  apostle,"  yet  he  may  think  you  worth  putting  into  the  apostle- 
ship.  God's  idea  of  your  worthiness  and  your  own  may  greatly  differ ; 
and  his  estimate  is  the  true  one. 

Besides,  suppose  that  you  are  last,  yet  "He  giveth  more  grace." 
•Christ  has  come,  not  only  that  we  may  have  life,  but  that  we  may  have 
it  "more  abundantly."  Do  not  be  content  with  what  you  have. 
"  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts."  Covet  still  more  the  best  graces. 
God  is  able  to  do  for  us  "  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask 
•or  think."  Go  in  for  great  things.  Hath  not  the  Lord  said,  "  Open  your 
mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it  "  't  I  spoke  to  a  man  of  God  this  morning, 
and  I  told  him  how  God  had  graciously  enabled  me  to  draw  near  to  him 
in  prayer,  and  of  the  glorious  way  he  had  granted  my  requests.  My 
friend  said,  "  Yes,  and  he  has  made  your  mouth  bigger  than  it  used 
to  be."  Is  it  not  so?  The  faculty  of  believing  prayer  grows  by  being 
used  The  more  you  ask,  the  more  you  may  ask  ;  and  the  more  you 
liave  asked,  the  more  you  will  ask.  The  capacity  to  receive  is  increased 
by  receiving.  God  grant  that  it  may  be  so  with  us  if  we  are  last ! 

Remember,  too,  that  if  you  really  are  among  the  least  useful,  yet 
•a  riff ftt  spirit  may  compensate  for  your  poverty,  and  make  your  little  ser 
vice  very  precious.  If  you  cannot  get  a  wide  sphere,  do  not  want  it. 
A  young  minister  said  to  an  old  one,  "  Ah,  sir !  I  preach  only  to  about 
one  hundred  people.  I  wish  that  I  could  get  where  I  could  gather 
a  thousand."  His  friend  answered,  "Young  man,  a  hundred  people 
are  quite  enough  for  you  to  be  accountable  for ;  and  if  you  faithfully 
discharge  your  duty  to  their  souls,  you  have  quite  enough  to  do." 
Wish  for  a  larger  sphere  if  you  are  capable  of  filling  it ;  but  remem 
ber  that  the  best  preparation  for  greater  usefulness  is  to  be  faithful 
in  your  present  position. 

My  last  word  to  God's  children  is  this  :  what  does  it  matter,  after 
all,  whether  we  are  first  or  whether  we  are  last?  Do  not  let  us 
•dwell  too  much  upon  it,  for  we  all  share  the  honour  given  to  each.  When 
we  are  converted,  we  become  members  of  Christ's  living  body ;  and  as 
we  grow  in  grace,  and  get  the  true  spirit  that  permeates  that  body,  we 
shall  say,  when  any  member  of  it  is  honoured,  "  This  is  honour  for  us." 
If  any  brother  shall  be  greatly  honoured  of  God,  I  feel  honoured  in 
his  honour.  If  God  shall  bless  your  brother,  and  make  him  ten  times 
more  useful  than  you  are,  then  you  see  that  he  is  blessing  you — not 
only  blessing  him,  but  you.  If  my  hand  has  something  in  it,  my 
foot  does  not  say,  "  Oh,  I  have  not  got  it !  "  No,  for  if  my  hand  has 
it,  my  foot  has  it ;  it  belongs  to  the  whole  of  my  body.  If  my  mouth 
alone  eats,  yet  it  does  not  eat  for  my  mouth  alone  ;  but  it  eats  for  my 
brain,  my  hand,  my  backbone,  for  every  part  of  me.  So,  when  you 
get  to  feel  your  oneness  with  Christ,  and  your  oneness  with  his  people, 
your  only  thought  will  be,  "  Let  God  be  glorified ;  let  him  be  mag 
nified.  It  does  not  matter  whether  I  am  first  or  last."  You  will  stand 
up  and  say,  "  That  brother,  who  was  converted  only  a  week  or  two  ago, 
get  his  penny,  and  I  am  glad  of  it."  Here  is  another,  who  has  done 
very  poor  work ;  but  you  will  thank  God  that  he  has  got  his  penny. 


480  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

He  is  one  of  the  family.  It  all  comes  from  the  same  hand,  and  it  will 
all  come  home  to  the  same  house.  We  are  something  like  men  in  a  great 
shop,  where  there  are  different  people  serving.  One  young  man  has 
a  counter  where  ladies  come,  and  he  serves  them,  and  he  takes  a  lot 
of  money  in  the  day ;  another  counterman,  at  the  back,  sells  goods 
that  take  a  deal  of  trouble  to  dispose  of,  and  upon  which  there  is  but 
a  trifling  profit.  Does  the  master  praise  the  men  of  the  shop  according 
to  the  quantity  of  money  each  takes  ?  The  one  who  is  put  in  the  back 
place,  and  sells  poor  goods,  is  just  as  diligent  and  just  as  worthy  in 
his  master's  sight  as  the  others.  Suppose  that  they  are  all  members  of 
one  family,  when  they  meet  at  night,  one  will  say,  "  I  took  so  much." 
Another  will  say,  "  I  took  ten  times  as  much  as  that ;  "  but  they  are 
all  glad,  because  it  all  goes  into  the  firm ;  it  is  all  a  part  of  the  same 
concern.  Go  then,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  and  work  away  for  Christ, 
and  do  not  envy  one  another,  but  all  be  glad  to  be  permitted,  in  this 
work  of  grace,  to  take  any  part  or  any  portion  for  your  Lord. 

One  thing  more,  and  I  have  done.  I  have  only  been  talking  to 
God's  people  all  this  while,  because  you  that  are  not  saved  cannot 
serve  him.  What  a  miserable  position  yours  is !  You  are  out  of  the 
pale  of  service.  God  will  receive  nothing  of  you  till  you  come  to 
Christ.  The  only  way  to  bring  a  sacrifice  is  to  bring  it  through  the 
great  High  Priest,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  Except  ye  be  converted, 
and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven;  "  much  less  shall  you  be  accepted  as  servants  there.  I 
beseech  you,  by  the  thought  of  the  grace  of  which  I  have  been  speak 
ing,  to  rest  not  until  you  can  say  that  Christ  has  saved  you,  made  you 
a  partaker  of  his  grace,  and  sent  you  forth  into  his  royal  service.  The 
Lord  bless  you !  Amen. 


PORTIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Matthew  xix.  16 — 30; 

xx.  1—16. 


HYMNS  FROM  "OuR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK" — 639,  663,  235* 


futyit 


A   SERMON    TO    OPEN    NEGLECTERS   AND    NOMINAL 
FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION. 


p 


ennon 

DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  MARCH  24TH,  1867,  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  AGRICULTURAL  HALL,    ISLINGTON. 

«'  But  what  think  ye  ?  A  certain  man  had  two  sons  ;  and  he  came  to  the  first, 
*nd  said,  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  my  vineyard.  He  answered  and  said,  I  will  not: 
but  afterward  he  repented,  and  went.  And  he  came  to  the  second  and  said,  likewise. 
And  he  answered  and  said,  I  go,  sir  :  and  went  not.  Whether  of  them  twain  did  the 
will  of  his  father  ?  They  say  unto  him,  The  first.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  That  the  publicans  arid  the  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  you. 
For  John  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  and  ye  believed  him  not  :  but  the 
publicans  and  the  harlots  believed  him  :  and  ye,  when  ye  had  seen  it,  repented  not 
afterwards,  that  ye  might  believe  him."  —  Matthew  xxi.  28—32. 

THE  eight  of  this  vast  arena,  and  of  this  crowded  assembly,  reminds 
me  of  other  spectacles  which,  in  days  happily  long  past,  were  seen  in 
the  amphitheatres  of  the  old  Roman  Empire,  .\round,  tier  upon  tier, 
were  the  assembled  multitudes,  with  their  cruel  eyes  and  iron  hearts  ; 
and  in  the  centre  stood  a  solitary,  friendless  man,  waiting  till  the  doors 
of  fhe  lion's  den  should  be  uplifted,  that  he  might  yield  himself  up  a 
witness  for  Christ  and  a  sacrifice  to  the  popular  fury.  There  would 
have  been  no  difficulty  then  to  have  divided  the  precious  from  the  vile 
in  that  audience.  The  most  thoughtless  wayfarer  who  should  enter 
into  the  amphitheatre,  would  know  at  once  who  was  the  disciple  of 
Christ  and  who  were  the  enemies  of  the  Crucified  One.  There  stood  the 
bravely-calm  disciple,  about  to  die,  but  all  around,  in  those  mighty 
tiers  of  the  Colosseum,  or  of  the  amphitheatre  of  some  provincial  town, 
AS  the  case  might  be,  there  sat  matrons  and  nobles,  princes  and 
peasants,  plebeians  and  patricians,  senators  and  soldiers,  all  gazing 
downward  with  the  same  fierce,  unpitying  look;  all  boisterous  for 
their  heathen  gods,  and  all  vociferous  in  the  joy  with  which  they  gazed 
upon  the  agonies  of  the  disciple  of  the  hated  Galilean,  butchered  to 
make  a  Roman  holiday.  Another  sight  is  before  us  to-day,  with  far 
more  happy  associations  ;  but  alas!  it  is  a  far  more  difficult  task  this  day 
to  separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  the  precious  from  the  vile,  thiin 
in  the  day  when  the  apostle  fought  with  beasts  at  Ephesus.  Here,  in 
this  arena,  I  hope  there  are  hundreds,  if  not  thousands,  who  would  be 
prepared  to  die  for  our  Lord  Jesus  ;  and  in  yondor  crowded  seats,  we 
may  count  by  hundreds  those  who  bear  the  uam«  and  accept  the 
No.  742.  4 


170  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTERS 

p-spcl  of  the  Man  of  Nazareth;  and  yet,  I  fear  me,  that  both  ir» 
these  living  hills  on  either  side,  and  upon  this  vast  floor,  there  are 
many  enemies  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  are  forgetful  of  his  righteous 
claims — who  have  cast  from  them  those  cords  of  love  which  should 
bind  them  to  his  throne,  and  have  never  submitted  to  the  mighty  love 
which  showed  itself  in  his  cross  and  in  his  wounds.  I  cannot  attempt 
the  separation.  You  must  grow  together  until  the  harvest.  To  divide- 
you  were  a  task  which  at  this  hour  angels  could  not  perform,  but  which 
one  day  they  will  easily  accomplish,  when  at  their  Master's  bidding,, 
fche  harvest  being  come,  they  shall  gather  together  first  the  tares  in 
bundles  to  burn  them,  and  afterwards  the  wheat  into  Jehovah's  barn. 
I  shall  not  attempt  the  division,  but  I  shall  ask  each  man  to  attempt  it 
for  himself  in  his  own  case.  I  say  unto  you,  young  men  and  maidens, 
old  men  and  fathers,  this  day  examine  yourselves  whether  you  be  in  the- 
faith.  Let  no  man  take  it  for  granted  that  lie  is  a  Christian  because 
he  has  helped  to  swell  the  numbers  of  a  Christian  assembly.  Let  no 
man  judge  his  fellow,  but  let  each  man  judge  himself.  To  each  one  of 
you  I  say,  with  deepest  earnestness,  let  a  division  be  made  by  your 
conscience,  and  let  your  understandings  separate  between  him  that 
feareth  God  and  him  that  feareth  him  not.  Though  no  man  clothed 
in  linen,  with  a  writer's  inkhorn  by  his  side,  shall  go  through  the  midst 
of  you  to  set  a  mark  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  men  that  sigh  and  cry 
for  all  the  abominations  of  this  city,  let  conscience  take  the  inkhora 
and  honestly  make  the  mark,  or  leave  the  favoured  sign  unmade,  and 
let  each  man  question  himself  this  morning,  "  Am  I  on  the  Lord's  side  ? 
Am  I  for  Christ,  or  for  his  enemies?  Do  I  gather  with  him,  or  do 
I  scatter  abroad?"  "Divide!  divide!"  they  say  in  the  House  of 
Commons ;  let  us  say  the  same  in  this  great  congregation  this  day. 
Political  divisions  are  but  trifles  compared  with  the  all-important  dis 
tinction  which  I  would  have  you  consider.  Divide  as  you  will  be 
divided  to  the  right  and  to  the  left  in  the  great  day  when  Christ  shall 
judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  Divide  as  you  will  be  divided  when 
the  bliss  of  heaven,  or  the  woes  of  hell,  shall  be  your  everlasting  portion* 

If  the  whole  of  us  were  thus  divided  into  two  camps,  and  we  could 
Bay  these  have  made  a  covenant  with  God  by  sacrifice,  and  those  on 
the  other  hand  are  still  enemies  to  God  by  wicked  works,  looking  at 
the  last  class  we  might  still  feel  it  necessary  by  way  of  personal  appli 
cation  to  make  a  division  among  them ;  for  although  all  unbelievers 
are  alike  unpardoned  and  unsaved,  yet  they  are  not  alike  in  the  cir 
cumstances  of  their  case  and  the  outward  forms  of  their  sins.  Alike  in 
being  without  Christ,  they  are  still  very  varied  in  their  mental  and 
moral  condition.  I  trust  I  was  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  my 
text  this  morning,  for  it  is  of  such  a  character,  that  while  it  enables 
"me  to  address  the  whole  mass  of  the  unconverted,  it  gives  me  a  hope 
ful  opportunity  of  getting  at  the  conscience  of  each  by  dividing  the- 
great  company  of  the  unconverted  into  two  distinct  classes.  0  that  for 
each  tribe  of  unbelievers,  there  may  be  a  blessing  in  store  this  day. 

First,  we  shall  speak  to  those  who  are  avowedly  disobedient  to  God  t 
and,  secondly,  to  those  who  are  deceptively  submissive  to  him. 

I.  First,  we  have  a  word  for  THOSE  WHO  ABE  AVOWEDLY  DISOBEDIENT 
10  GOD.  There  are  many  such  here.  God  has  said  to  you  as  he  say 


AND   NOMINAL   FOLLOWERS   OF   RELIGION.  171 

to  all  who  hear  the  gospel,  "  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  my  vineyard; "  and 
yon  have  replied,  perhaps  honestly,  but  certainly  very  boldly,  verj 
unkindly,  very  unjustly,  "  I  will  not."  You  have  made  no  bones  about 
it,  but  L-iven  a  refusal  point-blank  to  the  claims  of  your  Creator.  You 
have  spoken  your  mind  right  out,  not  only  in  words,  but  in  a  more 
forcible  and  unmistakable  manner,  for  actions  speak  far  more  loudly 
than  words.  You  have  said,  over  and  over  again,  by  your  actions,  "  I 
will  not  serve  God,  or  believe  in  his  Son  Jesus."  My  dear  friend,  I  am 
glad  to  see  you  here  this  mornjng,  and  trust  that  matters  will  change 
with  you  ere  you  leave  this  hall ;  but  at  present  you  have  not  yielded 
even  an  outward  obedience  to  God,  but  in  all  ways  have  said,  "I  will 
not."  Practically  you  have  said,  "  I  will  not  worship  God,  I  will  not 
attend  a  place  of  worship  on  the  Sunday — it  is  a  weariness  intoler 
able  to  me.  I  shall  not  sing  the  praise  of  my  Maker — I  will  not  pretend 
to  bless  the  God  for  whom  I  have  no  love.  In  public  prayer  I  shall 
not  join— I  have  no  heart  for  it.  I  shall  not  make  a  pretence^of  repeat 
ing  morning  and  nightly  prayer  in  private — what  is  the  good  of  it  ? 
I  will  not  pray  at  all ;  I  do  not  believe  in  its  efficacy,  and  I  will  not  be 
Buch  a  hypocrite  as  to  follow  a  vain  practice  in  which  I  have  no  belief 
whatever.  As  for  what  is  called  sin,  I  love  it  and  will  not  give  it  up." 
You  are  proud  of  being  called  an  honest  man,  for  you  own  the  claims 
of  your  fellow  men  upon  you,  but  you  scorn  to  be  thought  religious,  for 
you  do  not  admit  the  rights  of  your  Maker.  To  the  righteous  requests 
of  others  you  yield  a  cheerful  obedience,  but  to  the  just  and  tender 
requests  of  God  you  give  a  plain  a: id  evident  denial.  As  clearly  as 
actions  can  speak,  you  say  by  your  neglect  of  the  Sabbath,  by  your 
disregard  of  prayer,  by  your  never  reading  the  Bible,  by  your  perse 
verance  in  known  sin,  and  by  the  whole  course  of  your  life,  "  I  will 
not."  Like  Pharaoh,  you  have  demanded,  "  Who  is  the  Lord  that  I 
should  obey  his  voice  ?"  You  are  of  the  same  mind  as  those  of  old, 
who  said,  "It  is  vain  to  serve  God,  and  what  profit  is  there  if  we 
keep  his  ordinances?" 

Moreover,  my  friend,  you  have  not  as  yet  given  an  assent  to  the 
doctrines  of  God's  Word;  on  the  contrary,  intellectually  as  well  as 
practically,  you  go  not  at  God's  bidding.  You  have  set  up  in  your 
mind  the  idea  that  you  must  understand  everything  before  you  will 
believe  it — an  idea,  let  me  tell  you,  which  you  will  never  be  able  to 
cany  out,  for  you  cannot  understand  your  own  existence ;  and  there 
are  ten  thousand  other  things  around  you  which  you  never  can  com 
prehend,  but  whicK  you  must  believe  or  remain  for  ever  a  gigantic  fool. 
Still  you  cavil  at  this  doctrine  and  that  doctrine,  railing  at  the  gospel 
system  in  general;  and  if  you  were  asked  at  a  working  man's  conference, 
why  you  did  not  go  to  a  place  of  worship,  you  would  perhaps  say  that 
you  kept  away  from  worship  because  you  did  not  like  this  doctrine  or 
that.  Let  me  say  on  my  own  account,  that  as  far  as  I  am  personally 
concerned,  it  is  a  very  small  consideration  to  me  whether  you  do  like 
my  doctrine  or  do  not ;  for  your  own  sake  I  am  anxious  above  measure 
that  you  should  believe  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus;  but  while  you  live 
in  sin,  your  dislike  of  a  doctrine,  will  very  probably  only  make  me  feel 
the  more  sure  of  its  truth,  and  lead  me  to  preach  it  with  more  confi 
dence  and  vehemence.  Think  you  that  we  are  to  learn  God's  truth 


172  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTEBS 

from  the  likings  or  dislikings  of  those  who  refuse  to  worship  him,  and 
want  an  excuse  for  their  sins.  0  unconverted  men  and  women,  it  is 
very  long  br.fore  we  shall  come  to  you  to  learn  what  you  would  have 
us  preach,  and  when  we  fall  so  low  as  to  do  that,  you  yourselves  will 
despise  us.  What !  shall  the  physician  ask  his  patient  what  kind  of 
medicine  he  would  wish  to  have  prescribed?  Then  the  man  needs 
no  physician,  he  can  prescribe  for  himself.  Show  the  doctor  out 
at  the  back  door  directly.  What  is  the  use  of  such  a  physician  ?  Of 
what  service  is  a  minister  who  will  truckle  to  depraved  tastes  and  sinful 
appetites,  and  say,  "  How  would  you  like  me  to  preach  to  you?  What 
smooth  things  shall  I  offer  you?"  Ah  souls!  we  have  some  higher 
end  to  be  served  than  merely  pleasing  you.  We  would  save  you  by 
distasteful  truths,  for  honeyed  lies  will  ruin  you.  That  teaching  which 
the  carnal  mind  most  delights  in,  is  the  most  deadly  and  delusive. 
With  many  of  you,  your  beliefs,  and  tastes,  and  likes,  must  be  changed, 
or  else  you  will  never  enter  heaven.  I  admit  that  in  a  measure  I  like 
your  honesty  in  having  said  outright,  "I  will  not  serve  G-od;"  but  it  is 
an  honesty  which  makes  me  shudder,  for  it  betrays  a  heart  hard  as  the 
nether  millstone. 

Again,  you  have  said,  "  I  will  not  serve  God,"  and  up  to  this  time  it 
is  very  possible  that  you  have  never  been  in  the  humour  to  repent  of 
having  said  it,  for  the  ways  of  sin  are  sweet  to  you,  and  your  heart 
is  fixed  in  its  rebellion.  You  have  never  felt  that  conviction  of  sin 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  wrought  in  some  of  us ;  if  you  had  felt  it, 
you  would  soon  have  been  shaken  out  of  your  "I  will  not."  If  God's 
power  of  grace,  of  which  thousands  of  us  bear  witness  that  it  is  as  real 
a  power  as  that  which  guides  the  stars  or  wings  the  wind — if  God's 
almighty  grace  should  once  get  a  hold  of  you,  you  would  no  longer  say, 
"  I  do  not  believe  this  or  that;"  for,  as  tremblingly  as  any  of  those  whom 
you  now  despise,  you  would  cry  out,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  Up 
till  now  you  have  never  felt  that  power,  and  therefore  I  cannot  wonder 
that  you  do  not  acknowledge  it,  although  the  testimony  of  honest 
witnesses  ought  to  have  some  weight  with  you.  You  are  practically, 
intellectually,  and  avowedly  no  Christian;  you  have  never  deceived 
yourself  and  others  by  making  a  profession  which  you  do  not  honour, 
but  you  have  gone  on  in  your  own  chosen  path,  saying  with  more  or 
[ess  resolution,  in  answer  to  every  call  of  the  gospel,  "  I  will  not." 

We  said  just  now  that  the  answer  of  the  son  to  his  father  as  recorded 
in  our  text  was  very  plain  ;  it  was  not,  however,  very  genuine,  or  such 
as  his  father  might  have  expected.  His  father  said.  "  Son,  go  work 
to  day  in  my  vineyard;"  and  the  son  rudely  said,  "  I  will  not,  that  is 
flat ;"  and  without  another  word  of  apology  or  reason  went  his  way.  This 
is  not  quite  as  it  should  be.  Is  it?  Even  so,  my  friend,  you  may  have 
been  too  hasty  and  so  have  been  unjust.  Is  it  not  very  possible  you 
have  denied  to  God  and  to  his  gospel  the  respect  which  both  really 
deserve  ?  You  have  spoken  very  plainly,  but  at  the  same  time  very 
thoughtlessly,  very  harshly  to  the  God  who  has  deserved  better  things 
of  you.  Have  you  ever  given  the  claims  of  the  Lord  Jesus  a  fair  con 
sideration?  Have  you  not  dismissed  the  gospel  with  a  sneer  quite 
unworthy  of  you?  Have  you  not  been  afraid  to  look  the  matters 
between  God  and  your  sod-fairly  in  the  face?  I  believe  it  to  be  the 


AND  NOMINAL   FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION.  173 

case  of  hundreds  here;  I  know  it  to  be  the  case  of  thousands  and  tens 
of  thousands  in  London.  They  have  put  their  foot  down,  and  they  have 
said,  "  None  of  your  religion  for  me !  I  have  made  up  my  mind  and 
I  will  never  alter;  I  hate  it  and  will  not  listen  to  it."  Does  no  small 
voice  within  ever  tell  them  that  this  is  not  fair  to  themselves  or  to 
God?  Is  the  matter  so  easily  to  be  decided?  Suppose  it  should  turn 
out  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  is  true,  what  then?  What  will  be  the 
lot  of  those  who  despised  him?  My  hearer,  the  religion  of  Jesus  is  true, 
and  I  have  proved  its  truth  in  my  own  case;  do,  I  pray  you,  consider 
it,  and  do  not  trifle  away  your  immortal  soul.  Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
"  Consider  your  ways." 

It  is  now  time  for  me  to  tell  the  openly  ungodly  what  is  his  real 
state.  You  have  been  more  than  a  little  proud  of  your  honesty;  and 
looking  down  upon  certain  professors  of  religion  you  have  said,  "  Ah !  I 
make  no  such  pretences  as  they  do,  I  am  honest,  I  am."  Friend,  you 
cannot  have  a  greater  abhorrence  of  hypocrites  than  I  have ;  if  you  can 
find  a  fair  chance  of  laughing  at  them,  pray  do  so.  If  by  any  means 
you  can  stick  pins  into  their  wind-bags,  and  let  the  gas  of  their  pro 
fession  out,  pray  do  so.  I  try  to  do  a  little  of  it  in  my  way,  do  you  do 
the  same !  You  and  I  are  agreed  in  this,  I  hope,  in  heartily  hating 
anything  like  sham  and  falsehood ;  but  if  you  begin  to  hold  your  head 
up,  and  think  yourself  so  very  superior  because  you  make  no  profession, 
I  must  take  you  down  a  little  by  reminding  you  that  it  is  no  credit  to 
a  thief  that  he  makes  no  profession  of  being  honest,  and  it  is  not  thought 
to  be  exceedingly  honourable  to  a  man  that  he  makes  no  profession  of 
speaking  the  truth.  For  the  fact  is,  that  a  man  who  does  not  profess 
to  be  honest  is  a  professed  thief,  and  he  who  does  not  claim  to  speak 
the  truth  is  an  acknowledged  liar;  thus  in  escaping  one  horn  you  are 
thrown  upon  another,  you  miss  the  rock  but  ran  upon  the  quicksand. 
You  are  a  confessed  and  avowed  neglecter  of  God,  a  professed  despiser 
of  the  great  salvation,  an  acknowledged  disbeliever  in  the  Christ  of  God. 
When  our  Government  at  anytime  arrests  persons  suspected  of  Fenian- 
ism,  they  have  no  difficulty  about  those  gentlemen  who  glory  in  wearing 
the  green  uniform  and  flaunting  the  Dig  feather.  "Come  along," 
says  the  constable,  "  you  are  the  man.  for  you  wear  the  regimentals  of 
a  rebel."  Even  so  when  the  angel  of  justice  arrests  the  enemies  of 
the  Lord,  he  will  have  no  difficulty  in  accusing  and  arresting  you,  for, 
laying  his  hand  upon  your  shoulder,  he  will  say,  ''You  wear  the 
regimentals  of  an  enemy  of  God;  you  plainly,  and  unblushingly, 
acknowledge  that  you  do  not  fear  God  nor  trust  in  his  salvation."  No 
witnesses  need  be  called  concerning  you  at  the  last  great  day;  you  will 
stand  up,  not  quite  so  bravely  as  you  do  to-day,  for,  when  the  heavens 
are  on  a  blaze,  and  the  earth  is  rocking  to  and  fro,  and  the  great  white 
cloud  fills  the  field  of  vision,  and  the  eyes  of  the  great  Judge  shall  burn 
like  lamps  of  fire,  you  will  put  on  a  different  mien  and  a  different  carriage 
from  that  which  you  maintain  before  a  poor  preacher  of  the  gospd 
Ah  !  my  ungodly  hearer,  with  such  a  case  as  thine  there  shall  be  no 
need  to  judge,  for  out  of  thine  own  mouth  shalt  thou  be  condemned. 

Yet  I  came  not  here  to  tell  you  of  your  sins  only,  but  to  help  you  to 
escape  from  them.  It  is  necessary  that  this  much  should  be  said,  but 
we  now  turn  to  something  far  more  pleasant.  I  am  in  hopes  this  daj 


174  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTERB 

that  some  of  you  will  listen  to  that  little  word  in  the  text,  "  afterward" 
He  said,  "  I  will  not ;  but  afterward  he  repented,  and  went."  It  is  » 
long  lane  which  has  no  turning,  let  us  trust  that  we  have  come  to  the 
turning  now.  There  is  space  left  you  for  repentance ;  though  you  may 
have  been  a  drunkard,  or  a  swearer,  orunchas  e,  the  die  is  not  yet  cast, 
a  change  is  yet  possible.  May  God  grant  that  you  may  have  reached 
the  time  when  it  shall  be  said  of  you,  "Afterward  he  repented;  he 
changed  his  mind;  he  believed  upon  Jesus,  and  obeyed  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  and  went."  Perhaps  the  son  in  the  parable  thought  a  little 
more  calmly  about  it.  He  said  to  himself,  "  I  will  consider  the- 
matter,  second  thoughts  are  often  best.  I  growled  at  my  good  father, 
and  gave  him  a  sharp  answer,  and  I  saw  the  tear  standing  in  the  good 
man's  eye.  I  am  sorry  I  grieved  him.  The  thought  of  grieving  him 
makes  me  change  my  mind.  I  said  'No'  to  him,"  said  he,  "  but  I  did 
not  think  about  it.  I  forgot  that  if  I  go  and  work  in  my  lather's  vine 
yard,  I  shall  be  working  for  myself,  for  I  am  his  eldest  son,  and  ail- 
that  he  has  will  belong  to  me,  so  that  I  am  very  foolish  to  refuse  to 
work  to  my  own  advantage1.  Ah !  now  1  see  my  father  had  my 
advantage  at  heart,  I  wiM  even  go  as  he  bade  me."  See,  he  shoulders 
his  tools,  and  away  he  marches  to  labour  with  all  his  might.  He  said, 
"  I  will  not,"  but  he  repented  and  went,  and  it  is  admitted  by  all  that 
he  did  the  will  of  his  father.  Oh,  I  hope  that,  many  a  man  and  woman 
now  in  this  Agricultural  Hall  will  this  day  cry,  "I  do  retract  what  I 
have  said.  I  will  go  to  my  Father,  and  will  say  to  him,  '  I  will  do  thy 
bidding.  I  will  not  grieve  thy  love.  I  will  not  lose  the  opportunity  of 
advancing  my  soul's  best  interest ;  I  obey  the  gospel  command.' "  I  will 
suppose  that  I  see  one  such  before  me,  and  I  will  speak  to  him.  Perhaps 
he  said,  "  I  will  not,"  because  he  really  did  not  understand  what  religion 
was.  How  few  after  all  know  what  the  way  of  salvation  is ;  though 
they  go  to  church,  and  to  chapel,  they  have  not  yet  learned  God's  plan 
of  pardoning  sinners.  Do  you  know  the  plan  of  salvation  ?  Hear  it  and 
live  by  it.  You  have  offended  God;  God  must  punish  sin;  it  is  a 
fixed  law  that  sin  must  be  punished ;  how  then  can  God  have  mercy 
upon  you?  Why,  only  in  this  way:  Jesus  Christ  came  from  heaven 
and  he  suffered  in  the  room,  place,  and  stead  of  all  who  trust  him; 
suffered  what  they  ought  to  have  suffered,  so  that  God  is  just,  and  yet 
at  the  same  time  he  is  able  to  forgive  the  very  chief  of  sinners  through 
the  merits  of  his  dear  Son.  Your  debts,  if  you  be  a  believer  in  him,. 
Christ  has  paid  on  your  behalf.  If  you  do  but  come  and  rest  upon 
Jesus  and  upon  Jesus  only,  God  cannot  punish  you  for  your  sins,  for  he 
punished  Jesus  for  them,  and  it  would  not  be  just  of  him  to  punish 
Christ  and  then  to  punish  you,  to  exact  payment  first  from  the  Surety 
and  afterwards  from  the  debtor.  My  dear  hearer,  whoever  thou  mayst 
be,  whatever  thy  past  life  may  have  been,  if  thou  wilt  trust  Christ, 
thou  shall  be  saved  from  all  thy  sin  in  a  moment,  the  whole  of  thy 
past  life  shall  be  blotted  out ;  there  shall  not  remain  in  God's  book  so 
much  as  a  single  charge  against  thy  soul,  for  Christ  who  died  for  thee, 
shall  take  thy  guilt  away  and  leave  thee  without  a  blot  before  the  face 
of  God.  Read  the  last  verse  of  my  text,  and  you  will  see  that  it  wa& 
by  believing  that  men  entered  into  the  kingdom  of  God  of  old,  and  ife 
is  still  by  believing  that  men  are  saved.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of 


AND   NOMINAL   FOLLOWERS   OF   RELIGION.  179 

said  John  the  Baptist,  and  if  you  look  to  that  bleeding  Lamb,  you  shall 
live.  Do  you  understand  this  ?  Is  it  not  simple  ?  Is  it  not  suitable 
to  you.  Will  you  still  refuse  to  obey  it?  Does  not  the  Holy  Spirit 
prompt  you  to  relent  ?  Do  you  not  even  now  say.  "  Is  it  so  simole  ? 
I  will  even  trust  in  Jesus : 

*  Guilty,  but  with  heart  relenting, 
To  the  Saviour's  wounds  I'll  fly.' 

I  will  come,  by  God's  help,  this  morning,  lest  death  should  come 
before  the  sun  sets.  I  will  trust  Christ  to  S'tve  me.  Precious  way  of 
salvation !  Why  should  I  not  be  saved?" 

It  is  possible  too,  that  you  may  have  said,  "  I  will  not,"  because  you 
really  thought  there  was  no  hope  for  you.  Ah!  my  friend,  let  me 
assure  you — and  oli !  how  glad  I  am  to  be  able  to  do  it — that  there  ia 
hope  for  the  vilest  through  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus.  No  man  can 
have  gone  too  far  for  the  long  arm  of  Christ  to  reach  him.  Christ 
delights  10  save  the  biggest  sinners.  He  said  to  his  apostles,  "  Preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature,  but  begin  "—where  ?  "  begin  at  Jeru 
salem.  There  live  the  wretches  who  spat  in  my  face.  There  live  the 
cruel  ones  that  drove  the  nails  throup^  my  hands.  Go  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  them  first.  Tell  them  that  I  am  able  to  save,  not  little 
sinners  merely,  but  the  very  chief  of  sinners.  Tell  them  to  trust  in 
me  and  they  shall  live."  Where  are  you,  you  despairing  one  ?  I 
know  the  devil  will  try  to  keep  the  sound  of  the  gospel  from  your  ears 
if  he  can,  and  therefore,  I  would  "  cry  aloud  and  spare  not."  0  ye 
despairing  sinners,  there  is  no  room  for  despair  this  side  the  gates  of 
hell.  If  you  have  gone  through  the  foulest  kennels  of  iniquity,  no 
stain  can  stand  out  against  the  power  of  the  cleansing  blood. 

"  There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood, 

Drawn  from  Immanuel's  veins, 
And  sinners  plunged  beneath  that  flood, 
Lose  ALL  their  guilty  stains." 

Oh,  I  trust,  now  that  you  know  there  is  hope  for  you,  you  will  say,  "  1 
will  even  come  at  once,  and  put  my  trust  in  Jesus." 

While  I  would  thus  encourage  you  to  repent  of  your  neglect  of  God, 
let  me  invite  you  to  come  to  Jesus,  and  press  it  upon  you  yet  again. 
Ah  !  my  dear  friend,  you  will  soon  be  dying,  and  though  some  wicked 
men,  in  their  stupid  insensibility,  die  very  calmly,  and  as  David  said, 
"  They  are  not  in  trouble  as  other  men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like 
other  men,  but  their  strength  is  firm,"  yet,  whether  they  perceive  it  or 
not,  it  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  die  with  unpardoned  sin  hanging  about 
you.  What  wiH  your  guilty  soul  do  when  it  leaves  the  body  ?  Think 
of  it  a  minute.  It  is  a  matter  worthy  of  your  thought.  Some  of  you, 
in  all  probability,  will  die  this  week.  It  is  not  probable  that  so 
many  thousands  of  us  will  march  through  a  whole  week,  and  be 
found  alive  at  the  other  end  of  it.  Well  then,  as  we  may  some  of 
us  go  soon,  and  all  of  us  must  go  ere  long,  let  us  look  before  us  and 
think  a  bit.  Imagine  your  soul  unclothed  of  the  body.  You  have  left 
the  body  behind  you,  and  your  disembodied  spirit  finds  itself  in  a  new 
world.  Oh,  it  will  be  a  glorious  thing  if  that  separated  spirit  shall  see 
Jesus  whom  it  has  loved,  and  fly  at  once  into  his  bosom,  and  drink  for 
ever  of  the  crystal  fountain  of  ever-flowing  bliss:  but  it  will  be  « 


176  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTERS 

horrible  thing  if  instead  of  it,  your  naked  shivering  spirit  should  waku 
up  to  find  itself  friendless,  homeless,  helpless,  hopeless,  tormented  with 
remorse,  afflicted  with  despair.  What  if  it  should  have  to  cry  out  for 
ever,  "  I  knew  my  duty  but  I  did  it  not,  I  knew  the  way  of  salvation 
but  I  would  not  run  in  it.  I  heard  the  gospel,  but  I  shut  my  hears  to 
it.  I  lived  and  at  length  left  the  world  without  Christ,  and  here  I  am, 
past  hope,  no  repenting  now,  no  believing  now,  no  escaping  now,  for 
mercy  and  love  no  longer  rule  the  hour."  Have  pity  on  thyself,  my 
hearer.  I  have  pity  on  thee.  Oh,  if  my  hand  could  pluck  thee  from 
that  flame,  how  cheerfully  would  I  do  it !  Shall  I  pity  thee  and  wilt 
thou  not  pity  thyself?  Oh,  if  my  pleadings  should  by  God's  grace 
persuade  you  to  trust  in  Christ  this  morning,  I  would  plead  with  you 
while  voice,  and  lungs,  and  heart,  and  life  held  out !  But  oh,  have 
pitj  on  thyself!  Pity  tnat  poor  naked  spirit  which  so  soon  will  be 
quivering  with  utmost  agony,  a  self-caused  agony,  an  agony  from 
which  it  would  not  escape,  an  agony  of  which  it  was  warned,  but 
which  it  chose  to  endure  sooner  than  give  up  sin  and  yield  to  the 
sceptre  of  sovereign  grace. 

I  would  fain  hope  that  you  are  saying,  "  I  do  now  repent,  and  jy 
God's  grace  I  will  go."  If  so,  let  me  tell  you  there  are  a  great 
many  in  heaven  who  once,  like  you,  said,  "  I  will  not,"  but  they 
afterwards  repented  and  are  now  saved.  I  will  give  you  one  pic 
ture.  Yonder,  I  see  a  company  of  men  on  horseback,  and  there  is 
one,  the  proudest  of  them  all,  to  whom  they  act  as  a  guard ;  they  are 
going  to  Damascus,  that  he  may  take  Christians  to  prison  and  compel 
them  to  blaspheme.  Saul  of  Tarsus  is  the  name  of  that  cruel, 
murderous  persecutor.  When  Stephen  was  put  to  death,  God  said  to 
this  man  Saul,  "Go,  work  in  my  vineyard,"  but  Saul  said  plainly, 
"  I  will  not,"  and  to  prove  his  emnity,  he  helped  to  put  Stephen  to 
death.  There  he  is  riding  in  hot  haste,  upon  his  evil  errand,  none 
more  set  and  determined  against  the  Lord.  Yet  my  Lord  Jesus  can 
tame  the  lion,  and  even  make  a  lamb  of  him.  As  he  rides  along,  a 
bright  light  is  seen,  brighter  than  the  sun  at  noonday ;  he  falls  from 
his  horse,  he  lies  trembling  on  the  ground,  and  he  hears  a  voice  out  of 
heaven,  saying,  "Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me?"  Lifting  up 
his  eyes  with  astonishment,  he  sees  that  he  had  ignorantly  been  per 
secuting  the  Son  of  God.  What  a  change  that  one  discovery  wrought 
in  him.  That  voice,  "  I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest,"  broke  his 
hard  heart,  and  won  him  to  the  cause.  You  know  how  three  days  after 
that,  that  once  proud  and  bigoted  man  was  baptized  upon  profession 
of  the  faith  of  Christ,  whom  he  had  just  now  persecuted !  and  if  you 
want  to  see  an  earnest  preacher,  where  can  you  find  a  better  than 
che  apostle  Paul,  who,  with  heart  on  fire,  writes  again  and  again,  "  God 
forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
I  hope  there  is  a  Saul  here,  who  is  to  be  struck  down  this  morning. 
Lord,  strike  him  down  !  Eternal  Spirit  strike  him  down  now!  You 
did  not  know  perhaps,  that  you  had  been  fighting  God,  but  you  thought 
the  religion  of  Jesus  to  be  a  foolish  dream.  You  did  not  know  that 
you  had  insulted  the  dying  Saviour;  now  you  do  know  it,  may  your 
conscience  be  affected,  and  from  this  day  forth  may  you  serve  the 
Lord. 


AND  NOMINAL   FOLLOWERS  OF   RELIGION.  177 

I  must  leave  this  second  point  when  I  have  just  said  this.  If  there 
be  one  here  who  after  a  long  refusal,  at  last  relents,  and  is  willing  to 
become  a  servant  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  let  me  tell  him 
for  his  encouragement,  he  shall  not  be  one  whit  behind  those  who 
have  been  FO  long  making  a  profession  without  being  true  to  it, 
for  the  text  says,  "  The  publicans  and  harlots  go  into  the  king 
dom;"  but  what  else?  "Go  into  the  kingdom"  before  those  who 
made  a  profession  of  serving  God,  but  who  were  not  true  to  it.  You 
great  sinners  shall  have  no  back  seats  in  heaven !  There  shall  bo 
no  outer  court  for  you.  You  great  sinners  shall  have  as  much  love 
as  the  best,  as  much  joy  as  the  brightest  of  saints.  You  shall  be 
near  to  Christ;  you  shall  sit  with  him  upon  his  throne;  you  shall 
wear  the  crown;  your  fingers  shall  touch  the  golden  harps;  you 
shall  rejoice  with  the  joy  which  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  Will 
ye  not  come  ?  Christ  forgets  your  past  ill  manners,  and  bids  ye  come 
to-day.  "  Come,"  saith  he,  "  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Thirty  years  of  sin  shall  be  forgiven, 
and  it  shall  not  take  thirty  minutes  to  do  it  in.  Fifty,  sixty,  seventy 
years  of  iniquity  shall  all  disappear  as  the  morning's  hoar-frost  dis 
appears  before  the  sun.  Come  and  trust  my  Master,  hiding  in  his 
bleeding  wounds. 

"  Raise  thy  downcast  eyes,  and  see 

What  throngs  His  throne  surround ! 
These,  though  sinners  once  like  thee, 

Have  full  salvation  found. 
Yield  not  then  to  unbelief; 

He  says,  '  There  yet  is  room  :  ' 
Though  of  sinners  thou  art  chief, 

Since  Jesus  calls  thee,  come." 

II.  Bear  with  me  a  little  time  while  I  speak  to  the  second  character, 
THE  DECEPTIVELY  SUBMISSIVE,  by  far  the  most  numerous  everywhere  in 
England,  probably  the  most  numerous  in  this  assembly.  Oh !  you,  my 
own  regular  hearers,  you  who  have  heard  my  voice  these  thirteen  years, 
many  of  you  are  in  this  class.  You  have  said  to  the  Great  Father, "  I 
go,  sir!"  but  you  have  not  gone.  Let  me  sorrowfully  sketch  your  por 
traits  :  you  have  regularly  frequented  a  place  of  worship,  and  you  would 
shudder  to  waste  a  single  Sunday  in  an  excursion,  or  in  any  form  of 
Sabbath  breaking.  Outwardly  you  have  said,"  I  go,  sir."  When  the 
hymn  is  given  out,  you  stand  up  and  sing,  and  yet  you  do  not  sing 
with  the  heart.  When  I  say,  "  Let  us  pray  ! "  you  cover  your  faces, 
but  you  do  not  pray  with  real  prayer.  You  utter  a  polite,  respectful 
"  I  go,  sir,"  but  you  do  not  go.  You  give  a  notional  assent  to  the 
gospel.  If  I  were  to  mention  any  doctrine,  you  would  say,  "  Yes,  that 
is  true.  I  believe  that."  But  your  heart  does  not  believe :  you  do 
not  believe  the  gospel  in  the  core  of  your  nature,  for  if  you  did,  it 
would  have  an  effect  upon  you.  A  man  may  say,  "  I  believe  my  house 
is  on  fire,"  but  if  he  goes  to  bed  and  falls  to  sleep,  it  does  not  look  as  if 
he  believed  it,  for  when  a  man's  house  is  on  fire  he  tries  to  escape. 
If  some  of  you  really  believed  that  there  is  a  hell,  and  that  there  is  a 
heaven,  as  you  believe  other  things,  you  would  act  very  differently  from 
what  you  now  do.  I  must  add  that  many  of  you  say,  "  I  go,  sir,"  rn  » 


178  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTERS 

very  solemn  sense,  for  when  we  preach  earnestly  the  tears  run  dowi*  your 
•cheeks,  and  you  go  home  to  your  bedrooms,  and  you  pray  a  little,  and 
everybody  thinks  that  your  concern  of  mind  will  end  in  conversion  : 
•but  your  goodness  is  "like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew." 
You  are  like  dunghills  with  snow  upon  them :  while  the  snow  lasts  you 
•look  white  and  fair,  but  when  the  snow  melts  the  dunghill  remains  a 
dunghill  still.  Oh,  how  many  very  impressible  hearts  are  like  that  \ 
You  sin,  and  yet  you  come  to  a  place  of  worship,  and  tremble  under 
the  word ;  you  transgress,  and  you  weep  and  transgress  again ;  you 
feel  the  power  of  the  gospel  after  a  fashion,  and  yet  you  revolt  against 
it  more  and  more.  Ah !  my  friends,  I  can  look  some  of  you  in  the  face 
And  know  that  I  am  describing  some  of  your  cases  to  the  letter.  You 
have  been  telling  lies  to  God  all  these  years,  by  saying,  "  I  go,  sir," 
while  you  have  not  gone.  You  know  that  to  be  saved  you  must  believe 
in  Jesus,  but  you  have  not  believed.  You  know  that  you  must  be 
born  again,  but  you  are  still  strangers  to  the  new  birth.  You  are  as 
religious  as  the  seats  you  sit  on,  but  no  more;  and  you  are  as  likely  to 
get  to  heaven  as  those  seats  are,  but  not  one  whit  more,  for  you  are 
dead  in  sin,  and  death  cannot  enter  heaven.  0  my  dear  hearers, 
I  lament  that  ever  I  should  be  called  to  say  such  a  thing  as  this,  and 
not  be  more  affected  by  the  fact;  and,  wonder  of  wonders,  that  you, 
some  of  you,  know  it  to  be  true,  and  yet  do  not  feel  alarmed  thereby  1 
Ik  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  impress  some  of  you  by  a  sermon, 
but,  I  fear  me,  you  never  will  get  beyond  mere  transient  impressions. 
Like  the  water  when  lashed,  the  wound  soon  heals.  You  know,  and 
you  know,  and  you  know ;  and  you  feel,  and  feel,  and  feel  again,  and 
yet  your  sins,  your  self-righteousness,  your  carelessness,  or  your  wilful 
wickedness,  cause  you,  after  having  said,  "  I  go,  sir,"  to  forget  the 
promise  and  lie  unto  God. 

Now,  I  spoke  very  honestly  to  the  other  class,  and  must  be  equally 
plain  with  you.  You,  too,  criminate  yourselves.  There  will  be  no  need  of 
witnesses  against  you.  You  have  admitted  that  the  gospel  is  true.  You 
did  not  quarrel  with  the  doctrine  of  future  punishment  or  future  glory. 
You  attended  a  place  of  worship,  and  you  said  that  God  was  good  and 
worthy  to  be  served ;  you  confessed  that  you  owed  allegiance  to  him, 
and  ought  to  render  it.  You  have  even  knelt  down  and  in  prayer  you 
have  said,  "  Lord,  I  deserve  thy  wrath."  The  great  God  has  only  to 
turn  to  some  of  your  formal  prayers  to  find  quite  enough  evidence  to 
secure  your  condemnation.  Those  morning  prayers  of  yours,  those 
evening  prayers,  hypocritical  every  one  of  them,  will  be  more  than 
sufficient  to  condemn  you  of  your  own  mouth.  Take  heed  1  take  heed, 
I  pray  you,  while  you  are  yet  in  the  land  of  hope. 

All  this  while,  as  the  thirty-second  verse  reminds  me,  while  you  have 
remained  unsaved,  you  have  seen  publicans  and  harlots  saved  by  the 
very  gospel  which  has  had  no  power  upon  you.  Do  not  you  know  it, 
young  man?  You,  I  mean,  the  son  of  a  godly  mother  ?  You  know 
that  you  are  not  saved,  and  yet  you  had  a  drunken  workman  in  your 
"iither's  employment,  and  he  has  been  these  last  few  years  a  sober 
Christian  man,  he  is  saved,  and  you  perhaps  have  taken  to  the  habits 
which  he  has  forsaken.  You  know  that  there  have  been  picked  off  of 
the  streets  poor  fallen  women  who  have  been  brought  to  know  Christ, 


AND  NOMINAL    FOLLOWERS   OF   RELIGION.  179 

who  are  among  the  sweetest  and  fairest  flowers  in  Christ's  garden  now. 
though  they  were  once  castaways;  and  yet  some  of  you  respectable 
•people  who  never  committed  any  outward  vice  in  your  lives,  are  still 
unconverted,  and  still  saying  to  Christ,  "  I  go,  sir,"  but  you  have  not 
gone.  You  are  still  without  God  !  Without  Christ !  Lost,  lost,  lost! 
Yet  fairer  outward  characters  could  scarcely  be  found.  I  could  fain 
weep  for  you!  Oh !  beware,  beware  of  being"  like  the  apples  of  Sodom, 
which  are  green  to  look  upon,  but  when  crushed,  crumble  to  ashes. 
Beware  of  being  like  John  Bunyan's  trees  that  were  green  outside,  but 
inwardly  rotten,  and  only  fit  to  be  tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder-box. 
Oh  !  beware  of  saying  as  some  of  you  do,  "  I  go,  sir,"  while  you  go  not. 
I  sometimes  see  sick  people  who  quite  alarm  and  distress  me.  I  say 
to  them,  "My  dear  friend,  you  are  dying;  have  you  a  hope?"  There 
is  no  answer.  "  Do  you  know  your  lost  state  ?"  "  Yes,  sir."  "  Christ 
died  for  sinners."  "  Yes,  sir."  "  Faith  gives  us  of  his  grace."  "  Yes, 
sir."  They  say,  "Yes,  sir;  yes,  sir;  yes,  sir;  yes,  sir;  yes,  sir."  I 
sometimes  wish  before  God  they  would  contradict  me,  for  if  they  would 
but  have  honesty  enough'  to  say,  "  I  do  not  believe  a  word  of  it,"  I 
should  know  how  to  deal  with  them.  Stubborn  oaks  are  levelled  by 
the  gale,  but  those  who  bend  like  the  willow  before  every  wind,  what 
wind  shall  break  them?  0  dear  brethren,  beware  of  being  gospel- 
hardened;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  softened  but  for  a  season.  Beware 
of  being  a  promising  hearer  of  the  word,  and  nothing  more ! 

I  do  not  mean  to  close  my  discourse  by  speaking  to  you  in  this 
apparently  harsh  way,  which,  harsh  as  it  seems,  is  full  of  love  to  your 
soul.  I  have  a  jrood  word  for  you  too.  I  trust  that  you,  in  this  Agri 
cultural  Hall,  will  have  a  changd  wrought  in  you  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
for  although^ these  many  years  you  have  made  false'  professions  before 
God  ;  there  is  yet  room  in  his  gospel  feast  for  you.  Did  you  notice  the 
text?  "The  publicans  and  sinners  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
before  you."  Then  it  is  clear  you  may  come  after  them, "because  it  could 
not  be  said  they  entered  before  you,  if  you  did  not  come  after  them.  If 
the  Lord  shall  break  your  heart,  you^will  be  willing  to  take  the  Lord 
Jesus  for  your  all  in  all  in  just  the 'same  way  as  a  drunkard  must, 
though  you  have  not  been  a  drunkard. '•_  You  will  be  willing  to  rest  in 
the  merit  of  Jesus  just  as  a  harlot  must,  though  you  have  never  been 
such.  There  is  room  for  you,  young  people,  yet,  though  you  have 
broken  your  vows,  and  quenched  your  convictions.  Ay,  and  you  grey 
headed  people  may  be  brought  yet,  though  you  have  lived  so  long  in 
the  outward  means,  but  have  never  given  up  your  hearts  to  Jesus.  Oh, 
come  !  This  twenty- fourth  day  of  March,  may  the  Lord  bring  you  ID 
this  very  place  may  the  Lord  lead  you  to  say 'silently,  "  By  the  gi-ace  of 
God  I  will  not  be  an  open  pretender  any  longer ;  I  will  give  myself  up 
to  those  dear  hands  that  bled  for  me,  and  that  dear  heart  that  was 
pierced  for  me,  and  I  will  this  day  submit  to  Jesus'  way. 

The  fact  is,  to  close  the  subject,  there  is,  my  Idear  friends,  the  same 
gospel  to  be  preached  to  one  class  of  men  as  to  every  other  class.  I 
pray  God  the  day  may  never  come  when  we  shall  be  found  in  our 
preaching  talking  about  working  classes,  and  middle  classes,  and  upper 
classes.  I  know  no  difference  between  you,  you  are  the  same  to  me 
when  1  preach  the  gospel,  whether  you  are  kings  and  queens,  or  crossing 


180  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

sweepers;  satin  and  cotton,  broadcloth  and  fustian,  are  alike  to  the 
gospel.  If  you  are  peers  of  the  realm,  we  trim  not  our  gospel  to  suit 
you,  and  if  you  are  the  basest  of  thieves,  we  do  not  exclude  you  from  the 
voice  of  mercy.  The  gospel  comes  to  men  as  sinners,  all  equally  fallen 
in  Adam,  equally  lost  and  ruined  by  sin.  I  have  not  one  gospel  for  Her 
Majesty  the  Queen,  and  another  gospel  for  the  beggar-woman.  No, 
there  is  but  one  way  of  salvation,  but  one  foundation,  but  one  propitia 
tion,  but  one  gospel.  Look  to  the  cross  of  Christ  and  live.  High  was 
the  brazen  serpent  lifted,  and  all  that  Moses  said  was,  "  Look."  Was 
a  prince  of  the  house  of  Judah  bitten,  he  was  told  to  look;  without 
looking  his  lion  standard  of  costly  emblazonry  could  not  avail  him; 
was  some  poor  wretch  in  the  camp  bitten,  he  must  look,  and  the 
efficacy  was  the  same  for  him  as  for  the  greatest  of  the  host.  Look ! 
look !  look  to  Jesus.  Believe  in  the  Son  of  God  and  live !  One 
brazen  serpent  for  all  the  camp,  one  Christ  for  all  ranks  and  conditions 
of  men.  What  a  blessing  would  it  be  if  we  were  all  enabled  to  trust 
Christ  this  morning  !  My  brethren,  why  not  ?  He  is  worthy  of  the 
confidence  of  all.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  able  to  work  faith  in*  all.  0 
poor  sinner,  look  to  him  !  Dear  hearers,  I  may  never  speak  to  some  of 
you  again,  and  I  would  therefore  be  pressing  with  you ;  by  the  hour  of 
death,  by  the  solemnities  of  eternity,  I  do  implore  and  beseech  you  accepi 
the  only  remedy  for  sin  which  even  God  himself  will  ever  offer  to  the 
dying  sons  of  men,  the  remedy  of  a  bleeding  Substitute,  suffering  in 
your  room  and  stead,  believed  on  and  accepted  in  the  heart.  Cast 
yourself  flat  upon  Christ.  The  way  of  salvation  is  just  this — rest  alone 
upon  Christ !  Depend  wholly  upon  him.  The  negro  was  asked  what 
he  did,  and  he  said,  "  I  jest  fall  down  on  de  rock,  and  he  dat  is  down 
on  de  rock  cannot  fall  no  lower."  Down  on  the  rock,  sinner  1  Down 
on  the  rock !  The  everlasting  rock  of  ages  !  You  cannot  fall  lower  than 
that.  I  will  conclude  with  a  well-known  illustration.  Your  condition 
is  like  that  of  a  child  in  a  burning  house,  who,  having  escaped  to  the 
edge  of  the  window,  hung  on  by  the  window-sill.  The  flames  were 
pouring  out  of  the  window  underneath,  and  the  poor  lad  would  soon  be 
burnt,  or  falling  would  be  dashed  to  pieces ;  he  therefore  held  on  with 
the  clutch  of  death.  He  did  not  dare  to  relax  his  grasp  till  a  strong 
man  stood  underneath,  and  said,  "  Boy !  drop  !  drop !  I'll  catch  you." 
Now,  it  was  no  saving  faith  for  the  boy  to  believe  that  the  man  was 
strong — that  was  a  good  help  towards  faith — but  he  might  have  known 
that  and  yet  have  perished;  it  was  faith  when  the  boy  let  go  and  dropped 
down  into  his  big  friend's  arms.  There  are  you,  sinner,  clinging  to 
your  sins  or  to  your  good  works.  The  Saviour  cries,  "  Drop !  drop  into 
my  arms ! "  It  is  not  doing,  it  is  leaving  off  doing.  It  is  not  working, 
it  is  trusting  in  that  work  which  Jesus  has  already  done.  Trust !  that 
is  the  word,  simple,  solid,  hearty,  earnest  trust.  Trust  and  it  will  not 
take  an  hour  to  save  you,  the  moment  you  trust  you  are  saved.  You 
may  have  come  in  here  as  black  as  hell,  but  if  you  trust  in  Jesus  you 
are  wholly  forgiven.  In  an  instant,  swifter  than  a  flash  of  lightning 
the  deed  of  grace  is  done.  0  may  God  the  Spirit  do  it  now,  bringing 
you  to  trust,  that  you  may  be  saved. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Psalm  ciii. 


|fleti|opotitau 


WORK   FOR  JESUS. 


DELIVERED    BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." — Matthew  xxi.  28. 

I  AM  not  going  to  confine  myself  to  the  connection  of  these  words,  nor 
to  use  them  strictly  after  the  manner  in  which  they  were  first  spoken. 
I  may,  perhaps,  explain  the  parable  very  briefly  at  the  close  ;  but  I  take 
leave  to  withdraw  these  words  from  their  immediate  context,  and  use 
them  as  a  voice  which,  I  believe,  sounds  often  in  the  ears  of  God's  people, 
and  sometimes  sounds  in  vain. — "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  iny  vine 
yard."  It  is  certain  that  God  still  speaks  to  us.  He  has  spoken  to  us 
in  his  word.  There  are  his  precepts  and  promises ;  his  statutes  and 
testimonies.  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear  these  sacred  oracles. 
But  beside  this  open  revelation  there  are  counsels  and  rebukes  more 
closely  and  personally  addressed  to  the  conscience ;  voices — soft  some 
times  as  whispers,  at  other  times  loud  as  the  thunders  that  pealed  from 
Sinai.  The  Lord  has  a  way  of  speaking  to  men  when  "he  openeth  the 
ears  of  men  and  sealeth  their  instruction,"  as  Elihu  said.  Thus  he 
speaks  when  he  calls  them  effectually  by  his  grace  in  conversion.  So  he 
once  called  "  Samuel,  Samuel,"  till  the  child  answered.  So  he  said, 
"Matthew,  follow  me."  So  he  called  out,  "Zaccheus,  come  down." 
So  he  cried  out,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?"  So  he  bid 
some  of  ns  till  the  divine  accents  were  clear  and  irresistible.  In  like 
manner  we  have,  many  of  us,  heard  him  say,  "  Son,  give  me  thy 
heart ;"  and  we  have  given  him  our  hearts  :  we  could  do  no  otherwise. 
That  voice  exerted  such  a  charming  spell  and  swayed  us  with  such  a 
divine  power  that  we  were  subdued  by  it,  and  we  yielded  our  hearts  to 
the  God  of  love.  Since  then  you  who  know  the  Lord  must  often  have 
heard  a  voice  speaking  to  you  and  bidding  you  seek  his  face  in  prayer. 
Perhaps  you  have  been  busy  with  the  world,  but  you  found  an  impulse 
of  a  mysterious  kind  coming  over  you,  and  you  have  been  fain  to  with 
draw  yourself  for  a  few  minutes  to  the  closet  that  you  might  speak  with 
God.  You  know  how  it  has  been  when  you  have  been  meditating 
alone,  and  yet  not  alone.  One  whose  presence  you  knew,  whose  fact 
vou  could  not  see,  was  with  you.  You  felt  as  if  you  must  pray.  It 
has  not  been  any  effort  on  your  part.  The  exercise  has  been  as  easy  aa 
No.  1,338.  5 


86  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  breathe  and  as  pleasant  as  to  partake  of  your  daily  bread.  Yon  felt 
the  Lord  drawing  you  to  the  mercy-seat  and  saying  in  your  soul,  "  My 
son,  ask  what  thou  wilt  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  tbee."  You  must 
have  been  conscious  of  such  a  voice  as  that. 

And  have  you  not  at  times,  in  the  silence  of  your  mind,  heard  the 
Lord  call  you  to  a  closer  communion  with  himself?  Has  not  the  sense,  if 
not  the  words,  of  the  spouse  in  the  canticle  been  heard  in  your  soul, — 
"  Come,  my  beloved,  let  us  see  if  the  vines  flourish.  Come  with  me 
from  Lebanon  my  spouse,  with  me  from  Lebanon  "?  You  have  been 
up  and  away.  You  have  gone  into  the  secret  places  where  Christ  has- 
shown  you  his  love,  till  you  sat  under  his  shadow  with  great  delight, 
and  his  fruit  has  been  sweet  to  your  taste.  Our  experience  makes  us- 
know  that  there  are  heavenly  voices  that  invite  prayer  and  call  to- 
communion.  And  probably  some  of  you  have  also  been  conscious  of 
another  voice  which  I  earnestly  desire  we  may  all  hear  to-night,  namely, 
the  more  martial  and  stirring  call  to  service  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Some  of  you  have  been  obedient  to  the  call  these  many  years,  and  it 
calls  louder  and  louder  and  louder  still.  You  have  been  reaping,  and 
bearing  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day,  but  you  cannot  throw  down 
your  sickle,  your  hand  cleaves  to  it.  Yea,  rather  do  you  take  more 
gigantic  strides  and  sweep  down  more  of  the  precious  corn  at  every 
stroke  you  take.  You  feel  that  you  can  never  cease  from  it  till  you  do 

"  Your  body  with  your  charge  lay  down, 
And  cease  at  once  to  work  and  live." 

A  voice  divine  seems  calling  thee  and  saying,  "  Follow  me,  and  I  will 
make  thee  a  fisher  of  men.  Behold  I  have  made  thee  a  chosen  vessel  to 
bear  my  name  unto  the  Gentiles."  You  have  heard  that  voice,  and  you 
are  striving  to  obey  it  more  and  more. 

Others  either  have  never  heard  it,  or  hearing  it  have  forgotten  it. 
There  are  none  so  deaf  as  those  who  will  not  hear,  and  there  are  some 
who  have  a  very  deaf  ear  to  any  admonitions  of  this  kind.  They  are 
like  Issachar — a  strong  ass  crouching  down  between  two  burdens,  but 
yet  lifting  neither.  I  fear  lest  upon  them  should  come  the  curse  of 
Meroz,  because  they  come  not  "  to  the  help  of  the  Lord — to  the  help  of 
the  Lord  against  the  mighty."  Now,  mayhap  this  evening  there  are 
some  Christian  men  or  women  here  that  shall  feel  as  if  the  hand  of  the 
Crucified  were  laid  upon  them,  and  they  hear  him  say  to  them, "  Ye  are 
not  your  own.  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  wherefore  glorify  God 
in  your  bodies  and  in  your  spirits,  which  are  his.  Awake  thou  that 
sleepest  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light." 

The  text,  I  hope,  may  be  blest  of  God  to  be  such  a  voice  as  that. 
Listening  to  it,  we  notice  four  things.  First,  the  character  under  which 
it  calls  us,  "  Son":  secondly,  the  service  to  ivhich  it  calls  us,  "go  work"; 
thirdly,  the  time  for  which  it  calls  us,  "go  work  to-day";  and  fourthly, 
the  place  to  which  it  directs  us,  "  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 

1.  First,  then,  THE  CHARACTER  UNDER  WHICH  IT  CALLS  us. 

It  appears  to  me  to  be  a  very  powerful  selection  of  terms.  "  Son,  go? 
work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  It  puts  work  on  a  very  gracious  footing, 
when  we  are  bidden  to  work  for  the  Lord,  not  as  slaves,  nor  as  mere 
servants,  but  as  sons.  Moses  speaks  to  us,  and  he  says,  "  Servant,  go 


WORK    FOR   JESUS.  87 

and  work  for  thy  wages."  But  the  Father  in  Christ  speaks  to  us,  and 
he  says,  "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  No  more  as  a  servant, 
hut  as  a  son,  shalt  thou  serve  the  Lord.  The  returning  prodigal  said 
"  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants."  That  was  not  an  evangelical 
prayer,  and  was  not  answered.  The  father  said,  "  This  my  son  was 
dead,  and  is  alive  again,"  and  so  he  received  him,  not  as  a  hired  servant 
at  all,  but  as  a  son.  Oh,  dear  people  of  God,  I  trust  you  always  draw 
the  distinction  very  clearly  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the 
covenant  of  grace.  When  you  work  for  God  you  do  not  work  for 
life  but  from  life.  You  do  not  try  to  serve  Christ  in  order  that  you 
may  be  saved,  but  because  you  are  saved.  You  do  not  obey  his 
commands  that  you  may  become  his  children,  but  because  you  are 
his  children,  and  therefore  are  imitators  of  God  as  dear  children.  You 
say  "  Abba,  Father,"  because  you  feel  the  spirit  of  adoption  within  you, 
and  you  endeavour  to  obey  the  commands  of  your  Father  for  the  self 
same  reason.  I  do  not,  therefore,  say  to  anyone  here,  "  Go  and  work 
for  God  that  you  may  be  saved."  I  would  not  venture  to  put  it  on 
that  footing.  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  But  turning  to  those  who  are  saved,  the  gospel  exhortation 
is  put  after  a  gospel  sort—"  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard/' 

And  it  has  all  the  more  strength  on  this  account,  because,  in  address 
ing  us  as  sons,  it  reminds  us  of  the  great  love  which  has  made  us 
what  we  are.  We  were  by  nature  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others,  but, 
beloved,  "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon 
us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  Think  of  the  love  which 
chose  us  when  we  were  still  aliens  and  enemies ;  the  love  which  adopted 
us,  and  put  us  into  the  family,  itself  wondering  while  it  did  it,  for  the  Lord 
is  represented  as  saying,  "  How  shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children  ?" — 
as  if  it  were  a  strange  thing  that  such  as  we  are  should  ever  be  num 
bered  among  the  children  of  God.  The  love  which  adopted  us  did  not 
stay  there,  but  having  given  us  the  rights  of  children,  it  gave  us  the 
nature  of  children,  wherefore  we  were  regenerated — "  Begotten  again 
unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead ; 


born,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  word  of  God 
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  Now,  just  think  of  election,  adop 
tion,  regeneration,  and  when  the  Lord  addresses  you  by  that  term  of 
"son,"  think  of  all  that  and  say,  "  I  owe  to  God  an  immeasurable  debt 
of  gratitude  for  having  enabled  me  to  become  his  son :  giving  me  power 
and  privilege  to  become  a  child  of  God.  Therefore  do  I  feel  the  claims 
of  obligation,  and  I  would  endeavour  to  work  in  the  vineyard  because  I 
am  his  child,  his  son,  his  daughter,  made  so  by  his  grace." 

This  you  see,  dear  friends,  engages  us  to  work  in  the  vineyard  all  the 
more  cogently,  because  we  may  reflect  not  only  on  the  grace  which  has  made 
us  sons,  but  on  the  privileges  which  that  same  grace  bestowed  upon  us 
in  making  us  sons ;  for,  if  children  of  God,  the  Lord  will  provide  for 
us,  will  clothe  us,  will  heal  us,  will  protect  us,  will  guide  us,  will  educate 
us,  will  make  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light.  Remember,  too,  that  precious  passage,  "  If  children,  then  heirs ; 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  him, 
that  we  may  be  also  glorified  together."  If  heirs  of  God,  how  large  is 
oar  inheritance,  and  if  joint  heirs  with  Christ  how  sure  that  inheritance 


88  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

is ;  and  we  have  been  brought  now,  beloved,  to  such  an  estate  as  this 
that  the  angels  themselves  might  envy  us,  for  I  venture  to  apply  a 
passage  of  Scripture  to  this  case — I  hope  without  wresting  it — "  Unto 
which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,  Thou  art  my  Son  ?"  But  he 
speaks  thus  to  us  poor  worms  of  the  dust,  and  when  he  is  bidding  us 
serve  him.  he  comes  to  us  under  this  character,  and  addresses  us  in  this 
relationship,  and  he  says,  "  Son,  daughter,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard. 
I  have  given  thee  privileges  boundless  in  making  thee  my  child.  I 
have  given  thee  this  world  and  worlds  to  come.  Earth  is  thy  lodge,  and 
heaven  thy  home.  And  therefore,  because  I  have  done  all  this  for  thee 
— and  what  could  I  have  done  more  for  thee  than  have  made  thee  my 
child  ? — therefore  I  say,  Go,  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 

In  appealing  thus  to  us  under  the  name  of  son,  it  is  supposed  that  we 
have  some  feelings  within  us  correspondent  to  the  condition  to  which 
our  heavenly  Father  has  called  us.  He  says,  "son."  If  any  of 
you,  being  a  son,  hath  a  father,  and  if  that  father  wished  you  to  do 
something  for  him,  and  he  addressed  you  as  "  my  son,"  you  would  feel 
at  once  that  whatever  you  could  do  you  were  bound  to  do  because  you 
were  a  son.  It  would  awaken  in  you  the  filial  feeling  which  is  swift  at 
once  to  yield  obedience  and  love.  And  when  the  Lord  looks  upon  thee, 
my  brother,  and  says  to  thee  "  Son,"  it  is  supposed  that  there  is  in  thy 
heart  a  child's  nature  given  by  his  grace,  and  that  this  filial  instinct 
prompts  the  quick  response,  "  My  Father,  what  dost  thou  say  to  me  ? 
Speak,  Lord,  speak.  Father,  for  thy  son  heareth  thee.  I  long  to  do  thy 
will.  I  delight  in  it,  for  to  me  it  is  the  greatest  joy  I  know  that  thou 
.art  my  Father  and  my  God.  Therefore,  Lord,  my  heart  stands  ready 
now  to  listen  to  whatever  thou  hast  to  say,  and  my  hand  is  ready  to  do 
it,  as  thy  grace  shall  enable  me,  only  strengthen  me  in  thy  ways." 
Son,  daughter,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard. 

By  the  use  of  that  term  "  son,"  also,  it  is  supposed  that  you  have 
something  of  the  qualification  that  will  fit  you  to  do  what  he  bids  you. 
A  man  who  has  a  vineyard  naturally  supposes  that  his  son  knows  some 
thing  about  vineyards.  The  boy  will  have  learned  something  through 
his  sire,  and  you  that  know  the  Lord  are  the  only  people  that  can  serve  him 
in  his  vineyard — that  is  to  say,  in  winning  souls  for  Christ  none  can  do 
this  but  those  who  are  won  themselves.  If  there  be  a  lost  child  to  be 
reclaimed,  he  shall  be  brought  in  by  one  of  the  children  who  has  him 
self  been  found.  Unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  "  What  hast  thou  to  do 
to  declare  my  statutes  ?  "  but  to  you  who  are  his  sons  and  daughters  he 
entrusts  the  gospel,  putting  you  in  trust  with  it  that  you  may  bear  it  to 
others  and  bring  others  to  know  and  love  his  name.  Oh,  dear  friends, 
it  must  be  a  dreadful  thing  to  be  trying  to  save  the  souls  of  others 
while  you  yourselves  are  lost ;  and  what  an  unhappy  mortal  must  he  be 
who  has  to  preach  the  gospel  that  he  never  knew — to  tell  of  promises 
that  he  has  never  believed,  and  to  preach  a  Christ  in  whom  his  soul  has 
never  trusted!  But  when  the  Lord  speaks  to  you  as  his  son  and  hie 
daughter,  the  very  fact  that  you  stand  in  that  relationship  to  him  proves 
that  you  have  some  qualification  for  the  service ;  and,  therefore,  dear 
brother  or  sister,  you  must  not  back  out  of  it.  You  must  not  wrap  your 
talent  in  a  napkin,  for  you  have  got  some  talent  in  the  very  fact  of  being 
a  child  of  God — a  son  or  daughter  of  the  Most  High. 


WORK   FOR  JESUS.  89 

Thus  bare  I  tried  to  open  up  the  character  to  whom  the  Lord  speaks, 
but  I  cannot  do  it  so  as  to  interest  those  who  are  not  his  people.  But  I 
do  say  this  to  those  of  you  who  are  a  people  near  unto  him,  to  whom  he 
stands  as  a  Father,  that  this  fact  has  strong  claims  upon  you.  If  I  be  a 
Father,  where  is  my  honour  ?  If  ye  be  my  children,  where  is  your  fear  ? 
If  indeed  the  Lord  has  put  you  into  his  family,  do  you  not  owe  to  him 
the  obedience  and  the  love  of  children,  and  what  can  be  more  natural 
that  if  there  be  a  household  work  to  do — vineyard  work  to  do— your 
Father  should  look  to  you  to  do  it,  and  turn  to  you  whom  he  has  loved 
so  long  and  loved  so  well,  and  say,  "  Son,  daughter,  go  work  to-day  in  my 
vineyard  "  ? 

II.     Well,  now,  secondly,  let  us  turn  to  the  next  point,  and  that  is, 

THE  SERVICE  TO  WHICH  THE   LORD  CALLS  US — "  Go  WOrk." 

I  know  some  Christians  who  do  not  like  the  name  of  work,  and  they 
look  very  black  in  the  i'ace  if  you  say  anything  about  duty.  As  for  the 
matter  of  that,  I  do  not  mind  how  black  they  look,  because  there  are 
some  people  who  very  much  expose  their  own  disposition  by  black  looks 
and  sullen  moods ;  and  when  they  turn  sour  they  only  manifest  what  is 
in  their  own  nature.  He  that  quarrels  with  the  precept  quarrels  with 
God.  Let  him  mind  that.  And  he  that  docs  not  like  the  practical  part 
of  Christianity  may  do  what  he  likes  with  the  doctrinal  part  of  it,  for  he 
has  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter.  The  language  of  the  true  child 
of  God  is,  "I  delight  myself  in  thy  precepts";  and,  as  David  put  it, 
"  Thy  precepts  have  been  my  song  in  the  house  of  my  pilgrimage." 
He  would  even  sing  about  the  precepts  of  the  gospel.  And  now  the  text 
says,  "  Go  work."  That  is  something  practical,  something  real.  Go 
work.  He  does  not  say,  "  My  son,  go  and  think  and  speculate,  and 
make  curious  experiments,  and  fetch  out  some  new  doctrines  and 
astonish  all  thy  fellow  creatures  with  whims  and  oddities  of  thine  own." 
"  My  son,  go  work."  And  he  does  not  here  say,  "  My  son,  go  and  attend 
conferences  one  after  another  all  the  year  round  and  live  in  a  perpetual 
maze  of  hearing  different  opinions  and  going  from  one  public  meeting 
and  one  religious  engagement  to  another,  and  so  feed  thyself  on  the  fat 
things  full  of  marrow."  All  this  is  to  be  attended  to  in  its  proper  pro 
portion,  but  here  it  is  "  Go  work :  go  work."  How  many  Christians  there 
are  that  seem  to  read,  "  Go  plan ; "  and  they  always  figure  in  a  way  with 
some  wonderful  plan  for  the  conversion  of  all  the  world,  but  they  are 
never  found  labouring  to  convert  a  baby — never  having  a  good  word  to- 
say  to  the  tiniest  child  in  the  Sunday-school.  They  are  always  scheming, 
and  yet  never  effecting  anything.  But  the  text  says,  "  My  son,  go  work." 
Oh,  yes,  but  those  who  do  not  like  to  work  themselves  display  the  great 
ness  of  their  talents  in  finding  fault  with  those  who  do  work,  and  a 
very  clear  perception  they  have  "of  the  mistakes  and  the  crotchets  of  the 
very  best  of  workers,  whose  zeal  and  industry  are  alike  unflagging. 
Howbeit  the  text  does  not  say,  "  My  son,  go  and  criticize  ;"  what  it  dis 
tinctly  says,  is,  "  Go  and  work."  1  remember  that  when  Andrew  Fuller 
had  a  very  severe  lecture  from  some  Scotch  Baptist  brethren  about  the 
discipline  of  the  church,  he  made  the  reply, "  You  say  that  your  discipline 
is  so  much  better  than  ours.  Very  well,  but  discipline  is  meant  to  make 
good  soldiers.  Now,  my  soldiers  fight  better  than  yours,  and  I  think 
therefore  .that  you  ought  not  to  say  much  about  my  discipline."  So  the 


90  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

real  thing  is  not  to  be  for  ever  calculating  about  modes  of  church 
government,  and  methods  of  management  and  plans  to  be  adopted 
and  rules  to  be  laid  down,  which  it  shall  be  accounted  a  serious 
breach  to  violate.  All  well  in  their  place,  for  order  is  good  in  its 
way.  But  come,  now,  let  us  go  to  work.  Let  us  have  something 
done.  I  believe  the  very  best  working  for  God  is  often  done  in  a 
very  irregular  manner.  I  get  more  and  more  to  feel  like  the  old 
soldier  of  Waterloo  when  he  was  examined  about  the  best  garment 
that  could  be  worn  by  a  soldier.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  said  to  him, 
"  If  you  had  to  fight  AVaterloo  over  again  how  would  you  like  to  be 
dressed?"  The  answer  was,  "  Please,  sir,  I  should  like  to  be  in  my  shirt 
sleeves."  I  think  that  is  about  the  best.  Get  rid  of  everything  super 
fluous,  and  get  at  it  and  hack  away.  I  would  to  God  that  some 
Christians  could  do  that,  just  strip  to  it,  get  rid  of  the  superfluities  of 
orderliness  and  propriety,  and  everything  else  which  hampers  them  in 
trying  to  get  back  poor  souls.  There  they  are,  going  down  to  hell,  and 
we  are  stickling  about  this  mode  and  that,  and  considering  the  best 
way  not  to  do  it,  and  appointing  committees  to  consider  and  debate, 
to  adjourn  and  to  postpone,  and  to  leave  the  work  in  abeyance.  The 
best  way  is  to  arise  and  do  it,  and  let  the  committee  sit  afterwards. 
God  grant  we  may.  My  son,  go  work  to-day.  Let  it  be  something 
practical,  something  real,  something  actually  done. 

And  by  good  work  is  meant  something  that  will  involve  effort,  toil, 
earnestness,  self-denial,  perhaps  something  that  will  want  perseverance. 
In  right  earnest  you  will  need  to  stick  to  it.  You  will  have  heartily  to 
yield  yourself  up  to  it,  and  give  up  a  good  deal  else  that  might  hinder 
you  in  doing  it.  Oh,  Christian  men  and  women,  you  will  not  glorify 
God  much  unless  you  really  put  your  strength  into  the  ways  of  the  Lord, 
and  throw  your  body,  soul,  and  spirit — your  entire  manhood  and  woman 
hood — into  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To  do  this  you  need 
not  leave  your  families,  or  your  shops,  or  your  secular  engagements. 
You  can  serve  God  in  these  things.  They  will  often  be  vantage  grounds 
of  opportunity  for  you,  but  you  must  throw  yourself  into  it.  A  man 
does  not  win  souls  to  Christ  while  he  is  himself  half  asleep.  The  battle 
that  is  to  be  fought  for  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be  fought  by  men  who  are 
wide  awake  and  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  "  My  son,  go  work 
to-day."  Do  not  go  and  play  at  teaching  in  Sunday-schools.  Do  not 
go  and  play  the  preacher.  Do  not  go  and  play  at  exhorting  people  at  the 
corners  of  streets,  or  even  play  at  giving  away  tracts.  "  My  son,  go 
work."  Throw  thy  soul  into  it.  If  it  is  worth  doing  it  is  worth  doing 
well ;  and  if  it  is  worth  doing  well,  it  is  worth  doing  better  than  you 
have  ever  done  it  yet ;  and  even  then  it  will  be  worth  doing  better  still, 
for  when  you  have  done  your  best  you  have  still  to  reach  forward  to  a 
something  far  beyond  ;  for  the  best  of  the  best  is  all  too  little  for  such 
a  God  and  for  such  a  service.  "  My  son,  go  work." 

Well,  now,  such  a  claim  as  this  may,  perhaps,  you  think,  sound  rather 
hard ;  but  I  could  tell  you  of  many  who  would  be  very  glad  indeed  if 
the  Lord  would  say  that  to  them.  I  might  tell  you  of  some  who  seldom 
leave  their  couches,  some  who  can  seldom  sit  upright  through  their 
weakness,  to  whom  the  nights  are  often  full  of  pain,  and  the  days  arc  spent; 
in  weariness.  They  have  learned,  by  God's  teaching,  to  be  content  to 


WORK   FOR  JESUS.  91 

suffer ;  but  sometimes  they  cannot  stifle  an  ardent  wish  ;  they  wish  the 
Lord  would  let  them  serve  him.  They  do  not  envy,  but  yet  there 
sometimes  crosses  over  their  mind  the  shadow  of  something  like  envy 
when  they  recollect  what  opportunities  some  of  you  have,  who  are  full 
of  health  and  strength.  I  have  seen  my  brother  minister  laid  aside,  the 
voice  perhaps  gone,  the  lungs  feeble,  the  heart  prone  to  palpitate, 
and,  oh,  how  he  has  wished  that  he  could  preach.  With  what  fervour 
has  he  said,  "  Oh,  if  I  had  but  those  opportunities  over  again,  how  I 
would  try  to  use  them  better  than  when  I  was  favoured  with  them  !  I 
tell  you  there  are  thousands  of  God's  servants  who  would  kiss  the 
dust  of  his  feet  if  he  would  only  say  to  them,  "Go  work."  I  remember 
reading  of  a  minister  who  had  been  labouring  in  America  till  he  had 
fairly  broken  down.  He  had  to  take  a  tour  for  his  health.  He  had 
not  been  away  many  days  before  he  wrote  in  his  diary,  "  There  may 
be  some  ministers  who  count  it  a  pleasure  to  be  relieved  from  the 
duty  of  preaching,  but  I  count  it  a  misery.  I  would  sooner  preach  as  I 
'have  done  in  my  own  pulpit  continually  than  I  would  see  all  the  king 
doms  of  the  world."  And,  indeed,  there  is  no  pleasure  in  the  world  like 
that  of  serving  God.  You  will  soon  get  tired  if  you  have  a  vacation, 
but  you  will  never  get  tired  of  a  divine  vocation,  though  you  may  some 
times  grow  tired  in  it.  Now,  think  that  the  Lord  might  have  said  to  you, 
"  Now,  go  and  lie  on  that  bed  for  ten  years.  Go  and  pine  away  in  con 
sumption.  I  have  nothing  much  for  you  to  do.  You  have  got  to  bear 
my  will."  Are  you  not  very  glad  that  you  are  full  of  strength,  or  that 
you  have  some  share  of  it,  and  that  now  your  heavenly  Father  says, 
•"Son,  go  work.  I  have  given  you  strength:  go  work"?  Lord,  we 
thank  thee  for  so  kind  and  gentle  a  command. 

Besides,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  honour  in  this  work.  You  know  how 
much  your  little  boy  wants  to  be  a  man.  All  boys  do.  When  he  first 
wears  stick-up  collars  he  congratulates  himself  upon  the  sign  of  any 
thing  like  being  a  man.  How  proud  he  is  of  it !  And  if  you,  being  a 
lather,  were  to  say  to  your  boy,  "  My  son,  you  are  now  of  such  an 
age  that  I  can  trust  you  to  do  some  work  for  me";  see  how  the  little 
man  would  begin  to  lift  himself  up  :  he  is  glad  of  it.  And  1  am  sure 
that  if  we  look  at  it  rightly,  we  who  are  the  children  of  God  ought 
to  feel  honoured  by  our  heavenly  Father  saying  to  us,  "  You  may  do 
something  for  me."  We  must  be  very  humble,  for,  after  all,  we  cannot 
do  anything  except  as  he  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do.  But  it  is 
really  very  gratifying  and  ennobling  to  a  poor  mortal  spirit  to  be 
allowed  to  do  anything  for  God,  ay,  and  to  do  what  perfect  saints  above 
and  holy  angels  cannot  do  ;  for  oh,  dear  brother,  there  is  no  glorified 
spirit  that  can  go  down  that  back  street  and  up  that  blind  alley,  and  up 
those  staircases  that  seem  as  if  they  would  tumble  down  under  your  feet. 
Go  and  talk  to  that  dying  woman  about  Christ.  You  have  a  privilege 
which  honoured  Gabriel  has  not  got :  be  thankful  that  you  have  it. 
There  is  no  angel  that  can  take  that  little  child  in  the  Sunday-school 
*  -class  and  tell  it  of  "  Gentle  Jesus,  meek  and  mild,"  and  carry  the  little 
,  lamb  for  the  Good  Shepherd.  The  Lord  sends  you  to  do  it.  And  it 
should  be  a  point  of  thankfulness  with  us  all  that  he  has  counted  us 
worthy,  and  put  us  into  the  ministry — into  any  part  or  parcel  of  that 
cniiiisiry — to  do  something  for  his  name's  sake.  Well,  we  are  always 


92  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

receiving — always  receiving,  and  it  is  very  blessed ;  but  still  in  this,  as 
in  other  things,  "it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive;  and  when  we 
can  give  back  to  God  some  little  trifle  of  service,  stained  with  our  tears 
because  it  is  no  better  than  it  is,  oh,  it  is  a  happy  and  a  blessed  thing, 
How  grateful  you  ought  to  be  that  the  Lord  does  say  to  you,  "  Son,  go 
work  to-day." 

And  remember,  once  more,  on  this  point,  that  the  work  to  which  the 
Lord  calls  us  is  very  varied,  therefore  there  is  a  great  deal  of  change  in 
it ;  and,  besides  that,  it  suits  the  different  temperaments,  constitutions, 
dispositions,  and  abilities  of  his  people.  He  says,  "  My  son,  go  work  to 
day  in  my  vineyard."  But  he  does  not  give  you  to  do  my  work,  and  he 
does  not  give  me  to  do  your  work.  Dear  sister,  you  would  like  to  do 
the  work  of  such  and  such  an  excellent  Christian  woman,  would  not 
you  ?  Yes,  but  that  is  naughty  of  you.  Be  satisfied  to  do  your  own. 
Suppose  your  housemaid  always  wanted  to  do  the  cook's  work,  the 
house  would  soon  be  in  bad  order.  Better  keep  to  your  own  place,  dear 
sister.  Ah,  there  is  a  brother  here  who  says,  "  I  think  I  could  preach  if 
I  only  had  such  and  such  a  congregation."  Very  likely,  brother,  but 
you  had  better  preach  to  your  own  and  do  what  good  you  can  there. 
Very  likely  I  should  do  better  with  my  own  congregation,  and  you  will 
do  better  with  yours  than  I  should.  Every  man  had  better  keep  to  his 
own  work  in  his  own  place.  And  how  thankful  we  ought  to  be  that  if 
one  can  preach  a  sermon,  yet  another  can  offer  a  prayer, — that  if  one 
can  go  and  speak  to  thousands,  yet  another  can  speak  to  ones  and  twos. 
There  is  work  in  the  school ;  there  is  work  in  the  family  ;  there  is 
work  in  the  street ;  there  is  work  in  the  workshop  ;  there  is  work  every 
where  for  Jesus  if  thou  wilt  but  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  find  it  and 
follow  Solomon's  good  advice,  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do 
it  with  thy  might." 

III.  Now,  THE  TIME  is  the  next  thing.  "  My  son,  go  work  to-day." 
That  means  directly — now. 

Brother,  sister,  I  will  not  say  a  word  about  what  it  is  your  duty  to 
do  to-morrow.  Let  the  morrow  take  care  of  itself.  I  will  have  nothing 
to  say  about  what  it  will  be  right  for  you  to  do  in  ten  years'  time.  If 
you  are  alive,  grace  will  be  given  to  you  for  that.  But  what  1  have  to 
say  to  you  in  God's  name  is,  "  Go  work  to-day,"  and  as  the  sun  has  gone 
down,  let  it  be,  "  Go  work  to-night  in  my  vineyard,"  if  there  be  oppor 
tunity,  even  to-night,  ere  another  day's  sun  has  dawned  upon  the  world. 
"And  why  to-day?"  Because,  brother,  thy  Father  wants  thee  to  be 
at  it  at  once.  "  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ?"  If  thou  hast 
done  nothing  for  Christ  thou  hast  wasted  enough  time.  Do  not  rest 
to-day,  but  be  at  it  now.  He  wants  thee  to  do  it  now,  because  the  vines 
are  in  a  certain  condition  that  just  now  require  work.  There  is  some 
body  in  the  world  who  is  in  a  tender  state  of  mind,  to  whom  thou  mayesfe 
speak  successfully.  There  is  a  mourner  here  who  wants  comfort  to 
night.  There  is  one  struggling  against  his  conscience,  who  wants  urging 
on  to-night  in  the  right  way.  If  the  case  be  neglected  to-night  it  will 
be  like  neglecting  to  trim  the  vines  just  at  the  proper  time  for  taking 
away  the  superfluous  wood.  Now  canst  thou  do  it.  Thou  canst  not  do 
it  on  any  other  day.  Therefore,  "  go  work  to-day." 

"  To-day,"  because  there  are  certain  dangers  to  which  those  whom 


WORK    FOR   JESUS.  93 

thou  art  about  to  bless  are  just  now  exposed.  The  devil  is  tempting 
them  :  it  is  needful  that  thou  go  and  help  them  against  that  tempta 
tion.  They  are  just  now  in  despair  ;  it  is  needful  that  thou  step  in  with 
the  word  of  comfort  from  thy  Master's  mouth.  They  are,  perhaps,  this 
very  night,  before  they  go  to  their  rest,  about  to  commit  a  great  sin. 
Mayhap  the  Lord  means  thee  to  interpose  just  now,  ere  that  sin  be 
done.  Son,  go  work  to-day  ;  thou  art  wanted.  There  are  very  few 
labourers  just  now  :  many  of  them  have  gone.  Son,  do  thou  go  to-day, 
while  the  others  have  gone  out  for  their  recreation — while  the  others  are 
asleep  and  grown  idle.  There  is  a  gap  just  now  :  it  is  at  this  moment. 
Many  a  brave  deed  of  valour  owed  its  success  to  being  done  at  once.  If 
Horatius  had  not  kept  the  bridge  just  in  that  same  moment  when  the 
enemy  endeavoured  to  pass  over,  we  should  never  have  heard  of  him, 
nor  of  the  brave  deeds  of  old.  There  is  a  time  of  dearth — of  want : 
there  is  an  urgency.  Son,  God  saith  to  thee,  "  Haste  thee  now,  even 
now,  and  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  "  To-day  :"  mark  that. 

It  means  work  all  the  day  :  work  as  long  as  ever  you  live.  Son,  if 
once  thou  get  into  that  vineyard  do  not  come  home  again  until  the  day 
is  done.  I  am  always  sorry  when  I  hear  of  Christian  people  beginning 
to  give  up  some  of  their  work  before  the  infirmities  of  old  age  come  on  ; 
although  I  think  that  many  a  minister,  when  he  gets  old,  had  better 
give  up  a  charge  for  which  he  is  not  equal  and  take  one  smaller  for 
which  his  strength  would  avail.  But  I  know  that  some  give  up  this 
work  and  that,  and  they  say,  "  Let  the  young  people  come  and  take 
their  turn."  Yes,  yes,  but  suppose  the  sun  were  to  stop  shining  and  say, 
"  There  is  a  star  over  there  ;  let  him  have  a  turn  and  shine  instead  of 
me."  Suppose  the  moon  were  for  ever  to  give  up  shining  in  the  night 
watches,  and  say  that  she  has  had  enough  of  being  out  at  night ;  and 
suppose  the  earth  were  to  say  it  has  had  enough  of  yielding  karvests. 
"  Why  should  I  yield  any  more  ?  Let  the  sea  take  its  turn  and  grow 
corn/'  And  so,  dear  Christian  friends,  keep  on  as  long  as  you  can. 
Who  can  blame  dear  old  John  Newton  ?  When  he  got  too  feeble  to  get 
up  the  pulpit  stairs  of  St.  Mary  Woolnoth,  he  was  helped  up,  and  then, 
leaning  on  his  pulpit  Bible  he  poured  out  his  soul.  A  friend  of  his  said 
to  him, "  Dear  Mr.  Newton,  don't  you  think  you  ought  to  give  up 
preaching  ?"  "  What !"  said  he,  "  shall  the  old  African  blasphemer  ever 
give  up  praising  the  grace  of  God  as  long  as  there  is  breath  in  his  body  ? 
Never."  And  so  he  went  to  his  work  again.  Oh,  for  more  of  that 
spirit  to  persevere  in  the  Master's  service. 

Only  there  is  this  thought :  it  is  only  a  day.  "  Son,  go  work  to-day." 
It  will  only  be  a  day.  The  longest  life  is  no  more,  and  then  the  shadows 
of  death  will  gather  :  but  there  will  be  no  night,  for  instead  thereof  the 
day  shall  break  and  the  shadows  shall  flee  away,  and  then  life's  service 
here  below  will  all  be  over.  There  will  be  no  troublesome  children 
to  teach,  no  hard-hearted  sinners  to  rebuke,  no  backsliding,  lukewarm 
Christians  to  reprove,  no  decoivers  to  encounter,  no  sceptics  to  answer 
with  the  testimony  that  cannot  be  shaken,  no  scoffers  to  put  up  with, 
patiently  bearing  their  contumely.  It  will  be  all  over  then ;  and  then 
shall  those  who  have  served  their  Master  behold  him  gird  himself  and  sit 
down  and  serve  them,  and  they  shall  feast  at  his  table  and  enter  into  his 
joy.  "  My  son,  go  work  to-day,"  for  thou  shalt  rest  to-morrow.  Work 


"94  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

on,  for  there  is  rest  enough  in  heaven :  work  on,  for  eternity  shall  well 
repay  thee  for  the  toils  of  time. 

IV.  Then ;  as  to  THE  PLACE  WHERE  THE  LORD  CALLS  us  TO  THE 
WORK.  "  My  son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard.'" 

I  like  to  think  of  this  special  sphere  of  labour,  because  it  must  be  a 
pleasure  to  work  in  our  Father's  vineyard,  for  there  everything  that  we 
do  will  be  done  for  him.  I  trim  this  vine  ;  it  is  my  Father's  vine.  I 
dig  this  trench ;  but  it  is  my  Father's  ground  I  turn.  I  gather  out 
these  stones ;  it  is  my  Father's  vineyard  that  I  am  engaged  in  clearing. 
I  repair  this  fence;  it  is  my  Father's  soil  that  I  am  thus  hedging  about. 
It  is  all  done  for  him.  Who  would  not  do  all  that  he  could  for  the  dear 
Redeemer,  dying  Lamb,  and  for  the  blessed  Father  of  our  spirits  ?  "  Go 
work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 

Then  what  interesting  work  it  is,  for  it  is  our  own  vineyard  because 
it  is  our  Father's  vineyard.  All  that  belongs  to  him  belongs  to  us. 
We  are  sons  working  in  our  Father's  vineyard ;  so  we  can  say,  "  This 
vine  ;  why,  I  have  an  interest  in  it,  for  I  am  the  heir  of  my  Father's  pro 
perty.  This  ground  that  I  endeavour  to  dig  about  and  manure ; 
it  is  my  ground,  it  is  my  Father's.  And  this  wall  that  I  try  to 
mend  ;  it  is  mine,  it  is  my  Father's."  It  is  always  pleasant  to  work  for 
ourselves,  you  know  ;  and,  in  a  blessed  sense,  when  we  are  working  for 
Ood  we  are  working  for  ourselves.  Ye  are  labourers,  ye  are  God's  hus 
bandry,  ye  are  God's  people  ;  and  when  ye  are  working  for  the  Lord  ye 
really  are  taking  shares  with  him. 

And  what  a  work  it  is,  too !  "  Go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 
One  likes  working  in  a  vineyard,  because  it  pays.  Working  in  a 
desert  may  be  thankless  toil ;  but  working  in  a  vineyard  where  there  will 
be  clusters  is  very  different.  One  can  think  already  of  those  juicy 
.grapes  that  will  be  ready  for  the  winepress,  and  for  the  festival, 
when  the  ruddy  juice  comes  freely  forth — when  they  make  merry  and 
joy  in  the  vintage.  And  you  will  have  the  new  wine,  and  the  wine  on 
the  lees  well  refined.  All  sorts  of  pleasures  await  the  man  who  serves 
the  Lord. 

"  Go  work  in  my  vineyard."  Does  it  not  mean  that  the  work  is 
plentiful  ?  There  is  always  something  to  be  done  in  a  vineyard.  If 
you  ask  those  who  keep  vines  they  Avill  tell  you  that  there  is  much 
labour  required.  From  one  part  of  the  year  right  on  there  is  something 
still  to  be  done,  many  dangers  to  be  averted,  and  many  enemies  to  be 
<kept  off  from  the  vine ;  so  there  is  plenty  to  do,  brother.  Go  work  in 
the  vineyard,  where  there  will  be  need  of  all  thy  hands.  It  is  close  at 
-hand  ;  hard  by  you ;  for  the  heavenly  Father  did  not  say,  "  Son,  take 
•a  ship  and  go  to  Tarshish,  or  to  Ophir."  He  said,  "  My  son,  go  work  in 
my  vineyard";  and  the  vineyard  was  just  out  of  the  back  door  there. 
Now.  your  heavenly  Father's  vineyard  is  close  to  you.  Those  streets  where 
you  live — the  very  house  in  which  you  dwell — perhaps  the  very  chamber 
in  which  you  sleep — is  God's  vineyard,  where  you  are  to  work  for  him.  It 
is  your  heavenly  Father's  own  work,  to  be  done  by  you  in  your  heavenly 
Father's  own  strength.  Oh,  if  I  might  to-night  set  one  young  man 
on  fire  with  love  to  Christ  I  should  be  glad.  If  I  could  but  be  the 
humble  means  of  inspiring  some  Christian  woman  with  the  high  mission 
of  being  useful  in  her  day  and  generation,  how  much  would  my  soul 


WORK    FOR   JESUS.  95 

rejoice  !  There  came  into  this  Tabernacle  one  evening  a  young  gentleman 
who  was  well  known  as  being  a  great  hand  with  his  cricket  bat.  He 
was  a  Christian  and  full  of  earnestness  in  laying  hold  upon  the  great 
truths  of  revelation  ;  but  he  had  never  served  his  God.  He  thought  it 
right  to  spend  his  leisure  time  in  manly  exercises,  and  in  such  pursuits 
he  sought  recreation.  But  while  I  spoke  a  fire  kindled  within  him, 
and  he  went  home  to  begin  to  preach  the  gospel  in  the  street  of  the 
city  where  he  lived,  and  now  he  is  the  pastor  of  a  large  and  influential 
church  which  he  has  gathered  together.  Since  then  he  has  preached 
more  than  once  in  this  place  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Oh,  that  some 
other  believer  who  may  happen  to  be  in  that  condition — some  young 
man  of  ability  who  is  spending  all  his  strength  on  the  world  without 
going  into  anything  grossly  wrong*  but  simply  wasting  his  talent — 
might  hear  a  voice  saying  to  him  to-night,  as  he  goes  down  that  aisle, 
•"My  son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 

After  dwelling  so  long  upon  the  practical  admonition,  I  have  but 
h'ttle  time  left  for  that  brief  explanation  of  the  parable,  or  more  pro 
perly  the  parables  of  the  vineyard  with  which  on  the  outset  I  promised 
to  close.  The  occasion  on  which  they  were  spoken  is  memorable. 
Assailed  "while  he  ivas  teaching^ — rudely  interrupted  by  the  legal  san 
hedrim  of  the  Jews  with  the  high  priest  in  the  forefront,  they  confronted 
our  Lord  as  it  were  with  a  warrant  and  propounded  to  him  two  ques 
tions  ; — one  as  to  the  authority  or  title  by  which  he  acted — the  other  as 
to  the  source  from  which  his  authority  was  derived.  You  all  know  how 
skilfully  he  evaded  his  unscrupulous  antagonists.  "  I  also  will  ask  you 
one  thing"  he  said.  Therewith  he  put  to  them  a  question  that  proved  a 
poser,  and  left  them  to  a  ridiculous  parley,  for  "  they  reasoned  among 
themselves"  went  aside  to  whisper,  and  then  drew  back  in  sheer  timidity 
declining  an  answer,  for  "  they  feared  the  people"  or  as  you  may  read  it, 
they  were  afraid  of  the  mob.  The  advantage  our  Lord  thus  gained  he 
quickly  followed  up  with  a  parable — in  fact,  with  the  parable  we  have 
been  talking  about.  He  opened  it  thus, — "  What  think  ye*  " — putting 
a  query  about  two  sons,  the  one  forward  in  profession,  yet  utterly  dis 
obedient,  the  other  sullen  in  appearance  though  afterwards  penitent  in 
spirit  and  diligent  in  labour.  The  thing  was  so  obvious  that  they 
answer  without  hesitation  with  a  reply  that  nailed  the  censure  to  their 
own  breasts.  '*  Whether  of  these  twain  did  the  will  of  his  father  ? " 
They  say  unto  him,  "  the  first."  Read  it,  read  the  parable  for  your 
selves.  Realize  the  force  of  it  if  you  can.  The  penitent  harlot  and  the 
-obdurate  high  priest  are  put  in  the  scales.  "In  the  ivay  of  righteous 
ness  " — according  to  the  truthful  caricature — the  chief  priests  and 
elders  themselves  admit  that  "  the  first "  of  these  twain  did  the  will 
of  our  heavenly  Father.  Digest  this  parable,  I  pray  you.  Almost 
without  a  break  the  vineyard  supplied  him  yet  again  with  another 
parable  which  he  insisted  on  their  hearing — a  parable  that  brought 
out  the  character  of  the  dispensation  and  "  the  signs  of  the  times  " 
«o  distinctly,  that  they  could  not  fail  to  read  it  in  the  light  of  their 
o\vn  prophets,  and  at  the  same  time  it  so  exposed  the  treachery  of 
their  counsel  and  conspiracy  that  they  recognized  their  own  portrait  at 
once  and  perceived  that  he  spake  of  them.  "  The  vineyard,"  you  are  all 
aware,  was  the  constant  symbol  of  the  Jewish  nation  as  a  theocracy. 


96  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

The  men  that  safc  in  Moses's  seat  were  the  stewards  in  charge  of  that . 
rineyard  which  was  Jehovah's  special  property.  They,  like  the  perverse 
rulers  of  every  age,  sought  to  shelter  their  evil  designs  under  cover  of 
syndicates  and  conferences.  But  the  words  and  warnings  of  Jesus,  his 
proverbs  and  parables,  were  keen  enough  to  probe  all  their  subtleties,  and 
leave  them  to  stand  abashed  without  an  excuse  for  the  guile  of  their 
hearts  or  the  guilt  of  their  conduct.  Now  remember  that  the  kingdom 
of  God  was  taken  from  them  and  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the 
fruits  thereof.  To  what  nation  is  it  given  ?  Is  it  not  to  the  church 
which  is  called  "  a  chobcu  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation, 
a  peculiar  people  ;  that  ye  should  shew  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath 
called  you  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light"  ?  The  vine  is  the 
express  symbol  of  our  Christian  life^  as  all  believers  are  incorporated  with 
Christ.  Well  then,  there  is  a  vineyard  of  God's  own  planting  ;  you 
believe  that.  He  has  let  it  out  to  husbandmen  ;  you  believe  that.  He 
will  come  seeking  fruit  of  this  vineyard  ;  you  believe  that.  You  are, 
.dear  brethren,  the  children  of  the  husbandmen  ;  you  believe  that,  or  else 
you  would  not  presume  to  sit  at  his  table  and  drink  of  his  cup.  He 
says  therefore  to  you,  "  Son,  go  work  in  my  vineyard."  What  answer  do 
you  give  with  your  lips  ?  What  answer  do  you  give  with  your  life  ? 

Thus  far  I  have  not  been  speaking  to  unconverted  people.  I  have 
not  said  a  word  to  them.  To  them,  however,  f  have  this  word  to  say, 
and  I  have  done.  1  shall  not  ask  you  to  work  for  Christ.  I  cannot  ex 
hort  you  to  do  anything  for  him.  You  are  not  in  a  state  of  mind  to 
do  it.  You  must  first  believe  in  him.  Oh,  let  it  be  a  sorrow  to  you  to 
night  that  you  are  incapable  of  serving  Christ.  Till  you  get  a  new 
heart  and  a  right  spirit  you  have  no  capacity  to  serve  him.  You 
have  first  to  trust  Christ,  and  to  prove  in  your  own  souls  that  this 
gospel  is  the  power  of  God  to  your  salvation.  Your  eyes  must  be 
opened ;  you  must  be  turned  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the 
power  of  Satan  to  God,  that  you  may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins  and 
inheritance  among  them  which  are  sanctified  by  faith  in  Jesus,  before 
can  do  anything  for  him.  Then,  not  till  then,  will  ye  be  meet  to 

made  witnesses  both  of  those  things  which  ye  shall  have  seen  and  of 
those  things  in  the  which  he  will  hereafter  appear  unto  you.  You 
must  be  born  again  yourselves  before  ye  can  travail  in  birth  for  others, 
till  Christ  be  formed  in  them.  You  cannot  testify,  those  of  you  by  Avhom 
the  testimony  of  Christ  has  not  been  received  and  in  whom  it  is  not 
confirmed.  Your  unskilled  labour  would  be  mischievous.  Hands  off 
such  holy  work  till  those  hands  have  been  washed  clean  by  Jesus  Christ. 
Come  ye  unto  him,  and  trust  him,  and  believe  in  him,  and  when  he 
has  saved  you,  then  he  will  say  to  you,  "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my 
vineyard." 


|fUti[0pIitmt  SJabenrade 


THE   PARABLE   OF   THE   WEDDING   FEAST. 


DKMVBBKD  os  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  FEBRUARY  12TH,  1871,  BY 

C.   H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  certain  king,  which  made  a  marriage  for 
his  son,  and  sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  that  were  bidden  to  the  wedding :  and 
they  would  not  come.  Again,  he  sent  forth  other  servants,  saying,  Tell  them  which 
are'bidden,  Behold,  I  have  prepared  my  dinner:  my  oxen  and  my  fatlings  are  killed, 
and  all  things  are  ready:  come  unto  the  marriage." — Matthew  xxii.  2,  3,  4. 

IF  God  grant  me  strength  I  hope  to  go  through  this  parable,  but  at 
this  present  we  shall  confine  our  thoughts  to  the  opening  scene  of  the 
royal  festival.  Before,  however,  we  proceed  further,  it  is  most  fitting 
that  we  give  expression  to  our  deep  gratitude,  that  it  has  pleased 
the  infinite  mind  to  stoop  to  our  narrow  capacities,  and  instruct  us 
by  parable.  How  tenderly  condescending  is  God  to  devise  simili 
tudes,  that  his  children  may  learn  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  !  If 
it  be  sometimes  marvelled  at  among  men  that  great  minds  are  ever 
ready  to  stoop,  what  a  far  greater  marvel  that  God  himself  should  bow 
the  heavens  and  come  down  to  meet  our  ignorance  and  slowness  of 
comprehension  !  When  the  learned  professor  has  been  instructing  his 
class  in  the  hall  in  recondite  matters  of  deep  philosophy,  and  then  goes 
home  and  takes  his  child  upon  his  knee,  and  tries  to  bring  down  great 
truth  to  the  grasp  of  his  child's  mind,  then  you  see  the  great  love  of 
the  man's  heart:  and  when  the  eternal  God,  before  whom  seraphim 
are  but  insects  of  an  hour,  condescends  to  instruct  our  childishness 
and  make  us  wise  unto  salvation,  \ve  may  well  say,  "herein  is  love." 
Just  as  we  give  our  children  pictures  that  we  may  win  the  attention, 
and  may  by  pleasing  means  fix  truth  upon  their  memories,  so  the 
Lord  with  loving  inventiveness  has  become  the  author  of  many  a 
charming  metaphor,  type,  and  allegory,  by  which  he  may  gain  our 
interest,  and  through  his  Holy  Spirit  enlighten  our  minds.  It'  he  who 
thunders  till  the  mountains  tremble,  yet  deigns  to  speak  with  us  in  a  still 
KIII all  voice,  let  us  gladly  sit  in  Mary's  place  at  his  gracious  feet,  and 
willingly  learn  of  him.  0  that  God  would  give  to  each  one  a  teachable 
spirit,  for  this  is  the  greatest  step  towards  understanding  the  mind  of  God. 
He  who  is  willing  to  learn,  in  a  childlike  spirit,  is  already  in  a  considerable 
measure  taught  of  God.  May  we  all  so  study  this  instructive  purable 
No.  975.  6 


86  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

as  to  be  quickened  by  it  to  all  that  is  well-pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God, 
for  after  all  true  learning  in  godliness  may  be  judged  of  by  its  result  f 
upon  our  lives.  If  we  are  holier  we  are  wiser,  practical  obedience  to  th% 
will  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  surest  evide-ice  of  an  understanding  heart. 

In  order  to  understand  the  parable  before  us  we  must  first  direct  our 
attention  to  the  design  of  the  "certain  king  "  here  spoken  of.  He  had 
a  grand  object  in  view  ;  he  desired  to  do  honour  to  his  son  upon  the 
occasion  of  his  marriage.  We  shall  then  notice  the  very  generous 
method  by  which  he  proposed  to  accomplish  his  purpose ;  he  made  a 
dinner,  and  bade  many  :  there  were  other  modes  of  honouring  his  son, 
but  the  great  king  elected  the  mode  which  would  best  display  his 
bounty.  We  shall  then  observe,  with  sad  interest,  the  serious  hindrance 
which  arose  to  the  carrying  out  of  his  generous  design — those  who 
were  bidden  would  not  come.  There  was  nothing  to  hinder  the 
magnificence  of  the  festival  in  the  riches  of  the  prince — he  lavished  out 
his  stores  for  the  feast ;  but  here  was  a  hindrance  strange  and  difficult 
to  remove,  they  would  not  come.  Then  our  thoughts  will  linger 
admiringly  over  the  gracious  rejoinder  which  the  king  made  to  the- 
opposers  of  his  design;  he  sent  other  servants  to  repeat  the  invitation, 
"  Corne  ye  to  the  marriage."  If  we  shall  drink  deep  into  the  meaning 
of  these  three  verses,  we  shall  have  more  than  enough  for  one  meditation. 

I.  A  certain  king  of  wide  dominions  and  great  power  designed  to  give 
a  magnificent  banquet,  with  a  GRAND  OBJECT  in  view.  The  crown 
prince,  his  well  beloved  heir,  was  about  to  take  to  himself  a  fair  bride, 
and  therefore  the  royal  father  desired  to  celebrate  the  event  with 
extraordinary  honours.  From  earth,  look  up  to  heaven.  The  great 
object  of  God  the  Father  is  to  glorify  his  Son.  It  is  his  will  "  that  all 
men  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  (John 
v.  23.)  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  glorious  already  in  his  divine 
person.  He  is  ineffably  blessed,  and  infinitely  beyond  needing  honour. 
All  the  angels  of  God  worship  him,  and  his  glory  fills  all  heaven.  He 
has  appeared  on  the  stage  of  action  as  the  Creator,  and  as  such  his 
glory  is  perfect,  "  For  by  him  were  all  things  created,  that  are  in  heaven, 
and  that  ure  in  earth,  visible  and  invisible,  whether  they  be  thrones,  or 
dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers:  all  things  were  created  by  him, 
and  for  him."  He  said,  "  Light  be,"  and  it  flamed  forth.  He  bade  the 
mountains  lift  their  heads,  and  their  summits  pierced  the  clouds.  He 
createdthe  water- floods,he  bade  them  seek  their channels,and  he  appointed 
their  bounds.  Nothing  is  lacking  to  the  glory  of  the  Word  of  God, 
who  was  in  Che  begining  with  God,  who  spake  and  it  was  done,  who 
commanded,  and  it  stood  forth.  He  is  highly  exalted  also  as  the 
preserver,  for  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist.  He 
is  that  nail  fastene-l  in  a  sure  place,  upon  which  all  things  hang.  The 
keys  of  heaven,  and  death,  and  hell,  are  fastened  to  his  girdle,  and  the 
government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulders,  and  his  name  shall  be  called. 
Wonderful.  He  hath  a  name  which  is  above  every  name,  before  which 
all  things  shall  bow,  in  heaven,  and  earth,  and  under  the  earth.  He  is 
God  over  all.  He  is  blessed  for  ever.  To  him  that  is,  and  was,  and 
is  to  come,  the  universal  song  goeth  up. 

But  there  is  another  relation  in  which  the  Son  of  God  has  graciously 
been  pleased  to  sfcund  towards  us.     He  has  undertaken  to  be  a  Saviour + 


THE    PARABLE   OF    THE   WEDDING    FEAST.  8? 

in  order  that,  lie  might  be  a  'bridegroom.  He  had  enough  glorv  before, 
but  ill  the  greatness  of  his  heart,  he  would  magnify  his  compassion 
even  above  his  power,  and  he  therefore  condescended  to  take  into 
union  with  himself  the  nature  of  man,  in  order  that  he  might  redeem 
the  beloved  objects  of  his  choice  from  the  penalty  due  to  their  sins,  an«£ 
might  enter  into  the  nearest  conceivable  union  with  them.  It  is  six 
Saviour  that  the  Father  seeks  to  honour  the  Son,  and  the  gospel  feast 
is  uot  for  the  honour  of  his  person  merely,  but  for  the  honour  of  his- 
person  in  this  new,  yet  anciently  purposed  relationship.  It  is  for  the 
honour  of  Jesus  as  entering  into  spiritual  union  with  his  church,  that, 
the  gospel  is  prepared  as  a  royal  entertainment. 

Brethren,  when  I  said  that  here  was  a  grand  occasion,  it  certainly  is- 
so  in  God's  esteem,  and  it  should  be  so  in  ours;  we  should  delight  to 
glorify  the  Son  of  God.  To  all  loyal  subjects  in  any  realm,  the  marriage 
of  one  of  the  royal  family  is  a  matter  of  great  interest,  and  it  is  usual  and 
fitting  to  give  expression  to  congratulations  and  sympathies  by  suit 
able  rejoicings.  In  the  instance  before  us  the  occasion  calls  for  special 
joy  from  all  the  subjects  of  the  great  king  of  kings.  For  the 
occasion  in  itself  is  a  subject  for  great  delight  and  thankfulness- 
to  us  personally.  The  marriage  is  with  whom  ?  With  angels  ?  He 
took  not  up  angels.  It  is  a  marriage  with  our  own  nature,  "  he  took 
up  the  seed  of  Abraham."  Shall  we  not  rejoice  when  heaven's  great 
Lord  is  incarnate  as  a  man,  and  stoops  to  redeem  humanity  from  the 
ruin  of  the  fall  ?  Angels  rejoice  but  the}'  have  no  such  share  in  the 
joy  as  we  have.  It  is  the  highest  personal  joy  to  manhood  that  Jesus- 
Christ  who  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  writh  God,  was  made  in 
the  likeness  of  men  that  he  might  be  one  flesh  with  his  chosen.  Arise 
ye  who  slumber !  If  there  was  ever  an  occasion  when  ye  should  bestir 
your  spirits  and  cry  "  wrake  up  my  glory,  awake  psaltery  and  harp  "  it  is- 
now,  when  Jesus  comes  to  be  affianced  to  his  church,  to  make  himself 
of  one  flesh  with  her,  that  he  may  redeem  her,  and  afterwards  exalt  her 
to  sit  with  him  upon  his  throne.  Here  were  abundant  reasons  why  the 
invited  guests  should  come  with  joyful  steps,  and  count  themselves 
thrice  happy  to  be  bidden  to  such  a  banquet.  There  is  overwhelming 
reason  why  mankind  should  rejoice  in  the  glorious  gospel  of  Jesus  and 
hasten  to  avail  themselves  of  it. 

Beside  that  we  must  consider  the  royal  descent  of  the  Bridegroom. 
Remember  that  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  is  very  God  of  very  God. 
Are  we  asked  to  do  him  honour  ?  It  is  right,  for  to  whom  else  should 
honour  be  given?  Surely  we  should  glorify  our  Creator  and 
Preserver !  Wilful  must  be  the  disobedience  which  will  not  pay  reverence 
to  one  so  highly  exalted  and  so  worthy  of  all  homage.  It  is  heaven  to 
serve  such  a  Lord.  His  ylory  reacheth  unto  the  clouds ;  let  him  be  adore*  i 
for  ever  and  ever ;  0  come  let  us  worship  and  bow  down,  let  us  cheerfully 
obey  those  commands  of  God  which  aim  at  the  honour  of  his  Son. 

Remember  also  the  person  of  Immanuel,  and  you  will  desire  his  glory. 
This  glorious  Son,  whose  fame  is  to  he  spread  abroad,  is  most  certainly 
God — of  that  we  have  spoken,  but  he  is  also  most  assuredly  man,  our 
brother,  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  Do  we  not  delight  to 
believe  that  he,  tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are,  has  never  yet  sub 
mitted  LO  be  stained  by  sin  ?  Never  such  a  man  as  he,  head  of  the  race.- 


88  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  second  Adam,  the  everlasting  Father — who  among  us  would  not  da 
him  reverence  ?  Will  we  not  seek  his  honour,  seeing  that  now  he  lifts 
our  race  to  be  next  to  the  throne  of  God. 

Remember,  too,  his  character.  Was  there  ever  such  a  life  as  his  ?  I 
will  not  so  much  speak  of  his  divine  character,  though  that  furnishes 
abundant  reason  for  worship  and  adoration,  but  think  of  him  even  as  a 
man.  0  beloved,  what  tenderness,  what  compassion,  yet  what  holy 
boldness ;  what  love  for  sinners,  and  yet  what  love  for  truth  !  Men 
who  have  not  loved  him  have  nevertheless  admired  him,  and  hearts  in 
which  we  least  expected  to  see  such  recognition  of  his  excellencies  have 
nevertheless  been  deeply  affected  as  they  have  studied  his  life.  We 
must  praise  him,  for  He  is  "chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether 
lovely."  It  were  treason  to  be  silent  when  the  hour  has  come  to  speak 
of  him  who  is  peerless  among  men  and  matchless  among  angels  Clap, 
clap  your  hands  at  the  thought  of  the  marriage  of  the  King's  Son,  for 
whom  his  bride  hath  made  herself  ready. 

Think,  too,  of  his  achievements.  We  take  into  reckoning  whenever 
we  do  honour  to  a  prince  all  that  he  may  have  done  for  the  nation  over 
which  he  rules.  What,  then,  has  Jesus  done  for  us  ?  Rather  let  me 
say  what  has  he  not  done?  Upon  his  shoulders  were  laid  our  sins; 
he  carried  them  into  the  wilderness,  and  they  are  gone  for  ever. 
Against  him  came  forth  our  foes;  he  met  them  in  shock  of  battle,  and 
where  are  they  now?  They  are  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  As  for 
death  itself,  that  last  of  foes,  he  has  virtually  overcome  it,  and  ere  long 
the  weakest  of  us  through  him  shall  say,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting? 
0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?"  He  is  the  hero  of  heaven.  He 
returned  to  his  Father's  throne  amidst  the  acclamations  of  the  uni 
verse.  Do  we  not,  for  whom  he  fought,  for  whom  he  conquered, 
do  we  not  desire  to  honour  him?  I  feel  I  speak  with  bated  breath 
upon  a  theme  where  all  our  powers  of  speech  should  be  let  loose. 
Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem  and  crown  him !  Is  it  not  the  universal 
verdict  of  all  who  know  him  ?  Ought  it  not  to  be  the  cry  of  all  the 
sons  of  men  ?  East  and  west,  and  north  and  south,  ought  they  not 
to  ring  the  joy  bells  and  hang  out  streamers  on  his  marriage  day,  for 
joy  of  him  ?  Is  the  King's  Son  to  be  married,  is  there  a  festival  in 
his  honour  ?  0  then  let  him  be  great,  let  him  be  glorious !  Long 
live  the  King !  Let  the  maidens  go  forth  with  their  timbrels,  and 
the  sons  of  music  make  sweet  melody — yea,  let  all  creatures  that  have 
breath  break  forth  with  his  praises.  "  Hosanna  !  Hosanna  !  Blessed 
is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

II.  Secondly,  here  is  a  GENEROUS  METHOD  of  accomplishing  the  design. 
A  king's  son  is  to  be  honoured  on  the  day  of  his  marriage,  in  what  way 
shall  it  be  done  ?  Barbarous  nations  have  their  great  festivals,  and 
alas,  that  men  should  have  sunk  so  low;  on  such  occasions  rivers  of 
human  blood  are  made  to  flow.  To  this  very  day,  on  the  borders  of 
civilisation,  there  is  found  a  wretched  tyrant  whose  infernal  customs, 
for  I  dare  not  call  them  by  a  less  severe  term,  command  the  murder  of 
hundreds  of  his  fellow  creatures  in  cold  blood,  on  certain  high  days  and 
festivals.  Thus  would  the  monster  honour  his  son  by  acting  like 
a  fiend.  ]  To  blood  is  poured  forth  to  honour  the  Son  of  heaven's 
great  King.  I  doubt  not  Jesas  will  have  honour  even  in  the  destruction 


THE    PARABLE   OF    THE   WEDDING   FEAST.  83 

of  men  if  they  reject  his  mercy,  but  it  is  not  so  that  God  elects  to 
glorify  his  Son.  Jesus  the  Saviour,  on  his  wedding-day  with  man 
hood,  is  glorified  by  mercy,  not  by  wrath.  If  blood  be  mentioned  on 
such  a  day,  it  is  his  own  by  which  he  is  glorified.  The  slaughter  of  man 
kind  would  bring  no  joy  to  him,  he  is  meek  and  lowly,  a  lover  of  the 
sons  of  men.  It  has  been  the  custom  of  most  kings  to  signalise  a  princely 
wedding  by  levying  a  fresh  tax,  or  demanding  an  increased  subsidy 
from  ttieir  subjects.  In  the  case  of  the  anticipated  wedding  of  our 
beloved  Queen's  daughter,  the  dowry  sought  will  be  given  with  greater 
pleasure  than  upon  any  former  occasion,  and  noneof  us  would  lift  a  whisper 
of  complaint ;  but  the  parable  shows  that  the  King  of  kings  deals  with 
us  not  aftei  the  manner  of  man.  He  asks  no  dowry  for  his  Son;  he 
makes  the  marriage  memorable  not  by  demands  but  by  gifts.  Nothing 
is  sought  for  from  the  people,  but  much  is  prepared  for  them,  gifts  are 
lavishly  bestowed,  and  all  that  is  requested  of  the  subjects  is,  that  they  for 
awhile  merge  the  subject  in  the  more  honourable  character  of  the  guest, 
and  willingly  come  to  the  palace,  not  to  labour  or  serve  at  the  table,  but 
to  feast  and  to  rejoice. 

Observe,  then,  the  generous  method  by  which  God  honours  Christ  is 
set  forth  here  under  the  form  of  a  banquet.  I  noted  Matthew 
Henry's  way  of  describing  the  objects  of  a  feast,  and  with  the  allitera 
tion  of  the  Puritans,  he  says,  "  A  feast  is  for  love  and  for  laughter,  for 
fulness  and  for  fellowship."  It  is  even  so  with  the  gospel.  It  is  for 
love ;  in  the  gospel,  sinner,  you  are  invited  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  you 
are  assured  that  God  forgives  your  sins,  ceases  to  be  angry,  and  would 
have  you  reconciled  to  him  through  his  Son.  Thus  love  is  established 
between  God  and  the  soul.  Then  it  is  for  laughter,  for  happiness,  for 
joy.  Those  who  come  to  G-od  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  believe  in  him,  have 
their  hearts  filled  with  overflowing  peace,  which  calm  lake  of  peace  often 
lifts  up  itself  in  waves  of  joy,  which  clap  their  hands  in  exultation. 

It  is  not  to  sorrow  but  to  joy  that  the  great  King  invites  his  subjects, 
when  he  glorifies  his  Son  Jesus.  It  is  not  that  you  may  be  distressed,  but 
that  you  may  be  delighted  that  he  bids  you  believe  in  the  crucified  Saviour 
and  live.  A  feast,  moreover,  is  for  fulness.  The  hungry  famished  soul 
of  man  is  satisfied  with  the  blessings  of  grace.  The  gospel  fills  the 
whole  capacity  of  our  manhood.  There  is  not  a  faculty  of  our  nature 
which  is  not  made  to  feel  its  need  supplied  when  the  soul  accepts  the 
provisions  of  mercy ;  our  whole  manhood  is  satisfied  with  good  things 
and  our  youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagles.  "  For  I  have  satisfied  the 
weary  soiil,  and  I  have  replenished  every  sorrowful  soul."  To  crown 
all,  the  gospel  brings  us  into  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  In  Christ  Jesus  we  commune  with  the  sacred  Trinity. 
God  becomes  our  Father,  and  reveals  his  paternal  heart.  Jesus 
manifests  himself  unto  us  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world,  and  the 
communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  abides  with  us.  Our  fellowship  is  like 
that  of  Jonathan  with  "David,  or  Jesus  with  John.  We  feast  on  the 
bread  of  heaven,  and  drink  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined.  We  are 
brought  into  the  heavenly  banqueting  house  where  the  secret  of  the 
Lord  is  revealed  to  us,  and  our  heart  pours  itself  out  before  the  Lord. 
Very  near  is  our  communion  with  God ;  most  intimate  love  and  con 
descension  does  he  show  to  us.  What  say  you  to  this  ?  Is  there  nofc 
5 


90  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

here  a  rich  repast  worthy  of  him  who  prepares  it.  Here  all  yonr 
capacious  powers  can  wish,  0  sinner,  shall  be  given  to  you ;  all  you 
want  for  time  and  for  eternity  God  prepares  in  the  person  of  his  dear 
Son,  and  bids  you  receive  it  without  money  and  without  price. 

I  have  already  told  you  that  all  the  expense  lies  with  him.  It  was  a 
yery  sumptuous  festival,  there  were  oxen,  and  there  were  fatlings,  but 
none  of  these  were  taken  from  the  pastures,  or  stalls  of  the  guests.  The 
gospel  is  an  expensive  business  ;  the  very  heart  of  Christ  was  drained 
to  find  the  price  for  this  great  festival ;  but  it  costs  the  sinner  nothing^ 
nothing  of  money,  nothing  of  merit,  nothing  of  preparation.  You  .may 
come  as  you  are  to  the  gospel  feast,  for  the  only  wedding  dress  required 
is  freely  provided  for  you.  Just  as  you  are,  you  are  bidden  to  believe  in 
Jesus.  You  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  receive  of  his  fulness,  for  to 
"  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons 
of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name."  You  are  not  asked  to 
contribute  to  the  provision,  but  to  be  a  feaster  at  the  divine  banquet 
of  infinite  compassion. 

How  honourable,  too,  is  the  gospel  to  those  who  receive  it.  An  in 
vitation  to  a  regal  marriage  was  a  high  honour  to  those  who  were  bidden. 
I  do  not  suppose  that  many  of  us  are  likely  to  be  invited  to  the  Princess's 
wedding,  and,  if  we  were,  we  should  probably  be  greatly  elated,  for  we 
should  most  of  us  feel  it  to  be  one  of  the  great  events  of  our  lives.  So 
was  it  with  these  people.  A  king's  son  is  not  married  every  day,  and 
it  is  not  everybody  that  is  bidden  to  the  monarch's  entertainment.  All 
their  lives  long  they  would  say,  "  I  was  at  his  wedding,  and  saw  .nil  the 
splendour  of  the  marriage  festival."  Probably  some  of  them  had  never 
before  enjoyed  such  a  feast  as  the  luxurious  potentate  had  prepared  for 
that  day,  and  had  never  before  been  in  such  good  company.  My 
brethren,  nothing  so  honours  a  man  as  for  him  to  accept  the  gospel. 
While  his  faith  honours  Christ,  Christ  honours  him.  It  is  no  mean 
thing  to  be  a  king's  son,  but  those  who  come  to  the  marriage  feast  of 
God's  own  Son  shall  become  King's  sons  themselves — themselves  parti 
cipators  in  the  glory  of  the  great  heir  of  all  things.  While  I  am  speak 
ing  of  this  generous  method  my  heart  glows  with  sacred  ardour,  and 
my  wonder  rises  that  men  do  not  come  to  the  banquet  of  love  which 
honours  all  its  guests.  When  the  banquet  is  so  costly  to  the  host,  so 
free  to  the  guests,  and  so  honourable  to  all  concerned,  how  is  it  that 
there  should  be  found  any  so  unwise  as  to  refuse  the  favour.  Surely 
here  is  an  illustration  of  the  folly  of  the  unrenewed  heart,  and  a  proof 
of  the  deep  depravity  which  sin  has  caused.  If  men  turn  their  backs  on 
Moses  with  his  stony  tables,  I  do  not  marvel,  but  to  despise  the 
loaded  tables  of  grace,  heaped  up  with  oxen  and  fatlings — this  is  strange. 
To  resist  the  justice  of  God  is  a  crime,  but  to  repel  the  generosity  of 
heaven,  what  is  this  ?  We  must  invent  a  term  of  infamy  with  which  to 
brand  the  base  ingratitude.  To  resist  God  in  majesty  of  terror  is  insanity 
but  to  spurn  him  in  the  majesty  of  his  mercy  is  something  more  than 
madness.  Sin  reaches  its  climax  when  it  resolves  to  starve  sooner  than 
owe  anything  to  divine  goodness.  I  feel  I  must  anticipate  the  period 
for  delivering  my  message,  and  as  I  have  described  to  you  the  way  in 
which  God  honours  his  Son,  I  must  at  once  proclaim  the  invitation,  and 
cry  to  you,  "  Come  to  the  wedding  feast.  Come  ye,  and  glorify  Jesus 


THE    PARABLE   OF    THE   WEDDING    FEAST.  91 

by  accepting  the  provisions  of  grace.  Your  works  will  not  honour 
him,  if  you  set  them  up  as  a  righteousness  in  competition  with  his 
righteousness.  Not  even  your  repentance  can  glorify  him,  if  you  th  ink 
to  make  it  a  rival  to  his  precious  blood.  Come,  guilty  sinner,  as  you 
are,  and  take  the  mercy  Jesus  freely  presents  to  you,  and  accept  the 
pardon  which  his  blood  secures  to  those  who  believe  in  him."  Methinks 
when  the  messenger  went  out  from  the  King  and  first  of  all  marked 
signs  of  neglect  among  those  who  were  bidden,  and  saw  that  they  would 
not  come,  he  must  have  been  mute  with  astonishment.  He  had  seen 
the  oxen,  and  seen  the  fatlings,  and  all  the  goodly  preparations,  he  knew 
the  King,  he  -knew  his  Son,  he  knew  what  joy  it  was  to  be  at  such  a 
feast;  and  when  the  bidden  ones  began  to  turn  their  backs  on  him, 
and  go  their  way  to  their  farms,  the  messenger,  repeated  his  message 
over  and  over  again  with  eagerness,  wondering  all  the  while  at  the 
treason  which  dared  insult  so  good  a  King.  I  think  I  see  him,  at 
first  indignant  for  his  Master's  sake,  and  afterwards  melted  to  pity 
as  he  saw  what  would  surely  come  of  such  an  extravagance  oi 
ingratitude,  such  a  superfluity  of  insolence.  He  mourned  that  hig 
fellow-citizens  whom  he  loved  should  be  such  fools  as  to  reject  so 
good  an  offer,  and  spurn  so, blessed  a  proclamation.  I,  too,  am 
tossed  to  and  fro  in  soul,  with  mingled  but  vehement  feelings.  0,  my 
God,  thou  hast  provided  the  gospel,  let  none  in  this  house  reject  it,  and 
so  slight  thy  Son  and  dishonour  thee,  but  may  all  rejoice  in  thy  generous 
way  of  glorifying  Jesus  Christ,  the  Bridegroom  of  his  church,  and  may 
they  come-,  and  willingly  grace  the  festival  of  thy  love.. 

III.  "We  now  advance  to  our  third  point,  and  regretfully  remember 
THE  SERIOUS  HINDRANCE  which  for  awhile  interfered  with  the  joyful 
event. 

The  king  had  thought  in  his  mind,  "  I  will  make  a  great  feast,  I  will 
invite  a  large  number.  They  shall  enjoy  all  my  kingdom  can  afford, 
and  I  shall  thus  show  how  much  I  love  my  son,  and  moreover  all  the 
guests  will  have  sweet  memories  in  connection  with  his  marriage."  When 
his  messengers  went  out  to  intimate  to  those  who  had  received 
previously  an  express  invitation  that  the  time  was  come,  it  is  written, 
"  They  would  not  come;"  not  they  could  not,  but  they  "  would  not 
come."  Some  for  one  reason,  some  for  another,  but  without  exception 
they  would  not  come.  Here  was  a  very  serious  hindrance  to  the  grand 
business.  Cannot  the  king  drag  his  guests  to  the  table?  Tea,  but 
then  it  would  not  accomplish  his  purpose.  He  wants  not  slaves  to 
grace  his  throne'.  Persons  compelled  to  sit  at  a  marriage-feast  would 
not  adorn  it.  What  credit  could  it  be  to  a  king  to  force  his  subjects  to 
feast  at  his  table  ?  •  No,  for  once,  as  I  have  said  before,  the  subject 
must  be  merged  in  the  guest.  It  was  essential  to  the  dignity  of  the 
festival  that  the  guests  should  come  with  cheerfulness  to  the  festival, 


92  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

but  they  would  not  come.  Why?  Why  would  they  not  come  ?  The 
answer  shall  be  such  as  to  answer  another  question — Why  do  not  you 
come  and  believe  in  Jesus  !  With  many  of  them  it  was  an  indifference 
to  the  whole  aftair.  They  did  not  see  what  concern  they  had  in  the  king 
or  his  son.  Royal  marriages  were  high  things  and  concerned  high 
people ;  they  were  plain-speaking  men,  farmers  who  went  hedging  and 
ditching,  or  tradesmen  who  made  out  bills  and  bold  by  the  yard  or 
pound.  What  cared  they  for  the  court,  the  palace,  the  king,  the  prince, 
bis  bride,  or  his  dinner!  They  did  not  say  quite  that,  but  such  was 
their  feeling ;  it  might  be  a  fine  thing,  but  it  was  altogether  out  of 
their  line.  How  many  run  in  the  same  groove  at  this  hour?  We  have 
heard  it  said,  "  What  has  a  working  man  to  do  with  religion?"  and 
we  have  heard  others  of  another  grade  in  life  affirm  that  persons  who 
are  in  business  cannot  afford  time  for  religion,  but  had  better  mind 
the  main  chance.  The  Lord  have  mercy  upon  your  folly  !  Here  is 
one  great  obstacle  to  the  gospel,  the  stolid  indifference  of  the  human 
mind  concerning  this  grandest  of  all  conceptions — God's  glorifying  his 
dear  Son  by  having  mercy  upon  sinners. 

At  the  bottom  the  real  reason  for  the  refusal  of  those  in  the  parable 
was  that  they  were  disloyal,  they  would  not  come  to  the  supper  because 
they  saw  an  opportunity  for  the  loyal  to  be  glad,  and  not  being 
loyal  they  did  not  wish  to  hear  the  songs  and  acclamations  of  others 
who  were.  By  staying  away  they  insulted  the  king,  and  declared  that 
they  cared  not  whether  he  was  a  king  or  not,  whether  his  son  was  a 
prince  or  not.  They  determined  to  disavow  their  allegiance  by  refusing 
the  invitation.  They  said  in  effect,  **  Anyhow,  if  he  be  a  king  and  his 
son  a  prince,  we  will  do  him  no  honour,  we  will  not  be  numbered  with 
those  who  surround  his  board  and  show  forth  his  splendour.  No  doubt  a 
feast  is  worth  having,  and  such  a  feast  as  there  will  be  provided  t'were 
well  for  us  to  participate  in,  but  for  once  we  will  deny  our  appetites 
that  we  may  indulge  our  pride.  We  proclaim  a  revolt.  We  declare 
we  will  not  go."  Ah,  ye  who  believe  not  in  Jesus,  at  the  bottom  of  it 
your  unbelief  is  enmity  to  your  Maker,  sedition  against  the  great  Ruler 
of  the  universe,  who  deserves  your  homage.  "  The  ox  knoweth  his 
owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib,"  but  ye  know  not,  neither  do  ye 
consider  ;  ye  are  rebels  against  the  Majesty  of  heaven. 

Moreover,  the  refusal  was  a  slight  to  the  prince  as  well  as  to  his 
father,  and  in  some  cases  the  gospel  is  refused  mainly  with  this  intent, 
because  the  unbeliever  rejects  the  deity  of  Christ,  or  despises  his  atone 
ment.  0  sirs,  beware  of  this,  I  know  of  no  rock  more  fatal  than  to 
dishonour  Christ  by  denying  his  sonship  and  his  deity.  Split  not  upon 
it,  I  beseech  you — "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from 
the  way  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little."  Indifference  covered 
the  refusal  in  the  text,  "  they  made  light  of  it,"  but  if  you  take  off  the 


THE    PARABLE   OF   THE    WEDDING    FEAST.  98 

film  you  will  see  that   at  the  bottom  there  was  treason  against  th* 
majesty  of  the  king,  and  distaste  to  the  dignity  of  his  son. 

No  doubt  some  of  them  despised  the  feast  itself.  They  must  have 
known  that  with  such  a  king  it  could  not  be  a  starveling  meal,  but  they 
pretended  to  despise  the  feast.  How  many  there  are  who  despise 
the  gospel  which  they  do  not  understand,  I  say  which  they  do  not 
understand,  for  almost  invariably  if  you  hear  a  man  depreciate  the 
gospel,  you  will  find  that  he  has  scarcely  even  read  the  New  Testament 
and  is  a  utter  stranger  to  the  doctrines  of  grace.  Listen  to  a  man 
who  is  voluble  in  condemnation  of  the  gospel,  and  you  may  rest  assured 
that  he  is  loud  because  he  is  empty.  If  he  understood  the  subject 
better  he  would  find,  if  he  were  indeed  a  man  of  candour,  that  he 
would  be  led  at  least  to  be  silent  in  admiration  if  he  did  not  become 
loyal  in  acceptance. 

Beloved  friends,  the  feast  is  such  as  you  greatly  need,  let  me  tell  you 
what  it  is.  It  is  pardon  for  the  past,  renewal  of  nature  for  the  present, 
and  glory  for  the  future.  Here  is  God  to  be  our  helper,  his  Son  to  be 
our  shepherd,  the  Spirit  to  be  our  instructor.  Here  is  the  love  of  the 
Father  to  be  our  delight,  the  blood  of  the  Son  to  be  our  cleansing,  the 
energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  life  from  the  dead  to  us.  You  cannot, 
want  anything  that  you  ought  to  want,  but  what  is  provided  in  the 
gospel,  and  Jesus  Christ  will  be  glorified  if  you  accept  it  by  faith. 
But  here  is  the  hindrance,  men  do  not  accept  it,  "  they  would  not 
come."  Some  of  us  thought  that  if  we  put  the  gospel  in  a  clear  light, 
and  if  we  were  earnest  in  stating  it  our  hearers  must  be  converted, 
and  God  forbid  we  should  ever  try  to  do  otherwise  than  make  it  plain 
and  be  earnest,  but  for  all  that  the  best  ministry  that  ever  was,  or  ever 
could  be,  will  be  unsuccessful  in  a  measure;  yea,  and  altogether  so,  unless 
the  effectual  work  of  the  Spirit  be  present.  Still  will  the  cry  go  up, 
"Who  hath  believed  our  report?"  Still  will  those  who  serve  their 
Master  best,  have  reason  to  mourn  that  they  sow  on  stony  ground,  and 
cast  their  bread  on  thankless  waters.  Even  the  prince  of  preachers  had 
to  say,  "  Ye  search  the  scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal 
life,  but  ye  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  might  have  life."  Alas,  alas, 
that  mercy  should  be  rejected  and  heaven  spurned. 

IV.  So  now  we  must  close  with  the  most  practical  matter  of 
consideration,  THE  GRACIOUS  REJOINDER  of  the  king  to  the  imper 
tinence  which  interfered  with  his  plans.  What  did  he  say  ?  You 
will  observe  that  they  had  been  bidden,  and  then  called;  after  the 
Oriental  custom,  the  call  intimated  that  the  festival  was  now  approach 
ing,  so  that  they  were  not  taken  unawares,  but  knew  what  they  did.  The 
second  invitation  they  rejected  in  cold  blood,  deliberately,  and  with 
intent.  What  did  the  monarch  do?  Set  their  city  in  a  blaze,  and  at  once 
root  out  the  rebels?  No,  but  in  the  first  place,  he  winked  at  their  former 


94  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

insolent  refusal.  He  said  in  himself,  "  Perad venture  they  mistook  ray 
servants,  peradventure  they  did  not  understand  that  the  hour  was  come. 
Perhaps  the  message  that  was  delivered  to  them  was  too  brief,  and  they 
missed  its  meaning.  Or,  if  perchance,  they  have  fallen  into  some 
temporary  enmity  against  me,  on  reconsideration,  they  will  wish  that 
they  had  not  been  so  rude,  and  ungenerous  to  me.  What  have  I  done 
that  they  should  refuse  my  dinner  ?  What  has  my  son  done  that  they 
should  not  be  willing  to  honour  him  by  feasting  at  my  table.  Men  love 
feasting,  my  son  deserves  their  honour — why  should  they  not  come  ? 
I  will  pass  over  the  past  and  begin  again."  My  hearers,  there  are  many 
of  you  who  have  rejected  Christ  .after  many  invitations,  and  this  morn 
ing  my  Lord  forgets  your  former  unkindnesses,  and  sends  me  again 
with  the  same  message,  again  to  bid  you  "come  to  the  wedding."  It 
is  no  small  patience  which  overlooks  the  past  and  perseveres  in  kindness, 
honestly  desiring  your  good. 

The  King  sent  another  invitation — "  all  things  are  ready,  come  ye  to 
the  marriage,"  but  you  will  please  to  observe  that  he  changed  the  mes 
senger.  "  Again  he  sent  forth  other  servants."  Yes,  and  I  will  say  it, 
for  my  soul  feels  it,  if  a  change  of  messengers  will  win  you,  much  as 
I  love  the  task  of  speaking  in  my  Master's  name,  I  would  gladly  die 
now,  where  I  am,  that  some  other  preacher  might  occupy  this  platform, 
if  thereby  you  might  be  saved.  I  know  my  speech  to  some  of  you 
must  be  monotonous.  I  seek  out  images  fresh  and  many,  and  try 
to  vary  my  voice  and  manner,  but  for  all  that  one  man  must  grow 
stale  to  you  when  heard  so  often.  Perhaps  my  modes  are  not  the  sort 
to  touch  your  peculiarities  of  temperament — well,  good  Master,  set 
thy  servant  aside,  and  consider  him  not.  Send  other  messengers  if 
perchance  they  may  succeed.  But  to  some  of  you  I  am  another 
messenger,  not  a  better,  but  another,  since  my  brethren  have  failed  with 
you.  Oh,  then,  when  my  voice  cries,  "  Come  unto  Jesus,  trust  in  his 
atonement,  believe  in  him,  look  to  him  and  live ;"  let  the  new  voice  be 
successful,  where  former  heralds  have  been  disregarded. 

You  notice,  too,  that  the  mess  ge  was  a  little  changed.  At  first  it 
was  very  short.  Surely  if  men's  hearts  were  rijrht,  short  sermons  would 
be  enough.  A  very  brief  invitation  might  suffice  if  the  heart  were 
right,  but  since  hearts  are  wrong  God  bids  his  servants  enlarge,  expand, 
and  expound.  "  Come,  for  all  things  are  ready.  I  have  prepared  my 
dinner,  my  oxen  and  my  fatlings  are  killed,  all  things  are  ready,  come 
to  the  marriage."  One  of  the  best  ways  of  bringing  siuners  to  Christ  is 
to  explain  the  gospel  to  them.  If  we  dwell  upon  its  preparations,  if  we 
speak  of  its  richness  and  freeness,  some  may  be  attracted  whom  the  short 
message  which  merely  tells  the  plan  of  salvation  might  not  attract.  To 
some  it  is  enough  to -say,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved,"  for  they  are  asking,  "Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved?" 


THE   PARABLE   OF    THE   WEDDING    FEAST.  95 

but  others  need  to  be  attracted  to  the  wedding  feast  by  the  description 
of  the  sumptuousness  of  the  repast.  We  must  try  to  preach  the  gospel 
more  fully  to  you,  but  we  shall  never  tell  you  of  all  the  richness  of  the 
grace  of  God.  As  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so  high  are 
his  thoughts  above  your  thoughts,  and  his  ways  above  your  ways. 
Forsake  your  sins  and  your  thoughts  and  turn  to  the  Lord,  for  he  will 
abundantly  pardon  you.  He  will  receive  you  to  his  heart  of  love,  and 
give  you  the  kiss  of  his  affection  at  this  hour,  if,  like  prodigal  children, 
you  come  back  and  seek  your  Father's  face.  The  gospel  is  a  river  of 
love,  it  is  a  sea  of  love,  it  is  a  heaven  of  love,  it  is  a  universe  of  love, 
it  is  all  love.  Words  there  arc  none,  fully  to  set  forth  the  amazing  love 
of  God  to  sinners,  no  sin  too  big  or  too  black,  no  crime  too  crimson  or 
too  cursed  for  pardon.  If  you  do  but  look  to  his  dear  crucified  Son  all 
manner  of  sin  and  of  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  you.  There  is  forgive 
ness.  Jesus  gives  repentance  and  remission.  And  then  the  happiness 
which  will  be  brought  to  you  here  and  hereafter  are  equally  beyond 
description.  You  shall  have  heaven  on  earth  and  heaven  in  heaven ; 
God  shall  be  your  God>  Christ  shall  be  your  friend,  and  eternal  bliss 
shall  be  your  portion. 

In  this  last  message  the  guests  were  pressed  very  delicately,  but  still 
in  a  way  which  if  they  had  possessed  any  generosity  of  heart  at  all, 
must  have  touched  them.  You  see  how  the  evangelist  puts  it,  he  does 
not  say,  "  Come,  or  else  you  will  miss  the  feast ;  come,  'or  else  the  king 
will  be  angry ;  come,  come,  or  else  3  ou  will  be  the  losers."  No,  but  he 
puts  it,  as  I  read  it,  in  a  very  remarkable  way.  I  venture  to  say — if  I 
be  wrong,  the  Master  forgive  me  so  saying — the  king  makes  himself  the 
object  of  sympathy,  as  though  hs  were  an  embarrassed  host.  See  here, 
"My  dinner  is  ready,  but  there  is  no  one  to  eat  it;  my  oxen  and 
fatlings  are  all  killed,  but  there  are  no  guests."  "  Come,  come,"  he 
seems  to  say,  "  for  I  am  a  host  without  guests."  So  sometimes  in  the 
gospel  you  will  see  God  speaks  as  if  he  would  represent  himself  as 
getting  an  advantage  by  our  being  saved.  Now  we  know  that  herein  he 
condescends  in  love  to  speak  after  the  manner  of  men.  What  can  he 
gain  by  us  ?  If  we  perish  what  is  he  the  loser?  But  he  makes  himself 
often  in  the  gospel  to  be  like  a  father  who  yearns  over  his  child,  longing 
for  him  to  come  home.  He  makes  himself,  the  infinite  God,  turn  beggar 
to  his  own  creatures,  and  beseeches  them  to  be  reconciled.  Wondrous 
stoop;  for,  like  a  chapman  who  sells  his  wares,  he  cries,  "  Ho,  every 
one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters ;  and  he  that  hath  no  monej, 
let  him  come.''  Do  you  observe  how  Christ,  as  he  wept  over  Jerusalem, 
seems  to  weep  for  himself  as  well  as  for  them.  "  How  often  would  I 
have  gathered  thy  children  together."  And  God,  in  the  prophets,  puts 
it  as  his  own  sorrow,  "  How  can  I  set  thee  as  Admah,  how  can  I  make 
thee  as  Zeboim,"  as  if  it  were  not  the  child's  loss  alone,  but  the  futuer'i 


06  MjmtOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PTJLPJT. 

loss  also,  if  the  sinner  died.  Do  you  not  feel,  as  it  were,  a  sympathy 
with  God  when  you  see  his  gospel  rejected  ?  Shall  the  cross  be  lifted 
high,  and  none  look  to  it  ?  Shall  Jesus  die,  and  men  not  be  saved  by 
his  death  ?  0  blessed  Lord,  we  feel,  if  nothing  else  should  draw  us, 
we  must  come  when  we  see,  as  it  were,  thyself  represented  as  a  host 
under  our  embarrassment,  for  lack  of  guests.  Great  God,  we  come,  we 
come  right  gladly,  we  come  to  participate  of  the  bounties  which  thou 
hast  provided,  and  to  glorify  Jesus  Christ  by  receiving  as  needy  sinners- 
that  which  thy  mercy  has  provided. 

Brethren  and  sisters  since  Christ  finds  many  loath  to  honour  him, 
my  exhortation  is  to  you  who  love  him,  honour  him  the  more  since  the 
world  will  not.  You  who  have  been  constrained  to  corne,  remember  to 
sing  as  you  sit  at  his  table,  and  rejoice  and  bless  his  name.  Next  go 
home  and  intercede  for  those  who  will  not  come,  that  the  Lord  will  en 
lighten  their  understandings,  and  change  their  wills,  that  they  may  be 
yet  constrained  to  believe  in  Jesus ;  and  as  for  those  of  you  who  feel 
half  inclined  this  morning  by  the  soft  touches  of  his  grace  to  come  and 
feast,  let  rne  bid  you  come.  It  is  a  glorious  gospel — the  feast  is  good. 
He  is  a  glorious  king — the  Host  is  good.  He  is  a  blessed  Saviour,  he 
who  is  married,  he  is  good.  It  is  all  good,  and  you  shall  be  made  good 
too,  if  your  souls  accept  the  invitation  of  the  gospel  which  is  given  to 
you  this  day.  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved  :  he 
that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  The  Lord  send  his  Spirit  to  make  rb» 
call  effectual,  for  his  dear  Son's  sake.  Amen. 


Icto  farh  Street  f  irlpit. 


MAKING  LIGHT  OF  CHRIST. 


a  J&rrnum 

DELIVERED  ON  SABBATH  EVENING,  AUGUST  17,  1856,  BY  TH« 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   EXETER   HALL,   STRAND 

"But  they  made  ligtit  of  it,  and  ^yent  their  wa)b,  one  to  hu  farm,  another  to  his  merchandise." — 

Matthew  xxii.  6 

MAN  is  not  much  changed  since  the  days  of  Adam.  In  his  bodily  frame  lie  appears 
to  be  exactly  similar,  for  skeletons  many  hundred  years'  old  are  the  exact  counter 
parts  of  ours;  and  sure  enough  that  which  was  recorded  in  history  as  having 
been  done  by  man  centuries  ago,  might  be  written  again,  for  "  there  is  nothing 
new  under  the  sun."  The  same  class  of  men  is  still  to  be  discovered  (although, 
perhaps,  differently  dressed)  as  that  which  existed  ages  long  gone  by.  There  are 
still  men  who  answer  the  character  given  to  others,  in  his  day,  by  the  Saviour, 
"  They  go  their  way,  one  to  his  farm,  another  to  his  merchandise,"  making  light  of 
the  glorious  things  of  the  gospel.  I  am  certain  I  have  many  such  characters  here 
to-night,  and  I  pray  the  Lord  that  I  may  be  enabled  to  discourse  to  them  very 
solemnly  and  very  pointedly.  And  I  must  ask  all  you  who  understand  the 
heavenly  art  of  prayer,  to  pray  that  God  would  be  pleased  to  send  home  every 
thought  into  the  breast  where  he  intends  it  to  lodge,  that  it  may  bring  forth  the 
comfortable  fruit  of  righteousness  in  the  salvation  of  many  souls.  "  They  made 
light  of  it;"  so  do  too  many  in  this  day;  and  so  will  a  large  portion  of  my  hearers 
to-night.  I  believe  that  to  think  lightly  of  Christ  is  a  sin;  and  at  all  risks  of  being 
falsely  called  legalist,  or  free-wilier,  by  those  who  are  wise  above  what  is  written, 
I  shall  charge  it  upon  you  as  such,  for  I  hope  I  shall  never  belong  to  that  class  ot 
Calvinists  who  do  the  devil's  work  by  excusing  sinners  in  their  sins. 

In  the  first  place,  we  shall  have  a  few  words  with  you,  concerning  what  it  is  that 
the  sinner  makes  light  of;  secondly,  how  it  is  that  lie  makes  light  of  it ;  and  thirdly, 
why  it  is  that  he  makes  light  of  it.  Then  a  general  observation  or  two,  and  we  shell 
not  weary  you. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  WHAT  is  IT  THAT  THE  SINNER  MAKES  LIGHT  OF?  According 
to  the  parable,  the  person  alluded  to  made  light  of  a  marriage  banquet  which  a 
king  had  provided,  with  all  kinds  of  dainties,  to  which  they  were  freely  invited,  and 
from  which  they  wilfully  absented  themselves.  The  spiritual  meaning  of  this  is 
easy  to  discover.  Sinners  who  make  light  of  Christ  express  their  contempt  of  a 
glorious  banquet  which  God  has  provided  at  the  marriage  of  his  Son.  This  is 
solemn  ground  to  tread  upon.  Oh!  for  the  teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Taking  this  parable  as  the  basis  of  our  remarks,  we  may  observe,  first,  that  the 
sinn.T  makes  light  of  the  messenger  who  brings  him  the  news  that  the  marriage  supper 
is  prepared.  These  men  refused  to  come;  they  went — "  One  to  his  farm,  another  to  his 
merchandise,"  and  so  made  light  of  the  messenger;  and  every  sinner  who  neglects 
the  great  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ,  makes  light  of  the  gospel  minister,  which  i» 
no  little  insult  in  God's  esteem.  It  is  never  reckoned  ft  small  offence  by  our  great 

No.  98.  7 


MAKING   LIGHT    OF    CHRIST. 

nation,  if  our  ambassador  is  treated  with  indifference;  and  take  it  for  a  truth,  it  ifc 
no  light  thing  with  God  if  you  despise  the  ambassadors  he  sends  to  you.  But  this 
is  comparatively  little;  the  ambassadors  are  men  like  yourselves,  who  can  well 
afford  to  be  contemned,  if  that  were  all.  In  fact,  we  should  be  glad  enough  to  for 
give  you  if  it  were  in  our  power  to  do  so,  and  if  this  were  all  your  guilt. 

But  these  people  despised  the  feast.  Some  of  them  fancied  that  the  fatlings,  and 
other  provisions  that  would  be  upon  the  table,  would  be  no  better  than  what  they 
had  at  home.  They  thought  that  the  royal  banquet  would  be  no  very  great  thing  for 
which  to  give  up  their  merchandise  for  a  day,  or  to  renounce  their  farming  even  for 
an  hour.  They  scorned  the  banquet;  at  least,  it  appears  so,  because  they  did  not 
go  to  it.  Oh!  sinner,  when  thou  neglectest  the  great  salvation,  remember  what  thou 
dost  despise;  when  thou  makest  light  of  God's  gospel,  thou  makest  light  of  justifica 
tion  by  faith;  thou  makest  light  of  washing  in  the  blood  of  Jesus;  thou  makest  light 
of  the  Holy  Spirit;  thou  makest  light  of  the  road  to  heaven;  and  then  thou  makest 
light  of  faith,  and  hope,  and  love;  thou  makest  light  of  all  the  promises  of  the  eter 
nal  covenant,  of  all  the  glorious  things  that  God  has  laid  up  for  them  that  love  him, 
and  of  everything  which  he  hath  revealed  in  his  Word  as  being  the  promised  gift 
to  those  who  come  unto  him.  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  make  light  of  the  gospel,  for 
in  that  Word,  God's-spell — good  tidings,  is  summed  up  all  that  human  nature  can 
require,  and  all  that  even  the  saints  in  bliss  can  receive.  Oh!  to  despise  the  gospel 
of  the  blessed  God,  how  mad!  how  worse  than  folly!  Despise  the  stars,  and  thou 
art  a  fool;  despise  God's  earth,  with  its  glorious  mountains,  with  its  flowing  rivers, 
and  its  fair  meads,  and  thou  art  a  maniac ;  but  despise  God's  gospel,  and  thou  art 
ten  thousand  maniacs  in  one.  Make  light  of  that,  and  thou  art  far  more  foolish 
than  he  who  sees  no  light  in  the  sun,  who  beholds  no  fairness  in  the  moon,  and  no 
brilliancy  in  the  starry  firmament.  Trample,  if  you  please,  his  lower  works;  but 
ohl  remember,  when  you  make  light  of  the  gospel,  you  are  making  light  of  the 
masterpiece  of  your  great  Creator — that  which  cost  him  more  than  to  create  a 
myriad  worlds — the  bloody  purchase  of  our  Saviour's  agonies. 

And,  again,  these  people  made  light  of  the  King's  Son.  It  was  his  marriage,  and 
inasmuch  as  they  absented  themselves,  they  did  dishonour  to  that  glorious  One  in 
whose  honour  the  supper  was  prepared.  They  slighted  him  whom  his  Father  loved. 
Ah!  sinner,  when  thou  makest  light  of  the  gospel,  thou  makest  light  of  Christ — of 
that  Christ  before  whom  glorious  cherubs  bow  themselves— of  that  Christ  at  whose 
feet  the  high  archangel  thinks  it  happiness  to  cast  his  crown;  thou  makest  light  of 
him  with  whose  praise  the  vault  of  heaven  rings;  thou  makest  light  of  him  whom 
God  makes  much  of,  for  he  has  called  him,  "  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever."  Ah!  it 
is  a  solemn  thing  to  make  light  of  Christ.  Despise  a  prince,  and  ye  shall  have  little 
honour  at  the  king's  hand  for  it;  but  despise  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Father  will 
'have  vengeance  on  you  for  his  slighted  Son.  Oh!  my  dear  friends,  it  seems  to  me 
to  be  a  sin,  not  unpardonable,  I  know,  but  still  most  heinous,  that  men  should  ever 
despise  my  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  treat  him  with  cruel  scorn.  Make  light 
of  thee,  sweet  Jesus!  Oh !  when  I  see  thee  with  thy  shirt  of  gore,  wrestling  in  Geth- 
•semane,  I  how  myself  o'er  thee.  and  I  say,  "  0,  Kedeemer,  bleeding  for  sin,  can  any 
sinner  make  light  of  thee?"  When  I  behold  him  with  a  river  of  blood  rolling  down 
his  shoulder,  beneath  the  cursed  flagellation  of  Pilate's  whip,  I  ask,  "Can  a  sinner 
make  light  of  such  a  Saviour  as  this?"  And  when  I  see  him  yonder,  covered  with 
his  blood,  nailed  to  a  tree,  expiring  in  torture,  shrieking,  "  Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani," 
I  ask  myself,  "Can  any  make  light  of  this?"  Ay,  if  they  do,  then,  indeed,  it 
•were  sin  enough  to  damn  them,  if  they  have  no  other  sin — that  they  have  lightly 
esteemed  the  Prince  of  Peace,  who  is  glorious  and  altogether  lovely.  Oh!  my  friend, 
if  thou  makest  light  of  Christ,  thou  hast  insulted  the  only  one  who  can  save  thee — 
the  only  one  who  can  bear  thee  across  the  Jordan — the  only  one  who  can  unbolt  the 
gates  of  heaven,  and  give  thee  welcome.  Let  no  preacher  of  smooth  things  per 
suade  thee  that  this  is  not  crime.  0,  sinner,  think  of  thy  sin,  if  thou  art  making 
light  of  him,  for  then  art  thou  making  light  of  the  King's  only  Son. 

And  yet,  again,  these  people  made  light  also  of  the  King  who  had  prepared  the 
banquet.  Ah!  little  dost  thou  know,  6  sinner,  when  thou  dost  trifle  with  the 
gospel,  that  thou  art  insulting  God.  I  have  heard  some  say,  "Sir,  I  do  not  believe 
in  Christ,  but  still  I  am  sure  I  try  to  reverence  God;  I  do  not  care  about  the  gospel, 
I  do  not  wish  to  be  washed  in  Jesu's  blood,  nor  to  be  saved  in  free  grace  fashion;  but 

354 


MAKING   LIGHT   OF   CHRI3T. 

I  do  not  despise  God;  I  am  a  natural  religionist !"  Nay,  sir,  but  tliou  dost  insult 
the  Almighty,  inasmuch  as  thou  dost  deny  his  Son.  Despise  a  man's  offspring,  and 
thou  hast  insulted  the  man  himself ;  reject  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  and  thou 
hast  rejected  the  eternal  one  himself.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  true  natural  religion 
apart  from  Christ;  it  is  a  lie  and  a  falsehood;  it  is  the  refuge  of  a  man  who  is  not 
brave  enough  to  say  he  hates  God,  but  it  is  only  a  refuge  of  lies;  for  he  who  denieth 
Christ  in  that  act  offendeth  God,  and  shutteth  up  heaven's  gates  against  himself. 
There  is  no  loving  the  Father  except  through  the  Son;  and  there  is  no  acceptable 
worship  of  the  Father,  except  through  the  Great  High  Priest  the  Mediator,  Jesus 
Christ.  Oh!  my  friend,  remember,  thou  hast  not  merely  despised  the  gospel,  but 
thou  hast  despised  the  gospel's  God.  In  laughing  at  the  doctrines  of  revelation,  thou 
hast  laughed  at  God;  in  reviling  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  thou  hast  reviled  God  him 
self;  thou  hast  bent  thy  fist  in  the  face  of  the  Eternal;  thine  oaths  have  not  fallen 
upon  the  church,  they  havo  fallen  upon  God  himself.  Oh!  remember,  ye  that  mock 
at  the  message  of  Christ!  Oh!  remember,  ye  that  turn  away  from  the  ministry 
of  truth!  God  is  a  mighty  one;  how  severely  can  lie  punish!  God  is  a  jealous  God: 
oh!  how  severely  will  he  punish!  Make  light  of  God,  sinner?  Why,  this  above  all 
things  is  a  damning  sin,  and  in  committing  it,  it  may  be  thou  wilt  one  day  sign  thine 
own  death-warrant;  for  making  light  of  God,  of  Christ,  and  of  his  holy  gospel,  is 
destroying  one's  own  soul,  and  rushing  headlong  to  perdition.  Ah!  unhappy  souls, 
most  unhappy  must  ye  be,  if  ye  live  and  die  making  light  of  Christ,  and  preferring 
your  farms  and  your  merchandise  to  the  treaures  of  the  gospel. 

Again:  bethink  thee,  my  poor, pitiable  friend, in  that  thou  makest  light  of  all  tho 
things  I  have  mentioned,  thou  art  making  liyht  of  the  great  solemnities  of  eternity.  The 
man  who  lightly  esteems  the  gospel  makes  light  of  hell;  he  thinks  its  fires  are  not 
hot.  and  its  flames  not  such  as  Christ  has  described  them;  he  makes  light  of  the 
burning  tears  that  scald  despairing  cheeks  for  ever;  he  makes  light  of  the  yells  and 
shrieks  that  must  be  the  doleful  songs  and  terrible,  music  of  perishing  souls.  Ah  ! 
it  is  no  wise  thing  to  make  light  of  hell. 

Consider  again:  thou  makest  light  of  heaven— that  place  to  which  the  blest  ones 
long  to  go,  where  glory  reigns  without  a  cloud,  and  bliss  without  a  sigh.  Thou 
puttest  the  crown  of  everlasting  life  beneath  thy  feet;  thou  treadest  the  palm-branch 
beneath  thine  unhallowed  foot  and  thou  thinkest  it  little  to  be  saved,  and  little  to 
be  glorified.  "Ah!  poor  soul,  when  thou  art  once  in  hell,  and  when  the  iron  key 
is  turned  for  ever  in  the  lock  of  inevitable  destiny,  thou  wilt  find  hell  to  be  a  some 
thing  not  so  easy  to  despise;  and  when  thou  hast  lost  heaven  and  all  its  bliss, 
and  canst  only  hear  the  song  of  the  blessed,  sounding  faintly  in  the  distance,  in 
creasing  thy  misery  by  contrast  with  their  joy,  then  thou  wilt  find  it  no  little  thing 
to  have  made  light  of  heaven.  Every  man  who  makes  light  of  religion  makes  light 
of  these  things.  He  misjudges  the  value  of  his  own  soul,  and  the  importance  of 
its  eternal  state. 

This  is  what  men  make  light  of.  "  Oh !  sir,"  says  one,  "  I  never  indulge  in  any 
words  hostile  to  God's  truth,  I  never  laugh  at  the  minister,  nor  do  I  despise  the 
Sabbath."  Stop,  my  friend,  I  will  acquit  thee  of  all  that;  and  yet  I  will  solemnly- 
lay  to  thy  charge  this  great  sin  of  making  light  of  the  gospel.  Hear  me  then! 

II.       HOW  IS  IT  THAT  MEN  MAKE  LIGHT  OF  IT? 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  making  light  of  the  gospel  and  of  the  whole  of  God's 
glorious  things,  when  men  go  to  hear  and  yet  do  not  attend.  How  many  frequent 
churches  and  chapels  to  indulge  in  a  comfortable  nap!  Think  what  a  fearful 
insult  that  is  to  the  King  of  heaven.  Would  they  enter  into  Her  Majesty's  palace, 
ask  an  audience,  and  then  go  to  sleep  before  her  face?  And  yet  the  sin  of  sleeping 
in  Her  Majesty's  presence,  would  not  be  so  great,  even  against  her  laws,  as  the  sin 
of  wilfully  slumbering  in  God's  sanctuary.  How  many  go  to  our  houses  of  worship 
•who  do  not  sleep,  but  who  sit  with  vacant  stare,  listening  as  they  would  to  a  man 
who  could  not  play  a  lively  tune  upon  a  good  instrument.  What  goeth  in  at  one 
ear  goeth  out  at  another.  Whatever  entereth  the  brain  goeth  out  without  ever 
affecting  the  heart.  Ah,  my  hearers,  you  are  guilty  of  making  light  of  God's 
gospel,  when  you  sit  under  a  sermon  without  attending  to  it!  Oh!  what  would 
lost  souls  give  to  hear  another  sermon !  What  would  yonder  dying  wretch  who 
is  just  now  nearing  the  grave,  give  for  another  Sabbath!  And  what  will  you  give, 
on«  of  these  days,  when  you  shall  be  hard  by  Jordan's  brink,  that  you  might  havt 

355 


MAKING  LIGHT   OF  CHRIST. 

one  more  warning,  and  listen  once  more  to  the  wooing  voice  of  God's  minister! 
We  make  light  of  the  gospel  when  we  hear  it,  without  solemn  and  awful  attention 
to  it. 

But  some  say  they  do  attend.  Well,  it  is  possible  to  attend  to  the  gospel,  and  yet 
to  make  light  af  it.  I  have  seen  some  men  weep  beneath  a  powerful  sermon;  I  have 
marked  the  tears  chase  each  other — tears,  blessed  tell-tales  of  emotions  within.  I 
have  sometimes  said  to  myself,  it  is  marvellous  to  see  these  people  weep  under  some 
telling  word  from  God,  which  is  alarming  them,  as  if  Sinai  itself  were  thundering  in 
their  ears.  But  there  is  something  more  marvellous  than  men's  weeping  under  the 
word.  It  is  the  fact  that  they  soon,  too  soon,  wipe  all  their  tears  away.  But  ah ! 
my  dear  hearer,  recollect  that  if  thou  hearest  of  these  things  and  shakestoffa  solemn 
impression,  thou  art,  in  doing  that,  slighting  God  and  making  light  of  his  truth  ; 
and  take  heed  how  you  do  that,  lest  your  own  garments  be  red  with  the  blood  of 
your  soul,  and  it  be  said,  "  Oh,  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself." 

But  there  are  others  who  make  light  of  it  in  a  different  fashion.  They  hear  the 
word  and  attend  to  it ;  but,  alas !  they  attend  to  something  else  with  it. 

Oh !  my  hearer,  thou  makest  light  of  Christ,  if  thou  puttest  him  anywhere  save  in 
the  centre  of  thine  heart.  He  who  gives  Christ  a  little  of  his  affections,  makes  light 
of  Christ;  for  Christ  will  have  the  whole  heart  or  none  at  all.  He  who  gives  Christ 
a  portion,  and  the  world  a  portion,  despises  Christ,  for  he  seems  to  think  that  Christ 
does  not  deserve  to  have  the  whole.  And  inasmuch  as  he  says  that,  or  thinks  that, 
he  hath  mean  and  unholy  thoughts  of  Christ.  Oh!  carnal  man,  thou  who  art  half 
religious,  and  half  profane;  thou  who  art  sometimes  serious,  but  as  often  frivolous; 
sometimes  apparently  pious,  but  yet  so  often  unholy,  thou  makest  light  of  Christ. 
And  ye  who  weep  on  the  Sunday,  and  then  go  back  to  your  sins  on  the  Monday;  ye 
who  set  the  world  and  its  pleasures  before  Christ,  ye  think  less  of  him  than  he  de 
serves;  and  what  is  that  but  to  make  light  of  him?  Oh!  I  charge  you,  ask  yourself, 
my  hearer  this  night,  art  not  thou  the  man?  dost  not  thou  thyself  make  light  of 
Christ?  The  self-righteous  man  who  sets  himself  up  as  a  partner  with  Christ  in 
the  matter  of  salvation,  notwithstanding  all  his  trumpery  good  works,  is  such  a 
ringleader  among  despisers,  that  I  would  gibbet  him  in  the  very  middle  of  them, 
and  bid  all  like  him  tremble,  lest  they  also  be  found  slighters  of  Jesus. 

He  makes  light  of  Christ,  again,  who  makes  a  profession  of  religion,  and  yet  does  not 
live  up  to  it.  Ah!  church  members,  ye  want  a  great  deal  of  sifting;  we  have  an  im 
mense  quantity  of  chaff  now  mixed  with  the  wheat;  and  sometimes  I  think  we  have 
something  worse  than  that.  We  have  some  in  our  churches  that  are  not  so  good  as 
chaff,  for  they  do  not  seem  to  have  been  near  the  wheat  at  all;  they  are  nothing 
better  than  tares.  They  have  come  into  our  churches,  just  as  they  would  into  a 
trade-association,  because  they  think  it  will  improve  their  business.  It  gives  respect 
ability  to  their  name  to  take  the  sacrament;  it  makes  them  esteemed  to  have  been 
baptized,  or  to  be  a  member  of  a  Christian  church;  and  so  they  come  in  by  shoals 
after  the  loaves  and  fishes,  but  not  after  Jesus  Christ.  Ah!  hypocrite,  thou  makest 
light  of  Christ  if  thou  thinkest  that  he  is  a  stalkinghorse  to  get  thee  wealth.  If  thou 
dreamest  that  thou  art  to  saddle  and  bridle  Christ,  and  ride  to  wealth  upon  him, 
thou  makest  a  grand  mistake,  for  he  was  never  meant  to  carry  men  anywhere  except 
to  heaven.  If  you  suppose  that  religion  was  intended  to  gild  your  homes,  to  carpet 
your  floors,  and  line  your  purses,  you  have  greatly  erred.  It  was  intended  to  be  pro 
fitable  to  the  soul;  and  he  who  thinks  to  use  religion  to  his  own  personal  advantage 
thinks  lightly  of  Christ:  and  at  the  last  day  this  crime  shall  be  laid  to  his  charge — 
that  he  has  made  light  of  it;"  and  the  King  shall  send  his  armies  to  cut  him  in 
pieces,  among  those  who  have  despised  his  Majesty,  and  would  not  obey  his  laws. 

III.  And  now,  in  the  third  place,  I  will  tell  you  WHY  THEY  MADE  LIGHT  OF  IT. 
They  did  so  from  different  reasons. 

Some  of  them  made  light  of  it  because  they  were  ignorant;  they  did  not  know  how 
good  the  feast  was;  they  did  not  know  how  gracious  the  king  was;  they  did  not 
know  how  fair  the  Prince  was,  or  else  they  might  have  thought  differently.  Now, 
there  are  many  present  to-night,  I  dare  say,  who  think  lightly  of  the  gospel,  because 
they  d®  not  understand  it.  I  have  often  heard  people  laugh  at  religion ;  but  ask 
them  what  it  is,  and  they  know  no  more  about  religion  than  a  horse,  and  worse 
than  that,  for  they  believe  untruths  about  it,  and  a  horse  does  not  do  that. 
They  laugh  at  it,  simply  because  they  do  not  comprehend  it;  it  is  a  thing  beyond 

356 


MAKING    LIGHT   OF   CHRIST. 

them.  We  have  heard  of  a  foolish  man  who,  whenever  he  heard  a  piece  of  Latin 
mentioned,  laughed  at  it,  because  he  thought  it  was  a  joke,  at  any  rate  it  was  a  very 
outlandish  way  of  talking — and  so  he  laughed.  So  it  is  with  many  when  they  hear 
the  gospel;  they  do  not  know  what  it  is,  and  so  they  laugh  at  it.  "  Oh!"  they  say, 
44  the  man  is  mad."  But  why  is  he  mad?  Because  you  do  not  understand  him. 
Are  you  so  conceited  as  to  suppose  that  all  wisdom  and  all  learning  must  rest  witli 
you?  I  would  hint  to  you  that  the  madness  is  on  the  other  side.  And  though  you 
mav  say  of  him,  "Much  learning  hath  made  thee  mad;"  we  would  reply,  "It  is 
quite  as  easy  to  be  made  mad  with  none  at  all."  And  those  who  have  none,  and 
e'pt'dallv  those  who  have  no  knowledge  of  Christ,  are  the  most  likely  to  despise 
him.  Well  did  Watts  say— 

*  His  worth,  if  all  the  nations  knew, 
Sure,  the  whole  earth  would  love  him  too." 

Oh!  dear  friends,  if  you  once  knew  what  a  blessed  master  Christ  is,  if  you  once 
knew  what  a  blessed  thing  the  gospel  is,  if  you  could  once  be  brought  to  believe 
what  a  blessed  God  our  God  is,  if  you  could  only  have  one  hour's  enjoyment  such  as 
the  Christian  experiences,  if  you  could  only  have  one  promise  applied  to  your  heart, 
you  would  never  make  light  of  the  gospel  again.  Oh!  you  say  you  do  not  like  it! 
Why,  you  have  never  tried  it?  Should  a  man  despise  the  wine  of  which  he  has 
never  sipped.  It  may  be  sweeter  than  he  dreams?  Oh!  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord 
is  good;  and  so  sure  as  ever  you  taste,  you  will  see  his  goodness.  I  will  venture  tc 
say,  again,  that  there  are  many  who  make  light  of  the  gospel,  simply  through  igno 
rance;  and  if  that  is  so,  I  am  somewhat  in  hopes  that  when  they  are  a  little 
enlightened  by  sitting  under  the  Word,  the  Lord  may  be  pleased  graciously  to  bring 
them  to  himself;  and  then  I  know  they  will  never  make  light  of  Christ  again.  Oh! 
do  not  be  ignorant,  "  for  that  the  soul  be  without  knowledge  is  not  good."  Seek  tc 
know  him,  whom  to  know  aright  is  life  eternal;  and  when  you  know  him  you  will 
DC\  er  make  light  of  him. 

Other  people  make  light  of  it  because  of  pride.  "  What  is  the  good,"  said  one,  "of 
bringing  me  that  invitation?  Step  into  my  house,  my  man,  I  will  show  you  a  feast 
quite  as  good  as  any  you  can  tell  me  of.  Look  here!  there  is  good  cheer  for  you; 
my  table  is  as  well  spread  as  any  man's;  begging  his  Majesty's  pardon,  the  King 
cannot  give  a  better  feast  than  I;  and  I  do  not  see  why  I  should  drag  my  bones 
about  to  get  nothing  better  than  I  can  get  at  home."  So  he  would  not"  go,  out  of 
pride.  And  so  with  some  of  you.  You  want  to  be  washed!  No,  you  were  never 
filthy;  were  you?  You  need  to  be  forgiven!  Oh  no!  you  are  rather  too  good  for 
that.  Why,  you  are  so  awfully  pious  in  your  own  conceit,  that  if  it  were  all  true, 
you  would  make  even  the  angel  Gabriel  blush  to  think  of  you.  You  do  not  think 
even  an  angel  capable  of  holding  a  candle  to  you.  What!  you  seek  for  mercy? 
It  is  an  insult  to  you.  "  Go  and  teli  the  drunkard,"  you  say,  "  go  and  fetch  the 
harlot;  but  I  am  a  respectable  man;  I  always  go  to  church  or  chapel;  I  am  a  very 
good  sort  of  fellow;  I  may  frolic  now  and  then,  but  I  make  it  up  some  other  day; 
I  am  sometimes  a  little  slack,  but  then  I  rein  the  horses  in,  and  make  up  the  dis 
tance  afterwards;  and  I  dare  say  I  shall  get  to  heaven  as  soon  as  anybody  else.  I 
am  a  very  good  sort."  Well,  my  friend,  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  despise  the 
gospel,  for  the  gospel  just  tells  you  that  you  are  entirely  lost.  It  tells  you  that 
your  very  righteousness  is  full  of  sin.  That,  as  for  any  hope  of  your  being  saved 
by  it,  you  might  as  well  try  to  sail  across  the  Atlantic  on  a  sere  leaf  as  try  to  get 
to  heaven  by  your  righteousness.  And  as  for  it  being  a  garment  fit  to  cover  you, 
you  might  as  well  get  a  spider's  web  to  go  to  court  in,  and  think  it  a  dress  fit  to 
appear  in  before  her  Majesty.  Ah!  my  hearer,  I  know  why  thou  despisest 
Christ;  it  is  because  of  thy  Satanic  pride.  May  the  Lord  pull  the  pride  out  of  thee; 
for  if  he  do  not,  it  will  be  the  faggot  that  shall  roast  thy  soul  for  ever.  Take  heed 
of  pride;  by  pride  fell  the  angels — how  can  men,  then,  though  the  image  of  their 
Maker,  hope  to  win  by  it?  Shun  it,  flee  from  it;  for  so  sure  as  thou  art  proud, 
wilt  thou  incur  the  guilt  of  making  light  of  Christ. 

Perhaps  quite  as  many  made  light  of  the  good  news,  because  they  did  not  believt 
the  messenger.  "Oh!"  said  they,  4%stop  a  moment.  What!  a  dinner  to  be  given 
away?  I  do  not  believe  it.  What!  the  young  Prince  going  to  be  married?  Tell 

357 


MAKING    LIOHT    OF    CHRIST. 

that  to  fools,  we  do  not  believe  any  such  thing.  What!  we  all  invited?  We  do  not 
believe  it;  the  story  is  incredible."  The  poor  messenger  went  home  and  told  his 
Master  that  they  would  not  believe  him.  That  is  just  another  reason  why  many 
men  make  light  of  the  gospel,  because  they  do  not  believe  it.  "What!"  they  say, 
"Jesus  Christ  died  to  wash  men  from  their  sins?  We  do  not  believe  it.  What!  A 
heaven.  Who  ever  saw  it?  A  hell!  Who  ever -heard  its  groans?  What!  Eternity. 
Who  ever  returned  from  that  last  hope  of  every  spirit.  What!  Blessedness  in 
religion?  We  do  not  believe  it — it  is  a  moping,  miserable  thing.  What!  Sweetness 
in  the  promises?  No  there  is  not;  we  believe  there  is  sweetness  in  the  world,  but 
we  do  not  believe  there  is  any  in  the  wells  the  Lord  has  digged."  And  so  they 
despise  the  gospel,  because  they  do  not  believe  it.  But,  I  am  sure,  that  when  a  man 
once  believes  it,  he  never  thinks  lightly  of  it.  Once  let  me  have  the  solemn  con 
viction  in  my  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  if  unsaved,  there  is  a  gaping  gulf  that 
shall  devour  me;  do  you  think  I  can  go  to  rest  till  I  have  trembled  from  head  to 
foot?  Once  let  me  heartily  believe  that  there  is  a  heaven  provided  for  those  who 
believe  on  Christ,  do  you  think  I  could  give  sleep  to  my  eyes,  or  slumber  to  my 
eyelids,  till  I  have  wept  because  it  is  not  mine?-  I  believe  not.  But  damnable 
unbelief  thrusts  his  hand  into  the  mouth  of  man,  and  plucks  up  his  heart,  and  so 
destroys  him,  for  it  will  not  let  him  believe,  and,  therefore,  he  cannot  feel,  because 
he  believeth  not.  Oh!  my  friends,  it  is  unbelief  that  makes  men  think  lightly  of 
Christ;  but  unbelief  will  not  do  so  by-and-bye.  There  are  no  infidels  in  hell: 
they  are  all  believers  there.  There  are  many  that  were  infidels  here,  but  they  are 
not  so  now;  the  flames  are  too  hot  to  make  them  doubt  their  existence.  It  is  hard 
for  a  man,  tormented  in  the  flame,  to  doubt  the  existence  of  the  fire.  It  would 
be  difficult  for  a  man,  standing  before  the  burning  eyes  of  a  God,  to  doubt  the  exist 
ence  of  a  God  after  that.  Ah!  unbelievers,  turn  ye,  or  rather,  may  the  Lord  turn 
you  from  your  unbelief,  for  this  makes  you  think  lightly  of  Christ;  and  this  it  is 
that  is  taking  away  your  life,  and  destroying  your  souls. 

Another  set  of  people  thought  lightly  of  this  feast  because  they  were  so  worldly; 
they  had  so  much  to  do.  I  have  heard  of  a  rich  merchant  who  was  waited  on  one 
day  by  a  godly  man,  and  when  he  stopped  him,  he  said  to  him,  "  Well,  sir,  what  is 
the  state  of  your  soul?"  "Soul!"  he  said,  "bother  you,  I  have  no  time  to  take 
care  of  my  soul;  I  have  enough  to  do  to  take  care  of  my  ships."  About  a  week 
after,  it  so  happened  tha-t  he  had  to  find  time  to  die,  for  God  took  him  away.  We 
fear  he  said  to  him,  "Thou  fool!  this  night  thy  soul  shall"be  required  of  thee;  then 
whose  shall  those  tilings  be  which  thoti  hast  hoarded  up  for  thyself?"  Ye  merchants 
of  London,  there  are  many  of  you  who  read  your  ledgers  more  than  your  Bibles. 
Perhaps  you  must,  but  ye  do  not  read  your  Bibles  at  all,  while  ye  read  your 
ledgers  every  day.  In  America,  it  is  said,  they  worship?  the  almighty  dollar;  I 
believe  that  in  London  many  men  worship  the  almighty  sovereign;  they  have  the 
greatest  possible  respect  for  an  almighty  bank  note;  that  is  the  god  which  many  men 
are  always  adoring.  The  prayer-book  they  carry  so  religiously  in  their  hands  is 
their  cash-book.  Even  on  Sunday,  there  is  a  gentleman  over  "there,  he  does  not  think 
his  foreman  knows  it,  but  he  was  sitting  in  doors  all  this  morning,  because  it  was 
wet,  casting  up  his  accounts;  and  now  he  comes  here  in  the  evening,  because  he  is  a 
very  pious  man— extraordinarily  so.  He  would  shut  the  par%  up  on  a  Sunday,  he 
would — he  would  not  let  a  soul  get  a  breath  of  fresh  air,  because  he  is  so  pious, 
but  he  himself  may  sit  half-a-day  in  the  counting-house  and  yet  think  it  no  sin. 
But  many  are  too  busy  to  think  of  these  things.  "  Pray  ! "  they  say,  "  I  have  no 
time  for  that;  I  have  to  pay.  What!  read  the  Bible?  No  I  cannot;  I  have  to  be 
looking  over  this  thing  and  that  thing,  and  seeing  how  the  markets  go.  I  find  time 
to  read  the  Times,  but  I  could  not  think  of  reading  the  Brble,"  It  will  be 
marvellously  unfortunate  for  some  of  you,  that  you  will  find  the  lease  of  your  lives 
rather  shorter  than  you  expected.  If  you  had  taken  a  lease  of  yout  lives  for  eighty- 
eight  years  from  this  date,  you  would  be  foolish  enough,  perhaprs,  to  spend  forty- 
four  in  sin.  But  considering  that  you  are  a  tenant  at  will,  and  liable  to  be  turned 
out  any  day,  it  is  the  height  of  folly,  the  very  climax  of  absurdity,' excelling  all  that 
the  fool,  with  his  cap  and  bells,  ever  did,  to  be  living  just  to  gather  up  the  pelf  of 
this  world,  and  not  for  things  to  come.  Worldliness  is  a  demon  that  hath  wrung  the 
neck  of  many  souls;  God  grant  that  we  may  not  perish  through  bur  worldlinessl 

There  is  another  class  of  people  that  I  can' only  characterize  in  this  way:  they  art 

358 


1JAKING    I.K.M  r    OF    CHRIST. 

Altogether  thoughtless.  If  you  ask  them  concerning  religion,  they  nave  no  opinion  at  all 
about  it.  They  do  not  positively  detest  it,  they  do  not  mock  at  it;  but  they  have  not 
a  thought  about  it.  The  fact  of  it  is,  they  intend  thinking  about  it  by-and-bye. 
Theirs  IP  a  kind  of  butterfly  existence;  they  are  always  moving  about,  never  doing 
anything,  neither  for  others  or  themselves.  And  these  are  very  amiable  people,  whc 
are  always  ready  to  give  a  guinea  for  a  charity;  they  never  refuse  anybody,  and 
they  would  give  their  guinea  all  the  same,  whether  it  was  for  a  cricket  match  or  a 
church.  Kow,  if  I  were  forced  to  go  back  to  the  world,  and  had  to  choose  the  cha 
racter  I  would  wish  to  be,  the  last  position  1  would  wish  to  occupy  would  be  that  of 
the  thoughtless  man.  I  believe  thoughtless  persons  are  in  the  most  danger  of  being 
lost  of  any  class  I  know.  I  like,  sometimes  to  get  under  the  word  a  thoroughly 
stout,  stiff,  hater  of  the  gospel,  for  his  heart  is  like  a  flint,  and  when  it  is  struck 
with  the  hammer  of  the  gospel  the  flint  goes  to  pieces  in  a  moment.  But  these 
thoughtless  people  have  india-rubber  hearts— you  hit  them,  and  they  give  way;  you 
strike  them  again,  and  they  give  way.  If  they  are  sick,  and  you  visit  them,  they 
say  "yes."  You  talk  to  them  about  the  importance  of  religion;  they  say  ''yes." 
You  talk  to  them  about  escaping  from  hell  and  entering  heaven,  they  say  "  yes.'* 
You  preach  a  sermon  to  them  when  they  are  better,  and  remind  them  of  the 
vows  they  made  in  their  sickness;  "it  is  quite  right,  sir,"  they  say.  And 
they  say  the  same  whatever  you  may  tell  them.  They  are  always  very  polite  to 
you;  but  whatever  you  say  to  them  is  put  aside.  If  you  begin  talking  to  them 
about  drunkards:  oh!  they  are  not  drunkards;  they  may  have  accidently  got  drunk 
once,  but  that  was  a  little  thing  out  of  the  usual  way.  And  bring  whatever  sin 
you  like  to  them,  you  may  hit  them,  and  hit  them,  but  it  is  no  good,  for 
they  are  not  half  so  easily  broken  (speaking  after  the  manner  of  n:en)  as  the  real 
stout-hearted  hater  of  the  gospel.  Why,  there  is  a  sailor  comes  rolling  home  from 
sea,  swearing,  blaspheming,  cursing;  he  comes  into  the  house  of  God,  and  almost 
the  first  word  is  applied  by  the  Spirit  for  the  breaking  of  Jack's  heart.  Another 
young  man  says,  "  1  know  as  much  as  any  minister  can  tell  me;  for  my  own  mother 
taught  me,  and  my  old  father  used  to  read  the  Bible  for  me  till,  I  believe,  I  have 
got  every  bit  of  it  in  my  head.  I  go  to  chapel  out  of  respect  to  his  memory,  but 
1  really  don't  care  at  all  about  it;  it  is  very  good  for  old  people,  it  is  quite  right 
for  old*  women,  and  those  who  are  dying,  and  in  time  of  cholera.  It  is  a  very  good 
thing,  but  I  don't  care  anything  about  it  just  now."  Now,  I  tell  you,  careless 
people,  most  solemnly,  that  you  are  the  very  devil's  lifeguards;  you  are  his  reserve;, 
he  keeps  you  away  from  the  battle ;  he  does  not  send  you  out  like  he  does  a  hlas- 
1  hemer,  for  he  fears  that  a  shot  may  haply  light  upon  you,  and  you  may  be  saved. 
But  he  says,  "  Stand  by  here,  and  if  you  have  to  go  out  I  will  give  you  an  inpene- 
trable  coat  of  mail."  The  arrows  go  rattling  against  you:  they  all  hit  you;  but 
alas!  there  is  not  one  of  them  that  penetrates  your  heart,  for  that  is  left  elsewhere. 
You  are  only  an  empty  chrysalis,  and  when  you  come  to  God's  house,  and  his 
word  is  preached,  you  make  light  of  it,  because  it  is  your  habit  to  be  thoughtless 
about  everything. 

Very  briefly  1  must  touch  another  case,  and  then  I  must  dismiss  you.  You  may 
make  light  of  the  gospel  out  of  sheer  presumption.  They  are  like  the  foolish  man, 
who  goes  on,  and  is  punished;  not  like  the  prudent  man,  who  "forseeth  the  evil, 
and  hideth  himself."  They  go  on;  that  step  is  safe  — they  take  it;  the  next  step 
is  safe— they  take  it;  their  toot  hangs  over  a  gulf  of  darkness;  but  they  will  try  one 
step,  and  as'that  is  safe,  they  think  they  will  try  the  next;  and  as  the  last  has  been 
safe,  and  as  for  many  years  they  have  been  safe,  they  suppose  they  always  shall  be; 
and  because  they  have  not  died  yet, they  think  they  will  never  die.  And  so  our  of 
sheer  presumption,  thinking  "all  men  mortal  but  themselves,"  they  go  on  making 
light  of  Christ.  Tremble,  ye  presumptuous,  you  will  not  always  be  able  to  do 
that. 

And,  lastly,  I  fear  there  are  a  great  many  who  make  light  of  Christ  because  of  the 
commonness  of  the  gospel.  It  is  preached  everywhere,  and  that  is  why  you  make 
light  of  it.  You  can  hear  it  at  the  corner  of  every  street;  you  can  read  it  in  this 
widely  circulated  Bible;  and  because  the  gospel  is  so  common,  therefore,  you  don't 
care  for  it.  Ah !  my  dear  friends,  if  there  were  only  one  gospel  minister  in  London 
that  could  tell  you  the  truth;  if  there  were  only  one  Bible  in  London,  I  believe  you 
*rould  be  rushing  to  hear  that  Bible  read;  and  the  man  vho  had  the  message  would 

359 


MAKING    LIGflT    OF    CHRIST. 

hare  no  sinecure  of  it,  he  would  be  obliged  to  work  from  morning  to  night,  to  tell 
it  out  to  you.  But  now,  because  you  have  so  many  Bibles  you  forget  to  read  themj 
because  you  have  so  many  tracts  you  pack  up  any  article  in  them ;  because  you 
have  so  many  sermons  you  do  not  think  anything  at  all  of  them.  But  why  is  that? 
Dost  thou  think  the  less  of  the  sun  because  he  scatters  his  beams  abroad?  Dost 
thou  think  the  less  of  bread  because  it  is  the  food  which  God  gives  to  all  his  children? 
Dost  thou  think  the  less  of  water,  when  thou  art  thirsty,  because  every  rill  will 
afford  it  to  thee?  No.  If  thou  wert  athirst  after  Christ,  thou  wouldst  love  him  all 
the  better,  because  he  is  preached  everywhere;  and  thou  wouldst  not  think  lightly 
of  him  because  of  that. 

"  They  made  light  of  it."  How  many  of  my  hearers  to-night,  I  ask  again,  are 
making  light  of  Christ?  Many  of  you  are,  no  doubt.  I  will  give  you,  then,  just 
one  warning,  and  then  farewell.  Make  light  of  Christ,  sinner!  let  me  say,  again,  to 
thee,  and  thou  wilt  rue  the  day,  when  thou  comest  on  thy  death-bed.  It  will  go 
hard  with  thee  when  the  bony  monster  has  got  the  grip  of  thee,  and  when  he  is 
bringing  thee  down  the  river,  to  steep  thee  in  the  lake  of  death.  It  will  go  hard 
with  thee,  when  thy  eye-strings  break,  and  when  thy  death-sweat  stands  upon  thy 
brow.  Remember,  last  time  thou  hadst  a  fever;  ah!  how  thou  didst  shake.  Re 
member,  last  night,  how  thou  didst  quake  in  thy  bed,  when  flash  after  flash  of  light 
ning  came  through  thy  window;  and  how  thou  didst  tremble  when  the  deep- 
mouthed  thunder  spake  out  the  voice  of  God.  Ah !  sinner,  thou  wilt  tremble  worse 
then  when  thou  shalt  ses  death  for  thyself,  and  when  the  bony  rider,  on  his  white 
horse,  shall  grasp  his  dart  and  plunge  it  in  thy  bowels.  It  will  go  hard  with  thee 
then,  if  thou  hast  no  Christ  to  shelter  thee,  no  blood  wherein  to  wash  thy  soul ! 
Remember,  moreover,  after  death  cometh  the  judgment.  It  will  go  hard  with  thee 
if  thou  hast  despised  Christ,  and  shalt  die  a  despiser.  See  that  flying  angel?  his 
wings  are  made  of  flame,  and  in  his  hand  he  grasps  a  sharp  two-edged  sword.  0 
angel,  wherefore  dost  thou  wing  thy  speedy  flight?  "  Hark!"  says  he,  u  this  trump 
shall  tell  you."  And  he  puts  a  trumpet  to  his  lips,  and 

"  Blows  a  blast  so  loud  and  dread, 
Ne'er  were  prophetic  sounds  so  full  of  woe." 

Look  !  the  sheeted  dead  have  started  from  their  graves.  Behold,  the  cloudy 
chariot  is  wheeled  along  by  cherub's  hand.  Mark!  there  upon  the  throne  there 
sits  the  King — the  Prince.  O  angel,  what  in  this  terrible  day  must  become 
of  the  man  that  has  thought  lightly  of  Christ?  See  there,  he  unsheathes  his 
sword.  '*  This  blade,"  says  he,  "  shall  find  and  pierce  him  through.  This  blade, 
like  a  sjckle,  shall  reap  each  tare  from  the  wheat,  and  this  strong  arm  shall  bind 
him  up  in  his  bundle  to  be  burned;  and  this  great  arm  of  mine  shall  grasp  him, 
and  hurl  him  down,  down,  down,  where  flames  for  ever  burn,  and  hell  for  ever 
'  howls."  It  will  go  hard  with  you  then.  Mark  this  man's  word  to-night;  go  away 
and  laugh  at  it;  but  remember,  I  say  to  you  again,  it  will  be  a  solemn  thing  for  you 
when  Christ  shall  come  to  judgment,  if  you  have  made  light  of  him,  and  worse  than 
all,  if  you  should  ever  be  locked  up  in  the  caverns  of  despair,  if  you  should  ever 
hear  it  said,  "  Depart  ye  cursed,"  if  you  should  ever  mingle  your  awful  shrieks  with 
the  doleful  howls  of  lost  myriads,  if  you  should  see  the  pit  that  is  bottomless,  and 
the  gulf  that  has  walls  of  fire.  It  will  be  a  fearful  thing  to  find  thyself  in  there, 
and  to  know  that  thou  canst  r.e'er  get  out  again!  Sinner,  this  night  I  preach  the 
gospel  to  thee.  E'er  thou  goest,  hear  it,  and  believe  it;  may  God  grant  thee  grace 
to  receive  it,  so  thou  shalt  be  saved.  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be 
saved.  He  that  believeth  not,"  so  saith  the  Scripture,  "  shall  be  damned."  To 
believe,  is  to  put  your  trust  in  Christ;  to  be  baptized,  is  to  be  plunged  in  water  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  a  profession  that  you  are  already  saved,  and  that 
you  love  Christ.  "  He  that  believeth,  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  O  may  you  never  know  the  meaning  of  th&i  l&t 
word.  Farewell! 


960 


itan  ifabermtcle     ulpi 


"THE  WEDDING  WAS  FURNISHED  WITH  GUESTS." 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  MAY  GTH,   1888,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"The  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests."— Matthew  xxii.  10. 
OUR  discourse  will  follow  the  lines  of  the  parable.  A  king  desired 
to  honour  his  son  right  royally.  He  loved  his  son  well,  for  he 
deserved  richly  of  him ;  and  therefore,  as  the  most  fitting  time  had 
come,  he  resolved  to  honour  him.  His  son  was  about  to  take  to 
himself  a  spouse ;  should  not  his  marriage,  which  is  a  great  event  in 
life,  be  celebrated  with  honour  ?  The  father  determined  to  honour  his 
eon  on  the  joyful  occasion  by  inviting  a  large  number  of  guests  to  a 
sumptuous  banquet.  Not  by  the  infliction  of  pain,  or  the  pressure  of 
taxation,  but  by  liberality  and  festivity,  would  the  king  honour  the 
Crown  Prince,  it  should  be  an  extraordinary  feast.  Surely,  it  would 
be  the  simplest  thing  in  the  world  to  gather  together  a  grateful  com 
pany  of  guests.  One  would  expect  a  competition  for  admission ; 
everybody  in  the  royal  domain  would  eagerly  ask  for  an  invitation. 
But  it  fell  out  otherwise ;  there  was  a  disloyal  feeling  abroad,  and  it 
now  expressed  itself;  those  who  were  bidden  would  not  come,  and 
means  had  to  be  used  to  secure  the  result  spoken  of  in  the  text,  so 
that  "  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests." 

The  parable  is  plain.  The  great  Father  delights  to  honour  Jesus, 
his  Only-begotten  Son.  The  Father  loves  the  Son,  with  whom  he  is 
one.  The  Son  has  deserved  well  at  the  Father's  hands,  for  he  has 
been  "obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  It  is  the 
Father's  aim  in  the  work  of  grace  to  glorify  his  Son,  who,  as  God 
and  man  in  one  nature,  is  the  channel  of  grace  to  fallen  men.  He 
proposes  to  do  this  now  that  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  his  church  into 
marriage  union  with  himself.  The  incarnate  God  calls  a  chosen 
company,  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  and  celebrates  thus  early  in  the 
day  this  happy  union  by  a  wedding  breakfast,  to  which  he  invitel 
multitudes  to  come.  It  is  a  feast  of  mercy,  grace,  and  peace ;  a 
marriage  feast  of  delight  and  joy.  The  feast  is  for  the  glorifying  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  a  very  special  manner.  Can  any  of  us 
measure  the  glory  which  comes  to  our  Lord  Jesus  by  his  union  with 
the  church?  Angels,  and  principalities,  and  powers,  intelligences 

No.  2,022.  8 

6 


254  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

now  existing,  and  all  intelligences  yet  to  be  created,  will  wonderingly 
gaze  upon  the  riches  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints.  What  a  spectacle 
is  this !  The  Word  made  flesh  that  he  might  dwell  among  us ! 
Immanuel,  God  with  us,  taking  unto  himself  a  company  of  chosen  men, 
to  be  one  with  him  for  ever.  In  the  union  of  Christ  and  his  church  all 
wisdom  centres,  all  grace  shines  forth.  "The  excellency  of  our  God  " 
is  to  be  seen  in  the  salvation  of  the  elect  and  the  joining  of  them  unto 
the  Christ.  Our  glorious  Second  Adam  was  like  the  first  Adam  in  the 
garden,  for  whom  no  helpmeet  was  found.  Neither  cherubim  nor 
seraphim,  angels  nor  spirits,  could  be  fit  companions  for  him. 
He  says,  "My  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men."  Ho  willed 
that  his  chosen  church  should  stand  to  him  in  the  same  relation 
as  Eve  stood  to  Adam,  to  be  the  solace  of  his  heart  and  the  rest  of 
his  love.  He  chose  men  to  be  his  companions,  his  friends,  his  joy,  hii 
crown. 

One  would  have  thought  that  every  man  hearing  that  manhood  was 
thus  to  be  honoured  by  union  with  Godhead  would  flock  towards  the 
marriage-feast.  It  would  have  seemed  certain  that  all  would  desire 
to  know  this  heavenly  mystery,  and  as  soon  as  they  knew  it  would 
press  forward  to  be  partakers  in  its  bliss.  Alas !  this  is  not  the  case ; 
and  this  morning  my  business  is  to  tell  you  the  story  of  how  the  pur 
pose  of  divine  love  appeared  in  peril,  but  how,  in  the  end,  it  is  accom 
plished;  and,  according  to  the  language  of  the  text,  "the  wedding 
was  furnished  with  guests." 

I.  Our  first  point  is,  that  IT  SEEMED  AS  IF  NONE  WOULD  COME.  The 
wedding-feast  was  prepared  :  oxen  and  f atlings  were  killed,  all  things 
were  ready ;  but  where  were  the  guests  ? 

Those  first  invited,  and  naturally  expected,  would  not  come.  Previous 
notice  had  been  given  them  of  the  festival,  and  afterwards  a  summons 
had  been  sent  to  say  that  the  hour  was  come ;  but,  instead  of  joyfully 
responding,  they  would  not  come. 

These  were,  first  of  all,  the  Jews,  to  whom  the  gospel  had  been 
given  by  the  law  and  the  prophets  long  beforehand.  "  He  came  unto 
his  own,  but  his  own  received  him  not."  Israel  was  not  gathered : 
few  out  of  the  chosen  nation  recognized  the  Messiah.  He  came  with 
a  feast  of  mercy  for  them,  but  they  would  have  none  of  it.  He  called, 
and  they  refused. 

To-day  this  same  class  will  be  found  among  the  children  of  godly 
parents ;  dedicated  from  their  birth,  prayed  for  by  loving  piety,  listen 
ing  to  the  gospel  from  their  childhood,  and  yet  unsaved.  We  look 
for  these  to  come  to  Jesus.  We  naturally  hope  that  they  will  feast 
upon  the  provisions  of  grace,  and  like  their  parents  will  rejoice  in 
Christ  Jesus ;  but,  alas  !  how  often  it  is  the  case  they  will  not  come  ! 
Some  such  are  here  this  morning.  We  greatly  grieve  over  you.  You 
do  not  choose  your  father's  God,  nor  accept  your  mother's  Saviour. 
Ah  me !  if  you  will  not  come,  who  will  ?  If  you,  who  are  taught  con 
cerning  salvation  by  grace,  yet  refuse  it,  how  can  we  wonder  that  the 
children  of  the  godless  and  the  profane  reject  our  message?  Who 
will  come  if  you  will  not  ? 

Dear  hearers,  some  of  you  are  not  privileged  with  godly  parents, 
but  you  have  been  for  many  years  willing  listeners  to  the  Word  of  lif a, 


"  THE    WEDDING    WAS    FURNISHED    WITH    GUESTS."  255 

and  yet  you  do  not  accept  Christ  Jesus  as  yours,  nor  accept  the 
provisions  of  his  grace.  You  do  not  joy  with  him  in  his  union  with 
his  chosen,  for  you  do  not  love  him.  How  sad  is  this !  Well  may 
the  dispirited  preacher  mourn,  and  fear  in  his  heart  that  the  great 
f estival  of  love  will  prove  a  failure  !  If  such  as  you  are  will  not  come, 
how  will  the  wedding  be  furnished  with  guests? 

The  outlook  grew  worse  still  when  they  came  not  though  they  were 
reasoned  with.  When  they  would  not  come,  the  king  sent  other  servants 
to  bring  them  to  a  better  mind  ;  and  this  was  the  form  of  his  reason 
ing:  "  Behold,  I  have  prepared  my  dinner,  my  oxen  and  my  fatlings 
are  killed,  and  all  things  are  ready :  come  unto  the  marriage."  No 
kinder  argument  could  have  been  used :  there  was  an  appeal  to  all 
that  was  noble  in  them,  and  had  they  been  worthy  they  would  have 
come  at  once.  I  can  well  understand  that  the  servants  would  repeat 
their  lord's  message  with  special  eagerness,  as  they  thought  of  his 
waiting  in  the  palace,  and  watching  for  the  guests.  They  would  cry 
to  those  who  hesitated,  "You  have  waited  long  enough,  come  at  once. 
The  marriage  cannot  be  delayed,  why  should  you  delay  ?  Tarry  no 
longer.  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice  harden  not  your  hearts."  Still 
they  made  light  of  it.  When  you  have  been  invited  to  Jesus  many  a 
time  ;  when  tearful  earnestness  has  pleaded  with  you,  and  yet  men  of 
God  have  had  to  return  to  their  Master,  saying,  "Who  hath  believed 
our  report?"  it  becomes  a  sorrowful  business,  and  our  anxious  fears 
cannot  see  how  the  wedding  will  be  furnished  with  guests.  This  would 
have  been  an  overwhelming  surprise  to  us  if  Jesus  had  not  declared 
of  men  in  his  own  day,  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have 
life."  If  they  refused  his  pleadings  we  cannot  wonder  that  they  reject 
our  sayings.  Still  it  is  a  mournful  fact,  that  "Many  are  called,  but 
few  chosen." 

The  case  looks  darker  still  when  we  notice  that,  though  reasoned  with 
by  new  messengers,  they  did  not  come.  It  is  said,  "  He  sent  forth  other 
servants."  I  tell  you  from  my  very  soul  that,  if  my  Lord  will  only 
bring  you  to  the  banquet  of  his  grace,  I  mind  not  who  shall  be  the 
successful  messenger.  If  you  will  not  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  unto  eternal  life  through  what  I  have  to  say,  may  the  Lord 
remove  me,  and  send  some  one  else,  to  whom  he  will  give  power  by 
his  grace  to  reach  your  hearts.  I  shall  be  glad  to  remain  in  this 
pulpit  for  years  to  come,  but  not  at  the  cost  of  a  single  soul.  If 
somebody  else  can  preach  to  you  more  efficiently,  if  some  one  else  can 
get  at  your  hearts  better  than  I  have  done,  may  the  Lord  allow  me  to 
retire  for  your  good !  Do  you  wish  it?  "He  sent  other  servants." 
A  preacher  may  be  too  rhetorical :  let  a  plain -speaking  person  be  tried. 
He  may  be  too  weighty :  let  another  come  with  parable  and  anecdote. 
Alas  !  with  some  of  you  the  thing  wanted  io  not  a  new  voice,  but  a 
new  heart.  You  would  listen  no  better  to  a  new  messenger  than  to 
the  old  one.  After  so  many  good  men  and  true  have  spoken ;  after 
Paul,  and  Apollos,  and  Cephas  have  all  failed,  how  shall  the  wedding 
be  furnished  with  guests  ? 

If  you  look  at  the  various  characters  who  would  not  come,  you  will  see 
more  and  more  cause  for  sorrow.  Of  some  we  simply  read  that  "  they 
would  not  come"  They  made  no  excuses  or  apologies,  but  curtly  said 


256  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPlf. 

they  would  not  come.  There  was  an  end  of  the  matter.  Many 
dismiss  the  gospel  at  once ;  they  are  not  to  be  reasoned  with  :  they  do 
not  want  it,  and  will  not  have  it.  A  large  class  of  the  community 
have  heard  of  the  way  of  salvation,  but  they  care  nothing  for  it.  It 
is  not  with  them  want  of  information,  but  want  of  inclination.  JChey 
have  neither  mind  nor  will  for  heavenly  things. 

A  second  class  made  light  of  it.  They  were  indifferent  to  roya) 
honours  and  duties.  They  were  taken  up  with  the  care  of  what  they 
had  in  possession,  and  went  their  way,  each  man  to  his  farm,  saying,. 
'  I  have  worked  hard  to  get  my  farm,  and  I  cannot  afford  to  let  it  lie 
idle."  Another  was  taken  up  with  the  care  of  getting  an  estate,  and 
went  to  his  merchandise,  saying,  "  I  have  nobody  to  keep  my  shop. 
I  must  mind  the  main  chance.  If  you  do  not  look  alive,  everybody 
will  run  over  you.  I  must  attend  to  my  buying  and  my  selling.'7 
The  worldly-wise  make  up  a  very  numerous  class.  The  rich  man 
cannot  be  religious,  his  position  in  society  prevents  ;  the  poor  man 
cannot  mind  the  things  of  God,  he  is  worn  out  by  earning  his  daily 
bread.  Thus  they  aU  make  excuse.  Lord,  when  so  many  are  un 
willing,  and  so  many  more  are  occupied  with  other  things,  how  shall 
the  wedding  be  furnished  with  guests  ? 

A  third  class  were  violently  opposed:  they  would  not  be  bothered, 
they  had  no  patience  with  religious  cant :  they  "took  his  servants,  and 
entreated  them  spitefully,  and  slew  them."  These  are  not  so  numerous 
as  the  others  ;  but  yet  they  are  found  among  us.  Sceptics,  swearers, 
revilers  of  godliness,  and  "  modern  thought  "  men  :  these  revile  the 
cross,  and  are  ferocious  against  the  gospel.  When  we  see  these 
raging  and  raving,  we  are  apt  to  ask  very  mournfully — How  can  the 
wedding  be  furnished  with  guests  ? 

The  most  dreadful  thought  of  all  remains :  some  of  the  invited  had 
already  perished.  The  king  in  his  wrath  sent  his  troops  and  slew  the 
murderers  of  his  messengers,  and  burned  their  city.  While  I  have 
been  preaching,  many  of  my  hearers  have  died.  Where  are  they 
now  ?  If  they  died  without  Christ  they  are  now  past  hope.  Ah  me  ! 
they  can  never  enter  now,  for  the  door  is  shut.  If  they  died  in  their 
sins,  they  are  in  the  outer  darkness,  where  shall  be  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth.  When  you  think  of  it,  this  is  a  dark  prospect. 
Men  are  dying,  dying  without  hope  ;  and  those  who  are  yet  alive  are 
resolved  to  perish  in  like  manner,  for  they  are  earnestly  invited  to  the 
feast  of  love,  but  they  refuse  to  come.  How  can  the  wedding  be 
furnished  with  guests ? 

The  King  tells  us  the  real  reason  why  they  would  not  come  :  they 
were  not  worthy.  Those  who  were  invited  specially,  and  about  whom 
there  was  the  greatest  hope,  had  nothing  in  them  to  encourage  that 
hope  :  they  were  not  loyal,  they  were  not  kind-hearted,  they  were  not 
honest,  they  were  not  worthy,  else  they  would  have  come  to  do  honour 
to  the  son  of  their  King.  Their  not  coming  revealed  the  enmity  of 
their  hearts.  It  was  a  wretched  way  of  showing  their  £pite  to  the 
Prince  upon  his  wedding-day.  It  is  horrible  that  men  refuse  Christ 
and  heaven  out  of  enmity  to  God.  Rejectors  of  Christ  are  unworthy 
of  pardoning  grace,  unworthy  of  a  dying  Saviour,  unworthy  of  those 
marriage  bonds  into  which  Jesus  enters  with  believing  hearts.  They 


"THE  WEDDING  WAS  FURNISHED  WITH  QUESTS."  257 

are  not  worthy  in  the  gospel  sense  of  worthiness,  and  of  course  they 
were  far  less  worthy  in  a  legal  sense. 

The  most  mournful  spectacle  in  the  world  is  a  heart  which  refuses 
the  mercy  of  God.  Objection  is  sometimes  made  to  the  doctrine  of 
total  depravity.  I  do  not  know  what  adjective  can  be  too  strong  to 
describe  human  depravity  when  I  perceive  that  it  refuses  God  under 
his  loveliest  aspect :  God  in  the  greatness  of  his  love,  God  sparing 
not  his  own  Son.  If  men  turn  away  from  God  in  anger  I  can  under 
stand  it ;  if  men  turn  aside  from  God  in  justice  I  can  understand  it ; 
but  when  they  so  hate  God  that  they  will  not  even  have  his  salvation, 
when  they  refuse  pardon  through  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  when 
they  will  sooner  be  damned  than  reconciled  to  God,  this  shows  that 
their  heart  is  desperately  wicked.  The  cross  rejected  is  the  clearest 
proof  of  the  heart  depraved.  There  I  leave  this  mournful  subject,  and 
go  a  step  further.  Certainly  it  did  seem  as  if  the  wedding  would 
not  be  furnished  with  guests. 

II.  Secondly,  IT  WAS  A  MOURNFUL  PROSPECT.  Imagine  that  there 
had  been  no  guests  at  the  wedding  feast :  what  then  ? 

First,  it  would  have  been  greatly  to  the  king's  dishonour.  The  Crown 
Prince  is  married,  and  nobody  comes  to  the  wedding !  The  feast  is 
free,  costly,  plentiful,  but  nobody  will  come  to  it.  What  an  insult  ? 
The  banqueting-hall  is  lighted,  and  the  minstrels  are  in  their  place, 
but  no  eyes  or  ears  are  charmed.  Oxen  and  fallings  make  the  tables 
groan,  but  none  are  there  to  make  the  hall  resound  with  shout  and 
song.  What  a  wretched  spectacle  !  Empty  halls,  unfurnished  benches, 
meat  untasted  carried  out  to  the  dogs !  History  does  not  record  a 
more  deliberate  and  unmistakable  insult.  Let  me  translate  the 
parable.  If  no  souls  are  saved,  if  the  great  plan  of  redemption  does 
not  save,  what  a  farce  the  whole  business  will  be  !  What  a  dishonour  to 
the  name  of  the  great  God !  Look  at  the  supposition,  that  you  may  see  the 
impossibility  of  it.  Think  for  an  instant  of  a  defeated,  disappointed, 
dishonoured  Jehovah !  Can  it  be  ?  And  yet,  if  the  wedding  had  not 
been  furnished  with  guests,  the  king  would  have  been  disappointed 
and  insulted  in  the  tenderest  point.  If  the  chosen  are  not  saved,  if 
men  are  not  brought  to  Christ,  then  the  glorious  name  of  the  God  of 
grace  is  dishonoured.  Do  you  think  it  can  be  so  ? 

In  the  next  place,  suppose  none  had  come  to  the  wedding  feast ; 
then  the  king's  son  would  have  been  grieved.  His  wedding,  and  nobody 
there  !  If  it  were  your  own,  perhaps  you  could  put  up  with  it ;  for 
you  do  not  stand  in  so  public  a  position  as  the  king's  son,  and  you 
have  not  provided  so  vast  a  banquet.  But  the  king's  son !  Only 
imagine  that  it  is  his  wedding-day,  and  the  servants  are  mustered  in 
the  hall,  but  not  a  single  guest  arrives.  He  has  no  one  to  congratu 
late  him  upon  the  happy  day,  no  one  to  wish  him  well,  no  one  to 
welcome  the  bride.  Now,  the  same  is  true  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : 
if  he  dies,  and  men  do  not  believe  in  him;  if  he  rises  again,  and  men  do 
not  accept  him  ;  if  he  enters  heaven  as  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  and 
yet  no  one  receives  repentance  and  remission,  where  is  his  honour  ? 
where  is  his  glory  ?  Look  at  the  dreadful  supposition,  and  think 
whether  it  can  be.  I  am  sure,  as  you  gaze  upon  it,  you  will  say, 
"Impossible!  A  bleeding  Saviour  cannot  die  in  vain.  Our  Christ 


258  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

could  aot  in  death  have  paid  down  the  ransom  price  for  nothing.  He 
could  not  have  stood  a  substitute  for  men,  and  yet  see  men  lost  after 
all !  " 

If  no  guests  had  arrived,  how  disappointed  would  the  Bride  have  been? 
SLo,  too,  would  have  had  to  share  in  the  failure  of  the  day.  Her 
bridal  would  not  hav«  been  remembered  with  pleasure.  She  would 
have  been  happy  in  the  bridegroom,  but  also  unhappy  because  of  the- 
unkindness  shown  to  him.  In  vain  her  rich  apparel,  and  her  costly 
ornaments,  for  there  are  no  eyes  to  g*aze  upon  them.  If  souls  are 
not  saved  the  church  misses  her  greatest  joy.  When  men  believe 
in  Jesus,  how  delighted  we  are !  Our  hearts  leap  for  joy  when  men 
repent.  But  if  sinners  are  not  saved,  if  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
is  in  vain,  if  they  will  not  come  to  Christ,  then  are  saints  full  of  heavi 
ness,  and  the  church  cries  out  in  her  anguish,  "  Hast  thou  forgotten 
to  be  gracious?  " 

Had  none  come  to  the  marriage  feast,  a  store  of  provisions  would 
have  been  wasted.  The  King  says,  "My  oxen  and  my  fallings  are- 
killed."  See  the  bullocks  roasting  whole !  See  yonder  fatted  calf 
killed  for  the  feast !  Mark  how  the  sheep  are  led  to  the  slaughter  ! 
All  this  will  remain  untasted.  Yonder  dainty  dishes,  and  flowing 
bowls,  and  luscious  fruits  will  have  none  to  enjoy  them.  It  will  be  a 
wretched  business  indeed  !  I  want  you  to  look  at  the  dreadful  picture 
till  it  vanishes  out  of  sight.  Can  it  be  that  Jesus  has  made  himself 
the  heavenly  bread,  and  none  will  feed  on  him,  or  at  the  best  a  very 
few  ?  Can  it  be  that  he  has  provided  a  robe  of  righteousness,  and 
nobody  will  wear  it  ?  Is  heaven  prepared,  and  will  it  remain  half 
occupied  ?  I  do  but  suppose  it  for  the  moment,  to  make  you  see 
what  a  melancholy  fact  a  fail  are  in  the  scheme  of  mercy  would  be. 

"Would  it  not  have  meant,  also,  the  enemy's  triumph  ?  The  king's- 
foes  would  have  heard  of  it,  and  laughed  him  to  scorn.  At  a  royal 
wedding  he  could  not  command  guests  !  How  they  would  scoff  at 
his  wasted  provision !  "  Ha,  ha !  Ha,  ha  !  "  The  story  would  have 
been  told  on  every  ale-bench.  The  sons  of  Belial  would  make  rart) 
mirth  of  it.  The  King,  the  Prince,  the  Bride  would  all  have  b«en 
ridiculed,  because  of  a  wedding  in  empty  halls,  a  feast  with  phantom 
guests !  I  do  not  believe  that  God  intends  to  let  Satan  triumph  in 
this  way.  I  cannot  imagine  that  he  will  allow  the  powers  of  darkness- 
thus  to  open  their  wicked  mouths  against  him.  If  free-will  refuses  the 
gift  of  God,  free-grace  will  come  in  and  win  the  day.  I  have 
shown  you  already  how  free-will  threatens  to  empty  the  banqueting- 
hall,  and  dishonour  the  King,  the  Son,  and  the  Bride  ;  and  if  the 
business  had  been  left  to  the  free-will  of  man,  this  is  the  result  <vhich 
would  have  come  of  it :  a  God  dishonoured,  and  men  preferring  to 
die  rather  than  accept  life  through  Jesus  Christ.  Then  it  could  never 
have  been  said  that  "the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests." 

III.  Let  us  go  a  step  further  and  notice  that  in  the  parable  THIS 
CATASTROPHE  WAS  GRACIOUSLY  PREVENTED.  "  The  wedding  was  fur 
nished  with  guests." 

We  are  very  much  in  the  same  case  to-day  as  the  servants  were  in 
when  the  invited  ones  would  not  come.  We  preach  and  teach  the 
gospel,  but  we  have  to  complain  that  so  many  will  not  come  to  the- 


"  THE    WEDDING    WAS    FURNISHED    WITH    QUESTS.'*  259 

banquet  of  grace.  God  gives  us  many  souls,  but  not  so  many  as  we 
desire.  We  are  eager  for  many  more,  and  we  begin  to  be  afraid  lest, 
after  all,  God  should  not  be  glorified  as  we  wish  that  he  should  be. 
In  the  parable  an  unfurnished  banquet  was  prevented,  and  so  it  will 
be  in  the  reality.  How  was  the  calamity  averted  ? 

It  was  prevented,  first,  by  a  fuller  invitation.  At  first  the  heralds 
only  called  those  who  had  been  previously  bidden,  a  sort  of  aristocracy 
of  hopeful  persons.  As  these  would  not  come,  we  read,  "  Go  ye  there 
fore  into  the  highways,  arid  as  many  as  ye  shall  find,  bid  to  the 
marriage."  They  went  out,  not  to  a  select  band,  but  to  all  whom  they 
might  find.  Brethren,  it  is  a  grand  thing  when  we  get  a  clearer  idea 
of  what  the  gospel  really  is.  The  more  evangelical  our  notions  be 
come,  so  that  we  are  prepared  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature 
under  heaven  and  to  say,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall 
be  saved,"  the  more  we  may  hope  for  large  success.  If,  by  my  preach 
ing,  I  lead  a  man  to  look  at  himself,  to  see  whether  there  is  anything 
in  him  which  entitles  him  to  believe,  I  practically  hide  the  gospel  from 
him.  If  I  preach  up  character  unduly,  so  that  the  man  mainly 
enquires  whether  he  has  that  character,  I  fix  his  eye  upon  himself ; 
and  this  is  not  what  I  should  aim  at.  If  I  go  forth  and  gather 
together  as  many  as  I  find,  both  good  and  bad,  then  their  thoughts  are 
on  the  banquet  rather  than  on  themselves.  We  want  men  to  look  to 
Jesus,  and  therefore  we  cry,  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the 
water  of  life  freely."  When  we  get  upon  clear  gospel  lines,  and 
keep  there,  we  may  expect  to  see  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed,  and 
the  wedding  furnished  with  guests. 

Again,  the  invitation  was  now  given  more  publicly.  They  had  simply 
gone  to  the  houses  of  the  invited  guests,  and  said,  UA11  things  are 
ready :  come."  But  now  the  servants  go  to  the  chief  places  of  concourse ; 
and  they  cry  aloud,  and  spare  not  among  the  crowds  of  men.  One 
has  gone  to  the  market-cross  ;  another  is  preaching  where  four  ways 
meet.  Hark  to  the  voice  of  one  upon  the  village  green,  and  to  the 
songs  of  others  as  they  traverse  the  back  slum  .  You  cannot  now  go 
along  a  street  without  hearing  the  news  of  the  great  wedding  feast. 
Many  will  be  brought  in  when  many  are  eager  to  bring  them  in. 
God  is  pleased  to  own  the  means  which  he  has  himself  ordained. 
The  more  constant  and  public  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  becomes, 
the  more  numerously  will  men  be  saved  through  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Then  is  the  set  time  to  favour  Zion  come.  We  are  not  to  hide  our 
lamp  under  a  bushel.  He  that  knows  the  gospel  should  speak  it  out 
as  plainly  as  he  can,  and  let  his  voice  be  as  the  silver  trumpets  of 
jubilee,  that  every  ear  may  hear.  It  came  to  pass  that  the  king's 
message  was  more  widely  made  known,  and  thus  "  the  wedding  was 
furnished  with  guests.'* 

Another  matter  assisted  :  the  servants  were  now  thoroughly  aroused. 
I  am  sure  I  should  have  felt  dreadfully  agitated  to  see  all  those  pro 
visions  and  none  coming  to  eat  them.  Think  of  the  halls  decorated, 
the  cooks  working  day  and  night,  the  big  fires  burning,  bullocks 
roasting,  the  wines  on  the  lees  set  abroach,  and  yet  no  guests.  It 
would  have  worried  me  greatly,  and  you  too.  You  would  have  said, 
"  It  cannot  be,  it  must  not  be,  we  cannot  bear  it.  The  king,  how 


260  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sadly  he  must  feel !  The  good  prince,  how  bitter  it  is  for  him  !  The 
dear  bride,  what  must  be  her  sadness  when  this  great  insult  is  put 
upon  her  !  Here,  I  must  fetch  in  some  guests,  or  die  in  the  attempt." 
I  am  sure  we  should  have  travelled  six  ways  at  once  if  we  could ;  we 
should  have  invited  with  a  thousand  mouths  if  possible.  Getting  hold 
of  one  man's  coat  and  of  another  man's  sleeve,  we  should  have  compelled 
them  to  come  in.  This,  also,  is  the  Lord's  way  of  blessing  men.  He 
arouses  his  own  people,  makes  them  sorrowful  for  the  sins  of  the 
times,  and  then  they  grow  earnest  and  troubled,  and  so  they  lay  them 
selves  out  to  snatch  men  as  brands  from  the  burning.  ' '  As  soon  as 
Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her  children."  The  want  of  travail 
ing  causes  the  absence  of  conversion.  When  we  begin  to  sigh,  and 
cry,  and  mourn,  because  the  ways  of  God  are  forsaken,  then  our 
earnestness  moves  the  heart,  both  of  God  and  man,  and  the  guests 
come  to  the  wedding. 

Again,  the  calamity  of  a  wedding  without  guests  was  prevented  by 
a  certain  secret  power  which  went  with  the  messengers.  We  read  that  they 
"  gathered  together  all  as  many  as  they  found,  both  bad  and  good." 
They  did  not  merely  invite  them,  but  they  gathered  them  in.  Now 

Eeople  are  not  to  be  gathered  in  in  great  numbers  all  of  a  sudden,  and 
3d  to  a  feast  by  mere  words.  Words  are  but  air.  There  is  nothing  in 
our  words  to  make  men  come  to  Jesus  unless  the  Lord  works  by  them. 
Yet  the  guests  did  come  in  shoals.  An  influence  went  with  the  words 
of  those  servants  which  drew  the  people  together;  they  could  not 
wish  to  stay  away ;  they  came  gladly.  Their  wills  were  sweetly 
inclined,  and  they  thronged  the  palace.  Beloved,  all  the  hope 
of  our  ministry  lies  in  the  Spirit  of  God  operating  upon  the  spirits  of 
men.  I  want  all  the  members  of  this  church  to  feel  this  more  deeply  and 
practically  than  ever.  Do  not  put  trust  in  the  preacher :  if  he  happens 
to  be  away,  do  not  think  that  God  is  tied  to  him.  Look  for  a  blessing 
upon  the  gospel  itself  whoever  preaches  it.  If  the  Holy  Ghost  be 
with  us  we  shall  see  thousands  flocking  to  Jesus.  No  sinner  will  over 
come  to  Christ  apart  from  the  quickening,  enlightening,  drawing, 
converting  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  supernaturally  exercised  upon 
the  conscience  and  heart.  Let  us  believe  this ;  and  next,  let  us  be 
assured  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  with  us,  and  let  us  then  go  forth 
with  all  boldness.  To  the  street-corner,  the  cottage,  the  lodging- 
house,  the  wayside,  let  us  go  forth  and  publish  abroad  the  invitation 
of  the  great  King:  "  My  oxen  and  my  f atlirigs  are  killed,  and  all 
things  are  ready :  come  unto  the  marriage." 

Thus  you  have  seen  the  outward  means  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
brings  men  to  Jesus,  and  the  wedding  is  furnished  with  guests. 

IV.  I  close  by  noticing,  in  the  fourth  place,  that  IN  THE  END  THE 
FEAST  WAS  A  GLORIOUS  SUCCESS.  "  The  wedding  was  furnished  with 
guests."  Guests  are  a  part  of  the  furniture  of  a  wedding  feast. 
You  may  pile  on  your  gold  and  silver  plate,  hang  up  your  banners, 
load  your  tables,  and  sound  your  music  ;  but  if  you  have  no  guests 
the  feast  is  a  failure.  It  is  our  solemn  conviction  that  the  Lord  our  God 
has  never  failed  yet,  and  that  he  never  will  fail.  We  believe  that  the 
Lord's  eternal  purpose  will  stand,  and  that  he  will  do  all  his  pleasure. 
We  believe  in  no  blind  fate,  but  we  trust  in  a  predestination  which  is 


"THE  WEDDIXG  WAS  FURNISHED  WITH  GUESTS."  261 

full  of  eyes,  which  accomplishes  its  purpose  to  the  least  jot  and 
tittle.  God's  greatest  work  is  redemption ;  will  he  fail  in  it  ?  Salvation 
is  the  focus  of  his  glory;  shall  this  be  frustrated  ?  If  God  were  to  fail 
in  connection  with  the  cross,  it  would  be  a  failure  indeed ;  God  would 
bo  dishonoured,  and  his  crown  jewels  cast  into  the  mire.  But  it  shall 
not  be. 

Turn  to  the  parable,  and  we  find  there  were  sufficient  guests :  "  the 
wedding  was  furnished  with  guests."  There  were  as  many  guests  aa 
were  necessary  to  the  honour  of  the  King,  and  his  Son,  and  his  Bride. 
Oh  yes,  in  the  gathering  up  and  consummation  of  all  things,  the 
wedding  of  the  Lord  Jesus  will  be  amply  furnished  with  guests  :  "  He 
shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied."  There  will 
be  no  disappointment  to  Christ  at  the  last  great  day.  Satan  may 
whisper  disaster  and  disappointment  to  us  at  this  hour,  and  for  the 
moment  it  may  seem  as  if  the  forces  of  darkness  triumphed  ;  but  the 
end  is  not  yet.  The  will  of  God,  so  full  of  grace  and  mercy,  shall  be 
accomplished,  the  preparations  of  grace  shall  be  used,  and  the  purpose 
of  love  fulfilled.  As  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests  so  shall 
heaven  be  filled  with  "  a  number  which  no  man  can  number." 

The  feast  was  more  of  a  success  than  it  would  have  been  had  there 
been  no  opposition.  The  persons  who  came  to  the  wedding  ivere  more  grateful 
than  the  first  invited  might  have  been  if  they  had  come.  The  richer 
sort  had  a  good  dinner  every  day.  Those  farmers  could  always  kill 
a  fat  sheep  ;  and  those  merchants  could  always  buy  a  calf.  "  Thank 
you  for  nothing,"  they  would  have  said  to  the  king  if  they  had 
accepted  his  invitation.  But  these  poor  beggars  picked  off  the  streets, 
they  had  not  tasted  meat  for  months.  Their  half-starved  bodies 
welcomed  the  fatlings.  How  glad  they  were  !  One  of  them  said  to  the 
other,  "  It's  a  long  time  since  you  and  I  sat  down  to  such  a  joint  as 
this,"  and  the  other  answered,  "  I  can  hardly  believe  that  I  am  really 
in  a  palace  dining  with  a  king.  Why,  yesterday  I  begged  all  the  day, 
and  only  had  twopence  at  night.  Long  live  the  king,  say  I,  and 
blessings  on  the  prince  and  his  bride  !  "  I  warrant,  they  were  thank 
ful  for  such  a  feast.  They  said  it  was  an  ill  wind  that  blew  nobody 
any  good :  because  their  betters  had  refused  to  come,  there  was  now 
room  for  them.  When  the  Lord  saves  great  sinners,  such  as  you 
and  me,  he  wins  warm  hearts  for  himself.  When  the  Lord  saves  un 
likely  ones,  he  gets  unusual  thankfulness.  When  he  brings  in  the 
drunkard  and  the  profane,  the  unclean  and  the  hardened,  and  makes 
them  pure,  and  holy,  and  puts  them  among  the  children,  what  grati 
tude  he  gets !  The  Pharisee  may  ask  Christ  to  a  cold  dinner,  but  it  is 
the  woman  that  was  a  sinner  who  will  wash  his  feet  with  tears,  and 
wipe  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head.  If  some  of  you  moralists  get 
saved — and  God  grant  you  may ! — you  will  never  prize  the  precioua 
blood  so  much  as  those  do  who  are  washed  by  it  from  foulest  stains. 

The  joy  that  day  was  much  more  expressed  than  it  would  have  been 
had  others  come.  Those  ladies  and  gentlemen  who  were  first  invited, 
if  they  had  come  to  the  wedding,  would  have  seated  themselves  there 
in  a  very  stiff  and  proper  manner.  Dear  me,  what  a  fine  thing  pro 
priety  is !  And  yet,  what  a  dead  thing  it  is !  One  said  to  me  the 
other  day,  "  I  have  gone  to  my  place  of  worship  for  many  years,  and 


262  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

nobody  ever  did  speak  to  me  that  I  know  of,  and  nobody  ever  will; 
for  we  are  all  too  respectable  to  know  one  another.''  You  know  the' 
dignified  style  of  self-satisfied  people.  Among  such  there  is  no 
cordiality,  no  freshness,  no  sweet  naturalness.  Did  you  ever  attend 
a  breakfast  or  a  dinner  of  beggars  ?  Did  you  ever  see  a  company  of 
very  hungry  people  feeding,  to  their  heart's  content?  They  make  a 
merry  clatter  ;  they  are  not  muzzled  by  propriety ;  they  are  glad  at  the 
sight  of  every  dish.  They  look  at  the  waiters  as  angels  ;  and  when  the 
hurrahing  comes  to  be  done,  you  admire  the  strength  of  their  lungs. 
The  dull  monotony  of  respectability  knows  no  joy  like  that  which 
conies  to  poverty  when  it  feasts  to  the  full  at  the  table  of  bounty. 
The  Crown  Prince  was  happier  that  day  among  his  poor  subjects  than 
he  would  have  been  among  the  grandees  and  the  fashionables.  Those 
paupers,  those  labourers,  those  tramps,  those  hedge-birds,  those  were 
the  fellows  to  make  merry.  To  whom  much  is  forgiven,  the  same  loveth 
much.  Up  in  heaven  they  sing  like  the  voice  of  many  waters  and 
like  great  thunder,  because  they  have  been  cleansed  from  many  sins  and 
have  partaken  of  great  grace.  Let  the  Pharisee  and  the  moralist  refuse 
the  gospel ;  there  are  those  about  who,  in  accepting  it,  will  do  it  greater 
honour  than  their  dull  souls  could  ever  render  to  it.  Thus  the  wedding 
was  furnished  with  guests,  who  expressed  their  joy  enthusiastically. 

How  the  provisions  were  relished  !  It  does  one  good  to  see  a  hungry 
man  eat  his  food.  To  him  even  every  bitter  thing  is  sweet.  He  does 
not  turn  over  his  food  and  cut  off  every  little  bit  of  gristle,  as  some  of 
TOU  do  because  of  your  delicate  appetites.  The  true  gospel  hearer 
nearkens  to  the  text — "Eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul 
delight  itself  in  fatness."  He  does  not  act  the  critic,  and  cavil  at  this 
expression  and  that.  He  is  too  sharp-set  to  be  particular  about  the 
dishes  and  the  carving.  We  marvel  sometimes  at  the  capacity  of 
hungry  men ;  there  is  no  end  to  it ;  and  it  is  the  same  with  spiritual 
as  with  natural  hunger.  I  think  I  can  tell  what  happened  at  that 
wedding:  the  Bride  nudged  the  Bridegroom  and  said,  "See  these 
poor  people  eat !  Is  it  not  a  pleasure  to  give  one's  oxen  and  fatlings 
where  they  are  so  much  needed?"  The  Bridegroom  was  as  happy 
as  he  could  be,  for  he  was  of  a  sympathizing  heart,  and  he  greatly 
rejoiced  in  the  joy  of  the  poor  people  around  him.  The  king  himself 
that  day  was  gladdened  as  he  saw  what  a  gallant  company  of 
trenchermen  they  were,  and  how  there  was  no  niggling,  nor  finding* 
fault,  but  only  unbroken  enjoyment  and  gratitude.  The  choicest  kind 
of  guests  had  been  collected  if  the  object  was  to  give  joy.  Ah  dear 
friends  !  if  you  have  a  deep  sense  of  sin,  you  will  greatly  love  fre& 
grace  and  dying  love.  This  is  the  lack  of  certain  gentlemen  who  are 
always  finding  fault  with  the  gospel :  they  never  knew  their  own  state 
by  nature  and  by  practice,  and  therefore  they  do  not  prize  salvation. 
If  they  had  felt  a  few  lashes  of  the  ten-thonged  whip  of  the  law  upon 
their  bare  consciences,  they  would  relish  gospel  forgiveness  far  more. 
He  that  has  been  in  the  prison  of  conviction  prizes  blood-bought 
freedom.  He  that  has  felt  the  chains  of  sin  values  the  liberty  where 
with  Christ  makes  him  free.  So  I  say,  that  inasmuch  as  these  poor 
creatures  wore  brought  in  from  the  streets,  and  their  splendid  appetites 
enjoyed  tho  feast,  the  wedding  festival  was  no  failure,  but  all  the 


"  THE    WEDDING    WAS    FURNISHED    WITH    GUESTS."  *?63 

greater  success,  because  of  the  king's  enemies.  The  wedding  was 
furnished  with  guests — guests  who  enjoyed  the  abundance  provided 
by  the  King. 

Certainly,  the  occasion  became  more  famous  than  it  would  otherwise 
have  been.  If  the  feast  had  gone  on  as  usual  it  would  have  been  only 
one  among  many  such  things;  but  now  this  royal  banquet  was  the 
only  one  of  its  kind,  unique,  unparalleled.  To  gather  in  poor  men  off 
the  streets,  labouring  men  and  idle  men,  bad  men  and  good  men,  to 
the  wedding  of  the  Crown  Prince — this  was  a  new  thing  under  the 
sun.  Everybody  talked  of  it.  There  were  songs  made  about  it,  and 
these  were  sung  in  the  king's  honour  where  none  honoured  kings 
before.  In  the  kitchens,  among  the  servants,  this  was  a  fine  story  to 
tell  by  the  fireside,  while  Mary  and  Jane  wished  they  had  been  there 
to  see.  In  every  lodging-house  for  years  to  come  this  would  be  the 
favourite  story — the  tale  of  the  poor  man's  prince,  and  the  needy 
man's  queen.  On  the  exchange  and  in  the  market  men  talked  of  the 
brave  bride  and  bridegroom  who  had  defied  the  customs  of  fashion, 
and  had  done  a  deed  so  daring  in  its  goodness.  Was  ever  such  a 
thing  heard  of  before  ?  Here  was  a  feast  for  men  who  never  feasted 
before!  Sensible  men  said,  "And  nothing  could  be  better:  they 
were  feeding  those  that  wanted  feeding :  they  were  giving  good  cheer 
to  those  who  have  little  enough  of  it."  Among  the  poor  themselves 
the  Prince's  name  was  very  famous,  while  the  portrait  of  the  Princess 
was  nailed  up  over  the  mantel-piece.  Children  said  to  one  another, 
"  My  father  went  to  the  wedding  of  the  imperial  prince."  To  many 
it  seemed  like  a  story  out  of  the  Arabian  Nights.  It  did  not  read  like 
a  piece  of  common  history  at  all,  but  like  a  fairy  tale  of  the  age  of 
gold.  Dear  friends,  when  the  Lord  saved  some  of  us  by  his  grace,  it 
was  no  common  event.  When  he  brought  us  great  sinners  to  his  feet, 
and  washed  us,  and  clothed  us,  and  fed  us,  and  made  us  his  own,  it 
was  a  wonder  to  be  talked  of  for  ever  and  ever.  We  will  never  leave 
off  praising  his  name  throughout  eternity.  That  which  looked  as 
though  it  would  defame  the  King  turned  out  to  his  honour,  and 
"  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests." 

One  thing  more :  the  king'' 8  liberality  was  all  the  better  seen.  If 
those  who  were  first  bidden  had  put  in  an  appearance,  they  would 
have  come  arrayed  in  their  own  scarlet  and  fine  linen.  Some  of  the 
gentlemen  would  have  bought  a  new  suit  on  purpose.  You  may  depend 
upon  it,  all  the  cunning  women  in  the  city  would  have  been  employed 
to  get  their  ladyships  ready  for  the  banquet,  that  they  might  have 
honour  in  the  court  that  day.  Now  these  fine  clothes  would  have  been 
more  for  the  glory  of  those  who  came  in  them,  than  for  the  honour  of 
the  King.  There  was  nothing  of  this  among  those  who  were  gathered 
from  the  highways.  They  were  in  sorry  gear.  It  was  difficult,  per 
haps,  in  some  cases,  to  tell  which  was  the  original  stuff  of  their 
garments,  so  patched  and  mended  were  they.  Anyhow,  they  were- 
a  ragged  regiment ;  and  what  was  the  consequence  ?  Why,  then  they 
must  all  bo  dressed  in  the  Prince's  own  livery,  and  all  the  glory  of 
their  apparel  must  be  unto  him.  He  said  to  his  servants,  "  Go  to  my 
wardrobe.  Bring  forth  changes  of  raiment."  Everyone  that  came 
in  to  the  feast  was  invited  to  put  on  the  king's  wedding  garments* 


264  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

When  he  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  it  was  a  grand  sight,  for  everybody 
was  ro}'ally  arrayed.  The  king's  wedding  robes  were  much  better 
than  his  subjects'  best  suits.  It  was  a  grand  sight  to  see  so  many  all 
in  one  royal  livery ;  every  guest  wearing  the  uniform  of  mercy.  So 
is  it  with  us  poor  sinners,  saved  by  grace.  If  we  had  possessed  any 
true  righteousness  of  our  own  we  should  have  worn  it ;  but  now  we 
count  our  own  righteousness  but  dross  and  dung  that  we  may  win  Christ 
and  be  found  in  him.  His  righteousness  decorates  all  the  saints  :  they 
could  not  be  better  arrayed.  Thus  is  the  feast  made  more  glorious  than  it 
otherwise  would  have  been,  and  the  wedding  is  furnished  with  guests. 

How  I  wish  that  I  could  gather  in  many  this  morning,  both  bad 
and  good !  I  mean  by  good,  those  who  are  comparatively  so  as  to 
their  moral  conduct.  You  are  bidden  to  come  to  the  wedding-feast 
of  love.  But  even  if  you  are  bad,  and  obliged  to  own  that  you  are  so, 
I  am  equally  anxious  to  gather  you  in  to  the  feast.  Do  you  ask  me  : 
What  are  we  to  do?  What  were  these  persons  to  do  ?  To  come  just 
as  they  were,  and  freely  receive  what  the  king  had  freely  provided. 
Sometimes  at  our  treats  for  Sunday-school  children  every  child  is  told 
to  bring  his  own  mug  and  plate  ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  our  great  King. 
His  banquet  is  too  royal  for  that.  You  are  to  bring  nothing.  Still, 
everybody  must  go  home  and  wash,  must  he  not  ?  No,  the  washing 
and  the  clothing  shall  all  be  done  for  you  at  the  King's  palace.  Come 
as  you  are.  "  But  what  do  you  mean  by  coming  ?  "  We  mean  trust 
ing  :  trust  your  soul  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  will  save  it.  Trust 
him,  and  you  shall  know  that  he  died  in  your  room,  place,  and  stead, 
so  that,  believing  in  him,  you  shall  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  you  to  believe  in  Jesus,  that  is,  trust  him. 

I  have  told  you  the  gospel,  and  the  whole  of  it.  Trust  the  crucified 
Saviour,  and  you  shall  live.  Jesus  says,  "  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye 
saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Do  not  look  within  to  see  what  is 
there,  but  look  to  Jesus  hanging  on  the  cross.  A  look  at  Christ  cruci 
fied  will  save  you.  Look,  dear  girls,  young  as  you  are,  look  to  Jesus 
now  !  Look,  ye  grey-headed  men  and  women  who  have  never  looked 
before :  look  now !  Strangers  and  foreigners,  who  have  not  heard 
this  word  before,  there  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One  for  you ! 
Ye  guiltiest  of  the  guilty,  and  ye  most  amiable  of  the  amiable,  turn 
away  from  anything  there  is  in  yourselves,  bad  or  good,  and  look  to 
Jesus  only.  Receive  from  Jesus  all  he  brings  you — pardon,  righteous 
ness,  sanctification,  redemption,  himself.  He  that  comes  to  a  wedding 
feast  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  eat  and  to  drink.  Give  your  mind 
up  to  this  delightful  exercise.  Take  the  food  which  Grod  provides  you. 
You  shall  do  good  works  afterwards,  for  they  will  follow  as  a  conse 
quence  of  the  strength  which  comes  of  receiving  heavenly  food 
through  faith ;  but  just  now  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry,  as  becomes  a 
Prince's  marriage.  May  the  Father  be  pleased,  his  Son  be  honoured, 
and  his  church  be  comforted  through  you !  Anien,  and  Anien. 

PORTIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Matthew  xxi.  33 — 46; 

xxii.   1 — 14. 


HYMNS  FROM  "  OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 42  (Vers.  I.),  504,  488. 


Jflrtroptitmt  SMrermtde  fhilpit 


WHAT  IS  THE  WEDDING  GARMENT? 


tftttfltj 

DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  MAY  20TH,   1888,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  And  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  he  saw  there  a  man  which  had  not  on 
a  wedding  garment :  and  he  saith  unto  him,  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not 
having  a  wedding  garment  ?  And  he  was  speechless.  Then  said  the  king  to  the 
servants,  Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and  cast  him  into  outer  dark 
ness  ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth." — Matthew  xxii.  11 — 13. 

Two  Sabbath  mornings  ago  I  preached  from  this  parable,  and  I  trust 
many  were  encouraged  by  it ;  but  I  noticed  among  enquirers  who 
came  to  see  me  afterwards,  a  desire  to  know  about  the  wedding 
garment;  for  they  feared  lest,  in  coming  to  join  the  church,  they 
should  come  like  the  man  of  whom  I  shall  now  speak.  Many  true 
hearts  are  extremely  sensitive  to  the  impression  of  fear,  and  they 
seem  to  be  on  the  watch  for  reasons  for  anxiety.  I  do  not  condemn 
them ;  on  the  contrary,  I  wish  there  were  more  of  such  holy  tremblers. 
It  is  much  better  to  be  afraid  of  being  wrong  than  to  be  indifferent 
as  to  what  you  are.  I  perceive  among  the  very  best  of  the  saints  a 
considerable  number  who  are  deeply  anxious  as  to  their  state  before 
God.  Those  who  will  one  day  be  cast  out  of  the  wedding  feast  are 
feeding  themselves  without  fear,  while  those  who  have  the  most  right 
to  enjoy  the  banquet  are  full  of  gracious  anxiety.  Solomon  says, 
"  Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway  "  :  he  will  cling  closely  to  his 
God,  and  that  will  make  him  happy ;  he  will  not  run  risks  like  the 
presumptuous,  and  so  he  will  be  happy.  Holy  fear  spreads  few 
banquets,  but  it  takes  care  that  when  there  is  a  feast  we  go  to  it  in  a 
wedding  garment. 

My  chief  object  this  morning  will  be  to  allay  the  fears  of  gracious 
ones.  If  they  understand  what  the  wedding  garment  really  is,  they 
will  probably  discover  that  they  are  wearing  it ;  and,  if  not,  they  will 
know  in  whose  wardrobe  that  garment  of  joy  is  to  be  found,  and  they 
will  gladly  ask  to  be  arrayed  therein.  May  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Com 
forter,  give  a  wedding  joy  this  morning  to  each  wedding  guest,  by 
causing  him  to  see  for  certain  that  he  is  clothed  in  the  wedding  robe. 

Immediately  after  our  text,  we  find  these  solemn  words:  "  Many  are 
called,  but  few  are  chosen."  This  is  a  conclusion  drawn  from  the 
KT0.  2,024  9 


278  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

whole  parable,  in  which  we  see  processes  at  work,  which  separate  the 
chosen  few  from  the  many  who  are  called.  A  distinction  was  made 
by  the  summoning  of  the  invited  guests.  The  simple  delivery  of  the 
invitation  set  a  difference  between  the  loyal  and  the  rebellious — a  dis 
tinction  most  marked  and  decisive.  So  it  is  in  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel :  we  preach  it  to  every  creature '  within  our  reach.  Lovingly, 
tenderly,  earnestly ;  not  so  well  as  we  would,  but  still  with  all  our 
heart  we  call  men  to  the  royal  feast  of  grace ;  and  straightway  the 
very  invitation  begins  to  gather  out  the  precious  from  the  vile.  Pure 

fDspel  preaching  is  very  discriminating.  You  can  tell  Cain  from 
bel  as  soon  as  the  sacrifice  is  the  subject.  Preach  salvation  by  grace, 
and  you  find  that  some  will  not  have  it  at  any  price,  others  post 
pone  all  consideration  of  it,  and  a  third  party  raise  questions  without 
end.  Still  do  men  make  light  of  it,  and  go  their  way  to  their  farms  and 
to  their  merchandise.  Thus,  dear  friends,  every  Sabbath  day,  without 
our  attempting  to  sit  in  judgment  on  men,  the  gospel  is  in  itself  a 
refining  fire.  In  the  gospel  the  Son  of  David  has  a  throne  of  judg 
ment  as  well  as  of  mercy.  When  men  will  not  have  Christ  and  his 
grace,  the  Word  preached  by  his  humble  servant  drives  them  away, 
and  they  go  with  the  chaff.  But  the  work  of  discrimination  is  not 
finished  after  the  gospel  has  been  heard  and  men  have  been  brought  into 
the  church.  Alas !  even  in  the  church  division  has  to  be  made  ;  indeed, 
it  is  there  that  this  is  most  fully  carried  out.  "  His  fan  is  in  his  hand, 
and  he  will  throughly  purge  his  floor."  If  he  uses  a  scourge  nowhere 
else,  he  will  be  sure  to  use  it  in  his  own  temple.  Among  the  sheep 
there  are  goats  ;  among  the  virgins  there  are  foolish  ones  ;  and  among 
the  guests  at  the  wedding  feast  there  are  those  who  have  not  on  the 
"wedding  garment.  Until  we  come  to  heaven  itself  we  shall  always 
discover  necessity  for  the  work  of  self-examination.  Even  in  the 
apostolic  college,  Judas  carried  on  his  knavery,  as  if  to  warn  us  that 
no  rank  in  service,  no  honour  among  brethren,  no  length  of  expe 
rience  can  screen  us  from  the  necessity  of  saying,  "Lord,  is  it  I?" 
when  his  warning  voice  saith,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray  me."  In 
our  text  we  see  a  man  who  has  hearkened  to  the  invitation  and 
has  come  into  the  feast,  and  thus  has  passed  the  first  test ;  and  yet 
he  is  unable  to  abide  the  second ;  he  has  been  received  by  the  ser 
vants,  but  he  cannot  deceive  their  Master.  The  King  detects  him  as 
a  spot  in  the  feast,  and  he  is  cast  out  from  the  palace  of  mercy  into 
the  outer  darkness,  where  there  is  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing 
of  teeth.  May  none  of  us  be  of  this  sort. 

I  shall  endeavour  to  answer  four  questions  naturally  arising  out  of 
the  parable.  First,  What  is  meant  by  the  king's  coming  in  ? — "  when 
the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests  "  ;  secondly,  What  is  the  wedding 
garment  ?  thirdly,  Who  is  he  that  hath  it  not ;  and  fourthly.  Why  did  h& 
stand  speechless  when  he  was  asked,  "  How  earnest  thou  in  hither  not 
having  a  wedding  garment?  " 

I.     May  the  Holy  Spirit  help  us  while  we  consider,  first,  WHAT  ia 

MEAXT    BY   THE    KING'S    COMING   IN. 

"The  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests."  They  were  all  reclining 
at  the  tables,  for  "the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests."  They 
.gathered  while  the  sun  was  up,  but  darkness  covered  the  world  outside 


WHAT    IS    THE    WEDDING    GARMENT?  279 

when  "  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests."  They  had  feasted,  and 
now  the  king  came  to  honour  the  assembly. 

It  was  the  crown  and  the  culmination  of  the  feast.  No  matter  how 
dainty  the  viands,  nor  how  bright  the  hall,  the  feast  has  not  reached 
its  height  till  his  majesty  appears  in  gracious  condescension.  It  is  so 
with  us,  beloved,  in  reference  to  our  greater  King.  When  we  are 
gathered  in  this  house,  which  has  often  proved  to  us  a  palace  of 
delights,  we  never  reach  the  height  of  our  desire  till  the  Lord  manifests 
himself  to  us.  You  delight  to  hear  the  preacher,  and  to  join  in  the 
song,  and  to  say  Amen  to  the  prayer,  but  these  are  not  all.  Your 
heart  and  your  flesh  cry  out  for  God,  for  the  living  God  ;  you  Ipok  to 
behold  the  King  in  his  beauty.  When  the  glorious  Father  reveals 
himself  in  Christ  Jesus,  then  the  Sabbath  is  a  high  day,  for  our  prayer 
is  answered,  "Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  servant."  Our  glorious 
King  is  not  always  equally  manifest  in  our  solemn  assemblies.  Doubt 
less  because  of  our  sins  he  hideth  himself.  In  truth  he  is  always  with 
us ;  for  the  feast  is  his,  and  the  hall  is  his,  and  every  guest  is  brought 
in  by  his  grace,  and  every  dish  on  the  table  is  placed  there  by  his 
love ;  but  yet  there  are  times  when  he  is  specially  seen  among  his 
people.  Then  our  communion  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son, 
Jesus  Christ,  is  sweet  indeed. 

These  are  seasons  of  gracious  visitation :  times  of  refreshing  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  When  the  King  comes  into  the  assembly,  the 
preaching  of  the  word  is  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  power. 
Then  the  day  of  Pentecost  has  fully  come :  the  Spirit  is  abundantly 
outpoured,  souls  are  saved,  saints  are  edified,  and  Christ  is  glorified. 
The  spiritual  soon  detect  the  divine  presence,  and  the  shout  of  a  King 
is  heard  in  the  camp.  When  I  think  of  it,  my  heart  cries  out  with 
Isaiah,  ' '  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  rend  the  heavens,  that  thou  wouldest 
come  down,  that  the  mountains  might  flow  down  at  thy  presence!" 
The  presence  of  our  God  brings  with  it  heavenly  happiness,  solemn 
content,  and  overflowing  joy.  Well  does  Dr.  Watts  sing  : — 

"  The  King  himself  comes  near, 

And  feasts  his  saints  to-day ; 
Here  we  may  sit  and  see  him  here, 

And  love,  and  praise,  and  pray. 

"  One  day  amidst  the  place 
Where  my  dear  God  hath  been 

Is  sweeter  than  ten  thousand  days 
Of  pleasurable  sin." 

Beloved  friends,  you  know  better  than  I  can  tell  you  when  the  King 
is  near,  and  you  know  sorrowfully  when  he  is  not  in  the  assembly. 
Alas,  from  how  many  congregations  is  he  absent,  and  that  absence 
unmourned !  When  the  Lord  is  gone  we  spread  our  sails,  but  there 
is  no  wind  :  we  bring  the  sacrifice,  but  there  is  no  fire.  The  wedding 
would  have  been  a  failure  without  guests ;  but  what  would  the  feast 
have  been  if  the  host  had  refused  to  come  in  and  see  the  guests  ?  But 
the  King  came  in  in  due  time.  Ay,  came  in  among  that  crowd  of 
wayfarers  gathered  from  the  highways  at  a  moment's  notice,  and  his 
presence  crowned  the  festival  with  honour  and  rapture. 


280  METROPOLITAN   TABERXACLE    PULPIT. 

This  coming  in  to  see  the  guests  indicates  a  glorious  revelation 
of  himself.  When  the  King  saw  the  guests,  the  guests  saw  him  ;  but, 
inasmuch  as  his  sight  of  them  was  the  more  important  sight  of  the 
two,  the  chief  thing  is  mentioned  while  the  minor  matter  is  implied. 
Do  we  know  what  it  is  to  see  God  ?  This  is  the  special  privilege  of 
the  pure  in  heart.  When  the  Lord's  way  is  in  the  sanctuary,  then  his 
sanctified  ones  behold  him.  Spiritual  eyes  have  looked  to  Jesus  by  faith, 
and  he  saith,  ' '  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Have  you 
never  been  like  John  in  Patmos,  ready  to  swoon  away  because  of  the 
revelation  of  the  Father  in  Christ  ?  When  Jesus  has  been  set  forth 
evidently  crucified  among  us,  we  have  in  him  beheld  the  face  of  the 
great  K?ng,  and  our  hearts  have  leaped  for  joy,  so  that  we  have  been 
ready  to  leap  into  heaven  itself  if  the  word  had  been  given.  When 
Augustine  read  those  words,  "  Thou  canst  not  see  my  face  and  live," 
he  was  bold  enough  to  answer,  "  Let  me  die  to  see  thy  face." 

Blessed  vision ! 

"  Lord,  let  me  see  thy  beauteous  face ! 

It  yields  a  heaven  below  ; 
And  angels  round  the  throne  will  say, 
'Tis  all  the  heaven  they  know." 

The  King  delights  to  see  his  guests,  and  his  guests  delight  to  see  him. 
Then  is  our  worship  full  of  bliss,  and  no  place  out  of  heaven  is  so  like 
to  heaven  as  the  place  of  our  assemblies.  We  read  in  the  Gospel  of 
John :  "  Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord  "  ;  and 
well  they  might  be.  Then  are  we  glad  also  when  we  distinctly 
discern  him  as  our  Lord  and  our  God.  My  own  soul  knows  this  joy 
unspeakable,  but  because  it  is  unspeakable,  I  say  no  more. 

For  the  King  to  come  in  and  see  the  guests  includes  a  manifestation  of 
special  favour.  He  comes  in,  not  to  judge  the  guests,  but  to  look  upon 
them.  You  that  were  here  last  Thursday  might  will  remember  my 
text :  "  Look  thou  upon  me,  and  be  merciful  unto  me,  as  thou  usest  to 
do  unto  those  that  love  thy  name."  The  Lord  is  accustomed  to  look 
with  favour  upon  those  who  love  his  name,  for  he  is  pleased  with 
them.  0  brothers  and  sisters,  when  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad 
in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  when  the  Father  lifts  upon  us  the 
light  of  his  countenance,  then  our  summer  weather  is  come.  Can 
anything  be  compared  with  the  favour  of  God  ?  The  smiles  of  kings, 
the  friendships  of  emperors — do  not  mention  them  in  the  same  day. 
Some  of  you  know  that  the  Lord  loves  you  ;  yea,  that  he  loved  you 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  he  will  love  you  when  the 
world  has  ceased  to  be.  Oh  that  the  King  would  come  here  this 
morning  in  that  sense,  and  look  into  all  your  faces,  and  give  you  all 
the  full  assurance  that  you  are  in  his  heart,  and  shall  be  there  to  all 
eternity !  Oh  that  this  whole  church  may  be  a  living  temple  in  which 
the  Lord  shall  delight  to  dwell;  may  every  stone  of  it  be  brilliant 
with  the  reflected  light  of  his  favour;  may  all  our  testimonies  and 
labours  be  acceptable  unto  him,  and  may  he  be  very  gracious  at  the 
voice  of  our  cry!  0  Jehovah,  manifest  thyself  here  as  thou  didst 
between  the  cherubim  !  For  thy  sake  we  have  borne  reproach  ;  Lord 
be  our  glory  !  We  have  held  fast  thy  truth  ;  we  beseech  thee,  let  the 
light  of  thy  countenance  encourage  us ! 


WHAT    IS    THE    WEDDINO    GABMENT  ?  281 

But  here  is  the  solemn  point  to  which  I  call  your  attention  :  this 
visitation  brings  with  it  a  time  of  discovery  and  searching  of  heart. 
When  the  King  conies  in  to  see  the  guests,  the  light  grows  stronger, 
and  hidden  things  are  revealed  ;  for  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to 
the  eves  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  When  the  Lord  visits  his 
church,  his  fire  is  in  Zion,  and  his  furnace  in  Jerusalem;  then  the 
man  without  a  wedding  garment  is  winked  at  no  longer.  You  can  go 
on  sleeping  as  a  church  when  God  is  away,  and  no  members  will  fall 
off ;  for  those  who  know  not  the  Lord  will  come  in  and  go  out  among 
you  as  aforetime.  The  dead  will  remain  quiet  till  the  Lord  sounds  the 
trumpet  of  resurrection :  mere  professors  will  not  know  that  they  are 
making  a  false  profession,  but  will  remain  at  ease  in  our  solemn  feasts. 
But  when  the  King  comes  in  all  things  are  changed.  "  Who  may 
abide  the  day  of  his  coming  ?  and  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth  ? 
for  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fullers'  sope.''  You  cannot 
receive  abundant  spiritual  life  into  the  church  without  the  discern 
ment  of  the  unworthy,  and  the  explusion  of  the  spiritually  dead.  One 
goes  away  because  he  is  offended  at  the  doctrine,  another  is  grieved  at 
the  heart-searching  experience,  and  a  third  feels  himself  too  sternly 
rebuked  as  to  his  life.  Thus  the  Lord's  visitation  of  grace  becomes 
an  assize  of  judgment,  and  the  finger  of  the  Lord  writes  upon  the 
wall,  "Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art  found  wanting."  If 
the  Lord  our  God  were  to  come  into  his  church  to-day  there  would  be 
an  awful  shrinkage  among  the  number  of  his  guests ;  a  panic  would 
seize  the  assembly,  and  the  door  would  be  blocked  with  men  hastening 
to  escape  his  eye. 

Look  how  the  king's  discernment  is  recorded  in  the  text.  One  man 
only  had  refused  to  put  on  a  wedding  garment ;  but  the  king  at 
once  fixed  his  eye  upon  him.  The  Saviour,  by  a  kind  of  heavenly 
charity,  mentions  only  one  intruder,  but  I  fear  we  must  regard  the 
one  as  the  type  of  many.  If  the  King  should  come  in  at  the  time 
of  our  communion,  I  am  afraid  he  would  detect  more  than  one. 
Still,  if  there  were  but  one,  he  would  concentrate  his  gaze  upon 
that  one,  and  speak  to  him  by  himself.  If  you  are  the  only  per 
son  who  has  dared  to  enter  the  church  knowing  that  you  are  not 
converted,  the  King  will  spy  you  out.  If  you  make  a  profession  of 
religion  out  of  bravado,  and  keep  it  up  by  sheer  deceit,  you  may  hide 
yourself  away  among  your  family  connections,  or  think  that  your 
respectability  will  screen  you;  but  you  are  mistaken.  You  have 
to  deal  with  one  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  he  will  so 
unmask  you  that  you  will  not  have  a  word  to  say  in  your  own  defence. 
This  is  a  solemn  matter.  It  will  not  make  the  true-hearted  wish  the 
King  to  stay  away,  but  those  who  are  wilful  deceivers  may  well 
tremble.  The  King  does  come  to  this  church.  He  is  specially  pre 
sent  in  the  midst  of  this  people,  and  the  consequence  is  that  his  judg 
ment  is  strict  with  us.  I  have  seen  the  rod  of  his  discipline  here 
in  a  very  striking  manner.  I  have  seen  the  fair  professor  wither  in 
the  heat  of  love,  and  the  rootless  Christian  dried  up  in  the  noontide 
of  grace.  He  might  have  gone  on  very  well  in  any  other  church, 
but  he  has  not  been  able  to  abide  the  brandished  sword  of  the 
Spirit,  and  its  dividing  asunder  soul  and  spirit,  joints  and  marrow. 

7 


282  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

He  has  not  been  able  to  sit  it  out,  but  has  been  obliged  to  go  away 
and  find  an  easier  rest.  Just  in  proportion  as  we  really  have  the  King 
in  the  midst  of  us  making  glad  the  saints,  we  shall  have  the  King  in 
the  midst  of  us  discerning  the  false  and  casting  them  out,  first  into  the 
outer  darkness  of  the  world,  which  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,  and  at 
last  into  the  outer  darkness  of  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of 
teeth.  Still,  be  the  result  what  it  may,  our  prayer  this  morning 
is,  "  God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless  us ;  and  cause  his  face  to 
shine  upon  us." 

II.  Now  I  would  answer  the  second  question :  WHAT  is  THE 
WEDDING  GARMENT  ?  You  are  probably  aware  that  this  has  been  a 
point  greatly  disputed  among  theologians.  Is  the  wedding  garment 
justification,  or  sanctification,  or  what  ?  I  am  not  going  to  be  theo 
logical  and  bring  doctrinal  matters  to  the  text ;  but  I  shall  read  the 
parable  as  it  stands,  and  interpret  its  details  by  its  general  run.  It 
is  called  a  "wedding  garment" — a  garment  suitable  fora  marriage 
feast.  Let  us  translate  the  figure,  rather  than  attempt  to  rivet  a 
doctrine  to  it.  What  does  a  wedding  garment  mean  ?  What  is  that 
which  we  must  have  in  connection  with  our  Lord's  marriage  or  be  cast 
out  for  ever  ? 

I  think  I  may  say  plainly  that  it  must  signify  a  distinguishing  mark 
of  grace.  Everybody  does  not  wear  a  wedding  garment :  he  who 
wears  it  has  put  it  on  because  he  is  a  wedding  guest.  You  know  the 
wedding  guest  at  once  by  his  attire.  He  dresses  in  a  way  which 
would  be  considered  singular  if  he  were  so  arrayed  every  day.  Your 
steady  citizen  indulges  in  a  white  waistcoat  on  the  nuptial  occasion, 
but  he  never  dreams  of  going  down  to  his  office  in  the  city  in  such 
gear.  True  members  of  the  church  of  God  wear  a  distinguishing 
mark.  If  you  are  not  different  from  other  people,  you  have  no  right 
in  the  church  of  God.  If  a  servant  can  live  with  you  for  years  and 
never  discover  your  love  to  God,  I  should  think  there  is  none  to  dis 
cover.  If  you  are  just  the  same  as  those  you  lived  with  in  your 
former  days,  if  you  have  undergone  no  change,  and  are  like  the  rest 
of  men,  you  have  not  the  distinguishing  mark  which  sets  forth 
your  right  to  be  in  the  church  of  God.  There  ought  to  be  a  some 
thing  about  us  which  sets  us  apart — a  something  which  can  be  seen 
and  understood  by  common  people,  even  as  a  wedding  garment  could 
be  seen,  and  its  meaning  at  once  perceived.  Your  religion  must 
not  require  a  microscope  to  perceive  it,  nor  should  it  be  so  indistinct 
that  few  can  discover  any  meaning  in  it.  It  should  be  as  visible  as  the 
white  garment  which  was  worn  by  Easterns  at  a  marriage.  Is  it  so  ? 

I  may  boldly  add  here  that  the  wedding  garment  was  a  distinguish 
ing  mark  of  grace  ;  for  as  these  people  were  fetched  in  from  the  high 
ways  they  could  not  have  provided  themselves  with  wedding  garments. 
It  is  the  custom  in  the  East  for  a  king  to  provide  robes  for  his  guests  ; 
therefore  this  wedding  garment  was  a  mark  of  grace,  freely  given 
and  received.  Is  there,  then,  a  something  about  you  which  the  Lord 
in  love  has  given  you?  Do  you  differ  from  others,  not  in  natural 
attainments,  but  in  spiritual  grace  ?  Does  the  difference  mainly  lie  in 
what  God  himself  has  done  for  you  ?  That  is  the  question  involved 
in  the  symbol  of  the  wedding  garment.  Do  you  differ  from  what  you 


WHAT    IS    THE    WEDDING    GARMENT  ?  283 

used  to  be.  Do  you  differ  from  what  you  were  years  ago  ?  Do  you 
differ  from  those  with  whom  you  used  to  associate,  so  that  you  seek 
other  company  and  turn  aside  from  those  who  once  were  charming 
fellows  to  you?  If  so,  you  have  on  the  wedding  garment.  It  is  a 
distinguishing  mark.  I  do  not  mean  to  put  this  in  a  way  that  would 
grieve  anybody  here  unless  they  ought  to  be  grieved ;  but  if  they 
ought  to  be  grieved,  then  we  would  have  them  cry  to  God  for  renewal 
by  his  grace.  May  the  Lord  make  you  to  wear  his  livery!  May 
he  give  you  the  spot  of  his  children,  and  cause  you  no  longer  to  be 
of  the  world !  A  distinguishing  mark  is  plainly  the  first  meaning  of 
the  wedding  garment. 

In  the  next  place,  it  was  a  symbol  of  respect  for  the  king.  To  be  fit 
for  his  company,  the  dress  must  be  special.  The  absence  of  such  a 
dress  was,  in  the  case  before  us,  the  badge  of  irreverence  and  dis 
loyalty.  This  man  said  to  himself :  "  I  will  feed  at  the  feast  without 
acknowledging  its  intent.  Whoever  stops  me,  I  will  push  my  way  in, 
and  I  shall  sit  there  in  my  everyday  garments,  to  let  the  king  know 
that  I  do  not  respect  him  in  the  least,  and  will  not  wear  the  robes  he 
provides."  It  is  as  if  you  had  lost  a  son,  and  some  wretched  man 
should  say,  "  I  will  attend  the  funeral  in  a  wedding  suit.  I  shall  thus 
wound  the  feelings  of  the  mourners,  and  show  my  contempt  for  the 
whole  affair."  What  an  insult  it  would  be !  To  turn  the  picture. 
Suppose  you  were  being  married,  and  somebody  forced  his  way  into  the 
wedding  dressed  in  mourning,  with  crape  upon  his  hat,  and  black  kid 
gloves  upon  his  hands.  What  a  wanton  insult !  If  such  impudence 
were  met  with  a  horse-whip,  who  would  be  surprised?  Now,  this 
man  acted  in  that  fashion :  he  had  no  respect  for  the  king :  he 
showed  his  traitorous  nature  in  the  worst  possible  manner,  spiting  the 
king  in  his  own  halls  upon  a  tender  occasion.  Dear  friends,  I  trust 
that  you  can  truly  say,  "I  have  on  the  wedding  garment  of  reverence 
for  the  King.  I  do  not  despise  the  Lord  God  ;  but  I  bow  before  him 
in  true  worship.  I  would  come  into  his  church,  not  to  dishonour  him, 
but  to  give  glory  to  his  name."  The  wedding  garment  was  a  token  of 
respect  to  him  who  had  provided  the  feast  and  presided  over  it :  judge 
you  this  day  whether  you  have  on  the  wedding  garment,  by  enquiring 
whether  you  honour  and  reverence  the  Lord  God,  and  labour  to  be 
obedient  to  him  in  all  things. 

The  wedding  garment  was,  moreover,  a  token  of  honoitrfor  the  Prince. 
Those  who  put  on  the  wedding  garment  did  as  good  as  say,  "We 
join  in  the  joy  of  the  Prince,  and  come  hither  to-day  to  show  our 
attachment  to  him,  and  to  wish  him  joy  of  his  bride."  My  hearers, 
do  you  feel  a  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Many  do  not.  I  grieve 
to  say  we  have  a  race  of  men  sprung  up  nowadays  who  call  them 
selves  Christians,  who  pour  contempt  upon  his  precious  blood,  and 
ridicule  the  substitutionary  sacrifice.  Dreadful  assertion  1  but  it  is  a 
matter  of  fact.  The  name  of  Jesus,  why,  it  is  to  our  lives  what  the  sun 
is  to  the  skies,  what  the  rivers  are  to  the  plains.  Nothing  makes  us  so 
glad  as  thoughts  of  Jesus.  I  am  sure  when  I  hear  a  sermon  about 
Christ,  my  Master,  my  very  heart  grows  warm  within  me.  Is  it  so  with 
you  ?  Well,  then,  you  have  on  the  wedding  garment ;  that  is  to  say, 
you  do  truly,  though  it  be  but  in  a  simple  way,  pay  homage  to  the 


284  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Prince  of  Peace ;  you  love  the  name  and  person  of  Jesus,  xnd  you 
come  into  his  church  because  you  do  so. 

The  wedding  garment  also  signified  a  confession  of  sympathy  with 
the  great  occasion.  Every  man  who  ate  of  the  failings,  every  man  who 
drank  of  the  wines,  every  man  who  gave  his  presence,  was  a  helper  in 
the  honours  of  that  wedding  feast,  save  only  this  one  intruder,  who 
would  not  even  pretend  to  join  in  the  joy,  for  he  refused  the  simple  act  of 
putting  on  a  robe  fit  for  the  feast.  Dear  friend,  do  you  feel  sympathy  with 
the  Lord's  purposes  of  grace  ?  Do  you  rejoice  that  Jesus  finds  a  bride 
among  our  race  ?  Do  you  bless  Q-od  for  the  covenant  of  grace,  which 
includes  incarnation,  redemption,  and  sanctification  ?  Do  you  bless 
the  name  of  the  incarnate  God  for  taking  into  everlasting  union  with 
himself  a  people  prepared  of  the  Lord  ?  Well,  then,  you  are  in 
sympathy  with  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  and  you  have  a  right  to 
be  present  at  the  feast.  You  evidently  wear  the  wedding  garment 
which  denotes  your  joy  in  Christ,  your  interest  in  his  Church,  your 
part  and  lot  in  the  joyous  work  of  his  salvation. 

The  wedding  garment  means,  in  a  word,  conformity  to  the  require 
ments  of  the  occasion.  It  was  a  wedding,  and  the  guests  must  put  on 
a  suitable  dress.  This  man  refused  to  put  it  on.  He  was  proud,  and 
would  not  wear  the  gift  of  grace ;  he  was  self-willed,  and  must  needs 
be  singular,  and  show  his  independence  of  mind.  The  regulation 
was  by  no  means  irksome,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  guests  the  com 
mandment  was  not  grievous ;  but  this  man  would  have  his  own  way 
in  defiance  of  the  Lord  of  the  feast.  What  could  come  of  such  folly  ? 
Now,  beloved,  one  of  the  requirements  of  the  feast  is,  that  you  with 
your  heart  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  that  you  take  his  righteous 
ness  to  be  your  righteousness.  Do  you  refuse  this  ?  If  you  will  not 
accept  the  Lord  Jesus  as  your  substitute,  bearing  your  sins  in  his 
own  body  on  the  tree,  you  have  not  the  wedding  garment.  Another 
requirement  is  that  you  should  repent  of  sin  and  forsake  it ;  and  that 
you  should  follow  after  holiness,  and  endeavour  to  copy  the  example 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  You  are  to  possess,  as  the  work  of  divine  grace, 
a  godly  and  upright  character.  Have  you  such  a  character  ?  Even 
though  you  are  not  perfect,  yet,  inasmuch  as  you  follow  after 
righteousness,  you  have  the  wedding  garment.  You  say  that  you  are 
a  Christian ;  do  you  live  like  a  Christian  ?  Are  you  in  a  position  and 
condition  which  agree  with  the  gospel  feast?  If  so,  you  have  on 
the  wedding  garment. 

Those  who  came  unto  the  feast  were,  when  they  came,  both  bad  and 
good;  so  that  the  wedding  garment  does  not  relate  to  their  past 
character,  but  relates  to  something  with  which  they  were  invested 
when  they  came  to  the  banquet.  The  putting  on  of  a  wedding  robe 
cannot  refer  to  an  elaborate  ceremony,  or  a  feat  of  the  intellect,  or  to 
a  deep  experience  of  the  heart;  and  yet  it  involved  joining  in  the 
wedding,  or  not  joining  in  it.  It  involved  reverence  for  the  King, 
and  homage  to  the  Prince,  and  sympathy  with  the  whole  matter. 
Look  well  to  yourselves,  and  see  whether  you  truly  yield  yourselves  to 
the  Lord,  and  agree  with  him  in  the  whole  matter. 

III.     Thirdly,  WHO  is  THE  MAN  THAT  HAS  NOT  ON  THE  WEDDING 

GARMENT  ? 


WHAT   18   THE   WEDDING    GARMENT?  285 

I  should  say,  first,  he  is  the  man  who  rejects  God's  revealed  gospj  that 
ke  may  follow  his  own  thought  and  his  own  wisdom.  He  says  that  he  ia 
loyal  to  Christ,  and  he  expects  all  his  fellow  guests  to  be  firm  friends 
with  him,  for  is  he  not  in  the  banquet  as  much  as  they  are  ?  But  he 
does  not  mean  by  loyalty  what  they  mean  by  it.  He  is  among 
believers,  but  he  is  not  truly  of  them.  He  talks  about  atonement ;  he 
does  not  mean  substitution.  He  talks  about  the  divinity  of  Christ ;  he 
does  not  mean  the  Godhead  of  Christ.  He  talks  about  justification 
by  faith  ;  but  he  does  not  mean  the  old-fashioned  doctrine.  He  speaks 
of  regeneration,  but  means  evolution.  He  girds  himself  with  the 
garment  of  philosophy,  but  he  refuses  the  robe  of  revelation,  for  the 
cut  of  it  is  too  old-fashioned  for  him.  He  is  no  more  a  wedding 
guest  than  he  is  a  merry-andrew ;  perhaps,  not  so  much  so.  He  wears 
raiment  in  which  the  robe  of  righteousness  and  the  garments  of  glad 
ness  are  not  to  be  seen.  The  looms  of  free  grace  and  dying  love 
have  never  woven  him  a  wedding  dress.  His  robe  is  not  of  God's 
provision  ;  it  is  from  his  own  wardrobe.  He  glories  in  his  own  culture, 
and  not  in  the  revelation  of  God,  nor  yet  in  the  work  of  divine  grace 
upon  the  heart.  He  is  in  the  church,  but  he  is  not  in  Christ.  He 
has  a  name  to  live,  but  he  is  dead. 

The  next  person  who  has  not  on  the  wedding  garment  is  the  man 
who  refuses  the  righteousness  of  God  because  he  has  a  righteousness  of 
his  own.  He  thinks  his  work-day  dress  good  enough  for  Christ's  own 
wedding.  What  does  he  want  with  imputed  righteousness  ?  He 
scouts  it  as  immoral.  He  who  is  himself  immoral !  What  does  he  want 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  ?  He  does  not  need  to  be  washed 
from  crimson  stains.  He  writes  a  paper  against  the  sensuousness  of 
those  persons  who  sing — 

"  There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood 
Drawn  from  Iminanuel's  veins." 

His  own  righteousness,  though  it  be  of  the  law,  and  such  as  Paul 
rejected,  he  esteems  so  highly  that  he  counts  the  blood  of  the  covenant 
an  unholy  thing !  Ah  me,  the  insolence  of  self -righteousness !  Its 
pride  is  the  very  chief  of  sins,  for  it  slights  the  righteousness  of  God. 
Practically,  the  self-righteous  man  does  not  see  any  wedding  in  the 
gospel  system ;  he  does  not  see  anything  in  the  gospel  to  make  him 
glad,  nothing  for  him  to  sing  about,  nothing  to  make  him  shout  for 
joy  of  heart.  He  will  not  praise  the  Prince.  Not  he  !  He  is  under 
the  law,  and  he  is  content  to  be  a  slave ;  he  is  trying  to  save  himself 
by  his  own  works,  and  law  knows  no  holidays.  He  is  not  a  wedding 
guest,  but  a  mere  drudge. 

Another  sort  of  person  has  profession  without  feeling.  If  he  were 
outside  of  the  church  his  conscience  might  trouble  him  :  he  has  come 
inside  of  it,  and  now  he  says  to  himself,  "  It  is  all  right."  He  does 
not  care  to  watch  his  feelings ;  he  never  had  any :  he  would  rather 
not  have  any.  To  the  power  of  the  Word  he  is  a  stranger,  though 
he  knows  the  letter  of  it.  As  to  repentance,  and  the  burden  of  sin, 
he  never  knew  them,  and  does  not  want  to  know  them.  He  thinks 
Mr.  Bunyan  must  have  been  superstitious  or  morbid  when  he  wrote 
"  Grace  Abounding."  Joy  in  the  Lord  is  equally  a  thing  unknown 


286  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

co  him,  for  lie  hates  all  excitement.  He  has  no  solemn  depression! 
and  no  raptures,  for  he  has  no  spiritual  life.  As  he  has  no  holy 
feeling,  so  he  has  no  holy  action  :  he  is  a  Christian,  he  says ;  but 
having  put  up  the  sign-board,  he  drives  no  trade.  His  religion  operates 
far  more  upon  his  boots  and  his  hat  than  it  does  upon  his  heart :  that 
is  to  say  he  comes  out  respectably  dressed  on  a  Sunday,  but  his  religion 
never  affects  his  conduct.  Nobody  can  find  much  fault  with  him  except 
that  he  is  as  dead  as  a  door  nail.  He  commits  no  gross  sin,  he 
certainly  performs  no  brilliant  deeds  of  piety.  Spiritually  he  is  a  very 
well  washed  corpse — that  is  all. 

We  have  others  who  are  in  the  church,  who  think  that  what  they 
have  done  themselves,  or  what  nature  has  done  for  them,  is  quite 
enough.  They  do  not  seek  anything  supernatural.  They  do  not 
want  any  wedding  garment  more  than  their  every-day  coats.  They  are 
quite  reputable  in  appearance  even  now,  and  with  a  little  touching  up 
they  will  be  good  enough  without  the  new  birth,  and  without  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Alas,  my  hearers !  all  that  nature  can  ever  do  for  you 
will  leave  you  on  the  wrong  side  of  heaven.  You  may  cultivate  nature 
to  its  utmost,  it  will  never  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  "  Ye 
must  be  born  again."  If  you  have  not  come  into  living  contact  with  a 
living  Saviour  by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  you  may  be  in  the  Church, 
but  you  are  not  in  Christ,  and  have  not  on  the  wedding  garment. 

Why,  some  dare  to  come  into  the  church  who  have  not  even  common 
morality.  It  is  shocking  we  should  have  to  say  it,  but  nowadays,  we 
meet  with  those  who  call  themselves  Christians  who  can  drink  upon 
the  sly,  who  can  commit  uncleanness  with  their  bodies,  who  can  be 
dishonest  in  their  trading,  who  can  be  liars,  who  can  hate  their  own 
flesh  and  blood  and  be  at  enmity  with  their  brethren,  and  yet  dare  to 
come  to  the  communion  table.  In  the  highlands  of  Scotland  it  was  at 
one  time  difficult  to  get  Christian  people  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Table, 
for  they  so  trembled  under  a  sense  of  their  unworthiness.  We  do  not 
want  to  push  this  too  far,  but  that  is  a  great  deal  better  than  that 
unholy  daring,  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  minds  of  so  many  who 
serve  Christ  and  Belial.  Q-od  save  his  church  from  degradation! 
Unholy  professors  have  not  on  a  wedding  garment :  their  outward  robes 
by  no  means  befit  the  King's  feast :  but  they  are  a  dishonour  to  him. 

I  do  not  see  how  that  man  can  be  said  to  have  on  a  wedding 
garment  who  takes  no  interest  in  the  work  of  the  church.  You  see 
when  a  man  put  on  the  wedding  garment,  he  did  as  good  as  say,  "  I 
am  interested  in  the  wedding.  I  wish  God's  blessing  to  the  bride  and 
bridegroom."  But  many  come  in  now  to  the  King's  feast  who  do  not 
care  a  snap  of  the  finger  for  the  church  of  God,  nor  for  Christ  either. 
They  come  in  because  a  sort  of  selfishness  makes  them  anxious  to  be 
saved ;  but  as  to  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  they  do  not  care  whether 
she  starves  or  flourishes.  Sad  and  wretched  business  this !  If  mem 
bers  of  the  church  only  can  distribute  tracts  or  attend  meetings  for 
prayer — if  they  are  doing  this,  and  show  an  interest  thus  in  the  wedding 
— they  have  on  the  wedding  garment.  But  if  all  they  do  is  simply  to 
hear,  either  to  criticize  or  to  enjoy,  but  never  work  for  Christ,  nor 
pray  for  Christ,  they  have  no  sympathy  in  the  wedding  feast,  and 
therefore  they  have  not  on  a  wedding  garment. 


WHAT    IS    THE    WEDDING    GARMENT?  287 

IV.  To  close,  WHY  WAS  THIS  MAN  SPEECHLESS  ?  We  do  not  often 
meet  with  people  who  have  no  excuse.  Excuse-making  is  the  easiest 
trade  out.  A  man  can  make  an  excuse  out  of  nothing  at  all,  or  out 
of  what  is  less  than  nothing,  out  of  a  direct  lie.  But  here  was  a 
man  who  could  not  speak  ?  Why  was  that  ? 

Well,  I  think,  first,  the  affront  was  too  bare-faced.  "How  earnest  thou 
in  hither  ?  "  If  he  did  not  like  the  king  he  could  have  kept  outside. 
There  was  no  need  why  he  should  come  in  at  all,  and  there  display 
his  malice.  If  any  of  you  are  resolved  to  be  lost,  you  need  not  add  to 
your  eternal  ruin  by  making  a  profession  of  religion,  for  hypocrisy  is 
a  superfluity  of  naughtiness.  But  this  man  wilfully  refused  the 
wedding  garment.  Now  those  dear  souls  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning 
of  the  sermon  do  not  wilfully  refuse  the  Lord's  grace :  I  am  sure 
they  do  not.  Oh  no,  they  are  afraid  they  are  not  right,  but  they  do 
not  wish  to  be  wrong.  Such  are  not  among  those  whom  this  parable 
condemns. 

Next,  the  affront  was  so  audacious.  "  How  earnest  thou  in  hither?1' 
said  the  King.  He  must  have  pushed  by  the  deacons  at  the  door. 
The  fellow  would  come  in.  When  the  king  said,  "  Bind  him  hand 
and  foot,"  I  think  it  was  because  he  had  used  hand  and  foot  to  get  in. 
He  would  get  in;  he  said,  "I  will  get  in.  I  will  defy  the  king  to 
his  face,  and  sit  in  among  his  guests  without  a  wedding  garment." 
You,  dear  friend,  do  not  wish  to  do  that :  I  am  sure  it  is  the  last 
thing  you  would  do.  Why,  we  have  to  persuade  you  to  come  in  at 
all;  for  you  are  so  tenderly  jealous  lest  you  should  be  mistaken 
Do  not  let  this  parable  condemn  you. 

But  why  was  the  man  speechless  ?  I  answer  once  more,  because  it 
was  the  king  himself  who  spoke  to  him.  Ah  !  if  I  speak  to  you,  what  am 
I  but  flesh  and  blood  ?  You  do  not  mind  me  !  But  if  the  King  him 
self  were  here  to-day,  and  he  said  to  any  one  of  you,  "  Friend,  how 
earnest  thou  in  hither  not  having  a  wedding  garment  ?  "  the  tone  of 
his  voice,  the  glory  of  his  presence,  would  flash  in  upon  your  hearts, 
you  would  be  obliged  to  feel  it,  and  you  could  not  invent  an  answer. 
If  you  do  not  love  him,  if  you  have  no  reverence  for  him,  no  sympathy 
with  his  Son,  you  will  be  speechless  before  his  bar. 

Lastly,  the  reason  why  he  was  speechless  was  because,  even  if  he 
could  have  spoken  and  been  free  from  terror,  there  ivas  nothing  to  be 
said.  He  could  not  cry,  "  Lord,  I  did  not  know  it."  He  saw  all 
the  rest  with  wedding  garments  on.  He  could  not  say,  "Lord,  I  could 
not  get  a  wedding  garment  "  :  each  one  had  received  a  garment  gratis, 
and  he  might  have  received  the  same.  He  could  not  say,  "  Lord,  I 
was  pushed  in  here  by  somebody  else."  No,  he  had  willingly  chosen 
to  come,  and  to  defy  the  rule.  The  guests  had  all  looked  at  him : 
some  had  edged  a  little  way  off  from  him.  Some  had  tenderly  said, 
"  Brother,  will  you  not  put  on  the  wedding  garment  ?"  He  answered, 
"No."  "  Will  you  not  go  out  before  the  king  comes  in  ?  "  "  Why," 
he  said,  "  I  came  on  purpose  to  defy  him.  I  mean  to  keep  my 
place."  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  king  said,  "  Bind  him  hand  and  foot, 
and  cast  him  into  outer  darkness ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth."  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says  very  strong  things 
about  the  future  of  the  wicked.  I  have  been  accused  of  representing 


288  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  state  of  the  lost  in  too  horrible  a  manner.  I  have  never  gone 
beyond  the  dreadful  descriptions  given  by  our  Lord  himself.  Do  not 
risk  your  eternal  future.  Come  to  the  church  of  God  and  join  it,  but 
do  not  join  it  unless  you  love  the  Lord.  Do  not  come  to  the  gospel 
feast  unless  you  reverence  the  King ;  unless  you  love  the  Prince ; 
unless  you  are  in  sympathy  with  the  great  work  of  grace  which  is 
pictured  as  a  wedding  feast.  If  you  have  sympathy  with  the  wedding, 
love  to  the  Bridegroom,  and  delight  in  the  bride,  then  come  and  wel 
come  ;  for  you  have  the  wedding  garment.  I  am  thinking  just  now  of 
all  those  other  hundreds  of  people  at  the  wedding,  all  of  them  clothed 
with  the  wedding  garment.  What  joy  they  felt!  Many  had  been 
bad,  and  all  had  been  poor :  but  they  all  had  the  wedding  garment, 
and  not  one  of  them  was  cast  out.  If  you  will  but  put  your  trust  in 
Jesus,  and  so  honour  the  Son ;  and  rest  in  the  love  of  the  Father,  and 
BO  honour  the  King,  it  is  written,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out."  God  bless  you  for  Jesus'  sake  !  Amen. 


PORTIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Psalm  cxxi.,  cxxii. 


HYMNS  FEOM  "Oun  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 122  (Song  I.),  721,  873. 


THE   WEDDING  GARMENT. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  FEBRUARY  19ra,  1871,  BY 

C.   H.    SPUUGRON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 

44  And  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  he  saw  there  a  man  which  had 
not  on  a  wedding  garment  •  and  he  saith  unto  him,  Friend,  how  camt  st  thou  in 
hither  not  having  a  wedding  garment  ?  And  he  was  speechless.  Then  said  the  king 
to  the  servants,  Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and  cast  him  into  outer 
darkness  ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  For  many  are  called,  but 
few  are  chosen.'1 — Matthew  xxii.  11 — 14. 

APPARENTLY  the  parable  of  the  marriage  feast  would  have  been  com 
plete  without  this  addition,  but  there  was  infinite  wisdom  in  appending 
this  sequel.  This  is  seen  practically  in  the  experience  of  the  church  of 
God.  Those  who  are  permitted  to  see  large  additions  to  the  church 
will  find  this  parable  of  the  wedding  garment  to  be  singularly  appropriate 
arid  timely.  Whenever  there  is  a  revival,  and  many  are  brought  to 
Christ,  it  seems  inevitable  that  at  the  same  time  a  proportion  of  unworthy 
persons  should  enter  the  church.  However  diligent  may  be  the 
oversight,  there  will  be  pretenders  creeping  in  unawares  who  have  no 
true  part  or  lot  in  the  matter,  and  hence,  when  the  preacher  is  most 
earnest  for  the  ingathering  of  souls  to  Christ,  he  needs  to  couple  there 
with  a  holy  jealousy,  lest  those  who  come  forward  to  make  a  profession 
of  faith  should  be  moved  by  carnal  motives,  and  should  not  really 
have  given  their  hearts  to  God.  We  must  use  the  net  to  draw  in 
the  many,  but  all  are  not  good  fishes  that  are  taken  therein.  On  the 
threshing  floor  of  Zion  the  heap  is  not  all  pure  wheat,  the  chaff  is 
mingled  with  the  grain,  and  therefore  the  winnowing  fan  is  wanted. 
God's  furnace  is  in  Zion,  and  there  is  good  need  for  it,  for  the  gold  is 
yet  in  the  ore,  and  needs  to  be  separated  from  the  dross.  Wood, 
'hay,  and  stubble  building  is  quick  work,  but  it  is  a  waste  of  effort ;  we 
need  continually  to  examine  our  materials,  and  see  that  we  use  only  gold, 
silver,  and  precious  stones.  It  is  most  needful  in  times  of  religious  ex 
citement,  to  remind  men  that  godliness  does  n«>t  consist  in  profession, 
but  must  be  proved  by  inward  vitality  and  outward  holiness.  Every 
thing  will  have  to  be  tested  by  a  heart-searching  God,  and  if,  when  he 
comes  to  search  us,  we  are  found  wanting,  we  shall  be  expelled  even 
from  the  marriage  feast  itself;  for  there  is  a  way  to  hell  from  the  very 
gates  of  heaven.  In  a  word,  it  is  well  for  all  men  to  be  reminded  that 
the  enemies  of  the  great  King  are  not  only  outside  the  church,  but  they 
are  even  in  it;  while  a  part  refuse  to  come  to  the  wedding  of  his  Son, 
others  press  into  the  banquet  and  are  still  his  foes.  May  God  grant 
that  this  subject  may  have  a  heart-searching  etfect.  May  it  be  as  the 
Nos.  97G 


98  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

north  wind  when  it  blows  through  the  marrow  of  the  bones.  May  it 
lead  us  to  desire  to  be  searched  and  tried  of  God,  whether  we  be  truly  in 
the  faith,  or  are  reprobates  in  his  esteem. 

The  parable  may  be  discoursed  upon  under  five  heads.  Here  is  an 
enemy  at  the  feast;  here  is  the  king  at  the  feast ;  that  king  becomes 
the  judge  at  the  feast;  and  hence  the  enemy  becomes  the  criminal  ai 
the  feast;  and  swiftly  is  removed  by  the  executioner  at  the  feast. 

I.  We  see  in  the  text  AN  ENEMY  AT  THE  FEAST. 

He  came  into  the  banquet  when  he  was  bidden,  but  he  came  only  in 
appearance,  he  came  not  in  heart.  The  banquet  was  intended  for  the  honoui 
of  the  son,  but  this  man  meant  not  so ;  he  was  willing  to  eat  the  good 
things,  but  he  intended  no  respect  to  the  prince.  He  did  not,  like 
others,  say  "  I  will  not  come,  for  I  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign 
over  me;"  but  he  said,  "I  will  come,  but  it  shall  be  in  such  a  way 
that  the  royal  purpose  shall  not  be  served,  but  rather  hindered.  I  shall 
be  present  as  an  onlooker,  but  take  no  share  in  the  ceremony  ;  I  will, 
on  the  contrary,  show  that  I  have  no  care  for  the  business  in  hand,  except 
so  far  as  it  serves  my  turn."  The  man  came  in  the  full  exercise  of  self- 
will  and  self-love.  He  resolved  to  yield  no  homage,  but  to  assert  his 
independent  self-sovereignty.  He  would  show  the  king  even  at  his 
table,  where  his  bounties  were  so  largely  dispensed,  that  he  was  not 
afraid  to  affront  him.  When  he  came  to  the  door  of  the  feast,  he 
found  the  guests  all  putting  on  the  garment  suitable  for  the  marriage 
banquet.  As  here,  in  our  own  country,  at  a  funeral,  each  mourner  is 
expected  to  put  on  the  articles  of  mourning  which  are  provided,  so  at 
the  wedding  feast  each  person  was  expected  to  wear  the  bridegroom's 
favours,  the  garment  which,  as  a  badge,  marked  him  as  an  attendant  at 
the  wedding,  and  as  one  who  rejoiced  in  it.  While  others  cheerfully  put 
on  this  wedding  dress  the  traitor  would  not ;  he  resolved  to  defy  the 
rules  of  the  palace,  and  to  insult  the  king  by  appearing  in  his  own 
garments.  He  scorned  to  wear  the  livery  of  respectful  joy,  he  pre 
ferred  to  make  himself  conspicuous  by  his  daring  insolence.  The  badge 
was  intended  to  show  that  the  wearer  was  a  real  participator  in  the  joy 
of  the  feast,  and  for  that  very  reason  he  would  not  put  it  on.  He  did 
not  acknowledge  the  king  nor  the  prince,  nor  care  one  atom  about 
the  gladsome  event.  He  had  no  objection  to  be  there,  to  eat  the 
dainties,  or  recline  upon  the  seats,  and  see  the  pomp  and  the  show,  but 
he  was  only  in  it,  and  not  of  it ;  he  was  there  in  body,  but  not  in  spirit. 
Are  there  not  crowds  of  people  whose  union  to  the  church  is  nothing 
better  than  an  insult  to  God  ?  Custom  sways  them,  and  not  sincere 
faith.  They  have  no  regard  to  the  great  Head  of  the  church  or  to  the 
heart-searching  God.  They  treat  church-membership  as  a  trifle,  and 
have  no  tenderness  of  heart  touching  the  matter.  They,  in  effect,  say, 
"  The  table  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible."  "  Spots  are  they  in  our 
feasts,  feeding  themselves  without  fear." 

Many  a  time  the  question  has  been  asked,  "What  was  the  wedding 
garment  ?  "  It  is  a  question  which  need  not  be  curiously  pryed  into.  So 
many  answers  have  been  given  that  I  conclude  that  if  our  Saviour  had 
intended  any  one  specific  thing  he  would  have  expressed  himself  more 
plainly,  so  that  we  should  have  been  able,  without  so  much  theological 
disputing,  to  have  understood  what  he  meant.  It  seems  to  me  that 
our  Lord  intended  much  more  than  any  one  thing.  The  guests  were 


THE   WEDDING   GARMENT.  99 

bidden  to  come  to  the  wedding  to  sho^  their  respect  to  the  king  and 
prince ;  some  would  not  come  at  all,  and  so  showed  their  sedition  ;  this 
man  came,  and  when  he  heard  the  regulation,  that  a  certain  garment 
should  be  put  on,  comely  in  appearance  and  suitable  for  the  occasion, 
he  determined  that  he  would  not  wear  it.  In  this  act  of  rebellion, 
he  went  as  far  in  opposition  as  they  did  who  would  not  come  at  all ; 
and  he  went  a  little  further,  for  in  the  very  presence  of  the  guests 
and  of  the  king,  he  dared  to  declare  his  disloyalty  and  contempt.  Alas, 
how  many  are  willing  enough  to  receive  gospel  blessings,  bnt  they  are  still 
at  enmity  with  God,  and  have  no  delight  in  the  only  Begotten  Son. 
Such  will  dare  to  use  the  forms  of  godliness,  and  yet  their  hearts  are 
full  of  rebellion  against  the  Lord.  The  wedding  garment  represents 
anything  which  is  indispensable  to  a  Christian,  but  which  the  unrenewed 
heart  is  not  willing  to  accept,  anything  which  the  Lord  ordains  to  be 
a  necessary  attendant  of  salvation  against  which  selfishness  rebels. 
Hence  it  may  be  said  to  be  Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  us,  for 
alas,  many  nominal  Christians  kick  against  the  doctrine  of  justification 
by  the  righteousness  of  the  Saviour,  and  set  up  their  own  self-righteous 
ness  in  opposition  to  it.  To  be  found  in  Christ,  not  having  our  own 
righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God 
by  faith,  is  a  very  prominent  badge  of  a  real  servant  of  God,  and  to  re 
fuse  it  is  to  manifest  opposition  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  to  the  name, 
person,  and  work  of  his  exalted  Son.  But  we  might  with  equal  truth 
say  that  the  wedding  dress  is  a  holy  character,  the  imparted  righteous 
ness  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works  in  us,  and  which  is  equally  necessary 
as  a  proof  of  grace.  If  you  question  such  a  statement,  I  would  remind 
you  of  the  dress  which  adorns  the  saints  in  heaven.  What  is. said  of 
it  ?  "  They  have  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb."  Their  robes  therefore  were  such  as  once  needed  washing ; 
and  this  could  not  be  said  in  any  sense  of  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  that  was  always  perfect  and  spotless.  It  is  clear  then 
that  the  figure  is  sometimes  applied  to  saints  in  reference  to  their  personal 
character.  Holiness  is  always  present  in  those  who  are  loyal  guests  of 
the  great  King,  for  "  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Too 
oiany  professors  pacify  themselves  with  the  idea  that  they  possess  imputed 
righteousness,  while  they  are  indifferent  to  the  sanctifying  work  of  the 
Spirit.  They  refuse  to  put  on  the  garment  of  obedience,  they  reject  the 
white  linen  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints.  They  thus  re  veal  their  self- 
will,  their  enmity  to  God,  and  their  non-submission  to  his  Son.  Such 
men  may  talk  what  they  will  about  justification  by  faith,  and  salvation  by 
grace,  but  they  are  rebels  at  heart,  they  have  not  on  the  wedding  dress 
any  more  than  the  self-righteous,  whom  they  so  eagerly  condemn. 
The  fact  is,  if  we  wish. for  the  blessings  of  grace,  we  must  in  our  hearts 
submit  to  the  rules  of  grace  without  picking  and  choosing.  It  is  idle 
to  dispute  whether  the  wedding  garment  is  faith  or  love,  as  some  have 
done ;  for  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  and  blessings  of  the  covenant  go 
together.  Ko  man  ever  had  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ  with 
out  receiving  at  the  same  time  a  measure  of  the  righteousness  wrought 
in  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Justification  by  faith  is  not  contrary  to  the 
production  of  good  works:  God  forbid.  The  faith  by  which  we  are 
justified  is  the  faith  which  produces  holiness,  and  no  man  is  justified  by 
taith  which  does  not  also  sanctify  him,  and  deliver  him  from  the  love 


100  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  sin.  All  the  essentials  o£  the  Christian  character  may  be  under 
stood  as  making  up  the  great  wedding  garment.  In  one  word,  we  put 
on  Christ,  and  he  is  "  made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom,  righteousness, 
ganctification,  and  redemption." 

The  wedding  garment  is  simply  mentioned  here  as  being  a  test  of 
loyalty  to  those  who  came  to  the  marriage  feast,  and  as  a  mode  by 
which  rebellion  was  avowed  and  loyalty  made  apparent.  Here  was  a 
man  then  who  came  in  to  the  gospel  feast,  and  yet  refused  to  comply 
with  the  command  which  related  to  that  feast.  He  wilfully  preferred 
self  to  God,  his  heart  was  full  of  enmity  and  pride,  he  despised  the  gifts 
of  grace,  he  scorned  the  rule  of  love,  he  stood  a  defiant  rebel  even  at 
the  banquet  of  mercy  which  his  King  had  spread. 

His  sin  lay,  first  of  all,  in  coming  in  there  at  all  without  the  wedding 
garment.  If  he  did  not  mean  to  be  of  one  heart  with  his  fellow  guests 
and  his  lord,  why  did  he  come  ?  If  a  man  does  not  intend  to  yield 
himself  up  to  God's  will,  why  does  he  profess  to  be  of  God's  church  ? 
If  a  man  is  not  saved  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  why  does  he  pro 
fess  to  be  a  believer  in  Christ  ?  If  he  will  not  be  obedient  to  Christ's 
holy  will,  why  does  he  pretend  to  be  a  follower  of  Christ?  It  is  a 
grave  mistake  for  any  person  to  imagine  that  he  can  be  in  the  church 
of  God  to  his  own  advantage  unless  his  heart  is  renewed,  unless  he 
means  what  he  declares,  and  sincerely  loves  the  rule  under  which  he 
professes  to  put  himself. 

The  intruder's  sin  was  aggravated  by  the  fact,  that  after  he  had  unlaw 
fully  come  into  the  feast  he  still  continued  there  without  the  wedding  robe. 
He  does  not  appear  to  have  had  any  compunction,  or  to  have  thought  of 
amending  his  error.  Only  when  the  king  came  in  and  said,  "  Take  him 
away,"  had  the  insolent  rebel  any  idea  of  removing.  Had  he  come  in 
there,  as  I  fear  some  of  you  have  come  into  the  church,  under  a  mistake, 
thinking  that  there  was  no  need  of  the  wedding  dress,  when  he  looked 
around  and  saw  all  other  persons  wearing  it,  and  observed  that  it  was 
the  peculiar  mark  of  a  guest,  he  would  have  felt  uneasy  and  have  gone 
to  those  who  kept  the  royal  wardrobe  to  get  such  a  robe  for  himself ; 
arid  then  his  sin  in  the  matter  would  not  have  been  laid  to  his  charge. 
But  he  persisted  in  remaining  where  he  was,  and  as  he  was.  0  my  dear 
hearers,  if  you  have  already  perpetrated  the  sin  of  union  with  the  visible 
church  of  God  without  having  the  prerequisites,  without  being  indeed 
submissive  to  God  in  heart  and  desirous  to  honour  Christ,  I  entreat  you, 
seek  what  is  wanted,  seek  faith  in  God,  seek  a  new  heart,  seek  holiness  of 
life,  seek  to  become  a  loyal  subject  of  the  king,  and  be  not  content  until 
you  have  these  things,  for  the  King  will  soon  come  in  :  he  gives  yon 
time  as  yet,  may  he  also  give  you  grace  to  see  to  it  that,  being  now 
where  you  ought  never  to  have  been,  you  may  yet  make  your  position 
a  right  one  by  obtaining  that  which  will  justify  you  in  remaining  where 
you  are.  The  guest  in  his  own  clothes  was  a  speckled  bird  amongst 
that  company,  it  was  possible  for  him  even  then  to  have  become  one 
of  them;  but  he  would  not,  he  continued  to  defy  the  King. 

This  persistence  he  retained  though  he  probably  knew  the  fate  o  f 
those  who  had  refused  to  come.  He  knew  that  the  king  had  sent  forth 
his  armies  and  destroyed  those  wicked  men  who  had  molested  his 
messengers,  and  yet  he  dared  to  recline  at  his  ease  in  the  very 
teeth,  and  defying  the  terrible  power  of  the  monarch.  He  made 


THE    WEDDING   GARMENT.  101 

his  brow  as  brass  and  hardened  his  heart  as  adamant,  and  forced 
his  way  into  a  position  where  his  seditious  spirit  would  be  able  to 
display  itself  conspicuously.  He  said  within  his  soul,  "I  care  nothing 
for  this  marriage.  I  will  make  sport  of  it;  I  will  intrude  myself  into 
that  feast  and  show  my  contempt.  I  will  take  the  provisions,  but 
the  son  shall  have  no  honour  from  me,  and  the  king  shall  not 
find  me  bend  my  will  to  his  command."  Thus  he  had  the  audacity  tc 
disport  himself  as  a  wilful  rebel  at  the  feast  of  mercy.  Are  there  any 
such  among  you  here?  The  tendency  will  be  for  those  who  are  not  so, 
to  begin  to  condemn  themselves.  I  know  already  one  who  has  said, 
"  I  am  that  guest  that  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment."  She  is  not 
that  one,  for  she  is  not  even  a  member  of  the  church,  and  therefore  it 
cannot  concern  her;  but  many  like  her  write  bitter  tilings  against 
themselves.  Another  will  be  saying,  "  I  am  that  one,"  whereas,  if  there 
be  one  that  lives  near  to  God  and  whose  desire  is  to  be  like  Christ,  and 
to  be  in  all  things  conformed  to  the  divine  will,  he  is  the  man.  You 
who  are  most  assuredly  right  will  probably  be  suspicious  that  you  are 
not,  and  you  who  are  insincere  and  have  never  submitted  yourselves 
to  the  will  of  God  will  probably  say,  "  What  does  it  matter  ?  I  am 
doing  as  well  as  others,  I  give  as  much,  I  attend  the  means  as  much, 
surely  there  can  be  no  cause  for  concern  in  me."  God  grant  that  you 
may  feel  anxiety  and  fear  before  the  Lord. 

II.  We  pass  on  to  the  next  point — THE  KING  AT  THE  FEAST. 
"  The  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests."  What  an  honour  and  privilege  this 
was  to  the  poor  creatures  whom  his  royal  munificence  had  brought 
together !    Was  it   not  indeed  the  chief  point  of  the  entire  festival  ? 
One  of  our  greatest  joys  is  to  sing — 

u  The  king  himself  comes  near 
And  feasts  his  saints  to-day  !'* 

What  would  church  fellowship  be  if  it  had  not  the  fellowship  of  God 
with  it?  To  sit  with  my  dear  brethren  and  rejoice  in  their  love 
is  exceedingly  delightful;  but  the  best  wine  is  fellowship  with  the 
Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  The  king  did  not  provide 
the  banquet  and  leave  his  guests  to  eat  by  themselves,  but  he  "  came 
in;"  and  into  every  gospel  church  gathered  according  to  his  command 
the  King  will  come.  I  am  sure  the  most  fervent  desire  of  this  church 
is  that  the  King  may  personally  visit  us.  We  trust  he  is  with  us,  but 
we  want  him  yet  more  fully  to  reveal  himself.  Our  cry  is,  "  Come, 
great  King,  with  all  thy  glorious  power,  with  thy  Spirit  and  with  thy 
glorious  Son,  and  manifest  thyself  to  us  as  thou  dost  not  unto  the 
world." 

When  the  king  came  into  the  banqueting  chamber  he  saw  the 
guests,  and  they  also  saw  him.  It  was  a  mutual  revelation.  Ever 
sweet  is  this  to  the  saints,  that  their  God  looks  upon  them ;  his  look 
brings  no  terror  to  our  minds  when  we  are  loyal  and  loving.  "  Thou 
God  seest  me"  is  sweet  music.  We  desire  to  abide  for  ever  beneath 
the  divine  inspection,  for  it  is  an  inspection  of  unbounded  love.  ^  He 
sees  our  faults,  it  is  to  remove  them  ;  he  notes  our  imperfections,  it  is 
to  cleanse  them  away.  Behold  me,  0  great  King,  and  lift  up  thine 
eyes  upon  me,  accepting  me  in  the  Beloved.  What  joy  it  is  to  us  who 
are  saved  in  Christ  Jesus  that  we  also  can  see  him!  "Through  a  glass 


102  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

darkly,"  I  grant  you  we  behold  him,  for  as  yet  we  are  not  fit  to  behold 
the  full  splendour  of  his  Godhead !  but  yet  how  sweetly  doth  he  reveal 
himself  to  our  souls  and  unveil  his  eternal  love.  Then  it  is  that  the 
feast  is  most  fully  a  banquet  of  wine,  when  the  banner  of  love  waves 
over  us,  and  the  king's  voice  fills  us  with  unspeakable  delight. 

"  The  king  came  in  to  see  his  guests."  This,  I  say,  was  the  crowning 
point  of  the  entire  banquet.  Observe,  that  he  came  in  after  they  were 
in  their  places.  They  did  not  see  him  before  they  had  entered  his  halls. 
When  an  inferior  entertains  a  superior  he  always  advances  to  the  door 
to  meet  him  and  waits  till  he  comes.  If  her  Majesty  the  Queen  were 
entertained  by  one  of  her  nobles,  he  would  be  in  waiting,  and  at  the 
threshold  would  meet  her ;  but  when  a  superior  entertains  an  inferior 
the  inferior  may  take  his  seat  at  the  table,  and  when  all  is  ready  the 
noble  host  will  come  in.  It  is  so  in  the  banquet  of  mercy.  You  and 
I  see  nothing  of  God,  by  way  of  communion  with  him,  until  first  we 
have  been  brought  in  by  the  message  of  mercy  to  the  marriage-feast 
of  the  gospel;  for,  indeed,  until  then  a  sight  of  God  would  strike  us 
with  terror  : — 

"  Till  God  in  human  flesh  I  see, 

My  thoughts  no  comfort  find ; 
The  holy,  just,  and  sacred  Three 
Are  terrors  to  my  mind ; 

But  when  Immanuel's  face  appear, 

My  hope,  my  joy,  begins  ; 
His  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear, 

His  grace  removes  my  sins." 

When  I  get  to  the  banquet  of  mercy,  then  it  is  that  I  can  dare  to  look 
at  the  King  of  kings,  but  not  till  then.  What  a  joyous  sight,  a  vision 
of  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory  as 
he  appears  in  the  gospel,  feasting  us  upon  his  fatlings.  An  incar 
nate  God  makes  God  visible  to  us  and  makes  us  happy  in  the  sight. 
"  How  canst  thou  see  my  face  and  live  ?"  was  the  old  question, 
but,  behold,  it  is  answered  this  day.  At  the  marriage  union  of  Christ 
with  his  people  we  see  the  face  of  the  King  in  his  beauty,  and  our  souls 
not  only  live,  but  we  have  life  more  abundantly. 

Observe,  dear  brethren,  that  the  King  has  special  times  for  this.  He 
is  not  always  in  the  festal  chamber ;  to  our  sorrow  we  sometimes  miss 
the  King's  presence  at  his  table.  We  have  the  ordinances  always,, 
but  we  do  not  always  enjoy  the  God  of  ordinances.  The  means  of 
grace  are  abiding,  but  the  grace  of  the  means  will  come  and  go  accord 
ing  to  the  sovereign  good  pleasure  of  our  God.  The  King  has  his 
times  of  coming  in.  These  are  glad  times  to  his  people,  but  they 
are  trying  times  to  the  mass  of  professors.  When  are  these  times? 
So  far  as  unworthy  guests  are  concerned,  the  times  of  God's  visitation 
are  those  seasons  when  character  is  manifested.  All  times  and  periods 
do  not  reveal  character.  A  lion  may  lie  all  day  asleep,  you  may  scarce 
know  but  what  it  is  tame ;  but  when  the  night  brings  the  time  for  it  to> 
go  forth  to  its  prey,  then  it  howls,  and  displays  its  ferocity.  And  so 
an  ungodly  man  may  lie  down  in  the  church  of  God  with  the  lambs  of 
the  flock,  and  nothing  may  lead  you  to  suspect  his  true  character,, 
but  when  the  time  comes  for  him  to  make  profit  by  sin,  or  to  get 
pleasure  by  sin,  or  to  escape  from  persecution  by  sin,  then  you  find  out 


THE  WEDDING  GARMENT.  103 

what  he  is.  These  providences  are  the  King's  coming  in  to  scrutinise 
the  guests.  Changes  in  the  conditions  of  the  church,  changes  in  tho 
condition  of  the  individual,  all  sorts  of  providential  events  go  to  make 
up  the  great  sieve  by  which  the  wheat  and  the  chaff  are  separated. 

A  great  and  most  solemn  coming  in  of  the  King  to  see  the  guests  is, 
when  having  looked  over  the  church,  unknown  to  us,  he  decides  that 
such  and  such  a  hypocrite  has  had  space  enough  for  repentance 
and  time  enough  for  mischief,  and  must  now  be  summoned  to  the 
dread  tribunal  by  death.  The  time  when  the  King  comes  in  to  see  his 
guests  is  not  the  last  judgment,  for  that  is  the  coming  of  the  Son  and  not 
of  the  Father ;  and  if  it  were  intended  in  the  parable,  we  should  read 
that  the  prince  came  in  to  see  his  guests.  "We  are  led  to  view  the 
King  himself  as  continually  judging  professors  and  detecting  the  rebels 
who  place  themselves  among  the  saints ;  by  this  judgment  of  God  men 
are  taken  away  from  the  church  in  their  transgressions,  bound  Land  and 
foot,  and  cast  into  the  outer  darkness,  where  there  is  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth.  I  do  not  know,  my  dear  brethren,  when  God  may 
be  visiting  this  church,  and  taking  away  the  men  that  are  rebels  in  our 
midst,  but  I  do  know  that  when  professors  die  it  is  not  certain  that  all 
of  them  sleep  in  Jesus,  but  some  of  them  are  rooted  up,  like  tares  from 
among  the  wheat,  and  are  bound  up  in  bundles  to  burn.  The  division 
is  going  on  constantly.  The  King's  presence  is  known  to  believers  in 
the  joy  which  they  feel,  but  it  is  made  known  to  hypocrites  by  his 
cutting  them  off  and  appointing  them  their  portion  in  eternal  woe. 

If,  however,  there  is  any  one  time  when  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  the 
King  comes  in  to  see  the  guests,  it  is  after  large  ingatherings  from  the 
world;  for  notice  here,  when  the  servants  had  gathered  in  guests  in  large 
numbers,  it  was  then  that  the  king  came  in.  Now  it  will  be  after  the 
time  of  revival  which  we  are  feeling  just  now,  when  I  hope  a  great  many 
will  be  added  to  the  church,  that  the  Lord  will  search  and  sift  us.  If 
there  has  been  no  visitation  of  the  church  before  for  purposes  of  love 
or  judgment — for  they  go  together — we  shall  be  quite  sure  to  have  such 
a  visit  from  the  great  Lord  himself  at  this  time. 

III.  Solemnly  think  of  THE  JUDGE  AT  THE  FEAST.  To  all  the  rest 
at  the  festival  he  was  the  king,  the  beloved  monarch,  the  munificent 
donor  of  a  splendid  banquet,  and  all  eyes  feasted  as  they  looked  at  him: 
it  was  joy  enough  to  behold  the  king  in  his  beauty,  and  to  see  his  Son 
with  all  his  royal  jewels  on,  attired  for  the  wedding  feast ;  but  he  was 
a  judge  to  the  hypocritical  intruder.  The  day  of  comfort  to  his  saints 
is  also  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God.  He  who  comes  to  comfort  all 
that  mourn,  comes  at  the  same  time  to  smite  the  rebellious  with  a  rod 
of  iron. 

The  judge  begins,  as  you  perceive,  by  seeing,  "  He  saw  there  a  man. 
Wluit  eyes  are  those  of  Omniscience  !  The  parable  represents  but  one 
such  man  as  present,  yet  the  All-seeing  King  saw  him  at  once,  he  fixed 
his  flaming  eyes  on  that  one.  I  suppose  it  was  a  greater  crowd  than 
this,  but  the  king  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  solitary  offender  at  once.  Does- 
the  parable  speak  of  only  one  because  we  may  expect  to  find  only  one 
hypocrite  in  a  church?  Alas  1  there  have  been  many  such  at  the 
treading  feast,  but  one  only  is  mentioned  to  show  us  that  if  there  were- 
out  one,  God  would  find  him  out ;  and,  being  many,  the  sinners  in  Zion 
may  be  the  more  sure  that  they  will  not  escape.  It  is  possible  that 


104  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

none  of  the  guests  may  have  noticed  the  man's  garments;  the 
parable  makes  no  remark  upon  any  expostulations  made  to  him  bv 
others ;  perhaps  they  were  all  so  taken  up  with  the  sight  of  the  king, 
and  so  glad  to  be  at  the  feast  themselves,  that  they  had  no  heart  to 
make  remarks  upon  others.  But  this  is  certain,  that  the  king  detected 
at  once  the  absence  of  what  was  requisite  to  the  marriage  feast.  It 
was  not  the  presence  of  anything  offensive,  but  the  absence  of  something 
which  was  requisite.  He  did  not  say  to  the  unworthy  guest,  "Thou 
hast  rags  upon  thee,"  or  "  thou  art  filthy,"  or  "  thou  hast  an  unwashed 
face :  "  he  enquired  solely  into  the  absence  of  the  peculiar  badge 
which  denoted  a  loving  guest.  God  will  judge,  and  does  continually 
judge  his  church  upon  this  question,  the  absence  of  what  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  being  a  Christian,  the  absence  of  honouring  the  Son,  and 
obeying  the  Father.  0  soul,  if  thou  art  a  professor  of  religion,  and  yet 
dost  not  love  Jesus,  and  dost  not  fear  the  great  King  of  kings,  thou 
lackest  the  wedding  robe,  and  what  dost  thou  here  ?  The  king  will  see 
at  once  that  thou  lackest  it.  Thy  morality,  thy  generosity,  thy  high 
sounding  prayers,  ay,  and  even  thine  eloquent  discoursings,  these  cannot 
conceal  from  him  the  fact  that  thy  heart  is  not  with  him.  The  one 
thing  needful  is  to  accept  loyally  the  Lord  as  King. 

The  king  next  began  to  deal  with  the  rebel.  Note  how  he  spoke 
with  him.  He  took  him  on  his  own  ground.  It  was  too  high  a  day  for 
the  king  to  use  rough  speech ;  the  man  pretended  to  be  a  friend,  and  he 
addressed  him  as  such,  but  though  the  word  I  doubt  not  was  uttered 
softly,  it  must  have  stung  him  if  he  had  any  feeling  left.  Judas  ex 
emplified  in  his  own  person  this  character.  When  he  gave  the  Saviour 
the  traitor's  kiss,  our  Lord  addressed  him  as  "  friend."  He  pre 
tended  to  be  a  friend.  A  friend,  indeed,  to  insult  his  king  at  his  own 
table,  and  to  select  for  the  insult  the  delicate  occasion  of  the  prince's 
marriage  to  which  he  had  been  hospitably  invited  !  This  was  infamous  ! 
Friend  indeed !  Where  will  you  find  enemies  if  such  shall  be  called 
friends?  The  king  put  it  to  him,  "  How  earnest  thou  in  hither  ?  What 
business  hast  thou  here  ?  What  could  have  induced  thee  so  maliciously 
to  defy  me  ?  To  smite  me  in  my  tenderest  point,  and  mock  my  guests,  and 
trample  on  my  son?  Didst  thou  intend  such  daring  insolence?  "  How 
earnest  thou  in  hither  ?  In  hither?  Was  there  nowhere  else  to  pour 
ibrth  thy  sedition,  no  other  spot  in  which  to  play  the  traitor  ?  Needest 
tiiou  come  into  my  palace,  and  to  my  table,  and  before  my  son  on  his 
wedding  day  reveal  thy  enmity?  Was  there  a  need  to  do  this  ?" 
So  may  the  Lord  say  to  some  of  us.  "  Were  there  no  other  ways  to 
sin,  but  that  you  must  profess  to  be  my  servant  when  you  were  not 
so  ?  Were  there  no  other  bowls  that  you  could  drink  from,  that  ye 
must  profane  the  cups  of  my  table?  Was  there  no  other  bread  that 
you  could  put  into  your  wicked  mouths  but  the  bread  that  represents 
the  body  of  my  Son  ?  Had  you  nowhere  else  to  sin  in  that  you 
must  needs  sin  in  the  church  ?  Could  you  do  nothing  else  to  show 
your  spite  but  that  you  must  make  a  lying  profession  of  faith  in  my 
Son,  who  bled  upon  the  cross  to  redeem  the  sons  of  men  ?  Could  -you 
assail  me  nowhere  else  but  through  the  wounds  of  my  only-begotten 
Son  ?  Could  you  vex  my  Spirit  by  no  other  means  than  by  pretending 
to  be  my  friend,  and  thrusting  yourself  in  hither,  while  defiantly 
rejecting  that  which  was  necessary  to  do  me  honour,  and  to  do  my 


THE   WEDDING   GARMENT.  105 

Son  honour,  at  the  festival  of  my  grace?"  I  dare  not  dwell  upon  the 
topic.  I  give  you  the  text ;  I  pray  that  your  conscience  may  preach 
the  sermon. 

Notice,  however,  one  thing,  and  that  is,  that  the  king,  when  he 
thus  turned  a  judge,  dealt  with  this  man  only  about  himself.  "  How 
earnest  thou  in  hither  ?"  Did  I  hear  a  whisper  in  some  one's  mind, 
"Well,  if  I  am  unfit  to  be  a  church  member,  there  are  a  great 
many  others  who  are  in  the  same  condemnation."  What  is  that  to 
thee  ?  See  thou  to  thyself !  When  the  king  came  in  to  see  the 
guests  he  did  not  say  to  this  man,  "  How  came  yonder  persons  here 
without  the  wedding  garment?"  His  dealings  were  personal  with  him 
alone:  "  How  earnest  thou  in  hither,  not  having  on  the  wedding  gar 
ment  ?"  Professor,  look  to  thyself,  look  to  thyself.  Let  thy  chafity 
begin  at  home.  Cast  out  the  beam  from  thine  own  eye,  and  then 
mayst  thou  see  clearly  to  cast  out  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's 
eye.  He  fixed  on  the  one  man,  made  him  his  entire  audience,  and 
directed  to  him  the  solemn  question,  "  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in 
hither  ? "  Ah,  my  dear  hearers,  as  the  pastor  of  this  church  it  has 
been  a  very  great  joy  to  me  to  see  our  numbers  increased;  many  have 
been  added  to  us,  and  many  have  gone  forth  from  us  to  form  other 
churches ;  my  joy  has  been  constant  in  God  concerning  this  matter. 
Our  beloved  brethren  associated  with  me  in  office  have  done  their  best 
to  keep  any  of  you  back  who  have  sought  membership  in  whom  we 
could  see  no  fruits  corresponding.  We  have  not  used  our  office  deceit 
fully  ;  as  in  the  sight  of  God  we  have  tried  to  be  neither  too  severe  nor 
too  lax,  but  for  all  that  I  cannot  but  know  that  there  are  some  of  you 
who  are  not  Christians  though  you  bear  the  name.  Like  those  of  old, 
you  say  you  are  Jews  and  are  not,  but  do  lie.  I  am  not  now  speaking  of 
any  who  have  fallen  into  sin  and  have  suffered  our  rebuke,  or  have  been 
separated  from  us  by  excommunication  and  yet  remain  in  the  congrega 
tion;  I  mean  others  of  you  whose  lives  are  all  that  could  be  desired  openly  r 
and  yet  there  is  a  worm  at  the  heart  of  your  profession  ;  you  are  not 
vitally  godly,  you  have  a  name  to  live,  and  you  keep  that  name  un 
tarnished  as  yet,  but  you  are  dead.  Search  ye  yourselves;  do  not  from 
this  tabernacle  descend  into  hell ;  let  your  prayer  be,  "  Gather  not  my 
soul  with  sinners,  nor  my  life  with  bloody  men."  I  am  as  concerned 
about  myself  as  about  you,  that  I  should  be  found  "  accepted  in  the 
Beloved  ;"  lest  after  having  preached  to  others  I  myself  should  be  a 
castaway  !  Do  let  it  be  a  matter  of  solemn  anxiety-  with  each  one. 
If  you  have  never  come  to  Jesus,  come  now ;  if  you  have  never  sought 
holiness  of  life,  seek  it  now.  If  you  have  never  had  the  wedding  gar 
ment,  it  is  yet  procurable ;  go  ye  to  him  who  freely  gives  it,  the  Lord 
will  not  refuse  you  ;  go  to-d;iy  and  he  will  accept  you. 

IV.  He  who  was  the  unworthy  guest  is  now  THE  CRIMINAL  AT  THE 
FEAST.    The  king  has  now  become  a  judge  to  him;    the  question  has 
been  personally  put  to  him,  and  he  is  speechless.     Why  is  he  silent  ? 
Surely  it  was  because  he  was  convicted  of  open,  undeniable  disloyalty 
Xo  evidence  was  required  ;  he  had  come  there  on  set  purpose  with 
malice  aforethought  to  display  his  disloyalty,  and  had  done  so  in  the 
presence  of  the  King.     I  do  not  think  he  represents  at  all  a  person  who 
enters  the  church  through  ignorance,  with  a  sincere  but  ignorant  in 
tention,  hut  he  pourtrays  one  who  makes  a  profession  without  care  to 
8 


106  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

make  it  true — wilfully  despising  the  Lord's  commands.  He  is  a 
man  willing  to  be  saved  by  grace,  and  professing  to  be  so,  but 
refusing  to  acknowledge  his  duty  to  God  and  his  obligations  to  the  Son. 
He  was  speechless;  he  could  not  have  chosen  a  worse  place,  nor  a  more 
impertinent  method  of  ventilating  his  disloyalty  than  that  which  he 
selected;  there  was  nothing  he  could  say  in  self-defence.  At  that 
moment,  when  the  King  looked  him  through  and  through,  he  saw 
the  full  horror  of  his  position ;  his  loins  were  loosed,  like  Belshaz- 
zar  of  old  when  he  saw  the  handwriting  on  the  wall ;  he  saw  now  that 
his  time  to  insult  was  over,  and  the  day  of  retribution  had  come.  He 
was  taken  in  the  very  fact,  and  could  not  escape.  He  had  been  guilty 
of  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness,  of  an  unnecessary  extravagance  of 
wickedness  in  coming  into  the  feast  to  air  his  pride.  He  had  committed 
a  suicidal  intrusion.  He  might  have  kept  himself  away  at  any  rate, 
and  not  have  thrust  himself  into  the  Judge's  presence.  He  saw  now 
that  the  cause  of  sedition  was  hopeless,  the  King  was  there  and  he 
was  in  his  power  and  none  could  rescue  him.  Why  did  he  not  burst 
into  tears  ?  why  did  he  not  confess  the  wrong  ?  why  did  he  not  say, 
"  My  King,  I  have  insulted  thee,  have  pity  upon  me  ?  "  His  proud 
heart  would  not  let  him.  Sin  made  him  incapable  of  repentance. 
There  is  a  verse  in  one  of  Hart's  hymns  which  runs  thus — 

"  Fixed  is  their  everlasting  state  : 
Could  they  repent,  'tis  now  too  late." 

That  is  true  enough,  but  it  supposes  an  impossibility,  and  I  think  it 
would  have  been  lar  better  to  have  said — 

"  Fixed  is  their  everlasting  state ; 
They  can't  repent,  'tis  now  too  late." 

Because  the  sinner  goes  on  to  sin  he  continues  still  to  suffer ;  he  will 
not  turn,  he  cannot  turn.  As  the  Ethiopian  cannot  change  his  skin, 
nor  the  leopard  his  spots,  so  when  sin  has  reached  its  height  the  man 
cannot  bend,  or  bow,  or  retrace  his.  steps.  Oh,  if  he  could  have  repented 
even  then  !  .  But  he  could  not ;  and  the  tears  that  came  after  the  king 
had  pronounced  the  sentence  were  no  tears  of  penitence,  but  only  of 
despairing  pride.  He  stood  speechless.  It  was  not  only  that  he  had 
no  excuse,  but  he  would  not  confess  his  wrong.  Have  I  any  one  here 
in  such  a  condition  of  heart,  that  while  he  has  been  sinning  by  making 
a  false  profession,  and  knows  it,  yet  he  sullenly  refuses  to  confess  his 
fault  ?  Yield  thee,  man  !  Yield  at  once.  Fall  at  the  King's  feet  at 
once.  Even  if  you  are  not  a  hypocrite,  if  you  have  any.  suspicion  that 
you  are,  fall  down  and  say,  "  My  King,  make  me  sincere ;  I  submit 
myself  to  thy  will,  and  am  ready  to  put  on  the  wedding  badge  ;  if  there 
is  any  method  by  which  I  can  honour  thy  Son,  I  cavil  not  at  it;  let 
me  wear  his  colours,  and  be  known  by  all  men  to  be  truly  a  lover  of  the 
great  Prince." 

Y.  But  now,  lastly,  while  he  stood  speechless  in  the  king's  presence, 
the  king  gave  place  to  THE  EXECUTIONER,  for  he  uttered  these  words, 
"  Bind  Mm  hand  and  foot"  He  was  lawless,  make  him  feel  the  law  ; 
he  said,  "  I  am  free,  and  I  will  do  as  I  like,"  let  him  never  be  free 
again;  bind  him,  pinion  him.  Executioner,  do  your  duty,  prepare 
him  for  death. ..  Alas,  there  are  some  who  are  bound  and  pinioned 


THE.  WEDDING   GARMENT.  107 

•even   before   the   breath  is  out   of    their    bodies.       In    their    dying 
hours  false  professors   have   often  found   that   they  could  not  pray, 
and    could     not    repent ;     like    dying     Spira,     that    arch- hypocrite 
and  apostate,  they  have  been  sensible  of  misery,   but  not  penitent, 
and  no  gospel  promise  has  availed  to  comfort  them.    Their  hearts 
were   seared,  they    were   twice  dead   before  they  were  dead.      Then 
•came  the  sentence,  "  Take  him  away"  which  is  sometimes  executed 
by   the    church  in  her  excommunications— deceivers  are  taken  away 
from    the    gospel    feast   by    just    discipline;     but    which    is    more 
fully  carried  out  in  the  hour  of  death,   when  the  man's  hope   fails 
him.     Ah,  sirs,  what  will  ye  do  if  ye  have  no  true  grace  in  your  hearts 
when  you  are  taken  away  from  the  Lord's  table,  taken  away  from  the 
baptism  in  which  you  gloried,  taken  away  from  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
which  you  understood  so  well  by  head,  but  which  you  did  not  know  in 
your  heart.      John   Bunyan's   description    of  the   man   dragged   by 
seven  devils,  bound  with  cords,  comes  up  before   my  mind.     "  Bind 
him   hand    and   foot  and   take   him   away."      How    thankful   I   am 
that  the  servants  who  brought  them  in  are  not  the  same  who  were 
commanded  to  take  them  away.     The  Douloi  brought  them  in,  the 
diakonoi  took  them  away,  the  king  has  a  special  order  of  servants  for  the 
taking  of  deceivers  away ;  his  angels  do  that  in  the  hour  of  death — they 
•execute  his  vengeance.     He  gives  us  ministers  a  better  office,  he  bids 
us  be  his  heralds  of  mercy.     Then  the  judge  said,  "  Cast  him"  fling 
him  like  a  useless,  worthless  thing.     That  wretch  has  dared  pollute  my 
marriage  feast,  cast  him  away,  as  men  fling  weeds  over  the  garden  wall 
or  shake  off  vipers  into  the  fire.     There  is  none  in  heaven  or  earth 
thought  more  despicable,  more  fit  to  be  thrown  away  as  rubbish  and 
offal,  than  a  man  who  had  a  Christian  name,  but  had  not  the  essentials 
of  the  Christian's  nature.     Cast  him  away.      Where?     "Into   outer 
darkness"  far  from  the  banquet  hall  where  torches  flame  and  lamps 
are  bright  ;  drive  him  out  into  the  cold,  chilly  midnight  air.     He  has 
once  seen  the  light,  it  will  be  all  the  darker  now  for  him  when  he  is 
driven  into  the  dark.     There  is  no  darkness  so  dark  as  the  darkness  of 
the   man   who  once   saw   light.     Cast  him  into  the  outer   darkness. 
What  will  he  do  there  ?    We  are  not  told  what  would  be  done  to  him, 
it  was  not  needful,  we  learn  elsewhere  as  much  as  could  be  revealed 
to  us,  but  we  are  told  ivhat  he  did,  for  "  there  shall  be  weeping,"  not 
the  gush  of  tears  which  gives  relief  but  the  everlasting  dropping  of 
scalding  tears  which  create  fresh  sorrow  and  enlarge  their  own  source. 
The  outcast  shed  no  tears  of  regret,  but   of  sullen  disappointment, 
because  he  could  not  after  all  dishonour  the  king,  and  had  even  served 
to  illustrate  the  royal  justice  and  power,  and  so  had  brought  glory 
to  the  king  whom  he  hated  in  soul.     Then  came  the  "  gnashing  of 
teeth,"  caused  by  wrath  and  envy  because  he  could  do  no  more  mischief. 
No  sorrow  is  equal  to  that  of  a  malicious  spirit,  that  having  attempted 
a  daring  deed  of  atrocious  wickedness,  has  been  defeated  and  has  con 
tributed  to  the  triumph  of  the  good  and  excellent.     The  misery  of 
hell  is  not  a  misery  which  God  arbitrarily  creates,  it  is  the  necessary 
result  of  sin,  it  is  sin  itself  come  to  ripeness.     Here  you  see  the  picture 
of  the  man  who  was  insolent  enough  to  come  into  the  church  without 
being  a  Christian,  and  now  for  ever  he  gnashes  with  his  teeth  against 
that  glorious  Majesty  of  heaven  which  it  will  never  be  in  his  power  to 


108  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

injure,  but  which  it  will  always  be  in  his  heart  to  hate ;  and  this  will  be 
his  hell — that  he  hates  God,  this  his  darkness — that  he  cannot  see 
beauty  in  God,  and  this  the  outerness  of  the  darkness — that  he  cannot 
enter  into  God's  will.  "  Depart  ye  cursed,"  is  only  love  repelling  that 
which  is  not  lovely,  it  is  only  justice  giving  to  man  what  his  fallen 
nature  craved  after.  "Get  away  from  me,  ye  did  not  honor  me  ;  when 
ye  did  come  to  me  it  was  with  your  lips  only.  Go  where  your  hearts 
were ;  depart  from  me,  ye  cursed."  Oh,  may  God  grant  that  not  one 
here  may  come  under  the  lash  of  this  terrible  parable,  but  may  we  be 
found  of  the  Lord  in  peace  in  the  day  of  his  appearing.  You  see. 
then,  how  the  Lord  sifts  us.  First,  we  are  sifted  by  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel,  and  many  will  not  come — there  is  one  heap  of  chaff:  next, 
by  the  judgment  of  God  in  his  church,  and  others  are  found  wanting 
— there  is  another  heap  of  chaff.  Ah,  when  this  is  done,  and  the  two 
great  sieves  are  used,  shall  we  be  found  among  the  wheat  ? 

Do  you  say,  "the  sermon  has  nothing  to  do  with  me,  I  never 
made  a  profession,  I  shall  go  home  easy  enough."  Come  hithor  friend, 
I  must  not  let  you  go.  There  is  a  vagabond  brought  before  the  magis 
trate  accused  of  theft,  he  says  he  is  perfectly  innocent,  but  he  is  con 
victed,  and  has  to  suffer  for  it ;  after  him  comes  a  bragging  fellow,  who 
says,  "  I  do  not  make  any  profession  of  being  honest,  I  rob  anybody  I 
can,  and  J  mean  to  do  so,  I  do  not  pretend  to  keep  the  law."  Why, 
methinks  the  magistrate  would  say,  "  I  condemned  the  man  who  did  at 
least  pretend  to  something  decent,  but  to  you  I  give  double  punish 
ment,  you  are  evidently  incorrigible,  and  your  case  needs  no  considera 
tion."  You  who  do  not  say  you  are  Christians,  who  confess  you  are  not, 
you  avow  yourselves  the  enemies  of  Christ ;  get  no  comfort  therefore 
out  of  this  parable  I  pray  you,  but  yield  yourselves  to  the  Saviour,  and 
believe  in  him,  for  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON— Epistle  of  Jude, 


UNPROFITABLE    SERVANTS. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  JUNE   GTH,  1S80,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE     METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWLNGTON. 


**  And  east  ye  the  unprofitable  servant  into  outer  darkness:  there  shall  be  weeping 
and  gnashing  of  teeth." — Matthew  xxv.  30. 

"  So  likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall  have  done  all  those  things  which  are  commanded 
you,  say.  We  are  unprofitable  servants:  we  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  to 
do." — Luke  xvii.  10. 

"  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant."— 
Matthew  xxv.  21. 

THERE  is  a  narrow  path  between  indifference  and  morbid  sensibility. 
Some  men  seem  to  feel  no  holy  anxiety :  they  place  their  Master's  talent 
in  the  earth,  leave  it  there,  and  take  their  pleasure  and  their  ease  without 
a  moment's  compunction.  Others  profess  to  be  so  anxious  to  be  right 
that  they  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  can  never  be  so,  and  fall 
under  a  horror  of  God,  viewing  his  service  as  a  drudgery,  and  him 
self  as  a  hard  master — though  probably  they  never  say  so.  Between 
these  two  lines  there  is  a  path,  narrow  as  a  razor's  edge,  which  only  the 
grace  of  God  can  enable  us  to  trace ;  it  is  free  alike  from  carelessness 
and  from  bondage,  and  consists  in  a  sense  of  responsibility  bravely  borne 
by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  right  way  usually  lies  between 
two  extremes:  it  is  the  narrow  channel  between  the  rock  and  the 
whirlpool.  There  is  a  sacred  way  which  runs  between  self-congratula 
tion  and  despondency,  a  very  difficult  track  to  find,  and  very  hard  to 
keep.  There  are  great  perils  in  the  consciousness  that  you  have  done 
well,  and  that  you  are  serving  God  with  all  your  might ;  for  you  may 
come  to  think  that  you  are  a  deserving  person,  worthy  to  rank  among 
the  princes  of  Israel.  The  danger  of  being  puffed  up  can  hardly  be 
overestimated :  a  dizzy  head  soon  brings  a  fall.  But  perhaps  equally 
to  be  dreaded  on  the  other  side  is  that  sense  of  unworthiness  which  para 
lyzes  all  exertion,  making  you  feel  that  you  are  incapable  of  anything 
that  is  great  or  good.  Under  this  impulse  have  men  fled  from  the 
service  of  God  into  a  life  of  solitude ;  they  felt  that  they  could  not 
behave  valiantly  in  the  battle  of  life,  and  therefore  they  fled  from  the 
field  before  the  fight  began,  to  become  hermits  or  monks  ;  as  if  it  were 
possible  to  do  the  Lord's  perfect  will  by  doing  nothing  at  all,  and  to  dis 
charge  the  duties  to  which  they  were  born  by  an  unnatural  mode  of  exist 
ence.  Blessed  is  that  man  who  finds  the  strait  and  narrow  way  between 
No.  1,541.  11 


826  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

high  thoughts  of  self  and  hard  thoughts  of  God,  between  self-esteem 
and  a  timid  shrinking  from  all  effort.  My  desire  is  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  may  guide  our  minds  into  the  golden  mean  where  holy  graces  blend,, 
and  the  contending  vices,  equally  natural  to  our  evil  hearts,  are  all  ex 
cluded.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  bless  our  three  texts  and  the  three 
subjects  suggested  by  them,  so  that  we  may  be  put  right,  and  then  by 
infinite  mercy  may  be  kept  right  until  the  great  day  of  account. 

Let  us  read  Matthew  xxv.  30. 

"  And  cast  ye  the  unprofitable  servant  into  outer  darkness :  there  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth." 

In  this  our  first  text  we  have  THE  VERDICT  OF  JUSTICE  upon  the  man 
who  did  not  use  his  talent.  The  man  is  here  styled  an  "  unprofitable 
servant  "  because  he  was  slothful,  useless,  worthless.  He  did  not  bring 
his  master  interest  for  his  money  nor  render  him  any  sincere  service. 
He  did  not  faithfully  discharge  the  trust  reposed  in  him  as  his  fellow- 
servants  did. 

Notice,  first,  that  this  unprofitable  person  was  a  servant.  He  never 
denied  that  he  was  a  servant ;  in  fact,  it  was  by  his  position  as  a  servant 
that  he  became  possessed  of  his  one  talent,  and  to  that  possession 
he  never  demurred.  If  he  had  been  capable  of  receiving  more,  there 
is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  have  had  two  talents,  or  five  ;  for  the 
Scripture  tells  us  that  the  master  gave  to  every  man  according  to  his 
several  ability.  He  owned  the  rule  of  his  master  even  in  the  act  of 
burying  the  talent,  and  in  appearing  before  him  to  give  an  account. 
This  makes  the  subject  the  more  heart-searching  for  you  and  for  me ; 
for  we,  too,  profess  to  be  servants — servants  of  the  Lord  our  God. 
Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God ;  that  is,  with  those  who  are  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  as  children  and  servants  :  let  us,  therefore,  look  well 
to  our  goings.  If  judgment  first  begin  at  us,  "  what  shall  be  the  end  of 
them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God?"  "If  the  righteous  scarcely  be 
saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?"  If  this  in  our 
text  be  judgment  upon  servants,  what  will  be  the  judgment  upon 
enemies  ?  This  man  acknowledged  that  he  was  a  servant  even  to  the 
last ;  and  though  he  was  impertinent  and  impudent  enough  to  express 
a  most  wicked  and  slanderous  opinion  about  his  master,  yet  he 
neither  denied  his  own  position  as  a  servant,  nor  the  fact  that  hi& 
talent  was  his  lord's,  for  he  said,  "Lo,  there  thou  hast  that  is  thine/' 
In  thus  speaking  he  went  rather  further  than  some  professing 
Christians  do,  for  they  live  as  if  Christianity  were  all  eating  the 
fat  and  drinking  the  sweet  and  not  serving  at  all ;  as  if  religion  had 
many  privileges  but  no  precepts,  and  as  if,  when  men  were  savedr 
they  became  licensed  loiterers  to  whom  it  is  a  matter  of  honour  to  magnify 
free  grace  by  standing  all  the  day  idle  in  the  market-place.  Alas,  I  know 
some  who  never  do  a  hand's  turn  for  Christ,  and  yet  call  him  Master  and 
Lord.  Ill  will  it  fare  with  them  at  his  coming.  Many  of  us  acknowledge 
that  we  are  servants,  that  everything  we  have  belongs  to  our  Master,  and 
that  ^re  are  bound  to  live  for  him.  So  far,  so  good ;  but  we  may  get  as- 
far  as  that,  and  yet  in  the  end  we  may  be  found  unprofitable  servants, 
and  so  be  cast  into  outer  darkness,  where  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing- 
of  teeth.  Let  us  take  heed  of  this. 

This  man,  though  a  servant,  thought  ill  of  his  master,  and  disliked  his 


UNPROFITABLE  SERVANTS.  32? 

service :  he  said, "  I  knew  thee  that  thou  art  an  hard  man,  reaping  where 
thou  hast  not  sown,  and  gathering  where  thou  hast  not  strawed." 
Certain  professors  who  have  stolen  into  the  church  are  of  the  same 
mind:  they  dare  not  say  that  they  regret  their  having  joined  the 
church,  and  yet  they  so  act  that  all  may  conclude  that  if  it  could 
be  undone  they  would  not  do  the  like  again.  They  do  not  find 
pleasure  in  the  service  of  God,  but  continue  to  pursue  its  routine  as  a 
matter  of  habit  or  a  hard  obligation.  They  get  into  the  spirit  of  the 
elder  brother,  and  they  say,  "  Lo ;  these  many  years  do  I  serve  thee, 
neither  transgressed  I  at  any  time  thy  commandments,  and  yet  thou 
never  gavest  me  a  kid  that  I  might  make  merry  with  my  friends."  They 
sit  down  on  the  shady  side  of  godliness,  and  never  bask  in  the  sun 
which  shines  full  upon  it.  They  forget  that  the  father  said  to  the  elder 
son,  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine."  He 
might  have  had  as  many  feastings,  as  many  lambs  and  kids  as  he 
desired,  he  would  have  been  denied  no  good  thing.  The  presence  of 
his  father  ought  to  have  been  his  joy  and  his  delight ;  and  better  than 
all  merry-makings  with  his  friends ;  and  it  would  have  been  so  if  he 
had  been  in  a  proper  state  of  heart.  The  man  who  hid  his  talent  had 
carried  the  evil  and  petulant  spirit  much  further  than  that  elder  brother ; 
but  the  germs  are  the  same,  and  we  must  mind  that  we  crush  them  at  the 
beginning. 

This  unprofitable  servant  looked  upon  his  master  as  one  that  reaped 
where  he  never  sowed,  and  used  the  rake  to  gather  together  what  he 
had  never  scattered :  he  meant  that  he  was  a  hard,  exacting,  and  unjust 
person,  whom  it  was  difficult  to  please.  He  judged  his  lord  to  be  one 
who  expected  more  of  his  servants  than  he  had  any  right  to  look  for, 
and  he  had  such  a  hatred  of  his  unjust  conduct  that  he  resolved  to  tell 
him  to  his  face  what  he  thought  of  him.  This  spirit  may  readily  creep 
over  the  minds  of  professors ;  I  fear  it  is  brooding  over  many  even 
now,  for  they  are  not  content  with  Christ.  If  they  want  pleasure  thc^ 
go  outside  the  church  to  get  it :  their  joys  are  not  within  the  circle  o* 
which  Christ  is  the  centre.  Their  religion  is  their  labour,  not  their  de 
light;  their  God  is  their  dread,  not  their  joy.  They  do  not  delight 
themselves  in  the  Lord,  and  therefore  he  does  not  give  them  the  desire 
of  their  hearts,  and  so  they  grow  more  and  more  discontented.  They 
could  not  call  him  "  God,  mine  exceeding  joy,"  and  so  he  is  a  terror  to 
them.  Devotion  is  a  dreary  engagement  to  them ;  they  wish  that  they 
could  escape  from  it  with  an  easy  conscience.  They  do  not  say  as 
much  to  their  secret  selves :  but  you  can  read  between  the  lines  these 
words — "  What  a  weariness  it  is."  It  is  no  wonder  when  things  come 
to  this  pass  that  a  professor  becomes  an  unprofitable  servant ;  for  who 
can  do  a  work  well  which  he  hates  to  do  ?  Forced  service  is  not  de 
sirable.  God  wants  not  slaves  to  grace  his  throne.  A  servant  who  is 
not  pleased  with  his  situation  had  better  leave ;  if  he  is  not  content 
with  his  Master  he  had  better  find  another,  for  their  mutual  relation 
ship  will  be  unpleasant  and  unprofitable.  When  it  comes  to  this,  that 
you  and  I  are  discontented  with  our  God,  and  dissatisfied  with  his 
work,  we  had  better  look  out  for  another  lord,  if  any  such  will  have  us, 
for  we  shall  certainly  be  unprofitable  to  the  Lord  Jesus  from  our  want 
of  love  to  him. 


828  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Note  next,  that,  albeit  this  man  was  doing  nothing  for  his  master,  h* 
did  not  think  himself  an  unprofitable  servant.  He  exhibited  no  self- 
depreciation,  no  humbling,  no  contrition.  He  was  as  bold  as  brass,  and 
said  unblushingly,  "  Lo,  there  thou  hast  that  is  thine."  He  came  before 
his  master  with  no  apologies  or  excuses.  He  did  not  join  with  those 
who  have  done  all,  and  then  say,  "We  are  unprofitable  servants";  for 
he  felt  that  he  had  dealt  with  his  Lord  as  the  justice  of  the  case  de 
served  ;  indeed,  instead  of  acknowledging  any  fault  he  turned  to  accusing 
his  lord.  It  is  even  so  with  false  professors.  They  have  no  idea  that 
they  are  hypocrites,  the  thought  does  not  cross  their 'minds.  They  have 
no  notion  that  they  are  unfaithful.  Hint  at  it,  and  see  how  they  will 
defend  themselves.  If  they  are  not  living  as  they  ought  to  do,  they 
claim  to  be  pitied  rather  than  blamed ;  the  blame  lies  with  Providence ; 
it  is  the  fault  of  circumstances :  it  is  the  fault  of  anybody  but  themselves. 
They  have  done  nothing,  and  yet  they  feel  more  at  ease  than  those  who 
have  done  everything.  They  have  taken  the  trouble  to  dig  in  the  earth 
and  hide  their  talent,  and  they  as  good  as  ask — what  more  do  you 
want  ?  Is  God  so  exacting  as  to  expect  me  to  bring  more  to  him  than 
he  gave  me  ?  I  am  as  grateful  and  prayerful  as  God  makes  me — what 
more  will  he  require  ?  There  is  you  see  no  bowing  in  the  dust  with  a 
sense  of  imperfection,  but  an  arrogant  casting  upon  God  of  all  blame; 
and  this,  too,  under  the  pretence  of  honouring  his  sovereign  grace  ! 
Ah  me!  that  men  should  be  able  to  torture  truth  into  such  pre- 
.sumptuous  falsehood. 

Mark  well,  that  the  verdict  of  justice  at  last  may  turn  out  to  be  the 
very  opposite  of  that  which  we  pronounce  upon  ourselves.  He  who 
proudly  thinks  himself  profitable  shall  be  found  unprofitable,  and  he  who 
modestly  judges  himself  to  be  unprofitable  may  in  the  end  come  to  hear 
his  Master  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  So  little  are 
we  able,  through  the  defects  of  our  conscience,  to  form  a  right  estimate 
of  ourselves,  that  we  frequently  reckon  ourselves  to  be  rich  and  increased 
in  goods,  and  having  need  of  nothing,  when,  indeed,  we  are  naked,  and 
poor,  and  miserable.  Such  was  the  case  with  this  unfaithful  servant : 
he  wrapped  himself  up  in  the  conceit  that  he  was  even  more  just  than 
his  lord,  and  had  an  argument  to  plead  which  he  thought  would  exonerate 
him  from  all  blame. 

It  should  give  rise  to  much  searching  of  heart  when  we  notice  ivhat 
this  unprofitable  servant  did,  or,  rather,  what  he  did  not  do.  He  carefully 
deposited  his  capital  where  no  one  was  able  to  find  it  and  steal  it ;  and 
there  was  an  end  of  his  service.  We  ought  to  observe  that  he  did  not 
spend  that  talent  upon  himself,  or  use  it  in  business  for  his  own  benefit. 
He  was  not  a  thief,  nor  in  any  way  a  misappropriator  of  moneys  placed 
under  his  charge.  In  this  he  excels  many  who  profess  to  be  the  servants 
of  God,  and  yet  live  to  themselves  only.  What  little  talent  they  have 
is  used  in  their  own  business,  and  never  upon  their  Lord's  concerns. 
They  have  the  power  of  getting  money,  but  their  money  is  not  made  for 
Christ ;  such  an  idea  never  occurs  to  them.  Their  efforts  are  all  for 
themselves,  or — to  use  other  words  to  express  the  same  thing— -for  their 
families.  Yonder  is  a  man  who  has  the  gift  of  eloquent  speech,  and  he 
uses  it,  not  for  Christ,  but  for  himself,  thao  he  may  win  popularity,  that 
he  aiight  arrive  at  a  respectable  position :  the  one  end  and  object  of  his 


UNPROFITABLE    SERVANTS.  829 

most  earnest  speech  is  to  bring  grist  to  his  own  mill,  and  gain  to  his  own 
estate.  Everywhere  this  is  to  be  seen  amongst  professors,  that  they  are 
living  to  themselves :  they  are  not  adulterers  or  drunkards,  far  from 
it;  neithor  are  they  thieves  or  spendthrifts;  they  are  decent,  orderly, 
quiet  sort  of  people ;  but  still,  they  begin  and  end  with  self.  What  is 
this  but  to  be  an  unprofitable  servant?  What  is  a  servant  to  me  if 
he  works  hard  for  himself  and  does  nothing  for  me?  A  professing 
Christian  may  toil  till  he  becomes  a  rich  man,  an  alderman  in  the  City,  a 
Lord  Mayor,  a  member  of  Parliament,  a  millionaire ;  but  what  does  that 
prove?  Why,  that  he  could  work  and  did  work  well  for  himself;  and  if 
all  this  while  he  has  done  little  or  nothing  for  Christ,  he  is  all  the  more 
condemned  by  his  own  success :  if  he  had  worked  for  his  Lord  as  he 
worked  for  himself,  what  might  he  not  have  accomplished  ?  The 
unprofitable  servant  in  the  parable  was  not  so  bad  as  that :  and  yet 
he  was  cast  into  outer  darkness.  What  then  will  become  of  some  of 
you  ? 

Furthermore,  the  wicked  servant  did  not  go  and  mis-spend  his  talent : 
he  did  not  waste  it  in  self-indulgence  and  wickedness  as  the  prodigal  son 
did,  who  spent  his  substance  in  riotous  living.  Oh,  no  ;  he  was  a  much 
better  man  than  that.  He  would  not  waste  a  halfpenny ;  he  was  ah1  for 
saving  and  running  no  risks.  The  talent  was  as  he  received  it,  only 
wrapped  up  in  a  napkin  and  hidden  in  the  earth — put  into  a  bank,  in 
fact,  but  a  bank  which  gave  no  interest.  He  never  touched  a  penny  of 
it  for  a  feast  or  a  revel,  and  therefore  could  not  be  accused  of  being  a 
spendthrift  with  his  lord's  money ;  in  all  which  he  was  superior  to  those 
who  yield  their  strength  to  sin,  and  use  their  abilities  to  gratify  the 
guilty  passions  of  themselves  and  others. 

I  grieve  to  add  that  some  who  call  themselves  servants  of  Christ  lay 
out  their  strength  to  undermine  the  gospel  they  profess  to  teach ;  they 
speak  against  the  holy  name  by  which  they  are  named,  and  thus  they 
use  their  talent  against  their  Master.  This  man  did  noo  do  so ;  he  was 
bad  enough  in  heart  for  anything,  but  he  had  never  openly  become  so 
base  a  traitor.  He  never  employed  learning  in  order  to  raise  needless 
doubts,  or  to  resist  the  plain  doctrines  of  the  word  of  God ;  this  has  been 
reserved  for  divines  of  these  latter  days — days  which  produce  monsters 
unknown  to  less  educated  times. 

This  man's  talent  had  not  been  wasted  under  his  hand,  it  was  as  he 
had  received  it,  and  he  therefore  reckoned  lie  had  been  faithful.  Ah ! 
but  this  is  not  what  Christ  calls  faithfulness — just  to  keep  where  we  are. 
If  you  think  you  have  grace  and  only  keep  what  you  have,  without 
obtaining  more,  it  will  be  hiding  your  talent  in  the  earth  and  keeping 
it  a  barren  tiling.  It  is  not  enough  to  retain ;  you  must  advance. 
The  capital  may  be  there,  but  where  is  the  interest?  To  be  living 
without  aim  or  purpose  beyond  that  of  keeping  up  your  position 
is  to  be  a  wicked  and  slothful  servant,  condemned  already.  While 
meditating  upon  this  subject  may  we  each  one  say  to  himself,  "  Lord, 
is  it  I  ?" 

His  lord  called  this  servant  "wicked."  Is  it,  then,  a  wicked  thing  to 
be  unprofitable  ?  Surely  wickedness  must  mean  some  positive  action.  No. 
Not  to  do  right  is  to  be  wicked ;  not  to  live  for  Christ  is  to  be  wicked  ; 
not  to  be  of  use  in  the  world  is  to  be  wicked  ;  not  to  bring  glory  to  the 


880  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

name  of  the  Lord  is  to  be  wicked  ;  to  be  slothful  is  to  be  wicked.  It  is  clear 
that  there  are  many  wicked  people  in  the  world  who  would  not  like  to  be 
called  so.  "  Wicked  and  slothful ; "  these  are  the  two  words  which  are 
riveted  together  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  whose  speech  is  always  wise.  A 
schoolboy  was  asked  by  his  master  "What  are  you  doing,  John?"  He 
was  called  ;:p;  and  thought  to  be  quite  clear  by  saying,  "  I  was  doing 
nothing,  sir;"  but  his  master  answered,  "That  is  the  very  thing  for 
which  I  called  you  out,  for  you  ought  to  have  been  doing  the  lesson 
which  I  set  you."  It  will  be  no  excuse  at  the  last  for  you  to  cry,  "  I 
was  doing  nothing,  sir ! "  Were  not  those  on  the  left  hand  made  to 
depart  with  a  curse  upon  them  because  they  did  nothing  ?  Is  it  not 
written :  "  Curse  ye  Meroz,  said  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  curse  ye 
bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof ;  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of 
the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty."  He  who  does 
nothing  is  a  "  wicked  and  slothful  servant." 

This  man  was  condemned  to  outer  darkness.  Notice  this :  he  was 
condemned  to  be  as  he  was,  for  hell,  in  one  light,  may  be  described  as 
the  great  Captain's  saying,  "  As  you  were."  "  He  that  is  unjust,  let 
him  be  unjust  still ;  and  he  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still."  In 
another  world  there  is  permanence  of  character :  enduring  holiness  is 
heaven,  continual  evil  is  hell.  This  man  was  outside  of  the  family 
of  his  lord.  He  thought  his  lord  a  hard  master,  and  so  proved  that  he 
had  no  love  to  him,  and  that  he  was  not  really  one  of  his  household. 
He  was  outside  in  heart,  and  so  his  lord  said  to  him,  "Remain  outside." 
Besides  that,  he  was  in  the  dark :  he  had  wrong  notions  of  his  master ; 
for  his  lord  was  not  an  austere  and  hard  man,  he  did  not  gather  where 
he  had  not  strawed,  nor  reap  where  he  had  not  sown.  Therefore  his 
lord  said,  " You  are  wilfully  in  the  dark:  abide  there  in  the  darkness 
which  is  outside."  This  man  was  envious:  he  could  not  endure  his- 
master's  prosperity;  he  gnashed  his  teeth  at  the  thought  of  it.  He 
was  sentenced  to  continue  in  that  mind,  and  so  to  gnash  his  teeth  for 
ever.  This  is  a  dreadful  idea  of  eternal  punishment,  this  permanence  of 
character  in  an  immortal  spirit: — "  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust 
still."  While  the  character  of  the  ungodly  will  be  permanent,  it  will 
also  be  more  and  more  developed  along  its  own  lines :  the  bad  points 
will  become  worse,  and,  with  nothing  to  restrain  it,  evil  will  become 
viler  still.  In  the  next  world,  where  there  are  no  hindrances  from  the 
existence  of  a  church  and  a  gospel,  the  man  will  ripen  to  a  more  hideous 
maturity  of  enmity  against  God,  and  a  more  horrible  degree  of  consequent 
misery.  Sorrow  is  bound  up  with  sin :  abiding  in  siniulness,  a  man  must 
necessarily  abide  in  wretchedness ;  for  the  wicked  is  like  the  troubled 
sea  which  cannot  rest,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt.  What  must 
it  be  to  be  for  ever  outside  the  family  of  God !  Never  to  be  God's 
child!  For  ever  in  the  dark!  Never  to  see  the  light  of  holy  know 
ledge,  and  purity,  and  hope!  For  ever  to  gnash  one's  teeth  with 
painful  contempt  and  abhorrence  of  God,  whom  to  hate  is  hell !  0  for 
grace  to  be  made  to  love  him,  whom  to  love  is  heaven.  The  unprofitable 
servant  had  a  dreadful  wage  to  take  when  his  master  reckoned  with  him, 
but  who  can  say  that  he  had  not  well  earned  it  ?  He  had  the  due  reward 
of  his  deeds.  0  our  God !  grant  that  such  may  not  be  the  lot  of  any 
one  of  IIR  '. 


UNPROFITABLE  SERVANTS.  881 

I  must  now  call  your  attention  to  the  second  text : — • 

"So  likewise  yc,  when  ye  shall  hare  done  all  those  things  which  are 
commanded  yon,  say,  We  are  unprofitable  servants:  we  have  done  that 
which  was  onr  duty  to  do." — Luke  xvii.  10. 

This  is  THE  VERDICT  OF  SELF-ABASEMENT,  given  forth  from  the 
heart  of  servants  who  had  laboriously  discharged  the  full  work  of  the 
day.  This  is  a  part  of  a  parable  intended  to  rebuke  all  notions  of  self- 
importance  and  human  merit.  When  a  servant  has  been  ploughing  or 
feeding  cattle,  his  master  does  not  say  to  him,  "  Sit  down,  and  I  will  wait 
upon  you,  for  I  am  deeply  in  your  debt."  No,  his  master  bids  him  prepare 
the  evening  meal  and  wait  upon  him.  His  services  are  due,  and  therefore 
his  master  does  not  praise  him  as  if  he  were  a  wonder  and  a  hero.  He  is 
only  doing  his  duty  if  he  perseveres  from  morning  light  to  set  of  sun, 
and  he  by  no  means  expects  to  have  his  work  held  up  to  admiration  or 
rewarded  with  extra  pay  and  humble  thanks.  Neither  are  we  to  boast  of 
our  services,  but  think  little  of  them,  confessing  that  we  are  unprofitable 
servants. 

Whatever  of  pain  may  have  been  caused  by  the  first  part  of  the  dis 
course,  I  trust  it  will  only  prepare  us  the  more  deeply  to  enter  into  the 
spirit  of  our  second  text.  Both  these  texts  are  graven  on  my  heart  a» 
with  an  iron  pen,  by  a  merciless  wound,  inflicted  when  I  was  too  feeble 
to  bear  it.  When  I  was  exceedingly  ill  in  the  South  of  France,  and 
deeply  depressed  in  spirit — so  deeply  depressed  and  so  sick  and  ill  that  I 
scarce  knew  how  to  live, — one  of  those  malicious  persons  who  commonly 
haunt  all  public  men,  and  especially  ministers,  sent  me  anonymously  a 
letter,  openly  directed  to  "  That  unprofitable  servant  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 
This  letter  contained  tracts  directed  to  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
with  passages  marked  and  underlined,  with  notes  applying  them  to  my 
self.  How  many  Rabshekahs  have  in  their  day  written  to  me !  Ordinarily 
I  read  them  with  the  patience  which  comes  of  use,  and  they  go  to  light 
the  fire.  I  do  not  look  for  exemption  from  this  annoyance,  nor  do  I 
usually  feel  it  hard  to  bear,  but  in  the  hour  when  my  spirits  were  de 
pressed,  and  I  was  in  terrible  pain,  this  reviling  letter  cut  me  to  the 
quick.  I  turned  upon  my  bed  and  asked — Am  I,  then,  an  unprofitable 
servant  ?  I  grieved  exceedingly,  and  could  not  lift  up  my  head,  or  find 
rest.  I  reviewed  my  life,  and  saw  its  infirmities  and  imperfections,  but 
knew  not  how  to  put  my  case  till  this  second  text  came  to  my  relief,  and 
answered  as  the  verdict  of  my  bruised  heart.  I  said  to  myself,  "  I  hope 
I  am  not  an  unprofitable  servant  in  the  sense  in  which  this  person 
intends  to  call  me  so ;  but  I  am  assuredly  so  in  the  other  sense."  I 
cast  myself  upon  my  Lord  and  Master  once  again  with  a  deeper  sense 
of  the  meaning  of  the  text  than  I  had  felt  before :  his  atoning  sacrifice 
revived  me,  and  in  humble  faith  I  found  rest.  By  the  way,  I  wonder 
that  any  human  being  should  find  pleasure  in  trying  to  inflict  pain  upon 
those  who  are  sick  and  depressed ;  yet  are  there  persons  who  delight  to 
do  so.  Surely,  if  there  are  no  evil  spirits  down  below,  there  are  some 
up  above,  and  the  servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus  receive  painful  proofs  of 
their  activity.  Let  me,  then,  if  you  have  felt  any  pain  from  the  first 
text  lead  you  to  the  point  at  which  I  personally  arrived  when  at  last  I 
could  thank  God  for  that  letter,  and  feel  that  it  was  salutary  medicine 
to  my  spirit. 


382  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULI'IT. 

This  which  is  put  into  our  mouths  as  a  confession  that  we  are  un 
profitable  servants  is  meant  to  rebuke  us  when  we  think  we  are  some 
body,  and  have  done  somewhat  worthy  of  praise.  Our  text  is  meant  to 
rebuke  us  if  we  think  that  we  have  done  enough,  that  we  have  borne  the 
burden  and  heat  of  the  day  a  long  time,  and  have  been  kept  at  our  post 
beyond  our  own  watch.  If  we  conclude  that  we  have  achieved  a  fine  day's 
work  of  harvesting,  and  ought  to  be  invited  home  to  rest,  the  text  upbraids 
us.  If  we  feel  an  inordinate  covetousness  after  comfort,  and  wish  the 
Lord  would  give  us  some  present  and  striking  reward  for  what  we  have 
done,  the  text  shames  us.  This  is  a  proud,  unchildlike,  unservantlike 
spirit,  and  it  must  be  put  down  with  a  firm  hand. 

In  the  first  place,  in  ivhat  way  can  we  have  profited  God?  Eliphaz 
has  well  said,  "  Can  a  man  be  profitable  unto  God,  as  he  that  is  wise 
may  be  profitable  unto  himself  ?  Is  it  any  pleasure  to  the  Almighty, 
that  thou  art  righteous?  or  is  it  gain  to  him,  that  thou  makest  thy 
ways  perfect  ?  "  If  we  have  given  to  God  of  our  substance,  is  he  our 
debtor  ?  In  what  way  have  we  enriched  him  to  whom  all  the  silver 
and  gold  belongs  ?  If  we  have  laid  our  lives  out  with  the  devotion 
of  martyrs  and  missionaries  for  his  sake,  what  is  that  to  him,  whose 
glory  fills  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ?  How  can  we  dream  of  putting 
the  Eternal  in  debt  to  us  ?  The  right  spirit  is  to  say  with  David, 
"0  my  soul,  thou  hast  said  unto  the  Lord,  Thou  art  my  Lord:  my 
goodness  extendeth  not  to  thee ;  but  to  the  saints  that  are  in  the 
earth,  and  to  the  excellent,  in  whom  is  all  my  delight."  How  can  a  man 
place  his  Maker  under  an  obligation  to  him  ?  Let  us  not  dote  so 
blasphemously. 

Dear  brethren,  we  ought  to  recollect  that  tvhatever  service  we  have 
been  able  to  render  has  been  a  matter  of  debt.  I  hope  our  morality  is 
not  fallen  so  low  that  we  take  credit  to  ourselves  for  paying  our 
debts.  I  do  not  find  men  in  business  priding  themselves  and  saying, 
"I  paid  a  thousand  pounds  this  morning  to  such  an  one."  "Well,  did 
you  give  it  to  him  ?  "  "  Oh  no ;  it  was  all  owing  to  him."  Is  that  any 
great  thing?  Have  we  come  to  such  a  low  state  of  spiritual  morals 
that  we  think  we  have  done  a  great  deal  when  we  give  to  God  his  due  ? 
"  It  is  he  that  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves."  Jesus  Christ  has  bought 
us :  "we  are  not  our  own,"  for  we  are  "  bought  with  a  price."  We 
have  also  entered  into  covenant  with  him,  and  given  ourselves  over  to 
him  voluntarily.  Were  we  not  baptized  into  his  name  and  into  his 
death  ?  Whatever  we  may  do  is  only  what  he  has  a  right  to  claim  at 
our  hands  from  our  creation,  redemption,  and  professed  surrender  to 
him.  When  we  have  persevered  in  the  hard  work  of  ploughing  till  no 
field  is  left  untilled,  when  we  have  done  the  pleasanter  work  of  feeding 
the  sheep  and  when  we  have  finished  by  spreading  the  table  of  communion 
for  our  Lord  :  when  we  have  done  all  we  have  done  no  more  than  was  our 
duty  to  have  dune.  Why  boast  we,  then,  or  cry  for  a  discharge,  or  look 
for  thanks? 

Over  and  above  this  there  is  the  sad  reflection  that,  alas,  in  all  we 
have  done  ive  have  been  unprofitable  through  being  imperfect.  In  the 
ploughing  there  have  been  baulks,  in  the  feeding  of  the  cattle  there  have 
been  harshness  and  forgetfaluess,  in  the  spreading  of  the  table  the  viands 
have  been  unworthy  of  such  a  Lord  as  we  serve.  How  must  our  service 


UNPROFITABLE  SERVANTS.  333 

appear  to  him  of  whom  we  read,  "  Behold,  he  put  no  trust  in  his  servants, 
and  his  angels  he  charged  with  folly."  Can  any  of  you  look  back  upon 
your  service  of  your  Lord  with  satisfaction  ?  If  you  can,  1  cannot 
say  I  envy  you,  for  I  do  not  sympathise  with  you  in  the  least  degree, 
but  tremble  for  your  safety.  As  for  myself,  I  am  compelled  to  say  with 
solemn  truthfulness  that  I  am  not  content  with  anything  I  have  ever 
done.  I  have  half  wished  to  live  my  life  over  again,  but  now  I 
regret  that  my  proud  heart  allowed  me  so  to  wish,  since  the  pro 
babilities  are  that  I  should  do  worse  the  second  time.  Whatever  grace 
has  done  for  me  I  acknowledge  with  deep  gratitude ;  but  so  far  as 
I  have  done  anything  myself  I  beg  pardon  for  it.  I  pray  God  to  forgive 
my  prayers,  for  they  have  been  full  of  fault ;  I  beseech  him  to  forgive 
even  this  confession,  for  it  is  not  as  humble  as  it  ought  to  be ;  I 
beseech  him  to  wash  my  tears  and  purge  my  devotions,  and  to  baptize 
me  into  a  true  burial  with  my  Saviour,  that  I  may  be  quite  forgotten  in 
myself,  and  only  remembered  in  him.  Ah,  Lord,  thou  knowest  how  far 
we  fall  short  of  the  humility  we  ought  to  feel.  Pardon  us  in  this  thing. 
We  are  all  of  us  unprofitable  servants,  and  if  thou  shouldst  judge  us  by 
the  law  we  must  be  cast  a\vay. 

Once  more,  we  cannot  congratulate  ourselves  at  all,  even  if  we  have 
had  success  in  our  Lord's  work,  since  for  all  thai  we  have  done  we  are 
indebted  to  our  Lord's  abundant  grace.  If  we  had  done  all  our  duty, 
we  should  not  have  done  anything  if  his  grace  had  not  enabled  us  to  do 
it.  If  our  zeal  no  respite  knows,  it  is  he  that  keeps  the  fire  burning. 
If  our  tears  of  repentance  flow,  it  is  he  that  strikes  the  rock  and 
fetches  the  waters  from  it.  If  there  be  any  virtue,  if  there  be  any 
praise,  if  there  be  any  faith,  if  there  be  any  ardour,  if  there  be  any 
likeness  to  Christ,  we  are  his  workmanship,  created  by  him,  and  there 
fore  to  ourselves  we  dare  not  take  a  particle  of  the  praise.  Of  thine 
own  have  we  given  unco  thee,  great  God !  So  far  as  anything  has  been 
worth  thine  accepting,  it  was  thine  own  beforehand.  Hence  the  best 
are  still  unprofitable  servants. 

If  we  have  special  cause  of  Regret  because  of  some  evident  error,  we 
shall  be  wise  to  go  in  a  lowly  spirit  and  confess  the  fault,  and  then  go 
on  doing  the  work  of  each  day  in  a  plodding,  hopeful  spirit.  Whenever 
you  get  distressed  because  you  cannot  do  what  you  would ;  whenever  you 
see  the  faultiness  of  your  own  service,  and  condemn  yourself  for  it,  the 
best  thing  is  to  go  and  do  something  more  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord. 
If  you  have  not  served  Jesus  well  up  to  now,  go  and  do  better.  If  you 
make  a  blunder  do  not  tell  everybody,  and  say  that  you  will  never  try 
again,  but  do  two  good  things  to  make  up  for  the  failure.  Say,  '*  My 
blessed  Lord  and  Master  shall  not  be  more  a  loser  by  me  than  I  can  help. 
I  will  not  so  much  fret  over  the  past  as  amend  the  present  and  wake  up 
for  the  future."  Brethren,  try  to  be  more  profitable,  and  ask  for  more 
grace.  The  servant's  business  is  not  to  hide  himself  in  a  corner  of  the 
field  and  cry,  but  to  go  on  ploughing ;  not  to  bleat  with  sheep,  but  feed 
them,  and  so  prove  your  love  to  Jesus.  You  are  not  to  stand  at  the  head 
of  the  table  and  say,  "  I  have  not  spread  the  table  for  my  Master  so  well 
as  I  could  have  desired."  No,  go  and  spread  it  better.  Have  courage ; 
you  are  not  serving  a  hard  Master  after  all ;  and,  though  you  very  pro- 
call  yourself  an  unprofitable  servant,  be  of  good  cheer,  for  a  gentler 


334  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

verdict  shall  be  pronounced  upon  you  ere  long.  You  are  not  your 
own  judge  either  for  good  or  ill ;  another  judge  is  at  the  door,  and  when 
he  comcth  he  will  think  better  of  you  than  your  self-abasement  permits 
you  to  think  of  yourself:  he  will  judge  you  by  the  rule  of  grace  and  not 
by  law,  and  he  will  end  all  that  dread  which  comes  of  a  legal  spirit  and 
hovers  over  you  with  vampire  wings. 

Thus  I  have  brought  you  to  the  third  text, 

"  His  lord  said  unto  him,  AVell  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant." 
— Matthew  xxv.  21. 

I  shall  not  try  to  preach  upon  that  cheering  word,  but  shall  only  say 
a  word  or  two  upon  it.  It  is  much  too  grand  a  text  to  be  treated  upon 
at  the  end  of  a  sermon.  We  find  the  Lord  saying  to  those  who  had 
used  their  talents  industriously,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant." 
This  is  THE  VERDICT  OF  GRACE.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  shall  own 
himself  to  be  an  unfaithful  servant ;  and  blessed  is  the  man  to  whom 
his  Lord  shall  say,  "  Thou  good  and  faithful  servant." 

Observe  here  that  the  "  Well  done"  of  the  Master  is  given  to  faithful 
ness.  It  is  not  "Well  done,  thou  good  and  brilliant  servant;"  for 
perhaps  the  man  never  shone  at  all  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  appreciate 
glare  and  glitter.  It  is  not,  "  Well  done,  thou  great  and  distinguished 
servant ; "  lor  it  is  possible  that  he  was  never  known  beyond  his  native 
village.  He  conscientiously  did  his  best  with  his  *'  few  things,"  and 
never  wasted  an  opportunity  lor  doing  good,  and  thus  he  proved  himself 
faithful. 

The  same  praise  was  given  to  the  man  with  two  talents  as  to  his 
fellow-servant  with  five.  Their  stations  were  very  different ;  but  their 
reward  was  the  same.  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  was 
won  and  enjoyed  by  each  of  them.  Is  it  not  very  sweet  to  think  that 
though  I  may  have  only  one  talent  I  shall  not  thereby  be  debarred  from 
my  Lord's  praise  ?  It  is  my  faithfulness  on  which  he  will  fix  his  eye, 
and  not  upon  the  number  of  my  talents.  I  may  have  made  many  mis 
takes,  and  have  confessed  my  faults  "with  great  grief;  but  he  will 
commend  me  as  he  did  the  woman  of  whom  he  said,  "  She  hath  done 
what  she  could."  It  is  better  to  be  faithful  in  the  infant-school  than  to 
be  unfaithful  in  a  noble  class  of  young  men.  Better  to  be  faithful  in  a 
hamlet  over  two  or  three  score  of  people,  than  to  be  unfaithful  in  a  great 
city  parish,  with  thousands  perishing  in  consequence.  Better  to  be 
faithful  in  a  cottage  meeting,  speaking  of  Christ  crucified  to  half-a- 
hundred  villagers,  than  to  be  unfaithful  in  a  great  building  where 
thousands  congregate.  I  pray  you  be  faithful  in  laying  out  all  that  you 
are  and  have  for  God.  As  long  as  you  live,  whatever  faults  you  have,  be 
not  half-hearted  or  double-minded,  but  be  faithful  in  intent  and  desire. 
This  is  the  point  of  the  Judge's  praise, — the  servant's  faithfulness. 

This  verdict  was  given  of  sovereign  grace.  The  reward  was  not 
according  to  the  work,  for  the  servant  had  been  "faithful  in  a  few 
things,"  but  he  was  made  u  ruler  over  many  things."  The  verdict  itself 
is  not  after  the  rule  of  works,  but  according  to  the  law  of  grace.  Our 
good  works  are  evidences  of  grace  within  us  ;  our  faithfulness,  therefore, 
as  servants,  will  be  the  evidence  of  our  having  a  loving  spirit  towards  our 
Master, — evidence,  therefore,  that  our  heart  is  changed,  and  that  we  have 


UNPROFITABLE   SERVANTS.  335 

fceen  made  to  lore  him  for  whom  once  we  had  no  affection.  Our  works  are 
the  proof  of  our  love,  and  hence  they  stand  as  evidence  of  the  grace  of 
God.  God  first  gives  us  grace,  and  then  rewards  us  for  it.  He  works  in 
us,  and  then  counts  the  fruit  as  our  work.  We  work  out  our  own  sal 
vation,  because  "  he  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  good 
pleasure."  If  he  shall  ever  say,  "  Well  done  "  to  you  and  to  me  it  will 
be  because  of  his  own  rich  grace,  and  not  because  of  our  merits.  And, 
indeed,  this  is  where  we  must  all  come  and  where  we  must  all  keep ;  for 
the  idea  that  we  have  any  personal  merit  will  soon  make  us  find  fault 
with  our  Master,  and  his  service,  as  being  austere  ami  hard. 

I  have  sometimes  admired  how  men  who  have  denied  the  doctrine  of 
salvation  by  grace,  as  a  matter  of  theology,  have,  nevertheless,  admitted 
it  in  their  devotiuns.  They  have  entered  into  controversy  against  it,  and 
yet  unconsciously  they  have  believed  it.  An  extreme  case  is  that  of 
Cardinal  Bellarmine,  who  was  one  of  the  most  inveterate  enemies  of  the 
Reformation,  and  a  renowned  antagonist  of  the  teaching  of  Martin 
Luther.  I  will  quote  from  one  of  his  works  (Inst.  De  Justifications,  Lib. 
v.,  c.  1).  He  says,  in  summing  up,  "  On  account  of  the  uncertain  nature 
of  our  own  works  and  the  danger  of  vain-glory,  it  is  the  safest  course  to 
place  our  whole  trust  in  the  mercy  and  loving-kindness  of  God."  Thou 
hast  well  said,  0  Cardinal ;  and  since  the  safest  course  is  that  which 
we  would  choose,  we  will  place  our  whole  trust  in  the  mercy  and  loving- 
kindness  of  God.  It  is  reported,  and  I  believe  on  excellent  authority, 
that  this  great  man,  who  had  all  his  life  long  been  crying  up  salvation 
by  works,  when  dying,  breathed  a  prayer  in  Latin,  the  translation  of 
which  would  be  something  like  this  :  "  I  beseech  God,  who  weighs  not 
our  merits,  but  graciously  pardons  our  offences,  that  he  would  receive 
me  among  his  saints  and  his  elect."  Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ? 
Does  Bellarmine  at  the  last  pray  like  a  Calvinist  ?  Such  a  case  makes 
one  hope  that  many  others  may  be  saved  in  an  apostate  church.  Thank 
God,  many  are  a  great  deal  better  than  their  creed,  and  in  their  hearts 
believe  what,  as  polemical  theologians,  they  deny.  However  this  may 
be,  I  know  that  if  I  am  saved  or  rewarded  it  must  be  of  grace  alone,  for 
I  can  have  no  other  hope.  As  for  those  who  have  done  much  for  the 
church,  we  know  that  they  will  disclaim  all  praise,  saying,  "  Lord,  when 
saw  we  thee  an  hungered  and  gave  thee  meat ;  or  thirsty  and  gave  thee 
drink  ? "  All  the  Lord's  faithful  servants  will  sing,  "  Non  nobis  domine" 
Not  unto  us.  Not  unto  us. 

Lastly,  brethren,  with  what  infinite  delight  will  Jesus  fill  our  hearts 
if,  through  divine  grace,  we  are  happy  enough  to  hear  him  say,  "  Well 
done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  Oh,  if  we  shall  hold  on  to  the  end 
despite  the  temptations  of  Satan,  and  the  weakness  of  our  nature,  and 
all  the  entanglements  of  the  world,  and  keep  our  garments  unspotted 
from  the  world,  preaching  Christ  according  to  our  measure  of  ability,  and 
winning  souls  for  him,  what  an  honour  it  will  be !  What  bliss  for  him  to 
say,  "  Well  done."  The  music  of  these  two  words  will  have  heaven  in 
them  to  us.  How  different  it  will  be  from  the  verdict  of  our  fellow-men, 
svho  are  often  finding  fault  with  this  and  that,  though  we  do  our  best. 
We  never  could  please  them,  but  we  have  pleased  our  Lord.  Men  were 
always  misinterpreting  our  words  and  misjudging  our  motives,  but  he 
sets  all  right  by  saying,  "Well  donel'"'  Little  will  it  matter  then  what 


536  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

all  the  rest  have  said  :  neither  the  flattering  words  of  friends  nor  the  harsh 
condemnations  of  enemies  will  have  any  weight  with  us  when  he  says, 
"Well  done!"  Not  with  pride  shall  we  receive  that  eulogium;  for  we 
shall  reckon  ourselves  even  then  to  have  been  unprofitable  servants  ;  but 
oh  how  we  shall  love  him  for  setting  such  an  estimate  upon  the  cups  of 
cold  water  we  gave  to  his  disciples,  and  the  poor  broken  service  we  tried 
to  render  him.  What  condescension  to  call  that  well  done  which  we  feel 
was  so  ill  done  ! 

I  pray  God's  servants  here,  who  this  morning  first  began  with  search 
ing  themselves,  and  then  went  on  to  confess  their  imperfections,  now  to 
close  by  rejoicing  in  the  fact  that,  if  we  are  believing  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  are  really  consecrated  to  him,  we  shall  conclude  this  life  and  begin 
the  next  with  that  blessed  verdict  of  "Well  done!"  Mind,  however, 
that  you  are  those  who  are  doing  all  and  are  faithful.  I  hear  some 
people  speak  against  self-righteousness,  to  whom  I  would  say,  "  You 
need  not  say  much  about  that  matter,  for  it  does  not  concern  you,  since 
you  have  no  righteousness  to  be  proud  of."  I  hear  persons  speak  against 
salvation  by  good  works  who  are  in  no  danger  of  falling  into  that  error, 
since  good  works  and  their  lives  have  long  parted  company.  What  I  do 
admire  is  to  see  a  man  like  Paul,  who  lived  for  Jesus,  and  was  ready  to 
die  for  him,  yet  saying  at  the  close  of  his  life,  "  But  what  things  were 
gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ.  Yea,  doubtless,  and  I 
count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  my  Lord :  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and 
do  count  them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in 
him,  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God 
by  faith."  Go  on,  brothers,  and  think  not  of  resting  till  your  day's  work 
is  done.  Serve  God  with  all  your  might.  Do  more  than  the  Pharisees, 
who  hope  to  be  saved  by  their  zeal.  Do  more  than  your  brethren  expect 
of  you,  and  then,  when  you  have  done  all,  lay  it  at  your  Redeemer's  feet 
with  this  confession,  "  I  am  an  unprofitable  servant."  It  is  to  those 
who  blend  faithfulness  with  humility  and  ardour  with  self-abasement 
that  Jesus  will  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and  iaithful  servant :  enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord." 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Matthew  xxv.  14 — 46. 


HYMNS  FIIOM  "OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK."— 906,  670,  3€4. 


ark  Jitorf  Mpt 


THE  TWO  TALENTS. 


DELIVERED  ON  SABBATH  MORNING,  JANUARY  31,  1858,  BY  TH» 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT      THE      MUSIC      HALL,      ROYAL      SURREY      GARDENS. 

M  He  also  that  had  received  two  talents  came  and  said,  Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  two  talent* ; 
behold,  I  have  gained  two  other  talents  beside  them.  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant ;  thou  hast  been  faithful  orer  a  few  things,  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things : 
•nter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."— Matthew  xxv.  22.  23. 

"  EVERY  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the 
Father  of  lights.**  All  that  men  have  they  must  trace  to  the  Great  Fountain,  the 
giver  of  all  good.  Hast  thou  talents?  They  were  given  thee  by  the  God  of  talents. 
Hast  thou  time?  hast  thou  wealth,  influence,  power?  Hast  thou  powers  of  tongue? 
Hast  thou  powers  of  thought?  Art  thou  poet,  statesman,  or  philosopher?  What 
ever  be  thy  position  and  whatever  be  thy  gifts,  remember  that  they  are  not  thine, 
but  they  are  lent  thee  from  on  high.  No  man  hath  anything  of  his  own,  except 
his  sins.  We  are  but  tenants  at  will.  God  hath  put  us  into  his  estates,  and  he 
hath  said,  **  Occupy  till  I  come."  Though  our  vineyards  bear  never  so  much  fruit, 
yet  the  vineyard  belongs  to  the  King,  and  though  we  are  to  take  the  hundred  for 
our  hire,  yet  King  Solomon  must  have  his  thousand.  All  the  honour  of  our 
ability  and  the  use  of  it  must  be  unto  God,  because  he  is  the  Giver.  The  parable 
tells  us  this  very  pointedly;  for  it  makes  every  person  acknowledge  that  his 
talents  come  from  the  Lord.  Even  the  man  who  digged  in  the  earth  and  hid  his 
Lord's  money,  did  not  deny  that  his  talent  belonged  to  his  Master;  for  though  his 
reply,  "  Lo,  there  thou  hast  that  is  thine,"  was  exceedingly  impertinent,  yet  it  was 
not  a  denial  of  this  fact.  So  that  even  this  man  was  ahead  of  those  who  deny  their 
obligations  to  God,  who  superciliously  toss  their  heads  at  the  very  mention  of 
obedience  to  their  Creator,  and  spend  their  time  and  their  powers  rather  in 
rebellion  against  him  than  in  his  service.  Oh,  that  we  were  all  wise  to  believe  and 
to  act  upon  this  most  evident  of  all  truths,  that  everything  we  have,  we  have 
received  from  the  Most  High. 

Now,  there  are  some  men  in  the  world  who  have  but  few  talents.  Our  parable 
says,  "  One  had  five,  and  another  two."  To  them  I  shall  address  myself  this  morn 
ing;  and  I  pray  that  the  few  pointed  things  I  may  say,  may  be  blessed  of  God  to 
their  edification  or  rebuke.  First,  I  shall  notice  the  fact  that  there  are  many  persona 
who  have  but  few  talents,  and  I  will  try  to  account  for  God's  dispensing  but  few  to 
them.  Secondly,  I  shall  remind  them  that  even  for  these  few  talents  they  must 
be  brought  to  account.  And  thirdly,  I  shall  conclude,  by  making  the  comforting 
observation,  that  if  our  few  talents  be  rightly  used,  neither  our  own  conscience  nor  our 
Master's  judgment  shall  condemn  us  for  not  having  more. 

L  First,  then,  GOD  HAS  MADE  SOME  MEN  WITH  FEW  TALENTS.  You  very  often 
hear  men  speak  of  one  another  as  if  God  had  made  no  mental  differences  at  all. 
One  man  finds  himself  successful,  and  he  supposes  that  if  everyone  else  could  have 
been  as  industrious  and  as  persevering  as  himself,  everyone  must  necessarily  hav» 
been  as  successful.  You  will  often  hear  remarks  against  ministers  who  are  godlj 
and  earnest  men.  but  who  do  not  happen  to  have  much  Attracting  power,  and  the) 
are  called  drones  and  lazy  persons,  because  they  cannot  make  much  of  a  stir  in  the 

No    175.  12 

9 


THE   TWO   TALENTS. 

world,  whereas  the  reason  may  be,  that  they  have  but  little  talent,  and  are  making 
the  best  use  of  what  they  have,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  rebuked  for  the 
littleness  of  what  they  are  able  to  accomplish.  It  is  a  fact,  which  every  man  must 
see,  that  even  in  our  birth  there  is  a  diffidence.  All  children  are  not  alike  pre 
cocious,  and  all  men  certainly  are  not  alike  capable  of  learning  or  of  teaching. 
God  hath  made  eminent  and  marvellous  differences.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that 
all  the  difference  between  a  Milton  and  a  man  who  lives  and  dies  without  being 
able  to  read,  has  been  caused  by  education.  There  was  doubtless  a  difference 
originally,  and  though  education  will  do  much,  it  cannot  do  everything.  Fertile 
ground,  when  well-tilled,  will  necessarily  bring  forth  more  than  the  best  tilled 
estate,  the  soil  of  which  is  hard  and  sterile.  God  has  made  great  and  decided 
differences;  and  we  ought,  in  dealing  with  our  fellow  men,  to  recollect  this,  lest  we 
should  say  harsh  things  of  those  very  men  to  whom  God  will  afterwards  say, 
"  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant." 

But  why  is  it  that  God  has  not  given  to  all  men  like  talents?  My  first  answer 
shall  be,  because  God  is  a  Sovereign,  and  of  all  attributes,  next  to  his  love,  God  is 
the  most  fond  of  displaying  his  sovereignty.  The  Lord  God  will  have  men  know 
that  he  has  a  right  to  do  what  he  wills  with  his  own.  Hence  it  is,  that  in  salvation 
he  gives  it  to  some  and  not  to  others;  and  his  only  reply  to  any  accusation 
of  injustice  is,  "Nay,  but- O  man,  who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God?  Shall 
the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it,  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus?"  The 
worm  is  not  to  murmur  because  God  did  not  make  it  an  angel,  and  the  fish  that 
swims  the  sea  must  not  complain  because  it  hath  not  wings  to  fly  into  the  highest 
heavens.  God  had  a  right  to  make  his  creatures  just  what  he  pleased,  and  though 
men  may  dispute  his  right,  he  will  hold  and  keep  it  inviolate  against  all  comers. 
That  lie  may  hedge  his  right  about  and  make  vain  man  acknowledge  it,  in  all  his 
gifts  he  continually  reminds  us  of  his  sovereignty.  "I  will  give  to  this  man,"  he 
says,  "a  mind  so  acute  that  he  shall  pry  into  all  secrets;  I  will  make  another  so 
obtuse  that  none  but  the  plainest  elements  of  knowledge  shall  ever  be  attainable 
by  him.  I  will  give  to  one  man  such  a  wealth  of  imagination,  that  he  shall  pile 
mountain  upon  mountain  of  imagery,  till  his  language  seems  to  reach  to  celestial 
majesty;  I  will  give  to  another  man  a  soul  so  dull,  that  he  shall  never  be  able 
to  originate  a  poetic  thought."  Why  this,  0  God?  The  answer  comes  back,  "  Shall 
I  not  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own?"  "  So,  then,  the  children  being  not  yet  born, 
neither  having  done  good  or  evil,  that  the  purpose  of  God  according  to  election  might 
stand,  it  was  written,  the  elder  shall  serve  the  younger."  And  so  it  is  written 
concerning  men,  that  one  of  them  shall  be  greater  than  another;  one  shall  bow  his 
neck,  and  the  other  put  his  foot  upon  it,  for  the  Lord  hath  a  right  to  dispose  of 
places  and  of  gifts,  of  talents  and  wealth,  just  as  seemeth  good  in  his  sight. 

Now,  most  men  quarrel  with  this.  But  mark,  the  thing  that  you  complain 
of  in  God,  is  the  very  thing  that  you  love  in  yourselves.  Every  man  likes  to  feel 
that  he  has  a  right  to  do  with  his  own  as  he  pleases.  We  all  like  to  be  little 
sovereigns.  You  will  give  your  money  freely  and  liberally  to  the  poor;  but  if  any 
man  should  impertinently  urge  that  he  had  a  claim  upon  your  charity,  would  you  give 
unto  him?  Certainly  not;  and  who  shall  impeach  the  greatness  of  your  generosity  in  so 
doing?  It  is  even  as  that  parable,  that  we  have  in  one  of  the  Evangelists,  where,  after 
the  men  had  toiled,  some  of  them  twelve  hours,  some  of  them  six,  and  some  of  them 
but  one,  the  Lord  gave  every  man  a  penny.  Ohl  I  would  meekly  bow  my  head,  and 
say,  "My  Lord,  hast  thou  given  me  one  talent?  then  I  bless  thej  for  it,  and  I  pray 
thee  bestow  upon  me  grace  to  use  it  rightly.  Hast  thou  given  to  my  brother  ten 
talents?  I  thank  thee  for  the  greatness  of  thy  kindness  towards  him;  but  I 
neither  envy  him,  nor  complain  of  thee."  Ohl  for  a  spirit  that  bows  always  before 
the  sovereignty  of  God. 

Again:  God  gives  to  one  five,  and  to  another  two  talents,  because  the  Creator 
is  a  lover  of  variety.  It  was  said  that  order  is  heaven's  first  law;  surely  variety  is 
the  second;  for  in  all  God's  works,  there  is  the  most  beautiful  diversity.  Look  ye 
towards  the  heavens  at  night:  all  the  stars  shine  not  with  the  same  brilliance,  nor 
are  they  placed  in  straight  lines,  like  the  lamps  of  our  streets.  Then  turn  your  eyes 
below :  see  in  the  vegetable  world,  how  many  great  distinctions  there  are,  ranging 
from  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  to  the  hyssop  on  the  wall,  or  the  moss  that  is  smaller 
still.  See  how  from  the  huge  mammoth  tree,  that  seems  as  if  beneath  its  branches 
it  might  shade  an  army,  down  to  the  tiny  lichen,  God  hath  made  everything  beauti 
ful,  but  everything  full  of  variety.  Look  on  anj  one  tree,  if  you  please:  see  how 

M 


THE   TWO    TALENTS. 

«very  leaf  differs  from  its  fellow— how  even  the  little  tiny  buds  that  are  at  thli 
fcour  bursting  at  the  scent  of  the  approaching  perfume  of  spring,  differ  from  each 
other — not  two  of  them  alike.  Look  again,  upon  the  animated  world:  God  hath 
not  made  every  creature  like  unto  another.  How  wide  the  range — from  the  colossal 
elephant,  to  the  coney  that  burrows  in  the  rock— from  the  whale  thut  makes  the 
deep  hoary  with  its  lashings,  to  the  tiny  minnow  that  skims  the  brook;  God 
hath  made  all  things  different,  and  we  see  variety  everywhere.  I  doubt  net 
it  is  the  same,  even  in  heaven,  for  there  there  are  "  thrones,  and  dominions,  and 
principalities,  and  powers" — different  ranks  of  angels,  perhaps,  rising  tier  upon 
tier.  "  One  star  different  from  another  star  in  glory."  And  why  should  not 
the  same  rule  stand  good  in  manhood?  Doth  God  cast  us  all  in  the  same  mould? 
It  seems  not  so;  for  he  hath  not  made  our  faces  alike;  no  two  countenances  can  be 
said  to  be  exactly  the  same,  for  if  there  be  some  likeness,  yet  is  there  a 
manifest  diversity.  Should  minds,  then,  be  alike?  Should  souls  all  be  cast  in  the 
same  fashion  ?  Should  God's  creation  dwindle  down  into  a  great  manufactory,  in 
which  everything  is  melted  in  the  same  fire  and  poured  into  the  same  mould? 
No,  for  variety's  sake,  he  will  have  one  man  a  renowned  David,  and  another 
David's  unknown  armour  bearer;  he  will  have  one  man  a  Jeremy,  who  shall  pro 
phesy,  and  another  a  Baruch,  who  shall  only  read  the  prophecy;  one  shall  be  rich 
as  Dives,  another  poor  as  Lazarus;  one  shall  speak  with  a  voice  loud  as  thunder, 
another  shall  be  dumb;  one  shall  be  mighty  in  word  and  doctrine,  another  shall  be 
feeble  in  speech  and  slow  in  words.  God  will  have  variety,  and  the  day  will  come 
when,  looking  down  upon  the  world  we  shall  see  the  beauty  of  its  history  to  be 
mightily  indebted  to  the  variety  of  the  characters  that  entered  into  it. 

But  a  little  further.  God  hath  a  deeper  reason  than  this.  God  gives  to  some 
men  but  few  talents,  because  he  has  many  small  spheres,  and  he  would  have  these 
filled.  There  is  a  great  ocean,  and  it  needs  inhabitants.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  made 
Leviathan  to  swim  therein.  There  is  a  secret  grotto,  a  hidden  cavern,  far  away  in 
the  depths  of  the  sea;  its  entrance  is  but  small;  if  there  were  nought  but  a  Leviathan, 
it  must  remain  untenanted  for  ever :  a  little  fish  is  made,  and  that  small  place 
becomes  an  ocean  unto  it.  There  are  a  thousand  sprays  and  twigs  upon  the 
trees  of  the  forest;  were  aft  eagles,  how  would  the  forests  be  made  glad  with  song, 
and  how  could  each  twig  bear  its  songster  ?  But  because  God  would  have  each 
twig  have  its  own  music,  he  has  made  the  little  songster  to  sit  upon  it.  Each 
sphere  must  have  the  creature  to  occupy  it  adapted  to  the  size  of  the  sphere.  God 
always  acts  economically.  Does  he  intend  a  man  to  be  the  pastor  of  some  small 
parish  with  four  or  five  hundred  inhabitants  ?  Of  what  use  is  it  giving  to  that  man 
the  abilities  of  an  apostle?  Does  he  intend  a  woman  to  be  a  humble  teacher  of  her 
own  children  at  home,  a  quiet  trainer  of  her  own  family  ?  Would  it  not  even 
disturb  her  and  injure  her  if  God  should  make  her  a  poetess,  and  give  her  gifts 
that  might  electrify  a  nation  ?  The  littleness  of  her  talents  will  to  a  degree  fit  her 
for  the  littleness  of  her  sphere.  There  is  some  youth  who  is  quite  capable  of 
assisting  in  a  Ragged  School:  perhaps  if  he  had  a  higher  genius  he  might  disdain 
the  work,  and  so  the  Ragged  School  would  be  without  its  excellent  teacher.  There 
are  little  spheres,  and  God  will  have  little  men  to  occupy  them.  There  are  posts 
of  important  duty,  and  men  shall  be  found  with  nerve  and  muscle  fitted  for 
the  labour.  He  has  made  a  statue  for  every  niche,  and  a  picture  for  every 
portion  of  the  gallery;  none  shall  be  left  vacant;  but  since  some  niches  are 
small,  so  shall  be  the  statuettes  that  occupy  them.  To  some  he  gives  two  talents, 
because  two  are  enough,  and  five  would  be  too  many. 

Once  more:  God  gives  to  men  two  talents,  because  in  them  very  often  he  displays 
the  greatness  of  his  grace  in  saving  souls.  You  have  heard  of  a  minister  who  was 
deeply  read  in  sacred  lore;  his  wisdom  was  profound,  and  his  speech  graceful 
Under  his  preaching  many  were  converted.  Have  you  never  heard  it  not  quite 
said,  but  almost  hinted,  that  much  of  his  success  was  traceable  to  his  learning  and 
to  his  graceful  oratory?  But,  on  the  other  hand,  you  have  met  with  a  man,  rough 
in  his  dialect,  uncouth  in  his  manners,  evidently  without  any  great  literary  attain 
ments;  nevertheless,  God  has  given  that  man  the  one  talent  of  an  earnest  heart; 
he  speaks  like  a  son  of  thunder;  with  rough,  stern  language,  he  denounces  sin  and 
proclaims  the  gospel;  under  him  hundreds  are  converted.  The  world  sneers  at 
him.  -  I  can  see  no  reason  for  all  this,"  says  the  scholar;  •*  it  is  all  rubbish— cant; 
the  man  knows  nothing."  The  critic  takes  up  his  pen.  nibs  it  afresh,  dips  it  in  the 
bitterest  ink  he  can  find,  and  writes  a  most  delightful  history  of  the  man,  in  which 

83 


THE   TWO   TALENTS. 

AC  goes  so  far  as  to  say,  not  that  he  sees  horns  on  his  head,  but  almost  everything 
hut  that.  He  is  everything  that  is  bad,  and  nothing  that  is  good.  He  utterly 
denounces  him.  He  is  foolish,  he  is  vain,  he  is  base,  he  is  proud,  he  is  illiterate,  he 
is  vulgar.  There  was  no  word  in  the  English  language  that  was  bad  enough  for 
him,  but  one  must  be  coined.  And  now  what  says  the  church  ?  What  says  the 
man  himself?  "Even  so,  O  Lord;  now  must  the  glory  be  unto  thee  for  ever,  inas 
much  as  thou  hast  chosen  the  base  things  of  this  world,  and  the  things  that  are 
not,  to  bring  to  nought  the  things  that  are."  So  it  seemeth  that  out  of  the 
little  God  sometimes  winneth  more  glory  than  he  doth  out  of  the  great;  and  I 
doubt  not  that  he  has  made  some  of  you  with  little  power  to  do  good,  with  little 
influence,  and  with  a  narrow  sphere,  that  he  may,  in  the  last  great  day,  manifest  to 
angels  how  much  he  can  do  in  a  little  space.  You  know,  dear  friends,  there  are 
two  things  that  always  will  attract  our  attention.  One  is  skill  embodied  in  a 
stupendous  mass.  We  see  the  huge  ship,  the  Leviathan,  and  we  wonder  that  man 
could  have  made  it;  at  another  time  we  see  an  elegant  piece  of  workmanship 
that  will  stand  upon  less  than  a  square  inch,  and  we  say,  "  Well,  I  can 
understand  how  men  can  make  a  great  ship,  but  I  cannot  comprehend  how  an 
artist  could  have  the  patience  and  the  skill  to  make  so  minute  a  thing  as  this."  And 
ah!  my  friends,  it  seems  to  me  that  God  is  not  a  greater  God  to  our  apprehension, 
when  we  see  the  boundless  fields  of  ether  and  the  unnumbered  orbs  swimming  therein, 
than  when  we  see  a  humble  cottager,  and  behold  God's  perfect  word  carried  out  in 
her  soul,  and  God's  highest  glory  wrought  from  her  little  talent.  Surely  if  in  the 
little,  man  can  honour  himself  as  well  as  in  the  great,  the  Infinite,  and  the  Eternal, 
can  most  of  all  glorify  himself  when  he  stoopeth  to  the  Iittleness2s  of  mankind. 

II.  Our  second  proposition  was,  that  even  A  FEW  TALENTS  MCTST  BE  ACCOUNTED 
FOR.  We  are  very  apt  when  we  think  of  the  day  of  judgment,  to  imagine  that 
certain  characters  will  undergo  a  more  trying  process  than  others.  I  know  I  have 
often  involuntarily  said,  when  reading  the  history  of  Napoleon,  "  Here  is  a  man  of 
tremendous  ability,  the  world's  master;  a  dozen  centuries  might  be  required  to  pro 
duce  such  another  man;  but  here  is  a  man  who  prostitutes  all  his  ability  to  ambition, 
carries  his  armies  like  a  destroying  deluge  across  every  country,  widows  wives,  and 
renders  children  fatherless,  not  by  hundreds  but  by  thousands,  if  not  by  millions.  What 
must  be  his  solemn  account  when  he  stands  before  the  throne  of  God?  Shall  not  the 
witnesses  rise  up  from  the  fields  of  Spain,  of  Russia,  of  Italy,  of  Egypt,  of  Palestine, 
and  accuse  the  man  who,  to  gratify  his  own  bold  ambition,  led  them  to  death?"  But 
will  you  please  to  remember  that  though  Napoleon  must  be  a  prisoner  at  the  bar, 
each  of  us  must  stand  there  also?  And  though  our  position  is  not  very  high,  and 
we  have  not  stood  upon  the  pinnacle  of  fame,  yet  we  have  stood  quite  high  enough 
to  be  borne  under  the  observation  of  the  Most  High,  and  we  have  had  just  ability 
enough  and  power  enough  to  have  done  mischief  in  the  world,  and  to  be  accountable 
for  it.  "Oh!"  said  one,  "I  thought  that  surely  in  the  day  of  judgment  he  would 
pass  me  by;  I  have  been  no  Tom  Paine;  I  have  not  been  a  leader  amongst  low  and 
vulgar  infidels;  I  have  been  no  murderer;  I  have  not  been  a  prince  among  sinners; 
I  have  not  been  a  disturber  of  the  public  peace;  what  few  sins  I  have  committed 
have  taken  place  quietly;  nobody  has  heard  of  them;  I  don't  think  my  bad  example 
has  gone  far;  perhaps  my  children  have  not  been  much  blessed  by  my  behaviour, 
but,  nevertheless,  mine  has  been  a  very  small  quantum  of  mischief,  too  small  to 
have  poisoned  any  one  beside  myself.  I  have  been,  on  the  whole,  so  tolerably 
moral,  that  though  I  cannot  say  I  have  served  God,  yet  my  defalcations  from  the 
path  of  duty  have  been  slight  indeed!"  Ah!  truly  friends!  you  may  think  your 
selves  never  so  little,  but  your  making  yourselves  insignificant  will  not  excuse  you. 
You  have  had  but  little  entrusted  to  you!  Then  the  less  trouble  for  you  to  make 
use  of  your  talents.  The  man  who  has  many  talents  requires  much  hard  labour  to 
use  them  all.  He  might  make  the  excuse  that  he  found  five  talents  too  many  to 
put  out  in  the  market  at  once;  you  have  only  one;  anybody  can  lend  out  his  one 
talent  to  interest— it  will  cost  you  but  little  trouble  to  apply  that;  and  inasmuch 
as  you  live,  and  inasmuch  as  you  die,  without  having  improved  the  one  talent, 
your  guilt  will  be  exceedingly  increased  by  the  very  fact  that  your  talent  was  but 
little,  and,  consequently,  the  trouble  of  using  it  would  have  been  but  little  too.  If 
you  had  but  little,  God  required  but  little  of  you;  why,  then,  did  you  not  render 
that?  If  any  man  holds  a  house  at  a  rental  of  a  pound  a  year,  let  it  be  never  so 
email  a  house  for  the  money,  if  he  brings  not  his  rent  there  is  not  one  half  the 
excuse  for  him  that  there  would  be  if  his  rent  had  been  a  hundred  pounds,  and  he  had 
84 


THE    TWO    TALSNT9. 

failed  to  bring  it.  You  shall  be  the  more  inexcusable  on  account  of  the  little  th»t 
r.-as  required  of  you.  Let  me,  then,  address  you,  and  remind  you  that  you  must  be 
brought  to  account. 

Remember,  my  hearer,  that  in  the  day  of  judgment  thy  account  must  be  personal; 
God  will  not  ask  you  what  your  church  did— he  will  ask  you  what  you  did  your 
self.  Now  there  is  a  Sunday  school.  If  God  should  try  all  members  of  the  church 
in  a  body,  they  would  each  of  them  say,  O  Lord,  as  a  body  we  had  an  excellent 
Sunday  school,  and  had  many  teachers,  and  so  they  would  excuse  themselves 
But  no;  one  by  one,  all  professors  must  come  before  him.  "What  did  you  do  for 
the  Sabbath  school?  I  gave  you  a  gift  for  teaching  children — what  did  you  do?  " 
44  O  Lord,  there  was  a  Sabbath  school."  That  has  nothing  to  do  with  it?  What 
didj/ou  do?  You  are  not  to  account  now  for  the  company  with  which  you  were 
united,  but  for  yourself  as  an  individual.  "  O,"  says  one,  "  there  were  a  number  ol 
poor  ministers;  I  was  at  the  Surrey  Hall,  and  so  much  was  done  for  them."  No; 
what  did  you  do?  You  must  be  held  personally  responsible  for  your  own  wealth, 
for  your  own  ability.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "I  am  happy  to  say  there  is  a  great  deal 
more  preaching  now  than  there  used  to  be;  the  churches  seem  to  be  roused."  Yes, 
sir,  and  you  seem  to  take  part  of  the  credit  to  yourself.  Do  you  preach  more  than 
you  used  to?  You  are  a  minister;  do  you  make  any  greater  efforts?  Remember, 
it  is  not  what  your  brethren  are  doing,  but  it  is  what  you  do  that  you  will  be  called 
to  account  for  at  the  bar  of  God;  and  each  one  of  you  will  be  asked  this  question, 
**  What  hast  thou  done  with  thy  talent?  "  All  your  connection  with  churches  will 
avail  you  nothing;  it  is  your  personal  doings— your  personal  service  towards  God 
that  is  demanded  of  you  as  an  evidence  of  saving  grace.  And  if  others  are  idle — 
if  others  pay  not  God  his  due — so  much  the  more  reason  why  you  should  have 
been  more  exceedingly  diligent  in  doing  so  yourself. 

Recollect,  again,  that  your  account  will  have  to  be  particular.  God  will  go  into 
all  the  items  of  it.  At  the  day  of  judgment  you  will  not  have  to  cast  up  a  hurried 
account  in  the  gross,  but  every  item  shall  be  read.  Can  you  prove  that?  Yes. 
44  For  every  idle  word  that  man  shall  speak,  he  shall  be  brought  unto  account  at  the 
day  of  judgment."  Now,  it  is  in  the  items  that  men  go  astray.  "  Well,"  says  one, 
44  If  I  look  at  my  life  in  the  bulk,  I  am  not  very  much  ashamed,  but  it  is  those 
items,  those  little  items — they  are  the  troublesome  part  of  the  account,  that  one 
does  not  care  to  meddle  with."  Do  you  know  that  all  yesterday  was  made  up  of 
littles  ?  And  the  things  of  to-day  are  all  little,  and  what  you  do  to-morrow  will 
all  be  little  things.  Just  as  the  tiny  shells  make  up  the  chalk  hills,  and  the  chalk 
hills  together  make  up  the  range,  so  the  trifling  actions  make  up  the  whole  account, 
and  each  of  these  must  be  pulled  asunder  separately.  You  had  an  hour  to  spare 
the  other  day — what  did  you  do?  You  had  a  voice— how  did  you  use  it?  You 
had  a  pen — you  could  use  that — how  did  you  employ  it?  Each  particular  shall  be 
brought  out,  and  there  shall  be  demanded  an  account  for  each  one.  Oh,  that  you 
were  wise,  that  ye  did  not  slur  this  matter,  but  would  take  every  note  in  the  music 
of  your  behaviour,  and  seek  to  make  each  note  in  harmony  with  its  fellow,  lest, 
after  all,  the  psalm  of  your  life  may  prove  to  be  a  hideous  discord.  Oh,  that  ye 
who  are  without  God  would  remember  that  your  life  is  assuredly  such,  that  the 
trial  of  the  last  great  day  must  end  in  your  condemnation. 

Again,  that  account  will  be  very  exact,  and  there  will  be  no  getting  off  without 
those  little  things.  "Oh!  they  were  a  few  peccadilloes  and  very  small  matters 
indeed;  I  never  took  stock  of  them  at  all."  But  they  will  all  be  taken  stock  of 
then.  When  God  comes  to  look  into  our  hearts  at  last,  he  will  not  only  look  at  the 
great  but  at  the  little;  everything  will  be  seen  into,  the  pence  sins  as  well  as  the 
pound  iniquities — all  must  be  brought  against  us,  and  an  exact  account  given. 

Again,  remember,  in  the  last  place,  upon  this  point,  that  the  account  will  be 
very  impartial  at  the  day  of  judgment,  when  all  will  be  tried  without  any  reference 
to  their  station.  The  prince  will  be  summoned  to  give  an  account  of  his  talents, 
and  side  by  side  must  stand  his  courtier  and  his  slave.  The  mightiest  emperor 
must  stand  at  God's  bar,  as  well  as  the  meanest  cottager.  All  must  appear  and 
be  tried  according  to  the  deeds  they  have  done  in  the  body.  As  to  our  professions, 
they  will  avail  us  nothing.  We  may  have  been  the  proudest  hypocrites  that  ever 
made  the  world  sick  with  our  pride,  but  we  must  be  searched  and  examined,  aa 
much  as  if  we  had  been  the  vilest  sinners.  We  must  take  our  own  trial  before 
<Jod's  eternal  tribunal,  and  nothing  can  bias  our  judge,  or  make  him  give  an  opinion 
for  or  against  us,  apart  from  the  evidence.  Oh,  how  solemn  this  will  make  the 


THE    TWO    TALENTS. 

trial,  especially  if  we  have  no  blood  of  Christ  to  plead!  The  great  Advocate  will 
get  his  people  an  acquittal,  through  his  imputed  merits,  even  though  1  lei'  pin  in 
itself  would  condemn  them.  But  remember,  that  without  him  we  shall  never  be  able 
to  stand  the  fiery  ordeal  of  that  last  dread  assize.  "  Well,"  said  an  old  preacher, 
^when  the  law  was  given,  Sinai  was  on  a  smoke,  and  it  incited  like  wax;  but  when 
the  punishment  of  the  law  is  given,  the  whole  earth  will  quake  and  quail.  For  who 
shall  be  able  to  endure  the  day  of  the  Lord,  the  day  of  God's  fierce  anger  ?" 

III.  The  last  point  is,  IF  BY  DIVINE  GRACE— (and  it  is  only  by  divine  grace  that 
this  can  ever  be  accomplished) — OUR  TWO  TALENTS  BE  RIGHTLY  USED,  THE  FACT 

THAT  \VE  HAD  NOT  FIVE,  WILL  BE  NO  INJURY  TO  US. 

You  say,  when  such  a  man  dies,  who  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  church,  a 
triumphant  warrior  for  the  truth,  the  angels  will  crowd  to  heaven's  gates  to  see 
him,  for  he  has  been  a  mighty  hero,  and  done  much  for  his  Master.  A  Calvin  or 
a  Luther,  with  what  plaudits  shall  they  be  received! — men  with  talents,  who  have 
been  faithful  to  their  trust.  Yes,  but  know  ye  not,  that  there  is  many  a  humble  village 
pastor  whose  flock  scarcely  numbers  fifty,  who  toils  for  them  as  for  his  life,  who 
spends  hours  in  praying  for  their  welfare,  who  uses  all  the  little  ability  he  has  in 
his  endeavour  to  win  them  to  Christ;  and  do  ye  imagine  that  his  entry  into  heaven 
shall  be  less  triumphant  than  the  entry  of  such  a  man  as  Luther?  If  so,  ye  know 
not  how  God  dealeth  with  his  people.  He  giveth  them  rewards,  not  according  to 
the  greatness  of  the  goods  with  which  they  were  entrusted,  but  according  to  their 
fidelity  thereunto,  and  he  that  hath  been  faithful  to  the  least,  shall  be  as  much 
rewarded,  as  he  that  hath  been  faithful  in  much.  I  want  you  briefly  to  turn  to  the 
chapter,  to  see  this.  You  will  note  first,  that  the  man  with  two  talents  came  to 
his  Lord  with  as  great  a  confidence  as  the  man  that  had  five.  ••  And  he  said,  Lord, 
thou  deliveredst  unto  me  two  talents;  behold,  I  have  gained  two  talents  beside 
them."  I  will  be  bound  to  say,  that  while  that  poor  man  with  the  two  talents  was 
trading  with  them,  he  frequently  looked  upon  his  neighbour  with  the  five  talents, 
and  said,  "Oh,  I  wish  I  could  do  as  much  as  he  is  doing!  See  now,  he  has  five 
talents  to  put  out,  and  how  much  interest  he  has  coming  every  year;  Oh,  that 
I  could  do  as  much!"  And  as  he  went  on  he  often  prayed,  "  O  my  Lord,  give  me 
greater  ability,  and  greater  grace  to  serve  thee,  for  I  long  to  do  moro."  And  when 
he  sat  down  to  read  his  diary,  he  thought,  •'  Ah,  this  diary  does  not  tell  much. 
There  is  no  account  of  my  journey  through  fifty  counties;  I  cannot  tell  how  I 
have  travelled  from  land  to  land,  as  Paul  did,  to  preach  the  truth.  No;  I  have 
just  had  to  keep  in  this  parish,  and  been  pretty  well  starved  to  death,  toiling  for 
this  people,  and  if  I  have  added  some  ten  or  a  dozen  to  the  church,  that  has  been 
a  very  great  deal  to  me.  Why,  I  hear  that  Mr.  So-and-so,  was  privileged  to  add 
two  or  three  hundred  in  a  year;  Oh,  that  I  could  do  that!  Surely  when  I  go  to 
heaven,  I  shall  creep  in  at  the  door  somehow,  while  he  by  grace  will  be  enabled  to 
go  boldly  in,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him."  Now  stop,  poor  little  faith,  stop;  thy 
Master  will  not  deal  thus  with  thee.  When  thou  shalt  come  to  die;  thou  wilt 
through  his  grace  feel  as  much  confidence  in  dying  with  thy  two  well-used  talents, 
as  thy  brother  with  his  ten,  for  thou  wilt,  when  thou  comest  there,  have  thy 
Lord's  sweet  presence,  and  thou  wilt  say,  "  I  am  complete  in  Christ.  Christ's 
righteousness  covers  me  from  head  to  foot,  and  now  in  looking  back  upon  my  past 
life,  I  can  say,  Blessed  be  his  holy  name.  It  is  little  that  I  could  do,  but  I  have 
done  as  much  as  I  could  for  him.  I  know  that  he  will  pardon  my  defects,  and 
forgive  my  miscarriages,  and  I  shall  never  look  back  upon  my  humble  village 
charge  without  much  joy,  that  the  Lord  allowed  me  to  labour  there."  And,  Oh, 
mothinks,  that  man  will  have  even  a  richer  commendation  in  his  own  conscience, 
than  the  man  who  has  been  more  publicly  applauded,  for  he  can  say  to  himself, 
after  putting  all  his  trust  in  Christ,  "  Well,  I  am  sure  I  did  not  do  this  for  fame, 
for  I  blushed  unseen — I  have  lost  my  sweetness  on  the  desert  air.  No  one  has  ever 
read  my  deeds;  what  I  did  was  between  myself  and  my  God,  and  I  can  render  up 
my  account  to  him  and  say, 'Lord,  I  did  it  for  thee,  and  not  to  honour  myself.'"  Yes, 
friends,  I  might  tell  you  now  of  many  a  score  of  earnest  evangelists  in  this  our 
land  who  are  working  harder  than  any  one  of  us,  and  yet  win  far  less  honour.  Yes, 
and  I  could  bring  you  up  many  a  score  of  city  missionaries  whose  toil  for  Christ  is 
beyond  all  measure  of  praise,  who  never  get  much  reward  here,  nay,  rather  meet 
with  slights  and  disrespect.  You  see  the  poor  man  start  as  soon  as  lie  goes  from 
his  place  of  worship  to-day.  He  has  got  three  hours  this  afternoon  to  go  and  spend 
among  the  sick,  and  then  you  will  see  him  on  Monday  morning.  He  has  to  go  from 

86 


THE    TV!  >    TALEKT8. 

house  10  house,  often  with  the  door  slammed  in  his  face,  often  exposed  to  mobs  and 
drunken  men,  sometimes  jeered  and  scoffed  at,  meeting  with  persons  of  all  religioui 
persuasions  and  of  no  persuasion.  He  toils  on;  he  has  his  little  evening  meeting, 
and  there  he  gets  a  little  flock  together  and  tries  to  pray  with  them,  and  he  gets 
now  and  then  a  man  or  a  woman  converted;  but  he  has  no  honour.  He  just  takes 
him  off  to  the  minister,  and  he  says,  "  Sir,  here  is  a  good  man;  I  think  he  is  im 
pressed;  will  you  baptize  him  and  receive  him  into  yonr  church?"  The  minister 
gets  all  the  credit  of  that,  but  as  for  the  poor  city  missionary,  there  is  little  or 
nothing  said  of  him.  There  is,  perhaps,  just  his  name,  Mr.  Brown,  or  Mr.  Smith, 
mentioned  sometimes  in  the  report,  but  people  do  not  think  much  of  him,  except, 
perhaps,  as  an  object  of  charity  they  have  to  keep,  whereas  he  is  the  man  that  gives 
them  the  charity,  giving  all  the  sap  and  blood  and  marrow  of  his  life  for  some  poor 
sixty  pounds  a  year,  hardly  enough  to  keep  his  family  above  want.  But  he,  when 
he  dies,  my  friend,  shall  have  no  less  the  approval  of  his  conscience  than  the  man 
who  was  permitted  to  stand  before  the  multitudes  and  raised  the  nation  into  excite 
ment  on  account  of  religion.  He  shall  come  before  the  master  clothed  in  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  and  with  unblushing  face  shall  say,  "I  have  received  two 
talents;  I  have  gained  beside  them  two  talents  more." 

Furthermore,  and  to  conclude,  you  will  notice  there  was  no  difference  in  his 
Master's  commendation — none  in  the  reward.  In  both  cases,  it  was  "  Well  done  good 
and  faithful  servant;  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  few  things,  I  will  make  thee 
ruler  over  many  things ;  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  Here  comes 
Whitfleld,  the  man  that  stood  before  twenty  thousand  at  a  time  to  preach  the 
gospel,  who  in  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  America,  has  testified  the  truth  of 
God,  and  who  could  count  his  converts  by  thousands,  even  under  one  sermon  ! 
Here  he  comes,  the  man  that  endured  persecution  and  scorn,  and  yet  was  not 
moved— the  man  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,  who  lived  for  his  fellow  men, 
and  died  at  last  for  their  cause:  stand  by  angels  and  admire,  whilst  the  Master 
takes  him  by  the  hand  and  says,  "Well  done,  well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant; 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord  !"  See  how  free  grace  honours  the  man  whom 
it  enabled  to  do  valiantly.  Hark !  Who  is  this  that  comes  there  ?  a  poor  thin- 
looking  creature,  that  on  earth  was  a  consumptive ;  there  was  a  hectic  flush  now 
and  then  upon  her  cheek,  and  she  lay  three  long  years  upon  her  bed  of  sickness. 
Was  she  a  prince's  daughter,  for  it  seems  heaven  is  making  much  stir  about  her  ? 
No,  she  was  a  poor  girl  that  earned  her  living  by  her  needle,  and  she  worked 
herself  to  death  !  —Stitch,  stitch,  stitch,  from  morning  to  night !  and  here  she 
comes.  She  went  prematurely  to  her  grave,  but  she  is  coming,  like  a  shock  of 
corn  fully  ripe,  into  heaven;  and  her  master  says,  "Well  done  thou  good  and 
faithful  servant,  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  few  things-,  I  will  make  thee  ruler 
over  many  tilings  ;  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  She  takes  her  place  by 
the  side  of  Whitfield.  Ask  Avhat  she  ever  did,  and  you  find  out  that  she  used  to 
live  in  some  back  garret  down  some  dark  alley  in  London  ;  and  there  used  to  be 
another  poor  girl  come  to  work  with  her,  and  that  poor  girl,  when  she  first  came  to 
work  with  her,  was  a  gay  and  volatile  creature,  and  this  consumptive  child  told 
her  about  Christ;  and  they  used,  when  she  was  well  enough,  to  creep  out  of  an 
evening  to  go  to  chapel  or  to  church  together.  It  was  hard  at  first  to  get  the 
other  one  to  go,  but  she  used  to  press  her  lovingly ;  and  when  the  girl  went  wild  a 
little,  she  never  gave  her  up.  She  used  to  say,  "  0  Jane,  I  wish  you  loved  the 
Saviour ;"  and  when  Jane  was  not  there  she  used  to  pray  for  her,  and  when  she 
was  there  she  prayed  with  her ;  and  now  and  then  when  she  was  stitching  away, 
read  a  page  out  of  the  Bible  to  her,  for  poor  Jane  could  not  read.  And  with  many 
tears  she  tried  to  tell  her  about  the  Saviour  who  loved  her  and  gave  himself  for 
her.  At  last,  after  many  a  day  of  hard  persuasion,  and  many  an  hour  of  sad 
disappointment,  and  many  a  night  of  sleepless  tearful  prayer,  at  last  she  lived  to 
see  the  girl  profess  her  love  to  Christ ;  and  she  left  her  and  took  sick,  and  there 
she  lay  till  she  was  taken  to  the  hospital,  where  she  died.  When  she  was  in  the 
hospital  she  used  to  have  a  few  tracts,  and  she  used  to  give  them  to  those  who 
came  to  see  her ;  she  would  try,  if  she  could,  to  get  the  women  to  come  round,  and 
she  would  give  them  a  tract.  When  she  first  went  into  the  hospital,  if  she  could 
creep  out  of  bed,  she  used  to  get  by  the  side  of  one  who  was  dying,  and  the  nurse 
used  to  let  her  do  it ;  till  at  last  she  got  too  ill,  and  then  she  used  to  ask  a  poor 
woman  on  the  other  side  of  the  ward,  who  was  getting  bettor,  and  was  going  out, 
if  she  would  come  and  read  a  chapter  to  her;  not  that  she  wanted  her  to  read  to 

17 


THE    TWO   TALENTS. 

her  on  her  own  account,  but  for  her  sake,  for  she  thought  it  might  strike  her  heart 
while  she  was  reading  it.  At  last  this  poor  girl  died  and  fell  asleep  in  Jesus ;  and 
the  poor  consumptive  needle-woman  had  said  to  her,  "  Well  done" — and  what  more 
could  an  archangel  have  said  to  her  ? — "  she  hath  done  what  she  could." 

See,  then,  the  Master's  commendation,  and  the  last  reward  will  be  equal  to  all 
men  who  have  used  their  talents  well.  Ah  1  if  there  be  degrees  in  glory,  they  will 
not  be  distributed  according  to  our  talents,  but  according  to  our  faithfulness  in  using 
them.  As  to  whether  there  are  degrees  or  not,  I  know  not;  but  this  I  know,  he 
that  doeth  his  Lord's  will,  shall  have  said  to  him,  "  Well  done  good  and  faithful 
servant." 

And  now,  friends,  this  one  word  only.  I  have  told  you  that  there  are  many  in 
our  denomination  who  are  preaching  the  gospel  continually.  I  should  bring 
some  few  of  the  letters,  written  by  the  poor  ministers  to  us  to  read,  but 
sometimes  I  think  this  a  violation  of  delicacy,  and  I  do  not  like  to  do  it.  But  when 
I  did  that  one  year,  the  collection  was  almost  twice  as  good;  so  I  think  I  might 
almost  commit  a  breach  of  etiquette  in  order  to  help  them.  However,  I  can  solemnly 
assure  you,  that  if  there  is  poverty  anywhere,  it  is  to  be  found  among  the  ministers 
in  the  Baptist  churches,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  one  cause  of  it  is  the  fault  of 
the  people  themselves;  they  are  so  little  in  the  habit  of  giving,  that  their  ministers 
are  starved.  Now,  if  Christ  will  say,  "  Well  done,"  hereafter,  to  many  a  humble 
preacher,  do  you  think  he  intends  the  church  to  starve  them  while  they  are  here  on 
£30  or  £40  a  year.  Now,  brethren,  if  Christ  will  say  "  Well  done,"  at  last,  we  may 
anticipate  his  verdict,  and  say,  "Well  done  to-day."  And  can  we  better  say, 
"well  done"  than  by  unmuzzling  the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn,  and  give 
these  poor  ministers  something  out  of  our  own  wealth,  as  God  may  help  us,  that 
their  necessities  may  be  supplied  ?  There  will  be  pretty  well  a  score  of  persons 
who  will  be  dependant  during  the  next  year  upon  what  you  give  this  year  ;  perhaps 
you  will  remember  that  and  assist  them.  One  kind  gentleman,  who  usually  comes 
here,  says  "  I  could  not  come  to-day,  so  I  forward  my  pound  to  be  put  into  the  box 
by  the  minister."  And  I  trust,  it  there  are  any  not  here  to-day  who  will  be  here 
next  Sabbath,  that  they  will  not  forget  this  collection.  It  ia  always  very  dear  to  the 
heart  of  my  church. 


THE   REWARD  OF  THE   EIGHTEOUS. 


pennon 

DELIVERED  ON  SUNDAY  MORNING,  JANUARY  21ST,  1866,  BY 

C.    H.   S  PURGE  ON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him, 
then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory:  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all 
nations:  and  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep 
from  the  goats:  and  he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  left. 
Then  shall  the  King  say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father, 
inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world:  for  I  was  an 
hungred,  and  ye  gave  me  meat:  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  drink:  I  was  a  stranger, 
and  ye  took  me  in  :  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me :  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me :  I  w»§ 
in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  me." — Matthew  xxv.  31 — 36. 

IT  is  exceedingly  beneficial  to  our  souls  to  mount  above  this  present  evil 
world  to  something  nobler  and  better.  The  cares  of  this  world  and  the 
deceitfulness  of  riches  are  apt  to  choke  everything  good  within  us,  and 
we  grow  fretful,  desponding,  perhaps  proud,  carnal.  It  is  well  for  us 
to  cut  down  these  thorns  and  briars,  for  heavenly  seed  sown  among  them 
is  not  likely  to  yield  a  harvest,  and  I  do  not  know  a  better  sickle  with 
which  to  cut  them  down  than  thoughts  of  the  kingdom  to  come.  In  the 
yalleys  in  Switzerland  many  of  the  inhabitants  are  deformed  and  dwarfish, 
and  the  whole  of  them  wear  a  sickly  appearance,  for  the  atmosphere  Is 
charged  with  miasma,  and  is  close  and  stagnant;  you  traverse  them  ag 
rapidly  as  you  can,  and  are  glad  to  escape  from  them.  Up  yonder  on 
the  mountain  you  will  find  a  hardy  race,  who  breathe  the  clear  fresh 
air  as  it  blows  from  the  virgin  snows  of  the  Alpine  summits.  It  would 
be  well  for  their  frames  if  the  dwellers  in  the  valley  could  frequently 
leave  their  abodes  among  the  marshes  and  the  fever  mists,  and  get  them 
selves  up  into  the  clear  atmosphere  above.  It  is  to  such  an  exploit  of 
climbing  that  I  invite  you  this  morning.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  bear 
ns  as  upon  eagles'  wings,  that  we  may  leave  the  mists  of  fear  and  the 
fevers  of  anxiety,  and  all  the  ills  which  gather  in  this  valley  of  earth, 
and  get  ourselves  up  to  the  mountains  of  future  joy  and  blessedness 
where  it  is  to  be  our  delight  to  dwell  world  without  end!  Oh  may  God 
disentangle  us  now  for  a  little  while,  cut  the  cords  that  keep  us  here 
below,  and  permit  us  to  mount!  We  sit,  some  of  us,  like  chained  eagles 
fastened  to  the  rock,  only  that,  unlike  the  eagle,  we  begin  to  love  our 
chain,  and  would,  perhaps,  if  it  came  really  to  the  test,  be  loth  to  hart 
it  snapped.  May  God  now  grant  us  grace  if  we  cannot  at  once  escape 
from  the  chain  of  mortal  life  as  to  our  bodies,  yet  to  do  so  as  to  o*r 
spirits;  and  leaving  the  body  like  a  servant  at  the  foot  of  tke  hill, 
No.  671.  13 


38  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

may  our  soul,  like  Abraham,  go  to  the  top  of  the  mountain,  and  there 
may  we  have  communion  with  the  Most  High. 

While  expounding  my  text,  I  shall  ask  your  attention  this  morning, 
first,  to  the  circumstances  which  surround  the  rewarding  of  the  righteous; 
secondly,  to  their  portion;  and  thirdly,  to  the  persons  themselves. 

I.  There  is  MUCH  OF  TEACHING  IN  THE  SURROUNDING  CIRCUM 
STANCES. 

We  read,  "  When  the  King  shall  come  in  his  glory?  It  appears,  then, 
that  we  must  not  expect  to  receive  our  reward  till  by-and-by.  Like  the 
hireling  we  must  fulfil  our  day,  and  then  at  evening  we  shall  have  our 
penny.  Too  many  Christians  look  for  a  present  reward  for  their  labours, 
and  if  they  meet  with  success,  they  begin  doating  upon  it  as  though 
they  had  received  their  recompense.  Like  the  disciples  who  returned 
saying,  "  Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  unto  us,"  they  rejoice  too 
exclusively  in  present  prosperity;  whereas  the  Master  bade  them  not  to 
look  upon  miraculous  success  as  being  their  reward,  since  that  might 
not  always  be  the  case.  "  Nevertheless,"  said  he,  "rejoice  not  in  this, 
but  rather  rejoice  because  your  names  are  written  in  heaven."  Success 
in  the  ministry  is  not  the  Christian  minister's  true  reward:  it  is  an 
earnest,  but  the  wages  still  wait.  The  approbation  of  your  fellow- 
men  you  must  not  look  upon  as  being  the  reward  of  excellence,  for 
often  you  will  meet  with  the  reverse;  you  will  find  your  best  actions 
misconstrued,  and  your  motives  ill  interpreted.  If  you  are  looking 
for  your  reward  here  I  may  warn  you  of  the  apostle's  words,  *'  If  in 
this  life  only  we  have  hope,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable:"  be 
cause  other  men  get  their  reward;  even  the  Pharisee  gets  his:  "  Verily, 
I  say  unto  you,  they  have  their  reward;"  but  we  have  none  here.  To- 
be  despised  and  rejected  of  men  is  the  Christian's  lot.  Among  his 
fellow  Christians  he  will  not  always  stand  in  good  repute.  It  is  not 
unmitigated  kindness  nor  unmingled  love  that  we  receive  even  from  the 
saints.  I  tell  you  if  you  look  for  your  reward  to  Christ's  bride  herself 
you  will  miss  it;  if  you  expect  to  receive  your  crown  from  the  hand  even 
of  your  brethren  in  the  ministry  who  know  your  labours,  and  who 
ought  to  sympathize  with  your  trials,  you  will  be  mistaken.  "  When 
the  King  shall  come  in  his  glory,"  then  is  your  time  of  recompense;  but 
not  to-day,  nor  to-morrow,  nor  at  any  time  in  this  world.  Reckon 
nothing  which  you  acquire,  no  honour  which  you  gain,  to  be  the  reward 
of  your  service  to  your  Master;  that  is  reserved  to  the  time  "when  the 
King  shall  come  in  his  glory." 

Observe  with  delight  the  august  person  by  whose  hand  the  reward  is 
gfiven.  It  is  written,  "When  the  King  shall  come."  Brethren,  we  love  the 
King's  courtiers;  we  delight  to  be  numbered  with  them  ourselves.  It 
is  no  mean  thing  to  do  service  to  him  whose  head — "Though  once  'twas 
crowned  with  thorns,  is  crowned  with  glory  now."  But  it  is  a  delightful 
thought  that  the  service  of  rewarding  us  will  not  be  left  to  the  courtiers. 
The  angels  will  be  there,  and  the  brethren  of  the  King  will  be  there; 
but  heaven  was  not  prepared  by  them,  nor  can  it  be  given  by  them. 
Their  hands  shall  not  yield  us  a  coronation;  we  shall  join  their  songs, 
but  their  songs  would  be  no  reward  for  us;  we  shall  bow  with  them 
and  they  with  us,  but  it  will  not  be  possible  for  them  to  give  us  the 
recompense  of  th^  reward — that  starry  crown  is  all  too  weighty  for  an 


THE    REWARD   OF   THE    RIGHTEOUS. 

angel's  hand  to  bring,  and  the  benediction  all  too  sweet  bo  be  pronounced, 
even  by  seraphic  lips.  The  King  himself  must  say,  "  Well  done,  good 
and  faithful  servant."  What  say  you  to  this,  my  dear  brother?  Yon 
have  felt  a  temptation  to  look  to  God's  servants,  to  the  approbation  of 
the  minister,  to  the  kindly  look  of  parents,  to  the  word  ot  commendation 
from  your  fellow- worker;  all  these  you  value,  and  I  do  not  blame  you; 
but  these  may  fail  yon,  and  therefore  never  consider  them  as  being  th$ 
reward.  You  must  wait  till  the  time  when  the  King  cometh,  and  then 
it  will  neither  be  your  brethren,  your  pastors,  your  parents,  nor  your 
helpers,  but  the  King  himself  who  shall  say  to  you,  "  Come,  ye  blessed." 
How  this  sweetens  heaven!  It  will  be  Christ's  own  gift.  How  this 
makes  the  benediction  doubly  blessed !  It  shall  come  from  his  lips, 
which  drop  like  rnyrrh  and  flow  with  honey.  Beloved,  it  is  Christ  who 
became  a  curse  for  us,  who  shall  give  the  blessing  to  us.  Roll  ye  this 
as  a  sweet  morsel  under  your  tongues. 

The  character  in  which  our  Lord  Jesus  shall  appear  is  significant. 
Jesus  will  then  be  revealed  as  truly  "  the  King."  "  When  the  King  shall 
come."  It  was  to  him  as  King  that  the  service  was  rendered,  and  it  is 
from  him  as  King  that  the  reward  must  therefore  come;  and  so  upon 
the  very  threshold  a  question  of  self-examination  arises:  "The  King 
will  not  reward  the  servants  of  another  prince — am  I  therefore  his 
servant?  Is  it  my  joy  to  wait  at  the  threshold  of  his  gates,  and  sit  like 
Mordecai  at  the  courts  of  Ahasnerus — at  the  entrance  of  his  door?  Say, 
soul,  dost  thou  serve  the  King?"  I  mean  not  the  kings  and  queens  of 
earth;  let  them  have  loyal  servants  for  their  subjects;  but  saints  are  servants 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  King  of  kings— -are  ye  so?  If  ye  be  not 
so,  when  the  King  cometh  in  his  glory,  there  can  be  no  reward  for 
you.  I  long  in  my  own  heart  to  recognize  Christ's  kingly  office  more 
than  ever  I  have  done.  It  has  been  my  delight  to  preach  to  you  Christ 
dying  on  the  cross,  and  "God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the 
cross;"  but  I  want  for  my  own  self  to  realize  him  on  his  throne,  reigning 
in  my  heart,  having  a  right  to  do  as  he  wills  with  me,  that  I  may  get 
to  the  condition  of  Abraham,  who,  wjien  God  spoke,  though  it  was  to 
tell  him  to  offer  up  his  own  Isaac,  never  asked  a  question,  but  simply 
said,  "Here  am  I."  Beloved,  seek  to  know  and  feel  the  controlling 
power  of  the  King,  for  else  when  he  comes,  since  you  have  not  known 
him  as  King,  he  cannot  know  you  as  servant;  and  it  is  only  to  the 
servant  that  the  King  can  give  the  reward  which  is  spoken  of  in  the 
text, — "  When  the  King  shall  come." 

Now  pass  on.  "  When  the  King  shall  come  in  his  glory."  The 
fulness  of  that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive. 

"  Imagination's  utmost  stretch, 
In  wonder  dies  away." 

But  this  we  know, — and  it  is  the  sweetest  thing  we  can  know, — that  if 
we  have  been  partakers  with  Jesus  in  his  shame,  we  also  shall  be  sharers 
with  him  in  the  lustre  which  shall  surround  him.  Art  thou,  beloved,  one 
with  Christ  Jesus  ?  Art  thou  of  his  flesh  and  of  his  bones  ?  Does  a 
yital  union  knit  thee  to  him?  Then  thou  art  to-day  with  him  in  his 
ahame;  thou  hast  taken  up  his  cross,  and  gone  with  him  without  the 
camp  bearing  his  reproach;  thou  shalt  doubtless  be  with  him  whexy 


40  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  cross  is  exchanged  for  the  crown.  But  judge  thyself  this  morning; 
if  thou  art  not  with  him  in  the  regeneration,  neither  shalt  thou  be  with 
him  when  he  shall  come  in  his  glory.  If  you  start  back  from  the 
black  side  of  communion,  you  shall  not  understand  its  bright,  its  happy 
period,  when  the  King  shall  come  in  his  glory  and  all  his  holy  angels 
with  him.  What,  are  angels  with  him?  And  yet  he  took  not  up  angels, 
he  took  up  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Are  the  holy  angels  with  him? 
Come,  my  soul,  then  thou  canst  not  be  far  from  him.  If  his  friends  and 
his  neighbours  are  called  together  to  see  his  glory,  what  thinkest 
thou  if  thou  art  married  to  him?  Shall  thou  be  distant?  Though  it  be 
A  day  of  judgment,  yet  thou  canst  not  be  far  from  that  heart  which 
having  admitted  angels  into  intimacy  has  admitted  thee  into  union. 
Has  he  not  said  to  thee,  0  my  soul,  "  I  have  betrothed  thee  unto  me 
in  faithfulness,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  righteousness"?  Have  not  his 
own  lips  said  it,  "  I  am  married  unto  thee,  and  my  delight  is  in  thee  "? 
Then  if  the  angels,  who  are  but  the  friends  and  the  neighbours,  shall 
be  with  him,  it  is  abundantly  certain  that  his  own  beloved  Hephzibah, 
in  whom  is  all  his  delight,  shall  be  near  to  him  and  shall  be  a  partaker 
of  his  splendour.  It  is  when  he  comes  in  his  glory,  and  when  his  com 
munion  with  angels  shall  be  distinctly  recognised, — it  is  then  that  his 
unity  with  his  Church  shall  become  apparent.  "  Then  shall  he  sit  upon 
the  throne  of  his  glory"  Here  is  a  repetition  of  the  same  reason  why  it 
should  be  your  time  and  my  time  to  receive  the  reward  from  Christ  if 
we  be  found  among  his  faithful  servants.  When  he  sits  upon  his  throne 
it  were  not  fit  that  his  own  beloved  ones  should  be  in  the  mire.  When 
he  was  in  the  place  of  shame  they  were  with  him,  and  now  he  is  on  the 
throne  of  gold  they  must  be  with  him  too.  There  were  no  oneness, — 
union  with  Christ  were  amere  matter  of  talk, — if  it  were  not  certain  that 
when  he  is  on  the  throne  they  shall  be  upon  the  throne  too. 

But  I  want  you  to  notice  one  particular  circumstance  with  regard  to 
the  time  of  the  reward.  It  is  when  he  shall  have  divided  the  sheep  from 
the  goats.  My  reward,  if  I  be  a  child  of  God,  cannot  come  to  me  while 
I  am  in  union  with  the  wicked.  Even  on  earth  you  will  have  the  most 
enjoyment  of  Christ  when  you  are  most  separated  from  this  world: 
-rest  assured,  although  the  separated  path  does  not  seem  an  easy  one,  and 
it  will  certainly  entail  upon  you  persecution  and  the  loss  of  many 
friends,  yet  it  is  the  happiest  walking  in  the  world.  You  conforming 
Christians,  who  can  enter  into  the  world's  mirth  to  a  certain  degree, 
you  cannot,  you  never  can  know  as  you  now  are,  the  inward  joys  of 
those  who  live  in  lonely  but  lovely  fellowship  with  Jesus.  The  nearer 
you  get  to  the  world  the  further  you  must  be  from  Christ,  and  I  believe 
the  more  thoroughly  a  bill  of  divorce  is  given  by  your  spirit  to  every 
earthly  object  upon  which  your  soul  can  set  itself,  the  more  close  will 
be  your  communion  with  your  Lord.  "  Forget  also  thine  own  country 
and  thy  Father's  house;  so  shall  the  King  greatly  desire  thy  beauty, 
for  he  is  thy  Lord,  and  worship  thou  him."  It  is  significant  that  not 
antil  the  King  has  separated  the  sheep  from  the  goats  does  he  say, 
44  Come,  ye  blessed;"  and  though  the  righteous  will  have  enjoyed  * 
felicity  as  disembodied  spirits,  yet  as  risen  from  the  grave  in  their 
bodies,  their  felicity  is  not  fully  accomplished  till  the  great  Shepherd 
shall  have  appeared  to  separate  them  once  for  all,  by  a  great  gulf  which 


THE  REWARD  OF  THE   RIGHTEOUS.  41 

cannot  be  passed,  from  all  association  with  the  nations  that  forget  God 
Now  then,  beloved,  these  circumstances  all  put  together  come  to  this, 
that  the  reward  of  following  Christ  is  not  to-day,  is  not  among  the  sons 
of  men,  is  not  from  men,  is  not  even  from  the  excellent  of  the  earth, 
is  not  even  bestowed  by  Jesus  while  we  are  here,  but  the  glorious  crown 
of  life  which  the  Lord's  grace  shall  give  to  his  people  is  reserved  for  the 
second  advent,  "  when  the  King  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  hia 
holy  angels  with  him."  Wait  with  patience,  wait  with  joyful  expecta 
tion,  for  he  shall  come,  and  blessed  be  the  day  of  his  appearing. 

II.  We  have  now  to  turn  to  the  second  point — THE  PORTION  ITSELF. 
Every  word  is  suggestive.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  exhaust,  but  merely 
to  glance  at  all.  The  reward  of  the  righteous  is  set  forth  by  the  loving 
benediction  pronounced  to  them  by  the  Master,  but  their  very  position 
gives  some  foreshadowing  of  it.  He  put  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand. 
Heai  en  is  a  position  of  the  most  elevated  dignity  authoritatively  con 
ferred,  and  of  Divine  complacency  manifestly  enjoyed.  God's  saints  are 
always  at  his  right  hand  according  to  the  judgment  of  faith,  but  here 
after  it  shall  be  more  clearly  manifested.  God  is  pleased  to  be  close  tc 
his  people,  and  to  place  them  near  to  himself  in  a  place  of  protection. 
Sometimes  it  seems  as  if  they  were  at  the  left  hand ;  they  certainly  have, 
some  of  them,  less  comfort  than  the  worldlings.  "  I  have  seen  the 
wicked  in  great  power,  and  spreading  himself  like  a  green  bay  tree; 
their  eyes  stand  out  with  fatness,  they  have  more  than  heart  could  wish;" 
whereas  his  people  are  often  made  to  drink  waters  of  a  full  cup,  and 
their  meat  and  their  drink  are  bittered  with  wormwood  and  gall.  The 
world  is  upside  down  now;  the  gospel  has  begun  to  turn  it  the  right 
way  uppermost,  but  when  the  day  of  grace  is  over,  and  the  day  of  glory 
comes,  then  shall  it  be  righted  indeed;  then  those  that  wandered  about 
in  sheep-skins  and  goat-skins  shall  be  clothed  in  glittering  apparel, 
being  transfigured  like  the  Saviour  upon  Tabor;  then  those  of  whom 
the  world  was  not  worthy  shall  come  to  a  world  that  shall  be  worthy 
of  them;  then  those  who  were  hurried  to  the  stake  and  to  the  flames 
shall  triumph  with  chariots  of  fire  and  horses  of  fire,  and  swell  the 
splendour  of  the  Master's  pompous  appearing.  Yes,  beloved,  you  shall 
eternally  be  the  object  of  Divine  complacency,  not  insecret  and  un- 
manifested  communion,  but  your  state  and  glory  shall  be  revealed  before 
the  sons  of  men.  Your  persecutors  shall  gnash  their  teeth  when  they 
see  you  occupying  places  of  honour  at  his  right  hand,  and  themselves, 
though  greater  far  than  you  on  earth,  condemned  to  take  the  lowest  room. 
How  shall  Dives  bite  his  fire-tormented  tongue  in  vain  as  he  sees 
Lazarus,  the  beggar  on  the  dunghill,  made  to  sit  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  King  eternal  and  immortal!  Heaven  is  a  place  of  dignity.  "  There 
we  shall  be  as  the  angels,"  saith  one,  but  I  wot  we  shall  be  even  supe 
rior  than  they.  Is  it  not  written  of  him  who  in  all  things  is  our  repre 
sentative,  "  Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet  nl  Even  the  very 
seraphs  themselves  so  richly  blessed,  what  are  they  but  "  ministering 
spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation?" 

But  now  turning  to  the  welcome  uttered  by  the  judge,  The  first  word 
in  "Come.n  It  is  the  gospel  symbol.  The  law  said  "Go;"  the  gospel 
§aith  "Come."  The  Spirit  sa'ith  it  in  invitation;  the  Bride  saith  it 
io  intercession ;  "  let  him  that  heareth "  say  it  by  constantly,  laboriously 


42  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

endeavouring  to  spread  abroad  the  good  news.  Since  Jesus  saith  "  Come," 
we  learn  that  the  very  essence  of  heaven  is  communion.  "  Come  !" 
Ye  came  near  enough  to  say  "  Lord,  we  believe,  help  thou  our  unbelief !" 
On  the  cross  ye  looked  to  me  and  were  lightened.  Ye  had  fellowship 
with  me  in  bearing  my  cross.  Ye  filled  up  that  which  was  behind  of 
the  sufferings  of  Christ  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Churoh.  Still 
come!  Ever,  come!  For  ever  come!  Come  up  from  your  graves,  ye 
risen  ones!  Come  up  from  among  the  ungodly,  ye  consecrated  ones! 
Come  up  from  where  ye  cast  yourselves  down  in  your  humiliation  before 
the  great  white  throne!  Come  up  to  wear  my  crown,  and  sit  with  me 
upon  my  throne!  Oh,  that  word  has  heaven  lurking  within  it.  It 
shall  be  to  you  your  joy  for  ever  to  hear  the  Saviour  say  to  you, 
'*  Come."  I  protest  before  you  my  soul  has  sometimes  been  so  full  of 
joy  that  I  could  hold  no  more  when  my  beloved  Lord  has  said  "  Come" 
to  my  soul ;  for  he  has  taken  me  into  his  banqueting  house,  and  his 
love-banner  has  waved  over  my  head,  and  he  has  taken  me  away  from 
the  world,  and  its  cares  and  its  fears,  and  its  trials  and  its  joys,  up  to 
"  the  top  of  Amana,  from  the  top  of  Shenir  and  Hermon,"  where  he 
manifested  himself  to  me.  When  this  "  Come  "  shall  come  into  your 
ear  from  the  Master's  lips  there  shall  not  be  the  flesh  to  drag  you  back, 
there  shall  be  no  sluggishness  of  spirit,  no  heaviness  of  heart;  you 
shall  come  eternally  then;  you  shall  not  mount  to  descend  again,  but 
mount  on  and  on  in  one  blessed  Excelsior  for  ever  and  for  ever.  The 
first  word  indicates  that  heaven  is  a  state  of  communion — "  Come." 

Then  it  is  "  Come,  ye  Messed,"  which  is  a  clear  declaration  that  this 
is  a  state  of  happiness.  They  cannot  be  more  blessed  than  they  are. 
They  have  their  hearts'  desire,  and  though  their  hearts  have  been 
enlarged  and  their  desires  have  been  expanded  by  entering  into  the 
Infinite,  and  getting  rid  of  the  cramping  influences  of  corruption  and 
of  time,  yet  even  when  their  desire  shall  know  no  bound  they  shall  have 
all  the  happiness  that  the  utmost  stretch  of  their  souls  can  by  any 
possibility  conceive.  This  much,  and  this  is  all  we  know — they  are 
supremely  blessed.  Their  blessedness  you  perceive  does  not  come 
from  any  secondary  joy,  but  from  the  great  primary  Source  of  all  good. 
**  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father."  They  drink  the  unadulterated  wine 
At  the  winepress  itself,  where  it  joyously  leaps  from  the  bursting 
clusters;  they  pluck  celestial  fruits  from  the  unwithering  boughs  of  the 
immortal  tree;  they  shall  sit  at  the  well  head  and  drink  the  waters  as 
they  spring  with  unrivalled  freshness  from  the  depths  of  the  heart  of 
Deity;  they  shall  not  be  basking  in  the  beams  of  the  sun,  but  they 
shall  be  like  Uriel,  the  angel  in  the  sun  ;  they  shall  dwell  in  God,  and 
so  their  souls  shall  be  satisfied  with  favour,  and  full  and  more  than  full 
wiih  his  presence  and  benediction. 

Notice,  once  again,  that  according  to  the  words  used  it  is  a  state 
where  they  shall  recognise  their  rii>ht  to  be  there;  a  state  therefore  of 
perfect  freedom,  and  ease  and  fearlessness.  It  is — " inherit  the  kingdom" 
A.  man  does  not  fear  to  lose  that  which  he  wins  by  descent  from  his 
parent.  If  heaven  had  been  the  subject  of  earning,  we  might  have 
feared  that  our  merits  had  not  really  deserved  it,  and  therefore  suspect 
that  one  day  a  Writ  of  Error  would  be  issued  and  that  we  should  be 
sjected;  but  we  do  kno  ?  whose  sons  we  are;  we  know  whose  love 


TFB   REWARD   OF   THE    RIGHTEOUS.  43 

it  is  that  makes  glad  our  spirits,  and  when  we  "inherit"  the  kingdom 
we  shall  enter  it  not  as  strangers  or  as  foreigners,  but  as  sons  coming 
to  their  birthright.  Looking  over  all  its  streets  of  gold  and  surveying 
all  its  walls  of  pearl;  we  shall  feel  that  we  are  at  home  in  our  own  house, 
and  have  an  actual  right,  not  through  merit  but  through  grace,  to 
everything  that  is  there.  It  will  be  a  state  of  heavenly  bliss;  the  Christian 
shall  feel  that  law  and  justice  are  on  his  side,  and  that  those  stern 
attributes  have  brought  him  there  as  well  as  mercy  and  loving-kindness. 
But  the  word  "inherit"  here  imports  full  possession  and  enjoyment. 
They  have  inherited  in  a  certain  sense  before,  but  now  as  an  heir  when 
lie  has  arrived  at  full  maturity,  begins  to  spend  his  own  money,  and 
to  farm  his  own  acres,  so  do  they  enter  into  their  heritage.  We  are  not 
full  grown  as  yet,  and  therefore  are  not  admitted  to  full  possession. 
But  wait  awhile;  those  grey  hairs  betoken,  my  brethren,  that  you  are 
getting  ripe.  These,  these,  these  my  still  youthful  locks  show  me  alas 
that  I  may  have  to  tarry  for  a  little  longer,  and  yet  I  know  not,  the 
Lord  may  soon  permit  me  to  sleep  with  my  fathers;  but  later  or  earlier, 
be  it  as  he  wills,  we  shall  one  day  come  into  possession  of  the  goodly 
land.  Now  if  it  is  sweet  to  be  an  heir  while  you  are  in  nonage,  what 
is  it  to  be  an  heir  when  arrived  at  perfect  manhood?  Was  it  not  delight 
ful  to  sing  that  hymn  just  now,  and  to  behold  the  land  of  pure  delight, 
whose  everlasting  spring  and  never-withering  flowers  are  just  across  the 
narrow  stream  of  death.  Oh  ye  sweet  fields!  Ye  saints  immortal  who 
lie  down  therein!  When  shall  we  be  with  you  and  be  satisfied?  If  the 
mere  thinking  of  heaven  ravishes  the  soul,  what  must  it  be  to  be  there, 
to  plunge  deep  into  the  stream  of  blessedness,  to  dive  and  find  no 
bottom,  to  swim  and  find  no  shore?  To  sip  of  the  wine  of  heaven  as 
we  sometimes  do  makes  our  hearts  so  glad  that  we  know  not  how  to 
express  our  joy;  but  what  will  it  be  to  drink  deep  and  drink  again,  and 
sit  for  ever  at  the  table  and  know  that  the  feast  will  never  be  over  and 
the  cups  will  never  be  empty,  and  that  there  will  be  no  worse  wine 
to  be  brought  out  at  the  last,  but  if  possible  better  still  and  better  still 
in  infinite  progression? 

The  word  "  kingdom"  which  stands  next,  indicates  the  richness  of 
the  heritage  of  saints.  It  is  no  petty  estate,  no  alms  rooms,  no  happy 
corner  in  obscurity.  I  heard  a  good  man  say  he  should  be  content  to 
win  a  corner  behind  the  door.  I  shall  not  be.  The  Lord  says  we  shall 
inherit  a  kingdom.  We  would  not  be  satisfied  to  inherit  less,  because 
less  than  that  would  not  suit  oar  character.  "  He  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God,"  and  we  must  reign  for  ever  and  ever,  or  be  as 
wretched  as  deposed  monarchs.  A  king  without  a  kingdom  were  an 
unhappy  man.  If  I  were  a  poor  servant,  an  alms  room  would  be  a  boon, 
for  it  would  consort  with  my  condition  and  degree;  but  if  I  am  made 
by  grace  a  king,  ]  must  have  a  kingdom,  or  I  shall  not  have  attained 
to  a  position  equal  to  my  nature.  He  who  makes  us  kings  will  give 
us  a  kingdom  to  fit  the  nature  which  he  hath  bestowed  upon  us. 
Beloved,  do  strive  alter,  more  and  more,  that  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
will  give  you,  a  kingly  heart;  do  not  be  among  those  who  are  satisfied 
and  contented  with  the  miserable  nature  of  ordinary  humanity.  A 
child's  glass  bead  is  all  the  world  is  to  a  truly  royal  spirit;  these 
glittering  diadems  are  only  nursery  toys  to  God's  kings;  the  trut 


44  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

jewels  are  up  there;  the  true  treasury  wealth  looks  down  upon  the  stars, 
Do  not  stint  your  soul;  be  not  straitened!  Get  a  kingly  heart — ask 
the  King  of  kings  to  give  it  to  you,  and  beg  of  him  a  royal  spirit.  Act 
royally  on  earth  towards  your  Lord,  and  for  his  sake  towards  all  men. 
Go  about  the  world  not  as  mean  men  in  spirit  and  act,  but  askings  and 
princes  of  a  race  superior  to  the  dirt-scrapers  who  are  on  their  knees, 
crawling  in  the  mud  after  yellow  earth.  Then,  when  your  soul  is  royal, 
remember  with  joy  that  your  future  inheritance  shall  be  all  that  your 
kingly  soul  pants  after  in  its  most  royal  moments.  It  will  be  a  state 
of  unutterable  richness  and  wealth  of  soul. 

According  to  the  word  "prepared"  we  may  conceive  it  to  be  a  con 
dition  of  surpassing  excellence.  It  is  a  kingdom  prepared,  and  it  has 
been  so  long  a  time  prepared,  and  he  who  prepares  it  is  so  wondrously 
rich  in  resources,  that  we  cannot  possibly  conceive  how  excellent  it 
must  be.  If  I  might  so  speak,  God's  common  gifts,  which  he  throws 
away  as  though  they  were  but  nothing,  are  priceless;  but  what  will  be 
these  gifts  upon  which  the  infinite  mind  of  God  has  been  set  for  ages 
of  ages  in  order  that  they  may  reach  the  highest  degree  of  excellence? 
Long  before  Christmas  chimes  were  ringing,  mother  was  so  glad  to 
think  her  boy  was  coming  home,  after  the  first  quarter  he  had  been  out 
at  school,  and  straightway  she  began  preparing  and  planning  all  sorts 
of  joys  for  him.  Well  might  the  holidays  be  happy  when  mother  had 
been  contriving  to  make  them  so.  Now  in  an  infinitely  nobler  manner 
the  great  God  has  prepared  a  kingdom  for  his  people;  he  has  thought, 
"  that  will  please  them,  and  that  will  bless  them,  and  this  other  will 
make  them  superlatively  happy/'  He  prepared  the  kingdom  to  per 
fection  ;  and  then,  as  if  that  were  not  enough,  the  glorious  man  Christ 
Jesus  went  up  from  earth  to  heaven;  and  you  know  what  he  said  when 
he  departed, — "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  "We  know  that  the 
infinite  God  can  prepare  a  place  fitting  for  a  finite  creature,  but  the 
words  smile  so  sweetly  at  us  as  we  read  that  Jesus  himself,  who  is  a 
man,  and  therefore  knows  our  hearts'  desires,  has  had  a  finger  in  it;  JIB 
has  prepared  it  too.  It  is  a  kingdom  prepared  for  you,  upon  which 
the  thoughts  of  God  have  been  set  to  make  it  excellent  "  from  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world." 

But  we  must  not  pause:  it  is  a  " kingdom  prepared  for  you"  Mark 
that!  I  must  confess  I  do  not  like  certain  expressions  which  I  hear 
sometimes,  which  imply  that  heaven  is  prepared  for  some  who  will 
never  reach  it;  prepared  for  those  who  will  be  driven  as  accursed 
ones  into  the  place  of  torment.  I  know  there  is  a  sacred  expression 
which  says,  "let  no  man  take  thy  crown;"  but  that  refers  to  the  crown 
of  ministerial  success,  rather  than  of  eternal  glory.  An  expression  which 
grated  on  my  ear  the  other  evening  from  the  lips  of  a  certain  good  man, 
ran  something  in  this  fashion:  "  There  is  a  heaven  prepared  fiv  all  of 
you,  but  if  you  are  not  faithful  you  will  not  win  it.  There  is  a  crown 
in  heaven  laid  up  for  you,  but  if  you  are  not  faithful  it  will  be  without  a 
wearer."  I  do  not  believe  it,  I  cannot  believe  it.  That  the  crown  of 
eternal  life  which  is  laid  up  for  the  blessed  of  the  Father  will  ever  be 
given  to  anybody  else  or  left  without  possessor,  I  do  not  believe.  I 
dare  not  conceive  of  crowns  in  heaven  and  nobody  to  wear  them.  Think 
you  that  in  heaven,  when  the  whole  number  of  saints  is  complete,  yon 


THK   REWARD   OF  THE    RIGHTiQOim.  45 

will  find  a  number  of  unused  crowns?  "Ah!  what  are  these  for? 
Where  are  the  heads  for  these?  "  "  They  are  in  hell  !"  Then,  brother, 
I  have  no  particular  desire  to  be  in  heaven,  for  if  all  the  family  of 
Christ  are  not  there,  my  soul  will  be  wretched  and  forlorn  because  of 
their  sad  loss,  because  I  am  in  union  with  them  all.  If  one  soul  that 
believed  in  Jesus  does  not  get  there  I  shall  lose  respect  for  the  promise 
and  respect  for  the  Master  too;  he  must  keep  his  word  to  every  soul  that 
resteth  on  him.  If  your  God  has  gone  the  length  of  actually 
preparing  a  place  for  his  people  and  has  made  provision  for  them 
and  been  disappointed,  he  is  no  God  to  me,  for  I  could  not  adore  a 
disappointed  God.  I  do  not  believe  in  such  a  God.  Such  a  being 
would  not  be  God  at  all.  The  notion  of  disappointment  in  his 
eternal  preparations  is  not  consistent  with  Deity.  Talk  thus  of  Jupiter 
and  Venus  if  you  please,  but  the  Infinite  Jehovah  is,  as  far  as  human 
speech  can  dishonour  him,  dishonoured  by  being  mentioned  in  such 
a  connection.  He  has  prepared  a  place  for  you.  Here  is  personal 
election.  He  has  made  a  distinct  ordinance  for  every  one  of  his  people 
that  where  he  is  there  shall  they  be. 

"  Prepared  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Here  is 
eternal  election  appearing  before  men  were  created,  preparing  a  crown 
before  heads  were  made  to  wear  it.  And  so  God  had  before  the 
starry  skies  began  to  gleam  carried  out  the  decree  of  election 
in  a  measure  which  when  Christ  shall  come  shall  be  perfected  to  the 
praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  "  who  worketh  all  things  after  the 
counsel  of  his  will."  Our  portion  then  is  one  prepared  from  all  eternity 
for  us  acccording  to  the  election  of  God's  grace,  one  suitable  to  the 
loftiest  character  to  which  we  can  ever  attain,  which  will  consist  in 
nearness  to  Christ,  communion  with  God,  and  standing  for  ever  in  * 
place  of  dignity  and  happiness. 

III.  And  now  I  have  very  little  time  to  speak,  as  I  hoped  to  have 
spoken  this  morning  about  THE  PERSONS  WHO  SHALL  COME  THERE. 

They  are  recognisable  by  a  secret  and  by  a  public  character.  Their 
name  is — "  blessed  of  the  Father," — the  Father  chose  them,  gave  his 
Son  for  them,  justified  them  through  Christ,  preserved  them  in  Christ 
Jesus,  adopted  them  into  the  family,  and  now  accepted  them  into  his 
own  house.  Their  nature  you  have  described  in  the  word  "  inherit." 
None  can  inherit  but  sons;  they  have  been  born  again,  and  have 
received  the  nature  of  God;  having  escaped  the  corruption  which  is  in 
the  world  through  lust,  they  have  become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature: 
they  are  sons.  Their  appointment  is  mentioned;  "  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you,  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Their 
name  is  "  blessed,"  their  nature  is  that  of  a  child,  their  appointment 
is  that  of  God's  decree. 

Their  doings,  their  outward  doings,  these  we  want  to  speak  a  minute 
upon.  They  appear  to  have  been  distinguished  among  men  for  deeds 
of  charity,  and  these  were  not  in  any  way  associated  with  ceremonies  or 
outward  observances.  It  is  not  said  that  they  preached — they  did  so, 
•ume  of  them;  it  is  not  said  that  they  prayed — they  must  have  done  so, 
or  they  would  not  have  been  spiritually  alive.  The  actions  which  are 
selected  as  their  type,  are  actions  of  charity  to  the  indigent  and  forlorn. 
Why  these  ?  I  think,  because  the  general  audience  assembled  around  the 

10 


46  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

mrone  tvould  know  how  to  appreciate  this  evidence  of  their  newborn  nature. 
The  King  might  think  more  of  their  prayers  than  of  their  alms,  but  the 
multitude  would  not.  He  speaks  so  as  to  gain  the  verdict  of  all  assem 
bled.  Even  their  enemies  could  not  object  to  his  calling  those  blessed 
who  had  performed  these  actions;  for  if  there  be  an  action  which  wins 
for  men  the  universal  consent  to  their  goodness,  it  is  an  action  by  which 
men  would  be  served.  Against  this  there  is  no  law.  I  have  never  heard 
of  a  state  in  which  there  was  a  law  against  clothing  the  naked  and  feeding 
the  hungry.  Humanity  at  once,  when  its  conscience  is  so  seared  that  it 
cannot  see  its  own  sinfulness,  yet  detects  the  virtuousness  of  feeding  the 
poor.  Doubtless  this  is  one  reason  why  these  actions  were  selected. 
And  again,  they  may  have  been  chosen  as  evidences  of  grace,  because, 
as  actions,  they  are  a  wonderful  means  of  separating  between  the  hypocrite 
and  the  true  Christian.  Dr.  Gill  has  an  idea,  and  perhaps  he  is  right, 
that  this  is  not  a  picture  of  the  general  judgment,  but  of  the  judgment 
of  the  professing  Church,  and  if  so,  it  is  all  the  more  reasonable  to  con 
clude  that  these  works  of  mercy  are  selected  as  the  appropriate  discerner 
between  the  hypocrite  and  the  sincere.  I  fear  that  there  are  some 
of  you  high  professors  who  could  not  stand  the  test.  "  Good  praying 
people"  they  call  you,  but  what  do  you  give  to  the  Lord?  Your  religion 
has  not  touched  your  pockets.  This  does  not  apply  to  some  of  you,  for 
there  are  many  here  of  whom  I  would  venture  to  speak  before  the  bar 
of  God,  that  I  know  their  substance  to  be  consecrated  to  the  Lord  and 
his  poor,  and  I  have  sometimes  thought  that  beyond  their  means  they 
have  given  both  to  the  poor  and  to  God's  cause.  But  there  are  others 
of  a  very  different  disposition.  Now  here  I  shall  give  you  a  little  plain 
English  talk  which  none  can  fail  to  understand.  You  may  talk  about 
your  religion  till  you  have  worn  your  tongue  out,  and  you  may  get 
others  to  believe  you;  and  you  may  remain  in  the  Church  twenty  years, 
and  nobody  ever  detect  you  in  anything  like  an  inconsistency;  but,  if  it 
be  in  your  power,  and  you  do  nothing  to  relieve  the  necessities  of  the 
poor  members  of  Christ's  body,  you  will  be  damned  as  surely  as  if  you 
were  drunkards  or  whoremongers.  If  you  have  no  care  for  God's  Church 
this  text  applies  to  you,  and  will  as  surely  sink  you  to  the  lowest  hell  as 
if  you  had  been  common  blasphemers.  That  is  very  plain  English,  but 
it  is  the  plain  meaning  of  my  text,  and  it  is  at  my  peril  that  I  flinch 
from  telling  you  of  it.  "  I  was  an  hungred,  and  ye  gave  me" — what? 
good  advice;  yes,  but  no  meat.  "I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me" — 
what?  a  tract,  and  no  drink.  "  I  was  naked,  and  ye  gave  me  " — what? 
your  good  wishes,  but  no  clothes.  I  was  a  stranger  and — ye  pitied  me, 
but — ye  took  me  not  in.  I  was  sick,  you  said  you  could  recommend  me 
a  doctor,  but  you  did  not  visit  me.  I  was  in  prison,  I,  God's  servant, 
a  persecuted  one,  put  in  prison  for  Christ's  sake,  and  you  said  I  should 
be  more  cautious;  but  you  did  not  stand  by  my  side  and  take  a  share 
of  the  blame,  and  bear  with  me  reproach  for  the  truth's  sake.  You 
see  this  is  a  very  terrible  winnowing  fan  to  some  of  you  niggardly 
ones  whose  main  object  is  to  get  all  you  can  and  hold  it  fast,  but 
it  is  a  fan  which  frequently  must  be  used.  Whoever  deceives  you  or 
spares  you,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  will  not,  but  will  labour  to  be  more 
bold  than  ever  in  denouncing  sin.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  what  are  those 
U>  do  who  are  so  poor  that  they  have  nothing  to  give  away?"  My  dear 


THE    REWARD   OF   THE    RIGHTEOUS.  47 

brother,  do  you  notice  how  beautifully  the  text  takes  care  of  you.  Ic 
hints  that  there  are  some  who  cannot  give  bread  to  the  hungry,  and 
clothes  to  the  naked,  but  what  about  them?  Why  you  see  they  are  the 
persons  spoken  of  as  "my  brethren,"  who  receive  the  boon  of  kindness, 
so  that  this  passage  comforts  the  poor  and  by  no  means  condemns  them. 
Certain  of  us  honestly  give  to  the  poor  all  we  can  spare,  and  then  of 
course  everybody  comes  to  such;  and  when  we  say,  "  Really,  I  cannot 
give  any  more,"  somebody  snarls  and  says,  *'  Call  yourself  a  Christian?" 
"  Yes,  T  do,  I  should  not  call  myself  a  Christian  if  I  gave  away  other 

People's  money;  I  should  not  call  myself  a  Christian  if  I  gave  away  what 
have  not  got;  I  should  call  myself  a  thief,  pretending  to  be  charitable 
when  I  could  not  pay  my  debts."  I  have  a  very  great  pity  indeed  for 
those  people  who  get  into  the  Bankruptcy  Court,  I  do  not  mean  the 
debtors,  I  have  seldom  much  sympathy  with  them,  I  have  a  good  deal 
for  the  creditors  who  lose  by  having  trusted  dishonest  people.  If 
any  man  should  say,  '*  I  will  live  beyond  my  means  in  order  to  get  a 
good  character,"  my  dear  brother,  you  begin  wrong,  that  action  is  in 
itself  wrong.  What  you  have  to  give  must  be  that  which  is  your  own. 
"  But  I  shall  have  to  pinch  myself,"  says  one,  "  if  I  do  it."  Well,  pinch 
yourself!  I  do  not  think  there  is  half  the  pleasure  in  doing  good  till 
you  get  to  the  pinching  point.  This  remark  of  course  applies  only  to 
those  of  us  of  moderate  means,  who  can  soon  distribute  our  alms  and 
get  down  to  the  pinch  point.  When  you  begin  to  feel,  "  Now,  I 
must  go  without  that;  now  I  must  curtail  these  in  order  to  do  more 
good."  Oh!  you  cannot  tell;  it  is  then  when  you  really  can  feel,  '  Now 
I  have  not  given  God  merely  the  cheese  parings  and  candle  ends  that  I 
could  not  use,  but  I  have  really  cut  out  for  my  Master  a  good  piece  of 
the  loaf ;  I  have  not  given  him  the  old  crusts  that  were  getting  mouldy, 
but  I  have  given  him  a  piece  of  my  own  daily  bread,  and  I  am  glad  to 
do  it,  if  I  can  show  my  love  to  Jesus  Christ  by  denying  myself." 
If  you  are  doing  this,  if  you  are  thus  out  of  love  to  Jesus  feeding  the 
hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  I  believe  that  these  are  put  down  as  tests, 
because  they  are  such  blessed  detectives  between  the  hypocrites  and  the 
really  godly  people.  When  you  read  "for"  here,  yon  must  not 
understand  it  to  be  that  their  reward  is  because  of  this,  but  that  they 
are  proved  to  be  God's  servants  by  this;  and  so,  while  they  do  not 
merit  it  because  of  these  actions,  yet  these  actions  show  that  they  woie 
aaved  by  grace,  which  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  wrought 
such  and  such  works  in  them.  If  Christ  does  not  work  such  things 
in  you,  you  have  no  part  in  him;  if  you  have  not  produced  such 
works  as  these  you  have  not  believed  in  Jesus.  Now  somebody 
says,  "  Then  I  intend  to  give  to  the  poor  in  future  in  order  that 
I  may  have  this  reward."  Ah,  but  you  are  very  much  mistaken  if 
you  do  that.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  waited  upon  by  a  poor 
man,  a  very  loyal  subject,  who  brought  him  a  very  large  root  which  he 
had  grown.  He  was  a  very  poor  man  indeed,  and  every  root  he 
grew  in  his  garden  was  of  consequence  to  him;  but  merely  as  a  loyal 
offering  he  brought  to  his  prince  the  largest  his  little  garden  pro 
duced.  The  prince  was  so  pleased  with  the  man's  evident  loyalt) 
and  affection  that  he  gave  him  a  very  large  sum.  The  steward  thought, 
14  Well,  I  aee  this  pays;  this  man  has  got  fifty  pounds  for  his  large  root, 


48  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB   PULPIT. 

I  think  /  shall  make  the  duke  a  present."  So  he  bought  a  horse  and 
he  reckoned  that  he  should  have  in  return  ten  times  as  much  for  it  as  it 
was  worth,  and  he  presented  it  with  that  view:  the  duke,  like  a 
wise  man,  quietly  accepted  the  horse,  and  gave  the  greedy  steward 
nothing.  That  was  all.  So  you  say,  "  Well,  here  is  a  Christian  man, 
and  he  gets  rewarded.  He  has  been  giving  to  the  poor,  helping  the 
Lord's  Church,  and  see  he  is  saved;  the  thing  pays,  I  shall  make  a  little 
investment."  Yes,  but  you  see  the  steward  did  not  give  the  horse  out 
of  any  idea  of  loyalty,  and  kindness,  and  love  to  the  duke,  but  out  of 
very  great  love  to  himself,  and  therefore  had  no  return;  and  if  you 
perform  deeds  of  charity  out  of  the  idea  of  getting  to  heaven  by 
them,  why  it  is  yourself  that  you  are  feeding,  it  is  yourself  that  you  are 
clothing;  all  your  virtue  is  not  virtue,  it  is  rank  selfishness,  it  smells 
strong  of  selfhood,  and  Christ  will  never  accept  it;  you  will  never  hear 
him  say,  "Thank  you"  for  it.  You  served  yourself,  and  no  reward  is 
due.  You  must  first  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  look  to  him 
to  save  you;  you  will  for  ever  abjure  all  idea  of  doing  anything  to  save 
yourself,  and  being  saved,  you  will  be  able  to  give  to  the  poor  and  so  on 
without  selfishness  mixing  with  your  motive,  and  you  will  get  a  reward 
of  grace  for  the  love  token  which  you  have  given.  It  is  necessary  to 
believe  in  Christ  in  order  to  be  capable  of  true  virtue  of  the  highest 
order.  It  is  necessary  to  trust  Jesus,  and  to  be  yourself  fully  saved, 
before  there  is  any  value  in  your  feeding  the  hungry  or  clothing  the 
naked.  God  give  you  grace  to  go  to  my  Master  wounded  yonder,  and 
to  rest  in  the  precious  atonement  which  he  has  made  for  human  sin; 
and  when  you  have  done  that,  being  loved  at  such  a  rate,  show  that  you 
love  in  return;  being  purchased  so  dearly,  live  for  him  that  bought  you; 
and  among  the  actions  by  which  you  prove  it,  let  these  gleam  and 
glisten  like  God-given  jewels, — the  visiting  of  the  sick,  the  comforting 
of  the  needy,  the  relieving  of  the  distressed,  and  the  helping  of  the 
weak.  God  accept  these  offerings  as  they  come  from  gracious  souls, 
and  to  him  be  praise  evermore.  Amen. 


OF  SCRIPTURE   READ   BEFORE  SER1IOJT — Matt.  XXY.  14,  to 


eti[aplitmt 


THE   FINAL  SEPARATION. 


DELIVERED   BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTOW. 


"  And  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations :  and  he  shall  separate  them  ont 
from  another,  as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats." — Matthew  xxv.  32. 

JESUS  Christ,  the  man  of  Nazareth,  who  is  also  the  Son  of  God,  was 
crucified,  dead,  and  buried,  and  the  third  day  he  rose  again  from  the 
dead.  After  he  had  showed  himself  to  his  disciples  for  forty  days — some 
times  to  one  alone,  at  other  times  to  two  or  three  together,  and  on  one 
occasion  to  above  five  hundred  brethren  at  once — he  ascended  into 
heaven.  From  the  Mount  Olivet,  from  the  midst  of  his  disciples,  he  rose 
into  mid  air,  and  by-and-by  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight. 
That  same  Jesus  who  is  gone  into  heaven  shall  so  come  in  like  manner 
as  he  was  seen  to  go  up  into  heaven ;  that  is  to  say,  in  person,  in  his 
own  risen  body.  The  same  Christ  who  rose  into  the  skies  will  in 
the  latter  day  surely  descend  again.  The  time  of  his  coming  is  not 
revealed  to  us, — "  Of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not 
the  angels  of  God ;"  but  the  time  is  certainly  growing  nearer  every 
day,  and  we  cannot  tell  when  the  hour  shall  be.  We  are  told  that  he 
will  come  quickly.  It  seems  a  long  time  since  that  was  said,  even 
sighteen  hundred  years,  but  we  remember  that  things  which  are  slow 
with  us  may  be  very  quick  wfbh  the  Lord  ;  for  one  day  with  the  Lord 
is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day.  It  is  not  for 
us  to  know  the  times  and  the  sevens ;  they  remain  hidden  in  the 
purpose  of  God. 

For  excellent  reasons  these  times  and  seasons  are  unrevealed,  that  we 
may  be  always  on  the  watch-tower,  not  knowing  at  what  hour  the  Lord 
Jesus  may  be  revealed.  To  the  ungodly  world  he  will  come  as  a  thief 
in  the  night,  and  take  them  at  unawares  ;  but  we,  brethren,  are  not  in 
darkness  that  that  day  should  overtake  us  as  a  thief.  Being  children 
of  the  day,  we  are  taught  to  be  wakeful,  and  standing  in  the  clear  light, 
with  our  lo'ns  girt,  we  ought  to  be  always  looking  for  our  Master's 
appearing.  Always  are  we  to  be  watching,  never  sleeping. 

No.  1,234.  14 


278  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Our  text  tells  us  that  as  one  result  of  his  coming  there  will  be  a 
general  judgment.  I  am  not  going  to-night  to  try  and  arrange  the 
other  events  which  will  happen  at  the  Lord's  coming.  It  is  probably 
true  that  at  his  coming  there  will  be  first  of  all  a  resurrection  and 
rewarding  of  his  saints,  a  dividing  of  the  ten  cities,  and  the  five  cities, 
according  to  the  faithfulness  of  those  who  were  entrusted  with  talents ; 
and  at  the  close  of  that  period  will  come  that  last  tremendous  day  of 
which  prophets  and  apostles  have  spoken. 

"  The  day  that  many  thought  should  never  come  j 
That  all  the  wicked  wished  should  never  come ; 
That  all  the  righteous  had  expected  long  ; 
Day  greatly  feared,  and  yet  too  little  feared 
By  him  who  feared  it  most." 

A  day  of  fear  and  wrath,  a  day  of  destruction  of  the  ungodly,  a 
testing  day  to  all  mankind,  a  day  which  shall  burn  as  an  oven.  We 
may  tremblingly  say  of  it,  "Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming,  and 
who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth  ?  for  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire  and 
like  fuller's  soap." 

At  that  day  when  Christ  shall  come  he  shall  judge  all  nations. 
There  will  be  gathered  before  him,  not  only  the  Jews,  to  whom 
the  law  was  given,  but  the  Gentiles  also ;  not  merely  those  nations 
who  for  many  an  age  have  heard  the  gospel,  but  those  to  whom  it 
shall  then  have  been  but  lately  published,  for  the  kingdom  of  God 
must  be  published  throughout  all  nations  as  a  testimony  against  them. 
Everywhere  Christ  will  have  been  preached,  and  then  from  all  regions 
men  shall  be  summoned  to  stand  before  him.  Remember,  not  merely  all 
the  living  nations,  but  all  the  nationalities  that  have  passed  away.  There 
shall  rise  from  the  dead  the  hosts  that  perished  before  the  flood  and 
those  also  who  were  drowned  amid  its  awful  surges.  There,  too,  shall 
appear  the  myriads  that  followed  at  the  call  of  Nimrod,  the  swarms  of 
the  sons  of  Japheth,  who  divided  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles,  and  the 
hordes  that  marched  to  battle  at  the  command  of  the  kings  of  Assyria 
and  Babylon.  The  dead  of  Egypt  shall  rise  from  their  beds  of  spices, 
or  from  the  earth  with  which  their  dust  has  mingled.  The  tens  of 
thousands  shall  be  there  over  whom  Xerxes  wept  when  he  remembered 
how  soon  they  would  all  pass  away.  The  Greek  and  the  Persian,  these 
shall  rise,  and  the  Eoman  too,  and  all  the  hordes  of  Huns  and  Goths 
that  swarmed  like  bees  from  the  northern  hives.  They  all  passed 
into  the  unknown  land,  but  they  are  not  lost,  they  shall  each  answer  to 
the  muster-roll  in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord.  The  earth,  which  is  now 
becoming  more  and  more  a  graveyard,  shall  yield  up  her  dead,  and  the 
sea  itself,  transformed  into  a  solid  pavement,  shall  bear  upon  its  bosom 
the  lonely  ones  who  lie  asleep  to-day  in  her  gloomy  caverns.  All  of 
woman  born  shall  come  forth  from  the  prolific  womb  of  the  sepulchre 
— myriads,  myriads  countless  as  the  drops  of  the  morning,  or  as  the 
sands  of  the  sea  shore.  Multitudes,  multitudes  shall  be  gathered 
together  in  the  valley  of  decision.  Their  bones  shall  come  together, 
and  breath  shall  enter  their  bodies  anew,  and  they  shall  live  once  more. 
Long  as  they  have  slept  in  the  tomb,  they  shall  all  rise  with  one  im 
pulse  and  start  up  with  one  thought — to  appear  before  their  Judge. 


THE    FINAL    SEPARATION.  279 

The  great  white  throne  shall  be  set  on  high,  all  pure  and  lustrous, 
bright  and  clear  like  a  sapphire  stone,  as  one  vast  looking-glass  in 
which  every  man  shall  see  himself  and  his  sins  reflected  ;  and  on  that 
throne  shall  sit  the  Son  of  Man.  That  same  Jesus  who  was  nailed  to 
the  tree,  and  rose  to  heaven  shall  sit  upon  the  judgment  seat,  appointed 
to  determine  the  cases  of  all  mankind  of  every  age.  What  an  assem 
blage  !  No  imagination  can  compass  it.  Far  as  the  eye  can  carry — 
ay,  far  as  the  eagle's  pinion  can  soar — the  earth  shall  be  covered  with 
men,  like  a  field  with  grass  in  the  springtide ;  and  there  will  they  all 
stand  with  the  Judge  upon  the  great  white  throne  as  the  common 
Centre  of  observation,  for  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  that 
crucified  him,  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of 
him.  It  will  be  a  motley  throng,  as  you  may  well  imagine,  but  the 
Shepherd,  the  great  Shepherd,  the  Judge  himself,  shall  divide  them. 
That  division  will  be  the  one  work  of  the  judgment  day.  He  will 
divide  them  as  readily  and  unerringly  as  a  shepherd  divides  his  sheep 
from  the  goats.  My  business  to-night  shall  be  to  draw  the  attention  of 
each  one  to  that  division,  that  each  of  you  may  enquire  what  will  be 
the  result  of  it  upon  himself.  I  have  thought  it  over  on  my  own 
account,  and  desire  to  think  of  it  still :  I  would  bid  my  mind  fly  into 
the  future,  and  see  for  a  moment  "  the  pomp  of  that  tremendous  day 
when  Christ  with  clouds  shall  come  ;"  I  would  anticipate  the  verdict 
of  that  hour,  and  bethink  me  of  the  dread  alternative  of  heaven  or 
hell.  I  pray  we  may  all  think  of  it,  and  especially  you  who  are  un 
prepared  for  it,  that  you  may  at  once  fly  to  him  whose  blood  and 
righteousness  alone  can  make  you  hold  up  your  head  in  that  tre 
mendous  hour. 

Three  things  we  shall  speak  about :  the  first  is  the  division ;  the 
second  is  the  divider ;  and  the  third  is  the  rule  of  the  division. 

I.  The  first,  then,  is  THE  DIVISION.  "  Before  him  shall  be  gathered 
all  nations  :  and  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  shep 
herd  divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats." 

That  is  to  say,  first,  they  shall  be  divided  into  two  parts — his  sheep 
and  the  goats.  There  shall  be  two  positions  :  he  shall  put  his  sheep 
on  the  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  left.  Is  there  no  place  for  a 
third  party  ?  No,  for  the  simple  reason  that  there  will  then  be  no 
third  class ;  and  there  will  then  be  none  for  this  other  reason,  that 
there  never  was  a  third  class.  I  know  there  are  some  even  here  to 
night  who  dare  not  say  they  believe  in  Jesus,  but  they  would  not  like 
to  be  put  down  among  the  ungodly  :  yet  I  pray  you  remember  that 
there  are  but  two  books,  and  in  one  or  other  of  those  two  your  name 
must  stand  recorded  by  the  hand  of  God,  for  there  is  no  third  book. 
There  is  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life,  and  if  your  name  is  there  happy 
are  you.  If  it  is  not  there  your  sins  still  stand  recorded  in  the  books 
which  contain  the  condemning  evidence  which  will  seal  the  death- 
warrants  of  unbelievers.  Listen  to  me.  There  are  in  this  world  no 
where  any  other  sort  of  people  beside  those  who  are  dead  in  sin  and 
those  who  are  alive  unto  God.  There  is  no  state  between.  A  man 
either  lives  or  is  dead  ;  you  cannot  find  a  neutral  condition.  A  man 
may  be  in  a  swoon,  or  he  may  be  asleep,  but  he  is  alive ;  no  state  is 
there  that  is  not  within  the  boundary  of  either  life  or  death.  Is  not  thii 


280  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

clear  enough  ?  There  is  no  state  between  being  converted  and 
verted — between  being  quickened  and  being  dead  in  sin.  There  is  no 
condition  between  being  pardoned  and  having  our  sins  upon  us.  There 
is  no  state  between  dwelling  in  darkness  and  being  brought  into 
marvellous  light.  One  or  the  other  must  always  be  our  condition  ;  and 
this  is  the  great  folly  of  mankind  in  all  times — that  they  will  dream 
of  a  middle  state  and  try  to  loiter  in  it.  It  was  for  this  cause  that 
the  old  prophet,  standing  on  CarmePs  brow,  said,  "  How  long  halt 
ye  between  two  opinions  ?  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  him :  but  if 
Baal,  follow  him."  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  we  have  constantly 
to  call  the  attention  of  mankind  to  the  great  declaration  of  the 
gospel, — "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved  :  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned." 

God  has  given  to  the  preacher  two  hands,  that  he  may  set  the 
people  on  each  side,  and  deal  out  the  truth  to  two  characters  and  no- 
more.  Be  not  deceived  about  it,  you  are  either  in  the  way  to  heaven 
er  on  the  road  to  hell.  There  is  no  purgatory  or  middle  condition 
in  the  next  world.  Purgatory  is  an  invention  of  the  Pope  f©r  the 
filling  of  his  cellar  and  his  larder ;  and  no  more  profitable  speculation 
has  ever  been  set  agoing  than  the  saying  of  masses  and  the  robbing 
of  dupes,  under  the  pretence  of  altering  that  state  which  is  fixed  for  ever. 
Purgatory  Pickpurse  was  the  name  the  first  reformers  gave  it.  You 
will  go  to  heaven  or  to  hell,  and  you  will  remain  in  one  place  or 
the  other ;  for  you  have  either  a  character  that  is  fit  for  heaven 
or  a  character  that  is  fit  for  hell,  and  there  is  no  character  which  can 
be  supposed,  if  we  understand  the  Scriptures  aright,  which  would  be 
fit  for  a  middle  place,  neither  is  there  any  middle  place  prepared  for  it. 
"  He  shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  shepherd  divideth 
his  sheep  from  the  goats :  and  he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand, 
but  the  goats  on  the  left."  The  human  flock  will  be  divided  into  two 
companies. 

Observe,  next,  that  they  will  be  divided  readily.  It  is  not  everybody 
that  could  divide  sheep  from  goats.  I  suppose  according  to  your  ordi 
nary  judgment  of  goats  you  would  very  readily  tell  them  from  sheep ; 
but  one  who  has  travelled  in  the  East,  and  even  in  Italy,  knows  that  it 
takes  a  somewhat  tutored  eye  to  know  a  certain  kind  of  goat  from  a 
certain  kind  of  sheep.  They  are  extremely  like  each  other :  the  wool  of 
some  sheep  in  a  warm  climate  becomes  so  like  hair,  and  the  hair  of  a 
kind  of  goat  is  so  much  like  wool,  that  a  traveller  scarcely  knows 
which  is  which ;  but  a  shepherd  who  has  lived  among  them  knowa 
the  difference  well.  So  in  this  world,  it  is  easy  enough  to  tell  the  sinner 
from  the  saint  in  some  cases  :  you  need  no  great  wit  to  discern  the 
characters  of  the  grossly  dishonest,  the  drunken,  the  debauched,  the- 
Sabbath-breaking,  the  profane.  You  know  that  they  have  no  part 
amongst  the  people  of  God,  for  they  bear  upon  their  forefront  the 
ensigns  of  the  children  of  the  evil  one :  the  immoral  are  easily  sepa 
rated  from  the  pure  in  heart.  But  inside  the  church  there  are  a 
number  of  persons  who  have  so  much  about  them  that  looks  good,  and 
yet  so  much  that  is  terribly  inconsistent,  that  we  are  quite  unable  to 
discover  which  is  their  true  nature.  Thank  God  we  are  not  called 
upon  to  judge  them,  nor  even  allowed  to  do  so.  The  most  experienced 


THE   FINAL   SEPARATION.  281 

pastor  must  scarcely  attempt  to  do  so :  certainly,  if  he  feels  so  mnch 
trouble  about  the  matter  that  he  takes  it  to  his  Lord,  and  asks  for 
directions  as  to  how  to  deal  with  these  tares,  he  will  be  told  to  let 
them  grow  on  till  harvest  time,  lest  in  rooting  up  the  tares  he  should 
root  up  also  the  wheat  with  them.  I  talked  to-day  to  a  certain  good 
man  who  labours  hard  among  the  poor  in  the  East-end.  He  said, 
"  We  have  a  great  number  who  profess  to  be  converted ;  but,"  he 
said,  "  I  do  not  think  that  much  more  than  one  in  five  actually  stay 
and  turn  out  to  be  really  so.  But,"  said  he,  "  we  have  no  trouble 
about  them  in  the  church — not  such  trouble  as  you  would  be  likely 
to  have  with  your  people,  because,"  said  he,  "  amongst  the  class  of 
people  who  go  to  the  Tabernacle  there  is  a  feeling  that  it  is  right  to  go 
to  the  House  of  God  at  least  once  on  the  Sabbath,  if  not  twice ;  and 
if  persons  join  the  church  there  they  will  from  habit  continue  to 
attend.  But,"  said  he,  "  the  moment  a  man  of  the  poorest  class  ceases 
to  be  a  Christian  in  heart,  he  ceases  at  the  same  time  to  attend  the 
public  services,  because  there  is  no  fashion  to  keep  him  up  to  it ;  and 
so  he  follows  his  own  tastes,  stops  at  home  and  loafs  about,  and  in  all 
probability  gets  drunk,  or  falls  into  some  other  of  the  common  vices 
of  his  class,  and  he  is  sifted  off  at  once."  In  such  cases  the  classes  are 
easily  separated.  But  among  a  more  respectable  class  of  people,  who  do 
not  drink  and  who  observe  the  Sabbath-day,  you  will  have  a  number  of 
people  who  remain  in  the  church,  though  they  have  no  secret  piety, 
no  real  love  to  Christ,  no  private  prayer ;  and  hence  there  is  all  the 
more  danger.  Now,  dear  friends,  what  tee  cannot  do,  and  must  not 
try  to  do,  Jesus  Christ  will  do  easily  enough.  The  shepherd  when 
he  comes  will  soon  separate  his  sheep  from  the  goats.  His  eye  of  fire 
will  read  each  heart ;  the  hypocrites  in  the  church  will  tremble  in  a 
moment,  instinctively  reading  the  meaning  of  that  glance,  as  Christ 
will  by  that  eye  say  to  them,  "What  do  ye  here  amongst  my 
people?" 

Remember,  that  as  the  division  will  be  made  readily  it  will  be  made 
infallibly;  that  is  to  say,  there  will  not  be  found  amongst  the  goats 
one  poor  trembling  sheep  left  to  be  driven  off  with  the  unclean  herd. 
When  Christ  says  "  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  he  will  not  say  that  to  one 
sincere  but  feeble  soul.  Ah  no,  you  may  condemn  yourself,  but  if 
you  really  have  a  living  faith  the*Lord  will  not  condemn  you.  You 
may  often  be  afraid  that  he  will  bid  you  depart,  but  he  will  not.  No 
lamb  of  his  flock  shall  be  among  the  goats.  The  whole  company  of 
his  redeemed  shall  be  safely  gathered  into  their  eternal  mansions. 

"  Lord,  those  shall  bear  that  day,  so  dread,  so  splendid, 

Whose  sins  are  by  thy  merits  cover'd  o'er, 
Who  when  thy  hand  of  mercy  was  extended, 

Believ'd,  obey'd,  and  own'd  thy  gracious  power ; 
These,  mighty  God,  shall  see  without  dismay 

The  earth  and  heaven  before  them  pass  away." 

The  sword  cuts  the  other  way  too :  and  therefore  be  ye  sure  of  this,  that 
there  will  be  no  goat  suffered  to  enter  the  pastures  of  the  blessed  among 
the  sheep  ;  no  unconverted  graceless  person  will  follow  the  Great  Shep 
herd  to  those  living  fountains  above  which  afford  eternal  draughts  of 


"282  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

bliss  to  the  purchased  flock.  Though  the  sinner  may  have  led  a  sort 
-of  outwardly  consistent  life  for  forty  or  fifty  years,  though  he  may 
have  preached  the  gospel  and  done  many  wonderful  works,  yet  Christ 
will  say  to  him,  "I  never  knew  you."  He  will  not  be  able  to  keep  on 
his  sheep's  clothing  then,  or  bleat  any  longer  in  sheep  fashion  :  Christ 
will  know  him  under  whatever  disguise  he  may  wear,  he  will  find  him 
out,  and  drive  him  to  his  own  place,  so  that  not  a  single  one  of  the 
accursed  shall  enter  into  the  city  with  the  blessed.  It  will  be  an  in 
fallible  judgment ;  there  is,  therefore,  good  reason  that  we  be  prepared 
for  it.  There  is  no  bribing  or  deceiving  the  judge,  and  no  avoiding 
his  tribunal.  Oh,  be  ye  ready  to  face  that  eye  which  will  read  you 
through  and  through ! 

That  division,  when  it  shall  take  place,  let  me  further  beg  you  to 
remember,  will  be  very  keen  and  sharp.  Think  it  over,  think  it  over ; 
for  some  of  you  may  have  to  smart  through  it.  Two  men  shall  be 
in  the  field,  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left :  these  were  two 
labourers  who  worked  together,  they  had  guided  the  same  plough 
and  driven  the  same  oxen  ;  but  the  one  shall  be  upon  the  right  hand 
and  the  other  on  the  left.  Two  carpenters  at  the  same  bench  had 
handled  the  same  adze  and  the  same  plane,  but  ono  shall  be  taken  and 
the  other  left :  two  had  served  in  one  shop  at  the  same  counter  with 
the  same  goods,  and  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left ;  they  were 
familiar  acquaintances  and  old  shopmates,  but  one  shall  rejoice  to  hear 
the  welcome  "  Come,"  and  the  other  shall  tremble  as  he  receives  the 
dread  sentence,  "  Depart."  Alas,  the  division  will  come  closer  home 
still.  Two  women  shall  be  in  one  house  :  the  one  shall  be  taken  and 
the  other  left.  Two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  the  mill ;  that  is, 
engaged  about  the  household  duties,  grinding  the  morning's  breakfast 
corn — one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left.  So  you  may  be  two 
servants  in  the  same  house,  cook  and  housemaid,  one  saved  arid  the 
other  lost :  two  sisters  living  together  under  the  same  roof,  one  brought 
into  glory  and  the  other  cast  into  shame :  two  of  you  may  be  dwellers 
under  the  same  roof,  eating  bread  at  the  same  table,  drinking  from 
the  same  cup,  and  yet  one  of  you  shall  feast  at  the  eternal  banquets 
and  the  other  shall  cry  for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his  burning  tongue. 
You  would  not  like  to  be  separated,  but  separated  you  must  be.  Alas, 
there  will  be  a  separation  still  more  painful  yet !  Two  shall  be  in  one 
bed,  the  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left — the  husband  torn  away 
from  the  wife,  and  the  wife  sundered  from  her  husband.  Oh,  there 
will  be  partings,  there  will  be  partings ;  and  consequently  there  will 
be  weeping,  there  will  be  weeping  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;  not 
for  the  godly,  for  in  them  the  glory  of  their  Lord  will  swallow  up  all 
other  thought,  but  for  the  Christless,  the  prayerless,  the  graceless. 
Oh,  the  wailing  of  the  children,  and  the  wailing  of  the  women,  and  the 
wailing  of  the  husbands,  and  the  wailing  of  the  fathers,  when  their 
children  are  saved,  or  their  parents  are  saved,  or  their  husbands  and 
wives  are  saved,  and  tHey  themselves  are  cast  out  for  ever ! 

"  O  there  will  be  mourning 

Before  the  judgment  seat, 
When  this  world  is  burning 
Beneath  Jehovah's  teet. 


THE    FINAL    SEPARATION.  283 

"  Friends  and  kindred  then  shall  part, 

Shall  part  to  meet  no  more ; 

Wrath  consume  the  rebel's  heart, 

"While  saints  on  high  adore!" 

The  separation  will  be  agony  indeed  to  the  lost.  I  could  scarce  have 
the  heart  to  bid  a  man  "  good  bye  "  if  I  knew  that  I  should  never  see 
him  again.  The  worst  wish  I  could  entertain  concerning  the  worst  enemy 
I  ever  had — though  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  one  in  the  world — would 
not  go  so  far  as  to  say  I  wished  I  might  never  see  him  again,  for  since 
I  hope  I  shall  be  where  Jesus  is  I  should  like  to  see  him,  be  he  who 
he  may,  and  see  him  there  amongst  the  blessed.  But  it  must  not  be  ; 
it  must  not  be  if  sinners  will  not  repent  of  sin  ;  if  they  will  persist  in 
rejecting  Jesus  Christ.  Except  ye  believe  in  Jesus  the  parting  will 
be  keen  and  cutting,  dividing  between  joints  and  marrow,  tearing 
asunder  marriage  ties,  and  bonds  of  filial  or  parental  affection  ;  slaying 
all  vain  hopes  for  ever.  0  souls  impenitent,  I  could  weep  for  you  ! 
If  you  are  linked  in  blood  relationship  with  the  saints  it  will  not  help 
you  if  you  die  unregenerate  !  Though  you  were  bone  of  each  other's 
bone  and  flesh  of  each  other's  flesh,  yet  must  you  be  separated  unless 
you  are  one  with  Christ.  I  entreat  you  unregenerate  ones  to  lay  this 
to  heart  at  once,  and  trifle  no  longer  ! 

That  diviswn,  dear  friends,  remember,  will  le  very  wide  as  well  aa 
very  keen  ;  for  the  division  will  be  such  as  will  be  represented  in  its 
distance  by  heaven  and  by  hell :  and  what  a  distance  is  that !  The 
distance  between  God  and  devil !  Between  happiness  and  misery  ! 
Between  glory  and  everlasting  contempt !  Between  infinite  joy  and 
boundless  sorrow  !  Between  songs  and  weeping !  Between  triumphs  and 
wailing,  feasting  and  gnashing  of  teeth  !  If  the  only  division  would  be 
such  as  might  arise  from  difference  in  degrees  of  glory  (if  such  there  be), 
one  might  still  pine  to  have  the  companionship  of  our  dear  ones  :  but  the 
difference  is  between  heaven  and  hell,  and  Christ  says  of  it  that  there 
is  "  a  great  gulf  fixed  "  so  that  they  that  would  pass  from  us  tc  you 
cannot ;  neither  can  they  come  to  us  that  would  come  from  thence. 
The  distance  will  be  wide  as  eternity,  the  separating  gulf  will  be  deep 
as  the  abyss,  and  impassable  as  hell. 

And,  remember,  the  separation  will  be  final.  There  is  no  flinging  a 
bridge  across  that  vast  abyss.  Damned  spirits  may  look  down  into 
that  dread  gulf,  into  the  unutterable  blackness  of  its  darkness,  but 
they  will  never  see  a  hope  of  crossing  to  the  land  of  the  blessed.  The 
key  is  lost ;  they  can  never  come  out  of  the  dungeon  of  despair.  "  For 
ever,  for  ever,  for  ever,"  is  written  upon  the  chain  which  binds  the  lost 
spirit.  No  hope  of  restoration  was  ever  indulged  by  a  man  in  hell,  and 
it  is  idle  to  dream  about  it  now.  Of  all  figments  of  the  brain  it  has 
the  least  support  in  Scripture.  The  lost  sinner  is  for  ever  separated 
from  Jesus  and  from  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  however  near  akin  in  the 
flesh  those  disciples  may  have  been  to  him.  Unalterable  is  the 
separation  and  eternal. 

Beloved,  these  are  such  weighty  things  that  while  I  dwell  upon  them 
I  feel  far  more  inclined  to  sit  down  and  weep  than  to  stand  up  and 
speak  to  you.  The  theme  causes  me  to  feel  the  weakness  of  mere 
wordg,  and  in  a  measure  makes  me  lose  the  power  of  expression ;  for 


284  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

what  if  any  of  you  should  be  lost  for  ever?  It  was  a  touching  thing 
to  me  yesterday  when  I  saw  a  sister  in  Christ  who  has  been  my  hearer 
for  many  years,  and  she  told  me  that  she  was  decided  for  Christ 
by  my  saying,  when  I  went  away  last  time,  that  perhaps  I  might  never 
address  you  again,  and  might  find  a  grave  in  a  foreign  land.  I  felt 
that  it  might  be  so  at  the  time  I  uttered  the  words,  though  I  am 
glad  that  they  have  not  been  fulfilled.  She  thought,  "  Well,  he  has  been 
preaching  to  me  these  many  years,  and  if  I  die  unconverted  I  shall 
never  see  him  again :"  and  then  it  flashed  across  her  mind,  "  How 
much  worse  to  feel  that  I  shall  never  see  the  King  in  his  beauty ;  I 
shall  never  see  the  Saviour ;"  and  she  was  thus  led  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  give  her  heart  to  Jesus.  Perhaps  the  Lord  may  use  the  thought  of 
this  separation  to  move  some  of  you  to  say,  "  I  will  come  to  Jesus,  and 
I  will  rest  in  him."  0  Lord,  my  God,  grant  it  may  be  so,  for  Jesus' 
sake. 

II.  "We  have  spoken  about  the  division,  we  will  now  have  a  few  words 
about  THE  DIVIDER.  "  He  shall  separate  them  one  from  another." 

Christ  Jesus  will  be  the  divider  of  the  race  of  men  into  two  parts ; 
and  this  I  am  glad  to  know,  because,  first  of  all,  this  will  be  the  occa 
sion  of  lasting,  yea,  of  eternal  joy  to  all  the  saints.  No  child  of  God 
will  ever  have  a  doubt  in  heaven ;  but  it  is  needful  that  they  begin 
their  bliss  with  a  very  strong  assurance  of  divine  love,  or  else, 
methinks,  they  might.  Unless  God  had  ordained  the  method  at 
which  the  text  hints,  I  could  well  imagine  myself  in  heaven  saying  to 
myself,  after  I  had  been  there  a  little  while,  "  Oh,  can  it  be,  can  it  be 
that  I  am  here  ?  I  do  remember  the  sin  of  such  a  day,  and  the  short 
comings  of  such  an  hour,  and  my  murmurings,  and  my  unbelief,  and 
all  my  departures  from  my  God  ;  and  am  I  here,  after  all  ?"  I  could 
imagine,  if  there  had  not  been  the  means  used  to  put  an  end  to  such 
a  possibility,  my  saying,  "  Surely  I  am  to  taste  this  only  for  a  moment 
that  I  may  be  driven  to  my  due  deserts  after  all,  that  my  hell  may  be 
made  the  more  terrible  because  I  have  seen  what  heaven  is,  and  that 
my  hunger  may  grow  the  more  intolerable  because  I  have  eaten  of  the 
bread  of  angels."  If  such  a  fear  were  possible,  behold  the  answer  to 
it.  "He,  the  judge,  the  judge,  the  judge  himself  has  said,  '  Come,  ye 
blessed  of  my  Father.'"  That  judge  cannot  be  mistaken,  for  he  is 
Jesus  the  infallible  Son  of  God.  God  himself  has  blessed  his  chosen, 
and  Jesus  tells  them  so  in  the  plainest  terms — "Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you."  Since  Jesus 
has  decreed  his  everlasting  happiness,  the  child  of  God  cannot  doubt 
throughout  eternity.  That  voice  will  sound  for  ever  in  his  ears, 
sweeter  than  music  of  flute  or  harp  or  dulcimer.  "  Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father."  Why,  it  will  be  the  very  basis  of  the  bliss  of  heaven 
to  think,  "Jesus  bade  me  come.  Who  shall  ask  me  the  question,  How 
earnest  thou  in  hither ?  Did  not  Ae  admit  me?  Who  shall  question 
my  right  to  be  here  ?  Did  not  he  say,  '  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father  '  ?  "  Do  you  not  see  that  it  is  a  choice  and  comforting  fact  that 
we  shall  not  divide  ourselves  at  the  last,  nor  shall  an  angel  do  it  who 
might  err,  but  the  divider  will  be  Jesus  himself,  the  Son  of  God  ;  and 
therefore  the  glory  which  he  metes  out  to  us  will  be  most  surely  ours, 
and  we  may  enjoy  it  without  fear. 


THE    FINAL   SEPARATION.  285 

But  then,  note  on  the  other  hand,  that  this  will  increase  the  terror 
of  the  lost,  that  Christ  will  divide  them. 

Christ,  full  of  infinite  love,  would  he  destroy  a  sinner  unless  it  must 
be !  He  that  would  have  saved  Jerusalem,  and  wept  because  it  must 
be  destroyed  !  The  guilty  city  was  resolved  to  perish,  but  as  her  Lord 
pronounced  the  sentence  he  wept.  When  I  hear  of  a  judge  putting  on 
the  black  cap  to  condemn  a  man,  I  like  to  read  in  the  papers,  "  The 
judge's  voice  faltered,  and  he  was  evidently  unable  to  suppress  hia 
emotion  as  he  uttered  the  sentence  of  death."  What  right-minded 
man  could  be  otherwise  than  moved  when  compelled  to  deliver  his 
fellow-creature  to  the  gallows?  But  no  judge  on  earth  has  such  com 
passion  for  his  fellow  man  as  Jesus  has  for  sinners  ;  and  when  it  comes 
to  this  that  he  says,  "  I  must  do  it,  I  must  condemn  you,"  then,  sinner, 
it  must  be  so  indeed.  When  incarnate  love  says,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed," 
you  must  be  cursed  with  an  emphasis.  You  must  be  infamous  beings 
indeed  when  he  whose  lips  drop  blessings  as  lilies  drop  sweet-smelling 
myrrh, — when  he  calls  you  so  !  There  must  be  something  very  horrible 
about  you  that  lie  should  bid  you  "  depart ; "  and,  indeed,  there  is  an 
abominable  thing  in  you,  for  unbelief  in  God  is  the  most  horrible 
thing,  even  in  hell.  Not  to  believe  that  God  is  love  is  worthy  of  the 
utmost  condemnation.  You  will  have  to  say  if  you  are  lost,  "  I  was 
condemned  by  the  most  loving  judge  that  ever  sat  upon  a  judgment  seat. 
The  Christ  that  died  lifted  his  pierced  hand  at  the  very  moment  when 
he  said,  '  Depart,  ye  cursed  !' " 

Yet  there  is  something  more,  though  this  might  be  enough.  If  you 
should  be  lost,  as  God  forbid  you  should,  it  will  infinitely  add  to  your 
terror  to  know  that  you  were  condemned  by  one  who  is  infinitely  just. 
You  will  feel  that  the  Christ  who  condemned  you  was  the  holiest 
of  men,  in  whom  was  no  sin,  and  that,  besides,  he  is  pure  and  perfect 
God  ;  so  that  yon  will  not  be  able  to  cavil  at  the  sentence.  Neither 
will  there  be  any  question  about  a  new  trial ;  your  own  conscience  will 
make  you  feel  that  the  decision  is  final,  for  it  is  just ;  and  you  will  be 
too  well  assured  of  its  reality  and  certainty,  for  he  who  will  pronounce 
that  sentence  is  the  God  of  truth.  He  said,  "  I  am  the  way  and  the 
truth:"  you  would  not  have  him  for  a  way,  but  you  will  find  him  to 
be  "  the  truth"  :  and  when  he  pronounces  you  cursed,  cursed  you  will 
be  beyond  all  question. 

Once  more.  If  he  that  condemns  you  will  be  the  Christ  of  God 
you  will  know  that  he  has  power  to  carry  out  the  sentence,  for  all 
power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  the  government 
shall  be  upon  his  shoulders,  and  if  he  says,  "  Depart  into  everlasting 
fire  "  into  that  fire  you  must  go.  If  he  declares  that  the  fire  shall 
never  be  quenched,  depend  upon  it,  it  will  burn  on  for  ever ;  and  if  he 
decrees  that  the  worm  shall  never  die,  that  worm  will  live  and  gnaw  to 
all  eternity,  for  he  who  gives  forth  the  sentence  is  able  to  make  it  good. 
Remember  how  he  said,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  heaven  and 
earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  word  shall  never  pass  away."  Firmer 
than  the  rocks  shall  stand  the  irrevocable  decree — "  these  shall  go 
away  into  everlasting  punishment,  and  the  righteous  into  life  eternal." 
My  soul  trembles  while  I  thus  proclaim  Jesus  as  the  judge  whose 
awful  voice  divides  the  sinners  from  the  saints. 


286  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

III.  Lend  me  your  ears  but  for  a  minute  or  two  longer,  while  I 
notice,  in  the  third  place,  THE  RULE  OF  THE  DIVISION.  Did  you  notice 
where  the  division  is  made  ?  It  is  very  wonderful  to  me — very  won 
derful  indeed  !  The  great  division  between  the  sons  of  men  is  Christ. 
Here  are  the  sheep :  there  are  the  goats.  What  parts  them  ?  Christ ! 
He  is  the  centre.  There  is  no  great  barrier  set  up,  as  it  were,  on 
that  last  tremendous  day,  but  he  himself  is  the  division.  He  shall 
set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  goats  on  his  left.  Now,  that 
which  parts  us  to-night  into  two  portions  is  our  relationship  to  Jesus 
Christ.  On  which  side  of  Christ  are  you  to-night  ?  I  want  you  to 
question  yourselves  about  that.  If  you  are  on  his  right  hand  you  are 
among  his  people.  If  you  are  not  with  him  you  are  against  him,  and 
so  are  on  his  left  hand.  That  which  parts  the  saint  and  the  sinner 
is  Christ ;  and  the  moment  a  sinner  comes  to  Christ  he  passes  over  to 
the  other  side,  and  is  numbered  with  the  saints.  This  is  the  real  point 
of  separation.  Christ  stands  between  the  believers  and  the  unbelievers, 
and  marks  the  boundary  of  each  class.  When  Aaron  stood  between  the 
living  and  the  dead  swinging  the  censer  full  of  incense,  what  separated 
the  dead  from  the  living  ?  Realise  the  scene  before  you  answer  the 
question.  There  they  lie  !  There  they  lie,  I  say,  stricken  with  pesti 
lence  !  The  unseen  avenger  has  slain  them  in  heaps.  But  here  are  the 
living,  rejoicing  and  safe.  What  separates  them  ?  The  priest  standing 
there  with  the  censer.  Even  thus  our  great  High  Priest  stands  at  this 
moment  between  the  living  and  the  dead,  while  the  incense  of  his 
merits  ascends  before  God,  and  makes  the  most  real  dividing  wall 
between  dead  sinners  and  those  who  are  alive  unto  God  by  Jesus  Christ. 
Christ  is  the  divider,  Christ  is  himself  the  division. 

But  what  is  the  rule  by  which  he  separates  the  people  ?  The  rule  of 
the  division  is, first,  actions.  Actions!  Did  you  notice  that?  He  says 
nothing  about  words.  He  dwells  upon  deeds  of  mercy,  "  I  was  an 
hungered  and  ye  gave  me  meat,  I  was  thirsty  and  ye  gave  me  drink, 
I  was  naked  and  ye  clothed  me."  These  are  all  actions.  Now,  perhaps 
you  would  have  liked  the  judge  to  have  said  :  "  You  were  wont  to 
sing  hymns  out  of  '  Our  Own  Hymn  Book.'  You  were  wont  to  talk 
very  sweetly  about  me,  and  call  me  Master  and  Lord.  You  were 
accustomed  to  sit  at  the  communion  table."  Not  a  word  is  said  about 
these  things.  No,  nor  is  anything  said  about  ceremonial  actions.  He 
does  not  say,  "  You  used  to  bow  before  the  pyx ;  you  reverently  stood 
up  at  one  part  of  the  service,  and  knelt  at  another  ;  you  walked  round 
the  church  singing  the  processional  hymn."  Nothing  is  said  about 
these  performances,  only  common  actions  are  noticed,  "  I  was  an 
hungered  and  ye  gave  me  meat;  I  was  thirsty  and  ye  gave  me  drink"; 
these  are  all  commonplace  matters.  Actions  will  be  the  great  rule  of 
judgment  at  last.  I  am  not  preaching  now  contrary  to  the  gospel,  but 
only  repeating  in  other  words  what  our  Lord  himself  has  said.  "  We 
shall  give  an  account  tor  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  whether  they 
be  good,  or  whether  they  be  evil,"  is  the  statement,  not  of  the  law,  but 
of  the  New  Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Those 
that  have  done  evil  shall  go  away  into  eternal  punishment. 

Are  we,  then,  saved  by  our  works  ?  By  no  manner  of  means.  Yet 
onr  works  are  the  evidences  of  ou~  being  saved,  and  grace  will  bring 


TUB    FINAL    SEPARATION.  287 

out  these  evidences  in  our  lives  if  we  possess  them.  A  magistrate 
judges  by  the  actions  which  are  proved  upon  evidence;  it  is  true  he 
may  and  will  have  respect  to  the  motive  which  urged  the  action,  but 
first  of  all  the  actions  themselves  must  be  before  him  in  evidence  ;  and 
so  here  the  King  mentions  the  actions  that  were  done. 

Let  us  notice  that  the  actions  which  were  the  rule  of  judgment 
were  all  of  them  actions  about  Christ.  I  want  you  carefully  to  note 
this:  the  Lord  says,  "/  was  hungry  and  ye  gave  me  meat;  /  was 
thirsty  and  ye  gave  me  drink  ;  /  was  sick  and  ye  visited  me."  This 
summary  is  made  up  of  actions  about  Christ.  I  will,  therefore,  very 
earnestly  put  this  question — What  actions  have  you  ever  done  in 
reference  to  Jesus  ?  "  I  am  a  church  member,"  says  one.  I  will 
not  hear  about  that  just  now,  because  the  judge  will  not  say  any 
thing  about  it.  I  am  glad  you  are  an  avowed  disciple,  if  you  are 
honestly  so ;  but  do  your  actions  prove  that  you  are  really  go  ?  That 
is  the  question.  Have  you  ever  done  anything  for  Christ?  Have 
you  ever  given  anything  to  Christ?  Could  Christ  say  to  you,  "  I  was 
an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  meat ;  I  was  thirsty  and  ye  gave  me 
drink"?  Now,  I  know  some  professors  of  whom  I  fear  that  Jesus 
Christ  could  not  speak  thus,  for  he  cannot  speak  that  which  is  not 
true.  Their  pockets  are  hermetically  sealed,  like  tins  of  Australian 
meat ;  even  the  smell  of  their  money  never  reaches  Christ's  poor.  Give 
meat  to  a  hungry  man  ?  Not  they.  Let  him  go  to  the  parish. 
(Jive  clothes  to  a  naked  man?  Not  they.  What  do  we  pay  rates  for? 
The  idea  of  giving  anything  to  another,  or  doing  anything  for 
another,  without  getting  paid  for  it  or  praised  for  it,  seems  to  them  to 
be  out  of  all  character.  Now,  selfishness  is  as  much  opposed  to  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel  as  the  cold  of  the  northern  region  is  to  the 
warmth  of  the  sun.  If  the  sun  of  Christ's  love  has  shone  into  your 
heart  you  will  love  others,  and  you  will  show  your  love  to  others 
by  desiring  to  do  them  good  in  all  sorts  of  ways,  and  you  will  do  it 
for  Christ's  sake— -for  Christ's  sake:  so  that  when  he  comes  he  will  be 
able  to  say,  "/  was  an  hungered  and  ye  gave  me  meat;  /  was  thirsty 
and  ye  gave  me  drink ;  /was  sick  and  ye  visited  me;  /was  in  prison 
under  reproach  and  ye  came  unto  me."  What  have  your  actions  been 
with  regard  to  Christ  ?  I  pray  you,  brethren  and  sisters,  who  are  one 
with  me  in  the  profession  of  allegiance  to  Christ,  judge  yourselves 
by  your  actions  with  regard  to  him,  as  I  also  will  judge  myself. 

Now,  notice  that  Christ,  as  it  were,  inferentially,  tells  us  that  the 
actions  which  will  be  mentioned  at  the  judgment  day,  as  the  proof  of  our 
being  the  blessed  of  the  Lord,  spring  from  the  grace  of  God,  for  he  says, 
"  Ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
ironi  before  the  foundations  of  the  world."  They  fed  the  hungry,  but 
sovereign  grace  had  first  fed  them.  They  clothed  the  naked,  but  infinite 
love  first  clothed  them.  They  went  to  the  prison,  but  free  grace  had 
first  set  them  free  from  a  worse  prison.  They  visited  the  sick,  but 
the  good  Physician  in  his  infinite  mercy  first  came  and  visited  them. 
They  evidently  had  no  idea  that  there  was  anything  meritorious  in 
what  they  did  ;  they  had  never  dreamed  of  being  rewarded  for  it.  When 
they  stand  before  the  judgment-seat,  the  bare  idea  of  there  being  any 
excellence  in  what  they  have  done  will  be  new  to  the  saints,  for  they 


288  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

have  formed  a  very  lowly  estimate  of  their  own  performances,  and  what 
they  have  done  seems  to  them  too  faulty  to  be  commended.  The  saints 
fed  the  hungry  and  clothed  the  naked  because  it  gave  them  much  plea 
sure  to  do  so.  They  did  it  because  they  could  not  help  doing  it,  their 
new  nature  impelled  them  to  it.  They  did  it  because  it  was  their 
delight  to  do  good,  and  was  as  much  their  element  as  water  for  a  fish 
or  the  air  for  a  bird.  They  did  good  for  Christ's  sake,  because  it  was 
the  sweetest  thing  in  the  world  to  do  anything  for  Jesus.  Why  is  it 
that  a  wife  is  so  kind  to  her  husband  ?  Because  it  is  her  duty,  you 
say.  All  very  well,  but  the  real  reason  is  because  she  loves  him  so 
intensely.  Why  is  a  mother  so  careful  over  her  babe  ?  Is  there 
any  rule  or  act  of  parliament  commanding  mothers  to  be  fond  of  their 
little  ones  ?  No,  there  is  no  act  of  parliament ;  there  is  an  act  of  God, 
in  the  bosom  somewhere,  passed  nem.  con.  in  the  chamber  of  the  heart, 
and  the  mother  cannot  but  be  kind.  Now,  when  the  Lord  puts  a  new 
nature  into  us,  and  makes  us  one  with  Jesus  Christ,  we  cannot  help 
loving  his  people,  and  seeking  the  good  of  our  fellow-men ;  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  own  this  at  the  last  day  as  an  evidence  that 
there  was  love  in  the  heart,  because  love  was  shown  by  the  hand. 
May  God  grant  that  when  the  Judge  of  all  shall  come  we  may  be 
found  renewed  in  heart  and  full  of  love  through  the  power  of  his  Holy 
Spirit. 

"  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  I  wish  I  had  that  renewed  heart  which  would  pro 
duce  such  actions."  Jesus  can  give  it  you.  You  will  always  live  for  self 
in  some  sense  or  other  until  you  are  saved  :  even  the  most  philanthropic 
who  have  loved  their  fellow-creatures  best,  without  religion,  have 
generally  sought  for  their  esteem,  and  the  verse  is  true  concerning 
the  praise  of  our  fellow-creatures — 

"  The  proud,  to  gain  it,  toils  on  toils  endure; 
The  modest  shun  it  but  to  make  it  sure." 

But  when  you  receive  a  new  heart  you  will  not  live  for  the  approba 
tion  of  your  fellow-men.  Then  your  alms  will  be  done  in  secret,  and 
you  will  not  let  your  left  hand  know  what  your  right  hand  doeth. 
Then,  when  you  do  your  kindnesses,  it  will  not  be  that  others  may 
publish  abroad  the  announcement  that  you  have  visited  the  sick  and 
clothed  the  naked,  but  your  alms'  deeds  will  be  done  behind  the  door 
and  in  the  corner,  where  none  shall  know  of  them  but  your  God  and 
the  grateful  recipients  of  your  bounty.  You  will  quietly  put  into 
the  treasury  the  two  mites  that  make  a  farthing,  and  think  yourself 
unobserved,  but  One  who  sits  over  against  the  treasury,  who  knows 
your  heart,  will  take  good  note  of  it.  Your  Lord  will  accept  what  you 
do  because  you  do  it  out  of  love  to  him  ;  and  at  the  last,  while  you  blush 
to  hear  it,  he  will  tell  it  to  the  angels  and  to  the  listening  hosts  of  earth 
and  heaven,  and  swing  wide  the  gates  of  immortal  bliss,  and  let  you 
in,  according  to  the  promise  of  his  grace. 

God  bless  you,  beloved,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Matthew  xxr. 


HYJINS  FROM  "  OUR  OWN  HYMN  Bo        —346,  362,  365. 


ctwplitan  SEalwmade  flutpi 


WHAT  THE   FARM  LABOURERS  CAN  DO,  AND  WIIAT 
THEY  CANNOT  DO. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  JUNE  12TH,  1881,  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  And  he  said,  So  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  If  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  ground; 
and  should  sleep,  and  rise  night  and  day,  and  the  sued  should  spring  and  grow  up,  ha 
kuoweth  not  how.  For  the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself;  first  the  blade,  then 
the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear.  But  when  the  fruit  is  brought  forth,  imme 
diately  he  putteth  in  the  sickle,  because  the  harvest  is  come.'.' — Mark  iv.  26 — 29. 

LAST  Lord's-day  morning  our  subject  was  the  labourers  upon  God's 
farm  and  their  great  Master ;  and  then  we  tried  to  show  how  far  human 
agency  was  necessary  in  the  work  of  the  gospel.  We  also  saw  how  tho 
roughly  all  holy  results  depend  upon  God,  for  neither  he  that  soweth  nor 
he  that  watereth  is  anything,  but  God  who  giveth  the  increase.  We  have 
much  the  same  subject  this  morning,  only  it  goes  a  little  deeper,  and  yet 
more  fully  shows  how  far  the  labourer  can  go,  and  how  far  he  cannot 
go  ;  where  man  may  enter  with  holy  industry,  and  where  no  human  work 
can  possibly  intrude.  Our  subject  on  this  occasion  will  mainly  be  the 
measure  and  limit  of  human  instrumentality  in  the  kingdom  of  grace. 
If  we  shall  be  taught  of  the  Spirit  of  God  we  shall  find  this  Scripture 
lo  be  full  of  instruction  upon  the  matter. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  parable  before  us  is  peculiar  to  Mark.  No 
other  evangelist,  has  recorded  it,  but  we  do  not  think  any  the  less  of  it 
on  that  account.  If  it  had  been  told  to  us  four  times  we  should  have 
been  glad  to  hear  the  repetition,  and  would  have  given  it  a  fourfold  atten 
tion  ;  as  it  is  told  us  but  once,  we  will  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  a 
voice  which  speaketh  once  for  all.  We  are  glad  that  the  Holy  Spirit  led 
Mark  to  reserve  this  pearl  out  of  the  many  excellent  things  which  our 
Lord  said  which  have  been  lost.  John  tells  us  that  if  a  record  of  all  the 
works  which  Jesus  did  could  have  been  preserved  they  would  have  made 
a  library  so  large  that  scarce  the  world  itself  could  have  contained  all  the 
books.  Many  of  the  things  that  Jesus  said  floated  about,  no  doubt,  for 
a  time,  and  were  gradually  forgotten,  and  we  have  to  be  thankful  to  the 
Spirit  of  God  for  perpetuating  this  choice  similitude  by  the  hand  of  his 
servant  Mark.  Preserved  in  the  amber  of  inspiration,  this  choice  instruc 
tion  is  of  priceless  value. 

Here  is  a  lesson  for  sowers, — for  the  labourers  upon  the  farm  of  God. 

No.  1,603.  IK 

11 


830  WHAT  THE   FARM   LABOURERS  CAN  DO 

It  is  a  parable  for  all  who  are  concerned  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  will 
be  of  little  value  to  those  who  are  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  for  they  are 
not  bidden  to  sow  the  good  seed  :  "  Unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  what 
hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes  ?"  But  all  who  are  loyal  subjects- 
to  King  Jesus,  all  who  are  commissioned' to  scatter  seed  for  the  Royal 
Husbandman,  will  be  glad  to  know  how  the  kingdom  advances,  glad  to 
know  how  the  harvest  is  preparing  for  him  whom  they  serve.  Listen, 
then,  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters  ;  ye  that  with  holy  diligence  seek  to 
fill  the  garners  of  your  God, — listen,  and  may  the  Spirit  of  God  speak 
into  your  ears  as  you  are  able  to  bear  it. 

I.  We  shall,  first,  learn  from  our  text  WHAT  WE  CAN  DO  AND  WHAT 
WE  CANNOT  DO.  Let  this  stand  as  our  first  head. 

"  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the 
ground":  this  the  gracious  worker  can  do.  "And  the  seed  should 
spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth  not  how  "  :  this  is  what  he  cannot  do, 
it  belongs  to  a  higher  power.  Man  can  neither  make  the  seed  spring  nor 
grow  up,  he  is  out  of  the  field  in  that  respect,  and  may  go  home  "  to 
sleep,  and  rise  night  and  day."  Seed  once  sown  is  beyond  human  juris 
diction,  and  is  under  divine  care.  Yet  ere  long  the  worker  comes  in 
again  : — "  When  the  fruit  is  brought  forth,  immediately  he  putteth  in 
the  sickle."  We  can  reap  in  due  season,  and  it  is  both  our  duty  and 
our  privilege  so  to  do.  You  see,  then,  that  there  is  a  place  for  the 
worker  at  the  beginning,  and  though  there  is  no  room  for  him  in  the 
middle  passage,  yet  another  opportunity  is  given  him  further  on  when 
that  which  he  sowed  has  actually  yielded  fruit. 

Notice,  then,  that  we,  can  sow.  Any  man  who  has  received  the  know 
ledge  of  the  grace  of  God  in  his  heart  can  teach  others.  I  include  under 
the  term  "man  "  all  who  know  the  Lord,  be  they  male  or  female.  We 
cannot  all  teach  alike,  for  all  have  not  the  same  gifts  ;  to  one  is  given 
one  talent,  and  to  another  ten.  Neither  have  we  all  the  same  oppor 
tunities,  for  one  lives  in  obscurity  and  another  has  far-reaching  influence. 
Yet  there  is  not  within  the  family  of  God  an  infant  hand  which  may  not 
drop  its  own  tiny  seed  into  the  ground.  There  is  not  a  man  among  us 
who  needs  to  stand  idle  in  the  market-place,  for  work  suitable  to  his 
strength  is  waiting  for  him.  There  is  not  a  saved  woman  who  is  left 
without  a  holy  task ;  let  her  do  it  and  win  the  approving  word.  "  She 
hath  done  what  she  could."  Something  of  sacred  service  is  within  the 
reach  of  everyone's  capacity,  whether  it  be  the  mother  in  the  family, 
the  nurse-girl  with  the  infant,  the  boy  in  the  school,  the  workman  at 
the  bench,  or  the  nurse  at  the  bedside.  Those  with  the  smallest  range 
of  opportunities  can,  nevertheless,  do  something  for  Christ  and  his  cause. 
The  precious  seed  of  the  word  of  God  is  small  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed, 
and  may  be  carried  by  the  feeblest  hand  where  it  shall  multiply  a 
hundred-fold. 

We  need  never  quarrel  with  God  because  we  cannot  do  everything  if 
he  only  permits  us  to  do  this  one  thing ;  for  sowing  the  good  seed  is  a 
work  which  will  need  all  our  wit,  our  strength,  our  love,  our  care.  Holy 
seed  sowing  may  well  be  adopted  as  our  highest  pursuit,  and  be  no  in 
ferior  object  for  the  noblest  life  that  can  be  led.  You  will  need  heavenly 
teaching  that  you  may  carefully  select  the  wheat,  and  keep  it  free  from 
the  darnel  of  error.  We  must  even  winnow  out  of  it  our  own  thoughts 


AND    WHAT   THEY   CANNOT   DO.  331 

and  opinions,  for  these  may  not  be  according  to  the  mind  of  God.  Men 
are  not  saved  by  our  word,  but  by  God's  word.  We  are  bound  to  see 
that  we  know  the  gospel,  and  teach  the  whole  of  it.  To  difieient  men 
we  must,  with  discretion,  bring  forward  that  part  of  the  word  of  God 
which  will  best  bear  upon  their  consciences ;  for  much  may  depend  upon 
the  word  being  in  season,  and  not  a  chance  sentence  thrown  out  at 
random.  We  shall  have  enough  to  do  if  we  look  well. -to  the  seed- 
basket,  lest,  perad venture,  we  should  sow  tares  as  well  as  wheat,  or 
should  cast  good  seed  wantonly,  where  it  can  only  feed  evil  birds. 

Having  selected  the  seed,  we  shall  have  plenty  of  work  if  we  go  forth 
and  sow  it  broadcast  everywhere,  for  every  day  brings  its  opportunity, 
and  every  company  furnishes  its  occasion.  "  In  the  morning  sow  thy 
seed,  arid  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thy  hand."  "Sow  beside  all 
waters."  Imitate  the  sower  in  the  parable,  who  was  not  so  penny-wise 
that  he  would  only  cast  the  seed  where,  according  to  his  judgment,  all 
was  good  soil,  but  who,  feeling  that  he  had  other  work  for  his  judgment 
besides  the  selecting  of  the  soil,  threw  the  seed  right  and  left  as  he  went 
on  his  way,  and  denied  not  a  handful  even  to  thorny  and  rocky  soils. 
You,  dear  fellow-workers,  will  have  enough  to  do  if  at  all  times,  and  in 
all  places,  as  prudence  and  zeal  suggest,  you  spread  abroad  the  living 
word  of  the  living  Lord. 

Still,  wise  sowers  discover  favourable  opportunities  for  sowing,  and 
gladly  seize  upon  them.  There  are  times  when  it  would  clearly  be  a 
waste  to  sow ;  for  the  soil  could  not  receive  it,  it  is  not  in  a  fit  con 
dition.  After  a  shower,  or  before  a  shower,  or  at  some  such  time  as  he 
that  hath  studied  husbandry  knows,  then  is  the  time  to  be  up  and  doing. 
So  while  we  are  to  work  for  God  always,  yefc  there  are  seasons  when 
it  were  "Casting  pearls  before  swine  to  talk  of  holy  things ;  and  there  are 
other  times  when  if  we  were  slothful  it  would  be  a  shameful  waste  of 
propitious  seasons.  Sluggards  in  the  time  for  ploughing  and  sowing 
are  sluggards  indeed,  for  they  not  only  waste  the  day,  but  throw  away 
the  year.  If  you  watch  for  souls,  and  use  hours  of  happy  vantage,  and 
moments  of  sacred  softening,  you  will  not  complain  of  the  scanty  space 
allowed  for  agency.  Even  should  you  never  be  called  to  water,  or  to 
reap,  your  office  is  wide  enough  if  you  fulfil  the  work  of  the  sower. 

For  little  though  it  seem  to  teach  the  simple  truth  of  the  gospel,  yet 
it  is  essential.  How  shall  men  hear  without  a  teacher?  The  farm 
never  brings  forth  a  harvest  without  sowing.  Weeds  will  grow  without 
our  help,  but  not  so  wheat  and  barley.  The  human  heart  is  so  depraved 
that  it  will  naturally  bring  forth  evil  in  abundance,  and  Satan  is  quite 
sure  not  to  let  it  lie  without  a  sowing  of  evil  seed ;  but  if  ever  a  man's  soul 
is  to  yield  fruit  unto  God  the  seed  of  truth  must  be  cast  into  it  from 
without.  Servants  of  God,  the  seed  of  the  word  is  not  like  thistle 
down,  which  is  borne  by  every  wind,  nor  like  certain  seeds  wafted  by 
their  own  parachutes  here,  there,  ^and  everywhere,  but  the  wheat  of  the 
kingdom  needs  a  human  hand  to  sow  it,  and  without  such  agency  it  will 
not  enter  into  men's  hearts,  neither  can  it  bring  forth  fruit  to  the  glory 
of  God.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  the  necessity  of  every  age ;  God 
grant  that  our  country  may  never  be  deprived  of  it.  Even  if  the  Lord 
should  send  us  a  famine  of  bread  and  a  famine  of  water,  may  he  never 
send  us  a  famine  of  the  word  of  God.  Faith  couieth  by  hearing,  and 


882  WHAT  THE   FARM   LABOURERS  CAN  DO 

how  can  there  be  hearing  if  there  is  no  teaching  ?  Scatter  ye,  scatter  ye, 
then,  the  seed  of  the  kingdom,  for  this  is  essential  to  the  harvest.  The 
spreading  of  the  gospel  is  not  a  thing  that  ye  may  do  or  may  not  do, 
according  to  your  pleasure,  but  it  is  a  duty  urgently  needful,  to  be 
neglected  at  your  peril.  Ye  can  sow  the  seed,  and  the  seed  must  be 
flown. 

This  seed  should  be  sown  often,  for  the  times  are  such  that  one  sowing 
may  not  suffice.  Sow  again  and  again,  tor  many  are  the  foes  of  the 
wheat,  and  if  ye  repeat  not  your  sowing  ye  may  never  see  a  harvest. 
The  seed  must  be  sown  everywhere,  too,  for  there  are  no  choice  corners 
of  the  world  that  you  can  afford  to  let  alone,  in  the  hope  that  they  will 
be  self-productive.  Ye  may  not  leave  the  rich  and  intelligent  under  the 
notion  that  surely  the  gospel  will  be  iound  among  them,  for  it  is  not  so : 
the  pride  of  life  leads  them  away  from  Grod.  You  may  not  leave  the 
poor  and  illiterate,  and  say,  "  Surely  they  will  ot  themselves  feel  theii 
need  of  Christ."  Not  so  :  they  will  sink  from  degradation  to  degrada 
tion  unless  you  uplift  them  with  the  gospel.  No  tribe  of  man,  no 
peculiar  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  may  be  neglected  by  us,  but 
everywhere  we  must  preach  the  word,  in  season  and  out  of  season.  T 
have  heard  that  Captain  Cook,  the  celebrated  circumnavigator,  was  in 
pne  respect  an  admirable  example  to  us.  Wherever  he  landed,  in  whatever 
part  of  the  earth  it  might  be,  he  took  with  him  a  little  packet  of  divers 
English  seeds,  and  he  was  often  observed  to  scatter  them  in  suitable 
places.  He  would  leave  the  boat  and  wander  up  from  the  shore.  He 
said  nothing  to  anybody,  but  quietly  scattered  English  seeds  wherever 
he  went,  so  that  he  belted  the  world  with  the  flowers  and  herbs  of 
his  native  land.  Imitate  him  wherever  you  go;  sow  spiritual  seed  in 
every  place  that  your  foot  shall  tread  upon.  Some  of  you  will  before  long 
be  at  the  seaside,  or  amidst  the  mountains  of  Switzerland,  or  in  some  other 
regions  of  the  earth,  in  the  search  of  variety  and  beauty ;  carry  the 
heavenly  seeds  with  you,  and  be  not  satisfied  unless  in  every  place  you 
let  fall  a  grain  or  two  that  may  bring  forth  fruit  unto  your  God.  This 
is  what  you  can  do ;  mind  that  you  do  it. 

Let  us  now  think  of  what  you  cannot  do.  You  cannot,  after  the  seed 
has  left  your  hand,  cause  it  to  put  forth  life.  I  am  sure  you  cannot  make 
it  grow,  for  you  do  not  know  how  it  grows.  The  text  saith,  "And  the 
seed  should  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth  not  how."  That  which  is 
beyond  the  range  of  our  knowledge  is  certainly  beyond  the  reach  of  our 
power.  Can  you  make  a  seed  germinate?  You  may  place  it  under 
circumstances  of  damp  and  heat  which  will  cause  it  to  swell  and 
break  forth  with  a  shoot,  but  the  germination  itself  is  beyond  you. 
How  is  it  done?  We  know  not.  After  the  germ  has  been  put  forth, 
can  you  make  it  further  grow,  and  develop  its  life  into  leaf  and 
stem?  No;  that,  too,  is  out  of  your  power.  And  when  the  green, 
grassy  blade  has  been  succeeded  by  the  ear,  can  you  ripen  it  ?  It  will 
be  ripened;  but  can  you  do  it?  You  know  you  cannot;  you  can 
have  no  finger  in  the  actual  process,  though  you  may  promote  the 
conditions  under  which  it  is  produced.  Life  is  a  mystery ;  growth  is  a 
mystery ;  ripening  is  a  mystery :  and  these  three  mysteries  are  as  foun 
tains  sealed  against  all  intrusion.  How  comes  it  that  there  is  within 
the  ripe  seed  the  preparations  for  another  sowing  and  another  growth  ? 


AND   WHAT   THKY   CANNOT   DO.  838 

What  is  this  vital  principle,  this  secret  reproducing  energy  ?  Knowest 
thou  anything  about  this?  The  philosopher  may  say  that  he  can  ex 
plain  life  and  growth,  and  straightway  he  will,  according  to  the  ordinary 
process  of  philosophy,  bamboozle  you  with  terms  which  are  less  under 
standable  than  the  ordinary  talk  of  infants ;  and  then  he  will  say, 
"  There  is  the  whole  matter !  It  is  as  clear  as  possible."  He  cloaks  his 
ignorance  with  learned  jargon,  and  then  calls  it  wisdom.  To  this  day 
it  still  remaineth  true  of  the  growth  of  the  commonest  seeds, — "  He 
knoweth  not  how."  The  scientific  man  may  talk  about  chemical  com 
binations  and  physical  permutations,  and  he  may  proceed  to  quote 
analogies  from  this  and  that;  but  still  the  growth  of  the  seed  remains  a 
secret,  it  springs,  "  He  knoweth  not  how."  Certainly  tin's  is  true  of  the 
rise  and  progress  of  the  word  of  God  in  the  heart.  It  enters  the  soul, 
and  roots  itself  ye  know  not  how.  Naturally  men  hate  the  word,  but  it 
enters  and  it  changes  the  heart,  so  that  they  come  to  love  it,  but  we 
know  not  how.  Their  whole  nature  is  renewed,  so  that  instead  of  pro 
ducing  sin  it  yields  repentance,  faith,  and  love,  but  we  know  not  how. 
How  it  is  that  the  Spirit  of  God  deals  with  ihe  mind  of  man,  how  he- 
creates  the  new  heart  and  the  right  spirit,  how  we  are  begotten  again 
unto  a  lively  hope,  how  we  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  we  cannot  tell.  Thfr 
Holy  Ghost  enters  into  us ;  we  hear  not  his  voice,  we  see  not  his  light, 
we  feel  not  his  touch ;  yet  he  worketh  an  effectual  work  upon  us,  which 
we  are  not  long  in  perceiving.  We  know  that  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is 
a  new  creation,  a  resurrection,  a  quickening  from  the  deud  ;  but  all  these 
words  are  only  covers  to  our  utter  iguorance  of  the  mode  of  his  working, 
with  which  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  meddle.  We  do  not  know  how  he 
performs  his  miracles  of  love,  and,  not  knowing  how  he  works,  we  may 
be  quite  sure  that  we  cannot  take  the  work  out  of  his  hands.  We  can 
not  create,  we  cannot  quicken,  we  cannot  transform,  we  cannot  regenerate, 
we  cannot  save. 

This  work  of  God  having  proceeded  in  the  growth  of  the  seed,  what 
next?  We  can  reap  the  ripe  ears.  After  a  season  God  the  Holy  Spirit 
uses  his  servants  again.  As  soon  as  the  living  seed  has  produced 
first  of  all  the  blade  of  thought,  and  afterwards  the  green  ear  of  con 
viction,  and  then  faith,  which  is  as  full  coru  in  the  ear,  then  the 
Christian  worker  comes  in  for  further  service,  for  he  can  reap.  "  When 
the  fruit  is  brought  forth,  immediately  he  putteth  in  the  sickle." 
This  is  not  the  reaping  of  the  last  great  day,  for  that  does  not  come 
within  the  scope  of  the  parable,  which  evidently  relates  to  a  human 
sower  and  reaper.  The  kind  of  reaping  which  the  Saviour  here  intends 
is  that  which  he  referred  to  when  he  said  to  his  disciples,  "  Lift  up  now 
your  eyes,  for  behold  the  fields  are  white  already  to  the  harvest." 
After  he  hud  been  sowing  the  seed  in  the  hearts  of  the  Samaritans,  and 
it  had  sprung  up,  so  that  they  began  to  evince  faith  in  him,  the  Lord  Jesus 
cried,  "  The  fields  are  white  unto  the  harvest."  The  apostle  saith,  "  One 
soweth,  and  another  reapeth."  Our  Lord  said  to  the  disciples,  "I  sent  you 
to  reap  that  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  labour."  Is  there  not  a  promise,  "in 
due  season  ye  shall  reap  if  ye  faint  not"  ? 

Christian  workers  begin  their  harvest  work  by  watching  carefully  to 
see  when  men  evince  signs  of  faith  in  Christ.  They  are  eager  to  sec  the 
bla-K  njid  delighted  to  mark  the  ripening  ear.  They  often  hope  ihat 


334  WHAT   THE   FARM   LABOURERS   CAN   DO 

men  are  believers,  but  they  long  to  be  sure  of  it :  and  when  they  judge 
that  at  last  the  fruit  of  faith  is  put  forth,  they  begin  to  encourage,  to 
congratulate,  and  to  comfort.  They  know  that  the  young  believer  needs 
to  be  housed  in  the  barn  of  Christian  fellowship,  that  he  may  be  saved 
from  a  thousand  perils.  No  wise  farmer  leaves  the  fruit  of  the  field 
long  exposed  to  the  hail  which  might  beat  it  out,  or  the  mildew  which 
might  destroy  it,  or  the  birds  which  might  despoil  it.  Evidently  no 
believing  man  should  be  left  outside  of  the  garner  of  holy  fellowship, 
he  should  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  church  with  all  the  joy  which 
attends  the  home-bringing  of  sheaves.  The  worker  for  Christ  watches 
carefully,  and  when  he  discerns  that  his  time  is  come  he  begins  at  once 
to  fetch  in  the  converts  that  they  may  be  cared  for  by  the  brotherhood, 
separated  from  the  world,  screened  from  temptation,  and  laid  up  for  the 
Lord.  He  is  diligent  to  do  it  at  once,  because  the  text  saith,  "im 
mediately  he  putteth  in  the  sickle."  He  does  not  wait  for  months  in 
cold  suspicion  ;  he  is  not  afraid  that  he  shall  encourage  too  soon  when 
faith  is  really  present.  He  comes  with  the  word  of  promise  and  the 
smile  of  brotherly  love  at  once,  and  he  says  to  the  new  believer, 
"  Have  you  confessed  your  faith  ?  Is  not  the  time  come  for  an  open 
confession  ?  Hath  not  Jesus  bidden  the  believer  to  be  baptized  ?  If 
you  love  him,  keep  his  commandments."  He  does  not  rest  till  he  has 
introduced  the  convert  to  the  communion  of  the  faithful.  For  our  work, 
beloved,  is  but  half  done  when  men  are,  made  disciples  and  baptized. 
We  have  then  to  encourage,  to  instruct,  to  strengthen,  to  console,  and 
succour  in  all  times  of  difficulty  and  danger.  What  saith  the  Saviour  ? 
"  Go  ye  therefore,  and  make  disciples  of  all  the  nations,  baptizing 
them  into  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost :  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  commanded 
you." 

The  reaper  is  the  man  who  gathers  in  the  converts,  and  he  fulfils  an 
honourable  and  useful  office.  If  I  preach  the  gospel  to-day,  and  some 
shall  be  converted,  I  shall  be  the  sower  ;  but  if  going  home  to  the 
respective  towns  in  which  you  live,  you  who  have  dropped  in  here 
as  strangers,  shall  be  received  into  the  churches  by  your  own  pastors, 
they  will  be  reaping  what  I  have  sown.  I  envy  not  iny  brother  minister 
his  success  in  gathering  in  the  converts,  but  I  rejoice  with  him.  The 
sower  and  the  reaper  may  well  rejoice  together,  for  our  work  is  one,  and 
we  labour  for  one  Lord. 

Observe,  then,  the  sphere  of  agency.  We  can  introduce  the  truth  to 
men,  but  that  truth  the  Lord  himself  must  bless  ;  the  living  and  growing 
of  the  word  within  the  soul  is  the  operation  of  God  alone.  When  the 
mystic  work  of  growth  is  done  we  are  able  to  introduce  the  saved  ones 
into  the  church.  To  bring  them  into  the  fellowship  of  the  faithful  is 
our  work,  and  we  must  not  fail  to  do  it.  For  Christ  to  be  formed  in 
men  the  hope  of  glory  is  not  of  our  working,  that  remains  with  God  ; 
but  when  Jesus  Christ  is  formed  in  them,  to  discern  the  image  of  the 
Saviour  and  to  say,  "  Come  in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord,  wherefore 
standest  thou  without  ? "  this  is  our  duty  and  delight.  To  create  the 
divine  life  is  God's,  to  cherish  it  is  ours.  To  cause  the  hidden  life  to 
grow  in  secret  is  the  work  of  the  Lord;  to  see  the  uprising  and 
perfecting  of  that  life,  and  to  rejoice  in  it  is  the  work  of  the  faithful, 


AND  WHAT   THEY  CANNOT  DO.  H.';' 

sven  as  it  is  written,  "  when  the  fruit  is  brought  forth,  immediately  he 
putteth  in  the  sickle,  because  the  harvest  is  come." 

This,  then,  is  our  first  lesson ;  we  see  what  we  can  do  and  what  we 
cannot  do. 

II.     Our  second  head  is  like  unto  the  first,  and  consists  of  WHAT  WE 

CAN   KNOW  AND   WHAT  WE  CANNOT  KNOW. 

First,  ivhat  we  can  know.  We  can  know  when  we  have  sown  the 
good  seed  of  the  word  that  it  will  grow ;  for  God  has  promised  that  it 
shall  do  so.  Not  every  grain  in  every  place;  for  some  will  go  to  the 
bird,  and  some  to  the  worm,  and  some  to  be  scorched  by  the  sun ;  but 
as  a  general  rule  God's  word  shall  not  return  unto  him  void,  it  shall 
prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  he  hath  sent  it.  This  we  can  know.  And 
we  can  know  that  the  seed  when  once  it  takes  root  will  continue  to 
grow ;  that  it  is  not  a  dream  or  a  picture  that  will  disappear,  but  a  thing 
of  force  and  energy,  which  will  advance  from  a  grassy  blade  to  corn  in 
the  ear,  and  under  God's  blessing  will  develop  to  actual  salvation,  and 
be  as  the  "full  corn  in  the  ear."  God  helping  and  blessing  it,  our  work 
of  teaching  will  not  only  lead  men  to  thought  and  conviction,  but  to 
conversion  and  eternal  lite. 

We  also  can  know,  because  we  are  told  so,  that  the  reason  for  this  is 
mainly  because  there  is  life  in  the  word.  In  the  word  of  God  itself 
there  is  life,  for  it  is  written — "  The  word  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful," 
— that  is,  "living  and  powerful."  It  is  "the  incorruptible  seed  which 
liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  It  is  the  nature  of  living  seeds  to  grow, 
and  the  reason  why  the  word  of  God  grows  in  men's  hearts  is  because  it 
is  the  living  word  of  the  living  God,  and  where  the  word  of  a  king  is 
there  is  power.  We  know  this,  because  the  Scriptures  teach  us  so.  Is 
it  not  written,  "  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  by  the  word  of  truth"? 

Moreover,  the  earth,  which  is  here  the  type  of  the  man,  "  bringeth 
forth  fruit  of  hersel£"  We  must  mind  what  we  are  at  in  expounding 
this,  for  human  hearts  do  not  produce  faith  of  themselves ;  they  are  as 
hard  rock  on  which  the  seed  perishes.  Bat  it  means  this, — that  as  the 
earth  under  the  blessing  of  the  dew  and  the  rain  is,  by  God's  secret 
working  upon  it,  made  to  take  up  and  embrace  the  seed,  so  the  heart  of 
man  is  made  ready  to  receive  and  enfold  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
within  itself.  There  is  a  something  congruous  in  the  earth  to  the  seed 
which  is  sown  in  it,  so  that  the  seed  is  adopted  and  nourished  by  the 
soil.  Just  so  is  it  by  the  heart  of  man  when  God  makes  it  honest  and 
good  ground.  Man's  awakened  heart  wants  exactly  what  the  word  of 
God  supplies.  Moved  by  a  divine  influence  the  soul  embraces  the  truth, 
and  is  embraced  by  it,  and  so  the  truth  lives  in  the  heart,  and  is  quick 
ened  by  it.  The*  man's  love  accepts  the  love  of  God;  man's  faith 
wrought  in  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God  believes  the  truth  of  God ;  man's 
hope  wrought  in  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God  lays  hold  upon  the  things 
revealed,  and  so  the  heavenly  seed  grows  in  the  soil  of  the  soul.  The 
life  comes  not  from  you  who  preach  the  word,  but  it  is  placed  within 
the  word  which  you  preach  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  life  is  not  in  your 
hand,  but  in  the  man  himself  who  is  led  to  take  hold  upon  the  truth  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.  Salvation  comes  not  from  the  personal  authority  of 
the  preacher,  but  through  the  personal  conviction,  personal  faith,  and  per 
sonal  love  of  the  hearer.  You,  the  sower,  are  thub  taught  by  the  parable 


836  WHAT   THE    FARM    LABOURERS  CAN    DO 

that  spiritual  life  and  growth  are  of  (rod,  and  come  by  the  seed  and  the 
soil  far  more  than  by  you.  So  far  as  the  truth  is  concerned,  its  intrinsic 
power  is  the  same  whoever  preaches  it.  It  is  not  because  such  and  such  a 
divine,  whom  God  has  blessed,  tells  out  the  gospel,  that  therefore  it  lives 
in  men's  hearts.  Oh,  no  ;  it  is  because  of  the  truth  itself,  and  because 
of  the  hearts  themselves  which  receive  the  truth  by  the  secret  working 
of  God's  blessed  Spirit.  So  much  as  this  we  may  know,  and  is  it  not 
enough  for  all  practical  purposes  ? 

Still,  there  is  a  something  which  we  cannot  "know  :  a  secret  into  which 
we  cannot  pry.  I  repeat  what  I  have  said  before,  you  cannot  look  into 
men's  inward  ^arts  and  see  exactly  how  the  truth  takes  hold  upon  the 
heart,  or  the  heart  takes  hold  upon  the  truth.  Many  have  watched  their 
own  feelings  till  they  have  become  blind  with  despondency, and  others  have 
watched  the  feelings  of  the  young  till  they  have  done  them  rather  harm 
than  good  by  their  rigorous  supervision.  In  God's  work  there  is  more- 
room  for  faith  than  for  sight.  The  heavenly  seed  grows  secretly.  You 
must  bury  it  out  of  sight,  or  there  will  be  no  harvest.  Even  if  you- 
keep  the  seed  above  ground,  and  it  does  sprout,  you  cannot  discover  how 
it  grows  ;  even  though  you  microscopically  watched  its  swelling  and 
bursting,  you  could  not  see  the  inward  vital  force  which  moves  the  seed. 
Behind  the  veil  which  conceals  the  secret  working  of  God  in  the 
mysteries  of  natural  life  and  growth  you  cannot  pry ;  and  as  for  the 
divine  life  in  man,  it  must  for  ever  be  hidden  from  all  mortal  eyes.  The 
result  of  it  you  shall  be  able  to  see,  and  something  about  the  way  of  its 
development  you  shall  be  able  to  know ;  but  the  actual  modus  operandi,, 
the  secret  and  innermost  mystery  of  the  new  birth,  it  shall  not  be  given 
to  you  to  perceive.  Thou  knowest  not  the  way  of  the  Spirit.  His  work 
is  wrought  in  secret,  and.thou  canst  not  tell  whence  he  cometh  or 
whither  he  goeth.  "Explain  the  new  birth,"  says  somebody.  "My 
answer  is,  "Experience  the  new  birth,  and  you  shall  know  what  it  is." 
There  are  secrets  into  which  we  cannot  enter,  f~r  their  light  is  too- 
bright  for  mortal  eyes  to  endure.  0  man  thou  canst  not  become 
omniscient,  for  thou  art  a  creature,  and  not  the  Creator.  For  thee  there 
must  ever  be  a  region  not  only  unknown  but  unknowable.  So  far  shall 
thy  knowledge  go,  but  no  further ;  and  thou  mayest  thank  God  it  is  so, 
for  thus  he  leaves  room  for  faith,  and  gives  cause  for  prayer.  Cry 
mightily  unto  the  Great  Worker  to  do  what  thou  canst  not  attempt  to 
perform,  that  so,  when  thou  seest  the  salvation  of  men,  thou  mayest 
give  him  all  the  glory  evermore. 

III.  Thirdly,  our  text  tells  us  WHAT  WE  MAY  EXPECT  IF  WE  WORK 
FOB  GOD,  AND  WHAT  WE  MAY  NOT  EXPECT.  According  to  this  parable 
we  may  expect  to  see  fruit  The  husbandman  casts  his  seed  into  the 
ground,  and  the  seed  springs  and  grows,  and  he  may  expect  a  harvest. 
I  wish  I  could  say  a  word  to  stir  up  the  expectations  of  Christian 
workers;  for  I  fear  that  many  work  without  faith.  If  you  have  a 
garden  or  a  field,  and  you  sow  seed  in  it,  you  would  be  very  greatly  sur 
prised  and  grieved  if  it  did  not  come  up  at  all ;  but  many  Christian 
people  seem  quite  content  to  work  on,  and  they  never  reckon  upon, 
result  so  much  as  to  look  for  it  expectantly.  This  is  a  pitiful  kind  of 
working — pulling  up  empty  buckets  by  the  year  together.  iSurely  I  must 
either  see  a  result  for  my  labour  and  be  glad,  or  else,  tailing  to  see  it,  I 


AND   WHAT   THEY   CANNOT   DO.  837 

must  be  ready  to  break  my  heart  if  I  be  a  true  servant  of  the  great 
Master.  We  ought  to  expect  results :  if  we  had  expected  more  we 
should  have  seen  more,  but  a  lack  of  expectation  lias  been  a  great  cause 
of  failure  in  God's  workers. 

But  we  may  not  expect  to  see  all  the  seed  which  we  sow  spring 
up  the  moment  we  sow  it.  Sometimes,  glory  be  to  God,  we  have  but  to 
deliver  the  word,  and  straightway  men  are  converted:  the  reaper  over 
takes  the  sower,  in  such  instances,  but  it  is  not  always  so.  Some  sowers 
have  been  diligent  for  years  upon  certain  plots  of  ground,  and  apparently 
all  has  been  in  vain,  till  at  the  last  the  harvest  has  come,  a  harvest 
which,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  had  never  been  reaped  if 
they  had  not  persevered  to  the  end.  This  world,  as  I  believe,  is  to  be 
converted  to  Christ;  but  not  to-day,  nor  to-morrow,  peradventure  not 
for  many  an  age ;  but  the  sowing  of  the  centuries  is  not  being  lost,  it  is 
all  working  on  towards  the  grand  ultimatum.  A  crop  of  mushrooms 
may  soon  be  produced,  but  a  forest  of  oaks  will  not  reward  the  planter 
till  generations  of  his  children  have  mouldered  into  the  dust.  It  is  ours 
to  sow,  and  to  hope  for  quick  reaping ;  but  still  we  ought  to  remember 
that  u  the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  and 
hath  long  patience  for  it,  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain,"  and 
so  must  we.  We  are  to  expect  results,  but  not  to  be  dispirited  if  we  see 
them  not  to-day  or  on  the  morrow. 

We  are  also  to  expect  to  see  the  good  seed  grow,  but  not  always  after 
our  fashion.  We  are  nearly  all  of  us  like  children,  for  still  there  are  not 
many  fathers,  and  like  children  we  are  apt  to  be  impatient.  Your  little 
boy  sowed  mustard  and  cress  yesterday  in  his  little  garden.  This  after 
noon  Master  Johnny  will  be  turning  over  the  ground  to  see  if  the  seed 
is  growing.  There  is  no  probability  that  his  mustard  and  cress  will 
come  to  anything,  for  he  will  not  let  it  alone  long  enough  for  it  to  grow. 
So  is  it  with  hasty  workers  ;  they  must  see  the  result  of  the  gospel 
directly,  or  else  they  will  leave  off,  and  distrust  the  blessed  word.  Al 
though  the  people  may  have  taken  the  word  into  their  minds  and  may 
be  considering  it,  certain  preachers  are  in  such  a  hurry  that  they  will 
allow  no  time  for  thought,  no  space  for  counting  the  cost,  no  opportunity 
for  men  to  consider  their  ways  and  turn  to  tne  Lord  with  full  purpose 
of  heart.  All  other  seeds  take  time  to  grow  but  the  seed  of  the  word 
must  grow  before  the  speaker's  eyes  like  magic,  or  he  thinks  nothing 
has  been  done.  Such  good  brethren  are  so  eager  to  produce  blade  and 
ear  there  and  then,  that  they  roast  their  seed  in  the  fire  of  fanaticism, 
and  it  never  lives  at  all.  They  make  men  think  that  they  are  converted, 
and  thus  effectually  hinder  them  from  coining  to  a  saving  knowledge  of 
the  truth.  I  am  solemnly  convinced  that  some  men  are  prevented  from 
being  saved  by  being  told  that  they  are  saved  already,  and  by  being 
puffed  up  with  a  notion  of  perfection  when  they  are  not  even  broken 
in  heart.  Perhaps  if  such  people  had  been  taught  to  look  for  something 
deeper  they  might  not  have  been  satisfied  with  receiving  seed  on  stony 
ground  ;  but  now  they  are  content  with  that  which  comes  of  seed  sown 
on  unbroken  rocks,  they  exhibit  a  rapid  development,  and  an  equally 
rapid  decline  and  fall.  Let  us  believingly  expect  to  see  the  seed  grow; 
but  let  us  lo-jk  to  see  it  advance  after  the  manner  of  the  preacher, — firstly 
secondly,  thirdly ;  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear. 


338  WHAT   THE   FARM   LABOURERS   CAN  DO 

You  are  in  a  hurry,  my  brother,  but  it  were  better  to  exhibit  the 
patience  of  principle  than  the  heat  of  passion.  Leb  all  men  be  in  a 
hurry  to  be  saved,  but  let  those  who  are  preaching  the  truth  be  content 
to  see  men  convinced  of  sin,  delivered  from  self-confidence,  enlightened 
as  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  thus  led  by  sure  steps  to  faith.  Some  of  the 
best  of  Christians  do  not  know  the  exact  point  at  w,hich  they  were  con 
verted  ;  it  was  a  gradual  process,  from  green  blade  to  ripe  ear,  and  they 
-cannot  tell  exactly  when  the  actual  fruit  of  faith  was  formed  in  them. 
Some  of  the  most  thoughtful  minds  are  not  jerked  on  a  sudden  into 
religion,  but  are  brought  gradually  into  light,  even  as  the  noon  of  day 
dra \veth  on  by  degrees.  With  many  there  is  at  first  nothing  out  a  little 
blade,  you  cannot  tell  whether  it  is  not  grass  and  grass  only ;  their  feeling 
looks  like  a  natural  emotion  caused  by  the  fear  of  hell,  and  this  might 
lead  to  nothing  effectual.  Then  follows  a  little  belief,  so  formed  as  to  be 
like  the  wheat-ear  of  faith,  and  yet  it  may  be  only  a  notion :  it  takes 
time  with  such  persons  before  they  show  the  full  corn  of  assured  faith  in 
Jesus.  Growth  is  often,  if  not  generally,  gradual,  and  shall  we  wish  to 
alter  God's  method  of  working  ?  We  may  expect  the  seed  to  grow,  but 
«very  soil  is  not  equally  sharp  and  speedy,  and  we  must  not  demand  of 
God  that  he  shall  work  uniformly  after  the  same  rate  of  speed. 

We  may  expect  also  to  see  the  seed  ripen.     Our  work  will  lead  up  by 
God's  grace  to  real  faith  in  those  he  hath  wrought  upon  by  his  word,  and 
Spirit,  but  we  must  not  expect  to  see  it  perfect  at  the  first.     How  many 
mistakes  have  been  made  here.     Here  is  a  young  person  under  im 
pression,  and  some  good  sound  brother  talks  with  that  young  person  and 
asks  profound  questions.     He  shakes  his  experienced  head,  and  knits 
his  furrowed  brows.     He  goes  into  the  corn-field  to  see  how  the  crops 
are  prospering,  and  though  it  is  early  in  the  year,  he  laments  that  he 
oannot  see  an  ear  of  corn ;  indeed,  he  perceives  nothing  but  mere  grass. 
"  I  cannot  see  a  trace  of  corn,"  says  he.     No,  brother,  of  course  you 
cannot ;  for  you  will  not  be  satisfied  with  the  blade  as  an  evidence  of  life, 
but  must  insist  upon  seeing  everything  at  full  growth  at  once.     If  you 
had  looked  for  the  blade  you  would  have  found  it ;  and  it  would  have 
encouraged  you.     For  my  own  part,  I  am  glad  even  to  perceive  a  faint 
desire,  a  feeble  longing,  a  degree  of  uneasiness,  or  a  mea^ire  of  weari 
ness  of  sin,  or  a  craving  after  mercy.     Will  it  not  be  wise  for  you,  also, 
to  allow  things  to  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  their 
being  small  at  the  first  ?     See  the  blade  of  desire,  and  then  watch  for 
more.     Soon  you  shall  see  a  little  more  than  desire ;  for  there  shall  be 
conviction  and  resolve,  and  after  that  a  feeble  faith,  small  as  a  mustard 
seed,  but  bound  to  grow.     Do  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things.     Do 
not  examine  the  new- born  babe  about  Calvinism  in  its  different  shades, 
to  see  whether  he  is  sound  after  your  idea  of  soundness ;  ten  to  one  he 
is  a  long  way  off  sound,  and  you  will  only  worry  the  dear  heart  by  intro 
ducing  difficult  questions.     Speak  to  him  about  his  being  a  sinner,  and 
Christ  a  Saviour,  and  you  will  in  this  way  water  him,  so  that  his  grace 
in  the  ear  will  become  the  full  corn.     It  may  be  that  there  is  not  much 
that  looks  like  wheat  about   him  yet,    but   by-and-by   you  shall  say, 
"  Wheat !  ah,  that  it  is,  if  I  know  wheat.  This  man  is  a  true  ear  of  corn, 
and  gladly  will  I  place  him  among  my  Master's  sheaves."     If  you  crush 
the  blades,  where  will  the  ears  come  from?     If  you  cut  off  the  green 


AND   WHAT  THEY   CANNOT   DO.  8^0 

ears,  where  will  tne  ripe  ones  be  ?  Expect  grace  in  your  converts,  but 
do  not  look  to  see  glory  in  them  just  yet.  It  is  enough  if  you  see  heaven 
begun :  do  not  look  to  see  it  complete  in  them  here  below. 

Expect,  then,  brethren— for  you  may  expect  it — to  see  a  harvest,  but  do 
not  expect  to  find  every  seed  springing  up.  "  There,"  says  one.  "  that  is 
a  discouraging  word."  It  may  be  so,  but  it  is  a  true  word.  There  is  an 
old  worldly  proverb  which  saith,  "  Blessed  are  those  who  expect  nothing, 
for  they  shall  never  be  disappointed."  I  do  not  believe  in  that  proverb, 
but  I  believe  in  a  moderate  form  of  it  :  "  Blessed  are  those  who  do  not 
expect  what  is  unreasonable,  for  they  will  not  get  it."  If  you  young 
people  who  begin  to  work  for  God  expect  that  every  word  you  speak  will 
be  useful  to  all  who  hear  it,  it  will  not  happen,  and  you  will  grow  dis 
couraged  ;  therefore  I  would  raise  your  expectation  as  high  as  truth 
permits,  and  no  higher.  I  would  have  you  climb  to  the  top  of  the 
ladder ;  but  if  I  encourage  you  to  go  any  higher  you  will  soon  be  going 
down  the  other  side,  under  the  notion  that  you  are  ascending.  I  never 
like  to  see  a  man  expecting  what  he  will  not  obtain.  Now,  I  know 
that  some  of  our  seed  will  fall  among  thorns,  and  some  in  stony  places, 
and  I  do  not  despair  when  it  happens  to  be  so.  I  do  not  expect  when 
I  preach  the  gospel  that  everybody  who  hears  it  will  receive  it,  because 
I  know  it  will  be  a  savour  of  life  unto  life  to  some,  and  of  death  unto 
death  to  others.  I  pull  the  net  in,  hauling  away  with  all  my  might ;  but 
I  know  that  when  it  comes  to  shore  it  will  contain  some  queer  things 
that  are  not  fish,  which  will  have  to  be  thrown  away,  and  I  am  heartily 
glad  that  there  will  also  be  in  it  a  cheering  number  of  good  fishes. 
The  results  of  our  ministry  in  these  days  will  be  mixed,  even  as  they 
were  when  Paul  preached,  and  some  believed  and  some  believed  not ; 
we  must  be  prepared  for  that,  and  yet  I  bid  you  let  your  expectations 
be  very  large,  for  you  may  have  sixty  or  a  hundred-fold  of  fruit  from 
the  seed  if  God  be  with  you,  and  that  will  abundantly  repay  you,  even 
if  the  crows  and  the  worms  should  eat  their  share  of  the  grain. 

IV.  The  last  head  is  this,  WHAT  SLEEP  WORKERS  MAY  TAKE,  AND 
WHAT  THEY  MAY  NOT  TAKE  ;  for  it  is  said  of  this  sowing  man,  that  he 
sleeps  and  rises  night  and  day,  and  the  seed  springs  arid  grows  up  he 
knoweth  not  how.  They  say  a  farmer's  trade  is  a  good  one  because  it 
is  going  on  while  he  is  abed  and  asleep ;  and  surely  ours  is  a  good  trade, 
too,  when  we  serve  our  Master  by  sowing  good  seed,  for  it  is  growing 
even  while  we  are  asleep. 

But  how  may  a  good  workman  for  Christ  lawfully  go  to  sleep  ?  I 
answer,  first,  he  may  sleep  the  sleep  of  restfulness  born  of  confidence* 
You  are  afraid  the  kingdom  of  Christ  will  not  come,  are  you  ?  Who 
asked  you  to  tremble  for  the  ark  of  the  Lord  ?  Afraid  for  the  infinite 
Jehovah  that  his  purposes  will  fail  ?  Shame  on  you !  Your  anxiety 
dishonours  your  God.  You  degrade  him  by  a  suspicion  of  his  failing. 
Shall  Omnipotence  be  defeated  ?  You  had  better  sleep  than  wake  to  play 
the  part  of  Uzzah.  Rest  patiently,  God's  will  will  be  done,  and  his  king 
dom  will  come,  and  his  chosen  will  be  saved,  and  Christ  shall  see  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul.  Take  the  sweet  sleep  which  God  gives  to  his  beloved, 
the  sleep  of  perfect  confidence,  such  as  Jesus  slept  in  the  hinder  part  of 
the  ship  when  it  was  tossed  with  tempest.  The  cause  of  God  never  was 
in  jeopardy,  and  never  will  be ;  the  seed  sown  is  insured  by  omnipotence, 


340  METROPOLITAN   TAHERXAOLE   PULPIT. 

arnd  must  produce  its  harvest.  In  patience  possess  your  soul,  and  wait 
till  the  harvest  comes,  for  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  must  prosper  in  the 
hands  of  Jesus. 

Also  take  that  sleep  which  leads  to  a  happy  waking  of  joyful  expectancy. 
Get  up  in  the  morning  and  feel  that  the  Lord  is  ruling  all  things  for  the 
accomplishment  of  his  own  purpose.  Look  for  it.  If  you  do  not  sleep 
you  certainly  will  not  wake  up  in  the  morning  refreshed,  and  ready  for 
more  work.  If  it  were  possible  for  you  to  sit  up  all  night  and  eat  the 
bread  of  carefulness  you  would  be  unfit  to  attend  to  the  service  which 
your  Master  appoints  for  the  morning  ;  therefore  take  your  rest  and  be 
at  peace,  and  work  with  calm  dignity ;  for  the  matter  is  safe  in  the 
Lord's  hands. 

Take  your  rest  because  you  have  consciously  resigned  the  work  into 
God's  hands.  After  you  have  spoken  the  word  resort  to  God  in  prayer, 
and  commit  it  into  God's  hand,  and  then  do  not  fret  about  it.  It  cannot 
be  in  better  keeping — leave  it  there. 

But  do  not  sleep  the  sleep  of  un  watch  fulness.  The  farmer  sows 
his  seed,  but  he  does  not  therefore  forget  it.  He  has  to  mend  his  fences 
to  keep  the  cattle  out ;  it  may  be  he  has  to  drive  away  birds,  to  remove 
weeds,  or  to  prevent  floods.  AVhile  he  is  not  sitting  down  to  watch  the 
growth,  he  has  plenty  else  to  do.  He  never  sleeps  the  sleep  of  indifference 
or  even  of  inaction  ;  for  each  season  has  its  demand  upon  him.  He  has 
sown  one  field,  but  he  has  another  to  sow.  He  has  sown,  but  he  has  also  to 
reap ;  and  if  reaping  is  done,  he  has  something  else  to  do.  He  has  never 
done ;  for  in  one  part  or  other  of  the  farm  he  is  needed.  His  sleep  is 
but  an  interlude  that  gives  him  strength  to  continue  in  his  occupations. 
Consider  that  the  parable  teaches  us  that  we  have  not  to  intrude  into  the 
domain  of  God;  but  with  regard  to  the  secret  working  of  truth  upon 
man's  mind,  we  are  to  take  our  rest,  and  go  011  our  way,  serving  our 
day  and  generation  according  to  the  will  of  God. 

I  want  you,  clear  brethren  and  sisters,  to  come  to  that  point  this 
morning.  "  Lord,  this  is  thy  work.  Lord,  thou  canst  do  thine  own  work. 
Lord,  do  thine  own  work — \ve  entreat  and  beseech  thee  to  do  it.  Lord, 
help  us  to  do  our  work,  both  at  the  beginning  <>!'  the  chapter  and  at  the 
end  of  the  chapter,  confident  that  thou  wilt  not  fail  in  the  middle  of  the 
chapter ;  but  that  thou  wilt  do  thy  work.  Help  us  to  exercise  faith  in 
thee,  and  to  go  about  our  labour  in  the  confidence  that  thou  art  with  us, 
and  we  are  workers  together  with  thee."  Up,  brethren,  to  the  mountain, 
to  the  brow  of  Carmel  this  afternoon,  up  there  and  pray  that  God  will 
send  a  shower  of  heavenly  rain  by  his  Spirit.  Up,  Elijah  ;  put  your  head 
between  your  knees  and  cry  till  you  are  certain  that  the  cloud,  though 
it  be  little  at  first  as  a  man's  hand,  will  cover  all  the  earth  and  water  the 
land  with  blessing.  Up  and  pray  that  God  would  sweep  away  all  the 
doubts  which,  like  locusts,  devour  the  church  in-day,  and  all  love  of  sin 
and  all  rejection  of  Christ,  that  at  this  hour,  even  at  this  hour.  God  may 
glorify  himself  by  the  feeble  hand  of  his  sower  while  he  scatters  the  seed. 
I  beg  your  prayers,  my  dear  and  faithful  friends,  this  afternoon,  and  this 
evening,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  may  be  divinely  victorious.  1  stand 
back  that  God  may  work,  and  then  come  forward  that  God  may  work 
through  me,  and  to  him  be  praise  for  ever.  Amen. 


SFabermicle  pulpit, 


THE   CHOICE   OF  A   LEADER. 


DELIVERED  ox  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  AUGUST  IST,  1875,  BY 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,    NEVYINGTON. 


"And  he  spake  a  parable  unto  them,  Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind?  Shall  they 
not  both  fall  into  the  ditch  f  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master :  but  every  one 
that  is  perfect  shall  be  us  his  master." — Luke  vi.  39,  40. 

MAN  can  hardly  be  retained  in  the  place  of  wisdom,  even  if  brought 
thither.  Truth  lies  between  two  extremes,  and  man,  like  a  pendulum, 
swings  either  too  much  this  way  or  that.  He  abides  not  long  in  one 
stay,  but  tosses  from  side  to  side  ;  never,  except  by  divine  grace,  finding 
rest  in  the  middle  point  of  wisdom  at  all.  Two  extremes  exist  in  refer 
ence  to  the  pilgrimage  and  scholarship  of  life.  Some  assert  that  man 
needs  no  guide  whatever.  Is  he  not  a  noble  creature,  gifted  with  high 
intelligence  ?  Can  he  not  reason  and  judge,  and  understand  and 
discern  ?  He  can  surely  find  his  own  way  without  direction  from 
without.  As  a  learner,  why  needs  he  a  teacher?  He  can  instruct 
himself.  Is  he  not  possessed  of  science  ?  Has  he  not  already  found 
out  many  inventions  ?  Such  self-sufficient  boasters  will  not,  therefore, 
condescend  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  a  master,  or  follow  the  track  ot  a  guide, 
and  consequently  they  frequently  become  erratic,  singular,  lawless,  and 
unreasonable  in  their  modes  of  thought,  and  even  of  act.  Into  the  mazes 
of  infidelity  and  atheism  such  pilgrims  wander  ;  into  foolishness  and 
strong  delusion  such  teachers  of  themselves  conduct  their  own  minds. 
This  scheme  is  dangerous,  but  its  opposite  pole  is  not  less  so.  Deliver 
a  man  from  rationalism,  and  he  often  swings  into  superstition,  and 
says,  "  I  see  that  I  need  a  guide,  I  will  take  the  one  nearest  to  hand." 
Finding  a  guide  constituted  by  this  authority  or  that,  the  man  who  has 
ceased  to  use  his  judgment  surrenders  himself  at  once  to  his  leadership 
and  reckons  that  to  question  is  to  be  guilty  of  wicked  unbelief.  With 
out  considering  whether  the  guide  be  a  seeing  man  or  blind,  or  the 
teacher  an  instructed  and  qualified  instructor,  the  credulous  yield  them 
selves  up  to  priests  or  leaders,  and  are  misled.  Weary  of  thinking, 
No.  1,248.  16 


446  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

they  beg  others  to  think  for  them,  and  there  leave  the  matter.  This  is 
the  religion  of  a  great  many,  and  they  find  much  peace  in  it;  the  peace 
of  slumbering  stupidity.  They  meet  with  a  church  which  claims  to  be 
venerable  for  antiquity,  and  then  they  believe  whatever  that  church 
chooses  to  teach  :  they  consider  that  they  have  no  right  any  longer  to 
judge  or  to  use  their  understandings.  They  hang  conscience  and  reason 
in  a  sling,  as  if  they  were  broken  arms,  no  longer  usable,  and  give 
themselves  up  to  be  wheeled  about  like  invalids  in  the  chairs  of  tra 
dition  and  dogmatism  ;  they  do  not  dare  to  question  ; — that  would 
spoil  the  whole  thing ; — they  shut  their  eyes  and  let  other  people  see 
for  them,  nay,  they  shut  their  eyes  to  be  guided  by  blind  men ;  they 
give  up  thinking,  to  be  directed  by  those  who  have  also  given  up 
thinking,  who  have  long  ago  shut  their  eyes  and  opened  their  mouths 
to  take  in  whatever  a  supreme  council  or  a  pope  may  please  to  put  into 
them.  Between  these  two  extremes  there  is  a  narrow  path  of  right,  and 
happy  is  he  who  finds  it,  namely,  the  honestly  and  sincerely  judging 
who  the  leader  and  teacher  should  be,  the  discovery  that  a  leader  has 
been  appointed  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  a  teacher  in  the 
divine  Spirit,  and  then  a  complete,  willing  and  believing  submission  of 
the  whole  man  to  this  infallible  guidance.  Happy  is  that  man  who 
neither  in  the  pride  of  intellect  determines  to  be  a  guide  to  himself, 
and  so  to  be  guide  to  a  fool ;  nor  in  the  indolence  of  superstition  sur 
renders  himself  up  to  be  guided  by  his  fellow  man,  call  him  priest,  or 
pope,  or  minister,  or  what  you  will ;  but  who,  having  found  that  God 
has  sent  his  Son  into  this  world  of  ours  to  be  the  Captain  of  salvation, 
who  shall  bring  many  sons  into  glory,  follows  where  his  commander 
leads  the  way,  and  having  seen  this  same  Jesus  appointed  to  be  the 
prophet  of  his  people,  delights  to  sit  at  his  feet  and  receive  of  his  words  ;. 
reason,  affection,  contemplation,  and  will,  all  finding  perfect  rest  in  him. 
He  with  his  eyes  open  follows  the  All-seeing  One,  and  with  his  mind 
illuminated,  becomes  a  disciple  of  the  Eternal  Light. 

It  is  clear  that  the  most  important  thing,  if  we  are  agreed  that  we 
need  a  guide,  is  to  examine  the  claims  of  those  who  aspire  to  the  office. 
Some  take  a  guide  because,  as  I  have  said  before,  he  is  appointed  by 
authority  ;  he  happens  to  be  the  parson  of  the  parish,  or  the  family 
minister,  and  he  is  at  once  accepted  without  consideration.  He  would 
be  a  very  foolish  person  who  would  in  climbing  the  mountains  of 
Switzerland  take  a  guide  merely  because  he  professed  to  be  one,  and 
carried  the  usual  certificates,  if  upon  looking  at  him  it  was  clear  that 
the  man  was  stone  blind.  Would  you  say  that  does  not  matter,  he 
says  he  is  appointed  by  authority  ?  Would  you  go  to  the  top  of  Mont 
Blanc  with  him  ?  If  so,  he  would  soon  conduct  you  into  a  crevasse, 
and  there  would  be  an  end  to  your  folly.  Yet  multitudes  resolve  upon 
taking  their  religion  by  prescription,  feeling  confident  that  what  is 
patronised  by  the  great,  and  established  and  endowed  by  the  nation, 
must  of  course  be  right.  Whether  the  guide  can  see  or  not  seems  to  be 
a  trifle,  but  he  must  have  been  properly  ordained,  and  duly  inducted ; 
if  that  be  settled,  the  unthinking  many  ask  no  more.  For  my  part,  I 
like  to  look  at  my  guide's  eyes  ;  I  like  to  know  whether  he  has  ever 
traversed  the  country,  and  whether  he  has  had  experience  of  the  way; 
and  if  he  cannot  satisfy  me  on  those  points  I  look  elsewhere,  to  one 


THE  CHOICE  OF  A  LEADER.  447 

who  is  all  sight,  and  has  had  all  experience,  even  the  Lord  Jesus.  Hit 
authority  I  cannot  question  ;  I  take  for  granted  all  that  he  teaches  me. 
I  ain  glad  to  be  a  seeing  man  following  a  seeing  leader,  and  I  en 
deavour  to  be  an  intelligent  scholar  learning  of  a  wise  and  sympathetic 
teacher. 

GUI'  text  has.,  much  wisdom  about  it  as  to  this  matter  ;  for,  first,  it 
announces  to  us  a  great  general  principle,  as  a  warning,  namely,  that  a 
disciple  does  not  get  above  his  Master,  but  becomes  like  him  :  secondly, 
it  gives  a  special  application  of  the  great  general  principle  to  Christ,  that 
as  we  are  perfected  we  shall  become  like  him,  even  as  in  the  case  of  all 
other  disciples  who  grow  like  their  masters.  After  these  points,  I  shall 
try  to  use  the  text  for  the  encouragement  of  those  who  desire  Christ 
as  their  Master,  by  saying  that  we  may  put  the  fact  mentioned  in  the  text 
to  a  practical  test. 

I.  Let  us  take  THE  GREAT  GENERAL  PRINCIPLE  as  a  warning. 

Several  truths  are  involved  in  the  text,  and  these  all  illustrate  the 
main  point.  It  is  evident  that  the  disciple  is  generally  drawn  to  the 
master  wlw  is  most  like  himself ; — the  blind  man  is  led  by  the  blind.  It 
is  not  merely  that  birds  of  a  feather  flock  together,  and  hence  men  of 
kindred  minds  form  association  with  each  other,  but  there  is  about  us 
all  a  natural  tendency  to  admire  our  own  image,  and  to  be  willing  to 
submit  to  any  who  are  superior  to  us,  and  yet  are  of  our  type.  A 
teacher  who  does  not  shock  our  prejudices,  but  shows  a  sympathy  with 
our  tastes,  we  are  at  home  with  at  once.  The  priest  is  like  the  people 
because  the  people  are  pleased  to  have  him  so.  It  is  true  of  teachers 
as  of  idols,  "  they  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them."  If  the  blind 
man  only  could  see  he  would  not  choose  a  blind  man  to  be  his  guide, 
but  as  he  cannot  see  he  meets  with  one  who  talks  as  blind  men  talk, 
who  judges  things  as  they  are  in  the  dark,  and  who  does  not  know 
what  sighted  men  know,  and  therefore  never  reminds  the  blind  man  of 
his  infirmity,  and  at  once  he  says,  "  This  is  my  ideal  of  a  man,  he  is 
exactly  the  leader  I  require,  and  I  will  commit  myself  to  him."  So  the 
blind  man  takes  the  blind  man  to  be  his  guide,  and  this  is  the  reason 
why  error  has  been  so  popular.  No  error  would  live  if  it  did  not  chime 
in  with  some  evil  prospensity  of  human  nature,  if  it  did  not  gratify 
some  error  in  man  to  which  it  is  congruous.  Idolatry  is  a  prevailing 
sin  because  man  is  alienated  from  God  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  in  his  carnal 
folly  demands  a  god  whom  his  senses  can  apprehend.  When  you  hear 
of  crowds  going  over  to  Popery  do  not  wonder  at  it.  Popery  is  the 
religion  of  depraved  human  nature  put  into  shape  by  the  devil,  and 
therefore  it  is  no  marvel  that  the  nations  are  fascinated  by  it,  for  what 
they  love  and  what  the  god  of  this  world  sweetens  to  their  tooth  must 
go  down  with  them.  Popery  and  other  forms  of  sacramentarianism 
are  a  soft  bed  for  idle  limbs ;  and  as  surely  as  a  lazy  man  lies  down,  so 
surely  does  a  superstitious  man  take  to  these  systems.  Give  a  supersti 
tious  man  the  information  contained  in  the  Bible,  and  a  pair  of  scissors- 
to  cut  his  coat  according  to  his  shape,  and  Popery  in  some  shape  or 
other  will  be  the  religion  which  he  will  cut  out  for  himself ;  conse 
quently  it  is  popular.  You  cannot  at  first  understand  how  the  blind 
man  who  sets  up  for  a  guide  could  expect  to  find  clients  ;  neither 
would  he,  only  there  are  so  many  other  blind  people  about  who  know 


448  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

nothing  about  his  blindness,  and  are  sure  to  come  to  him.  Mind  you 
are  not  so  blind  yourself  as  to  follow  their  example.  Young  man,  mind 
who  it  is  you  choose  for  a  guide.  Your  tendencies  will  be  to  select  a 
wrong  one,  because  your  tendencies  themsel  selves  are  wrong.  Pray 
that  you  may  begin  aright  the  journey  of  life  having  grace  infused 
into  your  hearts,  that  you  may  choose  the  Christ  of  Gq,d  who  is  ""the 
way,  the  truth,  and  the  life."  0  Lord  let  no  soul  here  be  so  blind 
as  to  choose  blind  atheism,  blind  scepticism,  or  blind  superstition  to  be 
his  leader,  but  do  thou  take  the  blind  by  the  hand  and  lead  them  by  a 
way  that  they  know  not  and  by  paths  which  they  have  not  seen.  Do 
thou  these  things  unto  them,  and  do  not  forsake  them. 

Having  chosen  his  tutor,  the  student  gradually  becomes  more  and  more  like 
his  Master,  or,  having  taken  his  guide,  the  tendency  is  to  tread  more 
closely  in  his  footsteps,  and  obey  his  rules  more  fully  every  day.  We 
must  be  all  conscious  that  we  imitate  those  whom  we  admire.  Love  has  a 
strange  influence  over  our  nature,  to  mould  it  into  the  form  beloved.  A 
true  disciple  is  like  clay  on  the  wheel,  and  his  Master  fashions  him 
after  his  own  image.  We  may  be  scarcely  conscious  of  it,  but  we  are 
most  surely  being  conformed  to  the  likeness  of  those  to  whose  influence 
we  submit  ourselves.  AVhoever  then  your  Master  may  be,  dear  friend, 
you  are  changing  into  his  image :  if  you  choose  to  be  led  by  the 
votary  of  pleasure,  you  will  become  more  and  more  frivolous ;  if  you 
admire  the  slave  of  avarice,  you  will  become  avaricious ;  if  you  feel 
the  sway  of  the  minion  of  vice,  you  will  grow  vicious  yourself.  If  a 
man  who  despises  the  word  of  God  becomes  your  hero,  you  will  ere 
long  despise  it  too :  while  you  are  gazing  upon  him  with  admiration, 
a  kind  of  photography  is  going  on,  and  you,  like  a  sensitive  plate, 
receive  his  image.  I  charge  you,  therefore,  to  be  careful  who  becomes 
your  guide. 

And  mark,  the  pupil  does  not  go  beyond  the  tutor,  nor  does  the  man 
who  submits  to  be  led  go  beyond  his  guide.  Such  a  case  is  very  rarely 
found ;  indeed,  I  may  say  never ;  for  when  the  one  who  is  led  goes 
beyond  his  leader,  he  is  not  in  truth  led  any  longer :  rarely  enough 
does  it  ever  come  to  that.  Men,  if  they  outstrip  their  leaders,  generally 
do  so  in  the  wrong  direction.  They  seldom  exaggerate  their  virtues, 
those  they  frequently  omit,  but  they  usually  exaggerate  peculiarities, 
follies  /ailings,  and  faults.  It  is  said  that  in  the  court  of  Richard 
III.,  because  the  king  was  round-shouldered,  the  courtiers  gradually 
became  humpbacked,  and  we  have  seen  a  whole  country  idiotic  enough, 
not  in  the  last  century,  but  in  this  century,  to  have  almost  all  its  women 
limping  because  a  popular  princess  was  afflicted  with  a  temporary  lame 
ness.  It  is  the  way  of  mankind ;  they  imitate  each  other  as  if  by 
instinct,  and  this  is  the  only  excuse  I  know  of  for  Darwin's  theory  of 
our  having  descended  from  the  ape.  Iinitativeness  is  well  developed 
in  us,  but  if  left  to  itself  it  works  with  a  bias  the  wrong  way,  and  the 
imitation  is  most  forcible  in  the  direction  of  deformity  and  defect.  In 
music,  and  painting,  and  poetry,  and  literature,  men  of  a  school  seldom 
excel  their  master,  or,  if  they  do,  they  leave  him  ;  but  the  habit  is  to 
perpetuate  the  master's  mannerisms  and  weaknesses.  It  is  even  more 
so  in  the  art  of  living.  Young  men,  in  the  task  of  choosing  a  master 
for  your  faith,  I  beseech  you  be  careful  to  have  none  but  the  best,  for 


THE   CHOICE   OF   A   LEADER.  449 

you  will  not  excel,  but  rather  fall  behind  the  master  you  follow.  If 
you  are  cl loosing  a  leader,  choose  one  who  knows  the  road,  for  if  he 
has  made  some  blunders  you  will  make  ten  times  as  many,  and  in  all 
probability  you  will  exaggerate  each  one  of  his  mistakes. 

The  most  solemn  truth  remains  to  be  noted.  When  a  man  chooses  a 
bad  leader  for  his  soul,  at  the  end  of  all  bad  leadership  Ihere  is  a  ditch. 
A  man  teaches  error  which  he  declares  he  has  drawn  from  Scripture, 
and  he  backs  it  up  with  texts  perverted  and  abused.  If  you  follow 
that  error,  and  take  its  teacher  for  a  leader,  you  may  for  a  time  be 
very  pleased  with  yourself  for  knowing  more  than  the  poor  plain 
people  who  keep  to  the  good  old  way ;  but,  mark  my  word,  there  is  a 
ditch  at  the  end  of  the  error.  You  do  not  see  it  yet,  but  there  it  is, 
and  into  it  you  will  fall  if  you  continue  to  follow  your  leader.  At  the 
end  of  error  there  is  often  a  moral  ditch,  and  men  go  down,  down, 
down,  they  scarce  know  why,  till  presently,  having  imbibed  doctrinal 
error,  their  moral  principles  are  poisoned,  and  like  drunken  men  they 
find  themselves  rolling  in  the  mire  of  sin.  At  other  times  the  ditch 
beyond  a  lesser  error  may  be  an  altogether  damnable  doctrine.  Thi 
first  mistake  was  comparatively  trifling,  but,  as  it  placed  the  mind  on 
an  inclined  plane,  the  man  descended  almost  as  a  matter  of  course, 
and  almost  before  he  knew  it,  found  himself  given  over  to  a  strong 
delusion  to  believe  a  lie.  The  blind  man  and  his  guide,  whatever  else 
they  miss,  will  be  sure  to  find  the  ditch,  they  need  no  sight  to  obtain 
an  abundant  entrance  into  that.  Alas !  to  fall  into  the  ditch  is  easy, 
but  how  shall  they  be  recovered  ?  I  would  earnestly  entreat  especially 
professing  Christians,  when  novelties  of  doctrine  come  up,  to  be  very 
cautious  how  they  give  heed  to  them.  I  bid  you  remember  the  ditch. 
A  small  turn  of  the  switch  on  the  railway  is  the  means  of  taking  the 
train  to  the  far  east  or  to  the  far  west:  the  first  turn  is  very  little 
indeed,  but  the  points  arrived  at  are  remote.  There  are  new  errors 
which  have  lately  come  up  which  your  fathers  knew  not,  with  which 
some  are  mightily  busy,  and  I  have  noticed  when  men  have  fallen  into 
them  their  usefulness  ceased.  I  have  seen  ministers  go  only  a  little 
way  in  speculative  theories,  and  gradually  glide  from  latitudinarianism 
into  Socinianism  or  Atheism.  Into  these  ditches  thousands  fall.  Others 
are  precipitated  into  an  equally  horrible  pit,  namely,  the  holding 
nominally  of  all  the  doctrines  in  theory  and  none  of  them  in  fact. 
Men  hold  truths  nowadays  with  the  bowels  taken  out  of  them,  and 
the  very  life  and  meaning  torn  away.  There  are  members  and  ministers 
of  evangelical  denominations  who  do  not  believe  evangelical  doctrine, 
or  if  they  do  believe  it  they  attach  but  little  importance  to  it ;  their 
sermons  are  essays  on  philosophy,  tinged  with  the  gospel.  They  put  a 
quarter  cf  a  grain  of  gospel  into  an  Atlantic  of  talk,  and  poor  souls 
are  drenched  with  words  to  no  profit.  God  save  us  from  ever  leaving 
the  old  gospel,  or  losing  its  spirit,  and  the  solid  comfort  which  it- 
brings  ;  yet  into  the  ditch  of  lifeless  profession  and  philosophic  dreaming 
we  may  soon  fall  if  we  commit  ourselves  to  wrong  leaderships.  All 
this  should  prevent  us,  as  I  think,  from  taking  any  man  whatever  as 
our  leader,  for  if  we  triiet  to  any  mere  man,  though  he  may  be  right  in 
ninety-nine  of  the  hundred,  he  is  wrong  somewhere,  and  our  tendency 
will  be  to  be  more  influenced  by  his  one  wrong  point  than  by  any  one 
12 


450  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  his  right  ones.  Depend  upon  it  in  matters  of  religion  that  ancient 
malediction  is  abundantly  verified,  "  Cursed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  man 
and  maketh  flesh  his  arm."  There  is  one  whom  you  may  follow  im 
plicitly,  and  one  only.  There  is  one  whom  you  may  trust  without 
reserve,  and  only  one, — the  man  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  :  but  if 
you  do  not  wish  to  be  led  into  errors  of  heart  and  practice,  beware  of 
men,  and  follow  none  but  Jesus,  and  no  footsteps  but  the  footsteps  of 
that  flock  which  follows  at  his  heel.  You  will  do  best  not  even  to 
follow  the  sheep,  but  to  follow  the  Shepherd  only,  and  to  do  that  even 
if  you  walk  alone.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  be  given  you  to  lead  you  into 
all  truth.  Thus  much  upon  the  great  principle  ;  let  it  act  as  a  warning. 

II.    ITS    SPECIAL. APPLICATION  TO   OUR    LORD    JESUS    CHRIST  is  GUI' 

encouragement.  If  we  have  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  leader  we 
certainly  cannot  go  beyond  our  leader,  but  we  shall  be  privileged  to 
grow  more  and  more  like  him,  and  we  shall  be  perfected  according  to 
our  text,  as  our  leader  is. 

First,  this  is  what  we  might  have  expected.  We  see  ordinarily,  as  we 
have  said,  that  the  disciple  grows  like  his  Master,  but  with  such  a 
Master  the  process  becomes  more  sure.  With  such  a  Master,  of  whom 
these  lips  cannot  speak  well  enough,  a  Master  the  hatchets  of  whose 
shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  unloose,  it  may  well  come  to  pass  that  we  are 
melted  down  with  love  and  poured  out  into  the  mould  of  obedience. 
He  is  the  Creator,  can  he  not  create  in  us  his  image  ?  From  such  an 
one  as  he  is  we  confidently  expect  it. 

For,  observe,  the  teaching  itself  is  such  that  it  must  have  power  ovei 
hearts  that  yield  to  it.  His  doctrine  is  almighty  love  ;  all  his  teaching- 
is  divine,  and  yet  so  broken  down  to  human  capacity  that  it  exactly 
suits  the  man  who  has  taken  the  yoke  of  Christ  upon  him,  and  deter- 
niinded  to  learn  of  him.  Other  masters  teach  us  crooked  and  doubtful 
lessons,  and  when  learned  too  often  the  best  wisdom  is  to  unlearn  them  ; 
but  with  our  Lord  the  teaching  is  most  sure,  most  heavenly,  rnoso  potent, 
and  we  feel  within  ourselves  that  it  is  so  true,  so  noble,  so  grand,  that 
it  comes  to  us  with  authority,  and  not  as  the  word  of  man. 

If  I  knew  only  what  Jesus  teaches  I  should  conclude  that  a  teacher 
who  gives  forth  such  doctrines  and  such  precepts  must  influence  his 
disciples;  but  it  is  not  in  his  teaching  alone  that  his  influence  lies;  the 
most  potent  charm  is  himself.  When  he  spake  here  below  they  said, 
'*  Never  man  spake  like  this  man,"  and  the  reason  was  because  "  never 
man  lived  like  this  man."  His  word  was  with  power,  but  then  he  him 
self  was  THE  WORD.  If  you  view  the  precepts  of  Christ  as  embodied 
in  his  life  they  glow  with  beauty  and  flash  with  power.  You  can  bear 
from  such  a  teacher  what  you  could  not  have  endured  from  anybody 
else,  for  his  character  gives  him  a  right  to  speak.  Many  of  his  pre 
cepts  would  have  seemed  perfectly  preposterous  had  they  first  fallen 
from  the  lips  of  fallible  men,  for  their  hearers  would  have  cried  out, 
"  Physician,  heal  thyself."  Coming  from  him  they  come  naturally  as 
good  fruit  from  a  good  tree;  they  are  the  necessary  outgushings  of  such 
a  nature  and  such  a  life.  Who  can  help  being  persuaded  when  the 
arguments  live  before  our  eyes  ?  We  are  overpowered  by  the  grandeur 
of  the  Redeemer's  goodness,  by  the  splendour  of  his  love,  the  infinity  of 
his  self-sacrifice.  Jesus  commands  our  faith  by  the  revelation  of 


THE   CHOICE   OF   A   LEADER.  451 

himself,  and  by  that  same  manifestation  he  conforms  us  to  himself.  Was 
ever  such  a  life  as  his  ?  Was  ever  such  a  death  ?  Was  ever  such  an 
altogether  lovely  person  as  his  ?  Was  ever  such  perfection  as  his  ?  In 
life  he  was  so  outspoken  and  yet  so  gentle,  so  courageous  and  yet  so 
kind,  so  unflinching  and  yet  so  tender,  wearing  his  heart  upon  his 
sleeve  in  the  transparency  of  truth,  but  prudent  and  guarding  himself 
with  infallible  wisdom  ;  a  match  for  all,  however  they  might  assail  him, 
and  yet  apparently  never  on  his  guard  at  all,  but  as  a  child  among 
them,  the  holy  child  Jesus.  Oh,  if  you  sit  at  Jesus'  feet  you  will 
not  only  learn  of  him  and  his  teaching  will  have  power  over  you, 
but  you  will  learn  him,  for  he  himself  is  his  own  best  lesson.  Never 
did  eyes  look  up  into  those  dear  eyes  of  Jesus,  which  are  "  as  the 
eyes  of  doves  by  the  rivers  of  water,  washed  with  milk  and  fitly 
set,"  but  they  were  themselves  cleansed  and  purified  till  they  became 
41  like  the  fishpools  in  Heshbon,  by  the  gate  of  Beth-rabbim."  Who 
could  bear  the  Lord  Jesus  on  his  heart,  like  a  cluster  of  myrrh,  and 
not  be  perfumed  by  his  presence  ?  Who  could  be  with  him  and  not 
be  like  him  ? 

We  feel  quite  sure  that  the  disciples  will  grow  like  their  Master  in  the 
case  of  Jesus,  because  he  inspires  them  with  an  intense  love  to  himself, 
which  flames  forth  in  enthusiasm  for  him.  Get  a  teacher  whom  all  the 
scholars  love  and  admire,  and  they  will  soon  learn.  Make  them 
enthusiastic  for  him,  and  no  lesson  will  be  too  hard.  This  our  dear 
and  blessed  Lord,  of  whom  these  lips  cannot  speak  as  they  should,  has 
done.  We  admire,  we  love,  nay,  we  adore  him  :  he  is  our  God,  our  all 
in  all,  and  hence  we  pant  to  be  moulded  at  his  will.  Live  for  him  ? 
Yes,  we  find  it  to  be  our  joy,  for  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us. 
Die  for  him  ?  Ay,  his  saints  in  all  ages  have  rejoiced  to  lay  down 
their  lives  for  him.  Full  of  fervour,  and  fired  with  enthusiasm,  they 
have  suffered  losses  and  reproaches  for  his  name's  sake.  If  the  teacher 
inspires  such  enthusiasm,  doubtless  he  will  fashion  the  disciples  in  his 
likeness. 

Best  of  all,  our  Great  Teacher  has  a  spirit  with  him,  a  mighty  Spirit, 
God  himself,  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  when  he  teaches,  he  teaches  not  with 
words  alone,  but  with  a  power  which  goes  beyond  the  ear  into  the  heart 
itself.  Other  teachers,  except  as  they  follow  Christ,  must  depend  upon 
the  charms  of  eloquence,  or  the  force  of  argument,  but  our  Lord,  though 
most  eloquent  of  all,  for  his  lips  are  like  lilies  dropping  sweet-smelling 
myrrh,  though  full  of  arguments,  for  his  is  the  wjsdorn  of  God,  relies 
upon  the  energy  which  he  felt  when  he  said,  "  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  me,  for  the  Lord  hath  anointed  me."  The  divine  Spirit 
casts  a  light  into  the  soul,  of  such  a  brilliance  that  things  not  seen 
stand  out  in  clearest  evidence,  and  things  hoped  for  are  grasped  in  their 
very  substance.  With  that  light  there  comes  also  life  to  feel,  power  to 
realise,  and  discernment  to  judge,  and  so  the  soul  is  led  into  all  truth, 
and  the  scholar  receives  the  lessons  of  his  lord  in  their  life  and  energy. 
Who  else  can  give  this  Spirit  ?  By  what  other  teacher  can  the  Holy 
Ghost  be  breathed  into  us  ?  Who  would  not  sit  at  the  feet  of  a  Master 
so  transcendently  above  all  others  in  possessing  such  an  infinite  gift  ? 
I  would  to  God  while  I  am  speaking  thus,  that  some  here  present  would 
•ay,  "  Fain  would  I  commit  myself  to  that  great  teacher."  Remember. 


452  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

beloved,  if  you  want  him  to  be  your  Master,  he  equally  longs  for  you 
to  be  his  disciple. 

I  think  I  have  now  shown  that  it  was  to  be  expected  that  with  such 
a  Master  the  disciple  should  become  like  him.  Now  let  me  observe 
that  this  was  virtually  promised.  It  is  promised  to  us  in  effect  in  the 
great  decree  of  predestination,  "for  whom  he  did  foreknow  he  also  did 
predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son."  This  is  the 
great  purpose  of  God,  that  Christ  may  be  the  first-born  among  many 
brethren,  and  that  the  brethren  may  be  a  company  in  whose  faces  the 
Lord  shall  discern  the  image  of  the  Only  Begotten.  What  God  pre 
destinates  we  may  confidently  expect. 

It  is  promised  to  us  in  the  very  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  that  name 
is  Jesus,  "  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  But  saving 
men  from  their  sins  is  the  bringing  of  them  back  into  a  condition  of 
purity  and  holiness.  This,  indeed,  is  the  salvation  which  we  preach, 
not  the  mere  forgiveness  of  sin,  as  some  think,  but  the  conquering  of 
sin,  the  driving  out  of  sin,  the  making  of  men  like  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  very  name  of  Jesus  tells  us  that  he  means 
to  make  his  disciples  free  from  sin  as  he  is. 

We  know  also  that  this  was  our  Lord's  object,  for  the  design  of 
Christ's  life  is  clearly  seen  in  his  last  prayer  when  he  prayed,  "  Sanctify 
them  through  thy  truth  ;  thy  word  is  truth.  And  for  their  sakes  I 
sanctify  myself,  that  they  also  might  be  sanctified  through  thejbruth." 
You  can  see  that  his  one  object  is  to  make  his  people  holy,  as  he  is 
holy,  to  keep  them  from  evil  even  as  he  was  kept,  and  to  make 
them  conquerors  over  sin  even  as  he  conquered.  All  his  life  long  he 
laboured  at  this  with  the  twelve  and  with  others  who  followed  with 
him,  and  his  last  prayer  breathes  this,  "  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest 
take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from 
the  evil."  Everywhere  this  is  seen  to  be  true.  The  relationships 
which  he  assumes  suppose  it,  for  brethren  are  like  their  brother,  and 
friends  are  like  their  friend.  The  metaphors  which  he  uses  imply  the 
same  thing,  for  the  ingrafted  branch  drinks  in  the  nature  of  the  stem, 
the  spouse  grows  like  her  husband,  and  the  members  of  the  body  are  of 
the  same  nature  as  the  head.  The  mystical  Christ  it  not  like  the 
image  of  the  Babylonian  monarch's  dream  with  head  of  gold  and  feet  oi 
clay,  but  Christ  is  one  throughout,  the  grace  which  dwells  in  the  head, 
transforming  the  whole  body.  It  is  our  delightful  expectation  that 
"we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,"  and  then  shall  we 
be  satisfied,  for  we  shall  wake  up  in  his  likeness. 

Well,  brethren,  what  we  might  have  expected,  and  what  God  has 
thus  virtually  promised,  has  been  actually  seen,  for  the  disciples  have 
been  like  their  Lord,  and  this  is  where  I  want  to  lay  the  most  stress. 
Have  not  the  disciples  been  like  their  Lord  in  points  of  character  ?  It 
would  be  very  absurd  for  me  to  say  that  the  Old  Testament  saints  were 
disciples  of  Christ  in  a  literal  sense,  and  yet  in  spirit  they  all  were  so, 
for  the  gospel  is  the  same  in  all  ages,  and  it  is  the  same  light  which 
lighteneth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world.  The  inner  teaching 
of  the  Spirit  was  the  same  to  Abel  and  to  Noah  as  it  was  to  John  and 
Paul,  and  while  apostles  looked  back  to  Jesus  and  were  enlightened, 
patriarchs  looked  forward  and  had  light  too.  Now  each  of  the  saints 


THK   CHOICE    OF   A    LEADER.  453 

in  the  olden  time  had  some  likeness  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Think 
uf  a  few  of  them,  and  you  will  see  some  of  his  beauties.  Abel  reveals 
his  righteousness,  and  Enoch  his  walking  with  God.  Job  shows  his 
patience,  and  Abraham  his  faith  ;  Moses  his  meekness,  and  Samuel  his 
power  of  intercession.  Daniel  is  like  him  in  his  integrity,  and  Jere 
miah  in  his  weeping.  Like  drops  of  morning  dew,  all  these  reflected 
the  light  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  In  the  New  Testament  we  see 
the  transforming  power  of  his  teaching  in  many  instances.  Peter  and 
John  were  like  their  Master,  for  we  read  that  when  their  enemies  "  saw 
the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John,  and  perceived  that  they  were  unlearned 
and  ignorant  men,  they  took  knowledge  of  them  that  they  had  been 
with  Jesus."  The  likeness  was  so  striking  that  they  were  obliged  to 
confess  it.  Take  John  alone,  for  a  minute,  and  who  can  read  his 
epistles  without  saying,  "  Even  thus  his  Master  spake  ?  "  John  was  far 
behind  his  Lord,  but  yet  how  marvellously  like  him  !  You  have 
smiled  at  your  children  sometimes  when  you  have  seen  your  own  ways 
repeated  in  them.  You  have  beheld  your  own  peculiarities  as  in  a 
looking-glass.  Almost  unconsciously  they  have  been  yourself  in 
miniature.  So  was  it  evidently  with  John.  If  it  be  true,  as  tradition 
fiaith,  that  he  was  carried  into  the  assembly  when  he  was  too  old  to 
walk,  and  was  wont  to  say  to  them,  "  Little  children,  love  one  another: 
little  children,  love  one  another,"  it  was  so  like  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
you  might  have  thought  the  Master  had  returned  to  earth.  As  for 
Paul,  in  many  aspects  he  is  the  counterpart  of  his  Lord,  and  as  I  read 
that  strange  passage  in  Romans  which  staggers  some,  where  he  says, 
"  I  could  wish  myself  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  according 
to  the  flesh,"  I  am  led  to  say,  "  Herein  he  resembles  that  Blessed  One 
who  was  actually  made  a  curse  for  us,  as  it  is  written,  cursed  is  every 
one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  Now,  all  the  saints  of  God,  more  or  less, 
according  as  they  have  fully  been  disciples  of  Jesus,  display  his  charac 
teristics.  I  cannot  stop  this  morning  to  tell  you  what  characteristics  I 
see  in  you  which  are  like  my  Lord ;  I  rejoice  that  I  do  know  brothers 
and  sisters  here  of  whom  I  have  often  said  to  myself,  "  I  can  see  their 
Master  in  them."  I  wish  I  could  say  so  of  all  of  you,  but  still  I  am 
glad  to  see  in  so  many  the  points  of  true  likeness  to  Jesus,  the  family 
characteristics  which  mark  all  the  children  of  God.  There  are  little 
touches  of  their  Father  in  all  the  heirs  of  salvation  which  make  us  feel 
that  they  belong  to  the  same  family  as  Jesus,  they  could  not  have 
learned  those  ways,  they  must  have  been  imparted  by  a  birth  from 
above. 

It  is  a  very  noteworthy  thing  that  those  who  are  disciples  of  Christ 
•even  become  like  him  as  to  their  life-story.  Going  back  to  the  old 
•saints  as  being  really  disciples  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Redeemer,  there 
is  Melchizedek  bringing  forth  bread  and  wine  to  refresh  Abraham — 
would  you  not  have  thought  it  was  Christ  himself?  There  is  Isaac 
gently  submitting  to  his  father  while  he  draws  the  knife  to  slay  him — 
tould  you  not  have  said  that  it  was  Jesus  ?  There  is  Joseph  making 
himself  known  to  his  brethren,  and  ruling  all  Egypt  for  their  good- 
might  we  not  have  thought  that  it  was  our  Lord  come  on  earth  before 
his  time  to  bless  his  chosen  ones  ?  Yonder  is  David  coming  back 
with  Goliath's  head,  while  all  the  maidens  of  Israel  rejoice  around 


454  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

him — could  you  nofc  have  thought  it  was  our  Lord  returning  from 
Edom  with  dyed  garments  from  Bosra  ?  The  saints  are  types  of  him 
because  they  are  of  the  same  type  as  he  is.  As  for  the  disciples  after 
Christ  came  you  will  often  find  them  in  positions  which  set  forth 
Jesus  Christ  most  evidently.  See  Stephen  boldly  declaring  the  gospel 
until  his  enemies  stone  him.  Have  you  not  read  of  his  Master  many 
times,  "  They  would  have  stoned  him,  but  he  conveyed  himself  out  of 
their  sight "  ?  Look  at  Paul  at  Lystra.  They  are  about  to  sacrifice 
to  him  :  it  makes  you  think  of  days  when  the  crowd  cried  "  Hosanna, 
Hosanna."  Lo,  the  apostle  rebukes  the  throng,  and  now  they  are 
stoning  him,  and  it  recalls  to  your  memory  the  time  when  the  crowd 
shouted,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him  ;  away  with  such  a  fellow  from 
the  earth."  Kead  the  story  of  Paul  in  the  shipwreck,  when  he  says 
to  the  captain  of  the  ship,  and  to  the  officer  of  the  troops,  "  Be  of 
good  cheer,  for  there  shall  be  no  loss  of  any  man's  life  among  you." 
You  might  almost  have  thought  it  was  the  Saviour  himself  saying 
to  the  winds  and  waves,  "  Peace,  be  still,"  there  was  so  much  of  his 
Master  in  him.  Indeed  Christ  is  in  all  his  members  ;  his  life  is  written 
out  again  in  their  lives.  Beloved,  I  could  mention  many  saints  of 
modern  times  in  whose  lives  we  may  see  Jesus.  That  poor  woman 
who  dropped  into  the  treasury  her  two  mites,  which  were  all  her 
living ;  is  she  not  very  like  to  him  who  gave  up  all  for  us,  and  became 
poor  that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be  rich.  Others  are  like  to 
the  woman  who  brake  the  alabaster  box  of  precious  ointment,  to  give 
their  best  things  to  her  Lord.  Do  they  not  remind  you  of  the  lover 
of  our  souls,  who  brake  the  precious  alabaster  box  of  his  body  and 
filled  all  earth  and  heaven  with  the  perfume  ?  Everyone  who  gives  up 
self  for  God's  glory  is  Jesus  in  miniature.  Look  at  John  Howard 
going  about  among  the  dungeons  of  Europe,  spying  out  poor  prisoners 
to  do  them  good.  Is  not  that  Christ  over  again,  with  glad  tidings  for 
the  captives  ?  Or  John  Williams  landing  at  Erromanga,  with  his  life 
in  his  hand,  to  convert  cannibals;  was  not  that  laying  down  his  life  for 
the  sheep  ?  Now,  dear  friend,  do  you  think  if  we  had  your  life  before 
us  we  could  make  out  anything  like  Jesus  Christ  in  it  ?  If  you  are 
his  disciple  it  will  be  so.  There  will  be  in  your  biography  as  your 
children  will  read  it — for  they  will  read  it  better  than  anybody  else — 
as  your  wife  will  read  it,  as  those  you  work  with  will  read  it,  some 
thing  which  looks  as  if  it  were  extracted  from  the  life  of  Jesus. 
Students  in  Christ's  college  must  be  like  their  Tutor,  and  they  are. 
I  dare  say  the  brother  is  present  here  of  whom  I  am  about  to  speak, 
and  if  so  he  will  be  sorry  to  hear  me  tell  the  story,  and  would  stop 
my  mouth  if  he  could  ;  I  will,  however,  make  bold  to  go  on.  I  know 
a  house  painter  who  was  working  with  other  men  over  the  top  of  the 
Great  Northern  Kail  way,  at  a  great  height.  One  of  his  fellow  work 
men  had  been  drinking  very  heavily,  and  was  unsteady  on  the  lofty 
scaffold.  He  said  to  himself,  "  That  man  will  never  get  down  alive," 
and  rather  than  he  should  perish  he  actually  offered  to  carry  him 
down  on  his  back.  I  believe  it  would  have  been  death  to  them  both 
if  the  attempt  had  been  made,  but  he  cheerfully  offered.  He  said, 
"  My  soul  is  safe  ;  I  am  a  Christian  ;  I  am  afraid  you  will  be  killed, 
and  if  you  are  your  soul  will  be  lost.  I  will  carry  you  down  if  you 


THK  CHOICE  OF  A  LEADER.  455 

will  only  keep  quiet."  The  man  rejected  the  kind  offer,  though  per 
suaded  again  and  again,  and  alas,  in  trying  to  descend  he  fell  into  the 
middle  of  the  railway,  from  a  dreadful  height,  and  was  taken  up  dead. 
When  I  heard  of  my  good  brother,  a  humble  member  of  the  church 
doing  that,  I  thought,  "  There  is  our  Master,  revealed  in  his  disciple." 
Our  life  is  a  painting,  and  if  we  are  in  Christ's  studio  there  will  be 
traces  of  his  hand,  and  men  will  exclaim  that  was  no  common  painter; 
that  stroke,  that  line,  is  just  the  line  that  the  great  Master  used  to 
make  ;  I  am  sure  he  has  put  in  those  touches."  0  brethren,  we  need 
none  of  us  wish  to  be  originals  ;  let  us  piagarise  Christ,  and  that  will 
be  the  grandest  originality.  God  help  us  in  this. 

Now  I  was  going  to  say,  but  time  has  fled,  that  Christ's  disciples 
grow  like  him  in  their  struggles  and  in  their  temptations.  They  are 
met  by  Satan  as  Christ  was,  they  are  tried  by  the  world  as  Christ  was, 
they  are  assailed  by  Sadducean  unbelief  and  Pharisaic  superstition  as 
Christ  was,  they  have  to  go  through  the  same  fight,  and,  blessed  be  God, 
they  win  the  same  victories.  Christ's  disciples  overcome  sin  ;  by  their 
Master's  help  they  rise  above  doubt,  they  vanquish  the  world,  and  they 
stand  in  purity  and  faith.  By-and-by  they  shall  be  like  him  in  their 
rewards.  "  To  him  that  overcometh,"  saith  he,  u  will  I  give  to  sit  upon 
my  throne,  even  as  I  have  overcome  and  have  sat  down  with  my  Father 
upon  his  throne." 

It  is  a  beautiful  subject,  if  I  had  the  power  to  work  it  out,  the  way 
in  which  the  disciple  of  Jesus  thus  by  sure  steps  becomes  perfected 
into  the  image  of  Christ,  till  the  likeness  is  so  near  and  so  close  that 
even  the  blear  eyes  of  this  wicked  world  in  the  dim  atmosphere  of  its 
ignorance  cannot  help  seeing  that  the  man  is  like  the  Master. 

III.  Now,  lastly,  we  will  dwell  for  two  or  three  minutes  upon  this 
encouraging  fact,  that  WE  MAY  PUT  ALL  THIS  TO  THE  TEST  this 
morning  if  we  will.  Brethren  and  sisters,  if  you  are  not  disciples  of 
Jesus  Christ,  remember  he  will  receive  you.  He  will  receive  you 
though  you  have  been  to  other  masters,  and  learned  a  great  deal  under 
them,  all  of  which  you  will  have  to  unlearn.  It  is  a  very  easy  thing 
to  take  a  man  and  teach  him  if  his  mind  is  clear  and  clean,  but  you 
have  learned  a  great  deal  that  you  will  have  to  forget.  0  you  of  forty, 
fifty,  or  sixty,  what  a  world  of  mischief  there  is  in  you  that  will  have 
to  come  out.  Well,  my  Master  will  take  you  for  pupils,  though  you 
have  been  with  other  masters  all  this  while ;  and,  though  you  do  not 
know  even  the  rudiments  of  what  he  is  going  to  teach,  he  will  take 
you.  My  Lord  Jesus  keeps  an  A  B  C  school ;  he  begins  with  the 
infants.  What  a  mercy  it  is  that  he  takes  such  poor,  stupid  heads  as 
ours,  who  know  nothing  except  what  we  ought  not  to  know.  And  I 
will  add,  if  you  have  but  very  little  capacity,  or  none  at  all,  it  does  not 
matter. 

"  He  takes  the  fool,  and  makes  him  know 
The  wonders  of  his  dying  love." 

Not  many  great  men,  not  many  mighty  are  chosen;  but  God  has  chosen 
the  poor  of  this  world,  and  things  that  are  not,  and  things  that  are  despised, 
yea,  and  weak  things  and  foolish  things,  has  God  chosen.  Come  to  him, 
for  if  you  are  incapable,  he  is  not,  and  his  capacity  will  soon  overcome 
your  incapacity.  You  say,  "  I  cannot  learn."  Ah,  but  you  do  not  know 


4:56  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

how  well  he  can  teach,  for  he  can  teach  so  well  that  even  those  who 
think  they  cannot  learn  are  soon  instructed  in  his  school.  Stand  not 
back,  dear  friend,  because  you  cannot  pay  the  fee,  for  iny  Master's  is  a 
free  school ;  he  takes  nothing  from  us,  but  he  gives  everything  to  us. 
The  only  admission  ticket  that  you  want  is  simply  to  be  willing  to  be 
taught,  to  be  conscious  that  you  need  teaching  and  guiding,  and  to 
submit  yourself  to  his  guidance  and  instruction.  Are  you  willing  so 
to  do?  "  Oh,"  say  you,  " I  shall  grieve  him  till  he  gives  me  up." 
Well,  I  have  often  thought  so.  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  are  troubled 
with  that  thought ;  it  has  often  come  across  me  when  I  see  what  little 
progress  I  have  made  after  being  so  many  years  in  his  school.  If  I 
had  any  human  master  he  would  have  been  out  of  patience  with  me 
long  ago,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  never  gives  up  a  scholar ;  having 
once  commenced  to  teach,  he  continues  his  divine  lessons  till  they  are 
fully  learned,  and  the  more  difficult  it  is  for  him  to  teach  the  more 
honour  it  will  be  when  he  gets  all  his  scholars  educated  for  the  skies. 
He  will  not  brook  a  defeat  in  this  matter  ;  he  will  overcome  ignorance, 
and  sin,  and  hardness  of  heart,  and  infirmity,  and  incapacity,  till  he 
shall  have  instructed  us  in  the  lore  of  heaven,  and  made  us  meet  to  be 
partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  Come,  dear 
brethren  and  sisters,  you  that  are  scholars  of  Christ,  let  us  sit  at  his 
feet,  let  us  follow  in  his  ways  more  closely  than  ever.  And  you,  dear 
friends,  who  as  yet  are  not  in  his  school,  he  says  to  you,  "  Whoso  is 
simple  let  him  turn  in  hither  ;  as  for  him  that  wanteth  understanding  let 
him  eat  of  my  bread  and  drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  mingled."  May 
the  good  Lord  incline  your  hearts  to  learn  of  him,  for  Christ's  sake. 
Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  vi.  20 — 40. 


HYMNS  FROM  "OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK" — 852,262,705. 


JJlrtropItot  (ftabtrmirie  fjulgit. 


BANKRUPT   DEBTORS   DISCHARGED. 


e  r  in  o  i| 

DELIVERED   ON    LORD'S-DAY   MORNING,  SEPTEMBER  16TH,  ISs.'i,   BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON. 

AT   THE    MKTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINQTON. 


"  And  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly  forgave  them  both."— Luke  vii.  42. 

THE  two  debtors  differed  very  considerably  in  the  amounts  which  they 
owed :  the  one  was  in  arrears  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  other  fifty. 
There  are  differences  in  the  guilt  of  sins,  and  in  the  degrees  of  men's 
criminality.  It  would  be  a  very  unfair  and  unrighteous  thing  to  say  that 
all  men  are  exactly  alike  in  the  extent  of  their  transgression.  Some  are 
honest  and  upright,  kind  and  generous,  even  though  they  be  but  natural 
men :  while  others  appear  to  be  of  a  malicious,  envious,  selfish 
disposition,  and  rush  into  evil,  sinning,  as  it  were,  with  both  hands 
greedily.  The  man  who  is  moral,  sober,  and  industrious  is  only  a  fifty 
pence  debtor  as  compared  with  the  vicious,  drunken  blasphemer  whose 
debt  is  written  at  five  hundred  pence.  Our  Saviour  recognizes  the 
distinction,  because  it  exists  and  cannot  justly  be  overlooked.  There 
are  distinctions  among  unconverted  men,  very  great  distinctions.  One 
of  them,  a  young  man,  came  to  Jesus,  and  he  had  so  many  fine  traits  in 
his  character  that  the  Lord  looking  upon  him  loved  him;  whereas  when 
t.he  Pharisees  gathered  about  him  our  Lord  looked  round  upon  them 
with  indignation.  The  soil,  which  was  none  of  it  yet  sown  with  the 
good  seed,  yet  varied  greatly,  and  some  of  it  was  honest  and  good 
ground  before  the  sower  came  to  it.  Sinners  differ  from  each  other. 

But  I  call  your  particular  notice  to  this  fact — that  though  there  was 
one  point  of  difference  in  the  two  debtors,  there  were  three  points  of 
similarity  ;  for  they  were  both  debtors  :  and  so  ail  men  have  sinned,  be 
it  little  or  be  it  much:  and,  secondly,  they  were  both  alike  bankrupt, 
neither  of  them  could  meet  his  debt;  the  man  who  owed  fifty  pence 
could  no  more  pay  than  he  who  owed  five  hundred  pence,  so  that  they 
were  both  insolvent  debtors.  But  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  they  were 
alike  in  a  third  point !  for  "  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay,"  their  creditor 
*•  frankly  forgave  them  both." 

Oh,  my  dear  hearers,  we  are  all  alike  in  the  first  two  things !     Oh 

that  we  might  be  all  of  us  alike  in  this  last  point,  that  the  Lord  our  God 

may  grant  to  every  one  of  us  the  free  remission  of  sins  according  to  the 

riches  of  his  grace  through  Christ  .Jesus!     Why  should  it  uut  lx>  *o, 

No.  1,739  17 


494  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

since  Jesus  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  ? 
There  is  forgiveness  with  God.  He  delighteth  in  mercy.  He  can  cast  all 
our  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  that  they  may  not  be  mentioned 
against  us  any  more  for  ever.  While  we  are  compelled  to  go  together 
two-thirds  of  the  road,  what  a  pity  it  would  be  that  we  should  be 
divided  in  the  third  portion  of  it !  That  first  two-thirds  of  the  road  is 
a  very  muddy,  boggy  piece  of  way,  and  we  sorrowfully  wade  along  it  in 
company, — all  in  debt  and  all  of  us  unable  to  pay ;  but  that  next  part 
of  the  road  is  well-made,  smooth,  and  good  for  travellers,  and  it  leads 
into  the  gardens  of  felicity.  Oh  that  we  may  traverse  it,  and  find  the  free 
pardon  of  God !  Oh  for  free  remission  for  all  of  us  without  exception  I 
Why  not  ?  God  send  it  of  his  great  mercy  at  this  good  hour !  To  that 
end  I  wish  to  speak  with  you,  dear  friends  ;  for  I  believe  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  somewhat  to  say  unto  you,  and  I  pray  that  your  hearts  may 
be  open  to  him,  crying  gladly,  "  Master,  say  on ! " 

Our  first  point  for  consideration  is,  their  bankruptcy — "  they  had  nothing 
to  pay"  ;  the  second  is,  their  free  discharge — "he  frankly  forgave  them 
both"  ;  and  the  third  is,  the  connection  between  these  two  things:  for  that 
little  word  "when"  marks  the  connection — "when  they  had  nothing  to 
pay,  he  frankly  forgave  them  both." 

I.  First,  let  us  think  of  THEIR  BANKRUPTCY.  This  was  their  con 
dition.  They  were  unquestionably  in  debt.  If  they  could  have  dis 
puted  the  creditor's  claim,  no  doubt  they  would  have  done  so.  If  they 
could  have  pleaded  that  they  were  never  indebted,  or  that  they  had 
already  paid,  no  doubt  they  would  have  been  glad  to  have  done  so ;  but 
they  could  not  raise  a  question;  their  debt  could  not  be  denied. 
Another  fact  was  also  clear  to  them,  namely,  that  they  had  nothing  to  pay 
with.  No  doubt  they  had  made  diligent  search ;  they  had  turned  out 
their  pockets,  their  cash-boxes,  and  their  lockers,  and  they  had  found 
nothing;  they  had  looked  for  their  household  goods,  but  these  had 
vanished  piece  by  piece.  They  had  nothing  at  home  or  abroad  that 
they  could  dispose  of.  Things  had  come  to  such  a  pass  with  them  that 
they  had  neither  stock  nor  money,  nor  anything  in  prospect  which  they 
could  draw  upon :  they  were  brought  to  the  last  extremity,  reduced  to 
absolute  beggary.  Meanwhile,  their  great  creditor  was  pressing  them 
for  settlement.  That  idea  lies  in  the  heart  of  the  text.  The  creditor 
had  evidently  brought  his  over-due  accounts,  and  had  said  to  them, 
"  These  claims  must  be  met.  There  must  be  an  end  to  this  state  of 
affairs;  your  accounts  mast  be  discharged."  They  were  just  brought 
to  this  condition — they  must  confess  the  debt,  and  they  must  also 
humbly  acknowledge  that  they  had  nothing  to  meet  it  with  :  the  time 
for  payment  had  come,  and  it  found  them  without  a  penny.  No  condition 
could  be  much  more  wretched. 

So  far  I  have  stated  the  parable,  and  it  most  truly  sets  forth  the 
condition  of  every  man  who  has  not  come  to  Jesus  Onrist  and  so  received 
the  frank  forgiveness  of  his  sins.  Upon  this  we  will  enlarge.  We  are 
all  by  nature  and  by  practice  plunged  in  debt,  and  this  is  the  way  in 
which  we  came  to  be  so.  Hear  it  and  mark  it  well.  As  God's  creatures 
we  from  the  very  first  owed  to  him  the  debt  of  obedience.  We  were 
bound  to  obey  our  Maker.  It  is  he  that  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves ; 
and  we  we.re.  therefore,  bound  reverently  to  recognize  our  Creator, 


BANKRUPT    DEBTORS   DISCHARGED.  495 

affect  ion  ately  to  worship  him,  tmd  dutifully  to  serve  him.  This  is  an 
obligation  so  natural  and  reasonable  that  nobody  can  dispute  it.  If 
you  are  the  creatures  of  God,  it  is  nothing  more  than  right  that  you 
should  honour  him.  If  you  receive  daily  the  breath  in  your  nostrils 
and  the  food  that  you  eat  from  him,  then  you  are  bound  to  him  by  the 
ties  of  gratitude,  and  should  do  his  will. 

But,  dear  friends,  we  have  not  done  his  will.  We  have  left  undone 
the  things  we  ought  to  have  done,  and  we  have  done  the  things  we 
ought  not  to  have  done,  and  so  we  have  come  in  a  second  sense  into  his- 
debt.  We  now  stand  liable  to  penalty,  yea,  we  are  condemned  already. 
There  is  due  from  us  to  God,  in  vindication  of  his  broken  law,  both 
suffering  and  death  ;  and  in  the  word  of  God  we  find  that  the  righteous 
penalty  for  sin  is  something  utterly  overwhelming.  "  Fear  him,"  saith 
Christ,  "which  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell."  Yea,  I  say 
unto  you,  fear  him !  Very  terrible  are  the  metaphors  and  symbols  by 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  sets  forth  the  misery  of  a  soul  upon  which  the  Lord 
pours  forth  his  fiery  indignation.  The  pain  of  loss  and  pain  of  woe  which 
sin  at  last  brings  upon  guilty  men  are  inconceivable :  they  are  called  "  the 
terrors  of  the  Lord."  There  is  not  one  among  us,  apart  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  but  what  owes  to  God's  law  a  debt  which  eternity  cannot 
fully  meet,  even  though  it  be  crowded  with  agonizing  regrets.  A  life 
of  forgetfulness  of  God  and  breaking  of  his  law  must  be  recompensed 
by  a  future  life  of  punishment.  That  is  where  we  stand :  can  any  man 
be  at  rest  while  this  is  his  condition  before  God  ?  We  are  debtors :  the 
debt  is  overwhelming ;  it  brings  with  it  consequences  tremendous  to  the 
last  degree. 

And  we  are  utterly  unable  to  make  any  amends  for  this.  If  he 
should  meet  with  us  and  call  us  to  account  we  cannot  answer  him  one 
of  a  thousand.  We  cannot  excuse  ourselves,  and  we  cannot  by  any  pos 
sibility  render  to  him  his  righteous  due.  If  any  think  they  can,  let  me 
remind  them  of  this,  that  to  cancel  the  debt  which  we  owe  to  God  we 
must  pay  it  all.  God  demands,  righteously  demands,  from  us  thfr 
keeping  of  his  entire  law.  He  tells  us  that  he  that  is  guilty  in  one- 
point  is  guilty  of  all :  for  God's  law  is  like  a  fair  vase  of  alabaster, 
lovely  in  its  entireness ;  but  if  it  be  chipped  in  any  part,  it  may  not 
be  presented  in  his  court;  the  least  flaw  in  it  mars  its  perfection  and 
destroys  its  value.  A  perfect  obedience  to  a  perfect  law  is  that  which 
is  required  by  the  justice  of  the  Most  High ;  and  is  there  any  one  of  us 
who  can  render  it,  or  who  can  attempt  to  pay  the  penalty  due  for  not 
rendering  it  ?  Our  inability  to  obey  comes  of  our  own  fault,  and  i» 
part  of  our  crime.  Ah  me !  may  none  of  us  ever  have  to  bear  the 
penalty !  To  be  banished  from  his  presence,  and  from  tho  glory  of  his 
power !  to  be  cast  away  from  all  hope  and  light  and  joy  for  ever !  Why,, 
there  are  those  at  this  moment  in  the  abyss  of  woe  who  have  for  thou« 
sands  of  years  endured  the  heavy  hand  of  justice,  and  yet  their  debt 
remains  undischarged  even  now ;  for  they  have  yet  to  appear  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ  at  the  last  day  and  answer  for  their  trans 
gressions.  It  is  certain  that  to  meet  the  whole  payment  is  impossible; 
neither  in  the  form  of  obedience,  nor  in  the  form  of  penalty,  may  we  ever 
hope  to  meet  it — it  would  be  all  in  vain  to  make  the  attempt. 

Remember,  too,  that  if  there  is  anything  that  we  can  do  for  God  ID 


496  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

the  way  of  obedience  it  is  already  due  to  him.  All  that  T  can  do  if  I 
love  God  with  all  my  heart  and  soul  and  strength,  and  my  neighbour  as 
myself,  throughout  the  rest  of  my  life,  is  already  due  to  God :  I  shall 
but  be  discharging  new  duties  as  they  occur — how  will  this  affect  old 
disobediences?  In  what  way  can  I  cleanse  myself  from  my  former 
stains  by  the  resolve  that  I  will  not  be  defiled  with  fresh  ones  ?  If 
your  hand  be  blood  red  can  you  make  it  clean  by  the  mere  resolution 
that  you  will  not  plunge  it  again  into  the  dye  ?  You  know  it  is  not 
so :  past  sin  cannot  be  removed  by  future  carefulness. 
"  Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow, 

Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 

All  for  sin  could  not  atone  ; 

Christ  must  save,  and  Christ  alone." 

We  have  nothing  with  which  to  meet  our  liabilities  because  everything 
that  we  can  possibly  earn  or  obtain  in  the  future  is  already  due  to  justice, 
and  so  we  have  nothing  left  unmortgaged,  nothing  of  our  own. 

Moreover,  the  debt  is  immense  and  incalculable !  Fifty  pence  is  but 
a  poor  representation  of  what  the  most  righteous  person  owes ;  five 
hundred  pence  is  but  an  insignificant  sum  compared  with  the  trans 
gressions  of  the  greater  offenders.  Oh,  friends,  when  I  think  of  my  life 
it  seems  to  be  like  the  sea,  made  up  of  innumerable  waves  of  sin ;  or 
like  the  sea-shore,  constituted  of  sands,  that  cannot  be  weighed  nor 
counted.  My  faults  are  utterly  innumerable,  and  each  one  deserving 
death  eternal.  Our  sins,  our  heavy  sins,  sins  against  light  and  know 
ledge,  our  foul  sins,  our  repeated  sins,  our  aggravated  sins,  our  sins 
against  our  parents,  our  sins  against  all  our  relationships,  our  sins 
against  our  God,  our  sins  with  the  body,  our  sins  with  the  mind,  our 
sins  of  forgetfulness,  our  sins  of  thought,  our  sins  of  imagination — who 
can  reckon  them  up  in  order  unto  God  ?  Who  knoweth  the  number  of 
his  trespasses  ?  Now,  to  think  that  we  can  ever  meet  such  a  debt  is 
indeed  to  bolster  up  ourselves  with  a  notion  thac  is  utterly  absurd : — we 
have  nothing  to  pay. 

Moreover,  I  go  a  little  further.  Even  if  these  sins  were  somewhat 
within  compass,  and  if  we  were  not  indebted  for  the  future  as  to  all  we 
even  can  do,  yet  what  is  there  that  we  can  do  ?  Does  not  Paul  say  of 
himself  that  he  was  not  sufficient  to  think  anything  of  himself  ?  Did 
not  the  Lord  tell  his  Israel  of  old,  "  From  me  is  thy  fruit  found  "  ? 
Did  not  Jesus  say  to  his  disciples  and  even  to  his  apostles,  "  Without 
me  ye  can  do  nothing "  ?  Then,  0  bankrupt  sinner,  what  is  there 
good  that  you  can  do  of  yourself  ?  You  must  first  of  all  get  the  good 
work  from  God  before  you  can  perform  it  yourself.  It  is  true  you  are 
to  "work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling";  but  what 
must  come  first  ?  Read  the  passage,  "  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in 
you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  If  the  Lord  does  not 
work  salvation  in  us,  we  cannot  work  it  out.  Every  good  thing  in  man 
is  the  work  of  God,  the  produce  of  the  Spirit  of  God  operating  upon 
the  heart  and  mind.  Men  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  dead  to  all 
that  is  holy  and  acceptable  with  God,  and  life  itself  is  a  gift.  What  then 
can  sinners  do  ?  Their  bankruptcy  is  utter  and  entire  ;  and  this  is  true  of 
every  man  that  is  still  out  of  Christ — he  is  a  debtor,  and  he  has  nothing 
to  pa/, 


BANKRUPT    DEBTORS    DISCHARGED. 

This  being  the  case,  I  want  to  spend  a  minute  in  noticing  certain 
temptations  to  which  all  bankrupt  sinners  are  much  subject.  One  of 
these  is  to  try  and  forget  their  spiritual  estate  altogether.  Some  of  you 
here  to-day  have  never  given  serious  thought  to  your  souls  and  to  your 
condition  before  God.  It  is  an  unpleasant  subject.  You  suspect  that 
it  would  be  still  more  unpleasant  if  you  looked  into  it.  You  want 
amusement,  something  to  while  away  the  time,  because  you  do  not  care 
to  examine  into  the  state  of  your  heart  before  God.  Solomon  exhorts 
the  diligent  man  to  know  the  state  of  his  flocks,  and  look  well  to  his 
herds ;  but  he  that  is  careless  and  idle  would  rather  leave  such  enquiries, 
and  let  things  go  as  they  please.  The  man  who  is  going  backward 
in  business  has  no  pleasure  in  stock-taking.  "  Oh,"  says  he,  "  don't 
bring  me  my  books  ;  I  shall  not  sleep  at  nights  if  I  look  into  them." 
He  knows  that  he  is  sinking  lower  and  lower,  and  will  soon  be  a  ruined 
man;  and  the  only  way  in  which  he  can  endure  his  life  is  to  drive 
dull  care  away  by  drink,  or  by  going  into  company,  or  idle  amusement. 
He  labours  to  beguile  the  hours  that  he  may  conceal  from  himself  his 
true  condition.  But  what  a  fool  he  is !  Would  it  not  be  infinitely 
wiser  if  he  would  look  the  thing  in  the  face  and  have  it  out,  and  know 
his  actual  state?  Such  ignorance  as  he  chooses  is  not  bliss  to  a  right- 
hearted  man,  but  suspense  and  misery.  I  have  often  prayed  this  prayer 
— "Lord,  let  me  know  the  very  worst  of  my  case,"  for  I  do  not  wish  to 
entertain  a  hope  that  will  at  last  deceive  me.  Disappointment  will  be 
bitter  in  proportion  as  false  hope  was  sweet.  This  is  the  temptation  of 
the  bankrupt  soul,  to  shut  its  eyes  to  unwelcome  truth.  The  ostrich  is 
fabled  when  hunted  to  bury  its  head  in  the  sand,  and  conceive  that  the 
huntsman  is  gone  when  he  is  no  longer  seen.  But  he  is  not  gone  :  the 
unseen  danger  is  quite  as  real  as  if  it  stared  us  in  the  face.  However 
forgetful  you  may  be,  God  does  not  forget  your  sins. 

Another  temptation  to  a  man  in  this  condition  is  to  make  as  good  a 
show  as  he  can.  A  man  who  is  very  near  bankruptcy  is  often  noticed 
fur  the  dash  he  cuts.  What  a  horse  he  drives  as  he  comes  up  to  busi 
ness  !  What  fashionable  parties  he  gives!  Just  so,  he  desires  to  keep 
up  his  credit  as  long  as  ever  he  can.  He  is  going  to  make  a  smash 
of  it  by-and-by,  but  for  a  season  he  assumes  the  airs  of  my  lord,  and 
everybody  near  him  imagines  that  he  has  money  enough  and  to  spare. 
The  governor  of  a  besieged  city  threw  loaves  of  bread  over  the  wall  to 
the  besiegers,  to  make  them  believe  that  the  citizens  had  such  large 
supplies  that  they  could  afford  to  throw  them  away;  yet  they  were  starv 
ing  all  the  while.  There  are  some  men  of  like  manners ;  they  have 
nothing  that  they  can  offer  unto  God,  but  yet  they  exhibit  a  glittering 
self-righteousness.  Oh,  they  have  been  so  good,  such  superior  people,  so 
praiseworthy  from  their  youth  up ;  they  never  did  anything  much  amiss ; 
there  may  be  a  little  speck  here  and  there  upon  their  garments,  but 
that  will  brush  off  when  it  is  dry.  They  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh 
with  morality  and  formality,  and  a  smattering  of  generosity.  Besides, 
they  profess  to  be  religious:  they  attend  divine  service,  and  pay  their 
quota  of  the  expenses.  Who  could  find  any  fault  with  such  good  people  ? 
Just  BO  ;  this  profession  is  the  fine  horse  and  trap  with  which  they  too 
are  cutting  a  dash  just  before  going  through  the  court.  There  ia 
nothing  at  all  in  you,  and  there  never  was,  il  you  are  as  nature  has  made 


498  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

you  ;  wherefore  then  do  you  try  to  brazen  it  out,  and  make  yourself  to 
seem  somewhat  when  you  are  nothing.  You  may  by  this  means  deceire 
yourself,  but  certainly  you  will  not  deceive  (rod. 

Another  temptation  which  lurks  in  the  way  of  a  bankrupt  sinner  is 
that  of  making  promises  of  what  he  will  do.  Men  in  debt  are  generally 
Tery  promising  men ;  they  will  pay  next  week  for  certain ;  but  when  that 
next  week  comes,  they  meant  the  next  week  further  on,  and  then  pay 
ment  shall  be  doubly  certain ;  yet  they  pat  in  no  appearance  even  then, 
or,  if  they  do,  they  give  a  bill.  Is  not  that  a  precious  document  ?  is  it  not 
as  good  as  the  money  itself?  They  evidently  think  so,  for  they  feel 
quite  as  easy  as  if  they  had  really  paid  that  debt.  But  when  the  bill 
falls  due,  what  then  ?  It  falls,  never  to  rise  again.  Ah  me  !  a  bill  is 
often  just  a  lie  with  a  stamp  on  it.  So  will  debtors  go  on  as  long  as 
they  can.  This  is  what  every  sinner  does  before  he  becomes  cleared  by 
the  sovereign  grace  of  God.  He  cries,  "  I  mean  to  do  better."  Never 
mind;  tell  us  no  more  what  you  mean  to  do,  but  do  it.  To  promise  and 
vow  so  falsely  is  only  adding  to  your  sins  !  "  Oh !  but  you  know  I  do 
not  intend  to  go  on  in  this  way  always.  It  is  a  long  lane  that  has  no 
turning.  I  shall  pull  up  short  one  of  these  days,  and  then  you  will  see." 
What  shall  we  see?  What  we  shall  see;  and  that  will  not  be 
much.  Yes.  We  shall  see  the  dew  of  promise  disappear,  and  the 
morning  cloud  of  resolution  pass  away.  Dear  sir,  you  cannot  raise  our 
hopes  now.  Neither  God  nor  man  will  trust  you ;  you  have  promised 
these  twenty  years,  and  in  no  one  year  have  you  made  a  real  move  in  the 
right  direction.  You  have  not  lied  unto  men  only,  but  unto  God,  and 
how  will  you  answer  for  it  ?  Know  you  not  that  every  promise  that  you 
make  to  God  which  you  do  not  keep  is  a  great  addition  to  your  trans 
gressions,  and  helps  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  your  iniquities  ?  Give  up 
the  way  of  lying,  I  pray  you. 

Another  temptation  is,  always  to  ask  for  more  time — as  if  this  was  all 
that  was  needed.  When  the  debtor,  in  another  parable,  was  arrested, 
he  said  to  his  creditor,  "  Have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee 
all."  We  cannot  pay  any  of  our  debt  to-day,  and  yet  dote  upon  to 
morrow.  Yes,  it  does  seem  such  a  relief  to  get  a  little  longer  time ; 
somehow  a  vague  shadowy  hope  seems  to  pervade  the  months  to  come. 
The  sinner  cries,  "Go  thy  way  for  this  time;  when  I  have  a  con 
venient  season,  I  will  call  for  thee."  It  is  not  convenient  just 
now,  but  do  wait  a  little  bit,  a  suitable  hour  will  come.  With  this 
temptation  Satan  has  destroyed  multitudes  of  men,  tempting  them  to 
ask  for  more  time,  instead  of  coming  up  to  the  mark  at  once  and  asking 
for  immediate  pardon.  What  are  the  fabled  virtues  of  to-morrow?  Why 
do  men  dote  upon  the  unknown  future  ?  To  immediate  decision  I 
would  press  you  at  this  moment ;  and  may  God  by  his  divine  Spirit 
deliver  you  as  a  bird  from  the  hand  of  the  fowler,  that  you  may  no  longer 
procrastinate  and  waste  your  life  in  disobedient  delay. 

This  being  the  temptation,  let  me  hint  to  those  of  you  who  are 
bankrupt  what  your  ivisdom  is.  It  is  your  wisdom  to  face  the  business 
of  your  soul.  Your  soul-matters  are  the  most  important  things  you  will 
ever  have  on  hand,  for  when  your  wealth  must  be  left,  and  your  estate 
shall  see  you  no  more,  and  when  your  body  is  dead,  your  soul  will  still 
be  living  in  eternal  happiness  or  endless  woe ;  therefore,  do  not  let  your 


BANKRUPT   DEBTORS   DISCHARGED.  4 '.19 

gtate  in  reference  to  God  have  the  go-by.  It  is  the  most  important 
matter ;  give  it  the  first  place.  Settle  this  business  before  you  attend 
to  anything  else. 

Take  care  that  you  face  it,  like  an  honest  man,  and  not  as  one  who 
makes  the  best  of  a  bad  story.  Though  it  be  bad,  yet  still  the  best  thing 
you  can  do  is  to  go  right  through  with  it  in  truth  and  soberness  before  the 
Lord.  Hope  lies  that  way.  Do  not  let  your  danger  be  concealed  like 
a  thief  who  hides  in  the  good  man's  cupboard  till  the  hour  to  rob  his 
house.  Suffer  not  the  sparks  to  smoulder  where  they  may  consume  your 
all.  Quench  the  fire  before  you  sleep.  When  you  face  the  matter,  be 
very  true  and  sincere  with  yourself  and  with  God ;  because  you  are  not 
now  dealing  with  creditors  who  may  be  cheated,  but  you  are  dealing  with 
One  who  knows  the  secret  thoughts  and  intents  of  your  heart.  Before 
God  nothing  but  truth  can  stand  ;  the  painted  hypocrite  is  spied  out 
immediately.  The  Lord  takes  off  all  masks,  and  men  stand  before  him 
as  they  really  are,  and  not  as  they  would  seem  to  be  ;  so  be  true  with 
yourself.  Do  not  take  your  pen  and  write  down  sixty  if  you  owe  a 
hundred ;  but  put  the  fair  hundred  down.  Tricks  and  falsehoods  had 
better  be  put  away  once  for  all  when  you  deal  with  God. 

One  thing  more :  it  will  be  your  wisdom  to  give  up  all  attempts  to 
pay,  because  you  have  nothing  to  pay  with.  Do  not  delude  yourself 
into  the  idea  that  you  will  pay  one  day,  for  you  never  will  Do  not 
make  the  slightest  attempt  at  paying,  for  you  cannot  do  it ;  but  take 
quite  another  course,  plead  absolute  poverty,  and  appeal  to  mercy.  Say, 
"  Lord,  I  have  nothing,  I  am  nothing,  I  can  do  nothing.  I  must  throw 
myself  upon  thy  grace."  Of  this  grace  I  am  now  going  to  speak.  May 
I  so  speak  as  to  encourage  you  who  are  bankrupts  to  corne  to  the  Lord, 
that  he  may  frankly  forgive  you  all. 

II.  Our  second  head  is,  THEIR  FREE  DISCHARGE.  "He  frankly 
forgave  them  both."  What  a  blessing  they  obtained  by  facing  the 
matter  !  These  two  poor  debtors,  when  they  went  into  the  office,  were 
trembling  from  head  to  foot,  for  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  and  were 
deeply  involved ;  but  see  !  they  come  out  with  light  hearts,  for  the  debt 
is  all  disposed  of,  the  bills  are  receipted,  the  records  are  destroyed, 
Even  thus  the  Lord  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  that  was  against 
us,  and  has  taken  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  cross. 

In  this  free  discharge  I  admire,  first  of  all,  the  goodness  of  the  great 
creditor.  What  a  gracious  heart  he  had !  What  kindness  he  showed! 
He  said,  "  Poor  souls,  you  can  never  pay  me,  but  you  need  not  be  cast 
clown  because  of  it,  for  I  freely  cancel  your  debts."  Oh,  the  goodness  of 
it !  Oh,  the  largeness  of  the  heart  of  God !  I  was  reading  of  Caesar  the 
other  day.  He  had  been  at  fierce  war  with  Pornpey,  and  at  last  he 
conquered  him,  and  when  he  conquered  him  he  found  among  the  spoil 
Pompey's  private  cabinet,  in  which  were  contained  letters  from  the 
various  noblemen  and  senators  of  Rome  who  had  sided  with  him.  In 
many  a  letter  there  was  fatal  evidence  against  the  most  eminent 
Romans,  but  what  did  Caesar  do  ?  He  destroyed  every  document.  He 
would  have  no  knowledge  of  his  enemies,  for  he  freely  forgave  them  and 
wished  to  know  no  more.  In  this  Caesar  proved  that  he  was  fit  to 
govern  the  nation.  But  look  at  the  splendour  of  God  when  he  puts  all 
our  sins  into  one  cabinet,  and  then  destroys  the  whole.  If  the  sins  of 


300  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

his  people  be  sought  for  they  cannot  now  be  found.  He  will  never 
mention  them  against  us  any  more  for  ever.  Oh,  the  goodness  of  the 
infinite  God,  whose  mercy  endureth  for  ever!  Bow  before  that  good 
ness  with  joy. 

Bat,  then,  observe  the  freeness  of  it — "  He  frankly  forgave  them 
both."  They  did  not  stand  there  and  say,  •'  Oh,  good  sir,  we  cannot 
pay,"  and  plead  and  beg,  as  for  their  lives  ;  but  he  freely  said  to  them, 
"  You  cannot  pay,  but  I  can  forgive.  You  ought  never  to  have  got  into 
my  debt,  and  you  ought  not  to  have  broken  your  promises  to  me  ;  but 
behold,  I  make  an  end  of  all  this  weary  business:  I  freely  blot  out  all  your 
obligations  !  "  Did  not  this  open  a  fountain  in  their  eyes  ?  Did  they 
not  hasten  home  to  their  wives  and  children,  and  tell  them  th,at  they 
were  out  of  debt,  for  the  beloved  creditor  had  forgiven  it  all  most 
freely  ?  This  is  a  fair  picture  of  the  grace  of  God.  When  a  poor 
sinner  comes  to  him  bankrupt,  he  says,  "  I  forgive  you  freely  :  your 
oifence  is  all  gone.  I  do  not  want  you  to  earn  a  pardon  by  your  tears, 
and  prayers,  and  anguish  of  soul.  You  have  not  to  make  me  merciful, 
for  I  am  merciful  already ;  and  my  dear  Son  Jesus  Christ  has  made 
such  a  propitiation  that  I  can  be  just  and  yet  can  forgive  you  all  this 
debt.  Therefore,  go  in  peace." 

Furthermore,  this  debt  was  fully  discharged.  .  Tha  creditor  did  nob 
say,  "  Come,  my  good  fellow,  I  will  take  fifty  per  cent,  off  the  account 
if  you  find  the  remainder."  As  they  had  nothing  wherewith  to  pay, 
they  would  not  have  been  a  bit  the  better  if  he  had  reduced  them  ninety 
per  cent.  If  he  had  taken  half  the  debt,  the  one  would  have  owed  two 
hundred  and  fifty  and  the  other  twenty-five;  but  still  their  case  would 
have  been  hopeless,  since  they  had  not  a  farthing  of  their  own. 
Now  the  Lord,  when  he  blots  out  his  people's  sin,  leaves  no  trace  of  it 
remaining.  My  own  persuasion  is  that  when  our  Lord  Jesus  died  upon 
the  cross  he  made  an  end  of  all  the  sins  of  all  his  people,  and  made  full 
and  effectual  atonement  for  the  whole  of  those  who  ever  shall  believe  in 
him.  I  can  sing  with  all  my  heart  — 

4*  Here's  pardon  for  transgressions  past, 

It  matters  not  how  black  their  cast; 

And,  O  my  soul,  with  wonder  view, 

For  sins  to  come  here's  pardon  too !  ° 

All  the  sin  of  believers  has  been  once  for  all  carried  into  the  wilderness 
of  oblivion  by  our  great  Scapegoat,  and  none  shall  ever  find  a  sin 
wherewith  to  condemn  one  soul  of  the  chosen  band.  There  is  no  debt 
left  against  a  believer:  no,  not  one  single  pennyworth  of  debt  remains 
upon  the  score.  Does  not  the  Spirit  of  God  himself  ask  the  question, 
"  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "  The  Lord 
has  frankly  forgiven  their  debt,  and  he  has  not  done  so  in  part,  but  as  a 
whole.  As  for  our  sins,  "  the  depths  have  covered  them ; "  "  there  is  not 
one  of  them  left."  Hallelujah! 

Observe  that  it  was  a  very  effectual  forgiveness  too.  The  only  person 
that  can  forgive  a  debt  is  he  to  whom  the  debt  is  due.  God  only  can 
forgive  sin,  seeing  it  is  a  debt  to  him.  What  think  you  of  those 
folk  who  are  said  to  be  able  to  forgive  you  for  a  shilling  ?  Why,  I  say 
that  to  pay  them  their  fee  would  be  elevenpence  three  farthings  and 
another  farthing  thrown  away.  When  you  have  got  their  forgiveness 


BANKRUPT   DEBTORS  DISCHARGED.  501 

what  is  the  good  of  it?  Suppose  I  were  to  forgive  you  for  injuries 
done  by  you  to  the  Queen,  of  what  value  would  my  forgiveness  be  ?  He 
against  whom  I  have  transgressed  is  the  only  one  that  can  pronounce 
my  pardon  ;  but  if  he  absolves  me,  how  effectual  is  the  sentence !  When 
the  creditor  said,  "I  freely  forgive  you  both,"  why,  the  deed  was  done: 
his  lips  had  power,  he  had  finished  the  debt  by  his  word.  And  so  when 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  looked  unto  by  the  eye  of  faith,  there  comes  a 
voice  from  his  dear  wounds  which  cries  to  the  poor  trembling  bankrupt 
sinner,  "  Your  sins,  which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven.  I  have  blotted 
out  your  sins  like  a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick  cloud  your  iniquities." 
What  an  effectual  pardon  it  is!  How  it  charms  the  heart,  and  lulls 
every  fear  to  rest !  He  frankly,  he  fully,  he  freely,  he  effectually  forgave 
them  both. 

And  I  believe  that  when  this  is  done,  I  may  add  another  adjective — 
it  is  an  eternal  discharge.  That  creditor  could  never  summon  those 
debtors  again  for  debts  which  he  had  remitted.  He  could  never  think 
of  such  a  thing  with  any  show  of  justice.  He  had  frankly  forgiven 
them,  and  they  were  forgiven.  God  does  not  play  fast  and  loose  with 
his  creatures,  and  forgive  them  and  then  punish  them.  I  never  shall 
believe  in  God's  loving  a  man  to-day,  and  casting  him  away  to-morrow. 
The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance  on  his  part. 
Justification  is  not  an  act  which  can  be  reversed,  and  followed  with 
damnation.  No ;  no ;  "  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified." 
"If  sin  be  pardoned  I'm  secure, 

Death  has  no  sling  beside  ; 
The  law  gave  sin  its  damning  power, 

But  Christ  my  ransom  died." 

By  his  death  our  Redeemer  effectually  swept  away  sin  once  for  all,  and 
all  the  curse  of  the  law  he  removed.  In  the  offering  of  bullocks  and 
lambs  there  was  a  continual  remembrance  made  of  sin,  for  the  blood  of 
bulls  and  of  goats  could  not  take  away  sin ;  but  the  apostle  writes, 
"This  Man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat 
down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  because  his  work  was  effectually  and 
eternally  done. 

Only  one  more  remark  on  this  point:  this  frank  forgiveness  applied 
to  loth  the  debtors — "he  frankly  forgave  them  both."  The  man  that 
owed  only  fifty  pence  needed  a  free  discharge  as  truly  as  the  debtor  who 
owed  five  hundred ;  for  though  he  was  not  so  deep  in  the  mire,  yet  he 
was  as  truly  in  the  slough.  If  a  man  was  lying  in  prison  for  debt,  as  men 
used  to  do  under  our  old  laws,  if  he  only  owed  fifty  pounds  he  was  shut 
within  walls  just  as  closely  as  the  greater  debtor  who  owed  fifty  thousand ; 
and  he  could  no  more  get  out  without  the  payment  or  forgiveness  of  his 
smaller  liability  than  the  bigger  debtor  could.  A  bird  held  by  a  string 
is  as  much  a  prisoner  as  a  bull  that  is  tied  by  \  rope.  Now,  you  good 
people  who  have  always  tried  to  do  your  duty,  and  are  numbered  with 
the  fifty  pence  debtors,  you  must  confess  that  you  have  become  somewhat 
indebted  to  God  by  committing  a  measure  of  sins.  Take  note  that  you 
cannot  be  saved  except  by  the  free  forgiveness  of  God  through  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ.  The  fifty  pence  debtor  must  obtain  his  discharge  by 
grace  alone.  It  is  also  a  most  blessed  thing  to  perceive  that  he  forgave 
the  five  hundred  pence  debtor  with  equal  freeueaft.  Perhaps  I  have 
13 


502  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

some  here,  men  and  women,  who  have  never  made  any  pretence  of  being 
good,  who  from  their  childhood  have  gone  from  bad  to  worse.  There 
is  a  possibility  of  free  and  instantaneous  forgiveness  for  you  at  this- 
moment.  You  that  are  over  head  and  ears  in  debt  to  God  can  be  freely 
forgiven  by  the  same  Lord  who  forgives  the  smaller  debtors.  When  a 
man  has  his  pen  in  his  hand,  and  is  writing  receipts,  it  takes  him  no 
morp,  trouble  to  write  a  receipt  for  five  hundred  pounds  than  it  does  for 
a  bill  of  fifty — the  same  signature  will  suffice :  and  when  the  Lord  has 
the  pen  of  his  Spirit  in  his  hand,  and  he  is  about  to  write  upon  a 
conscience  the  peace  which  comes  of  reconciliation,  he  can  write  upon 
one  as  well  as  upon  another.  Ho,  you  with  a  little  bill,  bring  it  here 
that  infinite  grace  may  write  upon  it  "  CANCELLED  !  "  Ho,  you  with  a 
more  weighty  account,  come  and  place  it  near  that  gracious  right  hand, 
for  though  your  bill  be  never  so  long  and  heavy,  the  hand  of  Infinite 
Love  can  write  "  CANCELLED  "  in  a  moment !  My  joy  overflows  at 
having  such  a  gospel  to  preach  to  you :  whatever  your  guilt,  my  gracious 
God  is  ready  to  forgive  you  for  Jesus'  sake,  because  he  delighteth  in 
mercy. 

III.     I  now  beg  your  very  special  attention  to  the  last  point,  and 

that  is  THE   CONNECTION   BETWEEN   THIS   BANKRUPTCY   AND   THIS   FREE 

DISCHARGE.  It  is  said  "  When  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly  forgave 
them  both."  There  is  a  time  when  pardon  comes,  and  that  time  is 
when  self-sufficiency  goes.  If  any  person  in  this  place  has  in  his  own 
conscience  come  to  this  point,  that  he  feels  he  has  nothing  to  pay,  he  has 
come  to  the  point  at  which  God  is  ready  to  forgive  him.  He  that  will  own 
his  debt,  and  confess  his  own  incapacity  to  meet  it,  shall  find  that  God 
frankly  blots  it  out.  The  Lord  will  never  forgive  us  until  we  are 
brought  to  the  starvation  of  pride  and  the  death  of  boasting.  A  sense 
of  spiritual  bankruptcy  shows  that  a  man  has  become  thoughtful;  and 
this  is  essential  to  salvation.  How  can  we  believe  a  thoughtless  person 
to  be  a  saved  man  ?  If  we  so  think  about  our  state  as  to  mourn  our 
sin  and  feel  its  wickedness,  and  if  we  have  made  a  close  search  into  our 
hearts  and  lives,  and  find  that  we  have  no  merit  and  no  might,  then 
are  we  prepared  in  all  thoughtfulness  to  say,  "  In  the  Lord  have  I 
righteousness  and  strength."  Must  there  not  be  serious  thought 
before  we  can  hope  for  mercy?  Would  you  have  God  save  us  while  we 
are  asleep,  while  we  are  giddy,  frivolous,  trifling,  and  without  concern 
about  our  sin  ?  Surely  that  would  be  giving  a  premium  to  folly !  God 
acts  not  so.  He  will  have  us  know  the  seriousness  of  our  danger,  for 
else  we  shall  treat  the  whole  matter  with  lightness ;  and  we  shall  miss 
the  moral  effect  of  pardon,  while  he  will  be  robbed  of  his  glory. 

Next,  when  we  come  to  feel  our  bankruptcy  we  then  make  an  honest 
confession,  and  to  that  confession  a  promise  is  given — "  he  that  con- 
fesseth  his  sin  shall  find  mercy."  The  two  debtors  had  owned  to  their 
debts,  and  they  had  also  openly  confessed,  though  it  must  have  gone 
against  the  grain  a  bit,  that  they  could  not  pay.  They  humbled  them 
selves  before  their  creditor,  and  then  he  said,  "1  frankly  forgive 
you."  If  one  of  these  debtors  had  bounced  and  bragged,  "  Oh,  we  can 
pay  ;  "  in  all  probability  ho  would  have  been  sent  to  prison.  As  for  you, 
poor  trembler,  I  do  noi  know  where  you  are  this  morning,  but  here  is 
comfort  for  you  :  when  you  go  unto  God  in  your  chamber  and  cry, 


BANKRUPT  DEBTORS  DISCHARGED.  508 

w  Lord, have  mercy  upon  me,  for  I  am  guilty,  and  I  cannot  justify  myself 
before  thee,  nor  offer  any  excuse  to  thee :"  then  it  is  that  he  will  say, 
"  Be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  put  away  thy  sin  ;  thou  shalt  not  die."  When 
you  have  nothing  to  pay  arid  confess  your  insolvency,  the  debt  shall  be 
wiped  out.  When  you  are  brought  to  your  worst,  you  shall  see  the  Lord 
at  his  best. 

It  is  in  their  utter  destitution  that  men  value  a  discharge.  If  God 
were  to  give  his  mercy  to  every  man  at  once,  without  his  ever  having 
had  any  sense  of  sin  at  all,  why  men  would  count  it  cheap  and  think 
nothing  of  it.  "  God  is  merciful,"  is  a  common  saying  everywhere ;  and 
it  is  such  a  bit  of  valueless  talk  with  them,  that  they  let  it  roll  glibly 
out  as  if  it  were  no  mutter.  They  do  not  worship  him  for  his  mercy  or 
serve  him  for  his  grace.  They  say,  "  Oh,  God  is  merciful,"  and  then 
they  go  on  to  sin  worse  than  ever;  the  idea  has  no  effect  upon  their 
hearts  or  lives ;  they  have  no  esteem  for  that  mercy  of  which  they  speak 
BO  freely.  So  the  Lord  takes  care  that  the  sinner  shall  know  his  need 
of  mercy  by  feeling  the  pinch  of  conscience  and  the  terror  of  the  law. 
If  I  may  so  speak,  he  puts  in  the  sheriff's  officer,  and  makes  a  distraint 
upon  the  soul  by  convincing  the  man  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of 
judgment.  The  Lord  puts  an  execution  into  the  heart,  and  then  it  is, 
when  the  poor  creature  cries,  "  I  have  nothing  to  pay  with,"  that  free 
discharge  is  given  by  the  Lord,  and  heartily  prized  by  him  to  whom  it 
comes.  When  our  account  is  long  and  heavy,  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to 
see  the  Lord  write  "  Cancelled,"  and  to  behold  the  whole  mountain  of 
debt  swallowed  up  in  the  sea  of  love.  Christ  is  precious  when  sin  is 
bitter.  Is  it  not  wise  on  God's  part  that  the  cancelling  of  the  debt  shall 
come  just  when  we  have  nothing  to  pay,  and  therefore  are  prepared  to 
prize  a  free  forgiveness  ? 

Under  conviction  a  poor  soul  sees  the  reality  of  sin  and  of  pardon.  My 
dear  hearer,  you  will  never  believe  in  the  reality  of  forgiveness  till  you 
have  felt  the  reality  of  sin.  I  remember  when  I  felt  the  burden  of  sin, 
and  though  but  a  child,  my  heart  failed  me  for  anguish,  and  I  was 
brought  very  low.  Sin  was  no  bugbear  to  scare  me ;  it  was  a  grim 
reality ;  as  a  lion  it  tore  me  in  pieces.  And  now,  to-day,  I  know  the 
reality  of  pardon :  it  is  no  fancy,  no  dream,  for  my  inmost  soul  feels  its 
power.  I  know  that  my  sins  are  forgiven,  and  I  rejoice  therein  ;  but  I 
should  never  have  known  the  real  truth  of  this  happy  condition  if  I  had 
not  felt  the  oppressive  load  of  sin  upon  the  conscience.  I  could  not 
afford  to  play  at  conversion,  for  sin  was  an  awful  fact  in  my  soul.  Our 
heavenly  Father  does  not  wish  us  to  use  lightness  in  a  matter  concerning 
which  Jesus  shed  his  blood,  and  so  he  brings  us  into  trouble  of  soul, 
and  afterwards  into  a  vivid  realization  of  free  grace.  He  lets  the  whip 
fall  on  our  shoulders  until  we  bleed  again,  and  this  makes  us  weary  of 
the  slavery  of  sin.  He  sets  conscience  and  the  law  upon  us,  and  these 
two  gaolers  thrust  us  into  the  inner  dungeon,  and  make  our  feet  fast 
in  the  stocks.  All  this  prepares  us  for  the  delivering  power  which 
shakes  the  prison  walls,  and  looses  our  bonds,  and  for  the  tender  love 
which  washes  our  stripes  and  sets  meat  before  us. 

1  do  believe  that  the  Lord  will  give  us  our  quittance  when  we  have 
got  to  our  last  farthing,  and  not  till  then,  because  only  then  do  WB 
took  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Ah,  my  dear  friends,  as  lon«-  as  we 


504  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

have  anything  else  to  look  to,  we  never  will  look  to  Christ.  That  blessed 
port  into  which  no  ship  did  ever  run  in  a  storm  without  finding  a  sure 
haven  is  shunned  by  all  your  gallant  vessels :  they  will  rather  put  into 
any  port  along  the  coast  of  self-deceit  than  make  for  the  harbour  which 
is  marked  out  by  the  two  lighthouses  of  free-grace  and  dying  love.  As 
long  as  a  man  can  scrape  the  meal-barrel  and  find  a  little  in  it,  as  long 
as  he  can  hold  up  the  oil-cruse,  and  it  drips,  if  it  only  yields  a  drop 
in  a  week,  he  will  never  come  to  Christ  for  heavenly  provision.  As  long 
as  he  has  one  rtisty  counterfeit  farthing  hidden  away  in  the  corner  of 
his  till,  the  sinner  will  never  accept  the  riches  of  redeeming  love; 
but  when  it  is  all  up  with  him,  when  he  has  nothing  in  the  parlour, 
nothing  in  the  kitchen,  nothing  in  the  cellar,  when  there  is  neither 
stick  nor  stock  left,  then  he  prizes  Jesus  and  his  salvation.  We 
break  to  make.  We  are  emptied  to  be  filled.  When  we  cannot  give, 
God  can  forgive.  If  any  of  you  have  any  goodness  of  your  own  you 
will  perish  for  ever.  If  you  have  anything  you  can  trust  to  of  your 
own  you  will  be  lost  as  sure  as  you  are  living  men  and  women ;  but  if^ 
you  are  reduced  to  sore  extremity,  and  God's  tierce  wrath  seems  to  burn' 
against  you,  then  not  only  may  you  have  mercy,  but  mercy  is  yours 
already. 

"*Tis  perfect  poverty  alone 

That  sets  the  soul  at  large  ; 
While  we  can  call  one  mite  our  own 
We  get  no  full  discharge. 

But  let  our  debts  be  what  they  may, 

However  great  or  small, 
As  soon  as  we  have  nought  to  pay 

Our  Lord  forgives  us  all." 

Blessed  are  ye  poor,  for  ye  shall  be  rich !  Blessed  are  ye  hungry,  for  ye 
shall  be  fed !  Blessed  are  ye  that  are  empty,  for  ye  shall  be  filled !  But 
woe  unto  you  that  are  rich  and  are  increased  in  goods,  and  have  need  of 
nothing,  and  boast  of  your  own  goodness!  Christ  has  nothing  to  do 
with  you,  and  we  have  nothing  to  preach  to  you  except  this— "  They 
that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician."  The  heavenly  Surgeon  did  not 
oome  to  save  those  who  have  no  need  of  saving.  Let  those  who  are  sick 
prick  up  their  ears  and  hear  with  delight,  for  the  Physician  is  come  with 
a  special  eye  to  them.  Are  you  a  sinner?  Then  Christ  is  the  Saviour 
of  sinners.  Join  hands  with  him  by  faith,  and  the  work  is  done :  you 
are  saved  for  ever  1  God  bless  you,  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen. 


LOVE'S   COMPETITION. 


(I'll)  01) 

INTENDED   FOR   BEADING    ON   LoRD's-DAY,    FEBRUARY    2ND,    1890, 
DELIVERED   BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  Tell  me  therefore,  which  of  them  will  love  him  most?  Simon  answered  and  said, 
I  suppose  that  he,  to  whom  he  forgave  most.  And  he  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  rightly 
judged."— Luke  vii.  42,  43. 

I  REMEMBER  seeing,  somewhere  or  other,  as  a  sign  upon  an  inn,  the 
words  "  The  First  and  Last."  I  do  not  know  what  that  may  happen 
to  be  among  men,  but  I  know  that  love  is  God's  first  and  last.  It  is 
there  that  he  begins  with  us  in  mercy — "  We  love  him,  because  he 
first  loved  us."  His  love  at  the  first  springs  up  like  a  fountain 
in  the  midst  of  a  desert,  and  freely  flows  along  the  wilderness  to  the 
unworthy  sons  of  men.  In  the  end,  the  result  of  that  love  is  that  men 
love  him  :  they  cannot  help  it  any  more  than  the  rock  can  prevent  the 
echo  when  the  voice  falls  upon  it.  Love  is  not  a  creature  of  law :  it 
comes  not  on  demand,  it  must  be  free  or  not  at  all.  It  has  its  reasons- 
why  it  springs  up  in  our  hearts ;  but  it  is  not  a  mercenary  thing 
which  can  be  procured  at  such  and  such  a  price.  It  is  not  a  matter  of 
argument :  it  is  not  to  itself  an  act  performed  as  a  matter  of  duty. 
Love  is  a  duty  certainly,  but  it  does  not  come  to  us  that  way:  it 
comes  to  us  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart,  over  every  mountain  and  hill, 
leaping  and  bounding ;  it  comes  not  as  a  heavy  burden  dragged  along 
an  iron  way.  If  a  man  should  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for 
love,  it  would  utterly  be  contemned. 

Men  do  not  make  themselves  love  by  a  course  of  calculation ;  but 
they  are  overtaken  with  it,  and  carried  away  by  its  power.  When  godly 
men  consider  and  enjoy  the  great  love  of  God  to  them,  they  beg-in  to 
love  God  in  return;  just  as  the  bud,  when  it  feels  the  sunshine, 
opens  to  it  of  its  own  accord.  Love  to  God  is  a  sort  of  natural  con 
sequence  which  follows  from  a  sight  and  sense  of  the  love  of  God  to 
us.  I  think  it  is  Aristotle  who  says  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  person 
to  know  that  he  is  loved  without  feeling  some  degree  of  love  in  return. 
I  do  not  know  how  that  may  be,  for  I  am  no  philosopher ;  but  I  am 
Bure  that  it  is  so  with  those  who  taste  of  the  love  of  God.  As  love  is 
No.  2,127.  18, 


62  METROPOLITAN"  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

the  first  blessing  coining  from  God  to  us,  so  it  is  the  last  return  from 
us  to  God  :  he  comes  to  us  loving,  we  go  home  to  him  loving. 

I.  I  intend  to  keep  to  my  text,  and  handle  it  red  hot,  by  first 
noticing  that  IT  is  TAKEN  FOR  GRANTED  THAT  PARDONED  SINNERS  WILL 
LOVE.  "  Tell  me  therefore,  which  of  them  will  love  him  most?"  It 
is  implied  that  the  two  debtors  who  had  been  frankly  forgiven  would 
both  love  their  benefactor.  The  question  was  not  "  Which  of  them 
will  love  him?"  but  "Which  of  them  will  love  him  most?"  So, 
then,  I  say,  it  is  taken  for  granted  in  the  text  that  those  who  are 
pardoned  will  love  him  who  has  so  freely  pardoned  them. 

And  this,  first,  because  it  seems  most  natural  that  ivhere  kindness  is 
received  gratitude  should  be  felt.  This  is  so  generally  admitted  that 
gratitude  is  found  among  the  lowest  and  worst  of  mankind.  "If  ye 
love  them  which  love  you,  what  thank  have  ye?  for  sinners  also 
love  those  that  love  them."  It  is  man-like  to  return  good  for 
good,  and  ingratitude  is  looked  upon  most  rightly  as  one  of  the 
basest  of  the  vices.  Why,  we  find  gratitude  not  only  in  men  and 
women — intelligent  creatures — but  we  find  it  in  the  very  beasts  of  the 
field!  "The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib." 
How  a  dog  that  has  received  benefits  from  you  will  be  attached  to  you, 
and  by  every  possible  means  will  endeavour  to  show  his  affection! 
The  ancients  had  many  rare  stories  of  the  gratitude  of  wild  beasts. 
You  remember  that  of  Androcles  and  the  lion.  The  man  was  con 
demned  to  be  torn  to  pieces  by  beasts ;  but  a  lion,  to  which  he  was 
cast,  instead  of  devouring  him,  licked  his  feet,  because  at  some  former 
time  Androcles  had  extracted  a  thorn  from  the  grateful  creature's 
foot.  We  have  heard  of  an  eagle  that  so  loved  a  boy  with  whom  he 
had  played  that,  when  the  child  was  sick,  the  eagle  sickened  too; 
and  when  the  child  slept,  this  wild,  strange  bird  of  the  air  would 
sleep,  but  only , then;  for  when  the  child  awoke,  the  eagle  awoke. 
When  the  child  died,  the  bird  died  too.  You  remember  that  there  is 
a  picture  in  which  Napoleon  is  represented  as  riding  over  the  battle 
field,  and  he  stops  his  horse,  as  he  sees  a  slain  man  with  his  favourite 
dog  lying  upon  his  bosom  doing  what  he  can  to  defend  his  poor  dead 
master.  Even  the  great  man-slayer  paused  at  such  a  sight.  There 
is  gratitude  among  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air. 
And,  surely,  if  we  receive  favours  from  God,  and  do  not  feel  love  to 
him  in  return,  we  are  worse  than  brute  beasts ;  and  so  the  Lord,  in 
that  pathetic  verse  in  Isaiah,  pleads  against  us,  "  The  ox  knoweth 
his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib :  but  Israel  doth  not  know, 
my  people  doth  not  consider."  If  we  receive  favours  from  God,  it  is 
but  natural  that  we  should  love  him  in  return.  Alas,  that  many 
should  be  so  unnatural,  so  false  to  every  noble  instinct,  so  dead  to  the 
gratitude  which  goodness  deserves ! 

Hut  gratitude  should  surely  arise  when  the  benefit  is  surpassingly  great. 
When  favours  are  far  above  the  common  run  of  blessings — when 
these  favours  are  not  such  as  are  confined  to  time  and  to  the  body,  but 
when  they  reach  to  eternity  and  bless  the  soul ;  when  favours  are 
of  such  weight  as  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  the  salvation  of  the  soul  from 
wrath  to  come ;  surely  here  love  must  spring  up  with  the  greatest 
force  and  freedom.  I  would  stand  and  sing  to  the  fountain  of  the 


LOVE'S  COMPETITION.  63 

heart  as  Israel  did  in  the  wilderness,  "  Spring  up,  0  well;  sing  ye 
unto  it :  The  princes  digged  the  well."  And  has  not  our  great  Prince, 
who  has  been  smitten  upon  the  cheek,  digged  this  well  by  giving  us, 
through  his  free  grace  and  dying  love,  to  taste  of  full  remission  and  of 
complete  pardon  of  our  guilt  ?  Shall  we  not,  must  we  not,  love  the 
Redeemer  in  return  ?  To  have  sin  forgiven  and  not  to  love  God  !  I 
call  common  ingratitude  worse  than  brutish ;  but  in  this  case  where 
shall  I  go  for  a  word  ?  I  must  call  it  devilish.  It  were  worse  than 
infernal  to  receive  a  deliverance  from  guilt  so  great,  and  from 
punishment  so  justly  terrible,  and  not  to  love  the  Lord,  through  whom 
it  is  given  to  us.  Oh,  love  the  Lord,  whose  mercy  endureth  for  ever ! 
If,  indeed,  you  have  tasted  of  that  mercy,  you  must  love  him.  It 
cannot  be  otherwise — you  are  bound  to  God  by  bonds  of  love,  and 
these  draw  you,  by  a  secret  but  irresistible  force,  to  love  the  Lord  in 
return. 

And  moreover,  not  only  is  this  natural  and  necessary,  because  of  the 
greatness  of  the  mercy,  but  the  grace  of  God  always  takes  care  that 
wherever  pardon  is  given  love  shall  be  ensured ;  for  the  Holy  Spirit 
co-operates  with  the  work  of  Christ,  and  if  we  are  cleansed  from  the 
stain  of  our  former  evil  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  we  are  renewed 
and  changed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  does 
not  take  away  our  sin,  and  then  leave  us  that  old  heart  of  stone, 
insensible,  ungrateful ;  but  as  he  gives  us  a  garment  of  righteousness 
he  gives  us  a  heart  of  flesh.  The  Spirit  works  in  us  a  degree  of  love 
at  the  same  time  that  he  ciaates  the  first  look  of  faith.  Anon  our 
faith  increases  by  which  we  received  remission,  and  then  he  works 
in  us  more  and  more  that  love  to  Christ  by  which  we  cling  to  him. 
This  love  works  in  us  hatred  of  sin  and  a  spirit  of  obedience,  whereby 
we  yield  ourselves  up  to  the  service  of  him  who  has  bought  us  with 
his  precious  blood.  You  know  that  it  is  so,  brethren.  Where  pardon 
comes,  delight  in  God  comes  with  it.  You  know  that  God  does  not 
divide  his  gifts,  and  give  justification  to  one  and  sanctification  to 
another ;  but  the  covenant  is  one,  and  the  blessings  of  the  covenant 
are  threaded  on  the  one  string  of  infinite  wisdom,  so  that  when  there 
comes  the  washing  in  the  blood,  there  comes  also  a  cleansing  with 
water  by  the  Word.  The  Holy  Spirit  washes  us  from  the  power  of 
sin,  as  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanses  us  from  the  guilt  of  sin.  Where 
sin  is  forgiven,  there  must  bo  love  to  the  God  who  forgave  it,  because 
the  Spirit  of  God  makes  sure  work  upon  the  heart  of  the  believer,  and 
one  of  his  first  works  is  love. 

I  need  not  argue  this  further,  because  all  Christians  know  this  as 
a  matter  of  fact — where  there  is  no  love  there  is  no  pardon.  You  cannot 
be  pardoned,  and  not  love  God  as  a  result  of  his  loving  forgiveness. 
What  was  the  very  first  emotion  that  you  and  I  felt  when  we  had  a 
sense  of  guilt  removed?  We  felt  joy  for  our  own  sake ;  but  immediately 
after,  or  at  the  same  instant,  we  felt  such  intense  gratitude  to  God  that 
we  loved  him  beyond  all  expression.  We  have  sometimes  been  half 
afraid  that  we  do  not  love  God  so  much  now  as  we  did  at  that  moment, 
though  I  trust  that  the  fear  is  groundless.  But  at  that  moment  there 
was  nothing  too  hot  or  too  heavy  for  us  to  have  attempted  on  behalf 
of  him  who  had  taken  the  burden  from  off  our  shoulder.  We  would 


64  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

have  said  at  that  moment,  "Here  am  I;  send  me,"  if  it  had  been 
to  prison,  or  to  death.  Oh,  the  joy  of  those  first  days!  They  are 
rightly  called  the  da}rs  of  our  espousals.  And  what  love  we  had  then  I 
We  were  willing  to  leave  all  for  Christ's  sake.  "We  snapped  fond 
connections  at  his  command.  Truly,  like  Israel  of  old.  we  would  have 
gone  after  our  Grod  into  the  wilderness — ay,  after  our  Saviour  into  the 
grave.  Nothing  could  have  kept  us  back,  or  have  caused  us  to 
wander  from  him  then.  Do  you  not  remember  how  you  used  to  long 
for  Sabbath-days,  to  hear  of  Jesus,  and  praise  his  name  with  his 
people  ?  If  there  was  a  week-night  service,  you  were  always  there^ 
though  no  one  persuaded  you  to  go.  Then,  any  corner  in  the  meeting 
house  was  good  enough  for  you.  Now,  perhaps,  you  want  a  very  soft 
cushion  to  sit  upon.  You  sat  then  in  a  straight-backed  pew,  and  did 
not  know  it.  Now,  you  want  very  tender  dealing  ;  and  the  preacher 
must  mind  that  he  interests  you  by  illustrations  and  poetical  allusions;, 
but  then  the  gospel  itself  interested  you;  and  however  dull  the 
preacher  might  have  been,  you  were  so  willing  to  hear  about  Jesus, 
and  to  know  of  his  love,  that  there  you  were,  eager  to  hear  the 
humblest  evangelist.  Wisdom  did  not  need  to  press  you  into  her 
house,  for  you  were  earnestly  waiting  at  the  posts  of  her  doors,  glad 
to  hear  even  the  footfalls  of  those  who  came  in  and  out.  •  Oh,  those 
were  brave  days !  I  hope  that  we  have  braver  days  now ;  but,  for 
certain,  as  sure  as  we  knew  our  pardon,  we  felt  that  we  loved  the 
Lord  with  all  our  hearts. 

Now  I  want  to  make  a  little  practical  use  of  this  inference  fro  n 
the  text.  That  pardoned  souls  love  their  pardoning  Grod  is  a  great 
truth,  and  a  very  solemn  one  in  its  bearings  upon  us  at  this  time,  far 
there  are  persons  in  this  house  of  prayer  who  were  never  forgiven  -T 
and  we  are  sure  of  that  unhappy  fact,  since  they  do  not  love  Q-od. 
Their  sins  must  be  still  upon  them,  because  they  have  not  the  token 
of  pardon,  inasmuch  as  they  have  no  love  to  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Oh,  listen  to  me,  ye  that  do  not  love  Grod,  and  yet,  perhaps,  dream 
that  you  are  saved !  Are  there  not  some  here  that  seldom  think  of 
Grod,  who  do  not  care  if  a  day,  a  week,  a  month,  a  year,  should  pass 
over  their  heads,  and  yet  they  have  no  thought  of  the  Almighty  Judge 
of  all  the  earth  ?  They  receive  his  mercies ;  but  they  do  not  thank 
him.  They  feel  his  power  ;  but  they  do  not  fear  him.  "  Grod  is  not 
in  all  their  thoughts."  0  my  hearer,  if  this  be  your  case,  you  do  not  love 
him ;  for  if  we  love  any  person,  we  are  sure  to  think  of  him.  Thoughts- 
fly  that  way  in  which  the  heart  moves.  I  do  not  say  that  we  are 
always  thinking  of  those  we  love ;  but  I  do  say  that  our  thoughts 
will  fly  that  way  when  they  can.  You  know  at  sunset  where  the  crows 
live.  Perhaps  all  day  long  you  are  unable  to  tell ;  for  they  may  fly 
from  one  ploughed  field  to  another  to  find  their  meat.  But  watch 
When  night  comes  on,  and  when  they  are  free  from  other  obligations, 
and  wish  to  find  rest ;  they  fly  straight  to  those  tall  trees  whereon  they 
have  built  their  nests.  A  man  may,  in  the  busy  time  of  the  dayr 
think  about  fifty  things  ;  but  let  him  be  free  from  pressing  labour  and 
care,  and  he  returns  to  his  love  as  birds  fly  to  their  nests  at  night. 
His  thought  flies  to  Jesus,  because  Jesus  is  the  home  of  his  heart. 
If  your  hearts  love  God,  your  thoughts  will  run  to  him  as  the  rivers 


LOME'S  COMPETITION.  65 

to  the  sea.  Yea,  and  often  in  the  very  middle  of  business,  the 
man  who  loves  his  God  will  be  speaking  with  him.  He  may  not 
interrupt  the  conversation,  and  those  in  the  shop  may  not  know  what 
is  on  his  mind  ;  but  his  heart  will  be  up  above  the  mountains,  where 
the  angels  dwell,  communing  with  the  great  Father  of  lights.  But 
where  there  is  no  thought  of  God,  there  is  no  love  to  him. 

Are  there  not  many  who  never  do  anything  for  God  ?  He  has  made 
them,  and  he  preserves  them,  and  yet  they  never  make  him  any  return 
by  way  of  willing  action  designed  to  give  him  pleasure.  I  may  put 
it  to  some  of  you—  did  you  ever  do  anything  distinctly  for  God  in  all 
your  lives  ?  What !  Not  so  much  as  once  ?  Ah,  me !  a  man  so 
curiously  made  by  the  divine  finger,  displaying  infinite  skill  in  every 
blood-vessel,  and  nerve,  and  muscle,  that  are  necessary  for  his  life  and 
motion,  and  yet  he  has  never  thought  of  the  Great  One  who  has  set  all 
this  machinery  in  motion,  and  keeps  it  in  action !  To  live  only  by 
God,  and  yet  to  live  without  him  !  Strange  !  Can  there  exist  a  man 
who  never  does  anything  for  his  God,  who  is  constantly  doing  so  much 
for  him  ?  If  so,  I  would  say  to  such  a  one — You  have  never  been 
pardoned ;  for  you  do  not  love  God,  since  you  never  think  of  him,  and 
you  do  nothing  for  him. 

Some  men  evidently  do  not  love  God,  for  they  have  no  care  about 
anything  that  concerns  him.  They  do  not  refrain  from  sin  because  sin 
would  grieve  God.  The  idea  of  grieving  God,  perhaps,  has  not  crossed 
their  minds ;  so  they  vex  the  Holy  Spirit  most  thoughtlessly.  But,  ah  ! 
if  you  love  anyone,  you  will  not  like  to  cause  him  grief :  you  will 
not  do  the  evil  thing  which  he  hates.  He  that  loves  God  will  often 
have  a  check  put  upon  him,  and  feel  that  he  cannot  do  this  great 
wickedness,  and  sin  against  God.  To  sin  against  God  is  the  greatest 
of  sin,  and  the  essence  of  sin.  The  venom  of  sin  lies  there.  This 
makes  sin  so  exceeding  sinful,  that  it  is  against  the  God  of  love.  But 
if  you  never  felt  that,  then  you  do  not  love  him ;  and,  for  certain,  you 
are  not  forgiven. 

Look  at  others  :  they  do  not  love  God,  for  they  do  not  care  for  his 
house  where  his  people  meet.  They  seldom  come  to  the  meeting  for 
worship ;  and  if  they  come,  it  is  from  some  other  motive  than  to  meet 
with  God.  They  do  not  care  for  his  day.  Sundays  are  very  dreary 
in  London,  so  they  say.  There  is  nothing  to  interest  them,  for  they 
have  no  interest  in  the  great  Father,  or  his  incarnate  Son ;  they  have 
no  care  to  hear  of  him,  or  to  praise  him,  or  to  pray  to  him.  They  do 
not  care  for  his  Hook,  though  it  is  a  world  of  delights  and  comforts. 
The  Bible  is  perfumed  with  the  love  of  God,  but  they  perceive  not 
its  fragrance.  The  Saviour's  face  is  to  be  seen  reflected  in  almost 
every  page,  and  yet  some  think  that  the  Bible  is  more  dull  than  an  old 
almanack  ;  and,  though  they  must  keep  it  in  their  house — for  it  is- 
respectable  to  have  a  copy  of  it — yet  to  read  it,  and  to  read  it  with 
pleasure — why,  that  has  never  happened  to  them ;  nor  is  there  any 
likelihood  that  it  ever  will  unless  they  get  made  anew. 

Nor  do  they  care  for  God's  people.  In  fact,  they  like  a  quiet  joke 
against  Christian  people ;  and  sometimes,  if  they  can  see  faults 
in  them — and,  oh,  how  readily  they  may ! — they  report  those  faults 
with  considerable  exaggerations,  and  feel  pleased  to  eat  up  the  faults 


'66  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

of  God's  people  as  they  eat  bread !  Want  of  love  to  tlie  children 
argues  want  of  love  to  their  Father.  "  He  that  lovethhini  that  begat 
loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him ;  "  and  we  know  that  we  love 
God  when  we  love  his  children.  But  if  in  your  heart  there  is  no  such 
love  to  his  children,  to  his  Book,  to  his  day,  to  his  house,  or  to  his 
service,  you  may  rest  quite  certain,  my  friend,  that  your  guilt  clings 
to  you  still.  You  are  unpardoned,  and  God  will  require  that 
which  is  past,  and  call  you  to  account.  For  every  secret  thing  he  will 
bring  you  into  judgment,  and  for  every  idle  word  that  you  have  spoken 
he  will  take  reckoning  of  you.  Ah !  how  sad  it  is  that  when  I  am 
longing  to  speak  joyously  about  the  love  that  arises  out  of  pardoned 
sin,  I  am  compelled,  for  pity's  sake,  to  turn  aside  to  give  a  warning  to 
many  who,  having  no  love  to  God,  prove  by  that  fact  that  they  have 
never  been  forgiven ! 

So  I  leave  the  first  point.  It  is  supposed  in  the  text,  and  taken  for 
granted,  that  all  pardoned  sinners  will  love  him  who  has  pardoned 
them. 

II.     But  now,  secondly,  IT  is  SUGGESTED  IN  THE  TEXT,  THAT  THERE 

ARE  DIFFERENCES  OF   DEGREE   IN  THE   MATTER    OF   LOVE    TO    GOD.       "  Tell 

me  which  of  them  will  love  him  most."  These  words  evidently  show 
that  some  persons  love  God  more  than  others,  and  that,  albeit  there 
must  be  a  sincere  love  to  God  in  all  pardoned  sinners,  yet  there  is  not 
ihe  same  degree  of  love.  Love  is  evidently  a  grace  which  is  not 
stereotyped,  and  cast  in  a  mould,  so  as  to  be  the  same  in  every  case, 
and  at  every  time.  Love  is  a  thing  of  life :  it  is,  therefore,  a  thing  of 
•growth.  It  is  certainly  so  in  our  own  selves.  There  was  a  time  when 
we  did  not  love  God  so  much  as  we  do  now ;  and  I  grieve  to  say  that 
there  are  even  now  times  when  we  do  not  love  God  so  much  as  we 
-once  did,  for  we  grow  cold  and  backsliding.  Love  is  not  like  a  piece 
•of  cast  iron,  fixed  and  set ;  but  it  grows,  and  has  its  times  of  budding, 
flowering,  and  leaf -shedding.  It  is  like  a  fire ;  at  one  time  it  may 
burn  low,  and  at  another  time  it  may  be  blown  up  to  a  very  vehe 
ment  heat.  Love  rises  and  falls :  I  speak  not  of  God's  love  to  us ; 
but  of  our  love  to  God.  It  has  its  ups  and  downs,  its  summers  and 
its  winters,  its  flood-tides  and  its  ebbs  ;  and  if  we  find  a  change  in  love, 
in  the  same  heart,  we  are  not  at  all  astonished  that  it  should  differ  in 
different  hearts. 

Besides,  we  know  that  there  are  differences  in  love,  because  there  are 
differences  in  all  the  other  graces.  Faith — some  men  have  much  faith. 
God  be  thanked  that  there  are  men  of  strong  faith  still  on  the  face  of 
the  earth  !  But  there  are  others  who  have  a  faith  which,  though  a  true 
faith,  is  a  very  weak  one.  It  is  a  trembling  faith.  It  cannot  walk  the 
waves  with  Peter,  but  it  can  sink  with  him,  and  it  can  cry  out  for 
deliverance.  Faith,  in  some  Christians,  seems  to  be  a  very  feeble 
affair.  As  I  said  the  other  day,  they  hardly  know  whether  it  is  faith 
or  unbelief.  Their  cry  is,  "  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief," 
as  if  they  had  made  a  mistake  in  calling  it  faith  at  all,  for  it  was  so 
mixed  with  unbelief.  It  is  not  always  such  an  infant  grace,  for  there 
are  strong  believers,  who  have  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens 
— men  who  have  borne  their  cross  without  impatience,  and  their  tes 
timony  without  cowardice  :  men  who  have  conquered  sin,  and  lived 


LOVE'S  COMPETITION.  67 

in  holiness,  and  brought  glory  to  God.  Faith,  like  a  ladder,  has  its 
lower  and  its  higher  rounds.  Faith  has  its  dawning,  its  noon,  its 
flhade.  We  are  sure  that  it  is  so,  for  we  have  observed  it  in  ourselves, 
and  seen  it  in  others.  We  have  seen  it  great,  and  we  have  seen  it  little. 

The  practical  point  I  would  reach  is  just  this.  Let  us  look,  first  oj 
all,  to  our  love  in  its  sincerity.  What  if  my  love  may  not  be  compared 
with  yours  as  to  degree  ?  Yet  the  Lord  grant  that  I  may  truly  love 
him.  Peter  could  not  say  that  he  loved  Christ  more  than  others,  but 
he  did  say,  "  Thou  knowest  all  things ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee." 
A  little  pearl  is  a  pearl  as  much  as  a  great  one,  though  every  one  of  us 
would  sooner  have  the  greater  pearl.  There  is  the  Queen's  image  on 
a  fourpenny  piece  as  certainly  as  there  is  upon  the  sovereign : 
though  we  would  all  prefer  the  golden  coin.  There  is  the  image  of 
God  on  all  his  people's  faith  and  love,  whether  great  or  little.  The 
main  thing  with  the  coin  is  to  be  sure  that  it  is  genuine  metal.  So, 
if  love  be  real  lore,  that  is  the  main  point.  Do  you  love  the  Lord 
with  all  your  heart  ?  If  so,  strive  to  have  more  love,  but  do  not  fling 
away  what  you  have,  for  you  would  thus  despise  what  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  wrought  in  you. 

Endeavour  also,  dear  friends,  to  have  growing  love.  Do  not  be  satis 
fied  to  be  to-day  what  you  were  twelve  months  ago.  I  am  afraid 
that  some  Christians  do  not  grow  much.  I  am  very  glad  when  I  see 
them  grow  downward,  when  they  are  rooted  in  humility,  when  they 
have  truer  views  of  themselves  than  they  ever  yet  had,  and  a  deeper 
sense  of  their  indebtedness  to  God.  That  is  good  growth.  Try  to 
have,  however,  a  love  that  grows,  so  that  you  may  more  forcibly  love 
Jesus  Christ  than  you  did  in  days  that  are  past.  Do  say  to  yourself, 
"Well,  if  I  have  ever  so  little  love,  it  shall  be  practical  love,  I  will 
show  it.  I  will  be  doing  something  for  my  Lord."  The  woman, 
by  whose  means  this  parable  was  called  forth,  loved  Christ  so  that  she 
brought  her  alabaster  box  of  ointment,  and  anointed  his  feet,  and 
washed  them  with  tears,  and  wiped  them  with  the  hair  of  her  head. 
And  one  of  the  best  ways  to  make  love  grow  is  to  use  all  the  love  you 
have.  Is  it  not  so  with  merchants  and  their  money  ?  If  they  want  to 
increase  their  capital,  they  trade  with  it.  If  you  want  to  increase 
your  love  to  Jesus,  use  it.  Do  not  merely  talk  about  it,  but  actually 
serve  him  under  its  sweet  constraint.  It  is  a  very  poor  Christianity 
that  consists  in  sitting  still  and  dreaming,  and  never  attempting  any 
practical  service  for  Jesus,  our  Lord.  He  that  thinks  that  he  will 
quietly  enjoy  religion  all  alone,  will  soon  find  that  he  has  very  little 
of  it  to  enjoy ;  for  doubts  and  fears  will  breed  in  swarms  in  a  stagnant 
atmosphere.  Where  there  is  none  of  the  blessed  wind  of  activity, 
there  will  soon  be  mists  and  damps — perhaps  foul  gas  and  fevers. 

And  if  you  have  but  little  love  at  present,  cry  to  God  to  give  you  an 
intenser  love ;  and,  though  I  have  said  that  to  use  your  love  is  a  good 
way  to  increase  it,  yet  there  is  something  still  better,  and  that  is,  to 
know  more,  and  feel  more  of  the  love  of  Christ  to  you.  If  you  take 
exercise,  you  will  increase  your  sense  of  warmth ;  but  it  will  be  a  far 
surer  thing  if  you  get  where  the  sun  shines  with  equatorial  heat :  so 
other  means  are  good,  but  to  get  near  to  Jesus  is  best  of  all.  In  pro 
portion  as  you  live  close  to  the  glorious  central  sun  of  the  love  of 


68  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Christ,  you  will  yourself  be  warm.  I  was  about  to  compare  the 
of  my  Lord  to  a  volcanic  mountain  constantly  streaming  with  the 
burning  lava  of  love.  Oh,  that  my  soul  could  but  get  that  fire-stream 
poured  into  it  to  set  the  whole  of  my  nature  on  fire,  and  consume  me 
in  the  flame-torrent  of  love  ! 

You  see  that  it  is  suggested  in  the  text  that  there  are  differences  in 
the  degrees  of  love  ;  and  there  let  us  leave  it,  for  we  must  come  to  the 
third  point. 

III.  Thirdly,  THE  TEXT  PUTS  TO  us  A  QUESTION,  "  WHO  WILL  LOVE 
HIM  MOST  ?" 

I  want  to  introduce  the  question  to  you  by  saying  that  it  is  a  very 
interesting  one.  After  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  us,  one  takes  pleasure 
in  thinking  what  will  come  of  it.  One  likes  to  think  of  the  farmer's 
harvest.  After  all  that  ploughing  and  sowing,  what  will  come  of  it  ? 
It  is  interesting  to  begin  to  calculate  the  crop,  and  to  anticipate  the 
shouts  of  harvest-home.  Now,  what  will  come  of  infinite  love,  the 
supreme  act  of  God's  heart  to  men  ?  What  will  come  out  of  the  gift 
of  his  Only-begotten  Son,  and  the  putting  away  of  sin  through  the 
death  of  Jesus  ?  What  will  men  do  for  God  after  this  ?  How  much 
will  they  love  him  ?  It  is  an  interesting  question.  What  have  you  to 
say  upon  it  ? 

And  it  is  a  personal  question,  which  the  Lord  puts  to  each  one  of  us. 
You  know  he  put  it  to  Simon.  "  Tell  me,"  said  he,  "  which  of  them 
will  love  him  most  ?  "  And  he  puts  it  to  us  to  consider  it,  to  turn  it 
over,  and  to  give  our  own  verdict ;  because  there  may  be  some  blunder 
in  our  heart  which  this  question  is  meant  to  set  right ;  and  the  thoughts 
which  the  enquiry  will  cause  in  the  spirit  are  meant  to  correct  our 
judgments.  Therefore  do  not  put  it  aside,  but  try  now  to  answer  it 
as  the  Lord  puts  it. 

It  is  a  practical  question — u  Which  of  them  will  love  him  most :  " — 
for  everything  in  conduct  depends  upon  love.  Where  there  is  much 
love,  there  is  sure  to  be  much  service  in  proportion  to  the  strength. 
Give  us  a  church  that  loves  Christ  Jesus  much.  You  will  have  mighty 
prayer-meetings  ;  you  will  have  a  holy  membership ;  you  will  have 
liberal  giving  to  the  cause  of  Christ ;  you  will  have  hearty  praising 
of  his  name ;  you  will  have  careful  walking  before  the  world ;  you 
will  have  earnest  endeavours  for  the  conversion  of  sinners.  Missions 
at  home  and  abroad  will  be  set  on  foot  when  love  is  fervent.  When 
the  heart  is  right,  everything  is  likely  to  be  right ;  but  when  the  heart 
goes  wrong,  oh,  what  a  fatal  thing  it  is !  A  disease  of  the  heart  is 
looked  upon  as  the  worst  of  mischiefs  that  can  happen  to  a  man.  One 
old  doctor  of  my  acquaintance  used  to  say,  "  We  can  do  nothing  with 
the  heart."  God  keep  us  from  a  diseased  heart :  a  fatty  degeneration 
of  the  heart,  or  an  ossification  of  the  heart  towards  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ! 

The  question  asked  in  the  text  is,  however,  a  somewhat  limited  one. 
It  is  this.  The  question  is  not,  who  in  all  the  world  will  love  C.irifrt 
most  ? — but  who  out  of  two  persons,  in  whom  there  is  no  parti<  >ular 
difference  of  character,  but  only  this  one  difference — that  the  one  >wes 
five  hundred  pence,  and  the  other  fifty — which  out  of  these  twc  will 
love  Christ  most  ?  We  will  suppose  that  they  are  equally  tender  of 


LOVE'S    COMPETITION.  6& 

heart,  and  eq  ually  regenerate ;  and  that  they  do  know,  each  of  them, 
certainly,  that  his  debt  has  been  discharged.  The  only  difference 
between  them  is  that  one  has  been  a  grosser  sinner  than  the  other ; 
and  the  question  asked  is,  "  Which  of  those  two  will  love  the  Saviour 
most?" 

It  is  a  very  simple  question,  too,  not  at  all  hard  to  answer ;  for  even 
this  iSimou,  the  Pharisee,  who,  like  the  rest  of  the  Pharisees,  was1 
very  badly  instructed,  yet,  nevertheless,  could  see  his  way  to  answer 
the  question  correctly.  So  he  answered,  "  I  suppose  that  he,  to  whom 
he  forgave  most ;  "  and  the  Lord  replied,  "  Thou  hast  rightly  j  udged." 
Thus  I  have  set  before  you  the  question. 

IV.  And  so,  lastly,  IT  is  EXPECTED  THAT  WE  GIVE  A  REPLY;  and 
I  do  wish  for  myself — and  therefore  wish  the  same  for  you — that 
each  one  of  us  may  say,  "I  am  the  man  that  ought  to  love  the  Lord 
Jesus  most ;  and  by  his  grace  I  will  surely  do  so." 

The  most  indebted  should  love  most.  Have  we  not  here  many  five- 
hundred-pence  debtors?  Some  of  nry  dear  brethren  here  present 
were  among  outward  sinners  the  very  chief — men  who  could  drink, 
and  swear,  and  lie,  ringleaders  in  everything  that  was  evil.  Blessed 
be  God  that  such  have  been  here  led  to  Jesus !  We  heard  the  other 
night  a  dear  brother  tell  us  of  what  he  used  to  be.  With  modesty 
and  shamefacedness  he  mentioned  how  great  his  sin  had  been ;  but 
his  sin  was  put  away ;  he  was  pardoned,  and  he  knew  it,  and  re 
joiced  in  it.  Such  a  man  must  say,  "  I  will  love  him  most."  Where 
there  has  been  overt  sin,  palpable,  undeniable — where  the  outward 
character  has  been  defiled  and  stained  with  it,  forgiveness  involves  us 
in  deep  obligation  to  grateful  love.  You  may  stand  in  the  front 
rank,  and  love  Jesus  most. 

But  I  am  not  going  to  let  you  rise  to  that  eminence  of  obligation, 
or  rather  sink  to  that  depth  of  indebtedness  without  having  a  struggle 
for  it  myself.  Some  of  us  take  that  place  of  eminent  obligation  on 
another  ground,  and  yet  it  is  the  same  ground  ;  for  while  some  of  us 
never  were  openly  profane,  or  drunken,  or  immoral,  we  have  to  confess 
the  equal  greatness  of  our  sin  on  account  of  our  offending  against 
light  and  knowledge,  against  early  convictions,  against  a  holy  training, 
against  a  tender  conscience,  against  singular  favours  received  from 
God ;  and  therefore  with  shame  we  begin  to  take  the  lowest  room, 
acknowledging  that  to  us  belongs  the  greatest  debt  of  grateful  praise 
to  God.  When  I  was  preaching  once  I  said — and  I  meant  it — that 
I  should  be  the  deepest  debtor  to  divine  grace  that  ever  entered  the 
gates  of  glory,  and  1  ventured  to  say — 

"Then  loudest  of  the  crowd  I'll  sing, 
While  heaven's  resounding  mansions  ring, 
With  shouts  of  sovereign  grace." 

It  was  in  a  country  place,  and  as  I  came  down  the  pulpit  stairs  many 
clustered  about  me  to  shake  hands,  and  one  old  lady  said  to  me, 
"  You  made  one  great  blunder  in  your  sermon."  I  said,  "  My  dear 
soul,  I  dare  say  I  made  a  score.  I  am  a  great  blunderer."  "No," 
said  she,  "  but  you  said  that  you  would  sing  the  loudest  when  you 
get  to  heaven. ;  but  you  shall  not,  for  I  owe  more  to  divine  grace  than 


70  METROPOLITAN    TABERXACLE    PULPIT. 

you  possibly  can  do.  I  was  once  a  great  sinner,  and  I  have  had  much 
forgiven,  and  therefore  I  shall  praise  God  more  than  you."  I  did  not 
yield  the  point,  but  I  held  my  tongue.  I  could  let  her  be  first,  and 
yet  take  the  same  place  myself.  As  I  went  down  the  aisle  many 
friends  declared  that  they  would  not  give  way  to  me  in  that  point,  and 
that  they  ought  to  praise  God  more  than  I,  for  they  owed  him  more. 
It  was  a  happy  controversy.  It  reminded  me  of  Ralph  Erskine's  Con 
tention  among  the  Birds  of  Paradise,  where  he  represents  the  saints 
in  glory,  each  saying  that  he  shall  lie  the  lowest,  and  shall  praise 
the  most  sweetly  the  infinite  love  of  God.  I  think  that  there  are 
grounds  upon  which  some  here,  who  have  been  kept  from  everything 
which  is  outwardly  evil,  may,  nevertheless,  feel  that  inwardly  they 
are  five  hundred  pence  debtors ;  and  so,  when  the  question  is  asked, 
"  Which  will  love  him  most  ?  "  they  will  say,  "Why,  I !  I  was  not  so 
honest  as  some  of  those  wicked  fellows,  I  did  not  dare  to  say  all  they 
said,  nor  to  be  openly  vile  as  they  were ;  but  I  was  quite  as  bad  at 
heart,  and  if  I  dare  have  had  my  full  swing,  I  should  have  been  as 
base  as  they  were." 

But  I  do  not  think  that  the  spirit  of  the  parable  is  exhausted 
by  either  of  these  cases.  I  think  it  includes  more.  There  are  some 
who  evidently  have  not  had  more  forgiven  than  others  as  to  out 
ward  sin;  on  the  contrary,  they  have  been  prudently  brought  up 
from  their  childhood,  and  yet  for  many  a  year  they  have  been  fore 
most  in  service,  and  have  been  special  lovers  of  the  Lord.  Though 
by  no  means  great  offenders  in  their  unconverted  state,  they  are 
certainly  great  saints  now ;  intense  in  their  service,  consistent  in 
their  character,  fervent  in  their  love.  How  is  it  that  some  who 
shout  that  they  have  been  snatched  from  the  burning,  and  according 
to  their  own  statement  were  the  very  chief  of  sinners,  and  make  a 
great  trumpet-blowing  over  their  own  conversion,  yet  do  not  love 
the  Lord  Jesus  one  half  so  much  as  these  dear,  quiet  souls  who 
never  went  into  open  sin  ?  I  take  it,  the  reason  is  this.  Our  esti 
mate  of  sin  is,  after  all,  the  thing  which  will  create  and  inflame  our 
love ;  for  if  a  man  thinks  sin  to  be  exceeding  sinful,  and  feels  it  to 
be  so,  he  has  a  deeper  sense  of  his  indebtedness  than  the  man  who  may 
have  committed  grosser  vices,  but  has  never  seen  them  in  their  real 
blackness,  as  they  appear  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance.  Too 
many  believers  know  little  of  what  it  is  to  be  amazed  and  astounded 
at  the  heinousness  of  their  transgressions.  Why,  time  was  with  me 
— and  is  now — when,  if  I  had  inadvertently  spoken  a  word  that  was 
not  exactly  true,  it  cost  me  more  pain  to  think  of  what  was  only  a 
hasty  error  than  it  has  cost  many  men  to  repent  of  their  cursing  and 
swearing.  I  am  sorry  to  say  it,  but  1  believe  that  some  make  a  glory 
of  their  shame,  and  dare  to  brag  of  what  they  used  to  be.  They  stand 
up  and  make  confession  without  a  tear  in  their  eye,  or  a  blush  on  their 
cheek.  Such  testimony  ought  never  to  be  heard,  for  it  is  a  positive 
creator  of  evil  in  the  minds  of  those  that  hear  it.  I  am  sorry  to  have 
to  say  it;  but  I  know  that  it  is  so.  Testimonies  are  published  which 
are  provocatives  to  vice,  and  rather  tend  to  make  men  immoral  than 
to  make  them  turn  to  God.  In  certain  circles  he  is  treated  as  a  hero 
who  can  prove  that  he  has  been  a  great  rascal.  It  was  not  thus  that 


LOVE'S   COMPETITION.  71 

the  prodigal  was  received  by  his  father  :  he  never  hung  up  his  old 
rags  as  a  trophy.  0  brethren,  when  we  talk  about  what  we  were,  we 
had  better  veil  our  faces.  Our  former  follies  are  things  to  be  confessed 
to  God  in  secret ;  and  if  they  must  be  spoken  in  public,  to  the  praise 
of  divine  grace,  there  must  be  a  careful  avoidance  of  anything  like 
boasting,  for  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  the  things  that  were 
done  of  them  in  secret;  When  there  is  really  a  deep  sense  of  sin, 
there  is  a  holy,  delicate  way  of  speaking  of  it.  Old  sins  are  not  to  be 
talked  of  as  an  old  soldier  shoulders  his  crutch,  and  shows  how  fields 
were  won.  A  crimson  blush  is  the  best  colour  to  wear  when  we  speak 
of  our  lost  estate.  To  talk  smilingly  of  injuries  done  to  the  delicacy 
of  our  own  conscience,  of  awful  injuries  done  to  others  by  a  foul 
example,  is  not  to  glorify  God,  but  to  enthrone  vice. 

And,  dear  friends,  I  believe  that  some,  whom  God  has  preserved  by 
preventing  grace  from  going  into  great  sin,  will,  nevertheless,  love 
him  most  because  they  have  a  clearer  view  than  others  of  ivhat  it  cost  in 
order  that  they  might  be^pardoned.  Happy  are  they  wiio  remember  well 
the  griefs  of  our  Lord  in  the  garden  of  Gethsernane 
i -.-  . .  i .  •••• 

"  There's  ne'er  a  gift  his  hand  bestows 
But  cost  his  heart  a  groan." 

Oh,  if  your  heart  dwells  on  Calvary,  where  falls  the  crimson  shower 
of  Christ's  most  precious  blood — if  you  gaze  intently  upon  the  wounds 
of  Jesus  till  you  die  into  the  death  of  the  Crucified,  then  do  you  love 
much.  It  is  well  to  have  the  soul  torn  with  anguish  because 

"  It  p'o'st  HIM  cries'and  tears 

To 'bring  us  near  to  God  : 
Great  ;was  our  debt,  and  he  appears 

Toimake  the  payment  good." 

For,  in  proportion  as  you  estimate  the  sacrifice,  you  will  love  him 
whose  own  self  was  the  sacrifice  for  sin.  Brethren,  I  hope  you  all 
love  Christ  Jesus  more  than  I  do ;  for  I  would  have  him  possess  the 
highest  love  of  every  human  heart :  and  yet  I  will  not  be  willingly 
excelled  by  any  one  of  you  in  a  competition  of  love  to  Jesus.  I  will 
run  my  very  best  that  no  man  take  my  crown. 

But  supposing,  dear  friends,  any  of  you  do  love  him  most,  then 
show  it,  just  as  that  woman  did  who  brought  the  alabaster  box  of 
precious  ointment.  If  you  love  him  most,  do  most.  Do  everything 
that  is  possible  to  humanity,  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  If  you 
have  done  much,  do  ten  times  more.  Nevei  talk  of  what  you  have 
done,  but  go  on  to  something  else.  An  officer  rode  up  to  his  general, 
and  said,  "  Sir,  we  have  taken  two  guns  from  the  enemy."  "  It 
is  well,"  said  the  general,  "  Take  two  more." 

If  you  have  most  love  to  Christ,  do  most  spiritual  good  to  men. 
Yet  do  somewhat  distinctly  for  Jesiis.  It  is  a  blessed  token  for  good 
when  our  work  among  men  is  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  sinners  as 
for  love  of  Jesus.  When  we  love  the  brethren,  it  should  be  because 
they  belong  to  Christ.  It  is  sweet  to  serve  the  Lord  Christ  himself. 
See  how  the  holy  woman  offered  homage  distinctly  to  her  Lord :  tears 


72  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

for  his  travel-stains,  hair  to  wipe  his  feet,  ointment  to  anoint  his  flesh. 
Do  your  choicest  and  best  for  Jesus,  for  Jesus  personally. 

Try  to  do  it  most  humbly.  Stand  behind  him.  Do  not  ask  anybody 
to  look  at  you.  Do  it  very  quietly.  Do  it,  feeling  that  it  is  a  great 
honour  to  be  permitted  to  do  the  least  service  for  Jesus.  Do  not  dream 
of  saying,  "I  am  somebody.  lam  doing  great  things.  I  do  more 
even  than  Simon,  the  Pharisee.  Gome  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord  of 
hosts."  Jehu  talked  in  that  fashion ;  but  he  was  good  for  nothing. 
Do  your  personal  part  without  seeking  to  be  seen  of  men. 

Do  it  self-sacrificingly.  Bring  your  best  ointment.  Pinch  yourself 
for  Christ.  Make  sacrifices — go  without  this  and  that  to  have  some 
thing  wherewith  you  can  do  him  honour. 

Do  it  very  penitently.  When  you  serve  him  best,  still  let  the  tears 
fall  on  his  feet,  mingling  with  the  costly  ointment.  The  tears  and 
the  ointment  go  well  together.  Mourn  your  guilt,  while  you  rejoice 
in  his  grace. 

Do  it  continuously.  "  This  woman,"  said  Christ,  "  since  I  came  in 
hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my  feet."  Do  not  leave  off  loving  him  and 
serving  him.  Do  it  on,  and  on,  and  on,  however  much  the  flesh  may 
ask  for  respite  from  service. 

Do  it  enthusiastically.  See  how  she  kissed  his  feet ;  nothing  less  than 
this  would  express  her  love.  Stoop  down,  and  kiss  and  kiss  again 
those  blessed  feet  which  travelled  so  far  in  love  for  you.  Throw  your 
whole  soul  into  your  deed  of  love.  "Why,"  they  will  say,  "Mrs. 
So-and-so  is  enthusiastic.  She  is  quite  carried  away  by  her  zeal." 
Let  it  be  true,  more  and  more.  Never  mind  what  the  cold-hearted 
think,  for  they  cannot  understand  you.  They  will  say,  "Ah!  that 
young  person  is  too  fast  by  half."  Never  mind.  Be  faster  still.  Wise 
people  cry  out,  "  He  has  too  many  irons  in  the  fire."  But  I  say  to 
you,  blow  up  the  fire ;  get  all  the  irons  red  hot ;  and  hammer  away 
with  all  your  might.  With  all  your  strength  and  energy  plunge  into 
the  service  of  your  Master.  If  you  love  your  Master,  you  can  best 
show  your  love  by  ardent  service.  The  Lord  bless  you  with  the  utmost 
degree  of  love,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake !  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Psalm  xviii. 


HYMNS  FROM  "  OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 810,  814,  797. 


JJletijoptitmt 


THE   GOOD   SAMARITAN. 


DELIVERED   ON    LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,   JUNE  HTH,   1877,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  behalf  of  the  Hospitals  of  London. 


"  And,  behold,  a  certain  lawyer  stood  up,  and  tempted  him,  saying,  Master,  what 
shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ?  He  said  unto  him,  What  is  written  in  the  law  ? 
how  readest  thou  ?  And  he  answering  said,  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  aD 
thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind  ; 
and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  And  he  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  answered  right : 
this  do,  and  thou  shalt  live.  But  he,  willing  to  justify  himself,  said  unto  Jesus» 
And  who  is  my  neighbour  ?  And  Jesus  answering  said,  A  certain  man  went  down 
from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  and  fell  among  thieves,  which  stripped  him  of  his  raiment, 
and  wounded  him,  and  departed,  leaving  him  half  dead.  And  by  chance  there 
came  down  a  certain  priest  that  way  :  and  when  he  saw  him,  he  passed  by  on  the 
other  side.  And  likewise  a  Levite,  when  he  was  at  the  place,  came  and  looked  on 
him,  and  passed  by  on  the  other  side.  But  a  certain  Samaritan,  as  he  journeyed, 
came  where  he  was  :  and  when  he  saw  him  he  had  compassion  on  him,  and  went 
to  him,  and  bound  up  his  wounds,  pouring  in  oil  and  wine,  and  set  him  on  his  own 
beast,  and  brought  him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of  him.  And  on  the  morrow  when 
he  departed,  he  took  out  two  pence,  and  gave  them  to  the  host,  and  said  unto  him, 
Take  care  of  him  ;  and  whatsoever  thou  spendest  more,  when  I  come  again,  I  will 
repay  thee.  Which  now  of  these  three,  thinkest  thou,  was  neighbour  unto  him  that 
fell  among  the  thieves  ?  And  he  said,  He  that  showed  mercy  on  him.  Then  said 
Jesus  unto  him,  Go,  and  do  thou  likewise." — Luke  x.  25 — 37. 

OUR  text  is  the  whole  story  of  the  Samaritan  ;  but  as  that  is  very  long, 
suppose,  for  our  memories'  sake,  we  consider  the  exhortation  in  the 
thirty- seventh  verse  to  be  our  text.  "  Go,  and  do  thou  likewise" 

There  are  certain  persons  in  the  world  who  will  not  allow  the  preacher 
to  speak  upon  anything  but  those  doctrinal  statements  concerning  the 
way  of  salvation  which  are  known  as  *'  the  gospel."  If  the  preacher 
shall  insist  upon  some  virtue  or  practical  grace  they  straightway  say 
that  he  was  not  preaching  the  gospel,  that  he  became  legal,  and  was  a 
mere  moral  teacher.  We  do  not  stand  in  any  awe  of  such  criticism, 
for  we  clearly  perceive  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  would  very 
frequently  have  come  under  it.  Read  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and 
No.  1  360.  19 


85C  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

judge  whether  certain  people  would  be  content  to  hear  the  like  of  tt 
preached  to  them  on  the  Sabbath.  They  would  condemn  it  as  containing 
very  little  gospel  and  too  much  about  good  works.  Our  Lord  was  a  great 
practical  preacher.  He  frequently  delivered  addresses  in  which  he 
made  answer  to  questioners,  or  gave  direction  to  seekers,  or  upbraided 
offenders,  and  he  gave  a  prominence  to  practical  truth  such  as  some  of 
his  ministers  dare  not  imitate.  Jesus  tells  us  over  and  over  again  the 
manner  in  which  we  are  to  live  towards  our  fellow-men,  and  he  lays 
great  stress  upon  the  love  which  should  shine  throughout  the  Christian 
character.  The  story  of  the  good  Samaritan,  which  is  now  before  us,  is 
a  case  in  point,  for  our  Lord  is  there  explaining  a  point  which  arose  out 
of  the  question,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ?  "  The  question 
is  legal,  and  the  answer  is  to  the  point.  But  let  it  never  be  forgotten 
that  what  the  law  demands  of  us  the  gospel  really  produces  in  us.  The 
law  tells  us  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  it  is  one  object  of  the  gospel  to 
raise  us  to  that  condition.  Hence  our  Saviour's  teaching,  though  it  be 
eminently  practical,  is  always  evangelical :  even  in  expounding  the  law 
he  has  always  a  gospel  design.  TAVO  ends  are  served  by  his  setting  up  a 
high  standard  of  duty :  on  the  one  he  slays  the  self-righteousness  "which 
claims  to  have  kept  the  law  by  making  men  feel  the  impossibility  of 
salvation  by  their  own  works;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  calls 
believers  away  from  all  content  with  the  mere  decencies  of  life  and  the 
routine  of  outward  religion,  and  stimulates  them  to  seek  after  the 
highest  degree  of  holiness— indeed,  after  that  excellence  of  character 
which  only  his  grace  can  give.  This  morning  I  trust  that  though  I 
keep  very  much  to  practical  points  I  shall  be  guided  by  the  Spirit  of 
holiness,  and  shall  not  really  be  guilty  of  legality,  nor  will  any  of  you  be 
led  into  it.  I  shall  not  hold  up  the  love  of  our  neighbour  as  a  condition 
of  salvation,  but  as  a  fruit  of  it.  I  shall  not  speak  of  obedience  to  the 
law  as  the  road  to  heaven,  but  I  shall  show  you  the  pathway  which  is 
to  be  followed  by  the  faith  which  works  by  love. 

Let  us  proceed  to  the  parable  at  once. 

I.  Our  first  observation  will  be  that  THE  WORLD  is  VERY  FULL  OF 
AFFLICTION.  This  story  is  but  one  among  a  thousand  based  upon  an 
unhappy  occurrence.  "  A  certain  man  went  down  from  Jerusalem  to 
Jericho,  and  fell  among  thieves."  He  went  upon  a  short  journey,  and 
almost  lost  his  life  on  the  road.  We  are  never  secure  from  trouble  ;  it 
meets  us  around  the  family  hearth,  and  causes  us  to  suffer  in  our  own 
persons  or  in  those  of  the  dearest  relatives  ;  it  walks  into  our  shops  and 
counting-houses,  and  tries  us  ;  and  when  we  leave  home  it  becomes  our 
fellow-traveller,  and  communes  with  us  on  the  road.  "  Although  afflic 
tion  cometh  not  forth  of  the  dust,  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the 
ground  ;  yet  man  is  born  unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward." 

Frequently  the  greater  afflictions  are  not  occasioned  ly  the  fault  of  the 
sufferer.  Nobody  could  blame  the  poor  Jew  that  when  he  was  going 
down  to  Jericho  about  his  business  the  thieves  beset  him,  and  demanded 
his  money,  and  that  when  he  made  some  little  resistance  they  wounded 
him.  stripped  him,  and  left  him.  half  dead.  How  could  he  be  blamed  ? 
It  was  to  him  a  pure  misfortune.  Believe  me,  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
Borrow  in  the  world  which  does  not  arise  out  of  the  vice  or  folly  of  the 
persons  enduring  it :  it  comes  from  the  hand  of  God  upon  the  sufferer, 


THE  GOOD   SAMARITAN.  351 

•not  because  he  is  a  sinner  above  others,  but  for  wise  ends  unknown  to 
us.  Now,  this  is  the  kind  of  distress  which  above  all  others  demands 
Christian  sympathy,  and  the  very  kind  which  abounds  in  our  hospitals. 
The  man  is  not  to  blame  for  lying  there  beaten  and  bruised:  those  gaping 
wounds  from  which  his  life  is  oozing  are  not  of  his  own  inflicting,  nor 
received  in  a  drunken  brawl  or  through  attempting  a  foolhardy  feat ;  he 
suffers  from  no  fault  of  his  own,  and  therefore  he  has  a  pressing  claim 
upon  the  benevolence  of  his  fellow  men. 

Still,  very  muck  distress  is  caused  by  the  wickedness  of  others.  The 
poor  Jew  on  the  road  to  Jericho  was  the  victim,  of  the  thieves  who 
wounded  him  and  left  him  half  dead.  Man  is  man's  worst  enemy.  If 
man  were  but  tamed  to  peace  the  wildest  beast  in  the  world  would  be 
subdued ;  and  if  evil  were  purged  from  men's  hearts,  the  major  part  of 
the  ills  of  life  would  cease  at  once.  The  drunkard's  wastefulness  and 
brutality,  the  proud  man's  scorn,  the  oppressor's  cruelty,  the  slanderer's 
lie,  the  trickster's  cheat,  the  heartless  man's  grinding  of  the  faces  of 
the  poor, — these  put  together  are  the  roots  of  almost  all  the  poisonous 
weeds  which  multiply  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  to  our  shame  and 
sorrow.  If  dominant  sins  could  be  taken  away,  as  blessed  be  God  they 
shall  when  Christ  has  triumphed  through  the  world,  much  of  human 
sorrow  would  be  assuaged.  When  we  see  innocent  persons  suffering  as 
the  result  of  the  sin  of  others  our  pity  should  be  excited.  How  many 
there  are  of  little  children  starving,  and  pining  into  chronic  disease 
through  a  father's  drunkenness,  which  keeps  the  table  bare  !  AVives, 
too,  who  work  hard  themselves  are  brought  down  to  pining  sickness 
and  painful  disease  by  the  laziness  and  cruelty  of  those  who  should 
have  cherished  them.  Work-people,  too,  are  often  sorely  oppressed  in 
their  wages,  and  have  to  work  themselves  to  death's  door  to  earn  a 
pittance.  Those  are  the  people  who  ought  to  have  our  sympathy  when 
accident  or  disease  bring  them  to  the  hospital  gates  "  wounded  and  half 
dead." 

The  man  in  the  parable  was  quite  helpless,  he  could  do  nothing  for 
himself ;  there  he  must  lie  and  die,  those  huge  wounds  must  bleed  his 
very  soul  away  unless  a  generous  hand  shall  interfere.  It  is  as  much  as 
he  can  do  to  groan ;  he  cannot  even  dress  his  wounds,  much  less  arise 
and  seek  a  shelter.  He  is  bleeding  to  death  among  the  pitiless  rocks  of 
the  descent  to  Jericho,  and  he  must  leave  his  body  to  be  fed  upon  by 
kites  and  crows  unless  some  friend  shall  come  to  his  help.  Now,  when 
a  man  can  help  himself,  and  does  not,  he  deserves  to  "suffer ;  when  a 
man  flings  away  opportunities  by  his  idleness  or  self-indulgence  a  measure 
of  suffering  ought  to  be  permitted  to  him  as  a  cure  for  his  vices ;  but 
when  persons  are  sick  or  injured,  and  are  unable  to  pay  for  the  aid  of 
the  nurse  and  the  physician,  then  is  the  time  when  true-hearted  phi 
lanthropy  should  promptly  step  in  and  do  its  best.  So  our  Saviour 
teaches  us  here. 

Certain  paths  of  life  are  peculiarly  subject  to  affliction.  The  way 
which  led  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho  was  always  infested  by  robbers. 
Jerome  tells  us  that  it  was  called  the  "  bloody  way,"  on  account  of  the 
frequent  highway  robberies  and  murders  which  were  there  committed  ; 
and  it  is  not  so  long  ago  as  to  be  beyond  the  memory  of  man  that  an 
English  traveller  met  his  death  on  that  road,  while  even  very  recent 


352  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

travellers  tell  us  that  they  have  been  either  threatened  or  actually  at 
tacked  in  that  particularly  gloomy  region,  the  desert  which  goes  down 
to  the  city  of  palm  trees.  So  also  in  the  world  around  us  there  are 
paths  of  life  which  are  highly  dangerous  and  fearfully  haunted  by 
disease  and  accident.  Years  ago  there  were  many  trades  in  which  from 
want  of  precaution  death  slew  its  thousands.  I  thank  God  that  sanitary 
and  precautionary  laws  are  better  regarded,  and  men's  lives  are  thought 
to  be  somewhat  more  precious.  Yet  still  there  are  ways  of  life  which 
may  each  be  called  "the  bloody  way":  pursuits  which  are  necessary  to 
the  community,  but  highly  dangerous  to  those  who  follow  them.  Our 
mines,  our  railways,  and  our  seas  show  a  terrible  roll  of  suffering  and 
death.  Long  hours  in  ill-ventilated  work-rooms  are  accountable  for 
thousands  of  lives,  and  so  are  stinted  wages,  which  prevent  a  sufficiency 
of  food  from  being  procured.  Many  a  needlewoman's  way  of  life  is 
truly  a  path  of  blood.  When  I  think  of  the  multitudes  of  our  working 
people  in  this  city  who  have  to  live  in  close,  unhealthy  rooms,  crowded 
together  in  lanes  and  courts  where  the  air  is  stagnant,  I  do  not  hesitate 
to  say  that  much  of  the  road  which  has  to  be  trodden  by  the  poor  of 
London  is  as  much  deserving  of  the  name  of  the  way  of  blood  as  the 
road  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho.  If  they  do  not  lose  their  money  it  is 
because  they  never  have  it :  if  they  do  not  fall  among  thieves,  they  fall 
among  diseases  which  practically  wound  them,  and  leave  them  half  dead. 
Now,  if  you  have  not  to  engage  in  such  avocations,  if  your  pathway  does 
not  lead  you  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  but  takes  you,  perhaps,  full 
often  from  Jerusalem  to  Bethany,  where  you  can  enjoy  the  sweetnesses 
of  domestic  lore  and  the  delights  of  Christian  fellowship,  you  ought  to 
be  very  thankful,  and  be  all  the  more  ready  to  assist  those  who  for  your 
gakes,  or  for  the  benefit  of  society  at  large,  have  to  follow  the  more 
dangerous  roads  of  life.  Do  you  not  agree  with  me  that  such  persons 
ought  to  be  among  the  first  to  receive  of  our  Christian  kindness?  Such 
abound  in  our  hospitals  and  elsewhere. 

Let  that  stand  :  it  is  clear  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  affliction  in 
the  world,  and  much  of  it  is  of  the  sort  which  deserves  to  be  succoured 
at  once. 

II.  Secondly,  THERE  ARE  MANY  WHO  NEVER  RELIEVE  AFFLICTION. 
Our  Saviour  tells  us  of  two  at  least  who  ''passed  by  on  the  other  side," 
and  I  suppose  he  might  have  prolonged  the  parable  so  as  to  have 
mentioned  two  dozen  if  he  had  chosen  to  do  so,  and  even  then  he  might 
have  been  content  to  mention  but  one  good  Samaritan,  for  I  hardly  think 
that  there  is  one  good  Samaritan  to  two  heartless  persons.  I  wish 
there  were,  but  I  fear  the  good  Samaritans  are  very  few  in  proportion 
to  the  number  who  act  the  part  of  the  priest  and  the  Levite. 

Now,  notice  who  the  persons  were  that  refused  to  render  aid  to  the 
man  in  distress. 

First,  they  were  brought  to  the  spot  lij  God's  providence  on  purpose  to 
do  so.  What  better  thing  could  the  Lord  himself  do  for  the  poor  man 
half  dead  than  to  bring  some  man  to  help  him  ?  An  angel  could  not 
well  have  met  the  case.  How  should  an  angel,  never  wounded,  under 
stand  binding  up  wounds  and  pouring  in  wine  and  oil.  No,  a  man  was 
wanted  who  would  know  what  was  necessary,  who  would  with  brotherly 
sympathy  cheer  the  mind  while  doctoring  the  body.  In  our  English 


THE   GOOD   SAMAKITAN.  358 

version  we  read,  "  By  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  priest  that 
way  ;"  but  learned  Greek  scholars  read  it,  "By  a  coincidence"  It  waa 
in  the  order  of  divine  providence  that  a  priest  should  come  first  to  this 
afflicted  person,  that  so  he  might  go  and  examine  the  case  as  a  man  of 
education  and  skill,  and  then  when  the  Levite  came  afterwards  he 
would  be  able  to  carry  on  what  the  priest  began  ;  and  if  one  could  nr4- 
carry  the  poor  man,  the  two  might  between  them  be  able  to  bear  him  to 
the  inn,  or  one  might  remain  to  guard  him  while  the  other  ran  for  help. 
God  brought  them  to'this  position,  but  they  wilfully  refused  the  sacred 
duty  which  providence  and  humanity  demanded  of  them.  Now,  you 
that  are  wealthy  are  sent  into  our  city  on  purpose  that  you  may  have 
compassion  upon  the  sick,  the  wounded,  the  poor,  and  the  needy. 
God's  intent  in  endowing  any  person  with  more  substance  than  he 
needs  is  that  he  may  have  the  pleasurable  office,  or  rather  let  me  say, 
the  delightful  privilege,  of  relieving  want  and  woe.  Alas,  how  many 
there  are  who  consider  that  store  which  God  has  put  into  their  hands 
on  purpose  for  the  poor  and  needy  to  be  only  so  much  provision  for 
their  excessive  luxury,  a  luxury  which  pampers  them  but  yields  them 
neither  benefit  nor  pleasure.  Others  dream  that  wealth  is  given  them 
that  they  may  keep  it  under  lock  and  key,  cankering  and  corroding, 
breeding  covetousness  and  care.  Who  dares  roll  a  stone  over  the  well's 
mouth  when  thirst  is  raging  all  around  ?  Who  dares  keep  the  bread 
from  the  women  and  the  children  who  are  ready  to  gnaw  their  own  arms 
for  hunger  ?  Above  all,  who  dares  allow  the  sufferer  to  writhe  in  agony 
uncared  for,  and  the  sick  to  pine  into  their  graves  unnursed  ?  This  is 
no  small  sin :  it  is  a  crime  to  be  answered  for  to  the  Judge  when  he 
shall  come  to  judge  the  ojiick  and  dead.  Those  people  who  neglected 
the  poor  man  were  brought  there  on  purpose  to  relieve  him,  even  as  you 
are,  and  yet  they  passed  by  on  the  other  side. 

They  were  both  of  them  persons,  too,  who  ought  to  have  relieved 
him,  because  they  were  very  familiar  ivith  things  which  should  have 
softened  their  hearts.  If  I  understand  the  passage,  the  priest  was  coming 
down  from  Jerusalem.  I  have  often  wondered  which  way  he  was  going, 
•whether  he  was  going  up  to  the  temple,  and  was  in  a  hurry  to  be  in 
time  for  fear  of  keeping  the  congregation  waiting,  or  whether  he  had 
fulfilled  his  duty,  and  had  finished  his  month's  course  at  the  temple  and 
was  going  home.  I  conclude  that  he  was  going  from  Jerusalem  to 
Jericho,  because  it  says,  "  By  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  priest 
that  way."  Now  to  the  metropolis  it  is  always  "  going  up":  going  up 
to  London,  or  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and  as  this  priest  was  coming  down,  he 
iras  going  to  Jericho.  It  was  quite  literally  going  down,  for  Jericho 
lies  very  low.  I  conclude  that  he  was  going  home  to  Jericho,  after 
having  fulfilled  his  month's  engagements  in  the  temple,  where  he  had 
been  familiar  with  the  worship  of  the  Most  High,  as  near  to  God  as 
-man  could  be,  serving  amidst  sacrifices  and  holy  psalms  and  solemn 
prayers,  and  yet  he  had  not  learned  how  to  make  a  sacrifice  himself. 
He  had  heard  those  prophetic  words  which  say, "  I  will  have  mercy,  and 
not  sacrifice,"  but  he  was  entirely  forgetful  of  such  teaching :  he  had 
•often  reed  that  law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  but  he 
regarded  it  not.  The  Levite  had  not  been  quite  so  closely  engaged  in 
the  sanctuary  as  the  priest,  but  he  had  taken  his  share  in  holy  work, 


854  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  yet  he  came  away  from  it  with  a  hard  heart.  This  is  a  sad  fact. 
They  had  been  near  to  God,  but  were  not  like  him.  Dear  people, 
you  may  spend  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  in  the  worship  of  God,  or  what 
you  think  to  be  so,  and  you  may  behold  Christ  Jesus  set  forth  visibly 
crucified  among  you,  and  themes  which  ought  to  turn  a  heart  of  stone 
to  flesh  may  pass  before  your  minds,  and  nevertheless  you  may  return 
into  the  world  to  be  as  miserly  as  ever,  and  to  have  as  little  feeling 
towards  your  fellow  men  as  before.  It  ought  not  to  be  so.  I  beseech 
you  suffer  it  not  to  be  so  in  any  case  again. 

These  two  persons,  moreover,  were  bound  by  their  profession  to  have 
helped  this  man,  for  though  it  was  originally  said  of  the  high  priest  yefc 
I  think  it  could  be  said  of  any  priest  that  he  was  taken  from  among 
men,  that  he  might  have  compassion.  If  anywhere  there  should  be 
compassion  towards  men,  it  should  be  in  the  heart  of  the  priest  who  is- 
chosen  to  speak  for  God  to  men  and  for  men  to  God.  No  stone  should 
ever  be  found  in  his  bosom ;  he  should  be  gentle,  generous-hearted 
kindly,  full  of  sympathy  and  tenderness ;  but  this  priest  was  not  so,  nor 
was  the  Levite  who  ought  to  have  followed  in  his  wake.  And  oh, 
you  Christian  ministers,  and  all  of  you  who  teach  in  schools,  or  who  un 
dertake  any  service  of  Christian  ministry — and  you  ought  all  to  do  so, 
for  the  Lord  hath  made  all  his  people  to  be  priests  unto  him — there 
ought  to  be  in  you  from  your  very  profession  a  readiness  of  heart 
towards  the  kindliest  actions  for  those  who  need  them. 

And  there  is  one  thing  to  be  mentioned  also  against  this  priest  and 
Levite,  that  they  were  very  well  aware  of  the  man's  condition.  They 
came  close  to  him  and  saw  his  state.  It  is  a  narrow  trackway  down  to 
Jericho,  and  they  were  obliged  to  go  almost  over  his  wounded  body : 
the  first  corner  looked  at  him,  but  he  hurried  on ;  the  second  appears  to 
have  made  a  further  investigation,  to  have  had  sufficient  curiosity,  at 
any  rate,  to  begin  to  examine  the  state  of  the  case  ;  but  his  curiosity 
being  satisfied  his  compassion  was  not  aroused,  and  he  hurried  away, 
Half  the  neglect  of  the  sick  poor  arises  from  not  knowing  that  there  are 
such  cases,  but  many  remain  wilfully  in  ignorance,  and  such  ignorance 
is  no  available  excuse.  In  the  case  of  the  hospitals  for  which  we  plead 
to-day,  you  do  know  that  there  are  persons  in  them  at  this  moment 
suffering,  persons  suffering  grieviously,  for  no  fault  of  their  own,  and  you 
know  that  these  need  your  aid.  As  I  rode  the  other  evening  by  that 
noble  building  on  our  side  of  the  water,  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  I  could 
not  help  meditating  upon  what  a  mass  of  pain  and  suffering  was  gathered 
within  those  walls ;  but  then  I  thanked  God  that  it  was  within  those 
walls  where  succour  would  be  most  surely  rendered  to  it  to  the  best  of 
human  ability.  So  you  do  know  that  there  is  poverty  and  sickness- 
around  you,  and  if  you  pass  by  on  the  other  side  you  will  have  looked 
at  it,  you  will  have  known  about  it,  and  on  your  heads  will  be  the- 
criminality  of  having  left  the  wounded  man  unhelped. 

^Yet  the  pair  had  capital  excuses  :  both  the  priest  and  the  Levite  had 
excellent  reasons  for  neglecting  the  bleeding  man.  I  never  knew  a 
man  refuse  to  help  the  poor  who  failed  to  give  at  least  one  admirable 
excuse.  I  believe  that  there  is  no  man  on  earth  who  wickedly  rejects 
the  plea  of  need  who  is  not  furnished  with  arguments  that  he  is  right :. 
arguments  eminently  satisfactory  to  himself,  and  such  as  he  thinks 


THE  onor>  S.WATUTAN.  855 

should  silence  those  who  press  the  case.  For  instance,  the  priest  and 
Levite  were  both  in  a  hnrry.  The  priest  had  been  a  month  away  at 
Jerusalem  from  his  wife  and  dear  children,  and  he  naturally  wanted  to 
get  home ;  if  he  lingered  the  sun  might  be  down ;  it  was  an  awkward 
place  to  be  in  after  sundown,  and  you  could  not  expect  him  to  be  so 
imprudent  as  to  stay  in  a  lone  place  with  darkness  coming  on.  He  had 
spent  a  very  laborious  month  in  the  temple,  you  do  not  know  how 
exhausting  he  had  found  it  to  act  as  a  priest  for  a  whole  month,  and 
if  you  did  you  would  not  blame  him  for  wanting  to  get  home  to  enjoy 
a  little  rest.  Besides,  he  had  promised  to  be  home  at  a  certain  hour,  and 
he  was  a  man  of  punctuality,  and  would  by  no  means  cause  anxiety  to 
his  wife  and  children,  who  would  be  looking  from  the  housetop  for  him. 
A  very  excellent  excuse  was  this  :  but  he  also  felt  that  he  really  could 
not  do  much  good.  He  did  not  understand  surgery,  and  could  not  bind 
up  a  wound  to  save  his  life  ;  he  shrank  from  it ;  the  very  sight  of  blood 
turned  his  stomach,  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  go  near  a  person  who 
was  so  frightfully  mangled.  If  he  did  try  to  bind  up  a  wound  he  felt  he 
should  be  sure  to  make  a  muddle  of  it.  If  his  wife  had  been  with  him, 
she  could  have  done  it ;  or  if  he  had  brought  some  plaister,  liniment,  or 
strapping,  he  would  have  tried  his  best,  but  as  it  was  he  could  do 
nothing.  The  poor  man,  moreover,  was  evidently  half  dead,  and  would 
be  quite  dead  in  an  hour  or  two,  and  therefore  it  was  a  pity  to  waste 
time  on  a  hopeless  case.  Then  the  priest  was  only  one  person,  and 
could  not  be  expected  to  carry  a  bleeding  man,  and  yet  it  would  be 
idle  to  begin  with  the  case  and  leave  him  there  all  night.  True,  he 
could  almost  hear  the  sound  of  the  Levite's  feet,  indeed  he  hoped  he 
was  coming  up  behind,  for  he  felt  very  nervous  at  being  alone  with  such 
a  case ;  but  then  that  was  all  the  more  reason  for  leaving  the  matter, 
since  the  Levite  would  be  sure  to  attend  to  it.  Better  still  was  the  follow 
ing  line  of  excuse — you  would  not  have  a  person  stop  in  a  place  where 
another  man  had  been  half  killed  by  thieves.  The  thieves  might  be 
back  again,  they  were  scarcely  yet  out  of  hearing  even  then,  and  a  priest 
after  a  month's  service  ought  to  have  some  fees  in  his  purse,  and  it 
was  important  not  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  the  support  of  his  family 
by  stopping  in  a  place  which  was  evidently  swarming  with  highwaymen. 
He  might  be  wounded  too,  and  then  there  would  be  two  people  half  dead, 
and  one  of  them  a  valuable  clergyman.  Really,  philanthropy  would 
suggest  that  you  take  care  of  yourself,  as  you  could  not  possibly  do  any 
good  to  the  poor  man.  And  then  the  man  might  die,  and  the  person 
found  near  the  body  might  be  charged  with  the  murder.  It  is  always 
awkward  to  be  found  alone  in  a  dark  spot  with  the  corpse  of  one  who 
has  evidently  suifered  from  foul  play.  The  priest  might  be  taken  up  upon 
suspicion,  and  did  not  all  the  principles  of  prudence  suggest  that  the 
very  best  thing  that  he  could  do  was  to  get  out  of  the  way  as  quickly 
as  possible  ?  Moreover,  he  could  pray  for  the  man,  you  know,  and  he 
was  glad  to  find  that  he  had  a  tract  with  him  which  he  would  leave 
near  him,  and  what  with  the  tract  and  the  prayer  what  more  could  a 
good  man  be  expected  to  do  ?  With  this  pious  reflection  he  hastened  on 
his  way.  It  is  just  possible  also  that  he  did  not  wish  to  be  defiled.  A 
*  priest  was  too  holy  a  person  to  meddle  with  wounds  and  bruises.  Who 
would  propose  such  a  thing  ?  He  had  come  from  Jerusalem  in  all  the 


356  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

odour  of  sanctity ;  he  felt  himself  to  be  as  holy  as  he  could  conveniently 
be,  and  therefore  he  would  not  expose  such  rare  excellence  to  worldly 
influences  by  touching  a  sinner.  All  these  powerful  reasons  put 
together  made  him  content  to  save  trouble,  and  leave  the  doing  of 
kindness  to  others. 

No',v,  this  morning,  I  shall  leave  you  to  make  all  the  excuses  you 
like  about  not  helping  the  poor  and  aiding  the  hospitals,  and  when  you 
have  made  them  they  will  be  as  good  as  those  which  I  have  set  before 
you.  You  have  smiled  over  what  the  priest  might  have  said,  but  if  you 
make  any  excuses  for  yourselves  whenever  real  need  comes  before  you, 
and  you  are  able  to  relieve  it,  you  need  not  smile  over  your  excuses,  the 
devil  will  do  that ;  you  had  better  cry  over  them,  for  there  is  the 
gravest  reason  for  lamenting  that  your  heart  is  hard  toward  your  fellow- 
creatures  when  they  are  sick,  and  perhaps  sick  unto  death. 

III.  In  the  third  place  THE  SAMARITAN  is  A  MODEL  FOR  THOSE 
WHO  DO  HELP  THE  AFFLICTED.  He  is  a  model,  first,  if  we  notice  who 
the  person  was  that  he  helped.  The  parable  does  not  say  so,  but  it  im 
plies  that  the  wounded  man  was  a  Jew,  and,  therefore,  the  Samaritan 
was  not  of  the  same  faith  and  order.  The  apostle  says,  "  As  we  have 
opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  especially  unto  them  who  are 
of  the  household  of  faith."  This  man  was  not  of  the  household  of 
faith,  as  far  as  the  Samaritan's  judgment  went,  but  he  was  one  of  the 
"all  men."  The  Jew  and  he  were  as  much  apart  in  religious  sympathy  as 
they  well  could  be.  Ay,  but  he  \¥as  a  man :  whether  he  was  a  Jew  or 
not,  he  was  a  man,  a  wounded,  bleeding,  dying  man,  and  the  Samaritan 
was  another  man,  and  so  one  man  felt  for  another  man  and  came  to  his 
aid.  Do  not  ask  whether  a  sick  man  believes  in  the  thirty-nine  articles, 
or  the  Westminster  Assembly's  catechism.  Let  us  hope  that  he  is  sound 
in  the  faith,  but  if  he  is  not  his  wounds  need  staunching  just  as  much 
as  if  he  held  a  perfect  creed.  You  need  not  enquire  whether  he  is  a 
Bound  Calvinist,  for  an  Arminian  smarts  when  he  is  wounded;  a 
Churchman  feels  as  much  pain  as  a  Dissenter  when  his  leg  is  broken, 
and  an  infidel  needs  nursing  when  he  is  crushed  in  an  accident.  It  is 
as  bad  for  a  man  to  die  with  a  heterodox  creed  as  with  the  orthodox 
faith ;  indeed,  in  some  respects  it  is  far  worse,  and  therefore  we  should 
be  doubly  anxious  for  his  cure.  We  are  to  relieve  real  distress  irre 
spective  of  creed,  as  the  Samaritan  did. 

Moreover,  the  Jews  were  great  haters  of  the  Samaritans,  and  no 
doubt  this  Samaritan  might  have  thought,  "  If  I  were  in  that  man's  case 
he  would  not  help  me.  He  would  pass  me  by  and  say,  *  It  is  a  Samaritan 
dog,  let  him  be  accursed.' "  The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  curse  the 
Samaritans,  but  it  did  not  occur  to  the  good  man  to  remember  what  the 
Jew  would  have  said  :  he  saw  him  bleeding  and  he  bound  up  his  wounds. 
Onr  Saviour  has  not  given  us  for  a  golden  rule,  "Do  ye  to  others  as 
others  would  do  to  you,"  but  "  as  ye  would  they  should  do  to  you."  The 
Samaritan  went  by  that  rule,  and  though  he  knew  of  the  enmity  in  the 
Jewish  mind  he  felt  that  he  must  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  the  wounded 
man  by  loving  help  ;  therefore  he  went  straight  away  to  his  relief. 
Perhaps  at  another  time  the  Jew  would  have  put  oif  the  Samaritan  and 
refused  even  to  be  touched  by  him  ;  but  the  tender-hearted  sympathizer 
does  not  think  of  that :  the  poor  man  is  too  sick  to  hold  any  crotchets 


THE   GOOD   SAMARITAN.  357 

or  prejudices,  and  when  the  Samaritan  bends  over  him  and  pours  in  the 
oil  and  wine  he  wins  a  grateful  glance  from  the  son  of  Abraham. 

That  poor,  wounded  man  was  one  who  could  not  repay  him.  He  had  been 
stripped  of  all  that  he  had,  even  his  garments  were  taken  from  him  ;  but 
charity  does  not  look  for  payment,  else  were  it  no  charity  at  all.  The 
man  was  a  total  stranger  too.  The  Samaritan  had  not  even  seen  him 
before.  What  did  that  mutter  ?  He  was  a  man,  and  all  men  are  akin. 
"  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  that  dwell  upon  the  face  of 
the  earth  "  :  the  Samaritan  felt  that  touch  of  nature  which  makes  all 
men  kin,  and  he  bent  over  the  stranger  and  relieved  his  pains. 

He  might  have  said,  "  Why  should  /  help  ?  He  has  been  rejected  lij 
his  own  people ;  the  priest  and  the  Levite  have  left  him  ;  his  first  claim 
is  upon  his  own  countrymen."  So  have  I  known  some  say,  "  These 
persons  have  no  claim  ;  they  ought  to  go  to  their  own  people."  Well, 
suppose  they  have  gone  and  failed,  now  comes  your  turn ;  and  what 
the  Jew  would  not  do  for  the  Jew  let  the  Samaritan  do,  and  he  shall 
be  blessed  in  the  deed.  He  had  been  neglected  by  the  officials  and 
neglected  by  the  saints  ;  the  best,  or  those  who  ought  to  be  the  best, 
the  priest  and  the  Levite,  had  deserted  him,  and  left  him  to  die.  The 
Samaritan  is  neither  saint  nor  official,  but  yet  he  steps  in  to  do  the 
deed.  Oh,  Christian  brethren,  take  care  that  ye  are  not  put  to  shame 
by  this  Samaritan. 

He  is  a  model  to  us  next  in  the  spirit  in  ivhich  he  did  his  ivork.  He 
did  it  without  asking  questions.  The  man  was  in  need,  he  was  sure  of 
that,  and  he  helped  him  at  once  ;  doing  so  without  hesitation,  and 
making  no  compact  nor  agreement  with  him,  but  at  once  proceeding 
to  pour  in  the  oil  and  wine.  He  did  it  without  attempting  to  shift  the 
labour  from  himself  to  others.  Charity  nowadays  means  that  A  asks 
B  to  help  him,  and  B,  in  his  wonderful  charity,  does  him  the  great  favour 
of  sending  him  on  to  C.  That  is  to  say,  the  common  run  of  benevo 
lent  persons  nowadays  put  their  hands  but  seldom  into  their  own  purses, 
but  send  people  on  to  a  few  individuals  who  find  cash  for  all.  It  seems 
to  me  to  be  a  very  mean  way  of  getting  rid  of  a  case  by  saving  your 
own  pocket  and  passing  the  applicant  on  to  another  who  is  no  better  off 
than  yourself,  but  far  more  generous.  The  Samaritan  was  personally 
benevolent,  and  therein  he  is  a  mirror  and  model  to  us  all. 

He  did  it  without  any  selfish  fear :  the  thieves  might  have  been 
upon  him,  but  he  cared  nothing  for  thieves  when  a  life  was  in  danger. 
Here  is  a  man  in  want,  and  the  man  must  be  relieved,  thieves  or  no 
thieves,  and  he  does  it.  He  does  it  with  self-denial,  for  he  finds  oil  and 
wine,  and  money  at  the  inn,  and  everything,  though  he  was  by  no  means 
a  rich  man,  for  he  gave  two  pence,  a  larger  sum  than  it  looks,  but  still 
a  small  sum.  He  did  not  fling  his  alms  about  because  he  was  rich : 
he  is  not  said  to  have  given  a  handful  of  pence,  but  two,  for  he  had  to 
count  his  pence  as  he  expended  them.  It  was  a  poor  Samaritan  who 
did  this  rich  and  noble  act :  the  poorest  can  help  the  poor  ;  even  those 
who  feel  distress  themselves  may  manifest  a  generous  Christian  spirit, 
and  give  their  services.  Let  them  do  so  as  they  have  opportunity. 

This  man  helped  his  poor  neighbour  with  great  tenderness  and  care. 
He  was  like  a  mother  to  him.  Everything  was  done  with  loving  thought 
and  with  whatever  of  skill  he  possessed.  He  did  the  best  he  could. 


558  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Brethren,  let  what  we  do  for  others  always  be  done  in  the  noblest  style; 
Let  us  not  treat  the  poor  like  dogs  to  whom  we  fling  a  bone,  nor  visit 
the  sick  like  superior  beings  who  feel  that  they  are  stooping  down  to 
inferiors  when  they  enter  their  rooms ;  but  in  the  sweet  tenderness  of 
real  love,  learned  at  Jesu's  feet,  let  us  imitate  this  good  Samaritan. 

But  what  did  he  do  ?  Well,  first  he  came  to  where  the  sufferer  was, 
and  put  himself  into  his  position.  Then  he  put  forth  all  his  skill  for 
him,  and  bound  up  his  wounds,  no  doubt  rending  his  own  garment  to 
get  the  bands  with  which  to  bind  up  the  wound.  He  poured  in  oil  and 
wine,  the  best  healing  mixture  that  he  knew  of,  and  one  which  he 
happened  to  have  by  him.  He  then  set  the  sick  man  on  his  mule,  and 
of  course  he  had  to  walk  himself,  but  this  he  did  right  cheerfully,  sup 
porting  his  poor  patient  as  the  mule  proceeded.  He  took  him  to  an  inn, 
but  he  did  not  leave  him  at  the  caravanserai  and  say,  "  Anybody  will 
take  care  of  him  now,"  but  he  went  to  the  manager  of  the  establish 
ment  and  gave  him  money,  and  he  said,  "  Take  care  of  him."  I  admire 
that  little  sentence,  because  it  is  first  written, "  he  took  care  of  him,"  and 
next  he  said,  "  Take  care  of  him."  What  you  do  yourself  you  may  ex 
hort  other  people  to  do.  He  said,  t(  I  leave  this  poor  man  with  you, 
pray  do  not  neglect  him.  There  are  a  great  many  people  in  the  inn, 
but  take  care  of  him."  "  Is  he  a  brother  of  yours  ?"  "No,  I  never 
saw  him  before."  "Well,  are  you  at  all  under  obligation  to  him?" 
"  No ! — yes,  yes,  I  feel  under  obligation  to  everybody  that  is  a  man. 
If  he  wants  help  I  am  obliged  to  help  him."  "  Is  that  all  ?"  "  Yes, 
but  do  take  care  of  him.  I  feel  a  great  interest  in  him." 

The  Samaritan  did  not  cease  till  he  had  gone  through  with  his  kind 
ness.  He  said,  "  This  money  may  not  be  sufficient,  for  it  may  be  a 
long  time  before  he  is  able  to  move.  That  leg  may  not  soon  heal,  that 
broken  rib  may  need  long  rest.  Do  not  hurry  him  away,  let  him  stop 
here,  and  if  he  incurs  additional  expense,  I  will  be  sure  to  pay  it  when 
I  come  back  from  Jerusalem  again."  There  is  nothing  like  the  charity 
which  endures  even  to  the  end.  I  wish  I  had  time  to  enlarge  on  all 
these  things,  but  I  cannot  do  so ;  exhibit  them  in  your  lives,  and  you 
will  best  know  whafe  they  mean.  Go  and  do  likewise,  each  one  of  you, 
and  thus  reproduce  the  good  Samaritan. 

IV.  But  now,  fourthly,  WE  HAVE  A  HIGHER  MODEL  than  even  the 
Samaritan — our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  do  not  think  that  our  divine 
Lord  intended  to  teach  anything  about  himself  in  this  parable,  except 
so  far  as  he  is  himself  the  great  exemplar  of  all  goodness.  He  was 
answering  the  question,  "  Who  is  my  neighbour  ?"  and  he  was  not 
preaching  about  himself  at  all.  There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  strain 
ing  of  this  parable  to  bring  the  Lord  Jesus  and  everything  about  him 
into  it,  but  this  I  dare  not  imitate.  •  Yet  by  analogy  we  may  illustrate 
our  Lord's  goodness  by  it.  This  is  a  picture  of  a  generous  hearted 
man  who  cares  for  the  needy  :  but  the  most  generous  hearted  man  that 
ever  lived  was  the  Man  of  Nazareth,  and  none  ever  cared  for  sick  and 
suffering  souls  as  he  has  done.  Therefore,  if  we  praise  the  good 
Samaritan,  we  should  much  more  extol  the  blessed  Saviour  whom  his 
enemies  called  a  Samaritan,  and  who  never  denied  the  charge,  for  what 
cared  he  if  all  the  prejudice  and  scorn  of  men  should  vent  itself  on  him  ? 
Now,  brethren,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  done  better  than  the  good 


THE   GOOD   SAMARITAN.  35S> 

Samaritan,  because  our  case  was  worse.  As  I  have  already  said,  tho 
wounded  man  could  not  blame  himself  for  his  sad  estate ;  it  was  hia 
misfortune,  not  his  fault ;  but  you  and  I  are  not  only  half  dead,  but 
altogether  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  we  have  brought  many  of  our 
ills  upon  ourselves.  The  thieves  that  have  stripped  us  are  our  own 
iniquities,  the  wounds  which  we  bear  have  been  inflicted  by  our  own 
suicidal  hand.  We  are  not  in  opposition  to  Jesus  Christ  as  the  poor 
Jew  was  to  the  Samaritan  from  the  mere  force  of  prejudice,  but  we  have 
been  opposed  to  the  blessed  Redeemer  by  nature ;  we  have  from  the 
first  turned  away  from  him.  Alas,  we  have  resisted  and  rejected  him. 
The  poor  man  did  not  put  his  Samaritan  friend  away,  but  we  have  done 
so  to  our  Lord.  How  many  times  have  we  refused  Almighty  love  ! 
How  often  by  unbelief  have  we  pulled  open  the  wounds  which  Christ 
has  bound  up  !  We  have  rejected  the  oil  and  wine  which  in  the  gospel 
he  presents  to  us.  We  have  spoken  evil  of  him  to  his  face,  and  have 
lived  even  for  years  in  utter  rejection  of  him,  and  yet  in  his  infinite 
love  he  has  not  given  us  up,  but  he  has  brought  some  of  us  into  hig 
church,  where  we  rest  as  in  an  inn,  feeding  on  what  his  bounty  has 
provided.  It  was  wondrous  love  which  moved  the  Saviour's  heart 
when  he  found  us  in  all  our  misery,  and  bent  over  us  to  lift  us  out  of 
it,  though  he  knew  that  we  were  his  enemies. 

The  Samaritan  was  akin  to  the  Jew  because  he  was  a  man,  but  our 
Lord  Jesus  was  not  originally  akin  to  us  by  nature  :  he  is  God,  infi 
nitely  above  us,  and  if  he  was  "  found  in  fashion  as  a  man "  it  was- 
because  he  chose  to  be  so.  If  he  journeyed  this  way,  via  Bethlehem's 
manger,  down  to  the  place  of  our  sin  and  misery,  it  was  because  his 
infinite  compassion  brought  him  there.  The  Samaritan  came  to  the 
wounded  one  because  in  the  course  of  business  he  was  led  there,  and, 
being  there,  he  helped  the  man  ;  but  Jesus  came  to  earth  on  no  business 
but  that  of  saving  us,  and  he  was  found  in  our  flesh  that  he  might  have 
sympathy  with  us.  In  the  very  existence  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  you 
see  the  noblest  form  of  pity  manifested. 

And  being  here,  where  we  had  fallen  among  robbers,  he  did  not 
merely  run  risks  of  being  attacked  by  thieves  himself,  but  he  was  attacked 
by  them  :  he  was  wounded,  he  was  stripped,  and  not  half  dead  was  he, 
but  altogether  dead,  for  he  .was  laid  in  the  grave.  He  was  slain  for 
our  sakes,  for  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  deliver  us  from  the  mis 
chief  which  the  thieves  of  sin  had  wrought  upon  us  excepting  by 
suffering  that  mischief  in  his  own  person ;  and  he  did  suffer  it  that  he 
might  deliver  us. 

What  the  Samaritan  gave  to  the  poor  man  was  generous,  but  it  is 
not  comparable  to  what  the  Lord  Jesus  has  given  to  us.  He  gave  him 
wine  and  oil,  but  Jesus  has  given  his  heart's  blood  to  heal  our  wounds : 
"  he  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us."  The  Samaritan  lent  himself 
with  all  his  care  and  thoughtfulness,  but  Christ  gave  himself  even  to  the 
death  for  us.  The  Samaritan  gave  two  pence,  a  large  amount  out  of 
his  slender  store,  and  I  do  not  depreciate  the  gift,  but  "  he  that  was 
rich  for  our  sakes  became  poor  that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be 
rich."  Oh,  the  marvellous  gifts  which  Christ  has  bestowed  upon  us! 
Who  is  he  that  can  reckon  them !  Heaven  is  among  those  blessings,, 
but  his  own  self  is  the  chief  boon. 


360  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

The  Samaritan's  compassion  did  but  show  itself  for  a  short  time.  If 
he  had  to  walk  by  the  side  of  his  mule  it  would  not  be  for  many  miles, 
but  Christ  walked  by  the  side  of  us,  dismounted  from  his  glory,  all 
through  his  life.  The  Samaritan  did  not  stop  long  at  the  inn,  for  he 
had  his  business  to  attend  to,  and  he  very  rightly  went  about  it ;  but 
our  Lord  remained  with  us  for  a  lifetime,  even  till  he  rose  to  heaven : 
yea.  he  is  with  us  even  now,  always  blessing  the  sons  of  men. 

When  the  Samaritan  went  away  he  said,  "  Whatsoever  thou  spendest 
more  I  will  repay  thee."  Jesus  has  gone  up  to  heaven,  and  he  has  left 
behind  him  blessed  promises  of  something  to  be  done  when  he  shall 
come  again.  He  never  forgets  us.  The  good  Samaritan,  I  dare  say, 
thought  very  little  of  the  Jew  in  after  years ;  indeed,  it  is  the  mark  of 
a  generous  spirit  not  to  think  much  of  what  it  has  done.  He  went 
back  to  Samaria  and  minded  his  business,  and  never  told  anybody  "  I 
helped  a  poor  Jew  on  the  road."  Not  he.  But  of  necessity  our  Lord 
Jesus  acts  differently,  for  because  we  have  a  constant  need  he  continues 
to  care  for  us,  and  his  deed  of  love  is  being  done,  and  done,  and  done 
again  upon  multitudes  of  cases,  and  will  always  be  repeated  so  long  as 
there  are  men  to  be  saved,  a  hell  from  which  to  escape,  and  a  heaven 
to  win. 

I  have  thus  set  before  you  the  highest  example,  and  I  shall  conclude 
when  I  have  said  two  things.  Judge  yourselves,  all  ye  my  hearers,  if 
ye  are  hoping  for  salvation  by  your  own  works.  Look  to  what  you  must  be 
throughout  an  entire  liie  if  your  works  are  to  save  you.  You  must 
love  God  with  all  your  heart  and  soul  and  strength,  and  your  neighbour 
in  this  Samaritan's  fashion,  even  as  yourself,  and  both  of  these  without 
a  single  failure.  Have  you  done  this  ?  Can  you  hope  to  do  it  per 
fectly  ?  If  not,  why  do  you  risk  your  souls  in  this  frail  skiff,  this  leaky, 
sinking  craft  of  your  poor  works,  for  you  will  never  get  to  heaven 
therein  ? 

Lastly,  you  who  are  Christ's  people  are  saved,  and  you  are  not  going 
to  do  these  things  in  order  to  save  yourselves  :  the  greater  Samaritan  has 
saved  you,  Jesus  has  redeemed  you,  brought  you  into  his  church,  put 
you  under  the  care  of  his  ministers,  bidden  us  take  care  of  you,  and 
promised  to  reward  us  if  we  do  so  in  the  day  when  he  comes.  Seek, 
then,  to  be  true  followers  of  your  Lord  by  practical  deeds  of  kindness, 
and  if  you  have  been  backward  in  your  gifts  to  help  either  the  temporal 
or  the  spiritual  needs  of  men,  begin  from  this  morning  with  generous 
hearts,  and  God  will  bless  you.  0  diving  Spirit,  help  us  all  to  be  like 
Jesus.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  x.  17 — 42. 


HYMNS  FROM" OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 92  (Vers.  I.),  15,  428. 


GOOD  NEWS  FOR  YOU. 

wnum 

DELIVERED  ON  SUNDAY  MORNING,  OCTOBER  STH,  1862,  By 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 
"  But  a  certain  Samaritan,  as  he  journeyed,  came  where  he  was." — Luke  x.  33. 

THE  good  Samaritan  is  a  masterly  picture  of  true  benevolence.  The 
Samaritan  had  no  kinship  with  the  Jew,  he  was  purely  of  foreign  origin, 
yet  he  pities  his  poor  neighbour.  The  Jews  cursed  the  Cuthites,  and 
would  have  no  dealings  with  them,  for  they  were  intruders  in  their  land. 
There  was  nothing  therefore,  in  the  object  of  the  Samaritan's  pity  that 
could  excite  his  national  sympathies,  but  everything  to  arouse  his  prejii- 
dices,  hence  the  grandeur  of  his  benevolence. 

It  is  not  my  intention  this  morning,  to  indicate  the  delightful  points 
of  excellence  which  Christ  brings  out  in  order  to  illustrate  what  true 
charity  will  perform.  I  want  you  only  to  notice  this  one  fact,  that  the 
benevolence  which  the  Samaritan  exhibited  towards  this  poor  wounded 
and  half-dead  man,  was  available  benevolence.  He  did  not  say  to  him, 
"  If  you  will  walk  to  Jericho,  then  I  will  bind  up  your  wounds,  pouring 
in  the  oil  and  wine;"  or,  "If  you  will  journey  with  me  as  far  as 
Jerusalem,  I  will  then  attend  to  your  wants."  Oh,  no,  he  came  "  where 
he  was,"  and  finding  that  he  could  do  nothing  whatever  for  his  own 
assistance,  the  good  Samaritan  began  with  him  there  and  then  upon  the 
spot,  putting  no  impossible  conditions  to  him,  proposing  no  stipulations 
which  the  man  could  not  perform,  but  doing  everything  for  the  man,  and 
doing  it  for  him  as  he  was  and  where  he  was. 

Beloved,  we  are  all  quite  aware  that  a  charity  of  which  a  man 
cannot  avail  himself,  is  no  charity  at  all.  Go  among  the  operatives  of 
Lancashire,  and  tell  them  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  any  of  them  to 
starve,  for  on  the  top  of  Mt.  St.  Bernard  there  are  hospitable  monks 
who  keep  a  refectory,  where  they  relieve  all  passers-by ;  tell  them  they 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  journey  to  the  top  of  the  Alps,  and  there  they 
will  find  food  enough.  Poor  souls!  they  feel  that  you  mock  them,  for 
Ihe  distance  is  too  great.  Penetrate  one  of  our  back  streets,  climb  up 
three  pair  of  stairs  into  a  wretched  room,  so  dilapidated  that  the  stars 
look  Htween  the  tiles,  see  a  poor  young  girl  dying  of  consumption  and 
poverty,  tell  her  if  you  dare,  "  If  you  could  get  to  the  sea-side,  and  if 
you  could  eat  so  much  beef-steak,  you  would  no  doubt  recover."  You 
»re  shamefully  laughing  at  her — she  cannot  get  these  things — they  are 

No.  473.  20 


554  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

beyond  her  reach :  she  cannot  journey  to  the  seaside — she  would  die 
ere  she  reached  it.  Like  the  wicked,  your  tender  mercies  are  cruel. 
I  have  noticed  this  unavailing  charity  in  hard  winters.  People  give 
away  bread  and  soup  tickets  to  poor  people,  who  are  to  give  six 
pence,  and  then  receive  soup  and  bread;  and  often  I  have  had  persons 
come  to  me — "Sir,  I  have  a  ticket;  it  would  be  worth  a  great  deal 
to  me,  if  I  had  sixpence  to  go  with  to  get  the  relief;  but  I  have 
not  a  farthing  in  all  the  world,  and  I  cannot  make  out  the  good 
of  giving  me  this  ticket  at  all."  This  is  hardly  charity.  Think  you 
see  Jeremiah,  down  in  the  low  dungeon :  if  Ebed  melech  and  Baruch 
had  stood  over  the  top  of  the  dungeon,  and  called  out  to  him,  "Jeremiah, 
if  you  will  get  half  way  up,  we  will  pull  you  out,"  when  there  was  not  a 
ladder,  nor  any  means  by  which  he  could  possibly  get  so  far,  how 
cruel  would  have  been  this  charity;  but,  instead  thereof,  they  took  old 
rags  from  under  the  king's  treasury,  and  put  them  on  ropes,  and  bade 
him  put  the  rags  under  his  armholes,  and  sling  his  arms  through  the 
ropes,  and  then  they  pulled  him  up  all  the  way.  This  was  available 
charity ;  the  other  would  have  been  hypocritical  pretence.  Brethren, 
if  in  the  description  of  a  good  Samaritan,  Christ  hits  him  off  to  the 
life,  as  giving  to  this  poor  wounded  man  a  charity  of  which  he  could 
avail  himself,  does  it  not  seem  to  be  strongly  probable — nay,  even 
certain — that  when  Christ  comes  to  deal  with  sinners,  he  gives  them 
available  mercy — grace  which  may  be  of  real  service  to  them. 

Hence,  permit  me  to  say,  I  do  not  believe  in  the  way  in  which  some 
people  pretend  to  preach  the  gospel.  They  have  no  gospel  for  sinners 
as  sinners,  but  only  for  those  who  are  above  the  dead  level  of  sinner- 
ship,  and  are  technically  styled  sensible  sinners.  Like  the  priest  in  this 
parable;  they  see  the  poor  sinner,  and  they  say,  "  He  is  not  conscious  of  his 
need,  we  cannot  invite  him  to  Christ;"  "  He  is  dead,"  they  say,  "it  is  of  no 
use  preaching  to  dead  souls;"  so  they  pass  by  on  the  other  side,  keeping 
close  to  the  elect  and  quickened,  but  having  nothing  whatever  to  say 
to  the  dead,  lest  they  should  make  out  Christ  to  be  too  gracious,  and 
his  mercy  to  be  too  free.  The  Levite  was  not  in  quite  such  a  hurry 
as  the  priest.  The  priest  had  to  preach,  and  might  be  too  late  for 
the  service,  and  therefore  he  could  not  stop  to  relieve  the  man;  besides, 
he  might  have  soiled  his  cassock,  or  made  himself  unclean  ;  and  then  he 
would  have  been  hardly  fit  for  the  dainty  and  respectable  congregation 
over  which  he  officiated.  As  for  the  Levite,  he  had  to  read  the  hymns; 
he  was  a  clerk  in  the  church,  and  he  was  somewhat  in  a  hurry,  but 
stili  he  could  get  in  after  the  opening  prayer,  so  he  indulged  himself 
with  the  luxury  of  looking  on.  Just  as  I  have  known  ministers  say, 
"  Well,  you  know  we  ought  to  describe  the  sinner's  state,  and  warn  him, 
but  we  must  not  invite  him  to  Christ."  Yes,  gentlemen,  you  must  pass 
by  on  the  other  side,  after  having  looked  at  him,  for  on  your  own  con 
fession  you  have  no  good  news  for  the  poor  wretch.  I  bless  my  Lord 
and  Master  he  has  given  to  me  a  gospel  which  I  can  take  to  dead  sinners, 
a  gospel  which  is  available  for  the  vilest  of  the  vile.  I  thank  my  Master 
that  he  does  not  say  to  the  sinner,  "  Come  half  way  and  meet  me,"  but 
he  comes  "  where  he  is,"  and  finding  him  ruined,  lost,  obdurate,  he 
meets  him  on  his  own  ground,  and  gives  him  life  and  peace  without 


GOOD  NEWS  FOR  YOU.  555 

asking,  or  expecting  him  to  prepare  himself  for  grace.  Here  is,  I  think, 
set  fort?:  in  my  text,  the  available  benevolence  of  the  Samaritan;  it  is 
mine  this  morning,  to  show  the  available  grace  of  Christ. 

I.  The  sinner  is  WITHOUT  MORAL  QUALIFICATION  FOR  SALVATION, 
but  Christ  comes  where  he  is. 

I  want,  if  I  can,  not  to  talk  about  this  as  a  matter  having  to  do 
with  the  multitude  that  are  abroad,  but  with  us  in  these  pews.  I  speak 
not  of  t)wm  and  those,  but  of  you  and  me.  I  want  to  say  to  everj 
sinner,  "  You  are  in  a  state  in  which  there  is  nothing  morally  that  can 
qualify  you  for  being  saved,  bat  Jesus  Christ  meets  you  where  you 
DOW  are.* 

1.  Remember  first,  that  when  the  gospel  was  first  sent  into  the  world, 
those  to  whom  it  was  sent,  were  manifestly  without  any  moral  qualification. 
Did  you  ever  read  the  first  chapter  of  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans  ?   It 
is  one  of  those  awful  passages  in  Scripture,  not  intended  to  be  read  in 
congregations;    but  to  be  read  and  studied   in   the  secrecy  of  one's 
chamber.    The  apostle  gives  a  portrait  of  the  manners  and  customs  of 
the  heathen  world,  so  awful,  that  unless  our  missionaries  had  informed 
us,  that  it  is  exactly  the  photograph  of  life  in  Hindostan  at  the  present 
moment,  infidels  might  have  declared   that    Paul   had   exaggerated. 
Heathendom  in  the  time  of  Paul,  was  so  desperately  wicked  that  it 
would  be  utterly  impossible  to  conceive  of  a  sin,  into  which  men 
had  not  fallen ;  and  yet,  "We  turn  unto  the  Gentiles,"  said  the  apostle; 
and  yet  the  Lord  himself  commanded,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."   What !  to  Sodomites,  whose  very 
smallest  sin  is  adultery,  and  fornication ;  to  thieves  and  murderers,  to 
murderers  of  fathers  and  mothers  ?     Yes,  go  and  preach  the  gospel  to 
them  !    Manifestly,  the  fact  that  the  world  was  steeped  up  to  its  very 
throat  in  the  filth  of  abominable  wickedness,  and  yet  the  gospel  was  sent 
to  it,  proves  that  Christ  does  not  seek  for  any  qualification  of  morality, 
or  righteousness  in  man,  before  the  gospel  is  available  to  him.      He 
sends  the  Word  to  the  drunkard,  to  the  swearer,  the  harlot,  the  vilest 
of  the  vile ;  for  such  is  the  gospel  of  Christ  intended  to  save. 

2.  Recollect  again,  the  Biblical  descriptions  of  those  whom  Christ  came 
into  the  world  to  save,  which  prove  to  a  demonstration  that  he  comes  to  the 
sinner  where  he  is.   How  does  the  Bible  describe  those  whom  Christ  came 
to  save?  As  men?  No,  my  brethren;  Christ  did  not  come  to  save  men 

•as  men,  but  men  as  sinners.  As  sensible  sinners? — nay,  I  aver  not; 
they  are  described  as  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  But  to  the  law  and 
to  the  testimony,  let  me  read  you  one  or  two  passages ;  and,  while  I  read 
them,  I  hope  you  may  be  able  to  say,  "  There  is  hope  for  me."  First, 
those  whom  Christ  came  to  save  are  described  in  1  Timothy,  i.  15,  and 
many  other  places,  as  "sinners."  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners, 
of  whom  I  am  chief."  "  Sinners,"  without  any  adjective  before  the  word; 
not  awakened  sinners,  not  repenting  sinners ;  but  sinners  as  sinners. 
"Surely/'  saith  one,  "I  am  not  shut  out."  Another  account  is 
found  in  Romans  v.  6,  "  For  when  we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due 
time  Christ  died  " — for  whom  ?  those  who  had  some  desires  after  God? 
tome  respect  to  his  name ?  nay,  " for  the  ungodly"  Now,  an  ungodly 


556  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

man  means  a  man  without  God,  who  cares  not  for  God;  "God  is  not 
in  all  his  thoughts,"  and  therefore  he  is  not  what  men  call  a  sensible 
sinner.  "The  ungodly  are  like  "the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth 
away."  even  these  are  the  persons  that  Christ  came  to  save.  In  the 
same  chapter,  10th  verse,  you  find  them  mentioned  as  "enemies" — 
"  When  we  were  yet  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of 
his  Son."  What  say  ye  to  this?  they  are  not  described  as  friends. 
Christ  laid  down  his  life  for  his  friends  in  one  sense ;  "  But  God  com- 
mendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ 
died  for  us."  Enemies  to  God  were  the  objects  of  grace,  so  that  in 
enmity  Christ  comes  and  meets  man  where  he  is. 

In  Ephesians  ii.  1,  we  read  of  them  as  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins" — 
"  and  you  hath  he  quickened  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins." 
Christ,  then,  does  not  ask  the  sinner  to  make  himself  alive ;  the  gospel 
is  not  only  to  be  preached  to  those  who  have  some  good  notions,  some 
good  desires,  some  tremblings  of  the  heavenly  life  within,  but  to  the 
dead  as  dead;  to  the  dead  doth  Christ  come,  and  meet  them  in 
the  grave  of  their  sin.  Again,  (Ephesians  ii.  3,)  they  are  "  children  of 
wrath" — "we  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath  even  as  others.'' 
Yet  the  gospel  came  to  such.  Can  ye  see  anything  hopeful  in  a 
child  of  wrath?  I  ask  you  to  look  over  him  from  head  to  foot, 
if  this  be  his  name  and  character;  can  ye  see  a  spot  of  goodness  as 
large  as  a  pin's  point  in  the  man  ?  And  yet  such  Christ  came  to 
save.  Once  again,  they  are  mentioned  as  "accursed"  Ah,"  says 
one  sinner,  "  I  have  often  cursed  myself  before  God,  and  asked  him  to 
curse  me."  Well,  Christ  died  for  the  accursed;  (Galatians  iii.  13,) " Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for 
us;"  that  is,  for  us  who  were  under  the  curse.  And,  once  more, 
they  are  described  by  the  dreadful  word  "lost"  They  are  lost  to 
all  hope,  to  all  consideration  for  themselves;  even  their  own  friends 
have  given  their  case  up  as  hopeless.  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to 
seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  (Luke  xix.  10.)  If  I  understand 
those  passages  which  I  have  read  in  your  hearing,  they  mean  just  this 
— that  those  whom  Christ  came  to  save  have  no  good  whatever  in  them 
to  co-operate  towards  their  salvation,  and  Christ  doth  not  look  upon 
them  in  order  to  find  aught  that  is  good  in  them.  I  am  bold  to  say,  the 
only  fitness  for  cleansing  is  filthiness;  the  only  fitness  for  a  Saviour  is 
being  lost;  and  the  only  character  under  which  we  come  to  Jesus  is  as 
sinners,  lost,  dead,  and  accursed. 

3.  But,  thirdly,  it  is  quite  certain  from  the  work  of  grace  itself,  that 
the  Lord  does  not  expect  the  sinner  to  do  anything  or  to  be  anything  in 
oHer  to  meet  hifyn,  but  that  he  comes  to  him  where  he  is.  See,  sinner, 
Christ  dies  on  Calvary,  a  weight  of  sin  is  on  his  shoulders,  and  on  his 
hearc ;  in  agonies  the  most  awful  he  shrieks  under  the  desertion  of  his 
God.  For  whom  did  he  die  ?  For  the  innocent  ?  Wherefore  for  the 
innocent  ?  What  sacrifice  did  they  need  ?  For  those  who  had  some  good 
thing  in  them?  Why  all  these  agonies  for  such?  Surely  a  less  price 
might  do  for  them  if  they  could  eke  it  out  themselves.  But  because 
Christ  died  on  account  of  sin.  I  take  it  that  those  whom  he  died  foi 
must  be  viewed  as.  sinners,  and  only  as  such.  Inasmuch  as  he  paid  a 


GOOD  NEWS   FOR   YOU.  557 

dreadful  price,  I  gather  that  they  must  be  dreadfully  in  debt,  and  that 
he  died  for  those  who  had  nothing  to  pay  with.  But  Christ  rose  again, 
rose  again  for  our  justification.  For  whose  justification?  For  the 
justification  of  those  who  were  justified  in  themselves  ?  Why  this  were 
to  perform  an  unnecessary  work.  No,  my  brethren,  but  for  those  who  had 
no  justified  ion  of  their  own,  not  a  shadow  of  any,  who  were  condemned, 
utterly  condemned  on  account  of  their  own  works.  Moreover,  I  hear  him 
by  the  ear  of  faith  pleading  before  the  eternal  throne.  Who  does  he  plead 
for?  For  those  who  have  something  to  plead  on  their  own  account? — that 
were  needless.  Do  men  give  their  money  to  the  rich  ?  Do  they  spend 
their  charity  on  those  who  do  not  need  it  ?  If  men  have  something  to 
plead  for  themselves,  then  why  does  Christ  plead  for  them?  No,  brethren, 
he  pleads  for  those  who  have  nothing  whatever  that  they  can  bring  as  an 
argument  with  which  to  enforce  their  prayers.  But  Christ  ascended  and 
received  gifts.  Who  for  ?  For  those  who  merited  rewards  ?  No,  verily, 
let  them  get  thorn  for  themselves.  But  he  received  gifts  for  men ;  yea,  for 
the  rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them.  But 
he  gives  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  whom  does  he  give  the  Holy  Spirit?  To 
those  that  are  strong,  and  good,  and  can  do  all  themselves?  0, 
my  brethren,  this  were  a  work  of  supererogation ;  but  he  gives  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  those  that  are  powerless,  weak,  dead ;  he  gives  the  Holy 
Worker  to  those  who  are  all  unholy  and  full  of  sin ;  he  puts  the  omni 
potent  influence  into  those  who  were  slaves  to  the  spirit  of  evil.  Brethren, 
the  work  of  Christ  supposes  a  lost,  ruined,  rebellious  sinner,  and  so  I  say, 
Christ  meets  the  man  where  he  is. 

4.  Yet   more,  for   I   would  clear  up  this  point  before  I   leave  it, 
the  godlike  character  of  the  grace  of  God  proves  that  he  meets  the 
sinner  where  he  is;      If  God   forgive  little  sinners  only,  then  he  is 
little  in  his  mercy.      If  the  Lord  does  not  do  something  more  than 
men  can  think,  then  we  have  made  too  much  noise  about  the  gospel, 
and  have  exalted  the  cross  above  measure.     Unless  there  be  something 
extraordinary  in  divine  grace,  then  I  cannot  understand  such  a  passage  as 
this,  "  As  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so  high  are  my  ways 
above  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  above  your  thoughts."     I  venture  to 
say,  brethren,  that  many  of  us  have  thought  of  forgiving  our  enemies. 
It  has  sometimes  been  our  happy  portion  to  do  good  to  them  that  hate 
us.    Now,  if  God  would  be  godlike  in  his  grace — and  I  am  sure  he  will 
— he  must  do  something  more  than  that ;  he  must  not  only  forgive  his 
enemies,  but  they  must  be  enemies  of  such  an  atrocious  character  that 
no  man  would  have  forgiven  them. 

"  Who  is  a  pardoning  God  like  thee, 
Or  who  hath  grace  so  rich  and  free." 

But  where  is  the  meaning  of  this  boast,  if  the  Lord  merely  pardons  sin 
ners  who  are  sensible  of  their  sins,  and  lament  them  ?  The  marvel  is  in 
this,  that  while  they  are  yet  enemies  he  calls  them  by  his  grace,  and 
invites  them  to  mercy ;  yea,  more,  he  blots  out  their  sins,  and  makes  them 
friends;  thus  meeting  the  sinner  where  he  is. 

5.  The  spirit  and  genius  of  the  gospel  utterly  forbid  the  supposition  that 
God  requires  anything  in  any  man  in  order  to  save  him.     If  salvation  be 

15 


558  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

offered  to  man  upon  a  condition,  they  who  fulfil  the  condition  have  a 
claim  to  the  blessing.  This  is  the  old  covenant  of  works.  The  substance 
of  the  legal  covenant  is,  "  Do  this  and  I  will  reward  you."  When  the 
man  has  done  it,  he  deserves  what  has  been  promised.  Yes,  and  if  you 
make  the  condition  never  so  easy,  yet,  mark  you,  so  long  as  it  be  a  con 
dition,  God  is  bound  by  his  own  Word,  the  condition  being  fulfilled, 
to  give  man  what  he  has  earned.  This  is  works  and  not  grace ;  it  is 
debt  and  not  free  favour.  But,  inasmuch  as  the  gospel  is  free  favour 
from  beginning  to  end,  I  am  absolutely  sure  that  God  asketh  nothing; 
neither  good  wishes,  good  desires,  nor  good  feelings  of  a  sinner  before 
he  may  come  to  Christ.  But  that  he  may  know  that  everything  is  of 
grace,  the  rebel  is  commanded  to  come  just  as  he  is,  bringing  nothing, 
but  taking  everything  from  God,  who  is  superabundant  in  mercy,  and 
therefore  meeteth  the  sinner  just  where  he  is. 

I  say  to  the  sinner,  wherever  thou  mayest  be  to-day,  if  thou  be  without 
any  virtue,  and  if  thou  be  filled  with  all  vice,  if  there  be  no  good  points 
in  thy  character,  but  if  there  be  everything  that  is  bad  against  man  and 
against  God;  if  thou  hast  committed  every  crime  in  the  catalogue,  if  thou 
hast  ruined  thy  body  and  damned  thy  soul,  yet  still  Christ  hath  said  it, 
"  Him  that  cometh  unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  And  if  thou 
comest  to  him,  he  can  no  more  cast  thee  out  than  if  thou  hadst  been 
the  most  virtuous,  the  most  honourable,  and  the  most  devout  of  all  living 
men.  Only  do  thou  to-day  believe  in  the  mercy  of  God,  in  Christ,  and 
cast  thyself  on  Him,  and  thou  art  saved  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  that 
grace  which  meets  thee  just  where  thou  art,  and  saveth  thee  from  sin. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  there  are  very  many  of  the  lost  race  of 
Adam,  who  say  that  they  are  WITHOUT  ANY  MENTAL  QUALIFICATION. 

This  is  their  excuse — "  But,  sir,  I  never  was  a  scholar.  I  was  sent 
out  as  a  boy  to  earn  my  own  living,  so  that  I  never  had  a  week's  school 
ing  ;  I  am  so  ignorant  that  I  cannot  read  my  book,  and  if  anybody 
were  to  ask  me  to  make  a  prayer  I  could  not,  I  have  not  sense  enough." 
Now,  you  see  the  Lord  Jesus  meets  you  just  where  you  are.  And  how 
does  he  do  this?  Why,  first,  the  saving  act  is  one  that  requires  no  mental 
poiver.  Faith  lays  hold  on  eternal  life.  Now,  a  child  whose  faculties  are 
never  so  little  developed  can  believe  what  it  is  told.  The  child  cannot 
reason,  cannot  argue,  cannot  dispute,  cannot  split  hairs,  cannot  see  a 
knotty  point  in  theology,  but  it  can  believe  what  it  is  told.  Faith 
requires  so  little  mental  vigour  or  intellectual  clearness,  that  there  have 
been  many  who  were  idiots  in  other  things,  who  have  been  made  wise 
unto  salvation  by  the  act  of  faith  in  Christ.  You  remember  our  Lord's 
own  words,  "  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that 
thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed 
them  unto  babes."  But  this  never  could  have  happened  had  not  the 
act  which  brings  us  into  communion  with  Christ  been  the  lowest  act 
of  the  human  faculty,  that  of  simply  trusting  to  Christ,  as  the  result  of 
crediting  that  which  is  told  us  upon  good  testimony. 

But  then,  again,  to  meet  this  defect  of  mental  power,  remember 
the  singular  simplicity  of  that  which  is  believed.  Is  there  anything  more 
simple  in  the  world  than  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  We  deserve 
to  die,  Christ  dies  for  us;  we  are  in  debt,  Christ  pays  for  us.  Is  not 


GOOD  NEWS    FOR    YOU.  55) 

this  plain  enough  for  a  Ragged  School  ?  It  is  so  plain,  that  many  of 
our  learned  doctors  of  divinity  try  to  get  it  out  of  the  Bible;  they  think, 
"If  this  be  the  marrow  of  it  all,  then  any  fool  can  be  a  theologian;" 
so  they  kick  against  it.  What  is  Unitarianism  but  a  stumbling  at  the 
simplicity  of  the  cross.  They  were  Unitarians  who  stood  at  the  cross 
when  Christ  died;  they  said,  "Let  him  come  down  from  the  cross  and 
we  will  believe  on  him."  That  has  been  the  Unitarian  character  ever 
since;  they  will  receive  Jesus  anywhere  but  on  his  cross;  but  up  there, 
dying  in  man's  stead,  he  is  so  commonplace,  that  these  great  gentlemen 
run  to  philosophy  and  vain  deceit  sooner  than  lay  hold  on  that  which 
the  commonest  may  as  fully  understand  as  they. 

Yet  more  ;  to  meet  any  mental  deficiency  in  man,  while  the  truth 
itself  is  simple,  it  is  taught  in  the  Bible  under  such  simple  metaphors, 
that  none  can  say  they  cannot  understand  it.  How  simple  is  the 
metaphor  of  the  brazen  serpent,  held  up  before  the  snake-bitten 
Israelites,  while  they  are  commanded  to  look  and  live.  Who  doea 
not  understand  that  a  look  at  Christ  who  dies  in  the  stead  of  men, 
will  make  them  live  ?  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me 
and  drink."  Who  does  not  understand  the  figure  of  a  fountain  flowing 
in  the  streets,  that  every  thirsty  passer-by  may  put  his  lips  down  and 
drink?  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God."  Who  does  not  understand  the 
sacrifice?  Here  is  a  lamb  killed  for  the  sin  of  Israel,  and  so  Christ 
dies  for  the  sin  of  those  who  believe  in  him.  The  act  of  faith  is 
simple,  the  object  of  faith  is  plain ;  the  metaphors  make  it  clear,  and 
he  is  without  excuse  who  does  not  understand  tho  gospel  of  Christ. 

To  crown  all,  to  you,  my  beloved  hearers,  Christ  has  given  you 
abundance  of  teachers.  There  sits  in  your  pew  with  you  to-day 
a  man  of  your  own  rank  and  calling,  who  will  explain  to  you  the 
gospel,  if  you  do  not  understand  it.  Here  are  many  of  us,  who  are 
but  too  glad  if  we  can  roll  away  the  stone  from  the  door  of  your 
sepulchre;  here  are  children  of  God  themselves  saved  by  sovereign 
grace,  and  if  you  really  do  not  know  the  way,  do  but  touch  your  next 
neighbour,  and  say  to  him,  "  Can  you  explain  to  me  yet  more  clearly 
what  I  must  do  to  be  saved  ? "  Now,  this  is  meeting  you,  let  your 
brains  be  of  the  very  smallest ;  this  is  coming  down  to  you  though  you 
sit  on  the  lowest  step  of  human  intellect.  Jesus  Christ  meets  you  just 
where  you  are. 

III.  But  yet  again.     I  think  I  hear  another  say,  "  I  am  in  despair, 

for   I  CANNOT   FIND  ANY  REASON   IN  MYSELF,  OR  OUT   OF  MYSELF,  WHY 
GOD   SHOULD  FORGIVE   SUCH   A   PERSON  AS   I   AM." 

So  then,  you  are  in  a  hopeless  state,  at  least  you  see  no  hope.  The 
Lord  meets  you  where  you  are,  by  putting  the  reason  of  your  salvation  alto 
gether  in  himself.  Shall  I  remind  you  of  one  or  two  texts  which  will  surely 
satisfy  you?  "  I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions."  What 
for  ?  "  For  mine  own  sake."  He  cannot  pardon  you  for  your  sake,  you 
clearly  see  that;  and  you  feel  that  he  cannot  pardon  you  for  other  people's 
sake ;  but  for  "  my  own  sake"  saith  he,  "  that  I  may  glorify  myself."  Not 
in  you,  but  in  his  own  mighty  breast  he  finds  the  motive,  that  he  may 
make  his  own  mercy  illustrious;  for  his  own  sake  he  will  do  it.  Or 
take  another — "  For  my  name's  sake,  even  for  my  name's  sake,  will  I 


560  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

defer  mine  anger,  that  I  cut  thee  not  off."  Here  it  is  again  for  hia 
name's  sake,  as  if  he  knew  he  could  not  find  ar^  other  motive,  so  he  puts 
it  all  on  himself;  he  pardons  that  he  may  honour  and  glorify  his  own 
name.  Sinner,  thou  canst  not  say  that  this  does  not  meet  thy  case:  for 
if  thou  be  the  most  hellish  good-for-nothing  sinner  that  ever  cursed 
God's  earth,  and  polluted  the  air  thou  breathest,  yet  he  can  save"  thee, 
for  his  own  sake.  There  still  is  room  for  thee  to  hope  ;  for  the  bigger 
the  sinner  thou  be  the  more  glory  to  him  if  he  saveth  thee  ;  and  if 
salvation  be  given  for  a  reason  only  in  himself,  there  is  therefore  yet  a 
reason  by  which  he  can  save  thee,  even  thee. 

Remember,  that  he  puts  his  own  design  before  your  eyes  to  show 
you  that  if  you  have  no  reason  in  yourself,  that  is  no  hindrance  to 
his  saving  you.  What  is  God's  design  in  saving  men  ?  When  he 
brings  them  to  heaven,  what  will  be  the  result  of  it?  Why,  that 
they  may  love  and  praise  his  name  for  ever,  and  sing  "Unto  him 
that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood,  unto  him 
be  glory."  You  are  just  the  man  ;  if  you  are  ever  saved,  and  brought 
to  heaven,  oh,  will  not  you  praise  his  grace?  "Yes,"  said  one  old 
man  who  had  long  lived  in  sin,  "if  he  ever  does  bring  me  to 
heaven,  he  shall  never  hear  the  last  of  it,  for  I  will  praise  him 
throughout  eternity."  Why,  you  are  the  man,  do  you  not  see,  you  are- 
the  very  man  that  will  answer  God's  design,  for  who  shall  love  so  much 
as  he  who  has  had  much  forgiven,  and  who  shall  praise  so  loudly  as  he 
whose  mighty  sins  have  been  overcome  by  the  mighty  love  and  goodness 
and  grace  of  God  ?  Thou  canst  not  say  that  it  does  not  meet  thee,  for 
here  is  a  motive  and  a  reason,  though  thou  canst  find  none  in  thyself. 

Here  is  another  reason  why  God  should  save  thee,  it  is  His  own  Word, 
the  Word  of  him  that  cannot  lie.  I  will  bring  up  that  text  again;  perhaps 
there  is  a  heart  here  that  will  be  able  to  cast  anchor  on  it—"  Him  that 
cometh  unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  You  say,  "  But  if  I  come, . 
I  can  see  no  reason  why  he  should  save  me."  I  answer,  there  is  a  reason 
in  His  own  promise.  God  cannot  lie.  You  come ;  he  will  not  cast  you 
out.  He  says,  "  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out;"  but  you  say,  "  He  may  for 
such-and-such  a  reason."  Now,  this  is  a  flat  contradiction;  the  two  can 
not  stand.  Tf  there  be  anything  that  is  necessary  in  order  for  a  soul  to 
come,  and  you  come  without  it,  yet  there  is  the  promise,  and  as  it  has 
no  limit  in  it  plead  it,  and  the  Lord  will  not  refuse  to  honour  his  own 
Word.  If  he  can  cast  you  out  because  you  have  not  some  necessary 
qualification,  then  his  Word  is  not  true.  Whoever  you  may  be,  whatever 
you  may  not  be,  and  whatever  you  may  be,  if  you  believe  in  Jesus  Christ, 
there  is  a  reason  in  every  attribute  of  God  why  you  should  be  saved. 
His  truth  cries,  "  Save  him,  for  thou  hast  said  *  I  will/  "  His  power 
says,  "Save  him,  lest  the  enemy  deny  thy  might."  God's  wisdom  pleads, 
"Save  him,  lest  men  doubt  thy. judgment."  His  love  says,  "Save  him;" 
his  every  attribute  says,  "  Save  him;"  and  even  Justice,  with  its  hoarse 
voice,  cries,  "  Save  him,  for  God  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our 
sins,  if  we  confess  our  sins." 

I  am  trying  to  fish  in  deep  waters  after  some  of  you  that  have  long 
escaped  the  net.  I  know  when  I  have  given  free  and  full  invitations,  you 
have  said,  "Ah!  that  cannot  mean  me."  You  are  without  faith  in 


GOOD   NEWS   FOR   YOU.  561 

Christ,  oecausc  you  think  you  are  not  fit.  I  will  be  clear  of  your  blood 
this  morning;  I  will  show* you  that  there  is  no  fitness  wanted,  that  you 
are  commanded  now  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  you  are,  for 
Jesus  Christ's  gospel  is  an  available  gospel,  and  comes  to  you  just 
where  you  are.  Without  moral  or  mental  qualification,  and  without 
any  sort  of  reason  why  he  should  save  you,  he  meets  you  as  such,  and 
bids  you  trust  him. 

IV.  We  proceed  to  our  fourth  point.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  but  I  am 
WITHOUT  COURAGE;  I  dare  not  believe  on  Christ,  I  am  such  a  timid, 
trembling  soul,  that  when  I  hear  that  others  trust  to  Christ  I  think 
it  must  be  presumption ;  I  wish  I  could  do  the  same  but  I  cannot,  I  am 
kept  under  by  such  a  sense  of  sin,  that  I  dare  not.  0  sir,  I  dare 
not,  it  would  look  as  if  I  were  flying  in  the  face  of  justice  if  I  were  to 
dare  to  trust  Christ,  and  then  to  rejoice  in  the  pardon  of  my  sin."  Very 
well,  Christ  comes  to  meet  you  where  you  are,  by  very  tender  invitations. 
"  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath 
no  money  ;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk 
without  money  and  without  price."  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  "  The  Spirit 
and  the  bride  say,  come.  And  let  him  that  heareth  say,  come.  And 
let  him  that  is  athirst,  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the 
water  of  life  freely."  How  sweetly  he  puts  it  to  you.  I  do  not  know 
where  more  wooing  words  could  be  found,  than  those  the  Saviour  uses. 
Will  you  not  come  when  Christ  beckons,  when  with  his  loving  face 
streaming  with  tears,  he  bid  you  come  to  him.  What !  is  an  invitation 
from  him  too  little  a  thing  for  you.  0  sinner,  trembling  though  thoa 
art,  say  in  thy  soul, 

"  I'll  to  the  gracious  king  approach, 

Whose  sceptre  pardon  gives ; 
Perhaps  he  may  command  my  touch, 
And  then  the  suppliant  lives." 

Knowing  that  you  would  neglect  the  invitation,  he  has  put  it  to 
you  in  the  light  of  a  command.  "  This  is  the  commandment,  that  ye 
believe  on  Jesus  Christ  whom  he  hath  sent."  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  "He  that  believeth  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned." 
He  thought  you  would  say,  "  Ah,  but  I  am  not  fit  to  accept  the  invi 
tation."  '*  Well,"  says  he,  "  I  will  command  the  man  to  do  it/*  Like  a 
poor  hungry  man  with  bread  before  him,  who  says,  "  Ah,  it  would  be 
presumption  on  my  part  to  eat;"  but  the  king  says,  "  Eat,  sir,  or  I  will 
punish  you."  What  a  generous  and  liberal  command;  even  the 
threat  itself  has  no  anger  in  it.  Like  the  mother,  who  when  the 
child  is  near  to  die,  and  nothing  will  save  it  but  the  medicine, 
and  the  child  will  not  drink,  she  threatens  the  child,  but  only  out 
of  love  to  it  that  it  may  be  saved.  So  the  Lord  doth  add  threatenmgs 
to  commands;  for  sometimes  a  black  word  will  drive  a  soul  to  Christ 
where  a  bright  word  would  not  draw  it.  Fears  of  hell  sometimes 
make  men  flee  to  Jesus.  The  weary  wing  made  the  poor  dove  fly  to 
the  ark:  and  the  thunderbolts  of  God's  justice  are  only  meant  to  make 
thee  fly  to  Christ  the  Lord. 


562  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Beloved,  once  more,  my  Master  has  sweetly  met  your  want  of  courage 
by  bringing  many  others,  so  that  you  may  follow  their  example.  As 
fowlers  sometimes  have  their  decoy-birds,  so  my  Master  hath  decoy-birds 
that  are  to  draw  others  to  him.  Other  sinners  have  been  saved,  others 
he  has  cleansed  who  did  but  trust  him.  There  was  Lot.  Ah,  Lot  f 
guilty  of  drunkenness  and  incest,  and  yet  a  saint  of  God.  David  the 
adulterer  and  murderer  of  Uriah,  and  yet  washed  "  whiter  than  snow." 
Manasseh  the  bloody  persecutor,  who  had  cut  Esaias  in  two.  sawing-  him 
in  halves,  and  yet  he  was  taken  among  the  thorns,  and  God  had  mercy 
on  him.  What  shall  I  say  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  persecutor  of 
God's  people  ?  and  the  robber  dying  on  the  cross  for  his  crimes,  and 
yet  saved  ?  Sinner,  if  these  do  not  induce  thee  to  come,  what  can 
overcome  thy  sinful  diffidence  ?  "  But,"  says  one.  "  you  have  not 
hit  my  case  yet;  I  am  an  outrageous  sinner!"  Well  now,  I  will 
hit  it  this  time.  In  1  Corinthians,  vi.  9,  hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord, 
"Neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate, 
nor  abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind,  nor  thieves,  nor  covetous, 
nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  king 
dom  of  God.  And  such  were  some  of  you :  but  ye  are  washed,  but 
ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  Why,  brethren,  what  horrible  descriptions 
there  are  here;  there  are  some  of  them  so  bad  that  when  we  have  read 
the  description,  we  wish  to  forget  the  sin;  and  yet,  and  yet,  glory  be  to 
thine  Almighty  grace,  0  God !  such  hast  thou  saved,  and  such  thou 
canst  save  still.  0,  timid  sinner,  can  you  not  trust  in  Jesus  after  this? 
Hear  ye  the  Word  of  the  Lord  again  (Titus  iii.  3 — 5),  "  For  we  ourselves 
also  were  sometimes  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts 
and  pleasures,  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one 
another.  But  after  that  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour 
toward  man  appeared,  not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have 
done,  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us"  Now,  you  hateful 
sinners,  and  you  that  hate  others;  you  that  are  full  of  malice  and 
envy,  here  is  the  gate  open  even  for  you,  for  the  kindness  and  love  of 
God  towards  man  appears  in  the  person  of  Christ.  Listen  to  another, 
for  God's  words  are  more  than  mine,  and  I  do  hope  they  will  attract 
some  of  you  (Ephesians  ii.  1 — 3):  "  Dead  in  trespasses  and  sins;  wherein 
in  time  past  ye  walked  according  to  the  course  of  this  world,  according 
to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the 
children  of  disobedience.  Among  whom  also  we  all  had  our  conversation 
in  times  past  in  the  lusts  of  our  flesh,  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and 
of  the  mind ;  and  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others.  But 
God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  ever* 
when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ,  (by 


GOOD   NEWS   FOR   YOU.  5fi3 

grace  ye  are  saved,)  and  hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together 
in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus."  What  for?  "That  in  the  ages  to 
come,"— mark  this — he  might  show  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace  in 
his  kindness  towards  us  through  Christ  Jesus."  One  more  passage,  and 
I  will  not  weary  your  attention.  0  that  this  last  passage  might  com 
fort  some  of  you,  it  is  Paul  who  speaks  (1  Timothy  i.  13),  "I  was  before 
a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious:  but  I  obtained  mercy, 
because  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief.  And  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
was  exceeding  abundant  with  faith  and  love,  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus.  This  is  a  faithful  saying/'  see  how  he  puts  it  from  his  own 
experience,  "and  worthy  of  all  acceptation;"  and  therefore  worthy  of 
yours,  poor  sinner ;  "  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners,  of  whom  I  am  chief."  "Ah"  says  one  "but  he  would  not  save 
any  more."  Let  me  go  on — "  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy, 
that  in  me  first  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all  longsuffering,  for  a 
pattern  to  them  which  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  ever 
lasting."  So  that  if  you  trust  as  Paul  did,  you  shall  be  saved  as  Paul 
was,  for  his  conversion  and  salvation  are  a  pattern  to  all  those  who 
should  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  unto  life  everlasting.  So  sinner, 
timid  as  you  are,  here  Jesus  meets  you. 

0,  I  wish  I  could  say  a  word  that  would  lead  you  poor  tearful  ones 
to  look  to  Jesus.  0,  do  not  let  the  devil  tempt  you  to  believe  that  you 
are  too  sinful.  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come 
unto  God  by  him." 

"  Let  not  conscience  make  you  linger,  nor  of  fitness  fondly  dream." 

Fitness  is  not  needed — do  but  come  to  him.  You  are  hi  adv.  and  you 
do  not  feel  your  blackness  as  you  ought  —  that  makes  you  all  the 
blacker.  Come,  then,  and  be  clean.  You  are  sinful,  and  this  is  your 
greatest  sin,  that  you  do  not  repent  as  you  ought ;  but  come  to  him, 
and  ask  him  to  forgive  your  impenitence.  Come  as  you  are :  if  he 
rejecteth  one  ef  you,  I  will  bear  the  blame  for  ever;  if  he  casteth  one 
of  you  away  that  shall  trust  him,  call  me  a  false  prophet  in  the  day  of 
the  resurrection.  But  I  pawn  my  life  upon  it — I  stake  my  own  soul's 
interest  on  'this — that  whosoever  cometh  unto  him,  he  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out. 

V.  I  hear  one  more  complaint.  "  I  am  WITHOUT  STRENGTH,"  saith 
one:  "will  Jesus  come  just  where  I  am?"  Yes,  sinner,  just  where  you 
are.  You  say  you  cannot  believe,  that  is  your  difficulty.  God  meets 
you,  then,  in  your  inability.  First,  he  meets  you  with  his  promises, 
Soul,  thou  canst  not  believe;  but  when  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promises, 
will  you  not  believe,  can  you  not  believe  then  ?  I  do  think  God's 
promise — so  sure,  so  stedfast — must  overcome  this  inability  of  yours. 


564  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Cannot  you 
believe  now  ?  Why,  that  promise  must  be  true !  But  next,  as  if  he 
knew  that  this  would  not  be  enough,  he  has  taken  an  oath  with  it — and 
a  more  awful  oath  was  never  sworn — "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have 
no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but  had  rather  that  he 
should  turn  unto  me  and  live.  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye  die,  0 
house  of  Israel."  Can  you  not  believe  now?  What,  will  you  doubt  God 
when  he  swears  it,  not  only  make  God  a  liar  but — let  me  shudder  when 
I  say  it — will  you  think  that  God  can  perjure  his  own  self?  God 
forbid  you  should  so  blaspheme.  Remember,  he  that  believeth  not  hath 
made  God  a  liar,  because  he  believeth  not  on  the  Son  of  God.  Do  not 
do  this.  Surely  vou  can  believe  when  the  promise  and  the  oath 
compel  you  to  faitn.  But  yet  more,  as  if  he  knew  that  even  this 
were  not  enough,  he  has  given  you  of  his  Spirit.  "If  ye  being 
evil  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more 
shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him." 
Surely  with  this  you  can  believe.  "  But,"  saith  one,  "  I  will  try."  No, 
no,  do  not  try,  that  is  not  what  God  commands  you  to  do;  no  trying  is 
wanted;  believe  Christ  now,  sinner.  "But,"  saith  one,  "I  will  think 
of  it."  Do  not  think  of  it,  do  it  now,  do  it  at  once  for  this  is  God's 
gospel.  There  are  some  of  you  standing  in  these  aisles  and  sitting 
in  these  pews,  who  I  feel  in  my  soul  will  never  have  another  invitation, 
and  if  this  be  rejected  to-day,  I  feel  a  solemn  motion  in  my  soul— 
I  think  it  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost — that  you  will  never  hear  another  faithful 
sermon,  but  you  shall  go  down  to  hell  impenitent,  unsaved,  except  ye 
trust  in  Jesus  now.  I  speak  not  as  a  man,  but  I  speak  as  God's  ambas 
sador  to  your  souls,  and  I  command  you,  in  God's  name,  trust  Jesus, 
trust  now.  At  your  peril  reject  the  voice  that  speaks  from  heaven,  for 
"  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  How  shall  ye  escape  if  ye 
neglect  so  great  salvation.  When  it  comes  right  home  to  you,  when  it 
thrusts  itself  in  your  way,  oh,  if  ye  will  neglect  it  how  can  ye  escape  ? 
With  tears  I  would  invite  you,  and,  if  I  could,  would  compel  you  to 
come  in.  Why  will  ye  not  ?  0  souls,  if  ye  will  be  damned,  if  ye  make 
up  your  mind  that  no  mercy  shall  ever  woo  you,  and  no  warnings  shall 
ever  move  you,  then,  sirs,  what  chains  of  vengeance  must  you  feel  that 
slight  these  bonds  of  love.  You  have  deserved  the  deepest  hell,  for  you 
slight  the  joys  above.  God  save  you.  He  will  save  you,  if  you  trust  in 
Jesus.  God  help  you  to  trust  him  even  now,  for  Jesus'  sake. 


JUDGMENT  THREATENING,  BUT  MERCY  SPARING. 


DELIVERED  UN  SUNDAY  MORNING,  SEPTEMBER  I?TH,  1865,  BJ 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   TUB  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


•*  Cut  it  down ;  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground  ?  And  he  answering  said  unto  him, 
Liord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also." — Luke  xiii.  7,  8. 

THE  comparison  of  a  man  to  a  tree,  and  of  human  works  to  fruit,  is 
exceedingly  common  in  Scripture,  because  it  is  most  suggestive,  natural, 
and  appropriate.  As  fruit  is  the  production  of  the  tree's  life,  and  the 
end  for  which  the  tree  exists,  so  obedience  to  the  divine  will,  and 
holiness  unto  the  Lord,  should  be  the  product  of  man's  life,  and  for  it 
he  was  at  first  created.  When  men  plant  trees  in  a  vineyard,  they  very 
naturally  expect  to  find  fruit  thereon;  and  if  at  the  age  and  season  of 
fruitbearing  they  find  no  produce,  their  natural  and  justifiable  expecta 
tion  is  disappointed.  Even  thus,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  it 
is  natural  that  the  great  Maker  of  all  should  look  for  the  good  fruit  of 
obedience  and  love  from  the  men  who  are  the  objects  of  his  providential 
care,  and  be  grieved  when  he  meets  with  no  return.  Man  is  very  much 
more  God's  property  than  a  tree  can  ever  be  the  property  of  the  man 
who  plants  a  vineyard;  and  as  God  has  spent  so  much  more  skill  and 
wisdom  in  the  creation  of  a  man  than  a  husbandman  can  have  spent 
in  the  mere  planting  of  trees,  it  becomes  the  more  natural  that  God 
should  look  for  fruit  from  his  creature,  man;  and  the  more  reasonable 
that  his  most  righteous  requirements  should  not  be  refused.  Trees  that 
bring  not  forth  fruit  must  be  cut  down;  and  sinners  who  bring  not 
forth  repentance,  faith,  and  holiness,  must  die.  It  is  only  a  matter  of 
time  as  to  whether  or  not  the  vineyard  shall  be  cleared  of  the  incum- 
brance  of  its  barren  trees;  it  is  but  a  matter  of  time  as  to  when  the 
world  shall  be  delivered  from  the  burdensome  presence  of  barren  souls. 
It  stands  to  reason  that  barren  trees  which  soon  become  the  haunts  of 
all  sorts  of  mischief-doing  creatures,  should  be  a  nuisance  to  the  vine 
yard;  neither  can  sinners  be  permitted  for  ever  to  become  the  dwelling- 
places  of  evil  spirits,  and  the  dens  of  iniquity:  a  thorough  riddance  must 
be  made  of  impenitent  sinners  as  well  as  of  rotten  trees.  There  is  a  time 
for  felling  fruitless  trees,  and  there  is  an  appointed  season  for  hewing 
down  and  casting  into  the  fire  the  useless  sinner. 

I.  We  shall  not  linger  on  the  threshold  of  our  solemn  work  this  morn 
ing,  for  our  burden  is  very  heavy,  and  we  would  fain  be  rid  of  it  speedily. 
We  shall  address  ourselves  at  once  to  those  persons  who  are  living 
without  God  and  without  Christ,  among  whom  many  of  my  heareri 

No.  650. 

'21 


518  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

must  be  numbered.  We  shall  speak  to  those  who  are  not  saved:  there 
are  such  in  the  professing  Church  everywhere,  0  may  the  Holy 
Spirit  find  them  out  by  our  word,  and  bring  them  in  real  earnest  to 
consider  their  ways.  To  all  unprofitable,  unfruitful  sinners,  we  utter 
this  hard,  but  needful  sentence:  TO  CUT  YOU  DOWN  WOULD  BE  MOST 
REASONABLE.  It  is  right  and  reasonable  to  fell  barren  trees,  and  it  is 
just  as  right  and  reasonable  that  you  should  be  cut  down. 

1.  This  will  appear  in  the  first  place,  if  we  reflect,  that  this  is  the 
shortest  and  the  surest  way  to  deal  with  you;  it  will  cost  the  least 
trouble,  and  be  most  certainly  effectual  in  removing  you  from  the  place  to 
which  you  are  an  injury  rather  than  a  benefit.  When  the  owner  of 
the  vineyard  says  to  the  gardener  concerning  the  tree,  "  Cut  it  down," 
the  remedy  is  very  sharp,  but  it  is  very  simple;  the  felling  is  soon 
done,  the  clearance  is  thorough,  and  when  another  tree  is  planted  the 
benefit  is  evident.  To  dig  about  the  tree,  to  trench  it,  to  dung  it,  to 
prune  it,  and  water  it;  all  this  is  a  long  affair,  requiring  care,  and 
labour,  and  attention,  while  after  all,  the  process  may  fail  and  love's 
labour  may  be  lost.  To  spare  is  difficult  and  involves  trouble;  to  cut 
down  is  easy  and  effectual.  Unconverted  hearer,  to  preach  the  gospel 
to  you,  to  call  you  to  repentance,  to  entreat,  exhort,  instruct,  and  warn 
you,  is  a  laborious  process,  and  will  probably  be  unsuccessful  after  all. 
The  work  will  require  much  thought;  providential  agencies  must  be 
directed  with  wisdom,  saints  must  pray  with  earnestness,  ministers 
must  plead  with  tears,  the  Scriptures  must  be  written,  and  those  Scrip 
tures  must  be  expounded  and  explained;  all  this  is  more  than  thou  hast 
any  natural  right  to  expect  that  God  should  do  with  thee,  when  he  has  in 
his  hands  a  far  simpler  remedy  by  which  he  may  at  once  ease  himself  of 
his  adversary,  and  prevent  thy  being  any  further  offence:  he  has  but  to 
take  away  thy  breath  and  permit  thy  body  to  descend  into  the  grave 
and  thy  soul  into  hell,  and  the  vineyard  is  clear,  and  there  is  room  for 
another  tree.  This  sharp,  short,  simple  process,  is  one  which  commends 
itself  to  men  in  the  case  of  trees,  and  it  is  one  which  it  is  a  thousand 
wonders  that  the  Lord  has  not  used  with  thee.  There  will  be  no  more 
blaspheming  God,  sinner,  when  the  axe  has  laid  thee  low  !  There  will 
be  no  more  rejecting  the  promise  of  his  mercy,  no  more  violating  of 
Sabbath  days,  no  more  despising  Scripture,  when  the  day  of  doom 
arrives !  Death  shall  end  all  these  abominations  for  ever.  We  shall 
no  more  have  to  agonize  for  you  in  vain,  no  more  shall  we  weep  bitterly 
because  of  your  hardness  of  heart,  no  longer  study  to  meet  your  objections, 
and  sigh  at  your  constant  oppositions;  the  flames  of  hell  will  end  all 
this,  to  your  sad  and  awful  cost.  No  longer  will  a  longsuffering  God 
be  wearied  with  your  sins,  and  pressed  down  under  the  load  of  your 
iniquities.  He  will  make  short  work  in  righteousness,  and  a  clean  work 
too.  He  will  sweep  you  away  with  the  besom  of  destruction,  and  your 
rebellions  will  have  an  end,  and  your  iniquities  a  reward  most  sure  and 
terrible.  Barren  fig-tree,  you  will  draw  the  fatness  from  the  ground  no 
longer,  and  overshadow  with  evil  influence  your  fellow  trees  no  more. 
You  are  become  a  mere  waste,  and  worse  than  a  waste.  Sinner,  I  ask 
you,  is  not  the  readiest  plan  to  be  rid  of  you  suggested  by  the  text, 
"  Cut  it  down"  ?  You  yourself  would  do  thus  with  a  tree;  what  reason 
is  there  why  the  Lord  should  not  deal  thus  with  vou? 


JUDGMENT  THREATENING  BUT  MERCY   SPARING.  519 

Do  you  ar;*ue  that  you  are  of  far  greater  importance  than  a  tree? 
How  do  you  make  this  appear?  A  tree  is  far  more  valuable  to  you  than 
vou  can  be  supposed  to  be  to  the  infinite  God.  The  gardener  would  lose 
something  possibly  by  cutting  down  his  tree,  bufc  how  canst  thou  sup 
pose  that  thy  ruin  would  be  any  damage  to  the  great  God!  The  man 
who  has  many  acres  of  vineyard  is  not  much  distressed  if  one  barren 
vine  be  cut  down;  for  there  are  so  many  more.  If  God  had  but  one 
man  in  his  dominions,  it  might  seem  to  be  of  importance  whether  that 
man  were  saved  or  not;  but  there  are  so  many  of  our  race  that  your 
loss  will  be  no  more  than  the  blowing  of  one  atom  of  sand  from  the 
shore,  or  the  removal  of  one  drop  from  the  sea.  You  yourself  could 
not  well  complain  of  being  cut  down,  for  you  do  not  think  much  of 
your  own  soul;  you  are  not  concerned  about  its  salvation;  you  trifle 
with  its  best  interests.  Why  should  you  expect  another  to  value  you 
at  a  higher  rate  than  you  have  set  upon  yourself?  You  fling  away 
your  soul  for  passing  joys;  you  neglect  the  great  salvation;  you  live  in 
daily  disobedience  against  God,  who  alone  can  do  you  good;  even  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  that  all-powerful  engine,  seems  to  have  no 
effect  upon  you,  because  you  despise  your  own  self.  Well,  man,  if  God 
despises  you  too,  and  commands  his  angels  to  cut  you  down,  you  can 
not  complain:  it  is  but  reasonable  that  God  should  estimate  you  at 
your  own  price,  and  weigh  you  in  your  own  balances.  You  have  wan 
tonly  used  the  axe  to  yourself  on  many  occasions,  why  should  not  the 
proper  executioner  use  it  in  earnest?  Some  men  ruin  their  health 
by  their  sins;  they  wildly  dash  the  axe  against  their  own  root,  and 
wound  themselves  terribly.  On  your  soul  you  are  using  that  axe 
continually,  for  you  damage  it  by  sin,  and  seek  out  folly,  and  choose 
the  way  to  damnation,  and  labour  to  be  lost.  You  cannot,  therefore, 
complain.  The  crushing  of  you  will  be  of  no  more  consequence  in  this 
great  universe  than  the  killing  of  some  one  emmet  upon  the  hill.  You 
will  never  be  missed.  You  may  think  greatly  of  yourself,  but  you  are 
no  more  than  a  mere  worm  compared  with  the  great  universe  of  God. 
Beware,  0  rebellious,  unrepentant  sinner!  My  love  yearns  for  your 
salvation,  but  my  reason  approves  of  your  ruin,  foresees  it,  and  expects- 
it  speedily  except  you  turn  unto  the  Lord  and  live. 

2.  Another  reason  makes  the  argument  for  judgment  very  powerful, 
namely,  that  sufficient  space  jor  repentance  has  already  been  given.  If  there 
had  been  any  hope  of  your  repentance,  methinks  many  of  you  would 
have  repented  long  ago.  I  do  not  know  what  can  be  done  for  some  of 
you  more  than  has  been  done.  You  have  been  digged  about — the  digging,. 
I  suppose,  is  to  loosen  the  roots  of  their  hold  upon  the  earth — and  you 
have  had  affliction,  trial,  and  trouble,  like  the  gardener's  great  spade, 
to  wean  you  from  earth,  and  loosen  your  hold  of  carnal  things;  you 
have  had  sickness — you  have  tossed  to  and  fro  upon  the  bed  of  pain;  you 
have  been  in  the  jaws  of  death,  and  the  horrid  teeth  seemed  above  and 
beneath  you,  as  though  they  would  enclose  you  for  ever;  but  all  this  has- 
been  of  no  avail.  Why  should  you  be  stricken  any  more?  You  will 
revolt  more  and  more.  Already  some  of  you  have  been  smitten  until 
your  whole  head  is  sick,  and  your  whole  heart  faint,  but  you  will  not 
hear  the  rod.  By  the  blueness  of  the  wound,  says  Solomon,  the  heart 
is  made  better,  but  in  your  case  it  has  not  been  so.  Those  blue  wound* 


520  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  yours,  those  great  and  grievous  afflictions,  have  not  been  sanctified  to 
you,  but  rather  you  have  gone  on  offending  against  God,  and  provoking 
the  Most  High. 

The  gardener  spoke  of  dunging  as  well  as  of  digging,  and  some  of 
you  have  had  plentiful  helps  towards  repentance.  The  gospel  has  been 
put  close  by  your  roots,  hundreds  of  times;  you  have  a  Bible  in  every 
house;  you  have,  some  of  you,  had  the  advantage  of  godly  training 
from  your  youth  up.  You  have  been  warned  again,  and  again,  and 
again,  sometimes  sternly,  sometimes  affectionately;  you  have  heard  the 
wooing  voice  of  mercy,  and  the  thundering  notes  of  judgment;  but  yet, 
though  Jesus  Christ's  own  gospel  has  been  laid  close  to  your  root,  0 
barren  tree,  you  are  barren  still.  What  is  the  use  then  of  sparing  you? 
Sparing  has  been  tried,  and  it  has  had  no  effect:  the  other  remedy  is 
certain — "  Cut  it  down."  0  God,  cut  not  down  the  sinner!  and  yet  we 
dare  not  say  it  would  be  unreasonable,  but  on  the  contrary,  the  most 
natural  result  of  slighted  mercy.  0  sinner,  you  may  well  say— 

"  I  have  long  withstood  his  grace, 
Long  provoked  him  to  his  face ; 
Would  not  hearken  to  his  calls ; 
Grieved  him  by  a  thousand  falls. 

Depths  of  mercy !  can  there  be 
Mercy  still  reserved  for  me  ? 
Can  my  God  his  wrath  forbear  ? 
Me,  the  chief  of  sinners  spare  ?  ** 

8.  Sinner,  I  argue  thy  case  somewhat  harshly,  thou  thinkest.  Ah! 
man,  would  God  I  could  make  thee  think  me  harsh,  if  thou  wouldst  but 
have  pity  on  thine  own  soul,  for  my  harshness  is  only  apparent,  not 
real,  and  thy  carelessness  for  thy  soul  is  real  harshness,  for  thou  carest 
not  for  thine  own  soul,  but  treatest  it  as  a  thing  to  be  cast  away,  and  its 
ruin  to  be  laughed  at,  as  though  it  were  contemptible.  A II  this  while 
there  has  been  no  sign  of  improvement  whatever  in  thee.  If  there  had 
been  some  little  fruit,  if  some  tears  of  repentance  had  been  flowing  from 
thine  eyes,  if  there  had  been  some  seeking  after  Christ,  if  thine  heart 
had  been  a  little  softened,  if  thou  hadst  but  a  little  faith  in  Jesus, 
though  it  were  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  then  there  were  indeed 
reasons  for  sparing  thee;  but,  sorrowful  to  add,  thy  sparing  has  had  an 
ill  effect  upon  thee.  Because  God  hath  not  punished  thee,  therefore  thou 
hast  waxed  wanton  and  bold;  thou  hast  said,  "  Doth  God  know?  Is 
there  knowledge  in  the  Most  High?"  Thou  thinkest  that  he  is  alto 
gether  such  an  one  as  thou  art,  and  that  he  will  never  bring  thee  into 
judgment.  Thou  fanciest  that  his  sword  is  rusted  into  the  scabbard,  and 
his  arm  waxed  short.  Strange  madness  of  evil,  that  thou  shouldst  per- 
yert  the  longsuffering  which  calls  thee  to  repentance  into  a  reason  for 
running  to  greater  lengths  of  sin!  What,  when  Jehovah  spares  thee 
that  thou  mayst  turn  to  him,  shall  that  very  sparing  make  thee  lift  up 
the  foot  of  thy  rebellion  and  spurn  him?  It  has  done  so.  Up  to  this 
time  thou  hast  grown  hardened  instead  of  softened.  Thou  hast  grown 
older,  but  thou  art  no  wiser,  except  it  be  with  Satan's  subtlety  to  be 
more  wise  in  sin.  The  gospel  has  not  now  the  effect  it  had  once  on 
thee.  This  voice  could  make  thy  soul  shiver  and  thy  very  blood  chill 
in  its  veins,  but  it  cannot  do  so  now.  These  eyes  have  sometimes 


JUDGMENT   THREATENING   BUT   MERCY   SPARING*.  521 

looked  on  thee  and  seemed  as  though  they  flashed  with  fire,  but  now 
they  are  dull  as  lead  to  thee.  Once,  when  we  spoke  to  thee  of  the 
wrath  to  come,  the  tears  would  flow:  there  were  some  tears  of  gentle 
pity  for  thine  own  soul;  but  ah!  it  is  not  so  with  thee  now.  You  will 
go  your  way,  and  our  most  earnest  tones  will  seem  but  as  the  whistling 
wind,  and  our  most  importunate  entreaties  as  a  child's  playful  song. 
0  God,  it  is  reasonable  indeed  that  thou  shouldst  uplift  that  sharp 
axe  of  thine  and  say,  "  Cut  it  down/*  I  think  I  could  abundantly 
justify  the  severity  of  God,  if  now  he  were  to  use  it,  when  I  thus  perceive 
that  all  his  sparing  has  had  no  effect  but  to  make  you  worse,  when  I 
perceive  that,  notwithstanding  these  years  of  waiting,  there  are  no 
tokens  of  improvement.  If  he  saith,  "  Cut  it  down,"  justice  and  reason 
say,  "  Ay,  Lord,  it  is  well  it  should  be  so." 

4.  But  there  are  other  reasons  why  "  Cut  it  down  "  is  most  reasonable, 
when  ice  consider  the  owner  and  the  other  trees.  First  of  all,  here  is  a 
tree  which  brings  forth  no  fruit  whatever,  and  therefore  is  of  no  service. 
It  is  like  money  badly  invested,  bringing  in  no  interest;  it  is  a  dead 
loss  to  the  owner.  What  is  the  use  of  keeping  it?  The  dead  tree  is 
neither  use  nor  ornament:  it  can  yield  no  service  and  afford  no  pleasure. 
Cut  it  down  by  all  manner  of  means.  And  even  so  with  thee,  sinner; 
what  is  the  use  of  thee?  Thou  art  of  use  to  thy  children,  to  thy  family; 
in  business  thou  mayst  be  of  some  service  to  the  world;  but  then  the 
world  did  not  make  thee;  and  thy  children,  and  thy  family,  they  did 
not  create  thee.  God  has  made  thee,  God  has  planted  thee,  God  is  thy 
proprietor — thou  hast  done  nothing  for  God.  Even  in  coming  up  to 
his  house  to-day,  you  did  not  come  with  any  desire  to  honour  God;  and 
to-morrow,  if  you  should  chance  to  give  something  to  the  poor,  it  will 
not  be  because  they  are  God's,  nor  out  of  love  to  him.  You  neither 
pray  to  God,  nor  praise  God,  nor  live  for  God;  you  live  for  anything, 
for  everything,  for  nothing,  sooner  than  live  for  the  God  that  made  you. 
Then  what  is  the  good  of  you  to  God?  All  his  other  creatures  praise 
him.  There  is  not  a  spider  spinning  its  web  from  leaf  to  leaf  but  doth 
his  bidding.  "The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's 
crib;"  but  thou  dost  not  know.  Wouldst  thou  keep  a  horse  that  never 
did  thee  service?  Wouldst  thou  have  a  dog  in  thy  house  that  never 
licked  thy  hand  or  fawned  upon  thee,  or  did  thy  will?  Thou  wouldst 
say,  "  What  is  the  good  of  this?  A  servant  in  my  house  to  feed  upon 
my  bread,  to  be  clothed  with  my  bounty,  and  yet  never  to  obey  me,  but 
to  live  in  constant  reckless  disregard  of  my  most  reasonable  commands!" 
You  would  say  to  such  a  servant,  "Get  thee  gone;  thou  art  no  servant 
of  mine/'  Well  might  the  Lord  say  this  of  thee.  All  these  years 
preserving  goodness  has  winked  at  the  past;  longsufFering  has  borne 
with  thy  follies  and  thy  faults,  but  it  cannot  be  so  for  ever,  for  reason 
demands  that  a  useless  thing  should  not  always  stand,  and  "  Cut  it 
down,"  is  the  natural  inference  from  the  uselessness  of  thy  life.  Nor 
is  this  all.  While  you  have  been  thus  living  without  yielding  anything, 
you  have  been  a  very  costly  tree.  The  tree  in  the  vineyard  does  not 
cost  much  except  to  dig  about  it,  and  to  dung  it,  and  to  prune  it. 
There  is,  of  course,  the  expense  of  the  gardener  who  has  to  watch  over 
it,  but  this  is  very  little.  You  may  let  the  barren  tree  stand,  for  it  is 
no  great  expense;  but  see  what  it  costs  to  keep  theel  Thou  hast  to  be 


522  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

daily  fed.  The  breath  in  thy  nostrils  must  come  from  God  every  mo 
ment.  There  has  to  be  an  emanation  from  omnipotence  at  every  single 
tick  of  that  clock,  or  else  thou  wouldst  not  live.  The  complicated 
machinery  of  the  human  body  needs  to  be  tended  and  kept  in  order  by 
the  great  Master-Craftsman,  or  else  ere  long  the  cogs  would  cease  to  act 
upon  one  another,  and  the  wheels  would  be  broken,  and  the  whole 
machinery  would  be  put  out  of  gear.  Thy  body  is  a  harp  of  thousand 
strings,  and  fails  if  one  be  gone.  The  good  harpist  must  watch  with 
sedulous  care  to  prevent  the  strings  from  snapping.  Thou  costest  God 
much ;  much  patience,  much  bounty,  much  skill,  much  power.  Wherefore 
should  he  spare  thee?  What  is  there  in  thee,  that  he  should  go  on  with 
thee  in  this  manner?  Thou  wouldst  not  spare  the  gnat  that  was  always 
stinging  thee,  buzzing  in  thy  face,  and  every  moment  insulting  thee.  If  it 
cost  thee  much  of  thy  poor  gold  to  spare  that  poor  gnat's  life,  thou  wouldst 
riot  be  long  about  it;  thou  wouldst  crush  it.  And  oh!  it  is  a  marvel 
that  Jehovah  does  not  deal  thus  with  thee,  for  thou  art  more  imperti 
nent  than  that  gnat  could  be.  Sinner,  if  you  were  in  God's  place,  and 
were  as  ill-treated  by  your  creature,  as  the  Lord  is  by  you,  would  you 
lavish  love  and  goodness  upon  him,  to  receive  hardness  of  heart  and 
rebellion  in  return?  Assuredly  not.  Judge  then  whether  it  be  not 
right  that  the  Lord  should  say,  "  Out  it  down." 

But  there  is  a  worse  consideration,  namely,  that  all  this  while  you 
have  been  filling  up  a  space  which  somebody  might  have  been  filling  to  the 
glory  of  God.     Where  that  barren  tree  stands  there  might  have  been 
a  tree  loaded  with  fruit.    You  are  cumbering  the  ground,  as  the  text  says, 
that  is,  doing  nothing  but  just  being  a  cumbersome  nuisance.  If  another 
mother  had  those  children,  she  would  pray  for  them  and  weep  over 
them,  and  teach  them  of  Christ,  but  you  do  no  such  thing.     If  another 
man  had  that  money  it  would  be  laid  out  for  God's  glory,  and  you  lay 
it  out  for  your  own  pleasure  and  forget  the  God  who  gave  it  to  you. 
If  another  had  sat  in  that  seat  which  you  occupy,  it  may  be  that  he  had 
long  ago  repented  in  sackcloth  and  ashes;  but  you,  like  the  men  of 
Capernaum,  have  been  hardened  instead  of  being  softened  under  the 
gospel.     It  may  be,  man  of  influence,  if  another  had  stood  where  you 
have  stood  in  the  world's  judgment,  he  would  have  led  hundreds  in 
the  path  of  right,  but  you,  standing  there,  have  done  no  such  thing. 
Oh!  if  another  had  your  gifts,  young  man,  he  would  not  be  making  a 
company  laugh  at  the  tavern,  but  pleading  with  all  his  might  for  Jesus. 
If  another  had  but  your  gifts  of  utterance,  he  would  be  spending  in 
prayer  and  teaching  what  you  now  spend  in  fun  and  frolic  to  make 
amusement  for  fools.     Oh!  if  another  had  that  time  to  live  in,  he  would 
live  in  earnest  for  his  Master.     If  that  young  saint,  just  going  through 
the  flood,  had  your  health  and  vigour,  how  would  he  spend  and  be  spent! 
I  recollect  a  minister  of  Christ  who  had  but  one  talent,  but  much 
heart,  I  remember  hearing  him  pray  this  prayer:  "  0  God,  I  wish  I 
had  ten  talents,  that  I  might  serve  thee  better.     When  I  think  of  some 
that  have  them,  and  do  not  serve  thee  with  them,  I  am  inclined  to  pray, 
"  Lord  take  away  their  ten  talents,  and  trust  me  with  them  if  thou 
wilt,  for  I  do  desire  to  have  something  more  to  lay  out  for  thee."    Take 
heed,  0  my  dear  but  sinful  hearer  lest  the  Lord  remove  thee  suddenly, 
and  fill  up  thy  place  with  one  who  will  be  obedient  to  his  will. 


JUDGMENT   THREATENING   BUT   MERCY   SPARING.  523 

Moreover,  and  to  make  bad  worse  even  to  the  worst  degree,  all  thi* 
while  ungodly  men  are  spreading  an  evil  influence.  Thinking  over  the 
two  lines  of  the  verse  we  have  been  singing,  I  felt  a  horror  of  great 
darkness  as  I  realized  fully  their  solemn  truthfulness  with  regard  to 
some  of  you. 

"  I  have  shed  his  precious  blood, 
Trampled  on  the  Son  of  God; 
Filled  with  pains  unspeakable 
/  who  yet  am  not  in  hell" 

Well  may  the  question  arise — 

"  Whence  to  me  this  waste  of  love  f  ** 

It  is  so  apparently  a  waste  of  longsuffering  and  mercy  that  some 
transgressors  should  be  spared  at  all,  that  they  may  well  marvel.  Look 
at  it,  and  I  think  you  will  see  it  very  clearly  so,  the  very  fact  that  God 
does  not  punish  sin  on  the  spot  is  mischievously  interpreted.  Men  in  all 
ages  have  drawn  a  wicked  inference  from  the  patience  of  the  great  Judge. 
The  Preacher,  in  Ecclesiastes,  says,  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil 
work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men 
is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil."  "  Why,"  you  say,  "  So-and-so  drinks 
and  swears,  and  he  has  lived  to  be  a  hale,  hearty  old  man.  Such  an 
one  has  plunged  into  all  sorts  of  folly  and  wickedness;  he  was  a  thief, 
and  everything  bad  besides,  and  yet  he  prospers  in  the  world  and  grow;; 
rich.  Instead  of  God  sinking  him  down  at  once  to  hell,  he  has 
favoured  him,  and  fattened  him  as  a  bullock  in  rich  pasture.  "  Oh," 
the  worldling  says,  "there  is  no  justice  in  God.  He  does  not  punish 
sin."  The  very  fact  that  you  are  spared,  0  sinner,  is  doing  mischief  in 
the  world.  Do  you  see  that  ?  Your  mere  existence  in  this  world  is  to 
others  an  inducement  to  continue  in  sin;  for  while  you  are  spared, 
others  look  at  you  and  say,  "  God  has  not  punished  him."  Therefore 
they  infer  that  he  will  not  punish  sin  at  all. 

Moreover,  how  many  there  are  of  you  ivhose  example  is  fearfully  con 
tagious  ;  whose  lips  and  livfcs  combine  to  lead  your  associates  astray 
from  God.  In  this  dreadful  murrain  which  has  ravaged  our  fields  and 
destroyed  the  cattle,  farmers  have  been  advised,  as  soon  as  ever  the  cow 
is  attacked  with  the  disease,  to  kill  it  on  the  spot,  and  bury  it  five  feet 
deep  out  of  the  way.  Let  us  reflect  that  the  murrain  of  sin  is  much 
more  pestilential  and  more  certain  to  kill  than  this  murrain  among  the 
cattle,  and  therefore  stern  justice  cries,  "  Let  the  sinner  be  at  once  sent 
where  he  cannot  increase  the  plague  of  iniquity:  it  is  of  no  use  sparing 
him;  he  grows  no  better;  all  the  means  used  only  make  him  worse,  and 
meanwhile  we  must  look  to  the  welfare  of  others,  lest  he  perish  not 
alone  in  his  iniquity.  He  teaches  his  children  to  swear;  he  makes 
others  worldly;  the  whole  current  of  his  life  is  to  incite  men  to  rebel 
against  God:  let  his  desperate  course  be  stopped  at  once.  The  leprosy  is 
upon  him,  and  all  that  he  touches  he  pollutes:  for  high  sanitary  reasons, 
therefore,  he  must  be  removed."  It  is  better  that  one  die  than  that  many 
should  be  smitten,  and  therefore,  the  highest  consideration  for  the  good 
of  mankind  in  general  renders  it  necessary  that  the  mandate  should  go 
forth,  "  Cut  it  down." 


524  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

II.  Our  second  most  solemn  work  is  to  remind  thee,  0  impenitent 
sinner,  that  FOR  GOD  TO  HAVE  SPARED  YOU  so  LONG  is  A  VERY  wox- 
DERFCJL  THING.  That  the  infinitely  just  and  holy  God  should  have 
spared  you,  unconverted  man,  unconverted  woman,  up  till  now,  is  no 
small  thing,  but  a  matter  for  adoring  wonder. 

Let  me  show  you  this.  Consider,  negatively,  God  is  not  sparing  you 
because  he  is  insensible  towards  your  sins :  he  is  angry  with  the  wicked 
every  day.  If  the  Lord  could  be  indifferent  towards  sin,  and  could 
bring  his  holy  mind  to  treat  it  as  a  mere  trifle,  then  it  would  be  no 
wonder  that  he  should  let  the  transgressor  live;  but  he  cannot  endure 
iniquity — all  the  day  long  his  anger  smokes  and  burns  towards  evil,  and 
yet  he  holds  back  the  thunderbolt,  and  does  not  smite  the  guilty.  If 
you  had  been  angry  half-an-hour,  you  would  have  come  to  hard  words 
or  blows;  but  here  is  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  angry  every  day  for 
\wenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty,  sixty,  seventy,  or  eighty  years  with  some  of 
you,  and  yet  he  has  not  smitten.  //  is  not  because  the  offence  is  at  a  dis 
tance,  and  therefore  far  from  his  observant  eye;  no — your  sins  are  like 
smoke  in  his  nose;  your  iniquities  provoke  him  to  his  face;  you  touch 
the  apple  of  his  eye,  and  yet,  for  all  that,  though  this  accursed  thing 
tailed  sin  intrudes  into  his  presence  every  instant,  yet  still  he  has 
spared  you  until  now.  Mark,  sinner,  he  has  spared  you  not  because 
he  ivas  unable  to  have  destroyed  you.  He  might  have  bidden  the  tiles 
fall  from  the  roof,  or  the  fever  might  have  smitten  you  in  the  street; 
the  air  might  have  refused  to  heave  your  lungs,  or  the  blood  might 
have  ceased  its  circulation  in  your  veins.  The  gates  to  death  are  many. 
The  quiver  of  judgment  is  full  of  sharp  arrows.  The  Lord  has  but  to 
will  it,  and  your  soul  is  required  of  you.  He  said  to  the  foolish 
rich  man,  "  This  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee,"  and  he 
never  saw  the  morning;  and  he  might  as  easily  have  sent  the  same  sad 
message  to  you,  and  what  then?  As  I  have  said  before,  this  great 
patience,  is  not  manifested  towards  your  sinful  soul  because  the  Lord 
is  at  all  dependent  upon  you;  your  living  will  not  increase,  and  your 
dying  will  not  diminish  his  glory.  You  will  be  no  more  missed  than 
one  sere  leaf  is  missed  in  a  forest,  or»one  dewdrop  in  a  thousand 
leagues  of  grass.  Judgment  needs  but  a  word  to  work  its  utmost 
vengeance,  and  withal  you  are  so  provoking  that  the  marvel  is  that 
divine  severity  has  spared  you  so  long.  Admire  and  wonder  at  this 
longsuffering. 

Remember  that  this  wonder  is  increased,  when  you  think  of  ths 
fruit  he  deserved  to  have  had  of  you.  A  God  so  good  and  so  gracious, 
ought  to  have  been  loved  by  you.  He  has  treated  you  so  well,  and 
given  you  such  capacities  for  pleasure,  that  he  ought  to  have  had  some 
service  of  you.  You  are  not  to  God  precisely  what  the  ox  is  to  its 
owner — you  give  to  the  ox  but  his  grass  or  his  straw,  and  you  have 
done  with  him;  but  God  gives  to  you  not  only  your  daily  food,  but 
your  very  life — you  are  wholly  dependent  upon  him.  Nothing  can  be 
so  much  yours  as  you  are  God's.  You  ought  to  have  served  him,  to 
have  delighted  in  that  service,  to  spend  and  to  have  been  spent  for 
your  Lord.  He  asks  no  more  of  you  than  he  ought  to  have  had,  and 
yet  he  asks  you  to  love  the  Lord  your  God  with  all  your  heart,  your 
soul,  your  strength  —this  was  his  first  and  great  commandment,  but 


JUDGMENT  THREATENING   BUT   MERCY   SPARING.  525 

this  yon  have  constantly,  persistently  broken.  Oh,  think  then,  wheA 
you  'have  given  to  God  such  a  bad  return,  when  he  ought  to  have 
received  so  much  better — think,  I  pray  you,  how  you  must  have  pro 
voked  him. 

And  ah,  my  hearers!  I  have  to  touch  upon  a  very  solemn  part  of  the 
business  now,  when  I  notice  again  that  some,  perhaps  here  present, 
have  been  guilty  of  very  God-provoking  sins.  Some  offences  provoke 
God  much  more  than  others — I  believe  that  cursing  does,  for  it  is 
wanton  insolence,  by  which  nothing  can  be  gained.  It  is  altogether  a 
gratuitous  piece  of  insult.  To  swear,  to  imprecate  the  curse  of  God 
upon  one's  limbs  and  souls,  is  an  unnecessary,  supernumerary  sin. 
There  cannot  be  any  pleasure  in  pronouncing  oaths,  any  more  than 
in  uttering  any  other  form  of  words.  It  is  just  because  man  will  hate 
his  Maker,  and  will  provoke  him,  that  he  does  this.  0  sinner,  did  you 
ever  ask  God  to  damn  you,  and  are  you  not  astonished  that  he  has  not 
done  it?  Did  you  ever  desire  that  the  blast  should  come  upon  you, 
and  do  you  not  marvel  that  he  has  not  long  ago  swept  you  where 
his  wrath  would  wither  you  for  ever?  Swearing  is  a  sin  that  provokes 
the  Most  High.  0  sinner,  abhor  this  most  detestable  of  vices. 

Infidelity,  again,  and  how  many  are  guilty  of  that?  How  pro- 
yoking  to  God  for  a  man  to  deny  his  very  existence;  standing  up 
and  breathing  God's  air  and  living  upon  God's  life,  and  yet  saying  that 
there  is  no  God.  An  insignificant  worm  dares  challenge  the  Almighty 
to  prove  his  Godhead  and  existence  by  a  tremendous  act  of  justice. 
This  is  a  God-provoking  sin. 

So  again  is  persecution.  There  may  be  some  here  present  who 
have  persecuted  wife  and  child  because  of  their  following  Christ.  "  He 
that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  mine  eye,"  saith  God.  Beware, 
sinner,  you  will  not  touch  the  Lord's  eye  long  without  feeling  his  heavy 
hand.  If  any  man  injures  your  children  the  blood  is  in  your  cheek  at 
once,  if  you  are  a  father,  and  you  feel  that  you  will  show  yourself  strong 
in  their  defence,  even  so  the  heavenly  Father  will  avenge  his  own 
elect.  Therefore,  take  heed  lest  thou  persevere  in  this  heaven-provoking 
sin. 

And  slander,  too,  lying  against  God's  servants,  inventing  and  spread- 
ing  wicked  tales  against  those  who  walk  in  God's  fear,  this  is  another 
evil  which  awakes  the  anger  of  God,  and  stirs  up  righteous  fury  against 
the  man  who  is  guilty  of  it.  Beware!  beware! 

Filthiness,  filthiness  of  body  and  of  life,  will  also  provoke  the  Most 
Holy  One.  This  once  brought  hell  out  of  heaven  upon  Sodom;  God 
sent  down  fire  and  brimstone  because  of  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  that  made 
Sodom  to  stink  in  his  nostrils;  the  harlot  and  the  adulterer,  and  the 
fornicator,  shall  know  that  they  sin  not  without  provoking  God  very 
terribly. 

And  let  me  add  here  among  these  God-provoking  sins,  there  is  that 
quenching  of  conscience  of  which  some  of  you  have  been  guilty.  Ah, 
my  dear  hearers,  there  are  not  many  of  you  to  whom  I  spoke  under  these 
first  heads,  for  I  know  that  very  few  of  you  would  indulge  in  these  grosser 
sins;  but  there  are  some  of  you  quite  as  bad  in  another  sense,  for  you 
know  the  right  and  choose  the  wrong;  you  hear  of  Christ  and  do  not 
give  your  hearts  to  him.  We  had  hoped  of  some  of  you  that  long  ere 
1C 


526  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

this  we  should  have  seen  you  walking  in  the  Lord's  fear,  but  yon  are 
still  strangers  to  Christ.  You  must  have  had  hard  work  to  do  this.  You 
must  have  had  a  terrible  tug  with  conscience,  some  of  you;  I  know 
you  have  been  stifling  many  a  holy  desire,  and  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  been  striving  with  you,  you  have  been  so  desperately  set 
on  mischief,  that  still  you  have  gone  on  in  the  error  of  your  ways. 
Now  these  sins  provoke  God.  I  do  not  believe  that  I  stand  in  this 
pulpit  and  plead  with  you  in  God's  name,  and  then  go  back  and  tell 
my  Master  that  you.  have  rejected  his  warnings,  without  God's  being 
angry  with  your  hardness  of  heart  and  stiffneckedness.  I  know  if  we 
send  an  Ambassador  to  a  foreign  court  to  try  and  make  peace,  and 
he  honestly  and  earnestly  lays  down  proper  stipulations  for  peace, 
if  they  are  rejected,  you  will  soon  find  the  newspapers  and  public 
opinion  ringing  with  indignation.  "  Why,"  they  say,  "  will  not  the 
men  have  peace  when  the  terms  are  so  reasonable  ?  Get  out  the 
iron-clads,  let  them  have  war — war  to  the  knife.  If  they  will  not  yield 
to  what  is  reasonable,  then  let  us  dress  ourselves  in  thunder,  and  go- 
forth  across  the  sea."  And  what  think  you.  Shall  God  be  always  pro 
voked?  Shall  mercy  be  preached  to  you  for  ever  in  vain?  Shall* Christ 
be  presented  and  always  rejected,  and  will  you  continue  to  be  his 
enemies,  and  shall  he  never  proclaim  war  against  your  souls?  It  is  a 
marvel,  it  is  a  wonder  that  these  God-provoking  sins  have  so  long 
been  borne  with,  and  that  you  are  not  yet  cut  down. 

III.  And  now,  WHAT  is  THE  REASON  FOR  ALL  THIS  LONGSUFFERIXG? 
Why  is  it  that  this  cumber-ground  tree  has  not  been  cut  down?  The 
answer  is,  because  there  is  one  who  pleads  for  sinners.  I  have  shown 
you,  and  some  of  you  will  think  I  have  shown  you  with  very  great 
severity  too,  how  reasonable  it  is  that  you  should  be  cut  down.  I  wish 
you  felt  it,  for,  if  you  felt  how  reasonable  it  was  that  God  should  send 
you  to  hell,  then  you  would  begin  to  tremble,  and  there  would  be  some 
hope  of  you.  I  can  assure  you  I  have  trembled  for  you,  when  I  have 
thought  how  rational,  how  just,  nay,  it  would  seem  to  me,  how  necesr 
sary  it  was  that  some  of  you  should  be  lost— it  has  made  me  tremble 
for  you — and  I  would  to  God  you  would  tremble  for  yourselves.  But 
what  has  been  the  secret  cause  that  you  have  been  kept  alive?  The 
answer  is,  Jesus  Christ  has  pleaded  for  you,  the  crucified  Saviour  has 
interfered  for  you.  And  you  ask  me  "  Why?"  I  answer,  because  Jesus 
Christ  has  an  interest  in  you  all.  We  do  not  believe  in  general  redemp 
tion,  but  we  believe  in  every  word  of  this  precious  Bible,  and  there  are 
many  passages  in  the  Scripture  which  seem  to  show  that  Christ's  death 
had  an  universal  bearing  upon  the  sons  of  men.  We  are  told  that  he 
tasted  death  for  every  man.  What  does  that  mean?  Does  it  mean  that 
Jesus  Christ  died  to  save  every  man?  I  do  not  believe  it  does,  for  it  seema 
to  me  that  everything  which  Christ  intended  to  accomplish  by  the  act  of 
his  death  he  must  accomplish,  or  else  he  will  be  disappointed,  which 
is  not  supposable.  Those  whom  Christ  died  to  save  I  believe  he 
will  save  effectually,  through  his  substitutionary  sacrifice.  But  did  he 
in  any  other  sense  die  for  the  rest  of  mankind?  He  did.  Nothing  can 
be  much  more  plain  in  Scripture,  it  seems  to  me,  than  that  all  sinners 
are  spared  as  the  result  of  Jesus  Christ's  death,  and  this  is  the  sense  in 
which  men  are  said  to  trample  on  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  We 


JUDGMENT   THREATENING  BUT  MERCY   SPARING.  527 

read  of  some  who  denied  the  Lord  that  bought  them.    No  one  who  is 
bought  with  blood  for  eternal  salvation  ever  tramples  on  that  blood; 
but  Jesus  Christ  has  shed  his  blood  for  the  reprieve  of  men  that  they 
may  be  spared,  and  those  who  turn  God's  sparing  mercy  into  an  occasion 
for   fresh  sin,,  do  trample  on   the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.     You  can 
hold  that  doctrine  without  holding  universal  redemption,  or  without 
at  all  contradicting  that  undoubted  truth,  that  Jesus  laid  down  his 
life  for  his  sheep,  and  that  where  he  suffered  he  suffered  not  in  vain. 
Now,  sinner,  whether  thou  knowest  it  or  not,   thou  art  indebted  tG 
him  that  did  hang  upon  the  tree,  for  the  breath  that  is  now  in  thee. 
Thou  hadst  not  been  on  praying  ground  and  pleading  terms  with  God 
this  morning  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  dear  suffering  one.     Our  text 
represents  the  gardener  as  only  asking  to  have  it  spared;  but  Jesus 
Christ  did  something  more  than  ask;  he  pleaded,  not  with  his  mouth 
only,  but  with  pierced  hands,  and  pierced  feet,  and  pierced  side;  and 
those  prevailing  pleas  have  moved  the  heart  of  God,  and  you  are  yet 
spared.     May  I  speak  to  thee  then?     if  thy  life  had  been  spared,  when 
thou  wast  condemned  to  die,  by  my  intervention — suppose  such  a  case — 
would  you  despise  me?    If  I  had  power  at  the  Court,  and  when  you 
were  condemned  to  die,  had  gone  in  and  pleaded  for  you,  and  you  had 
been  reprieved,  year  after  year  would  you  hate  me?  would  you  speak 
against  me?  would  you  rail  at  my  character?  would  you  find  fault  with 
my  friends?     I  know  you  better:  you  would  love  me;  you  would  be 
grateful  for  the  sparing  of  your  life.   0  sinner,  I  would  you  would  treat 
the  Lord  Jesus  as  you  would  treat  man.     I  would  you  would  think  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  you  would  think  of  your  fellow-man  who  had 
delivered  you  from  death.    You  are  not  in  hell,  where  you  would  have 
been  if  he  had  not  come  in  and  pleaded  for  you.     I  do  beseech  you, 
think  of  the  miseiy  of  lost  souls,  and  recollect  that  you  would  have 
been  in  such  a  woful  case  yourself  this  morning,  if  he  had  not  lifted 
up  that  hand  once  pierced  for  human  sin.  There,  there,  where  the  flames 
can  no  abatement  know,  where  a  drop  of  water  is  a  boon  too  great  to  be 
received — there,  where  hope  is  excluded,  and  despair  sits  upon  a  throne 
of  iron,  binding  captive  souls  in  everlasting  bands — where  "  For  ever! " 
is  written  on  the  fire,  and  "  For  ever! "  is  printed  on  the  chain,  and 
"For  ever!  for  ever!  for  ever!"  rings  out  as  the  awful  death-knell  o» 
everything  like  hope,  and  rest — there  you  would  have  been  this  morning, 
this  morning,  if  sparing  grace  had  not  prevented.  "Where  are  your  com 
panions,  your  old  companions?   You  sat  in  the  pothouse  with  them;  they 
are  in  hell,  but  you  are  not.     When  you  were  younger  you  sinned  with 
them,  and  they  are  lost,  but  you  are  not.     Why  this  difference  made? 
Why  are  they  cast  away  and  you  spared?     I  can  only  ascribe  it  to  the 
gracious  longsuffering  of  Jehovah.     0,  I  pray  you  look  at  him  who 
spared  you,  and  weep  and  mourn  for  your  sin.     May  the  Spirit  of  God 
come  down  on  you  this  morning  and  draw  you  to  the  foot  of  his  dear 
cross,  and  as  you  see  the  blood  which  has  spared  your  blood,  and  the 
death  which  has  made  you  live  until  now,  I  do  trust  that  the  divine 
Spirit  may  make  you  fall  down  and  say,  "  0  Jesus,  how  can  I  offend 
thee?     How  can  I  stand  out  against  thee?     Accept  me  and  save  me  £>r 
thy  mercy's  sake."     For  while  I  have  thus  spoken  of  the  general  in 
terest  which  Christ  has  in  you  all,  I  have  good  hope  that  Christ  has 


528  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

a  special  interest  in  some  of  you ;  I  hope  that  he  has  specially  redeemed 
you  from  among  men,  and  bought  you  not  with  silver  and  gold,  but 
with  his  own  precious  blood,  having  loved  you  with  an  everlasting  love, 
I  trust  he  intends  with  the  bands  of  his  kindness  to  draw  you  this 
morning.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  cannot  think  that  such  can  be  the  case." 
But  suppose  you  were  to  find  out  ere  long  that  you  were  chosen  of  God, 
and  dear  to  Christ,  and  were  to  be  a  jewel  in  his  crown  for  ever,  what 
would  you  say  then  of  yourself?  "I  would  mourn  that  I  could  ever 
have  hated  him  that  loved  me  so  well.  Oh !  that  I  could  ever  have 
stood  out  against  him  that  was  determined  to  save  me !  What  a  fool  I 
was  to  quarrel  with  him  who  had  paid  my  price,  and  chosen  me  by  his 
grace,  and  taken  me  to  be  married  unto  himself  for  ever ! "  I  tell  you 
that  God  will  forgive  you,  but  you  will  never  forgive  yourselves  for 
having  stood  out  and  resisted  so  long.  Oh !  may  eternal  mercy,  which 
has  not  yet  said,  "  Cut  it  down,"  now  dig  about  you  and  dung  you, 
that  you" may  bring  forth  fruit,  and  then  it  shall  be  all  to  the  praise  of 
him  whose  precious  blood  has  saved  us  from  eternal  wrath.  May  God 
bless  these  feeble  words  of  mine.  He  knows  how  I  meant  them;  how  I 
meant  to  speak  them,  how  I  meant  to  have  wept  over  you,  how  I 
wanted  that  my  soul  should  heave  with  passionate  desire  for  your  con 
version;  but  if  there  have  been  no  such  outward  manifestations,  yet  I 
pray  God  that  the  truth  itself  may  be  irresistible,  and  may  he  get  to 
himself  the  victory,  and  his  shall  be  the  praise,  evermore. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  BEAD  BKFORE  SERMON— 2  Peter  Hi. 


rfi[optitmt 


"THIS  YEAR  ALSO." 


FOR  THE  NEW   YEAR.      FROM   THE   SICK  CHAMBER  OF 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


"  This  year  also." — Luke  xiii.  8. 

AT  the  opening  of  another  year,  and  at  the  commencement  of  another 
volume  of  sermons,  we  earnestly  desire  to  utter  the  word  of  exhortation  : 
but  alas,  at  this  present,  the  preacher  is  a  prisoner,  and  must  speak  from 
his  pillow  instead  of  his  pulpit.  Let  not  the  few  words  which  we  can 
put  together  come  with  diminished  power  from  a  sick  man,  for  the 
musket  fired  by  a  wounded  soldier  sends  forth  the  bullet  with  none  the 
less  force.  Our  desire  is  to  speak  with  living  words,  or  not  at  all.  He 
who  enables  us  to  sit  up  and  compose  these  trembling  sentences  is  en 
treated  to  clothe  them  with  his  Spirit,  that  they  may  be  according  to  his 
own  mind. 

The  interceding  vine-dresser  pleaded  for  the  fruitless  fig-tree,  "  let  it 
alone  this  year  also"  dating  as  it  were  a  year  from  the  time  wherein 
he  spoke.  Trees  and  fruitbearing  plants  have  a  natural  measure 
ment  for  their  lives :  evidently  a  year  came  to  its  close  when  it  was 
time  to  seek  fruit  on  the  fig-tree,  and  another  year  commenced  when  the 
vine-dresser  began  again  his  digging  and  priming  work.  Men  are  such 
barren  things  that  their  fruitage  marks  no  certain  periods,  and  it 
becomes  needful  to  make  artificial  divisions  of  time  for  them ;  there 
seems  to  be  no  set  period  for  man's  spiritual  harvest  or  vintage,  or  if 
there  be,  the  sheaves  and  the  clusters  come  not  in  their  season,  and 
hence  we  have  to  say  one  to  another, — "  This  shall  be  the  beginning  of 
a  new  year."  Be  it  so,  then.  Let  us  congratulate  each  other  upon 
seeing  the  dawn  of  "  this  year  also,"  and  let  us  unitedly  pray  that  we 
may  enter  upon  it,  continue  in  it,  and  come  to  its  close  under  the  un 
failing  blessing  of  the  Lord  to  whom  all  years  belong. 

I.  The  beginning  of  a  new  year  SUGGESTS  A  RETROSPECT.  Let  us  take 
it,  deliberately  and  honestly.  "  This  year  also  .•" — then  there  had  been 
former  years  of  grace.  The  dresser  of  the  vineyard  was  not  for  the  first 
time  aware  of  the  fig-tree's  failure,  neither  had  the  owner  come  for  the  first 
time  seeking  figs  in  vain.  God,  who  gives  us  "  this  year  also,"  has  given 
us  others  before  it ;  his  sparing  mercy  is  no  novelty,  hismtience  has  already 
No.  1,451,  22 


2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

been  taxed  by  oar  provocations.  First  came  our  youthful  years,  when 
even  a  little  fruit  unto  God  is  peculiarly  sweet  to  him.  How  did  we  spend 
them  ?  Did  our  strength  run  all  into  wild  wood  and  wanton  branch  ?  If 
so,  we  may  well  bewail  that  wasted  vigour,  that  life  misspent,  that 
sin  exceedingly  multiplied.  He  who  saw  us  misure  those  golden  months 
of  youth  nevertheless  affords  us  "  this  year  also,"  and  we  should  enter  upon 
it  with  a  holy  jealousy,  lest  what  of  strength  and  ardour  may  be  left  to 
us  should  be  allowed  to  run  away  into  the  same  wasteful  courses 
as  aforetime.  Upon  the  heels  of  our  youthful  years  came  those 
of  early  manhood,  when  we  began  to  muster  a  household,  and  to  become 
as  a  tree  fixed  in  its  place ;  then  also  fruit  would  have  been  precious. 
Did  we  bear  any?  Did  we  present  unto  the  Lord  a  basket  of 
summer  fruit  ?  Did  we  offer  him  the  firstling  of  our  strength  ?  If 
we  did  so,  we  may  well  adore  the  grace  which  so  early  saved  us ;  but 
if  not,  the  past  chides  us,  and,  lifting  an  admonitory  finger,  it  warns  us 
not  to  let  "  this  year  also  "  follow  the  way  of  the  rest  of  our  lives.  He 
who  has  wasted  youth  and  the  morning  of  manhood  has  surely  had 
enough  of  fooling  :  the  time  past  may  well  suffice  him  to  have  wrought 
the  will  of  the  flesh :  it  will  be  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness  to  suffer  "  this 
year  also  "  to  be  trodden  down  in  the  service  of  sin.  Many  of  us  are  now 
in  the  prime  of  life,  and  our  years  already  spent  are  not  few.  Have  we 
still  need  to  confess  that  our  years  are  eaten  up  by  the  grasshopper  and 
the  canker-worm  ?  Have  we  reached  the  half-way  house,  and  still  know 
not  whither  we  are  going  ?  Are  we  fools  at  forty  ?  Are  we  half  a 
century  old  by  the  calendar  and  yet  far  off  from  years  of  discretion  ?  Alas, 
great  God,  that  there  should  be  men  past  this  age  who  are  still  without 
knowledge !  Unsaved  at  sixty,  unregenerate  at  seventy,  unawakened  at 
eighty,  unrenewed  at  ninety !  These  are  each  and  all  startling.  Yet, 
peradventure,  they  will  each  one  fall  upon  ears  which  they  should  make 
to  tingle,  but  they  will  hear  them  as  though  they  heard  them  not.  Con 
tinuance  in  evil  breeds  callousness  of  heart,  and  when  the  soul  has  long 
been  sleeping  in  indifference  it  is  hard  to  arouse  it  from  the  deadly 
slumber. 

The  sound  of  the  words  "  this  year  also  "  makes  some  of  us  remember 
years  of  great  mercy,  sparkling  and  flashing  with  delight.  Were  those 
years  laid  at  the  Lord's  feet  ?  They  were  comparable  to  the  silver  bells 
upon  the  horses — were  they  "  holiness  unto  the  Lord"?  If  not,  how  shall 
we  answer  for  it  if  "this  year  also"  should  be  musical  with  merry  mercy 
and  yet  be  spent  in  the  ways  of  carelessness  ?  The  same  words  recall  to 
some  of  us  our  years  of  sharp  affliction  when  we  were,  indeed,  digged  about 
and  dunged.  How  went  those  years  ?  God  was  doing  great  things  for 
us,  exercising  careful  and  expensive  husbandry,  caring  for  us  with  ex 
ceeding  great  and  wise  care, — did  we  render  according  to  the  benefit 
received  ?  Did  we  rise  from  the  bed  more  patient  and  gentle,  weaned 
from  the  world,  and  welded  to  Christ  ?  Did  we  bring  forth  clusters  to 
reward  the  dresser  of  the  vineyard  ?  Let  us  not  refuse  these  questions 
of  self-examination,  for  it  may  be  this  is  to  be  another  of  these  years  of 
captivity,  another  season  of  the  furnace  and  the  fining-pot.  The  Lord 
grant  that  the  coming  tribulation  may  take  more  chaff  out  of  us  than  any 
of  its  predecessors,  and  leave  the  wheat  cleaner  and  better. 

The  new  year  also  reminds  us  of  opportunities  for  usefulness,  whicb 


"THIS   YEAR   ALSO/'  8 

'have  come  and  gone,  and  of  unfulfilled  resolutions  which  have  blossomed 
only  to  fade ;  shall  *'  this  year  also  "  be  as  those  which  have  gone  before  ? 
May  we  not  hope  for  grace  to  advance  upon  grace  already  gained,  and 
should  we  not  seek  for  power  to  turn  our  poor  sickly  promises  into  robust 
action  ? 

Looking  back  on  the  past  we  lament  the  follies  by  which  we  would  not 
willingly  be  held  captive  "  this  year  also,"  and  we  adore  the  forgiving 
mercy,  the  preserving  providence,  the  boundless  liberality,  the  divine 
love,  of  which  we  hope  to  be  partakers  "  this  year  also." 

II.  If  the  preacher  could  think  freely  he  could  wherry  the  text  at  his 
pleasure  in  many  directions,  but  he  is  feeble,  and  so  must  let  it  drive  with 
the  current  which  bears  it  on  to  a  second  consideration  :  the  text  MEN 
TIONS  A  MERCY.  It  was  in  great  goodness  that  the  tree  which  cumbered 
the  soil  was  allowed  to  stand  for  another  year,  and  prolonged  life  should 
always  be  regarded  as  a  boon  of  mercy.  We  must  view  "this  year 
also"  as  a  grant  from  infinite  grace.  It  is  wrong  to  speak  as  if  we  cared 
nothing  for  life,  and  looked  upon  our  being  here  as  an  evil  or  a  punish 
ment;  we  are  here  "this  year  also"  as  the  result  of  love's  pleadings,  and 
in  pursuance  of  love's  designs. 

The  wicked  man  should  count  that  the  Lord's  longsuffering  points  to 
his  salvation,  and  he  should  permit  the  cords  of  love  to  draw  him  to  it.  0 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  would  make  the  blasphemer,  the  Sabbath-breaker, 
•and  the  openly  vicious  to  feel  what  a  wonder  it  is  that  their  lives  are  pro 
longed  "  this  year  also  "  !  Are  they  spared  to  curse,  and  riot,  and  defy  their 
Maker  ?  Shall  this  be  the  only  fruit  of  patient  mercy  ?  The  procras- 
tinator  who  has  put  off  the  messenger  of  heaven  with  his  delays  and  half 
promises,  ought  he  not  to  wonder  that  he  is  allowed  to  see  "this  year  also  "  ? 
How  is  it  that  the  Lord  has  borne  with  him  and  put  up  with  his  vacilla 
tions  and  hesitations?  Is  this  year  of  grace  to  be  spent  in  the  same 
manner  ?  Transient  impressions,  hasty  resolves,  and  speedy  apostasies — • 
are  these  to  be  the  weary  story  over  and  over  again  ?  The  startled  con 
science,  the  tyrant  passion,  the  smothered  emotion !  Are  these  to  be  the 
tokens  of  yet  another  year  ?  May  God  forbid  that  any  one  of  us  should 
hesitate  and  delay  through  "  this  year  also."  Infinite  pity  holds  back  the 
axe  of  justice,  shall  it  be  insulted  by  the  repetition  of  the  sins  which  caused 
the  uplifting  of  the  instrument  of  wrath  ?  What  can  be  more  tantalizing 
to  the  heart  of  goodness  than  indecision  ?  Well  might  the  Lord's  prophet 
become  impatient  and  cry,  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?" 
Well  may  God  himself  push  for  a  decision  and  demand  an  immediate 
reply.  0  undecided  soul,  wilt  thou  swing  much  longer  between  heavei? 
and  hell,  and  act  as  if  it  were  hard  to  choose  between  the  slavery  of  Sata:. 
and  the  1  iberty  of  the  Great  Father's  home  of  love  ?  "  This  year  also  "  wilt 
thou  sport  in  defiance  of  justice,  and  pervert  the  generosity  of  mercy  into 
a  licence  for  still  further  rebellion  ?  "  This  year  also  "  must  divine  love  be 
made  an  occasion  for  continued  sin  ?  0  do  not  act  so  basely,  so  contrary 
to  every  noble  instinct,  so  injuriously  to  thine  own  best  interests. 

The  believer  is  kept  out  of  heaven  "  this  year  also  "  in  love,  and  not  in 
.anger.  There  are  some  for  whose  sake  it  is  needful  he  should  abide  in 
the  flesh,  some  to  be  helped  by  him  on  their  heavenward  way,  and  others 
to  be  led  to  the  Redeemer's  feet  by  his  instruction.  The  heaven  of 
many  saints  is  not  yet  prepared  for  them,  because  their  nearest  companions 


I  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

have  not  yet  arrived,  and  their  spiritual  children  have  not  yet  gathered 
in  glory  in  sufficient  number  to  give  them  a  thoroughly  heavenly 
welcome :  they  must  wait  "  this  year  also  "  that  their  rest  may  be  the 
more  glorious,  and  that  the  sheaves  which  they  will  bring  with  them 
may  afford  them  greater  joy.  Surely,  for  the  sake  of  souls,  for  the 
delight  of  glorifying  our  Lord,  and  for  the  increase  of  the  jewels  of  our 
crown,  we  may  be  glad  to  wait  below  "  this  year  also."  This  is  a  wide 
field,  but  we  may  not  linger  in  it,  for  our  space  is  little,  and  our  strength 
is  even  less. 

III.  Our  last  feeble  utterance  shall  remind  you  that  the  expression, 
"  This  year  also,"  IMPLIES  A  LIMIT.  The  vine-dresser  asked  no  longer  a 
reprieve  than  one  year.  If  his  digging  and  manuring  should  not  then 
prove  successful  he  would  plead  no  more,  but  the  tree  should  fall.  Even 
when  Jesus  is  the  pleader,  the  request  of  mercy  has  its  bounds  and  times. 
It  is  not  for  ever  that  we  shall  be  let  alone,  and  allowed  to  cumber  the 
ground ;  if  we  will  not  repent  we  must  perish,  if  we  will  not  be  benefited 
by  the  spade  we  must  fall  by  the  axe. 

There  will  come  a  last  year  to  each  one  of  us :  therefore  let  each  one 
say  to  himself — Is  this  my  last?  If  it  should  be  the  last  with  the 
preacher,  he  would  gird  up  his  loins  to  deliver  the  Lord's  message  with 
all  his  soul,  and  bid  his  fellow-men  be  reconciled  to  God.  Dear  friend, 
is  "  this  year  also  "  to  be  your  last?  Are  you  ready  to  see  the  curtain  rise 
upon  eternity  ?  Are  you  now  prepared  to  hear  the  midnight  cry,  and  to- 
enter  into  the  marriage  supper  ?  The  judgment  and  all  that  will  follow 
upon  it  are  most  surely  the  heritage  of  every  living  man,  blessed  are  they 
who  by  faith  in  Jesus  are  able  to  face  the  bar  of  God  without  a  thought 
of  terror. 

If  we  live  to  be  counted  among  the  oldest  inhabitants  we  must  depart 
at  last :  there  must  be  an  end,  and  the  voice  must  be  heard — "  Thug 
saith  the  Lord,  this  year  thou  shalt  die."  So  many  have  gone  before  us, 
and  are  going  every  hour,  that  no  man  should  need  any  other  memento 
snori,  and  yet  man  is  so  eager  to  forget  his  own  mortality,  and  thereby 
to  forfeit  his  hopes  of  bliss,  that  we  cannot  too  often  bring  it  before 
the  mind's  eye.  0  mortal  man,  bethink  thee !  Prepare  to  meet  thy 
God;  for  thou  must  meet  him.  Seek  the  Saviour,  yea,  seek  him  ere 
another  sun  sinks  to  his  rest. 

Once  more,  "this  year  also,"  and  it  may  be  for  this  year  only,  the  cross  i& 
uplifted  as  the  pharos  of  the  world,  the  one  light  to  which  no  eye  can 
look  in  vain.  Oh  that  millions  would  look  that  way  and  live.  Soon  the 
Lord  Jesus  will  come  a  second  time,  and  then  the  blaze  of  his  throne  will 
supplant  the  mild  radiance  of  his  cross  :  the  Judge  will  be  seen  rather 
than  the  Redeemer.  Now  he  saves,  but  then  he  will  destroy.  Let  us 
hear  his  voice  at  this  moment.  He  hath  limited  a  day,  let  us  be  eager 
to  avail  ourselves  of  the  gracious  season.  Let  us  believe  in  Jesus  this 
day,  seeing  it  may  be  our  last.  These  are  the  pleadings  of  one  who- 
now  falls  back  on  his  pillow  in  very  weakness.  Hear  them  for  your 
souls'  sakes  and  live. 


efipjj0Htmt  SMmwck  fjulpit 


ALL  THINGS  ARE  READY.  COME. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  MAY  13TH,  1877,  BY 

C.    H.   SP  URGED  N, 

AT    THE     METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


*'  Come,  for  all  things  are  now  ready." — Luke  xiv.  17. 

THIS  invitation  was  first  of  all  made  to  the  Jews,  but  it  seems  to  me  to 
have  a  peculiar  appropriateness  to  ourselves.  It  is  later  in  the  day  than 
when  first  the  Lord  was  here,  and  therefore  the  supper  time  is  evidently 
closer  at  hand.  The  shadows  lengthen,  the  sun  of  the  present  dispen- 
gation  is  nearing  its  setting ;  by  nearly  nineteen  hundred  years  has  its 
day  been  shortened  since  first  the  Lord  sent  forth  his  servants  at  supper 
time.  The  fulness  of  time  for  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  must 
speedily  arrive,  and  therefore  it  behoves  us  to  be  more  than  ever  earnest 
in  delivering  the  message  to  the  invited  guests. 

And  if  all  things  could  be  said  to  be  ready  even  in  our  Saviour's  day, 
we  may  say  it  with  still  greater  emphasis  now  ;  for  when  he  delivered 
this  parable  the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet  given,  but  Pentecost  has  now 
passed,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  abideth  with  us  to  accompany  the  word, 
to  fill  it  with  power  and  to  bless  our  souls  as  we  feed  upon  the  truth. 
Very  emphatically  then  at  this  time  all  things  are  now  ready,  and  the 
supper  awaits  the  guests.  I  pray  you  do  not  begin  to  make  excuses, 
but  be  prepared  to  follow  us  when  we  bid  you  come,  to  go  with  us  when 
we  seek  to  bring  you  in,  or  at  least  to  yield  to  our  entreaties  when  with 
all  the  sacred  violence  of  love  we  would  compel  you  to  come  in.  We 
will  not  grudge  the  use  of  all  the  three  increasing  modes  of  persuasion 
so  long  as  you  are  but  led  to  "  Come,  for  all  things  are  now  ready." 

There  are  two  things  clearly  in  the  text,  and  these  have  a  close  re 
lation  to  one  another.  A  plain  invitation — "  Come,"  and  then  a  forcible 
argument — "  for  all  things  are  ready."  The  argument  is  fetched  from 
the  divine  preparations,  gathered  from  among  the  dainty  viands  of  the 
royal  feast.  "  My  oxen  and  rny  tatlings  are  killed,  come  to  the  supper." 
The  readiness  of  everything  on  God's  part  is  the  argument  why  rn«n 
•hould  come  and  partake  of  his  grace  :  and  that  is  the  point  upon  which 
No.  1,354. 


<J78  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

we  will  dwell  at  this  time — the  readiness  of  the  feast  of  mercy  is  ime 
reason  why  men  should  come  to  it  at  once. 

I.  We  will  begin  our  meditation  by  laying  down  the  first  statement 
which  shall  make  our  first  division  of  discourse,  namely,  that  IT  is 
GOD'S  HABIT  TO  HAVE  ALL  THINGS  READY,  whether  for  his  guests  or 
his  creatures.  You  never  discover  him  to  be  behindhand  in  anything. 
When  the  guests  come  there  is  not  a  scramble  to  get  the  table  arranged 
and  the  food  prepared,  but  the  Lord  kas  great  forethought,  and  every 
little  point  of  detail  is  well  arranged.  "  All  things  are  ready." 

It  was  so  in  creation.  He  did  not  create  a  single  blade  of  grass  upon 
the  face  of  the  earth  until  the  soil  and  the  atmosphere  had  been  pre 
pared  for  it,  and  until  the  kindly  sun  had  learned  to  look  down  upon 
the  earth.  Imagine  vegetation  without  a  sun,  or  without  the  alterna 
tion  of  day  and  night.  But  the  air  was  full  of  light,  the  firmament 
upheld  the  clouds,  and  the  dry  land  had  appeared  from  out  of  the  sea, 
and  then  all  things  were  ready  fpr  herb,  and  plant,  and  tree.  Nor  did 
God  prepare  one  single  creature  that  hath  life,  nor  fowl  that  fly  in  the 
midst  of  heaven,  nor  fish  that  swim  the  seas,  nor  beast  that  moveth  on 
the  dry  land,  until  he  had  prepared  its  habitat,  and  made  ready  its  ap 
pointed  food.  There  were  no  cattle  before  there  were  meadows  for  their 
grazing ;  no  birds  till  there  were  trees  for  their  nests,  no,  nor  even  a 
creeping  insect  till  its  portion  of  meat  had  been  provided.  No  creature 
had  to  wait  in  hungry  mood  while  its  food  was  growing  ;  all  things  were 
ready :  ready  first  for  vegetation,  and  then  afterwards  for  animal  life. 
As  for  Adam,  when  God  came  to  make  him  as  his  laM,  and  noblest 
work  of  creation,  all  things  were  ready.  The  garden  was  laid  out  upon 
the  banks  of  flowing  streams,  and  planted  with  all  kinds  of  trees,  the 
fruits  were  ripe  for  his  diet,  and  the  flowers  in  bloom  for  his  delight. 
He  did  not  come  to  an  unfurnished  house,  but  he  entered  upon  a  home 
which  his  Father  had  made  pleasant  and  agreeable  for  his  dwelling. 
The  world  was  first  fitted  up,  and  then  the  man  who  was  to  govern 
that  world  was  placed  in  it.  "  All  things  are  ready,"  the  Lord  seems 
to  say,  "  Spring  up,  0  herb  yielding  seed";  and  then  "All  things  are 
ready,  come  forth  ye  roes  and  hinds  of  the  field ! "  and  then  "  All 
things  are  ready,  stand  forth,  0  man,  made  in  mine  own  image ! " 

In  after  times  we  may  gather  illustrations  of  the  same  truth  from  the 
ways  of  God  with  men.  The  ark  was  first  of  all  builded,  and  the  various 
creatures  were  gathered  into  it,  with  all  their  necessary  provender,  for 
that  strange  voyage  which  they  were  about  to  take  :  and  then  the  Lord 
said  to  Noah,  "  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark,"  "All  things 
are  ready,  come,"  was  his  voice  to  the  chosen  eight  as  they  entered  into 
the  ark.  There  was  no  need  to  tarry  any  longer,  every  preparation  was 
made,  and  therefore  God  shut  them  in.  Everything  is  done  with 
punctuality  and  exactness  by  the  only  wise  God.  The  selfsame  day  that 
a  thing  is  needed  it  is  prepared. 

Take  another  event  in  providence,  such  as  the  going  down  of  Israel 
into  Egypt.  God  had  determined  that  Jacob  and  his  seed  should  sojourn 
awhile  in  the  land  of  Ham,  but  how  wisely  he  prepared  the  whole  matter. 
He  sent  a  man  before  them,  even  Joseph,  and  Joseph  was  there  upon 
the  throne  clothed  with  power  to  nourish  them  through  the  famine. 
He  had  been  there  years  before,  all  in  i^ood  time  to  store  the  wheat 


ALL  THINGS  ARE  READY.   COME.  279 

while  the  seven  years  of  plenty  lasted,  that  they  might  be  well  fed 
during  the  seven  years  of  famine.'  Goshen  also  was  at  the  disposal  of 
Joseph,  so  that  the  flocks  and  herds  of  Israel  might  dwell  in  that  fat 
land.  Not  into  Egypt  shall  God's  Israel  go  till  all  things  are  ready  ; 
and  when  all  things  are  ready  they  will  come  out  again  with  a  high 
hand  and  an  outstretched  arm. 

So  was  it  when  the  tribe*  migrated  into  Canaan  itself.  God  took 
them  not  to  the  promised  land  until  all  things  were  ready.  They  were 
made  to  wait  for  the  fitting  time,  for  the  Lord  said  "  The  iniquity  of 
the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  Not  till  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  had 
passed  the  bounds  of  mercy,  and  were  condemned  to  die,  were  the 
Israelites  brought  upon  the  scene  to  be  at  once  their  executioners  and 
successors  ;  and  when  the  tribes  came  to  the  river  Jordan,  God  had 
prepared  everything  for  them,  for  he  had  sent  the  hornet  before  them 
to  drive  out  the  people,  and  a  pestilence  also,  for  the  spies  said,  "  It  is  a 
land  that  eateth  up  the  inhabitants  thereof.'"'  The  Lord  God  had  gone 
before  them  to  fight  their  battles  before  they  came,  and  to  prepare  a 
place  for  them,  so  that  when  they  entered  they  dwelt  in  houses  which 
they  had  not  built,  and  they  gathered  the  fruit  of  olives  which  they 
had"  not  planted.  They  came  to  a  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and 
honey,  a  land  in  a  fine  cultivated  condition,  and  not  a  wilderness  which 
with  hard  labour  must  be  reclaimed.  Israel  came  to  a  country  which 
was  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  whose  fruit  might  at  once  be  enjoyed, 
for  they  ate  of  the  old  corn  of  the  land  almost  as  soon  as  they  passed 
the  Jordan.  So  you  see  "  All  things  are  ready  "  is  a  proclamation 
which  the  Lord  has  often  in  spirit  made  to  those  whom  he  chooses  to 
bless. 

Now  the  fact  that  in  the  great  gospel  supper  all  things  are  ready 
teaches  us  first,  that  God's  thoughts  go  before  men's  comings.  "  Come, 
for  all  things  are  ready."  Not  "  If  you  come,  all  things  will  be  ready," 
but  "  they  are  ready,  and  therefore  come."  Grace  is  first,  and  man  at 
his  best  follows  its  footsteps.  Long  before  we  ever  thought  of  God  he 
thought  of  us  ;  yea,  heloie  we  had  a  being  and  ere  time  itself  began,  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Eternal  there  were  thoughts  of  love  towards  those  for 
whom  the  table  of  his  mercy  is  now  spread.  He  had  planned  and 
arranged  everything  in  his  august  mind  from  of  old,  he  had  indeed 
foreknown  and  predestinated  all  the  provisions  and  all  the  guests  of 
his  supper  ;  all  things  were  settled  in  his  eternal  covenant  and  purpose 
or  ever  the  earth  was.  Never  think,  oh  sinner,  that  thou  canst  out 
strip  the  love  of  God,  it  is  at  the  end  of  the  race  before  thou  art  at  the 
beginning.  God  hath  completed  before  thou  hast  begun.  His  thoughts 
ave  before  ours,  and  so  are  his  acts,  for  he  doth  not  say,  u  All  things 
are  planned  and  arranged,"  but  "All  things  are  ready."  Jesus,  the 
great  sacrifice,  is  slain,  the  fountain  for  our  cleansing  is  filled  with 
blood:  the  Holy  Si  irit  has  been  given,  the  word  by  which  we  are  to  be 
instructed  is  in  our  hands,  and  the  light  which  will  illuminate  that 
sacred  page  is  promised  us  through  the  Holy  Ghost.  Things  promised 
ought  to  encourage  us  to  come  to  Christ,  but  things  already  given  ought 
to  be  irresistible  attractions.  All  things  are  already  completed  by  the 
sacred  Trinity  before  we  come  to  cry  for  mercy  ;  this  should  make  us 
very  hopeful  and  eager  in  our  approaches  to  the  Lord.  Come,  sinner, 


'780  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

come  at  once :  this  ought  to  encourage  thee,  since  all  that  God  h^  j£ 
do  in  thy  salvation  is  done  before  thou  hast  a  thought  of  him  or  turnest 
one  foot  towards  his  abode.  All  things  are  ready.  Come  ! 

This  also  proves  how  wekome  those  are  who  come.  If  you  are  in 
vited  to  see  a  friend,  and  when  you  reach  the  place  you  find  the  door 
fast,  and  after  knocking  many  times  no  one  answers,  for  there  is  no  one 
at  home,  you  reckon  that  there  is  some  mistake,  or  that  the  invitation 
was  not  a  sincere  one.  Even  if  your  host  should  come  to  the  door  and 
admit  you,  but  should  evidently  be  embarrassed,  for  there  is  no  meal  pro- 
rided,  and  he  has  made  no  arrangements  for  your  rest  at  night,  you  soon 
detect  it,  and  like  a  wise  man  you  quickly  move  off  somewhere  else,  for 
if  you  had  been  welcome,  things  would  have  been  prepared  for  you. 
But  oh,  poor  soul,  if  thou  cornest  to  God  all  things  are  ready  for  thine 
entertainment. 

"  Spread  for  thee  the  festal  board, 
With  his  richest  dainties  stored.** 

The  couch  of  rest  and  quietness  is  prepared  for  thee.  All  things  are 
ready.  How  freely  doth  Jehovah  welcome  thee,  how  genuine  is  the 
invitation,  how  sincere  the  desire  that  thou  shouldst  come  to  feast  with 
him. 

So  much  upon  our  first  remark,  it  is  the  habit  of  the  Lord  to  have  all 
things  ready  for  his  guests. 

II.  Our  second  statement  is  that  THIS  READINESS  SHOULD  BB 
AN  ARGUMENT  THAT  HIS  SAINTS  SHOULD  COME  continually  to  him  and 
find  grace  to  help  in  every  time  of  need.  0  children  of  God,  I  will 
lift  the  parable  away  from  the  immediate  use  which  the  Saviour  made 
of  it  to  employ  it  for  your  good.  You  know,  beloved,  that  whenever 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  invites  his  people  to  come  to  him,  and  to  taste 
of  his  bounty,  all  things  are  ready.  It  was  a  beautiful  scene  by 
the  sea  of  Tiberias  when  the  Lord  spake  to  those  who  had  been  toiling 
on  the  lake  at  fishing,  and  said  to  them,  "  Come  and  dine."  They 
were  willing  enough  to  dine,  but  they  were  busy  dragging  to  the  shore 
those  great  fishes.  Remember,  when  they  did  land,  they  found  the 
invitation  to  be  no  vain  one,  for  it  is  written,  "  They  saw  a  fire  of  coals 
there  and  fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread."  How  the  coals  came  there,  and 
the  fish,  and  the  bread,  the  evangelist  does  not  tell  us,  but  our  Lord 
would  not  have  asked  them  to  dinner  if  he  had  not  been  able  to  give 
them  a  warm  reception ;  there  was  the  fire  of  coale,  and  the  fish  laid 
thereon  and  bread.  Whenever  therefore  your  Lord  and  Master,  by  his 
blessed  Spirit,  calls  you  to  come  near  to  him,  you  may  be  quite'sure 
that  all  things  are  ready  for  your  immediate  enjoyment :  you  need 
never  pause  or  hesitate,  but  approach  him  without  delay.  I  want  to 
caution  you  against  replying,  "  But,  Lord,  I  do  not  feel  ready."  That 
is  most  true,  but  that  is  not  an  argument  which  thou  shouldst  use  to 
excuse  thyself  in  holding  back.  It  is  his  readiness  that  is  the  main 
thing,  not  thine,  and  as  all  things  are  ready,  do  thou  come  whether  thou 
feelest  ready  or  not.  I  have  heard  of  some  Christians  who  have  said, 
"  I  do  not  feel  in  a  proper  frame  of  mind  to  pray."  My  brother,  pray 
till  you  do.  Some  have  said,  "  I  do  not  think  I  shall  go  rp  to  the 
house  of  God  to-day,  I  feel  so  unhappy,  so  cast  down."  When  shouldit 


ALL  THINGS  ARE  HEADY.   COME.  28  i 

thou  go  so  much  as  then,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  find  comfort  ? 
"  Still,"  saith  one,  "  you  would  not  have  me  sing  a  hymn  when  of  heavy 
heart  ?"  Ay,  would  I  not,  I  would  indeed,  I  would  have  thee  sing  thy 
self  up  from  the  depths  of  the  sea  where  all  God's  billows  have  gone 
orer  thee.  David  full  often  did  so,  when  he  began  a  psalm,  in  the  deeps, 
and  then  gradually  rose,  and  rose,  and  rose,  till  he  was  in  a  perfect  rapture 
of  delight  before  the  psalm  was  over.  All  things  are  ready  with  your 
Lord,  therefore  do  you  come  whether  you  happen  to  be  ready  or  not. 

Note  the  times  when  this  truth  ought  to  have  power  with  you.  All 
things  are  ready,  therefore  come  to  the  storehouse  of  divine  promise. 
Are  you  in  spiritual  poverty  ?  Come  and  take  what  God  has  provided  for 
you,  for  all  things  are  yours,  and  all  the  blessings  of  the  everlasting  hills 
belong  to  all  the  people  of  God.  Are  you  needing  strength  ?  There  is 
a  promise,  "  As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  It  is  ready,  come 
and  take  it.  Art  thou  wanting  consolation  ?  Dost  thou  not  know  that 
all  things  are  ready  for  thy  comfort,  that  two  immutable  things,  wherein 
it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  are  already  set  before  thee  ?  Come  thou, 
and  take  thy  solace.  Ay,  remember  that  all  that  God  has  promised  be 
longs  to  all  those  who  believe  the  promise,  and  that  you  may  therefore 
come  at  ah1  times,  however  deep  your  need,  and  if  you  have  but  faith  you 
shall  find  the  special  supply  for  the  special  want.  All  things  are  ready, 
therefore  come  with  holy  confidence,  and  take  what  is  ripe  enough  to 
gather,  ripe  for  you. 

Come  next  to  the  mercy  seat  in  prayer,  all  things  are  ready  there.  The 
mercy  seat  is  sprinkled  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  The  veil  also 
is  rent  in  twain,  and  from  between  the  cherubim  Jehovah's  glory  now 
shines  forth  with  mildest  radiance.  Let  us  therefore  come  with  bold 
ness  unto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace,  because  everything  there  is 
ready  for  the  pleading  suppliant.  Thou  hast  no  need  to  bring  anything 
with  thee  there.  Thou  hast  no  need  of  making  preparations  other  than 
the  Holy  Spirit  waits  to  give  thee  in  the  form  of  groanings  which  cannot 
be  uttered.  Come,  child  of  God,  notwithstanding  thy  carelessness  and 
indifference,  or  whatever  it  may  be  thou  hast  to  complain  of,  for  though 
thou  be  unready,  the  throne  of  grace  is  ready,  and  therefore  do  thou  draw 
near  to  it  and  find  the  grace  thou  needest. 

If  at  this  time  we  feel  strong  promptings  towards  communion  with 
Christ  what  a  blessing  it  is  that  Christ  is  always  ready  to  commune 
with  his  people.  "  Behold,"  saith  he,  "  I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock."  We  think  that  we  stand  at  the  door  and  knock,  but  it  ig 
scarcely  so,  the  greater  truth  with  regard  to  his  people  is  that  Jesus 
asks  for  fellowship  with  us,  and  tells  us  that  if  we  open  the  door,  and 
that  is  all  he  bids  his  people  do,  he  will  enter  in  and  sup  with  them, 
and  they  with  him.  Suppose  there  is  no  supper,  he  will  provide  it- 
he  hath  all  things  ready.  The  Master  saith,  "  Where  is  the  guest- 
chamber?"  He  doth  not  say  "Where  is  the  feast  ?"  If  thy  heart 
will  be  the  guest-chamber,  he  will  provide  the  supper,  and  thou  shalt  su| 
with  him  and  he  with  thee.  At  whose  door  did  Christ  knock  according 
to  the  Scriptures  ?  It  was  at  the  door  of  the  Laodicean  church,  at  the 
door  of  the  very  church  concerning  which  he  had  said,  "  Because  thou 
art  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth."  Therefore 
thou  jx>or  Laodicean  believer  that  art  here  this  morning,  if  thou  hast 


282  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

any  promptings  towards  Christ,  arise,  for  all  things  are  ready,  and  or 
ever  thou  art  aware  thy  soul  shall  be  as  the  chariots  of  Amminadib. 
He  is  ready  to  receive  us  to  his  heart  of  hearts.  How  sweetly  this 
ought  to  constrain  us  to  fly  into  the  arms  of  Jesus. 

I  think  the  same  thought  ought  to  cross  our  minds  with  regard  to 
every  daily  duty.  We  wake  up  in  the  morning,  but  we  do  not  know 
exactly  what  lies  before  us,  for  God's  providence  has  constantly  new 
revelations :  but  I  like  to  think  in  the  morning  that  all  things  are 
ready  for  my  pathway  through  the  day,  that  if  I  will  go  out  to  serve 
God  in  my  ministry  he  has  prepared  some  ear  into  which  I  am  to  drop 
a  gracious  word,  and  some  heart  in  the  furrows  of  which  I  shall  sow 
some  blessed  seed  effectually.  Behold  all  providence  with  its  mighty 
wheels  is  co-working  with  the  servant  of  the  living  God ;  only  go  for 
ward  in  zeal  and  confidence,  my  brother,  and  thou  shialt  find  that  every 
step  of  thy  way  is  ready  for  thee.  Thy  Master  has  trodden  the  road 
and  marked  out  for  thee  the  houses  of  refreshment  where  thou  art  to 
tarry  till  thou  shalt  come  to  the  celestial  city  itself,  and  the  hallowed 
spots  where  thou  shalt  bring  glory  to  his  blessed  name.  For  a  useful 
life  all  things  are  ready  for  us. 

Yes,  and  if  beyond  the  daily  service  of  life  we  should  feel  a  prompting 
to  aspire  to  a  higher  degree  of  holiness,  if  we  want  to  grow  in  grace  and 
reach  the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  all  things  are 
ready  for  us.  No  Christian  can  have  a  sacred*  ambition  after  holiness 
which  the  Lord  is  not  prepared  to  fulfil.  Thou  that  wiliest  to  be  like 
thy  Master,  thou  that  desirest  to  make  a  self-sacrifice  that  will  show  the 
power  of  his  grace  in  thee,  the  Holy  Spirit  waits  to  help  thee,  all  things 
shall  work  for  thee,  for  all  things  are  ready.  Come  therefore  without 
fear. 

One  of  these  days  it  may  be  that  you  and  I  shall  ei  ther  be  grown  very 
old,  or  else  disease  will  lay  hold  upon  us,  and  we  shall  lie  upon  the  sick 
bed  watching  and  waiting  for  our  Master's  coming.  Then  there  shall 
suddenly  appear  a  messenger  from  him,  who  will  bring  us  this  word, 
"All  things  are  ready,  come  unto  the  supper,"  and  closing  our  eyes 
on  earth  we  shall  open  them  in  heaven  and  see  what  he  has  done 
who  so  sweetly  said,  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  and  if  I  go  to 
prepare  a  place  for  you  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself, 
that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also."  Oh,  it  will  be  a  joyous 
moment  when  we  shall  hear  the  summons,  "All  things  are  ready, 
quit  thy  house  of  clay,  thy  farm,  thy  merchandise,  and  even  her  who 
lies  in  thy  bosom,  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  has  come,  and  thou  must 
be  there  ;  therefore,  rise  up,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away.  The 
winter  is  over  and  past,  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come  for 
fchee,  all  things  are  ready,  come!"  I  feel  tempted  to  linger  here,  but  I 
must  tear  myself  away  from  that  point  to  pass  on  to  the  next. 

III.  THE  PERFECT  READINESS  OF  THE  FEAST  OF  DIVINE  MERCY 
IS  EVIDENTLY  INTENDED  TO  BE  A  STRONG  ARGUMENT  WITH  SINNERS 

WHY  THEY  SHOULD  COME  AT  ONCE.  To  the  sinner,  then,  do  I  address 
myself. 

Soul,  dost  thou  desire  eternal  life?  Is  there  within  thy  spirit  & 
hungering  and  a  thirsting  after  such  things  as  may  satisfy  thy  spirit  and 
make  thee  live  for  ever  ?  Then  hearken  while  the  Master's  servant  gives 


ALL  THINGS  ARE  READY.   COME.  28.1 

fchee  the  invitation.  "  Come,  for  all  things  are  ready," — all,  not  some, 
but  all.  There  is  nothing  that  thou  canst  need  between  here  and  heaven 
but  what  is  provided  in  Jesus  Christ,  in  his  person  and  in  his  work.  All 
things  are  ready,  life  for  thy  death,  forgiveness  for  thy  sin,  cleansing 
for  thy  filth,  clothing  for  thy  nakedness,  joy  for  thy  sorrow,  strength  for 
thy  weakness,  yea,  more  than  all  that  ever  thou  canst  want  is  stored  up 
in  the  boundless  nature  and  work  of  Christ.  Thou  must  not  say,  "  I 
cannot  come  because  I  have  not  this,  or  have  not  that."  Art  thou  to 
prepare  the  feast  ?  Art  thou  to  provide  anything  ?  Art  thou  the  pur 
veyor  of  even  so  much  as  the  salt  or  the  water  ?  Thou  knowest  not 
thy  true  condition,  or  thou  wouldst  not  dream  of  such  a  thing.  The 
great  Householder  himself  has  provided  the  whole  of  the  feast,  thou 
hast  nothing  to  do  with  the  provision  but  to  partake  of  it.  If  thou 
lackest  come  and  take  what  thou  lackest ;  the  greater  thy  need  the 
greater  reason  why  thou  shouldst  come  where  all  things  that  thy  need 
can  possibly  want  will  be  at  once  supplied.  If  thou  be  so  needy  that 
thou  hast  nothing  good  at  all  about  thee,  all  things  are  ready.  What 
wouldst  thou  provide  more  when  God  has  provided  all  things  ?  Super 
fluity  of  naughtiness  would  it  be  if  thou  wert  to  think  of  adding  to  his 
"all  things  ";  it  would  be  but  a  presumptuous  competing  with  the  pro 
visions  of  the  great  King,  and  this  he  will  not  endure.  All  that  thou 
wantest — I  can  but  repeat  the  words — between  the  gates  of  hell,  where 
thou  now  liest,  and  the  gates  of  heaven,  to  which  grace  will  bring 
thee  if  thou  believest, — all  is  provided  and  prepared  in  Jesus  Christ  the 
Saviour. 

And  all  things  are  ready,  dwell  on  that  word.  The  oxen  and  the  fat- 
lings  were  killed ;  what  is  more,  they  were  prepared  to  be  eaten,  they 
were  ready  to  be  feasted  on,  they  smoked  on  the  board.  It  is  something 
when  the  king  gives  orders  for  the  slaughter  of  so  many  bullocks  for  the 
feast,  but  the  feast  is  not  ready  then  ;  and  when  beneath  the  polenxe 
the  victims  fall,  and  they  are  stripped  and  hung  up  ready  for  the  fire, 
there  is  something  done,  but  they  are  not  ready.  It  is  when  the  joints 
are  served  hot  and  steaming  upon  the  table,  and  all  that  is  wanted  is 
brought  forth  and  laid  in  proper  order  for  the  banquet,  it  is  then  that 
all  things  are  ready,  and  this  is  the  case  now ;  at  this  very  moment 
thou  wilt  find  the  feast  to  be  in  the  best  possible  condition ;  it  was 
never  better  and  never  can  be  better  than  it  is  now.  All  things  are 
ready,  just  in  the  exact  condition  that  thou  needest  them  to  be,  just  in 
such  condition  as  shall  be  best  for  thy  soul's  comfort  and  enjoyment. 
All  things  are  ready ;  nothing  needs  to  be  further  mellowed  or  sweetened, 
everything  is  at  the  best  that  eternal  love  can  make  it. 

But  notice  the  word,  "  now,"  "  All  things  are  now  ready  " — just  now, 
at  this  moment.  At  feasts,  you  know,  the  good  housewife  is  often 
troubled  if  the  guests  come  late.  She  would  be  sorry  if  they  came  half- 
aii-hour  too  soon,  but  half-an-hour  too  late  spoils  everything,  and  in 
what  a  state  of  fret  and  worry  she  is  if  when  all  things  are  now  ready, 
her  friends  still  delay.  Leave  food  at  the  fire  awhile,  and  it  does  not  seem 
to  be  "  now  ready,"  but  something  more  than  ready,  and  even  spoiled.  So 
doth  the  great  householder  lay  stress  upon  this,  all  things  are  now  ready, 
therefore  come  at  once.  He  saith  not  that  if  thou  wilt  tarry  for  another 
seven  years  all  things  will  then  be  ready :  God  grant  that  long  before 


284  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

that  space  of  time  thou  mayest  have  got  beyond  the  needs  of  persuasion 
by  having  become  a  taster  of  the  feast,  but  he  doth  say  that  they  are  all 
ready  now,  just  now.  Just  now  that  your  heart  is  so  heavy  and  your 
mind  is  so  careless,  that  your  spirit  is  so  wandering — all  things  are 
ready  now.  Just  now,  though  you  have  never  thought  of  these  things 
before,  but  dropped  in  this  morning  to  see  this  large  assembly  with 
no  motive  whatever  as  to  your  own  salvation,  yet  all  things  are 
ready  now.  Though  your  sins  are  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  your 
soul  trembles  under  an  awful  foreboding  of  coming  judgment,  yet  "  all 
things  are  now  ready."  After  all  your  rejections  of  Christ,  after  the 
many  invitations  that  have  been  thrown  away  upon  you,  come  ye  to  the 
supper. 

And  if  they  are  ready  now,  the  argument  is  come  now,  while  still  all 
things  are  ready.  While  the  Spirit  lingers  and  still  doth  strive  with 
men,  while  mercy's  gates  still  stand  wide  open,  that  "  whosoever  will 
may  come,"  while  life  and  health  and  reason  still  are  spared  to  you  and 
the  ministering  voice  that  bids  thee  come  can  still  be  heard,  come  now, 
come  at  once — all  things  are  ready — come !  Delay  is  as  unreasonable 
as  it  is  wicked  now  that  all  things  are  ready. 

Notice  that  all  things  were  ready  for  those  who  were  bidden.  They 
did  not  come,  but  they  were  not  mocked  when  they  were  bidden  to 
come.  The  fact  of  all  things  being  ready  proved  that  the  invitation 
was  a  sincere  one,  although  it  was  a  rejected  one.  There  are  some  who 
will  not  have  us  give  an  invitation  to  any  but  to  those  whom  we  believe 
are  sure  to  come,  nay,  in  a  measure  have  come ;  that  is  to  say,  they 
make  a  minister  to  be  a  mere  superfluity.  Why  need  he  come  and 
invite  those  who  have  already  begun  to  come  ?  But  we  believe  it  to  be 
our  duty  and  our  privilege  to  invite  the  whole  mass  of  mankind ;  and 
even  those  who  will  not  come  :  if  we  knew  they  would  not  come  we 
should  not  therefore  exempt  them  from  the  bidding,  for  the  servant  was 
sent  to  bid  them  to  the  wedding  who  nevertheless  all  with  one  consent 
began  to  make  excuse.  They  were  invited,  and  earnestly  invited,  and 
all  things  were  ready,  though  they  came  not.  0  my  dear  hearers,  if 
you  do  not  come  to  Christ  you  will  perish,  but  you  will  never  be  able 
to  say  you  were  not  bidden,  and  that  there  was  nothing  ready  for 
you.  No,  there  stands  the  feast  all  spread,  and  you  are  sincerely  and 
honestly  bidden  to  come.  God  grant  that  you  may  come,  and  come  at 
once. 

IV.  Now  I  am  going  to  pass  on  to  my  fourth  and  last  point,  which 
may  God  bless  to  the  comfort  of  some  seeking  soul.  THIS  TEXT  DIS 
POSES  OF  A  GREAT  DEAL  OF  TALK  ABOUT  THE  SINNER'S  READINESS  OR 

UNREADINESS  :  because,  if  the  reason  why  a  sinner  is  to  come  is  be 
cause  all  things  are  ready,  then  it  is  idle  for  him  to  say  "  But  I  am  not 
i-eady."  It  is  clear  that  all  the  readiness  required  on  man's  part  is  a 
willingness  to  come  and  receive  the  blessing  which  God  had  pro 
vided.  There  is  nothing  else  necessary ;  if  men  are  willing  to  come, 
they  may  come,  they  will  come.  Where  the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to 
touch  the  will  so  that  man  has  a  desire  towards  Christ,  where  the  heart 
really  hungers  and  thirsts  after  righteousness,  that  is  all  the  readiness 
which  is  wanted.  All  the  fitness  he  requireth  is  that  first  you  feel 
your  need  of  him  (and  that  he  gives  you),  and  that  secondly  in  feeling 


ALL  THINGS  ARE  READY.   COME.  285 

your  need  of  him  you  are  willing  to  come  to  hiir..  Willingness  to  come 
is  everything.  A  readiness  to  believe  in  Jesus  a  willingness  to  cast  the 
soul  on  him,  a  preparedness  to  accept  him  just  as  he  is,  because  yon  feel 
that  he  is  just  the  Saviour  that  you  need — that  is  all :  there  was  no 
other  readiness,  there  could  have  been  none,  in  the  case  of  those  who 
were  poor  and  blind,  and  halt,  and  maimed,  yet  came  to  the  feast. 
The  text  does  not  say,  "  You  are  ready,  therefore  come,"  that  is  a  legal 
way  of  putting  the  gospel ;  but  it  says,  "  All  things  are  ready,  the 
gospel  is  ready,  therefore  you  are  to  come."  As  for  your  readiness,  all 
the  readiness  that  is  possibly  wanted  is  a  readiness  which  the  Spirit 
gives  us,  namely,  willingness  to  come  to  Jesus. 

Now  notice  that  the  unreadiness  of  those  who  were  bidden  arose  out 
of  their  possessions  and  out  of  their  abilities.  One  would  not  come  be 
cause  he  had  bought  a  piece  of  land.  What  a  great  heap  Satan  casts 
np  between  the  soul  and  the  Saviour !  What  with  worldly  possessions 
and  good  deeds  he  builds  an  earthwork  of  huge  dimensions  between 
the  sinner  and  his  Lord.  Some  gentlemen  have  too  many  acres  ever  to 
come  to  Christ :  they  think  too  much  of  the  world  to  think  much  of 
him.  Many  have  too  many  fields  of  good  works  in  which  there  are 
growing  crops  in  which  they  pride  themselves,  and  these  cause  them  to 
feel  that  they  are  persons  of  great  importance.  Many  a  man  cannot 
come  to  Christ  for  all  things  because  he  has  so  much  already.  Others 
of  them  could  not  come  because  they  had  so  much  to  do,  and  could 
do  it  well — one  had  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  he  was  going  to  prove 
them  ;  a  strong  man  quite  able  for  ploughing  ;  the  reason  why  he  did 
not  come  was  because  he  had  so  much  ability.  Thousands  are  kept 
away  from  grace  by  what  they  have  and  by  what  they  can  do.  Empti 
ness  is  more  preparatory  to  a  feast  than  fulness.  How  often  does  it 
happen  that  poverty  and  inability  even  help  to  lead  the  soul  to  Christ. 
When  a  man  thinketh  himself  to  be  rich  he  will  not  come  to  the 
Saviour.  When  a  man  dreameth  that  he  is  able  at  any  time  to  repent 
and  believe,  and  to  do  everything  for  himself  that  is  wanted,  he  is  not 
likely  to  come  and  by  a  simple  faith  repose  in  Christ.  It  is  not  what 
you  have  not  but  what  you  have  that  keeps  many  of  you  from  Christ. 
Sinful  self  is  a  devil,  but  righteous  self  is  seven  devils.  The  man  who 
feels  himself  guilty  may  for  awhile  be  kept  away  by  his  guilt,  but  the 
man  who  is  self-righteous  will  never  come :  until  the  Lord  has  taken 
his  pride  away  from  him  he  will  still  refuse  the  feast  of  free  grace. 
The  possession  of  abilities  and  honours  and  riches  keep  men  from 
coming  to  the  Redeemer. 

But  on  the  other  hand  personal  condition  does  not  constitute  an  un- 
fitness  for  coming  to  Christ,  for  the  sad  condition  of  those  who  became 
guests  did  not  debar  them  from  the  snpper.  Some  were  poor,  and 
doubtless  wretched  and  ragged ;  they  had  not  a  penny  to  bless  them 
selves  with,  as  we  say ;  their  garments  were  tattered,  perhaps  worse, 
they  were  filthy,  they  were  not  fit  to  be  near  respectable  people,  they 
would  certainly  be  no  credit  to  my  lord's  table  ;  but  those  who  went  to 
bring  them  in  did  not  search  their  pockets,  nor  look  at  their  coats,  but 
they  fetched  them  in.  They  were  poor,  but  the  messengers  were  told  to 
bring  in  the  poor,  and  therefore  brought  them.  Their  poverty  did  not 
prevent  their  being  ready  ;  and  oh,  poor  soul,  if  thou  be  poor  literally,  or 

17 


286  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

poor  spiritually,  neither  sort  of  poverty  can  constitute  an  unfitness  fb* 
divine  mercy. 

"  The  poorer  the  wretch  the  welcomer  here." 

If  thou  art  brought  to  thy  last  penny,  yea,  if  that  is  spent,  and  if  thou 
hast  pawned  all,  and  thou  art  left  in  debt  over  head  and  ears,  and 
thinkest  that  there  is  nothing  lor  thee  but  to  be  laid  by  the  heels  in 
prison  for  ever,  nevertheless  thou  mayest  come,  poverty  and  all. 

Another  class  of  them  were  maimed,  and  so  were  not  very  comely  in 
appearance  :  an  arm  had  been  lopped  off,  or  an  eye  had  been  gouged 
out.  One  had  lost  a  nose,  and  another  a  leg.  They  were  in  all  stages 
and  shapes  of  dismemberment.  Sometimes  we  turn  our  heads  away,  and 
feel  that  we  would  rather  give  anything  than  look  upon  beggars  who 
show  their  wounds,  and  describe  how  they  were  maimed.  But  it  did 
not  matter  how  badly  they  were  disfigured  ;  they  were  brought  in, 
and  not  one  of  them  was  repulsed  because  of  the  ugly  cuts  he  had  re 
ceived.  So,  poor  soul,  however  Satan  may  have  torn  and  lopped  thee, 
and  into  whatsoever  condition  he  may  have  brought  thee,  so  that  thou 
feelest  tishamed  to  live,  nevertheless  this  is  no  unfitness  for  coining  ; 
just  as  thou  art  thou  mayest  come  to  his  table  of  grace.  Moral  dis 
figurements  are  soon  rectified  when  Jesus  takes  the  character  in  hand. 
Come  thou  to  him,  however  sadly  thou  art  injured  by  sin. 

There  were  others  who  were  halt,  that  is  to  say,  they  ha<!  lost  a  leg, 
or  it  was  of  no  use  to  them,  and  they  could  not  come  except  they  had  a 
crutch  and  crawled  or  hopped  upon  it  ;  but  nevertheless  that  was  no 
reason  why  they  were  not  welcome.  Ah,  if  you  find  it  difficult  to  be 
lieve,  it  is  no  reason  why  you  should  not  come  and  receive  the  grand 
absolution  which  Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to  bestow  upon  you.  Lame 
with  doubting  and  distrusting,  nevertheless  come  to  the  supper  and  say, 
"  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief." 

Others  were  blind  people,  and  when  they  were  told  to  come  they 
could  not  see  the  way,  but  in  that  case  the  messenger  was  not  told  to 
tell  them  to  come,  he  was  commanded  to  bring  them,  and  a  blind  man 
can  come  if  he  is  brought.  All  that  was  wanted  was  willingness  to  be 
led  by  the  hand  in  the  right  direction.  Now  you  that  cannot  fully 
understand  the  gospel  as  you  desire  to  do,  that  are  puzzled  and 
muddled,  give  your  hand  into  the  hand  of  Jesus,  and  be  willing  to  be 
led.  be  willing  to  believe  what  you  cannot  comprehend,  and  to  grasp  in 
confidence  that  which  you  are  not  able  yet  to  measure  with  your 
understanding.  The  blind,  however  ignorant  or  uninstructed  they  are, 
shall  not  be  kept  away  because  of  that. 

Then  there  were  the  men  in  the  highways,  I  suppose  they  were  beggars  ; 
and  the  men  in  the  hedges,  I  suppose  they  were  hiding,  and  were  pro 
bably  thieves  ;  but  nevertheless  they  were  told  to  come,  and  though 


ALL   THINGS   ARE    BEADY.      COME.  287 

they  were  highwaymen  and  hedge-birds  even  that  did  not  prevent 
their  coming  and  finding  welcome.  Though  outcasts,  offcasts,  spiritual 
gipsies,  people  that  nobody  cared  for,  yet,  whatever  they  might  be,  that 
was  not  the  question,  they  were  to  come  because  all  things  were  ready  : 
come  in  rags,  come  in  filth,  come  maimed,  come  covered  with  sores, 
come  in  all  sorts  of  filthiness  and  abomination,  yet  because  all  things 
are  ready  they  were  to  be  brought  or  to  be  compelled  to  come  in. 

Now,  lastly,  I  think  it  was  the  very  thing,  which  in  any  one  of  these 
people  looked  like  unfitness,  which  was  a  help  to  them.  It  is  a  great 
truth  that  what  we  regard  as  unfitness  is  often  our  truest  fitness.  I 
want  you  to  notice  these  poor,  blind,  and  halt  people.  Some  of  those 
who  were  invited  would  not  come  because  they  had  bought  some  land 
or  five  yoke  of  oxen,  but  when  the  messenger  went  up  to  the  poor  man 
in  rags  and  said,  "  Come  to  the  supper,"  it  is  quite  clear  he  would  not 
say  he  had  bought  a  field,  or  oxen,  for  he  could  not  do  it,  he  had  not 
a  penny  to  do  the  thing  with,  so  that  he  was  clean  delivered  from  that 
temptation.  And  when  a  man  is  invited  to  come  to  Christ  and  he  says, 
"  I  do  not  want  him,  I  have  a  righteousness  of  my  own,"  he  will  stay 
away ;  but  when  the  Lord  Jesus  came  along  to  me  I  never  was  tempted 
in  that  way,  because  I  had  no  righteousness  of  my  own,  and  could  not 
have  made  one  if  I  had  tried.  I  know  some  here  who  could  not  patch 
up  a  garment  of  righteousness  if  they  were  to  put  all  their  rags  together, 
and  this  is  a  great  help  to  their  receiving  the  Lord  Jesus.  What  a 
blessedness  it  is  to  have  such  a  sense  of  soul  poverty  that  you  will  never 
stay  away  from  Christ  because  of  what  you  possess. 

Then,  next,  some  could  not  come  because  they  had  married  a  wife. 
Now,  I  think  it  is  very  likely  that  these  people  who  were  maimed  and 
cut  about  were  so  injured  that  they  had  no  wife,  and  perhaps  could  not 
get  anybody  to  have  them.  Well  then,  they  had  not  that  temptation,  to 
stay  away.  They  were  too  maimed  to  attract  the  eye  of  anybody  who 
was  looking  for  beauty,  and  therefore  they  were  not  tempted  that  way. 
But  they  found  at  the  ever-blessed  supper  of  the  Lamb  an  everlasting 
wedlock,  which  was  infinitely  better.  Thus  do  souls  lose  earthly  joyi 
and  comforts,  and  by  the  loss  they  gain  supremely :  they  are  thus  made 
willing  to  close  in  with  Christ  and  find  n  higher  comfort  and  a  highey 
joy.  That  maiming  which  looked  like  unfitness  turned  out  to  be 
fitness. 

One  excuse  made  was,  "  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  I  go  to 
prove  them."  The  halt  could  not  do  that.  When  the  messenger 
touched  the  lame  man  on  the  shoulder  and  said  "  Come,"  he  could  not 
gay,  "  I  am  going  out  to-night  to  plough  with  my  new  teamg."  He  had 
never  been  over  the  clods  ever  since  he  had  lost  his  leg  poor  soul,  so 
that  he  could  not  make  such  an  excuse.  The  blind  man  could  not  say, 
44 1  have  bought  a  piece  of  land  and  I  must  go  to  see  it;"  he  was  frea 


28 S  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

from  all  the  lusts  of  the  eye,  and  so  far  was  all  the  more  ready  to  be 
led  to  the  supper.  Wnen  a  soul  feels  its  own  sinfulness,  and  wretched 
ness,  and  lost  estate,  it  thinks  itself  unfit  to  come  to  Christ,  but  this  is 
an  assistance  to  it,  since  it  prevents  its  looking  to  anything  else  but 
Christ,  kills  its  excuses,  and  makes  it  free  to  accept  salvation  by  grace. 

But  how  about  the  men  that  were  in  the  highway  ?  Well,  it  seems  to 
me  that  they  were  already  on  the  road,  and  at  least  out  of  their  houses, 
if  they  had  any.  If  they  were  out  there  begging,  they  were  the  more 
ready  to  accept  an  invitation  to  a  meal  of  victuals,  for  it  was  that  they 
were  singing  for.  A  man  who  is  out  of  the  house  of  his  own  self- 
righteousness,  though  he  be  a  great  sinner,  is  in  a  more  favourable 
position  and  more  likely  to  come  to  Christ  than  he  who  prides  himself 
in  his  supposed  self-righteousness. 

As  for  those  who  were  under  the  hedges,  well,  they  had  no  house  of 
their  own,  and  so  they  were  all  the  more  likely  to  come  and  fill  God's 
house.  Men  do  not  take  to  hedges  to  sleep  under  them  as  long  as  they 
have  even  a  hovel  where  they  may  rest  their  head,  but  oh,  poor  soul, 
when  thou  art  driven  to  such  distress  that  thou  wouldst  fain  hide  under 
any  hedge,  when  thou  hast  nothing  left  thee  but  a  fearful  looking  for  of 
judgment,  when  thou  thinkest  thyself  to  be  an  outlaw  and  an  outcast 
before  God,  left  to  wander  like  Cain,  a  waii  and  stray,  lost  to  ail  good, 
thou  art  the  very  man  to  come  to  Christ.  Come  out  of  your  hedges. 
then.  I  am  looking  for  you.  Though  you  hide  yourselves  away  yet 
God's  own  Spirit  will  discover  you,  and  bring  you,  I  trust  this  very 
morning,  to  feed  on  love  divine.  Trust  Jesus  Christ,  that  is  all,  just  as 
you  are,  with  all  your  unfitness  and  unreadiness.  Take  what  God  has 
made  ready  for  you,  the  precious  blood  to  cleanse  you,  a  robe  of 
righteousness  to  cover  you,  eternal  joy  to  be  your  portion.  Receive  the 
grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  oh  receive  it  now.  God  grant  you  may . 
for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  xiv.  12 — 35, 


HYMNS  FROM  "  OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 909,  504,  488  (T.  3— «X 


Sfafyrmtcle  fiuljtt 


A  BAD  EXCUSE  IS  WORSE  THAN  NONE. 


DELIVERED  ON  SUNDAY  MORNING,  JULY  SRD,  1864,  BY  THE 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 


AT  BAYSWATER. 


"And  they  all  with  one  consent  began  to  make  excuse." — Luke  xiv.  18. 

THE  provisions  of  the  gospel  or  Christ  may  well  be  compared  to  a  supper, 
provided,  as  they  were,  in  the  evening  of  the  world — "  in  these  last  days." 
The  description,  "  a  great  supper"  is  well  borne  out  if  we  consider  the 
greatness  of  the  provision;  how  much  of  love  and  mercy  God  has  dis 
played  towards  the  sons  of  men  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus;  how 
much  of  power  and  of  gracious  working  he  has  shown  by  his  Holy 
Spirit.  A  great  supper  it  is  if  we  think  of  the  richness  and  sweetness 
of  the  provision — it  is  a  feast  worthy  of  the  great  King.  The  flesh  of 
Jesus  is  our  spiritual  meat,  and  his  blood  our  choicest  wine.  Our  souls 
are  satisfied  with  covenant  mercies,  most  fitly  set  forth  as  "  A  feast  of 
fat  things,  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow, 
or  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined."  A  great  supper  it  is,  moreover, 
when  we  consider  the  number  of  guests  invited.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.'*  The  call  of  the 
gospel  comes  to  every  man  and  woman  of  Adam  born,  within  hearing 
of  the  ministers  of  God. 

"  None  are  excluded  thence,  but  those 

Who  do  themselves  exclude  ; 
Welcome  the  learned  and  polite, 
The  ignorant  and  rude." 

No  other  king  ever  sent  out  an  invitation  so  broad  as  this.  But  wisdom 
"  crieth  at  the  gates,  at  the  entry  of  the  city,  at  the  coming  in  at  the 
doors.  Unto  you,  0  men,  I  call;  and  my  voice  is  to  the  sons  of  man." 

Is  it  not  strange  that  when  the  householder  made  so  great  a  supper, 
when  he  offered  it  without  money  and  without  price,  that  all  his  neigh 
bours  should  with  one  consent  begin  to  make  excuse?  He  did  not 
call  them  to  prison  or  to  misery;  how  then  came  they  to  be  so  un 
willing  to  obey  the  summons?  Whence  this  unanimity  in  the  rejection? 
We  find  good  men  differing,  how  is  it  that  evil  men  can  hold  together 
«o  well?  What!  not  one  who  has  respect  enough  to  his  generou§ 

No.  578. 


878  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

friend  to  sit  at  his  table  and  receive  his  bounty?  Not  one.  Truly, 
here,  brethren,  we  have  a  picture  of  the  universal  depravity  of  man, 
All  men  are  thus  vile,  and  refuse  the  mercy  of  God.  We  never  know 
how  bad  man  is  till  the  gospel  is  preached  to  him.  The  gospel  acts  as 
a  white  back-ground  to  set  forth  the  blackness  of  man's  'heart.  Here 
human  nature  reaches  to  the  greatest  height  of  sin's  enormity.  Spitting 
forth  his  venom  against  the  Lord  of  infinite  love,  man  proves  himself 
truly  to  be  of  the  serpent's  brood.  The  gospel  is  preached  to  thousands, 
and  do  all  make  excuse  ?  So  the  parable  hath  it,  and  truly  so 
the  fact  proves  it.  What!  is  there  not  one  whose  free-will  is  inclined 
towards  Christ?  Is  there  not  one  of  so  good  a  natural  disposition  that 
he  will  come  to  Jesus?  Nay,  the  text  says,  not  one:  "They  all 
with  one  consent  began  to  make  excuse."  How  thoroughly  hath 
father  Adam  ruined  our  understandings!  What  fools  as  well  as  rebels 
we  are  to  refuse  to  partake  of  the  banquet  of  love.  We  are  altogether 
become  unprofitable;  there  is  not  one  who  seeketh  after  God.  You  will, 
perhaps,  remind  me  that  there  were  other  men  besides  those  who  made 
excuse.  Most  true;  but  these  were  in  the  highways  and  hedges,  or  in  the 
streets  and  lanes  of  the  city;  and  so  those  who  do  not  hear  the  gospel, 
and  therefore  are  not  guilty  of  rejecting  it,  yet  nevertheless  are  far  off' 
from  God  by  wicked  works,  and  strangers  to  the  commonwealth  of  Israel. 
Thus,  taking  the  two  characters  to  represent  all  mankind,  we  find  all  to 
be  enemies  of  God.  Those  in  the  highways  need  to  be  "  compelled  " 
to  come  in;  they  had  a  natural  reluctance  to  feast  at  the  good  man's 
table;  and  so  all  sorts  of  men  are  averse  to  the  gospel.  They  are 
perfectly  willing  to  sin  —  content  even  to  perish  in  sin,  but  to  come  to 
Christ,  to  accept  the  great  atonement,  to  put  their  trust  in  Jesus,  this 
is  a  thing  they  care  not  for,  and  with  one  consent,  when  they  hear  the 


gospel  they  begin  to  make  excuse. 

We  fear  that  there  are  many  -,  , 

who  have  been  blessed  with  hearing  the  gospel  for  years,  but  hitherto, 


e  fear  that  there  are  many  in  this  meeting-house,  this  morning, 


the  only  treatment  they  have  given  to  the  gracious  message  is  to  make 
excuses  about  it.  I  hope  to  deal  with  such  very  simply  and  very 
affectionately,  earnestly  desiring  that  they  make  their  last  excuse  this 
morning,  and  that  it  may  meet  with  its  death-blow.  0  that  they  may 
come  to  the  feast  which  they  have  long  rejected,  and  rejoice  in  the 
mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Why  did  they  make  an  excuse  ?  Let  us,  first,  try  to  account  for  their 
conduct;  secondly,  ivhat  excuses  do  they  make?  —  let  us  recount  them; 
and  thirdly,  how  foolish  thus  to  make  excuses!  —  here  let  us  encounter 
them. 

I.  Let  us  try  to  ACCOUNT  for  the  fact,  the  sad  fact,  that  men  are  so 
ready  to  make  excuses  rather  than  to  receive  the  Word  of  God. 

We  account  for  it  in  the  first  place  by  the  fact  that  they  had  no  heart 
at  all  to  accept  the  feast.  Had  they  spoken  the  truth  plainly,  they  would 
have  said,  "  We  do  not  wish  to  come,  nor  do  we  intend  to  do  so."  If 
man's  heart  were  not  so  deceitful,  it  would  not  make  excuses,  but  it 
would  say,  outright,  "  'We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us:  '  we 
do  not  feel  our  sinfulness,  we  will  not  therefore  accept  pardon:  we 
believe  that  we  can  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  our  own  doings  $ 
or,  if  not,  we  are  content  to  take  our  chance.  If  it  shall  go  ill  with  us, 


A   BAD    EXCUSE   IS   WORSE   THAN   NONE.  379 

it  will  go  ill  with  a  great  many  people.  We  will  run  all  risks:  we  do 
not  want  salvation:  we  choose 'rather  to  have  our  full  swing  of  carnal 
delights:  your  religion  involves  too  much  self-sacrifice;  it  is  altogether 
contrary  to  the  lustings  of  our  minds,  and  therefore  we  decline  it." 
This  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.  Some  of  you,  my  hearers,  have  often  been 
impressed,  and  partially  convinced  of  sin,  but  you  have  put  off  Christ 
with  excuses.  Will  you  bear  with  me  while  I  solemnly  assure  you,  that 
at  its  core  your  heart  is  at  enmity  to  God.  Your  excuse  may  look  very 
pretty,  but  it  is  as  flimsy  as  it  is  fair.  If  you  were  honest  with  your 
own  soul,  you  would  say  at  once,  "I  do  not  love  Christ;  I  do  not  want 
his  salvation."  Your  put-offs,  your  false  promises,  your  excuses  are 
worthless;  any  one  with  half  an  eye  can  see  through  them — they  are 
so  transparent.  You  are  an  enemy  to  God;  you  are  unreconciled,  and 
you  are  content  to  be  so.  This  truth  may  be  unpalatable,  but  it  is 
nevertheless  most  certain.  May  God  help  you  to  feel  this,  and  may 
it  humble  }rou  before  his  presence. 

Still,  if  they  would  not  come  to  the  good  man's  feast,  why  did  not 
they  say  so?  "if  the  real  secret  of  it  was  that  they  hated  him  and 
despised  his  provisions,  is  it  not  melancholy  that  they  ivere  not  homxt 
enough  to  give  him  a  "nay"  at  once?  Well,  they  certainly  were  not,  arul 
one  reason  might  be  because  they  -wished  to  be  upon  good  terms  with  their 
conscience.  They  felt  they  ought  to  go.  He  was  one  who  had  a  claim 
upon  their  courtesy,  if  not  their  gratitude,  and  therefore  feeling  that 
they  ought  to  go,  and  yet  not  intending  to  go,  they  sought  to  compro 
mise  by  an  excuse.  Conscience  is  a  very  unamiable  neighbour  to  men 
who  live  in  sin.  It  is  said  of  David,  "  David's  heart  smote  him," 
and  it  is  a  very  hard  blow  which  the  heart  is  able  to  give.  In  order  to 
parry  the  blow,  men  hold  up  a  shield  of  excuses.  You  cannot  quite 
extinguish  your  conscience,  which  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord,  and 
therefore  you  put  it  under  the  bushel  of  an  excuse.  The  thief  fears 
the  watch-dog,  and  therefore  throws  him  a  sop  to  keep  him  quiet — 
that  sop  is  made  of  excuses.  John  Bunyan  tells  us  that  Mr.  Recorder 
Conscience,  when  the  town  of  Mansoul  was  in  the  keeping  of  Diabolus, 
used  sometimes  to  cry  out  at  such  a  rate  that  he  made  all  the  in 
habitants  afraid,  and  so  they  put  him  in  a  very  dark  place,  and  tried 
to  put  a  gag  into  his  mouth  to  keep  him  quiet,  but  for  all  that,  some 
times  when  his  fits  came  on,  he  made  the  town  feel  very  uneasy.  I 
know  what  conscience  tells  some  of  you:  it  says  to  you,  "How  is  it 
you  can  forget  divine  things?  How  can  you  trifle  with  the  world  to 
come?  How  can  you  live  as  if  you  never  meant  to  die?  What  will  you 
do  when  you  come  to  die,  without  an  interest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?" 
So,  that  conscience  may  be  quiet  awhile,  you  make  an  excuse,  and 
persevere  in  refusing  to  come  to  the  feast. 

It  may  be  that  you  make  this  excuse  to  satisfy  custom.  It  is  not 
the  custom  of  this  present  age  to  fly  immediately  in  the  face  of  Christ. 
There  are  not  many  men  of  your  acquaintance  or  mine,  who  ostensibly 
oppose  religion.  Your  father  fears  God;  your  mother  is  a  woman  of  great 


devotion;  your  friends  go  to  the  house  of  God  and  speak  experimentally 

say  to  them,  "  I   will 
never  be  a  Christia'n;  I  dislike  the  ways  of  God;  I  do  not  choose  the 


of  divine  things:  you  do  not  like  therefore  to  saj 
never  be  a  Christian;  I  dislike  the  ways  of  God;  J 
plan  of  sovereign  grace;"  and  therefore  to  spare  their  feelings  you  make 


380  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

an  excuse.  You  do  not  want  to  grieve  dear  friends,  you  are  afraid  if  you 
spoke  out  honestly  what  your  soul  feels,  that  it  might  bring  your  mother 
with  grey  hairs  to  the  grave,  or  make  your  father's  heart  to  break,  and 
so  you  make  the  excuse,  that  they  may  entertain  a  comfortable  hope 
whereas,  while  you  make  excuses,  there  is  no  hope  for  you  at  all.  For  mj 
part,  I  would  rather  you  would  speak  outright  and  say  what  you  mean 
I  would  that  you  would  say,  "  I  am  an  enemy  of  Christ;  I  do  not  be 
lieve  his  gospel;  I  will  not  serve  him."  This  might  sound  very  badly, 
but  it  would  show,  at  least,  that  there  was  some  sincerity  in  you,  and  we 
would  hope  that,  ere  long,  you  might  be  bowed  to  the  will  of  Christ. 
Excuses  are  curses,  and  when  you  have  no  excuses  left  there  will  be  hope 
for  you. 

It  may  be  you  make  these  excuses  because  you  have  had  convictions 
which  so  haunt  you  at  times  that  you  dare  not  oppose  Christ  to  his 
face.  You  have  gone  home  from  the  services  to  weep.  That  little 
chamber  of  yours  is  a  witness  that  you  cannot  live  altogether  without 
prayer.  The  other  day  when  you  went  to  a  funeral,  you  came  home 
with  your  mind  very  solemn,  and  you  thought  then  that  certainly  you 
would  yield  to  the  commands  of  Jesus.  When  you  were  sick,  and  had 
that  week  or  two  upstairs  alone,  then  you  vowed  and  resolved;  but  your 
resolves  melted  into  thin  air.  The  tear  starts  to  your  eye,  you  are  almost 
persuaded  to  be  a  Christian;  you  breathe  a  prayer,  but  ah!  some  ill  com 
panion  tempts  you  the  next  morning,  and  according  to  the  old  proverb, 
"  The  dog  hath  returned  to  his  vomit,  and  the  sow  that  was  washed  to  her 
wallowing  in  the  mire."  Ah!  how  many  times  did  I  have  convictions 
of  sin,  and  terrible  ones,  too,  and  yet  I  said,  like  Felix  to  Paul,  "  Go  thy 
way  for  this  time;  when  I  have  a  convenient  season,  I  will  call  for 
thee;"  but  I  could  not  quench  these  convictions  by  downright  opposition 
to  Christ;  I  knew  too  much,  and  felt  too  much  to  do  that,  and  so  I  tried 
to  patch  up  a  truce  between  my  soul  and  my  convictions. 

Satan  is  always  ready  to  help  men  with  excuses.  This  is  a  trade  of 
which  there  is  no  end.  It  certainly  commenced  very  early,  for  after 
our  first  parents  had  sinned,  one  of  the  first  occupations  upon  which 
they  entered  was  to  make  themselves  aprons  of  fig-leaves  to  hide  their 
nakedness.  Read  the  Scriptures  through,  and  you  will  find  that  excuse- 
making  has  been  a  habit  in  all  ages  and  among  all  classes  of  people; 
and  till  the  last  sinner  shall  be  saved  by  sovereign  grace,  I  suppose 
men  will  still  be  setting  up  their  vain  excuses  in  the  temple  of  God.  If 
you  will  fire  the  gun,  Satan  will  always  keep  you  supplied  with  ammu 
nition.  When  he  thinks  that  a  truth  is  about  to  come  home  to  you,  if 
you  cannot  frame  an  excuse,  he  will  do  it  for  you;  he  will  run  between 
you  and  the  cannon-shot  of  God's  Word  to  prevent  your  being  wounded 
by  it.  If  the  preacher's  sword  should  be  too  sharp  for  you,  and  make 
your  conscience  bleed,  the  evil  one  has  a  Satanic  plaister  with  which  he 
very  soon  binds  up  the  wound. 

The  natural  self-righteousness  of  man  prompts  him  to  frame  apologies. 
We  are  all  the  best  men  in  the  world  according  to  our  own  gauge  and 
measure.  If  we  could  sit  as  judges  upon  ourselves,  the  verdict  would 
always  be  "Not  guilty."  Sin,  which  would  be  very  shocking  in 
another,  is  very  venial  in  us ;  nay,  what  would  be  abominable 
in  other  men,  becomes  almost  commendable  in  ourselves,  so  par- 


A   BAD   EXCUSE   IS   WORSE  THAN   NONE.  381 

tially  do  we  judge  our  own  case.  Since  the  sinner  cannot  think  it 
quite  right  for  himself  to  be  an  unbeliever  in  Christ,  since  hia 
enlightened  conscience  will  not  let  him  *s,y  that  he  is  quite  safe  while 
he  refuses  to  fly  to  the  wounds  cf  Jesus,  he  runs  to  excuses  in  order 
that  he  may  still  say,  "  I  aru  rich  and  increased  in  goods,"  and  not  be 
driven  to  the  unhappy  necessity  of  crying,  "  I  am  naked  and  poor  and 
miserable."  Sinful  self  is  hard  to  conquer,  but  righteous  self  is  the 
worst  enemy  of  the  two.  When  we  can  make  men  plead  guilty,  then 
God  pronounces  absolution  upon  them;  but  while  men  will  interpose 
their  extenuations,  there  is  little  or  no  hope  for  them.  0  great  God, 
our  Master,  rend  away  the  excuses  from  every  sinner  here,  and  make 
him  stand  guilty  before  thy  bar  in  his  own  consciousness,  that  he  may 
cry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner,"  and  find  pardon  through  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  Take  heed,  0  ye  ungodly  ones,  lest  ye  go  on 
excusing,  and  excusing,  and  excusing,  until  ye  excuse  yourselves  down 
to  the  pit  of  hell;  for'this  know,  ye  will  never  be  able  to  excuse  your 
selves  out  again. 

II.    We  come  to  RECOUNT  these  excuses. 

Many  will  not  come  to  the  great  supper — will  not  be  Christians  on 
the  same  ground  as  those  in  the  parable — they  are  too  busy.  They  have 
a  large  family,  and  it  takes  all  their  time  to  earn  bread  and  cheese  for 
those  little  mouths.  They  have  a  very  large  business— many  servants 
in  their  employ,  and  from  the  first  thing  in  the  morning  to  the  last 
thing  at  night,  if  they  do  not  see  after  business,  their  affairs  must  go 
wrong.  Or  else,  if  they  have  no  business,  yet  they  have  so  many 
pleasures,  and  these  require  so  much  time — their  butterfly  visits  during 
the  morning  take  up  so  many  hours — the  dropping  of  their  &nall  pieces 
of  pasteboard  at  other  people's  doors  occupy  all  their  leisuro,  and  they 
really  have  no  opportunity  to  think  about  matters  so  unpalatable  as 
death  and  eternity.  This  excuse  scarcely  needs  a  word  from  me 
to  answer  it,  because  every  man  knows  that  it  is  grossly  false.  Nobody 
^oes  starving  oecause  he  has  not  time  to  eat.  Now,  if  God  has 
given  time  "for  us  to  support  our  natural  frame,  much  more  has 
he  given  us  time  for  the  soul  to  feed.  I  do  not  find  my  friends 
111  the  street  half  dressed ;  but  I  find  some  of  them  spend  many  a  half- 
hour  over  that  other  pin,  and  that  other  ribbon.  Now,  surely  if  they 
have  time  to  dress  the  body,  they  must  have  had  time  given  them  in 
which  to  put  on  the  robe  of  righteousness  and  array  the  soul.  If 
you  have  not  the  time,  God  gave  it  to  you,  and  you  must  have  misspent 
it.  God  gives  you  time  as  a  steward,  and  if  you  say  to  your  Master, 
"I  have  it  not,"  he  will  reply  to  you,  "  I  entrusted  it  to  you;  you  must 
have  spent  it  on  yourself;  you  have  robbed  God."  A  little  earlier 
rising,  a  little  less  time  at  the  table — either  of  these  might  give  you 
time  enough.  You  know  you  have  the  time,  and  when  you  say  you 
have  it  not,  the  lie  is  too  thin;  you  can  see  through  it.  0  soul!  0 
eoul!  when  holy  men  can  find  hours  for  prayer;  when  such  a  man  as 
Martin  Luther,  when  he  was  very  busy,  used  to  say,  "  I  must  have  threa 
hours  prayer  to-day  at  least,  or  else  I  cannot  get  through  my  business," 
do  not  tell  me  that  you  have  not  time  to  seek  the  Lord.  Besides,  it  is  not 
an  affair  of  time.  Salvation  may  be  wrought  in  an  instant.  There  is  life 
in  a  look  at  the  crucified  One;  there  is  lite  at  this  moment  for  thee;  and 


382  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

betwcer  now  and  the  time  when  this  service  shall  have  gone,  there  is 
time  enough  for  thee  to  have  laid  hold  upon  eternal  life,  and  to  have 
received  Christ  Jesus  to  thy  soul's  salvation.  That  excuse  will  not  do. 

But  then  they  fly  to  another.  They  are  too  good.  When  I  have 
preached  free  grace  and  a  full  Christ,  I  have  heard  some  say,  "That  is 
a  good  sermon  for  the  crowd  in  a  theatre,  for  ignorant,  low-lived  people; 
but  we  respectable  people  do  not  require  such  salvation.  To  offer  a  free 
salvation  to  men  who  are  neither  drunkards  nor  swearers,  why  the  thing 
is  ridiculous.  The  sermon  was  very  good  for  Magdalens,  for  thieves, 
and  such  like,  but  not  for  us."  No,  you  are  too  good  to  be  saved.  You 
need  not  a  physician,  because  you  are  whole.  Your  own  table  has 
enough  upon  it,  you  do  not  need  to  come  to  this  feast.  But  bethink 
you,  I  pray  you,  whether  this  be  not  all  a  mistake.  In  what  are  you 
better  than  other  men,  after  all?  What  if  you  do  not  indulge  in  open 
sins,  does  not  your  heart  often  go  a-lusting  towards  evil?  Does  your 
tongue  always  speak  that  which  is  right  and  true?  If  you  cannot 
remember  sins  of  commission,  what  about  the  sins  of  omission?  Have 
you  fed  the  hungry?  Have  you  clothed  the  naked?  Have  you  taught 
the  ignorant?  Have  you  loved  God  with  all  your  heart,  and  soul,  and 
strength?  Have  you  given  him  all  that  he  demands  of  you?  Why 
you  cannot  say  this.  Now  the  perfection,  the  holiness,  'which  God 
demands  in  order  to  salvation  must  be  like  a  perfect  alabaster  vase: 
if  there  be  a  single  crack  or  spot  on  it,  all  is  spoiled.  You  may  say, 
"  Well,  it  is  not  much  broken;  we  have  not  seriously  damaged  it;'*'  nay, 
but  God  requires  it  to  be  perfect,  and  no  matter  how  slight  the  damage 
it  may  have  sustained,  you  cannot  enter  heaven  upon  the  footing  of 
your  good  works — you  are  cast  out  for  ever.  Hear  these  words,  "  By 
the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight." 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  and  "As  many  as  are 
of  the  works  of  the  law,  are  under  the  curse."  God  save  you  from  that 
false  excuse. 

Another  class  say,  "  We  are  too  lad  to  be  saved.  The  gospel  cries, 
*  Believe  in  Jesus  Christ  and  live,'  but  it  cannot  mean  me;  I  have  been 
too  gross  an  offender.  When  I  was  but  young  I  went  into  evil,  and  since 
then  I  have  gone  from  bad  to  worse.  0  sir,  I  have  cursed  God  to  his 
face;  I  have  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge,  against  a  mother's 
prayers  and  tears.  I  have  spoken  evil  of  God's  Word;  I  have  laughed 
at  the  very  name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  I  am  too  evil  to  be 
saved."  Here  is  another  bad  excuse.  You  Jcnow,  sinner,  if  you  have 
been  a  hearer  of  the  gospel,  that  this  is  not  true,  for  bad  as  you  are, 
no  man  is  excluded  from  Christ  on  account  of  his  vileness.  "All 
manner  of  sin  and  of  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men."  The 
invitations  of  the  gospel  do  not  stop  at  a  certain  point  of  sin,  but  on 
the  contrary,  they  seem  to  select  the  worst  sinners  first.  What  did  the 
Saviour  say?  "'Begin  at  Jerusalem."  But,  Lord,  the  men  live  there 
who  crucified  thee.  "Begin  at  Jerusalem."  But,  Lord,  it  was  in 
Jerusalem  that  they  shed  thy  blood,  and  thrust  out  the  tongue  and 
laughed  at  thee,  and  made  a  mockery  of  thy  prayers.  "  Begin  at 
Jerusalem" — the  worst  first.  Just  as  the  surgeon  in  a  battle  is- 
wont  tc  look  to  the  worst  cases  first.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  lost 


L   BA.D   EXCUSE    IS   WORSE   THAN   NONE-  383 

his  finger.  At.,  well,  let  him  bide  awhile,  we  will  see  to  that.  But 
here  is°another  who  has  lost  a  limb,  and  he  is  bleeding  fast,  and  if  the 
blood  be  not  stopped,  his  life  will  ooze  out.  The  surgeon  gives  him  the 
first  turn.  0  you  great  sinners,  you  who  feel  yourselves  to  have  been 
notorious  offenders,  I  pray  you  be  not  so  guilty  as  to  make  this  an  ex 
cuse  for  not  coming  to  Christ;  on  the  contrary,  use  it  as  a  reason  why 
you  should  fly  to  him  at  once.  The  more  filth,  the  more  need  of  washing; 
the  more  sick,  the  more  need  of  a  physician;  the  more  hungry,  the  more 
welcome  to  the  table.  Come  to  Jesus  just  as  you  are,  with  all  your 
sins:  "Though  they  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow;" 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  No  form  of  sin, 
imaginable  or  unimaginable,  can  by  any  possibility,  be  a  bar  to  any 
man's  salvation,  if  he  will  but  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Then  comes  another  excuse,  "  Sir,  I  would  trust  Christ  with  my  soul 
this  morning,  but  I  do  not  fed  in  a  fit  state  to  trust  Christ.  I  have  not  that 
sense  of  sin  which  I  think  to  be  a  fit  preparation  for  coming  to  Christ — 


"  '  If  aught  is  felt,  'tis  only  pain 
To  find  I  cannot  feel.'  " 


Ah!  my  dear  hearer,  this  is  an  excuse  which  looks  like  a  very  good  one, 
but  it  has  no  truth  in  it.  There  is  no  fitness  wanted  before  you  may 
trust  in  Christ.  Whatever  may  be  your  present  condition,  if  you  trust 
Jesus  Christ  with  your  soul,  you  are  saved  on  the  spot;  your  sins  are  for 
given  you;  you  are  made  a  child  of  God;  you  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved. 
Where  do  you  read  of  fitness  for  Christ  in  the  Scriptures?  Were  the  dead 
whom  Jesus  restored,  fit  to  be  raised  think  you?  Why,  Martha  said  of 
her  brother,  "  Lord,  by  this  time  he  stmketh,  for  he  hath  been  dead  four 
days;"  was  there  any  fitness  in  Lazarus  for  a  resurrection?  And  yet  Jesus 
said,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth!"  Does  the  gospel  say,  "He  who  is  in  a 
certain  state,  and  then  believeth,  shall  be  saved;"  no,  but,  "  He  that 
believeth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved."  How  am  I  bidden  to  preach 
to  you?  Am  I  to  say,  "Whosoever  feels  this  is  to  come?  "  no,  but,  "Who 
soever  will,  let  him  come  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  Are  you 
willing  to  have  Christ?  Then  you  may  have  him,  for  Christ  is  as  free 
to  every  needy  sinner  as  the  drinking-fountain  in  the  street  is  free  to 
every  thirsty  passer-by.  Trust  Jesus,  even  if  your  heart  be  hard  as 
granite — he  can  soften  it.  Trust  him,  though  conscience  be  asleep; 
though  all  the  mental  faculties  be  perverted — trust  him.  It  is  his  busi 
ness  to  make  you  holy,  not  your  business — trust  him  to  do  it  all.  He  is 
called  Jesus  because  he  saves  his  people  from  their  sins.  Trust  him  to 
overcome  your  corruptions,  to  kill  your  evil  temper,  to  subdue  your 
will,  to  soften  your  heart,  to  enlighten  your  conscience,  to  inflame  your 
love — trust  him  to  do  it  all.  0,  be  not  so  foolish  as  to  say,  "  I  am  too  ill 
to  send  for  a  doctor:  when  I  get  better,  when  I  feel  better,  then  I  will  send 
for  him."  Do  not  say,  "  I  am  so  black;  if  I  felt  more  clean,  I  would  wash;" 
no,  but  wash  because  thou  art  black;  wash  because  thou  hast  nothing  but 
filth  about  thee;  send  for  the  great  Physician  because  there  is  no  health 
in  thee.  There  is  nothing  in  thee  but  wounds,  bruises,  and  putrefying 
sores;  therefore,  let  thy  faith  entrust  thy  healing  entirely  to  him. 

Here  comes  another,  "  0  sir,  I  would  trust  Christ  with  my  soul,  but 
it  seems  too  good  to  be  true,  that  God  should  save  me  on  the  spot,  this 
morning.  You  little  know  where  I  was  last  night,  or  what  I  did  yesteiv 


S84  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

day;  you  cannot  tell  who  I  am,  nor  how  bad  I  have  been,  and  you  tell  ma 
that  if  I  trust  Jesus  Christ,  I  shall  be  saved.  Sir,  it  is  too  good  to  be 
true,  I  cannot  imagine  it."  My  dear  friend,  dost  thou  measure  God's 
corn  with  thy  bushel?  Because  the  thing  seems  an  amazing  thing  to 
thee,  should  it  therefore  be  amazing  unto  him?  What  if  his  thoughts 
should  be  as  high  above  thy  thoughts  as  the  heavens  are  above  the 
earth?  Is  not  this  just  what  he  has  said  in  Scripture?  I  know  you  find 
it  hard  to  forgive  your  fellow-man,  but  my  Father,  my  God,  can  readily 
forgive  you. 

"  Crimes  of  such  horror  to  forgive, 

Such  guilty  daring  worms  to  spare : 
This  is  thy  grand  prerogative, 
And  none  shall  in  the  honour  share." 

He  creates  like  a  God;  he  does  not  make  a  few  insects,  or  here  and  there 
a  star,  but  this  great  world  he  fashioned,  and  he  scattered  the 
starry  orbs  about  with  both  his  hands.  So  when  the  Lord  comes  to 
pardon,  he  does  not  pardon  some  small  offences  and  wink  at  trifles,  but 
the  whole  mass  of  sin  he  cleanseth  away  in  a  moment,  and  all  manner 
of  sin  and  blasphemy,  in  an  instant,  he  casteth  behind  his  back.  Do 
believe  that  God  is  God  and  not  such  a  one  as  thou  art;  do  think  that 
he  is  capable  of  doing  greater  things  than  thou  canst  dream  of.  Trust 
him,  trust  him  now,  and  however  good  the  things  are,  thou  shalt  find 
them  true?  however  great,  they  shall  be  thine. 

I  think  I  hear  one  say,  "  It  is  too  soon  for  me  to  come :  let  me  have  a 
little  look  at  the  world  first.  I  am  scarce  fifteen  or  sixteen.  There  is 
plenty  of  time  for  me."  You  have  been  to  the  graveyard.  Are  there  not 
there  the  records  of  those  who  have  found  fifteen  or  sixteen  none  too  soon, 
for  lo,  at  that  age,  they  were  taken  away  to  their  last  account.  Too  soon! 
Is  it  ever  too  soon  to  be  happy?  If  religion  made  you  miserable,  I  might 
advise  you  to  put  it  off  to  the  last,  but  inasmuch  as  to  be  in  Christ  is  to 
be  happy,  you  cannot  be  in  him  too  soon.  I  have  sat  by  many  death 
beds,  and  heard  many  regrets,  but  never  did  I  hear  a  Christian  regret 
that  he  was  converted  too  soon.  I  have  received  many  young  converts 
into  Church-fellowship,  but  I  never  heard  any  one  of  them  say  they  were 
sorry  to  be  called  by  grace  so  early.  If  I  were  condemned  to  die,  and 
anyone  should  bring  me  a  pardon,  I  should  not  think  I  received  it  too 
soon.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  you — can  it  be  too  soon  to  escape 
from  it?  You  are  the  subject  of  daily  temptations,  and  daily  add  to  your 
sins — can  it  be  too  soon  to  have  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit? 

Others  will  row  in  the  opposite  direction,  pleading,  "Alas!  it  is  too 
late."  The  devil  first  puts  the  clock  back  and  tells  you  it  is  too  soon, 
and  when  this  does  not  serve  his  turn,  he  puts  it  on  and  says,  "  The 
hour  is  passed,  the  day  of  grace  is  over;  mercy's  gate  is  bolted,  you 
•can  never  enter  it."  Let  us  answer  this  at  once.  It  is  never  too  late 
for  a  man  to  believe  in  Jesus  while  he  is  out  of  his  grave.  While  the 
lamp  of  life  continues  to  burn,  the  vilest  sinner  who  returns  shall 
find  Christ  ready  to  receive  him.  There  have  been  men  converted  at 
a  hundred  years  of  age;  we  have  instances  on  record  of  persons  who 
have  even  passed  the  century  and  become  children  of  Christ  Jesus? 
How  old  are  you?  Are  you  in  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf  of  eighty?  Ah! 
thou  hast  many  sins,  but  what  a  triumph  of  grace  it  will  be  when  eighty 


A   BAD    EXCUSE    IS   WORSE   THAN    NONE.  385 

years  of  sin  shall  all  be  washed  away  in  a  moment!  I  tell  you,  that  if  you 
were  as  old  as  Methuselah,  and  in  every  year  of  that  long  life  you  had  as 
many  sins  as  you  have  already  committed  in  the  whole  eighty  years,  yet 
the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ  is  sufficient  to  put  all  this  away.  Your  sins 
may  mount  up  like  mountains,  but  the  love  of  Christ,  like  Noah's  flood, 
can  go  twenty  cubits  upwards,  and  the  tops  of  the  mountains  shall  be 
covered.  It  is  not  too  soon;  it  is  not  too  late;  neither  of  these  reasons 
are  of  any  value  though  they  delude  many. 

"  Well,"  says  another,  "  I  would  believe  in  Christ,  but  /  do  not  know 
whether  I  am  one  of  God's  elect  or  not.  Sir,  that  doctrine  of  election 
troubles  me  and  staggers  me.  If  I  knew  I  was  one  of  the  elect,  I  would 
trust  Christ."  That  is — if  God  will  show  you  his  secrets,  then  you  will  do 
God's  will,  and  so  the  Almighty  is  to  bend  to  your  conditions,  and  then  you 
will  do  as  he  bids  you!  You  will  come  to  feast  at  the  man's  table,  if  he 
will  take  you  into  his  secret  closet,  and  show  you  all  his  treasure!  He 
will  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  How  foolish  this  talk  is  about  election!  The 
doctrine  of  election  is  a  great  and  precious  truth,  but  it  never  can  be  a 
valid  reason  for  a  man's  not  believing  in  Christ.  You  are  ill  to-day, 
and  the  doctor  comey,  "  There,"  says  he,  "  there  is  the  medicine,  I  will 
guarantee  if  you  take  it,  it  will  heal  you."  You  say.  "  Sir,  I  would  take 
it  at  once,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  I  am  predestinated  to  get  over  this 
fever.  If  I  am  predestinated  to  live,  why  then,  sir,  I  will  take  the 
medicine,  but  I  must  know  first."  "Ah!"  says  the  doctor,  "I  tell  you 
what,  if  you  do  not  take  it,  you  are  predestinated  to  die."  And  I  will 
tell  you  this,  if  you  will  not  'believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  you  will  be  damned, 
be  you  who  you  may,  but  you  will  not  be  able  to  lay  it  at  predesti 
nation's  door;  it  will  lie  at  your  own.  A  man  has  fallen  overboard;  a 
rope  is  thrown  to  him,  but  he  says,  "  I  should  like  to  grasp  that  rope, 
only  I  do  not  know  whether  I  am  predestinated  to  be  drowned."  Fool! 
he  will  go  down  to  the  bottom  with  a  lie  in  his  mouth.  We  do  not  say, 
"  I  would  sit  down  to  dinner  to-day,  but  I  will  not  eat,  because  I  do  not 
know  whether  I  am  predestinated  to  have  any  dinner  to-day."  We  do 
not  talk  so  foolishly  in  common  things,  why  then  do  we  so  in  religion? 
When  men  are  hard-up  for  an  excuse,  they  are  glad  to  run  to  the 
mysteries  of  God  to  use  them  as  a  veil  to  cover  their  faces.  0  my  dear 
friends,  you  must  know  that  though  God  has  a  chosen  people,  yet  when 
he  commands  you  to  believe  in  Christ,  his  having  a  chosen  people,  or 
not  having  a  chosen  people  cannot  excuse  you  from  obedience  to  the 
divine  command:  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved,"  I  could  not  attempt  to  go  through  all  these  excuses,  and  there* 
fore  after  handling  two  more,  I  will  have  done. 

"  Well,"  says  one,  "  if  I  were  to  believe  in  Christ  Z^  should  be  as  bad 
after  a  short  time  as  I  used  to  be.  I  might  be  a  little  better  for  a  time, 
but  I  should  go  back  again;  so  it  is  of  no  use  trusting-  Christ."  That  is 
to  say,  dear  friend,  Jesus  Christ  says  if  you  trust  him,  he  will  save  you: 
you  say  if  you  trust  him,  he  will  not  save  you.  That  is  what  it  comes 
to.  Jesus  Christ  promises  that  if  you  trust  him,  he  will  save  you  from 
your  sins:  you  say,  "  No,  I  should  go  back  to  my  sins  and  be  as  bad  as 
before."  Which  am  I  to  believe — your  excuse,  or  his  promise?  Why, 
Christ's  promise,  surely!  "But  I  tried  once  before,"  says  one.  Very 
likely  you  did,  but  Christ  never  tried,  for  if  he  had  tried,  he  would  have 


386  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

succeeded.  "  Well,  but,  I  did  hold  on  a  certain  length  of  time."  I  dare 
say  you  did — you  held  on;  but  if  Christ  had  hold  of  you,  he  would 
never  have  let  you  go.  When  you  get  hold  of  Christ  you  may  soon  drop 
him,  but  when  Jesus  gets  hold  of  you,  he  says,  "  I  give  unto  my  sheep 
eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck 
them  out  of  my  hand."  If  you  had  greatly  trusted  Christ,  he  would  not 
have  suffered  you  to  become  what  you  used  to  be. 

"Well,"  says  one,  "I  cannot  trust  Christ,  I  cannot  believe  him"  You 
talk  Latin,  brother;  you  talk  Latin.  "No,"  you  say,  "I  do  not  talk 
Latin."  Yes,  you  do.  I  will  translate  that  word  into  the  English  for 
you.  It  means,  " /  will  not"  When  you  say,  " I  cannot,"  it  means, 
"I  will  not;"  and  understand,  whenever  the  minister  says,  "You 
cannot,"  he  means,  "you  will  not;"  for  he  does  not  mean  that  you  have 
any  natural  inability,  but  chat  you  have  a  moral  inability  caused  by 
your  love  of  sin — a  wilful  inability.  "I  cannot,"  is  the  Latin,  but 
"I  will  not,"  is  the  English  of  it.  A  man  once  sent  his  servant 
to  a  certain  town  to  fetch  some  goods;  and  he  came  back  without 
them.  "Well,  sir,  why  did  you  not  go  there?"  "Well,  when  I 
got  to  a  certain  place,  I  came  to  a  river,  sir,  a  very  deep  river:  I  can 
not  swim,  and  I  had  no  boat;  so  I  could  not  get  over."  A  good  excuse, 
was  it  not?  It  looked  so,  but  it  happened  to  be  a  very  bad  one,  for  the 
master  said,  "Is  there  not  a  ferry  there?"  "Yes,  sir."  "  Did  you  ask 
the  man  to  take  you  over?"  "No,  sir."  Surely  the  excuse  was  a 
mere  fiction!  So  there  are  many  things  with  regard  to  our  salvation 
which  we  cannot  do.  Granted,  but  then  there  is  a  ferry  there!  There 
is  the  Holy  Spirit  who  is  able  to  do  all  things,  and  you  remember 
the  text,  "If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto 
your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  give 
good  things  to  them  that  ask  him?"  It  is  true  you  cannot  make  yourself 
a  new  heart,  but  did  you  ask  for  a  new  heart  with  sincerity  and  truth? 
Did  you  seek  Christ?  If  you  say,  "  Yes,  I  did  sincerely  seek  Christ, 
and  Christ  would  not  save  me,"  why  then  you  are  excused;  but  there 
never  was  a  soul  who  could  in  truth  say  that.  There  never  was  a 
sinner  yet  who  perished  seeking  Christ,  and  there  never  will  be;  and  if 
thy  heart's  sincere  desire  is  after  the  salvation  which  is  treasured  in 
Christ  Jesus,  then  heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  Christ  will 
never  cast  you  out  while  his  own  word  stands,  "  Him  that  cometh  to 
me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  "  Still,"  you  say,  "  I  cannot  trust 
Christ."  Now,  I  am  at  issue  with  you  here — I  am  at  issue  with  every 
awakened  sinner.  I  agree  with  you,  if  you  will  let  me  give  my  own 
translation  of  the  word  cannot — that  you  will  not,  but  if  it  is  to  stand 
as  the  word  is  generally  used,  I  am  at  issue  with  you.  Suppose  that 
you  believe  me  to  be  an  honest  man,  would  it  be  fair  after  that,  to  say, 
"  Sir,  I  cannot  believe  you?  "  Now,  if  you  believe  me  to  be  a  liar,  I  can 
very  well  understand  that  you  cannot  trust  me;  but  if  you  take  it  for 
granted  that  I  am  incapable  of  telling  a  falsehood,  and  yet  do  not 
believe  what  I  tell  you,  you  are  a  liar.  Now,  you  believe  that  Christ  is 
incapable  of  falsehood;  you  are  not  like  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the 
character  of  Christ,  and  therefore  you  know  him  to  be  incapable  of 
untruthfulness — and  then  you  say  you  cannot  believe  him.  Seeing  that 
Jesus  Christ  cannot  but  speak  truth,  it  cannot  be  a  difficult  thing  for 


A   BAD    EXCUSE    IS   WORSE   THAN    NONE.  387 

uny  man  to  believe  what  he  speaks.  If  you  have  sufficient  light  given 
you  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  know  that  Christ  is  the  truth,  I  believe 
you  have  sufficient  power  from  the  same  source  to  believe  what 
Christ  says.  I  trace  this  to  God's  gift,  but  I  do  pray  you  to  exercise 
the  power  which  you  certainly  have.  Tell  Christ  you  cannot  believe 
him!  Will  you  tell  him  that  to  his  face,  when  he  sits  upon  the 
judgment-seat  at  last?  Will  you  dare  to  say  this  when  his  eyes  of 
fire  shall  look  you  through  and  through  ?  "  Most  holy  Christ,  I 
could  not  trust  thee!  Most  truthful  Saviour,  I  could  not  believe 
thee!  I  suspected  thee,  I  doubted  thee!"  "Wherefore  didst  thou 
doubt  me  then?  What  cause  had  I  ever  given  thee?  Wherefore 
didst  thou  think  me  a  liar?  In  what  had  I  ever  broken  my  promises. 
or  when  did  I  err  from  the  truth?"  "  He  that  believeth  not,"  says 
John,  "  hath  made  God  a  liar,  because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that 
God  gave  of  his  Son."  0,  do  think  of  this,  and  never  make  that 
excuse  again.  Instead  of  saying,  "  I  cannot  believe,"  say  "  I  cannot 
make  God  a  liar,  I  must  therefore  believe,  for  I  know  God  is  no  liar — 
I  must  therefore  trust  his  Son  Jesus  Christ. 

I  have  recounted  a  few  of  these  excuses;  perhaps  you  will  make 
another  batch  before  the  evening  comes  on — you  who  determine  not  to 
be  saved.  It  is  only  the  mighty  Spirit  of  God  who  can  sweetly 
constrain  your  will  to  yield  to  Christ,  and  so  I  close  with  these  two  or 
three  words,  upon  the  third  point. 

III.  How  FOOLISH  THUS  TO  MAKE  EXCUSES.  For  first  remember  with 
whom  it  is  you  are  dealing.  You  are  not  making  excuses  before  a  man 
who  may  be  duped  by  them,  but  you  make  these  excuses  before  the 
heart-searching  God.  My  dear  hearers,  let  me  speak  very  solemnly,  and 
push  this  point  closely  home.  You  know  that  God  can  see  through  all 
this — why  then  do  you  hang  up  such  thin  veils?  Confess  before  him 
now  your  folly:  "Lord,  I  have  been  an  enemy  to  thee;  Lord,  I  have 
been  averse  to  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  therefore  have  I  patched  up 
these  excuses:  forgive  me;  I  see  how  foolish  I  have  been;  grant  that  I 
may  do  so  no  more." 

Remember  again,  what  it  is  you  are  trifling  with.  It  is  your  own 
soul,  the  soul  which  can  never  die.  You  are  trifling  with  a  heaven  which 
you  will  never  see  if  you  keep  on  with  these  excuses.  You  are  trifling, 
sinner,  with  that  hell  which  must  be  your  never-ending  portion  if  you 
continue  as  you  are.  Can  you  play  with  hell-fire?  0,  can  you  make 
sport  of  heaven?  Can  you  laugh  at  the  blood  of  Jesus?  You  are  really 
doing  so  while  you  are  thus  halting  between  two  opinions.  Now  if 
you  must  play  the  fool,  find  something  cheaper  to  play  with  than 
this.  0  sirs,  if  you  must  have  mirth,  I  pray  you  have  it  out  of  some 
thing  else  than  this.  To  be  saved!  hark  to  heaven's  music!  To  be  lost! 
listen  to  hell's  groans!  Neither  of  these  things  are  matters  for  you  to 
play  with.  Say,  as  now  you  are  sitting  here — I  pray  God  help  you  to 
say  it  before  you  leave  this  house — "Lord,  I  have* been  trifling  with 
eternity;  I  have  been  making  frivolous  excuses  rather  than  I  would 
accept  thy  love  in  Christ;  I  have  trifled  with  heaven  and  hell:  grant, 
Lord,  that  this  may  be  brought  to  an  end,  that  I  may  love  and  trust 
thee  this  day." 

Remember,  again,  that  these  excuses  will  look  very  different  soon- 


388  METE/  ^OLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

How  will  you  make  excuses  when  you  come  to  die,  as  die  you  must? 
When  death  gets  the  grip  of  you,  and  the  strong  man  faileth,  and  they 
wipe  the  death-sweat  from  your  fevered  brow,  when  the  glaze  of  death's 
night  is  coming  over  your  eyeballs,  what  will  you  think  of  these  excuses 
then?  It  may  be,  you  will  rave  with  very  fury  at  yourselves,  that  you 
conid  have  played  with  your  souls  to  such  an  extent.  What  will  you  do 
with  your  excuses  when  you  stand  at  the  bar  of  judgment?  The  trum 
pet  rings,  you  have  awakened  from  yonr  grave,  you  stand  amidst  the 
myriads  to  be  judged.  The  books  are  opened,  and  Christ  proclaims 
your  doom — "  Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire."  Will  excuses 
comfort  you  then?  Will  you  be  able  to  say  then,  "Lord,  it  was 
too  soon;  Lord,  it  was  too  late;  Lord,  I  was  too  great  a  sinner  to  believe 
in  Jesus,  or  I  did  not  need  a  Saviour?"  Nay,  when  the  trumpet  peals,  and 
the  heavens  are  in  a  blaze;  when  the  sun  is  turned  into  sackcloth,  and 
the  moon  into  blood,  and  the  stars  fall  like  fig-leaves  from  the  tree,  you 
will  find  other  work  to  do  than  excuse-making;  you  will  weep  and 
wail  because  of  sin,  and  when  you  are  cast  into  hell,  what  will  you  make 
then  of  your  excuses?  Written  in  letters  of  fire,  you  shall  see  in  one 
tremendous  arch  above  your  heads,  "  Ye  knew  your  duty,  but  ye  did 
it  not;  you  heard  the  gospel,  but  you  made  excuses."  Thundering 
more  tremendous  than  the  trump  of  resurrection,  shall  come  these 
words  to  you,  "  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused;  1  have  stretched 

out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded I  also  will  laugh  at  your 

calamity;  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh;  when  your  fear  cometh 
as  desolation,  and  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind;  when 
distress  and  anguish  cometh  upon  you."  0,  the  Lord  have  mercy 
upon  you,  excuse  makers,  and  bring  you  to  look  to  Jesus  now. 
Now,  I  say,  for  the  Scripture  saith,  "  To-day  is  the  accepted  time, 
to-day  is  the  day  of  salvation."  The  only  way  to  end  your  excuses 
is  not  by  praying  nor  resolving,  but  by  looking  to  Christ.  There 
hangs  the  bleeding  Saviour  on  the  cross,  he  dies  the  just  for  the 
unjust  to  bring  us  to  God;  he  suffers  there  that  sin  may  be  forgiven. 
Look  thou  to  him,  trust  thou  to  him,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved. 
My  hearer,  I  give  thee  now  in  God's  name  this  invitation,  this  com 
mand,  trust  thy  soul  to  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  who  suffered  for  sin, 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved.  But  mind  you  this.  I  may  never  meet  you 
all  this  side  the  grave,  but  I  will  meet  you  all  at  God's  great  day,  an^ 
if  you  receive  not  Christ  and  trust  in  him,  I  am  clear  of  your  blood. 
Upon  my  skirts  your  doom  cannot  fall.  Ye  have  heard  the  gospel,  ye 
have  been  told  to  trust  Jesus  as  you  are,  you  have  been  assured  that  he 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  to  him.  You  have 
been  bidden  to  come,  and  now  on  your  own  heads  be  your  soul's  ruin  if 
ye  come  not.  But  may  the  Spirit  of  God  take  these  things  and  apply 
them  to  your  souls.  May  he  be  as  a  fire  and  as  a  hammer  in  your  souls: 
as  a  fire  to  melt,  or  as  a  hammer  to  break;  and  may  you  to-day  with 
brokenness  of  heart  take  Christ  to  be  your  Saviour,  both  now  and  for 
fsver.  Amen 


JfWrapIitmi 


A  STRAIGHT  TALK. 


INTENDED  FOR  BEADING  ON  LORD'S-DAY,  JANUARY  12TH,   1890, 

DELIVERED    BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  May  19,   1889. 


"  I  cannot  come."— Luke  xiv.  20. 

THERE  are  different  ways  of  replying  to  the  invitation  of  the  gospel 
when  you  mean  to  refuse  it.  They  are  all,  at  bottom,  bad,  and  they 
may  all  be  classed  under  one  head;  for  "  they  all  with  one  consent 
began  to  make  excuse"  ;  but  yet  some  are  more  decently  worded  than 
others,  and  have  a  greater  show  of  reason  about  them.  The  first  two 
sets  of  people,  who  were  invited  to  the  supper,  said  to  the  servant, 
apologetically,  with  some  appearance  of  courtesy,  "  I  pray  thee  have 
me  excused."  But  the  third  man  did  not  beat  about  the  bush  at  all, 
or  pray  to  be  excused ;  but  he  said  tersely,  bluntly,  sharply,  ' '  /  cannot 
come"  This  was  a  final  reply;  he  did  not  intend,  nor  wish,  to  come 
to  the  supper.  "/  cannot  come"  was  a  snappish  word;  but  as  he  had 
married  a  wife,  he  thought  the  idea  of  his  coming  was  utterly  unrea 
sonable,  and  he  needed  no  sort  of  excuse. 

Now,  what  did  that  mean  ?  Well,  it  meant  that  he  thought  very 
lightly  of  the  giver  of  the  feast.  He  had  no  respect  for  this  "  certain 
man,"  who  had  made  a  great  supper.  He  had  an  opportunity  of 
slighting  him  by  refusing  his  invitation,  and  he  did  so  outspokenly, 
saying,  "  I cannot  come" 

It  also  showed  that  he  had  a  very  low  opinion  of  the  supper  itself. 
It  might  be  a  respectable  meal,  but  he  did  not  want  it :  he  could  have 
quite  as  good  a  supper  at  home.  He  was  better  off  than  those  people 
in  the  streets.  Those  hedge-birds  might  be  glad  enough  of  a  supper 
for  nothing ;  but  he  was  not  dependent  upon  anybody,  and  he  could 
do  very  well  for  himself.  Do  you  not  know  many  in  this  world  who 
have  no  opinion  of  Christ,  no  love  to  God  ?  Religion  is  to  them  mere 
nonsense — an  unpractical,  dreamy  matter,  about  which  they  have  no 
time  to  concern  themselves.  It  is  a  pitiful  thing  that  the  God,  whom 
angels  worship,  they  will  not  even  think  of ;  and  the  Christ  who  is  the 
loveliest  of  the  lovely — in  him  they  see  no  beauty ;  and  the  priceless 
provisions  of  mercy,  the  pardon  of  sin,  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  the 
No.  2,122.  25 

18 


14  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

heaven  of  God — they  neglect  these  things,  as  if  they  did  not  need  them, 
or  could  get  them  whenever  they  please.  Thousands  are  proudly 
independent  of  the  free  grace  of  God ;  they  are  good  enough,  and 
virtuous  enough ;  and  need  not  cry  for  mercy,  like  the  wicked  and 
profane.  In  their  own  judgment,  they  are  quite  able  to  fight  their 
own  way  to  heaven.  They  want  not  the  charities  of  the  gospel. 
Contempt  of  the  great  Feast-maker,  and  contempt  of  the  feast  itself — 
these  two  pieces  of  proud  disdain  induce  a  man  to  say,  "  I  cannot 
come" 

But  there  was  more  than  common  pride  in  this  brief,  brusque 
speech,  for  this  man  had,  at  the  first,  made  a  promise  to  come.  He- 
had  been  bidden,  and  it  is  implied  in  the  parable  that  he  had  at  that 
time  accepted  the  invitation.  He  had  accepted  the  cards  of  invitation 
to  the  supper ;  and,  though  he  had  done  so,  he  now  flies  in  the  face  of 
his  own  self,  and  says,  "  I  cannot  come."  I  think  that  I  am  address 
ing  some  here  who  have  pledged  themselves  many  a  time  to  come  to 
Christ.  If  I  runeniber  rightly,  you  asked  the  prayers  of  friends,  and 
promised  that  you  would  be  in  real  earnest.  You  looked  your  wife  in 
the  face,  and  said,  "I  hope  that  it  will  not  be  long  before  I  am  with 
you  in  the  church  of  God,  and  shall  no  longer  have  to  go  away  and 
leave  you  alone  at  the  Lord's  table."  You  asked  some  of  your  Christian 
friends  to  make  a  point  of  praying  for  you;  but  you  have  never 
carried  out  your  intention  of  becoming  a  true  Christian.  Your  resolu 
tions  may  be  still  read  in  God's  eternal  book  of  record ;  but  they  are 
there  as  witnesses  to  your  falseness  and  changeableness.  The  counter 
foils  are  there ;  but  there  is  no  fulfilment  of  any  of  the  resolutions. 
God  remembers  them,  although  you  have  forgotten  to  carry  them  out. 
You  accepted  the  invitation  on  the  spur  of  the  moment ;  but  when 
worldliness  had  got  the  upper  hand  with  you,  you  went  back  to  your  own 
obstinacy,  and  said,  "  I  cannot  come."  Perhaps  you  have  not  said  it  in 
quite  as  sharp  a  tone  as  I  used  just  now ;  but  it  has  come  to  the  same 
thing,  for  you  have  not  come  to  the  Gospel  Supper.  It  matters  little 
whether  you  say  it  angrily  or  quietly ;  for  if  you  do  not  come,  the 
practical  result  is  the  same.  I  think  I  hear  some  of  you,  even  now, 
say,  "Do  not  ask  me  so  often.  I  cannot  come.  It  is  of  no  use  to 
worry  me  about  it.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  uncivil  or  unkind.  Though  I 
said  I  would  come,  I  retract  my  words :  I  cannot  come." 

In  saying,  "I  cannot  come,"  the  man  intended,  as  it  were,  to  dis 
miss  the  matter.  He  wished  to  be  understood  as  having  made  up  his 
mind,  and  he  was  no  longer  open  to  argument.  He  did  not  parley ; 
he  did  not  talk ;  but  he  just  said,  off-hand,  "  I  want  no  more  persuad 
ing;  I  cannot  come,  and  that  settles  it."  Certain  of  our  hearers  have 
come  to  such  a  condition  of  heart  that  they  would  gladly  silence  our 
gospel  expostulations  :  with  a  kindly  but  determined  tone  they  would 
say,  "  I  cannot  come.  Do  not  trouble  me  any  more." 

I  suppose  that  this  man,  after  he  had  made  that  positive  declara 
tion,  felt  that  there  was  truth  in  what  he  had  stated.  He  said, 
"  Therefore  I  cannot  come."  He  had  reason  to  support  him  in  what 
he  said,  and  he  went  home,  sat  down,  and  enjoyed  himself,  and  felt 
that  he  was  a  righteous  man,  quite  as  good  as  those  who  had  gone  to 
the  supper,  and  perhaps  rather  better.  He  could  not  blame  himself. 


A    STRAIGHT    TALK.  15 

for  when  a  man  cannot  do  it,  why,  of  course,  he  cannot  do  it ;  and 
why  should  he  be  censured  for  an  impossibility  ?  "  I  cannot  come  "  : 
how  can  I  help  that  ?  So  he  sat  down  with  a  cool  indifference  to  eat 
his  own  supper.  It  was  nothing  to  him  whether  the  great  giver  of 
the  feast  was  grieved  or  not;  whether  his  oxen  and  fatlings  were 
wasted  or  not.  He  had  said  it  to  his  conscience  very  often,  till  he 
half  believed  it — "I  cannot  come,  and  there  is  no  disputing  it."  I 
have  no  doubt  that  many,  who  have  never  come  to  Christ,  have  made 
themselves  content  to  be  without  him  by  the  belief  that  they  cannot 
come.  Although  the  impossibility,  if  it  did  exist,  would  involve  the 
greatest  of  all  calamities,  yet  they  speak  of  it  with  very  little  concern. 
Practically,  they  say,  "  I  cannot  be  saved.  I  must  remain  an  unbe 
liever."  What  an  awful  thing  for  any  mortal  to  say  !  Yet  you  have 
said  it  till  you  almost  believe  it ;  and  you  wish  us  now  to  leave  you 
quite  alone  for  this  dreadful  reason.  You  do  not  want  to  be  troubled 
to-night.  The  text  already  begins  to  startle  you  a  little,  and  you  do 
not  like  it.  You  are  almost  sorry  that  you  are  here.  If  the  Lord 
helps  me,  I  will  trouble  you  far  more  before  you  get  out  of  this  place : 
I  have  heavy  tidings  from  the  Lord  for  you.  I  shall  endeavour,  if  I 
can,  to  pull  away  those. downy  pillows  from  your  sleepy  head,  and 
wake  you  up  to  immediate  anxiety,  lest  you  perish  in  your  sins.  With 
kindly  importunity  I  would  plead  with  you  and  try  to  show  you  that 
this  little  speech  of  yours,  "  1 cannot  come"  is  a  wretched  speech.  You 
must  throw  it  to  the  winds,  and  prove  that  you  can  come  by  coming  at 
once,  and  receiving  of  the  great  feast  of  love,  and  honouring  him  that 
spreads  it  for  hungry  souls. 

Two  or  three  things  I  would  like  to  say  about  this  case,  for  it  is 
very  serious.  It  was  bad  enough  for  this  man  to  say,  "  I  cannot  come," 
but  it  is  far  worse  for  you  to  say,  "I  cannot  come  to  Christ." 
Remember,  if  the  invited  guests  did  not  come,  and  come  at  once, 
they  could  never  come,  for  there  was  only  that  one  supper,  and  not  a 
series  of  banquets.  The  great  man  who  made  the  feast  did  not 
intend  to  prepare  another.  A  very  grave  offence  would  be  committed 
by  their  not  coming  to  the  one  supper.  My  dear  hearers,  there  is 
only  one  time  of  grace  for  you,  and  if  that  be  ended,  you  will  not  have 
a  second  opportunity.  There  is  only  one  Christ  Jesus ;  there  is  no 
more  sacrifice  for  sin.  There  is  only  one  way  of  eternal  love  and 
mercy ;  do  not  forsake  it.  I  pray  you,  do  not  turn  away  from  the 
one  door  of  life,  the  one  way  of  salvation.  If  it  is  slighted  now,  and 
the  feast  is  over,  as  it  will  be  when  you  die,  then  you  have  lost  the 
great  privilege,  and  you  have  been  guilty  of  a  gross  neglect,  from  the 
consequences  of  which  you  never  will  be  able  to  escape.  Note  this, 
and  beware. 

Besides,  it  is  not  merely  a  supper  that  you  will  lose  when  you  say, 
"I  cannot  come."  To  lose  a  supper  would  be  little,  and  might 
soon  be  set  right  when  breakfast-time  came  round.  But  you  lose 
eternal  life,  and  that  lost  in  time  can  never  be  found  in  eternity. 
You  lose  the  pardon  of  sin,  reconciliation  to  God,  adoption  into  the 
family  of  love — these  are  heavy  losses.  You  lose  the  joy  of  faith  for 
life,  and  you  lose  comfort  in  death — who  can  estimate  this  damage  ? 
Lose  not  your  immortal  soul !  Oh,  lose  not  that  !  For  if  you  gain 


16  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  whole  world,  it  will  not  recompense  you  for  such  a  loss.  Lose  whal 
you  will,  but  lose  not  your  soul,  I  pray  you !  Seek  that  salvation 
without  which  it  had  been  better  for  you  that  you  had  never  been 
born. 

Besides,  once  more,  if  you  do  not  come  to  Christ,  it  will  imply  the 
greatest  insult  that  you  can  put  upon  your  Maker.  You  have  already 
grieved  him  by  breaking  his  laws ;  but  what  will  be  his  indignation 
when  you  refuse  his  mercy  ?  when  you  turn  your  back  on  his  Son  ? 
when  you  refuse  not  only  your  God,  but  your  crucified  Saviour, 
hanging  there  with  outstretched  arms,  bleeding  his  life  away,  that  he 
may  save  you  ?  Do  not  turn  your  back  on  your  own  redemption.  No 
blood  was  ever  sprinkled  on  the  threshold  of  an  Israelite's  house ;  for 
he  must  not  trample  on  it :  that  would  be  ruinous  indeed.  The  blood 
was  on  the  lintel  and  on  the  two  side-posts,  but  never  under  foot. 
Trample  not  upon  the  blood  of  Christ;  but  you  will  do  so  if  you 
refuse  his  great  salvation.  If  you  will  not  come  to  him  to  be  saved, 
you  have  as  good  as  said  that  you  will  be  damned  rather  than  be 
loved  by  God — that  you  will  be  damned  rather  than  be  saved  through 
Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  It  will  prove  a  costly  insult  to  you,  as  well  as 
a  grievous  affront  to  your  Lord. 

Having  said  so  much  by  way  of  preface,  I  am  now  going  to  take 
these  words,  li  I  cannot  come,"  and  handle  them  a  little  with  the  hope 
that  you  may  grow  ashamed  of  them. 

I.  First,  this  man  declared,  "  I  cannot  come,"  because  he  said,  "  I 
HAVE  MARRIED  A  WIFE."  He  had  promised  to  come  to  the  supper,  and 
he  was  bound  to  fulfil  his  promise.  Why  did  he  want  to  get  married 
just  then  ?  Surely,  he  had  not  been  compelled  to  marry  all  in  a  hurry, 
so  that  he  could  not  keep  engagements  already  made.  He  was  bound 
to  keep  his  promise  to  the  maker  of  the  feast ;  and  that  promise  was 
claimed  of  him  by  the  messenger.  He  could  not  say  that  his  wife 
would  not  let  him  come.  Such  a  declaration  might  be  true  in  England ; 
but  in  the  East  the  men  are  always  masters  of  the  situation,  and  women 
seldom  bear  rule  in  the  family.  No  Oriental  would  say  that  his  wife 
would  not  let  him  come.  Nor  in  these  Western  regions,  where  the 
woman  more  nearly  gains  her  rights,  can  any  man  truthfully  say  that 
his  wife  will  not  allow  him  to  be  a  Christian.  I  do  not  believe  that 
any  of  you  will  be  able  to  say,  when  you  come  to  die,  that  your  wife 
was  responsible  for  your  not  being  a  Christian.  Most  men  would  be 
angry  if  we  told  them  that  they  were  hen-pecked,  and  could  not  call 
their  souls  their  own.  He  must  be  a  fool,  indeed,  who  would  let  a 
woman  lead  him  down  to  hell  against  his  will.  The  fact  is,  a  man  is 
a  mean  creature  when  he  tries  to  throw  the  blame  of  his  sin  upon  his 
wife.  I  know  that  Father  Adam  set  us  a  bad  example  in  that  respect ; 
but  the  fact  that  this  was  a  part  of  the  sin  which  caused  the  ruin  of 
our  race  should  act  as  a  beacon  to  us.  You  certainly,  as  a  man,  ought 
not  to  demean  yourself  so  much  as  to  say,  "  I  cannot  come,  for  my  wife 
will  not  let  me."  If  one  of  you,  however,  continues  to  whine  "  My 
wife  is  my  ruin.  I  am  unable  to  be  a  Christian  because  of  my  wife," 
I  must  ask  you  a  question  or  two  before  I  believe  your  pitiable  story. 
Do  you  let  her  rule  you  in  everything  else  ?  Does  she  keep  you  at 
home  of  an  evening  ?  Does  she  pick  all  your  companions  for  you  ? 


A    STRAIGHT    TALK.  17 

Why,  my  dear  man,  if  I  am  not  much  mistaken,  you  are  a  self-willed, 
cross-grained,  pig-headed  animal  about  everything  else;  and  then, 
when  it  comes  to  the  matter  of  religion,  you  turn  round,  and  whine 
about  being  governed  by  your  wife  !  I  have  no  patience  with  you.  It 
is  more  than  probable  that  the  very  best  thing  that  could  happen  to 
you  would  be  to  have  your  wife  on  the  throne  for  the  next  few  years. 
Upon  such  a  solemn  matter  as  this  do  not  talk  nonsense.  You  know 
that  the  blame  lies  with  yourself  alone  :  if  you  wished  to  seek  the  best 
things,  the  little  woman  at  home  would  be  no  hindrance  to  you. 

This  man  said,  "  1  cannot  come"     Why?     Because  he  had  a  wife! 
Strange  plea !  for  surely  that  was  a  reason  why  he  should  come,   and 
bring  her  with  him.    If  any  man,  unhappily,  has  a  wife  opposed  to  the 
things  of  God,   instead  of  saying,   * '  I  cannot  be  a  Christian,  for  I 
have  an  unconverted  wife,"  he  should  seek  for  double  grace  that  he 
may  win  his  wife  to  Christ.     If  a  woman  laments  that  she  has  an  un 
converted  husband,  let  her  live  the  nearer  to  God  that  she  may  save 
her  husband.     If  a  servant  has  an  unconverted  master,  let  him  labour 
with  double  diligence  to  glorify  God,  that  he  may  win  his  master.   Thus 
you   see  there  are  two  reasons  why  you  should  come  to  the  gospel 
banquet ;  not  only  for  your  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  your  uncon 
verted  relatives.     My  neighbour's  candle  is  blown  out ;  and  is  that  a 
reason  why  I  must  not  light  mine  ?     No,  but  that  is  a  reason  why  I 
should  be  all  the  more  careful  to  keep  mine  burning,  that  I  may  light 
my  neighbour's  candle  too.     It  is  a  pity  that  my  wife  should  be  lost, 
but  I  cannot  help  her  by  being  lost  myself.     Nay ;  but  I  may  help  her 
if  I  take  my  stand,  and  follow  Christ  the  more  resolutely  because  my 
wife  opposes  me.     Good  man,  do  not  allow  your  wife  to  draw  you 
aside !     Good  woman,  do  not  let  your  husband  hinder  you !     Do  not 
say,  "I  cannot  attend  the  house  of  God,  nor  be  a  Christian  while  I 
have  such  a  husband  as  I  have."     Nay,  that  is  the  reason  why  you 
should  take  }rour  stand  the  more  bravely  in  the  name  of  God  that,  by 
your  example,  those  whom  you  love  may  be  rescued  from  destruction. 
How  knowest  thou,  0  wife,  but  that  thou  mayest  save  thy  unbelieving 
husband  ?     How  knowest,  thou,  0  servant,  but  that  thou  mayest  save 
thy  unbelieving  master  ?     I  remember  hearing  Mr.  Jay  tell  a  story 
about  a  Nonconformist   servant-girl,  who   went  to  live  in  a  family 
of  worldly  people  who  attended  the  Church  of  England,  although  they 
were  not  real  believers.     They  were  outside  buttresses  of  the  church, 
and  they  had  very  little  to  do  with  the  inside  of  it ;   and  outsiders  are 
generally  the  most  bigoted.     They  were  very  angry  with  their  servant 
for  going  to  the  little  meeting-house,  and  threatened  to  discharge  her 
if  she  went  again.     But  she  went  all  the  same,  and  very  kindly  but 
firmly  assured  them  that  she  must  continue  to  do  so.     At  last  she 
received  notice  to  go  :  they  could  not,  as  good  Church-people,  have  a 
Dissenter  living  with  them.     She  took  their  rough  dismission  very 
patiently ;    and  it  came  to  pass  that,  the  day  before  she  was  to  leave 
her  situation,  a  conversation  took  place  somewhat  of  this  sort.     The 
master  said,  "  It  is  a  pity,  after  all,  that  Jane  should  go.     We  never 
had    such    a    good    girl.      She   is   very    industrious,    truthful,    and 
attentive."     The  wife  said,  "  Well,  I  have  thought  that  it  is  hardly 
the  thing  to  send  her  away  for  going  to  her  chapel.  You  always  speak 


18  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

up  for  religious  liberty,  and  it  does  not  look  quite  like  religious  liberty 
to  turn  our  girl  away  for  worshipping  God  according  to  her  conscience. 
I  ain  sure  she  is  a  deal  more  careful  about  her  religion  than  we  are 
about  ours."  So  they  talked  it  over,  and  they  said,  "  She  has  never 
answered  us  pertly,  nor  found  fault  with  us  about  our  going  to  church. 
Her  religion  is  a  greater  comfort  to  her  than  ours  is  to  us.  We  had 
better  let  her  stay  with  us,  and  go  where  she  likes."  "  Yes,"  said  the 
husband,  "  and  I  think  we  had  better  go  and  hear  the  minister  that 
she  goes  to  hear.  Evidently  she  has  got  something  that  we  have  not 
got.  Instead  of  sending  her  away  for  going  to  chapel,  we  will  go  with 
her  next  Sunday,  and  judge  the  matter  for  ourselves."  And  they  did, 
and  the  master  and  mistress  were  not  long  before  they  were  members 
of  that  same  church.  Do  not  say,  therefore,  "  I  cannot  come,  because 
my  master  and  mistress  object  to  it."  Do  not  make  idle  excuses  out 
of  painful  facts  which  are  reasons  why  you  should  be  more  determined 
than  ever,  even  if  you  have  to  go  to  heaven  alone,  that  you  will  be  a 
follower  of  Christ.  Keep  to  your  resolve,  and  you  may  entertain  the 
hope  and  belief  that  you  will  lead  others  to  the  Saviour's  feet. 

II.  A  second  reason  is  even  more  common.  It  is  not  everybody 
who  can  say,  "  I  have  married  a  wife  "  ;  but  everywhere  you  can  meet 
with  a  person  who  pleads,  "I  HAVE  NO  TIME."  You  say,  "Sir,  I 
cannot  attend  to  religion,  for  I  have  no  time."  I  remember  hearing 
an  old  lady  say  to  a  man  who  said  that  he  had  no  time,  "Well,  you 
have  got  all  the  time  there  is."  I  thought  that  it  was  a  very  conclu 
sive  answer.  You  have  had  the  time,  and  you  still  have  all  the  time 
there  is — why  do  you  not  use  it  ?  Nobody  has  more  than  twenty-four 
hours  in  a  day,  and  you  have  no  less.  You  have  no  time  ?  That  is 
very  singular  !  What  have  you  done  with  it ;  you  certainly  have  had 
it  ?  Time  flies  with  you,  I  know,  but  so  it  does  with  me,  and  with 
everybody.  What  do  you  do  with  it?  "Oh,  I  have  no  time,"  says 
one.  I  say  again,  you  have  had  the  time,  and  that  time  was  due,  in 
part,  to  a  solemn  consideration  of  the  things  of  Q-od.  You  have 
robbed  God  of  that  part  of  time  which  was  due  to  him,  and  you  have 
given  up  to  some  inferior  thing  what  your  great  Lord  and  Master 
could  rightly  claim  for  the  highest  purposes. 

You  have  time  enough  for  common  things.  See  here,  I  never  meet 
any  of  you,  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  in  the  street  in  your  shirt-sleeves. 
I  do  not  find  you  going  up  and  down  Cheapside  half -dressed.  "  Oh, 
no,  of  course,  we  have  time  to  put  on  our  clothes."  You  have  time 
to  dress  your  bodies,  and  no  time  to  dress  your  souls  with  the  robe  of 
Christ's  righteousness  ?  Do  not  tell  me  that !  I  do  not  meet  any  one  of 
our  friends  saying,  towards  evening,  "  I  am  ready  to  faint,  for  I  have 
had  nothing  to  eat  since  I  got  up.  I  have  had  no  time  to  get  a  morsel 
of  meat."  No,  no,  they  have  had  their  breakfast,  and  they  have  had 
their  dinner,  and  so  on.  "Oh,  yes,  we  have  time  to  eat,"  says  one. 
Do  you  tell  me  that  you  have  time  to  feed  your  bodies,  and  that  God 
has  not  given  you  time  in  which  to  feed  your  souls.  Why,  it  is  not 
common-sense !  Such  statements  will  not  hold  water  for  a  moment. 
You  must  have  time  to  feed  your  souls  in,  if  you  have  time  to  feed 
your  bodies  in.  People  find  time  to  look  in  the  glass,  and  wash  their 
faces,  and  brush  their  hair.  Have  you  no  time  whatever  to  look  at 


A    STRAIGHT   TALK.  19 

yourself,  to  see  your  spiritual  spots,  and  to  wash  in  the  fountain  that 
is  open  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  ?  0  dear  sirs,  you  have  time  for 
common  things,  and  you  must  certainly  have  time  for  those  much 
more  serious  and  important  matters  which  concern  your  souls  and 
immortality ! 

You  have  no  time  ?  How  is  this,  when  you  waste  a  good  deal  ? 
How  much  do  many  of  us  spend  in  silly  talk  ?  How  much  time  do 
certain  persons  spend  in  frivolous  amusements  ?  I  have  heard  people 
say  that  they  have  no  time,  when  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know  what  they 
<ian  have  to  occupy  them.  Are  there  not  many  people  about  who, 
if  they  were  tied  in  a  knot,  and  thrown  into  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  would 
be  missed  by  nobody  ;  for  they  do  no  good  to  any  mortal  being  ?  They 
are  living  without  an  object — purposeless,  aimless  lives;  and  yet  they 
talk  about  not  having  time  !  Such  pretences  will  not  do.  When  you 
plead  with  God,  say  something  that  looks  like  common-sense. 

You  have  no  time,  and  yet  you  undertake  more  secular  work.  You 
keep  a  shop,  do  you  not?  "Yes,  I  have  a  large  shop."  You  are 
going  to  enlarge  it,  are  you  not  ?  Will  you  have  time,  do  you  think, 
to  attend  to  it  when  the  business  grows?  "  Oh,  yes,  I  dare  say  that 
I  shall  find  time  :  at  any  rate,  I  must  make  time,  somehow  or  other." 
You  are  going  to  take  a  second  shop,  are  you  not  ?  How  will  you 
manage  it  ?  "  Oh,  I  shall  find  time."  Yes,  my  dear  sirs,  you  can  find 
time  for  all  those  enlargements,  and  speculations,  and  engagements ; 
let  me  be  plain  with  you,  and  say  that  you  could  find  time  for  thought 
about  your  soul  if  you  had  a  mind  to  do  so.  To  plead  that  you  have 
no  time  for  religion  is  a  fraud.  It  will  not  do !  It  is  lying  unto  God 
to  say  that  you  have  no  time.  When  a  man  wants  to  do  a  thing,  if 
he  has  no  time,  he  makes  time.  I  beg  the  idle  man  not  to  go  on  to 
deceive  himself  with  the  notion  that  he  has  no  time.  "Where 
there's  a  will  there's  a  way."  Where  there  is  a  heart  to  religion 
there  is  plenty  of  time  for  it.  Blame  your  unwilling  minds,  and  not 
your  scanty  hours.  You  will  have  time  enough  when  your  hearts  are 
once  turned  in  the  right  direction. 

Besides,  time  is  not  the  great  matter.  Did  the  Lord  demand  of  you 
a  month's  retirement  from  business  ?  Did  we  command  you  to  spend 
two  days  in  a  week  in  prayer?  Did  we  tell  you  that  you  could 
not  be  saved  unless  you  shut  yourself  up  an  hour  every  morning  for 
meditation  ?  I  would  to  God  you  could  have  an  hour  for  meditation ! 
but,  if  you  cannot,  who  has  demanded  it  of  you?  The  command 
is  that  you  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  forsake  your  sin ; 
and  this  is  a  matter  which  will  not  interfere  with  your  daily  work. 
A  man  can  turn  the  potter's  wheel,  and  pray.  A  man  can  lay  bricks, 
and  pray.  A  man  can  drive  the  plane,  and  pray.  A  man  can  walk 
behind  a  plough,  and  yet  he  can  be  walking  with  God.  A  woman 
can  scrub  a  floor,  and  commune  with  God.  A  man  can  be  riding  on 
horseback,  and  yet  he  can  still  be  in  communion  with  the  Most  High. 
A  woman  can  be  making  the  beds,  and  growing  in  grace.  It  is  not 
a  matter  in  which  time  comes  in  so  much  as  to  interfere  with  any  of 
the  ordinary  duties  of  life.  Therefore  throw  away  that  excuse,  and 
do  not  say  any  longer,  "  I  cannot  come  because  I  have  no  time." 
At  once  repent  of  sin,  and  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  then  all 


20  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

your  time  will  be  free  for  the  service  of  the  Lord,  and  yet  you  will 
have  not  a  moment  the  less  for  the  needful  duties  of  your  calling. 
III.     There  is  a  third  form  of  this  excuse,  and  a  very  common  one  I 

"I  HAVE  MORE   IMPORTANT    THINGS   TO   DO."       NOW,  COme  !       I  Will  have 

you  by  the  throat  over  that.  I  shall  contradict  you  flatly.  You 
have  nothing  more  important  to  do.  That  would  be  utterly  impossible. 
Nothing  under  heaven  can  be  of  one-hundredth  part  of  the  import* 
ance  of  your  being  reconciled  to  God,  and  saved  through  Jesus  Christ. 
What  is  that  more  important  business  ?  To  make  money  ?  Where 
is  the  importance  of  that  ?  You  may  get  a  pile  of  it,  and  the  net 
result  will  be  greater  care,  and  the  more  to  leave  when  you  die. 
But  you  tell  me  you  must  have  an  opportunity  for  study.  Well,  that 
is  better ;  but  what  are  you  going  to  study  ?  Science  ?  Art  ? 
Politics  ?  Are  these  important  as  compared  with  the  saving  of  your 
soul  ?  Why,  if  you  have  an  educated  mind,  and  it  is  lost,  it  will  be- 
as  bad  to  lose  it  in  culture  and  learning  as  to  lose  it  in  ignorance. 
Your  first  duty  is  to  be  right  with  your  God,  who  made  you.  Put 
nothing  before  your  God.  Has  Christ  redeemed  you  ?  Eest  not  till 
you  know  the  truth  of  that  redemption  by  being  reconciled  to  God- 
through  the  death  of  his  Son.  Nothing  can  be  so  important  to  a 
man  as  to  be  obedient  to  his  Maker,  and  enjoy  his  Maker's  love. 
Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  so  important  to  a  man  as  to  be  pardoned 
through  the  Saviour,  and  changed  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
from  an  enemy  of  God  into  a  friend  of  God. 

"Oh !  "  say  you,  "  but  my  business  occupies  so  much  of  my  time." 
Yes ;  but  do  you  not  know  that  very  likely  your  business  would  go  on 
better  if  you  were  right  with  God  ?  Many  a  time  a  business  goes* 
wrong  because  the  man  is  wrong  ;  and  sometimes  it  is  even  incumbent 
upon  God  to  be  at  cross-purposes  with  a  man  because  a  man  is  at  cross- 
purposes  with  him.  If  you  walk  frowardly  towards  him,  he  will  walk 
frowardly  towards  you ;  but  when  you  are  obedient  to  him,  he  can 
make  other  things  subservient  to  you.  In  a  little  church  on  the- 
Italian  mountains  I  saw,  amongst  many  absurd  daubings,  one  picture 
which  struck  me.  There  was  a  ploughman  who  had  turned  aside  at  a 
certain  hour  to  pray.  The  rustic  artist  drew  him  upon  his  knees 
before  the  opened  heavens ;  and,  lest  there  should  be  any  waste  of 
time  occasioned  by  his  devotion,  an  angel  was  going  on  with  the 
ploughing  for  him.  I  like  the  idea.  I  do  not  think  an  angel  ever 
did  go  on  with  a  man's  ploughing  while  he  was  praying,  but  I  think 
that  the  same  result  often  comes  to  pass,  and  that  when  we  give 
our  hearts  to  God,  and  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his 
righteousness,  all  these  things  are  added  unto  us.  If  religion  does 
not  make  you  richer,  which  it  may  not  do,  it  will  make  you  more  con 
tented  with  what  you  have.  The  blessing  of  God,  with  a  dinner  oi 
herbs,  will  make  it  better  than  a  stalled  ox  without  that  benediction. 
He  that  would  make  the  best  of  this  world,  and  have  the  greatest 
enjoyment  here  of  the  truest  and  best  kind,  will  do  well  to  give 
his  first  attention  to  his  Saviour,  and  his  whole  heart  to  faith  in 
him,  and  diligence  in  his  service.  You  have  no  more  important 
business,  I  am  <^uite  sure,  than  the  business  which  concerns  God  and 
eternity. 


A    STRAIGHT    TALK.  21 

IV.  I  have  heard  some  use  the  excuse  "  I  CANNOT  AFFORD  TO  BE 
A  CHRISTIAN."  "Well,  my  friend,  let  us  have  a  talk  about  that.  Cost 
you  more  than  you  can  afford  ?  What  do  you  mean  ?  What  cost  ? 
Cost  you  money?  It  need  not.  It  will  cost  you  no  more  than  you 
like  to  spend  upon  it  with  a  glad  heart.  God  will  give  you  a  generous 
spirit,  which  will  make  you  love  to  support  his  cause,  and  to  help  the 
poor,  and  contribute  your  share  to  all  Christian  mission  work.  But  in 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  there  is  no  taxation.  Giving  becomes  a  gratifi 
cation,  liberality  a  luxury.  Nothing  will  be  dragged  from  you  by  force. 
Surely,  our  God  abhors  money  that  comes  into  his  exchequer  by  any 
thing  but  the  freewill  offerings  of  loving  hearts.  It  will  not  cost  you 
much  in  that  way,  I  am  sure,  for  you  are  only  to  give  as  God  has 
prospered  you. 

Suppose  man  should  say,  "  Well,  I  must  take  a  seat  in  the  chapel 
if  I  would  comfortably  hear  the  gospel."  Very  well.  Will  it  be 
unjust  that  you  bear  your  proportion  of  necessary  expenses  in 
supporting  the  man  who  gives  all  his  time,  thought,  and  ability  to 
you  ?  Will  you  pay  as  much  in  a  year  to  hear  the  gospel  as  many  pay 
for  one  night  at  the  play  ?  Ay,  and  do  not  many  at  a  horse-race  spend 
a  hundred  times  more  than  they  ever  gave  throughout  their  whole 
existence  either  to  the  poor  or  to  the  church  of  God?  What  you 
will  save  by  holy,  gracious,  thrifty  habits,  will  render  this  no  loss  to 
you,  but  a  gain. 

"  Oh,  but  I  meant  that  I  could  not  afford  it,  for  I  should  have  to 
lose  several  friends."  Is  that  friend  worth  keeping  who  is  an  enemy 
to  God  ?  The  woman  who  would  lead  you  away  from  God,  or  the  man 
who  would  keep  you  out  of  heaven — are  friends  of  that  sort  worth 
having  ?  Be  brave,  and  end  a  connection  which  will  otherwise 
endlessly  connect  you  with  the  bottomless  pit. 

"  Oh,"  says  one,  "  but  I  mean  that  I  should  lose  so  much  in  trade." 
Ah,  well !  I  will  not  ask  you  to  explain  what  you  mean  by  that ;  for 
there  is  an  ugly  look  about  that  statement.  You  know  more  about 
your  trade  than  I  do.  No  doubt  there  are  trades  which  pander  to  the 
vices  of  men,  and  become  all  the  more  profitable  in  proportion  to  the 
growth  of  drunkenness  and  impurity.  These  must  be  given  up. 
Moreover,  there  are  traders  who  live  by  puffery,  and  lying,  and 
cheating  ;  and  I  do  not  recommend  you  to  profess  to  be  a  Christian  if 
that  is  your  line  of  things.  It  is  better  to  give  up  all  profession  of 
religion  when  you  go  in  for  unrighteous  gain.  What  ?  Did  I  hear 
a  hint  about  adulteration  ?  Did  I  also  hear  that  you  do  not  give 
full  weight  and  true  measure  ?  Ah,  my  dear  fellow !  give  up  that 
game  at  once,  whether  you  become  a  Christian  or  not ;  but  certainly, 
if  that  is  what  you  mean,  the  loss  of  dishonest  profits  will  be  a  great 
gain  to  you,  both  for  this  life  and  the  next. 

"Well,"  says  one,  "I  should  have  to  give  up  a  good  many  plea* 
sures."  Pleasures  which  block  the  road  to  heaven  ought  to  be  given 
up  at  once.  You  may  think  me  a  very  melancholy  sort  of  person ; 
but  I  fancy  that  I  am  about  as  happy  as  any  man  in  England.  I 
appreciate  a  merry  thought  and  a  cheerful  speech  as  much  as  anybody. 
I  can  laugh,  and  I  can  enjoy  good,  clean,  humorous  remarks  as  well 
as  moat  people ;  and,  having  now  served  the  Lord  for  nearly  forty 


22  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

years,  I  bear  my  witness  that  I  have  never  had  to  relinquish  a  single 
pleasure  for  which  I  have  felt  a  deliberate  desire.  As  soon  as  you 
are  renewed  in  heart,  you  are  changed  in  your  pleasures ;  and  that 
which  might  have  been  a  pleasure  once  to  you  would  then  be  a  misery. 
If  I  had  to  sit  in  some  people's  company,  and  hear  what  some 
people  talk  about,  it  would  be  hell  to  me.  One  night,  having  to 
preach  up  in  the  North  of  England,  this  unfortunate  circumstance 
occurred  to  me.  When  I  got  down  to  the  railway,  I  was  put  into  a 
first-class  carriage  with  five  racing  gentlemen,  who  were  going  to 
Doncaster  races.  Happily  they  did  not  know  me,  but  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  the  conversation  of  these  gentlemen  was  garnished 
with  expressions  which  tortured  me,  and  at  last  they  fell  upon  a  subject 
which  was  unutterably  loathsome.  I  pray  Grod  that  I  may  not  be 
condemned  to  dwell  with  such  people  for  ever,  for  it  would  be  hell  to 
me.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  need  not  think  that  I  rob  myself  of 
any  pleasure  when  I  do  not  go  to  race-courses,  or  associate  with  the 
licentious.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  keep  far  off  from  the  pleasures  of 
those  men  of  pleasure,  in  whose  company  I  was  forced  to  spend  that 
evening.  The  pleasures  of  this  world  are  so  full  of  dust,  dirt,  and 
.grit,  that  he  who  has  once  washed  his  mouth  clean  of  them,  declines 
another  meal  of  such  draff.  You  will  lose  no  pleasure  if  you  come  to 
Christ. 

V.  I  hear  one  other  person  say,  "  I  cannot  come."  Why  not  ? 
"  Well,  sir,  I  do  not  mean  that  I  shall  not  come  one  of  these  days ; 
but  IT  WOULD  NOT  BE  CONVENIENT  JUST  NOW.  I  could  not  yield  my 
heart  to  the  Lord  to-night."  No.  I  know.  You  have  an  engage 
ment  to-morrow  which  must  be  attended  to,  but  it  would  not  be  quite 
the  thing  for  a  Christian.  Just  so.  It  would  not  be  convenient  to 
night,  nor  on  Monday,  nor  will  it  be  on  Tuesday,  depend  upon  it. 
Your  anxious  thoughts  will  have  gone  by  then.  It  will  not  be  con 
venient  to  be  saved  !  You  want  to  see  a  little  "life,"  do  you  not? 
"Life"  in  London  means  death.  "  Oh,  but  just  now  I  am  only  an 
apprentice!"  Then  at  once  be  bound  apprentice  to  Christ.  "  But  I 
^m  a  journeyman.  When  I  get  a  little  business  of  my  own,  then  will 
be  the  time."  Will  it  ?  Oh,  that  you  would  become  a  journeyman  to 
Christ!  "But  I  have  associations  just  now  that  render  it  difficult." 
That  is  to  say,  Grod  must  wait  your  convenience.  Is  that  the  way  the 
poor  treat  the  doctors  who  receive  patients  gratis?  Do  they  say, 
"  Doctor,  it  is  not  convenient  for  me  to  call  upon  you  before  ten  or 
eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning.  It  is  not  convenient  for  me  to  come 
to  your  house.  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you  if  you  come  to  my  house 
about  half -past  eleven  in  the  evening."  Would  you  send  a  message 
to  a  physician  in  the  West  End,  that  you  will  be  pleased  for  him  to 
attend  to  you  for  nothing  if  he  will  come  at  your  time  ?  "  Oh,"  say 
you, ' '  I  should  not  think  of  insulting  a  doctor  like  that,  if  he  is  kind 
enough  to  attend  to  me  for  nothing."  And  yet  you  will  insult  your 
God  !  You  mean  that  Grod  is  not  worthy  of  your  strength  and  health  • 
but  when  you  aro  old,  and  worn  out,  then  you  mean  to  sneak  into 
heaven,  and  cheat  the  devil.  It  is  dirt  mean  of  you !  I  can  say  no 
better.  Though  the  Lord  is  exceedingly  gracious  and  merciful,  yet, 
when  men  make  up  their  minds  to  it  that  they  will  only  give  him 


A    STRAIGHT    TALK.  23 

the  fag-end  of  life,  it  is  small  wonder  that  they  die  in  their  sins.  What 
tnust  God  think  of  such  treatment ?  Do  not  say,  "I  cannot  coine." 
•Come  at  once.  The  Lord  help  you  to  come ! 

VI.  I  have  heard  people  say,  "I  cannot  come,  sir,  for  I  CANNOT 
UNDERSTAND  IT.  I  am  a  poor  man,  I  never  had  any  education." 
What  is  it  that  you  cannot  understand?  Can  you  not  understand 
that  you  have  broken  God's  law,  and  that  the  just  God  must  punish 
you  for  it  ?  You  can  understand  that.  Can  you  not  understand  that, 
if  you  trust  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  then  it  is  certain  that  he  took  your 
•sin,  and  bore  it  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  and  put  your  sin  away, 
for  his  name  is  the  "  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world  "  ?  Can  you  not  understand  that,  if  you  trust  in  him,  you  have 
him  to  stand  in  your  room,  and  place,  and  stead ;  for  the  Scripture  says, 
41  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might 
be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  You  can  understand  it, 
if  3rou  wish  to  do  so.  There  is  nothing  in  the  gospel  which  the  poorest 
and  the  least  educated  cannot  understand  if  their  minds  be  made 
willing  to  know  and  receive  the  truth.  If  the  Spirit  of  God  will  come 
upon  them,  they  can  not  only  understand  the  gospel,  but  grasp  it,  and 
enjoy  it,  and  begin  to  teach  it  to  others,  too ;  for  the  Lord  makes  the 
babes  to  have  knowledge  and  discretion  in  his  ways,  while  the  wise  and 
learned  in  scientific  matters  often  miss  the  way  to  the  eternal  kingdom. 

I  have  done.  The  sound  of  the  bell  tells  me  that  my  time  has  fled. 
Another  bell  will  one  day  warn  you  that  you  have  done,  and  that 
your  life  is  over,  even  as  my  sermon  is  over.  But  I  wanted  just  to 
say  this.  If  there  is  any  man  here  who  says,  "  I  cannot  come,"  I 
beg  him  to  express  himself  properly,  and  speak  out  the  sad  fact  as  it 
ought  to  be  spoken.  Here  is  the  style  :  "  Unhappy  wretch,  I  cannot 
come  to  Christ !  Millions  in  heaven  have  come,  but  I  cannot  come. 
My  mother  died  in  a  good  hope ;  but,  '  Mother,  I  cannot  come.' 
My  father  has  gone  home  to  be  with  Jesus;  but  I  cannot  come.'1 
I  thank  God  that  this  statement  is  not  true ;  but  if  you  say  it,  and 
believe  it,  you  ought  never  to  rest  any  more  ;  for  if  you  cannot  come 
to  Christ,  you  are  the  unhappiest  person  in  the  world.  Is  there 
any  woman  that  cries,  "I  cannot  come,"  or  any  man  that  pleads, 
"I  cannot  come"?  Wherever  you  are  sitting  or  standing,  let  the 
bell  that  told  out  the  death  of  the  last  hour,  warn  you  of  your 
spiritual  death ;  for  if  you  cannot  come  to  Christ,  and  eat  of  his 
supper,  you  cannot  be  saved.  You  cannot  escape  from  the  wrath  to 
come  :  you  are  doomed  for  ever. 

May  I  ask  you  to  do  another  thing  ?  If  you  still  intend  to  say,  "  I 
cannot  come,"  will  you  speak  the  truth  now  ?  Will  you  alter  a  word, 
and  get  nearer  the  truth?  Say,  "I  will  not  come."  "I  cannot 
come,"  is  Greek,  or  double  Dutch;  but  the  plain  English  is,  "I  WILL 
NOT  COME."  I  wish  you  would  say  thai  rather  than  the  other,  because 
the  recoil  of  saying,  "  I  will  not  come  :  I  will  not  believe  in  Jesus  : 
I  will  not  repent  of  sin  :  I  will  not  turn  from  my  wicked  ways  " 
—the  recoil,  I  say,  from  that  might  be  blessed  by  God  to  you  to  make 
you  see  your  desperate  state.  I  wish  you  would  then  cry,  "I  cannot 
sit  down,  and  make  uiy  own  damnation  sure  by  saying  that  I  will  not 
come  to  Christ." 


24  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

"Will  you  now,  instead  of  refusing  to  come,  resolve  to  come  at  once  f 
Say,  "  I  will  come  to  Jesus.  Tell  me  how."  You  can  only  come  to 
Christ  by  trusting  him.  Trust  yourself  with  him,  and  he  will  save 
you.  Never  did  anyone  trust  Jesus  in  vain.  Trust  has  a  powerful 
influence  over  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  comes  to  the  rescue  of  a  soul  that 
leans  wholly  upon  him.  He  will  do  all  things  for  you :  he  will  change 
your  nature  as  well  as  forgive  your  sin;  and  your  nature  being 
changed,  you  shall  lead  a  new  life  from  this  time  forth,  and  grow  in 
grace  until  you  become  like  him  in  whom  you  trust ;  and  then  he  will 
take  you  to  be  for  ever  with  him.  Washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
you  shall  walk  with  him  in  white  amidst  the  glorified. 

Thus  I  have  talked  to-night  in  a  very  homely  way.  I  pray  the 
Lord  to  bless  words  which  are  intended  to  be  faithful,  plain,  and 
impressive.  May  we  meet  in  heaven  !  There  are  very  many  strangers 
here  to-night ;  may  you  not  be  strangers  to  the  Lord  Jesus  !  Many 
of  our  friends  are  away,  and  some  of  you  have  come  out  although 
it  is  a  nasty  wet  evening :  I  take  this  as  a  token  for  good.  God  bless 
you !  I  pray  that  you  may  get  the  double  blessing,  and  may  remember 
this  gloomy,  dark,  Decembery  evening  in  May  by  the  blessing  that 
God  shall  put  upon  you  through  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  xiv. 


FROM  " OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 504,  560,  550 


Clje  |(efo  lark  Street 


•'COMPEL  THEM  TO  COME   IN." 

a  J&ermott 

DELIVERED  ON  SABBATH  MORNING,  DECEMBER  5xn,  1858,  BY  THH 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    MUSIC   HALL,    ROYAL   SURREY    GARDENS. 

"Compel  them  to  come  in." — Luke  xir.  23. 

I  FEEL  in  such  a  haste  to  go  out  and  obey  this  commandment  this  morning,  by 
compelling  those  to  come  in  who  are  now  tarrying  in  the  highways  and  hedge*, 
that  I  cannot  wait  for  an  introduction,  but  must  at  once  set  about  my  business. 

Hear  then,  O  ye  that  are  strangers  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus— hear  then  the 
message  that  I  have  to  bring  you.  Ye  have  fallen,  fallen  in  your  father  Adam;  ye 
have  fa-lien  also  in  yourselves,  by  your  daily  sin  and  your  constant  iniquity;  you 
have  provoked  the  anger  of  the  Most  High;  and  as  assuredly  as  you  have  sinned, 
so  certainly  must  God  punish  you  if  you  persevere  in  your  iniquity,  for  the  Lord  is 
a  God  of  justice,  and  will  by  no  means  spare  the  guilty.  But  have  you  not  heard, 
hath  it  not  long  been  spoken  in  your  ears,  that  God,  in  his  infinite  mercy,  has 
devised  a  way  whereby,  without  any  infringement  upon  his  honour,  he  can  have 
mercy  upon  you,  the  guilty  and  the  undeserving?  To  you  I  speak;  and  my  voice 
is  unto  you,  O  sons  of  men;  Jesus  Christ,  very  God  of  very  God,  hath  descended  from 
heaven,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.  Begotten  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
he  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary;  he  lived  in  this  world  a  life  of  exemplary  holiness, 
and  of  the  deepest  suffering,  till  at  last  he  gave  himself  up  to  die  for  our  sins,  "  the 
just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God."  And  now  the  plan  of  salvation  is  simply 
declared  unto  you — "  Whosoever  believeth  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  saved." 
For  you  who  have  violated  all  the  precepts  of  God,  and  have  disdained  his  mercy 
and  dared  his  vengeance,  there  is  yet  mercy  proclaimed,  for  "  whosoever  calleth  upon 
the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved"  "  For  this  is  a  faithful  saying  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I 
am  chief;"  "  whosoever  cometh  unto  him  he  will  in  no  wise  cast  out,  for  he  is  able 
also  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
iiveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  Now  all  that  God  asks  of  you — and  this  he 
gives  you — is  that  you  will  simply  look  at  his  bleeding  dying  son,  and  trust  your 
souls  in  the  hands  of  him  whose  name  alone  can  save  from  death  and  hell.  Is  it 
not  a  marvellous  thing,  that  the  proclamation  of  this  gospel  does  not  receive  the 
unanimous  consent  of  men?  One  would  think  that  as  soon  as  ever  this  was 
preached,  "  That  whosoever  believeth  shall  have  eternal  life,"  every  one  of  you, 
"casting  away  every  man  his  sins  and  his  iniquities,"  would  lay  hold  on  Jesus  Christ, 
and  look  alone  to  his  cross.  But  alas  I  such  is  the  desperate  evil  of  our  nature, 
such  the  pernicious  depravity  cf  our  character,  that  this  message  is  despised,  the 
invitation  to  the  gospel  feast  is  rejected,  and  there  are  many  of  you  who  are  this 
day  enemies  of  God  by  wicked  works,  enemies  to  the  God  who  preaches  Christ 
to  you  to-day,  enemies  to  him  who  sent  his  Son  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many. 
Strange  I  say  it  is  that  it  should  be  so,  yet  nevertheless  it  is  the  fact,  and  hence 
the  necessity  for  the  command  of  the  text, — "  Compel  them  to  come  in. ' 
Children  of  God,  ye  who  have  believed,  I  shall  have  little  or  nothing  to  say  to 

No.  227.  26 


"  COMPEL    THEM    TO    ^OlIE    IN.  ' 

ymi  this  morning;  I  am  going  straight  to  my  business— I  am  going  after  those 
that  will  not  come— those  that  are  in  the  byeways  and  hedges,  and  God  going  \vith 
me,  it  is  my  duty  now  to  fulfil  this  command,  "Compel  them  to  come  in." 

First,  I  must  jind  you  out ;  secondly,  I  will  go  to  work  to  compel  you  to  come  in. 

I.  First,  I  must  FIND  YOU  OUT.  If  you  read  the  verses  that  precede  the  text, 
you  will  find  an  amplification  of  this  command:  "Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets 
and  lanes  of  the  city,  and  bring  in  hither  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  halt,  and  the 
blind  ;"  and  then,  afterwards,  "  Go  out  into  the  highways,"  bring  in  the  vagrants, 
the  highwaymen,  "and  into  the  hedges,"  bring  in  those  that  have  no  resting- 
place  for  their  heads,  and  are  lying  under  the  hedges  to  rest,  bring  them  in  also,  and 
"compel  them  to  come  in."  Yes,  I  see  you  this  morning,  you  that  are/>oor.  I  am 
to  compel  you  to  come  in.  You  are  poor  in  circumstances,  but  this  is  no  barrier  to 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for  God  hath  not  exempted  from  his  yrace  the  man  that 
shivers  in  rags,  and  who  is  destitute  of  bread.  In  fact,  if  there  be  any  distinction 
made,  the  distinction  is  on  your  side,  and  for  your  benefit — "Unto  you  is  the 
word  of  salvation  sent;"  "For  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them." 
But  especially  I  must  speak  to  you  who  are  poor,  spiritually.  You  have  no  faith. 
you  have  no  virtue,  you  have  no  good  work,  you  have  no  grace,  and  what  is  poverty 
worse  still,  you  have  no  hope.  Ah,  my  Master  has  sent  you  a  gracious  invitation. 
Come  and  welcome  to  the  marriage  feast  of  Ins  love.  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him 
come  and  take  of  the  waters  of  life  freely."  Come,  I  must  lay  hold  upon  you, 
though  you  be  defiled  with  foulest  filth,  and  though  you  have  nought  but  rags 
upon  your  back,  though  your  own  righteousness  has  become  as  filthy  clouts,  yet 
must  I  lay  hold  upon  you,  and  invite  you  first,  a.id  even  compel  you  to  come  in. 

And  now  I  see  you  again.  You  are  not  only  poor,  but  you  are  maimed.  There 
was  a  time  when  you  thought  you  could  work  out  your  own  salvation  without  God's 
help,  when  you  could  perform  good  works,  attend  to  ceremonies,  and  get  to  heaven 
by  yourselves;  but  now  you  are  maimed,  the  sword  of  the  law  has  cut  off  your 
hands,  and  now  you  can  work  no  longer;  you  say,  with  bitter  sorrow — 

"  The  best  performance  of  my  hands, 
Dares  not  appear  before  thy  throne." 

You  have  lost  all  power  now  to  obey  the  law;  you  feel  that  when  you  would  do 
good,  evil  is  present  with  you.  You  are  maimed;  you  have  given  up,  as  a  forlorn 
hope,  all  attempt  to  save  yourself,  because  you  are  maimed  and  your  arms  are 
gone.  But  you  are  worse  off  than  that,  for  if  you  could  not  work  your  way  to 
heaven,  yet  you  could  walk  your  way  there  along  the  road  by  faith;  but  you  are 
maimed  in  the  feet  as  well  as  in  the  hands;  you  feel  that  you  cannot  believe, 
that  you  cannot  repent,  that  you  cannot  obey  the  stipulations  of  the  gospel.  You 
feel  that  you  are  utterly  undone,  powerless  in  every  respect  to  do  anything  that 
can  be  pleasing  to  God.  In  fact,  you  are  crying  out — 

"  Oh,  could  I  but^believe, 

Then  all  would  easy  be, 
I  would,  but  cannot,  Lord  relieve, 
My  help  must  come  from  thee." 

To  you  am  I  sent  also.  Before  you  am  I  to  lift  up  the  blood-stained  banner  of  ther 
cross,  to  you  am  I  to  preach  this  gospel,  "  Whoso  calleth  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  saved;"  and  unto  you  am  I  to  cry  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come 
and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely. 

There  is  yet  another  class.  You  are  halt.  You  are  halting  between  two  opinions. 
You  are  sometimes  seriously  inclined,  and  at  another  time  worldly  gaiety  calls  you 
away.  What  little  progress  you  do  make  ia  religion  is  but  a  limp.  You  have  a  little 
strength,  but  that  is  so  little  that  you  make  but  painful  progress.  Ah,  limping 
brother,  to  you  also  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent.  Though  you  halt  between 
two  opinions,  the  master  sends  me  to  you  with  this  message  :  "  How  long  halt  ye 
between  two  opinions?  if  God  be  God,  serve  him;  if  Baal  be  God,  serve  him." 
Consider  thy  ways;  set  thine  house  in  order, for  thoushalt  die  and  not  live.  Because 
I  will  do  this,  prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  0  Israel!  Halt  no  longer,  but  decide  for 
God  and  his  truth. 

And  yet  I  see  another  class,— the  blind.    Yes,  you  that  cannot  see  yourselves,  that 

18 


"COMPEL    THEM    TO   COMB    IN. 

think  yourselves  good  when  you  are  full  of  evil,  that  put  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  f<n 
bitter,  darkness  lor  light  and  light  for  darkness;  to  you  am  I  sent.  You,  blind 
souls  that  cannot  see  your  lost  estate,  that  do  not  believe  that  sin  is  so  exceedingly 
sinful  as  it  is,  and  who  will  not  be  persuaded  to  think  that  God  is  a  just  and 
righteous  God,  to  you  am  I  sent.  To  you  too  that  cannot  see  the  Saviour,  that  see 
no  beauty  in  him  that  you  should  desire  him;  who  see  no  excellence  in  virtue,  no 
glories  in  religion,  no  happiness  in  serving  God,  no  delight  in  being  his  children;  to 
you,  also,  am  I  sent.  Ay,  to  whom  am  I  not  sent  if  I  take  my  text.?  For  it  goes 
further  than  this — it  not  only  gives  a  particular  description,  so  that  each  indi 
vidual  case  may  be  met,  but  afterwards  it  makes  a  general  sweep,  and  says,  "  Go 
into  the  highways  and  hedges."  Here  we  bring  in  all  ranks  and  conditions  of  men— 
my  lord  upon  his  horse  in  the  highway,  and  the  woman  trudging  about  her 
business,  the  thief  waylaying  the  traveller — all  these  are  in  the  highway,  and  they 
are  all  to  be  compelled  to  come  in,  and  there  away  in  the  hedges  there  lie  some  poor 
souls  whose  refuges  of  lies  are  swept  away,  and  who  are  seeking  now  to  find  some 
little  shelter  for  their  weary  heads,  to  you,  also,  are  we  sent  this  morning.  This  is 
the  universal  command — compel  them  to  come  in. 

Now,  I  pause  after  having  described  the  character,  I  pause  to  look  at  the  herculean 
labour  that  lies  before  me.  Well  did  Melanchthon  say,  "  Old  Adam  was  too  strong 
for  young  Melanchthon."  As  well  might  a  little  child  seek  to  compel  a  Samson, 
as  I  seek  to  lead  a  sinner  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  And  yet  my  Master  sends  me 
about  the  errand.  Lo,  I  see  the  great  mountain  before  me  of  human  depravity  and 
stolid  indifference,  but  by  faith  I  cry,  "Who  art  thou,  0  great  mountain?  before 
Zerubhabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain."  Does  my  Master  say,  compel  them  to  come 
in?  Then,  though  the  sinner  be  like  Samson  and  I  a  child,  I  shall  lead  him  with  a 
thread.  Jf  God  saith  do  it,  if  I  attempt  it  in  faith  it  shall  be  done;  and  if  with  a 
groaning,  struggling,  and  weeping  heart,  I  so  seek  this  day  to  compel  sinners  to  come 
to  Christ,  the  sweet  compulsions  of  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  go  with  every  word,  and 
some  indeed  shall  be  compelled  to  come  in. 

II.  And  now  to  the  work — directly  to  the  work.  Unconverted,  unreconciled, 
unregenerate  men  and  women,  I  am  to  COMPEL  YOU  TO  COME  IN.  Permit  me 
first  of  all  to  accost  you  in  the  highways  of  sin  and  tell  you  over  again  my  errand. 
The  King  of  heaven  this  morning  sends  a  gracious  invitation  to  you.  He  says, 
"  As  1  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but 
had  rather  that  he  should  turn  unto  me  and  live:"  "  Come  now  and  let  us  reason 
together  saith  the  Lord,  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet  they  shall  be  as  wool; 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson  they  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  Dear  brother, 
it  makes  my  heart  rejoice  to  think  that  I  should  have  such  good  news  to  tell  you, 
and  yet  I  confess  my  soul  is  heavy  because  I  see  you  do  not  think  it  good  news, 
but  turn  away  from  it,  and  do  not  give  it  due  regard.  Permit  me  to  tell  you 
what  the  King  has  done  for  you.  He  knew  your  guilt,  he  foresaw  that  you  would 
ruin  yourself.  He  knew  that  his  justice  would  demand  your  blood,  and  in  order 
that  this  difficulty  might  be  escaped,  that  his  justice  might  have  its  full  due,  and 
that  you  might  yet  be  saved,  Jesus  Christ  hath  died.  Will  you  just  for  a  moment 
glance  at  this  picture.  You  see  that  man  there  on  his  knees  in  the  garden  of 
Gethsemane,  sweating  drops  of  blood.  You  see  this  next;  you  see  that  miserable 
sufferer  tied  to  a  pillar  and  lashed  with  terrible  scourges,  till  the  shoulder  bones 
are  seen  like  white  islands  in  the  midst  of  a  sea  of  blood.  Again  you  see  this  third 
picture;  it  is  the  same  man  hanging  on  the  cross  with  hands  extended,  and  with 
feet  nailed  fast,  dying,  groaning,  bleeding;  methought  the  picture  spoke  and  said, 
"  It  is  finished."  Now  all  this  hath  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  done,  in  order 
that  God  might  consistently  with  his  justice  pardon  sin;  and  the  message  to  you 
this  morning  is  this—"  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  chou  shalt  he  saved." 
That  is  trust  him,  renounce  thy  works,  and  thy  ways,  and  set  thine  heart  alone  on 
this  man,  who  gave  himself  for  sinners. 

Well  brother,  I  have  told  you  the  message,  what  sayest  thou  unto  it?  Do  you  turn 
away?  You  tell  me  it  is  nothing  to  you-,  you  cannot  listen  to  it;  that  you  will 
hear  me  by-and-bye;  but  you  will  go  your  ways  this  day  and  attend  to  your  farm 
and  merchandize.  Stop  brother,  I  was  not  told  merely  to  tell  you  and  then  go 
about  my  business.  No;  I  am  told  to  compel  you  to  come  in;  and  permit  me  to 
observe  to  you  before  I  further  go,  that  there  is  one  thing  I  can  say — and  to  which 
God  is  my  witness  this  morning,  that  I  am  in  earnest  with  you  in  my  desire  that 
vou  should  comply  with  this  command  of  God.  You  may  despise  your  own  salva- 

•9 


"COMPEL   THEM   TO   COME    IN. 

tion,  but  I  do  not  despise  it ;  yon.  may  go  away  and  forget  what  you  shall  hear,  but 
you  will  please  to  remember  that  the  things  I  now  say  cost  me  many  a  groan  ere  I 
came  here  to  utter  them.  My  inmost  soul  is  speaking  out  to  you,  my  poor 
brother,  when  I  beseech  you  by  him  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  is  alive  for 
evermore,  coneider  my  master's  message  which  he  bids  me  now  address  to  you. 

But  do  you  spurn  it?  Do  you  still  refuse  it?  Then  I  must  change  my  tone  a 
minute.  I  will  not  merely  tell  you  the  message,  and  invite  you  as  I  do  with  all 
earnestness,  and  sincere  affection — I  will  go  further.  Sinner,  in  God's  name  I 
command  you  to  repent  and  believe.  Do  you  ask  me  whence  my  authority  ?  I 
am  an  ambassador  of  heaven.  My  credentials,  some  of  them  secret,  and  in  my  own 
tieart;  and  others  of  them  open  before  you  this  day  in  the  seals  of  my  ministry, 
sitting  and  standing  in  this  hall,  where  God  has  given  me  many  souls  for  my  hire. 
As  God  the  everlasting  one  hath  given  me  a  commission  to  preach  his  gospel,  I 
command  you  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  not  on  my  own  authority,  but  on 
the  authority  of  him  who  said,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to 
erery  creature;"  and  then  annexed  this  solemn  sanction,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved,  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  Reject  my 
message,  and  remember  "  lie  that  despised  Moses's  law,  died  without  mercy  under 
two  or  three  witnesses:  of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be 
thought  worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God."  An  ambassador 
ig  not  to  stand  below  the  man  with  whom  he  deals,  fof  we  stand  higher.  If  the 
minister  chooses  to  take  his  proper  rank,  gi*  ded  with  the  omnipotence  of  God, 
and  anointed  with  his  holy  unction,  he  is  to  command  men,  and  speak  with  all 
authority  compelling  them  to  come  in:  "command,  exhort,  rebuke  with  all  long- 
suffering." 

But  do  you  turn  away  and  say  you  will  not  be  commanded  ?  Then  again  will  I 
change  my  note.  If  that  avails  not,  all  other  means  shall  be  tried.  My  brother,  I 
come  to  you  simple  of  speech,  and  I  exhort  you  to  flee  to  Christ.  0  my  brother,  dost 
thou  know  what  a  loving  Christ  he  is?  Let  me  tell  thee  from  my  own  soul  what 
I  know  of  him.  I,  too  once  despised  him.  He  knocked  at  the  door  of  my  heart 
and  I  refused  to  open  it.  He  came  to  me,  times  without  number,  morning  by 
morning,  and  night  by  night;  he  checked  me  in  my  conscience  and  spoke  to  me  by 
his  Spirit,  and  when,  at  last,  the  thunders  of  the  law  prevailed  in  my  conscience,  I 
thought  that  Christ  was  cruel  and  unkind.  0  I  can  never  forgive  myself  that 
1  should  have  thought  so  ill  of  him.  But  what  a  loving  reception  did  I  have  when 
I  went  to  him.  I  thought  he  would  smite  me,  but  his  hand  was  not  clenched  in 
anger  but  opened  wide  in  mercy.  I  thought  full  sure  that  his  eyes  would  dart 
lightning-flashes  of  wrath  upon  me;  but,  instead  thereof,  they  were  full  of  tears. 
He  fell  upon  my  neck  and  kissed  me;  he  took  off  my  rags  and  did  clothe  me  with 
his  righteousness,  and  caused  my  soul  to  sing  aloud  for  joy;  while  in  the  house  of 
my  heart  and  in  the  house  of  his  church  there  was  music  and  dancing,  because  his 
son  that  he  had  lost  was  found,  and  he  that  was  dead  was  made  alive.  I  exhort 
you,  then,  to  look  to  Jesus  Christ  and  to  be  lightened.  Sinner,  you  will  never 
regret, — I  will  be  bondsman  for  my  Master  that  you  will  never  regret  it, — you 
will  have  no  sigh  to  go  back  to  your  state  of  condemnation ;  you  shall  go  out  of 
Egypt  and  shall  go  into  the  promised  land  and  shall  find  it  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey.  The  trials  of  Christian  life  you  shall  find  heavy,  but  you  will  find 
grace  will  make  them  light.  And  as  for  the  joys  and  delights  of  being  a  child  of 
God,  if  I  lie  this  day  you  shall  charge  me  with  it  in  days  to  come.  If  you  will 
taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good,  I  am  not  afraid  but  that  you  shall  find  that 
he  is  not  only  good,  but  better  than  human  lips  ever  can  describe. 

I  know  not  what  arguments  to  use  with  you.  I  appeal  to  your  own  self-interests. 
Oh  my  poor  friend,  would  it  not  be  better  for  you  to  be  reconciled  to  the  God  of 
heaven,  than  to  be  his  enemy?  What  are  you  getting  by  opposing  God?  Are  you 
the  happier  for  being  his  enemy?  Answer,  pleasure-seeker:  hast  thou  found  delights 
in  that  cup?  Answer  me,  self-righteous  man:  hast  thou  found  rest  for  the  sole 
of  thy  foot  in  all  thy  works?  Oh  thou  that  goest  about  to  establish  thine  own 
righteousness,  I  charge  thee  let  conscience  speak.  Hast  thou  found  it  to  be  a  happy 
path?  Ah,  my  friend,  "Wherefore  dost  thou  spend  thy  money  for  that  which  is 
not  bread,  and  thy  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not;  hearken  diligently  unto 
me,  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness."  I 
exhort  you  by  everything  that  is  sacred  and  solemn,  everything  that  is  important 
and  eternal,  flee  for  your  lives,  look  not  behind  you,  stay  not  in  all  the  plain,  stay 

20 


14  COMPEL   THEM    TO    COME    IN." 

not  until  you  have  proved,  and  found  an  interest  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  that 
blood  which  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  Are  you  still  cold  and  indifferent?  Will  not 
the  blind  man  permit  me  to  lead  him  to  the  feast?  Will  not  my  maimed  brother 
put  his  hand  upon  my  shoulder  and  permit  me  to  assist  him  to  the  banquet?  Will 
not  the  poor  man  allow  me  to  walk  side-by-side  with  him?  Must  I  use  some 
stronger  words.  Must  I  use  some  other  compulsion  to  compel  you  to  come  in? 
Sinners,  this  one  thing  I  am  resolved  upon  this  morning,  if  you  be  not  saved  ye 
shall  be  without  excuse.  Ye,  from  the  grey-headed  down  to  the  tender  age  of 
childhood,  if  ye  this  day  lay  not  hold  on  Christ,  your  blood  shall  be  on  your  own 
head.  If  there  be  power  in  man  to  bring  his  fellow,  (as  there  is  when  man  is 
helped  by  the  Holy  Spirit)  that  power  shall  be  exercised  this  morning,  God  helping 
me.  Come,  I  am  not  to  be  put  off  by  your  rebuffs:  if  my  exhortation  fails,  I  must 
come  to  something  else.  My  brother  I  ENTREAT  you,  I  entreat  you  stop  and  consider. 
Do  you  know  what  it  is  you  are  rejecting  this  morning?  You  are  rejecting  Christ, 
your  only  Saviour.  "Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay;"  "there  is  none  other  name 
given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  My  brother,  I  cannot  bear  that  ye 
should  do  this,  for  I  remember  what  you  are  forgetting:  the  day  is  coming  when 
you  will  want  a  Saviour.  It  is  not  long  ere  weary  months  shall  have  ended,  and 
your  strength  begin  to  decline;  your  pulse  shall  fail  you,  your  strength  shall 
depart,  and  you  and  the  grim  monster— (loath,  must  face  each  other.  What  will 
you  do  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan  without  a  Saviour?  Death-beds  are  stony 
things  without  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  die*  anyhow;  he 
that  hath  the  best  hope,  and  the  most  triumphant  faith,  finds  that  death  is  not  a 
thing  to  laugh  at.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  pass  from  the  seen  to  the  unseen,  from 
the  mortal  to  the  immortal,  from  time  to  eternity,  and  you  will  find  it  hard  to  go 
through  the  iron  gates  of  death  without  the  sweet  wings  of  angels  to  conduct  you 
to  the  portals  of  the  skies.  It  will  be  a  hard  thing  to  die  without  Christ.  I 
cannot  help  thinking  of  you.  I  see  you  acting  the  suicide  this  morning,  and  I 
picture  myself  standing  at  your  bedside  and  hearing  your  cries,  and  knowing  that 
you  are  dying  without  hope.  I  cannot  bear  that.  I  think  I  am  standing  by  your 
coffin  now,  and  looking  into  your  clay-cold  face,  and  saying,  "This  man  despised 
Christ  and  neglected  the  great  salvation."  I  think  what  bitter  tears  I  shall  weep 
then,  if  I  think  that  I  have  been  unfaithful  to  you,  and  how  those  eyes  fast  closed 
in  death,  shall  seem  to  chide  me  and  say,  "  Minister,  I  attended  the  music  hall,  but 
you  were  not  in  earnest  with  me;  you  amused  me,  you  preached  to  me,  but  you 
did  not  plead  with  me.  You  did  not  know  what  Paul  meant  when  he  said,  '  As 
though  God  did  beseech  you  by  us  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled 
to  God.'" 

I  entreat  you  let  this  message  enter  your  heart  for  another  reason.  I  picture 
myself  standing  at  the  bar  of  God.  As  the  Lord  liveth,  the  day  of  judgment  is 
coming.  You  believe  that?  You  are  not  an  infidel;  your  conscience  would  not 
permit  you  to  doubt  the  Scripture.  Perhaps  you  may  have  pretended  to  do  so, 
but  you  cannot.  You  feel  there  must  be  a  day  when  God  shall  judge  the  world  in 
righteousness.  I  see  you  standing  in  the  midst  of  that  throng,  and  the  eye  of  God 
is  fixed  on  you.  It  seems  to  you  that  he  is  not  looking  anywhere  else,  but  only 
upon  you,  and  he  summons  you  before  him;  and  he  reads  your  sins,  and  he  cries, 
"Depart  ye  cursed  into  everlasting  fire  in  hell!"  My  hearer,  I  cannot  bear  to 
think  of  you  in  that  position;  it  seems  as  if  every  hair  on  my  head  must  stand  on 
end  to  think  of  any  hearer  of  mine  being  damned.  Will  you  picture  yourselves  in 
that  position?  The  word  has  gone  forth,  "Depart,  ye  cursed."  Do  you  see  the 
pit  as  it  opens  to  swallow  you  up?  Do  you  listen  to  the  shrieks  and  the  yells 
of  those  who  have  preceded  you  to  that  eternal  lake  of  torment?  Instead  of 
picturing  the  scene,  I  turn  to  you  with  the  words  of  the  inspired  prophet,  and 
I  say,  "Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring  fire?  Who  among  us 
shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings?"  Oh!  ray  brother,  I  cannot  let  you  put 
away  religion  thus;  no,  I  think  of  what  is  to  come  after  death.  I  should  be 
destitute  of  all  humanity  if  I  should  see  a  person  about  to  poison  himself,  and  did 
not  dash  away  the  cup;  or  if  I  saw  another  about  to  plunge  from  London  Bridge, 
if  I  did  not  assist  in  preventing  him  from  doing  so;  and  I  should  be  worse  than  u 
fiend  if  I  did  not  now,  with  all  love,  and  kindness,  and  earnestness,  beseech  you  to 
"  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,"  "to  labour  not  for  the  meat  that  perisheth,  but  for  the  meat 
that  endureth  unto  everlasting  life." 

Some  hyper-calvinist  would  tell  me  I  am  wrong  in  so  doing.     I  cannot  help  it. 

19 


11  COMPEL   THEM   TO   COME   IN." 

A  must  do  it.  As  I  must  stand  before  my  Judge  at  last,  I  feel  that  I  shall  not 
make  full  proof  of  my  ministry  unless  I  entreat  with  many  tears  that  ye  would  be 
saved,  that  ye  would  look  unto  Jesus  Christ  and  receive  his  glorious  salvation. 
But  does  not  this  avail?  are  all  our  entreaties  lost  upon  you;  do  you  turn  a  deaf 
ear?  Then  again  I  change  my  note.  Sinner,  I  have  pleaded  with  you  a§  a  man 
pleadeth  with  his  friend,  and  were  it  for  my  own  life  I  could  not  speak  more 
earnestly  this  morning  than  I  do  speak  concerning  yours.  I  did  feel  earnest  about 
my  own  soul,  but  not  a  whit  more  than  I  do  about  the  souls  of  my  congregation 
this  morning;  and  therefore,  if  ye  put  away  these  entreaties  I  have  something 
else; — I  must  threaten  you.  You  shall  not  always  have  such  warnings  as  these. 
A  day  is  coming,  when  hushed  shall  be  the  voice  of  every  gospel  minister,  at  least 
for  you;  for  your  ear  shall  be  cold  in  death.  It  shall  not  be  any  more  threatening; 
it  shall  be  the  fulfilment  of  the  threatening.  There  shall  be  no  promise,  no  pro 
clamations  of  pardon  and  of  mercy;  no  peace-speaking  blood,  but  you  shall  be  in 
the  land  where  the  Sabbath  is  all  swallowed  up  in  everlasting  nights  of  misery,  and 
where  the  preachings  of  the  gospel  are  forbidden  because  they  would  be  unavailing. 
I  charge  you  then,  listen  to  this  voice  that  now  addresses  your  conscience;  for  if 
not,  God  shall  speak  to  you  in  his  wrath,  and  say  unto  you  in  his  hot  displeasure, 
"I  called  and  ye  refused;  I  stretched  out  my  hand  and  no  man  regarded;  therefore 
will  I  mock  at  your  calamity;  I  will  laugh  when  your  fear  cometh."  Sinner,  I 
threaten  you  again.  Remember,  it  is  but  a  short  time  you  may  have  to  hear  these 
warnings.  You  imagine  that  your  life  will  be  long,  but  do  you  know  how 
short  it  is?  Have  you  ever  tried  to  think  how  frail  you  are?  Did  you  ever  see  a 
body  when  it  has  been  cut  in  pieces  by  the  anatomist?  Did  you  ever  see  such  a 
marvellous  thing  as  the  human  frame? 

"Strange,  a  harp  of  a  thousand  strings, 
Should  keep  in  tune  so  long." 

Let  but  one  of  those  cords  be  twisted,  let  but  a  mouthful  of  food  go  in  the  wrong 
direction,  and  you  may  die.  The  slightest  chance,  as  we  have  it.  may  send  you 
swift  to  death,  when  God  wills  it.  Strong  men  have  been  killed  by  the  smallest 
and  slightest  accident,  and  so  may  you.  In  the  chapel,  in  the  house  of  God,  men- 
have  dropped  down  dead.  How  often  do  we  hear  of  men  falling  in  our  streets — 
rolling  out  of  time  into  eternity,  by  some  sudden  stroke.  And  are  you  sure  that 
heart  of  your's  is  quite  sound?  Is  the  blood  circulating  with  all  accuracy?  Are 
you  quite  sure  of  that?  And  if  it  be  so,  how  long  shall  it  be?  0,  perhaps  there 
are  some  of  you  here  that  shall  never  see  Christmas-day;  it  may  be  the  mandate 
has  gone  forth  already,  "  Set  thine  house  in  order,  for  thou  shalt  die  and  not  live." 
Out  of  this  vast  congregation,  I  might  with  accuracy  tell  how  many  will  be  dead 
in  a  year;  but  certain  it  is  that  the  whole  of  us  shall  never  meet  together  again 
in  any  one  assembly.  Some  out  of  this  vast  crowd,  perhaps  some  two  or  three,, 
shall  depart  ere  the  new  year  shall  be  ushered  in.  I  remind  you,  then,  my 
brother,  that  either  the  gate  of  salvation  may  be  shut,  or  else  you  may  be  out  of 
the  place  where  the  gate  of  mercy  stands.  Come,  then,  let  the  threatening  have 
power  with  you.  I  do  not  threaten  because  I  would  alarm  without  cause,  but  in 
hopes  that  a  brother's  threatening  may  drive  you  to  the  place  where  God  hath  pre 
pared  the  feast  of  the  gospel.  And  now,  must  I  turn  hopelessly  away?  Have  I 
exhausted  all  that  I  can  say?  No,  I  will  come  to  you  again.  Tell  me  what  it  is, 
my  brother,  that  keeps  you  from  Christ.  I  hear  one  say,  "  Oh,  sir,  it  is  because  I 
feel  myself  too  guilty."  That  cannot  be,  my  friend,  that  cannot  be.  "  But,  sir,  I 
am  the  chief  of  sinners."  Friend,  you  are  not.  The  chief  of  sinners  died  and  went  to 
heaven  many  years  ago;  his  name  was  Saul  of  Tarsus,  afterwards  called  Paul  the 
apostle.  He  was  the  chief  of  sinners,  I  know  he  spoke  the  truth.  "  No,"  but  yon 
say  stili,  "  I  am  too  vile."  You  cannot  be  viler  than  the  chief  of  sinners.  You 
must,  at  least,  be  second  worst.  Even  supposing  you  are  the  worst  now  alive,  you 
are  second  worst,  for  he  was  chief.  But  suppose  you  are  the  worst,  is  not  that  the 
very  reason  why  you  should  come  to  Christ.  The  worse  a  man  is,  the  more  reason 
he  should  go  to  the  hospital  or  physician.  The  more  poor  you  are,  the  more  reason 
you  should  accept  the  charity  of  another.  Now,  Christ  does  not  want  any  merits 
of  your  s.  He  gives  freely.  The  worse  you  are,  the  more  welcome  you  are.  But 
let  me  ask  you  a  question:  Do  you  think  you  will  ever  get  better  by  stopping  away 
from^Christ  ?  If  so,  you  know  very  little  as  yet  of  the  way  of  salvation  at  all. 
No,  sir,  the  longer  you  stay  the  worse  you  will  grow;  your  hope  will  grow  weaker, 

22 


'COMTKL    THEM    TO   COME    IN.1 


your  despair  will  become  stronger;  the  nail  with  which  Satan  has  fastened  yot 
down   will  be  more  firmly  clenched,  and  you   will  be  less   hopeful   than  ever 
Come,  I  beseech  you,  recollect  there  is  nothing  to  be  gained  by  delay,  but  by  delay 
every  tiling  may  be  lost.     "But,"  cries  another,  "  I  feel  I  cannot  believe."    No,  my 
friend,  and  you  never  will  believe  if  you  look  first  at  your  believing.     Remember,  I 
am  not  come  to  invite  you  to  faith,  but  am  come  to  invite  you  to  Christ.     But  you 
say,  *'  What  is  the  difference?"    Why,  just  this,  If  you  first  of  all  say,  "  I  want  to 
believe  a  thing,"  you  never  do  it.     But  your  first  inquiry  must  be,  "  What  is  this 
thing  that  I  am  to  believe?"  Then  will  faith  come  as  the  consequence  of  that  search. 
Our  first  business  has  not  to  do  with  faith,  but  with  Christ.  Come,  I  beseech  you,  oc 
Calvary's  mount,  and  see  the  cross.     Behold  the  Son  of  God,  he  who  made  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  dying  for  your  sins,    Look  to  him,  is  there  not  power  in 
him  to  save?    Look  at  his  face  so  full  of  pity.     Is  there  not  love  in  his  heart  to 
prove   him   willing  to  save?      Sure   sinner,  the  sight  of  Christ   will   help   thee 
to  believe.     Do  not  believe  first,  and  then  go  to  Christ,  or  else  thy  faith  will 
be   a  worthless   thing;    go  to  Christ  without   any  faith,  and  cast  thyself  upon 
liim,  sink  or  swim.    But  I  hear  another  cry,  "  Oh  sir,  you  do  not  know  how  often 
I  have  been  invited,  how  long  I  have  rejected  the  Lord."     I  do  not  know,  and  I 
do  not  want  to  know;  all  I  know  is  that  my  Master  has  sent  me,  to  compel  you  to 
come  in  ;   so  come  along  with  you  now.     You  may  have  rejected  a  thousand  invita 
tions;  don't  make  this  the  thousandth-and-one.     You  have  been  up  to  the  house  of 
God,  and  you  have  only  been  gospel  hardened.  But  do  I  not  see  a  tear  in  your  eye; 
Come  my  brother  don't  be  hardened  by  this  morning's  sermon.     0,  Spirit  of  the 
living  God  come  and  melt  this  heart  for  it  has  never  been  melted,  and  compel  him 
to  come  in!     I  cannot  let  you  go  on  such  idle  excuses  as  that;  if  you  have  lived 
so  many  years  slighting  Christ,  there  are  so  many  reasons  why  now  you  should 
not  slight  him.     But  did  I  hear  you  whisper  that  this  was  not  a  convenient  time? 
Then  what  must  I  say  to  you?     When  will  that  convenient  time  come?      Shall  it 
come  when  you  are  in  hell?     Will  that  time  be  convenient?     Shall  it  come  when 
you  are  on  your  dying  bed,  and  the  death  rattle   is  in  your  throat— shall  it  come 
then?     Or  when  the  burning  sweat  is  scalding  your  brow;  and  then  again,  when 
the  cold  clammy  sweat  is  there,  shall  those  be  convenient  times?     When  pains  are 
racking  you,  ami  you  are  on  the  borders  of  the  tomb?     No,  sir,  this  morning 
is  the  convenient  time.     May  God  make  it  so.     Remember,  I  have  no  authority  to 
ask  you  to  come  to  Christ  to-morrow.    The  Master  has  given  you  no  invitation 
to  come  to  him  next  Tuesday.     The  invitation  is,  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his 
voice,  harden  not  your  hearts  as  in  the  provocation,"  for  the  Spirit  saith  "  to-day." 
"  Come  now  and  let  us  reason  together;"  why  should  you  put  it  off?   It  may  be  the 
last  warning  you  shall  ever  have.  Put  it  off,  and  you  may  never  weep  again  in  chapel 
You  may  never  have  so  earnest  a  discourse  addressed  to  you.     You  may  not  be 
pleaded  with  as  I  would  plead  with  you  now.     You  may  go  away,  and  God  may 
say,  "  He  is  given  unto  idols,  let  him  alone."    He  shall  throw  the  reins  upon  your 
neck;  and  then,  mark — your  course  is  sure,  but  it  is  sure  damnation  and  swift 
destruction. 

And  now  again,  is  it  all  in  vain?  Will  you  not  now  come  to  Christ?  Then  what 
more  can  I  do?  I  have  but  one  more  resort,  and  that  shall  be  tried.  I  can  be 
permitted  to  weep  for  you;  I  can  be  allowed  to  pray  for  you.  You  shall  scorn  the 
address  if  you  like;  you  shall  laugh  at  the  preacher;  you  shall  call  him  fanatic  if 
you  will;  he  will  not  chicle  you,  he  will  bring  no  accusation  against  you  to  the 
great  Judge.  Your  offence,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  is  forgiven  before  it 
is  Committed;  but  you  will  remember  that  the  message  that  you  are  rejecting 
this  morning  is  a  message  from  one  who  loves  you,  and  it  is  given  to  you  also 
by  the  lips  of  one  who  loves  you.  You  will  recollect  that  you  may  play  your 
soul  away  with  the  devil,  that  you  may  listlessly  think  it  a  matter  of  no  importance  j 
but  there  lives  at  least  one  who  is  in  earnest  about  your  soul,  and  one  who  before 
he  came  here  wrestled  with  his  God  for  strength  to  preach  to  you,  and  who  when 
he  has  gone  from  this  place  will  not  forget  his  hearers  of  this  morning.  I  say 
again,  when  words  fail  us  we  can  give  tears— for  words  and  tears  are  the  arms  with 
which  gospel  ministers  compel  men  to  come  in.  You  do  not  know,  and  I  suppose 
could  not  believe,  how  anxious  a  man  whom  God  has  called  to  the  ministry  feels 
about  his  congregation,  and  especially  about  some  of  them.  I  heard  but  the  other 
day  of  -i  young  man  who  attended  here  a  long  time,  and  his  father's  hope  was  that 
he  would  be  brought  to  Christ.  He  became  acquainted,  however,  with  an  infidel; 

It 


*  COVPEL    THEM   TO   COME    IN. 

and  now  be  neglects  \As  business,  and  lives  in  a  daily  course  of  sin.  I  saw  MB 
father's  poor  wan  face;  1  did  not  ask  him  to  tell  me  the  story  himself,  for  I  felt  it 
was  laking  up  a  trouble  and  opening  a  sore;  I  fear,  sometimes,  that  good  man's  grey 
hairs  may  be  brought  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  Toung  men,  you  do  not  pray  for 
yourselves,  but  your  mothers  wrestle  for  you.  You  will  not  think  of  your  own 
souls,  but  your  father's  anxiety  is  exercised  for  you.  I  have  been  at  prayer 
meetings,  when  I  have  heard  children  of  God  pray  there,  and  they  could  not  have 
prayed  with  more  earnestness  and  more  intensity  of  anguish  if  they  had  been  each 
of  them  seeking  their  own  soul's  salvation.  And  is  it  not  strange  that  we  should 
be  ready  to  move  heaven  and  earth  for  your  salvation,  and  that  still  you  should 
have  no  thought  for  yourselves,  no  regard  to  eternal  things? 

Now  I  turn  for  one  moment  to  some  here.  There  are  some  of  you  here  members 
of  Christian  churches,  who  make  a  profession  of  religion,  but  unless  I  be  mistaken 
in  you — and  I  shall  be  happy  if  I  am — your  profession  is  a  lie.  You  do  not  live 
up  to  it,  you  dishonour  it;  you  can  live  in  the  perpetual  practice  of  absenting 
yourselves  from  God's  house,  if  not  in  sins  worse  than  that.  Now  I  ask  such  of  you 
who  do  not  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  your  Saviour,  do  you  imagine  that  you  can 
call  me  your  pastor,  and  yet  that  my  soul  cannot  tremble  over  you  and  in  secret 
weep  for  you?  Again,  I  say  it  may  be  but  little  concern  to  you  how  you  defile  the 
garments  of  your  Christianity,  but  it  is  a  great  concern  to  God's  hidden  ones,  who 
sigh  and  cry,  and  groan  for  the  iniquities  of  the  professors  of  Zion. 

Now  does  anything  else  remain  to  the  minister  besides  weeping  and  prayer? 
Yes,  there  is  one  thing  else.  God  has  given  to  his  servants  not  the  power  of 
regeneration,  but  he  has  given  them  something  akin  to  it.  It  is  impossible  for  any 
man  to  regenerate  his  neighbour;  and  yet  how  are  men  born  to  God?  Does  not 
the  apostle  say  of  such  an  one  that  he  was  begotten  by  him  in  his  bonds.  Now  the 
minister  has  a  power  given  him  of  God,  to  be  considered  both  the  father  and  the 
mother  of  those  born  to  God,  for  the  apostle  said  he  travailed  in  birth  for  souls 
till  Christ  was  formed  in  them.  What  can  we  do  then?  We  can  now  appeal  to 
the  Spirit.  I  know  I  have  preached  the  gospel,  that  I  have  preached  it  earnestly, 
I  challenge  my  Master  to  honour  his  own  promise.  He  has  said  it  shall  not  return 
unto  him  void,  and  it  shall  not.  It  is  in  his  hands,  not  mine.  I  cannot  compel  you, 
out  thou  O  Spirit  of  God  who  hast  the  key  of  the  heart,  thou  canst  compel  Dit 
you  ever  notice  in  that  chapter  of  the  Revelation,  where  it  says,  "Behold  I  stand 
at  the  door  and  knock,"  a  few  verses  before,  the  same  person  is  described,  as  he 
who  hath  the  key  of  David.  So  that  if  knocking  will  not  avail,  he  has  the  key 
and  can  and  will  come  in.  Now  if  the  knocking  of  an  earnest  minister  prevail 
not  with  you  this  morning,  there  remains  still  that  secret  opening  of  the  heart  by 
the  Spirit,  so  that  you  shall  be  compelled. 

I  thought  it  my  duty  to  labour  with  you  as  though  /  must  do  it;  now  I  throw  it 
into  my  Master's  hands.  It  cannot  be  his  will  that  we  should  travail  in  birth,  and 
yet  not  bring  forth  spiritual  children.  It  is  with  him ;  he  is  master  of  the  heart, 
and  the  day  shall  declare  it,  that  some  of  you  constrained  by  sovereign  grace  have 
become  the  willing  captives  of  the  all-conquering  Jesus,  and  have  bowed  you* 
hearts  to  him  through  the  sermon  of  this  morning. 


p:eti[oplitan  Slab  er nitric  fhttjnt 


COUNTING  THE   COST. 


DELIVERED  ON   LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,   FEBRUARY  22ND,  1874,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOffr 


"For  which  of  you,  intending  to  build  a  tower,  sitteth  not  down  first,  and 
counteth  the  cost,  whether  he  have  sufficient  to  finish  it  ?  lest  haply,  after  he  hath 
laid  the  foundation,  and  is  not  able  to  finish  it,  all  that  behold  it  begin  to  mock  him, 
saying,  This  man  began  to  build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish.'' — Luke  xiv.  28 — 30. 

THIS  passage  is  peculiar  to  Luke,  and  he  tells  us  that  at  the  time  when 
our  Lord  uttered  it  great  multitudes  followed  him.  It  is  observable 
that  when  our  Lord  was  forsaken  by  the  crowd  he  was  not  depressed, 
and  when  his  ministry  became  popular  he  was  not  elated.  He  was 
calm  and  wise  in  the  midst  of  the  excitement  of  the  thronging  multi 
tudes.  This  passage  is  sufficient  evidence  of  that  fact.  On  this- 
occasion  our  Lord  spoke  with  a  view  to  the  winnowing  of  the  great 
heap  of  nominal  discipleship  which  lay  before  him,  that  the  chaff 
might  be  driven  away  and  only  the  precious  corn  might  remain.  The 
discourse  before  us  reminds  us  of  Gideon's  process  of  diminishing  that 
vast  but  motley  host  of  which  the  Lord  said,  "  The  people  are  too 
many  for  me."  After  having  bidden  the  faint-hearted  go,  he  next 
brought  down  the  remaining  thousands  to  the  river,  and  bade  them 
drink ;  and  then  only  kept  for  himself  those  who  lapped  in  a  certain 
peculiar  manner,  which  indicated  their  zeal,  their  speed,  their  energy,, 
and  their  experience.  Our  Lord  tested  his  followers  that  he  might 
have  only  those  remaining  who  would  be  fit  for  the  conquest  of  the 
world.  To  carry  his  precious  treasure  he  would  select  vessels  whom 
grace  had  made  fit  for  his  use,  the  rest  he  could  dispense  with. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  was  far  too  wise  to  pride  himself  upon  the  number 
of  his  converts  ;  he  cared  rather  for  quality  than  quantity.  He  rejoiced 
over  one  sinner  that  repented,  but  ten  thousand  sinners  who  merely 
professed  to  have  repented  would  have  given  him  no  joy  whatever. 
His  heart  longed  after  the  real,  he  loathed  the  counterfeit ;  he  panted  after 
the  substance,  and  the  shadow  could  not  content  him.  His  fan  was 
in  his  hand  with  which  to  throughly  purge  his  floor,  and  his  axe  was 
Xo.  1,159.  27 


110  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

laid  to  the  root  of  the  trees  to  hew  down  the  fruitless.  He  was  anxious 
to  leave  a  living  church  like  good  seed-corn  in  the  land,  as  free  us 
possible  from  all  admixture.  Hence  in  this  particular  instance  one 
might  even  think  that  he  was  repelling  men  rather  than  attracting 
them  to  his  leadership  ;  but,  indeed,  he  was  doing  nothing  of  the  kind. 
He  understood  right  well  that  men  to  be  truly  won  must  be  won  by 
truth,  that  the  truest  love  is  ever  honest,  and  that  the  best  disciple  is 
not  he  who  joins  the  class  of  the  great  Master  in  a  hurry,  and  then 
afterwards  discovers  that  the  learning  is  not  such  as  he  expected,  but 
one  who  comes  sighing  after  just  such  knowledge  as  the  teacher  is 
prepared  to  give.  Moreover,  our  Lord  knew  what  sometimes  we  may 
forget — that  there  is  no  heartbreak  in  the  world  to  the  godly  worker 
like  that  which  comes  of  disappointed  hopes,  when  those  who  have 
said,  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest,"  turn  back 
unto  perdition,  and  when  the  hot  breath  which  shouted  "  Hosanna  !  " 
turns  into  the  cruel,  cold-blooded  cry,  "  Crucify  him !  crucify  him  ! " 
Nothing  is  more  injurious  to  a  church  than  a  large  dilution  with  half 
hearted  members,  and  nothing  more  dangerous  to  the  persons  them 
selves  than  to  allow  them  to  put  on  an  untrue  profession.  Therefore 
did  the  Master  take  most  care  at  the  time  when  that  care  was  most 
needed,  that  none  should  follow  him  under  misapprehension,  but  should 
be  made  fully  aware  of  what  was  meant  by  being  his  disciples,  so  that 
they  should  not  say  afterwards,  "We  have  been  misled ;  we  have  been. 
beguiled  into  a  service  which  disappoints  us."  Unlike  the  enlisting 
sergeant,  who  sets  forth  all  the  glories  of  military  service  in  glowing 
colours  in  order  to  gain  a  recruit,  the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation 
would  have  his  followers  take  all  things  into  consideration  before  they 
cast  in  their  lot  with  him. 

This  morning  our  text  may  be  equally  suitable,  and  its  warning  may 
be  as  necessary  and  as  salutary  as  when  first  the  Master  pronounced  it ; 
for  great  multitudes  are  just  now  following  Christ,  a  revival  has  come 
and  stirred  the  mass  of  you.  Among  the  would-be  disciples  (blessed 
be  God  !)  are  many  whom  the  Lord  himself  has  called,  for  every  one  of 
whom  we  give  most  hearty  thanks  ;  but  with  them  necessarily,  and  of 
course  (for  when  was  it  ever  different  ?)  there  are  others  who  are  not 
called  of  God  at  all,  but  who  are  moved  by  the  natural  impulse  of 
imitating  others,  and  stirred  by  feelings  which  are  none  the  less 
fleeting  because  just  now  they  are  intense ;  and  therefore  in  Christ's 
name  it  is  ours  to  address  you  even  as  he  did,  and  warn  you  in  his 
own  words  :  "  If  any  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his  father,  and 
mother,  and  wife,  and  children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and 
his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple.  And  whosoever  doth  not 
bear  his  cross  and  come  after  me,  cannot  be  my  disciple.  For  which 
of  you,  intending  to  build  a  tower,  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  counteth 
the  cost,  whether  he  have  sufficient  to  finish  it  ?  Lest  haply,  after  he 
hath  laid  the  foundation,  and  is  not  able  to  finish  it.  all  that  behold  it 
begin  to  mock  him,  saying,  This  man  began  to  build,  and  was  not  able 
to  finish." 

To  assist  our  memories,  we  will  divide  our  meditation  into  three 
parts.  The  first  will  be  headed  in  this  manner :  true  religion  is  a  costly 
thing ;  the  second  shall  bear  this  motto  :  Wisdom  suggests  thai  before  we 


COUNTING   THE   COST.  Ill 

inter  upon  it  ice  should  estimate  the  cost;  and  the  third  shall  bear  this 
inscription  :  Cost  iuhat  it  may,  it  is  worth  ivJiat  it  costs. 

I.  First,  then,  it  is  clear  from  our  text  that  TRUE  RELIGION  is  COSTLY. 
Far  be  it  from  us  to  create  any  confusion  of  thought  here.  The  gifts 
of  God's  grace  cost  us  nothing,  neither  could  his  salvation  be  purchased 
with  money,  nor  with  merit,  nor  by  TOWS  and  penances.  "  If  a  maa 
should  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love,  it  would  utterly  he 
•contemned."  The  gospel  motto  is,  "without  money  and  without 
price  ";  we  are  "justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  Yet,  for  all  that,  if  a  man  will  be  a 
Christian  it  will  cost  him  something.  Consider  a  moment.  Here 
is  a  blind  man  sitting  by  the  wayside  begging ;  he  asks  to  have  his 
•eyes  opened.  Will  it  cost  him  anything  ?  No,  the  Saviour  would 
not  accept  all  the  gold  in  the  world  for  the  cure,  he  will  freely 
•open  his  eyes ;  but  when  they  are  opened  it  will  cost  that  blind  man 
something.  Obtaining  his  sight  he  will  be  called  upon  to  discharge 
the  duties  of  one  who  has  eyes.  He  will  not  be  allowed  after  that  to 
sit  there  and  beg,  or,  if  he  tries  to  do  so,  he  will  lose  the  sympathy 
which  is  bestowed  upon  blindness ;  now  that  his  eyes  are  opened  he 
must  use  them,  and  earn  his  own  bread.  It  will  cost  him  something, 
for  he  will  now  be  conscious  of  the  darkness  of  the  night  which  he 
knew  nothing  of  before  !  and  there  are  sad  sights  which  now  he  must 
look  upon  which  never  grieved  him  before,  for  often  what  the  eye  does 
not  see  the  heart  does  not  rue.  A  man  cannot  gain  a  faculty  except 
at  some  expense  ;  he  that  increaseth' knowledge  or  the  means  of  gaining 
it.  increaseth  both  sorrow  and  duty.  Take  another  case.  A  poor  man 
is  suddenly  made  a  prince  :  it  will  cost  him  the  giving  up  of  his  former 
manners,  and  will  involve  him  in  new  duties  and  cares.  A  man  is  set 
on  the  road  to  heaven  as  a  pilgrim :  does  he  pay  anything  to  enter  by 
the  wicket-gate  ?  I  trow  not ;  free  grace  admits  him  to  the  sacred  way. 
But  when  that  man  is  put  on  the  road  to  heaven  it  will  cost  him  some 
thing.  It  will  cost  him  earnestness  to  knock  at  the  wicket-gate,  and  sweat 
wherewith  to  climb  the  Hill  Difficulty,  it  will  cost  him  tears  to  find  his 
roll  again  when  he  has  lost  it  in  the  arbour  of  ease,  it  will  cost  him 
great  care  in  going  down  the  Valley  of  Humiliation,  it  will  cost  him 
resistance  unto  blood  when  he  stands  foot  to  foot  with  Apollyon  in  con 
flict,  it  will  cost  him  many  fears  when  he  has  to  traverse  the  Valley  of 
the  Shadow  of  Death,  it  may  cost  him  his  life  when  he  comes  to  Vanity 
Fair,  if  like  Faithful  he  is  called  to  bear  testimony  at  the  stake.  True 
religion  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  there  is  nothing  we  can  do  to  purchase 
it ;  at  the  same  time  if  we  receive  it  certain  consequences  will  flow 
from  it,  and  we  ought  to  consider  whether  we  shall  be  able  to  put  up 
with  them. 

You  may  be  sure  that  the  cost  must  be  great,  since  our  Lord  com 
pares  it  to  the  building  of  a  tower.     The  word  here  used  for  "  tower  " 
has  often  bean  employed  to  signify  a  turreted  house,  a  villa,  or  country 
'  mansion.  "  Which  of  you,"  says  he  to  the  people,  "  intending  to  build 
t  for  himself  a  mansion  in  which  to  reside  at  your  ease  would  not  first  of 
all  count  the  cost  ?"     The  building  is  to  be  a  costly  one.     Doddridge  is 
wrong  in   the  supposition  that   a  temporary  tower  is  here  intended. 
That  it  would  cost  a  considerable  sum  is  clear  from  the  Saviour's 


112  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

saying  that  the  wise  man  sits  down  and  counts  the  cost.  He  does  not 
merely  stand  up  and  pass  his  hand  over  his  brow,  and  say,  "  Thia 
tower  will  cost  me  so  many  hundred  pounds,"  but  it  is  to  be  an  elabo 
rate  construction,  an  almost  palatial  edifice,  and  therefore  he  sits  downy 
like  a  merchant  at  his  desk,  and  thoughtfully  considers  the  under 
taking  ;  he  consults  the  architect  and  the  mason,  and  calculates  what 
will  be  the  expense  of  the  outer  walls,  what  of  the  roof,  what  of  the 
interior  fittings,  and  the  like,  and  he  does  not  make  a  rough  guess,  but 
counts  the  cost  as  men  count  their  gold.  It  is  evidently  a  matter  of  con 
sequence  with  him,  and  so  is  true  religion — it  is  no  trifle,  but  an  all- 
important  business.  He  who  thinks  that  a  careless,  hit-or-miss,  head 
long  venture  will  suffice  for  his  eternal  interests  is  the  reverse  of  wise. 

True  godliness  is  the  building  up  of  a  character  which  will  endure 
the  day  of  judgment.  It  begins  in  laying  deep  the  foundations  in 
faith  and  love  and  a  renewed  heart ;  it  is  carried  on  by  the  putting 
patiently  and  carefully,  and  often  painfully,  stone  upon  stone  the  mate 
rials  of  the  fair  edifice,  diligently  adding  "  to  your  faith  courage,  and 
to  courage  knowledge,  and  to  knowledge  temperance,and  to  temperance 
patience,  and  to  patience  godliness,  and  to  godliness  brotherly  kind 
ness,  and  to  brotherly  kindness  charity."  Our  life-work  consists  in 
"  building  up  ourselves  in  our  most  holy  faith."  See  ye  not  that  it 
is  a  glorious  palace  to  which  the  Christian  character  is  likened? 

But,  lest  we  should  still  think  the  expense  small,  our  Lord  compares 
it  to  a  war,  and  he  speaks  of  the  number  of  troops  engaged  in  that 
war,  showing  that  it  is  no  petty  skirmish  of  two  insignificant  tribes ; 
he  likens  it  to  a  war  in  which  upon  one  side  there  is  an  array  of  ten 
thousand,  and  on  the  other  a  host  of  twenty  thousand.  Now,  war 
fare  is  always  expensive  work  ;  besides  the  cost  for  accoutrements  and 
ammunition,  there  is  the  cost  of  human  life  and  blood,  there  is  the 
removal  of  strong  arms  from  work  at  home,  and  the  direr  risks  of 
defeat,  captivity,  and  devastation.  The  Lord  compares  religion,  then, 
in  its  externals,  to  a  battle  between  the  gracious  man  and  the  evils 
rampant  in  the  outside  world.  The  disciple  of  Jesus  has  to  defend 
himself  against  a  gigantic  foe,  and  he  has  within  himself  a  power 
which,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  is  not  sufficient  for  the  contest ;  the 
odds  are  fearful — ten  thousand  against  twenty  thousand.  Well  doea 
the  Saviour  say  in  the  latter  case  that  it  is  well  to  sit  down  to  consult* 
The  king  with  the  smaller  army  consults,  asks  his  sage  senators,  takes 
counsel  from  experience,  calls  in  good  advisers,  and  debates  whether 
the  thing  can  be  done  or  not.  So  should  we  consider  the  matter  of  our 
souls,  for  religion  is  a  costly  thing,  and  not  to  be  entered  on,  as  the 
Frenchman  said,  "  with  a  light  heart."  That  light  heart  cost  his 
nation  dear,  and  so  it  will  ourselves  if  we  indulge  it. 

We  might  have  inferred  this,  I  think,  from  some  other  considera 
tions — namely,  first  from  the  fact  that  true  religion  is  a  lasting  thing. 
It  lasts  for  life.  False  religion  comes  and  goes  ;  true  regeneration  is 
never  repeated,  and  it  is  the  commencement  of  a  life  which  will  know 
no  end,  either  in  time  or  in  eternity.  Now  anything  which  is  to  last 
must  be  expensive.  You  shall  get  your  glass  coloured,  if  you  will, 
cheaply,  but  the  sun  will  soon  remove  all  its  beauty.  If  you  would 
obtain  a  glass  which  shall  retain  its  colour  for  centuries  every  single 


COUNTING  THE  COST.  113 

gtep  in  the  process  of  its  manufacture  will  be  costly,  involving  much 
labour  and  great  care.  So  is  it  with  true  religion.  You  may  get  it 
cheap  if  you  will,  it  will  look  quite  as  well  as  the  real  thing,  and  for  a 
little  while  it  will  bring  you  almost  all  the  comfort  and  respect  which 
the  genuine  article  would  have  brought  you  ;  but  it  will  not  last ;  soon 
will  its  colour  fly,  and  the  beauty  and  the  excellence,  which  were  there 
but  in  pretence,  will  soon  have  gone.  You  want,  dear  friend,  (I  am 
sure  you  do),  you  want  a  godliness  which  will  last  you  till  you  die  : 
well,  then,  it  must  cost  you  something,  be  you  sure  of  that. 

Remember  also  that  true  religion  will  have  to  bear  a  strain,  for  it  is 
certain  to  be  opposed.  This  tower  will  not  be  built  without  opposition. 
It  is  like  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  Sanballat  and  Tobias  will  be  sure  to 
hinder  the  building.  True  religion  must  be  able  to  endure  hardness : 
if  it  cannot  do  that  it  is  good  for  nothing.  The  old  Toledo  blade  cost 
the  warrior  much  at  first  hand,  but  when  he  had  once  procured  it  he 
knew  that  it  would  cut  through  joint  and  marrow  in  the  day  of  battle, 
and  he  was  not  afraid  to  dash  into  the  thick  of  the  fray,  trusting 
to  its  unrivalled  temper  and  keen  edge.  Could  he  not  find  a  cheaper 
sword  ?  I  ween  he  could  have  found  it  easily  enough,  and  with 
small  expense  of  gold,  but  then  in  the  moment  when  his  sword  smote 
upon  his  enemy's  helmet,  instead  of  cleaving  through  the  skull,  it 
snapped  in  the  warrior's  hand  and  cost  him  his  life.  Such  is  the 
cheap  religion  with  which  so  many  take  up  ;  there  is  no  self-denial 
in  it,  no  forsaking  of  the  world,  no  giving  up  of  carnal  amusements — 
they  are  just  the  same  as  the  world  ;  their  religion  costs  them  nothing, 
and  at  last  when  they  want  it  it  will  fail  them,  it  will  snap  like  the 
ill-made  sword  in  the  day  of  battle,  and  leave  them  defenceless.  Oh, 
if  you  want  that  which  will  endure  the  conflict  you  must  spend  cost 
upon  it.  Jesus  Christ  knew  that  the  persons  to  whom  he  spoke 
would  not  be  able  to  bear  the  tests  which  awaited  his  disciples ;  they 
did  not  know  that  he  would  be  crucified,  for  just  then  he  was  popular, 
and  they  hoped  that  he  was  to  be  the  King  of  Israel,  but  the  Saviour 
knew  that  there  would  come  dark  days  in  which  the  King  of  the  Jews 
would  be  hanged  upon  a  gibbet,  and  his  disciples,  even  his  true  ones, 
would  forsake  him  for  the  moment  and  would  flee  ;  and  therefore  he 
in  effect  said  to  them,  "  You  must  be  prepared  for  cross-bearing,  you 
must  be  prepared  to  follow  me  amid  derision  and  shame  and  reproach, 
and  if  you  are  not  ready  for  this  your  discipleship  is  a  mistake.  In 
their  case  it  did  not  stand  the  test,  these  people  were  nowhere  when 
the  time  of  trial  came. 

And  remember,  dear  friends,  and  I  dwell  with  great  emphasis  upon 
this  point,  we  want  a  religion  which  will  abide  the  inspection  of  the 
great  Judge  at  the  last  day.  Now,  there  are  things  in  the  world 
which  will  endure  for  awhile,  but  if  they  are  closely  looked  at,  and 
especially  if  they  are  placed  under  a  microscope,  they  will  be  seen  to 
have  many  flaws  :  now,  no  microscopical  examination  can  for  a  moment 
be  compared  with  the  glance  of  Jehovah,  he  will  read  us  through  and 
through.  Oh,  what  a  withering  will  there  be  for  fair  professions  in 
the  day  when  his  fiery  eye  shall  gaze  upon  them.  Never  does  the  grass 
dry  up  under  the  sirocco  one-half  so  swiftly  as  the  fair  plains  of  pre 
tended  Christianity  will  wither  beneath  the  divine  glance  in  the  last 


114  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

tremendous  day.  He  will  look  upon  what  men  call  Christendom,  and 
it  will  almost  if  not  altogether  vanish ;  for  "  when  the  Son  of  Man 
cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  upon  the  earth  ?  "  Will  it  not,  then,  be 
-evidently  true  that  "many  are  called,  and  but  few  are  chosen"? 
"  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,"  is  still  the  voice  of  Christ  to  all 
•of  us,  "for  many  shall  seek  to  enter  in,  but  shall  not  be  able."  If  our 
religion  is  to  be  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  may  perchance  be  found 
wanting,  it  is  well  for  us  to  see  to  it,  and  to  know  that  it  must  be  sincere, 
genuine,  and  costly,  if  it  is  to  pass  that  ordeal. 

What,  then,  is  the  expense  ?  What  is  the  cost  of  building  this 
tower  or  fighting  this  war  ?  The  answer  is  given  by  our  Saviour,  not 
by  me.  I  should  not  have  dared  to  invent  such  tests  as  he  has 
•ordained  ;  it  is  for  me  to  be  the  echo  of  his  voice  and  no  more.  What 
does  he  say  ?  Why,  first,  that  if  you  would  be  his,  and  have  his  salva- 
ation,  you  must  love  him  beyond  every  other  person  in  this  world. 
Is  not  that  the  meaning  of  this  expression,  "  If  any  man  come  to  me 
•and  hate  not  his  father  and  mother  "  ?  Dear  names  !  Dear  names  ! 
"  Father  and  mother ! "  Lives  there  a  man  with  soul  so  dead  that  he 
can  pronounce  either  of  these  words  without  emotion,  and  especially  the 
last — "  mother  "  ?  Men  and  brethren,  this  is  a  dear  and  tender  name  to 
us,  it  touches  a  chord  which  thrills  our  being  ;  yet  far  more  powerful 
is  the  name  of  Saviour,  the  name  of  Jesus.  Less  loved  must  father  and 
mother  be  than  Jesus  Christ.  The  Lord  demands  precedence  also  of  the 
best  beloved  "wife."  Here  he  touches  another  set  of  heart-strings. 
Dear  is  that  word  "wife,"  partner  of  our  being,  comfort  of  our 
sorrow,  delight  of  our  eyes — "  wife ! "  Yet,  wife,  thou  must  not 
take  the  chief  place,  thou  must  sit  at  Jesus'  feet,  or  else  thou  art  an 
idol,  and  Jesus  will  not  brook  thy  rivalry.  And  "  children,"  the  dear 
babes  that  nestle  in  the  bosom,  and  clamber  to  the  knee  and  pro 
nounce  the  parent's  name  in  accents  of  music,  they  must  not  be  our 
chief  love,  they  must  not  come  in  between  us  and  the  Saviour,  nor  for 
their  sakes,  to  give  them  pleasure  or  to  promote  their  worldly  advan 
tage,  must  we  grieve  our  Lord.  Many  a  child  is  master  of  his  father, 
many  a  daughter  has  been  mistress  to  the  mother ;  but  if  it  be  for 
-evil,  this  must  be  ended  at  once.  If  they  tempt  us  to  evil  they  must 
be  treated  as  if  we  hated  them  ;  yea,  the  evil  in  them  must  be  hated  for 
Christ's  sake.  If  ye  be  Christ's  disciples  your  Lord  must  be  first,  then 
mother,  father,  wife,  children,  brethren,  and  sisters  will  follow  in  due 
•rank  and  order. 

I  am  afraid  that  many  professors  are  not  prepared  for  this.  They 
would  be  Christians  if  their  family  would  approve,  but  they  must 
consult  their  brother,  father,  or  wife.  They  would  make  a  stand 
against  worldly  pleasures  if  others  would,  but  they  cannot  bear  to 
.appear  singular,  or  to  oppose  the  views  of  relatives.  They  say,  "My 
father  wishes  it,  and  I  dare  not  tell  him  that  it  is  wrong  "  "  My 
mother  says  that  we  must  not  be  too  strait-laced,  and  therefore,  though 
my  conscience  tells  me  it  is  wrong,  yet  will  I  do  it ;"  or  else  they  say, 
4<  My  girls  are  growing  up  and  must  have  amusement,  arid  my  boys 
must  be  allowed  their  pleasures,  arid  therefore  I  must  wink  at  sin/' 
Ah,  my  brethren,  this  must  not  be,  if  you  are  indeed  Christ's  disciples. 
You  must  put  them  all  aside,  the  dearest  must  go  sooner  than  Jesus  be 


COUNTING   THE   COST.  115 

forsaken ;  for  does  he  not  say  in  the  Psalms,  "  Hearken,  0  daughter, 
and  consider,  and  incline  thine  ear ;  forget  also  thine  own  people,  and 
thy  father's  house  ;  so  shall  the  king  greatly  desire  thy  beauty  :  for  he  is 
thy  Lord;  and  worship  thou  him"?  Mark  you,  you  will  best  prove 
your  love  to  your  relatives  by  being  decided  for  the  right,  since  you 
will  be  the  more  likely  to  win  their  souls.  Love  them  too  much  to 
indulge  the  wrong  in  them ;  love  them  so  truly  that  you  hate  that  in 
them  which  would  injure  you  and  ruin  them.  You  must  be  prepared 
to  suffer  from  those  who  are  bound  to  you  by  the  dearest  ties ;  sin 
must  not  be  tolerated  whatever  may  happen.  We  cannot  yield  in  the 
point  of  sin,  our  determination  is  invincible  ;  come  hate  or  come  love, 
we  must  follow  Christ. 

The  next  item  of  cost  is  this — self  must  be  hated.  I  am  afraid 
there  are  some  who  would  sooner  hate  father  or  wife  than  hate  their 
own  life.  Yet  such  is  the  demand.  It  means  this :  that  wherein 
my  own  pleasure,  or  my  own  gain,  or  my  own  repute,  or  even  my 
own  life  shall  come  in  the  way  of  Christ's  glory,  I  am  so  little  to 
make  any  account  of  myself,  that  I  must  even  hate  myself  if  self  shall 
stand  in  the  way  of  Christ.  I  am  to  look  upon  father,  mother,  brother, 
sister,  and  myself  also,  as  foes,  so  far  as  they  are  opposed  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  and  his  holy  will.  I  am  to  love  them  and  desire  their  good  as  I 
also  desire  good  for  myself,  but  I  am  not  to  desire  any  good  for  them 
or  for  myself  at  the  cost  of  sinning,  and  robbing  the  Lord  Jesus  of 
his  glory.  As  for  myself,  if  I  see  anything  in  myself  opposed  to  Jesus 
I  must  away  with  it.  I  must  mortify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and 
lusts,  denying  myself  anything  and  everything  which  would  grieve  the 
Saviour,  or  would  prevent  my  realising  perfect  conformity  to  him. 

Next,  the  Saviour  goes  on  to  say  that  if  we  would  follow  him  we 
must  bear  our  cross :  "  Whosoever  doth  not  bear  his  cross  and  coniQ 
after  me  cannot  be  my  disciple."  Sometimes  that  cross  comes  in  the 
shape  of  confessing  our  faith  before  gainsayers.  "  Ah,"  says  the  timid 
heart,  "  if  I  do  so  I  shall  have  all  my  friends  against  me."  Take  up 
your  cross !  it  is  a  part  of  the  cost  of  true  discipleship.  "  I  shall 
scarcely  be  able  to  bear  myself  in  the  house  if  I  avow  my  religion." 
Take  up  your  cross !  my  brother,  or  you  cannot  be  Christ's  disciple. 
"  Well,  but  it  will  involve  a  change  even  in  my  daily  life."  Make  the 
change,  my  brother,  or  you  cannot  be  the  Lord's  disciple.  "  But  I 
know  there  is  one  very  dear  whom  I  have  looked  upon  as  likely  to  be 
my  future  companion,  and  he  will  leave  me  if  I  forsake  the  ways  of 
the  world."  Then,  heavy  as  the  loss  may  be,  let  him  go,  if  it  be  so 
that  you  cannot  follow  Christ  and  uiJte  with  him  ;  for  Jesus  you  must 
follow,  or  be  lost  for  ever.  What  trying  words  these  are  !  What  de 
tectors  of  the  hypocrisy  of  many  professing  Christians !  Did  they 
ever  separate  from  the  world  ?  No,  not  they ;  they  fail  in  with  its 
fashions  as  the  dead  fish  floats  with  the  current.  Have  they  any  cross 
to  bear  ?  Does  anybody  reproach  them  with  being  too  rigid,  and  too 
puritanical  ?  Oh,  no  !  for  theirs  is  the  religion  which  the  world  praises, 
and  consequently  the  religion  which  God  abhors.  If  any  man  love  the 
world  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him,  and  he  who  has  the  smile 
of  the  ungodly  must  look  for  the  frown  of  God. 

But,  more  than  this,  the  Saviour,  as  another  item  of  cose,  requires 


116  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

that  his  disciple  should  take  up  his  cross,  and  come  after  him :  that 
is  t©  say,  he  must  act  as  Christ  acted.  If  we  are  not  prepared  to  make 
Christ  our  example,  yea,  if  it  be  not  our  highest  ambition  to  live  as 
he  lived,  to  give  ourselves  up  to  act  as  he  did,  we  cannot  be  his  disciples. 

Last  of  all,  we  must  make  an  unreserved  surrender  of  all  to  Jesus. 
Listen  to  these  words :  "  Whosoever  he  be  of  you  that  forsaketh  not 
all  that  he  hath,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple."  It  may  yet  come  to  this, 
that  persecution  may  arise,  and  you  may  have  actually  to  give  up  all. 
You  must  be  prepared  for  the  event.  You  may  not  have  to  give  up 
anything,  but  the  surrender  must  be  just  as  real  in  your  heart  as  if 
it  had  to  be  carried  out  in  act  and  deed.  No  man  has  truly  given 
himself  to  Christ  unless  he  has  also  said,  "  My  Lord,  I  give  to  thee 
this  day  my  body,  my  soul,  my  powers,  my  talents,  my  goods,  my 
house,  my  children,  and  all  that  I  have.  Henceforth  I  will  hold  them 
at  thy  will,  as  a  steward  under  thee.  Thine  they  are — as  for  me,  I  have 
nothing,  I  have  surrendered  all  to  thee."  You  cannot  be  Christ's 
disciples  at  any  less  expense  than  this :  if  you  possess  a  farthing  that 
is  your  own  and  not  your  Master's,  Christ  is  not  your  Master.  IjTmust 
be  all  his,  every  single  jot  and  tittle,  and  your  life  also,  or  you  cannot 
be  his. 

These  are  very  searching  words,  but  I  would  remind  you  once  again 
that  they  are  none  of  mine.  If  in  expounding  them  I  have  erred,  I 
am  grieved  that  it  should  be  so,  but  I  am  persuaded  I  have  not  erred 
on  the  side  of  too  great  severity.  I  confess  I  may  have  spoken  too 
leniently.  The  words  of  the  text  lay  the  axe  to  the  root,  and  are 
sweeping  to  the  last  degree.  Oh,  count  ye,  then,  the  cost !  and  if  any 
of  you  have  taken  up  a  religion  which  costs  you  nothing,  put  it  down 
and  flee  from  it,  for  it  will  be  your  curse  and  your  ruin. 
-  Is  there  any  getting  to  heaven  without  this  cost  ?  No.  But  may 
we  not  be  Christians  without  these  sacrifices  ?  You  may  be  counter 
feits,  you  may  be  hypocrites,  you  may  be  brethren  of  Judas,  but  you 
cannot  be  real  Christians.  This  cost  is  unavoidable,  it  cannot  be  bated 
one  solitary  mite.  God  grant  you  may  be  enabled  to  submit  to  it. 

II.  The  second  head  is  this,  WISDOM  SUGGESTS  THAT  WE  SHOULD 
COUNT  THE  COST.  You  feel  you  would  like  to  be  a  Christian.  Dear 
friend,  give  me  thy  hand.  I  am  glad  thou  hast  such  a  liking.  But  as 
I  grasp  thy  hand  and  would  fain  draw  thee  towards  Christ,  I  look  thee 
in  the  face  and  say,  "  Dost  thou  know  what  thou  desirest  ?  Art  thou 
sure  thou  desirest  it  ?  There  are  men  lying  on  beds  of  sickness  who 
cry  for  help,  but  when  they  recover  and  have  to  go  out  and  battle  with 
the  world,  the  time  may  come  when  they  will  say,  "  I  would  as  leave  be 
on  the  bed  of  sickness  again."  I  should  not  like  a  time  to  come  when 
any  one  of  you  shall  say,  "  I  joined  the  church,  but  it  was  a  mistake. 
I  did  not  weigh  the  matter  rightly.  I  am  now  in  for  it,  and  I  am  sorry 
I  am,  for  I  ought  not  to  be  where  I  am."  If  honest,  you  ought  to  give 
up  your  profession,  if  such  is  the  case.  If  you  have  no  grace,  I  hope 
you  will  have  enough  of  common  honesty  not  to  stick  to  a  practical  false 
hood.  I  should  grieve  indeed  if  that  should  happen,  and  therefore  this 
morning,  I  pray  you,  count  the  cost.  For  mark,  if  you  do  not  count  the 
cost,  you  will  not  be  able  to  carry  out  your  resolves.  It  is  a  great 
building,  it  is  a  great  war.  No  mistake  can  be  greater  than  the  notion 


COUNTING    THE   COST  H7 

that  in  order  to  be  saved  there  is  only  needed  a  measure  of  emotion  during 
a  few  days,  and  the  belief  of  some  one  decisive  hour.  If  I  preached  such 
doctrines  I  should  be  deceiving  your  souls.  Faith  and  repentance 
are  not  the  work  of  a"  week  or  two,  they  are  a  life-work  ;  as  long  as  the 
Christian  is  on  earth  he  must  repent ;  and  as  for  faith,  it  is  not  saying 
"  I  believe  in  Jesus,  and  therefore  I  am  saved,"  but  it  is  a  daily  grace, 
the  trust  of  a  lifetime ;  the  Christian  continues  still  to  believe  and 
repent  until  he  commences  to  triumph  in  eternal  glory,  Moreover,  faith 
is  continually  productive  of  sanctifying  results  upon  the  life  of  the 
believer,  or  otherwise  he  is  not  possessed  of  the  right  faith.  He  who 
believes  in  Jesus  Christ  is  saved ;  but  if  there  were  such  a  thing 
as  a  temporary  faith  there  would  be  such  a  thing  as  a  temporary  salva 
tion.  He  who  truly  repents  of  sin  is  a  renewed  man,  but  if  repentance 
of  sin  were  only  a  transient  thing,  and  were  soon  over,  the  life  which 
it  indicated  would  be  over  too.  You  must  not  be  content  with  false 
and  fleeting  religion.  You  are  beginning  to  build  a  tower  of  which  the 
topstone  will  never  be  laid  till  you  are  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  you  are 
commencing  a  war  which  will  never  end  till  you  exchange  the  sword  for 
the  palm  branch. 

Remember,  also,  that  to  fail  in  this  great  enterprise  will  involve  ter 
rible  defeat,  for  what  says  our  Lord  ?     He  says  that  not  to  be  able  to 
finish  will  expose  you  to  ridicule.     I  beg  you  to  notice  the  form  of  that 
ridicule.     "  All  that  pass  by  will  begin  to  mock  him,  saying  one  to 
another  (for  that  is  the  force  of  the  expression)  this  man  began  to 
build  but  was  not  able  to  finish."      Our  Lord  does  not  represent  them 
as  saying  to  the  foolish   builder,   "  You   began   to  buiid  and   were 
not  able  to  finish,"  but  as  speaking  about  him  as  a  third  person — "This 
man."     Now,  half-hearted  Christians,  half-hearted  religious  men,  may 
not  be  scoffed  at  in  the  public  streets  to  their  faces,  but  they  are  common 
butts  of  ridicule  behind  their  backs.     You  false  professors  are  univer 
sally  despised.     Worldlings  laughingly   say,  "Ah,  these   are   pretty 
specimens  of  church   members!"     The  world  looks  upon  a  worldly 
church  with  utter  disdain,  and  for  my  part  little  do  I  regret  that  such 
derision  is  poured  upon  an  object  which  so  well  deserves  it.     To  be  a 
mere  pretender  to   Christian  discipleship  is  to  become  an  object  of 
scorn  in  time  and  in  eternity,  and  such  will  be  the  false  professor's 
fate.     Sir,  if  you  mean  to  be  a  Christian,  resolve  that  it  shall  be  the  right 
thing,  thorough  and  decided ;  for  then  though  men  will  not  go  about 
and  praise  you  to  your  face,  they  will  honour  you,  and  even  those  who 
hate  you  will  know  your  value  ;  but  if  you  are  only  half  a  Christian, 
and  not  thorough,  they  may  not  come  to  your  face  and  show  their  con 
tempt,   but  as  they  pass   by   they   will   sneer,  and  will  have  more 
respect  for  a  downright  worldling  than  for  you,  because  he  is  what 
he   says   he  is,   and  makes  no  pretence  of  being  anything  else,  but 
as  for  you,  you  began  to  build  and  could  not  finish.     What  a  wretched 
object  is  a  sham  Christian !     We  have  sometimes  seen  great  build 
ings  which  have  been  commenced  and  deserted  by  over  speculative 
persons,    and    the    neighbours    have    called  them    "  Smith's   Folly," 
or  "  Brown's  Folly,"  or  "  Robinson's  Folly,"  or  the  like ;  these  are 
but   fleeting   causes   of  derision ;    but  the   pretender,   the   man  who 
i  appearance  commenced  to  be  a  Christian  and  then  broke  down  at  it, 


118  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

will  be  pointed  afc  even  by  the  lost  in  hell.  The  drunkard  will  cry,  "  And 
you  ?  Have  you  also  come  hither  ?  you  who  were  so  eloquent  about 
sobriety,  and  so  ready  to  rebuke  the  tippler."  te  Aha  !  "  cries  another, 
"  you  are  the  man  who  lived  down  our  street,  and  made  so  much  show 
of  your  religion  ;  you  told  me  I  was  very  wicked,  but  what  are  you  better 
off  than  I  am  ?  "  Behold,  I  see  the  openly  profane  upraise  themselves- 
from  their  racks  of  remorse  to  exclaim,  "  Art  thou  become  like  one  of 
us  ?  Thou  church-member,  art  thou  in  hell  ?  Is  the  taste  of  the  sac 
ramental  wine  upon  thy  lips  still  ?  Wherefore,  then,  dost  thou 
demand  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  thy  tongue  ?  That  sacramental  bread 
which  thou  didst  swallow  so  readily,  does  it  not  even  now  stick  in  thy 
hypocritical  throat  ?  Thou  liar  before  God  and  man,  meet  and  right 
is  it  that  thou  art  cast  out  even  as  we."  Oh,  if  you  must  be  lost,  be- 
lost  as  anything  but  hypocrites  ;  if  you  must  perish,  perish  rather  out 
side  the  church  than  in  it.  Do  not  ape  the  Lord  of  glory  !  I  know 
of  no  worse  act  than  to  mimic  the  excellences  of  the  Saviour  with  pert 
imitation  of  his  graces.  What  worse  offence  can  you  render  to  the 
majesty  of  his  sacred  virtue  than  to  travesty  his  holiness  and  ape  his 
perfection  ? 

III.  The  last  word  shall  be  this,  that  COST  WHATEVER  IT  MAY,  TRUE 
RELIGION  is  WORTH  THE  COST.  We  are  like  a  man  with  the  black 
pest  upon  him  who  knows  that  he  is  dying,  and  yet  yonder  is  a  drug 
which  will  heal  him.  "  Physician,"  says  he,  "you  ask  so  great  a  price 
that  each  drop  costs  me  a  diamond ;  you  are  demanding  more  than  its- 
weight  in  choicest  pearls,  but  it  does  not  matter,  I  must  have  it.  If  I 
do  not  I  am  a  dead  man,  and  then  what  will  it  profit  me  that  I  have 
kept  my  gold  ?  "  It  is  the  case  of  every  one  of  us  here  present,  we 
must  have  Christ  or  perish  for  ever,  and  it  will  be  better  for  us  to  cut 
off  our  right  arm  and  to  pluck  out  our  right  eye  than  that  we  should 
be  cast  into  hell  fire. 

Mark  you,  brethren,  the  present  blessings  of  true  religion  are  worth 
all  the  cost.  What  if  I  have  to  rend  some  fond  connection  ?  Jesus, 
thou  art  better  to  me  than  husband,  wife,  or  child.  If  it  must  be  so 
that  she  who  lies  in  my  bosom  shall  count  me  for  her  enemy  thou 
shalt  be  in  my  heart,  my  Saviour,  better  than  a  Eachel,  or  a  Rebekah. 
Yes.,  if  it  must  be  so  "that  the  father  shall  say,  "  You  shall  never 
darken  my  doors  again  if  you  follow  Christ,"  he  must  say  it,  for  when 
father  and  mother  forsake  me  the  Lord  will  take  me  up.  The  imme 
diate  joy  will  recompense  for  the  immediate  loss,  yea,  doubtless  you 
may  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of 
Christ  Jesus  your  Lord,  and  yet  remain  a  gainer. 

And  again,  what  recompense  comes  for  all  cost  in  the  consolation 
afforded  by  true  godliness  in  the  article  of  death  ?  To  lie  a-dying, 
why  it  will  give  no  pain  to  be  able  to  say  then,  '•  I  was  cast  out  of  my 
family  for  Jesus."  It  will  be  no  sorrow  to  remember,  "  I  was  ridiculed 
for  Christ."  It  will  cause  us  no  pangs  to  say,  "  I  was  counted  too  pre 
cise  and  too  much  of  a  Puritan."  No,  my  brethren,  those  are  not 
the  things  which  put  thorns  into  death  pillows.  Oh,  no !  there  we 
shall  see  how  sweet  it  was  to  have  borne  any  part  of  Jesus'  cross ;  a 
sliver  of  his  cross  will  be  worth  a  king's  ransom  on  a  dying  day. 
Moreover,  at  the  judgment,  when  the  trumpet  rings  out,  and  the  dead 


COUNTING   THE   COST.  119 

are  rising,  we  shall  not  say,  "  I  suffered  too  much  for  Christ."  When  to 
the  right  his  chosen  go,  and  we  among  them,  we  shall  not  look  back 
'with  regret  to  the  fact  that  we  lost  caste  in  society  and  position  amongst 
the  refined  for  Jesus'  sake.  We  shall  not  lament  that  we  attended  a 
despised  conventicle,  and  worshipped  among  the  poor  of  this  world  out 
of  love  to  Jesus,  and  fidelity  to  his  gospel.  Oh,  no  !  I  warrant  you 
in  that  day  he  shall  shine  brightest  who  was  most  beclouded  "for 
his'  Lord's  sake.  Midst  the  bright  ones,  doubly  bright  shall  be  the 
martyr  band  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,  who  were  accounted 
as  the  offscouring  of  all  things ;  and  while  each  one  of  the  disciples 
shall  receive  a  hundredfold  for  all  he  may  have  given  up  for  his  Lord's 
cause,  these  shall  have  the  fairest  portion. 

Moreover,  let  me  remind  you,  beloved,  that  Christ  asks  you  to  give 
up  nothing  that  will  injure  you.  If  you  must  hate  father  and  mother 
it  is  only  in  this  sense,  that  you  will  not  yield  to  their  wrong  requests, 
nor  will  you  leave  Christ  for  them.  If  you  must  give  up  any  pleasure  it 
is  because  it  is  not  a  fitting  pleasure  for  you,  it  is  poisonous  sugar  of 
lead,  and  not  true  sweetness.  Christ  will  give  you  greater  enjoyments 
by  far. 

Moreover,  I  remember  that  our  Redeemer  does  not  ask  any  one  of 
us  to  do  what  he  has  not  done  himself.  That  thought  pierces  me  to 
the  quick,  I  wish  it  might  affect  you  also.  Master,  dost  thou  say,  give 
up  father  ?  Didst  thou  not  leave  thy  Father  ?  Dost  thou  bid  me 
even  leave  my  father's  house  if  it  must  be  for  thy  sake  ?  Didst  thou 
not  leave  the  glorious  mansions  of  heaven  ?  Wh'at  if  I  be  called  to 
bear  reproach?  They  called  the  Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub. 
What  if  I  be  cast  out  ?  They  also  cast  thee  out.  When  we  think 
of  the  scourgings,  and  the  shame,  and  the  spitting  which  the  Lord 
endured,  what  are  our  griefs  ?  And  if  for  his  sake  we  should  even 
be  condemned  to  death  we  know  how  he  hung  on  the  cross,  stripped  of 
his  all,  that  he  might  save  us  from  the  wrath  to  come.  0  believer, 
can  you  follow  your  Lord  whithersoever  he  goeth  ?  Soldiers  of  the 
cross,  can  you  follow  him  ?  Is  the  path  smooth  enough  for  those  dear 
feet  and  too  rough  for  you  ?  There  is  he  in  the  centre  of  the  battle 
where  the  blows  fall  fastest,  will  you  follow  him  ?  Dare  you  follow 
him,  or  do  you  pine  for  the  tents  of  ease,  and  the  soft  couches  of  the 
cowards  yonder  who  are  shrinking  back,  and  deserting  to  the  enemy  ? 
Oh,  by  everything  that  is  good,  if  you  be  indeed  his  followers,  I  charge 
you  cry,  "  Where  he  is,  there  let  his  servant  be,  as  he  fares  so  let  his 
servant  fare  ;  in  this  world  be  ours  his  humiliation  that  in  the  world 
to  come  we  may  be  partakers  of  his  glory." 

This  is  strong  preaching,  you  tell  me,  but  the  Saviour  meant  all  that 
I  have  said.  His  was  a  testing  discourse,  but  there  are  truths  to  be 
remembered  which  may  console  us  while  hearing  them.  It  is  true  that 
you  cannot  build  the  tower ;  Joshua  said  to  the  people  in  his  time, 
"Ye  cannot  serve  the  Lord."  If  you  have  counted  the  cost,  you  know 
by  this  time  that  you  cannot  wage  the  war.  Ten  thousand  cannot 
stand  against  twenty  thousand.  But  yet  it  must  be  done,  inevitable 
necessity  drives  on  behind ;  whatever  may  be  in  front,  we  dare  not 
turn  back.  Remember  Lot's  wife.  What,  then,  must  we  do  ?  Hear 
ye  the  Lord's  words,  "  With  men  it  is  impossible,  but  with  God  all 


120  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

things  are  possible."  Are  you  willing  ?  Then  the  Spirit  of  God  will 
help  you.  You  shall  give  up  the  world  and  the  flesh  without  a  sigh  ; 
you  shall  fight  against  your  lusts  and  you  shall  overcome  them  through 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  The  tower  shall  be  built  and  the  Lord  shall 
inhabit  it.  Cast  yourselves  on  Jesus  by  a  simple  faith :  rest  in  his 
power,  and  from  day  to  day  believe  in  his  strength,  and  he  will  bear 
you  safely  through. 

Do  you  notice  the  verse  which  follows  this  passage?  I  wonder 
whether  anything  like  it  will  follow  my  sermon.  It  is  astonishing  that 
though  Jesus  thundered  out  as  from  the  top  of  Sinai,  and  his  words 
seemed  harsh,  yet  it  is  written,  "  Then  drew  near  unto  him  all  the 
publicans  and  sinners  for  to  hear  him,"  as  if  they  said  to  themselves, 
"This  mar  tells  us  the  truth,  therefore  we  will  hear  him."  And 
then  he  began  to  tell  them  the  precious  truths  of  his  free  grace, 
acting  just  as  the  husbandman  does  who  puts  in  the  plough  and  turns 
up  the  soil .  und  when  he  sees  the  clods  breaking  in  the  furrow  then 
he  scatters  cne  golden  seed,  but  not  till  then.  Ho,  every  one  of  you 
who  would  a&ve  Christ,  come,  and  have  him !  You  who  would  have 
salvation,  accept  it  ds  the  gift  of  his  sovereign  grace ;  but  do  not  re 
ceive  it  under  misapprehension ;  understand  what  is  meant  by  it. 
Salvation  is  not  deliverance  from  hell  alone  ;  it  is  deliverance  from 
sin.  It  is  not  the  rescue  of  men  from  eternal  pain  merely ;  it  is  their 
redemption  from  this  world's  vain  and  wicked  ways.  It  cannot  be 
divided,  it  is  a  garment  without  seam,  woven  from  the  top  throughout 
If  you  would  have  justification,  you  must  have  sanctification  :  if  you 
would  have  pardon,  you  must  have  holiness  ;  if  you  would  be  one  with 
Christ,  you  must  be  separate  from  sinners.  If  you  would  walk  the 
streets  of  gold  above,  you  must  walk  the  road  of  holiness  below.  Glod 
grant  you  his  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  you  so  to  do,  and  his  shall  be  the 
praise  for  ever.  Amen. 


PORTIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ   BEFORE   SERMON — Psalm  ciii. ; 
Luke  xiv.  25—35. 


HYMNS  FROM  "OuR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 906,  671,596. 


rfppfitan  3fafynrai[li[  fluty'it 


CONSIDER  BEFORE  YOU  FIGHT. 


J&rnura 


PREACHED   AT   THE  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON, 

BY 


C,  H.  SPURGEON. 


"  What  king,  going  to  make  war  against  another  king,  sitteth  not  down  first,  and 
eonsulteth  whether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to  meet  him  that  cometh  against  him 
with  twenty  thousand  ?  Or  else,  while  the  other  is  yet  a  great  way  off,  he  sendeth  an 
ambassage,  and  desireth  conditions  of  peace." — Luke  xiv.  31,  32. 

EVERY  sensible  man  endeavours  to  adapt  his  purposes  to  his  strength. 
He  does  not  begin  to  build  a  house  which  he  will  not  be  able  to  finish, 
nor  commence  a  war  which  he  cannot  hope  to  fight  through.  The 
religion  of  Christ  is  the  most  reasonable  one  in  the  world,  and  Jesus 
Christ  never  desires  to  have  any  disciples  who  shall  blindly  follow  him 
without  counting  the  cost.  We  always  esteem  it  to  be  a  happy  thing 
when  we  can  get  men  to  sit  down  and  consider.  The  most  of  you  are 
BO  full  of  other  thoughts,  so  occupied  with  the  world,  ever  running  hither 
and  thither  about  your  ordinary  business,  that  we  cannot  get  you  to 
think,  or  calmly  sit  down,  and  soberly  look  at  things  as  in  the  light  of 
eternity,  and  weigh  them  deliberately  as  you  ought.  And  yet  it  is  only 
reasonable  that  the  Master  should  ask  of  you  to  do  for  him  with  regard 
to  your  own  spiritual  matters,  what  you  will  admit  that  every  sensible 
man  does  in  his  business  continually.  You  are  poor  traders  if  you 
never  have  any  stock-takings  :  you  are  likely  to  be  ere  long  in  the 
bankruptcy  court  if  there  is  no  periodical  examination  of  accounts;  and 
so  Christ  would  have  you  sit  down  sometimes,  and  take  stock,  as  to 
where  you  are,  and  what  you  are,  and  then  to  figure  up  by  some  sort  of 
arithmetic  by  which  you  may  come  to  a  truthful  calculation,  what  you 
are  able  to  do,  and  what  not  to  do,  and  what  therefore  it  is  reason 
able  for  you  to  undertake,  and  what  unreasonable,  and  where  your 
position  ought,  and  where  it  ought  not  to  be. 

I  especially  invite  this  evening,  those  who  are  unconverted  in  this 
assembly,  to  some  few  thoughts  upon  the  w?ar  in  which  they  are  en 
gaged  with  God,  hoping  that  peradventure  if  they  consider  a  little  upon 
it,  they  will  send  an  ambassage,  and  desire  peace.  "When  I  have  spoken 
upon  that,  there  will  be  some,  perhaps,  who  will  be  running  away  with 
the  idea  that  they  will  at  once  be  at  peace  with  God,  and  make  war  with 

No.  632  2$ 

'20 


302  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Satan;  but  I  shall  want  to  pin  them  down  a  moment,  and  make  them 
estimate  their  chances  of  victory  in  such  a  war  as  that,  and  see  whether 
they  are  able  to  meet  the  black  prince  of  darkness  in  their  own  strength. 
We  will  try  if  we  cannot  make  it  to-night  the  subject  of  a  little  homely 
talk  about  our  souls,  and  a  little  earnest  personal  consideration  about 
our  future. 

I.  First,  then,  THERE  ARE  SOME  HERE  WHO  ARE  NOT  THE  FRIENDS 
OF  GOD,  and  in  this  case  he  that  is  not  with  him  is  against  him. 

If  you  cannot  look  up  to  God,  and  say,  "  My  Father,"  and  feel  that 
your  heart  beats  true  to  him,  then  remember  it  is  a  fact  that  you  are  his 
enemy.  If  you  could  have  what  you  wish  there  would  be  no  God.  If  it 
were  m  your  power  you  would  never  trouble  yourself  again  with  thoughts 
of  him.  You  would  like  to  live,  you  say,  as  you  list,  and  I  know  how  you 
would  list  to  live.  It  would  be  anyhow,  rather  than  as  God  commands. 
Now,  as  you  are  engaged  in  antagonism  with  him,  just  think  awhile — 
Can  you  expect  to  succeed?  Are  you  likely  to  win  the  day?  You  have 
entered  into  a  conflict  with  his  law;  you  do  not  intend  to  keep  it;  with 
his  day,  you  do  not  regard  it;  you  are  thus  at  war  with  God.  Now,  is  it 
likely  that  you  will  be  successful?  Is  there  a  chance  for  you?  If  there  be, 
why  then,  perhaps,  it  may  be  as  well  to  go  on.  If  you  can  conquer 
him,  if  the  battlements  of  glory  may  yet  see  the  flag  of  sin  waved 
triumphant  there,  why,  man,  then  try  it.  There  will  be  at  least  an 
ambition  worthy  of  Satan  who  desired  sooner  to  reign  in  hell  than  to  be 
ruled  by  heaven.  But  is  there  any  hope  for  you  ?  Let  me  put  a  few 
things  before  you  which  may,  perhaps,  make  you  think  the  conflict 
too  unequal  and  thus  lead  you  to  abandon  the  thought  at  once. 

Think  of  God's  stupendous  power !  What  is  there  which  he  cannot 
do  ?  We  see  but  little  of  God's  power  comparatively  in  our  land. 
Now  and  then  there  comes  a  crash  of  thunder  in  a  storm,  and  we  look  up 
with  amazement  when  he  sets  the  heavens  on  a  blaze  with  his  lightning. 
But  go,  and  do  business  on  the  deep  waters;  let  your  vessel  fly  before 
the  howling  hurricane;  mark  how  every  staunch  timber  seems  to  crack 
as  though  it  were  but  match-board,  and  the  steady  mast  goes  by  the 
board,  and  snaps,  and  is  broken  to  shivers.  Mark  what  God  does  when 
he  stirs  up  the  great  deep,  and  seems  to  bring  heaven  down,  and  lift  the 
earth  up  till  the  elements  mingle  in  a  common  mass  of  tempest.  Then 
go  to  the  Alps,  and  listen  to  the  thunder  of  the  avalanche.  Stand  amazed, 
as  you  look  down  some  grim  precipice,  or  peer  with  awe-struck  wonder 
into  the  blue  mysteries  of  a  crevasse;  see  the  leaping  cataracts,  and  mark 
those  frozen  seas,  the  glaciers,  as  they  come  sweeping  down  the  mountain 
side;  stay  awhile  till  a  storm  shall  gather  there,  and  Alp  shall  talk  to 
Alp,  and  those  white  prophetic  heads  shall  seem  to  bow  while  the 
wings  of  tempest  cover  them !  There  you  may  learn  something  of 
the  power  of  God  amidst  the  crash  of  nature.  If  you  could  have 
stood  by  the  side  of  Dr.  Woolfe,  when  rising  early  one  morning,  he 
went  out  of  Aleppo,  and  upon  turning  his  head,  saw  that  Aleppo  was 
no  more,  it  having  been  in  a  single  moment  swallowed  up  by  an  earth 
quake,  then  again  you  might  see  what  God  can  do.  But  why  need 
I  feebly  recapitulate  what  you  all  know  so  well?  Think  of  what  that 
Book  records  of  his  deeds  of  prowess,  when  he  unloosed  the  depths, 
and  bade  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  be  broken  up,  that  the  whole 


CONSIDER   BEFORE   YOU   FIGHT.  303 

world  that  then  was,  might  be  covered  with  water.  Think  of  what 
he  did  at  the  Red  Sea,  when  the  deptns  stood  upright  as  an  heap  for  a 
time,  while  his  people  went  through,  and  when  afterwards  with  eager 
joy  the  floods  clasped  their  hands,  and  buried  the  foemen  in  the  deep, 
never  to  rise  again  !  Let  such  names  as  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  Sihon, 
king  of  the  Amorites,  and  Sennacherib,  the  mighty,  rise  before  your 
recollection,  and  mark  what  God  lias  done !  Who  has  ever  dashed  upon 
the  bosses  of  his  buckler  without  being  wounded?  What  iron  has  he 
not  broken  ?  What  spear  has  he  not  shivered  ?  Millions  came  against 
him,  but  by  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  they  fell,  or  they  flew, 
like  the  chaff  before  the  wind.  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness 
thereof,  but  the  rocks  stand  still,  and  hurl  off  the  waves  in  flakes  of  foam, 
and  so  doth  God,  when  his  foes  are  most  enraged,  and  passionate.  He  that 
sitteth  in  the  heavens  doth  laugh;  the  Lord  doth  have  them  in  derision; 
and  he  breaketh  them  in  pieces  without  a  stroke  of  his  hand,  or  even 
the  glance  of  his  eye.  Think,  sinner,  think,  of  him  with  whom  thou  con- 
tendest.  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God's?  Canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice 
like  his  ?  Canst  thou  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  shake  the  mountains? 
Canst  thou  touch  the  hills,  and  make  them  smoke  ?  Canst  thou  say  to 
the  sea,  "Be  stirred  to  thy  depths,"  or  canst  thou  call  to  the  winds,  and 
bid  the  steeds  of  tempest  be  unloosed  ?  If  thou  canst  not,  then  think 
of  the  battle!  Attempt  to  do  no  more  but  hie  thee  back  to  thy  bed, 
and  there  commune  with  thine  heart,  and  make  thy  peace  with  him, 
against  whom  thou  canst  not  hope  successfully  to  contend. 

Think,  again,  0  rebellious  man,  you  have  to  deal  not  only  with 
almighty,  but  with  an  ever  encompassing  power.  Please  to  think  how 
much  you  are  in  God's  power  to-night  as  it  regards  your  temporal  posi 
tion.  You  are  prospering  in  business;  but  the  tide  of  prosperity  may  be 
turned  in  a  way  unknown  to  you.  God  has  a  thousand  ways  of  strip 
ping  those  whom  he  aforetime  seemed  to  clothe  most  lavishly.  Youdoat 
upon  that  wife  of  yours :  she  may  be  smitten  before  your  eyes,  and  waste 
with  consumption  or  decline,  or,  more  rapidly  still,  she  may  be  taken 
from  you  at  4  stroke,  and  then  where  is  your  joy  ?  Those  children, 
those  happy  prattlers  who  make  glad  you*  hearth ;  could  you  hold  them 
for  a  moment,  if  God  should  call  back  their  spirits?  If  he  said, 
"  Return  ye  children  of  men,"  your  prayers,  the  physician,  your  love — 
what  could  all  these  avail  you  ?  You  have  but  to  buy  the  coffin,  and 
the  shroud,  and  the  grave,  and  bury  your  dead  out  of  your  sight.  God 
can  sweep  away  all,  if  he  will,  and  leave  you  penniless,  childless,  a 
widower,  without  comfort  in  the  world.  I  would  not  contend  with  him 
who  has  so  many  ways  to  wound  me.  I  am  vulnerable  at  so  many 
points,  and  he  knows  how  to  pierce  me  to  the  quick  in  them  all.  I 
will,  therefore,  make  him  my  friend  rather  than  my  foe.  I  had  better 
not  strive  with  him  who  has  the  key  of  the  postern,  and  of  the  front  gate, 
and  of  the  iron  gate,  and  who  can  storm  every  position  along  my  bastion 
whenever  he  shall  please. 

Think,  again,  how  much  you  are  personally  in  his  hand !  You  are 
strong  you  say;  you  will  do  a  day's  work  with  any  man;  there  are  few 
can  lift  a  load  more  readily  than  you  can  perhaps,  and  yet  one  second 
would  be  enough  to  paralyse  every  limb.  Your  faculties  are  clear; 
you  can  write  with  perspicuity,  no  one  can  see  through  an  intricate 


504  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

account  more  rapidly  than  you  can,  or  find  out  a  secret  more  speedily;  and 
yet  one  tick  of  that  clock  is  time  enough  to  reduce  either  you  or  me  to  a 
drivelling  idiot,  or  to  a  raving  madman.  A  mysterious  hand  falls  on 
that  brain,  and  cools  it,  so  that  there  is  no  longer  the  light  of  intellect 
within  it,  or  else  an  awful  breath  fans  its  flame,  till  it  burns  like 
Nebuchadnezzar's  furnace,  and  the  soul  walks  within  it  a  martyr, 
doomed  to  live  in  the  midst  of  fire.  Think  of  this — not  many  yards 
from  here  there  stands  in  Bedlam  an  awful  proof  of  what  the  Providence 
of  God  can  do  in  one  moment  with  those  who  seemed  the  most  sane, 
the  most  witty,  and  the  most  able  of  men ;  and  you  have  not  to  go  far 
in  either  direction,  before  at  the  gate  of  some  hospital,  you  will 
find  how  soon  the  body  may  become  very,  very  low,  even  to  the 
dust,  if  God  but  will  it.  I  would  not,  0  sinner"  I  would  not  have 
God  other  than  my  friend,  while  I  am  thus  helplessly  in  his  control. 
If  the  moth  is  in  my  hand,  and  I  can  crush  it  at  my  will  and  pleasure, 
surely  if  that  moth  had  wit  and  sense,  it  would  not  provoke  me  to  anger, 
nor  seek  to  bring  down  my  plagues  upon  it,  but,  if  it  could,  it  would 
seek  to  nestle  near  my  heart,  that  I,  so  able  to  crush  it,  might  use  my 
power  for  its  protection,  and  might  make  what  wit  I  have  to  be  its 
wisdom  for  its  shelter  and  defence. 

It  is  well  also  to  remember  the  mighty  army  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts, 
and  that  you  live  amidst  the  creatures  of  God  who  all  are  ready  to 
do  his  bidding.  As  the  children  of  Israel  journeyed  in  the  wilderness, 
they  were  preserved  by  God  from  many  foes  and  innumerable  dangers 
which  lurked  around,  waiting  to  destroy  them.  Once  God  gave  the 
fiery  serpents  permission  to  assault  the  host,  and  what  death  and 
terror  immediately  filled  the  camp!  They  must  have  seen  then,  that  it 
was  no  small  thing  to  be  at  variance  with  God,  when  he  had  so  many 
allies  waiting  to  do  his  bidding.  How  clearly  this  was  shown  in  the 
plagues  of  Egypt,  when  frogs,  locusts,  and  lice,  hail  and  fire,  plague 
and  death,  flooded  the  ill-fated  land,  when  beckoned  on  by  the  uplifted 
finger  of  God.  He  can  still  call  to  his  help  the  forces  of  creation. 
The  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  Sisera,  and  God  can  still  make 
all  things  work  for  evil  as  well  as  good,  if  he  be  pleased  to  command  them. 
"When  Herod  strove  with  God,  he  was  smitten  of  worms  and  died, 
and  God  has  still  a  countless  army  of  servants  who  do  his  command 
ments,  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  word.  You  had  better  wait 
awhile  and  think  how  you  can  meet  them.  Are  your  friends  as  nume 
rous?  Can  you  muster  an  army  like  unto  God's?  Is  the  muster-roll 
of  your  hosts  like  unto  his?  Consider  the  heavens,  for  he  marshalleth 
yon  starry  multitude  and  calleth  them  all  by  names;  because  he  is  great 
in  strength,  not  one  faileth.  Be  wise  and  enter  into  covenant  with  him 
through  blood,  and  rush  not  on  to  certain  defeat  by  seeking  to  outrival 
God. 

Remember  moreover  what  is  the  extent  of  God's  wisdom,  and  that 
his  foolishness  is  greater  than  your  highest  knowledge.  A  good 
general  is  worth  more  than  a  regiment  of  men.  When  Stonewall  Jackson 
was  killed,  his  enemies  and  friends  alike  felt  that  his  death  was  more 
than  the  loss  of  ten  thousand  men.  Our  Iron  Duke,  when  alive, 
was  a  strength  to  our  army  beyond  all  calculation.  Now  mark  the  skill 
and  infinite  wisdom  of  the  God  who  leads  the  army  of  the  skies.  All 


CONSIDER   BEFORE   YOU   FIGHT.  305 

light  and  knowledge  are  his.  He  is  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  his  expe 
rience  runs  back  to  all  eternity.  You  are  but  of  yesterday  and  know 
nothing.  His  plans  are  beyond  your  conception,  but  he  knoweth  the 
way  you  take.  He  is  far  above  your  thoughts  and  ever  out  of  your 
sight;  but  he  can  see  you  through  and  through,  and  knoweth  you  better 
than  you  know  yourself.  Do  not  show  your  folly  by  weighing  your 
wisdom  against  his  in  the  scales,  or  by  expecting  to  outshine  him  so  as 
to  triumph  over  him.  Poor  moth  rushing  into  the  flame,  you  will  be 
consumed  amidst  the  pity  of  good  men  and  the  dertftion  of  evil  ones. 

Yet  there  is  another  matter  I  want  you  to  recoLect,  you  that  are  the 
enemies  of  God — that  you  have  a  conscience.  You  have  not  got  rid  of 
it  yet.  You  have  a  thief  in  that  candle  of  the  Lord  it  is  true,  but  still 
it  is  alight.  It  is  not  put  out;  and  God  has  ways  of  making  it  to  become 
a  terrible  plague  to  you,  if  you  do  not  accept  it  as  a  friend.  Con 
science  is  meant  to  be  man's  armour-bearer,  beneath  whose  shield  he 
may  fight  the  battles  of  the  right,  but  if  you  make  it  your  enemy,  then 
conscience  often  places  a  sword  in  such  a  way  as  to  cut  and  wound 
you  severely.  You  have  a  conscience,  and  that  is  a  very  awkward  thing 
for  a  man  to  have  who  is  an  enemy  of  God.  If  I  were  God's  enemy,  I 
should  prefer  having  no  monitor  to  call  my  attention  to  the  holy  character 
and  righteous  law  of  the  Most  High;  I  should  be  glad  to  get  rid  of 
every  particle  of  moral  sense.  But  you  have  consciences,  and  most  of 
you  are  not  yet  dead  to  all  feeling  of  guilt  and  shame,  you  cannot, 
therefore,  sin  so  cheaply  as  others;  and  if  you  do  for  the  present  manage 
to  put  Mr.  Conscience  down,  yet  since  he  is  still  in  you,  the  time  will 
oome  when  you  will  find  his  voice  grow  louder,  and  there  will  be  a  terror 
in  that  voice  which  will  make  it  a  terror  for  you  to  sleep,  and  hard  for 
you  to  go  about  your  daily  business  with  your  accustomed  regularity. 
"Those  men  who  serve  God  most  faithfully,  yet  find  that  their  conscience, 
when  it  can  accuse  them  of  anything  wrong,  though  it  is  their  best 
friend,  is  no  very  pleasant  companion.  It  is  said  that  David's  heart 
smote  him.  I  would  sooner  have  anybody  smite  me  than  my  own 
heart,  for  it  strikes  with  so  hard  a  blow,  and  hits  the  place  where  one 
may  most  tenderly  feel  it.  And  it  will  be  so  with  you  unless  you  get 
your  "  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron."  I  am  afraid  there  will  come 
a  time  when  you  will  not  rest  in  your  beds,  nor  be  able  anywhere  to  find 
peace  or  satisfaction.  I  think  therefore,  if  I  had  a  friend  of  God 
inside  my  heart,  I  would  not  like  to  fight  with  God,  so  long  as  ha 
continued  within  me.  Oh,  that  you  would  be  at  peace  with  him,  "  and 
thereby  good  shall  come  unto  you."  ' 

One  other  reflection,  for  I  must  not  keep  you  thinking  on  this  point 
long,  it  is  this.  Remember  you  must  die,  and  therefore,  it  is  a  pity  to 
be  at  enmity  with  God.  You  may  put  it  off,  and  say,  "  I  shall  not  die 
yet ; "  but  you  do  not  know.  How  can  you  tell?  It  is  possible  that 
you  may  die  to-morrow.  But  suppose  that  you  live  for  the  next  twenty 
or  thirty  years  ;  why  what  is  that?  I  am  only  some  thirty  years  of  age, 
and  yet  I  confess  that  I  never  thought  time  'so  short  as  I  feel  it  to  be 
now.  When  we  were  children,  we  thought  twelve  months  a  great 
length  of  time;  when  we  were  twenty,  a  year  seemed  to  be  a  very  respect 
able  period;  but  now  it  flies,  and  some  of  my  friends  here,  whose  hair 
is  turning  grey,  will  tell  you  that  whether  it  is  fifty,  sixty,  or  seyenty 


506  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

years,  it  all  seems  but  a  mere  dream,  a  snap  of  the  finger,  it  ia 
gone  so  soon.  Well,  just  push  through  a  little  interval  of  time,  then 
you  must  die.  My  dear  friend,  will  it  not  be  a  very  dreadful  thing  to 
die  when  you  are  "at  war  with  God  ?  If  you  could  fight  this  out  for 
ever  under  such  circumstances  as  those  in  which  you  now  are,  I  could 
not  then  commend  the  struggle,  but  since  it  must  come  to  such  an 
awful  pause,  since  there  must  be  that  death-rattle  in  your  throat,  since 
there  must  be  that  clammy  sweat  upon  your  brow,  0  you  will  want 
some  better  business  than  to  be  carrying  arms  against  the  God  of 
heaven  in  your  dying  moments.  They  that  have  God  for  their  friend, 
yet  find  death  no  very  pleasant  task,  but  what  will  you  find  it,  who  will 
have  to  strike  yourselves  in  every  blow  that  you  are  aiming  against 
the  Most  High,  whom  you  have  made,  and  continue  to  make  your 
enemy. 

Here  is  this,  too,  to  think  of,  there  is  a  future  state,  so  that  when 
you  die,  you  have  to  live  again.  We  know  very  little  about  that  next 
state,  and  I  do  not  intend  to  say  much  about  it  to-night.  You  are 
launched  without  your  body,  an  unclothed  spirit,  into  a  world  which 
you  have  never  seen.  Will  you  find  companions  there,  or  will  you  be 
alone  ?  Where  will  it  be  ?  What  sort  of  place  will  it  be  like  ?  I  should 
not  choose  to  enter  upon  the  realm  of  spirits  without  having  God  to  be 
my  friend ;  for  it  were  a  dreadful  thing  to  get  into  that  mysterious 
unknown  country,  having  nothing  to  take  with  me  across  its  bourne 
except  this, — an  inveterate  enmity  to  the  King  that  reigns  supreme  ID- 
it.  If  J  must  cross  the  border,  and  go  into  a  land  I  have  never 
trodden,  I  would  like,  at  least,  to  carry  a  passport  with  me,  or  to  be 
able  to  say,  "I  am  a  friend  of  the  King  that  reigns  here;"  but  to  go- 
there  as  God's  enemy — why  how  terrible  it  must  be ! 

Besides,  let  me  say,  you  cannot  hope  to  succeed,  all  experience  i& 
against  you;  there  never  was  one  yet,  that  either  in  this  state  or  the 
next  has  fought  with  God,  and  conquered,  and  you  will  not  be  the 
first;  for  they  who  contend  with  God  all  come  to  this  one  conclusion: 
"  He  comes  forth  in  his  strength,  and  his  enemies  are  given  like  stubble 
to  the  fire,  and  like  wax  to  the  flame:  he  lifteth  up  his  voice,  and  they 
melt  away  :  he  looks  at  them,  and  that  one  flash  of  fire  withers  them 
for  ever,  and  out  of  the  bottomless  pit  of  despair  they  weep  and  wail 
the  piteous  but  useless  regret,  that  their  harvest  is  past,  and  their 
summer  is  ended,  and  that  they  are  not  saved;  for  they  have  spent 
their  strength  against  their  God,  and  so  have  brought  themselves  where 
ruin  is  eternal,  and  hope  can  neVer  come."  Oh  that  thou  wouldst  send 
an  ambassage,  and  be  at  peace  ! 

Methinks,  I  hear  some  say,  "  Well,  we  wish  to  give  up  the  contest;  but 
what  is  to  be  done,  so  as  to  be  at  peace  with  God  ?"  I  ask,  Have  you  got 
an  ambassador  to  go  to  God  for  you?  That  is  the  first  thing.  He  cannot 
look  at  you.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Ambassador  between  God  and  man: 
can  you  commit  your  case  into  his  hand?  Will  you  do  so?  If  so,  your 
case  will  speed  well.  God  cannot  deny  him  any  request.  He  has  a 
right  to  all  he  ever  asks  the  Father  to  give,  and  the  Father  is  always 
well  pleased  in  him,  and  delighteth  to  grant  him  whatever  he  desires. 
That  Saviour  is  willing  to  plead  your  cause.  He  waiteth  to  be  gracious. 
I  am  sent  to  tell  you  the  good  news  of  his  love  and  mercy;  to  warn  yon- 


CONSIDER    BEFORE    YOU    FIGHT.  307 

of  the  certain  doom  which  awaits  all  who  turn  from  Christ;  and  to  bid 
you  and  every  sin-sick  rebel  to  come  at  once,  just  as  you  are,  to  the 
footstool  of  mercy;  and  I  can  pledge  the  honour  of  God,  (as  being 
Christ's  ambassador  for  this  purpose,)  that  if  you  come,  he  will  in  no 
wise  cast  you  out.  And  the  terms  of  peace  are  very  brief.  They  are 
these:  give  up  the  traitors;  there  can  be  no  peace  between  you  and 
God  while  you  harbour  sin.  Give  them  up,  and  be  willing  to  renounce 
every  sin  of  every  sort  and  kind,  for  one  harboured  traitor  will  prevent 
God  concluding  peace  with  you. 

Sinner,  what  sayest  thou  ?  Is  it  hard  to  give  up  thy  sin?  Does  that 
condition  strike  thee  as  unreasonable?  Out  with  the  knife,  man,  arid 
cut  the  throat  of  every  iniquity.  Why,  there  is  no  sin  for  which  it  is 
worth  your  while  to  be  damned.  A  little  rioting;',  and  chambering,  and 
wantonness — is  that  worth  hell-fire  for  ever?  What,  to  have  thy  giddy 
amusements  for  an  hour  or  two,  is  this  a  due  recompense  for  an  eternity 
of  fire  unmitigated  by  a  drop  of  water  ?  I  pray  thee,  be  reasonable. 
Barter  not  away  thy  soul  for  trifles ;  pawn  not  eternity  for  the  mere 
fictions  of  an  instant.  God  give  thee  grace,  sinner,  not  to  kick  at  that 
condition,  but  at  once  cast  out  your  enemies  and  gods,  and  then  lay 
hold  on  Christ,  on  Jesus  Christ  alone,  and  let  him  stand  as  Ambassador 
for  thee.  Thou  canst  not  fight  it  out.  Let  peace  be  made.  Oh  may 
it  be  made  to-night,  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  dear  Son. 

Then  next,  confess  that  you  deserve  the  King's  wrath.  Bow  that 
head;  put  the  rope  about  your  neck  as  though  you  felt  you  deserved 
that  the  executioner  should'  lead  you  forth.  Pray  to  God  for  pardon, 
and  cry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner ! "  and  then  cling  to  the 
skirts  of  that  appointed  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  on 
yonder  bloody  tree  made  expiation  for  the  sin  of  God's  enemies, 
that  they  might  thereby  become  God's  friends.  God  demands  of  you 
a  confession  of  your  guilt.  He  will  be  honoured  by  your  humbling 
yourself  before  him.  Your  sin  has  aimed  at  his  glory,  and  now  he 
will  glorify  himself  by  your  repentance.  It  were  only  just  on  his 
part  if  he  spurned  you  away,  and  cast  you  out  into  the  pit  which 
hath  no  bottom,  but  he  has  said  that  whoso  confesseth  his  sin  shall 
obtain  forgiveness.  Go,  therefore,  in  the  spirit  of  the  publican,  smite 
upon  your  breast,  and  say,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Confess 
that  you  deserve  hell,  but  ask  for  heaven,  and  you  shall  not  plead  in 
vain.  Only  honour  God's  justice,  and  appeal  to  his  mercy  through  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This,  surely,  is  not  much  for  God  to  expect  at  your 
hands.  If  you  will  not  submit,  what  can  you  say  when  God  shall  crush 
you?  You  refuse  to  bend  the  knee,  and  to  bow  the  head;  what  will 
you  do  when  God  shall  trample  on  you  in  his  fury,  and  tread  you  in 
his  hot  displeasure?  You  must,  therefore,  now  in  the  accepted  time, 
while  it  is  still  the  day  of  mercy,  seek  his  face,  and  with  weeping  and 
supplication  "take  with  you  words,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
have  mercy  upon  you;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon." 

II.     And  now  we  turn  the  subject,  so  as  to  look  at  THE  SECOND 

CONTEST,    IN   WHICH    I   TRUST   MANY   ARE   ANXIOUS   TO   BE   ENGAGED. 

Some  young  spirit  that  has  been  touched  with  a  sense  of  its  own  con 
dition,  and  somewhat  aroused,  may  be  saying,  "  I  will  be  God's  enemy  no 
longer:  I  will  be  his  friend."  Bo'wirig  the  knee,  that  heart  cries,  "  Oh 


308  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

God,  reconcile  me  unto  thyself  by  the  death  of  thy  dear  Son.  I  throw 
down  all  my  weapons;  I  confess  my  guilt;  I  plead  for  mercy.  For  Jesus' 
sake  vouchsafe  it  to  me."  "  But,"  says  that  soul,  "  if  I  am  the  friend  ot 
God,  I  must  be  the  foe  of  Satan,  and  from  this  day  I  pledge  myself  to 
fight  for  ever  with  Satan  till  I  get  the  victory,  and  am  free  from  sin." 
My  dear  friend,  T  want  you  to  stop.  I  do  not  wish  you  to  make  peace 
with  the  evil  one,  but  I  want  you  to  consider  what  you  are  at.  There 
are  a  few  things  I  would  whisper  in  your  ear,  and  one  is,  that  sin  is  sweet. 
The  uppermost  drops  of  sin's  cup  glitter  and  sparkle.  There  is 
pleasure  in  sin  of  a  certain  sort  and  for  a  certain  season.  It  is  a 
poisoned  sweet;  it  is  but  a  temporary  delusion,  but  still  the  world  does 
promise  fair,  its  gingerbread  is  gilt,  and  though  it  wears  nothing 
but  tinsel,  and  a  little  gold-leaf  now  and  then,  yet  it  does  look  very 
much  like  gold.  Canst  thou,  canst  thou  resist  sin,  when  it  seems  so 
charming  ?  The  next  time  the  cup  is  brought  thee — thou  knowest  the 
flavour  of  it — oh,  it  is  rich— canst  thou  turn  away?  Art  thou  certain 
that  thou  wilt  be  able  to  dash  it  from  thy  lips?  Ah,  man,  thou 
wilt  find  it  different  when  the  trial-hour  comes,  to  what  it  is  now  that 
thou  art  sitting  in  the  Tabernacle  and  resolving,  away  from  the  tempta 
tion,  that  thou  wilt  do  the  right. 

Remember,  again,  you  may  be  enticed  by  friends  who  will  be  very 
pressing.  You  can  give  up  sin  just  now,  but  you  do  not  know  who 
may  be  the  tempter  at  some  future  time.  If  she  should  allure  thee, 
who  has  tempted  so  well  before  !  If  he — he  !  should  speak  !  He  ! 
the  very  word  has  wakened  up  your  recollection;  if  he  should  speak 
as  he  alone  can  speak,  and  look  as  only  he  can  look,  can  you  then 
resist,  and  stand  out  ?  That  witching  voice,  that  fascinating  eye  ! 
Oh  how  many  souls  have  been  damned  for  what  men  call  love !  Oh 
that  they  had  but  a  little  true  love  of  themselves  and  others,  and 
would  not  thus  pander  to  the  prince  of  hell.  But  alas,  alas,  while  the 
cup  itself  looks  sweet,  there  is  to  be  added  to  it  the  hand  that  holds  it 
out.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  contend  with  Satan  when  he  employs  the 
service  of  some  one  whom  you  esteem  highly,  and  love  with  all  your 
heart.  Remember  the  case  of  Solomon  whose  wisdom  was  marvellous, 
but  who  was  enticed  by  his  wives,  and  fell  a  prey  into  the  hands  of  the 
evil  one.  It  needs  a  spirit  like  the  Master's,  to  be  able  to  say,  "  Get  thee 
behind  me,  Satan,"  to  the  tempter,  when  he  has  the  appearance  of  one 
of  your  best  loved  friends.  The  devil  is  a  crafty  being,  and  if  he 
cannot  force  the  door,  he  will  try  and  get  the  key  which  fits  the  wards 
of  the  lock,  and,  by  the  means  of  our  tenderest  love  and  affections,  will 
make  a  way  for  himself  into  our  hearts:  you  will  find  it  no  easy  task 
therefore  to  contend  with  him. 

Then  again,  remember,  man,  there  is  habit.  You  say  you  will  all  of 
a  sudden  give  up  your  sins,  and  fight  Satan.  Do  not  tell  me  that;  can 
the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots?  If  so,  then 
he  that  is  accustomed  to  do  evil  may  learn  to  do  well.  If  you  had  never 
sinned  as  you  have  sinned,  there  were  not  this  difficulty  with  you;  but 
he  that  has  gone  day  after  day,  and  year  after  year,  into  sin,  is  not  so 
easily  turned  from  it.  As  well  hope  to  make  Niagara  leap  up  instead 
of  down,  as  make  human  nature  flow  back  to  virtue  instead  of  goin 
downward  to  sin.  You  do  not  know  yourself.  Habit  is  an  iron  bon 


CONSIDER   BEFORE   YOU   FIGHT.  309 

and  he  that  is  once  enveloped  in  it  may  pull  and  strain,  but  he  will 
tear  away  his  flesh  sooner  than  break  the  links  of  that  dread  chnin. 
We  have  seen  men  who,  convinced  of  the  error  of  their  ways,  have 
sought  to  turn  from  them  without  asking  the  help  of  God.  For  a  time 
they  have  made  some  little  progress  in  appearance,  but  it  has  only  been 
like  the  retreating  of  the  waves  at  the  rising  of  the  tide;  their  evil 
habits  have  returned  upon  them  with  a  rush,  and  have  covered  them 
deeper  than  before.  Read  the  parable  of  our  Lord  concerning  the 
unclean  spirit  which  went  out  of  the  man,  and  roamed  through  dry 
places,  seeking  rest  but  rinding  none,  and  it  said,  "  I  will  return  to  the 
place  from  whence  I  went  out."  It  came  back,  and  found  it  swept 
and  garnished,  and  then  took  to  it  seven  other  evil  spirits,  more  wicked 
than  itself,  so  the  last  end  of  that  man  was  worse  than  the  first.  Thus 
it  is  with  those  who  enter  upon  the  work  of  saving  themselves,  without 
looking  up  by  faith  to  God  for  his  needed  help.  Satan  will  triumph 
over  you.  You  are  like  the  fly  in  the  toils  of  the  spider's  web,  the 
more  it  struggles,  the  more  it  will  be  encompassed.  You  must  cry  for 
help  as  you  are  quite  unable  of  yourself  to  escape  from  the  snares  of 
the  wicked  one.  He  has  you  bound  fast,  hand  and  foot,  and  you  will 
never  break  his  cords,  nor  be  able  to  cast  his  bands  from  you.  You 
have  no  seven  locks  of  strength  like  Samson,  but  you  will  certainly  be 
overcome. 

Again,  you  think  you  will  give  up  sin,  but  ridicule  is  very  unpleasant, 
and  when  the  finger  comes  to  be  pointed  at  you,  and  they  say,  «'  Ah,  so 
you  have  set  up  for  a  saint,  I  see; "  when  they  put  it  as  they  only  can 
put  it,  in  such  a  sharp,  cutting,  grating  manner;  when  it  is  wrapped 
up  so  wittily  in  an  epigram  that  is  told  all  round  the  shop  against 
you,  and  when,  moreover,  there  is  some  foible  of  yours,  some  giddy 
weakness,  and  they  know  how  to  hook  on  your  attempt  at  saintship  to 
your  weakness,  and  they  bandy  that  all  round,  and  there  are  fifty 
laughing  faces  for  yon,  can  you  stand  that?  Yes,  it  is  a  very  pretty 
thing  for  you  to  come  here  on  Sundays,  and  say  what  you  will  do,  but 
it  is  different  to  do  it  on  Mondays.  To  be  laughed  at  is  not  really  to 
a  sensible  man  anything  very  wonderful,  for,  methinks,  you  have  only 
to  get  used  to  it,  and  then  you  will  just  as  much  expect  to  hear  people 
laugh  at  you,  as  to  hear  birds  singing  when  you  walk  out  of  a  morning; 
but  at  first  that  is  a  very  sharp  trial,  that  trial  of  "  cruel  mockings;"  and 
many  who  have  been  going  to  fight  S;itan  have  drawn  back,  for  they 
found  they  could  not  stand  it.  When  the  Jews  were  rebuilding  the 
walls  of  Jerusalem  after  their  return  from  captivity,  one  of  the  most 
severe  tests  of  their  zeal  and  devotion  was  the  laughter  of  their  enemies 
who  came  and  looked  on,  and  said,  "What  do  these  feeble  Jews?  Even 
that  which  they  build,  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even  break  down  their 
stone  wall."  The  words  of  their  foes  were  more  cutting  than  swords, 
and  keenly  did  they  feel  in  their  spirits  the  derision  of  the  scoffers.  It 
is  as  painful  now  for  the  sensitive  spirit  as  it  was  of  old,  but  you  must 
not  be  daunted.  Heaven  is  worth  buying,  even  though  it  should  cost  a 
life  heaped  full  of  stinging  words  and  "malicious  sayings  from  a  deriding 
and  taunting  world.  Did  not  Christ  himself  show  us  how  to  endure 
this  trial?  See  his  foes  gathered  around  him  when  he  hung  dying  on 
the  cross.  They  laugh  at  him  even  there  :  **  He  saved  others,  himself 


310  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

he  cannot  save,"  said  they  as  they  wagged  their  heads,  and  mocked 
alike  his  dignity  and  his  \voe.  "  If  thou  be  the  Christ,  come  down 
from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  on  thee."  These  sayings  must 
have  been  bitterer  to  his  spirit  than  the  wormwood  mingled  with  gall 
was  to  his  lips.  You  must  follow  Christ  here  also  if  you  would  contend, 
as  he  did,  with  Satan.  Then  count  the  cost.  Can  you  drink  his  cup,, 
and  be  baptized  with  his  baptism? 

And  yet  further,  let  me  nay  to  you,  you  that  are  for  going  to  heaven  so 
zealously, — gain,  gain  is  a  very  pretty  thing,  a  very  pleasant  affair.  Who 
does  not  like  to  make  money?  You  know,  if  you  can  be  religious,  and 
grow  rich  at  the  same  time,  that  will  just  suit  some  of  you.  Oh  yes,  the 
two  going  together,  that  will  be  admirable;  you  will  kill  the  two  birds  with 
one  stone.  Mr.  By-Ends  said,  "  Now,  if  a  man  by  being  religious  can 
get  a  good  wife  who  has  a  considerable  sum  of  money;  and  it'  by  being 
religious  he  gets  a  good  shop,  and  many  customers,  why,"  says  he, 
"then  religion  is  a  good  thing;"  for  to  get  a  good  wife  is  a  good 
thing,  and  to  get  customers,  that  is  another  good  thing,  and  so,  he 
says,  "  The  whole  is  a  good  thing  put  together."  But  he  that  knows 
Mr.  By-Ends,  knows  that  he  is  an  old  rogue,  notwithstanding  that 
he  puts  it  prettily.  I  have  known  him.  He  is  a  member  of  this 
Church,  I  am  sorry  to  say;  I  never  went  into  a  Church  where  he  was 
not  a  member.  I  have  tried  to  turn  him  out,  and  did  once,  but  there 
was  another  one  of  the  family  left  inside,  and  however  many  you  may 
expel  there  are  sure  to  be  more  of  that  breed  remaining.  But  there 
sometimes  comes  a  pinch  with  Mr.  By-Ends.  Now  if  you  should  find 
that  shutting  up  your  shop  on  Sundays  should  ruin  your  business, 
well,  what  then?  Would  you  stand  it?  Now  there  are  some  of  you 
that  try  it  every  now  and  then  when  you  get  spasmodically  godly, 
but  it  does  not  pay  you,  you  find ;  and  so  you  begin  once  more  to 
open  shop  on  the  Lord's  day.  Some  of  you  Sunday  traders  discover, 
that  it  gets  a  little  hot  and  strong  for  you,  when  you  come  to  the 
Tabernacle  occasionally,  and  you  shut  up  for  a  season,  but  soon  you. 
say,  "  Well,  people  must  live."  Yes,  and  people  must  die,  and 
people  must  be  damned  too,  if  they  try  to  live  by  breaking  God's 
laws.  Remember  that  it  will  not  pay  to  be  religious,  some  people 
fancy.  We  have  heard  of  a  man  saying,  '•  I  cannot  afford  to  keep  a 
conscience,  it  is  too  expensive  an  article  for  me."  Ah,  but  keep  in  mind 
the  saying  of  the  Lord,  (i  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for 
his  soul?"  There  is  such  a  thinir  as  being  "  Penny  wise,  and  pound 
foolish,"  and  there  is  such  a  thing  also  as  being  "worldly  wise,  and 
eternally  foolish."  Think  of  this  then,  for  the  trial  will  come  to  you  in> 
the  shape  of  yellow  gold,  and  it  will  be  hard  to  keep  yourself  from  the 
glittering  bait  which  the  god  of  this  world  will  lay  beiore  you. 

I  am  putting  these  things  to  you,  so  that  you  may  calculate 
whether  you  can  carry  on  the  war  against  the  devil  with  all  these  fearful 
odds  against  you.  If  I  were  a  recruiting  serjeant  I  should  not  da 
this.  He  puts  the  shilling  into  the  country  lad's  hand,  and  the 
lad  may  say  fifty  things,  "Oh  never  mind,"  says  the  the  gallant  soldier, 
"you  know,  it  is  all  glory,  nothing  but  glory.  There,  I  will  just  tie 
these  ribbons  round  your  hat.  There  are  some  long  strips  of  glory  to 


CONSIDER   BEFORE   YOU   FIGHT.  311 

begin  with,  and  then  all  your  days  ifc  will  be  just  glory,  glory  for  ever; 
and  you  will  die  a  general,  and  be  buried  at  Westminster  Abbey,  and 
they 'will  play  the  '  Dead  March  in  Saul,'  and  all  that  kind  of  thinG:." 
Now  I  cannot  thus  deceive  or  try  to  cheat  men  to  enlist  under  the 
banner  of  the  cross.  I  do  not  desire  to  raise  objections  to  it;  all  I 
want  of  you  is  to  count  the  cost,  lest  you  should  be  like  unto  him  who 
began  to  build  without  being  able  to  finish.  That  is  the  misery  of  so 
many.  I  advise  you,  if  you  are  about  to  declare  war  with  Satan,  to  see 
whether  you  are  able  to  carry  it  out,  and  win  the  victory. 

"Well,"  says  one,  "it  is'hard  to  be  saved."  Nobody  ever  thought 
it  was  not,  I  hope.  What  does  Peter  say  ?  "  If  the  righteous  scarcely 
be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear?"  "  It  is  hard 
to  be  saved,"  you  say.  Whoever  said  it  was  not?  But  it  is  not  hard  to 
be  saved,  if  a  man  is  willing  to  be  received  according  to  the  plan  which 
God  has  appointed.  If  Christ  undertakes  it,  then  it  is  done,  and  my 
counsel  to  those  of  you  who  are  about  making  war  with  Satan,  is  to 
remember  that  it  is  too  much  for  you,  and  therefore  do  not  attempt  it 
in  your  own  strength.  Beware  of  this.  I  know  Satan  will  tempt  you 
first  of  all  to  believe  that  you  need  no  Saviour,  then  if  you  are  not  con 
vinced  of  this  but  are  disquieted  because  of  sin,  he  suggests  that  you 
can  save  yourself.  He  speaks  of  Abana  and  Pharpai*  rivers  of  Damascus 
which  flow  close  by  your  own  door.  He  says,  "Wash  in  these  home 
streams,  and  be  clean.  Stay  where  you  are,  and  help  yourself;"  but  if 
you  listen  to  the  words  of  the  seducer  of  souls  you  are  lost  and  undone 
for  ever.  Can  the  man  born  blind  see  to  operate  upon  his  own  scale- 
covered  eyes  so  as  to  give  himself  sight?  Can  the  crippled  man  run 
away  from  his  lameness,  and  outrun  the  feebleness  of  his  feet?  Can 
the  dead  man  exert  himself  to  make  the  life-tide  flow  once  more  in  his 
veins,  and  flush  his  cheek  anew  with  the  glow  of  health  ?  Can  he  call 
back  his  departed  spirit  from  the  shades  of  the  unseen  world,  and  make 
it  re-occupy  its  decaying  habitation,  and  bid  the  marks  of  the 
mighty  consumer  begone,  and  leave  no  trace  of  Death's  conquest  behind, 
to  remind  the  returning  inhabitant  that  the  palace  had  been  occupied 
by  the  ruthless  spoiler?  We  answer,  no.  A  mighty  finger  must  touch 
and  open  the  eyes.  An  omnipotent  arm  must  lift  up  the  paralysed 
and  impotent  man  into  strength  and  power;  and  most  evidently,  if  life 
is  to  be  secured,  the  voice  of  God  alone  can  speak  the  word  which  shall 
make  the  dead  to  live.  On  this  point  we  wish  to  be  clearly  understood. 
You  will  never  of  yourself  successfully  resist  sin  so  as  to  escape  its 
thraldom;  how  much  less  can  you  remove  its  guilt?  The  cancer  is  in 
your  blood,  and  you  can  never  get  it  out.  The  black  deed  is  done,  and 
it  is  written,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  Oh,  then  at  once 
ask  help  of  him  who  alone  can  save  you  irom  the  wrath  to  come. 

H  -member,  poor  feeble  one,  nothing  is  too  hard  for  God,  and  therefore 
ask  Almighty  strength  to  come  unto  your  help.  It  is  true  you  cannot 
contend  with  your  besetting  sins;  your  passions,  your  corruptions  of 
whatever  sort  they  may  be,  are  much  too  strong  for  you;  Old  Adam  is- 
too  mighty  for  you  with  your  best  intentions;  but  there  is  a  strong  one, 
whose  hand,  once  pierced,  is  always  ready  and  at  the  service  of  every 
sinner  who  would  have  Satan  cast  out.  There  is  one  "  mighty  to  save" 
who  can  oome  to  the  rescue,  and  do  for  you  what  you  cannot  do  for 


512  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

yourself.  Oh  that  you  had  Christ  to-night,  so  that  at  once  you  might 
cry  to  him,  "  Jesus,  save  me;  I  see  the  fight  is  too  unequal  for  me,  I 
cannot  drive  out  my  sins.  I  cannot  fight  my  way  to  heaven;  come  and 
help  me,  Lord  Jesus.  I  put  myself  into  thy  hands;  wash  me  in  thy 
blood,  fill  me  with  thy  Spirit;  save  me  with  thy  great  salvation,  and 
let  me  be  with  thee  where  thou  art  at  the  last." 

"  No  man  can  save  himself,"  says  one.  Yet  the  case  is  very  like 
that  of  the  master  who  sent  his  negro  servant  with  a  letter.  The 
negro  was,  like  some  others,  rather  lazy,  and  came  back  with  it.  "Why 
did  you  not  deliver  it?"  " I  could  not."  '•  Could  not  deliver  it?"  "No, 
master."  "  Why  not  ? "  "A  deep  river,  sir,  very  deep  river,  I  could 
not  get  across."  "  A  deep  river?"  said  he.  "Yes."  "  Is  not  there  a 
ferryman  there?"  "  Do  not  know,  sir;  if  there  was,  he  was  on  the  other 
side,"  "  Did  you  call  across,  '  Boat,  ahoy! ' "  "  No,  sir."  "  Why  then, 
you  rascal,"  said  he,  "  what  does  it  matter ;  it  is  no  excuse.  It  is  true, 
you  could  not  get  across  the  river,  but  then  there  was  one  there  who 
could  take  you,  and  you  never  cried  to  him."  And  so  it  is  in  your 
case.  You  say,  "  I  cannot  save  myself."  Quite  true  ;  but  there  is  one 
who  can,  and  you  have  never  cried  to  him,  for,  mark  you,  if  you  cry  to 
him,  if  your  heart  says,  "  Oh,  Saviour,  come  and  save  me,"  and  your 
spirit  rests  in  him,  deep  as  that  river  of  your  sin  certainly  is,  he  knows 
how  to  bear  you  safely  through  it,  and  land  you  on  the  other  shore. 
May  he  do  that  with  each  of  you.  With  God  all  things  are  possible, 
though  with  man  it  is  impossible.  May  the  blessing  of  the  Most  High 
rest  upon  us  this  night  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  KEAD  BEFORE  SERMON— Luke 


«h[0p0fitmi 


THE   LOST  SILVER   PIECE. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  JANUARY  15TH.  1871.  B* 

C.   H.    SPU11GEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  Either  what  woman  having  ten  pieces  of  silver,  if  she  lose  one  piece,  doth  not 
light  a  candle,  and  sweep  the  house,  and  seek  diligently  till  she  find  it  ?  And  when 
she  hath  found  it,  she  calleth  her  friends  and  her  neighbours  together,  saying,  Rejoice 
with  me ;  for  I  have  found  the  piece  which  I  had  lost.  Likewise,  I  say  unto  you, 
there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth." — 

Luke  xv.  8 — 10. 

THIS  chapter  is  full  of  grace  and  truth.  Its  three  consecutive  parables 
have  been  thought  to  be  merely  a  repetition  of  the  same  doctrine  under 
different  metaphors,  and  if  that  were  so,  the  truth  which  it  teaches  is  so 
important  that  it  could  not  be  rehearsed  too  often  in  our  hearing. 
Moreover,  it  is  one  which  we  are  apt  to  forget,  and  it  is  well  to  have 
it  again  and  again  impressed  upon  our  minds.  The  truth  here  taught 
is  just  this — that  mercy  stretches  forth  her  hand  to  misery,  that  grace 
receives  men  as  sinners,  that  it  deals  with  demerit,  unworthiness,  and 
worthlessness ;  that  those  who  think  themselves  righteous  are  not  the 
objects  of  divine  compassion,  but  the  unrighteous,  the  guilty,  and  the 
undeserving,  are  the  proper  subjects  for  the  infinite  mercy  of  God; 
in  a  word,  that  salvation  is  not  of  merit  but  of  grace.  This  truth  I 
say  is  most  important,  for  it  encourages  penitents  to  return  to  their 
Father;  but  it  is  very  apt  to  be  forgotten,  for  even  those  who  are 
saved  by  grace  too  often  fall  into  the  spirit  of  the  elder  brother,  and 
speak  as  if,  after  all,  their  salvation  depended  on  the  works  of  the  law. 

But,  my  dear  friends,  the  three  parables  recorded  in  this  chapter  are 
not  repetitions ;  they  all  declare  the  same  main  truth,  but  each  one 
reveals  a  different  phase  of  it.  The  three  parables  are  three  sides  of 
a  vast  pyramid  of  gospel  doctrine,  but  there  is  a  distinct  inscription 
upon  each.  Not  only  in  the  similitude,  but  also  in  the  teaching 
covered  by  the  similitude,  there  is  variety,  progress,,  enlargement, 
discrimination.  We  have  only  need  to  read  attentively  to  discover 
that  in  this  trinity  of  parables,  we  have  at  once  unity  of  essential 
truth  and  distinctness  of  description.  Each  one  of  the  parables  is 
needful  to  the  other,  and  when  combined  they  present  us  with  a  far 
more  complete  exposition  of  their  doctrine  than  could  have  been 
conveyed  by  any  one  of  them.  Note  for  a  moment  the  first  of  the 
three  which  brings  before  us  a  shepherd  seeking  a  lost  sheep.  To  whom 

No.  970.  29 


"26  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

does  this  refer?     Who  is  the  shepherd  of  Israel?     Who  brings  again 
that   which  has  gone   astray  ?     Do   we   not   clearly   discern  the  ever 
glorious  and  blessed  Chief  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  who  lays  down  his 
life  that  he  may  save  them  ?     Beyond  a  question,  we-  see  in  the  first 
parable  the  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  second  parable  is  most 
fitly  placed  where  it  is.     It,  I  doubt  not,  represents  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  working,  through  the  church,  for  the  lost  but  precious 
souls  of  men.     The  church  is  that  woman  who  sweeps  her  house  to 
find  the  lost  piece  of  money,  and  in  her  the  Spirit  works  his  purposes 
of  love.     Now  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  follows  the  work  of  Christ. 
As  here  we  first  see  the  shepherd  seeking  the  lost  sheep,  and  then  read 
of  the  woman  seeking  the  lost  piece  of  money,  so  the  great  Shepherd 
redeems,  and  then  the  Holy  Spirit  restores  the  soul.   You  will  perceive 
that  each  parable  is  thoroughly  understood  in  its  minute  details  when  so 
interpreted.     The  shepherd  seeks  a  sheep  which  has  wilfully  gone  astray, 
and  so  far  the  element  of  sin  is  present;  the  lost  piece  of  money  does 
not  bring  up  that  idea,  nor  was  it  needful  that  it  should,  since  the  parable 
does  not  deal  with  the  pardon  of  sin  as  the  first  does.    The  sheep,  on  the 
other  hand,  though  stupid  is  not  altogether  senseless  and  dead,  but  the 
piece  of  money  is  altogether  unconscious  and  powerless,  and  therefore 
all  the  fitter  emblem  of  man  as  the  Holy  Ghost  begins  to  deal  with  him, 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.    The  third  parable  evidently  represents  the 
divine  Father  in  his  abundant  love  receiving  the  lost  child  who  comes 
back  to  him.     The  third  parable  would  be  likely  to  be  misunderstood 
without  the  first  and  the  second.     We  have  sometimes  heard  it  said — 
here  is  the  prodigal  received  as  soon  as  he  comes  back,  no  mention  being 
made  of  a  Saviour  who  seeks  and  saves  him.     Is  it  possible  to  teach  all 
truths   in  one  single  parable  ?     Does  not  the  first  one  speak  of  the 
shepherd  seeking  the  lost  sheep  ?     Why  need  repeat  what  had  been 
said  before?     It  has  also  been  said  that  the  prodigal  returned  of  his 
own   free   will,   for  there   is   no  hint  of  the  operation  of  a   superior 
power  upon  his  heart,  it  seems  as  if  he  himself  spontaneously  says, 
"  I  will   arise,   and  go  unto  my   Father."      The  answer  is,  that  the 
Holy  Spirit's  work  had  been  clearly  described  in  the  second  parable,  and 
needed  not  to  be  introduced  again.     If  you  put  the  three  pictures  in  a 
line,  they  represent  the  whole  compass  of  salvation,  but  each  one  apart 
gets  forth  the  work  in  reference  to  one  or  other  of  the  divine  persons  of 
the  blessed  Trinity.     The  shepherd,  with  much  pain  and  self-sacrifice, 
seeks  the  reckless,  wandering  sheep ;  the  woman  diligently  searches  for 
the  insensible  but  lost  piece  of  money ;  the  father  receives  the  returning 
prodigal.    What  God  has  joined  together,  let  no  man  put  asunder.   The 
three  life-sketches  are  one,  and  one  truth  is  taught  in  the  whole  three, 
yet  each  one  is  distinct  from  the  other,  and  by  itself  instructive. 

May  we  be  taught  of  God  while  we  try  to  discover  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit  in  this  parable,  which,  as  we  believe,  represents  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  and  through  the  church.  The  church  is  evermore 
represented  as  a  woman,  either  the  chaste  bride  of  Christ,  or  the  shame 
less  courtesan  of  Babylon ;  as  for  good  a  woman  sweeps  the  house,  so 
for  evil  a  woman  takes  the  leaven  and  hides  it  in  the  meal  till  all  is 
leavened.  Towards  Christ  a  wife  and  towards  men  a  mother,  the  church 
is  must  fitly  set  forth  as  a  woman.  A  woman  with  a  house  under  her 


THK    LOST   SILVER   PIECE.  27 

control  is  the  tull  idea  of  the  text,  her  husband  away  and  herself  in 
charge  of  the  treasure:  just  such  is  the  condition  of  the  church  since 
the  departure  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  Father. 

To  bring  each  part  of  the  text  under  inspection  we  shall  notice  man 
in  three  conditions — lost,  sought,  found. 

I.  First,  the  parable  treats  of  man,  the  object  of  divine  mercy,  as  LOST. 

Notice,  first,  the  treasure  was  lost  in  the  dust.  The  woman  had  lost 
Ker  piece  of  silver,  and  in  order  to  find  it  she  had  to  sweep  for  it, 
which  proves  that  it  had  fallen  into  a  dusty  place,  fallen  to  the  earth, 
where  it  might  be  hidden  and  concealed  amid  rubbish  and  dirt.  Every 
man  of  Adam  born  is  as  a  piece  of  silver  lost,  fallen,  dishonoured, 
and  some  are  buried  amid  foulness  and  dust.  If  we  should  drop  many 
pieces  of  money  they  would  fall  into  different  positions ;  one  of  them 
might  fall  into  actual  mire,  and  be  lost  there;  another  might  fall  upon 
a  carpet,  a  cloth,  or  a  clean,  well-polished  floor,  and  be  lost  there. 
If  you  have  lost  your  money,  it  is  equally  lost  into  whatever  place  it 
may  have  fallen.  So  all  men  are  alike  lost,  but  they  have  not  all  fallen 
into  the  like  condition  of  apparent  defilement.  One  man  from  the 
surroundings  of  his  childhood  and  the  influences  of  education,  has 
never  indulged  in  the  coarser  and  more  brutalising  vices;  he  has  never 
been  a  blasphemer,  perhaps  never  openly  even  a  Sabbath -breaker,  yet 
he  may  be  lost  for  all  that.  Another,  on  the  other  hand,  has  fallen  into 
great  excess  of  riot;  he  is  familiar  with  wantonness  and  chambering,  and 
all  manner  of  evil;  he  is  lost,  he  is  lost  with  an  emphasis:  but  the  more 
decorous  sinner  is  lost  also.  There  may  be  some  here  this  morning 
(and  we  wish  always  to  apply  the  truth  as  we  go  on),  who  are  lost  in 
the  very  worst  of  corruption :  I  would  to  God  that  they  would  take 
hope  and  learn  from  the  parable  before  us,  that  the  church  of  God  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  are  seeking  after  them,  and  they  may  be  among  the 
found  ones  yet.  Since,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  here  who 
have  not  dropped  into  such  unclean  places,  I  would  affectionately 
remind  them  that  they  are  nevertheless  lost,  and  they  need  as  much  to 
be  sought  for  by  the  Spirit  of  God  as  if  they  were  among  the  vilest  of 
the  vile.  To  save  the  moral  needs  divine  grace  as  certainly  as  to  save 
the  immoral.  If  you  be  lost,  my  dear  hearer,  it  will  be  small  avail  to 
you  that  you  perished  respectably,  and  were  accursed  in  decent  company : 
if  you  lack  but  one  thing,  yet  if  the  deficiency  be  fatal,  it  will  be  but  a 
poor  consolation  that  you  had  only  one  lack.  If  one  leak  sent  the  vessel 
to  the  bottom ;  it  was  no  comfort  to  the  crew  that  their  ship  only 
leaked  in  one  place.  One  disease  may  kill  a  man  ;  he  may  be  sound 
everywhere  else,  but  it  will  be  a  sorry  comfort  to  him  to  know  that  he 
might  have  lived  long  had  but  that  one  organ  been  sound.  If,  dear 
hearer,  thou  shouldst  have  no  sin  whatever  save  only  an  evil  heart  of 
unbelief,  if  all  thy  external  life  should  be  lovely  and  amiable,  yet  if 
that  one  fatal  sin  be  in  thee,  thou  canst  draw  small  consolation  from  all 
else  that  is  good  about  thee.  Thou  art  lost  by  nature,  and  thou  must 
be  found  by  grace,  whoever  thou  mayst  be. 

In  this  parable  that  which  was  'lost  was  altogether  ignorant  of  its 
being  lost.  The  silver  coin  was  not  a  living  thing,  and  therefore  had 
no  consciousness  of  its  being  lost  or  sought  after.  The  piece  of  money 
lost  was  quite  as  content  to  be  on  the  floor  or  in  the  dust,  as  it  was 


28  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  be  in  the  purse  of  its  owner  amongst  its  like.  It  knew  nothing 
about  its  being  lost,  and  could  not  know.  And  it  is  just  so  with  the 
Binner  who  is  spiritually  dead  in  sin,  he  is  unconscious  of  his  state,  nor 
can  we  make  him  understand  the  danger  and  terror  of  his  condition. 
When  he  feels  that  he  is  lost,  there  is  already  some  work  of  grace  in  him. 
When  the  sinner  knows  that  he  is  lost,  he  is  no  longer  content  with 
his  condition,  but  begins  to  cry  out  for  mercy,  which  is  evidence  that 
the  finding  work  has  already  begun.  The  unconverted  sinner  will 
confess  that  he  is  lost  because  he  knows  the  statement  to  be  scriptural, 
and  therefore  out  of  compliment  to  God's  word  he  admits  it  to  be  true, 
but  he  has  no  idea  of  what  is  meant  by  it,  else  would  he  either  deny  it 
with  proud  indignation,  or  he  would  bestir  himself  to  pray  that  he  might 
be  restored  to  the  place  from  which  he  has  fallen,  and  be  numbered  with 
Christ's  precious  property.  0  my  hearers,  this  it  is  that  makes  the 
Spirit  of  God  so  needful  in  all  our  preachings,  and  every  other  soul- 
saving  exercise,  because  we  have  to  deal  with  insensible  souls.  The 
man  who  puts  the  fire-escape  against  the  window  of  a  burning  house, 
may  readily  enough  rescue  those  who  are  aware  of  their  danger,  and 
who  rush  to  the  front  and  help  him,  or  at  least  are  submissive  to  him 
in  his  work  of  delivering  them;  but  if  a  man  were  insane,  if  he  played 
with  the  flames,  if  he  were  idiotic  and  thought  that  some  grand  illumin 
ation  were  going  on,  and  knew  nothing  of  the  danger  but  was  only 
"  glamoured  by  the  glare,"  then  would  it  be  hard  work  for  the  rescuer. 
Even  thus  it  is  with  sinners.  They  know  not,  though  they  profess  to 
know,  that  sin  is  hell,  that  to  be  an  alien  from  God  is  to  be  "condemned 
already,  to  live  in  sin  is  to  be  dead  while  you  live.  The  insensibility 
of  the  piece  of  money  fairly  pictures  the  utter  indifference  of  souls 
unquickened  by  divine  grace. 

The  silver  piece  was  lost  but  not  forgotten.  The  woman  knew  that  she 
had  ten  pieces  of  silver  originally;  she  counted  them  over  carefully,  for 
they  were  all  her  little  store,  and  she  found  only  nine,  but  she  well 
remembered  that  one  more  was  hers  and  ought  to  be  in  her  hand.  This 
is  our  hope  for  the  Lord's  lost  ones,  they  are  lost  but  not  forgotten,  the 
heart  of  the  Saviour  remembers  them,  and  prays  for  them.  0  soul, 
I  trust  you  are  one  whom  Jesus  calls  his  own,  if  so  he  remembers  the 
pangs  which  he  endured  in  redeeming  you,  and  he  recollects  the 
Father's  love  which  was  reflected  on  you  from  old  eternity,  when  the 
Father  gave  you  into  the  hands  of  his  beloved  Son.  You  are  not 
forgotten  of  the  Holy  Spirit  who  seeks  you  for  the  Saviour.  This 
is  the  minister's  hope,  that  there  is  a  people  whom  the  Lord  re 
members  and  whom  he  never  will  forget,  though  they  forget  him 
Strangers  to  him,  far-off,  ignorant,  callous,  careless,  dead,  yet  the  ever 
lasting  heart  in  heaven  throbs  towards  them  with  love;  and  the  mind 
of  the  Spirit,  working  on  earth,  is  directed  to  them.  These,  who  were 
numbered  and  reckoned  up  of  old  are  still  in  the  inventory  of  the 
divine  memory  ;  and  though  lost  they  are  earnestly  remembered  still. 
In  some  sense  this  is  true  of  every  sinner  here.  You  are  lost,  but 
that  you  are  remembered  is  evident,  for  I  am  sent  to-day  to  preach  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  to  you.  God  has  thoughts  of  love  concerning  you, 
and  bids  you  turn  unto  him  and  live.  Have  respect,  I  pray  you,  to  the 
word  of  his  salvation. 


THE   LOST   SILVER   PIECE.  29 

Next,  the  piece  of  silver  was  lost  but  still  claimed.  Observe  that  the 
woman  called  the  money,  "  my  piece  which  was  lost."  When  she  lost 
its  possession  she  did  not  lose  her  right  to  it  ;  it  did  not  become  some 
body  else's  when  it  slipped  out  of  her  hand  and  fell  upon  the  floor. 
Those  for  whom  Christ  hath  died,  whom  he  hath  peculiarly  redeemed, 
are  not  Satan's  even  when  they  are  dead  in  sin.  They  may  come  under 
the  devil's  usurped  dominion,  but  the  monster  shall  be  chased  from  his 
throne.  Christ  has  received  them  of  old  of  the  Father,  and  he  has 
bought  them  with  his  precious  blood,  and  he  will  have  them ;  Le  will 
chase  away  the  intruder  and  claim  his  own.  Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
"Your  covenant  with  death  is  disannulled,  and  your  agreement  with 
hell  shall  not  stand."  Ye  have  sold  yourselves  for  nought;  and  ye 
shall  be  redeemed  without  money.  Jesus  shall  have  his  own,  and  none 
shall  pluck  them  from  his  hold ;  he  will  defend  his  claim  against  all 
coiners. 

Further,  observe  that  the  lost  piece  of  money  was  not  only  remembered 
and  claimed,  but  it  ivas  also  valued.  In  these  three  parables  the  value 
of  the  lost  article  steadily  rises.  This  is  not  very  clear  at  first  sight, 
because  it  may  be  said  that  a  sheep  i?  of  more  value  than  a  piece 
of  money ;  but  notice  that  the  shepherd  only  lost  one  sheep  out  of  a 
hundred,"but  the  woman  lost  one  piece  out  often,  and  the  father  one  son 
out  of  two.  Now,  it  is  not  the  value  of  the  thing  in  itself  which  is  here 
set  forth,  for  the  soul  of  a  man,  as  absolutely  valued  in  comparison  with 
the  infinite  God,  is  of  small  esteem;  but  because  of  his  love  it  is  of  great 
value  to  him.  The  one  piece  of  money  to  the  woman  was  a  tenth  part 
of  all  she  had,  and  it  was  very  valuable  in  her  esteem.  To  the  Lord  of 
love  a  lost  soul  is  very  precious :  it  is  not  because  of  its  intrinsic  value, 
but  it  has  a  relative  value  which  God  sets  at  a  high  rate.  The  Holy 
Spirit  values  souls,  and  therefore  the  church  prizes  them  too.  The 
church  sometimes  says  to  herself,  "  "We  have  but  few  conversions,  few 
members ;  many  are  called,  but  few  chosen."  She  counts  over  her  few 
converts,  her  few  members,  and  one  soul  is  to  her  all  the  more  precious 
because  of  the  few  there  are  who  in  these  times  are  in  the  treasury  of 
Christ,  stamped  with  the  image  of  the  great  King,  and  made  of  the 
precious  genuine  silver  of  God'~j  own  grace.  0  dear  friend,  you  think 
yourself  of  small  value,  you  \  ho  are  conscious  that  you  have  sinned, 
but  the  church  does  not  think  you  of  small  value,  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
does  not  despise  you.  He  sets  a  high  price  upon  you,  and  so  do  his 
people.  We  value  your  souls,  we  only  wish  we  knew  how  to  save  them  ; 
we  would  spare  no  expense  or  pains  if  we  might  but  be  the  means  of 
finding  you,  and  bringing  you  once  more  into  the  great  Owner's  hand. 

The  piece  of  money  was  lost,  but  it  was  not  lost  hopelessly.  The 
woman  had  hopes  of  recovering  it,  and  therefore  she  did  not  despair, 
but  set  to  work  at  once.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  think  of  those  souls 
which  are  lost  hopelessly.  Their  state  reminds  me  of  a  paragraph 
I  have  cut  from  this  week's  newspaper: — "The  fishing  smack  Veto, 
of  Grimsby,  S.  Cousins,  master,  arrived  in  port  from  the  Dogger  Bank 
on  Saturday  night.  The  master  reports  that  on  the  previous  VVednesday, 
when  about  two  hundred  miles  from  Spurn,  he  sighted  to  the  lee-' 
ward  what  at  first  appeared  to  be  a  small  schooner  in  distress,  but  on 
bearing  down  to  her  found  her  to  be  a  full- sized  lifeboat,  upwards  a* 
21 


80  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

twenty  feet  long,  and  full  of  water  up  to  her  corks.  There  was  no 
name  on  the  boat,  which  had  evidently  belonged  to  some  large  ship  or 
steamer.  It  was  painted  white  both  inside  and  out,  with  a  brown  streak 
round  the  rim.  When  alongside,  on  closer  examination,  three  dead 
sailors  were  perceived  lying  aft,  huddled  together,  and  a  fourth  athwart 
in  the  bow,  with  his  head  hanging  over  the  rowlocks.  They  seemed 
from  their  dress  and  general  appearance  to  be  foreigners,  but  the  bodies 
had  been  frightfully  '  washed  about,'  and  were  in  a  state  of  decompo 
sition,  and  had  evidently  been  dead  some  weeks.  The  water-logged 
waif  drifted  on  with  its  ghastly  cargo,  and  the  horrible  sight  so  shocked 
the  crew  of  the  Veto  that  afterwards  they  were  almost  too  unnerved  to 
attend  to  their  trawling,  and  the  smack,  in  consequence,  returned  to 
port  with  a  comparatively  small  catch,  and  sooner  than  expected." 
Do  you  wonder  at  the  men  sickening  in  the  presence  of  this  mystery  of 
the  sea?  I  shudder  as  I  think  I  see  that  Charon-like  boat  floating 
on  and  on;  mercy  need  not  follow  it,  she  can  confer  no  boon;  love 
need  not  seek  it,  no  deed  of  hers  can  save.  My  soul  sees,  as  in  a 
vision,  souls  hopelessly  lost,  drifting  on  the  waves  of  eternity,  beyond 
all  hope  or  help.  Alas  !  •  Alas  !  Millions  of  our  race  are  now  in  that 
condition.  Upon  them  has  passed  the  second  death,  and  powerless 
are  we  all  to  save  them.  Towards  them  even  the  gospel  has  no  aspect 
of  hope.  Our  joy  is  that  we  have  to  deal  to-day  with  lost  souls 
who  are  not  yet  hopelessly  lost.  They  are  dead  in  sin,  but  there 
is  a  quickening  power  which  can  make  them  live.  0  mariner  of 
the  sea  of  life,  fisher  of  men  upon  this  stormy  sea,  those  castaways 
whom  you  meet  with  are  accessible  to  your  efforts  of  compassion, 
they  can  be  rescued  from  the  pitiless  deeps;  your  mission  is  not  a 
hopeless  one.  I  rejoice  over  the  ungodly  man  here  to-day  that  he 
is  not  in  torment,  not  in  hell,  he  is  not  among  those  whose  worm  dieth 
not  and  whose  fire  is  not  quenched.  g  I  congratulate  the  Christian  church 
too,  that  her  piece  of  money  has  not  fallen  where  she  cannot  find  it.  I 
rejoice  that  the  fallen  around  us  are  not  past  hope ;  yea,  though  they 
dwell  in  the  worst  dens  of  London,  though  they  be  thieves  and  harlots, 
they  are  not  beyond  the  reach  of  mercy.  Up,  0  church  of  God,  while 
possibilities  of  mercy  remain !  Gird  up  your  loins,  ye  soul-winners, 
and  resolve  by  the  grace  of  God  that  every  hour  of  hope  shall  be  well 
employed  by  you. 

One  other  point  is  worthy  of  notice.  The  piece  of  silver  was  lost, 
but  it  was  lost  in  the  house,  and  the  woman  knew  it  to  be  so.  If  she  had 
lost  it  in  the  streets,  the  probabilities  are  she  would  not  have  looked 
for  it  again,  for  other  hands  might  have  closed  over  it.  If  she  had 
lost  it  in  a  river,  or  dropped  it  in  the  sea,  she  might  very  fairly  have 
concluded  that  it  was  gone  for  ever,  but  evidently  she  was  sure  that 
she  had  lost  it  in  the  house.  Is  it  not  a  consolation  to  know  that  tho^e 
here,  who  are  lost,  are  still  in  the  house?  They  are  still  under  the 
means  of  grace,  within  the  sphere  of  the  church's  operations,  within 
the  habitation  of  which  she  is  the  mistress,  and  where  the  Holy  Spirit 
works.  What  thankfulness  there  ought  to  be  in  your  minds  that  you 
are  not  lost  as  heathens,  nor  lost  amid  Romish  or  Mohammedan  super 
stition,  but  lost  where  the  gospel  is  faithfully  and  plainly  preached  to 
you ;  where  you  are  lovingly  told,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Christ 


THE   LOST  SILVER  PIECE.  31 

Jesus  is  not  condemned.  Lost,  but  lost  where  the  church's  business  ifc 
to  look  after  you,  where  it  is  the  Spirit's  work  to  seek  and  to  find  you. 

This  is  the  condition  of  the  lost  soul,  depicted  as  a  lost  piece  of  silver 

II.  Secondly,  we  shall  notice  the  soul  under  another  condition,  we 
shall  view  it  as  SOUGHT. 

By  whom  was  the  piece  of  silver  sought  ?  It  wah  zouytii  oij  us  oivn&i 
personally.  Notice,  she  who  lost  the  money  lit  a  candle  and  swept  the 
house,  and  sought  diligently  till  she  found  it.  So,  brethren,  I  have  said 
that  the  woman  represents  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  rather  the  church  in 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells.  Now,  there  will  never  be  a  soul  found 
till  the  Holy  Spirit  seeks  after  it.  He  is  the  great  soul  finder.  The 
heart  will  continue  in  the  dark  until  he  cornes  with  his  illuminating 
power.  He  is  the  owner,  he  possesses  it,  and  he  alone  can  effectually 
seek  after  it.  The  God  to  whom  the  soul  belongs  must  seek 'the  soul. 
But  he  does  it  by  his  church,  for  souls  belong  to  the  church  too;  they 
are  sons  and  daughters  of  the  chosen  mother,  they  are  her  citizens  and 
treasures.  For  this  reason  the  church  must  personally  seek  after  souls. 
She  cannot  delegate  her  work  to  anybody.  The  woman  did  not  pay  a 
servant  to  sweep  the  house,  but  she  swept  it  herself.  Her  eyes  were  much 
better  than  a  servant's  eyes,  for  the*  servant's  eyes  would  only  look  after 
somebody  else's  money,  and  perhaps  would  not  see  it;  but  the>mistress 
would  look  after  her  own  money,  and  she  would  be  certain  to  light 
upon  it  if  it  were  anywhere  within  sight.  When  the  church  of  God 
solemnly  feels,  "It  is  our  work  to  look  after  sinners,  we  must  nofc 
delegate  it  even  to  the  minister,  or  to  the  City-missionary,  or  the  Bible- 
woman,  but  the  church  as  a  church  must  look  after  the  souls  of  sinners," 
then  I  believe  souls  will  be  found  and  saved.  When  the  church  recog 
nises  that  these  lost  souls  belong  to  her,  she  will  be  likely  to  find  them. 
It  will  be  a  happy  day  when  every  church  of  God  is  actively  at  work 
for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  It  has  been  the  curse  of  Christendom  that 
she  has  ventured  to  delegate  her  sacred  duties  to  men  called  priests, 
or  that  she  has  set  apart  certain  persons  to  be  called  the  religious,  who 
are  to  do  works  of  mercy  and  charity  and  of  evangelisation.  We  are, 
every  one  of  us  who  are  Christ's,  bound  to  do  our  own  share ;  nay,  we 
should  deem  it  a  privilege  of  which  we  will  not  be  deprived,  personally 
to  serve  God,  personally  to  sweep  the  house  and  search  after  the  lost 
spiritual  treasures.  The  church  herself,  in  the  power  of  the  indwelling 
Spirit  of  God,  must  seek  lost  souls. 

Note  that  this  seeking  became  a  matter  of  chief  concern  with  the 
woman.  I  do  not  know  what  other  business  she  had  to  do,  but  I  do 
know  that  she  put  it  all  by  to  find  the  piece  of  money.  There  was  the 
corn  to  be  ground  for  the  morning  meal,  perhaps  that  was  done,  at  any 
rate,  if  not  so,  she  left  it  unprepared.  There  was  a  garment  to  be 
mended,  or  water  to  be  drawn,  or  the  fire  to  be  kindled,  or  the  friends 
and  neighbours  to  be  conversed  with — never  mind,  the  mistress  forgets 
everything  else,  she  has  lost  her  piece  of  money,  and  she  must  find  it  at 
once.  So  with  the  church  of  God,  her  chief  concern  should  be  to  seek 
the  perishing  sons  of  men.  To  bring  gouls  to  know  Jesus,  and  to  be 
saved  in  him  with  a  great  salvation  should  be  the  church's  great 
longing  and  concern.  She  has  other  things  to  do.  She  has  her  own 
edification  to  consider,  she  has  other  matters  to  be  attended  to  in  theii 


32  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

place,  but  this  first,  this  evermore  and  always  first.  The  woman 
evidently  said,  "  The  money  is  lost,  I  must  find  that  first."  The  loss  of 
her  piece  of  silver  was  so  serious  a  matter  that  if  she  sat  down  to  her 
mending,  her  hands  would  miss  their  nimbleness,  or  if  any  other  house 
hold  work  demanded  her  attention,  it  would  be  an  irksome  task  to  her,  for 
she  was  thinking  of  that  piece  of  coin.  If  her  friend  came  and  talked 
with  her,  she  would  say  to  herself,  "  I  wish  she  were  gone,  for  I  want 
to  be  looking  after  my  lost  money."  I  wish  the  church  of  God  had 
such  an  engrossing  love  for  poor  sinners  that  she  would  feel  everything 
to  be  an  impertinence  which  hindered  her  from  soul-saving.  We  have 
every  now  and  then,  as  a  church,  a  little  to  do  with  politics,  and  a  little 
to  do  with  finance,  for  we  are  still  in  the  world,  but  I  love  to  see  in  all 
churches  everything  kept  in  the  background,  compared  with  soul- 
fiaving  work.  This  must  be  first  and  foremost.  Educate  the  people — 
yes,  certainly;  we  take  an  interest  in  everything  which  will  do  good  to 
our  fellow  citizens,  for  we  are  men  as  well  as  Christians ;  but  first  and 
foremost  our  business  is  to  win  souls,  to  bring  men  to  Jesus,  to  hunt  up 
those  who  bear  heaven's  image,  though  lost  and  fallen.  This  is  what 
we  must  be  devoted  to,  this  is  the  main  and  chief  concern  of  believers, 
the  very  reason  for  the  existence  of  a  church ;  if  she  regard  it  not, 
she  forgets  her  highest  end. 

Now  note,  that  the  woman  having  thus  set  her  heart  to  find  her 
money,  she  used  the  most  fit  and  proper  means  to  accomplish  her  end. 
First,  she  lit  a  candle.  So  doth  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  church.  In 
Eastern  dwellings  it  would  be  necessary,  if  you  lost  a  piece  of  money 
and  wanted  to  find  it,  to  light  a  candle  at  anytime;  for  in  our  Saviour's 
day  glass  was  not  used,  and  the  windows  of  houses  were  only  little 
slits  in  the  side  of  the  wall,  and  the  rooms  were  very  dark.  Almost  all 
the  Oriental  houses  are  very  dark  to  this  day,  and  if  anything  be  dropped 
as  small  as  a  piece  of  silver,  it  must  be  looked  for  with  a  candle  even 
at  high  noon.  Now,  the  sphere  in  which  the  church  moves  here  on 
earth  is  a  dim  twilight  of  mental  ignorance,  and  moral  darkness,  and  in 
order  to  find  a  lost  %soul,  light  must  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  The 
Holy  Spirit  uses  the  light  of  the  gospel ;  he  convinces  men  of  sin,  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment  to  come.  The  woman  lit  a  candle,  and 
even  thus  the  Holy  Spirit  lights  up  some  chosen  man  whom  he  makes 
to  be  a  light  in  the  world.  He  calls  to  himself  whomsoever  he  wills, 
and  makes  him  a  lamp  to  shine  upon  the  people.  Such  a  man 
will  have  to  be  consumed  in  his  calling,  like  a  candle  he  will  be  burnt 
up  in  light-giving.  Earnest  zeal,  and  laborious  self-sacrifice,  will  eat 
him  up.  So  may  this  church,  and  every  church  of  God,  be  continually 
using  up  her  anointed  men  and  women,  who  shall  be  as  lights  in  the 
midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,  to  find  out  lost  souls. 

But  she  was  not  content  with  her  candle,  she  fetched  her  broom,  she 
swept  the  house.  If  she  could  not  find  the  silver  as  things  were  in  the 
house,  she  brought  the  broom  to  bear  upon  the  accumulated  dust. 
Oh,  how  a  Christian  church,  when  it  is  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
cleanses  herself  and  purges  all  her  work!  "Perhaps,"  saith  she, 
u  some  of  our  members  are  inconsistent,  and  so  men  are  hardened 
in  sin ;  these  offenders  must  be  put  away.  The  tone  of  religion  is 
low — that  may  be  hindering  the  conversion  of  souls,  it  must  be 


THE   LOST   SILVER   PIECE.  35 

raised.  Perhaps  our  statements  of  truth,  and  our  ways  of  proclaiming 
it,  are  not  the  most  likely  to  command  attention,  we  must  amend  them  ; 
we  must  use  the  best  possible  methods,  we  must  in  fact  sweep  the  whole 
house."  I  delight  to  see  an  earnest  house-sweeping  by  confession 
of  sin  at  a  prayer  meeting,  or  by  a  searching  discourse,  a  house-sweeping 
when  every  one  is  earnest  to  reform  himself,  and  to  get  nearer  to  God 
himself  by  a  revival  of  his  own  personal  piety.  This  is  one  of  the 
means  by  which  the  church  is  enabled  to  find  the  hidden  ones.  Besides 
this,  all  the  neighbourhood  round  the  church  (for  the  house  is  the  sphere 
in  which  the  church  moves),  must  be  ransacked,  stirred,  turned  over,  in  a 
word  "  swept."  A  church  that  is  really  in  earnest  after  souls  will  endea 
vour  to  penetrate  the  gloom  of  poverty  and  stir  the  heaps  of  profligacy 
She  will  hunt  high  and  hunt  low  if  by  any  means  she  may  rescue  from; 
destruction  the  precious  thing  upon  which  her  heart  is  set. 

Carefully  note  that  this  seeking  after  the  lost  piece  of  silver  with 
fitting  instruments,  the  broom  and  the  candle,  was  attended  ivith  no  small 
stir.  She  swept  the  house — there  was  dust  for  her  eyes  ;  if  any  neigh 
bours  were  in  the  house  there  was  dust  for  them.  You  cannot  sweep  a 
house  without  causing  some  confusion  and  temporary  discomfort.  We 
sometimes  hear  persons  complain  of  certain  Christians  for  making  too 
much  ado  about  religion.  The  complaint  shows  that  something  is  beingr 
done,  and  in  all  probability  some  success  being  achieved.  Those  people  who 
have  no  interest  in  the  lost  silver  are  annoyed  at  the  dust ;  it  is  getting 
down  their  throats,  and  they  cough  at  it;  never  mind,  good  woman^ 
sweep  again,  and  make  them  grumble  more.  Another  will  say,  "  I  do 
not  approve  of  religious  excitement,  I  am  for  quiet  and  orderly  modes- 
of  procedure."  I  dare  say  that  this  good  woman's  neighbour,  when  she 
came  in  to  make  a  call,  exclaimed  in  disgust,  "  Why,  mistress,  there  is 
not  a  chair  to  sit  down  upon  in  comfort,  and  you  are  so  taken  up  about 
this  lost  money  that  you  scarce  give  me  an  answer.  Why,  you  are 
wasting  candle  at  a  great  rate,  and  seem  quite  in  a  fever."  "  Well,"  the 
good  woman  would  answer,  "but  I  must  find  my  piece  of  silver,  and  in 
order  to  seek  it  out  I  can  bear  a  little  dust  myself,  and  so  must  you  if 
you  wish  to  stop  here  while  I  am  searching."  An  earnest  church  will 
be  sure  to  experience  a  degree  of  excitement  when  it  is  soul-hunting, 
and  very  cautious,  very  fastidious,  very  critical  people  will  find  fault. 
Never  mind  them,  my  brethren,  sweep  on  and  let  them  talk  on.  Never 
mind  making  a  dust  if  you  find  the  money.  If  souls  be  saved  irregu 
larities  and  singularities  are  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance.  If  men 
be  brought  to  Jesus,  care  nothing  what  cavillers  say.  Sweep  on,  sweep 
on,  even  though  men  exclaim,  "  They  that  turn  the  world  upside  down 
are  come  hither  also."  Though  confusion  and  stir,  and  even  persecu- 
cution  be  the  present  result,  yet  if  the  finding  of  an  immortal  soul  be 
the  ultimate  effect,  you  will  be  well  repaid  for  it. 

It  is  to  be  remarked,  also,  that  in  the  seeking  of  this  piece  of  silver 
the  coin  was  sought  in  a  most  engrossing  manner.  For  a  time 
nothing  was  thought  of  but  the  lost  silver.  Here  is  a  candle :  the  good 
woman  does  not  read  by  the  light  of  it,  nor  mend  her  garments ;  no, 
but  the  candle-light  is  all  spent  on  that  piece  of  money.  All  its  light 
is  consecrated  to  the  search.  Here  is  a  broom :  there  is  other  work 
for  the  broom  to  do,  but  for  the  present  it  sweeps  for  the  silver  and  for 


34  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

nothing  else.  Here  are  two  bright  eyes  in  the  good  woman's 
head :  ay,  but  they  look  for  nothing  but  the  lost  money ;  she  does 
not  care  what  else  may  be  in  the  house  or  out  of  it — her  money  she 
cares  for,  and  that  she  must  find;  and  here  she  is  with  candle,  broom, 
strength,  eyesight,  faculties  of  mind,  and  limbs  of  body,  all  employed 
in  searching  for  the  lost  treasure.  It  is  just  so  when  the  Holy  Ghost 
works  in  a  church,  the  preacher,  like  a  candle,  yields  his  light,  but  it  is 
all  with  the  view  of  finding  out  the  sinner  and  letting  him  see  his  lost 
estate.  Whether  it  be  the  broom  of  the  law  or  the  light  of  the  gospel, 
all  is  meant  for  the  sinner.  All  the  Holy  Spirit's  wisdom  is  engaged  to 
find  the  sinner,  and  all  the  living  church's  talent  and  substance  and 
power  are  put  forth  if  by  any  means  the  sinner  may  be  saved.  It  is  a 
fair  picture,  may  I  see  it  daily.  How  earnestly  souls  are  sought  for 
when  the  Spirit  of  God  is  truly  in  his  church  ! 

One  other  thought  only.  This  woman  sought  for  Jwr  piece  of  silver 
continuously — "  till  she  found  it."  May  you  and  I,  as  parts  of  the 
church  of  God,  look  after  wandering  souls  till  we  find  them.  We  say 
they  discourage  us.  No  doubt  that  piece  of  silver  did  discourage  the 
woman  who  sought  it.  We  complain  that  men  do  not  appear  inclined 
to  religion.  Did  the  piece  of  money  lend  the  housewife  any  help  ? 
Was  it  any  assistance  to  her  ?  She  did  the  seeking,  she  did  it  all. 
And  the  Holy  Ghost  through  you,  my  brother,  seeks  the  salvation  of 
the  sinner,  not  expecting  the  sinner  to  help  him,  for  the  sinner  is  averse 
to  being  found.  What,  were  you  repulsed  the  other  day  by  one  whose 
spiritual  good  you  longed  for?  Go  again!  Where  your  invitations 
laughed  at?  Invite  again !  Did  you  become  the  subject  of  ridicule 
through  your  earnest  entreaties  ?  Entreat  again !  Those  are  not 
always  the  least  likely  to  be  saved  who  at  first  repel  our  efforts.  A 
harsh  reception  is  sometimes  only  an  intimation  that  the  heart  recog 
nises  the  power  of  the  truth,  though  it  does  not  desire  at  present 
to  yield  to  it.  Persevere,  brother,  till  you  find  the  soul  you  seek.  You 
who  spend  so  much  effort  in  your  Sunday-school  class,  use  still  your 
candle,  enlighten  the  child's  mind  still,  sweep  the  house  till  you  find 
what  you  seek ;  never  give  up  the  child  till  it  is  brought  to  Christ. 
You,  in  your  senior  class,  dealing  with  that  young  man  or  young  woman, 
cease  not  from  your  private  prayers  and  from  your  personal  admonitions, 
till  that  heart  belongs  to  Jesus.  You  who  can  preach  in  the  streets,  or 
visit  the  lodging-houses,  or  go  from  door  to  door  with  tracts,  I  charge 
you  all,  for  you  can  all  do  something,  never  give  up  the  pursuit  of  sinners 
until  they  are  safely  lodged  in  Jesus'  hands.  We  must  have  them  saved  ! 
With  all  the  intense  perseverance  of  the  woman  who  turned  everything 
upside  down,  and  counted  all  things  but  loss  that  she  might  but  find 
her  treasure,  so  may  we  also,  the  Spirit  of  God  working  in  us,  upset 
everything  of  rule  and  conventionality,  and  form  and  difficulty,  if  we 
may  but  by  any  means  save  some,  and  bring  out  of  the  dust  those  who 
bear  the  King's  image,  and  are  dear  to  the  King's  heart. 

III.  Time  has  fled,  alas  !  too  swiftly,  and  so  I  must  close  with  the 
third  point,  which  is  the  piece  of  silver  FOUND. 

Found !  In  the  first  place,  this  was  the  woman's  ultimatum,  and 
nothing  short  of  it.  She  never  stopped  until  the  coin  was  found.  So 
it  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  design,  not  that  the  sinner  should  be  brought 


THE   LOST   SILVER   PIECE.  35 

into  a  hopeful  state,  but  that  he  should  be  actually  saved  :  and  this  is 
the  church's  great  concern,  not  that  people  be  made  hearers,  not  that 
they  be  made  orthodox  professors,  but  that  they  be  really  changed  and 
renewed,  regenerated  and  born  again. 

The  ivoman  herself  found  the  piece  of  money.  It  did  not  turn  up  by 
accident,  nor  did  some  neighbour  step  in  and  find  it.  The  Spirit  of  God 
himself  finds  sinners,  and  the  church  of  God  herself  as  a  rule  is  the 
instrument  of  their  recovery.  Dear  brethren,  a  few  years  ago  there  was 
a  kind  of  slur  cast  upon  the  visible  church,  by  many  enthusiastic  but 
mistaken  persons,  who  dreamed  that  the  time  was  come  for  doing  away 
with  organised  effort,  for  irregular  agencies  outside  of  the  visible 
church  were  to  do  all  the  work.  Certain  remarkable  men  sprang  up 
whose  ferocious  censures  almost  amounted  to  attacks  upon  the  recog 
nised  churches.  Their  efforts  were  apart  from  the  regular  ministry,  and 
in  some  cases  ostentatiously  in  opposition  to  it.  It  was  as  much  their 
aim  to  pull  down  the  existing  church  as  to  bring  in  converts.  I  ask 
any  man  who  has  fairly  watched  these  efforts,  what  they  have  come  to  ? 
I  never  condemned  them,  nor  will  I;  but  I  do  venture  to  say  to-day  in  the 
light  of  their  history,  that  they  have  not  superseded  regular  church  work 
and  never  will.  The  masses  were  to  be  aroused,  but  where  are  the  boasted 
results  ?  What  has  become  of  many  of  these  much-vaunted  works?  Those 
who  have  worked  in  connection  with  a  church  of  God  have  achieved  per 
manent  usefulness  ;  those  who  acted  as  separatist  agencies,  though  they 
•blazed  for  awhile  before  the  public  eye  and  filled  the  corners  of  the  news 
papers  with  spiritual  puffery,  are  now  either  altogether  or  almost 
-extinct.  Where  are  the  victories  which  were  to  be  won  by  these  free- 
shooters  ?  Echo  answers,  Where  ?  We  have  to  fall  back  on  the  old 
-disciplined  troops.  God  means  to  bless  the  church  still,  and  it  ie 
through  the  church  thut  he  will  continue  to  send  a  benediction  upon 
the  sons  of  men.  I  am  glad  to  hear  of  anybody  preaching  the  gospel; 
if  Christ  is  preached  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice.  1  re 
member  the  Master's  words,  "  Forbid  them  not  !  He  that  is  not  against 
us  is  for  us."  Still  the  mass  of  conversions  will  come  through  the 
church,  and  by  her  regular  organised  efforts.  The  woman  who  lights 
the  candle  and  sweeps  the  house,  to  whom  the  silver  belongs,  will  her 
self  find  it. 

Now  notice  when  she  had  found  it  what  she  did,  she  rejoiced.  The 
greater  her  trouble  in  searching,  the  higher  her  joy  in  finding.  What 
joy  there  is  in  the  church  of  God  when  sinners  are  converted  !  We 
have  our  high  holidays,  we  have  our  mirthful  days  downstairs  in  the 
lecture  hall,  when  we  hear  of  souls  turned  from  the  paths  of  the  des 
troyer  ;  and  in  the  vestries  behind,  your  pastors  and  elders  often 
experience  such  joy  as  only  heaven  can  equal,  when  we  have  heard 
the  stories  of  souls  emancipated  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  and  led  into 
the  perfect  liberty  which  Jesus  gives.  The  church  rejoices. 

Next,  she  calls  her  friends  and  neighbours  to  share  her  joy.  I  am 
afraid  we  do  not  treat  our  friends  and  neighbours  with  quite  enough 
respect,  or  remember  to  invite  them  to  our  joys.  Who  are  they  ?  I  think 
the  angels  are  here  meant;  not  only  the  angels  in  heaven,  but  those 
who  are  watching  here  below.  Note  well,  that  when  the  shepherd  took 
home  the  sheep,  it  is  written,  "  There  shall  be  joy  in  heaven  over  one 


36  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sinner  that  repenteth  ;"  but  it  does  not  mention  heaven  here,  nor  speak 
of  the  future,  but  it  is  written,  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels  of  God."  Xow,  the  church  is  on  earth,  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  on  earth,  at  work  ;  when  there  is  a  soul  saved,  the  angels  down 
below,  who  keep  watch  and  ward  around  the  faithful,  and  so  are  our 
friends  and  neighbours,  rejoice  with  us.  Know  ye  not  that  angels  are 
present  in  our  assemblies?  for  this  reason  the  apostle  tells  us  that  the- 
woman  hath  her  head  covered  in  the  assembly.  He  saith,  "  Because  of 
th*>  angels,  for  they  love  order  and  decorum."  The  angels  are  wherever 
the  saints  are,  beholding  our  orders  and  rejoicing  in  our  joy.  When  we 
see  conversions  we  may  bid  them  rejoice  too,  and  they  will  praise  God 
with  us.  I  do  not  suppose  the  rejoicing  ends  there ;  for  as  angels  are 
always  ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  Man,  they  soon  convey 
the  tidings  to  the  hosts  above,  and  heaven  rejoices  over  one  repenting 
sinner. 

The  joy  is  a  present  joy ;  it  is  a  joy  in  the  house,  in  the  church  in  her 
own  sphere  ;  it  is  the  joy  of  her  neighbours  who  are  round  about  her 
here  below.  All  other  joy  seems  swallowed  up  in  this :  as  every  other 
occupation  was  suspended  to  find  the  lost  silver,  so  every  other  joy  is 
hushed  when  the  precious  thing  is  found.  The  church  of  God  has  a 
thousand  joys — the  joy  of  her  saints  ascending  to  the  skies,  the  joy  of 
her  saints  ripening  for  glory,  the  joy  of  such  as  contend  with  sin  and 
overcome  it,  and  grow  in  grace  and  receive  the  promise  ;  but  the  chief 
joy  in  the  church,  which  swallows  all  others,  as  Aaron's  rod  swallowed 
up  the  other  rods,  is  the  joy  over  the  lost  soul  which,  after  much  sweep 
ing  and  searching,  is  found  at  last. 

The  practical  lesson  to  the  unconverted  is  just  this.  Dear  friend,  see 
what  value  is  set  upon  you.  You  think  that  nobody  cares  for  you — why, 
heaven  and  earth  care  for  you  !  You  say,  "  I  am  as  nothing,  a  cast 
away,  and  I  am  utterly  worthless."  No,  you  are  not  worthless  to  the 
blessed  Spirit,  nor  worthless  to  the  church  of  God — she  longs  for  you. 

See,  again,  how  false  thai  suspicion  of  yours  is  that  you  will  not  be 
welcome  if  you  come  to  Christ.  Welcome!  welcome !  why,  the  church  is- 
searching  for  you;  the  Spirit  of  God  is  searching  for  you.  Do  not  talk 
of  welcome,  you  will  be  a  great  deal  more  than  welcome.  Oh,  how  glad 
will  Christ  be,  and  the  Spirit  be,  and  the  church  be,  to  receive  you  t 
Ah  !  but  you  complain  that  you  have  done  nothing  to  make  you  fit  for 
nercy.  Talk  not  so,  what  had  the  lost  piece  of  money  done  ?  What 
could  it  do?  It  was  lost  and  helpless.  They  who  sought  it  did  all; 
he  who  seeks  you  will  do  all  for  you.  0  poor  soul,  since  Christ  now 
bids  thee  come,  come !  If  his  Spirit  draws  thee,  yield  I  Since  the  pro- 
tn?se  now  speaks,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together :  though  you* 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red 
like  c.imson,  they  shall  be  as  wool,"  accept  the  promise.  Believe  in 
Jesus.  God  bless  you  and  save  you,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 


PORTIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Psalm  cxxxvu 
and  Luke  xv. 


fjutyit 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND  ;  OR,  "  BREAD  ENOUGH  AND 

TO  SPARE." 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  JULY  16Tii,  1871,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


"  And  when  he  came  to  himself,  he  said,  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father'* 
have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I  perish  with  hunger!" — Luke  xv.  17. 

"  HE  came  to  himself."  The  word  may  be  applied  to  one  waking  out  of 
a  deep  swoon.  He  had  been  unconscious  of  his  true  condition,  and  he 
had  lost  all  power  to  deliver  himself  from  it;  but  now  he  was  coming 
round  again,  returning  to  consciousness  and  action.  The  voice  which 
shall  awaken  the  dead  aroused  him  ;  the  visions  of  his  sinful  trance  all 
disappeared;  his  foul  but  fascinating  dreams  were  gone;  he  came  to 
himself.  Or  the  word  may  be  applied  to  one  recovering  from  insanity. 
The  prodigal  son  had  played  the  madman,  for  sin  is  madness  of  the 
worst  kind.  He  had  been  demented,  he  had  put  bitter  for  sweet  and 
sweet  for  bitter,  darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness;  he  had  injured 
himself,  and  had  done  for  his  soul  what  those  possessed  of  devils  in  our 
Saviour's  time  did  for  their  bodies,  when  they  wounded  themselves  with 
stones,  and  cut  themselves  with  knives.  The  insane  man  does  not  know 
himself  to  be  insane,  but  as  soon  as  he  comes  to  himself  he  painfully  per 
ceives  the  state  from  which  he  is  escaping.  Returning  then  to  true  reason 
and  sound  judgment,  the  prodigal  came  to  himself.  Another  illustration 
of  the  word  may  be  found  in  the  old  world  fables  of  enchantment:  when  a 
man  was  disenthralled  from  the  magician's  spell  he  "came  to  himself/' 
Classic  story  has  its  legend  of  Circe,  the  enchantress,  who  transformed  men 
into  swine.  Surely  this  young  man  in  our  parable  had  been  degraded  in  the 
same  manner.  He  had  lowered  his  manhood  to  the  level  of  the  brutes. 
It  should  be  the  property  of  man  to  have  love  to  his  kindred,  to  ha?e 
respect  for  right,  to  have  some  care  for  his  own  interest;  this 
young  man  had  lost  all  these  proper  attributes  of  humanity,  and  so  had 
become  as  the  beast  that  perisheth.  But  as  the  poet  sings  of  Ulysses, 
that  he  compelled  the  enchantress  to  restore  his  companions  to  their 
original  form,  so  here  we  see  the  prodigal  returning  to  manhood,  look 
ing  away  from  his  sensual  pleasures,  and  commencing  a  course  of 
conduct  more  consistent  with  his  birth  and  parentage.  There  are  men 
No.  1,000.  30 


386  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

here  to-day  perhaps  who  are  still  in  this  swoon ;  0  God  of  heaven, 
arouse  them  !  Some  here  who  are  morally  insane;  the  Lord  recovel 
them,  the  divine  Physician  put  his  cooling  hand  upon  their  fevered 
brow,  and  say  to  them  :  "  I  will ;  be  thou  made  whole."  Perhaps  there 
are  others  here  who  have  allowed  their  animal  nature  to  reign  supreme ; 
may  he  who  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil  deliver  them  from  the  power 
of  Satan,  and  give  them  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God.  He  shall 
have  all  the  glory  ! 

It  appears  that  when  the  prodigal  came  to  himself  he  was  shut  up  to 
•two  thoughts.  Two  facts  were  clear  to  him,  that  there  was  plenty  in 
his  father's  house,  and  that  he  himself  was  famishing.  May  the  twto 
kindred  spiritual  facts  have  absolute  power  over  all  your  hearts,  if  you 
are  yet  unsaved ;  for  they  were  most  certainly  all-important  and 
pressing  truths.  These  are  no  fancies  of  one  in  a  dream  ;  no  ravings  of 
&  maniac  ;  .no  imaginations  of  one  under  fascination:  it  is  most  true 
that  there  is  plenty  of  all  good  things  in  the  Father's  house,  and  that 
the  sinner  needs  them.  No  where  else  can  grace  be  found  or  pardon 
gained  ;  but  with  God  there  is  plenitude  of  mercy  ;  let  none  venture  to 
dispute  this  glorious  truth.  Equally  true  is  it  that  the  sinner  without 
?God  is  perishing.  He  is  perishing  now;  he  will  perish  everlastingly. 
All  that  is  worth  having  in  his  existence  will  be  utterly  destroyed,  and 
he  himself  shall  only  remain  as  a  desolation  ;  the  owl  and  the  bittern 
of  misery  and  anguish  shall  haunt  the  ruins  of  his  nature  for  ever  and 
for  ever.  If  we  could  shut  up  unconverted  men  to  those  two  thoughts, 
what  hopeful  congregations  we  should  have.  Alas  !  they  forget  that 
there  is  mercjr  only  with  God,  and  fancy  that  it  is  to  be  found  some 
where  else;  and  they  try  to  slip  away  from  the  humbling  fact  of  their 
own  lost  estate,  and  imagine  that  perhaps  there  may  be  some  back 
•door  of  escape;  that,  after  all,  they  are  not  so  bad  as  the  Scripture 
declares,  or  that  perchance  it  shall  be  right  with  them  at  the  last,  however 
wrong  it  may  be  with  them  now.  Alas !  my  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  with 
those  who  wilfully  shut  their  eyes  to  truihs  of  which  the  evidence  is 
overwhelming,  and  the  importance  overpowering  ?  I  earnestly  entreat 
those  of  you  who  know  how  to  Approach  the  throne  of  God  in  faith,  to 
breathe  the  prayer  that  he  would  now  bring  into  captivity  the  uncon 
verted  heart,  and  put  these  two  strong  fetters  upon  every  unregenerate 
fioul ;  there  is  abundant  grace  with  God,  there  is  utter  destitution 
with  themselves.  Bound  with  such  fetters,  and  led  into  the  presence  of 
Jesus,  the  captive  would  soon  receive  the  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 

I  intend  only  to  dwell  this  morning,  or  mainly,  upon  the  first 
thought,  the  master  thought,  as  it  seems  to  me,  which  was  in  the 
prodigal's  mind — that  which  really  constrained  him  to  say,  "  I  will 
arise  and  go  to  ray  father."  It  was  not,  I  think,  the  home-bringing 
thought  that  he  was  perishing  with  hunger,  but  the  impulse  towards 
his  father  found  its  mainspring  in  the  consideration,  "  How  many  hired 
servants  of  my  father's  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare  !  "  The  plenty, 
the  abundance,  the  superabundance  of  the  father's  house,  was  that 
which  attracted  him  to  return  home;  and  many,  many  a  soul  has 
been  led  *o  seek  God  when  it  has  fully  believed  that  there  was  abun 
dant  mercy  with  him.  My  desire  this  morning  shall  be  to  put  plainly 
^before  every  sinner  here  the  exceeding  abundance  of  the  grace  of  God 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;   OR,  "JJREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."      387 

in  Christ  Jesus,  hoping  thnt  the  Lord  will  find  out  those  who  are  hit 
sons,  and  that  they  may  catch  at  these  words,  and  as  they  hear  of  the 
abundance  of  the  bread  in  the  Father's  house,  may  say,  "  I  will  arise 
and  go  to  my  Father.'* 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  consider  for   a  short   time   TUB   MORE  THAN 

ABUNDANCE  OF  ALL  GOOD  THINGS  IN  THE  FATHER'S  HOUSE.      What  dost 

:thou  need  this  morning,  awakened  sinner  ?  Of  all  that  thou  needest, 
there  is  with  God  an  all-sufficient,  a  super-abounding  supply;  "bread 
enough  and  to  spare."  Let  us  prove  this  to  thee.  First,  considerthe 
Father  himself,  and  whosoever  shall  rightly  consider  the  Father,  will 
at  once  perceive  that  there  can  be  no  stint  to  mercy,  no  bound  to  the 
possibilities  of  grace.  What  is  the  nature  and  character  of  the  Supreme  ? 
"  Is  he  harsh  or  loving  ?"  saith  one.  The  Scripture  answers  the  question, 
not  by  telling  us  that  God  is  loving,  but  by  assuring  us  that  God  is 
love.  God  himself  is  love;  it  is  his  very  essence.  It  is  not  that  love 
is  in  God,  but  that  God  himself  is  love.  Can  there  be  a  more  concise 
and  more  positive  way  of  saying  that  the  love  of  God  is  infinite  ?  You 
cannot  measure  God  himself;  your  conceptions  cannot  grasp  the  gran 
deur  of  his  attributes,  neither  can  you  tell  the  dimensions  of  his  love, 
nor  conceive  the  fulness  of  it.  Only  this  know,  that  high  as  the  heavens 
are  above  the  earth,  so  are  his  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  his 
thoughts  than  your  thoughts.  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  He 
pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his 
heritage.  He  retaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever,  because  he  delighteth 
in  mercy.  "  Thou,  Lord,  art  good,  and  ready  to  forgive :  and  plenteous 
in  mercy  unto  all  them  that  call  upon  thee."  "  Thy  mercy  is  great  above 
the  heavens."  "The  Lord  is  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy." 

If  divine  love  alone  should  not  seem  sufficient  for  your  salvation, 
remember  that  with  the  Father  to  whom  the  sinner  returns,  there  is  as 
much  of  wisdom  as  there  is  of  grace.  Is  thy  case  a  very  difficult  one? 
He  that  made  thee  can  heal  thee.  Are  thy  diseases  strange  and 
complex  ?  He  that  fashioned  the  ear,  can  he  not  remove  its  deafness  ? 
He  that  made  the  eye,  can  he  not  enlighten  it  if  it  be  blind?  No 
mischief  can  have  happened  to  thee,  but  what  he  who  is  thy  God 
can  recover  thee  from  it.  Matchless  wisdom  cannot  fail  to  meet 
the  intricacies  of  thy  case. 

Neither  can  there  be  any  failure  of  power  with  the  Father.  Dost 
thou  not  know  that  he  who  made  the  earth,  and  stretched  out  the 
heavens  like  a  tent  to  dwell  in,  hath  no  bound  to  his  strength,  nor 
limit  to  his  might  ?  If  thou  needest  omnipotence  to  lift  thee  up  from 
the  slough  into  which  thou  hast  fallen,  omnipotence  is  ready  to  deliver 
thee,  if  thou  cry  to  the  strong  Tor  strength.  Though  thou  shouldest 
need  all  the  force  with  which  the  Creator  made  the  worlds,  and  all  the 
strength  with  which  he  bears  up  the  pillars  of  the  universe,  all  that 
strength  and  force  should  be  laid  out  for  thy  good,  if  thou  wouldst 
believingly  seek  mercy  at  the  hand  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  None  of  his 
power  shall  be  against  thee,  none  of  his  wisdom  shall  plan  thy  overthrow; 
but  love  shall  reign  in  all,  and  every  attribute  of  God  ehall  become 
subservient  to  thy  salvation.  Oh,  when  I  think  of  sin  I  cannot  under 
stand  how  a  sinner  can  be  saved  ;  but  when  I  think  of  God,  and  look 
into  his -heart,  I  understand  how  readily  he  can  forgive.  "Look  into 


888  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  heart,"  saith  one ;  "how  can  we  do  that  ? "  Hath  he  not  laid  bare  hii 
heart  to  you  ?  Do  you  enquire  where  he  has  done  this?  I  answer,  yonder, 
upon  Calvary's  cross.  What  was  in  the  very  centre  of  the  divine 
heart?  What,  but  the  person  of  the  Well-beloved,  his  only  begotten 
Son  ?  And  he  hath  taken  his  only  begotten  and  nailed  him  to  the 
cross,  because,  if  I  may  venture  so  to  speak,  he  loved  sinners  better 
than  his  Son.  He  spared  not  his  Son,  but  he  spares  the  sinner;  he 
poured  out  his  wrath  upon  his  Son  and  made  him  the  substitute  for 
sinners,  that  he  might  lavish  love  upon  the  guilty  who  deserved  his 
anger.  0  soul,  if  thou  art  lost,  it  is  not  from  any  want  of  grace,  or 
wisdom,  or  power  in  the  Father  ;  if  thou  perish,  it  is  not  because  God 
is  hard  to  move  or  unable  to  save.  If  thou  be  a  castaway,  it  is  not 
because  the  Eternal  refused  to  hear  thy  cries  for  pardon  or  rejected 
thy  faith  in  him.  On  thine  own  head  be  thy  blood,  if  thy  soul  be  lost. 
If  thou  starve,  thou  starvest  because  thou  wilt  starve;  for  in  the 
Father's  house  there  is  "bread  enough  and  to  spare." 

But,  now,  consider  a  second  matter  which  may  set  this  more  clearly 
before  us.  Think  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  is  indeed  the  true  bread  of 
life  for  sinners.  Sinner,  I  return  to  my  personal  address.  Thou 
needest  a  Saviour;  and  thou  mayst  well  be  encouraged  when  thon 
seest  that  a  Saviour  is  provided — provided  by  God,  since  it  is  certain 
he  would  not  make  a  mistake  in  the  provision.  But  consider  who  the 
Saviour  is.  He  is  himself  God.  Jesus  who  came  from  heaven  for  our 
redemption  was  not  an  angel,  else  might  we  tremble  to  trust  the  weight 
of  our  sin  upon  him.  He  was  not  mere  man,  or  he  could  but  have  suffered 
as  a  substitute  for  one,  if  indeed  for  one  ;  but  he  was  very  God  of  very 
God,  in  the  beginning  with  the  Father.  And  does  such  a  one  come  to 
redeem  ?  Is  there  room  to  doubt  as  to  his  ability,  if  that  be  the  fact  ? 
I  do  confess  this  day,  that  if  my  sins  were  ten  thousand  times  heavier 
than  they  are,  yea,  and  if  I  had  all  the  sins  of  this  crowd  in  addition 
piled  upon  me,  I  could  trust  Jesus  with  them  all  at  this  moment  now 
that  I  know  him  to  be  the  Christ  of  God.  He  is  the  mighty  God,  and 
by  his  pierced  hand  the  burden  of  our  sins  is  easily  removed ;  he  blotteth 
out  our  sins,  he  casts  them  into  the  depths  of  the  sea. 

But  think  of  what  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  has  done.  He  who  was 
God,  and  thus  blessed  for  ever,  left  the  throne  and  royalties  of  heaven, 
and  stooped  to  yonder  manger.  There  he  lies ;  his  mother  wraps  him 
in  swaddling  clothes,  he  hangs  upon  her  breast ;  the  Infinite  is  clothed 
as  an  infant,  the  Invisible  is  made  manifest  in  flesh,  the  Almighty  is 
linked  with  weakness,  for  our  sakes.  Oh,  matchless  stoop  of  condescen 
sion  !  If  the  Redeemer  God  doe»  this  in  order  to  save  us,  shall  it  be 
rhought  a  thing  impossible  for  him  to  save  the  vilest  of  the  vile  ?  Can 
anything  be  too  hard  for  him  who  comes  from  heaven  to  earth  to 
redeem  ? 

Pause  not  because  of  astonishment,  but  press  onward.  Do  you  see 
him  who  was  Grod  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  living  more  than  thirty  years 
in  the  midst  of  the  sons  of  men,  bearing  the  infirmities  of  manhood, 
taking  upon  himself  our  sicknesses,  and  sharing  our  sorrows:  his  feet 
weary  with  treading  the  acres  of  Palestine ;  his  body  faint  oftentimes 
with  hunger  and  thirst,  and  labour  ;  his  knees  knit  to  the  earth  with 
midnight  praye";  his  eyes  red  with  weeping  (for  ofttimes  Jesus  wept), 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;  OR,  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."       889 

tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are  ?  Matchless  spectacle !  An  incar 
nate  God  dwells  among  sinners,  and  endures  their  contradiction! 
What  glory  flashed  forth  ever  and  anon  from  the  midst  of  his  lowliness! 
a  glory  which  should  render  faith  in  him  inevitable.  Thou  who  didst 
walk  the  sea :  thou  who  didst  raise  the  dead,  it  is  not  rational  to  doubt 
thy  power  to  forgive  sins  !  Didst  thou  not  thyself  put  it  so  when  thou 
badest  the  man  take  up  his  bed  and  walk?  "  Whether  is  easier,  to  say, 
Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee  ;  or  to  say,  Rise  up  and  walk  ?"  Assuredly 
he  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him : 
he  was  able  even  here  on  earth  in  weakness  to  forgive  sins,  much  more 
now  that  he  is  seated  in  his  glory.  He  is  exalted  on  high  to  be  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins. 

But,  ah  !  the  master  proof  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  "  bread  enough 
/ind  to  spare,"  is  the  cross.  Will  you  follow  me  a  moment,  will  you 
follow  him,  rather,  to  Gethsemane?  Can  you  see  the  bloody  sweat  as 
it  falls  upon  the  ground  in  his  agony  ?  Can  you  think  of  his  scourging 
before  Herod  and  Pilate  ?  Can  you  trace  him  along  the  Via  Dolorosa  of 
Jerusalem  ?  Will  your  tender  hearts  endure  to  see  him  nailed  to  the  tree, 
and  lifted  up  to  bleed  and  die  ?  This  is  but  the  shell ;  as  for  the  inward 
kernel  of  his  sufferings  no  language  can  describe  it,  neither  can  con 
ception  peer  into  it.  The  everlasting  God  laid  sin  on  Christ,  and 
where  the  sin  was  laid  there  fell  the  wrath.  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to 
bruise  him ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief."  Now  he  that  died  upon  the 
cross  was  God's  only  begotten  Son.  Can  you  conceive  a  limit  to  the 
merit  of  such  a  Saviour's  death?  I  know  there  are  some  who  think  it 
necessary  to  their  system  of  theology  to  limit  the  merit  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus :  if  my  system  of  theology  needed  such  a  limitation,  I  would  cast 
it  to  the  winds.  I  cannot,  dare  not,  allow  the  thought  to  find  a  lodging 
in  my  mind  ;  it  seems  so  near  akin  to  blasphemy.  In  Christ's  finished 
work  I  see  an  ocean  of  merit;  my  plummet  finds  no  bottom,  my  eye 
discovers  no  shore.  There  must  be  sufficient  efficacy  in  the  blood  of 
Christ,  if  God  had  so  willed  it,  to  have  saved  not  only  all  this  world, 
but  ten  thousand  worlds,  had  they  transgressed  the  Maker's  law.  Once 
admit  infinity  into  the  matter,  and  limit  is  out  of  the  question.  Having 
a  divine  person  for  an  offering,  it  is  not  consistent  to  conceive  of 
limited  value  ;  bound  and  measure  are  terms  inapplicable  to  the  divine 
sacrifice.  The  intent  of  the  divine  purpose  fixes  the  application  of  the 
infinite  offering,  but  does  not  change  it  into  a  finite  work.  In  the 
atonement  of  Christ  Jesus  there  is  "bread  enough  and  to  spare;"  even 
as  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  "  He  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of 
those  that  believe." 

But  now  let  me  lead  you  to  another  point  of  solemnly  joyful 
consideration,  and  that  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  believe  and  love  the 
Trinity  is  to  possess  the  key  of  theology.  We  spoke  of  the  Father, 
we  spoke  of  the  Son ;  let  us  now  "speak  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
We  do  him  all  too  little  honour,  for  the  Holy  Spirit  condescends  to 
come  to  earth  and  dwell  in  our  hearts ;  and  notwithstanding  all  our 
provocations  he  still  abides  within  his  people.  Now,  sinner,  thou 
needest  a  new  life  and  thou  needest  holiness,  for  both  of  these  are 
necessary  to  make  thee  fit  for  heaven.  Is  there  a  provision  for  this? 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  provided  and  given  in  the  covenant  of  grace ;  and 


390  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

surely  in  him  there  is  "  enough  and  to  spare."  What  cannot  the  Hoi? 
Spirit  do  ?  Being  divine,  nothing  can  be  beyond  his  power.  Look  at 
what  he  has  already  done.  He  moved  upon  the  face  of  chaos,  and 
brought  it  into  order;  all  the  beauty  of  creation  arose  beneath  his 
moulding  breath.  We  ourselves  must  confess  with  Elihu,  "  The  Spirit 
of  God  hath  made  me,  and  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me 
life."  Think  of  the  great  deeds  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost, 
when  men  unlearned  spake  with  tongues  of  which  they  knew  not  a 
syllable  aforetime,  and  the  flames  of  fire  upon  them  were  also  within 
them,  so  that  their  hearts  burned  with  zeal  and  courage  to  which  they 
hitherto  had  been  strangers.  Think  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  on  such 
a  one  as  Saul  of  Tarsus.  That  persecutor  foams  blood,  he  is  a  very  wolf, 
he  would  devour  the  saints  of  God  at  Damascus,  and  yet,  within  a  few 
moments,  you  hear  him  say,  "  Who  art  thou,  Lord  1  "  and  yet  again, 
"  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  1 "  His  heart  is  changed ; 
the  Spirit  of  God  has  new  created  it;  the  adamant  is  melted  in  a 
moment  into  wax.  Many  of  us  stand  before  you  as  the  living  monuments 
of  what  the  Holy  Ghost  can  do,  and  we  can  assure  you  from  our  own 
experience,  that  there  is  no  inward  evil  which  he  cannot  overcome,  no 
lustful  desire  of  the  flesh  which  he  cannot  subdue,  no  obduracy  of  the 
affections  which  he  cannot  melt.  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  1 
Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened?  Surely  no  sinner  can  be  beyond 
the  possibilities  of  mercy  when  the  Holy  Spirit  condescends  to  be  the 
agent  of  human  conversion.  0  sinner,  if  thou  perish,  it  is  not  because 
the  Holy  Spirit  wants  power,  or  the  blood  of  Jesus  lacks  efficacy,  or 
the  Father  fails  in  love ;  it  is  because  thou  believest  not  in  Christ, 
but  dost  abide  in  wilful  rebellion,  refusing  the  abundant  bread  of  life 
which  is  placed  before  thee. 

A  few  rapid  sentences  upon  other  things,  which  will  go  to  show  still 
further  the  greatness  of  the  provision  of  divine  mercy.  Observe  well  . 
that  throughout  all  the  ages  God  has  been  sending  one  prophet  after  another, 
and  these  prophets  have  been  succeeded  by  apostles,  and  these  by  martyrs 
and  confessors,  and  pastors  and  evangelists,  and  teachers  ;  all  these  have 
been  commissioned  by  the  Lord  in  regular  succession ;  and  what  has 
been  the  message  they  have  had  to  deliver?  They  have  all  pointed  to 
Christ,  the  great  deliverer.  Moses  and  the  prophets  all  spoke  of  him, 
and  so  have  all  truly  God-sent  ambassadors.  Dost  thou  think,  sinner, 
that  God  has  made  all  this  fuss  about  a  trifle  ?  Has  he  sent  all  these 
servants  to  call  thee  to  a  table  insufficiently  furnished  ?  Has  he  multi 
plied  his  invitations  through  so  long  a  time  to  bid  thee  and  others 
come  to  a  provision  which  is  not,  after  all,  sufficient  for  them  ?  Oh,  it 
cannot  be !  God  is  not  mocked,  neither  does  he  mock  poor  needy  souls,. 
The  stores  of  his  mercy  are  sufficient  for  the  utmost  emergencies. 

"  B.ivers  of  love  and  mercy  here 

In  a  rich  ocean  join ; 
Salvation  in  abundance  flows, 
Like  floods  of  milk  and  wine. 

Great  God,  the  treasures  of  thy  love 

Are  everlasting  mines, 
Deep  as  our  helpless  miseries  are, 

And  boundless  as  our  sins." 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;   OR,  'BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."      391 

Recollect,  again,  that  God  has  been  pleased  to  stake  his  honour  upon  th« 
gospel.  Men  desire  a  name,  and  God  also  is  jealous  of  his  glory.  Now, 
what  has  God  been  pleased  to  select  for  his  name  ?  Is  it  riot  the  conver 
sion  and  salvation  of  men  ?  When  instead  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  the 
myrtle-tree,  and  instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir-tree,  it  shall 
be  to  the  Lord  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut 
off.  And  dost  thou  think  God  will  get  a  name  by  saving  little  sinners 
by  a  little  Saviour  ?  Ah  1  his  great  nume  comes  from  washing  out 
stains  as  black  as  hell,  and  pardoning  sinners  who  were  foulest  of  the 
foul.  Is  there  one  monstrous  rebel  here  who  is  qualified  to  glorify  God 
greatly,  because  his  salvation  will  be  the  wonder  of  angels  and  the 
amazement  of  devils  ?  I  hope  there  is;  0  thou  most  degraded,  black, 
loathsome  sinner,  nearest  to  being  a  damned  sinner,  if  this  voice  can 
reach  thee,  I  challenge  thee  to  come  and  prove  whether  God's  mercy  is 
not  a  match  for  thy  sin.  Thou  Goliath  sinner,  come  thou  hither;  thou 
shalt  find  that  God  can  slay  thine  enmity,  and  make  thee  yet  his  friend, 
and  the  more  his  loving  and  adoring  servant,  because  great  forgiveness 
shall  secure  great  love.  Such  is  the  greatness  of  divine  mercy,  that 
"  where  sin  abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound." 

Dost  thou  think,  again,  0  sinner,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  out  of 
heaven  to  do  a  little  deed,  and  to  provide  a  slender  store  of  mercy  ? 
Dost  thou  think  he  went  up  to  Calvary,  and  down  to  the  grave,  and  allr 
that  he  might  do  a  commonplace  thing,  and  provide  a  stinted,  narrow, 
limited  salvation,  such  as  thine  unbelief  would  imagine  his  redemption 
to  be  ?  No.  We  speak  of  the  labours  of  Hercules,  but  these  were 
child's  play  compared  with  the  labours  of  Christ  who  slew  the  lion  of 
hell,  turned  a  purifying  stream  through  the  Augean  stables  of  man's 
sin,  and  cleansed  them,  and  performed  ten  thousand  miracles  besides : 
and  will  you  so  depreciate  Christ  as  to  imagine  that  what  he  has  ac 
complished  is,  after  all,  little,  so  little  that  it  is  not  enough  to  save  you? 
If  it  were  in  my  power  to  single  out  the  man  who  has  been  the  most 
dishonest,  most  licentious,  most  drunken,  most  profane — in  three  words, 
most  earthly,  sensual,  devilish — I  would  repeat  the  challenge  which  I 
gave  just  now,  and  bid  him  draw  near  to  Jesus,  and  see  whether  the 
fountain  filled  with  Christ's  atoning  blood  cannot  wash  him  white.  I 
challenge  him  at  this  instant  to  come  and  east  himself  at  the  dear 
Redeemer's  feet,  and  see  if  he  will  say,  "  I  cannot  save  thee,  thou  hast 
sinned  beyond  my  power."  It  shall  never,  never,  never  be,  for  he  is  able 
>o  the  uttermost  to  save.  He  is  a  Saviour,  and  a  great  one.  Christ 
will  be  honoured  by  the  grandeur  of  the  grace  which  he  bestows  upon  the 
greatest  of  offenders.  There  is  in  him  pardon  "  enough  and  to  spare." 

I  must  leave  this  point,  but  I  cannot  do  so  without  adding  that  I  think 
"  BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE  "  might  be  taken  for  the  motto  of  the 
gospel.  1  believe  in  particular  redemption,  and  that  Christ  laid  down 
his  life  for  his  sheep  ;  but,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  do  not  believe  in  the 
limited  value  of  that  redemption ;  how  else  could  I  dare  to  read  the 
words  of  John,  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  :  and  not  for  ours 
only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  There  is  a  sure  portion  for 
his  "own  elect,  but  there  is  also  over  and  above  "  to  spare."  I  believe  in  the 
electing  love  which  will  save  all  its  objerts — "  bread  enough  ;"  but  I 
believe  in  boundless  benevolence,  "  Bread  enough  and  to  spare."  We,. 


892  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

when  we  have  a  purpose  to  accomplish,  put  forth  the  requisite  quantity 
of  strength  and  no  more,  for  we  must  be  economical,  we  must  not  waste 
our  limited  store;  even  charity  gives  the  poor  man  no  more  than  he 
absolutely  needs ;  but  when  God  feeds  the  multitude,  he  spreads  the 
board  with  imperial  bounty.  Our  water-cart  runs  up  and  down  the 
favoured  road,  but  when  heaven's  clouds  would  favour  the  good  man's 
fields,  they  deluge  whole  nations,  and  even  pour  themselves  upon  the 
eea.  There  is  no  real  waste  with  God ;  but  at  the  same  time  there  is  no 
fitint.  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE;"  write  that  inscription  over 
the  house  of  mercy,  and  let  every  hungry  passer-by  be  encouraged 
thereby  to  enter  in  and  eat. 

II.  We  must  now  pass  on  to  a  second  consideration,  and  dwell  very 
briefly  on  it.  According  to  the  text,  there  was  not  only  bread  enough 
in  the  house,  but  THE  LOWEST  IN  THE  FATHER'S  HOUSE  ENJOYED 

ENOUGH  AND  TO   SPARE. 

We  can  never  make  a  parable  run  on  all  fours,  therefore  we  cannot 
find  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  "  hired  servants."  I  understand  the 
prodigal  to  have  meant  this,  that  the  very  lowest  menial  servant  employed 
by  his  father  had  bread  to  eat,  and  had  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  Now, 
how  should  we  translate  this  ?  Why,  sinner,  the  very  lowest  creature  that 
God  has  made,  that  has  not  sinned  against  him,  is  well  supplied  and  has 
abounding  happiness.  There  are  adaptations  for  pleasure  in  the 
organisations  of  the  lowest  animals.  See  how  the  gnats  dance  in  the 
summer's  sunbeam;  hear  the  swallows  as  they  scream  with  delight 
when  on  the  wing.  He  who  cares  for  birds  and  insects  will  surely  care 
for  men.  God  who  hears  the  ravens  when  they  cry,  will  he  not  hear 
the  returning  penitent?  He  gives  these  insects  happiness;  did  he 
mean  me  to  be  wretched?  Surely  he  who  opens  his  hand  and  supplies 
the  lack  of  every  living  thing,  will  not  refuse  to  open  his  hand  and 
supply  my  needs  if  I  seek  his  face. 

Yet  I  must  not  make  these  lowest  creatures  to  be  the  hired  servants. 
Whom  shall  I  then  select  among  men?  I  will  put  it  thus.  The  very 
worst  of  sinners  that  have  come  to  Christ  have  found  grace  "enough  and 
*o  spare,"  and  the  very  least  of  saints  who  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
.*ord  find  love  "enough  and  to  spare."  Take  then  the  most  guilty  of 
sinners,  and  see  how  bountifully  the  Lord  treats  them  when  they  turn 
unto  him.  Did  not  some  of  you,  who  are  yourselves  unconverted,  once 
know  persons  who  were  at  least  as  bad,  perhaps  more  outwardly  im 
moral  than  yourselves  ?  Well,  they  have  been  converted,  though  you 
have  not  been ;  and  when  they  were  converted,  what  was  their  testimony? 
Did  the  blood  of  Christ  avail  to  cleanse  them  ?  Oh,  yes ;  and  more  than 
cleanse  them,  for  it  added  to  beauty  not  their  own.  They  were  naked 
once  ;  was  Jesus  able  to  clothe  them  ?  Was  there  a  sufficient  covering 
in  his  righteousness  ?  Ah,  yes !  and  adornment  was  superadded ;  they 
received  not  a  bare  apparel,  but  a  royal  raiment.  You  have  seen  others 
thus  liberally  treated,  does  not  this  induce  you  also  to  come  ?  Some  of 
us  need  not  confine  our  remarks  to  others,  for  we  can  speak  personally 
of  ourselves.  We  came  to  Jesus  as  full  of  sin  as  ever  you  can  be,  and 
felt  ourselves  beyond  measure  lost  and  ruined  ;  but,  oh,  his  tender  love ! 
I  could  sooner  stand  here  and  weep  than  speak  to  you  of  it.  My  soul 
melts  in  gratitude  when  I  think  of  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  to  me 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;   OR,  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."      393 

in  that  hour  when  I  came  seeking  mercy  at  his  hands.  Oh  !  why  will 
not  you  also  come  ?  May  his  Holy  Spirit  sweetly  draw  you  !  I  proved 
that  there  was  bread  enough,  mercy  enough,  forgiveness  enough,  and 
to  spare.  Come  along,  come  along,  poor  guilty  one  ;  come  along,  there 
ifi  room  enough  for  thee. 

Now,  if  the  chief  of  sinners  bear  this  witness,  so  d3  the  most  obscure  of 
saints.  If  we  could  call  forth  from  his  seat  a  weak  beiiever  in  God,  who 
is  almost  unknown  in  the  church,  one  who  sometimes  questions  whether 
he  is  indeed  a  child  of  God,  and  would  be  willing  to  be  a  hired  servant 
so  long  as  he  might  belong  to  God,  and  if  I  were  to  ask  him,  "Now 
after  all  how  has  the  Lord  dealt  with  you  ?"  what  would  be  his  reply  ? 
You  have  many  afflictions,  doubts  and  fears,  but  have  you  any  com 
plaints  against  your  Lord?  When  you  have  waited  upon  him  for 
daily  grace,  has  he  denied  you  ?  When  you  have  been  full  of  troubles, 
has  he  refused  you  comfort  ?  When  you  have  been  plunged  in  distress, 
has  he  declined  to  deliver  you  ?  The  Lord  himself  asks,  *'  Have  I 
been  a  wilderness  unto  Israel?"  Testify  against  the  Lord,  ye  his 
people,  if  ye  have  aught  against  him.  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear, 
0  earth,  whosoever  there  be  in  God's  service  who  has  found  him  a  hard 
task-master,  let  him  speak.  Amongst  the  angels  before  Jehovah's 
throne,  and  amongst  men  redeemed  on  earth,  if  there  be  any  one  that 
can  say  he  hath  been  dealt  with  unjustly  or  treated  with  ungenerous 
churlishness,  let  him  lift  up  his  voice  !  But  there  is  not  one.  Even  the 
devil  himself  when  he  spoke  of  God  and  of  his  servant  Job,  said,  "  Doth 
Job  serve  God  for  nought?"  Of  course  he  did  not:  God  will  not 
let  his  servants  serve  him  for  nought;  he  will  pay  them  super 
abundant  wages,  and  they  shall  all  bear  witness  that  at  his  table  there 
is  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  Now,  if  these  still  enjoy  the  bread  of 
the  Father's  house,  these  who  were  once  great  sinners,  these  who  are 
now  only  very  commonplace  saints,  surely,  sinner,  it  should  encourage 
you  to  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father,"  for  his  hired  servants 
"  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare." 

III.  Notice  in  the  third  place,  that  the  text  dwells  upon  THE  MULTI 
TUDE  OF  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."  The 

prodigal  lays  an  emphasis  upon  that  word,  "  How  many  hired  servants 
of  my  father's  !"  He  was  thinking  of  their  great  number,  and  counting 
them  over.  He  thought  of  those  that  tended  the  cattle,  of  those  that 
went  out  with  the  camels,  of  those  that  watched  the  sheep,  and  those 
that  minded  the  corn,  and  those  that  waited  in  the  house ;  he  ran  them 
over  in  his  mind  :  his  father  was  great  in  the  land,  and  had  many 
servants ;  yet  he  knew  that  they  all  had  of  the  best  food  "  enough 
and  to  spare."  "  Why  should  I  perish  with  hunger  ?  I  am  only  one  at 
any  rate ;  though  my  hunger  seem  insatiable,  it  is  but  one  belly  that 
has  to  be  filled,  and,  lo,  my  father  fills  hundreds,  tlo*msands  every  day ; 
why  should  I  perish  with  hunger?"  Now,  0  thou  awakened  sinner, 
thou  who  dost  feel  this  morning  thy  sin  and  misery,  think  of  the 
numbers  upon  whom  God  has  bestowed  his  grace  already.  Think  of  the 
countless  hosts  in  heaven :  if  thou  wert  introduced  there  to-day,  thou 
wouldsc  find  it  as  easy  to  tell  the  stars,  or  the  sands  of  the  sea,  as 
to  count  the  multitudes  that  are  before  the  throne  even  now. 

They  have  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  and  they  are  sitting 

29 


394  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

down  with  Abraham,  with  Isaac,  and  with  Jacob,  and  there  is  room 
enough  for  thee.  And  beside  those  in  heaven,  think  of  those  on 
earth.  Blessed  be  God,  his  elect  on  earth  are  to  be  counted  by 
millions,  I  believe,  and  the  days  are  coming,  brighter  days  than 
these,  when  there  shall  be  multitudes  upon  multitudes  brought  to 
know  the  Saviour,  and  to  rejoice  in  him.  The  Father's  love  is  not  for 
a  few  only,  but  for  an  exceeding  great  company.  A  number  that  no  man 
can  number  will  be  found  in  heaven ;  now,  a  man  can  number  a  very 
great  amount.  Set  to  work  your  Newtons,  your  calculators,  they  can 
count  great  numbers,  but  God  and  God  alone  can  tell  the  multitude 
of  his  redeemed.  Now,  sinner,  thou  art  but  one  at  any  rate,  great 
sinner  as  thou  art,  and  the  mercy  of  God  which  embraces  millions  must 
have  room  enough  in  it  for  thee.  The  sea  which  holds  the  whales  and 
creeping  things  innumerable,  dost  thou  say,  "  It  will  overflow  its  banks 
if  I  bathe  therein  "  ?  The  sun  which  floods  the  universe  with  light, 
canst  thou  say,  "  I  should  exhaust  his  beams  if  I  should  ask  him  to 
enlighten  my  darkness  "  ?  Say  not  so.  If  thou  comest  to  thyself  thou 
wilt  not  tolerate  such  a  thought,  but  thou  wilt  remember  with  hope  the 
richness  of  the  Father's  grace,  even  though  thine  own  poverty  stare 
thee  in  the  face. 

Let  us  add  a  few  words  to  close  with,  close  grappling  words  to  some 
of  you  to  whom  God  has  sent  his  message  this  morning,  and  whom  he 
intends  to  save.  0  you  who  have  been  long  hearers  of  the  gospel,  and 
who  know  it  well  in  theory,  but  have  felt  none  of  the  power  of  it  in 
your  hearts,  let  me  now  remind  you  where  and  what  you  are  !  You 
sire  perishing.  As  the  Lord  liveth,  there  is  but  a  step  between  you  and 
death  ;  but  a  step,  nay,  but  a  breath  between  you  and  hell.  Sinner,  if. 
at  this  moment  thy  heart  should  cease  its  beating,  and  there  are  a 
thousand  causes  that  might  produce  that  result  ere  the  clock  ticks 
again,  thou  wouldst  be  in  the  flames  of  divine  wrath.  Canst  thou  bear 
to  be  in  such  peril  ?  If  you  were  hanging  over  a  rock  by  a  slender 
thread  which  must  soon  break,  and  if  you  would  then  fall  headlong 
down  a  terrible  precipice,  you  would  not  sleep,  but  be  full  of  alarm. 
May  you  have  sense  enough,  wit  enough,  grace  enough,  to  be  alarmed 
until  you  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

Eecollect,  however,  that  while  you  are  perishing,  you  are  perishing 
in  sight  of  plenty;  you  are  famishing  where  a  table  is  abundantly 
spread ;  what  is  more,  there  are  those  whom  you  know  now  sitting  at 
that  table  and  feasting.  What  sad  perversity  for  a  man  to  persist  in 
being  starved  in  the  midst  of  a  banquet,  where  others  are  being  satisfied 
with  good  things ! 

But  I  think  1  hear  you  say,  "  I  fear  I  have  no  right  to  come  to 
Jesus."  I  will  ask  you  this  :  have  you  any  right  to  say  that  till  you. 
have  been  denied  ?  Did  you  ever  try  to  go  to  Christ  ?  Has  he  ever 
rejected  you?  If  then  you  have  never  received  a  repulse,  why  do  you 
wickedly  imagine  that  he  would  repel  you  ?  Wickedly,  I  say,  for  it  is 
an  offence  against  the  Christ  who  opened  his  heart  upon  the  cross,  to 
imagine  that  he  could  repel  a  penitent.  Have  you  any  right  to  say, 
11  But  I  am  not  one  of  those  for  whom  mercy  is  provided  "  ?  Who  told 
you  so  ?  Have  you  climbed  to  heaven  and  read  the  secret  records  of 
God  election  ?  Has  the  Lord  revealed  a  strange  decree  to  you,  and  said, 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND:   OR,  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."      395 

"  Go  and  despair,  I  will  have  no  pity  on  you  "  ?  If  you  say  that  God 
has  so  spoken,  I  do  not  believe  you.  In  this  sacred  book  is  recorded  what 
God  has  said,  here  is  the  sure  word  of  testimony,  and  in  it  I  find  it  sai<] 
of  no  humble  seeker  that  God  hath  shut  him  out  from  his  grace.  Why 
hast  thou  a  right  to  invent  such  a  fiction  in  order  to  secure  thine  own 
damnation  ?  Instead  thereof,  there  is  much  in  the  word  of  God  and 
elsewhere  to  encourage  thee  in  coming  to  Christ.  He  has  not  repelled 
one  sinner  yet;  that  is  good  to  be»in  with:  it  is  not  likely  that  he 
would,  for  since  he  died  to  save  sinners,  why  should  he  reject  them 
when  they  seek  to  be  saved?  You  say,  "  I  am  afraid  to  come  to  Christ." 
Is  that  wise  ?  I  have  heard  of  a  poor  navigator  who  had  been  con 
verted,  who  had  but  little  education,  but  who  knew  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  when  dying:,  very  cheerfully  and  joyfully  longed 
to  depart.  His  wife  said  to  him,  "  But,  mon,  ain't  ye  afeared  to  stand 
before  the  judge  ?  "  "  Woman,"  said  he,  "  why  should  I  be  afeared  of 
a  man  as  died  for  me  ?  "  Oh,  why  should  you  be  afraid  of  Christ  who 
died  for  sinners  ?  The  idea  of  being  afraid  of  him  should  be  banished 
by  the  fact  that  he  shed  his  blood  for  the  guilty.  You  have  much 
reason  to  believe  from  the  very  fact  that  he  died,  that  he  will  receive 
you.  Besides,  you  have  his  word  for  it,  for  he  saith,  "  Him  that  cometh 
to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out " — for  no  reason,  and  in  no  way,  and 
on  no  occasion,  and  under  no  pretence,  and  for  no  motive.  "  I  will  noi 
not  cast  him  out,"  says  the  original.  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out/'  You  say  it  is  too  good  to  be  true  that 
there  can  be  pardon  for  you  :  this  is  a  foolish  measuring  of  God's  corn 
with  your  bushel,  and  because  it  seems  too  good  a  thing  for  you  to 
receive,  you  fancy  it  is  too  good  for  God  to  bestow.  Let  the  greatness 
of  the  good  news  be  one  reason  for  believing  that  the  news  is  true,  for 
it  is  so  like  God. 

"  Who  is  a  pardoning  God  like  thee  ? 
Or  who  hath  grace  so  rich  and  free  ?  '* 

Because  the  gospel  assures  us  that  he  forgives  great  sins  through  a 
great  Saviour,  it  looks  as  if  it  were  true,  since  he  is  so  great  a  God. 

What  should  be  the  result  of  all  this  with  every  sinner  here 
at  this  time  ?  I  think  this  good  news  should  arouse  those  who  have 
almost  gone  to  sleep  through  despair.  The  sailors  have  been  pumping 
the  vessel,  the  leaks  are  gaining,  she  is  going  down,  the  captain  is  per 
suaded  she  must  be  a  wreck.  Depressed  by  such  evil  tidings,  the  me*- 
refuse  to  work  ;  and  since  the  boats  are  all  stove  in  and  they  cannot 
make  a  raft,  they  sit  down  in  despair.  Presently  the  captain  has  better 
news  for  them.  "  She  will  float,"  he  says ;  "  the  wind  is  abating  too,  the 
pumps  tell  upon  the  water,  the  leak  can  be  reached  yet."  See  how  they 
work ;  with  what  cheery  courage  they  toil  on,  because  there  is  hope*! 
Soul,  there  is  hope  !  There  is  hope  !  THERE  is  HOPE  !  To  the  harlot, 
to  the  thief,  to  the  drunkard. 

"  There  is  no  hope,"  says  Satan.  Liar  that  thou  art,  get  thee  back 
to  thy  den  ;  for  thee  there  is  no  hope  ;  but  for  fallen  man,  though  he 
be  in  the  mire  of  sin  up  to  his  very  neck,  though  he  be  at  the  gates  of 
death,  while  he  lives  there  is  hope.  There  is  hope  for  hopeless  souls  in 
the  Saviour. 


896  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

In  addition  to  arousing  us  this  ought  to  elevate  the  sinner's  thoughts, 
Some  years  ago,  there  was  a  crossing-sweeper  in  Dublin,  with  hi& 
broom,  at  the  corner,  and  in  all  probability  his  highest  thoughts 
were  to  keep  the  crossing  clean,  and  look  for  the  pence.  One  day,  a 
lawyer  put  his  hand  upon  his  shoulder,  and  said  to  him,  "  My  good 
fellow,  do  you  know  that  you  are  heir  to  a  fortune  of  ten  thousand 
pounds  a  year  ?  "  "  Do  you  mean  it  ?  "  said  be.  "  I  do,"  he  said.  "  I 
have  just  received  the  information  ;  I  am  sure  you  are  the  man."  He 
walked  away,  and  he  forgot  Ms  Iroom.  Are  you  astonished?  Why,. 
who  would  not  have  forgotten  a  broom  when  suddenly  made  possessor 
of  ten  thousand  a  year  ?  So,  I  pray  that  some  poor  sinners,  who  have 
been  thinking  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  when  they  hear  that  there 
is  hope,  and  that  there  is  heaven  to  be  had,  will  forget  the  deceitful 
pleasures  of  sin,  and  follow  after  higher  and  better  things. 

Should  it  not  also  purify  the  mind  ?  The  prodigal,  when  he  said,  "I 
will  arise  and  go  to  my  father,"  became  in  a  measure  reformed  from 
that  very  moment.  How,  say  you  ?  Why,  he  left  the  swine-trough  : 
more,  he  left  the  wine  cup,  and  he  left  the  harlots.  He  did  not  go 
with  the  harlot  on  his  arm,  and  the  wine  cup  in  his  hand,  and  say,  "  I 
will  take  these  with  me,  and  go  to  my  father."  It  could  not  be. 
These  were  all  left,  and  though  he  had  no  goodness  to  bring,  yet  he  did 
not  try  to  keep  his  sins  and  come  to  Christ.  I  shall  close  with  this 
remark,  because  it  will  act  as  a  sort  of  caveat,  and  be  a  fit  word  to 
season  the  wide  invitations  of  the  free  gospel.  Some  of  you,  I  fear,  will 
make  mischief  even  out  of  the  gospel,  and  will  dare  to  take  the  cross 
and  use  it  for  a  gibbet  for  your  souls.  If  God  is  so  merciful,  you  will 
go  therefore  and  sin  the  more ;  and  because  grace  is  freely  given,  there 
fore  you  will  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound.  If  you  do  this, 
I  would  solemnly  remind  you  I  have  no  grace  to  preach  to  such  as  you. 
"  Your  damnation  is  just ; "  it  is  the  word  of  inspiration,  and  the  only 
one  I  know  that  is  applicable  to  such  as  you  are  ;  but  every  needy, 
guilty  soul  that  desires  a  Saviour  is  told  to-day  to  believe  in  Jesus,  that 
is,  trust  in  the  substitution  and  sacrifice  of  Christ,  trust  him  to  take 
your  sin  and  blot  it  out  ;  trust  him  to  take  your  soul  and  save  it.  Trust 
Christ  entirely,  and  you  are  forgiven  this  very  moment ;  you  are  saved 
this  very  instant,  and  you  may  rejoice  now  in  the  fact  that  being 
justified  by  faith  you  have  peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  0  come  ye,  come  ye,  come  ye  ;  come  and  welcome ;  come  ye 
now  to  the  Eedeemer's  blood.  Holy  Spirit,  compel  them  to  come  in, 
that  the  house  of  mercy  may  be  filled.  Amen,  and  Amen. 


Cjre  fto  $mi  Strat  fulfil 


CONFESSION  OF  SIN— A  SERMON  WITH  SEVEN  TEXTS. 


a  J&trnum 

DELIVERED  ON  SABBATH  MORNING,  JANUARY  18,  1857,  BY  TUB 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    MUSIC    HALL,   ROYAL    SURREY    GARDENS. 


MY  sermon  this  morning  will  have  seven  texts,  and  yet  I  pledge  myself  that  there 
shall  be  but  three  different  words  in  the  whole  of  them ;  for  it  so  happens  that  the 
«even  texts  are  all  alike,  occurring  in  seven  different  portions  of  God's  holy  Word. 
I  shall  require,  however,  to  use  the  whole  of  them  to  exemplify  different  cases;  and 
I  must  request  those  of  you  who  have  brought  your  Bibles  with  you  to  refer  to  the 
texts  as  I  shall  mention  them. 

The  subject  of  this  morning's  discourse  will  be  this — CONFESSION  OF  SIN.  We 
know  that  this  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation.  Unless  there  be  a  true  and 
hearty  confession  of  our  sins  to  God,  we  have  no  promise  that  we  shall  find  mercy 
through  the  blood  of  the  Redeemer.  "  Whosoever  confesseth  his  sins  and  forsaketh 
them  shall  find  mercy."  But  there  is  no  promise  in  the  Bible  to  the  man  who  will 
not  confess  his  sins.  Yet,  as  upon  every  point  of  Scripture  there  is  a  liability  of 
being  deceived,  so  more  especially  in  the  matter  of  confession  of  sin.  There  be 
many  who  make  a  confession,  and  a  confession  before  God,  who  notwithstanding, 
receive  no  blessing,  because  their  confession  has  not  in  it  certain  marks  which  are 
required  by  God  to  prove  it  genuine  and  sincere,  and  which  demonstrate  it  to  be 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  My  text  this  morning  consists  of  three  words,  "I  have 
sinned."  And  you  will  see  how  these  words,  in  the  lips  of  different  men,  indicate 
very  different  feelings.  While  one  says,  "I  have  sinned,"  and  receives  forgiveness; 
another  we  shall  meet  with  says,  '*  I  have  sinned,"  and  goes  his  way  to  blacken 
himself  with  worse  crimes  than  belore,  and  dive  into  greater  depths  of  sin  than 
heretofore  he  had  discovered. 


Wyt  Jarfcmi  Sinner. 

PHARAOH — •*  I  have  sinned." — Exodut  if.  i7. 

I.  The  first  case  I  shall  bring  before  you  is  that  of  the  HARDENED  SINNER,  who, 
when  under  terror,  says,  "  I  have  sinned."  And  you  will  find  the  text  in  the  book 
of  Exodus,  the  9th  chap,  and  27th  verse:  "And  Pharaoh  sent,  and  called  for  Moses 
and  Aaron,  and  said  unto  them,  I  have  sinned  this  time:  the  Lord  is  righteous,  and 
I  and  my  people  are  wicked." 

But  why  this  confession  from  the  lips  of  the  haughty  tyrant?  He  was  not  often 
wont  to  humble  himself  before  Jehovah.  Why  doth  the  proud  one  bow  himself?  You 
will  judge  of  the  value  of  his  confession  when  you  hear  the  circumstances  undoi 

No.  113.  31 


CONFESSION    OF    SIN — A    SERMON    WITH    SEVEN    TEXTS. 

which  it  VES  made.  "  And  Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod  toward  neaven;  and  the 
Lord  sent  thunder  and  hail,  and  the  fire  ran  along  upon  the  ground;  and  the  Lord 
rained  hail  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  So  that  there  was  hail,  and  fire  mingled  with 
the  hail,  very  grievous,  such  as  there  was  none  like  it  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  since 
it  became  a  nation."  "  Now,"  says  Pharaoh,  whilst  the  thunder  is  rolling  through 
the  sky,  while  the  lightning-flashes  are  setting  the  very  ground  on  fire,  and  while 
the  hail  is  descending  in  big  lumps  of  ice,  now,  says  he,  "  I  have  sinned."  He  is 
but  a  type  and  specimen  of  multitudes  of  the  same  class.  How  many  a  hardened 
rebel  on  shipboard,  when  the  timbers  are  strained  and  creaking,  when  the  mast  is 
broken,  and  the  ship  is  drifting  before  the  gale,  when  the  hungry  waves  are  opening 
their  mouths  to  swallow  the  ship  up  alive  and  quick  as  those  that  go  into  the  pit 
— how  many  a  hardened  sailor  has  then  bowed  his  knee,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and 
cried,  "I  have  sinned!"  But  of  what  avail  and  of  what  value  was  his  confession? 
The  repentance  that  was  born  in  the  storm  died  in  the  calm;  that  repentance  of 
his  that  was  begotten  amidst  the  thunder  and  the  lightning,  ceased  so  soon  as  all 
was  hushed  in  quiet,  and  the  man  who  was  a  pious  mariner  when  on  board  ship, 
became  the  most  wicked  and  abominable  of  sailors  when  he  placed  his  foot  on  terra 
firma.  How  often,  too,  have  we  seen  this  in  a  storm  of  thunder  and  lightning? 
Many  a  man's  cheek  is  blanched  when  he  hears  the  thunder  rolling;  the  tears  start 
to  his  eyes,  and  he  cries,  "0  God,  I  have  sinned!"  while  the  rafters  of  his  house 
are  shaking,  and  the  very  ground  beneath  him  reeling  at  the  voice  of  God  which 
is  full  of  majesty.  But  alas,  for  such  a  repentance !  When  the  sun  again  shines, 
and  the  black  clouds  are  withdrawn,  sin  comes  again  upon  the  man,  and  he 
becomes  worse  than  before.  How  many  of  the  same  sort  of  confessions,  too,  have 
we  seen  in  times  of  cholera,  and  fever,  and  pestilence!  Then  our  churches  have 
been  crammed  with  hearers,  who,  because  so  many  funerals  have  passed  their 
doors,  or  so  many  have  died  in  the  street,  could  not  refrain  from  going  up  to  God's 
house  to  confess  their  sins.  And  under  that  visitation,  when  one,  two,  and  three 
have  been  lying  dead  in  the  house,  or  next  door,  how  many  have  thought  they 
would  really  turn  to  God!  But,  alas!  when  the  pestilence  had  done  its  work,, 
conviction  ceased;  and  when  the  bell  had  tolled  the  last  time  for  a  death  caused  by 
cholera,  then  their  hearts  ceased  to  beat  with  penitence,  and  their  tears  did  flow 
no  more. 

Have  I  any  such  here  this  morning?  I  doubt  not  I  have  hardened  persons  who 
would  scorn  the  very  idea  of  religion,  who  would  count  me  a  cant  and  hypocrite  if 
I  should  endeavour  to  press  it  home  upon  them,  but  who  know  right  well  that 
religion  is  true,  and  who  feel  it  in  their  times  of  terror !  If  I  have  such  here  this 
morning,  let  me  solemnly  say  to  them,  "  Sirs,  you  have  forgotten  the  feelings  you 
had  in  your  hours  of  alarm ;  but,  remember,  God  has  not  forgotten  the  vows  you 
then  made."  Sailor,  you  said  if  God  would  spare  you  to  see  the  land  again,  you= 
would  be  his  servant;  you  are  not  so,  you  have  lied  against  God,  you  have  made 
him  a  false  promise,  for  you  have  never  kept  the  vow  which  your  lips  did  utter. 
You  said,  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  that  if  he  would  spare  your  life  you  would  never 
again  sin  as  you  did  before;  but  here  you  are,  and  this  week's  sins  shall  speak  for 
themselves.  You  are  no  better  than  you  were  before  your  sickness.  Couldst  thou 
lie  to  thy  fellow-man,  and  yet  go  unreproved?  And  thinkest  thou  that  thou  wilt 
lie  against  God,  and  yet  go  unpunished?  No;  the  vow,  however  rashly  made,  is- 
registered  in  heaven;  and  though  it  be  a  vow  which  man  cannot  perform,  yet,  as  it 
is  a  vow  which  he  has  made  himself,  and  made  voluntarily  too.  he  shall  be  punished 
for  the  non-keeping  it;  and  God  shall  execute  vengeance  upon  him  at  last,  because 
he  said  he  would  turn  from  his  ways,  and  then  when  the  bloAv  was  removed  he  did 
it  not.  A  great  outcry  has  been  raised  of  late  against  tickets-of-leave ;  I  have  no? 
doubt  there  are  some  men  here,  who  before  high  heaven  stand  in  the  same  position 
as  the  ticket- of-leave  men  stand  to  our  government.  They  were  about  to  die,  as 
they  thought;  they  promised  good  behaviour  if  they  might  be  spared,  and  they 
are  here  to-day  on  ticket-of-leave  in  this  world:  and  how  have  they  fulfilled  their 
promise?  Justice  might  raise  the  same  outcry  against  them  as  they  do  against  the 
burglars  so  constantly  let  loose  upon  us.  The  avenging  angel  might  say,  "  O  God, 
these  men  said,  if  they  were  spared  they  would  be  so  much  better;  if  anything  they 
are  worse.  How  have  they  violated  their  promise,  and  how  have  they  brought  doMTR- 

50 


CONFESSION    OF    SIN — A    SERMON    WITH    SEVEN    TEXTS. 

divine  wrath  upon  their  heads!"  This  is  the  first  style  of  penitence;  and  it  is  a 
style  I  hope  none  oi  you  will  imitate,  for  it  is  utterly  worthless.  It  is  of  no  usa 
for  you  to  say,  "  I  have  sinned,"  merely  under  the  influence  of  terror,  and  then  to 
forget  it  aliens  ards. 


BALAAM — "  I  have  sinned." — Numbers  x.rii.  34. 

II.  Now  for  a  second  text.  I  beg  to  introduce  to  you  another  character — the 
double-minded  man,  who  says,  "I  have  sinned,"  and  feels  that  he  has,  and  feels  it 
deeply  too,  but  who  is  so  worldly-minded  that  he  "loves  the  wages  of  unrighteous 
ness."  The  character  I  have  chosen  to  illustrate  this,  is  that  of  Balaam.  Turn  to 
the  book  of  Numbers,  the  22nd  chap,  and  the  34th  verse:  "And  Balaam  said  unto  the 
angel  of  the  Lord,  I  have  sinned." 

"I  have  sinned,"  said  Balaam;  but  yet  he  went  on  with  his  sin  afterwards.  One 
of  the  strangest  characters  of  the  whole  world  is  Balaam.  I  have  often  marvelled 
at  that  man;  he  seems  really  in  another  sense  to  have  come  up  to  the  lines  of  Ralph 
Erskine — 

"  To  good  and  evil  equal  bent, 
And  both  a  devil  and  a  saint." 

For  he  did  seem  to  be  so.  At  times  no  man  could  speak  more  eloquently  and 
more  truthfully,  and  at  other  times  he  exhibited  the  most  mean  and  sordid 
covetuousness  that  could  disgrace  human  nature.  Think  you  see  Balaam;  he 
stands  upon  the  brow  of  the  hill,  and  there  lie  the  multitudes  of  Israel  at  his 
feet;  he  is  bidden  to  curse  them,  and  he  cries,  "How  shall  I  curse  whom  God  hath 
not  cursed?"  And  God  opening  his  eyes,  he  begins  to  tell  even  about  the  coming 
of  Christ,  and  he  says,  "  I  shall  see  him,  but  not  now:  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not 
nigh."  And  then  he  winds  up  his  oration  by  saying — "Let  me  die  the  death  of  the 
righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his!"  And  ye  will  say  of  that  man,  he  is  a 
hopeful  character.  Wait  till  he  has  come  off  the  brow  of  the  hill,  and  ye  will  hear 
him  give  the  most  diabolical  advice  to  the  king  of  Moab  which  it  was  even  .possible 
for  Satan  himself  to  suggest.  Said  he  to  the  king,  "You  cannot  overthrow  these 
people  in  battle,  for  God  is  with  them;  try  and  entice  them  from  their  God."  And 
ye  know  how  with  wanton  lusts  they  of  Moab  tried  to  entice  the  children  of  Israel 
from  allegiance  to  Jehovah;  so  that  this  man  seemed  to  have  the  voice  of  an  angel  at 
one  time,  and  yet  the  very  soul  of  a  devil  in  his  bowels.  He  was  a  terrible  character; 
he  was  a  man  of  two  things,  a  man  who  went  all  the  way  with  two  things  to  a  very 
great  extent.  I  know  the  Scripture  says,  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  Now 
this  is  often  misunderstood.  Some  read  it,  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  Yes 
he  can;  he  can  serve  three  or  four.  The  way  to  read  it  is  this:  "No  man  can 
serve  two  masters."  They  cannot  both  be  masters.  He  can  serve  two,  but  they 
cannot  both  be  his  master.  A  man  can  serve  two  who  are  not  his  masters,  or 
twenty  either;  he  may  live  for  twenty  different  purposes,  but  he  cannot  livs  for 
more  than  one  master  purpose — there  can  only  be  one  master  purpose  in  his  soul. 
But  Balaam  laboured  to  serve  two;  it  was  like  the  people  of  whom  it  was  said, 
"They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  other  gods."  Or  like  Rufus,  who  was  a  loaf  of 
the  same  leaven;  for  you  know  our  old  king  Rufus  painted  God  on  one  side  of  his 
shield,  and  the  devil  on  the  other,  and  had  underneath,  the  motto:  "Ready  for  both; 
catch  who  can."  There  are  many  such,  who  are  ready  for  both.  They  meet  a 
minister,  and  how  pious  and  holy  they  are;  on  the  Sabbath  they  are  the  most  respect 
able  and  upright  people  in  the  world,  as  you  would  think;  indeed  they  effect  a 
drawling  in  their  speech,  which  they  think  to  be  eminently  religious.  But  on  a 
week  day,  if  you  want  to  find  the  greatest  rogues  and  cheats,  they  are  some  of  those 
men  who  are  so  sanctimonious  in  their  piety.  Now,  rest  assured,  my  hearers,  that 
2iO  confession  of  sin  can  be  genuine,  unless  it  be  a  whole  hearted  one.  It  is  of  no 
use  for  you  to  say,  "  I  have  siimed,''  and  then  keep  on  sinning.  "  I  have  sinned," 

ft] 


CONFESSION    OF    SIN— A    SERMON   WITH    SEVEN    TEXTS. 

say  you,  and  it  is  a  fair,  fair  face  you  show;  but,  alasi  alas!  for  the  sin  you  will  go 
away  and  commit.  Some  men  seem  to  be  born  with  two  characters.  I  remarked 
\rhen  in  the  library  at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  a  very  fine  statue  of  Lord  Byron. 
The  librarian  said  to  me,  "  Stand  here,  sir."  I  looked,  and  I  said,  "  What  a  fine 
intellectual  countenance!  What  a  grand  genius  he  was!"  "  Come  here,"  he  said, 
"to  the  other  side."  "  Ah!  what  a  demon!  There  stands  the  man  that  could  defy 
the  deity."  He  seemed  to  have  such  a  scowl  and  such  a  dreadful  leer  in  his  face; 
even  as  Milton  would  have  painted  Satan  when  he  said — "Better  to  reign  in  hell 
than  serve  in  heaven."  I  turned  away  and  said  to  the  librarian,  "Do  you  think 
tne  artist  designed  this?"  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  he  wished  to  picture  the  two  characters 
— the  great,  the  grand,  the  almost  superhuman  genius  that  he  oossessed,  and  yet 
the  enormous  mass  of  sin  that  was  in  his  soul."  Inere  are  su»ue  men  here  of  the 
same  sort.  I  dare  say,  like  Balaam,  they  would  overthrow  everything  in  argument 
with  their  enchantments;  they  could  work  miracles ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time  there 
is  something  about  them  which  betrays  a  horrid  character  of  sin,  as  great  as  that 
which  would  appear  to  be  their  character  for  righteousness.  Balaam,  you  know, 
offered  sacrifices  to  God  upon  the  altar  of  Baal:  that  was  just  the  type  of  his 
character.  So  many  do;  they  offer  sacrifices  to  God  on  the  shrine  of  Mammon; 
and  whilst  they  will  give  to  the  building  of  a  church,  and  distribute  to  the  poor, 
they  will  at  the  other  door  of  their  counting-house  grind  the  poor  for  bread,  and 
press  the  very  blood  out  of  the  widow,  that  they  may  enrich  themselves.  Ah!  it 
is  idle  and  useless  for  you  to  say,  "  I  have  sinned,"  unless  you  mean  it  from  your 
.heart.  That  double  minded  man's  confession  is  of  no  avail. 


SAUL — "  I  have  sinned." — 1  Samuel  xv.  24. 

III.  And  now  a  third  character,  and  a  third  text.  In  the  first  book  of  Samuel, 
•*,he  15th  chap,  and  24th  verse:  "  And  Saul  said  unto  Samuel.  I  have  sinned" 

Here  is  the  insincere  man — the  man  who  is  not  like  Balaam,  to  a  certain  ex 
tent  sincere  in  two  things;  but  the  man  who  is  just  the  opposite — who  has  no 
prominent  point  in  his  character  at  all,  but  is  moulded  everlastingly  by  the  circum 
stances  that  are  passing  over  his  head.  Such  a  man  was  Sau/.  Samuel  reproved 
him,  and  he  said,  "I  have  sinned."  But  he  did  not  mean  what  he  said:  for  if  you 
read  the  whole  verse  you  will  find  him  saying,  "I  have  sinned:  for  I  have  trans 
gressed  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  and  thy  words;  because  I  feared  the  people:" 
which  was  a  lying  excuse.  Saul  never  feared  anybody;  he  was  always  ready  enough 
to  do  his  own  will — he  was  the  despot.  And  just  before  he  had  pleaded  another  excuse, 
that  he  had  saved  the  bullocks  and  lambs  to  offer  to  Jehovah,  and  therefore  both 
excuses  could  not  have  been  true.  You  remember,  my  friends,  that  the  most  pro 
minent  feature  in  the  character  of  Saul  was  his  insincerity.  One  day  he  fetched 
David  from  his  bed,  as  he  thought,  to  put  him  to  death  in  his  house.  Another 
time  he  declares,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  aught  against  thee,  my  son  David." 
One  day,  because  David  saved  his  life,  he  said,  "  Thou  ar't  more  righteous  than 
I;  I  will  do  so  no  more."  The  day  before  he  had  gone  out  to  fight  against  his 
own  son-in-law,  in  order  to  slay  him.  Sometimes  Saul  was  among  the  pro 
phets,  easily  turned  into  a  prophet,  and  then  afterwards  among  the  witches; 
sometimes  in  one  place,  and  then  another,  and  insincere  in  everything.  How 
many  such  we  have  in  every  Christian  assembly;  men  who  are  very  easily 
moulded!  Say  what  you  please  to  them,  they  always  agree  with  you.  They  have 
affectionate  dispositions,  very  likely  a  tender  conscience;  but  then  the  conscience 
is  so  remarkably  tender,  that  when  touched  it  seems  to  give,  and  you  are  afraid  to 
probe  deeper, — it  heals  as  soon  it  is  wounded.  I  think  I  used  the  very  singular 
comparison  once  before,  which  I  must  use  again:  there  are  some  men  who  seem  to 
have  india-rubber  hearts.  If  you  do  but  touch  them,  there  is  an  impression  made 
at  once;  but  then  it  is  of  no  use,  it  soon  restores  itself  to  its  original  character. 
You  may  press  them  whatever  way  you  wish,  they  are  so  elastic  you  can  alwttyi 


CONFESSION    OF    SIN — A    SERMON    WITH    SEVEN    TEXTS 

effect  your  purpose;  but  then  they  are  not  fixed  in  their  character,  and  soon  return 
to  be  what  they  were  before.  O  sirs,  too  many  of  you  have  done  the  same;  you 
liave  bowed  your  heads  in  church,  and  said,  "We  have  erred  and  strayed  from  thy 
ways;"  and  you  did  not  mean  what  you  said.  You  have  come  to  your  minister; 
you  have  said,  "I  repent  of  my  sins;"  you  did  not  then  feel  you  were  a  sinner;  you 
only  said  it  to  please  him.  And  now  you  attend  the  house  of  God;  no  one  more 
impressible  than  you;  the  tear  will  run  down  your  cheek  in  a  moment,  but  yet. 
notwithstanding  all  that,  the  tear  is  dried  as  quickly  as  it  is  brought  forth,  and  you 
remain  to  all  intents  and  purposes  the  same  as  you  were  before.  To  say,  "  I  have 
sinned,"  in  an  unmeaning  manner,  is  worse  than  worthless,  for  it  is  a  mockery  of 
God  thus  to  confess  with  insincerity  of  heart. 

I  have  been  brief  upon  this  character;  for  it  seemed  to  touch  upon  that  of  Balaam ; 
though  any  thinking  man  will  at  once  see  there  was  a  real  contrast  between  Saul 
and  Balaam,  even  though  tliere  is  an  affinity  between  the  two.  Balaam  was  the 
great  bad  man.  great  in  all  he  did;  Saul  was  little  in  everything  except  in  stature — 
little  in  his  good  and  little  in  his  vice;  and  he  was  too  much  of  a  fool  to  be  despe 
rately  bad,  though  too  wicked  to  be  at  any  lime  good:  while  Balaam  was  great  in 
both :  the  man  who  could  at  one  time  defy  Jehovah,  and  yet  at  another  time  could 
say,  "  If  Balak  would  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold,  I  cannot  go  beyond 
the  word  ci  the  Lord  my  God,  to  do  less  or  more."  . 


Sjje  §joubtful  $)cmtmt. 

ACHAN — "  I  have  sinned." — Joshua  vii.  20. 

IV.  And  now  I  have  to  introduce  to  you  a  very  interesting  case;  it  is  the  case 
of  the  doubtful  penitent,  the  case  of  Achan,  in  the  book  of  Joshua,  the  7th  chap, 
and  the  20th  verse:  "And  Achan  answered  Joshua,  indeed  I  have  sinned." 

You  know  that  Achan  stole  some  of  the  prey  from  the  city  of  Jericho — that  he 
was  discovered  by  lot,  and  put  to  death.     I  have  singled  this  case  out  as  the  repre 
sentative  of  some  whose  characters  are  doubtful  on  their  death  beds;  who  do  repent 
apparently,  but  of  whom  the  most  we  can  say  is,  that  we  hope  their  souls  are  saved 
at  last,  but  indeed  we  cannot  tell.     Achan,  you  are  aware,  was  stoned  with  stones, 
for  defiling  Israel.  But  I  find  in  the  Mishna,  an  old  Jewish  exposition  of  the  Bible, 
these  words,  "Joshua  said  to  Achan,  the  Lord  shall  trouble  thee  this  day."     And 
the  note  upon  it  is — "  He  said  this  day,  implying  that  he  was  only  to  be  troubled 
in  this  life,  by  being  stoned  to  death,  but  that  God  would  have  mercy  oil  his  soul, 
seeing  that  he  had  made  a  full  confession  of  his  sin."    And  I,  too,  am  inclined, 
from  reading  the  chapter,  to  concur  in  the  idea  of  my  venerable  and  now  glorified 
predecessor,  Dr.  Gill,  in  believing  that  Achan  really  was  saved,  although  he  was 
put  to  death  for  the  crime,  as  an  example.  For  you  will  observe  how  kindly  Joshua 
spoke  to  him.  He  said,  "  My  son,  give,  I  pray  thee,  glory  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
and  make  confession  unto  him;  and  tell  me  now  what  thou  hast  done;  hide  it  not 
from  me."    And  you  find  Achan  making  a  very  full  confession.     He  says,  "  Indeed 
I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  thus  and  thus  have  I  done. 
When  I  saw  among  the  spoils  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment,  and  two  hundred 
shekels  of  silver,  and  a  wedge  of  gold  of  fifty  shekels  weight,  then  I  coveted  them, 
and  took  them;  and,  behold,  they  are  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  tent,  and 
the  silver  under  it."    It  seems  so  full  a  confession,  that  if  I  might  be  allowed  to 
judge,  I  should  say,  "I  hope  to  meet  Achan  the  sinner,  before  the  throne  of  God " 
But  I  find  Matthew  Henry  has  no  such  opinion;  and  many  other  expositors  con 
sider  that  as  his  body  was  destroyed,  so  was  his  soul.     I  have,  therefore,  selected . 
his  case,  as  being  one  of  doubtful  repentance.    Ah !  dear  friends,  it  has  been  my  lot 
to  stand  by  many  a  death-bed,  and  to  see  many  such  a  repentance  as  this;  I  have 
•een  the  man,  when  worn  to  a  skeleton,  sustained  by  pillows  in  his  bed;  and  he 
has  said,  when  I  have  talked  to  him  of  judgment  to  come,  "  Sir,  I  feel  1  have  been 
guilty,  but  Christ  is  good;  I  trust  in  him."  And  I  have  said  within  myself,  "I  be- 
fceve  the  man'g  soul  is  sare."     But  I  have  always  come  away  with  the  melancholy 

53 


OF    SIN — A    SERMON    NVITH    SEVEN    TEXTS. 

reflection  that  I  had  no  proof  of  it,  beyond  his  own  words;  for  it  needs  proof  ir; 
acts  and  in  future  life,  in  order  to  sustain  any  firm  conviction  of  a  man's  salvation. 
You  know  that  great  fact,  that  a  physician  once  kept  a  record  of  a  thousand  per 
sons  who  thought  they  were  dying,  and  whom  he  thought  were  penitents ;  he  wrote 
their  names  down  in  a  book  as  those,  who,  if  they  had  died,  would  go  to  heaven ; 
they  did  not  die,  they  lived;  and  he  says  that  out  of  the  whole  thousand  he  had 
not  three  persons  who  turned  out  well  afterwards,  but  they  returned  to  their  sins 
again,  and  were  as  bad  as  ever.  Ah!  dear  friends,  I  hope  none  of  you  will  have 
such  a  death-bed  repentance  as  that;  I  hope  your  minister  or  your  parents  will  not 
have  to  stand  by  your  bedside,  and  then  go  away  and  say,  "  Poor  fellow,  I  hope 
he  is  saved.  But  alas!  death -bed  repentances  are  such  flimsy  things;  such  poor, 
such  trivial  grounds  of  hope,  that  I  am  afraid,  after  all,  his  soul  may  be  lost."  Ohf 
to  die  with  a  full  assurance;  oh!  to  die  with  an  abundant  entrance,  leaving  a  testi 
mony  behind  that  we  have  departed  this  life  in  peace!  That  is  a  far  happier  way 
than  to  die  in  a  doubtful  manner,  lying  sick,  hovering  between  two  worlds,  and 
neither  ourselves  nor  yet  our  friends  knowing  to  which  of  the  two  worlds  we  are 
going.  May  God  grant  us  grace  to  give  in  our  lives  evidences  of  true  conversion, 
that  our  case  may  not  be  doubtful! 


®l]e  gcgentante  jrf  gespir. 

JUDAS — "  I  have  sinned." — Matthew  xxvii.  4. 

V.  I  shall  not  detain  you  too  long,  I  trust,  but  I  must  now  give  you  another 
bad  case;  the  worst  of  all.  It  is  the  REPENTANCE  OF  DESPAIR.  Will  you  turn  to  the 
27th  chap,  of  Matthew,  and  the  4th  verse?  There  you  have  a  dreadful  case  of  the 
repentance  of  despair  You  will  recognize  the  character  the  moment  I  read  the 
verse:  "  And  Judas  said,  I  have  sinned."  Yes,  Judas  the  traitor,  who  had  betrayed 
his  Master,  when  he  saw  that  his  Master  was  condemned,  "  repented,  and  brought 
again  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priests  and  elders,  saying,  I  have  sinned, 
in  that  I  have  betrayed  innocent  blood,  and  cast  down  the  pieces  in  the  temple,  and 
went"  and  what?— "and  hanged  himself"  Here  is  the  worst  kind  of  repentance  of 
all;  in  fact,  I  know  riot  that  I  am  justified  in  calling  it  repentance;  it  must  be 
called  remorse  of  conscience.  But  Judas  did  confess  his  sin,  and  then  went  and 
hanged  himself.  Oh!  that  dreadful,  that  terrible,  that  hideous  confession  of  despair. 
Have  you  never  seen  it?  If  you  never  have,  then  bless  God  that  you  never  were 
called  to  see  such  a  sight.  I  have  seen  it  once  in  my  life,  I  pray  God  I  may  never 
see  it  again, — the  repentance  of  the  man  who  sees  death  staring  him  in  the  face^ 
and  who  says,  "  I  have  sinned."  You  tell  him  that  Christ  has  died  for  sinners;  and 
he  answers,  "There  is  no  hope  for  me;  I  have  cursed  God  to  his  face;  I  have  defied 
him;  my  day  of  grace  I  know  is  past;  my  conscience  is  seared  with  a  hot  iron;  I 
am  dying,  and  I  know  I  shall  be  lost!"  Such  a  case  as  that  happened  long  ago, 
you  know,  and  is  on  record — the  case  of  Francis  Spira— the  most  dreadful  case, 
perhaps,  except  that  of  Judas,  which  is  upon  record  in  the  memory  of  man.  Oh! 
my  hearers,  will  any  of  you  have  such  a  repentance?  If  you  do,  it  will  be  a  beacon 
to  all  persons  who  sin  in  future;  if  you  have  such  a  repentance  as  that,  it  will  be  a 
warning  to  generations  yet  to  come.  In  the  life  of  Benjamin  Reach— and  he  also 
was  one  of  my  predecessors— I  find  the  case  of  a  man  who  had  been  a  professor  of 
religion,  but  had  departed  from  the  profession,  and  had  gone  into  awful  sin.  When 
he  came  to  die,  Keach,  with  many  other  friends,  went  to  see  him,  but  they  could 
$ever  stay  with  him  above  five  minutes  at  a  time;  for  he  said,  "  Get  ye  gone;  it  is 
of  no  use  your  coming  to  me;  I  have  sinned  away  the  Holy  Ghost;  I  am  like  Esau, 
I  have  sold  my  birthright,  and  though  I  seek  it  carefully  with  tears,  I  can  never 
find  it  again."  And  then  he  would  repeat  dreadful  words,  like  these:  " My  mouth 
is  filled  with  gravel  stones,  and  I  drink  wormwood  day  and  night.  Tell  me  not 
tell  me  riot  of  Christ!  I  know  he  is  a  Saviour,  but  I  hate  him  and  he  hates  me. 
I  know  I  must  die;  I  know  I  must  perish!"  And  then  followed  doleful  cries,  and 
hideous  noises,  such  as  none  could  bear.  They  returned  again  ia  his  placid  mo- 

64 


CONFESSION    OF    SIN — A    SRRMON    WITH    SEVliN    TKXTB. 

ment?  only  to  stir  him  up  once  more,  and  make  him  cry  out  in  his  despair,  u  I  am 
lost  !  I  am  lost  !  It  is  of  no  use  your  telling  me  anything  ahoutit  !"  Ah  !  there  may 
be  a  man  here  who  may  have  such  a  death  as  that  ;  let  me  warn  him,  ere  he  come 
•)  it  ;  and  may  God  the  Holy  Spirit  grant  that  that  man  may  be  turned  unto  God, 
a^  made  a  true  penitent,  and  then  he  need  not  have  any  more  fear  ;  for  he  who 
has  had  his  sins  washed  away  in  a  Saviour's  blood,  need  not  have  any  remorse  for 
hie  sins,  for  they  are  pardoned  through  the  Kedeeiner. 


®|rc  gqmtiante  jof  %  Saint. 

JOB. — "I  have  sinned." — Job  vi.  20 

VI.  And  now  I  come  into  daylight.  I  have  been  taking  you  through  dark  and 
dreary  confessions;  I  shall  detain  you  there  no  longer,  hut  bring  you  out  to  the  two 
good  confessions  which  I  have  to  read  to  you.  The  first  is  that  of  Job  in  7th  chap., 
at  the  20th  verse  :  ""I  have  sinned  ;  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee,  O  thou  preserver  of 
men?"  This  is  the  repentance  of  the  saint.  Job  was  a  saint,  but  he  sinned.  This 
is  the  repentance  of  the  man  who  is  a  child  of  God  already,  an  acceptable  repentance 
before  God.  But  as  I  intend  to  dwell  upon  this  in  the  evening,  1  shall  now  leave 
it,  for  fear  of  wearying  you.  David  was  a  specimen  of  this  kind  of  repentance,  and 
I  would  have  you  carefully  study  his  penitential  psalms,  the  language  of  which  i» 
ever  full  of  weeping  humility  and  earnest  penitence. 


f  |r* 

THE  PRODIGAL. — "  I  have  sinned." — Luke  xv.  18. 

VII.  I  come  now  to  the  last  instance,  which  I  shall  mention^  it  is  the  case  of 
the  prodigal.  In  Luke  xv.  18,  we  find  the  prodigal  says  :  "Father  I  have  sinned." 
Oh,  here  is  a  blessed  confession !  Here  is  that  which  proves  a  man  to  be  a  regene 
rate  character — "  Father,  I  have  sinned."  Let  me  picture  the  scene.  There  is  the 
prodigal  ;  he  has  run  away  from  a  good  home  and  a  kind  father,  and  he  has  spent 
all  his  money  with  harlots,  and  now  he  has  none  left.  He  goes  to  his  old  com 
panions,  and  asks  them  for  relief.  They  laugh  him  to  scorn.  "  Oh,"  says  he. 
"  you  have  drunk  my  wine  many  a  day  ;  I  have  always  stood  paymaster  to  you  in. 
all  our  revelries  ;  will  you  not  help  me  ?"  "  Get  you  gone"  they  say  ;  and  he  is 
turned  out  of  doors.  He  goes  to  all  his  friends  with  whom  he  had  associated,  but 
no  man  gives  him  anything.  At  last  a  certain  citizen  of  the  country  said, — "You 
want  something  to  do,  do  you  ?  Well  go  and  feed  my  swine."  The  poor  prodigal,, 
the  son  of  a  rich  landowner,  who  had  a  great  fortune  of  his  own,  has  to  go  out 
to  feed  swine  ;  and  he  a  Jew  too  ! — the  worst  employment  (to  his  mind,)  to  which 
he  could  be  put.  See  him  there,  in  squalid  rags,  feeding  swine  ;  and  what  are  his 
wages?  Why,  so  little,  that  he  "  AVOU!(\  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with  the  husks 
the  swine  eat,  but  no  man  gave  to  him."  Look,  there  he  is,  with  the  fellow  com 
moners  of  the  sty,  in  all  his  mire  and  filthiness.  Suddenly  a  thought  put  there  by 
the  good  Spirit,  strikes  his  mind.  "  How  is  it,"  says  he,  "  that  in  my  father's  house 
there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I  perish  with  hunger?  I  will  arise  and 
go  to  my  father,  and  will  say  unto  him,  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and 
before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son  :  make  me  as  one  of  thy 
hired  servants."  Off  he  goes.  He  begs  his  way  from  town  to  town.  Sometimes 
he  gets  a  lift  on  a  coach,  perhaps,  but  at  other  times  he  goes  trudging  his  way  up 
barren  hills  and  down  desolate  vales,  all  alone.  And  now  at  last  tic  comes  to  the 
hill  outside  the  village,  and  sees  his  father's  house  down  below.  There  it  is  ;  the 
old  poplar  tree  against  it,  and  there  are  the  stacks  round  which  he  and  his  brother 
used  to  run  and  play  ;  and  at  the  sight  of  the  old  homestead  all  the  feelings  and 
associations  of  his  former  life  rush  upon  him,  and  tears  run  down  his  cheeks,  and 

55 


CONFESSION  OP    SIN — A   SERMON   WITH    SEVEN    TEXTS 

be  5s  almost  ready  to  run  away  again.  He  says  "  I  wonder  whether  father's  dead 
I  daresay  mother  broke  her  heart  when  I  went  away  ;  I  always  was  her  favorite. 
And  if  they  are  either  of  them  alive,  they  will  never  see  me  again;  they  will  shut  the 
door  in  my  face.  What  am  I  to  do?  I  cannot  go  back,  I  am  afraid  to  go  forward." 
And  while  he  was  thus  deliberating,  his  father  had  been  walking  on  the  housetop, 
looking  out  for  his  son  ;  and  though  he  could  not  see  his  father,  his  father  could 
see  him.  Well,  the  father  comes  down  stairs  with  all  his  might,  runs  up  to  him, 
and  whilst  he  is  thinking  of  running  away,  his  father's  arms  are  round  his  neck, 
and  he  falls-to  kissing  him,  like  a  loving  father  indeed,  and  then  the  son  begins, — 
••'  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  in  thy  sight,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to 
be  called  thy  son,"  and  he  was  going  to  say,  "  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired 
servants."  But  his  father  puts  his  hand  on  his  mouth.  "  No  more  of  that,"  says 
he;  "I  forgive  you  all ;  you  shall  not  say  anything  about  being  a  hired  servant — 
I  will  have  none  of  that.  Come  along,"  says  he,  " come  in,  poor  prodigal.  Ho!" 
«ays  he  to  the  servants,  "  bring  hither  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,  and  put 
shoes  on  his  poor  bleeding  feet ;  and  bring  hither  the  fatted  calf  and  kill  it ;  and 
let  us  eat  and  be  merry  :  For  this  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again  ;  he  was 
lost  and  is  found.  And  they  began  to  be  merry."  Oh,  what  a  precious  reception 
for  one  of  the  chief  of  sinners  !  Good  Matthew  Henry  says — "  His  father  saw  him, 
there  were  eyes  of  mercy  ;  he  ran  to  meet  him,  there  were  legs  of  mercy  ;  he  put 
his  arms  round  his  neck,  there  were  arms  of  mercy  ;  he  kissed  him,  there  were 
kisses  of  mercy  ;  he  said  to  him — there  were  words  of  mercy, — Bring  hither  the 
best  robe,  there  were  deeds  of  mercy,  wonders  of  mercy — all  mercy.  Oh,  what  a 
God  of  mercy  he  is." 

Now,  prodigal,  you  do  the  same.  Has  God  put  it  into  your  heart?  There  are 
many  who  have  been  running  away  a  long  time  now.  Does  God  say  "return?** 
Oh,  I  bid  you  return,  then,  for  as  surely  as  ever  thou  dost  return  he  will  take  thee 
in.  There  never  was  a  poor  sinner  yet  who  came  to  Christ,  whom  Christ  turned 
away.  If  he  turns  you  away,  you  will  be  the  first.  Oh,  if  you  could  but  try  him  ! 
*•  Ah,  sir,  I  am  so  black,  so  filthy,  so  vile."  Well  come  along  with  you — you  cannot 
be  blacker  than  the  prodigal.  Come  to  your  Father's  house,  and  as  surely  as  he  is 
God  he  will  keep  his  word — "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out." 

Oh,  if  I  might  hear  that  some  had  come  to  Christ  this  morning,  I  would  indeed 
bless  God  !  1  must  tell  here  for  the  honor  of  God  and  Christ,  one  remarkable  cir 
cumstance,  and  then  I  have  done.  You  will  remember  that  one  morning  I  men« 
tioned  the  case  of  an  infidel  who  had  been  a  scorner  and  scoffer,  but  who,  through 
reading  one  of  my  printed  sermons,  had  been  brought  to  God's  house  and  then  to 
God's  feet.  Well,  last  Christmas  day,  the  same  infidel  gathered  together  all  hit 
books,  and  went  into  the  market-place  at  Norwich,  and  there  made  a  public  recan 
tation  of  all  his  errors,  and  a  profession  of  Christ,  and  then  taking  up  all  his  book* 
which  he  had  written,  and  had  in  his  house,  on  evil  subjects,  burned  them  in  the 
sight  of  the  people.  I  have  blessed  God  for  such  a  wonder  of  grace  as  that,  and 
pray  that  there  may  be  many  more  such,  who,  though  they  be  born  prodigal,  will 
yet  return  home,  wiving,  "  1  have  sinned." 


THE   TURNING   POINT. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  AUGUST  23RD,  1874,  BY 

•  C.   H.   SPURGE  ON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


•*  A.nd  he  arose,  and  came  to  his  father." — Luke  xv.  20. 

THIS  sentence  expresses  the  true  turning  point  in  the  prodigal's  life 
story.  Many  other  matters  led  up  to  it,  and  before  he  came  to  it  there 
was  much  in  him  that  was  very  hopeful ;  but  this  was  the  point  itself, 
and  had  he  never  reached  it  he  would  have  remained  a  prodigal,  but 
•would  never  have  been  the  prodigal  restored,  and  his  life  would  have 
been  a  warning  rather  than  an  instruction  to  us.  "  He  arose,  and  came 
to  his  father."  Speaking,  as  I  do,  in  extreme  weakness,  I  have  no 
words  to  spare  ;  and  while  my  voice  holds  out  I  shall  speak  straight  to 
the  point,  and  I  pray  the  Lord  to  make  every  syllable  practical  and 
powerful  by  his  Holy  Spirit. 

or  I.  We  shall  begin  by  noticing  that  HERE  WAS  ACTION — "He  arose, 
and  came  to  his  father"  He  had  already  been  in  a  state  of  thought- 
fulness  ;  he  had  come  to  himself,  but  now  he  was  to  go  further,  and 
come  to  his  father.  He  had  considered  the  past,  and  weighed  it  up, 
and  seen  the  hollowness  of  all  the  world's  pleasures ;  he  had  seen  his 
condition  in  reference  to  his  father,  and  his  prospects  if  he  remained 
in  the  far-off  country  ;  he  had  thought  upon  what  he  ought  to  do,  and 
what  would  be  the  probable  result  of  such  a  course  ;  but  now  he  passed 
beyond  the  dreaminess  of  thought  into  matter-of-fact  acting  and 
doing.  How  long  will  it  be,  dear  hearers,  before  you  will  do  the  same  ? 
We  are  glad  to  have  you  thoughtful ;  we  hope  that  a  great  point  is 
gained  when  you  are  led  to  consider  your  ways,  to  ponder  your  condition, 
and  to  look  earnestly  into  the  future,  for  thoughtlessness  is  the  ruin  of 
many  a  traveller  to  eternity,  and  by  its  means  the  unwary  fall  into  the 
deep  pit  of  carnal  security  and  perish  therein.  But  some  of  you  have 
been  among  the  "thoughtful"  quite  long  enough  ;  it  is  time  you  passed 
into  a  more  practical  stage.  It  is  high  time  that  you  came  to  action;  it 
would  have  been  better  if  you  had  acted  already ;  for,  in  the  matter  of 
reconciliation  to  God,  first  thoughts  are  best.  When  a  man's  life  J-.nngs 
No.  1,189. 


470  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT, 


on  a  thread,  and  hell  is  just  before  him,  his  path  is  clear,  and  a  second 
thought  is  superfluous.  The  first  impulse  to  escape  from  danger  ^n(j 
lay  hold  on  Christ  is  that  which  you  would  be  wise  to  follow.  Some  of 
you  whom  I  now  address  have  been  thinking,  and  thinking,  and  thinkin^ 
till  I  fear  that  you  will  think  yourselves  into  perdition.  May  you,  by 
divine  grace,  be  turned  from  thinking  to  believing,  or  else  your  thoughts 
will  become  the  undying  worm  of  your  torment. 

The  prodigal  had  also  passed  beyond  mere  regret.  He  was  deeply 
grieved  that  he  had  left  his  father's  house,  he  lamented  his  lavish  ex 
penditure  upon  wantonness  and  revelling,  he  mourned  that  the  son  of 
such  a  father  should  be  degraded  into  a  swineherd  in  a  foreign  land ; 
but  he  now  proceeded  from  regret  to  repentance,  and  bestirred  himself 
to  escape  from  the  condition  over  which  he  mourned.  What  is  the  use 
of  regret  if  we  continue  in  sin  ?  By  all  means  pull  up  the  sluices  of 
your  grief  if  the  floods  will  turn  the  wheel  of  action,  but  you  may  as 
well  reserve  your  tears,  if  they  mean  no  more  than  idle  sentimentalism. 
"What  avails  it  for  a  man  to  say  he  repents  of  his  misconduct  if  he  still 
perseveres  in  it  ?  We  are  glad  when  sinners  regret  their  sin  and  mourn 
the  condition  into  which  sin  has  brought  them,  but  if  they  go  no 
further,  their  regrets  will  only  prepare  them  for  eternal  remorse.  Had 
the  prodigal  become  inactive  through  despondency,  or  stolid  through 
sullen  grief,  he  must  have  perished,  far  away  from  his  father's  home, 
as  it  is  to  be  feared  many  will  whose  sorrow  for  sin  leads  them  into  a 
proud  unbelief  and  wilful  despair  of  God's  love  ;  but  he  was  wise,  for 
he  shook  oif  the  drowsiness  of  his  despondency,  and,  with  resolute 
determination,  "  arose  and  came  to  his  father."  Oh,  when  will  you  sad 
ones  be  wise  enough  to  do  the  same  ?  When  will  your  thinking  and 
your  sorrowing  give  place  to  practical  obedience  to  the  gospel  ? 

The  prodigal  also  pressed  beyond  mere  resolving.  That  is  a  sweet 
verse  which  says, "  I  will  arise,"  but  that  is  far  better  which  say$, 
"And  he  arose."  Resolves  are  good,  like  blossoms,  but  actions  are 
better,  for  they  are  the  fruits.  We  are  glad  to  hear  from  you  the  reso 
lution,  "  I  will  turn  to  God,"  but  holy  angels  in  heaven  do  not  rejoice 
over  .resolutions,  they  reserve  their  music  for  sinners  who  actually 
repent.  Many  of  you  like  the  son  in  the  parable  have  said,  "  I  go, 
sir,"  but  you  have  not  gone.  You  are  as  ready  at  forgetting  as  you 
are  at  resolving.  Every  earnest  sermon,  every  death  in  your  family, 
every  funeral  knell  for  a  neighbour,  every  pricking  of  conscience,  every 
touch  of  sickness,  sets  you  a  resolving  to  amend,  but  your  promissory 
notes  are  never  honoured,  your  repentance  ends  in  words.  Your  good 
ness  is  as  the  dew,  which  at  early  dawn  hangs  each  blade  of  grass  with 
gems,  but  leaves  the  fields  all  parched  and  dry  when  the  sun's  burning 
heat  is  poured  upon  the  pasture.  You  mock  your  friends,  and  trifle 
with  your  own  souls.  You  have  often  in  this  house  said,  "  Let  me 
reach  my  chamber  and  I  will  fall  upon  my  knees,"  but  on  the  way 
home  you  have  forgotten  what  manner  of  men  you  were,  and  sin  has 
confirmed  its  tottering  throne.  Have  you  not  dallied  long  enough  ? 
Have  you  not  lied  unto  God  sufficiently  ?  Should  you  not  now  give 
over  resolving  and  proceed  to  the  solemn  business  of  your  souls  like 
men  of  common  sense  ?  You  are  in  a  sinking  vessel,  and  the  life-boat 
is  near,  but  your  mere  resolve  to  enter  it  will  not  prevent  your  going 


THE   TURNING   POINT.  471 

down  with  the  sinking  craft ;  as  sure  as  you  are  a  living  man,  you  will 
drown  unless  you  take  the  actual  leap  for  life. 

"  He  arose  and  came  to  his  father."  Now,  observe  that  this  action 
of  the  prodigal  was  immediate,  and  without  further  parley.  He  did 
not  go  back  to  the  citizen  of  that  country  and  say,  "Will  you  raise  my 
wages  ?  If  not,  I  must  leave."  Had  he  parleyed  he  had  been  lost ; 
but  he  gave  his  old  master  no  notice,  he  cancelled  his  indentures  by 
running  away.  I  would  that  sinners  here  would  break  their  league  with 
death,  and  violate  their  covenant  with  hell,  by  escaping  for  their  lives 
to  Jesus,  who  receives  all  such  runaways.  We  want  neither  leave  nor 
licence  for  quitting  the  service  of  sin  and  Satan,  neither  is  it  a  subject 
which  demands  a  month's  consideration  :  in  this  matter  instantaneous 
action  is  the  surest  wisdom.  Lot  did  not  stop  to  consult  the  king  of 
Sodom  as  to  whether  he  might  quit  his  dominions,  neither  did  he  consult 
the  parish  officers  as  to  the  propriety  of  speedily  deserting  his  home  ; 
but  with  the  angel's  hand  pressing  them,  he  and  his  fled  from  the  city. 
Nay,  one  fled  not ;  she  looked  and  lingered,  and  that  lingering  cost 
her  her  life  !  That  pillar  of  salt  is  the  eloquent  monitor  to  us  to  avoid 
delays  when  we  are  bidden  to  flee  for  T)ur  lives.  Sinner,  dost  thou 
wish  to  be  a  pillar  of  salt  ?  Wilt  thou  halt  between  two  opinions, 
until  God's  anger  shall  doom  thee  to  final  impenitence  ?  Wilt  thou 
trifle  with  mercy  till  justice  smite  thee  ?  Up,  man,  and  while  thy 
day  of  grace  continues,  fly  thou  into  the  arms  of  love. 

The  text  implies  that  the  prodigal  aroused  himself,  and  put  forth  all 
his  energies.  It  is  said,  "he  arose;"  the  word  suggests  that  he  had 
till  then  been  asleep  upon  the  bed  of  sloth,  or  the  couch  of  presump 
tion.  Like  Samson  in  Delilah's  lap,  he  had  been  supine,  inactive,  and 
unstrung ;  but  now,  startled  from  his  lethargy,  he  lifts  up  his  eyes,  he 
girds  up  his  loins,  he  shakes  off  the  spell  which  had  enthralled  him, 
he  puts  forth  every  power,  he  arouses  his  whole  nature,  and  he  spares 
no  exertion  until  he  returns  to  his  father. 

Men  are  not  saved  between  sleeping  and  waking.  "  The  kingdom  or 
heaven  suffereth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force."  Grace  does 
not  stupefy  us,  it  but  arouses  us.  Surely,  sirs,  it  is  worth  while  making 
an  awful  effort  to  escape  from  eternal  wrath.  It  is  worth  while 
summoning  up  every  faculty  and  power  and  emotion  and  passion  of  your 
being,  and  saying  to  yourself,  "  I  cannot  be  lost ;  I  will  not  be  lost : 
I  am  resolved  that  I  will  find  mercy  through  Jesus  Christ."  The 
worst  of  it  is,  0  sinners,  ye  are  so  sluggish,  so  indifferent,  so  ready  to 
let  things  happen  as  they  may.  Sin  has  bewitched  and  benumbed  you. 
You  sleep  as  on  beds  of  down  and  forget  that  you  are  in  danger  of 
hell  fire.  You  cry,  "  A  little  more  rest,  and  a  little  more  slumber, 
and  a  little  more  folding  of  the  arms  to  sleep,"  and  so  you  sleep 
on,  though  your  damnation  slumbereth  not.  Would  to  God  you  could 
be  awakened.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  my  voice  to  arouse  you  ;  but 
may  the  Lord  Himself  alarm  you,  for  never  were  men  more  in  danger. 
Let  but  your  breath  fail,  or  your  blood  pause,  and  you  are  lost  forever. 
Frailer  than  a  cobweb  is  that  life  on  which  your  eternal  destiny 
depends.  If  you  were  wise  you  would  not  give  sleep  to  your  eyes,  nor 
slumber  to  your  eyelids,  till  you  had  found  your  God  and  been  forgiven. 
Oh,  when  will  you  come  to  a  real  action  ?  How  long  will  it  be  er* 


472  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

>u  believe  in  Jesus  ?  How  long  will  you  sport  between  the  jaws  of 
ell  ?  How  long  dare  you  provoke  the  living  God  ? 

II.  Secondly,  HERE  WAS  A  SOUL  COMING  INTO  ACTUAL  CONTACT 
WITH  GOD, — "  He  arose  and  came  to  his  father"  It  would  have  been 
of  no  avail  for  him  to  have  arisen  if  he  had  not  come  to  his  father. 
This  is  what  the  sinner  has  to  do,  and  what  the  Spirit  enables  him 
to  do  :  namely,  to  come  straight  away  to  his  God.  But,  alas  !  .very 
commonly,  when  men  begin  to  be  anxious,  they  go  round  about  and 
hasten  to  a  friend  to  tell  him  about  it,  or  they  even  resort  to  a  deceitful 
priest,  and  seek  help  from  him.  They  fly  to  a  saint  or  a  virgin,  and 
ask  these  to  be  mediators  for  them,  instead  of  accepting  the  only 
Mediator  Jesus  Christ,  and  going  to  God  at  once  by  him.  They  fly  to 
outward  forms  and  ceremonies,  or  they  turn  to  their  Bibles,  their 
prayers,  their  repentances,  or  their  sermon-hearings ;  in  fact,  to  any 
thing  rather  than  their  God.  But  the  prodigal  knew  better ;  he  went 
to  his  father,  and  it  will  be  a  grand  day  for  you,  0  sinner,  when  you 
do  the  same.  Go  straight  away  to  your  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  Come 
here,"  says  the  priest.  Pass  that  fellow  by.  Get  away  to  your  Father. 
Reject  an  angel  from  heaven  if  he  would  detain  you  from  the  Lord. 
Go  personally,  directly,  and  at  once  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  But 
surely  I  must  perform  some  ceremony  first  ?  Not  so  did  the  prodigal, 
he  arose  and  went  at  once  to  his  father.  Sinner,  you  must  come  to 
God,  and  Jesus  is  the  way ;  go  to  him  then,  tell  him  you  have  done 
wrong,  confess  your  sins  to  him,  and  yield  yourself  to  him.  Cry, 
"  Father,  I  have  sinned  :  forgive  me,  for  Jesus'  sake." 

Alas !  there  are  many  anxious  souls  who  do  not  go  to  others,  but 
they  look  to  themselves.  They  sit  down  and  cry,  "  I  want  to  repent ;  I 
want  to  feel  my  need  ;  I  want  to  be  humble."  0  man,  get  up !  What 
are  you  at  ?  Leave  yourself  and  go  to  your  Father.  "  Oh,  but  I  have 
so  little  hope  ;  my  faith  is  very  weak,  and  I  am  full  of  fears."  What 
matters  your  hopes  or  your  fears  while  you  are  away  from  your  Father  ? 
Your  salvation  does  not  lie  within  yourself,  but  in  the  Lord's  good  will 
to  you.  You  will  never  be  at  peace  till,  leaving  all  your  doubts  and  your 
hopes,  you  come  to  your  God  and  rest  in  his  bosom.  "  Oh,  but  I  want 
to  conquer  my  propensities  to  sin,  I  want  to  master  my  strong  tempta 
tions."  I  know  what  it  is  you  want.  You  want  the  best  robe  without 
your  Father's  giving  it  you,  and  shoes  on  your  feet  of  your  own  pro 
curing  ;  you  do  not  like  going  in  a  beggar's  suit  and  receiving  all  from 
the  Lord's  loving  hand ;  but  this  pride  of  yours  must  be  given  up,  and 
you  must  get  away  to  God,  or  perish  for  ever.  You  must  forget  yourself, 
or  only  remember  yourself  so  as  to  feel  that  you  are  bad  throughout,  and 
no  more  worthy  to  be  called  God's  son.  Give  yourself  up  as  a  sinking 
vessel  that  is  not  worth  pumping,  but  must  be  left  to  go  down,  and  get 
you  into  the  life-boat  of  free  grace.  Think  of  God  your  Father— of 
him,  I  say,  and  of  his  dear  Son,  the  one  Mediator  and  Redeemer  of  the 
sons  of  men.  There  is  your  hope — to  fly  away  from  self  and  to  reach 
your  Father. 

Do  I  hear  you  say,  "  Well,  I  shall  continue  in  the  means  of  grace, 
and  I  hope  there  to  find  my  God."  I  tell  you,  if  you  do  that,  and 
refuse  to  go  to  God,  the  means  of  grace  will  be  the  means  of  damna 
tion  to  you.  "  I  must  wait  at  the  pool,"  says  one.  Then  I  solemnly 


THE   TURNING   POINT.  473 

warn  you  that  you  will  lie  there  and  die  ;  for  Jesus  does  not  command 
you  to  lie  there,  his  bidding  is,  "  Take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk."  "  Believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  You  have  to  go 
unto  your  Father,  and  not  to  the  pool  of  Bethesda,  or  any  other  pool  of 
ordinances  or  means  of  grace.  "  But  I  mean  to  pray,"  says  one.  AVhat 
would  you  pray  for  ?  Can  you  expect  the  Lord  to  hear  you  while  you 
will  not  hear  him  ?  You  will  pray  best  with  your  head  in  your  Father's 
fcosoin,  but  the  prayers  of  an  unyielding,  disobedient,  unbelieving  heart 
are  mockeries.  Prayers  themselves  will  rain  you  if  they  are  made  a 
substitute  for  going  at  once  to  God.  Suppose  the  prodigal  had  sat  down 
at  tiic  swine  trough  and  said,  "  I  will  pray  here,"  what  would  it  have 
availed  him  ?  or  suppose  he  had  wept  there,  what  good  would  have 
i;ome  of  it  ?  Praying  and  weeping  were  good  enough  when  he  had 
come  to  his  father,  but  they  could  not  have  been  substituted  for  it. 
Sinner,  your  business  is  with  God.  Hasten  tc  him  at  once.  You  have 
nothing  to  do  with  yourself,  or  your  own  doings,  or  what  others  can  do 
for  you,  the  turning  point  of  salvation  is,  "  he  arose  and  came  to  his 
father."  There  must  be  a  real,  living,  earnest,  contact  of  your  poor 
guilty  soul  with  God,  a  recognition  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  God 
can  be  spoken  to,  and  an  actual  speech  of  your  soul  to  him,  through 
Jesus  Christ,  for  it  is  only  God  in  Christ  Jesus  that  is  accessible  at  all. 
Going  thus  to  God,  we  tell  him  that  we  are  all  wrong,  and  want  to  be 
set  right ;  we  tell  him  we  wish  to  be  reconciled  to  him,  and  are  ashamed 
that  we  should  have  sinned  against  him  ;  we  then  put  our  trust  in  his 
Son,  and  we  are  saved.  0  soul,  go  to  God  :  it  matters  not  though  the 
prayer  you  come  with  may  be  a  very  broken  prayer,  or  even  if  it  has 
mistakes  in  it,  as  the  prodigal's  prayer  had  when  he  said,  "  Make  me 
as  one  of  thy  hired  servants  ;"  the  language  of  the  prayer  will  not  sig 
nify  so  long  as  you  really  approach  to  God.  "  Him  that  cometh  to 
me*"  says  Jesus,  "I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  ;"  and  Jesus  ever  liveth 
to  make  intercessions  for  them  that  come  to  God  through  him. 

Here,  then,  is  the  great  Protestant  doctrine.  The  Romish  doctrine 
says  you  must  go  round  by  the  back  door,  and  half-a-dozen  of  the 
Lord's  servants  must  knock  for  you,  and  even  then  you  may  never  be 
heard  ;  but  the  grand  old  Protestant  doctrine  is,  come  to  God  yourself; 
come  with  no  other  mediator  than  Jesus  Christ ;  come  just  as  you  are 
without  merits  and  good  works  ;  trust  in  Jesus  and  your  sins  will  be 
forgiven  you. 

There  is  my  second  point :  there  was  Action,  and  that  action  was 
coutact  with  God. 

III.  Now,  thirdly,  IN  THAT  ACTION  THERE  WAS  AN  ENTIRE  YIELDING 
UP  OF  HIMSELF.  In  the  prodigal's  case,  his  proud  independence  and 
self-will  were  gone.  In  other  days  he  demanded  his  portion,  and 
resolved  to  spend  it  as  he  pleased,  but  now  he  is  willing  to  be  as  much 
under  rule  as  a  hired  servant,  he  has  had  enough  of  being  his  own 
master,  and  is  weary  of  the  distance  from  God  which  self-will  always 
creates.  He  longs  to  get  into  a  child's  true  place,  namely,  that  of 
dependence  and  loving  submission.  The  great  mischief  of  all  was 
his  distance  from  his  father,  and  he  now  feels  it  to  be  so.  His  great 
thought  is  to  remove  that  distance  by  humbly  returning,  for  then  he 
feels  that  all  other  ills  will  come  to  an  end.  He  yields  up  hii 
23 


474  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

cherished  freedom,  his  boasted  independence,  his  liberty  to  think  and 
do  and  say  whatever  he  chose,  and  he  longs  to  conie  under  loving  rule 
and  wise  guidance.  Sinner,  are  you  ready  for  this  ?  If  so,  come  and 
welcome ;  your  father  longs  to  press  you  to  his  bosom  ! 

He  gave  up  all  idea  of  self-justification,  for  he  said,  "  I  have  sinned." 
Before  he  would  have  said,  "  I  have  a  right  to  do  as  I  like  with  my 
own ;  who  is  to  dictate  how  I  shall  spend  my  own  money.  If  I  do  sow 
a  few  wild  oats,  every  young  man  does  the  same.  I  have  been  very 
generous,  if  nothing  else  ;  nobody  can  call  me  greedy.  I  am  no  hypo 
crite.  Look  at  your  canting  Methodists,  how  they  deceive  people  f 
There's  nothing  of  that  in  me,  I'll  warrant  you  ;  I  am  an  outspoken  man 
of  the  world  ;  and  after  all,  a  good  deal  better  in  disposition  than  my 
elder  brother,  fine  fellow  though  he  pretends  to  be."  But  now  the 
prodigal  boasts  no  longer.  Not  a  syllable  of  self-praise  falls  from  his 
lips;  he  mournfully  confesses,  "  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  before 
thee."  .  Sinner,  if  you  would  be  saved  you  also  must  come  down  from 
your  high  places,  and  acknowledge  your  iniquity.  Confess  that  you 
have  done  wrong,  and  do  not  try  to  extenuate  your  offence  ;  do  not  offer 
apologies  and  make  your  case  better  than  it  is,  but  humbly  plead  guilty 
and  leave  your  soul  in  Jesu's  hands.  Of  two  things,  to  sin  or  to  deny 
the  sin,  probably  to  deny  the  sin  is  the  worse  of  the  two,  and  shows  a 
blacker  neart.  Acknowledge  your  fault,  man,  and  tell  your  heavenly 
Father  that  if  it  were  not  for  bis  mercy  you  would  have  been  in  hell, 
and  that  as  it  is  you  richly  deserve  to  be  there  even  now.  Make  your 
case  rather  blacker  than  it  is  if  you  can ;  this  I  say  because  I  know 
you  cannot  do  any  such  thing.  When  a  man  is  in  the  hospital  it  cannot 
be  of  any  service  to  him  to  pretend  to  be  better  than  he  is ;  he  will  not 
receive  any  more  medical  attention  on  that  account,  but  rather  the 
other  way,  for  the  worse  his  case  the  more  likely  is  the  physician  to> 
give  him  special  notice.  Oh,  sinner,  lay  bare  before  God  thy  sores, 
thy  putrifying  sores  of  sin,  the  horrid  ulcers  of  thy  deep  depravity, 
and  cry,  "  0  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me  ?  "  This  is  the  way  of  wis 
dom.  Have  done  with  pride  and  self-righteousness,  and  make  thy 
appeal  to  the  undeserved  pity  of  the  Lord,  and  thou  will  speed. 

Observe  that  the  prodigal  yielded  up  himself  so  thoroughly  that  he. 
owned  his  father's  love  to  him  to  be  an  aggravation  of  his  guilt :  so  I 
take  it  he  means  when  he  says,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned."  It  adds  an 
emphasis  to  the  "I have  sinned  "  when  it  follows  after  the  word  "fattier." 
"  Thou  good  God,  I  have  broken  thy  good  laws  ;  thou  loving,  tender, 
merciful  God,  I  have  done  wrong  wantonly  and  wickedly  against  thee. 
Thou  hast  been  a  very  loving  Father  to  me,  and  I  have  been  a  most 
ungenerous  and  shameless  traitor  to  thee,  rebelling  without  cause. 
I  confess  this  frankly  and  humbly,  and  with  many  tears.  Ah !  hadst 
thou  been  a  tyrant  I  might  have  gathered  some  apology  from  thy 
severity,  but  thou  hast  been  a  Father,  and  this  makes  it  worse  that  I 
should  sin  against  thee."  It  is  sweet  to  hear  such  a  confession  as  this 
poured  out  into  the  Father's  bosom. 

The  penitent  also  yielded  up  ah1  his  supposed  rights  and  claims  upon 
his  father,  saying,  "  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son."  He  might 
have  said,  "  I  have  sinned,  but  still  1  am  thy  child,"  and  most  of  us 
would  have  thought  it  a  very  justifiable  argument;'  but  he  does  not 


THE   TURNING    POINT.  475 

Bay  so,  he  is  too  humble  for  that,  he  owns,  "  I  am  no  more  worthy  to 
be  called  thy  son."  A  sinner  is  really  broken  down  when  he  acknow 
ledges  that  if  God  would  have  no  mercy  on  him,  but  cast  him  away  for 
for  ever,  it  would  be  no  more  than  justice. 

"Should  sufklcn  vengeance  seize  my  breath, 
I  must  pronounce  thee  just  in  death  ; 
And,  if  my  soul  were  sent  to  hell. 
Thy  righteous  law  approves  it  well.'1 

That  soul  is  not  far  from  peace  which  has  ceased  arguing  and  submits 
to  the  sentence.  Oh,  sinner,  I  urge  thee,  if  thou  wouldst  find  speedy 
rest,  go  and  throw  thyself  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  where  God  meets 
such  as  thou  art,  and  say,  "  Lord,  here  I  am  ;  do  what  thou  wilt  with 
me.  Never  a  word  of  excuse  will  I  offer,  nor  one  single  plea  by  way 
of  extenuation.  I  am  a  mass  of  guilt  and  misery,  but  pity  me,  oh, 
pity  me  !  No  rights  or  claims  have  I ;  I  have  forfeited  the  rights  of 
creatureship  by  becoming  a  rebel  against  thee.  I  am  lost  and  utterly 
undone  before  the  bar  of  thy  justice.  From  that  justice  I  flee  and  hide 
myself  in  the  wounds  of  thy  Son.  According  to  the  multitude  of  thy 
tender  mercies,  blot  out  my  transgressions !  " 

Once  again,  here  was  such  a  yielding  up  of  himself  to  his  father 
that  no  terms  or  conditions  are  mentioned  or  implied.  He  begs  to  be 
received,  but  a  servant's  place  is  good  enough  for  him ;  amongst  the 
scullions  of  the  kitchen  he  is  content  to  take  his  place,  so  long  as  he 
may  be  forgiven.  He  does  not  ask  for  a  little  liberty  to  sin,  or  stipu 
late  for  a  little  self-righteousness  wherein  he  may  boast ;  he  gives  all 
up.  He  is  willing  to  be  anything  or  nothing,  just  as  his  father  pleases, 
so  that  he  may  but  be  numbered  with  his  household.  No  weapons  of 
rebellion  are  in  his  hands  now.  No  secret  opposition  to  his  father's 
rule  lingers  in  his  soul,  he  is  completely  subdued,  and  lies  at  his 
father's  feet.  Our  Lord  never  crushed  a  soul  yet  that  lay  prostrate 
at  his  feet,  and  he  never  will.  He  will  stoop  down  and  say,  "  Rise, 
my  child  ;  rise,  for  I  have  forgiven  thee.  Go  and  sin  no  more.  I 
have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love."  Come  and  let  us  return 
unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal  us ;  he  hath  smitten, 
and  he  will  bind  us  up.  He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor 
quench  the  smoking  flax. 

IV.  Notice  further,  and  fourthly,  that  IN  THIS  ACT  THERE  WAS  A 
MEASURE  OF  FAITH  IN  HIS  FATHER — a  measure,  I  say,  meaning  thereby 
not  much  faith,  but  some.  A  little  faith  saves  the  soul.  There 
was  faith  in  his  father's  power.  He  said,  "In  my  father's  honse 
there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  Sinner,  dost  thou  not  believe 
that  God  is  able  to  save  thee  ;  that  through  Jesus  Christ  he  is  able  to 
supply  thy  soul's  needs.  Canst  thou  not  get  as  far  as  this,  "  Lord,  if 
thou  wilt  thou  canst  make  me  clean."  The  prodigal  had  also  some 
faith  in  his  father's  readiness  to  pardon  ;  for  if  he  had  not  so  hoped, 
he  would  never  have  returned  to  his  father  at  all :  if  he  had  been  sure 
that  his  father  would  never  smile  upon  him  he  would  never  have 
returned  to  him.  Sinner,  do  believe  that  God  is  merciful,  for  so  he  is. 
Believe,  through  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  willeth  not  the  death  of  the 
sinner,  but  had  rather  that  he  should  turn  to  him  and  live  ;  for  as 


476  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

surely  as  God  liveth,  this  is  truth,  and  do  not  thou  believe  a  He  con 
cerning  thy  God.  The  Lord  is  not  hard  or  harsh,  but  he  rejoices  to 
pardon  great  transgressions.  The  prodigal  also  believed  in  his  father's 
readiness  to  bless  him.  He  felt  sure  that  his  father  would  go  as  far  as 
propriety  would  permit,  for  he  said,  "  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy 
son,  but  make  me  at  least  thy  servant."  In  this  also  he  admitted  that 
his  father  was  so  good,  that  even  to  be  his  servant  would  be  a  great 
matter.  He  was  contented  even  to  get  the  lowest  place,  so  long  as  he 
might  be  under  the  shade  of  so  good  a  protector 

Ah,  poor  sinner,  dost  thou  not  believe  that  God  wiH  have  mercy  on 
thee  if  he  can  do  so  consistently  with  his  justice  ?  If  thou  believest 
that,  I  have  good  news  to  tell  thee.  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,  has  offered 
such  an  atonement,  that  God  can  be  just,  and  yet  the  justifier  of  him 
that  believeth  ;  he  has  mercy  upon  the  vilest,  and  justifieth  the 
angodly,  and  accepteth  the  very  chief  of  sinners  through  his  dear 
Son.  Oh,  soul,  have  faith  in  the  atonement.  The  atonement  made 
by  the  personal  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  must  be  infinitely  precious  ; 
believe  thou  that  there  is  efficacy  enough  in  it  for  thee.  It  is  thy 
safety  to  fly  to  that  atonement  and  cling  to  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and 
thou  wilt  honour  God  by  so  doing ;  is  the  only  way  in  which  thou 
canst  honour  him.  Thou  canst  honour  him  by  believing  that  he  can 
save  thee,  even  thee.  The  truest  faith  is  that  which  believes  in  the 
mercy  of  God  in  the  teeth  of  conscious  unworthiness.  The  penitent 
in  the  parable  went  to  his  father  too  unworthy  to  be  called  his  son, 
and  yet  he  said,  "My  father."  Faith  has  a  way  of  seeing  the  black 
ness  of  sin,  and  yet  believing  that  God  can  make  the  soul  as  white  as 
snow.  It  is  not  faith  that  says,  "  I  am  a  little  sinner,  and  therefore 
God  can  forgive  me;"  but  that  is  faith  which  cries,  "I  am  a  great 
sinner,  an  accursed  and  condemned  sinner,  and  yet,  for  all  that,  God's 
infinite  mercy  can  forgive  me,  and  the  blood  of  Christ  can  make  me 
clean."  Believe  in  the  teeth  of  thy  feelings,  and  in  spite  of  thy 
conscience ;  believe  in  God,  though  everything  within  thee  seems  to 
say,  "  He  cannot  save  thee ;  he  will  not  save  thee."  Believe  in  God, 
sinner,  over  the  tops  of  mountain  sins.  Do  as  John  Bunyan  says  he 
did,  for  he  was  so  afraid  of  his  sins  and  of  the  punishment  thereof, 
that  he  could  not  but  run  into  God's  arms,  and  he  said,  "  Though  he 
had  held  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hands,  I  would  have  run  on  the  very 
point  of  it,  rather  than  have  kept  away  from  him."  So  do  thou,  pcor 
sinner.  Believe  thy  God.  Believe  in  nothing  else,  but  trust  thy  God, 
and  thou  wilt  get  the  blessing.  It  is  wonderful  the  power  of  faith 
over  God,  it  binds  his  justice  and  constrains  his  grace.  I  do  not 
know  how  to  illustrate  it  better  than  by  a  little  story.  When  I  walked 
down  my  garden  some  time  ago  I  found  a  dog  amusing  himself  among 
the  flowers.  I  knew  that  he  was  not  a  good  gardener,  and  no  dog  of 
mine,  so  I  threw  a  stick  at  him  and  bade  him  begone.  After  I  has 
done  so,  he  conquered  me,  and  made  me  ashamed  of  having  spoken 
roughly  to  him,  for  he  picked  up  my  stick,  and,  wagging  his  tail 
right  pleasantly,  he  brought  the  stick  to  me,  and  dropped  it  at  my 
feet.  Do  you  think  I  could  strike  him  or  drive  him  away  after  that  ? 
No,  I  patted  him  and  called  him  good  names.  The  dog  had  conquered 
the  man.  And  if  you,  poor  sinner,  dog  as  you  are,  can  have  confidence 


THE   TURNING   POINT.  477 

enough  in  God  to  come  to  him  just  as  you  are,  it  is  not  in  his  heart  to 
spurn  you.  There  is  an  omnipotence  in  simple  faith  which  will 
conquer  even  the  divine  Being  himself.  Only  do  but  trust  him  as  he 
reveals  himself  in  Jesus,  and  you  shall  find  salvation. 

V.  I  have  not  time  or  strength  to  dwell  longer  here,  and  so  I  must 
notice,  fifthly,  that  THIS  ACT  OF  COMING  INTO  CONTACT  WITH  GOD  is 

PERFORMED   BY   THE   SINNER    JUST   AS   HE   IS.        I    do  not    know    how 

wretched  the  prodigal's  appearance  may  have  been,  but  I  will  be  bound 
to  say  he  had  grown  none  the  sweeter  by  having  fed  swine,  nor  do  I 
suppose  his  garments  had  been  very  sumptuously  embroidered  by 
gathering  husks  for  them  from  the  trees.  Yet,  just  as  he  was,  he  came. 
Surely  he  might  have  spent  an  hour  profitably  in  cleansing  his  flesh  and 
his  clothes.  But  no,  he  said,  "  I  will  arise,"  and  no  sooner  said  than 
done  !  he  did  arise,  and  he  came  to  his  father.  Every  moment  that  a 
sinner  stops  away  from  God  in  order  to  get  better  he  is  but  adding  to 
his  sin,  for  the  radical  sin  of  all  is  his  being  away  from  God  and  the 
longer  he  stays  in  it  the  more  he  sins.  The  attempt  to  perform  good 
works  apart  from  God  is  like  the  effort  of  a  thief  to  set  his  stolen  goods 
in  order,  his  sole  duty  is  to  return  them  at  once.  The  very  same  pride 
which  leads  men  away  from  God  may  be  seen  in  their  self-conceited 
notion  that  they  can  improve  themselves  while  still  they  refuse  to 
return  to  him.  The  essence  of  their  fault  is  that  they  are  far  off 
from  God,  and  whatever  they  do,  so  long  as  that  distance  remains, 
nothing  is  effectually  done.  I  say  the  radical  of  the  whole  matter  is 
distance  from  God,  and  therefore  the  commencement  of  setting  matters 
right  lies  in  arising  and  returning  to  him  from  whom  they  have 
departed. 

The  prodigal  was  bound  to  go  home  just  as  he  was,  for  there  was 
nothing  that  he  could  do.  He  was  reduced  to  such  extremities  that 
he  could  not  purchase  a  fresh  piece  of  cloth  to  mend  his  garments,  nor 
a  farthing's  worth  of  soap  with  which  to  cleanse  his  flesh  ;  and  it  is  a 
great  mercy  when  a  man  is  so  spiritually  reduced  that  he  cannot  do 
anything  but  go  to  his  God  as  a  beggar,  when  he  is  so  bankrupt  that  he 
cannot  pay  a  farthing  in  the  pound,  when  he  is  so  lost  that  he  cannot 
even  repent  or  believe  apart  from  God,  but  feels  that  he  is  for  ever 
undone  unless  the  Lord  shall  interpose.  It  is  our  wisdom  to  go  to  God 
for  everything. 

Moreover,  there  was  nothing  needed  from  the  prodigal  but  to  return 
to  his  father.  When  a  child  who  has  done  wrong  comes  back,  the  more 
its  face  is  blurred  with  tears  the  better.  When  a  beggar  asks  for 
charity,  the  more  his  clothes  are  in  rags  the  better.  Are  not  rags  and 
sores  the  very  livery  of  beggars  ?  I  once  gave  a  man  a  pair  of  shoes 
because  he  said  he  was  in  need  of  them  ;  but  after  he  had  put  them  on 
and  gone  a  little  way  I  overtook  him  in  a  gateway  taking  them  off  in 
order  to  go  barefooted  again.  I  think  they  were  patent  leather,  and 
what  should  a  beggar  do  in  such  attire  ?  He  was  changing  them  for 
"old  shoes  and  clouted,"  those  were  suitable  to  his  business.  A  sinner 
is  never  so  well  arrayed  for  pleading  as  when  he  comes  in  rags.  At 
his  worst,  the  sinner,  for  making  an  appeal  to  mercy,  is  at  his  best. 
And  so,  sinners,  there  is  no  need  for  you  to  linger;  come  just  as  you 
are.  "  But  must  we  not  wait  for  the  Holy  Spirit  ? "  Ah,  beloved,  he 


478  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

who  is  willing  to  arise  and  go  to  his  Father  has  the  Holy  Spirit.  It 
tfc  the  Holy  Spirit  who  moves  us  to  return  to  God,  and  it  is  the  spirit 
•>f  the  flesh  or  of  the  devil  that  would  bid  us  wait. 

How  now,  sinners  ?  Some  of  you  are  sitting  in  those  pews  ;  where 
are  you  ?  I  cannot  find  you  out,  but  my  Master  can,  he  has  made 
this  sermon  on  purpose  for  you.  "  Well,  but  I  would  like  to  get  home 
and  pray."  Pray  where  you  are,  in  the  pew.  "But  I  cannot  speak  out 
aloud."  You  may  if  you  like,  I  won't  stop  you.  "  But  I  should  not 
like."  Well,  don't,  then.  God  can  hear  you  without  a  sound,  though 
I  wish  sometimes  we  did  hear  people  cry  out,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?"  I  would  gladly  hear  the  prayer,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner."  But  if  men  cannot  hear  you.  the  Lord  can  hear  the  cries  of 
their  hearts.  Now,  just  sit  still  a  minute,  and  say,  "  My  God  I  must 
come  to  thee.  Thou  art  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  him  thou  has  already 
come  a  great  way  to  meet  me.  My  soul  wants  thee  ;  take  me  now,  and 
make  me  what  I  ought  to  be.  Forgive  me,  and  accept  me."  It  is  the 
turning-point  of  a  man's  life  when  that  is  done,  wherever  it  is, 
whether  in  a  workshop,  or  in  a  saw-pit,  in  a  church,  or  in  a  tabernacle ; 
it  does  not  matter  where.  There  is  the  point — the  getting  to  God  in 
Christ,  giving  all  up,  and  by  faith  resting  in  the  mercy  of  God. 

VI.  The  last  point  of   all    is    this — THAT  ACT    WROUGHT    THE 

GREATEST   CONCEIVABLE   CHANGE    IN   THE   MAN.      He    Was   a  new  mail 

after  that.  Harlots,  winebibbers,  you  have  lost  your  old  companion 
now !  He  has  gone  to  his  Father,  and  his  Father's  company  and 
yours  will  never  agree.  A  man's  return  to  his  God  means  his  leaving 
the  chambers  of  vice  and  the  tables  of  riot.  You  may  depend  upon 
it  whenever  you  hear  of  a  professing  Christian  living  in  uncleanness, 
he  has  not  been  living  anywhere  near  his  God.  He  may  have  talked 
a  great  deal  about  it,  but  God  and  unchastity  never  agree  ;  if  you  have 
friendship  with  God  you  will  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful 
works  of  darkness. 

Now,  too,  the  penitent  has  done  with  all  degrading  works  to  support 
himself.  You  will  not  find  him  feeding  swine  any  more,  or  making  a 
swine  of  himself  either  by  trusting  in  priests  or  sacraments ;  he  will 
not  confess  to  a  priest  again,  or  pay  a  penny  to  get  his  mother  out  of 
purgatory  ;  he  is  not  such  a  fool  as  that  any  more.  He  has  been  to  his 
God  on  his  own  account,  and  he  does  not  want  any  of  these  shavelings 
to  go  to  God  for  him.  He  has  got  away  from  that  bondage.  No  more 
pig-feeding ;  no  more  superstition  for  him  !  "  Why,"  says  he,  "  I  have 
access  with  boldness  to  the  mercy-seat,  and  what  have  I  to  do  with  the 
priests  of  Rome  ?" 

There  is  a  change  in  him  in  all  ways.  Now  he  has  come  to  his 
father  his  pride  is  broken  down.  He  no  longer  glories  in  that  which 
he  calls  his  own ;  all  his  glory  is  in  his  father's  free  pardoning  love. 
He  never  boasts  of  what  he  has,  for  he  owns  that  he  has  nothing  but 
what  his  father  gives  him ;  and  though  he  is  far  better  off  than  ever 
he  was  in  his  spendthrift  days,  yet  he  is  as  unassuming  as  a  little  child. 
He  is  a  gentleman-commoner  upon  the  bounty  of  his  God,  and  lives 
from  day  to  day  by  a  royal  grant  from  the  table  of  the  King  of  kings. 
Pride  is  gone,  but  content  fills  its  room.  He  would  have  been  con 
tented  to  be  one  of  the  servants  of  the  house,  much  more  satisfied  is  he 


THE  TURNING   POINT.  479 

to  be  a  child.  He  loves  his  father  with  a  new  love;  he  cannot  even 
mention  his  name  without  saying,  "And  he  forgave  me,  he  forgave 
me  freely,  he  forgave  me  all,  and  lie  said,  *  Bring  forth  the  best  robe  and 
put  it  on  him  ;  put  a  ring  on  his  hand  and  shoes  on  his  feet.'  "  From 
the  day  of  his  restoration  the  prodigal  is  bound  to  his  Father's  home, 
and  reckons  it  to  be  one  of  his  greatest  blessings  that  it  is  written  in 
the  covenant  of  grace,  "  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  that  they 
shall  not  depart  from  me." 

This  morning  I  believe  that  God  in  his  mercy  means  to  call  many 
ainners  to  himself.  I  am  often  very  much  surprised  to  find  how  the  Lord 
guides  my  word  according  to  the  persons  before  me.  Last  Sunday 
there  came  here  a  young  son  of  a  gentleman,  a  foreigner,  from  a  distant 
land,  under  considerable  impressions  as  to  the  truth  of  the  Christian 
religion.  His  father  is  a  follower  of  one  of  the  ancient  religions  of  the 
East,  and  this  young  gentleman  naturally  felt  it  a  great  difficulty  that 
he  would  probably  make  his  father  angry  if  he  became  a  Christian. 
Judge,  then,  how  closely  the  message  of  last  Sabbath  came  home  to 
him,  when  the  text  was,  "  What  if  thy  father  answer  thee  roughly  ?  " 
He  came  to  tell  me  that  he  thanked  God  for  that  message,  and  he 
hoped  to  bear  up  under  the  trial,  should  persecution  arise.  I  feel  that 
I  am  with  equal  plainness  speaking  to  some  of  you.  I  know  I  am. 
You  are  saying,  "  May  I  now  go  to  God  just  as  I  am,  and  through 
Jesus  Christ  yield  myself  up  ;  and  will  he  forgive  me  ?  "  Dear  brother, 
or  dear  sister,  wherever  you  may  be,  try  it.  That  is  the  best  thing  to 
do  :  try  it;  and,  if  the  angels  do  not  set  the  bells  in  heaven  ringing, 
<j}od  has  altered  from  what  he  was  last  week,  for  I  know  he  received  poor 
sinners  then,  and  he  will  receive  them  now.  The  worst  thing  I  dread 
•about  you  is,  lest  you  should  say,  "  I  will  think  of  it."  Don't  think  of 
it.  Doit!  Concerning  this  no  more  thinking  is  needed;  but  to  do 
it.  Get  away  to  God.  Is  it  not  according  to  nature  that  the  creature 
should  be  at  peace  with  its  Creator  ?  Is  it  not  according  to  your  con 
science  ?  Is  there  not  something  within  you  which  cries,  "  Go  to  God 
in  Christ  Jesus."  In  the  case  of  that  poor  prodigal,  the  famine  said 
to  him,  "Go  home!"  Bread  was  dear,  meat  was  scarce,  he  was 
hungry,  and  every  pang  of  want  said,  "  Go  home  !  Go  home  !" 
When  he  went  to  his  old  friend  the  citizen,  and  he  asked  him  for  help, 
his  scowling  looks  said,  "Why  don't  you  go  home  ?"  There  is  a  time 
with  sinners  when  even  their  old  companions  seem  to  say,  "  We  do  not 
want  you.  You  are  too  miserable  and  melancholy.  Why  don't  you  go 
home  ? "  They  sent  him  to  feed  swine,  and  the  very  hogs  grunted, 
"  Go  home  ?"  When  he  picked  up  those  carob  husks  and  tried  to 
eat  them,  they  crackled,  "  Go  home."  He  looked  upon  his  rags,  and 
they  gaped  at  him,  "  Go  home."  His  hungry  belly  and  his  faintness 
cried,  "  Go  home."  Then  he  thought  of  his  father's  face,  and  how 
kindly  it  had  looked  at  him,  and  it  seemed  to  say,  "  Come  home  !" 
He  remembered  the  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  every  morsel 
seemed  to  say,  "  Come  home !  "  He  pictured  the  servants  sitting 
down  to  dinner  and  feasting  to  the  full,  and  every  one  of  them,  seemed 
ie  look  right  away  over  the  wilderness  to  him  and  to  say,  "  Come 
home  !  Thy  father  feeds  us  well.  Come  home  !  "  Everything  said, 
"  Come  home !  "  Only  the  devil  whispered,  "  Never  go  back.  Fight 


480  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

it  out !  Better  starve  than  yield  !  Die  game !  "  But  then  he  had 
got  away  from  the  devil  this  once,  for  he  had  come  to  himself,  and 
he  said,  "No  ;  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father."  Oh  that  you  would 
be  equally  wise.  Sinner,  what  is  the  use  of  being  damned  for  the 
sake  of  a  little  pride.  Yield  thee,  man !  Down  with  thy  pride  I 
You  will  not  find  it  so  hard  to  submit  if  you  remember  that  dear 
Father  who  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us  in  the  person  of  his  own 
dear  Son.  You  will  find  it  sweet  to  yield  to  such  a  friend.  And  when 
you  get  your  head  in  his  bosom,  and  feel  his  warm  kisses  on  your  cheek, 
you  will  soon  feel  that  it  is  sweet  to  weep  for  sin — sweet  to  confess 
your  wrong  doing,  and  sweeter  still  to  hear  him  say,  "  I  have  blotted 
out  thy  sins  like  a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgressions." 
"  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ; 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." 

God  Almighty  grant  this  may  be  the  case  with  hundreds  of  you  this 
morning.  He  shall  have  all  the  glory  of  it,  but  my  heart  shall  be  very 
glad,  for  I  feel  nothing  of  the  spirit  of  the  elder  brother  within  me, 
but  the  greatest  conceivable  joy  at  the  thought  of  making  merry  with 
you  by-and-by,  when  you  come  to  own  my  Lord  and  Master,  and  we  sit 
together  at  the  sacramental  feast,  rejoicing  in  his  love.  God  bless  you, 
for  his  sake  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTUKE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  XT. 


C|e  f eto  | ark  Stod 


THE  PRODIGAL'S   RETURN. 

8  J&rrnum 

DELIVERED  OH  SABBATH  MORNING,  FEBRUARY  7,  1858,  BT  THB 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   MUSIC   HALL,   ROYAL   SURREY   GARDENS. 


"But  when  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  hii  father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on 
kis  neck,  and  kissed  him." — Luke  xv.20. 

ALL  persons  engaged  in  education  will  tell  you  that  they  find  it  far  more  difficult 
to  make  the  mind  unlearn  its  errors  than  to  make  it  receive  truth.  If  \ve  could 
suppose  a  man  totally  ignorant  of  anything,  we  should  have  a  fairer  chance  of 
instructing  him  quickly  and  effectually  than  we  should  have  had  if  his  mind  had 
been  previously  stored  with  falsehood.  I  have  no  doubt  you,  each  of  you,  find  it 
harder  to  unlearn  than  to  learn.  To  get  rid  of  old  prejudices  and  preconceived 
notions  is  a  very  hard  struggle  indeed.  It  has  been  well  said,  that  those  few  words, 
"I  am  mistaken,"  are  the  hardest  in  all  the  English  language  to  pronounce, 
and  certainly  it  takes  very  much  force  to  compel  us  to  pronounce  them :  and  after 
having  done  so,  it  is  even  then  difficult  to  wipe  away  the  slime  which  an  old  ser 
pentine  error  has  left  upon  the  heart.  Better  for  us  not  to  have  known  at  all  than 
to  have  known  the  wrong  thing.  Now,  I  am  sure  that  this  truth  is  never  more 
true  than  when  it  applies  to  God.  If  I  had  been  let  alone  to  form  my  notion  of 
God,  entirely  from  Holy  Scripture,  I  feel,  that  with  the  assistance  of  his  Holy  Spirit 
it  would  have  been  far  more  easy  for  me  to  understand  what  he  is,  and  how  he 
governs  the  world,  than  to  learn  even  the  truths  of  his  own  Word,  after  the  mind 
had  become  perverted  by  the  opinions  of  others.  Why,  brethren,  who  is  it  that 
gives  a  fair  representation  of  God?  The  Arminian  slanders  God  by  accusing  him 
(not  in  his  own  intention,  but  really  so)  of  unfaithfulness;  for  he  teaches  that  GOG. 
may  promise  what  he  never  performs;  that  he  may  give  eternal  life,  and  promise 
that  those  who  have  it  shall  never  perish,  and  yet  they  may  perish  after  all.  He 
§peaks  of  God  as  if  he  was  a  mutable  being,  for  he  talks  of  his  loving  men  one 
day,  and  hating  them  the  next;  of  his  writing  their  names  in  the  Book  of  Life  one 
hour,  and  then  erasing  their  names  in  the  next.  And  the  influence  of  such  an  error 
as  that,  is  very  baneful.  Many  children  of  God,  who  have  imbibed  these  errors  in 
early  youth,  have  had  to  drag  along  their  poor  wearied  and  broken  frames  for  many 
a  day,  whereas  they  might  have  walked  joyfully  to  heaven  if  they  had  known  the 
truth  from  the  beginning.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  hear  the  Calvinistic 
preacher,  are  very  apt  to  misinterpret  God.  Although  we  trust  we  would  never 
speak  of  God  in  any  other  sense  than  that  in  which  we  find  him  represented  in 
sacred  Scripture,  yet  are  we  well  aware  that  many  of  our  hearers,  even  through 
our  assertions,  when  most  guarded,  are  apt  to  get  rather  a  caricature  of  God,  than 
a  true  picture  of  him.  They  imagine  that  God  is  a  severe  being,  angry  and  fierce, 
very  easily  to  be  moved  to  w'rath,  but  not  so  easily  to  be  induced  to  love;  they  are 
apt  to  think  of  him  as  one  who  sits  in  supreme  and  lofty  state,  either  totally  in 
different  to  the  wishes  of  his  creatures,  or  else  determined  to  have  his  own  way 
with  them,  as  an  arbitrary  Sovereign,  never  listening  to  their  desires,  or  com 
passionating  their  woes.  Oh  that  we  could  unlearn  all  these  fallacies,  and  belief* 
God  to  be  what  he  is!  Oh  that  we  could  come  to  Scripture,  and  there  look  into 

No.  176.  33 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RETURK. 

4hat  glass  which  reflects  his  sacred  image,  and  then  receive  him  as  he  is,  the  all« 
Wise,  the  all-Just,  and  yet  the  all-Gracious,  and  all-Loving  Jehovah!  I  shall 
«ndeavoar  this  morning,  by  the  help  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  to  represent  the  lovely 
character  cf  Christ;  and  if  I  shall  be  happy  enough  to  have  some  in  my  audience 
who  are  in  the  position  of.  the  prodigal  son  in  the  parable— coming  to  Christ,  and 
yet  a  great  way  off  from  him — I  shall  trust  that  they  will  be  led  by  the  same 
Divine  Spirit,  to  believe  in  the  lovingkindness  of  Jehovah,  and  so  may  find  peace 
with  God  now,  ere  they  leave  this  house  of  prayer. 

"  When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion,  and 
ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him."  First,  I  shall  notice  the  position  intended 
in  the  words,  "a  great  way  off;"  secondly,  I  shall  notice  the  peculiar  troubles  which 
agitate  the  minds  of  those,  who  are  in  this  condition;  and  then,  thirdly,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  teach  the  great  lovingkindness  of  our  own  adorable  God,  inasmuch  as 
when  we  are  "  a  great  way  off,"  he  runs  to  us,  and  embraces  us  in  the  arms  of  his 
love. 

I.  First,  then,  what  is  the  POSITION  signified  by  being "  a  great  way  off  ?"  I 
must  just  notice  what  is  not  that  position.  It  is  riot  the  position  of  the  man 
who  is  careless  and  entirely  regardless  of  God ;  for  you  notice  that  the  prodigal  is 
represented  now  as  having  come  to  himself,  and  as  returning  to  his  father's  house. 
Though  it  be  true  that  all  sinners  are  a  great  way  off  from  God,  whether  they 
know  it  or  not,  yet  in  this  particular  instance,  the  position  of  the  poor  prodigal 
is  intended  to  signify  the  character  of  one,  who  has  been  aroused  by  conviction, 
who  has  been  led  to  abhor  his  former  life,  and  who  sincerely  desires  to  return  to 
God.  I  shall  not,  then,  this  morning,  specially  address  the  blasphemer,  and  the 
profane.  To  him,  there  may  be  some  incidental  warning  heard,  but  I  shall  not 
specially  address  such  a  character.  It  is  another  person  for  whom  this  text  is 
intended:  the  man  who  has  been  a  blasphemer,  if  you  please,  who  may  have  been 
a  drunkard,  and  a  swearer,  and  what  not,  but  who  has  now  renounced  these  things, 
and  is  steadfastly  seeking  after  Christ,  that  he  may  obtain  eternal  life.  That  is 
the  man  who  is  here  said  to  be,  though  coming  to  the  Lord,  "  a  great  way  off." 

Once  again,  there  is  another  person  who  is  not  intended  by  this  description, 
namely,  the  very  great  man,  the  Pharisee  who  thinks  himself  extremely  righteous, 
and  has  never  learned  to  confess  his  sin.  You,  sir,  in  your  apprehension,  are  not 
a  great  way  off.  You  are  so  really  in  the  sight  of  God;  you  are  as  far  from  him 
as  light  from  darkness,  as  the  east  is  from  the  west;  but  you  are  not  spoken  of 
here.  You  are  like  the  prodigal  son,  only  that  instead  of  spending  your  life 
righteously,  you  have  run  away  from  your  Father,  and  hidden  in  the  earth  the  gold 
which  he  gave  you,  and  are  able  to  feed  upon  the  husks  which  swine  do  eat, 
whilst  by  a  miserable  economy  of  good  works  you  are  hoping  to  save  enough  of 
your  fortune  to  support  yourself  here  and  in  eternity.  Your  hope  of  self-salvation 
is  a  fallacy,  and  you  are  not  addressed  in  the  words  of  the  text.  It  is  the  man 
who  knows  himself  lost,  but  desires  to  be  saved,  who  is  here  declared  to  be  met  by 
God,  and  received  with  affectionate  embraces. 

And  now  we  come  to  the  question,  Who  is  the  man,  and  why  is  he  said  to  be  a 
great  way  off?  For  he  seems  to  be  very  near  the  kingdom,  now  that  he  knows 
his  need  and  is  seeking  the  Saviour.  I  reply,  in  the  first  place,  he  is  a  great  way 
off  in  his  own  apprehensions.  You  are  here  this  morning,  and  you  have  an  idea 
that  never  was  man  so  far  from  God  as  you  are.  You  look  back  upon  your  past 
life,  and  you  recollect  how  you  have  slighted  God,  despised  his  Sabbath,  neglected 
his  Book,  trampled  upon  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  rejected  all  the  invitations 
of  his  mercy.  You  turn  over  the  pages  of  your  history,  and  you  remember  the 
sins  which  you  have  committed — the  sins  of  your  youth  and  your  former  trans 
gressions,  the  crimes  of  your  manhood,  and  the  riper  sins  of  your  older  years* 
like  black  waves  dashing  upon  a  dark  shore,  they  roll  in  wave  upon  wave,  upon 
your  poor  troubled  memory.  There  comes  a  little  wave  of  your  childish  folly,  and 
over  that  there  leaps  one  of  your  youthful  transgressions,  and  over  the  head  of 
this  there  comes  a  very  Atlantic  billow  of  your  manhood's  transgressions.  At  the 
sight  of  them  you  stand  astonished  and  amazed.  "  OLord  my  God,  how  deep  is  the 
guli  which  divides  me  from  thyself,  and  where  is  the  power  that  can  bridge  it? 
I  am  separated  from  thee  by  leagues  of  sin,  whole  mountains  of  my  guilt  are  piled 
upwards  between  me  and  thyself.  O  God,  shouldest  tliou  destroy  me  now,  thou 
wouldest  be  just;  and  if  thou  dost  ever  bring. me  to  thyself,  it  must  be  nothing  lesi 
khan  a  power  as  Omnipotent  as  that  which  made  the  world,  which  can  ever  do  it. 
•0 


THE   PRODIGAL  8   RETURN 

>f)h!  how  far  am  I  from  God!"  Some  of  you  would  be  startled  this  morning, 
•it'  your  neighbours  were  to  give  you  revelations  of  their  own  feelings.  If  yonder 
man  standing  there  in  the  crowd  could  come  into  this  pulpit,  and  tell  out  what  he 
now  feels,  you  might  perhaps  be  horrified  at  his  description  of  his  own  heart. 
How  many  of  you  have  no  notion  of  the  way  in  which  a  soul  is  cut  and  hacked 
about,  when  it  is  under  the  convictions  of  the  law!  If  you  should  hear  the  man 
tell  out  what  he  feels,  you  would  say,  "Ah!  he  is  a  poor  deluded  enthusiast;  men 
are  not  so  bad  as  that;"  or  else  you  would  be  apt  to  think  he  had  committed 
some  nameless  crime  which  he  dare  not  mention,  that  was  preying  on  hia 
conscience.  Nay,  sir,  he  has  been  as  moral  and  as  upright  as  you  have  been; 
but  should  he  describe  himself  as  he  now  discovers  himself  to  be,  lie  would  shock 
.  you  utterly.  And  yet  you  are  the  same,  though  you  feel  it  not,  and  would 
indignantly  deny  it.  When  the  light  of  God's  grace  comes  into  your  heart,  it  is 
something  like  the  opening  of  the  windows  of  an  old  cellar  that  has  been  shut  up 
for  many  days.  Down  in  that  cellar,  which  has  not  been  opened  for  many  months, 
«re  all  kinds  of  loathsome  creatures,  and  a  few  sickly  plants  blanched  by  the 
darkness.  The  walls  are  dark  and  damp  with  the  trail  of  reptiles;  it  is  a  horrid 
filthy  place  in  which  no  one  would  willingly  enter.  You  may  walk  there  in  the 
dark  very  securely,  and  except  now  and  then  for  the  touch  of  some  slimy  creature, 
you  would  not  believe  the  place  was  so  bad  and  filthy.  Open  those  shutters,  clean 
a  pane  of  glass,  let  a  little  light  in,  and  now  see  how  a  thousand  noxious  things 
have  made  this  place  their  habitation.  Sure,  'twas  not  the  light  that  made  this 
place  so  horrible,  but  it  was  the  light  that  showed  how  horrible  it  was  before.  So 
let  God's  grace  just  open  a  window  and  let  the  light  into  a  man's  soul,  and  he 
will  stand  astonished  to  see  at  what  a  distance  he  is  from  God.  Yes,  sir,  to-day 
you  think  yourself  second  to  none  but  the  Eternal;  you  fancy  that  you  can 
approach  his  throne  with  steady  step;  it  is  but  a  little  that  you  hare  to  do  to  be 
saved;  you  imagine  that  you  can  accomplish  it  at  any  hour,  and  save  yourself 
upon  your  dying  bed  as  well  as  now.  Ah!  sir,  if  you  could  but  be  touched  by 
Ithuriel's  wand,  and  made  to  be  in  appearance  what  you  are  in  reality,  then  you 
would  see  that  you  are  far  enough  from  God  even  now,  and  so  far  from  him,  that 
unless  the  arms  of  his  grace  were  stretched  out  to  bring  you  to  himself,  you  must 
perish  in  your  sin.  Now  I  turn  my  eye  again  with  hope,  and  trust  I  have  not  a 
few  in  this  large  assembly,  who  can  say,  "Sir,  I  feel  I  am  far  from  God,  and  some 
times  I  fear  I  am  so  far  from  him.  that  he  will  never  have  mercy  upon  me;  I  dare 
not  lift  so  much  as  my  eyes  towards  heaven;  I  smite  on  my  breast,  and  say, 
'Lord  have  mercy  upon  me,  a  sinner.'"  Oh!  poor  heart;  here  is  a  comforting 
passage  foi  thee:  "When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him,  and  had 
compassion  on  him." 

But  again,  there  is  a  second  sense  in  which  some  now  present  feel  themselves  to 
be  far  off  from  God.  Conscience  tells  every  man  that  if  he  would  be  saved  he  must 
get  rid  of  his  sin.  The  Antinomian  may  possibly  pretend  to  believe  that  men  can 
be  saved  while  they  live  in  sin;  but  conscience  will  never  allow  any  man  to  swallow 
so  egregious  a  lie  as  that.  I  have  not  one  person  in  this  congregation  who  is  not 
perfectly  assured  that  if  he  is  to  be  saved  he  must  leave  off  his  drunkenness 
-and  his  vices.  Sure  there  is  not  one  here  so  stupified  with  the  laudanum  of  hellish 
indifference  as  to  imagine  that  he  can  revel  in  his  lusts,  and  afterwards  wear  the 
white  robe  of  the  redeemed  in  Paradise.  If  ye  imagine  ye  can  be  partakers  of  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  yet  drink  the  cup  of  "Belial;  if  ye  imagine  that  ye  can  be 
members  of  Satan  and  members  of  Christ  at  the  same  time,  ye  have  less  sense  than 
one  would  givd  you  credit  for.  No,  you  know  that  right  arms  must  be  cut  off,  and 
right  eyes  plucked  out — that  the  most  darling  sins  must  be  renounced,  if  ye  would 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  I  have  a  man  here  who  is  convinced  of 
the  unholiness  of  his  life,  and  he  has  striven  to  reform,  not  because  he  thinks 
reformation  would  save  him,  for  he  knows  better  than  that,  but  because  he  knows 
that  this  is  one  of  the  first  fruits  of  grace — reformation  from  sin.  Well,  poor  man, 
he  has  for  many  years  been  an  inveterate  drunkard,  and  he  struggles  now  to 
overcome  the  passion.  He  has  almost  effected  it;  but  he  never  had  such  an 
Herculean  labour  to  attempt  before ;  for  now  some  temptation  comes  upon  him 
so  strongly,  that  it  is  as  much  as  he  can  do  to  stand  against  it ;  and  perhaps 
sometimes  since  his  first  conviction  of  sin  he  has  even  fallen  into  it.  Or  perhaps 
it  is  another  vice,  and  you,  my  brother,  have  set  your  face  against  it;  but  there  are 
aiany  bonds  and  idlers  that  bind  us  to  our  vices,  aud  you  find  that  though  it  WAS 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RETURN. 

easy  enough  to  spin  the  warp  and  woof  of  sin  together;  it  is  not  so  easy  to 
unravel  that  which  you  have  spun.  You  cannot  purge  your  house  of  your  idols; 
you  do  not  yet  know  how  to  give  up  all  your  lustful  pleasures.  Not  yet  can  you 
renounce  the  company  of  the  ungodly.  You  have  cut  off  one  by  one  your  most 
intimate  acquaintances,  but  it  is  very  hard  to  do  it  completely,  and  you  are 
struggling  to  accomplish  it,  and  you  often  fall  on  your  knees  and  cry,  "  0  Lord, 
how  far  I  am  from  thee !  what  high  steps  these  are  which  I  have  to  climb !  Oh  ? 
how  can  I  be  saved  ?  Sure,  if  I  cannot  purge  myself  from  my  old  sins,  I  shall 
never  be  able  to  hold  on  my  way;  and  even  should  I  get  rid  of  them,  I  should 
plunge  into  them  once  more."  You  are  crying  out,  "  Oh,  how  great  my  distance 
from  God  I  Lord,  bring  me  near !" 

Let  me  present  you  with  one  other  aspect  of  our  distance  from  God.  You  have 
read  your  Bibles,  and  you  believe  that  faith  alone  can  unite  the  soul  to  Christ. 
You  feel  that  unless  you  can  believe  in  him  who  died  upon  the  cross  for  your  sins, 
you  can  never  see  the  kingdom  of  God;  but  you  can  say  this  morning,  "  Sir,  I  have 
striven  to  believe ;  I  have  searched  the  Scriptures,  not  hours,  but  days  together, 
to  find  a  promise  upon  which  my  weary  foot  might  rest ;  I  have  been  upon  my 
knees  many  and  many  a  time,  earnestly  supplicating  a  divine  blessing;  but  though 
I  have  pleaded,  all  in  vain  have  I  urged  my  plea,  for  until  now  no  whisper  have  I 
had  of  grace,  no  token  for  good,  no  sign  of  mercy.  Sir,  I  have  striven  to  believe, 
and  I  have  said, 

*O  could  I  but  believe! 

Then  all  would  easy  be; 
1  would,  but  cannot — Lord,  relieve, 
My  help  must  come  from  thee!' 

I  have  used  all  the  power  I  have,  and  have  desperately  striven  to  cast  myself  at  the 
Saviour's  feet  and  see  my  sins  washed  away  in  his  blood.  I  have  not  been  indif 
ferent  to  the  story  of  the  cross ;  I  have  read  it  a  hundred  times,  and  even  wept  over 
it ;  but  when  I  strive  to  put  my  hand  upon  the  scape-goat's  head,  and  labour  to 
believe  that  my  sins  are  transferred  to  him,  some  demon  seems  to  stop  the  breath 
that  would  breathe  itself  forth  in  adoration,  and  something  checks  the  hand  that 
would  lay  itself  upon  the  head  that  died  for  me."  Well,  poor  soul,  thou  art  indeed 
far  from  God.  I  will  repeat  the  words  of  the  text  to  thee.  May  the  Holy  Spirit 
repeat  them  in  thine  ear  !  "  When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him, 
and  had  compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him."  So  shall  it  be 
with  thee  if  thou  hast  come  thus  far,  though  great  may  be  the  distance,  thy  feet 
shall  not  have  to  travel  it,  but  God  the  Eternal  One  shall  from  his  throne  look  down 
and  visit  thy  poor  heart,  though  now  thou  tarriest  by  the  way  afraid  to  approach 
him. 

II.  Our  second  point  is  the  PECULIAR  TROUBLES  which  agitate  the  breasts  of 
those  who  are  in  this  position.  Let  us  introduce  to  you  the  poor  ragged  prodigal 
After  a  life  of  ease,  he  is  by  his  own  vice  plunged  into  penury  and  labour.  After 
feeding  swine  for  a  time,  and  being  almost  starved,  he  sets  about  returning  to  his 
father's  house.  It  is  a  long  and  weary  journey.  He  walks  many  a  mile  until  his 
feet  are  sore,  and  at  last  from  the  summit  of  a  mountain  he  views  his  father's  house 
far  away  in  the  plain.  There  are  yet  many  miles  between  him  and  his  father  whom 
he  has  neglected.  Can  you  conceive  his  emotions  when  tor  the  first  time  after  so 
long  an  absence  he  sees  the  old  house  at  home?  He  remembers  it  well  in  the  dis 
tance  i  for  though  it  is  long  since  he  trod  its  floors  he  has  never  ceased  to  recollect 
it;  and  the  remembrance  of  his  father's  kindness,  and  of  his  own  prosperity  when  he 
was  with  him,  has  never  yet  been  erased  from  his  consciousness.  You  would  imagine 
that  for  one  moment  he  feels  a  flash  of  joy,  like  some  flash  of  lightning  in  the 
midst  of  the  tempsst,  but  anon  a  black  darkness  comes  over  his  spirit.  In  the 
first  place,  it  is  probable  he  will  think,  "  Oh !  suppose  I  could  reach  my  home,  will 
my  father  receive  me  ?  Will  he  not  shut  the  door  in  my  face  and  tell  me  to  be 
gone  and  spend  the  rest  of  my  life  where  I  have  been  spending  the  first  of  it  ?** 
Then  another  suggestion  might  arise:  "Surely,  the  demon  that  led  me  first  astray 
may  lead  me  back  again,  before  I  salute  my  parent."  "Or  mayhap."  thought  he, 
"I  may  even  die  upon  the  road,  and  so  before  I  have  received  my  lather's  blessing 
my  «oul  may  stand  before  its  God."  I  doubt  not  each  of  these  three  thoughts  has 

92 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RETURN. 

crossed  your  mind  if  you  are  now  in  the  position  of  one  who  is  seeking  Christ,  but 
mourns  to  feel  himself  far  away  from  him. 

First,  you  have  been  afraid  lest  you  should  die  hefore  Christ  has  appeared  to  you. 
You  have  been  for  months  seeking  the  Saviour  without  finding  him,  and  now  the 
black  thought  comes,  "  And  what  if  I  should  die  with  all  these  prayers  unanswered  ? 
Oh  !  if  he  would  but^hear  me  ere  I  departed  this  world  I  would  be  content,  though 
he  should  keep  me  waiting  in  anguish  for  many  years.  But  what,  if  before  to 
morrow  morning  I  should  be  a  corpse  ?  At  my  bed  I  kneel  to-night  and  cry  for 
mercy.  Oh  !  if  he  should  not  send  the  pardon  before  to-morrow  morning,  and  in 
the  night  my  spirit  should  stand  belore  his  bar! — What  then?"  It  is  singular 
that  other  men  think  they  shall  live  for  ever,  but  men  convinced  of  sin,  who  seek  a 
Saviour,  are  afraid  they  shall  not  live  another  moment.  You  have  known  the  time, 
dear  Christian  brethren,  when  you  dared  not  shut  your  eyes  for  fear  you  should  not 
open  them  again  on  earth  ;  when  you  dreaded  the  shadows  of  the  night  lest  they 
should  darken  for  ever  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  you  should  dwell  in  outer  darkness 
throughout  eternity.  You  have  mourned  as  each  day  has  entered,  and  you  have 
wept  as  it  has  departed,  because  you  fancied  that  your  next  step  might  precipitate 
you  into  your  eternal  doom.  I  have  known  what  it  is  to  tread  the  earth  and  fear 
lest  every  tuft  of  grass  should  but  cover  a  door  to  hell ;  trembling,  lest  every  par 
ticle,  and  every  atom,  and  every  stone,  should  be  so  at  league  with  God  against  me, 
as  to  destroy  me.  John  Bunyan  says,  that  at  one  time  in  his  experience,  he  felt 
that  he  had  rather  have  been  born  a  dog  or  a  toad  than  a  man  ;  he  felt  so  unutter 
ably  wretched  on  account  of  sin  ;  and  his  great  point  of  wretchedness  was  the  fact, 
that  though  he  had  been  three  years  seeking  Christ,  he  might  after  all  die  without 
finding  him.  And  in  truth,  this  is  no  needless  alarm.  It  may  be  perhaps  too 
alarming  to  some  who  already  feel  their  need  of  Christ,  but  the  mass  of  us  need 
perpetually  to  be  startled  with  the  thought  of  death.  How  few  of  you  ever  indulge 
that  thought.!  Because  ye  live  and  are  in  health,  and  eat,  and  drink,  and  sleep,  ye 
think  ye  shall  not  die.  Do  ye  ever  soberly  look  at  your  last  end  ?  Do  ye  ever, 
when  ye  come  to  your  beds  at  night,  think  how  one  day  ye  shall  undress  for  the  last 
slumber  ?  And  when  ye  wake  in  the  morning,  do  ye  never  think  that  the  trump 
of  the  archangel  shall  startle  you  to  appear  before  God  in  the  last  day  of  the  great 
assize,  wherein  an  universe  shall  stand  before  the  Judge  ?  No.  "  All  men  think  all 
men  mortal  but  themselves ;"  and  thoughts  of  death  we  still  push  off,  until  at  last 
we  shall  find  ourselves  waking  up  in  torment,  where  to  wake  is  to  wake  too  late. 
But  thou  to  whom  I  specially  speak  this  morning,  thou  who  feelest  that  thou  art  a, 
great  way  off  from  Christ,  thou  shalt  never  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  works  of 
the  Lord ;  if  thou  hast  really  sought  him,  thou  shalt  never  die  until  thou  hast 
found  him.  There  was  never  a  soul  yet,  that  sincerely  sought  the  Saviour,  who 
perished  before  he  found  him.  No ;  the  gates  of  death  shall  never  shut  on  thee  till 
the  gates  of  grace  have  opened  for  thee?  till  Christ  has  washed  thy  sins  away  thou 
shalt  never  be  baptized  in  Jordan's  floot .  Thy  life  is  secure,  for  this  is  God's  con 
stant  plan — he  keeps  his  own  elect  alire  till  the  day  of  his  grace,  and  then  he  takes 
them  to  himself.  And  inasmuch  as  thou  knowest  thy  need  of  a  Saviour,  thou  art 
one  of  his,  and  thou  shalt  never  die  until  thou  hast  found  him. 

Your  second  fear  is,  "  Ah,  sir !  I  am  not  afraid  of  dying  before  I  find  Christ,  I 
have  a  worse  fear  than  that ;  I  have  had  convictions  before,  and  they  have  often 
passed  away  ;  my  greatest  fear  to-day  is,  that  these  will  be  the  same."  I  have 
heard  of  a  poor  collier,  who  on  one  occasion,  having  been  deeply  impressed  under  a 
sermon,  was  led  to  repent  of  sin  and  forsake  his  former  life ;  but  he  felt  so  great  a 
horror  of  ever  returning  to  his  former  conversation,  that  one  day  he  knelt  down 
and  cried  thus  unto  God,  "  O  Lord,  let  me  die  on  this  spot,  rather  than  ever  deny 
the  religion  which  I  have  espoused,  and  turn  back  to  my  former  conversation:** 
and  we  are  credibly  told,  that  he  died  on  that  very  spot,  and  so  his  prayer  was 
answered.  God  had  rather  take  him  home  to  heaven  than  suffer  him  to  bear  the 
brunt  of  temptation  on  earth.  Now,  when  men  come  to  Christ,  they  feel  that 
they  had  rather  suffer  anything  than  lose  their  convictions.  Scores  of  times  have 
you  and  I  been  drawn  to  Christ  under  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  We 
can  look  back  upon  dozens  of  occasions  on  which  it  seemed  just  the  turning 
point  with  us.  Something  said  in  our  hearts,  '•  Now,  believe  in  Christ,  now  is  the 
accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  But  we  said,  "To-morrow,  to 
morrow;"  and  when  to-morrow  came  our  convictions  were  gone.  We  thought 
what  we  said  yesterday  would  be  the  deed  of  to-day;  but  instead  of  it,  tht 

99 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RETURN. 

procrastination  of  yesterday  became  thehardened  wickedness  of  to-day :  we  wandered 
farther  from  God  and  forgot  him.  Now  you  are  crying  to  him  for  fear,  lest  he 
should  give  you  up  again.  You  have  this  morning  prayed  before  you  came  here, 
and  you  said,  "  Father,  suffer  not  my  companions  to  laugh  rne  out  of  my  religion; 
let  not  my  worldly  business  so  engross  my  thoughts,  as  to  prevent  my  due  atten 
tion  to  the  matters  of  another  world.  Oh,  let  not  the  trifles  jof  to-day  so  absorb 
my  thoughts  that  I  may  not  be  preparing  myself  to  meet  my  God — 

« Deeply  on  my  thoughtful  heart, 
Eternal  things  impress,' 

and  make  this  a  real  saving  work  that  shall  never  die  out,  nor  be  taken  from  me.' 
Is  that  your  earnest  prayer?  O  poor  prodigal,  it  shall  be  heard,  it  shall  be  answered. 
Thou  shalt  not  have  time  to  go  back.  To-day  thy  Father  views  thee  from  his- 
throne  in  heaven;  to-day  he  runs  to  thee  in  the  message  of  his  gospel;  to-day  he 
falls  upon  thy  neck  and  weeps  for  joy;  to-day  he  says  to  thee,  "  Thy  sins,  which  are 
many,  are  all  forgiven;"  to-day,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  he  bids  thee  come 
and  reason  with  him, "  for  though  thy  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  wool,  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  whiter  than  snow." 

But  the  last  and  the  most  prominent  thought  which  I  suppose  the  prodigal 
would  have,  would  be,  that  when  he  did  get  to  his  father,  he  would  say  to 
him,  "  Get  along  with  you,  I  will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  you."  "  Ah !"' 
thought  he  to  himself,  "  I  recollect  the  morning  when  I  rose  up  before  day-break, 
because  I  knew  I  could  not  stand  my  mother's  tears ;  I  remember  how  I  crept 
down  the  back  staircase  and  took  all  the  money  with  me,  how  I  stole  down  the 
yard  and  ran  away  into  the  land  where  I  spent  my  all.  Oh  !  what  will  the  old 
gentleman  say  of  me  when  I  come  back  ?  Why,  there  he  is  !  He  is  running  to  me. 
But  he  has  got  a  horsewhip  with  him,  to  be  sure,  to  whip  me  away.  It  is  not  at 
all  possible  that  if  he  comes  he  will  have  a  kind  word  for  me.  The  most  I  can 
expect  is  that  he  will  say,  'Well  John,  you  have  wasted  all  your  money,  you 
cannot  expect  me  to  do  anything  for  you  again.  I  won't  let  you  starve ;  you  shall 
be  one  of  my  servants ;  there,  come,  I  will  take  you  as  footman  ;'  and  K  he  will  do 
that  I  will  be  obliged  to  him;  nay,  that  is  the  very  thing  I  will  ask  of  him;  I  will 
say,  '  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants.'  "  "  Oh,"  said  the  devil  within  him, 
"your  father  will  never  speak  comfortably  to  you:  you  had  better  run  away 
again.  I  tell  you  if  he  gets  near  you,  you  will  have  such  a  dressing  as  you  never 
received  in  your  life.  You  will  die  with  a  broken  heart;  you  will  very  likely  fall 
dead  here;  the  old  man  will  never  bury  you;  the  carrion  crows  will  eat  you. 
There  is  no  hope  for  you:  see  how  you  have  treated  him.  Put  yourself  in  his 
place:  what  would  you  do  if  you  had  a  son  that  had  run  away  with  half  your 
living,  and  spent  it  upon  harlots?"  And  the  son  thought  if  he  were  in  his  father's 
place  he  should  be  very  harsh  and  severe;  and  possibly,  he  almost  turned  upon  his 
heel  to  run  away.  But  he  had  not  time  to  do  that.  When  he  was  just  thinking 
about  running  away,  on  a  sudden  his  father's  arms  were  about  his  neck,  arid  he 
had  received  the  paternal  kiss.  Nay,  before  he  could  get  his  whole  prayer  finished, 
he  was  arrayed  in  a  white  robe,  the  best  in  the  house;  and  they  had  brought  him 
to  the  table,  and  the  fatted  calf  was  being  killed  for  his  repast.  And  poor  soul, 
it  shall  be  so  with  you.  Thou  sayest,  "  If  I  go  to  God,  he  will  never  receive  me. 
I  am  too  vile  and  wretched:  others  he  may  have  pressed  to  his  heart,  but  he  will 
not  me.  If  my  brother  should  go,  he  might  be  saved;  but  there  are  such  aggra 
vations  in  my  crime;  I  have  grown  so  old  since;  1  have  done  such  a  deal  of 
mischief;  I  have  so  often  blasphemed  him,  so  frequently  broken  his  Sabbaths;  ah! 
and  I  have  so  often  deceived  him;  I  have  promised  I  would  repent,  and  when  I 
have  got  well  I  have  lied  to  God,  and  gone  back  to  my  old  sin.  Oh,  if  he  would 
but  let  me  creep  inside  the  door  of  heaven!  I  will  not  asic  to  be  one  of  his 
children;  I  will  only  ask  that  he  will  let  me  be  where  the  Syro-Phoenician  woman 
desired  to  be — to  be  a  dog,  to  eat  the  crumbs  that  fall  from  the  Master's  table. 
That  is  all  I  ask;  and  oh  I  if  he  will  but  grant  it  to  me,  he  shall  never  hear  the 
last  of  it,  for  as  long  as  I  live  I  will  sing  his  praise;  and  when  the  world  doth  fade 
away,  and  the  sun  grow  dim  with  age,  my  gratitude,  immortal  as  my  soul,  shall 
never  cease  to  sing  his  love,  who  pardoned  my  grossest  sins  and  washed  me  in  his 
blood."  It  shall  be  so.  Come  and  try.  Now,  sinners,  dry  your  tears;  let  hopeless 
sorrows  cease;  look  to  the  wounds  of  Christ,  who  died;  let  all  your  griefs  now  b« 

94 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RETURN. 

removed,  there  is  no  further  cause  for  them:  your  Father  loves  you;  he  accept* 
and  receives  you  to  his  heart. 

III.  Now,  in  conclusion,  I  may  notice  now  THESE  FEARS  WERE  MF.T  IN  THH 
PRODIGAL'S  CASE,  and  how  they  shall  be  met  in  ours  if  we  are  in  the  same  con 
dition. 

The  text  says,  "  The  Father  saw  him  '  Yes,  and  God  saw  thee  just  now.  That 
tear  which  was  wiped  away  so  hastily — as  if  tliou  wast  ashamed  ot  it — God  saw  it, 
and  he  stored  it  in  his  bottle.  That  prayer  which  thou  didst  breathe  just  a  few 
moments  ago,  so  faintly,  and  with  such  little  faith — God  heard  it.  The  other  day 
thou  wast  in  thy  chamber,  where  no  ear  heard  thee;  but  God  was  there.  Sinner, 
let  this  be  thy  comfort,  that  God  sees  thee  when  thou  beginnest  to  repent.  He 
does  not  see  thee  with  his  usual  gaze,  with  which  he  looks  on  all  men;  but  he  sees 
thee  with  an  eye  of  intense  interest.  He  has  been  looking  on  thee  in  all  thy  sin, 
and  in  all  thy  sorrow,  hoping  that  thou  wouldst  repent;  and  now  he  sees  the  first 
gleam  of  grace,  and  he  beholds  it  with  joy.  Never  warder  on  the  lonely  castle  top 
saw  the  first  grey  light  of  morning  with  more  joy  than  that  with  which  God 
beholds  the  first  desire  in  thy  heart.  Never  physician  rejoiced  more  when  he  saw 
the  first  heaving  of  the  lungs  in  one  that  was  supposed  to  be  dead,  than  God  doth 
rejoice  over  thee,  now  that  he  sees  the  first  token  for  good.  Think  not  that  thou 
art  despised,  and  unknown,  and  forgotten.  He  is  marking  thee  from  his  high 
throne  in  glory,  and  rejoicing  in  what  he  sees.  He  saw  thee  pray,  he  heard  thee 
groan,  he  marked  thy  tear;  he  looked  upon  thee  and  rejoiced  to*  see  that  these 
were  the  first  seeds  of  grace  in  thine  heart. 

And  then,  the  text  says,  "  he  had  compassion  on  him."  He  did  not  merely  see 
him.  but  he  wept  within  himself  to  think  he  should  be  in  such  a  condition.  The 
old  father  had  a  very  long  range  of  eye-sight;  and  though  the  prodigal  could  not 
sec  him  in  the  distance,  he  could  see  the  prodigal.  And  the  father's  first  thought 
•when  he  saw  him  was  this — "  0  my  poor  son,  O  my  poor  boy!  that  ever  he  should 
have  brought  himself  into  such  a  state  as  this!"  He  looked  through  his  telescope 
of  love,  and  he  saw  him,  and  said,  "  Ahl  he  did  not  go  out  of  my  house  in  such 
trim  as  that.  Poor  creature,  his  feet  are  bleeding;  he  has  come  a  long  way,  I'll  be 
bound.  Look  at  his  face;  he  doesn't  look  like  the  same  boy  that  he  was  when  he 
left  me.  His  eye  that  was  so  bright,  is  now  sunken  in  its  socket;  his  cheeks  that 
once  stood  out  with  fatness,  have  now  become  hollow  with  famine.  Poor  wretch, 
1  can  tell  all  his  bones,  he  is  so  emaciated."  Instead  of  feeling  any  anger  in  his 
heart,  he  felt  just  the  contrary;  he  felt  such  pity  for  his  poor  son.  And  that  is  how 
the  Lord  feels  for  you — you  that  are  groaning  and  moaning  on  account  of  sin.  H« 
iorgets  your  sins;  he  only  weeps  to  think  you  should  have  brought  yourself  to  bi 
what  you  are:  "Why  didst  thou  rebel  against  me,  and  bring  thyself  into  such  a 
state  as  this?"  It  was  just  like  that  day  when  Adam  sinned.  God  walked  in  the 
garden,  and  he  missed  Adam.  He  did  not  cry  out,  "  Adam,  come  here  and  be 
judged!"  No;  with  a  soft,  sorrowful,  and  plaintive  voice,  he  said,  "  Adam,  where 
art  thou?  Oh,  my  fair  Adam,  thou  whom  I  made  so  happy,  where  art  thou  now? 
Oh,  Adam!  thou  didst  think  to  become  a  God;  where  art  thou  now?  Thou  hast 
walked  with  me;  dost  thou  hide  thyself  from  thy  friend?  Little  dost  thou  know 
Oh  Adam,  what  woes  thou  hast  brought  on  thyself,  and  thine  ofispring.  Adam, 
where  art  thou?"  And  Jehovah's  bowels  yearn  to-day  over  you.  He  is  not  angry 
with  you;  his  anger  is  passed  away,  and  his  hands  are  stretched  out  still.  Inas- 
nmch'as  he  has  brought  you  to  feel  that  you  have  sinned  against  him,  and  to  detire 
reconciliation  with  him,  there  is  now  no  wrath  in  his  heart.  The  only  sorrow  that 
he  leels  is  sorrow  that  you  should  have  brought  yourself  into  a  state  so  mourntul 
as  that  in  which  you  now  are  found. 

But  he  did  not  stop  in  mere  compassion.  Having  had  compassion,  "  he  ran,  and 
fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him."  This  you  do  not  understand  yet;  but  you  shall. 
As  sure  as  God  is  God,  if  you  this  day  are  seeking  him  aright  through  Christ,  the 
day  shall  come  when  the  kiss  of  full  assurance  shall  be  on  your  lip,  when  the 
arms  of  sovereign  love  shall  embrace  you,  and  you  shall  know  it  to  be  so.  Thou 
mayest  have  despised  him,  but  thou  slialt  know  him  yet  to  be  thy  Father  and  thy 
Friend.  Thou  mayest  have  scoffed  his  name;  thou  shalt  one  day  come  to  rejoice 
jn  it  as  better  than  pure  gold.  Thou  mayest  have  broken  his  Sabbaths  and 
despised  his  Word;  the  day  is  coming  when  the  Sabbath  shall  be  thy  delight,  and 
his  Word  thy  treasure.  Yes,  marvel  not;  thou  mayest  have  plunged  into  the 
kennel  of  sin  and  made  thy  clothes  black  with  iniquity;  but  thou  shalt  one  day 

95 


THE   PKODiGAL  3    RETURN. 

•tand  before  his  throne  white  as  the  angels  be;  and  that  tongue  that  once  curseol 
him  shall  yet  sing  his  praise.  If  thou  be  a  real  seeker,  the  hands  that  have  been 
stained  with  lust  shall  one  day  grasp  the  harp  of  gold,  and  the  head  that  has 
plotted  against  the  Most  High  shall  yet  be  girt  with  gold.  Seemeth  it  not  a 
strange  thing  that  God  should  do  so  much  for  sinners?  But  strange  though  it 
seem,  it  shall  be  strangely  true.  Look  at  the  staggering  drunkard  in  the  ale-house. 
Is  there  a  possibility  that  one  day  he  shall  stand  amongst  the  fairest  sons  of 
light?  Possibility!  ay,  certainty,  if  he  repents  and  turns  from  the  error  of  his 
ways.  Hear  you  yon  curser  and  swearer?  See  you  the  man  who  labels  himself 
as  a  servant  of  hell,  and  is  not  ashamed  to  do  so?  Is  it  possible  that  he  shall  one 
day  share  the  bliss  of  the  redeemed?  Possible  1  ay,  more,  it  is  sure,  if  he  turneth 
from  his  evil  ways.  O  sovereign  grace,  turn  men  that  they  may  repent  I  "  Turn 
ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel?" 

"  Lord  do  thou  the  sinner  turn, 
For  thy  tender  mercies  sake!" 

One  word  or  so,  and  I  have  done.  II  any  of  you  to-day  are  under  conviction  of 
sin,  let  me  solemnly  warn  you  not  to  frequent  places  where  those  convictions  are 
likely  to  be  destroyed. 

A  correspondent  of  the  New  York  Christian  Advocate  furnishes  the  following 
affecting  narrative: — 

"  When  I  was  travelling  in  the  state  of  Massachusetts,  twenty-six  years  ago, 

after  preaching  one  evening  in  the  town  ot ,  a  very  serious-looking  young 

man  arose,  and  wished  to  address  the  assembly.  After  obtaining  leave,  he  spoke 
as  follows  : — '  My  friends,  about  one  year  ago,  I  set  out  in  company  with  a  young 
man  of  my  intimate  acquaintance,  to  seek  the  salvation  of  my  soul.  For  several 
weeks  we  went  on  together,  we  laboured  together,  and  often  renewed  our  covenant 
never  to  give  over  seeking  till  we  obtained  the  religion  of  Jesus.  But,  all  at  once, 
the  young  man  neglected  attending  meeting,  appeared  to  turn  his  back  on  all  the 
means  of  grace,  and  grew  so  shy  of  me,  that  I  could  scarcely  get  an  opportunity  to 
speak  with  him.  His  strange  conduct  gave  me  much  painful  anxiety  of  mind;  but 
still  I  felt  resolved  to  obtain  the  salvation  of  my  soul,  or  perish,  making  the 
publican's  plea.  After  a  few  days,  a  friend  informed  me  that  my  young  companion 
had  received  an  invitation  to  attend  a  ball,  and  was  determined  to  go.  I  went 
immediately  to  him,  and,  with  tears  in  my  eyes,  endeavoured  to  persuade  him  to 
change  his  purpose,  and  to  go  with  me  on  that  evening  to  a  prayer-meeting.  I 
pleaded  with  him  in  vain.  He  told  me,  when  we  parted,  that  I  must  not  give  him 
up  as  lost,  for  after  he  had  attended  that  ball,  he  intended  to  make  a  business  of 
seeking  religion.  The  appointed  evening  came,  and  he  went  to  the  ball,  and  I 
went  to  the  prayer-meeting.  Soon  after  the  meeting  opened,  it  pleased  God,  in 
answer  to  my  prayer,  to  turn  my  spiritual  captivity,  and  make  my  soul  rejoice  in 
his  justifying  love.  Soon  after  the  ball  opened,  my  young  friend  was  standing  at 
the  head  of  the  ball-room,  with  the  hand  of  a  young  lady  in  his  hand,  preparing  to 
lead  down  the  dance ;  and,  while  the  musician  was  turning  his  violin,  without  one 
moment's  warning,  the  young  man  sallied  back,  and  fell  dead  on  the  floor.  I  was 
immediately  sent  for,  to  assist  in  devising  means  to  convey  his  remains  to  his 
father's  house.  You  will  be  better  able  to  judge  what  were  the  emotions  of  my 
heart,  when  I  tell  you  that  that  young  man  was  my  own  brother.' " 

Trifle  not,  then,  with  thy  convictions,  for  eternity  shall  be  too  short  for  thee  to 
utter  thy  lamentations  over  such  trifling. 


fjutptt 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RECEPTION. 


DELIVERED  ON  SUNDAY  MORNING,   SEPTEMBER   4m,    1864,  B  - 

C.  H.  8PURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"And  he  arose,  and  came  to  his  father.     But  when  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off  hi* 
father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him." — 

Luke  xv  20. 

THERE  he  is !  he  is  as  wretched  as  misery  itself;  as  filthy  as  his  brute 
associates  who  could  satisfy  themselves  with  husks,  while  he  could  not. 
His  clothes  hang  about  him  in  rags,  and  what  he  is  without,  that  he  is 
within.     He  is  disgraced  in  the  eyes  of  the  good,  and  the  virtuous  re 
member  him  with  indignation.     He  has  some  desires  to  go  back  to  his 
father's  house ;  but  these  desires  are  not  sufficient  to  alter  his  condition.  Mere 
desires  have  not  scraped  the  filth  from  him,  nor  have  they  so  much  a« 
patched  his  rags.     Whatever  he  may  or  may  not  desire,  he  is  still  filthy, 
still  disgraced,  still  an  alien  from  his  father's  house:  and  he  knows  it,  for 
he  has  come  to  himself.     He  would  have  been  angry  if  we  had  said  as 
much  as  this  before,  but  now  we  cannot  describe  him  in  words  too  black. 
With  many  tears  and  sighs  he  assures  us  that  he  is  even  worse  than  he 
appears  to  be,  and  that  no  man  can  know  all  the  depth  of  the  vileness  of  his 
conduct:  he  has  spent  his  living  with  harlots;  he  has  despised  a  generous 
parent's  love  and  broken  lose  from  his  wise  control;  he  has  done  evil 
with  both  his  hands  to  the  utmost  of  his  strength  and  opportunity. 
There  he  stands,  notwithstanding  this  confession,  just  what  I  have 
described  him  to  be;  for  even  though  he  has  said  within  himself,  "I 
have  sinned,"  yet  that  confession  has  not  removed  his  griefs.    He  acknow 
ledges  that  he  is  not  worthy  to  be  called  a  son — and  it  is  true  he  is  not; 
but  his  un worthiness  is  not  removed  by  his  consciousness  of  it,  nor  by  his 
confession  of  it.    He  has  no  claims  to  a  father's  love.    If  that  father  shuts 
the  door  in  his  face,  he  acts  with  justice  to  him;  if  he  shall  refuse  so 
much  as  to  speak  a  single  word,  except  words  of  rebuke,  no  one  can 
blame  the  father,  for  the  son  has  so  sadly  erred.    To  this  the  son 
ntters  no  demur;  he  confesses  that  if  he  be  cast  away  for  ever,  he  de 
serves  it  well.     This  picture,  I  know,  is  the  photograph  of  some  who  are 
DOW  present;.     You  feel  your  vileness  and  sinfulness,  but  you  canuot  look 

No.  583.  34 

24 


498  METROPOLITAN  TABERXACLE   PULPIT. 

upon  that  sense  of  vileness  as  in  any  way  extenuating  or  altering  your 
condition.  You  feel,  but  you  cannot  plead  your  feelings.  You  confess 
this  morning  that  you  have  desires  towards  God,  but  that  you  have  no 
rights  to  him — you  cannot  demand  anything  at  his  hands.  If  your  soul 
were  sent  to  hell,  his  righteous  law  approves  it,  and  so  does  your  own 
conscience.  You  can  see  your  rags,  you  can  mark  your  filthiness,  you 
can  long  for  something  better,  but  you  are  no  better;  you  have  no  more 
claims  than  you  used  to  have  upon  God's  mercy;  you  stand  here  to-day, 
a  self-convicted  offender  against  the  loving-kindness  and  holiness  of 
God.  I  pray  that  to  such  of  you  as  are  in  this  case,  I  may  be  the  bearer 
of  a  message  from  God  to  your  soul  this  morning.  0  you  who  know 
the  Lord,  put  up  earnest  and  silent  prayers  just  now,  that  my  message 
may  come  home  with  power  to  troubled  consciences;  and  I  beseech  you, 
for  your  own  profit,  look  back  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  were 
digged,  and  to  the  miry  clay  whence  ye  were  drawn,  and  remember  how 
God  received  you.  And  while  we  talk  of  what  he  is  willing  and  able  to 
do  to  the  far  off  sinners,  let  your  souls  leap  with  joyous  gratitude  at  the 
recollection  of  how  he  received  you  into  his  love,  and  made  you  par- 
takers  of  his  grace  in  days  gone  by. 

There  are  two  things  in  the  text:  the  first  is  the  condition  of  many 
a  seeker — he  is  yet  a  great  way  off ;  and  then,  secondly,  the  matchless 
kindness  of  the  father  towards  him. 

I.     First,  dear  friends,  THE  CONDITION  OF  SUCH  A  SEEKER — HE  is  YET 

A  GREAT  WAY  OFF. 

He  is  a  great  way  off  if  you  consider  one  or  two  things.  Remember 
his  ivant  of  strength.  This  poor  young  man  had  for  some  time  been  with 
out  food — brought  so  very  low  that  the  husks  upon  which  the  swine 
fed  would  have  seemed  a  dainty  to  him  if  he  could  have  eaten  them. 
He  is  so  hungry  that  he  has  become  emaciated,  and  to  him  every  mile 
has  the  weariness  of  leagues  within  it.  It  costs  him  many  pains  and 
sore  griefs  to  drag  himself  along,  even  though  it  be  but  an  inch.  So  the 
sinner  is  a  long  way  off  from  God  when  you  consider  his  utter  want  of 
strength  to  come  to  God.  Even  such  strength  as  God  has  given 
him  is  very  painfully  used.  God  has  given  him  strength  enough  to 
desire  salvation,  but  those  desires  are  always  accompanied  with  deep  and 
sincere  grief  for  sin.  The  point  which  he  has  already  reached  has 
exhausted  all  his  power,  and  all  he  can  do  is  to  fall  down  before  Jesus, 
and  say, 

"  Oh !  for  this  no  strength  have  I, 
My  strength  is  at  thy  feet  to  lie." 

He  is  a  great  way  off  again,  if  you  consider  his  want  of  courage.  He 
longs  to  see  his  father,  but  yet  the  probabilities  are  that  if  his  father 
should  come  he  would  run  away:  the  very  sound  of  his  father's  foot 
steps  would  act  upon  him  as  they  did  on  Adam  in  the  garden — he 
would  hide  himself  among  the  trees;  so  that  instead  of  crying  after  his 
father,  the  great  Father  would  have  to  cry  after  him — "  Where  art  thou, 
poor  fallen  creature?  where  arc  thou?"  His  want  of  courage,  therefore, 
makes  the  distance  long,  for  every  step  hitherto  has  been  taken  as 
though  into  the  jaws  of  death.  "  Ah ! "  saith  the  sinner,  "it  must  be 
long  before  I  can  dare  to  hope,  for  mine  inquities  have  gone  over  my 


THE   PRODIGAL'S   RECEPTION.  499 

head  so  that  I  cannot  look  up."  Are  you  then  in  alarm  and  dread  this 
morning?  Your  prayers  seem  to  yourself  to  have  been  no  prayers  at  all; 
when  you  think  of  God,  terror  comes  over  your  mind,  and  you  feel  that 
you  are  a  long,  long  way  from  him;  you  imagine  that  it  is  not  likely 
that  he  will  hear  your  cries  nor  give  heed  to  your  words.  You  are 
yet  a  great  way  off. 

You  are  a  great  way  off  when  we  consider  the  difficulty  of  the  way 
of  repentance.  John  Bunyan  tells  us  that  Christian  found,  when  he 
went  back  to  the  arbour  after  his  lost  roll,  that  it  was  very  hard  work 
going  back.  Every  backslider  finds  it  so,  and  every  penitent  sinner 
knows  that  there  is  a  bitterness  in  momrning  for  sin  comparable  to  the 
loss  of  one's  only  son.  A  drowning  man  feels  no  great  pain:  the 
sensations  of  drowning  are  even  said  to  be  pleasant;  it  is  only  when 
the  man  is  being  restored  to  life,  when  the  blood  begins  to  make  the 
veins  tingle  because  life  leaps  there,  when  once  again  the  nerves  are 
sensible,  then  we  are  told  that  the  whole  body  is  full  of  many  agonies, 
but  then  they  are  the  agonies  of  life:  and  so  the  poor  penitent  feels  the 
goal  must  be  a  great  way,  for  if  he  had  to  feel  as  he  now  feels,  even  for 
a  month,  it  were  a  great  time;  and  if  he  had  to  journey  many  miles  as 
he  now  journeys,  so  painfully,  with  such  bleeding  feet,  it  would  indeed 
be  a  great  way. 

Let  us  look  into  this  matter,  and  show  that  while  the  road  seems 
long  on  this  account,  it  really  is  long  if  we  view  it  in  certain  lights. 
There  are  many  seeking  sinners  who  are  a  great  way  off  in  their  life. 
I  think  I  see  the  man  now,  and  hear  him  thus  bewail  himself,  "  I  have 
left  off  my  drunkenness.  I  could  not  sit  where  I  used  to  sit  by  the 
hour.  I  thank  God  I  shall  never  be  seen  reeling  through  the  streets 
again,  for  that  grovelling  lust  I  detest.  I  have  given  up  Sabbath- 
breaking,  and  I  am  found  in  God's  house;  and  I  have  endeavoured,  as 
much  as  I  can,  to  renounce  the  habit  of  swearing,  but  still  J  am  a 
great  way  off;  I  do  not  feel  as  if  I  could  yet  lay  hold  of  Christ,  for  I 
cannot  master  my  own  passions  yet.  An  old  companion  stopped  me 
this  week,  and  he  had  not  long  been  talking  before  I  found  the  old  man 
was  in  me,  and  the  old  lustings  came  up  into  my  face  again.  Why,  sir, 
the  other  day  an  oath  came  rapping  out.  I  thought  1  had  got  over 
it,  but  I  had  not — I  am  a  great  way  off.  When  I  read  of  what  saints 
are,  and  observe  what  true  Christians  are,  I  do  feel  that  my  conduct  is 
so  inconsistent  and  so  widely  apart  from  what  it  ought  to  be,  that  I  am 
a  great  way  off."  Ah!  dear  friend,  you  are;  and  if  you  had  to  come 
to  God  by  the  way  of  your  own  righteousness  you  would  never  reach 
him,  for  he  is  not  thus  to  be  found.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  way.  He  is 
the  sale,  sure,  and  perfect  road  to  God.  He  who  sees  Jesus,  has  seen  the 
Father;  but  he  who  looks  to  himself  will  only  see  despair.  The  road  to 
heaven  by  Mount  Sinai  is  impassable  by  mortal  man,  but  Calvary  leads 
to  glory;  the  secret  places  of  the  stairs  are  in  the  wounds  of  Jesus. 

Again,  you  feel  yourself  a  great  way  off  as  to  knoivledye.  "Why," 
say  you,  "  before  I  felt  thus  I  considered  myself  a  master  of  all  theology: 
I  could  twist  the  doctrines  round  my  fingers.  When  I  listened  to  a 
sermon  I  felt  quite  able  to  criticize  it,  and  to  give  my  judgment.  Now 
I  see  that  my  judgment  was  about  as  valuable  as  the  criticism  of  a 
blind  man  upon  a  picture,  for  I  was  without  spiritual  sight. 


500  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Now  I  feel  myself  to  be  a  fool.  I  do  know  what  sin  means, 
but  onty  to  a  degree.  Even  here  I  feel  that  I  am  not  conscious  of  the 
heinousness  of  human  guilt.  I  have  heard  the  doctrine  of  the  atone 
ment  of  Christ,  and  I  thank  God  I  know  it  to  some  degree,  but  the 
excellence  and  glory  of  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  which  Christ  offered  I 
confess  I  do  not  fully  comprehend."  The  sinner's  confession  now  is 
that  instead  of  understanding  Scripture  he  finds  he  needs  to  go  like  a 
child  to  school  to  learn  the  A  B  0  of  it.  "  0  sir,"  says  he,  "  I  am  a 
great  way  off  from  God,  for  I  am  so  ignorant,  so  foolish,  I  seem  to  be 
but  as  a  beast  when  I  think  of  the  deep  things  of  God."  Ah!  poor 
soul,  poor  young  wandering  brother,  I  wonder  not  that  it  seems  so  to 
you,  for  the  ignorance  of  the  carnal  man  is  indeed  fearful,  and  only  God 
can  give  thee  light;  but  he  can  give  it  to  thee  in  a  moment,  and  the 
distance  between  thee  and  him  upon  the  score  of  ignorance  can  be 
bridged  at  once,  and  thou  mayst  comprehend  even  to-day,  with  all 
gainfcs,  what  are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  know  the  love  of  Christ 
which  passeth  knowledge. 

In  another  point  also  many  an  earnest  seeker  is  a  great  way  off, 
I  mean  in  his  repentance.  "Alas!"  says  he,  "I  cannot  repent  as  I 
ought.  If  I  could  feel  the  brokenness  of  heart  which  I  have  heard  and 
Been  in  some!  Oh!  what  would  I  give  for  penitential  sighs;  how  thank 
ful  should  I  be  if  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  fountains  of 
tears,  if  I  could  even  feel  that  I  was  as  humble  as  the  poor  publican, 
and  could  stand  with  downcast  eyes  and  beat  upon  my  breast  and  say, 
'  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.'  But,  alas!  I  have  been  a  hearer  of 
the  Word  for  years,  and  all  the  progress  I  have  made  is  so  little,  that 
while  I  know  the  gospel  to  be  true,  I  do  not  feel  it.  I  know  myself  to 
be  a  sinner,  and  sometimes  I  mourn  over  it,  but  my  mourning  is  so 
superficial,  my  repentance  is  a  repentance  that  needs  to  be  repented 
of.  0  sir,  if  God  would  use  the  heaviest  hammer  that  he  had,  if  he 
would  but  break  my  heart,  every  broken  fragment  should  bless  his 
name.  I  wish  I  had  a  genuine  repentance.  Oh!  how  I  pant  to  be 
brought  to  feel  that  I  am  lost,  and  to  desire  Christ  with  that 
vehement  desire  which  will  not  take  a  denial;  but  in  this  point 
my  heart  seems  hard  as  hell-hardened  steel,  cold  as  a  rock  of  ice, 
it  will  not,  cannot  yield,  though  wooed  by  love  divine.  Adamant  itself 
may  run  in  liquid  torrents,  but  my  soul  yields  to  nothing.  Lord,  break 
it !  Lord,  break  it ! !"  Ah!  poor  heart,  I  see  thou  art  a  great  way  off,  but 
dost  thou  know  if  my  Lord  should  appear  to  thee  this  morning,  and  say 
to  thee,  "  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,"  thine  heart  would 
break  in  a  moment? 

44  Law  and  terrors  do  but  harden, 

All  the  while  they  work  alone ; 
But  a  sense  of  blood-bought  pardon, 
Can  dissolve  a  heart  of  stone." 

Great  way  off  as  you  are,  if  the  Lord  pardons  you,  while  yet  callous,  and 
consciously  hard  of  heart,  will  you  not  then  fall   at  his  feet  and  com 
mend  that  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  you,  even  when  ye  were  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins? 
Yes,  but  I  think  I  hear  one  say,  "  There  is  another  point  in  which  I 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RECEPTION.  501 

feel  a  great  way  off,  for  I  have  little  or  no  faith.  I  have  heard  faitJi 
preached  every  Sabbath  day;  I  know  what  it  is,  I  think  I  do,  but  I  cannot 
reach  it.  I  know  that  if  I  cast  myself  wholly  upon  Christ  I  shall  be 
saved.  I  quite  comprehend  that  he  does  not  ask  anything  of  me,  any 
willings,  or  doings,  or  feelings:  I  know  that  Christ  is  willing  to  receive 
the  greatest  sinner  out  of  hell  if  that  sinner  will  but  come  and  simply 
trust  him.  I  have  tried  to  do  it;  sometimes  I  have  thought  I  had  faith, 
but  then  again  when  I  have  looked  at  my  sins  I  have  doubted  so  dread 
fully,  that  I  perceive  I  have  no  faith  at  all.  There  are  sunshiny  moments 
with  me  when  I  think  I  can  say — 

"  My  faith  is  built  on  nothing  less, 
Than  Jesus'  blood  and  righteousness.** 

but  oh!  when  I  feel  my  corruptions  within  rising  upon  me,  I  hear  a 
voice  saying,  "The  Philistines  be  upon  thee,  Samson,"  and  straightway 
I  discover  my  own  weakness.  I  have  not  the  faith  that  I  want ;  I  am 
a  great  way  off  from  it,  and  I  fear  that  I  shall  never  possess  it.  Yes, 
my  brethren,  I  perceive  your  difficulty,  for  I  have  felt  the  sorrow  of  it 
myself ;  but  oh!  my  Lord,  who  is  the  giver  of  faith,  who  is  exalted  on 
high  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins,  can  give  you  the  faith 
you  so  much  desire,  and  can  cause  you  this  morning  to  rest  with  perfect 
confidence  upon  the  work  which  he  has  finished  for  you. 

To  gather  up  all  things  in  one  word,  the  truly  penitent  sinner  feels 
that  he  is  yet  a  great  way  off  in  everything.  There  is  no  point  upon 
which  you  can  talk  with  him  but  it  will  be  sure  to  lead  to  a  confession 
of  his  deficiency.  Begin  to  put  him  in  the  scales  of  the  sanctuary,  and 
he  cries,  "Alas!  before  you  put  in  the  weights  I  can  tell  you  I  shall  be 
found  wanting."  Bring  him  to  the  touchstone,  and  he  shrinks  from  it  \ 
"  Nay,"  says  he,  "  but  I  cannot  endure  any  sort  of  trial — 


*  All  unholy  and  unclean, 
I  am  nothing  else  but  sin." 


See,  see,  how  well  my  Master  has  pictured  your  case  in  this  parable— 
"Yet  a  great  way  off,"  yet  covered  with  rags,  yet  polluted  with  filth,  yet 
in  disgrace,  yet  a  stranger  to  your  Father's  house,  there  is  only  this  one 
point  about  you,  you  have  your  face  towards  your  Father,  you  have  a 
desire  towards  God,  and  you  would,  oh!  you  would  if  you  could,  lay 
hold  upon  eternal  life.  But  you  feel  too  far  off  for  anything  like  com 
fortable  hope;  now  I  must  confess  I  feel  many  tears  about  you  who 
are  in  this  state;  I  am  afraid  lest  you  should  come  so  far  and  yet 
go  back ;  for  there  are  many  whom  we  thought  had  come  as  far  as 
this,  and  yet  they  have  gone  back  after  all.  Oh!  remember  that 
desires  after  God  will  not  change  you  so  as  to  save  you.  You  must 
find  Christ.  Remember  that  to  say,  "I  will  arise"  is  not  enough,  nor 
•even  to  arise;  you  must  never  rest  till  your  Father  has  given  you  the 
kiss,  till  he  has  put  on  you  the  best  robe.  I  am  afraid  lest  you  should 
rest  satisfied  and  say,  «*  I  am  in  a  good  state  ;  the  minister  tells  U3 
that  many  are  brought  to  such  a  state  before  they  are  saved.  I  will 
stop  here."  My  dear  friend,  it  is  a  good  state  to  pass  through,  but  it  is 
a  bad  state  to  rest  in.  I  pray  you  never  be  content  with  a  sense  of 
*in,  never  be  satisfied  with  merely  knowing  that  you  are  not  what  you 


502  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

ought  to  be.  It  never  cures  the  fever  for  a  man  to  know  he  has  it; 
his  knowledge  is  in  some  degree  a  good  sign,  for  it  proves  that  the 
fever  has  not  yet  driven  him  to  delirium;  but  it  never  gives  a  man 
perfect  health  to  know  that  he  is  sick.  It  is  a  good  thing  for  him  to 
know  it,  for  he  will  not  otherwise  send  for  the  physician;  but  except  it 
lead  to  that,  he  will  die  whether  he  feels  himself  to  be  sick  or  no.  A 
mere  consciousness  that  you  are  hungry  while  your  father's  hired 
servants  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  will  not  stay  your  hunger, 
you  want  more  than  this.  You  are  a  great  way  off,  and  I  beseech 
you  remember  the  danger  is,  lest  you  should  stop  here  or  should  lose 
what  sensibility  you  already  have.  Perhaps  despair  may  come  upon 
you.  Some  have  commited  suicide  while  under  a  sense  of  the  greatness 
of  their  distance  from  God,  because  they  dared  not  look  to  the  Saviour. 
Our  prayers  shall  go  up  to  God  that  the  second  part  of  our  text  may 
come  true  to  you,  and  that  alike  backsliding  and  despair  may  be  pre 
vented  by  the  speedy  coming  of  God  dressed  in  the  robes  of  grace  to 
meet  your  guilty  soul,  and  give  you  joy  and  peace  through  believing. 

II.  Secondly — and  0  may  the  Master  give  us  his  help — we  have  to 
consider  THE  MATCHLESS  KINDNESS  OP  THE  HEAVENLY  FATHER.  We 
must  take  each  word  and  dwell  upon  it. 

First  of  all,  we  have  here  divine  observation.  "  When  he  was  yet  a 
great  way  off  his  father  saw  him."  It  is  true  he  has  always  seen  him. 
God  sees  the  sinner  in  every  state  and  in  every  position.  Ay,  and 
sees  him  with  an  eye  of  love  too — such  a  onosen  sinner  as  is  described 
in  this  text — not  with  complacency,  but  still  with  affection.  God 
looks  upon  his  wandering  chosen  ones.  I  say  that  father  saw  his 
son  when  he  spent  his  living  with  harlots,  saw  him  with  deep  sorrow, 
when  he  fain  would  have  filled  his  belly  with  the  husks  which  the 
swine  did  eat;  but  now,  if  there  can  be  such  a  thing  as  for  divine 
omniscience  to  become  more  exact,  the  father  sees  him  with  an  eye 
full  of  a  more  tender  love,  a  greater  care.  "  His  father  saw  him" 
Oh!  what  a  sight  it  was  for  a  father  to  see!  His  son,  it  is  true,  but  his. 
reprobate  son,  who  had  dishonoured  his  father's  name;  brought  down 
the  name  of  an  honourable  house  to  be  mentioned  among  the  dregs  and 
scum  of  the  earth.  There  he  is!  What  a  sight  for  a  father's  eye!  He 
is  filthy,  as  though  he  had  been  rolling  in  the  mire;  and  his  gay  clothing 
has  long  ago  lost  its  fine  colours,  and  hangs  about  him  in  wretched 
rags.  The  father  does  not  turn  away  and  try  to  forget  him,  he  fixes  his 
full  gaze  upon  him.  Sinner,  thou  knowest  that  God  sees  thee  thia 
morning;  sitting  in  this  house  thou  art  observed  of  the,  God  of  heaven. 
There  is  not  a  desire  in  thy  heart  unread  of  him,  nor  a  tear  in  thine 
eye  which  he  doth  not  observe,  I  tell  thee  he  has  seen  thy  midnight 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RECEPTION.  503 

sins,  he  has  heard  thy  cursings  and  thy  blasphemies,  and  yet  he  has 
loved  thee  notwithstanding  all  that  thou  hast  done.  Thou  couldst 
hardly  have  been  a  worse  rebel  against  him,  and  yet  he  has  noted  thee 
in  his  book  of  love,  and  determined  to  save  thee,  and  the  eye  of  his 
love  has  followed  thee  whithersoever  thou  hast  gone.  Is  there  not 
some  comfort  here?  "Why  could  not  he  see  his  father?  Was  it  the 
effect  of  the  tears  in  his  eyes  that  he  could  not  see?  or  was  it  that  his 
father  was  of  quicker  sight  than  he?  Sinner,  thou  canst  not  see  God, 
for  thou  art  unbelieving,  and  carnal,  and  blind,  but  he  can  see  thee; 
thy  tears  of  penitence  block  up  thy  sight,  but  thy  Father  is  quick  of 
eye,  and  he  beholds  thee  and  loves  thee  now;  in  every  glance  there  is 
love.  "  His  father  saw  him." 

Observe  this  was  a  loving  observation,  for  it  is  written,  "  His  father  saw 
him."  He  did  not  see  him  as  a  mere  casual  observer;  he  did  not  note 
him  as  a  man  might  note  his  friend's  child  with  some  pity  and 
benevolence,  but  he  marked  him  as  a  father  alone  can  do.  What  a 
quick  eye  a  parent  hath!  Why,  I  have  known  a  young  man  come 
home,  perhaps  for  a  short  holiday:  the  mother  has  heard  nothing,  not 
even  a  whisper,  as  to  her  son's  conduct,  and  yet  she  cannot  help 
observing  to  her  husband,  "  There  is  a  something  about  John  which 
makes  me  suspect  that  he  is  not  going  on  as  he  should  do.  I  do  not 
know,  my  husband,"  she  says,  "what  it  is,  but  yet  I  am  sure  he  is 
getting  among  bad  companions."  She  will  read  his  character  at  once. 
And  the  father  notes  something,  too.  he  cannot  precisely  say  what,  but 
cause  for  anxiety  he  knows  it  to  be.  But  here  we  have  a  Father  who  can 
see  everything,  and  who  has  as  much  of  the  quickness  of  love  as  he  has 
of  the  certainty  of  knowledge.  He  can,  therefore,  see  from  every  spot 
and  bruise,  and  note  ever/  putrifying  sore.  He  sees  his  poor  son  right 
through  as  though  he  were  a  vase  of  crystal;  he  reads  his  heart,  not 
merely  the  tell-tale  garments,  not  merely  the  sorrowful  tale  of  the 
unwashed  face  and  those  clouted  shoes,  but  he  can  read  his  soul,  he 
understands  the  whole  of  his  miserable  plight.  0  poor  sinner,  there  is 
no  need  for  thee  to  give  information  to  thy  God,  for  he  knows  it  already; 
you  need  not  pick  your  words  in  prayer  in  order  to  -make  your  case  plain 
and  perspicuous,  for  God  can  see  it,  and  all  you  have  to  do  is  to  uncover 
your  wounds,  your  bruises,  and  your  putrifying  sores,  and  say,  "  My 
Father,  thou  seest  it  all,  the  black  tale  thou  readest  in  a  moment,  my 
Father,  have  pity  upon  me." 

The  next  thought  to  be  well  cousideied  is  divine  compassion.  *'  When 
he  saw  him  he  had  compassion  on  him."  Does  not  the  word  corn-passion 
mean  suffering -ivith  or  fellow-suffering  ?  What  is  compassion,  then,  but 
putting  yourself  into  the  place  of  the  suiferer  and  feeling  his  grief? 


504  METROPOLITAN   TABEHXACLE   PULPIT. 

If  I  may  so  say,  the  father  put  himself  into  the  son's  rags,  and 
then  felt  as  much  pity  for  him  as  that  poor  ragged  prodigal  could  have 
felt  for  himself.  I  do  not  know  how  to  bring  up  your  compassion  this 
morning,  except  it  is  by  supposing  that  it  is  your  own  case.  I  will  sup. 
pose,  father,  it  is  a  son  of  yours.  I  saw,  not  many  hours  ago,  a  young 
man  who  brought  to  my  mind  the  prodigal  in  this  case:  his  face  marked 
with  innumerable  lines  of  sin  and  wretchedness,  his  body  lean  and 
emaciated,  his  clothes  close-buttoned,  his  whole  appearance  the  very 
mirror  of  woe.  He  knocked  at  my  door.  I  knew  his  case;  I  cannot 
hurt  him  by  telling  it.  He  had  disgraced  his  family,  not  once  nor  twice, 
but  many  times.  At  last  he  drew  out  what  money  he  had  in  the 
business  of  a  respectable  family,  came  up  to  London  with  four  hundred 
pounds,  and  in  about  five  weeks  spent  it  all;  and,  without  a  single 
farthing  to  help  himself,  he  often  wants  for  bread,  and  I  fear  that  he 
has  often  crept  at  night  into  the  parks  to  sleep,  and  thus  has  brought 
aches  and  pains  into  his  bones  which  will  hold  by  him  till  he  dies.  He 
wanders  the  streets  by  day  a  vagabond  and  a  reprobate.  I  have 
written  to  his  friends,  the  case  has  been  put  before  them;  they  will 
not  own  him;  and  considering  his  shameful  conduct,  I  do  not  wonder  at 
it.  He  has  no  father  and  no  mother  left.  If  he  were  helped  beyond 
mere  food  and  lodging,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  it  would  be  money  thrown 
away;  if  he  were  helped,  he  seems  so  desperately  set  on  wickedness,  that 
he  would  do  the  same  again.  Yet,  as  I  think,  I  can  but  desire  to  see 
him  have  one  more  trial  at  the  least,  and  he  would  have  it,  I  doubt  not, 
if  his  father  yet  lived;  but  others  feel  the  fountains  of  their  love  are 
stayed.  As  I  think  of  him,  I  cannot  but  feel  that  if  he  were  a 
son  of  mine  and  I  were  his  father,  and  I  saw  him  in  such  a  case  come 
to  my  door,  whatever  the  crime  was  that  he  had  committed,  I  must 
fall  upon  his  neck  and  kiss  him;  the  hugest  sin  could  not  put  out  for 
ever  the  sparks  of  paternal  love.  I  might  condemn  the  sin  in  terms 
the  sharpest  and  most  severe;  I  might  regret  that  he  had  ever  been  born, 
and  cry  with  David,  "  0  my  son  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  Absalom!  would 
God  I  had  died  for  thee!"  but  I  could  not  shut  him  out  of  my  house,  nor 
refuse  to  call  him  my  child.  My  child  he  is,  and  my  child  he  shall  be 
till  he  dies.  You  feel  just  now  that  if  it  were  your  child  you  would 
do  the  same.  That  is  how  God  feels  towards  you,  his  chosen,  his 
repentant  child.  You  are  his  child;  I  hope  so,  I  trust  so;  those  desires 
which  you  have  in  your  soul  towards  him,  make  me  feel  that  you  are 
one  of  his  children,  and  as  God  looks  out  of  heaven  he  knows  what  you 
mean.  What  is  it?  What  shall  I  say?  .Nay,  I  need  not  describe, 
but,  "Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them 
that  fear  him."  He  will  have  compassion  upon  you;  he  will  receive 
you  to  his  bosom  now.  Be  of  good  courage,  for  the  text  says,  "  He 
had  compassion  on  him." 


THE   PRODIGAL'S   RECEPTION.  505 

Notice  and  observe  carefully  the  siviftness  of  this  divine  love: — 
"He  ran."  Probably  he  was  walking  on  the  top  of  his  house  and 
looking  out  for  his  son,  when  one  morning  he  just  caught  a  glimpse  of 
a  poor  sorry  figure  in  the  distance.  If  he  had  been  anything  but  the 
father  he  would  not  have  known  it  to  be  his  son,  he  was  so  altered;  but 
he  looked  and  looked  again,  till  at  last  he  said,  "It  is  he!  oh!  what 
marks  of  famine  are  upon  him,  and  of  suffering  too! "  And  down  cjines 
the  old  gentleman — I  think  I  see  him  running  downstairs,  and  the 
servants  come  to  the  windows  and  the  doors,  and  say,  "Where  is  master 
going?  I  have  not  seen  him  run  at  that  rate  for  many  a-day."  See, 
there  he  goes;  he  does  not  take  the  road,  for  that  is  a  little  round  about; 
but  there  is  a  gap  through  the  hedge,  and  he  is  jumping  over  it;  the 
straightest  way  that  he  can  find  he  chooses;  and  before  the  son  has  had 
time  to  notice  who  it  is,  he  is  on  him,  and  has  his  arms  about  him,  falling 
upon  his  neck  and  kissing  him.  I  recollect  a  young  prodigal  who  was 
received  in  the  same  way.  Here  he  stands,  it  is  I,  myself.  I  sat  in 
a  little  chapel,  little  dreaming  that  my  Father  saw  me;  certainly  I  was 
a  great  way  off.  I  felt  something  of  my  need  of  Christ,  but  I  did  not 
know  what  I  must  do  to  be  saved;  though  taught  the  letter  of  the  Word, 
I  was  spiritually  ignorant  of  the  plan  of  salvation;  though  taught 
it  from  my  youth  up,  I  knew  it  not.  I  felt,  but  I  did  not  feel  what  I 
wished  to  feel.  If  ever  there  was  a  soul  that  knew  itself  to  be  far  off  from 
God,  I  was  that  soul;  and  yet  in  a  moment,  in  one  single  moment,  no 
sooner  had  I  heard  the  words,  "  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth,"  no  sooner  had  I  turned  my  eyes  to  Jesus  crucified, 
than  I  felt  my  perfect  reconciliation  with  God,  I  knew  my  sins  to  be 
forgiven.  There  was  no  time  for  getting  out  of  my  heavenly  Father's  way, 
it  was  done,  and  done  in  an  instant;  and  in  my  case,  at  least,  he  ran  and 
fell  upon  my  neck  to  kiss  me.  I  hope  that  will  be  the  case  this  morn 
ing;  before  you  can  get  out  of  this  place,  before  you  can  get  back  to 
your  old  doubtings,  and  fearings,  and  sighings,  and  cryings,  I  hope  here 
the  Lord  of  love  will  run  arid  meet  you,  and  fall  upon  your  neck  and 
kiss  you. 

After  noticing  thus,  observation,  compassion,  and  stvi/tness,  do  not  for 
get  the  nearness:  "He  fell  upon  his  neck  and  kissed  him."  This  I  can 
understand  by  experience,  but  it  is  too  wonderful  for  me  to  explain,  "  he 
fell  upon  his  neck."  If  he  had  stood  at  a  distance  and  said,  "John,  I 
should  be  very  glad  to  kiss  you,  but  you  are  too  filthy;  I  do  not  know  what 
may  be  under  those  filthy  rags;  I  do  not  feel  inclined  to  fall  upon  your 
neck  just  yet;  you  are  too  far  gone  for  me.  I  love  you,  but  there  is 
a  limit  to  the  display  of  love.  When  I  have  got  you  into  a  proper 
state,  then  I  may  manifest  my  affection  to  you,  but  I  cannot  just  now, 
while  you  are  so  very  foul."  Oh!  no;  but  before  he  is  washed  he  falla 
on  his  neck — there  is  the  wonder  of  it.  I  can  understand  how  God 


506  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

manifests  his  love  to  a  soul  that  is  washed  in  Jesus'  blood,  and  knows 
it;  but  how  he  could  fall  upon  the  neck  of  a  foul,  filthy  sinner  as  such! 
There  it  is — not  as  sanctified,  not  as  having  anything  good  in  himself, 
but  as  nothing  but  a  filthy,  foul,  desperate  rebel,  God  falls  upon  his 
neck  and  kisses  him.  Oh!  strange  miracle  of  love!  The  riddle  is  un 
riddled  when  you  recollect  that  God  never  had  looked  upon  that 
winner,  as  he  was  in  himself,  but  had  always  looked  upon  him  as  he  was 
in  Christ;  and  when  he  fell  upon  that  prodigal's  neck,  he  did  in 
effect  only  fall  upon  the  neck  of  his  once-suffering  Son,  Jesus  Christ, 
and  he  kissed  the  sinner  because  he  saw  him  iri  Christ,  and  therefore 
did  not  see  the  sinner' s  loathsomeness,  but  saw  only  Christ's  comeli 
ness,  and  therefore  kissed  him  as  he  would  have  kissed  his  substitute. 
Observe  how  near  God  comes  to  the  sinner.  It  was  said  of  that  eminent 
saint  and  martyr,  Bishop  Hooper,  that  on  one  occasion  a  man  in  deep 
distress  was  allowed  to  go  into  his  prison  to  tell  his  tale  of  conscience; 
but  Bishop  Hooper  looked  so  sternly  upon  him,  and  addressed  him  so 
severely  at  first,  that  the  poor  soul  ran  away,  and  could  not  get  comfort 
until  he  had  sought  out  another  minister  of  a  gentler  aspect.  Now 
Hooper  really  was  a  gracious  and  loving  soul,  but  the  sternness  of  his 
manner  kept  the  penitent  off.  There  is  no  such  stern  manner  in  our 
heavenly  Father,  he  loves  to  receive  his  prodigals.  When  he  comes 
there  is  no  "  Hold  off ! "  no  "  Keep  off !"  to  the  sinner,  but  he  falls  upon 
his  neck  and  he  kisses  him. 

There  is  yet  another  thought  to  be  brought  out  of  the  metaphor  of 
kissing;  we  are  not  to  pass  that  over  without  dipping  our  cup  in  the 
honey.  In  kissing  his  son  the  father  recognises  relationship.  He  said, 
with  emphasis,  "  Thou  art  my  son,"  and  the  prodigal  was 

"  To  his  Father's  bosom  pressed, 
Once  for  all  a  child  confessed." 

Again,  that  kiss  was  the  seal  of  forgiveness.  He  would  not  have 
kissed  him  if  he  had  been  angry  with  him;  he  forgave  him,  forgave  him 
all.  There  was,  moreover,  something  more  than  forgiveness,  there  was 
acceptance — "I  receive  you  back  into  my  heart  as  though  you  were 
worthy  of  all  that  I  give  to  your  elder  brother,  and  therefore  I  kiss 
you."  Surely  also  this  was  a  kiss  of  delight — as  if  he  took  pleasure  in  him, 
delighting  in  him,  feasting  his  eyes  with  the  sight  of  him,  and  feeling  more 
nappy  to  seo  him  than  to  see  all  his  fields,  and  the  fatted  calves,  and  all 
the  treasures  that  he  possessed.  His  delight  was  in  seeing  this  poor  restored 
child.  Surely  this  is  all  summed  up  in  a  kiss.  And  if  this  morning 
my  Father,  and  your  Father,  should  come  out  to  meet  mourning  peni 
tents,  in  a  moment  he  will  show  you  that  you  are  his  children,  you  shall 
say,  "  Abba,  Father,"  on  your  road  to  y>ur  own  house;  you  shall  feel 
that  your  sin  is  all  forgiven,  that  every  pavticle  of  it  is  cast  behind 


THE  PRODIGAL'S  RECEPTION.  50? 

Jehovah's  back;  you  shall  feel  to-day  that  you  are  accepted — as  your 
faith  looks  to  Christ  you  shall  see  that  God  accepts  you,  because  Christ 
your  substitute  is  worthy  of  God's  love  and  God's  delight.  Nay;  I  trust 
you  shall  this  very  morning  delight  yourself  in  God,  because  Q-od 
delights  himself  in  you,  and  you  shall  hear  him  whisper  in  your  ear, 
"  Thou  shalt  be  called  Hcphzi-bah  .  .  .  for  the  Lord  delighteth  in  thee." 
I  wisli  I  could  picture  such  a  text  as  this  as  it  ought  to  be;  it  needs 
some  tender,  sympathetic  heart,  some  man  who  is  the  very  soul  of 
pathos,  to  work  out  the  tender  touches  of  such  a  verse  as  this.  But, 
oh!  though  I  cannot  describe  it,  I  hope  you  will  feel  it,  and  that  is  better 
than  description.  I  come  not  here  to  paint  the  scene,  except  to  be  the 
brush  in  God's  hand  to  paint  it  on  your  hearts.  There  are  some  of  you 
who  can  say,  %<I  do  not  want  descriptions,  for  I  have  felt  it;  I  went  to 
Christ  and  told  him  my  case,  and  prayed  him  to  meet  me;  now  I  believe 
on  him,  and  I  have  gone  my  way  rejoicing  in  him." 

We  will  just  say  these  words  and  have  done.  In  summing  up,  one 
may  notice  that  this  sinner,  though  he  was  a  great  way  off,  was  not 
received  to  full  pardon  and  to  adoption  and  acceptance  by  a  gradual  pro- 
ctss,  but  he  was  received  at  once.  He  was  not  allowed  to  enter  into  the  out 
house  first,  and  to  sleep  in  a  barn  at  night,  and  then  afterwards  allow 
to  come  sometimes  and  have  his  meals  with  the  servants  in  the  kitch  i 
and  then  afterwards  allowed  to  sit  at  the  bottom  of  the  table  and  by 
degrees  brought  near.  No;  but  the  father  fell  on  his  neck  and  kissed 
him  the  first  moment;  he  gets  as  near  to  God  the  first  moment  as  he 
ever  will.  So  a  saved  soul  may  not  enjoy  and  know  so  much,  but  he  is 
as  near  and  dear  to  God  the  first  moment  he  believes  as  he  ever  will  be; 
a  true  heir  of  all  things  in  Christ,  and  as  truly  so  as  even  when  he 
shall  mount  to  heaven  to  be  glorified  and  to  be  like  his  Lord.  Oh!  what 
a  wonder  is  this?  Fresh  trom  his  pigstye  was  he  not,  yet  in  a  father's 
bosom;  fresh  from  the  swine  with  their  gruntings  in  his  ears,  and  now 
he  hears  a  father's  loving  words;  a  few  days  ago  he  was  putting  husks 
to  his  mouth,  and  now  it  is  a  father's  lips  that  are  on  his  lips.  What  a 
change,  and  all  at  once.  I  say  there  is  no  gradual  process  in  this,  but  the 
thing  is  done  at  once,  in  a  moment  he  comes  to  his  father,  his  father 
comes  to  him,  and  he  is  in  his  father's  arms. 

Observe  again,  as  there  was  not  a  gradual  reception,  there  was  not  a 
partial  reception.  He  was  not  forgiven  on  conditions;  he  was  not  re 
ceived  to  his  father's  heart  if  he  would  do  so-and-so.  No;  there  were 
no  "ifs"  and  no  "  buts;"  he  was  kissed,  and  clothed,  and  feasted,  with 
out  a  single  condition  of  any  kind  whatever.  No  questions  asked — his 
father  had  cast  his  offences  behind  his  back  in  a  moment,  and  he  was 
received  without  even  a  censure  or  a  rebuke.  It  was  not  a  partial 
reception.  He  was  not  received  to  some  things  and  refused  others. 
He  was  not*  for  instance,  allowed  to  call  himself  a  child,  but  to  think 


508  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

himself  an  inferior.  No;  he  wears  the  best  robe;  ho  has  the  ring  on 
his  finger;  he  has  the  shoes  on  his  feet;  and  he  joins  in  eating  the 
fatted  calf :  and  so  the  sinner  is  not  received  to  a  second  class  place, 
but  he  is  taken  to  the  full  position  of  a  child  of  God.  It  is  not  a  gradual 
nor  yet  a  partial  reception. 

And  once  more,  it  is  not  a  temporary  reception.  His  father  did  not 
kiss  him  and  then  turn  him  out  at  the  back  door.  He  did  not  receive 
him  for  a  time,  and  then  afterwards  say  to  him,  "  Go  thy  way;  I  have  had 
pity  upon  thee;  tliou  hast  now  a  new  start,  go  into  the  far  country  and 
mend  thy  ways."  No;  but  the  father  would  say  to  him  what  he  had 
already  said  to  the  elder  brother,  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all 
that  I  have  is  thine."  In  the  parable,  the  son  could  not  have  the  goods 
restored,  for  he  had  spent  his  part;  but  in  the  truth  itself  and  matter  of 
fact,  God  does  make  the  man  who  comes  in  at  the  eleventh  hour  equal 
with  the  one  who  came  in  at  the  first  hour  of  the  day;  he  gives  every 
man  the  penny ;  and  he  gives  to  the  child  who  has  been  the  most 
wandering  the  same  privileges,  and  ultimately  the  same  heritage,  which 
he  gives  to  his  own  who  have  been  these  many  years  with  him,  and 
have  not  transgressed  his  commandments.  That  ^is  a  remarkable 
passage  in  one  of  the  prophets,  where  he  says,  "  Ekro'n  as  a  Jebusite ; " 
meaning  that  the  Philistine  when  converted  should  be  treated  just  the 
same  as  the  original  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem;  that  the  branches  of 
the  olive  which  were  grafted  in  have  the  same  privileges  as  the  original 
branches.  When  God  takes  men  from  being  heirs  of  wrath,  and  makes 
them  heirs  of  grace,  they  have  just  as  much  privilege  at  the  first  as 
though  they  had  been  heirs  of  grace  twenty  years,  because  in  God's 
sight  they  always  were  heirs  of  grace,  and  from  all  eternity  he  viewed 
his  most  wandering  sons. 

"  Not  as  they  stood  in  Adam's  fall, 
When  sin  and  ruin  covered  all ; 
But  as  they'll  stand  another  day, 
Fairer  than  sun's  meridian  ray." 

O,  I  would  to  God  that  he  would  in  his  infinite  mercy  bring  some  of  hia 
own  dear  children  home  this  day,  and  he  shall  have  the  praise,  world 
without  r>nd.  Amen. 


gfobwnade  fiulpit 


PBODIGAL  LOVE  FOE  THE  PRODIGAL  SON. 


INTENDED  FOE  READING  ON  LORD'S-DAY,  DECEMBER  27in,   1891, 

DELIVERED    BY 

C.   H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTO1T, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  March  29th,  1891. 


"And  kissed  him."— Luke  xv.  20. 

IN  the  Revised  Version,  if  you  will  kindly  look  at  the  margin,  you 
will  find  that  the  text  there  reads,  "And  kissed  him  much"  This  is  a 
very  good  translation  of  the  Greek,  which  might  bear  the  meaning, 
"Kissed  him  earnestly,"  or  "Kissed  him  eagerly,"  or  " Kissed  him 
often."  I  prefer  to  have  it  in  very  plain  language,  and  therefore 
adopt  the  marginal  reading  of  the  Revised  Version,  "Kissed  him 
much,"  as  the  text  of  my  sermon,  the  subject  of  which  will  be,  the 
overflowing  love  of  God  toward  the  returning  sinner. 

The  first  word  "  and"  links  us  on  to  all  that  had  gone  before.  The 
parable  is  a  very  familiar  one,  yet  it  is  so  full  of  sacred  meaning  that 
it  always  has  some  fresh  lesson  for  us.  Let  us,  then,  consider  the  pre 
liminaries  to  this  kissing.  On  the  son's  side  there  was  something,  and 
on  the  father's  side  much  more.  Before  the  prodigal  son  received  these 
kisses  of  love,  he  had  said  in  the  far  country,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to 
my  father."  He  had,  however,  done  more  than  that,  else  his  father's 
kiss  would  never  have  been  upon  his  cheek.  The  resolve  had  become 
a  deed  :  "  He  arose,  and  came  to  his  father."  A  bushelful  of  resolu 
tions  is  of  small  value;  a  single  grain  of  practice  is  worth  the 
whole.  The  determination  to  return  home  is  good ;  but  it  is  when  the 
wandering  boy  begins  the  business  of  really  carrying  out  the  good 
resolve,  that  he  draws  near  the  blessing.  If  any  of  you  here  present 
have  long  been  saying,  "  I  will  repent ;  I  will  turn  to  God ;"  leave  off 
resolving,  and  come  to  practising ;  and  may  God  in  his  mercy  lead 
you  both  to  repent  and  to  believe  in  Christ ! 

Before  the  kisses  of  love  were  given,  this  young  man  was  on  his 
way  to  his  father ;  but  he  would  not  have  reached  him  unless  his 
father  had  come  the  major  part  of  the  way.  "When  you  give  God 
an  inch,  he  will  give  you  an  ell.  If  you  come  a  little  way  to  him, 
when  you  are  "  yet  a  great  way  off  "  he  will  run  to  meet  you.  I  do 
No.  2.236. 


METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

not  know  thctt  the  prodigal  saw  his  father,  but  his  father  saw  Mm.  The 
eyes  of  mercy  are  quicker  than  the  eyes  of  repentance.  Even  the  eye 
of  our  faith  is  dim  compared  with  the  eye  of  God's  love.  He  sees  a 
sinner  long  before  a  sinner  sees  him. 

I  do  not  suppose  that  the  prodigal  travelled  very  fast.  I  should 
imagine  that  he  came  very  slowly — 

"  With  heavy  heart  and  downcast  eye, 
"With  many  a  sob  and  many  a  sigh." 

He  was  resolved  to  come,  yet  he  was  half  afraid.  But  we  read  that 
his  father  ran.  Slow  are  the  steps  of  repentance,  but  swift  are  the 
feet  of  forgiveness.  God  can  run  where  we  can  scarcely  limp,  and  if 
we  are  limping  towards  him,  he  will  run  towards  us.  These  kisses 
were  given  in  a  hurry ;  the  story  is  narrated  in  a  way  that  almost 
makes  us  realize  that  such  was  the  case :  there  is  a  sense  of  haste  in 
the  very  wording  of  it.  His  father  "ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and 
kissed  him ;  " — kissed  him  eagerly.  He  did  not  delay  a  moment ;  for 
though  he  was  out  of  breath,  he  was  not  out  of  love.  uHe  fell  on 
his  neck,  and  kissed  him  much."  There  stood  his  son  ready  to  confess 
his  sin ;  therefore  did  his  father  kiss  him  all  the  more.  The  more 
willing  thou  art  to  own  thy  sin,  the  more  willing  is  God  to  forgive 
thee.  When  thou  dost  make  a  clean  breast  of  it,  God  will  soon  make 
a  clear  record  of  it.  He  will  wipe  out  the  sin  that  thou  dost  willingly 
acknowledge  and  humbly  confess  before  him.  He  that  was  willing 
to  use  his  lips  for  confession,  found  that  his  father  was  willing  to  use 
his  lips  for  kissing  him. 

See  the  contrast.  There  is  the  son,  scarcely  daring  to  think  of 
embracing  his  father,  yet  his  father  has  scarcely  seen  him  before  he 
has  fallen  on  his  neck.  The  condescension  of  God  towards  penitent 
sinners  is  very  great.  He  seems  to  stoop  from  his  throne  of  glory 
to  fall  upon  the  neck  of  a  repentant  sinner.  God  on  the  neck  of  a 
sinner  !  What  a  wonderful  picture  !  Can  you  conceive  it  ?  I  do  not 
think  you  can ;  but  if  you  cannot  imagine  it,  I  hope  that  you  will 
realize  it.  When  God's  arm  is  about  our  neck,  and  his  lips  are  on 
our  cheek,  kissing  us  much,  then  we  understand  more  than  preachers 
or  books  can  ever  tell  us  of  his  condescending  love. 

The  father  "saw"  his  son.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  that  word, 
•"  saw."  He  saw  who  it  was ;  saw  where  he  had  come  from;  saw  the 
swineherd's  dress ;  saw  the  filth  upon  his  hands  and  feet ;  saw  his 
rags ;  saw  his  penitent  look ;  saw  what  he  had  been ;  saw  what  he 
was  ;  and  saw  what  he  would  soon  be.  "  His  father  saw  him."  God 
has  a  way  of  seeing  men  and  women  that  you  and  I  cannot  under 
stand.  He  sees  right  through  us  at  a  glance,  as  if  we  were  made  of 
glass ;  he  sees  all  our  past,  present  and  future. 

"When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him."  It  was 
not  with  icy  eyes  that  the  father  looked  on  his  returning  son.  Love 
leaped  into  them,  and  as  he  beheld  him,  he  "had  compassion  on  him ; " 
that  is,  he  felt  for  him.  There  was  no  anger  in  his  heart  towards 
his  son;  he  had  nothing  but  pity  for  his  poor  boy,  who  had  got 
into  such  a  pitiable  condition.  It  was  true  that  it  was  all  his  own 
fault,  but  that  did  not  come  before  his  father's  mind.  It  was  the 


PRODIGAL  LOVE  FOR  THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  651 

state  that  he  was  in,  his  poverty,  his  degradation,  that  pale  face  -f 
his  so  wan  with  hunger,  that  touched  his  father  to  the  quick.  And 
Ood  has  compassion  on  the  woes  and  miseries  of  men.  They  may 
have  brought  their  troubles  on  themselves,  and  they  have  indeed  does 
«o ;  but  nevertheless  God  has  compassion  upon  them.  "It  is  of  the 
Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed,  because  his  compassions  foil 
not." 

We  read  that  the  father  "  ran."  The  compassion  of  God  is  followed 
by  swift  movements.  He  is  slow  to  anger,  but  he  is  quick  to  bless. 
He  does  not  take  any  time  to  consider  how  he  shall  show  his  love  to 
penitent  prodigals;  that  was  all  done  long  ago  in  the  eternal 
covenant.  He  has  no  need  to  prepare  for  their  return  to  him ;  that 
was  all  done  on  Calvary.  God  comes  flying  in  the  greatness  of  his 
compassion  to  help  every  poor  penitent  soul. 

"  On  cherub  and  on  cherubim, 

Full  royally  he  rode  ; 
And  on  the  wings  of  mighty  winds 
Came  flying  all  abroad." 

And  when  he  comes,  he  comes  to  kiss.  Master  Trapp  says  that, 
if  we  had  read  that  the  father  had  kicked  his  prodigal  son,  we 
should  not  have  been  very  much  astonished.  Well,  I  should  have  been 
very  greatly  astonished,  seeing  that  the  father  in  the  parable  was  to 
represent  God.  But  still,  his  son  deserved  all  the  rough  treatment  that 
some  heartless  men  might  have  given ;  and  had  the  stgry  been  that  oi 
a  selfish  human  father  only,  it  might  have  been  written  that  '*  as  he 
was  coming  near,  his  father  ran  at  him,  and  kicked  him."  There  are 
such  fathers  in  the  world,  who  seem  as  if  they  cannot  forgive.  If 
he  had  kicked  him,  it  would  have  been  no  more  than  he  had  deserved. 
But  no,  what  is  written  in  the  Book  stands  true  for  all  time,  and  for 
overy  sinner, — "  He  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him ; "  kissed  him 
eagerly,  kissed  him  much. 

What  does  this  much  kissing  mean  ?  It  signifies  that,  when  sinners 
come  to  God,  he  gives  them  a  loving  reception,  and  a  hearty  welcome. 
If  any  one  of  you,  while  I  am  speaking,  shall  come  to  God,  expecting 
mercy  because  of  the  great  sacrifice  of  Christ,  this  shall  be  true  of 
you  as  it  has  been  true  of  many  of  us  :  "  He  kissed  him  much." 

I.  First,  this  much  kissing  means  MUCH  LOVE.  It  means  much  love 
truly  felt ;  for  God  never  gives  an  expression  of  love  without  feeling 
it  in  his  infinite  heart.  God  will  never  give  a  Judas-kiss,  and  betray 
those  whom  he  embraces.  There  is  no  hypocrisy  with  God;  he 
never  kisses  those  for  whom  he  has  no  love.  Oh,  how  God  loves 
sinners !  You  who  repent,  and  come  to  him,  will  discover  how  greatly 
he  loves  you.  There  is  no  measuring  the  love  he  bears  towards  you. 
He  has  loved  you  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  he 
will  love  you  when  time  shall  be  no  more.  Oh,  the  immeasurable  love 
of  God  to  sinners  who  come  and  cast  themselves  upon  his  mercy ! 

This  much  kissing  also  means  much  love  manifested.  God's  people  do 
not  always  know  the  greatness  of  his  love  to  them.  Sometimes,  IIOTT- 
ever,  it  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which 
is  given  unto  us.  Some  of  us  know  at  times  what  it  is  to  be 
almost  too  happy  to  live !  The  love  of  God  has  been  so  overpowe^'ngly 


652  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

experienced  by  us  on  some  occasions,  that  we  have  almost  had  to  ask 
for  a  stay  of  the  delight  because  we  could  not  endure  any  more.  If 
the  glory  had  not  been  veiled  a  little,  we  should  have  died  of  excess 
of  rapture,  or  happiness.  Beloved,  Q-od  has  wondrous  ways  of 
opening  his  people's  hearts  to  the  manifestation  of  his  grace.  He 
can  pour  in,  not  now  and  then  a  drop  of  his  love,  but  great  and 
mighty  streams.  Madame  Guyon  used  to  speak  of  the  torrents  of  love 
that  come  sweeping  through  the  spirit,  bearing  all  before  them.  The 
poor  prodigal  in  the  parable  had  so  much  love  manifested  to  him, 
that  he  might  have  sung  of  the  torrents  of  his  father's  affection. 
That  is  the  way  God  receives  those  whom  he  saves,  giving  them  not 
a  meagre  measure  of  grace,  but  manifesting  an  overflowing  love. 

This  much  kissing  means,  further,  much  love  perceived.  When  his 
father  kissed  him  much,  the  poor  prodigal  knew,  if  never  before,  that 
his  father  loved  him.  He  had  no  doubt  about  it ;  he  had  a  clear 
perception  of  it.  It  is  very  frequently  the  case  that  the  first  moment 
a  sinner  believes  in  Jesus,  he  gets  this  "  much  "  love.  God  reveals 
it  to  him,  and  he  perceives  it  and  enjoys  it  at  the  very  beginning. 
Think  not  that  God  always  keeps  the  best  wine  to  the  last ;  he  gives 
us  some  of  the  richest  dainties  of  his  table  the  first  moment  we  sit 
there.  I  recollect  the  joy  that  I  had  when  first  I  believed  in  Jesus ; 
and,  even  now,  in  looking  back  upon  it,  the  memory  of  it  is  as 
fresh  as  if  it  were  but  yesterday.  Oh,  I  could  not  have  believed  that 
a  mortal  could  be  so  happy  after  having  been  so  long  burdened,  and 
BO  terribly  cast  down  !  I  did  but  look  to  Jesus  on  the  cross,  and  the 
crushing  load  was  immediately  gone ;  and  the  heart  which  could  only 
sigh  and  cry  by  reason  of  its  burden,  began  to  leap  and  dance  and 
sing  for  joy.  I  had  found  in  Christ  all  that  I  wanted,  and  I  rested  in 
the  love  of  God  at  once.  So  may  it  be  with  you  also,  if  you  will  but 
return  to  God  through  Christ.  It  shall  be  said  of  you  as  of  this 
prodigal,  "  The  father  saw  him,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and 
kissed  him  in  much  love." 

II.  Secondly,  this  much  kissing  meant  MTTOH  FORGIVENESS.  The 
prodigal  had  many  sins  to  confess ;  but  before  he  came  to  the  details 
of  them,  his  father  had  forgiven  him.  I  love  confession  of  sin  after 
forgiveness.  Some  suppose  that  after  we  are  forgiven  we  are  never  to 
confess;  but,  oh,  beloved,  it  is  then  that  we  confess  most  truly, 
because  we  know  the  guilt  of  sin  most  really!  Then  do  we  plaintively 
sing — 

'*  My  sins,  my  sins,  my  Saviour, 

How  sad  on  thee  they  fall ! 
Seen  through  thy  gentle  patience, 

I  tenfold  feel  them  all. 
I  know  they  are  forgiven, 

But  still  their  pain  to  me 
Is  all  the  grief  and  anguish 

They  laid,  my  Lord,  on  thee." 

To  think  that  Christ  should  have  washed  me  from  my  sins  in  his 
own  blood,  makes  me  feel  my  sin  the  more  keenly,  and  confess  it  the 
more  humbly  before  God.  The  picture  of  this  prodigal  is  marvellously 
true  to  the  experience  of  those  who  return  to  God.  His  father  kissed 


PBODIGAL  LOVE  FOB  THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  653 

nim  with  the  kiss  of  forgiveness ;  and  yet,  after  that,  the  young  man 
went  on  to  say,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  before 
thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son."  Do  not  hesitate, 
then,  to  acknowledge  your  sin  to  God,  even  though  you  know  that  in 
Christ  it  is  all  put  away. 

From  this  point  of  view,  those  kisses  meant,  first,  "  Tour  sin  is  all 
gone,  and  will  never  be  mentioned  any  more.  Come  to  my  heart,  my 
son !  Thou  hast  grieved  me  sore,  and  angered  me ;  but,  as  a  thick 
cloud,  I  have  blotted  out  thy  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  thy  sins." 

As  the  father  looked  upon  him,  and  kissed  him  much,  there 
probably  came  another  kiss,  which  seemed  to  say,  "There  is  no  sore 
ness  left :  I  have  not  only  forgiven,  but  I  have  forgotten  too.  It  is  all 
gone,  clean  gone.  I  will  never  accuse  you  of  it  any  more.  I  will  never 
love  you  any  the  less.  I  will  never  treat  you  as  though  you  were  still 
an  unworthy  and  untrustworthy  person."  Probably  at  that  there  came 
another  kiss ;  for  do  not  forget  that  his  father  forgave  him  "  and 
kissed  him  much,"  to  show  that  the  sin  was  all  forgiven. 

There  stood  the  prodigal,  overwhelmed  by  his  father's  goodness, 
yet  remembering  his  past  life.  As  he  looked  on  himself,  and  thought, 
"  I  have  these  old  rags  on  still,  and  I  have  just  come  from  feeding  the 
swine,"  I  can  imagine  that  his  father  would  give  him  another  kiss,  as 
much  as  to  say,  ' '  My  boy,  I  do  not  recollect  the  past ;  I  am  so  glad  to 
see  you  that  /  do  not  see  any  filth  on  you,  or  any  rags  on  you  either. 
I  am  so  delighted  to  have  you  with  me  once  more  that,  as  I  would  pick 
up  a  diamond  out  of  the  mire,  and  be  glad  to  get  the  diamond  again, 
so  do  I  pick  you  up,  you  are  so  precious  to  me."  This  is  the  gracious 
and  glorious  way  in  which  God  treats  those  who  return  to  him. 
As  for  their  sin,  he  has  put  it  away  so  that  he  will  not  remember  it. 
He  forgives  like  a  God.  Well  may  we  adore  and  magnify  his  match 
less  mercy  as  we  sing — 

"  In  wonder  lost,  with  trembling  joy 

"We  take  the  pardon  of  our  God ; 
Pardon  for  crimes  of  deepest  dye ; 

A  pardon  bought  with  Jesus'  blood ; 
Who  is  a  pardoning  God  like  thee  P 
Or  who  has  grace  so  rich  and  free  ?  " 

"Well,"  says  one,  "can  such  a  wonderful  change  ever  take  place 
with  me?"  By  the  grace  of  God  it  may  be  experienced  by  every  man 
who  is  willing  to  return  to  God.  I  pray  God  that  it  may  happen  now, 
and  that  you  may  get  such  assurance  of  it  from  the  Word  of  God,  by 
the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  from  a  sight  of  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ  shed  for  your  redemption,  that  you  may  be  able  to  say,  "  I 
understand  it  now ;  I  see  how  he  kisses  all  my  sin  away ;  and  when 
it  rises,  he  kisses  it  away  again ;  and  when  I  think  of  it  with  shame, 
he  gives  me  another  kiss ;  and  when  I  blush  all  over  at  the  remem 
brance  of  my  evil  deeds,  he  kisses  me  again  and  again,  to  assure  me 
that  I  am  fully  and  freely  forgiven."  Thus  the  many  kisses  from  the 
prodigal's  father  combined  to  make  his  wayward  son  feel  that  his  sin 
was  indeed  all  gone.  They  revealed  much  love  and  much  forgiveness. 

III.  These  repeated  kisses  meant,  next,  FULL  RESTORATION.  The 
prodigal  was  going  to  say  to  his  fathom  "  Make  me  as  one  of  thy 
25 


654  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

hired  servants."  In  the  far  country  he  had  resolved  to  make  that 
request,  but  his  father,  with  a  kiss,  stopped  him.  By  that  kiss,  his 
sonship  was  owned;  by  it  the  father  said  to  the  wretched  wanderer, 
"  You  are  my  son."  He  gave  him  such  a  kiss  as  he  would  only  give 
to  his  own  son.  I  wonder  how  many  here  have  ever  given  such  a  kiss 
to  anyone.  There  sits  one  who  knows  something  of  such  kisses  as 
the  prodigal  received.  That  father's  girl  went  astray,  and,  after  years 
of  sin,  she  came  back  worn  out,  to  die  at  home.  He  received  her, 
found  her  penitent,  and  gladly  welcomed  her  to  his  house.  Ah,  my 
dear  friend,  you  know  something  about  such  kisses  as  those !  And 
you,  good  woman,  whose  boy  ran  away,  you  can  understand  something 
about  these  kisses,  too.  He  left  you,  and  you  did  not  hear  of  him  for 
years,  and  he  went  on  in  a  very  vicious  course  of  life.  When  you  did 
near  of  him,  it  well-nigh  broke  your  heart,  and  when  he  came  back, 
you  hardly  knew  him.  Do  you  recollect  how  you  took  him  in  ?  You 
felt  that  you  wished  that  he  was  the  little  boy  you  used  to  press 
to  your  bosom ;  but  now  he  was  grown  up  to  be  a  big  man  and  a 
great  sinner,  yet  you  gave  him  such  a  kiss,  and  repeated  your  welcome 
so  often,  that  he  will  never  forget  it,  nor  will  you  forget  it  either. 
You  CRH  understand  that  this  overwhelming  greeting  was  like  the 
father  saying,  "My  boy,  you  are  my  son.  Despite  all  that  you 
have  done,  you  belong  to  me;  however  far  you  have  gone  in  vice 
and  folly,  I  own  you.  You  are  bone  of  my  bone,  and  flesh  of  my 
flesh."  In  this  parable  Christ  would  have  you  know,  poor  sinner, 
that  God  will  own  you,  if  you  come  to  him  confessing  your  sin 
through  Jesus  Christ.  He  will  gladly  receive  you ;  for  all  things  are 
zeady  against  the  day  that  you  return. 

'*  Spread  for  thee  the  festal  board, 
See  with  richest  dainties  stored, 
To  thy  Father's  bosom  pressed, 
Yet  again  a  child  confessed ; 
Never  from  his  house  to  roam, 
Come  and  welcome,  sinner,  come." 

The  father  received  his  son  with  many  kisses,  and  so  proved  that 
Ins  prayer  was  answered.  Indeed,  his  father  heard  his  prayer  before 
ke  offered  it.  He  was  going  to  say,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned,"  and 
ko  ask  for  forgiveness ;  but  he  got  the  mercy,  and  a  kiss  to  seal  it, 
before  the  prayer  was  presented.  This  also  shall  be  true  of  thee, 
0  sinner,  who  art  returning  to  thy  God,  through  Jesus  Christ !  You 
shall  be  permitted  to  pray,  and  God  will  answer  you.  Hear  it,  poor, 
despairing  sinner,  whose  prayer  has  seemed  to  be  shut  out  from 
heaven !  Come  to  your  Father's  bosom  now,  and  he  will  hear  your 
prayers ;  and,  before  many  days  are  over,  you  shall  have  the  clearest 
proofs  that  you  are  fully  restored  to  the  divine  favour  by  answers  to 
your  intercessions  that  shall  make  you  marvel  at  the  Lord's  loving- 
kindness  to  you. 

Further  than  this,  you  shall  have  all  your  privileges  restored,  even 
as  this  wandering  young  man  was  put  among  the  children  when  he 
i»4urned.  As  you  see  him  now  in  the  father's  house,  where  he  was 
iw»ived  with  the  many  kisses,  he  wears  a  son's  robe,  the  family  ring 
•»  v&  "bis  finger,  and  the  shoes  of  the  home  are  on  his  feet.  Ho  eats  no 


PRODIGAL  LOVE  FOR  THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  655 

longer  swine's  food,  but  children's  bread.  Even  thus  shall  it  be  with 
you  if  you  return  to  God.  Though  you  look  so  foul  and  so  vile,  and  really 
are  even  more  defiled  than  you  look  ;  and  though  you  smell  so  strongly 
of  the  hogs  among  which  you  have  been  living  that  some  people's 
nostrils  would  turn  up  at  you,  your  Father  will  not  notice  these  marks 
of  your  occupation  in  the  far  country  with  all  its  horrible  defilement. 
See  how  this  father  treats  his  boy.  He  kisses  him,  and  kisses  him 
again,  because  he  knows  his  own  child,  and,  recognizing  him  as  his 
child,  and  feeling  his  fatherly  heart  yearning  over  him,  he  gives  him 
kiss  after  kiss.  He  kisses  him  much,  to  make  him  know  that  he  has 
full  restoration". 

In  this  repeated  kissing  we  see,  then,  these  three  things:  much  love, 
much  forgiveness,  and  full  restoration. 

IY.  But  these  many  kisses  meant  even  more  than  this.  They 
revealed  his  father's  EXCEEDING  JOY.  The  father's  heart  is  overflowing 
with  gladness,  and  he  cannot  restrain  his  delight.  I  think  he  must 
have  shown  his  joy  by  a  repeated  look.  I  will  tell  you  the  way  I 
think  the  father  behaved  towards  his  son  who  had  been  dead,  but 
was  alive  again,  who  had  been  lost,  but  was  found.  Let  me  try  to 
describe  the  scene.  The  father  has  kissed  his  son,  and  he  bids  him 
tiit  down ;  then  he  comes  in  front  of  him,  and  looks  at  him,  and  feels 
eo  happy  that  he  says,  "I  must  give  you  another  kiss,"  then  he 
walks  away  a  minute;  but  he  is  back  again  before  long,  saying  to 
himself,  "Oh,  I  must  give  him  another  kiss  !  "  He  gives  him  another, 
for  he  is  so  happy.  His  heart  beats  fast ;  he  feels  very  joyful ;  the 
old  man  would  like  the  music  to  strike  up ;  he  wants  to  be  at  the 
-dancing ;  but  meanwhile  he  satisfies  himself  by  a  repeated  look  at  his 
long-lost  child.  Oh,  I  believe  that  God  looks  at  the  sinner,  and  looks 
at  him  again,  and  keeps  on  looking  at  him,  all  the  while  delighting 
in  the  very  sight  of  him,  when  he  is  truly  repentant,  and  comes  back 
to  his  Father's  house. 

The  repeated  kiss  meant,  also,  a  repeated  blessing,  for  every  time  he 
put  his  arms  round  him,  and  kissed  him,  he  kept  saying,  "  Bless  you ; 
oh,  bless  you,  my  boy !  "  He  felt  that  his  son  had  brought  a  blessing 
to  him  by  coming  back,  and  he  invoked  fresh  blessings  upon  his  head. 
Oh,  sinner!  if  you  did  but  know  how  God  would  welcome  you,  and 
how  he  would  look  at  you,  and  how  he  would  bless  you,  surely  you 
would  at  once  repent,  and  come  to  his  arms  and  heart,  and  find  yourself 
happy  in  his  love. 

The  many  kisses  meant,  also,  repeated  delight.  It  is  a  very  wonderful 
thing  that  it  should  be  in  the  power  of  a  sinner  to  make  God  glad. 
He  is  the  happy  God,  the  source  and  spring  of  all  happiness  ;  what  can 
we  add  to  his  blesseclness?  And  yet,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men, 
God's  highest  joy  lies  in  clasping  his  wilful  Ephraims  to  his  breast, 
when  he  has  heard  them  bemoaning  themselves,  and  has  seen  them 
arising  and  returning  to  their  home.  God  grant  that  he  may  see  that 
sight  even  now,  and  have  delight  because  of  sinners  returning  to  him 
self  !  Yea,  we  believe  it  shall  be  even  so,  because  of  his  presence 
with  us,  and  because  of  the  gracious  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Surely  that  is  the  teaching  of  the  prophet's  words  :  "  The  Lord  thy  God 
in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty ;  he  will  save,  he  will  rejoice  over  thoe 


656  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

with  joy ;  lie  will  rest  in  his  love,  he  will  joy  over  thee  witn  singing." 
Think  of  the  eternal  God  singing,  and  remember  that  it  is  because 
a  wandering  sinner  has  returned  to  him  that  he  sings.  He  joys  in  the 
return  of  the  prodigal,  and  all  heaven  shares  in  his  joy. 

Y.  I  have  not  got  through  my  subject  yet.  As  we  take  a  fifth  look, 
we  find  that  these  many  kisses  mean  OVERFLOWING  COMFORT.  This  poor 
young  man,  in  his  hungry,  faint,  and  wretched  state,  having  come  a 
very  long  way,  had  not  much  heart  in  him.  His  hunger  had  taken 
all  energy  out  of  him,  and  he  was  so  conscious  of  his  guilt  that  he  had 
hardly  the  courage  to  face  his  father ;  so  his  father  gives  him  a  kiss, 
as  much  as  to  say,  "  Come,  boy,  do  not  be  cast  down  ;  I  love  you." 

"Oh,  the  past,  the  past,  my  father!"  he  might  moan,  as  he  thought 
of  his  wasted  years ;  but  he  had  no  sooner  said  that  than  he  received 
another  kiss,  as  if  his  father  said,  "  Never  mind  the  past ;  I  have 
forgotten  all  about  that."  This  is  the  Lord's  way  with  his  saved  ones. 
Their  past  lies  hidden  under  the  blood  of  atonement.  The  Lord  saith 
by  his  servant  Jeremiah,  "  The  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought  for? 
and  there  shall  be  none ;  and  the  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  not 
be  found :  for  I  will  pardon  them  whom  I  reserve." 

But  then,  perhaps,  the  young  man  looked  down  on  his  foul  garments, 
and  said,  "  The  present,  my  father,  the  present,  what  a  dreadful  state  I 
am  in!"  And  with  another  kiss  would  come  the  answer,  "Never 
mind  the  present,  my  boy.  I  am  content  to  have  thee  as  thou  art. 
I  love  thee."  This,  too,  is  God's  word  to  those  who  are  "  accepted 
in  the  Beloved."  In  spite  of  all  their  vileness,  they  are  pure  and 
spotless  in  Christ,  and  God  says  of  each  one  of  them,  "  Since  thou  wast 
precious  in  my  sight,  thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I  have  loved 
thee.  Therefore,  though  in  thyself  thou  art  unworthy,  through  my 
dear  Son  thou  art  welcome  to  my  home." 

"  Oh,  but,"  the  boy  might  have  said,  "  the  future,  my  father,  tk» 
future!  What  would  you  think  if  I  should  ever  go  astray  again?" 
Then  would  come  another  holy  kiss,  and  his  father  would  say,  "  I  will 
see  to  the  future,  my  boy  ;  I  will  make  home  so  bright  for  you  that 
you  will  never  want  to  go  away  again."  But  God  does  more  than  that 
for  us  when  we  return  to  him.  He  not  only  surrounds  us  with 
tokens  of  his  love,  but  he  says  concerning  us,  "  They  shall  be  my 
people,  and  I  will  be  their  God  :  and  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  and 
one  way,  that  they  may  fear  me  for  ever,  for  the  good  of  them,  and  of 
their  children  after  them :  and  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant 
with  them,  that  I  will  not  turn  away  from  them,  to  do  them  good  ; 
but  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  that  they  shall  not  depart 
from  me."  Furthermore,  he  says  to  each  returning  one,  "  A  new 
heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you : 
and  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give 
you  an  heart  of  flesh.  And  I  will  put  my  spirit  within  you,  and  cause 
you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments,  and  do 
them." 

Whatever  there  was  to  trouble  the  son,  the  father  gave  him  a  kiss 
to  set  it  all  right ;  and,  in  like  manner,  our  God  has  a  love-token  for 
every  time  of  doubt  and  dismay  which  may  come  to  his  reconciled 
sons.  Perhaps  one  whom  I  am  addressing  says,  "  Even  though  I 


PRODIGAL  LOVE  FOR  THE  PRODiuUi.  SON.  66T 

confess  my  sin,  and  seek  God's  mercy,  I  shall  still  be  in  sore  trouble, 
for  through  my  sin,  I  have  brought  myself  down  to  poverty."  "  There 
is  a  kiss  for  you,"  says  the  Lord:  "  Thy  bread  shall  be  given  thee, 
and  thy  water  shall  be  sure."  "But  I  have  even  brought  disease 
upon  myself  by  sin,"  says  another.  "  There  is  a  kiss  for  you,  for 
I  am  Jehovah-Rophi,  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee,  who  forgiveth  all 
thine  iniquities,  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases."  "  But  I  am  dreadfull\ 
down  at  the  heel,"  says  another.  The  Lord  gives  you  also  a  kiss,  and 
says,  "  I  will  lift  you  up,  and  provide  for  all  your  needs.  No  good 
thing  will  I  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  All  thy 
promises  in  this  Book  belong  to  every  repentant  sinner,  who  returnB 
to  God  believing  in  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son. 

The  father  of  the  prodigal  kissed  his  son  much,  and  thus  made  him 
feel  happy  there  and  then.  Poor  souls,  when  they  come  to  Christ, 
are  in  a  dreadful  plight,  and  some  of  them  hardly  know  where  they 
are.  I  have  known  them  talk  a  lot  of  nonsense  in  their  despair, 
and  say  hard  and  wicked  things  of  God  in  their  dreadful  doubt.  The 
Lord  gives  no  answer  to  all  that,  except  a  kiss,  and  then  another  kiss. 
Nothing  puts  the  penitent  so  much  at  rest  as  the  Lord's  repeated 
assurance  of  his  unchanging  love.  Such  a  one  the  Lord  has  often 
received,  "  and  kissed  him  much,"  that  he  might  fetch  him  up  even 
from  the  horrible  pit,  and  set  his  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  establish 
his  goings.  The  Lord  grant  that  many  whom  I  am  addressing  may 
understand  what  I  am  talking  about ! 

VI.  And  now  for  our  sixth  head,  though  you  will  think  I  am  get 
ting  to  be  like  the  old  Puritans  with  these  many  heads.  But  I  cannot 
help  it,  for  these  many  kisses  had  many  meanings  :  love,  forgiveness, 
restoration,  joy,  and  comfort  were  in  them,  and  also  STRONG  ASSURANCE. 

The  father  kissed  his  son  much  to  make  him  quite  certain  that  it 
was  all  real.  The  prodigal,  in  receiving  these  many  kisses,  might  say 
to  himself,  "  All  this  love  must  be  true,  for  a  little  while  ago  I  heard 
the  hogs  grunt,  and  now  I  hear  nothing  but  the  kisses  from  my  dear 
father's  lips."  So  his  father  gave  him  another  kiss,  for  there  was 
no  way  of  convincing  him  that  the  first  was  real  like  repeating  it ; 
and  if  there  lingered  any  doubt  about  the  second,  the  father  gave 
him  yet  a  third.  If,  when  the  dream  of  old  was  doubled,  the  inter 
pretation  was  sure,  these  repeated  kisses  left  no  room  for  doubt.  The 
father  renewed  the  tokens  of  his  love  that  his  son  might  be  fully 
assured  of  its  reality. 

He  did  it  that  in  the  future  it  might  never  be  questioned.  Some  of  us 
were  brought  so  low  before  we  were  converted,  that  God  gave  us  an 
excess  of  joy  when  he  saved  us,  that  we  might  never  forget  it.  Some 
times  the  devil  says  to  me,  "You  are  no  child  of  God."  I  have 
long  ago  given  up  answering  him,  for  I  find  that  it  is  a  waste  of 
time  to  argue  with  such  a  crafty  old  liar  as  he  is ;  he  knows  too  much 
for  me.  But  if  I  must  answer  him,  I  say,  "  Why,  I  remember  when 
I  was  saved  by  the  Lord !  I  never  can  forget  even  the  very  spot  of 
ground  where  first  I  saw  my  Saviour ;  there  and  then  my  joy  rolled 
in  like  some  great  Atlantic  billow,  and  burst  in  mighty  foam  of 
bliss,  covering  all  things.  I  cannot  forget  it."  That  is  an  argument 
which  even  the  devil  cannot  answer,  for  he  cannot  mak?  me  believe 


658  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

that  such  a  thing  never  happened.  The  Father  kissed  me  much, 
and  I  remember  it  full  well.  The  Lord  gives  to  some  of  us  such  a 
clear  deliverance,  such  a  bright,  sunshiny  day  at  our  conversion, 
that  henceforth  we  cannot  question  our  state  before  him.  but  must 
believe  that  we  are  eternally  saved. 

The  father  put  the  assurance  of  this  poor  returning  prodigal  beyond 
all  doubt.  If  the  first  kisses  were  given  privately,  when  only  the  father 
and  son  were  present,  it  is  quite  certain  that,  afterwards,  he  kissed  him 
before  men,  where  others  could  see  him.  He  kissed  him  much  in  the 
presence  of  the  household,  that  they  also  might  not  be  calling  in 
question  that  he  was  his  father's  child.  It  was  a  pity  that  the  elder 
brother  was  not  there  also.  You  see  he  was  away  in  the  field.  H« 
was  more  interested  in  the  crops  than  in  the  reception  of  his  brother. 
I  have  known  such  a  one  in  modern  days.  He  was  a  man  who  did  not 
come  out  to  week-evening  services.  He  was  such  a  man  of  business 
that  he  did  not  come  out  on  a  Thursday  night,  and  the  prodigal  came 
home  at  such  a  time,  and  so  the  elder  brother  did  not  see  the  father 
receive  him.  If  he  lived  now,  he  would  probably  not  come  to  the 
church-meetings ;  he  would  be  too  busy.  So  he  would  not  get  to  know 
about  the  reception  of  penitent  sinners.  But  the  father,  when  he 
received  that  son  of  his,  intended  all  to  know,  once  for  all,  that  he  wa& 
indeed  his  child.  Oh,  that  you  might  get  these  many  kisses  even  now  f 
If  they  are  given  to  you,  you  will  have,  for  the  rest  of  your  life,  strong 
assurance  derived  from  the  happiness  of  your  first  days. 

VII.  I  have  done  when  I  have  said  that  I  think  that  here  we  have 
a  specimen  of  the  INTIMATE  COMMUNION  which  the  Lord  often  gives  to 
sinners  when  first  they  come  to  him.  "  His  father  saw  him,  and  had 
compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him  much." 

You  see,  this  was  before  the  family  fellowship.  Before  the  servants  had 
prepared  the  meal,  before  there  had  been  any  music  or  dancing  in  the 
family,  his  father  kissed  him.  He  would  have  cared  little  for  all  their 
songs,  and  have  valued  but  slightly  his  reception  by  the  servants,  if, 
first  of  all,  he  had  not  been  welcomed  to  his  father's  heart.  So  i& 
it  with  us ;  we  need  first  to  have  fellowship  with  God  before  we  think 
much  of  union  with  his  people.  Before  I  go  to  join  a  church,  I  want 
iny  Father's  kiss.  Before  the  pastor  gives  me  the  right  hand  of 
fellowship,  I  want  my  heavenly  Father's  right  hand  to  welcome  me. 
Before  I  become  recognized  by  God's  people  here  below,  I  want  a 
private  recognition  from  the  great  Father  above ;  and  that  he  gives  to 
all  who  come  to  him  as  the  prodigal  came  to  his  father.  May  he 
give  it  to  some  of  you  now! 

This  kissing,  also,  was  before  ihe  table  communion.  You  know  that 
the  prodigal  was  afterwards  to  sit  at  his  father's  table,  and  to  eat  of 
the  fatted  calf ;  but  before  that,  his  father  kissed  him.  He  would 
scarcely  have  been  able  to  sit  easily  at  the  feast  without  the  previous 
kisses  of  love.  The  table  communion,  to  which  we  are  invited,  is  very 
sweet.  To  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  symbol,  in 
the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  is,  indeed,  a  blessed  thing ;  but  I 
want  to  have  communion  with  Grod  by  the  way  of  the  love-kiss  before 
I  come  there.  "  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth."  This 
is  something  private,  rav^H""Tj  and  sweet.  God  give  it  to  many  of  youJ 


PRODIGAL  LOVE  FOR  THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  659 

May  you  get  the  many  kisses  of  your  Father's  mouth  before  you  come 
into  the  church,  or  to  the  communion  table  ! 

These  many  kisses  likewise  came  before  the  public  rejoicing.  The 
friends  and  neighbours  were  invited  to  share  in  the  feast.  But  think 
how  shamefaced  the  son  would  have  been  in  their  presence,  if,  first  of 
all,  he  had  not  found  a  place  in  his  father's  love,  or  had  not  been  quite 
sure  of  it.  He  would  almost  have  been  inclined  to  run  away  again. 
But  the  father  had  kissed  him  much,  and  so  he  could  meet  the  curious 
gaze  of  old  friends  with  a  smiling  face,  until  any  unkind  remarks  they 
might  have  thought  of  making  died  away,  killed  by  his  evident  joy  in 
his  father.  It  is  a  hard  thing  for  a  man  to  confess  Christ  if  he  has 
not  had  an  overwhelming  sense  of  communion  with  him.  But  when 
we  are  lifted  to  the  skies  in  the  rapture  God  gives  to  us,  it  becomes 
easy,  not  only  to  face  the  world,  but  to  win  the  sympathy  of  even  those 
who  might  have  opposed  themselves.  This  is  why  young  converts  are 
frequently  used  to  lead  others  into  the  light ;  the  Lord's  many  kisses 
of  forgiveness  have  so  recently  been  given  to  them,  that  their  words 
catch  the  fragrance  of  divine  love  as  they  pass  the  lips  just  touched 
by  the  Lord.  Alas,  that  any  should  ever  lose  their  first  love,  and 
forget  the  many  kisses  they  have  received  from  their  heavenly  Father ! 

Lastly,  all  this  was  given  before  the  meeting  with  the  elder  brother. 
If  the  prodigal  son  had  known  what  the  elder  brother  thought  and 
said,  I  should  not  have  wondered  at  all  if  he  had  run  off,  and  never 
come  back  at  all.  He  might  have  come  near  home,  and  then,  hearing 
what  his  brother  said,  have  stolen  away  again.  Yes,  but  before  that 
could  happen,  his  father  had  given  him  the  many  kisses.  Poor  sinner ! 
you  have  come  in  here,  and  perhaps  you  have  found  the  Saviour.  It 
may  be  that  you  will  go  and  speak  to  some  Christian  man,  and  he  will 
be  afraid  to  say  much  to  you.  I  do  not  wonder  that  he  should  doubt 
you,  for  you  are  not,  in  yourself,  as  yet  a  particularly  nice  sort  of  person 
to  talk  to.  But,  if  you  get  your  Father's  many  kisses,  you  will  not 
mind  your  elder  brother  being  a  little  hard  upon  you.  Occasionally  I 
hear  of  one,  who  wished  to  join  the  church,  saying,  "  I  came  to  see  the 
elders,  and  one  of  them  was  rather  rough  with  me.  I  shall  never  come 
again."  What  a  stupid  man  you  must  be !  Is  it  not  their  duty  to  be 
a  little  rough  with  some  of  you,  lest  you  should  deceive  yourselves,  and 
be  mistaken  about  your  true  state  ?  We  desire  lovingly  to  bring  you 
to  Christ,  and  if  we  are  afraid  that  you  really  have  not  yet  come  back 
to  God,  with  penitence  and  faith,  should  we  not  tell  you  so,  like 
honest  men  ?  But  suppose  that  you  have  really  come,  and  your  brother 
is  mistaken ;  go  and  get  a  kiss  from  your  Father,  and  never  mind  your 
brother.  He  may  remind  you  how  you  have  squandered  your  living, 
painting  the  picture  even  blacker  than  it  ought  to  be ;  but  your 
Father's  kisses  will  make  you  forget  your  brother's  frowns.  If  you 
think  that  in  the  household  of  faith  you  will  find  everybody  amiable, 
and  everyone  willing  to  help  you,  you  will  be  greatly  mistaken. 
Young  Christians  are  often  frightened  when  they  come  across  some 
who,  from  frequent  disappointment  of  their  hopes,  or  from  a  natural 
spirit  of  caution,  or  perhaps  from  a  lack  of  spiritual  life,  receive  but 
coldly  those  upon  whom  the  Father  has  lavished  much  love.  If  that 
is  your  case,  never  mind  these  cross-grained  elder  brethren ;  get 


660  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

another  kiss  from  your  Father.  Perhaps  the  reason  it  is  written, 
"He  kissed  him  much"  was  because  the  elder  brother,  when  he 
came  near  him,  would  treat  him  so  coldly,  and  so  angrily  refuse 
to  join  in  the  feast. 

Lord,  give  to  many  poor  trembling  souls  the  will  to  come  to  thee ! 
Bring  many  sinners  to  thy  blessed  feet,  and  while  they  are  yet  a  great 
way  off,  run  and  meet  them ;  fall  on  their  neck,  give  them  many  kisses 
of  love,  and  fill  them  to  the  full  with  heavenly  delight,  for  Jesus 
Christ's  sake !  Amen. 


PORTION   OF    SCRIPTUBR    REAP    BEFORE    SERMON — Lllke   XT. 


itmt  SWrcrmtcle  ||ul|nt 


THE   RECEPTION   OF   SINMERS. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  NOVEMBER  22ND,  1874,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOH. 


"  But  the  father  said  to  his  servants,  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on 
him ;  and  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet :  And  bring  hither  the 
fatted  calf,  and  kill  it;  and  let  us  eat  and  be  merry."— Luke  xv.  22,  23. 

LAST  Lord's-day  we  spoke  upon  the  consecration  of  priests.  That 
theme  might  seem  too  high  for  troubled  hearts  and  trembling  con 
sciences,  who  fear  that  they  shall  never  be  made  priests  and  kings  unto 
God.  So  glorious  a  privilege  appears  to  them  to  hang  in  the  dim, 
distant  future,  if,  indeed,  they  reach  it  at  all.  Therefore,  at  this  time,  we 
will  go  down  from  the  elevated  regions  to  comfort  those  who  are  seek 
ing  the  Lord,  with  the  view  of  helping  them  in  their  turn  to  climb 
also. 

AVe  speak  this  morning,  not  of  the  consecration  of  priests,  but  of 
the  reception  of  sinners,  and  this,  according  to  our  text,  is  a  very  joyful 
business,  it  is  even  described  as  a  merrymaking,  accompanied  with 
music  and  with  dancing.  We  very  frequently  speak  of  the  sorrow  for 
sin  which  accompanies  conversion,  and  I  do  not  think  we  can  speak  of 
it  too  often  ;  but  yet  there  is  a  possibility  of  our  overlooking  the 
equally  holy  and  remarkable  joy  which  attends  the  return  of  a  soul  to 
God.  It  has  been  a  very  common  error  to  suppose  that  a  man  must 
pass  through  a  very  considerable  time  of  despondency,  if  not  of  horror 
of  mind,  before  he  can  find  peace  with  God :  now  in  this  parable  the 
father  seems  determined  to  cut  short  that  period ;  he  stops  his  son  in 
the  very  middle  of  his  confession,  and  before  he  can  ask  to  be  made  as 
one  of  the  hired  servants,  his  mournful  style  is  changed  for  rejoicing, 
for  the  father  has  already  fallen  on  his  neck  and  kissed  his  trembling 
lips  into  a  sweet  silence.  It  is  not  the  Lord's  desire  that  sinners  should 
tarry  long  in  the  state  of  unbelieving  conviction  of  sin,  it  is  some 
thing  wrong  in  themselves  which  keeps  them  there ;  either  they  are 
ignorant  of  the  freeness  and  fulness  of  Christ,  or  they  harbour  self- 
righteous  hopes,  or  they  cling  to  their  sins.  Sin  lieth  at  the  door,  it 

^o.  1,204  36 


t!50  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

is  no  work  of  God  which  blocks  the  way.  He  delights  in  their 
delight,  and  joys  in  their  joy.  It  is  the  Father's  will  that  the 
penitent  sinner  should  at  once  believe  in  Jesus,  at  once  find  com 
plete  forgiveness,  and  immediately  enter  into  rest.  If  any  of  you 
came  to  Jesus  without  the  dreary  interval  of  terror  which  is  so  fre 
quent,  I  pray  you  do  not  judge  yourselves  as  though  your  conversions 
were  dubious — they  are  all  the  more  instead  of  all  the  less  genuine 
because  they  bear  rather  the  marks  of  the  gospel  than  of  the  law.  The 
weeping  of  Peter,  which  in  a  few  days  turns  to  joy,  is  far  better 
than  the  horror  of  Judas,  which  ends  in  suicide.  Conversions,  as 
recorded  in  Scripture,  are  for  the  most  part  exceedingly  rapid.  They 
were  pricked  in  the  heart  at  Pentecost,  and  the  same  day  they  were 
baptised  and  added  to  the  church,  because  they  had  found  peace 
with  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  Paul  was  smitten  down  with  con 
viction,  and  in  three  days  was  a  baptised  believer.  Perhaps  the  figure 
is  inapt,  but  I  was  about  to  say  that  sometimes  God's  power  is  so 
very  near  us  that  the  lightning  flash  of  conviction  is  often  attended 
at  the  very  same  moment  by  the  deep  thunder  of  the  Lord's  voice, 
which  drives  away  our  fears  and  proclaims  peace  and  pardon  to  the 
soul.  In  many  cases  the  sharp  needle  of  the  law  is  immediately  fol 
lowed  by  the  silken  thread  of  the  gospel ;  the  showers  of  repentance  are 
succeeded  at  once  by  the  sunshine  of  faith  ;  peace  overtakes  penitence, 
and  walks  arm  in  arm  with  her  into  yet  fuller  rest. 

Having  thus  reminded  you  that  God  would  have  penitents  very 
soon  rejoice,  I  want  to  spend  this  morning  in  setting  forth  the  joy 
which  is  caused  by  pardoned  sin.  That  joy  is  threefold.  We  will  talk 
about  it,  first,  as  the  joy  of  God  over  sinners  ;  secondly,  the  joy  of  sinners 
in  God;  and,  thirdly,  what  is  so  often  forgotten,  the  joy  of  the  servants, 
for  they  too  rejoiced,  for  the  father  said,  "  Let  us  eat  and  be  merry;  " 
and  one  of  the  points  of  the  parable  is  just  this,  that  as  in  the  case  of 
the  lost  sheep  the  shepherd  calleth  together  his  friends  and  neigh 
bours,  and  as  in  the  case  of  the  piece  of  money  the  woman  calleth  her 
neighbours  together,  so  in  this  case,  also,  others  share  in  the  joy  which 
chiefly  belongs  to  the  loving  father  and  the  returning  wanderer. 

I.  THE  JOY  OF  GOD  OVER  SINNERS.  It  is  always  difficult  to  speak 
of  the  ever-blessed  God  becomingly  when  we  have  to  describe  him  as- 
touched  by  emotions  ;  I  pray,  therefore,  to  be  guided  in  my  speech  by 
the  Holy  Spirit.  We  have  been  educated  into  the  idea  that  the  Lord 
is  above  emotions,  either  of  sorrow  or  pleasure.  That  he  cannot  suffer, 
for  instance,  is  always  laid  down  as  a  self-evident  postulate.  Is  that 
quite  so  clear  ?  Cannot  he  do  or  bear  anything  he  chooses  to  do  ? 
What  means  the  Scripture  which  says  that  man's  sin  before  the  flood 
made  the  Lord  repent  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth,  "  and  it 
grieved  him  at  his  heart"?  Is  there  no  meaning  in  the  Lord's  own 
language,  "Forty  years  long  was  I  grieved  with  this  generation"? 
Are  we  not  forbidden  to  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  Is  he  not  described 
as  having  been  vexed  by  ungodly  men !  Surely,  then,  he  can  be 
grieved  :  it  cannot  be  an  altogether  meaningless  expression.  For  my 
part,  I  rejoice  to  worship  the  living  God,  who,  because  he  is  living, 
does  grieve  and  rejoice.  It  makes  one  feel  more  love  to  him  than  if  he 
dwelt  on  some  serene  Olympus,  careless  of  all  our  woes,  because  inca- 


THE   RECEPTION   OF    SINNERS.  65 11 

pnUe  of  any  concern  about  us,  or  interest  in  us,  one  way  or  the  other. 
To  look  upon  him  as  utterly  impassive  and  incapable  of  anything  like 
emotion  does  not,  to  my  mind,  exalt  the  Lord,  but  rather  brings  him 
down  to  be  comparable  to  the  gods  of  stone  or  wood,  which  cannot 
sympathise  with  their  worshippers.  No,  Jehovah  is  not  insensible.  He 
is  the  living  God,  and  everything  that  goes  with  life, — pure,  perfect, 
holy  life,  is  to  be  found  in  him.  Yet  must  such  a  subject  always  be 
spoken  of  very  tenderly,  with  solemn  awe,  because,  albeit  we  know 
something  of  what  God  is,  for  we  are  made  in  the  image  of  God,  and 
the  best  likeness  of  God  undoubtedly  was  man  as  he  came  from  his 
Maker's  hand,  yet  man  is  not  God,  and  even  in  his  perfectness  he  must 
have  been  a  very  tiny  miniature  of  God ;  while  now  that  he  has  sinned 
he  has  blotted  and  blurred  that  image.  The  finite  cannot  fully  mirror 
the  Infinite,  nor  can  the  grand,  glorious,  essential  properties  of  Deity 
be  communicated  to  creatures :  they  must  remain  peculiar  to  God 
alone.  The  Lord  is,  however,  continually  represented  as  displaying 
joy.  Moses  declared  to  sinful  Israel,  that  if  they  returned  and  obeyed 
the  voice  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  would  again  rejoice  over  them  for 
good,  as  he  rejoiced  over  their  fathers  (Deut.  xxx.  9).  The  Lord  is- 
said  to  rejoice  in  his  works  and  to  delight  in  mercy,  and  surely  we 
must  believe  it.  Wherefore  should  we  doubt  it?  Many  passages 
of  Scripture  speak  very  impressively  of  God's  joy  in  his  people. 
Zephaniah  puts  it  in  the  strongest  manner :  "  He  will  save,  he  will 
rejoice  over  thee  with  joy ;  he  will  rest  in  his  love,  he  will  joy  over 
thee  with  singing."  Our  God  is  for  ever  the  happy  or  blessed  God ; 
we  cannot  think  of  him  as  other  than  supremely  blessed.  Still,  from 
the  Scriptures  we  gather  that  he  displays  on  certain  occasions  a  special 
joy  which  he  would  have  us  recognise.  I  do  not  think  that  it  can  be 
mere  parable,  but  it  is  real  fact,  that  the  Lord  does  rejoice  over 
returning  and  repenting  sinners. 

Every  being  manifests  its  joy  according  to  its  nature,  and  seeks 
means  for  its  display  suitable  to  itself.  It  is  so  with  men.  When  the 
old  Romans  celebrated  a  triumph  because  some  great  general  returned 
a  victor  from  Africa,  Greece,  or  Asia  with  the  spoils  of  a  long  cam 
paign,  how  did  the  fierce  Roman  nature  express  its  joy  ?  Why,  in  the 
Colosseum,  or  in  some  yet  vaster  amphitheatre,  where  buzzing  nations- 
choked  the  ways,  they  gathered  in  their  myriads  to  behold  not  only 
beasts,  but  their  fellow  men,  "butchered  to  make  a  Roman  holiday." 
Cruelty  upon  an  extraordinary  scale  was  their  way  of  expressing  the 
joy  of  their  iron  hearts.  Look  at  the  self-indulgent  man!  He  has 
had  a  prosperous  season,  and  has  made  a  lucky  hit,  as  he  calls  it,  or 
some  event  has  occurred  in  his  family  which  makes  him  very  jubilant ; 
what  will  he  do  to  show  forth  his  joy  ?  Will  he  bow  the  knee  in 
gratitude,  or  lift  a  hymn  of  praise  ?  Not  he.  He  will  hold  a  drinking 
bout,  and  when  he  and  his  fellows  are  mad  with  wine  his  joy  will 
find  expression !  The  sensual  show  their  joy  by  sensuality.  Now, 
God  whose  name  is  good,  and  whose  nature  is  love,  when  he  has  joy 
expresses  it  in  mercy,  in  lovingkindness,  and  grace.  The  father's  joy 
in  the  parable  before  us  showed  itself  in  the  full  forgiveness  accorded, 
in  the  kiss  of  perfect  love  bestowed,  in  the  gift  ol  the  best  robe,  the 
ring,  and  the  sandals,  and  in  the  gladsome  festival  which  filled  the 


€52  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

whole  house  with  hallowed  mirth.  Everything  expresses  its  joy  accord 
ing  to  its  nature ;  infinite  love,  therefore,  reveals  its  joy  in  acts  of  love. 

The  nature  of  God  being  as  much  above  ours  as  the  heaven  is 
above  the  earth,  the  expression  of  his  joy  is  therefore  all  the  loftier, 
and  his  gifts  the  greater,-  Still,  there  is  a  likeness  between  God's  way 
of  expressing  joy  and  ours,  which  it  will  be  profitable  to  note.  How 
uo  we  express  ourselves,  ordinarily,  when  we  are  glad  ?  We  do  so 
very  commonly  by  a  display  of  bounty.  When  in  the  olden  time  our 
kings  came  into  the  city  of  London,  or  a  great  victory  was  celebrated, 
the  conduit  in  Cheapside  ran  with  red  wine,  and  even  the  gutters 
flowed  with  it.  Then  were  there  tables  set  in  the  street,  and  my  lords, 
and  the  aldermen,  and  the  mayor  kept  open  house,  and  everybody  was 
fed  to  the  full.  Joy  was  expressed  by  hospitality.  You  have  seen  the 
picture  of  the  young  heir  coming  of  age,  and  have  noticed  how  the 
artist  depicts  the  great  yard  of  the  manor-house  as  full  of  men  and 
women,  who  are  eating  and  drinking  to  their  hearts'  content.  At 
Ohristmas  seasons,  and  upon  marriage  days  and  harvest  homes,  men 
ordinarily  express  their  joy  by  bountiful  provision ;  so  also  does  the 
father  in  this  wondrous  parable  exhibit  the  utmost  bounty,  repre 
senting  thereby  the  boundless  liberality  of  the  great  Father  of  spirits, 
who  shows  his  joy  over  penitents  by  the  manner  in  which  he  enter 
tains  them.  The  best  robe,  the  ring,  the  shoes,  and  the  fatted 
calf,  and  the  "  Let  us  eat  and  be  merry,"  all  show  by  their  bounti- 
fulness  that  God  is  glad.  His  oxen  and  his  fatlings  are  killed, 
for  the  feast  of  mercy  is  the  banquet  of  the  Lord.  So  unrivalled  are 
the  gifts  of  his  gracious  hand  that  the  receivers  of  his  favours  have 
cried  out  in  amazement,  "Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee!"  Beloved, 
consider  awhile  the  Lord's  bounty  to  returning  sinners,  blotting  out 
their  sins  like  a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick  cloud  their  iniquities,  justifying 
them  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  endowing  them  with  his  Holy 
Spirit,  regenerating  them,  comforting  them,  illuminating  them,  purify 
ing  them,  strengthening  them,  guiding  them,  protecting  them,  filling 
them  with  all  his  own  fulness,  satisfying  their  mouth  with  good  things, 
and  crowning  them  with  tender  mercies.  I  see  in  the  bounty  of  God 
with  which  he  so  liberally  endows  returning  sinners  a  mighty  proof 
that  his  inmost  soul  rejoices  over  the  salvation  of  men. 

At  glad  times  men  generally  manifest  some  speciality  in  their  bounty. 
On  the  day  of  the  young  heir's  coming  of  age  the  long  stored  cask  of 
wine  is  broached,  and  the  best  bullock  is  roasted  whole.  So  here  in 
the  parable  we  read,  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,"  indicating  that  it 
had  been  laid  by  and  kept  in  store  until  then.  Nobody  had  used  that 
robe,  it  was  locked  up  in  the  wardrobe,  only  to  be  brought  out  on  some 
very  special  occasion.  This  was  the  happiest  day  that  ever  had  made  glad 
the  house,  and  therefore  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,"  no  other  will  suffice. 
Meat  is  wanted  for  the  banquet.  Let  a  calf  be  killed.  Which  shall  it 
be?  A  calf  taken  at  random  from  the  herd?  No,  but  the  fatted  calf 
which  has  been  standing  in  the  stalls,  and  is  well  fed,  and  has  been 
reserved  for  a  festival.  Oh,  beloved,  when  God  blesses  a  sinner  he 
shows  his  joy  by  giving  him  the  reserved  mercies,  the  special  treasures 
of  everlasting  love,  the  precious  things  of  grace,  the  secret  of  the 
covenant :  yea,  he  has  given  to  sinners  the  best  of  the  best  in  giving 


THE   RECEPTION   OF   SINNERS.  658 

them  Christ  Jesus,  and  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  best 
that  heaven  affords  God  bestows  on  sinners  when  they  conie  to  him. 
No  scraps  and  odds  and  ends  are  dealt  out  to  hungry  and  thirsty 
seekers,  but  in  princely  munificence  of  unstinting  love  the  heavenly 
Father  deals  out  abundant  grace.  I  would  that  sinners  would  corne 
and  try  my  Lord's  hospitality;  they  would  find  his  table  to  be  more 
richly  loaded  than  even  that  of  Solomon,  though  thirty  oxen  and  a 
hundred  sheep  did  not  suffice  for  one  day's  provision  for  the  household 
of  that  magnificent  sovereign.  If  they  would  but  come,  even  the 
largest-hearted  among  them  would  be  wonder-struck  as  they  saw  how 
richly  God  supplied  all  their  need,  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by. 
Christ  Jesus. 

44  Rasrs  exchanged  for  costly  treasure, 

Shoes  and  rinj?  and  heaven's  best  robe ! 
Gifts  of  love  which  knows  no  measure; 

Who  can  tell  the  heart  of  God? 
All  his  loved  ones — his  redeemed  ones, 

Perfect  are  in  his  abode." 

We  also  show  our  joy  by  a  concentration  of  thought  upon  the  object 
of  it.  When  a  man  is  carried  away  with  joy  he  forgets  everything  else, 
and  gives  himself  up  to  the  one  delight.  David  was  so  glad  to  bring 
back  the  Ark  of  the  Lord  that  he  danced  before  the  Lord  with  all  his 
might,  being  clad  only  with  a  linen  ephod.  He  laid  aside  his  stately 
garments,  and  thought  so  little  of  his  dignity  that  Michal  sneered  at 
him  ;  he  was  so  much  absorbed  in  adoring  his  Lord  that  all  regard  to 
appearances  was  quite  gone.  Observe  well  the  parable,  and  think  you 
hear  the  father  say,  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him,  and 
put  a  ring  on  his  hand  and  shoes  on  his  feet,  and  let  us  eat  and  be 
merry,  for  this  my  son  was  dead  and  is  alive  again."  The  son  alone  is 
in  the  father's  eye,  and  the  whole  house  must  be  ordered  in  reference  to 
him.  Nothing  is  to  be  thought  of  to-day  but  the  long-lost  son,  he  is 
paramount  in  the  wardrobe,  the  jewel  room,  the  farmyard,  the  kitchen, 
and  the  banquetting  chamber.  He  that  was  lost,  he  that  was  dead,  he 
being  found  and  alive,  engrosses  the  whole  of  the  father's  mind.  Sinner, 
it  is  wonderful  how  God  sets  all  his  thoughts  on  you  according  to  his 
promise,  '*  I  will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  for  good,"  (Jer.  xxiii.  6) ; 
and  again,  "  I  will  watch  over  them  to  build  and  to  plant  saith  the 
Lord."  The  Lord  thinketh  upon  the  poor  and  needy,  his  eyes  are  upon 
them  and  his  ears  are  open  to  their  cry.  He  thinks  as  much  of  each 
penitent  sinner  as  if  he  were  the  only  being  in  the  universe.  0  penitent, 
for  you  is  the  working  of  the  Lord's  providence  to  bring  you  home,  for  you 
the  training  of  his  ministers  that  they  might  know  how  to  reach  your 
heart,  for  you  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  upon  them  that  they  might  be  power 
ful  with  your  conscience ;  yea,  for  you  his  Son,  his  eternal  Son  once 
bleeding  on  the  cross,  and  now  sitting  in  the  highest  heavens  making 
intercession  for  you.  I  saw  in  Amsterdam  the  diamond  cutting,  and  I 
noticed  great  wheels,  a  large  factory  and  powerful  engines,  and  all  the 
power  was  made  to  bear  upon  a  small  stone  no  larger  than  the  nail  of  my 
little  finger.  All  that  huge  machinery  for  that  little  stone,  because  it  was 
so  precious  !  Methinks  I  see  you  poor  insignificant  sinners,  who  have 
rebelled  against  your  God,  brought  back  to  your  Father's  house,  and 


654  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

now  the  whole  universe  is  full  of  wheels  and  all  those  wheels  are  working 
together  for  your  good,  to  make  out  of  you  a  jewel  fit  to  glisten  in  the 
Redeemer's  crown.  God  is  not  represented  as  saying  more  of  creation 
than  that  "  it  was  very  good,"  but  in  the  work  of  grace  he  is  described 
as  singing  for  joy.  He  breaks  the  eternal  silence  and  cries,  "  my  son. 
is  found."  As  the  philosopher  when  he  had  compelled  nature  to  yield 
her  secret  ran  through  the  street  crying,  u  Eureka !  Eureka !  I  have 
found  it !  I  have  found  it ! "  so  does  the  Father  dwell  on  the  word, 
"  my  son  that  was  dead,  is  alive  again,  he  that  was  lost  is  found." 
The  whole  of  Scripture  aims  at  the  bringing  back  again  of  the  Lord's 
banished,  for  this  the  Redeemer  leaves  his  glory,  for  this  the  church 
sweeps  her  house  and  lights  her  candle,  and  when  the  work  is  done  all 
other  bliss  is  secondary  to  the  surpassing  joy  of  the  Lord,  of  which  he 
bids  his  ransomed  ones  partake,  saying, "  Enter  ye  into  the  joy  of  your 
Lord." 

We  also  show  our  joy  by  an  alacrity  of  motion.  I  quoted  David 
just  now.  It  was  so  with  him,  he  danced  before  the  ark.  I  cannot 
imagine  David  walking  slowly  before  the  ark,  or  creeping  after  it  like 
a  mourner  at  a  funeral.  I  often  notice  the  difference  between  your 
coming  to  this  place  and  people  going  to  other  places  of  worship.  I 
remark  a  very  solemn,  stately,  and  sombre  motion  in  almost  everybody 
else,  but  you  come  tripping  along  as  if  you  were  glad  to  go  up  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord ;  you  do  not  regard  the  place  of  our  joyous  assem 
blies  as  a  sort  of  religious  prison,  but  as  the  palace  and  banquetting 
house  of  the  great  King.  When  any  one  is  joyous  he  is  sure  to  show 
it  by  the  quickness  of  his  motions.  Hearken  to  the  father,  he  says, 
"  Bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him,  and  put  a  ring  on  his 
hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet,  and  bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  let  us 
eat  and  be  merry."  As  quickly  as  possible  he  pours  out  sentence  after 
sentence.  There  is  no  delay ;  no  interval  between  the  commands. 
Might  he  not  have  said,  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him, 
and  let  us  look  at  him  awhile,  and  sit  down  and  prepare  him  for  the 
next  step ;  and  in  an  hour's  time,  or  to-morrow,  we  will  put  a  ring 
on  his  hand ;  and  then  soon  we  will  put  shoes  on  his  feet ;  he  is  best 
without  shoes  for  the  present,  for  perhaps  if  he  has  shoes  on  he  will  run 
away.  As  to  the  festival,  perhaps  we  had  better  rejoice  over  him  when, 
we  see  whether  his  repentance  is  genuine."  No,  no,  no,  the  father's  heart 
is  too  glad  ;  he  must  bless  his  boy  at  once,  heap  on  his  favours,  and  mul 
tiply  his  tokens  of  love.  When  the  Lord  receives  a  sinner,  he  runs  to  meet 
him,  he  falls  on  his  neck,  he  kisses  him,  he  speaks  to  him,  he  forgives 
him,  he  justifies  him,  he  sanctifies  him,  he  puts  him  among  the  children, 
he  opens  the  treasures  of  his  grace  to  him,  and  all  in  quick  succession. 
Within  a  few  minutes  after  he  has  been  cleansed  from  sin,  the  prodigal 
is  robed,  and  adorned,  and  shod  for  service.  The  love  of  our  Redeemer's 
heart  made  him  say  to  the  poor  thief,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me 
in  Paradise ; "  he  would  not  let  him  linger  in  pain  on  the  cross,  but 
carried  him  away  to  Paradise  in  an  hour  or  two.  Love  and  joy  are  ever 
quick  of  foot.  God  is  slow  to  anger,  bat  he  is  so  plenteous  in  his  mercy 
that  his  grace  overflows  and  rushes  on  like  a  torrent  when  it  leaps  along 
the  ravine. 

Once  more,  the  joy  of  the  father  was  shown  as  ours  often  is  by  open 


THE    RECEPTION   OP   SINNERS.  655 

utterance.  It  is  hard  for  a  glad  man  to  hold  his  tongue.  What  can 
dumb  people  do  when  they  are  very  happy  ?  I  cannot  imagine  how 
they  endure  silence  at  such  times;  it  must  then  be  a  terrible  misfortune. 
When  you  are  very  happy  you  must  tell  somebody.  So  does  this  father. 
He  pours  out  his  joy,  and  the  utterance  is  very  simple.  "  My  son  was 
dead,  and  is  alive  again,  was  lost,  and  is  found."  Yet,  simple  as  it 
is,  it  is  poetry.  The  poetry  of  the  Hebrews  consisted  in  parallelism,  or  a 
repetition  of  the  sense  or  a  part  of  the  words.  Here  are  two  lines 
which  pair  with  each  other,  and  make  a  verse  of  Hebrew  poetry.  Glad 
men  when  they  speak  naturally  and  simply  always  say  the  right  thing 
in  the  very  best  manner,  using  nature's  poetry,  as  does  the  father  here. 
Note,  also,  that  there  is  reiteration  in  his  utterance.  He  might  have 
been  satisfied  to  say,  "This  my  son  was  dead  and  is  alive  again." 
Xo;  the  fact  is  so  sweet  he  must  repeat  it,  "  He  was  lost,  and  is  found." 
Even  thus  we  speak  when  we  are  very  full  of  sweet  content ;  the 
heart  bubbleth  up  with  a  good  matter,  and  over  again  and  over 
again  we  rehearse  our  joy.  When  the  morsel  is  sweet  we  roll  it 
under  the  tongue.  We  cannot  help  it.  So  the  Lord  rejoices  over 
sinners,  and  tells  his  joy  in  holy  scripture  in  varied  phrase  and  meta 
phor,  and  though  those  scriptures  are  simple  in  their  style,  yet  they 
contain  the  very  essence  of  poetry.  The  bards  of  the  Bible  stand  in  the 
first  rank  amongst  the  sons  of  song,  God  himself  deigning  to  use  poetry 
to  utter  his  joy  because  a  more  prosaic  manner  would  be  all  too  cold  and 
tame.  Hear  how  he  puts  it:  "As  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the 
bride,  so  shall  thy  God  rejoice  over  thee."  "  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem 
and  joy  in  my  people."  We  might  have  been  left  in  the  dark  about  this 
joy  of  God;  we  might  have  been  coldly  informed  that  God  would  save 
sinners,  and  we  might  never  have  known  that  he  found  such  joy  in  it;  but 
the  divine  joy  was  too  great  to  be  concealed,  the  great  heart  of  God  could 
not  restrain  itself,  he  must  tell  out  to  all  the  universe  the  delight  which 
the  exercise  of  mercy  brought  to  him.  It  was  meet  that  he  should 
make  merry  and  be  glad,  and  therefore  he  did  it,  for  nothing  that  is 
meet  to  be  done  will  ever  be  neglected  by  the  Lord  our  God. 

Thus,  dear  friends,  have  I  feebly  spoken  of  the  joy  of  God,  and  I 
want  you  to  notice  that  it  is  a  delight  in  which  every  attribute  of 
God  takes  a  share.  Condescension  ran  to  meet  the  son,  love  fell  on  his 
neck,  grace  kissed  him,  wisdom  clothed  him,  truth  gave  him  the  ring, 
peace  shod  him,  wisdom  provided  the  feast,  and  power  prepared  it.  No 
one  attribute  of  the  divine  nature  quarrels  with  the  forgiveness  and 
salvation  of  a  sinner ;  not  one  attribute  holds  back  from  the  beloved 
employ.  Power  strengthens  the  weak,  and  mercy  binds  up  the 
wounded ;  justice  smiles  upon  the  justified  sinner,  for  it  is  satisfied 
through  the  atoning  blood,  and  truth  puts  forth  her  hand  to  guarantee 
that  the  promise  of  grace  is  fulfilled;  immutability  confirms  what  has 
been  done,  and  omniscience  looks  around  to  see  that  nothing  is  left 
undone.  The  whole  of  Deity  is  brought  to  bear  upon  a  poor  worm  of 
the  dust,  to  lift  it  up  and  transform  it  into  an  heir  of  God,  joint-heir 
with  the  Only  Begotten.  The  joy  of  God  occupies  the  whole  of  his 
being,  so  that  when  we  think  of  it  we  may  well  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord, 
0  my  soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me  bless  his  holy  name,"  since  all  that 
is  within  him  is  engaged  to  bless  his  saints. 


<>56  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

This  joy  of  the  Lord  should  give  every  sinner  great  confidence  in 
coming  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ,  for  if  you  would  be  glad  to  be  saved, 
he  will  be  glad  to  save  you ;  if  you  long  to  lay  your  head  in  your 
Father's  bosom,  your  Father's  bosom  longs  to  have  it  there ;  if  you 
pant  to  say,  "  I  have  sinned,  "  he  equally  longs  to  say  to  you,  by  acts  of 
love,  "  I  forgive  thee  freely."  If  you  pine  to  be  his  child  in  his  own 
house  once  more,  the  door  is  open,  and  he  himself  is  on  the  watch. 
Come  and  welcome,  come  and  welcome,  and  no  more  delay. 

II.  I  have  now  to  speak  of  THE  JOY  OF  THE  SINNER.  The  son  was 
glad.  He  did  not  express  it  in  words,  as  far  as  I  can  see  in  the 
parable,  but  he  felt  it  none  the  less— but  all  the  more.  Sometimes 
silence  is  discreet,  and  it  was  so  in  this  case ;  at  other  times  it 
is  absolutely  forced  upon  you  by  inability  to  utter  the  emotion, 
and  this  also  was  true  of  the  prodigal.  The  son's  heart  was 
too  full  for  utterance  in  words,  but  he  had  speaking  eyes,  and  a 
speaking  countenance  as  he  looked  on  that  dear  father.  As  he  put 
on  the  robe,  the  ring,  and  the  shoes,  he  must  have  been  too  astonished 
to  speak.  He  wept  in  showers  that  day,  but  the  tears  were  not  salt 
with  grief;  they  were  sweet  tears,  glittering  like  the  dew  of  the  morn 
ing.  What  would  make  the  son  glad,  think  you  ?  Why,  the  father's 
love,  the  father's  forgiveness,  and  restoration  to  his  old  place  in  the 
father's  heart.  That  was  the  point.  But  then  each  gift  would  serve 
as  a  token  of  that  love  and  make  the  joy  overflow.  There  was  the  rote 
put  on, — the  dress  of  a  son,  and  of  a  son  well  beloved  and  accepted. 
Have  you  noticed  how  the  robe  answered  to  his  confession  ?  The  sen 
tences  match  each  other  thus  :  u  Father,  I  have  sinned ;" — "  Bring 
forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him."  Cover  all  his  sins  with  Christ's 
righteousness  ;  put  away  his  sin  by  imputing  to  him  the  righteousness 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  robe  also  met  his  condition ;  he  was  in  rags, 
therefore, "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him,"  and  you  shall 
see  no  more  of  his  rags.  It  was  fit  that  he  should  be  thus  arrayed,  in 
token  of  his  restoration.  He  who  is  re-endowed  with  the  privileges 
of  a  son  should  not  be  dressed  in  sordid  clothes,  but  wear  raiment 
suitable  to  his  station.  Moreover,  as  a  festival  was  about  to 
begin  he  ought  to  wear  a  festive  garment.  It  would  not  be  seemly 
for  him  to  feast  and  be  merry  in  his  rags.  Put  the  best  robe  on 
him  that  he  may  be  ready  to  take  his  place  at  the  banquet.  So  when 
the  penitent  comes  to  God  he  is  not  only  covered,  as  to  the  past,  by  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  but  he  is  prepared  for  the  future  blessedness 
which  is  reserved  for  the  pardoned  ones,  yea,  he  is  fitted  to  begin  the 
rejoicing  at  once. 

Then  came  the  ring,  a  luxury  rather  than  a  necessary,  except  that 
now  he  was  a  son  it  was  well  that  he  should  be  restored  to  all  the 
honours  of  his  relationship.  The  signet  ring  in  the  east  in  former 
times  conferred  great  privileges  :  in  those  days  men  did  not  sign  their 
names,  but  stamped  with  their  signet  upon  wax,  so  that  the  ring  gave 
a  man  power  over  property,  and  made  him  a  sort  of  other  self  to  the 
man  whose  ring  he  wore.  The  father  gives  the  son  a  ring,  and  how 
complete  an  answer  was  that  gift  to  another  clause  of  his  confession. 
Let  me  read  the  two  sentences  together,  "  I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be 
called  thy  son."  "  Put  a  ring  on  his  hand."  The  gift  precisely  meets 


THE    RECEPTION    OF    SINNERS.  657 

the  confession.  It  also  tallied  with  his  changed  condition.  How  sin 
gular  that  the  very  hand  which  had  been  feeding  swine  should  now 
wear  a  ring.  There  were  no  rings  on  his  hands  when  they  were  soiled 
at  the  trough,  I  warrant  you ;  but  now  he  is  a  swine-feeder  no  longer, 
but  an  honoured  son  of  a  rich  father.  Slaves  wear  no  rings. 
Juvenal  laughs  at  certain  freed-men  because  they  were  seen  walking 
up  and  down  the  Via  Sacra  with  conspicuous  rings  on  their  fingers, 
the  emblems  of  their  new-found  liberty.  The  ring  indicated  the  peni 
tent's  liberty  from  sin,  and  his  enjoyment  of  the  full  privileges  of 
his  Father's  house.  0,  beloved,  the  Lord  will  make  you  glad  if  you 
come  to  him,  by  putting  the  seal  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  indwelling  upon 
you,  which  is  both  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance  and  the  best  adorn 
ment  of  the  hand  of  your  practical  character.  You  shall  have  a  sure 
and  honourable  token,  and  shall  know  that  all  things  are  yours,  whether 
things  present,  or  things  to  come.  This  ring  upon  your  finger  will 
declare  your  marriage  union  to  Christ,  set  forth  the  eternal  love  which 
the  Father  has  fixed  upon  you,  and  be  .the  abiding  pledge  of  the  perfect 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Then  they  put  shoes  on  his  feet.  I  suppose  he  had  worn  out  his 
own.  In  the  east  servants  do  not  usually  wear  shoes  at  home,  and 
especially  in  the  best  rooms  of  the  house.  The  master  and  the  son 
wear  the  sandals,  but  not  the  servants,  so  that  this  order  was  an  answer  to 
the  last  part  of  the  penitent's  prayer,  "  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired 
servants."  "  No,"  says  the  father,  "  put  shoes  on  his  feet."  In  the 
forgiven  sinner  the  awe  which  puts  off  its  shoes  is  to  be  overmatched  by 
the  familiarity  which  wears  the  shoes  which  infinite  love  provides.  The 
forgiven  one  is  no  longer  to  tremble  at  Sinai,  but  he  is  to  come  unto 
Mount  Zion,  and  to  have  familiar  intercourse  with  God.  Thus  also  the 
restored  one  was  shod  for  filial  service — he  could  run  upon  his 
father's  errands,  or  work  in  his  father's  fields.  He  had  now  in  every 
way  all  that  he  could  want — the  robe  that  covered  him,  the  ring 
that  adorned  him,  and  the  shoe  that  prepared  him  for  travel  or  labour. 

Now  ye  awakened  and  anxious  ones  who  are  longing  to  draw  nigh 
to  God,  I  would  that  this  description  of  the  joy  of  the  prodigal 
would  induce  you  to  come  at  once.  Come,  ye  naked,  and  he  will 
say,  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe."  Come,  ye  that  see  your  natural 
deformity  through  sin,  and  he  will  adorn  you  with  a  ring  of  beauty. 
Come,  ye  who  feel  as  if  you  could  not  come,  for  ye  have  bleeding, 
weary  feet,  and  he  will  shoe  you  with  the  silver  sandals  of  his  grace. 
Only  do  but  come,  and  you  shall  have  such  joy  in  your  hearts  as  you 
have  never  dreamed  of.  There  shall  be  a  young  heaven  born  within 
your  spirit,  which  shall  grow  and  increase  until  it  comes  to  the  fulness 
of  bliss. 

III.  The  time  has  now  come  for  us  to  dwell  upon  THE  JOY  OF  THE 
SERVANTS.  They  were  to  be  merry,  and  they  were  merry,  for  the 
music  and  the  dancing  which  were  heard  outside  could  not  have  pro 
ceeded  from  one  person  only,  there  must  have  been  many  to  join  in  it, 
and  who  should  these  be  but  the  servants  to  whom  the  father  gave  his 
commands  ?  They  ate,  they  drank,  they  danced,  they  joined  in  the 
music.  There  are  many  of  us  here  who  are  the  servants  of  our  own 
heavenly  Father ;  though  we  are  his  children,  we  delight  to  be  hia 

26 


658  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

servants.  Now,  whenever  a  sinner  is  saved,  we  have  our  share  of 
joy.  We  have  joy,  first,  in  the  Father's  joy.  They  were  so  glad, 
because  their  lord  was  glad — good  servants  are  always  pleased  when 
they  see  that  their  master  is  greatly  gratified,  and  I  am  sure  the  Lord's 
servants  are  always  joyous  when  they  feel  that  their  Lord  is  well 
pleased.  That  servant  who  went  out  to  the  elder  brother,  showed  by  his 
language  that  he  was  in  sympathy  with  the  father,  for  he  pleaded  with 
the  son  upon  the  matter  ;  and  when  you  are  in  sympathy  with  God. 
my  dear  brother  or  sister,  if  the  Lord  lets  you  see  poor  sinners  saved 
you  must  and  will  rejoice  with  him.  It  will  be  to  you  better  than  find 
ing  a  purse  full  of  money,  or  making  a  great  gain  in  business  ;  yea, 
nothing  in  the  world  can  give  you  more  delight  than  to  see  some  brother 
oi  yours  or  some  child  of  yours  made  to  rejoice  in  Christ.  A  mother 
once  beautifully  said,  "I  remember  the  new  and  strange  emotions 
which  trembled  in  my  breast  when  as  an  infant  he  was  first  folded  to 
my  heart — my  first-born  child.  The  thrill  of  that  moment  still  lingers; 
but  when  he  was  '  born  again,'  clasped  in  my  arms  a  '  new  creature 
in  Christ  Jesus,'  my  spiritual  child,  my  son  in  the  gospel,  pardoned, 
justified,  adopted,  saved,  for  ever  saved  !  Oh  !  it  was  the  very  depth 
°'*  Jov  >  j°7  unspeakable  !  My  child  was  a  child  of  God  !  The  prayers 
which  preceded  his  birth,  which  cradled  his  infancy,  which  girdled  his 
youth,  were  answered.  My  son  was  Christ's.  The  weary  watchings, 
the  yearning  desires,  the  trembling  hopes  of  years  were  at  rest.  Our 
first-born  son  was  avowedly  the  Lord's."  May  every  father  and  mother 
here  know  just  such  joy  by  having  sympathy  with  God. 

But  they  had  sympathy  with  the  son.  I  am  sure  they  rejoiced  to 
see  him  back  again,  for  somehow  usually  even  bad  sons  have  the  good 
will  of  good  servants.  When  young  men  go  .away,  and  are  a  great  grief 
to  their  fathers,  the  servants  often  stick  to  them.  They  will  say, 
"Well,  Master  John  was  very  inconsiderate  and  gay,  and  he  vexed  his 
father  a  great  deal,  but  I  should  like  to  see  the  poor  boy  back  again." 
Especially  is  this  true  of  the  old  servants  who  have  been  in  the  house 
since  the  boy  was  born  :  they  never  forget  him.  And  you  will  find 
that  God's  old  servants  are  always  glad  when  they  see  prodigal 
children  return  ;«they  are  delighted  beyond  measure,  because  they  love 
them  after  all,  notwithstanding  their  wanderings.  Sinner,  with  all 
your  faults  and  hardness  of  heart  we  do  love  you,  and  we  should  be  glad  " 
for  your  sake  to  see  you  delivered  from  eternal  ruin  and  from  the  wrath 
of  God  which  now  abideth  on  you,  and  brought  to  rejoice  in  pardoned 
sin,  and  acceptance  in  the  Beloved. 

We  should  rejoice  for  the  sinner's  sake,  but  I  think  the  servants 
rejoiced  most  of  all  when  they  were  the  instruments  in  the  father's 
hand  of  blessing  the  son.  Just  look  at  this.  The  father  said  to  the 
servants,  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe."  He  might  have  gone  to  the 
wardrobe  himself  with  a  key  and  opened  it,  and  brought  out  the  robe 
himself,  but  he  gave  them  the  pleasure  of  doing  it.  When  I  get  my 
orders  from  my  Lord  and  Master  on  the  Lord's-day  morning  to  bring 
forth  the  best  robe,  I  am  delighted  indeed.  Nothing  delights  me  more 
than  to  preach  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  sub- 
stitutionary  sacrifice  of  our  exalted  Redeemer.  "  Bring  forth  the  best 
'robe."  Why,  my  Master,  I  might  be  content  to  keep  out  of  heaven  if 


THE    RECEPTION    OF    SINNERS.  650 

thou  wouldst  always  give  me  this  work  to  do — to  bring  forth  the  best 
robe  and  extol  and  exalt  Jesus  Christ  in  the  eyes  of  the  people.  Then 
he  said,  "  Put  it  on  him."  When  our  Lord  gives  us  grace  to  do  that 
there  is  more  joy  still.  How  many  times  I  have  brought  forth  the  best 
robe,  but  could  not  put  it  on  you.  I  have  held  it  up,  and  expatiated 
on  its  excellencies,  and  pointed  to  your  rags,  and  said  what  a  delightful 
thing  it  would  be  if  I  could  put  it  on  you,  but  I  could  not ;  but  when 
the  heavenly  Father,  by  his  divine  grace  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
makes  us  the  means  of  bringing  these  treasures  into  the  possession  of 
poor  sinners,  oh,  what  joy  !  I  should  rejoice  to  bring  forth  the  ring 
of  the  Spirit's  sealing  work,  and  the  shoes  of  the  preparation  of  the 
gospel  of  peace,  for  it  is  a  joy  to  exhibit  these  blessings,  and  a  greater 
joy  still  to  put  them  upon  the  poor,  returning  wanderer.  God  be 
thanked  for  giving  his  servants  so  great  a  pleasure  !  I  would  not 
have  dared  to  describe  the  Lord's  servants  as  putting  on  the  robe,  the 
ring,  and  the  shoes,  but  as  he  has  himself  done  so  I  am  rejoiced  to  use 
the  Holy  Spirit's  own  language. 

How  sweet  was  the  command,  " Put  it  on  him"  Yes,  put  it  on  the 
poor  trembling,  ragged,  shivering  sinner,  "  Put  it  on  him,"  even 
on  him,  though  he  can  hardly  believe  such  mercy  to  be  possible. 
"  Put  it  on  him  ? "  Yes,  on  him.  He  who  was  a  drunkard,  a 
swearer,  an  adulterer?  Yes,  put  it  on  him,  for  he  repents.  What  joy 
it  is  when  we  are  enabled  by  God's  commission  to  throw  that  glorious 
mantle  over  a  great  sinner.  As  for  the  ring,  put  it  on  him;  that  ia 
the  beauty  of  it.  And  the  shoes,  put  them  on  him;  that  they  are  for 
him  is  the  essence  of  our  joy — that  such  a  sinner,  and  especially  when 
he  is  one  of  our  own  household,  should  receive  these  gifts  of  grace 
is  wonderful !  It  was  most  kind  of  the  father  to  divide  the  labour 
of  love.  One  would  put  on  the  robe,  another  the  ring,  and  a  third  the 
shoes.  Some  of  my  brethren  can  preach  Jesus  Christ  in  his  righteous 
ness  gloriously,  and  they  put  on  the  best  robe  ;  others  seem  most  gifted 
'n  dwelling  upon  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  they  put  on  the 
ring:  while  yet  another  class  are  practical  divines,  and  they  put  on  the 
shoes.  I  do  not  mind  which  I  have  to  do,  if  I  may  but  have  a  part 
in  helping  to  bring  to  poor  sinners  those  matchless  gifts  of  grace,  which 
at  infinite  expense  the  Lord  has  prepared  for  those  who  come  back  to 
him.  How  glad  those  were  who  helped  to  dress  him  I  cannot  tell. 
Meanwhile,  another  servant  was  gone  off  out  of  doors  to  bring  in  the 
fatted  calf,  and  perhaps  two  or  three  were  engaged  in  killing  and  dress 
ing  it,  while  another  was  lighting  a  fire  in  the  kitchen,  and  preparing 
the  spits  for  the  roast.  One  laid  the  table,  and  another  ran  to  the  garden 
to  bring  flowers  to  make  wreaths  for  the  room, — I  know  I  should  have 
done  that  if  I  had  been  there.  All  were  happy.  All  ready  to  join  in 
the  music  and  dancing.  Those  who  work  for  the  good  of  sinners  are 
always  the  gladdest  when  they  are  saved.  You  who  pray  for  them,  you 
who  teach  them,  you  who  preach  to  them,  you  who  win  them  for 
Christ,  you  shall  share  their  merriment. 

Now,  dear  brethren,  we  are  told  that  they  "  began  to  be  merry,"  and 
according  to  the  description  it  would  seem  that  they  were  merry  indeed, 
but  still  they  only  "  began."  I  see  no  intimation  that  they  ever  left 
oft".  "  They  began  to  be  merry,"  and  as  merriment  is  apt  to  grow 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

beyond  all  bounds  when  it  once  starts,  who  knows  what  they  have 
come  to  by  this  time.  The  saints  begin  to  be  merry  now,  and  they 
will  never  cease,  but  rejoice  evermore.  On  earth  all  the  joy  we  have 
is  only  beginning  to  be  merry,  it  is  up  in  heaven  that  they  get  into 
full  swing.  Here  our  best  delight  is  hardly  better  than  a  neap  tide  at 
its  ebb ;  there  the  joy  rolls  along  in  the  majesty  of  a  full  spring  tide. 

**Oh  what  rapturous  hallelujahs 
In  our  Father's  home  above  I 
Hallelujah !    Hallelujah  ! 

O'er  the  embraces  of  his  love ! 
Wondrous  welcome — God's  own  welcome, 
May  the  chief  of  sinners  prove. 

44  Sweet  melodious  strains  ascending, 

All  around  a  mighty  flood ; 
Servants,  friends,  with  joy  attending— 

Oh  !  the  happiness  of  God  ! 
Grace  abounding,  all  transcending, 
Through  a  Saviour's  precious  blood.*1 

Let  us  begin  to  be  merry  this  morning.  But  we  cannot  unless  we  are 
labouring  for  the  salvation  of  others  in  all  ways  possible  to  us.  If  we 
have  done  and  are  doing  that,  let  us  praise  and  bless  the  Lord,  and 
rejoice  with  the  reclaimed  ones,  and  let  us  keep  the  feast  as  Jesus 
would  have  it  kept;  for  I  hope  there  is  no  one  here  of  the  elder 
brethren  who  will  be  angry  and  refuse  to  go  in.  Let  us  continue  to  be 
merry  as  long  as  we  live,  because  the  lost  are  found  and  the  dead  are 
made  alive.  God  grant  you  to  be  merry  on  this  account  world  without 
«nd.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  xv.  1 1 — 32, 


Cfce  p>  f  mi  Street  fulfil 


THE    SUNDAY-SCHOOL   TEACHER— A    STEWARD. 


DBUTEBED   ON   TUESDAY   EVENING,   MAY   4,    1358,   BY   THB 

REV.    C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   BLOOMSBDRY   CHAPEL, 

On   behalf  of  the   Sunday  School  Union. 
"  Gire  an  account  of  thy  stewardship." — Luke  Tri.  2. 

WE  have  heard  many  times  in  our  lives,  that  we  are  all  stewards  to  Almighty 
God.  We  hold  it  as  a  solemn  truth  of  our  religion,  that  the  rich  man  is  respon 
sible  for  the  use  which  he  makes  of  his  wealth ;  that  the  talented  m;m  must  give 
an  account  to  God  of  the  interest  which  he  getteth  upon  his  talents;  that  every 
one  of  us,  in  proportion  to  our  time  and  opportunities,  must  give  an  account  for 
himself  before  Almighty  God.  But,  my  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  our  responsi 
bility  is  even  deeper  and  greater  than  that  of  other  men.  We  have  the  ordinary 
responsibility  which  falls  upon  all  professors  of  religion,  to  give  an  account  of  all 
we  have  to  God ;  but  besides  this,  you  and  I  have  the  extraordinary  responsibilities  of 
our  official  standing — you,  as  teachers  for  Christ  in  your  classes;  and  others  of  u§ 
as  preachers  for  him  before  the  great  congregation.  The  first  responsibility  is  too 
heavy  for  any  man  to  fulfil.  Apart  from  divine  grace,  it  is  not  possible  that  any 
man  should  so  use  all  that  God  has  given  him  as  to  be  accepted  at  last  with  a 
"Well  done  thou  good  and  faithful  servant;"  yet  even  if  that  were  possible,  it 
would  still  remain  an  utter  impossibility  for  us  fully  to  sustain  the  fearful 
weight  of  responsibility  which  rests  upon  us  as  teachers  of  the  Word  of  God  to 
our  fellow  immortals.  Upon  our  necks  there  are  two  yokes;  Sovereign  grace 
can  make  them  light  and  easy,  but  apart  from  that  they  will  gall  our  shoulders  \ 
for  they  are,  of  themselves,  too  heavy  for  us  to  bear.  Common  responsibility  is  aa 
Solomon's  whip;  but  extraordinary  responsibility  derived  from  official  standing, 
when  not  regarded,  will  be  as  the  scorpion  of  Rehoboam,  its  little  finger  *hall  be* 
thicker  than  its  father's  loins.  Woe  unto  the  watchman  who  warns  them  not| 
woe  unto  the  minister  who  fails  to  teach  the  truth;  woe  unto  the  Sabbath- 
school  teacher  who  is  unfaithful  to  his  trust.  Now,  let  us  try  to  stir  one  another 
up,  upon  this  seriously  important  matter.  You  will  pray  for  me  while  I  preach, 
that  I  may  utter  some  things  that  may  do  good  to  all  now  present,  and  I  will  labour 
that  God  may,  in  answer  to  your  prayers,  give  me  words  and  thoughts  which  shall 
be  blessed  to  you. 

Now,  first,  let  me  show  the  meaning  of  our  being  stewards;  then  let  us  consider 
what  kind  of  account  we  shall  have  to  give-,  and  lastly,  let  us  notice  the  days  of 
reckoning  when  we  OUGHT  to  cast  up  our  account,  and  the  days  of  reckoning  when  wt 
MUST  give  in  our  account. 

L     First,  then,  THE  STEWARD— WHAT  is  HE? 

In  the  first  place,  the  steward  is  a  servant.  He  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  servants, 
but  he  is  only  a  servant.  Perhaps  he  is  the  bailiff  of  a  farm,  and  looks,  to  all 
intents  and  purposes,  like  a  country  farmer:  he  rides  over  his  master's  estate,  and 
has  many  men  under  him;  still  he  is  only  a  servant,  he  is  under  authority,  he  is 
only  a  steward.  Perhaps  he  is  steward  in  the  house  of  some  gentleman,  who 
employs  him  to  see  after  the  whole  of  his  establishment,  in  order  that  he  may  be  free 
from  cares.  In  that  capacity  he  is  himself  a  master,  but  still  he  is  a  servant;  far 

No    182.  -6; 


"?HB    SUNDAY-SCHOOL   TEACHER— A   STEWARD. 

ne  has  one  over  him.  Let  him  be  as  proud  as  he  pleases,  he  has  little  to  be  proud 
of,  for  the  only  rank  he  holds  in  life,  is  the  rank  of  a  servant.  Now,  the  minister, 
and  the  Sunday-school  teacher  specially  stand  in  the  rank  of  servants.  Why,  we 
are  m-ne  of  us  our  own  masters;  we  are  not  independent  gentlemen,  who  may  do 
as  we  please;  our  classes  are  not  our  own  farms,  which  we  may  till  in  our  own 
manner,  and  neglect  if  we  please,  out  of  which  we  may  produce  any  harvest,  or 
none  at  all,  at  our  own  discretion.  No,  we  are  nothing  better  than  stewards,  and 
we  are  to  labour  for  our  Master  in  heaven.  What  a  strange  thing  it  is  to  see  a 
minister  or  a  teacher  giving  himself  fine  airs,  as  if  he  were  everybody  in  the  world, 
and  might  do  as  he  pleased.  Is  it  not  an  anomaly?  How  is  he  to  talk  about  the 
sacrifices  that  he  makes,  when  he  is  spending  only  his  master's  property?  How 
is  he  to  boast  about  the  time  which  he  expends,  when  his  time  is  not  his  own? 
It  is  all  his  Master's.  He  is  a  servant,  and  therefore,  do  he  what  he  may,  he 
only  discharges  the  duty  for  which  he  is  well  rewarded.  He  has  no  reason  to  be 
proud,  or  to  lord  it  over  others,  for  whatever  his  power  among  them  may  b3,  he  is 
himself  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  servant.  Let  each  of  us  try  to  recollect  that 
henceforth  "I  am  only  a  servant."  If  a  superintendent  puts  a  teacher  to  a  class 
which  she  does  not  like,  she  will  recollect  that  she  is  a  servant.  She  does  not  allow 
her  servants  at  home  to  stand  up  and  say,  they  are  not  going  to  do  scullery- 
work  but  will  only  wait  at  table;  they  are  servants,  and  must  do  as  they  are 
bidden;  and  if  we  felt  that  we  were  servants,  we  should  not  object  to  do  what 
we  are  told  for  Christ's  sake:  though  we  would  not  do  it  at  the  dictation  of  men, 
yet  for  Christ's  sske  we  do  it  as  unto  the  Lord.  We  do  not  suppose  that  our 
servants  will  come  to  us  at  night,  and  expect  us  to  say  to  them,  "  You  have 
done  your  work  very  well  to-day;"  we  do  not  imagine  that  they  will  look  for 
constant  commendation.  They  are  servants,  and  when  they  get  their  wages,  that  is 
their  encomium  on  their  work.  They  may  judge  they  are  worth  their  money,  or 
else  we  should  not  keep  them.  When  you  do  your  work  for  Jesus,  recollect  you 
are  only  a  servant.  Do  not  expect  always  to  have  that  encouragement,  which  some 
people  are  constantly  crying  after.  If  you  get  encouragement  from  your  pastor, 
from  other  teachers,  from  your  friends,  be  thankful;  but  if  you  do  not  get  it,  go 
on  with  your  work  notwithstanding.  You  are  a  servant,  and  when  you  receive  your 
reward,  that  is  of  grace,  and  not  of  debt,  then  you  will  have  the  highest  encomium 
that  can  be  passed  upon  you,  the  plaudit  of'your  Lord,  and  eternal  glory  with 
him  whose  you  are,  and  whom  you  desire  to  serve. 

But  still  while  the  steward  is  a  servant,  he  is  an  honourable  one.  It  does  not  do 
for  the  other  servants  in  the  house  to  tell  him  that  he  is  a  servant.  He  will  not 
endure  that:  he  knows  it,  and  feels  it;  he  desires  to  act  and  work  as  such,  but  at 
the  same  time,  he  is  an  honoured  servant.  Now,  those  who  serve  Christ  in  the 
office  of  teaching,  are  honourable  men  and  women.  I  remember  to  have  heard  a 
very  unseemly  discussion  between  two  persons,  as  to  whether  the  minister  was 
not  superior  to  the  Sabbath-school  teacher.  It  reminded  me  of  that  talk  of  the 
disciples,  as  to  who  among  them  was  the  greatest.  Why,  we  are  all  of  us  "  the 
least,"  if  we  feel  aright,  and  though  we  must  each  of  us  exalt  our  office  as  God 
hath  given  it  to  us,  yet,  I  see  not  anywhere  in  the  Bible,  anything  that  should  lead 
me  to  believe  that  the  office  of  the  preacher  is  more  honourable  than  that  of  the 
teacher.  It  seems  to  me,  that  every  Sunday-school  teacher  has  a  right  to 
put  "Reverend"  before  his  name  as  much  as  I  have,  or  if  not,  if  he  discharges  his 
trust  he  certainly  is  a  "  Eight  Honourable."  He  teaches  his  congregation  and 
preaches  to  his  class.  I  may  preach  to  more,  and  he  to  less,  but  still  he  is 
doing  the  same  work,  though  in  a  smaller  sphere.  I  am  sure  I  can  sympathise 
with  Mr.  Carey,  when  he  said  of  his  son  Felix,  who  left  the  missionary  work  to 
become  an  ambassador, "  Felix  has  drivelled  into  an  ambassador;"  meaning  to 
say,  that  he  was  once  a  great  person  as  a  missionary,  but  that  he  had  afterwards 
accepted  a  comparatively  insignificant  office.  So  I  think  we  may  say  of  the 
Sabbath-school  teacher,  if  he  gives  up  his  work  because  he  cannot  attend  to  it,  on 
account  of  his  enlarged  business,  he  drivels  into  a  rich  merchant.  If  he  forsakes 
his  teaching  because  he  finds  there  is  so  much  else  to  do,  he  drivels  into  something 
less  than  he  was  before;  with  one  exception,  if  he  is  obliged  to  give  up  to  attend 
to  his  own  family,  and  makes  that  family  his  Sabbath-school  class,  there  is  no 
drivelling  there;  he  stands  in  the  same  position  as  he  did  before.  I  say  they 
who  teach,  they  who  seek  to  pluck  souls  as  brands  from  the  burning,  are  to  be 
considered  as  honoured  persons,  second  lar  to  him  from  whom  they  received  their 
ocm mission ;  but  still  iu  some  sweet  seusu  lifted  up  to  become  fellows  with  him,  for 

218 


.*2    &CKDAY-SCHGOL    FJCACHER— A 

he  Lfttts  them  his  brethren  and  his  friends.  "The  serrant  kaoweth  not  what 
his  Lord  doeth,  but  I  have  called  you  friends,  for  all  things  I  have  heard  of  my 
Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you." 

Only  one  more  thought  here.  The  steward  is  also  a  servant  who  has  very 
(jreat  responsibility  attached  to  his  position.  A  sense  of  responsibility  *eems  to 
right  man  always  a  weighty  thing.  To  do  a  thing  where  there  is  no  respon 
sibility  involved  at  all,  is  a  very  slight  matter,  and  hence  we  find  in  ordinary 
affairs  that  the  labour  which  involves  no  trust  is  but  poorly  paid.  But  where 
there  is  a  large  amount  of  trust  reposed  the  labour  is  paid  in  proportion.  Now 
the  work  of  the  Sabbath-school  teacher  is  one  of  the  most  responsible  in  the 
world.  It  has  sometimes  staggered  me  to  think  how  greatly  God  trusts  you  and 
me.  You  remember  the  story  of  the  prodigal.  It  finds  a  counterpart  in  each  of 
us,  who  after  long  wandering  in  sin  have  come  home  to  Jesus.  I  sometimes 
think  that  a  prudent  father,  when  the  prodigal  was  restored  to  his  house, 
would  receive  him  to  his  heart,  would  press  him  to  his  bosom,  and  give  him 
a  share  of  all  his  wealth,  but  would  be  very  slow  to  trust  him  in  any 
matter  of  responsibility.  The  next  market-day  the  old  gentlemen  would  say, 
"  Now  John  I  love  you  with  all  my  heart,  but  you  know  you  ran  away  once,  and 
spent  your  living  riotously;  I  must  send  your  elder  brother  to  market;  I  camua 
trust  you  with  my  purse:  I  love  you;  I  have  totally  forgiven  you,  at  the  same 
time  I  cannot  yet  rely  upon  you."  Why  does  not  God  say  so  to  us?  Instead  of 
that,  when  he  takes  poor  prodigals  to  his  heart,  he  trusts  us  with  his  most 
precious  jewels,  he  trusts  us  with  immortal  souls.  He  permits  us  to  be  the  means 
of  seeking  his  lost  sheep,  and  then  allows  us  to  feed  the  lambs  after  they  are 
gathered.  He  puts  the  prodigal  into  the  most  important  station,  and  hath 
confidence  in  him.  Then  my  brethren  and  sisters,  seeing  he  hath  been  gracious 
enough  to  repose  confidence  in  such  unworthy  persons,  shall  we  deceive  b>a? 
Oh  no;  let  us  earnestly  labour  as  stewards  that  every  part  of  the  e&-ate 
committed  to  us  shall  be  found  in  good  order  when  our  Master  comes;  that  every 
jot  and  tittle  of  our  account  shall  be  found  correct  when  he  sums  it  up  in  the 
great  day  of  the  audit  before  his  throne.  Our  office  is  a  very,  very  solemn  one. 
Some  think  little  of  it.  Some  take  it  upon  themselves  very  lightly.  Giddy  youths 
are  enticed  into  the  school  and  not  rendered  more  sober  by  their  connection 
with  it.  Let  such  depart  from  us.  We  want  none  but  those  who  are  sober,  none 
but  those  who  solemnly  weigh  what  they  are  doing,  and  who  enter  upon  the  work 
as  a  matter  involving  life  or  death;  not  as  a  trivial  affair  which  concerns  the 
interests  of  time,  but  an  awfully  solemn  thing  which  even  an  angel  would  be 
incapable  of  performing,  unless  he  had  the  abundant  assistance  of  God  the  Holy 
Spirit.  I  have  thus  endeavoured  very  simply  to  set  forth  the  idea  couched 
in  the  word  "  stewardship."  We  are  servants  highly  honoured,  very  responsible, 
and  much  trusted. 

II.  And  now,  THE  ACCOUNT — "Give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship."  Let 
us  briefly  think  of  this  giving  an  account  of  our  stewardship. 

Let  us  first  notice  that  when  we  shall  come  to  give  an  account  of  our  steward 
ship  before  God,  that  account  must  be  given  in  personally,  by  every  one  of  us. 
While  we  are  here,  we  talk  in  the  mass;  but  when  we  come  before  God,  we  shall 
have  to  speak  as  individuals.  You  hear  persons  boasting  about  "  our  Sabbath- 
school."  Many  persons  are  wicked  enough  to  call  the  Sabbath-school  "  their 
school,"  when  they  never  see  it  by  the  year  together.  They  say,  "I  hope  our 
school  is  flourishing,"  when  they  never  subscribe  a  halfpenny,  when  they  ne>er 
give  the  teachers  a  word  of  encouragement,  or  even  a  smile,  and  do  not  know  how 
many  children  the  school  contains.  Yet  they  call  it  theirs.  Thieves  that  they  are, 
taking  to  themselves  that  which  does  not  belong  to  them!  Well,  but  we,  in  our 
measure,  make  the  same  mistake.  As  a  ministry,  we  often  talk  of  the  doings  of 
the  ''body,"  and  what  wonders  have  been  done  by  the  ''denomination."  Now,  let 
us  recollect,  when  we  come  before  God,  there  will  be  no  judging  us  in  denominations, 
no  dealing  with  us  in  schools  and  in  churches,  but  the  account  must  be  given  for 
each  one  by  himself.  So,  then,  thou  that  hast  the  infant  class,  tliou  wilt  have  to 
give  thine  own  account.  It  was  but  the  other  day  thou  wast  finding  fault  with 
the  conduct  of  the  senior  class,  and  thou  wast  told  then  to  look  at  home.  Con 
science  told  thee  so.  But  at  last,  when  thou  shalt  have  to  stand  before  God,  thou 
wilt  have  no  account  to  give  of  the  senior  class,  but  of  that  infant  class  committed 
to  thee.  And  you,  my  sister,  you  have  been  seven  or  eight  years  a  teacher — you 
must  give  an  acc«unt  for  \ourself,  not  for  that  other  teacher  of  another  class,  ot 

111 


THK   SUHDAT-SCHOOL   TEACHER — A   STEWARD. 

vhom  you  hare  often  boasted,  because  she  has  been  the  means  of  bringing  «ix  01 
aeyen  children  to  Christ  lately.  Remember,  her  six  won't  be  put  with  your  none 
at  all,  in  order  to  make  the  total  at  the  year's  end  look  respectable;  but  there  will 
stand  your  great  blank  at  the  end  of  your  labours,  and  there  will  remain  the  dark 
mark  for  your  negligence,  for  your  unpunctuality,  your  carelessness  in  your  class, 
without  the  relief  of  the  bright  side  of  the  diligent  teacher's  success.  You  must 
be  judged  each  of  you  for  yourself,  not  in  parties,  but  one  by  one.  This  makes  it 
terrible  work,  for  a'man  to  be  looked  at  all  alone.  I  have  known  people  who  could  not 
bear  to  stand  up  in  a  pulpit;  the  very  fact  of  so  many  eyes  looking  upon  them  seemed 
so  horrible;  but  how  will  it  be  when  we  must  stand  up  and  hear  our  hearts  read  by  the 
all-searching  eye  of  God,  and  when  the  whole  of  our  career  in  the  offices  which  we 
now  hold  will  be  published  before  the  sun,  and  that,  I  repeat  it.  without  the  salvo 
of  the  success  of  others,  without  any  addition  to  our  labours  derived  from  the 
diligence  of  other  teachers  ?  Come,  Mr.  Steward,  what  is  your  account  ?  Not 
that  one,  sir,  not  that  one;  your  account.  "Lord,  I  have  brought  in  the  account 
of  the  Sunday-school  books."  "No,  not  that;  the  account  of  your  own  class?" 
"  Well,  my  Master,  I  have  brought  in  the  account  of  the  class  for  the  last  twenty- 
five  years,  showing  how  many  were  converted."  "No,  not  that;  the  account  of  your 
own  class  while  you  were  its  teacher."  "  Well,  I  have  brought  in  the  account  of  the 
class  during  the  time  I  was  teacher  with  So-and-so."  "No,  not  that;  the  account  of 
the  class  while  you  were  the  teacher  of  it  alone ;  the  account  of  how  you  taught, 
what  you  taught,  how  you  prayed,  how  earnestly  you  laboured,  how  diligently  you 
studied,  and  what  you  sought  to  do  for  Christ."  Not  the  addenda  of  the  other  teacher 
who  helped  you  in  another  part  of  the  duty,  but  your  own  personal  account  alone 
must  be  brought  in  before  God.  "  Give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship."  Putting 
it  in  this  light,  what  account  will  some  of  you  give  in  at  the  last  and  great  day? 
Just  let  me  stop  a  minute  to  charge  your  memories.  What  kind  of  account  will  it 
be  ?  I  trust  a  very  large  number  here  can  humbly  in  their  hearts  say,  "  I  have 
done  but  little,  but  I  did  that  sincerely  and  prayerfully;  may  God  accept  it  through 
Jesus  Christ  1"  But  I  fear  there  are  some  others,  who,  if  they  are  true  to  their 
consciences,  will  say,  "I  have  done  but  little;  I  did  that  little  carelessly;  I  did  it 
without  prayer;  I  did  it  without  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  Then,  my  brother 
and  sister,  1  hope  you  will  add  after  that,  "  Oh,  my  God,  forgive  me,  and  help  me 
from  this  good  hour  to  be  diligent  in  this  divine  business,  fervent  in  my  spirit, 
serving  the  Lord."  And  may  God  bless  you  in  that  prayer!  Make  no  resolve,  but 
offer  a  prayer  which  is  better  far;  and  may  you  be  heard  in  heaven,  the  dwelling- 
place  of  God. 

And  note  again,  that  while  this  account  must  be  personal  it  must  be  exact. 
You  will  not,  when  you  present  your  account  before  God,  present  the  gross 
total,  but  every  separate  item.  When  thou  givest  in  thine  account  of  thy 
stewardship,  it  will  be  thus.  Thou  hadst  so  many  children.  What  didst  thou 
say  to  this  child,  and  to  this,  and  to  this,  and  to  the  other?  How  often  didst 
thou  pray  for  that  child  with  his  bitter  temper;  for  that  child  with  his  un 
bending  obstinacy;  for  that  child  with  its  quickness,  and  its  sweet  affection  ^ 
for  that  child,  that  sulky  one ;  for  that  child,  the  headstrong,  vicious  one, 
that  had  learned  all  the  evils  of  the  street,  and  seemed  to  taint  others? 
What  didst  thou  do  for  each  one  of  these?  How  didst  thou  labour  for  the 
conversion  of  every  one?  And  to  make  the  account  still  more  particular,  it  will 
run  thus — What  didst  thou  do  lor  each  child  on  each  Sabbath?  Thou  heardest 
one  child  utter  an  ill  word:  didst  thou  reprove  it?  Thou  sawest  another  child 
oppress  a  little  one:  didst  thou  deliver  the  less  out  of  his  hand  and  reprove  himr 
and  teach  both  children  to  love  each  other?  Didst  thou  notice  the  follies  of  each, 
and  strive  to  understand  the  temperament  of  each,  so  that  thou  shouldest  fit  thy 
discourse  or  thy  prayer  to  each?  Didst  thou  travail  in  birth  for  the  conversion 
tf  each  one?  Didst  thou  agonise  in  prayer  with  God,  and  then  didst  thou 
agonise  in  exhortation  with  them,  beseeching  them  to  be  reconciled  to  Christ?  1 
Relieve  the  account  will  be  far  more  minute  than  this,  when  God  shall  come  to  try 
our  heart?  and  reins  as  well  as  our  works  and  ways.  My  poor  way  of  putting  it 
does  but  becloud  the  truth  which  I  seek  to  bring  forth,  but  nevertheless  so  shall  it 
be;  a  special  and  exact  account  shall  be  given.  And  then  there  shall  be  an 
account  given,  for  every  opportunity;  not  only  for  every  child,  but  for  every 
opportunity  of  doing  good  to  the  child.  Did  you  avail  yourself  of  that  afternoon, 
when  the  child  was  in  a  peculiarly  solemn  frame  because  his  little  brother  lay  at 
home  dead?  Did  you  seek  to  send  the  arrows  home  when  providence  had  made 

X20 


THE    *rNI>AY-§CHOOL   TEACHER— A    STEWARD. 

ft  wound  in  his  little  heart  because  he  had  lost  his  dear  mother?  Did  you  seek 
to  turn  every  event  which  occurred  in  the  school  to  account,  whether  it  was 
joyous  or  the  reverse?  God  pave  you  the  opportunity,  and  he  will  at  last  ask  you 
what  you  did  with  it.  We  shall  many  of  us  make  but  a  sorry  account,  for  we 
have  neglected  much  that  we  ought  to  have  done;  and  the  general  confession 
must  be  ours  as  teachers,  "  We  have  done  those  things  which  we  ought  not  to  hare 
done,  and  we  have  left  undone  those  things  which  we  ought  to  have  done." 

And  then  remember,  again,  the  account  will  bs  exact  as  to  everything  that  we 
did.  We  shall  not  only  be  examined  as  to  how  we  addressed  the  school;  we  may 
have  had  peculiar  gifts  for  that,  and  we  may  have  done  well;  it  will  be,  "  How  did 
you  address  your  own  class?"  and  not  that  alone,  but  " How  did  you  study  the 
lessons?"  If  thou  hadst  no  time  it  will  not  be  required  of  thee  to  do  what 
"hou  couldst  not  do;  but  if  thou  hadst  much  leisure  how  didst  thou  spend  it? 
Was  it  for  thy  children,  for  thy  Master's  good,  that  thou  mightest  find  polished 
shafts  to  shoot  forth  from  thy  bow,  that  God  might  bless  thee,  by  giving  thee 
strength  to  send  them  home  into  the  heart?  And  then,  what  didst  thou  do  in  thy 
closet?  Wast  thou  cold  and  careless  there?  Were  thy  children  forgotten,  or  didst 
thou  bring  them  on  thy  heart,  and  in  thine  arms,  and  with  tears  and  cries  com 
mend  them  to  Christ?  Ah,  Sunday-school  teachers,  your  closet  shall  be  turned 
into  the  open  air  one  day,  and  the  contents  of  your  secret  chambers  be  published 
before  the  sun.  Oh,  ye  whose  cobwebbed  closets  witness  against  you;  oh,  ye  against 
whom  the  beam  out  of  the  wall  exclaimeth  because  your  voice  has  not  been  heard 
there,  against  whom  the  very  floor  might  bear  witness,  because  it  hath  never  felt 
the  weight  of  your  knees,  how  will  you  stand  this  searching  test?  How  will  you 
endure  this  day  of  burning,  when  God  shall  try  you  for  everything  you  did,  and 
everything  you  did  not  do  which  you  ought  to  have  done,  in  connection  with  the 
work  of  teaching  your  children?  The  account  must  be  exact  and  precise,  as  well 
as  personal.  I  shall  not  stop  to  enlarge  upon  that;  your  own  conscience  and 
judgment  can  enlarge  npon  it  at  home. 

Now,  remember,  once  again,  that  the  account  must  be  complete.     You   will  not 
be   allowed   to   leave  out  something,  you  will  not  be  allowed  to  add  anything. 
Perhaps   some  of  you  would  like  to  begin  with  to-morro\v,  or  next  Sabbath- 
day,  and  strike  out  the  past.     No,  Sunday-school  teacher,  when  God  says,  "  Give 
an  account  of  thy  stewardship,"  you  will   have  to  begin  with  the  day  when  you 
first  were  a  teacher.    Ah,  my  God,  how  many  there  are  who  profess  to  preach  the 
Word,  who  might  well  beg  that  thou  wouldest  let  many  a  year  of  their  ministry 
be  buried  in  forgetfulness !     Ah,  might  not  some  of  us  fall  upon  our  knees  and  say, 
"Lord,  let    me    give    account    of    my   diligent   years,  not  of  my  idle  years ?'r 
But  we  must  begin  with  our  ordination,  we  must  end  with  our  death;  and  you 
must  begin  with  the  first  hour  when  you  sat  down  in  your  class,  and  you  must  end 
when  lite  ends,  and  not  till  then.     Does  not  this  put  a  very  solemn  aspect  upon 
your  account,  some  of  you?     You  are  always  saying,  "  I  will  be  better  to-morrow." 
Will  that  blot  out  yesterday?     "I  must  be  more  diligent  in  future."     Will  that 
redeem   the   lost  opportunities   which   have  departed    in    the    years   gone   by? 
No;   if  you  have  loitered  long,  and  lingered   much,  you  will  find  the  hardest 
running  of  to-day  will  not  make  up  for  the  loitering  of  yesterday.     There  have 
been  some  men  who,  alter  spending  many  years  in  sin,  have  been  doubly  diligent 
for  Christ  afterwards,  but  they  have  always  felt  that  they  have  only  done  the  day's 
work  in  the  day,  and  they  mourned  over  those  years  which  the  locusts  had  eaten, 
as  gone  beyond  recall.    Oh!  catch  the  moments  as  they  fly,  Sabbath-school  teachers; 
use  the  days  as  they  come.     Do  not  be  talking  about  making  up  for  the  badness  of 
the  first  part  of  the  account  by  the  brilliant  character  of  the  conclusion;  you 
cannot  do  it,  you  must  give  an  account  for  each  day  separately,  for  each  year*  by 
itself;   and  do  what  you  may  to  retrieve  your  losses,  the  losses  still  stand  upon 
the  book,  and  the  Master  will  say,  at  last,  "  How  came  these  here?"    And,  though 
they  are  all  covered  up  in  Sovereign  grace,  if  thou  belie  vest  in  Christ  Jesus,  yet 
thou  wouldest  not  wish  to  have  any  the  more  stains  for  that.    Because  Christ  hath 
washed  thee,  thou  dost  not  desire  to  make  thyself  filthy;  because  he  hath  atoned, 
thou  dost  not  desire  to  commit  sin.     No,  live,  my  brothers  and  sisters,  as  Sunday- 
school  teachers  should  live.     Live  as  if  your  own  salvation  depended  upon  the 
strictness  of  your  fulfilling  your  duty;   and  yet  recollect  your  salvation  does  not 
depend  upon  that,  hut  on  your  personal  interest  in  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  in 
the  all-prevailing  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  Israel's  strength  and 
Redeemer. 

221 


TUB    SUTTDAT-SCHOOL    TEACUER — A   STEWARD. 

.'II.  And  now,  though  there  are  many  other  things  I  might  say,  I  fear  lest  I 
might  weary  you,  therefore,  let  me  notice  some  occasions  when  it  will  be  WELL  for 
you  all  to  give  an  account  of  your  stewardship;  and  then  notice  when  you  MUST 
give  an  account  of  it. 

You  know  there  is  a  proverb,  that  "  short  reckonings  make  long  friends,"  and  a 
very  true  proverb  it  is.  A  man  will  always  be  at  friendship  with  his  conscience  as 
long  as  he  makes  short  reckonings  with  it.  It  was  a  good  rule  of  the  old  Puritans, 
that  of  making  frank  and  full  confession  of  sin  every  night;  not  to  leave  a  week's 
sin  to  be  confessed  on  Saturday  night,  or  Sabbath  morning,  but  to  recall  the  failures, 
imperfections,  and  mistakes  of  the  day,  in  order  that  we  might  learn  from  one  day 
of  failure  how  to  achieve  the  victory  on  the  morrow,  and  that  washing  ourselves 
daily  from  our  sins  we  might  preserve  the  purity  and  whiteness  of  our  gar 
ments.  Brothers  and  sisters,  do  the  same;  make  short  reckonings.  And  it  will 
be  well  for  you  every  Sabbath  evening,  or  at  any  other  time,  if  so  it  pleaseth  you, 
to  make  a  reckoning  of  what  you  do  on  the  Sabbath.  I  do  not  say  this  in  order 
that  you  may  be  encouraged  in  any  self-righteous  congratulation  that  you  have 
done  well;  because,  if  you  make  your  reckoning  correct,  you  will  never  have  much 
cause  to  congratulate  yourself,  but  always  cause  to  mourn  that  you  did  your  duty 
so  ill  compared  with  what  you  ought  to  have  done.  When  the  Sabbath  is  over, 
and  you  have  been  twice  to  the  house  of  God  to  teach  your  class,  just  sit  down  and 
try  to  recollect  what  were  the  points  in  which  you  failed.  Perhaps  you  exhibited 
a  hasty  temper;  you  spoke  to  a  boy  too  sharply  when  he  was  a  little  rebellious. 
Perhaps  you  were  too  complacent;  you  saw  sin  committed,  and  ought  to  have 
reproved  it,  and  you  did  not  do  so.  If  you  find  out  your  own  failing,  that  is  half 
the  way  to  a  cure.  Next  Sabbath  you  can  try  and  set  it  right. 

Then,  there  are  times  which  Providence  puts  in  your  way,  which  will  be  excellent 
seasons  for  reckoning.  For  instance,  every  time  a  boy  or  girl  leaves  the  school, 
there  is  an  opportunity  afforded  you  of  thinking  to  yourselves,  "  Well,  how  did  I 
deal  with  Betsy?  How  did  I  treat  John?  Did  I  give  William  such  teaching  as 
will  help  him  in  his  future  life,  to  maintain  integrity  in  the  midst  of  temptation, 
and  preserve  righteousness  when  he  shall  be  subjected  to  imminent  perils?  How- 
did  I  teach  the  girl?  Did  I  so  teach  her  that  she  will  know  her  duty  when  she 
goes  into  the  world?  Did  I  strive  with  all  my  might  to  lead  her  to  the  foot  of  the 
cross?"  There  are  many  solemn  questions  which  you  may  put  concerning  the  child. 
And  when  you  meet  with  any  of  them  grown  up  in  after  years,  you  will  find  that 
a  very  proper  season  for  giving  an  account  of  your  stewardship  to  your  conscience, 
by  seeing  whether  you  really  did  with  that  person,  when  a  child,  as  you  could  have 
desired. 

Then,  there  is  a  peculiar  time  for  casting  up  accounts  when  a  child  dies.  Ah! 
what  a  host  of  thoughts  cluster  around  the  dying-bed  of  a  child  whom  we  have 
taught.  Next  to  the  father  and  the  mother,  I  should  think  the  Sabbath-school 
teacher  will  take  the  most  interest  in  the  dying  one.  You  will  recollect,  "  There 
lies  withering  the  flower  which  my  hand  hath  watered;  there  is  an  immortal  soul 
about  to  pass  the  portals  of  eternity,  whom  I  have  taught.  O  God,  have  I  taught 
this  dying  child  the  truth,  or  have  I  deceived  him!  Have  I  dealt  faithfully  with 
him?  "  Have  I  told  him  of  his  ruin?  Have  I  set  before  him  how  he  was  fallen  in 
Adam  and  depraved  in  himself?  Have  I  told  him  about  the  great  redemption  of 
Christ?  Have  I  shown  him  the  necessity  of  regeneration  and  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit?  or  have  I  amused  him  with  tales  about  the  historical  parts  of  the  Bible,  and 
pieces  of  morality,  and  kept  back  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law?  Can  I  put 
my  hand  into  his  dying  hand,  and  silently  lifting  my  heart  to  heaven,  can  I  say, 
*O  God  thou  knowest  I  am  clear  of  his  blood?'  "  Ah!  that  is  a  thing  that  stingg 
the  minister  often— when  he  recollects  that  any  of  his  congregation  are  dying. 
When  I  stand  sometimes  by  the  dying-bed  of  any  of  the  ungodly  in  my  congre 
gation,  it  brings  many  a  tearful  thought  to  me.  Have  I  been  as  earnest  as  I 
ought  to  have  been?  Did  I  cry  to  this  man,  '"  Escape  for  thy  life,  look  not  behind 
thee,  stay  not  in  all  the  plain,  flee  to  the  mountain?  Did  I  pray  for  him,  weep 
over  him,  tell  him  of  his  sin,  preach  Christ  simply,  plainly,  boldly,  to  him?  Was 
there  not  an  occasion  when  I  used  lightness  when  I  ought  to  have  been  solemn? 
Might  there  not  have  been  a  season  when  I  uttered  something  by  mistake,  which 
may  have  bten  a  pillow  for  the  armhole  of  his  conscience  on  which  he  might  rest? 
Have  not  I  helped  to  smooth  his  path  to  hell,  instead  of  putting  blocks  in  his  way, 
and  chains  across  his  path  that  he  might  be  turned  out  of  it  and  led  to  seek  the 
'Saviour?"  Ah!  while  we  know  that  salvation  is  all  of  grace,  let  none  of  us>  imagine 

229 


THE   SUNDAY-SCHOOL    TEACHER— A    STEWARD. 

we  are  free  from  the  blood  of  souls,  unless  we  warn  them  with  diligence,  unless  vre 
preach  with  faithlulness;  for  this  same  Bible  which  tells  me  that  Christ  shall  see 
of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  be  satisfied,  tells  me  that  if  I  warn  them  not,  their 
blood,  if  they  perish,  shall  be  required  at  my  hand. 

But  now,  teacher,  let  me  tell  you  an  occasion  when  you  must  give  in  your 
account.  You  may  put  off  all  ttyese  seasons  if  you  like;  you  may  live  as  care 
lessly  as  you  please,  but  if  you  have  a  particle  ot  heart  in  you,  you  will  have  to 
give  an  account  when  you  are  sick,  and  cannot  go  to  your  class.  If  your  conscience 
is  worth  having— which  some  people's  consciences  are  not,  for  they  are  dead  and 
seared — if  your  conscience  is  an  awakened  one,  when  you  are  put  out  of  your 
work,  you  will  begin  to  think  how  you  did  it.  You  should  read  the  letters  of  that 
holy  man  Rutherford.  If  ever  there  was  a  man  who  preached  the  gospel  sweetly 
and  with  divine  unction,  I  should  think  it  must  have  been  he;  and  yet  when  he 
was  shut  up  in  Aberdeen,  and  could  not  get  out  to  his  much-loved  flock,  he  began 
to  say,  "  Ah,  if  the  Lord  will  let  me  go  out  to  preach  again,  I  will  never  be  such 
a  dull  drone  as  I  was  wont  to  be.  I  will  preach  with  tears  in  mine  eyes,  so  that 
the  people  may  be  comforted,  and  the  sinners  converted."  Perhaps  when  you  are 
lying  ill  in  your  bed-room,  little  Jane  comes  to  see  you,  and  says,  "  I  hope  you  will 
soon  get  well,  teacher;"  or  William,  or  Thomas  calls  and  enquires  about  you  every 
Sunday  afternoon,  and  asks  the  servant  to  give  his  love  to  you,  and  hopes  that 
teacher  will  soon  come  back  again.  Then  is  the  time  when  I  know  you  will  be 
sure  to  cast  up  your  account.  You  will  say,  "  Ah,  when  I  get  back  to  my  class,  I 
won't  teach  them  as  I  used  to  do;  I  will  study  my  lesson  more,  I  will  pray  more. 
I  won't  be  so  hot  or  so  fast  with  them  as  I  was  wont  to  be.  I  will  bear  with  their 
ill  manners.  Ah,  if  my  Master  will  give  me,  like  Hezekiah,  another  fifteen  years 
of  labour,  and  will  give  me  more  grace,  I  will  strive  to  be  better."  You  will  be 
sure  to  cast  up  your  accounts  when  you  get  sick. 

But  if  you  do  not  do  it  then,  I  will  tell  you  when  you  must;  that  is  when  you 

come  to  die.    What  a  dreadful  thing  it  must  be  to  be  an  unfaithful  preacher  on  a 

dying- bed.    (Oh  that  I  may  be  saved  from  that!)    To  be  upon  one's  bed  when  life 

is  over;  to  have  had  great  opportunities,  mighty  congregations,  and  to  have  been 

so  diligent  about  something  else  as  to  have  neglected  to  preach  the  full  and  free 

gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ!   methinks  as  I   lie  in   my  bed  a-dying,  I  should 

see  spectres  and  grim  things  in  the  room.     One  would  come  and  stare  upon  me 

and  say,  "Ah!  you  are  dying.     Remember  how  many  times  I  sat  in  the  front  of 

the  gallery,  and  listened  to  you,  but  you  never  once  told  me  to  escape  from  the 

wrath  to  come;  you  were  talking  to  me  about  something  I  did  not  understand;  but 

the  simple  matter  of  the  gospel  you  never  preached  to  me,  and  I  died  in  doubt  and 

trembling.     And  now  you  are  coming  to  me  to  the  hell  which  I  have  inherited 

because  you  were  unfaithful."     And  when-  in  our  grey  and  dying  age  we  see  the 

generations  which  have  grown  up  around  our  pulpits,  we  shall  think  of  them  all. 

We  shall  think  of  the  time  when  as  striplings  we  first  began  to  preach;  we  shall 

recollect  the  youths  that  then  crowded,  then  the  men,  and  then  the  grey  heads 

that  patsed  away.     And  methinks  as  they  come  on  in  grim  procession,  they  will 

everyone  leave  a  fresh  curse  upon  our  conscience  because  we    were  unfaithful. 

The  death-bed  of  a  man  who  has  murdered  his  fellows,  of  some  grim  tyrant  who 

has  let  the  bloodhounds  of  war  loose  upon  mankind,  must  be  an  awful  thing. 

When  the  soldier,  and  the  soldier's  widow,  and  the  murdered  man  of  peace  rise  up 

before  him;  when  the  smoke  of  devastated  countries  seems  to  blow  into  his  eyes 

and  make  them  sore  and  red;  when  the  blood  of  men  hangs  on  his  conscience  like  a 

great  red  pall;  when  bloody  murder,  the  grim  chamberlain,   draws  red  curtains 

round  his  bed,  and  when  he  begins  to  approach  the  last  end  where  the  murderer 

must  inherit  his  dreary  doom,  it  must  be  a  fearful  time  indeed.     But,  methinks  to 

have  mdrdered  souls  must   be  more   awful   still — to   have  distributed   poison  to 

children  instead  of  bread,  to  have  given  them  stones  when  they  asked  us  for  right 

food,  to  have  taught  them  error  when   we  ought  to  have  taught  them  the  truth  a» 

it  is   in  Jesus,  or  to  have  spoken  to  them  with  cold  listlcssness  when  earnestness 

was  needed.     Oh,  how  your  children  seem  to  curse  you,  when  you  lie  there  and 

have  been  unfaithful  to  your  charge.     Yes,  you  will  have  to  cast  up  your  account 

then;  and  let  me  tell  you,  though  your  hope  must  all  be  fixed  on  Jesus,  and  that 

must   be   the  consolation  of  your  life  and   death,  yet  it  will  be  very  sweet  tt 

remember  when  you  eouie  to  die,  that  you  have  been  successful  in  winning  souls  to 

Christ.     Ah!  that  will  bring  a  little  life  into  the  cheek  of  the  consumptive  teacher, 

who  sickens  young  when  you  remind  her  that  there  was  a  little  girl  who,  a  year 

223 


THE   SUNDAY-SCHOOL   TEACHER— A   STEWARD 

before  she  was  taken  ill,  kissed  her  hand,  and  said,  "  Good  bye,  teacher,  we  shall 
meet  in  heaven.  Do  not  you  recollect,  teacher,  telling  me  the  story  of  Jesus  on  the 
cross,  and  taking  me  home  one  Sunday  afternoon,  and  putting  your  arms  around 
my  neck,  and  kneeling  down  and  praying  that  God  would  bless  me?  Oh,  my 
teacher,  that  brought  me  to  Jesus."  Yes,  teacher,  when  you  are  lying  on  your 
bed,  pale  and  consumptive,  you  will  recollect  that  there  is  one  up  there  beside 
your  Saviour  who  will  receive  you  into  eternal  habitations — that  young  spirit  who 
has  gone  before  you,  who  by  your  means  was  emancipated  from  the  wickedness 
and  bondage  of  a  sinful  worM.  Happy  is  the  teacher  who  has  the  hope  of  meeting  a 
whole  band  of  such  in  heaven.  Such  a  thought  often  cheers  me.  Let  the  world 
say  what  it  will,  I  know  when  I  die  there  is  many  a  spirit  that  will  think  of  me  in 
after  years  as  the  man  who  preached  the  gospel  to  him;  many  a  drunkard  brought 
to  Jesus,  and  many  a  harlot  reclaimed.  And  to  the  teacher  it  must  be  the  same  to 
think  that  when  he  claps  his  wings  and  mounts  from  this  lower  valley  of  earth  to 
heaven,  he  will  see  a  bright  spirit  coming  down  to  meet  him,  and  he  will  hear  the 
Spirit  saying — 

"  Sisfer  spirit,  come  away.' 

And  when  he  opens  his  eyes,  he  will  see  that  the  song  came  from  the  lips  of  one  to 
whom  he  had  been  blessed  as  the  u:eans  of  conversion.  Happy  you  who  shall  be 
welcomed  at  the  gates  of  Paradise  by  your  spiritual  sons  and  daughters,  and  who 
shall  have  beside  your  Master's  welcome,  the  welcome  of  those  whom  he  hath  given 
you  to  be  jewels  in  your  crown  of  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 

Now  to  conclude.  We  must  all  give  an  account  to  God  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
That  is  the  thing  which  makes  death  so  terrible.  Oh,  Death,  if  thou  wert  all, 
what  art  thou  but  a  pinch,  and  all  is  over  !  But  after  Death  the  judgment.  This 
is  the  sting  of  the  dragon  to  the  ungodly.  The  last  great  day  is  come.  The  books 
are  opened — men,  women,  and  children  are  assembled.  Many  have  come,  and 
some  on  the  right,  and  some  on  the  left,  have  already  heard  the  sentence.  It  is 
now  your  turn.  Teacher!  what  account  will  you  render?  In  the  first  place,  are 
you  in  Christ  yourself?  or  have  you  taught  to  others  what  you  did  not  know 
yourself?  Have  I  any  such  here?  Doubtless,  I  have;  for  alas  !  there  are  many 
such  in  our  schools.  Oh,  my  friend,  what  wilt  thou  say  when  the  Master,  opening 
the  book,  shall  ask  thee,  "  What  hadst  thou  to  do,  to  declare  my  statutes?"  Will 
you  look  at  him  and  say,  "  Lord  I  taught  in  thy  schools,  and  thou  hast  eaten  and 
drunk  in  our  streets."  If  you  should  say  so,  he  will  say,  "  Verily,  I  never  knew 
you;  depart  from  me  ye  cursed."  Then,  what  have  you  to  say  with  regard  to  your 
schools — for  although  our  state  at  last  will  really  be  settled  according  to  our  in 
terest  in  Christ,  you  will  be  judged  by  your  works,  as  evidences.  The  Scripture 
always  says  that  we  are  to  be  judged  according  to  our  works.  Well,  then,  the  book 
is  opened.  You  hear  your  own  name  read,  and  you  hear  that  one  brief  sentence — 
"  Inasmuch  as  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a  few  things,  I  will  make  thee  a  ruler 
over  many  things — enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord!"  Oh,  heaven  of  heavens ! 
and  is  this  the  reward  of  the  little  trouble  of  teaching  a  few  children?  Oh,  Master, 
thou  givest  ingots  of  gold  for  our  grains  of  dust— our  fragments  of  service  thou 
rewardest  with  crowns  and  kingdoms!  But  he  turns  to  others,  and  to  you  he  says, 
u  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  unto  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  not  unto 
me.  Depart  from  me  into  everlasting  fire  in  hell,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels."  Which  of  these  two  shall  be  saidtowe?  Which  of  these  two  shall  be 
said  to  you  ?  Oh!  as  in  God's  sight  I  charge  you  by  him  who  is  the  Judge  of  quick 
and  dead,  by  the  swiftness  of  his  chariot-wheels  which  now  are  bringing  him  here, 
by  the  solemnity  of  his  awful  tribunal,  by  that  sentence  which  shall  never  be  re 
versed,  judge  yourselves,  for  then  ye  shall  not  be  judged.  Give  an  account  of  youi 
stewardship  to  your  conscience,  and  to  your  God.  Confess  your  sins,  seek  his 
help,  and  begin  from  this  hour,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  to  undertake  his  work  afresh; 
so  shall  ye  stand  before  his  face,  clothed  in  the  righteousness  of  your  Redeemer 
and  washed  in  his  blood.  Though  not  boasting  in  your  works  you  shall  be  able 
to  stand  accepted  in  him,  and  your  works  shall  follow  when  you  rise  from  youi 
labours,  and  you  shall  be  among  the  blessed  that  die  in  the  Lord. 


224 


THE  BRIDGELESS  GULP. 


DELIVERED  ON  SUNDAY  MORNING,  JULY  STH,  1863,  BY  THE 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  Beside  all  this,  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed  :  so  that  they  whicfc 
would  pass  from  hence  to  you  cannot ;  neither  can  they  pass  to  us,  that  would  com- 
from  thence." — Luke  xvi.  26. 

FOR  the  last  few  months  I  have  been  led  to  blow  the  silver  trumpet, 
sounding  forth  the  love  and  mercy  of  our  God  in  Christ.  Many  times 
in  your  hearing  I  have  preached  a  full  Christ  for  empty  sinners,  and 
have  set  forth  the  freeness  and  graciousness  of  the  divine  proclamation 
which  in  the  gospel  is  made  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  I  have  not,  con 
cerning  that  point,  shunned  to  declare  unto  you  the  whole  counsel  of 
God.  But  I  feel  that  I  must  now  blow  a  blast  upon  the  rough  ram's 
horn,  for  sometimes  our  congregations  need  to  be  reminded  of  the  larc 
and  terrors  of  God,  and  of  the  judgment  to  come;  our  experience  is,  that  the 
preaching  of  judgment  is  greatly  blessed  of  God;  we  have  remarked  that  a 
•very  large  number  of  conversions  have  occurred  under  those  sermons  in 
which  the  declaration  of  God's  wrath  against  all  iniquity  has  been  the  mosf 
plain  and  solemn.  A  thunder-storm  clears  the  air ;  there  are  pestilences 
which  would  gather  beneath  the  wings  of  calm  which  can  only  be  purged 
away  by  the  lightning  flash.  When  God  sends  his  servant  with  heavy 
tidings,  his  message  of  alarm  cleanses  the  spiritual  atmosphere,  and  kills 
the  sloth,  pride,  indifference,  and  lethargy,  which  otherwise  might  fall  upon 
the  people.  As  the  sharp  needle  prepares  the  way  for  the  thread,  so  the 
piercing  law  makes  a  way  for  the  bright  silver  thread  of  divine  grace. 
The  lancet  is  quite  as  needful  as  the  healing  balm.  The  law  is  our 
pedagogue  to  bring  us  to  Christ ;  like  the  old  Greek  pedagogue 
who  led  the  boy  to  school,  so  the  law  leads  us  to  Christ,  who 
teaches  and  instructs  us,  and  makes  us  wise  unto  salvation.  Thos€ 
who  preached  the  law,  as  well  as  the  gospel,  in  the  Puritanic  times, 
were  the  most  fruitful  soul-winners.  We  find  our  blessed  Lord  and 
Master,  whose  heart  was  overflowing  with  compassion,  and  whose  very 
nature  was  love,  often  dwelling  upon  the  wrath  to  come ;  and  indeed 
No.  518.  38 


374  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  utterances  are  more  telling  and  terrible  than  the  most  burning 
threatening  from  the  lips  of  thundering  seers  of  old.  God  grant  that 
this  morning,  the  effect  which  so  anxiously  I  desire,  may  follow  from  that 
burden  of  the  Lord  which  now  weighs  so  heavily  upon  me.  May  the 
Master  gather  out  this  day  a  seed  unto  himself,  who  shall  be  saved  from 
the  wrath  to  come,  and  be  to  all  eternity  the  reward  of  the  Redeemer's 
travail.  Lift  up  your  hearts  to  God,  ye  that  know  him  and  have  power 
with  him,  and  ask  that  now  the  divine  Spirit  may  work  mightily,  that 
hearts  may  be  broken  and  sinners  led  to  Jesus. 

"  Beside  all  this,  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed." 
Human  ingenuity  has  done  very  much  to  bridge  great  gulfs.  Scarcely 
has  the  world  afforded  a  river  so  wide  that  its  floods  could  not  be  over 
leaped  ;  or  a  torrent  so  furious  that  it  could  not  be  made  to  pass  under 
the  yoke.  High  above  the  foam  of  Columbia's  glorious  cataract,  man 
has  hung  aloft  his  slender  but  substantial  road  of  iron,  and  the  shriek 
of  the  locomotive  is  heard  above  the  roar  of  Niagara.  This  very  week 
I  saw  the  first  chains  which  span  the  deep  rift  through  which  the  Bristol 
A.von  finds  its  way  at  Clifton ;  man  has  thrown  his  suspension  bridge 
across  the  chasm,  and  men  will  soon  travel  where  only  that  which  hath 
wings  could  a  little  while  ago  have  found  a  way.  There  is,  however, 
one  gulf  which  no  human  skill  or  engineering  ever  shall  be  able 
to  bridge  ;  there  is  one  chasm  which  no  wing  shall  ever  be  able 
to  cross  ;  it  is  the  gulf  which  divides  the  world  of  joy  in  which 
the  righteous  triumph,  from  that  land  of  sorrow  in  which  the 
wicked  feel  the  smart  of  Jehovah's  sword.  Whatever  other  arguments 
there  may  be  why  the  righteous  should  have  no  communion  with  the 
wicked  in  a  future  state,  beside  all  these  other  things,  any  one  of  which 
is  enough  and  sufficient  of  itself,  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed,  so  that 
there  can  be  no  passage  from  the  one  world  to  the  other. 

I.  In  trying  solemnly  to  speak  upon  this  matter,  I  shall  commence 

With  this — THERE  IS  NO  PASSAGE  FROM  HEAVEN  TO  HELL — "  They  which 

would  pass  from  hence  to  you,  cannot."  Glorified  saints  cannot  visit  the 
prison-house  of  lost  sinners.  Long  enough  were  the  righteous  mingled 
with  the  wicked ;  sufficient  was  the  evil  time  in  which  the  wheat  waa 
choked  with  the  tares ;  quite  long  enough  was  the  period  in  which 
the  chaff  laid  upon  the  same  floor,  side  by  side  with  the  wheat. 
Patience  had  its  perfect  work.  They  did  both  grow  together  until  the 
time  of  the  harvest ;  it  is  not  necessary  now  that  harvest  has  come, 
that  they  should  lie  together  any  longer.  It  were  inconsistent  with 
the  perfect  joy  and  the  beatific  state  of  the  righteous,  with  its  perfect 
calm  and  purity,  that  sin  should  be  admitted  into  their  midst,  or  that 
they  should  be  permitted  to  find  companionships  in  the  abodes  of  evil. 
It  were  not  glorious  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  they  should  cease 
from  beholding  his  beauties  and  adoring  his  person,  in  order  to  succour 


THE   BRIDGELE8R   GULF.  37g 

his  enemies,  and  comfort  his  desperate  foes.  Shall  the  courtiers  of 
heaven  become  traitors  to  their  King,  that  they  may  relieve  his 
implacable  adversaries?  Shall  the  princes  of  the  blood  imperial,  who 
wear  eternal  coronets,  lay  aside  their  robes  of  honour,  to  become  menial 
servants  to  tha  damned  in  hell,  who  would  not,  when  Christ  was 
preached  to  them,  bow  the  knee  and  kiss  the  Son  ?  This  must  not 
and  cannot  be.  Besides,  the  decree  of  God,  like  a  great  mountain 
of  brass,  has  for  ever  shut  the  righteous  in  with  holiness,  with  happi 
ness,  with  God,  and  they  cannot,  if  they  would,  must  not,  cross  the  great 
gulf  which  divides  them  from  the  world  of  the  wicked. 

It  follows  that  the  most  earnest  and  assiduous  preacher  must  then 
renounce  all  hope  of  converting  sinners.  God  has  raised  up  some 
apostolic  spirits,  whose  presence  in  a  nation  is  like  the  rising  of  the  sun ; 
darkness  flies  before  them,  and  the  light  of  salvation  streams  from  them 
to  tens  of  thousands.  When  they  lift  up  their  hands  to  preach,  God 
gives  them  power  to  shake  the  gates  of  hell,  and  when  they  bend  the 
knee  to  pray,  they  unlock  the  gates  of  heaven.  Men  like  Baxter  with 
bursting  hearts  of  love,  or  Joseph  Alleine  with  glowing  tongue,  or 
Whitfield  with  seraph's  fire,  or  Wesley  with  cherub's  zeal ;  these  are 
the  men  who  bless  their  age  and  are  most  truly  great.  These  men  can 
go  to  the  borders  of  the  earth  if  they  will;  their  commission  is  co-ex 
tensive  with  the  human  race — "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature ;"  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  ends 
of  the  world."  These  men  are  never  so  happy  as  when  they  are  preaching. 
Woe  is  unto  them  if  they  preach  not  the  gospel,  and  when  they  preach 
it  and  God  helps  them,  they  are  like  Elihu,  refreshed  by  the  effort.  They 
were  born  to  preach  the  gospel  and  to  win  sinners  to  Christ,  and  the^ 
are  never  content  except  they  are  fulfilling  their  high  commission.  But 
they  must  cease  from  their  labours  soon,  for  in  heaven  they  are  not 
needed,  and  from  hell  they  are  excluded.  0  sinner,  even  our  voice,  feeble 
though  it  be,  may  win  you  to  Jesus  now;  but  if  you  die  impenitent,  it 
can  never  woo  you  again  to  a  Saviour.  Now  is  my  time  to  preach  to 
you,  and  set  open  mercy's  door  before  you,  but  then  I  can  never  warn 
you,  nor  invite  you ;  never  again  depict  the  agonies  of  my  Lord  and 
Master  and  endeavour  to  attract  you  by  the  story  of  his  love,  his  dying 
bleeding  love.  No,  it  will  be  all  over  then.  "  They  rest  from  their  labours; 
and  their  works  do  follow  them."  They  must  bring  their  sheaves  with 
them,  for  they  cannot  return  into  another  field  to  sow,  nor  journey  into 
other  broad  acres  to  reap.  Burning  as  their  hearts  will  still  be  with  divine 
love,  they  will  have  to  exercise  it  in  another  way.  Their  passionate 
longings  for  God's  glory  will  find  other  channels  in  which  to  flow.  They 
will  bow  their  heads  and  adore  him  day  and  night,  but  they  can  no 
longer  serve  him  in  gospel  ministry.  The  ambassador  rolls  up  his  com 
mission  for  God  has  run  up  the  black  flag  of  damnation,  and  hangs  out 


376  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

no  more  signals  of  peace.  Poor  sinner,  fain  would  I  win  thee  now,  ftv 
it  is  new  or  never  with  thee  and  me. 

The  efforts  of  the  most  importunate  visitor,  the  most  earnest  friend, 
must  cease  with  death.  Some  of  you  have  Mends  who  can  get  nearer 
to  your  heart  than  I  can.  You  can  afford  sometimes  to  forget  my  poor 
words  and  go  your  way  to  sin  again;  but  you  have  a  sister,  and  when  she 
pleads  with  you,  you  do  feel  it;  you  have  one  loving  friend,  and  when  he 
speaks  to  you  you  cannot  be  deaf;  your  conscience  has  often  been  im 
pressed  by  him,  and  sometimes  through  him  the  strivings  of  the  Spirit 
have  been  very  mighty  with  your  soul.  I  love,  my  brethren  and  sisters, 
to  see  you  earnest  for  the  souls  of  others.  God  may  give  you  some  souls 
whom  he  will  never  give  to  me,  and  so  long  as  they  be  but  saved,  though 
I  have  a  holy  covetousness  and  earnestly  desire  to  bring  many  to  Christ, 
yet  I  will  as  unfeignedly  rejoice  in  their  salvation  by  your  instrumen 
tality  as  if  it  had  been  accomplished  by  my  own.  Go  and  labour  with 
all  your  might.  Tell  what  Christ  has  done  for  you.  With  pleading, 
loving  accents,  beseech  them  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  But  oh!  remember 
you  can  only  do  that  in  this  life,  for  when  the  gates  are  shut,  you  are 
shut  in  for  your  reward,  and  all  the  world  is  shut  out  from  your  efforts. 
O  my  hearer,  dost  thou  hear  this  ?  not  only  will  there  be  no  public 
congregations,  no  Sabbaths,  no  houses  of  prayer,  but  there  shall  be  no 
private  messengers,  no  earnest  Christians  who  shall  privately  seek 
thy  soul's  good.  What  sayest  thou  to  this  ?  Does  not  this  give  an 
awful  value  to  those  tender  words  of  importunate  love  ?  Turn  thee  at 
the  gentle  rebuke,  for  otherwise  thou  shalt  be  suddenly  destroyed,  and 
that  without  remedy. 

Those  who  are  nearest  and  dearest  must  be  divided  from  you,  if  you 
perish  in  your  sins.  A  mother  can  put  her  arms  about  her  child's 
neck  and  pray  for  it  here  ;  she  may  affectionately  exhort  her  son  to  seek 
peace  with  God  now ;  she  may  earnestly  and  incessantly  follow  him 
with  her  holy  entreaties,  but  she  can  never  come  to  him  from  the 
realms  of  glory  if  once  he  is  lost.  "  They  that  would  come  from  us 
to  you  cannot."  Do  ye  hear  it,  young  man  ?  Those  glistening  eyes  of 
a  mother's  love  shall  never  weep  again  for  you.  That  touching  voice 
which  sometimes  awoke  the  echoes  of  your  heart,  shall  never  plead  again. 
O  ungodly  woman,  thou  shalt  never  see  thy  godly  child.  Father,  ia  it  that 
daughter  you  are  thinking  of  who  loved  and  feared  God  in  childhood  and 
was  taken  from  you  ?  Did  she  say  to  you  when  she  was  dying,  "  Follow 
me  to  heaven,  my  Father?"  You  have  heard  her  voice  for  the  last 
time;  that  child  will  never  see  her  father  more  unless  he  turns  from  his 
evil  ways.  Methinks  if  she  could  be  in  heaven  what  she  was  on  earth,  she 
would  fling  her  arms  about  your  neck  and  seek  to  draw  you  to  the  glorious 
throne  of  the  Most  High ;  but  oh !  it  cannot  be.  A  just  God  condemns 
the  imoenitent  sinner,  and  just  men  assent  to  the  Divine  sentence.  See 


THE   BRIDGELES8  GULF.  377 

thep,  0  ye  ungodly  ones  that  are  present  to-day,  you  often  think  our  com 
pany  a  great  nuisance,  and  perhaps  while  I  am  preaching,  my  alarming 
words  annoy  you.  Ah,  we  shall  not  annoy  you  long.  Does  your  mother 
tease  you  when  she  bids  you  seek  the  Lord?  She  will  not  tease  you  long. 
When  I  bring  home  the  judgment  to  come,  is  the  subject  obnoxious  to 
you?  I  shall  not  ask  your  patience  long.  We  shall  be  separated;  if 
you  go  your  way  and  follow  after  sin  and  wrath,  there  will  come  a 
dividing  time,  and  0  let  me  say  to  you,  you  would  give  worlds  if  you 
had  them ;  you  would  give  them  if  they  were  solid  diamonds,  to  hear 
again  the  voice  which  now  fatigues  you,  and  to  listen  once  more  to 
those  plaintive  invitations  which  vex  you  and  spoil  your  mirth.  Ah, 
how  would  you  bless  God  if  he  would  let  you  come  back  again  an 
have  once  more  those  Sabbaths  which  were  so  dull  and  dreary,  and 
permit  you  to  go  up  once  more  to  the  house  of  God  which  now  perhaps 
is  like  a  prison-house  to  your  vain  and  frivolous  spirits.  0  sirs,  I  say 
ye  may  well  have  patience  with  us  for  a  little  time  and  bear  with  our 
importunities,  for  we  shall  not  plague  you  much  longer.  We  beseech 
you  to  come  to  Jesus;  we  would  pluck  you  by  your  garments  and  beseech 
you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come;  forgive  us  for  being  thus  in  earnest, 
for  even  if  we  should  fail  with  you,  you  will  soon  escape  the  impor 
tunities  of  our  love.  A  few  short  months  of  mortal  life,  and  then  you 
will  be  far  away  from  all  religious  discourses  and  all  spiritual  talk  of 
things  to  come;  you  will  be  in  your  own  company,  but  I  warn  you  this 
will  yield  you  little  enough  content. 

Dear  friends,  how  earnest  this  ought  to  make  the  people  of  God  to 
work  while  it  is  called  to-day.  If  this  is  our  only  time  for  doing  good, 
let  us  do  good  while  we  can.  I  hear  people  sometimes  say,  "  Mr.  So- 
and-so  does  too  much ;  he  works  too  hard."  Oh !  we  none  of  us  do 
half  enough.  Do  not  talk  about  working  too  hard  for  Jesus  Christ,  the 
thing  is  impossible.  Are  souls  perishing,  and  shall  I  sleep  ?  My  idle, 
lazy  flesh,  shalt  thou  keep  me  still  while  men  are  dying  and  hell  is 
filling  ?  Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  be  lukewarm  no  longer.  If  God 
makes  us  lights  in  the  world,  let  us  spend  ourselves  as  a  candle  does, 
which  consumes  itself  by  shining.  As  the  poor  work  girl,  who  has  but 
one  light,  works  with  desperate  pace  because  that  will  soon  be  burned 
out.  so  let  us  be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  watching,  praying 
labouring  for  the  souls  of  men.  We  are  not  earnest  enough  about* 
immortal  souls.  If  we  had  but  a  view  of  the  shortness  of  life,  the 
fleeting  character  of  time,  and  the  terrors  of  eternal  wrath;  if  we  could 
but  see  lost  souls,  and  understand  their  unutterable  woe,  we  should 
shake  ourselves  from  the  dust,  and  go  forth  to  work  while  it  is  called 
k)-day. 

II.     As  we  cannot  go  from  heaven  to  hell,  so  the  text  assures  us, 

44  NEITHER   CAN    THEY  COME   TO    US   THAT  WOULD  COME  FROM  THENCE." 
27 


378  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

The  lost  spirits  in  hell  are  shut  in  for  ever.  I  see  the  angel  standing  at 
that  iron  door  ;  I  hear  the  awful  key  as  it  grates  among  the  tremendous 
wards,  and  when  that  gate  is  closed,  he  hurls  the  key  into  the  abyss  of  obli 
vion,  and  the  captives  are  fast  immured,  bound  in  fetters  which  will  never 
break,  in  chains  which  never  rust.  The  sinner  cannot  come  to  heaven 
for  a  multitude  of  reasons.  Among  the  rest,  these.  First,  his  own 
character  forbids  it.  As  a  man  lives  and  dies,  so  will  he  be  through 
out  eternity.  The  drunkard  here  will  have  all  a  drunkard's  thirst  there 
without  the  means  of  gratifying  it.  The  swearer  here  will  become  a 
yet  more  ripe  and  proficient  blasphemer.  Death  does  not  change  but 
fixes  character;  it  petrifies  it.  "  He  that  is  holy  let  him  be  holy  still; 
he  that  is  filthy  let  him  be  filthy  still."  The  lost  man  remains  a  sinner 
and  a  growing  sinner,  and  continues  to  rebel  against  God.  Would  you 
have  such  a  man  in  heaven  ?  Shall  the  thief  prowl  through  the  streets 
of  the  New  Jerusalem?  Shall  the  atmosphere  of  Paradise  be  polluted  by 
an  oath  ?  Shall  the  songs  of  angel*  be  disturbed  by  the  ribaldry  of 
licentious  conversation?  It  cannot  be.  Heaven  were  no  heaven,  if 
the  sinner  could  be  permitted  to  enter  it.  "  Except  a  mar_  be  born 
again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God,"  and  as  there  is  no  hope  of 
the  finally  lost  ever  being  born  again,  that  kingdom  of  God  they  cannot 
see.  Sinner,  if  you  are  not  fit  for  heaven  now,  hast  thou  any  right  to 
hope  thou  ever  wilt  be  ?  If  you  die  without  God  and  without  hope, 
where  must  your  portion  be  ?  Without  a  God  can  ye  dwell  in  heaven — 
God's  own  dominions  ?  Without  hope,  can  ye  enter  where  hope  is  con 
summated  in  full  fruition  ?  Never.  The  enemies  of  God  shall  never  be 
permitted  to  beard  him  to  his  face,  and  vent  their  blasphemies  in  his 
own  palace ;  they  must  be  driven  from  his  presence,  and  driven  from 
that  presence  for  ever. 

Moreover,  not  only  does  the  man's  character  shut  him  out,  but  also 
the  sinner's  doom.  *What  was  it?  "These  shall  go  away  into  ever 
lasting  punishment."  If  it  is  everlasting,  how  can  they  enter  heaven? 
What  does  the  Saviour  say,  "  Where  their  worm  dieth  not  and  their 
fire  is  not  quenched."  If  there  be  any  truth  in  that  metaphor,  the  lost 
are  lost  for  ever;  the  worm  would  die  if  they  entered  heaven,  and  the 
fire  were  quenched  if  they  obtained  celestial  seats.  How  does  the  Holy 
Spirit  put  it  ?  Does  he  not  describe  the  wrath  to  come  as  a  bottomless 
pit?  It  were  not  such  if  they  could  get  handhold,  and  afterwards  climb 
upward  to  the  starry  thrones  of  angels.  Brethren,  he  that  dooms  men, 
he  that  has  put  it  in  the  strong  expression,  "  He  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned,"  will  certainly  and  literally  carry  out  his  own  words; 
and  if  it  be  so,  it  shall  never  be  possible  for  thenTto  break  their  prison 
of  fire,  and  enter  the  land  of  joy  and  peace. 

Moreover,  sinner,  thou  canst  not  go  out  of  the  prison-house  because 
God's  character  and  God's  word  are  against  thee.  Shall  God  ever  cease 
to  be  just  ?  But  if  he  be  just,  he  must  never  cease  from  punishing 
thee  when  thou  art  finally  condemned.  "  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God 
of  Sabaoth,"  is  the  never  ceasing  cry  of  cherubim,  but  as  long  as  he 
is  "  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,"  thou  canst  never  be  acceptable  to  him.  Shall 
God  ever  cease  to  be  true  ?  But  remember,  as  long  as  he  is  true  to 
his  own  threatenings,  he  must  and  will  send  his  arrows  through  you, 


THE   BRIDGELESS  GULF.  379 

and  make  his  fierce  wrath  to  consume  you.  Then  there  stands  his 
decree,  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned;"  this  is  the  great 
gulf,  that  fixed  chasm  by  which  the  impenitent  sinner  is  fast  as  firmest 
destiny  bound  like  Prometheus  to  the  rock  for  ever,  never  to  be  loosed 
in  time  or  in  eternity.  It  must  not — it  shall  not  be — if  God  be  God, 
and  if  his  decree  be  not  a  falsehood  and  a  vanity,  ye  must  not  come 
out  of  the  place  of  your  torment. 

Nay,  yet  more,  remember  sinner,  there  never  was  but  one  bridge 
between  fallen  man  and  a  holy  God.  That  bridge  you  reject.  The 
person  of  the  Mediator,  his  substitution,  his  righteousness,  his  painful 
death,  these  make  the  only  road  from  sin  to  righteousness,  from  wrath  to 
acceptance.  But  these  you  reject.  If  you  should  ever  be  lost  you  will  have 
finally  rejected  Christ;  and  inasmuch  as  you  are  not  this  morning  saved, 
O  my  poor  fellow  creature,  thou  art  now  rejecting  Christ ;  thou  art  as 
good  as  saying,  "  Christ  died,  but  not  for  me ;  Christ  shed  his  blood  to 
save  men,  but  I  will  not  be  saved  in  his  way.  Let  him  die.  I  count 
his  death  a  trifle,  and  his  blood  a  vanity ;  I  had  sooner  perish  than  be 
saved  by  him."  This  is  what  you  in  effect  are  saying.  I  know  the 
words  make  you  shudder ;  you  would  not  venture  to  utter  them,  but  that 
is  your  feeling.  Ye  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  you ;  you 
will  not  bow  the  knee  and  kiss  the  Son;  you  will  still  be  an  adversary 
to  God,  and  sooner  be  destroyed  than  be  saved  through  the  atonement 
of  Christ.  Well,  now,  if  you  reject  the  only  way,  what  wonder,  if 
having  rejected  that,  there  remains  no  hope  ?  Besides,  remember  there 
is  no  other  sacrifice  for  sin.  Scripture  expressly  tells  us  that  there 
remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin.  Do  you  think  that  Jesus  will 
come  a  second  time  to  die  ?  Shall  those  divine  hands  be  stretched 
again  to  the  wood  ?  You  reject  him  now.  If  he  died  again  you  would 
reject  him.  Shall  the  head  again  be  pierced  with  thorns  ?  Shall  the 
side  again  be  rent  with  the  spear  ?  Why,  sinner,  if  thou  refusest  to 
have  him  now  thou  wouldest  refuse  him  could  he  die  a  second  time. 
But  that  cannot  be.  He  has  offered  an  atonement  once  for  all,  and  now 
for  ever  he  sits  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  No 
second  atonement — no  second  redemption  shall  ever  be  offered  for  the 
sin  of  men. 

Besides,  remember,  there  is  no  Holy  Spirit  in  the  pit.  The  blessed 
Spirit  is  here  to-day,  and  often  has  he  striven  with  some  of  you.  Do  you 
remember  when  you  trembled  like  Felix?  Do  not  you  remember  the  time 
when,  like  Agrippa,  you  were  almost  persuaded  ?  but  still  all  this  was  put 
away;  conscience  was  hushed;  the  Spirit  of  God  was  quenched.  Well,  that 
Spirit  can  strive  with  you  again,  and  if  he  comes  forth  in  his  irresistible 
strength,  if  your  heart  be  like  a  flint,  he  can  break  it;  and  if  like  iron,  he 
can  melt  it.  But  once  in  the  pit,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  never  comes  there. 
That  blessed  dove  shuns  the  place  of  wrath,  and  over  souls  given  up  to 
destruction,  never  will  his  life-giving  wings  be  known  to  brood.  If 
so,  then  you  cannot  be  born  again,  and  cannot  enter  heaven ;  ye  can 
not  be  sanctified;  and  unsanctified  spirits  cannot  have  a  portion  in  the 
skies.  So  then,  it  is  clear  enough  you  cannot  possibly  pass  from  hell  to 
heaven.  Ah,  this  will  be  a  judgment  upon  you,  a  solemn  judgment 
upon  you  for  many  things.  You  do  not  like  the  house  of  God ;  you 


380  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

shall  be  shut  out  of  it.  You  do  not  love  the  Sabbath  ;  you  are  shut  out 
from  the  eternal  Sabbath.  The  voice  of  sacred  song  had  no  charm  in  it 
for  you  ;  you  shall  not  join  it.  The  face  of  God  you  never  loved  ;  you 
shall  never  see  it.  The  name  of  Jesus  Christ  was  never  melodious 
in  your  ears ;  you  shall  never  hear  it.  Jesus  Christ  was  preached  to 
you,  but  you  rejected  him ;  his  blood  you  trod  beneath  your  feet.  The 
way  to  heaven  was  freely  set  open  before  you,  but  you  would  not  come 
unto  him  that  ye  might  have  life.  There  is  a  road  from  earth  to 
heaven :  sinner,  though  thou  hast  gone  into  the  depths  of  sin,  if  thou 
hast  been  the  most  infamous  and  most  outrageous  of  offenders,  there  is- 
a  road  for  thee  to  heaven  yet.  The  harlot,  the  thief,  the  profane,  th& 
drunkard,  may  yet  find  mercy  through  the  grace  of  Jesus,  but 

"  There  are  no  acts  of  pardon  passed 
In  that  cold  grave  to  which  we  haste; 
But  darkness,  death,  and  long  despair 
Reign  in  eternal  silence  there." 

God  bless  the  solemn  remarks  we  make,  and  he  shall  have  the  glory. 

III.  But  now,  once  again  to  change  the  subject  for  a  few  minutes, 
I  have  to  notice  in  the  third  place,  that  while  no  persons  can  pass  that 
bridgeless  chasm,  so  NO  THINGS  CAN.  Nothing  can  come  from  hell  to 
heaven.  Rejoice  ye  saints  in  light,  triumph  in  your  God  for  this — no 
temptation  of  Satan  can  ever  vex  you  when  once  you  are  landed  on  the 
golden  strand ;  you  are  beyond  bowshot  of  the  arch-enemy;  he  may  howl 
and  bite  his  iron  hands,  but  his  howlings  cannot  terrify  and  his  bitings 
cannot  disturb.  No  longer  shall  you  be  vexed  with  the  filthy  conver 
sation  of  the  ungodly.  Lot  shall  never  hear  another  foul  word.  You 
shall  not  have  to  say,  "  Woe  is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech,  that  I  dwell 
in  the  tents  of  Kedar." 

"  No  light  discourse  shall  reach  your  heart, 
Nor  trifles  vex  your  ear." 

Ton  shall  be  shut  out  from  everything  that  belongs  to  hell.  And, 
remember,  you  shall  be  in  heaven,  so  secure  that  the  wrath  of  God  which 
makes  hell  shall  never  light  on  you.  Your  Saviour  carried  it,  not  a  drop 
of  it  shall  fall  upon  your  persons.  No  present  pains  shall  be  in  heaven, 
they  are  for  the  lost ;  no  pains  of  body,  no  distractions  of  mind.  You 
shall  have  no  sin ;  sin  cannot  pass  from  them  to  you ;  you  shall  be 
perfect — like  your  Lord,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing. 

"  Your  inward  foes  shall  all  be  slain, 
Nor  Satan  vex  your  peace  again." 

You  shall  have  no  fears  for  the  future.  You  shall  know  that  your 
bliss  is  eternal.  This  shall  always  be  the  honey  of  your  honeycomb- 
that  it  lasts  for  ever.  Millions  of  years  you  shall  gaze  into  the  face  of  your 
beloved ;  throughout  endless  ages  you  shall  bask  in  the  sunlight  of  his 
smile.  This  is  joy,  I  say,  to  the  Christian,  if  he  will  but  think  it  over  it 
will  reconcile  him  to  the  hardest  strokes  of  temporary  tribulation, 
and  make  him  rejoice  in  the  hardest  toil  of  this  mortal  struggle. 
Courage,  man,  it  is  but  a  day  or  two  of  wrestling,  and  then  the  immortal 


THE   BRIDQELESS   GULP.  381 

crown ;  an  hour  or  two  of  fighting,  and  then  the  everlasting  rest. 
Methinks  I  see  to-day  the  angels  leaning  from  the  battlements  of  the 
celestial  palace,  and  as  they  mark  you,  like  armed  men  cutting  your  way 
to  the  gates  thereof,  they  cry  to  you  : — 

44  Come  in,  come  in, 
Eternal  glory  you  shall  win." 

Will  ye  sheathe  your  swords?  Will  ye  stop  the  conflict?  No;  press 
on,  and  let  your  true  Jerusalem  blades  cut  through  soul  and  spirit,  and 
divide  joint  and  marrow,  till  you  reach  the  summit,  and  the  eternal 
glory  shall  be  yours. 

IV.  Again,  we  change  the  strain  for  a  fourth  point,  and  this 
a  terrible  one.  As  nothing  can  come  from  hell  to  heaven,  so  nothing 
heavenly  can  ever  come  to  hell.  There  are  rivers  of  life  at  God's  right 
hand — those  streams  can  never  leap  in  blessed  cataracts  to  the  lost. 
Nay,  Lazarus  is  not  permitted  to  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water  to 
administer  the  cooling  drop  to  the  fire-tormented  tongue.  Not  a  drop 
of  heavenly  water  can  ever  cross  that  chasm.  See  then,  sinner,  heaven 
is  rest,  perfect  rest — but  there  is  no  rest  in  hell ;  it  is  labour  in  the 
fire,  but  no  ease,  no  peace,  no  sleep,  no  calm,  no  quiet;  everlasting 
storm ;  eternal  hurricane ;  unceasing  tempest.  In  the  worst  disease, 
there  a^e  some  respites:  spasms  of  agony,  but  then  pauses  of  repose. 
There  is  no  pause  in  hell  s  torments.  The  dreadful  music  of  the 
eternal  miserere  has  not  so  much  as  a  single  stop  in  it.  It  is  on,  on, 
on,  with  crash  of  battle,  and  dust  and  blood,  and  fire  and  vapour  of 
smoke. 

Heaven,  too.  is  a  place  of  joy;  there  happy  fingers  sweep  celestial 
chords;  there  joyous  spirits  sing  hosannahs  day  without  night;  but 
there  is  no  joy  in  hell;  for  music  there  is  the  groan;  for  joy  there  is 
the  pang;  for  sweet  fellowship  there  is  the  binding  up  in  bundles; 
for  everything  that  is  blissful  there  is  everything  that  is  dolorous.  No,  I 
could  not  exaggerate,  that  were  impossible ;  I  cannot  come  up  to  the 
doleful  facts,  therefore  there  I  leave  them.  Nothing  of  the  joy  of 
heaven  can  ever  come  to  hell. 

Heaven  is  the  place  of  sweet  communion  with  God— 

"  There  they  behold  his  face, 

And  never,  never  sin ; 
There  from  the  rivers  of  his  grace, 
Drink  endless  pleasures  in." 

There  is  no  communion  with  God  in  hell.  There  are  prayers,  but 
they  are  unheard ;  there  are  tears,  but  they  are  unaccepted ;  there  are 
cries  for  pity,  but  they  are  all  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord.  God 
willeth  not  the  death  of  any;  he  had  rather  that  he  should  turn 
unto  him  and  live,  but  if  that  grace  be  refused — 

44  The  Lord,  in  vengeance  dressed, 

Shall  lift  his  hand  and  swear, 
You  that  despised  my  promised  reat 
Shall  have  no  portion  there." 


582  METROPOLITAN   TABERXACLE   PULPIT. 

Tell  me  what  heaven  is  if  ye  will,  and  I  must  say  of  any  description 
that  ye  give  of  its  joys,  that  there  is  none  of  them  in  Tophet,  for 
heaven's  blessings  cannot  cross  from  the  celestial  regions  to  the  infernal 
prison-house.  No,  it  is  sorrow  without  relief,  misery  without  hope,  and 
here  is  the  pang  of  it — it  is  death  without  end.  There  is  only  one 
thing  that  I  know  of  in  which  heaven  is  like  hell — it  is  eternal.  "  The 
wrath  to  come,  the  wrath  to  come,  the  wrath  to  come"  for  ever  and  for 
ever  spending  itself,  and  yet  never  being  spent. 

And  now,  would  to  God,  I  could  speak  with  you  as  my  heart  desireth ; 
for  this  is  my  only  opportunity,  since,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  can  do 
this  no  more  if  I  be  saved  and  if  you  be  lost.  Spare  me,  then,  two 
or  three  minutes  while  I  close  this  poor  discourse  of  mine,  by  trying 
to  reason  with  those  of  you  who  are  unconverted.  I  have  had 
little  to  say  to  G-od's  people  this  morning ;  I  may  comfort  them  in  the 
evening,  but  this  morning  I  have  to  deal  with  you  who  fear  not  God. 
Many  of  you  now  present  are  unconverted.  I  will  never  flatter  you  by 
preaching  to  you  as  though  you  were  all  Christians.  The  Lord  my 
God  knoweth  there  is  many  a  heart  here  that  never  was  broken  ;  there 
is  many  a  spirit  here  that  never  trembled  before  the  majesty  of  infinite 
justice,  and  never  kissed  the  outstretched  sceptre  of  a  crucified  Redeemer. 
You  know  this,  some  of  you;  you  know  you  are  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 
and  in  the  bonds  of  iniquity.  I  do  not  mean  you  alone  who  live  in 
open  sin ;  but  I  mean  you  who  are  amiable,  excellent,  admirable  in  your 
carriage  and  deportment,  but  yet  the  love  of  God  is  not  in  you.  There 
is  no  fault  to  be  found  with  your  outward  character,  may*  be,  but  you 
have  not  been  born  again  ;  you  have  never  passed  from  death  unto  life ; 
and  remember,  sirs,  there  is  the  same  hell  for  the  most  excellent  as  for 
the  most  abominable,  unless  ye  fly  to  Christ — "  For  other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ ;"  and  if  ye 
believe  not  in  him,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins,  "  for  there  is  none  other 
name  under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  Come, 
then,  let  me  plead  with  you,  and  I  will  ask  you  a  question — do  you  believe 
all  this  ?  Do  you  believe  that  there  is  a  hell  ?  Do  you  believe  that  there 
is  a  heaven  to  be  lost  ?  If  you  profess  that  you  do  not  so  believe,  I 
have  done  with  you.  God  bring  you  to  a  better  mind.  But  what  did 
you  come  here  for?  Why  do  you  profess  to  be  a  Christian  if  you 
reject  the  Christian's  inspired  Book?  Become  an  infidel,  and  be 
honest.  For  my  part,  modern  infidelity  never  gives  me  any  alarm ; 
I  had  as  soon  see  you  outwardly  infidels,  as  to  hear  you  pretend 
to  be  Christians,  and  yet  disbelieve  what  that  Book  teaches.  I  like 
honesty,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  when  a  man  honestly  says,  "  I  shall 
not  make  a  profession  of  believing  what  I  do  not  believe,"  that  there  is 
at  least  one  virtue  in  him,  and  we  may  hope  that  others  may  find  soil  to 
grow  in.  But  you  that  profess  to  be  religious,  and  attend  your  Church 
or  your  Chapel,  and  yet  do  not  believe  the  revelation  of  God,  what  can  I 
say  to  you,  but  that  your  damnation  will  be  most  just.  I  think  I  hear 
many  of  you  say,  "  Believe  it,  sir,  oh !  we  never  doubted  it;  we  learned 
it  in  our  earliest  childhood,  we  have  heard  it  always,  and  we  never  ven 
tured  to  doubt."  Ah!  well  then,  I  ask  you — are  you  in  your  sober  senses 
to  believe  that  there  is  ^  hell,  and  not  seek  to  escape  from  it  ?  Do  you 


THE    BHIDQELESS   GULF.  383 

believe  there  is  a  wrath  to  come,  and  that  it,  may  fall  upon  you  in  the 
next  minute,  for  you  may  be  dead  and  never  leave  this  house  of  prayer, 
and  yet  do  you  sit  easy  in  your  pews;  or  are  you  mad?  has  sin  so  be 
sotted  you  with  its  foul  intoxication,  that  you  cannot  think?  for  if  you 
can  think,  and  there  be  an  angry  God  who  will  punish  with  the 
awful  force  of  his  omnipotence,  how  is  it  that  you  can  be  at  ease  in 
Zion? 

Let  me  ask  you  another  question:  if  these  things  be  so,  have  you  used 
your  senses  in  giving  a  preference  to  the  pleasures  of  this  life  beyond  tfce 
joys  of  heaven  ?  in  following  the  pleasures  of  to-day,  when  you  know 
they  will  be  followed  with  the  miseries  of  eternity.  Do  not  mistake,  I 
do  not  mean  to  say  that  a  Christian  is  without  pleasures,  we  have  the 
highest  and  purest  pleasure  that  mortal  or  immortal  can  know ;  we  have 
not  the  pleasures  of  sin,  but  we  have  higher,  more  delightful,  and  deeper 
pleasures.  But  this  is  what  I  mean,  will  you  spend  yourselves  in  sinful 
pleasure  ?  will  you  occupy  your  time  with  lust,  or  drunkenness,  or  with 
the  frivolities  of  fashionable  life,  and  do  you  think  that  these  are  worth  the 
expense  that  they  will  cause  ?  "  Oh,"  said  one  to  me,  who  holds  a  high 
position  in  society,  as  I  talked  with  him  long,  after  having  preached  earnestly 
the  gospel,  he  took  me  by  the  button,  and  he  said,  "  it  does  seem  to  me  to 
be  an  awful  thing,  that  I,  knowing  as  I  do  what  will  be  my  lot  if  I  live 
and  die  as  I  am,  should  still  act  as  I  do.  When  you  are  with  me,"  said  he, 
*•  and  I  listen  to  a  solemn  address,  I  think  there' shall  come  a  change  over 
me;  I  will  serve  God,  but  0  sir,  you  do  not  know  the  temptations  of  my 
life;  you  do  not  know  how  it  is  when  I  get  into  the  midst  of  pomps  and 
vanities,  and  perhaps  mingle  with  men  who  ridicule  all  thoughts  of 
religion,  it  all  goes,  and  I  am  such  a  fool  that  I  sell  my  soul — sell  my 
soul  for  it."  Oh !  there  are  such  fools  here  to-day,  who  sell  their  souls 
for  a  little  sin — one  or  two  whirls  in  the  world's  mad  dance,  and  then 
the  devil  is  your  partner,  and  your  mirth  is  over.  I  ask  you  to  use  your 
reason,  and  judge  whether  it  be  worth  your  while  to  gain  the  whole 
world  and  lose  your  own  soul. 

1  shall  put  it  to  you  in  another  way.  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  lay 
hold  of  Christ,  since  this  is  the  only  time  when  there  is  a  probability 
that  Christ  can  be  laid  hold  of.  I  will  tell  you  why  it  is.  You  do  not 
love  Christ;  you  love  sin.  Or  else  you  are  too  proud  to  come  to 
Christ ;  you  think  yourselves  good  enough,  and  you  think  that  Christ 
is  not  for  such  as  you  are,  but  only  for  great  sinners  and  the  lowest  of 
the  low.  0  sirs,  is  your  pride  such  a  fine  thing,  that  you  will  be 
damned  in  order  to  maintain  its  dignity?  Throw  your  pride  down,  come 
as  a  sinner  must  come,  and  lay  hold  of  Jesus  Christ.  Or  if  it  be  your 
sin  which  hinders,  may  God  the  Holy  Ghost  help  you  to  pluck  out  the 
right  eye  and  cast  off  a  right  arm  sooner  than  having  two  eyes  and 
two  arms  to  be  cast  into  hell  fire. 

"  But,"  saith  one,  "how  may  I  lay  hold  on  Christ?"  May  the  blessed 
Spirit  enable  you  to  do  it.  Here  it  is,  trust  Jesus  Christ  and  you  shall 
be  saved.  Conscious  that  you  deserve  his  wrath,  trembling  because  of 
his  terrible  law,  look  to  Jesus.  There  hangs  a  bleeding  Savioiu. 
Methinks  these  eyes  can  see  him  bleeding  there;  God  eternal,  he  by 
whom  the  heaven  of  heavens  were  made,  and  the  earth  and  the  fulness 


884  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

thereof,  takes  upon  himself  the  form  of  man  and  hangs  npc  a  the 
tree  of  the  curse. 

"  See  from  his  head,  his  hands,  his  feet, 
Sorrow  and  love  flow  mingled  dowri  J 
Did  e'er  such  love  and  sorrow  meet, 
Or  thorns  compose  so  rich  a  crown?" 

There  is  life  in  a  look  at  that  crucified  One,  there  is  life  at  this  moment 
for  thee.  Will  you  glance  at  him  with  a  tearful  eye,  "  Jesus,  slaughtered, 
martyred,  murdered  for  my  sake,  I  do  believe  in  thee;  here  at  thy  feet  I 
throw  myself,  all  guilty,  polluted,  foul;  let  thy  blood  drop  on  me;  turn 
thine  eye  upon  me;  say  to  me  'I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting 
love,  therefore  with  the  bands  of  my  kindness  have  I  drawn  thee.'  Corne 
and  welcome,  sinner — come."  I  have  but  preached  the  law  to  you  out 
of  love.  God  knoweth  how  these  hard  things,  as  I  speak  them,  make 
my  heart  bleed  blood.  0  that  you  would  believe  in  Jesus ;  he  is  freely 
preached  to  you — accept  him.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  lead  you  now  to 
accept  him.  These  are  no  hard  terms,  no  stern  conditions  of  a  blood 
thirsty  tyrant ;  he  does  but  say,  "  Bow  the  knee  and  kiss  the  Son. 
Come,  and  welcome,  sinner — come."  Young  man,  wilt  thou  be  saved  or 
not?  Thou  sinner,  yonder,  with  thy  grey  head,  betokening  the  approach 
of  death,  wilt  thou  believe  in  Christ  or  not?  It  may  be  this  is  thy  last 
time — thou  shalt  never  hear  the  gospel  faithfully  and  affectionately 
pressed  home  upon  thee  again.  Wilt  thou  have  Jesus  to  be  thine? 
Spirit  of  God,  lead  that  heart  to  say,  "  Yea,  Lord,  I  will ; "  and  as  the 
acceptance  is  heard  on  earth,  may  it  be  registered  in  heaven,  and  may 
talvation  come  to  that  man's  heart  this  day.  The  Lord  bless  you  all, 
every  one  of  you ;  and  when  he  gathers  his  people  together,  may  I  and 
f  ou,  every  one  of  us,  he  found  at  his  right  hand,  to  see  his  smiling  face. 


*\k%       t      &  L        L    cu%     f    •  i 

$  mi  Street  |)mpt 


A  PREACHER  FROM  THE  DEAD. 


&  pennon 

DELIVERED  ON  SABBATH  MORNING,  JULY  26,  1857,  BY  TUB 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    MUSIC    HALL,   ROYAL  SURREY  GARDENS. 


*•  And  he  said  unto  him,  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded 
Chough  one  rose  from  the  dead. — Luke  xvi.  31. 

MAN  is  very  loath  to  think  ill  of  himself.  The  most  of  mankind  are  very  prone 
to  indulge  in  apologies  for  sin.  They  say,  "  If  we  had  lived  in  better  times 
we  had  been  better  men;  if  we  had  been  born  into  this  world  under  happier 
auspices  we  should  have  been  holier;  and  if  we  had  been  placed  in  more  ex 
cellent  circumstances  we  should  have  been  more  inclined  to  the  right."  The 
mass  of  men,  when  they  seek  the  cause  of  their  sin,  eeek  it  anywhere  but  in 
ihe  right  place.  They  will  not  blame  their  own  nature  for  it;  they  will  not 
find  fault  with  their  own  corrupt  heart,  but  they  will  lay  the  blame  anywhere 
else.  Some  of  them  find  fault  with  their  peculiar  position.  "If,"  says  one, 
"  I  had  been  born  rich,  instead  of  being  poor,  I  should  not  have  been  dis 
honest."  "  Or  if,"  ays  another,  "  I  had  been  born  in  middle  life,  instead  of 
being  rich,  I  should  not  have  been  exposed  to  such  temptations  to  lust  and 
pride  as  I  am  now;  but  my  very  condition  is  so  adverse  to  piety,  that  I  am 
compelled  by  the  place  I  hold  in  society,  to  be  anything  but  what  I  ought  to 
be."  Others  turn  round  and  find  fault  with  the  whole  of  society;  they  say 
that  the  whole  organism  of  society  is  wrong;  they  tell  us  that  everything  in 
government,  everything  that  concerns  the  state,  everything  which  melts  men 
into  commonwealths,  is  all  so  bad  that  they  cannot  be  good  while  things  are 
what  they  are.  They  must  have  a  revolution,  they  must  upset  everything; 
and  then  they  think  they  could  be  holy !  Many  on  the  other  hand  throw  the 
blame  on  their  training.  If  they  had  not  been  so  brought  up  by  their  parents, 
if  they  had  not  been  so  exposed  in  their  youth,  they  would  not  have  been  what 
they  are.  It  is  their  parent's  fault;  the  sin  lay  at  their  father's  or  their 
mother's  door.  Or  it  is  their  constitution.  Hear  them  speak  for  themselves,  "  If 
I  had  such  a  temper  as  so-and-so,  what  a  good  man  I  would  be !  But  with  my 
headstrong  disposition  it  is  impossible.  It  is  all  very  well  for  you  to  talk  to  me: 
but  men  have  different  turns  of  mind,  and  my  turn  of  mind  is  such  that  I  could 
not  by  any  means  be  a  serious  character  ;  "  and  so  he  throws  the  blame  on  his 
constitution.  Others  go  a  deal  farther,  and  throw  the  blame  on  the  ministry. 
41  If,"  say  they,  "at  one  time  the  minister  had  been  more  earnest  in  preaching, 
I  should  have  been  a  better  man  ;  if  it  had  been  my  privilege  to  sit  under 
sounder  doctrine  and  hear  the  Word  more  faithfully  preached,  I  should  have 
heen  better."  Or  else  they  lay  it  at  the  door  of  professors  of  religion,  and  say, 
"  If  the  church  were  more  consistent,  if  there  were  no  hypocrites  and  no  for- 
malistSj  then  we  should  reform  !"  Ah  !  sirs,  you  are  putting  the  saddle  on  the 
wrong  norse,  yuu  are  laying  the  burden  on  the  wrong  back  ;  the  blame  is  in 
your  nearts,  nowhere  else.  If  your  hearts  were  renewed  you  would  be  better; 
but  until  that  is  done,  if  society  were  remodelled  to  perfection,  if  ministers 
were  angels,  and  profecsors  of  religion  were  seraphs,  you  would  be  none  the 
better;  but  having  less  excuse  for  your  sin,  you  would  be  doubly  guilty,  and 
perish  with  r,  iuvre  terrible  destruction.  But  yet  men  will  always  be  having 
it,  that  ii  Mings  wore  different  they  would  be  different  too;  whereas,  the  differ 
ence  must  be  mad:.-  in  themselves,  if  they  begin  in  the  right  place. 

Amongst  other  "hims  v'hich  have  occureu  to  the  human  mind.  siKh  aw  oac 

No.  U3.  39 


A    PliKACIIEi;     FKOM    THK    DEAD. 

as  that  of  my  text  may  sometimes  have  arisen.  "  If,"  said  the  rich  man  m 
hell,  "  if  one  should  arise  from  the  dead,  if  Lazarus  should  go  from  heaven  tc 
preach,  my  hardened  brethren  would  repent,"  And  some  have  heen  apt  tc 
say,  "  If  my  aged  father,  or  some  venerable  patriarch  could  rise  from  the 
dead  and  preach,  \ve  should  all  of  us  turn  to  God."  That  is  another  way  of 
casting  the  blame  in  the  wrong  quarter:  we  shall  endeavour,  if  we  can,  to  re 
fute  such  a  supposition  as  that  this  morning,  and  affirm  most  strenuously  the 
doctrine  of  the  text,  that  "If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither 
will  they  be  persuaded,  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  Let  us  proceed  with 
this  subject. 

Suppose  a  preacher  should  come  from  another  world  to  preach  to  us,  we  must 
naturally  suppose  that  he  came  from  heaven.  Even  the  rich  man  did  not  ask 
that  he  or  any  of  his  compeers  in  torment  might  go  out  of  hell  to  preach. 
Spirits  that  are  lost  and  given  up  to  unutterable  wickedness,  could  not 
visit  this  earth ;  and  if  they  did,  they  could  not  preach  the  truth,  nor 
lead  us  on  the  road  to  heaven  which  they  had  not  trodden  themselves.  The 
advent  of  a  damned  spirit  upon  earth  would  be  a  curse,  a  blight,  a  withering 
blast ;  we  need  not  suppose  that  such  a  thing  ever  did  or  could  occur.  The 
preacher  from  another  world,  if  such  could  come,  must  come  from  heaven.  He 
must  be  a  Lazarus  who  had  lain  in  Abraham's  bosom,  a  pure,  perfect,  and  holy 
being.  Now,  imagine  for  a  moment  that  such  an  one  had  descended  upon 
earth ;  suppose  that  we  heard  to-morrow  a  sudden  piece  of  news — that  a  vener 
able  spirit,  who  had  been  a  long  time  buried,  had  on  a  sudden  burst  his  cere 
ments,  lifted  up  his  coffin-lid,  and  was  now  preaching  the  word  of  life.  Oh  ! 
what  a  rush  there  would  be  to  hear  him  preach !  What  place  in  this  wide 
world  would  be  large  enough  to  hold  his  massive  congregations!  How  would 
you  rush  to  listen  to  him !  How  many  thousands  of  portraits  would  be  pub 
lished  of  him,  representing  him  in  the  dread  winding-sheet  of  death,  or  as  an 
angel  fresh  from  heaven.  Oh  !  how  would  this  city  be  stirred  :  and  not  this 
city  only,  but  this  whole  land  !  Nations  far  remote  would  soon  hear  the  news  ; 
and  every  ship  would  be  freighted  with  passengers,  bringing  men  and  women 
to  hear  tnis  wondrous  preacher  and  traveller  who  had  returned  from  the  bourne 
unknown.  And  how  would  yon  listen  ?  And  how  solemnly  would  you  gaze 
at  that  unearthly  spectre !  And  how  would  your  ears  be  attent  to  his  every 
word !  His  faintest  syllable  would  be  caught  and  published  everywhere 
throughout  the  world — the  utterances  of  a  man  who  had  been  dead  and  was  alive 
again.  And  we  are  very  apt  to  suppose,  that  if  such  a  thing  should  happen, 
there  would  be  numberless  conversions,  for  surely  the  congregations  thus 
attracted  would  be  immensely  blest.  Many  hardened  sinners  would  be  led  to 
repent ;  hundreds  of  halters  would  be  made  to  decide,  and  great  good  would 
be  done.  Ah  !  stop ,  though  the  first  part  of  the  fairy  dream  should  occur,  yet 
would  not  the  last.  If  some  one  should  rise  from  the  dead,  yet  would  sinners 
no  more  repent  through  his  preaching  than  through  the  preaching  of  any  other. 
God  might  bless  such  preaching  to  salvation,  if  he  pleased;  but  in  itself  there 
would  be  no  more  power  in  the  preaching  of  the  sheeted  dead,  or  of  the 
glorified  spirit,  than  there  is  in  the  preaching  of  feeble  man  to-day.  "Though 
one  should  rise  from  the  dead,  they  would  not  repent." 

But  yet,  many  men  would  suppose  that  advantages  would  arise  from  the 
resurrection  of  a  saint,  who  could  testify  to  what  he  had  seen  and  heard. 
Now,  the  advantages,  I  suppose,  could  only  be  three.  Some  would  say 
there  would  be  advantage  in  the  strength  of  evidence  which  such  a  man  could  give 
to  the  truth  of  Scripture;  for  you  would  say,  "If  a  man  did  actually  come  from 
the  pearly-gated  city  of  Jerusalem,  the  home  of  the  blest,  then  there  would 
be  no  more  dispute  about  the  truth  of  revelation.  That  would  be  settled.  f 
Some  wouln.  suppose  that  be  could  tell  us  more  than  Moses  and  the  prophets 
had  told  us5  and  tha;;  there  would  be  an  advantage  in  (he  instruction  ivhich  he  could 
confer,  as  well  as  in  the  evidence  which  he  would  bear.  And,  thirdly,  there 
may  be  soms  who  suppose  that  it  would  be  an  advantage  gained  in  the  manner  in 
which  such  an  cue  would  speak,  "For  surely,"  say  they,  "he  would  speak  with 
great  eloquence,  with  a  far  mightier  power,  and  with  a  deeper  feeling  than 
any  common  preacher  who  had  never  beheld  the  solemnities  of  another  world." 
Now,  these  three  points  one  after  another,  and  we  think  we  will  settle  them. 
286 


A    FREACHBK    FROM    THE    DEAD. 

I.  First,  it  is  thought  that  if  one  did  come  from  the  dead  to  pr?nch,  then 
would  he  A  CONFIRMATION  OF  THE  TRUTH  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  and  a  testimony 
borne  at  which  jeering  infidelity  would  stand  aghast  in  silence.  Stop,  we  will 
see  about  that.  We  do  not  think  so.  We  believe  that  the  resurrection  of  one 
dead  man  to-day,  to  come  into  this  hall  and  preach,  would  be  no  confirmation 
of  the  gospel  to  any  person  here  present  who  does  not  believe  it  already. 

If,  my  friends,  the  testimony  of  one  man  who  had  been  raised  from  the  dead 
were  of  any  value  for  the  confirming  of  the  gospel,  would  not  God  have  used  it 
before  now?  This  shall  be  my  first  argument.  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  some 
have  risen  from  the  dead.  We  find  accounts  in  Holy  Scripture  of  some  men 
who  by  the  power  of  Christ  Jesus,  or  through  the  instrumentality  of  prophets, 
were  raised  from  the  dead;  but  ye  will  note  this  memorable  fact,  that  they 
never  any  of  them  spoke  one  word  which  is  recorded,  by  way  of  telling  us  what 
they  saw  while  they  were  dead.  I  shall  not  enter  into  any  discussion  as  to 
whether  their  souls  slept  during  the  time  of  their  death,  or  whether  they  were  in 
heaven  or  not.  That  would  be  a  discussion  without  profit,  only  gendering  dis 
putes,  which  could  yield  no  fruit.  I  only  say,  it  is  memorable  that  there  is  not 
a  record  of  any  one  of  them  having  given  any  description  of  what  they  saw 
while  they  were  dead.  Oh,  what  secrets  might  he  have  told  out,  who  had  laid 
in  his  grave  four  days !  Do  ye  not  suppose  that  his  sisters  questioned  him  ? 
Do  ye  not  think  that  they  asked  him  what  he  saw  — whether  he  had  stood  before 
the  burning  throne  of  God,  and  been  judged  for  the  things  done  in  his  body, 
and  whether  he  had  entered  into  rest  ?  But,  however  they  may  have  asked, 
it  is  certain  he  gave  no  answer :  for  had  he  given  an  answer  we  should  have 
known  it  now;  tradition  would  nave  cherished  the  record.  And  do  ye  remem 
ber,  when  Paul  once  preached  a  long  sermon,  even  until  midnight,  there  was  a 
young  man  in  the  third  loft  named  Eutychus,  who  fell  asleep,  and  fell  down, 
and  was  taken  up  dead  ?  Paul  came  down  and  prayed,  and  Eutychus  was  res 
tored  to  life.  But  did  Eutychus  get  up  and  preach  after  he  had  come  from  the 
dead?  No  ;  the  thought  never  seems  to  have  struck  a  single  person  in  the 
assembly.  Paul  went  on  with  his  sermon,  and  they  sat  and  listened  to  him, 
and  did  not  care  one  fig  about  what  Eutychus  had  seen  ;  for  Eutychus  had  no 
thing  more  to  tell  them  than  Paul  had.  Of  all  the  number  of  those  who  by 
divine  might  have  been  brought  again  from  the  shades  of  death,  I  repeat  the 
assertion,  we  have  not  one  secret  told;  we  have  not  one  mystery  unravelled 
by  them  all.  Now,  God  knoweth  best ;  we  will  not  compare  our  surmises  to 
divine  decision.  If  God  decided  that  resurrection  men  should  be  silent,  it  was 
best  it  should  be  ;  their  testimony  would  have  been  of  little  worth  or  help  to  us, 
or  else  it  would  have  been  borne. 

But  again,  I  think  it  will  strike  our  minds  at  once,  that  if  this  very  day  a  man 
should  rise  from  his  tomb,  and  come  here  to  affirm  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  the 
infidel  icorld  would  be  no  more  near  believing  than  it  is  now.  Here  comes  Mr.  Infidel 
Critic.  He  denies  the  evidences  of  the  Bible  ;  evidences  which  so  clearly  prove 
its  authenticity,  that  we  are  obliged  to  believe  him  to  be  either  blasphemous  or 
senseless,  in  that  he  does  so,  ana  we  leave  him  his  choice  between  the  two.  But 
he  dares  to  deny  the  truth  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  will  have  it  that  all  the 
miracles  whereby  it  is  attested  are  untrue  and  false.  Do  you  think  that  one 
who  had  risen  from  the  dead  would  persuade  such  a  man  as  that  to  believe? 
What?  when  God's  whole  creation  having  been  ransacked  by  the  hand  of 
science,  has  only  testified  to  the  truth  of  revelation — when  the  whole  history  of 
buried  cities  and  departed  nations  has  but  preached  out  the  truth  that  the  Bible 
was  true — when  every  strip  of  land  in  the  far-off  East  has  been  an  exposition 
and  a  confirmation  of  the  prophecies  of  Scripture  ;  if  men  are  yet  unconvinced, 
do  ye  suppose  that  one  dead  man  rising  from  the  tomb  would  convince  them? 
No;  I  see  the  critical  blasphemer  already  armed  for  his  prey.  Hark  to  him; 
"  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  you  ever  were  dead  ;  sir,  you  profess  to  be  risen  from 
the  dead  ;  1  do  not  believe  you.  You  say  you  have  been  dead,  and  have  gone  to 
heaven  ;  my  dear  man  you  were  in  a  trance.  You  must  bring  proof  from  the 
parish  register  that  you  were  dead."  The  proof  is  brought  that  he  was  dead. 
Well,  now  you  must  prove  that  you  were  buried."  It  is  proved  that  he  was 
buried,  and  it  is  proved  that  some  sexton  in  old  times,  did  take  up  his  dry  bone* 
and  cast  his  d  \st  in  the  air.  "That  is  very  good  :  now  I  want  you  to  proY? 

887 


A    PREACHER    FROM    THE    DEAD. 

that  you  are  the  identical  man  that  was  buried."  "Well  I  am,  I  know  f  am; 
I  tell  you  as  an  honest  man  I  have  been  to  heaven,  and  I  have  come  back 
again."  "  Well  then,"  says  the  infidel,  "  it  is  not  consistent  with  reason  ;  it  is 
ridiculous  to  suppose  that  a  man  who  was  dead  and  buried  could  ever  come  to 
life  again,  and  so  I  don't  believe  you,  I  tell  you  so  straight  to  your  face."  That 
is  how  men  would  answer  him  ,  and  instead  of  having  only  the  sin  of  denying 
many  miracles  men  would  have  to  add  to  it  the  guilt  of  denying  another  ; 
but  they  would  not  be  so  much  as  a  tithe  of  an  inch  nearer  to  conviction  ;  and 
certainly,  if  the  wonder  were  done  in  some  far-off' land,  and  only  reported  to  the 
rest  of  the  world,  I  can  suppose  that  the  whole  infidel  world  would  exclaim, 
"  Simple  childish  tales  and  such  traditions  have  been  current  elsewhere  :  but  we 
are  sensible  men,  we  do  not  believe  them."  Although  a  churchyard  should  start 
into  life,  and  stand  up  before  the  infidel  who  denies  the  truth  of  Christianity  : 
I  declare  I  do  not  believe  there  would  be  enough  evidence  in  all  the  church 
yards  in  the  world  to  <  onvince  him.  Infidelity  would  still  cry  for  some 
thing  more.  It  is  like  the  horse-leech;  it  crieth,  "Give,  give!"  Prove  a 
point  to  an  infidel,  and  he  wants  it  proved  again  ;  let  it  be  as  clear  as  noon 
day  to  him  from  the  testimony  of  many  witnesses,  yet  doth  he  not  believe  it. 
In  fact,  he  doth  believe  it ;  but  he  pretendeth  not  to  do  so,  and  is  an  infidel  in 
spite  of  himself.  But  certainly  the  dead  man's  rising  would  be  little  worth 
for  the  conviction  of  such  men. 

But  remember,  my  dear  friends,  that  the  most  numerous  class  of  unbelievers 
are  a  set  of  people  who  never  think  at  all.  There  are  a  great  number  of  people 
in  this  land  that  eat  and  drink,  and  everything  else  except  think  •  at  least,  they 
think  enough  to  take  their  shop  shutters  down  of  a  morning,  and  put  them  up 
at  night ;  they  think  enough  to  know  a  little  about  the  rising  of  the  funds,  or 
the  rate  per  cent,  of  interest,  or  something  like  how  articles  are  selling,  or  the 
price  of  bread  ;  but  their  brains  seem  to  be  given  them  for  nothing  at  all,  except 
to  meditate  upon  bread  and  cheese.  To  them  religion  is  a  matter  of  very  small 
concern.  They  dare  say  the  Bible  is  very  true,  they  dare  say  religion  is  all 
right ;  but  it  does  not  often  trouble  them  much.  They  suppose  they  are  Chris 
tians  ;  for  were  they  not  christened  when  they  were  babies  ?  They  must  be 
Christians — at  least  they  suppose  so  ;  but  they  never  sit  down  to  enquire  what 
religion  is.  They  sometimes  go  to  church  and  chapel  and  elsewhere;  but  it 
does  not  signify  much  to  them.  One  minister  may  contradict  another,  but  they 
do  not  know  ;  they  dare  say  they  are  both  right.  One  minister  may  fall  foul 
of  another  in  almost  every  doctrine ;  it  does  not  signify,  and  they  pass  over 
religion  with  the  queer  idea — "  God  Almighty  will  not  ask  us  where  we  went 
to,  I  dare  say."  They  do  not  exercise  their  judgments  at  all.  Thinking  is  such 
hard  work  for  them  that  they  never  trouble  themselves  at  all  about  it.  Now, 
if  a  man  were  to  rise  from  the  dead  to-morrow  these  people  would  never  be 
startled.  Yes,  yes,  they  would  go  and  see  him  once,  just  as  they  go  and  see 
any  other  curiosity,  the  living  skeleton,  or  Tom  Thumb;  they  would  talk  about 
him  a  good  deal,  and  say,  "There's  a  man  risen  from  the  dead,"  and  possibly 
some  winter's  evening  they  might  read  one  of  his  sermons ;  but  they  would  never 
give  themselves  trouble  to  think  whether  his  testimony  was  worth  anything  or 
not.  No,  they  are  such  blocks  they  never  could  be  stirred  ;  and  if  the  ghost 
were  to  come  to  any  of  their  houses  trie  most  they  would  feel  would  be,  they 
were  in  a  fearful  fright;  but  as  to  what  he  said,  that  would  never  exercise  their 
leaden  brains,  and  never  stir  their  stony  senses.  Though  one  should  rise  from 
the  dead,  the  great  mass  of  these  people  never  would  be  affected. 

And,  besides,  my  friends,  if  men  will  not  believe  the  witness  of  God,  it  is  impossi 
ble  that  they  should  believe  the  witness  oj  man.  If  the  voice  of  God  from  the  top  of 
Sinai  and  his  voice  by  Moses  in  the  book  of  the  Law,  if  his  voice  by  the  divers 
prophets  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  especially  his  own  word  by  his  own  Son, 
who  hath  brought  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel,  cannot  convince  men, 
then  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  can  of  itself  accomplish  the  work.  No; 
if  God  speak  once,  but  man  regardeth  him  not,  we  need  not  wonder  that  we 
have  to  preach  many  a  time  without  being  regarded  ;  and  we  should  not  harbour 
the  thought  that  some  men  who  had  risen  from  the  dead  would  have  a  greater 
power  to  convince  than  the  words  of  God.  If  this  Bible  be  not  enough  to  cpn- 
Tert  you,  apart  from  the  Spirit,  (and  certainly  it  is  not)  then  there  is  nothing 

288 


A    P1EACHER    FT7OM    TI[E    DEAD. 

in  the  world  that  can,  apart  from  his  influence;  and  if  the  revelation  which  God 
has  given  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  in  this  blessed  book,  if  the  Holy  Scripture  be 
not  in  the  hands  of  God  enough  to  bring  you  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  then,  though 
an  angel  from  heaven,  then,  though  the  saints  fiom  glory,  then,  though  God 
himself  should  descend  on  earth  to  preach  to  you,  you  would  go  on  unsaved  and 
unblest.  "If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  per 
suaded,  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  That  is  the  first  point. 

II.  It  is  imagined,  however,  that  if  one  of  *'  the  spirits  of  the  just  made 
perfect  "  would  come  to  earth,  even  if  he  did  not  produce  a  most  satisfactory 
testimony  to  the  minds  of  sceptics,  he  would  yet  be  able  to  give  abundant  infor 
mation  concerning  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  "  Surely,"  some  would  say,  "if 
Lazarus  had  come  from  the  bosom  of  Abraham,  he  could  have  unfolded  a  tale 
that  would  have  made  our  hair  stand  upright,  while  he  talked  of  the  torments 
of  the  rich  man;  surely,  if  he  had  looked  from  the  gates  of  bliss,  he  might 
have  told  us  about  the  worm  that  dieth  not  and  the  fire  that  never  can  be 
quenched  :  some  horrible  details,  some  thrilling  words  of  horror  and  of  terror 
he  might  have  uttered,  which  would  have  unfolded  to  us  more  of  the  future 
state  of  the  lost  than  we  know  now."  "  And,"  says  the  bright-eyed  believer, 
"  if  he  had  come  on  earth  he  might  have  told  us  of  the  saints'  everlasting  rest : 
he  might  have  pictured  to  us  that  glorious  city  which  hath  the  Lord  God 
for  its  eternal  light,  the  streets  whereof  are  of  gold,  and  its  gates  of  pearl. 
Oh  !  how  sweetly  would  he  have  descanted  upon  the  bosom  of  Christ,  and  the 
felicity  of  the  blest.  He  had  been 

'  Up  where  eternal  ages  roll ; 
Where  solid  pleasures  never  die, 
And  fruits  immortal  feast  the  soul.' 

Surely  he  would  have  brought  down  with  him  some  handfuls  of  the  clusters 
of  Eshcol ;  he  would  have  been  able  to  tell  us  some  celestial  secrets,  which 
would  have  cheered  our  hearts,  and  nerved  us  to  run  the  heavenly  race,  and 
put  a  cheerful  courage  on."  Stop;  that  is  a  dream  too.  A  spirit  of  the  just 
descending  from  heaven  could  tell  us  no  more  that  would  be  of  any  use  to  us 
than  we  know  already.  What  more  could  that  spirit  from  heaven  tell  us  of  the 
pains  of  hell  than  we  do  already  know?  Is  not  the  Bible  explicit  enough?  Did 
not  the  lips  of  Christ  dreadfully  portray  the  lake  of  fire  ?  Did  he  not,  even  he 
who  wept  over  men,  did  he  not  in  awful  language  tell  us  that  God  would  say 
at  last,  "Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels?"  Do  you  need  more  thrilling  words  than  these?  "  The  worm  that 
dieth  not,  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched."  Do  you  need  more  terrible 
warnings  than  these, — "The  wicked  snail  be  cast  into  hell,  with  all  the  nations 
that  forget  God?"  Do  you  want  more  awful  warnings  than  this — "  Who  among 
us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings?"  What !  do  you  want  a  fuller  declara 
tion  than  the  words  of  God.  "Tophet  is  prepared  of  old;  the  pile  thereof 
is  fire  and  much  wood  ;  the  breath  of  the  Lord  like  a  stream  of  brimstone 
doth  kindle  it?"  You  cannot  want  more  than  Scripture  gives  of  that.  Even 
that  you  try  to  run  away  and  escape  from  ;  you  say  the  book  is  too  horrible,  and 
tells  you  too  much  of  damnation  and  hell.  Sirs,  if  you  think  there  is  too  much 
there,  and  therefore  reject  it,  would  you  stand  for  an  instant  to  listen  to  one 
who  should  tell  you  more?  No;  ye  do  not  wish  to  know  more,  nor  would  it 
be  of  any  use  to  you  if  you  did.  Do  you  need  more  details  concerning  the 
judgment,  that  day  of  wrath  to  which  each  of  us  is  drawing  nigh  ?  Are  we  not 
told  that  the  king  "  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory,  and  before  him  shall 
be  gathered  all  people ;  and  he  shall  divide  them  the  one  from  the  other,  as 
the  shepherd  divideth  the  sheep  from  the  goats."  Suppose  there  were  one  here 
who  had  seen  the  solemn  preparation  for  the  great  assize— one  who  had  stood 
where  the  throne  is  to  be  planted,  and  had  marked  the  future  with  a  more 
piercing  eye  than  ours.  Yet  of  what  avail  would  it  be  to  us?  Could  he  tell  ui 
more  than  Holy  Writ  hath  told  us  now — at  least,  any  which  would  be  more 
profitable  ?  Perhaps  he  knows  no  more  than  we.  And  one  thing  I  am 
sure  of,  he  would  not  tell  us  more  about  the  rule  of  judgment  than  we  knovr 

289 


A    PRKACHKR    FROM    THE    DTCAD. 

now.  Spirit  that  hath  returned  from  another  world,  tell  me,  how  are  men 
judged?  Why  are  they  condemned?  Why  are  they  saved ?  I  hear  him  say, 
"  Men  are  condemned  because  of  sin.  Read  the  ten  commandments  of  Moses, 
and  you  will  find  the  ten  great  condemnations  whereby  men  are  for  ever  cut 
off."  I  knew  that  before,  bright  Spirit;  thou  hast  told  me  nothing  !  "No," 
says  he,  "  and  nothing  can  I  tell."  "  Because  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  no 
meat;  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink;  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me 
not ;  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  not  unto  me ;  therefore,  inasmuch  as  ye  did 
it  not  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  not  to  me.  Depart, 
ye  cursed!"  "  Why,  Spirit,  was  that  the  word  of  the  King?"  "  It  was,"  says 
he.  ''  I  have  read  that,  too  ;  thou  hast  told  me  no  more."  If  you  do  not  know 
the  difference  between  right  and  wrong  from  reading  the  Scripture,  you  would 
not  know  it  if  a  spirit  should  tell  you ;  if  you  do  not  know  the  road  to  hell  and 
the  road  to  heaven  from  the  Bible  itself,  you  would  never  know  it  at  all.  No 
book  could  be  more  clear,  no  revelation  more  distinct,  no  testimony  more  plain. 
And  since  without  the  agency  of  the  Spirit,  these  testimonies  are  insufficient 
for  salvation,  it  follows  that  no  further  declaration  would  avail.  Salvation  is 
ascribed  wholly  to  God,  and  man's  ruin  only  to  man.  What  more  could  a  spirit 
tell  us,  than — a  distinct  declaration  of  the  two  great  truths. — "  O  Israel,  thou 
hast  destroyed  thyself;  but  in  me  is  thine  help  found!" 

Beloved,  we  do  solemnly  say  again,  that  Holy  Scripture  is  so  perfect,  so 
complete,  that  it  cannot  want  the  supplement  of  any  declaration  concerning 
a  future  state.  All  that  you  ought  to  know  concerning  the  future  you  may 
know  from  Holy  Scripture.  It  is  not  right  to  say  with  Young — 

"  My  hopes  and  fears  start  up  alarmed, 
And  o'er  life's  narrow  verge  look  down, 
On  what  ?     A  bottomless  abyss, 
A  dread  eternity." 

It  is  not  right  to  say  that,  as  if  it  were  all  we  know.  Blessed  be  God,  the 
saint  does  not  look  down  upon  a  bottomless  abyss  ;  he  looks  up  to  the  celestial 
"  city  that  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  Nor  do  even 
the  wicked  look  down  upon  an  unknown  abyss ;  for  to  them  it  is  clearly  re 
vealed.  Though  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,"  the  tortures  of  the  lost, 
yet  hath  Holy  Scripture  sufficiently  told  us  of  them  to  make  it  a  well-mapped 
road ;  so  that  when  they  meet  with  death,  and  hell,  and  terror,  it  shall 
be  no  new  thing ;  for  they  heard  of  it  before,  and  it  was  distinctly  re 
vealed  to  them.  Nothing  more  could  we  know  that  would  be  of  any  use. 
Tattlers,  idle  curiosity  people,  and  such  like,  would  be  mightily  delighted  with 


such  a  man.  Ah  !  what  a  precious  preacher  he  would  be  to  them,  if  they  could 
get  him  all  the  way  from  heaven,  and  get  him  to  tell  all  its  secrets  out !  Oh, 
how  would  they  love  him — how  would  they  delight  in  him  !  "  For,"  say  they, 


"  he  knows  a  great  deal  more  than  anybody  else  ;  he  knows  a  great  deal  more 
than  the  Bible  tells  us  ;  he  knows  a  great  many  little  details,  and  it  is  wonder 
ful  to  hear  him  explain  them  !"  But  there  the  matter  would  end.  It  would  be 
merely  the  gratification  of  curiosity  ;  there  would  be  no  conferring  of  blessing; 
for  if  to  know  more  of  the  future  state  would  be  a  blessing  for  us,  God  would 
not  withhold  it ;  there  can  be  no  more  told  us.  If  what  you  know  would  not 

Sersuade  you,   "Neither  would  you  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the 
ead." 

III.  Yet  some  say,  "SURELY,  IF  THERE.  WERE  NO  GAIN  IN  MATTER,  YET  THERE 
WOULD  BE  A  GAIN  IN  MANNER.  Oh,  if  such  a  spirit  had  descended  from  the 
spheres,  how  would  he  preach!  What  eloquence  celestial  would  flow  frcm  his 
lips!  How  majestically  would  he  word  his  speech  !  How  mightily  would  he 
move  his  hearers!  What  marvellous  words  would  he  utter !  What  sentences 
that  might  start  us  from  our  feet,  and  make  us  quiver  with  their  thrilling  in 
fluence.  There  would  be  no  dulness  in  such  a  preacher;  it  would  be  no  fatigue 
to  hear  him  ;  there  would  be  no  want  of  affection  in  him,  and  surely  no  want 
of  earnestness ;  we  might  well  be  pleased  to  hear  him  every  day,  and  never 
weary  with  his  wondrous  speech.  Such  a  preacher  earth  hath  never  heard. 
Oh,  if  he  would  but  come !  How  would  we  listen !" — Stay!  that  too  i\s  a  dream* 
200 


A    PKEACIIEU    FSOM    THE    DEAD. 

£  do  believe  that  Lazarus  from  Abraham's  bosom  would  not  be  so  good  a 
preacher  as  a  man  who  has  not  died,  but  whose  lips  have  been  touched  with  a 
live  coal  from  oft  the  altar.     Instead  of  his  being  better,  I   cannot  see  that  he 
would  be  quite  so  good.     Could  a  spirit  from  the  other  world  speak  to  you 
more  solemnly  than  Moses  and  the  prophets  have  spoken  ?     Or  could  ther 
speak  more  solemnly  than  you  have  heard  the  word  spoken  to  you  at  divers 
times  already  ?     O  sirs,  some  of  you  have  heard  sermons  that  have  been  as 
solemn  as  death  and  as  serious  as  the  grave.     I  can  recall  to  some  of  your 
memories  seasons  when  you  have  sat  beneath  the  sound  of  the  word,  wonder 
ing  and  trembling  all  the  while.     It  seemed  as  if  the  minister  had  taken  to 
himself  bow  and  arrows,   and  were  making  your  conscience  the  butt  at  which 
his  shafts  were  levelled.     You  have  not  known  where  you  were;  you  have 
been  so  grievously  frighted  and  smitten   with  terror  that  your  knees  did  knock 
together,  and  your  eyes  ran   with  tears.     What  more  do  you  want  than  that? 
If  that  solemn  preaching  of  some  mighty  preacher  whom  God  had  inspired 
for  the  time— if  that  did  not  save  you,  what  can  save  you,  apart  from  the  in 
fluence  of  the  Spirit?     And  oh !  you  have  heard  more  solemn  preaching  than 
that.      You    had  a    little  daughter    once ;    that  child  of  yours  had  been   to 
the  Sabbath-school     it  came  home,  and  was  sick  unto  death ;    you  watched 
it  by  night  and  day,  and  the  fever  grew  upon  it;  and  you  saw  that  it  must  die. 
You  have  not  forgotten  yet  how  your  little  daughter  Mary  preached  you  a 
sermon  that  was  solemn  indeed :  just  before  she  departed  she  took  your  hand  in 
her  little  hand,  and  she  said,  "  rather,  I  am  going  to  heaven  ;    will  you  follow 
me?"     That  was  a  solemn  sermon  to  you.     What  more  could  sheeted  dead 
have  said?     Ye  have  not  forgotten  yet,  how  when  your  father  lay  a  dying — (a 
holv  man  of  God  he  had  been  in  his  day,   and  served  his  Master  well) — you 
with  your  brothers  and  sisters  stood  around  the  bed,  and  he  addressed  you  one 
by  one.     Woman  !  you  have  not  forgotten  yet,  despite  all  your  sin  and  wicked 
ness  since  then,  how  he  looked  you  in  the  face  and  said,  "My  daughter,  'twere 
better  for  thee  that  thou  hadst  never  been  born  than  that  thou  shouldst  be  a 
despiser  of  Christ  and  a  neglecter  of  his  salvation,'      And  you  have  not  for 
gotten  how  he  looked  when  with  solemn  tears  in  his  eyes  he  addressed  you  and 
said,  "My  children,  I  charge  you  by  death  and  by  eternity,  I  charge  you,  if 
you  love  your  own  souls,  despise  not  the  gospel  of  Christ;  forsake  your  follies, 
and  turn  unto  God  and  live."     What  preacner  do  you  want  better  than  that? 
What  voice  more  solemn  than  the  voice  of  that  of  your  own  parent  upon  the 
confines  of  eternity?     And  you  have  not  yet  quite  clean  escaped  from  the  in 
fluence  of  another  solemn  scene.     You  had  a  friend,  a  so-called  friend;  he  was 
a  traitor,  one  who  lived  in  sin  and  rebelled  against  God  with  a  high  hand  and 
an  outstretched  arm.     You  remember  his  death-bed,  when  he  lay  near  to  death 
terrors  got  hold  of  him  ;  the  flames  of  hell  began  to  get  their  grip  of  him, 
before  he  had  clean  departed.     You  have  not  yet   forgotten  his  shrieks,  his 
screams;  you  have  not  yet  quite  got  from  your  vision  in  your  dreams  that 
hand  through  which  the  finger  nails  were  almost  pierced  in  agony,  and  that  face, 
contorted  with  direful  twitchings  of  dismay.     You  have  not  clear  escaped  yet 
from  that  horrid  yell  with  which  the  spirit  entered  the  realm  of  darkness  and 
forsook  the  land  of  the  living.     What  more  of  a  preacher  do  you  want?     Have 
you  heard  this  preaching,   and  yet  have  you  not  repented?    Then  verily,  if 
after  all  this  you  are  hardened,  neither  would  you  be  persuaded  though  one 
rose  from  the  dead. 

Ah  !  but  you  say,  you  want  some  one  to  preach  to  you  more  feelingly.  Then, 
Sir,  you  cannot  have  him  in  the  preacher  you  desire.  A  spirit  from  heaven 
could  not  be  a  feeling  preacher.  It  would  oe  impossible  for  Lazurus,  who  had 
been  in  Abraham's  bosom,  to  preach  to  you  \nth  emotion.  As  a  perfect  being 
of  course  he  must  be  supremely  happy.  Imagine  this  morning  a  supremely 
happy  being  preaching  to  you,  about  repentance  and  the  wrath  of  God. 
Do  you  not  see  him?  there  is  a  placid  smile  ever  upon  his  brow;  the  light  of 
heaven  gilds  his  face ;  he  is  talking  about  the  torments  of  hell,  it  was  the  place 
for  sighs  and  groans ;  but  he  cannot  sigh ;  his  face  is  just  as  placid  as  ever. 
He  is  speaking  of  the  torments  of  the  wicked,  it  was  the  time  for  tears ;  he 
cannot  weep  ;  that  \yere  incompatible  with  blessedness.  The  man  is  Breaching 
of  dreadful  things  with  a  smile  upon  his  face  ;  there  is  summer  on  his  brow,  ana 


A    PREACHER    FROM    THE    DEAD. 


winter  on  his  lips — heaven  in  his  eyes,  and  hell  in  his  mouth.  You  couia  not 
bear  such  a  preacher;  he  would  seem  to  mock  you.  Ay,  it  needs  a  man  to 
preach,  a  man  like  yourselves,  who  is  capable  of  feeling.  There  wants  one 
who,  when  he  preaches  of  Christ,  smiles  on  his  hearers  with  love — who,  when 
he  tells  of  terror,  quails  in  his  own  spirit  whilst  he  utters  the  wrath  of  God. 
The  great  power  of  preaching,  next  to  the  power  of  God's  Spirit,  lies  in  the 
preacher's  feeling  it.  We  shall  never  do  much  good  in  preaching  unless  we 
feel  what  we  utter.  "Knowing  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  we  persuade  men."  Now, 
a  glorified  spirit  from  heaven  could  not  feel  these  things  ;  he  could  show  but 
ittle  emotion.  True,  he  could  speak  of  the  glories  of  heaven  ;  and  how  would 
his  face  grow  brighter,  and  brighter,  and  brighter,  as  he  told  the  wonders  of 
that  upper  world  !  But  when  he  came  to  cry  "  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come," 
the  voice  would  sound  as  sweet  when  he  spoke  of  death  and  judgment,  as  when 
he  spoke  of  glory  ;  and  that  would  make  sad  discord,  the  sound  not  answering 
to  the  sense — the  modulations  of  his  voice  being  unfit  to  express  the  idea  upon 
the  mind.  Such  a  preacher  could  not  be  a  powerful  preacher,  even  though  he 
came  again  from  the  dead. 

And  one  thing  we  may  say,  he  could  not  preach  more  closely  home  to  you 
than  you  have  had  the  truth  preached  to  you.     I  shall  not  say  that  you  have 
had  preaching  put    very  close  to  you  from  ,the  pulpit.     I  have  striven  to  be 
very  personal  sometimes :  I  have  not  shunned  to  point  some  of  you  out  in  the 
congregation,  and  given  you  a  word  of  rebuke,  such  as  you  could  not  mistake ; 
nor  if  I  knew  that  any  of  you  were  indulging  in  sin  would  I  spare  you.  I  bless 
God  that  I  am  not  afraid  to  be  a  personal  preacher,  and  to  shoot  the  arrow  at 
each  separate  man  when  he  needs  it.     But,  nevertheless,  I  cannot  preach  home 
to  you  as  I  would.     Ye  are  all  thinking  your  neighbour  is  intended,  when  it  is 
yourself.     But  you  have  had  a  personal  preacher  once.    There  was  a  great 
preacher  called  at  your  house  one  day  ;  his  name  was  Cholera  and  Death.     A 
terrible  preacher  he  !     With  grim  words  and  hard  accent  he  came  and  laid  his 
hand  upon  your  wife ;  and  then  he  put  his  other  hand  on  you,  and  you  grew 
cold  and  well-nigh  stiff.     You  remember  how  he  preached  to  you  then.      He 
made  your  conscience  ring  again  and  again  ;  he  would  not  let  you  lie  still ;  he 
cried  aloud  concerning  your  sin  and  your  iniquity  ;  he  brought  all  your  past 
life  to  light,  and  set  all  your  evil  conduct  in  review.  From  your  childhood  even 
up  till  then  he  led  you  through  all  your  wanderings :  and  then  he  took  the 
whip   of  the  law,  and  began  to  plough  your  back  with  furrows.     He  affrighted 
you  with  "the  wrath  to  come."   You  sent  for  the  minister;  you  bade  him  pray ; 
you  thought  you  prayed  yourself;  and  after  all  that,  that  preacher  went  away, 
and  he  had  come  on  a  fruitless  errand  ;  no  good  had  been  done  to  you;  you 
had  been  a  little  startled  and  a  little  stirred,  but  you  are  to-day  what  you  were 
then,  unsaved  and  unconverted.  Then,  sir,  you  would  not  be  converted,  though 
one  rose  from  the  dead       You  have  been  wrecked  at  sea  ;  you  have  been  cast 
into  the  jaws  of  the  grave  by  fever ;  you  have  been  nearly  smitten  to  death  by 
accident ;  and  yet,  with  all  this  personal  preaching,  and  with  Mr.  Conscience 
th-.,dering  in  your  ears,  you  are  to-day  unconverted.      Then  learn  this  truth> 
that  no  outward  means  in  the  world  can  ever  bring  you  to  the  footstool  of  divine 
grace  and  make  you  a  Christian,  if  Moses  and  the  prophets  have  failed.     All 
that  can  be  done  now  is  this  :  God  the  Spirit  must  bless  the  word  to  you , 
otherwise  conscience  cannot  awaken  you,  reason  cannot  awaken  you,  powerful 
appeals  cannot  awaken  you,  persuasion  cannot  bring  you  to  Christ.      Nothing 
will  ever  do  it  except  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  Oh!  do  you  feel  that  you  are  drawn 
/his  morning  ?    Does  some  sweet  hand  draw  you  to  Christ,  and   does  some 
Messed  voice  say,  "  Come  to  Jesus,  sinner  ;  there  is  hope  for  thee."    Then  that 
is  God's  Spirit.     Bless  him  for  it !      He  is  drawing  thee  by  the  hands  of  love 
and  the  cords  of  a  man.     But  oh  !  if  thou  be  undrawn  and  left  to  thyself,  thou 
wilt  surely  die.     Brethren  and  sisters  in  the  faith,  let  us  lift  up  our  prayers  to 
God  for  sinners,  that  they  may  be  drawn  to  Christ— that  they  may  be  led  to 
come,  all  guilty  and  burdened,  and  look  to  Jesus  to  be  lightened,  and  that  they 
may  be  persuaded,  by  the  coming  power  of  the  Spirit,  to  take  Christ  to  be  their 
"all-in-all,"  knowing  that  they  themselves  are  "nothing  at  all."     O  God  the 
Holy  Spirit  bless  these  words,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.     Amen  and  Amen. 

2P2 


THE    IMPORTUNATE    WIDOW. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  FEBRUARY  21ST,  1869,  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINQTON. 


"  And  he  spake  a  parable  unto  them  to  this  end,  that  men  ought  always  to  pray, 
and  not  to  faint ;  saying,  There  was  in  a  city  a  judge,  which  feared  not  God,  neither 
regarded  man :  and  there  was  a  widow  in  that  city ;  and  she  came  unto  him,  saying, 
Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary.  And  he  would  not  for  a  while  :  but  afterward  he  said 
•within  himself,  Though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man;  yet  because  this  widow 
troubleth  me,  I  will  avenge  her,  lest  by  her  continual  coming  she  weary  me.  And  the 
Lord  said,  Hear  what  the  unjust  judge  saith.  And  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own 
elect,  which  cry  day  and  night  unto  him,  though  he  bear  long  with  them  ?  I  tell  you 
that  he  will  avenge  them  speedily." — Luke  xviii.  1 — 8. 

REMEMBER  that  our  Lord  did  not  only  inculcate  prayer  with  great 
earnestness,  but  he  was  himself  a  brilliant  example  of  it.  It  always 
gives  force  to  a  teacher's  words  when  his  hearers  well  know  that  he 
carries  out  his  own  instructions.  Jesus  was  a  prophet  mighty  both  in 
deed  and  in  word,  and  we  read  of  him,  "  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  to 
teach."  In  the  exercise  of  prayer,  "  cold  mountains  and  the  midnight  air  " 
witnessed  that  he  was  as  great  a  doer  as  a  teacher.  When  he  exhorted 
his  disciples  to  continue  in  prayer,  and  to  "  pray  without  ceasing,"  he 
only  bade  them  follow  in  his  steps.  If  any  one  of  all  the  members  of 
ttye  mystical  body  might  have  been  supposed  to  need  no  prayer,  it 
would  certainly  have  been  our  Covenant  Head,  but  if  our  Head  abounded 
in  supplication,  much  more  ought  we,  the  inferior  members.  He  was 
never  defiled  with  the  sins  which  have  debased  and  weakened  us 
spiritually  ;  he  had  no  inbred  lusts  to  struggle  with.  But  if  the 
perfectly  pure  drew  near  so  often  unto  God,  how  much  more  incessant 
in  supplication  ought  we  to  be  !  So  mighty,  so  great,  and  yet  so 
prayerful  I  0  ye  weak  ones  of  the  flock,  how  forcibly  does  the  lesson 
come  home  to  you  I  Imagine,  therefore,  the  discourse  of  this  morning 
is  not  preached  to  you  by  me,  but  comes  fresh  from  the  lips  of  one  who 
was  the  great  master  of  secret  prayer,  the  highest  paragon  and  pattern 
of  private  supplication,  and  let  every  word  have  the  force  about  it  as 
coming  from  such  a  One. 

Turn  we  at  once  to  our  text,  and  in  it  we  shall  notice,  first,  the  end 

No. 

28 


98  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  design  of  the  parable;  secondly,  we  shall  have  some  w  jrds  to  say 
upon  the  two  actors  in  it.  whose  characters  are  intentionally  so  described 
as  to  give  force  to  the  reasoning ;  and  then,  thirdly,  we  shall  dwell  upon 
the  power  which  in  the  parable  is  represented  as  triumphant. 

I.  First,  then,  consider  OUR  LORD'S  DESIGN  IN  THIS  PARABLE—"  Men 
ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint." 

But  can  men  pray  always  ?  There  was  a  sect  in  the  earlier  days  of 
Christianity  who  were  foolish  enough  to  read  the  passage  literally,  and 
to  attempt  praying  without  ceasing  by  continual  repetition  of  prayers. 
They  of  course  separated  themselves  from  all  worldly  concerns,  and  in 
order  to  fulfil  one  duty  of  life  neglected  every  other.  Such  madmen 
might  well  expect  to  reap  the  due  reward  of  their  follies.  Happily 
there  is  no  need  in  this  age  for  us  to  reprobate  such  an  error ;  there  is 
far  more  necessity  to  cry  out  against  those  who,  under  the  pretence  of 
praying  always,  have  no  settled  time  for  prayer  at  all,  and  so  run  to  the 
opposite  extreme.  Our  Lord  meant  by  saying  men  ough  t  always  to  pray, 
that  they  ought  to  be  always  in  the  spirit  of  prayer,  always  ready  to  pray. 
Like  the  old  knights,  always  in  warfare,  not  always  on  their  steeds 
dashing  forward  with  their  lances  in  rest  to  unhorse  an  adversary,  but 
always  wearing  their  weapons  where  they  could  readily  reach  them,  and 
always  ready  to  encounter  wounds  or  death  for  the  sake  of  the  cause 
which  they  championed.  Those  grim  warriors  often  slept  in  their 
armour;  so  even  when  we  sleep,  we  are  still  to  be  in  the  spirit 
of  prayer,  so  that  if  perchance  we  wake  in  the  night  we  may 
still  be  with  God.  Our  soul,  having  received  the  divine  centri 
petal  influence  which  makes  it  seek  its  heavenly  centre,  should 
be  evermore  naturally  rising  towards  God  himself.  Our  heart 
is  to  be  like  those  beacons  and  watch-towers  which  were  pre 
pared  along  the  coast  of  England  when  the  invasion  of  the  Armada 
was  hourly  expected,  not  always  blazing,  but  with  the  wood  always  dry, 
and  the  match  always  there,  the  whole  pile  being  ready  to  blaze  up  at 
the  appointed  moment.  Our  souls  should  be  in  such  a  condition  that 
ejaculatory  prayer  should  be  very  frequent  with  us.  No  need  to  jause 
in  business  and  leave  the  counter,  and  fall  down  upon  the  knees ;  the 
spirit  should  send  up  its  silent,  short,  swifb  petitions  to  the  throne  of 
grace.  When  Nehemiah  would  ask  a  favour  of  the  king,  you  will  re 
member  that  he  found  an  opportunity  to  do  so  through  the  king's  asking 
him,  "  Why  art  thou  sad  ?"  but  before  he  made  him  an  answer  he  says, 
"  I  prayed  unto  the  King  of  heaven  ;"  instinctively  perceiving  the 
occasion,  he  did  not  leap  forward  to  embrace  it,  but  he  halted  just  a 
moment  to  ask  that  he  might  be  enabled  to  embrace  it  wisely  and  fulfil 
his  great  design  therein.  So  you  and  I  should  often  feel, "  I  cannot  do 
this  till  I  have  asked  a  blessing  on  it."  However  impulsively  I  may 
spring  forward  to  gain  an  advantage,  yet  my  spirit,  under  the  influence 


THE   IMPORTUNATE   WIDOW.  99 

/>f  divine  grace,  should  hesitate  until  it  has  said,  "  If  thy  Spirit  go  not 
with  me,  carry  me  not  up  hence."  A  Christian  should  carry  the  weapon 
of  all-prayer  like  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand.  We  should  never  sheathe 
our  supplications.  Never  may  our  hearts  be  like  an  unlimbered  gun, 
with  everything  to  be  done  to  it  before  it  can  thunder  on  the  foe,  but 
it  should  be  like  a  piece  of  cannon,  loaded  and  primed,  only  requiring 
the  fire  that  it  may  be  discharged.  The  soul  should  be  not  always  in 
the  exercise  of  prayer,  but  always  in  the  energy  of  prayer  ;  not  always 
actually  praying,  but  always  intentionally  praying. 

Further,  when  our  Lord  says,  men  ought  always  to  pray,  he  may  also 
have  meant  that  the  whole  life  of  the  Chrisiiansfwuldbea  life  of  devotion 

to  God. 

"  Prayer  and  praise,  with  sins  forgiven, 
Bring  down  to  earth  the  bliss  of  heaven." 

T  >  praise  God  for  mercies  received  both  with  our  voices  and  with  our 
actions,  and  then  to  pray  to  God  for  the  mercies  that  we  need,  devoutly 
acknowledging  that  they  come  from  him,  these  two  exercises  in  one  form 
or  other  should  make  up  the  sum  total  of  human  life.  Our  life  psalm 
should  be  composed  of  alternating  verses  of  praying  and  of  praising 
until  we  get  into  the  next  world,  where  the  prayer  may  cease,  and 
praise  may  swallow  up  the  whole  of  our  immortality.  "  But,"  saith  one, 
11  we  have  our  daily  business  to  attend  to."  I  know  you  have,  but  there 
is  a  way  of  making  business  a  part  of  praise  and  prayer.  You  say, 
"Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread,"  and  that  is  a  prayer  as  you  utter 
it ;  you  go  off  to  your  work,  and  as  you  toil,  if  you  do  so  in  a  devout 
spirit,  you  are  actively  praying  the  same  prayer  by  your  lawful  labour. 
You  praise  God  for  the  mercies  received  in  your  morning  hymn  ;  and 
when  you  go  into  the  duties  of  life,  and  there  exhibit  those  graces  which 
reflect  honour  upon  God's  name,  you  are  continuing  your  praises  in  the 
best  manner.  Remember  that  with  Christians  to  labour  is  to  pray, 
and  that  there  is  much  truth  in  the  verse  of  Coleridge— 
"  He  prayeth  best  who  loveth  best." 

To  desire  my  leliow  creatures'  good  and  to  seek  after  it,  to  desire  God's 
glory,  and  so  to  live  as  to  promote  it,  is  the  truest  of  devotion.  The 
devotion  of  the  cloisters  is  by  no  means  equal  to  that  of  the  man  who 
is  engaged  in  the  battle  of  life ;  the  devotion  of  the  nunnery  and  the 
monastery  is  at  best  the  heroism  of  a  soldier  who  shuns  the  battle;  but 
the  devotion  of  the  man  in  business  life,  who  turns  all  to  the  glory  of 
God,  is  the  courage  of  one  who  seeks  the  thickest  of  the  fray,  and  there 
bears  aloft  the  grand  old  standard  of  Jehovah-nissi.  You  need  not  be 
afraid  that  there  is  anything  in  any  lawful  calling  that  need  make  you 
desist  from  vital  prayer;  but,  oh  1  if  your  calling  is  such  that  you  can 
not  pray  in  it,  you  had  better  leave  it.  If  it  be  a  sinful  calling,  an 
unholy  calling,  of  course,  you  cannot  present  that  to  God,  biU  any  of 


100  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  irdiiiary  avocations  of  life  are  such  that  if  you  cannot  sanctify 
them,  it  is  a  want  of  sanctity  in  yourself,  and  the  fault  lies  with  you. 
Men  ought  always  to  pray.  It  means  that  when  they  are  using 
the  lapstone,  or  the  chisel,  when  the  hands  are  on  the  plough 
handles,  or  on  the  spade,  when  they  are  measuring  out  the  goods,  when 
they  are  dealing  in  stocks,  whatever  they  are  doing,  they  are  to  turn  all 
these  things  into  a  part  of  the  sacred  pursuit  of  God's  glory.  Their 
common  garments  are  to  be  vestments,  their  meals  are  to  be  sacraments, 
the»r  ordinary  actions  are  to  be  sacrifices,  and  they  themselves  a  royal 
prk-  jthood,  a  peculiar  people  zealous  for  good  works. 

A  third  meaning  which  I  think  our  Lord  intended  to  convey  to  us 
was  this :  men  ought  always  to  pray,  that  is,  they  should  persevere  in 
prayer.  This  is  probably  his  first  meaning.  When  we  ask  God  for  a 
mercy  once,  we  are  not  to  consider  that  now  we  are  not  further  to 
trouble  him  with  it,  but  we  are  to  come  to  him  again  and  again.  If 
we  have  asked  of  him  seven  times,  we  ought  to  continue  until  seventy 
times  seven.  In  temporal  mercies  there  may  be  a  limit,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  may  bid  us  ask  no  more.  Then  must  we  say,  the  "  Lord's  will  be 
done."  If  it  be  anything  for  our  own  personal  advantage,  we  must 
let  the  Spirit  of  submission  rule  us,  so  that  after  having  sought  the 
Lord  thrice,  we  shall  be  content  with  the  promise,  "  My  grace  is  suffi 
cient  for  thee,"  and  no  longer  ask  that  the  thorn  in  the  flesh  should  be 
removed.  But  in  spiritual  mercies,  and  especially  in  the  united  prayers 
of  a  church,  there  is  no  taking  a  denial.  Here,  if  we  would  prevail, 
we  must  persist ;  we  must  continue  incessantly  and  constantly,  and 
know  no  pause  to  our  prayer  till  we  win  the  mercy  to  the  fullest  pos 
sible  extent.  "  Men  ought  always  to  pray."  Week  by  week,  month 
by  month,  year  by  year ; .  the  conversion  of  that  dear  child  is  to  be  the 
father's  main  plea.  The  bringing  in  of  that  unconverted  husband  is  to 
lie  upon  the  wife's  heart  night  and  day  till  she  gets  it ;  she  is  not  to 
take  even  ten  or  twenty  years  of  unsuccessful  prayer  as  a  reason  why 
she  should  cease;  she  is  to  set  God  no  times  nor  seasons,  but  so  long  as 
there  is  life  in  her  and  life  in  the  dear  object  of  her  solicitude,  she  is  to 
continue  still  to  plead  with  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.  The  pastor  is 
not  to  seek  a  blessing  on  his  people  occasionally,  and  then  in  receiving 
a  measure  of  it  to  desist  from  further  intercession,  but  he  is  to  continue 
vehemently  without  pause,  without  restraining  his  energies,  to  cry 
aloud  and  spare  not  till  the  windows  of  heaven  be  opened  and  a  bless 
ing  be  given  too  large  for  him  to  house.  But,  brethren,  how  many 
times  we  ask  of  God,  and  have  not  because  we  do  not  wait  long  enough 
at  the  door !  we  knock  a  time  or  two  at  the  gate  of  mercy,  and  as  no 
friendly  messenger  opens  the  door,  we  go  our  ways.  Too  many  prayers 
are  like  boys'  runaway  knocks,  given,  and  then  the  giver  is  away  before 
the  door  can  be  opened.  0  for  grace  to  stand  foot  to  loot  with  the 


THE   IMPORTtTRATE  WIDOW  101 

angel  of  God,  and  never,  never,  never  relax  our  hold  ;  feeling  that  the 
cause  we  plead  is  one  in  which  we  must  be  successful,  for  souls  depend 
on  it,  the  glory  of  God  is  connected  with  it,  the  state  of  our  fellow  men. 
is  in  jeopardy.  If  we  could  have  given  up  in  prayer  our  own  lives 
and  the  lives  of  those  dearest  to  us,  yet  the  souls  of  men  we  cannot  give 
up,  we  must  urge  and  plead  again  and  again  until  we  obtain  the 

answer. 

"  The  humble  suppliant  cannot  fail 

To  have  his  wants  supplied, 

Since  he  for  sinners  intercedes 

Who  once  for  sinners  died.'' 

I  cannot  leave  this  part  of  the  subject  without  observing  that 
our  Lord  would  have  us  learn  that  men  should  be  more  frequent 
in  prayer.  Not  only  should  they  always  have  the  spirit  of  prayer, 
and  make  their  whole  lives  a  prayer,  and  persevere  in  any  one 
object  which  is  dear  to  their  souls,  but  there  should  be  a  greater 
frequency  of  prayer  amongst  all  the  saints.  I  gather  that  from  the 
parable,  "  lest  by  her  continual  coming  she  weary  me."  Prayerfulness 
will  scarcely  be  kept  up  long  unless  you  set  apart  times  and  seasons 
for  prayer.  There  are  no  times  laid  down  in  Scripture  except  by  the 
example  of  holy  men,  for  the  Lord  trusts  much  to  the  love  of  hia 
people  and  to  the  spontaneous  motions  of  the  inner  life.  He  does  not 
say,  "  Pray  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  every  day,"  or  "  pray  at 
night  at  eight,  or  nine,  or  ten,  or  eleven  ;"  but  says,  "  Pray  without 
ceasing."  Yet  every  Christian  will  find  it  exceedingly  useful  to  have 
his  regular  times  for  retirement,  and  I  doubt  whether  any  eminent 
piety  can  be  maintained  without  these  seasons  being  very  carefully  and 
scrupulously  observed.  We  read  in  the  old  traditions  of  James  the 
apostle,  that  he  prayed  so  much  that  his  knees  grew  hard  through  his 
long  kneeling :  and  it  is  recorded  by  Fox,  that  Latimer,  during  the 
time  of  his  imprisonment,  was  so  much  upon  his  knees  that  frequently 
the  poor  old  man  could  not  rise  to  his  meals,  and  had  to  be  lifted  up 
by  his  servants.  When  he  could  no  longer  preach,  and  was  immured 
within  stone  walls,  his  prayers  went  up  to  heaven  for  his  country,  and 
we  in  these  times  are  receiving  the  blessing.  Daniel  prayed  with  his 
windows  open  daily  and  at  regular  intervals.  "  Seven  times  a  day," 
saith  one,  "  will  I  praise  thee."  David  declared  that  at  "  Evening,  and 
morning,  and  at  noon,"  would  he  wait  upon  God.  0  that  our  intervals 
of  prayer  were  not  so  distant  one  from  the  other ;  would  God  that  on 
the  pilgrimage  of  life  the  wells  at  which  we  drink  were  more  frequent. 
In  this  way  should  we  continue  in  prayer. 

Our  Lord  means,  to  sum  up  the  whole,  that  believers  should  ex&rcisea 
universality  of  supplication— we  ought  to  pray  at  all  times.  There  are  no 
canonical  hours  in  the  Christian's  day  or  week.  We  should  pray  from 


102  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

eockcrowing  to  midnight,  at  such  times  as  the  Spirit  moveth  us.  We 
Bhould  pray  in  all  estates,  in  our  poverty  and  in  our  wealth,  in  our 
health  and  in  our  sickness,  in  the  bright  days  of  festival  and  in  the 
dark  nights  of  lamentation.  We  should  pray  at  the  birth  and  pray  at  the 
funeral,  we  should  pray  when  our  soul  is  glad  within  us  by  reason  of 
abundant  mercy,  and  we  should  pray  when  our  soul  draweth  nigh  unto 
the  gates  of  death  by  reason  of  heaviness.  We  should  pray  in  all 
transactions,  whether  secular  or  religious.  Prayer  should  sanctify  every 
thing.  The  word  of  God  and  prayer  should  come  in  over  and  above  the 
common  things  of  daily  life.  Pray  over  a  bargain,  pray  over  going  into  the 
shop  and  coming  out  again.  Remember  in  the  days  of  Joshua  how  the 
Gibeonites  deceived  Israel  because  Israel  enquired  not  of  the  Lord,  and 
be  not  thou  deceived  by  a  specious  temptation,  as  thou  mayst  well  be 
if  thou  dost  not  daily  come  to  the  Lord,  and  say,  "  Guide  me :  make 
straight  a  plain  path  for  my  feet,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting." 
Thou  shalt  never  err  by  praying  too  much,  thou  shalt  never  make  a 
mistake  by  asking  God's  guidance  too  often ;  but  thou  shalt  find  this 
to  be  the  gracious  illumination  of  thine  eyes,  if  in  the  turning  of  the 
road  where  two  paths  meet  which  seem  to  be  equally  right,  thou  shalt 
stay  a  moment  and  cry  unto  God,  "  Guide  me,  0  thou  great  Jehovah." 
"  Men  ought  always  to  pray."  I  have  enlarged  upon  it  from  this  pulpit, 
go  you  and  expound  it  in  your  daily  lives. 

II.  In  enforcing  this  precept,  our  Lord  gives  us  a  parable  in  which 
there  are  TWO  ACTORS,  the  characteristics  of  the  two  actors  being  such 
as  to  add  strength  to  his  precept. 

In  the  first  verse  of  the  parable  there  is  a  judge.  Now,  herein  is  the 
great  advantage  to  us  in  prayer.  Brethren,  if  this  poor  woman  pre 
vailed  with  a  judge  whose  office  is  stern,  unbending,  untender,  how  much 
more  ought  you  and  I  to  be  instant  in  prayer  and  hopeful  of  success 
when  we  have  to  supplicate  a  Father !  Far  other  is  a  father  than  a 
judge.  The  judge  must  necessarily  be  impartial,  stern,  but  the  father 
is  necessarily  partial  to  his  child,  compassionate  and  tender  to  his  own 
offspring.  Doth  she  prevail  over  a  judge  ;  and  shall  not  we  prevail 
with  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven  ?  And  doth  she  continue  in  her  des 
perate  need  to  weary  him  until  she  wins  what  she  desires  ;  and  shall  not 
we  continue  in  the  agony  of  our  desires  uatil  we  get  from  our  heavenly 
Father  whatsoever  his  word  hath  promised  ? 

In  addition  to  being  a  judge,  he  was  devoid  of  all  good  character.  In 
both  branches  he  failed.  He  "  feared  not  God."  Conscience  was  seared 
in 'him,  he  had  no  thoughts  of  the  great  judgment-seat  before  which 
judges  must  appear.  Though  possibly  he  had  taken  an  oath  before 
God  to  judge  impartially,  yet  he  forgot  his  oath,  and  trod  justice  under 
his  foot.  "  Neither  did  he  regard  man."  The  approbation  of  his 
feJ]ow  creatures,  which  is  very  often  a  power,  even  with  naturally  bad 


THE    IMPORTUNATE   WIDOW.  103 

men,  either  to  restrain  them  from  overt  evil,  or  else  to  constrain  them 
to  righteousness,  this  principle  had  no  effect  upon  him.  Now,  if  the 
widow  prevailed  over  such  a  wretch  as  this,  if  the  iron  of  her  im 
portunity  broke  the  iron  and  steel  of  this  man's  obduracy,  how  much 
more  may  we  expect  to  be  successful  with  him  who  is  righteous,  and 
just,  and  good,  the  Friend  of  the  needy,  the  Father  of  the  fatherless,  and 
the  Avenger  of  all  such  as  are  oppressed  !  0  let  the  character  of  God  as 
it  rises  before  you  in  all  its  majesty  of  truthfulness  and  faithfulness, 
blended  with  lovingkindness,  and  tenderness,  and  mercy,  excite  in  you 
an  indefatigable  ardour  of  supplication,  making  you  resolve  with  this 
poor  woman  that  you  will  never  cease  to  supplicate  until  you  win 
your  suit. 

The  j  udge  was  a  man  so  unutterably  bad,  that  he  even  confessed  his 
badness  to  himself,  with  great  contentment  too.  Without  the  slightest 
tinge  of  remorse,  he  said  within  himself,  "  Though  I  fear  not  God,  neither 
regard  man."  There  are  few  sinners  who  will  go  this  length.  They 
may  neither  fear  God  nor  regard  men,  yet  still  they  will  indulge  in 
their  minds  some  semblance  of  that  which  is  virtuous,  and  cheat  them 
selves  into  the  belief  that  at  least  they  are  not  worse  than  others. 
But  with  this  man  there  was  no  self-deception.  He  was  as  cool  about 
this  avowal  as  the  Pharisee  was  concerning  the  opposite,  "  God,  I  thank 
thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are."  To  what  a  brazen  impertinence 
must  this  man  have  come,  to  what  an  extent  must  he  have  hardened 
his  mind,  that  knowing  himself  to  be  such,  he  yet  climbed  the  judgment- 
fieat,  and  sat  there  to  judge  his  fellow  men  !  Yet  the  woman  prevailed 
with  this  monster  in  human  form,  who  had  come  to  take  pleasure  in  his 
own  wickedness,  and  gloated  in  the  badness  of  his  own  heart.  Over 
this  man  importunity  prevailed — how  much  more  over  him  who  spared 
not  his  own  Son,  but  freely  delivered  him  up  for  us  all ;  how  much  more 
over  him  whose  name  is  love,  whose  nature  is  everything  that  is 
attractive  and  encouraging  to  such  as  seek  his  face !  The  worse  this 
judge  appears,  and  he  could  scarcely  have  been  painted  in  blacker 
colours,  the  more  does  the  voice  of  the  Saviour  seem  to  say  to  us, 
"Men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint." 

Xote  with  regard  to  the  character  of  this  judge,  that  he  was  one  who 
consciously  cared  for  nothing  but  his  own  ease.  When  at  last  he 
consented  to  do  justice,  the  only  motive  which  moved  him,  was,  "  lest 
by  her  continual  coming  she  weary  me.  "  She  stun  me,"  might  be  the 
Greek  word — a  kind  of  slang,  I  suppose,  of  that  period,  meaning  lest  "she 
batter  me,"  "she  bruise  me,"  and  as  some  translate  it,  "black  my  face 
with  her  incessant  constant  batterings."  That  was  the  kind  of  language 
he  used-  a  short  quick  sentence  of  indignation  at  being  bothered,  as 
we  should  say,  by  such  a  case  as  this.  The  only  thing  that  moved  him 
was  a  desire  to  be  at  ease,  and  to  take  things  comfortably.  0 


104  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

brethren,  if  she  could  prevail  over  such  a  one,  how  much  more  shall 
WQ  speed  with  God  whose  delight  it  is  to  take  care  of  his  children,  who 
loves  them  even  as  the  apple  of  his  eye ! 

This  judge  was  practically  unkind  and  cruel  to  her;  yet  the  widow 
continued.  For  awhile  he  would  not  listen  to  her,  though  her 
household,  her  life,  her  children's  comfort,  were  all  hanging  upon  his 
will ;  he  left  her  by  a  passive  injustice  to  suifer  still.  But  our  God 
has  been  practically  kind  and  gracious  to  us,  up  to  this  moment  he  has 
heard  us  and  granted  our  requests.  Set  this  against  the  character  of 
the  judge,  and  surely  every  loving  heart  that  knows  the  power  of 
prayer  will  be  moved  to  incessant  importunity. 

We  must,  however,  pass  on  now  to  notice  the  other  actor  in  the  scene — 
the  widow ;  and  here  everything  tells  again  the  same  way,  to  induce 
the  church  of  God  to  be  importunate.  She  was  apparently  a  perfect 
stranger  to  the  judge.  She  appeared  before  him  as  an  individual  in 
whom  he  took  no  interest.  He  had  possibly  never  seen  her  before ; 
who  she  was  and  what  she  wanted  was  no  concern  to  him.  But  when 
the  church  appears  before  God  she  comes  as  Christ's  own  bride,  she 
appears  before  the  Father  as  one  whom  he  has  loved  with  an  everlasting 
love.  And  shall  he  not  avenge  his  own  elect,  his  own  chosen,  his  own 
people  ?  Shall  not  their  prayers  prevail  with  him,  when  a  stranger's 
importunity  won  a  suit  of  an  unwilling  judge  ? 

The  widow  appeared  at  the  judgment-seat  without  a  friend.  Accord 
ing  to  the  parable,  she  had  no  advocate,  no  powerful  pleader  to  stand  up 
in  the  court  and  say,  "  I  am  the  patron  of  this  humble  woman."  If 
she  prevailed,  she  must  prevail  by  her  own  ardour  and  her  own  intensity 
of  purpose.  But  when  you  and  I  come  before  our  Father,  we  come 
not  alone,  for— 

"  He  is  at  the  Father's  side, 
The  Man  of  love,  the  Crucified." 

We  have  a  Friend  who  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  u^ 
0  Christian,  urge  thy  suit  with  holy  boldness,  press  thy  case,  for  the 
blood  of  Jesus  speaks  with  a  voice  that  must  be  heard.  Be  not  thon 
therefore  faint  in  thy  spirit,  but  continue  instant  in  thy  supplication. 

This  poor  woman  came  without  a  promise  to  encourage  her,  nay,  with 
the  reverse,  with  much  to  discourage ;  but  when  you  and  I  come  before 
God,  we  are  commanded  to  pray  by  God  himself,  and  we  are  promised 
that  if  we  ask  it  shall  be  given  us,  if  we  seek  we  shall  find.  Does  she 
win  without  the  sacred  weapon  of  the  promise,  and  shall  not  we  win 
who  can  set  the  battering-rams  of  God's  own  word  against  the  gates  of 
heaven,  a  battering-ram  that  shall  make  every  timber  in  those  gates  to 
quiver  ?  0  brethren,  we  must  not  pause  nor  cease  a  moment  while  we 
have  God's  promise  to  back  our  plea. 


THE   IMPORTUNATE   WIDOW.  105 

The  widow,  in  addition  to  having  no  promise  whatever,  was  even 
without  the  right  of  constant  access.  She  had,  I  suppose,  a  right  to 
clamour  to  be  heard  at  ordinary  times  when  judgment  was  administered, 
but  what  right  had  she  to  dog  the  judge's  footsteps,  to  waylay  him  in 
the  streets,  to  hammer  at  his  private  door,  to  be  heard  calling  at  nightfall, 
so  that  he,  sleeping  at  the  top  of  his  house,  was  awakened  by  her  cries? 
She  had  no  permission  so  to  importune,  but  we  may  come  to  God  at  all 
times  and  all  seasons.  We  may  cry  day  and  night  unto  him,  for  he 
has  bidden  us  pray  without  ceasing.  What,  without  a  permit  is  this- 
woman  so  incessant  !  and  with  the  sacred  permissions  which  God  has 
given  us,  and  the  encouragement  of  abounding  lovingkindness,  shall  we 
cease  to  plead  ? 

She,  poor  soul,  every  time  she  prayed,  provoked  the  judge ,  lines  of 
anger  were  on  his  face.  I  doubt  not  he  foamed  at  the  mouth  to  think 
he  should  be  wearied  by  a  person  so  insignificant;  but  with  Jesus,  everj 
time  we  plead  we  please  him  rather  than  provoke  him.  The  prayers  of 
the  saints  are  the  music  of  God's  ears. 

"  To  him  there's  music  in  a  groan, 
And  beauty  in  a  tear." 

We,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  bring  a  gratification  to  God 
when  we  intercede  with  him.  He  is  vexed  with  us  if  we  restrain  our 
supplications ;  he  is  pleased  with  us  when  we  draw  near  constantly. 
Oh,  then,  as  you  see  the  smile  upon  the  Father's  face,  children  of  his 
love,  I  beseech  you  faint  not,  but  continue  still  without  ceasing  to 
entreat  the  blessing. 

Once  more,  this  woman  had  a  suit  in  which  the  judge  could  not  be 
himself  personally  interested ;  but  ours  is  a  case  in  which  the  God  we 
plead  with  is  more  interested  than  we  are ;  for  when  a  church  asks  for 
the  conversion  of  souls,  she  may  justly  say,  "  Arise,  0  God,  plead  thine 
own  cause."  It  is  for  the  honour  of  Christ  that  souls  should  be  con 
verted  ;  it  brings  glory  to  the  mercy  and  power  of  God  when  great 
sinners  are  turned  from  the  error  of  their  ways ;  consequently  we  are 
pleading  for  the  Judge  with  the  Judge,  for  God  we  are  pleading  with 
God.  Our  prayer  is  virtually  for  Christ  as  through  Christ,  that  his 
kingdom  may  come,  and  his  will  may  be  done. 

I  must  not  forget  to  mention  that  in  this  woman's  case  she  was  only 
one.  She  prevailed  though  she  was  only  one,  but  shall  not  God  avenge 
his  own  elect,  who  are  not  one,  but  tens  of  thousands  ?  If  there  be  a 
promise  that  if  two  or  three  are  agreed  it  shall  be  done,  how  much  more 
if  in  any  church  hundreds  meet  together  with  unanimous  souls  anxiously 
desiring  that  God  would  fulfil  his  promise  ?  These  pleas  cast  chains 
around  the  throne  of  God  !  How  do  they,  as  it  were,  hem  in  omnipo 
tence  !  How  'hey  constrain  the  Almighty  to  arise  out  of  his  place  and 


106  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

come  in  answer  to  his  people,  and  do  the  great  deed  which  shall  bless 
his  church  and  glorify  himself. 

You  see,  then,  whether  we  consider  the  judge,  or  consider  the  widow, 
each  character  has  points  about  it  which  tend  to  make  us  see  our  duty 
and  our  privilege  to  pray  without  ceasing. 

III.    The  third  and  last  point :  THE  POWER  WHICH,  ACCORDING  TO 

THIS   PARABLE,    TRIUMPHED. 

This  power  was  not  the  woman's  eloquence,  "  I  pray  thee  avenge 
me  of  mine  adversary."  These  words  are  very  few.  They  have 
the  merit  of  being  very  expressive,  but  he  that  would  study  oratory 
will  not  gather  many  lessons  from  them.  *'  I  pray  thee  avenge 
me  of  mine  adversary."  Just  eight  words.  You  observe  there  is  no 
plea,  there  is  nothing  about  her  widowhood,  nothing  urged  about 
her  children,  nothing  said  about  the  wickedness  of  her  adversary, 
nothing  concerning  the  judgment  of  God  upon  unjust  judges,  nor  about 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  unjust  men,  who  devour  widows'  houses — 
nothing  of  the  kind.  "  I  pray  thee  avenge  me  of  mine  adversary." 
Her  success,  therefore,  did  not  depend  upon  her  power  in  rhetoric,  and 
we  learn  from  this  that  the  prevalence  of  a  soul  or  of  a  church  with 
God  does  not  rest  upon  the  elocution  of  its  words,  or  upon  the  eloquence 
of  its  language.  The  prayer  which  mounts  to  heaven  may  have  but  very 
few  of  the  tail  feathers  of  adornment  about  it,  but  it  must  have  the 
strong  wing  feathers  of  intense  desire  ;  it  must  not  be  as  the  peacock, 
gorgeous  for  beauty,  but  it  must  be  as  the  eagle,  for  soaring  aloft,  if  it 
would  ascend  up  to  the  seventh  heavens.  When  you  pray  in  public,  as 
a  rule  the  shorter  the  better.  Words  are  cumbersome  to  prayer.  It 
often  happens  that  an  abundance  of  words  reveals  a  scarcity  of  desires. 
Verbiage  is  generally  nothing  better  in  prayer  than  a  miserable  fig  leaf 
with  which  to  cover  the  nakedness  of  an  unawakened  soul. 

Another  thing  is  quite  certain,  namely,  that  the  woman  did  not 
prevail  through  the  merits  of  her  case.  It  may  have  been  a  very  good 
case,  there  is  nothing  said  about  that.  I  do  not  doubt  the  right- 
ness  of  it ;  but  still,  the  judge  did  not  know  nor  care  whether  it  was  right 
or  wrong ;  all  he  cared  about  was,  this  woman  troubled  him.  He  does 
not  say,  "  She  has  a  good  case,  and  I  ought  to  listen  to  it."  No,  he  was 
too  bad  a  man  to  be  moved  by  such  a  motive — but  "  she  worries  me," 
that  is  all,  "  [  will  attend  to  it."  So  in  our  suit — in  the  suit  of  a 
sinner  with  God,  it  is  not  the  merit  of  his  case  that  can  ever  prevail 
with  God.  Thou  hast  no  merit.  If  thou  art  to  win,  another's  merit 
must  stand  instead  of  thine,  and  on  thy  part  it  must  not  be  merit  but 
misery ;  it  must  not  be  thy  righteousness  but  thy  importunity  that  is  to 
prevail  with  God.  How  this  ought  to  encourage  those  of  you  who  are 
labouring  under  a  sense  of  unworthiness  !  However  unworthy  you  may 
be,  continue  in  prayer.  BUck  may  be  the  hand,  but  if  it  can  but  lift 


THE   IMPORTUNATE   WIDOW.  107 

the  knocker,  the  gate  will  open.  Ay,  though  thou  have  a  palsy  in  tlat 
hand;  though,  in  addition  to  that  palsy,  thou  be  leprous,  and  the 
white  leprosy  be  on  thy  forehead,  yet  if  thou  canst  but  tremblingly 
lift  up  that  knocker  and  let  it  fall  by  its  own  weight  upon  that  sacred 
promise,  thou  shalt  surely  get  an  audience  with  the  King  of  kings. 
It  is  not  eloquence,  it  is  not  merit,  that  wins  with  God,  it  is  nothing 
but  importunity. 

Note  with  regard  to  this  woman,  that  the  judge  said  first,  she  troubled 
him,  next  he  said,  she  came  continually,  and  then  he  added  his  fear  lest 
41  she  weary  me."  I  think  the  case  was  somewhat  after  this  fashion. 
The  judge  was  sitting  one  morning  on  his  bench,  and  many  were  the 
persons  coming  before  him  asking  justice,  which  he  was  dealing  out 
with  the  impartiality  of  a  villain,  giving  always  his  best  word  to  him 
who  brought  the  heaviest  bribes  ;  when  presently  a  poor  woman  uttered 
her  plaint.  She  had  tried  to  be  heard  several  times,  but  her  voice  had 
been  drowned  by  others,  but  this  time  it  was  more  shrill  and  sharp, 
and  she  caught  the  judge's  eye.  "My  lord,  avenge  me  of  mine  adver 
sary."  He  no  sooner  sees  from  her  poverty-stricken  dress  that  there 
are  no  bribes  to  be  had,  than  he  replies,  "  Hold  your  toL0-ue  !  I  have 
other  business  to  attend  to."  He  goes  on  with  another  suit  in  which 
the  fees  were  more  attractive.  Still  he  hears  the  cry  again,  "  My 
lord,  I  am  a  widow,  avenge  me  of  mine  adversary."  Vexed  with  the 
renewed  disturbance,  he  bade  the  usher  put  her  out,  because  she 
interrupted  the  silence  of  the  court  and  stopped  the  public  busi 
ness.  "  Take  care  she  does  not  get  in  again  to-morrow,"  said  he, 
"  she  is  a  troublesome  woman."  Long  ere  the  morrow  had  corne,  he 
found  out  the  truth  of  his  opinion.  She  waited  till  he  left  the  court, 
dogged  his  footsteps,  and  followed  him  through  the  streets,  until  he  was 
glad  to  get  through  his  door,  and  bade  the  servants  fasten  it  lest  that 
noisy  widow  should  come  in,  for  she  had  constantly  assailed  him  with 
the  cry,  "  Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary."  He  is  now  safely  within  doors, 
and  bids  the  servants  bring  in  his  meal.  They  are  pouring  water  on 
his  hands  and  feet,  his  lordship  is  about  to  enjoy  his  repast,  when  a 
heavy  knock  is  heard  at  the  door,  followed  by  a  clamour,  pushing, 
and  a  scuffle.  "  What  is  it  ?  "  saith  he.  "  It  is  a  woman  outside, 
a  widow  woman,  who  wants  your  lordship  to  see  justice  done  her.'' 
*'  Tell  her  I  cannot  attend  to  her,  she  must  be  gone."  He  seeks  his  rest 
at  nightfall  on  the  housetop,  when  he  hears  a  heavy  knock  at  the  door, 
and  a  voice  comes  up  from  the  street  beneath  his  residence,  "  My  lord, 
avenge  me  of  mine  adversary."  The  next  morning  his  court  is  open, 
and,  though  she  is  forbidden  to  enter,  like  a  dog  that  will  enter  some 
how,  she  finds  her  way  in,  and  she  interrupts  the  court  continually  with 
her  plea,  "  My  lord,  avenge  me  of  mine  adversary."  Ask  her  why  sh« 
is  thus  importunate,  and  she  will  tell  you  her  husband  is  dead,  and  hd 


108  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

left  a  little  plot  of  land — it  was  all  they  had,  and  a  cruel  neighbour 
who  looked  with  greedy  eyes  upon  that  little  plot,  has  taken  it  as  Ahab 
took  Naboth's  vineyard,  and  now  she  is  without  any  meal  or  any  oil  for 
the  little  ones,  and  they  are  crying  for  food.  Oh,  if  their  father  had 
been  alive,  how  he  would  have  guarded  their  interests !  but  she  has  no 
helper,  and  the  case  is  a  glaring  one ;  and  what  is  a  judge  for  if  he  i& 
not  to  protect  the  injured  ?  She  has  no  other  chance,  for  the  creditor  is 
about  to  take  away  her  children  to  sell  them  into  bondage.  She  cannot 
bear  that.  "  No,"  she  says,  "  I  have  but  one  chance ;  it  is  that  this 
man  should  speak  up  for  me  and  do  me  justice,  and  I  have  made  up 
my  mind  he  shall  never  rest  till  he  does  so.  I  am  resolved  that  if  I 
perish,  the  last  words  on  my  lips  shall  be,  'Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary.' " 
So  the  court  is  continually  interrupted.  Again  the  judge  shouts,  "  Put 
her  out;  put  her  out!  I  cannot  conduct  the  business  at  all  with  this 
crazy  woman  here  continually  dinning  in  my  ears  a  shriek  of  'Avenge  me 
of  mine  adversary.' "  But  it  is  sooner  said  than  done.  She  lays  hold 
of  the  pillars  of  the  court  so  as  not  to  be  dragged  out,  and  when  at 
last  they  get  her  in  the  street,  she  does  but  wait  her  chance  to  enter 
again,  she  pursues  the  judge  along  the  highways,  she  never  lets  him 
have  a  minute's  peace.  "  Well,"  says  the  judge,  "  I  am  worried 
out  of  my  very  life.  I  care  not  for  the  widow,  nor  her  property,  nor 
her  children;  let  them  starve,  what  are  they  to  me?  but  I  cannot 
stand  this,  it  will  weary  me  beyond  measure.  I  will  see  to  it."  It 
is  done,  and  she  goes  her  way.  Nothing  but  her  importunity  prevails. 
Now,  brethren,  you  have  many  other  weapons  to  use  with  God  in 
prayer,  but  our  Saviour  bids  you  not  neglect  this  master,  all-conquer 
ing,  instrument  of  importunity.  God  will  be  more  easily  moved  than 
this  unjust  judge,  only  be  you  as  importunate  as  this  widow  was.  If  you 
are  sure  it  is  a  right  thing  for  which  you  are  asking,  plead  now,  plead  at 
noon,  plead  at  night,  plead  on  ;  with  cries  and  tears  spread  out  your  case, 
order  your  arguments,  back  up  your  pleas  with  reasons,  urge  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus,  set  the  wounds  of  Christ  before  the  Father's 
eyes,  bring  out  the  atoning  sacrifice,  point  to  Calvary,  enlist  the 
crowned  Prince,  the  Priest  who  stands  at  the  right  hand  of  God; 
and  resolve  in  your  very  soul  that  if  Zion  do  not  flourish,  if  souls 
be  not  saved,  if  your  family  be  not  blessed,  if  your  own  zeal  be 
not  revived,  yet  you  will  die  with  the  plea  upon  your  lips,  ai?d  with 
the  importunate  wish  upon  your  spirits.  Let  me  tell  yta  that 
if  any  of  you  should  die  with  your  prayers  unanswered,  you  need 
not  conclude  that  God  has  disappointed  you.  "With  one  story 
I  will  finish.  I  have  heard  that  a  certain  godly  father  had  the 
unhappiness  to  be  the  parent  of  some  five  or  six  most  graceless 
eons.  All  .  f  them  as  they  grew  up  imbibed  infidel  sentiments,  and  led 
a  libidinous  life.  The  father  who  had  been  constantly  praying  for  them, 


THE   IMPORTUNATE   WIDOW.  109 

and  was  a  pattern  of  every  virtue,  hoped  at  least  that  in  his  death  he 
might  be  able  to  say  a  word  that  should  move  their  hearts.  He  gathered 
them  to  his  bedside,  but  his  unhappiness  in  dying  was  extreme,  for  he 
lost  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  and  was  beset  with  doubts  and 
fears,  and  the  last  black  thought  that  haunted  him  was,  "  Instead  ot 
my  dtath  being  a  testimony  for  God,  which  will  win  my  dear  sons,  I 
die  in  such  darkness  and  gloom  that  I  fear  I  shall  confirm  them  in  their 
infidelity,  and  lead  them  to  think  that  there  is  nothing  in  Christianity 
at  all."  The  effect  was  the  reverse.  The  sons  came  round  the  grave 
at  the  funeral,  and  when  they  returned  to  the  house,  the  eldest  son 
thus  addressed  his  brothers: — "  My  brothers,  throughout  his  lifetime, 
our  father  often  spoke  to  us  about  religion,  and  we  have  always  despised 
it,  but  what  a  sermon  his  deathbed  has  been  to  us !  for  if  he  who  served 
God  so  well  and  lived  so  near  to  God  found  it  so  hard  a  thing  to  die, 
what  kind  of  death  may  we  expect  ours  to  be  who  have  lived  without 
God  and  without  hope?"  The  same  feeling  possessed  them  all,  and  thus 
the  father's  death  had  strangely  answered  the  prayers  of  his  life  through 
the  grace  of  God.  You  cannot  tell  but  what,  when  you  are  in  glory,  you 
should  look  down  from  the  windows  of  heaven  and  receive  a  double 
heaven  in  beholding  your  dear  sons  and  daughters  converted  by  the 
words  you  lefc  behind.  I  do  not  say  this  to  make  you  cease  pleading 
for  their  immediate  conversion,  but  to  encourage  you.  Never  give  up 
prayer,  never  be  tempted  to  cease  from  it.  So  long  as  there  is  breath 
in  your  body,  and  breath  in  their  bodies,  continue  still  to  pray,  for  I  tell 
you  that  he  will  avenge  you  speedily  though  he  bear  long  with  you. 
God  bless  these  words  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 


POBTJON  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Lake  XViil".  1—30. 


§Iatmrade  fulptt, 


THE   SEARCH   FOR  FAITH. 


t  • 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  MAY  15TH,   1887,  BY 

C.   H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINQTON. 


" Nevertheless  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth?"— 
Luke  xviii.  8. 

IT  is  absolutely  certain  that  God  will  hear  the  prayers  of  his  people. 
From  beneath  the  altar  souls  cry  unto  him  day  and  night  to  vindicate 
thn  cause  of  Christ,  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness,  and  to  cast 
clown  his  adversary  :  these  shall  be  answered  speedily.  Here  on  earth, 
si  tint  though  the  supplication  may  be,  yet  there  is  a  remnant  according 
to  the  election  of  grace,  who  cease  not  to  importune  the  Almighty  God 
to  make  bare  his  arm,  and  display  the  majesty  of  his  Word.  Though 
for  wise  and  gracious  purposes  the  answer  to  those  prayers  may  be 
delaye-.),  yet  it  is  absolutely  certain.  Shall  not  God  avenge  his  own 
elect,  which  cry  day  and  night  unto  him,  though  he  keep  their  case 
long  in  hand  ?  Assuredly  he  will ;  for  those  prayers  are  inspired  by 
the  Spirit,  who  knows  the  mind  of  God  ;  they  are  for  the  glory  of  God 
and  of  his  Christ,  and  they  are  presented  by  our  great  High  Priest. 
Longsuffering  keeps  back  the  advent  and  the  judgment  for  a  while;  for 
the  Lord  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come 
to  repentance  ;  but  he  will  not  for  ever  delay  the  long-expected  end. 
The  Lord  Jesus  himself  gives  us  this  personal  assurance,  "I  tell  you 
that  he  will  avenge  them  speedily."  No  doubt  remains  when  Jesus 
says,  "I  tell  you."  The  Lord  will  come,  and,  according  to  his  own 
reckoning,  he  will  come  quickly.  His  reckoning  is  according  to  the 
chronology  of  heaven,  and  this  the  heirs  of  heaven  ought  gladly  to 
accept :  it  is  meet  that  we  keep  celestial  time  even  now. 

Brethren,  let  not  your  hearts  fail  you  as  to  the  ultimate  issue  of  the 
present  conflict.  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  Halle 
lujah."  The  idols  he  shall  utterly  abolish.  Antichrist  shall  be  over 
thrown  ;  like  a  millstone  cast  into  the  sea,  it  shall  fall  and  be  no  more. 
The  heathen  shall  be  our  Lord's  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth  shall  be  his  possession.  He  must  reign  until  all  enemies 
shrll  be  put  under  his  feet.  If  the  present  contest  should  be  con 
tinued  century  after  century,  be  not  weary.  It  is  only  long  to  your 
impatience;  it  is  a  short  work  unto  God.  So  grand  a  volume  of  the 
book  as  this,  which  contains  the  history  of  redemption,  may  well 
No.  1,963.  41 


278  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

require  a  Ions:  time  for  its  unrolling,  and  to  such  poor  readers  as  we 
are  the  spelling  of  it  out  word  by  word  may  seem  an  endless  task  ; 
but  we  shall  yet  come  to  its  close,  and  then  we  shall  find  that,  like 
the  Book  of  Psalms,  it  ends  in  hallelujahs. 

The  matter  to  be  questioned  is  not  what  God  will  do,  but  what  men 
will  do.  Faithfulness  is  established  in  the  very  heavens  :  but  what  of 
faithfulness  upon  the  earth  ?  The  part  that  God  allots  to  us  is  that 
we  believe  his  word,  for  so  shall  we  be  established :  it  is  the  child's  part 
to  trust  his  father,  it  is  the  disciple's  part  to  accept  the  teaching  of  his 
Master.  Alas  !  how  little  there  is  of  it  at  this  moment !  Knowing 
the  feebleness  of  the  faith  of  those  around  him,  and  foreseeing  that 
future  generations  would  partake  of  the  same  folly,  the  Saviour  gave 
utterance  to  this  memorable  question,  "  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh. 
shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?"  God  is  faithful  ;  but  are  men  faith 
ful  ?  God  is  true  ;  but  do  we  believe  him  ?  This  is  the  point:  and  it 
is  upon  this  that  I  shall  speak  this  morning  as  the  Holy  Ghost  shall 
help  me. 

I.     I  notice  with  regard  to  our  text,  first,  that  IT  is  REMARKABLE  IP 

WE   CONSIDER    TUE     PERSON     MENTIONED     AS     SEARCHING   FOR    FAITH: 

"When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?" 

When  Jesus  conies  he  will  look  for  precious  faith.  He  has  more  regard 
for  faith  than  for  all  else  that  earth  can  yield  him.  Our  returning 
Lord  will  care  nothing  for  the  treasures  of  the  rich  or  the  honours  of  the 
great.  He  will  not  look  for  the  abilities  we  have  manifested,  nor  the 
influence  we  have  acquired  ;  but  he  will  look  for  our  faith.  It  is  his 
glory  that  he  is  "  believed  on  in  the  world,"  and  to  that  he  will  have 
respect.  This  is  the  jewel  for  which  he  is  searching.  This  heavenly 
merchantman  counts  faith  to  be  the  pearl  of  great  price — faith  is 
precious  to  Jesus  as  well  as  to  us.  The  last  day  will  be  occupied  with  a 
great  scrutiny,  and  that  scrutiny  will  be  made  upon  the  essential  point — 
where  is  there  faith,  and  where  is  there  no  faith  ?  He  that  believeth  is 
saved  ;  he  that  beiieveth  not  is  condemned.  A  search-warrant  will  be 
issued  for  our  houses  and  our  hearts,  and  the  enquiry  will  be  :  Where 
is  your  faith  ?  Did  you  honour  Christ  by  trusting  his  word  and  his 
blood,  or  did  you  not?  Did  you  glorify  God  by  believing  his  revelation 
and  depending  upon  his  promise,  or  did  you  not  ?  The  fact  that  our 
Lord,  at  his  coming,  will  seek  for  faith  should  cause  us  to  think  very 
highly  of  faith.  It  is  no  mere  act  of  the  intellect ;  it  is  a  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  which  brings  glory  to  God  and  produces  obedience  in  the 
heart.  Jesus  looks  for  it  because  he  is  the  proper  object  of  it,  and  it  is 
by  means  of  it  that  his  great  end  in  his  first  advent  is  carried  out. 
Dear  hearers,  conceive  for  a  minute  that  our  Saviour  is  searching  for  faith 
now.  "  His  eyes  behold,  his  eyelids  try,  the  children  of  men."  This 
is  the  gold  he  seeks  alter  amid  the  quartz  of  our  humanity.  This  is 
the  object  of  his  royal  quest — Dost  thou  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?" 

When  our  Lord  comes  and  looks  for  faith,  he  will  do  so  in  his  most 
sympathetic  character^  Our  text  saith  not,  When  the  Son  of  God  cometh, 
but  "  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  will  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?" 
It  is  peculiarly  as  the  Son  of  man  that  Jesus  will  sifc  as  a  refiner, 
to  discover  whether  we  have  true  iaith  or  not.  He  also  as  the  Son  of 


THE    SEARLrf    FOR    FAITH.  279 

man  displayed  faith  in  God.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  it  is 
mentioned  as  one  of  the  points  in  which  he  is  made  like  unto  his 
brethren,  that  he  said,  "  I  will  put  my  trust  in  him."  The  life  of  Jesus 
was  a  life  of  faith — faith  which  cried,  "  My  God,  my  God,"  ev«n  when 
he  was  forsaken.  His  was,  on  a  grander  scale  than  ours,  the  battle  of 
faith  in  the  great  Father,  waged  against  all  the  rebellious  influences 
which  were  in  array  against  him.  He  knows  what  fierce  temptations 
men  experience,  for  he  has  felt  the  same.  He  knows  how  want  tries  the 
faithful,  and  what  faith  is  needed  to  be  able  to  say,  "  Man  shall  not  live 
by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God  shall  man  live."  He  knows  how  elevation  tests  the  soul ;  for  he 
once  stood  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and  heard  the  infernal  whisper, 
"  Cast  thyself  down :  for  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee." 
He  knows  what  faith  means  in  contradistinction  to  a  false  confidence 
which  misreads  the  promise,  and  forgets  the  precept  altogether.  He 
will  not  err  in  judgment,  and  accept  brass  for  gold.  He  knows  what  it 
is  to  be  tempted  with  the  proffer  of  honour  and  gain :  "  All  these  things 
will  I  give  thee,''  said  the  fiend,  "  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship 
me."  He  knows  how  faith  puts  all  the  glory  of  the  world  away  with 
its  one  brave  and 'prompt  utterance,  "  Get  thee  hence,  Satan  :  for  it  is 
written,  Thou  jshalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou 
serve."  Beloved,  when  Jesus  comes  as  the  Son  of  man  he  will  recog 
nize  our  weaknesses,  he  will  remember  our  trials;  he  will  know  the 
struggle  of  our  hearts,  and  the  borrow  which  au  h»nest  faith  has  cost 
us.  He  is  best  qualified  to  put  the  true  price  upon  tried  faith,  self- 
denying  faith,  long-enduring  faith.  He  will  discern  between  the  men 
who  presume  and  the  men  who  believe ;  the  men  who  dote  upon 
vain  delusions,  and  those  who  follow  the  plain  path  of  God's  own 
word. 

Further,  I  would  have  you  note  well  that  the  Son  of  man  is  the  most 
likely  person  to  discover  faith  if  it  is  to  be  found.  Not  a  grain  of  faith 
exists  in  all  the  world  except  that  which  he  has  himself  created.  If 
thou  hast  faith,  my  brother,  the  Lord  has  dealt  with  thee ;  this  is  the 
mark  of  his  hand  upon  thee.  By  faith  he  has  brought  thee  out  of  thy 
death  in  sin,  and  the  natural  darkness  of  thy  mind.  "  Thy  faith  hath 
saved  thee,"  for  it  is  the  candlestick  which  holds  the  candle  by  which 
the  chamber  of  thy  heart  is  enlightened.  Thy  God  and  Saviour  has 
put  this  faith  in  thee.  Now,  if  faith  in  every  instance  is  our  Lord's 
gift,  he  knows  where  he  has  given  it.  If  it  is  the  work  of  God,  he  knows 
where  lie  has  produced  it;  for  he  never  forsakes  the  work  of  his  own 
hands  If  that  faith  be  only  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  if  it  be 
hidden  away  in  the  obscurest  corner  of  the  earth,  yet  the  loving  Jesus 
spies  it  out,  for  he  has  an  intimate  concern  in  it,  since  he  is  its  author 
and  finisher.  Our  Lord  is  also  the  sustainer  of  faith ;  for  faith  is  never 
independent  of  him  upon  whom  it  relies.  The  greatest  believer  would 
not  believe  for  another  moment  unless  grace  were  constantly  given  him 
to  keep  the  flame  of  faith  burning.  Beloved  friend,  if  thou  hast  had 
any  experience  of  the  inner  liie  at  all,  thou  knowest  that  he  that  first 
made  thee  live,  must  keep  thee  alive,  or  else  thou  wilt  go  back  to  thy 
natural  death.  Since  faith  from  day  to  day  feeds  at  the  table  of  Jesus, 
theu  he  kuowa  where  it  is.  It  is  well  for  us  that  we  have  one  looking 

29 


280  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

for  faith  who,  on  accouat  of  his  having  created  and  sustained  it,  will 
be  at  no  loss  to  discern  it. 

Besides,  faith  always  looks  to  Christ.  There  is  no  faith  in  the  world 
worth  having,  but  what  looks  to  him,  and  through  him  to  God,  for 
everything.  On  the  other  hand,  Christ  always  looks  to  faith ;  there 
never  yet  was  an  eye  of  faith  but  what  it  met  the  eye  of  Christ.  He 
delights  in  faith  :  it  is  his  joy  to  be  trusted  :  it  is  a  great  part  of  the 
reward  of  his  death  that  the  sons  of  men  should  come  and  shelter  in 
him.  If  faith  looks  to  Christ,  and  Christ  looks  to  faith,  he  is  sure 
to  find  it  out  when  he  comes,  and  that  makes  the  text  so  very  striking  : 
"  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  " 

The  Son  of  man  will  give  a  wise  and  generous  judgment  in  the  matter. 
Some  brethren  judge  so  harshly  that  they  would  tread  out  the  sparks 
of  faith  ;  but  it  is  never  so  with  our  gracious  Lord  ;  he  does  not  quench 
the  smoking  flax,  nor  despise  the  most  trembling  faith.  The  question 
becomes  most  emphatic  when  it  is  put  thus.  The  tender  and  gentle 
Saviour,  who  never  judges  too  severely,  when  he  comes,  shall  even  he 
find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  What  a  sad  and  humbling  question  it  is  ! 
He  who  is  no  morose  critic  but  a  kind  interpreter  of  character,  he  who 
makes  great  allowances  for  feebleness,  he  that  carrieth  the  lambs  of 
faith  in  his  bosom  and  gently  leads  the  weak  ones — when  even  he  shall 
come  to  make  a  kindly  search,  will  he  be  able  to  find  faith  on  the  earth? 
Unbelief  is  rampant  indeed,  when  he  who  is  omniscient  can  scarce 
find  a  grain  of  faith  amid  the  mass  of  doubt  and  denial !  Ah  me !  that 
ever  I  should  have  to  explain  the  question,  "  When  the  Son  of  man 
cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  " 

Once  more  :  I  want  to  put  this  question  into  a  striking  light  by 
dwelling  on  the  time  of  the  scrutiny.  "  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh, 
shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  "  Look  ye,  brethren,  the  ages  are  accu 
mulating  proofs  of  the  truth  of  Christianity,  and  the  s°arch  takes  place 
when  this  process  has  reached  its  climax.  Whatever  may  be  said  about 
the  present  torrent  of  doubt,  which  no  doubt  is  exceedingly  strong,  yet 
the  reason  for  doubt  grows  weaker  and  weaker  every  year.  Every 
mound  of  earth  in  the  East  contributes  a  fresh  testimony  to  the 
accuracy  of  the  Word  of  God.  Stones  are  crying  out  against  the 
incredulity  of  sceptics.  Moreover,  all  the  experiences  of  all  the  saints, 
year  after  year,  are  swelling  the  stream  of  testimony  to  the  faithfulness 
of  God.  You  that  are  growing  grey  in  his  service  know  how  every 
year  confirms  your  confidence  in  the  eternal  verities  of  your  God  and 
Saviour.  I  know  not  how  long  this  dispensation  of  longsuffering  will 
last ;  but  certainly  the  longer  it  continues  the  more  wantonly  wicked 
does  unbelief  become.  The  more  God  reveals  himself  to  man  in  ways 
of  providence,  the  more  base  is  it  on  man's  part  to  belie  his  solemn 
witness.  But  yet,  my  brethren,  at  the  winding-up  of  all  things,  when 
revelation  shall  have  received  its  utmost  confirmation,  even  then  faith 
will  be  such  a  rarity  on  the  earth  that  it  is  a  question  if  the  Lord 
himself  will  find  it.  You  have,  perhaps,  a  notion  that  faith  will  go 
on  increasing  in  the  world  ;  that  the  church  will  grow  purer  and 
brighter,  and  that  there  will  be  a  wonderful  degree  of  faith  among  men 
in  the  day  of  our  Lord's  appearing.  Our  Saviour  does  not  tell  us  so; 
but  he  puts  the  question  of  our  text  about  it.  Even  concerning  the 


THE    SEARCH    FOR    FAITH.  281 

dawn  of  the  golden  «ge  he  asks,  "  When  the  Son  ot  man  cometh,  shaK 
he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?" 

I  want  you  to  notice  tJie  breadth  of  the  region  of  search.  He  doea 
not  say,  shall  he  find  faith  among  philosophers  ?  When  had  they  any  ? 
He  does  not  confine  his  sc-rutiny  to  an  ordained  ministry  or  a  visible 
church  ;  but  he  takes  a  wider  sweep — "Shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  " 
As  if  he  would  search  from  throne  to  cottage,  among  the  learned  and 
among  the  ignorant,  among  public  men  and  obscure  individuals ; 
and,  after  all,  it  would  be  a  question  whether  among  them  all,  from  the 
pole  to  the  equator,  and  again  from  the  equator  to  the  other  pole,  he 
would  find  faith  at  all.  Alas,  poor  earth,  to  be  so  void  of  faith  !  Is 
there  none  in  her  vast,  continents,  or  on  the  lone  islets  of  the  sea?  May 
it  not  be  found  in  some  of  the  countless  ships  upon  the  deep  ?  What ! 
not  upon  the  earth  ?  Not  with  Jesus  himself  to  look  for  it  ? 

I  have  tried  to  set  forth  the  question  as  distinctly  as  I  can,  that  it 
may  have  due  effect  upon  your  minds.  It  sounds  through  the  chambers 
of  my  soul  like  the  knell  of  many  a  gay  hope  and  pleasant  imagination. 
Lord,  what  is  man,  that  centuries  of  mercy  can  scarce  produce  a  single 
fruit  of  faith  among  a  whole  world  of  the  sons  of  Adam  ?  When 
thousands  of  summers  and  autumns  have  come  and  gone,  shall  there  be 
no  harvest  of  faith  upon  the  earth,  except  a  few  ears  of  corn,  thin  and 
withered  by  the  east  wind  ? 

II.  Let  us  somewhat  change  the  run  of  our  thoughts  :  having  intro 
duced  the  question  as  a  remarkable  one,  we  will  next  notice  that  IT  is 

EXCEEDINGLY     INSTRUCTIVE     IN    CONNECTION     WITH    THE    PARABLE   OF 

WHICH  IT  is  PART.  It  is  wrong  to  use  the  Bible  as  if  it  were  a  box 
full  of  separate  links,  and  not  a  chain  of  connected  truth.  Some  pick 
sentences  out  of  it  as  a  crow  picks  worms  out  of  a  ploughed  field.  If 
you  tear  words  from  their  connection,  they  may  not  express  the  mind 
of  the  Spirit  at  all.  No  book,  whether  written  by  God  or  man,  will 
bear  to  be  torn  limb  from  limb  without  being  horribly  mutilated. 
Public  speakers  know  the  unfairness  of  this  to  themselves,  and  Holy 
Scripture  suffers  even  more.  The  connection  settles  the  drift  and 
directs  us  to  the  true  meaning — a  meaning  which  may  be  very  different 
from  that  which  it  seems  to  bear  when  rent  from  its  surroundings.  Lei 
us  carefully  note  that  this  passage  occurs  in  connection  with  the  parable  of 
the  importunate  widow  pleading  with  the  unjust  judge;  for  it  is  to  be 
interpreted  in  connection  with  it. 

Hence,  it  means,  first  of  all:  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he 
find  upon  the  earth  the  faith  which  prays  importunately,  as  this  widow 
did  ?  Now,  the  meaning  is  dawning  upon  us.  We  have  many  upon 
the  earth  who  pray ;  but  where  are  those  whose  continual  coming  is 
sure  to  prevail  ?  1  thank  God  that  the  prayer-meetings  of  this  church 
are  well  sustained  by  praying  men  and  women  ;  but  where  are  the 
Jacob-like  wrestlers  ?  I  am  afraid  it  cannot  even  be  said  of  many 
churches  that  their  prayer-meetings  are  at  all  what  they  should  be  ;  for 
among  many  the  gathering  for  prayer  is  despised,  and  men  say,  "  It  is 
only  a  prayer-meeting  !  "  As  if  that  were  not  the  very  crown  and  queen 
of  all  the  assemblies  of  the  church,  with  the  sole  exception  of  that  for 
the  breaking  of  bread.  Brethren,  I  will  not  judge  with  severity,  but 
\\here  are  those  who  offer  effectual,  fervent,  much-privailing  prayer  ?  I 


282  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

know  that  there  are  many  here  who  do  not  neglect  private  and  family 
devotion,  and  who  pray  constantly  for  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  But  even  to  you  I  put  the 
question:  If  the  Son  of  man  were  now  to  come,  how  many  would  he 
find  among  us  that  pray  with  a  distinct,  vehement,  irresistible  importunity 
of  faith  ?  In  the  olden  days,  there  was  a  John  Knox,  whose  prayers 
were  more  terrible  to  the  adversary  than  whole  armies,  becau-e  he 
pleaded  in  faith  ;  but  where  shall  we  find  a  Knox  at  this  hour  ?  Every 
ase  of  revival  has  had  its  men  mighty  in  prayer — where  are  ours  ? 
Where  is  the  Elias  on  the  top  of  Carmel  who  will  bring  down  the  rain 
upon  these  parched  fields  ?  Where  is  the  church  that  will  pray  down  a 
Pentecost  ?  I  will  not  decry  my  brethren  in  the  ministry,  nor  speak  little 
of  deacons  and  elders,  and  other  distinguished  servants  of  my  Lord  ;  but 
still,  my  brothers  and  sisters,  taking  us  all  round,  how  few  of  us  know  what 
it  is  to  pray  the  heaven-overcoming  prayer  which  is  needful  for  this  crisis! 
How  few  of  us  go  again,  and  again,  and  again  to  God,  with  tears,  and 
cries,  and  heart-break,  pleading  as  for  our  own  lives  for  the  increase  of 
Zion,  and  the  saving  of  the  ungodly !  If  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  will 
he  find  much  of  such  praying  faith  among  our  own  churches?  Ah  me  T 
that  I  should  have  to  ask  such  a  question ;  but  I  do  ask  it,  hanging  my 
head  for  shame. 

The  importunate  widow  waited  with  strong  resolve,  and  never  ceased 
through  sullen  doubt.  If  the  judge  had  not  yet  heard  her,  she  was  sure 
hs  must  hear  her,  for  she  had  made  up  her  mind  that  she  would  plead 
until  he  did.  A  waiting  faith  is  rare.  Men  can  believe  for  a  time,  but 
to  hold  out  through  the  long  darkness  is  another  matter.  Some  soldiers 
are  good  at  a  rush,  but  they  cannot  form  a  square,  and  stand  fast  hour 
after  hour.  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  will  he  find  many  who  can 
believe  in  a  delaying  God,  and  plead  a  long-dated  promise — waiting, 
but  never  wearying?  When  we  have  a  revival,  and  everybody 
is  crying  "Hosannah!"  certain  eager  folk  are  sure  to  be  in  the 
front ;  but  when  the  popular  voice  growls  out  its  "  Crucify  him ! " 
where  are  they  ?  Where  are  even  Peter,  and  John,  and  the  rest  of  the 
disciples  ?  Go,  learn  to  plead  on  when  no  answer  comes,  and  to  press 
on  when  repulsed  :  this  is  ihe  test  of  faith.  It  is  so  easy  to  be  a  believer 
when  everybody  believes ;  but  to  be  a  believer  when  nobody  believes, 
and  to  be  none  the  less  a  firm  believer  because  nobody  believes  with 
you,  this  is  the  mark  of  the  man  valiant  for  truth,  and  loyal  to  Jesus. 
Brethren,  is  it,  after  all,  a  matter  of  counting  heads?  Can  you  not  dare 
to  be  in  the  right  with  two  or  three  ?  Can  you  not  be  like  rocks  which 
defy  the  raging  waves?  Can  you  not  let  the  billows  of  popular  mis 
belief  wash  over  you,  and  break  and  crash,  and  break  and  crash  in  vain  ? 
If  these  things  move  you,  where  is  your  faith  ?  When  the  Son  of  man 
cometh,  how  many  will  he  find  on  the  earth  whose  faith  stands  not  in 
men,  but  in  the  witness  of  God  ? 

The  widow  staked  her  all  upon  the  result  of  her  pleading  with  the  judge. 
She  had  not  two  strings  to  her  bow,  she  had  but  one  'esort  in  her 
trouble  :  the  judge  must  hear  her.  She  would  lose  her  little  property, 
and  her  children  would  die  of  starvation,  if  he  did  not  hear  her.  He 
must  hear  her  ;  about  that  she  had  no  two  opinions.  What  we  want  at 
the  present  moment  is  the  man  that  believes  God,  and  believes  the 


THE   SEARCH   FOR   FAITH.  283 

gospel,  and  believes  Christ,  and  does  not  care  two  pins  about  anything 
else.  We  need  those  who  will  stake  reputation,  hope,  and  life  itself 
upon  the  veracity  of  God  and  the  certainty  of  the  everlasting  gospel. 
To  such  the  revelhMon  of  God  is  not  one  among  many  truths  :  it  is  the 
one  and  only  saving  truth.  Alas !  we  have  nowadays  to  deal  with  foxes 
with  holes  to  run  to  in  case  they  are  too  closely  hunted.  Oh,  to  have 
done  with  all  glory  but  glorying  in  the  cross!  For  my  part,  I  am  content 
to  be  a  fool  if  the  old  gospel  be  folly.  What  is  more,  I  am  content  to 
be  lost  if  faith  in  the  atoning  sacrifice  will  not  bring  salvation.  I  am 
*o  sure  about  the  whole  matter,  that  if  I  were  left  alone  in  the  world  aa 
ibe  last  believer  in  the  doctrines  of  grace,  I  would  not  think  of  abandon- 
ing  them,  nor  even  toning  them  down  to  win  a  convert.  My  all  is 
staked  on  the  veracity  of  God :  "  Let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a 
liar." 

"  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth," 
such  as  he  de.-erves  at  our  hands  ?  Do  we  believe  in  Jesus  practically, 
in  matter-of-fact  style  ?  Is  our  faith  fact,  and  not  fiction  ?  If  we  have 
the  truth  of  faith,  have  we  the  degree  of  faith  which  we  might  have  ? 
Just  think  of  this  :  "If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  ye 
shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Remove  hence  to  yonder  place,  and  it  shall 
remove."  What  does  this  mean  ?  Brethren,  are  we  not  off  the  rails  ? 
Do  we  even  know  what  faith  means  ?  I  begin  sometimes  to  question 
whether  we  believe  at  all.  What  signs  follow  our  believing  ?  When 
we  think  what  wonders  faith  could  have  done  ;  when  we  consider  what 
marvels  our  Lord  might  have  wrought  among  us  if  it  had  not  been  for 
our  unbelief;  are  we  not  humiliated  ?  Have  we  ever  cut  ourselves  clear 
of  the  hamper  of  self-trustfulness  ?  Have  we  ever  launched  out  into  the 
deep  in  clear  reliance  upon  the  eternal  God  ?  Have  we  ever  quitted  the 
visible  for  the  invisible  ?  Have  we  clung  to  the  naked  promise  of  God 
•and  rested  upon  the  bare  arm  of  omnipotence,  which  in  and  of  itself  is 
•more  than  sufficient  for  the  fulfilment  of  every  promise  ?  0  Lord, 
where  are  we  ?  Where  shall  we  find  an  oasis  of  t'uith  amid  this 
-wilderness  of  doubt  ?  Where  shall  we  find  an  Abraham  ?  Is  not  the 
question  an  instructive  one  when  set  in  connection  with  the  parable 
which  teaches  us  the  power  of  importunate  prayer  ? 

III.  In  the  next  place,  our  text  seems  to  me  to  be  SUGGESTIVE  IN 
VIEW  OF  ITS  VERY  FORM.  It  is  put  as  a  que>tion  :  "When  the  Son  of 
man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  "  I  think  it  warns  us 
not  to  dogmatize  about  what  the  latter  days  ivill  be.  Jesus  puts  it  as  a 
question.  Shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  If  you  say,  "No,"  my 
dear  friend,  I  shall  be  very  much  inclined  to  take  the  other  side,  and 
warmly  plead  the  affirmative.  1  remember  how  Elias  said  that  he  only 
was  left,  and  yet  the  Lord  had  reserved  unto  himself  seven  thousand 
men  that  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal.  Nations  that  know  not 
•Christ  shall  run  unto  him,  and  the  kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer 
gifts.  I  venture  to  hope  that  when  the  Son  of  man  comes  he  will  find 
laith  on  the  earth  :  but  if  you  vehemently  assert  that  it  will  be  so,  I 
shall  be  driven  to  advance  the  negative  side  with  much  apprehension 
that  it  may  prove  true.  When  our  Lord  was  here  before,  he  found  little 
enough  of  laith  ;  and  he  has  distinctly  told  us  that  when  he  shall  come 
<the  second  time,  men  will  be  as  they  were  in  the  days  of  Noah  :  "  they 


284  MF/TROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

did  eat,  they  drank,  they  married  wives,  they  were  given  in  marriage, 
until  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark."  I  am  inclined  to  take 
neither  side.  Let  it  remain  a  question,  as  our  Lord  has  pat  it. 

This  question  leads  us  to  much  holy  fear  as  to  the  matter  of  faith. 
If  onr  gracious  Lord  raises  the  question,  the  question  ought  to  be 
raised.  They  say  that  some  of  us  are  old  fogies,  because  we  are  jealous 
for  the  Lord  "of  hosts.  They  say  that  we  are  nervous  and  fidgety,  and 
that  our  fears  are  tiie  result  of  advancing  age.  Yes,  at  fifty-three  I  am 
supposed  to  be  semi-imbecile  with  years.  If  I  were  of  their  way  of 
thinking,  I  do  not  suppose  that  this  would  occur  to  them.  We  fall 
into  a  pessimism — I  think  that  is  the  word  they  use  :  I  do  not  know 
much  about  such  terms.  Surely  the  Saviour  was  not  nervous.  None 
will  dare  to  accuse  him  of  foolish  anxiety  ;  but  yet  he  puts  it,  "  When 
the  Son  of  mfm  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  "  As  far  as- 
my  observation  goes,  it  is  a  question  which  might  suggest  itself  to  the 
most  hopeful  persons  at  this  time  ;  for  many  processes  are  in  vigorous 
action  which  tend  to  destroy  faith.  The  Scriptures  are  being  criticized 
with  a  familiarity  which  shocks  all  reverence,  and  their  very  foundation 
is  being  assailed  by  persons  who  call  themselves  Christians.  A  chilling 
criticism  has  taken  the  place  of  a  warm,  childlike,  loving  confidence. 
As  one  has  truly  said,  "  We  have  now  a  temple  without  a  sanctuary." 
Mystery  is  discarded  that  reason  may  reign.  Men  have  eaten  of  the 
fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  till  they  think 
themselves  gods.  Revealed  truth  is  not  now  a  doctrine  to  be  believed, 
but  a  proposition  to  be  discussed.  The  loving  woman  at  Jesus-* 
feet  is  cast  out  to  make  room  for  the  traitor  kissing  Christ's  cheek. 
Like  Belshazzar,  our  men  of  modern  thought  are  drinking  out  of  the 
vessels  of  Jehovah's  sanctuary  in  honour  of  their  own  deities.  The 
idea  of  child-like  faith  is  scouted,  and  he  is  regarded  as  the  most 
honest  man  that  can  doubt  the  most,  and  pour  most  contempt  upon  the 
authority  of  the  divine  word.  If  this  continues  we  may  well  say, 
"  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth?"  In> 
some  places  the  greatest  fountain  of  infidelity  is  the  Christian  pulpit. 
If  this  is  the  case — and  I  am  sure  it  is  so — what  must  become  of  the 
churches,  and  what  must  come  to  the  outlying  world  ?  Will  Jesus  find 
faith  in  the  earth  when  he  comes  ? 

In  addition  to  many  processes  which  are  in  actipn  to  exterminate 
faith,  are  there  not  influences  which  dwarf  and  stunt  it  f  Where  do 
you  find  great  faith  ?  Where  is  the  preaching  or  the  teaching  that  is 
done  in  full  faith  in  what  is  preached  and  taught  ?  It  is  no  use  flogging 
other  people  ;  let  us  come  home  to  ourselves.  My  brothers  and  sisters,, 
where  is  our  own  faith  ?  It  seemed  almost  a  novelty  in  the  church 
when  it  was  s  ated  long  ago  that  Mr.  George  Miiller  walked  by  faith 
in  regard  to  temporal  things.  To  feed  children  by  faith  in  God  was- 
looked  upon  as  a  pious  freak.  We  have  come  to  a  pretty  pass,  have  we 
not,  when  God  is  not  to  be  trusted  about  common  things  ?  Abraham 
walked  with  God  abouo  daily  life ;  but,  nowadays,  if  yon  meet  with  a 
man  who  walks  wich  God  as  to  his  business,  trusts  God  as  to  every 
item  and  detail  of  his  domestic  affairs,  persons  look  at  him  with  a 
degree  01  suspicious  wonder.  They  think  he  has  grace  in  his  heart,  but 
they  also  suspect  that  he  has  a  bee  in  his  bonnet,  or  he  would  not  act 


THE    SEARCH    FOR   FAITH.  285 

in  that  sort  of  way.     Oh  yes,  we  have  a  fancied  f;iith  ;  but  when  it 
comes  to  the  stern  realities  of  life  where  is  our  faith  ? 

My  brethren,  why  are  you  so  full  of  worldly  care?  Why  are  you  so 
anxious,  if  you  have  faith  in  God?  Why  do  you  display  in  worldly 
things  almost  as  much  distrust  as  worldly  men ?  Whence  this  fear? 
this  murmuring?  this  worry?  0  my  Saviour,  if  thou  wert  to  come, 
we  could  not  defend  ourselves  for  our  wretched  mistrust,  our  foolish 
apprehension,  our  want  of  luring  reliance  upon  thee.  We  do  not  trust 
thee  as  thou  oughtestto  be  trusted ;  and  if  this  be  the  case  among  those 
who  are  such  great  debtors  to  thy  loving  faithfulness,  where  wilt  thou 
find  faith  on  earth?  Where  is  that  unstaggering  faith  which  betakes 
itself  to  prevailing  prayer,  and  so  rises  above  the  petty  miseries  of  the 
hour,  and  the  fears  of  a  threatening  future  ? 

Do  you  not  think  that  this,  put  in  a  question  a«  it  is,  invites  us  to 
intense  watchfulness  over  ourselves?  D<>  you  not  think  it  should  set 
is  scrutinizing  ouiselves  as  our  Lord  will  scrutinize  UH  when  he  comes  ? 
You  have  been  looking  for  a  j/reat  many  things  in  yourself,  my  brother  ; 
let  me  entreat  yon  to  look  to  your  faith.  What  if  love  grow  cold  !  I 
am  sorry  for  it ;  but,  after  all,  the  frost  mutt  have  begun  in  your 
faith.  You  are  not  so  active  as  you  used  to  be  ;  that  is  to  be  greatly 
regretted  ;  but  the  streams  run  low  because  the  well-head  is  not  so  full 
as  it  was  wont  to  be  ;  your  faith  is  failing.  Oh  that  your  soul  were  fed 
upon  divine  realities  !  Oh  that  you  had  a  vivid  consciousness  of  the 
certainty  of  God's  presence  and  power  !  When  faith  is  strong,  all  the 
other  graces  are  vigorous.  The  branches  flourish  when  the  root  suclw 
up  abundant  nutriment ;  and  when  faith  is  in  a  healthy  state,  all  the 
rest  of  the  spiritual  man  will  be  vigorous  aUo.  Brethren,  guard  well 
your  faith.  My  fear  is  that  when  Christ  comes,  if  he  delays  much 
longer,  he  will  find  many  of  us  faint  because  of  our  long  waiting,  and 
because  of  the  disappointments  which  arise  out  of  the  slow  spread  of  the 
gospel.  The  nations  continue  in  unbelief.  0  Lord,  how  long  \ 
Because  we  have  not  accomplished  all  that  we  hoped  to  have  done,  we 
are  apt  to  grow  weary.  Or  perhaps  when  he  comes  he  will  find 
us  sleeping  for  sorrow,  like  the  disciples  in  the  garden  when  he 
came  to  them  thrice  and  found  them  very  heav).  We  may  get  to 
feel  so  sad  that  the  gospel  does  not  conquer  all  mankind,  that 
we  may  fall  into  a  swoon  of  sadness,  a  torpor  of  despair,  and  so 
be  asleep  when  the  Bridegroom  cometh.  I  fear,  most  of  all,  that 
when  Jesus  comes  he  may  find  that  the  love  of  many  has  waxed 
cold  because  iniquity  abounds.  Warm-hearted  saints  keep  each  other 
warm,  but  cold  also  is  contagious.  When  sin  abounds  saints  may  be 
able  to  stand  against  it;  ami  yet  it  has  a  sad  tendency  to  chill  their 
faith.  If  the  Masier  comes  and  finds  us  lukewarm,  it  will  be  a  calamity 
indeed.  The  question  stirs  a  bitter  anguish  iu  my  soul.  I  trust  it 
moves  you  also. 

It  is  H  question.  I  cannot  answer  it,  but  I  open  wide  the  doors  of 
my  heart  to  let  it  enter  and  try  me.  It  acts  like  a  fan  in  the  Lord's 
hand  to  purge  the  floor.  It  sweeps  away  my  self-confidence  and  leads 
ine  to  watch  and  pray,  that  I  enter  not  into  the  temptation  of  giving  up 
my  faith.  I  pray  that  we  may  stand  fast  when  others  slide,  so 
when  the  Lord  cometh  we  may  be  found  accepted  of  him. 


286  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

IV.  I  will  close  with  this  remark  :  my  text  is  very  IMPRESSIVE 
IN  RKSPECT  TO  PERSONAL  DUTY.  "  When  the  Son  of  man  comets,  shall 
he  find  faith  on  the  earth."  Let  faith  have  a  home  in  our  hearts,  if  it 
is  denied  a  lodging  everywhere  else.  If  we  do  not  trust  our  Lord,  and 
trust  him  much  more  than  we  have  ever  done,  we  shall  deserve  his 
gravest  displeasure.  It  will  be  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness  for  us  to 
doubt  ;  for  to  some  of  us  conversion  was  a  clear,  sharp,  and  distinct 
fact.  The  change  made  in  our  characters  was  so  manifest  that  the  devil 
himself  could  not  make  us  doubt  it.  We  know  that  the  misery  we 
suffered  under  a  sense  of  sin  was  no  fiction,  and  that  the  peace  we  received 
through  faith  in  Jesus  was  no  dream.  Wherefore  do  we  doubt  ?  Since 
conversion  some  of  us  have  been  led  in  a  strange  way,  and  every  step 
of  it  has  shown  us  that  the  Lord  is  good  and  true,  and  ought  to  be 
trusted  without  stint.  We  have  been  sore  sick,  and  full  of  pain,  and 
anguish,  and  depression  of  spirit,  and  yet  we  have  been  upheld,  and  sus 
tained,  and  brought  through.  In  great  labours  we  have  been 
strengthened,  in  great  undertakings  we  have  been  supported.  Some  of 
you  have  been  very  poor,  or  your  business  has  been  declining,  and 
emergencies  have  been  frequent,  and  yet  all  these  have  proved  the  truth 
of  God.  Do  not  these  things  make  it  the  more  incumbent  upon  you  to 
trust  him  ?  Others  of  you  have  suffered  sad  bereavements  :  you  have 
lost,  one  after  another,  the  props  of  your  comfort ;  but  when  you  have 
gone  to  God  he  has  heard  your  prayers,  and  been  better  to  you  than 
father,  husband,  or  friend.  It  is  down  in  your  diary  in  black  and 
white  that  his  mercy  eridureth  for  ever;  and  you  have  said  to  yourself 
many  times,  *'  I  shall  never  doubt  again  after  this."  Brethren,  it  ought 
to  us  to  be  impossible  to  mistrust,  and  natural  to  confide  ;  and  yet  I  fear  it 
is  not  so.  If  after  all  this  watering  we  grow  so  little  faith,  we  may 
not  wonder  that  our  Lord  said,  "When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he 
find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  " 

Some  of  us  have  been  so  familiar  with  dying  beds,  we  have  seen  so 
many  pass  away  in  holy  calm,  and  even  with  transporting  triumph, 
that  for  us  to  doubt  is  disrespect  to  the  memories  of  the  saints.  For 
us  to  doubt  would  be  treachery  to  the  Lord  who  has  favoured  ourselves 
also  with  visits  of  his  love.  We  may  doubt  the  dearest  ones  we  have, 
and  that  would  be  cruel;  but  we  had  better  do  that  than  cast  any 
suspicion  upon  him  who  has  manifested  himself  to  us  as  he  does  not  to 
the  world.  I  speak  not  to  you  all,  but  I  speak  to  those  whom  the  Lord 
has  specially  favoured,  to  whom  he  has  revealed  his  secrets,  and  made 
known  his  covenant ;  for  these  to  question  his  faithfulness  is  wicked 
ness.  What  shall  I  say  of  his  own  elect,  if  they  do  not  believe  him.  ? 
If  it  were  possible  for  you  to  quit  your  faith,  you  would  crucify 
your  Lord  afresh.  He  must  not  be  thus  wounded  in  the  house  of  his 
friends.  No,  go  where  thou  wilt,  0  unbelief,  thou  shalt  not  find  willing 
lodgrneat  in  my  heart.  From  my  spirit  thou  shalt  be  banished  as  a 
detested  traitor  ;  for  my  Beloved  is  true,  and  I  will  lean  upon  him. 

I  think  I  hear  you  say,  "  We  are  resolved  upon  it;  we  are  called  to 
have  faith  in  our  Lord,  even  if  none  else  believe  him."  Then  look  to  it 
that  you  do  not  fail  in  these  evil  times.  If  you  would  keep  your  faith, 
settle  it  in  your  minds  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  inspired  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  so  are  our  infallible  rule  of  faith.  If  you  give  up  that 


THE    SEARCH    FOR.    FAITH.  287 

foundation  you  cannot  exhibit  faith  worthy  of  the  name.  It  is  as  clear 
as  the  sun  in  the  heavens  that  a  childlike  faith  in  God  as  he  is  revealed 
is  not  possible  to  the  man  who  doubts  the  revelation.  You  must  accept 
the  revelation  as  infallible,  or  you  cannot  unquestioningly  believe  in  the 
God  therein  revealed.  If  you  once  give  up  inspiration,  the  foundations 
are  removed,  and  all  building  is  laborious  trifling.  How  are  the 
promises  the  support  of  faith  if  they  are  themselves  questionable  ?  God 
can  only  be  known  by  his  own  light,  and  if  we  cannot  trust  the  light, 
where  are  we  ?  Next,  settle  it  in  your  soul  as  to  the  Holy  Spirit's 
dealings  with  yourself.  He  has  renewed  you  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind. 
At  least,  I  ask  the  question — Has  he  or  has  he  not  ?  You  were  con 
verted  t>y  a  divine  agency  from  your  lost  estate  of  sin,  and  brought  by 
the  same  divine  agency  into  newness  of  life  :  were  you  or  were  you  not  ? 
Unless  you  are  quite  certain  about  this,  it  is  not  possible  for  you  to  rise  to 
any  height  of  faith.  You  must  know  that  God  has  come  into  contact 
with  your  soul,  or  else  what  have  you  to  believe  ?  Next  to  that  belief, 
you  must  know  your  full  pardon  and  sure  justification  through  the  blood 
and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  your  Lord.  Believe  in  the  precious 
blood :  x\  hatever  else  you  doubt,  believe  in  the  merit  of  the  great  sacrifice 
of  Calvary.  Rejoice  in  your  own  acceptance  through  the  sacrifice,  seeing 
your  whole  faith  rests  therein.  0  brothers,  our  eternal  hopes  cannot  be 
built  on  speculation;  we  need  revelation.  We  cannot  fight  the  battles 
of  life  with  probabilities;  we  need  certainties  for  such  a  conflict.  If 
God  has  not  revealed  fixed  truth,  you  may  go  and  think  and  dream;  but 
if  he  has  given  us  a  clear  revelation,  Jet  us  believe  it,  and  cease  to 
imagine  and  invent.  0  sirs,  if  you  must  speculate,  risk  your  silver  and 
your  gold ;  but  I  beseech  you  to  lay  aside  all  idea  of  speculating  in 
reference  to  your  souls.  I  want-  absolute  certainties  and  unquestionable 
verities  to  bear  me  up  when  death's  cold  flood  is  rising  up  to  my  Joins. 
Divine  truths,  as  they  are  written  in  the  Book,  and  brought  home  to  the 
heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  sure  standing  ground  for  that  faith  which 
Jesus  looks  for.  He  looks  for  it  in  vain  when  men  no  longer  accept 
his  work  as  undoubted  fact.  Again,  if  you  would  have  strong  faith, 
never  relax  your  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  This  is  essential 
to  my  text;  for  the  widow  used  n«»  other  weapon  than  prayer  in 
her  importunity  with  the  judge.  She  would  not  have  persevered 
as  she  did  in  her  pleadings  if  she  had  not  felt  morally  certain 
that  in  the  long  run  she  would  prevail.  Brethren,  believe  that  God 
hears  your  prayers,  and  that  he  will  answer  them.  As  for  me,  I  do  not 
want  any  argument  to  prove  the  influence  of  prayer  with  God.  I  have 
tried  it,  and  do  try  it,  till  it  is  no  longer  an  experiment.  The  man  that 
habitually  eats  bread  knows  that  he  is  nourished  by  it :  the  man  that 
habitually  lives  by  prayer  to  God  knows  that  God  hears  him.  It  would 
be  absurd  to  offer  him  evidence  for  or  against  the  statement.  If  a  per 
son  were  to  argue  with  me  that  there  was  no  sun  in  the  heavens, 
I  am  afraid  I  should  laugh  outright.  I  f  anyone  said  that  he  did  not  believe 
me  to  be  alive,  I  do  not  know  in  what  way  I  could  prove  it  to  him.  Would 
it  be  lawful  to  kick  him,  by  way  ot  argument  ?  When  a  man  says,  *'  I 
do  not  believe  in  prayer,"  I  answer,  "  What  if  you  do  not  ?  You  are 
che  only  loser."  That  God  Answers  prayer  is  u  living  certainty  to  me, 
and  I  can  say  110  more  and  no  less.  If  you  do  not  believe  in  prayer, 


288  METROPOLITAN    TAKEKNACI/E    PULPIT. 

assuredly  the  Lord  will  not  find  in  you  the  faith  of  which  our  text 
speaks.  If  yon  regard  it  as  a  pious  exercise  which  refreshes  the  devout 
but  has  no  power  whatever  with  God — well  then,  if  all  are  of  your  mind, 
the  Son  of  man  will  find  no  faith  on  the  earth.  Do  not  talk  aboufc 
believing,  you  know  nothing  of  the  matter. 

If  you  do  believe,  believe  up  to  the  hilt.  Plunge  into  this  sea  of  holy 
confidence  in  God,  and  you  nhall  find  waters  to  swim  in.  He  that 
believes  what  he  believes  shall  see  what  he  shall  see.  No  man  was  ever 
yet  found  guilty  of  believing  in  God  too  much.  Among  the  high 
intelligences  of  heaven  no  creature  was  ever  censured  for  being  too 
credulous  when  dealing  with  the  word  of  the  Most  High.  Let  us 
believe  implicitly  and  explicitly.  Let  us  believe  without  measure 
and  without  reserve.  Let  us  hang  our  all  upon  the  truth  of  God. 
Let  us  aspire  also  to  walk  with  God  in  the  heavenlies,  and  become  the 
King's  Remembrancers.  Let  us  seek  grace  to  become  importunate 
pleaders  of  a  sort  that  cannot  be  denied,  since  their  faith  overcomes 
heaven  by  prayer.  Oh,  that  1  might  have  in  my  church  many  a 
prevailing  Israel !  Some  here  know  what  it  is  to  be  up  early  in 
the  morning  to  besiege  the  throne  of  2ra<;e  with  all  the  power  of 
believing  prayer.  How  much  I  owe  to  these  dear  ones,  eternity  alone 
will  declare !  Oh,  that  we  ha  1  many  more  intercessors,  who  would  bear 
sinners  on  their  hearts  day  and  night,  before  the  Lord,  and,  like  their 
Saviour,  would  never  rest  till  the  Lord  built  up  his  church!  Alas,  for 
the  rarity  of  such  conquering  faith  !  I  question  whether  there  are  not 
Christian  people  here  who  have  never  heard  a  certain  text  which  I  am 
about  to  quote ;  and  I  aw  sure  there  are  others  who  will  shudder  when 
they  hear  it.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  concerning  the  work  of  my  hands 
command  ye  me."  "  Surely  that  cannot  be  Scripture ! "  cries  one.  But 
it  is  so.  Turn  to  Isaiah  xlv.  11,  and  read  it  both  in  the  Authorized 
and  the  Revised  Versions.  Can  a  man  command  the  Lord  ?  Yes,  to 
believing  men  he  puts  himself  at  their  call ;  he  bids  them  command  his 
help,  and  use  it  as  they  will.  Oh  that  we  could  rise  to  this!  Is  there 
sucn  faith  among  us?  If  there  be  not,  in>iy  our  Lord  Jesus,  by  his 
Spirit,  work  it  in  us  for  his  own  glory!  Amen. 


PORTIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  xvii.  20 — 87 1 

xviii.  1—8. 


A   SERMON   FOR  THE   WORST  MAN   ON   EARTH. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING.  FEBRUARY  20TH,  1887,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNA'CLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  And  the  publican,  standing  afar  off,  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven, 
but  smote  upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." — Luke  xviii.  13. 

IT  was  the  fault  of  the  Pharisee  that,  though  he  went  up  into  the  temple 
to  pray,  he  did  not  pray;  there  is  no  prayer  in  all  that  he  said.  It  is 
one  excellence  of  the  publican  that  he  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray, 
and  he  did  pray  :  there  is  nothing  but  prayer  in  all  that  he  said,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  "  is  a  pure,  unadulterated  prayer  throughout. 
It  was  the  fault  of  the  Pharisee  that  when  he  went  up  to  the  temple  to 
pray  he  forgot  an  essential  part  of  prayer,  which  is  confession  of  sin: 
bespoke  as  if  he  had  uo  sins  to  confess,  but  many  virtues  to  parade. 
It  was  a  chief  excellence  in  the  devotion  of  the  publican  that  he  did 
confess  his  sin,  ay,  that  his  utterance  v\  as  full  of  confession  of  sin  : 
from  beginning  to  end  it  was  an  acknowledgment  of  his  guilt,  and  an 
appeal  for  grace  to  the  merciful  God.  The  prayer  of  the  publican  i» 
admirable  fur  its  fulness  of  meaning.  An  expositor  calls  it  a  holy  tele- 
gram;  and  certainly  it  is  so  compact  and  so  condensed,  so  free  from 
superfluous  words,  that  it  is  worthy  to  be  called  by  that  name.  I  do 
not  gee  how  he  could  have  expressed  his  meaning  more  fully  or  more 
briefly.  In  the  original  Greek  the  words  are  even  fewer  than  in  the 
English.  Oh,  that  men  would  learn  to  pray  with  less  of  language 
and  more  of  meaning!  What  great  things  are  packed  away  in  this 
short  petition  !  God,  mercy,  sin,  the  propitiation,  and  forgiveness. 

He  speaketh  of  great  matters,  and  trifles  arc  not  thought  of.  He  has- 
nothing  to  do  with  fastings  twice  in  the  week,  or  the  paying  of  tithes, 
and  such  second-rate  things  ;  the  matters  he  treats  of  are  of  a  highei 
order.  His  trembling  heart  moves  among  sublimities  which  overcome 
him,  and  he  speaks  in  tones  consistent  therewith.  He  deals  with  the 
greatest  things  that  ever  can  be  :  he  pleads  for  his  life,  hia  soul.  Where 
could  he  find  themes  more  weighty,  more  vital  to  his  eternal  interests  ? 
He  is  not  playing  at  prayer,  but  pleading  in  awful  earnest 

His  supplication  speeded  well  with  God,  and  he  speedily  won  his  suit 
with  heaven.  Mercy  granted  to  him  full  justification.  The  prayer  so 
pleased  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  heard  it,  that  he  condescended  to 


110  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

become  a  portrait  painter,  and  took  a  sketch  of  the  petitioner.  I  say 
the  prayer  in  itself  was  so  pleasing  to  the  gracious  Saviour,  that  he  teils 
us  how  it  was  offered  :  "Standing  afar  off,  he  would  not  lift  up  so  much 
as  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast."  Luke,  who, 
according  to  tradition,  was  somewhat  of  an  artist  as  well  as  a  physician, 
takes  great  care  to  place  this  picture  in  the  national  portrait  gallery 
of  men  saved  by  sovereign  grace.  Here  we  have  the  portrait  of  a  man 
who  called  himself  the  sinner,  who  may  yet  be  held  up  as  a  pattern  to 
•saints.  I  am  glad  to  have  the  divine  sketch  of  this  man,  that  I  may  see 
the  bodily  form  of  his  devotion.  I  am  gladder  still  to  have  his  prayer, 
that  we  may  look  into  the  very  soul  of  his  pleading.  My  heart's  desire 
this  morning  is  that  many  here  may  seek  mercy  of  the  Lord  as  this  pub 
lican  did,  and  go  down  to  their  houses  justified.  I  ask  no  man  to  use  the 
same  words.  Let  no  man  attach  a  superstitious  value  to  them.  Alas,  this 
prayer  has  been  used  flippantly,  and  foolishly,  and  almost  looked  upon  as 
a  sort  of  charm  !  Some  have  said — "  We  may  live  as  we  like,  for  we  have 
only  to  say,  '  God  be  merciful  to  me,'  when  we  are  dying,  and  all  will  be 
well."  This  is  a  wicked  misuse  of  gospel  truth ,  yea,  it  turns  it  into  a 
lie.  If  you  choose  thus  to  pervert  t  he  grace  of  the  gospel  to  your  own 
destruction,  your  blood  must  be  on  your  own  heads.  You  may  not  have 
space  given  you  in  which  to  breathe  out  even  this  brief  sentence  ;  or 
if  you  have,  the  words  may  not  come  from  your  heart,  and  so  you  may 
die  in  your  sins.  I  pray  you,  do  not  thus  presume  upon  the  forbearance 
-of  God.  But  if  with  the  publican's  heart  we  can  take  the  publican's 
•attitude,  if  with  the  publican's  spirit  we  can  use  the  publican's  words, 
then  there  will  follow  a  gracious  acceptance,  and  we  shall  go  home 
justified.  If  such  be  the  case,  there  will  be  grand  times  to-day,  for 
-angels  will  rejoice  over  sinners  reconciled  to  God,  and  made  to  know  hi 
•their  own  souls  the  boundless  mercy  of  the  Lord. 

In  preaching  upon  the  text,  I  shall  endeavour  to  bring  out  its  inner 
most  spirit.  May  we  be  taught  of  the  Spirit,  so  that  we  may  learn  four 
lessons  from  it ! 

I.  The  first  is  this — THE  FACT  OF  SINNERSHIP  is  NO  REASON  FOR 
DESPAIR.  You  need  none  of  you  say,  •'  I  am  guilty,  and  therefore  I 
may  not  approach  to  God ;  I  am  so  greatly  guilty  that  it  would  be  too 
daring  a  thing  for  me  to  ask  for  mercy."  Dismiss  such  thoughts  at 
once.  My  text  and  a  thousand  other  arguments  forbid  despair. 

For,  first,  this  man  who  was  a  sinner  "yet  dared  to  approach  the  Lord. 
According  to  our  version,  he  said,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,'' 
but  a  more  accurate  rendering  is  that  which  the  Revised  Veryion  puts  in 
the  margin — "  the  sinner."  "He  meant  to  say  that  he  was  emphatically 
the  sinner.  The  Pharisee  yonder  was  the  saint  of  his  age  :  but  this 
publican  who  stood  afar  off  from  the  holy  place  was  the  sinner.  If  there 
was  not  another  sinner  in  the  world,  he  was  one ;  and  in  a  world  of 
sinners  he  was  a  prominent  offender — the  sinner  of  sinners.  Em 
phatically  he  applies  to  himself  the  guilty  name.  He  takes  the  chief 
place  in  condemnation,  and  yet  he  cries,  ''God  be  merciful  to  me  the 
sinner."  Now  if  you  know  yourself  to  be  a  sinner,  you  may  plead  with 
.God ;  but  if  you  mourn  that  you  are  not  only  a  sinner,  but  the  sinner 
with  the  definite  article,  the  sinner  above  all  others,  you  may  still  hope 
in  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  The  worst,  the  most  profane,  the  most 


A    SERMON   FOR    THE    WORST   MAN    ON    EARTH.  11* 

horrible  of  sinners  may  venture,  as  this  man  did,  to  approach  the  God 
of  mercy.  I  know  that  it  looks  like  a  daring  action;  therefore  you 
mnat  do  it  by  faith.  On  any  other  footing  but  that  of  faith  in  the 
mercy  of  God,  you  who  are  a  sinner  may  not  dare  to  approach  the  Lord 
lest  you  be  found  guilty  of  presumption.  But  with  your  eye  on  mercy 
you  may  be  bravely  trustful.  Believe  in  the  great  mercy  of  God,  and 
though  your  sins  be  abundant,  you  will  find  that  the  Lord  will 
abundantly  pardon  ;  though  they  blot  your  character,  the  Lord  will  blot 
them  out ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  yet  the  precious  blood  of 
Jesus  will  make  you  whiter  than  snow. 

This  story  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  publican  is  intended  as  an 
encouraging  example  to  you.  If  this  man  who  was  tlw  sinner  found 
forgiveness,  so  also  shall  you  if  you  seek  it  in  the  same  way.  One 
sinner  has  speeded  so  well,  why  should  not  you  ?  Gome  and  try  for 
yourself,  and  see  if  the  Lord  dors  not  prove  in  your  case  that  his 
ineicy  endureth  for  ever. 

Next,  remember  that  you  may  not  only  find  encouragement  in> 
looking  at  the  sinner  who  sought  his  God,  but  in  the  God  whom  he 
sought.  Sinner,  there  is  great  mercy  in  the  heart  of  God.  How  often  did 
that  verse  ring  out  as  a  chorus  in  the  temple  song — 

"  For  his  mercy  shall  endure 
Ever  faithful,  ever  sure"  ! 

Mercy  is  a  specially  glorious  attribute  of  Jehovah,  the  living  God, 
He  is  "  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious."  He  is  "  slow  to  anger  and 
plenteous  in  mercy."  Do  you  not  see  how  this  should  cheer  you  ? 
Sinners  are  needful  if  mercy  is  to  be  indulged.  How  can  the  Lord  dis 
play  his  mercy  except  to  the  guilty  ?  Goodness  is  for  creatures,  but 
mercy  is  for  sinners.  Towards  unfallen  creatures  there  may  be  love, 
but  there  cannot  be  mercy.  Angels  are  not  fit  recipients  of  mercy  ; 
they  do  not  require  it,  for  they  have  not  transgressed.  Mercy  coine* 
into  exercise  alter  law  has  been  broken  ;  not  till  then.  Among  the 
attributes  it  is  the  last  which  found  scope  for  itself.  So  to  spe;ik,  it  is- 
the  Benjamin,  and  the  darling  attribute  of  God :  "  He  delighteth  in 
mercy."  Only  to  a  sinner  can  God  be  merciful.  Hearest  thou  this, 
thou  sinner  ?  Be  sure  that  thou  catch  at  it  !  It  there  be  boundless 
mercy  in  the  heart  of  God,  and  it  can  only  exercise  itself  towards  the 
guilty,  then  thou  art  the  man  to  have  it,  for  thou  art  a  guilty  one. 
Come,  then,  and  let  his  mercy  wrap  thee  about  like  a  garment  this* 
day,  and  cover  all  thy  shame.  Does  not  God's  delight  in  mercy  prove 
that  sinnership  is  no  reason  for  despair  ? 

•Moreover,  the  conception  of  salvation  implies  hope  for  sinners.  That 
salvation  which  we  preach  to  you  every  day  is  glad  tidings  for  the 
guilty.  Salvation  by  grace  implies  that  men  are  guilty.  Salvation 
ineaus  not  the  reward  of  the  righteous,  but  the  cleansing  of  the  un 
righteous.  Salvation  is  meant  for  the  lost,  the  ruined,  the  undone ; 
and  the  blessings  which  it  brings  of  pardoning  mercy  and  cleansing 
grace  must  be  intended  for  the  guilty  and  polluted.  "The  whole 
need  not  a  physician  ; "  the  physician  has  his  eye  upon  the  sick. 
Alms  are  for  the  poor,  bread  is  for  the  hungry,  pardon  is  for  the  guilty. 
0  you  that  are  guilty,  you  are  the  men  that  mercy  seeks  after  !  You 


112  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

were  in  God's  eye  when  he  sent  his  Son  into  the  world  to  save  sinners. 
From  the  very  first  inception  of  redemption  to  the  completion,  of  it 
the  eyes  of  the  ijreat  God  were  set  on  the  guilty,  and  not  on  the  deserv 
ing.  The  very  name  of  Jesus  tells  us  that  he  shall  save  his  people 
from  their  sins. 

Let  me  further  say  that,  inasmuch  as  that  salvation  of  (rod  is  a  great 
one,  it  must  have  been  intended  to  meet  great  sins.  0  sirs,  would 
Christ  have  shed  the  blood  of  his  heart  for  some  trifling,  venial  sins 
which  yonr  tears  could  wash  away  ?  Think  you  G-od  would  have  given 
his  dear  Son  to  die  as  a  mere  superfluity  ?  If  sin  had  been  a  small 
matter,  a  little  sacrifice  would  have  sufficed.  Think  you  that  the  divine 
atonement  was  made  only  for  small  offences?  Did  Jesus  die  for  little 
sins,  and  leave  the  great  ones  unatoned  ?  No,  the  Lord  God  measured 
the  greatness  of  our  sin,  and  found  it  high  as  heaven,  deep  as  hell,  and 
broad  as  the  infinite,  and  therefore  he  gave  so  great  a  S  iviour.  He  gave 
his  only  begotten  Son,  an  infinite  sacrifice,  an  unmeasurable  atonement. 
With  such  throes  and  pangs  of  death  as  never  can  be  fully  described  the 
Lord  Jesus  poured  out  his  soul  in  unknown  sufferings,  that  he  might  pro 
vide  a  great  salvation  for  the  greatest  of  sinners.  See  Jesus  on  the  cross, 
and  learn  that  all  manner  of  sin  and  of  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven 
unto  men.  The  fact  of  salvation,  and  of  a  great  salvation,  ought  to 
drive  away  the  very  notion  of  despair  from  every  heart  that  hears  of  it. 
Salvation,  that  is  for  me,  for  I  am  lost.  A  great  salvation,  that  is  for 
me,  for  I  am  the  greatest  of  sinners.  Oh,  hear  my  word  this  day  !  Ic 
is  God's  word  of  love,  and  it  rings  out  like  a  silver  bell.  0  my  beloved 
hearers,  I  weep  over  you,  and  yet  I  feel  like  Hinging  all  the  time,  for  I 
am  sent  to  proclaim  salvation  from  the  Lord  for  the  very  worst  of  you. 

The  gospel  is  especially,  definitely,  and  distinctly  addressed  to  sinners. 
Listen  to  it :  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;  of  whom  I  am 
chief."  "  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance." 
"The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost." 
The  gospel  is  like  a  letter  directed  in  a  clear  and  legible  hand ;  and  if 
you  will  read  its  direction,  you  will  find  that  it  runs  thus :  "  TO  THE 
SINNER."  0  sinners,  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent.  If  you 
are  a  sinner,  you  are  the  very  man  for  whom  the  gospel  is  intended  ; 
and  I  do  not  mean  by  this  a  merely  complimentary  nominal  sinner,  but 
an  out-and-out  rebel,  a  transgressor  against  God  and  man.  0  sinner, 
seize  upon  the  gospel  with  joyful  alacrity;  and  cry  uuto  God  for  mercy 
ao  once  1 

M  'Twas  for  sinners  that  he  suffer'd 

Agonies  unspeakable  ; 
Canst  thou  doubt  thou  art  a  sinner  ? 
If  thou  canst — then  hope,  farewell. 

But,  believing  what  is  written — 

*  All  are  guilty ' — *  dead  in  sin/ 
Looking  to  the  Crucified  One, 

Hope  shall  rise  thy  soul  within.*' 

If  you  will  think  of  it  again,  there  must  be  hope  for  sinners,  for  the 
great  commands  of  the  gospel  are  most  suitable  to  sinners.  Hear,  for 
instance,  this  word  :  "  Repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your 


A   SERMON   FOR   THE    WORST   MAN   ON   EARTH.  113 

eins  may  be  blotted  out "  (Acts  iii.  19).  Who  can  repent  but  th« 
guilty  ?  Who  can  be  converted  but  those  who  are  on  the  wrong  track, 
and  therefore  need  to  be  turned  ?  The  following  text  is  evidently 
addressed  to  those  who  are  good  for  nothing:  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake 
his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  ami  let  him  return  unto 
the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him  ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he 
will  abundantly  pardon."  The  very  word  "repent"  indicates  that  it  is 
addressed  to  those  who  have  sinned  ;  let  it  beckon  you  to  mercy. 

Then  you  are  bidden  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Now, 
salvation  by  faith  must  be  for  guilty  men  ;  for  the  way  of  life  foi 
the  innocent  is  by  perseverance  in  good  works.  The  law  saith, 
"  This  do,  and  live."  The  gospel  talks  of  salvation  by  believing,  because 
it  is  the  only  way  possible  for  those  who  have  broken  the  law,  and  are 
condemned  by  it.  Salvation  is  of  faith  that  it  might  be  by  grace. 
Believe  and  live  !  Believe  and  live  !  Believe  and  live  !  This  is  the 
jubilee  note  of  the  trumpet  of  free  grace.  Oh,  that  you  would  know 
the  joyful  sound,  and  thus  be  blessed  !  Oh,  that  you  that  are  sinful 
would  hear  the  call  as  addiessed  to  you  in  particular  !  You  are  up  to 
your  necks  in  the  mire  of  sin,  but  a  mighty  hand  is  stretched  out  to 
deliver  you.  "  Repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gospel." 

If  you  want  any  other  argument — and  I  hope  you  do  nut — I  would  put 
it  thus  :  great  sinners  have  been  saved.  All  sorts  of  sinners  are  being 
saved  to-day.  What  wonders  some  of  us  have  seen  !  What  wonders 
have  been  wrought  in  this  Tabernacle  !  A  man  was  heard  at  a  prayer- 
meeting  pleading  in  louder  tones  than  usual  ;  he  was  a  sailor,  and  his 
voice  was  pitched  to  the  tune  of  the  roaring  billows.  A  lady  whispered 

to  her  friend,  "  Is  that  Captain  F ?  "  "  Yes,  said  the  other,  "  why 

do  you  ask  ?  "  "  Because,"  said  she,  "  the  last  time  I  heard  that  voice 
its  swearing  made  my  blood  run  cold  ;  the  man's  oaths  were  beyond 
measure  terrible.  Can  it  be  the  same  man  ?  "  Some  one  observed, 
"Go  and  ask  him."  The  lady  timidly  said,  "Are  you  the  same  Captain 

F that  I  heard  swearing  in  the  street,  outside  my  house  ? " 

"  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  am  the  same  person,  and  yet,  thank  God,  I  am 
not  the  same!"  0  brethren,  such  were  some  of  us  ;  but  we  are  washed, 
but  we  are  sanctified  !  Wonders  of  grace  to  God  belong.  I  was  reading 
the  other  day  a  story  of  an  old  shepherd  who  had  never  attended  a  place 
of  worship  ;  but  when  he  had  grown  grey,  and  was  near  to  die,  he  was 
drawn  by  curiosity  into  the  Methodist  chapel,  and  all  was  new  to  him. 
Hard-hearted  old  fellow  as  he  was,  he  was  noticed  to  shed  tears  during 
-the  sermon.  He  had  obtained  a  glimpse  of  hope.  He  saw  that  there 
was  mercy  even  for  him.  He  laid  hold  on  eternal  life  at  once.  The 
surprise  was  great  when  he  was  seen  at  the  chapel,  and  greater  still 
when,  on  the  Monday  night,  he  was  seen  at  r,he  prayer-meeting  ;  yes, 
and  heard  at  the  prayer-meeting,  for  he  fell  down  on  his  knees  and 
praised  God  that  he  had  found  mercy.  Do  you  wonder  that  the 
Methodists  shouted,  "  Bless  the  Lord  "  ?  Wherever  Christ  is  preached 
the  most  wicked  of  men  and  women  are  made  to  sit  at.  the  Saviour's 
leet,  "clothed,  and  in  their  right  minds."  My  hearer,  why  should  it 
not  be  so  with  you  ?  At  auy  rate,  we  have  full  proof  of  the  fact 
that  sinnership  is  no  reason  for  despair. 

II.     I  must  now  advance  to  my  second  observation  :  A  SENSE  OF 


114  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

SINNERSHIP  CONFERS    NO  RIGHT   TO   MERCY.       You     will    Wonder    why    I 

mention  this  self-evident  truth;  but  I  must  mention  it  because  of  a 
common  error  which  does  great  mischief.  This  man  was  very  sensible  of 
his  sin  insomuch  that  he  called  himself  THB  SINNER  ;  but  he  did  not 
urge  his  sense  of  sin  as  any  reason  why  he  should  find  mercy.  There  is 
an  ingenuity  in  the  heart  of  man,  nothing  less  than  devilish,  by  which 
he  will,  if  he  can,  turn  the  gospel  itself  into  a  yoke  of  bondage.  If  we 
preach  to  sinners  that  they  may  come  to  Christ  in  all  their  anguish  and 
misery,  one  cries — "  I  do  not  feel  myself  to  be  a  sinner  as  I  ought  to 
feel  it.  I  have  not  felt  those  convictions  of  which  you  speak,  and, 
therefore,  I  cannot  come  to  Jesus."  This  is  a  horrible  twist  of  our 
meaning.  We  never  meant  to  insinuate  that  convictions  and  doubts 
and  despondencies  conferred  upon  men  a  claim  to  mercy,  and  were 
necessary  preparations  for  grace.  I  want  you,  therefore,  to  learn  that 
a  sense  of  sin  gives  no  man  a  right  to  grace. 

If  a  deep  sense  of  sin  entitled  men  to  mercy,  it  would  be  a  turning  oj 
this  parable  upsile  down.  Do  you  dre^m  that  this  publican  was,  after 
all,  a  Pharisee  differently  dressed  ?  Do  you  imagine  that  he  really 
meant  to  plead,  *'  God  be  merciful  to  me  because  I  am  humble  and 
lowly  "  ?  Did  he  say  in  his  heart,  "  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me  because 
I  am  not  a  Pharisee,  and  am  deeply  despondent  on  account  of  my  evil 
ways"  ?  This  would  prove  that  he  was  in  his  heart  of  hearts  a  Phari 
see.  If  you  make  a  righteousness  out  of  your  feelings,  you  are  just  as 
much  out  of  the  true  way  as  if  you  made  a  righteousness  out  of  your 
works.  Whether  it  be  work  or  feeling,  anything  which  is  relied  upon 
as  a  claim  for  grace  is  an  antichrist.  You  are  no  more  to  be  saved 
because  of  your  conscious  miseries  than  because  of  your  conscious 
merits ;  there  is  no  virtue  either  in  the  one  or  in  the  other.  If  you 
make  a  Saviour  of  convictions  you  will  be  lost  as  surely  as  if  you  made 
a  Saviour  out  of  ceremonies.  The  publican  trusted  in  divine  mercy 
and  not  in  his  own  convictions,  and  you  must  do  the  same. 

To  imagine  that  an  awful  sense  of  sin  constituted  a  claim  upon  mercy 
would  be  like  giving  a  premium  to  great  sin.  Certain  seekers  thinly 
"  I  have  never  been  a  drunkard,  or  a  swearer,  or  unchaste,  and  I  almost 
wish  I  had  been,  that  I  might  feel  myself  to  be  the  chief  of  sinners, 
and  so  might  come  to  Jesus."  Do  not  wish  anything  so  atrocious; 
there  is  no  good  in  sin  in  any  shape  or  way.  Thank  God  if  you 
have  been  kept  from  the  grosser  forms  of  vice,  Do  not  imagine  that 
repentance  is  easier  when  sin  is  grosser :  the  reverse  is  true.  Do  be 
lieve  that  there  is  no  advantage  in  having  been  a  horrible  offender. 
You  have  sins  enough  ;  to  be  worse  would  not  be  better.  If  good 
works  do  not  help  you,  certainly  bad  works  would  not.  You  that  have 
been  moral  and  excellent  should  cry  for  mercy,  and  not  be  so  silly  as 
to  dream  that  greater  sins  would  help  you  to  readier  repentance. 
Come  as  you  are,  and  if  your  heart  be  hard,  confess  it  as  one  of  your 
greatest  sins.  A  deeper  sense  of  sin  would  not  entitle  you  to  the 
mercy  of  God  ;  you  can  have  no  title  to  mercy  but  that  which  mercy 
gives  you.  Could  your  tears  for  ever  flow,  could  your  grief  no  respite 
knovv,  you  would  have  no  claim  upon  the  sovereign  grace  of  God,  who 
will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy. 

Then,  de^r  friends,  remember,  if  we  begin  to  preach  to  sinners  that. 


A   SERMON   FOR   THE   WORST   MAN   ON   EARTH.  115 

they  must  have  a  certain  sense  of  sin  and  a  certain  measure  of  con 
viction,  such  teaching  would  turn  the  sinner  away  from  God  in  Christ  tc 
himsef.  The  man  begins  at  once  to  say,  "  Have  I  a  broken  heart?  Do 
J  feel  the  burden  of  sin  ?"  This  is  only  another  Ibrni  of  looking  to  self. 
Man  must  not  look  to  himself  to  find  reasons  for  God's  grace.  The  remedy 
•does  not  lie  in  the  seat  of  the  disease;  it  lies  in  the  physician's  hand. 
A  sense  of  bin  is  not  a  claim,  but  a  gift  of  that  blessed  Saviour  who  is 
exalted  on  hijjh  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  Beware  of  an^ 
teaching  which  makes  you  l«.ok  to  yourself  for  help,  but  cling  to  that 
doctrine  which  makes  you  look  alone  to  Christ.  Whether  you  know  it  or 
not,  you  are  a  lost,  ruined  sinner,  only  fit  to  be  cast  into  the  flames  of  hell 
for  ever.  Confess  this,  but  do  not  ask  to  be  driven  mad  by  a  sense  of 
it.  Come  to  Jesus  just  as  you  are,  and  do  not  wait  for  a  preparation 
made  out  of  your  own  miseries.  Look  (o  Jesus,  and  to  him  alone. 

If  we  fall  into  the  notion  that  a  certain  sense  of  sin  has  a  claim  upon 
God,  we  sliall  be  putting  salvation  upon  other  grounds  than  tttat  of  faith, 
and  that  must  be  a  false  ground.  Now,  the  ground  of  salvation  is — 
"God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life." 
A  simple  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  way  of  salvation  ;  but  to 
say,  •'  I  shall  be  saved  because  I  am  horribly  convicted  of  sin,  and 
diiven  to  desperation,"  is  not  to  speak  like  the  gospel,  but  to  rave  out 
of  the  pride  of  an  unbelieving  heart.  The  gospel  is  that  you  believe  in 
Christ  Jesus  ;  that  you  get  right  out  of  yourself,  and  depend  alone  in 
him.  Do  you  say,  "  I  feel  so  guilty"  ?  You  are  certainly  guilty,  whether 
you  feel  it  or  not ;  and  you  are  far  more  guilty  than  you  have  any  idea 
of.  Coine  to  Christ  because  you  are  guilty,  not  because  you  have  been 
prepared  to  come  by  looking  at  your  guilt.  Trust  nothing  of  your  own, 
not  even  your  seri^e  of  need.  A  man  may  have  a  sense  of  disease  a  long 
time  before  he  will  get  healing  out  of  it.  The  looking-glass  of  convic 
tion  reveals  the  spots  on  our  face,  but  it  cannot  wash  them  away.  You 
cannot  fill  your  hands  by  putting  them  into  your  empty  pocket  and 
feeling  how  empty  it  is;  it  would  be  far  wiser  to  hold  them  our,  and 
receive  the  gold  which  your  friend  so  freely  gives  you.  •'  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner  "  is  the  right  way  to  put  it,  and  not,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  because  I  sufficiently  feel  my  sinnership,  and  most 
fittingly  bewail  it." 

III.  My  third  observation  is  this :  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THEIK 
SINNERSHIP  GUIDES  MEN  TO  RIGHT  ACTION.  When  a  man  has  learned 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  he  is  a  sinner,  then  by  a  kind  of  instinct  of  the 
new  life,  he  does  the  right  thing  in  the  right  way.  This  publican  had 
not  often  been  to  the  temple,  and  had  not  learned  the  orthodox  way  of 
behaving.  It  is  easy  to  learn  how  we  all  do  it  nowadays  in  our 
temples — take  off  your  hat,  Jr.lc?  it  ;n  front  of  your  face,  and  read  the 
maker's  name  and  address.  Then  sit  down,  and  at  the  proper  moment, 
bend  forward  and  cover  your  eyes,  and,  furthermore,  stand  up  wiien 
the  rest  of  the  congregation  do  so.  People  get  to  do  this  just  as  if  they 
were  wound  up  by  machinery ;  yet  they  do  not  pray  when  they  are 
supposed  to  be  praving,  nor  bow  before  the  Lord  when  worship  is  being 
offered.  This  publican  is  out  of  rank  ;  he  does  not  follow  the  rubric  ; 
lie  has  gestures  of  his  own.  First,  instead  of  coming  forward  he 
30 


116  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

stands  afar  off.  He  does  not  dare  to  come  where  that  most  respects 
able  person,  the  Pharisee,  is  displaying  himself,  for  he  does  not  feel' 
worthy.  He  leaves  space  between  himself  and  God,  an  opening 
for  a  Mediator,  room  for  an  Advocate,  place  for  an  Intercessor 
to  interpose  between  himself  and  the  throne  of  the  Most  Higfi. 
Wise  man  thus  to  stand  afar  off;  for  by  this  means  he  could  safely 
draw  near  in  the  person  of  Jesus.  Furthermore,  he  would  not  lift 
so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven.  It  seems  natural  to  lift  up  your 
hands  in  prayer,  but  he  would  not  even  lift  his  eyes.  The  uplifting 
of  the  eyes  is  very  proper,  is  it  not?  But  it  was  still  more  proper 
for  "  the  sinner "  not  to  lift  his  eyes.  His  downcast  eyes  meant 
much.  Our  Lord  does  not  say  that  he  could  not  lift  up  his  eyes, 
but  he  would  not.  He  could  look  up,  for  he  did  in  spirit  look  up  as- 
he  cried,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me "  ;  but  he  would  not,  because  it 
seemed  indecorous  for  eyes  like  his  to  peer  into  the  heaven  where 
dwells  the  holy  God.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  penitent  publican  kept 
smiting  upon  his  breast.  The  original  does  not  say  that  he  smote 
upon  his  breast  once,  but  he  smote  and  smote  again.  It  was  a  continuous- 
act.  He  seemed  to  say — Oh,  this  wicked  heart  !  He  would  smite 
it.  Again  and  again  he  expressed  his  intense  grief  by  this  Oriental 
gesture,  for  he  did  not  know  how  else  to  set  forth  his  sorrow.  His 
heart  had  sinned,  and  he  smote  it;  his  eyts  had  led  him  astray, 
and  he  made  them  look  down  to  the  earth  ;  and  as  he  himself  had  sinned 
by  living  far  off  from  God,  he  banished  himself  far  from  the  manifest 
Presence.  Every  gesture  and  posture  is  significant,  and  yet  all  came 
spontaneously.  He  had  no  book  of  directions  how  DO  behave  himself  in 
the  house  of  God  ;  his  sincerity  guided  him.  If  you  want  to  know 
how  to  behave  yourselves  as  penitents,  be  penitents.  The  best  rubrics 
of  worship  are  those  which  are  written  on  broken  hearts.  I  have  heard 
of  a  minister  who  was  said  to  cry  in  the  wrong  place  in  his  sermons,. 
and  it  was  found  afterwards  that  he  had  written  in  the  margin  of  his- 
manuscript,  u  Weep  here."  His  audience  could  not  see  the  reason  for 
his  artificial  moisture.  It  must  have  had  a  ludicrous  effect.  In  religion? 
everything  artificial  is  ridiculous,  or  worse;  but  grace  in  the  heart  is  ihe 
best  "  master  of  the  ceremonies."  He  who  prays  aright  with  his  heart 
will  not  much  err  with  foot,  and  hand,  and  head.  If  thou  wouldst  know 
how  to  approach  God,  confess  thyseU  a  sinner,  and  so  take  thy  true 
place  before  the  God  of  truth  :  throw  thyself  on  divine  mercy,  and 
thus  place  God  in  his  true  position  as  thy  Judge  and  Lord. 

Observe  that  this  man,  even  under  the  weight  of  conscious  sin,  was- 
led  aright;  for  he  went  straight  away  to  God.  A  sense  of  sin  without 
faith  drives  us  from  God,  but  a  sense  of  sin  with  faith  draws  us  imme 
diately  to  God.  He  came  to  God  alone;  he  felt  that  it  would  be  of  no- 
avail  *to  confess  his  fault  to  a  mortal,  or  to  look  for  absolution  from 
man.  He  did  not  resort  to  the  priest  of  the  temple,  but  to  the  God  of 
the  temple.  He  did  uot  ask  to  speak  to  the  good  and  learned  man,  the 
Pharisee,  who  stood  on  the  same  floor  with  him.  His  enquiry-room  \va*» 
the  secret  of  his  own  soul,  and  he  enquired  of  the  Lord.  He  ran 
•straight  away  to  God,  who  alone  was  able  to  help;  and  when  he  opened 
his  mouth,  it  was  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  That  is  what  you 
have  f,o  do,  my  dear  hearer,  if  you  would  be  saved:  you  must  go 


A   SERMON   FOR   THE   WORST   MAN   ON    EARTH.  117 

distinctly  and  immediately  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Forget  all  things 
else,  and  suy,  with  the  returning  prodigal,  ''  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
father."  None  but  God  can  help  us  out  of  our  low  estate.  No  mercy 
out  the  mercy  of  God  can  serve  our  turn,  and  none  can  give  us  that 
mercy  but  the  God  of  mercy.  Let  every  broken-down  sinner  come  to 
his  God,  against  whom  he  has  offended. 

The  publican  did  not  look  round  on  his  fellow- worshippers,  he  waa 
too  much  absorbed  in  his  own  grief  of  heart.  Specially  is  it  noteworthy 
that  he  had  no  remarks  to  make  upon  the  Pharisee.  He  did  not  de 
nounce  the  pride,  or  the  hypocrisy,  or  the  hard-heartedness  of  the  pro- 
lessor  who  so  offensively  looked  down  upon  him.  He  did  not  return 
contempt  for  contempt,  as  we  are  all  too  apt  to  do.  No  ;  he  dealt  with 
the  Lord  alone  in  the  deep  sincerity  of  his  own  heart  ;  and  it  was  well. 
My  hearer,  when  will  you  do  the  same  ?  When  will  you  cease  to  censure 
others,  and  reserve  your  severity  for  yourself,  your  critical  observationa 
for  vour  own  conduct  ? 

When  he  came  to  God  it  was  with  a  fall  confession  of  sin — "  God  b& 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  His  very  eyes  and  hands  joined  with  his  lips 
in  acknowledging  his  iniquities.  His  prayer  was  wet  with  the  dews  of 
repentance.  He  poured  out  his  heart  before  God  in  the  most  free  and 
artless  manner  :  his  prayer  came  from  the  same  fountain  as  that  of  the 
prodigal  when  he  said,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned,"  and  that  of  David 
when  he  cried,  "Against  thee,  thee  only  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this 
evil  in  thy  sight."  That  is  the  best  praying  which  comes  from  the 
lowliest  heart. 

Then  he  appealed  to  mercy  only.  This  was  wise*.  See  how  rightly 
he  was  guided.  What  had  he  to  do  with  justice,  since  it  could  only 
condemn  and  destroy  him  ?  Like  a  naked  sword,  it  threatens  to  sheathe 
itself  in  my  heart ;  how  can  I  appeal  to  justice  ?  Neither  power  nor 
wisdom,  nor  any  other  quality  of  the  great  God  could  be  resorted  to  ; 
only  mercy  stretched  out  her  wing.  The  prayer,  u  God  be  merciful," 
is  the  only  prayer  that  you  can  pray  who  have  beeu  greatly  guilty.  If 
all  your  lives  you  have  spurned  your  Saviour,  all  you  can  now  do  is  to- 
cast  yourselves  upon  the  mercy  of  God. 

The  original  Greek  permits  us  to  see  that  this  man  had  an  eye  to  the 
propitiation.  I  do  not  say  that  he  fully  understood  the  doctrine  of 
atonement ;  but  still  his  prayer  was,  "  God  be  propitiated  to  me  the 
sinner."  He  had  seen  the  morning  and  the  evening  lamb,  and  he  had 
heard  of  the  sin-offering ;  and  though  he  might  not  have  known  all 
about  atonement,  expiation,  and  substitution,  yet  as  far  as  he  did  know, 
his  eye  was  turned  that  way.  "  0  God,  be  propitiated,  accept  a  sacrifice, 
aud  pardon  me."  If  you  know  your  sin,  you  will  be  wise  to  plead 
the  propitiation  which  God  hath  set  forth  for  human  sin.  May  the 
Spirit  of  God  constrain  you  to  trust  in  Jesus  now !  The  new  year  is 
already  gliding  away  ;  its  second  month  is  slipping  from  under  us ; 
how  many  months  are  to  go  before  you,  a  guilty  sinner,  will  come  and 
ask  mercy  of  God,  the  infinitely-gracious  One  ?  Great  God,  let  this 
day  be  the  day  of  thy  power  ! 

IV.  I  now  close  with  my  last  head,  which  is  this — THE  BELIEVING 
CONFESSION  OF  SINNERSHIP  is  THE  WAY  OF  PEACE.  "  God  be  merciful 
to  me  a  sinner,"  was  the  prayer,  but  what  was  the  answer  ?  Listen  to 


118  METROPOLITAN   TABRHNACLB   PULPIT. 

this :   "  This  man   went  down  to  his  house  justified  rather  than   the 
other." 

In  a  few  sentences  let  me  sketch  this  man's  progress.  He  came  to 
God  only  as  a  sinner,  nakedly  as  a  sinner.  Observe,  he  did  not  say, 
'*  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  penitent  sinner."  He  was  a  penitent  sinner, 
but  he  did  not  plead  his  penitence  ;  and  if  you  are  ever  so  penitent  and 
convinced  of  sin,  do  not  mention  it  as  an  argument,  lest  you  be 
accused  of  self-righteousness.  Come  as  you  are,  as  a  sinner,  and  as 
'nothing  else.  Exhibit  your  wounds.  Bring  your  spiritual  poverty 
before  God,  and  not  your  supposed  wealth.  If  you  have  a  single  penny  of 
your  own,  get  rid  of  it.  Perfect  poverty  alone  will  discharge  you  from 
your  bankruptcy.  If  you  have  a  mouldy  crust  in  the  cupboard  of  self- 
righteousness,  no  bread  from  heaven  will  be  yours.  You  must  be 
nothing  and  nobody  if  God  is  to  be  your  all  in  all.  This  man  does  not 
£ry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  the  penitent  "  ;  but,  "  be  merciful  to  'me 
the  sinner."  He  does  not  even  £ay,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  the 
reformed  sinner."  I  have  no  doubt  he  did  reform,  and  give  up  his  evil 
ways,  but  he  does  not  plead  that  reformation.  Reformation  will  not 
take  away  your  sinnership;  therefore  do  not  speak  as  if  it  could  do  so. 
What  you  are  to  be  will  make  no  atonement  for  what  you  have 
been.  Gome,  therefore,  simply  as  a  sinner,  not  as  a  changed  and 
improved  sinner.  Do  not  come  because  you  are  washed,  but  to  be 
washed  !  The  publican  does  not  say,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
praying  sinner."  He  was  praying,  but  he  does  not  mention  it  as  a 
plea,  for  he  thought  very  little  of  his  own  prayers.  Do  not  plead  your 
prayers ;  you  might  as  well  plead  your  sins.  God  knows  that  your 
prayers  have  sin  in  them.  Why,  man,  your  very  tears  of  repentance 
need  washing!  When  your  supplications  are  most  sincere,  what  are 
they  but  the  wailings  of  a  condemned  creature  who  cannot  give  a  single 
reason  why  he  should  not  be  executed  ?  Feel  and  own  that  you  de 
serve  condemnation,  and  come  to  God  as  a  sinner.  Off  with  your  paltry 
finery,  I  mean  your  "filthy  rags."  Do  not  trick  yourself  out  in  the 
weeds  of  your  own  repentance,  much  less  in  the  fig-leaves  of  your 
own  resolutions,  but  come  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus  in  all  the  nakedness 
of  your  sin,  and  everlasting  mercy  will  cover  both  you  and  your  sins. 

Next,  notice  that  this  man  did  nothing  but  appeal  to  mercy :  he  said, 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me."  He  did  not  attempt  to  excuse  himself,  and 
say,  "  Lord,  I  could  not  help  it.  Lord,  I  was  not  worse  than  other 
publicans.  Lord,  I  was  a  public  servant,  and  only  did  what  every  other 
tax-collector  did."  No,  no,  he  is  too  honest  to  forge  excuses.  He  is  a 
sinner,  and  he  owns  it.  If  the  Lord  should  condemn  him  out  of  his 
own  mouth,  and  send  him  to  hell,  he  cannot  help  it ;  his  sin  is  too 
evident  to  be  denied.  He  lays  his  head  on  the  block,  and  humbly 
pleads,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Neither  does  this  publican 
offer  any  promises  of  future  amendment  as  a  set-off.  He  doas  not  s^y, 
"  Lord,  be  merciful  for  the  past,  and  I  will  be  better  in  the  future." 
Nothing  of  the  sort ;  "  Be  merciful  to  me  the  sinner"  is  his  one  and 
only  request.  So  would  I  have  you  cry,  **  0  God,  be  merciful  to  me  ! 
Although  I  am  even  now  condemned,  and  deserved  to  be  hopelessly 
damned  by  thy  justice,  yet  have  mercy  upon  me,  have  mercy  on  me 
aow."  That  is  the  way  to  pi'ay ;  and  if  vou  pray  in  that  way  God  will 


A    SERMON   FOR   THE    WORST   MAN   ON    EARTH.  119 

hear  you.  He  does  not  otter  to  pat/  anything  ;  he  does  not  propose  any 
form  of  self-paid  ransom ;  lie  does  not  present  to  God  his  tears,  his 
abstinence,  his  self-  lenial,  his  generosity  to  the  church,  his  liberality 
to  the  poor,  or  anything  else;  but  simply  begs  the  Lord  to  be  pro 
pitiated,  and  to  be  merciful  to  him  because  of  the  great  sacrifice.  Oh, 
th;it  all  of  you  would  at  once  pray  in  this  fashion! 

Now,  I  want  to  cheer  your  hearts  by  noticing  that,  this  man,  throngn. 
this  prayer,  and  through  this  confession  of  sin,  experienced  a  remarkable 
degree  of  acceptance.  He  had  come  up  to  the  temple  condemned  ;  "  he 
went  down  to  his  house  justified."  A  complete  change,  a  sudden 
change,  a  happy  change  was  wrought  upon  him.  Heavy  heart  and 
downcast  eye  were  exchanged  for  glad  heart  and  hopeful  outlook.  He 
came  into  that  temple  with  trembling,  he  left  it  with  rejoicing.  I  am 
sure  his  wife  noticed  the  difference.  What  had  come  over  him  ?  The 
children  began  to  observe  it  also.  Poor  father  used  to  sit  alone,  and 
heave  many  a  sigh  ;  but  all  of  a  sudden  he  is  so  happy ;  he  even  singa 
psalms  o!  David  out  of  the  latter  end  of  the  hook.  The  change 
was  very  marked.  Before  dinner  he  says,  "•  Children,  we  innsr.  give 
God  thank-*  before  we  eat  this  meal."  The\r  gather  round  and  wonder 
at  dear  father's  happy  faee  as  he  blesses  the  God  of  Israel.  IL^  says  to 
his  friends,  "  Brethren,  1  am  comforted  ;  God  has  had  mercy  upon  me. 
I  went  to  the  temple  guilty,  but  I  have  returned  justified.  My  sins 
are  all  forgiven  me.  God  has  accepted  a  propitiation  on  my  behalf." 
What  good  would  come  of  such  a  happy  testimony  !  This  was  a  very 
sudden  change,  was  it  not  ?  It  was  wrought  in  a  moment.  The  pro 
cess  of  spiritual  quickening  is  not  a  matter  of  hours,  but  of  a  single 
second  of  time.  The  processes  which  lead  up  to  it,  and  spring  out  of 
it,  are  lon-j,  but  the  actual  reception  of  life  must  be  instantaneous. 
Not  in  every  case  would  you  be  able  to  put  your  finger  upon  that 
second  of  time,  but  the  passage  from  death  unto  life  must  be  in 
stantaneous.  There  must  be  a  moment  in  which  the  man  is  dead,  and 
another  moment  in  which  he  is  alive.  I  grant  you,  life  would  be 
very  feeble  at  first ;  still,  there  must  be  a  time  in  which  it  was  not  there 
at  all;  and  again,  there  must  have  been  an  instant  in  which  it  begins. 
There  can  be  no  middle  condition  between  dead  and  alive.  Yet  a  man 
may  not  know  when  the  change  took  place.  If  you  were  going  to  the 
Cape  you  might  cross  the  equator  at  dead  of  ni<-ht,  and  know  nothing 
about  it,  but  still  you  would  cross  it.  Some  poor  landsmen  have 
thought  that  they  would  see  a  blue  line  right  across  the  waves ; 
'•lie  it  is  not  perceptible,  although  it  is  truly  there;  the  equator  is  quite 
as  real  as  it  we  could  see  a  golden  belt  around  the  glohe.  Dear 
friends,  I  want  you  to  cross  the  line  this  morning!  Oh,  thp.t 
you  might  go  out  of  this  house  saying,  »« Glory,  glory,  hallelujah! 
God  has  had  mercy  upon  me."  Though  you  feel  this  morning  that  you 
would  not  give  twopence  for  your  life,  yet  if  you  come  to  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  you  shall  go  away  blessing  liod  not  only  that  you  are  alive, 
but  that  you  shall  live  for  ever,  happy  in  his  love. 

Once  more,  this  man  went  away  with  a  witness  such  as  I  pray  we 

may  all  have.     '•  He  was  justified."     "  Bur,,"  you  add,  "how  do  I  know 

he  was  justified  ? "     Listen  to  these  words.     Our  blessed  Lord  says, 

'  "  /  tell,  you  that  this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified  rather  than 


120  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  other."  "/tell  you."  Jesus,  our  Lord,  can  tell.  Into  our  ear  he 
tells  it.  He  tells  it  to  G-od  and  the  holy  angels,  and  he  tells  it  to  the  man 
himself.  The  man  \vho  has  cried  from  his  heart  "  God  be  merciful  to  me 
a  sinner"  is  a  justified  man.  When  he  stood  and  confessed  his  sin, 
and  cast  himself  wholly  upon  the  divine  mercy,  that  man  was  un 
burdened,  so  that  he  went  down  to  his  house  justified.  We  are  all 
going  down  to  our  houses.  Oh,  that  we  might  go  down  justified !  You 
are  going  home ;  I  want  you  to  go  home  to  God,  who  is  the  true  home 
of  the  soul.  "  He  went  'down  to  his  house  justified,"  and  why  should 
not  you  do  the  same  ?  Perhaps,  my  hearer,  you  have  never  been  to 
the  Tabernacle  before.  Possibly,  my  friend,  you  are  one  of  those 
gentlemen  who  spend  Sunday  mornings  in  their  shirt-sleeves  at  home 
reading  the  weekly  paper.  You  have  come  here  this  morning  quite 
by  accident.  Blessed  be  God!  I  hope  you  will  go  home  "justified." 
The  Lord  grant  it !  Perhaps  you  always  come  here,  and  have  occupied 
a  seat  ever  since  the  Tabernacle  was  built,  and  yet  you  have  never 
found  mercy.  Oh,  that  you  might  find  mercy  this  morning!  Let  us 
seek  this  blessing.  Come  with  me  to  Jesus.  I  will  lead  the  way  ;  I 
pray  you  say  with  me  this  morning — '•  God  be  merciful  to  me  the  sinner." 
Rest  on  the  great  propitiation :  trust  in  Jesus  Christ's  aooning  blood. 
Cast  yourself  upon  the  Saviour's  love,  and  you  shall  go  down  to  your 
house  justified.  Is  it  a  poor  cottage  ?  Is  it  less  than  that,  a  back 
room  up  three  pairs  of  stairs  ?  Are  you  very,  very  poor,  and  have 
you  been  out  of  work  for  a  long  time  ?  Never  mind.  God  knows  all. 
Seek  you  his  face.  It  will  be  a  happy  Sunday  for  you.  if  you  this  day 
begin  a  new  life  by  faith  in  Jesus.  You  shall  have  joy,  peace,  and 
happiness  if  you  seek  and  find  mercy  from  the  great  Father.  I  think 
I  see  you  trudging  home,  having  left  your  load  behind  you,  but  com 
passed  about  with  songs  of  praise  unto  our  God.  So  be  it.  Amen 
arid  Amen. 


OF  SCRIPT u HE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Psalms  li.  and  xxxii. 


f  k  |to  Dark  Street  ftolpit. 

CONFESSION    AND    ABSOLUTION. 

a  J^ennon 

DELIVERED  ON  SABBATH  MORNING,  OCTOBER  3,  1858,   BT   TH» 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     MUSIC     HALL,      ROYAL     SURREY     GARDENS. 


"And  the  publican,  standing  afar  off,  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  hearen,  but  smote 
«pon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." — Luke  xviii.  13. 

THE  heroes  of  our  Saviour's  stories  are  most  of  them  selected  to  illustrate  traits 
of  character  entirely  dissimilar  to  their  general  reputation.  What  would  you  think 
of  a  moral  writer  of  our  own  day,  should  he  endeavour  in  a  work  of  fiction,  to 
set  before  us  the  gentle  virtue  of  benevolence  by  the  example  of  a  Sepoy?  And 
yet.  Jesus  Christ  has  given  us  one  of  the  finest  examples  of  charity  in  the  case  of 
a  Samaritan.  To  the  Jews,  a  Samaritan  was  as  proverbial  lor  his  bitter  animosity 
against  their  nation,  as  the  Sepoy  is  among  us  for  his  treacherous  cruelty,  and 
as  much  an  object  of  contempt  and  hatred;  but  Jesus  Christ,  nevertheless,  chose 
his  hero  from  the  Samaritans,  that  there  should  be  nothing  adventitious  to  adorn 
him,  but  that  all  the  adorning  might  be  given  to  the  grace  of  charity.  Thus,  too, 
in  the  present  instance,  our  Saviour,  being  desirous  of  setting  before  us  the 
necessity  of  humiliation  in  prayer,  has  not  selected  some  distinguished  saint  who 
was  famed  for  his  humility,  but  he  has  chosen  a  tax-gatherer,  probably  one  of  the 
most  extortionate  of  his  class,  for  the  Pharisee  seems  to  hint  as  much  ;  and  I 
doubt  not  he  cast  his  eye  askance  at  this  publican,  when  he  observed,  witk  self- 
gratulation,  "God,  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  extortioners,  un 
just,  adulterers,  or  even  as  this  publican."  Still,  our  i.ord,  in  order  that  we  might 
*ee  that  there  was  nothing  to  predispose  in  the  person,  but  that  the  acceptance  of 
the  prayer  might  stand  out,  set  even  in  a  brighter  light  by  the  black  foil  of  the 
publican's  character,  has  selected  this  man  to  be  the  pattern  and  model  of  one  who 
*hou  (1  offer  an  acceptable  prayer  unto  God.  Note  that,  and  you  will  not  be  surprised 
to  find  the  same  characteristic  exhibited  very  frequently  in  the  parables  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  As  for  this  publican,  we  know  but  little  of  his  previous  career,  but 
we  may,  without  perilling  any  serious  error,  conjecture  somewhat  near  the  truth. 
He  may  have  been,  and  doubtless  he  was  a  Jew,  piously  brought  up  and  religiously 
trained,  but,  perhaps  like  Levi,  he  ran  away  from  his  parents,  and  finding  no 
other  trade  exactly  suited  to  his  vicious  taste,  he  became  one  of  that  corrupt  class 
irho  collected  the  "Roman  taxes,  and,  ashamed  to  be  known  as  Levi  any  longer,  he 
•changed  his  name  to  Matthew,  lest  anyone  should  recognize  in  the  degraded  cast 
•of  the  publican,  the  man  whose  parents  feared  God,  and  bowed  their  knees  before 
Jehovah.  It  may  be  that  this  publican  had  in  his  youth  forsaken  the  ways  of  his 
fathers,  and  given  himself  up  to  lasciviousness,  and  then  found  this  unworthy 
occupation  to  be  most  accordant  with  his  vicious  spirit.  We  cannot  tell  how  often 
lie  had  ground  the  faces  of  the  poor,  or  how  many  curses  had  been  spilled  upon 
his  Iu>ad  wtier  he  had  broken  into  the  heritage  of  the  widow,  and  had  robbed  the 
friendless,  unprotected  orphan.  The  Roman  government  gave  a  publican  far  greater 
power  than  he  ought  to  possess,  and  he  was  never  slow  to  use  the  advantage  for 
his  own  enrichmeut.  Probably  half  of  all  he  had  was  a  robbery,  if  not  more,  for 
Zaccheus  seen  s  to  hint  as  much  in  his  own  instance,  when  he  says — "  Behold,  Lord, 

No.  216  43 


CONFESSION   AND    ABSOLUTION. 

the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor,  and  if  I  have  gotten  anything  of  any  mai> 
by  false  accusation,  I  restore  it  unto  him  four-fold."  It  was  not  often  that  this- 
puhlican  troubled  the  temple;  the  priests  very  seldom  saw  him  coming  with  a 
sacrifice;  it  would  have  been  an  abomination,  and  he  did  not  bring  it.  But  so  it 
happened,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  met  with  the  publican;  and  had  made 
him  think  upon  his  ways,  and  their  peculiar  blackness:  he  was  full  of  trouble,  but 
he  kept  it  tohimself,  pent  up  in  his  own  bosom;  he  could  scarcely  rest  at  night,  nor  go* 
about  his  business  by  day,  for  day  and  night  the  hand  of  God  was  heavy  upon 
him.  At  last,  unable  to  endure  his  misery  any  longer,  he  thought  of  that  house  of 
God  at  Zion,  and  of  the  sacrifice  that  was  daily  offered  there.  "  To  whom,  or  where 
should  I  go,"  said  he,  "  but  to  God? — and  where  can  I  hope  to  find  mercy,  but  where 
the  sacrifice  is  offered?  "  No  sooner  said  than  done.  He  went;  Ids  unaccustomed 
^eet  bent  their  steps  to  the  sanctuary,  but  he  is  ashamed  to  enter.  Yon  Pharisee, 
holy  man  as  he  appeared  to  be,  goes  up  unblushingiy  to  the  court  of  the  Israelites; 
he  goes  as  near  as  he  dare  to  the  very  precincts,  within  which  the  priesthood  alone 
might  stand ;  and  he  prays  with  boastful  language.  But  as  for  the  publican,  he  choose* 
out  for  himself  some  secluded  corner  where  he  shall  neither  be  seen  nor  heard,  and 
now  he  is  about  to  pray,  not  with  uplifted  hands  as  yonder  Pharisee,  not  with  eves 
turned  up  to  heaven  with  a  sanctimonious  gaze  of  hypocrisy,  but  fixing  his  eyes 
upon  the  ground,  the  hot  tears  streaming  from  them,  not  daring  to  lift  them  up  to 
heaven.  At  last  his  stifled  feelings  found  utterance;  yet  that  utterance  was  a 
groan,  a  short  prayer  that  must  all  be  comprehended  in  the  compass  of  a  sigh: 
"God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  It  is  done;  he  is  heard;  the  angel  of  mercy 
registers  his  pardon ,  his  conscience  is  at  peace;  he  goes  down  to  his  house  a  happy 
man,  justified  rather  than  the  Pharisee,  and  rejoicing  in  the  justification  that  the 
Lord  had  given  to  him.  Well  then,  my  business  this  morning  is  to  invite,  to  urge, 
to  beseech  you  to  do  what  the  publican  did,  that  you  may  receive  what  he  obtained. 
There  are  two  particulars  upon  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  speak  solemnly  and 
earnestly:  the  first  is  confession;  the  second  is  absolution. 

I.  Brethren,  let  us  imitate  the  publican,  first  of  all  in  his  CONFESSION.  There 
has  been  a  great  deal  of  public  excitement  during  the  last  few  weeks  and  months- 
about  the  confessional.  As  for  that  matter,  it  is  perhaps  a  mercy  that  the  outward 
and  visible  sign  of  Popery  in  the  Church  of  England  has  discovered  to  its  sincere 
friends  the  inward  and  spiritual  evil  which  had  long  been  lurking  there.  We  need 
not  imagine  that  the  confessional,  or  priestcraft,  of  which  it  is  merely  an  offshoot,  in 
the  Church  of  England  is  any  novelty:  it  has  long  been  there;  those  of  us  who 
are  outside  her  borders  have  long  observed  and  mourned  over  it;  but  now  we 
congratulate  ourselves  on  the  prospect  that  the  Church  of  England  herself  will  be 
compelled  to  discover  her  own  evils;  and  we  hope  that  God  may  give  her  grace  and 
strength  to  cut  the  cancer  out  of  her  own  breast  before  she  shall  cease  to  be  a 
Protestant  Church,  and  God  shall  cast  her  away  as  an  abhorred  thing.  This 
morning,  however,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  confessional.  Silly  women  may 
go  on  confessing  as  long  as  they  like,  and  foolish  husbands  may  trust  their  wives  if 
they  please  to  such  men  as  those.  Let  those  that  are  fools  show  it;  let  those  that 
have  no  sense  do  as  they  please  about  it;  but  as  for  myself,  I  should  take  the 
greatest  care  that  neither  I  nor  mine  have  ought  to  do  with  such  things- 
Leaving  that,  however,  we  come  to  personal  matters,  endeavouring  to  learn,  even 
from  the  errors  of  others,  how  to  act  rightly  ourselves. 

Note  the  publican's  confession;  to  whom  was  it  presented?  " God  be  merciful  to> 
me  a  sinner."  Did  the  publican  ever  think  about  going  to  the  priest  to  ask  for 
mercy,  and  confessing  his  sins?  The  thought  may  have  crossed  his  mind,  but  his 
sin  was  too  great  a  weight  upon  his  conscience  to  be  relieved  in  any  such  way,  so 
fie  very  soon  dismissed  the  idea.  "  No,"  saith  he,  "  I  feel  that  my  sin  is  of  such  a 
character  that  none  but  God  can  take  it  away;  and  even  if  it  were  right  for  me  to- 
go  and  make  the  confession  to  my  fellow  creature,  yet  I  should  think  it  must  be 
utterly  unavailing  in  my  case,  for  my  disease  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  none  but  an 
Almighty  Physician  ever  can  remove  it."  So  he  directs  his  confession  and  hi* 
prayer  to  one  place,  and  to  one  alone — "God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  And 
you  will  note  in  this  confession  to  God,  that  it  was  secret :  all  that  you  can 
hear  of  his  confession  is  just  that  one  word — "a  sinner."  Do  you  suppose  that 
was  all  he  confessed?  No,  beloved,  I  believe  that  long  before  this,  the  publican  had 
made  a  confession  of  all  his  sins  privately,  upon  his  knees  in  his  own  house  before 
God.  But  now,  in  God's  house,  all  he  has  to  say  tor  man  to  hear,  is — "  I  am  a  sinner  ** 

410 


CONFESSION    AND    ABSOLUTION. 

And  1  counsel  you,  if  ever  you  make  a  confession  before  man,  let  it  be  a  general  one 
but  never  a  particular  one.  You  ought  to  confess  often  to  your  fellow  creatures, 
that  you  have  been  a  sinner,  but  to  tell  to  any  man  in  what  respect  you  have  been 
a  sinner,  is  but  to  sin  over  again,  and  to  help  your  fellow  creature  to  transgress. 
How  filthy  must  be  the  soul  of  that  priest  who  makes  his  ear  a  common  sewer  tor 
the  filth  of  other  men's  hearts.  I  cannot  imagine  even  the  devil  to  be  more 
depraved,  than  the  man  who  spends  his  time  in  sitting  with  his  ear  against  the  lip» 
of  men  and  women,  who,  if  they  do  truly  confess,  must  make  him  an  adept  in 
every  vice,  and  school  him  in  iniquities  that  he  otherwise  never  could  have  known. 
Oh,  I  charge  you  never  pollute  your  fellow  creature;  keep  your  sin  to  yourself, 
and  to  your  God;  He  cannot  be  polluted  by  your  iniquity;  make  a  plain  and  full 
confession  of  it  before  him;  but  to  your  fellow  creature,  add  nothing  to  the  general 
confession— "I  am  a  sinner!" 

This  confession  which  he  made  before  God,  was  spontaneous.  There  was  no  question 
put  to  this  man  as  to  whether  he  were  a  sinner  or  no;  as  to  whether  he  had  broken 
the  seventh  commandment,  or  the  eighth,  or  the  ninth,  or  the  tenth ;  no,  his  heart  was 
full  of  penitence,  and  it  melted  out  in  this  breathing— "God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 
They  tell  us  that  some  people  never  can  make  a  full  confession,  except  a  priest 
helps  them  by  questions.  My  dear  friends,  the  very  excellence  of  penitence  is  lost, 
and  its  spell  broken,  if  there  be  a  question  asked:  the  confession  is  not  true  and  real 
unless  it  be  spontaneous.  The  man  cannot  have  felt  the  weight  of  sin,  who  wants 
somebody  to  tell  him  what  his  sins  are.  Can  you  imagine  any  man  with  a  burden  on 
his  back,  who,  before  he  groaned  under  it,  wanted  to  be  told  that  he  had  got  one  there? 
Surely  not.  The  man  groans  under  it,  and  he  does  not  want  to  be  told — "There  il 
is  on  your  back,"  he  knows  it  is  there.  And  if,  by  the  questioning  of  a  priest,  a 
full  and  thorough  confession  could  be  drawn  from  any  man  or  woman,  it  would  be 
totally  useless,  totally  vain  before  God,  because  it  is  not  spontaneous.  We  must 
confess  our  sins,  because  we  cannot  help  confessing  them;  it  must  come  out,  because 
we  cannot  keep  it  in;  like  fire  in  the  bones,  it  seems  as  if  it  would  melt  our  very 
spirits,  unless  we  gave  vent  to  the  groaning  of  our  confession  before  the  throne  of 
God.  See  this  publican;  you  cannot  hear  the  abject  full  confession  that  he  makes; 
ail  that  you  can  hear  is  his  simple  acknowledgement  that  he  is  a  sinner;  but  that 
comes  spontaneously  from  his  lips;  God  himself  has  not  to  ask  him  the  quesstionr 
but  he  comes  before  the  throne,  and  freely  surrenders  himself  up  to  the  hands  of 
Almighty  Justice,  confessing  that  he  is  a  rebel  and  a  sinner.  That  is  the  first 
thing  we  have  to  note  in  his  confession — that  he  made  it  to  God  secretly  and 
spontaneously;  and  all  he  said  openly  was  that  he  was  '•  a  sinner." 

Again:  what  did  he  confer?  He  confessed,  as  our  text  tells  us,  that  he  was  a 
sinner.  Now,  how  suitable  is  this  prayer  for  us!  For  is  there  a  lip  here  present 
that  this  confession  will  not  suit — "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner?"  Do  you- 
say, — "the  prayer  will  suit  the  harlot,  when, after  a  life  of  sin,  rottenness  is  in  her 
bones,  and  she  is  dying  in  despair — that  prayer  suits  her  lips?"  Ay,  but  my  friendr 
it  will  suit  thv  lips" and  mine  too.  If  thou  icnowest  thine  heart,  and  I  know  mine,, 
the  prayer  that  will  suit  her  will  suit  us  also.  You  have  never  committed  the  sins- 
which  the  Pharisee  disowned;  you  have  neither  been  extortionate,  nor  unjust,  nor 
an  adulterer;  you  have  never  been  even  as  the  publican;  but  nevertheless  the 
word  "sinner"  will  still  apply  to  you;  and  you  will  feel  it  to  be  so  if  you  are  in  a 
right  condition.  Remember  how  much  you  have  sinned  against  light.  It  is  true  the 
harlot  hath  sinned  more  openly  than  you.  but  had  she  such  light  as  you  have  had  ? 
Do  you  think  she  had  such  an  early  education  and  such  training  as  you  have 
received?  Did  she  ever  receive  such  checkings  of  conscience  and  such  guarding* 
of  providence,  as  those  which  have  watched  over  your  career?  This  much  I  must 
confess  for  myself— I  do,  and  must  feel  a  peculiar  heinousness  in  my  own  sin,  for  I 
sin  against  light,  against  conscience,  and  more,  against  the  love  of  God  received, 
and  against  the  mercy  of  God  promised.  Come  forward,  thou  greatest  among 
saints,  and  answer  this  question, — dost  not  this  prayer  suit  thee?  I  hear  thee 
answer,  without  one  moment's  pause— "Ay,  it  suits  me  now;  and  until  I  die.  my 
quivering  lips  must  often  repeat  the  petition,  '  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me  a  sinner.'  " 
Men  and  brethren,  1  beseech  you  use  this  prayer  to-day,  for  it  must  suit  you  all. 
Merchant,  hast  thou  no  sins  of  business  to  confess?  Woman,  hast  thou  no 
household  sins  to  acknowledge?  C....d  of  many  prayers,  hast  thou  no  offence 
against  father  and  mother  to  confess?  Have  we"  loved  the  Lord  our  God  with  all 
our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  strength;  and  have  we  each  loved  our 

441 


CONFESSION   AND   ABSOLUTION. 

tu  ighbour  as  ourself.  Oh,  let  us  close  our  lips  as  to  any  boasting,  and  when  we 
open  them,  let  these  be  the  first  words  that  escape  from  them,  "  I  have  sinned, 
•O  Lord;  I  have  broken  thy  commandments;  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me  a  sinner." 
But  mark,  is  it  not  a  strange  thing  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  teach  a  man  to 
plead  his  sinnership  before  the  throne  of  God?  One  would  think  that  when  we 
come  before  God  we  should  try  to  talk  a  little  of  our  virtues.  Who  would  suppose 
that  when  a  man  was  asking  for  mercy  he  would  say  of  himself,  "I  am  a  sinner?" 
Why  surely  reason  would  prompt  him  to  say,  "Lord  have  mercy  upon  me;  there  is 
some  good  point  about  me:  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me;  I  am  not  worse  than  my 
neighbours:  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me;  I  will  try  to  be  better."  Is  it  not  against 
reason,  is  it  not  marvellously  above  reason,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  teach  a  man 
to  urge  at  the  throne  of  grace,  that  which  seems  to  be  against  his  plea,  the  fact  that 
he  is  a  sinner?  And  yet,  dear  brethren,  if  you  and  I  want  to  be  heard,  we  must  come 
to  Christ  as  sinners.  Do  not  let  us  attempt  to  make  ourselves  better  than  we  are. 
When  we  come  to  God's  throne,  let  us  not  for  one  moment  seek  to  gather  any  of 
the  false  jewels  of  our  pretended  virtues;  rags  are  the  garments  of  sinners.  Con 
fession  is  the  only  music  that  must  come  from  our  lips;  "God  be  merciful  to 
ME — a  sinner; "  that  must  be  the  only  character  in  which  I  can  pray  to 
God.  Now,  are  there  not  many  here  who  feel  that  they  are  sinners,  and  are 
groaning,  sighing,  and  lamenting,  because  the  weight  of  sin  lies  on  their  conscience? 
Brother,  I  am  glad  thou  feelest  thyself  to  be  a  sinner,  for  thou  hast  the  key  of  the 
kingdom  in  thy  hands.  Thy  sense  of  sinnership  is  thy  only  title  to  mercy. 
Come,  I  beseech  thee,  just  as  thou  art — thy  nakedness  is  thy  only  claim  on 
heaven's  wardrobe;  thy  hunger  is  thy  only  claim  on  heaven's  granaries;  thy  povert} 
is  thy  only  claim  on  heaven's  eternal  riches.  Come  just  as  thou  art,  with  nothing 
of  thine  own,  except  thy  sinfulness,  and  plead  that  before  the  throne — "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  This  is  what  this  man  confessed,  that  he  was  a  sinner, 
and  he  pleaded  it,  making  the  burden  of  his  confession  to  be  the  matter  of  his  plea 
before  God. 

Now  again,  how  does  he  come?  What  is  the  posture  that  he  assumes?  The  first 
thing  I  would  have  you  notice  is  that  he  "  stood  afar  off."  What  did  lie  do  that 
for?  Was  it  not  because  he  felt  hi :r self  a  separated  man?  VVre  have 
often  made  general  confessions  in  the  temple,  but  there  never  was  a  confession 
accepted,  except  it  was  particular,  personal,  and  heartfelt.  There  were  the  people 
gathered  together  for  the  accustomed  service  of  worship;  they  join  in  a  psalm  of 
yraise,  but  the  poor  publican  stood  far  away  from  them.  Anon,  they  unite  in 
ihe  order  of  prayer,  still  he  could  not  go  near  them.  No,  he  was  come  there 
for  himself,  and  he  must  stand  by  himself.  Like  the  wounded  hart  that  seeks 
the  deepest  glades  of  the  forest  where  it  may  bleed  and  die  alone  in  profound  soli 
tude,  so  did  this  poor  publican  seem  to  feel  he  must  be  alone.  You  notice  he  does 
not  say  anything  about  other  people  in  his  prayer.  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,"  he 
•says.  He  does  not  say  "  one  of  a  company  of  sinners,"  but  "a  sinner,"  as  if 
there  were  not  another  sinner  in  all  the  world.  Mark  this,  my  hearer,  that  thou 
must  feel  thyself  solitary  and  alone,  before  thou  canst  ever  pray  this  prayer 
acceptably.  Has  the  Lord  ever  picked  thee  out  in  a  congregation?  Has  it  seemed 
to  you  in  this  Hall  as  if  there  were  a  great  black  wall  round  about  you,  and  you 
were  closed  in  with  the  preacher  and  with  your  God,  and  as  if  every  shaft  from 
the  preacher's  bow  was  levelled  at  yon,  and  every  threatening  meant  for  you,  and 
every  solemn  upbraiding  was  an  upbraiding  for  you  f  If  thou  hast  felt  this,  I 
will  congratulate  thee.  No  man  ever  prayed  this  prayer  aright  unless  he  prayed 
alone;  unless  lie  said  "God  be  merciful  to  me"  as  a  solitary,  lonely  sinner.  "The 
publican  stood  afar  off." 

Note  the  next  thing.  "He  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven." 
That  was  because  he  dare  not,  not  because  he  would  not;  he  would  have  done  it 
if  he  dared.  How  remarkable  it  is  that  repentance  takes  all  the  daring  out  of  men. 
We  have  seen  fellows  very  dare-devils  before  they  were  touched  by  sovereign  grace, 
who  have  become  afterwards,  the  most  trembling  and  conscientious  men  with  the 
tenderest  conscience  that  one  could  imagine.  Men  who  were  careless,  bragging  and 
defying  God,  have  become  as  humble  as  little  children,  and  even  afraid  to  lift  their 
•eyes  to  heaven,  though  once  they  sent  their  oaths  and  curses  there.  But  why 
•did  he  not  dare  to  lift  his  eyes  up?  It  was  because  he  was  dejected  in  his  "  spirit,"  so 
oppressed  and  burdened  that  he  could  not  look  up.  Is  that  thy  case,  my  friend, 
this  morning  ?  Are  you  afraid  to  pray  ?  Do  you  feel  as  if  you  could  not  hope 

4  It 


CONFESSION    AND   ABSOLUTION. 

that  God  would  have  mercy  on  you  ;  as  if  the  least  gleam  of  hope  was  more  light 
than  vou  could  possibly  bear  ;  as  if  your  eyes  were  so  used  to  the  darkness 
of  doubt  and  despondency,  that  even  one  stolen  ray  seemed  to  be  too  much  for  your 
poor  weak  vision?  Ah  !  well,  fear  not,  for  happy  shall  it  be  for  thee;  thou  art 
only  following  the  publican  in  his  sad  experience  now,  and  the  Lord  who  helps 
thee  to  follow  him  in  the  confession,  shall  help  thee  to  rejoice  with  him  in  the 
absolution. 

Note  what  else  he  did.  He  smote  upon  his  breast.  He  was  a  good  theologian  ; 
he  was  a  real  doctor  of  divinity.  What  did  he  smite  his  breast  for  ?  Because  he 
knew  where  the  mischief  lay — in  his  breast.  He  did  not  smite  upon  his  brow  as 
sor.ie  men  do  when  they  are  perplexed,  as  if  the  mistake  were  in  their  understand 
ing.  Many  a  man  will  blame  his  understanding,  while  he  will  not  blame  his  heart, 
and  say,  "  Well,  I  have  made  a  mistake;  1  have  certainly  been  doing  wrong,  but  I 
am  a  good-hearted  fellow  at  the  bottom."  This  man  knew  where  the  mischief  lay, 
and  he  smote  the  right  place. 

"  Here  on  my  heart  the  burden  lies." 

He  smote  upon  his  breast  as  if  he  were  angry  with  himself.  He  seemed  to  say,  '*  Oh  I 
that  I  could  smite  thee,  my  ungrateful  heart,  the  harder,  that  thou  hast  loved  sin 
rather  than  God."  He  did  not  do  penance,  and  yet  it  was  a  kind  of  penance 
upon  himself  when  he  smote  his  breast  again  and  again,  and  cried  "Alas!  alas!  woe 
is  me  that  I  should  ever  have  sinned  against  my  God — "  God  be  merciful  to 
a  sinner."  Now,  can  you  come  to  God  like  this,  my  dear  friend  ?  Oh,  let  us 
all  draw  near  to  God  in  this  fashion.  Thou  hast  enough,  my  brother,  to  make 
thee  stand  alone  for  there  have  been  sins  in  which  thou  and  I  have  stood  each  of  u« 
in  solitary  guilt.  There  are  iniquities  known  only  to  ourselves,  which  we  never  told 
to  the  partner  of  our  own  bosom,  not  to  our  own  parents  or  brothers,  nor  yet  to  the 
friend  with  whom  we  took  sweet  counsel.  If  we  have  sinned  thus  alone,  let  us  go  to 
our  chambers,  and  confess  alone,  the  husband  apart,  and  the  wife  apart,  the  lather 
apart,  and  the  child  apart.  Let  us  each  one  wail  for  himself.  Men  and  brethren,  leave 
off  to  accuse  one  another.  Cease  from  the  lickerings  of  your  censoriousness,  and  from 
the  slanders  of  your  envy.  Rebuke  yourselves  and  not  your  fellows,  llend  your  own 
hearts,  and  not  the  reputation  of  your  neighbours.  Come,  let  each  man  now  look  to  his 
own  case,  and  not  to  the  case  ofanother;  let  each  cry,  •'  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me,  as 
here  I  stand  alone,  a  sinner."  And  hast  thou  not  good  reason  to  cast  down  thine  eyes  ? 
Does  it  not  seem  sometimes  too  much  for  us  ever  to  look  to  heaven  again.  We  have 
blasphemed  God,  some  of  us,  and  even  imprecated  curses  on  our  own  limbs  and 
eyes  ;  and  when  those  things  come  back  to  our  memory  we  may  well  be  ashamed  to 
look  up.  Or  if  we  have  been  preserved  from  the  crime  of  open  blasphemy — 
how  often  have  you  and  I  forgotten  God!  how  often  have  we  neglected  prayer! 
how  have  we  twoken  his  Sabbaths  and  left  his  Bible  unread  !  Surely  these  things, 
as  they  flash  across  our  memory,  might  constrain  us  to  feel  that  we  cannot  lift  up 
so  much  as  our  eyes  towards  heaven.  And  as  for  smiting  on  our  breast,  what  man 
is  there  among  us  that  need  not  do  it  ?  Let  us  be  angry  with  ourselves,  because 
we  have  provoked  God  to  be  angry  with  us.  Let  us  be  in  wrath  with  the  sins  that 
have  brought  ruin  upon  our  souls;  let  us  drag  the  traitors  out,  and  put  them  at  once 
to  a  summary  death;  they  deserve  it  well;  they  have  been  our  ruin;  let  us  be  their 
destruction.  He  smote  upon  his  breast  and  said,  "  God,  be  merciful  unto  nie  a 
sinner." 

There  is  one  other  feature  in  this  man's  prayer,  which  you  must  not  overlook. 
What  reason  had  he  to  expect  that  God  would  have  any  mercy  upon  him  ?  The  Greek 
explains  more  to  us  than  the  English  does;  and  the  original  word  here  might  be 
translated — "  Godbe  propitiated  to  me  a  sinner."  1  here  is  in  the  Greek  word  a  distinct 
reference  to  the  doctrine  of  atonement.  It  is  not  the  Unitarian's  prayer — "God  be 
merciful  to  me;"  it  is  more  than  that — it  is  the  Christian's  prayer,  "God  be 
propitiated  towards  me,  a  sinner."  There  is,  I  repeat  it,  a  distinct  appeal  to  the 
atonement  and  the  mercy-seat  in  this  short  prayer.  Friend,  if  we  would  come 
before  God  with  our  confessions,  we  must  take  care  that  we  plead  the  blood  of 
Christ.  There  is  no  hope  for  a  poor  sinner  apart  from  the  cross  of  Jesus.  We 
may  cry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,"  but  the  prayer  can  never  be  answered- 
apart  from  the  victim  offered,  the  Lamb  slain  from  before  the  foundation  oi 
the  world.  When  thou  hast  thine  eye  upon  the  mercy-seat,  take  care  to  havt 

41* 


CONFESSION    AND    ABSOLUTION. 

thine  eye  upon  the  cross  too.  Remember  that  the  cross  is,  after  all,  the  mercy- 
seat;  that  mercy  never  was  enthroned,  until  she  did  han-g  upon  the  cross  crowned  with 
thorns.  If  thou  wouldst  find  pardon,  go  to  dark  Gethsemane,  and  see  thy  Redeemer 
sweating,  in  deep  anguish,  gouts  of  gore.  If  thou  wouldst  have  peace  of  conscience, 
go  to  Gabbatha,  the  pavement,  and  see  thy  Saviour's  back  flooded  with  a  stream  of 
blood.  If  thou  wouldst  have  the  last  best  rest  to  thy  conscience,  go  to  Golgotha; 
see  the  murdered  victim  as  he  hangs  upon  the  cross,  with  hands  and  feet  and  side 
all  pierced,  as  every  wound  is  gaping  wide  with  misery  extreme.  There  can  be  no 
hope  for  mercy  apart  from  the  victim  offered — even  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God. 
Oh,  come;  let  us  one  and  all  approach  the  mercy-seat,  and  plead  the  blood.  Let  us 
each  go  and  say,  "Father,  I  have  sinned;  but  have  mercy  upon  me,  through  thy 
Son."  Come,  drunkard,  give  me  thy  hand;  we  will  go  together.  Harlot,  give  me  thy 
hand  too;  and  let  us  likewise  approach  the  throne.  And  you,  professing  Christians, 
come  ye  also,  be  not  ashamed  of  your  company.  Let  us  come  before  his  presence 
with  many  tears,  none  of  us  accusing  our  fellows,  but  each  one  accusing  himself; 
and  let  us  plead  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  speaketh  peace  and  pardon  to- 
every  troubled  conscience. 

Careless  man,  I  have  a  word  with  thee  before  I  have  done  on  this  point.  You 
say, "  Well,  that  is  a  good  prayer,  certainly,  for  a  m;m  who  is  dying.  When  a  poor 
fellow  has  the  cholera,  and  sees  black  death  staring  him  in  the  face,  or  when  he  i& 
terrified  and  thunderstruck  in  the  time  of  storm,  or  when  he  findt  himself  amidst 
the  terrible  confusion  and  alarm  of  a  perilous  catastrophe  or  a  sudden  accident, 
while  drawing  near  to  the  gates  of  death,  it  is  only  right  that  he  should  say.  Lord,, 
have  mercy  upon  me."  Ah,  friend,  the  prayer  must  be  suitable  to  you  then,  if 
you  are  a  dying  man;  it  must  be  suitable  to  you,  for  you  know  not  how  near 
you  are  to  the  borders  of  the  grave.  Oh,  if  thou  didst  but  understand  the  frailty 
of  life,  and  the  slipperiness  of  that  poor  prop  on  which  thou  art  resting,  thou  wouldst 
say,  "  Alas  for  my  soul !  if  the  prayer  will  suit  me  dying,  it  must  suit  me  now;  for 
I  am  dying,  even  this  day,  and  know  not  when  I  may  come  to  the  last  gasp." 
"Oh,"  says  one,  "I  think  it  will  suit  a  man  that  has  been  a  very  great  sinner. >r 
Correct,  my  friend,  and  therefore,  if  you  knew  yourself,  it  would  suit  you.  You 
are  quite  correct  in  saying,  that  it  won't  suit  any  but  great  sinners;  and  if  you 
don't  feel  yourself  to  be  a  great  sinner,  I  know  you  will  never  pray  it.  But  there 
are  some  here  that  feel  themselves  to  be  what  you  ought  to  feel  and  know  that  you 
are.  Such  will,  constrained  by  grace,  use  the  prayer  with  an  emphasis  this  morning, 
putting  a  tear  upon  each  letter,  and  a  sigh  upon  each  syllable,  as  they  cry,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner."  But  mark,  my  friend;  thou  mayest  smile  contempt 
uously  on  the  man  that  makes  this  confession,  but  he  shall  go  from  this  house 
justified,  while  thou  shalt  go  away  still  in  thy  sins,  without  a  hope,  without  a  ray 
of  joy  to  cheer  thy  unchastened  spirit. 

II.  Having  thus  briefly  described  this  confession,  I  comemore  briefly  still  to 
notice  the  ABSOLUTION  which  God  gave.  Absolution  from  the  lips  of  man  I  do 
believe  is  little  short  ol'  blasphemy.  There  is  in  the  Prayer  Book  of  the  Church 
of  England  an  absolution  which  is  essentially  Popish,  which  I  should  think  must  be 
almost  a  verbatim  extract  from  the  Romish  missal.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that 
there  was  never  anything  more  blasphemous  printed  in  Holywell  Street,  than  the 
absolution  that  is  to  be  pronounced  by  a  clergyman  over  a  dying  man;  and  it  is 
positively  frightful  to  think  that  any  persons  calling  themselves  Christians  should 
rest  easy  in  a  church  until  they  have  done  their  utmost  to  get  that  most  excellent 
book  thoroughly  reformed  and  revised,  and  to  get  the  Popery  purged  out  of  it» 
But  there  is  such  a  thing  as  absolution,  my  friends,  and  the  publican  received  it. 
"He  went  to  his  house  justified  rather  than  the  other."  The  other  had  nought  of 
peace  revealed  to  his  heart ;  this  poor  man  had  all,  and  he  went  to  his  house  justified.. 
It  does  not  say  that  he  went  to  his  house,  having  eased  his  mind;  that  is  true,  but 
more:  he  went  to  his  house  "justified."  What  does  that  mean?  it  so  happen* 
that  the  Greek  word  here  used  is  the  one  which  the  apostle  Paul  always  employs- 
to  set  out  the  great  doctrine  of  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ — even  the  righteous 
ness  which  is  of  God  by  faith.  The  fact  is,  that  the  moment  the  man  prayed  the 
prayer,  every  sin  he  had  ever  done  was  blotted  out  of  God's  book,  so  that  it  did 
not  stand  on  the  record  against  him;  and  more,  the  moment  that  prayer  was 
heard  in  heaven,  the  man  was  reckoned  to  be  a  righteous  man.  All  that  Christ 
did  for  him  was  cast  about  his  shoulders  to  be  the  robe  of  his  beauty,  that  moment 
all  the  guilt  that  he  had  ever  committed  himself  was  washed  entirely  away  and 

414 


OONFKSSION    AND    ABSOLUTION. 

lost  for  ever.  When  a  sinner  believes  in  Christ,  his  sins  positively  cease  to  be, 
and  what  is  more  wonderful  they  all  cease  to  be,  as  Kent  says  in  those  well  known 
lines — 

'*  Here's  pardon  for  transgressions  past, 

It  matters  not  how  black  their  cast, 

And.  O  my  soul  with  wonder  view, 

For  sins  to  come  here's  pardon  too." 

They  are  all  swept  away  in  one  solitary  instant;  the  crimes  of  many  years ;  extor 
tions,  adulteries,  or  even  murder,  wiped  away  in  an  instant;  for  you  will  notice 
the  absolution  was  instantaneously  given.  God  did  not  say  to  the  man — "  Now  you 
must  go  and  perform  some  good  works,  and  then  I  will  give  you  absolution."  Ke 
did  not  say  as  the  Pope  does,  "  Now  you  must  swelter  awhile  in  the  fires  of  Purga 
tory,  and  then  I  will  let  you  out."  No,  he  justified  him  there  and  then ;  the  pardon 
was  given  as  soon  as  the  sin  was  confessed.  "Go,  my  son,  in  peace;  I  have  not  a 
charge  against  thee;  thou  art  a  sinner  in  thine  own  estimation,  but  thou  art  none  in 
mine;  I  have  taken  all  thy  sins  away,  and  cast  them  into  the  depth  of  the  sea,  and 
they  shall  be  mentioned  against  thee  no  more  for  ever."  Can  you  tell  what  a  happy 
man  the  publican  was,  when  all  in  a  moment  he  was  changed?  If  you  may  reverse 
the  figure  used  by  Milton,  he  seemed  himself  to  have  been  a  loathsome  toad,  but  the 
touch  of  the  Father's  mercy  made  him  rise  to  angelic  brightness  and  delight;  and  lie 
went  out  of  that  house  with  his  eye  upward,  no  longer  afraid.  Instead  of  the  groan 
that  was  on  his  heart,  he  had  a  song  upon  his  lip.  He  no  longer  walked  alone;  lie 
sought  out  the  godly  and  he  said,  "Come  and  hear,  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I  will 
tell  you  what  he  has  done  for  my  soul."  He  did  not  smite  upon  his  breast,  but 
he  went  home  to  get  down  his  harp,  and  play  upon  the  strings,  and  praise  his 
God.  You  would  not  have  known  that  he  was  the  same  man,  if  you  had  seen  him 
going  out;  and  all  that  was  done  in  a  minute.  "But,"  says  one,  " do  you  think 
he  knew  for  certain  that  all  his  sins  were  forgiven?  Can  a  man  know  that?" 
Certainly  he  can.  And  there  be  some  here  that  can  bear  witness  that  this  is  true. 
They  have  known  it  themselves.  The  pardon  which  is  sealed  in  heaven  is  re-sealed 
in  our  own  conscience.  The  mercy  which  is  recorded  above  is  made  to  shed  its 
light  into  the  darkness  ot  our  hearts.  Yes,  a  man  may  know  on  earth  that  his 
•ins  are  forgiven,  and  may  be  as  sure  that  he  is  a  pardoned  man  as  he  is  of  his 
own  existence.  And  now  I  hear  a  cry  from  some  one  saying,  "And  may  I  be 
pardoned  this  morning?  and  may  I  know  that  I  am  pardoned?  May  I  be  so 
pardoned  that  all  shall  be  forgotten — I  who  have  been  a  drunkard,  a  swearer,  or 
what  not?  May  I  have  all  my  transgressions  washed  away?  May  I  be  made  sure 
of  heaven,  and  all  that  in  a  moment?"  Yes,  my  friend,  if  thou  belie  vest  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  if  thou  wilt  stand  where  thou  art,  and  just  breathe  this  prayer  out, 
"Lord,  have  mercy!  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,  through  the  blood  of  Christ." 
I  tell  thee  man,  God  never  did  deny  that  prayer  yet;  if  it  came  out  of  honest  lips 
he  never  shut  the  gates  of  mercy  on  it.  It  is  a  solemn  litany  that  shall  be  used 
as  long  as  time  shall  last,  and  it  shall  pierce  the  ears  of  God  as  long  as  there  is  a 
sinner  to  use  it  Come,  be  not  afraid,  I  beseech  you,  use  the  prayer  before  you 
leave  this  Hall.  Stand  where  you  are;  endeavour  to  realize  that  you  are  all  alone, 
and  if  you  feel  that  you  are  guilty,  now  let  the  prayer  ascend.  Oh,  what  a 
marvellous  thing,  it  from  the  thousands  of  hearts  here  present,  so  many  thousand 
prayers  might  go  up  to  God!  Surely  the  angels  themselves  never  had  such  a  day 
in  Paradise,  as  they  would  have  to-day,  if  every  one  of  us  could  unfeignedly  make 
that  confession.  Some  are  doing  it;  1  know  they  are;  God  is  helping  them.  And 
sinner,  do  you  stay  away?  You,  who  have  most  need  to  come,  do  you  refuse  to 
join  with  us.  Come,  brother  come.  You  say  you  are  too  vile.  No,  brother,  you 
cannot  be  too  vile  to  say,  "  God  be  merciful  to  we"  Perhaps  you  are  no  viler 
than  we  are;  at  any  rate,  this  we  can  say — we  feel  ourselves  to  be  viler  than  you, 
and  we  want  you  to  pray  the  same  prayer  that  we  have  prayed.  "  Ah,"  says  one, 
•*  I  cannot;  my  heart  won't  yield  to  that;  I  cannot."  But  friend,  if  God  is  ready 
to  have  mercy  upon  thee,  thine  must  be  a  hard  heart,  if  it  is  not  ready  to  receive 
his  mercy.  Spirit  of  God,  breathe  on  the  hard  heart,  and  melt  it  now !  Help  the  man 
who  feels  that  carelessness  is  overcoming  him — help  him  to  get  rid  of  it  from  this 
hour.  You  are  struggling  against  it;  you  are  saying,  "  Would  to  God  I  could  pray 
that  I  could  go  back  to  be  a  boy  or  a  child  again,  and  then  I  could;  but  I 
1iave  got  hardened  and  grown  grey  in  sin,  and  prayer  would  be  hypocrisy 


CONFESSION   AND   ABSOLUTION. 

in  me.  No,  brother,  no,  it  would  not.  If  thou  canst  but  cry  it  from  thy 
heart,  I  beseech  thee  say  it.  Many  a  man  thinks  he  is  a  hypocrite,  when 
he  is  not,  and  is  afraid  that  lie  is  not  sincere,  when  his  very  fear  is  a 
proof  ot  his  sincerity.  "But,"  says  one,  "I  have  no  redeeming  trait  in  my 
character  at  alt."  I  am  glad  you  think  so;  still  you  may  use  the  prayer,  "God  be 
merciful  to  me."  "But  it  will  be  a  useless  prayer," says  one.  My  brother,  I  assure 
thee,  not  in  my  own  name,  but  in  the  name  of  God,  my  Father  and  your  Father,  it 
shall  not  be  a  useless  prayer.  As  sure  as  God  is  God,  him  that  cometh  unto 
Christ  he  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.  Come  with  me  now,  I  beseech  thee;  tarry  no 
longer;  the  bowels  of  God  are  yearning  over  thee.  Thou  art  his  child,  and  he  will 
not  give  thee  up.  Thou  hast  run  from  him  these  many  years,  but  he  has  never 
forgotten  thee;  thou  hast  resisted  all  his  warnings  until  now,  and  he  is  almost 
weary,  but  still  he  has  said  concerning  thee,  "  How  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ; 
how  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim?  Mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  repentings 
are  kindled  together." 

"  Come  humbled  sinner,  in  whose  breast 

A  thousand  thoughts  revolve; 
Come  with  thy  guilt  and  fear  oppressed, 
And  make  this  last  resolve: 

I'll  go  to  Jesus;  though  my  kin 

Hath  like  a  mountain  rose, 
I  know  his  courts;  I'll  enter  in, 

Whatever  may  oppose. 

Prostrate  I'll  lie  before  his  face, 

And  there  my  sins  confess; 
I'll  tell  him  I'm  a  wretch  undone, 

Without  his  sov'reign  grace." 

Go  home  to  your  houses:  let  everyone — preacher,  deacon,  people,  ye  of  the  church, 
and  ye  of  the  world,  everyone  of  you,  go  home,  and  ere  you  feast  your  bodies,  pour 
out  your  hearts  before  God,  and  let  this  one  cry  go  up  from  all  our  lips,  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

I  pause.     Bear  with  me. 

I  must  detain  you  a  few  moments.  Let  us  use  this  prayer  as  our  own  now.  Oh 
that  it  might  come  up  before  the  Lord  at  this  time  as  the  earnest  supplication  of 
every  heart  in  this  assembly !  I  will  repeat  it, — not  as  a  text,  but  as  a  prayer, — 
as  my  own  prayer;  as  your  pra}Ter.  Will  each  one  of  you  take  it  personally  for 
himself?  Let  everyone,  I  entreat  you,  who  desires  to  offer  the  prayer,  and  can 
join  in  it,  utter  at  its  close  an  audible  "  Amen  ' 

Let  us  pray. 

"  GOD  -  BE  -  MERCIFUL  -  TO  -  ME  -  A  -  SINNER." 

[And  the  people  did  with  deep  solemnity  say"]     "  AMEN." 


P.S. — The  preacher  hopes  that  he  who  *°%ds  will  feel  constrained  most  solemnly 
to  do  likewise. 


THE  SERVANTS  AND  THE  POUNDS. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  APRIL  24TH,  1887,  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  A  certain  nobleman  went  into  a  far  country  to  receive  for  himself  a  kincrdom,  and 
to  return.  And  he  called  his  ten  servants,  and  delivered  them  ten  pounds,  and  said 
unto  them,  Occupy  till  I  come." — Luke  xix.  12,  13. 

WE  are  told  the  reason  for  the  Saviour's  delivering  this  parable  at  this 
particular  time.  He  was  going  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  ignorant  and 
enthusiastic  crowd  hoped  that  he  might  now  set  up  a  temporal  soverei.  nty. 
*'  They  thought  that  the  kingdom  of  God  should  immediately  appear." 
Their  minds  were  crowded  with  mistakes,  and  the  Saviour  would  set 
them  right  upon  this  matter.  To  banish  from  their  minds  the  idea  of 
a  Jewish  empire,  in  which  every  Hebrew  would  be  a  prince,  our  Lord 
told  them  this  story :  I  use  the  word  advisedly,  for  his  parable  was  also 
a  fact.  He  would  show  them  that  as  yet  they  were  not  to  he  partakers 
in  a  kingdom,  but  were  soon  to  be  waiters  for  an  absent  Lord  who  had 
gone  to  receive  a  kingdom,  and  to  retum.  In  his  absence  his  disciples 
were  to  be  in  the  position  of  servants  put  in  trust  with  property  while 
their  master  was  gone  far  away  to  receive  a  kingdom,  and  then  to  come 
again.  He  was  now  like  a  nobleman,  who  may  be  one  among  many 
citizens;  but  he  was  going  away  to  a  court  where  he  would  be  invested 
with  royal  authority,  and  he  would  come  back  a  king.  They  were  to  be 
put  in  trust  with  certain  pounds  till  he  should  return. 

I  confess  I  never  thoroughly  saw  the  meaning  of  this  parable  till  1 
was  directed  by  an  eminent  expositor  to  a  passage  in  Jos^phus,  which, 
if  it  be  not  the  key  of  it,  is  a  wonderfully  close  example  of  a  class  of 
facts  which,  no  doubt,  often  occurred  in  the  Roman  empire  in  our 
Saviour's  day.  Herod,  you  know,  was  king  over  Judaea  ;  but  he  was  only 
a  subordinate  king  under  the  Roman  emperor.  Caesar  at  Rome  made  and 
unmade  kings  at  his  pleasure.  When  Herod  died  he  was  followed  by  his 
son  Archelatis,  of  whom  we  read  in  Matthew's  account  of  our  Lord's 
infancy  that  when  Joseph  heard  that  Archelaus  was  king  in 
Judaea  in  the  room  of  his  father  Herod  he  was  afraid  to  go  thither. 
This  Archelaus  had  no  right  to  the  throne  till  he  obtained  the  sanction 
of  Caesar,  and  therefore  he  took  ship  with  certain  attendants,  and  went 
to  Rome,  which  in  those  days  was  a  far  country,  that  he  might  receive 
No.  1,960  44 


242  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  kingdom,  and  return.  While  he  was  on  the  way  his  citizens,  who 
hated  hun,  sent  an  ambassage  after  him,  so  has  the  Revised  Version 
correctlv  worded  it ;  and  this  ambassage  bore  this  message  to  Caesar  : — 
"  We  will  not  that  this  man  reijzn  over  us."  The  messengers  represented 
to  Caesar  that  Archelaus  was  not  fit  to  be  king  of  the  Jews.  Certain 
of  the  pleadings  are  recorded  in  Josephus,  and  they  show  that  barristers 
nineteen  hundred  years  a<j;o  pleaded  in  much  the  same  style  as  their 
brethren  of  to-day.  The  people  were  weary  of  the  Herods,  and  preferred 
anything  to  their  cruel  rule.  They  even  asked  that  Judaea  might  be 
come  a  Roman  province,  and  be  joined  to  Syria,  rather  than  they  should 
remain  under  the  hated  joke  of  the  Idumean  tyrants.  It  is  evident 
that  in  the  case  of  Archelans  his  citizens  hated  him,  and  said,  "  We  will 
not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  It  pleased  Cassar  to  divide  the 
kingdom '  and  to  put  Archelaus  on  the  throne  as  ethnarch,  or  a  ruler  with 
less  power  than  a  king.  When  he  returned  he  took  fierce  revenge  upon 
those  who  had  opposed  him,  and  rewarded  his  faithful  adherents  most 
liberally.  This  story  of  what  had  been  done  thirty  years  before  would, 
no  doubt,  rise  up  in  the  recollection  of  the  people  when  Jesus  spoke, 
for  Archelaus  ha-1  built  a  palace  for  himself  very  near  to  Jericho,  and  it 
may  be  that  under  the  walls  of  that  palace  the  Saviour  used  the  event 
as  the  basis  of  his  parable.  Those  who  lived  in  our  Lord's  day  must 
have  understood  his  allusions  to  current  facts  much  better  than  we  do 
who  live  nineteen  centuries  later.  The  providence  of  God  provided 
that  observant  Jew,  Josephus,  to  store  up  much  valuable  information 
for  us.  Read  the  passage  in  his  history,  and  you  will  see  that  even  the 
details  tally  with  this  parable.  There  is  the  story. 

The  Saviour,  without  excusing  Archelaus  or  commending  him  in  the 
least  degree,  simply  makes  his  goin^  to  Rome  an  illustration.  Here  is 
a  noble  personage  who  is  to  be  a  king ;  but  to  obtain  the  throne  he 
must  journey  to  the  distant  court  of  a  superior  power.  While  he  is 
going,  his  citizens  so  hate  him  that  they  send  an  ambassage  to  oppose 
his  claims ;  for  they  will  not  have  him  for  their  king.  However,  he  re 
ceives  the  kingdom,  and  returns  to  rule  it.  When  he  does  so,  he 
rewards  those  who  have  been  faithful  to  him,  and  he  punishes  with 
overwhelming  destruction  those  who  have  tried  to  prevent  his  reigning. 
There  is  the  story :  let  me  further  interpret  it. 

The  Saviour  likens  himself  to  a  nobleman.  He  was  here  on  earth 
a  man  among  men,  and  truly  a  nobleman  in  the  midst  of  his  fellow- 
citizens.  It  was  his  to  become  king,  king  of  all  the  earth  :  indeed,  ho 
•Js  such  by  nature  and  by  right,  but  he  must  first  go,  by  death,  resurrec 
tion,  and  ascension,  away  to  the  highest  courts,  and  there  from  the  great 
Lord  of  all  he  must  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom.  It  is  written,  "Ask 
of  me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance";  and 
therefore  Jesus  must  plead  his  claims  before  the  king,  and  win  his  suit. 
The  day  is  coming  when  he  will  return,  clothed  with  glory  and  honour, 
tc.  take  unto  himself  his  great  power  and  reign ;  for  he  must  reign  till 
all  enemies  are  put  under  his  feet.  When  he  comes  his  enemies  will  be 
destroyed,  and  his  faithful  servants  will  be  abundantly  rewarded. 

Let  us  now  draw  near  to  this  feast  of  divine  teaching.  May  the  Spirit 
of  God  help  us  to  gather  practical  lessons  from  this  paraMe! 

I.    First,  I  invite  you  to  notice  that  THERE  ARE  HERE  TWO  SETS 


THK   SERVANTS   AND   THE   POUNDS.  243 

OF  PERSONS.  We  see  the  enemies  who  would  not  have  this  man  to 
reign  over  them,  and  the  servants  who  had  to  trade  with  his  monej'. 
There  are  many  divisions  among  men  into  nationalities,  ranks,  offices, 
and  characters;  but,  after  all,  the  deep  divisions  will  always  be  two — 
the  enemies  and  the  servants  of  Christ  Jesus.  You  that  are  not  ser 
vants  are  enemies ;  you  that  are  not  enemies  must  take  care  that  yon 
are  servants.  I  find  no  class  of  persons  mentioned  in  the  parable  but 
these  two,  and  I  feel  certain  that  there  are  no  others  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.  You  are  all  either  enemies  or  servants  of  Jesus. 

Consider  the  enemies  !  The  person  hated  was  a  nobleman.  He  was 
a  man,  but  a  noble  man.  What  u  man  is  the  Lord  Jesus  !  Forgetting 
his  Godhead  for  the  moment,  regard  him  only  as  the  man  Christ  Jesus; 
and  what  a  man  !  I  need  not  dwell  upon  the  nobility  of  his  birth,  of 
the  seed  of  David ;  but  I  would  remind  you  of  the  nobility  of  his 
character,  for  that  is  where  true  nobility  resides.  In  this  respect  where 
is  there  nobility  to  be  compared  to  his  ?  Brothers,  it  would  be  difficult 
to  find  a  second  to  the  man  Christ  within  measurable  distance  of  him : 
even  those  who  copy  him  most  nearly  confess,  regretfully,  that  in  ID  any 
things  they  fall  short  of  his  glory.  There  was  nothing  petty,  mean,  or 
selfish  about  Jesus  of  Nazarer,h.  He  was  altogether  the  noble  man. 

He  deigned,  for  gracious  purposes,  to  become  a  citizen  amongst  others , 
for  since  we  read  of  his  being  anointed  above  his  fellows,  it  is  implied 
that  some  were  his  fellows.  He  was  a  man  among  men.  He  was  of  the 
society  of  carpenters  ;  he  was  also  free  of  the  company  of  itinerant 
preachers.  He  associated  with  men  of  the  sea,  with  men  that  handled 
the  net  and  the  oar.  He  went  in  and  out  among  the  peasantry,  and  in 
his  dress  and  style  of  living  there  was  nothing  to  distinguish  him  from 
the  rest  of  the  citizens.  Truly,  he  was  separate  from  them  by  his  holier 
character,  but  the  separation  was  not  caused  by  his  unwillingness  to 
come  down  to  them,  but  by  their  inability  to  go  up  to  him. 

The  citizens  hated  him  ;  but  they  hated  him  without  a  cause.  There 
is  always  some  cause  tor  dislike  in  us,  but  there  was  none  in  him.  In 
tone,  or  manner,  or  spirit,  the  best  give  some  cause  of  offence ;  but  in 
him  there  was  nothing  which  could  excuse  their  hate:  it  was  a  wanton 
rejection  of  the  fittest  to  reign. 

As  he  claimed  to  be  the  King  of  the  Jews,  they  especially  hated  his 
royalty,  saying,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us";  and  again, 
"  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar."  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not."  Yet,  my  brethren,  merely  regarding  Jesus  as  a  man, 
if  we  wanted  a  king,  he  ought  to  be  elected  by  the  universal  suffrages  of 
mankind,  openly  given  by  uplifted  hands  and  joyful  acclamations.  la 
triumphal  Mighty  Conqueror,  reign  for  ever!  Prince  of  the  kings  of 
the  earth,  lover  of  the  sons  of  men,  who  didst  for  our  sake  pour  out  thy 
precious  blood,  thou  deservest  to  be  king  of  all  I  The  most  kingly  of 
men  should  be  king  of  men.  Yet  they  hated  his  royal  claims,  and  this 
also  without  cause.  Which  of  them  had  he  oppressed  ?  What  revenue 
did  he  oxtort  from  the  people  ?  What  law  of  his  was  hard  or  cruel  ?  In 
what  case  did  he  ever  judge  unrighteously?  Yet  his  citizens  hat-d  him. 
There  is  that  same  hate  of  Christ  in  the  world  to-day.  Do  any  of  you 
nate  him  ?  "  No,"  say  you.  Yet  are  not  some  of  you  who  do  not 
oppose  him  treating  him  with  greater  contempt  than  if  vou  did  oppose 
31 


244  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

him  ?  You  pass  him  by  altogether,  he  is  not  in  all  your  thoughts ;  yon 
•%ct  as  if  he  were  not  worthy  even  to  be  opposed:  you  make  nothing  of 
iim.  He  is  not  among  the  objects  for  which  you  live.  Sometimes  you 
.nay  speak  with  a  partial  admiration  of  his  character;  but  earnest  ad 
miration  leads  to  imitation.  If  Jesus  be  a  Saviour,  what  worse  can  you 
do  to  him  than  to  refuse  to  be  saved  by  him  ?  I  charge  you  indifferent 
ones  with  being,  in  the  core  of  your  hearts,  his  worst  enemies.  Oh  that 
you  would  repent  of  this,  and  turn  unto  him,  for  he  is  coming  again; 
and  when  he  conies  he  will  say,  "  As  for  these  mine  enemies,  slay  them 
before  mine  eyes."  The  expression  is  full  of  terror.  To  be  slain  before 
the  eyes  of  injured  love  is  doubly  death.  The  Lord  by  his  grace 
deliver  us  from  so  dread  a  doom! 

The  other  set  of  persons  were  his  servants:  the  original  would  justify 
the  translation,  his  bond-servants.  Those  who  were  not  his  enemies 
were  his  faithful  servants.  I  suppose  that  the  nobleman  had  bought 
them  with  his  money,  or  that  they  had  been  born  in  his  house,  or  that 
they  had  willingly  bound  themselves  by  indentures  to  him.  When  I  said 
tint  these  were  only  his  slaves  you  inwardly  said,  "Then  you  that 
believe  in  Jesus  are  his  bond-servants."  Spare  us  not  even  the  harsher 
word  "  slaves."  We  were  never  free  till  we  came  under  bonds  to  Jesus,  and 
we  grow  in  free  iorn  as  we  yield  to  him.  Paul  said,  "  I  bear  in  my  body 
the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  as  if  the  hot  iron  oT  affliction  had  branded 
him  with  the  name  of  Christ.  Yes,  we  are  the  property  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  not  our  own.  We  cannot  somehow  find  words  which  will  in 
all  its  fulness  express  our  belonging  to  Jesus ;  we  wish  to  sink  into 
Ohrist,  and  to  become  as  nothing  for  his  sake.  Truly  he  hath  called  us 
friends,  but  we  call  ourselves  his  servants.  We  take  a  great  delight  in 
owning  him  as  Master:  like  David,  who  said,"  I  am  thy  servant";  and 
then  again,  "  I  acn  thy  servant";  and  then  again,  •'  and  the  son  of  thine 
handmaid.*'  He  was  born  a  servant,  born  of  a  mother  who  was  also  her 
self  a  servant.  After  all  this  he  added,  "  thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds." 
Servitude  to  Christ  is  perfect  freedom,  and  in  every  respect  we  have 
found  it  so.  We  never  expect  to  know  perfect  freedom  until  he  has 
brought  every  thought,  every  conception,  imagination,  desire,  into 
captivity  to  himself.  We  have  beea  bought  with  his  money,  and  we  cost 
him  dear.  We  have  also  been  born  in  his  house  by  a  second  birth,  and 
we  are  bound  to  him  by  indentures  which  we  have  gladly  signed  and 
sealed,  and  are  ready  to  sign  and  seal  again. 

*'  High  heaven,  that  heard  the  solemn  vow, 
That  vow  renew'd  shall  daily  hear : 
Till  in  life's  latest  hour  we  bow, 
And  bless  in  death  a  bond  so  dear." 

We  are  truly  thus  on  the  opposite  side  to  his  enemies,  for  we  are 
willingly  his  servants. 

I  have  thus  introduced  to  you  the  two  classes.  Before  we  go  any 
further,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  operate  upon  us,  to  make  us  discern  to 
which  of  these  two  we  belong!  If  we  are  enemies,  may  we  become 
servants  from  this  time  forth  ! 

II.  We  now  a-lvance  a  step  further,  and  notice  THE  ENGAGEMENTS 
OF  THESE  SERVANTS.  Their  lord  was  going  away,  and  he  left  his  ten 


THE   SERVANTS   AND  THE  POUNDS.  245 

servants  in  charge  with  a  little  capital,  with  which  they  were  to  trade 
for  him  till  he  returned.  He  did  not  tell  them  how  long  he  would  be 
awav,  perhaps  he  did  not  know  himself — I  mean  the  king  in  the  story: 
even  our  Master  says,  "  Of  that  day  and  hour  knovveth  no  man,  no, 
not  the  angels  of  heaven."  "I  am  going  away,"  he  said,  "you  are 
my  servants,  and  I  leave  you  as  my  servants  in  the  midst  of  my  enemies. 
Be  loyal  to  me;  and,  to  prove  your  faithful  ness,  continue  to  trade  in  my 
name.  I  shall  entrust  to  each  of  you  a  very  small  sum  of  money,  but 
it  will  keep  you  occupied,  and  your  trading  on  my  account  will  be  your 
daily  protest  that  you  are  loyal  to  me,  whatever  others  may  be." 

Notice,  fir^t,  that  this  was  honourable  work.  They  were  not  entrusted 
with  large  funds,  but  the  amount  was  enough  to  serve  as  a  test.  It  put 
them  upon  their  honour.  If  they  were  really  attached  to  their  master 
they  would  feel  that  he  had  placed  a  confidence  in  them  which  they 
must  justify.  Slaves  are  not  always  to  be  entrusted  with  money;  in 
fact,  the  tendency  of  bondage  has  been  always  to  take  away  from  men 
the  quality  of  trustworthiness :  our  bondage  to  Christ  has  the  opposite 
effect,  because  it  is  no  bondage  at  all.  These  servants  of  the  master 
were  treated  in  some  respect  as  partners,  they  were  to  have  fellowship 
with  him  in  his  property.  They  were  his  confidants  and  trustees. 
His  eye  was  not  watching  them,  for  he  had  gone  into  a  far  country,  and 
he  trusted  them  to  be  a  law  unto  themselves.  They  were  not  to  render 
a  daily  account,  but  to  be  left  alone  until  he  returned.  Now  that  is 
just  how  the  Master  has  treated  us:  he  has  put  us  in  trust  with  the 
gospel,  and  he  relies  upon  our  honour.  He  does  not  call  us  at  once  to  an 
audit,  for  he  is  not  here.  I  do  not  think  that  systems  of  church  govern 
ment  which  involve  a  measure  of  the  spy  system  are  at  all  after  our 
Lord's  mind.  If  Christians  are  what  they  ought  to  be,  they  can  be 
trusted :  they  are  a  law  unto  themselves.  The  Lord  puts  you  not  under 
certain  rules  and  regulations  so  as  to  ordain  that  you  shall  give  a  tenth, 
though  I  wish  you  did  give  as  much  at  least.  He  does  not  say,  "  You 
shall  subscribe  so  much  at  such  a  time,  and  work  in  such  a  way."  No; 
you  are  not  under  law,  but  under  grace.  If  you  love  your  Master  you 
will  soon  discover  what  to  do  for  him,  and  you  will  do  it  with  delight. 
The  Lord  does  not  lay  down  rigid  rules,  and  order  that  at  such  an  hour 
in  the  morning  you  must  begin  work,  and  that  you  must  work  on  for  so 
many  hours.  No,  he  says,  *'  Take  my  pound,  and  trade  therewith."  Our 
version,  "  Occupy  till  I  come,"  is  a  lumbering  Latin  way  of  saying, 
"  Trade  therewith  till  I  come."  The  Lord  has  put  us  on  the  footing  of 
confidence,  appealing  to  our  honour  and  love.  He  will  not  come  and 
look  after  us  to-day  or  to-morrow,  though  he  will  ultimately  have  a 
strict  reckoning  with  us.  Meanwhile  he  has  gone,  but  he  has  left  us 
here  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  to  show  his  enemies  that  he  has  some 
friends,  and  that  he  must  be  a  good  Master,  since  even  those  who  own 
themselves  to  be  his  vassals  rejoice  to  spend  their  whole  lives  in  his 
service.  I  say  he  gave  them  honourable  work ;  and  was  it  not  so  ? 

It  was  work  for  which  he  gave  them  capital.  He  gave  to  each  of  them 
a  pound.  "  Not  much,"  you  will  say.  No,  he  did  not  intend  it  to  be 
much.  They  were  not  capable  of  managing  very  much.  If  he  found 
them  faithful  in  "a  very  little  "  he  could  then  raise  them  to  a  higher 
responsibility.  I  do  not  read  that  any  one  of  them  complained  of  the 


246  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

smallness  of  his  capital,  or  wished  to  have  it  doubled.  Brothers,  we 
need  not  ask  for  more  talents,  we  have  quite  as  many  as  we  shall  be 
able  to  answer  for.  Preachers  need  not  seek  for  larger  spheres :  let  them 
be  faithful  in  those  which  they  now  occupy.  A  brother  said  to  me,  "  I 
cannot  do  much  with  a  hundred  hearers,"  and  I  replied,  "  You  will  find 
it  hard  work  to  give  in  a  good  account  for  even  a  hundred  people."  I 
confess  it  very  quietly,  but  I  have  often  wished  that  I  had  a  little 
congregation,  that  I  might  watch  over  every  soul  in  it;  but  now  I 
am  doomed  to  an  everlasting  dissatisfaction  with  my  work,  for  what 
am  I  among  so  many  ?  I  can  only  feel  that  I  have  not  even  begun  to 
do  the  hundredth  part  of  what  needs  to  be  done  in  such  a  church  as 
this.  Each  one  had  a  pound  in  his  hand,  and  his  lord  only  said, 
"  Trade  therewith."  He  did  not  expect  them  to  do  a  wholesale  business 
on  so  small  a  stock,  but  they  were  to  trade  as  the  market  would  allow. 
He  did  not  expect  them  to  make  more  than  the  pound  would  fairly 
bring  in ;  for,  after  all,  he  was  not  "an  austere  man."  "Take  that  pound," 
he  said,  "  and  do  your  best.  I  know  the  times  are  bad,  for  you  have 
to  trade  among  enemies.  You  could  not,  perhaps,  manage  to  put  out 
twenty  pounds  under  such  circumstances,  but  you  can  turn  over  a 
pound,  and  use  every  shilling  of  it"  Thus  he  gave  them  a  sufficient 
capital  for  his  purpose.  My  friend,  have  you  that  pound  anywhere 
about  you  ?  "Alas!"  says  one,  "I  have  no  abilities  at  all."  How  is 
that  ?  Your  Lord  gave  you  a  pound ;  what  has  become  of  it  ?  You  are 
one  of  his  servants,  and  if  you  are  doing  nothing  you  are  in  an  evil  case, 
and  ought  to  be  ashamed.  What  have  you  done  with  that  pound  ?  Put 
your  hand  in  your  pocket  again.  It  is  not  there.  Is  it  in  the  napkin  ? 
— that  napkin  with  which  you  ought  to  have  wiped  the  sweat  of  labour 
irom  your  brow  !  Have  you  got  that  pound  ?  You  say,  "  It  is  not 
much."  The  Master  did  not  say  it  was  much,  on  the  contrary,  he  called 
it  "  very  little  "  ;  but  have  you  used  that  very  little  ?  This  should  go 
home  to  your  consciences.  You  have  been  treared  as  confidential 
servants,  and  yet  you  are  not  true  to  your  Lord.  How  is  this  ? 

What  they  had  to  do  with  the  pound  was  prescribed  in  general  terms. 
They  were  to  trade  with  it,  not  to  play  with  it.  I  dare  say  they  were 
inclined  to  argue,  "  Our  master's  cause  is  assailed,  let  us  fight  for  him  "; 
yet  he  did  not  say,  "fight,"  but  trade.  Peter  drew  his  sword.  Oh, 
yes,  we  are  eager  combatants,  but  slow  merchants.  Many  manifest  a 
defiant  spirit,  and  are  never  more  satisfied  than  when  they  are  in  noise 
and  strife.  The  servants  in  this  parable  were  not  to  fight,  but  to  trade, 
which  is  a  much  more  cool-blooded  and  ignoble  thing  in  common  esteem. 
We  may  leave  our  Lord's  enemies  to  himself ;  he  will  end  their  rebellions 
one  of  these  days.  We  are  to  follow  a  much  lowlier  line  of  things. 

No  doubt  certain  of  them  might  have  thought  that  the  pound  would 
be  useful  to  purchase  them  comforts,  or  even  luxuries  :  one  would  buy 
a  new  coat,  and  another  would  bring  home  a  piece  of  furniture  for  his 
house,  and  others  would  solemnly  say,  "  We  have  our  families  to  think 
of."  Yes,  but  their  lord  did  not  say  so ;  the  master  said,  "  Trade  therewith 
until  I  come."  They  were  neither  to  fight  with  it,  nor  hoard  it,  nor 
spend  it,  nor  waste  it,  but  to  trade  with  it  for  him. 

The  pound  was  not  put  into  their  hands  for  display.  They  were  not 
to  glory  over  others  who  had  not  so  much  as  a  penny  to  bless  themselves 


THE  SERVANTS  AND  THE  POUNDS.  247 

with ;  for  though  they  were  little  capitalists,  that  capital  was  their  lord's. 
It  is  a  pity  when  graces  or  talents  are  boasted  of  as  if  they  were  our  own. 
A  tradesman  who  is  prospering  seldom  has  mucL  money  to  show ;  it  is 
all  wanted  in  his  business.  Sometimes  he  can  scarcely  put  Ins  hand  upon 
a  five-pound  note,  because  his  cash  is  all  absorbed :  his  golden  grain  is 
all  sown  in  the  field  of  his  trade.  Speaking  for  myself,  I  cannot  find  any 
room  for  glorying  in  myself;  for  if  I  have  either  grace  or  strength,  I 
certainly  have  none  to  spare.  I  have  barely  enough  for  the  work  in 
hand,  and  not  enough  for  the  service  in  prospect.  Our  pound  is  not  lo 
be  hung  on  our  watch-chain,  but  to  be  traded  with. 

Trading  represents  a  life  which  may  be  called  common-place  ;  but  it  is 
eminently  practical:  and  it  has  an  exceedingly  practical  effect  upon  the 
person  engaged  in  it.  This  is  owing  in  part  to  the  fact  that  it  is  an 
occupation  in  which  there  is  great  scope  for  judgment.  They  were  not 
tied  down  to  a  special  kind  of  trade.  The  man  who  made  his  one  pound 
into  ten  chose  the  best  form  of  busine?s.  He  s<>ught  not  that  which 
was  most  pleasant,  but  that  which  was  most  profitable.  So  you  are 
left,  dear  friends,  to  choose  your  own  line  of  service  for  your  Mnster,  only 
you  must  trade  for  him,  and  for  him  everything  must  be  done  well. 
At  the  present  time  no  trading  pays  better  than  the  mission  to  the 
Congo,  or  to  the  hill-tribes  of  India  :  large  dividends  come  also  from 
dealings  with  the  poorest  of  the  poor  in  the  slums,  and  as  much  from 
widows  and  orphans  who  are  in  extreme  destitution.  When  men  have 
to  lay  down  their  lives  for  the  Lord  Jesus,  after  a  life  languished  away 
with  fever,  the  returns  are  amazing.  Where  the  need  is  greatest  our 
Lord  receives  most  glory.  It  is  left  to  you  to  judge  what  you  can  do, 
how  you  can  do  it,  and  where  you  will  do  it.  Do  that  which  will  most 
surely  win  souls,  and  that  which  will  best  establish  your  Lord's  kingdom. 
Exercise  your  very  best  judgment,  and  get  into  thar,  line  of  \  oly  service 
in  which  you  can  bring  in  the  largest  revenue  for  ywur  glorious  Master. 

The  work  which  he  prescribed  was  one  thcit  would  briny  them  out. 
The  man  who  never  succeeds  in  trade,  do  you  know  him  ?  I  know  him. 
He  complains  that  he  has  a  small  head  ;  and  u-ually  the  complaint  is 
founded  on  fact.  He  needs  to  follow  a  business  in  which  the  bread  and 
butter  will  be  brought  to  his  door  ready  spread  ;  and  even  then,  unless 
it  is  cut  up  into  dice  pieces  on  his  platf,  he  will  get  no  breakfast.  The 
man  that  is  to  succeed  in  trade  in  these  times  must  have  confidence, 
look  alive,  keep  his  eyes  open,  and  be  all  there.  Our  times  are  hard, 
but  not  so  hard  as  those  described  in  the  parable  when  the  faithful 
servants  were  trading  in  the  midst  of  traitors;  they  had  need  of  sharp 
wits.  Trade  develops  a  man's  perseverance,  patience,  and  courage :  it 
tests  honesty,  truthfulness,  and  firmness.  It  is  a  singularly  excellent 
discipline  for  character.  When  this  nobleman  gave  his  servant  the 
pound,  it  was  that  he  might  see  what  stuff  he  was  made  of.  Trade 
with  small  capital  means  personal  work  and  drudgery,  loug  hours  and 
few  holidays;  plenty  of  disappointment  and  small  gains.  It  means 
working  with  might  and  main,  and  doing  the  thing  with  all  your 
heart  and  mind.  In  such  a  manner  are  we  to  serve  Christ.  The  word 
"trade"  has  a  world  of  meaning  in  it.  I  cannot  bring  it  out  this 
morning;  but  there  is  no  need,  for  the  most  of  you  know  more  about 
trade  than  I  do,  and  you  can  instruct  yourselves.  You  are  to  trade  for  the 


248  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  a  higher  and  yet  more  emphatic  sense  than  that  in 
which  yon  have  traded  for  yourselves.  With  your  physical  strength,  your 
mental  faculties,  your  substance,  your  family,  with  everything — you  are 
to  bring  glory  to  God,  and  honour  to  the  name  of  Jesus.  It  is  to  be 
your  life-business  co  work  for  Jesus,  and  with  Jesus. 

Trading,  if  ic  be  successfully  carried  on,  is  an  engrossing  concern, 
calling  out  the  whole  man.  It  is  a  continuous  toil,  a  varied  trial,  a  re 
markable  test,  a  valuable  discipline,  and  this  is  why  the  nobleman  put 
his  bondsmen  to  it,  that  he  might  afterwards  use  them  in  still  higher 
service.  Brethren,  learn  what  is  meant  by  trading,  and  then  carry  on  a 
spiritual  trade  with  all  your  heart. 

At  the  same  time,  let  us  notice  that  it  was  work  suitable  to  their 
capacity.  Small  as  the  capital  was,  it  was  enough  for  them  ;  for  they 
were  no  more  than  bondsmen,  not  of  a  high  grade  of  rank  or  educa 
tion.  Their  master  gave  them  only  a  pound,  which  did  not  mean  more 
than  £3  10s.  of  our  money.  One  would  not  get  a  large  shop,  or  even 
a  decent  stock,  with  that  small  amount.  They  could  not  complain  that 
they  were  placed  in  a  business  which  was  too  heavy  for  them  to  manage. 
They  could  any  of  them  buy  a  few  goods,  and  hawk  them.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  does  not  ask  you  to  do  more  than  you  can  do ;  he  does 
not  break  you  down  with  cares  beyond  your  capacity.  We  .iave  not 
yet  reached  the  limit  of  our  powers:  we  can  yet  do  more.  Jesus  is  no 
exacting  master  ;  it  is  only  a  false  and  lying  servant  who  will  call  him 
"an  austere  man,  reaping  where  he  has  not  sowed."  Nothing  of  the 
kind.  He  has  given  us  a  light  business :  our  work  for  him  is  suited  to 
our  limited  powers,  and  he  is  ready,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  to  assist  us.  Let 
us  use  well  our  single  pound.  Let  it  be  our  ambition  to  make  ten  of  it 
at  the  very  least ;  and  may  the  Lord  graciously  prosper  our  endeavours, 
that  we  may  have  large  interest  to  present  to  him  when  he  shall  come ! 

Did  you  enquire  as  to  how  these  men  were  to  be  supported  ?  Their 
master  did  not  tell  them  to  live  out  of  his  pound.  No,  they  were  his 
servants,  and  so  they  lived  under  his  roof,  and  he  provided  for  all 
their  needs.  He  had  gone  on  a  journey,  but  his  establishment  was 
not  given  up:  the  table  was  still  spread,  and  the  children  and  the 
servants  had  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  "Oh,"  says  one,  "that  alters 
the  case."  Just  so,  but  it  does  not  make  it  different  from  yours  ;  or,  if 
it  does,  I  am  sorry  for  you.  Are  you  your  own  provider  ?  Do  you  cry, 
"What  shall  I  eat  ?  What  shall  I  drink  ?"  Do  you  not  know  that 
all  these  things  do  the  nations  of  the  earth  seek  after  ?  Whereas  Jesus 
says,  "  Your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these 
things."  As  I  understand  my  life,  I  am  to  do  my  Lord's  work,  and  he 
is  to  provide  for  me.  He  may  do  this  through  my  own  industry,  but 
still  it  is  his  work  to  do  it,  and  not  mine.  If  the  providence  of  G-od  is 
not  sufficient  to  provide  for  us,  then  I  am  sure  we  cannot  provide  for 
ourselves ;  and  if  it  be  sufficient,  we  shall  be  wise  to  cast  all  our  care  on 
the  Lord,  and  live  undividedly  for  his  praise.  Remember  that  text, 
"  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness ;  and  all  these 
things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  You,  as  a  servant,  are  not  to  be  en 
tangled  with  carking  cares  about  your  own  interests,  but  you  are  to  give 
your  whole  thought  and  life  to  your  Master's  service.  He  will  take  care 
of  you  now,  and  reward  you  when  he  shall  come. 


THE  SERVANTS  AND  THE  POUNDS.  249 

III.    Thirdly,  to  understand  this  parable,  we  must  remember  THE 

EXPECTANCY   WHICH    WAS    ALWAYS    TO    INFLUENCE   THEM.        They    Were 

left  as  trusted  servants  till  he  should   return,  but  that  return  was  a 
main  item  in  the  matter. 

They  were  to  believe  that  he  would  return,  and  that  he  would  return 
a  king.  The  citizens  did  not  believe  it.  They  hoped  that  Caesar  would 
refuse  him  the  throne ;  but  we  are  to  be  sure  that  our  noble  Master  will 
receive  the  kingdom.  This  rebel  world  does  not  believe  that  Jesus  ever 
will  be  king.  The  other  day  we  read  of  the  "  Eclipse  of  Christianity." 
Constantly  we  see  his  dominion  assailed.  They  say  that  it  is  practically 
disproved  by  facts.  Is  it  ?  Sirs,  excuse  me,  I  am  desperately  prejudiced, 
for  I  am  his  servant.  I  owe  him  my  life,  my  all.  I  am  persuaded  that  he 
is  and  must  be  King  of  kings.  I  know  him  so  well  that  I  am  sure  that 
he  will  prevail  at  the  court  to  which  he  has  gone.  He  is  in  very  high 
favour  there.  The  last  time  I  saw  the  face  of  the  great  King  I  obtained 
that  favour  through  the  use  of  his  name.  I  receive  anything  I  ask  for 
when  I  mention  his  name,  and  so  I  am  sure  that  he  is  in  wonderful  high 
repute  above.  Why,  his  Father  is  the  sovereign  !  I  am  sure  he  will  not 
deny  the  kingdom  to  his  only-begotten  Son.  Jesus  will  come  in  his 
kingdom  ;  I  am  sure  of  it.  Let  us  work  in  the  full  conviction  that  our 
absent  Lord  will  soon  be  here  again,  with  a  glorious  diadem  upon  his- 
brow.  When  he  went  away  he  took  with  him  the  scars  of  one  who  died 
a  felon's  death ;  and  he  will  come  again  with  them,  but  the  nail-prints 
will  be  no  memorials  of  his  shame:  they  will  be  as  jewels  to  hia 
hands. 

His  servants  were  to  regard  their  absent  master  as  already  king,  and 
they  were  so  to  trade  among  his  enemies  that  they  should  never  com 
promise  their  own  loyalty.  They  were  of  the  king's  party,  and  of  no 
other.  It  is  a  very  awkward  position  to  be  in,  to  trade  among  people 
that  are  enemies  to  your  king:  you  need  in  such  a  case  to  be  wise  aa 
serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves.  This  is  precisely  our  position.  We 
have  to  bring  glory  to  God  out  of  men  who  hate  him :  we  have  to  mag 
nify  our  Lord  among  men  who  would,  if  they  could,  again  crucify  him. 
We  have  to  go  in  and  out  among  them  in  such  a  mann  r  that  they 
can  never  say  that  we  side  with  them  in  their  rebellion,  or  wink  at  their 
disloyalty.  We  cannot  be  "  Hail  fellow:  well  met!"  with  those  whose- 
life  is  a  practical  insult  to  the  crown  rights  of  King  Jesus.  We  must 
above  all  things  prove  ourselves  loyal  to  our  absent  Lord,  lest  he  appoint 
us  our  portion  among  his  enemies. 

I  find  that  the  original  would  suggest  to  any  one  carefully  reading  ifc 
that  they  were  to  regard  their  master  as  already  returning.  This  should 
be  our  view  of  our  Lord's  Advent;  he  is  even  now  on  his  way  hither 
No  sooner  had  he  risen  from  the  grave  than,  practically,  our  Lord  wa? 
coming  back.  Strange  paradox !  but  his  ascension  into  heaven  was,  in  i 
certain  sense,  part  of  his  coming  back  to  us ;  for  the  way  for  him,  from 
the  cross  on  earth  to  the  crown  of  the  whole  eanh,  was  via  the  New 
Jerusalem.  He  is  coming  now  as  fast  as  wisdom  judges  it  to  be  right. 
I  am  sure  our  Saviour  will  not  delay  a  moment  beyond  what  is  abso 
lutely  needful,  for  he  loves  the  church  which  is  his  bride,  and  as  her 
Bridegroom  he  will  not  delay  the  long-expected  hour  of  their  meeting, 
never  to  part  again.  He  is  ready,  it  is  the  bride  that  needs  to  make 


250  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

herself  ready.  Jesus  cbsires  to  come;  his  heart  is  responsive  to  our 
cry  when  we  say,  "Ccme  quickly!"  He  will  come  sooner  than  we 
think.  WQ  are  bound  to  feel  that  he  is  afc  this  moment  on  the  road ; 
and  we  are  to  live  as  if  he  might  arrive  at  any  moment. 

We  must  trade  on  till  our  Lord  has  come.  There  must  be  no  retiring 
from  his  business,  even  if  we  retire  from  our  own ;  there  must  be  no 
ceasing  because  we  fancy  we  have  done  enough.  Our  rest  will  be  when 
he  comes,  but  till  then  we  must  trade  on. 

Let  us  labour  as  in  his  actual  presence.  How  would  you  act  with 
Jesus  at  your  elbow  ?  Act  just  so.  He  sees  us  as  clearly  as  if  his  bodily 
presence  were  in  our  midst.  Be  aroused  and  inspired  by  the  Redeemer's 
eye.  Thus  will  you  live  in  this  trial  state  after  the  best  possible 
manner. 

IV.  Now  comes  the  sweet  part  of  the  subject.  Note  well  THE 
SECRET  DESIGN  OF  THE  LOUD.  Did  it  ever  strike  you  that  this  nobleman 
had  a  very  kindly  design  towards  his  servants  ?  Did  this  nobleman 
give  these  men  one  pound  each  with  the  sole  design  that  they  should 
make  money  for  him  ?  It  would  be  absurd  to  think  so.  A  few  pounds 
would  be  no  item  to  one  who  was  made  a  king.  No,  no!  It  was  as 
Mr.  Bruce  says,  "  he  was  not  money-making,  but  character-making." 
His  design  was  not  to  gain  by  them,  but  to  educate  them.  , 

First,  their  being  entrusted  with  a  pound  each  was  a  tes&  This 
nobleman  said  to  himself,  '*  When  I  am  a  king  I  must  have  faithful 
servants  in  power  around  me.  My  going  away  gives  me  an  opportunity 
of  seeing  what  my  servants  are  made  of.  I  shall  thus  test  their  capacity 
and  their  industry,  their  honesty  and  their  zeal.  If  they  prove  faithful 
over  a  few  things  they  will  be  fit  to  be  trusted  with  greater  matters." 
The  test  was  only  a  pound  ;  and  they  could  not  make  much  mischief 
out  of  that,  but  it  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  try  their  capacity  and 
fidelity,  for  he  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least  will  be  faithful  also 
in  much.  They  did  not  all  endure  the  test,  but  by  its  means  he  revealed 
their  characters. 

It  was  also  a  preparation  of  them  for  future  service.  He  would  lift 
them  up  from  being  servants  to  become  rulers.  They  were,  therefore, 
to  be  put  in  a  place  of  measurable  responsibility,  and  to  be  made  men 
of  thereby.  They  were  to  be  rulers  over  a  very  little — say  a  pound, 
and  that  which  came  of  it,  and  this  would  be  an  education  for  them. 
In  the  process  of  trading  they  would  be  in  training  to  rule.  The  best 
way  to  learn  to  be  a  master  is  to  be  first  a  servant,  and  the  reason  why 
some  masters  are  hard  and  tyrannical  is  because  they  do  not  know  the 
heart  of  a  servant  by  experience.  They  know  nothing  of  service,  and 
so  they  have  not  the  wisdom,  and  the  generosity,  and  the  tenderness, 
which  masters  should  show  towards  servants.  So  this  nobleman  was 
wise,  he  was  at  the  same  time  testing  and  training  his  men. 

Besides  this,  I  think  he  was  giving  them  a  little  anticipation  of  their 
future  honours.  He  was  about  to  make  them  rulers  over  cities,  and  so 
he  first  made  them  rulers  over  pounds.  They  had  been  servants,  and 
taken  orders  from  him  every  morning ;  but  now  they  have  no  master  to 
go  to,  and  must  use  their  own  discretion.  They  were  in  effect,  in  a 
small  sphere,  made  into  little  kings.  In  all  that  country  the  citizens 
had  rebelled,  but  there  was  a  litcle  kingdom  of  the  nobleman's  own 


THE  SERVANTS  AND  THE  POUNDS.  251 

servants,  and  these  obeyed  him,  and  did  their  beet  to  maintain  his  interest 
in  their  little  way.  They  were  already  made  free,  placed  in  a  mensure 
of  authority,  and  made  to  know  the  sweets  and  the  burdens  of  personal 
responsibility.  Oh,  you  that  work  for  God,  when  you  are  overseers  of 
others  for  him,  when  you  win  souls  for  him,  and  when  you  conquer 
adversaries  in  his  name  you  are  already  anticipating  your  eternal  reward. 
We  are  fashioning  our  tuture  position  upon  the  anvil  of  our  lives ;  for 
heaven,  though  it  be  a  state  and  a  place  prepared  for  us  by  the  Lord 
Jesus,  lies  also  mainly  in  character.  The  man  is  more  the  source  of  joy 
than  the  streets  of  gold  in  which  he  will  walk.  If  you  hide  your  pound 
and  neglect  your  Master's  service  here  you  are  making  for  yourselves  a 
dim  and  hazy  future  in  that  grand  millennial  reign  of  his.  You  that 
addict  yourselves  to  your  holy  trade,  and  consecrate  yourselves  entirely 
to  your  Lord,  shall  have  large  honours  when  he  comes  to  reign  among 
his  ancients  gloriously. 

For  see,  when  he  came  to  the  man  who  had  earned  ten  pounds,  he 
gave  him  ten  cities.  Think  of  that !  There  is  no  proportion  between 
the  poor  service  and  the  rich  reward.  A  pound  is  rewarded  with  a  city. 
The  rewards  of  the  millennium  will  evidently  be  all  of  grace,  because 
they  are  so  incomparably  beyond  anything  which  the  servants'  earnings 
could  have  deserved.  Their  Lord  was  not  bound  to  pay  them  anything : 
they  were  his  b  >nd-servants ;  but  what  he  gave  them  was  of  his  over 
flowing  grace.  I  do  not  think  that  he  who  brought  five  pounds  was  in 
the  least  blamed.  lie  may  have  been  just  as  diligent  as  the  other,  but 
he  had  less  capacity.  But  how  he  must  have  opened  his  eyes  when  his 
master  gave  him  five  cities.  Perhaps  he  wondered  more  than  the  first. 
Fancy  if  any  one  of  us  had  been  put  to  trade  with  a  pound  upon  com 
mission,  and  had  received  five  cities  for  reward.  The  money  earned 
would  not  buy  the  smallest  house,  and  yet  it  brings  in  to  the  worker 
five  cities !  What  surprise  filled  the  heart  of  the  recipient  of  such 
bounty  !  It  never  entered  into  his  heart  to  envy  the  brother  who  had 
ten  cities,  for  the  five  were  so  vast  a  recompense.  He  must  have  been 
carried  away  with  rapture  with  the  prospect  before  him.  Though  there 
may  be  degrees  of  glory,  the  only  difference  will  be  in  the  capacity  of  the 
blessed  to  contain  it.  All  the  vessels  will  be  full,  but  they  will  not  be 
all  equally  large :  the  man  of  the  ten  pounds  will  simply  be  a  larger 
vessel,  full  to  the  brim  ;  and  the  man  with  the  five  will  be  less  capacious, 
but  quite  as  full,  to  his  own  glad  amazement  and  joyful  bewilderment. 
However,  let  us  go  in  for  winning  the  ten  pounds  if  we  can.  For  our 
Lord's  sake  let  us  trade  in  spiritual  things  with  all  our  hearts. 

"  But,"  saith  one,  **  where  and  what  will  these  cities  be?"  It  may  be 
that  all  this  will  literally  happen  during  the  millennial  period,  but  I  do 
not  know.  When  Christ  shall  come  the  dead  in  Christ  will  rise  first ; 
and  we  read  that  u  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  till  the  thousand 
years  were  finished."  There  may  be  space  during  that  era  for  all  the 
special  rewards  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  It  may  also  be,  but  I  do  not 
know,  and  so  I  cannot  tell  you,  that  we  are  in  future  dispensations  to  fill 
unto  other  worlds  much  the  same  office  as  angels  fill  to  ours.  Jesus  hath 
made  us  kings  and  priests,  and  we  are  in  training  for  our  thrones.  What 
if  in  this  congregation  I  am  learning  to  proclaim  my  Master's  glory  to 
myriads  of  worlds  1  Possibly  the  preacher  who  is  faithful  here  may  yet  be 


252  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

made  to  tell  forth  his  Lord's  glory  to  constellations  at  a  time.  What  il 
one  might  stand  upon  a  central  star  and  preach  Christ  to  worlds  on 
worlds  instead  of  preaching  him  to  these  two  galleries  and  to  this  area! 
Why  not?  At  any  rate,  if  I  should  ever  gain  a  voice  loud  enough  to  be 
heard  for  millions  of  miles,  I  would  speak  none  other  than  those  glorioua 
truths  which  the  Lord  has  revealed  in  Christ  Jesos.  If  we  are  faithful 
here,  we  may  expect  our  Master  to  entrust  us  with  higher  service  here 
after  ;  only  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are  able  to  endure  the  test,  and  that 
we  profit  by  the  training.  As  our  account  comes  out  in  the  very  little, 
so  will  it  be  with  us  on  the  grand  scale  of  eternity.  This  puts  another 
face  upon  the  work  of  this  lower  sphere.  Rulers  over  ten  cities ! 
Rulers  over  five  cities !  Brothers,  you  are  not  fit  for  such  dignities  if 
you  cannot  serve  your  Lord  well  in  this  world  with  the  little  he  has 
entrusted  to  you.  If  you  live  wholly  to  him  here,  you  will  be  pre 
pared  for  the  glories  unspeakable  which  await  all  consecrated  souls. 
Let  us  go  in  for  a  devoted  life  at  once!  Time  is  so  short,  and  the 
things  we  deal  with  are  comparatively  so  small!  We  are  soon  coming 
out  of  the  eggshell  of  time ;  and  when  we  break  loose  into  eternity,  and 
see  the  vastness  of  the  divine  purposes,  we  shall  be  altogether  amazed 
at  the  service  bestowed,  which  will  be  the  reward  of  service  done.  0 
Lord,  make  us  faithful !  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON— Luke  xix.  1—38. 


HYMNS  FUOM  "OuR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK" — 347,  356,  342. 


etijaplitmt  Sfabenmde  f) u%it 


OUR  OWN   DEAR   SHEPHERD. 


IlTTENDED   FOR   READING   ON    LORD'S-DAY,   JANUARY   3RD,    1886 
DELIVERED   BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  TBE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTOH, 
ON  THURSDAY  EVENING,  NOVEMBER  2GTH,  1885. 


"  I  am  the  good  Shepherd,  and  know  my  sheep,  and  am  known  of  mine.  As  the 
Father  knoweth  me,  even  so  know  I  the  Father :  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the 
eheep.'' — John  x.  14,  15. 

As  the  passage  stands  in  the  Authorized  Version,  it  reads  like  a  number 
of  short  sentences  with  scarcely  any  apparent  connection.  Even  in  that 
form  it  is  precious ;  for  our  Lord's  pearls  are  priceless  even  when  they 
are  not  threaded  together.  But  when  I  tell  you  that  in  the  Greek  the 
word  "and"  is  several  times  repeated,  and  that  the  translators  have  had 
to  leave  out  one  of  these  "  ands  "  to  make  sense  of  the  passage  on  their 
line  of  translation,  you  will  judge  that  they  are  none  too  accurate  in 
this  case.  To  use  many  "ands"  is  after  the  manner  of  John  ;  but  there 
is  usually  a  true  and  natural  connection  between  his  sentences.  The 
'*  and  "  with  him  is  usually  a  real  golden  link,  and  not  a  mere  sound ; 
we  need  a  translation  which  makes  it  so.  Observe  also  that  in  our 
Version  the  word  "  sheep  "  is  put  in  italics,  to  show  that  it  is  not  in  the 
original.  There  is  no  need  for  this  alteration  it'  the  passage  is  more 
closely  rendered.  Hear,  then,  the  text  in  its  natural  form — 

"  /  am  the  good  Shepherd ;  and  I  know  mine  own,  and  mine  own  know 
me,  even  as  the  Father  knoweth  me,  and  I  know  the  Father ;  and  I  lay 
down  my  life  for  the  sheep." 

This  reading  I  have  given  you  is  that  of  the  Revised  Version. 
For  that  Revised  Version  I  have  but  little  care  as  a  general  rule, 
holding  it  to  be  by  no  means  an  improvement  upon  our  Common 
Authorized  Version.  It  is  a  useful  thing  to  have  it  for  private  reference, 
but  I  trust  it  will  never  be  regarded  as  the  standard  English  translation 
of  the  New  Testament.  The  Revised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament  U 
so  excellent,  that  I  am  half  afraid  it  may  carry  the  Revised  New  Testa 
ment  upon  its  shoulders  into  general  use.  I  sincerely  hope  that  this 
may  not  be  the  case,  for  the  result  would  be  a  decided  loss.  However, 
that  is  not  my  point.  Returning  to  our  subject,  I  believe  that,  on  this 
No.  1,877.  45 


228  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

-occasi  >n,  the  Revised  Version  is  true  to  the  original.  We  will  therefore 
follow  it  in  this  instance,  and  we  shall  find  that  it  makes  most  de 
lightful  and  instructive  sense.  "  I  am  the  good  Shepherd;  and  I  know 
mine  own,  and  mine  own  know  me,  even  as  the  Father  knoweth  me, 
and  I  know  the  Father;  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep." 

He  who  speaks  to  us  in  these  words  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To  our 
mind  every  word  of  Holy  Scripture  is  precious.  When  God  speaks  to 
us  by  priest  or  prophet,  or  in  any  way,  we  are  glad  to  hear.  Though 
when,  in  the  Old  Testament,  we  meet  with  a  passage  which  begins  with 
*'Thus  saith  the  Lord"  we  feel  specially  charmed  to  have  the  message 
directly  from  God's  own  mouth,  yet  we  make  no  distinction  between 
this  Scripture  and  that.  We  accept  it  all  as  inspired;  and  we  are  not 
given  to  dispute  about  different  degrees  and  varying  modes  of  inspira 
tion,  and  all  that.  The  matter  is  plain  enough  if  learned  unbelievers 
did  not  mystify  it ;  "  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and 
is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction 
in  righteousness  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  16).  Still,  there  is  to  our  mind  a  pecu 
liar  sweetness  about  words  which  were  actually  spoken  by  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  himself:  these  are  as  honey  in  the  comb.  You  have  before 
you,  in  this  text,  not  that  which  comes  to  you  by  prophet,  priest, 
or  king,  but  that  which  is  spoken  to  you  by  one  who  is  Prophet, 
Priest,  and  King  in  one,  even  your  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  opens  his 
mouth,  and  speaks  to  you.  You  will  open  your  ear,  and  listen  to  him, 
if  you  be  indeed  his  own. 

Observe  here,  also,  that  we  have  not  only  Christ  for  the  speaker,  but 
we  have  Christ  for  the  subject.  He  speaks,  and  speaks  about  himself. 
It  were  not  seemly  for  you,  or  for  me,  to  extol  ourselves;  but  there 
is  nothing  more  comely  in  the  world  than  for  Christ  to  commend  himself. 
He  is  other  than  we  are,  something  infinitely  above  us,  and  is  not  under 
rules  which  apply  to  us  fallible  mortals.  When  he  speaketh  forth  his 
own  glory,  we  feel  that  his  speech  is  not  vain-glory  ;  nay,  rather,  when 
he  praises  himself,  we  thank  him  for  so  doing,  and  admire  the  lowly 
condescension  which  permits  him  to  desire  and  accept  honour  from  such 
poor  hearts  as  ours.  It  were  pride  for  us  to  seek  honour  of  men  ;  it 
is  humility  in  him  to  do  so,  seeing  he  is  so  great  an  One  that  the 
esteem  of  beings  so  inferior  as  we  are  cannot  be  desired  by  him  for  his 
own  sake,  but  for  ours.  Of  all  our  Lord's  words,  those  are  the  sweetest 
in  which  he  speaks  about  himself.  Even  he  cannot  find  another  theme 
which  can  excel  that  of  himself. 

My  brethren,  who  can  speak  of  Jesus  but  himself  ?  He  masters  all 
our  eloquence.  His  perfection  exceeds  our  understanding;  the  light  of 
his  excellence  is  too  bright  for  us,  it  blinds  our  eyes.  Our  Beloved 
must  be  his  own  mirror.  None  but  Jesus  can  reveal  Jesus.  Only  he 
can  see  himself,  and  know  himself,  and  understand  himself ;  and  there 
fore  none  but  he  can  reveal  himself.  We  are  most  glad  that  in  his 
tenderness  to  us  he  sets  himself  forth  by  many  choice  metaphors,  and 
instructive  emblems,  by  which  he  would  make  us  know  some  little  of 
that  love  which  passeth  knowledge.  With  his  own  hand  he  fills  a 
golden  cup  out  of  the  river  of  his  own  infinity,  and  hands  it  to  us  that 
we  may  drink  and  be  refreshed.  Take,  then,  these  words  as  being 
doubly  refreshing,  because  they  come  directly  from  tne  Well-beioved'i 


OUR   OWN   DEAR   SHEPHERD.  229 

month,  and  contain  rich  revelations  of  his  own  all-glorious  self.  I 
feel  that  I  must  read  them  again ; — "  I  am  the  good  Shepherd ;  and 
I  know  mine  own,  and  mine  own  know  me,  even  as  the  Father 
knoweth  me,  and  I  know  the  Father ;  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the 
sheep." 

In  this  text  there  are  three  matters  about  which  I  shall  speak.  First, 
I  see  here  complete  character.  "  I  am  the  good  Shepherd."  He  is  not  a 
half  shepherd,  but  a  shepherd  in  the  fullest  possible  sense.  Secondly,  I 
see  complete  knowledge,  "and  I  know  mine  own,  and  mine  own  know  me, 
even  as  the  Father  knoweth  me,  and  I  know  the  Father."  Thirdly, 
here  is  complete  sacrifice.  How  preciously  that  sentence  winds  up  the 
whole,  "  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep" !  He  goes  the  full  length 
to  which  sacrifice  can  go.  He  lays  down  his  soul  in  the  stead  of  his 
sheep  ;  so  the  words  might  be  not  incorrectly  translated.  He  goes  the 
fall  length  of  self-sacrifice  for  his  own. 

1.  First,  then,  here  is  COMPLETE  CHARACTER.  Whenever  the  Saviour 
describes  himself  by  any  emblem,  that  emblem  is  exalted,  and  expanded; 
and  yet  it  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  meaning.  The  Lord  Jesus  fills  out 
every  type,  figure,  and  character  ;  and  when  the  vessel  is  filled  there  is 
an  overflow.  There  is  more  in  Jesus,  the  good  Shepherd,  than  you  can 
pack  away  in  a  shepherd.  He  is  the  good,  the  great,  the  chief  Shep 
herd  ;  but  he  is  much  more.  Emblems  to  set  him  forth  may  be  multi 
plied  as  the  drops  of  the  morning,  but  the  whole  multitude  will  fail  to 
reflect  all  his  brightness.  Creation  is  too  small  a  frame  in  which  to 
hang  his  likeness.  Human  thought  is  too  contracted,  human  speech 
too  feeble,  to  set  him  forth  to  the  full.  When  all  the  emblems  in  earth 
and  heaven  shall  have  described  him  to  their  utmost,  there  will  remain 
a  somewhat,  not  yet  described.  You  may  square  the  circle  ere  you  can 
set  forth  Christ  in  the  language  of  mortal  men.  He  is  inconceivably 
above  our  conceptions,  unutterably  above  our  utterances. 

But  notice  that  he  here  sets  himself  forth  as  a  shepflerd.  Dwell  on 
this  for  a  moment.  A  shepherd  is  hardly  such  a  man  as  we  employ  in 
England  to  look  after  sheep  for  a  few  months,  till  they  are  large  enough 
to  be  slaughtered ;  a  shepherd  after  the  Oriental  sort,  such  as  Abraham, 
Jacob,  or  David,  is  quite  another  person. 

The  Eastern  shepherd  is  generally  the  owner  of  the  flock,  or  at  least 
the  son  of  their  owner,  and  so  their  proprietor  in  prospect.  The  sheep 
are  his  own.  English  shepherds  seldom,  or  never,  own  the  sheep :  they 
are  employed  to  take  care  of  them,  and  they  have  no  other  interest  in 
them.  Our  native  shepherds  are  a  very  excellent  set  of  men  as  a  rule 
— those  I  have  known  have  been  admirable  specimens  of  intelligent 
working-men — yet  they  are  not  at  all  like  the  Oriental  shepherd,  and 
cannot  be ;  for  he  is  usually  the  owner  of  the  flock  which  he  tends.  He 
remembers  how  he  came  into  possession  of  the  flock,  and  when  and 
where  each  of  the  present  sheep  was  born,  and  where  he  has  led  them, 
and  what  trials  he  had  in  connection  with  them ;  and  he  remembers  this 
with  the  emphasis  that  they  are  his  own  inheritance. 

His  wealth  consists  in  them.  He  very  seldom  has  much  of  a  house, 
and  he  does  not  usually  own  much  land.  He  takes  his  sheep  over  a 
good  stretch  of  country,  which  is  open  common  for  all  his  tribe;  but 
his  possessions  lie  in  his  flocks.  Ask  him.  "  How  much  are  you  worth  ?  " 


230  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

He  answers, "  I  own  so  many  sheep."  In  the  Latin  tongue  the  word  for 
money  is  akin  to  the  word  "  sheep,"  because,  to  many  of  the  first  Romans, 
wool  was  their  wealth,  and  their  fortunes  lay  in  their  flocks.  The  Lord 
Jesus  is  our  Shepherd :  we  are  his  wealth.  If  you  ask  what  is  his 
heritage,  he  tells  you  of  "  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in 
the  saints."  Ask  him  what  are  his  jewels,  and  he  replies,  "  They  shall 
be  mine  in  that  day."  If  you  ask  him  where  his  treasures  are,  he  will 
tell  you,  **  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people.  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his 
inheritance."  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  nothing  that  he  values  as  he 
does  his  own  people.  For  their  sakes  he  gave  up  all  that  he  had,  and 
died  naked  on  the  cross.  Not  only  can  he  say,  "  I  gave  Ethiopia  and 
Seba  for  thee,"  but  he  "  loved  his  church,  and  gave  himself  for  it."  He 
regards  his  church  as  being  his  own  body,  "  the  fulness  of  him  that 
filleth  all  in  all." 

The  shepherd,  as  he  owns  the  flock,  is  also  the  caretaker.  He  takes 
care  of  them  always.  One  of  our  brethren  now  present  is  a  fireman ; 
and,  as  he  lives  at  the  fire-station,  he  is  always  on  duty.  I  asked  him 
whether  he  was  not  off  duty  during  certain  hours  of  every  day  ;  but  he 
said,  "  No  ;  I  am  never  off  duty."  He  is  on  duty  when  he  goes  to  bed, 
he  is  on  duty  while  he  is  eating  his  breakfast,  he  is  on  duty  if  he  walks 
down  the  street.  Any  time  the  bell  may  ring  the  alarm,  and  he  must 
be  in  his  place,  and  hasten  to  the  fire.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
never  off  duty.  He  has  constant  care  of  his  people  day  and  night.  He 
has  declared  it, — "For  Zion's  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for 
Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not  rest."  He  can  truly  say  what  Jacob  did. 
*'  In  the  day  the  drought  consumed  me,  and  the  frost  by  night."  He 
says  of  his  flock  what  he  says  of  his  garden,  "I  the  Lord  do  keep  it ;  I 
will  water  it  every  moment :  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and 
day."  I  cannot  tell  you  all  the  care  a  shepherd  has  over  his  flock, 
because  his  anxieties  are  of  such  a  various  kind.  Sheep  have  about  as 
many  complaints*as  men.  You  do  not  know  much  about  them,  and  I 
am  not  going  to  enter  into  details,  for  the  all-sufficient  reason  that  I  do 
not  know  much  about  them  myself ;  but  the  shepherd  knows,  and  the 
shepherd  will  tell  you  that  he  leads  an  anxious  life.  He  seldom  has  all 
the  flock  well  at  one  time.  Some  one  or  other  is  sure  to  be  ailing,  and 
he  spies  it  out,  and  has  eye  and  hand  and  heart  ready  for  its  succour  and 
relief.  There  are  many  varieties  of  complaints  and  needs,  and  all  these 
are  laid  upon  the  shepherd's  heart.  He  is  both  possessor  and  care 
taker  of  the  flock. 

Then  he  has  to  be  the  provider  too,  for  there  is  not  a  woolly  head 
among  them  that  knows  anything  about  the  finding  and  selecting  of 
pasturage.  The  season  may  be  very  dry,  and  where  there  once  was 
grass  there  may  be  nothing  but  a  brown  powder.  It  may  be  that 
herbage  is  only  to  be  found  by  the  side  of  the  rippling  brooks,  here 
and  there  a  bit ;  but  the  sheep  do  not  know  anything  about  that ;  the 
shepherd  must  know  everything  for  them.  The  shepherd  is  the  sheep's 
providence.  Both  for  time  and  for  eternity,  for  body  and  for  soul,  our 
Lord  Jesus  supplies  all  our  need  out  of  his  riches  in  glory.  He  is  the 
great  storehouse  from  which  we  derive  everything.  He  has  provided, 
ho  does  provide,  and  he  will  provide  ;  and  each  one  of  us  may  therefore 
sing,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd ;  I  shall  not  want." 


OUR   OWN   DEAR   SHEPHERD.  231 

But,  dear  friends,  we  often  dream  that  we  are  the  shepherds,  or  that 
we,  at  any  rate,  have  to  find  some  of  the  pasture.  I  could  not  help 
saying  just  now  to  our  friends  at  our  little  prayer-meeting,  "  There  is 
a  passage  in  the  Psalms  which  makes  the  Lord  do  for  us  what  one  would 
have  thought  we  could  have  done  for  ourselves — '  He  maketh  me  to  lie 
down  in  green  pastures.' "  Surely,  if  a  sheep  can  do  nothing  else  it  can 
lie  down.  Yet  to  lie  down  is  the  very  hardest  thing  for  God's  sheep  to 
do.  It  is  here  that  the  full  power  of  the  rest-giving  Christ  has  to  come 
in  to  make  our  fretful,  worrying,  doubtful  natures  lie  down  and  rest. 
•  Our  Lord  is  able  to  give  us  perfect  peace,  and  he  will  do  so  if  we  will 
simply  trust  to  his  abounding  care.  It  is  the  shepherd's  business  to  be 
the  provider ;  let  us  remember  this,  and  be  very  happy. 

Moreover,  he  has  to  be  the  leader.  He  leads  the  sheep  wherever  they 
have  to  go.  I  have  often  been  astonished  at  the  shepherds  in  the  South 
of  France,  which  is  so  much  like  Palestine,  to  see  where  they  will 
take  their  sheep.  Once  every  week  I  saw  the  shepherd  come  down  to 
Mentone,  and  conduct  all  his  flock  to  the  sea-beach.  I  could  see  nothing 
for  them  but  big  stones.  Folk  say  that  perhaps  this  is  what  makes  the 
mutton  so  hard ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  the  poor  creatures  get  a  little 
taste  of  salt,  or  something  which  does  them  good.  At  any  rate,  they 
follow  the  shepherd,  and  away  he  goes  up  the  steep  hillsides,  taking  long 
steps,  till  he  reaches  points  where  the  grass  is  growing  on  the  sides  of 
the  hills.  He  knows  the  way,  and  the  sheep  have  nothing  to  do  but  to 
follow  him  wherever  he  goes.  Theirs  not  to  make  the  way ;  theirs  not 
to  choose  the  path  ;  but  theirs  to  keep  close  to  his  heel. 

Do  you  not  see  our  blessed  Shepherd  leading  your  own  pilgrimage  ? 
Cannot  you  see  him  guiding  your  way  ?  Do  you  not  say,  "  Yes,  he 
leadeth  me,  and  it  is  my  joy  to  follow"?  Lead  on,  0  blessed  Lord; 
lead  on,  and  we  will  follow  the  traces  of  thy  feet! 

The  shepherd  in  the  East  has  also  to  be  t/ie  defender  of  the  flock,  for 
wolves  yet  prowl  in  those  regions.  All  sorts  of  wild  beasts  attack  the 
flock,  and  he  must  be  to  the  front.  Thus  is  it  with  our  Shepherd.  No 
wolf  can  attack  us  without  finding  our  Lord  in  arms  against  him.  No 
lion  can  roar  upon  the  flock  without  arousing  a  greater  than  David. 
"  He  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither  slumber  nor  sleep." 

He  is  a  shepherd,  then,  and  he  completely  fills  the  character — much 
more  completely  than  I  ct,n  show  you  just  now. 

Notice  that  the  text  puts  an  adjective  upon  the  shepherd,  decorating 
him  with  a  chain  of  gold.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  says,  "  I  am 
the  good  Shepherd."  "  The  good  Shepherd  " — that  is,  he  is  not  a  thief 
that  steals,  and  only  deals  with  the  sheep  as  he  bears  them  from  the  fold 
to  the  slaughter.  He  is  not  a  hireling:  he  does  not  do  merely  what  he 
is  paid  to  do,  or  commanded  to  do,  but  he  does  everything  con  amore, 
with  a  willing  heart.  He  throws  his  soul  into  it.  There  is  a  goodness, 
a  tenderness,  a  willingness,  a  powerfulness,  a  force,  an  energy  in  all  that 
Jesus  does  that  makes  him  to  be  the  best  possible  Shepherd  that  can  be. 
He  is  no  hireling ;  neither  is  he  an  idler.  Even  shepherds  that  have  had 
their  own  flocks  have  neglected  them,  as  there  are  farmers  who  do  not 
well  cultivate  their  own  farms;  but  it  is  never  so  with  Christ.  He  is 
the  good  Shepherd:  good  up  to  the  highest  point  of  goodness,  good  in 
all  that  is  tender,  good  in  all  that  is  kind,  good  in  all  the  directions  in 


232  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

which  a  shepherd  can  be  needed ;  good  at  fight,  and  good  at  rule ;  good 
in  watchful  oversight,  and  good  in  prudent  leadership ;  good  every  way 
most  eminently. 

And  then  notice  he  puts  it,  "  I  am  the  good  Shepherd."  That  is  the 
point  I  want  to  bring  out.  Of  other  shepherds  we  can  say,  he  is  a 
shepherd ;  but  this  is  the  Shepherd.  All  others  in  the  world  are  shadows 
of  the  true  Shepherd ;  and  Jesus  is  the  substance  of  them  all.  That 
which  we  see  in  the  world  with  these  eyes  is  after  all  not  the  substance, 
but  the  type,  the  shadow.  That  which  we  do  not  see  with  our  eyes, 
that  which  only  our  faith  perceives,  is  after  all  the  real  thing.  I  have  seen 
shepherds ;  but  they  were  only  pictures  to  me.  The  Shepherd,  the  real, 
the  truest,  the  best,  the  most  sure  example  of  shepherdry  is  the  Christ 
himself;  and  you  and  I  are  the  sheep.  Those  sheep  we  see  on  yonder 
mountain-side  are  just  types  of  ourselves :  but  we  are  the  true  sheep,  and 
Jesus  is  the  true  Shepherd.  If  an  angel  were  to  fly  over  the  earth  to 
find  out  the  real  sheep,  and  the  real  Shepherd,  he  would  say,  "  The 
sheep  of  God's  pasture  are  men ;  and  Jehovah  is  their  Shepherd.  He 
is  the  true,  the  real  Shepherd  of  the  true  and  real  sheep."  All  the 
possibilities  that  lie  in  a  shepherd  are  found  in  Christ.  Every  good 
thing  that  you  can  imagine  to  be,  or  that  should  be,  in  a  shepherd,  you 
find  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Now,  I  want  you  to  notice  that,  according  to  the  text,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  greatly  rejoices  in  this.  He  says,  "  I  am  the  good  Shepherd." 
He  does  not  confess  that  fact  as  if  he  were  ashamed  of  it,  but  he  repeats 
it  in  this  chapter  so  many  times  that  it  almost  reads  like  the  refrain 
of  a  song.  "I  am  the  good  Shepherd":  he  evidently  rejoices  in  it. 
He  rolls  it  under  his  tongue  as  a  sweet  morsel.  Evidently  it  is  to  his 
heart's  content.  He  does  not  say,  "  I  am  the  Son  of  God,  I  am  the 
Son  of  man,  I  am  the  Redeemer  " ;  but  this  he  does  say,  and  he  con 
gratulates  himself  upon  it :  "I  am  the  good  Shepherd." 

This  should  encourage  you  and  me  to  get  a  full  hold  of  the  word.  If 
Jesus  is  so  pleased  to  be  my  Shepherd,  let  me  be  equally  pleased  to  be 
his  sheep ;  and  let  me  avail  myself  of  all  the  privileges  that  are  wrapped 
up  in  his  being  my  Shepherd,  and  in  my  being  his  sheep.  I  see  that 
it  will  not  worry  him  for  me  to  be  his  sheep.  I  see  that  my  needs  will 
cause  him  no  perplexity.  I  see  that  he  will  not  be  going  out  of  his 
way  to  attend  to  my  weakness  and  trouble.  He  delights  to  dwell  on 
the  fact,  '*  I  am  the  good  Shepherd."  He  invites  me,  as  it  were,  to 
come  and  bring  my  wants  and  woes  to  him,  and  then  look  up  to  him, 
and  be  fed  by  him.  Therefore  I  will  do  it. 

Does  it  not  make  you  feel  truly  happy  to  hear  your  own  Lord  say 
himself,  and  say  it  to  you  out  of  this  precious  Book,  "  I  am  the  good 
Shepherd "  ?  Do  you  not  reply,  "  Indeed  thou  art  a  good  Shepherd. 
Thou  art  a  good  Shepherd  to  me.  My  heart  lays  emphasis  upon  the 
word  'good,'  and  says  of  thee,  '  there  is  none  good  but  One,  but  thou  art 
that  good  One.'  Thou  art  the  good  Shepherd  of  the  sheep"  ? 

So  much,  then,  concerning  the  complete  character. 

II.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  bless  the  word  still  more,  while  I  speak  it 
my  broken  way  upon  the  next  point:  THE  COMPLETE  KNOWLEDGE 

The  knowledge  of  Christ  towards  his  sheep,  and  of  the  sheep  towards 
him,  is  wonderfully  complete.  I  must  read  the  text  agaiu — "1  know 


OUR   OWN   DEAR   SHEPHERD.  233 

mine  own,  and  mine  own  know  me,  even  as  the  Fatlier  knoweth  me, 
and  I  know  the  Father." 

First,  then,  consider  Christ's  knowledge  of  his  own,  and  the  com 
parison  by  which  he  sets  it  forth :  "  As  the  Father  knows  me."  I 
cannot  conceive  a  stronger  comparison.  Dost  thou  know  how  much  the 
Father  knows  the  Son,  who  is  his  glory,  his  darling,  his  alter  ego,  his 
other  self— yea,  one  God  with  him  ?  Dost  thou  know  how  intimate  the 
knowledge  of  the  Father  must  be  of  his  Son,  who  is  his  own  wisdom,  ay, 
who  is  his  own  self  ?  The  Father  and  the  Son  are  one  spirit.  We 
cannot  tell  how  intimate  is  that  knowledge  ;  and  yet  so  intimately,  so 
perfectly,  does  the  great  Shepherd  know  his  sheep. 

He  knows  their  number.  He  will  never  lose  one.  He  will  count 
them  all  again  in  that  day  when  the  sheep  shall  pass  a<_>ain  under  the 
hand  of  him  that  telleth  them,  and  then  he  will  make  full  tale  of  them. 
*'  Of  all  that  thou  hast  given  me,"  says  he,  "  I  have  lost  none."  He 
knows  the  number  of  those  for  whom  he  paid  the  ransom- price. 

He  knows  their  persons.  He  knows  the  age  and  character  of  every 
one  of  his  own.  He  assures  us  that  the  very  hairs  of  our  head  are  all 
numbered.  Christ  has  not  an  unknown  sheep.  It  is  not  possible  that 
he  should  have  overlooked  or  forgotten  one  of  them.  He  has  such 
an  intimate  knowledge  of  all  who  are  redeemed  with  his  most  precious 
blood  that  he  never  mistakes  one  of  them  for  another,  nor  misjudges 
one  of  them.  He  knows  their  constitutions, — those  that  are  weak  and 
feeble,  those  that  are  nervous  and  frightened,  those  that  are  strong,  those 
that  have  a  tendency  to  presumption,  those  that  are  sleepy,  those  that  are 
brave,  those  that  are  sick,  sorry,  worried,  or  wounded.  He  knows  those 
that  are  hunted  by  the  devil,  those  that  are  caught  up  between  the 
jaws  of  the  lion,  and  shaken  till  the  very  life  is  almost  driven  out  of 
them.  He  knows  their  feelings,  fears,  and  frights.  He  knows  the  secret 
ins  and  outs  of  every  one  of  us  better  than  any  one  of  us  knows  himself. 

He  knows  our  trials, — the  particular  trial  under  which  you  are  now 
bowed  down,  my  sister  ;  our  difficulties, — that  special  difficulty  which 
seems  to  block  up  your  way,  my  brother,  at  this  very  time.  All  the 
ingredients  of  our  life-cup  are  known  to  him.  "  I  know  mine  own,  as 
the  Father  knoweth  me."  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  completer 
knowledge  than  that  which  the  Father  has  of  his  only-begotten  Son  ; 
and  it  is  equally  impossible  to  conceive  a  completer  knowledge  than  that 
which  Jesus  Christ  has  of  every  one  of  his  chosen. 

He  knows  our  sins.     I  often  feel  glad  to  think  that  he  always  did 
know  our  evil  natures,  and  what  would  come  of  them.     When  he  chose 
us,  he  knew  what  we  were,  and  what  we  should  be.     He  did  not  buy 
his  sheep  in  the  dark.     He  did  not  choose  us  without  knowing  all  tli 
devious  ways  of  our  past  and  future  lives. 

u  He  saw  us  ruined  in  the  fall, 
Yet  loved  us  notwithstanding  all/* 

Herein  lieth  the  splendour  of  his  grace.  "  Whom  he  did  foreknow,  he 
also  did  predestinate."  His  election  implies  foreknowledge  of  all  our  ill 
manners.  They  say  of  human  love  that  it  is  blind ;  but  Christ's  love  haa 
many  eyes,  and  all  its  eyes  are  open,  and  yet  he  loves  us  still. 

I  need  not  enlarge  upon  this.     It  ought,  however,  to  be  very  full  of 


234:  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

comfort  to  you  that  you  are  so  known  of  your  Lord,  especially  as  h€ 
knows  you  not  merely  with  the  cold,  clear  knowledge  of  the  intellect, 
but  with  the  knowledge  of  love  and  of  affection.  He  knows  you  in  his 
heart.  You  are  peculiarly  dear  to  him.  You  are  approved  of  him.  You 
are  accepted  of  him.  He  knows  you  by  acquaintance  with  you  ;  not  by 
hearsay.  He  knows  you  by  communion  with  you  ;  he  has  been  with 
you  in  sweet  fellowship.  He  has  read  you  as  a  man  reads  his  book, 
and  remembers  what  he  reads.  He  knows  you  by  sympathy  with  you  : 
he  is  a  man  like  yourself. 

"  He  knows  what  sore  temptations  mean, 
For  he  has  felt  the  same." 

He  knows  your  weaknesses.  He  knows  the  points  wherein  you  suffer 
most,  for 

"  In  every  pang  that  rends  the  heart 
The  Man  of  sorrows  had  a  part." 

He  gained  this  knowledge  in  the  school  of  sympathetic  suffering. 
"  Though  he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  obedience  by  the  things  which 
he  suffered."  "He  was  in  all  points  made  like  unto  his  brethren;" 
and  by  being  made  like  to  us  he  has  come  to  know  us,  and  he  does 
know  us  in  a  very  practical  and  tender  way.  You  have  a  watch,  and 
it  will  not  go,  or  it  goes  very  irregularly,  and  you  give  it  into  the  hands 
of  one  who  knows  nothing  about  watches  ;  and  he  says,  "  I  will  clean 
it  for  you."  He  will  do  it  more  harm  than  good.  But  here  is  the  very 
person  who  made  the  watch.  He  says,  "  I  put  every  wheel  into  its 
place  ;  I  made  the  whole  of  it,  from  beginning  to  end."  You  think  to 
yourself,  "  I  feel  the  utmost  confidence  in  trusting  that  man  with  my 
watch ;  he  can  surely  put  it  right,  for  he  made  it."  It  often  cheers 
my  heart  to  think  that  since  the  Lord  made  me  he  can  put  me  right, 
and  keep  me  so  to  the  end.  My  Maker  is  my  Redeemer.  He  that 
first  made  me  has  made  me  again,  and  will  make  me  perfect,  to  his  own 
praise  and  glory.  That  is  the  first  part  of  this  complete  knowledge. 

The  second  part  of  the  subject  is  our  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
fact  by  which  it  is  illustrated.  "And  mine  own  know  me,  even  as  I 
know  the  Father."  I  think  I  hear  some  of  you  say,  "  I  do  not  see  so 
much  in  that.  I  can  see  a  great  deal  more  in  Christ's  knowing  us." 
Beloved,  I  see  a  great  deal  in  our  knowing  Christ.  That  he  should 
know  me  is  great  condescension,  but  it  must  be  easy  to  him  to  know 
me.  Being  so  divine,  with  such  a  piercing  eye  as  his,  it  is  amazingly 
condescending,  as  I  say,  but  it  is  not  difficult  for  him  to  know  me. 
The  marvel  is  that  I  should  ever  know  him.  That  such  a  stupid,  blind, 
deaf,  dead  soul  as  mine  should  ever  know  him,  and  should  know  him 
as  he  knows  the  Father,  is  ten  thousand  miracles  in  one.  Oh,  sirs,  this 
is  a  wonder  so  great  that  I  do  not  think  you  and  I  have  come  at  it  yet 
co  the  full,  or  else  we  should  sit  down  in  glad  surprise,  and  say, — This 
proves  him  to  be  the  good  Shepherd  indeed,  not  only  that  he  knows 
his  flock,  but  that  he  has  taught  them  so  well  that  they  know  him  ! 
With  such  a  flock  as  Christ  has,  that  he  should  be  able  to  train  his 
sheep  so  that  they  should  be  able  to  know  him,  and  to  know  him  as  he 
knows  the  Father,  is  miraculous. 

0  beloved,  if  this  be  true  of  us,  that  we  know  our  Shepherd,  we 


OUR   OWN   DEAR   SHEPHERD.  235 

may  clap  onr  hands  for  very  joy  !  And  yet  I  think  it  is  true  even  uow. 
At  any  rate,  I  know  so  much  of  my  Lord  that  nothing  gives  me  so 
much  joy  as  to  hear  of  him.  Brethren,  there  is  no  boasting  in  this 
personal  assertion  of  mine.  It  is  only  the  bare  truth.  You  can  say 
the  same  ;  can  you  not  ?  If  anybody  were  to  preach  to  you  the  finest 
sermon  that  was  ever  delivered,  would  it  charm  you  if  there  was  no 
Christ  in  it  ?  No.  But  you  will  come  and  hear  me  talk  about  Jesus 
Christ  in  words  as  simple  as  ever  I  can  find,  and  you  cry  one  to  another, 
"  It  was  good  to  be  there." 

"  Thou  dear  Redeemer,  dying  Lamb, 

We  love  to  hear  of  thee  : 
No  music's  like  thy  charming  name, 

Nor  half  so  sweet  can  be." 

Now  mark  that  this  is  the  way  in  which  Jesus  knows  the  Father. 
Jesus  delights  in  his  Father,  and  you  delight  in  Jesus.  I  know  you 
do ;  and  herein  the  comparison  holds  good. 

Moreover,  does  not  the  dear  name  of  Jesus  stir  your  very  soul  ? 
What  is  it  that  makes  you  feel  as  if  you  wish  to  hasten  away,  that 
you  might  be  doing  holy  service  for  the  Lord  ?  What  makes  your 
very  heart  awake,  and  feel  ready  to  leap  out  of  your  body  ?  What  but 
hearing  of  the  glories  of  Jesus  ?  Play  on  what  string  you  please, 
and  my  ear  is  deaf  to  it ;  but  when  you  once  begin  to  tell  of  Calvary, 
and  sing  the  song  of  free  grace,  'and  dying  love,  oh,  then  my  soul  opens 
all  her  ears,  and  drinks  in  the  music,  and  then  her  blood  begins  to 
stir,  and  she  is  ready  to  shout  for  joy  !  Do  you  not  even  now  sing— 

"  Oh,  for  this  love  let  rocks  and  hills 

Their  lasting  silence  break, 
And  all  harmonious  human  tongues 
The  Saviour's  praises  speak. 

*  Ye*,  we  will  praise  thee,  dearest  Lord, 

Our  souls  are  all  on  flame, 
Hosanna  round  the  spacious  earth 
To  thine  adored  name  ?  " 

Yes,  we  know  Jesus.  We  feel  the  power  of  our  union  with  him.  We 
know  him,  brethren,  so  that  we  are  not  to  be  deceived  by  false  shepherds. 
There  is  a  way  nowadays  of  preaching  Christ  against  Christ.  It  is  a 
new  device  of  the  devil  to  set  up  Jesus  against  Jesus,  his  kingdom  against 
his  atonement,  his  precepts  against  his  doctrines.  The  half  Christ  in  his 
example  is  put  up,  to  frighten  souls  away  from  the  whole  Christ,  who 
saves  the  souls  of  men  from  guilt  as  well  as  from  sin,  from  hell  as  well 
as  from  folly.  But  they  cannot  deceive  us  in  that  way.  No,  beloved 
we  know  our  Shepherd  from  all  others.  We  know  him  from  a  statue 
covered  with  his  clothes.  We  know  the  living  Christ,  for  we  have 
come  into  living  contact  with  him,  and  •  we  cannot  be  deceived  an) 
more  than  Jesus  Christ  himself  can  be  deceived  about  the  Father. 
"  Mine  own  know  me,  even  as  I  know  the  Father."  We  know  him  by 
nnion  with  him,  and  by  communion  with  him.  "  We  have  seen  the 
Lord."  "  Truly  onr  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  liis  Sou 
Jesus  Christ." 


236  ttETROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

We  know  him  by  love :  our  soul  cleaves  to  him,  even  as  the  heart 
of  Christ  cleaves  to  the  Father.  We  know  him  by  trusting  him — "  He 
is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire."  I  remember  once  feeling  many 
questions  as  to  whether  I  was  a  child  of  God  or  not.  I  went  into  a 
little  chapel,  and  I  heard  a  good  man  preach.  He  was  a  simple  working- 
man.  I  heard  him  preach,  and  I  made  my  handkerchief  sodden  with 
tny  tears  as  I  heard  him  talk  about  Christ,  and  the  precious  blood.  When 
I  was  preaching  the  same  things  to  others  I  was  wondering  whether 
this  truth  was  mine,  but  while  I  was  hearing  for  myself  I  knew  it  was 
mine,  for  my  very  soul  lived  upon  it.  I  went  to  that  good  man,  and 
thanked  him  for  the  sermon.  He  asked  me  who  I  was.  When  I  told 
him,  he  turned  all  manner  of  colours.  "  Why,"  he  said,  "  Sir,  that  was 
your  own  sermon."  I  said,  "Yes,  I  knew  it  was,  and  it  was  good  of 
the  Lord  to  feed  me  with  food  that  I  had  prepared  for  others."  I 
perceived  that  I  had  a  true  taste  for  what  I  myself  knew  to  be  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Oh,  yes,  we  do  love  our  good  Shepherd  !  We 
cannot  help  it. 

And  we  know  him  also  by  a  deep  sympathy  with  him  ;  for  what  Christ 
desires  to  do,  we  also  long  to  do.  He  loves  to  save  souls,  and  so  do  we. 
Would  we  not  save  all  the  people  in  a  whole  street  if  we  could  ?  Ay,  in 
a  whole  city,  and  in  the  whole  world  !  Nothing  makes  us  so  glad  as 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  a  Saviour.  "There  is  news  in  the  paper,"  says 
one.  That  news  is  often  of  small  importance  to  our  hearts.  I  happened 
to  hear  that  a  poor  servant  girl  had  heard  me  preach  the  truth,  and 
found  Christ ;  and  I  confess  I  felt  more  interest  in  that  fact  than  in  all 
the  rise  and  fall  of  Whigs  or  Tories.  What  does  it  matter  who  is  in 
Parliament,  so  long  as  souls  are  saved  ?  That  is  the  main  thing.  If 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  grows,  all  the  other  kingdoms  are  of  small  ac 
count.  That  is  the  one  kingdom  for  which  we  live,  and  for  which  we 
would  gladly  die.  As  there  is  a  boundless  sympathy  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son,  so  is  there  between  Jesus  and  ourselves. 

We  know  Christ  as  he  knows  the  Father,  because  we  are  one  with 
him.  The  union  between  Christ  and  his  people  is  as  real  and  as 
mysterious  as  the  union  between  the  Son  and  the  Father. 

We  have  a  beautiful  picture  before  us.  Can  you  realize  it  for  a 
minute  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  here  among  us — picture  him !  He  is  the 
Shepherd.  Then,  around  him  are  his  own  people,  and  wherever  he  goes 
they  go.  He  leads  them  into  green  pastures,  and  beside  the  still  waters. 
And  there  is  this  peculiarity  about  them :  he  knows  them  as  he  looks 
upon  every  one  of  them,  and  they  every  one  of  them  know  him.  There 
is  a  deeply  intimate  and  mutual  knowledge  between  them.  As  surely  as 
he  knows  them,  they  know  him.  The  world  knows  neither  the  Shepherd 
nor  the  sheep,  but  they  know  each  other.  As  surely  as  truly,  and  as 
deeply,  as  God  the  Father  knows  the  Son,  so  does  this  Shepherd  know 
his  sheep  ;  and  as  God  the  Son  knows  his  Father,  so  do  these  sheep 
know  their  Shepherd.  Thus  in  one  band,  united  by  mutual  intercourse, 
they  travel  through  the  world  to  heaven.  "  I  know  mine  own,  and  mine 
own  know  me,  even  as  the  Father  knoweth  me,  and  I  know  the  Father." 
Is  not  that  a  blessed  picture  ?  God  help  us  to  figure  in  it ! 

III.  The  last  subject  is  COMPLETE  SACRIFICE.  The  complete  sacrifice 
is  thus  described, — «*  /  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep" 


OUR    OWN    DEAR   SHEPHERD.  23? 

These  words  are  repeated  in  this  chapter  in  different  forms  some  four 
times.  The  Saviour  keeps  on  saying,  "  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the 
§heep."  Read  the  eleventh  verse:  "The  good  Shepherd  giveth  his  life 
for  the  sheep."  The  fifteenth  verse:  "I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep." 
The  seventeenth  verse:  "I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  may  take  it  again." 
The  eighteenth  verse:  "I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power 
to  take  it  again."  It  looks  as  if  this  was  another  refrain  of  our  Lord's 
personal  hymn.  I  call  this  passage  his  pastoral  song.  The  good  Shepherd 
with  his  pipe  sings  to  himself  and  to  his  flock,  and  this  comes  in  at 
the  end  of  each  stanza,  "  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep." 

Did  it  not  mean,  first,  that  he  was  always  doing  so  ?  All  his  life 
long  he  was,  as  it  were,  laying  it  down  for  them ;  he  was  divesting 
himself  of  the  garments  of  life,  till  he  came  to  be  fully  disrobed  on  the 
cross.  All  the  life  he  had,  all  the  power  he  had,  he  was  always  laying 
it  out  for  his  sheep.  It  means  that,  to  begin  with. 

And  then  it  means  that  the  sacrifice  was  actively  performed.  It  was 
ever  in  the -doing  as  long  as  he  lived;  but  he  did  it  actively.  He  did 
not  die  for  the  sheep  merely,  but  he  laid  down  his  life,  which  is  another 
thing.  Many  a  man  has  died  for  Christ :  it  was  all  that  he  could  do. 
But  we  cannot  lay  down  our  lives,  because  they  are  due  already  as  a 
debt  of  nature  to  God,  and  we  are  not  permitted  to  die  at  our  own  wills. 
That  were  suicidal  and  improper.  With  the  Lord  Christ  it  was  totally 
different.  He  was,  as  it  were,  actively  passive.  "  I  lay  down  my  life 
for  the  sheep.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take 
it  again.  This  commandment  have  I  received  of  my  Father." 

I  like  to  think  of  our  good  Shepherd,  not  merely  as  dying  for  us,  but 
as  willingly  dying — laying  down  his  life  :  while  he  had  that  life,  using 
it  for  us  ;  and  when  the  time  came,  putting  off  that  life  on  our 
behalf.  This  has  now  been  actually  done.  When  he  spoke  these  words, 
it  had  not  been  done.  At  this  time  it  has  been  done.  "  I  lay  down 
my  life  for  the  sheep"  may  now  be  read,  "I  have  laid  down  my  life 
for  the  sheep."  For  you,  beloved,  he  has  given  his  hands  to  the  nails, 
and  his  feet  to  the  cruel  iron.  For  you  he  has  borne  the  fever  and  the 
bloody  sweat ;  for  you  he  has  cried  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani ;" 
lor  you  he  has  given  up  the  ghost. 

And  the  beauty  of  it  is  that  he  is  not  ashamed  to  avow  the  object  of 
it.  "I  lay  down  my  life /or  the  sheep."  Whatever  Christ  did  for  the 
world — and  I  am  not  one  of  those  who  would  limit  the  bearings  of 
the  death  of  Christ  upon  the  world — yet  nig  peculiar  glory  is,  "I  iaj 
down  my  life  for  the  sheep. 

Great  Shepherd,  do  you  mean  te  say  that  you  have  died  for  such  <ia 
these  t  What !  for  these  sheep  ?  Died  for  them  ?  What!  die  for  sheep, 
Shepherd  ?  Surely  you  have  other  objects  for  which  to  live  beside  sheep. 
Have  you  not  other  loves,  other  joys  ?  We  know  that  it  would  griex  e 
rou  to  see  the  sheep  killed,  torn  by  the  wolf,  or  scattered  ;  but  you  really 
have  not  gone  so  far  in  love  for  them  that  for  the  sake  of  those  poor 
creatures  you  would  lay  down  your  life  ?  "Ah,  yes,"  he  says,  "  I  would, 
I  have !  "  Carry  your  wondering  thoughts  to  Christ  Jesus.  What ! 
What !  What !  Son  of  God,  infinitely  great  and  inconceivably  glorious 
Jehovah,  wouldst  thou  lay  thy  life  down  for  men  and  women  ?  They 
are  no  more  io  comparison  with  tliee  than  so  many  ants  and  wasps, 


238  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

pitiful  and  obnoxious  creatures.  Thou  couldst  make  ten  thousand 
millions  of  them  with  a  word,  or  crush  them  out  of  existence  at  one 
blow  of  thy  hand.  They  are  poor  things,  make  the  most  you  can  of 
them.  They  hare  hard  hearts,  and  wandering  wills ;  and  the  best  of 
thjem  are  no  better  than  they  should  be.  Saviour,  didst  thou  die  for 
such  ?  He  looks  round,  and  says,  "  Yes,  I  did.  I  did.  I  laid  down 
my  life  for  the  sheep.  I  am  not  ashamed  of  them,  and  I  am  not 
ushamed  to  say  that  I  died  for  them."  No,  beloved,  he  is  not  ashamed 
of  his  dying  love.  He  has  told  it  to  his  brethren  up  yonder,  and  made 
it  known  to  all  the  servants  in  his  Father's  house,  and  this  has  become 
the  song  of  that  house,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain ! "  Shall  not 
we  take  it  up,  and  say,  "  For  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to 
God  by  thy  blood  "  ?  Whatever  men  may  talk  about  particular  redemp 
tion,  Christ  is  not  ashamed  of  it.  He  glories  that  he  laid  down  his 
life  for  the  sheep.  For  the  sheep,  mark  you.  He  says  not  for  the 
world.  There  is  a  bearing  of  the  death  of  Christ  towards  the  world  ; 
but  here  he  boasts,  and  glories  in  the  specialty  of  his  sacrifice.  *'  I  lay 
down  my  life  for  the  sheep" — "  instead  of  the  sheep,"  it  might  be  read. 
He  glories  in  substitution  for  his  people.  He  makes  it  his  boast,  when 
he  speaks  of  his  chosen,  that  he  suffered  in  their  stead — that  he  bore, 
that  they  might  never  bear,  the  wrath  of  God  on  account  of  sin. 
What  he  glories  in,  we  also  glory  in.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory 
gave  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  the  world  is 
crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world ! " 

0  beloved,  what  a  blessed  Christ  we  have  who  loves  us  so,  who  knows 
us  so — whom  we  also  know  and  love !  May  others  be  taught  to  know 
him,  and  to  love  him  !  Yea,  at  this  hour  may  they  come  and  put 
their  trust  in  him,  as  the  sheep  trust  to  the  shepherd  !  We  ask  it  for 
Jesu's  sake.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE   READ  BEFORE  SERMON — John  I. 


Sfabmrad*  flutpit, 


OTHER   SHEEP  AND   ONE   FLOCK. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  MARCH  25TH,  1883,  er 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE     METROPOLITAN    TABHIINACLE,     NKVVINGTON. 


"  And  other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold  :  them  also  I  must  bring,  and 
they  shall  hear  my  voice  ;  and  they  shall  be  one  fold,  and  one  shepherd  (or  more  cor 
rectly,  ouejtock,  one  shepherd)." — John  x.  16. 

THIS  verse  is  guarded  before  and  behind  by  two  notable  statements. 
Before  it  we  hear  the  Master  say,  "  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep," 
and  immediately  after  it  we  meet  with  another  grand  sentence,  "  I  lay 
down  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again."  The  first  statement,  "  7 
lay  doivn  my  life  for  the  sheep  "  is  the  sheet  anchor  of  our  confidence 
when  storms  assail  the  vessel  of  the  church.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  by  his 
death  proved  his  love  to  his  people ;  and  his  determination  to  save  them 
is  made  clear  by  his  laying  down  his  life  for  them  ;  therefore  doubt  and 
fear  should  be  banished  and  the  very  name  of  despair  should  be  un 
known  among  the  Israel  of  God.  Now  are  we  sure  of  the  love  of  the 
Son  of  God  to  his  chosen  flock,  for  we  have  an  infallible  proof  of  it  in 
the  laying  down  of  his  life  for  them.  Now  also  are  we  absolutely 
certain  that  Christ's  purpose  is  perpetual :  it  cannot  alter ;  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  committed  himself  to  that  purpose  beyond  recall,  for  the 
price  is  paid  and  the  deed  is  done  by  which  the  purpose  is  to  be  effected. 
Beyond  this  we  are  hereby  assured  beyond  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  the 
divine  purpose  will  be  carried  out,  for  it  cannot  be  that  Christ  should 
die  in  vain.  We  think  it  a  kind  of  blasphemy  to  suppose  that  his  blood 
should  be  spilt  for  naught.  Whatever  was  proposed  to  be  accomplished 
by  the  laying  down  of  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God,  we  feel  absolutely 
certain  that  it  will  be  fully  performed  in  the  teeth  of  all  adversaries ;  for 
we  are  not  now  speaking  of  man's  design,  but  of  the  purpose  of  God, 
to  which  he  devoted  the  heart's  blood  of  his  only-begotten  Son.  We 
both  patiently  hope  and  quietly  wait  to  see  the  salvation  of  God,  and 
the  performance  of  all  his  designs  of  love  ;  for  that  deach  upon  the  cross 
is  a  cause  which  will  surely  produce  its  effect.  Christ  did  not  die  at  a 
peradventure.  The  supposition  of  a  Saviour  disappointed  in  the  results 
of  his  blood-shedding  is  not  to  be  tolerated  for  a  moment.  In  darkest 
times  that  glorious  cross  flames  with  light.  No  evil  event  can  prevent 
its  efficacy.  Still  in  that  sign  we  conquer.  If  Jesus  has  laid  down 
his  life  for  the  sheep,  then  all  is  well.  Rest  assured  of  the  Father's 
No.  1,713.  4(3 


182  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

love  to  those  sheep;  rest  assured  of  the  immutability  of  the  Divine 
purpose  concerning  them,  and  rest  assured  of  its  ultimate  achievement. 
It  must  not,  shall  not  be  that  God's  own  Son  shall  lay  down  his  life  in 
vain.  Though  heaven  and  earth  should  pass  away,  the  precious  heart's 
blood  of  the  Son  of  God  shall  accomplish  the  end  for  which  it  was  so 
freely  poured  forth.  Jesus  says,  "  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep," 
therefore  the  sheep  must  live  who  have  been  redeemed  at  such  a  price  as 
this,  and  the  Shepherd  in  them  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and 
shall  be  satisfied.  So  far  we  are  cheered  by  the  vanguard  which  marches 
in  advance  of  our  text. 

But  as  if  the  poor,  timid  people  of  God  would,  nevertheless,  at 
times  fancy  that  the  purpose  of  Christ  would  not  be  achieved,  behold 
in  the  rear  another  sentence,  "  /  lay  down  my  life  that  I  might  take  it 
again."  He  that  died,  and  so  redeemed  his  people  by  price,  lives  that 
he  may  himself  personally  see  that  they  are  also  redeemed  by  power. 
If  a  man  dies  to  achieve  a  purpose,  you  feel  sure  that  his  very  soul 
must  have  been  in  it :  but  if  that  man  should  rise  again  from  the  dead, 
and  still  pursue  his  purpose  you  would  see  how  resolutely  he  was  set 
on  his  design.  If  he  rose  with  greater  power,  clothed  with  higher 
rank,  and  elevated  to  a  more  eminent  position,  and  if  he  still  pursued 
his  great  object,  you  would  then  be  more  than  certain  of  his  never- 
ending  determination  to  perform  his  design.  In  the  risen  life  of  Jesus 
assurance  is  made  doubly  sure :  now  are  we  sure  that  his  design  must 
be  carried  out,  nothing  can  hinder  it.  We  dare  not  dream  that  the  Son 
of  God  can  be  disappointed  of  the  object  for  which  he  died,  and  for 
which  he  lives  again.  If  Jesus  died  for  a  purpose  he  will  accomplish 
it ;  if  Jesus  rose  for  a  purpose,  he  will  accomplish  it ;  if  Jesus  lives 
for  ever  for  a  purpose,  he  will  accomplish  it.  To  me  this  conclusion 
seems  to  be  past  question :  and  if  it  be  so,  it  puts  the  destiny  of  the  sheep 
beyond  all  hazard.  Did  not  Paul  argue  much  in  the  same  way  when  he 
said,  "  For  if,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by 
the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by 
his  life"? 

If  any  of  you  have  been  cast  down  by  reason  of  present  difficulties, 
let  these  two  grand  texts  sound  their  silver  trumpets  in  your  ears.  If  you 
have  been  looking  forth  from  the  windows,  and  the  outlook  has  seemed 
to  be  exceeding  dark,  take  courage,  I  pray  you,  from  what  your  Lord 
has  done :  his  death  and  resurrection  are  prophetic  of  good  things  to 
come.  You  dare  not  think  that  Christ  will  miss  the  end  of  his  death: 
you  dare  not  think  that  he  will  miss  the  purpose  of  his  glory-life :  why, 
then,  are  you  cast  down  ?  His  will  shall  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in 
heaven,  as  surely  as  he  came  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  has  returned 
from  earth  to  heaven.  His  purpose  shall  be  carried  out  as  surely  as  he 
died  and  lives  again.  Is  not  this  the  secret  reason  why,  when  the  Lord 
appeared  to  his  sorrowing  servant  John,  he  said  to  him,  "  I  am  he  that 
liveth  and  was  dead  and  am  alive  for  evermore,  amen,  and  have  the 
keys  of  death  and  of  hell"  ?  Is  not  the  dying  and  then  living  Shepherd 
the  safety  and  the  glory  of  the  flock  ?  Wherefore  comfort  one  another 
with  these  words  of  your  Lord, "  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep";  "  I 
lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again." 

I.    There  are  four  things  in  the   text  itself  which  deserve  your 


OTHER  SHEEP  AND  ONE  FLOCK.  183 

attention,  for  they  are  full  of  consolation  to  minds  troubled  by  the  evila 
of  these  perilous  times.  The  first  is  this,— OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST  HAD 
A  PEOPLE  UNDER  THE  WORST  CIRCUMSTANCES.  When  he  speaks  of 
"other  sheep,"  it  is  implied  that  he  had  certain  sheep  at  the  time;  and 
when  he  says  "  other  sheep  have  I  which  are  not  of  this  fold,"  it  is 
manifest  that  even  then  the  Good  Shepherd  had  a  fold.  The  times  were 
grievously  dark  and  evil,  but  a  few  true  hearts  clustered  about  the 
Saviour  and  by  his  divine  power  were  protected  as  in  a  "fold."  It 
has  been  supposed  that  our  Lord  here  alludes  to  the  Jews  as  "  this 
fold"  ;  but  the  Jews,  as  such,  were  never  Christ's  fold.  He  could  not 
have  meant  to  call  the  Jews  around  him  his  fold,  for  a  little  further  on 
he  exclaims,  "  Ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said 
unto  you."  His  fold  were  that  little  handful  of  disciples  whom  by  his 
personal  ministry  he  had  gathered,  and  who  stood  folded,  as  it  were, 
about  their  Good  Shepherd.  They  might  be  sneered  at  as  a  little 
company,  but  he  saith  to  his  enemies  who  are  standing  outside  the 
fold  foaming  with  wrath,  "  Other  sheep  I  have  that  are  not  of  thm 
little  fold :  these  you  cannot  see,  but  I  have  them  none  the  less  for 
that ;  these  I  must  in  due  time  lead,  and  then  there  shall  be  one  flock 
and  one  Shepherd." 

See,  then,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  had  a  people  in  the  worst  times. 
Doubtless  these  days  are  exceedingly  dangerous,  and  I  have  certain 
brethren  round  me  who  never  allow  me  to  forget  it,  for  they  play  well  in 
the  minor  key,  and  dwell  most  judiciously  upon  the  necessary  topic  of 
the  general  declension  of  the  church  and  the  growing  depravity  of  the 
world.  I  would  not  stop  them  from  their  faithful  warnings,  although  I 
can  assure  them  that,  with  slight  variations,  I  have  heard  the  same  tune 
for  years.  Many  a  time  have  they  afflicted  me  from  my  youth  up,  and 
it  has  been  good  for  me.  I  recollect  hearing  some  thirty  years  ago  that 
we  lived  in  awful  times ;  and,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  the  tinier 
have  been  awful  ever  since ;  and  I  suppose  they  always  will  be.  The 
watchmen  of  the  night  see  everything  except  the  coming  of  the  morning. 
Our  pilots  perceive  dangers  ahead  and  steer  with  caution.  Perhaps  this 
is  as  it  should  be ;  at  any  rate,  it  is  better  than  sleeping  in  a  fool's, 
paradise.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  clear  that  the  days  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  were  emphatically  terrible  times.  No  age  can  be  worse  than 
that  age  which  literally  crucified  the  Son  of  God,  crying,  "  Away  witb 
him!  Away  with  him!"  Whether  the  present  days  are  better  than 
those  I  will  not  determine,  but  they  cannot  be  worse.  The  day  of  our 
Lord's  first  advent  was  the  culmination  and  the  crisis  of  the  world's 
career  of  sin ;  and  yet  the  Good  Shepherd  had  a  fold  among  men  in  the 
midnight  of  history. 

There  was  a  sad  lack  of  vital  godliness  in  those  days.  A  few  godly 
ones  watched  for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah;  but  they  were  very  few, 
such  as  good  old  Simeon  and  Anna.  A  small  remnant  sighed  and 
cried  for  the  abounding  sin  of  the  nation ;  but  the  salt  was  almost  gone : 
Israel  was  becoming  like  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  The  choice  band  of 
mourners  in  Zion  had  not  quite  died  out,  but  their  number  was  so  few 
that  a  child  might  write  them.  Speaking  generally,  when  the  Saviour 
came  to  his  own,  his  own  received  him  not.  The  mass  of  professing 
people  in  that  day  was  rotten  throughout ;  the  life  of  God  was  gone;  it 


184  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

could  not  dwell  with  the  Pharisees  nor  the  Sadducees,  nor  any  of  the 
sects  of  the  times,  for  they  were  altogether  gone  out  of  the  way.  The 
Lord  looked,  and  there  was  no  man  to  help  or  to  uphold  his  righteous 
cause  :  those  who  professed  to  be  its  champions  had  altogether  become 
unprofitable.  As  for  the  religious  teachers,  their  mouth  was  become  an 
open  sepulchre,  and  the  poison  of  asps  was  under  their  tongues :  and 
yet  the  Lord  had  a  people  in  Judea  even  then.  On  earth  there  was 
still  a  fold  for  sheep  whom  he  had  chosen  who  knew  the  Shepherd's 
voice  and  gathered  to  his  call  and  followed  him  faithfully. 

It  was  a  time  when  will-worship  abounded.  Men  had  given  up  wor 
shipping  God  according  to  the  Scriptures,  and  they  worshipped  accord 
ing  to  their  own  fancies.  Then  you  might  hear  the  trumpet  in  every 
corner  of  the  street,  for  Pharisees  were  distributing  their  alms.  You  could 
see  fathers  and  mothers  neglected,  and  families  broken  up  because  the 
scribes  had  taught  the  people  that  if  they  should  say  "  Oorban  "  they 
were  free  from  all  obligation  to  help  father  or  mother.  They  taught  for 
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men,  and  the  commandments  of  God 
were  laid  on  one  side.  To  wear  broad-bordered  garments  and  phylac 
teries  was  exalted  into  a  matter  of  first  importance ;  while  to  lie  and 
cheat  were  mere  trifles.  To  eat  with  unwashen  hands  was  thought  to 
be  a  crime,  but  to  devour  widow's  houses  was  a  thing  which  to  the 
most  self-righteous  Pharisee  caused  no  qualm  of  conscience.  The  land 
was  filled  with  will-worship,  and  that  is  one  great  and  growing  hin 
drance  nowadays ;  but  for  all  that  Christ  had  a  fold  of  his  own,  and  in 
it  were  those  who  knew  his  voice,  and  these,  following  at  his  heel,  were 
enabled  to  go  in  and  out  and  find  pasture. 

It  was  a  day  when  there  was  the  most  fierce  opposition  to  f.he  real 
truth  of  God.  Our  Lord  Jesus  could  hardly  open  his  mouth  but  they 
took  up  stones  to  stone  him.  It  was  said  that  he  had  a  devil  and  was 
mad  ;  and  that  he  was  a  "  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine  bibber,  the  friend 
of  publicans  and  sinners."  The  rage  of  men  against  Christ  was  then 
boiling  at  its  greatest  heat,  till  at  last  they  took  him  and  nailed  him  to 
the  cross  because  they  could  not  endure  that  he  should  live  among  them. 
And  yet  he  had  his  own  in  those  dreadful  times  :  even  then  he  had  his 
chosen  company  for  whom  he  laid  down  his  life,  of  whom  he  said  to 
the  Father,  "  Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me ;  and  they  have 
kept  thy  word."  To  those  he  spake  saying  "Ye  are  they  that  have 
continued  with  me  in  my  temptations.  And  I  appoint  unto  you  a 
kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  unto  me."  Wherefore,  beloved,  I 
gather  that  though  at  this  time  there  is  a  sad  decline  in  vital  godliness, 
and  though  will  worship  sweeps  over  the  land  with  its  tumultuous 
waves,  and  though  opposition  to  the  pure  truth  of  Christ  is  more  fierce 
than  ever ;  nevertheless  even  at  this  present  time  there  is  a  remnant 
according  to  the  election  of  grace.  Even  to-day  the  answer  of  G-od 
saith  to  the  complaining  prophet,  "  Yet  have  I  left  me  seven  thousand 
in  Israel,  all  the  knees  which  have  not  bowed  unto  Baal."  Wherefore, 
my  brethren,  in  confidence  possess  ye  your  souls. 

Now,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  this  little  company  of  Christ's  people  he 
calls  a  "fold."  Afterwards  they  were  to  be  a  "flock,"  but  while  hia 
bodily  presence  was  with  them  they  were  pre-eminently  a  "  fold."  They 
were  few  in  number,  all  of  one  race,  mostly  in  one  place,  and  so 


OTHER  SHEKP  AND  ONE  FLOCK.  185 

compact  that  they  could  fitly  be  said  to  be  a  fold  One  glance  of  the 
Shepherd's  bodily  eye  saw  them  all.  Happily,  also,  they  were  so 
thoroughly  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the  world  that  they  were  eminently 
and  evidently  folded.  Our  Lord  said  of  them,  "  Ye  are  not  of  the 
world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  He  had  shut  them  in  to  himself, 
and  shut  the  world  out.  Within  this  blessed  seclusion  they  were 
perfectly  safe,  so  that  their  Lord  said  to  the  Father,  "  While  I  was  with 
hem  in  the  world,  I  kept  them  in  thy  name :  those  that  thou  gavest 
ae  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perdition;  that 
he  scripture  might  be  fulfilled."  Whatever  their  mistakes  and  faults, 
and  they  were  many,  yet  they  did  not  conform  themselves  to  the 
generation  among  which  they  dwelt,  but  they  were  kept  apart  as  in  a 
fold  while  Jesus  was  with  them.  In  that  fold  they  were  protected 
from  all  ill  weathers,  and  from  the  wolf,  and  the  thief.  The  Lord's 
presence  with  them  was  like  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  them :  they  had 
only  to  run  to  him  and  he  answered  all  their  adversaries,  and  defended 
them  from  reproach.  Like  another  David,  the  Lord  Jesus  guarded  his 
flock  from  all  the  ravening  lions  that  sought  to  devour  them.  True, 
even  in  that  little  fold  there  were  goats,  for  he  himself  said,  "  I  have 
chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil."  Even  then  they  were 
not  absolutely  pure,  but  they  were  wonderfully  so  ;  and  they  were 
marvellously  separated  from  the  world,  preserved  from  false  doctrine, 
and  kept  from  dividing  and  scattering.  Within  that  fold  they  were 
being  strengthened  for  the  future  following  of  their  great  Shepherd. 
They  were  learning  a  thousand  things  which  would  be  useful  to 
them  when  afterwards  he  sent  them  forth  as  lambs  among  wolves; 
so  that  they  would  be  "  wise  as  serpents  and  harmless  as  doves," 
because  of  what  they  had  learned  of  their  Lord.  Thus  you  see  that  in 
the  worst  times  the  Lord  had  a  church,  I  might  almost  say  the  best 
church.  May  1  not  call  it  so  ?  for  that  apostolic  church  upon  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  descended  was  nut  a  whit  behind  the  church  of  any  era  that 
succeeded  it.  It  was  the  choice  flock  of  all  the  flocks  of  the  ages,  even 
that  feeble  company  of  which  Jesus  said,  "  Fear  not,  little  little  Sock ;  for 
it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom." 

Yet  you  see  one  thing  is  notable  here,  that  when  Jesus  had  thus  shut 
them  all  in  he  would  not  allow  them  to  become  exclusive  and  glide  into  a 
state  of  selfish  satisfaction.  No,  he  opens  wide  the  door  of  the  sheep- 
fold  and  cries  to  them,  "  Other  sheep  I  have."  Thus  he  checks  a 
tendency  so  common  in  the  church  to  be  forgetful  of  those  outside  the 
fold,  and  to  make  one's  own  personal  salvation  the  sum  and  substance 
of  religion.  1  do  not  think  it  wrong  to  sing — 

"  We  are  a  garden  wall'd  around, 
Chosen,  and  made  peculiar  ground  ; 
A  little  spot,  enclosed  by  grace 
Out  of  the  world's  wide  wilderness." 

On  the  contrary,  I  judge  that  the  verse  is  true,  and  sweet,  and  ought  to 
be  sung  ;  but  then  there  are  other  truths  besides  this  one.  To  us  also 
the  Shepherd  opens  the  door  of  the  enclosed  garden  and  says,  "  The 
wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them,  and  the  desert 
rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose."  The  fold  is  our  abode,  but  it  is 


188  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not  our  sole  sphere  of  action;  for  we  are  to  go  forth  of  it  into  all  the 
world  seeking  our  brethren.     Seeing  that  our  Lord  has  other  sheep 
which  are  not  of  this  fold,  and  these  are  to  be  found  by  him  through 
his  faithful  people,  let  us  arouse  ourselves  to  the  holy  enterprise. 
u  O,  come,  let  us  go  and  find  them 

In  the  paths  of  death  they  roam  ; 

At  the  close  of  the  day  'twill  be  sweet  to  say, 

*  I  have  brought  some  lost  one  home.'  " 

Beloved,  I  shall  leave  this  point  when  I  have  said  to  you, — never 
despair !  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  his  people.  They  may  be  few 
and  poor,  but  they  are  Christ's,  and  that  makes  them  precious.  A 
common  sheepfold  is  not  a  thing  of  glory  and  beauty,  four  rough  walls 
compose  it,  and  it  is  but  a  hovel  for  sheep ;  even  so  the  church  may 
appear  mean  and  base  in  men's  eyes  ;  but  then  it  is  the  sheepfold  of 
tke  Shepherd-King,  and  the  sheep  belong  to  the  Lord  G-od  Almighty. 
There  is  a  glory  about  this  which  angels  do  not  fail  to  see.  Here  is 
human  weakness,  but  also  divine  power.  We  do  not,  I  fear,  estimate  the 
strength  of  a  church  aright.  I  read  of  three  brethren  who  had  to  carry 
on  a  col-lege  when  funds  were  running  short.  One  of  them  complained 
that  they  had  no  helpers,  and  could  not  hope  to  succeed ;  but  another 
who  had  more  faith  said  to  his  brother,  "  Do  you  ask  what  we  can  do  ? 
Do  you  say  that  we  are  so  few  ?  I  do  not  see  that  we  are  few  ;  for 
we  are  a  thousand  at  the  least."  "  A  thousand  of  us  !  "  said  the  other, 
"  how  is  that  ? "  "  Why,"  replied  the  first,  "  I  am  a  cipher,  and  you  are 
a  cipher,  and  our  brother  is  a  cipher  ;  so  we  have  three  noughts  to  begin 
with.  Then  I  am  sure  the  Lord  Jesus  is  ONE  :  put  him  down  before  the 
three  ciphers  and  we  have  a  thousand  directly."  Was  not  this  bravely 
spoken  ?  What  power  we  have  when  we  do  but  set  the  great  ONE  in  the 
front.  You  are  nothing,  brother ;  you  are  nothing,  sister ;  I  am  nothing ; 
we  are  all  nothing  when  we  are  put  together  without  our  Lord :  but,  oh, 
if  he  stands  in  front  of  us  then  we  are  thousands ;  and  again  is  it  true  on 
earth  as  in  heaven,  the  chariots  of  the  Lord  are  twenty  thousand,  even 
thousands  of  messengers,  the  Lord  is  among  them  as  in  the  holy  place. 
Wherefore,  my  friends,  be  ye  not  cast  down  at  any  time,  but  say  unto- 
yourselves — We  are  not  even  now  come  to  so  dark  a  night  as  once  fell 
on  this  world.  We  are  not  at  this  painful  moment  in  such  a  desperate 
condition  as  the  church  of  Christ  was  in  his  own  day;  and  if  the  Lord 
be  spiritually  in  the  midst  of  us  we  need  not  fear  though  the  earth  be 
removed,  and  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  for 
there  is  a  city  which  abides  for  ever,  and  there  is  a  river  the  streams 
whereof  shall  for  ever  make  her  glad.  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her,, 
she  shall  not  be  moved ;  God  shall  help  her,  and  that  right  early. 
Wherefore,  my  fellow-believers,  be  ye  strong  and  of  good  courage ! 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  it  is  clear,  for  the  text  teaches  it  in  so  many 
words,  that  OUR  LORD  HATH  OTHER  SHEEP  NOT  YET  KNOWN  TO  us. 
He  says,  "  Other  sheep  I  have."  I  want  you  to  notice  that  strong  ex 
pression,  "  Other  sheep  /  have," — not  "  I  shall  have,"  but  "  I  have 
other  sheep."  Many  of  these  sheep  were  not  even  in  the  thoughts  of  the 
apostles.  I  do  not  think  it  had  crossed  the  mind  of  Peter,  James,  or 
John  that  their  Lord  had  any  sheep  in  this  poor  savage  island,  then 
scarcely  regarded  as  being  within  the  borders  of  the  earth.  I  do  not 


OTHER  SHEEP  AND  ONE  FLOCK.  187 

suppose  the  apostles  at  that  time  even  dreamed  that  their  Lord  Jesua 
had  sheep  in  Home.  No,  their  most  liberal  notion  was  that  the  Hebrew 
nation  might  be  converted,  and  the  scattered  of  the  seed  of  Abraham 
gathered  together  in  one.  Our  Shepherd-King  has  greater  thoughts 
than  the  most  large-hearted  of  his  servants.  He  delights  to  enlarge 
the  area  of  our  love.  "  Other  sheep  have  I."  You  do  not  know  them, 
but  the  Shepherd  does.  Unknown  to  ministers,  unknown  to  the 
warmest-hearted  Christians,  there  are  many  in  the  world  whom  Jesus 
claims  for  his  own  through  the  covenant  of  grace. 

Who  are  these  ?  Well,  these  "  other  sheep  "  were,  first,  his  chosen ; 
for  he  lias  a  people  whom  he  has  chosen  out  of  the  world,  and  ordained 
unto  eternal  life.  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,"  said  he,  "  but  I  have 
chosen  you," — there  is  a  people  upon  whom  his  sovereignty  has  fixed  its 
loving  choice  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  And  of  these 
elect  ones  he  says,  "  I  have  them."  His  election  of  them  is  the  basis 
of  his  property  in  them.  These  are  also  those  whom  his  Father  gave 
him,  of  whom  he  says  in  another  place,  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me 
shall  come  to  me":  and  again,  u  Of  those  whom  thou  hast  given  me  I 
have  lost  none."  His  Father's  eternal  donation  of  them  seals  his  title 
to  them.  These  are  the  people  for  whom  he  peculiarly  and  especially 
laid  down  his  life,  that  they  might  be  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord.  "  Christ 
loved  his  church,  and  gave  himself  for  it."  These  are  they  that  are 
redeemed  from  among  men,  of  whom  we  read,  "Ye  are  not  your  own, 
ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  The  Lord  Jesus  laid  down  his  life  for  his 
sheep  :  he  tells  us  so  himself,  and  none  can  question  his  own  statement. 
These  are  those  of  whom  Jesus  says  '*  I  have  them/'  for  on  account  of 
these  he  entered  into  suretiship  engagements,  even  as  Jacob  undertook 
the  flock  of  Laban  and  watched  day  and  night  that  he  should  not  lose 
them,  and  if  one  had  been  torn,  he  would  have  had  to  make  it  good. 
These  sheep  represent  a  people  for  whom  Christ  hath  entered  into 
suretiship  engagements  with  his  Father  that  he  will  deliver  each  one  of 
them  safely  at  the  last  day  of  account,  not  one  of  them  being  absent 
when  the  sheep  shall  pass  again  under  the  hand  of  him  that  telleth 
them  as  they  will  at  the  last  great  day.  "Other  sheep  I  have,"  says 
Christ.  How  wonderful  that  he  should  say,  "  I  have  them,"  though  as 
yet  they  were  far  off  by  wicked  works. 

What  was  their  state  ?  They  were  a  people  without  shepherd,  with 
out  fold,  without  pasture,  lost  on  the  mountains,  wandering  in  the 
woods,  lying  down  to  die,  ready  to  be  devoured  by  the  wolf;  yet  Jesus 
says,  "  Other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold."  They  were 
sheep  that  had  wandered  exceeding  far,  even  into  the  most  shameful 
iniquity,  and  yet  he  says,  "  I  have  them."  Bad  as  this  world  is  to-day, 
it  must  have  been  far  worse  in  the  cruel  Roman  age  as  to  open  vices 
and  unmentionable  abominations;  and  yet  these  wanderers  were  the 
sheep  of  Christ,  and  in  due  time  they  were  delivered  from  their  sins, 
and  fetched  away  from  all  the  superstition  and  idolatry  and  filthiuess 
into  which  they  had  wandered.  They  were  Christ's  even  while  they 
were  afar  off;  he  had  chosen  them,  the  Father  had  given  them  to  him, 
he  had  bought  them,  and  he  determined  to  have  them ;  nay,  he  suith, 
"  I  have  them,"  and  he  calls  them  his  own  even  while  they  are  trans 
gressing  and  running  headlong  to  destruction. 


188  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

It  seems  to  ine  that  these  were  as  well  known  to  Christ  as  those  that 
were  in  his  fold.  I  think  I  see  him,  the  Divine  Man,  standing  there 
confronting  his  adversaries,  and  when  he  has  cast  his  glance  upon  his 
foes,  I  see  his  eyes  going  to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth  to  gaze 
upon  a  sight  far  more  pleasant  to  him.  While  he  speaks  his  eyes  flash 
with  joyous  fire  as  they  light  upon  thousands  out  of  every  kindred  and 
people  and  tongue,  and  while  he  quotes  to  himself  the  words  of  the 
twenty-second  Psalm  :  "  All  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember  and 
turn  unto  the  Lord :  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  worship 
before  thee.  For  the  kingdom  is  the  Lord's :  and  he  is  the  governor 
among  the  nations.  A  seed  shall  serve  him ;  it  shall  be  accounted  to  the 
Lord  for  a  generation."  He  spies  out  the  myriads  that  are  his,  and  he 
rejoices  before  his  scornful  foes  as  he  sees  his  growing  kingdom  which 
they  are  powerless  to  overthrow.  Proud,  self-righteous  men  may  blindly 
refuse  the  leadership  of  the  Lord's  anointed  Shepherd,  but  he  shall  not 
be  without  a  flock  to  be  his  honour  and  reward.  Did  not  the  Lord  at 
that  time  rejoice  in  his  inmost  heart  and  soliloquize  within  himself 
thus — "  Though  Israel  be  not  gathered,  yet  shall  I  be  glorious  in  the 
eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  my  God  shall  be  my  strength"  ?  This  led  him  to 
say,  "  Other  sheep  I  have." 

In  this  there  is  great  comfort  for  God's  people  who  love  the  souls  of 
their  fellow-men.  The  Lord  has  a  people  in  London,  and  he  knows 
them.  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city,"  was  said  to  the  apostle 
when  as  yet  nobody  was  converted  there.  "  I  have  them,"  says  Christ ; 
though  as  yet  they  had  not  sought  him.  Oar  Lord  Jesus  has  an  elect 
redeemed  people  all  over  the  world  at  this  time,  though  as  yet  they  are 
not  called  by  grace.  I  know  not  where  they  are,  nor  where  they  are  not ; 
but  for  certain  he  has  them  somewhere,  since  still  it  stands  true,  "  Other 
sheep  I  have  which  are  not  of  this  fold."  This  is  a  part  of  our  authority 
for  going  out  to  find  the  lost  sheep ;  for  we  brethren  have  a  right  to  go 
anywhere  to  ask  after  our  Master's  sheep.  I  have  no  business  to  go 
hunting  after  other  people's  sheep  ;  but  if  they  are  my  Master's  sheep 
who  shall  stop  me  over  hill  or  dale  enquiring,  "  Have  you  seen  my 
Master's  sheep  ?  "  If  any  say,  "You  do  intrude  in  this  land,"  let  the 
answer  be,  "  We  are  after  our  Master's  sheep  which  have  strayed 
here ! "  "  Excuse  our  pushing  further  than  politeness  might  allow, 
we  are  in  haste  to  find  a  lost  sheep."  This  is  your  excuse  for 
going  into  a  house  where  you  are  not  wanted,  to  try  and  leave  your 
tract  and  speak  a  word  for  Christ :  say,  "  I  think  my  Master  has 
one  of  his  sheep  here,  and  I  am  come  after  it."  You  have  received  a 
search-warrant  from  the  King  of  kings,  and  therefore  you  have  a  right 
to  enter  and  search  after  your  Lord's  stolen  property.  If  men  belonged  to 
the  devil  we  would  not  rob  the  enemy  himself ;  but  they  do  not  belong 
to  him ;  he  neither  made  theni  nor  bought  them,  and  therefore  we  seize 
them  in  the  King's  name  whenever  we  can  lay  hands  on  them.  I 
doubt  not  but  what  there  are  some  here  this  morning  who  neither 
know  nor  love  the  Saviour  as  yet,  who  nevertheless  belong  to  the 
Redeemer,  and  he  will  yet  bring  them  to  himself  and  to  his  flock. 
Therefore  it  is  that  we  preach  with  confidence.  I  do  not  come  into  this 
pulpit  hoping  that  peradventure  somebody  will  of  his  own  free  will 
return  to  Christ ;  that  may  be  so  or  not,  but  my  hope  lies  in  another 


JTIIER   SHEEP   AND   ONE   FLOCK.  189 

quarter ;  I  hope  that  my  Master  will  lay  hold  of  some  of  them  and  say, 
"  You  are  mine,  and  you  shall  be  mine;  I  claim  you  for  myself."  My 
hope  arises  from  the  freeness  of  grace,  and  not  from  the  freedom  of  the 
will.  A  poor  haul  of  fish  will  any  gospel  fisherman  make  if  he  takes 
none  but  those  who  are  eager  to  leap  into  the  net.  Oh,  for  an  hour  of 
Jesus  among  this  crowd!  Oh,  for  five  minutes  of  the  great  Shepherd's 
handiwork!  When  the  good  Shepherd  overtakes  his  lost  sheep  he  has 
not  much  to  say  to  it.  According  to  the  parable  he  says  nothing,  but  he 
lays  hold  of  it,  lays  it  on  his  shoulders  and  carries  it  home,  and  that  is 
what  I  want  the  Lord  to  do  this  morning  with  some  of  you  whose  will 
is  all  the  other  way,  whose  wishes  and  desires  are  all  contrary  to  him.  I 
want  him  to  come  with  sacred  violence  and  mighty  love  to  restore  you  to 
your  Father  and  your  God.  Not  that  you  will  be  saved  against  your 
will,  but  your  consent  will  be  sweetly  gained.  Oh,  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
would  take  you  in  hand  and  never  let  you  go  again.  May  he  sweetly  say 
to  you,  "  Yea,  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,  therefore  with 
lovingkindness  have  I  drawn  thee." 

III.  Our  third  head  contains  in  it  much  delight.  OUR  LORD  MUST 
BRING  OR  LEAD  THOSE  OTHER  SHEEP.  "  Them  also  I  must  bring  " — 
read  it,  and  it  will  be  more  accurate,  "  them  also  I  must  lead:  "  Christ 
must  be  at  the  head  of  these  other  sheep,  and  they  must  follow  his  lead 
— "them  also  I  must  lead,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice."  Those  who 
belong  to  Christ  secretly  must  be  openly  led  to  follow  him. 

First,  it  is  Christ  that  has  to  do  it,  even  as  he  has  done  it  hitherto. 
The  text  says,  "Them  also  I  must  bring,"  and  this  language  implies 
that  those  who  have  already  come  he  has  brought.  All  that  were  in 
the  fold  Christ  had  brought  there,  and  all  that  are  to  be  in  the  fold  he 
must  lead  there.  All  of  us  who  are  saved  have  been  saved  by  the 
mighty  power  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Is  it  not  so  ?  Is  there  anyone 
among  us  that  came  to  Jesus  without  Jesus  first  coming  to  him? 
Surely,  no.  Without  exception  we  all  admit  that  it  was  his  love  that 
sought  us  out  and  brought  us  to  be  the  sheep  of  his  pasture.  Now,  as 
the^Lord  Jesus  has  done  this  for  us  he  must  do  it  for  others ;  for  they 
will  never  come  except  he  fetch  them. 

Here  comes  in  that  emphatic,  imperious  "must."  The  proverb  is  that 
"  must "  is  for  the  king,  and  the  king  may  say  4<  must "  to  all  of  us  : 
but  did  you  ever  hear  of  a  "  must  "  that  bound  the  king  himself  and 
constrained  him  ?  Kings  generally  do  not  care  to  have  it  said  to  them 
you  "  must ; "  but  there  is  a  king,  the  like  of  which  king  there  never 
was  nor  shall  be  for  glory  and  for  dominion,  and  yet  he  is  bound  by  a 
"  must " — the  Prince  Immanuel  saith,  "  them  also  I  must  bring."  When 
ever  Jesus  says  "must"  something  comes  of  it.  Who  can  resist  the 
omnipotent  must  f  Clear  out,  devils  !  Clear  out,  wicked  men  !  Flee, 
darkness  !  Die,  0  death  I  If  Jesus  says  "  must "  we  know  what  is  going 
to  happen :  difficulties  vanish,  impossibilities  are  achieved.  Glory,  glory, 
the  Lord  shall  get  the  victory  !  Jesus  says  of  his  chosen,  his  redeemed, 
his  espoused,  his  covenanted  ones,  "  Them  also  I  must  bring,"  and  there 
fore  it  must  be  done. 

Furthermore,  he  tells  us  how  he  must  do  it.  He  says,  "  They  shall  hear 
my  voice."  So  that  our  Lord  is  going  to  save  people  still  by  the  gospel. 
J  do  not  look  for  any  other  means  of  converting  men  beyond  the  siinpla 


190  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

preaching  of  the  gospel  and  the  opening  of  men's  ears  to  hear  it — "They 
shall  hear  my  voice."  The  old  methods  are  to  be  followed  to  the  end  of 
the  chapter.  Our  standing  orders  are, — "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  We  are  not  commissioned  to  do 
anything  else  but  continue  to  preach  the  gospel,  the  selfsame  gospel 
which  saved  us  and  which  was  delivered  to  us  at  the  beginning.  We 
know  of  no  alterations,  enlargements,  or  amendments  to  the  gospel.  We 
obey  and  follow  one  voice,  not  many  voices.  One  gospel  of  salvation 
is  to  be  proclaimed  every  where,  and  no  other  work  is  in  our  commission. 

Then  it  is  added,  "  They  shall  hear  my  voice."  It  is  promised  that 
they  shall  first  lend  an  attentive  ear  and  then  that  they  shall  yield  a 
willing  heart  to  the  voice  of  divine  love,  and  follow  Jesus  where  he 
leads.  '-What  then,"  saith  one;  "suppose  I  speak  in  Christ's  name, 
and  they  will  not  hear?"  Do  not  suppose  what  cannot  be!  The 
Scripture  says  of  the  chosen  sheep, — "  they  shall  hear  my  voice."  The 
rest  remain  in  their  blindness,  bui.  the  redeemed  will  hear  and  see.  Do 
not  again  say,  "  Suppose  they  will  not !  "  You  must  not  suppose  any 
thing  that  is  contrary  to  what  Jesus  promises  when  he  says,  "  They 
shall  hear  my  voice."  The  graceless  may  stop  their  ears  if  they  will, 
and  perish  with  Christ's  voice  as  a  witness  against  them,  but  his  own 
redeemed  shall  hear  the  heavenly  voice  and  obey  it.  There  is  no 
resisting  this  divine  necessity:  Jesus  says — "I  must  bring  them,  and 
they  shall  hear  my  voice."  It  was  with  this  that  Paul  turned  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  said  to  the  Jews,  "  Be  it  known  therefore  unto  you,  that 
the  salvation  of  God  is  sent  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  that  they  will  hear 
it."  He  had  no  fear  about  the  reception  the  word  would  meet  with; 
neither  ought  we  to  entertain  any,  since  Christ  has  a  people  who  must 
be  led,  and  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Bishop  and  Shepherd  of  souls. 

We  have  heard  it  said  that  "  If  Christ  must  have  his  people,  what  is 
the  good  of  preaching?"  What  would  be  the  good  of  preaching  if  it 
were  otherwise  ?  Why,  dear  sir,  this  fact  is  one  great  reason  why  we 
preach.  That  which  you  suppose  to  be  a  motive  for  inaction  is  the 
strongest  motive  for  energetic  movement.  Because  the  Lord  has  a 
people  that  must  be  saved  we  feel  an  imperious  necessity  laid  upon  us  to 
join  with  him  in  bringing  this  people  to  himself.  They  must  come,  and 
we  must  fetch  them :  Christian  brethren,  do  you  not  feel  that  you  must 
help  in  compelling  them  to  come  to  the  wedding-feast  ?  Is  it  not  laid 
upon  you  that  you  must  go  after  lost  souls,  that  you  must  speak  to  them, 
seeing  that  you  must  have  a  hand  in  bringing  these  blood-bought  ones 
to  Christ  by  his  Holy  Spirit  ? 

And  again,  are  there  not  some  in  this  place  who  feel  a  necessity  laid 
upon  them  also  that  they  must  come  ?  Do  I  not  hear  some  of  you 
saying,  "  I  have  stood  out  a  long  while,  but  I  must  come ;  I  have 
resisted  divine  grace  long  enough,  and  now  Christ  has  laid  his  hand  on 
me,  I  must  come."  How  I  wish  that  a  heavenly  "must,"  a  blessed 
necessity  of  omnipotent  decree  may  overshadow  you,  and  bear  you  as  a 
sheep  to  the  fold.  Oh  that  you  may  now  yield  yourselves  unto  God 
because  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  you.  Submit  yourselves  unto 
God,  owning  the  supreme  authority  of  his  grace,  which  shall  lead  every 
thought  into  captivity,  that  henceforth  Christ  may  reign  in  your  hearts, 
and  put  every  enemy  under  his  feet.  He  saith,  "  Him  that  cometh  to 


OTHER  SHEEP  AND  ONE  FLOCK.  191 

me  I  will  in  nowise  cast  out."  "  I  will  trust  him,"  saith  one ;  "  I  feel 
I  must."  Just  so ;  and  that  trust  is  a  mark  of  your  election  of  God, 
for  "  He  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life."  "  Whom  he  did 
predestinate  them  he  also  called."  If  he  is  calling  you  it  is  because  he 
did  predestinate  you ;  and  you  may  rest  quite  sure  of  it,  and  yield  to 
him  with  holy  joy  and  delight.  As  for  me,  I  feel  so  happy  in  preaching 
the  gospel,  because  I  am  not  fishing  with  a  "  chance  "  and  a  u  perhaps  " 
that  some  may  come.  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,  and  they 
shall  come.  Every  congregation  is,  in  this  sense,  a  picked  assembly. 
I  felt  this  morning  when  I  came  here  that  there  were  so  many  friends 
out  in  the  country  for  the  holidays  that  we  should  very  likely  have  a 
thin  house.  I  rejoice  that  I  was  altogether  out  in  ray  reckoning,  but 
even  then  I  thought,  God  has  a  people  that  he  will  bring  whom  he  means 
to  bless.  Here  they  are,  and  now  while  standing  here  I  know  that  God's 
word  "shall  not  return  to  him  void,  but  it  shall  accomplish  that  which 
he  pleases,  and  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  he  hath  sent  it." 

IV.  But  now,  lastly,  OUR  LORD  GUARANTEES  THK  UNITY  OF  HIS 
CHURCH.  "  Them  also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice ;  and 
there  shall  be  one  fold  and  one  shepherd."  We  hear  a  great  deal  about 
the  unity  of  the  church,  and  notions  upon  this  subject  are  rather  wild. 
We  are  to  have  the  Roman  and  the  Greek  and  the  Anglican  church  all 
joined  together  in  one :  if  they  were  so,  the  result  would  not  be  worth 
two-pence  ;  but  much  evil  would  come  of  it.  God  has,  I  doubt  not,  a 
chosen  people  amongst  all  these  three  great  corporations,  but  the  union 
of  such  questionable  organizations  would  be  a  dire  omen  of  mischief  to 
the  world :  the  dark  ages,  and  a  worse  Popedom  than  ever,  would  soon 
be  upon  us.  The  more  those  three  quarrel  with  each  other  the  better 
for  truth  and  righteousness.  I  should  like  to  see  the  Anglican  Church 
standing  at  drawn  daggers  with  the  Roman,  and  coming  into  a  more 
and  more  open  opposition  to  its  superstitions.  I  would  to  God  that 
the  national  church  would  in  all  things  be  delivered  from  the  Pope  of 
Rome  and  his  Antichristian  enormities. 

Truly,  this  has  been  carried  out  as  a  matter  of  fact ;  there  never  was 
but  one  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  yet,  even  Christ  Jesus ;  and  there  never 
was  but  one  flock  of  God  yet,  and  there  never  will  be.  There  is  one 
spiritual  church  of  God,  and  there  never  were  two.  All  the  visible 
churches  up  arid  down  the  world  contain  within  themselves  parts  of 
the  one  church  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  there  were  never  two  bodies  of 
Christ,  and  there  cannot  be.  There  is  one  church,  and  there  is  one  Head 
of  the  church  :  the  motto  of  Christianity  is, — one  flock  and  one 
Shepherd. 

As  a  matter  of  experience  this  is  carried  out  in  believers.  I  do  not 
care  who  the  man  is,  if  he  is  a  truly  spiritually-minded  man  he  is  one 
with  all  other  spiritually-minded  men.  Those  people  in  any  visible 
church  who  have  no  grace  are  usually  the  greatest  sticklers  for  every 
point  of  difference  and  ever  particle  of  rite  and  form.  Nominal 
professors  are  soon  at  war,  quickened  believers  follow  after  peace  Of 
course,  when  a  man  has  nothing  else  but  the  outside,  he  rights  for  it  tooth 
and  nail;  but  a  man  who  loves  the  Lord,  and  lives  near  him,  perceives 
the  inner  life  in  others,  and  has  fellowship  therewith  :  that  inner  life  ia 
one  in  all  the  quickened  family,  and  compels  them  to  be  one  in  heart, 


192  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULVIT. 

Set  two  brethren  at  prayer,  the  one  a  Calvinist  and  the  other  at* 
Arniinian,  and  they  pray  alike.  Get  a  real  work  of  the  Spirit  in  a 
district  and  see  how  Baptists  and  Paedo-Baptists  pull  together.  Tell  out 
your  inward  experience  and  speak  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  the  soul,  and 
see  how  we  are  all  moved  thereby.  Here  is  a  brother,  a  member  of 
the  Society  of  Friends,  and  he  likes  silent  worship ;  and  here  is  another 
who  enjoys  hearty  singing ;  but  when  they  get  near  to  God  they  do  not 
quarrel  over  this,  but  agree  to  differ :  the  one  says,  "  The  Lord  be  with 
you  in  your  holy  silence,"  and  the  other  prays  that  the  Lord  may  accept 
his  brother's  psalm.  All  who  are  one  with  Christ  have  a  certain  family 
feeling,  a  higher  form  of  clannishness,  and  they  cannot  shake  it  off.  I 
have  found  myself  reading  a  gracious  book  which  has  drawn  me  near 
to  God,  and  though  I  have  known  that  it  was  written  by  a  man  with 
whose  opinions  I  had  little  agreement,  I  have  not  therefore  refused  to 
be  edified  by  him  in  points  which  are  unquestionably  revealed.  No,  but 
I  have  blessed  the  Lord  that,  with  all  his  blunders,  he  knew  so  much  of 
precious  vital  truth,  and  lived  so  near  his  Lord.  What  Protestant  can 
refuse  to  love  the  holy  Bernard  ?  Was  there  ever  a  more  consecrated 
servant  of  God  or  a  dearer  lover  of  Christ  than  he  ?  Yet  he  was  most 
sorrowfully  in  bondage  to  the  superstitions  of  his  age  and  of  the  Romish 
Church.  Are  you  not  all  one  with  him  who  sang— 
**  Jesus,  the  very  thought  of  thee 

With  sweetness  fills  my  breast  -t 
But  sweeter  far  thy  face  to  see, 

And  in  Thy  presence  rest"  ? 

The  external  church  is  needful,  but  it  is  not  the  one  and  indivisible 
church  of  Christ.  Jesus  as  the  life  binds  his  church  together,  and  that 
life  flows  through  all  the  regenerate,  even  as  the  blood  flows  through 
all  the  veins  of  the  body.  Drop  the  external,  and  look  by  faith  into  the 
spiritual  realm  and  you  will  see  one  flock  and  one  Shepherd. 

The  practical  lesson  is,  let  us  belong  to  that  one  flock.  How  are 
they  known?  Answer:  they  are  a  hearing  flock — they  hear  the  Lord 
and  follow  his  lead.  Be  you  one  of  those  who  listen  to  Christ's 
voice,  and  to  none  besides.  Keep  to  the  one  Shepherd!  How  do  you 
know  him?  It  is  Jesus:  in  his  feet  and  hands  are  nail-prints,  and* his 
side  bears  yet  the  scar.  He  it  is  who  leads  the  one  only  flock.  Follow 
Jesus  and  you  are  right.  Follow  him  everywhere  and  you  are  happy. 
The  best  way  to  promote  the  unity  of  the  church  is  for  all  the  sheep  to 
follow  the  Shepherd.  If  they  all  follow  the  Shepherd  they  will  all  keep 
together.  Let  us  go  forth  and  try  and  do  that,  and  let  us  long  for  that  happy 
day  when  all  disputed  points  shall  be  settled  by  all  obeying  the  Lord. 
Compromises  would  only  mean  an  agreement  to  disobey  the  Lord.  Let 
no  man  yield  a  principle  under  pretence  of  charity  :  it  is  not  charity  to 
call  falsehood  truth.  We  must  follow  Jesus  fully,  and  we  shall  co-ne 
together.  First  pure  then  peaceable  is  the  rule.  Oh,  when  shall  the 
triple  banner  again  float  over  all, — "  One  Lord,  one  Faith,  one  Baptism  !  " 
Oh,  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  forgive  us  our  errors,  and  bring  us  to  thy 
truth !  Oh,  God  the  Son,  forgive  us  our  want  of  holiness,  and  renew 
us  in  thine  own  image!  Oh,  God  the  Father,  forgive  us  our  want  of 
love,  and  melt  us  into  one  family.  To  the  one  God  be  glory,  in  the  one 
church,  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 


Sfabmrack  f  ulpit. 


THE  SHEEP  AND  THEIK  SHEPHERD. 

&   £*rmon 

DELIVERED   BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NKWINGTON. 


"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me." — John  x.  27. 

CHRISTIANS  are  here  compared  to  sheep.     Not  a  very  flattering  com 
parison  you  may  say;   but  then  we  do  not  wish  to  be  flattered,  nor 
would  our  Lord  deem  it  good  to  flatter  us.     While  far  from  flattering, 
it  is,  however,  eminently  consoling,  for  of  all  creatures  there  are  not 
any  more  compassed  about  with  infirmity  than  sheep.     In  this  frailty 
of  their  nature  they  are  a  fit  emblem  of  ourselves ;  at  least,  of  so  many 
of  us  as  have  believed  in  Jesus  and  become  his  disciples.     Let  others 
boast   how  strong  they  are;   yet  if  there  be   strong  ones  anywhere, 
certainly  we  are  weak.     We  have  proved  our  weakness,  and  day  by 
day   we  lament  it.     We  do  confess  our  weakness;   yet  may  we  net 
repine  at  it,  for,  as  Paul  said,  so  we  find,  when  we  are  weak  then  are  we 
strong.     Sheep  have  many  wants,  yet  they  are  very  helpless,  aud  quite 
unable  to  provide  for  themselves.     But  for  the  shepherd's  care  they 
would  soon  perish.     This,  too,  is  our  case.     Our  spiritual  needs  are 
numerous  and  pressing,  yet  we  cannot  supply  any  of  them.    We  are 
travellers  through  a  wilderness  that  yields  us  neither  food  nor  water. 
Unless  our  bread  drop  down  from  heaven,  and  our  water  flow  out  of 
the  living  rock,  we  must  die.     Our  weakness  and  our  want  we  keenly 
feel :  still  we  have  no  cause  to  murmur,  since  the  Lord  knows  our  poor 
estate,  and  succours  us  with  the  tenderest  care.     Sheep,  too,  are  sillj 
creatures,  and  in  this  respect  likewise  we  are  very  sheepish.    We  meekly 
own  it  to  him  who  is  ready  to  guide  us.     We  say,  as  David  said,  "  O 
God,  thou  knowest   my  foolishness;"  and  he  says  to  us  as  he  said  to 
David,  '« I  will  instruct  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou 
shalt  go."     If  Christ  were  not  our  wisdom,  we  should  soon  fall  a  prey 
to  the  destroyer.     Every  grain  of  true  wisdom  that  we  possess  we  have 
derived  from  him  ;  of  ourselves  we  are  dull  and  giddy  ;  folly  is  bound 
up  in  our  heart.     The  more  conscious  you  are,  dear  brethren,  of  your 
own  deficiencies,  your  lack  of  stamina,  discretion,  sagacity,  and  all  the 
instincts  of  self-preservation,  the  more  delighted  you  will  be  to  see 
that  the   Lord   accepts  you   under   these   conditions,  and   calls   YOU 
No.  995. 


326  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  people  of  his  pasture  and  the  sheep  of  his  hand.  He  discerns  YOU 
as  you  are,  claims  you  as  his  own,  foresees  all  the  ills  to  which  you 
are  exposed,  yet  tends  you  as  his  flock,  sets  store  by  every  lamb  of  the 
fold,  and  so  feeds  you  according  to  the  integrity  of  his  heart,  and  guides 
you  by  the  skilfulness  of  his  hands.  "  /  will  feed  my  flock,  and  I  will 
cause  them  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord  God."  Oh,  what  sweet  music  there 
is  to  us  in  the  name  which  is  given  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  of  "  the 
good  Shepherd"!  It  not  only  describes  the  office  he  holds,  but  it  sets 
forth  the  sympathy  he  feels,  the  aptness  he  shows,  and  the  responsibility 
he  bears  to  promote  our  well-being.  What  if  the  sheep  be  weak,  yet 
is  the  shepherd  strong  to  guard  his  flock  from  the  prowling  wolf  or 
the  roaring  lion.  If  the  sheep  suffer  privation  because  the  soil  is 
barren,  yet  is  the  shepherd  able  to  lead  them  into  pasturage  suitable 
for  them.  If  they  be  foolish,  yet  he  goes  before  them,  cheers  them 
with  his  voice,  and  rules  them  with  the  rod  of  his  command.  There 
cannot  be  a  flock  without  a  shepherd ;  neither  is  there  a  shepherd  truly 
without  a  flock.  The  two  must  go  together.  They  are  the  fulness  of 
each  other.  As  the  church  is  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all, 
so  we  rejoice  to  remember  that  "  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and 
grace  for  grace."  That  I  am  like  a  sheep  is  a  sorry  reflection;  but  that 
I  have  a  shepherd  charms  away  the  sorrow  and  creates  a  new  joy. 
It  even  becomes  a  gladsome  thing  to  be  weak,  that  I  may  rely  on  his 
strength;  to  be  full  of  wants,  that  I  may  draw  from  his  fulness  ;  to  be 
shallow  and  often  at  my  wit's  end,  that  I  may  be  always  regulated  by 
his  wisdom.  Even  so  doth  my  shame  redound  tg  his  praise.  Not  to 
you,  ye  great  and  mighty,  who  lift  your  heads  high,  and  claim  for 
yourselves  honour :  not  for  you  is  peace,  not  to  you  is  rest ;  but  unto 
you,  ye  lowly  ones,  who  delight  in  the  valley  of  humiliation,  and  feel 
yourselves  to  be  taken  down  in  your  own  esteem — to  you  it  is  that  the 
Shepherd  becomes  dear;  and  to  you  will  he  give  to  lie  down  in  green 
pastures  beside  the  still  waters. 

In  a  very  simple  way,  we  shall  speak  about  the  proprietor  of  the 
sheep.  ">My  sheep,"  says  Christ.  Then,  we  shall  have  a  little  to  say 
about  the  marks  of  the  sheep.  After  that  I  propose  to  talk  awhile 
about  the  privileges  of  the  sheep.  "  I  know  my  sheep :  "  they  are 
privileged  to  be  known  of  Christ.  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice." 

I.  Who  is  the  proprietor  of  the  sheep?  They  are  all  Christ's. 
"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice."  How  came  the  saints  to  be  Christ's  ? 

They  are  his,  first  of  all,  because  he  chose  them.  Ere  the  worlds  were 
made,  out  of  all  the  rest  of  mankind  he  selected  them.  He  knew  the 
race  would  fall,  and  become  unworthy  of  the  faculties  with  which  he 
endowed  them,  and  the  inheritance  he  had  assigned  them.  To  him 
belonged  the  sovereign  prerogative  that  he  might  have  mercy  on  whom 
he  would  have  mercy;  and  he,  out  of  his  own  absolute  will,  and 
according  to  the  counsel  of  his  own  good  pleasure,  made  choice  severally 
and  individually  of  certain  persons,  and  he  said,  "  These  are  mine." 
Their  names  were  written  in  his  book:  they  became  his  portion 
and  his  heritage.  Having  chosen  them  of  old  so  many  ages  ago,  rest 
assured  he  will  not  lose  them  now.  Men  prize  that  which  they  have 
long  had.  If  there  is  a  thing  that  was  mine  but  yesterday,  and  it  is  lost 
to-day,  I  might  not  fret  about  it ;  but  if  I  h  ave  long  possessed  it,  and 


THE  SHEEP  AND  THEIR  SHEPHERD.  327 

palled  it  my  patrimony,  I  would  not  willingly  part  with  it.  Sheep  of 
Christ,  ye  shall  be  his  for  ever,  because  ye  have  been  his  from  ever. 
They  are  Christ's  sheep,  because  his  Father  gave  them  to  him.  They 
were  the  gift  of  the  Father  to  Christ.  He  often  speaks  of  them  in 
this  way.  "  As  many  as  thou  hast  given  me :  "  "Thou  hast  given  them 
me,"  saith  he,  over  and  over  again.  Of  old,  the  Father  gave  his  people 
to  Christ.  Separating  them  from  among  men,  he  presented  them  to 
him  as  a  gift,  committed  them  into  his  hand  as  a  trust,  and  ordained 
them  for  him  as  the  lot  of  his  inheritance.  Thus  they  become  a  token 
of  the  Father's  love  to  his  only  begotten  Son,  a  proof  of  the  confidence 
he  reposed  in  him,  and  a  pledge  of  the  honour  that  shall  be  done  unto 
him.  Now,  I  suppose  we  most  of  us  know  how  to  value  a  gift  for  the 
donor's  sake.  If  presented  to  us  by  one  whom  we  love,  we  set  great 
store  by  it.  If  it  has  been  designed  to  be  a  love-token,  it  awakens  in 
our  minds  many  sweet  memories.  Though  the  intrinsic  worth  may  he 
of  small  account,  the  associations  make  it  exceedingly  precious.  '"We 
might  be  content  to  lose  something  of  far  greater  value  in  itself  rather 
than  that  which  is  the  gift  of  a  friend,  the  offering  of  his  love.  I  like 
the  delicate  sentiment  of  the  poet,  as  it  is  expressed  in  that  pretty 
verse — 

"  I  never  cast  a  flower  away, 

The  gift  of  one  who  cared  for  me ; 

A  little  flower — a  faded  flower, 

But  it  was  done  reluctantly." 

Yet,  oh,  how  weak  the  words  of  human  passion  !  but,  oh,  how  strong 
the  expressions  of  divine  ardour,  when  Jesus  speaks  to  the  Father  of 
"  the  men  whom  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the  world  "I  "  Thine  they  were," 
he  says,  "  and  thou  gavest  them  me ;  and  those  that  thou  gavest  me  I 
have  kept."  Ye  sheep  of  Christ,  rest  safely  ;  let  not  your  soul  be 
disturbed  with  fear.  The  Father  gave  you  to  his  Son,  and  he  will  not 
lightly  lose  what  God  himself  has  given  him.  The  infernal  lions  shall 
not  rend  the  meanest  lamb  that  is  a  love-token  from  the  Father  to 
his  best  Beloved.  While  Christ  stands  defending  his  own,  he  will 
protect  them  from  the  lion  and  the  bear,  that  would  take  the  lambs  of 
his  flock ;  he  will  not  suffer  the  least  of  them  to  perish. 

"•  My  sheep"  says  Christ.  They  are  his,  furthermore,  because,  in 
addition  to  his  choice  and  to  the  gift,  he  has  bought  them  with  a  price. 
They  had  sold  themselves  for  nought;  but  he  has  redeemed  them,  not 
with  corruptible  things  as  with  silver  and  gold,  but  with  his  precious 
blood.  A  man  always  esteems  that  to  be  exceedingly  valuable  which 
he  procured  with  risk — with  risk  of  life  and  limb.  David  felt  he 
could  not  drink  the  water  that  the  brave  warriors  who  broke  through 
the  host  of  the  Philistines  brought  to  him  from  the  well  at  Bethlehem, 
because  it  seemed  to  him  as  though  it  were  the  blood  of  the  men  that 
went  in  jeopardy  of  their  lives ;  and  he  poured  it  out  before  the  Lord. 
It  was  too  precious  a  draught  for  him,  when  men's  lives  had  been 
hazarded  for  it.  But  the  good  Shepherd  not  only  hazarded  his  life, 
but  even  laid  it  down  for  his  sheep.  Jacob  exceedingly  valued  one 
part  of  his  possessions,  and  he  gave  it  to  Joseph  :  he  gave  him  one 
portion  above  his  brethren.  Now,  you  may  be  sure  he  would  giye 
Joseph  that  which  he  thought  most  precious.  *  But  why  did  he  give  him 


328  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

that  particular  portion ?  Because,  he  says,  "I  took  it  out  of  the  hand 
of  the  Amorite  with  my  sword  and  with  my  bow."  Now,  our  blessed 
Shepherd  esteems  his  sheep  because  they  cost  him  his  blood.  They  cost 
him  his  blood — I  may  say,  he  took  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite 
with  his  sword  and  with  his  bow  in  bloody  conflict,  where  he  wa& 
victor,  but  yet  was  slain.  There  is  not  one  sheep  of  all  his  flock  but 
what  he  can  see  the  mark  of  his  blood  on  him.  In  the  face  of  every 
saint  the  Saviour  sees,  as  in  a  glass,  the  memorial  of  his  bloody  swea,t  in 
G-ethsemane,  and  his  agonies  at  Golgotha.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,  foT  ye 
are  bought  with  a  price."  That  stands  as  a  call  to  duty,  but  it  is  at  the 
same  time  a  consolation,  for  if  he  has  bought  me,  he  will  have  me. 
Bought  with  such  a  price,  he  will  not  like  to  lose  me,  nor  suffer  any 
foe  to  take  me  out  of  his  hand.  Think  not  that  Christ  will  suffer  those 
to  perish  for  whom  he  died.  To  me  the  very  suggestion  seems  to  draw 
near  to  the  verge  of  blasphemy.  If  he  has  bought  me  with  his  blood, 
I  cannot  conceive  he  cares  nothing  for  me,  will  take  no  further  concern 
about  me,  or  will  suffer  my  soul  to  be  cast  into  the  pit.  If  he  has 
suffered  in  my  stead,  where  is  justice  gone  that  the  substitute  should 
bear  my  guilt,  and  I  should  bear  it  too?  and  where  is  mercy  fled,  that 
God  should  execute  twice  the  punishment  for  one  offence?  Nay, 
beloved,  those  whom  he  hath  bought  with  blood  are  his,  and  he  will 
keep  them. 

"  My  sheep''  says  Christ.  They  are  his,  or  in  due  time  they  shall 
become  so,  through  his  capturing  them  by  sacred  power.  As  well  by 
power  are  we  redeemed  as  by  price,  for  the  blood-bought  sheep  had 
gone  astray  even  as  others.  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ; 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way  ; "  but,  my  brethren,  the 
good  shepherd  lias  brought  many  of  us  back  with  infinite  condes 
cension  :  with  boundless  mercy  he  followed  us  when  we  went  astray. 
Oh,  what  blind  slaves  we  were  when  we  sported  with  death  !  We 
did  not  know  then  what  his  love  had  ordained  for  us:  it  never 
entered  our  poor,  silly  heads  that  there  was  a  crown  for  us;  we  did 
not  know  that  the  Father's  love  had  settled  itself  on  us,  or  ever  the 
day-star  knew  its  place.  We  know  it  now,  and  it  is  he  that  has  taught 
us  ;  for  he  followed  us  over  mountains  of  vanity,  through  bogs  and 
miry  places  of  foul  transgression ;  tracked  our  devious  footsteps  on  and 
on,  through  youth  and  manhood,  till  at  last,  with  mighty  grace,  he 
grasped  us  in  his  arms  and  laid  us  on  his  shoulder,  and  is  this  day 
carrying  us  home  to  the  great  fold  above,  rejoicing  as  he  bears  all  our 
weight  and  finds  us  in  all  we  need.  Oh,  that  blessed  work  of  effectual 
grace  !  He  has  made  us  his  own,  he  has  defeated  the  enemy,  the  prey 
has  been  taken  from  the  mighty,  and  the  lawful  captive  has  been  de 
livered.  "  He  hath  broken  the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  the  bars  of  iron 
asunder,"  to  set  his  people  free.  "  0  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord 
for  his  goodness,  and  for  his  wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men!" 

"  MY  SHEKP,"  saith  Christ,  as  he  stands  in  the  midst  of  his  disciples. 
'  My  Shepherd,"  let  us  one  and  all  reply.  All  the  sheep  of  Christ  who 
have  been  redeemed  by  his  power,  become  his  by  their  own  willing  and 
cheerful  surrender  of  themselves  to  him.  We  would  not  belong  to 
another  if  we  might ;  nor  would  we  wish  to  belong  to  ourselves  if  we  could; 
nor,  I  trust,  do  we  want  any  part  of  ourselves  to  be  our  own  property. 


THE   SHEKP   AND   THEIR   SHEPHERD.  329 

Judge  ye  whether  this  be  true  of  you  or  not.  In  that  day  when  I  sur 
rendered  my  soul  to  my  Saviour,  I  gave  him  my  body,  my  soul,  my  spirit ; 
I  gave  him  all  I  had,  and  all  I  shall  have  for  time  and  for  eternity.  I 
gave  him  all  my  talents,  my  powers,  my  faculties,  my  eyes,  my  ears,  my 
limbs,  my  emotions,  my  judgment,  my  whole  manhood,  and  all  that  could 
come  of  it,  whatever  fresh  capacity  or  new  capability  I  may  be  en 
dowed  with.  Were  I  at  this  good  hour  to  change  the  note  of  gladness 
for  one  of  sadness,  it  should  be  to  wail  out  my  penitent  confession  of 
the  times  and  circumstances  in  which  I  have  failed  to  observe  the  strict 
and  unwavering  allegiance  I  owe  to  my  Lord.  So  far  from  regretting, 
I  would  fain  renew  my  vows  and  make  them  over  again.  In  this  I 
think  every  Christian  would  join. 

u  'Tis  done  !   the  great  transaction's  done 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine  : 
He  drew  me,  and  I  follow'd  on, 
Charm'd  to  confess  the  voice  divine. 

Now  rest,  my  long-divided  heart ; 
Fix'd  on  this  blissful  centre,  rest : 
With  ashes  who  would  grudge  to  part, 
When  call'd  on  angels'  bread  to  feast? 

High  heaven,  that  heard  the  solemn  vow, 
That  vow  renew'd  shall  daily  hear: 
Till  in  life's  latest  hour  1  bow, 
And  bless  in  death  a  bond  so  dear." 

And  yet,  brethren,  though  our  hearts  may  now  be  all  in  a  glow,  lest  they 
should  presently  grow  cold,  or  the  bleak  atmosphere  of  this  evil  world 
should  chill  our  devotion,  let  us  never  cease  to  think  of  the  good  Shepherd 
in  that  great,  good  act,  which  most  of  all  showed  his  love  when  he  laid 
down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  You  have  heard  the  story  told  by  Francis 
de  Sales.  He  saw  a  girl  carrying  a  pail  of  water  on  her  head,  in  the 
midst  of  which  she  had  placed  a  piece  of  wood.  On  asking  her  why 
she  did  this,  she  told  him  it  was  to  prevent  the  motion  of  the  water,  for 
fear  it  might  be  spilt.  And  so,  said  he,  let  us  place  the  cross  of  Christ 
in  the  midst  of  our  hearts  to  check  the  movement  of  our  affections,  that 
they  may  not  be  spilt  in  restless  cares  or  grievous  troubles. 

"  My  sheep"  says  Christ,  and  thus  he  describes  his  people.  They  are 
Christ's,  his  own,  a  peculiar  property.  May  I  hope  that  this  truth  will  be 
henceforth  treasured  up  in  your  soul !  It  is  a  common  truth,  certainly; 
but  when  it  is  laid  home  by  the  Holy  Spirit  it  shines,  it  beams,  not  merely 
as  a  lamp  in  a  dark  chamber,  but  as  the  day-star  rising  in  your  hearts. 
Remember  this  is  no  more  our  shame  that  we  are  sheep,  but  it  is  our 
honour  that  we  are  Christ's  sheep.  To  belong  to  a  king  carries  some 
measure  of  distinction.  We  are  the  sheep  of  the  imperial  pastuies. 
This  is  our  safety:  he  will  not  suffer  the  enemy  to  destroy  his  sheep. 
This  is  our  sanctity*  we  are  separated,  the  sheep  of  the  pasture  of  the 
Lord's  Christ.  This  is  sanctin'cation  in  one  aspect  of  it:  for  it  is  the 
making  of  us  holy,  by  setting  us  apart  to  be  the  Lord's  own  portion  for 
ever.  And  this  is  the  key  to  our  duty :  we  are  his  sheep :  then  let  us 
live  to  him,  and  consecrate  ourselves  to  him  who  loved  us  and  gave  him 
self  for  us.  Christ  is  the  proprietor  of  the  sheep;  and  we  are  the 
property  of  the  good  Shepherd. 


830  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

TI.  JSTow,  let  us  commune  together  awhile  upon  the  marks  of  the 
pheep.  When  there  are  so  many  flocks  of  sheep,  it  is  necessary  to  mark 
them.  Our  Saviour  marks  us.  It  has  been  very  properly  observed,  that 
there  are  two  marks  on  Christ's  sheep.  One  is  on  their  ear,  the  other 
is  on  their  foot.  These  are  two  marks  of  Christ's  sheep  not  to  be 
found  on  any  other ;  but  they  are  to  be  found  on  all  his  own — the  mark 
on  the  ear:  "My  sheep  hear  my  voice" — the  mark  on  the  foot:  "I 
know  them,  and  they  follow  me." 

Think  of  this  mark  on  their  ear.  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice."  They 
hear  spiritually.  A  great  many  people  in  Christ's  day  heard  his 
voice  who  did  not  hear  it  in  the  way  and  with  the  perception  that  is 
here  intended.  They  would  not  hear ;  that  is  to  say,  they  would  not 
hearken  or  give  heed,  neither  would  they  obey  his  call  or  come  unto  him 
that  they  might  have  life.  These  were  not  always  the  worst  sort  of 
people :  there  were  some  of  the  best  that  would  not  hear  Christ,  of 
whom  he  said,  according  to  the  original,  as  translated  by  some,  "  Ye 
search  the  Scriptures ;  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life  :  and 
they  are  they  which  testify  of  me.  And  ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that 
ye  might  have  life."  They  would  get  as  far  as  curiosity  or  criticism 
might  allure  them;  but  they  would  not  go  any  farther:  they  would  not 
believe  in  Jesus.  Now,  the  spiritual  ear  listens  to  God.  The  opening 
of  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  this  is  a  mark  of  Christ's  chosen 
blood-bought  people,  that  they  hear  not  only  the  hollow  sound,  but 
the  hidden  sense  ;  not  the  bare  letter,  but  the  spiritual  lesson  ;  and  that 
too  not  merely  with  the  outward  organ,  but  with  the  inward  heart. 
The  chief  point  is  that  they  hear  his  voice.  Oh,  if  all  that  heard 
my  voice  heard  Christ's  voice,  how  would  I  wander  down  every  street 
in  this  city  to  proclaim  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ ;  but,  alas  !  the 
voice  of  the  minister  is  utterly  ineffectual  to  save  a  soul,  unless 
the  voice  of  Christ  reach  the  conscience  and  rouse  its  dormant  powers. 
"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice  ;  "  the  voice  of  Jesus,  his  counsel,  his  com 
mand,  clothed  with  the  authority  of  his  own  sacred  sovereign  utterance. 
When  the  gospel  comes  to  you  as  Christ's  gospel,  with  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit,  the  invitation  is  addressed  to  you  by  him.  You  can  look 
upon  it  in  no  other  light ;  so  you  must  accept  and  receive  it.  When 
his  princely  power  comes  with  it — being  mighty  to  save,  he  puts  saving 
power  into  the  word — then  you  hear  Christ's  voice  as  a  fiat  that  must 
be  obeyed,  as  a  summons  that  must  be  attended  to,  as  a  call  to  which 
there  must  be  a  quick  response.  0  beloved,  do  not  ever  rest  satisfied 
with  hearing  the  voice  of  the  preacher.  We  are  only  Christ's  speaking- 
trumpets  :  there  is  nothing  in  us :  it  is  only  his  speaking  through  us 
that  can  do  any  good.  0  children  of  God,  some  of  you  do  not 
always  listen  to  Christ's  voice  in  the  preaching.  While  we  comment 
on  the  word,  you  make  your  comments  on  us.  Our  style,  or  our  tone, 
or  even  our  gesture,  is  enough  to  absorb — I  might  rather  say,  to  distract 
— your  thoughts.  "  Why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  u~;  ?"  I  beseech  you, 
give  less  heed  to  the  livery  of  the  servant,  and  give  more  care  to  the 
message  of  the  Master.  Listen  warily,  if  you  please ;  but  judge  wisely, 
if  you  can.  See  how  much  pure  grain,  and  how  much  of  Christ,  there 
is  in  the  sermon.  Use  your  sieve;  put  away  all  the  chaff;  take  only 
the  good  wheat ;  hear  Christ's  voice.  Well  were  it  if  we  could 


THE  SHEEP  AND  THEIR  SHEPHERD.  831 

obscure  ourselves  that  we  might  manifest  him.  I  could  wis'i  so  to 
preach  that  you  could  not  see  even  my  little  finger  ;  might  I  but  so 
preach  that  you  could  get  a  full  view  of  Jesus  only.  0  that  you  could  hear 
his  voice  drowning  ours  !  This  is  the  mark,  the  peculiar  mark  of  those 
who  are  Christ's  peculiar  people  :  they  hear  his  voice.  Sometimes,  truly, 
it  sounds  in  the  ministry;  sometimes  it  thrills  forth  from  that  book  of 
books,  which  is  often  grossly  neglected ;  sometimes  it  comes  in  the  night- 
watches.  His  voice  may  speak  to  us  in  the  street.  Silent  as  to  vocal 
utterance,  but  like  familiar  tones  that  sometimes  greet  us  in  our  dreams, 
the  voice  of  Christ  is  distinctly  audible  to  the  soul.  It  will  come  to  you 
in  sweet  or  in  bitter  providences;  yea,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  hearing 
Christ's  voice  in  the  rustling  of  every  leaf  upon  the  tree,  in  the  moaning 
of  every  wind,  in  the  rippling  of  every  wave.  And  there  be  those  that 
have  learned  to  lean  on  Christ's  bosom,  till  they  have  looked  for  all  the 
world  as  though  they  were  a  shell  that  lay  in  the  ocean  of  Christ'? 
love,  listening  for  ever  to  the  sonorous  cadence  of  that  deep,  un- 
fathomed,  all-mysterious  main.  The  billows  of  his  love,  never  cease  to 
swell.  The  billowy  anthem  still  peals  on  with  solemn  grandeur  in  the 
ear  of  the  Christian.  0  may  we  hear  Christ's  voice  each  one  of  us  for 
ourselves  !  I  rind  that  language  fails  me,  and  metaphors  are  weak  to 
describe  its  potent  spell. 

One  point  is  worth  noticing,  however.  I  think  our  Lord  meant 
here  that  his  sheep,  when  they  hear  his  voice,  know  it  so  well  that  they 
can  tell  it  at  once  from  the  voice  of  strangers.  The  true  child  of  God 
knows  the  gospel  from  the  law.  It  is  not  by  learning  catechisms, 
reading  theological  books,  or  listening  to  endless  controversies,  that 
he  finds  this  out.  There  is  an  instinct  of  his  regenerate  nature 
far  more  trustworthy  than  any  lessons  he  has  been  taught.  The  voice 
of  Jesus  !  Why,  there  is  no  music  like  it.  If  you  have  once  heard  it, 
you  cannot  mistake  it  for  another,  or  another  for  it.  Some  are  babes 
in  grace:  others  are  of  full  age,  and  by  reason  of  use,  have  their  senses 
exercised  ;  but  one  sense  is  quickly  brought  out — the  sense  of  hearing. 
It  is  so  easy  to  tell  the  joy-bells  of  the  gospel  from  the  death-knell  of 
the  law ;  for  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life.  "  Do,  or  die,'* 
says  Moses.  "  Believe,  and  live,"  says  Christ :  you  must  know  whicbHs 
which.  Yes;  and  I  think  they  are  equally  shrewd  and  quick  to  dis 
criminate  between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit.  Let  some  of  the  very  feeblest 
of  God's  people  sit  down  under  a  fluent  ministry,  with  all  the  beauties 
of  rhetoric,  and  let  the  minister  preach  up  the  dignity  of  human  nature, 
and  the  sufficiency  of  man's  reason  to  fitul  out  the  way  of  righteousness, 
and  you  will  hear  them  say :  "  It  is  very  clever ;  but  there  is  no  food  for 
me  in  it."  Bring,  however,  the  best  and  most  instructed,  and  most 
learned  Christian  man,  and  set  him  down  under  a  ministry  that  is  very 
faulty  as  to  the  gift  of  utterance,  and  incorrect  even  in  grammar;  but 
if  it 'is  full  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  know  what  he  will  say:  "Ah!  never 
mind  the  man,  and  never  mind  the  platter  on  which  he  brought  the 
meat ;  it  was  food  to  my  soul  that  1  fed  upon  with  a  hearty  relish ;  it 
was  marrow  and  fatness,  for  I  could  hear  Christ's  voice  in  it."  I  am 
not  going  to  follow  out  these  tests;  but  certain  it  is,  that  the  sheep 
know  Christ's  voice,  and  can  easily  distinguish  it.  I  saw  hundreds  of 
lambs  the  other  day  together,  and  there  were  also  their  mothers; 


332  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

and  I  am  sure  if  I  had  had  the  task  of  allotting  the  proper  lamb  to 
each,  or  to  any  of  them,  it  would  have  kept  me  till  now  to  have  done 
it.  But  somehow  the  lambs  knew  the  mothers,  and  the  mothers 
knew  the  lambs;  and  they  were  all  happy  enough  in  each  other's 
company. 

Every  saint  here,  mixed  up  as  he  may  be  at  times  with  parties 
and  professors  of  all  sorts,  knows  Christ,  and  Christ  knows  him,  and 
he  is  therefore  bound  to  his  owner.  That  is  the  mark  on  the  ear. 
You  have  seen  sometimes  in  the  country  two  flocks  together  on  the 
road,  and  you  say:  "I  wonder  how  the  shepherds  will  manage  to  keep 
them  distinct  ?  They  will  get  mixed  up."  They  do  not;  they  go  this 
way  and  that  way  ;  and  after  a  little  commingling  they  separate,  for  they 
know  their  master's  voice;  "  and  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow."  You 
will  go  to-mcrrow,  many  of  you,  out  into  the  world,  son:e  to  the  Ex 
change,  others  to  the  market,  and  others  again  into  the  factory  :  you 
are  all  mixed.  Yes;  but  the  seeming  confusion  of  your  company  is 
temporary,  not  real  and  permanent.  You  will  come  right  again,  and 
you  will  go  to  your  own  home  and  your  own  fellowship.  And  at  the 
last,  when  we  shall  have  ended  our  pilgrimage,  the  one  shall  wend  his 
way  to  the  glory  land,  and  the  other  to  the  ab}'ss  of  woe.  There  will 
be  no  mistake.  You  will  hear  the  Master's  call,  and  obey.  There  is  a 
mark  on  the  ear  which  identifies  every  saint. 

Christ's  sheep  hear  his  voice  obediently.  This  is  an  important  proof 
of  discipleship.  Indeed,  it  may  serve  as  a  reproof  to  many.  Oh,  1  would 
that  you  were  more  careful  about  this  1  "  He  that  hath  my  com 
mandments,  and  keepeth  them,"  said  Jesus,  "he  it  is  that  loveth  m«." 
"  He  that  loveth  me  not  keepeth  not  my  sayings."  How  comes  it  to  pass, 
then,  that  there  are  certain  commands  of  Christ  which  some  Christians 
will  suffer  to  lie  in  abeyance?  They  will  say,  "  The  Lord  commands 
this,  but  it  is  not  essential."  Oh,  unloving  spirit,  that  can  think  any 
thing  unessential  that  thy  Bridegroom  bids  thee  do  !  They  ihat  love, 
think  little  things  of  great  moment,  especially  when  they  are  looked 
upon  as  tokens  of  the  strength  or  the  tenderness  of  one's  regard.  It 
may  not  be  essential,  in  order  to  prove  the  relation  in  which  a  wife 
stands  to  her  husband,  that  she  should  study  his  tastes,  consult  his 
ivishes,  or  attend  to  his  comfort.  But  will  she  the  less  strive  to  please, 
because  love,  not  fear,  constrains  her  ?  I  trow  not.  And  can  it  be 
that  any  of  you,  my  brethren,  would  harbour  such  a  thought  as  your 
negligence  implies  ?  Do  you  really  suppose  that  after  the  choice  of 
Christ  has  been  fixed  on  you,  and  the  love  of  Christ  has  been  plighted 
to  you,  you  may  now  be  as  remiss  or  careless  as  you  like?  Nay,  rather, 
might  we  not  expect  that  a  sacred  passion,  an  ardent  zeal,  a  touch  of 
inspiration  would  stir  you  up,  put  you  on  the  alert,  make  you  wake  at 
the  faintest  sound  of  his  voice,  or  keep  you  listening  to  do  his  will?  Be 


THE   SHEEP   AND   THEIR    SHEPHERD.  333 

it  ours,  then,  to  act  out  with  fidelity  that  verse  we  have  often  sung  with 
enthusiasm  : — 

44  In  all  my  Lord's  appointed  ways 
My  journey  I'll  pursue." 

However  little  the  precept  may  appear  in  the  eyes  of  others  ;  however 
insignificant  as  compared  with  our  salvation,  yet — doth  the  Lord  com- 
inand  it? — then  his  sheep  hear  his  voice,  and  they  follow  him. 

Christ  has  marked  his  sheep  on  their  feet  as  well  as  their  ears. 
They  follow  him:  they  are  gently  led,  not  harshly  driven.  They 
follow  him  as  the  Captain  of  their  salvation;  they  trust  in  the  power  of 
his  arm  to  clear  the  way  for  them.  All  their  trust  on  him  is  stayed;  all 
their  hope  on  him  they  lean.  They  follow  him  as  their  teacher ;  they 
call  no  man  "  Rabbi  "  under  heaven,  but  Christ  alone.  He  is  the 
infallible  source  of  their  creeds;  neither  will  they  allow  their  minds  to 
be  ruled  by  conclaves,  councils,  nor  decrees.  Hath  Christ  said  it  ?  It  is 
enough.  If  not,  it  is  no  more  for  me  than  the  whistling  of  the  wind. 
They  follow  Christ  as  their  teacher. 

And  the  sheep  of  Christ  follow  him  as  their  example  ;  they  desire  to 
be  in  this  world  as  he  was.  It  is  one  of  their  marks,  that  to  a  greater 
or  less  degree  they  have  a  Christ-like  spirit ;  and  if  they  could  they 
would  be  altogether  like  their  Lord. 

They  follow  him,  too,  as  their  Commander,  and  Lawgiver,  and  Prince. 
"  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it,"  was  his  mother's  wise  speech ; 
and  it  is  the  children's  wise  rule  :  *'  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do 
it."  Oh,  blessed  shall  they  be  above  many  of  whom  it  shall  be  said, 
"  These  are  they  that  have  not  defiled  their  garments."  "  These  are  they 
which  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth."  Some  of  his  followers  are 
not  very  scrupulous.  They  love  him.  It  is  not  for  us  to  judge  them. 
Rather  we  place  ourselves  among  them  and  share  in  the  censure.  But 
happiest  of  all  the  happy  are  they  who  see  the  footprint — the  print  of 
that  foot  that  once  was  pierced  with  the  nail — and  put  their  foot  down 
where  he  placed  it,  and  then  again,  in  the  selfsame  mark,  follow  where  he 
trod,  till  they  climb  at  last  to  the  throne.  Keep  close  to  Christ;  take  care 
of  his  little  precepts  unto  the  end.  Remember,  "  Whosoever  shall 
break  one  of  these  least  commandments,  and  shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall 
be  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Do  not  peril  being 
least  in  the  heavenly  kingdom,  though  it  is  better  to  be  that  than  to  be 
greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  0  seek  to  be  very  near  him,  to 
be  a  choice  sheep  in  his  chosen  flock,  and  to  have  the  mark  distinctly 
upon  your  footl 

1  will  not  stay  to  apply  these  truths,  but  leave  each  one  of  you  to 
make  such  self-searching  enquiries  as  the  text  suggests.  Have  I  the 
ear  mark  ?  Have  I  the  foot  mark  ?  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,"  "  and 
they  follow  me."  I  hope  that  I  am  among  the  number. 


334  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

III.  The  last  point,  with  which  we  now  proceed  to  close,  is — THE 
PRIVILEGE  OF  CHRIST'S  SHEEP.  It  does  not  look  very  large,  but  if  we 
open  it  we  shall  see  an  amazing  degree  of  blessedness  in  it.  "I  know 
them,"  "  I  know  them."  What  does  it  mean? 

1  have. not  time  now  to  tell  you  all  it  means.  "/  know  them" 
What  is  the  reverse  of  this  but  one  of  the  most  dreadful  things  that 
is  reserved  for  the  day  of  judgment?  There  will  be  some  who  will  say, 
"  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name,  and  in  thy  name 
cast  out  devils?"  And  he  shall  say,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
1  never  knew  you;  depart  from  me,  ye  cursed."  Now  measure  the 
height  of  that  privilege  by  the  depth  of  this  misery.  "I  never  knew 
you."  What  a  volume  of  scorn  it  implies !  What  a  stigma  of  infamy 
it  conveys !  Change  the  picture.  The  Redeemer  says,  "  I  know  them," 
"  I  know  them."  How  his  eyes  flash  with  kindness ;  how  their  cheeks 
burn  with  gratitude,  as  he  says,  "  I  know  them  "!  Why,  if  a  man  had  a 
friend  and  acquaintance  that  he  used  to  know,  and  some  years  after 
he  found  him  a  disreputable,  abandoned,  wicked,  guilty  criminal, 
I  feel  pretty  sure  he  would  not  say  much  about  having  known  such 
a  fellow,  though  he  might  be  driven  to  confess  that  he  had  some  years 
ago  a  passing  acquaintance  with  him.  But  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
though  he  knows  what  poor,  unworthy  ones  we  are,  yet  when  we  shall 
be  brought  up  before  the  Lord,  before  the  great  white  throne,  he  will 
confess  he  knew  us.  He  does  know  us,  we  are  old  acquaintances  of  his, 
and  he  has  known  us  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  "  For 
whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  his  Son,  that  he  might  be  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren. 
Moreover  whom  he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called."  There 
are  riches  of  grace  in  this ;  but  we  will  consider  it  in  another  way.  Our 
Saviour  knows  us,  our  Shepherd  knows  us.  Beloved,  he  knows  your 
person  and  all  about  you.  You,  with  that  sick  body,  that  aching  head, 
he  knows  you  and  he  knows  your  soul  with  all  its  sensitiveness ;  that 
timidity,  that  anxiety,  that  constitutional  depression — he  knows  it  all.. 
A  physician  may  come  to  see  you,  and  be  unable  to  detect  what  the  disease 
is  that  pains  or  prostrates  you,  but  Christ  knows  you  through  and 
through ;  all  the  parts  of  your  nature  he  understands.  "  I  know 
them,"  saith  he;  he  can  therefore  prescribe  for  you.  He  knows  your 
gins.  Do  not  let  that  dismay  you,  because  he  has  blotted  them  all  out; 
and  he  only  knows  them  to  forgive  them,  to  cover  them  with  his 
righteousness.  He  knows  your  corruptions  ;  he  will  help  you  to  over 
come  them ;  he  will  deal  with  you  in  providence  and  in  grace,  so  that 
they  shall  be  rooted  up.  He  knows  your  temptations.  Perhaps  you 
are  living  away  from  your  parents  and  Christian  friends,  and  you  have 
had  an  extraordinary  temptation,  and  you  wish  you  could  go  home  and 
tell  your  mother.  Oh,  he  knows  it,  he  knows  it;  he  can  help  you  better 


THE  SHEEP  AND  THEIR  SHEPHERD.  335 

than  your  mother  cm.  You  s,iy  :  "  I  wish  the  minister  knew  the  tempta 
tion  I  have  passed  through."  Do  not  tell  it;  God  knows  it,  As 
Daniel  did  not  waut  Nebuchadnezzar  to  tell  him  the  nature  of  his 
dream,  but  gave  him  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  at  the  same  time, 
so  God  can  send  you  comfort.  There  will  be  a  word  as  plainly  suited 
to  your  case  as  though  it  were  all  printed  and  the  preacher  had  known 
it  all.  It  must  be  so.  Depend  upon  it,  the  Lord  knows  your  temptation, 
and  watches  your  trial ;  or  be  it  a  sick  child,  or  be  it  a  bad  matter  of 
business  that  has  lately  occurred ;  or  be  it  a  slander  that  has  wounded 
your  heart,  there  is  not  .a  pang  you  feel  but  God  as  surely  sees  it  as  the 
weaver  sees  the  shuttle  which  he  throws  with  his  own  hand.  He  knows 
your  trial,  and  he  knows  the  meaning  of  your  groans :  he  can  read  the 
secret  desire  of  your  heart.  You  need  not  write  it  nor  speak  it :  he  has 
understood  it  all.  You  were  saying :  "  0  that  my  child  were  converted ! 
O  that  I  grew  in  grace  !"  He  knows  it :  he  knows  it  every  whit.  There 
is  not  a  word  on  your  tongue,  nor  a  wish  in  your  heart,  but  he 
knoweth  it  altogether.  0  dear  heart,  he  knows  your  sincerity ! 
Perhaps  you  want  to  join  the  church,  and  your  proposal  has  been  de 
clined,  because  you  could  not  give  satisfactory  testimony.  If  you  are 
sincere,  he  knows  it ;  he  knows,  moreover,  what  your  anxiety  is.  You 
cannot  tell  another  what  it  is  that  is  bitter  to  you — the  heart  knoweth 
its  own  bitterness — he  knows .  it.  As  his  secret  is  with  you,  so  your 
secret  is  with  him.  He  knows  you :  he  knows  what  you  have  been 
trying  to  do.  That  secret  gift — that  offering  dropped  so  quietly  where 
none  could  see  it— he  knows  it.  And  he  knows  that  you  love  him. 
"Yes,"  you  are  saying  in  your  soul,  "if  ever  I  loved  thee,  my  Jesus, 
'tis  now."  No,  you  cannot  tell  him,  nor  tell  others  ;  but  he  knows 

it  all. 

So,  now,  in  closing,  let  us  say  that  in  the  text  there  is  mutual 
knowledge.  "  I  know  them,  but  they  also  know  me,  because  they  hear 
my  voice,  and  recognise  it."  Here  is  mutual  confession.  Christ  speaks, 
else  there  would  be  no  voice :  they  hear,  else  were  the  voice  not  useful. 
"I  know  them;"  that  is  his  thoughts  go  towards  them, 
follow  me;"  that  is,  their  thoughts  go  towards  him.  He  leads  the 
way,  else  they  could  not  follow.  They  follow,  however,  when  he  leads 
the  way.  Being  the  counterpart  of  each  other,  what  the  one  does 
the  other  returns  through  grace;  and  what  grace  puts  into  the 
sheep  the  shepherd  recognises,  and  makes  t*  return  to  them.  Christ 
and  his  church  become  an  echo  of  each  other :  his  the  voice,  theirs  is 
but  a  faint  echo  of  it ;  still  it  is  a  true  echo,  and  you  shall  know  who 
are  Christ's  by  this.  Do  they  echo  what  Christ  saith?  Oh,  how  I  wish 
WQ  were  all  sheep !  How  my  soul  longs  that  we  may  many  of  us  who 
are  not  of  his  fold  be  brought  in.  The  Lord  bring  you  in,  my  dear 
hearers.  The  Lord  give  you  his  grace,  and  make  you  his  own,  comfort 


336'  METROPOLITAN   7ABERNACLK   PULPIT. 

you,  and  make  you  to  follow  him.  And  if  you  are  his,  show  it.  These, 
dear  brethren  and  sisters,  here  at  this  time,  desire  to  confess  Christ  in 
your  presence.  If  they  are  doing  right,  and  you  are  not  doing  as  they 
do,  then  you  are  doing  wrong.  If  it  is  the  duty  of  one,  it  is  the  duty 
of  all ;  and  if  one  Christian  may  neglect  making  a  profession,  all  may 
do  so,  and  then  there  will  be  no  visible  church  whatever,  and  the  visible 
ordinances  must  die  out.  If  you  know  him,  own  him,  for  he  hath  eaid : 
"  Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  confess 
also  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  But  whosoever  shall  deny 
me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
God  bless  you,  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen. 


Latter  from  Mr.  Spur g eon,  read  at  the  Tabernacle  on  Lor -d 's-day ',  June 
18th:— 

MY  BELOVED  FRIENDS, — 

As  soon  as  the  church  had  resolved  to  meet  for  special  prayer  for 
me,  I  began  rapidly  to  recover.  It  pleased  God  to  turn  the  wind  at  the  beginning 
of  this  week,  and  the  change  in  the  temperature  has  worked  wonders.  We  may 
truthfully  say  of  the  Wednesday  meeting  for  prayer,  that  the  Lord  fulfilled  his 
word  :  "  Before  they  call,  I  will  answer  ;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will 
hear."  For  all  this  great  goodness  I  pray  you  to  unite  with  me  in  sincere  and 
intense  gratitude  to  the  Lord  our  God. 

I  feel  bound  publicly  to  express  my  happiness  of  heart.  This  week  has  furnished 
me  with  the  liveliest  proofs  of  your  true  love.  I  have  been  deeply  touched  with  the 
various  ways  in  which  the  afl'ection  of  so  many  of  you  has  sought  to  find  expression. 
I  value  this  not  only  for  my  own  sake,  though  it  is  very  sweet  to  be  the  object  of 
such  hearty  love,  but  because  I  see  in  it  the  evidence  that  our  union  has  been 
cemented  by  years,  and  the  earnest  of  future  years  of  united  effort,  if  God  spares  us. 
The  absence  of  unity  is  weakness :  its  indisputable  presence  is  strength. 

On  the  closing  day  of  my  thirty-seventh  year,  I  find  myself  the  pastor  of  a  beloved 
flock,  who  have  borne  the  test  of  twelve  Sabbaths  of  their  minister's  absence,  and 
the  severer  test  of  more  than  seventeen  years  of  the  same  ministry,  and  are  now 
exhibiting  more  love  to  him  than  ever.  I  bless  God,  but  I  also  thank  you,  and 
assure  you  that  I  never  felt  happier  in  the  midst  of  my  people  than  I  do  now  in  the 
prospect  of  returning  to  you. 

I  am  still  weak,  but  the  improvement  in  strength  has  been  this  week  very 
surprising.  I  hardly  dare  speak  of  the  future ;  but  I  earnestly  hope  we  shall  look 
each  other  in  the  face  on  the  first  Sabbath  of  July. 

The  collection  to-day  is  to  enable  the  London  Baptist  Association  to  build  a  new 
chapel  in  the  Wandsworth  Road.  We  are  to  carry  out  the  project,  so  that  it  will  not 
become  us  to  be  slack  in  our  collection.  London  grows  so  rapidly,  that  much  must 
be  done  to  keep  pace  with  its  spiritual  needs.  Our  Association  does  something,  but 
ten  times  more  would  be  little  enough.  You  will  I  am  sure  give  as  God  has  prospered 
you.  The  College,  of  course,  will  be  less  helped ;  but  I  must  beg  to  thank  you  for 
the  continued  series  of  noble  contributions  which  have  made  each  week  remarkable. 

Peace  be  with  you  and  the  Lord's  own  anointing.  May  those  who  speak  to  you 
to-day  be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  May  the  soft  south  wind  of  the  Spirit's  love  be 
among  you,  and  may  you  pour  forth  praise  as  flowers  breathe  perfume. 

Yours  very  truly, 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


rtropoliten  Stomach  fhtlpit. 


THE   SECURITY   OF  BELIEVEES ;  OR,    SHEEP  WHO 
SHALL  NEVER   PERISH. 


T 
INTENDED  FOR  READING  ON  LORD'S-DAY,   DECEMBER  29TH,   1889, 

DELIVERED    BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOtf, 
On  Thursday  Evening,  September  5th,  1889. 


"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me :  and  I  give  unto 
them  eternal  life ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out 
of  my  hand.  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  all ;  and  no  man  la 
able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's  hand.  I  and  my  Father  are  one." — John  x. 
27—30. 

OUR  Saviour  did  not  hesitate  to  preach  the  deeper  doctrines  of  the 
gospel  to  the  most  miscellaneous  assembly.  When  he  began  to  preach 
where  he  was  brought  up,  they  all  gathered  with  admiration  about 
him,  until  he  preached  the  doctrine  of  election ;  and  then,  straightway, 
they  were  so  maddened  that  they  would  have  destroyed  him.  They 
could  not  bear  to  hear  of  the  widows  of  Israel  passed  by,  and  the 
woman  of  Sarepta  chosen ;  nor  of  a  heathen  leper  healed,  while  the 
many  lepers  of  their  own  race  were  left  to  die.  Election  seems  to  heat 
the  blood  and  fire  the  wrath  of  many.  Not  that  they  care  to  be  chosen 
of  God  themselves  ;  but,  like  the  dog  in  the  manger,  they  would  keep 
other  people  out  of  the  privilege.  Not  even  to  prevent  these  displays 
of  bad  temper  did  our  Lord  keep  back  the  discriminating  truths  of  the 
Word.  Here,  when  addressing  the  Jews,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  speak, 
even  to  a  rude  rabble,  concerning  that  glorious  doctrine.  He  says, 
"  Ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said  unto 
you."  He  does  not  lower  the  standard  of  doctrine  ;  but  he  holds  hia 
ground,  and  carries  the  war  into  the  enemy's  camp.  The  notion  that 
certain  truths  are  not  fit  to  be  preached  to  a  general  assembly,  but  are 
to  be  kept  for  the  special  gathering  of  the  saints,  is,  I  believe,  hor 
ribly  mischievous.  Christ  has  not  commanded  us  to  keep  a  part  of  our 
teaching  sub  rosd  ;  reserved  from  the  common  folk,  and  set  aside  for 
the  priests  alone.  He  is  for  openly  proclaiming  all  truth.  "  What  I 
tell  you  in  darkness,  that  speak  ye  in  light :  and  what  ye  hear  in 
the  ear,  that  preach  ye  upon  the  housetops."  There  is  no  truth  that 
No.  2,120.  4ft 


264  THE    SECURITY    OF    BELIEVERS; 

we  need  be  ashamed  of,  and  there  is  no  truth  that  will  do  any  harm. 
We  grant  you  that  every  truth  can  be  twisted ;  but  even  this  would 
be  a  less  evil  than  the  concealment  of  it.  Whatever  the  doctrine 
may  be,  ungodly  men  can  pervert  it  according  to  their  own  lusts ;  and 
if  we  have  to  stop  preaching  a  doctrine  because  of  the  possibility 
of  perverting  it,  we  shall  never  preach  anything  at  all,  for  every 
truth  may  be  perverted,  and  made  to  be  the  mother  of  infinite  mischief. 
Our  Saviour  did  not  teach  his  disciples  to  keep  certain  things  for  the 
instructed  few  who  were  able  to  receive  them;  but  he  bade  us  publish  all 
the  great  truths,  since  they  are  necessary  for  conviction,  for  conversion, 
for  edification,  for  sanctification,  and  for  the  perfecting  of  the  people  of 
God.  Even  to  his  brutish  opponents  he  exhibited  but  little  reserve. 
He  flashed  in  the  faces  of  his  adversaries  this  grand,  but  humbling 
truth,  "Ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep."  Your 
unbelief  is  just  an  evidence  that  you  were  not  chosen,  that  you  have 
not  been  called  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  that  you  are  still  in  your 
gins. 

The  Jews  had  said  to  him,  "  If  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly." 
They  professed  that  they  wanted  to  know  more  certainly  concerning 
him.  This  was  a  vain  pretence,  for  he  had  told  them  all  they  needed 
to  know,  and  they  had  not  believed  him.  Therefore  he  answered 
them  to  a  large  degree  by  making  them  know  more  about  them 
selves.  Sometimes  the  point  in  which  a  man  is  deficient  is  not  as  to 
the  gospel,  but  as  to  his  own  need  of  it.  He  may  know  all  of  Christ 
that  is  needful  for  his  salvation,  but  he  may  not  know  enough  about 
himself  and  his  own  lost  condition  ;  and  therefore  he  is  not  in  the  way 
in  which  Christ  becomes  precious  to  him,  because  he  is  ignorant  of  his 
deep  and  terrible  need.  So  the  Saviour  began  to  talk  to  them,  not  so 
much  about  himself  as  about  his  people,  and  what  they  were  to  be. 
"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me." 

I  pray  God,  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  bless  the  word  to  many,  that  they 
may  learn  more  about  the  work  of  Christ  in  their  hearts,  and  more 
about  their  need  of  it,  and  thus  may  be  led  to  seek  Jesus,  and  find 
him  to-night  as  their  Saviour  and  their  Shepherd. 

There  are  two  things  in  my  text  which  will  suffice  for  our  medita 
tion.  First,  here  is  a  description  given  of  the  Lord's  people.  "My 
sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me."  And 
then,  secondly,  there  is  a  privilege  secured  to  them,  namely,  their  ever 
lasting,  unquestionable  safety.  "I  give  unto  them  eternal  life;  and 
they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand.  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  all ;  and  no 
man  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's  hand.  I  and  my  Father 
are  one." 

I.  First,  and  all  that  I  can  say  will  be  but  little,  considering  the 
largeness  of  the  subject,  let  us  notice  THE  DESCRIPTION  HERE  GIVEN  OF 

THE    PEOPLE    OF    GOD. 

They  are  first  described  by  a  speciality  of  possession:  "  My  sheep." 
All  men  are  not  sheep,  for  some  are  foxes,  or  ravening  wolves,  and 
others  are  compared  to  dogs  and  lions.  All  persons  who  might  be 
called  sheep  are  not  Christ's  sheep.  All  do  not  belong  to  his  flock. 
All  are  not  gathered  into  his  fold.  There  is  a  speciality  of  possession. 


OR,  SHEEP  wno  SHALL  NEVER  PERISH.  265 

There  may  be  many  sheep,  but  the  Saviour  speaks  of  " My  sheep," 
those  whom  he  chose  of  old,  those  who  were  given  him  of  the  Father, 
those  who  have  been  bought  with  his  blood,  redeemed  from  among 
men,  and  in  due  time  have  been  ransomed  by  his  power,  for  he  has 
bought  them  back  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  and  therefore  claims 
them  to  be  his  own.  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people."  Other  lords 
have  their  portion,  and  Christ  takes  his  portion.  His  people  are  the 
lot  of  his  inheritance.  He  speaks  of  "  my  sheep "  as  a  peculiar 
heritage,  whom,  as  a  shepherd,  he  claims  for  his  own.  Of  these  he  ia 
the  sole  Owner.  He  is  not  merely  their  Keeper,  but  their  Possessor. 
We  read  of  the  hireling  shepherd,  "  whose  own  the  sheep  are  not  "  ; 
but  in  the  case  of  our  good  Shepherd,  "  he  putteth  forth  his  own 
sheep." 

There  is  a  speciality  of  character  about  them.  They  are  "  my  sheep." 
They  are  dependent,  timid,  trembling,  obedient,  teachable ;  they  are 
made  sheep  by  his  own  Spirit.  They  have  received  a  nature  which  is  not 
that  of  the  doggish  world,  nor  that  of  the  swinish  multitude,  nor  that 
of  the  wolfish  persecutor  ;  but  that  of  men  indwelt  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
who  are  therefore  clean,  gentle,  loving,  gracious.  He  calls  them  "  My 
sheep,"  for  they  have  a  special  relation  to  himself  :  they  are  like  Jesus. 
Being  his  sheep,  he  has  become  their  Guardian  as  well  as  their  Pro 
prietor,  and  they  look  up  to  him  as  such.  They  are  sheep  to  him,  and 
he  is  a  shepherd  to  them. 

We  may  judge  ourselves  to-night  by  considering  whether  towards 
Christ  we  are  his  sheep.  Do  we  acknowledge  ourselves  as  belonging 
to  him,  spirit,  soul,  and  body  ?  Do  we  regard  ourselves  as  being,  in 
relation  to  him,  no  wiser,  no  stronger,  than  sheep  to  a  shepherd  ?  I 
know  some  who  are  certainly  no  sheep  of  Christ's  flock,  for  they  will 
be  led  by  nobody  in  heaven,  or  on  earth ;  but  must  have  their  own 
sweet  way.  They  are  critics  of  the  Bible,  not  disciples  of  it.  They 
might  be  very  good  dogs,  but  they  are  very  queer  sheep.  They  would 
make  very  respectable  wolves,  for  they  are  great  in  destructive  criti 
cism  ;  but  they  certainly  are  not  sheep  ;  and  their  temper  and  spirit 
are  such  that  they  would  disdain  the  character,  if  they  understood  it. 
"  What !  to  go  where  I  am  led  ?  To  lie  down  where  I  am  bidden  to 
lie  down?  Not  to  choose  my  own  way?  Just  to  see  nothing,  and 
know  nothing ;  but  to  have  my  eyes  in  his  head,  and  my  wisdom  in 
his  mind  ?  To  be  shepherded  by  another  mind  than  my  own  ?  Is  it 
so?  Am  I  to  be  nothing  but  a  sheep  to  the  Lord  Jesus?"  Yes,  it 
is  even  so ;  and  hence  the  modern  wise  man  is  indignant,  and  proudly 
repudiates  the  character  of  a  sheep.  As  for  us,  we  accept  all  that 
the  name  implies.  0  brethren,  we  can  play  the  man  before  other 
people,  but  when  we  come  before  our  Lord,  as  the  sheep  is  a  mere 
animal  in  comparison  with  its  shepherd,  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  less 
than  that.  How  often  have  we  cried  with  David,  "  So  foolish  was  I, 
and  ignorant :  I  was  as  a  beast  before  thee  "  !  0  my  Lord,  in  thy 
presence  I  sink  as  low  as  low  can  be,  and  thou  becomest  very  high, 
yea,  all  in  all  to  me,  the  Shepherd  of  my  weak,  vacillating,  trembling 
spirit !  There  is  a  speciality,  then,  about  these  people  in  the  descrip 
tion.  I  have  only  time  to  hint  at  it. 

A  chief  mark  of  Chrises  people  u  attention.  "  My  sheep  hear." 
34 


266  THE    SECURITY    OF    BELIEVERS  ; 

They  can  hear,  because  they  have  had  spiritual  ears  given  them.  Once 
the  Shepherd  might  have  spoken  all  day  long,  and  they  would  not  have 
heard  him;  but  it  is  not  so  now.  Even  from  the  cross  our  Lord's 
plaintive  cries  were  all  unheard  by  them ;  but  now  he  has  given  them 
spiritual  capacity  and  perception,  and  they  can  hear,  and  they  do  hear 
what  his  dying  love  would  make  them  know  and  understand.  Their 
Lord  has  spoken  to  them.  They  have  heard  his  voice,  and  have  known 
it  to  be  his ;  they  still  hear  it,  and  they  distinguish  between  his 
voice  and  other  voices.  "  A  stranger  will  they  not  follow :  for  they 
know  not  the  voice  of  strangers."  They  now  so  hear  that  voice  as 
to  hear  it  in  a  true  way ;  and  joyfully  to  own  it  by  obeying  it.  Do 
you  not  say,  sometimes,  to  a  child  that  is  disobedient,  ''Did  you  not 
hear  me  speak,  child  ?  "  So  Christ  may  say  to  many  who  hear  with 
the  outward  ear,  but  who  will  not  yield  obedience,  that  they  have  not 
heard  him ;  for  indeed  they  have  not  hearkened  with  the  inner  ear. 
Their  ear  does  not  reach  down  to  their  heart ;  and  thus,  for  spiritual 
purposes,  it  is  no  ear  at  all.  It  is  an  awful  thing  when  the  ear  is  a 
closecl-up  passage,  shut  against  the  voice  of  the  Saviour.  You  can  tell 
the  sheep  of  Christ  by  their  being  marked  in  the  ear.  ' '  My  sheep 
hear  my  voice."  They  may  not  hear  a  good  deal  that  other  people 
hear ;  they  may  even  be  glad  to  be  deaf  to  it.  There  are  many  calls 
exceedingly  musical  to  carnal  ears,  which  have  no  charms  for  them. 
They  try  to  be  deaf  to  some  voices  from  which  they  could  gather 
nothing  but  temptation;  but  they  hear  Christ's  voice.  They  are  all 
there  when  he  speaks  :  their  soul  sits  at  the  door  to  hear  his  softest 
whisper.  They  try  to  hear :  they  charge  themselves  to  take  heed  that 
they  lose  no  sound  from  heaven.  They  do  hear;  but  they  long  to 
hear  yet  more  completely,  and  to  be  more  obedient  to  that  voice  which 
rings  through  the  chambers  of  their  soul.  Oh,  what  a  hearing  we 
have  sometimes  given  to  Christ !  I  have  heard  him  with  my  body,  my 
soul,  my  spirit ;  at  least,  I  have  thought  so  ;  but  whether  in  the  body, 
or  out  of  the  body,  I  could  not  tell.  If  in  the  body,  every  pore  has 
been  an  ear  for  my  Lord's  sweet  voice.  As  though  my  blood  were 
tingling  from  the  crown  of  my  head  to  the  sole  of  my  foot,  so  has  my 
spirit  been  wholly  and  entirely  affected  by  the  charming  tones  of  the 
voice  of  the  Well-beloved.  Oh,  that  he  would  speak  to-night!  Can 
you  not  hear  him  ?  Beloved,  is  he  not  now  calling  us  ?  Do'  you  not 
rejoice  to  hear  him  ? 

No  music's  like  his  charming  voice, 
Nor  half  so  sweet  can  be. 

So,  you  see,  a  noteworthy  speciality  of  the  elect  ones  lies  in  their 
attention  to  Jesus,  their  Shepherd.  He  calls  in  vain  to  others ;  but  his 
sheep  hear  his  voice. 

Another  mark  of  the  Lord's  people  i*  intimacy.  "My  sheep  hear 
my  voice,  and  /  know  them"  "I  know  them."  Yes,  the  Lord 
discerns  them.  He  singles  them  out,  for  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them 
that  are  his."  Sometimes  we  do  not  know  them;  but  he  says,  "I 
know  them."  In  cloudy  times  they  do  not  know  themselves ;  but 
he  says,  "  I  know  them."  When  a  child  of  God  does  not  know 
whether  he  is  a  child  of  Q-od  or  not,  his  Father  knows  his  own  children, 


OB,    S1IEEP   WHO    SHALL    NEVER    PERISH.  267 

and  the  great  Shepherd  knows  his  own  sheep.  His  is  a  discernment 
which  never  fails.  The  hypocrite  cannot  get  into  the  true  fold  of  Christ. 
He  may  get  into  the  visible  fold  ;  but  not  into  the  real  spiritual  fold  of 
Christ ;  for  Christ  does  not  know  him,  and  bids  him  depart.  This  is 
the  very  seal  upon  the  foundation — "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that 
are  his."  His  eyes  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked, 
between  him  that  feareth  God  and  him  that  feareth  him  not ;  hia 
is  a  knowledge  of  quick  and  certain  discernment. 

But  this  might  make  us  tremble  if  we  did  not  know  that  the  ex 
pression,  "I  know  them,"  means  a  knowledge  of  approbation.  "I 
know  them,''  says  the  Shepherd  ;  "  I  take  a  delight  in  them.  I  kncur 
their  secret  sighs  and  mournings.  I  hear  their  private  prayers.  I 
know  their  praises  in  the  silence  of  their  hearts.  I  know  their  conse 
cration,  and  their  aspirations  after  perfect  service.  I  know  their 
longings  and  their  lovings.  I  know  how  they  delight  in  me.  I  know 
how  they  trust  my  promise.  I  know  how  they  look  to  my  atoning 
blood.  I  know  how  in  their  inmost  souls  they  rejoice  in  my  name. 
I  know  them,  and  approve  their  secret  thoughts."  0  sweet  word, 
understood  in  that  sense !  And  this  is  one  part  of  the  character  of 
the  Lord's  people — that  he  did  foreknow  them  in  his  sovereign  grace ; 
and  now  he  personally  knows  them  by  taking  a  delight  in  them. 

This  divine  complacency  leads  to  a  very  intense  observation  of  them. 
"  He  knoweth  the  way  that  I  take."  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of 
the  righteous."  He  has  an  eye  upon  them,  and  marks  their  paths. 
His  ears  are  open  to  their  cry,  and  he  hears  their  petitions.  Though 
there  be  all  the  world  for  his  omniscience  to  consider,  yet  he  looks  upon 
each  one  of  his  saints  as  much  as  if  there  were  only  that  one 
person  in  the  universe.  Oh,  to  think  of  this!  "I  know  them," 
sounds  like  music  in  this  sense.  He  that  knows  the  stars,  and  knows 
the  infinite  multitude  of  living  creatures  in  the  universe,  has  a  special 
and  peculiar  knowledge  of  his  own  chosen.  "  I  know  them,"  says 
he ;  and  he  intends  thereby  an  intense  observation. 

Now,  beloved,  just  try  a  little  here,  to  see  whether  you  come  into 
this  number — "  I  know  them."  Does  the  Lord  know  you  as  his  own  ? 
Has  he  had  personal  intercourse  with  you,  and  you  with  him  ?  Or 
will  he  have  to  say  to  you  at  the  last,  "  I  never  knew  you  "  ?  AVhy, 
some  of  you  have  made  him  know  you !  You  have  gone  to  him  in 
such  trials,  and  in  such  troubles,  and  you  have  cried  to  him  in  such 
bitterness  and  anguish,  that,  if  he  asks  your  name,  you  can  say — 

"  Once  a  sinner  near  despair 
Sought  thy  mercy-seat  by  prayer ; 
Mercy  heard,  and  set  him  free ; 
Lord,  that  inercy  caine  to  me  I  " 

When  thou  didst  help  me  in  great  need,  when  thcu  didst  pass  by  my 
great  sin,  then  didst  thou  know  me,  0  my  Lord  !  "  Dost  thou  ask  me 
who  I  am?  Ah,  my  Lord  !  thou  knowest  niy  name."  Just  as  some 
men  know  right  well  the  importunate  beggar  who  is  often  at  their 
door,  so  does  the  Lord  for  certain  know  some  of  you,  for  you  go  every 
day  begging  at  his  gate,  and  you  receive  a  constant  alms  at  his  hand. 
Besides  that,  you  go  every  day  thanking  him  for  the  mercies  you 


268  THE    SECURITY   OF   BELIEVERS; 

receive.  He  knows  your  name :  the  name  of  one  who  is  drowned  in 
debt  to  his  infinite  bounty.  He  can  never  forget  your  groans  and 
cries ;  and  day  by  day  your  praises  are  a  memorial  to  him.  By  his 
love,  and  pity,  and  compassion,  he  is  sure  to  remember  you.  Sooner 
can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking-child  than  your  Grod  forget  you. 

Well,  here  are  things  well  worth  the  noting — speciality,  attention, 
and  intimacy.  Are  these  yours  ? 

But  here  is  one  more :  actual  obedience.  How  does  he  put  it  f 
"  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me.'1  All  the  Lord's  sheep  are 
marked  in  the  foot,  as  well  as  in  the  ear.  The  foot  and  ear-mark  must 
be  in  every  sheep  of  the  Lord's  flock.  "  They  follow  me."  That  is  to 
say,  they  openly  avow  him  as  their  Shepherd.  Other  shepherds  come, 
and  other  sheep  go  after  them  ;  but  these  sheep  know  the  Lord  Jesus , 
and  they  follow  him.  He  alone  is  their  Leader.  They  are  not  ashamed 
to  own  it.  They  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  the  Cross-bearer,  and  they 
bear  his  name. 

More  than  that,  they  practically  carry  out  their  open  avowal,  and 
they  follow  him  in  daily  life,  copying  his  example.  They  not  only 
say,  "He  is  my  Leader,"  but  they  follow  him.  Christ's  sheep  try  to 
follow  in  the  track  that  the  Shepherd  marks  for  them.  Christ's  people 
are  never  so  happy  as  when  they  can  put  down  their  feet  where  Christ 
put  his  feet  down.  The  very  marks  that  he  has  left  by  his  bleeding 
footsteps  we  would  desire  to  follow,  all  the  day,  and  every  day. 
Beloved,  look  you  carefully  to  this  !  Do  what  Jesus  did,  according  to 
your  measure  and  power.  This  is  what  the  people  of  God  try  to  do. 
If  you  do  not  endeavour  to  be  like  Christ,  you  are  not  his  sheep ;  for 
of  his  sheep  it  is  true,  "I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me." 

And  this  is  personally  operative  upon  them.  I  could  not  tell  you 
exactly  in  English  words,  but  the  Greek  word  gives  here  a  kind  of 
personality  to  the  whole  company.  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,"  that 
is,  the  whole  of  the  flock  of  God.  "I  know  them,"  that  is,  again,  the 
whole  flock  of  them,  altogether.  But,  "•  they  follow  me,"  is  in  the 
plural  number.  It  is  as  though  it  said,  "  They,  each  one,  follow  me." 
We,  who  are  the  Lord's  chosen,  hear  en  masse,  and  the  Lord  knows  the 
whole  church,  for,  as  a  whole,  it  is  redeemed  by  Christ ;  but  we  indi 
vidually  follow — each  one  for  himself,  through  grace.  We  each  one 
follow  him.  "  They  follow  me."  I  like  that  singular  personal  pro 
noun.  It  is  not  written,  "  They  follow  my  commandments,"  though 
they  do.  It  is  not  said,  "  They  follow  the  route  that  I  have  mapped 
for  them,"  though  they  do  that.  But,  "  they  follow  me"  distinctly. 
In  their  individual  personality  they  follow  their  Lord  in  his  individual 
personality.  They  have  recognized  himself  above  his  words,  above 
his  ways,  and  even  above  his  salvation.  "  They  follow  me,"  saith  he. 
This  is  a  grand  mark  of  a  Christian,  not  merely  a  life  of  morality, 
a  life  of  integrity,  a  life  of  holiness,  but  a  life  of  all  these  in  connec 
tion  with  Christ.  They  follow  him,  not  holiness,  nor  morality,  nor 
integrity,  apart  from  Christ,  but  they  follow  their  Lord.  A  good  life  is 
good  in  any  man.  We  cannot  speak  evil  of  virtue,  even  when  we  find 
it  in  the  ordinary  moralist ;  but  this  is  not  the  complete  mark  of  Christ's 
sheep.  The  virtues  of  Christ's  sheep  are  in  connection  with  himself. 
The  Christian  is  holy,  and  all  that,  but  that  is  because  he  follows  his 


OR,    SHEEP    WHO    SHALL    NEVER    PERISH.  269 

.perfect  Master,  and  keeps  close  to  him.     This  is  one  of  the  peculiaj 
and  unfailing  marks  of  the  child  of  God. 

I  have  run  through,  very  briefly,  the  description,  and  I  now  leave 
you  to  meditate  upon  it  when  you  are  alone.  This  description  of  the 
sheep  of  Christ  is  worthy  of  reading,  marking,  and  inwardly  digesting. 

II.  But  my  main  object  to-night  is  to  show  you  THE  GREAT  PRIVI 
LEGE  HERE  CONFERRED  ON  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD.  Christ  has  secured  to 
them  the  priceless  boon  of  eternal  security  in  him.  No  sheep  of  Christ 
shall  ever  be  lost.  None  that  he  has  purchased  with  his  blood,  and 
made  to  be  his  own,  shall  ever  wander  away  so  as  to  perish  at  last. 
This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  verses  now  before  us.  At  any  rate,  if  I 
wanted  to  express  that  doctrine,  I  could  not  find  words  in  which  I 
could  set  it  forth  more  definitely,  or  more  completely,  than  is  done  by 
the  words  before  me. 

The  security  of  the  people  of  God  lies,  first  of  all,  in  the  character  oj 
the  life  which  they  have  received.  Listen  to  this  :  "  And  I  give  unto 
them  ETERNAL  LIFE."  All  the  spiritual  life  which  all  the  sheep  in 
the  flock  now  possess  has  been  given  to  them  by  their  Shepherd. 
Never  was  there  another  flock  of  which  this  could  be  said.  No 
shepherd  but  this  one  can  give  life  to  his  sheep ;  but  he  gave  them 
all  the  true  life  that  they  have.  Nay,  stop :  he  not  only  gave  them 
life,  but  he  sustains  that  life  by  a  constant  gift.  Observe,  it  is  not 
written,  "I  gave  to  them  eternal  life,"  but  "I  give  unto  them  eternal 
life."  They  are  always  living  by  virtue  of  the  life  which  he  is 
always  giving.  They  are  constantly  receiving  life  from  him,  according 
to  that  assurance,  ''Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  What  he 
always  gives  they  must  always  receive,  and  therefore  it  cannot  cease. 

Notice  the  nature  of  that  life.  "  I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life." 
Now,  you  all  know  what  "  eternal "  means :  or  say,  rather,  none  of 
you  can  form  an  idea  of  eternity  which  can  grasp  all  its  length  of 
endurance.  Only  this,  you  know  it  has  no  end,  and  cannot  therefore 
close.  If  anybody  said  that  he  had  eternal  life  and  lost  it,  he 
would  be  flatly  contradicting  himself.  It  could  not  be  eternal,  or 
«lse  he  must  still  have  it.  If  it  is  eternal,  it  is  eternal,  and  there  is 
no  end  to  it ;  and  there  is  an  end  of  further  argument  about  it.  If  the 
life  that  Christ  gives  us,  when  we  are  born  again,  can  die,  it  is  not 
"  eternal "  life,  or  else  words  have  ceased  to  have  any  meaning  at  all. 
In  its  nature,  as  being  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  an  emanation 
from  God,  the  life  bestowed  in  regeneration  is  an  undying  one.  Has 
not  the  Holy  Ghost  described  us  as  "  being  born  again,  not  of  cor 
ruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever  "  ?  The  life  of  God  imparted  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
must  live  for  ever.  As  the  gift  is  continuous,  and  it  is  always  being 
given,  and  as  it  is  in  itself  eternal  life,  it  must  always  exist. 

But,  principally,  I  dwell  upon  the  glorious  character  of  the  Giver. 
"  /  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life."  The  life  that  Christ  gives  is  not 
that  poor,  paltry  life  which  lasts  the  professor  for  about  three  weeks, 
and  then  dwindles  down,  and  dies  out ;  or,  say,  three  months,  and 
then  the  revival  is  over,  and  the  convert  is  spun  out  and  done  for, 
and  has  to  begin  again.  Such  is  the  religious  life  which  is  excited  by 
men  j  but  it  is  not  so  with  the  life  which  comes  from  God.  I  said  thai 


270  THE    SECURITY    OF   BELIEVERS  | 

cue  false  convert  begins  again,  though,  how  he  begins  again  I  know 
not,  because  I  read  in  Scripture  of  people  being  born  again ;  but  I 
have  never  read  of  their  being  born  again,  and  again,  and  again, 
and  again.  I  am  told  that  some  of  our  religionists  have  had  their 
people  converted  and  born  again  more  times  than  they  can  count ;  and 
I  heard  that  a  woman  had  been  born  again  twelve  times  down  at  a 
certain  meeting ;  but  he  who  stated  the  fact  said  shrewdly  that  he 
feared  it  was  not  done  well  the  last  time.  No,  I  do  not  think  it  will 
ever  be  done  well  in  that  way.  He  that  is  born  again,  according  to 
Scripture,  has  received  eternal  life ;  and  this  is  the  only  life  worth 
receiving.  I  would  not  preach  my  very  soul  away  in  order  to  pro 
claim  such  a  twopenny,  trumpery,  temporary  salvation  as  that ;  but  to 
preach  the  Lord  Jesus  as  giving  eternal  life  is  worth  living  for  and 
dying  for.  I  tell  you,  sirs,  it  is  this  that  brought  me  to  Christ. 
While  I  was  yet  young,  and  thinking  over  matters,  I  saw  young  lads 
that  were  brought  up  with  me,  excellent  in  character,  who  left  their 
homes  to  be  apprenticed,  and  after  a  while  the  temptations  of  the 
world  overcame  them,  and  they  went  astray,  and  had  no  religion  at 
all.  But  when  I  read  that  Christ  gave  his  sheep  eternal  life,  I  looked 
at  it  as  a  kind  of  moral  life  insurance  for  my  soul,  and  I  came  to 
Christ,  and  trusted  him  to  keep  me  to  the  end.  I  shall  suffer  a 
grievous  disappointment  if  I  ever  find  out  that  the  life  of  God  in  me 
is  not  eternal,  and  that  the  new  birth  does  not  assure  final  perse 
verance.  I  did  not  go  up  to  the  booking-office,  and  take  a  ticket  for 
a  quarter  of  the  distance  to  heaven  ;  but  I  took  my  ticket  all  the  way 
through.  I  trust,  nay,  I  know,  that  according  to  my  faith,  so  will  it 
be  unto  me.  I  am  very  glad  to  have  my  through-ticket  with  me,  and 
I  believe  that  unless  the  train  of  Almighty  grace  smashes  up — which 
it  never  will — I  shall  get  through  to  the  Celestial  terminus  as  surely 
as  ever  divine  power  can  draw  me  there ;  for  so  it  is  written,  "  I  give 
unto  my  sheep  eternal  life." 

Now,  depend  upon  it,  it  is  what  you  hold  out  to  people  that  has 
much  to  do  with  how  they  behave  themselves  afterwards.  Tell  them 
that  if  they  believe  in  Christ,  they  are  going  to  get,  not  eternal  life, 
but  life  for  a  little  while — life  for  as  long  as  they  take  good  care  of  it, 
and  I  fear  it  will  prove  to  be  so.  It  may  do  them  good  to  get  the  poor 
little  change  you  offer  them ;  but  as  surely  as  they  are  converted  to 
a  temporary  life,  they  will  die  out  before  long.  You  told  them  that 
they  would.  You  did  not  propose  any  more  to  them.  But  when  you 
propose  to  them  this — "  Here  is  everlasting  life  to  be  had  by  believing 
in  Christ.  It  is  not  temporary,  but  eternal  fife  " — why,  then  they  grip  it 
as  such.  They  believe  in  Christ  for  that,  and  according  to  their  faith  it 
is  unto  them ;  and  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life  is  glorified  in  giving  to 
them  this  great  and  splendid  gift,  the  gift  of  all  gifts.  "I  give  unto 
my  sheep  eternal  life." 

I  do  not  know  in  what  other  way  to  preach  from  this  text  than  the 
one  in  which  I  am  preaching  from  it.  Somebody  says,  "  Oh,  that  is 
Calvinism !  "  I  do  not  care  what  it  is.  It  is  Scriptural.  I  have  this 
inspired  Book  before  me,  and  I  cannot  see  any  meaning  in  the  words 
before  me,  if  they  do  not  mean  that  those  who  have  received  life  from 
the  Lord  Jesus  have  an  endless  inheritance.  I  cannot  make  them 


OR,    SHEEP    WHO    SHALL   NEVER    PERISH.  271 

mean  anything  else.  "I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,"  must 
mean  that  believers  are  eternally  secure.  "  It  is  dangerous  doctrine," 
cries  one.  I  have  not  found  it  dangerous,  and  I  have  tried  it  these 
many  years.  I  conceive  that  it  would  be  far  more  dangerous  to  tell 
people  that  they  could  be  truly  converted,  and  yet  the  work  of  grace 
would  end  in  six  months,  and  then  they  could  come  back  again,  and 
begin  again,  and  do  so  as  many  times  as  they  liked  ;  whereas  the  Word 
of  God  tells  them  that  if  they  shall  fall  away,  it  is  impossible  to  renew 
them  again  unto  repentance.  Men  may  fall  and  be  restored  ;  but  if 
they  fall  away  utterly,  there  remains  no  other  work  which  can  be 
done  for  them.  If  this  everlasting  life  could  die,  the  Holy  Ghost 
would  have  done  his  best,  and  nothing  more  would  remain  to  be  done. 
If  it  were  so  that  this  salt  which  is  good  should  lose  its  savour, 
wherewith  could  it  be  salted  ?  See  what  a  gulf  opens  before  you ; 
and  do  not  look  for  a  work  which  will  not  endure  every  possible  strain. 
Oh,  that  you  may  get  this  eternal  life ! 

So  we  take  a  step  farther.  The  children  of  God  are  safe,  again, 
not  only  because  of  the  life  they  receive,  but  because  of  the  inner 
dangers  which  are  averted.  Take  the  next  sentence — "  And  they  shall 
never  perish."  They  have  a  tendency  to  spiritual  sickness,  but  their 
Shepherd  will  doctor  them  so  that  they  shall  never  perish.  They  are 
sheep,  and  have  a  tendency  to  wander  ;  but  their  Shepherd  shall  keep 
them  so  that  they  shall  never  perish.  Time  tries  them,  and  they  grow 
old,  and  the  novelty  of  religion  wears  off;  but  they  shall  never 
perish.  Think  what  you  will  of  them,  "  they  shall  never  perish,"  for 
so  the  promise  stands. 

The  first  statement,  "  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,"  is  as  broad  as 
well  can  be,  and  this  is  broader  still — "they  shall  never  perish." 
The  rule  has  absolutely  no  exception.  The  whole  of  them  shall  be 
preserved.  Let  them  live  to  be  as  old  as  Methuselah,  they  shall  never 
perish,  whatever  temptation  may  assail  them.  They  may  be  tried, 
and  troubled,  and  broken  down,  so  that  they  may  be  hardly  able  to 
live;  but  they  shall  never  perish.  "  Never  "  is  a  long  day  ;  but  it  is 
not  longer  than  grace  will  last.  Blessed  be  God,  this  grand  promise 
stands  fast — "  They  shall  never  perish." 

Now  we  must  go  a  step  farther.  We  have  no  time  to  urge  these 
arguments  at  any  great  length.  They  are  safe,  next,  by  outer  injuries 
being  prevented.  "  Neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." 
Many  will  pluck  at  them,  but  none  shall  pluck  them  away.  The 
devil  will  give  many  a  horrible  pluck  and  pull,  to  get  them  away ; 
but  out  of  the  great  Shepherd's  hand  he  shall  never  take  them.  Their 
old  companions,  and  the  memory  of  their  old  sins  will  come,  and  pluck 
at  them  very  hard,  and  very  cunningly  ;  but  the  Saviour  says,  "  None 
shall  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand."  *  So,  first,  here  is  their  security : 
they  are  in  his  hand;  that  is,  in  his  possession,  and  he  grasps  them, 
as  a  man  holds  a  thing  in  his  hand,  and  says,  "It  is  mine." 
Neither  shall  any  take  them  away  from  being  under  his  protection. 
Never  shall  they  be  plucked  away  from  Christ.  When  he  says  this, 
he  pledges  his  honour  to  preserve  them,  for  if  it  could  be  that  one 
were  plucked  out  of  his  hand,  then  would  the  devils  in  hell  rejoice, 
and  say,  "  He  could  not  keep  them.  He  said  that  he  would,  but  he 


272  THE    SECURITY    OF    BELIEVERS; 

could  not.  We  have  managed  to  pluck  this  one,  or  that  one,  out  of 
the  pierced  hand  of  their  Bedeemer."  But  such  a  horrible  exultation 
shall  never  be  heard  throughout  the  ages  of  eternity.  "  They  shall 
never  perish  ;  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." 

Some  one  wickedly  said,  ' '  They  may  get  out  of  his  hand  them 
selves."  But  how  can  this  be  true,  when  the  first  sentence  is,  "  They 
shall  never  perish  "  ?  Treat  Scripture  honestly  and  candidly,  and  you 
will  admit  that  the  promise  "  they  shall  never  perish"  shuts  out  the 
idea  of  perishing  by  going  out  of  the  Lord's  hand  by  their  own  act  and 
deed.  ' '  They  shall  never  perish ;  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of 
my  hand."  "Who  is  to  loosen  the  clasp  of  that  hand  which  was  pierced 
with  the  nail  for  me  ?  My  Lord  Jesus  bought  me  too  dearly  ever  to 
let  me  go.  He  loves  me  so  well  that  his  whole  omnipotence  will  work 
with  that  hand,  and  unless  there  is  something  greater  than  Godhead, 
I  cannot  be  plucked  away  from  that  dear,  fast-holding  grip. 

Now,  to  make  quite  sure  about  it,  and  to  pile  on  the  comfort,  the 
Saviour  goes  on  to  add  the  care  and  power  of  God  himself.  Our  Lord 
says,  "  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me."  The  saints  of  God  are  safe, 
because  the  Father  gave  them  to  his  Son.  He  did  not  give  him  a 
transitory  inheritance.  He  did  not  bestow  on  him  a  something  which 
he  might,  after  all,  lose.  Will  the  Lord  Christ  lose  what  his  Father 
gave  him  ?  You  know  how  people  say,  "  Oh,  I  hope  that,  if  a  burglar 
takes  anything  from  my  house,  he  will  not  take  that  cup,  which  is  an 
heirloom.  My  father  gave  it  to  me."  If  a  man  had  to  defend  his 
property,  he  would  be  sure  to  take  care  of  that  which  was  a  very 
special  gift,  given  in  his  honour,  as  a  memorial  of  a  great  work.  So 
is  it  with  our  Lord  Jesus :  he  values  that  which  his  Father  gave  him. 
I  delight  in  the  thought.  I  picture  my  blessed  Lord  looking  at  each 
one  of  his  believing  people,  and  saying,  "  My  Father  gave  you  to  me." 
That  poor  woman,  that  struggling  young  man,  that  decrepit  old  lady, 
that  man  who  is  half -starved,  but  who  loves  his  Lord — Jesus  says 
of  each  one,  "  My  Father  gave  this  soul  to  me."  He  cannot  lose 
what  his  Father  gave  him.  He  would  die  again  sooner  than  he  would 
lose  them.  His  death  has  made  their  salvation  safe  beyond  all  jeopardy. 
He  laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  The  lion  came,  and  leaped 
into  the  fold ;  but  the  Shepherd  met  the  lion ;  yea,  he  received  him 
on  his  naked  breast,  and  held  him  there.  It  was  a  terrible  tug.  The 
Shepherd  sweat  great  drops  of  blood  as  he  held  the  monster  ;  but  he 
rent  him,  and  he  hurled  him  to  the  earth,  and  said,  "  It  is  finished :  " 
and  it  was  finished.  He  has  so  saved  all  his  flock  until  now  that  we 
are  sure  that  he  will  never  lose  one  of  those  whom  his  Father  com 
mitted  to  his  trust.  "  My  Father  gave  them  me." 

Then  he  goes  on  to  say  that  his  people  are  kept  by  the  Father's 
power ;  for  he  says,  "  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater 
than  all ;  and  no  man  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's  hand." 
Beloved,  although  God  gave  us  to  Christ,  he  did  not  cease  to  care  for  us 
himself !  Our  sweet  text  last  Sunday  night  I  must  bring  to  your 
memory.  I  could  not  fully  preach  from  it,  but  the  text  was  enough 
without  a  sermon :  "  All  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine ;  and  I 
am  glorified  in  them."  We  tried  to  show  you  how  we  were  none  the 
less  the  Father's  because  we  were  the  Son's,  and  none  the  less  the 


OR,    SHEEP    WHO    SHALL   NEVER    PERISH.  273 

Son's  because  we  belonged  to  the  Father.  So  here  Jesus  in  effect 
says.  "My  Father  gave  you  to  ine;  yet  he  takes  care  of  you  none 
the  less,  but  all  the  more.  Because  he  is  determined  that  what  he 
gave  to  me  shall  be  mine,  the  Lord  will  put  forth  his  wisdom  and 
power  to  preserve  you." 

Let  me  by  a  symbol  illustrate  the  latter  words  of  the  text.  There 
lie  the  chilolren  of  God  in  the  hand  of  Christ.  Do  you  see  that  fast 
closed  hand  ?  They  are  safe  enough  there.  Jesus  says,  "  No  man 
shall  be  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand."  But  see  the  Father, 
he  puts  his  hand  over  the  hand  of  Jesus  !  There,  now :  you  are  inside 
two  hands,  "  And  no  man  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father' 9 
hand"  Oh,  the  serene  security  of  those  who  hear  the  voice  of  Christ, 
and  whom  he  calls  his  sheep !  A  double-handed  force  keeps  them 
safe  against  all  ill.  Pluck  away,  Satan  !  You  will  never  pluck  them 
away  from  the  hand  of  Jesus,  and  the  hand  of  his  Father !  "  Quit 
separabit  ?  "  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  "  It 
is  impossible  to  be  done. 

And  then  the  Saviour  finishes  all  by  saying  that,  while  he  has 
spoken  of  the  Father  and  himself  as  two — and  two  they  are  as  per 
sons — yet  in  their  divine  essence  they  are  but  one.  He  says,  "  I  and 
my  Father  are  one ;  "  and  especially  one  in  love  to  his  people.  "  The 
Father  himself  loveth  you,"  even  as  he  loves  his  Son  ;  and,  while  you 
read  the  love  of  Christ  in  his  death,  you  must  read  the  Father's  love 
quite  as  much  in  that  great  sacrifice.  It  is  true  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
that — "  He  loved  the  church,  and  gave  himself  for  it ;  "  but  it  ia 
equally  true  of  the  Father — "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave 
his  Only-begotten  Son."  They  are  one  in  an  infinite  love  to  all  those 
who,  called  according  to  the  divine  purpose,  are  following  Christ,  and 
hearing  his  voice.  I  fall  back  with  great  joy  upon  this  blessed  convic 
tion — that  he  will  not  suffer  those  to  perish  who  have  received  eternal 
life  at  his  hands.  Of  course,  if  you  have  only  taken  temporary  life — 
if  you  only  believe  in  that — you  will  get  no  more  than  you  believe.  Your 
gift  will  be  measured  by  your  faith.  But  if  you  say,  <4 1  gave  myself 
up  to  Christ  that  he  might  be  Alpha  and  Omega  t#  me  ;  and  I  wholly 
trust  myself  to  him  without  reserve,  throughout  all  my  life,  to  save 
me,"  he  will  do  it;  for  "I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that 
which  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day."  "  He  which 
hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesug 
Christ."  "  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth 
more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day." 

You  are  safe  in  Christ's  hand.  Know  it,  and  feel  the  joy  of  it. 
"  Oh,"  says  one,  "  but  if  I  thought  so,  I  should  run  into  sin ! '  I  am 
sorry  for  you :  things  act  very  strangely  upon  you.  Nothing  binds 
me  to  my  Lord  like  a  strong  belief  in  his  changeless  love.  "  Oh,  but 
it  would  be  far  safer  to  tell  your  hearers  that  they  may  be  overcome 
by  sin,  and  perish! "  I  will  not  tell  them  what  I  do  not  believe.  I  will 
not  dishonour  my  Lord  by  a  falsehood.  Shall  I  come  home  to  your 
house,  and  tell  your  children  that,  if  they  do  wrong,  you  will  cut  their 
heads  off ;  or  that,  if  they  disobey  you,  they  will  cease  to  be  your 
children.  If  I  were  to  propound  that  doctrine,  your  children  would 
grow  angry  at  such  I  slander  upon  their  father.  They  would  say, 

18 


274 


THE    SECURITY   OF   BELIEVERS. 


11  No,  we  know  better  than  that !  "  Far  rather  would  I  say  to  them, 
"  My  dear  children,  your  father  loves  you  ;  he  will  love  you  without 
end,  therefore  do  not  grieve  him."  Under  such  doctrine  true  children 
will  say,  "  We  love  our  ever-loving  father.  We  will  not  disobey  him. 
We  will  endeavour  to  walk  in  his  ways." 

"  Tis  love  that  makes  our  willing  feet 
In  swift  obedience  move  " 

Our  loving  Lord  will  not  cast  away  those  to  whom  he  is  bound  by 
niarriage-bonds. 

"Well,  but  suppose  we  sin."  He  will  chasten  us,  and  restore  us 
"  If  I  believed  that  doctrine,  I  should  live  as  I  like,"  says  one.  Then 
you  are  not  one  of  his  sheep,  for  his  sheep  love  holiness,  and  will  not 
love  iniquity.  The  change  wrought  by  the  new  birth  is  such  that  a 
man  will  not  return  to  his  old  ways  of  sin  and  folly.  This  is  the  doc 
trine  ;  and  how  can  you  make  it  to  be  an  indulgence  to  sin?  True  saints 
never  turn  the  grace  of  Grod  into  licentiousness,  but  the  very  men 
tion  of  eternal  love  leads  them  to  careful  obedience. 

One  thing  I  must  say  at  the  end.  Some  ministers  preach  a  gospel 
with  a  very  wide  door  to  it,  but  there  is  nothing  to  be  had  when  you  get 
within.  I  am  sometimes  told  that  I  make  my  door  a  little  too  narrow. 
It  in  not  true,  for  I  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  under  heaven, 
with  all  my  might ;  but  if  the  door  be  narrow,  there  is  something 
worth  having  when  you  enter  by  it.  Even  if  the  way  be  narrow,  if 
you  once  get  in,  you  have  got  in,  and  you  have  found  eternal  life,  and 
you  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  you  out  of  Christ's 
hands.  Sinner,  come  and  have  an  eternal  blessing !  It  is  worth 
having.  Come  and  have  it !  If  thou  believest,  thou  shalt  assuredly 
be  saved.  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ;  " 
saved  from  sin  so  as  never  to  go  back  and  live  in  it  again ;  so  saved 
as  to  be  made  holy  ;  so  saved  as  to  be  preserved  in  holiness.  Holi 
ness  shall  be  the  set  of  the  main  current  of  thy  life,  until,  made 
perfectly  holy,  thou  shalt  dwell  with  Grod  above. 

Into  his  hands  let  us  commit  our  spirits  to-night,  and  we  may  rest 
assured  that  they  stall  be  safe  eternally.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — John  x.  19 — 42. 


HYMNS  FROM  "OuR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK" — 196,  670,  676. 


je(r0p0ltfcm  SFabcnraclc  f) utyit 


LIFE   ETERNAL. 


pennon 

DELIVERED  BY 

C.    FT.    S  I'll  RGB  ON, 

AT    THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 

"  And  I  giv*  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 
man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." — John  x.  28. 

SOME  will  say  that  this  is  a  mixed  congregation,  and  that  such  a  doctrine 
as  this  should  not  be  advanced  in  the  presence  of  ungodly  men  and 
women.  This  shows  how  little  such  objectors  read  their  Bible,  for  this 
very  text  was  spoken  by  the  Saviour,  not  to  his  loving  disciples,  but  to 
his  enemies.  Read  the  thirty-first  verse  of  the  chapter,  and  you  will  see 
the  temper  of  the  congregation  to  whom  Jesus  Christ  preached  upon 
this  subject — "  Then  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  to  stone  him."  So 
that  an  indignant  multitude  of  bigots  had  this  hurled  into  their  face  by 
the  Saviour,  that  although  they  might  reject  him,  and  because  of  their 
wilful  obstinacy  might  miss  the  blessings  of  grace,  yet  those  blessings 
were  rich  and  rare.  He  would  have  them  to  know  that  what  they  lost 
was  inexpressibly  precious,  and  that  his  message  was  not  to  be  despised 
without  great  damage  to  their  souls.  Thus,  if  there  be  a  mixed  multi 
tude  here — and  I  fear  the  allegation  is  true,  that  there  are  many  here  who 
cannot  comprehend  the  preciousness  of  the  things  of  God — yet,  for  the 
same  reason  which  prompted  the  Saviour  to  preach  of  this  doctrine  to 
the  wicked  in  his  day,  we  will  do  the  same  now,  that  they  may  know  what 
it  is  they  lose  by  losing  Christ,  what  those  comfortable  things  are  which 
they  despise,  and  what  are  the  inestimable  treasures  which  those  must 
miss  who  seek  after  the  treasures  of  this  world,  and  let  their  God, 
their  Saviour  go. 

We  have  no  time  to  loiter,  and  let  us  therefore,  as  the  bee  sucks  honey 
from  the  flower,  seek  after  the  sweet  essence  of  the  text,  "  I  give  unto 
them  eternal  life."  The  connection  tells  us  that  the  pronoun  "  them'* 
refers  to  Christ's  sheep,  to  certain  persons  whom  he  had  chosen  to  be 
his  sheep,  and  whom  he  had  also  called  to  be  such.  Lest  we  should  be  in 
the  dark  as  to  whom  they  are,  our  Saviour  has  kindly  put  us  in  possession 
of  the  marks  by  which  his  sheep  may  be  discovered.  We  cannot  read 
the  secret  roll  of  election,  nor  can  we  search  the  heart,  but  we  can 
mark  the  outward  conduct  of  men,  and  the  verse  before  the  text  tells  us 
by  what  signs  we  are  to  know  God's  people.  "  My  sheep  hear  my 
voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me."  The  marks  aie  the 

No.  726  49 


698  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

hearing  of  Christ,  and  then  the  following  of  Christ,  first,  by  faith  in 
him,  and  then  by  an  active  obedience  to  his  precepts.  "Faith  which 
worketh  by  love"  is  the  mark  of  Christ's  sheep,  and  it  is  of  true  be 
lievers  that  he  speaks  when  he  says,  "  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life, 
and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand."  Would  to  God  that  aJl  of  us  wore  the  livery  of  the  elect, 
namely,  active,  sanctifying  faith!  Oh  that  we  all  listened  to  the  Great 
Shepherd's  voice,  that  we  received  the  truth  which  he  delivers!  and 
then  resolved  by  his  grace  to  follow  him  whithersoever  he  goeth,  as 
the  sheep  follow  the  shepherd. 

Having  thus  explained  to  whom  the  text  belongs,  we  will  now  handle 
it  in  a  threefold  manner.  The  text  implies,  first,  sometvhat  concern 
ing  the  past  of  these  people;  the  text  plainly  states,  in  the  second  place, 
a  great  deal  about  the  present  of  these  people;  and,  thirdly,  the  text  not 
obscurely  hints  at  something  about  their  future. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  the  studious  reader  will  observe  that  the  text 
implies  SOMEWHAT  CONCERNING  THE  PAST  HISTORY  OF  THE  PEOPLE 
OF  GOD. 

It  is  said,  "  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life."  There  is  an  implication, 
therefore,  that  they  had  lost  eternal  life.  Every  one  of  God's  people  fell 
in  Adam,  and  all  have  fallen  also  by  actual  sin;  consequently,  we  came 
under  condemnation,  and  Christ  Jesus  has  done  for  us  what  Her  Majesty 
the  Queen  has  sometimes  done  for  a  condemned  criminal — he  has  brought 
us  a  free  pardon.  He  has  given  us  life.  When  our  own  desert  was  eternal 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  Jesus  Christ  stepped  in,  and  he 
said,  "  Thou  art  forgiven;  the  sentence  shall  not  take  place  upon  thee; 
thine  offence  is  blotted  out;  thou  art  clear/'  Nay,  I  think  the  text 
implies  that  there  was  something  more  than  condemnation,  there  was 
execution.  We  were  not  only  condemned  to  die,  we  were  already  spiritu 
ally  dead.  Jesus  did  not  merely  spare  the  life  which  ought  to  have  been 
taken,  and  in  that  sense  gave  it  to  us,  but  he  imparted  to  us  a  life  which 
we  had  not  before  enjoyed.  It  is  implied  in  the  text  that  we  were  spiritually 
dead;  nay,  we  are  not  left  here  to  our  own  surmisings,  nor  even  to  our  own 
experience,  for  the  apostle  Paul  has  said,  "You  hath  he  quickened  who  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  What,  Paul,  dead?  Are  you  not  mistaken? 
Perhaps  they  were  only  a  little  sick?  Nay,  we  are  ready  to  admit,  0  apostle, 
that  they  were  sick  and  near  to  death,  but  surely  they  had  a  little  vital 
energy,  a  little  power  to  assist  themselves!  "  No,"  says  the  apostle,  "  you 
were  dead,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  The  work  of  salvation  is  tanta 
mount,  not  only  to  the  healing  of  the  sick,  but  to  the  actual  resurrection 
of  a  dead  man  from  his  grave.  All  the  saints  who  are  now  alive  unto  God 
were  once  as  dead  as  others,  quite  as  corrupt  and  offensive  as  others,  and 
as  much  an  ill  savour  in  the  nostrils  of  Divine  Justice  by  reason  of  their 
sins  as  even  the  most  corrupt  of  their  fellows.  We  had  altogether  gone 
out  of  the  way;  we  had  altogether  become  abominable,  for  "there  is 
none  that  doeth  good,  no  not  one."  When  we  were  all  shut  up  under 
sin  then  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  region  of  death,  and  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  us.  Life  was  forfeited  by  all  the  saints;  spiritual  life 
they  had  none:  Jesus  the  Quickener  has  made  them  alive  unto  God. 

Is  it  not  also  very  clearly  implied  that,  so  far  from  having  any  life, 
these  people  could  not  otherwise  have  obtained  life  except  by  its  being 


LIFE   ETKRNAI*  699 

given  to  them?  It  is  a  rule  well  kno*n  to  all  Biblical  students,  that  you 
never  meet  in  God's  Word  with  an  unnecessary  miracle,  that  a  miracle  is 
never  wrought  where  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  would  suffice.  Now,  my 
brethren,  the  greatest  of  all  miracles  is  the  salvation  of  a  soul.  If  that 
soul  could  save  itself  God  would  not  save  it,  but  would  let  it  do  what 
it  could  do;  and  if  the  spiritually  dead  could  quicken  themselves,  rest 
assured,  from  the  analogy  of  all  the  divine  transactions,  that  Jesus  Christ 
would  not  have  come  to  give  them  life.  I  believe  that  it  would  be 
utterly  impossible  for  any  one  of  us  to  enter  heaven,  let  us  do  what  we 
might,  unless  Jesus  Christ  had  come  from  heaven  to  show  us  the  way,  to 
remove  the  bolts  and  bars  for  us,  and  to  enable  us  to  tread  in  the 
path  which  leads  to  glory  and  immortality.  Lost!  lost!  Lost!  The  race 
of  man  was  utterly  lost,  not  partly  lost,  not  thrown  into  a  condition  in 
which  it  might  be  ruined  unless  it  worked  hard  to  save  itself;  but 
BO  lost,  that  but  for  the  interposition  of  a  divine  arm,  but  for  the  appear 
ance  of  God  in  human  flesh,  but  for  the  stupendous  transaction  upon 
Calvary,  and  the  work  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart,  not  one 
dead  soul  ever  could  come  to  life.  Eternal  life  would  not  be  the 
peculiar  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  if  man  had  a  finger  in  it,  but  now  man's 
power  is  excluded  and  grace  reigns. 

It  is  clearly  to  be  seen  in  the  text,  by  a  little  thought,  that  eternal 
life  was  not  the  merit  of  any  one  of  God's  people,  for  it  is  said  that  it  is 
(/teen  to  us.  Now,  a  gift  is  the  very  opposite  of  payment.  What  a 
man  receives  as  a  gift  he  certainly  does  not  deserve.  If  it  be  given  to 
us,  then  it  is  no  more  a  debt,  but  if  it  be  a  debt  then  it  can  be  no  more 
a  gift.  None  of  us  merits  eternal  life,  or  ever  can  merit  it.  Mere 
mortal  life  is  a  gift  of  divine  mercy,  we  do  not  deserve  it;  and  as  for  the 
eternal  life  spoken  of  in  the  text,  it  is  a  boon  too  high  for  the  fingers  of 
human  merit  to  hope  to  reach  it;  if  a  man  should  work  never  so 
hard  after  it,  yet  upon  the  footing  of  the  law  it  would  be  impossible 
for  him  to  obtain  it.  Man  merits  nothing  but  death,  and  life  must 
be  the  free  gift  of  God.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death;"  that  is  to  say 
it  is  earned  and  procured  as  matter  of  debt  ;  "  but  the  gift  of  God,"  the 
free-grace  gift  of  God,  "is  eternal  life."  Now,  this  is  a  very  humi 
liating  doctrine,  I  know,  but  it  is  true,  and  I  want  you  all  to  feel  it. 
Children  of  God,  I  know  you  do.  You  see  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence 
you  were  drawn?  Do  you  see  it?  Or  have  you  grown  proud  of  late? 
Those  fine  feelings  and  prayings  of  yours  have  you  stuck  them  like 
feathers  in  your  cap  ?  I  pray  you  recollect  what  you  were  1  Ton  be 
proud!  do  not  forget  the  dunghill  where  you  once  grew!  Remem 
ber  the  filth  out  of  which  God  took  you,  and  instead  of  being  scarlet 
with  the  garments  of  pride,  your  cheeks  may  well  be  scarlet  with  a 
blush!  Oh!  may  God  forbid,  once  for  all,  that  we  should  glory,  for  what 
have  we  to  glory  in?  What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received  ? 

It  is  clear,  too,  from  the  text,  that  those  who  are  now  right&om 
would  have  perished  but  for  Christ.  Christ  says,  "they  shall  never 
perish."  Promises  are  never  given  as  superfluities.  There  is  a  neces 
sity,  therefore,  for  this  promise.  There  was  a  danger,  a  solemn  danger, 
that  every  one  of  those  men  who  are  now  saved  would  have  perished 
eternally.  Sin  made  them  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others,  so  Scripture 
tells  us;  and  justice  must  have  overwhelmed  them  with  the  rest  if 


TOO  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

distinguishing  grace  had  not  prevented.  Even  now  it  is  solemnly  true, 
that  there  is  no  reason  why  a  truly  righteous  soul  should  not  perish, 
except  that  Christ  still  prevents  it.  You  are  alive,  but  you  would  not  be 
spiritually  alive  an  hour,  unless  the  Holy  Spirit  continued  to  pour 
his  vital  energy  into  your  soul.  You  shall  be  preserved,  but,  mark 
you,  it  is  stated  as  a  promise,  and  therefore  it  is  not  at  all  a  matter  of 
natural  necessity.  Apart  from  grace  you  are  in  fearful  danger  of 
apostacy,  and  probably  you  have  fears  about  it  even  now ;  like  the  apostle, 
who  fea*red  lest  after  having  preached  to  others,  he  himself  should  be  a 
castaway;  a  very  proper  fear,  a  fear  which  will  often  come  upon  sincere 
souls,  who  feel  a  holy  jealousy  of  themselves.  But  we  need  have  no 
fear  when  we  come  to  the  promise  of  God,  for  if  we  are  really  in  Christ 
we  have  a  guarantee  of  security,  since  Christ's  own  word  is,  "  They  shall 
never  perish."  The  promise  was  certainly  given  because  it  was  wanted. 
There  is  a  danger  of  perishing;  there  are  ten  thousand  risks  of  perishing; 
only  Omnipotence  itself  keeps  off  the  fiery  darts  of  Satan;  the  blessed 
Physician  gives  the  antidote  or  the  poison  would  soon  destroy  us;  he 
who  swears  to  bring  us  safely  home  protects  us  from  a  thousand  foes, 
who  otherwise  would  work  our  ill.  "  They  shall  never  perish." 

It  is  also  implied,  that  naturally  the  people  of  God  have  ten  thousand 
enemies  ivho  would  pluck  them  out  of  Christ's  hand.  They  were  once 
in  the  hand  of  the  enemy;  they  were  once  willing  bond-slaves  of  Satan. 
All  this  they  know,  and  all  this  they  are  willing  to  acknowledge.  I 
would  to  God  that  some  here  would  feel  the  truth  of  that  which  I  have 
been  saying.  You  self-righteous  ones  will  say,  "  I  am  all  right;  I  do  my 
best,  I  go  to  a  place  of  worship."  Now,  soul,  that  is  right  enough  in 
itself,  but  if  thou  boastest  of  it,  it  is  an  evidence  that  thou  knowest 
neither  God  nor  thyself.  When  I  have  heard  of  some  who  have  boasted 
that  they  felt  no  inbred  sin,  I  have  wished  that  they  would  read  the 
story  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  Publican.  At  the  Fulton  Street  Prayer 
Meeting,  a  brother  asked  for  the  prayers  of  believers,  because  he  felt  so 
much  the  corruption  of  his  own  heart,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  and 
especially  the  natural  vileness  of  his  own  nature.  A  brother  stood  up 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  hall,  and  said  he  thanked  God  that  was  not 
his  experience;  he  did  not  feel  any  corruption,  and  his  heart  was  not 
depraved.  The  other  one  made  no  reply,  but  a  friend  present  read  these 
words:  "  Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray ;  the  one  a  Pharisee, 
and  the  other  a  publican.  The  Pharisee  stood  and  prayed  thus  with 
himself,  God,  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  extor 
tioners,  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as  this  publiean.  I  fast  twice  in 
the  week,  I  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess.  And  the  publican,  standing 
afar  off,  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote 
upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.  I  tell  you, 
this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified  rather  than  the  other:  for 
every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased;  and  he  that  humbleth 
himself  shall  be  exalted/'  A  sense  of  sin  is  a  blessed  sign  either  of 
pardon  received,  or  of  pardon  to  come.  He  that  says  he  has  no  sin  makes 
God  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him.  He  who  will  not  confess  his 
sin  shall  never  be  absolved;  but  he  who  with  a  broken  and  a  trembling 
heart  goes  to  the  foot  of  the  cross  shall  find  forgiveness  there.  This 
much,  then,  upon  the  past  estate  of  the  heirs  of  heaven. 


LIFE   ETERNAL.  701 

If.  And  now,  to  plunge  at  once  into  the  subject.    THE  TEXT  SHEDS 

A  FLOOD  OF  LIGHT  UPON  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  EVERY  BELIEVER. 

We  shall  have  to  give  you  hints  rather  than  a  long  exposition;  so 
kindly  take  the  first  sentence,  which  speaks  of  a  gift  received.  "  I  give 
unto  them  eternal  life."  This  gift  is,  first  of  all,  life.  You  will  make 
strange  confusion  of  God's  Word  if  you  confound  life  with  existence,  for 
they  are  very  different  things.  All  men  will  exist  for  ever,  but  many 
will  dwell  in  everlasting  death;  they  will  know  nothing  whatever  of 
life.  Life  is  a  distinct  thing  altogether  from  existence,  and  implies  in 
God's  Word  something  of  activity  and  of  happiness.  In  the  text 
before  us  it  includes  many  things.  Note  the  difference  between  the 
stone  and  the  plant.  The  plant  has  vegetable  life.  You  know  the 
difference  between  the  animal  and  the  plant.  While  the  plant  has 
vegetable  life,  yet  it  is  altogether  dead  in  the  sense  in  which  we  speak 
of  living  creatures.  It  has  not  the  sensations  which  belong  to  animal 
life.  Then,  again,  if  we  turn  to  another  and  higher  grade,  namely, 
mental  life,  an  animal  is  dead  so  far  as  that  is  concerned.  It  cannot 
enter  at  all  into  the  mysterious  calculations  of  the  mathematician,  nor 
revel  in  the  sublime  glorieg  of  poetry.  The  animal  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  life  of  the  intellectual  mind;  as  to  mental  life  it  is  dead. 
Now,  there  is  a  grade  of  life  which  is  higher  than  the  mental  life — 
a  higher  life  quite  unknown  to  the  philosopher,  not  put  down  in  Plato, 
nor  spoken  of  by  Aristotle,  but  understood  by  the  very  meanest  of  the 
children  of  God.  "it  is  a  phase  of  life  called  "spiritual  life,"  a  new  form 
of  life  altogether,  which  does  not  belong  to  man  naturally,  but  is  given 
to  him  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  first  man,  Adam,  was  made  a  living  soul, 
and  a41  his  descendants  are  made  like  unto  him.  The  second  Adam  is 
made  a  quickening  spirit,  and  until  we  are  made  like  the  second  Adam 
we  know  nothing  of  spiritual  life.  This  body  of  ours  is  by  nature 
adapted  for  a  soulish  life.  The  apostle  tells  us,  in  that  wonderful 
chapter  in  Corinthians,  that  the  body  is  sown — what?  "A  natural 
body."  The  Greek  is,  "A  soulish  body"— "but  it  is  raised  "—what? 
'*  A  spiritual  body."  There  is  a  soulish  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual 
body.  There  is  a  body  adapted  to  the  lower  life  which  belongs  to  all 
men,  a  mere  mental  existence;  and  there  is  to  be  a  body  which  will 
belong  to  all  those  who  have  received  spiritual  life,  who  shall  dwell  in 
that  body  as  the  house  of  their  perfected  spirit  in  heaven.  The  life  which 
Jesus  Christ  gives  his  people  is  spiritual  life,  therefore  it  is  mysterious. 
"Thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  thou  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh, 
nor  whither  it  goeth;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  You 
who  have  mental  life  cannot  explain  to  the  horse  or  the  dog  what  it  is, 
neither  can  we  who  have  spiritual  life  explain  to  those  who  have  it 
not  what  it  is.  You  can  tell  them  what  it  does  and  what  its  effects  are, 
but  what  the  "spark  of  heavenly  flame"  may  be  you  yourselves  do  not 
know,  though  you  are  conscious  that  it  is  there. 

It  is  spiritual  life  which  Jesus  Christ  gives  his  people,  but  it  is  more; 
it  is  divine  life.  This  life  is  like  the  life  of  God,  and  therefore  it  is 
elevating.  "  We  are  made,"  says  the  apostle,  "partakers  of  the  divine 
nature."  "  Begotten  again  by  God  the  Father,  not,"  says  the  apostle, 
"  with  corruptible  seed,  but  with  incorruptible."  We  do  not  become 
divine,  but  we  receive  a  nature  which  enables  us  to  sympathize  with 


702  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Deity,  to  delight  in  the  topics  which  engage  the  Eternal  Mind,  and  to 
live  upon  the  same  principles  as  the  Most  Holy  G-od.  We  love,  for 
God  is  love.  We  begin  to  be  holy,  for  God  is  thrice  holy.  We 
pant  after  perfection,  for  he  is  perfect.  We  delight  in  doing  good, 
for  God  is  good.  We  get  into  a  new  atmosphere.  We  pass  out  of  the  old 
range  of  the  mere  mental  faculties;  our  spiritual  faculties  make  us  akin 
to  God.  "  Let  us,"  said  he,  "  make  man  in  our  own  image,  after  our 
own  iikeness."  That  image  Adam  lost;  that  image  Christ  restores,  and 
gives  to  us  that  life  which  Adam  lost  in  the  day  when  he  sinned,  when 
God  said  to  him,  "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely 
die."  In  that  sense  he  did  die;  the  sentence  was  not  postponed;  he 
died  spiritually  directly  he  touched  the  fruit;  and  this  long-lost  life 
Jesus  Christ  restores  to  every  soul  who  believes  in  him. 

This  life,  you  will  gather  from  my  remarks,  is  heavenly  life.  It  is  the 
same  life  that  expands  and  develops  itself  in  heaven.  The  Christian 
does  not  die.  What  does  the  Saviour  say?  "He  that  believeth  in  me 
shall  never  die."  Does  not  the  mental  life  die?  Yes.  Does  not  the 
mere  bodily  life  die?  Ay,  but  not  the  spiritual  life.  It  is  the  same  life 
here  which  it  will  be  there,  only  now  it  is  undeveloped  and  corruption 
impedes  its  action.  Brethren,  nothing  of  us  shall  go  to  heaven  aa 
flesh  and  blood,  but  only  as  it  is  subdued,  elevated,  changed,  and  per 
fected  by  the  influence  of  the  spirit-life.  Know  ye  not  that  "  flesh  and 
blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God;  neither  doth  corruption 
inherit  incorruption."  Then  what  is  the  "  I,"  the  "  myself"  that  shall 
enter  heaven?  Why,  if  you  be  in  Christ  a  new  creature,  then  that  new 
creature  and  nothing  but  that  new  creature,  the  very  life  which  you 
have  lived  here  in  this  tabernacle,  the  very  life  that  has  budded  and 
blossomed  in  the  garden  of  communion  with  God,  that  life  which  has- 
led  you  to  visit  the  sick,  and  clothe  the  naked,  and  feed  the  hungry, 
that  life  which  has  made  tears  of  repentance  stream  down  your  cheeks,, 
that  life  which  has  caused  you  to  believe  in  Jesus, — this  is  the  life 
which  will  go  to  heaven;  and  if  you  have  not  this,  then  you  do  not 
possess  the  life  of  heaven,  and  dead  souls  cannot  enter  there.  Only 
living  men  can  enter  into  the  land  of  the  living.  "  As  we  have  borne 
the  image  of  the  earthy,  so  also  shall  we  bear  the  image  of  the- 
heavenly."  Even  now  the  heavenly  life  heaves  and  throbs  within  us. 

I  think  it  may  also  be  inferred  from  all  this  that  the  life  which  Christ 
gives  his  people  is  an  energetic  life.  If  the  spiritual  life  is  poured  into 
a  man  it  raises  him  above  his  former  state,  and  lifts  him  out  of  the 
range  of  merely  carnal  comprehension.  He  himself  is  discerned  of 
no  man.  "For  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God."  You  cannot  expect  the  world  to  understand  this  new  life. 
It  is  a  hidden  thing.  It  will  be  a  mystery  to  yourselves,  a 
wonder  to  your  own  hearts.  But  oh!  how  active  it  will  be!  It 
will  fight  with  your  sins,  and  will  not  be  satisfied  until  it  has  slam 
them.  If  you  tell  me  you  never  have  a  conflict  within,  I  tell  you  I  can 
not  understand  how  you  can  have  the  divine  life,  for  it  is  sure  to  come 
into  conflict  at  once  with  the  old  nature,  and  there  will  be  perpetual 
strife.  The  man  becomes  a  new  man  at  home;  his  wife  and  family 
observe  it;  he  is  a  different  man  in  business;  he  is  a  changed  man 
altogether,  whether  you  view  him  in  connection  with  his  fellow-men  or 


LIFE    ETKRNAT*  703 

with  his  God.  He  is  a  new  creature.  He  feels  that  the  new  and 
wondrous  life  which  has  been  planted  in  him  has  made  him  of  a  different 
race  from  the  common  herd,  and  he  walks  amongst  the  sons  of  men 
feeling  that  he  is  an  alien  and  a  stranger.  "  Beloved,  now  are  \ve  the 
eons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not-  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,  but  we 
know  that  when  he  shall  appear* we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see 
him  as  he  is." 

I  wish  there  were  more  time  to  describe  the  inward  life,  but  this 
must  suffice  to  indicate  the  blessing  which  Jesus  gives  to  the  believer 
by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

There  is  a  word  in  the  text  which  qualifies  it:  "I  give  unto  them 
eternal  life."     "Eternal"  means  "without  end."     If  Christ  puts  the 
life  of  God  into  a  man  that  life  cannot  be  taken  away.     It  cannot  die, 
that  were  impossible.     When  I  have  heard  one  say  that  you  mav  be  a 
child  of  God  to-day  but  that  next  week  may  find  you  a  child  of  thedevil, 
I  have  supposed  that  the  word  "eternal "  according  to  him  could  only 
have  meant  five  or  six  days;  but  according  to  the  dictionary  I  use, 
according  to  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  "  eternal  "  means  "  without  end." 
If,  then,  a  man  says,  "  I  had  spiritual  life  once,  but  I  do  not  possess  it 
now,"  it  is  clear  that  either  he  is  mistaken  altogether  or  he  never  had 
it  at  all.     If  Jesus  had  said,  "  I  give  unto  them  life  which  shall  last 
for  seven  years,   but  which  may  perhaps   be  quenched  and   put  out 
under  temptation,"  I  could  understand  a  man  saying  that  he  had  fallen 
from  grace;  but  if  it  be  "eternal  life,"  then  it  mu>t  be  "eternal;"  there 
is  no  end  to  it,  it  must  go  on.     The  mere  existence  of  the  soul  we  believe 
will  be  never-ending,  but  it  will  be  no  boon  to  the  ungodly  that  it  will 
be  so.     It  is  not  for  Christ  to  give  us  mere  immortality  "of  existence, 
for  that  will  be  a  fearful  curse  to  some  men.     Lost  souls  would  be  glad 
enough  if  they  could  be  rid  of  their  immortal  existence,  but  Christ 
gives  an  eternal,  a  holy  life,    a  happy  life,  which  is  infinitely  more  than 
existence.     Existence  may  be  a  curse,  but  life  is  a  blessing.     This  life 
begins  here:  "  I  give  unto  them."    Not,  "  I  shall  give,"  but  "I  give." 
Not,  "I  will  give  it  to  them  when  they  die,"  but  "I  give  it  them  here, 
I  give  unto  them  eternal  life."     Now,  my  hearer,  you  have  either  got 
eternal  life  to-night,  or  you  are  still  in  death.     If  you  have  not  received 
it  yon  are  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  and  your  doom  will  be  a  terrible 
one ;  but  if  God  has  given  you  eternal  life,  fear  not  the  surrounding 
hosts  of  hell  nor  the  temptations  of  the  world,  for  the   eternal  God 
is  your  refuge,  and  underneath  you  are  the  everlasting  arms. 

This  life  is  given  as  a  free  gift  to  every  one  of  the  Lord's  people,  and 
is  bestowed  by  the  Lord  and  by  none  else. 

2.  Let  us  turn  now  to  the  second  part  of  the  blessing.  Here  ia 
preservation  secured.  "  They  shall  never  perish."  6ertain  gentlemen 
who  cannot  endure  the  doctrine  of  final  perseverance  manage  to  slip 
away  from  the  next  sentence,  "Neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of 
my  hands,"  and  suggest,  "but  they  may  get  out  themselves."  No. 
no,  no,  because  the  text  says,  "  They  shall  never  perish."  Our  present 
sentence  which  we  have  now  in  hand  puts  aside  all  suppositions  of 
every  kind  about  the  destruction  of  one  of  Christ's  sheep.  "  They 
shall  never  perish."  Take  each  word.  "  They  shall  never  perish."  Some 
of  their  notions  may,  some  of  their  comforts  mav,  some  of  their  expe- 

35 


704  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

jriences  may,  but  THEY  never  shall.  That  which  is  the  essence  of  the 
man,  his  true  soul,  his  inward  renewed  nature,  shall  never  be  destroyed. 
See,  then,  Christian,  you  may  be  deprived  of  a  thousand  things  without 
any  violation  of  the  promise.  The  promise  is  not  that  the  ship  shall 
not  go  to  the  bottom,  but  that  the  passengers  shall  get  to  the  shore. 
The  promise  is  not  that  the  house  shall  not  be  burned;  the  pledge  is 
that  you  who  are  in  the  house  shall  escape.  "  They  shall  never  perish." 
Take  another  word:  "They  shall  never  perish"  They  shall  go  very  near 
it,  perhaps.  They  shall  lose  their  joys  and  their  comforts,  but  "  they 
shall  never  perish"  The  life  in  them  shall  never  be  starved  out,  nor 
beaten  out,  nor  driven  out.  If  you  once  get  leaven  into  a  piece  of  bread 
you  cannot  get  it  out;  you  may  boil  it,  you  may  fry  it,  you  may  bake 
it,  you  may  do  what  you  like  with  it,  but  the  leaven  is  in  it,  and  you 
.cannot  get  it  out.  Get  the  soul  saturated  with  the  grace  of  God,  and 
-you  can  never  eradicate  it.  The  man  himself  shall  never  perish.  He 
-may  think  he  shall,  the  devil  may  tell  him  he  shall,  his  comforts  may 
be  withdrawn,  he  may  go  to  his  death-bed  full  of  doubts  and  fears  about 
himself,  but  he  shall  never  perish.  Now,  this  is  either  true  or  it  is  not. 
You  who  think  it  is  not  true  tell  the  Lord  so  ;  but  I  believe  that  it  is 
a  most  sure  and  infallible  fact,  for  Jehovah  says  it.  I  do  not  know 
how  it  is  that  they  do  not  perish,  it  is  a  wondrous  tiling;  but  then  it 
is  all  a  marvel  throughout  from  first  to  last.  Now  take  the  word 
"never."  We  have  shown  how  long  the  preservation  endures  :  "They 
shall  never  perish."  "  Well,  but  if  they  should  live  to  be  very  aged,  and 
should  then  fall  into  sin?  "  "  They  shall  never  perish."  Oh!  but  perhaps 
they  may  be  assaulted  in  quarters  where  they  least  expect  it,  or  they  may 
be  beleaguered  by  temptation."  They  shall  never  perish."  "  Well,  but  a 
man  may  be  a  child  of  God  and  yet  go  to  hell."  How  so,  if  he  can 
never  perish  ?  Why,  that  "  never"  includes  time  and  eternity,  it  includes 
living  and  dying,  it  includes  the  mount  and  the  valley,  the  tempest 
.and  the  calm.  "  They  shall  never  perish." 

*  In  every  state  secure, 
Kept  by  the  eternal  Hand." 

Beneath  the  wings  of  the  Almighty  God  night  with  its  pestilence  cannot 
smite  them,  and  day  with  its  cares  cannot  destroy  them;  youth  with  its 
passions  shall  be  safely  passed;  middle  age  with  all  its  whirl  of  business 
shall  be  navigated  in  safety;  old  age  with  its  infirmities  shall  become 
the  land  of  Beuiah;  death's  gloomy  vale  shall  be  lit  up  with  the  coming 
splendour;  the  actual  moment  of  departure,  the  last  and  solemn  article 
shall  be  the  passing  over  of  a  river  dryshod.  "  When  thou  passest 
through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee  ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they 
shall  not  overflow  thee:  when  thou  walkest  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt 
not  be  burned;  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee,  saith  the  Lord." 
"  They  shall  never  perish." 

There  is  a  way  of  explaining  away  everything,  I  suppose,  but  I 
really  do  not  know  how  the  opponents  of  the  perseverance  of  God's 
saints  will  get  over  this  text.  They  may  do  with  it  as  they  will,  but  I 
shall  still  believe  what  I  find  here,  that  I  shall  never  perish  if  I  am  one 
of  Christ's  people.  If  I  perish,  then  Christ  will  not  have  kept  hig 
promise;  but  I  know  he  must  abide  faithful  to  his  word.  "He  is  not  a 


LIFE   ETERNAL.  705 

man  that  he  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  he  should  repent." 
Every  soul  that  resteth  on  the  atoning  sacrifice  is  safe,  and  safe  for 
^ver  ;  "they  shall  never  perish." 

3.  Then  comes  the  third  sentence,  in  which  we  have  a  position  gua 
ranteed — "in  Christ? 9  hand"  We  have  not  time  to  expound  it:  it  is 
to  be  in  a  place  of  honour;  we  are  the  ring  he  wears  on  his  finger.  It 
is  a  place  of  love:  "  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  my  hands; 
thy  walls  are  continually  before  me."  It  is  a  place  of  power:  his 
right  hand  encloses  all  his  people.  It  is  a  place  of  property:  Christ 
holds  his  people;  "all  the  saints  are  in  thy  hand."  It  is  a  place  of 
discretion:  we  are  yielded  up  to  Christ,  and  Christ  wields  a  discretionary 
government  over  us.  It  is  a  place  of  guidance,  a  place  of  protection: 
as  sheep  are  said  to  be  in  the  hand  of  the  shepherd,  so  are  we  in  the 
hand  of  Christ.  As  arrows  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty  man,  to  be  used 
by  him,  as  jewels  in  the  hands  of  the  bride  to  be  her  ornament,  so  are 
we  in  the  hand  of  Christ.  Now,  what  says  the  text?  It  reminds  us 
that  there  are  some  who  want  to  pluck  us  thence.  There  are  those 
who,  with  false  doctrine,  would  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very 
•elect.  There  are  roaring  persecutors  who  would  frighten  God's  saints, 
and  so  make  them  turn  buck  in  the  day  of  battle.  There  are  scheming 
tempters — the  panderers  to  hell,  the  jackals  of  the  lion  of  the  pit,  who 
would  fain  drag  us  to  destruction.  Then  there  are  our  own  hearts 
that  would  pluck  us  thence.  You  know  in  the  text  before  us  we  need 
not  read  the  word  "man,"  for  it  is  not  in  the  original.  The  translators 
have  put  the  word  "  man  "  in  italics  to  show  that  it  is  not  in  the  Greek, 
and  so  we  may  read  it — "Neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand."  Not  only — any  "  man,"  but  any  devil  either.  Nothing  that  is 
present  shall  do  it,  nothing  to  come;  no  principality,  no  power,  nothing 
whatsoever  that  is  conceivable.  "  None  shall  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand."  It  does  not  merely  include  men,  who  are  sometimes  our  worst 
foes,  for  the  worst  that  we  have  are  they  of  our  own  household;  it  also 
includes  fallen  spirits;  but  none  shall  be  able  to  pluck  us  out  of  his 
hand.  By  no  possibility  shall  any  be  able,  by  any  of  their  schemes,  to 
remove  us  from  being  his  favourites,  his  property,  his  dear  sons,  his 
protected  children.  Oh,  what  a  blessed  promise  ! 

Now,  do  you  know,  while  I  have  been  preaching  to  you  about  this,  I 
have  been  thinking  a  little  about  my  own  history  before  I  knew  the 
Lord.  One  of  the  things  that  made  me  want  to  be  a  Christian  was 
this.  I  had  seen  some  young  lads  that  I  was  at  school  with,  they 
were  excellent  lads,  and  some  of  them  had  been  held  up  as  patterns  of 
imitation  to  me  and  to  others.  I  saw  them,  though  only  a  very  few 
years  older  than  myself,  turn  out  as  vain  and  ungodly  as  well  could 
be,  and  yet  I  knew  them  to  have  been  excellently  well  disposed  as 
boys,  nay,  to  have  been  very  patterns ;  and  this  kind  of  thought  used 
to  cross  my  young  brain,  "  Is  there  not  some  means  of  being  pre- 
€e>-ved  from  making  a  shipwreck  of  my  life?  "  When  I  came  to  read 
the  Bible,  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  full  of  this  doctrine:  '•  If  you  trust 
Christ,  he  will  save  you  from  all  evil ;  he  will  keep  you  in  a  life  of 
integrity  and  holiness  while  here,  and  he  will  bring  you  safe  to  heaven 
at  the  last."  I  felt  that  I  could  not  trust  man,  for  I  had  seen  some 
of  the  very  best  wandering  far  Irom  truth  ;  if  I  trusted  Christ,  it  was 


706  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

not  a  chance  as  to  whether  I  should  get  to  heaven,  but  a  certainty; 
and  I  learned  that  if  I  rested  all  my  weight  upon  him  he  would 
keep  me,  for  I  found  it  written,  "  The  righteous  shall  hold  on  his 
way,  and  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  wax  stronger  and  stronger." 
I  found  the  apostle  saying,  "  I  am  persuaded  that  he  that  hath  begun 
a  good  work  in  you  will  carry  it  on,"  and  such-like  expressions. 
"  Why,"  I  reasoned,  "  I  have  found  an  insurance  office,  and  a  good 
one  too;  I  will  insure  my  life  in  it;  I  will  go  to  Jesus  as  I  am,  for  he 
bids  me;  I  will  trust  myself  with  him."  If  I  had  listened  to  the- 
Arminian  theory  I  should  never  have  been  converted,  for  it  never 
had  any  charms  for  me.  A  Saviour  who  casts  away  his  people,  a  God 
who  leaves  his  children  to  perish,  were  not  worthy  of  my  worship, 
and  a  salvation  which  does  not  save  outright  is  neither  worth 
preaching  nor  listening  to.  When  I  stand  here  and  say  to  this- 
assembled  mass,  Trust  my  Master,  believe  him,  and  it  is  no  matter  of 
question  as  to  whether  you  shall  be  s-aved,  for  he  has  said  that  "  he  that 
believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved;"  when  I  say  that,  I  feel  that 
I  have  something  to  say  which  is  worth  listening  to.  My  dear  hearer, 
with  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit  you  will  be  a  new  man.  As  you  now 
are,  if  you  were  to  be  pardoned  to-night  you  would  be  condemned  to 
morrow,  for  the  tendencies  of  your  nature  would  lead  you  astray.  But 
if  God  shall  put  a  new  nature  into  you,  your  old  nature  shall  not  be  able 
to  control  it.  The  new  immortal  principle  shall  get  the  mastery;  you 
shall  be  kept  from  sinning;  you  shall  be  preserved  in  holiness,  and  though 
you  will  have  to  mourn  over  your  imperfection,  yet  you  will  feel  that 
you  have  God's  own  life  in  you;  though  you  will  realize  that  you  are  not 
perfect,  yet  you  will  wish  you  were,  and  this  wishing  to  be  so  will 
be  a  sign  of  grace  in  your  soul,  and  these  wishes  and  desires  will  go  on 
waxing  stronger  and  stronger,  till,  having  mastered  sin  by  the  power  of 
the  Spirit,  the  day  shall  come  when  this  body  shall  be  dropped  off,  and 
the  new  life,  disencumbered  of  the  vile  rags  which  it  was  compelled  to 
wear  while  it  was  here,  shall  leap  in  its  disembodied  existence  into  per 
fection,  and  then  shall  wait  for  the  trumpet's  sound,  and  the  body  itself, 
purified  and  made  fit  for  the  new  and  higher  life,  shall  be  again  inha 
bited,  and  so  both  the  body  and  the  soul,  delivered  from  all  sin,  shall 
be  an  everlasting  testimony  to  the  promise  of  Christ,  for  those  who  rest 
in  him  shall  have  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall 
any  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand. 

III.  I  have  anticipated  the  last  point,  as  to  THE  OUTLOOK  OF  MY 

TEXT   INTO  THE  FUTURE. 

If  God  has  given  you  eternal  life,  that  comprehends  all  the 
future.  'Your  spiritual  existence  will  flourish  when  empires  and 
kingdoms  decay.  Your  life  will  live  on  when  the  heart  of  this  great 
vcorld  shall  grow  cold,  when  the  pulse  of  the  great  sea  shall  cease  to 


LIFE   ETERNAL.  707 

beat,  when  the  eye  of  the  bright  sun  shall  grow  dim  with  age.  You 
possess  eternal  life.  When,  like  a  moment's  foam  which  melts  into  the 
wave  that  bears  it,  the  whole  universe  shall  have  gone,  and  left  not  a 
•wreck  behind,  it  shall  be  well  with  you,  for  you  have  eternal  life. 
You  have  an  existence  that  will  run  parallel  with  the  existence  of 
the  Deity.  Eternal  life!  Oh!  what  an  avenue  of  glory  is  opened  by 
those  words— Eternal  Life!  "  Because  I  live,"  saith  Christ,  ki  ye  shall 
live  also."  As  long  as  there  is  a  Christ  there  shall  be  a  happy  soul,  and 
you  shall  be  that  happy  soul.  As  long  as  there  is  a  God  there  shall  be  a 
'beatified  existence,  and  you  shall  enjoy  existence,  for  Jesus  gives  you 
•eternal  life.  Spin  on,  old  world,  until  thine  axle  is  worn  out.  Fly  on, 
Old  Father  Time,  until  thine  hour-glass  is  broken,  and  thou  shalt  cease 
to  be!  Come,  mighty  angel  !  plant  thy  foot  upon  the  sea  and  upon 
the  land,  and  swear  by  him  that  liveth  that  time  shall  be  no  more,  for 
«ven  then  every  Christian  shall  still  live,  because  Christ  gives  unto  them 
eternal  life. 

Does  not  the  next  sentence  also  look  into  the  future? — "They  shall 
never  perish."  They  shall  never  cease  to  exist  in  perpetual  blessedness! 
never  cease  to  be  like  God  in  their  natures;  never.  Think  you  have 
been  in  heaven  a  thousand  years— ^can  you  realize  it?  A  thousand 
years'  blessed  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus !  A  thousand  years  in 
his  bosom !  A  thousand  years  with  the  sight  of  him  to  ravish  your 
spirit!  Well,  but  you  will  have  just  as  long  to  be  there  as  if  you  had 
never  begun,  for  you  shall  never,  never  perish.  When  the  millennium 
shall  come,  or  when  the  judgment  shall  sit,  and  when  all  the  great 
transactions  of  prophecy  shall  be  fulfilled,  these  need  not  distress  you, 
for  if  you  trust  Christ  you  shall  never — oh!  turn  that  word  over — you 
shall  never,  never,  never,  never,  NEVER  perish!  What  an  eternity  of 
glory,  what  unspeakable  delight  is  wrapped  up  ir  this  promise — "They 
shall  never  perish!" 

Then,  surely,  this  is  another  glance  into  the  future — "  And  none 
•shall  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand."  We  shall  be  in  his  hand  for  ever, 
we  shall  be  in  his  heart  for  ever,  we  shall  be  in  his  very  self  for  ever — 
•one  with  him,  and  none  shall  pluck  us  thence.  Happy,  happy  is  the 
•man  who  can  lay  claim  to  such  a  promise  as  this! 

Oh!  there  are  some  of  you  to  whom  I  wish  this  promise  belonged! 
It  is  very  rich,  and  very  full  of  comfort;  I  wish  it  belonged  to.  you. 
Dost  thou  say,  "I  wish  it  belonged  to  me"?  Oh!  friend,  I  am  glad 
•to  hear  thee  say  that!  Dost  thou  know,  soul,  that  there  is  but  one  key 
to  open  this  precious  treasure,  and  that  is  the  key  of  the  cross  of  the 
Lord  Jesus?  What  sayest  thou?  Canst  thou  trust  him?  When  one 
told  me  the  other  day  she  could  not  trust  Christ,  I  looked  her  in  the 
face  and  said,  "  What  has  he  done  that  you  should  not  trust  him?  Can 
trust  me?"  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  I  can  trust  my  fellow-creatures,  bnt  I 


708  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

cannot  trust  God."  Oh!  I  thought,  what  terrible  blasphemy!  It 
honestly  spoken,  and  it  was  spoken  by  one  who  did  not  perceive  the 
greatness  of  the  offence  in  it,  but  I  do  not  know  that  there  is  any 
worse  thing  that  can  be  said  than  that — "  I  cannot  trust  God!"  Well, 
sir,  you  have  made  him  a  liar  thenl  That  is  the  practical  result  of 
it ;  for  if  j'ou  believe  a  man  to  be  honest  you  can  always  trust  him. 
Can  I  trust  my  fellow-man,  and  not  trust  God  ?  Oh!  the  horror  of 
that  thought !  There  is  such  an  amount  of  blasphemy  in  it  that 
I  must  not  quote  it  again  !  Not  trust  Christ!  "  Well,"  says  one, 
"but  may  we  not  have  a  merely  natural  trust  and  so  be  deceived?" 
I  do  not  know  of  any  trust  in  Christ  except  a  spiritual  one,  nor  do 
I  believe  in  any.  If  thou  trustest  Christ  thou  hast  not  done  that 
of  thyself.  There  was  never  a  soul  that  did  trust  Christ  unless  he 
was  enabled  to  do  it  by  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  if  you  wholly  and 
simply  trust  Christ  you  need  not  ask  any  questions  about  natural 
trusting  or  spiritual  trusting.  If  you  trust  the  Lord  Jesus  wholly  you 
are  right.  Rest  on  him  then;  rest  on  him  only,  wholly,  and  solely, 
and  if  you  perish  then  I  do  not  understand  the  gospel,  and  I  cannot 
comprehend  what  the  Bible  means.  I  will  tell  you  one  thing,  and  then 
close.  If  you  trust  Christ  and  you  perish,  then  I  must  perish  most 
certainly,  and  so  must  all  my  brethren  and  sisters  here  who  have  believed 
in  Jesus.  It  is  all  over  with  us  if  it  is  all  over  with  you.  When  there 
is  a  storm,  one  passonger  cannot  very  well  go  to  the  bottom,  if  he  is  in 
the  ship,  unless  the  whole  of  the  ship's  company  go  too.  We  must  go- 
together.  We  have  got  into  the  life-boat,  and  if  the  life-boat  goes  down 
with  you  it  must  go  down  with  all  the  saints,  and  all  the  apostles,  and 
all  the  martyrs  too.  They  went  to  heaven  resting  upon  Christ,eand  if 
you  rest  on  Christ  you  will  get  there  also. 

Oh!  sinner,  mayest  thou  be  led  to-day  to  rest  on  Jesus  and  on  Jesus 
only,  and  then  take  the  text.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  it — "  I  give  unto  my 
sheep  eternal  life;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck 
them  out  of  my  hand." 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — John  x.  1 — 30. 


ifabcrmtde  f)  utyit. 


A  SHARP  KNIFE  FOR  THE  VINE-BRANCHES. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  OCTOBER  GTH,  1867,  BY 

C.  II.  Sl'UKGEOiX, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 

"  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away :  and  every  branch  that 
beareth  fruit,  he  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit." — John  xv.  2. 

THESE  are  the  ivords  of  Jesus.  Unto  you  that  believe  he  is  precious ; 
and  every  word  that  he  speaks  is  precious  for  his  sake :  you  will  be 
sure,  then,  to  give  every  syllable  its  weight,  and  to  let  each  word  fall 
upon  your  soul  as  coming  directly  from  his  lips.  These  are  the  words 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  just  before  his  departure  from  the  world.  We  reckon 
the  words  of  dying  men  to  be  worth  storing,  and  especially  of  such  a 
matchless  man  as  our  Lord  and  Master.  It  may  be  said  of  him,  "  Thou 
hast  kept  the  best  wine  until  now;"  for,  in  this  chapter,  and  in  that 
which  follows,  we  have  some  of  the  choicest,  deepest,  and  richest  words 
that  the  Master  ever  uttered.  You  will  endeavour  then,  to  hear  him 
speaking  as  upon  the  verge  of  Gethsemarie ;  you  will  listen  to  these 
sentences  as  coming  to  you  associated  with  the  groans  and  bloody  sweat 
of  his  agony.  These  are  ivords,  moreover,  about  us,  and,  therefore,  to 
be  received  by  us  with  profound  attention;  the  most  of  us  who  are  here 
are  in  Christ,  some  one  way  or  another;  the  majority  of  us  profess  to 
be  Christians;  the  text,  then,  is  directed  to  us.  When  Jesus  speaks 
about  anything,  it  is  weighty,  and  demands  our  ear,  but  when  he  speaks 
about  ourselves  to  ourselves,  we  must  give  him  the  heart  as  well  as  the 
ear,  and  give  most  earnest  heed  to  the  things  which  he  speaks  to  usr 
lest  by  any  means  we  let  them  slip.  We  may  have  to  regret  one  day 
that  we  did  not  listen  to  his  voice  in  love,  for  we  may  have  to  hear  it 
when  we  must  listen  to  it,  when  the  tones  have  become  those  of  judg 
ment,  and  Jesus  the  judge  shall  say  unto  us,  "  I  know  you  not,"  even 
though  we  shall  venture  to  plead  that  we  ate  and  drank  in  his  presence, 
and  that  he  taught  in  our  streets. 

Having,  then,  your  solemn  attention,  we  will  read  the  text  again : 
'•Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away :  and  every 
branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more 
fruit." 

The  text  suggests  self-examination ;  conveys  instruction ;  and,  invites 
meditation. 

I.   In  the  first  place,  it  SUGGESTS  SELF-EXAMINATION^ 

I  hear  in  these  solemn  words  the  tones  of  his  voice  of  whom  Malachi 
said,  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming  ?  and  who  shall  stand 
when  he  appeareth?  for  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fullers'  soap." 

No.  774  50 


554  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

I  discern  in  these  two  heart-searching  sentences,  the  voice  of  him  of 
whom  John  said,  "  His  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  throughly  purge 
his  floor,  and  gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner ;  but  he  will  burn  up  the 
chaff  with  unquenchable  fire."  Truly  the  Lord's  "  fire  is  in  Ziou,  and  his 
furnace  in  Jerusalem/'  Happy  shall  that  man  be  who  can  bear  to  be 
thrust  into  the  flame,  and  to  be  covered  with  the  hot  coals  of  the  burn 
ing  truths  here  taught:  but  he  shall  be  found  reprobate  who  cannot 
bear  the  trial 

1.  Observe,  that  our  text  mentions  two  characters  who  are  in  some 
respects  exceedingly  alike  /  they  are  both  branches,  they  are  both  branches 
in  the  vine :  " Every  branch  in  me"  How  much  alike  persons  may  be 
apparently,  who  in  God's  sight  stand  at  opposite  poles  of  character !  Both 
the  persons  described  in  the  text  were  in  Christ:  in  Christ  in  different 
senses  it  is  plain,  because  the  first  persons  were  not  so  in  Christ  as  to 
bring  forth  fruit,  consequently,  as  fruit  is  that  by  which  we  are  to  judge 
a  man,  they  were  not  in  Christ  effectually,  graciously,  influentially,  or 
so  as  to  receive  the  fruit-creating  sap.  If  they  had  brought  forth  fruit, 
their  fruitfulness  would  have  been  a  sign  that  they  were  in  Christ 
savingly.  Who  will  venture  to  say  that  a  man  who  yields  no  fruit  of 
righteousness  can  be  really  a  Christian?  Yet  they  were  in  Christ  in 
some  sense  or  other;  that  is  to  say,  the  two  characters  were  equally 
esteemed  to  be  Christians ;  their  names  were  enrolled  in  the  same  church 
register;  in  the  common  judgment  of  men  they  were  equally  Chris 
tian  ;  according  to  their  own  profession,  they  were  so ;  in  many  other 
respects  which  we  need  not  now  catalogue,  they  were  both  in  Christ  as 
his  avowed  disciples,  as  soldiers  professedly  fighting  under  his  banner, 
as  servants  wearing  his  livery. 

These  two  persons  were  probably  equally  sound  in  their  doctrinal 
views,  they  held  the  same  precious  truth.  If  they  heard  falsehood,  they 
were  equally  earnest  to  denounce  it.  When  they  listened  to  the  gospel, 
they  received  it  with  joy,  and  so  received  it  as  to  be  willing  to  assist  in 
the  spread  of  it,  and  even  to  make  sacrifices  for  its  extension.  These 
persons  were  equally  attentive  to  ordinances.  How  often  has  it 
happened  that  two  persons  of  widely  different  state  before  the  Lord, 
have  been  baptised  at  the  same  hour,  in  the  same  water,  into  the  same 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  G-host,  and  have 
then  broken  bread  together  with  equal  apparent  fervency,  and  with 
equal  professions  of  enjoyment  and  devotion!  These  people  have 
been  equally  fair  in  their  profession ;  their  moral  conduct  has  in  the 
judgment  of  :all  onlookers  been  much  the  same;  they  have  avoided  every 
thing  of  ill  repute,  and  they  have  in  their  measure  sought  after  that 
which  was  comely  and  lovely  in  the  estimation  of  men.  Ah!  there  will 
often  be  found  two  who  publicly  pray  alike,  have  an  equal  gift  in 
prayer — and  what  is  worse,  preach  with  equal  earnestness  and  zeal, 
to  all  appearance,  who  have  family  prajrer  maintained  with  the  same 
consistency,  and  yet  for  all  this,  the  end  of  the  one  shall  be  to  be  cast 
away  as  a  branch  to  be  burned,  while  the  end  of  the  other  shall  be  to 
bring  forth  fruit  unto  perfection,  with  everlasting  life  as  the  reward. 
Ah!  friends,  man  can  counterfeit  cleverly,  but  when  the  devil  helps  him, 
he  becomes  master  of  the  art.  You  will  see  pieces  of  coinage  which 
it  is  aJmost  impossible  for  you  to  discover  to  be  mere  counterfeit!* 


A   SHARP   KNIFE    FOR  THE   VINE- BRANCHES.  555 

by  their  appearance,  or  even  by  their  ring;  in  the  scales  they  almost 
deceive  you,  but  you  put  them  into  the  fire,  and  then  the  discovery 
is  made.  Doubtless  there  are  thousands  in  all  Christian  churches 
who  have  the  stamp  and  the  impress  of  the  King  upon  them,  and  look 
like  the  genuine  shekels  of  the  sanctuary,  who  after  all  are  only  fit  to  be 
like  bad  money,  fastened  down  on  the  footstool  of  the  judgment  seat, 
with  a  nail  driven  through  them,  to  their  everlasting  reprobation  and 
disgrace.  How  can  we  tell  a  bold  man  from  a  coward?  Two  soldiers 
wear  the  same  regimentals:  they  will  talk  equally  loudly  of  what  they 
will  do  when  the  enemy  shall  come.  It  is  the  battle  that  tests  and  proves 
them;  some  peculiar  phase  of  the  conflict  will  bring  out  the  difference; 
but  till  the  battle  comes,  how  easy  it  is  for  the  poltroon  to  play  the 
hero,  while  perhaps  the  bravest  man  may  modestly  shrink  into  the  rear! 
Our  text,  then,  brings  before  us  two  characters  apparently  alike. 

2.  Then,  in  the  second  place,  it  shows  us  IM  distinction  between  them — 
the  great  and  solemn  difference.  The  first  branch  brought  forth  no 
fruit;  the  second  branch  bore  some  fruit.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall 
know  them."  We  have  no  right  to  judge  of  our  neighbours'  motives 
and  thoughts,  except  so  far  as  they  may  be  clearly  discoverable  by  their 
actions  and  words.  The  interior  we  must  leave  with  God,  but  the  exterior 
we  may  judge,  and  must  judge.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  are  not  to 
judge  men ;  but  there  is  another  sense  in  which  he  would  be  an  arrant 
fool  who  did  not  constantly  exercise  his  judgment  upon  men.  "  By  their 
fruits  ye  shnll  know  them,"  is  our  Lord's  own  canon  of  sacred  criticism. 
If  you  would  judge  men  and  judge  yourselves,  this  is  the  one  test — 
"  by  their  fruits." 

Now,  then,  what  say  you  professors  who  are  present  here  to-day;  you 
who  are  so  regular  in  your  attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace  ?  Will 
you  now  search  yourselves,  to  see  whether  you  have  any  fruit  ?  That 
you  may  be  helped  in  such  an  investigation,  let  me  remind  you  that  the 
apostle  Paul  has  given  us  a  list  of  these  fruits,  in  his  fifth  chapter  of 
the  epistle  to  the  Galatians.  He  says  in  the  twenty-second  verse,  "  The 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering,  gentleness,  goodness, 
faith,  meekness,  temperance."  Nine  kinds  of  fruit:  all  these  should  be 
41  in  us  and  abound."  Let  us  question  ourselves  whether  we  have  any 
of  them. 

Say,  professor,  hast  thou  brought  forth  the  fruit  of  "  love"?  Search 
ing  question,  this!  I  do  not  ask  thee,  canst  thou  talk  of  love?  but, 
dost  thou  feel  it  ?  I  do  not  say,  is  love  upon  your  tongue?  but,  does 
love  rule  thy  heart?  Dost  thou  love  God  as  a  child  loves  its  father? 
Dost  thou  love  the  Saviour  from  a  sense  of  gratitude  to  him  who  bought 
thee  with  his  blood  ?  Dost  thou  feel  the  love  of  the  gracious  Comforter, 
who  dwells  in  thee,  if  thou  be  indeed  a  child  of  God?  What  kuowest 
thou  about  love  to  the  brethren  ?  Dost  thou  love  the  saints,  as  saints, 
whether  they  belong  to  thy  church  or  no ;  whether  they  please  thee  or 
serve  thy  turn  or  no  ?  Say,  dost  thou  love  God's  poor  ?  Dost  thou 
love  God's  persecuted  and  despised  ones?  Answer,  I  pray  thee.  What 
about  love  to  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord's  dear  Son,  and  to  the  souls  of 
men?  Canst  thou  sit  still  and  be  satisfied  with  being  saved  thyself, 
while  thy  neighbours  are  being  damned  by  thousands  ?  Are  thine  eyes 
never  wet  with  tears  for  impenitent  souls  ?  Do  the  terrors  of  the  Lord 


556  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

never  get  hold  upon  thee,  when  thou  thinkest  of  men  plunging  them 
selves  into  perdition  ?  "  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath 
seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?"  Hast  thou  this 
fruit,  then  ?  for  if  not,  "  every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit 
he  taketh  away." 

Next  comes  joy.  Does  thy  religion  ever  give  thee  joy  ?  Is  it  mere 
matter  of  duty,  a  heavy  chain  for  thee  to  drag  about  like  a  convict,  or  is 
thy  religion  a  harp  for  thee  to  dance  to  the  tune  of?  Dost  thou  ever 
rejoice  in  Jesus  Christ?  Dost  thou  know  what  the  "joy  of  the  Lord" 
means  ?«  Does  it  ever  give  thee  joy  to  think  that  he  is  the  same  even 
when  the  fig  tree  does  not  blossom,  and  the  herd  is  cut  off  from  the 
stall?  Dost  thou  feel  a  joy  in  reading  the  promises  of  God's  word? 
Hast  thou  a  joy  in  secret  prayer;  that  joy  which  the  world  never  gave 
thee,  and  cannot  take  away  from  thee  ?  Hast  thou  a  secret  joy,  like  a 
spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed,  which  is  only  open  to  thee  and  thy 
Lord,  because  thy  fellowship  is  with  him,  and  not  with  the  sons  of  sin? 
He  that  never  mourned  because  of  sin,  has  never  repented;  but  he  who 
has  never  rejoiced  because  of  forgiveness,  cannot  have  seen  the  cross. 
Corne,  then,  hast  thou  produced  this  fruit  of  joy?  The  Lord  give  it 
more  and  more  to  thee!  If  thou  hast  never  had  it,  then  hear  the 
sentence — "Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh 
away." 

Next  follows  "  peace."  Oh,  blessed  fruit !  an  autumn  fruit,  mellow 
and  sweet,  and  fit  for  an  angel's  tooth.  It  is  the  fruit  the  blessed  feed 
upon  in  heaven— peace  with  God,  peace  of  conscience,  peace  with 
one's  fellow  men,  "  the  peace  of  God  wnich  passeth  all  understanding," 
which  "keeps  the  heart  and  mind  through  Jesus  Christ."  "Great 
peace  have  they  which  love  thy  law:  and  nothing  shall  offend  them." 
"  Therefore  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Ah !  my  hearers,  some  of  you  make  a  great  deal  of 
noise  perhaps  about  religion,  and  yet  never  have  peace  of  conscience. 
This  is  what  ceremonialists  never  can  obtain.  "  We  have  an  altar, 
whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the  tabernacle"  of  out 
ward  ordinances,  and  carnal,  vainglorious,  pompous  ceremonies.  Of 
our  altar,  where  the  finished  sacrifice  is  eaten  as  a  peace  offering,  they 
cannot  eat.  They  find  no  peace  after  all  their  masses,  and  holy  offices, 
and  processions,  and  sacred  hours,  and  priestcraft,  and  I  know  not 
what ;  poor  slaves,  they  go  down  to  their  graves  as  much  in  bondage 
as  ever,  with  the  dreary  prospect  of  a  purgatorial  fire  before  them  :  no 
delightful  prospect  of  waking  up  in  the  likeness  of  Christ;  no  sense  of 
the  truth  of  that  glorious  passage,  "  and  ye  are  complete  in  him."  He 
that  hath  Christ  hath  this  one  of  his  fruits,  namely,  peace.  He  who 
knows  no  peace  with  God,  has  good  need  to  tremble. 

Mention  is  next  made  of  long  suffer  ing.  I  fear  there  are  many  pro 
fessors  who  have  very  little  of  this,  a  quality  which  may  be  viewed  in 
many  aspects.  There  is  patience,  which  bears  God's  chastising  hand, 
and  does  not  turn  against  him,  but  says,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord 
hath  taken  away;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Long-suffering 
towards  God,  suffering  long.  Then  there  is  longsuffering  towards  man, 
bearing  persecution  without  apostacy,  bearing  slander  and  reproach  with 
out  revenge,  bearing  the  errors  and  mistakes  of  mankind  with  tender 


A   SHARP  KNIFE   FOR  THE   VINE-BRANCHES.  557 

compassion.  The  believer  should  have  much  of  this.  Some  of  us, 
perhaps,  may  be  naturally  quick  tempered;  grace  must  overcome  angry 
passions.  It  is  not  for  you  to  say,  " I  cannot  help  it;"  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  longsuffering — you  must  help  it.  If  there  is  no  change  in  your 
temper,  there  is  no  change  in  you  at  all ;  you  have  need  to  be  converted. 
If  the  grace  of  God  does  not  help  you  in  a  measure  to  keep  under  that 
temper  which  will  be  there,  but  which  you  must  restrain,  you  have  need 
to  go  to  God  and  ask  him  to  make  sound  work  in  you,  for  there  is  no 
work  of  grace  there  yet.  We  must  have  longsuffering,  or  we  may  be 
found  fruitless,  and  then  woe  unto  us. 

Next  in  order  is  gentleness,  by  which  I  understand  kindness.  The 
Christian  is  a  man  of  kindness.  He  recognises  hi*  kinuedness  with  his 
fellow  men,  he  wishes  to  treat  them  as  his  kin.  He  has  compassion  for 
those  who  are  suffering;  he  endeavours  to  make  his  manners  kind  and 
courteous.  He  knows  that  there  is  a  natural  offence  in  the  cross  to 
carnal  men,  he  does  not  wish  therefore  to  make  any  offence  of  his  own. 
He  desires  in  his  own  life  not  to  be  morose,  suspicious,  harsh,  proud 
domineering,  but  he  seeks  to  imitate  his  Master,  who  said  of  himself, 
"  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly 
in  heart."  The  believer  in  Christ  should  be  gentle  towards  all  men 
with  whom  he  comes  in  contact.  This  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit,  and,  I  may  add,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  in  which  many  professors 
fire  terribly  deficient.  Do  not  think  that  I  judge  you.  I  jud<re  you 
not — there  is  one  that  judgeth  you,  it  is  this  word  of  God  which  we 
speak.  Gentleness  is  the  fruit"  of  the  Spirit,  and  if  you  have  it  not, 
you  have  not  this  fruit  of  the  Spirit:  and  what  saith  the  text,  "  Every 
branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away !" 

We  are  next  reminded  of  goodness,  by  which  is  undoubtedly  meant 
beneficence,  benevolence,  generosity,  not  merely  kindliness  of  manner,  but 
bounty  of  heart.  Oh,  what  a  fine  thing  it  is  when  our  Christianity  gives 
us  a  noble  spirit !  We  cannot  all  be  nobles  in  pocket,  but  every  child 
of  God  should  be  a  noble  in  his  heart.  "  Come  in,"  said  a  poor  Scotch 
woman  to  some  of  the  Lord's  people,  "  I  have  room  for  ten  of  you 
in  my  house,  but  I  have  room  for  ten  thousand  of  you  in  my  heart.'* 
So  should  the  believer  say,  "Come  in,  ye  that  are  in  need;  Thave  not 
the  power  to  help  many  of  you.  but  I  have  the  will  to  help  all  of  you 
if  I  could."  The  Christian  should  be  like  his  Lord  and  Master,  easily 
entreated,  ready  to  communicate,  making  it  his  delight  and  his  busi 
ness  to  distribute,  like  a  cloud  that  is  full  of  rain,  and  empties  itself 
upon  the  earth;  like  the  bright  and  sparkling  sun  scattering  his  beams 
abroad,  and  not  hiding  or  hoarding  his  light.  If  ye  have  not  this  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  in  some  measure,  I  beseech  you  to  remember  the  solemn 
words  of  the  text,  "Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he 
taketh  away." 

Then  comes  faith,  by  which  is  probably  not  meant  the  grace  of  faith 
which  is  rather  a  root  than  a  fruit,  yet  that  is  included.  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  indeed  faith  in  God;  without  this,  there  is  not  even  the  com 
mencement  of  anything  like  security  in  the  soul.  Dost  thou  believe  on 
the  Son  of  God?  Hast  thou  faith  ?  If  thou  hast  faith  but  as  a  grain 
of  mustard-seed,  it  is  a  sign  of  life  within  thee.  If  thou  hast  little  of 
it,  pray,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith  1"  But  the  faith  here,  I  think,  means 


'•558  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

faithfulness — faithfulness  towards  God,  faithfulness  towards  conscience. 
How  little  some  Christians  make  of  that  nowadays  !  Why,  they  swallow 
their  consciences.  There  are  ministers  who  subscribe  to  words  which 
they  know  to  be  deceiving  the  people,  and  help  to  buttress  a  church 
which  is  doing  its  utmost  to  lead  this  nation  into  downright  Popery. 
The  good  and  gracious  ministers  in  the  Establishment  are  the  prop  and 
pillar  of  it,  and  by  their  influence  they  maintain  a  system  which  enables 
traitors  to  pollute  this  land  with  Popery.  0  that  our  friends  had  a 
little  more  tenderness  of  conscience,  and  would  come  out  from  their 
unhallowed  alliance  with  the  Popish  Eitualists.  How  earnestly  do  I 
pray  that  none  of  us  have  the  remotest  connection  with  anything  which 
would  take  us  back  to  that  Antichrist  which  God  hateth,  which  he  so 
hateth,  that  he  has  bidden  his  servant  John,  call  the  apostate  church 
by  a  dreadful  name,  a  brand  of  infamy,  a  name  which  God  never  uses 
till  he  has  cast  off  and  utterly  abhorred  a  thing.  My  brethren,  may 
your  consciences  be  faithful,  and  may  you  be  faithful  to  your  con 
sciences  :  men  that  trifle  with  doctrine,  it  seems  to  me,  little  know 
what  sins  they  commit.  I  tell  you  who  trifle  with  doctrines,  that  you 
are  as  bad  as  thieves ;  you  are  worse,  for  the  thief  only  robs  men,  but 
you  rob  God  and  your  own  souls.  By  helping  to  foster  error,  you  are 
heaping  together  the  elements  of  a  pestilence  which,  unless  grace  pre 
vent,  will  utterly  destroy  this  land.  We  must  have  faithfulness  also 
in  our  dealings  with  our  fellow  men  in  business.  Saints  are  men  of 
^honour  still.  The  Christian  man  "  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt,  and  changeth 
not."  He  does  not  take  an  oath,  but  his  word  is  his  bond.  0  that  we 
may  have  this  fruit  of  the  Spirit:  faithfulness,  directness,  straight 
forwardness,  doing  the  right,  loving  the  true,  and  walking  uprightly 
before  the  Lord  our  God ! 

The  next  fruit  is  meekness.  May  we  possess  much  of  this,  for 
there  is  a  peculiar  benediction  promised  to  the  meek :  "  Blessed  are 
-the  meek :  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth."  The  Christian  is  to  be  as 
harmless  as  a  dove.  In  his  Master's  battles,  bold  as  a  lion,  but  for 
himself  and  for  his  own  cause,  tender,  gentle,  shunning  debate,  loving 
quietness,  ready  to  take  a  rebuke  rather  than  to  administer  one; 
feeling  himself  to  be  weak  and  frail.  Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men, 
-often  provoked,  but  only  once  speaking  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  It 
is  marvellous  how  he  bore  with  the  people ;  they  were  the  most  pro 
voking  people  in  the  world,  except  ourselves — but  yet,  like  as  a  nurse 
is  tender  with  a  sick  child,  even  so  was  he  with  a  foolish  people. 
How  oft  did  they  provoke  him  and  grieve  his  spirit !  He  grew  indig 
nant,  and  dashed  the  two  tables  of  stone  upon  the  ground,  when  he 
•saw  the  idolatry  of  the  people.  Moses,  the  meekest  of  men,  could 
not  bear  that ;  and  God's  meekest  servants  grow  wrath  when  they  think 
of  the  idolatry  into  which  this  land  is  sliding  so  rapidly.  But  meek 
we  must  be  towards  all  men ;  and  if  we  have  not  this  fruit,  the  Master 
says,  "  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away." 

Do  not  forget  temperance,  which  is  now  generally  used  in  respect  to 
meats  and  drinks,  but  which  has  a  far  wider  signification,  though  it 
includes  that.  The  man  who  indulges  the  appetites  of  the  flesh,  and 
cannot  control  himself  as  to  eating  and  drinking,  need  not  pretend 
<to  be  a  Christian.  He  has  first  to  prove  that  he  is  equal  to  a  beast 


A   SHARP  KNIFE   FOR  THE   VINE-BRANCHES.  559 

before  he  may  pretend  to  be  a  child  of  God ;  he  has  first  to  show  that 
he  is  a  man  before  he  may  claim  to  be  a  Christian.  Those  who 
indulge  in  drunkenness  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  God's  wrath  ere  long, 
and  then  how  bitter  will  their  sweet  wines  be  to  them  !  how  will  that 
which  has  been  sweet  to  the  throat,  be  as  poison  in  the  bowels  for 
ever  and  ever  !  If  we  have  not  that  kind  of  temperance,  evidently  we 
can  know  nothing  about  true  religion.  But  there  must  be  an  equal 
temperance  in  all  other  things,  a  temperance  in  your  dress,  in  your 
expenditure,  in  your  temper,  and  indeed  in  every  act.  There  is  a 
moderation  to  be  observed,  a  narrow  road  to  be  followed,  which  the 
tutored  eye  of  the  spiritual  man  can  see,  and  which  it  is  a  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  for  the  spiritual  foot  to  tread.  God  grant  that  we  may  have- 
these  fruits. 

Beloved  in  the  Lord,  I  am  persuaded  that  no  truth  needs  to  be  pressed 
more  upon  my  own  soul  and  yours  than  this,  that  positive  fruit  is  the 
only  test  of  our  being  in  Christ.  It  is  so  easy  for  us  to  wrap  ourselves 
up  in  the  idea  that  attention  to  religious  ceremonies  is  the  test,  but  it 
is  not  so,  for  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteous 
ness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,"  who  were  the  most  religious  people- 
of  their  day,  "ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  I 
know  it  is  easy  to  think,  "  Well,  I  do  not  indulge  in  drunkenness ;  I 
am  no  rogue;  I  do  not  do  this  or  that."  This  "is  little  to  the  matter, 
ttemember  that  the  judgment  will  not  be  about  those  things  which 
you  do  not  do,  but  about  positive  things.  How  does  Jesus  Christ  put 
that  judgment  matter?  "  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat: 
1  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink :  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me 
not  in:  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me' not:  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye 
risited  me  not."  The  absence  of  positive  fruit  was  that  which  condemned 
the  lost.  "  Every  tree,"  says  John,  "  that  bearcth  not  fruit  shall  be 
hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire."  He  does  not  say,  "  Every  tree  that 
bears  bitter  fruit,  or  sour  grapes,"  but  "Every  tree  that  bringcth  forth 
no  fruit."  Fruitless  professors,  tremble !  I  may  not  speak  so  as  to 
make  this  truth  penetrate  as  I  would  it  should  into  your  inmost  souls,, 
but  I  pray  the  eternal  Spirit  to  make  ife  like  fire  in  the  bones  of  every 
deceived  man  and  woman.  If  my  Lord  shall  come  to  you,  my  hearer, 
day  after  day,  as  he  once  came  to  the  fig-tree,  and  should  find  leaves- 
upon  you  and  no  fruit,  I  tell  you  he  will  say,  "  Henceforth  let  no 
fruit  be  on  thee  for  ever,"  and  thou  shalt  wither  away.  What  is  hia 
own  parable  !  The  master  of  the  vineyard  said  to  the  husbandman, 
"  Behold,  these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig  tree,  and  find 
none:  cut  it  down;  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground?"  And  when  the 
husbandman  interceded,  you  will  remember  his  intercession  was  only 
so  far :  "  If  it  bear  fruit,  well:  and  if  not,  then  after  that  thou  shalt 
cut  it  down."  Jesus  the  intercessor  agrees  with  his  Father  the  Hus 
bandman  ;  Mercy  agrees  with  Justice ;  if  there  be  no  fruit,  the  tree 
must  come  'down.  May  I  beseech  you  to  lay  these  things  to  heart. 
Thou  must  bear  fruit  unto  God  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  or  it  is- 
down  with  thee.  God  fingers  his  axe  this  morning;  it  is  sharp,  and 
if  he  doth  but  lift  it,  woe  to  thee,  barren  fig  tree !  Woe,  indeed,  to  me 
also,  if  I  be  found  barren  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  appearing. 

In  closing  this  weighty  business  of  self-examination,  I  must  remind 


560  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

you  that  our  Lord  tells  us,  that  although  these  persons  were  in  some 
points  alike,  the  solemn  difference  between  them  led  to  a  solemn  result. 
"  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away."  There 
are  many  ways  in  which  the  Lord  takes  away  barren  branches.  Some 
times  he  allows  the  professor  to  apostatise.  He  gets  rich,  and  then  he 
will  not  go  to  the  place  of  worship  which  he  used  to  frequent  when  he 
was  a  poorer  man,  and  was  humble  enough  to  hear  the  gospel;  he  must 
go  to  some  fashionable  place,  where  he  can  listen  to  anything  but  the 
truth ;  and  thus  by  his  own  pride  he  is  taken  away.  Or  else  he  is 
allowed  to  fall  into  open  sin.  "We  always  should  regret  the  falls  of 
professors,  but  sometimes  it  is  possible  that  discovered  sins  may  be  a 
blessing,  for  they  take  away  from  the  church  men  who  never  ought  to 
have  been  there,  and  who  were  an  injury  to  it.  Many  bright  professors 
have  stood  well  for  a  long  time,  but  at  last  they  have  been  snuffed  out 
ecclesiastically  by  reason  of  their  outward  sins.  God  has  taken  them 
away.  Some  have  been  taken  away  in  a  more  terrible  sense  by  death; 
God  has  removed  them.  They  have  lived  in  the  church  and  died  in  the 
church,  but  have  been  taken  away  in  solemn  judgment,  and  cast  into 
the  fire.  Then  there  is  a  taking  away  which  is  worst  of  all,  when  the 
Master  shall  say,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed !"  Now,  do  observe  it :  these 
were  respectable  people;  these  were  people  like  you,  decent,  good 
people,  who  attended  a  place  of  worship,  and  contributed,  and  were 
very  moral,  but  still  they  had  not  grace  in  their  souls.  They  had 
nominal  Christianity,  but  not  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  and  what  was  done 
with  them  ?  "  Lord,  cannot  some  mild  means  be  used  ?  How  sad  to 
see  these  branches  cut  off!"  "No,"  saith  he,  "if  they  bring  not 
forth  fruit,  they  must  be  taken  away."  "  But,  Lord,  they  never  reeled 
in  and  out  of  the  gin  palace  1  Lord,  they  were  much  too  good  and 
much  too  amiable  to  be  found  amongst  the  debased  and  the  debauched!" 
"  Take  them  away ;  they  brought  no  fruit,  and  they  must  be  taken 
away."  "  But,  Master,  they  were  so  diligent  in  the  use  of  ordinances, 
they  were  so  constant  and  regular  in  the  form  of  prayer!"  "They 
brought  forth  no  fruit,"  saith  he,  "  take  them  away."  There  is  only 
this  one  thing  for  them :  if  they  had  through  saving  faith  been  made  to 
bear  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  they  should  have  been  saved;  but  as  there 
was  no  fruit,  take  them  away. 

What  is  done  with  that  which  is  taken  away?  If  I  could  take  you 
just  outside  the  garden  wall,  I  would  let  you  see  a  heap  of  weeds  and 
slips  that  are  taken  from  the  vine,  and  there  they  are  neaped  together 
with  a  little  straw,  and  the  gardener  burns  them.  The  other  branches 
with  their  purple  clusters  are  in  honour,  but  these  dishonoured  things 
are  burnt  outside  the  gate.  I  cannot  picture  to  you  that  day  of  doom, 
that  fate  tremendous  which  shall  come  upon  fruitless  branches  of  the 
spiritual  vine — outside  the  gate,  with  a  great  gulf  fixed  between  them 
and  heaven,  where  the  smoke  of  their  torment  goeth  up  for  ever  and 
ever,  "  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  If 
such  people  are  cast  away,  what  will  become  of  some  of  you  ?  If  these 
good  people  who  were  in  Christ,  in  a  way,  still  perish,  because  thev 
brought  forth  no  fruit,  0  ye  who  are  like  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  the 
field,  ye  who  produce  the  grapes  of  Gomorrha  and  the  apples  of  Sodom 
what  shall  be  your  doom  ia  the  day  of  account  when  the  Master  shalj 


A  SHARP  KNIFE  FOR  THE  VINE- BRANCHES.  561 

come  forth  in   robes  of  judgment  to  execute  righteousness  among  the 
sons  of  men? 

II.  Briefly  on  the  second  point.    THE  TEXT  CONVEYS  INSTRUCTION. 

Looking  at  it  carefully,  we  observe  chat  th-e  fruit-bear i/v/  branches 
are  not  perfect.  If  they  were  perfect,  they  would  not  need  pruning ;  but 
the  fact  is  there  is  much  of  original  inbred  sin  remaining  in  the  best  of 
God's  people,  so  that  whenever  the  sap  within  them  is  strong  for  the 
production  of  fruit,  there  is  a  tendency  for  that  strength  to  turn  into 
evil,  and  instead  of  good  fruit  evil  is  produced.  It  is  the  strength  of  the 
tree,  and  the  richness  of  the  sap  which  makes  the  branch  produce  too 
much  wood,  so  that  it  needs  pruning.  The  gardener  desires  to  see  that 
strength  in  clusters,  but  alas!  instead  it  runs  into  wood.  Now,  observe 
that  in  a  Christian  when  the  sap  comes  into  him  to  produce  confidence 
in  God,  through  the  evil  that  is  in  him,  it  often  produces  confidence  in 
himself,  and  he  who  should  be  strong  in  faith  becomes  strong  in  carnal 
security.  When  the  sap  would  produce  zeal,  how  very  frequently  it 
turns  into  rashness,  and  instead  of  zeal  with  knowledge,  fanaticism  is 
brought  forth!  Suppose  the  sap  flows  to  produce  self-examination,  very 
generally  unbelief  is  the  outgrowth,  and  instead  of  the  man  doubting 
himself,  he  begins  to  doubt  his  Lord.  How  often  have  I  seen  even  the 
joy  of  the  Lord  turned  into  pride,  and  when  the  man  should  rejoice  in 
Christ  Jesus,  he  has  began  to  rejoice  in  himself,  to  grow  proud  and  say, 
"  What  a  fine  experience  I  possess!  "  That  love  which  we  ought  to  bear 
towards  our  neighbours,  how  apt  is  that  to  run  into  love  of  the  world 
and  carnal  complacency  towards  its  evil  ways!  The  gentleness  which  I 
praised  just  now,  often  turns  to  a  silly  compliance  with  everybody's  whim, 
and  meekness  which  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  how  often  that  becomes  an 
txcuse  for  holding  your  tongue,  when  you  ought  boldly  to  speak!  The 
fact  is,  it  is  very  difficult  to  keep  ourselves,  when  we  are  in  a  flourishing 
state,  from  producing  wood  instead  of  grapes.  God  grant  us  grace  to 
keep  us  from  this  evil ;  and  I  do  not  know  how  the  grace  can  come  except 
by  his  judicious  pruning. 

I  say  the  fruit- bearing  branches  are  not  perfect  because  they  bear  a 
great  deal  that  is  not  fruit,  and,  moreover,  not  one  of  them  bears  as 
much  fruit  as  it  ought  to  do.  I  do  not  agree  with  Mr.  Wesley's  opinion 
about  perfection.  It  is  very  difficult  to  see  how  he  could  have  done  more 
than  he  did,  but  I  do  not  doubt  that  even  he  felt  that  he  might  have  been 
more  like  his  Lord.  None  of  the  Lord's  people  with  whom  I  ever  came 
into  communion  have  dared  to  think  themselves  perfect;  and  if  they  had 
said  so,  and  proved  it,  I  should  have  rejoiced  to  think  that  there  were 
such  people,  but  greatly  sorrowed  to  find  that  I  belong  to  a  very  different 
order  of  beings  myself;  for  "  in  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  there  dwelleth 
no  good  thing."  The  Master  is  bringing  us  upon  our  way  to  bring 
forth  more  fruit,  but  as  yet,  the  fruit-bearing  branches  are  not  perfect. 

Hence  we  are  taught,  in  the  second  place,  that  pruning  is  the  lot  of  all 
the  fruitful  saints.  You  may  escape  it  if  you  are  not  fruitful,  you  will 
be  cut  off,  you  will  not  be  pruned,  but  all  the  fruit-bearing  saints  must 
feel  the  knife.  Observe  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  had  not  those 
patriarchs  their  trials?  Moses  and  David,  Jeremiah  and  Daniel,  who 
among  those  escnped?  Though  they  honoured  their  Master  much, 
who  escaped  without  the  pruning  knife?  And  if  you  come  to  the  saint* 


562  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  the  New  Testament,  surety  the  flame  was  seven  times  hotter  with 
regard  to  them  than  with  regard  to  the  elder  brethren.  How  does  tb» 
Lord  prune  his  people,  then?  It  is  generally  said  by  affliction;  I  ques 
tion  if  that  could  be  proved  as  it  stands;  it  needs  explanation.  It  is 
generally  thought  that  our  trials  and  troubles  purge  us:  I  am  not  sure 
of  that,  they  certainly  are  lost  upon  some.  Our  Lord  tells  us  what  it  is 
that  prunes  us.  "  Now,"  saith  he,  in  the  third  verse  of  the  chapter,  "  ye- 
are  clean  (or  pruned)  through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto- 
you."  It  is  the  word  that  prunes  the  Christian,  it  is  the  truth  that 
purges  him,  the  Scripture,  made  living  and  powerful  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  effectually  cleanses  the  Christian.  "  What  then  does  affliction 
do?"  say  you.  Well,  if  I  may  say  so,  affliction  is  the  handle  of  the- 
knife ;  affliction  is  the  grindstone  that  sharpens  up  the  word ;  affliction 
is  the  dresser  which  removes  our  soft  garments,  and  lays  bare  the  diseased 
flesh,  so  that  the  surgeon's  lancet  may  get  at  it ;  affliction  makes  us 
ready  to  feel  the  word,  but  the  true  pruner  is  the  word  in  the  hand  of 
the  Great  Husbandman.  Sometimes  when  you  lay  stretched  upon  the- 
bed  of  sickness,  you  think  more  upon  the  word  than  you  did  before, 
that  is  one  great  thing.  In  the  next  place,  you  see  more  the  applicability 
of  that  word  to  yourself.  In  the  third  place,  the  Holy  Spirit  makes- 
you  feel  more,  while  you  are  thus  laid  aside,  the  force  of  the  word  than 
you  did  before.  Ask  that  affliction  may  be  sanctified,  beloved,  but 
always  remember  there  is  no  more  tendency  in  affliction  in  itself  to 
sanctify  us  than  there  is  in  prosperity ;  in  fact,  the  natural  tendency 
of  affliction  is  to  make  us  rebel  against  God,  which  is  quite  opposite  to- 
sanctification.  It  is  the  word  coming  to  us  while  in  affliction  that 
purges  us;  it  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost  laying  home  divine  truth,  and 
applying  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  working  in  all  his  divine  energy  in  the 
soul ;  it  is  this  that  prunes  us,  and  affliction  is  only  the  handle  of  the 
knife,  or  what  if  I  say  the  ladder  which  the  gardener  takes  to  reach 
the  vine,  so  that  he  may  prune  it  the  betterl  Now,  it  may  be  that  some 
of  us  have  been  afflicted  a  great  deal,  and  have  not  been  pruned.  I 
know  some  people  who  have  been  very  poor,  I  do  not  see  that  they  are 
any  better  for  it,  and  I  know  some  others  who  have  been  very  sick,  and 
I  have  never  heard  that  they  have  been  improved.  Alas  1  some  people 
are  of  such  a  character,  that  if  they  were  stricken  till  their  whole  head 
W3?e  sick,  and  their  whole  heart  faint,  they  would  not  be  benefited ;  if 
they  were  beaten  till  they  were  all  bruises  and  putrifying  sores,  they 
would  still  go  on  to  rebel,  for  these  things  only  provoke  them  to  a 
greater  hatred  against  the  Most  High.  We  must  be  pruned,  but  it 
must  be  by  the  word,  through  affliction. 

Now,  the  object  in  this  pruning  is  never  condemnatory.  God  does 
not  purge  his  children  with  a  view  to  visit  them  penally  for  sin;  he 
chastises,  but  he  cannot  punish  those  for  whom  Jesus  Christ  has 
been  already  punished.  You  have  no  right  to  say,  when  a  man  is 
afflicted,  that  it  is  because  he  has  done  wrong ;  on  the  contrary,  "  every 
branch  that  beareth  fruit  he  purgeth."  Just  the  branch  that  is  good 
for  something  gets  the  pruning  knife.  Do  not  say  of  yourselves,  or  of 
other  people,  "  That  man  must  have  been  a  great  offender,  or  he  would 
not  have  met  with  such  a  judgment."  Nonsense,  who  a  holier  man  than 
»Job;  but  who  brought  lower  than  he?  Why,  the  fact  is,  it  is  because 


A   SHARP  KNIFE   FOR  THE   VINK-BRANCHE8.  563 

the  Lord  loves  his  people  that  he  chastens  them,   not  because  of  any 

•"•anger  that  he  hath  towards  them.     But  learn,  beloved,  especially  you 

under  trial,  not  to  see  an  angry  God  in  your  pains  or  your  losses,  or 

your  crosses;  but  instead  thereof  see  a  husbandman,  who  thinks  you  a 

branch  whom  he  estimates  at  so  great  a  rate,  that  he  will  take  the 

trouble  to  prune  you,  which  he  would  not  do  if  he  had  not  a  kind  con- 

'  sideration  towards  you. 

The  real  reason  is  that  more  fruit  may  be  produced ;  which  I  understand 
to  mean  more  in  quantity.  A  good  man,  who  feels  the  power  of  the 
word  pruning  him  of  this  and  that  superfluity,  sets  to  work,  in  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  do  more  for  Jesus.  Before  he  was  afflicted 
he  did  not  know  how  to  be  patient.  He  learns  it  at  last — a  hard  lesson. 
Before  he  was  poor  he  did  not  know  how  to  be  humble,  but  he  learna 
•that.  Before  the  word  came  with  power  he  did  not  know  how  to  pray 
with  his  fellows,  or  to  speak  to  sinners,  or  lay  himself  out  for  useful 
ness  ;  but  the  more  he  is  pruned,  the  more  he  serves  his  Lord.  More 
fruit  in  variety  too,  may  be  intended.  One  tree  can  only  produce  one 
kind  of  fruit  usually,  but  the'Lord's  people  can  produce  many,  as  we 
have  already  seen ;  and  the  more  they  are  pruned  the  more  they  will 
produce.  There  will  be  all  kinds  of  fruits,  both  new  and  old,  which 
they  will  lay  up  for  their  beloved.  There  will  be  more  in  quality  too. 
The  man  may  not  pray  more,  but  he  will  pray  more  earnestly;  he  may 
not  preach  more  sermons,  but  he  will  preach  them  more  thoroughly 
from  his  heart,  with  a  greater  unction.  It  may  be  that  he  will  not  be 
more  in  communion  with  God  as  to  time,  but  it  will  be  a  closer  com 
munion;  he  will  throw  himself  more  thoroughly  into  the  divine  element 
of  communion,  and  will  become  more  hearty  in  all  that  he  does. 

This  is  the  result  of  the  pruning  which  our  heavenly  Father  gives ; 
And  if  such  be  the  result,  the  Lord  keep  on  pruning,  for  what  greater 
blessing  can  a  man  liave  than  to  produce  much  fruit  for  God?  Better 
to  serve  God  much  than  to  become  a  prince.  He  that  doeth  much  for 
Christ,  shall  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever.  He  is  glorifying 
God;  he  is  blessing  his  fellow  men;  he  is  bringing  joy  into  his  own 
spirit.  Oh,  if  on  bended  knee  we  might  seek  but  one  favour,  methinke 
we  would  not  ask  the  wisdom  which  Solomon  craved;  we  would  petition 
for  this,  that  we  might  bring  forth  much  fruit,  that  so  we  might  be 
•Christ's  disciples. 

III.  To  conclude.     Our  text  INVITES  MEDITATION. 

I  will  hint  at  the  points  on  which  it  invites  our  thoughts.  It 
suggests  to  every  unconverted  person  here  this  one  question.  It 
seems  that  it  is  not  very  easy  for  the  righteous  to  be  saved :  "  If  the 
righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  ivliere  sliall  the  ungodly  and  the  wicked 
appear?"  If  the  branches  in  Christ  that  bear  no  fruit,  are  taken 
:uway,  what  must  become  of  the  Sabbath-breakers,  the  despisers  of 
God,  the  atheists,  the  drunkards,  the  unchaste,  the  dishonest,  the  blas 
phemers  ?  I  raise  the  question — solve  it !  Let  it  burn  into  your  soul ! 

Secondly,  wliat  a  mercy  it  is  to  the  believer  that  it  is  pruning  with  him 
and  not  cutting  off !  Ah,  let  the  knife  be  very  sharp,  let  the  word 
throw  us  into  the  great,  deeps,  till  we  almost  despair;  yet,  thank  God, 
we  are  not  cast  into  hell !  Dear  friends,  your  prayer  should  be,  "  Lord, 
let  thy  word  cut  deep  into  me.  Do  not  let  the  preacher  mince  matter* 

36 


564  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

with  me.  Deliver  him  from  sewing  pillows  under  my  armholes,  and 
lulling  me  to  sleep.  Lord,  I  would  be  faithfully  dealt  with  !  I  put 
the  proud  flesh  before  thee,  cut  it  out,  that  the  wound  heal  not  so  as 
to  be  worse  when  healed  than  it  was  when  a  running  sore."  What  a 
mercy  it  is  not  to  be  cut  off!  Ah,  Christian,  you  are  desponding 
and  doubting  to-day,  while  the  word  is  searching  you,  but  you  might 
have  been  in  hell !  Think  of  that.  You  are  poor,  or  you  are  full  of 
pain,  but  you  might  have  been  driven  from  the  presence  of  God.  How 
can  you,  as  a  living  man,  complain,  whatever  God  may  place  upon  you? 

In  the  next  place,  it  would  be  well  to  think  how  gently  the  pruning 
has  been  done  tvith  the  most  of  us  up  till  now,  compared  with  our 
barrenness.  I  wonder  the  Lord  has  not  cut  us  about  much  more.  He 
who  has  a  deep-seated  disease  requires  sharp  medicine ;  and  when  the  sore 
runs  deep,  the  doctor  must  cut  deep  too.  With  all  the  rust  that  is  on  usr 
I  wonder  we  are  not  filed  more.  There  is  so  much  alloy,  it  is  marvellous 
that  we  are  not  oftener  put  into  the  fire.  0  Spirit  of  God,  thou  hast 
hard  work  with  some  of  us,  still  we  bless  thee,  for  thy  gentleness  hath 
been  manifested  very  graciously.  How  tenderly  hast  thou  dealt  with 
our  frail  dust,  0  God  of  love ! 

Again,  how  earnestly  ive  ought  to  seek  for  more  fruit.  If  this  is  what 
God  seeks  after,  we  should  be  after  it.  If  he  often  goes  the  length 
of  pruning  the  vine,  although  he  does  not  love  to  do  it,  for  he  does 
not  afflict  willingly,  or  grieve  the  children  of  men  for  nought,  let  us 
agree  with  God,  and  seek  to  yield  more  fruit. 

How  concerned  should  every  one  of  us  be  to  be  efficaciously  and  truly 
one  with  Christ!  I  ought  to  have  said  that  the  whole  gist  of  the 
text  lies  in  that  "  in  me,  in  me,  in  me."  You  see,  if  a  man  is  not  in 
Christ  at  all,  why  then,  of  course,  there  is  no  hope  of  any  sort ;  and 
then,  when  he  is  in  Christ,  there  comes  the  question,  is  he  in  Christ  by 
living  faith,  by  real  trust?  has  he  the  faith  of  God's  elect?  has  he  been 
born  again  from  above?  is  he  a  spiritual  grace- taught  soul?  Let  this 
be  the  question  which  shall  rest  upon  our  minds.  I  would  that  this 
morning  my  text  might  be  sweet  to  you;  sweet,  I  said,  because  if  for 
the  moment  it  seemeth  bitter,  the  end  is  sweetness.  Faithful  are  the 
wounds  of  such  a  friend  as  Jesus.  If  he  has  wounded  any  of  you, 
it  is  not  to  drive  you  from  him,  but  to  make  you  cling  the  closer  to 
him.  Have  you  never  learned  that,  when  you  feel  the  most  humbled, 
most  afraid,  most  full  of  sin,  most  conscious  of  your  own  imperfection, 
the  best  thing  is  to  cling  to  Christ  the  more?  "Well,  Lord,  if  I  have 
been  the  most  cursed  hypocrite  that  ever  lived,  I  will  come  to  thee 
now.  If  up  to  this  moment  I  have  been  deceived,  and  have  not  had  a 
grain  of  true  faith,  nor  a  single  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  yet  here 
J  am,  a  poor  black  sinner,  I  to  the  fountain  fly ;  a  naked  sinner,  I  wrap 
thy  righteousness  about  my  loins ;  a  poor  sin-sick,  lost  sinner,  I  look  up 
to  thee  on  yonder  cross,  and  I  do  believe  that  thou  canst  save  me. 
From  the  very  jaws  of  death,  and  out  of  the  belly  of  hell,  do  I  cry  unto 
thee,  and  thou  wilt  hear  me.  0  sinners  and  saints,  come  to  Christ 
again,  whether  you  are  his  experimentally,  or  are  strangers  to  him, 
come  to  him  now,  for  still  the  gospel-bell  rings  out  sweetly,  "Whoso 
ever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  0  God,  grant  us  grace 
to  come  now  afresh,  and  his  be  the  praise  1  Amen,  and  Amen. 


WITHOUT  CHRIST— NOTHING. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  OCTOBER  23RD,  1881,  nt 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   MKTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON.        . 

r1 

"  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing." — John  xv.  5. 

THIS  is  not  the  language  of  a  man  of  ordinary  mould.  No  saint, 
no  prophet,  no  apostle  would  ever  have  addressed  a  company  of 
faithful  men,  and  have  said  to  them,  "Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing." 
Had  Jesus  Christ  been,  as  some  say,  a  good  man,  and  nothing  more, 
such  language  as  this  would  have  been  unseemly  and  inconsistent! 
Among  the  virtues  of  a  perfect  man  we  must  certainly  reckon  modesty',, 
but  this  from  a  mere  man  would  have  been  shamelessly  immodest.  It  is' 
impossible  to  conceive  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  had  he  not  been  more 
than  man,  could  ever  have  uttered  the  sentence,  "  Without  me  ye  can 
do  nothing."  My  brethren,  I  hear  in  this  sentence  the  voice  of  that 
Divine  Person  without  whom  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made. 
The  majesty  of  the  words  reveals  the  Godhead  of  him  that  uttered 
them.  The  "  I  am  "  comes  out  in  the  personal  word  "  me,"  and  the 
claim  of  all  power  unveils  the  Omnipotent.  These  words  mean  God 
head  or  nothing.  The  spirit  in  which  we  listen  to  this  language  is  that 
of  adoration.  Let  us  bow  our  heads  in  solemn  worship, °and  so  unite 
with  the  multitude  before  the  throne  who  ascribe  power  and  dominion: 
and  might  to  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb. 

In  this  adoring  state  of  mind  we  shall  be  the  better  prepared  to  enter 
into  the  innermost  soul  of  the  text.  I  am  not  going  to  preach  upon  the 
moral  inability  of  the  unregenerate,  although  in  that  doctrine  I  most 
firmly  believe ;  for  that  truth  did  not  come  in  our  Lord's  way  when  he 
uttered  these  words,  neither  did  he  allude  to  it.  It  is  quite  true  that 
unregenerate  men,  being  without  Christ,  can  do  no  spiritual  action  what 
ever,  and  can  do  nothing  which  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God ;  but 
our  Lord  was  not  speaking  to  unregeuerate  men  at  all,  nor  speaking 
about  them.  He  was  surrounded  by  his  apostles,  the  eleven  out  of  whoin 
Judas  had  been  weeded,  and  it  is  to  them  as  branches  of  the  true  vine 
that  he  says,  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  The  statement  refers 
to  such  as  are  in  the  vine,  and  even  to  such  as  have  been  pruned,  and 
have  for  a  while  been  found  abiding  in  the  stem,  which  is  Christ ;  evea 
No.  1,625.  z-t 


594  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

in  such  there  is  an  utter  incapacity  for  holy  produce  if  separated  from 
Christ. 

We  are  not  called  upon  just  now  to  speak  upon  all  forms  of  doing,  as 
beyond  us,  but  of  that  form  of  it  which  is  intended  in  the  text. 
There  are  certain  forms  of  doing  in  which  men  excel  who  know  little  or 
nothing  of  Christ ;  but  the  text  must  be  viewed  in  its  own  connection, 
and  the  truth  is  clear.  Believers  are  here  described  under  the  figure  of 
branches  in  the  vine,  and  the  doing  alluded  to  must  therefore  be  the 
bearing  of  fruit.  I  might  render  it,  "  Apart  from  me  ye  can  produce 
nothing — make  nothing, 'create  nothing,  bring  forth  nothing."  The 
reference,  therefore,  is  to  that  doing  which  may  be  set  forth  by  the  fruit 
of  the  vine  branch,  and  therefore  to  those  good  works  and  graces  of  the 
Spirit  which  are  expected  from  men  who  are  spiritually  united  to  Christ: 
it  is  of  these  that  he  says,  "  Without  me, ye  can  do  nothing."  Our  text 
is  only  another  form  of  the  fourth  verse  :  "  As  the  branch  cannot  bear 
fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine ;  no  more  can  ye  except  ye 
abide  in  me."  I  am  therefore  going  to  address  myself  to  you  who  pro 
fess  to  know  and  love  the  Lord;  and  nre  anxious  to  glorify  his  name, 
and  I  have  to  remind  you  that  union  to  Christ  is  essential ;  for  only  as 
you  are  one  with  him,  and  continue  to  be  so,  can  you  bring  forth  the 
fruits  which  prove  you  to  be  truly  his. 

I.  Heading  again  this  solemn  sentence,  "Without  me  ye  can  do 
nothing,"  it  first  of  all  excites  in  me  AX  ASPIRATION  OF  HOPE.  There 
is  something  to  be  done,  our  religion  is  to  have  a  grand  practical  out 
come.  I  have  been  thinking  of  Christ  as  the  vine,  and  of  the  myriads 
of  branches  in  him,  and  my  heart  has  hoped  for  great  things.  From 
such  a  root  what  a  vintage  must  come!  Bsing  branches  in  him,  what 
fruit  we  must  produce!  There  can  be  nothing  scanty  or  poverty- 
stricken  in  the  fruitage  of  a  vine  so  full  of  sap.  Fruit  of  the  best 
quality,  fruit  in  the  utmost  abundance,  fruit  unrivalled,  must  be  borne 
by  such  a  vine.  That  word  "  do  "  has  music  in  it.  Yes,  brethren, 
Jesus  went  about  about  doing  good,  and,  being  in  him,  we  shall  do 
good.  Everything  about  him  is  efficient,  practical, — in  a  word,  fruit- 
bearing  ;  and  being  joined  to  him  much  will  yet  be  done  by  us.  We 
have  been  saved  by  the  almighty  grace  of  God  apart  from  all  doings  of 
our  own,  and  now  that  we  are  saved  we  long  to  do  something  in  return  : 
we  feel  a  high  ambition  to  be  of  some  use  and  service  to  our  great  Lord 
and  Master.  The  text,  even  though  there  be  a  negative  in  it,  yet 
raises  in  our  soul  the  hope  that  ere  we  go  hence  and  be  no  more  we  may 
even  here  on  earth  do  something  for  Christ. 

Beloved,  there  is  the  ambition  and  hope  before  us  of  doing  some 
thing  in  the  way  of  glorifying  God  by  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  holi 
ness,  peace,  and  love.  We  would  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour 
in  all  things.  By  pureness,  by  knowledge,  by  long-suffering,  by  love 
unfeigned,  by  every  good  and  holy  work  we  would  show  forth  the  praises 
of  our  God.  Apart  from  the  Lord  Jesus  we  know  we  cannot  be  holy  ; 
but  joined  unto  him  we  overcome  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil, 
and  walk  with  garments  unspotted  from  the  world.  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance,  and  all  manner  of  holy  conversation.  For  none 
of  these  things  are  we  equal  in  and  of  ourselves,  and  yet  by  faith  we  say 


WITHOUT   CHRIST — NOTHING.  595 

with  Paul,  "  1  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengthened  me-" 
We  may  be  adorned  with  plentiful  clusters,  we  may  cause  the  Saviour  to 
have  joy  in  us  that  our  joy  may  be  full  :  great  possibilities  are  before  us. 

We  aspire  not  only  to  produce  fruit  in  ourselves,  but  to  bear  much 
fruit  in  the  conversion  of  others,  even  as  Paul  desired  concerning  the 
Romans,  that  he  might  have  fruit  among  them.  In  this  matter  we  can 
do  nothing-  whatever  alone;  but  being  united  unto  Christ  we  bring 
forth  increase  unto  the  Lord.  Our  Lord  Jesus  said,  "The  works  that 
I  do  shall  ye  do  also,  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  ye  do,  because 
I  go  unto  the  Father."  Brethren,  a  hope  springs  up  in  our  bosom  that 
we  may  each  one  of  us  bring  many  souls  to  Jesus.  Not  because  we 
have  any  power  in  ourselves,  but  because  we  are  united  to  Jesus  we 
joyfully  hope  to  bring  forth  fruit  in  the  way  of  leading  others  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  gospel. 

My  soul  takes  lire  of  hope,  and  I  say  to  myself,  If  it  be  so,  all  these 
branches,  and  all  alive,  how  much  fruit  of  further  blessing  will  ripen  for 
this  poor  world.     Men  shall  be  blessed  in  us  because  we  are  blessed  in 
Christ.     What  must  be  the  influence  of  ten  thousand  godly  examples ! 
What  must  be  the  influence  upon  our  country  of  thousands  of  Christian 
men  and   women  practically  advancing  love,  peace,  justice,  virtue,  holi 
ness!      And  if  each   one  is  seeking  to  bring   others  to  Christ  what 
numerous  conversions  there  must  be,  and  how  largely  must  the  church 
of  God  be  increased.     Do  you  not  know  that  if  there  were  only  ten 
thousand  real  Christians  in  the  world,  yet  if  each  one  of  these  broug'hfc 
one  other  to  Christ  every  year  it  would  not  need  twenty  years  to  accom 
plish  the  conversion  of  the  entire  population  of  the  globe?     This  is  a 
simple  sum  in  arithmetic  which  any  schoolboy  can  work  out.     Certainly 
it  looks  a  small  thing    that   each   one   should    bring  another  to  the 
Lord  ;    and  surely  if   we  are  one  with  him  we  may  hope  to   see    it 
done.      So  1  sit  me   down   and    dream   right   comfortably,  according 
to   the  promise,  "  Your  young    men  shall  see  visions,   and  your  old 
men  shall  dream  dreams."    See  these  thousands  of  branches,  proceeding 
from  such  a  stem  as  Christ   Jesus,  and    with  such  sap  as  the  Holy 
Ghost  flowing  through   them;  why,  surely,  this  vine  muse  soon  clothe 
the  mountains  with  its  verdure,  and  there  shall  not  remain  a  single 
barren    rock  unadorned   with   the   blessed   foliage !      /Then   shall  the 
mountains  drop  sweet  wine,  and  all  the  hills  shall  melt.    Not  because  of 
any  natural  fertility  in  the  branches,  but  because  of  their  glorious  root, 
and  stem,  and  sap,  each  one  shall  bear  full  clusters,  and  each  fruitfal 
bough  shall  run  over  the  wall.     Beloved  friends  in  Christ,  have  you 
not  strong  desires  to  see  some  such  consummation  ?   Do  you  not  long  to 
take  a  share  in  the  high  enterprise  of  winning  the  world  to  Christ  ?     Oh, 
ye  that  are  young  and  full  of  spirits,  do  you  not  long  to  press  to  the 
front  of  this  great  crusade  ?   Our  souls  pine  to  see  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord  covering  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.     It  is  glad  tidings 
to  us  that,  joined  unto  Christ,  we  can  do   something   in.  this  great 
business,  something  upon  which  the  Lord  will  smile,  something  which' 
shall  redound  to  the  glory  of  his  name.     We  are  not  condemned  to  in 
action  ;  we  are  not  denied  the  joy  of  service,  the  superior  blessedness  of. 
giving  and  of  doing  :  the  Lord  hath  chosen  us  and  ordained  us  to  go 
and  bring  forth  fruit,  fruit  that  shall  remain.     This  is  the  aspiraiiou 


590  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

which  irises  in  our  soul ;  the  Lord  grant  that  we  may  see  it  take  actual 
form  in  our  lives. 

II.  But  now,  in  the  second  place,  there  passes  through  my  heart  a 
shudder, — A  SHUDDER  OF  FKAR.  Albeit  I  glow  and  burn  with  strong 
desire,  and  rise  upon  the  wing  of  a  mighty  ambition  to  do  something 
great  for  Christ,  yet  I  read  the  text,  and  a  sudden  trembling  takes 
hold  upon  me.  "Without  me": — it  is  possible,  then,  that  I  may  be 
without  Christ,  and  so  may  be  utterly  incapacitated  for  all  good. 
Come,  friends,  I  want  you  to  feel,  even  though  it  cast  a  cold  chill  over 
you,  that  you  may  possibly  be  "  without  Christ."  I  would  have  you  feel  it 
in  the  very  marrow  of  your  bones,  yea,  in  the  centre  of  your  hearts.  You 
profess  to  be  in  Christ ;  but  are  you  so  ?  The  large  majority  of  those 
to  whom  I  speak  this  morning  are  visible  members  of  the  visible 
church  of  Christ ;  but  what  if  you  should  not  be  so  in  him  as  to  bring 
forth  fruit  ?  Evidently  there  are  branches  which  in  a  certain  sense  are  iii 
the  vine,  and  yet  bring  forth  no  fruit  !  It  is  written,  "  Every  branch 
in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away."  Yes,  you  are  a  member, 
perhaps  an  elder,  perhaps  a  deacon,  possibly  a  minister,  and  so  you  are 
in  the  vine  ;  but  are  you  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  holiness  ?  Are 
you  consecrated  ?  Are  you  endeavouring  to  bring  others  to  Jesus 
Christ?  Or  is  your  profession  a  thing  apart  from  a  holy  life,  and  devoid 
of  all  influence  upon  others  ?  Does  it  give  you  a  name  among  the  people 
«f  .God  and  nothing  more  ?  Say,  is  it  a  mere  natural  association  with 
the  church,  or  is  it  a  living,  supernatural  union  with  Christ  ?  Let  the 
thought  go  through  you  and  prostrate  you  before  him  who  looks  down 
from  heaven  upon  you,  and  lifts  his  pierced  hand,  and  cries,  "  Without 
me  ye  can  do  nothing."  My  friend,  if  you  are  without  Christ,  what  is 
-the  use  of  carrying  on  that  Bible-class  ;  for  you  can  do  nothing  ?  What 
is  the  use  of  my  coming  to  this  pulpit  if  I  am  without  Christ  ?  What 
is  the  use  of  your  going  down  into  the  Sunday-school  this  afternoon  if, 
after  all,  you  are  without  Christ  ?  Unless  we  have  the  Lord  Jesus  our 
selves  we  cannot  take  him  to  others.  Unless  within  us  we  have  the 
living  water  springing  up  unto  eternal  life,  we  cannot  overflow  so  that 
out  of  our  midst  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water. 

I  will  put  the  thought  another  way, — What  if  you  should  be  in  Christ, 
and  not  so  in  him  as  to  abide  in  him  ?  It  appears  from  our  Lord's  words 
that  some  branches  in  him  are  cast  forth  and  are  withered.  "  If  a  man 
abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  withered."  Some 
who  are  called  by  his  name,  and  reckoned  aiming  his  disciples,  whose 
names  are  heard  whenever  the  muster-roll  of  the  church  is  read,  yet 
do  not  continue  in  him.  My  hearer,  what  if  it  should  happen  that 
you  are  only  in  Christ  on  a  Sunday,  but  in  the  world  all  the  week  !  What 
if  you  are  only  in  Christ  at  the  communion  table,  or  at  the  prayer- 
meeting,  or  at  certain  periods  of  devotion  ?  What  if  you  are  off  and  on 
with  Christ !  What  if  you  play  fast  and  loose  with  the  Lord  !  What  if 
you  are  an  outside  saint  and  an  inside  devil !  Ah  me,  what  will  come  of 
such  conduct  as  this  ?  And  yet  some  persist  in  attempting  to  hold  an 
intermittent  communion  with  Christ ;  in  Christ  to-day  because  it  is  the 
Sabbath  ;  out  of  Christ  to-morrow  because  it  is  the  market,  and  obedience 
to  Christ  might  be  inconvenient  when  they  buy  and  sell  This  will  not 
do.  We  must  be  so  in  Christ  as  to  be  always  in  him,  or  else 


WITHOUT   CHRIST — NOTHING.  597 

•we  are  not  living  branches  of  the  living  vine,  and  we  cannot  produce 
fruit.  If  there  were  such  a  thing  as  a  vine  branch  that  was  only 
occasionally  joined  to  the  stem,  would  you  expect  it  to  yield 
a  cluster  to  the  husbandman  ?  So  neither  can  you  if  you  are  off 
and  on  with  Christ.  You  can  do  nothing  if  there  be  not  constant  union. 

One  year  when  I  was  travelling  towards  my  usual  winter  resting-place 
I  hiil ted  at  Marseilles,  and  there  was  overtaken  by  great  pain.  In  my  room 
in  the  hotel  I  found  it  cold,  and  so  I  asked  for  a  fire.  I  was  sitting 
in  a  very  desponding  mood,  when  suddenly  the  tears  came  to  my  eyes, 
as  if  smitten  with  a  great  sorrow.  I  shall  never  forget  the  thoughts 
which  stirred  my  heart.  The  porter  came  in  to  light  the  fire.  He  had 
in  his  hand  a  bundle  of  twigs.  I  called  to  him  to  let  me  look  at  it. 
He  was  about  to  push  it  into  the  stove  as  fuel  with  which  to  kindle 
the  fire.  As  I  took  the  bundle  into  my  hand,  I  found  it  was  made  of 
vine  branches — branches  that  had  been  cut  off  now  that  the  pruning 
time  was  come.  Ah  me,  I  thought,  will  this  be  my  portion?  Here  I 
am,  away  from  home,  unable  to  bear  fruit,  as  I  love  to  do.  Shall  I  end 
with  this  as  my  portion  ?  Shall  I  be  gathered  for  the  fire  ?  Those  vine 
shoots  were  parts  of  a  good  vine,  no  doubt — branches  that  once  looked 
fair  and  green  ;  but  now  they  were  fuel  for  the  flame.  They  had  been 
cut  off  and  cast  off  as  useless  things,  and  then  men  gathered  them 
and  tied  them  in  bundles,  and  they  were  ignobly  thrust  into  the  fire. 
What  a  picture!  There  goes  a  bundle  of  ministers  into  the  fire! 
There  is  a  bundle  of  elders  !  There's  another  bundle  of  deacons,  a 
bundle  of  church  members,  a  bundle  of  Sunday-school  teachers !  "  Men 
gather  them,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned."  Dear 
brothers  and  sisters,  shall  this  be  the  lot  of  any  of  us  who  have  named 
the  name  of  Christ  ?  Well  did  I  say  a  shudder  may  go  through  us  as 
we  listen  to  those  words,  *•  without  me."  Our  end  without  Christ  will 
be  terrible  indeed.  First,  no  fruit  ;  then  no  life ;  and  at  last  no  place 
among  the  saints,  no  existence  in  the  church  of  God.  AVithout  Christ 
we  do  nothing,  we  are  nothing,  we  are  worse  than  nothing.  This  is  the 
condition  of  the  heathen  now,  and  it  was  our  own  condition  once ;  God 
forbid  that  we  should  find  it  to  be  our  condition  now — "  without  Christ, 
having  no  hope !  "  Here  is  grave  cause  for  heart-searching,  and  I 
leave  the  matter  with  you  to  that  end. 

III.  Having  come  so  far  in  our  second  head,  under  the  third  I 
behold  A  VISION  OF  TOTAL  FAILURE.  "  Without  me/'  says  the  text,  "ye 
can  do  nothing " — ye  can  produce  nothing.  The  visible  church  of 
Christ  has  tried  this  experiment  a  great  many  times  already,  and  always 
with  the  same  result.  Separated  from  Christ,  his  church  can  do  nothing 
which  she  was  formed  to  do.  She  is  sent  into  the  world  upon  a  high 
enterprise,  with  noble  aims  before  her,  and  grand  forces  at  her  disposal ; 
but  if  she  could  cease  from  communion  with  Christ  she  would  become 
wholly  incapable. 

Now  what  are  the  outward  signs  of  any  community  being  apart  from 
Christ  ?  Answer,  first,  It  may  be  seen  in  a  ministry  without  Christ  in 
its  doctrine.  This  we  have  seen  ourselves.  Woe  worth  the  day  that  it  is 
so  !  History  tells  us  that  not  only  in  the  Romish  church  and  the  Anglican 
church,  but  among  the  Nonconformist  churches,  Christ  has  been  at 
times  forgotten.  Not  only  among  Unitarians,  but  among  Presbyterians, 


598  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PJJLPIT. 

Methodists,  Baptists,  all  round,  Jesus  has  been  dishonoured,  Attempt* 
have  been  made  to  do  something  without  Christ  as  the  truth  to  be 
preached.  Ah  me,  what  folly  it  is  !  They  preach  up  intellectualism, 
and  hope  that  this  will  be  the  great  power  of  God;  but  it  is  not. 
"  Surely,"  say  they,  "  novelties  of  thought  and  refinements  of  speech 
will  attract  and  win  !  The  preachers  aspire  to  be  leaders  of  thought ;  ' 
will  they  not  command  the  multitude  and  charm  the  intelligent  ?  Add 
music  and  architecture,  and  what  is  to  hinder  success  ?"  Many  a 
young  minister  has  given  up  his  whole  mind  to  this — to  try  and 
be  exceedingly  refined  and  intellectual  ;  and  what  has  he  done  with- 
these  showy  means?  The  sum  total  is  expressed  in  the  text— " No 
thing":  "Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  What  emptiness  this 
folly  has  created:  when  the  pulpit  is  without  Christ  the  pews  are 
soon  without  people.  I  knew  a  chapel  where  an  eminent  divine 
was  to  be  heard  for  years.  A  converted  Jew  coming  to  London  to 
visit  a  friend,  set  out  on  Sunday  morning  to  find  a  place  of  Christian 
worship,  and  he  chanced  to  enter  the  chapel  of  this  eminent  divine. 
When  he  came  back  he  said  that  he  feared  he  had  made  a  mistake  ; 
he  had  turned  into  a  building  which  he  hoped  was  a  Christian  place  of 
assembly  ;  but  as  he  had  not  heard  the  name  of  Jesus  all  the  morn  ing,  he 
thought  perhaps  he  had  fallen  in  with  some  other  religionists.  I  fear 
that  many  modern  sermons  might  just  as  fairly  have  been  delivered 
in  a  Mahometan  mosque  as  in  a  Christian  church.  We  have  too  many 
preachers  of  whom  we  might,  complain,  "  they  have  taken  away  my" 
Lord,  and  I  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him."  Christianity  without 
Christ  is  a  strange  thing  indeed.  And  what  comes  of  it  where  it  is- 
held  up  to  the  people  ?  Why,  by-and-by  there  are  not  enough  people- 
to  support  the  ministry;  empty  benches  are  plentiful,  and  the  thing  gets- 
pretty  nearly  wound  up.  Blessed  be  God  f.»r  it!  I  am  heartily  glad 
that  without  Christ  these  pretended  ministers  cannot  prosper.  Leave- 
Christ -out  of  the  preaching  and  you  shall  do  nothing.  Only  advertize 
it  all  over  London,  Mr.  Baker,  that  you  are  making  bread  without  flour  ; 
put  it  in  every  paper,  "  Bread  without  flour  ;  "  and  you  may  soon  shut 
up  your  shop,  for  your  customers  will  hurry  off  to  other  tradesmen. 
Somehow  there  is  a  strange  prejudice  in  people's  minds  in  favour  of 
bread  made  of  flour,  and  there  is  also  an  unaccountable  prejudice  in  the 
human  mind  which  makes  men  think  that  if  there  be  a  gospel  it  must 
have  Christ  in  it.  A  sermon  without  Christ  as  its  beginning,  middle, 
and  end  is  a  mistake  in  conception  and  a  crime  in  execution.  However 
grand  the  language  it  will  be  merely  much-ado-about-nothing  if  Christ 
be  not  there.  Ay,  and  I  mean  by  Christ  not  merely  his  example  and  the 
ethical  precepts  of  his  teaching,  but  his  atoning  blood,  his  wondrous 
satisfaction  made  for  human  sin,  and  the  grand  doctrine  of  "  believe  and 
live."  If  "  Life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One  "  be  obscured,  all  is  dark  * 
if  justification  by  faith  be  not  set  in  the  very  forefront  in  the  full  blaze 
of  light,  nothing  can  be  accomplished.  Without  Christ  in  the  doctrine 
ye  shall  do  nothing. 

Further,  without  acknowledging  always  ffie  absolute  supremacy  of 
Christ  we  shall  do  nothing.  Jesus  is  much  complimented  nowadays  ; 
but  he  is  not  submitted  to  as  absolute  Lord.  I  hear  many  pretty- 
things  about  Christ  from  men  who  reject  his  gospel.  "  Lives  of  Christ  "" 


;<  WITHOUT  CHHIST — NOTHING.  599 

we  have  in  any  quantity.  Oh  for  one  which  would  set  him  forth  in  his 
glory  as  God,  as  Head  of  the  church  and  Lord  of  all.  I  should  greatly, 
like  to  see  a  "  Life  of  Christ  "  written  by  one  who  knew  him  by  com 
munion  with  him  and  by  reverently  sitting  at  his  feet.  Most  of  the 
pretty  things  about'  Jesns  which  I  read  nowadays  seem  to  have  been 
written  by  persons  who  have  seen  him  through  a  telescope  at  a  great 
distance,  and  know  him  "  according  to  Matthew,"  but  not  according  to 
personal  fellowship.  Oh  for  a  "  Life  of  Christ"  by  Samuel  Rutherford 
or  George  Herbert,  or  by  some  other  sweet  spirit  to  whom  the  ever- 
blessed  One  is  as  a  familiar  friend.  Certain  modern  praises  of  Jesus 
are  written  upon  the  theory  that,  on  the  whole,  the  Saviour  has  given  us 
a  religion  that  is  tolerabfy  suited  to  the  enlightenment  -pf  the  nine 
teenth  century,  and  may  be  allowed  to  last  a  little  longer*  Jesus  is- 
commended  by  these  critics,  and  somewhat  admired  as  preferable  to  most 
teachers  ;  but  he  is  by  no  means  to  be  blindly  followed.  It  is  fortunate 
for  Jesus  that  he  commends  himself  to  the  "  best  thought"  and  ripest 
culture  of  the  period ;  for,  if  he  had  not  done  so,  these  wise  gentlemen 
would  have  exposed  him  as  being  behind  the  times.  Of  course  they 
have  every  now  and  then  to  rectify  certain  of  his  dogmas,  especially 
such  as  justification  by  faith,  or  atonement,  or  the  doctrine  of  election 
— these  are  old-fashioned  things,  which  belong  to  an  older  and  less  en 
lightened  period,  and  therefore  they  adapt  them  by  tearing  out  their 
real  meaning.  The  doctrines  of  grace,  according  to  the  infallible  critics 
of  the  period,  are  out  of  date — nobody  believes  them  now,  and  so  they 
settle  off  old-fashioned  believers  as  non-existent.  Christ  is  rectified 
and  squared,  and  his  garment  without  seam  is  taken  off,  and  he 
is  dressed  out  in  proper  style,  as  by  a  West-End  clothier ;  then 
he  is  introduced  to  us  as  a  remarkable  teacher,  and  we  are  advised  to 
accept  him  as  far  as  he  goes.  For  the  present  the  wise  ones  tolerate 
Jesus ;  but  there  is  no  telling  what  is  to  come  :  the  progress  of  this  age 
is  so  astonishing  that  it  is  just  possible  we  shall  before  long  leave  Christ 
and  Christianity  behind.  Now,  what  will  come  of  this  foolish  wisdom  ? 
Nothing  but  delusions,  mischief,  infidelity,  anarchy,  and  all  manner  of 
imaginable  and  unimaginable  ills.  The  fact  is,  if  you  do  not  acknow 
ledge  Christ  to  be  all,  you  have  virtually  left  him  out,  and  are  without 
him.  We  must  preach  the  gospel,  because  Christ  has  revealed  it. 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  is  to  be  our  logic.  We  must  preach  the  gospel 
as  ambassadors  delivering  their  message ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  King's 
name,  by  an  authority  not  their  own.  We  preach  our  doctrines,  not. 
because  we  consider  that  they  are  convenient  and  profitable,  but 
because  Christ  has  commanded  us  to  proclaim  them.  We  believe 
the  doctrines  of  grace,  not  because  the  enlightenment  of  the  age  sets- 
its  wonderful  imprimatur  upon  them,  but  because  they  are  true  and  are 
the  voice  of  God.  Age  or  no  age  has  nothing  to  do  with  us.  The  world 
hates  Christ  and  must  hate  him:  if  it  would  boldly  denounce  Christ  it 
would  be  to  us  a  more  hopeful  sign  than  its  deceitful  Judas  kiss.  We  keep 
simply  to  this,— the  Lord  hath  said  it,  and  we  care  not  who  approves  or 
disapproves.  Jesus  is  God  and  Head  of  the  church,  and  we  must  do 
what  he  bids  us,  and  say  what  he  tells  us:  if  we  fail  in  this,  nothing 
of  good  will  come  of  it.  If  the  church  gets  back  to  her  loyalty  she 
shall  see  whut  her  Lord  will  do;  but  without  Christ  as  absolute  Lord, 


600  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

infallible  Teacher,  and  honoured  King,  all  must  be  failure  even  to  the 
end. 

Go  a  little  further:  you  may  have  sound  doctrine,  and  yet  do  nothin°- 
unless  you  have  Christ  in  your  spirit.  I  have  known  all  the  doctrines 
of  grace  to  be  unmistakably  preached,  and  yet  there  have  been  no 
conversions ;  for  this  reason,  that  they  were  not  expected  and  scarcely 
desired.  In  former  years  many  orthodox  preachers  thought  it  to  be  their 
sole  duty  to  comfort  and  confirm  the  godly  few  who  by  dint  of  great 
perseverance  found  out  the  holes  and  corners  in  which  they  prophesied. 
These  brethren  spoke  of  sinners  as  of  people  whom  God  might  possibly 
gather  in  if  he  thought  fit  to  do  so  ;  but  they  did  not  care  much  whether 
he  did  so  or  not.  As  to  weeping  over  sinners  as  Christ  wept  over 
Jerusalem  ;4  as  to  venturing  to  invite  them  to  Christ  as  the  Lord  did 
when  he  stretched  out  his  hands  all  the  day  long;  as  to  lamenting  with 
Jeremiah  over  a  perishing  people,  they  had  no  sympathy  with  such 
emotions,  and  feared  that  they  savoured  of  Arminianism.  Both  preacher 
and  congregation  were  cased  in  a  hard  shell,  and  lived  as  if  their  own 
salvation  was  the  sole  design  of  their  existence.  If  anybody  did  grow 
zealous  and  seek  conversions,  straightway  they  said  he  was  indiscreet,  or 
conceited.  When  a  church  falls  into  this  condition  it  is,  as  to  its  spirit, 
"  without  Christ."  What  comes  of  it  ?  Some  of  you  know  by  your 
own  observation  what  does  come  of  it.  The  comfortable  corporation 
exists  and  grows  for  a  little  while,  but  it  comes  to  nothing  in  the  long 
run  ;  and  so  it  must :  there  can  be  no  fruit-bearing  where  there  is  not, 
the  spirit  of  Christ  as  well  as  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  Except  the  spirit 
of  the  Lord  rests  upon  you,  causing  you  to  agonize  for  the  salvation  of 
men  even  as  Jesus  did,  ye  can  do  nothing. 

But  above  all  things  we  must  have  Christ  with  us  in  the  power  of 
his  actual  presence.  Do  we  always  think  of  this — "Without  me  ye  can 
do  nothing"?  We  are  going  out  this  afternoon  to  teach  the  young  ; 
shall  we  be  quite  sure  to  take  Christ  with  us?  or  on  the  road  shall  we 
suddenly  stop  and  say,  "  I  am  without  my  Master,  and  I  must  not  dare 
to  go  another  step"?  The  abiding  consciousness  of  the  love  of  Christ 
in  our  soul  is  the  essential  element  of  our  strength.  We  can  no  more 
convert  a  sinner  without  Christ  than  we  could  light  up  new  stars  in 
the  sky.  Power  to  change  the  human  will,  power  to  enlighten  the  in 
tellect  as  to  the  things  of  God,  and  to  influence  the  mind  as  to  repentance 
and  faith,  must  come  entirely  from  the  Most  High.  Do  we  feel  that? 
or  do  we  put  our  thoughts  together  for  an  address,  and  say, "  Now,  that 
is  a  strong  point,  and  that  will  produce  effect";  and  do  we  rest  there  ? 
If  so,  we  can  do  nothing  at  all.  The  power  lies  with  the  Master,  not 
with  the  servant ;  the  might  is  in  the  hand,  not  in  the  weapon.  We 
must  have  Christ  in  these  pews  and  in  these  aisles,  and  in  this  pulpit, 
and  Christ  down  in  our  Sunday-school,  and  Christ  at  the  street  corner 
when  we  stand  up  there  to  talk  of  him,  and  we  must  feel  that  he  is 
with  us  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  or  we  shall  do  nothing. 

We  have,  then,  before  us  a  vision  of  total  failure  if  we  attempt  in  any 
way  to  do  without  Christ.  He  says,  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing  :  " 
it  is  in  the  doing  that  the  failure  is  most  conspicuous.  Yon  may  talk 
a  good  deal  without  him  ;  you  may  hold  congresses,  and  conferences, 
and  conventions ;  but  doing  is  another  matter.  Without  Jesus  you  can 


WITHOUT  CHRIST— NOTHING.  601 

talk  any  quantity  ;  but  without  him  you  can  do  nothing.  The  most 
eloquent  discourse  without  him  will  be  all  a  bottle  of  smoke.  You 
shall  lay  your  plans,  and  arrange  your  machinery,  and  start  your 
schemes  ;  but  without  the  Lord  you  will  do  nothing.  Immeasurable 
clondland  of  proposals  and  not  a  spot  of  solid  doing  large  enough  for 
a  dove's  foot  to  rest  on— such  shall  be  the  end  of  all  !  You  may  have 
all  the  money  that  generosity  can  lavish,  all  the  learning  that  your 
universities  can  supply,  and  all  the  oratory  that  the  most  gifted  can 
lay  at  your  feet ;  but  '•  without  me,"  saith  Christ,  <kye  can  do  nothing." 
Fuss,  flare,  fireworks,  and  failure  ;  that  is  the  end  of  it.  "Without  me 
ye  can  do  nothing."  Let  me  repeat  those  words  again,  "  Do  nothing." 
u  Do  nothing,"  and  the  world  dying  around  us  !  Africa  in  darkness  ! 
China  perish  ng  !  Hindostan  sunk  m  superstition,  and  a  church  which 
can  do  nothing !  No  bread  to  be  handed  out  to  the  hungry,  and  the 
multitude  fainting  and  dying!  The  rock  to  be  smitten  and  the  water 
of  life  to  leap  out  for  the  thirsty,  but  not  a  drop  forthcoming,  because 
Jesus  is  not  there.  Ministers,  evangelists,  churches,  salvution  armies, 
the  world  dies  for  want  of  you,  and  yet  "ye  can  do  nothing '*  if  your 
Lord  is  away.  The  age  shall  advance  in  discovery,  and  men  of  science 
shall  do  their  little  best,  but  you  shall  do  "  nothing  "  without  Christ, 
absolutely  nothing  !  You  shall  not  proceed  a  single  inch  upon  your 
toilsome  way,  though  you  row  till  the  oars  snap  with  the  strain;  you 
shall  be  drifted  back  by  winds  and  currents  unless  you  take  Jesus  into 
the  ship.  Remember  that  all  the  while  the  great  Husbandman  is 
watching  you,  for  his  eye  is  on  every  vine-branch.  He  sees  that  you 
are  producing  no  grapes,  and  he  is  coming  round  with  that  sharp  knife 
of  his,  cutting  here  and  there  !  What  must  become  of  \ou  who  produce 
nothing  ?  It  makes  one's  very  soul  to  curdle  within  him  to  think  that 
we  should  live  to  do  nothing.  Yet  I  fear  that  thousands  of  Christians 
get  no  further  than  this;  they  are  not  immoral,  dishonest,  or  profane; 
but  they  do  nothing.  They  think  of  what  they  would  like  to  do,  and 
they  plan  and  they  propose  ;  but  they  do  nothing.  There  are  buds  in 
plenty,  but  not  a  single  grape  is  produced  and  all  because  they  do  not 
get  into  that  vital,  overflowing,  effectual  communion  with  Christ  which 
would  fill  them  with  life,  and  constrain  them  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto 
the  glory  of  God.  There  is  a  vision,  then,  of  the  failure  all  along  the 
line  if  we  try  to  do  without  Christ. 

IV.  But  now,  fourthly,  I  hear  A  VOICE  OF  WISDOM,  a  still  small 
voice  which  speaks  out  of  the  text,  and  says  to  us  who  are  in  Christ, 
let  us  acknowledge  this.  Down  on  your  knees,  bow  your  mouths  in  the 
dust  and  say,  "  Lord,  it  is  true  :  without  thee  we  can  do  nothing,  nothing 
whatever  that  is  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.  We  have  not 
ability  of  ourselves  to  think  anything  of  ourselves,  but  our  ability  is  of 
God."  Now,  do  not  speak  thus,  as  if  you  paid  a  compliment  which 
orthodoxy  requires  you  to  make  ;  but  from  the  deeps  of  your  soul,  smitten 
with  an  absolute  self-despair,  own  the  truth  unto  God.  "To  will  is 
present  with  me,  but  how  to  perform  that  which  I  would  I  find  not." 
Lord,  I  am  a  good-for-nothing  do-nothing,  a  fruitless,  barren,  dry, 
rotten  branch  without  thee,  and  this  I  feel  in  my  inmost  soul.  Be  not 
far  from  me,  but  quicken  me  by  thy  presence. 

Next,  let  us  pray.     If  without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing,  let  us  cry  to 


602  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

him  that  we  may  never  be  without  him.  Let  us  with  strong- crying 
and  tears  entreat  his  abiding  presence.  He  comes  to  those  who  seek 
him  :  let  us  never  cease  seeking.  In  conscious  fellowship  with  him,  let 
us  plead  that  the  fellowship  should  be  unbroken  evermore.  Let  us  pray 
that  we  may  be  so  knit  and  joined  to  Jesus  that  we  may  be  one  spirit 
with  him,  never  to  be  separated  from  him  again.  Master  and  Lord, 
let  the  life  floods  of  thy  grace  never  cease  to  flow  into  us,  for  we 
know  that  we  must  be  thus  supplied  or  we  can  produce  nothing. 
Brethren,  let  us  have  much  more  prayer  than  has  been  usual  among  us. 
Prayer  is  appointed  to  convey  the  blessings  God  ordains  to  give  ;  let 
us  constantly  use  the  appointed  means,  and  may  the  result  be  ever 
increasing  from  day  to  day. 

Next,  let  us  personally  cleave  to  Jesus.  Let  us  not  attempt  a  life  of 
separation;  for  that  were  to  seek  the  living  among  the  dead.  Do  not 
let  us  depart  from  him  for  a  single  minute.  Would  you  like  to  be 
caught  at  any  one  second  of  your  life  in  a  condition  in  which  you  could 
do  nothing  ?  I  must  confess  I  should  not  like  to  be  in  that  state  — . 
incapable  of  defence  against  my  enemies,  or  of  service  for  my  Lord. 
If  an  awakened  one  should  come  before  you  under  distress  of  mind, 
and  you  should  feel  quite  incapable  of  doing  any  good  to  him,  what 
a  sad  perplexity.  Or  if  you  did  not  feel  incapable,  and  yet  should  really 
be  so,  and  what  if  you  should  therefore  talk  on  in  a  religious  way,  but 
know  no  power  in  it;  would  it  not  be  a  sad  thing?  May  you  never 
be  in  such  a  state  that  you  would  be  a  do-nothing,  with  opportunities 
afforded  and  yet  without  strength  to  utilize  them!  If  you  are  divided 
from  Christ  you  are  divided  from  the  possibility  of  doing  good;  cling,, 
therefore,  to  the  Saviour  with  your  whole  might,  and  let  nothing,  take 
you  off  from  him  ;  no,  not  for  an  hour. 

Heartily  submit  yourselves,  also,  dear  frien  Is,  to  the  Lord's  headship- 
and  leadership,  and  ask  to  do  everything  in  his  style  and  way.  He  will 
not  be  with  you  unless  you  accept  him  as  your  Master.  There  must  be- 
no  quarrel  about  supremacy,  but  you  must  yield  yourself  up  absolutely 
to  him,  to  be,  to  do,  or  to  suffer,  according  to  his  will.  When  it  is- 
wholly  so  he  will  be  with  you,  and  you  shall  do  everything  that  is  re 
quired  of  you.  Wonderful  things  will  the  Lord  perform  through  you 
when  once  he  is  your  all  in  all.  Will  we  not  have  it  so  ? 

Once  more ;  joyfully  believe  in  him.  Though  without  him  you  can  do- 
nothing,  yet  with  him  all  things  are  possible.  Omnipotence  is  in  that 
man  who  has  Christ  in  him.  Weakness  itself  you  may  be,  but  you 
shall  learn  to  glory  in  that  weakness  because  the  power  of  Christ  doth 
rest  upon  you  if  your  union  and  communion  with  Christ  are  continually 
kept  up.  Oh  for  a  grand  confidence  in  Christ!  We  have  not  believed 
in  him  yet  up  to  the  measure  of  the  hem.  of  his  garment;  for  even  that 
faith  made  the  sick  woman  whole.  Oh  to  believe  up  to  the  measure  of 
his  infinite  Deity!  Oh  for  the  splendour  of  the  faith  which  measure* 
itself  by  the  Christ  in  whom  it  trusts!  May  God  bring  us  there,  then 
shall  we  bring  forth  much  fruit  to  the  glory  of  his  name. 

Y.  And  now,  lastly.  While  I  was  listening  to  my  text  as  a  child 
puts  a  shell  to  its  ear  and  listens  till  it,  hears  the  deep  sea  rolling  in  its 
windings,  I  heard  within  my  text  A  SONG  OF  CONTENT.  "Without 
me  ye  can  do  nothing/'  My  heart  said,  "  Lord,  what  is  there  that  1 


WITHOUT   CHRIST — NOTHING.  GU3 

want  to  do  without  thee?  There  is  no  pain  in  this  thought  to  me.  If 
I  can  do  without  thee  1  am  sorry  to  possess  so  dangerous  a  power.  I 
am  happy  to  be  deprived  of  all  strength  except  that  which  comes  from 
thee.  it  charms,  it  exhilarates,  and  delights  my  soul  to  think  that  thou 
art  my  all.  Thou  bust  made  me  penniless  as  to  all  wealth  of  my  own, 
that  1  might  dip  my  hand  into  thy  treasury;  thou  hast  taken  all  power 


away  from  every  sinew  and  muscle  of  mine,  that  I  may  rest  on  thv 
bosom/'  "Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  Be  it  so.  Brethren, 
are  you  not  all  agreed?  Do  you  wish  to  have  it  altered,  any  of  you 
that  love  his  dear  name  ?  I  am  sure  you  do  not ;  for  suppose,  dear 
friends,  we  could  do  something  without  Christ,  then  he  would  not 
have  the  glory  of  it.  Who  wishes  that  ?  There  would  he  little  crowns  for 
our  poor  littlj  heads,  for  we  should  have  done  something  without  him  j 
but  now  there  is  one  great  crown  for  that  dear  head  which  once  was 
girt  with  thorns  ;  for  all  his  saints  put  together  cannot  do  anything 
without  him.  The  goodly  fellowship  of  the  apostles,  the  noble  army  of 
martyrs,  and  the  triumphant  host  of  the  redeemed  by  blood,  all  put 
together,  can  do  nothing  without  Jesus.  Let  him  be  crowned  with 
majesty  who  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  good 
pleasure.  For  our  own  sakes,  for  our  Lord's  sake,  we  are  glad  that 
it  is  so.  All  things  are  more  ours  by  being  his ;  and  if  our  fruit  is 
his  rather  than  our  own,  it  is  none  the  less  but  all  the  more  ours.  Is 
not  tin's  rare  music  for  a  holy  ear  ? 

I  feel  so  glad  that  without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing  because  I  fear 
that  if  the  church  could  do  something  without  Christ  she  would  try  to 
Jive  without  him.  If  she  could  teach  the  school  and  bring  the  children 
to  salvation  without  Christ,  I  am  afraid  Christ  would  never  go  into 
a  Sunday-school  again.  It'  we  could  preach  successfully  without  Jesus, 
I  suspect  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  seldom  stand  on  high 
among  the  people  again.  If  our  Christian  literature  could  bless  men  with 
out  Christ,  I  am  afraid  we  should  set  the  printing-press  going,  and  never 
think  about  the  crucified  One  in  the  matter.  If  there  could  be  work 
•done  by  the  church  without  Jesus,  there  would  be  rooms  into  which  he 
would  never  be  invited ;  and  these  would  soon  become  a  sort  of  Blue 
Beard's  chambers,  full  of  horror.  A  something  that  we  could  do  without 
Christ !  Why  the  mass  of  the  church  would  get  to  working  that 
machinery  tremendously,  and  all  the  rest  would  be  neglected,  and  so 
it  is  a  blessed  thing  for  the  whole  church  that  she  must  have  Christ 
-everywhere. 

"  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  As  I  listened  to  the  song  within 
these  words  I  began  to  laugh  :  I  wonder  if  you  will  laugh  too.  It  was 
to  myself  I  laughed,  like  Abraham  of  old.  I  thought  of  those  who  are 
going  to  destroy  the  orthodox  doctrine  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth. 
How  they  boast  of  the  decline  and  death  of  old-fashioned  evangelism. 
I  have  read  once  or  twice  that  I  am  the  last  of  the  Puritans,  the  race  is 
all  dying  out  To  this  I  demur:  I  am  willing  to  be  esteemed  last  in 
merit,  but  not  last  as  ending  the  race.  There  are  many  others  who  are 
steadfast  in  the  faith.  They  say  our  old  theology  is  decaying,  and 
that  nobody  believes  it.  It  is  all  a  lie;  but  wise  men  say  so,  and  there 
fore  we  are  bound  to  consider  ourselves  obsolete  and  extinct.  We  are, 
in  their  esteem,  as  much  out  of  date  as  antediluvians  would  be  could 


604  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

they  walk  down  our  streets.  Yes,  they  are  going  to  quench  onr 
coal  and  blot  us  out  from  Israel.  Newspapers  Mid  reviews  and  the 
general  intelligence  of  the  age  all  join  to  dance  upon  our  graves. 
Put  on  your  night-caps,  ye  good  people  of  the  evangelical  order, 
and  go  home  to  bed  and  sleep  the  sleep  of  the  righteous,  for  the  end 
of  you  is  coine.  Thus  say  the  Philistines,  but  the  armies  of  the 
Lord  think  not  so.  The  adversaries  exult  exceedingly ;  but  Christ 
is  not  with  them.  They  know  very  little  about  him,  they  do  not 
work  in  his  spirit,  nor  cry  him  up,  nor  extol  the  gospel  of  his  precious 
blood,  and  so  I  believe  that  when  they  have  done  their  little  best  it 
will  come  to  nothing.  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing  : "  if  this  be  true 
of  apostles,  much  more  of  opposers!  If  his  friends  can  do  nothing 
without  him,  I  am  sure  his  foes  can  do  nothing  against  him.  If  they 
that  follow  his  steps  and  lie  in  his  bosom  can  do  nothing  without  him, 
I  am  sure  his  adversaries  cannot,  and  so  I  laughed  at  their  laughter 
and  smiled  at  their  confusion.  I  laughed,  too,  because  I  recollected  a 
story  of  a  New  England  service  when  the  pastor  one  afternoon  was 
preaching  in  his  own  solemn  way,  and  the  good  people  were  listening  or 
sleeping,  as  their  minds  inclined.  It  was  a  substantial  edifice  wherein  they 
assembled,  fit  to  outlive  an  earthquake.  All  went  on  peacefully  in  the 
meeting-house  that  afternoon  till  suddenly  a  lunatic  started  up, 
denounced  the  minister,  and  declared  that  he  would  at  once  pull  down 
the  meeting-house  about  their  ears.  Taking  hold  of  one  of  the  pillars 
of  the  gallery,  this  newly-announced  Samson  repeated  his  threatening. 
Everybody  rose ;  the  women  were  ready  to  faint ;  the  men  began 
to  rush  to  the  door,  and  there  was  danger  that  the  people  would  be 
trodden  on  as  they  rushed  down  the  aisles.  There  was  about  to  be  a 
great  tumult ;  no  one  could  see  the  end  of  it ;  when  suddenly  one  cool 
brother  sitting  near  the  pulpit  produced  a  calm  by  a  single  sentence. 
'*  Let  him  try ! "  was  the  stern  sarcasm  which  hushed  the  tempest. 
Even  so  to-day  the  enemy  is  about  to  disprove  the  gospel  and  crush  out 
the  doctrines  of  ^race.  Are  you  distressed,  alarmed,  astounded?  So 
far  from  that,  my  reply  to  the  adversary's  boast  that  he  will  pull  dowo 
the  pillars  of  our  Zion  is  this  only, — LET  HIM  TRY  !  Amen. 


tan  §aknwde 


THE  SECEET   OF   POWER  IN   PEAYEB. 


I 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  JANUARY  STH,   1888, 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you." — John  xv.  7. 

THE  gifts  of  grace  are  not  enjoyed  all  at  once  by  believers.  Coming 
unto  Christ,  we  are  saved  by  a  true  union  with  him ;  but  it  is  by 
abiding  in  that  union  that  we  further  receive  the  purity,  the  joy,  the 
power,  the  blessedness,  which  are  stored  up  in  him  for  his  people. 
See  how  our  Lord  states  this  when  he  speaks  to  the  believing  Jews 
in  the  eighth  chapter  of  this  gospel,  at  the  thirty-first  and  thirty- 
second  verses  : — "  Then  said  Jesus  to  those  Jews  which  believed  on 
him,  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  then  are  ye  my  disciples  indeed ;  and 
ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  We  do 
not  know  all  the  truth  at  once :  we  learn  it  by  abiding  in  Jesus. 
Perseverance  in  grace  is  an  educational  process  by  which  we  learn  the 
truth  fully.  The  emancipating  power  of  that  truth  is  also  gradually 
perceived  and  enjoyed.  "The  truth  shall  make  you  free."  One 
bond  after  another  snaps,  and  we  are  free  indeed.  You  that  are  young 
beginners  in  the  divine  life  may  be  cheered  to  know  that  there  is 
something  better  still  for  you:  you  have  not  yet  received  the  full 
recompense  of  your  faith.  As  your  hymn  puts  it — "It  is  better  on 
before."  You  shall  have  happier  views  of  heavenly  things  as  you 
climb  the  hill  of  spiritual  experience.  As  you  abide  in  Christ  you 
shall  have  firmer  confidence,  richer  joy,  greater  stability,  more  com 
munion  with  Jesus,  and  greater  delight  in  the  Lord  your  God.  Infancy 
is  beset  with  many  evils  from  which  manhood  is  exempt :  it  is  the 
same  in  the  spiritual  as  in  the  natural  world. 

There  are  these  degrees  of  attainment  among  believers,  and  the 
Saviour  here  incites  us  to  reach  a  high  position  by  mentioning  a  cer 
tain  privilege  which  is  not  for  all  who  say  that  they  are  in  Christ,  but 
for  those  only  who  are  abtders  in  him.  Every  believer  should  be  an 
abider,  but  many  have  hardly  earned  the  name  as  yet.  Jesus  says, 
"If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye 
will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  You  have  to  live  with  Christ  to 
know  him,  and  the  longer  you  live  with  him  the  more  will  you  admire 
and  adore  him ;  yes,  and  the  more  will  VQU  receive  from  him,  eveD 
No.  2,002.  52 


576  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

( grace  for  grace.  Truly  he  is  a  blessed  Christ  to  one  who.  is  but  a 
month  old  in  grace ;  but  these  babes  can  hardly  tell  what  a  precious 
Jesus  he  is  to  those  whose  acquaintance  with  him  covers  well-nigh 
half  a  century !  Jesus,  in  the  esteem  of  abiding  believers,  grows 
sweeter  and  dearer,  fairer  and. more  .lovely,  day  by  day.  Not  that  he 
improves  in  himself,  for  he  is  perfect ;  but  that  as  we  increase  in  our 
knowledge  of  him,  we  appreciate  more  thoroughly  his  matchless  ex 
cellences.  How  glowingly  do  his  old  acquaintances  exclaim,  "Yea,  he 
is  altogether  lovely  "  !  Oh,  that  we  jnay  continue  to  grow  up  into  him 
in  all  things  who  is  our  head,  that  we  thus  may  prize  him  more  and 


more  1 


I  call  your  earnest  attention  to  our  text,  begging  you  to  consider 
with  me  three  questions.  First,  what  is  this  special  blessing?  "Ye 
•shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  Secondly,  how 
is  this  special  blessing  obtained?  "If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words 
abide  in  you."  Then,  thirdly,  why  is  it  obtained  in  this  way  ?  There 
must  be  a  reason  for  the  conditions  laid  down  as  needful  to  obtaining 
the  promised  power  in  prayer.  Oh,  that  the  anointing  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  which  abideth  on  us  may  now  make  this  subject  very  profitable 
to  us! 

I.  WHAT  is  THIS  SPECIAL  BLESSING  ?  Let  us  read  the  verse  again. 
Jesus  says,  "If-  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall 
•  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

Observe  that  our  Lord  had  been  warning  us  that,  severed  from  him, 
we  can  do  nothing,  and,  therefore,  we  might  naturally  have  expected 
that  he  would  now  show  us  how  we  can  do  all  spiritual  acts.  But 
the  text  does  not  run  as  we  should  have  expected  it  to  run.  The  Lord 
Jesus  does  not  say,  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,  but,  if  ye  abide 
in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  do  all  spiritual  and 
gracious  things."  He  does  not  now  speak  of  what  they  should  them 
selves  be  enabled  to  do,  but  of  what  should  be  done  unto  them:  "  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you."  He  says  not,  "  Strength  shall  be  given  you 
eumcient  for  all  those  holy  doings  of  which  you  are  incapable  apart 
from  me."  That  would  have  been  true  enough,  and  it  is  the  truth 
which  we  looked  for  here ;  but  our  most  wise  Lord  improves  upon  all 
parallelisms  of  speech,  and  improves  upon  all  expectancies  of  heart, 
.and  says  something  better  still.  He  does  not  say,  "If  ye  abide  in 
.me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  do  spiritual  things  ";  but, 
"  ye  shall  ask."  By  prayer  you  shall  be  enabled  to  do  ;  but  before  all 
attempts  to  do,  "  Ye  shall  ask."  The  choice  privilege  here  given  is  a 
mighty  prevailing  prayerf ulness.  Power  in  prayer  is  very  much  the 
gauge  of  our  spiritual  condition ;  and  when  that  is  secured  to  us  in  a 
high  degree,  we  are  favoured  as  to  all  other  matters. 

One  of  the  first  results,  then,  of  our  abiding  union  with  Christ  will 
be  the  certain  exercise  of  prayer :  "  Ye  shall  ask."  If  others  neither 
seek,  nor  knock,  nor  ask,  ye,  at  any  rate,  shall  do  so.  Those  who 
keep  away  from  Jesus  do  not  pray.  Those  in  whom  communion  with. 
Christ  is  suspended  feel  as  if  they  could  not  pray ;  but  Jesus  says,  "If 
ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask."  Prayer 
comes  spontaneously  from  those  who  abide  in  Jesus,  even  as  certain 
oriental  trees,  without  pressure,  shed  their  fragrant  gums.  Prayer  in 


THE    SECRET    OF    POWER    IN    PRAYER.  677 

the  natural  outgushing  of  a  soul  in  communion  with  Jesus.  Just  a* 
the  leaf  and  the  fruit  will  come  out  of  the  vine-branch  without  any 
conscious  effort  on  the  part  of  the  branch,  but  simply  because  of  its 
living  union  with  the  stem,  so  prayer  buds,  and  blossoms,  and  fruits 
out  of  souls  abiding  in  Jesus.  As  stars  shine,  so  do  abiders  pray.  It 
is  their  use  and  their  second  nature.  They  do  not  say  to  themselves, 
"  Now  it  is  the  time  for  us  to  get  to  our  task  and  pray."  No,  they 
pray  as  wise  men  eat,  namely,  when  the  desire  for  it  is  upon  them. 
They  do  not  cry  out  as  under  bondage,  "  At  this  time  I  ought  to  be  in 
prayer,  but  I  do  not  feel  like  it.  What  a  weariness  it  is !  "  but  they 
have  a  glad  errand  at  the  mercy-seat,  and  they  are  rejoiced  to  go  upon 
it.  Hearts  abiding  in  Christ  send  forth  supplications  as  fires  send  out 
flames  and  sparks.  Souls  abiding  in  Jesus  open  the  day  with  prayer ; 
prayer  surrounds  them  as  an  atmosphere  all  day  long ;  at  night  they 
fall  asleep  praying.  I  have  known  them  even  dream  a  prayer,  and,  at 
any  rate,  they  are  able  joyfully  to  say,  "  When  I  awake,  I  am  still 
with  thee."  Habitual  asking  comes  out  of  abiding  in  Christ.  You 
will  not  need  urging  to  prayer  when  you  are  abiding  with  Jesus : 
he  says,  u  Ye  shall  ask  ";  and,  depend  upon  it,  you  will. 

You  shall  also  feel  most  powerfully  the  necessity  of  prayer.  Your 
great  need  of  prayer  \vill  be  vividly  seen.  Do  I  hear  you  say — 
"  What !  When  we  abide  in  Christ,  and  his  words  abide  in  us,  have 
we  not  already  attained  ?  "  Far  are  we,  then,  from  being  satisfied 
with  ourselves ;  it  is  then  that  we  feel  more  than  ever  that  we  must 
ask  for  more  grace.  He  that  knows  Christ  best,  knows  his  own 
necessities  best.  He  that  is  most  conscious  of  life  in  Christ,  is  also 
most  convinced  of  his  own  death  apart  from  Christ.  He  who  most 
clearly  discerns  the  perfect  character  of  Jesus,  will  be  most  urgent  in 
prayer  for  grace  to  grow  like  him.  The  more  I  see  to  be  in  my  Lord, 
the  more  I  desire  to  obtain  from  him,  since  I  know  that  all  that  is  in 
him  is  put  there  on  purpose  that  I  may  receive  it.  "  Of  his  fulness 
have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace."  It  is  just  in  proportion 
as  we  are  linked  to  Christ's  fulness  that  we  feel  the  necessity  of  drawing 
from  it  by  constant  prayer.  Nobody  needs  to  prove  to  an  abider  in 
Christ  the  doctrine  of  prayer,  for  we  enjoy  the  tiling  itself.  Prayer  is 
now  as  much  a  necessity  of  our  spiritual  life  as  breath  is  of  our 
natural  life  :  we  cannot  live  without  asking  favours  of  the  Lord.  "  If 
ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  ":  and  ye 
shall  not  wish  to  cease  from  asking.  He  hath  said,  "  Seek  ye  my 
face,"  and  your  heart  will  answer,  "  Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek." 

Note  next,  that  the  fruit  of  our  abiding  is  not  only  the  exorcise  of 
prayer,  and  a  sense  of  the  necessity  of  prayer,  but  it  includes  liberty 
in  prayer  :  "Ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will."  Have  you  not  been  on  your 
kuees  at  times  without  power  to  pray  ?  Have  you  not  felt  that  you 
could  not  plead  as  you  desired  ?  You  wanted  to  pray,  but  the  waters 
were  frozen  up,  and  would  not  flow.  You  said,  mournfully,  "  I  am 
shut  up,  and  cannot  coine  forth."  The  will  was  present,  but  not  the 
freedom  to  present  that  will  in  prayer.  Do  you,  then,  desire  liberty  in 
prayer,  so  that  you  may  speak  with  God  as  a  man  speaketh  with  his 
friend  ?  Here  is  the  way  to  it :  "If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words 
abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will  "  I  do  not  mean  that  you  will 


578  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    TULPIT. 

gain  liberty  as  to  mere  fluency  of  utterance,  for  that  is  a  very  inferior 
gift.  Eluency  is  a  questionable  endowment,  especially  when  it  is  not 
attended  with  weight  of  thought  and  depth  of  feeling.  Some  brethren 
pray  by  the  yard ;  but  true  prayer  is  measured  by  weight,  and  not  by 
length.  A  single  groan  before  God  may  have  more  fulness  of  prayer 
in  it  than  a  fine  oration  of  great  length.  He  that  dwells  with  God  in 
Christ  Jesus,  he  is  the  man  whose  steps  are  enlarged  in  intercession. 
He  comes  boldly  because  he  abides  at  the  throne.  He  sees  the  golden 
sceptre  stretched  out,  and  hears  the  King  saying,  "  Ask  what  thou 
wilt,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  It  is  the  man  who  abides  in 
conscious  union  with  his  Lord  who  has  freedom  of  access  in  prayer. 
Well  may  he  come  to  Christ  readily,  for  he  is  in  Christ,  and  abides  in 
him.  Attempt  not  to  seize  this  holy  liberty  by  excitement,  or  pre 
sumption  :  there  is  but  one  way  of  really  gaining  it,  and  here  it  is — 
""  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye 
will."  By  this  means  alone  shall  you  be  enabled  to  open  your  mouth 
wide,  that  God  may  fill  it.  Thus  shall  you  become  Israels,  and  as 
princes  have  power  with  God. 

This  is  not  all :  the  favoured  man  has  the  privilege  of  successful 
grayer.  "  Ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 
You  may  not  do  it,  but  it  shall  be  done  unto  you.  You  long  to  bear 
fruit :  ask,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you.  Look  at  the  vine  branch. 
It  simply  remains  in  the  vine,  and  by  remaining  in  the  vine  the  fruit 
oomes  from  it ;  it  is  done  unto  it.  Brother  in  Christ,  the  purport  of 
your  being,  its  one  object  and  design,  is  to  bring  forth  fruit  to  the 
glory  of  the  Father :  to  gain  this  end  you  must  abide  in  Christ,  as 
the  branch  abides  in  the  vine.  This  is  the  method  by  which  your 
prayer  for  frujtfulness  will  become  successful,  "it  shall  be  done  unto 
you."  Concerning  this  matter,  "you  shall  ask  what  you  will,  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you."  You  shall  have  wonderful  prevalence  with 
God  in  prayer,  insomuch  that  before  you  call  he  will  answer,  and 
while  you  are  yet  speaking  he  will  hear.  "  The  desire  of  the  righteous 
shall  be  granted."  To  the  same  effect  is  the  other  text:  "Delight 
thyself  also  in  the  Lord ;  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine 
heart."  There  is  a  great  breadth  in  this  text,  "Ye  shall  ask  wha*. 
ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  The  Lord  gives  the  abidnr 
carte  blanche.  He  puts  into  his  hand  a  signed  cheque,  and  permits 
him  to  fill  it  up  as  he  wills. 

Does  the  text  mean  what  it  says  ?  I  never  knew  my  Lord  to  say  any 
thing  he  did  not  mean.  I  am  sure  that  he  may  sometimes  mean  more 
than  we  understand  him  to  say,  but  he  never  means  less.  Mind  you, 
he  does  not  say  to  all  men,  "  I  will  give  you  whatever  you  ask."  Oh 
no,  that  would  be  an  unkind  kindness  :  but  he  speaks  to  his  disciples, 
and  says,  "  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall 
ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  It  is  to  a  certain 
class  of  men  who  have  already  received  great  grace  at  his  hands — it 
is  to  them  he  commits  this  marvellous  power  of  prayer.  0  my  dear 
friends,  if  I  may  covet  earnestly  one  thing  above  every  other,  it  is  this ; 
that  I  may  be  able  to  ask  what  I  will  of  the  Lord,  and  have  it.  The 
prevailer  in  prayer  is  the  man  to  preach  successfully,  for  he  may  well 
prevail  with  man  for  G-od  when  he  has  already  prevailed  with  God  for 


THE    SECRET    OF    POWER    IN    PRAYER.  579 

men.  Thik-  is  the  man  to  face  the  difficulties  of  business  life ;  for 
what  can  baffle  him  when  he  can  take  all  to  God  in  prayer  ?  One 
such  man  as  this,  or  one  such  woman  as  this  in  a  church,  is  worth  ten 
thousand  of  us  common  people.  In  these  we  find  the  peerage  of  the 
skies.  In  these  are  the  men  in  whom  is  fulfilled  God's  purpose  con 
cerning  man,  whom  he  made  to  have  dominion  over  all  the  works  of 
his  hands.  The  stamp  of  sovereignty  is  on  the  brows  of  these  men  : 
they  shape  the  history  of  nations,  they  guide  the  current  of  events 
through  their  power  on  high.  "We  see  Jesus  with  all  things  put  under 
him  by  the  divine  purpose,  and  as  we  rise  into  that  image,  we  also  are 
<clothed  with  dominion,  and  are  made  kings  and  priests  unto  God. 
Behold  Elijah,  with  the  keys  of  the  rain  swinging  at  his  girdle:  he 
shuts  or  opens  the  windows  of  heaven !  There  are  such  men  still 
alive.  Aspire  to  be  such  men  and  women,  I  beseech  you,  that  to  you 
the  text  may  be  fulfilled.  "  Ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be 
-done  unto  you." 

The  text  seems  to  imply  that,  if  we  reach  this  point  of  privilege, 
this  gift  shall  be  a  perpetuity:  "  Ye  shall  ask,"  ye  shall  always  ask; 
ye  shall  never  get  beyond  asking,  but  ye  shall  ask  successfully,  for 
41  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  Here  we 
have  the  gift  of  continual  prayer.  Not  for  the  week  of  prayer,  not 
during  a  month's  conference,  nor  upon  a  few  special  occasions  shall  ye 
pray  prevailingly ;  but  ye  shall  possess  this  power  with  God  so 
long  as  you  abide  in  Christ,  and  his  words  abide  in  you.  God 
will  put  his  omnipotence  at  your  disposal :  he  will  put  forth  hia 
<k>dhead  to  fulfil  the  desires  which  his  own  Spirit  has  inwrought  in 
you.  I  wish  I  could  make  this  jewel  glitter  before  the  eyes  of  all  the 
saints  till  they  cried  out,  "  Oh  that  we  had  it !  "  This  power  in  prayer 
is  like  the  sword  of  Goliath :  wisely  may  every  David  say — "  There  is 
none  like  it;  give  it  me."  This  weapon  of  all-prayer  beats  the  enemy, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  enriches  its  possessor  with  all  the  wealth  of  God. 
How  can  he  lack  anything  to  whom  the  Lord  hath  said,  "  Ask  what 
thou  wilt,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee  "  ?  Oh,  come,  let  us  seek  this 
boon.  Listen,  and  learn  the  way.  Follow  me,  while  by  the  light  of 
the  text  I  point  out  the  path.  May  the  Lord  lead  us  in  it  by  his  Holy 
Spirit ! 

II.  The  privilege  of  mighty  prayerfulness — HOW  is  IT  TO  BE 
OBTAINED ?  The  answer  is,  "If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide 
in  you."  Here  are  the  two  feet  by  which  we  climb  to  power  with  God 
in  prayer. 

Beloved,  the  first  line  tells  us  that  we  are  to  abide  in  Christ  Jesus 
*ur  Lord.  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  we  are  already  in  him.  May 
it  be  taken  for  granted  in  your  case,  dear  hearer  ?  If  so,  you  are 
to  abide  where  you  are.  As  believers  we  are  to  remain  tenaciously 
clinging  to  Jesus,  livingly  knit  to  Jesus.  We  are  to  abide  in  him, 
by  always  trusting  him,  and  him  only,  with  the  same  simple  faith 
which  joined  us  to  him  at  the  first.  We  must  never  admit  any  other 
thing  or  person  into  our  heart's  confidence  as  our  hope  of  salvation, 
but  rest  alone  in  Jesus  as  we  received  him  at  the  first.  His  Godhead, 
his  manhood,  his  life,  his  death,  his  resurrection,  his  glory  at  the  rignt 
hand  of  the  Father — in  a  word,  himself  must  be  our  heart's  sole 


580  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

reliance.     This  is  absolutely  essential.     A  temporary  faith   will  not 
save  ;   an  abiding  faith  is  needful. 

But  abiding  in  the  Lord  Jesus  does  not  only  mean  trusting  in  him  ; 
it  includes  our  yielding  ourselves  up  to  him  to  receive  his  life,  and 
to  let  that  life  work  out  its  results  in  us.  We  live  in  him,  by  him,  for 
him,  to  him,  when  we  abide  in  him.  We  feel  that  all  our  separate  life 
has  gone :  for  "  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ."  We 
are  nothing  if  we  get  away  from  Jesus ;  we  should  then  be  branches 
withered,  and  fit  only  to  be  cast  into  the  fire.  We  have  no  reason  for 
existence  except  that  which  we  find  in  Christ ;  and  what  a  marvellous- 
reason  that  is !  The  vine  needs  the  branch  as  truly  as  the  branch 
needs  the  vine.  No  vine  ever  bore  any  fruit  except  upon  its  branches. 
Truly  it  bears  all  the  branches,  and  so  bears  all  the  fruit ;  but  yet  it  is. 
by  the  branch  that  the  vine  displays  its  fruitfulness.  Thus  are  abiding 
believers  needful  to  the  fulfilment  of  their  Lord's  design.  Wonderful 
thing  to  say ;  but  the  saints  are  needful  to  their  Saviour !  The  church, 
is  his  body ;  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all.  I  want  you  ta 
recognize  this,  that  you  may  see  your  blessed  responsibility,  your  prac 
tical  obligation  to  bring  forth  fruit,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  may  be  glorified 
in  you.  Abide  in  him.  Never  remove  from  your  consecration  to  his- 
honour  and  glory.  Never  dream  of  being  your  own  master.  Be  not  the- 
servant  of  men,  but  abide  in  Christ.  Let  him  be  the  object,  as  well  a* 
the  source,  of  your  existence.  Oh,  if  you  get  there,  and  stop  there  in 
perpetual  communion  with  your  Lord,  you  will  soon  realize  a  joy,  a 
delight,  a  power  in  prayer,  such  as  you  never  knew  before.  There 
are  times  when  we  are  conscious  that  we  are  in  Christ,  and  we  know 
our  fellowship  with  him;  and  oh,  the  joy  and  the  peace  which  we  drink 
from  this  cup!  Let  us  abide  there.  " Abide  in  me,"  saith  Jesus. 
You  are  not  to  come  and  go,  but  to  abide.  Let  that  blessed  sinking 
of  yourself  into  his  life,  the  spending  of  all  your  powers  for  Jesus,  and^ 
the  firm  faith  of  your  union  with  him  remain  in  you  evermore.  Oh,, 
that  we  might  attain  to  this  by  the  Holy  Grhost ! 

As  if  to  help  us  to  understand  this,  our  gracious  Lord  has  given 
us  a  delightful  parable.  Let  us  look  through  this  discourse  of  the 
vine  and  its  branches.  Jesus  says,  "Every  branch  in  me  that  bear  eth 
fruit,  he  purgeth  it."  Take  care  that  you  abide  in  Christ  when  you  are 
being  purged.  "Oh,"  says  one,  "I  thought  I  was  a  Christian;  but> 
alas !  I  have  more  troubles  than  ever :  men  ridicule  me,  the  devil 
tempts  me,  and  my  business  affairs  go  wrong."  Brother,  if  you  are- 
to  have  power  in  prayer  you  must  take  care  that  you  abide  in  Christ. 
when  the  sharp  knife  is  cutting  everything  away.  Endure  trial,  and 
never  dream  of  giving  up  your  faith  because  of  it.  Say,  "  Though  he 
slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him."  Your  Lord  warned  you  when  you 
first  came  into  the  vine  that  you  would  have  to  be  purged  and  cut 
closely;  and  if  you  are  now  feeling  the  purging  process,  you  must 
not  think  that  some  strange  thing  hath  happened  unto  you.  Rebel 
not  because  of  anything  you  may  have  to  suffer  from  the  dear  hand  of 
your  heavenly  Father,  who  is  the  husbandman  of  the  vineyard.  No, 
but  cling  to  Jesus  all  the  more  closely.  Say,  "  Cut,  Lord,  cut  to  the 
quick  if  thou  wilt ;  but  I  will  cling  to  thee.  To  whom  should  we  go  ? 
Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  Hfe."  Yes,  cling  to  Jesus  when  the> 


THE    SECRET   OF    POWER   IN    PRAYER.  581 

purging  knife  is  in  his  hand,  and  so  "  shall  ye  ask  what  ye  will,  and 
it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

Tcike  care,  also,  that  when  the  purging  operation  has  been  carried  out 
you  still  cleave  to  your  Lord.  Notice  the  third  verse:  "Now  ye  are 
•clean  through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you.  Abide  in  me, 
and  I  in  you."  Abide  after  cleansing  where  you  were  before  cleansing. 
When  you  are  sanctified,  abide  where  you  were  when  first  justified. 
When  you  see  the  work  of  the  Spirit  increasing  in  you,  do  not 
let  the  devil  tempt  you  to  boast  that  now  you  are  somebody,  and  need 
not  come  to  Jesus  as  a  poor  sinner,  and  rest  in  his  precious  blood  alone 
ior  salvation.  Abide  still  in  Jesus.  As  you  kept  to  him  when  the 
knife  cut  you,  keep  to  him  now  that  the  tender  grapes  begin  to  form. 
Do  not  say  to  yourself,  "  What  a  fruitful  branch  I  am !  How  greatly 
I  adorn  the  vine !  Now  I  am  full  of  vigour !  "  You  are  nothing  and 
nobody.  Only  as  you  abide  in  Christ  are  you  one  whit  better  than 
the  waste  wood  which  is  burned  in  the  fire.  "But  do  we  not  make 
progress  ?  "  Yes,  we  grow,  but  we  abide  :  we  never  go  an  inch  fur 
ther,  we  abide  in  him  ;  or,  if  not,  we  are  cast  forth,  and  are  withered. 
Our  whole  hope  lies  in  Jesus  at  our  best  times  as  well  as  at  our  worst. 
Jesus  saith,  "  No  wye  are  clean  through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken 
unto  you.  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you." 

Abide  in  him  as  to  all  your  fruitfulness.  "  As  the  branch  cannot  bear 
fruit  of  itself  except  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye 
abide  in  me."  "Here,  then,  I  have  something  to  do,"  cries  one. 
Certainly  you  have,  but  not  apart  from  Jesus.  The  branch  has  to 
bear  fruit ;  but  if  the  branch  imagines  that  it  is  going  to  produce  a 
cluster,  or  even  a  grape,  out  of  itself  alone,  it  is  utterly  mistaken. 
The  fruit  of  the  branch  must  come  forth  of  the  stem.  Your  work  for 
Christ  must  be  Christ's  work  in  you,  or  else  it  will  be  good  for  nothing. 
I  pray  you,  see  to  this.  Your  Sunday-school  teaching,  your  preaching, 
or  whatever  you  do,  must  be  done  in  Christ  Jesus.  Not  by  your 
natural  talent  can  you  win  souls,  nor  by  plans  of  your  own  inventing 
-can  you  save  men.  Beware  of  home-made  schemes.  Do  for  Jesus 
what  Jesus  bids  you  do.  Remember  that  our  work  for  Christ,  as  we 
•call  it,  must  be  Christ's  work  first,  if  it  is  to  be  accepted  of  him.  Abide 
in  him  as  to  your  fruit-bearing. 

Yea,  abide  in  him  as  to  your  very  life.  Do  not  say,  "  I  have  been  a 
•Christian  man  now  twenty  or  thirty  years,  I  can  do  without  continued 
-dependence  upon  Christ."  No,  you  could  not  do  without  him  if  you 
Trere  as  old  as  Methuselah.  Your  very  being  as  a  Christian  depends 
upon  your  still  clinging,  still  trusting,  still  depending ;  and  this  he 
must  give  you,  for  it  all  comes  from  him,  and  him  alone.  To  sum  it 
-all  up,  if  you  want  that  splendid  power  in  prayer  of  which  I  spoke 
just  now,  you  must  remain  in  loving,  living,  lasting,  conscious, 
practical,  abiding  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  you  get  to 
that  by  divine  grace,  then  you  shall  ask  what  you  will,  and  it  shall  be 

/done  unto  you. 

j  But  there  is  a  second  qualification  mentioned  in-  the  text,  and  you 
must  not  forget  it — "and  my  words  abide  in  you."  How  important, 
then,  are  Christ's  words  !  He  said  in  the  fourth  verse,  "Abide  in,  me, 
and  I  in  you,"  and  now  as  a  parallel  to  this  it  is,  "  If  ye>  abide  in  ine, 


582  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

and  my  words  abide  in  you."  "What,  then,  are  Christ's  words  and 
himself  identical  ?  Yes,  practically  so.  Some  talk  about  Christ  being1, 
the  Master,  but  as  to  doctrine,  they  do  not  care  what  his  word  declares. 
So  long  as  their  hearts  are  right  towards  his  person  they  claim  liberty 
of  thought.  Ay,  but  this  is  a  mere  subterfuge.  We  cannot  separate 
Christ  from  the  Word ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  he  is  the  Word ;  and, 
in  the  next  place,  how  dare  we  call  him  Master  and  Lord  and  do  not 
the  things  which  he  says,  and  reject  the  truth  which  he  teaches  ?  We- 
must  obey  his  precepts  or  he  will  not  accept  us  as  disciples.  Espe 
cially  that  precept  of  love  which  is  the  essence  of  all  his  words.  We- 
must  love  God  and  our  brethren;  yea,  we  must  cherish  love  to  all 
men,  and  seek  their  good.  Anger  and  malice  must  be  far  from  us. 
We  must  walk  even  as  he  walked.  If  Christ's  words  abide  not  ins 
thee,  both  as  to  belief  and  practice,  thou  art  not  in  Christ.  Christ  and 
his  gospel  and  his  commands  are  one.  If  thou  wilt  not  have  Christ  and 
his  words,  neither  will  he  have  thee  nor  thy  words ;  but  thou  shalt 
ask  in  vain,  thou  shalt  by-and-by  give  up  asking,  thou  shalt  become 
as  a  withered  branch.  Beloved,  I  am  persuaded  better  things  of  you,, 
and  things  that  accompany  salvation,  though  I  thus  speak. 

Oh  for  grace  to  pass  through  these  two-leaved  gates,  these  two- 
golden  doors!  "If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you." 
Push  through  the  two,  and  enter  into  this  large  room — "  Ye  shall  ask 
what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

III.  It  is  my  last  work  to  try  to  show  WHY  THIS  PRIVILEGE  SHOULD* 
BE  so  OBTAINED.  This  extraordinary  power  of  prayer,  why  is  it  given 
to  those  who  abide  in  Christ  ?  May  what  I  have  to  say  encourage  you 
to  make  the  glorious  attempt  to  win  this  pearl  of  great  price !  Why 
is  it,  that  by  abiding  in  Christ,  and  having  his  words  abide  in  us,  we- 
get  to  this  liberty  and  prevalence  in  prayer  ? 

I  answer,  first,  because  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  You  may  very  well 
ask  what  you  will  when  you  abide  in  Christ,  because  whatsoever  you 
may  require  is  already  lodged  in  him.  Good  Bishop  Hall  worked  out 
this  thought  in  a  famous  passage.  I  will  give  you  the  substance  of  it. 
Do  you  desire  the  grace  of  the  Spirit?  Go  to  your  Lord's  anointing. 
Do  you  seek  holiness  ?  Go  to  his  example.  Do  you  desire  pardon  of 
sin  ?  Look  to  his  blood.  Do  you  need  mortification  of  sin  ?  Look  to* 
his  crucifixion.  Do  you  need  to  be  buried  to  the  world?  Go  to  his. 
tomb.  Do  you  want  to  feel  the  fulness  of  a  heavenly  life  ?  Behold 
his  resurrection.  Would  you  rip,e  above  the  world?  Mark  his 
ascension.  Would  you  contemplate  heavenly  things  ?  Remember  his. 
session  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  know  that,  he  "  hath  raised  us  up 
together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places."  I  see  clearly 
enough  why  the  branch  gets  all  it  wants  while  it  abides  in  the  stem, 
since  all  it  wants  is  already  in  the  stem,  and  is  placed  there  for  the- 
sake  of  the  branch.  What  does  the  branch  want  more  than  the  stem 
can  give  it  ?  If  it  did  want  more  it  could  not  get  it ;  for  it  has  no 
other  means  of  living  but  by  sucking  its  life  out  of  the  stem.  0  my 
precious  Lord,  if  I  want  anything  which  is  not  in  thee,  I  desire  always 
to  be  without  it.  I  desire  to  be  denied  a  wish  which  wanders  outside 
of  thyself.  But  if  the  supply  of  my  desire  is  already  in  thee  for  me,. 
should  I  go  elsewhere  ?  Thou  art  my  all ;  where  else  should  I 


THE    SECRET    OF    POWER    IN    PRAYER.  583 

look?  Beloved,  " it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness 
dwell,"  and  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father  is  our  good  pleasure  also: 
WQ  are  glad  to  draw  everything  from  Jesus.  We  feel  sure  that,  ask 
wnat  we  will,  we  shall  have  it,  since  he  has  it  ready  for  us. 

The  next  reason  for  this  is,  the  richness  of  the  Word  of  God.  Catch 
this  thought,  "If  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will, 
and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  The  best  praying  man  is  the  man 
who  is  most  believingly  familiar  with  the  promises  of  God.  After  all, 
prayer  is  nothing  but  taking  God's  promises  to  him,  and  saying  to 
him,  "Do  as  thou  hast  said."  Prayer  is  the  promise  utilized.  A 
prayer  which  is  not  based  on  a  promise  has  no  true  foundation.  If  I 
go  to  the  bank  without  a  cheque  I  need  not  expect  to  get  money ;  it  ie 
the  "order  to  pay"  which  is  my  power  inside  the  bank,  and  my 
warrant  for  expecting  to  receive.  You  that  have  Christ's  words  abiding 
in  you  are  equipped  with  those  things  which  the  Lord  regards  with 
attention.  If  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  you  are  the  man  that 
can  pray,  because  you  meet  the  great  God  with  his  own  words,  and 
thus  overcome  omnipotence  with  omnipotence.  You  put  your  finger 
down  upon  the  very  lines,  and  say,  "  Do  as  thou  has*  said."  This  is 
the  best  praying  in  all  the  world.  0  beloved,  be  n.ied  with  God's 
Word.  Study  what  Jesus  has  said,  what  the  Holy  Ghost  has  left  on 
record  in  this  divinely-inspired  Book,  and  in  proportion  as  you  feed 
on  the  Word,  and  are  filled  with  the  Word,  and  retain  the  Word  in 
your  faith,  and  obey  the  Word  in  your  life — in  that  proportion  you 
will  be  a  master-man  in  the  art  of  prayer.  You  have  acquired  skill  as  a 
wrestler  with  the  covenant  angel  in  proportion  as  you  can  plead  the 
promises  of  your  faithful  God.  Be  well  instructed  in  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  and  let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly,  that  you  may 
know  how  to  prevail  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Abiding  in  Christ,  and 
his  words  abiding  in  you,  are  like  the  right  hand  and  the  left  hand  of 
Moses,  which  were  held  up  in  prayer,  so.  that  Anialek  was  smitten, 
Israel  was  delivered,  and  God  was  glorified. 

Let  us  go  a  little  further :  you  still  may  say  you  do  not  quite  see 
why  a  man  who  abides  in  Christ,  and  in  whom  Christ's  words  abide, 
should  be  allowed  to  ask  whatever  he  wills,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto- 
him.  I  answer  you  again :  it  is  so,  because  in  such  a  man  as  that 
there  is  a  predominance  of  grace  which  causes  him  to  have  a  renewed  ivill^ 
which  is  according  to  the  will  of  God.  Suppose  a  man  of  God  is  in 
prayer,  and  he  thinks  that  such  and  such  a  thing  is  desirable,  yet  he 
remembers  that  he  is  nothing  but  a  babe  in  the  presence  of  his  all- 
wise  Father,  and  so  he  bows  his  will,  and  asks  as  a  favour  to  be  taught 
what  to  will.  Though  God  bids  him  ask  what  he  wills,  he  shrinks  and 
cries,  "  My  Lord,  here  is  a  request  which  I  am  not  quite  clear  about. 
As  far  as  I  can  judge,  it  is  a  desirable  thing,  and  I  will  it ;  but,  Lord, 
I  am  not  fit  to  judge  for  myself,  and  therefore  I  pray  thee,  give  not  as 
I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Do  you  not  see  that,  when  we  are  in  such  a 
condition  as  this,  our  real  will  is  God's  will.  Deep  down  in  our  hearts 
we  will  only  that  which  the  Lord  himself  wills ;  and  what  is  this  but 
to  ask  what  we  will,  and  it  is  done  to  us  ?  It  becomes  safe  for  God 
to  say  to  the  sanctified  soul,  "Ask  what  thou  wilt,  and  it  shal] 
be  done  unto  thee."  The  heavenly  instincts  of  that  man  lead  him 


684  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

right ;  the  grace  that  is  within  his  soul  thrusts  down  all  covetous  lust- 
ings  and  foul  desires,  and  his  will  is  the  actual  shadow  of  God's  will. 
The  spiritual  life  is  master  in  him,  and  so  his  aspirations  are  holy, 
heavenly,  Godlike.  He  has  been  made  a  partaker  of  the  divine 
nature ;  and  as  a  son  is  like  his  father,  so  now  in  desire  and  will  he  is 
"one  with  his  Q-od.  As  the  echo  answers  to  the  voice,  so  does  the 
renewed  heart  echo  the  mind  of  the  Lord.  Our  desires  are  reflected 
beams  of  the  divine  will :  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be 
even  so. 

You  clearly  see  that  the  holy  God  cannot  pick  up  a  common  man  in 
the  street,  and  say  to  him,  "  I  will  give  you  whatsoever  you  will." 
"What  would  he  ask  for  ?  He  would  ask  for  a  good  drink,  or  per 
mission  to  enjoy  himself  in  evil  lust.  It  would  be  very  unsafe  to 
trust  the  most  of  men  with  this  permit.  But  when  the  Lord  has  taken 
a  man,  and  has  new-made  him,  has  quickened  him  into  newness  of 
life,  and  has  formed  him  in  the  image  of  his  dear  Son,  then  he  can 
trust  him !  Behold,  the  great  Father  treats  us  in  our  measure  as  he  treats 
his  Firstborn.  Jesus  could  say,  "  I  know  that  thou  hearest  me  always  "  ; 
and  the  Lord  is  educating  us  to  the  selfsame  assurance.  We  can  say 
with  one  of  old,  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  Do  not  your  mouths  water 
for  this  privilege  of  prevailing  prayer  ?  Do  not  your  hearts  long  to 
get  at  this  ?  It  is  by  the  way  of  holiness,  it  is  by  the  way  of  union 
to  Christ,  it  is  by  the  way  of  a  permanent  abiding  in  him,  and  an 
obedient  holding  fast  of  his  truth,  that  you  are  to  come  to  this 
privilege.  Behold  the  only  safe  and  true  way.  When  once  that  way 
is  really  trodden,  it  is  a  most  sure  and  effectual  way  of  gaining 
substantial  power  in  prayer. 

I  have  not  quite  done.  A  man  will  succeed  in  prayer  when  his  faith 
is  strong ;  and  this  is  the  case  with  those  who  abide  in  Jesus.  It  is 
faith  that  prevails  in  prayer.  The  real  eloquence  of  prayer  is  a  be 
lieving  desire.  "  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."  A 
man  abiding  in  Christ  with  Christ's  words  abiding  in  him,  is  eminently 
a  believer,  and  consequently  eminently  successful  in  prayer.  He  has 
strong  faith  indeed,  for  his  faith  has  brought  him  into  vital  contact  with 
Christ,  and  he  is  therefore  at  the  source  of  every  blessing,  and  may 
drink  to  his  full  at  the  well  itself. 

Such  a  man,  once  more,  will  also  possess  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  If  we  abide  in  Christ,  and  his  words  abide  in  us,  then  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  come  and  taken  up  his  residence  in  us  ;  and  what 
better  help  in  prayer  can  we  have  ?  Is  it  not  a  wonderful  thing  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  himself  maketh  intercession  in  the  saints  according  to 
the  will  of  God?  He  "maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings 
that  cannot  be  uttered."  .What  man  knoweth  the  mind  of  a  man  save 
the  spirit  of  a  man  ?  The  Spirit  of  God  knows  the  mind  of  God,  and 
he  works  in  us  to  will  what  God  wills,  so  that  a  believing  man's 
prayer  is  God's  purpose  reflected  in  the  soul  as  in  a  mirror.  The 
eternal  decrees  of  God  project  their  shadows  over  the  hearts  of  godly 
men  in  the  form  of  prayer.  What  God  intends  to  do  he  tells  unto  his 
servants  by  inclining  them  to  ask  him  to  do  what  he  himself  is 
resolved  to  do.  God  says,  "  I  will  do  this  and  that  "  ;  but  then  he 
adds,  "For  this  will  I  bo  enquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel  to  do  it 


THB    SECRET    OF    POWER    IN    PRAYER.  585 

for  them."  How  clear  it  is  that  if  we  abide  in  Christ,  and  his  worda 
abide  in  us,  wo  may  ask  what  we  will !  For  we  shall  only  ask  what 
the  Spirit  of  God  moves  us  to  ask;  and  it  were  impossible  that  God 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  God  the  Father  should  be  at  cross-purposes  with 
one  another.  What  the  one  prompts  us  to  ask,  the  other  has  assuredly 
determined  to  bestow. 

I  struck  out  a  line  just  now  to  which  I  must  return  for  a  single 
moment.  Beloved,  do  you  not  know  that  when  we  abide  in  Christ, 
and  his  words  abide  in  us,  the  Father  looks  upon  us  with  the  same 
eye  with  which  he  looks  upon  his  dear  Son  ?  Christ  is  the  vine,  and 
the  vine  includes  the  branches.  The  branches  are  a  part  of  the  vine. 
God,  therefore,  looks  upon  us  as  part  of  Christ — members  of  his  body, 
•of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.  Such  is  the  Father's  love  to  Jesus  that 
he  denies  him  nothing.  He  was  obedient  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
<jross ;  therefore  doth  his  Father  love  him,  as  the  God-man  Mediator, 
and  he  will  grant  him  all  his  petitions.  And  is  it  so,  that  when  you 
and  I  are  in  real  union  to  Christ,  the  Lord  God  looks  upon  us  in  the 
same  way  as  he  looks  on  Jesus,  and  says  to  us,  "  I  will  deny  you 
nothing;  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you  "  ? 
So  do  I  understand  the  text. 

I  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  that  fifteenth  chapter,  the 
ninth  verse,  which  I  did  not  read  this  morning,  runs  thus: — "  As  the 
Father  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I  loved  you."  The  same  love  which  God 
gives  to  his  Son,  the  Son  gives  to  us;  and  therefore  we  are  dwellers  in 
the  love  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son.  How  can  our  prayers  be 
rejected?  Will  not  infinite  love  have  respect  unto  our  petitions ?  0 
dear  brother  in  Christ,  if  thy  prayers  speed  not  at  the  throne,  suspect 
that  there  is  some  sin  that  hinders  them :  thy  Father's  love  sees  a 
necessity  for  chastening  thee  this  way.  If  thou  dost  not  abide  in 
Christ,  how  canst  thou  hope  to  pray  successfully  ?  If  thou  dost  pick 
and  choose  his  words,  and  doubt  this,  and  doubt  that,  how  canst  thou 
hope  to  speed  at  the  throne  ?  If  thou  art  wilfully  disobedient  to  any 
one  of  his  words,  will  not  this  account  for  failure  in  prayer  ?  But 
abide  thou  in  Christ,  and  take  fast  hold  upon  his  words,  and  be 
altogether  his  disciple,  then  shalt  thou  be  heard  of  him.  Sitting  at 
Josus'  feet,  hearing  his  words,  thou  mayest  lift  up  thine  eyes  to  his 
-dear  face,  and  say,  "  My  Lord,  hear  me  now  ";  and  he  will  answer 
thee  graciously:  he  will  say  unto  thee,  "  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time 
accepted,  and  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I  succoured  thee.  Ask 
what  thou  wilt,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  Oh  for  power  at  the 
mercy-seat ! 

Beloved  friends,  do  not  hear  this  sermon,  and  then  go  away  and 
forget  it.  Do  try  to  reach  this  place  of  boundless  influence.  What  a 
•church  we  should  be,  if  you  were  all  mighty  in  prayer !  Dear  children 
of  God,  do  you  want  to  be  half  starved  ?  Beloved  brethren,  do  you 
desire  to  be  poor,  little,  puny,  drivelling  children,  who  will  never  grow 
into  men?  I  pray  you,  aspire  to  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  to  enjoy 
this  exceedingly  high  privilege.  What  an  army  would  you  be  if  you 
all  had  this  power  with  God  in  prayer !  It  is  within  your  reach,  ye 
children  of  God !  Only  abide  in  Christ,  and  let  his  words  abide  in 
you,  and  then  this  special  privilege  will  be  yours.  These  are  not 


586  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

irksome  duties,  but  they  are  in  themselves  a  joy.  Go  iu  for  them  with 
your  whole  heart,  and  then  you  shall  get  this  added  to  you,  that  you 
shall  ask  what  you  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you. 

Unhappily,  to  a  portion  of  this  congregation  my  text  says  nothing 
at  all ;  for  some  of  you  are  not  even  in  Christ,  and  therefore  you  cannot 
abide  in  him.  0  sirs,  what  shall  I  say  to  you  ?  You  seem  to  me  to 
miss  a  very  heaven  even  now.  If  there  were  no  hell  hereafter,  it  is 
hell  enough  not  to  know  Christ  now,  not  to  know  what  it  is  to  prevail 
with  God  in  prayer,  not  to  know  the  choice  privilege  of  abiding  in  him, 
and  his  words  abiding  in  you.  Your  first  matter  is  that  you  believe 
in  Jesus  Christ  to  the  saving  of  your  souls,  yielding  your  souls  to  his 
cleansing,  your  lives  to  his  government.  God  hath  sent  him  forth 
as  a  Saviour,  accept  him.  Receive  him  as  your  Teacher ;  yield  your 
self  up  to  him  as  your  Master.  May  his  gracious  Spirit  come  and  do 
this  work  upon  you  now  ;  and  then,  after  this,  but  not  before,  you  may 
aspire  to  this  honour.  First  of  all — "Ye  must  be  born  again."  I 
cannot  say  to  you  as  you  are  now,  "Grow,"  because  you  will  only 
grow  a  bigger  sinner.  However  much  you  may  be  developed,  you 
will  only  develop  what  is  in  you :  and  that  is,  the  heir  of  wrath 
will  become  more  and  more  the  child  of  evil.  You  must  be  made 
anew  in  Christ :  there  must  be  an  absolute  change,  a  reversal  of  all 
the  currents  of  nature,  a  making  you  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus  ; 
and  then  you  may  aspire  to  abide  in  Christ,  and  let  his  words  abide 
in  you,  and  the  consequent  prevalence  with  God  in  prayer  shall  be 
yours. 

Gracious  Lord,  help  us  this  morning.  Poor  creatures  as  we  are,  we 
can  only  lie  at  thy  feet.  Come  thyself,  and  uplift  us  to  thyself,  for  thy 
mercy's  sake  !  Amen. 


PORTIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — John  xv.  1 — 8; 

1  John  ii. 


HYMNS  FROM  "OuR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK"— 103  (Vers.  III.),  761,  800. 


JJtoplifcm  35; 


THE   CANDLE. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  APRIL  24TH,  1881,  BT 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   TUB   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


•'  Neither  do  men  light  a  caudle,  and  put  it  under  a  bushel,  but  on  a  candlestick ;  and 
it  giveth  light  unto  all  that  are  in  the  house.  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that 
they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." — Matthew 
v.  15,  16. 

OUR  Saviour  was  speaking  of  the  influence  of  his  disciples  upon  their 
fellows,  and  he  first  of  all  mentioned  that  secret  but  powerful  influence 
which  he  describes  under  the  figure  of  salt:  "Ye  are  the  salt  of  the 
earth."  No  sooner  is  a  man  born  unto  God  than  he  begins  to  affect  his- 
fellow-men  with  an  influence  which  is  rather  felt  than  seen.  The  very 
existence  of  a  believer  operates  upon  unbelievers.  He  is  like  a  handful 
of  salt  cast  upon  flesh;  he  has  a  savour  in  himself,  and  this  begins  to 
pe  uetrate  those  who  are  in  contact  with  him.  The  unobserved,  and 
almost  unconscious  influence  of  a  holy  life  is  most  effectual  to  the  con 
serving  of  society  and  the  prevention  of  moral  putrefaction.  May  there 
be  salt  in  every  one  of  us,  for  "  salt  is  good."  Have  salt  in  yourselves,, 
and  then  you  will  become  a  blessing  to  all  around  you. 

But  there  is  about  every  true  Christian  a  manifest  and  visible  influence 
which  he  is  bound  to  exercise,  and  this  our  Lord  sets  forth  under  the 
figure  of  light:  "Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world.  A  city  that  is  set  on 
an  hill  cannot  be  hid."  In  any  case  the  genuine  Christian  will  exercise 
the  silent  and  unseen  salting  influence  upon  those  who  come  into  im 
mediate  contact  with  him.  ;  but  let  him  also  labour  to  possess  the 
second,  or  illuminating  influence,  which  covers  a  far  larger  area,  and 
deals  more  with  real  life ;  for  salt  is  for  dead  flesh,  and  light  for  living 
men.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good 
works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Saltness  and  light 
are  the  power  of  a  Christian.  I  do  not  believe  that  any  man  will  give 
forth  light  if  he  has  not  first  received  salt ;  and  yet  some  have  a  measure 
of  salt  who  are  none  too  liberal  with  their  light.  May  God  grant  us 
grace  to  balance  the  inward  and  the  outward.  May  we  have  the  con 
serving  salt  and  the  diffusive  light.  Our  thoughts  will  now  run  towards- 
light-giving,  and  I  pray  that  I  maybe  helped  to  move  the  more  retiring 
and  less  active  among  us  to  exert  their  influence  upon  others  to  a  greater 
Nos.  1.5U  53 


218  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

extent ;  to  crown  the  silent  testimonies  of  their  humble  faith  by  an  out 
spoken  witness-bearing  for  their  Lord  and  Saviour.  All  who  have  salt 
will  now  be  urged  to  show  their  light. 

The  figure  which  our  Saviour  uses  is  a  homely  one,  borrowed  from 
the  eastern  tent  and  house.  He  speaks  of  a  candle,  or,  more  accurately, 
of  a  lamp.  We  should  read  the  passage — "  Neither  do  men  light  a  lamp 
and  put  it  under  the  bushel,  but  on  the  lampstand,  and  it  giveth  light 
unto  all  that  are  in  the  house."  I  shall  use  the  figure  both  in  its 
eastern  and  in  its  western  dress,  and  sometimes  we  will  make  a  lamp  of 
it  and  sometimes  a  candle.  Perhaps  we  shall  see  all  the  better  with  both 
a  lamp  and  a  candle ;  and,  though  we  may  confuse  the  metaphor,  we  shall 
not  confuse  anybody's  mind  upon  the  important  truth  which  it  sets  forth. 

Three  things  are  in  the  text.  The  first  is  the  lighting,  the  second 
is  the  placing,  and  the  third  is  the  shining.  The  first  two  are  both 
intended  to  produce  the  third.  May  he  who  alone  can  create  light  illu 
minate  our  minds  while  dwelling  on  his  word. 

I.  First  let  us  consider  THE  LIGHTING.  "  Neither  do  men  light  a 
candle."  What  is  this  lighting  up  of  the  souls  of  men  ?  They  are  with 
out  light  by  nature,  "having  the  understanding  darkened,  being  alienated 
from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  them."  What, 
then,  is  this  lighting  ? 

It  is,  first  of  all,  a  divine  work.  God  began  his  creating  work  of  old 
by  saying,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and  there  was  light.  And  as  in  the  old 
creation  so  in  the  new,  the  first  thing  that  God  worketh  in  the  heart  of 
man  is  light:  "the  entrance  of  thy  word  giveth  light."  Well  said 
David,  "  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation."  The  Holy  Spirit  en 
lightens  the  understanding,  so  that  the  man  perceives  the  desperateness 
of  his  own  condition,  and  his  inability  to  win  salvation  by  his  own 
works.  The  Lord  pours  light  into  the  soul,  so  that  Christ  is  seen  by 
faith,  and  at  the  sight  of  him  the  heart  catches  fire,  and  light  takes 
hold  upon  the  inner  man,  so  that  he  not  only  sees  light  but  has  light. 
The  light  not  only  shines  upon  the  heart  but  from  the  heart.  "  Ye  were 
sometime  darkness," — not  only  in  the  dark,  but  darkness, — "but  now 
are  ye  light  in  the  Lord":  not  only  have  ye  light  from  the  Lord,  but 
ye  are  light,  your  souls  having  caught  the  flame.  The  Holy  Spirit  alone 
can  accomplish  this  work.  No  human  being  will  ever  have  light  within 
himself  till  God  who  spoke  the  fiat  at  creation  shall  by  the  selfsame  word 
•create  light  in  the  soul.  The  apostle  Paul  says  of  all  the  saints,  "  God, 
who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our 
hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ." 

This  lighting  is  a  separating  work.  When  this  light  comes  it 
separates  a  man  from  those  around  him  who  are  as  the  darkness.  It 
does  not  take  him  away  from  his  surroundings,  it  does  not  shut  him  up 
in  a  monastery,  but  the  separation  is  complete ;  for  to  set  a  division 
between  a  candle  and  the  darkness  all  that  is  wanted  is  to  light  it.  The 
tiniest  spark  will  by  its  very  existence  be  distinguished  from  the  dark 
ness.  There  is  no  need  to  label  light  to  prevent  its  being  confounded 
with  the  darkness,  and  there  is  no  need  for  it  to  sound  a  trumpet  before 
itself,  saying,  "  Here  am  I,"  What  fellowship  hath  light  with  darkness  ? 
No  sooner  cometli  the  light  into  a  man's  heart  than  he  is  separate  from 


THE   CANDLE.  21  if 

those  who  are  round  about  him,  called  by  the  grace  of  God  by  a 
vocation  which  at  once  sets  a  difference  between  the  called  ones  and  the 
rest  of  the  sons  of  men.  The  darkness  could  not  have  created  the  light, 
for  it  does  not  even  comprehend  it,  "  the  light  shineth  in  darkness ;  and 
the  darkness  comprehended  it  not."  Those  that  are  round  about  the 
Christian  man  cannot  make  him  out,  for  his  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God.  At  his  conversion  they  perceive  that  a  strange  alteration  had 
come  over  him  ;  and,  as  Dr.  Watts  says,  they  "  gaze  and  admire,  and 
hate  the  change  "  ;  but  they  know  no  more  about  it  than  owls  do  of  the 
sun.  At  first  they  set  the  change  down  to  melancholy,  until  the  man's 
experience  flashes  into  delight,  and  then  they  call  it  fanaticism  or  a  kind 
of  madness,  a  sort  of  twist  of  the  mind.  Oh,  blessed  twist!  Would 
God  that  those  who  know  it  not  could  be  twisted  after  the  same  fashion  ! 
It  is  the  kindling  of  the  candle,  so  that  where  all  was  darkness  before 
there  may  now  be  the  heavenly  light. 

The  darkness,  though  it  does  not  understand  or  love  the  light,  is 
nevertheless  compelled  to  yield  to  it  ;  for  the  battle  between  light  and 
darkness  is  short  and  decisive.  Up  to  the  measure  of  the  light  is  the 
measure  of  its  conquest.  Though  only  a  few  beams  should  irradiate  the 
eastern  sky,  yet  so  far  the  arrows  of  the  sun  have  pierced  the  heart  of  the 
nigiit;  and  as  that  light  shall  glow  into  high  noon  all  trace  of  darkness 
must  fly  before  it.  Beloved,  if  God  has  given  light  to  us,  he  has  put 
within  us  a  principle  that  shall  go  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer. 
Let  the  darkness  be  as  dense  as  that  which  plagued  the  Egyptians,  yet 
must  it  yield  to  light.  A  conflict  is  to  be  expected,  but  a  conquest  is 
guaranteed.  We  must  not  dream  that  the  darkness  will  put  forth  its 
black  arms  to  embrace  our  light ;  nor  may  we  imagine  that  it  will 
come  cowering  at  the  foot  of  our  candlestick  and  ask  to  make  a  league 
with  us.  Light  cannot  dwell  side  by  side  with  the  darkness,  making 
covenant  therewith,  for  it  is  written,  "  God  divided  the  light  from  the 
darkness,  and  God  called  the  light  day,  and  the  darkness  he  called 
night,"  thus  giving  to  each  its  own  distinguishing  name,  that  none 
might  confound  them.  No  man  shall  ever  be  able  to  mingle  the  two : 
they  are  and  must  be  for  ever  distinct.  To  the  end  of  time  there  shall 
be  two  seeds,  the  heirs  of  light  and  the  children  of  darkness,  and  these 
two  cannot  be  one.  The  light  shall  war  with  the  darkness  till  the 
eternal  light  hath  fully  risen  and  reached  its  zenith,  and  then  the  earth 
shall  be  filled  with  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God.  Till  then,  ye  children 
of  light,  see  to  it  that  ye  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of 
darkness.  This  lighting  up  of  the  candle  takes  place  at  regeneration, 
and  you  perceive  it  in  enlightenment,  conviction,  conversion.  The  ques 
tion  is,  have  you  ever  been  lit,  dear  friend?  Have  you  ever  received 
that  divine  light?  Have  you  ever  felt  the  touch  of  the  heavenly  torch 
of  the  word  by  which  light  has  come  to  you,  and  now  dwells  within  you, 
so  that  you  yourself  have  become  a  light,  and  arfe  shining  to  the  glory  of 
God? 

Furthermore,  this  light  giving  is  a  personal  work  to  every  man  who  is 
the  subject  of  it.  The  text  says,  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men/' 
When  a  man  lights  a  candle  the  light  does  not  belong  to  the  candle 
originally ;  but  when  once  the  candle  has  accepted  the  flame  the  light 
becomes  the  candle's  own  light,  and  the  candle  begins  to  shine  by  its  own. 


220  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACI.K    PULPIT. 

light.  So,  beloved,  the  grace  of  God,  the  light  from  heaven,  must  come 
to  each  one  of  us  individually  from  the  divine  hand,  and  we  must 
personally  receive  it.  Light  is  not  inherent  in  any  one  of  us,  and  there 
fore  it  must  be  bestowed.  Its  bestowal  necessitates  a  personal  acceptance. 
It  is  not  bestowed  upon  us  as  part  of  a  nation  or  family.  In  its  en 
lightening  operations  grace  does  not  deal  with  men  in  the  gross,  but 
with  each  man  by  himself.  Sin  is  personal,  and  so  must  grace  be.  We 
are  individually  in  the  darkness,  and  must  be  individually  kindled  into 
light.  One  by  one  each  man  must  accept  the  light,  permitting  it,  as  it 
were,  to  kindle  upon  him,  so  that  the  very  wick  of  his  being,  that  inner 
most  life  which  goes  through  the  very  centre  of  his  nature,  shall  embrace 
the  flame  and  begin  to  burn  with  it.  There  must  be  an  individual 
appropriation  of  the  light,  so  that  to  each  one  of  you  it  becomes  your 
own.  ''Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men."  Do  not  deceive  yourselves 
with  the  notion  of  national  Christianity  or  hereditary  Christianity; 
the  only  true  religion  is  personal  godliness.  We  cannot  light  these 
candles  by  the  pound  at  a  time,  nor  heap  up  lamps  in  a  pile  and  light 
them  in  a  mass.  We  have  nowadays  wonderful  lights,  which  can  be  all 
lit  in  an  instant  by  a  single  touch  of  electricity ;  but  even  then  each  one 
of  the  lights  has  to  receive  a  flame  for  itself,  which  becomes  all  its  own. 
There  is  no  way  by  which  individuality  can  be  destroyed  and  men  saved 
en  masse. 

In  each  man  the  light  is  peculiar  and  distinct.  The  light  that  burns 
in  one  true  minister  of  Christ  is  the  same  which  shines  forth  from  another, 
and  yet  one  star  differeth  from  another  star  in  glory :  Peter  is  not  John, 
Paul  is  not  James,  Whitefield  is  not  Wesley.  You  shall  examine  the 
whole  range  of  God's  lamps  and  candlesticks  and  you  shall  not  find 
two  exactly  alike.  Many  artists  exhaust  themselves  and  then  repeat 
themselves  ;  but  God  is  inexhaustibly  original ;  no  two  touches  of  his 
pencil  are  the  same.  Light  is  one,  and  its  glory  is  one,  and  yet  there  is 
one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another  glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory 
of  the  stars.  There  is  a  difference  in  the  lights  of  various  oils  and  gases, 
and  so  there  is  in  your  light,  my  brother,  and  my  light.  It  is  very  pos 
sible  that  you  would  like  to  put  my  candle  in  order ;  you  may  do  so  if 
you  can,  but  do  not  snuff  me  out.  Your  own  light  is,  however,  your 
main  concern,  and  you  had  better  ask  for  special  grace  that  it  may  not 
fail.  Your  light  is  distinct  from  mine,  as  distinct  as  your  life  is  from 
mine,  though  in  another  sense  it  is  '  -ue  that  your  spiritual  light  is  one 
with  all  the  light  that  ever  shone  in  «nis  world.  There  is  in  the  lighting 
a,  personal  appropriation  of  the  divine  flame,  and  afterwards  a  personal 
and  distinct  sending  forth  of  the  sacred  light  in  the  individual's  own  way. 
Look  ye  well  to  this,  lest  ye  be  mistaken,  and  suppose  yourselves  to  be 
lighted  from  heaven  when  you  are  the  mere  will-o'-the-wisps  of  delusion. 

I  like  our  translators  reading  the  word  candle — '*  Neither  du  men  light 
a  candle,"  for  nowadays  a  candle  is  the  smallest  of  all  lights.  We 
almost  despise  a  candle  in  these  days  of  the  electric  light ;  yet  small 
lights  are  useful,  and  tiny  lamps  have  their  sphere.  God  has  many 
email  lights ;  in  his  great  house  he  has  candles  as  well  as  stars,  and  he 
would  not  have  even  a  small  light  wasted.  Even  the  most  twinkling 
ray  of  light  is  of  God's  kindling :  think  of  that,  you  who  cannot  do 
more  than  talk  to  a  child  or  give  away  a  tract  for  love  of  his  dear  name. 


THE   CAJfDLK.  221 

You  are  a  little  light,  but  if  the  Lord  has  given  you  even  a  spark  of  the 
sacred  tire  he  means  that  you  should  shine.  In  this  world  there  are 
many  lights,  but  none  too  many.  We  could  not  spare  the  sun,  and  it 
would  be  a  calamity  if  the  smallest  star  were  quenched.  We  cannot 
spare  those  modern  inventions  which  so  cheer  us  by  turning  our  city's 
night  into  day ;  but  I  wot  we  should  miss  even  the  glowworm  from 
its  dewy  haunt  in  the  quiet  lane.  We  cannot  aiford  to  lose  a  ray  of 
light  in  this  misty,  foggy,  all-beclouded  sky  of  ours.  The  church 
and  the  world  need  all  the  light  that  has  been  vouchsafed,  and  much 
more.  I,  therefore,  would  press  upon  all  my  brethren  and  siste.rs  here 
who  may  happen  to  have  but  one  talent  the  necessity  of  their  putting  it 
out  to  interest.  Your  light,  my  friend,  may  be  but  a  farthing  rushlight, 
but  you  must  not  hide  it,  for  all  lights  are  of  God,  and  are  sent  with  a 
kind  and  gracious  purpose  by  the  great  Father  of  lights. 

Note  further,  that  lighting  is  a  work  which  needs  sustaining.  Whilst 
lighting  is  a  process  performed  in  a  moment,  it  is  also,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  prolonged  ;  for  the  lamp  needs  to  be  trimmed,  and  it  would  be 
ill  to  light  a  lamp  and  leave  it  to  itself.  The  lamp  must  have  fresh  oil 
from  time  to  time,  since  by  shining  it  consumes  its  fuel.  Do  not  any  of 
you,  therefore,  think  if  you  can  fix  upon  a  certain  time  and  say,  "  I  was 
converted  then,"  that  you  may  live  as  you  like  afterwards.  God 
forbid  !  The  saints  prove  their  conversion  by  their  perseverance,  and 
that  perseverance  comes  from  a  continual  supply  of  divine  grace  to  their 
souls.  Judge  ye,  then,  yourselves  by  this,  not  so  much  whether  on  a 
certain  special  occasion  you  were  turned  from  darkness  to  light,  but  are 
you  still  "  light  in  the  Lord  "  ?  Have  you  oil  in  your  vessels  with  your 
lamps  ?  Are  you  looking  unto  Jesus  ?  It  was  well  that  you  looked  ;  but 
are  you  looking  ?  for  that  is  the  great  thing.  Remember,  it  is  a  present 
business — looking.  It  is  well  that  you  came  to  Jesus,  but  that  is  merely 
the  beginning  ;  it  is  "  to  whom  coining,"  coming  continually,  as  unto  a 
living  stone.  Our  lungs  must  have,  as  we  all  know,  fresh  supplies  of  air. 
It  will  avail  me  nothing  that  I  breathed  yesterday  ;  I  am  dead,  unless 
I  breathe  to-day.  We  must  have  constant  food  :  you  ate  yesterday ;  but 
could  you  without  hunger  and  weakness  go  without  to-day  ?  We  con 
tinually  need  to  be  built  upas  to  our  bodies,  and  it  is  just  the  same  with 
our  souls,  and  if  we  neglect  this,  if  we  fancy  that  something  done  twenty 
years  ago  is  all  that  is  wanted,  we  shall  make  a  great  mistake.  There 
must  be  the  frequent  trimming  of  the  lamp,  which  is,  in  effect,  a  con 
tinuation  of  the  lighting. 

Once  again,  let  me  say  that  this  work  of  lighting  is  a  work  which 
when  it  is  done  upon  a  man  consecrates  him  entirely  to  the  service  of  light 
giving.  A  candle  once  lit,  if  it  continues  alight  will  be  all  consumed  in 
giving  light.  It  is  what  it  was  made  for,  not  to  be  laid  by  in  a  glass 
case  and  looked  at,  but  to  be  burned  away.  Blessed  is  the  man  who 
can  say,  "  My  zeal  hath  consumed  me."  You  will  say  that  in  the  case 
of  the  lamp  the  lamp  itself  is  not  consumed.  No,  but  it  is  conse 
crated  to  the  one  purpose  of  lighting  the  house,  and  it  contains  the 
supply  of  oil  by  which  the  flame  is  fed.  The  whole  of  the  lamp, 
whether  it  be  of  gold  or  silver  or  clay,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  is  dedi 
cated  to  the  one  purpose  of  giving  light :  and  if  God  ever  comes  and 
lights  you,  my  dear  brother,  you  are  henceforth  separated  from  all 


222  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

other  purposes,  and   appointed   to   the   one   calling.     Yoti    may   be   & 
great  many  other  things  according  to  your  human  calling,  but  these 
must  be  subordinate.     I  wish  that  some  men  kept  earthly  things  much- 
more  subordinate  than  they  do.     The  first  thing  in  a  Christian  is  his 
Christianity.     The  chief  business  of  one  whom  God  has  called  is  that  he 
should  live  as  the  elect  of  God.     Look  at  Christ  Jesus,  he  was  a  car 
penter,  but  I  confess  I  seldom  think  of  him  as  such :  it  is  as  the  Saviour 
of  men,  and  the  servant  of  God  that  he  comes  before  my  mind.     Evert 
thus  a  Christian  man  ought  so  to  live  if  he  be  a  carpenter  that  the  Chris 
tian  swallows  up  the  carpenter ;  and  if  he  be  a  business  man,  or  a  man  of 
letters,  or  an  orator,  he  ought  so  to   live  that  the  most  conspicuous  fact 
about  him  is  that  he  is  a  Christian.     He  is  a  lamp,  and  his  one  business 
is  to  shine.     You  may  use  a  candle  for  many  purposes  ;  I  saw  a  man 
grease  a  saw  with  one  the  other  day,  and  another  made  his  boots  fit  for 
walking  in  the  snow  in  like  manner  ;   but  still  these  are  not  the  objects 
for  which  a  candle  is  designed :  it  has  missed  the  object  of  its  existence  if 
it  does  not  give  light.     I  suppose  on  occasions  you  might  use  a  lamp 
for  a  weight,  or  for  some  other  purposes  ;  but  it  would  not  be  the  fib 
instrument  for  any  purpose  except  that  of  giving  light.     Every  thing  is- 
best  when  fulfilling  its  proper  purpose.     Have  you  ever  seen  a  swan  out 
of  water  ?      How  ungainly  is  his  walk !     What  an  uu wieldly  bird  he 
seems  !     But  see  him  on  the  water.     What  a  fine  model  for  a  ship  ! 
What  grace  !     What  beauty  !     So  is  it  with  the  Christian,  his  beauty  is- 
best  seen  in  his  proper  element ;  give  him  any  other  aim  and  he  is. 
awkward  and  uncomely.     When  seeking  to  instruct  and  save  his  fellow 
man,  he  is  where  God  would  have  him,  and  then  all  the  lines  of  creating 
wisdom,  and  all  the  beauties  of  divine  grace  are  manifested    in  him. 
Let  us  take  care  then  about  this  lighting,  that  it  be  lighting  from  above, 
that  it  be  a  lighting  such  as  makes  the  light  our  own,  and  that  it  be  a 
lighting  which  takes  possession  of  us,  and  consecrates  us  entirely,  and  is 
perpetually  sustained  by  the  visitation  of  the  Spirit  of  God.     So  much  on 
that  first  point. 

II.  We  will  now,  in  the  second  place,  consider  THE  PLACING.  "  No- 
man  lighteth  a  candle  and  putteth  it  under  a  bushel."  It  is  a  great 
point  this  placing  of  a  man — it  may  hide  his  light  or  send  it  further 
afield.  The  chief  matter  is  the  lighting  him,  and  getting  him  to  have 
light  to  give  ;  but  the  next  most  important  thing  is  where  to  put  him 
when  he  is  alight.  For  some  men  when  they  first  find  Christ  are  in  the 
wrong  place  altogether.  How  can  a  lamp  shine  if  it  be  dropped  into 
a  river  ?  After  the  conversion  of  certain  persons  their  removal  becomes 
necessary.  It  is  significant  that  when  God  called  Abraham  he  did  not 
let  him  stop  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees:  the  place  for  Abraham  to  shine  was 
not  even  in  Haran ;  but  he  must  get  into  the  chosen  country  and  wander 
as  a  shepherd  prince,  for  only  there  and  in  that  character  could  Abraham 
shine  to  the  glory  of  God.  Most  men  will  be  wise  to  stay  where  they  are 
and  shine ;  but  others  must  undergo  a  great  change  of  position  before 
they  will  be  able  to  scatter  their  light  to  the  extent  which  the  Lord 
intends  for  them.  That  may  account,  my  friend,  for  your  having  more 
trouble  since  you  were  converted  than  you  ever  had  before.  You  have 
been  left  to  lie  still  till  now,  but  you  are  wanted,  and  so  you  are  fetched 
out  from  your  hiding.  It  did  not  matter  where  you  were  when  you 


'HIE  CANDLE. 

gave  no  light,  you  were  just  as  well  behind  a  box  or  in  a  closet  as  any 
where  else :  but  now  that  you  are  lighted  you  must  be  put  on  a  larnp- 
fitand,  and  hence  you  are  undergoing  processes  of  providence  that  are 
aomewhat  painful  to  you.  Our  placing,  whether  it  has  necessitated  re 
moval  or  not,  is  largely  done  by  the  providence  of  God:  one  man  is 
placed  here  and  another  there,  and  it  is  well  for  us  to  look  at  our 
position  from  this  point  of  view.  God  puts  us  where  we  can  best  serve 
his  cause  and  bless  our  age.  If  you  had  your  choice,  perhaps,  if  yon 
had  to  be  a  street  lamp,  you  would  like  to  be  a  lamp  in  Hyde  Park,  to 
chine  upon  the  nobles  who  pass  that  way.  But  the  poor  souls  want 
lights  far  more  down  that  blind  alley,  down  that  den  of  a  court,  where 
wild  Irish  are  quarrelling,  or  drunkards  murdering  their  wives.  He  that 
loves  God,  if  he  had  his  choice,  might  sooner  choose  to  shine  in  the  worse 
place  than  in  the  better.  "  Oh,  that  I  lived  in  the  midst  of  a  warm 
hearted  church  ! "  says  one.  If  you  are  an  earnest,  thorough-going  man, 
lam  glad  that  you  are  placed  in  that  dreary  village  where  the  people  are 
pretty  nearly  starved  for  spiritual  life.  "  What,"  cries  one, "  glad  chat  I 
shave  to  suffer  so  much  ?"  No,  not  for  that,  but  because  if  you  are  a  strong 
man,  you  will  not  suffer,  but  you  will  make  other  people  suffer ;  that  is  to 
say,  make  it  hard  for  the  minister,  and  the  deacons,  and  the  church  to 
remain  in  their  wretched  condition  of  lukewarmness.  I  hope  you  will 
;be  the  means  of  arousing  them,  and  bringing  them  nearer  to  Christ. 
How  often  a  place  which  appears  undesirable  will  become  desirable  if  \ve 
aregard  it  in  this  light.  Providence  puts  us  where  we  can  give  the  most 
.light,  and  if  our  lamp  is  set  up  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  where  else 
•should  it  be  ?  This  Tabernacle  reminds  me  of  those  frames  on  wheels, 
rilled  with  lamps,  which  are  used  at  our  railway  stations ;  here  we  have 
•.Scores  of  lamps  all  burning  together,  and  when  first  one  and  then 
Another  is  dropped  through  the  roof  into  a  carriage  and  whisked  away 
along  the  line,  though  it  be  to  Australia,  or  America,  or  India,  I  am 
sorry  to  lose  you,  but  I  am  glad  that  you  are  going  where  you  will  do 
more  good  than  you  will  do  here.  Why  should  you  not  be  scattered 
abroad  like  the  first  believers  ?  Why  should  not  the  candles  be  carried 
rrhere  the  darkness  is  ?  Why  should  we  keep  up  an  everlasting  illumina 
tion  upon  this  particular  spot,  just  to  gladden  our  own  eyes,  ins'ead  of 
lending  light  to  all  the  world  ?  It  is  ours  to  say  to  others,  "There  is  a 
-candle,  let  it  shine  in  your  houses  "  ;  or,  "  Here  is  a  lamp,  set  it  up  in 
jour  tents,  that  God  may  bless  you  thereby." 

But  though  I  have  thus  spoken  of  Providence,  a  good  deal  of  our 
placing  is  in  our  own  hands.  There  are  ways  of  placing  yourselves — tor 
instance,  that  mentioned  in  the  text,  which  may  be  as  ruinous  to  our 
influence  as  if  a  candle  were  placed  under  a  bushel ;  or  you  can  put 
yourself  in  a  place  of  advantage,  as  when  a  lamp  is  set  upon  a  lamp- 
•stand. 

First,  note  the  word  in  the  negative — "  Neither  do  men  place  it  under 
a  bushel."  A  bushel  is  a  good  and  useful  article.  In  almost  every 
eastern  house  there  was  a  corn-measure,  here  called  a  bushel,  though  it 
did  not  generally  measure  much  more  than  a  peck ;  this  measure  was 
commonly  in  every  house,  because  they  ground  their  own  corn,  and  so 
we're  generally  dealing  with  the  neighbours.  That  useful  corn-measme 
:tc  me  represents  the  pursuits  of  ordinary  life — the  proper  and  natural 

38 


224  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

avocations  of  the  household.  Many  men  and  women  hide  the  candle 
that  God  has  lit  under  the  bushel  of  business  and  domestic  cares.  Bat 
you  ask,  Is  not  a  housewife  to  be  a  housewife  ?  Certainly  ;  but  not  so 
a  housewife  as  to  conceal  her  godliness.  Is  not  the  labouring  man  to- 
work  with  his  hands  ?  Certainly,  but  not  so  to  work  for  the  bread 
that  perisheth  as  to .  miss  life  eternal.  Is  not  the  man  of  business  to- 
give  his  best  attention  thereto  ?  Of  course  he  is,  but  he  must  see  to  it 
that  he  do  not  lose  his  own  soul,  or  injure  the  souls  of  others.  Keep  your 
bushel;  nobody  asks  you  to  burn  it;  but  do  keep  it  in  its  place.  Sub 
ordinate  all  worldly  things  to  the  glory  of  G-od.  Suffer  not  your  pos 
sessions  or  your  desires,  your  pleasures  or  your  cares  to  act  as  a  bushel 
hiding  his  light. .  This  happens  with  a  great  many.  I  must  ask  con 
science  to  be  so  kind  as  to  preach  for  me  for  a  minute  or  two.  Will  you, 
look  at  home,  dear  friends,  and  see  where  you  place  your  business  and 
your  religion  ?  Which  is  uppermost  ?  Which  is  foremost  ?  Is  religion 
your  business,  or  is  business  your  religion  ?  Does  your  candle  shine  upon 
the  bushel,  or  does  the  bushel  hide  the  candle  ?  I  will  not  dwell  upon  the 
question,  because  it  will  be  well  for  you  to  answer  it  in  quiet,  each  man 
for  himself.  I  know  how  a  minister  can  put  his  light  under  a  bushel — 
he  can  be  a  mere  official  and  perform  service,  being  nothing  more  than  3 
performer.  The  worst  thing  to  do  with  the  gospel  is  to  parson ificate  it. 
As  soon  as  we  preach  as  mere  officials  we  have  lost  all  power:  we 
must  speak  as  men  to  men.  A  brother  minister  one  day  said  to  me, 
"The  moment  I  shut  the  pulpit  door  I  shut  out  my  natural  self."  This 
will  never  do :  a  man  must  be  all  there  when  he  is  serving  God,  and  if 
ever  he  is  himself  it  must  be  in  preaching.  We  can  also  cover  the  candle 
by  using  hard  words,  words  which  are  not  hard  to  educated  people,  but 
to  the  bulk  of  our  hearers.  We  can  also  use  technical  creed  words,, 
such  as  we  might  use  in  the  class  room  or  in  the  discussion  hall,  and 
these  may  conceal  our  meaning  from  the  people.  I  know  some  Chris 
tians  who  put  their  light  under  a  bushel  by  being  excessively  bashful,  and 
shamefaced.  They  are  not  so  dreadfully  retiring  when  five-pound  notes- 
are  to  be  made ;  but  if  anything  is  to  be  said  for  Christ  then  they 
blush  and  stammer.  Oh  that  they  could  overcome  this  hindrance. 
Others  put  their  light  under  a  bushel  by  inconsistency :  they  do  not 
act  as  Christians  should  act,  and  when  people  see  their  bad  work? 
they  do  not  glorify  God.  God  forbid  that  in  the  house  our  dark 
ness  should  be  more  conspicuous  than  our  light.  Some,  I  fear,  cover 
their  light  under  the  bushel  of  indifference:  they  do  not  seem  to  care 
how  things  go  with  the  cause  and  kingdom  of  Christ.  They  look  well 
to  the  state  of  their  flocks  and  herds,  but  for  the  house  of  the  Lord  they 
have  small  concern.  I  pray  you,  dear  friends,  do  not  hide  your  light 
in  any  way.  Let  not  your  lawful  callings,  your  relationships,  your 
sicknesses,  your  literary  pursuits,  or  your  personal  sorrows  become  so 
exaggerated  as  to  conceal  the  divine  light  within  your  soul. 

The  text  is,  however,  positive.  Put  yourself  on  a  candlestick  or  on. 
a  lampstand.  What  must  that  be  ?  A  candlestick  is  an  appropriate 
exhibitor  of  the  light ;  and  each  man  should  make  an  appropriate  con 
fession  of  his  faith.  The  best  way  is  prescribed  in  God's  word.  It  is 
written,  "He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  Take  care 
thut  when  you  have  faith  you  declare  it  in  the  ordained  manner ;  for 


THE   CANDLE.  225 

he  that  with  his  heart  believeth  and  with  his  mouth  muketh  confession 
of  him  shall  be  saved.  0  lamp,  do  not  say,  "  I  will  shine,  but  I 
will  lie  upon  the  floor  and  do  it."  No,  your  place  is  on  the  stand 
which  is  provided.  Dear  Christian  friend,  join  the  church  that  you 
may  be  placed  where  you  will  be  in  order  with  the  arrangements  of  the 
divine  household.  A  lamp-stand  should  also  be  something  which  makes  the 
lamp  sufficiently  visible.  If  you  do  not  come  out  and  diffuse  your  light 
willingly  and  cheerfully  it  is  very  likely  the  master  of  the  house  will  fetch 
you  out.  Providence  will  arrange  that  the  light  shall  not  be  hidden. 
See  what  the  Lord  did  for  his  church  years  ago  ;  he  allowed  her  to  be 
persecuted  into  publicity.  What  a  lamp-stand  was  found  for  Christianity 
in  the  martyrdoms  of  the  Colosseum,  in  the  public  burnings  by  pagans 
and  papists,  and  in  all  the  other  modes  by  which  believers  in  Christ  were 
forced  into  fame.  When  there  was  no  printing-press,  when  there  were 
scanty  opportunities  of  making  the  gospel  public  compared  with  those  of 
to-day,  the  Lord  caused  his  witnesses  to  stand  before  rulers  and  kings,, 
and  there  publish  in  the  most  public  places  the  word  of  his  salvation. 
Persecution  built  the  lighthouse,  and  the  divine  love  set  up  aloft  the 
burning  and  shining  light  of  sacred  truth.  You  may  find  that  God  will 
make  such  a  candlestick  for  you.  You  shall  be  forced  into  testimony  in 
your  family  by  the  opposition  of  those  about  you,  unless  you  take  other 
and  happier  methods.  We  ought  to  be  valiant  for  the  truth,  and  speak 
of  it  with  all  prudence,  but  without  stint 

I  long  for  the  day  when  the  precepts  of  the  Christian  religion  shall  be 
the  rule  among  all  classes  of  men,  in  all  transactions.  I  often  hear  it 
said  "  Do  not  bring  religion  into  politics."  This  is  precisely  where  it 
ought  to  be  brought,  and  set  there  in  the  face  of  all  men  as  on  a  candle 
stick.  I  would  have  the  Cabinet  and  the  Members  of  Parliament  do  the 
work  of  the  nation  as  before  the  Lord,  and  I  would  have  the  nation,, 
either  in  making  war  or  peace,  consider  the  matter  by  the  light 
of  righteousness.  We  are  to  deal  with  other  nations  about  this  or 
that  upon  the  principles  of  the  New  Testament  I  thank  God  that  I 
have  lived  to  see  the  attempt  made  in  one  or  two  instances,  and  I 
pray  that  the  principle  may  become  dominant  and  permanent,  We- 
have  had  enough  of  clever  men  without  conscience,  let  us  now  see  what 
honest,  God-fearing  men  will  do.  But  we  are  told  that  we  must  study 
**  British  interests,"  as  if  it  were  not  always  to  a  nation's  truest  interest 
to  do  righteousness.  "  But  we  must  follow  out  our  policy."  I  say,  No ! 
Let  the  policies  which  are  founded  on  wrong  be  cast  like  idols  to  the 
moles  and  to  the  bats.  Stand  to  that  most  admirable  of  policies, — 4<  As 
ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  also  to  them  likewise." 
Whether  we  are  kings,  or  queens,  or  prime  ministers,  or  members  of 
parliament,  or  crossing  sweepers,  this  is  our  rule  if  we  are  Christians. 

Yes,  and  bring  religion  into  your  business,  and  let  the  light  shine  in 
the  factory  and  in  the  counting-house.  Then  we  shall  not  have  quite 
so  much  china  clay  in  the  calicoes  wherewith  to  cheat  the  foreigner,  nor 
shall  we  see  cheap  and  nasty  articles  described  as  of  best  quality,  nor 
any  other  of  the  dodges  in  trade  that  everybody  seems  to  practise  iiow- 
a-days.  You  tradespeople  and  manufacturers  are  very  much  one  like 
the  other  in  this :  there  are  tricks  in  all  trades,  and  one  sees  it  every 
where.  I  believe  everybody  to  be  honest  in  all  England,  Scotland,  and 


226  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Ireland  until  he  is  found  out ;  but  whether  there  are  any  so  incorruptible 
that  they  will  never  be  found  wanting  this  deponent  sayebh  not,  for  I 
am  not  a  judge. 

Do  not  put  your  candle  under  a  bushel,  but  let  it  shine,  for  it  was 
intended  that  it  should  be  seen.  Religion  ought  to  be  as  much  seen  at 
our  own  table  as  at  the  Lord's  table.  Godliness  should  as  much  influence 
the  House  of  Commons  as  the  Assembly  of  Divines.  God  grant  that  the 
day  may  come  when  the  mischievous  division  between  secular  and 
religious  things  shall  no  more  be  heard  of,  for  in  all  things  Christians  are 
to  glorify  God,  according  to  the  precept,  "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or 
whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God." 

III.  Our  time  has  gone,  but  I  must  detain  you  a  little  while  I  speak 
upon  the  SHINING  :  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men." 

When  a  candle  shines  it  is  because  it  cannot  help  it.  Shining  is  the 
natural  result  of  possessing  light,  and  I  want  you,  dear  brethren,  to  exert 
a  holy  influence  upon  others,  because  the  grace  of  God  is  really  in  you. 
Some  men  made  desperate  attempts  to  appear  good ;  they  would  be  far 
more  successful  if  they  would  seek  to  be  good.  Grace  must  be  in  a  man 
as  a  living  fountain,  and  then  rivers  of  living  water  will  flow  from  him. 
The  natural  result  of  a  renewed  heart  is  a  renewed  life,  and  the  natural 
result  of  a  renewed  life  is  that  men  see  it  and  glorify  God. 

Shining,  however,  is  not  altogether  a  thing  of  necessity  so  as  to  forbid 
our  attention  to  it,  for  the  text  demands  care  of  us.  "  Let  your  light  so 
shine."  I  must  ask  the  printer  to  put  the  two  letters — s,  o, — in  very  large 
capitals.  "Let  your  light  SO  shine — -let  it  so  shine  that  men  may  see 
your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  You 
will  not  shine  in  the  best  manner  though  you  may  have  grace  in  your 
heart  unless  you  abound  in  prayerful,  watchful,  earnest  care.  You  must 
guard  heart  and  lip  and  hand,  or  your  light  will  not  so  shine  before  men 
as  could  be  desired.  Your  light  will  need  trimming.  Neglect  it  not. 

The  shining  which  comes  from  the  Christian  is  here  described  as  "  good 
works,"  Good  talk  is  very  well,  but  it  takes  a  great  deal  of  talk  to  light 
a  room.  Good  works  are  the  splendour  of  the  light  of  God.  What  works 
are  good  works?  I  would  answer — upright  actions,  honest  dealings, 
sincere  behaviour.  When  a  man  is  scrupulously  true,  and  sternly  faithful, 
all  right-minded  persons  admit  that  his  works  are  good  works.  Good 
works  are  works  of  love,  unselfish  works,  works  done  for  the  benefit  of 
others  and  the  glory  of  God.  Deeds  of  charity,  kindness,  and  brotherly 
love  are  good  works.  As  also  careful  attendance  to  duty,  and  all  service 
honestly  done,  together  with  all  courses  which  promote  the  moral  and 
spiritual  good  of  our  fellow-men.  Works  of  devotion  in  which  you  prove 
that  you  love  God  and  his  Christ,  that  you  love  the  gospel,  that  you  desire 
to  spread  the  kingdom  of  Christ, — these  may  not  be  so  highly  valued  by 
ordinary  people,  but  are  eminently  good  works.  Let  these  good  and 
true  things  abound  in  you,  and  shine  out  from  you ;  do  them  not  out  of 
ostentation,  but  still  without  shame. 

Good  works,  like  the  shining  of  a  candle,  have  good  effects.  A  candle 
cheers  the  gloom.  What  a  comfort  it  is  when  you  have  long  been  wan 
dering  in  the  dark  to  spy  out  a  twinkling  candle  in  a  cottage  window  J 
A  candle  directs  and  guides  men,  and  by  its  illumination  it  instructs 
thsm.  In  its  light  they  see,  discern,  and  discover.  He  who  acts  teaches. 


THE   CANDLE.  227 

The  man  who  lives  Christianity  preaches  it.  He  is  the  truest  evangelist 
\vhose  life  brings  glory  to  God  and  goodwill  to  men. 

But  note,  it  is  said  *'  it  giveth  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house";  so  that 
when  we  are  lit  from  on  high  we  are  first  to  shine  at  home.  It  is  not 
abroad  alone  that  we  should  make  our  Christianity  known,  but  chiefly  at 
the  fireside,  to  those  who  are  in  the  house.  Some  have  a  very  little 
house,  they  live  in  a  couple  of  rooms  with  a  small  family ;  let  them  take 
care  that  they  have  grace  enough  to  make  a  few  thoroughly  happy,  which 
is  not  always  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world.  Others  have  a  large 
family ;  may  they  have  grace  enough  to  influence  the  whole.  A  few  have 
large  workshops,  and  employ  many  hands,  and  these  ought  to  exercise  a 
holy  influence  over  all  their  workfoiks.  Some  of  us  are  preachers  of  the 
gospel,  and  have  a  large  house  in  which  to  shine :  we  shall  need  more 
of  the  oil  of  grace  than  others,  that  we  may  give  light  to  the  whole  of 
our  house ;  and  that  grace  is  to  be  had.  The  whole  world  is  a  house  in 
which  the  church  is  the  caudle;  and,  therefore,  the  members  of  the 
church  should  so  shine,  each  one  in  his  place,  that  the  whole  world  shall 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God. 

The  text  says  that  the  candle  gives  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house. 
Some  professors  give  light  only  to  a  part  of  the  house.  I  have  known 
women  very  good  to  all  but  their  husbands,  and  these  they  nag  from 
morning  to  night,  so  that  they  give  no  light  to  them.  I  have  known 
husbands  so  oi'ten  out  at  meetings  that  they  neglect  home,  and  thus  their 
wives  miss  the  light.  I  have  known  wasters  who  are  utterly  indifferent 
about  their  servants ;  and  mistresses  who  quite  forget  to  seek  the 
good  of  their  maids.  If  our  light  be  in  good  order  it  will  illuminate  the 
parlour  and  the  kitchen,  the  drawing  room  and  the  scullery,  shining 
upon  all  that  are  in  the  house.  Candles  do  not  shed  all  their  light  either 
that  way  or  this,  but  they  shine  in  all  directions.  A  Christian  should  be 
an  all  round  man,  blessing  all,  both  great  and  small,  who  come  in  contact 
with  him. 

The  object  of  our  shining  is  not  that  men  may  see  how  good  we  are, 
nor  even  see  us  at  all,  but  that  they  may  see  grace  in  us  and  God  in  us, 
and  cry,  "What  a  Father  these  people  must  have."  Is  not  this  the  first 
time  in  the  New  Testament  that  God  is  called  our  Father?  Is  it  not 
singular  that  the  first  time  it  peeps  out  should  be  when  men  are  seeing 
the  good  works  of  his  children  ?  The  Fatherhood  of  God  is  best  seen  in 
the  holiness  of  saints.  When  men  see  that  light  is  good  they  bless  the 
source  of  that  light,  and  seeing  that  ic  cometh  troin  the  Father  of  lights, 
they  glorify  his  name. 

1  have  had  to  hasten  over  all  this,  but  I  pray  God  to  make  it  none 
the  less  effectual  for  the  stirring  up  of  every  Christian  here  to  use  ail 
the  light  he  has.  It  is  a  dark  world,  and  it  seems  to  get  darker,  for  the 
emissaries  of  Satan  are  going  about  thirsting  to  quench  every  light. 
Look  ye  well  to  your  lamps — look  ye  well  to  your  lamps,  ye  virgin  souls. 
Trim  well  the  flame,  and  go  you  forth  even  into  the  black  night  to  meet 
the  Bridegroom.  Lift  high  your  torches  into  the  very  face  of  darkness, 
and  make  men  see  that  Gpd  the  Father  is  still  in  the  midst  of  his 
people. 

The  venerable  Bede,  when  he  was  interpreting  this  text,  said  that 
Christ  Jesus  brought  the  light  of  Deity  into  the  poor  lantern  of  our 


228  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

humanity,  and  then  set  it  upon  the  candlestick  of  his  church  that  the 
whole  house  of  the  world  might  be  lit  up  thereby.  So  indeed  it  is.  The 
reason  why  there  is  light  in  the  church  is  that  those  who  are  in  the 
dark  may  see.  Churches  do  not  exist  for  themselves,  but  for  the  world  at 
large.  Have  ye  thought  of  this,  ye  professors?  Ye  are  blessed  that 
ye  may  be  a  blessing.  Take  heed  that  ye  behave  aright.  You  go  to 
Christ's  wedding  feast,  and  you  are  glad  to  hear  that  he  turneth  water  into 
wine,  and  you  are  ready  to  bless  him  that  he  has  kept  the  best  wine 
until  now.  But  oh,  ye  servants  of  God,  remember  what  is  said,  "  Draw 
out  now  and  bear."  These  are  your  orders.  There  is  the  God-made 
wine— "Draw,  out  now,  and  bear."  Receive  from  Christ's  fulness,  and 
distribute  to  others.  Neglect  not  your  duty  as  servitors  at  your  Lord's 
great  feast.  Your  Master  has  taken  the  bread,  and  has  blessed  and 
broken  it,  and  then  he  has  given  it  to  you.  Is  that  the  end  of  the 
process?  Do  you  stand  there  and  munch  your  own  personal  morsel 
with  a  miserable  self-satisfaction  ?  Nay,  if  you  be  indeed  disciples  of 
Christ  you  will  remember  that  the  next  words  are,  "  and  the  disciples  to 
the  multitude,  and  they  did  eat."  Break  then  your  bread  among  the 
hungry  that  surround  you.  Take  the  whole  loaf  of  Christ,  and  rightly 
divide  and  distribute  it,  and  you  shall  have  as  much  left  as  at  the  first; 
yea,  more,  you  shall  gather  of  the  fragments  many  baskets  full.  Only  see 
ye  to  it  that  ye  freely  give  what  ye  have  freely  received,  lest  hoarded 
manna  breed  corruption,  lest  a  canker  come  upon  your  hoarded  gold  and 
silver,  and  lest  your  very  souls  grow  mouldy  even  to  reeking  rottenness 
before  God,  because  you  have  not  drawn  out  your  souls  unto  the  hungry, 
nor  sought  to  teach  those  who  are  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge. 

The  Baptist  Missionary  Society  will  enable  you  to  teach  the  heathen. 
Take  a  share  in  it.     There,  make  the  collection !     Do  your  best ! 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON— Luke  viii. 


HYMNS  FUOM  "Ouu  OWN  HYMN  BOOK  "—136  (Song  I.),  652, 
22  CFart  111.; 


JHetropoliiau  SEabenmcte 


THE    EYE    AND    THE    LIGHT. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  OCTOBER  13TH,   1889,  BY 

•     C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"No  man,  when  he  hath  lighted  a  caudle,  putteth  it  in  a  secret  place,  neither  under 
a  bushel,  but  ou  a  candlestick,  that  they  which  come  in  may  see  the  light.  The  light  of 
the  body  is  the  eye  :  therefore  when  thine  eye  is  single,  thy  whole  body  also  is  full  of 
light ;  but  when  thine  eye  is  evil,  thy  body  also  is  full  of  darkness.  Take  heed  therefore 
that  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness.  If  thy  whole  body  therefore  be  full  of 
lighr,  having  no  part  dark,  the  whole  shall  be  full  of  light,  as  when  the  bright  shining 
of  a  candle  doth  give  thee  light." — Lukexi.  33 — 36. 

IN  this  parable,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  light.  Some  saw  his 
brightness,  and  were  even  dazzled  by  it,  as  was  that  woman  who  cried, 
•"  Blessed  is  the  womb  that  bare  thee,  and  the  paps  which  thou  hast 
sucked."  The  malicious  saw  not  his  light,  but  even  dared  to  impute 
Ids  miracles  to  the  Prince  of  darkness.  Others  professed  to  see  go 
little  light  in  him  that  they  demanded  a  sign  from  heaven.  Our 
Lord's  constant  answer  was,  to  go  shining  on.  He  was  meant  to  be 
•observed ;  even  as  a  lamp  is  intended  to  be  seen.  A  lamp  is  not 
lighted  to  be  placed  in  a  cellar,  nor  to  be  hidden  under  a  bushel :  the 
lamp  is  lighted  on  purpose  that  all  who  come  into  the  house  may  see 
the  light.  Even  so,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  could  not  be  hid.  In  the 
narrow  circle  of  the  Holy  Land,  he  shone  so  clearly  that  Gentiles  came 
to  the  brightness  of  his  rising.  Yet,  to  make  him  seen  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth,  he  must  needs  be  set  on  the  lamp-stand.  He  was  lifted  up 
by  crucifixion ;  and  anon  he  was  further  raised  by  resurrection :  he 
was  lifted  up  from  earth  to  heaven  at  his  ascension,  and  in  another 
.sense  he  was  set  on  high  by  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the 
widespread  ministry  of  his  servants.  Our  Lord  was  thus  taken  from 
under  the  bushel  of  the  obscurity  which  attached  to  his  humble  origin, 
brought  away  from  the  dark  cellar  of  the  despised  Jewish  nation,  and 
set  out  in  the  open,  where  Greek  and  Roman,  Barbarian  and  Scythian, 
might  rejoice  in  his  light.  It  is  our  duty  to  keep  his  name  and  his 
truth  ever  before  the  world,  waiting  for  the  time  when  every  eye  shall 
jsee  him  on  the  throne  of  his  glory. 

Our  Lord  would  have  all  men  behold  the  light  of  his  gospel ;  for 
the  text  saith,  "that  they  which  come  in  may  see  the  light."     Who 
soever  comes  into  the  church,  or  even  into  the  world,  should  be  met 
with  this  lamp ;  for  this  gospel  is  to  be  preached  to  every  creature 
No.  2,109.  54 


55,4      .,         p  s  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

under  heaven.  The  mighty  deeds  of  his  salvation  were  not  done  in  a 
corner  :  they  are  for  .world- wide  observation.  He  that  hath  eyes  to 
see  let  him  see.  If  you  do  not  ~see  Jesus,  it  is  not 'because^lie  has 
hidden  himself  in  darkness,  but  because  your  eyes  are  blinded.  The 
light  which  streams  from  the  face  of  Jesus  is  meant  for  human  eyes  : 
the  tempered  brightness  of  the  "Mediator's  glory  suits  those  eyes,  which 
are  bidden  to  look  to  him  and  live.,-  Light  is  not  for  the  rich,  the  wise, 
the  strong,  but  for  men  as  men.  The  doctrines  of  our  Lord  Jesus- 
Christ  are  not  meant  to  be  the  monopoly  of  a  few  learned  doctors  ;  they 
are  the  common  inheritance  of  those  who  labour  and  are  heavy  laden. 
As  the  morning  breaks  for  all  weary,  watching  eyes,  so  shines  the 
light  of  the  glorious  gospel  for  all  who  sit  in  darkness  and  long  for  the 
light  of  God. 

Beloved,  the  great  thing  to  be  desired  is  that  the  light  which  is  so 
freely  given  forth  by  the  Lord  Jesus  inay  become  light  within  our 
souls.  There  he  stands,  as  the  lamp  placed  upon  the  lampstand,  con 
spicuous  to  all ;  but  we  need  that  the  light  outside  in  the  room  may 
become  light  inside,  within  the  soul.  Nothing  more  truly  needs  light 
than  our  inner  man.  We  are,  by  nature,  as  a  lantern  with  the 
candle  blown  out.  Whether  we  will  believe  it  or  not,  by  nature  we 
are  in  thick  Egyptian  night.  Well  saith  the  apostle,  "  Ye  were 
sometimes  darkness.1'  Much  is  said  about  the  light  of  conscience,  but. 
in  many  this  is  but  a  glimmering  taper  whose  beams  are  "  not  light,  but. 
darkness  visible."  The  light  of  nature  is  dimmed  by  so  many  sur 
roundings,  and  has  so  little  oil  to  sustain  it,  that  it  leads  no  man  to 
eternal  life,  unless  there  be  added  to  it  light  from  above — :the  light  of 
grace,  the  clear  shining  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Light  is  absolutely  essential  to  spiritual  life.  Ignorance  is  not  the 
mother  of  devotion,  but' of  superstition.  Knowledge,  grace,  truth,  are- 
the  nurses 'of  true  faith.'  The  light  of  God  is  needful  to  the  life  of 
God'.  We  must  know  Christ,  we  must  be  illuminated '  by  his  Holy 
Spirit,  , we  must  have  fellowship  with  the  Father's  truth,  or  else  we  are- 
dead,  as  well  as  dark.  Light  within  we  must-  have,  or  the  light 
outside  will  not  benefit  us.  Upon  that  subject  we  will  speak  at  this- 
time.  May  God  grant  us  the  light  of  his  Spirit ;  for  it  would  be  idle 
for  us  to  try  to  explain  the  action  of  light  while  ourselves  in  darkness.. 
Shine  within,  0  Holy  Spirit,  that' we  speak  not  of  theory,  but  of  actual, 
experience ! 

Tirst,  we  will  consider  how  the  light  enters:  "The  light  of  the  body 
is  the  eye:  therefore  when  thine  eye  is  single,  thy  whole  body  also  is 
full  of  light."  Secondly,  we  shall  note  how  this  light  may  be  perverted : 
"When  thine  eye  'is  evil,  thy  body  also  is  full  of  darkness.  Take- 
heed  therefore  that  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness."  In 
conclusiori,  we  shall  observe  how  the  light  acts  within:  "If  thy  whole  body 
therefore  be  full  of  light,  having  no  part  dark,  the  whole  shall  be  full, 
of  light,  as  when  the  bright  shining  of  a  candle  doth  give  thee  light." 

.  I.  First,  then,  consider  HOW  THE  LIGHT  ENTERS  THE  SOUL.  Into- 
the  body  the  light '  enters  through  the  eye. ;  A  man  without  an  eye- 
might  as'  well  be/  without  the  sun,  so  far  as  light  is  concerned.  The- 
eye  is  as  needful  as  the  lamp,  if  a  man  is  to  see.  The  most  brilliant, 
light  that  ever"  has  *beeri  *inveritedj  o'r"  ever  can*  be  "discovered,  will  -bfe? 


THE    EYE   AND,  THE    LIGHT.  .,   :.  556 

.  of  no  use  to  the  person  who  has  no  eye ;  .hen^e  it  is  true,  "  The  light 
of  the  body  is  the  eye."  It  is  most  important  to  attend  to  that  winch, 
is  the  eye  of  the  inner  man ;  for  in  vain  doth  Christ  himself  shine  if 
his  light  cannot  enter  our  souls.  The  condition  of  the  eye  of  the  mind 
is  of  the  utmost  importance  :  our  light  or  our  darkness  will  depend  upon 
it.  The  eye  of  the  soul  may  be  viewed  as  the  understanding,  the 
conscience,  the  motive,  or  the  heart.  It  would  not  be  possible  to  con 
fine  it  to  any  one  of  these  names.  .  I  venture  to  call  it  "the  intent  of 
the  mind  "  ;  or,  if  you  will,  "  the  aim  of  .the  heart,"  the  honesty  of  the 
understanding.  When  Q-od  has  given  a  man  a  true  intent  to  see  the 
light  of  the  gospel,  he  has  in  that  honest  intent  furnished  him  with 
an  eye  for  the  heavenly  light.  If  the  Holy.  Ghost  makes  us  truly 
willing  to  know  the  truth,  he  has  cleared  the  mental  eye.  The  worst 
of  it  is,  that  men  have  .no  will  to  see  the  light  of  God :  their  foolish 
heart  is  darkened,  and  hence  they  do  not  understand,  but  altogether 
misrepresent  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  battle  of  grace  is 
with  man's  unwillingness  to  see  those  truths  against  which  he  is> 
naturally  at  enmity.  If. a  man  wills  to  see  the  honest  truth,  and. 
submits  himself  to  the  enlightenment  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  will  not 
be  left  in  darkness.  When  a  man  does  not  want  to  see,  he  cannot 
see :  when  he  is  determined  not  to  learn,  when  truth  is  unpalatable  to- 
him,  when  he  designedly  twists  it  from  its  meaning,  then  his  eye  is- 
diseased,  and  the  light  is  hindered  from  its  due  effect. 

Many  things  darken  the  eye  of  the  soul.  One  of  the  most  common 
is  prejudice.  The  man  conceives  that  he  has  light  already.  His  father, 
his  grandfather,  his  great-grandfather,  and  previous  generations,  were 
brought  up, in  .a  certain  religion,  and  therefore  it  must  be  right. 
Whether  the  lamp  gives  light  or  not,  is  not  the  .question :  it  is  the 
family  lamp,  and  he  will  have  no  other.  He  will  not  enquire  :  he  is- 
quite  sure,  and  wants  no  evidence.  When  the  light  of  God  comes  to 
him,  he.  at  once  repels  it.  .He  .cannot  be  disturbed,  and  therefore  he- 
will  not  hear,  nor  read,  nor  consider  the  matter :  he  is  satisfied  to- 
let  things.be  as  they  are.  The  .very  supposition  tliat  he  may  be  wrong 
he  regards  as  an  insult,  maliciously  invented  by  an  uncharitable  mind. 
What  is  to  be  done  with  one  so  blindfolded  ?.  Are  there  not  many 
sucli  ? 

Sloth,  too,  is  a  great  blinder  of  the  eye:  it  draws  down  the  eyelid, 
and  shuts  out  the  light  by  the  spirit  of  slumber.  The  man  does  not  care 
what  the  gospel  is,  or  is  not/  Like  Pilate,  jbe  asks,  "  What  is  truth?" 
but  he  never  waits  for  an  answer.  It  is  too  much  trouble  to  some 
people  to  think,  to  search  the  Scriptures,  and  to  pray.  ,They  have  no< 
heart  for  a  process  so  troublesome.-/  "No,"  saith  the  worldling,  "I 
have  other  fish  to  fry.  I  go  my  way  ito  my  farm,  and  to  my  merchan 
dise.  Let  graceless  bigots  fight  about  creeds  'and  the  like.;  it  matters 
not  one  jot  what  a  man  believes,"  Thus  .do  many  abide  in  the  blackest 
darkness,  because  it  is  too  much  trouble  to  open  the  shulters,  and 
draw  up  the  blinds.  All  me  !  how  dark  are  they  who  prefer  an 
indolent  ease  to.  the  light  of  God  ! 

The  light  is  often  shut  out  by  gross  error.  I  cannot  go  over  the  list 
of  the  favourite  errors  of  the  .present  hour.;  for  .that  list  has  grown, 
too  long  for  one  day's  reading.  .Spaciously  taught  ii>  BQleofcftJ  phrases^ 


556  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PIJLPIT. 

cunningly  supported  by  a  dreamy  science,  and  adorned  with  certain 
great  names,  errors  come  to  us  nowadays  as  respectable  forms  of 
thought.  Falsehoods  of  which  we  heard  when  we  were  children — 
but  only  heard  of  them  as  loathsome  heresies,  long  ago  decayed  and 
thrown  into  the  limbo  of  worthless  and  mischievous  imaginations — 
these  are  now  refashioned,  freshened  up  with  touches  of  bright 
colour,  and  brought  out  as  advanced  ideas.  When  any  of  these  are 
permitted  to  occupy  the  mind,  as  they  so  commonly  do  nowadays, 
the  old  gospel  is  no  longer  seen,  because  the  eye  is  inflamed  by 
the  incoming  of  a  foreign  and  irritating  substance.  Can  it  be  that 
what  was  true  a  hundred  years  ago,  is  not  true  now  ?  Can  it  be  that 
the  gospel  which  saved  souls  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  cannot  save 
souls  now  ?  Is  it  so,  that  some  men  are  wiser  than  God,  and  are 
qualified  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  prophets  and  apostles?  Surely, 
judicial  blindness  has  happened  to  this  generation  :  the  chaff  of  their 
own  folly  has  darkened  their  eyes,  and  Christ  is  hid  from  them. 

One  thing  darkens  the  eye  more  than  any  other,  and  that  is  the 
love  of  sin.  Nine  times  out  of  ten,  allowed  sin  is  the  cataract  which 
-darkens  the  mental  eye.  Men  cannot  see  truth,  because  they  love 
falsehood.  The  gospel  is  not  seen,  because  it  is  too  pure  for  their 
loose  lives  and  lewd  thoughts.  Christ's  holy  example  is  too  severe  for 
the  worldly ;  his  Spirit  is  too  pure  for  lovers  of  carnal  pleasure.  When 
people  reject  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  they  also  tolerate  laxity  of 
morals,  and  give  predominance  to  the  customs  of  the  world.  How  can 
men  see,  when  sin  hath  pricked  the  very  eyeballs  of  the  mind !  "  How 
can  ye  believe,"  said  Christ,  "  which  receive  honour  one  of  another  ?  " 
The  love  of  worldly  honour  prevented  the  Pharisees  from  believing  in 
the  lowly  Messiah.  When  sin,  like  a  handful  of  mud,  seals  up  the 
eye,  you  need  not  wonder  that  the  man  becomes  an  agnostic,  a  doubter, 
,a  caviller.  To  have  a  clear  eye  one  must  have  a  clean  heart.  The  pure 
in  heart  shall  see  God ;  and  hence  the  pure  in  heart  see  God's  truth, 
:so  as  to  appreciate  it  and  delight  in  it.  Oh,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may 
wash  the  filth  out  of  our  eyes,  that  we  may  walk  in  the  light,  as  God 
Is  in  the  light. 

Pride,  too,  is  a  great  darkener  of  the  soul's  eye.  When  a  man 
admires  himself  he  never  adores  God.  He  that  is  taken  up  with  the 
conceit  of  his  own  righteousness  will  never  see  the  righteousness  of 
Christ.  If  thou  believest  thyself  to  be  pure  thou  wilt  never  prize  the 
blood  which  cleanses  from  all  sin.  If  thou  believest  thyself  to  be 
already  perfect,  thou  wilt  not  prize  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Sanctifier. 
.No  man  cries  for  grace  till  he  perceives  his  own  need  of  it :  if,  there 
fore,  we  be  puffed  up  with  the  notion  that  we  are  rich  and  increased 
in  goods,  we  shall  never  see  the  riches  of  grace  which  are  treasured 
up  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  light  of  God  dwells  not  with  human  self- 
sufficiency.  A  man's  own  shadow  is  very  often  the  means  of  keeping 
him  in  the  dark. 

Self -seeking ,  in  every  form,  is  a  sad  cause  of  obscuring  the  light  of 
the  soul.  Self-seeking,  in  the  grosser  form  of  avarice,  makes  men 
grope  in  the  daytime.  The  glitter  of  gold  is  injurious  to  the  eye. 
How  could  Judas  see  the  beauty  of  Christ  when  he  saw  such  value 
in  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  ?  How  can  a  man  set  store  by  a  future 


THE  EYE  AND  THE  LIGHT.  557 

heaven  when  a  present  fortune  is  heaven  enough  for  him  ?  Mammon 
repays  its  worshippers  with  blinded  eyes.  Self  does  the  same  when  it 
appears  as  ambition,  desire  of  honour  and  respect,  or  a  wish  to  have  a 
finger  in  one's  own  salvation.  The  proud  desire  to  share  the  glory  of 
our  salvation  with  free  grace  prevents  the  entrance  of  the  light  of 
God.  Self,  in  the  form  of  magnifying  the  nobility  of  human  nature, 
extolling  the  grandeur  of  our  common  humanity,  and  all  that,  is  a 
very  blinding  thing.  How  can  a  man  that  has  his  eye  upon  self  have 
any  sight  for  Jesus  ?  Of  all  antichrists,  self  is  the  hardest  to  over 
come.  It  is  written,  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease"  ;  but 
if  proud  self  will  not  endure  a  decrease,  how  can  I  see  Christ  increas 
ing  ?  There  is  no  room  for  him  in  my  heart.  Appreciation  of  self 
leads  to  depreciation  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Multitudes  are  kept  in  darkness  through  fear  of  men.  They  dare  not 
see.  They  feel  bound  to  think  as  the  fashion  goes — and  there  is  a 
fashion  of  opinions  as  well  as  of  coats  and  bonnets.  If  you  resolve  to 
hold  fast  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  you  will  be  regarded  as 
antiquated,  and  you  will  be  as  much  pointed  out  for  your  faith,  as  you 
would  be  for  your  dress  if  you  should  walk  down  the  street  in  the 
costume  of  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  To  many  it  would  be  great 
sin  to  be  singular.  They  never  think  for  themselves ;  in  fact,  they  are 
mentally  shiftless.  They  ask  their  way  of  a  certain  person  supposed 
to  be  a  deeper  student  than  themselves  :  of  him  they  enquire  what 
they  ought  to  believe,  disbelieve,  praise,  or  blame.  I  remember  well 
a  man  who  never  knew  whether  he  liked  a  sermon  till  he  had  asked  a 
certain  knowing  old  gentleman  whether  it  was  a  good  one  or  not :  he 
had  no  home-grown  judgment,  he  imported  his  ideas.  His  brains,  for 
safe  keeping,  were  placed  in  another  person's  head :  this  is  a  very 
convenient  thing,  and  saves  a  good  deal  of  headache  ;  but  it  has  its 
drawbacks.  Some  persons  put  all  their  thinking  out,  and  have  it 
done  for  them  by  the  dozen :  but  he  that  would  have  God's  light, 
knows  that  it  comes  not  to  the  coward  who  fears  the  frown  of  a 
mortal,  and  makes  man  his  god.  God  could  have  given  to  the  crowd  a 
common  judgment,  and  have  left  us  to  be  guided  by  a  central  authority, 
if  he  had  thought  it  right  so  to  do ;  but  having  given  to  each  indi 
vidual  an  understanding,  he  expects  us  to  use  it,  and  to  an  honest 
personal  use  of  understanding  he  gives  the  light.  The  eye  of  the 
sparrow  or  of  the  ant  may  be  very  small,  yet  it  sees  the  grt-at  light, 
if  it  be  a  single  and  clear  eye.  Pray,  then,  for  grace,  that  you  may 
search  out  for  yourselves  the  truth  of  God,  free  from  the  fear  of  man 
which  bringeth  a  snare.  Let  us  never  enquire,  "Have  any  of  the 
rulers  believed  ?  "  Whether  the  rulers  have  or  have  not  believed,  let 
us  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth,  and  rejoice  in  that  pure 
light  which  flows  from  him. 

God  save  you,  dear  friends,  from  having  your  eye  injured  by  any 
ot  the  mischiefs  I  have  mentioned.  There  are  legions  more  of  these 
blinding  things :  may  grace  guard  you  from  them  !  God  give  you  a 
*'  single  eye,"  by  which  is  meant  an  eye  which  does  not  look  at  two 
things  at  a  time — a  mind  which  is  free  from  sinister  motives,  and  from 
anything  which  would  cause  you  to  choose  falsehood  rather  than  truth, 
and  wrong  rather  than  right.  God  grant  that  we  may  have  a  desire 


558  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  be  right,  a  resolute  design  to  know  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and 
to  feel  and  act  in  sincere  conformity  therewith  !  Oh,  to  be  sincere, 
simple-hearted,  child-like,  true !  We  want  neither  great  genius  nor 
sparkling  wit,  but  we  need  an  unsophisticated,  mind  ;  for  so  the  light 
gets  entrance  into  the  soul  through  the  Spirit  of  God. 

II.  Secondly,  let  us  consider  HOW  THE  LIGHT  MAY  BE  PERVERTED. 
Some  men  might  have  light  enough,  but  their  eye  is  in  such  an  evil 
condition  that  the  light,  is  turned  into  darkness.  I  suppose  that  in 
the  natural  world  light  could  not  actually  become  darkness  ;  but  in  the 
spiritual  kingdom  it  is  certainly  so  :  "  When  thine  eye  is  evil,  thy 
body  also  is  full  of  darkness.  Take  heed  therefore  that  the  light 
which  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness."  Hearken,  my  brethren,  and 
take  heed. 

A  man  has  heard  the  gospel  of  free  grace  and  dying  love,  he  has- 
heard  a  message  full  of  love  concerning  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  and 
pardon  bought  with  blood,  and  freely  given  to  him  that  believeth. 
The  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  has  been  clearly  explained  to  him. 
He  believes  firmly  in  these  great  evangelical  truths,  and  calls  them 
glorious  and  precious.  But  he  draws  an  inference  from  this  teaching 
which  is  ruinous  to  his  soul.  He  considers  that,  after  all,  sin  is  of 
small  consequence,  and  he  may  indulge  in  it  freely,  for  God  is  merciful, 
and  grace  is  infinite.  At  some  time  or  other  he  will  repent  and  believe 
in  Jesus,  and  then  he  will  be  set  right,  however  grossly  he  may  have 
offended.  God  is  gracious,  and  therefore  he  may  be  sinful :  Grod  freely 
forgives,  and  therefore  he  may.  recklessly  offend.  This  is  to  turn  light 
into  darkness.  Such  turning  of  the  grace  of, God  into  lasciviousriess  is- 
infamous.  Words  cannot  set  forth  the  hideous  ingratitude  of  such 
depraved  argument.  We  may  justly  say  of  a  man  who  thus  turns  light 
into  darkness,  "  his  damnation  is  just."  Yet  no  doubt  there  are  many 
such  who  silently,  in  their  own  hearts,  draw  from  the  goodness  of  God. 
a  license  to  sin.  Ah,  my  hearer  !  if  your  eye  be  in  this  condition,  the 
more  freely  we  preach  to  you  the  gospel  .of  the  grace  of  God,  the  more- 
surely  will  you  go  from  sin  to  sin.  This  is  terrible.  0  false  hearts. L 
what  shall  I  do  with  you  ?  You  make  me  wish  to  be  dumb,  lest  I 
minister  to  your  condemnation.  In  the  lowest  hell  you  are  digging  for 
yourselves,  a  deeper  hell :  you  use  the  promises  of  mercy  as  the  in 
struments  of  your  own  destruction.  What!  can  you  hang  yourselves- 
nowhere  but  on  the  cross  ?  Can  you  drown  yourselves  nowhere  but 
in  the  waters  of  Siloah  ?  What  has  come  to  you,  that  you  are  so- 
infatuated  as  to  find  your  death  in  the  gospel  which  is  ordained  for 
life? 

Let  me  set  before  you  another  form  of  this  evil.  A  man  perceives- 
the  great  value  of  the  means  of  grace,  but  he  goes  further  and  misuses 
them.  Having  been  brought  up  religiously,  he  has  a  deep  respect  for 
the  ministers  of  God's  house,  for  the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  and 
especially  for  the  two  ordinances  which  Christ  has  established  in  his 
church — Baptism  and  the  Supper  of  the  Lord.  He  reverences  the 
Sabbath  and  the  inspired  Word,  and  the  church  and  all  its  sacred 
ministries.  But  it  may  , be  that  , he  proceeds  from  a  due  regard  .pf 
these  things  to  a  superstitious  trust  in  them,  making  of  them  what 
God  has  never  made  of  them :  thus  his  light  becomes  darkness.  He- 


THE    EYE    AND    THE    LIGHT.  559 

regards  attendance  upon  public  worship  as  a  substitute  for  inward 
religion ;  he  looks  upon  membership  with  a  church  as  a  certificate  of 
salvation.  He  may  be  so  foolish  as  to  speak  of  Baptism  as  an  ordi 
nance  whereby  he  was  made  a  member  of  Christ,  and  a  child  of  God ; 
and  of  the  Supper  of  the  Lord  as  a  saving  ordinance,  or  even  as  a 
sacrifice  for  the  quick  and  dead.  When  instructive  symbols  are  per 
verted  into  instruments  of  priestcraft,  the  light  is  turned  into  darkness. 
By  multitudes,  in  these  days,  aids  to  faith  are  degraded  into  the 
machinery  of  superstition.  The  church,  which  is  our  mother  and 
inurse,  is  made  into  an  antichrist,  and  men  look  to  her  for  salvation 
instead  of  looking  wholly  and  alone  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Out 
ward  modes  of  worship  and  instruction  may  be  very  beneficial,  but  if 
they  are  allowed  to  usurp  the  confidence  of  the  soul,  they  may  gender 
disease  and  death.  When  a  man's  religion  becomes  his  destruction, 
.how  sure  is  that  destruction  ! 

I  have  known  many  go  another  way  :  they  have  said,  "  I  care  very 
little  about  the  shape  or  form  of  religion.  A  sincere  spirit  is  every 
thing.  The  letter  killeth,  the  spirit  giveth  life."  Such  a  man 
professes  to  clutch  at  the  soul  of  things,  but  I  have  seen  him  grow 
indifferent  in  creed  and  licentious  in  life.  He  believes  everything  to 
have  some  measure  of  truth  in  it ;  every  evil  practice  to  have  some 
good  point  about  it.  This  is  a  poisonous  atmosphere  for  any  man  to 
breathe.  Hear  him  talk,  if  you  would  see  how  the  worse  can  be  made 
to  seem  the  better.  Nothing  to  him  is  fixed  truth,  nor  even  settled 
right.  He  is  like  the  chameleon,  which  takes  its  colour  from  the 
changing  light  about  it.  This  he  calls  "  liberty  "  ;  but  assuredly  it  is 
not  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  makes  men  free.  Say,  rather,  it  is 
the  light  of  charity  turned  into  the  darkness  of  indifference.  How 
great  is  this  darkness  !  How  many  are  deceived  by  it !  After  all, 
there  is  light  and  there  is  darkness,  and  they  are  not  the  same  thing. 
There  is  truth,  taught  of  God,  and  there  is  a  lie,  which  is  the  devil's 
own  ;  and  these  will  never  sit  at  the  same  table.  There  is  a  blessing 
for  the  preacher  of  the  truth  ;  but  if  any  man  preach  another  gospel, 
for  him  there  is  an  anathema  which  none  can  reverse. 

I  have  also  seen  this  light  turned  to  darkness  in  the  case  of  the 
student  who  has  gathered  great  erudition,  and  enrolled  himself  among 
the  learned.  He  begins  to  criticize.  Do  not  condemn  him  for  that :  he 
judges  very  properly  at  first,  he  criticizes  things  that  ought  to  be  criti 
cized  ;  but  he  stops  not  there.  Once  having  his  critical  faculty  aroused, 
he  is  like  a  boy  with  a  new  knife ;  he  must  cut  something  or  other. 
Nothing  comes  in  his  way  more  often  than  the  Scriptures  ;  and  he  must 
have  a  cut  at  them.  He  whittles  at  Genesis  ;  he  makes  a  gash  in  Deu 
teronomy  ;  he  halves  Isaiah  ;  he  takes  slices  out  of  the  Gospels,  and  cuts 
the  Epistles  into  slivers.  You  see,  he  has  so  sharp  a  knife  that  he  must 
use  it.  By-and-by,  from  a  critic  he  advances  to  an  irreverent  fault 
finder,  and  from  that  to  an  utter  unbeliever,  hard  in  the  mouth  and  stiff 
in  the  neck.  His  light  has  blinded  him.  He  has  taken  his  own  eye  to 
pieces  that  he  might  study  its  anatomy,  and  henceforth  the  light  will 
be  of  no  more  use  to  him  than  to  the  dead. 

We  have  seen  the  light  turned  to  darkness  in  a  further  sense  ;  hear 
and  understand.  There  is  a  Uossed  light  called  the  full  assurance 


560  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

of  faith :  the  more  we  have  of  it  the  better.  Blessed  is  that  man  who 
never  doubts  his  God,  who  hangs  with  hoty  confidence  upon  the 
eternal  promise  and  the  immutable  covenant,  and  is  never  staggered 
through  unbelief.  He  walks  in  the  light  of  God,  and  enjoys  divine 
fellowship.  But  I  have  seen  something  very  like  to  this  holy  confi 
dence  which  has  been  before  the  Lord  a  very  different  matter.  Assur 
ance  has  been  counterfeited  by  presumption.  The  man  has  taken  for 
granted  that  he  is  a  child  of  God  when  he  is  not,  and  he  has  appro 
priated  privileges  which  are  none  of  his.  He  has  supposed  himself  to 
be  in  the  covenant  when  he  has  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter ;  and 
without  repentance,  without  the  new  birth,  and  without  saving  faith, 
he  has  dared  to  boast  of  those  sacred  securities  which  belong  only  to 
the  heirs  of  grace,  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus.  Dreadful  is  the  case 
of  the  man  who  has  presumed  to  hope  for  heaven  while  living  an 
ungodly  life  ;  boasting  of  freedom  from  all  fear,  when,  indeed,  he  was 
destitute  of  all  hope. 

I  have  also  seen  the  light  turned  to  darkness  in  quite  another 
manner.  Sweet  and  soft  is  the  light  of  holy  fear :  it  is  as  the  twi 
light  of  the  evening.  It  is  a  light  that  comes  from  God,  when  a  man 
is  afraid  to  sin,  when  he  fears  lest  he  should  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God, 
when  he  trembles  lest  in  anything  he  should  err  from  the  teaching 
of  his  heavenly  Father.  But  then  this  light  may  be  corrupted 
into  slavish  dread,  despondency,  and  despair.  Introspection,  or 
looking  within,  may  degenerate  into  a  morbid  habit :  under  its 
influence,  the  soul  may  refuse  to  look  to  Christ,  and  may  enshroud 
itself  in  the  gloom  of  remorse.  Truth  may  be  distorted  till  it  takes  a 
most  alarming  shape,  and  the  soul,  in  sullen  despair,  refuses  to  be 
comforted,  refuses  to  believe  in  the  Son  of  God. 

Do  you  wonder  that  our  Lord  seemed  to  hold  up  his  hands  in 
astonishment  as  he  said,  "If  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness, 
how  great  is  that  darkness  ! "  If  that  which  should  lead  misleads, 
how  misled  you  will  be !  If  your  better  part  turns  out  to  be  evil, 
how  evil  must  you  be  !  See  to  it  then,  dear  friends,  as  before  the  living 
God,  that  you  have  a  clear  eye,  and  that  the  light  of  Christ  comes, 
streaming  into  your  soul  in  all  its  glorious  purity  and  power. 

III.  I  close  by  coming  to  the  third  and  most  important  point : 
HOW  THE  LIGHT  ACTS  WHEN  IT  COMES  WITHIN.  If  the  eye  be  right, 
single,  and  clear,  there  is  no  laborious  work  for  that  eye  to  do  to 
obtain  the  light.  When  the  sun  is  shining,  if  you  wish  for  light  you. 
simply  open  your  eyes,  and  you  have  light  at  once.  You  have  not  to  rub 
the  eye,  or  work  it  into  some  singular  position :  let  the  outward  light 
come  to  the  eye,  and  at  once  it  enters  it,  and  conveys  an  image  to  the 
mind.  When  the  eye  is  sound  it  takes  pleasure  in  the  light,  and  with 
delight  conveys  the  image  of  things  external  to  the  mind  within.  If  the 
Lord,  in  his  great  grace,  has  made  your  eye  single,  so  that  you  desire 
only  to  know  the  truth,  and  to  be  yourself  true,  then  without  toil  you 
will  perceive  truth,  and  the  image  thereof  will  readily  appear  before^ 
your  mind.  The  light  is  willing  enough  to  enter  when  the  window 
of  the  soul  allows  its  admission.  When  that  light  comes  in,  you  will 
know  it.  No  man  passes  from  his  natural  darkness  into  heavenly 
light  without  being  aware  that  a  great  change  has  taken  place. 


THE  EYE  AND  THE  LIGHT.  561 

Beloved,  I  will  try  to  show  you   how  the  holy  light   acts  when  it 
enters  our  nature. 

When  it  first  comes  in  it  reveals  much  that  was  before  unperceivecL 
If  a  room  has  been  long  shut  up,  and  kept  in  darkness,  the  light  has 
a  startling  effect.  You  may  have  hurried  through  that  room  with  a 
candle,  but  you  never  stayed  to  look,  and  therefore  did  not  notice 
the  state  of  things.  The  room  did  not  strike  you  as  being  very 
unpleasant,  though  it  smelt  a  little  stale  and  fusty ;  but  now  that  you 
have  put  back  the  shutters  and  drawn  up  the  bliud,  the  light  has  made 
the  mould  and  dust  very  manifest.  That  black  festoon  of  spiders' 
webs ;  those  insects  which  hurry  out  of  the  light ;  that  all-encrusting 
dust — these  had  been  overlooked.  The  room  cannot  be  suffered  to 
remain  in  such  a  state.  What  a  change  is  demanded !  All  hands  are 
summoned  to  clean  out  the  den,  and  turn  it  into  a  healthy  chamber  fit 
to  be  inhabited.  The  light  of  heaven  reveals  a  thousand  sins,  and 
causes  their  removal.  The  first  effect  of  the  light  of  God  in  the  soul 
is  painfully  unpleasant:  it  makes  you  loathe  yourself,  and  almost 
wish  that  you  had  never  been  born.  Things  grow  worse  and  worse  to 
our  consciousness  as  the  light  shines  more  and  more.  Beloved,  we 
wish  it  to  be  so.  We  would  have  no  part  kept  in  the  dark.  We 
would  have  every  idol  discovered  and  broken,  every  secret  chamber  of 
imagery  exposed  to  the  sun,  and  then  destroyed.  Is  it  not  so  ?  Do 
you  wish  to  keep  the  light  from  any  one  part  of  your  nature  ?  Do  you 
not  far  rather  desire  that  the  light  should  search  you  through  and 
through,  and  lay  bare  all  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  and  all  the 
falseness  of  the  depraved  mind  ? 

As  that  light  continues  to  enter,  it  gradually  illuminates  each  faculty 
of  the  mind.  The  will  by  nature  prefers  the  darkness  :  the  man  claims 
the  right  to  act  as  he  pleases,  and  to  give  no  reasons  for  his  waywardness. 
When  the  light  of  God  enters  the  soul,  the  Lord  Jesus  becomes  altogether 
lovely,  and  then  the  sacred  light  falls  on  the  proud  will,  and  the  man 
sees  that  it  is  evil  and  perverse,  and  he  cries,  "  0  Lord  Jesus,  not  my 
will,  but  thine,  be  done."  This  same  light  falls  on  the  outward  life 
which  is  ruled  by  the  will,  and  the  conduct  and  conversation  become 
bright  with  the  light  of  love.  The  judgment  feels  the  inner  illumina 
tion,  and  decides  according  to  the  law  of  truth  and  righteousness. 
With  the  judgment  the  delight  is  lit  up  also,  and  the  heart  rejoices  ia 
the  law  of  the  Lord. 

The  light  is  poured  in  upon  the  conscience,  and  now  that  poor,  half- 
blinded  thing  issues  edicts  and  gives  forth  verdicts  which  are  according 
to  the  oracles  of  God.  What  a  difference  between  a  natural  conscience 
and  a  conscience  instructed  by  God,  and  enlightened  by  his  Word  I 
There  remains  much  more  to  be  done  in  this  direction  than  many  of  us 
suspect.  We  may  be  living  unconsciously  in  evils  for  which  our 
consciences  have  never  once  accused  us.  Godly  men,  in  old  time,  per 
secuted  those  who  differed  from  them,  and  thought  it  a  duty  to  do  so : 
they  even  called  toleration  a  crime.  The  best  of  men  owned  negro 
slaves,  and  were  not  conscious  of  wrong.  When  Mr.  Whitefield  left 
certain  negroes  to  the"  Orphan  House,  he  did  not  dream  that  he  was 
violating  the  rights  of  man  :  in  fact,  he  was  very  careful  for  their  present 
and  future  welfare.  Conscience  does  not  tolerate  slavery  now.  Do  you 


$62  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

not  think  that  a  great  enlightenment  has  taken  place  upon  the  drink 
question  ?  Is  not  similar  light  needed  as  to  war,  as  to  wage-paying 
and  wage-earning,  and  a  thousand  other  things  ?  It  is  a  happy  thing 
"that  we  have  received  a.  light  which  will  shine  brighter  and  brighter 
unto  the  perfect  day.  There  is  nothing  hid  within  us  which  this  light 
'will  not  manifest;  and  so,  as,  one  by  one,  we  see  our  imperfections, 
we  shall  cry  for  grace  to  remove  them,  and,  thus  we  shall  grow  in 
holiness  through  the  grace  of  God. 

This  same  light,  falling  on  the  memory,  awakens  penitence  for  our 
faults  and  gratitude  for  God's  goodness.  Shining  on  our  thoughts,  it 
makes  them  sparkle  with  the  beauty  of  holiness,'  shining  upon  our 
emotions,  it  makes  them  flash  and  glow  with  love  to  God  and  heavenly 
things.  A  soul  is  a  fine  object  when  thus  lit  up.!  The  holy  light  falls 
on  our  motives,  and  unveils  the  secret  heart  of  all  our  actions.  You  do 
.right,  but  this  light  shows  you  why  you  do  right.  You  are  a  friend 
to  man,  but  why  ?  You  are  a  Christian  professor,,  but  are  you  sincere  ? 
The  light  makes  short  work  with  that  which  did  not  flow  from  a  pure 
motive.  This  light  falls  also  on  the  spirit  in  which  a  deed  was  done ; 
and  here  much  is  seen  which  some  had  rather  not  see. 

Did  you  ever  have  the  light  of  God  brought  to  bear  upon  your 
imagination  ?  Imagination  is  the  play-room  of  the  soul.  Here  many 

•  a  man  considers  that  he  is  without  law.     "  Surely,"  says  he,  "thought 
is  free."    The  man  gloats  over  sins  which  he  would  fear  to  commit :  he 

.finds  a  pleasure  in  thinking  over  lusts  which  his  circumstances  compel 
him  to  avoid.  In  the  dark  chambers  of  imagination  the  heart  commits 
.adulteries,  murders,  thefts,  and  all  manner  of  infamies.  When  the 
light  falls  here,  the  man  shudders  as  he  learns  that  as  he  thinketh  in  his 
heart  so  is  he.  He  trembles  as  he  perceives  that  the  fond  imagination 
of  sin  is  sin.  Then  is  the  floor  of  imagination  purged,  and  the  foul 

•  dust  and  chaff  are  driven  into  the  fire.     Fancy  then  gleams  in  the 
light   of  God,   and  imagination,  washed   in  the   brazen  laver,  sings 
songs  on  her  stringed   instruments  unto  the  God  of   her   salvation, 
who  has  brought  her  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light. 

Brethren,  we  need  the  light  to  shine  in  upon  our.  tempers.  We 
know  some  Christian  people  who  will  not  let  you  mention  their  tempers: 
they  have  taken  out  a  license  to  be  as  surly  as  they  like,  on  the  ground 
of  "  it  is  their  constitution."  "No,"  they  say,  "  I  cannot  help  being 
passionate.  My  mother  was  a  very  quick-tempered  woman,  and  I  am 
naturally  in  that  way.  There's  no  help  for  it."  Let  the  light  in 
upon  that  unseemly  thing.  If  what  you  say  be  true,  write  it  down  in 
black  and  white  that  you  are  an  incorrigible  vixen,  and  must  be  so  all 
your  life.  What !  Do  you  not  like  it  ?  If  it  is  true,  let  the  light 
in  upon  it.  Let  it  be  known  to  your  own  self  and  to  others  that  you 
are  a  mad  dog,  and  that  there  is  no  curing  you.  Are  you  angry  with 
me  for  suggesting  it  ?  I  am  only  taking  you  at  your  word.  Do  not 
say,  "  I  cannot  help  having  a  bad  temper."  Friend,  you  must  help  it. 
Pray  God  to  help  you  to  overcome  it  at  once  ;  for  either  you  must  kill 
it,  or  it  will  kill  you.  You  cannot  carry  a  bad  temper  into  heaven. 
They  will  have  none  of  your  passions  in  the  "Father's  house  above. 
Let  in  the  light  of  Christ's  love  on  it,  and  the  vile  thing  will  be  made 
to  die.  It  is  a  night-bird  j  it  cannot  bear  the  light  of  grace  and  love. 


THE    EYE   AND   THE    LIGHT.  5$$ 

Live  near  to  Jesus,  and  his  compassion  will  destroy  your  evil  passion. 
J.ry  it. 

Your  desires,  your  hopes,  your  fears,  your  aspirations,  should  all  be 
set  m  the  light,  and  what  a  joy  it  will  be  when  they  all  glitter  in  it! 

No   part  dark  "—what   a   wonderful   condition!     Some   professors 

appear  to  have  a  little  light  in  the  upper  rooms ;  they  have  notions 

their  heads,  and  ideas  on  their  tongues !     Alas !  the  first  floor  is 

clark,  very  dark.     From  their  common  conversation  the  light  of  God 

is  absent.     Enter  at  the  door,  and  you  cannot  see  your  way  into  the 

passage,  or  up  the  stairs ;  the  light  is  up  aloft,  but  not  in  the  dwellinff- 

Oh   for  light  in  the  region  of  the  heart !     Oh,  for  light  upon 

household  talk,  and  the  business  conversation !     From  Barret  to 

cellar  may  the  whole  houses  of  our  humanity  be  lighted  up !    This  is 

the  true  work  of  grace,  when  the  whole  man  is  brought  into  the  li^ht, 

and  no  part  is  left  to  pine  in  the  darkness.     Then  are  we  the  children 

of  light,  when  we  abide  in  the  light,  and  have  no  fellowship   with 

darkness.     Then  is  the  distinction  seen  between  Israel  and  Eo-ypt  • 

for  while  all  Egypt  sat  in  a  darkness  which  might  be  felt,  in  the  land 

of  Groshen  there  was  light. 

Where  this  light  comes  it  gives  certainty :  we  cease  to  doubt,  and  we 
know  whom  we  have  believed.  With  this  comes  direction :  we  see  our 
way,  and  how  to  walk  in  it.  We  pursue  a  plain  path,  and  are  no  more 
m  a  maze  "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,"  is  sounded  in  our  ears 
as  the  light  revealsto  us  the  narrow  way  which  leads  to  life  eternal. 

This  light,  when  it  dwells  in  the  heart,  brings  good  cheer  with  it. 
Darkness  is  doleful,  light  brings  delight.  Did  you  never  travel  by  a 
train  which  passed  through  a  tunnel,  but  was  destitute  of  a  single 
lamp  ?  Somebody  has  struck  a  match,  and  lighted  a  candle,  and  all 
eyes  have  turned  towards  him.  In  a  small  way  he  was  a  benefactor: 
all  eyes  are  glad  of  light.  Oh,  what  a  sweet  thing  is  the  light  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  one  that  has  been  long  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance, 
sorrow,  and  despair  !  A  poor  boy  who  was  put  down  in  the  coal  mine 
to  close  a  door  after  the  coal  waggons  had  passed  by,  was  forced  to 
sit  there  all  alone,  hour  after  hour,  in  the  dark.  He  was  a  gracious 
child  ;  and  when  one  said  to  him,  "  Are  you  not  weary  with  sitting  so 
long  in  the  dark?  "  he  said,  «  Yes,  I  do  get  tired  ;  but  sometimes  the 
men  give  me  a  bit  of  candle,  and  when  I  get  a  light  I  sing.'  So  do  we. 
When  we  get  a  light  we  sing.  Glory  be  to  God,  he  is  our  light  and 
our  salvation,  and  therefore  we  sing.  0  child  of  God,  when  ycur  eye 
is  single,  and  the  light  of  God  fills  every  part  of  your  being,  then  you 
sing,  and  sing  again,  and  feel  that  you  can  never  have  done  singing 
on  earth,  till  you  begin  singing  in  heaven. 

The  text  has  perplexed  many  a  learned  reader ;  and  therefore  you 
will  not  wonder  that  I  confess  that  it  has  puzzled  me  many  times.  See 
what  it  says:— "If  thy  whole  body  therefore  be  full  of  light,  having 
no  part  dark,  the  whole  shall  be  full  of  light."  Is  not  this  saying  the 
same  thing  ?  The  Holy  Spirit  would  not  use  a  tautology,  nor  utter  a 
trite,  self-evident  thing.  Yet  we  must  not  go  beyond  what  the  text 
says.  It  seems  to  me  that  our  Lord  wished  us  to  feel  that  he  could 
say  nothing  better  in  praise  of  a  soul  in  which  there  was  no  part  dark 
than  what  he  had  said,  namely,  "  The  whole  shall  be  full  of  light." 


664  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Some  have  thought  that  he  meant  that  being  lighted  within  we  shaH 
be  full  of  light  to  others.  That  is  a  great  truth ;  but  our  Lord  does 
not  say  so  here  ;  for  he  compares  our  inward  light  to  a  candle  which 
shines  on  ourselves  :  "as  when  the  bright  shining  of  a  candle  doth 
give  thee  light."  He  refers  to  our  own  personal  comfort.  When  a 
room  is  thoroughly  well  lighted  up  in  every  corner,  it  has  a  joyous 
splendour.  One  looks  about  and  feels  content  and  satisfied.  So,  when 
the  whole  nature  is  filled  with  the  light  of  God,  we  have  sweetness  and 
light  to  the  full,  and  heaven  seems  begun  below.  It  is  inexpressibly 
delightsome,  luxuriously  blessed,  to  dwell  in  the  full  light  of  Grod 
when  there  is  no  concealment  and  no  love  of  evil.  When  once  the 
sun  thus  shines  full  on  me  I  would  cry  with  Joshua,  "  Sun,  stand  thou 
still  »  ! 

This  inner  light  will  make  us  shine  before  others.  It  is  the  only 
shining  we  should  seek.  A  clean  lantern  with  a  lighted  candle 
in  it  makes  no  noise,  and  yet  it  wins  attention  :  the  darker  the  night, 
the  more  is  it  valued.  There  never  was  a  time  in  which  true  inner 
light  was  more  needed  than  now  :  may  the  Lord  impart  it  to  each  one 
of  us,  and  then  we  shall  shine  as  lights  in  the  world  !  The  Lord  Grod 
bring  this  light  to  you,  and  fill  you  with  it ;  and  unto  his  name  shall 
be  the  glory  !  You  have  not  to  work  for  the  light,  you  have  only  to 
receive  it.  Then  shall  your  profiting  be  known  unto  all  men  when  it 
is  true  profiting  to  your  own  character.  Grod  bless  you,  for  Christ's 
sake !  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  xi.  14 — 44. 


HYMNS  FROM  "Qua  OWN  HYMN  BOOK" — 911,  459,   126. 


Sfldropolitmi  SEabcrmtcle  futpii. 


THE  TWO   BUILDERS   AND  THEIR   HOUSES. 


sermou 

DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  FEBRUARY  27TH,  1870,  BY 

C.  II.  SPUltGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,    NEWINQTON. 


"Therefore  whosoever  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine,  and  doeth  them,  I  will  liken 
'him  unto  a  wise  man,  which  built  his  house  upon  a  rock :  and  the  rain  descended,  and 
the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew,  and  beat  upon  that  house ;  and  it  fell  not:  for  it 
was  founded  upon  a  rock.  And  every  one  that  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine,  and 
doeth  them  not,  shall  be  likened  unto  a  foolish  man,  which  built  his  house  upon  the 
sand:  and  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew,  and  beat  upon 
that  house ;  and  it  fell :  and  great  was  the  fall  of  it." — Matthew  vii.  24 — 27. 

THESE  were  the  closing  words  of  our  Saviour's  most  famous  sermon 
'upon  the  mount.  Some  preachers  concentrate  all  their  powers  upon  an 
•effort  to  conclude  with  a  fine  thing  called  a  peroration ;  which,  being 
interpreted,  means  a  blaze  of  rhetorical  fireworks,  in  the  glory  of  which 
the  speaker  subsides.  They  certainly  have  not  the  example  of  Christ  in 
this  discourse  to  warrant  them  in  the  practice.  Here  is  the  Saviour's 
peroration,  and  yet  it  is  as  simple  as  any  other  part  of  the  address. 
There  is  an  evident  absence  of  all  artificial  oratory.  The  whole  of  his 
hill-sermon  was  intensely  earnest,  and  that  earnestness  was  sustained 
to  the  end,  so  that  the  closing  words  are  as  glowing  coals,  or  as  sharp 
arrows  of  the  bow.  Our  Lord  closes  not  by  displaying  his  own  powers 
of  elocution,  but  by  simply  and  affectionately  addressing  a  warning  to 
those  who,  having  heard  his  words,  should  remain  satisfied  with  hearing, 
and  should  not  go  forth  and  put  them  into  practice.  As  according  to  usual 
•experience  a  preacher  warms  to  his  subject  as  he  advances,  and  becomes 
more  intense  as  he  nears  his  final  sentences,  we  are  bound  to  give  the  more 
earnest  heed  to  the  words  which  are  now  before  us,  with  which  the 
Lord  of  all  preachers  concluded  his  memorable  discourse. 

Jesus  had  been  saying  many  things,  but  these  are  two  words  to 
which  I  think  he  specially  alluded  when  he  said,  "  Whosoever  heareth 
these  sayings  of  mine,  and  doeth  them,  I  will  liken  him  unto  a  wise 
man."  The  first  of  these  words  was,  "  Enter  ye  in"  (Matthew  vii. 
13);  and  the  second  was,  "  Beivare"  (Matthew  vii.  15).  Our  Lord  had 
spoken  of  the  "  strait  gate,"  of  the  "  narrow  way,"  and  of  the  few  who 
travel  it,  and  his  urgent  admonition  was,  "Enter  ye  in."  Not  "Learn 
ye  all  concerning  it,  and  then  be  satisfied;"  not  "Find  fault  with  the 
travellers  and  the  road;"  not  "Seek  to  enlarge  the  gate  and  widen 
the  way,"  but  "Enter  ye  in."  Be  obedient  to  the  gospel,  believe  its 

No.  918.  55 


122  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

testimony  concerning  Jesus ;  enter  into  fellowship  with  its  mysteries, 
receive  its  blessings:  be  travellers  along  its  road.  "Enter  ye  in."  He 
who  hears  of  the  way  to  heaven,  but  enters  not  into  it,  is  a  foolish  man; 
he  who  hearing  of  the  strait  gate,  presses  to  enter  in,  is  a  wise  man. 

Afterwards  our  Lord  added  the  other  admonition,  "  Beware." 
"  Beware,"  saith  he,  "  of  false  prophets;"  and  after  having  dwelt  for 
awhile  on  that,  he  added  in  other  words,  "  Beware  of  false  professions.'* 
Of  false  prophets  beware,  for  they  may  delude  you,  they  may  bring 
before  you  a  salvation  which  will  not  save,  a  mere  mirage  that  looks  like- 
the  pure,  cooling,  refreshing  stream,  but  which  only  mocks  your  thirst. 
Beware  of  all  teaching  which  would  lead  you  away  from  the  one  Saviour 
of  the  souls  of  men.  And  then  he  adds,  "  Beware  of  false  professions," 
however  loudly  they  make  you  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord."  You  may  have  in 
company  with  these  professions  the  loftiest  gifts,  such  as  casting  out 
devils;  and  the  greatest  abilities,  such  as  only  prophets  possess;  but 
they  shall  not  avail  you.  In  that  day  when  the  Master  shall  only 
accept  into  his  marriage-feast  the  companions  of  his  warfare  on  earth, 
he  will  say  to  those  who  have  not  done  the  Father's  will, "  I  never  knew  ye;, 
depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity."  These  are  two  of  the  sayings 
of  Christ,  and  they  are  comprehensive  of  almost  all  he  ever  said : 
"  Enter  ye  in  "  and  "  Beware."  Take  heed  that  ye  do  them  as  well  as 
hear  them. 

I.  "We  shall  now  proceed  to  the  Master's  parable,  and  will  you  please- 
notice,  first  of  all,  THE  TWO  BUILDERS. 

The  wise  and  the  foolish  man  were  both  engaged  in  precisely  the  same 
avocations,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  achieved  the  same  design ;  both 
of  them  undertook  to  build  houses,  both  of  them  persevered  in  building, 
both  of  them  finished  their  houses.  The  likeness  between  them  is  very 
considerable.  They  were  equally  impressed  with  the  need  of  building  a 
house.  They  perceived  the  necessity  of  shelter  from  the  heavy  rains, 
they  were  alike  desirous  of  being  shielded  from  the  floods,  and  screened 
from  the  wind.  The  advantage  of  a  house  to  dwell  in  was  evident  to 
both.  Even  thus,  at  this  period,  we  have  a  large  number  in  the  con 
gregation  who  are  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  they  need  a 
Saviour.  I  am  delighted  to  find  that  there  is  a  stir  among  my  hearers, 
and  I  trust  it  is  a  movement  of  God's  Holy  Spirit ;  and  as  a  result  very 
many  of  you  feel  deeply  that  you  need  a  refuge  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
You  now  admit  that  you  must  be  forgiven,  justified,  regenerated  and 
sanctified,  and  your  desires  are  fervent ;  for  all  which  I  am  deeply  grateful, 
but  also  deeply  anxious.  You  are  in  crowds  desirous  of  becoming  builders,, 
and  although  some  are  wise  and  some  foolish,  up  to  this  present  we 
can  see  no  difference  in  you ;  for  you  seem  to  be  equally  convinced 
that  you  need  eternal  life,  and  a  good  hope  for  the  world  to  come.  Nor 
doeg  the  likeness  end  here,  for  the  two  builders  were  both  alike  resolved 
to  tUain  what  they  needed— &  house;  and  their  determination  was 
not  in  words  only,  but  in  deeds,  for  they  both  resolutely  set  to 
work  to  build.  In  the  same  way  there  are  among  us  at  this  hour  many 
who  are  resolved  that  if  Christ  "is  to  be  had,  they  will  have  him  ;  and 
if  there  is  such  a  thing  as  salvation,  they  will  find  it.  They  are  very 
earnest,  intensely  earnest,  and  though  some  of  them  will  fail,  and  some 
of  them  succeed,  yet  up  to  this  point  they  are  both  alike,  and  none  but 


THE  TWO   BUILDERS  AND  THEIR   HOUSES.  123 

'he  who  searcheth  all  hearts  can  discern  the  slightest  difference.  I  look 
with  sadness  upon  the  t\vo  pilgrims,  with  their  faces  zealously  turned 
Zionward,  and  I  sigh  as  I  wonder  which  one  will  find  the  Celestial  City, 
and  which  will  join  with  Formalist  and  Hypocrisy,  and  perish  on  the 
Dark  Mountains.  We  are  glad  to  hear  of  yearning  hearts  and  resolute 
determinations,  but.  alas !  all  is  not  wheat  that  prows  in  corn-fields,  all 
is  not  gold  that  glitters.  Appearances  are  very  very  hopeful,  but 
appearances  are  often  deceptive.  There  may  be  a  deep  sense  of  need, 
and  there  may  be  a  determined  resolution  to  get  that  need  supplied, 
and  yet  out  of  two  seekers,  one  may  find  and  the  other  may  miss,  one 
may  be  foolish  and  the  other  may  be  wise. 

These  two  builders  seem  to  have  been  equally  well  skilled  in  archi 
tecture.  The  one  could  build  a  house  without  receiving  any  more 
instruction  than  the  other.  I  do  not  find  that  there  was  halt 
•or  pause  on  the  part  of  either  because  he  could  not  turn  an 
arch,  or  fix  a  truss.  Evidently  they  were  both  skilled  workmen, 
well  acquainted  with  their  art.  So  is  it  with  many  here.  They  know 
as  far  as  the  theory  goes  what  the  plan  of  salvation  is,  as  well  as  I  do. 
Yet,  where  the  knowledge  is  the  same,  the  ultimate  result  may  vary; 
two  men  may  be  equally  well  instructed  in  the  Scriptures,  yet  one  of 
them  may  be  wise  and  the  other  foolish.  To  know  what  faith  is,  what 
repentance  is,  what  a  good  hope  in  Christ  is,  may  all  be  yours,  and  yet 
it  may  but  increase  your  misery  for  ever.  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy 
are  ye  if  ye  do  them.  It  is  not  the  hearer,  but  the  doer  of  the  word, 
that  is  blessed.  Knowledge  puffeth  up;  love  alone  buildeth  up.  My 
-dear  friends,  I  am  most  earnest  that  those  of  you  who  are  desiring  to 
find  everlasting  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  may  not  be  content  with  anything 
short  of  a  true,  deep,  and  real  work  of  grace  in  your  hearts ;  for  no 
clearness  of  head  knowledge,  no  natural  earnestness  of  purpose  or 
eagerness  of  desire  can  save  you;  without  an  interest  in  Christ  Jesus 
you  are  lost  to  all  eternity.  "Ye  must  be  born-  again;"  ye  must  be 
brought  into  vital  union  with  the  living  Saviour,  or  your  hopefulness 
will  end  in  overwhelming  destruction. 

Once  more,  these  two  builders  both  persevered  and  finished  their 
.ttructure.  The  foolish  man  did  not  begin  to  build,  and  then  cease  his 
work  because  he  was  not  able  to  finish ;  but,  as  far  as  I  know,  his  house 
was  finished  with  us  much  completeness  as  the  other  ;  and,  perhaps, 
furnished  quite  as  well.  If  you  had  looked  at  the  two  structures,  they 
would  have  seemed  equally  complete  from  basement  to  roof,  and  yet 
there  was  a  great  difference  between  them  in  a  most  essential  point* 
Even  thus,  alas  I  many  persevere  in  seeking  salvation  until  they 
imagine  that  they  have  found  it;  they  abide  for  years  in  the  full  belief 
that  they  are  saved;  they  cry,  "Peace,  peace,"  and  write  themselves  down 
amongst  the  blessed,  and  yet  a  fatal  error  lies  at  the  base  of  all  their 
religion;  all  their  hopes  are  vain,  and  their  life-work  will  prove  to  be  a 
terrible  failure.  The  builders  are  much  alike  up  to  this  point,  but  yet  in 
reality  they  are  wide  as  the  poles  asunder  both  in  work  and  character. 
The  one  builder  is  wise,  the  other  foolish;  the  one  superficial,  the 
other  substantial ;  the  one  pretentious,  the  other  sincere.  The  wise 
man's  work  was  honest  work  where  men's  eyes  could  not  judge  of  it,  the 
other's  work  was  only  well  wrought  above  ground,  there  was  nothing 


124  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  reality  in  the  hidden  parts ;  and  hence  in  due  time  the  first  builder 
rejoiced  as  he  saw  his  house  outlive  the  storm;  the  other  with  his- 
house  was  swept  away  to  total  destruction. 

II.  Thus  much  upon  the  two  builders,  let  us  now  think  upon  THEIR. 

TWO  HOUSES. 

One  chief  apparent  difference  between  the  two  edifices  probably  was 
this,  that  one  of  them  built  his  house  more  quickly  than  the  other.  The 
wise  man  had  to  spend  a  deal  of  time  in  underground  work.  Luke, 
tells  us  that  he  digged  deep,  and  laid  his  foundation  on  a  rock.  Now 
that  rock-blasting,  that  carving  and  cutting  of  the  hard  granite,  must 
have  consumed  days  and  weeks.  The  foolish  builder  had  not  this- 
delay  to  encounter ;  the  sand  was  all  smooth  and  ready  for  him ;  he 
was  able  to  commence  at  once  to  lay  his  courses  of  brick,  and  raise  the 
walls  with  all  rapidity.  But  all  haste  is  not  good  speed,  and  there  be- 
some  who  travel  too  fast  to  hold.  Unsound  professors  are  often  very 
rapid  in  their  supposed  spiritual  growth.  They  were  yesterday  un 
converted,  to-day  they  become  believers,  to-morrow  they  begin  to- 
teach,  the  next  day  they  are  made  perfect.  They  appear  to  be  born  of 
full  stature,  and  equipped  at  all  points,  like  Minerva,  when,  according- 
to  the  fable,  she  leaped  from  the  brain  of  Jupiter.  They  come  up  in  a- 
night,  and  alas!  too  often,  like  Jonah's  gourd,  they  perish  also  in  a  night- 
Now  I  raise  not  a  question  concerning  the  genuine  character  of  sudden 
conversions.  I  believe  that  sndden  conversions  are  among  the  best  and 
truest  forms  of  conversion.  Take,  for  instance,  that  of  the  apostle  PauL 
But  still  there  are  among  those  who  profess  to  have  been  suddenly  con 
verted  a  sadly  numerous  company  who  answer  to  the  description  I 
have  just  given,  for  they  build  very,  very  quickly,  much  too  quickly 
for  the  masonry  to  be  well  constructed  and  lasting.  It  may  be  that 
some  mourner  is  lamenting  bitterly  that  he  makes  very  slow  progress* 
in  grace.  "  I  have  been  seeking  God  in  prayer,"  says  one,  "  these 
months.  I  have  been  humbled  and  broken  down  under  a  sense  of  sin- 
for  weeks,  and  have  only  as  yet  had  now  and  then  a  glimpse  of  hoper 
when  I  have  been  able  to  turn  my  eye  to  the  crucified  Saviour.  I  have 
as  yet  few  consolations,  and  many  doubts.  I  fain  would  have  the  full 
light  of  love  in  my  heart,  but  the  dawning  is  slow  in  breaking,"  "Well,, 
friend,  you  are  building  slowly,  but  if  it  be  surely,  you  shall  have  no 
cause  to  regret  that  deep  digging.  Small  cause  will  you  have  to  mourn, 
that  it  took  you  longer  to  arrive  at  peace  than  it  did  your  hasty  friend,. 
if  your  peace  shall  last  you  to  eternity,  while  his  hope  shall  be  a 
possession  in  cloudland,  driven  away  of  the  wind. 

Of  the  two  houses,  one  was  built,  I  doubt  not,  ivithfar  less  trouble  than? 
the  other.  Digging  foundations  in  hard  rocks,  as  I  have  said,  takes- 
time,  but  it  also  involves  labour.  Oftentimes  did  that  wise  builder 
pause  to  wipe  the  sweat  from  his  brow ;  oftentimes  did  he  retire  to  his 
bed  worn  out  with  his  day's  work,  and  yet  there  was  not  a  stone 
appearing  above  the  soil.  His  neighbour,  opposite,  had  run  up  the 
walls,  had  reached  the  gable,  was  almost  about  to  put  on  the  roof, 
before  there  was  scarce  a  foot  above  the  ground  of  the  wise  builder's 
structure.  "  Ah,"  said  he  of  the  sandy  foundation,  "  your  toil  is  need 
less,  and  you  have  nothing  to  show  for  it.  See  how  quickly  my  walla- 
have  risen,  and  yet  I  don't  slave  as  you  do.  I  take  things  easily ;  1 


THE   TWO  BUILDERS  AND  THEIR   HOUSES.  125 

neither  bore  myself  nor  the  rocks,  and  yet  see  how  my  house  springs  nn 
and  how  neat  it  looks  !  Your  old-fashioned  ways  are  absurd.  You  dig 
and  hammer  away  down  below  there  as  if  you  meant  to  pierce  the 
centre.  Why  not  use  your  common  sense,  and  go  a-head  as  I  do 
Away  with  your  sighing  and  groaning,  do  as  I  do,  and  rejoice  at  once.' 
Anxiety  will  kill  you."  After  this  fashion  are  truly  awakened  souls, 
like  Lamps  despised  of  those  who  are  at  ease."  One  man  jumps  as  it 
were,  into  peace,  and  boasts  himself  secure  ;  whether  he  is  correct  or  not 
in  his  confidence,  he  does  not  pause  to  question,  he  is  too  comfortable  to 
have  time  to  enquire  into  that  matter.  The  estate  is  fair,  why  worry 
about  the  title-deeds  ?  The  feast  is  rich,  why  tarry  for  the  weddino-- 
If  a  doubt  should  arise,  the  carnally  secure  man  ascribes 

i  to  Satan,  and  puts  it  aside,  whereas  it  is  his  own  conscience  and  the 
warning  voice  of  hearen  which  bid  him  take  heed  and  be  not  deceived 
lhe  prayer  for  the  Lord  to  search  and  try  his  heart  and  his  reins    he 
never  sincerely  offers.     Such  a  man  does  not  like  self-examination,  and 
cannot  endure  to  be  told  that  there  must  be  fruits  meet  for  repentance. 
He  takes  things  at  guess-work,  comes  to  rash  conclusions,  and  shuts 
his  eyes  to  disagreeable  facts.    He  dreams  that  he  is  rich  and  increased 
in  goods,  whereas  he  is  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable.     Alas,  what  a 
waking  will  be  his  !     His  more  serious  companion  aroused  at  the  same 
time  is,  on  the  other  hand,  far  more  diffident  and  self- distrustful ; 
when  he  prays  his   heart  groans   before  God,  yet  he  fears   he   does 
not    pray   aright,   and   never   rises   from   his   knees  contented   with 
himself.     He  is  not  quite  so  soon  satisfied  about  the  reality  of  his  faith 
as  the  other;  "  Perhaps/  says  he,  "after  all  it  is  not  the  faith  of  God's 
elect."     He  examines  himself  whether  he  be  in  the  faith.     He  trembles 
lest  he  should  have  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power.     He  is 
afraid  of  shams  and  counterfeits,  and  is  for  buying  gold  tried  in  the  fire. 
"  My  repentance,"  saith  he,  "  am  I  sure  it  is  a  real  loathing  of  sin  as  sin,' 
or  did  I  only  shed  a  tear  or  two  under  the  excitement  of  a  revival  service  ? 
Am  I  sure  that  my  nature  is  renewed  by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
or  is  it  mere  reformation?"  You  see  this  second  man  has  much  exer 
cise  of  soul,  he  labours  to  enter  into  rest,  lest  by  any  means  he  should 
seem  to  come  short  of  it.     He  has  many  strivings,  many  anxieties, 
many  searchiugs  of  heart,  because  he  is  sincere  and  fears  to  be  deceived. 
From  him  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  he  finds  the  gate 
strait  and  the  way  narrow,  and  that  the  righteous  scarcely  are  saved. 

Be  thankful,  dear  hearer,  if  you  are  among  this  second  class,  for  these 
are  the  true  sons  of  God,  and  heirs  of  immortality.  Your  house  costs 
you  more  to  build,  but  it  will  be  worth  the  cost.  0  beware  of  wearing 
the  sheep's  clothing  without  the  sheep's  nature;  beware  of  saying 
"  Lord,  Lord,"  while  you  are  the  servant  of  sin.  Beware  of  getting  up 
fictitious  religion,  borrowing  your  experience  from  biographies,  picking 
up  godliness  at  second-hand  from  your  mothers  and  fathers,  and 
friends  and  acquaintances.  Whatever  it  mav  cost  you  of  heart 
breaking  and  agony,  see  to  it  that  the  sure  foundation  is  reached,  and 
the  house  so  builded,  that  it  will  endure  the  trials  which  will  inevitably 
test  it.  I  would  fain  saturate  my  speech  with  tears,  so  weighty  and  so 
needful  do  I  feel  this  caution  to  be,  both  to  myself  and  you. 

I  should  think  that,  in  the  course  of  time,  although  the  foolish  builder 


126  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

built  with  so  much  less  cost,  and  so  much  more  rapidly,  his  walls  would 
le  liable  to  very  ugly  settlements.  For  walls  that  have  no  foundation, 
but  are  piled  up  on  the  sand,  would  every  now  and  then  gape  wide  with 
hideous  cracks;  and  stones  would  start  here,  and  timbers  would  slip 
there,  and  cement  and  stopping  would  be  much  required.  What  work 
for  daubers  and  plasterers  to  make  the  ruinous  fabric  look  like  decent 
masonry !  Very  likely  when  a  settlement  was  covered  up  in  one  place, 
another  would  happen  in  the  next  wall ;  for  with  such  a  foundation  it 
would  be  hard  to  keep  the  structure  well  together,  and  in  the  long  run 
I  should  not  wonder  but  what  it  would  cost  the  foolish  builder  more 
pains  to  keep  up  his  wretched  edifice  than  it  did  the  wise  builder  who 
laboured  so  hard  with  his  foundation  at  the  first.  Mark  you  well,  that 
mere  formal  religion  and  hypocrisy  in  the  end  become  a  very  difficult 
affair  to  maintain.  The  man  has  to  struggle  hard  to  patch  up  his 
reputation,  propping  it  up  with  new  lies,  and  bolstering  it  with  fresh 
pretences.  At  one  time  an  un renewed  will  rebels  fiercely,  and  he  has 
to  feign  resignation  to  affliction ;  next  an  unconquered  lust  demands 
indulgence,  and  he  has  to  conceal  the  sin  with  more  double-distilled 
deceit ;  the  form  of  prayer  becomes  irksome,  and  he  has  to  screw  him 
self  up  to  the  horrible  farce ;  and  meanwhile  his  outward  life  is  always 
on  the  verge  of  a  slip,  and  he  fears  detection.  One  way  and  another  he 
is  continually  afraid,  like  a  thief  at  large  who  fears  that  the  police  will 
find  him.  At  every  puff  of  wind  his  habitation  threatens  to  tumble 
about  his  ears.  He  half  wishes  after  ail  that  he  had  been  at  the  trouble 
of  digging  a  foundation  on  the  rock,  but  with  desperate  resolve  he  puts 
from  him  the  voice  of  caution,  and  will  have  none  of  its  rebuke.  0 
dear  hearer,  rest  assured  that  truth,  after  all,  is  the  cheapest  and  easiest 
in  the  long  run.  Your  gilt,  your  varnish,  your  paint,  your  hypocrisy, 
soon  wear  off,  while  the  reality  is  at  no  expense  for  beautifying.  Even 
as  a  matter  of  consideration  for  this  life,  it  will  be  more  hard  in  the 
long  run  to  keep  up  the  pretentious  than  to  maintain  the  true  ;  and 
then  in  the  latter  case  you  have  God  at  your  back,  while  he  abhors 
everything  unreal.  I  beseech  you  see  to  it  that  ye  daub  not  your  walls 
with  untempered  mortar,  lest  they  not  only  come  down  with  a  crash 
when  most  you  need  to  shelter  behind  them,  but  even  now  begin  to 
show  alarming  signs  of  decay. 

The  higher  the  foolish  man  built  the  harder  ivork  he  had  to  keep  it 
upright,  for  of  course  every  tier  of  bricks  that  he  laid  made  the 
weight  the  greater,  and  caused  the  sand  to  give  way.  The  nearer 
heaven  the  builder  went  the  sooner  his  wall  bowed  to  its  fall.  A  man 
who  only  makes  it  his  aim  to  be  thought  a  respectable  man  by  attending 
a  place  of  worship,  may  manage  pretty  well  to  keep  up  such  a  low  wall 
even  without  a  foundation  ;  another  man  who  joins  a  worldly  church — 
a  church  that  makes  no  pretence  of  purity — can  also  succeed  with  ease ; 
but  if  he  joins  a  church  of  Jesus  Christ  which  carefully  seeks  to  pre 
serve  purity  in  its  membership,  he  has  hard  work  to  live  up  to  the 
standard  required  of  him.  Suppose,  yet  further,  that  he  should 
become  a  deacon  or  an  elder,  and  he  is  devoid  of  grace,  his  higher 
aim  will  cost  him  more  by  far — for  there  are  more  to  look  at 
him,  and  there  is  more  required  of  him.  Now  he  prays  in  public, 
now  he  speaks  a  word  of  instruction  to  enquirers,  and  what  straits 


THE   TWO   BUILDERS  AND  THEIR  HOUSES.  127 

and  shifts  the  poor  man  is  driven  to,  how  constantly  out  of  his 
own  mouth  is  he  condemned?  "Why,"  saith  he  in  his  heart,  "I 
know  nothing  about  these  things  in  my  soul,  and  yet  I  have  to  speak 
and  act  as  if  I  were  taught  of  God."  If  he  becomes  a  preacher, 
he  is  in  a  still  more  pitiful  plight;  what  hard  work  must  it  be, 
then,  to  keep  up  the  character!  When  the  tower  rises  tier  upon 
tier,  upon  so  frail  a  base,  it  leans  like  the  tower  of  Pisa,  and  unlike 
that  singular  structure  it  threatens  to  come  down  with  a  crash. 
By-and-by  such  a  trumpery  thing  falls  in  utter  ruin,  and  its 
•elevation  helps  to  hasten  the  catastrophe.  So,  my  dear  hearers,  the 
more  spirituality  you  aim  at,  and  the  more  usefulness  you  strive  for, 
the  worse  for  you,  unless  you  have  a  good  foundation  to  begin  with,  in 
true  sincerity  and  real  faith.  So  bad  is  the  course  of  unsound  religion, 
that  the  further  you  go  in  it  the  worse  it  becomes. 

The  main  difference,  however,  between  the  two  houses  did  not  lay  in 
these  cracks  and  settlements,  nor  in  the  cheapness  or  rapidity  of  the 
building — it  lay  out  of  sight,  underground.  It  was  all  a  matter  of 
foundation.  How  many  there  are  who  suppose  that  if  a  thing  is 
out  of  sight  it  may  as  well  be  out  of  mind  !  Who  do  you  think 
is  likely  to  dig  down  and  see  what  the  foundations  are?  "  Well,"  saith 
one,  "  I  see  no  need  for  being  over  precise ;  I  do  not  believe  in 
being  so  particular.  What  nobody  sees  cannot  signify."  Many 
subscribe  to  the  graceless  song — 

"  For  faith  and  grace  let  foolish  zealots  fight ; 
He  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the  right.** 

41  You  pay  twenty  shillings  in  the  pound,  attend  a  plnce  of  worship 
take  the  sacrament,  be  charitable,  and  say  your  prayers,  and  never 
trouble  about  anything  further" — that  is  the  popular  notion.  "What 
is  the  use  of  fretting  about  your  heart  ?  That  is  all  transcendental  non 
sense.  What  can  it  signify  ?"  That  is  how  the  foolish  builder  com 
forted  himself,  and  he  doubtless  sneered  at  the  wise  builder  as  a  poor 
miserable  creature,  who  was  righteous  overmuch,  and  melancholy. 
Outward  appearance  is  everything  with  men,  but  nothing  with  God. 
The  essential  difference  between  the  true  child  of  God  and  the  mere 
professor  is  not  readily  to  be  discovered,  even  by  spiritual  minds ;  but  the 
Lord  sees  it.  It  is  a  secret  mysterious  something  which  the  Lord 
prizes,  "  for  he  knoweth  them  that  are  his."  He  separates  between  the 
precious  and  the  vile.  He  putteth  away  the  pretenders  as  dross,  but 
he  suffereth  no  sincere  heart  to  be  destroyed. 

What,  then,  is  this  important  matter  ?  I  answer  it  is  just  this. 
Beloved  hearer,  if  thou  wouldst  be  built  on  a  rock,  see  to  it  that  thou 
hast  a  true  sense  of  sin.  I  do  not  say  that  a  sense  of  sin  is  a  prepara 
tion  for  Christ,  and  that  we  ought  to  put  men  back  from  the  gospel  till 
they  feel  their  sin;  but  I  do  believe  that  wherever  there  is  true  faith  in 
Jesus  theregoes  with  it  a  deep  abhorrence  of  sin.  Faith  without  contrition 
is  a  dead  and  worthless  faith.  When  1  meet  with  professors  who  talk 
lightly  of  sin,  I  feel  sure  that  they  have  built  without  a  foundation.  If 
they  had  ever  felt  the  Spirit's  wounding  and  killing  sword  of  conviction, 
they  would  flee  from  sin  as  from  a  lion  or  a  bear.  Truly  forgiven 
einners  dread  the  appearance  of  evil  as  burnt  children  dread  the  fire. 


128  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Superficial  repentance  always  leads  to  careless  living.  Faith  that  was 
never  bedewed  with  repentance  never  brings  forth  the  flowers  of  holiness. 
Pray  earnestly  for  a  broken  heart.  Remember  it  is  the  contrite  spirit 
which  God  is  pleased  with.  Do  not  believe  that  you  can  have  ground 
for  rejoicing  if  you  never  saw  reason  for  lamenting.  The  promised 
comfort  is  only  secured  to  those  who  have  been  mourners.  (Matt. 
v.  iv.) 

Next  to  this  seek  for  real  faith.  Many  things  which  men  call 
faith  are  not  the  precious  faith  of  God's  elect.  Sincere  trust  in 
Jesus  Christ  is  counterfeited  in  a  thousand  ways,  and  often  imitated 
so  accurately  that  only  by  rigid  self-examination  shall  you  discover 
the  cheat.  Ye  must  lie  flat  upon  Christ,  the  Rock;  ye 'must  depend 
entirely  upon  him,  all  your  hope  and  all  your  trust  must  be  in 
him.  If  you  believe  with  the  heart,  and  not  nominally,  you  are  safe, 
but  not  otherwise.  You  muse  have  true  repentance  and  real  faith,  or 
ye  are  foolish  builders. 

Furthermore,  seek  an  inwrought  experience  of  divine  truth.  Ask  to 
have  it  burnt  into  you.  Why  is  it  that  people  give  up  the  doctrines  of 
grace  if  they  fall  in  with  eloquent  advocates  of  free  will  ?  Why  is  it 
they  renounce  the  orthodox  creed  if  they  meet  with  smart  reasoners  who 
contradict  it  ?  Because  they  have  never  received  the  word  in  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  so  as  to  have  it  sealed  in  their  hearts.  I  tremble 
for  our  churches  now  that  false  doctrine  is  rife,  because  I  fear  that  many 
are  not  established  in  the  truth.  I  pray  the  Lord  for  you,  my  dear 
flock,  that  you  may  know  the  truth  by  being  taught  of  the  Lord,  for 
then  you  will  not  be  led  aside.  The  thieves  and  robbers  will  come,' but 
as  Christ's  sheep  you  will  not  hear  them.  It  is  one  thing  to  have  a  creed ; 
it  is  quite  another  thing  to  have  the  truth  graven  upon  the  tables  of 
the  heart.  Many  fail  here  because  truth  was  never  experimentally 
made  their  own. 

Pray,  moreover,  that  your  faith  may  produce  personal  holiness.  Do 
not  believe  yourself  to  be  saved  from  sin  while  you  are  living  in  sin. 
If  you  can  find  pleasure  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  you  are  no  child  of 
God.  If  you  are  given  to  drunkenness — and,  mark  you,  many  pro 
fessors  are  so, -only  they  drink  at  home  and  are  not  seen  in  the  streets 
— how  dwelleth  the  grace  of  God  in  you?  If  you  delight  in  idle  songs, 
and  frequenting  of  places  of  vain  amusement,  you  need  not  be  long  in 
weighing  yourself,  you  are  found  wanting  already.  If  you  were  re 
newed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind,  you  would  no  more  love  these  things 
than  an  angel  would.  There  must  be  a  new-boru  nature  implanted, 
and  where  there  is  not  this  exemplified  in  holiness  of  life,  you  may 
build  ever  so  high  and  prate  ever  so  loudly  about  your  building,  it  is 
a  poor  miserable  shanty  after  all,  and  will  fall  in  the  last  hurricane. 

Want  of  depth,  want  of  sincerity,  want  of  reality  in  religion — this 
is  the  want  of  our  times.  Want  of  an  eye  to  God  in  religion,  lack  of 
sincere  dealing  with  one's  own  soul,  neglect  of  using  the  lancet  with  our 
hearts,  neglect  of  the  search  warrant  which  God  gives  out  against  sin, 
carelessness  concerning  living  upon  Christ;  much  reading  about  him, 
much  talkingabout  him,  but  too  little  feeding  upon  his  flesh, and  drinking 
of  his  blood  — these  are  the  causes  of  tottering  professions  and  baseless 
hopes. 


THE   TWO   BUILDERS  AND  THEIR   HOUSES.  129 

Thus  have  I  tried  to  open  up  the  parable :  and  I  have  not  designed 
to  discourage  any  sincere  soul,  my  aim  has  been  to  say  to  yon,  "Make 
your  calling  and  election  sure.  Build  on  Christ's  love,  sincerity,  desire, 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  be  not  deceived." 

III.  So  now  I  come,  in  the  third  place,  to  notice  THE  COMMON  TRIAL 

OF  THE   TWO  HOUSES. 

Whether  your  religion  be  true  or  not,  it  will  be  tried;  whether  it  be 
chaff  or  wheat,  the  fan  of  the  Great  Winnower  will  surely  be  brought 
into  operation  upon  all  that  lies  on  the  threshing-floor.  If  thou  hast 
dealings  with  God,  thou  hast  to  do  with  a  "  consuming  fire.'  Whether 
thou  be  really  or  nominally  a  Christian,  if  thou  comest  near  to  Christ 
he  will  try  thee  as  silver  is  tried.  Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house 
of  God,  and  if  thou  darest  to  come  in  to  the  house  of  God,  judgment 
will  begin  with  thee.  By  the  way,  let  us  note  that,  if  there  are  such  trials 
for  those  who  profess  to  be  Christians,  what  will  become  of  you  who  make 
no  profession?  If  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  will  the  un 
godly  and  the  wicked  appear  ?  If  judgment  begin  with  the  house  of 
God  what  will  the  end  be  of  them  that  believe  not  ?  Terrible  thought ! 
But  to  return.  Trials  will  come  to  profession,  whether  it  be 
true  or  false.  If  I  do  not  mistake  the  reference  in  the  text  to  rain, 
flood,  wind,  these  trials  will  be  of  three  sorts  at  least.  The  rain 
typifies  afflictions  from  heaven.  God  will  send  you  adversities  like 
showers,  tribulations  as  many  as  the  drops  of  'the  dew.  Between- 
now  and  heaven,  0  professor,  you  will  feel  the  pelting  storm. 
Like  other  men,  your  body  will  'be  sick;  or  if  not,  you  shall  have 
trouble  in  your  house;  children  and  friends  will  die,  or  riches  will  take 
to  themselves  winirs,  and  fly  like  an  eagle  towards  heaven.  You  must 
have  trials  from  God's  hand;  and,  if  you  are  not  relying  on  Christ,  you 
will  not  be  able  to  bear  them.  If  you  are  not,  by  real  faith,  one  with 
Jesus  Christ,  even  God's  rain  will  be  too  much  for  you.  But  there  will 
also  arise  trials  from  earth—"  the  floods  came."  In  former  daj  s  the  floods 
of  persecution  were  more  terrible  than  now,  but  persecution  is  still 
felt;  and  if  you  are  a  professor,  you  will  have  to  bear  a  measure  of  it. 
Cruel  mockings  are  still  used  against  the  people  of  God.  The  world  no 
more  loves  the  true  church  to-day  than  it  did  in  the  olden  times.  Can 
you  bear  slander  and  reproach  for  Jesus?  Not  unless  you  are  firmly 
rooted  and  grounded.  In  the  day  of  temptation  and  persecution  the 
rootless  plants  of  the  stony  ground  are  withered  away.  See  ye  to  this. 
Then  there  will  come  mysterious  trials  typified  by  tk  the  winds."  The 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  will  assail  you,  with  blasphemous 
suggestions,  horrible  temptations,  or  artful  insinuations.  He  know& 
how  to  cast  clouds  of  despondency  over  the  human  spirit;  he  can 
attack  the  four  corners  of  the  house  at  once  by  his  mysterious 
agency ;  he  can  tempt  us  in  divers  ways  at  the  same  time,  and  drive  us 
to  our  wits'  end.  Woe  to  thee,  then,  unless  thou  hast  something  co 
noid  by  better  than  the  mere  sand  of  profession ! 

Where  there  is  a  good  foundation  trials  will  do  no  hurt,  but  where 
there  is  no  foundation  they  will  frequently  bring  the  man's  profession 
down  in  ruin,  even  in  this  life.  How  many  lose  their  religion  at 
the  very  outset!  Pliable  and  Christian  both  set  out  for  the  Celestia. 
City,  both  aspiring  to  the  crown  of  gold;  but  they  fell  into  the  Slougiv 


130  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  Despond,  and  then,  as  one  of  them  struggled  out  on  the  side  nearest 
his  own  house,  and  went  back  to  the  City  of  Destruction,  while  the 
other  strove  manfully  to  reach  the  further  shore,  the  difference  between 
the  wise  and  foolish  pilgrim  was  made  manifest. 

After  Christians  have  proceeded  further  they  will  be  tried  in  other 
ways.  Infidelities  often  try  Christians,  I  mean  doubts  about  the 
essentials  of  the  faith,  and  all  its  doctrines;  and  those  that  are  not  well 
cemented  to  the  rock  are  easily  moved  to  unbelief.  This  is  the  age  of 
infidelities,  but  they  who  are  on  the  rock  by  a  truthful  experience  are 
not  moved.  A  negro  was  once  told  by  a  friend  that  some  man  had  said 
the  Bible  was  not  true.  Now,  our  poor  friend  had  never  thought  anybody 
<jould  doubt  the  Bible,  but  his  quick  way  of  disposing  of  the  novel 
difficulty  was,  "  Dat  book  not  true !  why,  I  take  it  into  my  house  and 
I  sit  down  and  read  it,  and  it  make  my  heart  laugh.  How  can  it  be 
a  lie  dat  make  my  heart  laugh?  I  was  drunkard,  thief,  and  liar,  and 
<dat  book  talked  to  me  and  made  me  a  new  man — dat  book  no  lie."  The 
very  best  proof  in  the  world  surely,  at  least  to  the  man  himself,  if  not 
-to  others.  We  who  have  had  our  hearts  made  to  laugh  by  God's  word 
cannot  be  laughed  out  of  our  faith.  We  have  lived  on  the  word  and 
proved  its  truthfulness  by  experience,  and  are  therefore  invulnerable 
to  all  attacks,  whilst  strangers  to  such  experience  are  staggered. 

Where  the  heart  is  really  grounded  upon  the  truth,  you  will  find  that 
heresies  as  well  as  infidelities,  have  but  little  effect.  The  sound 
Christian  is  like  a  stone,  if  he  is  thrown  into  the  pool  of  false  doctrine, 
he  may  be  wetted  by  it,  but  he  does  not  receive  it  into  his  inner  self, 
whereas  the  unsound  professor  is  like  a  sponge,  he  sucks  it  all  in 
greedily,  and  retains  what  he  absorbs. 

How  many  there  are  who  are  tried  by  woiidliness,  and  if  their  reli 
gion  be  but  mere  profession,  woiidliness  soon  eats  the  heart  of  it  as 
doth  a  canker,  and  they  become  even  as  others!  If,  however,  the 
•Christian  man's  heart  is  right  with  God,  he  comes  out  and  is  separate, 
and  the  pride  of  life  does  not  entrap  him. 

In  cases  of  backsliding,  where  there  is  a  sound  heart  towards  God, 
•the  backslider  is  soon  brought  back,  but  where  the  heart  is  rotten,  the 
backslider  goes  from  bad  to  worse.  I  was  struck  with  a  story  of  two  men 
who  were  accustomed  to  give  exhortations  at  meetings,  who  had  fallen 
•out  with  each  other,  and  one  of  their  brethren,  who  grieved  to  think  two 
servants  of  God  should  be  at  difference  with  each  other,  went  to  reconcile 
them.  He  called  upon  the  first,  and  said,  "John,  I  am  very  sorry  to  find 
you  and  James  have  quarrelled.  It  seems  a  great  pity,  and  it  brings  much 
dishonour  on  the  church  of  God."  "Ah,"  said  John,  "I  am  very 
grieved,  too,  and  what  grieves  me  most  is,  that  I  am  the  sole  cause  of 
it.  It  was  only  because  I  spoke  so  bitterly,  that  James  took  offence." 
"  Ah,  ah,"  said  the  good  man,  "  we  will  soon  settle  this  difficulty,  then," 
and  away  he  went  to  James.  "  James,  I  am  very  sorry  that  you  and 
John  cannot  agree."  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  it  is  a  sad  thing  we  don't,  we 
ought  to  do  so,  for  we  are  brethren ;  but  what  troubles  me  most  is,  that 
it  is  all  my  fault.  If  I  had  not  taken  notice  of  a  little  word  John  said, 
there  would  have  been  an  end  of  it."  The  matter,  as  you  may  guess, 
was  soon  rectified.  You  see  there  was  at  bottom  a  true  friendship 
^between  them,  so  that  the  little  difficulty  was  soon  got  over,  and  so 


THE   TWO    BUILDERS   AND    THEIR   HOUSES.  131 

where  there  is  a  true  union  between  God  and  the  soul,  the  backsliding 
will  soon  be  recovered. 

IV.  To  close.  Having1  thus  mentioned  the  common  trials  and  the 
effects  produced  in  this  life,  let  me  now  remind  you  of  the  DIFFERENT 
RESULTS  OF  THE  TRIALS  in  reference  to  the  life  to  come. 

In  the  one  case,  the  rain  descended  very  heavily,  and  threatened  to  wash 
the  house  away,  but  it  was  built  on  a  rock,  and  not  only  did  the  house 
stand,  but  the  man  inside  found  great  comfort  in  it.  He  could  hear 
the  pelting  torrent  beating  on  the  roof,  and  sit  and  sin? ;  when  the 
gusts  came  against  the  windows  he  would  only  be  the  more  happy  to 
think  he  had  such  a  shelter.  Then  came  the  floods.  They  would,  if 
they  could,  have  sapped  and  undermined  the  foundations,  but  they 
took  no  effect  on  the  granite  rock,  and  though  the  wind  howled  round 
the  habitation,  every  stone  was  well  cemented,  and  all  bound  as  with 
iron  bands  to  the  grand  old  rock,  and  therefore  the  man  was  safe  and 
happy  within,  and  above  all,  grateful  that  he  had  built  on  such  a> 
foundation.  He  could  sit  down  and  sing — 

"  Loud  may  the  troubled  ocean  roar, 
In  sacred  peace  my  soul  abides." 

The  Christian  rests  peacefully  upon  Christ.  Troubles  come  one  after 
another,  but  they  do  not  sweep  him  away,  they  only  endear  to  him  the- 
hope  which  is  based  upon  Christ  Jesus.  And  when  at  last  death  comes, 
that  awful  flood  which  will  undermine  everything  that  can  be  removed, 
it  cannot  find  anything  to  shake  in  the  wise  builder's  hope.  He  rests 
on  what  Christ  has  done;  death  cannot  affect  that.  He  believes  in 
a  faithful  God;  and  dying  cannot  affect  that.  He  believes  in  the 
covenant  signed,  and  sealed,  and  ratified,  in  all  things  ordered  well. 
He  lays  hold  on  the  "  shalls"  and  "  wills"  of  an  immutable  God,  all 
sealed  with  the  blood  of  the  Redeemer;  death  cannot  affect  any  of  these. 
And  when  the  last  great  trumpet  sounds,  and  the  last  fire  that 
shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is,  comes  forth  from  the 
throne  of  God,  the  man  who  in  true  sincerity  and  with  real  etperience 
has  laid  hold  on  Christ,  is  not  afraid  of  the  tremendous  hour.  What 
though  the  trumpet  sounds  exceeding  loud  and  long,  and  the  dead 
awake,  and  the  angels  gather  round  the  great  white  throne,  and  the 
pillars  of  heaven  tremble,  and  the  earth  is  dissolved,  and  the  elements 
melt  with  fervent  heat  1  the  man  of  God  feels  that  the  rock  on  which  he 
has  built  can  never  fail  him,  and  the  hope  that  grace  has  given 
him  can  never  be  removed.  He  smiles  serenely  amid  it  all. 

But  look  at  the  case  of  the  man  whose  hope  is  built  on  the  sand !  He 
could  hardly  endure  the  trials  of  life;  he  almost  fell  under  common 
temptation ;  he  turned  his  coat  during  the  hour  of  persecution ;  but 
sorer  trials  now  await  him.  Some  hypocrites  have  been  bolstered  up 
even  in  the  last  moments,  and  perhaps  have  never  known  that  they 
were  lost  till  they  felt  they  were ;  like  Dives,  of  whom  it  is  written, 
"  In  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torment."  He  had  never  lift  up 
his  eyes  before ;  he  did  not  know  his  condition  till  he  actually  realised 
it  in  all  its  misery.  But  the  most  of  men  who  have  come  under  the 
sound  of  the  gospel,  and  made  a  profession,  if  they  have  been  deceivers 
find  it  out  at  death,  and  it  must  be  a  dreadful  thing  to  make  that 


132 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


discovery  when  pain  is  sharp  and  parting  is  bitter.  All !  dear  friend, 
if  you  be  mistaken  may  you  find  it  out  now,  and  not  on  your  dying 
couch.  May  your  prayer  be,  "  Lord,  show  me  the  worst  of  my  case. 
If  my  profession  has  been  a  mistake,  0  let  me  not  build  up  and 
prop  up  a  rotten  thing,  but  help  me  to  build  aright  upon  the  Rock  of 
Ages."  Do  pray  that  prayer,  I  beseech  you.  Remember  if  death  should 
Lot  teach  you  "the  whole  truth  of  your  case,  judgment  will.  There 
will  be  no  mistake  there,  and  no  opportunity  for  repentance.  This 
fallen  house  was  never  built  again ;  there  was  no  salvage  from  the  total 
wreck.  Lost,  lost,  lost,  there  is  no  word  to  follow ;  for  once  lost,  lost 
for  ever  !  0  dear  hearer,  I  bid  thee  if  thou  hast  a  name  to  live  and 
art  dead,  a-rise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  life.  I  pray 
thee  if  thou  be  a  seeker,  be  not  put  off  with  empty  hopes  and  vain  confi 
dences.  Buy  the  truth  and  sell  it  not.  Lay  hold  on  eternal  life.  Seek 
the  true  Saviour  and  be  not  content  till  thou  hast  him,  for  if  lost  thy 
ruin  will  be  terrible.  Oh,  that  lake  !  Have  you  ever  read  the  words, 
"  Shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire:  which  is  the  second  death"?  The 
lake  of  fire !  and  souls  cast  into  it !  The  imagery  is  dreadful.  "  Ah,"  says 
one,  "  that  is  a  metaphor."  Yes,  T  know  il  is,  and  a  metaphor  is  but  a 
shadow  of  the  reality.  Then,  if  the  shadow  be  a  lake  of  fire,  what  must 
the  reality  be  ?  If  we  can  hardly  bear  to  think  of  a  "  worm  that  never 
dieth,"  and  a  "fire  that  never  shall  be  quenched,"  and  of  a  lake 
whose  seething  waves  of  fire  that  dash  o'er  undying  and  hopeless  souls, 
what  must  hell  be  in  very  deed  ?  The  descriptions  of  Scriptures  are, 
after  all,  but  condescensions  to  our  ignorance,  partial  revealings  of 
fathomless  mysteries;  but  if  these  are  so  dreadful,  what  must  the  full 
reality  be  ?  Provoke  it  not,  my  hearers,  tempt  not  your  God,  neglect 
not  the  great  salvation,  for  if  you  do,  you  shall  not  escape.  Play  not 
with  your  souls,  be  not  heedless  and  careless  of  the  realities  of  eternity; 
but  now,  even  now,  may  God  hear  your  prayer  as  you  breathe  it  from 
your  inmost  souls,  and  give  you  truly  to  be  washed  in  the  precious 
blood,  and  effectually  saved  by  him,  in  whom  there  is  fulness  of  truth 
and  sracft.  Amen. 


My  God,  I  mark  with  fear 
How  many  hopes  decay, 
And  like  the  foolish  builder's  house 
Fall  in  the  trial  day. 

Perhaps  amid  this  throng 
Thou  dost  a  soul  espy 
Whose  towering  hopes  are  built  on  sand, 
I  ask,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  " 

A  thousand  doubts  arise, 
1  bring  them  all  to  thee  ; 
Am  I  unconsciously  deceived? 
Lord,  search  my  heart  and  see. 


0  teach  me  deep  to  dig 
Down  to  the  solid  rock, 

That  when  tornadoes  round  me  sweep 
My  house  may  bear  the  shock. 

Jesus,  thou  only  art 
The  sure  foundation  stone, 
Firm  as  th'  eternal  hills  art  thou, 

1  build  on  thee  alone. 

Cemented  fast  to  thee 
No  stone  is  laid  in  vain, 
My  hope  defies  th'  assaults  of  hell, 
The  flood,  the  wind,  the  rain. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON— Matthew  vfL 


Slabmwcte  fluljrit 


ON  LAYING  FOUNDATIONS. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  JANUARY  21ST,  1883,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

At    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEVVINGTON. 


"  And  why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  which  I  say  ?  Whosoever 
cometh  to  me,  and  heareth  my  sayings,  and  doeth  them,  I  will  shew  you  to  whom  he  is 
like :  He  is  like  a  man  which  built  an  house,  and  digged  deep,  and  laid  the  foundation 
on  a  rock  :  and  when  the  flood  arose,  the  stream  beat  vehemently  upon  that  house,  and 
could  not  shake  it :  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  rock.  But  he  that  heareth,  and  doeth 
not,  is  like  a  man  that  without  a  foundation  built  an  house  upon  the  earth  ;  against 
which  the  stream  did  beat  vehemently,  and  immediately  it  fell ;  and  the  ruin  of  that 
house  was  great." — Luke  vi.  46 — 49. 

THESE  parables  describe  two  classes  of  hearers ;  but  they  say  nothing 
of  those  who  are  not  hearers.  Their  position  and  prospects  we  must 
infer  from  what  is  said  of  hearers.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  come 
into  the  world  to  tell  us  of  the  Father's  love,  and  never  man  spake  as  he 
spake,  and  yet  there  are  many  who  refuse  to  hear  him.  I  do  not  mean 
those  who  are  far  away,  to  whom  the  name  of  Jesus  is  well-nigh  un 
known,  but  I  mean  persons  in  this  land,  and  especially  in  this  great 
and  highly-favoured  city,  who  wilfully  refuse  to  hear  him  whom  God 
has  anointed  to  bring  tidings  of  salvation.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  pro 
claimed,  I  was  about  to  say,  upon  the  house-tops  in  this  city  ;  for  even 
in  their  music-halls  and  theatres  Christ  is  preached  to  the  multitude, 
and  at  the  corners  of  our  streets  his  banner  is  lifted  up ;  and  yet  there 
are  tens  of  thousands  to  whom  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  as  music  in 
the  ears  of  a  corpse.  They  shut  their  ears  and  will  not  hear,  though  the 
testimony  be  concerning  God's  own  Son,  and  life  eternal,  and  the 
way  to  escape  from  everlasting  wrath.  To  their  own  best  interests,  to 
their  eternal  benefit,  men  are  dead :  nothing  will  secure  their  attention 
to  their  God.  To  what,  then,  are  these  men  like  ?  They  may  fitly  be 
compared  to  the  man  who  built  no  house  whatever,  and  remained  home 
less  by  day  and  shelterless  by  night.  When  worldly  trouble  comes  like 
a  storm  those  persons  who  will  not  hear  the  words  of  Jesus  have  no 
consolation  to  cheer  them ;  when  sickness  comes  they  have  no  joy  of 
heart  to  sustain  them  under  its  pains ;  and  when  death,  that  most  terrible 
of  storms,  beats  upon  them  they  feel  its  full  fury,  but  they  cannot  find 
a  hiding  place.  They  neglect  the  housing  of  their  souls,  and  when  the 
hurricane  of  almighty  wrath  shall  break  forth  in  the  world  to  come 
they  will  have  no  place  of  refuge.  In  vain  will  they  call  upon  the 
No.  1,702.  5G 


50  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

rocks  to  fal?  upon  them,  and  the  mountains  to  cover  them.  They  shall 
be  in  that  day  without  a  shelter  from  the  righteous  wrath  of  the 
Most  High.  Alas,  that  any  being  who  wears  the  image  of  man  should 
be  found  in  such  a  plight !  Homeless  wanderers  in  the  day  of  tempest ! 
How  my  soul  grieves  for  them  !  Yet,  what  excuse  will  those  men  invent 
who  have  refused  even  to  know  the  way  of  salvation  ?  What  excuse 
can  the  tenderest  heart  make  for  them  ?  Will  they  plead  that  they 
could  not  believe  ?  Yet  they  may  not  say  that  they  could  not  hear  ;  and 
faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God.  Oh  my  friend,. 
if  the  word  of  God  comes  to  you,  and  you  decline  to  hear  it,  and  there 
fore  do  not  believe  in  Jesus,  but  die  in  your  sins,  what  is  this  but 
soul-suicide  ?  If  a  man  die  of  a  disease  when  infallible  medicine  is  to 
be  had,  must  not  his  death  lie  at  his  own  door?  If  a  man  perish  of 
hunger  when  bread  is  all  around  him  and  others  feed  to  the  full,  and  he 
will  not  have  it,  will  any  man  pity  him  ?  Surely  not  a  drop  of  pity  will 
be  yielded  to  a  lost  soul  wherewith  he  may  assuage  the  torment  of  his 
conscience,  for  all  holy  intelligences  will  perceive  that  the  sinner  chose 
his  own  destruction.  This  shall  ever  press  upon  the  condemned  con 
science,  "  You  knew  the  gospel,  but  you  did  not  attend  to  it :  you  knew 
that  there  was  salvation,  and  that  Christ  was  the  Saviour,  and  that 
pardon  was  proclaimed  to  guilty  men,  but  you  would  not  afford  time 
from  your  farm  and  from  your  merchandise,  from  your  pleasures  and  from 
your  sins,  to  learn  how  you  could  be  saved.  That  which  cost  God  so 
dear  you  treated  as  a  trifle.  Ah,  my  dear  friends,  may  none  of  you 
belong  to  the  non-hearing  class.  It  is  not  to  such  that  I  shall  this 
morning  address  myself,  and  yet  I  could  not  enter  upon  my  discourse 
without  a  word  of  loving  expostulation  with  them.  Let  me  part  with 
them  by  quoting  the  warning  word  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  "See  that  ye 
refuse  not  him  that  speaketh.  For  if  they  escaped  not  who  refused 
him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn  away 
from  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven." 

Our  earnest  attention  will  now  be  given  to  those  who  are  hearers  of 
the  word,  and  are  somewhat  affected  by  it.  All  hearers  are  builders  of 
houses  for  their  souls  :  they  are  each  one  doing  something  to  set  up  a 
spiritual  habitation.  Some  of  these  go  a  considerable  distance  in  this 
house-building,  and  even  crown  the  structure  by  publicly  confessing 
Christ.  They  say  unto  him,  "  Lord,  Lord":  they  meet  with  his  fol 
lowers,  and  join  with  them  in  reverence  to  the  Master's  name  ;  but  they 
do  not  obey  the  Lord ;  they  hear  him,  but  they  fail  to  do  the  things 
which  he  says.  Hence  they  are  mistaken  builders,  who  fail  in  the 
foundation,  and  make  nothing  sure  except  that  their  house  will  come 
down  about  their  ears.  Others  there  are,  and  we  trust  they  will  be 
found  to  be  many  among  us,  who,  are  building  rightly,  building  for 
eternity ;  constructing  a  dwelling-place  with  basis  of  rock,  and  walls  of 
well-built  stone,  of  which  the  Lord  Christ  is  both  foundation  and 
corner-stone. 

I  am  anxious  to  speak  at  this  time  to  those  who  are  just  beginning  to 
build  for  eternity.  I  am  indeed  happy  to  know  that  there  are  many 
such  among  us.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  bless  this  sermon  to  them. 

I.  Our  first  subject  will  be  A  COMMON  TEMPTATION  WITH  SPIRITUAL 
BUILDERS.  A  common  temptation  with  hearers  of  the  word,  according 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  51 

to  the  two  parables  before  us,  is  to  neglect  foundation-work,  to  get 
hurriedly  over  the  first  part  of  the  business,  and  run  up  the  building 
quickly.  They  are  tempted  to  assume  that  all  is  done  which  is  said  to 
be  done ;  to  take  it  for  granted  that  all  is  right  which  is  hoped  to  be 
right ;  and  then  to  go  on  piling  up  the  walls  HS  rapidly  as  possible.  The 
great  temptation,  I  say,  with  young  beginners  in  religious  life,  is  to 
scamp  the  foundation,  and  treat  those  things  lightly  which  are  of  the 
first  importance.  The  same  temptation  comes  to  us  throughout  the 
whole  of  life,  but  to  young  beginners  it  is  especially  perilous:  Satan 
would  have  them  neglect  the  fundamental  principles  upon  which  their 
future  hope  and  character  are  to  rest,  so  that  in  a  future  trying  hour, 
from  want  of  a  solid  foundation,  they  may  yield  to  evil,  and  lose  the 
whole  of  their  life-building. 

This  temptation  is  all  the  more  dangerous,  first,  because  these  young 
^beginners  have  no  experience.  Even  the  most  experienced  child  of  God 
is  often  deceived ;  how  much  more  the  pilgrim  who  has  but  just  entered 
(the  wicket-gate  !  The  tried  saint  sometimes  mistakes  that  for  a  virtue 
which  is  only  a  gilded  fault,  and  he  fancies  that  to  be  genuine  which  is 
.mere  counterfeit ;  how,  then,  without  any  experience  whatever,  can  the 
•mere  babe  in  grace  escape  deception  unless  he  be  graciously  preserved? 
.Newly  awakened,  and  rendered  serious,  earnest  hearts  get  to  work  in  the 
•divine  life  with  much  hurry,  seizing  upon  that  which  first  comes  to  hand, 
building  in  heedless  haste,  without  due  care  and  examination.  Some 
thing  must  be  done,  and  they  do  it  without  asking  whether  it  is  according 
to  the  teaching  of  the  Lord.  They  call  Jesus  "  Lord  ";  but  they  do  what 
•others  say  rather  than  what  Jesus  says.  Satan  is  sure  to  be  at  hand  at 
such  times  that  he  may  lead  the  young  convert  to  lay  in  place  of  gospel 
repentance  a  repentance  that  needs  to  be  repented  of,  and  instead  of 
the  faith  of  God's  elect  a  proud  presumption  or  an  idle  dream.  For 
that  love  of  God  which  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  he  brings  mere 
natural  affection  for  a  minister  ;  and  he  says,  "  There,  that  will  do:  you 
must  have  a  house  for  your  soul  to  dwell  in.  There  are  the  materials, 
pile  them  up."  Like  children  at  play  upon  the  beach,  the  anxious  heap  up 
their  sand-castles,  and  please  themselves  therewith,  for  they  are  ignorant 
•of  Satan's  devices.  I  am  for  this  cause  doubly  anxious  to  save  my  beloved 
young  friends  from  the  deceiver.  The  common  temptation  is,  instead  of 
really  repenting,  to  talk  about  repentance ;  instead  of  heartily  believing, 
to  say>  "  1  believe,"  without  believing ;  instead  of  truly  loving,  to  talk 
of  love,  without  loving  ;  instead  of  coming  to  Christ,  to  speak  about 
coming  to  Christ,  and  profess  to  come  to  Christ,  and  yet  not  to  come  at 
all.  The  character  of  Talkative  in  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  ably  drawn. 
I  have  met  the  gentleman  many  times,  and  can  bear  witness  that  John 
Bunyan  was  a  photographer  before  photography  was  invented.  Christian 
said  of  him  "  He  talketh  of  prayer,  of  repentance,  of  faith,  and  of  the 
new  birth  ;  but  he  knows  but  only  to  talk  of  them,  I  have  been  in  his 
family,  and  his  house  is  as  empty  of  religion  as  the  white  of  an  egg  is 
of  savour."  We  have  too  many  such  persons  around  us  who  are,  as 
to  what  they  say,  everything  that  is  to  be  desired,  and  yet,  by  what  they 
are  proven  to  be,  mere  shams.  As  tradesmen  place  dummies  in  their 
shops,  papered  and  labelled  to  look  like  goods,  while  yet  they  are 
.nothing  of  the  sort,  so  are  these  men  marked  and  labelled  as  Christiana, 
40 


f;2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

but  the  grace  of  God  is  not  in  them.  Oh  that  you  young  beginners  may 
be  on  the  alert,  that  you  be  not  content  with  the  form  of  godliness,  but 
are  made  to  feel  the  power  of  it. 

There  is  this  to  help  the  temptation  too,  that  this  plan  for  the  present 
saves  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  Your  mind  is  distressed,  and  you  want 
comfort ;  well,  it  will  comfort  you  to  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,"  though  you 
do  not  the  things  that  Christ  says.  If  you  admit  the  claims  of  Jesus- 
to  be  Lord,  even  though  you  do  not  believe  on  him  for  salvation,  and  so 
neglect  the  main  thing  which  he  commands,  yet  you  will  find  some  ease- 
in  the  admission.  He  bids  you  repent  of  sin,  trust  his  blood,  love  his- 
word,  and  seek  after  holiness ;  but  it  is  much  easier  to  admire  these 
things  without  following  after  them  in  your  life.  To  feign  repentance 
and  faith  is  not  difficult,  but  genuine  godliness  is  heart-work,  and  re 
quires  thought,  care,  sincerity,  prayerfulness,  and  watchfulness.  Believe 
me,  real  religion  is  no  sport.  He  that  would  be  saved  will  find  it  to 
be  no  jesting  matter.  "The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence  ";, 
and  he  that  is  easy  about  the  thing,  and  thinks  it  is  nothing  more  that> 
the  conjuror's  "  Heigh,  presto,  done,"  has  made  a  fatal  mistake. 
"Strive,"  saith  Christ,  "to  enter  into  the  strait  gate."  The  Spirit 
striveth  in  us  mightily,  and  often  works  us  to  an  agony.  The  crown  of 
eternal  glory  is  not  won  without  fighting,  nor  the  prize  of  our  high 
calling  received  without  running;  yet  by  just  making  a  holy  profession, 
and  by  practising  an  outward  form,  a  man  imagines  that  the  same, 
result  is  produced  as  by  seeking  the  Lord  with  his  whole  heart,  and 
believing  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  it  were  so,  there  would  be  a  fine  broad 
road  to  heaven,  and  Satan  himself  would  turn  pilgrim.  Believe  me, 
dear  hearers,  this  saving  of  trouble  will  turn  out  to  be  a  making  of 
trouble,  and,  before  matters  end,  the  hardest  way  will  turn  out  to  be  the 
easiest  way. 

This  kind  of  building  without  foundation  has  this  advantage  to  back 
up  the  temptation,—  it  enables  a  man  to  run  up  a  religion  very  quickly. 
He  makes  splendid  progress.  While  the  anxious  heart  is  searching 
after  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  begging  to  be  renewed  by  grace, 
his  exulting  friend  is  as  happy  as  he  can  be  in  a  peace  which  he  has 
suddenly  obtained  without  question  or  examination.  This  rapid  grower 
never  asks,  "  Has  my  religion  changed  my  conduct?  Is  my  faith  at 
tended  by  a  new  nature?  Does  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  me  ?  Am  I 
really  what  I  profess  to  be,  or  am  I  but  a  bastard  professor  after  b.31  ?" 
No,  he  puts  aside  all  enquiry  as  a  temptation  of  the  devil.  He  takes 
every  good  thing  for  granted,  and  votes  that  all  is  gold  which  glitters. 
See  how  fast  he  goes !  The  fog  is  dense,  but  he  steams  through  it, 
heedless  of  danger !  He  has  joined  the  church :  he  has  commenced 
work  for  God :  he  is  boasting  of  his  own  attainments  :  he  hints  that  he 
is  perfect.  But  is  this  mushroom  building  safe  ?  Will  it  pass  muster 
in  the  last  great  survey  ?  Will  it  stand  should  a  tempest  happen  ?  The 
chimney-shaft  is  tall,  but  is  it  safe  ?  Ay,  there's  the  rub.  This  is  the 
question  which  makes  an  end  of  much  of  the  boasting  which  is  all  around 
us.  It  is  better  to  tremble  at  God's  word  than  boldly  to  presume.  It 
is  better  to  be  fearful,  lest  after  all  we  may  be  castaways,  than  to  harden 
one's  forehead  with  vain  confidence.  When  a  man  travels  upon  a  wrong 
road,  the  faster  he  runs  the  further  he  will  go  astray.  Remember  the 


ON   LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  53 

advice  to  hasten  slowly,  and  the  old  proverb  which  saith,  "The  more 
haste  the  less  speed."  If  you  build  quickly  because  you  build  without 
a  foundation,  your  time  and  toil  are  thrown  away. 

How  common,  how  deceptive  is  this  temptation  1  For  the  young 
beginner,  the  man  who  is  just  aroused  to  seek  the  Lord,  will  find  a  great 
many  to  help  him  in  his  mistake,  should  he  neglect  the  foundation. 
Kind,  good,  Christian  friends  often,  without  a  thought  of  doing  so, 
help  to  mislead  seeking  souls.  "  Yes,"  they  say,  "  you  are  converted," 
and  so  perhaps  the  person  would  be  if  all  he  said  was  true ;  but  then  it 
is  said  without  feeling;  it  comes  from  the  lip  only,  and  does  not  come 
from  the  heart;  and  therefore  it  is  ruinous  to  encourage  him.  A  kindly 
assurance  from  a  Christian  friend  may  breed  false  confidence,  if  that 
assurance  was  mistakenly  given.  In  these  days  we  do  not  meet  with 
many  Christians  who  err  by  dealing  too  severely  with  converts ;  the 
shot  strikes  the  other  target.  Our  forefathers  were  possibly  too  sus 
picions  and  jealous  ;  but  nowadays  we  nearly  all  err  in  the  opposite 
direction  :  we  are  so  anxious  to  see  everybody  brought  to  Christ,  that 
our  wish  may  tend  to  delude  us  into  the  belief  that  it  is  so.  We  are  so 
willing  to  cheer  and  comfort  those  who  seek  the  Lord,  that  we  may  fall 
into  the  habit  of  prophesying  smooth  things,  and  thus  shun  everything 
which  tends  to  probe  and  test,  lest  it  should  also  discourage.  Let  us- 
beware  lest  we  cry,  "  Peace,  peace,"  where  there  is  no  peace.  It  will  be 
a  sad  thing  to  breed  hypocrites  when  we  were  looking  for  converts.  I 
have  heard  of  one  who  had  been  into  the  Enquiry  Room  a  dozen  times, 
and  when  on  another  occasion  she  was  invited  to  go  there  she  said,  "  I 
really  do  not  know  why  I  should  go,  for  I  have  been  told  that  I  was 
saved  twelve  times  already,  and  I  am  not  a  bit  better  than  before  they 
told  me  so."  It  would  be  better  to  send  some  home  weeping  rather  than 
rejoicing.  Many  a  wound  needs  the  lancet  more  than  the  plaster.  You 
may  be  comforted  by  well-meant  assurances  of  tender  friends,  and  yet 
that  comfort  may  be  all  a  lie.  I  therefore  warn  you  against  any  peace 
except  that  which  comes  from  doing  that  which  Jesus  commands,  or  in 
other  words,  against  any  confidence  except  that  which  rests  in  Jesus 
only,  and  is  attended  with  repentance,  faith,  and  a  life  of  obedience  to- 
your  Lord. 

No  doubt  many  are  encouraged  in  slight  building  by  the  fact  that  so 
many  professors  are  making  a  fair  show,  and  yet  their  building  is  tvithout 
foundation.  We  cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  in  all  churches 
there  are  persons  who  have  no  depth  of  spiritual  root,  and  we  are  afraid 
no  real  spiritual  life.  We  cannot  root  them  up,  though  we  fear  that 
they  are  tares,  for  we  are  assured  that  we  should  unavoidably  root  up  the- 
wheat  with  them,  and  this  our  Master  forbids.  There  is  nothing  about 
their  outward  conduct  which  we  could  lay  hold  upon  as  a  proof  of  their 
being  deceivers,  and  yet  a  cold  chill  runs  through  us  when  we  talk  with 
them,  for  they  have  no  warmth,  and  no  life,  and  nothing  of  the  Lord  about 
them.  We  miss  in  their  conversation  that  sweet  spirituality,  that 
holy  unction,  that  blessed  humility,  which  are  sure  to  be  present  wtan  ' 
men  are  truly  familiar  with  the  Lord,  and  have  entered  into  living  ' 
union  with  him.  People  of  this  order  mix  up  with  us  in  our  holy ' 
convocations,  and  when  they  come  across  the  newly-awakened  ones, 
they  talk  of  divine  things  in  such  an  off-hand  and  flippant  manner' 


54:  METROPOLITAN  TABKRNACLE  PULPIT. 

that  they  do  serious  mischief.  They  speak  about  conversion  as  if  i( 
were  a  mere  trifle,  a  matter  as  easy  as  kissing  your  hand  ;  and  so  those 
who  are  hopeful,  and  over  whom  our  hearts  are  yearning,  are  turned  aside 
by  them.  Young  people  are  apt  to  think,  "  So-and-so  is  a  member  of 
the  church,  and  he  is  never  very  precise.  If  a  lukewarm  profession 
satisfies  him,  why  should  it  not  satisfy  me  !  "  Ah,  my  dear  friends,  buc 
you  would  not  say  so  in  business.  If  you  knew  a  man  was  trading 
without  capital  and  likely  to  come  to  bankruptcy,  you  would  not  say, 
"  I  may  do  the  same."  If  you  saw  a  man  venturing  into  deep  water 
who  could  not  swim,  and  you  felt  sure  that  he  would  ultimately  sink, 
you  would  not  follow  his  example  and  be  drowned  too.  No,  no ;  let  these 
frothy  professors  be  beacons  to  you.  Get  away  from  Mr.  Talkative, 
lest  he  make  you  as  hollow  a  drum  as  himself.  Beware  of  loose  pro 
fessors,  who  are  as  wreckers'  lights  that  lure  men  upon  the  rocks. 
Make  sure  work  for  eternity,  and  bid  triflers  begone. 

Again,  there  is  always  at  the  back  of  all  this  an  inducement  to  build 
without  a  foundation  because  it  -will  not  be  known,  and  possibly  may  not 
be  found  out  for  years.  Foundation-work  is  quite  out  of  sight,  and  the 
house  can  be  got  up  and  be  very  useful  in  a  great  many  ways,  and  it  may 
stand  a  good  while  without  the  underground  work ;  for  houses  without 
foundations  do  not  tumble  down  at  once;  they  will  stand  for  years? 
nobody  knows  how  long  they  may  keep  up ;  perhaps  they  may  evep 
be  inhabited  with  comfort  till  the  last  great  flood.  Death  alone  will 
discover  some  impostures.  Hence,  because  the  ill-founded  house  will 
do  for  the  present,  and  can  be  used,  and  may  bring  immediate  com 
fort,  many  people  consider  it  economical  to  leave  out  the  foundation  as 
a  needless  superfluity.  If  they  are  questioned  as  to  their  vital  godliness 
they  grow  angry : — "  What  business  have  you  to  enter  into  my  private 
business?  Why  should  you  meddle  with  the  secrets  of  my  soul?'' 
Ah,  dear  friend,  if  we  were  cruel  to  you,  and  wished  you  to  be  deceived, 
we  would  hold  our  tongues,  or  speak  to  you  with  the  voice  of  flattery ;  but 
as  we  love  you,  and  as  we  hope  to  be  blessed  in  years  to  come  through 
/our  true  and  holy  consecration  to  Christ,  we  are  intensely  earnest  that 
you  should  begin  aright.  We  would  have  you  build  that  which  will 
not  need  to  be  pulled  down  again,  work  that  will  stand  when  the  waters 
are  out  and  the  stream  beats  vehemently  upon  it.  I  dread  that  any 
man  should  perish  without  religion,  but  1  dread  far  more  that  any  man 
should  perish  with  it,  finding  his  faith  to  have  been  false  after  all.  If 
you  do  build,  build  what  is  worth  building :  if  you  must  be  builders 
for  your  souls,  and  surely  you  must,  or  else  be  shelterless,  then  take  heed 
on  what  foundation  you  build,  and  be  careful  what  ye  build  thereon, 
lest  after  all  yuu  suffer  the  loss  of  all  your  labour  in  that  last  tremendous 
day.  How  sad  it  will  seem  to  dwell  near  the  gates  of  heaven,  and  spend 
your  lives  among  those  who  are  to  be  its  future  inhabitants,  and  then  for 
vant  of  sincerity  and  truth  to  be  shut  out  of  the  celestial  city.  How 
»errible  to  find  out  by  experience  that  there  is  a  back  way  to  the  gates 
of  hell  even  from  the  gates  of  heaven.  God  grant  it  be  not  so  with  one 
of  us  here  present.  0  ye  builders,  care  not  merely  for  the  present,  but 
build  for  death,  and  judgment,  and  eternity! 

This  part  of  our  discourse  is  not  only  for  young  people,  but  for  us  all — 
for  old  as  well  as  young.  Depend  upon  it,  there  is  not  one  man  among 


UN'    LAYIXO    FOUNDATIONS.  OD 

us  but  what  has  need  to  search  himself,  and  see  whether  the  foundation 
of  his  faith  has  been  truly  laid  or  no. 

II.     So  I  advance  to  the  second  step,  and  there  we  will  consider  A  WISE 

PRECAUTION  WHICH    SAFE    BUILDERS   NEVER    FORGET.      They    dig   deep, 

and  never  rest  till  they  get  a  good  substantial  foundation  :  they  are  glad 
to  get  to  the  bottom  of  all  the  loose  earth  and  to  build  on  the  rock. 
Let  me  commend  this  wise  precaution  to  all  of  you. 

Follow  the  text  and  learn  to  see  to  your  sincerity.  The  Lord  Jesus 
says  "Why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  which  I  say?" 
May  the  Holy  Ghost  make  you  true  to  the  core.  Be  afraid  to  say  a  word 
more  than  you  feel.  Never  permit  yourself  to  speak  as  if  you  had  an 
experience  of  which  you  have  only  read.  Let  not  your  outward  worship 
go  a  step  beyond  the  inward  emotion  of  your  soul.  If  Christ  be  truly 
your  Lord  you  will  obey  him  :  if  he  be  not  your  Lord  do  not  call  him 
so.  It  is  a  great  point  in  all  your  religious  thoughts,  beliefs,  words,  and 
acts  to  have  the  heart  moving  in  all.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  make  a 
high  profession  of  sanctity,  and  yet  live  in  the  indulgence  of  secret  vice : 
such  persons  will  listen  to  my  observation  and  commend  me  for  my  faith 
fulness,  and  yet  continue  in  their  hypocrisy.  This  is  most  painful. 
These  men  can  speak  the  Jew's  language,  and  yet  the  tongue  of  Babylon 
is  more  natural  to  them :  they  follow  Christ,  but  their  hearts  are  with 
Belial.  Ah,  me  !  My  soul  is  sick  at  the  thought  of  them.  Be  true  ! 
Be  true  !  If  truth  will  carry  you  no  further  than  despair,  better  that 
you  stop  in  despair  than  gain  a  hope  by  a  lie.  Do  not  live  on  fiction, 
profession,  presumption.  Eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  feed  only  upon 
the  truth.  Remember  that  when  you  build  with  the  wood,  hay,  and 
stubble  of  mere  notion  you  are  only  gathering  materials  for  your  own 
funeral  pile  in  that  day  when  the  fire  shall  devour  all  lovers  and  makers 
of  a  lie.  Be  true  as  steel  1  Every  wise  builder  for  his  soul  must  mind 
that. 

The  next  thing  is  thoroughness.  For  observe,  according  to  our  Lord, 
the  wise  builder  digged  deep.  You  cannot  do  a  right  thing  too  well. 
Dig  deep  if  you  do  dig  a  foundation.  If  it  be  repentance,  let  it  be  an 
intensely  earnest  repentance,  including  a  vehement  hatred  of  every  form 
of  sin.  If  you  make  confession  before  God,  confess  with  your  very  soul, 
and  not  with  your  lips  only :  lay  bare  your  spirit  before  the  glance  ol 
Deity.  If  it  be  faith  that  you  talk  of,  believe  right  up  to  the  hilt.  DC 
not  go  in  for  that  kind  of  sceptical  believing  which  is  so  common  nowa 
days.  If  thou  believest,  believe :  if  thou  repentest,  repent.  In  the 
purging  of  the  soul  there  is  nothing  like  sweeping  out  every  particle  of 
the  old  leaven  of  falsehood ;  and  in  bringing  in  the  good  things  into 
the  heart  there  is  nothing  like  bringing  in  everything  that  Christ  pre 
scribes,  that  of  his  fulness  we  may  receive,  not  only  grace,  but  grace 
for  grace,  grace  upon  grace,  all  the  grace  that  is  needed.  Be  down 
right  in  everything.  The  wise  builder  dug  through  the  earth,  and 
continued  his  digging  till  he  reached  the  rock;  and  then  he  dug 
into  the  rock,  and  struck  out  a  trench  wherein  he  might  lay  his  founda 
tion  ;  for  he  could  not  be  content  unless  he  made  sure  and  thorough 
work  of  it.  Sincerity  and  thoroughness  are  fine  building-materials. 

Next  to  that  add  self-renunciation ;  for  that  is  in  the  parable.  When 
a  man  digs  a  deep  foundation  he  has  much  earth  to  throw  out.  So  h« 


56'  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

that  builds  for  eternity  has  a  great  deal  to  get  rid  of.  Self-trust  must 
goat  the  beginning;  love  of  sin  must  follow;  worldliness,  pride,  self- 
seeking,  all  sorts  of  iniquity, — these  must  be  cast  aside.  There  is  very 
much  rubbish,  and  the  rubbish  must  go."  You  cannot  make  sure  work 
for  eternity  without  clearing  away  much  which  flesh  and  blood  would 
like  to  retain.  See  ye  to  this,  and  count  the  cost. 

Then  must  come  solid  principle.  The  man  who  is  determined  that  if 
he  does  build  he  will  build  securely,  digs  down  to  the  rock.  He  says, 
"I  believe  in  God,  he  is  my  helper.  I  believe  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  on 
his  atoning  sacrifice  and  living  intercession  I  build  my  eternal  hopes. 
I  also  build  on  the  doctrine  of  grace,  for  the  Lord  hath  said  it, — By 
grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith.  I  build  on  Scripture :  nothing  but 
the  warrant  of  the  word  will  do  for  me."  What  God  has  said  is  a 
rock:  what  man  teaches  is  mere  shifting  sand.  What  a  blessed  thing 
it  is  to  get  down  to  the  eternal  principles  of  divine  verity !  You  that 
;pick  up  your  religion  from  your  mothers  and  fathers ;  you  that  follow  it 
because  it  happened  to  be  in  the  family;  what  are  you  worth  in  the 
day  of  trouble  ?  You  are  blown  down  like  a  booth,  or  a  hut  of  boughs. 
But  you  that  know  what  you  believe,  and  why  you  believe  it,  you  who, 
when  you  put  your  foot  down,  knew  what  you  are  standing  upon,  and 
are  persuaded  that  you  have  firm  rock  beneath  you  ;  you  are  the  men 
who  will  stand  fast  when  mere  pretenders  are  hurled  out  of  their  place. 
Oh,  my  dear  seeking  1'riends,  fix  upon  true  principles,  and  be  not  content 
with  falsehood. 

These  truthful  principles  must  be  firmly  adhered  to.  Bind  your  build 
ing  to  the  rock.  A  house  will  not  stand  merely  because  it  is  on  the  rock; 
you  must  get  its  foundation  into  the  rock.  The  house  must  take  a  grip  of 
the  rock,  and  the  rock  must  grasp  the  house.  The  more  you  can  get 
the  house  to  be  a  bit  of  the  rock,  and  the  rock,  as  it  were,  to  grow  up 
into  the  house,  the  more  secure  you  are.  It  is  of  no  use  saying,  "  Yes, 
I  confide  in  Christ,  in  grace,  in  revelation,"  unless  your  very  life  enters 
into  these  things,  and  they  enter  into  you.  Hypocrites,  Job  says,  are 
stolen  away  in  the  night ;  so  easily  are  they  removed.  The  inventor  of 
some  new  notion  comes  along,  cracks  up  his  novel  wares,  and  silly  souls 
are  at  once  taken  in  by  him.  Christ  may  go,  grace  may  go,  and  the 
Bible  may  go,  too :  their  new  master  has  them  wholly  in  his  power. 
We  want  not  such  unsubstantial  men ;  we  care  not  for  these  speculating 
builders  whose  carcases  are  ail  around  us.  We  have  had  enough  of 
castles  in  the  air :  we  need  true  men,  vrho  will  stand  fast  like  the  moun 
tains  while  errors,  like  clouds,  blow  over  them.  Remember  the  huge 
shaft  at  Bradford,  and  how  many  were  slain  by  its  fall,  and  let  it  teach 
you  to  hold  hard  to  foundation  truths,  and  never  depart  from  them. 

The  man  in  the  second  parable  did  not  build  as  he  should;  what  may 
I  say  of  him  ?  I  will  say  three  words.  First,  he  was  a  man  who  had 
nothing  out  of  sight :  you  could  see  all  his  house  when  you  looked  at  it. 
If  you  can  see  all  a  man's  religion  at  a  glance  he  has  no  religion  worth 
having.  Godliness  lies  most  in  secret  prayer,  private  devotion,  and 
inward  grace.  The  wise  builder  had  the  most  costly  part  of  his  house 
buried  in  the  ground  ;  but  the  other  man  showed  all  that  he  had  a'rove 
ground.  He  is  a  poor  tradesman  who  has  no  stock  but  that  whicn  he 
puts  into  the  window.  He  will  not  last  long  who  has  no  capital.  He 


ON    LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  57 

cannot  long  rtand  who  has  no  backbone  within.  Beware  of  a  religion 
of  show. 

Next,  this  man  had  nothing  to  hold  to.  He  built  a  house,  but  it 
stood  upon  the  loose  soil :  he  easily  dug  into  that,  and  stuck  up  his  house ; 
but  his  walls  had  no  holdfast.  Beware  of  a  religion  without  hold- 
lasts.  But  if  I  get  a  grip  upon  a  doctrine  they  call  me  a  bigot.  Let 
them  do  so.  Bigotry  is  a  hateful  thing,  and  yet  that  which  is  now 
abused  as  bigotry  is  a  great  virtue,  and  greatly  needed  in  these  frivolous 
times.  I  have  been  inclined  lately  to  start  a  new  denomination,  and 
call  it  "  the  Church  of  the  Bigoted."  Everybody  is  getting  to  be  so 
•oily,  so  plastic,  so  untrue,  that  we  need  a  race  of  hard-shells  to  teach  us 
how  to  believe.  Those  old-fashioned  people  who  in  former  ages  believed 
something,  and  thought  the  opposite  of  it  to  be  false,  were  truer  folk 
than  the  present  time-servers.  I  should  like  to  ask  the  divines  of  the 
broad  school  whether  any  doctrine  is  worth  a  man's  dying  for  it.  They 
would  have  to  reply,  •'  Well,  of  course,  if  a  man  had  to  £>o  to  the  stake 
or  change  his  opinions,  the  proper  way  would  be  to  state  them  with 
much  diffidence,  and  to  be  extremely  respectful  to  the  opposite  school." 
But  suppose  he  is  required  to  deny  the  truth?  *«  Well,  there  is  much 
to  be  said  on  each  side,  and  probably  the  negative  may  have  a  measure 
of  truth  in  it  as  well  as  the  positive.  At  any  rate,  it  cannot  be  a 
prudent  thing  to  incur  the  odium  of  being  burned,  and  so  it  might  be 
preferable  to  leave  the  matter  an  open  question  for  the  time  being." 
Yes,  and  as  these  gentlemen  always  find  it  unpleasant  to  be  unpopular, 
they  soften  down  the  hard  threatenings  of  Scripture  as  to  the  world  to 
>conie,  and  put  a  colour  upon  every  doctrine  to  which  worldly-wise  men 
object.  The  teachers  of  doubt  are  very  doubtful  teachers.  A  man 
must  have  something  to  hold  to,  or  he  will  neither  bless  himself 
nor  others.  Bring  all  the  ships  into  the  pool;  but  do  not  moor  or 
anchor  one  of  them;  let  each  one  be  free!  Wait  you  for  a  stormy 
night,  and  they  will  dash  against  each  other,  and  great  mischief  will 
come  of  this  freedom.  Perfect  love  and  charity  will  not  come  through 
our  being  all  unmoored,  but  by  each  having  his  proper  moorings  and 
keeping  to  them  in  the  name  of  God.  You  must  have  something  to 
hold  to ;  but  the  builder  in  the  parable  had  not,  and  so  he  perished. 

The  foolish  builder  had  nothing  to  resist  outward  circumstances.  On 
summer  days  his  house  was  a  favourite  resort,  and  was  considered  to  be 
<quite  as  good  as  his  neighbour's  in  all  repects.  Frequently  he  rubbed 
his  hands  and  said,  "  I  do  not  see  but  what  my  house  is  quite  as  good 
as  his,  and  perhaps  a  little  better  the  fact  is,  I  had  a  few  pounds  to 
•spare  which  I  did  not  bury  in  the  ground  as  he  did,  and  with  it  I  have 
bought  many  a  little  ornament,  so  that  my  habitation  has  a  finer  look 
than  his  building."  So  it  seemed;  but  when  the  torrent  came  raging 
^own  the  mountain  side,  his  building,  having  nothing  wherewith  to 
resist  the  violence  of  the  flood,  fell  down  at  once,  and  not  a  trace  of  it 
remained,  when  the  storm  had  ceased.  Thus  do  men  fail  because  they 
otter  no  resistance  to  forces  which  drive  them  into  sin ;  the  great  current 
at' evil  finds  in  them  victims,  and  not  opponents. 

III.     Thirdly,  we  will  now  gather  from  our  text  A  SET  OF  ARGUMENTS, 

tJRGING    US   TO  TAKE   CARE   OP  THE   FOUNDATION.      I    will    glance   OVCF 

these  arguments,  wishing  much  that  I  had  time  to  enforce  them.     The 


58  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

first  is  this.  "We  ought  to  build  with  a  good  foundation  at  the  beginning 
because  otherwise  we  shall  not  build  well  in  any  other  part,  of  the  house. 
Bad  work  in  the  foundation  influences  all  the  rest  of  the  courses.  la 
the  Kevised  Version  at  the  end  of  the  forty-eighth  verse  instead  of,  "  For 
it  was  founded  upon  a  rock,"  we  read,  "  Because  it  had  been  well 
builded."  The  house  was  built  well  at  the  bottom,  and  that  led  the 
workman  to  put  in  good  work  ail  the  way  up,  so  that  all  through  "  it 
had  been  well  builded."  The  other  man  built  badly  underground,  and 
did  the  same  up  to  the  roof.  When  you  get  into  the  habit  of  slovenly 
work  in  secret  the  tendency  is  to  be  slovenly  in  public  too.  If  the  under 
ground  part  of  our  religion  is  not  firmly  laid  upon  Christ,  then  in  the 
upper  part  there  will  be  rotten  work,  half-baked  bricks,  mud  instead  of 
mortar,  and  a  general  scamping  of  everything.  When  a  great  Grecian 
artist  was  fashioning  an  image  for  the  temple  he  was  diligently  carving 
the  back  part  of  the  goddess,  and  one  said  to  him,  "You  need  not 
finish  that  part  of  the  statue,  because  it  is  to  be  built  into  the  wall." 
He  refilled,  "  The  gods  can  see  in  the  wall."  He  had  a  right  idea  of 
what  is  due  to  God.  That  part  of  my  religion  which  no  man  can  see 
should  be  as  perfect  as  if  it  were  to  be  observed  by  all.  The  day  shall 
declare  it.  When  Christ  shall  come  everything  shall  be  made  known, 
and  published  before  the  universe.  Therefore  see  to  it  that  it  be  fit  to 
be  thus  made  known. 

See,  again,  that  we  ought  to  have  good  foundations  when  we  look  at 
the  situation  whereon  the  house  is  to  be  built.  It  is  clear  from  this- 
parable  that  both  these  houses  were  built  in  places  not  far  from  a  river,. 
or  where  streams  might  be  expected  to  come.  Certain  parts  of  the 
South  of  France  are  marvellously  like  Palestine,  and  perhaps  at 
the  present  moment  they  are  more  like  what  the  Holy  Land  was  in 
Christ's  day  than  the  Holy  Land  now  is.  When  I  reached  Cannes  last 
year  I  found  that  there  had  been  a  flood  in  the  town.  This  flood  did  not 
come  by  reason  of  a  river  being  swollen,  but  through  a  deluge  of  rain. 
A  waterspout  seems  to  have  burst  upon  the  hill-side  tearing  up  earth,, 
and  rocks,  and  stones,  and  then  hurrying  down  to  the  sea.  It  rushed 
across  the  railway  station  and  poured  down  the  street  which  led  to  it, 
drowning  several  persons  in  its  progress.  When  I  WHS  there  a  large 
hotel — I  should  think  five  stories  high — was  shored  up  with  timber,  and 
was  evidently  doomed ;  for  when  this  stream  rushed  down  the  narrow 
street  it  undermined  the  lower  courses  of  the  building,  and  as  there 
were  no  foundations  at  all  able  to  bear  such  a  test  the  whole  erection 
was  rendered  unsafe.  The  Saviour  had  some  such  case  in  his  mind's 
eye.  A  torrent  of  water  would  come  tearing  down  the  side  of  the- 
mountain,  and  if  a  house  was  built  on  the  mere  earth,  it  would  be- 
carried  away  directly,  but  if  it  were  fastened  into  the  rock  so  that  it. 
became  part  and  parcel  of  it,  then  the  flood  might  rush  all  around 
it,  but  it  would  not  shake  the  walls.  Beloved  builder  of  a  house  fer 
vour  soul,  your  house  is  so  situated  that  one  of  these  days  there  must 
come  great  pressure  upon  it.  "How  do  you  know  ?"  Well,  I  know 
that  the  house  wherein  my  soul  lives  is  pitched  just  where  winds  blow, 
and  waves  rise,  and  storms  beat.  Where  is  yours?  Do  you  live  ia« 
a  snug  corner  ?  Yes,  but  one  of  these  times  you  will  find  that  the  snug 
corner  will  be  no  more  shielded  than  the  open  riverside ;  lor  God  so> 


ON    LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  59 

orders  providence  that  every  man  has  his  test  sooner  or  later.  It  may  ba 
that  yon  think  yourself  past  temptation,  but  the  idea  is  a  delusion,  as 
time  will  show.  Perhaps  from  the  very  fact  that  you  seem  quite  out  of 
the  way,  a  peculiar  temptation  may  befall  you.  Therefore,  I  do  pray 
you,  because  of  the  exposed  condition  of  your  life's  building,  build  upon 
a  good  foundation. 

The  next  argument  is,  build  deep,  because  of  the  ruin  which  will  result 
from  a  bad  foundation.  The  foolish  builder's  house  was  without  a 
foundation.  Notice  that  word,  "without  a  foundation."  Write  down 
the  expression,  and  see  whether  they  apply  to  you  or  not.  What  hap 
pened  to  this  house  without  a  foundation  ?  The  stream  beat  vehemently 
on  it.  The  river's  bed  had  long  been  dry,  but  suddenly  it  was  flooded, 
and  the  torrent  rolled  with  tremendous  power.  Perhaps  it  was  persecu 
tion,  perhaps  it  was  prosperity,  perhaps  it  was  trouble,  perhaps  it  was 
temptation,  perhaps  it  was  prevalent  scepticism,  perhaps  it  was  death  ; 
but,  anyhow,  the  flood  beat  vehemently  upon  that  house ;  and  now  w& 
read  the  next  word, — "  And  immediately  it  fell"  It  did  not  stand  a 
prolonged  assault,  it  was  captured  at  once.  "  Immediately  it  fell.'* 
What !  in  a  minute,  all  that  fair  profession  gone  ?  "  Immediately  ifc 
fell."  Why,  that  is  the  man  I  shook  hands  with  the  other  Sunday, 
and  called  him  "  Brother,"  and  he  has  been  seen  drunk !  or  he  has  been 
in  the  frivolous  assembly,  using  unhallowed  language !  or  he  has  be 
come  an  utter  doubter  all  on  a  sudden!  It  is  sorrowful  work  bury 
ing  our  friends,  but  it  is  much  more  sorrowful  work  to  lose  them  in  this 
fashion :  and  yet  so  they  vanish.  They  are  gone  :  even  as  Job  saith 
"  the  east  wind  carrieth  him  away  and  he  departeth."  "  Immediately  " 
they  fall,  and  yet  we  thought  so  highly  of  them,  and  they  thought  so 
highly  of  themselves.  "  Immediately  it  fell "  ;  their  profession  could 
not  endure  trial,  and  all  because  it  had  no  foundation. 

Then  it  is  added,  "And  the  ruin  of  that  house  was  great."  The  house- 
cprne  down  with  a  crash,  and  it  was  the  man's  all.  The  man  was  an 
eminent  professor,  and  hence  his  ruin  was  all  the  more  notable.  It  was 
a  great  fall  because  it  could  never  be  built  up  again.  When  a  man  dies 
a  hypocrite  certainly  there  is  no  hope  of  restitution  for  him.  By  the 
stream  the  very  debris  of  the  ruined  house  was  swept  away  ;  nothing 
was  left.  Oh,  men,  if  you  lose  a  battle  you  may  fight  again  and  win 
another  ;  if  you  fail  in  business  you  may  start  again  in  trade  and  realise 
a  fortune ;  but  if  you  lose  your  souls  the  loss  is  irretrievable.  Once  lost,, 
lost  for  ever.  There  will  be  no  second  opportunity.  Do  not  deceive 
yourselves  about  that.  Therefore,  dig  deep,  and  lay  every  stone  most 
firmly  upon  the  foundation  of  rock. 

For  lastly,  and  perhaps  this  will  be  the  best  argument,  observe  the 
effect  of  this  good,  sure  building,  this  deep  building.  We  read  that  when 
the  flood  beat  upon  the  wise  man's  house  "  it  could  not  shake  it."  Thafc 
is  very  beautiful.  Not  only  could  it  not  carry  it  away,  but  "  it  could  not 
shake  it."  I  see  the  man:  he  lost  his  money  and  became  poor,  but  he 
did  not  give  up  his  faith  :  "  It  could  not  shake  it."  He  was  ridiculed 
and  slandered,  and  many  of  his  former  friends  gave  him  the  cold 
shoulder ;  but  "It  could  not  shake  it."  He  went  to  Jesus  under 
his  great  trial  and  he  was  sustained:  "It  could  not  shake  it."  He 
was  very  sick  and  his  spirit  was  depressed  \vithin  him,  but  still  he- 


<30  MKTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

•held  his  confidence  in  Christ :  "  It  could  not  shake  it."  He  was  near  tc 
-die  ;  he  knew  that  he  must  soon,  depart  out  of  this  world,  bat  all  the 
pains  of  death  and  the  certainty  of  dissolution  could  not  shake  him. 
He  died  as  he  lived,  firm  as  a  rock,  rejoicing  as  much  as  ever,  nay, 
rejoicing  more,  because  he  was  nearer  to  the  kingdom  and  to  the  fruition 
of  all  his  hopes.  "  It  could  not  shake  it."  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  have 
a  faith  which  cannot  be  shaken.  I  saw  one  day  a  number  of  beech 
trees  which  had  formed  a  wood :  they  had  all  fallen  to  the  ground 
through  a  storm.  The  fact  was  they  leaned  upon  one  another  to  a  great 
-extent,  and  the  thickness  of  the  wood  prevented  each  tree  from  getting 
a  firm  hold  of  the  soil.  They  kept  each  other  up  and  also  constrained 
.each  other  to  grow  up  tall  and  thin,  to  the  neglect  of  root-growth. 
"When  the  tempest  forced  down  the  first  few  trees  the  others  readily 
followed  one  after  the  other.  Close  to  that  same  spot  I  saw  another 
tree  in  the  open,  bravely  defying  the  blast,  in  solitary  strength.  The 
hurricane  had  beaten  upon  it,  but  it  had  endured  all  its  force  un 
sheltered.  That  lone,  brave  tree  seemed  to  be  better  rooted  than  before 
the  storm.  I  thought,  "  Is  it  not  so  with  professors  ? "  They  often 
hold  together,  and  help  each  other  to  grow  up,  but  if  they  have  not  firm 
personal  roothold,  when  a  storm  arises  they  fall  in  rows.  A  minister  dies, 
or  certain  leaders  are  taken  away,  and  over  go  the  members  by  departure 
from  the  faith  and  from  holiness.  I  would  have  you  be  self-contained, 
growing  each  man  into  Christ  for  himself,  rooted  and  grounded  in  love 
and  faith  and  every  holy  grace.  Then  when  the  worse  storm  that  ever 
blew  on  mortal  man  shall  come,  it  will  be  said  of  your  faith,  "  It  could 
not  shake  it."  I  beseech  you  who  are  now  seeking  Christ  to  take  care 
that  you  build  well,  that  you  may  stand  long  in  our  Zion,  steadfast  and 
immovable.  God  grant  it  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen. 


fli|oplitmt  Sfabrrnade  Sulptt 

r* 


ONE   LOST   SHEEP. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  APRIL  28Tn,   1889,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINOTON. 


"  How  think  ye  ?  if  a  man  have  an  hundred  sheep,  and  one  of  them  be  gone  astray, 
doth  he  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine,  and  #oeth  into  the  mountains,  and  seeketh 
that  which  is  gone  astray?  And  if  so  be  that  he  find  it,  verily  I  say  unto  you, 
he  rejoiceth  more  of  that  sheep,  than  of  the  ninety  and  nine  which  went  not 
astray."— Matthew  xviii.  12,  13. 

THIS  passage  occurs  in  a  discourse  of  our  Saviour  against  despising 
one  of  those  little  ones  that  believe  in  him.  He  foretells  a  dreadful 
doom  for  those  who,  in  their  contempt  for  the  little  ones,  cause  them 
to  stumble  ;  and  he  forbids  that  contempt  by  a  variety  of  forcible 
arguments,  upon  which  we  cannot  now  dwell.  There  is  a  tendency, 
apparent  at  this  present  time,  to  think  little  of  the  conversion  of 
individuals,  and  to  look  upon  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  each 
separate  person  as  much  too  slow  a  business  for  this  progressive  age. 
We  hear  grand  theories  of  a  theocracy  of  a  kind  unknown  to  Holy 
Scripture  :  a  semi- political  dominion  of  the  Lord  over  masses  whexein 
the  individuals  are  unregenerate.  We  listen  to  great  swelling  words 
about  the  uplifting  of  nations  and  the  advancement  of  the  race ;  but 
these  lofty  ideas  do  not  produce  facts,  nor  have  they  any  moral  power. 
Our  "cultured"  teachers,  weary  of  the  humdrum  work  of  bringing 
individual  souls  into  light ;  they  pine  to  do  it  wholesale,  by  a  far 
more  rapid  process  than  that  of  personal  salvation.  They  are  tired  of 
the  units,  their  great  minds  dwell  upon  "the  solidarity  of  the  race." 
I  am  bold  to  assert  that  if  ever  we  despise  the  method  of  individual 
conversion,  we  shall  get  into  an  unsound  order  of  business  altogether, 
and  find  ourselves  wrecked  upon  the  rocks  of  hypocrisy.  Even  in 
those  right  glorious  times  when  the  gospel  shall  have  the  freest  course, 
and  shall  run  the  most  quickly,  and  be  the  most  extensively  glorified, 
its  progress  will  still  be  alter  the  former  manner  of  the  conviction,  con 
version,  and  sanctification  of  individuals,  who  shall  each  one  believe 
and  be  baptized,  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 

I  fear  lest  in  any  of  you  there  should  be  even  the  least  measure  of 

despising  the  one  lost  sheep,  because  of  the  large  and  philosophical 

methods  which  are  now  so  loudly  cried  up.     I  would  not  hare  you 

exchange  the  gold  of  individual  Christianity  for  the  base  metal  of 

No.  2,083.  ,37 


242  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Christian  Socialism.  If  the  wanderers  are  to  be  brought  in  in  vast 
numbers,  as  I  pray  they  may  be,  yet  must  it  be  accomplished  by 
the  bringing  of  them  in  one  by  one.  To  attempt  national  regenera 
tion  without  personal  regeneration  is  to  dream  of  erecting  a  house 
without  separate  bricks.  In  the  vain  attempt  to  work  in  the  gross,  we 
may  miss  the  practical  result  which  would  have  followed  working 
in  detail.  Let  us  settle  it  in  our  minds  that  we  cannot  do  better  than 
obey  the  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  given  us  in  the  text,  and  go  after 
the  one  sheep  which  has  gone  astray. 

Our  text  warns  us  that  we  are  not  to  despise  one  person,  even  on 
account  of  evil  character.  The  first  temptation  is  to  despise  one, 
because  only  one ;  the  next  is  to  despise  one,  because  that  one  is  so> 
little ;  the  next,  and  perhaps  the  most  dangerous,  form  of  the  temp 
tation,  is  to  despise  one,  because  that  one  has  gone  astray.  The 
individual  is  not  in  the  right  path,  not  obeying  law,  nor  reflecting 
credit  on  the  church,  but  doing  much  that  vexes  the  spiritual,  and 
grieves  the  holy ;  yet  we  are  not,  therefore,  to  despise  him.  Head  the 
eleventh  verse  :  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  save  that  which  was  lost." 
In  the  Greek,  the  word  "  lost "  is  a  very  strong  word :  we  may  read  it,, 
"that  which  is  destroyed."  It  does  not  mean  "that  which  is  non 
existent,"  as  you  will  clearly  see;  but  that  which  is  destroyed  as  to 
usefulness  to  the  shepherd,  as  to  happiness  to  itself,  and  as  to  working 
out  the  intent  for  which  it  was  created.  If  any  are  so  effectually 
destroyed  by  sin  that  their  existence  is  a  greater  calamity  than  their 
non-existence  would  have  been ;  if  they  are  now  dead  in  trespasses- 
and  sins,  and  even  offensive  in  character,  yet  must  we  not  despise 
them.  The  Son  of  man  did  not  despise  such,  since  "He  has  come  to- 
seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  Many  a  soul  that  has  been  so 
destroyed  as  to  be  lost  to  itself,  lost  to  God,  lost  to  his  people,  lost  to- 
anything  like  hope  and  holiness,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  saved  by 
his  -gracious  power.  Re  values  each  one  ;  this  is  the  lesson  which  I 
would  teach  this  morning  to  the  utmost  of  my  power.  May  the  Holy 
Spirit  teach  it  also. 

In  considering  the  words  of  our  Lord  which  are  now  before  us,  I  beg 
you  to  notice,  first,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  herein  shows  peculiar  interest  in 
one  lost  soul;  secondly,  he  puts  forth  special  exertion  for  the  rescue  of  this 
lost  one ;  and  thirdly,  he  displays  a  special  rejoicing  when  the  lost  one  is 
restored.  When  we  have  thought  of  all  this,  we  shall  then  observe, 
fourthly,  that  he  sets  us  a  very  striking  example,  herein  teaching  us  to 
care  for  each  soul  destroyed  by  sin. 

I.     First,  then,  in  the  words  before  us,  OUR  SAVIOUR  SHOWS  PECULIAB 

INTEREST   IN   ONE   LOST    SOUL. 

Note,  in  the  commencement,  that  for  the  sake  of  those  lost  ones  our 
Lord  assumes  a  special  character.  The  eleventh  verse  puts  it,  "  The  Son 
of  man  is  come  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  He  was  not  originally 
known  as  "the  Son  of  man,"  but  as  "the  Son  of  God."  Before  all 
worlds,  he  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  "thought  it  not 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God."  But  in  order  to  redeem  men,  the  Son 
of  the  Highest  became  "  the  Son  of  man."  He  was  born  of  the  Virgin^ 
and  by  birth  inherited  the  innocent  infirmities  of  our  nature,  and  bor€ 
the  sufferings  incident  to  those  infirmities.  Then  did  he  also  take  upo» 


ONE    LOST    SHEEP.  243 

liimself  our  sin  and  its  penalty,  and  therefore  died  upon  the  cross. 
He  was  in  all  points  made  like  unto  his  brethren.  He  could  not  be  the 
ehepherd  of  men  without  becoming  like  to  them,  and  therefore  the 
Word  condescended  to  be  made  flesh.  Behold  the  stupendous  miracle 
of  incarnation  !  Nothing  can  excel  this  marvel — Iinmanuel,  God  with 
us !  "  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross."  0  lost  one,  conscious  of  your  loss, 
take  heart  to-day  when  the  name  of  Jesus  is  named  in  your  hearing  > 
lie  is  God,  but  he  is  man,  and  as  God-and-man  he  saves  his  people 
from  their  sins. 

Next  to  this,  to  show  how  Jesus  values  one  lost  soul,  he  makes  a  very 
wonderful  descent.  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come."  He  was  always  known 
as  "The  Coming  One"  ;  but  as  to  the  salvation  of  the  lost  he  has 
actually  come.  For  judgment  he  is  "  the  coming  one"  still;  but  for 
salvation  we  rejoice  that  our  Saviour  has  already  come.  Quitting  the 
assemblies  of  the  perfect,  he  has  been  here  as  the  Friend  of  publicans 
and  sinners.  From  being  the  Lord  of  angels,  he  has  stooped  to  be  "a 
man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  Yes,  he  has  come  ;  and 
not  in  vain.  Those  who  preached  the  coming  Saviour  had  such  a 
joyous  message  to  deliver  that  their  feet  were  beautiful  upon  the 
mountains,  and  their  voices  were  as  heavenly  music ;  but  as  for  ua 
who  preach  that  he  has  come,  and,  coming,  has  finished  the  work 
which  he  undertook  to  perform — surely  ours  is  the  choicest  of  mes 
sages.  Our  Lord  Jesus  has  completed  the  atoning  sacrifice,  and  the 
justifying  righteousness,  by  which  lost  men  are  saved  :  happy  is  the 
preacher  of  such  tidings,  and  blessed  are  your  ears  that  hear  them ! 
The  good  Shepherd  has  performed  all  that  is  necessary  for  the  salva 
tion  of  the  flock  which  his  Father  has  given  into  his  hands.  Beloved, 
let  us  take  heart.  Lost  as  we  are,  Christ  has  come  to  save  us.  He 
has  come  to  the  place  of  our  ruin  and  woe.  His  coming  and  seeking 
will  not  be  in  vain.  Brethren,  how  greatly  ought  we  to  value  the 
souls  of  men  when  Jesus  for  their  sake  becomes  a  man,  and  comes  into 
this  sinful  world  among  our  guilty  race  that  he  may  work  the  salvation 
of  the  lost ! 

Note,  here,  that  he  does  this  for  those  that  are  still  straying.  I  have 
marked,  in  looking  at  the  Greek  text,  that  it  is  written,  "  He  seeketh 
that  which  ^>eth  astray."  The  Shepherd  seeks  while  the  sheep  strays : 
seeks  it  because  it  strays  and  needs  seeking.  Full  many  of  the  Lord's 
redeemed  are  even  now  going  astray,  and  even  now  is  the  Shepherd 
going  after  them.  The  Saviour  seeks  those  who  are  even  now  sinning. 
That°  he  should  have  a  love  to  those  who  are  repenting  I  can  well 
understand ;  but  that  he  should  care  for  those  who  are  wilfully  going 
astray  is  far  more  gracious.  Jesus  seeks  those  whose  backs  are 
towards  him,  who  are  going  further  and  further  away  from  the  fold ; 
herein  is  grace  most  free,  most  full,  most  sovereign.  Indeed  it  is  so. 
Though  thou  dost  harden  thyself  against  the  Lord,  though  thou  dost 
refuse  to  turn  at  his  rebuke,  yet  if  thou  be  his  redeemed,  his  eye  of 
love  marks  thee ;  in  all  thy  wilful  wanderings  he  follows  thee.  He 
sees  thee,  he  seeks  thee ;  oh  that  thou  mayest  yield,  and  find  that  he 
saves  thee!  0  ye  that  are  now  in  the  flock,  think  of  the  love  of 
•Christ  to  you  when  you  were  outside  the  fold  ;  when  you  bad  no  wiah 


244  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

to  return;  when,  seeing  him  pursuing  you,  you  only  ran  the  faster  to 
escape  his  almighty  love  !  Let  us  sing  together, 

"  Determined  to  save,  he  watched  o'er  my  path, 
When,  Satan's  blind  slave,  I  sported  with  death." 

Notwithstanding  all  my  rebellion,  and  all  my  wilful  transgression,  he 
still  loved  me  with  his  heart,  and  pursued  me  with  his  Word.  Oh, 
how  we  ought  to  love  sinners,  since  Jesus  loved  us,  and  died  for  us 
while  we  were  yet  sinners !  We  must  care  for  drunkards  while  they 
still  pass  round  the  cup ;  swearers  even  while  we  hear  them  swear ; 
and  profligates  while  we  mourn  to  see  them  polluting  our  midnight 
streets.  We  must  not  wait  till  we  see  some  better  thing  in  them, 
but  feel  an  intense  interest  for  them  as  what  they  are — straying 
and  lost.  When  the  sheep  is  torn  with  the  thorns  of  the  waste  places, 
and  is  sick,  and  w.orn  to  skin  and  bones  with  long  wanderings  and 
hungerings,  we  must  seek  its  restoration,  though  we  see  in  it  no  desire 
to  submit  itself  to  the  Shepherd's  care  and  rule.  Such  was  our 
Saviour's  love  to  us :  such  be  our  love  to  lost  ones. 

The  Shepherd  takes  a  peculiar  interest  in  the  lost,  not  only  as  now 
strajdng,  but  as  having  already  gone  very  far  away.  Carefully  consider 
these  words— "  If  so  be  that  he  find  it."  That  "if"  tells  its  own  tale. 
The  sheep  had  become  so  terribly  lost  that  it  was  not  likely  to  be  found 
again :  it  had  wandered  into  so  dense  a  thicket,  or  strayed  into  so  wild 
a  region,  that  it  seemed  scarcely  within  the  bounds  of  hope  that  it  would 
ever  be  discovered  and  brought  back.  We  do  not  often  meet  with  an 
"  if  "  in  reference  to  the  work  of  Christ ;  but  here  is  one — "  If  so  be 
that  he  find  it."  This  does  not  show  weakness  in  the  Shepherd,  but 
the  desperate  danger  of  the  sheep.  I  have  often  heard  it  said,  by  those 
who  come  to  confess  Christ,  and  to  acknowledge  his  love  to  them,  that 
they  are  struck  with  wonder  that  they,  above  all  others,  should  be 
doing  any  such  thing.  When  we  sit  at  the  Lord's  table,  the  feast  is 
very  wonderful ;  but  the  greatest  wonder  is  the  guest,  when  I  am  there. 
How  humbly  do  we  each  one  sing, 

"  Why  was  I  made  to  hear  thy  voice, 

And  enter  where  there's  room, 
When  thousands  make  a  wretched  choice* 
And  rather  starve  than  come  ?  " 

But  it  is  so.  The  good  Shepherd  is  to-day  seeking  many  whose  salva 
tion  seems  highly  improbable,  if  not  utterly  impossible.  Herein  is  love 
that  he  should  go  after  those  whose  finding  is  by  no  means  a  cer 
tainty,  nor  even  a  probability !  Yery  improbable,  almost  impossible, 
is  the  task  he  undertakes !  Yet  in  such  he  takes  a  deep  interest. 

Moreover,  those  toward  whom  our  Lord  has  these  thoughts  of  love 
bave  often  sinned  so  as  to  have  brought  themselves  into  the  deadliest 
danger.  "  For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  save  that  which  was  lost." 
Saving  implies  ruin,  peril,  jeopardy — yea,  destruction  already  in  a 
measure  present.  Are  not  many  now  playing  with  the  fire  of  hell  ? 
For  what  is  that  unquenchable  fire  but  sin,  in  its  nature  and  results  ? 
Men  are  trifling  on  the  brink  of  eternal  woe  :  * '  Their  foot  shall  slide 
in  due  time."  Playing  with  edged  tools  is  nothing  in  danger  com 
pared  with  sporting  with  your  lusts ;  and  many  are  doing  so.  Yet, 


ONE   LOST   SHEEP.  244 

detpite  their  danger  Jesus  socks  them.  See  you  not  those  sheep 
heedlessly  feeding  n  3ar  the  den  of  the  wolf  ?  In  a  little  the  monster 
•will  devour  them.  They  are  far  away  from  home,  and  food,  and 
rest,  and  safety.  They  have  no  desire  to  return ;  but  they  are  re 
solved  to  roam  yet  further  from  the  fold.  The  Lord  Jesus  conies  after 
such  desperately  deluded  ones.  Until  you  pass  the  iron  gate  the 
gospel  will  invite  you  to  return.  If  you  be  but  one  inch  this  side  of 
hell,  love  will  pursue  you,  and  mercy  will  follow  you.  Our  glorious 
David,  while  a  lamb  still  lives,  is  able  to  rescue  it  from  the  jaw  of  the 
lion,  and  the  paw  of  the  bear.  Though,  like  Jonah,  a  soul  may  have 
descended  into  the  deeps,  and  may  lie  out  of  all  human  reach,  yet  a 
word  from  Jesus  can  bring  it  up  from  the  lowest  pit.  Glory  be  to  the 
blessed  name  of  the  Almighty  Saviour,  he  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter 
most  :  his  power  to  save  the  lost  is  such  that  none  are  too  vile  for  his 
salvation. 

If  we  rightly  consider  the  parable  before  us,  we  shall  see  that  Tie  takea 
a  special  interest  in  these  stray  sheep  because  they  are  his  own.  This  man 
did  not  go  after  wild  beasts,  nor  after  other  men's  sheep  ;  but  he  had 
a  hundred  sheep  of  his  own,  and  when  he  had  counted  them,  he  missed 
one.  The  hireling,  whose  own  the  sheep  are  not,  would  have  said, 
1 '  We  have  nearly  the  hundred :  we  need  not  be  particular  about  an 
odd  one."  But  these  hundred  sheep  belonged  to  the  Shepherd  himself ; 
they  were  his  own  by  choice,  by  inheritance,  by  divine  gift,  by  glorious 
capture,  and  by  costly  purchase,  and  he  could  not  accept  ninety  and 
nine  for  a  hundred.  "  None  of  them  is  lost,"  saith  he.  "  Those  that 
thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of 
perdition;  that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled."  Jesus  could  not 
endure  to  report  a  loss  upon  the  flock  handed  over  to  him  of  the 
Father.  Ninety-nine  is  not  a  hundred,  and  the  Saviour  will  not  con 
sider  it  such ;  for  well  he  knows  that  "  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven,  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish."  Dear 
friends,  since  Jesus  takes  such  an  interest  even  in  one  stray  soul,  you 
must  not  think  it  little  that  you  should  be  called  to  care  for  a  single 
soul.  Do  not  think  that  a  little  congregation  of  forty  or  fifty  is  too 
few  to  be  worthy  of  your  best  efforts.  Should  your  class,  through 
various  circumstances,  get  down  to  a  very  small  number,  do  not, 
therefore,  give  it  up.  No,  no.  Value  one  soul  more  than  a  world's 
purchase.  The  full  company  of  the  redeemed  is  far  from  being  made 
up  as  yet,  and  the  Lord  hath  much  people  in  this  city  not  yet  brought 
to  his  feet;  therefore,  never  dream  of  ceasing  your  labours.  Rest 
not  till  the  hour  shall  come, 

44  When  all  the  chosen  race 

Shall  meet  around  the  throne ; 
Shall  bless  the  conduct  of  his  grace, 

And  make  his  glories  known." 

II.  Secondly,  may  the  Spirit  of  God  help  me  while  I  remind  you 
that  OUR  LORD  TUT  FORTH  SPECIAL  EXERTION  TO  SAVE  ONE  SOLITARY 

INDIVIDUAL. 

Observe  in  the  parable — for  it  is  a  parable,  though  briefly  told — 
that  we  see  the  Shepherd  leaving  happier  cares.  He  felt  himself  at  homf 


246  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

with,  his  attached  and  faithful  flock ;  they  had  not  gone  astray,  and 
•they  gathered  about  him,  and  he  fed  them,  and  took  pleasure  in 
them.  There  is  always  a  great  deal  to  do  with  sheep :  they  have 
many  diseases,  many  weaknesses,  many  needs ;  but  when  you  have  an 
attached,  affectionate  nock  about  you,  you  feel  at  home  with  them.  So 
the  great  Shepherd  describes  himself  as  leaving  the  ninety  and  nine, 
his  choice  flock,  the  sheep  that  had  fellowship  with  him,  and  he  with 
them.  Yes,  he  leaves  those  in  whom  he  could  take  pleasure,  to  seek  one 
that  gave  him  pain.  I  will  not  dwell  upon  how  he  left  the  paradise 
above,  and  all  the  joy  of  his  Father's  house,  and  came  to  this  bleak 
world  ;  but  I  pray  you  remember  that  he  did  so.  It  was  a  wonderful 
descent  when  he  came  from  beyond  the  stars  to  dwell  on  this  beclouded 
globe,  to  redeem  the  sons  of  men.  But,  remember,  he  still  continually 
comes  by  his  Spirit.  His  errands  of  mercy  are  perpetual.  The  Spirit 
-of  God  moves  his  ministers,  who  are  Christ's  representatives,  to 
forego  the  feeding  of  the  gathered  flock,  and  to  seek,  in  their  dis 
courses,  the  salvation  of  the  wandering  ones,  in  whose  character 
and  behaviour  there  is  nothing  to  cheer  us.  My  Master's  heart  is 
full  of  care  for  all  that  love  him  ;  he  wears  their  names  engraven  on 
the  jewels  of  his  breast-plate  ;  but  yet  his  heart  is  always  going  forth 
afar,  after  those  who  have  not  yet  been  brought  to  him ;  and  after 
those  who  once  were  in  his  fold,  but  have  gone  aside,  and  quitted  the 
flock.  He  leaves  the  happy  and  the  holy,  and  gives  his  best  thoughts 
to  the  lost. 

Our  Lord  goes  out  to  seek  these.  It  is  not  merely  a  sending  forth  of 
thought,  it  is  a  marching  forth  of  power.  His  divine  grace  is  going 
forth,  I  trust,  this  day,  beyond  the  company  whom  he  has  called  by 
his  grace,  to  those  other  sheep,  who  are  not  yet  of  his  fold,  whom  also 
he  must  bring  in.  He  would  not  have  his  church  expend  all  her  care 
on  the  flock  which  he  has  led  into  her  green  pastures,  but  he  would 
have  her  go  afield  after  those  who  are  not  yet  in  her  blest  society. 

According  to  the  text,  the  Shepherd  goes  into  the  mountains :  among 
difficulties  and  dangers.  He  will  do  and  dare  for  the  saving  of  the 
lost :  no  hardships  can  daunt  his  mighty  love.  You  know  through 
what  dark  ravines  he  passed  in  saving  men.  You  have  heard  what 
climbing  he  had  after  proud  souls,  and  what  condescensions  for 
despairing  ones.  A  sheep  in  the  East  is  more  light  of  foot  than  our 
sheep;  it  will  leap  like  a  gazelle,  and  climb  the  mountains  like  a 
chamois ;  and  so  are  sinners  very  swift  in  transgression,  and  very  daring 
in  presumption.  They  leap  in  their  iniquities  where  the  children  of 
God  would  shudder  to  follow  them  even  in  thought.  They  make 
nothing  of  leaps  of  profanity  which  would  curdle  the  blood  of  him  that 
has  been  taught  the  fear  of  God  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  Christ.  Yet  the 
Lord  Jesus  went  after  these  desperadoes.  What  difficulties  he  con 
quered,  what  sufferings  he  endured,  what  mountains  he  overleaped, 
that  he  might  seek  and  save  !  0  brethren,  the  same  heart  is  in  him 
still :  he  goes  forth  continually  in  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  With 
many  a  sigh  and  many  a  groan  on  the  part  of  his  chosen  ministers,  he 
goes  among  the  mountains  to  seek  that  which  has  gone  astray.  I  pray 
that  he  may  accept  the  effort  of  his  unworthy  servant  this  day,  and 
bring  some  lost  one  home  by  means  of  this  sermon 


LOST    SHEEP.  247 

To  show  liis  exertion  for  the  lost,  our  Lord  describes  himself  ai 
seeking  with  persevering  diligence.  He  looks  this  way,  but  sees  nothing. 
He  shades  his  eyes  with  his  hand,  and  looks  steadily !  He  thought 
he  saw  his  sheep.  There  is  surely  a  living  object  upon  the  hill-side  \ 
He  gazes  intently.  No,  it  does  not  stir  :  it  is  a  white  rock!  Possibly 
the  lost  sheep  is  in  yonder  gully !  It  is  a  long  way  to  go,  but  he  is  so 
intent  on  his  purpose  that  he  is  soon  there ;  but  the  sheep  is  not  to  be 
seen.  Where  can  it  be  ?  He  travels  on  with  swift  foot,  for  he  does 
not  know  what  may  become  of  his  sheep  while  he  delays.  Every  now 
and  then  he  stops :  he  thinks  ho  hears  a  bleating.  Surely  it  is  the 
voice  of  his  sheep !  He  is  mistaken.  His  love  makes  his  ear  the 
father  of  sounds  which  are  not  sounds  at  all.  He  has  neither  seen 
nor  heard  it  these  long  hours ;  but  he  will  continue  seeking  till  he 
iinds  it.  The  concentrated  omniscience  of  Christ  is  set  upon  a  soul 
that  goes  astray,  looking  after  it  in  all  its  evil  desires  and  evil  emo 
tions;  watching  the  growth  of  anything  that  looks  like  repentance ; 
and  observing  with  sorrow  the  hardening  of  its  heart.  This  is  what 
our  Lord  is  doing  for  those  redeemed  with  blood,  who  as  yet  have  not 
been  carried  back  to  the  fold.  He  puts  forth  a  gracious  exertion  of 
eye  and  mind  as  well  as  of  foot  and  hand,  towards  his  wandering 
sheep. 

At  the  last  he  saves — completely  saves.  He  has  not  come  to  make  the 
salvation  of  his  people  possible  ;  but  to  save  them.  He  has  not  come 
to  put  them  in  the  way  of  saving  themselves,  but  to  save  them.  He 
has  not  come  to  half  save  them ;  but  to  save  them  altogether.  When 
my  Lord  comes  forth  in  the  majesty  of  his  sovereign  grace  to  save  a 
soul,  he  achieves  his  purpose,  despite  sin,  and  death,  and  hell.  The 
wolf  may  grind  his  teeth,  but  the  Shepherd  is  the  wolf's  master.  The 
sheep  itself  may  for  a  long  time  have  wandered,  and  at  the  last  may 
struggle  against  him ;  but  he  grips  its  feet,  and  throws  the  creature 
on  his  shoulders,  and  bears  it  home ;  for  he  is  resolved  to  save  it. 
The  sheep  is  glad  to  be  so  borne,  for  with  a  touch  the  Shepherd  moulds 
its  will  to  his  more  perfect  will.  His  grace  is  the  triumphant  energy 
by  which  the  lost  one  is  restored. 

The  salvation  of  a  single  soul  is  a  mass  of  miracles.  I  have  heard  of 
a  fire  which  consumed  the  shop  of  a  jeweller,  and  a  number  of  costly 
treasures  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  were  found  among 
the  ruins,  caked  into  a  conglomerate  of  riches.  What  a  salvage !  Such 
is  the  salvation  of  a  single  man,  it  is  a  mass  of  priceless  mercies  melted 
into  one  inestimable  ingot,  dedicated  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his 
gr^oe  who  makes  us  to  be  "accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  and  "saved 
in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  salvation."  When  I  think  of  the 
energy  which  is  put  forth  by  the  Lord  to  save  a  single  lost  soul,  I 
feel  stirrecl  in  ray  heart,  and  I  desire  that  your  hearts  should  be 
stirred  also,  that  we  may  put  forth  all  our  strength  to  go  and  find  the 
Lord's  lost  ones.  Let  us  co-operate  with  him  in  his  great  labour  of 
seeking  that  which  is  lost.  Oh,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  put  such  a 
spirit  within  us,  and  keep  it  there  ! 

III.  I  am  compelled  to  pass  onward  somewhat  hurriedly.  Notice, 
in  the  third  place,  that  our  Lord  FEELS  A  SPECIAL  REJOICING  AT  TUB 
OF  A  WANDEEiNO  SHEEP.  Do  not  make  a  mistake  here.  Do 
41 


248  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

not  suppose  that  our  Lord  loves  more  the  one  soul  that  has  wandered 
than  the  ninety  and  nine  who  have  been  preserved  by  his  grace  from 
going  astray.  Oh,  no  !  he  thinks  ninety-nine  times  more  of  ninety- 
nine  than  of  one ;  for  his  sheep  are  each  one  equally  precious  to  him. 
We  must  not  suppose  that  he  looks  upon  any  one  soul  of  his  redeemed 
with  a  tenderness  ninety-nine  times  greater  than  he  gives  to  another. 
But  you  will  see  the  meaning  of  the  passage  by  an  illustration  from 
your  own  experience.  You  have  a  family,  and  you  love  all  your 
children  alike.  But  little  Johnny  is  very  ill ;  he  has  a  fever,  and  is  like 
to  die  :  now  you  think  more  of  him  than  of  aJl  the  rest.  He  recovers, 
and  you  bring  him  downstairs  in  your  arms,  and  just  then  he  is  the 
dearest  child  of  the  whole  company.  Not  that  he  is  really  more  valued 
than  his  brothers  and  sisters,  but  the  fact  that  he  has  been  so  ill,  and 
was  likely  to  die,  has  brought  him  more  before  your  mind,  and  caused 
you  more  anxiety,  and  therefore  you  have  more  joy  in  him  because  of 
his  recovery.  The  great  deeps  of  Christ's  love  are  the  same  to  all  his 
flock,  but  on  the  surface  there  is  sometimes  a  holy  storm  of  joy  when 
any  one  of  them  has  been  newly  restored  after  wandering. 

Learn  the  occasion  of  this  demonstrative  joy.  The  wandering  one 
has  caused  great  sorrow.  We  were  all  grieved  that  our  brother  should 
become  a  gross  backslider,  that  such  an  earnest  Christian  as  he  seemed 
to  be  should  disgrace  his  profession.  Our  Lord  is  still  more  grieved 
than  we  are.  When  the  erring  one  comes  back,  we  feel  a  new  joy  in 
him.  In  proportion  to  the  sorrow  felt  over  the  wanderer,  is  the  joy 
manifested  when  he  is  restored. 

Moreover,  great  apprehensions  were  aroused  ;  we  feared  that  he  was 
not  the  Lord's,  and  that  he  would  go  back  unto  perdition.  We 
trembled  for  him.  That  black  dread  is  all  over  now  :  the  sheep  is  safe, 
the  doubtful  one  is  saved  and  restored  to  the  fold.  In  proportion  to 
the  weight  of  the  apprehension  is  the  intensity  of  the  relief. 

The  Shepherd  had  exercised  also  great  labour  over  the  lost  one. 
He  went  up  among  the  mountains  to  find  his  sheep  ;  but  now  his 
labour  is  fully  rewarded,  for  he  has  found  his  lost  sheep.  He  re- 
membereth  no  more  his  travel  and  travail  for  joy  that  the  sheep  is 
safe. 

Besides,  in  this  newly-restored  one,  there  are  marks  of  salvation  which 
cause  joy.  He  has  been  torn  with  the  briars,  but  he  is  resting  now. 
See  how  he  lies  down  in  the  tender  grass !  He  was  weary  and  worn, 
and  almost  dead  with  his  wanderings ;  but  now,  how  happy  he  is  in 
the  presence  of  his  shepherd  !  How  closely  he  keeps  to  his  shepherd's 
footsteps  !  All  this  goes  to  make  the  shepherd  glad ! 

Besides,  the  shepherd  rejoiqes  when  he  brings  back  the  lost  sheef 
because  he  makes  that  rescue  an  occasion  and  opportunity  for  having  a  special 
gala  day.  He  wishes  all  his  sheep  to  learn  his  delight  in  them  all  b^ 
seeing  his  delight  in  one.  I  know  it  is  so  in  the  church.  I  bless  the 
Lord  when  he  keeps  the  feet  of  his  saints  :  I  bless  him  every  day  for 
preserving  grace ;  but  when  some  grievous  wanderer  is  restored,  the* 
we  bless  him  more  emphatically.  Then  we  have  music  and  dancing. 
The  elder  brother  wonders  what  these  overflowing  joys  can  mean : 
but  everybody  else  can  see  good  reason  for  special  mirth  when  the 
lost  one  is  found.  Shepherds  and  their  flocks  cannot  have  holiday 


ONE    LOST    SHEEP.  249 

«very  day ;  but  when  a  lost  one  has  been  recovered,  they  feel  such 
mutual  delight  in  each  other,  and  such  a  common  delight  in  the 
saving  of  the  lost,  that  they  seize  upon  the  occasion  for  rejoicing.  I 
"want  you  all  to  recognize  that,  if  you  love  the  church  of  Christ,  you 
are  bound  to  keep  a  feast-day  when  f alien,  ones  are  raised  up ;  and 
that  you  may  hold  that  festival,  you  are  bound  to  put  out  all  your 
strength  to  bring  in  the  lost  one. 

IV.  Now  we  come  to  the  tug-of-war,  that  is,  to  look  upon  our 
divine  Shepherd  as  HE  SETS  us  A  STRIKING  EXAMPLE. 

We  may  view  this  text  as  our  personal  missionary  warrant.  To-day 
we  are  called  upon  to  think  of  missions ;  and  as  I  think  it  idle  to 
preach  about  missions  in  the  big  high-flying  style,  I  have  purposed 
to  say  something  common-place,  but  practical.  Brethren,  we  are  all 
of  us  to  be  missionaries  for  Christ,  and  the  text  presents  a  warrant  for 
each  one  to  work  earnestly  as  a  soul-winner. 

What  shall  we  do,  then,  to  imitate  our  Lord  ?  The  answer  is — Let 
us  go  after  one  soul.  I  cannot  make  a  selection  for  you  this  morning, 
but  I  do  entreat  all  who  are  workers  together  with  God  to  go 
after  the  ones.  There  is  a  kind  of  knack  in  speaking  to  individuals 
— everybody  does  not  possess  it ;  but  every  believer  should  labour  to 
acquire  it.  Seek  the  souls  of  men  one  by  one.  It  is  far  easier  work 
to  me  to  speak  to  you  all  than  it  would  be  to  take  each  one  apart  and 
speak  to  him  personally  of  his  soul ;  and  yet  such  speaking  to  you  one 
by  one  might  be  more  successful  than  this  sermon  to  you  in  the  mass. 
I  entreat  you,  as  the  great  Shepherd  goes  after  one,  do  not  think  you 
will  demean  yourself  by  going  after  one  poor  man,  or  woman,  or  child ; 
but  do  it  now. 

Listen  again  :  let  that  one  be  somebody  that  is  quite  out  of  the  way. 
Try  and  think  of  one  who  has  grievously  gone  astray ;  it  may  be  there 
is  one  such  in  your  family,  or  you  meet  with  one  such  in  the  course 
of  trade.  Think  carefully  of  that  one  soul,  and  reflect  upon  its  sin 
and  danger.  You  would  like  to  pick  out  a  hopeful  case,  in  order  that 
you  might  feel  sure  of  success.  Take  another  course  this  time :  seek 
the  one  which  is  going  astray,  and  seems  hopeless.  Follow  your  Lord's 
example,  and  go  after  one  who  is'  the  least  likely  to  be  found.  Will 
you  try  this  plan  ?  If  you  do  not,  you  will  be  quitting  the  way  of 
your  Lord. 

"I  have  a  class  and  a  work,"  says  one.  Yes,  I  want  you,  for  a 
little,  to  leave  the  ninety  and  nine.  I  pray  that  you  may  feel  called  to 
look  after  some  one  greatly  depraved  person,  or  some  utterly  neglected 
child.  Keep  up  your  ninety-and-nine  class,  if  you  possibly  can,  but, 
at  all  hazards,  go  after  the  one.  Make  an  unusual  effort ;  go  out  of 
your  way  ;  let  ordinary  service  be  placed  second  for  the  time  being. 
It  will  be  a  healthy  change  for  you,  and,  perhaps,  a  great  relief. 
Peradventure,  you  will  come  back  and  do  more  good  with  the  ninety 
and  nine,  after  you  have  been  away  a  little  while  with  the  stray 
ing  one.  You  are  getting  a  little  mouldy ;  and  you  are  just  a  wee 
tired  of  the  monotony  of  your  work.  Every  Sunday  the  same  girls, 
or  the  same  boys,  and  the  same  form  of  lesson.  Well,  cut  the  whole 
concern  for  a  little,  and  go  after  the  one  sheep  that  has  gone  astray. 
"  You  are  giving  us  odd  advice,  Mr.  Spurgeon."  If  it  is  not  in  my 


250  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   P'CTLPIT. 

text,  then  do  not  follow  it ;  but  if  it  is  in  our  dea*  Master's  words,  I 
trust  you  will  carry  it  out  bravely. 

When  you  go  after  that  one,  have  all  your  wits  about  you.  Go  and 
seek ;  and  that  you  cannot  do,  unless  you  are  on  the  alert.  Follow 
up  the  straying  one.  Did  you  say  that  you  would  wait  till  he  called 
at  your  house  ?  Is  that  your  notion  of  seeking  lost  sheep  ?  Is  that 
the  way  of  sportsmen  in  the  autumn  ?  do  they  sit  in  the  drawing- 
room  till  the  pheasants  fly  by  the  window  ?  That  would  be  poor 
sport. 

"  O  come,  let  us  go  and  find  them, 
In  the  paths  of  death  they  roam." 

Gk>  after  them,  for  so  the  shepherd  did.  He  braved  the  moiintain's- 
elippery  side.  I  do  not  suppose  the  shepherd  had  any  greater  love 
for  mountain  tracks  than  you  have ;  but  up  the  rough  tracks  he  climbed^ 
for  the  sheep's  sake.  Go  after  sinners  into  their  poverty  and  wretched 
ness,  until  you  find  them. 

Here  is  one  thing  to  cheer  you.  If  you  should  win  such  a  soul  as 
that,  you  will  have  more  joy,  a  great  deal,  than  in  saving  those  for  whom 
you  regularly  labour — more  joy  over  that  lost  one  than  over  the  ninety 
and  nine  hopeful  ones.  It  will  be  such  a  support  to  your  faith,  such 
a  fillip  for  your  joy,  such  a  bright  light  to  your  labour,  to  have  won 
such  a  specially  guilty  one.  I  should  not  wonder  but  what  you  will 
talk  about  it  for  many  a  day,  and  it  will  be  a  source  of  strength  to 
you  when  things  are  not  quite  as  you  would  desire.  Such  converts 
are  our  crown  of  rejoicing.  May  I  specialty  recommend  that  you  make 
a  trial  of  this  extra  sheep-seeking '{  If  you  do  not  succeed,  you  will 
have  done  no  harm  ;  for  you  will  have  copied  your  Lord  and  Master. 
But  you  will  succeed,  for  he  is  with  you,  and  his  Spirit  works  by  you. 

I  would  remind  you  that,  even  under  the  old  law,  you  would  be  bound 
to  do  this  thing.  Turn  to  the  twenty-third  chapter  of  Exodus,  and 
read  the  fourth  and  fifth  verses.  "If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or 
his  ass  going  astray,  thou  shalt  surely  bring  it  back  to  him  again. 
If  thou  see  the  ass  of  him  that  hateth  thee  lying  under  his  burden,  and 
wouldest  forbear  to  help  him,  thou  shalt  surely  help  with  him."  You 
are  bound  to  do  good  even  to  your  enemy.  Will  you  not  serve  your 
best  friend  ?  If  your  enemy's  ox  or  ass  needed  to  be  taken  back  to 
him,  you  are  bound  to  do  it.  How  much  more  when  the  sheep  belongs 
to  him  whom  you  love  with  all  your  heart !  Prove  your  love  to  Jesus 
by  labouring  to  take  him  back  his  strays  ! 

Turn  to  the  twenty-second  of  Deuteronomy,  first  to  fourth  verses, 
and  there  you  will  find  another  bit  of  the  law.  "  Thou  shalt  not  see 
thy  brother's  ox  or  his  sheep  go  astray,  and  hide  thyself  from  them  : 
thou  shalt  in  any  case  bring  them  again  unto  thy  brother."  Oh,  will, 
you  not  bring  in  the  stray  sheep  of  your  greater  Brother,  "  the  first 
born  among  many  brethren  "7  "  And  if  thy  brother  be  not  nigh  untO' 
thee,  or  if  thou  know  him  not,  then  thou  shalt  bring  it  unto  thine  own 
house,  and  it  shall  be  with  thee  until  thy  brother  seek  after  it,  and 
thou  shalt  restore  it  to  him  again."  If  you  cannot  get  a  soul  to  Christ, 
at  any  rate  get  it  to  yourself.  If  you  cannot  lead  it  immediately  to 
conversion,  show  it  some  hospitality  within  your  own  doors,  by  minister 
ing  such  comfort  as  you  can.  Do  what  you  can  to  cheer  the  poor  heart 


ONE   LOST    SHEEP.  251 

•Sill  Christ  comes  after  it.  "  Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ass  orhia 
ox  fall  down  by  the  way,  and  hide  thyself  from  them :  thou  shalt  surely 
help  him  to  lift  them  up  again."  How  easy  it  is  to  hide  ourselves! 
that  is  the  expression  used  by  Moses,  "  thou  shalt  not  hide  thyself 
from  them."  When  you  know  that  people  are  very  wicked,  the  usual 
plan  is  to  wish  them  well,  but  keep  out  of  their  way.  Prudence 
makes  you  hide  yourself  from  them.  The  whole  street  may  swarm 
with  harlots,  but  then  you  haye  gone  to  bed,  and  the  door  is  shut. 
What  has  their  sin  to  do  with  you  ?  There  are  many  drunken  men 
about ;  but  you  do  not  drink  to  excess,  what  has  their  drinking  to  do 
with  you  ?  That  is  what  is  meant  by  hiding  ourselves  from  them. 
How  easily  that  can  be  done !  Take  an  illustration  which  is  worth 
ihe  telling.  A  vessel,  the  other  day,  was  crossing  the  Atlantic,  and 
it  fell  in  with  that  disabled  emigrant  ship,  The  Danmark.  Suppose 
the  captain  had  kept  on  his  course.  He  might  have  looked  another 
way,  and  resolved  not  to  be  detained.  He  might  have  argued,  "  I  am 
"bound  to  do  the  best  for  my  owners.  It  will  hinder  me  greatly  if  I 
rgo  pottering  ab«ut  after  this  vessel.  I  had  better  go  by,  and  not  see 
it ;  or  make  haste  to  port  and  send  out  help."  It  could  have  been 
done,  and  nobody  would  have  been  the  wiser  ;  for  the  ship  would  have 
gone  down  soon.  The  captain  of  that  vessel  was  a  man  of  a  nobler 
breed.  He  did  not  hide  himself,  nor  turn  the  blind  eye  towards  the 
vessel  in  distress.  But  what  did  the  captain  do  ?  All  honour  to  him, 
he  came  near,  and  took  the  ship  in  tow.  This  was  not  all :  he  found 
that  she  could  not  keep  afloat,  and  he  resolved  to  take  those  hun 
dreds  of  emigrants  on  board  his  own  ship.  But  he  could  not  carry 
them  and  his  cargo  too.  What  then  ?  The  decision  was  greatly  to 
his  honour.  Overboard  goes  the  cargo !  God's  blessing  rest  on  the 
man !  Into  the  sea  went  the  freight,  and  the  passengers  were  taken  on 
board,  and  carried  to  the  nearest  port.  He  could  have  easily  hidden 
himself,  could  he  not  ?  So  can  you,  you  Christian  people,  as  you  call 
yourselves.  Can  you  go  through  this  world  and  always  have  a  blind 
•eye  to  the  case  of  lost  sinners  ?  Can  you  come  in  and  out  of  this 
Tabernacle  and  never  speak  to  the  strangers  who  throng  these  aisles  ? 
Will  you  let  them  go  to  hell  unwarned  and  uninstructed  ?  Can  you 
hide  yourselves  from  them  !  How  dare  you  call  yourselves  Christians  ? 
How  will  you  answer  for  it  at  last?  Brothers,  sisters,  let  us  shake  "oil 
this  inhuman  indifference,  and,  deny  ourselves  rest,  ease,  credit,  that 
we  may  save  poor  sinking  souls.  Overboard  with  cargo  cheerfully, 
that  you  may,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  save  souls  from  death. 
Once  more,  this  text  is  the  great  missionary  warrant  for  all  the  churck 
of  God.  We  are  to  go,  as  the  Saviour  did,  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
which  was  lost ;  and  we  are  to  do  this,  not  on  account  of  the  numbers 
of  the  heathen,  but  for  one  of  them.  I  grant  you  there  is  a  great 
power  in  the  argument  of  numbers — so  many  hundreds  of  millions  in 
•China,  so  many  hundreds  of  millions  in  India ;  but  if  there  were  only 
•  one  person  left  unsaved  in  any  part  of  the  world,  it  would  be  worth 
4  while  for  the  entire  Christian  church  to  go  after  that  one  person  ;  for 
>  he  who  is  greater  than  the  church,  as  the  Bridegroom  is  greater  than 
the  bride,  quitted  heaven,  ay,  and  quitted  the  sweet  society  of  his  own 
beloved,  that  he  might  go  after  the  one  that  had  gone  astray.  Do  not 


J52  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

care,  therefore,  about  numbers :  save  tlie  smallest  tribes.  Have  »n 
eye  to  the  hamlets  in  England.  I  believe  that  the  scattered  cottages 
of  our  land  are  in  a  worse  condition  than  the  villages.  Care  for  the 
ones.  Your  Lord  did  so,  and  here  ia  your  warrant  for  doing  the 
like. 

Next,  notice,  that  we  ought  never  to  be  moved  by  the  supposed 
superiority  of  a  race.  I  have  heard  it  said  that  it  would  be  far  better 
to  try  and  convert  the  superior  races  than  to  consider  the  more 
degraded.  Is  it  not  better  to  bring  in  the  educated  Brahmins  than 
the  wild  hill-tribes?  "What  a  fine  sort  of  people  these  are,  these- 
philosophical  Hindoos !  If  we  could  win  them  they  would  be  worth 
converting ! "  That  is  not  at  all  according  to  the  mind  of  Christ. 
The  Shepherd  sought  a  lost  sheep,  and  when  he  had  found  it,  it  was 
no  great  spoil  for  him,  for  it  was  so  worn  out  as  to  be  nothing  but  a 
destroyed  sheep.  Yet  he  went  after  that  one  poor  animal.  Let  us  feel 
that  the  degraded  Africans,  the  dwarfs  of  the  woods,  the  cannibals  of 
New  Guinea,  and  all  such,  are  to  be  sought  quite  as  much  as  more 
advanced  races.  They  are  men  ;  that  is  enough. 

Once  more,  the  motive  for  missionary  enterprise  must  never  be  the 
excellence  of  the  character  of  the  individuals.  The  shepherd  did  not 
go  after  the  sheep,  because  it  never  went  astray,  nor  because  it  was 
docile,  but  because  it  did  go  astray,  and  was  not  docile.  The  sin  of 
men  is  their  claim  upon  the  church  of  God.  The  more  sin,  the  more- 
reason  for  abounding  grace.  Oh  that  the  church  would  feel  it  to  be 
her  duty,  if  not  to  go  to  the  most  degraded  first,  yet  not  to  leave  them 
to  the  last !  Where  you  seem  least  likely  to  succeed  there  go  at  once, 
for  there  you  will  find  room  for  f aitk ;  and  where  there  is  room  for 
faith,  and  faith  fills  the  room,  God  will  send  a  blessing.  , 

Dear  friends,  as  you  cannot,  all  of  you,  go  abroad  to  the  heathen, 
though  some  of  you  ought  to  do  so,  I  ask  you  to  do  what  you  can  do. 
Contribute  to  the  collection,  which  is  for  the  support  of  mission  work. 
Here  is  a  small  opportunity ;  and  if  you  do  not  avail  yourselves  of  it, 
you  are  not  likely  to  do  the  greater  thing  to  which  I  have  invited  you. 
The  Lord  bless  you  !  Amen. 


rtwpttau 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  LOST  SHEEP. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  SEPTEMBER  28TH,  1884,  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,    NEWINQTON. 


"What  man  of  you,  having  an  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one  of  them,  doth  not  leave 
the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  wilderness,  and  go  after  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it? 
And  when  he  hath  found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing.  And  when  he 
cometh  home,  he  calleth  together  his  friends  and  neighbours,  saying  unto  them,  Rejoice 
with  me  ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost.  I  say  unto  you,  that  likewise  joy 
shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine  just 
persons,  which  need  no  repentance." — Luke  xv.  4 — 7 

OUR  Lord  Jesus  Christ  while  he  was  here  below  was  continually  in  the 
pursuit  of  lost  souls.  He  was  seeking  lost  men  and  women,  and  it  was 
for  this  reason  that  he  went  down  among  them,  even  among  those  who 
were  most  evidently  lost,  that  he  might  find  them.  He  took  pains  to 
put  himself  where  he  could  come  into  communication  with  them,  and  he 
exhibited  such  kindliness  towards  them  that  in  crowds  they  drew  near 
to  hear  him.  I  dare  say  it  was  a  queer-looking  assembly,  a  disreputable 
rabble,  which  made  the  Lord  Jesus  its  centre.  I  am  not  astonished 
that  the  Pharisee,  when  he  looked  upon  the  congregation,  sneered  and 
said,  "  He  collects  around  him  the  pariahs  of  our  community,  the  wretches 
who  collect  taxes  for  the  foreigner  of  God's  free  people ;  and  the  fallen 
women  of  the  towns,  and  such-like  riffraff  make  up  his  audiences ; 
and  he,  instead  of  repelling  them,  receives  them,  welcomes  them,  looks 
upon  them  as  a  class  to  whom  he  has  a  peculiar  relationship.  He 
even  eats  with  them.  Did  he  not  go  into  the  house  of  Zaccheus, 
and  the  house  of  Levi,  and  partake  of  the  feasts  which  these  low  people 
made  for  him?"  We  cannot  tell  you  all  the  Pharisees  thought,  it 
might  not  be  edifying  to  attempt  it ;  but  they  thought  as  badly  of  the 
Lord  as  they  possibly  could,  because  of  the  company  which  surrounded 
him.  And  so,  he  deigns  in  this  parable  to  defond  himself;  not  that  he 
cared  much  about  what  they  might  think,  but  that  they  might  have  no 
excuse  for  speaking  so  bitterly  of  him.  He  tells  them  that  he  wa8 
seeking  the  lost,  and  where  should  he  be  found  but  among  those  whom 
he  was  seeking  ?  Should  a  physician  shun  the  sick  ?  Should  a  shep 
herd  avoid  the  lost  sheep  ?  Was  he  not  exactly  in  his  right  position 
when  there  "  drew  near  unto  him  all  the  publicans  and  sinners  for  to  hear 
him"? 

No.  1.801  58 


518  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Oar  divine  Lord  defended  himself  by  what  is  called  an  argumentum 
ad  hominem,  an  argument  to  the  men  themselves  ;  for  he  said,  "  What 
man  of  you,  having  an  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one  of  them,  doth  not  go 
after  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it  ?  "  No  argument  tells  more 
powerfully  upon  men  than  one  which  conies  close  home  to  their  own 
dally  life,  and  the  Saviour  put  it  so.  They  were  silenced,  if  they 
were  not  convinced.  It  was  a  peculiarly  strong  argument,  because 
in  their  case  it  was  only  a  sheep  that  they  would  go  after,  but  in  his  case 
it  was  something  infinitely  more  precious  than  all  the  flocks  of  sheep 
that  ever  fed  on  Sharon  or  Carmel ;  for  it  was  the  soul  of  man  which  he 
sought  to  save.  The  argument  had  in  it  not  only  the  point  of  peculiar 
adaptation,  but  a  force  at  the  back  of  it  unusually  powerful  for  driving 
it  home  upon  every  honest  mind.  It  may  be  opened  out  in  this  fashion, — 
"  If  you  men  would  each  one  of  you  go  after  a  lost  sheep,  and  follow  in  its 
track  until  you  found  it,  how  much  more  may  I  go  after  lost  souls,  and 
follow  them  in  all  their  wanderings  until  I  can  rescue  them?"  The 
going  after  the  sheep  is  a  part  of  the  parable  which  our  Lord  meant  them 
to  observe :  the  shepherd  pursues  a  route  which  he  would  never  think  of 
pursuing  if  it  were  only  for  his  own  pleasure ;  his  way  is  not  selected  for 
his  own  ends,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  stray  sheep.  He  takes  a  track  up 
hill  and  down  dale,  far  into  a  desert,  or  into  some  dark  wood,  simply 
because  the  sheep  has  gone  that  way,  and  he  must  follow  it  until  he  find 
it.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  matter  of  taste  and  pleasure,  would  never 
have  been  found  among  the  publicans  and  sinners,  nor  among  any  of  our 
guilty  race:  if  he  had  consulted  his  own-  ease  and  comfort  he  would  have 
consorted  only  with  pure  and  holy  angels,  and  the  great  Father  above ; 
but  he  was  not  thinking  of  himself,  his  heart  was  set  upon  the  lost 
ones,  and  therefore  he  went  where  the  lost  sheep  were ;  "  for  the  Son  of 
man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  The  more  steadily 
you  look  at  this  parable  the  more  clearly  you  will  see  that  our  Lord's 
answer  was  complete.  We  need  not  this  morning  regard  it  exclusively 
as  an  answer  to  Pharisees,  but  we  may  look  at  it  as  an  instruction  to  our 
selves  ;  for  it  is  quite  as  complete  in  that  direction.  May  the  good  Spirit 
instruct  us  as  we  muse  upon  it. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  I  call  attention  to  this  observation :  THE  ONE 
SUBJECT  OF  THOUGHT  to  the  man  who  had  lost  his  sheep.  This  sets 
forth  to  us  the  one  thought  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Good  Shepherd, 
when  he  sees  a  man  lost  to  holiness  and  happiness  by  wandering 
into  sin. 

The  shepherd,  on  looking  over  his  little  flock  of  one  hundred,  can 
only  count  ninety-nine.  He  counts  them  again,  and  he  notices  that  a 
certain  one  has  gone :  it  may  be  a  white-faced  sheep  with  a  black  mark 
on  its  foot :  he  knows  all  about  it,  for  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are 
his."  The  shepherd  has  a  photograph  of  the  wanderer  in  his  mind's 
eye,  and  now  he  thinks  but  little  of  the  ninety  and  nine  who  are  feeding 
in  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness,  but  his  mind  is  in  a  ferment  about  the 
one  lost  sheep.  This  one  idea  possesses  him  :  "a  sheep  is  lost!  "  This 
agitates  his  mind  more  and  more — "  a  sheep  is  lost."  It  masters  his 
every  faculty.  He  cannot  eat  bread;  he  cannot  return  to  his  home; 
he  cannot  rest  while  one  sheep  is  lost. 

To  a  tender  heart  a  lost  sheep  is  a  painful  subject  of  thought.     It  is 


THE    PATIABLE   OP   THE    LOST   STTKEP.  519 

<i  sheep,  and  therefore  utterly  defenceless  now  that  it  has  left  its  de 
fender.  If  the  wolf  should  spy  it  out,  or  the  lion  or  the  bear  should 
come  across  its  track,  it  would  be  torn  in  pieces  in  an  instant.  Thus 
the  shepherd  asks  his  heart  the  question — "  What  will  become  of  my 
sheep?  Perhaps  at  this  very  moment  a  lion  may  be  ready  to  spring 
upon  it,  and,  if  so,  it  cannot  help  itself !  "  A  sheep  is  not  prepared  for 
fight,  and  even  for  flight  it  has  not  the  swiftness  of  its  enemy.  That 
makes  its  compassionate  owner  the  more  sad  as  he  thinks  again — "  A 
sheep  is  lost,  it  is  in  great  danger  of  a  cruel  death/'  A  sheep  is  of  all 
creatures  the  most  senseless.  If  we  have  lost  a  dog,  it  may  find  its  way 
home  again ;  possibly  a  horse  might  return  to  its  master's  stable ;  but 
a  sheep  will  wander  on  and  on,  in  endless  mazes  lost.  It  is  too 
foolish  a  thing  to  think  of  returning  to  the  place  of  safety.  A  lost  sheep 
is  lost  indeed  in  countries  where  lands  lie  unenclosed  and  the  plains  are 
boundless.  That  fact  still  seems  to  ring  in  the  man's  soul — "  A  sheep  is 
lost,  and  it  will  not  return,  for  it  is  a  foolish  thing.  Where  may  it 
not  have  gone  by  this  time  ?  Weary  and  worn,  it  may  be  fainting  ;  it 
may  be  far  away  from  green  pastures,  and  be  ready  to  perish  with  hunger 
among  the  bare  rocks  or  upon  the  arid  sand."  A  sheep  is  shiftless;  it 
knows  nothing  about  providing  for  itself.  The  camel  can  scent  water 
from  afar,  and  a  vulture  can  espy  its  food  from  an  enormous  distance ; 
but  the  sheep  can  find  nothing  for  itself.  Of  all  wretched  creatures  a 
lost  sheep  is  one  of  the  worst.  If  anybody  had  stepped  up  to  the 
shepherd  just  then,  and  said,  "  Good  sir,  what  aileth  you?  you  seem  in 
great  concern";  he  would  have  replied,  "And  well  I  may  be,  for  a 
sheep  is  lost."  "  It  is  only  one,  sir ;  and  I  see  you  have  ninety-nine 
left."  "Do  you  call  it  nothing  to  lose  one?  You  are  no  shepherd 
jourself,  or  you  would  not  trifle  so.  Why,  I  seem  to  forget  these  ninety- 
nine  that  are  all  safe,  and  my  mind  only  remembers  that  one  which  is 
lost." 

What  is  it  which  makes  the  Great  Shepherd  lay  so  much  to  his  heart 
the  loss  of  one  of  his  flock?  What  is  it  that  makes  him  agitated  as  he 
reflects  upon  that  supposition — "  if  he  lose  one  of  them"  ? 

I  think  it  is,  first,  because  of  his  property  in  it.  The  parable  does 
not  so  much  speak  of  a  hired  shepherd,  but  of  a  shepherd  proprietor. 
"What  man  of  you  having  an  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one  of  them." 
Jesus,  in  another  place,  speaks  of  the  hireling,  whose  own  the  sheep  are 
not,  and  therefore  he  flees  when  the  wolf  comes.  It  is  the  shepherd 
proprietor  who  lays  down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  It  is  not  a  sheep  alone, 
and  a  lost  sheep,  but  it  is  one  of  his  own  lost  sheep  that  this  man  cares 
for.  This  parable  is  not  written  about  lost  humanity  in  the  bulk — it  may  be 
so  used  if  you  please — but  in  its  first  sense  it  is  written  about  Christ's 
own  sheep ;  as  also  is  the  second  parable  concerning  the  woman's  own 
money ;  and  the  third,  not  concerning  any  prodigal  youth,  but  the  father's 
own  son.  Jesus  has  his  own  sheep,  and  some  of  them  are  lost :  yea, 
they  were  all  once  in  the  same  condition ;  for  "  all  we  like  sheep  have 
gone  astray;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way."  The  parable 
refers  to  the  unconverted,  whom  Jesus  has  redeemed  with  his  most 
precious  blood,  and  whom  he  has  undertaken  to  seek  and  to  save :  these 
are  those  other  sheep  whom  also  he  must  bring  in.  "  For  thus  saith  the 
Lord  God;  Behold  I,  even  I,  will  both  search  my  sheep,  and  seek  them 


520  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

out.  As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his  flock  in  the  day  that  he  is  among 
his  sheep  that  are  scattered;  so  will  [  seek  out  my  sheep,  and  will  deliver 
them  out  of  all  places  where  they  have  been  scattered  in  the  cloudy  an<i 
dark  day."  The  sheep  of  Christ  are  his  long  before  they  know  it— his 
even  when  they  wander ;  and  when  they  are  brought  into  the  fold  by  the 
effectual  working  of  his  grace  they  become  manifestly  what  they  were 
in  covenant  from  of  old.  The  sheep  are  Christ's,  first,  because  he  chose 
them  from  before  the  foundations  of  the  world— "  Ye  have  not  chosen 
me,  but  I  have  chosen  you."  Kis,  next,  because  the  Father  gave  them  to 
him.  How  he  dwells  upon  that  fact  in  his  great  prayer  in  John  xvii. : 
"  Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me  ;"  "  Father,  I  will  that  they 
also,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am."  We  are  the 
Lord's  own  flock,  furthermore,  by  his  purchase  of  us ;  he  says :  "  I  lay 
down  my  life  for  the  sheep."  It  is  nearly  nineteen  centuries  ago  since 
he  paid  the  ransom  price,  and  bought  us  to  be  his  own ;  and  we  shall  be 
his,  for  that  purchase-money  was  not  paid  in-  vain.  And  so  the  Saviour 
looks  upon  his  hands,  and  sees  the  marks  of  his  purchase ;  he  looks 
upon  his  side,  and  sees  the  token  of  the  effectual  redemption  of  his  own 
elect  unto  himself  by  the  pouring  out  of  his  own  heart's  blood  before 
the  living  God.  This  thought,  therefore,  presses  upon  him,  "  One  of  my 
sheep  is  lost."  It  is  a  wonderful  supposition,  that  which  is  contained  in 
this  parable — "  if  he  lose  one  of  them."  What !  lose  one  whom  he 
loved  or  ever  the  earth  was?  It  may  wander  for  a  time,  but  he  will  not 
have  it  lost  for  ever :  that  he  cannot  bear.  What !  lose  one  whom  his 
Father  gave  him  to  be  his  own  ?  Lose  one  whom  he  has  bought  with 
his  own  life  ?  He  will  not  endure  the  thought.  That  word — "  if  he  lose 
one  of  them  "  sets  his  soul  on  fire.  It  shall  not  be.  You  know  how  much 
the  Lord  has  valued  each  one  of  his  chosen,  laying  down  his  life  for  his 
redemption.  You  know  how  dearly  he  loves  every  one  of  his  people  : 
it  is  no  new  passion  with  him,  neither  can  it  grow  old.  He  has  loved  his 
own  and  must  love  them  to  the  end.  From  eternity  that  love  has 
endured  already,  and  it  must  continue  throughout  the  ages,  for  he 
changeth  not.  Will  he  lose  one  of  those  so  dearly  loved  ?  Never  ; 
never.  He  has  eternal  possession  of  them  by  a  covenant  of  salt,  where 
in  the  Father  hath  given  them  to  him  :  this  it  is  which  in  great  measure 
stirs  his  soul  so  that  he  thinks  of  nothing  but  this  fact, — One  of  niy 
sheep  is  lost. 

Secondly,  he  has  yet  another  reason  for  this  all-absorbing  thought, 
namely,  his  great  compassion  for  his  lost  sheep.  The  wandering  of  a 
soul  causes  Jesus  deep  sorrow  ;  he  cannot  bear  the  thought  of  its 
perishing.  Such  is  the  love  and  tenderness  of  his  heart  that  he  cannot 
bear  that  one  of  his  own  should  he  in  jeopardy.  He  can  take  no  rest  as 
long  as  a  soul  for  whom  he  shed  his  blood  still  abides  under  the  dominion 
of  Satan  and  under  the  power  of  sin  ;  therefore  the  Great  Shepherd 
neither  night  nor  day  forgetteth  his  sheep:  he  must  save  his  flock,  and 
he  is  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished. 

He  has  a  deep  sympathy  with  each  stray  heart.  He  knows  the  sorrow 
that  sin  brings,  the  deep  pollution  and  the  terrible  wounding  that 
comes  of  transgression,  even  at  the  time ;  and  the  sore  heart  and 
the  broken  spirit  that  will  come  of  it  before  long;  and  so  the  sym 
pathetic  Saviour  grieves  over  each  lost  sheep,  for  he  knows  the 


THE   PARABLE   OP   THE   LOST   SHEEP.  521 

misery  which  lies  in  the  fact  of  being  lost.  If  you  have  ever  been 
in  a  house  with  a  mother  and  father,  and  daughters  and  sons,  when 
a  little  child  has  been  lost,  you  will  never  forget  the  agitation  of 
each  member  of  the  household.  See  the  father  as  he  goes  to 
the  police-station,  and  calls  at  every  likely  house;  for  he  must  find 
his  child  or  break  his  heart.  See  the  deep  oppression  and  bitter 
anguish  of  the  mother;  she  is  like  one  distracted  till  she  has  news  of  her 
darling.  You  now  begin  to  understand  what  Jesus  feels  for  one  whom 
he  loves,  who  is  graven  on  the  palms  of  his  hands,  whom  he  looked  upon 
in  the  glass  of  his  foreknowledge,  when  he  was  bleeding  his  life  away 
upon  the  tree ;  he  hath  no  rest  in  his  spirit  till  his  beloved  is  found. 
He  hath  compassion  like  a  God,  and  that  doth  transcend  all  the  com 
passion  of  parents  or  of  brothers, — the  compassion  of  an  infinite  heart 
brimming  over  with  an  ocean  of  love.  This  one  thought  moves  the 
pity  of  the  Lord— "if  he  lose  one  of  them." 

Moreover,  the  man  in  the  parable  had  a  third  relation  to  the  sheep, 
which  made  him  possessed  with  the  one  thought  of  its  being  lost, — he 
ivas  a  shepherd  to  it.  It  was  his  own  sheep,  and  he  had  therefore  for 
that  very  reason  become  its  shepherd ;  and  he  says  to  himself,  "  If  I  lose 
one  of  them  my  shepherd-work  will  be  ill-done."  What  dishonour  it 
would  be  to  a  shepherd  to  lose  one  of  his  sheep !  Either  it  must  be  for 
want  of  power  to  keep  it,  or  want  of  will,  or  want  of  watchfulness  ;  but 
none  of  these  can  appertain  to  the  Chief  Shepherd.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  will  never  have  it  said  of  him  that  he  has  lost  one  of  his  people, 
for  he  glories  in  having  preserved  them  all.  "  While  I  was  with 
them  in  the  world,  I  kept  them  in  thy  name :  those  that  thou  gavesfc 
me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perdition ; 
that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled."  The  devil  shall  never  say 
that  Jesus  suffered  one  whom  his  Father  gave  him  to  perish.  His 
work  of  love  cannot  in  any  degree  become  a  failure.  His  death  in 
vain!  No,  not  in  jot  or  tittle.  I  can  imagine,  if  it  were  possible, 
that  the  Son-of  God  should  live  in  vain  :  but  to  die  in  vain !  It  shall 
never  be.  The  purpose  that  he  meant  to  achieve  by  his  passion  and 
death  he  shall  achieve,  for  he  is  the  Eternal,  the  Infinite,  the  Omnipo 
tent;  and  who  shall  stay  his  hand,  or  baffle  his  design?  He  will  not 
have  it.  "If  he  lose  one  of  them,"  says  the  passage;  imagine  the 
consequence.  What  scorn  would  come  from  Satan !  *"  What  derision 
would  he  pour  upon  the  Shepherd !  How  hell  would  ring  with  the 
news,  "  He'hath  lost  one  of  them."  Suppose  it  to  be  the  feeblest;  then 
would  they  cry, "  He  could  keep  the  strong,  who  could  keep  themselves." 
Suppose  it  to  be  the  strongest ;  then  would  they  cry, "  He  could  not  even 
keep  one  of  the  mightiest  of  them,  but  must  needs  let  him  perish." 
This  is  good  argument,  for  Moses  pleaded  with  God,  "  What  will  the 
Egyptians  say?"  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven 
thai  one  of  these  little  ones  shall  perish,  neither  is  it  for  the  glory  of 
Christ  that  one  of  his  own  sheep  should  be  eternally  lost. 

You  see  the  reason  for  the  Lord's  heart  being  filled  with  one  burning 
thought ;  for  first,  the  sheep  is  his  own;  next,  he  is  full  of  compassion  ;  and 
then  again,  it  is  his  office  to  shepherd  the  flock. 

All  this  while  the  sheep  is  not  thinking  about  the  shepherd,  or  caring 
for  him  ip  the  least  degree.  Some  of  you  are  not  thinking  at  all  about 


522  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAo^E   PULPIT. 

the  Lord  Jesus.  You  have  no  wish  nor  will  to  seek  after  him !  What 
folly !  Oh,  the  pity  of  it,  that  the  great  heart  above  should  be  yearning 
over  you  to-day,  and  should  fail  to  rest  because  you  are  in  peril,  and. 
you,  who  will  be  the  greater  loser,  for  you  will  lose  your  own  soul,  are 
sporting  with  sin,  and  making  yourself  merry  with  destruction.  Ah, 
me  !  how  far  you  have  wandered  !  How  hopeless  would  your  case  be 
if  there  were  not  an  Almighty  Shepherd  to  think  upon  you. 

II.  Now  we  come  to  the  second  point,  and  observe  THE  ONE 
OBJECT  OP  SEARCH.  This  sheep  lies  on  the  shepherd's  heart,  and  he 
must  at  once  set  out  to  look  for  it.  He  leaves  the  ninety-and-nine  in 
the  wilderness,  and  goes  after  that  which  is  lost  until  he  find  it. 

Observe  here  that  it  is  a  definite  search.  The  shepherd  goes  after 
the  sheep,  and  after  nothing  else  ;  and  he  has  the  one  particular  sheep 
in  his  mind's  eye.  I  should  have  imagined,  from  the  way  in  which  I 
have  seen  this  text  handled,  that  Christ,  the  Shepherd,  went  down  into 
the  wilderness  to  catch  anybody's  sheep  he  could  find.  Many  were 
•running  about,  and  he  did  not  own  any  one  of  them  more  than  another, 
but  was  content  to  pick  up  the  one  that  he  could  first  lay  hold  upon  ; 
or  rather,  that  which  first  came  running  after  him.  Not  so  is  the 
case  depicted  in  the  parable.  It  is  his  own  sheep  that  he  is  seeking, 
and  he  goes  distinctly  after  that  one.  It  is  his  sheep  which  was  lost, — 
&  well-known  sheep  ;  well  known  not  only  to  himself,  but  even  to  his 
friends  and  neighbours, — for  he  speaks  to  them  as  if  it  was  perfectly 
understood  ,vhich  sheep  it  was  that  he  went  to  save.  Jesus  knows 
all  about  his  redeemed,  and  he  goes  definitely  after  such  and  such  a 
soul.  When  I  am  preaching  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  I  delight  to 
think  that  I  am  sent  to  individuals  with  the  message  of  mercy.  I 
am  not  going  to  draw  the  bow  at  a  venture  at  all;  but  when  the 
Divine  hands  are  put  on  mine  to  draw  the  bow,  the  Lord  takes  such 
aim  that  no  arrow  misses  its  mark:  into  the  very  centre  of  the 
heart  the  word  finds  its  way  ;  for  Jesus  goes  not  fortli  at  a  peradven- 
ture  in  his  dealings  with  men.  He  subdues  the  will  and  conquers  the 
heart,  making  his  people  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power.  He  calls  indi 
viduals  and  they  come.  He  saith,  "  Mary,"  and  the  response  is,  "  Rab- 
boni."  I  say,  the  man  in  the  parable  sought  out  a  distinct  indivi 
dual,  and  rested  not  till  he  found  it ;  and  so  doth  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
the  movements  of  his  love  go  forth  at  no  uncertainty :  he  does  not 
grope  about  to  catch  whom  he  may,  as  if  he  played  at  Blindman's- 
buff  with  salvation,  but  he  seeks  and  saves  the  one  out  of  his  own 
sheep  which  he  has  his  eye  upon  in  its  wanderings.  Jesus  knows 
what  he  means  to  do,  and  he  will  perform  it  to  the  glory  of  the  Father. 
Note  that  this  is  an  all-absorbing  search.  He  is  thinking  of  nothing 
but  his  own  lost  sheep.  The  ninety-and-nine  are  left  in  safety;  bus 
they  are  left.  When  we  read  that  he  leaves  them  in  the  wilderness  we 
are  apt  to  think  of  some  barren  place ;  but  that  is  not  intended :  it 
simply  means  the  open  pasturage,  the  steppe,  the  prairie:  he  leaves 
them  well  provided  for,  leaves  them  because  he  can  leave  them.  For 
the  time  being  he  is  carried  away  with  the  one  thought  that  he  must  seek 
and  save  the  lost  one,  and  therefore  he  leaves  the  ninety-and-nine  in 
their  pasture.  "  Shepherd,  the  way  is  very  rocky  !  "  He  does  not  seem 
&>  know  what  the  way  is,  his  heart  is  with  his  lost  sheep.  "  Shepherd, 


THK  PARABLE  OF  THE  LOST  SHEEP.  523 

it  is  a  heavy  climb  up  yon  mountain  side/'  He  does  not  note  hi» 
toil;  his  excitement  lends  him  the  feet  of  the  wild  goat;  he  stands 
securely  where  at  other  times  his  foot  would  slip.  He  looks  around  for 
his  sheep  and  seems  to  see  neither  crag  nor  chasm.  "  Shepherd,  it 
is  a  terrible  path  by  which  you  must  descend  into  yonder  gloomy  valley." 
It  is  not  terrible  to  him :  his  only  terror  is  lest  his  sheep  should 
perish  ;  he  is  taken  up  with  that  one  fear,  and  nothing  else.  He  leaps 
into  danger,  and  escapes  it  by  the  one  strong  impulse  which  bears  him 
on.  It  is  grand  to  think  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  his  heart  set  im 
movably  upon  the  rescue  of  a  soul  which  at  this  moment  is  lost  to  him. 

It  is  an  active  search  too ;  for  observe,  he  goes  after  that  which  is  lost, 
until  he  find  it ;  and  he  does  this  with  a  personal  search.  He  does  not 
say  to  one  of  his  underlings,  "  Here,  hasten  after  that  sheep  which  was 
lost,  and  bring  it  home."  No,  he  follows  it  himself.  And  if  ever 
there  is  a  soul  brought  from  sin  to  grace,  it  is  not  by  us  poor  ministers 
working  alone,  but  it  is  by  the  Master  himself,  who  goes  after  his  own 
sheep.  It  is  glorious  to  think  of  him  still  personally  tracking  sinners, 
who,  though  they  fly  from  him  with  a  desperateness  of  folly,  yet  are  still 
pursued  by  him — pursued  by  the  Son  of  God,  by  the  Eternal  Lover  of 
men — pursued  by  him  until  he  finds  them. 

For  notice  the  perseverance  of  the  search;  "until  he  find  it."  He 
does  not  stop  till  he  has  done  the  deed.  You  and  I  ought  to  seek  after 
a  soul,  how  long  ?  Why,  until  we  find  it ;  for  such  is  the  model  set  before 
us  by  the  Master.  The  parable  says  nothing  about  his  not  finding  it ;  no 
hint  of  failure  is  given  ;  we  drearn  not  that  there  may  be  a  sheep  belonging 
to  him  which  he  will  never  find.  Oh,  brethren,  there  are  a  great  many 
whom  you  and  I  would  never  find  ;  but  when  Jesus  is  after  his  own  lost 
sheep,  depend  upon  it  such  is  his  skill,  so  clearly  doth  he  see,  and  so 
effectually  doth  he  intervene,  that  he  will  surely  bring  them  in.  A  de 
feated  Christ  I  cannot  conceive  of.  It  is  a  personal  search,  and  a  per 
severing  search,  and  a  successful  search,  until  he  finds  it.  Let  us  praise 
and  bless  his  name  for  this. 

Observe  that  when  the  shepherd  does  find  it,  there  is  a  little  touch  in 
the  parable  not  often  noticed, — he  does  not  appear  to  put  it  back  into  the 
fold  again :  I  mean,  we  do  not  find  it  so  written,  as  a  fact  to  be  noted. 
I  suppose  he  did  so  place  it  ultimately  ;  but  for  the  time  being  he  keeps 
it  with  himself  rather  than  with  its  fellows.  The  next  scene  is  the 
shepherd  at  home,  saving,  "  Rejoice  with  me ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep 
which  was  lost."  It  looks  as  if  Jesus  did  not  save  a  soul  so  much  to 
the  church  as  to  himself,  and  though  the  saved  are  in  the  flock,  the 
{Greatest  joy  of  all  is  that  the  sheep  is  with  the  shepherd.  This  shows 
you  how  thoroughly  Christ  lays  himself  out  that  he  may  save  his  people. 
There  is  nothing  in  Christ  that  does  not  tend  towards  cne  salvation  of 
his  redeemed.  There  are  no  pull-backs  with  him,  no  half-consecrated 
influences  which  make  him  linger.  In  the  pursuit  of  certain  objects  we 
lay  out  a  portion  of  our  faculties  :  but  Jesus  lays  out  all  his  powers  upon 
the  seeking  and  saving  of  souls. 

The  whole  Christ  seeks  after  each  sinner ;  and  when  the  Lord  finds 
it,  he  .gives  himself  to  that  one  soul  as  if  he  had  but  that  one  soul  to 
bless.  How  my  heart  admires  the  concentration  of  all  the  Godhead  and 
manhood  of  Christ  in  his  search  afcer  each  sheep  of  his  flock. 


524  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

III.  Now,  we  must  pass  on  very  briefly  to  notice  a  third  point  We 
have  had  one  subject  of  thought  and  one  object  of  search  ;  now  we  have 
ONR  BURDEN  OF  LOVE.  When  the  seeking  is  ended,  then  the  saving 
appears, — "When  he  hath  found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  re 
joicing."  Splendid  action  this  !  How  beautifully  the  parable  sets  forth 
the  whole  of  salvation.  Some  of  the  old  writers  delight  to  put  it  thus  : 
in  his  incarnation  he  came  after  the  lost  sheep  ;  in  his  life  he  continued 
to  seek  it ;  in  his  death  he  laid  it  upon  his  shoulders  ;  in  his  resurrection 
he  bore  it  on  its  way,  and  in  his  ascension  he  brought  it  home  rejoicing. 
Our  Lord's  career  is  a  course  of  soul-winning,  a  life  laid  out  for  his 
people ;  and  in  it  you  may  trace  the  whole  process  of  salvation. 

But  now,  see,  the  shepherd  finds  the  sheep,  and  he  layeth  it  on  his 
shoulders.  It  is  an  uplifting  action,  raising  the  fallen  one  from  the  earth 
whereon  he  hath  strayed.  It  is  as  though  he  took  the  sheep  just  as  it 
was,  without  a  word  of  rebuke,  without  delay  or  hesitancy,  and  lifted  it 
out  of  the  slough  or  the  briers  into  a  place  of  safety.  Do  you  not 
remember  when  the  Lord  lifted  you  up  from  the  horrible  pit  ?  when  he 
sent  from  above,  and  delivered  you,  and  became  your  strength  ?  I  shall 
never  forget  that  day.  What  a  wonderful  lift  it  was  for  me  when  the 
Great  Shepherd  lifced  me  into  newness  of  life.  The  Lord  said  of 
Israel,  "  I  bare  you  on  eagles'  wings ; "  but  it  is  a  dearer  emblem  still 
to  be  borne  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  incarnate  Lord. 

This  laying  on  the  shoulders  was  an  appropriating  act.  He  seemed 
to  say,  "You  are  my  sheep,  and  therefore  I  lay  you  on  my  shoulders." 
He  did  not  make  his  claim  in  so  many  words,  but  by  a  rapid  action  he 
declared  it :  for  a  man  does  not  bear  away  a  sheep  to  which  he  has  no 
right :  this  was  not  a  sheep-stealer,  but  a  shepherd-proprietor.  He 
holds  fast  the  sheep  by  all  four  of  its  legs,  so  that  it  cannot  stir,  and 
then  he  lays  it  on  his  o\vn  shoulders,  for  it  is  all  his  own  now.  He 
seems  to  say, "  I  am  a  long  way  from  home,  and  [  am  in  a  weary  desert ; 
but  I  have  found  my  sheep,  and  these  hands  shall  hold  it."  Here  are 
our  Lord's  own  words,  "  I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they 
shall  never  perish;  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." 
Hands  of  such  might  as  those  of  Jesus  will  hold  fast  the  found  one. 
Shoulders  of  such  power  as  those  of  Jesus  will  safely  bear  the  found  one 
home.  It  is  all  well  with  that  sheep,  for  it  is  positively  and  ex 
perimentally  the  Good  Shepherd's  own,  just  as  it  always  had  been  his  in 
the  eternal  purpose  of  the  Father.  Do  you  remember  when  Jesus  said 
unto  you,  "  Thou  art  mine"  ?  Then  I  know  you  also  appropriated  him, 
and  began  to  sing — 

"  So  I  my  best  Beloved's  am, 
And  he  is  mine." 

More  condescending  still  is  another  view  of  this  act  :  it  was  a  deed  of 
service  to  the  sheep.  The  sheep  is  uppermost,  the  weight  of  the  sheep 
is  upon  the  shepherd.  The  sheep  rides,  the  shepherd  is  the  burden- 
bearer.  The  sheep  rests,  the  shepherd  labours.  "  I  am.  among  you 
as  he  that  serveth,"  said  our  Lord  long  ago.  "Being  found  in 
fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross."  On  that  cross  he  bore  the  burden  of  our 
ein,  and  what  is  more,  the  burden  of  our  very  selves.  Blessed  he  his 
name,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  fhe  iniquity  of  us  all,"  and  he  hath 


THR    PARABLE    OF  THK    LOST   SHEEP.  525 

laid  us  on  him,  too,  and  he  beareth  us.  Remember  that  choice  Scripture : 
"  In  his  love  and  in  his  pity  he  redeemed  them ;  and  he  bare  them,  and 
carried  them  all  the  days  of  old."  Soul-melting  thought,  the  Son  of  God 
became  subservient  to  the  sons  of  man !  The  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth  bowed  his  shoulders  to  bear  the  weight  of  sinners. 

It  was  a  rest-giving  act,  very  likely  needful  to  the  sheep  which  could 
go  no  further,  and  was  faint  and  weary.  It  was  a  full  rest  to  the  poor 
creature  if  it  could  have  understood  it,  to  feel  itself  upon  its  shepherd's 
shoulders,  irresistibly  carried  back  to  safety.  What  a  rest  it  is  to  you 
and  to  me  t.o  know  that  we  are  borne  along  by  the  eternal  power  and 
Godhead  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  "  The  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall 
dwell  in  safety  by  him,  and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders." 
The  Christ  upbears  us  to-day  :  we  have  no  need  of  strength  :  our 
weakness  is  no  impediment,  for  he  bears  us.  Hath  not  the  Lord  said, 
"  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear  ;  even  I  will  carry  and  will  deliver 
you"?  We  shall  not  even  stumble,  much  less  fall  to  ruin:  the  shep 
herd's  feet  shall  traverse  all  the  road  in  safety.  No  portion  of  the  way 
back  should  cause  us  fear,  for  he  is  able  to  bear  us  even  to  his  home 
above.  What  a  sweet  word  is  that  in  Deuteronomy  :  "  The  Lord  thy 
God  bare  thee,  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son,  in  all  the  way  that  ye  went, 
until  ye  came  into  this  place."  Blessed  rest  of  faith,  to  give  yourself 
up  entirely  to  those  hands  and  shoulders  to  keep  and  carry  you  even  to' 
the  end !  Let  us  bless  and  praise  the  Lord.  The  shepherd  is  con 
secrated  to  his  burden  :  he  bears  nothing  on  his  shoulders  but  his 
sheep  ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus  seemeth  to  bear  no  burden  but  that  of  his 
people.  He  layeth  out  his  omnipotence  to  save  his  chosen ;  having 
redeemed  them  first  with  price  of  blood,  he  redeems  them  still  with 
all  his  power.  "  And  they  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord,  in  that  day 
when  I  make  up  my  jewels."  Oh  the  glorious  grace  of  our  unfailing 
Saviour,  who  consecrates  himself  to  our  salvation,  and  concentrates 
upon  that  object  all  that  he  has  and  is  ! 

IV.  We  close  by  noticing  one  more  matter,  which  is — THE  ONE  SOURCE 
OF  JOY.  This  man  who  had  lost  his  sheep  is  filled  with  joy,  but  his 
sheep  is  the  sole  source  of  it.  His  sheep  has  so  taken  up  all  his  thought, 
and  so  commanded  all  his  faculties,  that  as  he  found  all  his  care  centred 
upon  it,  so  he  now  finds  all  his  joy  flowing  from  it. 

I  invite  you  to  notice  the  first  mention  of  joy  we  get  here  :  "  When 
he  hath  found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing."  "  That  is  a 
great  load  for  you,  shepherd  1 "  Joyfully  he  answers,  "  I  am  glad 
to  have  it  on  my  shoulders."  The  mother  does  not  say  when  she 
has  found  her  lost  child,  **  This  is  a  heavy  load."  No  ;  she  presses 
it  to  her  bosom.  She  does  not  mind  how  heavy  it  is  ;  it  is  a  dear 
burden  to  her.  She  is  rejoiced  to  bear  it  once  again.  "  He  layeth 
it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing.'1  Remember  that  text:  "  Who  for  the  joy 
that  was  set  before  him  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame."  A  great 
sorrow  was  on  Christ  when  our  load  was  laid  on  him ;  but  a  greater 
joy  flashed  into  his  mind  when  he  thought  that  we  were  thus  reco 
vered  from  our  lost  estate.  He  said  to  himself,  "I  have  taken 
them  up  upon  my  shoulders,  and  none  can  hurt  them  now,  neither  can 
they  wander  to  destruction.  I  am  bearing  their  sin,  and  they  shall 
ne?er  come  into  condemnation.  The  penalty  of  their  guilt  has  been  laid 


526  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

n  me  that  it  may  never  be  laid  on  them.  I  am  an  effectual  and 
efficient  Substitute  for  them.  I  am  bearing,  that  they  may  never  bear, 
ray  Father's  righteous  ire."  His  love  to  them  made  it  a  joy  to  feel 
every  lash  of  the  scourge  of  justice;  his  love  to  them  made  it  a 
delight  that  the  nails  should  pierce  his  hands  and  feet,  and  that 
his  heart  should  be  broken  with  the  absence  of  his  Father,  God. 
Even  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani,"  when  the  deeps  of  its  woe  have 
been  sounded,  will  be  found  to  have  pearls  of  joy  in  its  caverns.  No 
shout  of  triumph  can  equal  that  cry  of  grief,  because  our  Lord  joyed  to 
bear  even  the  forsaking  of  his  Father  for  the  sin  of  his  chosen  whom  he  had 
loved  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Oh,  you  cannot  under 
stand  it  except  in  a  very  feeble  measure  !  Let  us  try  to  find  an  earthly 
miniature  likeness.  A  son  is  taken  ill  far  away  from  home.  He  is 
laid  sick  with  a  fever,  and  a  telegram  is  sent  home.  His  mother  says 
she  must  go  and  nurse  him  ;  she  is  wretched  till  she  can  set  out  upon 
the  journey.  It  is  a  dreary  place  where  her  boy  lies,  but  for  the  moment 
it  is  the  dearest  spot  on  earth  to  her.  She  joys  to  leave  the  comforts  of  her 
home  to  tarry  among  strangers  for  the  love  of  her  boy.  She  feels  an 
intense  joy  in  sacrificing  herself ;  she  refuses  to  retire  from  the  bedside, 
she  will  not  leave  her  charge  ;  she  watches  day  and  night,  and  only  from 
utter  exhaustion  does  she  fall  asleep.  You  could  not  have  kept  her  in 
England,  she  would  have  been  too  wretched.  It  was  a  great,  deep, 
solemn  pleasure  for  her  to  be  where  she  could  minister  to  her  own 
beloved.  Soul,  remember  you  have  given  Jesus  great  joy  in  his  saving 
you.  He  was  for  ever  with  the  Father,  eternally  happy,  infinitely 
glorious,  as  God  over  all ;  but  yet  he  must  needs  come  hither  out  of  bound 
less  love,  take  upon  himself  our  nature,  and  suffer  in  our  stead  to  bring  us 
back  to  holiness  and  God.  "  He  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing." 
That  day  the  shepherd  knew  but  one  joy.  He  had  found  his  sheep, 
and  the  very  pressure  of  it  upon  his  shoulders  made  his  heart  light,  for 
he  knew  by  that  sign  that  the  object  of  his  care  was  safe  beyond  all 
question. 

Now  he  goes  home  with  it,  and  this  joy  of  his  was  then  so  great  that 
it  filled  his  soul  to  overflowing.  The  parable  speaks  nothing  as  to  his 
joy  in  getting  home  again,  nor  a  word  concerning  the  joy  of  being 
saluted  by  his  friends  and  neighbours.  No,  the  joy  of  having  found  his 
sheep  eclipsed  all  other  gladness  of  heart,  and  dimmed  the  light  of  home 
and  friendship.  He  turns  round  to  friends  and  neighbours  and  entreats 
them  to  help  him  to  bear  the  weight  of  his  happiness.  He  cries, 
"  Rejoice  with  me,  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost."  One 
sinner  had  repented,  and  all  heaven  must  make  holiday  concerning  it. 
Oh,  brethren,  there  is  enough  joy  in  the  heart  of  Christ  over  his  saved 
ones  to  flood  all  heaven  with  delight.  The  streets  of  Paradise  run  knee- 
deep  with  the  heavenly  waters^of  the  Saviour's  joy.  They  flow  out  of 
the  very  soul  of  Christ,  and  angels  and  glorified  spirits  bathe  in  the 
mighty  stream.  Let  us  do  the  same.  We  are  friends  if  we  are  not 
neighbours.  He  calls  us  to-day  to  come  and  bring  our  hearts,  like  empty 
vessels,  that  he  may  fill  them  with  his  own  joy,  that  our  joy  may  be 
full.  Those  of  us  who  are  saved  must  enter  into  the  joy  of  our  Lord. 
When  I  was  trying  to  think  over  this  test  I  rejoiced  with  my  Lord  in  the 
bringing  in  of  each  one  of  his  sheep,  for  each  one  makes  a  heaven  full  of 


THE   PARABLE   OP  THE  LOST   SHEEP.  527 

joy.  But,  oh  to  see  all  the  redeemed  brought  in !  Jesus  would  have 
no  joy  if  he  should  lose  one :  it  would  seem  to  spoil  it  all.  If  the  pur- 
;pose  of  mercy  were  frustrated  in  any  one  instance  it  were  a  dreary 
defeat  of  the  great  Saviour.  But  his  purpose  shall  be  carried  out  in  every 
instance.  He  "  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied." 
He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged.  He  shall  carry  out  the  will  of  the 
Father.  He  shall  have  the  full  reward  of  his  passion.  Let  us  joy  and 
rejoice  with  him  this  morning  ! 

But  the  text  tells  us  there  was  more  joy  over  that  one  lost  sheep  than 
over  the  ninety-and-nine  that  went  not  astray.  Who  are  these  just  per 
sons  that  need  no  repentance  ?  Well,  you  should  never  explain  a  parable 
so  as  to  make  it  run  on  four  legs  if  it  was  only  meant  to  go  on  two. 
There  may  not  be  such  persons  at  all,  and  yet  the  parable  may  be  strictly 
accurate.  If  all  of  us  had  been  such  persons,  and  had  never  needed  re 
pentance,  we  should  not  have  given  as  much  joy  to  the  heart  of  Christ 
as  one  sinner  does  when  he  repents.  But  suppose  it  to  mean  you  and 
me  who  have  long  ago  repented — who  have,  in  a  certain  sense,  now  no 
need  of  repentance,  because  we  are  justified  men  and  women — we  do  not 
;give  so  much  joy  to  the  heart  of  God,  for  the  time  being,  as  a  sinner 
^does  when  he  first  returns  unto  God.  It  is  not  that  it  is  a  good  thing 
to  go  astray,  or  a  bad  thing  to  be  kept  from  it.  You  understand  how 
-that  is  :  there  are  seven  children  in  a  family,  and  six  of  them  are  all 
well ;  but  one  dear  child  is  taken  seriously  ill,  and  is  brought  near  to  the 
.gates  of  death.  It  has  recovered,  its  life  is  spared,  and  do  you  wonder 
that  for  the  time  being  it  gives  more  joy  to  the  household  than  all  the 
healthy  ones  ?  There  is  more  expressed  delight  about  it  a  great  deal  than 
•over  all  those  that  have  not  been  ill  at  all.  This  does  not  show  it  is  a 
good  thing  to  be  ill.  No,  nothing  of  the  kind ;  we  are  only  speaking  of 
the  joy  which  comes  of  recovery  from  sickness.  Take  another  case: 
you  have  a  son  who  has  been  long  away  in  a  far  country,  and  another 
son  at  home.  You  love  them  both  equally,  but  when  the  absent  son 
comes  home  he  is  for  a  season  most  upon  your  thoughts.  Is  it  not 
natural  that  it  should  be  so  ?  Those  at  home  give  us  joy  constantly 
from  day  to  day,  but  when  the  stream  of  joy  has  been  dammed  back  by 
his  absence,  it  pours  down  in  a  flood  upon  his  return.  Then  we  have 
-"high  days  and  holy  days''  and  "bonfire  nights." 

There  are  special  circumstances  about  repentance  and  conversion 
which  produce  joy  over  a  restored  wanderer.  There  was  a  preceding 
Borrow,  and  this  sets  off  the  joy  by  contrast.  The  shepherd  was  so 
touched  with  compassion  for  the  lost  sheep,  that  now  his  sorrow  is 
inevitably  turned  into  joy.  He  suffered  a  dreadful  suspense,  and  that  is 
a  killing  thing;  it  is  like  an  acid  eating  into  the  soul  That  suspense 
which  makes  one  ask,  Where  is  the  sheep  ?  Where  can  it  be  ?  is  a 
piercing  of  the  heart.  All  those  weary  hours  of  searching,  and  seeking, 
and  following  are  painfully  wearing  to  the  heart.  You  feel  as  if  you 
would  almost  sooner  know  that  you  never  would  find  it  than  be  in 
that  doubtful  state  of  mind.  That  suspense  when  it  is  ended  naturally 
brings  with  it  a  sweet  liberty  of  joy.  Moreover,  you  know  that  the  joy 
over  penitents  is  so  unselfish  that  you  who  have  been  kept  by  the  grace 
of  God  for  many  years  do  not  grieve  that  there  should  be  more  joy 
over  a  repenting  smner  than  over  you.  No,  you  say  to  yourself,  "  There 


528  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

is  good  cause.  I  am  myself  among  thoso  who  are  glad."  You  re 
member  that  good  men  made  great  rejoicing  over  you  when  you  first 
came  to  Jesus  ;  and  you  heartily  unite  with  them  in  welcoming  new 
comers.  You  will  not  act  the  elder  brother,  and  say  I  will  not 
share  the  joy  of  my  Father.  Not  a  bit  of  it ;  but  you  will  enter 
heartily  into  the  music  and  dancing,  and  count  it  your  heaven  to  see 
souls  saved  from  hell.  I  feel  a  sudden  flush  and  flood  of  delight  when 
I  meet  with  a  poor  creature  who  once  lay  at  hell's  dark  door,  but  is  now 
brought  to  the  gate  of  heaven.  Do  not  you  ? 

The  one  thing  I  want  to  leave  with  you  is  how  our  gracious  Lord 
seems  to  give  himself  up  to  his  own  redeemed.  How  entirely  and 
perfectly  every  thought  of  his  heart,  every  action  of  his  power,  goes 
toward  "the  needy,  guilty,  lost  soul.  He  spends  his  all  to  bring 
back  his  banished.  Poor  souls  who  believe  in  him  have  his  whole 
strength  engaged  on  their  behalf.  Blessed  be  his  name!  Now  let 
all  our  hearts  go  forth  in  love  towards  him,  who  gave  all  his  heart 
to  work  our  redemption.  Let  us  love  him.  We  cannot  love  him  as- 
he  loved  us  as  to  measure  ;  but  let  us  do  so  in  like  manner.  Let  us- 
love  him  with  all  our  heart  and  soul.  Let  us  feel  as  if  we  saw  nothing, 
knew  nothing,  loved  nothing  save  Jesus  crucified.  As  we  filled  all  hi» 
heart  let  him  fill  all  our  hearts  ! 

Oh,  poor  sinner,  here  to-day,  will  you  not  yield  to  the  Good  Shepherd  ? 
Will  you  not  stand  still  as  he  draws  near  ?  "Will  you  not  submit  to  his 
mighty  grace  ?  Know  that  your  rescue  from  sin  and  death  must  be  of 
him,  and  of  him  alone.  Breathe  a  prayer  to  him, — "  Come,  Lord,  I 
wait  for  thy  salvation  !  Save  me,  for  I  trust  in  thee."  If  thou  dost 
thus  pray,  thou  hast  the  mark  upon  thee  of  Christ's  sheep,  for  he 
eaith,  "My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow 
me."  Come  to  him,  for  he  comes  to  you.  Look  to  him  for  he  looks 
to  you. 


3Hcti(aplitan  SH 


OUE    GREAT  SHEPHERD  FINDING  THE  SHEEP. 


INTENDED  FOR  EEADING  ON  LORD'S-DAY,  JANUARY  2?TH,   1889, 

DELIVERED    BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lords-day  Evening,  March  25th,  1883. 


"  Until  he  find  it.  ...  And  when  he  hath  found  it.  ...  And  when  he  coraeth 
home."— Luke  xv.  4,  5,  6. 

THE  love  of  Jesus,  the  Great  Shepherd,  is  very  practical  and  active. 
There  ^is  a  sheep  lost,  and  the  Lord  regrets  it ;  but  his  love  does  not 
spend  itself  in  regrets ;  he  arises,  and  goes  forth  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
which  was  lost.  The  love  of  Jesus  Christ  is  love  not  in  word  only,  but 
in  deed  and  in  truth.  The  love  of  Jesus  is  prevenient.  He  does  not  wait 
until  the  sheep  is  willing  to  return,  or  until  it  makes  some  attempt  to 
come  back ;  but  no  sooner  is  its  lost  estate  known  to  the  Shepherd  than 
he  starts  off,  that  he  may  find  that  which  was  lost.  The  love  of  Jesus 
to  the  lost  sheep  is  pre-eminent.  He  leaves  the  ninety-and-nine  in  their 
pasturage ;  and  for  a  while  forgets  them,  that  all  his  heart,  his  eye,  his 
strength  may  be  given  to  the  one  that  has  gone  astray.  0  sweet  love 
of  Christ,  so  practical,  so  pre-eminent,  so  prevenient !  Let  us  ask  for 
grace  that  we  may  imitate  it,  especially  those  of  us  who  are  called  to 
be  shepherds  of  men. 

Among  God's  people  most  of  the  saints  have  a  charge  to  watch  over. 
However  little  the  flock  may  be,  even  if  it  be  restricted  to  our  own 
family,  or  to  the  little  class  that  gathers  about  us  on  the  Sabbath,  yet  we 
are  all  our  brother's  keeper  in  some  measure.  Let  us  learn  the  love  of 
Christ,  that  we  may  be  wise  in  shepherdry.  Let  us  not  talk  about  our 
friends,  and  say  we  love  them ;  but  let  us  show  it  by  earnest,  personal, 
speedy  endeavours  to  do  them  good.  Let  us  not  wait  until  we  see  some 
goodness  in  them — until  they  seek  after  instruction.  But 

"  Oh,  come,  let  us  go  and  find  them, 
In  the  paths  of  death  they  roam." 

And  long  before  they  have  a  thought  of  coming  home,  let  us  be  on 
their  track,  eager  to  grasp  them,  if  by  any  means  we  may  save  some. 
Oh,  to  have  in  our  hearts  such  love  of  souls  that  it  engrosses  us  so 
that  we  forget  earthly  needs,  and  only  remember  this  yet  higher 
No.  2,065 


38  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

necessity !  It  is  a  good  house,  said  St.  Bernard,  in  which  Martha 
has  to  complain  of  Mary — where  gracious  pursuits  put  other  work 
in  the  background.  It  is  a  choice  crime  that  men  should  even  grow 
/ax  about  their  lower  business  for  a  while,  that  they  may  devote  their 
chief  energy  to  the  saving  of  the  lost  sheep. 

Let  that  stand  as  an  introduction.  May  we  see  the  love  of  Jesus,  as 
Bernard  saw  it,  and  we  shall  have  had  sermon  enough. 

In  my  text  there  are  three  periods  to  which  I  call  your  attention. 

I.  Christ,  the  Good  Shepherd,  first  seeks  the  lost  sheep  "UNTIL 
HE  FIND  IT.''  Just  put  a  mark  under  those  words.  That  is  our  first 
head— "  Until  he  find  it."  It  is  a  long  reach  "  Until  he  find  it." 

I  like  the  expression.  The  Lord  Jesus  did  not  come  down  to  earth 
to  make  an  attempt  to  find  men,  but  he  came  to  do  it,  and  he  did  it. 
He  tarried  here,  seeking  the  lost  sheep  till  he  found  it :  he  never 
gave  over  till  his  work  was  done.  At  this  hour,  in  his  work  of  grace 
amongst  his  chosen,  he  does  not  make  an  attempt  at  their  salvation, 
and  suffer  defeat ;  but  he  keeps  at  soul-seeking  work  until  he  find  it. 

Look  at  the  seeking  shepherd:  he  is  looking  for  the  sheep. 
Notice  his  anxious  countenance  "  until  he  find  it."  We  read  that  after 
he  found  it  he  rejoiced;  but  there  is  no  rejoicing  until  he  find  it.  He  is 
all  excitement,  quick  of  ear  to  catch  the  faintest  sound,  for  it  may  be 
the  bleating  of  his  lost  sheep.  His  eyes  are  like  the  eyes  of  eagles.  He 
saw  something  stir  in  the  bracken  yonder,  and  he  will  be  there  in  a 
bound  or  two ;  he  is  so  eager.  No:  it  was  a  mistake.  It  was  not  the 
sheep ;  perhaps  it  was  some  frightened  fox.  He  climbs  a  cairn,  and 
from  the  top  of  it  he  looks  all  around.  I  was  about  to  say  that  he 
looks  with  ears  and  eyes  together.  He  puts  his  whole  soul  into  the 
organs  of  watchfulness,  if  peradventure  he  may  discern  the  sheep.  Is 
there  a  smile  on  his  face  ?  Ah,  no  !  not  "  until  he  find  it."  His  whole 
soul  is  in  his  eyes  and  ears  until  he  find  it.  This  is  a  faint  yet  true 
picture  of  that  Great  Shepherd  who  came  here  to  seek  his  flock.  So 
the  evangelists  have  drawn  him  in  their  pen-and-ink  sketches  of  him — 
always  watchful ;  spending  night  and  day,  in  prayers,  and  tears,  and 
entreaties  ;  never  more  to  have  a  joy  until  he  find  the  lost  one.  Then, 
when  he  did  find  a  single  sheep,  finding  his  meat  and  his  drink  in  it, 
and  becoming  refreshed  from  the  fact  that  he  has  so  far  accomplished 
his  beloved  work.  The  great  Shepherd  is  all  energy,  care,  and  con 
centration  of  thought  concerning  his  sheep,  "  until  he  find  it." 

There  is  no  hesitating  with  Jesus.  The  sheep  is  lost,  and  the 
news  is  brought  to  the  shepherd ;  he  girds  his  loose  robe  about  him, 
and  is  on  the  way.  He  knows  within  a  little  which  way  that  stray 
sheep  will  go,  and  he  is  on  its  track  at  once,  though  he  knows  that 
he  must  mark  that  track  with  his  blood.  See  the  blessed  shepherd 
pressing  on :  there  is  no  pausing  nor  resting  "  until  he  find  it."  He 
has  made  up  his  mind  that  no  sheep  of  his  shall  be  lost,  and  he  hies 
over  hill  and  dale  after  the  wanderer  until  he  find  it. 

If  you  look  into  that  shepherd's  face,  there  is  no  trace  of  anger 
there.  He  does  not  say,  "  Oh,  that  I  should  be  worried  with  this 
silly  sheep  thus  going  astray ! "  No  thought  is  there  but  that  of 
anxious  love.  It  is  all  love,  and  nothing  else  but  love,  before  he  finds 
and  until  he  finds  it ;  and  you  may  be  sure  that  careful  tenderness  will 


OUE    GllEAT    SHEPHERD    FINDING    THE    SHEEP.  39 

bo  in  full  action  after  he  has  found  it.  He  is  looking  with  anxious 
eye  of  love.  "  As  I  live,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  him  that  dieth,  but  that  he  should  turn  unto  me  and  live." 
"  Until  he  find  it  "  there  will  be  no  thought  of  anxiety,  but  a  fulnesa 
of  pitying  care  for  the  lost  sheep. 

And,  mark,  there  is  no  giving  up.  That  sheep  has  wandered  now 
for  many  hours.  The  sun  has  risen,  and  the  sun  has  set ;  or,  at  least 
it  is  just  going  down ;  but  as  long  as  the  shepherd  can  see,  and  the 
yheep  is  still  alive,  he  will  pursue  it  "antil  he  find  it."  He  has  been 
disappointed  a  great  many  times ;  and  when  he  thought  that  he 
should  have  found  it,  he  has  missed  it ;  but  still,  he  will  never  give 
it  up.  He  is  impelled  onward  by  irresistible  love,  and  he  must 
continue  his  weary  search  until  he  find  it.  It  was  precisely  so  with 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  he  came  after  you  and  after  me,  we 
ran  from  him,  but  he  pursued  us :  we  hid  from  him,  but  he  discovered 
us :  he  had  almost  grasped  us,  but  so  long  as  we  eluded  him  he  still 
pursued  with  love  unwearied  until  he  found  us.  Oh,  if  he  had  given 
up  after  the  first  ten  years — if  he  had  ceased  to  care  for  some  of  us 
after  fifty  different  occasions  in  which  we  had  choked  conscience  and 
quenched  the  Spirit,  then  we  should  have  been  lost.  But  he  would 
not  be  turned  away.  If  he  determines  to  save,  he  continues  to 
pursue  the  rambling  sheep  until  he  find  it.  He  cannot,  he  must 
not,  he  will  not,  cease  from  the  work  of  seeking  and  of  finding  til) 
he  find  it.  I  wish  to-night  that  the  time  were  come  with  some  here 
that  it  should  be  said,  "  The  Saviour  did  pursue  such  and  such  a 
one  until  he  found  him — found  him  in  the  Tabernacle,  and  ended 
all  his  wanderings  there — found  him  standing  in  yonder  gallery,  and 
ended  all  his  wanderings  at  the  *  foot  of  the  cross.'  "  God  grant 
that  it  may  be  so !  but  whether  it  be  so  with  you  or  not,  be  ye  sure 
of  this — that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  in  hundreds  and  thousands  of  cases 
pursued  sinners  with  unflagging  mercy,  leaping  to  them  over  hills  of 
sin,  and  following  them  till  he  has  found  them.  We  are  now  his  for 
ever  and  ever,  for  he  who  has  found  us  will  never  lose  us.  Blessed 
be  his  name ! 

Learn  this  lesson  before  I  pass  on.  If  ever  you  are  seeking  the 
conversion  of  any  man  follow  him  up  until  you  find  him.  Do  not  be  dis 
couraged.  Put  up  with  a  great  many  rebuffs  and  rebukes  :  you  will 
have  him  yet.  He  is  surest  to  succeed  who  cannot  be  put  off  from 
his  aim.  From  some  it  will  be  necessary  to  receive  a  great  deal 
that  is  most  discouraging.  Receive  it,  and  say  nothing  about 
it;  only  whisper  to  yourself,  "I  might  well  have  put  the  Great 
Shepherd  off  from  caring  for  me,  and  yet  was  not  so  turned  aside. 
If  he  persevered  with  me  even  to  the  death,  I  may  well  persevere 
as  long  as  I  live  in  seeking  and  finding  a  soul.  I  have  heard 
of  wives  who  have  pleaded  with  God  for  their  husbands  twenty 
years;  and  yet  have  seen  them  converted  after  all.  There  are 
instances  in  this  place  in  which  indefatigable  love  has  followed  up 
ungodly  relatives  until  they  have  at  last  been  saved  by  sovereign 
grace.  Persevere  with  loving  entreaties !  Till  you  bury  your  un 
saved  ones,  do  not  consider  them  dead;  and  do  not  bury  them 
spiritually  till  they  are  dead  really.  Some  are  easily  baffled.  They 


40  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

have  written  the  death-warrant  of  their  friend  by  ceasing  to  pray  for 
him,  and  yet  that  death-warrant  will  never  be  written  in  the  records 
of  heaven,  for  their  friend  will  be  brought  to  the  Saviour's  feet. 

"  Until  he  find  it."  Now  nail  your  colours  to  the  mast.  "  Until  he 
find  it."  Go  out,  ye  under- shepherds  for  Christ.  Wear  this  motto  on 
your  right  hand.  "Until  I  find  it."  Live  or  die,  or  work  or  suffer, 
whether  the  time  be  short  or  long,  or  the  way  be  smooth  or  rough, 
let  each  one  of  you  be  bound  to  seek  a  soul  "until  he  find  it."  You 
will  find  it  then,  even  as  Christ  found  you.  There  I  leave  that  first 
point. 

II.  .And  now  we  come  to  the  second — "  AND  WHEN  HE  HATH  FOUND 
IT.''  When  he  has  found  it,  what  does  he  do  then  ?  Well,  first,  he 
takes  fast  hold.  "He  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders  rejoicing."  So  when 
he  has  found  it,  the  first  thing  is  to  get  a  tight  grip  of  it.  See  him  : 
he  has  got  close  up  to  the  sheep.  The  poor  thing  is  spent,  and  yet 
may  have  strength  enough  to  get  away,  therefore  the  shepherd  takes 
good  care  that  he  shall '  not.  He  grasps  his  legs  and  holds  him  tight. 
That  is  what  the  Lord  Jesus  does  when  at  last  he  gets  a  man  broken 
down  under  a  sense  of  sin,  spent  and  worn  out  as  to  further  resistance  of 
divine  mercy.  Our  Lord  gets  such  a  grip  of  the  rebel  that  he  will 
never  get  away  any  more.  I  remember  when  he  laid  hold  of  me. 
He  has  never  lost  his  grasp  even  to  this  day.  But,  oh,  it  was  a  grasp ! 
Nothing  ever  gripped  my  fickle  mind  like  the  hand  of  Christ.  When 
the  divine  hand,  which  fixed  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  had  fixed 
itself  on  me,  my  wanderings  were  ended  once  for  all. 

The  next  thing  after  the  fast  hold  was  the  gracious  lift.  He  lifted 
this  poor  sheep  up  and  put  it  on  his  shoulders,  and  there  it  was  with 
all  its  weight,  carried  by  powerful  shoulders.  That  is  what  the 
Saviour  does  for  poor  weary  sinners.  He  carries  the  weight  of  their 
sin,  nay  the  weight  of  themselves.  He  takes  us  just  as  we  are,  and 
instead  of  driving  us  back  by  his  law,  he  carries  us  home  by  his  love. 
Instead  of  urging  us  to  go  home,  he  becomes  the  great  burden-bearer 
of  his  redeemed,  and  bears  them  on  his  shoulders.  And  now  you  have 
before  you  one  of  the  loveliest  of  portraits  that  ever  imagination  can 
sketch — that  great  crowned  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords,  bearing  on  his  shoulders,  as  a  burden  he  delights  to 
carry,  the  sheep  that  had  gone  astray.  Oh,  I  pray  God  that  you  may 
lie  on  those  broad  shoulders  if  you  never  have  been  so  favoured.  The 
shoulders  of  omnipotence  bearing  up  our  weakness — the  mighty 
Saviour  bearing  us  and  all  our  sin  and  all  our  care,  and  our  whole 
being  upon  the  shoulders  of  his  strength — this  is  a  sight  for  angels. 

And  as  he  thus  carries  the  weight,  observe  that  the  distance  is  removed. 
We  read  in  the  next  verse,  "When  he  cometh  home,"  but  there  is 
nothing  said  about  the  road ;  for  somehow  our  Master  has  the  knack 
of  being  at  home  at  once.  The  sinner  may  weary  himself  by  twenty 
years  of  sin,  but  in  five  minutes  that  may  all  be  gone.  It  may  have 
taken  you  fifty  years  to  make  yourself  such  a  hell-deserving  sinner  as 
you  are,  but  it  will  not  take  Jesus  fifty  ticks  of  the  clock  to  wash 
you  and  make  you  whiter  than  snow,  and  to  get  you  back  into  the 
great  Father's  house.  Truth  to  tell,  the  Shepherd's  redeeming  work 
is  done  already 


OUR   GREAT    SHEPHERD    FINDING   THE    SHEEP.  41 

"  How  dreadful  was  the  hour, 
When  God  our  wanderings  laid, 
And  did  at  once  his  vengeance  pour 
Upon  our  Shepherd's  head ! 

•'  How  glorious  was  the  grace, 
When  Christ  sustained  the  stroke  ! 
His  life  and  blood  the  Shepherd  pays, 
A  ransom  for  the  flock." 

By  that  redeeming  process  he  brought  us  near  to  God. 

There  is  no  weary  journey  back  for  Shepherd  or  sheep.  He  grasps 
the  sheep  ;  he  puts  it  on  his  shoulders,  and  they  are  both  back  at  the 
fold. 

But  the  particular  point  I  want  you  to  notice  is  when  the  great 
Shepherd  gets  this  burden  on  his  back.  We  read,  "When  he  hath 
found  it  he  layeth.  it  upon  his  shoulders  " — with  great  anxiety  ?  Look 
to  see  whether  it  is  so.  Nothing  of  the  sort.  But  is  it  not,  "He 
layeth  it  on  his  shoulders  with  great  weariness"?  No.  See!  See! 
"  He  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders  rejoicing — rejoicing"  He  does  not 
remember  all  the  weariness  that  he  has  had  to  suffer.  He  does  not 
think  of  the  folly  of  his  sheep  in  having  lost  good  pasture,  in  having 
involved  itself  in  so  much  danger,  and  in  costing  him  so  much  labour. 
Not  a  word  is  mentioned  of  it.  "He  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders  rejoicing." 
He  says  to  himself,  "  I  am  glad  to  carry  this  burden :  happy  to 
carry  my  lost  sheep  home."  And  oh !  I  do  love  to  picture  to  myself 
at  this  moment  the  joy  in  the  heart  of  the  blessed  Christ.  "  For  the 
joy  that  was  set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the 
shame."  And  now,  whenever  he  gets  a  lost  sheep  to  carry  back — he 
rejoices.  His  heart  leaps  within  him.  All  anxiety  is  gone.  Fulness 
of  delight  is  upon  him.  "  He  layeth  it  upon  his  shoulders  rejoicing." 
I  wonder  whether  the  sheep  could  see  that  the  Shepherd  rejoiced.  I 
do  not  suppose  that  it  could;  but  it  could  feel  it.  There  are  two 
ways,  you  know,  of  handling  a  sheep,  and  the  sheep  very  soon  knows 
which  expresses  pleasure  on  its  owner's  part ;  at  any  rate,  I  am  sure 
that  a  dog  knows  well  enough  what  your  movements  mean.  If 
you  speak  angrily  to  a  sheep,  and  throw  it  upon  your  shoulder  with 
indignation,  that  is  one  thing ;  but  if  you  have  not  a  word  to  say, 
except  it  be,  "  Poor  thing,  I  am  glad  I  have  found  you,"  and  you 
cast  it  on  your  shoulders  rejoicing,  why,  sheep  as  it  is,  it  knows  the 
difference.  At  any  rate,  I  know  that  Christ  has  a  way  of  saving  us : 
oh,  so  gently,  so  lovingly,  so  gleefully,  that  he  makes  us  happy  in 
being  saved.  There  is  a  way  of  turning  a  penny  into  stone  or  into 
gold  according  to  the  way  in  which  you  give  it  to  a  poor  man.  You 
can  fling  it  at  him  as  if  he  were  a  dog,  and  he  will  be  about  as  grateful 
to  you  as  a  dog,  or  not  so  much.  But  there  is  a  way  in  which  you  can 
say,  "I  am  sorry  for  your  needs.  This  is  all  I  can  afford  you  now. 
Take  it,  and  do  what  you  can  with  it."  Given  with  a  brotherly 
look,  it  will  be  gratefully  received,  and  made  the  most  of.  There  is 
much  in  the  manner,  as  well  as  in  the  matter  of  a  gift.  The  mannerism 
of  Christ  is  grandly  gracious :  he  saves  us  rejoicingly.  It  is  a  matter 
of  thanksgiving  to  him  when  he  gets  hold  of  his  lost  sheep,  and  gets 
it  on  his  shoulders.  It  makes  me  glad  to  think  that  it  is  so.  We 


42  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

are  not  saved  by  a  grudging  Christ,  who  seems  as  if  he  were  weary 
of  us,  and  must  save  us  out  of  hand,  to  get  rid  of  us.  He  does  not 
act  with  us  as  some  rude  surgeon  might  do  who  says,  "I  will  attend 
to  you  directly,  but  I  have  plenty  else  to  do,  and  you  gratis  patients 
are  a  trouble."  Nor  does  he  roughly  set  the  bone.  No  ;  Jesus  comes, 
and,  as  with  a  lady's  dainty  hand,  he  moulds  the  dislocated  joint; 
and  when  he  sets  it,  there  is  bliss  even  about  the  method  of  the 
setting.  We  look  into  his  face,  and  we  see  that  he  puts  his  tenderest 
sympathy  into  each  movement.  You  know  the  different  ways  which 
workmen  have.  Some  kind  of  work  a  man  is  soon  sick  of.  The 
principle  of  division  of  labour  is  a  very  admirable  one  for  the 
production  of  results  upon  a  large  scale ;  but  it  is  a  miserable  business 
for  the  workman  to  have  to  do  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again, 
all  day  long,  as  if  he  were  an  automaton.  Get  a  man  at  work  at  a. 
statue — an  artist  whose  whole  soul  is  in  his  chisel,  who  knows  that 
there  is  a  bright  spirit  within  that  block  of  marble,  and  who  means 
to  chip  off  all  that  hides  the  lovely  image  from  his  sight.  See  how 
he  works  !  No  man  does  a  thing  well  who  does  it  sorrowfully.  The 
best  work  that  can  be,  is  done  by  the  happy,  joyful  workman; 
and  so  it  is  with  Christ.  He  does  not  save  souls  as  of  necessity — as 
though  he  would  rather  do  something  else  if  he  might;  but  his- 
very  heart  is  in  it,  he  rejoices  to  do  it,  and  therefore  he  does  it. 
thoroughly,  and  he  communicates  his  joy  to  us  in  the  doing  of  it. 

Now,  learn  a  lesson  before  I  go  away  to  the  third  point.  l '  When 
he  hath  found  it."  Suppose  that  any  of  you  should  very  soon  meet 
with  a  poor  troubled  sinner,  anxious  to  come  to  Christ.  When  you. 
have  found  him,  let  me  recommend  you  to  imitate  the  Master's 
example  :  get  a  tight  grip  of  him.  Do  not  let  him  slip.  Get  a  hold 
of  him ;  and  then,  if  he  is  in  trouble,  take  all  that  trouble  upon 
yourself.  Try  whether  you  cannot  get  him  upon  your  shoulders. 
Imitate  your  Master  in  that  way.  Try  to  bear  all  his  burden  for  him, 
as  Christ  bore  yours.  Conduct  him  to  the  Christ  who  is  the  true 
burden-bearer  ;  and  all  the  while  be  very  happy  about  it.  I  do  not 
think  we  ought  to  go  and  talk  to  young  converts  in  a  dreadfully 
solemn  tone,  as  though  it  would  be  something  horrible  to  find  a  Saviour. 
They  will  never  come  again,  you  may  depend  upon  it.  They  will 
give  you  a  wide  berth.  But  just  go,  and  in  a  joyful  spirit  say, 
"I  am  so  glad  to  find  you  caring  about  your  soul."  The  best  thing 
that  can  happen  to  a  soul-seeker  is  to  meet  with  a  troubled  conscience ;. 
show  that  you  think  so.  "But,"  say  you,  "I  have  not  the  time." 
Always  have  time,  even  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  to  see  a  poor 
conscience-stricken  sinner.  But  perhaps  you  are  very  weary,  or  not 
well.  If  I  were  weary  I  should  not  be  weary  any  longer  when  I 
came  across  a  lost  sheep  ;  and  if  I  were  ill,  I  would  get  well  on  pur 
pose  to  see  after  a  sin-sick  sinner.  Talk  in  that  way,  with  sweet  and 
pleasant  encouragement,  for  this  is  the  way  to  help  your  brother  sinner 
to  the  Saviour. 

My  time  has  gone,  but  just  a  few  words  more  on  this  last  point. 

III.  "WHEN  HE  COMETH  HOME."  "  When  he  comethhome,  he  calleth 
together  his  friends  and  neighbours,  saying  unto  them,  Rejoice  with- 
me ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost." 


OUE    GREAT    SHEPHERD    FINDING    THE    SHEEP. 

Some  hurried  observations.  First,  heaven  is  a  home.  "When  he 
cometh  home  "  ;  and  the  next  verse  says  that  it  is  heaven.  Heaven  is 
a  home.  Do  you  not  like  to  think  of  it  under  that  aspect  ?  It  is  the 
home  of  Jesus  ;  and  if  it  is  the  home  of  Jesus  can  any  other  home  be 
equal  to  it  ?  "  When  he  comcth  home." 

Note,  next,  that  lost  ones  are  known  in  heaven.  I  give  you  that 
thought  more  from  the  Greek  than  from  the  English  here.  "  When 
he  cometh  home,  he  calleth  together  his  friends  and  neighbours,  saying 
unto  them,  Rejoice  with  me ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep — the  lost  one." 
That  is  how  it  should  run.  It  is  as  if  the  friends  knew  that  one  had 
been  lost,  and  the  loss  had  been  deplored :  and  the  shepherd  says,  "  I 
have  found  my  sheep  :  you  know  -which  one — the  lost  one."  Up 
there  they  know  which  are  Christ's  sheep,  and  which  are  lost. 
Heaven  is  nearer  earth  than  some  of  us  dream.  How  long  does  it 
take  to  get  there  ? 

"One  gentle  sigh  the  spirit  breaks: 
We  scarce  can  say,  '  He's  gone,' 
Before  the  ransomed  spirit  takes 
Its  mansion  near  the  throne." 

And  there  are  more  communications  between  earth  and  heaven  than 
some  folk  dream ;  for  here  it  is  clear  that  when  the  shepherd  came 
home  he  said  to  them,  "I  have  found  the  sheep,"  the  lost  one.  So 
they  knew  all  about  it.  It  is  evident,  again,  that  they  all  knew  there 
that  the  shepherd  had  gone  after  the  sheep,  for  he  says,  "I  have 
found  my  sheep  which  was  lost."  They  all  knew  that  he  had  gone 
on  search,  and  therefore  they  could  all  understand  his  joy  when  he 
came  back  with  the  sheep.  I  believe  that  they  know  in  heaven  when 
Christ  is  seeking  after  anyone.  It  must  be  a  great  satisfaction  to 
some  up  there  who  die  with  an  unconverted  son,  or  an  unconverted 
girl,  to  know,  after  a  little  while,  son  or  daughter  is  converted  to 
Christ.  I  am  persuaded  they  know  it.  They  cannot  help  knowing  it, 
because  they  are  Christ's  friends  and  neighbours,  and,  according  to 
the  parable,  he  tells  them,  and  he  says  to  them,  "  Rejoice  with  me  "  ; 
and  if  he  says,  "Rejoice  with  me,"  why,  of  course,  he  tells  them 
why.  You  don't  think  that  Jesus  ever  invited  a  spirit  before  the 
throne  to  rejoice  with  him,  and  received  for  answer,  "  I  cannot  do  it, 
for  I  know  no  cause  for  joy."  If  I  had  been  converted  after  my 
mother's  death,  I  can  fancy  that  when  Jesus  said  to  all  of  them, 
"Rejoice  with  me;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep,  the  lost  one,"  my 
mother  would  say,  "  My  Lord,  I  can  rejoice  more  than  any  of  them, 
for  that  was  my  boy,  and  he  is  saved  at  last."  Your  mother  in 
glory  will  be  twice  glorified  to-night,  John,  if  you  give  your  heart 
to  Christ ;  and  I  pray  that  you  ma}*.  Your  father,  now  before  the 
throne,  will  think  that  paradise  has  grown  more  paradisiac  than  ever 
if  he  hears  it  whispered  down  the  golden  streets  that  the  wanderer 
has  come  home. 

Notice,  next,  very  briefly,  ilioi  Jesus  Christ  loves  other  people  to  rejoice 
with  him,  so  that,  when  he  finds  a  sinner,  he  has  so  much  love  in  his 
heart  that  his  joy  runs  over,  and  he  cries  to  others,  "  Come,  friends, 
come  neighbours,  come  and  help  me  to  be  glad,  for  I  have  saved. 


44  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

another  soul."  Let  us  catch  the  blessed  infection.  If  you  have  just 
heard  of  somebody  being  saved,  be  glad  about  it.  Though  you  do 
not  know  the  person,  yet  be  glad  about  it,  because  Jesus  is  glad. 

Notice,  next,  that  repentance  is  regarded  as  coming  home.     This  sheep 
was  not  in  heaven.     No,  but  as  soon  as  it  had  been  brought  into  the 
fold  it  is  described  as  repenting;    and  Jesus  and  the  angels  begin  to 
rejoice  over  it.     If  a  man  truly  repents,  and  Christ  saves  him,  it  is 
clear  that  he  never  will  be  lost.     A  certain  old  proverb  forbids  us  to 
count  our  chickens  till  they  are  hatched ;    and  I  do  not  think  that 
angels  would  do  so  in  the  case  of  immortal  souls.     If  they  believed 
that  repenting  sinners  might  afterwards  be  lost,  they  would  not  ring 
the  marriage  bells  just  yet,  but  they  would  wait  a  while  to  see  how 
things  went  on.     If  they  can  yet  perish  there  is  not  one  convert  that 
the  angels  dare  rejoice  over  ;  for  if  any  child  of  God  might  fall  away 
and  perish,  why  not  every  one  of  us  ?     If  any  one  falls  from  grace, 
I  fear  I  shall.      0  my  brother,  do  you  not  fear  the  same  for  yourself  ? 
"  No,"  say  you,  "I  don't  think  so."    Well,  then,  you  are  a  proud  fellow, 
and  you  are  the  most  likely  one  to  desert  your  Lord.     If  ever  a  sheep 
of  Christ's  shall  fall  away,  I  shall.     I  see  more  of  my  own  tendencies 
to  wander,  and  more  of  my  own  temptations  to  offend  than  I  do  of 
yours.     I  would  not  have  the  angels  rejoice  over  a  man  because  he 
repents,  if  repentance  be  only  a  sign  of  human  improvement,  and  noo 
a  token  of  heavenly  love.     I  would  say,    "Stop,  ye  angels;  for  thia 
man  may  go  back,  and  perish  after  all,  if,  according  to  the  modern 
gospel  Christ  loves  to-day  and  hates  to-morrow,  and  a  child  of  God  may 
jet  be  a  child  of  the  devil."     I  do  not  believe  a  word  of  such  doctrine. 
I  believe  that  where  the  Lord   begins  the   good  work  of  grace  he 
will  carry  it  on,  and  perfect  it ;  and  when  the  Lord  has  once  given  to 
a  man  to  know  him,  he  will  see  that  he  is  preserved  in  that  knowledge 
for  fever.     There  is  a  text  that  clenches  it :   "I  give  unto  my  sheep 
eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck 
them  out  of  my  hand."     Now,  if  they  have  eternal  life,  it  cannot  come 
to  an  end ;  for  eternal  life  is  eternal,  evidently ;  and  if  they  have  eternal 
life,  the  Shepherd  and  his  friends  may  justifiably  sing  when  one  single 
possessor  of  that  eternal  life  is  brought  to  life  and  salvation.     In  the 
penitent  man  a  work  is  done  that  never  can  be  undone ;  and  he  is 
put  where  he  never  can  be  lost.     Yes, 

"  I  to  the  end  shall  endure, 

As  sure  as  the  earnest  is  given ; 
More  happy,  but  not  more  secure. 
Are  the  glorified  spirits  in  heaven." 

Sing  away,  angels  !  There  is  something  to  sing  about  now ;  and  we 
will  join  with  you  in  blessing  and  praising-  the  unchanging  God  for 
<ever  and  for  ever.  Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Luke  xv. 


HYMNS  FROM  "OuR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK" — 421,  257,  373. 


SOWN  AMONG  THORNS. 


DELIVERED  ox  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  AUGUST  19TH,   1888,   BY 

C.   H.   S  PURGED  N, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"And  some  fell  among  thorns;  and  the  thorns  sprung  up,  and  choked  them." — 
Matthew  xiii.  7. 

"  He  also  that  received  seed  among  the  thorns  is  he  that  heareth  the  word  ;  and  the 
care  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  choke  the  word,  and  he  becometh 
unfruitful."— Matthew  xiii.  22. 

WHEN  that  which  conies  of  his  sowing  is  unfruitful,  the  sower's  work 
is  wasted :  he  has  spent  his  strength  for  nought.  Without  fruit  the 
sower's  work  would  even  seem  to  be  insane ;  for  he  takes  good  wheat, 
throws  it  away,  and  loses  it  in  the  ground.  Preaching  is  the  idlest  of 
occupations  if  the  word  be  not  adapted  to  enter  the  heart,  and  produce 
good  results.  0  my  hearers,  if  you  are  not  converted,  I  waste  time 
and  energy  in  standing  here !  Men  might  well  think  it  madness  that 
one  whole  day  in  the  week  should  be  given  up  to  hearing  speeches  : 
madness,  indeed,  it  would  be  if  nothing  came  of  it  to  conscience  and 
heart.  If  you  do  not  bring  forth  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  is 
not  everlasting  life,  I  should  be  better  employed  in  breaking  stones 
on  the  road-side  than  in  preaching  to  you. 

Fruit-bearing  made  the  difference  appear  in  the  various  soils  upon 
which  the  sower  scattered  seed.  You  would  not  so  certainly  have 
known  the  quality  if  you  had  not  seen  the  failure  or  success  of  the 
seed.  We  do  not  know  your  hearts  till  we  see  your  bearing  towards 
the  gospel.  If  it  produces  in  you  holiness  and  love  to  God  and  man, 
then  we  know  that  there  is  good  soil  in  you  :  but  if  you  are  merely 
promising  people,  but  not  performing  people,  then  we  know  that  the 
ground  of  your  heart  is  hard,  or  stony,  or  thorny.  The  word  of  the 
Lord  tries  the  heart  and  reins  of  the  children  of  men,  and  in  this  it  is 
as  the  fire  which  distinguishes  between  metal  and  dross.  0  my  dear 
hearers,  you  undergo  a  test  to-day !  Peradventure  you  will  be  judging 
the  preacher,  but  a  greater  than  the  preacher  will  be  judging  you : 
for  the  Word  itself  shall  judge  you.  You  sit  here  as  a  jury  upon 
yourselves  :  your  own  condition  Avill  be  brought  clearly  out  by  the  way 
in  which  you  receive  or  refuse  the  gospel  of  God.  If  you  bring  forth 
fruit  to  the  praise  of  God's  grace,  well ;  but  if  not,  however  you  may 
seem  to  hear  with  attention,  and  may  retain  what  you  hear  in  your 

^  0.2040. 


470  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

memories,  if  no  saving  effect  is  produced  upon  your  souls,  we  shall 
know  that  the  soil  of  your  heart  has  not  been  prepared  of  the  Lord, 
but  remains  in  its  native  barrenness. 

What  fruit  have  you  borne  hitherto  from  all  your  hearing  ?  May 
I  venture  to  put  the  question  to  each  one  of  you  very  pointedly  ?  Some 
of  you  have  been  hearers  from  your  childhood — are  you  any  the 
better  ?  What  long  lists  of  sermons  you  must  have  heard  by  now  1 
Count  over  your  Sundays ;  how  many  they  have  been !  Think  of 
the  good  men  now  in  heaven,  to  whom  you  once  listened !  Remember 
the  tears  that  were  drawn  from  you  by  their  discourses  !  If  you  are 
not  saved  yet,  will  you  ever  be  saved  ?  If  you  are  not  holy  yet,  will 
you  ever  be  holy?  Why  has  the  Lord  spent  so  much  on  one  who 
makes  no  return  ?  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  Surely  you  will 
have  much  to  answer  for  in  that  great  day  when  the  servants  of  God 
shall  give  in  their  accounts,  and  shall  have  no  joy  when  they  come  to 
mention  you.  How  will  you  excuse  yourselves  before  God  for  having 
occasioned  them  so  much  disappointment  ? 

At  this  time  I  will  only  deal  with  one  class  of  you.  I  will  not 
speak  to  those  of  you  who  hear  the  Word,  and  retain  none  of  it 
because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts  ;  such  are  the  wayside  hearers. 
Neither  will  I  address  myself  to  those  who  receive  the. truth  with 
sudden  enthusiasm,  and  as  readily  quit  it  when  trial  befalls  them  ; 
such  are  the  rocky-ground  hearers.  But  I  will  deal  with  those  of 
you  who  hear  the  Word  attentively,  and,  in  a  sense,  receive  it  inta 
your  hearts  and  understandings,  so  that  the  seed  grows  in  you,  though 
its  fruit  never  comes  to  perfection.  You  are  religious  persons,  and 
to  all  appearance  you  are  under  the  influence  of  godliness.  You 
exhibit  plenty  of  leaf,  but  there  is  no  corn  in  the  ear,  no  substance 
in  your  Christianity.  I  cannot  speak  with  any  degree  of  physical 
vigour  to  you,  by  reason  of  the  infirmity  under  which  I  struggle  ;  but 
what  I  do  say  to  you  is  steeped  in  earnest  desire  that  the  Lord  may 
bless  it  to  you.  An  eloquent  congregation  will  make  any  preacher 
eloquent :  help  me  then  this  morning.  If  you  will  give  me  your  ear, 
you  will  make  up  for  my  deficiency  of  tongue  :  especially  if  you 
give  to  God  your  hearts,  he  will  bless  his  truth,  however  feebly  I  may 
utter  it. 

First,  I  desire  to  talk  to  you  a  little  about  the  seed  which  you  have- 
received  ;  secondly  about  the  thorns ;  thirdly  about  the  result. 

I.  First  a  little  about  THE  SEED.  Remember,  first,  that  it  ivas  the 
same  seed  in  every  case.  Yonder  it  has  brought  forth  thirty -fold ;  it 
was  the  same  seed  which  was  lost  upon  you.  In  a  still  better  case, 
the  seed  has  brought  forth  a  hundred-fold ;  it  was  precisely  the  same 
corn  with  which  your  field  has  been  sown.  The  sower  went  to  hia 
master's  granary  for  all  his  seed  ;  how  is  it  that  in  your  case  it  is  all 
lost  ?  If  there  were  two  gospels,  we  might  expect  two  results  with 
out  fault  in  the  soil  which  failed.  But  with  many  of  you  to  whom  I 
speak  there  has  been  only  one  gospel  throughout  the  whole  of  your 
lives.  You  have  been  attending  in  this  house  of  prayer,  where  we 
have  never  changed  our  seed,  but  have  gone  on  sowing  the  one  eternal 
truth  of  God.  Many  have  brought  forth  fruit  a  hundred-fold  from 
the  seed  which  has  been  scattered  broadcast  from  this  platform. 


§OWN    AMONG    THORNS.  471 

They  heard  no  more  than  you  have  hoard,  but  how  much  better  they 
treated  it  than  you  have  done  !  I  want  you  to  consider  this.  How 
covered  with  briars  and  thorns  must  your  mind  be  that  the  gospel 
which  converted  your  sister  or  friend  never  touched  you !  Though 
you  may  be  nominally  a  believer  in  the  Word  of  God,  it  has  never  so 
affected  you  as  to  make  you  gracious  and  holy.  You  are  still  a 
hearer  only.  How  is  this  ?  The  fault  is  not  in  the  seed,  for  it  is  the 
same  which  has  been  so  useful  to  others. 

You  have  heard  the  gospel  with  pleasure.  "  Heard  it !  "  you  say, 
"  I  heard  it  when  a  little  child."  Your  mother  brought  you  to  the 
house  of  God  in  her  arms.  You  have  heard  it,  and  still  hear  it, 
though  it  is  rather  like  an  old  song  to  you :  but  is  this  to  be  all  ? 
I  am  very  grateful  that  you  do  hear  the  gospel,  for  I  hope  that 
one  of  these  days  God  may  cause  it  to  grow  in  you,  and  yield  fruit. 
But  still  a  grave  responsibility  is  upon  you.  Think  how  favoured 
you  have  been!  How  will  you  answer  for  this  privilege  if  it  is 
neglected  and  rendered  useless  by  that  neglect  ?  Dear  hearers,  if  we 
lived  in  the  heart  of  Africa,  and  we  died  without  believing  in  a  Christ 
of  whom  we  had  not  heard,  we  could  not  be  blamed  for  that :  but 
here  we  are  in  the  heart  of  London,  where  the  gospel  is  preached 
in  all  our  streets,  and  our  blood  will  be  on  our  own  heads  if  we 
perish.  Do  you  mean  to  go  down  to  hell  ?  Are  you  so  desperate 
that  you  will  go  thither  wearing  the  garb  of  Christians  ?  If  you  do 
persist  in  ruining  your  souls,  my  eyes  shall  follow  you  with  tears ; 
and  when  I  cannot  warn  you  any  longer,  I  will  weep  in  secret  places 
because  of  your  perversity. 

Those  described  in  my  text  were  not  only  hearers,  but  in  a  measure 
they  accepted  the  good  Word.  The  seed  fell  not  only  on  this  ground, 
but  into  it,  so  that  it  began  to  grow.  Of  you  it  is  true  that  you  do  not 
refuse  the  gospel,  or  raise  disputes  concerning  it.  I  am  glad  that  you 
have  no  difficulties  about  the  inspiration  of  Scripture,  or  the  Deity  of 
our  Lord,  or  the  fact  of  his  atonement.  You  do  not  befog  yourself 
with  "  modern  thought,"  but  you  avow  your  belief  in  the  old,  old 
gospel.  So  far  so  good ;  but  what  shall  I  make  of  the  strange  fact 
that  your  acceptance  of  the  truth  has  no  effect  upon  you  ?  It  is  a 
very  lamentable  case,  is  it  not,  that  a  man  should  believe  the  gospel  to 
be  true,  and  yet  should  live  as  if  it  were  a  lie  ?  If  it  be  the  truth, 
why  do  you  not  yield  obedience  to  it  ?  The  man  knows  that  there  is  an 
atonement  for  sin,  but  he  has  never  confessed  his  sin,  and  accepted  the 
great  sacrifice.  Those  great  truths,  which  circle  about  the  cross 
like  a  coronet  of  stars,  he  has  seen  their  beauty  and  enjoyed  their 
brilliance,  but  he  has  never  allowed  their  light  to  enter  his  heart, 
and  find  a  reflection  in  his  moral  character.  This  is  evil,  only 
evil.  If  you  believe  the  truth,  what  do  you  more  than  the  devil  ? 
Nay,  you  are  behind  him,  for  he  believes,  and  trembles,  and  you  have 
not  gone  so  far  as  the  trembling.  It  should  be  so,  that  every  great 
truth  which  is  believed  should  influence  the  mind,  sway  the  thoughts, 
and  mould  the  life :  this  is  the  natural  fruitage  of  great  spiritual 
truth.  The  doctrine  of  grace,  when  it  takes  possession  of  the  mind, 
and  governs  the  heart,  produces  the  purest  results ;  but  if  it  be  held 
.in  unrighteousness,  it  is  a  curse  rather  thaa  a  blessing  to  have  a  head- 


472  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

knowledge.  Is  it  not  a  dreadful  thing  to  believe  God's  revelation 
without  receiving  God's  Spirit  ?  This  is  to  accept  a  well,  but  never 
to  drink  of  the  water  ;  accept  corn  in  the  barn,  and  yet  die  of  hunger. 
God  have  mercy  upon  the  possessors  of  a  dead  faith ! 

The  seed  sown  among  thorns  lived  and  continued  to  grow.  And  in 
many  men's  minds  the  gospel  of  divine  truth  is  growing  after  a 
fashion :  they  understand  it  better,  can  defend  it  more  valorously,  and 
speak  of  it  more  fluently.  Moreover,  it  does  influence  them  in  some 
form  and  degree,  for  gross  vices  are  forsaken.  They  are  decent 
imitations  of  believers :  you  can  see  the  shape  of  an  ear :  the  stalk 
has  struggled  up  through  the  thorns  until  you  can  see  its  head,  and 
are  led  to  expect  corn.  But  go  to  that  apparent  wheat-ear,  and  feel 
it :  there  are  the  sheaths,  but  there  is  nothing  in  them ;  you  have  all 
the  makings  of  an  ear  of  wheat,  but  it  will  yield  no  grain.  I  would 
speak  to  those  before  me  who,  perhaps,  have  been  baptized,  and  are 
members  of  the  church ;  I  want  to  ask  of  them  a  question  or  two. 
Do  you  not  think  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  empty  profession 
nowadays  ?  Do  you  not  think  that  many  have  a  name  to  live  and 
are  dead?  uYes,"  say  you,  "I  know  a  neighbour  whom  I  judge 
to  be  in  that  condition."  May  not  another  neighbour  judge  the  same 
of  you  ?  Would  it  not  be  well  to  raise  the  question  about  yourself  ? 
Have  you  really  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Are  you  truly  converted 
from  sin  and  self  ?  Turn  that  sharp  eye  of  yours  homeward  for  a  while. 
Examine  your  own  actions,  and  judge  your  condition  by  them.  Put 
yourself  into  the  crucible.  0  my  God,  what  if  I  should  be  a  preacher 
to  others,  and  should  be  myself  a  castaway !  Will  not  every  deacon 
and  elder,  and  every  individual  church-member,  speak  to  himself  after 
the  same  fashion.  You  will  go  to  your  Sunday-school  class  this  after 
noon  ;  will  you  be  teaching  the  children  what  you  do  not  know  ?  You 
mean  to  go  to  a  meeting  this  evening,  and  talk  to  others  about  con 
version  ;  will  you  be  exhorting  them  to  that  which  you  have  never 
yourself  experienced  ?  Will  it  be  so  ?  You  do  not  need  fine  preaching, 
but  you  do  need  probing  in  the  conscience.  A  thorough  examination 
will  do  the  healthy  no  harm,  and  it  may  bless  the  sick.  "Lord,  let 
me  know  the  worst  of  my  case,"  is  one  of  my  frequent  prayers,  and 
I  suggest  it  to  you. 

So  much  then  about  the  seed :  it  was  good  seed,  it  was  sown,  it 
was  received  by  the  soil,  it  grew  and  promised  well,  but  yet  in  the  end 
it  was  unfruitful.  No  doubt  multitudes,  who  receive  Christianity, 
become  regular  attendants  at  our  place  of  worship,  and  are  honest 
in  their  moral  character ;  but  Christ  is  not  all  in  all  to  them  ;  he  holds 
a  very  secondary  place  in  their  affections.  Their  wheat  is  over 
shadowed  with  a  thicket  of  thorns,  and  is  so  choked  that  it  come* 
to  nothing.  Their  religion  is  buried  beneath  their  worldliness.  Sad 
will  their  end  be.  God  in  mercy  save  us  from  such  a  doom  ! 

H.  But  now,  secondly,  I  would  speak  a  little  about  THE  THORNS. 
They  are  by  Matthew  described  as  "  the  care  of  this  world,  and  the 
deceitfulness  of  riches."  Luke  adds,  "and  pleasures  of  this  life"; 
and  Mark  still  further  mentions,  "  the  lusts  of  other  things."  I 
suppose  that  the  sower  did  not  see  any  thorns  when  he  threw  the 
handful  of  corn :  they  had  all  been  cut  down  level  with  the  surface. 


SOWN   AMONG   THORNS.  473 

He  probably  hoped  that  it  was  all  good  ground,  and  therefore  he 
cowed  it,  little  suspecting  that  the  thorns  were  in  possession. 

Note  well  that  thorns  are  natural  to  the  soil.  Since  the  fall  these 
are  the  first-born  children  of  the  ground.  Any  evil  which  hinder? 
religion  is  not  at  all  an  extraordinary  thing— it  is  what  we  ought  to 
expect  among  fallen  men.  Grace  is  an  exotic ;  thorns  are  indigenous. 
Sm  is  very  much  at  home  in  the  human  heart ;  and,  like  an  ill  weed, 
it  grows  apace.  If  you  wish  to  go  to  heaven,  I  might  take  a  little 
time  to  show  you  the  way,  and  I  should  need  to  stir  you  up  to  dili 
gence ;  but  if  you  must  needs  go  to  hell— well,  "easy  is  the  way  to 
destruction  "—it  is  only  a  little  matter  of  neglect.  "  How  shall  we 
escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ? "  Evil  things  are  easy 
things :  for  they  are  natural  to  our  faUen  nature.  Eight  things  are 
rare  flowers  that  need  cultivation.  If  any  of  you  are  being  injured 
by  the  cares  of  the  world  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  I  am  not 
astonished  ;  it  is  natural  that  it  should  be  so.  Therefore,  be  on  your 
guard  against  these  mischiefs.  I  pray  you  say  to  yourself,  "  Come, 
there  is  something  in  this  man's  talk.  He  is  very  slow  and  dull, 
but  still  there  is  something  in  what  he  says.  I  may,  after  all,  be 
tolerating  those  thorns  in  my  heart  which  will  kill  the  good  seed, 
for  I  am  of  like  passions  and  infirmities  with  other  men."  I  beseech 
you  look  to  yourselves,  that  you  be  not  deceived  at  the  last. 

The  thorns  were  already  established  in  the  soil.  They  were  not  onlv 
the  natural  inhabitants  of  the  soil,  but  they  were  rooted  and  fixed 
m  it.  Our  sins  within  us  claim  the  freehold  of  our  faculties,  and 
they  will  not  give  it  up  if  they  can  help  it.  They  will  not 'give 
way  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  to  the  new  life,  or  to  the  influences  of 
divine  grace,  without  a  desperate  struggle.  The  roots  of  sin  run 
through  and  through  our  nature,  grasp  it  with  wonderful  force,  and 
keep  up  their  grasp  with  marvellous  tenacity.  0  my  dear  hearer, 
whoever  you  may  be,  you  are  a  fallen  creature !  If  you  were  the 
Pope  himself,  or  the  President  of  the  United  States,  or  the  Queen  of 
England,  it  would  be  true  of  you  that  you  were  born  in  sin,  and 
shapen  in  iniquity,  and  your  unregenerate  heart  is  deceitful  above  all 
things,  and  desperately  wicked.  The  established  church  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul  has  the  devil  for  its  archbishop.  Sin  has  enclasped  our 
nature  as  a  boa-constrictor  encircles  its  victim;  and  when  it  has 
maintained  its  hold  for  twenty,  forty,  or  sixty  years,  I  hope  you  are 
not  so  foolish  as  to  think  that  holy  things  will  easily  get  the  mastery. 
Our  evil  nature  is  radically,  conservative,  and  it  will  endeavour  to 
crush  out  every  attempt  at  a  revolution  by  which  the  grace  of  God 
should  reign  through  righteousness.  Wherefore,  watch  and  pray,  lest 
temptation  choke  that  which  is  good  in  you.  Watch  earnestly,  for 
grace  is  a  tender  plant  in  a  foreign  soil,  in  an  uncongenial  clime ; 
while  sin  is  in  its  own  element,  and  is  strongly  rooted  in  the  soil. 

Do  you  know  why  so  many  professing  Christians  are  like  the 
thorny  ground?  It  is  because  processes  have  been  omitted  which 
would  have  gone  far  to  alter  the  condition  of  things.  It  was  the 
husbandman's  business  to  uproot  the  thorns,  or  burn  them  on  the  spot. 
Years  ago,  when  people  were  converted,  there  used  to  be  such  a  thing 
as  conviction  of  sin.  The  great  subsoil  plough  of  soul-anguish  was 


474  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

used  to  tear  deep  into  the  soul.  Fire  also  burned  in  the ,  mind 
with  exceeding  heat :  as  men  saw  sin,  and  felt  its  dreadful  results, 
the  love  of  it  was  burned  out  of  them.  But  now  we  are  dinned 
with  braggings  about  rapid  salvations.  As  for  myself,  I  believe 
in  instantaneous  conversions,  and  I  am  glad  to  see  them;  but  I 
am  still  more  glad  when  I  see  a  thorough  work  of  grace,  a  deep 
sense  of  sin,  and  an  effectual  wounding  by  the  law.  We  shall 
never  get  rid  of  thorns  with  ploughs  that  scratch  the  surface. 
Those  fields  grow  the  best  corn  which  are  best  ploughed.  Con 
verts  are  likely  to  endure  when  the  thorns  cannot  spring  up  because 
they  have  been  ploughed  up.  Dear  hearer,  are  you  undergoing  to 
day  a  very  severe  conviction  of  sin  ?  Thank  God  for  it.  Are  you  in 
awful  trouble  and  anguish?  Do  not  think  that  a  calamity  has 
happened  to  you.  May  God  himself  continue  to  plough  you,  and  then 
sow  you,  and  make  sure  work  in  you  for  years  to  come  !  So  you  see 
these  thorns  were  natives,  and  old-established  natives,  and  it  would 
have  been  well  had  they  been  cut  up. 

The  thorns  were  bound  to  grow.  There  is  an  awful  vitality  in  evil. 
First  the  thorns  sent  up  a  few  tiny  shoots.  These  shoots  branched  out, 
and  more  and  more  came  to  keep  them  company,  till  the  wheat  stood 
as  a  lonely  thing  in  a  thicket  of  briars,  and  was  more  and  more  over 
topped  and  shadowed  by  them.  The  thorns  aspired  to  the  mastery, 
and  they  soon  obtained  it ;  and  that  done,  they  set  to  work  to  destroy 
the  wheat.  They  blocked  it  up,  crowded  it  out,  and  some  of  the 
thorn- shoots  twisted  around  it,  and  held  the  wheat  by  the  neck  till  it 
was  choked. 

The  thorns  sucked  away  all  the  nutriment  from  the  wheat,  and  it  was 
starved ;  for  there  is  only  a  certain  quantity  of  nourishment  in  the 
soil,  and  if  the  thorns  have  it,  the  wheat  must  go  without  it.  There 
is  only  a  certain  amount  of  thought  and  energy  in  a  man ;  and  if  the 
world  gets  it,  Christ  cannot  have  it.  If  our  thoughts  run  upon  care 
and  pleasure,  they  cannot  be  eager  about  true  religion :  is  not  that 
clear  ?  That  is  the  way  in  which  those  thorns  served  the  wheat ;  they 
starved  it  by  devouring  its  food,  and  they  choked  it  by  keeping  off 
the  air  and  sun  ;  and  the  poor  thing  became  shrivelled  and  weak,  and 
quite  unable  to  produce  the  grain  which  the  sower  expected  of  it. 
So  it  is  with  many  professing  Christians.  They  are  at  first  worldly, 
but  not  so  very  worldly.  They  are  fairly  religious,  though  by  no 
means  too  zealous.  They  seek  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  but  by  no 
means  quite  so  much  as  others  we  could  name.  But  very  soon  the 
thorns  grow,  and  it  becomes  doubtful  which  will  win,  sin  or  grace, 
the  world  or  Christ.  Two  masters  there  cannot  be  ;  and  in  this  case 
it  is  specially  impossible,  since  neither  of  the  contending  powers  will 
brook  a  rival.  Sin  has  sprung  from  a  royal,  though  evil  stock,  and 
if  it  be  in  the  heart,  it  will  struggle  for  the  throne.  So  it  came  to 
pass  that  the  tares,  being  tolerated,  choked  the  good  seed. 

Let  me  describe  these  thorns  a  little.  Putting  together  Matthew, 
Mark,  and  Luke,  we  find  that  there  were  four  sorts  of  thorns.  The 
first  is  called  "  The  care  of  this  world"  This  assuredly  comes  to  the 
poor :  they  are  apt  to  grow  anxious  and  mistrustful  about  temporal 
things.  "  What  shall  we  eat  ?  What  shall  we  drink  ?  Wherewithal 


8OWX    AMONG    THORNS.  475 

shall  we  be  clothed  ?  "  This  trinity  of  doleful  questions  much  afflicts 
many.  But  anxiety  comes  to  rich  people  also.  Care  dwells  with 
wealth  as  well  as  with  poverty.  "How  shall  I  get  more?  How 
shall  I  lay  it  up  ?  How  shall  I  still  increase  it  ?  "—and  so  on. 
It  is  "the  care  of  the  age"  which  we  are  most  warned  against. 
Each  age  has  its  own  special  fret.  It  is  not  a  care  for  God — that 
is  not  the  care  of  any  age ;  but  the  care  of  the  age  is  some  vanity 
or  another,  and  as  a  standing  thing  it  is  the  ambition  to  keep 
up  with  your  fellows,  to  be  respectable,  and  to  keep  up  appear 
ances.  This  is  the  care  which  eats  as  doth  a  canker  in  the  case  of 
many.  Grim  care  turns  many  a  black  hair  white,  and  furrows  many 
a  brow.  If  you  let  care  grow  in  your  soul,  it  will  choke  up  your 
religion  :  you  cannot  care  for  God  and  for  Mammon  too.  "  We  must 
have  care,"  says  one.  There  is  a  care  which  is  proper,  and  there  is 
an  anxiety  which  is  improper.  That  is  proper  care  which  you  can  cast 
upon  God — "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him  ;  for  he  careth  for  you." 
That  is  an  improper  care  which  you  dare  not  take  to  God,  but  have 
to  bear  yourself.  Take  heed  of  anxiety ;  it  will  eat  the  heart  out  of 
your  religion. 

There  were  others  who  felt  "the  deceitfulness  of  riches"  Our  Lord 
does  not  say  "riches,"  but  " the  deceitfulness  of  riches."  The  two 
things  grow  together:  riches  are  evermore  deceitful.  They  deceive 
people  in  the  getting  of  them,  for  they  judge  matters  very  unfairly 
when  a  prospect  of  gain  is  before  them.  The  jingle  of  the  charming 
guinea,  or  of  "the  almighty  dollar,"  makes  a  world  of  difference  to 
the  ear  when  it  is  hearing  a  case.  Men  cannot  afford  to  lose  by 
integrity,  and  so  they  take  the  doubtful  way,  and  either  sail  near  the 
wind,  or  speculate  till  it  amounts  to  gambling.  They  would  not  endure 
the  idea  of  such  conduct,  were  it  not  that  the  hope  of  gain  deceives 
them.  Our  line  of  conduct  ought  never  to  be  ruled  by  gain  or  loss. 
Do  right  if  the  heavens  fall.  Do  no  wrong,  even  though  a  kingdom 
should  be  its  reward.  Men  turn  to  Adam  Smith's  "Wealth  of  Nations," 
a  wonderful  book,  and  there  they  find  certain  laws  which  I  believe  to 
be  as  fixed  and  unalterable  as  the  laws  of  gravitation ;  led  on  by  the 
deceitfulness  of  riches,  men  make  these  laws  into  an  excuse  for  grinding 
the  faces  of  the  poor.  They  might  as  well  take  people  to  the  top  of  a 
rock,  fling  them  down,  and  dash  them  to  pieces,  and  then  cry  out, 
"  This  is  the  natural  result  of  the  law  of  gravitation."  Of  course r 
the  law  of  gravitation  operates  remorselessly,  and  so  will  the  law  of 
supply  and  demand ;  but  we  must  not  use  either  of  these  laws  as  a 
cover  for  cruelty  to  the  poor  and  needy :  yet .  many  do  so  through 
"  the  deceitfulness  of  riches." 

Biches  are  very  deceitful  when  they  are  gained,  for  they  breed  in 
men  many  vices  which  they  do  not  themselves  suspect.  One  man  is 
purse-proud,  but  he  thinks  he  is  humble.  He  is  a  self-made  man. 
and  worships  him  that  made  him.  Is  it  not  natural  that  a  man  should 
worship  his  maker  ?  In  his  heart  he  thinks :  "  I  am  somebody. 
I  came  up  to  London  with  half -a- crown  in  my  pocket,  and  now  I 
could  buy  a  whole  street !  "  People  ought  to  respect  a  man  of 
that  kind,  ought  they  not,  even  though  he  may  have  made  his  money 
by  very  queer  practices  ?  It  little  matters  how  you  make  money 
43 


476  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

nowadays :  Galy  get  it,  and  you  will  have  plenty  of  admirers,  and 
the  deceitfulness  of  riches  will  enable  you  to  admire  yourself.  With 
pride  comes  a  desire  for  wealthy  society  and  vain  company ;  and  thus 
again  religion  receives  severe  injury.  There  is  apt  to  grow  up  in  the 
mind  an  idolatry  of  this  world  and  its  treasures.  "I  don't  love 
money,"  says  one.  "  You  know  it  is  not  money  that  is  the  root  of 
all  evil,  but  the  love  of  it."  Just  so ;  but  are  you  sure  that  you  do 
not  love  it  ?  Your  thoughts  run  a  good  deal  after  it.  You  hug  it 
rather  closely,  and  you  find  it  hard  to  part  with  it.  I  will  not  accuse 
you ;  but  I  would  have  you  awake  to  the  fact  that  riches  worm 
themselves  into  a  man's  heart  before  he  is  well  aware  of  it. 

You  may  perceive  the  deceitfulness  of  riches  if  you  note  the 
excuses  which  men  make  for  getting  so  much  and  withholding  it  from 
the  cause  of  Q-od.  "  They  intend  to  do  a  great  deal  of  good  with  it." 
Did  you  hear  the  devil  laugh?  I  am  not  speaking  of  many  dear 
brethren  in  this  place  who  are  doing  a  great  deal  of  good  with  their 
means  ;  but  I  am  speaking  of  those  who  are  simply  living  to  accumu 
late  wealth,  and  say  that  they  will  one  day  do  a  great  deal  of  good 
with  it.  They  say  so.  Will  it  ever  be  more  than  saying  ?  I  fear 
that  in  this  thing  many  lich  men  deceive  themselves.  They  go 
-on  accumulating  the  means,  but  never  using  them :  making  bricks, 
but  never  building.  All  they  will  get  will  be  a  corner  in  "The 
Illustrated  London  News  "  to  say  that  they  died  worth  so  much.  0 
sirs,  how  can  you  be  content  thus  to  have  your  good  things  choked  ? 
Wherever  this  deceitfulness  of  riches  is  allowed  the  upper  hand,  it 
chokes  the  good  seed.  A  man  cannot  be  eager  to  get,  and  eager  to 
keep,  and  eager  to  increase,  and  eager  to  become  a  millionaire,  and  at 
the  same  time  be  a  true  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  As  the  body  grows 
rich  the  soul  grows  poor. 

Luke  tells  us  of  another  kind  of  weed,  namely,  "  the  pleasures  of 
this  life"  I  am  sure  that  these  thorns  play  a  dreadful  part  nowadays. 
I  have  nothing  to  say  against  recreation  in  its  proper  place.  Certain 
forms  of  recreation  are  needful  and  useful ;  but  it  is  a  wretched 
thing  when  amusement  becomes  a  vocation.  Amusement  should 
be  used  to  do  us  good  "like  a  medicine":  it  must  never  be  used 
.as  the  food  of  the  man.  From  early  morning  till  late  at  night  some 
spend  their  time  in  a  round  of  frivolities,  or  else  their  very  work  is 
simply  carried  on  to  furnish  them  funds  for  their  pleasures.  This 
is  vicious.  Many  have  had  all  holy  thoughts  and  gracious  resolutions 
stamped  out  by  perpetual  trifling.  Pleasure  so  called  is  the  murderer 
of  thought.  This  is  the  age  of  excessive  amusement :  everybody 
craves  for  it,  like  a  babe  for  its  rattle.  In  the  more  sober  years  of 
our  fathers,  men  had  something  better  to  live  for  than  silly  sports. 
The  thorns  are  choking  the  age. 

Mark  adds,  "and  the  lusts  of  other  things."  I  will  not  enumerate 
all  those  other  things  ;  but  all  things  except  the  things  of  Christ  and 
of  the  Father  are  "  other  things."  If  anybody  spends  his  life  on  any 
object,  however  good,  short  of  the  glory  of  Glod,  the  good  seed  is 
choked  by  the  inferior  object.  One  person  is  eminently  scientific,  and 
he  will  do  well  if  his  science  is  used  for  holy  purposes ;  but  it  can  be 
used  to  choke  the  seed.  One  man  is  a  great  proficient  in  the  arts,  and 


SOWN   AMONG   THORNS.  477 

tie  does  well  if  the  arts  are  used  as  a  mule  for  Christ  to  ride  upon  ; 
but  if  art  is  to  ride  upon  Christ,  then  it  is  ill  enough.  I  met  with 
-a  clergyman  many  years  ago  who  was  going  a  long  distance  to  find  a 
new  beetle.  He  was  a  great  entomologist,  and  I  did  not  blame  him 
for  it,  for  to  a  thoughtful  man  entomology  may  yield  many  profitable 
lessons.  But  if  he  neglected  his  preaching  to  catch  insects,  then  I  do 
not  wonder  that  a  parishioner  should  wish  that  the  beetles  would  nibble 
his  old  sermons,  for  they  were  very  stale.  I  call  it  choking  the  seed 
-when  any  inferior  pursuit  becomes  the  master  of  our  minds,  and  the 
<:ause  of  God  and  truth  takes  a  secondary  place.  The  seed  is  choked 
in  our  souls  whenever  Christ  is  not  our  all  in  all.  You  see  my  drift : 
~be  it  what  it  may — gain,  glory,  study,  pleasure — all  these  may  be  briers 
that  will  choke  the  seed. 

Mr.  Jay  was  never  more  pleased  than  when  at  Bristol  he  had  a  note 
«ent  up  to  him  which  ran  as  follows  : — "A  young  man,  who  is  prosper 
ing  in  business,  begs  the  prayers  of  God's  people  that  prosperity  may 
not  be  a  snare  to  him."  Take  care  that  you  look  thus  upon  your 
prosperity.  My  dear  friend,  Dr.  Taylor,  of  New  York,  speaks  of 
some  Christians  nowadays  as  having  a  "butterfly  Christianity." 
When  time,  and  strength,  and  thought,  and  talent  are  all  spent  upon 
mere  amusement,  what  else  are  men  and  women  but  mere  butterflies  ? 
*l  Society  "  is  just  a  mass  of  idle  people,  keeping  each  other  in  counten 
ance.  0  dear  hearers,  surely  we  did  not  come  into  this  world  to  play 
away  our  days !  I  do  not  think  we  came  into  this  world  either  to 
•slave  ourselves  to  death,  or  to  rust  away  in  laziness.  We  have  come 
here  as  a  man  enters  into  the  porch  that  he  may  afterwards  enter  the 
house.  This  life  is  the  doorway  to  the  palace  of  heaven.  Pass 
through  it  in  such  style  that  you  may  enter  before  the  King  with  holy 
joy.  If  you  give  your  minds  and  thoughts  to  these  passing  things, 
be  they  what  they  may,  you  will  ruin  your  souls,  for  the  good  seed 
cannot  grow. 

III.  So  I  close  in  the  last  place  by  noticing  THE  RESULT.  The  seed 
was  unfruitful. 

These  briers  and  thorns  could  not  pull  the  seed  up,  or  throw  it 
away :  it  remained  where  it  was,  but  they  choked  it.  So  it  may  be 
that  your  business,  your  cares,  your  pleasures,  have  not  torn  up  your 
religion  by  the  roots — it  is  there  still,  such  as  it  is.  But  these 
things  suffocate  your  better  feelings.  A  man  that  is  choked  is  not 
good  for  much.  If  a  thief  gets  into  his  house,  and  he  desires  to 
defend  his  property,  what  can  he  do  while  he  is  choked  ?  He  must 
wait  till  he  gets  his  breath  again.  What  an  amount  of  choked  religion 
we  have  around  us !  It  may  be  alive  :  I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  or 
not ;  but  it  looks  very  black  in  the  face.  God  save  you  from  having 
your  religion  choked ! 

I  have  already  told  you  it  was  drained  of  all  its  sustenance.  Look 
at  many  Christians ;  I  call  them  Christians,  for  they  call  themselves 
so.  A  boy  in  the  streets,  selling  mince-pies,  kept  crying,  "  Hot  mince- 
pies  !  "  A  person  bought  one  of  them,  and  found  it  quite  cold.  "  Boy," 
said  he,  "  why  did  you  call  these  pies  hot  ?  "  "  That's  the  name  they 
go  by,  sir,"  said  the  boy.  So  there  are  plenty  of  people  that  are 
called  Christians,  but  they  are  not  Christians — that's  the  name  they 


478  METROPOLITAN"   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

go  by ;  but  all  the  substance  is  drained  out  of  them  by  other  matters^ 
You  see  the  shape  of  a  Christian,  the  make  of  a  Christian,  and  some 
of  the  talk  of  a  Christian,  but  the  fruit  of  a  Christian  is  not  there. 
That  is  the  result  of  the  choking  by  the  thorns  of  care,  riches,  plea 
sure,  and  worldliness  in  general. 

What  life  there  was  in  the  wheat  was  very  sickly.  Let  me  remind 
certain  persons  that  their  spiritual  life  is  growing  weak  at  this  time. 
Morning  prayer  this  morning,  how  long  did  it  take  ?  Do  not  grow  red 
in  the  face.  I  will  say  no  more  about  it.  You  are  not  coming  out  to 
night,  are  you  ?  Half  a  Sunday  is  enough  worship  for  you.  Would 
you  not  like  to  live  in  some  country  place,  where  you  did  not  need  to 
go  out  to  a  place  of  worship  even  once  ?  Bible-reading,  how  much 
do  you  do  of  that  ?  Family  prayer,  is  that  a  delight  to  you  ?  Why, 
numbers  of  so-called  Christians  have  given  up  family  religion 
altogether.  How  about  week-day  services  ?  You  are  not  often  at 
a  prayer-meeting.  No,  the  distance  is  too  great !  Thursday  night 
service  ?  "Well,  well,  you  see  I  might  come,  but  there  happens  to  be 
a  lawn-tennis  party  that  night."  Will  you  come  in  the  winter  ? 
"  Yes,  I  would,  but  then  a  friend  drops  in,  and  we  have  an  evening 
at  bagatelle."  How  many  there  are  in  this  condition !  I  am  not 
going  to  judge  them  ;  but  I  remember  that  an  eminent  minister  used 
to  say,  "  When  week-day  services  are  forsaken,  farewell  to  the  life  of 
godliness."  Such  people  never  seem  to  bathe  in  their  religion,  but 
they  give  themselves  a  wetting  with  the  end  of  the  towel  j  thus  they 
try  to  look  decent,  but  they  are  not  inwardly  cleansed. 

As  to  confessing  Christ  before  men,  many  fail  altogether.  If  you 
were  pushed  into  a  corner,  and  were  asked  if  you  were  a  Christian, 
you  would  say,  "  Well,  I  do  go  to  a  place  of  worship,"  but  you  are  by 
no  means  anxious  to  own  the  soft  impeachment.  Our  SalvEStion  Army 
friends  are  not  ashamed  of  their  religion  ;  why  should  you  be  ?  Our 
Quaker  friends  used  to  wear  broad  brims,  but  they  are  very  properly 
giving  up  their  peculiar  garb  :  I  hope  it  is  not  to  be  to  you  an. 
indication  that  you  may  conceal  your  religion,  and  be  as  much  as 
possible  like  the  world.  Do  you  hope  to  be  soldiers,  and  yet  never 
wear  your  regimentals  ?  This  is  one  of  the  marks  of  feeble  religion. 

When  it  comes  to  defending  the  gospel,  where  do  you  see  it  in  this 
age  ?  I  hoped  that  many  would  be  found  among  Baptists  who  would 
care  for  the  truth  ;  but  now  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  with 
many,  as  with  the  showman,  when  asked  which  was  Wellington,  and 
which  was  Buonaparte :  "  Whichever  you  please,  my  little  dears.  Pay 
your  money,  and  take  your  choice  !  "  Free  will  or  free  grace,  human 
merit  or  Christ's  atonement,  it  does  not  matter  now.  New  theology 
or  old  theology,  human  speculation  or  divine  revelation — who  minds  ? 
What  do  they  care  whether  Grod's  truth  stands  or  the  devil's  lies?  I 
am  weary  of  these  drivellers !  The  thorns  have  choked  the  seed  in 
the  pulpits  and  in  the  churches  as  well  as  in  private  individuals.  Oh, 
that  God  would  return !  Oh,  that  his  Spirit  would  raise  up  among  us 
men  who  believe  indeed,  and  prove  the  power  of  their  belief ! 

The  fruit  of  much  modern  piety  is  nil.  I  sat  down  one  day  with 
three  or  four  old  Christian  men.  We  had  no  sooner  met  than  we  began 
to  speak  of  the  providential  dealings  of  God  with  his  people:  w$ 


SOWN   AMONG   T1IORNS.  479 

related  instances  of  answers  to  prayer,  and  we  spoke  of  the  sovereign 
grace  of  God,  and  his  faithfulness  to  his  saints.  When  we  had  gone  a 
little  forward  in  the  conversation,  one  remarked  how  he  had  enjoyed 
the  talk.  "  Alas !  "  said  he,  "  nobody  talks  about  God  now  :  his  pro 
vidence  and  his  readiness  to  hear  prayer  are  seldom  mentioned  now  • 
the  talk  is  all  about  the  markets,  and  the  weather,  and  Home  Rule, 
and  Mr.  Gladstone,  and  Disestablishment ;  but  little  enough  about  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  That  witness  was  true.  In  old  times  the  Lord's 
people  spake  often  one  to  another,  and  the  Lord  stood  at  the  window 
and  listened : — "  The  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard  it."  He  liked  their 
talk  so  well,  that  he  said  he  would  print  it — "  A  book  of  remembrance 
was  written  before  him  for  them  that  feared  the  Lord,  and  that 
thought  upon  his  name."  Where  do  you  get  experimental  Christian 
talk  now  ?  The  thorns  choke  holy  communion  upon  the  best  things. 

Fervent  prayer !  Mighty  prayer !  Where  do  you  meet  with  it  ? 
Thank  God,  we  have  some  brethren  here  whose  prayers  could  unlock 
the  windows  of  heaven,  or  shut  them  up ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  many. 
Oo  to  the  prayer-meetings  of  most  of  the  churches.  What  poor 
things!  Of  course  I  find  in  country  places  that  many  drop  the 
prayer-meeting  during  hay- time  and  harvest.  In  London  they  do  not 
•drop  the  prayer-meetings  in  summer,  because  they  are  too  small  to 
need  dropping :  they  take  up  the  fragment  of  a  prayer-meeting  and 
mend  with  it  the  worn-out  lecture,  so  that  it  becomes  neither  lecture 
nor  prayer-meeting.  How  can  we  expect  a  blessing  when  we  are  too 
lazy  to  ask  for  it  ?  Is  it  not  evidence  of  a  dying  religion  when,  to 
cover  their  carelessness  about  meeting  for  prayer,  we  even  hear 
ministers  doubting  the  value  of  prayer-meetings,  and  calling  them 
"  religious  expedients  "  ? 

Where  do  you  meet  with  intense  enjoyment  of  the  things 
of  God?  The  spiritual  life  is  low  when  there  is  little  delight  in 
holy  service.  Oh,  for  the  old  Methodistic  fire!  Oh,  to  feel  our 
hearts  dance  at  the  sound  of  Jesus'  name !  Oh,  to  flame  up  like 
beacon  fires,  and  blaze  towards  heaven  with  holy  ecstasy !  It  is  a 
sorrowful  day  when  religion  goes  abroad  without  wearing  her 
ornaments  of  joy.  When  an  army  has  left  its  flag  behind,  it  has 
evidently  given  up  all  idea  of  victory. 

If  there  is  a  declension  in  spiritual  life,  we  cannot  expect  to  see 
deeds  of  holy  consecration.  Oh,  for  men  and  women  who  bring  their 
alabaster  boxes  to  Jesus!  I  am  glad  when  I  hear  this  kind  of 
lamentation.  u  Mj'- dear  sir,  I  have  not  done  for  the  Lord  what  I 
ought  to  have  done.  I  have  been  a  believer  now  for  many  years, 
but  I  have  not  given  to  his  cause  what  I  ought  to  have  given ;  tell 
me  what  I  can  do."  There  are  hopeful  signs  in  such  enquiries,  and 
therefore  they  are  well ;  but  it  would  be  better  to  begin  early,  and 
avoid  such  regrets. 

I  would  put  it  to  you,  my  dear  hearer,  have  you  been  fruitful  ? 
Have  you  been  fruitful  with  your  wealth  ?  Have  you  been  fruitful 
with  your  talent  ?  Have  you  been  fruitful  with  your  time  ?  What 
are  you  doing  for  Jesus  now  ?  Salvation  is  not  by  doings,  you  are 
saved  by  grace ;  but  if  you  are  so  saved,  prove  it  by  your  devoted 
lives.  Consecrate  yourself  anew  this  day  wholly  to  your  Master's 


480  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

service.  You  are  not  your  own,  but  bought  with  a  price ;  and  if  yoa. 
would  not  be  like  these  thorn-choked  seeds,  live  while  you  live,  with- 
all-consuming  zeal. 

"  Well,"  says  one,  "but  there  are  the  thorns."  I  know  there  are :. 
they  were  here  when  our  blessed  Lord  came  anmng  us,  and  they  made 
him  a  cruel  crown.  Are  you  going  to  grow  more  of  them  ?  May  I  urge, 
you  to  give  up  cultivating  thorns  ?  They  are  useless ;  they  come  to 
no  good.  Whatever  the  pursuit  is,  short  of  the  glory  of  God,  it  is  a 
thorn,  and  there  is  no  use  in  it.  It  will  in  the  end  be  painful  to  you 
as  it  was  to  your  Lord.  A  thorn  will  tear  your  flesh,  ay,  tear  your 
heart.  Specially  when  you  come  to  die  will  these  thorns  be  in  your 
pillow.  Even  if  you  die  in  the  Lord,  it  will  grieve  your  heart  to  think 
you  did  not  live  more  to  Jesus.  If  you  live  for  these  things,  you  will, 
rue  the  day,  for  they  are  like  thorns,  painful  in  the  getting,  painful 
in  the  keeping,  and  painful  in  the  extraction  :  you  who  have  had  a 
thorn  in  your  hand  know  what  I  mean.  Worldly  cares  come  with 
pain,  they  stay  with  pain,  and  they  go  with  pain. 

Still,  there  is  a  use  for  thorns.  What  is  that  use  ?  First,  if  you 
have  thorns  about  you  to-day,  make  a  child's  use  of  them.  WTiat 
does  a  child  do  ?  If  he  gets  a  thorn  in  his  finger,  he  looks  at  it,  and 
cries.  How  it  smarts !  Then  he  runs  off  to  his  mother.  That  is  one 
of  the  sweet  uses  of  his  adversity,  it  admits  him  to  his  mother  at 
once.  She  might  say,  "What  are  you  coming  in  for?  Run  about 
the  garden."  But  he  cries,  "Please,  mother,  I've  got  a  thorn  in  my 
finger."  This  is  quite  enough  argument  to  secure  him  the  best  atten 
tion  of  the  queen  of  the  house.  See  how  tenderly  she  takes  out  the 
little  dagger !  Let  your  cares  drive  you  to  God.  I  shall  not  mind  if 
you  have  many  of  them  if  each  one  leads  you  to  prayer.  If  every  fret 
makes  you  lean  more  on  the  Beloved,  it  will  be  a  benefit.  Thus  make 
good  use  of  the  thorns. 

Another  service  to  which  thorns  may  be  put  is  to  make  a  hedge  of 
them,  to  keep  the  goats  of  worldly  pleasure  from  eating  the  young 
shoots  of  your  graces.  Let  the  sorrows  of  life  keep  off  temptations 
which  else  might  do  you  serious  mischief. 

May  we  meet  in  heaven  !  Oh,  may  we  all  meet  in  heaven  !  What 
a  congregation  I  have  addressed  this  morning !  I  feel  overawed  as- 
I  look  at  you.  From  the  ends  of  the  earth  have  many  of  you  come. 
The  Lord  bless  you !  Strangers  are  here  in  vast  numbers,  for  the 
most  of  our  regular  hearers  are  at  the  sea-side.  I  may  never  see  you 
again  on  earth.  May  we  all  meet  in  heaven,  where  thorns  will  never 
grow !  May  we  be  gathered  by  the  angels  in  that  day  when  the  Lord 
shall  say,  "  Gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn  "  !  Amen.  So  let  it  be. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Matt.  xiii.  1 — 23. 


HYMNS  FROM  "  OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK''— 916,  643,  30 


This  sermon  will  be  issued  separately,  in  book  form,  for  distributioa, 
Price  One  Penny. 


cti[0ptitmt  Wrmrade 


THE  SEED  UPON  STONY  GROUND. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  SEPTEMBER   14ra,  1873,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEW1NGTON. 


"  And  some  fell  on  stony  ground,  where  it  had  not  much  earth ;  and  immediately 
it  sprang  up,  hecause  it  had  no  depth  of  earth  :  hut  when  the  sun  was  up,  it  was 
scorched  ;  and  hecause  it  had  no  root,  it  withered  away.1' — Mark  iv.  5,  6. 

THE  gospel  seed,  according  to  the  parable,  falls  upon  all  kinds  of  soil. 
Some  of  its  precious  grains  drop  upon  the  hard  pathway,  some  upon 
the  rock,  some  amongst  the  thorns,  and  only  a  portion,  perhaps  a 
smaller  proportion  than  one  in  four,  falls  upon  good  ground,  in  which  it 
finds  a  congenial  abiding-place.  The  preacher,  therefore,  will  not 
meet  with  unmixed  success  in  all  directions.  He  may  look  for  a  full 
recompense  from  his  work  as  a  whole,  but  he  must  not  fondly  suppose 
that  everywhere  the  good  word  will  become  effectual ;  for  in  many  it 
will  be  a  savour  of  death  unto  death,  and  not  of  life  unto  life.  Even 
when  Jesus  preached  but  few  received  him,  and  of  Paul's  ministry  it 
is  recorded  that  "  some  believed  the  things  which  were  spoken,  and 
some  believed  not."  It  is  for  the  beginner  in  holy  service  to  go  forward 
with  reasonable  expectations,  lest  he  should  ere  long  weary  of  the  work 
and  leave  it  because  of  his  bitter  disappointments. 

Mark,  with  care,  that  the  sower  in  the  parable  is  not  blamed  for 
having  scattered  his  seed  upon  soil  which  proved  to  be  unproductive ; 
not  a  word  of  censure  is  recorded  against  him  on  that  account  ;  from 
which  it  is  fair  to  infer  that  he  did  no  more  and  no  less  than  his  duty, 
and  that  the  minister  of  Christ  is  to  scatter  the  seed  of  the  gospel 
broadcast  among  all  mankind.  It  is  God's  work  to  direct  the  saving 
word  into  the  chosen  hearts  which  he  has  prepared  to  receive  it,  but  as 
for  us,  we  are  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  and  going  out 
into  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city,  as  many  as  we  find  we  are  to  bid 
to  the  supper.  Many  are  called  but  few  are  chosen  ;  it  was  never  in 
tended  that  the  external  call  should  be  as  narrow  as  the  election  ;  yet 
there  are  some  ministers  whose  preaching  consists  far  more  of  an 
analysis  of  soils  than  of  a  sowing  of  seed.  Leaving  the  analyzing 
of  the  soil  to  God,  I  take  my  commission  from  his  hands  and  desire 
No.  1,132  61 


518  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

to  fulfil  it.  Stony-ground  hearer,  there  is  a  handful  of  seed  for  you  ; 
you  who  are  hard  like  the  trodden  road,  there  is  a  handful  for  you  ; 
and  even  among  the  thorns,  which  are  plentiful  enough  in  this  age, 
shall  the  good  seed  fall  like  a  heavenly  shower  ;  and  if  God  shall 
graciously  direct  it  to  his  own  chosen,  and  they,  like  the  good  ground, 
shall  receive  it,  it  will  be  his  doing,  it  will  never  be  effected  by  any 
skill  of  mine.  It  is  mine  to  sow  beside  all  waters,  and  his  to  give 
the  increase.  The  best  shot  that  was  ever  made  with  bow  and  arrow 
was  taken  at  a  venture,  and  Ahab  the  king  was  pierced  between  the 
joints  of  his  harness  ;  so  also,  while  drawing  my  bow  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature,  my  faith  feels  confident  that  the  Lord  will 
direct  the  arrow  and  effect  his  purposes  of  grace. 

I  feel  that  I  have  very  solemn  work  on  hand.  I  have  always 
pleasure  in  preaching  upon  encouraging  topics,  but  this  morning  my 
themes  are  for  sifting  and  testing.  We  have  to  deal  with  certain 
apparently  good  people,  and  to  show  that  they  are  not  what  they  seem. 
We  have  to  put  corn  from  the  barn-floor  into  the  sieve,  and  it  may 
be  there  will  be  much  chaff  to  be  blown  away  ;  this  is  an  operation 
not  pleasant  to  the  flesh,  and  one  which  needs  much  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  that  we  may  perform  it  aright,  lest  the  weak  ones  be  sorely 
troubled,  which  is  far  enough  from  our  desire.  Solemn  discourse 
should  have  a  solemn  heart  to  utter  it,  and  solemn  hearts  to  hear  it  : 
may  God  grant  it  may  be  so  at  this  time,  that  the  sermon  may  be  greatly 
profitable  to  every  one  of  us,  whether  professors  of  the  gospel  or  not. 

First,  we  shall  read  the  history  of  stony-ground  hearers ;  secondly, 
we  shall  mark  the  radical  defect  of  their  character ;  and,  thirdly,  we 
shall  try  to  learn  a  lesson  from  the  whole. 

I.  First,  we  have  here  A  BRIEF  BIOGRAPHY  OF  CERTAIN  PROFESSORS 
OF  RELIGION.  Let  us  read  it  carefully.  It  is  said  of  them,  first,  that 
they  heard  the  word.  "  These  are  they  which  are  sown  on  stony  ground  • 
wno,  when  they  have  heard  the  word,  immediately  receive  it  witb 
gladness."  They  enjoyed  the  great  privilege  of  hearing  God's  word 
They  heard  the  real  gospel,  they  did  not  attend  upon  ritualistic  false 
hoods,  or  philosophic  speculations  :  it  was  the  word  which  they  heard. 
The  sower  did  not  sow  tares,  but  he  sowed  good  corn.  How  happy  are 
those  who  sit  under  a  downright  gospel  ministry  !  May  God  be  pleased 
to  multiply  such  ministries  everywhere,  and  the  lovers  of  them  !  How 
can  we  expect  salvation  to  come  to  us  if  we  do  not  hear  the  soul- 
saving  gospel  ?  If  we  are  listening  merely  to  opinions  and  notions 
and  philosophies  and  superstitions,  and  not  to  the  very  word  of  God, 
we  cannot  expect  to  find  salvation.  The  Holy  Ghost  does  not  save 
men  by  means  of  lies,  but  if  we  hear  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
we  may  hope  that  he  will  make  it  effectual  to  our  conversion. 

Remember,  next,  that  hearing  is  not  enough.  "  Hearers  only  "  will 
not  enter  heaven  ;  there  must  be  a  doing  of  the  word  as  well  as  a 
hearing  of  it.  These  people  were  good  hearers,  capital  hearers,  for 
they  went  further  than  hearing — they  received  the  word ;  not  in  the 
divine  power  or  supernatural  efficacy  of  it,  but  they  nevertheless 
received  it,  that  is  to  say,  they  never  cavilled  at  it,  they  assented  to  it: 
as  they  heard  it,  and  recognised  it  as  'God's  truth.  Receiving  it,  it  pro 
duced  an  effect  upon  them.  They  were,  in  a  measure,  impressed  by  it. 


THE   SEED   UPON   STONY   GROUND.  519 

If  the  sermon  spo*  e  of  the  wrath  of  God  on  account  of  sin,  they  were 
alarmed  if  it  told  them  of  the  love  of  God  in  Ohi'ist  Jesus,  they  were 
encouraged.  They  did  not  always  hear  with  dry  eyes  ;  they  were  not 
always  like  the  seuts  they  sat  upon,  unmoved  and  stolid  ;  but  they 
received  the  word,  it  stirred  their  affections  and  their  emotions,  they 
felt  its  moving  effects,  and  were  thus  led  to  many  changes  of  life. 
They  went  home  and  swept  the  chambers  which  had  been  full  of  filthi- 
ness  ;  they  cleansed,  at  any  rate,  the  outside  of  their  cups  and  platters, 
and  took  care  that  the  sepulchre,  if  not  cleansed  of  the  dead  men's 
bones,  should  be  decently  whitewashed,  so  as  to  shock  no  passer  by. 
They  were  improved  and  reformed  externally  by  what  they  heard,  and 
so  far  they  received  it. 

And  there  is  this  said  about  them,  in  the  third  place,  that  they 
received  it  immediately.  In  them  it  excited  no  questions,  doubts,  or 
conflicts.  The  preacher  said,  "  This  the  word  of  God,"  and  they  were 
content  to  believe  him,  though  they  knew  not  why.  While  other 
minds  were  asking  for  the  authority  of  the  message,  and  then,  having 
recognised  the  authority,  were  battling  hard  with  a  thousand  difficul 
ties,  these  persons  saved  themselves  a  world  of  trouble  by  never  thinking 
at  all.  It  was  their  father's  religion  and  their  mother's  religion, 
therefore  they  believed  it ,  they  swallowed  the  pill  with  their  eyes 
shut,  caring  nothing  whether  it  was  God's  truth  or  Satan's  lie.  Any 
thing  like  spiritual  mastication  of  the  doctrine  they  did  not  attempt, 
but  they  endorsed  wholesale  whatever  they  were  taught.  Priests 
themselves  could  not  desire  more  plastic  material.  These  hearers  had 
no  hard  strugglings  to  get  at  the  Saviour,  no  sense  of  sin  to  hold  them 
back,  no  horrors  of  conscience  to  make  them  afraid,  no  alarms  lest 
they  should  not  be  the  Lord's  own  people  after  all,  no  testings  and 
•sittings  to  see  whether  they  possessed  real  repentance  and  acceptable 
faith.  They  sprang  into  religion  as  a  man  may  leap  into  a  bath,  head 
over  heels  at  once.  They  said,  "  Surely  this  is  the  right  thing,  and 
we  will  have  it  ;  "  and  after  a  certain  sort  they  did  have  it  :  not  with 
any  depth  of  consideration  or  weight  of  judgment,  but  immediately 
they  received  the  word. 

It  is  added,  they  received  it  with  giadness.  The  immediate  effect  01 
receiving  the  word  was  to  make  them  very  happy  ;  and  there  are  not 
a  few  who  suppose  that  to  be  made  very  happy  is  a  sure  sign  of  being 
converted.  Believe  me,  it  is  a  very  dubious  sign  indeed.  No  doubt, 
one  grand  effect  of  the  reception  of  the  gospel  into  the  heart  is  to 
bring  joy  and  peace  through  believing  ,  but  there  are  many  kinds  of 
joy,  and  many  sorts  of  peace ;  and  there  is  a  joy  which  is  not  the  fruifc 
of  grace,  bnt  the  growth  of  nature,  and  a  peace  which  comes  from 
delusion,  and  not  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  must  take  care  we  do 
not  conclude  that  we  are  safe  because  we  are  "so  happy."  The  rich 
man  who  went  to  hell  was  happy  when  he  i'ared  sumptuously  every 
day  ;  the  farmer,  who  said  he  would  pull  down  his  barns  and  build 
greater,  was  happy  when  he  surveyed  his  stores ;  and  so  was  the 
prodigal  son  happy  while  he  was  spending  his  living  riotously,  but' 
theirs  was  a  very  different  kind  of  joy  from  that  which  is  the  fruit  of 
the  Spirit.  The  characters  in  our  text  looked  at  the  happy  side  of 
religion  exclusively.  "  There,  "  said  the  stony-ground  hearer,  "  there 


520  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

is  my  mother  ;  what  a  happy  Christian  she  is.  I  have  seen  her  in 
deep  trial  borne  up  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  I  have  marked  her  when 
we  have  had  deaths  in  the  house,  and  seen  how  peaceful  and  quiet  she 
has  been  :  I  will  lay  hold  on  Christ,  for  then  I  shall  be  as  happy  as 
she  is."  These  stony-ground  hearers  thought  what  a  happy  thing  it 
must  be  to  be  forgiven ;  and  so,  indeed,  it  is,  but  they  dwelt  "upon  that 
alone.  To  be  pardoned,  to  be  a  child  of  God,  to  be  accepted  in  the 
Beloved,  what  precious  things  these  must  be  !  And  what  a  delightful 
thing  to  be  numbered  with  God's  saints,  to  go  to  the  communion  table, 
and  to  be  thought  much  of  in  the  church  !  Are  not  all  these  ways  of 
pleasantness  ?  And  to  go  to  heaven  at  last,  to  die  triumphantly,  to  be 
taken  up  to  dwell  where  Jesus  is  amidst  the  glory  ;  what  joyful  things  ! 
Who  doubts  it  ?  But  these  people  dwelt  only  upon  this  view  of  the 
matter,  and  did  not  recollect  that  between  this  and  heaven  there  are 
temptations  to  be  combatted  and  to  be  overcome,  trials  to  be  endured, 
stern  trials,  too,  through  which  we  can  only  be  brought  by  divine  help. 
Right  arms  must  be  cut  off,  and  right  eyes  must  be  plucked  out ;  there 
are  costs  to  be  counted,  and  reckonings  to  be  made,  as  to  whether  the 
future  will  repay  for  the  labours  of  the  present.  Youthful  Hopefuls 
vow  that  they  will  have  the  brave  country  of  Canaan,  but  they  do  not 
recollect  the  roughness  of  the  road  thither.  Like  Pliable,  they  set  out 
for  the  Celestial  City,  but  they  have  not  reckoned  upon  the  Slough  of 
Despond,  and  therefore  after  the  first  mouthful  of  mud  they  are  ready 
to  turn  back,  and  let  those  have  the  brave  country  who  care  for  it  ;  as 
for  them,  if  they  can  keep  whole  bones  in  their  body,  they  will  be  well 
content  to  let  the  future  go  as  it  may. 

These  people,  then,  immediately  received  the  word  with  joy.  How 
hopeful  all  this  must  have  looked  to  the  sower  !  Do  you  not  see  how 
easily  ministers  may  be  deceived  ?  When  you  have  only  to  preach, 
and  men  are  willing  to  hear ;  only  to  preach  and  men  are  willing  to 
receive, — to  receive  the  gospel  at  once,  without  causing  you  any  difficulty 
in  arguing  with  them  ;  when  they  receive  it  with  gladness,  and  you 
have  not  the  trouble  to  cheer  them  up,  and  to  meet  their  doubts  and 
anxieties  with  a  thousand  promises  selected  out  of  the  word  of  God  ; 
is  not  this  splendid  work,  which  will  richly  repay  the  sower  ?  Alas, 
we  must  not  reckon  our  fruit  by  our  buds !  All  is  not  gold  that  glitters, 
and  it  is  not  every  egg  that  will  be  hatched. 

We  read  yet  further  that  these  characters  made  rapid  progress, — they 
sprang  up  because  they  had  no  depth  of  earth  ;  because  of  their  shallow 
soil  they  were  very  rapid  in  their  growth.  These  people  heard  the  gospel 
one  day,  received  it,  and  felt  sure  that  they  were  saved  ;  at  once  they 
were  full  of  joy  and  transport,  and  hastened  to  make  a  profession.  They 
did  not  require  time  to  sit  down  and  see  whether  they  could  bear  out 
that  profession,  or  seek  grace  that  they  might  not  run  before  they  were 
called  ;  but  away  they  went,  just  as  if  a  spark  had  been  dropped  into  so 
much  powder.  They  made  a  profession,  and  the  next  week  they  were 
teaching  in  the  Sunday-school.  They  were  so  sure  they  were  on  the 
r'ght  road,  that  they  were  very  vexed  with  other  pilgrims  who  did  not 
travel  so  rapidly.  When  they  heard  of  Christians  being  anxious  as 
to  their  condition,  they  said,  "  What  nonsense  !  What  reason  was  there 
for  it v  "  If  they  sw  a  deep-taught  Christian  tremblingly  examining 


THE   SEED   UPON   STONY   GROUND.  521 

himself,  they  said,  "  Oh,  you  must  not  look  at  all  at  yourself  ;  nevei 
consider  what  is  going  on  within."  They  had  received  a  one-sided 
gospel  only,  and  that  quite  contented  them  ;  but  as  to  anything  like 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  soul,  and  the  holy  jealousy 
which  is  one  of  the  best  fruits  of  vital  godliness,  these  they  quite 
dispensed  with.  They  were  going  to  drag  the  church  behind  them, 
and  drive  the  world  before  them  ;  and  very  soon  they  would  dis 
tance  even  the  ministry  which  had  been  the  means,  as  they  said,  oi 
their  conversion.  They  grew  from  hyssops  on  the  wall  to  cedars  of 
Lebanon  in  about  a  week.  They  were  THE  men,  and  wisdom  would 
die  with  them.  Grand  work  to  have  to  deal  with  these  men,  is  not  it  ? 
"We  shall  see  by-and-by,  and  shall  have  to  learn  that  not  every  stem 
that  puts  forth  leaves  is  a  fruit-bearing  branch. 

In  due  time,  according  to  the  parable,  came  the  trial.  The  seed  was 
up,  and  soon  the  sun  was  up  too,  and  began  to  scorch  it.  None  will 
get  to  heaven  without  being  tried  on  the  road.  Ask  concerning 
those  who  stand  in  their  white  robes  before  the  throne  of  God,  who  are 
those,  and  whence  came  they  ?  And  the  answer  will  be,  "  These  are 
they  that  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed  their  robes 
and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  There  is  not  a 
fragment  of  gold  in  all  God's  temple  but  what  has  passed  through  the 
fire.  Untried  faith  is  no  faith,  untried  grace  is  no  grace.  God  will  try 
his  people  and  discern  between  the  precious  and  the  vile. 

According  to  the  Saviour's  explanation  of  the  text,  the  trial  came 
in  the  form  of  persecution.  Ah  !  how  many  there  are  who  have 
received  the  word  with  gladness,  who,  if  there  were  a  stake  in  Smith- 
field,  would  very  soon  drop  the  profession  of  Christianity,  for  it  would 
be  too  hot  for  them  ;  or  if  there  were  a  prison  ready  for  them  in  which 
they  must  lie  till  the  moss  grew  on  their  eyelids,  they  would  soon 
forsake  the  truth  and  turn  aside  to  error.  We  need  not  be  much  afraid 
of  the  revival  of  such  tests,  but  there  are  other  forms  of  persecution 
which  mere  professors  are  equally  unable  to  bear.  A  sneer  in  society ; 
a  remark  against  Christianity  from  a  person  whom  you  are  accustomed 
to  respect ;  a  look  from  someone  who  is  above  you  in  wealth,  as  he 
despises  you  for  professing  to  be  a  follower  of  Christ ;  unkind  remarks 
from  a  father,  opposition  from  a  husband,  the  desertion  of  some  young 
companion  with  whom  you  hoped  your  life  would  be  linked  ;"  such 
matters — nothing  like  the  stake  or  the  prison — are  yet  quite  sufficient 
to  overcome  flimsy  professors,  so  that  they  are  offended,  and  turn  their 
backs  upon  the  religion  which  they  once  so  quickly  espoused.  In  many 
instances  to  follow  principle  would  involve  a  great  loss  in  business: 
they  could  not  afford  to  incur  such  a  loss.  If  Christ  could  be  had  at  a 
cheaper  rate,  they  would  have  him,  but  to  lose  all  the  treasures  in 
Egypt !  No,  they  could  not  do  that,  and  so  they  renounce  again  that 
Christ  whom  they  once  called  their  all-in-all. 

With  others  it  has  not  been  such  a  trial  as  that,  but  providential 
affliction.  I  painfully  remember  a  man  and  his  wife,  who  were  mem 
bers  of  this  church  for  some  time,  and  it  was  certainly  true,  as  they 
affirmed,  that  from  the  very  hour  they  made  profession  of  religion  they 
began  to  be  in  trouble  ;  and  therefore  they  renounced  the  consolation 
because  of  the  affliction,  for  they  drew  the  conclusion  that  surely  thej 


022  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

could  not  be  the  people  of  God,  or  else  God  would  not  have  so  tried 
them,  a  conclusion  the  reverse  of  the  teachings  of  Scripture.  Many 
will  have  Christ  if  he  will  pat  them  on  the  cheek,  but  not  if  he 
flog  them  with  the  rod.  They  will  follow  the  Lord  while  he  is  on  the 
giving  hand,  but  they  cannot  believe  in  a  God  who  takes  away.  They 
can  bless  him  while  he  enriches  them,  but  they  know  nothing  of  that 
Job-like  faith  which  exclaims,  "  The  Lord  gave  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

Or,  perhaps,  it  may  be  that  when  they  first  made  a  profession  of 
religion  they  did  not  know  much  about  the  temptations  of  life,  but 
now  they  have  moved  from  home,  they  have  obtained  a  situation 
where  there  are  young  men  who  tell  them  of  haunts  of  pleasurable 
vice  ;  or  they  have  left  the  circle'  of  godly  people  in  which  they  once 
moved,  and  are  cast  amongst  ungodly  ones,  and,  alas,  their  mouths  are 
watering  for  the  sweets  of  the  world  :  the  basilisk  of  sinful  pleasure 
has  cast  a  spell  over  them,  and  now  Christ  may  go  for  Belial,  true 
religion  for  worldliness,  and  following  God  for  the  indulgence  of  the 
flesh.  Ah,  how  often  is  this  the  case  ! 

Or,  perhaps,  another  shining  of  the  sun  has  come  upon  them.  They 
thought  they  believed  the  gospel,  but  they  have  fallen  among  debaters  ; 
they  are  surrounded  by  a  sceptical  circle,  where  they  have  heard  argu 
ments  they  never  heard  before,  and  never  having  weighed  anything,  or 
considered  the  reasons  why  they  believed  in  God  and  in  Christ,  they 
are  quite  staggered.  They  have  no  depth  of  earth,  no  root-hold  of  the 
truth  by  conviction,  and  solemn  judgment  of  it ;  and  so  as  soon 
as  they  meet  with  an  atheist  or  a  deist,  or  a  sceptic  of  any  form, 
they  are  like  thistledown  before  the  wind.  Having  no  ballast  in 
their  vessel,  the  first  breeze  oversets  them  and  they  are  lost. 
What  a  grand  thing  it  is  to  be  established  in  the  faith,  rooted, 
grounded,  settled.  I  remember  reading  of  one  who  said,  "When  I 
read  the  arguments  brought  by  infidels  against  the  gospel,  I  laugh 
them  to  scorn,  because  they  are  nothing  like  so  deep,  cunning,  or  hard 
to  answer,  as  the  arguments  which  my  own  heart  has  brought  against 
the  Lord  in  years  gone  by,  which  having  answered  and  overcome,  I 
feel  myself  more  than  a  match  for  the  puny  oppositions  of  ungodly 
men."  It  is  a  grand  thing  not  to  be  moved  in  these  sceptical  times, 
but  to  know  the  Lord  by  secret  intercourse  with  him,  to  know  his 
truth  *by  inner  consciousness,  and  by  a  devout  reading  of  his  word  with 
<eyes  opened  from  above.  Alas,  many  hearers  and  receivers  of  the 
word  have  been  destroyed  by  carping  infidels ;  they  knew  nothing 
thoroughly,  and  so  were  readily  deceived. 

It  is  said  of  the  stony-ground  people  that  immediately  they  were 
offended.  They  were  just  as  soon  out  of  love  with  the  gospel  as  they 
were  in  with  it.  "  Immediately  they  were  offended."  They  did  not 
at  first  stop  to  enquire  why  they  should  be  Christians,  and  now  they 
do  not  stop  to  argue  why  they  should  renounce  their  profession.  They 
took  their  religion  hot  from  the  oven,  and  dropped  it  before  it  was  cool 
enough  to  feed  on.  Somebody  said,  "  Believe,  believe,  believe !  "  and 
they  were  excited  ;  and  now  another  speaker  says,  "  Do  not  believe  ;  do 
not  believe  !  "  and  they  are  excited  the  other  way.  They  went  in  with 
a,  crowd  of  others  all  on  a  sudden  during  a  revival ;  and  now  they 


THE   SEED   UPON   STONY   GROUND.  523 

are  going  out  with  the  crowd  during  a  season  of  lukewar  ainess.  The 
minister  took  them  in  at  the  front  door,  and  now  he  has  to  let  them  out 
at  the  back  door.  They  have  disappointed  him,  they  have  brought 
scandal  upon  the  church,  and  double  responsibility  upon  themselves, 
and  now  they  are  just  as  earnest  to  give  up  religion  as  they  were  to 
profess  it.  Unhappy  souls,  volatile  in  everything,  frivolous  about  the 
solemnities  of  eternity,  ready  to  be  right  if  rightly  led,  and  as  ready 
to  be  wrong  if  wrongly  driven.  Having  no  mind  of  their  own,  they 
are  molluscous  creatures — without  a  backbone,  mere  jelly-fish  ;  nothing 
solid  or  consistent  can  be  found  in  them.  Their  sand-built  houses 
are  no  sooner  up  than  they  are  washed  down  by  the  tide  ;  they  have  no 
rocky  foundations,  no  strong  grips  of  truth,  no  principles  ;  their  motive 
powers  are  submission  to  persuasion,  admiration  of  eloquence,  and 
desire  of  approbation.  Unhappy!  Unhappy!  Unhappy!  God  grant 
that  we  may  not  belong  to  such  a  class. 

II.  I  shall  show  THEIR  RADICAL  DEFECT.  Their  radical  defect,  in 
the  first  place,  lay  in  an  unbroken  heart.  The  parable  does  not  refer  to 
ground  with  stones  in  it,  such  as  we  commonly  call  stony  ground,  for  that 
will  grow  corn  well  enough,  but  to  soil  where  there  was  a  hard  rock 
underneath,  and  only  a  very  thin  covering  of  earth.  A  hard  pan  of  iron 
rock  was  at  the  bottom,  and  it  was  barely  hidden  by  a  little  mould 
created  by  the  lichens  and  mosses,  enough  to  catch  the  seed  and  make 
it  germinate,  but  not  enough  to  feed  its  roots  for  any  length  of  time. 
In  these  people  their  hearts  have  never  been  broken.  "  Is  not  my  word 
like  a  hammer,  saith  the  Lord  ?  "  They  do  not  know,  for  it  never  ham 
mered  them.  They  got  their  joy  and  peace  without  a  blow.  What 
is  to  be  done  with  a  piece  of  ground  which  has  the  rock  so  close  to  the 
surface  ?  Nothing  can  be  done  with  it  by  man.  The  only  thing  that 
can  be  done  is  for  God  to  come  in,  and  when  God  in  his  infinite  mercy 
changes  the  rock  into  good  soil,  then  the  wheat  will  grow,  but  not 
till  then.  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  right  spirit  will  I 
put  within  you.  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh, 
and  I  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh."  There  must  be  a  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  by  which  the  natural  rock  of  nature  shall  be  turned  into 
the  good  soil  of  grace,  or  else  all  the  sowing  in  the  world  will  never 
produce  a  harvest.  These  people  skipped  over  that,  and  in  fact  they 
did  not  like  to  hear  of  it.  They  liked  preachers  who  always  preached 
simple  faith  in  the  work  of  Jesus,  but  never  mentioned  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit, — lopsided  preachers,  messengers  whose  legs  are  not 
equal,  who  deliver  half  God's  message  and  no  more  :  and  under  such 
teaching  they  found  peace  without  soul-trouble,  and  comfort  without  the 
new  birth.  As  for  repentance,  that  old-fashioned  grace,  they  despised  it. 
Weeping  before  God  on  account  of  sin,  terror  under  a  sense  of  God's 
wrath,  or  fear  lest  the  sentence  of  his  law  should  be  executed,  they 
never  knew.  They  passed  into  the  land  of  hope  without  going  round 
by  Weeping  Cross,  and  every  day  I  grow  more  and  more  suspicious 
of  a  man's  religion  if  he  has  not  gone  round  by  that  road.  A  man 
who  was  healed  before  he  was  wounded,  clothed  before  he  was  stripped, 
filled  before  he  was  empty,  made  alive  before  he  was  slain,  has  good 
reason  to  suspect  whether  sovereign  grace  has  ever  laid  its  hand  upon 
him.  These  people  with  the  unbroken  heart  had  gladsome  hopes 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  joyful  confidences,  but  they  all  came  to  an  end,  as  they  will  do  in 
your  case  and  mine  if  we  are  strangers  to  contrition.  Ever  be  it  re 
membered  that,  true  as  it  is  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  Christ 
shall  be  saved,  it  is  equally  true  "Ye  must  be  born  again  ;  "  "  Except 
ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  in  no  wise 
enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  "  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is 
flesh,  and  that  which  is  born  of  the  spirit  is  spirit;"  and 
*'  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  It  is  only 
the  birth  of  the  spirit,  the  spiritual  nature,  that  can  enter  into  spiritual 
matters  and  become  a  possessor  of  truly  spiritual  joys.  An  unbroken 
heart  is  a  fatal  defect. 

This  led  to  a  second  fault,  namely,  want  of  depth.  The  stony- 
ground  hearer  was  all  surface  ;  everything  about  him  was  superficial. 
The  rock  never  having  been  broken  there  was  no  depth  of  earth  to 
plough.  So  in  many  men  who  profess  to  be  converted,  there  has  been 
no  real  estimate  of  sin.  "  Yes,  we  are  sinners,"  they  say,  "  Oh,  vest, 
yes,  of  course  we  are  all  sinners  ;"  but  to  feel  what  it  is  to  be  a  sinnei 
is  quite  another  thing.  To  be  crushed  down  to  the  earth  under  a 
sense  of  having  violated  the  thrice  holy  law  of  God,  this  many  have 
never  felt.  And  Jesus  Christ — yes,  he  is  a  Saviour,  and  they  will  say 
they  take  him  for  a  Saviour  ;  but  what  it  is  to  be  saved,  what  it  was 
he  suffered,  why  he  needed  to  suffer,  what  was  the  tremendous  guilt 
that  compelled  such  a  sacrifice,  they  have  never  considered  ;  in  fact, 
they  have  never  thought  at  all,  and  they  do  not  mean  to  think.  Bees 
descend  into  the  flowers  and  suck  out  the  honey,  but  butterflies  alight 
on  the  lilies  for  a  moment,  and  are  away  again,  true  emblems  of  flip 
pant  pretenders  to  grace.  Many  persons  who  profess  to  be  Christians 
seem  to  have  no  acquaintance  with  the  plague  of  their  own  hearts  ; 
they  believe  that  there  is  something  amiss  within,  but  they  do  not 
know  that  their  heart  is  "  deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately 
wicked ;  "  consequently,  though  they  admit  they  need  divine  grace, 
they  do  not  know  how  much  they  need  it.  They  would  subscribe  to 
the  truth,  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,"  but  they  do  not  know  it 
experimentally.  They  are 'Strangers  to  those  failures  and  inward  dis 
appointments  which  lead  a  man  to  feel  his  nothingness.  It  is  surface 
work  ;  nothing  is  deep  about  them.  When  they  became  professors  of 
the  religion  of  Christ  they  never  weighed  the  truth,  or  searched  the 
Scriptures  to  see  whether  things  are  indeed  so.  They  were  Calvinists 
because  the  preacher  was  Calvinistic  ;  they  would  have  been  Arminians 
quite  as  readily  if  the  preacher  had  been  Arminian ;  in  fact,  they  would 
have  been  anything  they  were  taught  to  be  ;  they  never  judged,  weighed, 
and  considered  for  themselves.  In  espousing  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus 
they  never  calculated  the  difficulties  of  a  religious  life.  It  did  not 
strike  them  that  they  would  have  to  fight  with  sin  without  and  sin 
within  ;  they  never  looked  at  that  mighty  trinity,  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil,  with  which  they  would  have  to  wage  a  life-long  combat. 
They  took  the  sweets,  and  thought  not  of  the  bitter  herbs.  They  were 
volatile,  and  are  volatile  still.  They  cannot  think,  neither  can  you 
persuade  them  to  attempt  it.  This  is  a  fault  indeed. 

And  then  there  was  a  third  defect :  the  secret  part  of  their  religion  was 
i  failure.  The  seed  on  the  stony  ground  did  not  fail  in  the  sprouting, 


THB    SEED   UPON   STOXY   GROUND.  525 

nor  in  the  blade  wb  ich  appeared  above  ;  but  it  had  no  root.  If 
you  were  to  trace  some  professors  home,  you  would  find  no  secret, 
prayer.  Let  that  woid  go  through  this  congregation,  if  there  are  any 
of  you  living  in  the  neglect  of  secret  prayer.  No  secret  prayer,  no 
secret  reading  of  the  Word  of  God,  no  chewing  of  it  to  get  the 
essence  and  the  juice  out  of  it,  no  vital  contact  with  Christ  in 
private,  no  communion  of  the  soul  in  secret  with  the  living  God  ! 
This  is  a  deadly  sign !  They  were  at  the  public  meeting  ;  they  were 
fussy  enough  upon  committees  ;  they  could  be  first  and  foremost  if 
there  were  any  singing  to  be  done,  or  if  there  were  any  preaching 
required  ;  but  oh,  the  secret  prayer,  the  secret  living  with  God,  the 
soul-searching,  the  trying  of  the  reins  to  see  whether  they  were  right 
or  wrong — they  had  given  this  all  up.  Taking  it  for  granted  that  they 
must  be  right  because  they  have  a  sort  of  faith,  they  look  upon  every 
question  as  to  their  safety  as  so  much  unbelief,  and  the  work  of  Satan, 
and  so  they  wrap  themselves  up  in  their  delusions.  They  think  they 
must  be  the  people  of  God  because  they  profess  themselves  to  be  such, 
but  they  have  never  looked  for  the  fruit  which  must  be  borne  by 
every  branch  of  the  true  vine. 

And  go,  fourthly,  there  was  another  thing  which  I  do  not  think  you 
will  find  in  Mark/  but  you  will  see  it  in  one  of  the  other  evangelists— 
they  lacked  moisture.  Now,  a  plant  must  have  moisture.  Dew,  rain, 
or  some  sort  of  watering  must  come  to  it.  On  that  little  soil  with  a 
hard  rock  at  the  bottom  there  was  plenty  of  heat  when  the  sun  shone, 
and  so  the  little  moisture  it  had  made  the  seed  sprout  at  once,  but  it 
had  no  further  moisture,  and  therefore  became  parched.  So  certain 
hearers  get  a  little  moisture,  as  it  were,  by  contact  with  an  earnest 
preacher,  they  come  under  that  word  which  drops  as  the  dew  an<i 
distils  as  the  rain,  but  they  have  not  the  vitalizing  Holy  Ghost  at 
their  root  to  be  the  perpetual  source  of  life.  They  have  their  lamps, 
but  they  have  no  oil  in  their  vessels  to  keep  them  trimmed.  They  lack 
the  moisture  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  it  is  that  comes  to  his  own  people 
secretly,  at  the  roots  of  their  life,  so  that  from  him  they  suck  up  the  life 
of  God,  and  so  they  live  :  but  the  mere  stony-ground  convert  has  not  the 
Holy  Ghost.  And  oh,  permit  me  to  say  most  solemnly  to  every  one  here, 
if  we  have  no  more  than  nature  gave  us  under  its  best  conceivable  cir 
cumstances,  we  have  no  more  than  the  Pharisees,  and  that  landed  them 
in  hell.  We  must  have  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  from  first  to  last  the  religion 
of  our  hearts  must  be  wrought  of  the  Spirit,  and  sustained  by  the  Spirit, 
and  if  it  be  not,  the  sooner  we  are  rid  of  such  a  religion  the  better,  for 
it  will  only  deceive  us.  I  feel  the  necessity  of  preaching  such  a  sermon 
as  this,  because  I  perceive  church  members  going  aside  into  open  sin, 
and  others  turning  aside  to  one  or  another  of  the  new  delusions  of  the 
present  age,  and  there  seems  to  be  a  new  one  every  month.  Some 
foolish  people  stand  with  their  mouths  open  ready  for  any  novelty  to 
fly  down  their  throats.  They  are  as  dry  straw,  only  wanting  some 
impostor  to  apply  the  spark  to  them,  and  yet  they  call  themselves 
Christians.  There  are  so  many  now-a-days  who  do  not  know  what  they 
believe,  and  so  become  the  prey  of  Romanists,  Ritualists,  Atheists,  or 
some  other  deceivers.  There  is  a  little  plant  in  the  garden,  and  a 
thief  comes  along  and  takes  away  root  and  all ;  he  will  not  do  so  with 


526  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

a  well  rooted  oak,  I  warrant  you :  and  if  we  were  well  rooted  like 
the  oak,  we  should  believe  what  we  do  believe,  and  know  what  we 
do  know ;  and  should  have  principle  to  keep  us  steady.  The  old 
Nonconformists,  might  have  been  dragged  to  prison  or  to  the  stake 
without  difficulty  ;  but  to  get  them  to  yield  their  nonconformity,  or  put 
aside  their  principles,  was  not  possible  ;  alas  for  the  degenerate  sons 
of  such  sturdy  fathers.  If  what  you  believe  be  not  true,  fling  it 
away ;  but  if  it  be  true,  let  your  faces  be  like  flints  and  your  natures 
like  iron  against  all  the  temptations  of  this  wicked,  ever-changing  age, 
which  flies  this  way  and  that,  but  always  away  from  its  God.  Oh, 
when  shall  it  be  that  those  who  know  the  Lord  shall  stand  fast,  and 
having  done  all,  shall  still  stand  ! 

III.  Thirdly,  I  must  close  by  trying  to  teach  THE  LESSON  OF  THE 
TEXT.  That  lesson  is  four-fold.  It  says  to  each  one  of  us,  le  deeply  in 
earnest.  Do  not  play  at  religion.  Do  not  think  of  a  religious  pro 
fession  as  a  garb  which  you  can  put  on  and  take  off.  Pray  God 
to  make  sure  work  in  your  soul,  sure  work  for  eternity.  You  have  to 
die,  you  have  to  face  the  judgment  seat ;  have  a  religion  that  will  bear 
those  ordeals.  Pray  to  have  such  a  work  of  the  Spirit  in  your  soul  that 
neither  death  nor  judgment  can  alarm  you.  Cry  to  God  that  repentance 
may  be  cut  deep  into  you,  making  lasting  marks  in  you,  that  your 
faith  may  be  no  sham  faith,  but  a  giving  up  of  your  soul  entirely 
into  the  hands  of  Christ  ;  that  your  love  to  Christ  may  be  no 
rhapsody,  but  a  matter  of  real  heart-affection  ;  that  your  religious 
walk  may  not  be  for  other  people  to  see,  but  be  a  walk  before  God  ; 
that  all  your  actions  may  be  the  result  of  principle,  and  that  you  may 
not  be  swayed  by  company,  but  rather  may  sway  company,  and  may  have 
a  vital  force  within  yourself  of  God's  implanting,  that  will  bear  you  on 
in  the  straight  road,  whichever  way  others  may  take.  I  say  again,  Be 
awfully  in  earnest  about  everything  that  concerns  religion,  and  pray  God 
to  forgive  you  if  in  any  measure  you  have  been  flippant  concerning  it. 

Secondly,  watch  the  effect  of  your  own  daily  trials.  See  how  they 
affect  you.  If  a  boat  is  ready  to  sink  in  the  Thames,  it  ought  never 
to  be  trusted  at  sea.  If  your  religion  already  begins  to  fail  you, 
what  will  it  do  by-and-by  ?  You  were  laughed  at,  and  you  were 
half  inclined  to  give  it  all  up  :  what  would  you  do  if  you  were  more 
sternly  persecuted  ?  You  have  already  been  willing  to  go  back,  your 
heart  has  faltered :  what  will  you  do  if  fiercer  temptations  assail 
you  ?  You  have  already  been  terribly  put  to  it  by  the  arguments  of 
a  fool :  what  would  you  do  if  some  of  the  deep  thinkers  were  to  argue 
with  you  ?  "  If  thou  hast  run  with  the  footmen  and  they  have  wearied 
thee,  how  wilt  thou  contend  with  horsemen  ?  And  if,  in  the  land 
of  peace  wherein  thou  hast  trusted,  they  have  wearied  thee,  what 
wilt  them  do  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan  ? "  I  do  not  object  to  your 


THE   SEED    UPON   STONY   GROUND.  527 

growing  slowly  if  you  grow  surely.  If  my  house  takes  a  long  time  in 
building,  I  would  rather  give  the  builder  his  time  than  tell  him  to  run 
it  up  in  a  week  or  two,  and  make  it  so  frail  that  the  first  wind  would 
blow  it  away  like  cardboard.  You  have  to  live  in  this  house  eternally, 
pray  God  to  build  it  surely.  As  to  building  fast,  that  little  matters 
<)  you  that  can  hardly  go  a  step  towards  heaven  without  question  and 
dispute,  I  do  not  so  much  tremble  concerning  you,  as  about  some  who 
never  have  any  question  or  doubt,  because  they  have  never  any  thought 
at  all,  but  pass  it  all  by  with  a  heedless  carelessness,  taking  things 
for  granted.  See,  then,  how  you  stand  in  your  present  trials.  You 
have  grown  richer  ;  do  you  love  the  Lord  as  much  as  you  did  ? 
You  transact  more  business  ;  can  you  still  keep  the  world  out  of  your 
heart  ?  You  have  received  more  praise  of  late ;  can  you  still  cling 
•to  Christ  as  you  used  to  do  when  you  had  but  few  friends  ?  You 
have  been  in  health  lately  ;  have  you  lived  as  near  to  God  as  when  you 
were  ill  ?  Or  you  have  come  down  in  the  world  and  are  numbered 
with  the  poor  ;  do  you  love  the  Lord  as  much  as  you  did  when  he 
-enriched  you  ?  You  have  lately  heard  the  remarks  of  a  cunning  hater 
•of  the  gospel ;  were  you  able  to  feel  that,  though  you  could  not  answer 
him  in  words,  yet  your  heart  answered  him,  and  threw  off  his  falsehood 
as  the  roof  throws  off  the  rain  ?  If  not,  look  to  it.  If  your  vessel  is 
ready  to  go  down  in  smooth  water,  what  will  she  do  in  a  storm  ?  If 
you  cannot  keep  the  water  out  of  her  now,  what  will  you  do  when 
the  hurricane  overtakes  her  ?  It  will  be  all  over  with  you  then,  I  fear- 

Another  lesson  is,  constantly  examine  yourself.  A  great  many 
persons  get  into  the  Bankruptcy  Court,  but  as  far  as  I  recollect  never 
-one  came  there  through  too  much  attendance  to  his  business.  I  never 
heard  of  a  farmer  losing  his  crop  through  being  too  diligent  in  hus 
bandry  ;  and  of  all  the  souls  that  are  lost  not  one  has  perished  through 
being  too  much  in  earnest  as  to  self-examination.  Dear  brethren,  choose 
a  faithful,  testing  ministry.  Do  not  look  after  a  smooth-tongued 
preacher  who  will  always  cry,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye,  my  people." 
You  want  comfort,  and  should  have  it,  but  you  want  searching  as  well, 
and  you  must  have  it.  Do  pray  that  you  may  be  faithfully  dealt  with, 
that  there  may  be  no  glozing  over  matters,  no  filming  of  wounds,  but 
that  there  may  be  honest  dealings  between  you  and  the  minister,  and 
between  you  and  your  God.  God  grant  that  we  may  be  willing  to  be 
searched,  for  when  we  are  unwilling  to  be  searched  we  may  reckon 
it  quite  certain  that  there  is  something  amiss  with  us.  When  we  cry, 
"  I  am  afraid  I  atn  a  hypocrite,"  there  is  very  little  fear  of  it ;  but 
presumption  is  fatal. 

Now,  lastly,  let  all  this  show  us  how  necessary  it  is  that  we  cast  all  the 
stress  and  burden  of  our  salvation  entirely  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
.because  wherever  a  man  does  that,  there  is  honest  and  good  ground 

44 


528  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

in  his  soul,  and  the  seed  has  sprung  up  aright.  Whenever  a  man  caB 
truly  say,  "  I  rest  alone  in  Jesus  ; 

1  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring : 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling,' " 

that  is  the  great  secret  of  a  true  hope.  Jesus  lived  and  died  for  us  ^ 
and  if  we  do  entirely  and  alone  depend  upon  him  it  is  well  with  our 
souls. 

It  is  well  to  live  continually  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  looking  up  to 
Jesus,  finding  all  our  hope  in  him,  and  none  in  ourselves.  Beloved,. 
it  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  bring  us  there  and  keep  us  there. 
If  we  search  ourselves  in  the  light  of  the  cross  we  shall  be  willing 
to  judge  ourselves  that  we  be  not  judged  ;  in  the  presence  of  those 
dear  wounds  from  whence  distils  the  atoning  blood,  we  shall  cry,. 
"  Try  my  reins  and  my  heart."  But  if  any  man  say,  "  I  believe 
in  Jesus,  therefore  I  will  not  search:  I  trust  in  Jesus,  therefore 
I  will  live  as  I  like,"  that  man's  religion  is  vain  ;  he  has  profaned 
the  cross  by  his  reckless  reasoning,  and  let  him  take  heed  how  God 
shall  judge  him,  for  of  all  judgments  surely  that  will  be  the  heaviest 
which  shall  come  upon  the  man  who  dared  to  take  the  doctrine  of 
the  cross  as  a  reason  for  careless  living,  and  made  the  mercy  and  the 
cleansing  power  of  the  Redeemer  himself  an  apology  for  walking 
heedlessly  before  God,  and  continuing  in  vain  presumption.  God 
grant  us  grace  to  receive  the  seed  into  good  ground,  for  Jesus  sake* 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON — Mark  iv.  1 — 34. 


HYMNS  FROM  "OuR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK  "^42  (Version  I.),  15,  645* 


Cjre  Jfar  |1ark  Start  |1nl]rit 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  SOWER. 


DKLIVKRED  ox  SABBATH  MOUSING,  APRIL  15TH.   1860,   BT  TIIB 

REV.    C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  EXETEU  HALL,  STRAND. 


"  And  when  much  people  were  gathered  together,  and  were  come  to  him  out  of  every  city,  ha 
spake  by  a  parable :  a  sower  went  out  to  sow  his  seed :  and  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  way  side; 
and  it  was  trodden  down  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  devoured  it.  And  some  fell  upon  a  rock  ;  and  aa 
soon  as  it  was  sprung  up,  it  withered  away,  because  it  lacked  moisture.  And  some  fell  among 
thorns ;  and  the  thorns  sprang  up  with  it,  and  choked  it.  And  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and 
sprang  up,  and  bare  fruit  an  hundredfold.  And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  he  cried,  He  that 
hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."— Luke  viii.  4—8. 

IN  our  country  when  a  sower  goes  forth  with  his  seed,  he  enters  into  an  enclosed  field, 
and  begins  at  once  with  due  order  and  precision  to  scatter  the  seed  from  his  basket 
along  every  ridge  and  furrow  ;  but  in  the  East,  the  corn-growing  country,  hard  by  a 
small  town,  is  one  vast  unenclosed  plain.  True,  it  is  divided  into  different  properties, 
but  there  are  no  hedges,  no  divisions,  except  the  ancient  landmark,  or  perhaps  on  rar 
occasions,  a  simple  ridge  of  stones  to  divide  one  man's  field  from  another.  Through 
these  wide  open  common  lands  there  are  footpaths,  the  most  frequented  being  called  the 
highways.  You  must  not  imagine  these  highways  to  be  in  the  slightest  degree  like  our 
macadamized  roads,  but  simply  frequent  paths,  which  are  trodden  tolerably  hard. 
Here  and  there,  there  are  bye- ways,  along  which  travellers  who  wish  to  avoid  the  public 
road  may  journey  with  a  little  more  safety  when  the  main  road  is  infested  with  robbers, 
and  the  hasty  pedestrian  can  strike  out  a  short  cut  for  himself  across  the  plain,  and  so 
open  a  fresh  road  for  others  who  are  journeying  in  the  same  direction.  When  the 
sower  goes  out  in  the  morning  to  sow  hi?  seed,  he  finds,  perhaps,  a  little  spot  of 
ground  scratched  over  with  the  primitive  Eastern  plough  ;  he  begins  to  scatter  hia 
seed  there  of  course  most  plentifully,  but  there  runs  a  path  right  through  the  very 
centre  of  his  field,  and  unless  he  is  willing  to  leave  a  broad  headland,  he  must  throw  a 
handful  on  the  pathway  ;  and  yonder,  there  is  a  rock  cropping  out  just  in  the  midst  of 
the  ploughed  land,  and  the  seed  falls  on  that ;  and  there  too,  fostered  by  the  negligent 
husbandry  of  the  East,  there  is  a  corner  1  u|J  of  the  roots  of  nettles  and  thistles,  and 
the  sower  sows  his  seed  there  too  ;  the  corn  and  the  nettles  come  up  together,  and  as 
we  know  by  the  parable,  the  thorns  being  tnt,  strongest  spring  up  and  choke  the  seed,. 
BO  that  it  bringeth  forth  no  fruit  unto  perfection.  The  recollection  that  the  Bible  wa» 
written  in  the  East,  and  that  its  metaphors  and  allusions  are  fully  to  be  explained  to. 
us  only  by  Eastern  travellers,  would  very  often  help  us  to  understand  a  passage  fat 
better  than  the  common  English  reader  possibly  can  do. 

Now  the  preacher  of  the  gospel  is  like  the  sower.  He  does  not  make  his  seed  ;  the- 
seed  is  given  him  by  his  Master.  It  would  not  be  possible  for  a  man  to  make  the 
tioallest  seed  that  ever  germinated  upon  the  earth,  much  less  that  celestial  seed  of 
eternal  life.  The  minister  goes  to  his  Master  in  secret,  and  asks  him  to  teach  him  his 
truth,  and  thus  he  fills  his  basket  with  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom.  What  the 
minister  has  to  do,  is  to  go  forth  in  his  Master's  name  and  scatter  precious  truth.  If  he 
knew  where  the  best  soil  was  to  be  found,  perhaps  he  might  limit  himself  to  that  which 
had  been  prepared  by  the  plough  of  conviction.  But  not  knowing  men's  hearts,  it  i» 
his  business  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature — to  throw  a  handful  on  that  hard  heart- 
yonder,  and  another  handful  on  that  overgrown  heart,  which  is  full  of  cares  and  richet 
and  pleasures  of  this  world.  He  has  to  leave  the  fate  of  the  seed  in  the  care  of  the 
Master  who  gave  it  to  him,  for  well  he  understands  that  he  is  not  responsible  for  thr 
harvest,  he  is  only  responsible  for  the  care,  the  fidelity,  and  the  integrity  with  whicb 
he  scatters  the  seed,  right  and  left  with  both  his  hands.  What,  if  not  a  single  ear 
should  ever  make  glad  the  sheaves  ;  if  never  should  there  be  seen  a  single  green  blade 
starting  up  among  the  furrows,  the  man  would  be  accepted  and  rewarded  by  his  Maiter, 
if  he  had  but  sown  the  right  seed,  and  sown  it  with  careful  hand.  Alas  !  alas  ! — if  it 

No.  308.  £2 


THE  PARABLE  OP  THE  SOWER. 

were  not  for  this  fact — that  we  are  not  responsible  for  our  success — with  w 
agony  must  we  remember,  that  too  often  we  labour  in  vain,  and  spend  our  strength 
for  nought.  The  cry  of  Esaias  of  old.  must  be  our  cry  still,  "Who  hath  believed  our 
report,  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ? "  But  one  seed  in  four  finds 
hopeful  soil.  The  three  portions  out  of  the  four  scattered  on  evil  places,  produce  no 
good  effect,  but  they  are  lost,  and  shall  iie'er  be  seen  again,  except  when  they  shall  rise 
up  in  judgment  against  our  ungracious  hearers  to  condemn  them.  Here  let  me  remark, 
that  the  measure  of  our  duty  is  not  limited  by  the  character  of  our  hearers,  but  by  the 
command  of  (3-od.  We  are  bound  to  preach  the  gospel,  whether  men  will  hear,  or 
whether  they  wil  *orbear.  Let  men's  hearts  be  what  they  may,  I  am  not  loosed  from 
my  obligation  to  sow  the  seed  on  the  rock  as  well  as  in  the  furrow,  on  the  highway  as 
well  as  in  thf  ploughed  field. 

My  plan  this  morning  will  be  very  simply  to  address  myself  to  the  four  classes  of 
hearers  that  are  tc  be  found  in  my  congregation.  We  have,  first  of  all,  those  who 
are  represented  by  the  way-side,  the  mere  hearers  ;  then  those  represented  by  the 
stony-ground  hearers,  those  in  whom  there  is  a  transient  impression  produced,  so  tran 
sient,  however,  that  it  never  comes  to  any  lasting  good.  Then,  those  on  whom  a  large 
and  good  impression  is  produced,  but  the  cares  of  this  life,  and  the  deceitfulness  of 
riches,  and  the  pleasures  of  this  world  choke  the  seed  ;  and,  lastly,  that  small  class — 
God  be  pleased  to  multiply  it  exceedingly — that  small  class  of  good-ground  hearers,  in 
whom  the  Word  brings  forth  fruit,  in  some  thirty,  in  some  sixty,  and  in  some  » 
hundred  fold. 

T.  First  of  all,  then,  I  am  to  address  myself  to  those  hearts  which  are  like  the  WAY 
SIDE— "Some  fell  by  the  way  side  ;  and  it  was  trodden  down,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air 
devoured  it."  There  are  many  of  you  who  did  not  come  here  this  morning  to  get  a 
blessing.  You  did  not  intend  to  worship  God,  or  to  be  affected  by  anything  that  you 
might  hear.  You  are  like  the  highway  which  was  never  intended  to  be  a  corn  field.  If 
a  single  grain  of  truth  should  fall  into  your  heart  and  grow  it  would  be  a  miracle,  as 
great  a  wonder  as  for  the  corn  to  grow  upon  the  hardly-trodden  wayside.  You  are  the 
wayside  hearer.  If  the  corn,  however,  shall  be  dexterously  scattered,  some  of  it  will 
fall  upon  you  and  rest  for  a  while  upon  your  thoughts.  Tis  true  you  will  not  under 
stand  it,  but  nevertheless  if  it  be  placed  before  you  in  an  interesting  style,  it  will  lodge 
for  a  little  season.  Until  some  more  congenial  entertainment  shall  attract  you,  you  will 
talk  of  the  wards  which  you  heard  from  the  minister  of  truth.  But  even  this  slender 
benefit  is  brief,  for  in  a  very  little  season  yon  will  forget  what  manner  of  man  you  are. 
Would  to  God  I  could  hope  that  my  words  would  tarry  with  you,  but  we  cannot  hope 
it,  for  the  soil  of  your  heart  is  so  well  beaten  by  continual  traffic,  that  there  is  no  hope 
of  the  seed  finding  a  lasting  and  living  roothold  down  its  roots.  There  is  too  much  traffic 
in  your  soul  to  let  the  good  see.d  remain  uncrushed.  The  foot  of  Satan  is  always  passing 
over  your  heart,  with  his  herd  of  blasphemies,  lusts,  lies,  and  vanities .  Then  the  chariots 
of  piide  roll  along  it,  and  the  feet  of  greedy  mammon  tread  it  till  it  is  hard  as  adamant. 
Alas  I  for  the  good  seed,  it  finds  not  a  moment's  respite  ;  crowds  pass  and  re  pass  ;  in 
fact,  your  soul  is  an  Exchange,  across  which  continually  pass  the  busy  feet  of  the 
merchants,  that  make  merchandise  with  thn  souls  of  men.  You  are  buying  and  selling, 
but  you  little  think  that  you  are  selling  the  truth,  and  that  you  are  buying  your 
soul's  destruction  ;  you  are  busy  here  and  there  about  this  body,  the  husk  of  your 
manhood,  but  you  are  negligent  of  that  internal,  precious  thing,  your  soul.  You 
have  no  time,  you  say,  to  think  of  religion.  No,  the  road  of  your  heart  is  such  a 
crowded  thoroughfare,  that  there  is  no  room  for  this  wheat  to  spring  up.  If  it  did 
begin  to  germinate,  some  rough  foot  would  crush  the  green  blade  ere  it  could  come  to 
anything  like  perfection.  There  have  been  times  with  you  when  the  seed  has  lain  long 
enough  to  begin  to  germinate,  but  just  then  there  was  some  place  of  amusement  open, 
and  you  entered  there,  and  as  with  an  iron  heel,  the  spark  of  life  that  was  in  the  seed 
was  crushed  out ;  it  had  fallen  in  the  wrong  place  ;  there  was  too  much  traffic  there  for 
it  possibly  to  grow.  During  the  plague  of  London,  when  men  were  carried  to  their 
long  home  by  multitudes,  .the  grass  grew  in  the  streets  ;  but  corn  could  not  grow  in 
Cornhill,  however  excellent  might  be  the  seed  which  you  should  sow  there.  Ransack 
the  world,  and  you  cannot  purchase  a  wheat  that  would  flourish  where  such  traffic 
continually  rolls  along.  Your  heart  is  just  like  that  crowded  thoroughfare  ;  for  there 
are  so  many  thoughts,  and  cares,  and  sins,  so  many  proud,  vain,  evil,  rebellious 
thoughts  against  God,  continually  trafficking  through  it  ;  that  the  truth  is  like  seed  cast 
on  the  highway  ;  it  cannot  grow,  it  is  crushed  down  ;  and  if  it  does  remain  a  moment, 
the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  steal  it  away.  Ay,  but  it  is  a  very  sad  thought,  that  if 
you  should  scatter  seed  on  the  highway,  it  is  not  only  the  foot  of  a  bad  man  that  would  ' 
prevent  its  growing,  but  the  foot  even  of  a  saint  would  help  to  destroy  its  life^  Alas  1 

174 


THK  PARABLE  OF  THE  SOWER. 

men's  hearts  may  be  hardened,  nut  merely  by  sin,  but  by  the  very  preaching  of  tiu 
gospel.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  being  gospel-hardened  ;  it  ia  possible  to  sit  under 
sermons  till  your  heart  becomes  dead,  and  callous,  and  careless.  Like  the  blacksmith's 
dog,  that  lies  and  sleeps  while  the  sparks  are  flying  about  his  nostrils,  so  you  will  lie 
and  sleep  under  the  hammer  of  the  law,  while  the  sparks  of  damnation  are  flying  about 
you,  never  startled,  never  astonished.  You  have  heard  all  that  before  ;  we  tell  you 
but  a  thrice-told  tale  when  we  warn  you  of  the  wrath  to  come.  The  men  that 
work  in  the  huge  boilers  in  the  Southwark  manufactories,  when  they  are  first  put  inside 
to  hold  the  hammer,  their  ears  are  stunned,  they  cannot  hear  a  sound ;  but  by  degrees, 
I  am  told,  they  are  so  used  to  that  hideous  noise,  that  they  could  sleep  in  the  midst 
of  the  engine  while  men  were  battering  it  and  beating  it,  although  the  reverberations  are 
like  the  loudest  thunder.  So  has  it  become  with  you  ;  minister  after  minister  has  trod 
den  along  the  highway  of  your  soul,  till  it  has  become  so  hard,  that  unless  God  himself 
shall  be  pleased  to  crack  it  in  sunder  with  an  earthquake,  or  with  an  heartquake,  there 
will  never  be  room  for  the  seed  of  heaven  to  lodge  there.  Your  soul  has  become  lika 
a  hard,  well-beaten  path,  that  hath  much  traffic  on  it. 

We  have  marked  this  hard  road-side,  let  us  now  describe  what  becomes  of  the  good 
word,  when  it  falls  upon  his  heart.  It  does  not  grow,  it  would  have  grown  if  it  had 
fallen  on  right  soil,  but  it  is  in  the  wrong  place,  and  it  remains  as  dry  as  when  it 
fell  from  the  sower's  hand.  Its  life  lies  asleep,  the  life-germ  in  the  gospel  hides  itself, 
and  it  lies  upon  the  surface  of  the  heart,  but  never  enters  into  it.  Like  the  snow, 
which  sometimes  falls  upon  our  streets  and  does  not  lie  there  for  an  instant,  but  drops 
upon  the  wet  pavement  and  is  dissolved  and  gone,  so  is  it  with  this  man.  The  word  has 
not  time  to  quicken  in  the  souls  of  such  casual  hearers  of  it.  It  lies  there  an  instant, 
but  it  never  begins  to  strike  its  root,  or  to  take  the  slightest  effect. 

But,  we  say,  why  do  men  come  to  hear  if  the  word  is  never  made  useful  to  them, 
and  never  enters  the  heart ?  That  has  often  puzzled  me  ;  there  are  some  of  our 
hearers  who  would  not  be  absent  on  the  Sunday  for  all  the  world,  and  who  seem  to  be 
quite  delighted  to  come  up  with  us  to  worship,  but  yet  the  tear  never  trickles  down 
their  cheek,  their  soul  never  seems  mounting  up  to  heaven  on  the  wings  of  praise, 
nor  do  they  truly  join  in  our  confessions  of  sin.  When  do  they  ever  think  about  the 
wrath  to  come,  or  the  future  state  of  their  souls  ?  Their  heart  is  iron  ;  the  minister 
might  as  well  preach  to  a  heap  of  stones  as  preach  to  them.  What  brings  these  sense 
less  sinners  here  ?  Shall  we  talk  to  brows  of  brass  and  hearts  of  steel  ?  Surely  we  are 
as  hopeful  of  converting  lions  and  leopards  as  these  untamed,  unmoved  hearts.  Oh 
feeling  !  thou  art  fled  to  brutish  beasts,  and  men  have  lost  their  reason.  I  suppose  these 
men  often  come  because  it  is  respectable,  and  again,  because  it  even  helps  to  make  them 
hard  ;  if  they  stopped  away  conscience  <vould  prick  them,  there  would  be  a  little  life 
in  them,  but  they  go  that  they  may  be  able  to  flatter  themselves  with  the  notion  that 
they  are  doing  right  after  all.  They  are  not  irreligious,  not  they  ;  they  are  not 
regardless  of  God's  house  and  of  his  servant ;  they  come,  that  they  may  get  hardened, 
and  may  be  more  and  more  stultified  in  their  state  of  sin  and  insensibility.  Oh  !  my 
hearers,  your  case  is  one  that  might  make  an  angel  weep  ;  to  have  the  sun  of  the  gospel 
shining  on  your  faces,  and  yet  to  have  blind  eyes  that  never  see  the  light.  The  music 
of  heaven  sounds  sweetly,  but  your  ears  are  deaf,  and  the  faintest  accent  never  reaches 
your  poor  spirit ;  the  minister  is  to  you  as  one  who  plays  upon  a  goodly  instrument, 
but  he  plays  before  a  statue  that  has  no  ears  to  hear.  You  can  catch  the  turn  of  a 
phrase,  you  can  find  out  the  meaning  of  a  metaphor,  but  the  hidden  meaning,  the 
divine  life,  is  all  lost  upon  you.  You  are  sitting  down  at  the  marriage  feast,  but  you 
eat  not  of  the  dainties,  you  drink  not  of  those  wines  ;  you  hear  the  bells  of  heaven 
sounding  joy  over  ransomed  spirits,  but  you  yourself  live  unransomed,  without  God, 
and  without  Christ.  You  are  standing  at  the  gate  of  the  narrow  way,  at  the  very 
gate,  but  yet  you  do  not  enter  it ;  you  are  close  to  the  house  of  mercy,  and  the  door  is 
on  the  jar;  you  stand,  and  sometimes  look  within,  but  never  take  the  final  and  decisive 
step.  Let  us  do  what  we  may  to  urge  you,  let  us  plead  with  you  and  pray  for  you,  and 
weep  over  you,  you  still  remain  just  as  hardened,  as  careless,  and  as  thoughtless  as  ever 
you  were.  Oh  !  may  God  have  mercy  on  you,  and  bring  you  out  of  this  evil  state, 
that  you  may  yet  be  saved.  O  Holy  Spirit,  break  up  this  hard  highway,  and  cause  it 
yet  to  bring  forth  abundantly. 

We  have  not,  however,  completed  the  picture.  The  passage  tells  us,  that  the  fowls 
of  the  air  devoured  it.  Is  there  a  man  here,  this  morning,  who  is  one  of  these  way 
side  hearers  ?  Perhaps  he  did  not  mean  to  come  in,  bub  he  saw  a  great  crowd 
standing  in  the  Strand,  and  he  thought  he  would  even  turn  in  and  spend  the  hour,  and 
he  will  hear  something,  perhaps,  which  he  will  not  readily  forget ;  but  when  he  shall 
get  outside  and  go  home,  some  old  companion  will  propose  to  him  that  thev  should  go 

175 


THE    PARABLE   OF   THE   SOWER 

on  some  excursion  this  afternoon.  He  agrees,  and  that  poor  seed  which  fell  on  such  an 
anpropitious  spot,  will  be  devoured  by  the  fowls  of  the  air.  There  are  plenty  of  evil 
ones  ready  always  to  eat  up  this  good  seed.  There  is  the  devil  himself,  that  prince  of  the 
air,  ready  at  any  time  to  snatch  away  a  good  thought,  or  quench  a  holy  resolution. 
And  then,  the  devil  is  not  alone — he  hath  legions  of  helpera.  He  may  set  a  man's 
own  wife,  a  man's  own  children,  he  may  set  that  shop  of  yours  upon  you,  and  it 
may  eat  up  the  good  seed.  There  may  be  a  customer  waiting  at  the  door,  and  though 
you  have  no  wish  to  serve  him  to-day,  yet  you  may  be  afraid  of  losing  him,  and  you 
may  do  it,  and  then  the  good  seed  is  gone,  and  all  its  good  effect  is  carried  away.  Oh, 
sorrow  upon  sorrow,  that  heavenly  seed  should  become  devil's  meat ;  that  God's  corn 
should  feed  the  devil's  birds. 

Let  me  turn  personally  to  you  again,  this  morning.  0  my  hearers,  if  you  have  heard 
the  gospel  from  your  ycuth,  what  waggon-loads  of  sermons  have  been  wasted  on  you  ! 
In  your  younger  days,  you  heard  old  Dr.  So-and-so,  and  how  that  dear  old  man  was  wont 
to  pray  for  his  hearers  till  his  eyes  seemed  red  with  tears  !  Do  you  recollect  those  many 
Sundays  when  you  said  to  yourself,  "  Let  me  go  to  my  chamber  and  fall  on  my  knees  and 
pray  •? "  But  you  did  not ;  the  fowls  of  the  air  ate  up  the  seed,  and  you  went  on  to  sin 
just  as  you  had  sinned.  Since  then,  by  some  strange  impulse,  you  are  very  rarely  absent 
from  God's  house  ;  but  now  the  sparks  of  the  gospel  fall  into  your  soul  as  if  they  dropped 
into  an  ocean,  in  which  they  are  quenched  for  ever.  The  law  may  be  thundered  at  you, 
you  do  not  sneer  at  it,  but  it  never  affects  you.  Jesus  Christ  may  be  lifted  up  ;  his  dear 
wounds  may  be  exhibited  ;  the  streaming  blood  may  flo  w  before  your  very  eyes,  and  you 
may  be  bidden  with  all  earnestness  to  look  to  him  and  live  ;  but  it  has  now  become  a 
matter  of  perfect  indifference  to  you.  You  have  not  said  so  much  in  words,  "  If  I  am  to 
be  lost,  I  shall  be  lost,  and  if  I  am  to  be  saved,  I  shall  be  saved  ; "  you  have  not  said  so  much, 
but  you  have  come  to  think  so,  and  now  we  may  do  what  we  will  with  you,  and  what  we 
will  for  you,  your  flinty  spirits  we  cannot  penetrate,  and  into  your  hard  heart  wexiannot 
thrust  a  holy  thought.  What  shall  I  do  for  you  ?  Shall  I  stand  here,  and  rain  tears  upon 
this  hard  highway  ?  Alas  !  my  tears  will  not  break  it ;  it  is  far  too  hard  for  that.  Shall 
I  bring  the  gospel-plough  upon  it  ?  Alas  !  it  will  break  the  steel ;  but  the  share  will  not 
enter.  What  shall  we  do  ?  0  God,  thou  knowest  how  to  dash  the  flint  in  pieces.  Thou 
canst  melt  the  stony  long-travelled  heart  with  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus.  Do  it  now,  we 
beseech  thee,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  thy  grace,  that  the  good  seed  may  yet  live,  and  yet 
produce  that  heavenly  harvest,  after  which  the  soul  of  thy  servant  yearns,  without  which 
he  cannot  live,  but  with  which  he  can  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

II.  I  shall  now  turn  to  the  second  class  of  hearers.  "And  some  fell  upon  a  KOCK, 
and  as  soon  as  it  was  sprung  up  it  withered  away,  because  it  lacked  moisture."  You 
can  easily  picture  to  yourselves  that  piece  of  rock  cropping  out  in  the  midst  of  the  field. 
By  some  disruption  of  nature,  it  has  been  heaved  upwards  into  the  midst  of  the  plain,  and 
of  course  the  seed  falls  there  as  it  does  everywhere  else.  We  have  hearers  who  cause  us 
more  pleasure  and  yet  more  subsequent  pain  than  many  of  you  would  believe.  None 
but  those  who  love  the  souls  of  men  can  tell  what  hopes,  what  joy,  and  what  bitter 
dashings  of  our  expectations  to  the  ground  these  stony  places  have  caused  us.  We  have 
a  class  of  hearers  whose  hearts  inwardly  are  very  hard,  but  outwardly  they  are  ap 
parently  the  softest  and  most  impressable  of  men.  While  other  men  see  nothing  in 
the  sermon,  these  men  weep.  It  is  but  an  ordinary  discourse  to  the  most  of  our  hearers, 
but  these  men  are  affected  to  tears.  Whether  you  preach  the  terrors  of  the  law  or  the 
love  of  Calvary,  they  are  alike  stirred  in  their  souls,  and  the  liveliest  impressions  are 
apparently  produced.  I  have  some  such  here  this  morning.  They  have  resolved,  re- 
resolved,  and  yet  have  procrastinated.  They  are  not  the  sturdy  enemies  of  God  who 
clothe  themselves  in  steel,  but  they  seem  to  bare  their  breasts,  and  lay  them  open,  and 
say  to  the  minister,  "  Cut  here  ;  here  is  a  naked  breast  for  you.  Here  aim  your  arrows. 
They  shall  find  a  ready  lodging  place."  Eejoiced  in  heart,  we  shoot  our  arrows  there, 
and  they  appear  to  penetrate  ;  but,  alas,  there  is  a  secret  armour  worn  underneath  the 
flesh  which  blunts  every  dart,  and  though  it  abides  awhile,  it  falls  away,  and  no  work 
is  done.  We  read  of  this  character  under  this  language — "Some  fell  upon  stony  places, 
where  they  had  not  much  earth  :  and  forthwith  they  sprung  up,  because  they  had  no 
deepness  of  earth."  Or  as  another  passage  explains  it :  "And  these  are  they  likewise 
which  are  sown  on  stony  ground ;  who,  when  they  have  heard  the  word,  immediately 
receive  it  with  gladness  ;  and  have  no  root  in  themselves,  and  so  endure  but  for  a  time  ; 
afterward,  when  affliction  or  persecution  ariseth  for  the  word's  sake,  immediately  they  are 
offended."  Oh  !  have  we  not  tens  of  thousands  of  our  hearers  who  receive  the  word  with 
joy  ?  They  have  no  deep  convictions,  it  is  true,  no  terrible  alarms,  but  they  leap  into  Christ 
on  a  sudden,  and  profess  an  instantaneous  faith  in  him,  and  that  faith  too  has  all  the 
appearance  of  being  genuine.  When  we  look  at  it,  the  seed  has  really  sprouted. 

176 


THE   PARABLE   OP  THE  SOWER. 

*  kind  of  life  in  it,  there  is  the  real  green  blade.     We  thank  God,  and  how  our  knee*, 
And  clap  our  hands — mere  is  a  sinner  brought  back  we  say,  there  is  a  soul  born  to  God, 
there  is  an  heir  ^f  heaven.   But  our  joy  is  premature — they  sprang  up  on  a  sudden,  and 
received  the  v***rd  with  joy,  because  they  had  no  depth  of  earth,  and  from  that  very 
<;ause  which  hastened  their  reception  of  the  seed  they  also  by-and-bye  when  the  su    in 
risen  with  his  fervent  heat,  withered  away.     These  men  we  see  every  day  in  the  week. 
They  often  come  to  join  the  Church  ;  they  tell  us  a  story  of  how  they  heard  us  preach 
on  such-and-such  an  occasion,  and  oh  the  word  was  so  blessed  to  them,  they  never  felt 
«o  happy  in  their  lives  !     "Oh  sir,  I  thought  I  must  lea^  from  rny  seat  when  I  heard 
•about  a  precious  Christ,  and  1  believed  on  him  there  and  th'Ti ;  I  am  sure  I  did."     We 
ask  them  whether  they  ever  felt  their  need  of  a  Saviour.     They  say   "Yes,"  but  they 
mean  "  No."     We  question  them  as  to  whether  they  were  ever  convinced  of  sin.     Well 
they  think  they  were,   but  they  don't  know  ;    but  one  thing  they  know,  they    eel  a 
great  pleasure  in  religion.    We  put  it  to  them,  "  Do  you  think  you  will  hold  on  ?"    Oh, 
they  are  confident  they  shall.     They  could  not  go  back  to  their  old  acquaintance,  they 
are  quite  sure  of  it.     They  hate  the  things  they  once  loved,   they  are  sure  they  do. 
Everything  has  become  new  to  them.     And  all  this  is  on  a  sudden.     We  enquire  when 
the  good  work  began.     We  find  it  began  when  it  ended,   that  is  to  say,  there  was  no 
previous  work,  no  ploughing  of  the  soil,  but  on  a  sudden  they  sprang  from  death  to  life 
and  out  of  condemnation  into  grace,  as  a  man  standing  on  the  edge  of  a  river  might  leap 
into  the  flood      Still  we  are  very  thankful  for  these  men.      We  cannot  deny  that  there 
seems  to  be  every  appearance  of  grace.    Perhaps  we  receive  them  into  the  Church  ;  but 
in  a  week  or  two  they  are  not  so  regular  as  they  used  to  be  at  a  place  of  worship.     We 
gently  reprove  them,  and  they  say,  well,  they  meet  with  such  opposition  in  religion,  that 
they  are  content  to  yield  a  little.      Another  week  and  we  lose  them  altogether.     The 
reason  is  that  they  have  been  laughed  at,  exposed  to  a  little  opposition,  and   they  have 
gone  back.     They  are  the  Mr.  Pliables  ;  they  will  go  to  heaven  with  Christian,  for 
heaven  is  a  brave  country.   So  they  walk  arm  in  arm,  chatting  so  sweetly  together  about 
the  world  to  come.     But  by-and-bye  there  is  a  bog — the  Slough  of  Despond — and  in 
goes  poor  Christian,  and  Mr.  Pliable  falls  in  too.     "Oh  !  "  says  he,  "I  did  not  bargain 
for  this  ;  I  did  not  bargain  to  have  my  mouth  filled  with  dirt ;  if  I  can  once  get  out, 
and  get  back,  you  may  have  the  brave  country  all  to  yourself  for  me."     So  the  poor  man 
flounders  out  as  best  he  can,  and  lands  on  the  same  side  as  his  own  house  ;  and  back 
he  goes,  so  glad  to  think  he  has  escaped  from  the  melancholy  necessity  of  being  a 
Christian.     And  what  think   you  are  the  feelings  of  the  minister  ?     He  feels  that  he 
had   reckoned  too  early  upon  his  success.     He  is  like  the  husbandman,  who  sees  his 
field  all  green  and  flourishing,  and  at  night  a  frost  nips  every  shoot,  and  the  poor 
farmer  mourns  because  his  hoped-for  gains  are  gone.     So  does  the  minister  ;  he  goes 
to  his  chamber,  and  casts  himself  on  his  face  before  God,  and  cries,   "Oh,  I  have 
been  deceived  ;  this  man  hath  returned  like  the  dog  to  his  vomit  ;  like  the  sow  that  was 
washed,  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire."     You  will  remember  that  ancient  picture  of 
Orpheus,  who  had  such  skill  upon  the  lyre,  that  the  ancients  said  he  made  the  very  oaks 
and  stones  dance   around  him.     It  is  a  poetical  fiction,   and  yet  hath  it  sometimes 
happened  to  the  minister,  that  not  only  have  the  godly  rejoiced,  but  the  very  oaks  and 
stones  have  danced  from  their  places  ;   but  alas  !   they  have  been  oaks  and   stones  still 
Hushed  is  the  lyre,  and  the  oak  returns  to  its  rooting  place,  and  the  stone  casts  itself 
once  more  heavily  to  the  earth.     The  sinner,   who,   like  Saul,  was  among  the  prophets, 
goes  back  to  plan  mischief  against  the  Lord  Most  High.     He  who  sung  yesterday,  and 
prayed  the  day  before  in  tke  public  assembly,   goes  to  the  tavern  to  curse  ;  he  rolls 
through  the  streets  on    the    Sabbath    night    which    follows    his   reception   into   the 
Church  visible  on  earth.      I  had  one  man  who  caused  me  many  bitter  tears.     In  a 
certain  village  he  was  the  ringleader  of  all  that  was  bad  ;  he  was  a  tall,  fine,  big  fellow, 
and  a  man  that  could  drink  more  largely  than,  perhaps,  any  man  for  miles  around  him. 
He  was  the  terror  of  the  neighbourhood, — a  man  who  would  curse  and  swear,  and 
never  knew  a  thought  of  fear.     He  stepped  in  one  day  to  hear  the  Word  of  God,  and 
he  wept.     All  the  parish  was  astonished.      There   was  old  So-and-so  weeping,  and  it 
was  rumoured  about  that  Tom  felt  impressed  ;   he  began  regularly  to  attend  the  chapel, 
and  was  manifestly  an  altered  man.      The  public-house  lost  an  excellent  customer ; 
'he  was  not  seen  in  the  skittle  alley,  nor  was  he  detected  in  the  drunken  rows  that  were 
so  common    in  the  neighbourhood.      At  last   he  ventured  to  come  forward  at   tha 
prayer- meeting  ;   he    talked  about  what  he  had  experienced,    what  he  had  felt   and 
known.     I  heard  him  pray ;  it  was  rough,  rugged  language,  but  there  was  such  im 
passioned  earn3stness.     I  set  him  down  as  being  a  bright  jewel  in  the  Redeemer's  crown. 
He  held  out  six,  nay,  nine  months  he  persevered  in  our  midst.     If  there  was  romrlj 
work  to  be  done,  he  would  do  it ;  if  there  was  a  Sunday-school  to  be  maintained  six  op 

177 


THE   PARABLE   OF   THE   SOWER 

seven  miles  away,  he  would  walk  there  At  any  risk,  he  would  be  out  to  help  in  the 
Lord's  work  ;  if  he  could  but  be  of  service  to  the  meanest  member  of  the  Church  of 
Christ,  he  rejoiced  greatly.  So  he  went  on  ;  but  at  last,  the  laughter  to  which  he  was  ex 
posed,  the  jeers  and  scoffs  of  his  old  companions, — though  at  first  he  bore  them  like  a- 
man, — became  too  much  for  him.  He  began  to  think  he  had  been  a  little  too  fanatical, 
a  little  too  earnest.  He  slunk  up  to  the  place  of  worship  instead  of  coming  boldly  in  ; 
he  gradually  forsook  week-night  service,  and  forsook  the  Sabbath  day  at  last  ;  and 
though  often  warned,  and  often  rebuked,  he  returned  to  his  old  habits,  and  though 
never  again  such  a  monster  in  sin  as  he  had  been  before,  yet  any  thoughts  of  God  or 
godliness  that  he  had  ever  known,  seemed  to  die  away.  He  could  again  take  the  blas 
phemer's  oath  ;  once  more  could  he  act  wickedly  with  the  profane  ;  and  he — of  whom 
we  had  often  boasted,  and  said  in  our  meetings  together,  "Oh!  how  much  is  God  to 
be  glorified  by  this  !  what  cannot  grace  do  '< " — to  the  confusion  of  us  all,  was  to  be 
seen  sometimes  drunk  in  our  streets,  and  then  it  was  thrown  in  our  teeth,  "This  is- 
one  of  your  Christians,  is  it  ? — one  of  your  converts  gone  back  again,  and  become  as- 
bad  as  he  was  before  ? " 

If  it  is  bad  to  be  like  the  wayside  hearer,  I  cannot  think  it  is  much  better  to  be  like 
the  rock.  And  yet  this  second  class  of  hearers  certainly  give  us  more  joy  than  the 
first.  There  is  a  sort  of  people  who  always  come  round  a  new  minister  ;  and  I  have 
often  thought  it  is  an  act  of  God's  kindness  in  Providence  that  he  always  sends  some 
of  these  people  at  first,  while  the  minister  is  young,  and  has  but  few  to  stand  by  him. 
— a  class  of  people  who  are  easily  moved,  and  if  he  preaches  earnestly  they  feel  it,  and 
they  love  him,  and  they  gather  round  him.  But  time,  that  proves  all  things,  proves 
them.  They  seemed  to  be  made  of  good  and  true  metal,  but  they  are  put  in  the  fire, 
they  are  tested,  they  are  proved,  they  are  consumed  in  the  furnace.  I  see  as  I  look  her* 
some  one  or  two  of  that  kind.  I  do  not  know  the  most  of  you,  but  I  do  see  some  of 
whom  I  must  say,  "  Ye  are  the  very  persons  here  described."  I  have  looked  at  you  when 
I  have  been  preaching,  and  often  have  I  thought,  "  There,  that  man  one  of  these  days 
will  come  out  from  the  world,  I  am  sure  he  will."  I  have  thanked  God  for  him.  Ah  ! 
but  these  seven  years  have  we  preached  to  you  and  you  are  the  same  as  you  were. 
Well,  there  may  be  seven  years  more,  who  can  tell  ?  and  are  those  to  be  seven  years 
of  wasted  efforts  ?  are  those  to  be  seven  years  of  warnings  rejected  and  of  invitations 
refused  ?  Can  it  be  so,  and  must  you  be  carried  to  your  tomb  at  last,  and  shall  I  stand 
over  the  mouth  of  that  open  sepulchre,  and  think,  "  Here  lies  a  blasted  hope,  a  flower 
that  withered  in  its  bud,  a  man  in  whom  grace  seemed  to  struggle,  but  in  whom  it  never 
reigned,  who  gave  some  hopeful  spasms  of  life,  and  then  they  all  subsided  into  the 
coldness  and  languor  of  eternal  death  ? "  God  save  you  !  Oh  !  may  he  deal  with  you 
effectually,  and  may  you,  even  you,  yet  be  brought  in,  that  Jesus  may  have  all  the 
glory. 

III.  I  shall  have  very  briefly  to  treat  of  the  third  class,  and  may  the  Spirit  of 
God  assist  me  to  deal  faithfully  with  you.  "  And  some  fell  among  THORNS,  and  the 
thorns  spxung  up  and  choked  it."  Now  this  was  good  soil.  The  two  first  characters 
were  bad  ;  the  wayside  was  not  the  proper  place,  the  rock  was  not  a  congenial 
situation  for  the  growth  of  any  plant,  but  this  is  good  soil,  for  it  grows  thorns. 
A  soil  that  will  grow  thistles,  will  surely  grow  wheat.  Wherever  the  thistle  will  spring 
up  and  flourish,  there  would  wheat  flourish  too.  This  was  right  rich,  fat,  fertile  soil ; 
it  was  no  marvel  therefore  that  the  husbandman  dealt  largely  there,  and  threw  handful 
after  handful  upon  that  corner  of  the  field.  See  how  happy  he  is  when  in  a  month  or 
two's  time  he  visits  the  spot.  The  seed  has  sprung  up.  True,  there's  a  suspicious  little 
plant  down  there  of  about  the  same  size  as  the  wheat.  "  Oh  !  "  he  thinks,  "  that's  not 
much,  the  corn  will  outgrow  that ;  when  it  comes  up  it  will  choke  these  few  thistles 
that  have  unfortunately  mixed  with  it."  Ay,  Mr.  Husbandman,  thou  dost  not  under 
stand  the  force  of  evil,  or  thou  wouldst  not  thus  dream  !  He  comes  again,  and  tne 
seed  has  grown,  there  is  even  the  corn  in  the  ear,  but  the  thistles,  the  thorns,  and  the 
briars  have  become  intertwisted  with  one  another,  and  the  poor  wheat  can  hardly  get 
a  ray  of  sunshine.  It  is  so  festooned  with  brambles  every  way,  that  what  with  the 
drippings  from  the  brambles  and  the  absence  of  sunlight,  it  looks  of  a  yellow  and 
sallow  hue.  Still  it  lives  ;  it  perseveres  in  growing,  and  it  does  seem  as  if  it  would 
bring  forth  a  little  fruit,  but  it  never  comes  to  anything.  With  it  the  reaper  never  fills 
his  arm.  There  is  the  sign  of  fruit,  but  there  is  no  reality  in  it,  it  brings  forth  no  fruit 
unto  perfection. 

Now  we  have  this  class  very  largely  among  us.     We  have  the  gentlemen  and  ladies 

who   come  up  to  hear  the  word,  and  they  understand  what  they  hear  too.     They  are 

not  ignorant  and  uneLlightened  men  and  women,  who  cast  away  what  they  have  heard. 

We  arc  not  throwing  pearls  before  swine  wht:n  we  preach  to  them,   but  they  recollect 

178 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  SOWER. 

and  treasure  up  the  words  of  truth  ;  they  take  them  home  ;  they  think  them  over  j- 
they  come,  they  come,  they  come  again.  They  even  go  the  length  of  making  a  pro 
fession  of  religion.  The  wheat  seems  to  bud,  and  bloom  and  blossom,  it  will  soon 
come  to  perfection.  Be  in  no  hurry,  these  men  and  women  have  a  great  deal 
to  see  after  ;  they  have  the  cares  of  a  large  concern  ;  their  establishment  employs  so 
many  hundred  hands  ;  do  not  be  deceived  about  their  godliness — they  have  no  time  for 
it.  They  will  tell  you  tbat  they  must  live  ;  that  they  cannot  neglect  this  world  ;  that 
they  must  anyhow  look  out  for  the  present,  and  as  for  the  future,  they  think  they  will 
be  able  to  take  care  of  that  by-and-bye.  They  continue  to  attend,  and  that  poor  little 
dwindled  blade  keeps  on  growing  :  and  now  they  have  got  rich,  they  can  come  up  to 
the  place  of  worship  in  their  carriage,  they  have  all  that  heart  can  wish  now.  Ah ! 
now  the  seed  will  grow,  will  it  not(?  No,  no.  They  have  no  cares  now  ;  the  shop 
is  given  up,  they  live  in  the  country  ;  they  have  not  to  ask,  "  Where  shall  the  money 
come  from  to  meet  the  next  bill ; "  or  "  how  they  shall  be  able  to  provide  for  an 
increasing  famil"."  No,  now  they  have  too  much  instead  of  too  little,  for  they  have 
their  riches.  ""Well  but,"  says  one,  "  they  might  spend  their  riches  for  God  ;  they 
might  be  talents  that  they  could  put  out  at  interest."  Oh !  no,  it  is  not  that ;  their 
riches  are  deceitful.  Now  they  have  to  entertain  much  company,  now  they  must 
bo  respectable,  now  they  must  think  about  becoming  members  of  parliament,  now 
they  must  have  all  the  deceitfulness  which  riches  can  possibly  confer.  Yes,  but 
they  begin  to  spend  their  riches,  so  they  have  surely  got  over  that  difficult}'.  They 
give  largely  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  they  are  munificent  in  the  cause  of  charity,  and 
the  like  ;  now  that  little  blade  will  grow,  will  it  not  ?  No,  for  now  behold  the  thorns 
of  pleasure.  Their  liberality  to  others  involves  liberality  to  themselves  ;  they  take 
pleasure  in  what  they  have,  and  quite  right  they  should  too  ;  but  at  the  same  time 
these  pleasures  become  so  tall  and  so  big  that  they  choke  the  wheat,  and  the  good 
grains  of  gospel  truth  cannot  grow  because  they  have  this  pleasure,  that  musical  party, 
that  ball  and  that  soiree  ;  so  they  cannot  attend  to  the  things  of  God,  because  the 
pleasures  of  this  world  choke  the  seed.  I  know  several  fearful  specimens  of  this- 
class.  It  were  not  fair  to  tell  the  story  if  it  should  be  known  again,  but  I  might 
tell  of  scores.  I  know  one  who  stands  high  in  court  circles,  who  has  often  con 
fessed  to  me  that  he  wishes  he  \vere  poor,  for  he  thinks  that  then  he  might  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  He  holds  a  high  position,  but  he  has  said  it — and  said  it  too  with 
marks  upon  his  countenance- which  showed  that  he  meant  what  he  said — "Ah!  sir, 
these  politics,  these  politics,  I  wish  I  were  rid  of  them,  they  are  eating  the  life  out 
of  my  heart ;  I  cannot  serve  God  as  I  would.  I  only  wish  I  could  retire  to  some 
sequestered  place  to  seek  my  Saviour."  I  know  of  one,  too,  overloaded  perhaps  with 
riches,  always  kind  and  noble  with  them  too  ;  that  man  has  said  to  me — when  we  Ivave 
walked  together  and  I  have  read  his  very  thoughts-  "  Ah  !  sir,  it  is  an  awful  thing  to 
be  rich,  for  one  cannot  rind  it  easy  to  keep  to  the  Saviour  with  all  this  earth  about  me." 

Ah  !  my  dear  hearers,  I  will  not  ask  for  you  that  God  may  lay  you  on  a  bed  of  sickness, 
that  he  may  strip  you  of  all  your  wealth,  that  he  may  bring  you  to  beggary,  that  he 
may  take  away  your  comforts  ;  I  will  not  ask  that ;  but  oh,  if  he  were  to  do  it,  and  you 
were  to  save  your  soul,  it  would  be  the  greatest  bargain  you  could  ever  make.  If  the 
king  could  doff  his  diadem  to  be  saved  ;  if  those  mightiest  among  the  mighty  who  now 
make  this  complaint,  that  the  thorns  choke  the  seed,  could  give  up  all  their  riches  and 
be  banished  from  all  their  pleasures  ;  if  all  their  luxury  should  be  turned  into  poverty, 
and  if  they  that  fare  sumptuously  every  day  could  take  the  place  of  Lazarus  on  the 
dunghill,  and  have  dogs  to  lick  their  sores,  it  were  a  happy  change  for  them  if  their  souls 
might  be  but  saved.  Mind  you,  I  do  not  believe  but  what  a  man  may  be  honourable 
and  rich,  and  have  much  pleasure  in  the  mercies  of  God,  and  then  go  to  heaven 
hereafter  ;  but  it  will  be  hard  work  with  him  :  "  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through 
the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Some  of 
those  camels  do  go  through  the  needle's  eye  ;  God  does  make  some  rich  men  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  but  hard  is  their  struggle,  and  desperate  is  the  strife  they  always 
have  against  their  proud  flesh,  to  keep  it  under  and  subdue  it.  Steady,  young  man, 
steady  !  hurry  not  to  get  up  there.  It  is  a  place  where  thy  head  will  turn.  Do  not  ask 
God  to  make  thee  popular  ;  they  that  have  popularity  hate  it,  and  would  be  rid  of  it. 
Do  not  ask  that  he  would  make  thee  famous  and  rich  ;  they  that  are  famous  and 
rich  often  look  within,  and  wish  that  they  could  go  back  to  the  quietude  they  once 
enjoyed.  Cry  with  Agur — "Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches."  God  give  me 
to  tread  the  golden  mean,  and  may  I  ever  have  in  my  heart  that  good  seed,  which  shall 
bring  forth  fruit  a  hundredfold  to  his  own  glory. 

IV.  I  now  close  with  the  last  character,  namely  the  GOOD  GROUND.  Of  the  good 
toil  3Jt  you  will  mark,  we  have  but  one  in  lour.  Ah!  would  to  God  there  were  on* 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  SOWER. 

in  four  of  us  here,  with  well-prepared  hearts  to  receive  the  Word.  The  ground 
was  good  ;  not  that  it  was  good  by  nature,  but  it  had  been  made  good  by  grace. 
God  had  ploughed  it ;  he  had  stirred  it  up  with  the  plough  of  conviction,  and  there  it 
Jay  in  ridge  and  furrow  as  it  should  be.  And  when  the  Gospel  was  preached,  the  heart 
received  it,  for  the  man  said,  "  That's  just  the  Christ  I  want.  Mercy  !"  said  he,  "it's 
just  what  a  needy  sinner  requires.  A  refuge  !  God  help  me  to  fly  to  it,  for  a  refuge  I 
sorely  want."  So  that  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  was  THE  thing  to  give  comfort  to 
this  disturbed  and  ploughed  soil.  Down  fell  the  seed  ;  it  sprung  up.  In  some  cases  it 
produced  a  fervency  of  love,  a  largeness  of  heart,  a  devotedness  of  purpose,  like 
seed  which  produced  a  hundredfold.  The  man  became  a  mighty  servant  for  God, 
he  spent  himself  and  was  spent.  He  took  his  place  in  the  vanguard  of  Christ's  army, 
stood  in  the  hottest  of  the  battle,  and  did  deeds  of  daring  which  few  could  accomplish, — 
the  seed  produced  a  hundredfold.  It  fell  in  another  heart  of  like  character  ; — the  man 
could  not  do  the  most,  still  he  did  much.  He  gave  himself,  just  as  he  was,  up  to  God, 
and  in  his  business  he  had  a  word  to  say  for  the  business  of  the  world  to  come.  In 
his  daily  walk,  he  quietly  adorned  the  doctrine  of  God  his  Saviour, — he  brought  forth 
sixtyfold.  Then  it  fell  on  another,  whose  abilities  and  talents  were  but  small ;  he 
could  not  be  a  star,  but  he  would  be  a  glow-worm  ;  he  could  not  do  as  the  greatest, 
but  he  was  content  to  do  something,  even  though  it  were  the  least.  The  seed  had 
brought  forth  in  him  tenfold,  perhaps  twentyfold.  How  many  have  I  of  such  in  this 
vast  congregation  to-day  ?  I  came  here  with  my  soul  all  on  fire  to  preach  to  you  ; 
but  a  sudden  darkness  and  heaviness  of  soul  has  possessed  me,  and  while  I  have  been 
addressing  you,  I  have  preached  in  my  own  spirit  against  wind  and  tide.  But  may  I 
hope  that  notwithstanding  the  awkwardness  with  which  I  throw  the  seed  it  may  light 
on  some  good  spot,  some  happy  soil?  Is  there  one  who  prays  within  himself,  "  O  Lord 
eave  me  ;  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  ? "  The  seed  has  fallen  in  the  right  spot. 
Soul,  thy  prayer  shall  be  heard  ;  God  never  sets  a  man  longing  for  mercy  without  in 
tending  to  give  it.  And  does  another  whisper,  "  Oh  !  that  I  might  be  saved  ?"  Soul, 
"  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou,  even  thou,  shalt  be  saved."  Hast  thou 
been  the  chief  of  sinners  ?  Trust  Christ,  and  thy  enormous  sins  shall  vanish  as  the  mill 
stone  sinks  beneath  the  flood.  Is  there  no  man  here  that  •*'!!  now  trust  the  Saviour  ? 
-Can  it  be  possible  that  the  Spirit  is  entirely  absent  ?  that  be  is  not  moving  in  one  soul  ? 
not  begetting  life  in  one  spirit  ?  We  will  pray  that  now  he  may  descend,  that  scattered 
badly  as  the  seed  may  be,  the  protecting  God  may  watch  over  it,  and  foster  and  nourish 
it,  till  it  shall  come  to  an  eternal  harvest. 

What  a  solemn  thought  it  is — to  think  of  these  great  Sunday  gatherings  these  many 
years,  coming  and  going,  coming  and  going,  and  so  many  yet  unsaved  !  I  suppose  it 
is  my  lot  to  address  more  than  one  or  two  millions  every  year  of  precious  immortal 
spirits,  and  how  many  out  of  these  millions  hear  with  deaf  ears,  are  not  moved  in  their 
souls,  but  continue  as  they  were,  dead  in  trespasses  and  in  sins  !  The  thought  some 
times  staggers  me — shall  these  congregations  pass  before  my  eyes  in  eternity,  and  if  I 
have  been  unfaithful,  shall  I  be  spit  upon  by  every  mouth  of  every  man  whom  I  have 
deceived  ?  Shall  every  eye  of  the  millions  I  have  addressed  flash  fiery  damnations  on 
me  throughout  eternity  ?  They  must,  they  must,  if  I  have  not  sought  your  welfare,  and 
if  I  have  not  preached  to  you  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  I 
implore  you,  I  beseech  of  you,  if  your  blood  must  fall  somewhere,  at  least  take  heed 
to  what  I  say  now,  or  permit  me  to  hope  that  you  will  accept  me  as  having  tried  to  be 
faithful  to  you,  lest  your  blood  be  found  on  my  skirts.  But  why  should  that  blood  be 
scattered  anywhere?  Is  there  not  hope?  Is  there  not  salvation  ?  Is  there  not,  while 
life  lasts,  still  an  open  door  of  escape  ?  Flee,  flee,  my  hearer,  flee  !  I  beseech  the^  flee, 
I  implore  thee  by  the  living  God,  by  time,  by  eternity,  by  heaven,  by  hell,  flee,  flee  to 
Jesus,  ere  Death  o'ertakes  thee,  for  he  is  after  thee — that  skeleton  rider  on  his  pale 
•horse,  and  ere  damnation  reaches  thee  flee,  flee  to  him  whose  opened  arms  are  ready 
to  receive  thee  now.  Trust  Jesus  and  thou  art  saved :  "  He  that  believeth  on  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved,  he  that  believeth  not  must  be  damned," 
Am  I  fanatical  or  enthusiastic  in  begging,  in  beseeching  you  to  think  of  these  things  ? 
"Fanatic,"  at  the  day  of  judgment,  will  only  mean  a  man  who  was  in  earnest.  An 
•"  Enthusiast,"  will  only  mean  one  who  meant  what  he  said.  Oh,  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  lest  now,  even  while  you  are  here,  God's  wrath  should  burn,  and  his  swift 
justice  overtake  you  : — 

"Come,  guilty  souls,  and  flee  awtiy, 

To  Christ,  and  heal  your  worinde; 
This  is  the  welcome  gospel-day, 

Wherein  free  grace  abounds/' 


dijoplitmi  Sfaberaade  fhtljit 

SATAN'S   PUNCTUALITY,   POWER,   AJND   PURPOSE. 


IR,  I  T?  T  IE  IST       .A.  T       IMI  IE  IT  T  O  IT  33  ,        BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


"Then  cometh  the  devil,  and  tnketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts,  lest  the} 
should  bilieve  and  be  saved."—  Luke  viii.  12. 

IT  is  a  great  comfort  that  such  multitudes  are  willing  to  hear  the  word 
of  God.  Even  though  many  should  turn  out  to  be  as  the  rock,  the 
wayside,  or  the  thorny  ground,  still  it  is  a  cheering  circumstance  that 
the  seed  can  be  sown  broadcast  over  so  large  an  acreage.  Yet  the 
thoughts  excited  by  the  sight  of  a  vast  congregation  are  not  all  plea 
surable  ;  the  question  most  naturally  ari^js — What  will  come  of  all  this 
preaching  and  hearing  ?  Will  the  heavenly  seed  produce  a  harvest  or  fall 
on  barren  soil  ?  The  thoughtful  Christian,  in  considering  this  question, 
takes  into  consideration  the  condition  of  the  persons  addressed,  and 
remembers  that  many  are  unprepared  for  the  gospel.  So  far  from  being 
like  a  field  furrowed  to  receive  the  seed,  they  are  like  a  trodden  pathway. 
They  hear  the  gospel,  and  so  far  we  are  hopeful  of  them,  but  they  have 
no  idea  of  allowing  it  to  enter  their  inmost  souls.  The  ground  of  their 
hearts  is  too  much  occupied  already,  other  feet  will  tread  there  and 
speedily  obliterate  the  sower's  footprints,  and  as  for  the  good  seed,  it  may 
lie  where  it  falls,  entrance  into  the  inner  man  it  can  have  none.  Nor  is 
this  all,  the  anxious  observer  remembers  that  there  is  yet  another  diffi 
culty  :  the  arch-enemy  of  God  and  man  is  opposed  to  the  salvation  of 
souls,  and  therefore  he  is  present  with  destructive  power  wherever  the 
seed  of  the  Word  is  being  sown.  It  is  of  this  \ve  shall  now  speak, — the 
activity  of  Satan  during  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  He  is  out  of  sight, 
but  we  may  not  allow  him  to  be  out  of  mind :  he  does  all  the  more 
mischief  if  men  sleep ;  let  us  watchfully  turn  our  eyes  towards  him,  and 
prove  that  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices. 

Our  divine  Lord  in  the  words  before  us  reminded  his  hearers  of  the 
devils  punctuality, — "then  cometh  the  devil";  of  his  vower, — "and 
taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts";  and  of  his  purpose,  which  is 
the  prevention  of  saving  faith, — "  lest  they  should  believe  and  be  saved." 
At  this  time,  when  special  services  are  being  held,  it  may  be  well  to 
bring  these  points  clearly  forward  that  all  may  be  warned  against  the 
wicked  one,  and  so  by  the  grace  of  God  his  designs  may  be  frustrated. 

I.  First  observe  the  evil  one's  PUNCTUALITY.  No  sooner  does  the 
seed  fall  than  the  fowls  devour  it.  Our  text  says  "  then,"  that  is,  there 
and  then,  "  cometh  the  devil."  Mark  renders  it,  "  Satan  cometh  imme 
diately."  Whoevev  else  may  loiter,  Sacan  never  does.  No  sooner  doea  a 
Nos.  1,459  63 


98  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

camel  fall  dead  in  the  wilderness  than  the  vultures  appear.  Not  a  bird1 
was  visible,  nor  did  it  seem  possible  that  there  could  be  one  within  a 
radius  of  many  miles,  yet  speedily  there  are  specks  in  the  sky,  and  soon 
the  devourers  are  gorging  themselves  with  flesh :  even  thus  do  the  spirits 
of  evil  scent  their  prey  from  afar,  and  hasten  to  their  destroying  work. 
The  lapse  of  time  might  give  opportunity  for  thought,  and  thought 
might  lead  to  repentance,  and  therefore  the  enemy  hurries  to  prevent 
the  hearer  from  considering  the  truth  he  has  heard.  When  the  gospel 
has  somewhat  affected  the  hearers,  so  that  in  some  slight  degree  it  is  in 
their  hearts,  then  swifter  than  the  flight  of  the  eagle  is  the  haste  of  the 
devil  to  take  the  word  out  of  their  hearts.  A  little  delay  might  put  the 
case  beyond  Satanic  power,  hence  the  promptitude  of  diabolic  activity. 
0  that  we  were  half  as  quick  and  active  in  the  service  of  our  Lord,  one 
half  as  prompt  to  seize  every  opportunity  for  blessing  the  souls  of  men ! 

No  doubt  Satan  acts  at  times  directly  upon  the  thoughts  of  men.  He 
personally  suggested  to  Judas  the  selling  of  his  Master,  and  many  ano 
ther  black  insinuation  has  he  cast  into  men's  minds.  Like  the  foul  vul 
ture  which  constantly  feasted  itself  upon  the  vitals  of  Prometheus,  so 
does  the  devil  tear  away  the  good  thoughts  which  would  be  the  life  of  a 
man's  soul.  Insatiably  malicious,  he  cannot  endure  that  a  single  divine 
truth  should  bless  the  heart.  Fearful  blasphemies,  lewd  imaginations, 
gross  unbeliefs,  or  vain  frivolities  the  devil  casts  into  the  mind  like  infernal 
bombshells  to  destroy  any  new-born  thought  which  looks  toward  Christ 
and  salvation.  At  one  time  he  fascinates  the  mind,  and  anon  he  terrifies 
it ;  his  one  aim  being  to  distract  the  man's  thoughts  from  the  gospel, 
and  prevent  its  lodgment  in  the  conscience  and  heart. 

As  Satan  cannot  be  everywhere  present  at  one  time,  he  frequently 
does  his  evil  work  by  his  servants,  sending  the  inferior  spirits  to  act  a& 
fowls  in  devouring  the  seed,  and  these  again  employ  various  agents. 
With  great  cunning  are  the  common  incidents  of  life  used  in  the  evil 
business,  so  that  even  by  things  indifferent  in  themselves  the  purposes- 
of  the  adversary  are  brought  about.  The  preacher  has  some  speciality  in 
his  manner,  utterance,  or  appearance,  and  this  becomes  the  bird  which 
devours  the  seed :  the  hearer  is  so  taken  up  with  a  trifling  oddity  in  the 
minister  that  he  forgets  the  truth  which  was  spoken.  An  anecdote  was- 
related,  an  illustration  employed,  or  a  word  used  which  awakened  a  memory 
in  the  hearer's  breast,  and  away  went  the  word  out  of  his  heart  to  make 
room  for  mere  vanity.  Or  if  the  sermon  was  preserved  to  its  close,  it  then 
encountered  a  fresh  peril :  a  lost  umbrella,  an  extra  pressure  in  the  aisle, 
a  foolish  jest  overheard  in  the  crowd,  or  the  absurd  dress  of  an  unknown 
person,  may  any  one  of  them  answer  the  devil's  purpose  and  snatch  away 
the  word.  Little  does  it  signify  whether  the  seed  is  devoured  by  black 
crows  or  white  doves,  by  great  fowls  or  little  sparrows :  if  it  does  not 
abide  in  the  heart  it  cannot  bring  forth  fruit,  and  hence  the  devil  arranges- 
that  somehow  he  will  take  away  the  seed  at  once.  If  he  never  visits  a 
place  of  worship  at  any  other  time,  he  will  be  sure  to  be  there  when  a 
revival  has  begun, — "  then  cometh  the  devil."  He  lets  many  a  pulpit 
alone,  but  when  an  earnest  man  begins  preaching,  "  Satan  cometh 
immediately''' 

II.     Secondly,  we  will  now  for  a  moment  notice  his  POWER.     "  And 
taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts."     It  is  not  said  that  he  trie* 


SATAN'S  PUNCTUALITY,  POWER,  AND  PURPOSE.  99 

to  do  it,  but  that  he  actually  does  so.  He  sees,  he  comes,  and  he  con 
quers.  The  word  is  there,  and  the  devil  takes  it  away  as  easily  as  a  bird 
removes  a  seed  from  the  wayside.  Alas,  what  a  sway  has  the  evil  one 
over  the  human  mind,  and  ho\v  ineffectual  is  the  preacher's  work,  unless 
a  divine  power  is  put  forth  with  it.  Perhaps  from  the  striking  manner 
in  which  it  was  stated,  a  little  of  the  truth  abides  in  the  memory,  but 
the  enemy  takes  it  quite  out  of  the  heart  ;  and  so  the  main  part,  the  all- 
important  part  of  our  work  is  undone.  We  may  be  foolish  enough  to 
aim  at  the  head  only,  but  he  who  is  crafty  beyond  all  craft  deals  with 
the  heart.  Who  will  may  win  the  intellect,  if  Satan  can  keep  the  affec 
tions  he  is  quite  content.  To  the  man's  heart  the  good  seed  is  lost,  the 
fowls  have  devoured  it ;  it  has  become  to  him  a  nullity,  having  no  power 
•over  him,  no  life  in  him.  Not  a  trace  is  left,  any  more  than  there  would 
be  a  mark  remaining  of  seed  cast  on  the  wayside  after  the  birds  had  taken 
it  away  :  so  effectual  is  the  work  of  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air. 
When  Satan  thinks  it  worth  his  while  to  come,  and  come  immediately,  he 
means  business,  and  he  takes  care  that  his  errand  shall  not  fail. 

His  power  is  partly  derived  from  his  natural  sagacity.  Fallen  as  he 
now  is,  he  was  once  an  angel  of  light,  and  his  superlative  faculties, 
though  perverted,  defiled,  and  dimmed  by  the  blighting  influence  of  sin, 
are  still  vastly  superior  to  those  of  the  human  beings  upon  whom  he  tries 
his  arts.  He  is  more  than  a  match  for  preacher  and  hearer  united  if  the 
Holy  Spirit  be  not  there  to  baffle  him.  He  has  also  acquired  fresh 
cunning  by  long  practice  in  his  accursed  business.  He  knows  the  human 
heart  better  than  anyone,  except  its  Maker ;  for  thousands  of  years 
he  has  studied  the  anatomy  of  our  nature,  and  is  conversant  with  our 
weaker  points.  We  are  all  young  and  inexperienced  compared  with  this 
ancient  tempter,  all  narrow  in  our  views  and  limited  in  our  experience 
compared  with  this  serpent,  who  is  more  subtle  than  all  the  beasts  of  the 
field  :  what  wonder  that  he  takes  away  the  word  which  is  sown  in  hard 
hearts. 

Moreover,  he  derives  his  chief  power  from  the  man's  condition  of 
soul :  it  is  easy  for  birds  to  pick  up  seed  which  lies  exposed  on  a 
trodden  path.  If  the  soil  had  been  good  and  the  seed  had  entered 
it,  he  would  have  had  far  greater  difficulty,  he  might  even  have 
been  foiled  ;  but  a  hard  heart  does  the  devil's  work  for  him  in 
great  measure;  he  need  not  use  violence  or  craft;  there  lies  the  unre- 
ceived  word  upon  the  surface  of  the  soul,  and  he  takes  it  away.  The 
power  of  the  evil  one  largely  springs  from  our  own  evil.  Let  us  pray 
the  Lord  to  renew  the  heart  that  the  testimony  of  Jesus  may  be  accepted 
heartily,  and  may  never  be  taken  away.  Great  is  the  need  for  such 
prayer.  Our  adversary  is  no  imaginary  being,  his  existence  is  real,  his 
presence  constant,  his  power  immense,  his  activity  indefatigable.  Lord, 
match  him,  and  overmatch  him.  Drive  away  this  foulest  of  fowls, 
break  up  the  soil  of  the  soul,  and  let  thy  truth  truly  live  and  gra 
ciously  grow  within  us. 

III.  Our  short  sermon  closes  with  the  third  point,  which  is  the  devil's 
PURPOSE.  He  is  a  sound  theologian,  and  knows  that  salvation  is  by 
believing  in  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  and  hence  he  fears  above  all  things  lest 
men  should  "  bslieve  and  be  saved."  The  substance  of  the  gospel  lies 
in  those  few  words,  "believe  and  be  saved,"  and  in  proportion  as  Satan 


100  4TETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

hates  that  gospe?  we  ought  to  prize  it.  He  is  not  so  much  afraid  of 
works  as  of  faith.  If  he  can  lead  men  to  work,  or  feel,  or  do  anything 
in  the  place  of  believing,  he  is  content ;  but  it  is  believing  that  he  dreads, 
because  God  has  coupled  it  with  being  saved.  Every  hearer  should 
know  this,  and  be  instructed  thereby  to  turn  all  his  attention  to  the 
point  which  the  devil  considers  to  be  worthy  of  his  whole  activity.  If 
the  destroyer  labours  to  prevent  the  heart's  believing,  the  wise  will  have 
their  wits  about  them,  and  regard  faith  as  the  one  thing  needful. 

"  Lest  they  should  believe  and  be  saved  "  Satan  takes  away  the  word 
out  of  their  hearts.  Here  also  is  wisdom, — wisdom  hidden  within  the 
enemy's  cunning.  If  the  gospel  remains  in  contact  with  the  heart  its 
tendency  is  to  produce  faith.  The  seed  abiding  in  the  soil  springs  up 
and  brings  forth  fruit,  and  so  will  the  gospel  display  its  living  power  if 
it  dwells  within  the  man,  and  therefore  the  devil  hastens  to  take  it  away. 
The  word  of  God  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  devil  does  not  like  to 
see  it  lie  near  the  sinner  for  fear  it  should  wound  him.  He  dreads  the 
influence  of  truth  upon  the  conscience,  and  if  he  cannot  prevent  a  man's 
hearing  it  he  labours  to  prevent  his  meditating  upon  it.  "  Faith  cometh 
by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God  ":  to  obliterate  that  which 
has  been  heard  is  the  Satanic  method  of  preventing  faith.  Here,  again, 
is  a  practical  word  for  the  ear  of  prudence : — let  us  keep  the  gospel  as 
much  as  possible  near  the  mind  of  the  unconverted,  let  us  sow  and  sow 
again,  if  haply  some  grain  may  take  root.  Countrymen  were  wont  in 
planting  certain  seeds  to  put  in  "  one  for  the  worm,  and  one  for  the  crow, 
and  then  a  third  which  would  surely  grow,"  and  we  must  do  the  like. 
In  the  book  of  Jeremiah  the  Lord  describes  his  own  action  thus, — "  I 
spoke  unto  you  rising  up  early  and  speaking,  but  ye  heard  not ;  and  I 
called,  but  ye  answered  not ":  surely,  if  the  Lord  himself  has  thus  con 
tinued  to  speak  to  an  unanswering  race  we  need  not  mnrmur  if  much  of 
our  preaching  should  appear  to  be  in  vain.  There  is  life  in  the  seed  of 
the  gospel,  and  it  will  grow  if  it  can  be  got  into  the  soil  of  the  heart ;  let 
us  therefore  have  faith  in  it,  and  never  dream  of  obtaining  a  crop  except 
by  the  old-fashioned  way  of  sowing  good  seed.  The  devil  evidently 
hates  the  word,  let  us  then  keep  to  it,  and  sow  it  everywhere. 

Reader  or  hearer,  you  have  often  heard  the  gospel,  have  you  heard 
it  in  vain  ?  Then  the  devil  has  had  more  to  do  with  you  than  you 
have  dreamed.  Is  the  thought  a  pleasant  one  ?  The  presence  of  the 
devil  is  defiling  and  degrading,  and  he  has  been  hovering  over  you  as  the 
birds  over  the  high-road,  and  lighting  upon  you  to  steal  away  the  Word. 
Think  of  this.  Fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ  you  are  missing  by  your  unbelief,  and  instead  thereof  you  are 
having  fellowship  with  Satan.  Is  not  this  horrible  ?  Instead  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  dwelling  in  you  as  he  dwells  in  all  believers,  the  prince  of  darkness- 
is  making  you  his  resort,  coming  and  going  at  his  pleasure  into  your 
mind.  You  remember  Jacob's  dream  of  a  ladder,  and  angels  ascending 
and  descending  from  himself  to  heaven :  your  life-experience  may  be  set 
forth  by  another  ladder  which  descends  into  the  dark  abyss,  and  up  and 
down  its  rounds  foul  spirits  come  and  go  to  yourself  1  Does  not  this 
startle  you  ?  The  Lord  grant  it  may.  Do  you  desire  a  change  ?  May 
the  Holy  Spirit  turn  your  heart  into  good  ground,  and  then  shall  the  seed 
of  divine  grace  grow  in  you,  and  produce  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 


f ulpit 


THE    MUSTARD    SEED: 
A    SERMON    FOR    THE    SABBATH-SCHOOL    TEACHER. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  OCTOBER  20x11,   1889, 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"Then  said  he,  Unto  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  like?  and  whereunto  shall  I 
resemble  it  ?  It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took,  and  cast  into  his 
garden  ;  and  it  grew,  and  waxed  a  great  tree;  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  lodged  in  the 
branches  of  it." — Luke  xiii.  18,  19. 

I  SHALL  not  attempt  fully  to  explain  this  great  little  parable.  A  full 
exposition  may  be  left  for  another  occasion.  The  parable  may  be 
understood  to  relate  to  our  Lord  himself,  who  is  the  living  seed.  You 
know  also  how  his  church  is  the  tree  that  springs  from  him,  and  how 

freatly  it  grows  and  spreads  its  branches  until  it  covers  the  earth, 
rom  the  one  man  Christ  Jesus,   despised  and  rejected  of  men,  slain 
and  buried,  and  so  hidden  away  from  among  men — from  him,  I  say, 
•there  ariseth  a  multitude  which  no  man  can  number.     These  spread 
themselves,  like  some  tree  which  grows  by  the  rivers  of  waters,  and 
they  yielded  both  gracious  shelter  and  spiritual  food.     I  called  it  a 
great  little  parable,  and  so  it  is :   it  has  a  world  of  teaching  within 
the  smallest  compass.     The  parable  is  itself  like  a  grain  of  mustard 
eeed,  but  its  meanings  are  as  a  great  tree. 

But  at  this  time  of  the  year,  Sabbath-school  teachers  come  together 
specially  to  pray  for  a  blessing  on  their  work;  and  pastors  are 
invited  to  say  a  word  to  cheer  them  in  their  self-denying  service. 
This  request  I  would  cheerfully  fulfil ;  and  therefore  my  discourse  will 
not  be  a  full  explanation  of  the  parable,  but  an  adaptation  of  it  to  the 
cheering  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  admirable  work  of  teaching 
the  young  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Never  service  more  important :  to 
overlook  it  would  be  a  grave  fault.  We  rejoice  to  encourage  our 
friends  in  their  labour  of  love. 

In  this  parable  light  is  thrown  upon  the  work  of  those  who  teach 
the  gospel.  First,  notice  a  very  simple  ivork :  "  a  grain  of  mustard  seed, 
*which  a  man  took,  and  cast  into  his  garden."  Secondly,  observe  what 
came  of  it:  "it  grew,  and  waxed  a  great  tree;  and  the  fowls  of 
the  air  lodged  in  the  branches  of  it." 

I.     First,   NOTICE  A  VTTHY  SIMPLE   WORK.     The  work  of   teaching 
No.  2,110.  64 


566  THE  MUSTAKD  SEED: 

the   gospel   is   as   the   casting  of   a  grain  of   mustard   seed   into   a 
garden. 

Note,  first,  what  the  nameless  man  did.  "  It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard 
seed,  which,  a  man  took."  He  took  it;  that  is  to  say,  picked  it  out 
from  the  bulk.  It  was  only  one  grain,  and  a  grain  of  a  very 
insignificant  seed ;  but  he  did  not  let  it  lie  on  the  shelf ;  he  took  it 
in  his  hand  to  put  it  to  its  proper  use.  A  grain  of  mustard  seed  is  too 
small  a  thing  for  public  exhibition ;  the  man  who  takes  it  in  his  hand 
is  almost  the  only  one  who  spies  it  out.  It  was  only  a  grain  of  mustard 
seed,  but  the  man  set  it  before  his  own  mind  as  a  distinct  object  to  be 
dealt  with.  He  was  not  sowing  mustard  over  broad  acres,  but  he 
was  sowing  "a  grain  of  mustard  seed''  in  his  garden.  It  is  well 
for  the  teacher  to  know  what  he  is  going  to  teach ;  to  have  that  truth 
distinctly  in  his  mind's  eye,  as  the  man  had  the  grain  of  mustard  seed 
between  his  fingers.  Depend  upon  it,  unless  a  truth  is  clearly  seen 
and  distinctly  recognised  by  the  teacher,  little  will  come  of  it  to  the 
taught.  It  may  be  a  very  simple  truth ;  but  if  a  man  takes  it,  under 
stands  it,  grasps  it,  and  loves  it,  he  will  do  something  with  it.-  Beloved, 
first  and  foremost  let  us  ourselves  take  the  gospel,  let  us  believe  it,  let 
us  appreciate  it,  let  us  prize  it  beyond  all  things ;  for  truth  lives  as  ifc 
is  loved,  and  no  hand  is  so  fit  for  its  sowing  as  the  hand  which  grasps 
it  well. 

Further,  in  this  little  parable  we  notice  that  this  man  had  a  garden  : 
"Like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took,  and  cast  into  his 
garden."  Some  Christian  people  have  no  garden — no  personal  sphere 
of  service.  They  belong  to  the  whole  clan  of  Christians,  and  they  pine 
to  see  the  entire  band  go  out  to  cultivate  the  whole  world ;  but  they 
do  not  come  to  personal  particulars.  It  is  delightful  to  be  warmed 
up  by  missionary  addresses,  and  to  feel  a  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  all 
the  nations  ;  but,  after  all,  the  net  result  of  a  general  theoretic  earnest- . 
ness  for  all  the  world  does  not  amount  to  much.  As  we  should  have 
no  horticulture  if  men  had  no  gardens ;  so  we  shall  have  no  mis 
sionary  work  done  unless  each  person  has  a  mission.  It  is  the  duty  of 
every  believer  in  Christ,  like  the  first  man,  Adam,  to  have  a  garden  to 
dress  and  to  till.  Children  are  in  the  Sunday-schools  by  millions : 
thank  Grod  for  that !  But  have  you  a  class  of  your  own  ?  All  the 
church  at  work  for  Christ !  Grlorious  theory  !  Are  you  up  and  doing 
for  your  Lord  ?  It  will  be  a  grand  time  when  every  believer  has  his 
allotment,  and  is  sowing  it  with  the  seed  of  truth.  The  wilderness  and 
the  solitary  place  will  blossom  as  the  rose  when  each  Christian  cultivates 
his  own  plot  of  roses.  Where  should  this  unnamed  man  sow  his 
mustard  seed  but  in  his  own  garden  ?  It  was  near  him,  and  dear  to 
him,  and  thither  he  went.  Teach  your  own  children,  speak  to  your 
neighbours,  seek  the  conversion  of  those  whom  Grod  has  especially 
entrusted  to  you. 

Having  a  garden,  and  having  this  seed,  the  man  sowed  it :  and 
simple  as  this  is,  it  is  the  hinge  of  the  instruction.  You  have  a» 
number  of  seeds  in  a  pill-box.  There  they  are  :  look  at  them !  Take 
that  box  down  this  day  twelve  months,  and  the  seeds  will  be  just  the 
same.  Lay  them  by  in  that  dry  box  for  seven  years,  and  nothing 
will  happen.  Truth  is  not  to  be  kept  to  ourselves:  it  is  to  be 


A  SERMON  FOR  THE  SABBATH-SCHOOL  TEACHER.         567 

published  and  advocated.  There  is  an  old  proverb,  "  Truth  is 
mighty,  and  will  prevail."  The  proverb  is  true  in  a  sense;  but 
it  needs  to  be  taken  with  a  grain  of  salt.  If  you  put  truth  away, 
and  leave  it  without  a  voice,  it  won't  prevail;  it  will  not  even 
contend.  When  have  great  truths  prevailed?  Why,  when  brave 
men  have  persisted  in  declaring  them.  Daring  spirits  have  taken 
up  a  cause  which  has  been,  at  the  first,  unpopular,  and  they 
have  spoken  about  it  so  earnestly,  and  so  often,  that  at  length  the 
cause  has  commanded  attention :  they  have  pressed  on  and  on  till  the 
cause  has  triumphed  altogether.  Truth  has  been  mighty,  and  has 
prevailed ;  but  yet  not  without  the  men  who  gave  it  life  and  tongue. 
Not  even  the  gospel  itself,  if  it  be  not  taught,  will  prevail.  If 
revealed  truth  be  laid  on  one  side  and  kept  in  silence,  it  will  not 
grow.  Mark  how,  through  the  dark  ages,  the  gospel  lay  asleep  in 
old  books  in  the  libraries  of  monasteries,  till  Luther  and  his  fellow 
reformers  fetched  it  out  and  sowed  it  in  the  minds  of  men. 

This  man  simply  cast  it  into  his  garden.  He  did  not  wrap  it  round 
with  gold  leaf,  or  otherwise  adorn  it ;  but  he  put  it  into  the  ground. 
The  naked  seed  came  into  contact  with  the  naked  soil.  0  teachers, 
do  not  try  to  make  the  gospel  look  fine ;  do  not  overlay  it  with  your 
fine  words,  or  elaborate  explanations.  The  gospel  seed  is  to  be  put 
into  the  young  heart  just  as  it  is.  Gret  the  truth  concerning  the  Lord 
Jesus  into  the  children's  minds.  Make  them  know,  not  what  you  can 
say  about  the  truth,  but  what  the  truth  itself  says.  It  is  wicked  to 
take  the  gospel  and  make  a  peg  of  it  to  hang  our  old  clothes  upon 
The  gospel  is  not  a  boat  to  be  freighted  with  human  thoughts,  fine 
speculations,  scraps  of  poetry,  and  pretty  tales.  No,  no,  the  gospel 
is  the  thought  of  God :  in  and  of  itself  it  is  the  message  which  the 
soul  needs.  It  is  the  gospel  itself  which  will  grow.  Take  a  truth, 
specially  that  great  doctrine,  that  man  is  lost  and  that  Christ  is  the 
only  Saviour,  and  see  to  it  that  you  place  it  in  the  mind.  Teach 
plainly  the  great  truth  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  hath  ever 
lasting  life ;  and  that  the  Lord  Jesus  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body 
on  the  tree,  and  suffered  for  us,  the  just  for  the  unjust — I  say  take 
these  truths  and  set  them  forth  to  the  mind,  and  see  what  will  come 
of  it.  Sow  the  very  truth  ;  not  your  reflections  on  the  truth,  not  your 
embellishments  of  the  truth,  but  the  truth  itself.  This  is  to  be 
brought  into  contact  with  the  mind  ;  for  the  truth  is  the  seed,  and 
the  human  mind  is  the  soil  for  it  to  grow  in. 

These  remarks  of  mine  are  very  plain  and  trite ;  and  yet  everything 
depends  upon  the  simple  operation  described.  Nearly  everything  has 
been  tried  in  preaching  of  late,  except  the  plain  and  clear  statement 
of  the  glad  tidings  and  of  the  atoning  sacrifice.  People  have 
talked  about  what  the  church  can  do,  and  what  the  gospel  can 
do  :  we  have  been  informed  as  to  the  proofs  of  the  gospel,  or  the 
doubts  about  it,  and  so  forth ;  but  when  will  they  give  us  the  gospel 
itself  ?  Brethren,  we  must  come  to  the  point  and  teach  the  gospel,  for 
this  is  the  living  and  incorruptible  seed  which  abideth  for  ever.  It 
is  an  easy  thing  to  deliver  an  address  upon  mustard  seed,  to  pive  the 
children  a  taste  of  the  pungency  of  mustard,  to  tell  them  how  mustard 
seed  would  grow,  what  kind  of  a  tree  it  would  produce,  and  how  the 
45 


568  THE    MUSTARD    SEED  : 

birds  would  sing  among  its  branches.  But  this  is  not  sowing  mustard 
seed.  It  is  all  very  fine  to  talk  about  the  influence  of  the  gospel,  the 
ethics  of  Christianity,  the  elevating  power  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  so 
on ;  but  what  we  want  is  the  gospel  itself,  which  exercises  that  influence. 
Sow  the  seed  :  tell  the  children  the  doctrne  of  the  cross,  the  fact  that 
with  the  stripes  of  Jesus  we  are  healed,  and  that  by  faith  in  him  we 
are  justified.  What  is  wanted  is  not  talk  about  the  gospel,  but  the 
gospel  itself.  We  must  continually  bring  the  living  word  of  the  living 
God  into  contact  with  the  hearts  of  men.  Oh  for  the  aid  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  this !  He  will  help  us,  for  he  delights  to  glorify  Jesus. 

That  which  is  described  in  the  parable  was  an  insignificant  busi 
ness  :  the  man  took  the  tiny  seed  and  put  it  into  his  garden.  It  is 
a  very  common-place  affair  to  sit  down  with  a  dozen  children  around 
you,  and  open  your  Bible  and  tell  them  the  well-worn  tale  of  how 
Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  No  Pharisee 
is  likely  to  stand  and  blow  a  trumpet  when  he  is  going  to  teach 
children :  he  is  more  likely  to  point  to  the  children  in  the  temple, 
and  sneeringly  say,  "Hearest  thou  what  these  say?"  It  is  a  lowly 
business  altogether :  but  yet  to  the  mustard  seed,  and  to  the  man  with 
a  garden,  the  sowing  is  the  all-important  matter.  The  mustard  seed 
will  never  grow  unless  put  into  the  soil :  the  owner  of  the  garden  will 
never  have  a  crop  of  mustard  unless  he  sows  the  seed.  Dear  Sunday- 
school  teacher,  do  not  become  weary  of  your  humble  work,  for  none 
can  measure  its  importance.  Tell  the  boys  and  girls  of  the  Son  of 
Grodj  who  lived  and  loved  and  died  that  the  ungodly  might  be 
saved.  Urge  them  to  immediate  faith  in  the  mighty  Saviour,  that 
they  may  be  saved  at  once.  Tell  of  the  new  birth,  and  how  the 
souls  of  men  are  renewed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  whose  divine 
working  none  can  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Cast  in  mustard 
seed,  and  nothing  else  but  mustard  seed,  if  you  want  to  grow 
mustard.  Teach  the  gospel  of  grace,  and  nothing  but  the  gospel 
of  grace,  if  you  would  see  grace  growing  in  the  hearts  of  your  young 
people. 

Secondly,  let  us  consider  what  it  was  that  the  man  sowed.  We  have 
seen  that  he  sowed  :  what  did  he  sow  ?  It  was  one  single  seed,  and 
that  seed  a  very  small  one ;  so  very,  very  small,  that  the  Jews  were 
accustomed  to  say,  "  As  small  as  mustard  seed."  Hence  the  Saviour 
speaks  of  it  as  the  smallest  among  seeds ;  which  it  may  not  have  been 
absolutely,  but  which  it  was  according  to  common  parlance ;  and  our 
Lord  was  not  teaching  botany,  but  speaking  a  popular  parable.  Yes, 
the  gospel  seems  a  very  simple  thing :  Believe  and  live !  Look  to  Jesus 
dying  in  the  sinner's  stead  !  Look  to  Jesus  crucified,  even  as  Israel 
looked  to  the  brazen  serpent  lifted  up  upon  a  pole.  It  is  simplicity 
itself :  in  fact,  the  gospel  is  so  plain  a  matter  that  our  superior  people 
are  weary  of  it,  and  look  out  for  something  more  difficult  of  com 
prehension.  People  nowadays  are  like  the  negro  who  liked  to  hear  the 
Scriptures  "  properly  confounded  "  ;  or  like  the  other  who  said,  "  You 
should  hear  our  minister  dispense  with  the  truth."  Sowing  seed  is  work 
too  ordinary  for  the  moderns  :  they  demand  new  methods.  But,  beloved, 
we  must  not  run  after  vain  inventions  :  our  one  business  is  to  sow  the 
Word  of  God  in  the  niind  of  children.  It  is  yours  and  mine  to  teach 


A    SERMOX    FOR   THE    SABBATH-SCHOOL   TEACHER.  569 

everybody  the  simple  truth,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners,  and  that  whosoever  believe th  in  him  shall  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life.  We  know  nothing  else  among  men  or  among 
children.  This  one  seed,  apparently  so  little,  so  insignificant,  we  con 
tinue  to  sow.  They  sneeringly  say,  "  What  can  be  the  moral  result  of 
peaching  such  a  gospel  ?  Surely  it  would  be  better  to  discourse  upon 
morals,  social  economics,  and  the  sciences  ?  "  Ah,  friends  !  if  you  can 
do  any  good  in  those  ways,  we  will  not  hinder  you  ;  but  our  belief  ia 
that  a  hundred  times  more  can  be  done  with  the  gospel ;  for  it  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation  unto  every  one  that  believeth.  The  gospel 
is  not  the  enemy  of  any  good  thing ;  say,  rather,  it  is  the  force  by 
which  good  things  are  to  be  carried  out.  Whatsoever  things  are  pure 
and  honest  and  of  good  repute,  are  all  nurtured  by  that  spirit  which 
is  begotten  by  the  simple  gospel  of  Christ.  Yet  conversions  do  not 
come  by  essays  upon  morals,  but  by  the  teaching  of  salvation  by 
Christ.  The  cleansing  and  raising  of  our  race  will  not  be  effected  by 
politics  or  science,  but  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  which  liveth  and 
abideth  for  ever.  To  bring  the  greatest  blessings  upon  our  rising 
youth,  we  must  labour  to  implant  in  their  minds  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Oh,  for  divine  power  in  this  work ! 

But  the  seed,  though  very  small,  was  a  living  thing.  There  ig 
a  great  difference  between  a  mustard  seed  and  a  piece  of  wax  of 
the  same  size.  Life  slumbers  in  that  seed.  What  life  is,  we  cannot 
tell.  Even  if  you  take  a  microscope  you  cannot  spy  it  out.  It  is  a 
mystery :  but  it  is  essential  to  a  seed.  The  gospel  has  a  something  in 
it  not  readily  discoverable  by  the  philosophical  enquirer,  if,  indeed,  he 
can  perceive  it  at  all.  Take  a  maxim  of  Socrates  or  of  Plato,  and 
enquire  whether  a  nation  or  a  tribe  has  ever  been  transformed  by  it 
from  barbarism  to  culture.  A  maxim  of  a  philosopher  may  have 
measurably  influenced  a  man  in  some  right  direction ;  but  who  has 
ever  heard  of  a  man's  whole  character  being  transformed  by  any 
observation  of  Confucius  or  Socrates  ?  I  confess  I  never  have.  Human 
teachings  are  barren.  But  within  the  gospel,  with  all  its  triteness 
and  simplicity,  there  is  a  divine  life,  and  that  life  makes  all  the 
difference.  The  human  can  never  rival  the  divine,  for  it  lacks  the 
life-fire..  It  is  better  to  preach  five  words  of  God's  Word  than  five 
million  words  of  man's  wisdom.  Men's  words  may  seem  to  be  the 
wiser  and  the  more  attractive,  but  there  is  no  heavenly  life  in  them. 
Within  God's  Word,  however  simple  it  may  be,  there  dwells  an 
omnipotence  like  that  of  God,  from  whose  lips  it  came. 

Truth  to  tell,  a  seed  is  a  very  comprehensive  thing.  Within  the 
mustard  seed  what  is  to  be  found  ?  Why,  there  is  all  in  it  that  ever 
comes  out  of  it.  It  must  be  so.  Every  branch,  and  every  leaf,  and 
every  flower,  and  every  seed  that  is  to  be,  is,  in  its  essence,  all  within 
the  seed  :  it  needs  to  be  developed ;  but  it  is  all  there.  And  so,  within 
the  simple  gospel,  how  much  lies  concentrated  ?  Look  at  it !  Within 
that  truth  He  regeneration,  repentance,  faith,  holiness,  zeal,  consecra 
tion,  perfection.  Heaven  hides  itself  away  within  the  gospel.  Like 
u  young  bird  in  its  nest,  glory  dwells  in  grace.  We  may  not  at  first 
see  all  its  results,  nor,  indeed,  shall  we  see  them  at  all,  till  we  sow  the 
seed  and  it  grows  j  but  yet  it  is  all  there.  Do  you  believe  it,  young 


570  THE   MUSTARD    SEED:: 

teacher  ?  Have  you  realized  what  you  have  in  your  hold  when  you 
grasp  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God?  It  is  the  most  wonderful 
thing  beneath  the  skies.  Do  you  believe  in  the  gospel  which  you  have 
to  teach  ?  Do  you  discern  that  within  its  apparently  narrow  lines  the 
Eternal,  the  Infinite,  the  Perfect,  and  the  Divine  are  all  enclosed  ?  As 
in  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  there  was  the  Eternal  Q-od,  so  within  the 
simple  teaching  of  "Believe  and  live"  there  are  all  the  elements  of 
eternal  blessedness  for  men,  and  boundless  glory  for  Q-od.  It  is  a 
very  comprehensive  thing,  that  little  seed,  that  gospel  of  God. 

And  for  this  reason  it  is  so  wonderful :  U  is  a  divine  creation. 
Summon  your  chemists  :  bring  them  together  with  all  their  vessels  and 
their  fires.  Select  a  jury  of  the  greatest  chemists  now  alive,  analytical 
or  otherwise,  as  you  will.  Learned  sirs,  will  you  kindly  make  us 
a  mustard  seed  ?  You  may  take  a  mustard  seed,  and  pound  it 
and  analyze  it,  and  you  may  thus  ascertain  all  its  ingredients.  So 
far  so  good.  Is  not  your  work  well  begun?  Now  make  a  single 
mustard  seed.  We  will  give  you  a  week.  It  is  a  very  small  affair. 
You  have  all  the  elements  of  mustard  in  yonder  mortar.  Make  us 
one  living  grain :  we  do  not  ask  for  a  ton  weight.  One  grain  of 
mustard  seed  will  suffice  us.  Great  chemists,  have  you  not  made  so 
small  a  thing  ?  A  month  has  gone  by.  Only  one  grain  of  mustard 
seed  we  asked  of  you,  and  where  is  it  ?  Have  you  not  made  one  in  a 
month  ?  What  are  you  at  ?  Shall  we  allow  you  seven  years  ?  Yes, 
with  all  the  laboratories  in  the  kingdom  at  your  service,  and  all  known 
substances  for  your  material,  and  all  the  world's  coal-beds  for  your 
fuel,  get  to  your  work.  The  air  is  black  with  your  smoke,  and  the 
streams  run  foul  with  your  waste  products  ;  but  where  is  the  mustard 
seed  ?  This  baffles  the  wise  men :  they  cannot  make  a  living  seed. 
No  ;  and  nobody  can  make  a  gospel,  or  even  a  new  gospel  text.  The 
thinkers  of  the  age  could  not  even  concoct  another  life  of  Christ  to 
match  with  the  four  gospels  which  we  have  already.  I  go  further : 
they  could  not  create  a  new  incident  which  would  be  congruous  with 
the  facts  we  already  know.  Plenty  of  novel  writers  nowadays  can 
beat  out  imaginary  histories  upon  their  anvils  :  let  them  write  a  fifth 
gospel — say  the  gospel  according  to  Peter,  or  Andrew.  Let  us  have 
it !  They  will  not  even  commence  the  task.  Who  will  write,  a  new 
Psalm,  or  even  a  new  promise  ?  Clever  chemists  prove  their  wisdom 
by  saying  at  once,  "  No,  we  cannot  make  a  mustard  seed  "  ;  and  wise 
thinkers  will  equally  confess  that  they  cannot  make  another  gospel, 
My  learned  brethren  are  trying  very  hard  to  make  a  new  gospel  fot 
this  nineteenth  century ;  but  you  teachers  had  better  go  on  with  the 
old  one.  The  advanced  men  cannot  put  life  into  their  theory.  This 
living  Word  is  the  finger  of  God.  That  simple  grain  of  mustard  seed 
must  be  made  by  God,  or  not  at  all ;  and  he  must  put  life  into  the 
gospel,  or  it  will  not  have  power  in  the  heart.  The  gospel  of  Sunday- 
school  teachers,  that  gospel  of  "  Believe  and  live,"  however  men  may 
despise  it,  has  God-given  life  in  it.  You  cannot  make  another  which 
can  supplant  it ;  for  you  cannot  put  life  into  your  invention.  Go  on 
and  use  the  one  living  truth  with  your  children,  for  nothing  else  has 
God's  life  in  it. 

I  want  you  to  see  what  a  little  affair  the  sowing  seemed,  as  we 


A    SERMON   FOR   THE    SABBATH-SCHOOL   TEACHER.  571 

answer  the  question,  What  was  it  to  him  ?  It  was  a  very  natural  act ;  he 
sowed  a  seed.  It  is  a  most  natural  thing  that  we  should  teach  others 
what  we  believe  ourselves.  I  cannot  make  out  how  some  professors 
can  call  themselves  Christians,  and  yet  never  communicate  the  faith  to 
others.  That  the  young  people  of  our  churches  should  gather  othei 
young  people  around  them,  and  tell  them  of  Jesus,  whom  the^ 
love,  is  as  natural  as  for  a  gardener  to  put  seeds  into  his  prepared 
ground. 

To  sow  a  mustard  seed  is  a  very  inexpensive  act.  Only  one  grain 
of  mustard :  nobody  can  find  me  a  coin  small  enough  to  express  its 
value.  I  do  not  know  how  much  mustard  seed  the  man  had ;  certainly 
it  is  not  a  rare  thing ;  but  he  only  took  one  grain  of  it,  and  cast  it 
into  his  garden.  He  emptied  no  exchequer  by  that  expenditure  ;  and 
this  is  one  of  the  excellencies  of  Sabbath-school  work,  that  it  neither 
exhausts  the  church  of  men  nor  of  money.  However  much  of  it  ia 
done,  it  does  not  lessen  the  resources  of  our  Zion :  it  is  done  freely, 
quietly,  without  excitement,  without  sacrifice  of  life ;  and  yet  what  a 
fountain  of  blessing  it  is  ! 

Still,  it  was  an  act  of  faith.  It  is  always  an  act  of  faith  to  sow 
seed;  because  you  have,  for  the  time,  to  give  it  up,  and  receive 
nothing  in  return.  The  farmer  takes  his  choice  seed-corn,  and  throws 
it  into  the  soil  of  his  field.  He  might  have  made  many  a  loaf  of 
bread  with  it ;  but  he  casts  it  away.  Only  his  faith  saves  him  from 
being  judged  a  maniac  :  he  expects  it  to  return  to  him  fifty-fold.  If 
you  had  never  seen  a  harvest,  you  would  think  that  a  man  burying 
good  wheat  under  the  clods  had  gone  mad ;  and  if  you  had  never 
seen  conversions,  it  might  seem  an  absurd  thing  to  be  constantly 
teaching  to  boys  and  girls  the  story  of  the  Man  who  was  nailed  to  the 
tree.  We  preach  and  teach  as  a  work  of  faith ;  and,  remember,  it  is 
onty  as  an  act  of  faith  that  it  will  answer  its  purpose.  The  rule  of 
the  harvest  is,  "  According  to  thy  faith,  be  it  unto  thee."  Believe, 
dear  teacher,  believe  in  the  gospel.  Believe  in  what  you  are  doing 
when  you  tell  it.  Believe  that  great  results  from  slender  causes  spring. 
G-o  on  sowing  your  mustard  seed  of  salvation  by  faith,  expecting  and 
believing  that  fruit  will  come  thereof. 

It  was  an  act  which  brought  the  sower  no  honour.  The  Saviour  has 
chronicled  the  fact  that  the  man  took  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  and 
sowed  it ;  but  thousands  of  men  had  gone  on  sowing  mustard  seed  for 
half  a  lifetime  without  a  word.  Nobody  has  ever  spoken  in  your 
honour,  my  friend,  though  you  have  taught  the  truth.  Dear  teacher, 
go  on  sowing,  though  nobody  should  observe  your  diligence,  or  praise 
your  faithfulness.  Sow  the  seed  of  precious  truth  in  the  garden  of 
the  child's  mind ;  for  much  more  will  come  of  it  than  you  have  dared 
to  hope. 

It  seems  to  me  that  our  Lord  selected  the  mustard  seed  in  this 
parable,  not  because  its  results  are  the  greatest  possible  from  a  seed — 
for  an  oak  or  a  cedar  are  much  greater  growths  than  a  mustard  tree — 
but  he  selected  it  because  it  is  the  greatest  result  as  compared  with 
the  size  of  the  seed.  Follow  out  the  analogy.  Come  to  yonder  school, 
and  see !  That  earnest  young  man  is  teaching  a  boy,  one  of  those  wild 
creatures  of  the  street ;  they  swarm  in  every  quarter.  A  dozen  young 


572  THE    MUSTARD    SEED  : 

f 

Turks  are  before  him,  or  say  young  Arabs  of  the  street ;  he  is  teaching 
them  the  gospel.  Small  affair,  is  it  not  ?  Yes,  very ;  but  what  may 
come  of  it  ?  Think  of  how  joyfully  much  may  grow  out  of  this  little ! 
What  is  that  young  man  teaching  ?  Only  one  elementary  truth.  Do  not 
sneer  ;  it  is  truth,  but  it  is  the  mere  alphabet  of  it.  He  touches  upon 
nothing  deep  in  theology  :  he  only  says,  ' '  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners.  Dear  boy,  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  live." 
That  is  all  he  says.  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  The 
teacher  himself  is  teaching  the  one  truth  in  a  very  poor  way ;  at  least, 
lie  thinks  so.  Ask  him,  when  he  has  done,  what  he  thinks  of  his  own 
teaching  ;  and  he  replies,  "  I  do  not  feel  fit  to  teach."  Yes,  that  young 
man's  teaching  is  sighed  over  ;  and  in  his  own  judgment  it  is  poor  and 
weak ;  but  there  is  life  in  the  truth  he  imparts,  and  eternal  results  will 
follow — results  of  which  I  have  now  to  speak  in  the  second  part  of  my 
sermon.  May  the  good  Spirit  help  me  so  to  speak  as  to  encourage  my 
beloved  friends,  who  have  given  themselves  up  to  the  Christ-like  work 
of  teaching  the  little  ones ! 

II.     Secondly,  let  us  enquire,  WHAT  CAME  OF  IT  ? 

First,  "  it  grew"  That  was  what  the  sower  hoped  would  come  of  it : 
he  placed  the  seed  in  the  ground,  hoping  that  it  would  grow.  It  is 
not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  would  have  sown  it  if  he  had  not 
hoped  that  it  would  spring  up.  Dear  teacher,  do  you  always  sow  in 
hope,  do  you  trust  that  the  Word  will  live  and  grow  ?  If  you  do  not,  I 
do  not  think  your  success  is  very  probable.  Expect  the  truth  to  take 
root,  and  expand  and  grow  up.  Teach  divine  truth  with  earnestness, 
and  expect  that  the  life  within  it  will  unveil  its  wonders. 

But  though  the  sower  expected  growth,  he  could  not  himself  have 
made  it  grow.  After  he  had  placed  the  seed  in  the  ground,  he  could 
water  it,  he  could  pray  God  to  make  the  sun  shine  on  it ;  but  he  could 
not  directly  produce  growth.  Only  he  that  made  the  seed  could  cause 
it  to  grow.  Growth  is  a  continuance  of  that  almighty  act  by  which  life 
is  at  first  given.  The  putting  of  life  into  the  seed  is  God's  work,  and 
the  bringing  forth  of  the  life  from  the  seed  is  God's  work  too.  This  is 
a  matter  within  your  hope,  but  far  beyond  your  power. 

A  very  wonderful  thing  it  is,  that  the  seed  should  grow.  If  we  did 
not  see  it  every  day,  we  should  be  more  astonished  at  the  growth  of 
seed  than  at  all  the  wonders  of  magicians.  A  growing  seed  is  God's 
abiding  miracle.  You  see  a  piece  of  ground  near  London  covered  with 
a  market-garden,  and  after  a  few  months  you  go  by  the  place,  and  you 
see  streets,  and  a  public  square,  and  a  church,  and  a  great  population. 
You  say  to  yourself,  "It  is  remarkable  that  all  these  houses  should 
have  sprung  up  in  a  few  months."  Yet  that  is  not  at  all  so  wonderful 
as  for  a  ploughed  field  to  become  covered  four  feet  high  with  corn, 
and  all  without  the  use  of  waggons  to  bring  the  material,  or  tools  to 
work  it  up  into  a  harvest.  Without  noise  of  hammer,  or  the  ringing 
of  trowels ;  without  handiwork  of  man,  the  whole  has  been  done. 
Wonder  at  the  growth  of  grace.  See  how  it  increases,  deepens, 
strengthens  !  Growth  in  grace  is  a  marvel  of  divine  love.  That  a  man 
should  repent  through  the  gospel,  that  he  should  believe  in  Jesus, 
that  he  should  be  totally  changed,  that  he  should  have  a  hope  of 
heaven,  that  he  should  receive  power  to  become  a  child  of  God — these 


A    SERMOX    FOR    THE    SABBATH-SCHOOL   TEACHER.  O<-> 

are  all  marvellous  things ;  and  yet  they  are  going  on  under  our  eyes, 
and  we  fail  to  admire  them  as  we  should.  The  growth  of  holiness  in 
such  fallen  creatures  as  we  are,  is  the  admiration  of  angels,  the  delight 
of  all  intelligent  beings. 

To  the  sower  this  growth  was  very  pleasing.  How  pleasant  it  is  to 
see  the  seed  of  grace  grow  in  children  !  Do  you  not  remember  when  you 
first  sowed  mustard-and-cress  as  a  boy,  how  the  very  next  morning  you 
went  and  turned  the  ground  up  to  see  how  much  it  had  grown.  How 
pleased  you  were  when  you  saw  the  little  yellow  shoot,  and  afterwards 
a  green  leaf  or  two  !  So  is  it  with  the  true  teacher :  he  is  anxious  to  see 
growth,  and  he  makes  eager  enquiry  for  it.  What  he  expected  is  taking 
place,  and  it  is  most  delightful  to  him,  whatever  it  may  be  to  others. 
An  unsympathetic  person  cries,  "  Oh,  I  do  not  think  any  thing  of  that 
child's  emotions.  It  is  merely  a  passing  impression :  he  will  soon  forget 
it."  The  teacher  does  not  think  so.  The  cold  critic  says,  "  I  don't  think 
much  of  a  child's  weeping.  Children's  tears  lie  very  near  the  surface." 
But  the  teacher  is  full  of  hope  that  he  sees  in  these  tears  a  real 
sorrow  ior  sin,  and  an  earnest  seeking  after  the  Lord.  The  questioner 
says,  "  It  is  nothing  for  a  child  to  say  that  he  gives  his  heart  to  Jesus. 
Youngsters  soon  think  that  they  believe.  They  are  so  easily  led." 
People  talk  thus  because  they  do  not  love  children,  and  live  with  the 
desire  to  save  them.  If  you  sympathize  with  children,  you  are 
pleased  with  every  hopeful  token,  and  are  on  the  watch  for  every 
mark  of  divine  life  within  them.  If  you  are  a  florist,  you  will  see  more 
of  the  progress  of  your  plants  than  if  you  are  no  gardener,  and  have 
no  interest  in  such  things.  Think,  then,  of  what  my  text  says  :  "It 
grew."  Oh,  for  a  prayer  just  now,  from  all  of  you  this  morning, 
"  Lord,  make  the  gospel  grow  wherever  it  falls  !  Whether  the  preacher 
scatters  it,  or  the  teacher  sows  it ;  whether  it  falls  among  the  aged 
people,  or  the  young;  Lord,  make  the  gospel  grow!"  Pray  hard 
for  it,  brethren !  You  cannot  make  it  grow  :  but  you  can  prevail 
with  God  to  bless  it  to  his  honour  and  praise. 

Next,  having  started  growing,  it  became  a  tree;  Luke  says,  "It 
waxed  a  great  tree."  It  was  great  in  itself ;  but  the  greatness  was 
seen  mainly  in  comparison  with  the  size  of  the  seed.  The  growth  was 
great.  Here  is  the  wonder  :  not  that  it  became  a  tree,  but  that,  being  a 
mustard  seed,  it  should  become  "  a  great  tree."  Do  you  see  the  point  of 
the  parable  ?  I  have  already  brought  it  before  you.  Listen !  It  was 
only  a  word  spoken — "  Dear  boy,  look  to  Jesus."  Only  such  a  word, 
and  a  soul  was  saved,  its  sin  was  forgiven,  its  whole  being  was  changed, 
a  new  heir  of  heaven  was  born.  Do  you  see  the  growth?  A  word 
produces  salvation  !  A  grain  of  mu8'«d,rd  seed  becomes  a  great  tree ! 
A  little  teaching  brings  eternal  life.  That  is  not  all :  the  teacher, 
with  many  prayers  and  tears,  took  her  girl  home,  and  pleaded  with 
her  for  Christ,  and  the  girl  was  led  to  yield  her  heart  to  the  dominion 
of  Christ  Jesus — a  holy,  heavenly  life  came  out  of  that  pleading. 
See  !  she  becomes  a  thoughtful  girl,  a  loving  wife,  a  gracious  mother, 
a  matron  in  Israel,  such  a  one  as  Dorcas  among  the  poor,  or  Hannah 
with  her  Samuel.  What  a  great  result  from  a  little  cause !  The 
teacher's  words  were  tearfully  spoken ;  they  could  not  have  been 
printed,  for  they  were  far  too  broken  and  childlike ;  but  they 


574  THE   MUSTARD    SEED: 

in  God's  hands,  the  means  of  fashioning  a  life  most  sweet,  most  chaste, 
most  beautiful. 

A  boy  was  about  as  wild  as  any  roamer  of  our  streets :  a  teacher 
knelt  by  his  side,  with  his  arm  about  the  lad's  neck.  He  pleaded 
with  Q-od  for  the  boy,  and  with  the  boy  for  Q-od.  That  boy  was  con 
verted,  and  as  a  youth  in  business  he  was  an  example  to  the  work 
room  ;  as  a  father,  he  was  a  guide  to  his  household ;  as  a  man  of 
God,  he  was  a  light  to  all  around  ;  as  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  he 
adorned  the  doctrine  of  God  his  Saviour  in  all  things.  There  is  much 
more  which  I  might  easily  picture ;  but  you  can  work  it  out  as  well 
as  I  can.  All  that  is  to  be  desired  may  spring  out  of  the  simple  talk 
of  a  humble  Christian  with  a  youth.  A  mustard  seed  becomes  a  great 
tree  ;  a  few  words  of  holy  admonition  may  produce  a  noble  life. 

But  is  that  all  ?  Beloved,  our  teaching  may  preserve  souls  from 
the  deep  darkness  of  the  abode  of  the  lost.  A  soul  left  to  itself 
might  hurry  down  from  folly  to  vice,  from  vice  to  obduracy,  from 
obduracy  to  fixed  resolve  to  perish ;  but  by  the  means  of  loving 
teaching  all  this  is  changed.  Rescued  from  the  power  of  sin,  like  a 
lamb  snatched  from  between  the  jaws  of  the  lion,  the  youth  is  now 
no  longer  the  victim  of  vice,  but  seeks  holy  and  heavenly  things. 
Hell  has  lost  its  prey ;  and  see  up  yonder,  heaven's  wide  gate  has 
received  a  precious  soul.  "  Sweeping  through  the  gates  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  "  many  have  come  who  were  led  there  from  the  Sunday- 
school.  They  who  once  were  foul  are  now  white-robed,  washed  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.  Hark  to  their  songs  of  praise  !  You  may  keep 
on  listening,  for  those  songs  will  never  come  to  an  end.  All  this  was 
brought  about  through  a  brief  address  of  a  trembling  brother  who 
»**ood  up  one  Sunday  afternoon  to  close  the  school  and  talk  a  little 
-V>ut  the  cross  of  Jesus.  Or  all  this  came  of  a  gentle  sister  who 
oould  never  have  spoken  in  public,  but  yet  was  enabled  to  warn  a 
young  girl  who  was  growing  giddy,  and  seemed  likely  to  go  sadly 
astray.  Wonderful  that  a  soul's  taking  the  road  to  heaven  or  to  hell 
should  be  made,  in  the  purpose  of  God,  to  hinge  upon  the  humble 
endeavours  of  a  weak  but  faithful  teacher  !  You  see  how  the  mustard 
seed  grew  till  it  waxed  a  great  tree. 

This  great  tree  became  a  shelter  :  "the  fowls  of  the  air  lodged  in  the 
branches  of  it."  Mustard  in  the  East  does  grow  very  large  indeed. 
The  commonest  kind  of  it  may  be  found  eight  or  ten  feet  high  ;  but 
there  is  a  kind  which  will  grow  almost  like  a  forest  tree,  and  there 
probably  were  some  of  these  latter  trees  in  the  sheltered  region  wherein 
our  Lord  was  speaking.  A  mustard  which  grew  here  and  there  in 
Palestine  was  of  surprising  dimensions.  When  the  tree  grew,  the  birds 
came  to  it.  Here  we  have  unexpected  influences.  Think  of  it.  That  man 
took  a  mustard  seed  which  you  could  hardly  see  if  I  held  it  up.  When 
he  took  the  mustard  seed,  when  he  put  it  into  his  garden,  had  he  any 
thought  of  bringing  birds  to  that  spot  ?  Not  he.  You  do  not  know 
all  you  are  doing  when  you  are  teaching  a  child  the  way  of  salvation 
by  Jesus  Christ.  When  you  are  trying  to  bring  a  soul  to  Christ,  your 
action  has  ten  thousand  hooks  to  it,  and  these  may  seize  on  innumerable 
things.  Holy  teaching  is  the  opening  of  a  well,  and  no  one  knows  all 
the  effect  which  the  waters  will  produce  on  that  spot.  There  seems  no 


A    SERMON    FOR    THE    SABBATH-SCHOOL   TEACHER.  575 

link  between  sowing  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  and  birds  of  the  air ; 
but  the  winged  wanderers  soon  made  a  happy  connection.  There 
may  seem  no  connection  between  teaching  that  boy  and  the  reclaiming 
of  cannibals  in  New  Guinea  ;  but  I  can  see  a  very  possible  connection. 
Tribes  in  Central  Africa  may  have  their  destiny  shaped  by  your 
instruction  of  a  tiny  child.  When  John  Pounds  bribed  an  urchin  with 
a  hot  potato  to  come  and  learn  to  read  the  Bible,  I  am  sure  John 
Pounds  had  no  idea  of  all  the  Eagged-schools  in  London ;  but  there 
is  a  clear  line  of  cause  and  effect  in  the  whole  matter.  A  hot  potato 
might  be  the  coat  of  arms  of  the  Ragged-school  Union.  When 
Nasmyth  went  about  from  house  to  house  visiting  in  the  slums  of 
London,  I  do  not  suppose  that  he  saw  in  his  act  the  founding  of  the 
London  City  Mission  and  all  the  Country  Town  Missions.  No  man 
can  tell  the  end  of  his  beginnings,  the  growth  of  his  sowings.  Go  on 
doing  good  in  little  ways,  and  you  shall  one  day  wonder  at  the  great 
results.  Do  the  next  thing  that  lies  before  you.  Do  it  well.  Do  it 
unto  the  Lord.  Leave  results  with  his  unbounded  liberality  of  love ; 
but  hope  to  reap  at  least  a  hundred-fol4- 

How  many  fowls  came  and  roosted  under  that  one  mustard  tree  I  do 
not  know.  How  many  birds  in  a  day,  how  many  birds  in  the  year, 
came  and  found  a  resting-place,  and  picked  the  seeds  they  loved  so 
well,  I  cannot  tell.  When  one  person  is  converted,  how  many  may 
receive  a  blessing  out  of  him  none  can  tell.  Now  is  the  day  for 
romances :  our  literature  is  drenched  with  tales  religious  or  irreligious. 
What  stories  might  be  written  concerning  benefits  bestowed,  directly 
and  indirectly,  by  a  single  godly  man  or  woman !  When  you  have 
written  a  thrilling  story  upon  the  subject,  I  can  assure  you  I  can  match 
it  with  something  better  still.  One  single  individual  can  scatter 
benedictions  across  a  continent,  and  belt  the  world  with  blessing. 

But  what  is  that  I  hear  ?  I  see  this  mustard  tree — it  is  a  very 
wonderful  tree ;  but  I  not  only  see,  I  hear !  Music !  music !  The 
birds !  the  birds  !  It  is  early  morning,  the  sun  is  scarcely  up — what 
torrents  of  song !  Is  that  the  way  to  produce  music  ?  Shall  I  sow 
mustard  seed,  and  reap  songs  ?  I  thought  we  must  buy  an  organ, 
or  purchase  a  violin ;  or  by  some  wind  or  stringed  instrument  come  at 
music  ;  but  here  is  a  new  plan  altogether.  Nebuchadnezzar  had  his 
flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psaltery,  dulcimer,  and  all  kinds  of  music ;  but  all 
that  mingled  sound  could  not  rival  the  melody  of  birds.  I  shall  sow 
mustard  seed  now,  and  get  music  in  God's  own  way.  Friends,  when 
you  teach  your  children  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  are  sowing 
the  music  of  heaven.  Every  time  you  tell  the  tidings  of  pardon  bought 
with  blood,  you  are  filling  the  choirs  of  glory  with  sweet  voices,  which, 
to  the  Eternal  Name,  shall,  day  and  night,  trill  out  songs  of  devout 
gratitude.  Go  on,  then,  if  this  is  to  be  the  result.  If  even  heaven's 
high  harmonies  depend  upon  the  simple  teaching  of  a  Ragged-school, 
let  us  never  cease  from  our  hallowed  service. 

Having  said  so  much,  I  now  close  with  these  three  practical  observa 
tions.  A.re  we  not  highly  honoured  to  be  entrusted  with  such  a  marvellous 
thing  as  the  gospel  ?  If  it  be  a  seed  comprehending  so  much  within  it, 
which  will  come  to  so  much  if  it  be  properly  used,  blessed  and  happy 
are  we  to  have  such  good  news  to  proclaim  !  I  thought  this  morning, 


576  THE    MUSTARD    SEED. 

when  I  awoke  into  the  damp  and  rain,  and  felt  my  bones  complaining 
I  shall  be  glad  when  four  more  Sundays  shall  have  gone,  and  I  shaL 
be  free  to  take  a  little  rest  in  a  sunnier  clime.  Jaded  in  mind,  and 
weary  in  spirit,  I  braced  myself  with  this  reflection — what  blessed  work 
I  have  to  do  !  What  a  glorious  gospel  have  I  to  preach  !  I  ought  to 
be  a  very  happy  man  to  have  such  glad  tidings  to  bear  to  my  fellows. 
I  said  to  myself,  "  So  I  am."  Well  now,  beloved  teacher,  next  Sunday, 
when  you  leave  your  bed,  and  say,  "  I  have  had  a  hard  week's  work, 
and  I  could  half  wish  that  I  had  not  to  go  to  my  class  "  ;  answer  your 
self  thus  :  "  But  I  am  a  happy  person  to  have  to  talk  to  children  about 
Christ  Jesus.  If  I  had  tc  teach  them  arithmetic  or  carpentering,  I  might 
get  tired  of  it ;  but  to  talk  about  Jesus,  whom  I  love,  why,  it  is  a  joy  for 
ever. 

Let  us  be  encouraged  to  sow  the  good  seed  in  evil  times.  If  we  do  not 
see  the  gospel  prospering  elsewhere,  let  us  not  despair ;  if  there  were 
no  more  mustard  seed  in  the  world,  and  I  had  only  one  grain  of  it,  I 
should  be  all  the  more  anxious  to  sow  it.  You  can  produce  any 
quantity  if  only  one  seed  will  grow.  So  now  to-day  there  is  not 
very  much  gospel  about ;  the  church  has  given  it  up ;  a  great  many 
preachers  preach  everything  but  the  living  truth.  This  is  sad  ;  but  it 
is  a  strong  reason  why  you  and  I  should  teach  more  gospel  than  ever. 
I  have  often  thought  to  myself — Other  men  may  teach  Socialism, 
deliver  lectures,  or  collect  a  band  of  fiddlers,  that  they  may  gather  a 
congregation  ;  but  I  will  preach  the  gospel.  I  will  preach  more  gospel 
than  ever  if  I  can ;  I  will  stick  more  to  the  one  cardinal  point.  The 
other  brethren  can  attend  to  the  odds  and  ends,  but  I  will  keep  to 
Christ  crucified.  To  the  men  of  vast  ability,  who  are  looking  to  the 
events  of  the  day,  I  would  say,  "Allow  one  poor  fool  to  keep  to 
preaching  the  gospel."  Beloved  teachers,  be  fools  for  Christ,  and 
keep  to  the  gospel.  Don't  you  be  afraid  :  it  has  life  in  it,  and  it 
will  grow :  only  you  bring  it  out,  and  let  it  grow.  I  am  sometimes 
afraid  that  we  may  prepare  our  sermons  and  addresses  too  much,  so 
as  to  make  ourselves  shine.  II:  so,  we  are  like  the  man  who  tried  to 
grow  potatoes — he  never  grew  any,  and  he  wondered  much  ;  "for,'' 
said  he,  "I  very  carefully  boiled  them  for  hours."  So,  it  is  very 
possible  to  extract  all  the^life  out  of  the  gospel,  and  put  so  much  of 
yourself  into  it  that  Christ  will  not  bless  it. 

And,  lastly,  we  are  bound  to  do  it.  If  so  much  will  come  out  oi  so 
little,  we  are  bound  to  go  in  for  it.  Nowadays  people  want  ten  per 
cent,  for  their  money.  Hosts  of  fools  are  readily  caught  by  any 
scheme,  or  speculation,  or  limited  liability  company,  that  promises  to 
give  them  immense  dividends !  I  should  like  to  make  you  wise  by 
inviting  you  to  an  investment  which  is  sure.  Sow  a  mustard  seed, 
and  grow  a  tree.  Talk  of  Christ,  and  save  a  soul :  that  soui  saved 
will  be  a  blessing  for  ages,  and  a  joy  to  God  throughout  eternity. 
Was  there  ever  such  an  investment  as  this  ?  Let  us  go  on  with  it.  If 
on  our  simple  word  eternity  is  hung,  let  us  speak  with  all  our 
heart.  Life,  death,  and  hell,  and  worlds  unknown,  hang  on  the  lips 
of  the  earnest  teacher  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus:  let  us  never  cease 
speaking  while  we  have  breath  in  our  body.  The  Lord  bless  you! 
Amen,  and  Amen. 


THE   PLEADING   OF  THE  LAST  MESSENGER. 


DELIVERED  ON  LORD'S-DAY  MORNING,  MARCH  GTH,  1887,  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGE  ON. 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Haying  yet  therefore  one  son,  his  wellbeloved,  he  sent  him  also  last  unto  them,  saying, 
They  will  reverence  my  son.  But  those  husbandmen  said  among  themselves,  This  is  the 
heir  ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inheritance  shall  be  ours.  And  they  took  him,  and 
killed  him,  and  cast  Lim  out  of  the  vineyard.  What  shall  therefore  the  lord  of  the 
vineyard  do  ?  he  will  come  and  destroy  the  husbandmen,  and  will  give  the  vineyard  unto 
others."— Mark  xii.  6—9. 

BRETHREN,  you  know  the  story  of  God's  dealing  with  Israel,  and  Israel's 
dealing  with  God.  The  Lord  chose  their  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  ;  he  made  them  a  race  separated  unto,  himself,  he  brought 
them  out  of  Egypt  from  under  the  iron  yoke  ;  he  led  them  through  the 
Red  Sea ;  he  fed  them  for  forty  years  in  the  wilderness  ;  he  led  them 
about  and  tutored  them,  even  as  a  man  teacheth  his  son.  In  due  time 
he  brought  them  into  the  land  which  floweth  with  milk  and  honey;  and 
ne  put  them  under  a  dispensation  eminently  gentle  and  full  of  ten 
derness,  where  as  a  nation  they  might  enjoy  unbroken  prosperity, 
"  sitting  every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  his  fig  tree,  none  making 
them  afraid."  All  that  he  required  of  them  was  that  he  should  be  their 
God,  that  they  should  put  no  idols  in  his  place,  but  should  obey  his 
statutes.  Alas !  from  the  first  they  copied  the  nations  among  whom  they 
dwelt :  they  set  up  the  gods  of  Egypt  when  they  were  in  the  wilderness, 
and  in  Canaan  they  went  astray  after  the.polluted  deities  of  the  nations. 
They  worshipped  defiled  gods  with  rites  obscene ;  they  even  passed  their 
children  through  the  fire  to  Moloch,  and  did  horrible  things  which 
angered  the  Most  High.  In  his  longsuffering  he  sent  to  them  prophets 
one  after  another — prophets  who  received  unworthy  treatment  at  their 
hands  whenever  they  rebuked  their  sins.  The  prophets  were  derided, 
persecuted,  and  even  slain  with  the  sword.  God  in  great  patience  sent 
them  more  of  his  messengers,  some  of  them  grandly  eloquent,  like 
Esaias  and  Ezekiel ;  others  of  them  full  of  tears,  like  Jeremiah;  or 
clothed  with  dignity,  like  Daniel.  They  warned  the  people,  and  ceased 
not  to  plead  with  them,  whether  they  would  hear  or  whether  they  would 
forbear.  Cruel  treatment  awaited  many  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord  ; 
they  were  stoned,  they  were  sawn  asunder. 

Israel  rejected  the  servants  that  came  from  the  great  Householder 
No.  1,951.  65 


134  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

asking  for  the  rent  of  his  vineyard.  They  repudiated  the  claims  of  God, 
And  cast  off  allegiance  to  him  with  contempt  and  disdain;  until  at  last 
the  nation  was  led  into  captivity,  and  in  the  end  only  lingered  on  the 
•chosen  soil  as  a  mere  remnant.  Judah  wept  upon  the  dunghill ;  whereas 
aforetime  she  was  adorned  with  bridal  ornaments,  and  sat  upon  the 
throne.  The  adversary  ruled  in  the  halls  of  David ;  for  the  days  of 
Herod,  the  Idumean  tyrant,  had  come.  The  Roman  yoke  was  heavy 
upon  the  people :  their  sins  had  brought  them  low.  God,  in  his  infinite 
compassion,  gave  them  one  more  opportunity.  He  had  one  Son,  his 
Wellbeloved  Son,  and  he  sent  him  to  his  Israel.  With  lips  that  dropped 
mercy,  and  with  eyes  that  overflowed  with  tenderness,  he  came.  "  Oh, 
that  thou  hadst  known,"  said  he,  "  even  thou,  in  this  thy  day  "  !  He 
wept  over  the  city  which  would  not  be  saved.  But  his  warning  and  his 
weeping  were  lost  upon  the  blinded  people.  Those  who  had  rejected  the 
prophets,  also  rejected  the  Lord:  the  fate  of  the  servants  was  repeated 
in  "  the  heir."  "  Let  us  kill  him,"  said  they ;  and  they  put  him  to  the 
death  of  the  cross.  You  know  the  story :  it  is  full  of  infinite  mercy  on 
God's  part,  and  of  immeasurable  guilt  on  the  part  of  man.  God  seemed 
to  out-do  himself  in  his  long-suffering,  and  man  seemed  to  out-do  him 
self  in  his  wanton  defiance  of  the  Most  High.  Sin  culminated  in  the 
murder  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  it  reached  its  utmost  height  of  horror  when 
the  cry  was  heard,  "  Crucify  him  !  Crucify  him  !  "  Yes,  they  crucified 
the  Lord  of  Glory. 

What  has  this  to  do  with  us  ?  I  am  not  going  to  preach  this  morning 
merely  to  rehearse  a  piece  of  ancient  history  which  has  no  bearing  on 
to-day  ;  I  do  not  so  regard  the  death  of  our  Lord.  My  anxiety  is  to 
xeach  the  consciences  of  living  men,  and,  if  possible,  to  win  to  the 
Blessed  Heir  of  all  things,  who  has  risen  from  the  dead,  some  of  those 
who  have  had  a  share  in  his  death.  I  would  bring  to  the  Great 
Householder  the  fruits  of  the  vineyard  which  he  himself  has  planted, 
and  I  would  move  many  hearts  to  relent  towards  him  at  the  remembrance 
of  the  wicked  injuries  which  have  been  done  to  his  servants  and  to  his 
Son.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  silently  move  over  this  audience  at  this 
time,  as  I  try  to  use  this  passage,  not  in  its  strictest  application,  but 
with  such  an  application  as  I  am  sure  the  Spirit  of  God  will  approve ! 
May  he  bless  the  Saviour's  word  to  present  uses,  that  we  may  this  day 
repent  ! 

The  fact  is,  that  unless  changed  by  divine  grace,  we  have  all  refused 
to  pay  to  our  great  God  the  service  which  is  due  to  him.  He  has  put 
us  here  and  given  us  this  life,  like  a  vineyard,  for  us  to  cultivate;  but 
many  have  cultivated  that  vineyard  entirely  for  themselves — themselves 
or  their  families  and  friends,  and  not  for  their  God,  their  Maker. 
"  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts."  Now,  the  Lord  has  sent  to  such  many 
messengers.  We  have  had  no  prophets  in  these  days  living  among  us ;  but 
we  have  the  Word  of  God  and  the  record  of  the  testimonies  of  his  inspired 
messengers,  and  these  virtually  speak  to  us.  We  have  Moses  and  the  pro 
phets  :  they  are  speaking  to  us  even  now.  Besides  that,  we  have  been 
-surrounded  by  men  of  God,  and  encompassed  by  holy  women  who  have 
appealed  to  us  on  God's  behalf.  They  have  been  urged  to  speak  by  the 
love  of  their  hearts,  and  they  have  tried  to  bring  us  to  repent  of  past 
'rebellion  and  to  yield  ourselves  at  once  to  God.  Many  are  the  voices 


THE   PLEADING   OF  THE   LAST   MESSENGER.  135 

around  us  and  within  us  which  persuade  to  render  nnto  the  great  House 
holder  his  due  ;  but  in  many  cases  none  of  these  have  been  successful. 
Last  of  all  God  has  sent  to  each  one  of  us  his  Son,  that  he  in  his  own 
person  may  lovingly  repeat  with  greater  emphasis  the  requirements  of 
the  Lord  of  love.  The  incarnate  wisdom  now  cries  to  us,  "My  son,  f?ive 
me  thine  heart."  Jesus  warns  us,  "Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all 
likewise  perish."  He  .sets  before  us  the  way  of  reconciliation,  and 
bids  us  believe  in  him  and  live.  With  many  a  charming  parable  he 
would  draw  the  far-off  prodigal  home  to  the  bosom  of  forgiving  love. 
The  very  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  in  human  form,  as  Emmanuel, 
God  with  us,  is  love's  great  plea  for  reconciliation.  Who  can  resist 
BO  powerful  an  argument  ?  It  is  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ 
that  God  makes  his  last  and  strongest  appeal  to  the  human  con 
science.  By  the  Christ  of  God,  he  virtually  saith  this  morning,  "  Turn 
ye,  turn  ye  :  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?"  And  I  would  to  God 
that  the  answer  might  be  from  many  a  heart,  "  Come,  let  us  return  unto 
the  Lord  ;  for  he  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal  us."  Cause  it  to  be  so,  0 
great  Spirit ! 

Three  things  I  shall  speak  of  this  morning,  and  the  first  will  be 
the  amazing  mission  :  "  Having  yet  therefore  one  son,  his  wellbeloved, 
he  sent  him  also  last  unto  them,  saying,  They  will  reverence  my  son." 
Secondly,  the  astounding  crime :  "  They  took  him,  and  killed  him,  and 
cast  him  out  of  the  vineyard."  And,  therefore,  thirdly,  the  appropriate 
punishment,  of  which  the  text  says,  "  What  shall  therefore  the  lord  of 
the  vineyard  do  ? "  What  vengeance  can  be  sufficient  for  so  base  a 
deed? 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  dwell  for  a  few  moments  upon  THE  AMAZING 
MISSION  :  "  Having  yet  therefore  one  son,  his  wellbeloved,  he  sent  him 
also." 

Pleape  remember  concerning  the  Son  of  God,  sent  to  us  to  reconcile 
us  to  the  Father,  that  he  came  after  many  rejections  of  divine  iov6. 
As  to  Israel  he  followed  the  prophets,  so  to  us  he  comes  after  many 
others.  There  are  none  among  us,  I  should  think,  who  have  been  left 
without  admonitions  and  expostulations  from  God.  He  began  early 
with  some  of  us,  calling  us,  like  Samuel,  when  as  yet  we  were  children. 
He  repeated  those  calls  to  us  all  through  the  days  of  our  youth.  It  was 
never  cheap  to  some  of  us  to  sin ;  we  never  went  astray  but  what  there 
was  a  something  within  which  plucked  us  by  the  sleeve,  and  warned  us 
of  our  wrong-doing.  We  have  been  called  to  God  by  most  earnest  entreaties 
of  faithful  men  and  affectionate  women.  Discourses  have  been  addressed 
to  us  which  might  have  moved  hearts  of  stone ;  but  yet,  though  stirred 
for  the  moment,  we  remain  obstinate  enemies  to  God,  dishonest  to  his 
claims,  careful  of  this  world,  and  forgetful  of  the  world  to  come.  After 
all  these  refusals,  if  the  Lord  had  closed  the  casket  of  mercy,  and  had 
opened  the  vials  of  vengeance  and  had  poured  them  out  upon  us,  who 
could  have  blamed  him?  Instead  of  which,  he  still,  in  his  longsuffering 
pity,  speaks  to  us  by  his  Son.  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  he  made  the 
worlds,  condescends  to  be  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  He 
gently  reminds  us  of  our  offences  against  the  great  Father,  of  our  wil- 
fulneas  in  not  returning  to  him,  and  of  the  tremendous  peril  which  we 
iucur  by  remaining  in  opposition  to  the  great  God.  The  very  existence 


136  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLF   PULPIT. 

of  our  Saviour  gives  us  warning  of  our  sin,  of  our  ruin,  and  of  the 
only  way  of  escape.  If  it  be  so,  that  we  have  rejected  God's  claims  so 
often,  will  not  the  time  past  suffice  us  to  have  played  this  dreadful 
srame?  Have  we  not  had  enough  of  trifling  witfi  our  souls?  0  Lord, 
how  long  shall  men  act  the  part  of  fools  and  risk  the^  immortal  souls? 
Oh,  will  they  not  at  length  yield  to  wisdom  ?  Jesus  himself,  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  pleads  with  us  :  are  we  determined  to  perse 
vere  in  our  evil  ways?  Do  we  not  feel  some  tender  relentings  ?  Does 
not  a  "  still  small  voice  "  urge  us  to  arise  and  go  to  our  Father  ?  After 
many  provocations,  will  we  not  at  length  yield  to  the  God  of  grace  ? 

Remember,  that  Jesus  Christ  when  he  comes  to  us  to-day,  as  the 
messenger  of  the  Father,  comes  for  no  personal  ends.  When  the  mes 
sengers  were  sent  by  the  householder,  it  was  to  claim  the  householder's 
rent ;  when  the  heir  came,  it  was  for  the  same  purpose.  So  it  is  in  the 
human  emblem  ;  but  in  the  divine  this  becomes  less  conspicuous 
When  Jesus  pleads  with  us,  although  he  urges  us  to  render  unto  God 
our  love  and  our  obedience,  yet  God  does  not  stand  in  need  of  these  as 
the  householder  stood  in  need  of  his  rents.  Wrut  is  it  to  the  infinite 
Jehovah  whether  thou  serve  him  or  not?  If  thou  rebel  against  God, 
will  he  be  less  glorious  ?  If  thou  wilt  not  obey  the  Lord,  what  difference 
can  it  make  to  his  boundless  happiness  ?  Will  his  crown  shine  the  less 
brightly,  or  his  heaven  be  less  resplendent  because  thou  choosest  to  be 
a  rebel  against  him  ?  What  if  the  tow  strive  with  the  fire,  will  the  fire 
be  quenched  thereby  ?  If  a  gnat  should  contend  with  yonder  blast 
furnace,  you  know  what  the  end  would  be.  It  is  for  thine  own  sake 
that  God  would  have  thee  yield  to  him;  how  can  it  be  for  his  own?  If 
he  were  hungry  he  would  not  tell  thee,  for  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills 
are  his.  He  can  crush  whole  worlds  to  dust,  "or  with  his  word  or  with 
his  nod "  ;  and  dost  thou  think  he  has  aught  to  gain  from  thee?  Thou 
alone  wilt  be' the  gainer  or  the  loser  ;  therefore  when  Jesus  prays  thee 
to  repent,  believe  thou  in  the  disinterestedness  of  his  heart;  believe 
that  it  can  be  nothing  but  the  tenderest  regard  for  thy  well-being  which 
makes  him  warn  thee.  Hear  how  Jehovah  puts  it:  "  As  I  live,  saith 
the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked ;  but  that 
the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live."  A  messenger  after  many  re 
jections,  a  messenger  who  9omes  solely  out  of  love  to  us,  ought  to  have 
our  respectful  attention. 

Let  us  see  for  a  minute  who  this  messenger  is.  He  is  one  greatly 
beloved  of  his  Father,  and  in  himself  he  is  of  surpassing  excellence.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  so  inconceivably  glorious  that  I  tremble  at  any 
attempt  to  describe  his  glory.  Assuredly,  he  is  very  God  of  very  God, 
co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  the  Father,  and  yet  he  deigned  to  take  upon, 
himself  a  human  form.  He  was  born  an  infant  into  our  weakness,  and  he 
lived  a  carpenter  to  share  our  toil.  When  he  quits  the  bench  and  the  saw  it- 
is  to  follow  still  more  laborious  ways  as  a  teacher  and  healer  of  the  people. 
He  was  the  lowly  and  suffering  teacher  of  the  blessed  will  of  the  Father. 
He  took  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  yet  in  him  dwelletk 
all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  He  is  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  and  yet  he  took  a  towel  and  washed  his  disciples'  feet. 
Such  is  he  who  pleads  with  you.  So  majestic  and  so  compassionate, 
ao  great,  and  yet  so  good :  will  you  refuse  him  ?  If  I  plead  with  you,  I 


THE   PLEADING   OF  THE   LAST  MESSEXGE3.  137 

am  but  as  you  are,  flesh  of  yonr  fle.-h  ;  but  if  Jesus  speaks  to  you, 
I  beseech  you  by  the  glory  of  his  Godhead,  as  well  as  by  the  tenderness 
of  his  manhood,  do  not  refuse  him.  Because  of  his  Godhead  you  must 
not  dare  to  harden  your  hearts'.  He  is  God's  wellbeloved ;  and  if  you 
are  wise,  he  will  be  yours.  Do  not  turn  your  back  upon  him  whom  all 
the  angels  worship.  Beware,  lest  thou  reject  One  whom  God  loves  so 
well  ;  for  he  will  take  it  as  an  insult  to  himself:  he  thar  despises  the 
anuiuted  of  God  has  blasphemed  God  himself.  Thou  puttest  thy  finger 
into  the  very  eye  of  God  when  thou  dost  slight  his  Son.  In  grieving 
the  Christ  thou  dost  vex  the  very  heart  of  God ;  therefore  do  not  do  so. 
I  beseech  thee,  then,  by  the  love  which  God  bears  to  his  Son,  to  listen 
to  this  matchless  messenger  of  mercy,  who  would  fain  persuade  thee 
to  repent. 

1  have  already  said  that  he  is  so  glorious  that  I  cannot  describe  him  j 
I  will  therefore  only  say  that  his  graciousness  is  as  conspicuous  as  his 
glory.  Theie  was  never  such  a  one  as  he.  None  of  us  loves  men  as 
Christ  loves  them ;  and  if  the  loves  of  all  the  tender-hearted  in  the 
world  could  be  run  together,  they  would  make  but  a  drop  compared 
with  the  ocean  of  the  compassion  of  Jesus.  Of  old  his  delights  were 
with  the  sons  of  men;  and  though  he  might  have  been  happy  enough 
among  the  angels,  yet  he  quitted  their  company  thut  he  might  take  up  this 
inferior  race.  Yea,  he  espoused  our  nature,  and  became  bone  of  our  bone 
and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  for  love  of  that  chosen  company  whom  he  calls 
his  Bride.  He  hid  not  his  face  from  shame  and  spitting,  nor  his  body 
from  the  shedding  of  biood,  nor  his  soul  from  deadly  agony ;  but  he 
loved  the  church,  and  gave  himself  for  it.  It  is  this  lover  of  souls  that 
becomes  God's  advocate  with  us,  and  pleads  with  us  that  we  would  cease 
from  our  rebellion.  Do  not  refuse  him  !  If  he  were  stern  and  unloving, 
I  could  imagine  that  all  the  obstinacy  of  your  nature  might  be  aroused; 
but  his  love,  which  passeth  the  lore  of  women,  deserves  another  treat 
ment.  If  you  reject  him,  he  answers  you  with  tears;  if  you  wound 
him,  he  bleeps  out  cleansing;  if  you  kill  him,  he  dies  to  redeem;  if 
you  bury  him,  he  rises  again  to  bring  us  resurrection.  Jtsus  is  love 
made  manifest. 

"  Heart  of  stone,  relent,  relent ; 

Break,  by  Jesu's  cross  subdued  I 

See  his  body,  mangled,  rent, 

(Jover'd  with  a  gore  of  blood  ; 

Sinful  soul,  what  hast  thou  done? 

Crucified  God's  only  Son  !  " 

Furthermore,  his  manner  is  most  winning.  When  I  have  been  plead 
ing  for  men  with  God,  and  I  have  ceased  my  pleading,  I  have  i'eared 
that  something  in  my  tone  or  in  my  manner  would  cause  my  pleading 
to  fail.  I  am  nut,  perhaps,  so  tender  as  I  should  be,  nor  is  there  suffi 
cient  pathos  in  my  tones.  If  I  could  do  better,  I  would  go  to  any  school 
to  learn.  God  has  put  me  often  to  the  school  of  suffering  to  instruct 
rne  in  this  respect ;  and  yet  I  do  confess  my  failings  with  deep  regret. 
But  when  Jesus,  my  Lord,  pleads  with  you,  this  charge  cannot  be 
laid  against  him.  His  pleading  is  perfect.  When  Jonah  preaches,  his 
tones  are  harsh,  and  his  spirit  forbidding  ;  but  that  can  never  be  said  of 
J  tsub.  When  Jeremiah  weeps,  there  is  an  undertone  of  uitter  complaint 


138  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

within  the  sweet  sorrow  of  his  love;  but  it  is  never  so  with  Jeaus* 
"  Never  man  spake  like  this  man/'  If  ever  his  words  thunder — as 
they  otten  do — even  in  that  thunder  there  is  heard  the  voice  of  love. 
When  he  flashes  with  the  lightning  of  judgment  against  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  yet  soft  mercy-drops  follow  every  flame  of  fire.  He  is  stern 
because  he  is  tender  :  his  utterances  of  terror  are  born  of  a  love  which 
dares  not  conceal  the  truth,  even  though  it  breads  its  heart  in  the  tell 
ing  of  it.  God  is  love,  and  Christ  is  God's  love  incarnate  among  men. 
Therefore,  my  hearer,  if  you  see  anything  about  me  of  which  you  dis 
approve,  censure  me  if  you  will  ;  but  be  ail  the  more  attentive  to  my 
Lord,  about  whom  there  is  nothing  but  what  is  wooing  and  melting. 
God  has  sent  to  you  his  own  wellbeloved  Son  ;  I  implore  you,  do  not 
refuse  him.  My  heart  trembles  at  the  bare  suspicion  that  even  one  of 
you  should  reject  the  plea-lings  of  one  so  jealous  for  your  eternal  welfare* 
Yet  again,  when  God  sends  his  Son  to  plead  with  men,  remember  he 
does  not  urge  us  to  anything  which  will  be  for  our  loss  and  detriment  : 
obedience  to  him  is  happiness  for  ourselves.  He  does  not  urge  us  to  follow 
a  life  of  misery,  nor  to  begin  a  course  which  will  end  in  our  destruction. 
Far  from  it.  The  ways  in  which  he  would  have  us  run  are  ways  of 
pleasantness,  and  all  the  paths  in  which  he  would  lead  us  are  paths  of 
peace.  Even  repentance  is  charming  sorrow,  far  more  sweet  than  the 
joy  of  sin.  They  that  repent  and  turn  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
find  such  joy,  such  happiness,  that  earth  becomes  to  them  the  vestibule 
of  heaven.  The  joy-bells  ring  within  the  Father's  house,  when  a  soul 
returns  to  its  home.  The  great  Father  leads  the  joy,  and  all  the  house 
hold  rejoice  with  him.  To  persuade  you  to  he  holy  is  to  induce  you  to 
be  happy;  to  urge  you  to  seek  God  is  to  urge  you  to  seek  your  own 
best  welfare ;  to  urge  you  to  lay  down  the  weapons  of  rebellion  and  be 
reconciled  to  the  Most  High,  is  to  set  before  you  the  wisest,  safest,  and 
best  course  that  you  can  follow.  Therefore,  hear  ye  him.  The  Loid 
God  out  of  heaven  cries  to  you  :  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son ;  hear  ye 
him."  WV11  may  ye  hear  him,  when  every  word  that  he  speaks  intends 
your  salvation. 

Remember,  once  more,  that  if  you  do  not  hear  the  wellbeloved  Son 
of  God,  you  have  refused  your  last  hope.  He  is  God's  ultimatum. 
Nothing  remains  when  Christ  is  refused.  No  one  else  can  be  sent ;. 
heaven  itself  contains  no  further  messenger.  If  Christ  be  rejected, 
hope  is  rejected.  Neither  would  you  be  converted  though  one  rose  from 
the  dead;  for  Jesus  has  risen  from  the  dead,  and  you  have  refused  him. 
I  should  like  every  person  here  that  is  un  -onverted  to  recollect  that 
there  is  no  other  gospel,  and  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin.  I  have  heard 
talk  of  "a  larger  hope"  than  the  gospel  sets  before  us  :  it  is  a  fable, 
with  nothing  in  Scripture  to  warrant  it.  Rejecting  Christ,  you  have 
rejected  all  ;  you  have  shut  against  yourself  the  one  door  of  hope. 
Christ,  who  knows  better  than  all  pretenders,  declares  that,  "He  tnat 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  There  remains  nothing  but  damnation 
for  those  who  believe  not  in  Jesus.  "  There  is  none  other  name  under 
heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  This  is  clear ; 
for  heaven's  grandest  effort  has  been  made.  What  more  can  God  do  ? 
0  heavens  and  earth !  I  appeal  to  you,  what  more  can  Jehovah  do  ? 
If  he  gives  his  Son  to  die,  and  that  great  sacrifice  is  rejected,  what; 


THE   PLEADING   OP  THE    LAST  MESSENGER.  189 

remains?  Infinite  wisdom  has  done  its  best,  and  infinite  love  has  sur 
passed  itself:  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  ie  all  that  despises 
may  expect. 

Thus  this  amazing  mission  is  set  forth  before  you,  and  I  pray  you,  as 
you  love  yourselves,  do  not  refuse  him  that  speaketh  ;  for  if  they  escaped 
not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  how  shall  they  escape  who 
•despise  him  that  ppeaketh  from  heaven  ? 

II.  I  beg  your  attention  while  I  look,  in  the  second  place,  to  THE 
ASTOUNDING  CRIME,  It  was  nothing  less  than  an  astounding  crime,  that 
when  this  householder  sent  his  wellbeloved  son,  the  husbandmen  said  one 
to  another,  "This  is  the  heir;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inheritance 
shall  be  ours.  And  they  took  him,  and  cast  him  out  of  the  vineyard." 
**  No,"  says  one,  "  we  never  killed  the  Son  of  God."  I  will  not  charge 
you  with  having  done  so  literally;  that  were  to  make  myself  chargeable 
with  exaggeration.  But  a  man  may  do  virtually  what  he  cannot  do 
actually.  If  a  murder  be  committed  and  I  approve  of  it,  if  my  own 
principles  lead  up  to  it,  if  I  feel  no  indignation  against  it,  but  express 
myself  very  coolly  about  it,  if  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  if  1  had 
been  there,  I  should  have  done  the  same,  then  I  may  be  in  the  sight  ot 
God  a  partaker  in  the  crime.  There  are  many  among  us  who  are  guilty 
of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  The  hymn  we  just  now  sung  does  not 
bring  a  groundless  charge. 

44  Yes,  thy  sins  have  done  the  deed, 
Driven  the  nails  that  fix'd  him  there, 
Crown'd  with  thorns  his  sacred  head, 
Plunged  into  his  side  the  spear, 
Made  his  soul  a  sacrifice, 
While  for  sinful  man  he  dies !  ** 

Now,  I  say  this,  that  all  those  who  persistently  deny  the  deity  of  Christ, 
virtually  kill  him ;  for  the  Son  of  God  is  not  alive  if  his  Godhead  be 
not  in  existence.  It  is  essential  to  the  idea  of  Christ,  the  heir  of  all 
things,  that  he  be  God,  and  to  deny  his  Godhead  is  to  stab  at  his  heart. 

All  those  who  deny  his  atonement  also  slay  him  ;  for  the  blood  of 
sacrifice  is  the  life  of  the  Christ  of  God.  The  very  essence  of  his  Christ- 
hood,  the  soul  of  his  character  as  Jesus,  lies  in  his  having  been  appointed 
to  be  a  propitiation  for  sin.  No  cross  no  Christ,  no  atonement  no 
cross.  Deny  the  great  expiation  for  sin,  and  to  the  full  extent  of  your 
power  you  have  annihilated  the  Christ.  As  far  as  you  can  do  it,  you 
have  destroyed  the  Saviour. 

"  Well,  we  have  not  done  that,"  cry  some  of  you.  "  Wre  have  been  no 
opposers  of  the  deity  or  sacrifice  of  Jesus."  But  let  me  remind  you 
that  it  you  do  not  judge  him  to  be  worthy  of  your  most  careful  thoughts, 
'if  yon  are  indifferent  to  his  claims,  and  refuse  to  obey  his  gospel,  you 
have  virtually  put  him  away.  To  you  it  is  the  same  as  if  there  were  no 
Christ. 

"Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ? 
Is  it  nothing  to  you  that  Jesus  should  die  ?  " 

You  have  virtually  answered  "  It  is  nothing."     You  have  set  Christ 
down  as  nothing  compared  with  the  business  of  daily  life,  and  thus  you 
have  virtually  slain  him  :  you  have  put  him  out  of  existence  so  far  as 
46 


140  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

you  are  concerned.  In  the  little  world  of  your  mind  there  is  no  living 
Saviour  :  he  is  dead  and  buried  to  you,  and  the  claims  of  God  which  he 
pleads  you  will  not  think  upon.  You  have  been  occupied  all  the  week 
with  trivial  amusements,  or  unimp  >rtant  discussions,  but  you  have  not 
deigned  to  think  of  him  whose  advent  into  the  world  is  so  great  a 
wonder,  that  if  you  never  thought  of  anything  else,  you  might  be 
justified  in  a  life  of  devout  meditation.  He  who  deserves  all  your 
thoughts  gets  none  of  them.  You  have  nothing  to  do  with  Christ,  his 
cross,  his  people,  or  his  cause;  and  therefore — I  say  it  with  no  harshness, 
but  with  much  grief — you  are  kill-Ohnsts,  and  are  guilty  of  his  blood. 
I  charge  you  with  making  away  with  your  Saviour.  I  press  the 
accusation  home,  and  trust  that  it  will  strike  you  with  horror. 

I  have  still  closer  work  with  some  of  you,  who  are  most  assuredly 
guilty.  You  were  once  members  of  the  Church  ;  you  came  to  the 
communion-table,  where  they  gather  who  remember  his  precious  body 
and  blood  ;  you  used  to  glory  in  his  name  ;  but  you  have  gone  back, 
you  have  denied  the  faith,  you  have  ceased  to  be  followers  of  the  Lamb. 
Now,  these  are  no  words  of  mine,  but  inspired  words  : — You  have 
"  crucified  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame."  You 
are  beyond  all  question  among  those  who  have  cast  the  heir  out  of  the 
vineyard  and  slain  him,  deliberately  turning  your  backs  upon  his  sacred 
cause.  The  Lord  have  mercy  on  youl  You  have  had  no  mercy  on 
Christ,  or  on  yourselves. 

I  must  press  this  home  upon  a  great  many  more  who  have  heard  of 
Christ,  and  believe  him  to  be  God,  and  assent  to  all  the  truth  about  him, 
but  who  yet  have  never  yielded  themselves  to  his  authority.  0  sirs,  what 
have  you  done  ?  You  have  preferred  the  world  to  Christ :  you  have  chosen 
Barabbas  and  condemned  the  Saviour.  You  have  said  to  the  claims  of 
Jesus,  "  Wait."  For  whom  has  your  Lord  had  to  wait  ?  What !  For 
a  harlot  ?  For  a  bribe  of  gold  ?  For  your  giddy  pleasure  ?  When  a  great 
question  is  postponed  to  let  another  take  precedence  of  it,  we  do  not 
object  if  that  other  is  of  pre-eminent  importance ;  but  can  you  say  that 
anything  has  a  greater  claim  on  you  than  the  Son  of  God  ?  Is  there 
anything  that  has  a  greater  right  to  your  thoughts,  to  your  considera 
tion,  to  your  love,  than  the  great  salvation  which  Jesus  Christ  has 
wrought  out?  If  you  haye  pushed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  out  of  the 
first  place,  he  will  occupy  no  other,  and  therefore  you  have  virtually  un- 
Christed  him,  and  you  are  guilty  of  his  blood.  You  must  either  be 
justified  by  him  or  you  must  be  condemned  by  him.  There  is  no  third 
course  to  take :  you  must  either  believe  in  him  or  disbelieve  him.  Now, 
to  refuse  to  believe  him  is  to  make  him  a  liar,  and  to  make  him  a  liar  is 
virtually  to  slay  the  Lord  of  truth.  His  blood  must  be  on  you  by  faith 
to  cleanse  you,  or  else  it  will  lie  on  you  to  condemn  you,  as  it  did  the  Jews 
of  old. 

What  was  the  reason  why  these  husbandmen,  these  dressers  of  the 
vineyard,  dared  thus  to  treat  the  heir  ?  The  reason  is  one  which 
presses  upon  those  here  present  who  have  rejected  Christ.  They  did  it, 
first,  because  they  had  enjoyed  a  Long  immunity  from  punishment.  They 
had  not  been  ao  once  punished  for  their  defiance  of  their  lord.  They 
had  rejected  his  messengers  without  provoking  him  to  war ;  they  had 
gone  on  to  stone  and  slay  others  of  his  servants,  and  the  householder  had 


THE    PLEADING    OF    THE    LAST    MESSENGER.  141 

not  come  npon  them  to  overthrow  them.  The  first  time  they  mocked  at 
the  messenger  they  were  somewhat  afraid  ;  they  feared  lest  soon  the 
sword  of  the  prince  whom  they  had  defied  would  threaten  their  gates. 
But  as  there  was  no  invasion  they  grew  bold.  The  next  messenger  they 
*lew,  and  washed  their  hands,  in  presumption,  saying,  "Nothing  will 
come  of  it."  They  grew  at  last  to  be  very  hardened.  I  know  not  what 
they  said,  but  I  conceive  that  certain  of  them  propagated  the  theory 
that  their  lord  took  no  notice  of  what  they  did,  or  that  he  was  too 
loving  to  punish  them  severely.  "See!"  said  they,  "he  only  sends 
fresh  messengers  if  we  kill  the  old  ones;  and  even  if  we  k'll  his  son  he 
will  bear  it.  Let  us  not  imagine  that  he  will  take  vengeance.  He  is 
love,  and  even  should  we  murder  his  son,  he  will  lay  up  in  store  for  us 
a  larger  hope."  "At  any  rate,"  they  seemed  to  say,  "we  will  run  all 
risks.  We  will  test  his  graciousness.  We  will  kill  his  son,  and  so 
challenge  him  to  do  his  worst." 

Ungrateful  men  abuse  God's  long-suffering  to-day  as  they  did  of  old. 
They  say,  "  Well,  I  have  refused  the  gospel  a  long  time;  I  have  put 
aside  many  appeals;  but  I  am  not  dead,  nor  struck  with  blindness,  nor 
smitten  down  with  a  stroke.  I  can  go  on  at  least  a  little  longer  in 
safety.  I  may  refuse  Christ  yet  again,  for  God  is  merciful/'  "  Certain 
teachers,"  say  you,  "tell  us  that  God  is  so  good,  that  if  we  even  kill  his  Son 
he  will  take  no  account  of  it.  We  will  kill  his  Son,  and  so  we  will 
reject  the  atonement,  and  trample  on  the  precious  blood,  and  yet  we 
doubt  n»t  all  will  come  right  in  the  long  run,  and  the  evil  of  our 
crime  will  prove  to  be  only  temporary."  You  do  not  put  your  thoughts 
into  those  words ;  but  you  are  saying  as  much  by  your  actions.  You 
dare  not  say  it,  and  yet  it  lurks  iu  your  hearts,  and  works  itself  out  in 
your  deeds.  You  are  going  to  run  the  dreadful  risk  of  trifling  with  the 
Son  of  God.  To  you  this  seems  a  little  thing,  but  horror  takes  hold  of 
me  at  the  thought  of  it.  0  sirs,  I  will  be  no  partner  in  your  crime.  I 
will  not  cease  to  warn  you  that  it  must  be  of  all  risks  the  most  tre 
mendous.  Gracious  as  he  is — and  God  has  proved  his  grace  by  sending 
his  Son — yet  God  is  not  effeminate  nor  unjust.  If  you  refuse  the  mercy 
which  he  so  freely  proffers  you,  he  will  deal  with  you  in  his  justice. 
He  is  the  Judiie  of  all  the  earth,  and  he  must  do  right.  Remember  how 
he  puts  it:  "My  sword  shall  be  bathed  in  heaven."  "  If  I  whet  my 
glittering  sword,  and  mine  hand  take  hold  on  judgment,  I  will  render 
vengeance  to  mine  enemies"  (Deut.  ixiii.  41).  Fur  as  truly  as  he  is 
love,  so  truly  is  he  holiness.  He  is  wondrous  in  his  power  to  forgive  ; 
but  he  is  also  terrible  out  of  his  holy  places.  "  If  the  sinner  turn  not,  he 
will  whet  his  sword;  he  haih  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  ready."  "  Be 
ware,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  he  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to 
deliver." 

The  great  reason,  however,  why  these  husbandmen  determined  to  kill 
the  heir  was  this:  they  said,  "  Then  the  inheritance  shall  be  ours." 
This  is  what  the  heart  of  man  vainly  desires.  It  says,  "  Let  us  be  rid 
of  this  troublesome  talk  of  religion,  and  then  we  can  live  for  ourselves, 
and  study  our  own  pleasure  without  remorse  of  conscience.  Are  we  not 
our  own  ?  Who  shall  be  lord  over  us  ?  If  we  are  rid  of  this  Jesus,  we 
shall  not  have  this  claim  being  always  made  upon  us,  that  we  are  God's 
creatures,  and  that  we  ought  to  live  to  him.  \Ve  do  not  intend  to  serv*€ 


142  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

God.  We  will  pay  no  rent  to  this  householder.  We  will  be  our  own 
proprietors.  God  shall  have  nothing  from  us.  Who  is  the  Lord,  that 
we  should  obey  his  voice  ?  If  we  can  get  rid  of  this  Christ  business 
we  can  live  as  we  list,  and  do  as  we  please,  and  no  one  will  call  us  to 
account.  If  we  can  persuade  ourselves  that  religion  is  not  true, 
we  shall  then  care  nothing:  for  checks  and  warnings,  but  we  shall 
take  our  full  swing  and  enjoy  ourselves  without  stint.  A  short  life 
and  a  merry  one  will  suit  us.  We  might  enjoy  ourselves  if  th'S  matter 
of  God,  and  Christ,  and  eternity,  could  be  disposed  of."  Yes,  young 
man,  this  is  what  your  prototype  thought  when  he  said  to  his  father, 
"  Give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to  me."  Then  he  gathered 
all  together,  and  went  into  a  far  country,  and  spent  his  "  substance  in 
riotous  living.  This  is  what  you  hanker  after.  But  your  folly  is  ex 
ceeding  great.  I  grieve  as  I  look  into  your  young  face  and  read  the 
idle  dream  of  your  heart.  You  little  know  what  a  tyrant  he  serves 
who  lives  as  he  lists.  May  God  grant  that  I  may  never  live  as  my 
ainful  lusts  would  make  me  live !  I  had  rather  be  a  machine  and  be 
compelled  to  do  always  what  is  right,  than  have  free  will,  and  with  that 
free  will  give  myself  up  to  do  that  which  is  wrong.  But  there  is  no 
need  to  be  made  into  a  machine;  the  grace  of  God  can  make  you  as  free 
in  holiness  as  in  sin.  Grace  can  make  you  more  free  in  the  service  of 
God  than  in  the  service  of  yourself. 

Self  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  rejection  of  Christ — "  Let  us  kill  him,  and 
the  inheritance  shall  be  ours."  Ah,  my  hearer !  it  will  not  be  yours  ;  and 
if  it  were  yours  for  a  little  while,  and  you  could  do  just  as  you  pleased 
with  it,  yet  remember  that  the  inheritance  which  is  so  gained  will 
soon  pass  away,  and  you  yourself  will  soon  have  to  stand  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ  to  give  an  account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the 
body,  whether  they  be  good,  or  whether  they  be  bad.  And  what  will 
you  do  who  have  slain  your  Saviour?  What  will  you  do  in  that  dav, 
who  have  lived  and  died  unsaved  ? 

III.  I  must  close  with  that  third  head,  which  is  so  dreadful  to  me: 
THE  APPROPRIATE  PUNISHMENT.  I  do  not  supp  »se  thai  the  thought 
of  this  subject  will  be  half  so  dreadful  to  anybody  here  who  is  unc> in 
verted  as  it  is  to  me.  I  tremble  as  I  meditate  upon  the  wrath  to  come. 
How  glad  I  would  be  if  I  had  not  to  preach  from  such  a  theme!  But  I 
must  preach  from  it,  or  be  a  traitor  to  God,  and  an  enemy  to  you.  If 
you  perish,  your  blood  will  be  required  at  my  hands,  if  I  do  not  warn 
you  of  the  punishment  of  sin.  This  is  how  the  Saviour  put  it :  "  When 
the  lord  therefore  of  the  vineyard  cometh,  what  will  he  do  unto  those 
husbandmen?"  He  leaves  our  conscience  to  award  the  penalty.  He 
leaves  our  imagination  to  prescribe  a  doom  sufficient  for  a  crime  so  base, 
so  daring,  so  cruel.  They  have  killed  the  only  son  of  their  lord,  what 
will  he  do  unto  those  husbandmen  ? 

Here  1  must  interject  a  terrible  passage,  which  it  burdens  me  to 
deliver.  At  this  present  moment  I  am  afraid  that  this  parable  is  being 
written  out  again  in  the  history  of  the  Church  of  God.  God  has  put 
into  his  vineyard,  or  allowed  to  come  into  his  vineyard,  a  number  of 
religious  teachers  who  are  not  rendering  to  him  the  honour  due. 
Those  religious  teachers  to  whom  I  refer  are  not  teaching  the  gospel  as 
it  is  delivered  in  Holy  Scripture,  but  they  are  adapting  it  to  the  age, 


THE   PLEADING   OF   THE   LAST   MKSSENGER.  143 

and  to  the  scientific  knowledge  of  the  period.  They  are  described  in 
the  book  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah:  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
Hearken  not  unto  the  words  of  the  prophets  that  prophesy  unto  you : 
they  make  you  vain :  they  speak  a  vision  of  their  own  heart,  and  not 
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  They  say  still  unto  them  that  despise 
me,  The  Lord  hath  said,  Ye  shall  have  peace ;  and  they  say  unto  every 
one  that  walketh  after  the  imagination  of  his  own  heart,  No  evil  shall 
come  upon  you."  The  thoughts  of  their  own  minds  are  given  instead 
of  the  revelation  of  God.  Thus  they  set  up  another  gospel,  which  is 
not  another ;  but  there  be  some  that  trouble  you.  My  tear  is  that  the 
Lord  will  not  much  longer  bear  with  these  husbandmen.  He  will  not 
long  bear  these  '•  prophets  of  the  deceit  of  their  own  hearts."  He  will 
bring  an  everlasting  reproach  upon  them,  and  cut  them  off  in  his 
anger.  He  will  destroy  those  wicked  men,  and  he  will  give  his  vineyard 
unto  other  husbandmen,  who  will  deal  more  faithfully  with  the  souls  of 
men.  I  feel  in  my  own  soul  that  it  must  be  so.  I  dare  not  live  as  a 
preacher  of  my  own  inventions.  I  dare  not  die  as  a  preacher  of  my  own 
thoughts,  or  of  the  thoughts  of  other  men.  I  must  tell  my  Master's 
message  or  be  accursed.  The  spirit  of  the  age  is  the  spirit  of  proud 
self-sufficiency  ;  be  it  ours  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet.  My  Lord  will  one 
day  say  to  me,  "I  gave  thee  a  message,  didst  thou  deliver  it?  I 
bade  thee  speak  in  my  name,  didst  thou  speak  my  words  or  thine  own  ? 
I  gave  thee  a  revelation,  didst  thou  deliver  that  revelation  as  best 
thou  couldst  ?  or  didst  thou  invent  a  new  thing  out  of  thine  own  brain  ?  " 
I  know  liow  I  shall  answer.  I  fear  that  a  terrible  doom  awaits  those 
who  go  after  the  fashionable  idlsehoods  of  the  day.  Be  they  clergy 
men  or  dissenting  ministers,  an  unutterably  horrible  damnation  from 
the  right  hand  of  God  awaits  those  who  prostitute  the  office  of  the 
ministry  for  the  delivery  of  human  philosophies  instead  of  teaching  the 
gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  Brethren,  beware  that  none  of  us  sin  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  by  setting  up  our  dreams  in  rivalry  with  his  certainties. 
Pray  for  those  who  do  so,  lest  God  deal  with  them  speedily  in  vengeance. 
The  Lord  have  mercy  upon  all  false  prophets,  and  bring  them  humbly 
and  tremblingly  to  his  feet,  lest  they  ensnare  the  people  yet  more,  to  the 
overthrow  of  this  nation,  and  the  taking  away  of  the  candlestick  out  of 
its  place. 

1  return  to  you  whom  I  have  already  addressed.  You  have  crucified 
the  Son  of  God  by  refusing  to  believe  in  him.  What  shall  the  Lord  do 
unto  \ou  when  he  comes  ?  The  sentence  cannot  be  too  severe,  for  the 
crime  is  beyond  measure  horrible.  It  must  be  the  highest  form  of 
punishment  known  to  the  law.  They  slew  the  servants,  and  they  slew 
the  heir;  no  temporary  punishment  can  meet  the  case.  Those  who 
plead  for  a  light  doom  for  such  a  crime  must,  in  their  own  hearts,  be 
rebels.  Those  who  are  evermore  making  light  of  hell  are  probably  doing 
it  in  the  hope  of  making  it  easy  tor  themselves.  He  is  the  devil's 
advocate  who  would  judge  the  punishment  of  the  impenitent  to  be  a 
liglit  one ;  God's  true  servants  say,  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of 
the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  Our  Lord  leaves  our  own  consciences  to 
depict  the  overwhelming  misery  of  those  miserable  men  who  carry  their 
rebellion  to  its  full  length. 

Jn  the  chapter  which  we  read  (Matthew  xxi.),  our  Lord  gives  us  a 


i44  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

terrible  word.  Comparing  himself  to  the  stone  which  should  be  the 
foundation,  but  which  the  builders  reject,  he  says,  "  On  whomsoever  it 
shall  fall,  it  will  grinr!  him  to  powder."  Sinner,  if  you  reject  the 
Saviour,  you  will  have  to  feel  his  fall  weight,.  Boundless  iu  power, 
infinite  in  mnjesty,  the  whole  weight  of  him  will  fall  on  you.  Will  you 
think  that  over  ?  Since  he  breaks  the  nations  in  pieces  with  a  rod  <»f 
iron,  judge  ye  his  power ;  since  from  his  presence  heaven  and  earth  flee 
away,  judge  ye  his  power.  But  whatever  that  power  may  be,  you  will 
have  to  feel  the  full  force  of  it  This  foundation  stone  falling  upon 
you  shall  grind  you  to  powder.  I  will  not  dwell  further  upon  this 
tremendous  thought,  but  I  will  repeat  it  in  set  and  solemn  form  : 
the  full  weight  of  the  incarnate  God,  in  the  day  of  his  wrath,  you 
will  have  to  bear.  It  is  put  in  another  way  in  that  expression — "  The 
wrath  01  the  La-ob."  Is  not  that  a  marvellous  combination,  "  The  wrath 
of  the  Lamb"?  Love  when  it  turns  to  jealousy  is  the  fiercest  of  all 
passions;  and  when  the  love  01  Christ  in  infinite  justice  shall  be  turned 
into  holy  indignation  against  unrighteousness,  then  it  will  be  something 
terrible  to  think  of,  and  to  bear  it  will  be  the  second  death.  Are  you 
prepared  to  bear  the  awful  weight  of  a  Saviour's  anger?  No:  you  are 
not.  Come,  then,  to  Jesus.  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye 
perish  from  the  way,  while  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little."  0  my 
hearers,  my  dear  hearers,  do  not  refuse  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  now  pleads 
with  you.  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  his  ambassador;  \  am  not  fit  for  the 
office;  but  yet  I  would  plead  with  you  as  a  loving  brother.  Will  you 
lose  your  souls?  Will  you  reject  Christ  ?  0  sirs,  will  you  refuse  the 
Son  of  God?  Men  and  women,  can  you  be  so  mad  as  to  live  and  die 
without  the  Saviour?  Are  you  so  far  gone  as  this?  Turn,  I  beseech 
you,  turn  you  this  day.  Lord,  turn  them,  for  thy  dear  Sun's  sake  ! 
Amen. 


PORTION  OF  SCRIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SERMON— Matthew  xxi.  18—46. 


C.  H.  SPURGEON'S  BOOKS  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  EXTRACTS,  FOB 
THE  USE  OF  PREACHERS,  SUNDAY-SCHOOL  TEACHERS,  AND 
OTHER  CHRISTIAN  WORKERS. 

THE  FOLLOWING  VOLUMES  ARE  ALL  PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS. 
PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  LONDON. 

The  Salt-Cellars.      Being  a    Collection   of  Proverbs,    together  with 

Homely  A  otes  thereon.      In  2  vols ,   35.   6d.  each,  or  beautifully 

bound  in  French  Morocco,  Limp,  75.  6d.  each. 

"  This  is  a  book  to  be  kept  close  at  hand  for  a  spare  five  minutes ; 

there  is  not  a  sentence  in  it  which  does  not  fulfil  the  requirement  of 

the  motto  on  the  title-page  by  having  '  shortness,  sense,  and  salt.' 

The  arrangement  of  the  matter  is  masterly ;  while  the  get-up  of  the 

volume  reflects  great  credit  on  the  publishers." — Christian  Leader. 

Feathers  for  Arrows  ;   or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and  Teachers, 

from  my  Note  Book.  Cloth,  25.  6d.  (See  Lecture  V.,  page  88.) 
"  The  work  covers  a  wide  range  of  subjects ;  the  metaphors  are 
always  striking  and  frequently  brilliant,  while  the  truths  which  they 
illustrate  are  such  as  have  always  formed  the  staple  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
discourses.  A  choicer  collection  of  illustrations  we  do  not  know." 
— Freeman. 

"  The  collection  is  very  varied,  but  all  bearing  on  the  highest 
themes,  and  fitted  to  help  the  highest  purpose  of  the  Christian 
ministry.  There  is  an  admirable  index  of  subjects,  and  another  of 
texts." — "Evangelical  Magazine. 

Barbed  Arrows  from  the  Quiver  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Cloth,  25.  6d. 

Illustrations  and  Meditations  ;  or,  Flowers  from  a  Puritan's  Garden, 

Distilled  and  Dispensed '  bv  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth,  2S.  6d. 
"  The  volume  before  us  is  full  of  helpful  suggestions  and  beautiful 
illustrations.  Nowhere  have  we  met  with  more  characteristics  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  mind  and  heart  than  in  these  illustrations.  The 
book  ought  to  be  immensely  popular,  as  it  doubtless  will  be." — 
Christian  Commonwealth. 

Strmons  in  Candles.     Illustrations  which  mav  be  found  in  Common 

Candles.     Stiff  Covers,  is.;  Cloth   Gilt  Edges,  2S. 
a  For  originality  and  quaintness,  for  some  smartly-stated  views  on 
religious  truth,  this  little  work  stands  unsurpassed.     The  Lectures 
are  unique." — Freeman. 

"  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  Lectures  are  full  of  illuminating 
grace  and  wisdom,  and  are  quite  monumental  in  their  ingenuity  and 
cleverness.  Light  and  heat  break  out  on  every  page." — The  Christian. 

The  Bible  ana  the  Newspaper ;    Spurgeon's  Shilling  Series.      (See 

Lecture  IV.,  page  54.) 

"  Our  hope  is  that  many  will  read  this  book,  and  find,  in  the  oyster- 
shell  of  a  parable,  the  pearl  of  great  price." — C.  H.  SPURGEON,  in 
The  Sword  and  the  Trowel. 

"  If  anyone  wishes  to  know  how  Mr.  Spurgeon  can  write,  let  him 
invest  a  shilling  in  one  of  these  little  books, — Spurgeon's  Shilling 
Series, — and  he  will  readily  see  how  it  is  that  their  author  can 
attract  both  readers  and  hearers." — The  Bookseller. 


Spurgeon' s  Birthday  Book.  Containing  a  metaphor,  simile,  allegory, 
or  illustration  for  every  day  in  the  year,  compiled  from  the  works  of 
C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth,  25.  6d. ;  Persian,  33.  6d. ;  Morocco, 
55.  ;  Russia,  with  Photographs,  los.  6d. 

"  For  thirty  pence,  our  readers  may  possess  a  book  which  is  as  useful 
as  it  is  handsomely  got  up.  The  records  of  dates  which  are  dear 
to  the  household,  or  the  signatures  of  beloved  friends  and  visitors, 
will  find  here  the  happiest  method  of  preservation  and  reference." — 
Christian  Age. 

My  Sermon- Notes  >  containing  264  Sermon  Outlines.  Illustrated  by 
numerous  Anecdotes,  Extracts,  etc.  Complete  in  2  vols.,  53.  each, 
or  may  be  had  in  four  parts,  28.  6d.  each.  A  complete  index 
of  subjects  and  texts  in  each  volume. 

"  Preachers,  who  are  willing  to  learn  from  anyone  really  capable  of 
teaching  them,  might  do  many  a  worse  thing  than  buy  a  copy  of  this 
work,  which;  we  believe,  will  prove  really  helpful." — Church  Review. 

The  Art  of  Illustration  ;   Third  Series  of  Lectures  to  my  Students.    A 

selection  from  Addresses  delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastor? 

College.  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.    By  C.  H.  SPURGEON,  President, 

2S.  6d 

"  We  shall  be  surprised  if  preachers,  teachers,  and  speakers  of  all 
kinds  do  not  secure  a  copy  quickly.  It  is  a  book  that  will  captivate 
the  general  reader,  too,  written  as  it  is  in  a  style  that  is  full  of 
breezy,  robust  Saxon.  The  kindly  humour  that  bubbles  up  every 
where  makes  an  additional  charm  to'  an  already  delightful  book." — 
Word  and  Work. 
Types  and  Emblems.  A  Collection  of  Sermons  preached  on  Sunday 

and  Thursday  evenings,  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Price  33. 
*  To  characterize  these  discourses,  would  be  simply  superfluous. 
Every  reader  of  Mr.  Spurgeoii's  sermons  knows  the  worth  of  every 
thing  issuing  from  the  press  of  which  he  is  the  author.  The  volume 
is  very  tastefully  got-up." — Christian  Age. 
Flashes  of  Thought ;  Being  One  Thousand  Choice  Extracts  from  the 

Works  ofC.  H.  SPURGEON.     Alphabetically  arranged,  and  with  a 

copious  Index.     Price  55. 

"  The  idea  is  a  good  one ;  and  Flashes  of  Thought,  the  volume  in 
question,  containing  one  thousand  choice  extracts  from1  the  works 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  is  sure  of  ready  acceptance  with  the  immense  body 
by  whom  he  is  admired  and  followed." — Daily  Telegraph. 

Spurgeon }s  Gems  :   Being  Brilliant  Passages  Selected  from  the  Dis 
courses  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Large  Type,  35.  6d. 
"  A  selection  from  the  pages  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  containing  specimens 
of  his  happiest  thoughts,  gems  from  his  discourses,  etc." — Extract 
•from  Preface. 

Gleanings  among  the  Sheaves.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth,  is. 
"  These  extracts  are  quite  Spurgeonic, — racy,  rich,  and  rare,  both  as 
to  style  and  matter, — full  of  exquisite  consolation,  faithful  advice, 
clear  analogies,  poetic  touches,  and  glorious  old  gospel.  We  do  not 
wonder  that  eight  thousand  copies  were  disposed  of  on  the  day  of 
publication,  and  we  trust  that  eight  times  eighty  thousand  will  find 
their  way  to  the  religious  public." — Weekly  Review. 


48258 


